Beige Book: National Summary
May 6, 1986

Virtually all districts report continued moderate economic growth. With the exception of Dallas, which is plagued by problems related to railing oil and gas prices, no district reports general stagnation. Energy sector problems, coupled with problems in agriculture and some manufacturing sectors, have led to unbalanced growth in the Kansas City, Boston, Cleveland, and Minneapolis districts. New York, Philadelphia, and Richmond report a more general improvement.

Consumer spending—particularly for housing—appears to have been strengthening lately. Active housing markets in almost all districts have generated much construction activity, boosted the demand for building materials, and caused a spurt in mortgage lending.

Sources of weakness include the energy and agriculture industries and some manufacturing sectors. Oil and gas price declines have led to drastic cutbacks in drilling activities and related supplies and spending. Low prices still hinder many farmers' attempts to return to profitability. While many districts mention that manufacturing output has been steady or rising, a few point out that manufacturing employment is still falling.

Consumer Spending
Most districts say that retail sales of general merchandise have registered gains, with San Francisco noting particular strength. Richmond and Kansas City say that sales have been improving—in the Richmond district, significantly in recent weeks. New York has seen greater strength in sales at stores that cater to high-income shoppers. Inventories have rarely been excessive.

Auto sales, though, have leveled off lately. Kansas City, Dallas, and Philadelphia all say that vehicle sales have fallen off. But Boston has received mixed reports, and Cleveland believes that sales have been high, but flat.

Most districts report very active housing markets—as one New York contact says, in this industry "business is booming." Only the Dallas district reports the opposite. Chicago mentions that housing permits are 40 percent above their level last year at this time. Atlanta also adds that, except in New Orleans and Jackson, single-family home sales throughout the Southeast are higher than a year ago.

Atlanta and Richmond report healthy levels of tourist spending. Some districts are looking forward to more of the same, fueled by lower gas prices, the lower dollar, and citizen concern about overseas travel.

Construction
Housing activity has led to a lot of construction in most parts of the country, particularly of single-family homes. Several districts, including New York and San Francisco, see signs of strength in commercial construction as well. Nonresidential construction contracts in the St. Louis district increased in the first quarter. The Boston and Chicago districts report much demand for commercial space in their Reserve cities. Atlanta notes that Southeastern industrial space construction is beginning to accelerate. But Richmond notes that high vacancy rates have been hindering urban office construction there.

Manufacturing
Reports from manufacturers are mixed. While Chicago notes that auto and steel production plans are being cut back some, Cleveland reports that sales of Ohio-made Hondas have been particularly strong. Demand for wood- based products is also strong. Chicago reports "near-boom conditions" at its cardboard box plants, while Minneapolis notes that waferboard production is high. Aerospace manufacturing—both commercial and defense—is a welcome help in the San Francisco and Dallas districts.

Among the weaker sectors, computer equipment production has remained sluggish in the Boston district. Both San Francisco and Dallas haven't seen a turnaround in the faltering electronics industry, but they think the worst times may be behind it now. While apparel production has remained steady in the Richmond district, Dallas reports a big layoff, but hopes that modernization and marketing efforts will help this sector.

Resource-Related Industries
Mixed conditions also characterize the resource-related sectors. Drilling activities have plunged with oil and gas prices. The rig count is down 50 percent from a year ago in the Dallas district, 40 percent in the Kansas City district, and substantially in North Dakota and Montana. Atlanta reports that this has made Louisiana's unemployment rate the nation's highest. Cleveland points out that coal prices are down, too. But Richmond and San Francisco note growing lumber demand driven by housing starts.

Agriculture
With a few noteworthy exceptions, the nation's agricultural conditions aren't good. Low grain prices are hurting Minneapolis and St. Louis district farmers. St. Louis observes that corn futures prices recently reached their lowest level in nine years. Winter wheat has suffered substantial winter kill in the Chicago district, and dry weather is hurting spring-planted crops in the Atlanta district. Demand for Kentucky horses is down, and cattle ranchers in the Minneapolis and Kansas City districts are upset about the aftermath of the government's dairy herd buy-out program. But San Francisco reports that production of many fruits and vegetables is still profitable, while Atlanta says that poultry production is more profitable than last year.

Finance
Lending activity appears to be fairly good. Leading the way is mortgage lending. In Cleveland, for example, mortgage lenders report that lending increased 100 percent over last year. Home refinancing is up across the country. Regional differences have occurred in commercial lending—picking up in Boston, Philadelphia, and San Francisco while falling off in Cleveland, Atlanta, and Dallas. Only Boston and San Francisco also note increased consumer loan growth. More agricultural loan losses are foreseen in the Dallas and St. Louis districts.

Beige Book Report: Atlanta
May 6, 1986

Important economic sectors of the southeastern economy strengthened in the first quarter. However, the adverse employment impact of declining oil prices on Louisiana's economy and that of other energy-producing parts of the region has masked current and expected improvements. With few exceptions, construction activity is strong, and the activity and outlook for tourism has improved. Consumer spending increased in March following a lull in the beginning months of the year. In agriculture, dry weather has slowed the progress of crops thus tar this growing season.

Employment and Industry
The region's unemployment rate edged upward from January to February, and available state estimates hint at a further slight rise in March. Weakness in the energy sector has pushed Louisiana's oil-based economy to the highest unemployment rate in the nation with little prospect for improvement in the foreseeable future. Mississippi and Alabama also are suffering from the drop in petroleum prices, with a refinery In Mississippi temporarily closed in reaction to falling oil prices. Florida and Georgia continue to post unemployment rates significantly below that of the nation, while Tennessee's rate is about on a par with the nation's.

More job losses are expected as a result or falling oil prices. The rig count for Louisiana has dropped to the lowest level since 1975, resulting in further layoffs by companies that service the dwindling number of offshore oil platforms. The offshore rig utilization rate has dropped to 40 percent from 79 percent in early December, with exploration at a standstill.

More positively, some small towns in the region have been able to attract new industry and diversify their economies out of textiles by taking advantage of the labor pool of workers displaced by imports or automation. Furniture producers are starting to note moderate backlogs and some overtime work. They, along with lumber producers, are optimistic that falling interest rates will continue to stimulate their industry but are concerned by growing low-cost imports. Several leading furniture manufacturers are discontinuing production of certain items and are instead importing them for resale. The defense-related aerospace industry continues to bolster many local economies throughout the region.

Consumer Spending
The District's year-over-year retail sales growth in January- February 1986 was slightly below that of the nation. March and early April retail sales were compared favorably to year-ago levels by merchants in all District states except Louisiana, where weak activity continues. Retailers attributed improving sales in March to Easter season apparel purchases. In March, Louisiana and Mississippi were the only states in the region that mirrored the nation's depressed sales of non-auto durable goods. Through mid-April, 1986 car sales remained weak throughout the region.

Construction
With the major exceptions of New Orleans and Jackson, construction and sales of single-family home are above last year's levels throughout the Southeast. Lower mortgage rates are stimulating sales to both first-time buyers and families upgrading their housing; favorable weather for building has reinforced the positive interest rate impact. however, apartment markets in many metropolitan areas are experiencing softening rents, and condominium prices continue to fall in south Florida. Southeastern industrial space construction is beginning to accelerate, while low interest rates are said to be triggering some "high risk" office, retail, and hotel construction. Office vacancy rates are high and rising in all major cities except Birmingham, with suburban rates generally higher than those in downtown areas. Available retail space and lodging vacancy rates also are rising as a result of rapid increases in supply.

Financial Services
Total loan growth at large District banks continued its year-long slide in February and March. Real estate lending exhibits stronger growth than either consumer or business loans, but its growth rate also has been declining steadily. The Mississippi legislature has passed and sent a bill to the Governor that would allow interstate banking after a period for statewide expansions anti consolidations. In Louisiana, the remaining state in the region that prohibits interstate banking, enabling legislation is expected to be introduced in the current legislative session. After more than a year of active interstate banking in the District, merger and acquisition activity has enabled seven bank holding companies based in the region-up from five a year ago—to rank among the nation's 40 largest.

Tourism
Figures for visitor registrations and national park attendance through February show strength across the District. Most states are experiencing double-digit growth over last year for both of these measures. Some of this increase in activity has been attributed to already lower gas prices, and there is widespread expectation that summer tourism will grow at an even faster clip. In Florida, attendance records were set at major attractions in March, and expectations for the remainder of the year are very high. Lower airfares have stimulated passenger traffic through most airports compared to a year ago, with double-digit growth experienced by most major airports.

Agriculture
A prolonged period of dry weather has severely limited growth of forage for beef and dairy animals and has retarded the progress of spring-planted crops. Rainfall deficiencies also threaten water supplies that are likely to be needed for intensive irrigation during the summer. Prices received by farmers remain well below year-ago levels, with orange, vegetable, grain, and peanut crops showing especially large declines. At the same time, poultry producers are reaping favorable returns with market prices comparing favorably with year-ago levels, and feed costs have been declining.

Beige Book Report: Boston
May 6, 1986

Expansion in the First District remain unbalanced. Manufacturing activity is generally slow but some firms report encouraging signs. Retail sales are growing modestly, with upscale merchants doing better than discounters. Financial markets are active; real estate and businesses associated with home building are robust and likely to continue so. Outside the real estate sector, prices are generally stable as both consumer and producer markets remain highly competitive.

Retail
Sales results in the First District were mixed but get generally satisfactory in March and April. Several department store chains report "very good" increases of 6 to 10 percent over last year; another is disappointed with "sluggish" growth in comparable store sales—below plan but 6 to 8 percent ahead of last year. Hardware and building supply stores report excellent performance. Retailers doing well cite a combination of factors that leave more money in consumers pockets, including failing oil prices and lover interest rates. One discount chain with slow sales suggested that home mortgage refinancing is a more positive factor for high and middle income customers; among those contacted upscale merchants are more upbeat than those serving low to moderate income customers.

Inventories are a little heavier than planned in a number of stores, but not a source of concern. In some cases, the pace of restocking has been slowed; others prefer to wait before they take action to see if the situation corrects itself.

Several contacts said they are having difficulty hiring sales help in stores or clerical workers in the home office. Labor markets are reportedly tightening even outside the region's major urban areas.

Prices are generally steady, except for in upward trend in lumber and plywood. Department store buyers report that foreign prices are rising and that they will therefore substitute some domestic goods for imports. According to one contact, consumers don't see much price change because the marketplace is still very competitive and promotional.

Retailers expect the rest of 1986 to be strong in New England—"not a boom but good solid demand". These expectations derive from the factors mentioned above, plus reports by those stores with national affiliates that New England again outpaces other areas.

Automobiles
Reports of sales activity from automobile dealerships are mixed for both imports sad domestics. Those doing well claim that tax refunds, low gasoline prices, and warn weather are responsible. Dealers with disappointing sales suggest that large scale incentive programs late last year captured potential buyers from this spring. Domestic car purchases are shifting somewhat from compact to full-sized models. Truck sales are consistently strong.

Manufacturing
Manufacturing performance continues to be mixed in the First District. Firms producing computer-related items report sluggish sales and orders with some exceptions in the office automation area, while producers tied to homebuilding and other activities responding directly to consumers show signs of picking up. Tools, equipment, and other operations related to the oil industry are down. Some firms dependent on the capital spending of industries other than energy have seen orders improve but others report their industrial customers continue to postpone decisions about new equipment.

No major improvements are yet occurring as a result of the decline in the U.S. dollar. Several firms note the increased dollar value of sales made in foreign currencies, and one reports shifting some export production work from offshore facilities to its U.S. plants. A contact in the computer industry attributes the lack of real improvement in overseas sales to two factors: first, most of their competitors in Europe are other American manufacturers; second, declining prices create an incentive to postpone purchases in anticipation of further declines.

Inventories are in good shape and head counts are also lean. Capital spending plans are generally unchanged, and reflect programs to improve productivity, not to expand capacity with bricks and mortar.

The outlook is hazy. Firms are moderately optimistic, but in some cases this means they hope 1986 will be level with last year. Current order rates provide no indication that activity levels will shift significantly in the near future, but inquiries and proposals have picked up noticeably for two computer-related concerns.

Real Estate
The residential real estate market in New England is flourishing, with overall activity very high. Demand is outpacing supply; prices are climbing at a rate similar to last year and many homes are being sold at asking price. While the majority of those buying are upgrading to larger homes, low mortgage rates may also have brought additional first time purchasers into the market. Condominiums are maintaining their attractiveness in urban centers, but are weaker in some suburban areas.

Activity in the commercial real estate sector is healthy. Absorption rates are high. Prices for retail space in Boston are reportedly escalating, but prices for commercial space elsewhere are rising only slightly.

Finance
Consumer lenders in the First District report increased activity. Home equity loans, generally being used to pay off debt incurred at higher interest rates, are up the most; automobile and personal lending are also increasing.

Residential mortgage activity is at its highest level in several years, causing extensive processing backlogs. Most residential mortgage loan applicants are refinancing existing higher-rate loans. Interest rates are reportedly expected to continue declining, keeping activity at a high level.

Commercial loan demand continues to be strong, especially for commercial mortgages. Contacts report that businesses are refinancing existing debt as well as borrowing for expansion, and both of these activities are likely to continue at high levels.

Beige Book Report: Chicago
May 6, 1986

Summary
Most contacts at District companies report improving conditions, continuing a tread toward somewhat greater optimism. District payroll employment has shown some expansion, but still trails the U.S. performance. Purchasing managers in Chicago and Milwaukee noted increasing production and orders in March. Other contacts note growth in real estate transactions, residential construction, and higher shipments of paperboard, cement, concrete, gypsum board, basic and specialty chemicals, household appliances, and oil products. There is increasing evidence of favorable results from the lower dollar. Lower than expected sales or some auto models have led to inventory accumulation and new sales incentives. Heavy truck sales also are down, but sales of light and medium trucks remain strong. Sales of RVs and tourism are expected to increase substantially, boosted by the sharp drop in gasoline prices. Mechanical capital goods remain depressed, but there has been some rise in lighter construction equipment. Slower growth of federal spending and flat capital spending, with weakness in oil/gas, electric utilities, steel, and most machinery, are tending to offset at least part of the positive effects on activity of lower energy costs, reduced interest rates, and the depreciation of the dollar. Analysts see increased evidence that the 5-year slide in District farm real estate values will end later this year.

Paperboard
District analysts report "near-boom conditions" in the cardboard box industry. Strength in this sector is not matched elsewhere. Supplies are tight and operating rates high. Exports of linerboard are well above last year, attributed to the lower dollar and renewed economic expansion in Europe. Price increases of about 10 percent have been announced by leading producers, with 6 to 7 percent expected to "stick."

Motor Vehicles
Auto production plans have been revised down in light of excessive inventories, but remain near last year's levels. Some assembly plants have been closed temporarily in Michigan and Wisconsin. Light-duty truck sales have softened slightly but remain near record levels and output schedules are still above last year. Orders for medium trucks have increased slightly in recent weeks. An industry analyst expects sales of heavies to be down about 10% this year, but sees sales of mediums about even with last year, rather than down as expected earlier. Foreign competition is increasing for both medium and heavy trucks.

Steel
Orders for sheet steel have slipped, after strengthening in the first quarter, because of cuts in auto production schedules. Production at Chicago and Detroit area mills, through mid-April, is ahead of a year ago, but still at low and unprofitable levels. The market for sheet is being supported by continued relatively high demand for most autos, light trucks, and appliances. Demand for structural steel and activity at service centers are vigorous. Orders for machinery are weak. Shipments to the oil and gas industries are virtually at a standstill, except for pipelines.

Capital Goods
Weakness in capital spending is evident in electric utilities, machinery, steel, railroads, and water transport. A major electric utility is seeking regulatory approval of higher rates which would allow conversion of a stalled nuclear power plant to gas. No pickup is evident in orders for diesel engines for non-truck markets. A major District farm equipment producer has scheduled its North American farm equipment output 14 percent less than its low 1985 level, and plans further cuts in employment. Smaller types of construction equipment, paper-related equipment, and food processing equipment are picking up moderately. Demand has revived for electronic capital goods. The sharp decline in capital spending by oil companies has less adverse effect in this District than elsewhere.

Nonresidential Construction
Office building is slowing in the Chicago suburbs, but bidding volume continues strong in downtown Chicago, with large new projects announced. Commercial mortgages are readily available, with rates under 10 percent, down about 150 basis points since the beginning of the year. Life insurance companies are seeking more commercial mortgages. Construction of industrial buildings in the 40-50,000 square foot range is picking up. Ground was recently broken for an auto assembly plant in Illinois, a joint venture of an American and a Japanese auto maker.

Residential Construction
Demand for new and used housing is vigorous, spurred by low mortgage interest rates. Permits for new housing construction, for 3 months, are up 40 percent or more from year ago in the District. Fixed-rate, 30-year mortgages are available below 10 percent. Most borrowers want fixed-rate loans. New loans together with a huge volume of refinancings have caused delays in processing loan applications. Appropriately priced homes sell quickly, and home prices have risen substantially in favored suburban areas.

Consumer Spending
A large general merchandise chain reports improved sales in recent weeks, helped by mild weather. Inventories are described as flat. Analysts are optimistic about demand through the rest of this year, partly because of gains in spendable income associated with lower energy prices and reduced mortgage payments. Credit sales have not kept pace with total sales recently, and delinquencies are approaching 1980 highs. The strong housing market, for new and used homes, is boosting sales of appliances and home furnishings. Two large national oil companies are abandoning retailing in the Chicago area.

Agriculture
The District's winter wheat crop—which ranks a distant third to corn and soybeans in terms of crop marketings—suffered considerable winterkill damage. Wheat farmers will be able to offset some of the loss by replanting other crops or using seriously affected acreage to meet set-aside requirements. Favorable weather has permitted District crop farmers to get an early start on spring fieldwork, which may reduce subsequent weather stress. Bids from dairy farmers that account for 5.4 percent of the District's milk production, versus 8.7 percent nationwide, have been accepted for the government's whole-herd dairy buy-out program. These dairy farmers must liquidate their entire dairy herds within 18 months. Anticipation of increased dairy cattle slaughter undermined livestock prices in recent weeks. District farmland values, on average, declined nearly 3 percent during the first quarter, to 17 percent below a year earlier and 45 percent below the 1981 peak, but analysts increasingly believe the land market will bottom later this year. Transactions in farm real estate are up, from very low levels a year ago. But with heavy surpluses likely to continue in agriculture, no bounceback in land values is expected.

Beige Book Report: Cleveland
May 6, 1986

Summary
The Fourth District economy continues to expand slowly, but significant sectors of weakness remain. General merchandise sales are rising slowly while new car sales are high but flat. The unemployment rate is falling. Manufacturing output and orders are rising, but manufacturing employment is falling. Price behavior appears mixed. Oil, and coal prices and production are down. Problems continue in agriculture. House construction and sales are robust as is mortgage refinancing activity. Bank commercial and industrial loans are down and expected to remain weak while consumer installment lending is growing slowly.

Consumer Spending
Retailers in this District report generally small spending increases during the first quarter, particularly during the month of March. General merchandise sales in current dollars, as reported by three major District chains, were roughly 4-6 percent above year-ago levels. Although general merchandise inventories have risen since year-end 1985, none of the chains expressed concern over current inventory levels.

Auto dealers in the District are showing high, but relatively flat sales trends. Total domestic new-car sales in the Northern Ohio region during the first quarter were up only 1.4 percent from the year-ago level. Unlike the national experience, imported new-car sales in the Northern Ohio region have been accelerating in recent months. Sales of Ohio-made Hondas (included as "imports" by local reporting agencies) have been particularly strong this year. All of the domestic auto dealers contacted report new-car inventories were well above average at the end of March.

Labor Market Conditions
The unemployment rate in Ohio averaged 8.4 percent (s.a.) in the first three months of 1986, down 0.5 percentage points from a year earlier. The national unemployment rate remains lower but fell only 0.25 percentage points over the period.

Manufacturing
Output of manufacturers in this District continues to increase, but the rate of expansion has slowed. Despite this gain, more firms are reducing than increasing employment. Raw material and supply inventories are flat while finished good inventories continue to be drawn down. Firms report prices paid for raw materials and supplies are falling slowly but transaction prices for manufactured products sold are rising more rapidly than at any time in the last 12 months. Incoming orders are rising at an increasing pace.

A major food manufacturer reports his product prices are declining. Paper prices are up. There have been some production cutbacks in the tool and die business, but the plastic molding business is improving. Aluminum prices have risen because inventories have been reduced substantially and demand has improved.

Energy
Oil exploration activity in this District is off sharply, and a major oil firm is shutting down stripper wells. Coal production is slowing, and the price of coal is weakening.

Agriculture
The horse industry in Kentucky is in the midst of a shake-out as demand is weak. Many horse producers are overextended and many large farms are for sale. Grape and potato producers in this District have not been as adversely affected as agricultural producers in other regions.

Housing and Construction
The high level of housing activity in this District continues unabated, and market participants expect the strong pace to persist through year-end. A major builder in the District reports that traffic and new orders are up 25 percent overall and up 50 percent in some markets. The builder fears that house construction may be escalating so rapidly that important materials shortages will occur, but so far the firm has experienced only minor shortages. The builder also reports that its average price on homes sold is up 10 percent from a year ago despite no increase in list prices, because many homebuyers are adding amenities now that financing costs have fallen.

Realtors report that closings surged in March and April and that the inventory of listings is falling to low levels because of a severe drop in new listings. In this region, the composition of homebuyers has continued to shift toward first-time buyers who now constitute over 40 percent of buyers, up from 30 percent a year ago. The trend toward shorter-maturity mortgage loans is growing stronger, as more buyers demand 15-year mortgage loans. The period from application to closing of mortgage loans has increased from a normal range of 30 to 45 days to 45 to 90 days, because of increased volume.

Mortgage lenders in this District report that mortgage lending is up over 100 percent from a year ago. At some institutions, refinancings represent as much as 80 percent of mortgage volume. Few lenders are actively marketing their adjustable rate mortgage loans.

Commercial Banking
Loan demand appears to have weakened at District banks recently. Total loans outstanding at large banks fell over the past month. Commercial and industrial loans were down, while real estate and consumer installment lending inched up. Growth of consumer installment lending continues to taper off and is now at less than a 6 1/2 percent annual rate at large banks in this District. Contacts acknowledge the softness in loan demand and do not expect much improvement in the immediate future, despite the recent cut in the prime rate. One contact reports underlying weakness in business lending and expects it to continue over the next several months.

Beige Book Report: Dallas
May 6, 1986

The decline in the price of oil has brought economic expansion in the Eleventh District to a standstill. The drilling rig count continues to plunge and there is no sign that the bottom has yet been reached. Contract values for both residential and nonresidential construction are down. Falling demand from the energy and construction sectors has led to reduced sales by manufacturers. Retail sales are soft, especially in the energy-dependent areas of the District. Auto sales have begun to slow from the rapid pace of the previous two years. The recent flat loan demand at the District's large banks reflects the sluggish economy. In agriculture, credit problems are becoming more serious.

Manufacturing
Sales in manufacturing have been depressed by problems in construction and in the energy industry. Glass producers note a decline in orders that is tied to the downturn in nonresidential construction, but the output of lumber and wood products is stable as a result of strength in orders from outside the District. Primary and fabricated metals producers are adjusting to a drop in orders from the construction and energy sectors, but respondents indicate that past efforts to diversify their product lines should shelter them from serious weakness. Sales of oilfield machinery are sliding because of weakening drilling activity. District refiners have recently decreased production, but that is a response to a seasonal downturn in demand. Refiners expect sales this year to be high owing to reduced product prices. On the more positive side, electronics firms report that their sales have stabilized and are expected to rise, and aircraft employment and output is up sharply. Among apparel producers, one major manufacturer has just announced large layoffs, but past modernization and marketing efforts are beginning to help other firms against foreign competition.

Energy
The extraction portion of the energy industry continues to slide with little chance of stabilizing in the near future. The Texas rig count has fallen to 50 percent of year-earlier levels, compared to a 30-percent decline during the latter half of 1985. Well permit applications, a leading indicator of drilling activity, are 50 percent below a year earlier in District states. Another leading indicator, the seismic crew count, has dropped 30 percent from last year's level.

Construction
Reductions in the values of both nonresidential and residential construction contracts are widespread. Absorption rates for office space have fallen. Vacancy rates in most major cities are high and may increase further as office space that is now under construction is completed. Residential construction had been steady, but the value of contracts plummeted in March, paced by a large drop in multifamily units.

Retail Sales
Retail sales mirror the slowdown in other portions of the District economy. The nominal level of retail sales in energy-dependent areas has declined significantly. Elsewhere, slight gains have occurred. All product lines are moving slowly, especially consumer durables. Respondents report acceptable inventory levels, but they indicate that continued sluggish sales may lead to undesired inventory accumulation.

Auto Purchases
Auto purchases have ebbed in response to weakness in the District economy and to what dealers say is buyer satiation in the wake of the special promotions of 1984 and 1985, Sales declines, compared with a year earlier, are widespread throughout the District. Dealers note that involuntary inventory accumulation has begun to occur.

Large Banks
Asset growth at the District's large banks varies widely among individual institutions, but overall increases are down sharply from growth rates last year. Growth in real estate loans has slipped and business lows have been declining absolutely from year-earlier levels. The level of deposits at large banks is little changed from a year ago. Continued weakness in energy and construction recently induced the large District banks to increase their provisions to loan loss reserves. At thrift institutions, deposit growth remains strong.

Farmers and Ranchers
Income prospects for District farmers and ranchers are mixed. The impact of low crop prices is likely to be offset by more generous government programs and reduced grain costs will offset lower beef prices. Generally, District agricultural prices were lower in March than in February and they are likely to remain significantly below year-earlier levels. District agricultural land values continued to fall modestly in the first quarter. Agricultural bankers report that the proportion of agricultural loans with repayment problems is up from a year ago. Nearly 10 percent of last year's farm borrowers will not receive operating loans this year, compared with a reduction of 7 percent in 1985. Although the falling price of energy has lowered operating expenses for District farmers, declines in income from oil and gas royalties are likely to more than offset these cost reductions.

Beige Book Report: Minneapolis
May 6, 1986

Since year's end, conditions have not changed much in the Ninth District. Early in the first quarter, employment grew slightly. Overall, consumer spending growth was modest, with the exception of large gains in housing. Resource-related industries remained mixed, with good performance in the wood products sector but poor conditions in the energy sector. The agricultural outlook has not improved. Agricultural banking issues dominated the district's finance sector.

Employment
Overall, district employment conditions stopped deteriorating early in the first quarter, but they may now be declining in the oil- producing regions. In February, district states' unemployment rates hardly changed at all, and total employment grew in Minnesota, the Dakotas, and Montana during that month. But employment in durable goods manufacturing continued to falter. In Minnesota, this was largely due to a downturn in computer equipment manufacturing. Due to recent declines in oil prices, North Dakota's unemployment rate rose in March.

Consumer Spending
Retail purchases of general merchandise grew moderately. Although two department store chains in the district sold more than planned during the first quarter, sales at both slowed early in April. The chains' credit sales have been growing rapidly and are now being scrutinized for signs of deteriorating quality. Inventories were not excessive at either chain. Two big discounters report good sales generally throughout the district. However, bank directors say sales have been spotty outside the Twin Cities metro area, with flat sales in parts of Montana and western North Dakota but growing sales at a large shopping mall in Duluth, Minnesota.

Sales of motor vehicles have leveled off and may even be below year earlier levels. For one large domestic manufacturer, district car sales were running 16 percent below last year's level, while its truck sales were down 4 percent since a year ago. New car sales were weak in both western Montana and Bismarck, North Dakota, but were good in Fargo, North Dakota, and Pierre, South Dakota.

Housing activity has been generally quite strong. Realtors report that more homes were sold during March in the Minneapolis-St. Paul area than during any other previous month. Requests for FHA appraisals in the Twin Cities were also higher in March than ever before. Lower mortgage rates have also been spurring house sales in other parts of the district, including western Wisconsin.

Tourist spending at district ski resorts was mixed this winter. Business at some big Montana resorts was harmed by late starts and high winds. Resorts on the Upper Peninsula of Michigan also had a less-than-desirable season, according to a Bank director. But another director says a resort in northeastern Minnesota that usually loses money actually turned a profit this winter. In preparation for the summer season, many Minnesota resorts are expanding their facilities.

Resource-Related Industries
Conditions among the district's resource-related industries remained mixed. The wood products industry has been doing well. One Bank director notes that waferboard production has been going strong and that its price has firmed; another mentions that a new fiberboard plant on the Upper Peninsula of Michigan should eventually employ 300 workers. However, wood suppliers for such plants are receiving low prices for their products. Low prices are also plaguing the district's energy sector. As a result, active oil and gas drilling rigs are almost nonexistent in North Dakota and Montana. Although coal production in Montana has increased, coal prices have dropped.

Agriculture
Conditions remained poor in the agriculture sector. This Bank's late March survey of rural bankers in the district found little cause for optimism. The surveyed bankers say their customers' net farm earnings and farmland values fell below year-earlier levels. The Minnesota farm price index didn't rise from its low level in February. Wet weather has impeded early field work in Minnesota, although the moisture should help crops grow later. Drought conditions affecting the wheat-growing area of northeastern Montana have eased.

The U.S. agriculture department's dairy herd buy-out program has received much attention.. Nearly 10 percent of Minnesota's dairy farmers will be paid a total of $145 million to shut down operations for at least five years. The participation rate was lower in Wisconsin, according to a bank director. The buy out spurred many farmers to sell off their cows, at least temporarily lowering cattle prices and infuriating ranchers.

Finance Agricultural banking issues predominated in the district's finance sector. A group of seven rural Minnesota banks announced a program for reducing interest rates on farm loans secured by real estate, The Minnesota legislature enacted an interest buy-down program for farm loans, and participation has been so heavy that the program's budgeted funds have already run out. However, Minnesota's governor has promised continued funding for the program.

Beige Book Report: New York
May 6, 1986

In general, the Second District's economy has continued to improve since the last report. Retail sales showed over-the-year gains, particularly at higher income levels, and inventories remained in line. The spring homebuilding season was off to a good start, and the demand for office space continued to increase. Business activity was stable to somewhat improved. Demand for commercial mortgages has increased at small District banks as a result of declining interest rates.

Consumer Spending
Retail sales, although higher in general, have not shown equal strength for all income groups or in all regions. After a weak January-February period, retail sales in stores serving higher income consumers downstate and in New Jersey grew strongly in March. Most of these states reported over-the-year increases of 10 to 15 percent (well above plan), and early April figures suggest that sales are continuing strong. However, sales at department stores in western New York and at lower-priced stores throughout the District showed more modest gains. Over-the-year increases in March and early April of 6 to 7 percent were somewhat below expectations. Some retailers mentioned an "economic stratification" of the market. Higher income households appear to have the discretionary income to continue generating strong sales growth. But low and middle income consumers, feeling the weight of high consumer debt, appear hesitant to increase spending.

Despite some difficulty in predicting sales, District stores were generally able to keep inventories in line with desired levels. Most retailers planned promotions and sales similar to earlier years, though some higher-priced stores bad more spring promotions this year. Sales of apparel end housewares—highly advertised items—were especially strong.

Business Activity
Economic conditions in the Second District have tended to stabilize in recent weeks. More than 80% of purchasing managers surveyed in Rochester and Buffalo reported unchanged or improved conditions in March. Inventories at the majority of these firms held steady as well.

Plans for several plant expansions and relocation into the District have recently been announced. These included an $11 million renovation and modernization at a Buffalo food plant, a $6 million expansion of a ceramics and brick plant in Niagara Falls, and the move to central New York of some frozen food operations from an Iowa location. In addition, an electronics firm that invested $14 million at its Long Island plant last year plans even larger capital outlays at that location in 1986.

Offsetting these developments, however, were announcements of some further layoffs and plant closings. In the Buffalo area, Westinghouse announced plans to close a factory, idling 800 workers by year's end. Layoffs associated with the recently announced production cutbacks at General Motors and further restructuring at Union Carbide could also have a negative impact on the District's employment. Thus far, however, the unemployment rates for March of 6.7 percent in New York and 4.2 percent in New Jersey remained below the national average.

Construction and Real Estate
The new homebuilding season is reportedly off to a good start in the Second District, "Business is booming," according to one contact, and builders in general are busy, fulfilling contracts negotiated this winter as well as negotiating new ones. Strong buyer interest, fueled in part by the sharp drop in mortgage rates, has led many builders to anticipate a repeat of last year's lively pace. Some possible deterrents were noted, however. A growing shortage of suitable land was cited as a major factor behind rising home prices in rural areas. In addition, a short supply of subcontractors and other skilled labor could throw homebuilders behind schedule in the months ahead.

The commercial real estate market remained relatively strong in the Second District, and the demand for office space has increased further in several areas. The pickup in office leasing activity was most evident in Fairfield County, in northern New Jersey, and on Long Island. Nonetheless, conditions generally continue to be characterized as favorable to tenants, and rent concessions have been widespread in some areas. New York City's efforts to expand its office market to the outer boroughs were recently rewarded. British Airways announced that it will move its U.S. headquarters to Queens, and a stock exchange subsidiary plans to relocate its corporate headquarters to downtown Brooklyn.

Financial Developments
With the continued decline in interest rates, small Second District banks have seen an increased demand for commercial mortgages. At some banks this demand has been mainly for refinancings of both fixed and adjustable rate loans, while at others almost all requests has been for new loans. Prepayment penalties at some banks may discourage refinancings. Currently, some banks are incorporating floors into their variable rate loans. There is also some preference for shorter terms to maturity, in general in the 3 to 15 year range. Expectations are that demand for both new loans and refinancings will continue to increase.

Beige Book Report: Philadelphia
May 6, 1986

The Third District economy appears to be generally healthy in April. Retail sales, except for automobiles, have been strong, and bankers report that overall loan growth in the first quarter was not as fast-paced as last year, but still good. Mortgage lending is surging due to both refinancings and sales. The manufacturing sector is holding steady, although order backlogs have dropped and employment has declined.

The outlook in the Third District business community is for steady or improving conditions in the near term. Manufacturers expect business to improve, but they do not foresee gains in employment. Retailers expect current strong department store sales to continue into the summer. Bankers anticipate steady growth in commercial and industrial loan demand, but believe that growth in consumer loans will depend on further interest rate reductions.

Manufacturing Manufacturing activity in the third District is steady, according to the latest Business Outlook Survey. Of the industrial firms surveyed in April, 71 percent report no change in the pace of their business compared to March, 11 percent say business improved, and 16 percent indicate declining activity. Nondurable goods producers appear to be doing slightly better than producers of durable goods.

Most measures of industrial activity eased in April. Shipments increased, but new orders leveled off, pulling down backlogs of unfilled orders. Factory employment fell as well; one-third of the companies contacted for the April survey reported payroll cuts, while just 12 percent added to workforces. Prices of industrial goods in the region are stable. Mare than three-fourths of the survey respondents reported no change in the prices of either the goods they purchase or the products they sell.

Despite this month's pause in growth, Third District manufacturers are optimistic about the future. In their outlook for the next six months, over 40 percent of the firms participating in the April survey expect a pickup in new orders and a matching increase in shipments. Employment, however, may decline; although half of the firms polled intend to maintain current payrolls, 30 percent expect to reduce workforces. The rate of capital spending by manufacturers in the region is expected to show little change over the next six months.

Retail
Third District retailers say recent sales trends have been good. Department store officials report that February and March sales were above year-ago levels by healthy amounts--more than 10 percent for some stores. Discount store sales have been better than expected. Some of this improvement is attributed to growing sales of appliances and home furnishings coincident with more house sales in recent months. Clothing and children's items are also mentioned as particularly strong areas. Automobile sales have fallen, and dealers say a rebound is unlikely in the absence of even greater manufacturers' incentives.

Although household debt is high by historical standards, Third District merchants believe that consumers are in sufficiently good financial condition to continue the current rate of spending into the summer. They expect sales to be buoyed by rising real income, lower finance charges, and improved cash flow as mortgages are refinanced at lower interest rates. Further gains in sales of appliances, furniture, and home furnishings are expected in the wake of continued strength in the honing market.

Finance
Total loan volume outstanding at major Third District banks in early April was approximately 13 percent higher than a year earlier. In commercial lending, the retail and services sectors account for a major share of new loans at this time because financing needs are growing as business expands. Loan demand in the manufacturing sector is not as strong, and bankers note a fall-off in equipment financing as manufacturers postpone capital spending commitments while changes in rules on depreciation and investment tax credits are being considered by Congress. Lending officers expect overall C&I loan demand to remain strong and say that the current 10-14 percent annual growth rate is sustainable.

Real estate and construction loan volume is above year-ago levels at Third District financial institutions. Residential mortgage refinancing activity is brisk, as is mortgage lending for house sales. Bankers say they are continuing to lend for commercial and residential construction to developers with successful records and substantial financial resources, although concern is growing about possible increases in office vacancy rates later in the year.

Third District bankers report that consumer lending is growing, but at only about half the rate at which it started the year. The large amount of financing supplied by automobile manufacturers in recent months is cited as one factor in this slowdown, but area bankers generally report a substantial drop in the growth of credit card balances as well. Some banks have had no increase in credit card outstandings since March. Lending officers and bank economists do not think that consumers have reached their debt limits; they believe that consumers may be delaying credit purchases in anticipation of interest rate reductions.

Most Third District banks cut their prime rate to 8.5 percent in late April. Commercial bank economists think that the prime rate will stay at this level for the rest of the year. As for other interest rates, most bank forecasts call for a drop of 25-50 basis points along the yield curve during the second quarter, followed by rising rates as the economy and inflation accelerate in the second half of the year.

Beige Book Report: Richmond
May 6, 1986

Overview
Business condition are reported to be stronger than a few weeks ago by most retailers and manufacturers, although weakness persists in the textile and shipbuilding industries and in mining. Residential construction continues very strong with some indications of a leveling off, while commercial building is slowing somewhat. According to our sources, banks are liquid and S&Ls are busy, agriculture is in the midst of a relatively normal spring, the regional ports are experiencing increased activity, and summer tourism is expected to be very good.

Consumer Spending
Retailers report significant increases in activity in recent weeks. Most attribute the surge in sales to declining interest rates. Major department stores report strong to very strong durable goods sales that are expected to remain robust along with the housing boom. Nondurable goods, especially apparel, are also moving well. Ski areas enjoyed their best season on record, and summer tourism is off to an excellent start. Resort bookings are running above optimistic expectations, and major tourist areas are revising their forecasts upward due to lower gasoline prices and decreased interest in traveling abroad.

Manufacturing and Mining
Regional manufacturing activity is up by some measures and down by others this month, according to our survey of business conditions. Fifty-two percent of the responding firms report increased shipments and 19 percent report no change over last month. The volume of new orders is also up, although the backlog of orders is reported to be down by 48 percent of the responding firms. Inventories remain mostly unchanged or reduced but are still judged too high, especially in light of the reduced backlogs. For this reason, perhaps, 32 percent of the responding firms report fewer employees and 27 percent report declines in hours worked as compared with a month ago. Within this environment, the majority of firms believe that business activity in their immediate market areas and the production of their own firms will pick up during the next six months.

Within the manufacturing sector, shipbuilding and ship repairs remain bleak, with foreign competition cited as the main problem. Apparel executives express concern over imports, especially those from the Orient, although production remains steady in both the textile and apparel industries.

The regional ports show increased activity in both import and export shipments. The lumber industry continues to grow along with housing. Mining output remains steady although slightly below a year ago.

Construction
The residential real estate market remains very strong, with the number of units sold running sharply above year-ago levels across the District. A decline in the length of time property is remaining on the market also attests to the robustness of current isles activity. Construction of new residential units is generally up, although reports of a leveling off are coming from some areas. Prices are moving upward almost everywhere in the District, but the size of the increases varies widely.

Commercial and office construction is generally perceived to be slowing somewhat. Vacancy rates for office buildings in urban areas remain high and are generally regarded to be a primary factor limiting more new construction.

Financial
Members of our Small Business and Agriculture Advisory Council report that banks are highly liquid and eager to make good loans at low rates.

S&L executives report very high volume in mortgage financing and refinancing. Mortgage rates are being held up artificially, they say, to reduce applications.

Agriculture
Spring planting is progressing at a normal pace throughout the District. Small grains and pastures have been held back by cooler- than-normal weather, but recent rains have alleviated the moisture shortage experienced during March and the first half of April. Livestock producers are currently facing some downward price pressure but lower feed costs should assist them in maintaining profit margins.

Agriculture in the Fifth District remains stronger than in many other areas of the nation. Recent data indicate that the region's farmland values have remained reasonably stable over the past year; possibly the multi-year downward trend may be nearing the bottom.

Beige Book Report: San Francisco
May 6, 1986

Economic activity in much of the Twelfth District has shown some improvement during the past month. Most of the District should benefit from the recent plunge in oil prices, although oil producing regions have been hit hard. Consumer spending, while no longer growing at its previous high rates, remains high and shows no sign of slowing. Lower interest rates have generated renewed optimism in the construction and wood products industries, while the slump in high tech appears to have bottomed out. Weakness continues, however, in the agriculture and mining sectors. Nevertheless, strong loan volumes suggest that the overall mood is optimistic.

Trade and Services
Retail sales continue strong in much of the West, with Idaho, Utah, and Oregon showing increased strength in sales volume. While respondents in most parts of the District anticipate improved trade due to lower oil prices and interest rates, Alaska's oil related problems could hamper trade in parts of Washington and Oregon, where Alaska is an important market. In most parts of the District, lower oil prices have resulted in reduced retail gasoline prices. Lower travel costs, together with the lower value of the dollar and fears of terrorism abroad, are expected to boost tourist spending throughout the West this summer. Businesses in the Pacific Northwest expect particularly strong gains due to the World's Fair in British Columbia.

Manufacturing
Aerospace industries continue to prosper, as high defense contract volumes combine with strong commercial aircraft demand to boost activity. While the electronics sector appears to have weathered the worst of its downturn, employment levels in many areas remain below their year-earlier levels. Employment is unlikely to expand during the initial stages of the industry's recovery because many firms continue to operate with excess capacity.

Other manufacturing industries, such as aluminum, are likely to benefit from reduced energy costs. In some cases, these lower costs could make previously unprofitable plants profitable for the first time in years.

Resource Based Industries
The sharp reduction in oil prices is wreaking havoc in energy producing parts of the Twelfth District. In Alaska, drilling activity has been reduced substantially. In California and Utah, drilling and pumping activity is down sharply, with rig counts in most oil producing areas between 20 and 80 percent below their year-earlier levels. Respondents in Alaska, Utah, and Kern County (California) report that their governments have already lost millions of dollars in tax revenue due to the lower oil prices.

In contrast, the forest products industry currently is posting its best performance in several years. Lower interest rates and the reduced foreign exchange value of the U.S. dollar have boosted prices of some products to 22 percent above their year-earlier levels, while lumber orders at West Coast mills reportedly reached a record level during the week of March 8. One respondent reports that lumber mill inventories are at their lowest level in two years. Although lumber trade volume through some Northwest ports had not yet picked up in February, industry sources remain optimistic about future prospects.

Sustained weakness in copper prices continues to be a problem in Utah and in parts of Arizona. In contrast, gold mining is a healthy industry in Nevada, which currently produces more gold than does any other state.

Agriculture continues to show weakness due to low prices and increased competition from abroad. Despite the overall weakness, some crops, including many fruits and vegetables, continue to be quite profitable.

Construction and Real Estate
Lower interest rates have spurred real estate and construction activity in most parts of the Twelfth District. Home resales and residential and commercial construction are all strong, although the boom is not shared by oil producing parts of the District. In Alaska, where the government has in the past funded huge infrastructure construction projects, the building sector has been hit particularly hard.

Financial Sector
Mortgage loan originations continue to grow, spurred by a rush to refinance existing home mortgages taken out when rates were higher, as well as by renewed buying activity. In most of the District, consumer loan volumes continue to be strong. In addition, commercial loan volumes have picked up, apparently spurred by low interest rates and, in Oregon, by an improved economic outlook as well.

Beige Book Report: St Louis
May 6, 1986

Summary
The Eighth District indicators of real economic activity were higher than national figures over the most recent period. Expansion of both goods- and services-producing industries contributed to substantial employment growth in recent months. Retail sales have been strong this year with growth surpassing that of the nation. Respondents expect mortgage refinancing to result in increased disposable income that may boost future consumer spending. Spurred by mild weather in the region, construction activity in the first quarter also exceeded national figures. Financial and agricultural indicators are less encouraging, with commercial and consumer lending slowing in the first quarter and no change in the forecast of low prices for District farm products.

Employment
Eighth District nonagricultural employment grew at a 1.2 percent annual rate in February, trailing the 1.9 percent national rate. In the three-month period ending in February, however, the 10.7 percent growth rate of District nonagricultural employment exceeded the nation's 3.6 percent rate. District manufacturing employment increased at a 4.8 percent annual rate in the three months ending in February compared with a 2.1 percent rate for the nation. Despite these strong employment figures, even faster growth in the labor force raised the Eighth District unemployment rate in February from 7.7 to 8.0 percent.

Consumer Spending
District retail sales growth continues to exceed the national pace. January sales in the region were 10.9 percent above year-ago levels while nationally sales increased by 6.2 percent. District retail sales grew at a 1.3 percent annual rate for the three months through January while the nation's sales declined slightly during the period.

Some District retailers have suggested that spending would be higher were it not for the "up-front" closing costs incurred when consumers refinance home mortgages. The results of a survey of 11 District financial institutions, however, suggest that mortgage refinancing has not restrained consumer spending and, in fact, should result in improved cash flows that could lead to further growth of consumer spending. Most indicated that the overwhelming majority of refinancers have been able to include the closing costs in the new mortgage and still enjoy lower monthly payments.

Construction
Spurred by good weather, first quarter construction activity grew faster in the District than in the nation. Contracts for District residential construction grew by 8.5 percent (simple rate) from the previous quarter, while a 1.9 percent decline was posted for the nation. District nonresidential construction contracts increased by 4.3 percent in the first quarter while the national figure declined by 15.2 percent.

Banking
Total loans at large District banks grew at a 9.7 percent rate for the first quarter. This increase represents a considerable slowing from the 19.3 percent annual rate of growth recorded for the first three months of 1985. Commercial lending continues to be sluggish, increasing at a 6.6 percent rate, compared with a 16.0 percent rate of growth for the first quarter of last year. Over the most recent three months, however, month-to-month growth rates have been accelerating. Compared with recent experience, the growth of consumer lending is slower than that for the same period last year. Consumer lending expanded at a 15.8 percent rate, while a 24.1 percent rate of growth was recorded for the first quarter of 1985.

The Missouri interstate banking bill has received both Senate and House endorsement and now awaits the Governor's approval. The bill provides for a reciprocal agreement with eight neighboring states and contains no provision for full nationwide banking.

Agriculture
The price outlook for major District crops remains depressed as futures prices for this season's crops have fallen to levels well below old crop prices. Corn futures prices, for example, are at a nine-year low while fall cotton futures are 38 percent below current prices. Farmland values are expected to continue falling in tandem with crop prices as they have over the last four years. Bank data indicate similar farm lending trends in the District and the U.S. Loans outstanding to farmers declined in 1985 by 10.2 and 12.3 percent, respectively, at banks in the nation and the District. The percent of overdue farm loans at agricultural banks increased from 2.9 percent in 1983 to 5.5 percent in 1985 in the District and from 2.9 percent to 4.2 percent in the nation. Because loans that are eventually written off first appear as overdue loans, these increases in overdue loans suggest that agricultural loan losses will continue to rise in the future.



























