National Summary
Overall Economic Activity
On balance, economic activity was little changed in nearly all Districts since early September, though two Districts reported modest growth. Most Districts reported declining manufacturing
activity. Activity in the banking sector was generally steady to up slightly, and loan demand was
mixed, with some Districts noting an improvement in the outlook due to the decline in interest
rates. Reports on consumer spending were mixed, with some Districts noting shifts in the compo- sition of purchases, mostly toward less expensive alternatives. Housing market activity has generally held up: inventory continued to expand in much of the nation, and home values largely held
steady or rose slightly. Still, uncertainty about the path of mortgage rates kept some buyers on
the sidelines, and the lack of affordable housing remained a persistent problem in many communities. Commercial real estate markets were generally flat, although data center and infrastructure
projects boosted activity in a few Districts. The short-lived dockworkers strike caused only minor
temporary disruptions. Hurricane damage impacted crops and prompted pauses in business
activity and tourism in the Southeast. Agricultural activity was flat to down modestly, with some
crop prices remaining unprofitably low. Energy activity was also unchanged or down modestly, and
lower energy prices reportedly compressed producers’ margins. Despite elevated uncertainty, contacts were somewhat more optimistic about the longer-term outlook.
Labor Markets
On balance, employment increased slightly during this reporting period, with more than half of the
Districts reporting slight or modest growth and the remaining Districts reporting little or no
change. Many Districts reported low worker turnover, and layoffs reportedly remained limited.
Demand for workers eased somewhat, with hiring focused primarily on replacement rather than
growth. Worker availability improved, as many contacts reported it had become easier to find the
workers they need. However, contacts noted that it remained difficult to find workers with certain
skills or in some industries, such as technology, manufacturing, and construction. Wages generally
continued to rise at a modest to moderate pace. With the improvement in worker availability, contacts in multiple Districts pointed to a slowdown in the pace of wage increases. Still, larger than
usual pay increases were reported for some workers, such as those in the skilled trades or in
remote areas.
Note: This report was prepared at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York based on information collected on or before
October 11, 2024. This document summarizes comments received from contacts outside the Federal Reserve System and
is not a commentary on the views of Federal Reserve officials.
1
Prices
Inflation continued to moderate with selling prices reportedly increasing at a slight or modest pace
in most Districts. Still, the prices of some food products, such as eggs and dairy, were reported to
have increased more sharply. Home prices edged up in many Districts, while rents were reported
to be steady or down slightly. Many Districts noted increasing price sensitivity among consumers.
Input prices generally rose moderately. Contacts across several industries noted more acute pressures from rising insurance and healthcare costs. Multiple Districts reported that input prices generally rose faster than selling prices, compressing firms’ profit margins.
Highlights by Federal Reserve District
Boston
Economic activity was flat, as was employment, and prices increased slightly. International travel
was a bright spot, and the summer tourism season on Cape Cod was described as strong. More
broadly, consumers remained highly price conscious, and certain manufacturers had persistently
weak sales. Home sales and home prices softened noticeably over the summer. Contacts were
cautiously optimistic about the outlook for late 2024 and 2025.
New York
On balance, regional economic activity was little changed. Employment increased slightly and
wages continued to increase moderately. Housing markets remained solid, with home prices continuing to edge up. Selling price increases remained modest. Capital spending plans were strong, with some investments already underway. Philadelphia
Business activity continued to decline slightly in the current Beige Book period. Consumer
spending fell modestly, and nonmanufacturing activity fell slightly. Employment appeared to rise
slightly, after falling slightly last period. Wage growth continued at a modest pace, as did reported
rises in input costs and prices. Expectations for future growth rose—becoming more widespread
for both manufacturers and nonmanufacturers.
Cleveland
Overall, Fourth District business activity was stable. Residential construction and real estate
activity increased and demand for nonfinancial services remained strong. By contrast, consumer
spending and demand for manufactured goods remained soft. Employment levels were stable. On
balance, wages increased modestly, nonlabor costs grew moderately, and selling prices increased
slightly.
2 The Beige Book
Richmond
The regional economy grew modestly this cycle. Consumer spending picked up, loan demand
increased, manufacturing activity expanded, port activity rose, and employment grew slightly. Ports
in the District were minimally impacted by the short-lived worker strike; however, parts of our District were heavily affected by Hurricane Helene; the full impacts of the loss of life and property
were still being assessed.
Atlanta
The economy of the Sixth District declined slightly. Employment was steady and wages grew slowly. Prices were little changed, and pricing power softened. Consumer spending slowed, and tourism
decelerated. Demand for housing was flat. Transportation activity increased slightly. Loans grew
modestly. Manufacturing declined and energy activity slowed. Agriculture conditions weakened.
Chicago
Economic activity increased slightly. Consumer spending rose modestly; employment was up
slightly; construction and real estate activity was flat; nonbusiness contacts saw little change in
activity; and business spending and manufacturing activity edged down. Prices were up modestly, wages rose moderately, and financial conditions loosened slightly. Prospects for 2024 farm
income were unchanged.
St. Louis
Economic activity across the Eighth District has remained unchanged since our previous report,
despite continuing to show some signs of slowing demand. Across the District, contacts
expressed their intention to maintain employment levels in the upcoming months. Prices continued to increase modestly with some input costs remaining unchanged or decreasing. The outlook among contacts remains slightly pessimistic but has modestly improved for many. Minneapolis
Economic activity declined slightly since the last report. Employment grew but labor demand continued to soften. Prices increased slightly overall, with greater pressure on input prices, while
wages increased moderately. Consumer spending was flat, with some contacts expressing concern for consumer financial health. Manufacturing decreased moderately. Commercial and residential construction declined slightly. Agricultural conditions were stable at low levels.
National Summary 3
Kansas City
District economic activity was steady as mild growth in consumer spending offset slower manufacturing and professional service activity. Employment levels remained flat on net, though more contacts reported reducing their staffing levels recently. Business contacts reported more delays in
receiving payments, raising financial strains but not affecting their hiring plans.
Dallas
Economic activity rose modestly over the reporting period, buoyed by a pickup in growth in nonfinancial services. Housing demand held steady, while retail sales, loan demand, and manufacturing output weakened. Employment increased, and wage growth was moderate. Outlooks were
mixed, with domestic policy and economic uncertainty cited as key concerns.
San Francisco
Economic activity was steady. Labor availability improved further, and wages grew slightly. Overall
prices were largely stable. Retail sales and activity in manufacturing and consumer services softened. Demand for business services improved, while conditions in real estate, financial services,
agriculture, and resource-related industries were largely unchanged.
4 The Beige Book
Federal Reserve Bank of
Boston
Summary of Economic Activity
Economic activity was roughly flat overall. Employment was unchanged and wages rose moderately. Prices increased only slightly, although isolated cost pressures were still noted. Retail and
tourism led in terms of activity—including moderate gains in international travel—but still showed
only slight growth on balance as consumers’ price sensitivity persisted or even intensified. Manufacturing revenues were down slightly amid weak demand at most firms. Demand and revenues
were steady among software and IT services firms. Home sales posted modest gains from a year
earlier despite an especially soft summer. Commercial real estate activity was flat but varied
across property types. Sentiment for late 2024 and 2025 was cautiously optimistic on average,
but ranged from bullish, among tourism contacts, to pessimistic, among some manufacturers.
Labor Markets
Employment was flat net of seasonal increases, and wages increased further at a moderate pace.
Among IT services contacts, headcounts were stable, and wage increases ranged from slight to
moderate. Summer hiring on Cape Cod in retail and hospitality was facilitated by a resurgence in
short-term visas for foreign-born workers as well as increased supply of domestic seasonal
workers. Hotel contacts around Boston also reported a normalization of labor supply, notwithstanding the ongoing hotel worker strike in the area. Manufacturing employment was stable
overall, but one firm paused hiring and incentivized early retirement, while another increased headcount slightly. Manufacturers reported either no changes in wages or standard raises, but one firm
continued to face above-average wage pressures, and another reported a large increase in healthcare costs. The outlook for hiring was subdued, as only one contact (a manufacturer) planned to
expand its headcount significantly in the coming months; at the same time, no contacts intended
to make layoffs.
Prices
Prices increased slightly on balance. Most manufacturers held output prices steady over the
quarter, in one case despite a significant rise in healthcare costs, but one offered discounts in
response to declines in input prices. Otherwise, manufacturers’ nonlabor costs (excluding healthcare) increased modestly, and one firm was concerned about increased uncertainty in shipping
5
costs. Among IT firms, output prices increased slightly to adjust for inflation. Retail prices were
stable despite slight input cost pressures. Hotel room rates in the Greater Boston area rose modestly on a year-over-year basis, though marking a stepdown from the pace reported in the previous
quarter. Hospitality contacts on Cape Cod said that average rates for accommodations were down
slightly this past summer from the previous one. Across all sectors, planned output price
increases for 2025 were modest, and contacts did not express major concerns about cost pressures aside from healthcare and shipping. Retail and Tourism
First District retail and tourism contacts reported slight growth in revenues in recent months.
Retailers on Cape Cod had a strong summer season, with activity that was roughly level with the
summer of 2023. An online retailer had stable revenues overall but observed a growing gap in
sales volumes between promotional periods and off-promotion periods, especially for higher-priced
items. Airline passenger traffic through Boston increased moderately year-over-year, with international travel up more than 15 percent over 2019 levels. Hotel occupancy in greater Boston rose
modestly in August from earlier in the summer, consistent with seasonal expectations and on par
with August 2023. Contacts are forecasting strong tourism and convention activity for Boston for
the rest of 2024 and early 2025, supported by both domestic and international visitors. Retailers
expressed cautious optimism that demand would hold steady moving forward.
Manufacturing and Related Services
Manufacturing revenues were down slightly from the previous quarter. Most firms described
demand as weak, although a frozen food producer reported strong growth in year-to-date revenues
compared with the same period in 2023. For one contact, third-quarter revenues beat expectations despite declining slightly from a year earlier, while a semiconductor manufacturer said that
recent results fell short of expectations because of an ongoing industrywide slump. Inventories
rose modestly at selected firms, approaching higher-than-desired levels. Capital expenditures were
consistent with previous plans, with one firm spending much more than last year to add a new
production facility. Most firms expected stable or improving demand for the rest of 2024, but the
outlook for 2025 was mixed. Half of contacts were either cautiously or unreservedly optimistic,
but the other half perceived a high degree of uncertainty and feared that sales would fall short
of targets.
IT and Software Services
Among First District IT services contacts, demand and revenues held steady on average. Concerning revenues, one firm beat expectations with a healthy increase from the previous quarter, and another saw a temporary dip that was attributed to the firm’s transition to a subscription6 The Beige Book
based model. Capital spending was flat at very low levels or declining in one case due to
increased reliance on cloud-based servers. Contacts held neutral-to-positive expectations for
activity at their respective businesses, based on beliefs that demand for their products and services was on the rise. Nonetheless, contacts saw risks to the overall business climate from uncertainty surrounding the presidential election, and one firm worried that inflation could surge again
and hurt its profit margins.
Commercial Real Estate
Commercial real estate activity was stable on average, but office leasing fell short of seasonal
expectations. In the Boston area, legal and financial tenants continued to provide decent office
demand, but weak demand from high tech firms persisted. The life sciences industry buoyed
leasing activity in Providence, but not enough to drive meaningful changes in vacancy rates or
rents. Contacts reported no recent office foreclosures, though many properties remained distressed. Industrial leasing was stable but on the slower side, especially for larger spaces,
although industrial sales picked up moderately. Retail leasing was stable, and retail rents showed
slight increases. Lending conditions remained tight relative to historical norms, especially for
office properties, while funding was comparatively more available for industrial and multifamily
properties. The outlook for the sector was mixed, with some contacts expecting no major changes
in conditions and others expecting a significant increase in activity in 2025 as election-related
uncertainty was resolved and interest rates fell further. Residential Real Estate
First District residential home sales in August 2024 were up modestly from a year earlier but were
down slightly from June net of seasonal factors. Single-family home sales increased moderately
on a year-over-year basis (to August 2024) in most states but fell slightly in Massachusetts. (No
data were available for Connecticut). Contacts in Massachusetts said that summer home sales
were muted, even relative to seasonal norms, as prospective buyers waited for mortgage rates to
fall further; the same contacts noted that home prices softened for two consecutive months but
still increased moderately from a year earlier. Home prices were also up moderately from
August 2023 in the other First District states, on average, but the price changes were somewhat
mixed across markets. For-sale inventories rose substantially on a year-over-year basis (to August)
in every market except Massachusetts, where inventories were flat from one year earlier. Contacts
were guardedly optimistic that home sales would improve further in late 2024 and into 2025,
based on the likelihood that mortgage rates would fall further during that period.
For more information about District economic conditions visit: https://www.bostonfed.org/in-theregion.aspx.
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston 7
Federal Reserve Bank of
New York
Summary of Economic Activity
Economic activity in the Second District was little changed this reporting period. Employment
increased slightly and wages continued to increase moderately. Selling price increases remained
modest. Manufacturing activity was little changed, and service sector activity was flat. Capital
spending plans were strong, with some investments already underway. Consumer spending
increased slightly. Housing markets remained solid, with home prices continuing to edge up. Commercial real estate markets worsened. Activity in the broad finance sector increased slightly after
an extended period of decline. Many contacts reported hesitancy in decision-making due to heightened uncertainty surrounding the presidential election. Looking further ahead, businesses were
now somewhat optimistic conditions would improve.
Labor Markets
On balance, employment in the region increased slightly, though at a slower pace than in the last
report. Employment reductions were reported among business services, information services, construction, and retail firms. However, manufacturers increased headcounts slightly for the first time
in many months, and employment increases were reported among leisure and hospitality, education and health, wholesale, and transportation firms. There were no signs of major layoffs in the
region and hiring plans generally remained solid.
Demand for workers remained subdued, and worker availability continued to increase. Contacts at
employment agencies in New York City and upstate New York noted steady demand for labor in
financial services but indicated that demand for tech workers has remained soft. A contact at a
regional tech firm reported a reduction in hiring plans for entry level roles, noting that college job
fairs have had considerably more jobseekers than in recent years. More generally, hiring was subdued and was largely for replacement rather than growth, as businesses remained hesitant to
make hiring decisions due to uncertainty surrounding the presidential election. Several contacts
noted that turnover rates remained exceptionally low. Wage growth, while still moderate, slowed somewhat. With more workers available, there has been
less pressure on employers to provide outsized raises, except in rural areas where labor supply
remains low.
8
Prices
Selling price increases remained steady and continued at a modest pace, while input price
increases remained steady and moderate. Fuel remains an exception, and despite declines in the
cost of fuel, a construction industry contact reported that fuel surcharges persist on invoices for
the delivery of materials, keeping costs from falling as much. Further, a contact in the retail gas
sector noted that prices at the pump have remained elevated, even as costs have dropped. Some
contacts were on edge about the dockworkers’ strike and its potential impact on input prices, but
such concerns were short lived. Businesses expect little change in pricing pressures in the
coming months.
Consumer Spending
Consumer spending increased slightly this period. Department store contacts in the region
reported growing sales in recent weeks after muted sales during the previous period. Consumers
have been more discriminating, trading off less quantity for higher quality, particularly for accesso- ries such as handbags and shoes.
Auto dealers in upstate New York noted that sales activity softened somewhat following unusually
strong sales after June’s cyber-attack. Consumers now have a good selection of available inventory from which to choose. With increases in car prices and the cost of living more generally, it has
become difficult for many households to afford a new car. Used car sales remained solid and fairly
steady during this reporting period. Although credit conditions continued to tighten, creditworthy
borrowers are still able to get auto loans.
Manufacturing and Distribution
Manufacturing activity was little changed. New orders declined slightly, while shipments were
essentially flat. Firms in the transportation and warehousing industries reported little change in
activity, while wholesalers pointed to a modest decline. Though supply availability worsened somewhat, delivery times were little changed. Several contacts reported jitters about the possibility of
supply-chain bottlenecks around the dockworkers strike, but such concerns resolved quickly with
the end of the strike. Manufacturing and wholesale firms grew quite optimistic that conditions
would improve in the months ahead.
Services
On balance, activity in the service sector held mostly steady. However, activity increased somewhat in the education and health and leisure and hospitality sectors, and declined in the personal
services sector. Of note, service sector firms reported a modest increase in capital spending for
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 9
the first time in a while, and capital spending plans were strong. Still, optimism among services
firms remained subdued.
Tourism activity in New York City edged down since the last report as typically busy fall weekends
were quieter than expected. A New York City tourism expert reported that suburban residents have
been visiting less often, due to concerns for public safety and the rise in remote work arrangements. With reduced visits, the restaurant industry has seen declining sales. Still, attendance at
Broadway shows improved, with recent attendance just a bit below pre-pandemic levels. Hotel
bookings for the months ahead have slowed somewhat as some travelers have put travel planning on hold.
Real Estate and Construction
The housing market remained firm. The supply of homes continued on a slow upward trend but
remained near historic lows. Demand remained solid, though it was tempered by buyers’ uncertainty about the path of mortgage rates and home prices. Demand continued to outpace supply, and home prices edged up across the District. Although bidding wars became slightly less frequent, a substantial share of sales closed over the asking price, and cash sales remained an
unusually large share of activity. Manhattan remained the exception, where inventory was at
normal levels, closings were subdued, and prices moved down slightly. The rental market eased slightly after an extended period of rising rents. Rents in New York City
edged down slightly but remained at high levels. Demand for rental housing was strong, and new
signed contracts continued to rise. Outside of New York City, rents edged up after bottoming out
earlier in the year, and vacancy rates were slightly above pre-pandemic levels.
Commercial real estate markets weakened. The office market continued to worsen, albeit at a
slower pace than last year. Demand for office space continued to decline, and vacancy rates rose
across the District. The retraction in the industrial market following the pandemic boom continued.
In northern New Jersey in particular, the industrial vacancy rate rose considerably as demand for
space sagged.
Construction firms reported that activity continued to decline at a moderate pace. One business
owner reported notably elongated construction times due to protracted permitting processes and
utility-related delays.
Banking and Finance
Activity in the broad finance sector increased slightly after a period of persistent weakness. Still,
small-to-medium-sized banks reported reduced demand for business and consumer loans, while
10 The Beige Book
demand for commercial and residential mortgages, as well as refinancing, held steady. Credit
standards tightened for business loans, consumer loans, and commercial mortgages. Deposit
rates continued to decline noticeably, and delinquency rates continued to rise for all loan types.
However, with lower interest rates, banking contacts are optimistic that demand will rise and margins will widen in the months ahead.
Community Perspectives
Community leaders expressed concern about increasing food insecurity as the number of recipients for programs that distribute food and financial assistance, continued to increase. Processing
delays for benefits programs combined with sustained high food prices post-pandemic have
weighed on community members with fixed incomes, including elderly, low-income, and student
populations. Direct funding of food programs from state and local governments for school-age and
elderly people has provided stopgap funding where federal funds have been delayed or
discontinued.
For more information about District economic conditions visit: https://www.newyorkfed.org/
regional-economy.
Federal Reserve Bank of New York 11
Federal Reserve Bank of
Philadelphia
Summary of Economic Activity
On balance, business activity in the Third District continued to decline slightly. Consumer spending
continued to fall despite a rise in retail promotions focused on driving higher customer traffic. Nonmanufacturing activity declined slightly after holding steady last period, and manufacturing activity
fell modestly. Employment appeared to rise slightly following a slight decrease in the prior period,
mostly due to manufacturing firms increasing their workforces. Staffing firms reported a slight
increase in demand. Wage inflation remained modest. Continued improvement in employee retention and labor availability kept wage pressures at or below pre-pandemic norms. Firm costs and
prices continued to rise modestly. On average, firms expect modest economic growth over the next
six months—optimism was more widespread among both manufacturers and nonmanufacturers,
although expectations remained below historical averages for both firm types.
Labor Markets
Employment appeared to rise slightly, reversing a slight decline in the prior period. Based on our
September survey, full-time employment rose for manufacturing firms. Nonmanufacturing firms
reported steady full-time employment and an increase in part-time jobs. Over half of both manufacturers and nonmanufacturers continued to report no change in employment during the period,
while no manufacturers reported a decrease in their number of employees. However, manufacturing firms reported a decline in the average workweek.
Staffing contacts reported a slight increase in demand after reporting steady activity last period.
One contact highlighted that the normally busy end-of-year season for staffing appeared to start
earlier this year. Another staffing contact noted that many service-sector clients were active in
hiring to replace departing workers; however, relatively few were looking to expand their workforce.
Overall, wage inflation remained at a modest pace. Most business contacts continued to report
low or no wage pressure for most jobs outside of specialty trades. A couple of business contacts
noted that recently negotiated labor union contracts resulted in moderate wage gains for many
union and nonunion employees and led to growing wage pressure from other workers. Most contacts continued to report low employee turnover and better labor availability.
12
In our monthly surveys, the share of nonmanufacturing firms reporting higher wage and benefit
costs per employee ticked up in September but remained typical of the pre-pandemic era when
modest wage growth prevailed.
Prices
On balance, firm prices continued to rise at a modest pace. Contacts continued to report that
increases in most input costs have stabilized; however, some commodity prices continued to fluctuate. Contacts across many sectors noted they were keeping prices steady, and in some cases
reducing them, as customers have pushed back on further price increases.
In our monthly surveys, the prices paid and prices received indexes declined for nonmanufacturers
and were below their nonrecession averages. Among manufacturers, the prices paid and prices
received indexes both rose and were above their nonrecession averages.
Looking ahead, the indexes for future prices paid and future prices received continued to suggest
that manufacturing firms expect price increases over the next six months. Both indexes ticked up
relative to last period and were somewhat above their long-run averages.
Manufacturing
Manufacturing activity declined modestly, following moderate growth in the prior period. The
indexes for new orders and shipments both declined—a trend observed near the end of the prior
period—and turned negative in September. Manufacturers’ expectations for growth over the next six months continued to become more widespread. However, the indexes for future new orders and shipments remained below their historical
averages.
Consumer Spending
On balance, retailers (nonauto) continued to report modest decreases in real sales. One contact
reported that customers continued to visit less frequently despite a rush of discounting and pro- motions throughout the industry in recent months. However, the contact noted that customers
spent slightly more per visit toward the end of the period—a reversal of recent trends. Contacts
also noted a recent increase in price sensitivity among higher-income consumers—a trend
common among lower- and middle-income consumers over the past year.
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 13
Auto sales appeared to hold steady during the period, as affordability concerns continued to weigh
on demand. Contacts reported that a rise in incentives aided sales, and inventories continued to
grow, especially for electric vehicles.
On balance, tourism activity declined slightly after holding steady during the prior period. Contacts
reported that demand for leisure travel held mostly steady, but noted that ongoing price sensitivity
and last-minute bookings led to increased discount offerings and lower accommodation prices.
Contacts also highlighted that tourists were booking slightly shorter stays and spending slightly
less once they arrived at their destination. Meanwhile, one contact noted a stronger-than-usual
rise in business and group travel in the Philadelphia region in September. Nonfinancial Services
Nonmanufacturing activity appeared to decline slightly after holding steady last period. The index
for new orders turned negative in September following a near-zero reading in August. Meanwhile,
the sales/revenues index moved higher but remained slightly below its historical average.
At the firm level, nonmanufacturers reported a softening in general activity in September. Nonmanufacturers’ perceptions of general activity for the region picked up from the prior period but
remained negative on balance.
Expectations among nonmanufacturers for their own growth over the next six months remained
modest but grew more widespread after narrowing during the prior period.
Financial Services
The volume of bank lending (excluding credit cards) was essentially flat during the period (not seasonally adjusted), a slowdown after modest growth during the comparable period in 2023.
District banks reported moderate declines in commercial and industrial loans, while home equity
lines and auto loans grew modestly. Home mortgages and commercial real estate lending essentially held steady. Credit card volumes changed little for a second consecutive period—volumes
grew modestly during the same period one year ago.
Banking contacts continued to report strong credit quality with low delinquency rates. Contacts
noted that growth in demand for loans remained tepid across most industries, with clients most
commonly citing the expectation of further interest rate declines and the upcoming election as reasons to hold off on investment plans. Mortgage applications picked up during the period, but most
applicants opted against locking in a rate, as they expected further drops in mortgage rates,
according to one contact.
14 The Beige Book
Real Estate and Construction
Brokers reported that existing-home sales continued to grow slightly. The inventory of for-sale
properties edged slightly higher, but homes continued to sell extremely quickly and for over asking
price, according to brokers.
Homebuilders reported that contract signings continued to hold mostly steady, supported in part
by recent declines in mortgage rates. One builder described “malaise” around prospective buyer
traffic; however, another contact highlighted that the share of prospective buyers that signed a
contract is high compared with the historical average.
In the office market, leasing activity held steady. Multiple contacts noted increased investment interest
in office properties, in part due to much lower valuations, but transactions remained sporadic.
Commercial real estate contacts reported a slight decline in construction activity after it held
steady at lower levels last period. Contacts noted that institutional and infrastructure projects continued to enter the pipeline, but multifamily construction slowed slightly. For more information about District economic conditions visit: https://www.philadelphiafed.org/
regional-economy.
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 15
Federal Reserve Bank of
Cleveland
Summary of Economic Activity
Business activity in the Fourth District was stable after declining slightly during the prior reporting
period. Reports on retail sales were mixed. While some contacts reported softer sales, lower-cost
retailers benefited amid heightened consumer price consciousness. Residential builders and realtors noted increased activity as lower mortgage rates drew more prospective buyers into the
market. However, commercial construction and real estate activity was mostly unchanged. Manufacturing activity again declined moderately, and contacts expected demand to remain soft in the
coming months. Overall employment levels were stable, though there were isolated reports of layoffs. Wages rose at a modest pace, typical of increases prior to the pandemic. Although nonlabor
costs grew moderately and selling prices increased slightly on balance, most contacts reported no
change in either. Except for manufacturers, contacts expected activity to increase moderately in
the months ahead.
Labor Markets
On balance, contacts reported flat employment levels in recent weeks, with most firms making no
changes to their headcounts. Many firms kept their employment levels steady in accordance with
flat demand. Trends differed by sector: professional and business services firms grew their
employment levels moderately, whereas freight and manufacturing contacts reported modest
reductions in employment levels, leaving newly vacated positions unfilled and occasionally laying
off staff in response to weaker demand. Overall, contacts expected employment to increase
slightly over the next two months.
Wages increased at a modest pace in the most recent reporting period, with greater gains in the
service sector. Several firms continued to report challenges hiring skilled employees and accompanying wage pressures. Overall, however, the pace of wage increases was largely similar to that
from before the pandemic. A few firms said decreased revenues prevented them from raising
wages further, while one contact pointed to cooling labor markets and slower inflation as additional reasons for easing wage pressures.
16
Prices
Nonlabor input costs increased moderately on balance, though reports varied by sector, and more
than half of contacts continued to report that input costs had not changed since the last reporting
period. Restaurateurs reported that their egg costs had increased significantly in recent weeks,
likely because of a rise in avian influenza cases. A number of contacts across sectors also
reported that their costs had increased for services such as insurance and software. In contrast,
most manufacturing and construction contacts reported that their raw materials costs were flat.
Upward pressure on selling prices remained relatively weak, with little change from the previous
reporting period. Across sectors, most contacts reported making no adjustments to their selling
prices in recent weeks, and contacts continued to report customers’ unwillingness to accept additional price increases. Several contacts in the transportation and manufacturing sectors reported
that they were lowering prices in order to shore up demand, while most professional and businesses services and construction contacts held prices steady. Conversely, food retailers and restaurateurs increased prices slightly to offset cost increases in eggs and dairy products.
Consumer Spending
Consumer spending declined moderately overall in recent weeks. However, lower-cost retailers and
restaurants reported slight sales growth, suggesting increased price consciousness among consumers. Several automotive dealers reported ongoing affordability challenges for many consumers, with no noticeable change in sales even as auto financing rates began to decline.
Contacts generally expected moderate consumer spending growth in the coming months, particularly after November’s presidential election.
Manufacturing
Demand for manufactured goods again declined moderately, though the share of contacts who
reported steady demand increased from the prior period. Some contacts reported fewer orders
from other producers because of lower consumer and commercial vehicle production, while several also noted that some producers were holding off on orders because of uncertainty related to
the coming presidential election. Shipments of metals and metal products remained weak, a circumstance which contacts attributed to low vehicle and agricultural equipment production and soft
residential and commercial construction. On balance, manufacturers expected demand to decline
modestly in the coming months.
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 17
Real Estate and Construction
Residential construction contacts reported strong growth in demand for homes in recent weeks.
New home construction activity increased, with several builders describing “buyers coming off the
sidelines” as interest rates have trended down. Declines in mortgage rates in recent months have
also affected the market for existing homes, though real estate contacts were mixed on the outcome; one realtor saw more buyers come into the market, while another contact suggested that
some potential buyers were continuing to wait for further declines in interest rates. On balance,
contacts expected activity to grow at a moderate pace over the months ahead.
Nonresidential construction activity was flat over the last two months. Two commercial builders
reported that many companies were planning to wait until after the general election to undertake
construction projects. Public construction firms also reported fewer projects in their pipelines.
Still, commercial real estate agents reported increased demand for office space as some firms
returned to in-person work and others renewed leases after previously postponing such decisions.
Collectively, contacts anticipated a moderate increase in demand in the coming months.
Financial Services
Overall, bankers reported that loan demand increased modestly, with some contacts noting that
recent reductions in some interest rates had encouraged borrowing by both households and businesses. Looking ahead, bankers anticipated continued modest increases in loan demand. Most
bankers reported slight increases in delinquencies in recent months driven mostly by consumer
lending products, a circumstance which one banker attributed to an increase in “economic
stress.” Overall, core deposits slightly increased. One banker reported that the issuance of oneyear certificates of deposit had increased as clients sought to “lock in” rates in anticipation of further cuts.
Nonfinancial Services
Professional and business services firms reported robust demand in recent weeks and expected
robust demand to continue in the coming months. One e-commerce contact attributed this growth
to a continued shift to online purchases. Another contact cited increased optimism about a soft
landing and potential further decreases in interest rates. Freight contacts reported no change in
demand over the most recent reporting period but expected modest growth in the coming months.
One transportation contact reported seasonal increases in shipments of consumer products but
decreases in shipments of industrial products.
18 The Beige Book
Community Conditions
Nonprofit contacts reported deterioration in the financial well-being of low- and moderate-income
households and in the availability of affordable housing over the past six months, according to a
semiannual survey. One contact observed that higher costs for basic needs had driven more
households to borrow money from family or friends or to rely on credit or short-term loans to make
ends meet. Several contacts noted that rising rents limited affordable housing options for low- and
moderate-income households, while some contacts expressed concern about the impact of shortterm rentals on housing supply, particularly in areas around tourist sites. One contact also noted
that construction of new affordable housing units had lagged because of the higher costs of
building materials and financing. For more information about District economic conditions visit: https://www.clevelandfed.org/en/
region/regional-analysis.
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 19
Federal Reserve Bank of
Richmond
Summary of Economic Activity
Economic activity in the Fifth District grew at a modest rate since our previous report. Consumer
spending picked up modestly, overall. Travel and tourism were steady, on balance, as business
travel increased, and leisure travel softened. Residential real estate activity slowed slightly, and
commercial real estate activity was little changed in recent weeks. Financial institutions saw an
increase in loan demand, largely driven by refinancing activity. Port activity increased slightly, and
ports worked to offload ships ahead of the expected worker strike, which ended quickly with little
disruption to operations. Employment increased slightly and some firms raised wages to attract
certain skilled workers that were hard to find. Prices increased at a modest to moderate pace.
Hurricane Helene severely impacted parts of the Fifth District. While the full extent of the damage
was still being assessed, it clearly had substantial negative impacts to residents and businesses
with the tragic loss of life, physical assets, and economic activity in the affected areas.
Labor Markets
Employment in the Fifth District increased slightly in the most recent period. While many firms
reported seeing improvements in the candidate pool and moderate wage growth, some continued
to face challenges finding specific types of workers. To attract those hard-to-find workers, firms
increased wages more robustly and used outside help. A chartered bus company, for example,
reported improvement in driver availability but had to “dramatically” increase wages to attract
skilled mechanics and a lighting manufacturer instituted a $2 per hour wage increase for production workers. Meanwhile, a chemical manufacturer reported a dry talent pool for applicants and
was using outside agencies for help. Hurricane Helene impacted many businesses and workers,
particularly in western North Carolina, leading to a spike in initial unemployment insurance claims
in the state in the first week of October. Prices
Price growth continued to ease slightly in recent weeks. On a year-over-year basis, prices grew at a
modest to moderate rate. According to our most recent surveys, prices received by manufacturing
firms grew modestly compared to last year. Service providers, on the other hand, reported moderate annual price growth. Several consumer facing businesses believed that customers wouldn’t
20
accept any further price increases and that was keeping pressure on them to hold price levels constant for some time.
Manufacturing
Manufacturing activity in the Fifth District was flat to up slightly for some producers in the most
recent reporting period. Several contacts relayed optimism about their prospects. A fuse panel
manufacturer reported a strong backlog going into 2025 due to large recent orders. An industrial
pump manufacturer reported an uptick in orders due to more certainty around the path of interest
rates. Several contacts, however, mentioned uncertainty leading to delays on new orders. A textile
manufacturer expected tepid demand because customers were buying cautiously until the new
year due to the “usual nervous period” ahead of elections.
Ports and Transportation
Ports in the Fifth District reported a slight increase in containerized cargo volumes as they accommodated additional trucking traffic to offload ships in advance of the anticipated International
Longshoreman Association worker strike on September 30th. The strike, which lasted three days
and was suspended until January 15, 2025, affected 45,000 union workers at 36 ports across
the East and Gulf coasts, including 6,000 workers at Fifth District ports. Port contacts said that
the brevity of the strike had little impact on operations, and they expected the agreed upon wage
increases to factored into future container rates.
Despite the increased activity out of ports, contacts reported flat demand in the trucking segment
with a slight decrease in industrial equipment movement. Firms expected trucking demand to
remain muted heading into the winter months. On pricing, firms noted that they have been disciplined about raising rates, but profitability was down because freight spot rates have fallen to a
low level. As a result, contacts were not investing in replacing old equipment.
Retail, Travel, and Tourism
Consumer spending picked up modestly since our previous report. Retailers reported an increase
in sales and shopper traffic in recent weeks. A few contacts said that transaction volumes were
flat compared to last year, but revenues were up because prices were higher. An ice cream shop
and a producer of prepared food for grocery stores said that same-store sales were steady, and
their businesses were growing because they were expanding into new markets. An art dealer
reported an increase in sales and foot traffic after experiencing a lull during the summer when
customers were spending their time and money on travel rather than artwork for their homes. Consumer spending at restaurants also rebounded after a reported decline in late summer. Hotel and
tourism contacts saw an increase in business travel but a slowdown in leisure travel. A hotel repFederal Reserve Bank of Richmond 21
resentative attributed some of the slowdown in leisure travel to the active hurricane season. Business and hotel contacts in western North Carolina were still assessing the damage and impacts
of Hurricane Helene and were focused on helping the rescue and relief efforts needed in the area,
but most expected the impacts to be felt for several months.
Real Estate and Construction
Residential real estate activity experienced a slight downtick in recent weeks, which many agents
attributed to the typical fall slowdown and the hold for rate cuts. Despite this, online buyer traffic
remained robust, with fewer casual viewers visiting properties in person. An agent in Virginia noted
that housing inventory was on the rise, particularly with fixer-uppers and less-than-ideal homes
entering the market. Agents across our District continued to mention the continuum of lawsuits
and uncertainties with the recent National Association of Realtors policy changes.
Commercial real estate activity has leveled off in the past month. Agents noted a decrease in
vacancies in prime A spaces but continued vacancy growth in lower-grade markets. In the industrial sector, there was caution around speculative building but an uptick in owner-user purchases.
A few companies in North Carolina noted they were delaying major capital expenses until 2025.
This delay was also seen in private construction, according to a residential and metal buildings
construction company in Virginia, who noted fewer potential customers and clients finding it more
difficultly to afford the work.
While the full extent of the damages from Hurricane Helene remains unclear, the storm caused
severe destruction of both commercial properties and housing stock in western North Carolina and
Virginia.
Banking and Finance
Financial institutions reported a modest increase in loan demand, primarily driven by recent
interest rate cuts. Commercial real estate and first mortgage refinancings were noted as the main
drivers of this increase in demand. One respondent noted that borrowers were reaching inflection
points in their decision-making processes, which helped to drive this demand. Credit quality levels
remained stable with no noted deterioration of borrower’s creditworthiness. Deposit levels
remained stable amid heightened competition in the market for balances. Lenders continued to
note a modest decline in the credit quality of borrowers, but delinquencies remained stable.
Nonfinancial Services
Nonfinancial services providers continued to report little change in demand for their services and
revenues remained stable. A law firm noted that decreasing interest rates could have a positive
22 The Beige Book
impact on future merger, acquisition, and real estate deals and they were anticipating a modest
increase in this work. Some firms believed that activity was being constrained by a hesitancy to
make any new investments or business decisions until the uncertainty around the election and
international conflicts is resolved.
For more information about District economic conditions visit: https://www.richmondfed.org/
research/data_analysis.
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond 23
Federal Reserve Bank of
Atlanta
Summary of Economic Activity
Economic activity in the Sixth District declined slightly, on balance, over the reporting period. Labor
markets were steady, and wages increased modestly. Prices and input costs were little changed
since the previous report. Pricing power declined. Consumer spending fell. Tourism declined modestly, hampered by Hurricane Helene. Residential real estate activity was flat to slightly down.
Commercial real estate activity slowed further. Transportation activity grew somewhat. Manufacturing output decreased. Loan growth was modest. Energy activity increased modestly. Agriculture
conditions slowed.
Labor Markets
Employment in the District was fairly steady over the reporting period. The pace of hiring continued
to slow amid easing demand for labor, and labor availability improved further for most positions.
Firms reported plans to keep headcount roughly flat for the remainder of the year, and while a
growing minority reported modest and targeted reductions in headcount in response to slowing
demand, most were not planning to implement widescale layoffs. Some firms reported welcoming
or encouraging attrition, hesitating to backfill positions, or reducing hours. A minority of firms were
hiring for growth.
Wage growth was modest in recent weeks across most industries and position types. However, wage pressures persisted for some roles requiring specialized skills or in certain geographies.
Prices
Prices and input costs were little changed over the reporting period. Contacts noted most operating expenses remained elevated, however. Construction materials and food commodities costs
stabilized, and the impacts of the three-day East and Gulf coast port strike appeared to be minor.
Insurance premium increases have been accompanied by decreased coverage, leaving covered
firms with greater exposure. Pricing power diminished further, as many contacts offered discounts
or promotions and implemented operating efficiencies in order to maintain margins. The Atlanta
Fed’s Business Inflation Expectations survey showed year-over-year unit cost growth at 2.6 per24
cent, on average, in September, unchanged from August; firms’ year-ahead inflation expectations
for unit cost growth were 2.1 percent, on average, also unchanged from August.
Consumer Spending and Tourism
Retail sales declined modestly in recent weeks. Contacts reported a continued trend of declining
discretionary spending and trading down to lower-priced goods and services. Though this was still
mostly concentrated among lower-income groups, middle- to high-income consumers, while continuing to spend, became more selective with purchases and sought discounts. Auto dealers
noted increasing inventories and a softening in demand that was greater than the normal seasonal decline and noted that luxury car sales have not slowed as much as others, though those
buyers increasingly pushed back on prices.
Due to Hurricane Helene, tourism and hospitality contacts noted an uptick in cancellations of
travel to the District. Prior to the storm, group travel was strong while leisure travel was down
slightly, and travelers pulled back on on-property spending. Occupancy levels at high-end hotels
remained healthy; however, lower-tier properties reported modest declines in occupancy rates.
Although tourism activity declined modestly, contacts were optimistic about the upcoming
holiday season.
Construction and Real Estate
Despite declining mortgage interest rates, housing demand was flat or slightly down over the
reporting period. Home sales saw slight to modest declines while inventory levels increased
sharply, especially in Florida markets. Even with higher inventories, prices remained near peak
levels. Elevated prices, combined with rising taxes, insurance, and HOA costs, offset much of the
cost benefits of lower interest rates. As such, affordability remained a concern for potential
buyers, incentivizing many to delay purchasing in expectation of future rate declines. Optimism in
the new home market improved. However, builders still offered aggressive incentives (i.e., rate
buydowns) to attract buyers.
Commercial real estate (CRE) activity across the District declined slightly. Office, industrial and
multifamily sectors continued to see rising vacancy rates. Non-bank lenders reported higher levels
of delinquencies of office, multifamily, and hotel loans. Increasing CRE loan maturities continued
to create challenges for all lender types. Underwriting standards remained tight, making access to
loans challenging. A slight uptick in transaction volume was spurred by lower rates; however, uncertain CRE values continued to create sizable headwinds.
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta 25
Transportation
Transportation activity grew slightly, on net, since the previous report. Some District ports reported
significant increases in container volumes year over year and leading up to the east coast dockworkers strike but reported little operational disruption. Hurricane Helene caused several shortlived port closures in late September, and little damage to infrastructure. Railroads saw increases
in intermodal shipments and total traffic. Trucking activity remained mixed: one large trucking firm
described relatively stable demand year over year, and slight growth in market share as smaller
carriers filed for bankruptcy or shuttered operations; another noted weaker volumes over the
reporting period and expectations for low single-digit growth for 2025. Demand for warehousing
development remained slow. Manufacturing
On balance, manufacturing activity declined modestly. District manufacturers noted a contraction
in output, new orders, backlogs and finished goods inventories. Supplier delivery times increased.
Orders of certain inputs for export, such as plastics and fabricated metal and rubber products,
declined. However, demand for electronics, as well as some consumer goods, like food and beverages, rose. Demand for apparel producers was slow. An automobile engine manufacturer noted an
uptick in sales year to date, including significant growth in hybrid vehicles.
Banking and Finance
Although loan growth was modest, financial institutions noted anticipating additional future loan
demand in a lower rate environment. Multifamily lending increased moderately since the previous
report, as demand for housing continued to exceed supply. Deposits, including large time
deposits, increased modestly since the previous report. Borrowings continued to decline as banks
reduced reliance on more expensive sources of funding. Rising cash balances drove increasing
cash-to-assets ratios at District institutions and across the industry more broadly. Energy
Activity in the energy sector grew modestly overall and was described as steadily slowing by several contacts. A refiner noted that slowing growth was putting downward pressure on margins,
especially when combined with declining gasoline prices. Utilities contacts described steady
demand across residential, small commercial, and large industrial customers; however, power
infrastructure was damaged in parts of the District by Hurricane Helene. The hurricane caused
minimal operational disruption offshore, including temporary halts to drilling and industrial sup- port; inland, however, the storm halted plant activity, causing power outages at fueling terminals
resulting in delays in re-supplying the hardest hit areas.
26 The Beige Book
Agriculture
Agricultural conditions declined modestly. Farmers in south Georgia and parts of Florida noted significant damage and losses resulting from Hurricane Helene. Demand for beef remained historically strong but declined slightly. Dairy farmers reported strong sales amid reduced competition as
high beef prices resulted in more cows being used for beef instead of dairy. Row crop farmers
reported low demand, especially for cotton, and many saw disappointing yields. Demand for
timber continued to weaken, with one timber producer reporting that he had to pay to get rid of the
little timber harvested. Demand for citrus held steady. For more information about District economic conditions visit: https://www.atlantafed.org/
economy-matters/regional-economics.
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta 27
Federal Reserve Bank of
Chicago
Summary of Economic Activity
Economic activity in the Seventh District increased slightly overall over the reporting period, and
contacts expected a similar increase in activity over the next year. Consumer spending rose modestly; employment was up slightly; construction and real estate activity was flat; nonbusiness contacts saw little change in activity; and business spending and manufacturing activity edged down.
Prices were up modestly, wages rose moderately, and financial conditions loosened slightly. Prospects for 2024 farm income were unchanged.
Labor Markets
Employment rose slightly and contacts expected growth to continue at a similar pace over the next
12 months. There were continued reports of difficulty filling higher skilled positions, particularly
from manufacturers. Some contacts were also concerned that construction workers were going to
be pulled away from projects to support rebuilding after the recent hurricanes. However, many contacts noted softening in the labor market, with several of these reporting an increase in the
number of applicants to open positions. A staffing firm contact saw a slowdown in hiring, particularly by auto and furniture manufacturers. Additionally, a number of contacts in finance and construction said they were not hiring or replacing employees who leave. Wages and benefits costs
continued to rise moderately, though contacts indicated growth was noticeably slower than a year
or two ago. One machinery manufacturing contact said that prospective employees haven’t been
negotiating over wages for about a year. Prices
Prices increased modestly overall over the reporting period and contacts expected a similar rate of
increase over the next 12 months. Producer prices moved up modestly. Nonlabor input costs continued to rise, including for energy, raw materials, and shipping. Several contacts also noted a
pickup in the cost of insurance and complying with new regulations. Consumer prices again rose
modestly overall.
28
Consumer Spending
Consumer spending increased modestly overall. Contacts noted that customers across all income
segments were “trading down.” For example, low- and moderate-income consumers were picking
cheaper value meals over more expensive combo meals at fast food restaurants, while highincome consumers were choosing more affordable furniture and appliances. Nonauto retail sales
increased modestly. Declines in sales of appliances and home-improvement items were more than
offset by greater sales at discount stores and of streaming services and expensive sports equip- ment, such as boats and snowmobiles. Leisure and hospitality spending was unchanged. Light
vehicle sales increased slightly, with growth in both the affordable and luxury segments, but a
decline in mid-size SUVs and trucks. Dealers in Iowa and Wisconsin noted that to save money,
farmers were opting for used heavy trucks over new ones.
Business Spending
Business spending decreased slightly on balance over the reporting period. Capital expenditures
moved down slightly. Demand for truck transportation declined further, though truck freight rates
held steady. Retail inventories were a little elevated. Many retailers had built up inventory in anticipation of the International Longshoreman’s Association strike at East and Gulf coast ports.
Because the strike ended quickly, contacts expected minimal disruptions. Auto inventories were a
bit low, and one contact noted that their used vehicle inventory was down significantly. Manufacturing inventories were a little high. There were few reports of input shortages, though contacts
said there was the potential for shortages of building materials given the need for rebuilding after
recent hurricanes in other Districts.
Construction and Real Estate
Construction and real estate activity was unchanged on net. Residential construction activity was
flat. In a recent homebuilders’ survey, a majority of respondents expected national housing starts
to end the year higher than last year and expected a further increase in 2025. Residential real
estate activity was little changed overall, though rent and home prices increased slightly. Demand
for starter homes was up, while demand for middle-market homes eased. Contacts indicated that
higher property taxes and homeowner insurance rates were barriers to buyers entering the market.
Nonresidential construction increased slightly. Contacts highlighted ongoing healthcare, data
center, and electric vehicle battery plant projects. Commercial real estate activity was unchanged,
as prices held steady and rents decreased a bit. Vacancy rates and the availability of sublease
space ticked up.
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago 29
Manufacturing
Manufacturing demand decreased slightly over the reporting period. Orders for steel ticked down
on balance, as decreases from the heavy equipment, energy, and automotive sectors outpaced
increased demand for infrastructure and data center construction. Fabricated metals orders were
down slightly, in part due to slowdowns in residential construction and heavy machinery manufacturing. That said, several contacts noted increases in demand from the defense sector as well as
for products destined for rebuilding efforts after the hurricanes. Machinery sales decreased
slightly, auto industry contacts saw a dip in demand, and heavy truck demand fell modestly. A contact in the heavy truck industry expected a further drop in demand over the next few months.
Banking and Finance
Financial conditions loosened slightly on balance. Bond values were up some, as were equity
values. Volatility increased slightly on net. Business loan demand edged up, though one banking
contact highlighted a decline in lending to the heavy equipment sector. Business loan rates
decreased modestly, but terms were unchanged. Business loan quality moved down slightly. Consumer loan volumes rose slightly, in part due to greater mortgage demand. Consumer loan rates
edged down and terms were stable. Consumer loan quality decreased slightly. Agriculture
Farm income expectations for the District were stable over the reporting period despite prospects
for above-average corn and soybean harvests. Dry weather helped reduce crop drying costs but
also led to lower crop weights, cutting into potential revenue. Corn and soybean prices increased
slightly, and farmers were maximizing crop storage in hopes of selling later at higher prices. Cattle
prices increased as the inventory of cattle continued to fall, reaching its lowest point since the
1950s. Dairy prices rose some, while egg prices ticked down. Hog prices were steady. Agriculture
transportation faced several logistical disruptions, including constrained rail traffic to Mexico and
barge slowdowns from low water levels on the Mississippi River. There were reports of agriculture
equipment and input sellers offering low- and even zero-interest loans to spur sales.
Community Conditions
Community, nonprofit, and small business contacts saw little change in economic activity but were
slightly optimistic about future economic conditions. State government officials again saw healthy
growth in tax revenues. Small business contacts in affordable housing development commented
that persistent high costs, including labor and insurance, continued to squeeze profit margins and
disrupt project plans. Philanthropic leaders noted increases in grant requests, as nonprofit
grantees sought to manage higher operating costs and meet basic community needs, including
30 The Beige Book
food. Community contacts also reported increases in homelessness as well as utility arrearages,
both indicators of the housing challenges faced by low-income community members.
For more information about District economic conditions visit: https://chicagofed.org/cfsec.
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago 31
Federal Reserve Bank of
St. Louis
Summary of Economic Activity
Economic activity across the Eighth District has remained unchanged since our previous report,
although demand continues to show some signs of slowing. Prices continued to increase modestly, with some input costs remaining unchanged or decreasing. Consumer spending reports continued to indicate that higher prices for goods are weighing more heavily on spending than higher
prices for services or experiences. Across the District, contacts expected they will maintain
employment levels in the upcoming months. Manufacturing activity continued to decrease slightly
with fewer new orders and lower production. Residential and commercial real estate remained
unchanged, yet construction activity had picked up. Banking sector contacts observed recent
favorable changes to balance sheets due to higher bond values and lower deposit rates. Agriculture sector contacts reported some stress due to low commodity prices despite good yields and
slightly lower input costs. While the outlook has remained slightly pessimistic overall, it has modestly improved for many. Labor Markets
Employment has remained unchanged since our previous report. Contacts noted that hiring pressures had eased, with lower turnover, and that more people were applying for open positions. But
contacts in several sectors reported that many applicants were not qualified and hiring skilled
labor has continued to be a challenge. A Louisville real estate contact noted labor for housing
improvements, such as painters and drywall installers, was hard to find. Similarly, hospital contacts reported that the market for nurses and physicians continued to be tight and that they have
put greater emphasis on company culture and employee recognition to increase retention. Several
tourism and hospitality contacts in the St. Louis area reported that employment levels would be
flat to slightly higher in the upcoming months. Agriculture businesses reported that most of the
contraction and rightsizing had already occurred over the past six months.
Wage growth for most contacts has remained unchanged, settling back to around three percent,
and was anticipated to remain around that rate over the next six months. However, some contacts
reported that their lowest-wage workers in the past year had accelerated wage growth, which may
continue to put upward pressure on wages.
32
Prices
Prices have continued to increase modestly since our previous report. Contacts reported that not
all input prices were increasing, but rather that some of the prices that were increasing reflected
suppliers who postponed price adjustments over the past year or two. Some costs were slightly
lower, and some prices charged to customers were flat to slightly lower. Contacts across many
sectors reported higher insurance costs. A healthcare contact reported that costs of pharmaceuticals and high-end medical equipment continued to climb, though pricing contracts with their customers prevented passing on these costs. One restaurant in Arkansas noted that they were
increasing prices despite their concern that it could negatively impact customers. A food provider
noted that prices to consumers were flat despite lower costs of feed and energy because these
lower costs did not offset increases in other costs. A trucking contact noted that fuel prices had
come down significantly and that, because of low demand, vendors supplying goods to the
trucking industry weren’t raising prices. A fast-food contact reported that a combination of discounted prices and higher wages was continuing to squeeze profit margins.
Consumer Spending
Consumer spending has remained unchanged since our previous report. Retail spending continues
to be slightly below expectations. Car dealerships continued to note slower foot traffic. Several
casual restaurants noted that sales per person remained a few dollars lower than a year ago and
that customers have reduced their frequency of eating out. Hotels across the District reported that
room rates were unchanged, occupancy rates had been steady, and bookings were looking strong
for the upcoming months. Several hospitality contacts noted that demand was higher than a year
ago and, in most cases, had met expectations. However, concession spending at their venues was
lower and visitors appeared more sensitive to higher goods prices relative to the prices of their
activities.
Manufacturing
Manufacturing activity has decreased slightly since our previous report. Contacts in the consumer
packaged-goods industry continued to hold higher levels of inventory due to weaker consumer
demand. Contacts reported that inventories were also elevated in anticipation of disruptions stemming from the port worker strike, which was resolved quickly. Across the District, production and
new orders have slightly decreased. A plastics packaging manufacturer reported slower orders and
that his orders typically lead other manufacturing activity by about three months. A spirits producer
cut their capital expenditures budget by 50 to 60 percent from what was expected prior to entering
the fiscal year. Automobile manufacturers in Kentucky reported slowing production due to supply
chain disruptions stemming from storm devastation affecting plants in North Carolina.
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis 33
Nonfinancial Services
Activity in the nonfinancial services sector has decreased slightly since our previous report. Contacts in the transportation industry indicated slower growth due to softening demand. A St. Louis
trucking contact reported lower demand and higher operating costs that have been tempered by
lower fuel costs. An air cargo contact reported that volumes were depressed and continued to
weaken. Airport contacts were expecting passenger demand to improve in the upcoming months,
especially for leisure travel, as they had recently seen less leisure travel relative to business
travel. In the healthcare sector, lack of high-skilled workers and high costs remain a challenge. A
large hospital in the District reported recruiting workers from other states and outside the region.
Hospital contacts also reported greater discipline around capital spending, and a contact at a
rural hospital in Arkansas reported that reimbursements were down while costs were
trending higher. Real Estate and Construction
Residential real estate has remained unchanged, on net, since our previous report. In the
St. Louis area, sales and listings remained stable. In Tennessee, existing inventories of homes for
sale have continued to increase and contacts reported that these homes were staying on the
market longer. In Arkansas and Northen Mississippi, contacts noted that the residential real
estate market had improved over the past month. Contacts across the region reported that the
recent decline in interest rates is expected to attract more potential homebuyers, with the concern
that it will place upward pressure on property prices, as buyers compete for a limited supply
of homes.
Commercial real estate has slightly improved; contacts reported that construction activity was
picking up. Developers in Arkansas noted that a project previously on hold had actively moved forward in recent weeks. Many multifamily complexes across the District are under construction, and
rental units continue to be in high demand. Contacts also reported industrial construction is
expected to remain strong due to demand for data centers and power plants.
Banking and Finance
Banking activities have remained stable since our previous report. Loan demand growth continued
to be mixed. While mortgage originations have remained unchanged, consumer loans have slightly
increased. Bankers have reported increased inquiries for loans and that they were able to adjust
deposit rates downward without receiving much pushback from customers. While past-due credit
card payments have been increasing, bankers’ credit quality forecasts continued to be favorable.
Bankers reported positive moves in their capital and balance sheets due to favorable changes in
bond values. Bankers indicated that larger commercial loans were tied to a variable rate; thus,
34 The Beige Book
customers in that category were expected to see some immediate relief in their interest rate
expense.
Agriculture and Natural Resources
Agriculture production has been stable since our previous report; however, overall sector conditions have weakened. Contacts from Mississippi reported that, even with very good yields, most
farmers will struggle to break even this year. Across the District, crops were healthy and yields
were high; however, input prices remained high and commodity prices were low. The decrease in
feed prices has been positive for protein producers, yet it failed to offset other cost increases.
Contacts also noted a minimal effect of recent hurricanes, and they expected the cotton harvest
to be strong despite the rains, although crops’ milling quality has been negatively impacted in
Arkansas.
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis 35
Federal Reserve Bank of
Minneapolis
Summary of Economic Activity
Economic activity in the Ninth District was slightly down since the previous report. Employment
increased slightly, but labor demand continued to trend down. Prices increased slightly, and wage
growth was moderate. Manufacturing declined moderately and construction decreased slightly. Consumer spending, energy, and agriculture were flat. Residential real estate activity was moderately lower, and commercial real estate was slightly up. Activity among minority- and women-owned
business enterprises was mixed.
Labor Markets
Employment increased slightly since the last report. Those with open positions reported that labor
availability was much improved. A source at a Minnesota supply company said that it received
12 applications for a high-skill driving position that it had previously struggled to fill, and noted, “I
about fell out of my chair.” However, job openings continued to decline, particularly among full-time
positions, and a larger share of firms were not hiring. A job fair in central Minnesota was canceled
for lack of employer interest. Hiring related to turnover remained high. A Montana staffing company said that they were receiving record numbers of job applications “and not many are unemployed.” Numerous contacts acknowledged some hiring caution due to the uncertainty of the
upcoming presidential election, and also some optimism for higher labor demand afterward.
Wage growth was moderate. Survey respondents reported increases similar to levels seen earlier
in the year. Numerous contacts in different fields reported that wages increased by three to
four percent. Workforce contacts reported that some businesses looked to less-experienced
workers in hopes of keeping labor costs down. A South Dakota contact said that labor demand
has dropped, “not because businesses don’t need the help, but because they don’t believe they
can afford the wages, so they’re not hiring.” Prices
Prices increased slightly overall since the previous report. A monthly survey found little change
overall in prices charged by firms in September compared with the previous month. Input price
pressures appeared to have ticked up slightly, as 40 percent of firms said they were up over the
36
month. Results from an annual tourism and hospitality survey indicated that firms in the sector
saw decreased inflationary pressure over the summer relative to the year earlier. Retail fuel prices
in District states decreased slightly since the previous report. Prices received by farmers
increased in August from a year earlier for sugar beets, dry edible beans, chickens, eggs, milk,
and cattle; prices decreased from a year earlier for corn, soybeans, wheat, barley, lentils, hogs,
and turkeys.
Worker Experience
Overall, workers and job seekers across the region experienced a moderate decrease in their
ability to find jobs that meet their demands, but there was considerable variation across employment types. A workforce development contact in Minnesota reported that getting jobs in tech and
IT was difficult, in part because remote work allows employers to hire experienced workers from
out of state. Project delays in construction limited electricians’ abilities to secure employment,
according to a labor contact. On the flipside, job seekers continued to experience relative ease
finding jobs in the health care sector, particularly those in older adult services and long-term care,
where wages and bonuses remained attractive. Flexibility continues to be a key priority among
workers and job seekers. “Employees, especially younger generations, are seeking roles where
they feel they can make meaningful contributions,” shared a Minnesota contact. “Many jobseekers
are now more selective, seeking out employers that align with their values, offer clear career
development paths, and support mental health initiatives.” Consumer Spending
Consumer spending was flat since the last report. A South Dakota contact said retail foot traffic
has been down and consumer spending has been flat. However, a Minnesota mall contact
reported healthy recent foot traffic and spending activity, with similar expectations heading into
the holiday season. Vehicle sales, including for recreation, were softer on a year-over-year basis.
Hotel sources suggested that occupancy rates were steady and average room rates remained
comparatively high. Leisure travel across District airports remained strong. Contacts reported
some concern for consumer financial health. Bankers noted increases in home equity loans as
well as increased consumer loan delinquencies. A retail contact said consumer health was “deteriorating, but not tanking. Lots of trading down” in purchases, like generic products for namebrand ones.
Construction and Real Estate
Construction activity was down since the last report, with some lumpiness across the sector.
Industry data suggested that sector activity was growing slightly. But sources suggested that large
projects, like data centers and infrastructure, have balanced much slower activity in other segFederal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 37
ments, particularly multifamily and other commercial projects. A contact from a mid-sized Minnesota construction firm said it was seeing “increased pressure on margins to secure a smaller
number of opportunities.” Several contacts reported a small, preliminary uptick in those looking to
restart delayed projects given the recent cut in interest rates. Others reported that potential customers and projects were in a “wait and see” mode in relation to the election. Single-family
residential permitting increased in September, year over year, in much of the District, with the
exception of Minneapolis-St. Paul, which saw a fairly large decline.
Commercial real estate remained soft. Industrial vacancy rates have risen but were expected to
fall going forward thanks to a dearth of new building. Office vacancy rates remained high, though
new leasing activity in high-quality space was reportedly healthier. Residential housing sales were
lower overall and fairly volatile compared with last year’s activity. Available sales figures for August
and September showed double-digit declines in some markets, while some markets saw increases
of similar size, even in the same state.
Manufacturing
Manufacturing activity in the District decreased moderately since the previous report. More manufacturing firms reported decreased orders in the previous month compared with those seeing
increases; however, most expected sales to increase in the coming month. A regional manufacturing index indicated a contraction in activity in Minnesota and South Dakota in September from a
month earlier, while activity increased in North Dakota.
Agriculture, Energy, and Natural Resources
Agricultural conditions in the District were stable at low levels. Preliminary estimates suggested
that corn production in District states will decrease modestly from a year ago and soybean production will increase moderately. Wheat production in District states increased significantly from last
year. A decline in Montana was more than offset by increases in other states. District oil and gas
exploration activity was unchanged since the previous report.
Minority- and Women-Owned Business Enterprises
Minority- and women-owned business enterprises were evenly split between those reporting higher
or lower sales; a small number noted flat conditions. Over half of contacts reported lower profits in
the last month. Employee headcount was largely unchanged, and only one in five contacts said
hiring demand for their business was up. Most contacts expected sales to remain steady or
improve over the following weeks. A South Dakota restaurant owner said they were hoping for an
“exceptional hunting season” to boost their business and improve profitability. Less than half of
38 The Beige Book
contacts reported paying more for labor and other inputs compared with the previous month. A
similar share said they expected costs to increase further in the coming weeks.
For more information about District economic conditions visit: https://www.minneapolisfed.org/
region-and-community.
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 39
Federal Reserve Bank of
Kansas City
Summary of Economic Activity
Economic activity in the Tenth District held steady in recent months, led by modest growth in consumer spending. While employment levels were unchanged on net and only a small share of contacts reported staff reductions, reports of declining headcount were somewhat more common in
recent months. Even though employment remained steady, manufacturing production and sales of
professional services declined across the District. Contacts across sectors reported a significant
increase in the amount of time it takes to receive payments from customers compared to the
beginning of the year. Few contacts reported that these payment delays resulted in either reduced
hiring or capital outlays. However, these delays are reportedly raising financial strains among businesses and influencing their cash management practices. Prices continued to grow slowly over the
last month, including growth in housing prices. The deceleration in shelter prices were more evident in areas that experienced rapid growth in recent years, while shelter price pressures
remained elevated where rent and housing prices had not risen as fast.
Labor Markets
Employment levels were mostly unchanged across the District on net. Only a small share of contacts reported reducing their staffing levels, though reports of declining headcount were somewhat
more common in recent months. More manufacturing firms lowered their headcount than service
firms, and they were also more likely to curb overtime hours and reduce the average hourly work
week. Contacts that were actively recruiting noted the number of job applicants for open positions
greatly exceeded the amount from a year ago. Wage growth continued to decelerate, with compensation levels rising only modestly. Fewer firms indicated they raised wages substantially to retain
workers in recent months as quit rates reportedly remained low. Prices
Prices continued to grow slowly over the last month, with some differences across business contacts and households. Input prices continued to rise moderately for both services and manufacturing firms. However, reports on selling prices were mixed. Service firms noted modest growth in
selling prices due to some ability to pass higher prices onto consumers, while selling prices
declined slightly for manufacturers. Housing prices and rents grew modestly on average across the
District over the last month, but varied widely across locations. Home prices expanded more
40
slowly in western states like Colorado and New Mexico, where housing price growth had been
faster in recent years. In contrast, housing prices grew more swiftly in midwestern states like
Missouri and Kansas, where price growth had been relatively lower over the past couple of years.
Rents followed a similar pattern, with muted rent growth in western metros like Denver and
Albuquerque and faster rent growth in smaller midwestern metros like Wichita and Tulsa.
Consumer Spending
Growth in consumer spending slowed to a modest pace. Reports were generally mixed, even
among businesses within narrow spending categories, with the exception that most contacts
noted consumers were increasingly price sensitive. Many of the businesses that reported
expanding activity attributed that growth to promotions, sales, or discounts. Meanwhile, many of
the businesses that indicated declining consumer spending highlighted pullbacks in luxury or
higher-end goods and services. For example, home remodeling activity slowed for large renovations and luxury improvements but picked up among smaller home maintenance and repair
activity. Similarly, auto sales slowed for EVs and large SUVs that have higher price points but
picked up slightly among smaller economy models that are more affordable.
Community Conditions
Contacts reported that the ability to remain connected to the internet became more challenging for
low- and moderate-income (LMI) populations, exacerbated by the ending of the Affordable Connectivity Plan earlier this year. Organizations assisting in digital access said that many households
have elected to maintain their internet connections through discounted plans offered by internet
service providers (ISPs) or by reducing the plan quality. They noted uncertainty about how long
households would maintain service amid other cost constraints and limited funds available from
internet subsidies. Regarding ISPs discounted plans, contacts highlighted variability in the access
and reliability across service areas. Furthermore, they noted some ISPs expressed concern about
the financial sustainability of certain infrastructure projects aimed at improving internet access
due to the loss of lower-income internet subscribers.
Manufacturing and Other Business Activity
The pace of decline in manufacturing activity accelerated to a moderate rate over the past month,
led by robust declines in the production and sales of finished goods. Services businesses also
reported declines in activity, but those declines were modest. Contacts across sectors reported a
significant increase in the amount of time it takes to receive payments from customers as compared to the beginning of the year. Delayed payments were reported for customers of all sizes.
Contacts indicated the increases in time to receive payments significantly increased financial
stress for their business, but almost none of the contacts reported that greater delays in receiving
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 41
payments resulted in slower hiring plans or capital outlays. Instead, contacts indicated they are
adopting stricter cash management practices. Although financial stress rose among many businesses, the outlook for production activity and hiring were mostly unchanged and expectations
were for current conditions to persist over the next six months.
Real Estate and Construction
Commercial real estate activity picked up recently. The volume of sales continued to grow modestly, and sales prices also rose after having been in decline for several months. Refinancing
activity reportedly rose as well. Loan demand picked up in accordance with the increase in transaction activity, though borrowers continued to cite difficulties in accessing credit. Several contacts
indicated operating expenses continued to rise at an outsized pace with multiple drivers. Property
owners indicated prospective tenants are requesting more modifications resulting in modest
increases in cost pressures. Insurance premiums and maintenance costs have reportedly continued to rise at a robust pace. Some contacts expected that construction and maintenance costs
could reaccelerate in coming months.
Community and Regional Banking
Loan demand was mostly unchanged at District Banks over the last month, although several
bankers indicated moderately stronger demand for residential mortgage loans. A larger proportion
of respondents indicated overall loan quality deteriorated modestly, primarily for consumer lending. Expectations were reportedly for further, but mild, deterioration in credit quality over the next six
months. Deposit levels remained stable, with some contact noting a shift toward certificates of
deposit accounts due to the declining rate environment. The primary outlook for bank M&A activity
among contacts was generally unchanged, though several bankers did note an anticipated
increase in their outlook for M&A activity over the next twelve months.
Energy
Tenth District oil and gas activity fell moderately. While most contacts reported no change in
activity, nearly a third reported declines in drilling activity. The few firms that reported higher
activity were generally smaller operators. Drilling activity varied across the District, with slightly
higher rig counts in Oklahoma and Wyoming but fewer rigs in Colorado. Revenues and profits
declined somewhat as oil prices softened but remained in positive territory for the average District
firm. Consequently, capital expenditures fell somewhat compared to last year. Natural gas prices
increased recently, yet remain below profitable levels. Contacts reported the current low gas
prices constrain or completely hinder drilling over the near term, but expectations are that drilling
for natural gas will be profitable in a couple of years.
42 The Beige Book
Agriculture
Activity in the agricultural sector within the Tenth District continued to decline at a moderate pace
as crop prices remained weak. As activity slowed, farm lenders still reported increased loan
demand driven by higher operating costs and living expenses. Agricultural lenders reported lower
farm incomes and a slight decline in farm loan repayment rates during the most recent survey
period. Deterioration in farm borrower liquidity and income was more pronounced in states most
heavily concentrated in crop production. Financial conditions were more stable in areas most concentrated in cattle production as profit opportunities for cow/calf producers remained strong. Although contacts indicated slight declines in repayment rates and borrower liquidity, overall loan
quality remained sound and farm real estate values held firm.
For more information about District economic conditions visit: https://www.KansasCityFed.org/
research/regional-research.
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 43
Federal Reserve Bank of
Dallas
Summary of Economic Activity
The Eleventh District economy expanded modestly over the reporting period. Activity grew moderately in nonfinancial services but was flat to down in manufacturing, retail, finance, and energy. Demand for nonprofit services increased. Home sales were flat, and agricultural conditions weakened. Employment rose modestly, and wage growth remained moderate. Selling price growth continued to be below average in most sectors except for manufacturing, where it was more typical.
Outlooks were mixed, buoyed partly by the recent rate cut but weighed down by concerns regarding
slowing demand and rising geopolitical and domestic policy uncertainty. Labor Markets
Employment increased modestly over the past six weeks. Staffing firms cited a shift from tempo- rary to direct hiring activity and added that firms were being more selective in their hiring decisions. Some firms said hiring was on pause, while professional and business services firms noted
difficulty filling certain skilled positions. Most firms noted no change in the share of employees
working remotely over the last year, while 11 percent cited having increased shares to boost
employee morale and help with recruitment and worker retention. Among the 13 percent of
employers who decreased the share of remote workers, improving teamwork and company culture
were the main reasons.
Wage growth generally remained moderate. Some staffing services firms reported downward pressure on rates and one firm said in some instances the rates were so low that they were barely
profitable. Texas businesses expect wage growth in the next 12 months to be 3.7 percent, on
average, up from 3.5 percent in June but down from 4.4 percent in the previous 12 months.
Prices
Prices increased at a modest pace over the reporting period. Input costs were flat to up in most
sectors, including energy, construction, and manufacturing. Selling price growth was moderate in
manufacturing but remained below average in most other sectors. Homebuilders and auto dealers
noted margin compression. Contacts’ expectations of input cost growth have adjusted downward
while selling price expectations were stable. Over the next 12 months, contacts expect input costs
44
to rise 3.2 percent down from 3.7 percent in June, and plan to increase their prices by 2.7 percent, which is little changed from June.
Manufacturing
Texas manufacturing activity fell modestly in September, after stabilizing in August. Weakness persisted in durable goods, particularly in primary metals and machinery manufacturing. Among
nondurables, food manufacturers saw a notable increase in new orders, while Gulf Coast refinery
utilization rates dipped due to narrowing margins and seasonality. Manufacturing firms generally
reported little to no impact of the port workers strike on their business, though some said if the
strike had persisted it would have affected polymer production at several plastic manufacturing
facilities. Manufacturing outlooks remained weak, with sluggish demand and heightened election
uncertainty cited as key headwinds.
Retail Sales
Retail sales fell during the past six weeks. Auto dealers reported slow traffic and declining sales.
However, not all sectors experienced a slowing. Health and personal care retailers cited modest
increases, and food and beverage stores generally reported flat activity. Retail inventories held
steady. Outlooks remained negative.
Nonfinancial Services
Service sector activity accelerated over the reporting period, with revenue growth strengthening to
a normal pace following sluggish activity over the last year. Revenues in the leisure and hospitality
sector rebounded strongly from the declines seen this summer. Revenue growth was moderate in
transportation services. Airlines said air passenger demand remained stable, and business travel
was returning in the form of fewer longer-duration trips rather than short, frequent ones. Growth in
information services and professional and business services continued at a steady rate. In contrast, revenues in health care and education exhibited weakness. Outlooks shifted from slightly
pessimistic to neutral but were still being dampened by labor costs and economic and domestic
policy uncertainty. Construction and Real Estate
Housing demand was stable during the reporting period. Contacts cited steady traffic and sales
but noted lack of urgency among buyers and that clients were looking for deals. There were
reports of weaker activity in the entry-level market. Discounting and rate buy downs remained
widespread, and land and lot prices stayed elevated. The squeeze on builders’ margins tempered
outlooks.
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas 45
Commercial real estate activity was steady. Apartment leasing continued to be solid, but concessions remained widespread putting downward pressure on rents. Office leasing activity improved
though it remained slow and was primarily concentrated in class A space. Retail and industrial
demand grew, and rents were flat to up. Outlooks improved slightly, though contacts said the rate
cuts have not yet materially impacted activity or pricing. Financial Services
Loan volumes declined in October, despite loan prices having declined for the first time since
2021. Overall, credit tightening continued and loan nonperformance rose but at slower pace for
both than in the previous reporting period. There was a notable uptick in concern for the performance of office commercial real estate loans. Bankers reported working with borrowers to keep
CRE loans in good standing prior to maturity, when they may be refinanced. Despite this increased
concern, bankers’ outlooks turned sharply optimistic. Contacts expect a significant improvement in
loan demand and business activity six months from now, although they still anticipate continued
deterioration in loan performance.
Energy
Oilfield activity held fairly steady over the reporting period. Input costs dipped as capacity utilization in oil field services eased. Producers continued to note an elevated level of production and
improving well productivity and expectations are for modest production growth in the remainder of
the year. While contacts broadly expect U.S. production to expand further in 2025, lower price outlooks, domestic policy uncertainty, long-term concerns regarding the adequacy of freshwater
supply for fracking in the Permian, and geopolitical risks have heightened uncertainty in outlooks.
Agriculture
Drought conditions emerged in more parts of the state over the reporting period, straining crops.
Contacts continued to report tough financial conditions for row crop farmers this year, as both
cotton and grain prices are at unprofitable levels for many producers. Above-average production is
needed for producers to cover costs, and that largely hasn’t materialized due to dryness in some
areas and hurricane damage in others. One contact emphasized needing to get the new farm bill
passed to provide more beneficial safety net programs. On the cattle side, deteriorating grazing
conditions are a key concern, though calf and cattle prices remain high and profitable.
Community Perspectives
Nonprofit service providers noted continued solid demand for social services. Availability of safe
and affordable housing remained a top concern, and there were reports of increased demand
46 The Beige Book
among lower-income clients for funding for home repairs or weatherization, particularly in the aftermath of recent severe weather events. Contacts cited rising assistance requests from seniors
which they attributed to inflation. One nonprofit reported rising vacancies in their senior-only
housing facilities, as seniors were reentering the workforce out of economic necessity, disqualifying them for these low-cost units. Some nonprofit leaders expressed reduced concern about
inflation and interest rates, with one indicating that increased confidence has led them to move
forward with capital investment. However, a few others said that economic and election uncertainty
has led to hesitancy to give among some donors.
For more information about District economic conditions visit: https://www.dallasfed.org/
research/texas.
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas 47
Federal Reserve Bank of
San Francisco
Summary of Economic Activity
Economic activity in the Twelfth District remained stable during the September through earlyOctober reporting period. Labor availability and employee retention improved further, and several
employers resumed plans to expand employment after holding their headcounts steady over the
past year. Prices were generally stable in recent weeks, while wages grew slightly. Retail sales as
well as activity in manufacturing and consumer services softened. Demand for business services
improved, while conditions in real estate, financial services, agriculture, and resource-related
industries were largely unchanged. Demand for housing and food services remained elevated, and
job seekers sought training and workforce development services to get higher-paying jobs in their
communities. Looking ahead, contacts’ views on the economic outlook improved notably in recent
weeks, with several citing recent reductions in interest rates and their improved sentiments about
the labor market.
Labor Markets
Employment levels were generally stable to slightly higher over the reporting period. Several
employers began hiring for open positions put on hold over the past year, citing an improved eco- nomic outlook. Labor availability improved further in recent weeks. The number of job applications
increased, and employers generally found it easier to hire. Additionally, turnover continued to slow
across industries, particularly in financial, consulting, and legal services. A few contacts highlighted some challenges attracting workers in construction and nonprofit community support
organizations as well as for some management positions in the technology, accounting, and
health-care sectors. There were some reports of continued investment in automation solutions
and generative artificial intelligence (GenAI) technologies to improve labor productivity. For
example, one restaurateur reported successfully using GenAI software at drive-thru stations in
some urban and suburban locations.
Wages grew slightly in recent weeks, and at a pace generally in line with historical growth rates.
Wage pressures reportedly subsided for entry-level positions in construction, real estate, and business services but remained somewhat elevated for positions in mid-level management, information security, and the skilled trades. Some contacts anticipated a pickup in the pace of wage
48
growth for positions impacted by recent and ongoing labor union negotiations and minimum wage
adjustments that go into effect early next year. Prices
Prices were generally stable in recent weeks after ticking up slightly during the prior reporting
period. This was the first reporting period with no net increase in prices in over three years. Contacts largely reported stable operating costs across industries and geographies, with the excep- tion of energy costs, which rose notably since late September. Prices of some raw materials, such
as lumber, fell in recent weeks, while insurance and health-care costs remained elevated.
Community Conditions
Demand remained elevated for community support services, particularly for health-care, food,
housing, and workforce development. Contacts reported that workers were seeking training to get
higher-paying jobs. Some people in the community were focusing on cost over quality when looking
for mental health services. Funding availability for nonprofit organizations from government grants,
the private sector, and individual donors remained subdued. Contacts reported that some small
businesses in Hawaii, such as those in food services and retail, faced continued challenges with
lower consumer demand. Some newer small business owners in Utah sought help with obtaining
funding and with business operations training. One contact noted that elevated demand for shelters and community services attracted interest in market entry by some for-profit entities.
Retail Trade and Services
Retail sales moderated slightly. Contacts noted that sales for apparel, pet products, and home
improvement goods softened somewhat, leading to excess capacity for some. Consumers continued to seek discounts and were reluctant to pay full price for nonessential goods. A few reports
highlighted some pullback in spending in the Pacific Northwest from households impacted by
recent and ongoing labor disputes in the region.
Activity in the consumer services sectors decreased further, while demand for business services
improved relative to the previous reporting period. Demand for leisure travel and hospitality services softened, and sales at restaurants and fast-food establishments were down. Business travel
slowed in recent weeks beyond seasonal factors, in part due to increased uncertainty related to
the elections. Demand for medical laboratory testing remained strong, and demand for janitorial,
security, and food catering services was robust, supported by more businesses expanding their
mandates for workers to return to offices. Contacts in legal services reported higher demand, particularly from individuals as opposed to business.
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 49
Manufacturing
Manufacturing activity slowed modestly over the reporting period. Sales of wood products were
hampered by a softer housing market and slower demand from Asian markets. Activity in the aero- space industry was weaker due to recent and ongoing labor contract negotiations. A few contacts
highlighted the negative impact of labor disputes on economic activity in the Pacific Northwest.
One manufacturer in the defense industry highlighted continued uncertainty related to government
investment.
Agriculture and Resource-Related Industries
Conditions in the agriculture and resource-related industries were largely unchanged. Exports
remained subdued, particularly to Asian markets, despite a slightly weaker U.S. dollar relative to
the last reporting period. Domestic demand was stable overall, but sales reportedly fell at the
retail level for some produce, such as apples. The supply of produce, including tree fruit and nuts,
remained solid, largely owing to healthy harvest yields and stored inventory from the prior harvest.
Materials and agricultural inputs were readily available. While demand for logs remained low, demand for forested land for investment and conservation purposes was robust.
Real Estate and Construction
Conditions in the residential real estate sector were stable and similar to those in the prior
reporting period on net. Single-family home prices were stable to up, while multifamily rents were
stable to down as new completions continued to expand supply. A Southern California contact
observed that migration out of the area somewhat contributed to higher vacancy rates. Some
builders reportedly put new projects on hold in anticipation of lower financing costs over the
coming months.
Commercial real estate activity was unchanged on balance. Demand for retail space was solid,
and landlords reported being able to fill vacant stores at higher rents. Rents for industrial space
were stable, and one contact observed stronger demand for smaller properties. Office vacancies
remained elevated as renovation costs reportedly limited landlords’ ability to lower rents further to
attract prospective tenants. Commercial construction activity was bolstered by government infrastructure projects, and project backlogs reportedly eased.
Financial Institutions
Activity in the financial services sector was largely unchanged. Demand for most business and
consumer loans was muted. Contacts generally anticipated improved liquidity and higher demand
for credit given recent declines in interest rates. Lenders reported a recent uptick in inquiries
50 The Beige Book
about loan product offerings by businesses due to their expectations of lower interest rates
ahead. Credit and asset quality were reportedly high. Contacts in the insurance industry highlighted that increasing costs and premiums pushed some carriers out of business.
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 51