Beige Book: National Summary
January 2, 1980

Sharp drops in residential construction and new car sales reinforced the growing conviction that the recession has arrived. Christmas spending was good throughout most of the nation and provided a welcome boost. Manufacturing activity declined in several Districts, and new orders slackened in most Districts. Input prices are expected to continue escalating. Mortgage funds are available, but high interest rates cut demand sharply. Demand for commercial and consumer loans lessened. Employment held steady despite some cutbacks.

Retail sales, except for automobiles, held their own in December. Inflation-adjusted sales were equal to or slightly better than last Christmas for New York, Philadelphia, Richmond, and Atlanta. Holiday purchases were sluggish for Boston and Chicago. Sales and promotions were prevalent. Amidst increasing concern about a recession during the first half of 1980, most retailers are keeping inventories under very tight control; none report excessive inventories.

New car sales dropped substantially, with large- and mid-size autos taking the brunt of the decline. Compacts remain popular; some sales were lost because of shortages and delivery problems. Inventories of large-size autos are high nationwide. However, New York reported promotions and markdowns helped clear out 1979 leftovers.

Residential construction, mortgage lending, and real estate sales slid markedly, except for Boston, where several directors observed a relatively high level of sales and also an increasing number of purchases in cash. Several Districts report an availability of mortgage funds, but reduced demand due to high interest rates. Mortgage lending is at a virtual standstill in New York and Texas because of usury ceilings. Additionally, usury ceilings imposed during December noticeably hampered lending in numerous other states. Contacts in many Districts believe real estate activity will turn down even further in several months when commitments are used up.

A resilient commercial construction sector continued to partially offset declines in residential building for most Districts. San Francisco, Dallas, and St. Louis report commercial construction proceeding at a rapid pace. However, builders in the St. Louis and San Francisco Districts are apprehensive about the smaller number of new projects in the planning stage.

Production for industries related to automobiles and residential construction is off sizably. Steel firms in the Cleveland District noted a sharp contraction in auto-related orders. A spokesman in the same District states that new-car tire production shrank 12 percent this year. Aluminum orders for automobiles fell, but notable support was provided by above-normal demand for aluminum by the canning industry and for exports.

A major manufacturer of plastics in the St. Louis District encountered a reduction in orders for all products used by automotive and residential building industries. In the First District, manufacturers of housing fixtures and other housing products noted a drop in demand. In the Second and Twelfth Districts, the slump in home building crimped sales of lumber products. Some smaller mills in the West have been closed.

Manufacturing activity leveled off for Boston, dropped for Philadelphia, declined slightly for Dallas, and remained stable for San Francisco. New orders were down broadly for Richmond and declined for St. Louis. In the New York District, new orders eased, but the shipments remained robust. New orders lag shipments in the Chicago District, and businesses have started to cut back on ordering in the Minneapolis District. However, electrical equipment industries located in the Boston, Cleveland, and Chicago Districts report a continued high level of activity. And, machine tool firms in the Cleveland and Chicago Districts are experiencing sustained growth of new business.

Input prices for materials and parts continue to rise. Some discounting in steel occurred. Nearly all manufacturing executives in the Philadelphia District predicted higher costs for raw materials by summer, and 80 percent planned to charge more for their own products by then. No input availability problems were reported.

Loan requests for the Boston and Philadelphia Districts remained at a high level. Kansas City and Dallas reported notable declines. A softening in demand was experienced in the remaining Districts. High costs of borrowing rather than the availability of funds discouraged businesses and consumers from applying for loans. Reduced inventories contributed significantly to the tempering in commercial loan demand. Many Districts observed cutbacks in consumer loans, particularly loans for automobiles and higher-priced consumer durables.

On balance, employment levels were unchanged. Areas of strength remained, but some Districts reported weaknesses. Philadelphia and Richmond noted reduced workweeks, and Atlanta reported layoffs in automotive and residential building industries. Employment levels in Michigan declined due to the slump in auto production. Labor markets were relatively strong for Minneapolis, Kansas City, and Dallas. In the Northwest, employment continued to grow in response to expansion in the electronics and aircraft industries.

Agricultural reports were generally upbeat. Grain and livestock sales, and also profits, increased in the Kansas City and Minneapolis Districts. Transportation bottlenecks in the Midwest eased. Atlanta reported that prices for broilers and hogs finally rose. A record apple crop was harvested in Washington State. An improvement in agricultural bank liquidity occurred in the Kansas City District, where abruptly higher interest rates reduced loan demand and favorable agricultural sales increased deposits.

Beige Book Report: Atlanta
January 2, 1980

Moderate gains in Christmas spending provided welcome support to the District economy during the past month. The slump in housing and automobile sales continued. Loan demand slackened. Consumer delinquencies moved upward. So far, unemployment rates have not risen. The tourist industry was strengthened by the announcement of huge investments in the New Orleans area and Orlando. Orange growers face a reduction in revenue because lower prices are expected to more than offset increased yields. Prices for broilers and hogs have finally risen, improving prospects for producers.

Initial reports for the entire Christmas season indicate retail sales levels, in real terms, commensurate with or slightly better than comparable year-ago figures. A property management contact described real sales at his various malls and shopping centers in southern Louisiana as even with levels established last Christmas. Inflation-adjusted sales for a major Atlanta-based retail firm were better than expected, registering a moderate increase. However, this firm's officials share in the prevailing concern regarding sales for the first quarter of 1980. Its bad checks and credit card delinquencies have worsened. A company spokesman believes his customers have accumulated all the debt they can handle and feels the next few months are crucial because the repayment of indebtedness will almost certainly cause those customers to retrench. Retail inventories have been strictly controlled for many months and, therefore, should not prove excessive unless a severe fallout in sales occurs.

Sales of automobiles contracted appreciably. Notable declines occurred in Baton Rouge, Jacksonville, central Florida, and southern Mississippi. Large and intermediate car sales suffered most. Late-model used auto and compact sales, particularly GM X cars, were generally good. Inventories continue to be pared to a minimum, primarily because of excessive carrying costs. For example, a Ford dealer on the Mississippi coast wants to reduce orders to get his normal 60-day supply down to 30 days. GM dealers there will reduce inventories even further in 1980.

Single-family residential construction was curtailed considerably throughout the District, and a recent sizable drop in building permits is certain to further depress this sector. Building permits in Huntsville, Alabama for single-family and multi-family structures are only one-third and one-eighth of year-ago figures, respectively. Substantial declines in permits were also reported for Tallahassee and large metropolitan areas of Tennessee. A large Florida bank forecasts a 20 percent downturn in new residential units in 1980.

Residential mortgage demand has fallen markedly. An Atlanta Federal Home Loan Bank officer reports most S&Ls are encountering a profit squeeze. For example, an Atlanta S&L experienced a one-point increase in its cost of savings during the past year, while its mortgage yield increased by only 35 basis points.

Loan demand dipped in most parts of the District. A Jacksonville banker attributes a decrease in loan demand to high interest rates and selective screening. High interest rates, the postponement of projects, and lower inventories are responsible for a gradual decline in loan demand for a central Florida contact. Commercial loan demand remains soft generally. Consumer loan demand continues to be reasonably strong in south central Tennessee, even though smaller-sized loans are being granted. A Melbourne, Florida banker notes a continuing increase in personal bankruptcies related to credit cards and personal loans.

Unemployment rates remain at relatively low levels. Nonetheless, layoffs in industries that typically weaken prior to a recession (automobiles and residential building materials) are evident. A substantial number of workers at an Atlanta GM assembly plant were laid off during the last half of December due to excessive inventories. In Mississippi, workers at a GM parts supply factory are on a 4-day workweek. Several hundred Ford glass plant workers in Nashville are on an extended layoff. The slump in housing construction caused a work force reduction at a large Masonite plant in Mississippi.

The pace of tourist sector investment will accelerate markedly by the building of $750 million theme park near New Orleans and a $600 million commercial and tourist complex in Orlando. "New Orleans, Past, Present, and Future" may exceed Disney World in size and employ 7,000 upon completion. Plaza International in Orlando will consist of convention hotels, restaurants, and entertainment and retail facilities to complement a planned Orange County Civic Center. The creation of 11,300 permanent positions is anticipated over a ten-year construction period.

This year's orange crop is estimated to be about 20 percent higher than production for the last two seasons. But, prices have slid 30 percent below the year-ago level, suggesting a sizable shortfall in total revenue. District winter wheat acreage expanded by 50 percent vis-a-vis 9 percent for the nation. Georgia's acreage more than doubled. Shrimpers in Georgia are experiencing their best harvest in 10 years. This year's catch and total revenue may set records.

The outlook for broiler and hog producers, which has been gloomy for months, has improved. Some recovery in broiler prices, combined with stable feed costs in recent weeks, has created renewed optimism. Broiler production has grown moderately after dropping sharply below year-ago levels during November. Hog prices have climbed markedly from their very low mid-November level, and Georgia producers plan a 29-percent rise in pig production for the December-February period.

Beige Book Report: Boston
January 2, 1980

Respondents in the First District report growing evidence of a slowing in economic activity. Retail sales are disappointing. In the manufacturing sector, business is generally good, but most firms have some product lines for which demand has weakened. Loan demand is no longer growing but remains at a high level; all banks contacted have ample funds.

The major retailers in New England report that Christmas sales are not good. A few have seen a pick up in the past few days but others have become more pessimistic. People are said to be rebelling against higher prices, although top quality items are selling well. The head of one large department store chain says he is very worried about the first half of next year. Despite the weakness most retailers do not expect to have serious inventory problems. Most had been managing their inventories cautiously; in addition they are reacting to the weakness with more promotions and reduced prices. There are more sales than normal for this time of year.

Manufacturing activity has leveled off. More firms are reporting that particular products are becoming difficult to sell; however, these same firms usually have some divisions which are doing well. A manufacturer of cooking stoves has seen a pronounced decline in demand; competitors have been trying to maintain sales volumes by cutting prices. Housing fixtures and other housing products are not selling as well as they were. The demand for cameras is said to be low for this time of year. At the same time, the electronics and aircraft industries are doing well, sales of industrial safety equipment are picking up after a period of weakness, and military business is extremely good. No one has seen a significant slowing in the rate of price increase for materials and parts, although a recent survey of local purchasing agents found that delivery lead times are shortening. All those contacted believe their inventories are under control.

Banking respondents claim to have ample funds and most are seeking additional customers. However, one banker from northern New England believes that some of the banks in his area are heavily loaned and do not have enough liquidity; he expects some consolidations. Loan demand has softened but is still high. Residential mortgage demand has definitely weakened. Despite this decline several directors observed that the level of real estate activity remains high. An increasing number of people are thought to be using cash for home purchases.

Professors Houthakker and Samuelson were available for comment this month. Both respondents agree that a mild recession is underway, and both expect the economy to remain sluggish beyond the middle of next year. However, they disagreed about the consequences for the real economy of the latest round of OPEC oil price increases.

Describing the economy's current performance as "obscure," Professor Houthakker nevertheless thinks that the available data indicate that a mild, but perhaps prolonged, recession has begun. In his view the recently announced OPEC price increases will have no major effect on either inflation or real output, so he argues that monetary policy need not be adjusted to the new oil price regime. While it is too early for a firm judgment on the effectiveness of the October 6 policy switch, Houthakker believes that the current rate of M1 growth of about 5 percent is consistent with an improvement in inflation without undue pressure on employment. Houthakker is hopeful that inflation will ease somewhat next year. He notes that there has been no acceleration in inflation as measured by the NIA deflators, and he expects a reduction in the rate of CPI increases in coming months as the extensive sales at the retail level induced by high inventory carrying costs are reflected in this index. Houthakker is concerned that recent rapid gold price increases may become "a self-fulfilling prophecy" that will contribute to the weakness of the dollar unless the nervousness in the gold market is alleviated. Since the October 6 actions were evidently not sufficient to reduce international anxiety over the dollar, he recommends that massive Treasury gold sales (perhaps as many as five million ounces) be undertaken in the near future.

Professor Samuelson also expects a mild but prolonged recession. The recession will be mild because institutional reforms have apparently reduced the effectiveness of monetary policy for a given change in interest rates; it will be prolonged because the high rates do still weaken real activity eventually and because the latest round of OPEC price increases will sustain the pressure for tight macroeconomic policies. Samuelson thinks that the new monetary policy operating procedures may bring closer control of the aggregates. However, he notes that stabilizing the aggregates will not stabilize GNP as long as money demand continues to shift unexpectedly. Thus, it is too early to tell whether the greater control afforded by the new procedure will be an advantage over the at least partial adaptability to demand shifts automatically produced by the old procedure.

Beige Book Report: Chicago
January 2, 1980

Despite surprisingly strong national economic data, most informed observers in the Seventh District are in agreement that a national recession has begun, and that it will continue at least through the first half of 1980. The district probably has been in a recession since last spring, primarily reflecting depressed conditions in the motor vehicle industry and in the housing sector. Business capital spending continues at high levels, but appears vulnerable to a decline in 1980. Although inventories are judged to be at moderate levels, most businesses are trying to reduce them further. Price inflation continues unabated, except for some discounting in steel and other metals. Total employment has leveled off in most areas and has declined in Michigan. Retail sales appear to have been disappointing during the Christmas season. Credit conditions are tight, but loans are "available" in most markets.

In contrast to the bitter cold and heavy snows of recent years, this winter has proved mild thus far with above normal temperatures and little snow to hamper activity. Outside work has continued on many commercial and industrial construction projects into late December.

Activity in the Seventh District in November and December was affected adversely by major strikes at Caterpillar and International Harvester. Work stoppages reflected disputes over work rules and managerial prerogatives, rather than the economic package, which paralleled the auto pacts. The Caterpillar strike was settled December 19 after 79 days, and operations are returning to normal. The International Harvester strike is still unsettled. Output of companies supplying materials and parts also has been seriously affected by the strikes. Output of trucks, farm equipment, and construction equipment would have declined even if no strikes had been called. The companies had been building inventories of finished goods in anticipation of strikes, while demand for most products had declined for both seasonal and cyclical reasons.

On December 17, 11,000 Chicago Transit Administration workers (who operate buses and rapid transit, but not railroad commuter trains) struck over a proposal to modify a long-standing COLA agreement that, each quarter, provides an automatic, unlimited wage increase that is related to changes in the Chicago area CPI, which is 14 percent above year ago. The union also demanded a "basic" wage increase and other concessions. Pay and benefits of CTA workers are the highest anywhere, and exceed compensation of police and other municipal workers. CTA operations were resumed December 21 under a court order. The terms of settlement of this dispute are expected to have widespread repercussions on demands of other organized groups. The CTA strike kept some people from getting to work, and reduced downtown retail volume at a crucial times.

Confidence in the motor vehicle industry probably is at the lowest ebb since the years following 1929. Despite a series of layoffs and plant closings, vehicle inventories remain at excessive levels, except for a few favored models. Layoffs have also hit suppliers of parts and dealerships. The clouds overhanging Chrysler have hurt sales of its subcompacts which had been best sellers. Some makers of production equipment for Chrysler's proposed new models are said to have suspended work awaiting assurance of payment. Lenders and suppliers of components are very reluctant to undertake a share of the risks of a "bail out."

Output of most types of producer equipment remains at a high level, but new orders have been lagging shipments in the past month or two. Machine tool companies with large, firm backlogs and long lead times provide an exception to the usual situation. Order cancellations for producer goods have been rare, in contrast to late 1974, but some cancellations are expected in the case of railroad freight cars.

The financial crisis of the huge Chicago public school system has become increasingly evident since mid-November. Revelations of questionable financial practices, indulged in to meet advancing salary demands of teachers' union have prevented the sale of school bonds. As a result, on December 21, 49,000 employees did not receive their biweekly checks. These problems may spread to other municipal operations. No short-term solution, short of federal aid, is in sight. Detroit and Wayne County also show signs of financial stress. These developments have no parallels since the mid-1930s.

Credit conditions in the district stabilized, following the initial reaction to the Fed's moves of early October. Business loans have remained available to borrowers with established credit ratings, but frequently at rates in excess of the prime rate. High interest rates have helped to moderate loan demand as heavy carrying costs have encouraged firms to reduce inventories to bare minimum levels. Steel mills report that, to an unusual degree, customers have deferred deliveries beyond January first. Nevertheless, we have little evidence of precipitous inventory liquidation caused by financial stringency. Demand for farm operating loans remains strong, but farmers are not liquidating holdings of crops or animals sooner than normal. Many banks have de-emphasized consumer installment loans, partly because of usury ceilings. Some collection difficulties are reported.

Mortgage loan commitments are being met, but new commitments are very difficult to obtain. Some commercial and industrial construction projects that would have been started in the second half of 1980 probably will be postponed. Prevailing rates on home mortgage loans are about 13 percent in most parts of the district. A 12-percent home mortgage ceiling is still in effect in Wisconsin. About half of the S&Ls in Wisconsin now require a 50 percent down payment, which effectively eliminates many borrowers. In the Chicago area there is some concern over condominium loans owed by borrowers who purchased one or more units as speculations, but there is no clear evidence of forced sales thus far. Chicago experienced a broad and rapid wave of "forced conversions" of rental apartments to condos.

Beige Book Report: Cleveland
January 2, 1980

Business conditions in the Fourth District continue to be relatively strong, except for the slump in the automotive industry and housing. Steel production and shipments have weakened while aluminum orders and production have held up relatively well. Orders and shipments in capital goods industries, except for trucks, remain strong, but appliance production continues to decline gradually from its spring peak. Retail sales during the holiday season appear better than expected. Retailers, however, are bearish over sales prospects next quarter. Most officials believe that inventories are currently about in line with sales and few are adjusting inventories because of higher interest rates. Bankers report that C&I loans are expanding very slowly and consumer loans have slackened in recent weeks. The real estate market has virtually dried up because of a lack of demand rather than a lack of mortgage credit.

The steel and aluminum industries have experienced a sharp contraction in auto-related orders but only steel producers report low operating rates. Steel shipments have weakened and backlogs have been nearly depleted, according to a steel official. A steel economist reports that steel production over the next three months is not expected to change much from this quarter, but seasonally adjusted, production will decline as the steel industry feels the impact of the fuel-related auto slump and as steel customers cut back inventories. Support for aluminum orders has come from above normal demand from the can industry and exports, which more than offset the drop in auto orders. Strength in aluminum orders may be partly related to a hedge against an expected price increase in January and a possible strike next May when the existing labor contract expires. Aluminum shipments are expected to decline slightly over the next three months, and about 7% in 1980 because of the expected economic slowdown.

Capital goods producers of industrial and electrical equipment report a continued high level of incoming business and some capacity constraints. An official with an industrial equipment firm states that new orders remain strong, especially because of auto-retooling commitments, and that backlogs are expected to remain firm, at least for the near-term. A machine tool economist reports that orders have continued very strong in recent months, although domestic orders in current dollars are off slightly from the September peak. Machine tool backlogs are currently at 18 months and could reach 24 months, as orders press against capacity. An economist for an electrical equipment producer states that orders for motors and telecommunications equipment are still rising faster than shipments because of limited capacity, although orders from small distributors have slowed because of high borrowing costs.

Consumer goods producers, excluding automotive, report a slight decline in durable-goods orders, but a leveling of nondurable goods orders. A supplier to appliance producers states that backlogs are strong. Appliance-related orders are holding steady and are not expected to drop as sharply as auto-related orders. An economist for an appliance manufacturer reports that orders did not increase in October from year-ago levels, but are not yet showing signs of declining. However, substantial reductions in auto production schedules have contributed to a cutback in tire production. Production of new-car tires is down 12% this year, while replacement tire output has held steady, according to a tire official.

Department store officials and other retailers report that holiday season sales are better than expected, although in some cases "real" sales are apparently off from a year-ago. Many explanations are given for the reported increase in November retail sales, including an extra shopping week after Thanksgiving and a "last-gasp" of consumers who are taking advantage of month-long sales promotions.. However, several officials are skeptical over a November sales increase, and are unable to corroborate the reported increase from their own experience. Most department store officials expect weakness in retail sales after Christmas, followed by a very slow recovery.

Inventories at the producer and retail level are generally regarded as being in balance, even where sales have weakened. Exceptions include automotive and steel inventories. Steel inventories being depleted because of ample availability of steel since automotive customers cut back orders. Several retailers state that inventories are in line with current sales, but continued strength in sales during the last two weeks of the holiday season is needed to avoid an inventory problem. Although the high cost of financing inventories has been a factor in controlling inventories, several respondents note that the cost effect has been mitigated by some product prices rising faster than interest rates and by contract provisions that protect a manufacturer with lengthy delivery times from rising interest rates. Nevertheless, the high financing costs for inventories, along with weak sales, have contributed to several auto-dealer closings in the District and could, according to one banker, begin to affect smaller retail stores if interest rates remain high.

Bankers report that C&I loans have been edging up slightly in recent weeks, but consumer loans were off in November. High cost of borrowing, rather than lack of availability, has discouraged many businesses and consumers from applying for loans. Banks have generally become more cautious in making loans. A bank economist reports that speculative loan applications, especially broker and collateral loans, are being rejected and low-margin loans are being reduced to shift funds to more profitable centers. Some banks report greater reliance on borrowed funds, such as money market certificates and repurchase agreements, because core deposits have been very weak.

Mortgage demand is weaker than normal for this time of the year, although lenders typically report that mortgage funds are available. Credit terms tightened following October 6 policy changes, but an S&L economist states that mortgage market conditions have not tightened further in recent weeks and may soon show signs of a little easing. High interest rates and sizable monthly financing costs are said to inhibit loan applications. An FHLB economist in this District reports that S&Ls have cut back borrowing from year-ago levels, even though deposits have not grown. Housing prices have stabilized, and according to a major realty association, prices are now virtually unchanged from a year-ago. They nevertheless expect a rise in prices by next summer. In Pennsylvania, usury ceilings, although recently adjusted upward again, continue to hamper lending by some S&Ls. One official believes S&Ls are facing an intense squeeze on profit margins that will result in a step-up in merger activity in 1980.

Beige Book Report: Dallas
January 29, 1980

The economy of the Eleventh District enters the eighties on a strong underpinning that promises sustained, long-term growth. Weakness in the near term apparently will confined largely to auto sales and residential construction, while dollar sales at department stores are likely to slow. Increased oil field activity and nonresidential construction, and their supplying industries, are expected to provide most of the strength to the economy this year. Buyer resistance to high interest rates has stymied home mortgage lending. Bank loan demands are running slightly ahead of normal for this time of year, while agricultural loans at rural banks declined slightly last quarter.

The dollar volume of department store sales in the Eleventh District is about 18 percent above the level a year ago when bad weather brought shopping to a standstill. And retail executives indicate post-Christmas sales exceeded expectations. Sales in South Texas are being bolstered by a heavy influx of northern tourists and increased buying by Mexican nationals. Retail inventories are trim. Most retailers expect a slowing trend in sales for the next six months and are ordering conservatively for spring and summer.

New car sales may have bottomed out at the low level recorded in December, according to dealers surveyed. Tight credit conditions continue to be a drag on sales. Our respondents suggest sales are 15 to 35 percent below potential because many would-be customers cannot obtain credit. Auto inventories remain higher than desired, but improved deliveries of popular domestic models are helping to keep stocks up. Most dealers forecast a pickup in sales this spring, especially if credit conditions ease.

Output continues to increase in most manufacturing industries. Much of the strength is centered in building materials, machinery and metals; but food and apparel production is also on the rise. The only areas of weakness are auto assemblies and refining. Refinery runs continue to decline with weakening demand and improved inventory levels of finished products. A prolonged strike by the Oil, Chemical, and Atomic Workers union could eventually impact on refinery output.

A survey of three large aircraft manufacturers indicate they could increase substantially their current average rate of capacity utilization if defense spending is boosted. However, all cited substantial production bottlenecks would be created at the materials and supplier stages of production if expenditures were increased rapidly.

Drilling activity is off to a fast start this year because of favorable weather and high product prices. The average rotary drilling rig count in the nation is forecast to rise about 12 percent, and the number of wells completed is expected to increase about 7 percent. Expanding oil field activity has created a continued shortage of experienced drilling crews.

Construction activity shows little sign of slowing. Much of the increase in activity this year will be for such heavy construction projects as highways; earthwork, waterways, and irrigation; and water and sewerage systems. Large nonresidential building construction projects should also post strong gains, while residential and small business construction projects should slip further.

The mortgage market in Texas is at a standoff. Buyer resistance to the prevailing 13-percent mortgage rate is stiff, and some S&Ls have begun to back down from that rate. Loan activity is not expected to pick up substantially until buyers are offered a more acceptable rate, and the S&Ls increase their liquidity by selling loans in the secondary market. New savings inflows at S&Ls continue to run below seasonal norms. Municipally backed bond programs stimulated mortgage activity in some Texas cities, but those funds were exhausted quickly.

Total borrowings at District member banks quickened at year-end, but business loans at large banks remain soft—especially to customers in nondurable goods manufacturing, trade, and services. Deposits at large banks are growing slightly faster than normal for this time of year, and liquidity is not a problem.

Our January survey of rural bankers indicates farm loan demand has eased somewhat since October. Requests for feeder cattle loans, in particular, are down. Higher interest costs may have contributed to the apparent decline in cattle feeding activity. On average, interest rates charged for short-term farm operating and feeder cattle loans at survey banks increased about one and one-half percentage points in the fourth quarter of 1979. Loan-deposit ratios averaged 59 percent, compared with 63 percent in October and 60 percent a year ago.

Beige Book Report: Kansas City
January 29, 1980

Inflation remains strong in the Tenth District while business activity continues to slow. Purchasing agents report suppliers have recently increased prices for material inputs and further increases are expected in the near future. Retailers report good January sales performance due to mild winter weather, but expect sales over the coming year to increase by less than the increase in retail prices. The recently imposed grain embargo has produced uncertainty in area grain markets and the resulting decrease in marketings has produced cash flow difficulties for many farmers. Loan demand is moderate in most areas of the District while deposit growth is reported to be moderate to strong.

Purchasing agents contacted in the Kansas City District report input prices have increased by 10 per cent or more over the past year. Most purchasing agents indicate that suppliers have raised prices within the past three months, and all expect further price increases over the next three months. With the exception of the aircraft and electronics industries, input availability is not a major problem in the District, nor is it expected to become one during coming months.

The majority of purchasing agents report that material inventories are to be kept low during the next several months because of high interest rates and a pessimistic outlook for the economy. About half the companies contacted will need to further trim their inventories to reach their desired lower levels. The majority of firms contacted indicated that they were operating at about normal capacity for this time of year. Labor is in adequate supply in the District although a shortage of skilled labor continues to exist in Wichita and Colorado Springs.

Most retailers contacted report that sales during January are 6 to 20 per cent higher than a year ago, mostly as a result of mild weather which has encouraged shopping. Most retailers expect sales to increase between 5 and 8 per cent during 1980, while retail prices are expected to grow by 10 per cent or more. Inventories are currently at satisfactorily low levels, and are expected to be kept at low levels by means of continued winter clearance sales.

The embargo on grain sales to the Soviet Union is having short-term effects upon Tenth District agriculture. Area grain markets are nearly at a standstill, because of farmers' unwillingness to sell until some of the current price uncertainty is resolved. Transportation problems are being exacerbated as grain backs up from port elevators to local grain elevators. Shortages of grain storage facilities are occurring in many areas and wet grain is compounding storage problems.

Many farmers are experiencing cash flow difficulties. Loans are now due that were to be paid by receipts from grain marketings. Agricultural banks are finding it difficult to meet the increased demand for loans and extensions because of slow deposit growth at many rural banks. Machinery and new equipment dealers are also feeling the impact of the embargo, as orders for new equipment are being canceled by farmers concerned about 1980 income prospects. Production yields may decrease in the 1980 crop year as farmers reduce fertilizer purchases and use more crop rotation.

The District's 1980 winter wheat crop production is heavily dependent upon weather conditions during the next two months. Wheat seedlings did not achieve enough growth during the fall to adequately protect the topsoil.

Lack of snow cover coupled with strong winds has led to erosion of topsoil in many areas and loss of some planted acreage. Moisture levels are sufficient at the present time due to recent rainfall. Snowfall is needed both for moisture and as protection against extremely cold weather.

Loan demand is moderate in most areas of the Tenth District. High lending rates and usury ceilings are limiting real estate, business, and automobile loans. However, growth in agricultural loans remains relatively strong, in part because the embargo on grain exports to the Soviet Union is causing increased demand for loans to finance inventories of wheat and corn. Lending rates have been relatively stable in the past month and are generally expected to remain stable for the next several weeks.

Most of the bankers contacted for the January survey report moderate or strong deposit growth. Money market CD's continue to account for most of the deposit growth. However, the 2 1/2-year floating rate CD's are also attracting substantial funds.

Beige Book Report: Minneapolis
January 2, 1980

As 1979 ends, signs of softening in the Ninth District economy persist. Consumers continue to be hesitant to spend, businesses have started cutting back their ordering, and loan requests are still declining. The region, however, is not yet in a recession. Industrial activity remains strong, employment is high, and agricultural conditions are good.

The signs of softening persist...
In November we said consumers seemed hesitant to spend, and this assessment hasn't changed. Adjusted for inflation, December sales at most stores have been either the same as or slightly less than a year ago. According to this Bank's directors, home and auto sales are down from a year ago. In the Minneapolis/St. Paul metropolitan area, for example, 10 percent fewer homes have been sold recently and about 40 percent fewer homes are now listed for sale compared to last year at this time.

Consumer reluctance to spend is one reason why manufacturers are starting to receive fewer new orders. A director affiliated with a large national manufacturer indicates that in December his firm's new orders have weakened. Another national manufacturer reports a slight falloff in the incoming order rate at one industrial division.

This softening in new orders, along with the weakness in consumer spending, is reflected in a continuing cutback in loan requests at district financial institutions. In November we reported that consumers were requesting fewer loans, and this cutback is continuing, especially on loans to finance homes and large durable goods. The Savings League of Minnesota, for example, reports that its members' mortgage loan applications in late November were 28 percent below a year ago. Our sources also indicate that businesses are still requesting fewer loans.

A main cause of this letup in spending and lending is high interest rates. At present rates, many consumers cannot afford the monthly payments required to buy a large durable good or a house. Interest expense has become the fastest increasing business cost. To reduce it, businesses are cutting back inventories.

...but the Ninth District is still not in a recession In our last report we said strong industrial activity, employment gains, and good agricultural conditions were keeping the district out of a recession, and this is still true.

District industrial activity remains strong. District manufacturers responding to our survey expect their fourth-quarter shipments to be 16 percent ahead of a year ago. A recent University of Minnesota survey also reports strong manufacturing activity in the region. Complementing the manufacturing strength is considerable petroleum and coal exploration and production in Montana and North Dakota.

To accommodate this expansion in industrial activity, district employers are still hiring more workers. District help-wanted advertising is currently at a record high. This Bank's directors also indicate that employers' desires to expand payrolls are keeping labor markets tight.

Not only have industrial activity and employment remained strong, but agricultural conditions are even better now than in November. Then, many district agricultural producers were enjoying income gains, but two developments were restricting the income of some grain producers. Poor weather had put the corn harvest way behind schedule, and many feared that it would not be completed. And even if it were, transportation problems had made marketing grains difficult. In November and December, however, the weather cooperated, most farmers were able to harvest their corn, and transportation bottlenecks eased. Thus, grain producers are now marketing their crops at profitable prices and realizing income gains along with other agricultural producers.

Beige Book Report: New York
January 2, 1980

Scattered signs of a slowdown in business activity in the Second District have emerged in December, according to comments of District directors and business leaders contacted recently. The major element of strength remains department store sales, which posted a healthy gain for the month as a whole. Outside of retailing, however, business activity appears to have lost momentum. New orders for capital goods have weakened and some order backlogs have declined. Inventories are generally in line with sales expectations, although some accumulations were reported developing among housing industry suppliers. On the financial scene, the prospective suspension of state-imposed mortgage rate ceilings is expected to have a major impact on mortgage markets in New York and New Jersey. Overall credit demands appear to have steadied.

Retailers in the Second District generally were satisfied with the holiday shopping season. Traditional department stores appeared to fare somewhat better than mass merchandisers. Among particular goods, especially strong sellers were electronic toys, apparel and other soft goods. Appliances and other large ticket items also sold well in the downstate region, but the strength failed to spill over into the Rochester-Buffalo area. The directors of the Buffalo Branch reported that big ticket item purchases were weak. There was a sharp pick up in holiday activity during the five days before Christmas at New York City stores when the surge in sales often outpaced the gains at suburban counterparts. While virtually all of the merchants seemed satisfied with retailing activity, one major discount chain reported an especially disappointing season. This chain blamed its sluggish sales on its own policy of sharply restricting the availability of customer credit. Inventories, for the most part, are at planned levels as a result both of conscious efforts by merchants to keep stocks lean and of relatively good December sales. Indeed, spot shortages of some items were reported by a few respondents.

Automotive dealers in the District also seemed satisfied with new car sales activity in December. Indeed, area dealers report that with help of promotions and markdowns, virtually all leftover 1979 models have been cleared out. As a result, local dealers judge overall inventories to be at acceptable levels. Still, because of the strength of small car sales, dealers report some sales have been lost because inadequate stocks did not allow timely deliveries. Part of this inventory leanness was attributed to the high cost of financing. One dealer noted his daily interest charges per car were twice what they were fourteen months ago. Used car sales were mixed, while truck sales have begun to pick up in the downstate region.

Outside the consumer sector, there is increasing evidence of a slowing in business activity. Although business shipments have remained robust, there has been an easing in new orders. One manufacturer noted that the slowdown in home building had crimped sales of new lumber products and, as a result, inventories were beginning to build up. For now, this company prefers to absorb the costs of the supply buildup rather than to reduce mill operations and then have to play catch-up when demand and prices recover. Other than the mild accumulation in the home building supply industry, inventories appear to be generally in line with sales. Indeed, sales of paper products remain strong and the markets were described as tight. The chairman of a major chemical firm indicated his industry was beginning to see a downturn in demand across many product lines. He noted that major customers were ordering smaller quantities, and thereby foregoing the discount for larger quantities, in order to avoid the high interest rates involved in financing larger quantities. For the most part, upstate manufacturers have not adjusted their capital spending plans, nor have there been reports of worker layoffs. None of the respondents have encountered any financing problems. In fact, several contacts noted that cash flow positions were so good that no outside financing has been required. Nonetheless, a noticeable slowdown in payments from customers was noted by virtually all respondents.

On the financial scene, mortgage lending remains at a virtual standstill. Many respondents expect the prospective legislation suspending state-imposed mortgage rate ceilings to have a major impact on mortgage markets in New York and New Jersey. Currently, mortgage usury ceilings are 10 1/4 percent in New York and 10 1/2 percent in New Jersey. It is expected that the suspension of these ceilings will increase the availability of mortgage funds. At this point there is confusion over some of the legal aspects surrounding the legislation. In New York, one of the uncertainties is whether the law will override the state's "120-day rule," which prevents lenders from charging a higher rate than the rate prevailing when a mortgage application is completed for 120 days.

Beige Book Report: Philadelphia
January 29, 1980

Reports from the Third District in January indicate that business activity is mixed. Representatives of the industrial sector report continued decline in manufacturing and predict further slippage in the next six months. Retailers, on the other hand, are experiencing unexpectedly strong sales this month. In the financial sector, area bankers say consumer loan demand has been strong, but business borrowing is mixed. Interest rates have stabilized for the time being, but will probably drop slightly in the first half of the year.

Respondents to this month's Business Outlook Survey say the '80s have begun with further slippage in area manufacturing. About one-third of the manufacturers polled this month say general business conditions are worse than they were in December, while less than a tenth report improvement. In terms of specific indicators, new orders are down again in January, but shipments have remained stable. So, once again, producers' backlogs have diminished, and a commensurate cut in inventories is noted. On the jobs scene, payrolls have been pared slightly at area plants for the first time since the slump began some seven months ago, and many managers have cut working hours somewhat as well.

Looking ahead to the next six months, responding manufacturers predict further decay of general business conditions, as they've been doing since December '78. New orders are expected to increase only marginally between now and July, while a more significant pickup in shipments is forecast. The cautious mood of the respondents is reflected in their plans to maintain current inventory positions for a while and hold the line on hiring as well. Working hours will probably be trimmed fractionally in coming months.

Industrial prices are on the upswing again in January, according to survey participants. Over three-quarters of the manufacturers polled this month report paying higher prices for inputs than they did last month, and well over one-third say they are charging more for their finished products. For the longer term, almost 9 out of 10 respondents expect the cost of raw materials to be higher by midsummer, while about 8 out of 10 plan price hikes by that time for the goods they produce.

Area bankers contacted in January report strong consumer loan demand, but say business borrowing is mixed. Commercial loans are running between 1 and 19 percent ahead of January '79 levels, but are generally below plan. A Director of this Bank comments that inquiries about business loans are numerous, but that actual follow-throughs are relatively few. Looking ahead to the next six months, most bankers are anticipating a dip in business loans, as the economy in general slows down.

Interest rates appear to have stabilized, at least temporarily, in the Third District. The prime rate at all of the banks contacted remains at 15 1/4 percent, unchanged from its mid-November level. Projections of the prime call for a drop of about 100 basis points over the next six months, followed by further cuts which will leave the rate at about 12 1/4 percent by year-end.

Bankers say that deposit flows are adequate in January, but that the effect of the new two and a half year floating rate certificate is less than they'd hoped. Although response to the new instrument has been quick and enthusiastic, the certificates are attracting little new money, with as much as 75 percent of the funds used to buy them coming from other time deposits at the issuing bank. The minimum denomination on the certificates is generally $500.

Mortgages are still being made by banks in the District, with a good deal of nonprice rationing observed. Bankers say they have not seen, thus far, any improvement in the mortgage market as a result of the suspension of state usury ceilings effective January 1.

Area retail activity has remained strong thus far in January. Merchants report current dollar sales of 8 to 10 percent over year-ago figures, which is better than they anticipated. After strong Christmas sales in December, most merchants expected a slump as consumers became more cautious about their spending, but no curtailment has been observed as yet. Inventories are in "very good shape" because sales have been so much better than expected. No serious shortages have been reported.

Area retailers are cautiously optimistic about the next six months. The anticipated recession is overdue at this point, and the merchants contacted feel that if a slowdown does come, it may be only slight. They are not really anticipating any cutback, though, until late in the second quarter.

Beige Book Report: Richmond
January 29, 1980

Business conditions continue spotty in the Fifth District. Manufacturers surveyed this month have, on balance, experienced further weakening of new orders, reduced order backlogs, and a resumption of inventory accumulation. There is little indication, however, that these conditions are pervasive or, in fact, that they represent the underlying trend. Our directors, for instance, see little evidence that demand for the products of firms in their areas has slackened further in the past month. Nonetheless, the expectations of District businessmen remain decidedly negative. Retail sales have softened in recent weeks. Indications are that wholesale and retail credit demands have also moderated. Most lenders hold the view that, in the near-term at least, loan growth will continue to slow.

Despite the continuing weakness in new orders, Fifth District manufacturers were able to maintain the level of shipments over the past month. More than 40 percent of the respondents to our survey of manufacturers reported a decline in the volume of new orders over the past month and nearly as many experienced further reductions in order backlogs. Survey respondents also suggest a resumption of inventory accumulation. Apparently most of the additions to stocks took place in materials. Also, inventories appear not to have risen relative to desired levels. The number of respondents viewing current stocks as excessive has remained fairly stable for several months now. The view that current plant and equipment capacity might be in excess has become slightly more widespread recently, but remains a minority position. There is still virtually no sentiment for altering current expansion plans, however. Employment and weekly hours worked both declined among our manufacturing respondents over the latest survey period.

Most of our directors have seen little or no improvement in conditions in their respective areas over the past month. Nonetheless, they report some industries, e.g., textiles, electronics, printing, food processing, continuing to show some buoyancy. The directors continue to cite weakness in residential real estate, automobiles, and some related areas such as construction, primary metals, and glass. Despite what is apparently perceived as a lack of any real strength, our directors are unaware of any significant layoffs, unwanted inventory accumulation, production retrenchments or other evidence of slackening demand.

Retail sales have softened slightly in the past few weeks, but general merchandise lines such as those in department stores continue to hold up. Big ticket items and home improvement lines are contributing significantly to the broad weakness in total sales. Retailers have apparently reduced their inventories somewhat and there do not seem to be any serious problems in this area. Survey responses suggest that there may be some significant price cutting taking place at the retail level.

Despite the view among district lenders that loan growth will continue to slow, few expect interest rates to decline by any substantial amount. As has been the case for sometime, consumer demand for personal loans is offsetting weakness in other areas, but this source of strength is not as great as it has been. The larger business customers of banks have been very quiet. There continues to be a steady flow of smaller sized business loan requests, but only in a very few cases have lenders seen firms seeking financing for unusual inventory buildups. In some areas, e.g., Maryland, industrial revenue bond financing for plant improvements is an important source of funds.

Area lenders are beginning to see some signs of retrenchment on the part of consumers insofar as the use of credit is concerned, but the picture here is far from clear. Credit card volume, which is still growing due to Christmas related expenditures, remains strong. A number of banks, however, have commented on signs of weakness in installment loan demand. Moreover, this developing weakness appears to be broadly based and not due exclusively to slower automobile sales. There has been some mention recently of increased applications for second mortgage loans to be used for bill consolidation. Residential mortgage financing is slowing, due largely to decreased willingness on the part of borrowers to pay high rates. The market has softened to such an extent that in some areas rates have come down 1/4-1/2 percentage points from their peak levels.

With both crop and livestock receipts significantly larger, the District's total cash farm income during the third quarter of 1979 registered a 16 percent gain over a year earlier. The District improvement, which compared with a 14 percent upturn nationally, may well be somewhat lower at year-end 1979, however, because of the sharply smaller tobacco and peanut crops.

Beige Book Report: San Francisco
January 29, 1980

The economy of the Twelfth District exhibits persistent strength with no reports of major declines in employment or production. The housing industry and automobile retailing activity continue to be extremely weak, however, and there is mounting evidence that this weakness is spreading to allied industries. Retail sales over the holiday were quite good, but many retailers are gloomy over the prospects for the first quarter of 1980. Loan demand has fallen off sharply in most parts of the District and most bankers anticipate continued declines in lending as the "pipeline" of commitments dries up. Harvests were generally good in the District and the prospects for the agricultural sector in 1980 are believed to be bright.

Residential construction activity has fallen off sharply throughout the district. In Utah, for example, residential construction permits declined approximately 20 percent in l979 compared to 1978. Similar reports were received from the states of Washington and Oregon. Home resales are also very weak. Homes in California, for example, are now staying on the market much longer although the housing market in the San Fernando Valley and Orange County areas of Southern California is still very active. There is no evidence of widespread softening of housing prices.

The weakness in the housing industry has begun to have repercussions in the lumber industry and other activities associated with housing. A regional lumber manufacturer in Oregon reports that production is off 20 to 25 percent. Closures of both plywood facilities and sawmills are also reported in Oregon, with the loss of about 1,000 more jobs than is usual for this time of year. Employment data for the state of California show an abnormal decline in November in the lumber and furniture industries although the absolute numbers involved are small. Prices of dimension lumber have dropped by about a third since early September. Non-residential construction activity is credited with temporarily cushioning the building supply industries from a more severe decline and some observers expect considerably worsened conditions in the coming months as non-residential construction falters.

Automobile retailers are reported to be in severe straits in some parts of the District. A survey of dealers in Salt Lake City resulted in remarks about sales such as "almost non-existent" and "worst in twenty years." In Seattle, however, dealers have accommodated high flooring costs by cutting inventories and sales are reported to be "fair." Sales of small and foreign cars continue to be stronger than sales of large domestic automobiles.

There are very few reports of weakness in the District's economy outside the housing and automobile sectors. Demand for aluminum products is so strong that a major producer is allocating the product to its customers. Recent rainfall in the Northwest has removed the threat of hydroelectric power cutbacks that would have hurt aluminum production. High world prices for lead, zinc, gold and copper have boosted the value of output from the Coeur d'Alene mining district in the Northwest. If current metals prices hold, the mining district's 1980 production is expected to be more than triple last year's figures. The Secretary of Interior announced last month that the intermountain power project will be located near Delta, Utah. Construction of this $4-6 billion plant is expected to further boost that area's economy.

The demand for skilled technical and clerical labor remains high throughout much of the Twelfth District. The unemployment rate of clerical labor in Southern California is estimated to be only 2 percent, for example. A major transportation company reports strong demand for its pipeline and rail services despite weakness in the forest products and automobile industries.

The large department stores in the District report a level of holiday sales ranging from "good" to "exceeding our budgets." A regional manager of Sears in Utah added that regional sales were better than those for Sears nationally. Sales of kitchenware and softgoods were stronger than sales of consumer durables. Most retailers are apprehensive about the prospects for the first quarter of the year and have maintained trim inventories.

Loan demand is generally weak throughout the District. However, a major bank headquartered in Southern California reports strong demand for commercial loans and loans for commercial and industrial construction. The weakness in demand for consumer loans, auto loans and mortgage loans is ascribed to consumer resistance to high interest rates. Several lenders in the District have dropped their rates but still have no significant loan volume. In those states without binding usury limits, funds are reported to be "generally available" at the prevailing interest rates. However, applicants in many parts of the District are having difficulty qualifying at present interest rates. A bank in Oregon reports that only one out of every four mortgage loan applicants is able to qualify for a loan. Delinquencies on consumer loans are reported to be on the rise, although they still remain at reasonable levels. Bankers in the District generally expect bankruptcies and foreclosures to increase in 1980. They also expect loan volumes to weaken further as previous commitments dry up.

The agricultural sector in the District is in good shape after the successful harvests of 1979. Banks in the central valley of California enjoyed strong deposit growth because of good harvests and there are no reports of anticipated farm credit problems. Inventories of farm equipment are high as a hedge against the increasing prices of this equipment. Farmers expect the markets for beef cattle, dairy cows and farm crops to be strong in 1980.

Beige Book Report: St Louis
January 29, 1980

Business activity in the Eighth District appears to have declined somewhat in recent weeks. Although the automobile and housing sectors led the decline, a number of associated industries are beginning to experience reduced sales and orders. On the other hand, capital goods production and nonresidential construction remain relatively strong and, in some instances, continue to increase. Among those capital goods experiencing strong demand are products used for energy conservation purposes, oil and gas exploration, and aerospace and defense. In the financial sector, net inflows of savings have been quite modest in recent weeks as competition from other instruments, such as money market funds, has been acute. Mortgage interest rates have increased to 12-1/2 percent or more and the number of mortgage loans made in recent weeks is reported to have decreased.

Department store sales since the year-end have been about the same as a year ago after adjustment for inflation, but such sales data are not quite comparable since weather has been significantly better this year. Retailers are guarded about prospects for sales, with most retailers expecting no improvement before mid-year. Automobile sales remain substantially below a year ago, and car dealers report that the trend toward more gas-efficient cars continues. A foreign car dealer noted, however, that the waiting list has declined for some gas-efficient models from as much as six months last summer to about six weeks currently.

Manufacturing activity in the District is mixed. Automobile manufacturing has been the hardest hit of the major industries in terms of layoff of workers. In the St. Louis area, where automobile and truck assembly activities are very important, the work force at the end of January is estimated to be down 40 percent from a year ago. Deterioration of business activity was also reported in many auto-related industries, such as auto frames, carburetors, brakes, piston rings, etc. On the other hand, it was reported that some types of consumer tools, such as chain saws and various do-it-yourself tools, are in great demand. Also, suppliers of the residential construction industry believe that the decline in home building will have a major impact on their business in the near future. Some other manufacturers of consumer durables, such as appliances, reported that demand has fallen.

Inventories at retail stores have generally been kept at desired levels as excess stocks have been quickly removed by sales promotions. Inventories of most appliances are at desired levels, with the exception of room air conditioners.

Demand for nondurable products has been affected less than durable products, yet some declines have occurred in this sector. Demand for domestically produced apparel and shoes has slowed, partly due to increasing foreign competition. A boxboard manufacturing representative noted a decline in orders in recent weeks which has led to some layoff of workers. The biggest drop in boxboard orders has been from manufacturers of automobiles parts.

Capital goods production remains the strongest area of manufacturing activity. Farm equipment is experiencing increasing demand, a reflection of the strong farm income in 1979. However, such demand may diminish later in the year if the expected decline in 1980 farm income occurs. Another area of strength is defense-related goods. Major defense contractors reported that production increases are likely in 1980 based on a high level of orders and the prospect of increased defense spending. The aircraft industry has experienced a strong demand for commercial aircraft. Other products with strong demand include energy-efficient motors, welding and cutting equipment, gas and oil drilling equipment, telecommunication products, and data processing equipment.

Nonresidential building remains at a high level in the District whereas residential building has declined further and is now at a virtual standstill over much of the District. Several major commercial and government projects in the St. Louis area are expected to get under way in 1980, including a major office building, hotel, and waterway project. While contractors are fairly optimistic that a high level of activity can be maintained through mid-year because of a backlog of projects, they expect a slowing later in the year as these projects are completed.

Representatives of financial intermediaries report that strong competition from money market funds is having a sizable impact on the net inflows of funds. Saving and loan officials report only modest increases in net savings in recent weeks, although the new 2-1/2 year certificates have been received better than expected. The bulk of new funds, however, continues to be the six-month money market certificates.




















