Beige Book: National Summary
June 23, 1971

Reports in this Red Book generally confirm the slightly more optimistic tone of the two previous issues. Most districts report moderate improvement both in retail sales and in manufacturers' shipments and orders. Residential construction is very strong almost everywhere. Defense cutbacks continue. Demand for business equipment remains weak. Unemployment remains high with no present prospects for improvement. Employment generally is steady to slightly higher. Although a few scattered price declines were noted, one of the clearest impressions through the district reports is a strengthening of the inflationary psychology—in large part because of generous wage settlements. Authorized and wildcat strikes continue to hamper activity.

In the financial sector, a pickup in loan demand was noted in a number of districts—especially New York, Chicago, and San Francisco. Consumer and mortgage loan demand also is up. Savings inflows at banks have slowed, but remain at a high level. Interest rates charged by banks have firmed. Home mortgage rates are steady to higher—by a quarter percentage point or more.

Businessmen and bankers now have learned to refer to the rapid growth of the money supply, which they typically deem excessive and inflationary. One "verbose" academician, however, finds the rapid growth of the money supply to be eminently appropriate to conditions. Increases in retail sales were reported in most districts, but higher prices account for most of the gain from last year. Stronger sales of autos, appliances, and home furnishings were noted in a number of districts. A pickup in tourism was observed in the Minneapolis and Atlanta Districts.

The pace of the recovery appears to have moderated in the Cleveland District, but this partly reflects the beginning of the cutback in steel production as inventory buildups are completed. Districts commenting on the potential steel strike that may start August 1, expected a settlement or a relatively short strike.

Among the strongest sectors are residential construction and the industries that supply building materials and components. At the other extreme are defense industries and capital goods (other than utilities)—with machine tools severely depressed. In some districts—Richmond and Atlanta—strength in nonresidential construction was noted.

Business inventories, except for strike hedges, are generally under good control—a point emphasized by New York and St. Louis. Richmond finds some manufacturers' inventories on the high side.

A number of districts commented on farm income prospects. Drought conditions are hurting crops and cattle in the Dallas District, while growing conditions are favorable in the San Francisco and St. Louis Districts. Planted corn acreage is larger this year in the Chicago District, and crop prospects would be favorable, but for the specter of the corn blight. In general, it is expected that higher prices will boost farm cash receipts in the nation in the second half of 1971, but net farm income for the year may be lower than in 1970 because of rising costs.

Beige Book Report: Atlanta
June 23, 1971

Reports of leading businessmen and bankers indicate the recovery is continuing but at a slow pace. The outlook has turned mixed, after being optimistic. One Alabama businessman describes the economy of his area as continuing a slow, barely perceptible growth. Another businessman reports growing uneasiness about the sluggishness of recovery. Yet another speaks of a more confident atmosphere. Announcements of plant expansions continue, but a few plant closings and sizable layoffs have cropped up. Construction is strong, with some exceptions.

On balance, there is little vigor in manufacturing. Some companies in Tennessee are reported to be operating on only a four-day week, and even then inventories are piling up. An Alabama industrialist reports that manufacturing is the "weak spot" in the Alabama economy. A north Florida banker, who has been reporting strong economic gains in his vicinity, now describes activity as being on a plateau.

There have been a number of layoffs and plant closings in recent weeks. Between 500 and 750 workers have been idled by an aluminum company, reportedly because of stockpiling before the recent labor negotiations. A textile mill employing 1,000 in Alabama is scheduled to close, but an effort is underway to try to find a buyer to take over the operation. About 300 workers are being laid off in Alabama because a vending machine manufacturing operation is closing. A spinning plant in Georgia has idled 200 and is anticipating another 200-man layoff, allegedly because of air pollution problems and foreign competition. An engineering firm in Tennessee is laying off 120 workers because of reduced aerospace research and rising costs. On the other hand, it has been reported that some firms that did not recruit at the University of Tennessee in the spring are planning to return this fall.

New plant announcements have been slow but steady. They include an electric motor plant in Mississippi, a carpet dyeing and finishing plant in Georgia, a mobile home plant in Georgia, a plant to manufacture leisure wear in Tennessee, and three plants to separate sulfur from oil produced in Alabama and Florida. Several plant expansions are occurring at a variety of businesses in Tennessee.

Outside of manufacturing, there are signs of economic strength. South Florida tourist business is vigorous. Long distance calls and telephone installations in Alabama are increasing strongly. Air traffic has picked up in the Tampa area. Retail sales are generally reported good, with one merchant noting that consumers have started to charge more of their purchases, presumably an indication of increased consumer confidence.

Construction activity is generally reported to be strong. Jackson, Mississippi, for example, is experiencing a high level of activity, and two large motel complexes have been announced recently. A shortage of skilled labor is anticipated in that area. A large residential and industrial complex has been announced for an area northeast of Atlanta. The northern Gulf Coast of Florida is experiencing a motel and condominium building boom. Residential construction is brisk in the Auburn, Alabama, area. Builders there are planning to construct speculative houses in the $23,000 to $27,000 class because they are moving much faster than homes in the $35,000 to $45,000 class. Another residential recreation project is going to be built on a lake in east central Alabama. A $15 million condominium is planned for St. Petersburg. Counter to the generally favorable construction news, condominiums are reported to be overbuilt in south Florida, and construction is reported to be at a very low level in Lake Charles, Louisiana, where some announced projects have not as yet commenced.

Two prominent businessmen report growing concern over the inability to lick inflation.

Beige Book Report: Boston
June 2, 1971

First District directors continue to express guarded optimism on the progress of the recovery, noting that the slight improvement in consumer spending first reported last month seems to be continuing. However, prospects for a significant slowing of inflation over the rest of 1971 are considered poor. In the financial sector, the gains noted for the past several months seem to be coming to an end. At Boston, area thrift institutions' conventional mortgage rates have eased back up toward 8 percent from their April low of 7 1/2 percent, and the large deposit inflows seem to be tapering off. Credit availability remains good, however, at thrift institutions, commercial banks, and large area insurance lenders. Despite the virtual disappearance of equity kickers and a drop in effective yield of more than 600 basis points over the last eight months, insurance companies are finding commercial mortgage demand very sluggish.

At the recent joint meeting of the First and Second District Boards of Directors, a list of common questions was given to each attending member to elicit their sentiment regarding the current business outlook. Among the five Boston directors responding to these questions, there was near unanimity. All agreed that the greater consumer willingness to spend reported a month ago seems to be continuing, with two of our directors further noting that this trend seems to be developing even in the area of luxury items. Four of the five expressed their conviction that housing starts for the year can hold at a 1.9-million unit level and that the primary deterring factor to gains beyond this level is inflated home prices. The fifth member, active in both commercial and mutual savings banking, noted that in his area sales seem to be proceeding well in spite of home prices.

All five directors agreed that capacity utilization levels-not high, long-term rate levels-will determine spending on plant and equipment over the next several quarters and that the outlook thus remains somewhat weak. Of the three directors answering a question on recent developments in the employment situation, two saw no changes and a third noted a tendency to slightly longer workweeks.

Commenting to the recent update of the DRI Model forecast and subsequent developments, Professor Eckstein stated that the leading indicators have become an absolute hodgepodge of contradictions and convey no sense of direction at all to him. Consistent with the latest DRI solution ($1,050-billion GNP for 1971), Eckstein noted that the extra inflation comes at least partly at the expense of the real GNP, a result he feels is descriptive of the real world in the short to medium run. In spite of the recent reversals in rate levels, Eckstein advised the System to concentrate on the growth rates of money stock and free reserves over the next quarter, shooting for something like a 7- to 8-percent annual rate of M1 growth. Consistent with his past prescriptions, Professor Tobin took the opposite position, making a plea that System policy should simply be one of pushing on the aggregates hard enough to keep the bill rate steady to declining.

Professor Shapiro once again took a sanguine view of events. Dismissing the recent Kaufman speech as "utter, errant nonsense," he stated that most sectors are doing just about what was expected and that the recovery is proceeding in an orderly manner. He is not yet concerned with short-term rate levels and continues to predict a fall in long-term rates by the end of the summer. Shapiro cautions the System to hew closely to a 5- to 6-percent M1 growth rate as its primary objective for the year. Shapiro and Eckstein concur in their conviction that housing starts of close to 1.9 million units now seem assured for the year as a whole.

Professors Wallich and Samuelson were unavailable for comment this month.

Beige Book Report: Chicago
June 2, 1971

The moderate improvement in sentiment noted a month ago is still evident. But signs of a vigorous uptrend, except in residential building, remain elusive. Job markets appear to have stabilized, with some scattered rehirings, but students and teachers are swelling the number of job seekers. Prospects are even less favorable than earlier for a significant diminution of upward price pressures. Demand for long-term funds remains strong, but demand for bank loans continues weak, although commitment volume has picked up sharply. There is no indication that the economy will again slide into a slump, but the reversal of the build-up in steel inventories after July and the ending of other temporary stimuli are expected to dampen the business uptrend. Looking ahead to 1972, a broadly based recovery is widely anticipated.

Orders have improved moderately for a variety of consumer goods, capital goods, components, and materials in the past several weeks. In almost all sectors, however, the order lead time remains very short. Nevertheless, stronger demand has encouraged price increases for such items as steel, nonferrous metals, building materials, plastics, and chemicals.

Inventories of most items are said to be well in line with requirements. Exceptions are extra holdings of steel, aluminum, and copper, awaiting strike developments. Many manufacturers have reduced goods-in-process inventories.

The outlook remains bleak for capital equipment generally. Farm equipment sales are reported to have improved recently, but data for first quarter show a large deficit from a year ago. The picture on construction-related equipment is mixed, with greatest strength in exports and mining equipment. The only really vigorous demand is for equipment related to pollution control.

Steel orders have slowed down to a level below shipments. Nevertheless, some transportation problems are beginning to hamper deliveries to steel users. On steel strike possibilities, it is generally recognized that the terms incorporated in the auto, can (and now, aluminum) settlements should set the pattern for agreement. Nevertheless, local problems and militant leaders may force a strike.

Concern about foreign competition continues to rise—in steel, machinery, and consumer goods. Some producers who used to emphasize an all-American product are developing or are seeking foreign sources for components (even including such bulky items as castings).

The current auto sales picture is clouded by effects of sales incentive programs. Inventories are now about right. Total sales of 9.8 million cars (including 1.5 million imports) will require strong demand for 1972 models.

With few exceptions, bankers continue to report demand for business loans as slow and disappointing. But there has been a sharp pickup in demand for firm commitments—paid for by fees or balances. Lines of credit, term loans, and revolving credit are all mentioned. Most of these commitments reflect a desire for insurance against future stringencies, because there is little indication that funds will be required in the near future. With slow business loan demand, banks are showing increased interest in mortgages, consumer credit, and broker loans.

More bankers, especially in Michigan, are investigating the advantages of holding companies and possible acquisitions of "bank-related" enterprises.

Inflows to bank savings accounts are reported to have slackened in recent weeks. CD money is not being sought aggressively. Savings inflows to S&Ls, however, remain very strong.

Beige Book Report: Cleveland
June 2, 1971

This report is based on information obtained from about 50 economists who attended a regularly scheduled meeting of the Fourth District Business Economists' Round Table held at the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland on May 27, 1971. The consensus forecast for the remainder of 1971 that emerged from this meeting indicated moderate real growth, continued high unemployment, and only a modest improvement in the rate of inflation. In general, the group's outlook was changed little from the projections presented at our previous meeting on January 29, 1971.

The group's median forecast of current dollar GNP for 1971 was revised slightly upward from $1,045 billion to $1,050 billion. However, their estimate of the GNP deflator was also increased from a year-to-year gain of 4.2 percent to 4.7 percent. Thus, real growth for the year is still estimated to be only 2.7 percent. Moreover, several members expected an acceleration in the Consumer Price Index to a 4-percent annual rate during the second half of 1971, reflecting higher food prices and upward pressure on mortgage interest rates. With only moderate real growth anticipated, the business economists remained generally pessimistic about the prospects of any appreciable improvement in the recent
6-percent level of unemployment in 1971.

The majority of the economists noted that the strengthening of economic activity in the first quarter was generally in line with their expectations. Discounting the effects of the rebound from the auto strike and other distorting influences in the first quarter, the recovery of overall economic activity was moderate. Most of the underlying strength in the first quarter was centered in the interest rate sensitive areas of residential construction and state and local government spending. A large number of the Round Table members indicated concern that further increases in interest rates might choke off a continued expansion in these sectors later this year. Several economists asserted that mortgage rates have apparently bottomed out at relatively high levels, and representatives of several large commercial banks reported that the prospects for increases in the prime rate—to perhaps 6 to 6 1/2 percent by the end of this year—are strong.

The group did not foresee any significant improvement in the rate of business spending this year; therefore, the strength of the recovery in the months ahead will depend increasingly upon consumer spending. Most of the economists noted scattered evidence of improvement in consumer spending; however, no major surge in consumer spending was anticipated for the balance of this year. The group was encouraged by retail sales in March, April, and so far in May. Moreover, since the fourth quarter of 1970, the advance in retail sales has become more broadly based, reflecting some pickup in such hard goods as furniture and appliances. The rate of new car sales, however, is expected to decline following the first quarter post-strike rebound. The median forecast of domestic new car sales in 1971, submitted by ten economists associated with the automotive, steel, and rubber industries, has been reduced slightly since the January meeting to an annual rate of 8.5 million units. Estimates of imported car sales, however, have been increased by approximately 300,000 units to a level of 1.5 million units. In total, retail sales are expected to rise 8 percent in 1971.

Several steel industry economists reported that recent developments within their industry closely resemble the patterns experienced prior to the expiration of the labor contract in 1968. However, the steel inventory build-up in 1971 is expected to be about one-half million tons less than in 1968, because the economy was weaker at the beginning of 1971 and inventories held by steel consumers were much higher than in 1968. The median forecast for steel indicates domestic steel consumption of 102.4 million tons, domestic steel shipments of 93.6 million tons, and steel ingot production of 132.2 million tons. New orders for steel reached a peak early this year, and it is expected that production and shipments will peak in May and June, respectively.

Beige Book Report: Dallas
June 23, 1971

The economy in the Southwest is still somewhat weaker than a year ago in the opinion of economic analysts with the Southwest regional office of the U. S. Department of Labor and with the district states' Labor Commissions. However, a slim majority felt that the situation would improve by year end. But these analysts generally did not expect the current rate of inflation to change much by year end. Most expect area prices to increase about the same as nationally, and for these price increases to be mainly in consumer durables and services. In addition, they also anticipate moderate increases in both short and long interest rates over the balance of the year.

Most of the respondents view the present level of employment as about the same as it was at the end of last year. But a few analysts reporting on New Mexico and Oklahoma felt that the situation has worsened in their states. About half indicated that the unemployment problem in their region was concentrated in relatively few areas. Counties with defense industries or Indian reservations and counties in southwestern New Mexico and in southern Texas are feeling the pinch in particular. For the district as a whole,
defense-related industries were cited as industries in which unemployment problems were most severe. However, a number of other industries were also reported as suffering high unemployment in the different district states, including transportation equipment, electrical equipment, general services, and construction.

Moreover, the outlook for employment in the Southwest is not particularly promising. Only about half of the respondents felt that the situation would improve somewhat by year end, with the others anticipating no change or some further increase in unemployment. Also, everyone thought the outlook for summer employment is particularly bleak.

Those that expected some improvement in the unemployment situation felt that it would be selective, likely to occur principally in construction, manufacturing, trade, and state and local governments. Those anticipating no change or a worsening in unemployment emphasized the anticipated growth in the labor force. They pointed out that the labor force had increased substantially since a year ago, reflecting in part returning veterans, entering youth, and migration. Moreover, it is anticipated that virtually every labor category, with the exceptions of unskilled and agricultural labor, will increase between now and year end.

Most did feel, however, that the impact of unemployment had fallen less on minority groups in past months than it had in other periods of economic slowdown. But they thought that the outlook for minority group employment was no better or worse than that for workers as a whole.

District economic indicators available since the last issue of the Red Book continue to evidence a mild upturn. Registrations of new passenger cars in Dallas, Fort Worth, Houston, and San Antonio were 8 percent lower in May than in April, but continued to be 9 percent greater than the same period a year ago. Department store sales were 9 percent higher in the four weeks ended June 12 than for the corresponding period a year before, and 8 percent higher on a cumulative basis this year than for the same period last year. The Texas Railroad Commission, however, reduced Texas oil production allowables from June's allowable of 75.4 to a factor of 68.7 percent for July. New Mexico also cut her production allowable for her southeast fields from 80 barrels to 70 barrels a day per well.

Agricultural conditions in the Eleventh District remain somewhat precarious. Recent rains have failed to totally break the drought in Arizona, New Mexico, and Texas, and arrived too late to aid the small grain crops. Range and cattle conditions in the four western states remain substantially below the ten-year average due to drought stress. The outlook depends largely on the adequacy of water supplies, both irrigation and rainfall. Arizona and New Mexico both face possible water shortages, but at this time irrigated crops throughout the district are progressing well.

Beige Book Report: Kansas City
June 2, 1971

Businessmen continue to remain cautious on the economy. Steel stockpiling does not appear to be providing as strong an underpinning to second quarter economic activity as was anticipated earlier. Although the supply of mortgage funds for financing residential construction remains ample, the rate of deposit inflows is below the levels of earlier this year. One businessman is sure the recent turnaround in interest rates will slow recovery, while another thinks it represents a correction for an overly rapid decline. Others feel that progress against inflation will be extremely difficult so long as monopoly power prevails to the extent that it does. One of these rejects wage-price controls as unenforceable and ineffective because the cause is not treated. Thus, considerable confusion exists as to what is happening and what needs to be done.

Users and producers of steel indicate only modest stockpiling to date. Some who are carrying larger-than-usual steel inventories give reasons other than, or in addition to, the likelihood of a strike. One manufacturer blames lower-than-expected sales. Another claims to be hedging against further price increases. Still another thinks a prolonged strike most unlikely, although he admits to buying steel ahead—just in case. One purchasing agent points to mill ads for certain types of steel not normally available in shortage situations as evidence of little industrywide stockpiling. He adds that, if there is not a strike, steel producers will be faced with a slow fourth quarter as users are evidently accumulating adequate inventories considering current rates of use.

Steel producers and service centers throughout the District confirm the reports of only light overall stockpiling by their customers. A major steel producer in the Denver area describes orders as disappointing. He believes that steel demand is being held back by uncertainty in the economy and because steel companies are not providing financing for 60 to 90 days this time as they have done previously. A service center in Omaha says it is not doing much hedge buying because of the possibility of a construction strike in June but may do a little after this uncertainty is resolved. Two companies in Oklahoma give similar reports of only light hedging. A pair of steel distributors in Kansas City answered "some" to the question of steel stockpiling. One terms July an open-tonnage month, with plenty of room for orders. This has not characterized past strike-year patterns and gives users more room to hedge later, he said. The other pointed out that business is not such that firms are stockpiling in anticipation of strikes as in the past. Several of those contacted pointed to foreign supplies of steel and supplies from independents unaffected by a strike as contributing to the reasons for little stockpiling.

Farm machinery sales show some indications of improvement after two years of sluggish activity. Within the Tenth District, however, the prospects remain somewhat mixed, as sales in those areas suffering from the current drought are not expected to improve over last year. In fact, some decline seems likely. According to the machinery companies contacted, sales during the October-April period were generally disappointing—running 5 to 10 percent below
year-earlier levels. However, the companies indicated that sales have recently picked up sharply, as farmers moved into the spring planting season and began preparations for the wheat harvest. One company reported an 11-percent increase in combine sales, and all representatives stated that large tractors (l00+hp) have been moving especially well. With the exception of the drought areas, the outlook is generally optimistic for the remainder of the year, with sales expected to run moderately above 1970 levels. Much of the impetus for this expected improvement arises from the more flexible planting features of the new farm program, easier credit conditions, relatively high grain prices, and the deferred buying actions taken by farmers during the past two years.

The demand for mortgage credit has been heavy during the past few months throughout the Tenth District, except in areas where layoffs have been particularly high and have dampened consumer enthusiasm. Demand for funds to finance the purchase and construction of single- family units remains strong. The apparent bottoming out of interest rates has added some boost to demand, encouraging borrowers to go ahead with their home buying plans rather than wait for lower interest rates. However, the demand for funds may be slackening somewhat in the multi-family area.

Some increases in mortgage lending rates have occurred during recent weeks. In line with national developments, the points charged on FHA-VA insured mortgages have increased from the 2.5-3 to the 4-5 area during the past two weeks. In some cases, conventional mortgage rates have ticked up a notch. The prevailing rate on an 80-percent conventional loan is 7 1/2 percent (plus 1 percent origination fee).

The supply of mortgage funds for purchase and construction of conventional single-family units remains quite ample. Savings and loan associations report continuing strong deposit flows and mortgage commitments continue to rise. However, the rate of deposit inflows is below that which occurred earlier in the year. Savings and loan associations are responding by reducing their purchases of FHA-VA mortgages in the secondary market. This slowing of funds flowing into the secondary market is causing problems for some mortgage companies caught without commitments. In the multi-family area, the supply of funds has tightened in some cases due to the feeling on the part of the lenders that some overbuilding may be occurring in this area.

Beige Book Report: Minneapolis
June 23, 1971

Although directors of this bank have not experienced any significant increases in wholesale prices in their businesses over the past month, they are not optimistic in expectations of future costs and prices. Capital spending plans among district businessmen, while still relatively bearish, do not seem to have changed since the beginning of the year. Retailers did not experience any significant rise in consumer spending in the past few weeks but are still optimistic in their sales forecasts. Meanwhile, tourist activity, which is beginning to expand seasonally, is expected to rise about 6 to 10 percent this year over last.

Contrary to what would be expected because of the significant rise in the wholesale price index during May, the directors of this bank were generally unaware of any significant price changes in their businesses over the past month. Among industries with recent price increases are packaging materials, wholesale groceries, construction, and raw materials used in manufacturing heavy equipment. A number of directors, however, were able to cite cases where prices had actually declined over the past month—most notably, ready-to-wear clothing and apparel industries. One director felt that these recent reductions, primarily caused by an increase in foreign competition, were large enough so that retail clothing prices this summer will not be higher than they were last year. Wholesale cattle prices also have slipped in the past few weeks.

The directors did not view these recent price reductions as indications of curtailment in inflation; the prevailing opinion still seems to be that prices will continue to rise. In the construction industry, for example, increases in steel are expected later on this summer, and another general round of price rises are anticipated after January 1 of next year. One director, who is the president of a utilities firm, said that, "purchasing agents, with few exceptions, continue to think of rather large price increases as a way of life. When anticipating future outlays, the big question is whether to build in expected cost increases of 7 to 10 percent."

Manufacturers in the Ninth District apparently have not changed their expectations regarding capital spending plans. Investment throughout the district is at a reduced level, but this is the result of decisions made as early as 1969 and not because area businessmen have recently reduced their anticipations.

Consumer spending has not changed in the past few weeks, although retailers continue to be optimistic. The directors felt that auto sales in the district were doing a little better than earlier in the year, despite a tendency for consumers to buy lower-priced units. Department store sales also appear to have picked up, largely because of the recent changes in fashions.

It is still early in the season, yet tourist operators throughout the district are already expecting an increase in summer tourist travel. A number of directors have noticed a significant increase in campers and trailers on the road, and advance reservations at resorts and motels suggest that tourist activity in the district will rise about 6 to 10 percent this year.

Mortgage interest rates in the Twin Cities have become slightly more restrictive in the past few weeks. Whereas government-insured mortgages in the Twin Cities were down to around 7 percent plus 2 points to the seller as recently as a month ago, a minimum of 3 points is now being charged to the seller. A number of lenders also have raised conventional mortgage rates to 7 3/4 percent from the 7 1/2 percent which prevailed three weeks ago.

Beige Book Report: New York
June 23, 1971

The views expressed by the directors of this bank and the Buffalo branch, as well as by some large retailers, point to a continuing gradual increase in consumer spending, but very cautious inventory policies by businessmen. In general, most respondents looked for a slight easing in wage demands, but do not expect any marked change in the price picture. Opinions regarding the strength of the demand for business loans indicated some strengthening on balance.

With respect to consumer spending, all the Second District directors and retailers who expressed an opinion on the subject felt the upward trend was continuing. A number of the respondents, however, adopted a relatively cautious attitude towards the strength of retail activity. Thus, the treasurer of a large nationwide chain of retail department stores specializing in softwear felt that much of the rise in his firm's dollar volume reflected higher prices, with the physical volume of sales running only moderately above last year. He felt that official tabulations indicating increasing strength in consumer spending were somewhat exaggerated, and reported that his firm as well as other retailers he had spoken to had not as yet seen signs that consumer retail outlays were reaching such proportions. As a result, he felt that "doubt was cast" on some of the official statistics. Similarly, while the vice president of a large New York department store with branches in the suburbs reported a "healthy" rise in his firm's sales in dollar terms, he noted that higher prices accounted for a good part of this increase. All of the Buffalo branch directors detected a continuing upward trend in retail activity, with a "spurt" in some areas related to seasonal factors. The New York bank directors, however, characterized the pick up in retail sales as "moderate" to "slow".

All of the respondents felt that businessmen were continuing to pursue cautious policies toward increasing their inventories, and that such building as was taking place was largely due to special circumstances. The chairman of the board of a large manufacturing concern reported that he knew of no company accumulating inventories with speculative motives," but he thought that some accumulation was taking place as the result of special factors, such as anticipations of strikes and environmental protection measures—especially the spreading ban on phosphates and restrictions on the paper industry. The vice president of Rochester's largest firm also reported that strike-hedging purchases had resulted in a substantial increase in inventories at his firm. However, he also pointed to the trend among retailers to limit their inventories and to rely increasingly upon the ready availability of adequate stocks from jobbers and distributors. The retailers who were contacted indicated there had been a slight rise in their inventories in preparation for an expected increase in sales activity later on in the year.

The views of the directors regarding business loan demand seemed to indicate some strengthening. Thus, the presidents of three upstate banks and the chairman of a large nationwide manufacturing concern felt that the demand for this type of loan had increased in recent weeks, and one pointed particularly to the strength in the mortgage area. And, while the chairman of the board of another upstate bank reported that his bank had not experienced any strengthening of loan demand, he noted that business loans are not a major part of his portfolio.

The respondents all continued to voice concern over the wage and price situation, although on balance the opinions expressed seemed slightly less pessimistic than a month ago. Thus, Buffalo branch directors reported some slowdown in the rate of wage increases, particularly among nonunionized concerns, and felt this trend might continue for the balance of the year. On the other hand, no significant change in the rate of advance of prices was evident to any of the Buffalo directors. One of the two New York City manufacturing executives on this bank's board saw inflation as continuing, but detected signs of an easing in wage increases. The other New York manufacturer saw a pattern of first-year wage increases averaging about 10 percent "less of a disaster" than previous increases, but "still a disaster" since he expected productivity to rise by only 3 percent to 3 1/2 percent in most industries.

Beige Book Report: Philadelphia
June 2, 1971

The general mood of businessmen, bankers, and economists in the Third District is that the recovery is continuing but at a gradual pace. Caution is still dominating inventory and plant and equipment decisions. Some step-up in hiring plans is occurring at the manufacturing level. On balance, inflationary expectations seem to be somewhat stronger than they were a few weeks ago. Bankers expect long-term rates to rise further. The mood of manufacturers in the Third District is generally optimistic. Most of them believe the economy will continue to expand. For the immediate weeks ahead, they forecast an upward trend for new orders and sales. However, they remain cautious about building inventories and boosting outlays for new plant and equipment.

Increased business activity apparently is beginning to have an expansionary impact on hiring plans for District manufacturers. Since early 1970, more area manufacturers were laying off more workers than they were hiring. For most of the second half of last year, the percentage laid off was substantially greater than the percentage hired. This gap began to close earlier in 1971. For the last two months, the number of manufacturing firms adding to their payrolls has equaled the number cutting back. Nearly four times the number of manufacturers who were polled plan to increase the number of employees six months from now as plan decreases.

Inflationary expectations, however, continue to be very much alive. One director believes they are actually increasing. He says costs are rising rapidly and are exerting upward pressure on wholesale prices. Sooner or later, he says, prices at retail will begin accelerating again. There is fairly widespread acceptance of this view. Most businessmen that we talked with believe that inflation is still the number one economic problem facing the nation.

A sampling of business economists in the Philadelphia area indicates that most are still forecasting a $1,045-1,050-billion GNP for 1971, with an unemployment rate near 6 percent at year-end. There is some disagreement, however, on the outlook for inflation. One group believes that a gradual recovery with lingering unemployment will be enough to dampen the pace of upward price movements. The other group contends that wage-push pressures are simply too great to be checked, even with the amount of excess capacity that is likely to prevail for the balance of the year.

Loan demand at banks is still on a very modest upward path. Most bankers we talked with anticipate that long-term rates will move up further. The reasons cited most often are a continuation of rising loan demand and the belief that inflationary expectations will intensify rather than abate. One country banker said he feels so strongly about higher rates that he wouldn't touch a 20-year mortgage for less than 8 1/2 percent.

Beige Book Report: Richmond
June 2, 1971

Recent surveys of businessmen and bankers in the Fifth District indicate general agreement on the following points: (1) in manufacturing, reduced backlogs of orders with slight improvements in shipments and new orders; (2) substantial increases in manufacturing wages; (3) continued improvement in retail sales including automobiles; (4) substantial increases in loan demand, particularly business and mortgage loans; and (5) decreased optimism regarding future business conditions.

Improvements reported last month in District manufacturing have continued. Survey respondents indicated an increase in shipments and volume of new orders. Backlogs of orders, after showing a significant improvement in April, declined during May, according to respondents.

District bankers and retailers report improved retail sales. According to bankers, however, automobile sales were not up as much as they were in the previous month. Declines in inventories were reported by both manufacturers and retailers.

Manufacturers reported a slight improvement in employment. Very few respondents indicated increases in employment, but the number reporting decreases was lower than in the previous period. There was a slight increase in the number of bankers reporting decreases in their areas. District retailers report improvement in the employment situation.

Retailing and manufacturing respondents indicated continued increases in prices received. Upward pressures on wages continued, with more than one-half of the respondents in manufacturing and retailing and services reporting increased wage costs.

The construction sector of the Fifth District economy continues to be strong. Both residential and nonresidential construction showed substantial improvement in the District during the reporting period.

Respondents indicated that the demand for all types of loans increased in May. More than four-fifths of the bankers reporting indicated an increase in the demand for mortgage loans, and more than one-half reported increased demand for business and consumer loans.

District cash receipts from farm marketings continue to run below those of a year ago, although the decline is not as great as it was earlier in the year. Total cash receipts during the first quarter were 5 percent below those in the same period a year earlier. An 8-percent decline in livestock receipts more than offset a 7-percent increase in receipts from crops.

Although optimism has declined somewhat since the last survey, respondents remain optimistic on balance. Increased activity in construction—both residential and nonresidential—and in retail sales accounts for this guardedly optimistic outlook.

Beige Book Report: San Francisco
June 2, 1971

According to reports received from bankers and businessmen in the Twelfth District, there has been no major change in the general pace of economic activity. Growth is at a moderate rate, as consumer spending remains steady and business investment plans are cautious. The recovery of the housing industry and the real estate markets is expected to be a growing element of strength in most areas, but the aerospace industry continues to cause problems in Washington and parts of California.

Our directors were asked to comment on investment activities in their area or industry. Most reported that, in the absence of a stronger expansion in demand, there would be no major increase in investment expenditures. Industrial firms are either carrying through programs planned earlier in the year without any recent upward modification or else limiting themselves to projects which promise immediate benefits in the form of cost reduction. Certainly there is no evidence that inventories are being built up. Firms continue to keep inventories closely tied to sales in order to reduce costs. A major oil company, for example, describes its inventories as "low but manageable." On the other hand, public investment is expected to be heavier in some states and large office building projects are continuing to be important in many of the major cities in the District.

The greatest weakness is in those areas where the aerospace industry is important. The Seattle-Tacoma District of Washington continues to experience low or declining retail sales and a stagnant real estate market. A further reduction in aerospace employment is expected. However, the local economy is described by one director as having reached a "hard floor" under personal income, but there will be no turnabout until the spring of 1972. The problems of Lockheed are causing further uncertainty in those parts of California where that firm and its principal suppliers are located; suppliers to the aerospace industry are reported to expect no pickup this year and very little next year.

The amount of vacant industrial property continues to rise in southern California. As one example, the vacancy factor for industrial buildings is 25 percent in some parts of Orange County.

Housing activity continues to grow in most states of the District. Commercial construction, especially large shopping areas and multistory buildings, continues to be important in California, Idaho, and Utah. Several large banks, for example, are constructing large, new head offices. The greater availability and lower cost of mortgage funds in the past few months has helped to stimulate real estate sales and construction activity.

The greater construction activity has helped the forest products industries, but the demand from construction is not sufficient to bring about a full recovery in that industry. The demand for plywood is weak, and prices for that particular product are falling. In western Washington, wood products are described as facing a poor market after anticipating an improvement, while in parts of Oregon, lumber mill employment is higher.

The prospects for agriculture are mixed. In western Washington, wet weather has created poor prospects for the local fruit crop. In Idaho, the picture for cattle prices is good, while that for the potato market is still uncertain because of the large carry-over from the previous crop.

Retail expenditures remain one of the stronger sources of demand, yet the rate of growth has not been great. Retail sales in some areas are reported as being at only the same level as last year, while in other cases, appliance sales are running 10 to 15 percent above levels of last year. New car sales are improving, but much of this activity is due to sales of small foreign cars. Overall, consumers are described as cautious.

Bankers continue to experience inflows of deposits, especially savings deposits. Also, there has been some firming of the demand for business and mortgage loans. Many banks are still attempting to expand their lending to make use of their larger supplies of funds. There has been some adjustment in interest rates., In most cases, the prime rate has been adjusted upward but not other lending rates to any degree. Most, but not all, banks have lowered their passbook savings rate
to 4 percent.

In summary, there has been little change in economic or financial conditions, and the general expectation is for a continued gradual expansion of the economy.

Beige Book Report: St Louis
June 23, 1971

Businessmen in the Eighth District indicate that the upward economic trend of recent months is continuing and they are "reasonably optimistic" about business prospects for the rest of the year. However, many businessmen expressed concern that inflation will continue unabated. Retail and manufacturing sales, production, and construction continue their upward advance from the autumn trough. Financial agencies are pessimistic as to loan demand, but report that they must continue to pay high rates for funds in order to attract savings. The outlook for agriculture and related industries is more promising now that weather conditions have improved.

Representatives of major retail outlets in the district report continuing increases in sales. Some feel that the recent rise in sales volume reflects a less apprehensive consumer attitude with respect to the economy. None indicated a relaxation of the more stringent inventory policies initiated last year, despite their belief that sales will continue to be strong through the fall.

The trend of manufacturing sales and production remains basically unchanged from last month. Manufacturing respondents indicate employment is holding steady and foresee no significant increase in hirings in the near future. The machine tool business still has not recovered from its recent slump.

Business investment continues to rise slowly, and respondents indicate that investment this year will be slightly above last year's dollar volume but less in real terms.

Both residential and industrial construction continue to expand throughout the district. Construction in St. Louis county, the largest county in the district, set a record in the first five months of this year, according to the public works director. Total construction in the first five months of this year reached $81 million, exceeding the previous record set in 1969 by $5 million and the 1970 total by $26 million. Housing construction is likewise reported to be vigorous in other metropolitan areas of the district.

Loan demand has apparently lagged behind other economic indicators in the Eighth District. The decline in business loan demand at commercial banks, which began last December, seems to have ended. However, no substantial increase in commercial loan demand is expected until the end of the third quarter. One respondent stated that the prime rate is too low in light of the high rates paid on deposits, and anticipates raising the prime rate in the near future.

Despite the rise in construction, loanable funds at savings and loan associations in the St. Louis area continue to be available with little change in interest rates. This is due to the extremely rapid flow of deposits into these institutions in recent months. One savings and loan association official expressed concern about the possibility of higher market interest rates, which in view of the ceiling on rates paid, may lead to a slower rate of growth in deposits.

The outlook for agriculture and farm-related business has picked up in recent weeks. The earlier adverse weather conditions, which required many crops to be replanted, have generally improved, and farmers are now more optimistic. Increased agri-business sales were reported. Herbicide sales were especially strong, in part reflecting increased crop acreage.

Progress of government efforts to curb inflation has been disappointing to most respondents. They are concerned about recent large wage settlements which they feel set dangerous precedents for future wage negotiations. Many businessmen expressed concern about the recent acceleration in the rate of growth of the money stock. One respondent stated that this rapid growth of money will cause inflation to be an "uncomfortable yoke for some time to come."
