Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2005/july-2005.pdf
Date: 2005-07-31

Bank of England
Agents’ summary of business conditions
July 2005
G Retail sales values have fallen slightly, and demand remained weaker for durable goods.  Consumer services grew
at a subdued pace.
G The housing market remained muted, with both activity and prices broadly flat.  Stocks on estate agents’ books
rose.
G Exports grew at a moderate pace, and at a slightly slower rate than last month.  There were signs that imports had
weakened in response to the consumer slowdown.
G Investment intentions eased a little, but still pointed to firm growth.
G Manufacturing output growth fell back as sales for domestic consumption eased further.  
G Construction output growth continued to be strong, although there were tentative signs of slower growth ahead.
G Service sector output growth may have slowed.  But growth in business services and finance remained much
stronger than in consumer services.
G Employment intentions and recruitment difficulties eased, although the demand for labour was still strong in the
construction and professional service sectors.  Staff turnover continued to be low.
G Capacity utilisation edged slightly lower, but was still above normal.  However, apart from those sectors facing
labour constraints, there were few signs that capacity pressures were pushing up output prices. 
G Wage settlements remained flat, with the most commonly cited increase at 3%.  
G Some commodity prices flattened off, but the full impact of the past oil price rises had not yet been felt. 
G Consumer price inflation may have edged slightly lower.
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by the Bank of England’s Agents, following discussions with over
680 businesses in the period between late-May and late-June 2005.  It provides information on the state of businessconditions, from firms across all sectors of the economy.  The report does not represent the Bank’s own views, nor does itrepresent the views of any particular firm or region.  The Bank’s Monetary Policy Committee uses the intelligence provided bythe Agents, in conjunction with information from other sources, to assist its understanding and assessment of currenteconomic conditions.  A copy of this publication can be found at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/agentssummary/index.htm.
The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, the East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the
North West, Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, the South West, Wales, the West Midlands, andYorkshire & the Humber.
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in the
Inflation Report , obtained from:  www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/inflationreport/index.htm.DEMAND
Consumption and housing
The value of retail sales fell slightly over the past month,
with footfall also weaker during June.  Most Agencyreports told a similar story, with few signs of anunderlying pickup in sales.  The weakness in spendingremained most pronounced for durable goods such asfurniture.  And sales of cars to private buyers havecontinued to be flat recently, although significantlydown on a year ago.  Motor traders expected only agradual improvement in demand during the second halfof the year.
Sales of some goods (eg clothing) continued to rise in
volume terms, but that appeared to be due to pricediscounting, as values were generally flat.  Spending onconsumer services continued to increase, but at asubdued pace, with pubs, restaurants and leisure centresbeing the weakest sectors. 
Overall prices and transactions in the housing market
had been broadly stable in recent months.  Early signs ofa pickup in demand since Easter had not been sustained.Housebuilders were reducing prices and offeringincentives (eg cash back, more part exchange, help withlegal fees) to try and maintain sales.  In the secondaryhousing market both buyers and sellers were morereluctant to enter the market and any sales were takingmuch longer to complete.  Turnover as a proportion ofstock remained very low.  The continuing rise in thestock of unsold properties on estate agents’ booksshowed little sign of abating.  Contacts expected themarket to continue in a similar vein for the rest of theyear.  An increasing number mentioned the change to self-invested pensions in 2006, which will allow tax reliefon buy-to-let investment property included in pensionportfolios.  This could provide a stimulus to the housingmarket, but some contacts believed the scheme would beslow to take off, and the effects on the housing marketmay initially be small.
Exports and imports
Exports grew at a moderate pace.  The United States wasa key source of demand for UK goods, and the recentstrengthening of the dollar could act to boost exportvolumes, but had not yet had an effect.  A number ofAgencies reported increased demand from China andother Asian economies, but also the new EU members,eastern Europe and Russia.  Contacts generally remaineddownbeat about the prospects for demand from westernEurope, with many citing conditions as flat or sluggish.  
Most Agencies also reported that import growth had
weakened over the past month, reflecting the slowdownin demand for consumer goods such as durables.  Andsome contacts reported that high stocks in the supply
chain had also affected orders for the rest of the year.But contacts were continuing to import more goods andcomponents from low-cost economies.
Investment
Contacts’ investment intentions eased over the pastmonth, but were still reasonably firm compared toofficial data, which had shown broadly flat businessinvestment over the past two quarters.  Both servicesector and manufacturing investment intentions were atouch lower, but still pointed to growth in investment.While business confidence remained subdued and firms were cautious about the outlook, the majority ofcontacts appeared to be pressing ahead with plannedinvestment, although most of this was aimed atimproving efficiency and cutting costs rather thanexpanding capacity.  
Despite the slowdown in sales, retailers and consumer
service providers were generally pressing ahead withinvestment in new stores and refurbishment, with mostcompanies taking a long-term view, based on a desire togrow market share by having a larger presence.Telecoms operators were also investing heavily.
OUTPUT
Primary production
The oil and gas sectors were benefiting from high energyprices, and were using the funds to invest.  In the samevein, the coal sector had seen high demand over the pastyear.  The impact of the Single Farm Payment,particularly potential disruptions to the pattern of cashflow, continued to be a key concern for farmers.
Manufacturing
Manufacturing output growth continued to weaken.  Thiswas mainly due to poor sales of goods to the domesticmarket, reflecting the weaker outlook for consumerspending.  Manufacturing exports grew at a more robustpace than domestic production, although export growthalso eased in June (see above).  Niche producersperformed best.
The shift in plant capacity from the United Kingdom to
lower-cost economies continued, with activities such asthe processing of perishable food moving abroad as wellas the production of more durable goods.  
Construction
Construction output increased rapidly, underpinned byrobust public sector demand.  However, some contactswere becoming concerned about whether the strength of
July 2005AGENTS’ SUMMARY OF BUSINESS CONDITIONSpublic spending would persist, citing a lull in early stage
work for civil projects.  And some contacts at the frontend of the construction chain reported activity levellingoff.
The commercial property sector had also held up well
due to continued demand from investors, although somecontacts were worried that the market may beoverheating.  In the housing market, new builds mayhave started to slow, and housebuilders had to offer anumber of incentives in order to try and shift stock (seeearlier).  However, social housing work was continuing tofill some of the gap.   
Services
Private services output growth may have eased a touchover the past month.  The service sector continued toexhibit two-speed growth, with business services andfinance outperforming consumer services.  MostAgencies reported that business services growthremained broad-based, although a number also reportedthat growth eased slightly overall.  But it was too soon totell whether this reflected spillover from the slowdown inother sectors of the economy.  Once again, growth inconsumer services was significantly weaker than inbusiness services, reflecting the slowdown in bothconsumption and housing market activity.  
EMPLOYMENT  
The degree of tightness in the labour market had eased.Employment intentions fell a little, and recruitmentdifficulties had also diminished in recent months.  Theseweaker intentions partly reflected an increased rate ofjob loss in manufacturing, but also lower recruitment —and in some cases job cuts — in the retail and publicsectors.  Some retailers were also responding to weakerdemand by cutting hours.  Another reason recruitmenthad eased was the very low rate of staff turnover, whichperhaps reflected caution on the part of workers.However, in some parts of the economy labour demandwas still strong, underpinned by high levels of utilisationand skill shortages: this was particularly the case in theconstruction and professional service sectors.Employers were recruiting from abroad to meet theseshortages.
CAPACITY UTILISATION
Whole-economy capacity utilisation eased slightly overthe past month, but remained above normal.Nevertheless, outside the construction and professionalservice sectors, where labour constraints were prevalent,there were few signs that contacts were seeking toexpand capacity, or that capacity pressures wereresulting in rising output prices.  Given the uncertainoutlook for UK growth, many contacts were cautious
about increasing capacity.
COSTS AND PRICES
Pay  
Pay pressures were generally stable, with mostrespondents citing a settlement in the region of 3%.  Fewcontacts reported growing pressure on pay, with theexception of heavily unionised sectors and thosecontinuing to experience significant skill shortages.  Thelack of any broad-based upward pressure on pay wasconsistent with the recent easing in recruitmentdifficulties and a more uncertain outlook for theeconomy.   
In May and June, the Agents carried out a survey of their
contacts regarding pay flexibility.  The survey, whichcovered around 230 companies employing a total of400,000 people, suggested that the use of performancerelated pay (PRP) had become more important in recentyears (Chart 1).  This had been driven by companieswanting to make wage increases more self-financing, andhence unit labour costs less variable.  Employers’contributions to pension schemes had also become moreimportant following the recent shortfalls in funds.Respondents cited labour market conditions andindividual performance as the most important factorsdetermining basic pay;  for other types of pay, such asbonuses, company profitability and individualperformance were the two key influences.
Input prices  
Input price inflation eased over the past month.  Andthere were signs that some commodity prices have beenstabilising.  In particular, a number of contacts fromdifferent Agencies reported that the price of steel andChart 1Changes in importance of different types of pay
(a)
604020020406080
Basic pay Overtime PRP Pensions Benefits OtherNet percentage balance
More important
Less important+
–
(a) Weighted net balance of firms reporting a pay component having become 
more important in recent years.other metals appeared to have levelled off.  However, the
full impact of the past oil price rises was yet to be felt,which was likely to put further upward pressure on inputprices and costs over the next few months.  The recentappreciation of the dollar had also had an impact oncosts.  But utility price rises continued to be the chiefconcern for many contacts, with increases of 50% ormore cited over the past year.  
Output and consumer prices  
Some manufacturers had managed to push through priceincreases in recent months to cover their higher inputcosts.  But those supplying the major retail groupscontinued to face strong downward pressure on prices,particularly in light of the slowdown in consumerspending.  Overall, output price inflation may have easeda little over the past month.
This downward pressure, and the tendency for retailers
to move towards sourcing goods from cheaper overseaseconomies, meant that retail goods prices probably fellin June.  Generally contacts reported that servicesinflation was unchanged, although there were somereports of downward pressure on retail services prices.Overall, consumer price inflation may have eased a little.  
July 2005