Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2005/may-2005.pdf
Date: 2005-05-31

Bank of England
Agents’ summary of business conditions
May 2005
● Retail spending has shown few signs of recovery.  Retailers were increasingly cautious about the short-term
outlook, though few anticipated a further deterioration.
● The housing market continued to pick up slowly from its end-2004 trough.  Estate agents expected a moderate
recovery to continue in the months ahead.     
● Export growth was modest, with markets in Western Europe remaining subdued. 
● Investment intentions were fairly upbeat, partly due to growing pressures on capacity.  
● Manufacturing output continued to rise gently, though the pace of growth may have weakened further.  The
global recovery in investment was underpinning demand for capital goods.  
● Construction output growth remained strong.
● Service sector output growth picked up slightly.  Activity in the business and professional services sector was
especially strong.  
● Private sector employment growth may have stabilised in recent months.  Stronger jobs growth in the service
sector partly reflected the greater availability of skilled workers.  Recruitment difficulties had eased. 
● Capacity utilisation increased slightly in the service sector, though that partly reflected special factors in
professional services.  
● Pay pressures continued to edge up slightly. 
● Input price inflation remained high, though somewhat off its peak in late 2004.
● Manufacturers were more able to secure price increases, though prices of retail goods continued to fall.
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by the Bank of England’s Agents, following discussions with over
600 businesses in the period between late-March and late-April 2005.  It provides information on the state of businessconditions, from firms across all sectors of the economy.  The report does not represent the Bank’s own views, nor does itrepresent the views of any particular firm or region.  The Bank’s Monetary Policy Committee uses the intelligence provided bythe Agents, in conjunction with information from other sources, to assist its understanding and assessment of current economicconditions.  A copy of this publication can be found at www.bankofengland.co.uk.
The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, the East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the
North West, Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, the South West, Wales, the West Midlands, andYorkshire & the Humber.
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in the
Inflation Report , obtained from:  www.bankofengland.co.uk.DEMAND
Consumption and housing 
Retail spending growth remained fairly weak.  Overall,
retailers reported that after taking account of seasonaleffects, the volume of sales in April may have beenbroadly unchanged compared with the previous month,with few indicating any significant pickup.  New car saleshad not improved and stocks continued to build indealers’ showrooms and at the ports.  Growth ofspending on consumer services had been more resilientrecently than spending on goods, though it too had beenfairly stable compared with the previous month.
Contacts reported a variety of factors that might help to
explain the recent slowdown in consumption growth.Those included uncertainty among households regardingfuture rates of interest and taxes;  the softening of thehousing market;  the cumulative impact on households’debt servicing costs of previous interest rate rises;  andthe effects on discretionary spending from recent costincreases of utilities, petrol and Council Tax.  Some ofthose were expected to have only a temporary effect onspending.  Most contacts believed that economicconditions remained healthy, and few expected thatdemand would weaken much further.  Nevertheless, somecontacts perceived that the current cautious mood ofconsumers would persist for a while and were notanticipating a significant upturn in demand in themonths ahead.  
In April, the Agents carried out a survey of their contacts
regarding prospects for consumer spending on services.The survey covered 166 firms with a total annualturnover of nearly £24 billion, equivalent to around 6%of total UK consumer spending on services.  A weightednet balance of 28% of firms reported that turnover hadbeen higher in the latest six months compared with theprevious six months (Chart 1, where the net balance isderived by subtracting the ‘Lower’ balance from the‘Higher’ balance).  Looking ahead to the next six months,a weighted net balance of 26% of firms expectedturnover to be higher than in the latest six months.  Thissuggested that any future slowdown in householdspending on services might only be modest.          
After allowing for seasonal factors, the housing market
had continued a slow recovery from its trough in late2004.  Many estate agents reported that activity wasbelow expectations.  That had dented their confidenceregarding prospects for the rest of the year, though theyexpected a moderate recovery to continue in the monthsahead.  Potential buyers remained cautious and weretaking longer to make offers.  And some prospectivesellers were reluctant to accept offers below the askingprice.  First-time buyers remained scarce.  In someregions, those factors had resulted in an overhang ofunsold properties.  There were several reports that house builders had
maintained sales volumes recently, by offering discountsand/or incentives equivalent to around 5%–10% of theasking price.  That had been sufficient to bolsterdemand, suggesting that buyers were not expectinghouse prices to fall significantly from current levels.
Exports and imports  
Exports continued to grow at fairly modest rates.  Stronginvestment growth worldwide had boosted contacts’exports of capital goods, especially to the United Statesand the Far East.  Profit margins in those marketsremained tight owing to the dollar’s weakness and therewere growing reports of contacts looking to export moreto China and other developing economies.  The rising oilprice had stimulated exploration activity in the MiddleEast and Eastern Europe.  That in turn had increaseddemand for capital equipment and the products ofengineering and construction companies.  There werefew reports of increasing demand from Western Europe.Shipping contacts confirmed the recent picture ofweakening growth of imported consumer goods,especially from the Far East.  Nevertheless, importcompetition remained intense in some sectors and wasexpected to increase further in others, as EasternEuropean producers continued to raise the quality oftheir products. 
Investment  
Contacts’ investment intentions were a little moreupbeat, having weakened slightly during the previous sixmonths.  There were further reports from corporatebanking contacts that businesses’ investment plans werestrengthening, driven by capacity shortages and anincreased appetite for investment in information
May 2005Chart 1Bank of England regional Agents’ survey of consumer spending on services
(a)
02 0 4 0 6 08 0HigherSameLowerPast six months
Next six months
Percenta ge of firms
(a) Firms were asked about the value of sales compared with the previous 
six months.  Their responses were weighted by turnover.  The survey was conducted in April 2005.AGENTS’ SUMMARY OF BUSINESS CONDITIONStechnology (IT) as a means of improving productivity.  In
the service sector, investment was being propelled bywidespread expectations of continuing expansion, andbusiness optimism was fairly strong in all regions.  Bycontrast, reports from manufacturers were more varied,with some contacts indicating that the recovery ininvestment was losing strength.  That partly reflectedfinancial pressures in sectors where profits have beeneroded by falling margins, and expectations that outputgrowth could weaken in the rest of 2005.  Following theregulatory review, water companies were undertakingsubstantial investment programmes.
OUTPUT
Primary production
Dairy farmers had benefited from recent increases inmilk prices, though there were doubts about howsustainable the increases would be.  Arable farmerscontinued to face steep, oil-related increases in the costof fertilisers and agrichemicals.  There were growingconcerns among some farmers that they could face cash-flow problems arising from delays to the new EUcompensation payments.   
Manufacturing  
Contacts’ reports suggested that manufacturing outputcontinued to rise gently in April, though the pace ofgrowth may have weakened further.  There were ratherdivergent trading conditions between industries.Companies in aerospace and those supplying the public,oil and construction sectors reported robust growth andIT manufacturers were seeing steady improvement.  Bycontrast, manufacturers of consumer goods reportedsome deterioration in activity.  That was most apparentin the car industry.  The closure of MG Rover, coupledwith high levels of car stocks, was having adverse effectson component suppliers.  
Construction 
Construction output continued to grow at a fairly strong
pace.  Public sector demand had been buoyant for sometime.  And demand for commercial property hadstrengthened a little recently as more service sectorcontacts reported shortages of office space.  Contacts inthe retail and distribution sector continued to invest innew capacity.  Although activity in the secondaryhousing market had slowed considerably in the pastyear, most house builders had not reduced the numberof new starts and they continued to buy land.Government planning guidance and changes in demandwere encouraging builders to build more apartments andsocial housing units, and fewer large houses.  That wasreducing profitability.Services  
The Agencies’ reports suggested that private servicesoutput growth may have picked up a little in the pastmonth, though it remained somewhat below its peak lastsummer.  The growth of turnover rose further in businessand financial services.  Strong growth of demand hadspread to a wider range of activities, with reports of apickup in discretionary spending on business servicessuch as marketing, public relations, training andconference facilities.  Even so, the growth of demand forthose activities was slower than for professional andfinancial services and remained very price sensitive.  
Contacts reported that spending patterns within
consumer services were changing, with no clear evidenceof either a pickup or a slowdown in overall growth.Demand for services linked to the housing market hadslowed, though there were some reports of strongerdemand for services such as for overseas travel anddomestic transport.
EMPLOYMENT  
Overall, the Agencies’ reports suggested thatemployment growth had been broadly unchanged inrecent months.  Employment growth in private servicesmay have picked up a little.  Contacts reported that thispartly reflected the greater availability of skilled workers,both from overseas and due to a downturn inrecruitment by the public sector.  Manufacturersindicated that overall, their labour forces may havecontracted at a slightly faster rate recently.  That mostlyreflected an increased rate of job loss in areas that hadalready been losing jobs for some time, such as steel andprinting, in addition to the closure of MG Rover.  
With labour supply increasing at a slightly faster pace
than employment (mostly due to the steady increase inthe number of migrant workers), the Agencies noted thatthe labour market had continued to ease slightly.Contacts’ reports of recruitment difficulties were at theirlowest level for around 18 months.  
CAPACITY UTILISATION
Whole-economy capacity utilisation edged a littlehigher.  
Capacity utilisation in manufacturing was thought to be
at around normal levels.  By contrast, service sectorcapacity utilisation was reported to be at its highest levelfor around four years.  Many contacts in the accountingand legal sectors were working at almost maximumcapacity, and close to the levels in the late 1980s.  Inaccountancy, that partly reflected the increased auditdemands from the Sarbanes-Oxley Act and the newInternational Accounting Standards.  So for some
contacts, current growth rates of activity were notexpected to persist for more than a few months.  
COSTS AND PRICES
Pay  
Pay pressures were fairly steady but with a slight upward
drift.  Across-the-board wage settlements had risenmarginally in recent months, owing partly to an increasein those settlements that were linked to RPI inflation.But not all settlements were so linked and the averageincrease in settlements was quite small when judged inrelation to the pickup in RPI and CPI inflation in thepast year.  There were some reports that the recruitmentof migrant workers was holding down pay.  
The prospective increase in the National Minimum Wage
(NMW) in October was putting some upward pressure onwages in lower-paying industries.  That was partlybecause the NMW was directly affecting the pay of alarger number of workers, and because there weregreater indirect effects as an increasing number ofhigher-paid employees sought to maintain their paydifferentials.       
Input prices  
Input price inflation remained high, though somewhatbelow its peak at the end of last year.  Past increases inoil prices continued to feed through the supply chain,affecting the prices of a wide variety of materials, energy
sources and services (including road and rail freight and shipping).  For some contacts, those higher costshad been at least partly recovered by applyingsurcharges to their own prices (see below).  And somehad offset these higher costs by re-sourcing from dollar-based suppliers.  For many contacts, increases inbusiness rates and regulatory costs (associated withwaste disposal and employment, for example), were ofmore concern.  
Output and consumer prices  
Manufacturers reported that higher input costs werebeing passed on to customers more quickly and to agreater degree than in recent months.  Customers weremore willing to accept increases in factory gate pricesthat arose from higher costs of oil-derived inputs, whichwere widely expected to persist and were affectingsuppliers globally, but continued to resist all other pricerises.  Business to business price inflation for serviceshad increased in recent months, largely reflectinggrowing pressures on capacity.
By contrast, there was scant evidence that falls in the
prices of retail goods had come to an end.  Intensecompetition from supermarkets and easier pricecomparisons on the internet were limiting the ability ofretailers to raise prices, despite increasing overheads.  Asa result, many contacts had been reliant on volumegrowth to maintain profitability, which was now notpossible owing to the slowdown in consumer spending. 
May 2005