Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2005/april-2005.pdf
Date: 2005-04-30

Bank of England
Agents’ summary of business conditions
April 2005
● The growth of consumer spending weakened a little further, with the slowdown spreading to parts of the
consumer services sector.
● Conditions in the housing market were little changed compared with the previous month.  According to contacts,
potential buyers remained cautious, possibly nervous of further interest rate increases and house price falls.There were fewer first-time buyers.     
● Export growth remained modest.  Exporters of low value-added goods found that margins and sales were
increasingly under pressure owing to the weak dollar. 
● Investment intentions were reasonably firm, supported by improving corporate balance sheets and cash flow.  
● Manufacturing output was rising gently.  Domestic markets were expected to remain subdued in the near term.  
● Construction output growth remained strong.
● Service sector output growth was brisk, though perhaps a little off its recent highs.  
● Private sector employment growth eased further and contacts reported only modest plans to expand
employment in the near term.   
● Capacity utilisation remained slightly above normal.  Spare capacity was least among professional and business
services, which continued to report skill shortages. 
● Pay pressures continued to edge up.  That was not yet a major concern for most contacts, partly on account of
improvements in labour productivity.
● A further rise in oil prices contributed to continued strong growth of input prices .
● Gradually increasing cost pressures were having little impact on consumer price inflation .
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by the Bank of England’s Agents, following discussions with around
800 businesses in the period between late-February and late-March 2005.  It provides information on the state of businessconditions, from firms across all sectors of the economy.  The report does not represent the Bank’s own views, nor does itrepresent the views of any particular firm or region.  The Bank’s Monetary Policy Committee uses the intelligence provided bythe Agents, in conjunction with information from other sources, to assist its understanding and assessment of current economicconditions.  A copy of this publication can be found at www.bankofengland.co.uk/agencies/index.htm.
The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, the East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the
North West, Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, the South West, Wales, the West Midlands, andYorkshire & the Humber.
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in the
Inflation Report , obtained from:  www.bankofengland.co.uk/inflationrep/index.htm.DEMAND
Consumption and housing 
The Agencies reported that the pace of consumer
demand had eased a little further.  The growth ofspending on consumer services may have declinedslightly, with signs of weakening sales in restaurants,pubs and hotels.  And there were reports of reduceddemand for housing-related financial services, due to theslowdown in housing transactions.  Spending ondurables showed few signs of recovering.  New carregistrations in March were expected to be at least 10%lower than a year earlier.  There were some reports thatdealers’ stocks of new cars were relatively high and couldincrease further in March, as sales fell short ofexpectations.         
Retail sales growth may have picked up slightly, though
that followed several months of weak demand.  Someretailers attributed the recent weakness to expectationsof higher interest rates, coupled with uncertainty aheadof the recent Budget and the prospective GeneralElection.  Retail sales may also have been reduced byhigher prices of petrol and utilities, resulting in lowerconsumer spending on other goods and services.  Whilefew retailers expected a rapid improvement in spendingpatterns, some of the factors restraining consumerdemand were thought to be temporary.  
The Agencies’ reports suggested that households might
have increased their saving.  Contacts in the financialservices sector noted that sales of household savingproducts had risen, possibly as a result of higher depositrates and firmer sentiment in the stock market.  Andsome reported that consumers had a shrinking appetitefor debt and were paying off their outstanding creditcard balances more quickly.  
Activity and prices in the housing market were little
changed compared with the previous month.  Overall,estate agents were confident that the market would pickup steadily in the year ahead, reflecting the underlyingstrength of the economy.  In the short term, however,potential buyers (especially first-time buyers) remainedcautious, partly due to their perceived risk of furtherinterest rate increases and house price falls.  It wasreported that the share of new mortgage advancesaccounted for by first-time buyers had declined sharplyin recent months.           
Exports and imports 
Export growth continued its recent modest pace.  For
manufacturers, areas of strength were exports of highvalue-added capital and intermediate goods, particularlythose destined for the United States.  By contrast,exporters of commodity-based goods found that marginsand sales were increasingly under pressure, owing to theweak dollar and resultant increased competition from
dollar-based suppliers.  Many businesses had previouslycovered themselves against future dollar weakness.  Butin some cases those contracts were now drawing to anend and their extension would be at much lessfavourable exchange rates.  Demand in the euro arearemained subdued.  The market share of imports indomestic markets continued to increase, if at a slowerrate.  The recent slowdown in demand for consumerdurables may have resulted in some moderation in thegrowth of imports.  
Investment  
Contacts’ investment intentions continued to suggest
further recovery in capital spending in 2005.  Businessconfidence appeared somewhat stronger than that ofconsumers.  According to some banking contacts, thatmay have been associated with stronger corporatebalance sheets and cash flow, the result of pastrestructuring and improved profitability.  With capacityutilisation typically slightly above normal levels (seebelow), contacts were more willing to invest in newcapacity.  And some of the larger retailers were planningto expand, in spite of weakening demand.  Nevertheless,there were further reports of contacts whose investmentdecisions were being constrained by the need to fundpension deficits.  
OUTPUT
Primary production
Dairy and arable farmers reported that margins werebeing squeezed further, partly as a result of growinginternational competition.  For some contacts, that hadnecessitated diversifying into non-farming activities.Farmers expected to see some benefit from the expectedpass-through of higher retail prices for milk.      
Manufacturing 
Output continued to increase, though the pace of growthwas widely reported to have slowed in recent months.That largely reflected weaker domestic demand,particularly for consumer goods.  In the near term,contacts expected domestic markets to remain subdued,so that any pickup in the pace of output growth would bedependent on the acceleration of exports.  Factorsmentioned as restraining sales in domestic marketsincluded an increased market share of importedconsumer goods and the continual relocation ofmanufacturing customers overseas.         
Construction  
The construction sector remained strong, with several
Agencies reporting a pickup in the growth of activityrecently.  Public sector demand was still the principal
April 2005AGENTS’ SUMMARY OF BUSINESS CONDITIONSdriving force, though there were reports of stronger
private sector demand as well, including retail anddistribution and utilities.  In most regions, housebuilders reported that activity has so far been littleaffected by the housing slowdown.  But margins havebeen reduced by the need to offer greater incentives anddiscounts, while land prices and labour costs continuedto rise.          
Services
Service sector output growth was little changed.  Itremained above trend, though slightly off its recentpeak.  The buoyancy of activity in the service sector wasreflected in a strengthening corporate lending market,with the ready availability of funds to finance expansion.  
Slightly weaker output growth of consumer services (see
above) was broadly offset by a further strengthening ofgrowth in the business services sector, where businessconfidence was rising.  Legal and accountancy firms werebenefiting from growing numbers of managementbuyouts and private equity backed transactions.Growing regulation, strong demand for tax planning andan active commercial property market also boostedactivity.       
EMPLOYMENT
Private sector employment growth continued to weakenand contacts reported only modest plans to expandemployment in the near term.  That partly reflectedcompetitive pressures on manufacturers, some of whichwere cutting back their operations or relocatingoverseas.  
Most Agencies reported that the labour market remained
fairly tight, though it continued to ease gradually.  Therewere contrasting reports of the labour markets for skilledand lesser skilled workers.  The market for more skilledworkers was relatively tight.  Nevertheless, there weresome reports that employment intentions for skilledworkers had eased a little.  It was uncertain to whatextent that was cyclical, reflecting the recent slowdownin private sector output growth, or if it was due at leastpartly to structural factors, such as the need to improvecompetitiveness.  By contrast, lesser skilled workers weremore readily available.  That was partly due to the steadyincrease in the number of migrant workers, who weremostly employed in lower paying industries.  
LABOUR PRODUCTIVITY
In February and March the Agents conducted a survey ofselected contacts on the growth of their labourproductivity.  The survey sought to cast light on thefactors which had been driving productivity growth inthe previous year and the extent to which they were
expected to continue in the next twelve months.  Thesurvey found that, while labour productivity wouldcontinue to increase, it might do so at a slightly slowerpace in the year ahead, with fewer companies expectingsubstantial improvements in performance.  That seemedto reflect expectations among contacts of a cyclicalslowdown in the growth of turnover.  Contacts reportedthat the principal means of enhancing productivity wasthrough more efficient organisation of work processesand by the application of information technology (IT).By contrast, relatively few contacts reported spending onnon-IT capital goods as a significant driver ofproductivity growth at present. Companies showing thefastest productivity growth were predominantlymanufacturers, reflecting the particularly strongpressures to reduce costs in that sector.
CAPACITY UTILISATION
Whole-economy capacity utilisation remained slightlyabove normal.  
Agencies reported that overall capacity utilisation in
manufacturing was currently close to normal levels.There were several reports that manufacturers wererunning their UK plants at close to full capacity, withsome reducing their domestic operations to eliminateunprofitable plant.  By contrast, there were few signsthat contacts’ labour forces were being worked muchharder than normal, which would have been reflected,for example, in increased overtime working.  
Conditions were rather different in the service sector,
where capacity utilisation was reported to haveremained at around its highest level for nearly fouryears.  Shortages of professional staff were reported,though office space remained in plentiful supply.Capacity utilisation in the distribution sector continuedto rise.  
COSTS AND PRICES
Pay 
Contacts reported that wage settlements continued to
edge higher.  Contributory factors were the increase inRPI inflation in the previous year;  past and prospectiveincreases in the National Minimum Wage (which havehad knock-on effects on the pay of staff earning morethan the minimum rate);  and skill shortages.  Bycontrast, contacts reported that pay pressures weremitigated to some extent by job uncertainty among theirwork forces.  That was partly due to corporaterestructuring (sometimes involving the relocation ofoperations overseas) and the influx of labour fromabroad.  The gradual increase in pay pressures was not
yet a major concern for most contacts, partly on accountof improvements in labour productivity.
Input prices  
A further rise in oil prices contributed to continuedstrong growth of input prices.  Contacts reported laggedeffects of past oil price increases, which were steadilyfeeding through into higher prices of related materialssuch as plastics and paint.  The jump in utilities prices remained of concern.  But the news was not allone-sided.  For example, there were several reports thatsteel price increases had started to tail off.
Output and consumer prices 
Contacts’ reports suggested that further increases incost pressures continued to have relatively little impacton consumer price inflation.  Increased cost pressures were evident in several parts of
the supply chain.  Contacts reported that they were moreable than previously to pass on cost increases ofmaterials to their customers by way of price surcharges.And some noted a strengthening of prices of importedfinished goods.  Strong demand was underpinningrelatively high rates of price increases for professionalservices.
By contrast, contacts in the distribution sector found it
much harder to raise prices, so that rising transportcosts were squeezing margins.  Major supermarketscontinued to resist most pressure for price increases bysuppliers.  Lastly, there were some reports thatweakening demand for consumer services, coupled withover-capacity in the leisure sector, may have resulted ina slight easing of consumer services price inflationrecently.       
April 2005