Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2005/february-2005.pdf
Date: 2005-02-28

Bank of England
Agents’ summary of business conditions
February 2005
● Consumer spending growth continued to moderate.
● Export growth slowed further and some contacts were concerned whether current volumes could be sustained in
the months ahead. 
● Investment intentions remained firm, though there were downside risks should the economy slow. 
● Manufacturing output continued to grow modestly.
● Construction output growth eased a little.
● Estate Agents reported tentative signs of a pickup in housing market activity levels. 
● Service sector output growth was brisk, underpinned by demand for professional and financial services.
● Private sector employment growth weakened slightly.
● Capacity utilisation remained a little above normal.
● Pay settlements edged higher.  There were prospects of further modest increases in wage inflation in the year
ahead.
● Input price inflation may have peaked.  Prices of materials were expected to remain at or slightly above current
levels in 2005.
● Output and consumer price inflation picked up a little, particularly in the service sector.
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by the Bank of England’s Agents, following discussions with around
600 businesses in the period between late-December and late-January 2005.  It provides information on the state of businessconditions, from firms across all sectors of the economy.  The report does not represent the Bank’s own views, nor does itrepresent the views of any particular firm or region.  The Bank’s Monetary Policy Committee uses the intelligence provided bythe Agents, in conjunction with information from other sources, to assist its understanding and assessment of current economicconditions.  A copy of this publication can be found at www.bankofengland.co.uk/agencies/index.htm.
The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, the East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the
North West,Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, the South West, Wales, the West Midlands, andYorkshire & the Humber.
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in the
Inflation Report , obtained from:  Publications Group, Monetary Analysis, Bank of England, London EC2R 8AH 
(Price £3.00).DEMAND
Consumption
Contacts reported that the annual growth of retail sales
continued to moderate.  Private new car sales remainedweak and some contacts reported that buyers had tradeddown to cheaper models.  Sales of other big ticket itemssuch as carpets and furniture were generally sluggish, inpart due to the slowdown in the housing market.  Bycontrast, spending on consumer services, such as hotels,restaurants and leisure activities, was rather firmer.  Thedemand for credit weakened and lenders tightened theirterms.       
Exports
Exports continued to grow, though the pace of growthmay have weakened further.  Some contacts wereconcerned whether current export volumes could besustained in the months ahead.  That was partly onaccount of the squeeze on margins in dollar markets.There were no signs of a recovery in demand in the euroarea and most contacts were unable to gain market sharein those markets, despite favourable exchange rates.Instead, more companies were looking to develop newcustomers in Eastern Europe and the Far East.  
Investment
Contacts’ investment intentions may have levelled out inrecent months.  Nevertheless, most were reasonablypositive with regard to their planned capital spending inthe year ahead.  That was due to a number of factors.  Forthe majority, there have been reasonable increases inoutput and profits in the past year;  capacity was limited;and financing was readily available at a favourable cost,with interest rates not expected to rise sharply lookingforward.  However, with some contacts expecting thegrowth of demand to slow in the months ahead andmargins to come under further pressure, there were a fewreports that any future adjustment to plannedinvestment was more likely to be downward than upward.Contacts continued to report that they favoured low-costoverseas locations to the United Kingdom for newcapacity.  The main strength in capital spending was indistribution and the public sector.        
OUTPUT
Primary production
Agricultural prices were reported to have stabilised inrecent months, following earlier falls.  Even so, pressureon margins remained fierce for contacts in the dairy andarable sectors.  Price competition among supermarketshad resulted in lower prices for farmers, whose costs forfertiliser and other inputs have risen sharply.  The newEuropean Union finance support system, which is to be
phased in over the next seven years, was expected toaccelerate consolidation in the sector.   
Manufacturing
Contacts reported a rather mixed picture for recenttrends in output growth.  Many were fairly optimisticabout prospects for 2005.  By contrast, others reportedthat confidence was waning, largely due to increasedcompetition from suppliers located in dollar-basedmarkets.  On balance, manufacturers continued to report modest growth in output, mostly driven byexports.  But UK output was growing at a slower pacethan suggested by contacts’ order books, as increasinglythe overseas orders of larger companies were being metfrom their overseas factories that have lower unit costsand were closer to their customers.  Prospects weregenerally the strongest for those contacts with niche,high-value products that were sheltered from overseascompetition.
Construction and housing
Construction output growth eased slightly.  Demand
from the public and retail and distribution sectorscontinued to underpin activity.  And with major projectsstill unfinished, contacts were not expecting activity totail off significantly over the year ahead.  
Many were a little less confident about prospects than
they were a year ago.  That was partly due to theslowdown in the housing market and there were somereports that the number of houses under constructionhad fallen a little.  Even so, the major house buildersmostly expected to hit their sales targets in 2005.  Thatwas as a result of price discounting and sales incentives.    
Annual house price inflation continued to slow.
Nevertheless, several Agencies reported that, afterallowing for seasonal influences, there were tentativesigns of improvement in the housing market followingthe weak end to 2004.  Some estate agents reported apickup in activity levels, with more properties comingonto the market and being sold.  Potential buyers were alittle more confident to make offers on properties.  Mostestate agents thought that house prices were unlikely todecline much from current levels.          
Services
Output growth was brisk in the past month, underpinnedby demand for professional and financial services.Corporate finance continued to strengthen, with anincreased number of AIM stock exchange flotations andbuy-outs, the latter supported by readily availablefunding from banks and venture capitalists.  That wasbenefiting executive search firms and recruitment
February 2005AGENTS’ SUMMARY OF BUSINESS CONDITIONSagencies, which reported a strong level of assignments
from financial companies and government bodies.  Andthere were some reports of a pickup in corporateexpenditure on marketing and advertising.      
Outsourcing by private companies began to recover and
consultants in the information, communications andtechnology (ICT) sector reported stronger growth.  Theexpansion of retail capacity and the introduction of Chipand Pin payment systems had buoyed demand for ICTservices.  
Contacts reported strong growth in rail travel, with
industry-wide growth in volumes estimated to be around7% in the previous twelve months.  Leisure services alsosaw good growth.  By contrast, housing-related firms,such as estate agents and conveyancers, continued tofeel the chill from a cool housing market.  Some contactsin the overseas travel sector reported a fairly slow startto the year.  
EMPLOYMENT 
There was a modest slowdown in employment growth in services, mainly due to the need for contacts toimprove productivity and cut costs (particularly forhousing-related services).  The main exception was theICT sector, where recruitment was reported to haveaccelerated in recent months.  Increased corporatefinance work had resulted in selective recruitment infinancial services, though some contacts were planningto reduce numbers employed in the United Kingdom bymoving their back office jobs overseas.  Manufacturingemployment continued to decline.  That was largely onaccount of job losses in traditional sectors that weremost vulnerable to plant closures.  By contrast,employment trends were brighter in industries such aselectronics and biochemicals.  Looking forward, contactsin the private sector on average expected to increaseemployment modestly over the next six months, althoughsome of that growth was on account of the anticipatedoutsourcing of activities from the public sector.          
CAPACITY UTILISATION
Capacity utilisation remained slightly above normallevels for the economy as a whole.  Constraints to outputwere mainly among the most strongly growing parts ofthe services sector and took the form of shortages ofskilled staff rather than of plant or office space.  Inmanufacturing, by contrast, capacity utilisation was at orslightly below normal levels.  For an increasing numberof contacts in services and manufacturing, the rate ofutilisation of their UK plants was no longer a limitingfactor.  That was because they could source from theiroverseas operations.    COSTS AND PRICES
Pay  
There were further signs of a slight increase in pay
pressure.  Settlements edged higher, as wage bargainerstook into account the rise in RPI inflation in the pastyear.  Contacts reported a somewhat stronger increase inthe growth of their employees’ total earnings, due toincreased overtime and performance-related bonuses.Those were financed largely by increased productivity.Overall, most contacts concluded that pay pressureswere modest and their employees were not looking forpay rises that would be unaffordable.  For many contacts,the size of their companies’ pension contributions stilladded significantly to labour costs, though somereported that their contributions were no longerexpected to rise further.
The Agencies carried out a survey of their contacts in
December and January, concerning the prospects for payand total labour costs in 2005.  The results of the surveypointed to a continuation of recent trends in the yearahead.  
The net percentage balance of contacts expected to have
a higher settlement in 2005 than in 2004.  A largernumber of contacts expected that total pay growth peremployee in 2005 would be higher than in 2004.  Thatsuggested a stronger pickup in total pay growth than insettlements, due to increased payments such as bonusesand overtime.  And a larger number still expected ahigher growth rate in 2005 than in 2004 of total labourcosts (a wider definition including non-pay elementssuch as pension costs).  The outlook for inflation wasseen as the main factor putting upward pressure onlabour costs (Chart 1).  That contrasts with the results ofthe survey carried out a year earlier, when contacts weremost concerned with the increased cost of their pensioncontributions.         
Input prices
The rates of price inflation for metals and oil-relatedproducts had moderated in recent weeks.  There weresome reports that the price of steel had fallen back byaround 6% since its peak in mid-2004.  But manycontacts remained concerned about increases in theprices of other inputs, particularly utilities and freightcharges.  Gas prices were typically around 30%–40%higher on contract renewal.  Looking ahead, contacts in heavy engineering reported that the continuingstrength of the Chinese economy was expected to keepthe prices of materials at or slightly above current levelsin 2005.Output and consumer prices  
An increasing number of manufacturing contacts were
able to pass on most of their cost increases by raisingprices.  Contacts in the services sector generally facedless intense competition, especially from overseas, andwere better able to maintain margins, particularly inbusiness services.  There were some reports that estateagency fees had risen to offset the relatively low numberof housing transactions.  In the retail sector, goodsprices continued to fall but, after allowing for seasonalinfluences, the level of discounting was less marked thanin the immediate post-Christmas sales period.
The Agencies reported an increased market share for
those contacts that sold goods and services on theinternet, which were typically at lower prices than on theHigh Street and were becoming an increasinglyimportant downward pressure on consumer prices.  
February 2005Chart 1
Agents’ survey:  sources of upward pressure on privatesector labour costs
(a)
10 0 10 20 30 40Inflation outlook
Profits
Recruitment
Pensions
Productivity
Performance-related pay
Other
Balance(b)–+37
-2
17
24
20
11
20
(a) Based on 301 responses, weighted by employment, from a survey of companies in 
December 2004 and January 2005.
(b) Percentage of firms citing that factor as a reason for higher labour costs in 2005, 
less the percentage of firms citing it as a reason for lower labour costs.