Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2005/march-2005.pdf
Date: 2005-03-31

Bank of England
Agents’ summary of business conditions
March 2005
● The growth of consumer spending eased.  Retail sales growth has weakened, though parts of the consumer
service sector continued to show reasonable growth.  
● Confidence in the housing market improved a little, but remained fragile.  
● Exports continued to grow modestly.  Looking ahead, exporters expected a little stronger growth in demand in
the next six months. 
● Investment intentions remained fairly upbeat, though there were risks that future investment plans might be cut
back should consumption growth continue to weaken.  
● Manufacturing output continued to grow gently.  
● Construction output growth remained above trend and was buoyed by strong demand from the public sector.
Looking towards the end of the year, the expectation was for the rate of growth to ease slightly.
● Service sector output growth has been brisk, though perhaps slightly off its recent highs.  
● The labour market remained tight, but may have eased very slightly.  Private sector employment growth was
subdued. 
● Capacity utilisation remained slightly above normal.  
● Pay pressures have edged a little higher, though most businesses reported that wage costs remained under
control. 
● Input prices , especially of oil-based products, continued to increase.  But the rate of increase was a little lower
and there were signs that the annual rate of input price inflation may have peaked.
● Output and consumer price inflation remained on a gently upwards trend.
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by the Bank of England’s Agents, following discussions with around
600 businesses in the period between late-January and late-February 2005.  It provides information on the state of businessconditions, from firms across all sectors of the economy.  The report does not represent the Bank’s own views, nor does itrepresent the views of any particular firm or region.  The Bank’s Monetary Policy Committee uses the intelligence provided bythe Agents, in conjunction with information from other sources, to assist its understanding and assessment of current economicconditions.  A copy of this publication can be found at www.bankofengland.co.uk/agencies/index.htm.
The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, the East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the
North West, Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, the South West, Wales, the West Midlands, andYorkshire & the Humber.
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in the
Inflation Report , obtained from:  Publications Group, Monetary Analysis, Bank of England, London EC2R 8AH 
(Price £3.00).DEMAND
Consumption and housing
The Agencies reported that the pace of consumer
demand growth has slowed in recent months.  Theslowdown has been fairly widespread, though it was mostevident in the demand for consumer durables.  And somepreviously buoyant sectors were now seeing weakergrowth.  For example, contacts indicated that spendingon mobile phone services has levelled out.  That wasdespite the availability of new services such as 3G — forwhich sales growth has been below contacts’expectations.      
Despite a weak start to 2005, many retailers were
budgeting for a fairly average year by historicalstandards.  The strength of prospective consumerspending over Easter was seen by many as an importantindicator of the short-term outlook.  Car sales remainedweak.  Some dealers detected early signs of a possiblepickup in demand in the spring, although new car salesin March were likely to be down on a very buoyantperiod a year earlier.    
Following a sharp decline towards the end of last year,
estate agents reported modestly higher levels of housingmarket activity in the first two months of 2005.  Butconfidence was fragile and most contacts thought it wastoo early to judge whether a sustained recovery was intrain.  The ratio of sales to stocks was either rising orsteady for most estate agents.  
Nevertheless, with potential buyers no longer expecting
prices to rise, most were taking longer to reach decisionsand a cautious mood prevailed.  Sentiment was alsoaffected by expectations of an approaching generalelection, and by uncertainty about future movements ininterest rates.  Also, prices remained high in relation tohouseholds’ earnings, especially for first-time buyers.  Allin all, most contacts expected only a very slow pickup inactivity.  Some believed that current levels of housingdemand were not sufficient to prevent prices easing alittle further in the short term.     
Exports and imports  
Exports continued to grow modestly.  Demand growthwas strongest for capital and intermediate goods, mostly in North American and Far Eastern markets.Exports to eastern Europe were growing quickly, butfrom a low base.  Demand in the euro area remainedsubdued.  Contacts reported that recent exchange ratemovements continued to have relatively little impact ontheir export volumes.  Turning to imports, contacts notedthat the recent strong pace of growth seemed to havebeen maintained, despite the easing in consumptiongrowth. In February, the Agencies carried out a survey of their
contacts regarding export prospects.  The survey coveredfirms with total exports of around £14 billion a year,equivalent to nearly 5% of total UK exports.  A highproportion of the firms surveyed were manufacturers.On average, exports in the past six months were reportedto have risen fractionally compared with the previous six-month period (Chart 1).  That was somewhat weakerthan indicated by the official data for export values.Looking ahead, exporters expected a little strongergrowth in demand in the next six months.  Prospectswere strongest for exports to the United States.  Mostcontacts expected that much of the growth in theirexport values in the next six months would be accountedfor by higher volumes.  Around one fifth of contactsexpected that higher export prices would be moreimportant.  Only a few contacts expected that thesterling exchange rate would be an important influenceon the value of their exports in this period.
Investment  
Investment intentions remained reasonably upbeat,though most contacts were not planning to expandcapital spending to the same degree as in previouseconomic cycles.  Contacts reported particularly stronggrowth of capital spending in the retail and distributionsector.  That was despite the recent slowdown in retailsales growth.  A number of retailers were investing inadditional floor space to improve sales and productivity.Investment growth was also robust in the logistics sector,with new and larger warehouse facilities as well asimproved management information systems.  However,some contacts reported that sentiment towards capitalspending could change if consumer demand remainedsoft after Easter.  
Manufacturing investment continued to grow modestly.
Investment was driven by the need to reduce costs and
March 2005Chart 1Past and prospective growth in export values
0.00.51.01.52.02.53.0
Total Euro area United States Rest of worldPast six months
Next six months
Percentage changes on the previous six monthsAGENTS’ SUMMARY OF BUSINESS CONDITIONSmeet regulatory requirements.  Investment in the oil and
gas extraction sector was expected to pick up strongly in2005.       
OUTPUT
Primary production
Without further details of the new Single Farm Paymentscheme, farmers were uncertain how it would affect theirbusiness and the industry in general.  But some thoughtthat the decoupling of payments from production levelswould reduce their activity.  
Manufacturing  
Output grew gently.  Contacts pointed to weaker growthof output and orders in the second half of 2004 assuggestive that the cycle may have passed its peak.  Mostreported that exports were growing more strongly thandomestic sales.  Aerospace was seeing the strongestgrowth in orders, while the information, communicationsand technology (ICT) sector continued a steadyrecovery.  By contrast, contacts supplying theautomotive sector reported weak levels of activity, withcar manufacturers cutting production to reduceinventory.  Looking ahead, the recent slowdown indomestic consumption and the housing market, alongwith the steady loss of market share to overseascompetitors, led some contacts to predict a weakeroutlook for the rest of 2005.  
Construction 
Construction output growth was above trend and
continued to be underpinned by demand from thepublic and retail sectors.  Health and educationremained the cornerstones of public sector activity.Looking ahead, contacts mostly believed that the outlookfor 2005 was less robust and that growth may slow torates more in tune with the rest of the economy.  Thatwas partly because of the slowdown in the housingmarket and the faltering buy-to-let market.  Mostcontacts expected that public sector activity wouldremain supportive in the coming year.      
Services  
Service sector output growth remained brisk, thoughperhaps a little off its recent highs.  Business andfinancial companies reported strengthening growth.Mergers and acquisitions continued to pick up, after amostly subdued 2004, which was generating work for awide range of businesses including investment banks,lawyers and accountants.  There were further reports of arecovery in demand for consultancy services and therewas continuing growth of outsourcing of functions suchas call centres to achieve cost savings and greater
efficiency.    
Consumer services growth was more modest.  Even so,
demand was holding up better than many contacts hadexpected, in view of the recent slowdown in retail salesand lower levels of housing market activity.  Althoughfinancial services connected to the housing market were seeing a drop-off in demand, contacts in otherconsumer services reported reasonable growth.  Thoseincluded rail and bus transport, hotels, leisure andoverseas travel.          
EMPLOYMENT  
Private sector employment growth was subdued.  Labourdemand weakened for housing-related services, butpicked up for services in the ICT and consultancysectors.  Many contacts reported that the labour markethad become a little looser recently, due to an increasedsupply of workers.  Participation of older workers rose and there was a greater availability of overseaslabour, particularly from EU accession countries.Contacts noted that there were well establishedarrangements for recruiting eastern European workerswith, for example, employment agencies in easternEurope routinely contacting British firms aboutsupplying workers.  
CAPACITY UTILISATION
Whole-economy capacity utilisation remained slightlyabove normal.  
Manufacturing capacity utilisation was perhaps slightly
below normal.  Most manufacturers reported that therewere no capacity constraints on their activities:  evenwhen spare capacity was limited they were readily ableto sub-contract work.  More often, contacts sought toreduce capacity (sometimes by mergers and subsequentrationalisation), to bring it more into line with expecteddemand.  By contrast, pressures on capacity were muchmore evident in the service sector, particularlyprofessional services where qualified accountants werein short supply.    
COSTS AND PRICES
Pay  
Overall, pay settlements continued to edge higher, and
total pay growth was increasing faster still.  But thosetrends were not evident in all regions — pay pressuresgenerally appeared to be stronger in southern Englandwhere the service sector was a comparatively larger shareof the economy.  And there were reports of significantlyhigher bonus payments for staff in financial and
professional services in those regions.  Even so, paypressures were not a major concern for most contacts,though some were nervous about the size of the increasein the National Minimum Wage due to take effect inOctober.    
Input prices  
Input price inflation continued to ease.  Nevertheless,not all contacts recognised that picture, with manycontinuing to see the lagged effects on their costs of past increases in commodity prices.  That was mostevident where firms had annually negotiated contracts(most frequently for utilities).  There continued to bereports of contacts circumventing input price increasesby searching out cheaper suppliers, particularly indollar-based markets, or by building up stocks ahead ofpre-announced rises.Output and consumer prices  
Output and consumer price inflation remained on agently upward trend.  In the service sector the Agenciesreported that contacts were more able to raise prices forservices with a relatively high amount of value added,particularly in professional services where capacityconstraints were most evident.  For business to businessservices, there was generally strong demand growth,rising output price inflation and improving margins.  By contrast, manufacturing output price inflation mayhave peaked, following a steady increase in the past 18 months.
Consumer services price inflation continued its gradual
increase of the past year.  Goods prices were reported to have continued to fall gently and new car prices were under renewed downward pressure, reflecting over-capacity in the industry.  
March 2005