Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2005/september-2005.pdf
Date: 2005-09-30

Bank of England
Agents’ summary of business conditions
September 2005
G Growth of consumer demand has remained weak in the past month.  The value of retail spending remained
relatively flat, while growth in spending on consumer services eased.  
G The housing market was generally subdued, and some house builders reported a downturn in activity.  But in
some regions there were tentative signs of a pickup in activity.
G Export prospects have improved, with demand growing strongly from regions such as the Middle East due to the
higher oil price.  Growth in imports of consumer goods could remain subdued in the months ahead.
G Investment intentions have eased a little further as firms remained cautious about the outlook for the economy.
G Manufacturing output has been steady, underpinned by stronger overseas orders.  
G The pace of construction output growth has eased.
G Service sector output growth has been fairly steady.  Growth in professional and financial services remained
robust, though demand growth has weakened in some other sectors.
G Employment intentions and recruitment difficulties have both fallen over the past month. 
G Capacity utilisation eased a little, though it was perhaps still slightly above its normal level for the economy as a
whole.
G Pay pressures have remained muted.   
G Input price inflation has started to pick up again, mainly due to rising oil and energy costs.
G Manufacturing output price inflation eased, but business services price inflation increased.
G Consumer price inflation edged up.
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by the Bank of England’s Agents, following discussions with over
730 businesses in the period between late July and late August 2005.  It provides information on the state of businessconditions, from firms across all sectors of the economy.  The report does not represent the Bank’s own views, nor does itrepresent the views of any particular firm or region.  The Bank’s Monetary Policy Committee uses the intelligence provided bythe Agents, in conjunction with information from other sources, to assist its understanding and assessment of currenteconomic conditions.  A copy of this publication can be found at 
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/agentssummary/index.htm.
The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, the East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, theNorth West, Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, the South West, Wales, the West Midlands, andYorkshire & the Humber.
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in the
Inflation Report , obtained from:  www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/inflationreport/index.htm.DEMAND
Consumption and housing
Overall, consumption growth was broadly unchanged in
the past month.  Retail sales values remained relativelyflat, but retailers generally reported a better balance intheir stock positions.  The build-up in stocks in previousmonths had been largely unwound.  Spending onconsumer services has been helping to supportconsumption growth.  But contacts reported slightlyweaker growth in the past month.
Consumers remained cautious and were looking to repay
debt.  Consumer caution was reflected in weakerdiscretionary spending on leisure services such asrestaurants and leisure centres;  consumers had switchedto less expensive alternative products (with up-marketjewellers for example reporting weaker sales);  andsluggish demand for consumer durables continued,especially housing-related goods and cars.  It appearedto some dealers that potential buyers were extending theperiod before replacing their car, and demand was notanticipated to revive until early next year.     
Contacts had reported a second slowing in retail sales
following the attempted terrorist attacks on 21 July.  And spending was taking longer to recover than it had following the earlier attacks on 7 July.  Contactswere also concerned about the ongoing impact on both domestic and foreign tourism over the next sixmonths.
The housing market was subdued.  Estate agents’ stocks
of unsold houses continued to increase and some werenot expecting activity to pick up significantly withoutfurther house price falls.  Potential first-time buyersremained cautious and seemed to be awaiting signs ofrecovery before making offers.  Some house buildersreported a slowdown in sales and a consequent scalingback of their new building plans.  Nevertheless, therewere tentative signs of a gentle recovery in housingmarket activity in some regions, though so far this yeartransactions had remained significantly lower than in thefirst half of 2004.  
Exports and imports
Export growth had rallied further, helped by the firmerdollar exchange rate against sterling.  Demand in theMiddle East had grown strongly, largely due to thecontinued rise in the price of oil.  That had boosted real
incomes in those regions and increased their demand forrelated goods and services, such as mining andexploration equipment and the design and constructionof petro-chemical plants.  By contrast, Western Europeanmarkets remained fairly static.
The slowdown in UK consumption continued to reduce
the growth of imported consumer goods.  But that was atleast partly offset by the continued shift towardsoverseas sourcing by manufacturers, which increasedimports of parts and assemblies.  Contacts reported thatgrowth of imported consumer goods was expected toremain subdued in the months ahead, reflecting thefairly long lead times between the slowdown in consumerdemand and its full impact on imports.
Investment
Investment intentions eased further.  For some contacts,particularly those in the retail sector, a more cautiousassessment of economic prospects had resulted ininvestment projects being delayed until a recovery wasmore clearly in train.  Some manufacturers’ investmentplans had been dented by a further squeeze on theirprofit margins.
OUTPUT
Primary production
Milk production was reported to be below quota levels,with dairy farmers continuing to exit the industry due tolow prices, the CAP reforms and high labour andinvestment costs.  While those ceasing production hadbeen mostly small farms, contacts expected some of thelarger producers to downsize or even exit the sector laterthis year.  Cereals harvests were helped by the goodsummer weather and contacts expected that exportswould be boosted as a result.     
Manufacturing
Reports from contacts suggested that the level ofmanufacturing output was broadly unchanged in thepast month.  Increased export orders were offset by lowerdomestic demand.  Exports in the aerospace industry andof energy-related products (such as generators andturbines) were particularly strong.  In the metals sector,weak domestic demand partly reflected a continuingrundown by customers of stocks of steel and steelcomponents, following earlier stockpiling when prices
September 2005AGENTS’ SUMMARY OF BUSINESS CONDITIONSwere rising.  By contrast, weak domestic demand for new
cars resulted in an increase in stocks with manufacturersand dealers, and had started to affect production.  
Construction
Construction output growth continued, if at a slightlyslower pace.  That was partly due to reduced activity ofhouse builders.  And a slower rate of expansion in theretail sector had reduced the demand for newdistribution centres.  Most contacts reported continuingstrong demand growth from the public sector.
Services
Output growth was fairly steady in the past month,underpinned by persistently strong demand forprofessional and financial services.  Buoyant equitymarkets helped support growth of corporate financeactivity, with higher levels of initial public offerings,management buyouts and mergers and acquisitions.  Butthere were tentative signs of slightly weaker growth insome business to business services such as marketing,advertising and recruitment agencies.  Output ofconsumer services had slowed in recent months,particularly for housing-related services.  And there werealso signs of weaker discretionary spending on leisureactivities for example.  
EMPLOYMENT
Contacts’ reports suggested that the labour marketcontinued to soften gently.  Employment prospects,recruitment difficulties, staff turnover and skill shortageshad eased in most sectors.  The main exception wasprofessional and financial services, where employerswere continuing to recruit in response to strongerdemand.  
Contacts reported a variety of factors underlying the
slightly softer labour market, including the slowdown inthe economy;  the need to raise productivity (especiallyin manufacturing against a background of strong pricecompetition);  the relocation of operations overseas;  andthe greater availability of migrant labour, particularlyfrom Eastern Europe.
CAPACITY UTILISATION
Capacity utilisation continued to ease in manufacturingand was perhaps slightly below its normal level.  Bycontrast, oil refining capacity was extremely tight.  Thatwas adding to the upward pressure on diesel and petrol
prices.  Utilisation in the service sector had eased inrecent months, though it remained above normal levels.That easing mostly reflected the slowdown in theconsumer services sector.
COSTS AND PRICES
Pay
Pay pressures were subdued in most sectors and mayhave eased slightly in the past few months.  That waspartly due to the recent softer state of the labour market.Contacts noted that the pickup in CPI inflation since thestart of the year had not resulted in any increase in wagesettlements, perhaps because there had not been acorresponding rise in RPI inflation, which was usuallyseen as the main measure of inflation when negotiatingpay.   
Input prices
Input price inflation had started to pick up again.  Thatwas largely on account of renewed price increases ofpetrol/diesel, other oil-based materials and utilities.Those increases had more than offset some slight fall inthe prices of non-oil materials, for example metals.  Somemanufacturers reported that their bills for oil, gas andelectricity had risen by more than 50% in the pasttwelve months, and that the increases had significantlyexceeded those faced by overseas competitors.  Higherworld prices for fuel and energy and the stronger dollarwere also starting to be reflected in higher sterlingprices for imported parts and assemblies.
Output and consumer prices
Overall, manufacturers’ price inflation may have eased alittle further in the past month.  The scope formanufacturers to raise prices continued to be limited,despite increases in the costs of materials.  Somecontacts reported that their overseas competitors hadnot seen equivalent increases in their own input costs, sothat UK producers were forced to reduce profit marginsto remain competitive.  By contrast, price inflation forbusiness to business services increased, partly onaccount of higher energy costs that contacts were moreeasily able to pass on to their customers.  
Reports of consumer prices were mixed, but overall
inflation may have picked up a fraction.  Retail goodsprices continued to fall, though the rate of decline mayhave eased slightly compared with a month ago.  Price
discounting was most evident for those goods wheredemand was weakest, such as furniture and cars.Consumer price inflation for services increased a little.Contacts were more able to raise prices and maintainprofit margins in the face of rising costs.
September 2005