Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2005/august-2005.pdf
Date: 2005-08-31

Bank of England
Agents’ summary of business conditions
August 2005
G The value of retail spending may have stabilised, but growth in spending on consumer services has weakened.
G Activity has been stable in the housing market , albeit at a much lower level than a year ago.  The stock of
properties on estate agents’ books remained high.
G Export prospects have improved in light of the dollar appreciation against sterling.  Import growth weakened
further.
G Investment intentions fell back a little as firms became more cautious about the outlook for the economy.
G Manufacturing output fell due to weaker domestic sales.  Export growth has held up.  
G The pace of construction output growth eased, but was still robust.
G Service sector output growth eased, and there were some signs that the weakness in the consumer-facing sectors
was starting to have an impact on business services.
G Employment intentions and recruitment difficulties have fallen over the past month. 
G Capacity utilisation was below normal in manufacturing, but above normal in the service sector.
G Paypressures remained muted.  
G Input price inflation was broadly stable.
G Consumer price inflation eased a little.
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by the Bank of England’s Agents, following discussions with over
700 businesses in the period between late-June and late-July 2005.  It provides information on the state of businessconditions, from firms across all sectors of the economy.  The report does not represent the Bank’s own views, nor does itrepresent the views of any particular firm or region.  The Bank’s Monetary Policy Committee uses the intelligence provided bythe Agents, in conjunction with information from other sources, to assist its understanding and assessment of currenteconomic conditions.  A copy of this publication can be found at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/agentssummary/index.htm.
The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, the East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the
North West, Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, the South West, Wales, the West Midlands, andYorkshire & the Humber.
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in the
Inflation Report , obtained from:  www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/inflationreport/index.htm.DEMAND
Consumption(a)and housing
There were some signs that the value of retail spending
may have stabilised over the past month.  But mostcontacts still reported that sales were flat or down on ayear ago.  The weakness in spending continued to bemost pronounced for durable goods, and private carsales remained poor.  A number of retailers had extendedtheir summer sales, either by starting them earlier thanusual, discounting by more than usual, or including awider range of goods in the sales.  That was partly toclear the involuntary build-up in stocks that resultedfrom the weaker pattern of spending since the end of lastyear.  Most retailers believed that growth in the secondhalf of 2005 was likely to be weak, and had reducedorders for new stock accordingly.
Spending on consumer services rose, but the pace of
growth weakened.  Restaurant and leisure contacts weremost affected, and hotels were also reporting weakerdemand from consumers.
Contacts in and around London reported a sharp slowing
in consumer spending on both goods and servicesfollowing the terrorist attacks on 7 July.  But demandreturned to more normal levels in the weeks followingthe bombings.
Activity in the housing market was broadly stable over
the past month, though it was significantly down on ayear ago.  House builders were offering increasinglylarger discounts in an attempt to shift completed stock,and were cutting back on new building.  Estate agentscontinued to report high stocks of properties on theirbooks, and the average duration of sales also rose.  Therewas a mismatch between the price sellers wanted toachieve and the price buyers were prepared to pay, andthe lack of first-time buyers was a major concern.Generally prices had been flat to falling since the start ofthe year, and were seen as likely to remain flat or evenfall over the rest of 2005 as the excess supply wasworked out.  
Exports and imports
A number of contacts reported improved prospects forexports over the past month.  In particular, contactsoften cited the appreciation of the dollar againststerling, although they believed the impact was morelikely to be seen in margins than in volumes in the shortterm.  In terms of actual volumes, exports to the UnitedStates grew over the past month.  Exports to Asia alsorose, though there were tentative signs that growth mayhave softened recently for some goods.  Contactsremained generally downbeat about prospects in themajor European economies, although there were some
reports that demand in Germany may have beengradually improving.  
The Agencies also reported that import growth weakened
significantly over the past month.  This primarilyreflected the slowdown in demand for consumer goods,with retailers wanting to reduce their existing stocks andalso reducing orders for the rest of the year.  However,generally contacts were importing more goods andcomponents from low-cost economies, and were movingaway from traditional suppliers.
Investment
Contacts’ investment intentions eased again over thepast month.  Manufacturing investment was risingmodestly, but this usually reflected cost-saving motivesrather than a desire to increase capacity.  Service sectorinvestment was more positive, concentrated in IT andtelecoms.  But both consumer and business servicecompanies were becoming more cautious aboutinvesting to increase capacity.  In particular, althoughretailers had remained reasonably sanguine about theirinvestment plans in previous months, some chains werenow reviewing these due to the squeeze on their marginsand cashflow.  
OUTPUT
Primary production
Oil producers were looking to bring new sites on streamrapidly in order to benefit from the high oil price.  Theimpact of the Single Farm Payment continued to be a keyconcern for farmers, but a number of contacts reportedthat conditions look favourable for this year’s harvest.However, margins were continuing to be squeezed.
Manufacturing  
Reports from a large number of contacts suggested thatmanufacturing output had fallen over the past month,due to the easing in domestic demand for goods.  Therewere some reports that manufacturers had beensurprised by the weakening in demand, and had been leftwith excess stocks of unsold goods.  Competition fromabroad also intensified, and producers offering niche orhigh-spec items fared best — for example someengineering firms (eg aerospace) were still reportingrises in output and new orders.  Once again exportsoutperformed domestic sales.
Construction
Construction output increased at a robust pace, butseveral Agencies reported that growth had slowed.  Thispartly reflected a lull in new demand from the public
August 2005(a)  The intelligence for this summary was gathered before the second London alert on 21 July. AGENTS’ SUMMARY OF BUSINESS CONDITIONSsector, which could prove to be temporary, but also
weaker private demand and less work on repairs andmaintenance.  New builds in the housing market alsoweakened.  Some suppliers to construction firms alsoreported a slowdown in sales.  Looking further ahead,contacts from several different regions expressedconcern about whether there was enough capacity in theindustry to cope with the development work for the2012 Olympics as well as other work in the pipeline.  
Services
While services growth was strong overall, there werereports of an easing in growth over the past month.Growth in business services and finance remained muchstronger than in consumer services.  But there weresome signs of spillover from the slowing in consumerdemand — for example, some logistics and advertisingfirms reported a downturn in business.  There were also some reports that sentiment may have weakened alittle, as businesses were reluctant to take majorspending decisions while the economic climate isuncertain. 
EMPLOYMENT
There were further signs of easing in the labour market.Employment prospects weakened, with falls inrecruitment and job creation across many sectors.  Staffturnover was low, and contacts had less need to useemployment agencies.  Job cuts intensified in themanufacturing sector, and public sector recruitmentslowed.  Recruitment difficulties eased on the month,and for many sectors contacts were having little troublefinding staff to fill posts.  However, skill shortagesremained particularly pronounced in some instances,primarily in the professional services sector, althoughthere were signs that shortages in the constructionsector may have eased a little.  Where possible employerswere recruiting from abroad to address shortages,particularly from Eastern Europe. 
In July, the Agents carried out a survey of their 
contacts regarding employment.  The survey, whichcovered around 200 companies employing a total of260,000 people, suggested that over the next six monthsprivate sector employment may be broadly unchanged,following a rise in employment over the past six months(Chart 1).   There was some sectoral divergence:construction firms planned to increase employmentmarkedly, but non-retailing service sector companiesthought their employee numbers would be unchanged.Respondents noted that increased costs andimprovements in productivity were most likely to reduce headcount, while stronger demand for theirproducts was most likely to lead to them taking on staff.CAPACITY UTILISATION
Capacity utilisation eased in manufacturing, particularlyfor firms providing consumer goods.  Utilisation in theservice sector was above normal, but the underlyingpicture was mixed, with constraints most prevalent inprofessional services, reflecting skill shortages.  In thisinstance, the pressure on capacity was sufficient togenerate rises in output prices.  Some contacts — fromboth manufacturing and services — remarked thatcapacity could often be ‘flexed’ in response to changes indemand.  
COSTS AND PRICES
Pay
There was little change in settlements, and moregenerally upward pressures on pay were subdued.  Thiswas partly due to less pressure on employers to concedewage increases, given the easing in recruitmentdifficulties.  The exception was professional services,where some firms offered significantly enhancedpackages to attract and retain staff.  Bonus paymentscontinued to be high this year, reflecting companies’strong profitability last year.  But contacts expectedbonuses to be lower in the year ahead as profits startedto be squeezed following the economic slowdown.
Input prices
Overall, input price inflation was broadly unchanged.Energy and utility prices continued to be the mainconcern for most contacts, given the substantial risesover the past year.  Many contacts were also worriedabout the likelihood of future increases in these costs.This may have been linked to the further rise in the oilChart 1Changes to the number of workers employed in the United Kingdom
(a)
10010203040506070
Substantially
lowerSlightly
lowerUnchanged Slightly
higherSubstantially
higherPast six months
Next six months Percentage balance of firms
Net
balance–+
(a) Net balance of firms reporting an increase in employee numbers, or an 
intention to take on more staff.  Individual responses have been weighted by firms’ employee numbers.price in recent months, which had been exacerbated by
the fall in the pound against the dollar.  The exchangerate movement also increased the cost of many otherimports, including finished goods.  However, mostAgencies reported that some other commodity prices,such as steel, had fallen back a little after rising sharplyover the past year.  Companies were also sourcingcomponents from lower-cost economies, which offsetsome of the upward pressure on imported costs.  
Output and consumer prices
A number of firms were managing to raise their ownprices in response to the higher oil price, for example via‘escalator’ clauses in contracts.  But more generally,companies were finding it difficult to raise prices in theface of continued global competition.  Overall, annualoutput price inflation eased over the past month.
Retail goods prices continued to fall.  There has been
additional downward pressure on prices over the pastmonth, due to bigger than usual discounting in anattempt by retailers to clear stock and stimulate sales.  Inaddition, some of the recent rise in food prices may haveunwound.  Retail services prices rose at a similar pace tolast month, as competitive pressure was generally lessintense than for goods.  There were further increases intransport-related prices.
August 2005