Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2005/october-2005.pdf
Date: 2005-10-31

Bank of England
Agents’ summary of business conditions
October 2005
G Growth in the value of consumer spending appeared to have stabilised at a low rate.
G Activity began to recover in the housing market .  
G Exports continued to pick up, reflecting demand from a variety of sources.  Imports of consumer goods remained 
sluggish.
G Investment intentions weakened further, partly reflecting uncertainty about the impact of rises in energy prices.
G Domestic sales of manufactured goods were weak, but export growth has improved.  
G The pace of construction output growth slackened.
G Service sector output growth was unchanged, with professional services the most buoyant.
G The easing in the labour market continued.
G Capacity utilisation eased. 
G Pay pressures remained muted.   
G Input price inflation picked up, reflecting rising energy and fuel costs.
G Overall, consumer price inflation edged higher.
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by the Bank of England’s Agents, following discussions with over
740 businesses in the period between late August and late September 2005.  It provides information on the state of businessconditions, from firms across all sectors of the economy.  The report does not represent the Bank’s own views, nor does itrepresent the views of any particular firm or region.  The Bank’s Monetary Policy Committee uses the intelligence provided bythe Agents, in conjunction with information from other sources, to assist its understanding and assessment of currenteconomic conditions.  A copy of this publication can be found at 
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/agentssummary/index.htm.
The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, the East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, theNorth West, Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, the South West, Wales, the West Midlands, andYorkshire & the Humber.
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in the
Inflation Report , obtained from:  www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/inflationreport/index.htm.DEMAND
Consumption and housing
The level of retail spending was broadly unchanged over
the past month.  Demand was still generally weak formajor purchases such as furniture, although reports fromdifferent regions were more mixed than in previousmonths.  Overall, retailers thought that Christmas maybe worse than last year.  Consumers were spending moreof their income on petrol following the rise in its price.As usual, private car sales were boosted by the newregistration plate in September, but sales were stillweaker than last year.
Spending on consumer services remained subdued, but
the underlying pace of growth may have stabilised.There was still some weakness in central London due tofewer bookings following the July terrorist attacks, butmore generally growth in spending on services held up.Leisure attractions in several other regions reportedgood demand in recent months, in some instancesreflecting tourists shunning London, but also helped by the good weather compared with last year.  Spendingin bars and restaurants was little changed on the month. 
There were signs that activity in the housing market may
have started to revive.  Estate agents in a number ofregions reported higher footfall and viewing numbers,alongside more visits from first-time buyers.  Some of the revival in housing activity could have reflectedpent-up demand over the summer, so it was too soon tojudge whether underlying demand had started torecover.  Across the country as a whole, prices remainedstable.
Notwithstanding these tentative signs of improvement,
builders were still having trouble selling finished homes,despite offering discounts and other incentives.  Builderswere cutting back on new starts while their existingproperties remained unsold.
Exports and imports
The improvement in export growth continued thismonth.  Contacts were generally more optimistic andreported strong sales to the Middle East arising from thesurge in oil revenues.  Demand from the Far East was alsostrong, partly reflecting infrastructure spending.  Andcontacts continued to report robust demand from theUnited States, although margins were often thin becauseof the weak dollar.  Exports to Western Europe remainedflat.
Imports of consumer goods were sluggish at a time when
shops would normally be building up their Christmasstocks.  That was consistent with the cautious moodamong retailers, although some may have beenpostponing orders until the outlook became clearer.  Butmanufacturers continued to source more products fromlower-cost economies.Investment  
Contacts’ investment intentions weakened again over thepast month.  The higher energy prices have generatedadditional uncertainty and many contacts wereconcerned about the possible implications for demandprospects, as well as the impact on margins:  as a resultsome contacts have delayed investment plans until nextyear.  Only a small minority of contacts planned toincrease investment as a result of the higher energyprices.  Where investment was planned, it was generallyfocused at reducing costs, rather than directly expandingcapacity.  The retail sector was continuing to invest innew floor space, although some non-food chains hadbecome more cautious.
OUTPUT
Primary production
The cereals harvest was variable across the UnitedKingdom, with some regions enjoying higher quantitiesbut others reporting lower volumes.  Most meatproduction was only marginally profitable.  And althoughhigher prices had generated improved prospects for oiland gas production, volumes recently fell due tomaintenance work.
Manufacturing
The underlying picture in manufacturing was broadlyunchanged, with output for domestic sales remainingweak.  Niche producers once again fared the best, whileother production continued to move overseas gradually.However, manufacturing exports rose again this month,reflecting continued strong demand in several markets(see above).
Construction
Annual growth in construction output eased further, toaround its lowest level for two years.  Private residentialconstruction remained relatively weak, as buildersstruggled to sell completed homes.  Other constructionwork grew more strongly, underpinned by public sectorspending on health, education and social housing.However, contacts had noted a slight easing in demandfrom the public sector.  Retail investment shouldcontinue to support construction activity for some time,but the outlook for other commercial projects was moremixed.  
Services
Underlying growth was broadly unchanged over the pastmonth, and stronger than in other sectors of theeconomy.  Professional services remained most buoyantwith high levels of activity, especially for corporatefinance.  But a variety of other sub-sectors were alsoseeing robust growth in activity, including consultingand accountancy.  Demand for consumer services was
October 2005AGENTS’ SUMMARY OF BUSINESS CONDITIONSweaker, and this had also affected related industries such
as advertising.   
EMPLOYMENT
The labour market continued to soften slowly.Recruitment difficulties were broadly unchangedcompared with a year ago.  There had been acombination of less recruitment and more job sheddingacross several sectors as firms responded to theweakening in the economy.  Overall, companies generallyintended to hold or to reduce staffing levels in the shortterm.  And employees were also cautious about changingjobs in the current environment.  The main exceptionswere professional services companies, where robustdemand for their products was resulting in continuedrecruitment;  this was also where skill shortagesremained most prevalent.  Workers from Eastern Europewere filling job vacancies in a range of sectors, includinghotels, construction, transport and heavy industry.
CAPACITY UTILISATION
Utilisation eased across the economy as a whole.Contacts reported few concerns about capacityconstraints:  and those that did mentioned specific skillshortages (normally in professional services) rather thanphysical capacity.  The slowing in the economy hadresulted in some slack, and where capacity could bereduced fairly quickly this was starting to happen.  Thatcontinued the trend of companies ‘flexing’ capacity inresponse to changes in demand.
COSTS AND PRICES
Pay
There had been little news on settlements, as few firmssettle at this time of year.  But pay pressures remainedgenerally muted, and there was little sense that totallabour costs were accelerating.  At this point, contactshad little expectation that employees would seek largerpay rises despite the pickup in petrol prices and CPIinflation.  Employers in some sectors — particularlyleisure, cleaning and retailing — were concerned aboutthe new rates for the National Minimum Wage, whichwas due to come into effect in October.  Apart from that,pay pressures were only marked in sectors where therewere significant skill shortages, such as professionalservices.
Input prices 
Input price inflation picked up again.  That reflectedrising energy and fuel costs, with some contactsexpecting the rises to persist for some time.  Togetherthese effects dominated flat or falling prices for otherraw materials, such as steel.  Contacts were increasinglysourcing materials from abroad to achieve cost savings.Insurance costs also stabilised, or even fell in someinstances.  But higher energy costs were the mainconcern for most businesses.In September, the Agents carried out a survey of their
contacts regarding their response to higher input prices.The survey covered around 180 companies with a totalturnover of over £36 billion.  The vast majority of firmsreported that the cost of their raw materials and inputshad risen over the past year, with service sector firmsand manufacturers having faced similar scales ofincrease.  The biggest impact of these increases hadbeen to reduce profit margins and push up output pricesbut the effects on employment and investment had beenmodest (Chart 1).  Over the next twelve months firmsexpected similar effects, although the past price risescould also result in lower investment.
Output and consumer prices  
Companies were having mixed success in passing on thesubstantial rises in input costs to their customers.Transport companies had been reasonably successful,normally due to ‘escalator’ clauses in contracts.  Otherfirms were finding it hard to raise prices in the face ofcontinued intense competition from overseas, althoughthere were more reports that some firms had managed todo so.  Overall, manufacturing output price inflation hadpicked up.
Retail goods prices continued to fall, although the pace
of decline had eased.  That largely reflected the markedrise in petrol prices in recent months, notwithstandingthe recent competition on supermarket forecourts.  Butsome retailers had managed to reduce their stockholdings of other goods, resulting in fewer discountoffers.  Retail service price inflation was broadlyunchanged:  there were some reports of increases inutility and transport prices, but a weaker picture fromhotels, restaurants and telecoms.  Business servicesinflation was also unchanged.Chart 1The impact of input cost changes over the past twelvemonths
(a)
604020020406080
Output 
volumesOutput 
pricesProfit 
marginsEmployment 
InvestmentWages
OtherPast twelve months
Next twelve monthsPercentage balances
Increased
Decreased+
_
(a) Net balances of firms reporting an impact from input price rises on a variety of 
factors.  Individual responses have been weighted by firms’ turnover.October 2005