Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2005/december-2005.pdf
Date: 2005-12-31

Bank of England
Agents’ summary of business conditions
December 2005
G Growth in the value of consumer spending may have picked up a little, but the underlying picture remained 
subdued.
G Activity continued to edge up in the housing market ;  prices were flat.  
G Growth in exports continued.  Imports also rose, despite weaker imports of consumer goods.
G Investment intentions eased slightly.
G The level of domestic manufacturing sales may have stabilised.  
G Construction output growth remained lower than a year ago.
G Business services growth was robust;  there was a small rise in consumer services growth.
G The labour market softened again.
G Capacity pressures eased. 
G There was little sign of any upward pressure on pay.
G Overall, input price inflation eased back.  But wholesale gas prices increased markedly.
G Consumer price inflation edged lower.
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by the Bank of England’s Agents, following discussions with over
600 businesses in the period between late October and late November 2005.  It provides information on the state of businessconditions, from firms across all sectors of the economy.  The report does not represent the Bank’s own views, nor does itrepresent the views of any particular firm or region.  The Bank’s Monetary Policy Committee uses the intelligence provided bythe Agents, in conjunction with information from other sources, to assist its understanding and assessment of currenteconomic conditions.  A copy of this publication can be found at 
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/agentssummary/index.htm.
The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, the East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, theNorth West, Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, the South West, Wales, the West Midlands, andYorkshire & the Humber.
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in the
Inflation Report , obtained from:  www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/inflationreport/index.htm.DEMAND
Consumption and housing
Consumer spending growth remained weak in November,
although there were some tentative signs ofimprovement and some regional variation.  Severalcontacts reported slightly stronger sales of clothingfollowing the onset of the colder weather, but manyretailers continued to report lower sales than a year ago.This was particularly true for ‘big-ticket’ items and morediscretionary items such as jewellery.  Growth in sales bymail order and over the internet continued tooutperform high-street sales growth. 
Retailers remained cautious about the outlook for sales
around Christmas and the New Year, and generallyexpected spending to be down on a year ago.  Contactsreported that the timing of sales was likely to be mixed:there were some reports that pre-Christmas discountingcould be less marked than last year, although a numberof stores were planning ‘one-day’ reductions as thefestive season progressed.
Growth in spending on consumer services also picked up
a little on an annual basis.  But again, the underlyingpicture was weaker than in the first half of the year.Restaurants and bars generally reported weaker trade,but other leisure services, such as hotels and low-cost airtravel, reported stronger sales.
The new-build residential market was weak.  But some
contacts reported a slight increase in sales of newhouses, although levels remained much lower than lastyear.  Correspondingly, while part-exchange deals andother incentives remained prevalent in order to sellcompleted homes, the scale of these incentives was nolonger increasing.
Overall, activity in the housing market continued to
recover gently, although the picture was patchy, withsome regions reporting that the recovery had stalled.Generally contacts expected the market to remainrelatively quiet until the usual upturn in interest in thespring.  House prices remained generally flat across mostregions. 
Exports and imports
Exports continued to rise in November for a range ofbusinesses, and the recent rate of growth was broadlyunchanged.  Once again the pickup in sales wasconcentrated in the Middle East and Eastern Europe;  US demand also remained strong.  Trade growth withWestern Europe was subdued, with most contactsreporting only a weak pickup in demand at best.  
Imports of consumer goods, particularly from the Far
East, have decelerated in recent months, consistent withretailers’ views that Christmas spending would be moresubdued than last year.  But, more generally, contactsreported that import penetration continued across arange of sectors, including services companiesoutsourcing administration functions as well as
manufacturers importing components more cheaply.
Investment  
Contacts’ investment intentions eased in November.Manufacturing investment intentions were unchanged,with firms still expecting to reduce spending a little overthe next six months.  Service sector investmentintentions fell slightly.  More generally, investmentspending remained concentrated in IT, with a view toreducing costs and increasing efficiency, as well asmeeting regulatory requirements.  And the retail sectorcontinued to invest heavily in new capacity, despite theslowdown in sales growth during this year.
OUTPUT
Primary production
Output from farming remained flat at best, and contactswere generally pessimistic about long-term prospects asthe Single Farm payment system takes effect.  Plannedand unplanned interruptions in the oil and gas sectorwere continuing to affect production. 
Manufacturing
Overall, manufacturing output was broadly flat inNovember.  Export sales continued to outperformdomestic orders, but the latter may have stabilised assome firms started to replenish stocks that had beenpreviously run down.  The emphasis continued to shifttowards higher value-added production for nichemarkets and products.  The trend of manufacturersclosing their UK operations and switching productionoverseas continued.
Construction
Annual output growth stabilised in November, butremained noticeably weaker than in 2004.  Some housebuilders slowed the pace of new starts until their existingstock of finished properties — particularly flats — weresold.  Private demand was mixed, with some contactsreporting stabilising demand in areas like commercialdevelopment, while others cited fewer projects enteringthe pipeline.  But public sector demand — spending onroads, hospitals and schools — remained strong, andthere were some reports that the recent slowdown inpublic sector spending may not have been sustained.  
Services
Growth in business services turnover was broadlyunchanged.  Financial and professional firms continuedto see robust growth, with high levels of mergers andacquisitions and further strong demand for advisoryservices that was likely to persist for some time.  Otherbusiness services also continued to see healthy growth,although the picture was more mixed across contacts,with some sectors such as haulage continuing to feel thesqueeze from the slowdown in consumer demand.  Therewere tentative signs that growth in consumer services
December 2005AGENTS’ SUMMARY OF BUSINESS CONDITIONSturnover started to recover slightly in November,
reflecting stronger demand for leisure services.  Butconsumer services growth remained much weaker thanin the business services sector.
EMPLOYMENT 
The labour market slackened a little over the month.Manufacturing firms continued to lay off staff in the faceof overcapacity and the continuing shift of productionabroad.  Overall, consumer service firms expected tokeep employment broadly unchanged over the next sixmonths:  within that, retailers were taking on fewer staffthis year for the Christmas period.  Employmentintentions in business services were also broadlyunchanged;  overall firms expected to increaseheadcount.  There were also reports of weaker publicsector recruitment.  Against this backdrop, and in theface of companies hiring more workers from overseas,recruitment difficulties were lower than for some time.The main exception was in the professional and financialservices, where there were consistent reports of skillshortages throughout the regions.
In November, the Agents carried out a survey of their
contacts regarding the use of migrant labour.  Thesurvey covered around 220 companies employing a totalof over 275,000 workers.  For a quarter of respondents,migrants made up at least a tenth of the workforce,particularly in the hospitality and agricultural sectors.Overall, firms expected that the proportion of non-UKnationals in their workforce would rise over the nexttwelve months, although perhaps not as fast as over thepast year.  Respondents reported that the main reasonfor employing foreign workers was the scarcity of localworkers.  Migrants were also more willing to take ‘hard tofill’ jobs.  But very few companies employed migrantsprimarily because they were cheaper than UK workers(Chart 1). CAPACITY UTILISATION
Utilisation eased in both the manufacturing and servicesectors.  Skill shortages in professional and financialservices were the key constraint that was uniformly citedacross Agencies.  But even here, employers were usinghuman resources more flexibly, continuing the trend ofcompanies adjusting or ‘flexing’ capacity.  Given theslack in the labour market, many service sector contactscould increase capacity quickly in the short run to dealwith increases in demand.  And most manufacturers hadsufficient capacity to deal with any upturn in demand —indeed, there was overcapacity in the sector as a whole.
COSTS AND PRICES
Pay  
There was little upward pressure on wage growth, and ingeneral contacts were not expecting any increase inpressure for the 2006 wage round.  Settlements lookedlikely to be either linked to RPI inflation, which was theusual benchmark, or set at around the 3% level.  Somecontacts also thought that wage drift — the gap betweenearnings and settlements — was likely to be modest.  Paypressures were slightly higher in construction, althoughthese were less intense than compared with the lastcouple of years.  Pay was likely to rise faster inprofessional services, particularly financial serviceswhere bonuses were expected to be much stronger thanlast year.  The recent increase in the National MinimumWage had some effect on pay differentials, but theimpact on overall pay was negligible. 
Input prices
On balance, annual input price inflation eased.  Petroland diesel prices fell slightly, and some metals pricescontinued to edge lower.  But past price rises were stillfeeding through to other products such as plastics.  Thebiggest news in November was the marked rise inwholesale spot gas prices.  Contacts across the regionswere concerned that the rise in spot gas prices couldtrigger increases in costs when fixed-price gas andelectricity contacts were next renewed.  In the shortterm, many firms were likely to see lower margins asthere was often little scope to pass the cost increase onto their customers.  
Output and consumer prices
Output price inflation was broadly stable.  In the face ofintense competition, many manufacturers continued tofind it hard to recover cost increases fully throughhigher prices.  Retail goods prices fell, and the pace ofdeflation increased following the slight easing lastmonth.  This reflected more pressure on margins givensofter consumer demand.  Consumer services priceinflation was unchanged.Chart 1Reasons why companies employ non-UK nationals
(a)
010203040506070
Cheaper More
productiveScarcity of
local workersWilling to
take hard to
fill jobsOtherPer cent
(a) Percentage of firms reporting the main reason for employing non-UK nationals in their
workforce.  Individual responses have been weighted by the size of companies’ workforces.December 2005