Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2005/january-2005.pdf
Date: 2005-01-31

Bank of England
Agents’ summary of business conditions
January 2005
● After allowing for seasonal influences, the monthly growth of retail sales values may have slowed a little, resulting
in greater-than-normal price discounting around Christmas. 
● Export growth slowed and imports continued to gain market share in the United Kingdom. 
● Investment intentions may have levelled out.  Manufacturing investment remained mostly targeted at achieving
greater efficiency.  
● Manufacturing output continued to increase, but growth eased slightly.  
● Construction output growth declined a little and house builders reported falling sales.
● Activity in the housing market continued to weaken.  Even so, many contacts expected a recovery in the first half
of 2005.
● Service sector output growth declined slightly, partly related to the slowdown in the housing market.
● Private sector employment growth weakened. 
● Capacity utilisation in the manufacturing and services sectors remained above normal.  Skill shortages may have
eased a little in the construction sector.
● There was a modest increase in pay settlements and wage growth, but pay pressures were not seen as a cause for
concern by most contacts. 
● Input price inflation may have peaked on account of recent falls in oil prices.
● Competitive pressures and overseas sourcing continued to keep in check manufacturers’ margins and prices .
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by the Bank of England’s Agents, following discussions with around
700 businesses in the period between late-November and late-December 2004.  It provides information on the state ofbusiness conditions, from firms across all sectors of the economy.  The report does not represent the Bank’s own views, nordoes it represent the views of any particular firm or region.  The Bank’s Monetary Policy Committee uses the intelligenceprovided by the Agents, in conjunction with information from other sources, to assist its understanding and assessment ofcurrent economic conditions.  
The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, the East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the
North West,Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, the South West, Wales, the West Midlands, andYorkshire & the Humber.DEMAND
Consumption
Contacts suggested that consumer confidence was fairly
resilient to the housing market slowdown, with few signsof belt tightening.  Even so, having allowed for seasonalinfluences, the monthly growth of retail sales values mayhave slowed a little compared with November.  Thatresulted in greater-than-normal price discountingaround Christmas.  Growth of retail sales volumes mayhave been around its average of recent months.               
The contrasting experience of different retail contacts
made it especially difficult for the Agents to judge theoverall strength of consumer demand in the Christmasperiod.  Spending on many ‘big ticket’ items haddeclined.  That was mostly ascribed to recent falls inhousing market activity, which reduced demand for somehousing-related goods such as furniture.  And new carsales were weaker, due in part to rising interest ratesover the past year and the reluctance of consumers toundertake further mortgage equity withdrawal whenhouse prices were easing.  By contrast, demand grewstrongly for some high-priced goods such as jewelleryand consumer electronics.  
After allowing for seasonal influences, demand
strengthened as the month progressed.  Consumersremained particularly cost conscious and waited for latepromotions and discounts to get value for money.  Thatresulted in the timing of consumer spending in theperiod under review being slightly later than in recentyears.  Some contacts reported strong growth ofspending on gift vouchers, to be redeemed in the post-Christmas sales, and further rapid acceleration ininternet sales.  Internet retailing gained market share ina wider range of products.      
Exports and imports
Contacts reported that the pace of export growth hadeased recently and short-term prospects were a littleweaker.  Recent falls in the sterling exchange rate haveso far had relatively little impact on export volumes andwere mostly affecting contacts’ profit margins.  Mostcontacts reported that the United States and the Far Eastwere the strongest export markets, though margins havebeen squeezed.  By contrast, demand in the euro areagenerally remained subdued and was restraining theoverall growth of export volumes, though margins hadimproved due to sterling’s depreciation against the euro.Looking forward, some contacts believed that there was agenerally confident mood among US companiesconcerning prospects for the US economy.  But sterling’spast appreciation against the dollar was expected to startto affect export volumes to dollar markets in the monthsahead.  Turning to imports, the underlying trend remained one
of increasing import penetration of domestic markets,perhaps at a slightly quicker rate recently.  That partlyreflected the continued relocation of manufacturingcapacity overseas and UK manufacturers wereincreasingly sourcing parts and materials from cheaperoverseas suppliers, often in the Far East or EasternEurope.  
Investment
Contacts indicated that their investment intentions hadlevelled out in the fourth quarter.  Although anincreasing number of manufacturers reported that theywere operating at close to full capacity, many werecautious about expanding capacity in the UnitedKingdom.  That was because higher profits were availablefrom investing overseas.  Manufacturing investment inthe United Kingdom was mostly targeted at costreduction and regulatory requirements.  
Investment in information, communications and
technology (ICT) grew strongly as contacts looked toupgrade their systems.  There was also continued steadygrowth of investment in the retail and distributionsector, aimed at increasing efficiency and adding newcapacity.  The rapid growth of internet sales was cited bysome contacts as one factor promoting investment innew distribution centres.  The public sector continued tounderpin a significant proportion of investment inproperty.      
OUTPUT
Primary production
Contacts in the agricultural sector continued to beaffected by uncertainty ahead of the forthcomingreforms to the Common Agricultural Policy.  That wasexpected to result in further consolidation in arablefarming, so raising efficiency.  In the oil and gas sector,contacts reported that their budgets for explorationactivity in 2005 were significantly higher than in theprevious year.  
Manufacturing
Contacts reported that although growth had slowed alittle recently, the level of output continued to increaseand orders were generally satisfactory.  There were mixedviews concerning the prospects in 2005.  The majorityexpected some further increase in production.  Even so,many contacts were fairly cautious and expected profitmargins to come under downward pressure.  That waspartly on account of their reduced competitiveness indollar markets.  In the automotive sector, the stocks offinished cars and components had risen and production
January 2005AGENTS’ SUMMARY OF BUSINESS CONDITIONSwas being cut back.  Components suppliers had lost
market share to overseas competitors.      
Construction and housing
Construction activity in the retail and distribution
sector continued to grow strongly.  Public sectordemand was also robust, although there were somereports of temporary delays to road projects by localauthorities due to end-of-year budget pressures.Overall, construction output growth may have easedslightly in the fourth quarter.  
House builders reported that, despite increasing
incentives, properties remained more difficult to sell andturnover had fallen significantly in recent months.  Thatwas mostly attributed to the current high level of houseprices in relation to earnings and the increase in interestrates in the previous year.  So future house buyers werenervous that prices could fall, which was restrainingdemand.  Even so, most house builders reported that theslowdown had not had a major impact on theirconstruction activity and land acquisition, partlybecause they expected the housing market to pick upagain fairly quickly in the first half of 2005.    
That view of the housing market was shared by most
estate agents, who reported that future buyers werewaiting for a price correction to take place.  And theintroduction in November of new rules by the FinancialServices Authority for mortgage approval may havetemporarily reduced the number of mortgagecompletions as lenders became familiar with the newregime.  There was no consensus as to how far houseprices might have to fall, though most expected thatdemand would recover to normal levels in the first half of2005.  The Agents’ reports suggested that prices werecurrently either flat or falling gently.  Many contactsbelieved that the recovery would start once future housebuyers were more confident that interest rates hadpeaked and house prices had stabilised.           
Services
Service sector output growth eased a little.  That was inpart related to the sharp fall in turnover in the housingmarket, which had reduced demand for a variety ofconsumer services including financial services, estateagents (some of which were reducing staffing), surveyors,solicitors and removals companies.  
Though contacts reported a decline in the volume of job
advertising, output growth of contacts serving businesscustomers strengthened further.  Professional servicessuch as accountancy and law were seeing the strongestgrowth, partly on account of a pickup in corporatemergers and acquisitions and capital market issuance.Demand was also being driven by regulatory issues such
as international companies’ need to meet newaccounting standards, as well as health and safety andemployment legislation.  
EMPLOYMENT
Most contacts reported that recruitment difficulties hadeased slightly.  Employment growth in the private sectorweakened.  Also, labour shortages were probably easingdue to steadily rising inward migration of workers fromEastern Europe, who were filling a widening range ofvacancies.  A growing number of contacts reported thatthey planned to employ more overseas labour in 2005,as they became more familiar with systems for recruitingoverseas.      
CAPACITY UTILISATION  
Capacity utilisation in manufacturing and services wassomewhat above normal.  Some manufacturers reportedlengthening delivery times arising from insufficientcapacity to meet their orders.  And there were growingskill shortages in business services, such as accountancyand law.  By contrast, skill shortages in the constructionsector, while still severe, may have eased a little andmany firms in housing-related consumer services werenow operating below capacity.  
COSTS AND PRICES
Pay
There was a modest increase in pay settlements and total
pay growth, particularly in business services whereactivity was growing strongly and skill shortages weremost evident.  Overall, however, pay pressures stemmingfrom recruitment difficulties were not seen as a seriouscause for concern for most contacts, who were planningto keep pay growth to around the levels of the previousyear.  That was partly on account of the greateravailability of labour recently relative to demand.  Somecontacts noted that the recent increase in the NationalMinimum Wage had squeezed differentials for lower paidworkers, who were in short supply.  That resulted inabove average pay increases for the lower paid.    
Input prices
Reports from contacts suggested that input priceinflation was perhaps close to peaking or may alreadyhave peaked.  Large increases in the prices of steel andoil in the past year were responsible for most of theupward pressure on input prices.  Those increases werecontinuing to feed through into higher prices of derivedmaterials such as plastics.  And contacts continued toreport sharp rises in their energy costs.  However, withthe dollar weakening further and oil prices coming off
their peak, some contacts believed that inflationarypressures from this source may have started to abate.There were also some reports that the official figurestended to exaggerate the upward pressure onmanufacturers’ material costs, as companies were oftenable to find cheaper suppliers to offset price increases.  
Output and consumer prices
An increasing number of manufacturing contacts wereable to pass on at least some of their recent increases inmaterials costs.  But the overall message remained one ofcompetitive pressures and overseas sourcing keeping incheck manufacturers’ margins and prices.  The samefactors were constraining retail goods prices, andaccounted for the more extensive than usual pre-Christmas price discounting on the High Street.Competitive pressures were generally less severe in theservice sector, particularly for professional serviceswhere many contacts were working at full capacity.     
January 2005