Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2005/november-2005.pdf
Date: 2005-11-30

Bank of England
Agents’ summary of business conditions
November 2005
G Growth in the value of consumer spending remained subdued, with few signs of a pickup in the near term.
G A modest recovery continued in housing market activity , but prices were flat.  
G Export growth remained robust.  Imports also continued to rise, despite some weakness in consumer goods.
G Investment intentions eased as firms became more cautious.
G Domestic manufacturing sales were weak, with export sales faring notably better.  
G The pace of construction output growth eased, but activity remained high.
G Service sector output growth was broadly unchanged;  professional and financial service companies reported 
continued robust growth in demand.
G The labour market continued to soften.
G Fewer firms were worried about capacity pressures . 
G Pay pressures remained muted.   
G Input price inflation was broadly unchanged, although not all companies had yet felt the full impact of past rises 
in energy prices.
G Output price increases were tempered by competition, but consumer price inflation edged a little higher.
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by the Bank of England’s Agents, following discussions with over
830 businesses in the period between late September and late October 2005.  It provides information on the state ofbusiness conditions, from firms across all sectors of the economy.  The report does not represent the Bank’s own views, nordoes it represent the views of any particular firm or region.  The Bank’s Monetary Policy Committee uses the intelligenceprovided by the Agents, in conjunction with information from other sources, to assist its understanding and assessment ofcurrent economic conditions.  A copy of this publication can be found at
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/agentssummary/index.htm.
The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, the East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, theNorth West, Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, the South West, Wales, the West Midlands, andYorkshire & the Humber.
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in the
Inflation Report , obtained from:  www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/inflationreport/index.htm.DEMAND
Consumption and housing
Consumer spending growth in October remained
unchanged on the previous month at modest levels.Overall, retail sales were relatively flat.  Consumerscontinued to cut back on discretionary spending, whichwas reflected in weaker sales of, for example, furniture,white goods, and jewellery.  Clothing sales were alsoweaker than retailers expected, perhaps partly as a resultof poor weather conditions, and some contacts wereconsidering earlier-than-usual price discounting in anattempt to clear unsold stock.  Spending on some leisuregoods was more robust, particularly where the productwas innovative.  But, overall, contacts from across theUnited Kingdom were cautious about the outlook forChristmas trading — even some contacts who had seenthe seasonal pickup in orders begin to materialise notedthat the rise was weaker than usual.  
There were also signs that consumers were deferring
major purchasing decisions for durable goods.  The mostobvious example was cars, with contacts throughout thecountry reporting weak sales, particularly in theimportant September plate change month.  
Spending on consumer services grew moderately, but the
picture was very mixed across regions.  For example,some leisure attractions reported rising visitor numbers,while others experienced flat demand at best.  Therewere some signs of increased consumer caution, such asmore shopping around — often using the internet — forthe best travel prices.
Overall, there were further signs of a modest recovery of
activity in the housing market.  Enquiries andcompletions in the secondary market continued toimprove, and contacts reported that sellers were a little more willing to do deals on price.  As a result,selling prices probably remained broadly flat across the country as a whole, despite the improvement inactivity.  
In the new-build market, some contacts reported higher
viewings, but this improved level of interest was notbeing translated into completed sales.  As a result, part-exchange deals and other incentives remainedprevalent, especially for house builders whose strategywas to maintain volumes.  
Exports and imports
Export growth was steady at high levels.  Sales to theMiddle East and Asia continued to grow quite strongly,reflecting higher oil revenues and continued stronggrowth in China and other emerging economies,including Latin America.  Sales to these markets reflecteddemand for both capital equipment and consumer goods.UK exporters also continued to benefit from robustdemand in the United States, although the level of theUS dollar remained a concern for some contacts with thedollar’s partial recovery this year not yet translated intohigher sales.  Demand in the euro area was patchy and
had generally remained subdued.  
Imports were still rising, mainly reflecting the continuing
increase in sourcing of products or components fromlower-cost overseas economies.  But the recent weaknessof imports of consumer goods persisted:  the normalseasonal spike in these imports ahead of Christmas waspossibly less pronounced than a year ago. 
Investment 
Contacts’ investment intentions eased modestly over thepast month.  The manufacturing sector’s UK investmentplans remained weak, reflecting overcapacity in theUnited Kingdom, squeezed margins and global trends torelocate production capacity.  Service sector firms weregenerally still planning additional investment, but therewere signs of a more cautious mood.  Where investmentwas planned, it was generally aimed at improvingefficiency and reducing costs, which frequently involvedan intensified use of IT and telecommunications.  Yeteven here the picture was patchy, with some IT contactsreporting lower sales of hardware.  A minority of contacts— typically those firms most directly affected by energyprice rises — were increasing their capital spending toinvest in more energy-efficient equipment.  Someretailers had revised down their investment plans in theface of weaker demand, but overall the retail sector wascontinuing to invest in new floor space, reflecting astrategy of competing for market share by opening newstores and expanding existing ones.  
In October, the Agents carried out a survey of their
contacts regarding capital investment.  The surveycovered around 180 companies with a total turnover ofover £40 billion.  Overall, firms expected that the rise ininvestment spending in 2006 would be lower than in2005, with only business services companies expectingtheir investment spending in the United Kingdom toaccelerate (Chart 1).  Strong UK and foreign demandwere acting to boost investment, as was healthy cash flow
November 2005Chart 1Actual and planned investment by sector
(a)
4030201001020304050602005
2006 Net percentage balances
Manufacturing Construction Consumer
servicesBusiness
servicesOther+
_
(a) Net balances of firms in each sector reporting that actual investment in 2005 
was higher than in 2004, and that planned investment in 2006 was higher than actual spending in 2005.  Individual responses have been weighted by firms’ turnover.AGENTS’ SUMMARY OF BUSINESS CONDITIONSand profitability.  But, as noted above, some firms were
relocating production abroad, which was depressingtheir UK investment spending.  Higher energy costs wereacting as a stimulus to investment spending in somecases, but as a constraint in others — mainly whereenergy costs had substantially impaired cash flow andprofits.
OUTPUT
Primary production
The gradual rationalisation of agriculture continued.The autumn harvest was variable across the UnitedKingdom but, overall, was at or above the average of thepast few years.  Combined oil and gas production, whichdeclined sharply in the summer because of maintenancework, had begun to improve. 
Manufacturing
Domestic sales remained weak, offset by better exports.Those sectors faring best were aerospace, defence,medicine and pharmaceuticals.  There were some signsof increasing financial fragility for firms, particularlythose worst affected by the energy price rises and thosefaced with overcapacity.  More production continued toshift overseas, as the long-term trend of rationalisationcontinued.
Construction
Output growth eased a little.  While demand continuedto be underpinned by the public sector, contacts fromdifferent regions reported a slowdown in public sectorspending.  It was unclear whether that was likely to betemporary — projects being delayed rather thancancelled — or more permanent, perhaps due toconcerns over budgets.  In the past, governmentdepartments have often chosen to defer maintenance inthe face of tighter budget constraints, which could leadto a shift in the composition of spending.  
Private sector demand was more subdued, although
ongoing long-term retail investment (see earlier) wassupporting activity.  The number of new homes built hadreached a plateau or was falling in most regions, ashouse builders’ sales targets were proving more difficultto meet.  Some developers were delaying new startsaccordingly.
Services
Growth in professional and financial services remainedstrong.  This was underpinned by continued demand foradvisory work on regulation, M&A activity andcommercial property investment.  Demand growth in thefinancial sector was also robust.  There were somereports of banks tightening their lending criteriafollowing increased payment difficulties and defaultsfrom corporate and personal borrowers.  Spending bycompanies on other business services — such asadvertising and transportation — was somewhat weaker.Spending on consumer services continued to grow moremoderately than on business services, reflecting 
the deceleration in consumer demand over the past year.  
EMPLOYMENT 
The past tightness of the labour market softened a littlefurther in October.  Manufacturing firms continued tolay off staff in the face of overcapacity.  And employmentintentions of consumer services firms may haveweakened for the first time this year.  Business servicescontinued to recruit new staff, but even here the pace ofhiring had eased.  Overall, private sector employmentmay be flat at best over the next six months.  Coupledwith the slower pace of public sector recruitment, thecontinued inward migration of foreign workers fromEastern Europe, and increased staff retention due toemployee caution, recruitment difficulties eased.  Themain sector continuing to experience skill shortagesacross the country was professional and financialservices. 
CAPACITY UTILISATION
Utilisation eased across the economy as a whole.  Onceagain only professional and financial service firmsreported concerns about capacity pressures, reflectingspecific skill shortages.  Many contacts were reducingcapacity following the slowdown in demand, continuingthe trend of more companies ‘flexing’ capacity.
COSTS AND PRICES
Pay  
Wage growth was little changed.  Most across-the-boardsettlements were closely linked to RPI.  Given that RPIinflation was slightly lower than a year ago, the impact ofthe recent pickup in CPI inflation had been minimal.There was little evidence of increased militancy ordissatisfaction among employees, although there werereports of pay freezes.  There had as yet been littleupward pressure on earnings in the economy as a wholefollowing the introduction of the new National MinimumWage rates.  Pay continued to rise fastest in a handful ofsectors where firms were faced with specific skillshortages.  However, some contacts reported thatpension contributions were likely to add to labour costsin the short term.
Input prices  
Annual input price inflation was broadly unchanged inOctober.  The apparent plateauing in inflation reflectedthe decline in the oil price from its recent peak, andcontinued easing of some commodity prices such asminerals and metals.  However, the full impact of pastincreases in oil prices on some intermediate products,such as plastics, had probably not yet been felt.  Themajor concern was energy costs, with some companiesfacing very significant increases in gas and electricitybills.  Contacts were expecting the higher oil and energyprices to persist over the medium term.  There wereconcerns that insurance premia could rise in the
aftermath of the US hurricane season.
Output and consumer prices 
There was little news on output price inflation, whichhad steadied reflecting companies’ mixed success inpassing input price rises on to their customers.  Thepace of decline in retail goods prices may have eased alittle, reflecting further oil price effects and higherimport costs.  Consumer services price inflation wasunchanged.
November 2005