Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2005/june-2005.pdf
Date: 2005-06-30

Bank of England
Agents’ summary of business conditions
June 2005
G Retail sales values were broadly flat in May compared with the previous month.  Demand remained subdued for
consumer durables.  Growth of household spending on services may have eased a little, partly reflecting reducedspending on housing-related financial services.
G House prices and transactions were stable.  Estate agents now expect the housing market to remain fairly flat in
the months ahead.     
G Export growth remained modest.  Sterling’s recent weakening against the dollar improved margins for some
contacts.  Euro-area demand remained subdued.  
G Investment intentions were firm, underpinned by the need to raise efficiency and, in the service sector, a lack of
spare capacity.  
G Manufacturing output growth seemed to have stalled and some contacts expected the level of output to fall
slightly in the second half of the year.  
G Construction output growth was steady.
G Service sector output growth may have slowed a little, reflecting lower growth of household spending on services.  
G Employment growth weakened a little, mostly due to an increased rate of job loss in manufacturing and weaker
recruitment in the public sector. 
G Whole-economy capacity utilisation remained a little above normal.  
G Pay pressures continued to edge up. 
G Input price inflation was little changed.
G Gradually increasing cost pressures were having little impact on consumer price inflation , partly because some
retailers’ margins were squeezed by the slowdown in consumer spending.   
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by the Bank of England’s Agents, following discussions with over
850 businesses in the period between late-April and late-May 2005.  It provides information on the state of businessconditions, from firms across all sectors of the economy.  The report does not represent the Bank’s own views, nor does itrepresent the views of any particular firm or region.  The Bank’s Monetary Policy Committee uses the intelligence provided bythe Agents, in conjunction with information from other sources, to assist its understanding and assessment of currenteconomic conditions.  A copy of this publication can be found atwww.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/agentssummary/index.htm.
The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, the East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the
North West, Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, the South West, Wales, the West Midlands, andYorkshire & the Humber.
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in the
Inflation Report , obtained from:  www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/inflationreport/index.htm.DEMAND
Consumption and housing  
After allowing for seasonal influences, the Agents
reported that the value of retail sales was little changedcompared with the previous month.  Few retailers hadseen any clear signs of recovery and there was generaldisappointment that consumer spending in theimmediate post-Election period had not been stronger.Demand remained subdued for durable goods includingcars, furniture, white goods, televisions and homecomputers.  Retailers and wholesalers reported that theirstocks of those goods had increased, resulting in lowerorders from suppliers as they sought to clear surplusinventory.            
The volume of purchases of lower-priced goods, such as
clothing, had been rather stronger, partly due to pricediscounting.  That was not so much associated with weakunderlying demand, but more the actions of the majorsupermarkets which continued to gain market share inthe non-food sector by competing on price.  Growth ofhousehold spending on services had eased slightly.  That was partly on account of reduced spending onhousing-related financial services and leisure servicessuch as restaurants.  
Many contacts attributed the slowdown in spending on
durable goods to weaker activity in the housing marketand the lagged effects of past increases in interest rates.There were some reports that consumers had started torepay debt.  In the food retail sector, consumer cautionwas being reflected in a search for greater value with, forexample, households generally trading down to cheaperbrands.  
In the housing market, prices and transactions were
broadly stable and most estate agents expected them toremain so in the months ahead.  Few expected the marketto weaken significantly.  
Recent speculation that short-term interest rates may
have peaked had not resulted in any improvement inmarket sentiment.  Sellers outnumbered buyers and thestock of unsold houses continued to increase.  Somereports indicated that the average time between aproperty coming onto the market and a sale beingagreed had risen from around 5 weeks a year ago toaround 15 weeks presently.  Activity in the buy-to-letmarket weakened with some investors continuing toswitch their attention to the commercial propertymarket.  
Exports and imports  
Exports continued to grow at a moderate pace,underpinned by strong US demand.  The very recentweakening of sterling against the US dollar had not givenany discernible boost to export volumes, though margins
had improved.  Demand continued to be weak inWestern Europe, particularly in Germany.  
High oil and gas prices have stimulated global
exploration activity, which to some extent has increasedthe demand for UK manufactures.  But with more UKsuppliers manufacturing abroad, contacts noted that themain impact has been on the demand for UK-basedconsultancy and design services.                     
The Agents reported that the slowdown in demand for
consumer durables was being reflected in weaker growthof imports.  Nevertheless, for most consumer goods theunderlying trend remained one of rising importpenetration and there were some reports that theresultant boost to imports had outweighed the effects ofweaker consumer demand.   
Investment  
Overall, contacts’ investment intentions remained firm.That was despite some weakening in the investmentintentions of manufacturers due to a deterioratingoutlook for orders.  The main influences on investmentremained the need to raise efficiency and drive downcosts, together with some shortages of spare capacity.   
Retailers continued to invest in new stores and the
refurbishment of existing stores, as well as in distributioncentres.  There were few signs that their investmentplans had been revised down in the light of the recentslowdown in sales.  The appetite of most contacts for ITimprovements was undiminished.  And telecomsoperators continued to invest at high levels in networks.  
OUTPUT
Primary production
Business confidence has remained high in the oil and gassector and contacts reported that investment in the UKContinental Shelf has risen strongly this year.Nevertheless, equipment, such as oil rigs, was in shortsupply, pushing up rental rates and constraining output.Farmers reported that changes to the Single FarmPayment were finalised too late to affect the 2005harvest, though the amount of land devoted to arableand livestock was expected to start to decline in 2006 asa result of the decoupling of production and CAPsubsidies.     
Manufacturing 
Contacts’ reports suggested that manufacturing outputgrowth has stalled.  And with order books weakening,some contacts expected their output to fall slightly in thesecond half of the year.  The growth of output continued
June 2005AGENTS’ SUMMARY OF BUSINESS CONDITIONSto be restrained by increasing overseas competition and
the relocation of UK production offshore.  
In addition to the direct effects on manufacturers of the
slowdown in demand for consumer durables, there hadbeen second-round effects on orders from domesticsuppliers of components.  In the automotive sector,carmakers reported excess stocks and falling output andactivity had slowed in the glass and metal industries.  Butnot all sectors had seen a decline in activity and demandremained strong for contacts with defence andconstruction-related businesses and for companies inthe information, communications and technology sector.  
Construction  
Construction output growth remained steady,underpinned by a combination of firm demand forcommercial property and from the public sector.  
Investor demand for commercial property has persisted
at very high levels, supported by overseas investors andpension funds.  Looking ahead, however, there weresome reports that the commercial property market waslooking less robust in the face of weak occupationaldemand.  In the housing market, there was an upturn insocial housing schemes, with increased public fundingfor key worker housing.  But smaller house-buildingcompanies were scaling back activity due to reducedcash flow.   
Services  
Private services output growth slowed a little in Maycompared with the previous month.  That largelyreflected lower growth in services such as mortgageproviders and conveyancers.  Demand for personal loanshad also diminished.  Growth of business services outputremained strong.  Greater business confidence wasincreasingly filtering through to the activities of smallerand medium-sized business service providers.Accountancy continued to be the most active sector,with changes to pensions’ regulations next Aprilproviding a new source of demand growth.  The recentstrength of the commercial property market had resultedin strong demand growth for architects, surveyors andproperty consultants.  And the Agents cited a wide rangeof other businesses that were reporting good growth,including those in marketing, advertising, publicrelations, and management and information technologyconsultants.
In May, the Agents carried out a survey of their contacts
regarding prospects for the business services andfinance sector (Chart 1).  The survey, which covered 139 companies with a total turnover of around £18 billion, pointed to healthy output growth in theprevious six-month period.  The balance of companies
expected demand to continue increasing over thefollowing six months, if perhaps at a slightly slower ratethan in the previous six months.  Past and prospectivedemand growth was particularly strong in the businessservices sector, most notably accountancy and computerservices.  Financial companies reported more modestdemand growth, especially from households.  Demandgrowth from the government sector was robust, thoughthat was a relatively small source of demand for most ofthe firms covered by the survey.   
EMPLOYMENT  
The labour market eased slightly and recruitmentdifficulties faced by contacts declined.  The rate of jobloss in manufacturing increased and public sectorrecruitment declined.  Employment agencies reportedweaker demand for their staff, particularly for lesserskilled workers.  By contrast, labour demand was muchfirmer in professional services, where capacity utilisationwas at high levels.  Part of the explanation for a slighteasing in labour market conditions was an increase inlabour supply.  There were continued reports of aplentiful supply of Eastern European workers and thegreater willingness of older age groups to return to(mostly part-time) work.  
CAPACITY UTILISATION  
Whole-economy capacity utilisation was little changedin the past month and remained slightly above normal.For some contacts, shortages of capacity were beingaddressed through investment in new buildings andmachinery.  But for most contacts, capacity utilisationwas not so high that increasing output presented majorChart 1Demand in business services and finance:  net balances by sector
(a)
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40Business servicesProperty servicesFinancial servicesTotalLatest six months
Next six months
Per cent
(a) Weighted net balance of firms reporting higher output compared with the previous 
six-month period.  The survey covered 139 firms in nine different subsectors, and theresults in each subsector were weighted according to their relative share of ONS grossdomestic product.problems or resulted in additional cost pressures.  The
main exception was the construction sector, wheredifficulties in securing planning permission continued toresult in shortages of land for development and upwardpressure on land values, though a greater supply of(often Eastern European) labour had eased skillshortages in the industry.  Contacts in professionalservices were operating close to full capacity and somereported that shortages of skilled staff were holding backthe growth of business.    
COSTS AND PRICES
Pay  
Pay pressures continued to increase, though only gently.Rising pay settlements mostly reflected higher RPIinflation and improved corporate profitability than ayear earlier.  So employees needed larger pay rises tomaintain the growth of their pay in real terms, whileemployers were more able to afford those increases.Also, past increases in the National Minimum Wage wereaffecting the pay settlements of higher paid employees,who sought to restore differentials.  By contrast, thegreater availability of workers and weaker labourdemand had added to job uncertainty.  That hadtempered pay growth for some contacts.  And inmanufacturing, some contacts reported that theirovertime payments had declined as a result of weakerorders. 
Input prices   
Input price inflation was steady.  Past increases in oilprices continued to feed through the supply chain,resulting in higher prices for a wide range of products
including plastics, polymers and chemicals.  But for somecontacts, the chief concern remained the sharp increasein the costs of gas and electricity, with annual increasesof around 45% and 30% respectively mentioned.  Partlyoffsetting those cost pressures, there was a slight easingin the prices of steel and other metals.  However, lookingahead there were some reports that manufacturers’input prices may start to accelerate again, with somecontacts pointing to rising prices for materials importedfrom the Far East (particularly China, where strongoutput growth continued to put upward pressure oncommodity prices).       
Output and consumer prices 
There was a range of views among manufacturersregarding recent developments in their pricingbehaviour.  Some reported that there was littleresistance among their customers to price increases thatwere driven by higher costs of materials, though highercosts of utilities could not be passed on.  Others notedthat it was becoming more difficult to pass their costincreases on to customers.  On balance, it appeared thatprice inflation for manufacturers continued to edgehigher.
Consumer price inflation was little changed in May
compared with the previous month.  There were somereports that the softening in demand for consumerdurables and increases in retailers’ stocks has resulted inlower retail goods prices.  With overall cost pressuresincreasing slightly, that was squeezing the profit marginsof some retailers.           
June 2005