Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2006/september-2006.pdf
Date: 2006-09-30

•Consumer spending growth remained reasonably firm.
•The recovery in housing market transactions continued.  The recent interest rate increase was not
expected to dampen demand.   
•Export growth strengthened modestly, with signs of further recovery in euro-area demand.
•Investment intentions rose a little further.
•The level of manufacturing output continued to increase, with strengthening demand in domestic as well
as overseas markets.
•Construction output growth ticked up.
•Service sector output growth was steady.
•Employment intentions rose, but there remained some slack in the labour market.
•Capacity pressures rose slightly in both manufacturing and services.
•Pay pressures remained benign except in a few areas of specific skill shortages.  But future pay
negotiations were expected to be tougher.
•Input price inflation levelled out, helped by a weaker dollar against the pound and lower fuel prices.
•Manufacturing output price inflation continued to rise modestly and there was further pass-through to
consumer goods prices .  
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by the
Bank of England’s Agents, following discussions with around 700businesses in the period between late July 2006 and late August2006.  It provides information on the state of business conditions,from firms across all sectors of the economy.  The report does notrepresent the Bank’s own views, nor does it represent the views ofany particular firm or region.  The Bank’s Monetary PolicyCommittee uses the intelligence provided by the Agents, inconjunction with information from other sources, to assist itsunderstanding and assessment of current economic conditions. A copy of this publication can be found at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/agentssummary/index.htmThe Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, 
the East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the NorthWest, Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, the South West, Wales, the West Midlands & Oxfordshire, andYorkshire & the Humber.
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic
conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in theInflation Report , obtained from: 
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/inflationreport/index.htmAgents’ summary of business conditions
September 2006Demand
Consumption and housing  
Consumer demand growth in August was little changed
compared with the previous month and remained reasonablyfirm.  An increase in mortgage equity withdrawal hadsupported consumption growth and was also being used byhouseholds to reduce their unsecured debt.  It was too early tojudge whether the interest rate increase on 3 August wouldhave any adverse effect on consumer sentiment.Notwithstanding that, retailers believed that consumerconfidence remained fragile.  Discretionary spending on biggerticket items such as white goods and furniture remained weak,though demand had ticked up slightly in the latest month.And early orders for new cars with a September registrationplate suggested that sales volumes would be down slightly onlast year.  Dealers continued to report that the market for usedcars was holding up rather better than that for new cars.
Reports of consumer demand for services were mixed, but
overall pointed to reasonably steady growth.  The hot summerweather and the recent disruption to air travel may have givena temporary boost to the domestic tourist industry and leisureattractions.  Legal and financial services continued to benefitfrom the strengthening housing market.  By contrast, spendingat bars and restaurants was reported to be below expectationsin some areas, in part due to a credit squeeze on indebtedyoung adults.     
The steady recovery in the housing market continued and the
number of sales was higher than usual for the summer.  Lower-priced properties remained the easiest to sell.  But witha shortage of cash buyers, housing chains were relatively long,which had slowed the rate of completions.  Overall, annualhouse price inflation had not yet risen decisively, despite fairlystrong demand and a scarcity of stock.  Estate agents generally
expected current levels of demand to continue in the rest ofthe year.  Buy-to-let activity strengthened, with more investordemand for lower-priced property, in part for rental to migrantworkers.  Construction of new houses continued to gatherpace with strong demand for social housing.  
Exports and imports  
There was no loss of momentum in exports.  Strong USdemand continued, there was a further recovery in sales to theeuro area and export growth to Eastern Europe, India andChina remained buoyant.  Some contacts reported thatdemand from the Middle East had accelerated, possiblyreflecting the increase in oil revenues there.  Suppliers ofcapital goods to energy-related businesses had seenparticularly strong growth recently, reflecting the surge inglobal investment in the oil, gas and petrochemicals industries.That also benefited some business services, such as the designand project management of plant construction.  The recentdepreciation of the dollar had not significantly affected exportvolumes to date, though it had caused concern for a number ofexporters.  The growth of imports of components and finishedgoods continued to rise.  Many companies increasingly sourcedfrom lower-cost developing economies rather than the UnitedKingdom, to help mitigate margin pressures.    
Investment  
Investment intentions strengthened a little further, though byless than seen in recent months.  Overall, business confidencewas conducive to stronger growth in investment.  However,some companies that had funds available to invest weredelaying new capital expenditure, partly on account ofperceptions of greater uncertainty about the global economicoutlook and geopolitical risks.  In manufacturing, thecontinued pickup in investment intentions largely reflected theneed to improve cost competitiveness by reducing inputs oflabour, materials and energy.  Consequently firms emphasisedthe need for greater automation and mechanisation and thepurchase of energy-efficient machinery.  Infrastructureinvestment by utilities companies was accelerating.  In theservice sector, demand for office space had strengthened ascapacity constraints tightened.  Larger retailers continued toinvest in new outlets and the refurbishment of existing stores.  
Output
Primary production 
Farmers reported that the hot and dry weather in July hadsignificantly reduced crop yields in the United Kingdom and onthe continent.  Lower yields and stocks globally had increasedcereals prices by around 10% compared with a year ago.  Meatprices had also risen, partly reflecting increased demand sincethe lifting of the export ban on UK beef, and partly reflectingrestrictions on imports from South America.2 Agents’ summary of business conditions September 2006
20246810
2001 02 03 04 05 060.50.00.51.01.52.02.5Percentage change, three months on
same period a year earlier Score(b)
ONS (left-hand scale)Agents (right-hand scale)
+
–+
–
(a) For more information on the Agents’ scores, see Ellis, C and Pike, T (2005), 
‘Introducing the Agents’ scores’, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin , Winter, pages 424–30,
available at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/quarterlybulletin/qb050401.pdf. 
(b) A score of zero indicates that sales or turnover were unchanged in the latest three months
compared to a year earlier.  A positive (negative) score indicates sales or turnover werehigher (lower) than a year earlier.  For more information see Ellis and Pike (2005).Chart 1 Retail sales values(a)Agents’ summary of business conditions September 2006 3
Manufacturing  
The level of manufacturing output rose again.  Overseas
demand continued to strengthen.  That in turn stimulatedmanufacturers’ domestic sales of intermediate and capitalgoods to exporters.  In addition to continued strong growth inaerospace and pharmaceuticals, firms that reported a pickup ingrowth included suppliers of capital goods to the oil and gas,power generation and construction industries.  Firms in nichemarkets serving high-income consumers — for example privateboat builders — reported exceptional levels of demand, muchof which emanated from the emerging economies.       
Construction  
Construction output growth increased slightly.  Strong publicsector demand continued for social housing, schools andnurseries.  There was increased investor demand forcommercial property, including new warehousing andworkshop premises, partly from overseas where there theUnited Kingdom was seen as offering attractive returns.  Somecontacts were concerned that these robust investment flowswere not matched by a corresponding increase in end-userdemand for commercial property so that yields had fallen.     
Services  
Output growth in the service sector was little changed inAugust.  Growth in consumer services was steady (see above).Professional and financial services output growth remainedvery strong.  That was assisted by a firmer tone to globalequity markets in recent months, which among other thingshad increased households’ demand for services related to themanagement of savings and tax planning.  The picture forother business services remained patchy.  Media contactsnoted declining advertising spending in newspapers, TV andradio, which had not been fully offset by increased advertisingon the internet.  Hotels reported only slow growth in spendingon corporate events, while logistics companies continued tosuffer from strong foreign competition.  But softwarecompanies had seen stronger growth, partly on account offirms looking to improve their management information andthe development of their intranet and internet sites.  Andbusinesses providing services to the oil and gas industry, suchas marine surveys and the design of refineries, reported recordorder books stretching some years into the future.  
Employment  
Contacts’ employment intentions over the next six monthsrose marginally in August, consistent with slightly strongerreports of demand and output growth.  Even so, the availabilityof labour was generally viewed to be more than adequate tomeet this increased demand.  That largely reflected thegrowing availability and use of workers from the accessioncountries.  More employers were willing to tap into the pool ofmigrant workers to address labour shortages, and jobadvertising on the internet had enabled companies to accessforeign labour more easily.  However, skill shortages remained
in certain specific areas, notably in occupations such asaccountancy and law. 
Capacity utilisation  
Capacity utilisation increased slightly.  Manufacturers mostlyhad an adequate amount of capacity.  In part that reflectedinvestment and other measures aimed at increasing labourproductivity (see above).  Some service sector firms continuedto report that activity was significantly constrained by skillshortages, notably in professional and financial services,information technology, electrical engineering andconstruction project management.  But the picture was mixed,with increased spare capacity for some services such asinsurance.  That partly reflected new entrants from overseas.    
Costs and prices
Pay  
Pay settlements remained at or below those of last year.  Butincreasing bonus and overtime payments resulted in a smallacceleration in average earnings, particularly in those firmswith more acute skill shortages.  The cost of funding pensionfund deficits remained a key concern for many employers andwas putting downward pressure on pay in these sectors.Looking ahead, a growing number of firms expected toughernegotiations in their next annual pay review.  That was largelydue to the increase in RPI inflation, which was used as thestarting point for many pay negotiations.  
Input prices  
Input price inflation remained high, though it had levelled out.The dollar’s weakness against sterling had helped to subdueinflationary pressures.  
Steel and other metals prices continued to increase.  In the
construction sector the cost of building materials had32101234
2001 02 03 04 05 06Scores
ManufacturingServices
+
_Chart 2 Capacity constraintsaccelerated, with particular pressure on the prices of timber
products owing to supply constraints in Scandinavia.  Andprices of arable crops continued to rise due to low yields in theUnited Kingdom and Europe.  By contrast, the cost of fuel hadeased and sea freight charges for outbound cargo to the FarEast had fallen due to increased shipping capacity.  
Output and consumer prices  
Manufacturers’ output price inflation continued to risemodestly.  It was slightly easier for manufacturers to pass onhigher costs, including those that supplied the largersupermarkets.  But manufacturers’ profit margins continued tobe squeezed and the recovery in margins was expected to bedrawn out.  Business services inflation edged higher.  Withdemand growth outstripping supply, some professionalservices found it relatively easy to pass on higher labour coststo their clients.
Consumer goods price inflation picked up further in August.
That largely reflected higher prices of utilities and fresh food.Both were expected to increase further in the short term.Abstracting from those increases however, the Agents reportedthat there were few signs of more widespread inflationarypressure for consumer goods.  Consumer services priceinflation was little changed.   Increased capacity for some
consumer services, including insurance, hotels and leisureattractions, may have dented contacts’ ability to pass onhigher costs.  In the transport sector, bus companies hadpassed on higher fuel costs to their customers.  But regulatoryrestrictions had delayed what were anticipated to be largerthan usual increases in rail ticket prices.4 Agents’ summary of business conditions September 2006
2101234
1998 2000 02 04 062.01.51.00.50.00.51.01.52.02.5
+
_Percentage change in latest three months
compared with same period a year earlier 
+
_ONS (left-hand scale)
Agents (right-hand scale)ScoreChart 3 Manufacturers’ prices