Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2006/august-2006.pdf
Date: 2006-08-31

• Consumer spending growth was steady, at or slightly above historical average rates.  But many retailers
remained cautious about prospects for the rest of the year.
•The housing market recovery continued and optimism of house builders improved.
•Growth of exports and imports rose further. 
• Investment intentions increased.  That partly reflected manufacturers’ need to invest in energy-saving
equipment to improve cost competitiveness.
• Manufacturing production continued to pick up gradually, with a slight strengthening in domestic as well
as overseas markets.
• Construction output growth was steady.
• Professional and financial services activity remained buoyant but output growth in other business
services such as advertising weakened a little.
• Employment intentions remained slightly positive while slack in the labour market may have increased
fractionally.
• Capacity pressures rose slightly in both manufacturing and services.
•There were few signs of any general increase in pay pressure .
•Input price inflation remained high, reflecting higher prices of energy, some metals and imported goods.
•Manufacturing output price inflation also stayed high and there was further pass-through to consumer
goods prices .
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by the
Bank of England’s Agents, following discussions with around 750businesses in the period between late June 2006 and late July2006.  It provides information on the state of business conditions,from firms across all sectors of the economy.  The report does notrepresent the Bank’s own views, nor does it represent the views ofany particular firm or region.  The Bank’s Monetary PolicyCommittee uses the intelligence provided by the Agents, inconjunction with information from other sources, to assist itsunderstanding and assessment of current economic conditions. A copy of this publication can be found at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/agentssummary/index.htmThe Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, 
the East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the NorthWest, Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, the South West, Wales, the West Midlands & Oxfordshire, andYorkshire & the Humber.
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic
conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in theInflation Report , obtained from: 
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/inflationreport/index.htmAgents’ summary of business conditions
August 2006Demand
Consumption and housing  
Consumer demand growth stabilised in July, at or slightly
above historical average rates.  Demand for electrical goodsremained strong and the hotter weather stimulated sales ofsummer fashions and goods for outdoor leisure activities.  Bycontrast, contacts generally reported subdued demand for newcars and white goods.  In addition, there were further reportsof increased purchases of nearly new cars at the expense ofreduced demand for new cars, on value for money grounds.  
Looking ahead, many retailers remained cautious about
trading prospects for the rest of the year.  That reflectedperceived budgetary pressures on households due to thesqueeze on real income growth from higher energy and fuelprices, increased personal taxes and tightening creditconditions.  Some contacts were also concerned about thepossibility of interest rates being increased.   
Consumer services growth was little changed in July.  Legal and
financial services provided to consumers had benefited fromthe revival in the housing market and by more active wealthmanagement (including tax planning) by upper income groups.But leisure services — including bars, restaurants, hotels andpubs — generally reported weaker demand.  An anticipatedsurge after the World Cup in bookings of overseas holidayswith travel operators had not materialised.  That wasattributed in part to the prolonged spell of warm weather inthe United Kingdom.     
The steady recovery in housing market activity continued.
Overall, the market was viewed as having returned to normallevels of activity.  Prices rose modestly but were not expectedto accelerate, reflecting affordability problems, especially for
potential first-time buyers.  Nevertheless, demand for lower-priced housing had remained strong, and many estateagents were concerned by declining stocks of those propertiesas sales outpaced new instructions.  Some regions reportedfurther signs of revival in the buy-to-let market.  
House builders were upbeat about prospects for the rest of the
year, with increasing sales reservations, housing starts andcompletions.  Some large builders had stepped up volumes inorder to offset the loss of profits arising from a change in themix of house building towards lower priced houses wheredemand was strongest but margins were smaller.  Persistentdifficulties in securing planning permission had intensifiedcompetition between developers for new sites.  
Exports and imports  
Export growth continued to pick up with strengtheningdemand from the euro area, especially France and Germany.Buoyant sectors included defence, aerospace, health care andthe manufacture of electrical equipment used in powergeneration.  Growth in exports of goods remained strongest inemerging markets such as Eastern Europe, India and China.The service sector also benefited from growth in these regions,with for example increased demand for construction, surveyingand engineering services.  There were some reports thatexports to the Middle East were curtailed due to thedeteriorating security situation there.  
Turning to imports, the current focus on cost cutting to
alleviate the squeeze on manufacturers’ margins had given afurther fillip to overseas sourcing, at the expense of domesticoutput.  Ports cited renewed growth in imports from India andChina after a brief slowdown in Q1.  That chimed with otherreports from contacts that the Chinese economy acceleratedin Q2.  Import penetration also increased for services, forexample financial services continued to outsource back-officeand customer-service operations to India, and hauliers based inEastern Europe gained market share in the United Kingdomdue to lower costs of labour and fuel. 
Investment  
Manufacturing investment intentions strengthened a littlefurther.  To some extent, that reflected a more positive outlookfor demand, with some firms looking to increase capacity.  Butmore often contacts cited the need to reduce energy bills.Many firms were concerned that energy costs could remainhigher in the medium term, causing some to accept longerpay-back periods of up to five years on investments that savedenergy.  Service sector investment intentions also edgedhigher.  Supermarkets and other large retailers continued toinvest heavily in new floor space and warehousing, and in therefurbishment of existing premises to improvecompetitiveness.  And investment in transport infrastructure2 Agents’ summary of business conditions August 2006
20246810
2001 02 03 04 05 060.50.00.51.01.52.02.5Percentage change, three months on
same period a year earlier Score(b)
ONS (left-hand scale)Agents (right-hand scale)
+
–+
–
(a) For more information on the Agents’ scores, see Ellis, C and Pike, T (2005), 
‘Introducing the Agents’ scores’, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin , Winter, pages 424–30,
available at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/quarterlybulletin/qb050401.pdf. 
(b) A score of zero indicates that sales or turnover were unchanged in the latest three months
compared to a year earlier.  A positive (negative) score indicates sales or turnover werehigher (lower) than a year earlier.  For more information see Ellis and Pike (2005).Chart 1 Retail sales values(a)Agents’ summary of business conditions August 2006 3
rose, with ports expanding to cope with increased trade
volumes while airports and railways planned for risingpassenger numbers.
But the news on investment was not uniformly positive.  For
those firms whose margins were most under pressure fromhigher energy costs, capital expenditure was often being cutback to improve cash flow.   Existing assets were being usedmore intensively, an example being the subdued demand fornew trucks by road hauliers.  
Output
Primary production
There were concerns that the very dry weather recently wouldreduce yields of cereals and some vegetables compared with2005.  But with generally firmer prices for cattle and arablecrops, farmers’ optimism had improved a little.  The growth ofglobal supply of bio-fuels had increased demand and prices ofwheat and oil-seed rape.  But prices of sugar beet had fallensharply since the change in EU subsidy arrangements.  Theoutlook for dairy farmers remained poor owing to continuedlow milk prices.         
Manufacturing  
Manufacturing output rose further, with slightly improveddemand in domestic as well as overseas markets.  The mainsources of stronger domestic demand were the constructionand aerospace industries and users of energy-efficient capitalequipment.  Some food and drink processors also reportedimproved domestic sales, with the hot weather boostingdemand for soft drinks, prepared salads etc.    
Construction  
Construction output growth remained steady, at slightly abovenormal rates.  Growth in public sector demand remainedstrong, but had slowed, with contacts noting reduced ordersfrom the NHS.  Offsetting that, house building and privatelyfinanced infrastructure projects accelerated.     
Services  
Professional and financial services activity continued to growstrongly in July.  Banks, building societies, accountants andsolicitors all reported strong growth in activity.  That washelped by the housing market, regulatory changes in variousareas of business (including pensions, accounting standards,the environment and health and safety), growing mergers andacquisitions activity and greater demand for tax planningadvice by households.  By contrast, demand for other businessservices decelerated slightly in July.  That was partly due tocompanies’ efforts to cut costs in the face of a continuedsqueeze on their margins.  Most notably affected was thedemand for advertising.  Overall, growth in consumer serviceswas little changed.  Stronger growth in consumer demand forprofessional and financial services was offset by
weaker demand for leisure services (see above).  
Employment
Contacts’ employment intentions over the next six monthswere little changed in July.  While the rate of job loss inmanufacturing continued to slow, employment prospects inthe private services sector may have eased slightly.  Largeretailers further reduced labour usage, in part by bettermatching of the hours worked by part-time staff to their peakhours of trading.  Job creation in the public sector continueddespite redundancies in the NHS.  Overall, recruitmentdifficulties if anything had eased further.  That largely reflectedthe growing availability of lower paid workers from theaccession countries.  But skill shortages amongst professionssuch as accountants and solicitors had increased.
Capacity utilisation
Capacity pressures rose slightly.  The degree of spare capacityin manufacturing diminished further due to the increaseddemand seen in recent months.  But most businesses retainedsome flexibility to increase capacity where necessary, forexample by using agency staff during peak periods.  Capacitypressures in the services sector also picked up slightly.  Thosepressures were most pronounced for professional and financialservices, reflecting a lack of skilled staff.  
Costs and prices
Pay  
Only a relatively small number of companies were reported tohave reviewed pay over the past month.  Overall, averageearnings growth in those companies was little changed as aresult of these reviews.  Many firms, including some inprofessional services, had agreed pay rises for the majority oftheir staff in recent months that were generally around last+
–
101234
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06Consumer servicesBusiness servicesScoresChart 2 Services turnoveryear’s levels, or were lower where company performance had
deteriorated.  The growth of overtime and bonus payments insectors with skill shortages continued to increase as capacityconstraints tightened a little. 
Input prices  
Input price inflation stayed high.  In addition to the rising costof electricity, more contacts noted that steel prices hadaccelerated.  Prices of foodstuffs also increased.  That waspartly due to tighter global markets — world demand for
cereals had risen due to increased production of bio-fuels andthere had been import restrictions on beef from parts of South America.  Prices of imported manufactures continued to accelerate.  Contacts reported that inflationary pressureswere mounting in China and some had switched to Indiansuppliers.  These included importers of engineered goods andtextiles.    
Output and consumer prices  
Price inflation of manufactured goods continued to rise.  But inthe majority of cases not all of manufacturers’ higher costscould be passed on to their customers and margins remainedunder downward pressure.  Business services price inflationwas little changed.  Many companies in that sectorexperienced less impact from recent energy and fuel priceincreases on their overall costs.  
Consumer goods price inflation picked up further in July.
Strengthening demand allowed many retailers to pass on toconsumers the higher prices charged by their suppliers.  Thatincluded higher prices of fresh and processed foods.  Consumerservices price inflation was little changed.  Greater competitivepressures for budget airlines and holidays served to offset theeffects of higher energy and fuel costs.4 Agents’ summary of business conditions August 2006
1.51.00.50.00.51.01.52.02.53.0
2001 02 03 04 05 06Scores
GoodsServices
+
–Chart 3 Consumer prices for goods and services