Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2006/april-2006.pdf
Date: 2006-04-30

Bank of England
Agents’ summary of business conditions
April 2006
G Consumer spending growth fell back as retail sales decelerated.
G Activity and prices rose in the housing market . 
G Domestic manufacturing sales were broadly unchanged;  export sales accelerated, and contacts were optimistic 
about future prospects.
G Investment intentions were unchanged, implying modest increases in future investment spending.
G Growth in business services turnover was strong;  in response, employment intentions in the business services 
sector picked up.
G Overall, there was significantly more slack in the labour market than a year earlier.
G Capacity pressures remained subdued.
G There was little sign of widespread paypressure.   
G Input price inflation rose, reflecting the impact of energy prices. 
G Consumer price inflation picked up a little.
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by the Bank of England’s Agents, following discussions with over
700 businesses in the period between late February 2006 and late March 2006.  It provides information on the state ofbusiness conditions, from firms across all sectors of the economy.  The report does not represent the Bank’s own views, nordoes it represent the views of any particular firm or region.  The Bank’s Monetary Policy Committee uses the intelligenceprovided by the Agents, in conjunction with information from other sources, to assist its understanding and assessment ofcurrent economic conditions.  A copy of this publication can be found atwww.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/agentssummary/index.htm.
The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, the East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the
North West, Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, the South West, Wales, the West Midlands &Oxfordshire, and Yorkshire & the Humber.
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in the
Inflation Report , obtained from:  www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/inflationreport/index.htm.DEMAND
Consumption and housing
Consumer spending growth eased in March, reflecting a
slowing in the pace of retail sales growth (Chart 1).(1)
Electrical goods sold well, and there were some signs thatspending on carpets, furnishings and other items linkedto the housing market were beginning to pick up.  Butspending on other products was more fragile, withclothing and footwear sales particularly weak.  Somecontacts noted that the cold weather could have affectedsales, and the timing of Easter may also have had animpact on the pattern of spending.  Generally, retailersremained cautious about the outlook for this year.  As aresult, a number of contacts reported that they weretrying to maintain lower inventory levels than a year ago. 
Contacts reported that underlying car sales were weak in
March:  although there was the usual boost to sales fromthe registration plate change, spending remained weakerthan a year earlier.  Those consumers who were spendingwere very brand-specific, and there was little sign ofrecovery in the sector as a whole.
Consumer services held up rather better than retail sales,
with growth broadly unchanged.  But there were stillsigns of belt-tightening, with restaurants, pubs and clubsreporting flat or falling demand compared with last year.Spending on holidays and travel was stronger, withcontacts reporting higher spending than a year ago.
The recent revival in housing market activity was
sustained, with estate agents reporting healthy activitylevels and more interest from first-time buyers.  Theshortage of stock on the market intensified, as new
instructions were weaker than sales.  In light of this, bothadvertised and achieved selling prices were now rising inmost parts of the United Kingdom. 
Housebuilding activity remained relatively subdued,
although the recent revival in the residential market hadspurred on builders to start work on a larger number ofnew sites.  The main hindrance faced by housebuilderswas getting planning approval, but several contactsnoted that the requirement for a large amount of‘affordable’ or social housing in most new developmentswas also acting as a disincentive.
Exports and imports
Export growth picked up in March, and contacts weregenerally more optimistic about the outlook for sales.Demand from the Middle East and Asia was increasingrapidly, although these markets were still relatively small,and euro-area demand was also reviving.  Export sales ofhigh-tech capital and consumer goods rose at a fast rate.
During February and March, the Agents carried out a
survey of their contacts regarding the prospects forexports.  The survey covered around 150 companies witha total export turnover of over £20 billion.  The resultsfrom the survey suggested that contacts expected exportsales over the next six months to pick up compared withthe previous six months.  Respondents were alsooptimistic about the outlook for exports over the nexttwo to three years to a range of markets including thenew EU member states and Asia (Chart 2).  Productinnovation and world demand were the strongest factors
April 2006(1) For more information on the Agents’ scores, see Ellis, C and Pike, T (2005), ‘Introducing the Agents’ scores’, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin , Winter, pages 424–30,
available at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/quarterlybulletin/qb050401.pdf. 20246810
2001 02 03 04 05 060.50.00.51.01.52.02.5Percentage change, three months on
same period a year earlierScore(a)
ONS (left-hand scale)Agents (right-hand scale)
+
–+
–Chart 1
Retail sales(a)
Chart 2Prospects for export sales over the next two to three years
(a)
(a) Net balances of firms reporting that the prospects for export sales to different 
regions were favourable.  Within sectors individual responses have been weighted by export turnover, and sectoral totals have been weighted by ONS export shares.01020304050
Euro area New EU
membersUnited States Asia Rest of the
worldPercentage net balances(a) A score of zero indicates that sales or turnover were unchanged in the latest three 
months compared to a year earlier.  A positive (negative) score indicates sales or turnover were higher (lower) than a year earlier.  For more information see Ellis and Pike (2005).AGENTS’ SUMMARY OF BUSINESS CONDITIONSboosting export sales, together with UK companies
exploiting new export markets.  
Import growth was steadier, with materials, intermediate
and consumer goods increasingly being sourced fromabroad.  If anything, this process may have acceleratedas firms sought to reduce costs following recent energyprice rises.  However, this was partly offset by retailerstending to hold lower levels of stock.
Investment  
Overall, companies’ investment plans were broadlyunchanged.  As in previous months, the manufacturingsector was reducing investment spending in the UnitedKingdom.  Those companies that were experiencingstrong demand were generally investing in extra capacityabroad.  The service sector continued to increaseinvestment spending at a relatively modest rate, andspending was concentrated in information,communications and technology.  Generally, contactswere focusing on reducing costs rather than expandingcapacity.  There were also reports of companies cuttingback on their investment spending in order to reducepension fund deficits.
OUTPUT
Primary production
Many farmers in England and Wales had still to receivetheir Single Farm Payments.  More generally, confidencewas low and the long-term prospect was for agriculturaloutput to fall, as selling prices were generally lower thanproduction costs.  Electricity generators weremaximising output from coal-fired stations due to thesignificant price advantage over gas, but coal productionitself remained in long-term decline. 
Manufacturing
The two-speed nature of manufacturing outputcontinued, with domestic sales broadly unchangedcompared to last year, and exports accelerating in theface of increased demand (see earlier).  Demand wasstrongest in the aerospace, engineering and chemicalsectors, and more generally for producers of high-techgoods.  The recent high gas prices were affecting firms,but so far only a small number of contacts had cutoutput in response.
Construction
Construction output grew steadily, with some signs of alift in demand.  Government-sponsored projects werethe main source of growth.  And although demand frominvestors in commercial property was still stronger than
occupational demand from companies, the recent pickupin commercial construction and infrastructure workgathered pace.  Housebuilding activity also improvedfollowing the strengthening in the residential market.   
Services  
Business services turnover rose strongly, particularly inprofessional and financial services.  IT services reportedrobust demand, with ongoing regulatory requirementsboosting activity in the accounting and consultancysectors.  Growth in financial services turnover wasstrong, with buoyant mergers and acquisitions activity.Turnover for other business services such as conferenceservices and logistics also grew steadily, albeit at a moresubdued pace than professional services.  Generally,contacts in the business services sector were optimisticabout the outlook for growth in 2006.  Growth in theconsumer services sector was weaker than for businessservices, continuing the trend in recent years (Chart 3).
EMPLOYMENT  
While the manufacturing sector continued to lay offstaff, and consumer services contacts expected broadlyunchanged staffing levels over the next six months,employment intentions in the business services sectorpicked up in the face of strong demand from theircustomers.  Skill shortages were most prominent inprofessional and financial services, where some firmswere running at full capacity.  Elsewhere skill shortageswere less pronounced, and more generally the labourmarket was significantly slacker than a year earlier.Where contacts were recruiting, they were often doingso from overseas, notably Eastern Europe.  This hadhelped to ease skill shortages, for example in theconstruction sector, in recent months.Chart 3Services turnover
101234
2001 02 03 04 05 06Consumer services Business servicesScores(a)
+
–
(a) See footnote to Chart 1.CAPACITY UTILISATION
Capacity pressures were broadly unchanged in March.
There was spare capacity in most sectors, with the mainexception being professional and financial services.  
COSTS AND PRICES
Pay  
A significant proportion of private sector pay settlementsfor 2006 were now finalised, and were broadly similar tothose seen in the previous year.  There was scantevidence of widespread upward pressure on pay, apartfrom occupations with particular skill shortages.  Somecontacts reported increased employee nervousnessabout job security, which had made them more willing toaccept modest pay rises or even freezes.  Funding finalsalary pension schemes was a major concern for manycontacts, resulting in the cost of labour increasing at afaster rate than pay awards alone would suggest.
Input prices  
Input price inflation remained high, reflecting both therecent surge in gas prices but also the rising cost ofenergy intensive materials such as plastics andpetrochemicals.  Many contacts had long-term 
fixed-price contracts, which meant that the impact ofhigher energy prices was only slowly trickling down tocompanies, and the full pass-through from energy costsmay not yet have been felt.  The cost of importedcomponents was also rising, having fallen in previousyears.  However, there were signs that insurance costsmay be stabilising.
Output and consumer prices  
Manufacturing output price inflation edged higher, asmore contacts posted price increases in an effort torecoup rises in their input costs.  The lack of pricingpower meant that companies were generally unable topass on the full cost increase, and were having to acceptlower margins while they looked for other costreductions and efficiency savings.
There were also tentative signs that the rises in output
prices were starting to feed through into retail goodsprices.  But the extent of the pass-through was small,with overcapacity in the retail sector acting as arestraint.  Services price inflation was broadly steady;some leisure companies passed on cost increases in timefor the new tourist season.   
April 2006