Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2006/november-2006.pdf
Date: 2006-11-30

•Consumer spending growth was steady;  sales of household durable goods picked up, but car sales
weakened.
•Activity in the housing market was little changed.
•Export sales accelerated yet again;  import growth remained strong.
•Investment intentions rose to their highest level for 18 months.
•Manufacturing output accelerated, as domestic demand strengthened.
•Construction output grew strongly.
•Service sector activity accelerated;  professional and financial services were particularly strong.
•The labour market tightened a little, but there was still a degree of slack overall.
•Capacity pressures increased;  pressures in the service sector were the highest for five years.
•There was little evidence of higher paysettlements, but contacts were cautious about the upcoming pay
round.
•Input price inflation eased a little, reflecting lower energy prices.
•Consumer price inflation was broadly unchanged.
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by
the Bank of England’s Agents, following discussions with over1,000 businesses in the period between late September and lateOctober 2006.  It provides information on the state of businessconditions, from firms across all sectors of the economy.  Thereport does not represent the Bank’s own views, nor does itrepresent the views of any particular firm or region.  The Bank’sMonetary Policy Committee uses the intelligence provided by theAgents, in conjunction with information from other sources, toassist its understanding and assessment of current economicconditions.  A copy of this publication can be found at:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/agentssummary/index.htm.The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, the
East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the North West,Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, theSouth West, Wales, the West Midlands & Oxfordshire, andYorkshire & the Humber.
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic
conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in theInflation Report, obtained from:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/inflationreport/index.htm.Agents’ summary of business conditions
November 2006Demand
Consumption
Overall, consumer demand growth was steady in October.
Retail sales growth picked up slightly, driven by strong sales ofitems such as high-specification televisions and otheraudio-visual products.  There were also reports that demandfor some other durable goods was rising.  Sales of low-valueitems were robust, with the main weakness again centred in‘middle market’ clothing, continuing the polarisation ofspending seen during this year.  Overall, confidence amongretailers probably improved over the month, with some reportsof strong early sales of seasonal items.
In contrast, private demand for new cars showed no sign of
picking up, with some exceptions among high-value models.The seasonal boost from the new registration plate inSeptember had been weaker than last year, and most motortraders were downbeat about the prospects for sales of newcars.
Consumer services growth was broadly unchanged in October.
The recent strength of domestic tourism continued, and therewere also signs that foreign visitor numbers were picking up.But pubs, clubs and restaurants continued to report weakeningdemand, particularly those serving young and low-incomecustomer groups.
Housing
Activity in the housing market was little changed.  Whileestate agents have enjoyed the usual seasonal pickup inactivity following the summer lull, underlying demand in someregions softened.  Despite this, the market remains relativelytight, particularly for less expensive properties, whereshortages of homes for sale abound.  However, this tightnesswas only having a limited upward impact on selling prices, withmany contacts reporting modest house price inflation.
House builders were enjoying steady demand for new homes,
particularly for lower-cost units;  these were frequently boughtoff-plan, before the homes had actually been built.  Moregenerally demand remained steady, although the use ofincentives to sell completed new housing stock was stillwidespread.
Exports and imports
Export sales accelerated in October, continuing to underpinthe improvement in manufacturing output.  Once again,strong growth was seen across the Agency network.  Demandfrom Europe continued to improve, and exports to the Far Eastremained strong.  Despite some concerns among contactsabout the outlook for the US economy, the impact on UKexports had so far been minimal.Despite steady consumption growth, there were some reports
that stocking by retailers for the pre-Christmas period was stillfairly cautious, exacerbating the recent weakness of consumerimports.  However, imports of raw materials and intermediategoods continued apace, and contacts were extending theout-sourcing of services activities abroad, such as IT andback-office work.
Investment
Investment intentions rose in October, reaching their highestlevels for 18 months (
Chart 1 ).  Many companies were
continuing to invest in energy-efficiency projects, given thehigh level of energy prices.  But there was also more focus onexpanding capacity in the face of strong demand.  In particular,while many manufacturing companies were locating newcapacity abroad, an increasing number were also investing innew equipment or extending facilities for their UK operations.Professional services firms were investing heavily in IT inresponse to capacity constraints (skill shortages), in anattempt to raise output per worker.  Retailers were alsoinvesting in new and refurbished premises, and several hotelchains were expecting to invest significantly more over thenext year than they have over the past year.
Output
Manufacturing
Manufacturing production picked up in the face of strongdemand, reflecting an acceleration in both exports (see above)and production for the domestic market ( Chart 2 ).  High-tech
and niche manufacturers were performing the strongest, withproducers of more commoditised items increasingly focusingon assembly of parts sourced overseas, rather than producingthose items themselves.2 Agents’ summary of business conditions November 2006
2101234
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06Scores(a)
Services
Manufacturing+
–
(a) A score of zero indicates that investment over the next twelve months was expected to be
unchanged, compared with the past twelve months.  A positive (negative) score indicatesthat investment was expected to be higher (lower) than a year earlier.  For more informationsee Ellis, C and Pike, T (2005), ‘Introducing the Agents’ scores’, Bank of England Quarterly
Bulletin , Winter, pages 424–30.Chart 1 Investment intentionsAgents’ summary of business conditions November 2006 3
Construction
The expansion in construction output continued.  Public sector
spending was a key driver of output growth, with furthereducation work and an increasing emphasis on infrastructuredevelopment helping to buoy order books.  Private sectordemand was also strong across a variety of work, including civilengineering, retail, city offices and utilities.
Services
Professional and financial services activity accelerated inOctober, continuing the very strong expansion seen in recentmonths.  Demand was very high for taxation, regulatory andinvestment advice, corporate banking and commercialproperty activities.  The strength of demand growth in thesesectors was also spilling over into other service sectors, wheredemand also rose.  Business demand for hotels wasstrengthening, as was corporate demand for outsourcing ofback-office work and infrastructure management.  However,some areas of weakness remained, notably traditionaladvertising:  spending budgets were still tight, and the shift tointernet-advertising continued.  And performance was mixedin other sectors, such as wholesaling and haulage.  Consumerservices growth was broadly unchanged (see earlier).
Employment
Contacts’ intentions for employment growth over the nextsix months were broadly unchanged.  Employment inmanufacturing was expected to remain broadly stable, whileconsumer services companies expected a modest increase inheadcount.  The strongest demand was again from businessservices firms, where a lack of skilled labour was the maincapacity constraint many contacts were facing.  Perhapsreflecting this, the use of migrant labour remained widespread,and there were further reports of migrants filling higher-skilledroles.  The supply of labour at the lower end of the market wasstill generally sufficient to meet demand.  However, there were
some signs that skill shortages at the higher end of the marketmay have intensified, particularly in business services.  So, onbalance, the degree of slack in the labour market may havediminished a little.
Capacity utilisation
Capacity utilisation increased further.  This was particularlytrue in the service sector, where pressures were the highest forfive years.  A lack of skilled staff in the business services sectorwas the primary constraint, and contacts were increasinglylooking to migrants to fill specific skill shortages.  As a result ofthese constraints, companies were more selective about thework they undertook, and were prepared to outsource activitywhere necessary.  However, the impact of these capacityconstraints on the selling prices of business services was stillfairly subdued (see later).  In the manufacturing sector,capacity pressures picked up a little, reflecting the pickup indemand growth.
Costs and prices
Pay
As yet, there was no widespread evidence of large payincreases:  most settlements remained around the 3% mark.There were exceptions, notably in financial services, where skillshortages and strong profitability were leading to high payincreases.  More generally, contacts were cautious about theupcoming pay round, citing the pickup in RPI inflation and therecent increase in the National Minimum Wage, which hadnarrowed pay differentials at the lower end of the wagedistribution.  However, while negotiations were expected to betougher this year than last year, many contacts were still undermargin pressure and employees were aware of that.
Input prices
Input price inflation eased again in October.  While the pricesof material inputs were still higher than a year ago, the recentfall in energy prices was relieving part of the pressure oncontacts’ margins.  However, many companies were tied intofixed-term contracts, rather than buying energy on the spotmarket.  So, just as the full impact of the rises in energy priceshad taken time to appear, the recent decline in prices wouldnot be fully passed on to companies for some time.  Similarly,the prices of energy-related inputs, such as plastics andchemicals, were lagging the decline in oil prices.  The prices ofimported finished goods continued to rise, although at a moremodest pace than other input costs.
Output and consumer prices
Manufacturing output price inflation crept up again inOctober, as the recent buoyancy in demand made it easier forcompanies to pass on more of their increased input costs to432101234
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06ExportDomesticScores(a)
+
–
(a) A score of zero indicates that output over the past three months was unchanged compared
with the same period a year earlier.  A positive (negative) score indicates that output washigher (lower) than a year earlier.Chart 2 Manufacturing outputcustomers.  However, in most instances contacts had still only
passed on a limited proportion of the increase in costs inhigher prices.
Although the pressure on capacity in the business services
sector had been both prolonged and increasing over the pastyear, the rise in business to business service price inflation hadbeen relatively modest ( Chart 3 ).  In part, that reflected
companies ‘flexing’ capacity, where it was possible to do so.Contacts also reported that other factors had affected pricesetting, including longer-term considerations, rather than justcurrent capacity pressures.
Consumer price inflation was broadly unchanged in October,
with little sign of widespread inflationary pressure.  Higherenergy prices continued to boost headline inflation althoughpetrol prices had fallen back recently.4 Agents’ summary of business conditions November 2006
0.00.51.01.52.02.53.0
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5
Total service sector capacity constraint score (twelve-month lead)(c) Business-to-business services prices score(b) 
(a) Between January 2005 and October 2006.
(b) A score of zero indicates that prices over the past three months were unchanged compared
with the same period a year earlier.  A positive (negative) score indicates that prices washigher (lower) than a year earlier.
(c) Constraints over the next six months.  Before January 2005, this score reflected companies’
current situation, rather than being forward-looking.Chart 3 Capacity pressure and business services
inflation(a)