Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2006/december-2006.pdf
Date: 2006-12-31

•Consumer spending growth increased;  sales of household durable goods picked up further and car sales
improved a little. 
•Activity in the housing market was unchanged.
•Export growth slowed a little, mostly reflecting the weaker US housing market. 
•Investment intentions continued to strengthen.
•Manufacturing output growth stabilised.  
•Construction output continued to grow strongly.
•Service sector activity accelerated again;  growth of consumer and other business services output was
slightly firmer.
•Firms’ employment intentions rose, but their current recruitment difficulties remained less than normal.
•Capacity pressures intensified a little.
•Pay growth rose slightly due to increased wage drift. 
•Input price inflation was steady.  Higher prices of some metals and foodstuffs offset lower oil prices.
•Consumer price inflation was unchanged.
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by
the Bank of England’s Agents, following discussions with around700 businesses in the period between late October and lateNovember 2006.  It provides information on the state of businessconditions, from firms across all sectors of the economy.  Thereport does not represent the Bank’s own views, nor does itrepresent the views of any particular firm or region.  The Bank’sMonetary Policy Committee uses the intelligence provided by theAgents, in conjunction with information from other sources, toassist its understanding and assessment of current economicconditions.  A copy of this publication can be found at:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/agentssummary/index.htm.The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, the
East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the North West,Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, theSouth West, Wales, the West Midlands & Oxfordshire, andYorkshire & the Humber.
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic
conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in theInflation Report, obtained from:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/inflationreport/index.htm.Agents’ summary of business conditions
December 2006Demand
Consumption and housing
Consumer demand growth increased a little in November
(Chart 1 ).  Retailers reported higher-than-anticipated demand
in the past month and improved confidence in the short-termoutlook.  But some of those reports predated the Novemberrise in interest rates and many retailers remained cautiousregarding prospects for sales after Christmas, partly onaccount of the two recent rate increases.  Also, some thoughtthat the seasonal pattern of demand may have changed, withconsumers more willing to spend during the Christmas periodbut then expected to retrench more than usual in January and February.  Spending on bigger-ticket items such asfurniture and white goods continued to pick up and sales ofhigh-tech electrical goods remained strong.  There was afurther substantial gain in the market share of internetretailers.  
There were tentative signs that private new car sales had
improved a little, possibly stimulated by greater than normalprice discounts.  Sales of high-volume brands were slightlyhigher than a year ago:  increased motoring costs hadencouraged buyers to purchase cheaper, more fuel-efficientmodels.  
Consumer services growth also picked up a little in November,
largely reflecting firmer growth in leisure spending.  Up-markethotels reported stronger demand for weekend breaks,passenger numbers using low-cost airlines continued to growrapidly and overseas visitor numbers accelerated.  But therewere further reports of weakening demand from pubs, clubsand restaurants, particularly those serving young and otherlow-income groups. Overall, the secondary housing market was fairly steady, with
transactions generally reported to be around their historicalaverage level and house price inflation was stable.  A fewAgencies reported a slightly softer market compared with last month, with a lower level of enquiries.  But most estateagents judged this to be erratic and few believed that theoutlook for the housing market had weakened.  The top end ofthe market had strengthened noticeably in London and,especially for properties with land, some parts of southernEngland.     
House builders reported a steady level of demand.  There was
continued strong growth in sales of lower-priced new housing,but discounting and the use of part exchange remainednecessary to stimulate demand for mid-priced and higher-priced properties.  
Developments in the buy-to-let market mirrored those of the
wider housing market.  In most regions, investor demand was alittle weaker, especially for new apartments.  Also there weresome signs of greater investor distress, including increasedrepossessions.  By contrast, the buy-to-let market hadstrengthened in London and Northern Ireland, partly due toincreased activity by overseas investors.  The lettings marketremained brisk, partly reflecting demand from a growingnumber of migrant workers.  Also, many potential first-timebuyers preferred to rent on account of the high level of house prices and mortgage payments in relation to theirearnings.     
Exports and imports  
Export growth eased slightly in November.  The slowdown inthe US housing market had started to affect UK exporters ofconstruction materials and equipment.  Otherwise the USmarket remained robust, though exporters’ margins werereduced by the dollar’s depreciation.  Euro-area salescontinued to recover, with German industrial demandparticularly strong.  Russia was increasingly cited as asignificant market for UK luxury consumer goods.  Turning toimports, growing difficulties in securing ships and UK portstorage facilities, particularly in the run up to Christmas, hadforced some importers to bring forward the timing ofpurchases earlier in the year.  
Investment  
Investment intentions strengthened further in November,principally in the service sector ( Chart 2 ).  In manufacturing,
there were more reports of increased investment to meetdomestic capacity pressures.  Even so, most capital spendingremained directed at reducing costs and to meet regulatoryrequirements.  In the service sector, retailers continued toinvest in new floor space;  air and sea ports were expandingcapacity to meet increased commercial and leisure traffic;  andinvestment by utility and telecommunication companies in2 Agents’ summary of business conditions December 2006
0.50.00.51.01.52.02.5
2001 02 03 04 05 06Scores(a)
Retail sales valuesConsumer services
turnover
+
_Chart 1 Annual growth of retail sales and consumer
services turnover
(a) A score of zero indicates that retail sales and consumer services turnover over the next twelve
months was expected to be unchanged, compared with the past twelve months.  A positive(negative) score indicates that retail sales and consumer services turnover was expected to behigher (lower) than a year earlier.  For more information see Ellis, C and Pike, T (2005),‘Introducing the Agents’ scores’, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin , Winter, pages 424–30.Agents’ summary of business conditions December 2006 3
infrastructure projects remained at high levels.  Lastly, very
strong growth in the professional and financial services sector,coupled with increasing skill shortages, continued to stimulateIT investment in order to free up the chargeable hours ofcompanies’ fee earners.  
Output
Primary production  The dairy sector continued to face significant margin pressure.That, together with an increase in agricultural land prices, hadresulted in a large number of farm sales and furtherconsolidation in the sector.  Although grain prices hadincreased sharply in recent months, many farmers had alreadysold forward at least a proportion of their 2006 harvests atlower prices.  And the price of feed had increased for farmers ofpoultry etc.
Manufacturing  
Production growth stabilised.  While domestic demand growthcontinued to strengthen, that was offset by a slightdeceleration in exports.  Nevertheless, growth in exportsremained comfortably above that in domestic markets.Demand was strongest for companies with links to theconstruction, defence, aerospace, pharmaceuticals and oil andgas sectors.  
Construction  
Construction output continued to grow strongly.  A fewAgencies reported tentative signs of a slight slowing, mostlyarising from delays to some public programmes.  But growth inprivate sector demand, especially for utilities infrastructure,remained robust.  Looking forward, business confidenceremained at a high level.  Order books were strong and firmsnoted that expenditure stemming from the 2012 Olympicswould start to have a significant impact on constructionactivity over the next year or so.Services  
In November, output growth in the professional and financialservices sector was broadly unchanged, remaining at a highrate.  The main drivers of demand remained compliance with awide range of Government regulations, corporateconsolidation — reflected in a high level of mergers andacquisitions activity — and commercial and personal taxplanning.  Public sector demand for professional servicescontinued to grow strongly, for example some primary caretrusts had sought help with resolving their budget deficits.  Inthe commercial property market, investor demand remainedbuoyant but occupancy rates increased only modestly.  Rentalgrowth was subdued.  According to some contacts, yields haddeclined too far and the growth of property prices was likely toslow.      
Other business services activity accelerated a little in the past
month, though growth remained much more muted than inthe professional and financial sector.  The slight improvementreflected growing demand in areas such as recruitment,transport (passenger and freight) and telecommunications.Advertising spend recovered somewhat from a period ofsluggish growth, though spending was increasingly beingredirected from traditional media to the internet, and totransmission via mobile phones.  Consumer services growthwas slightly firmer (see earlier).
Employment  
Firms’ employment intentions over the next six months roseslightly.  Overall, recruitment difficulties were little changedand remained significantly less than normal.      
Manufacturing employment was expected to remain broadly
stable and the employment intentions of companies in theconsumer services sector increased a little.  The strongestdemand remained from business services firms, whose skillshortages continued to increase.  By contrast, the amount ofslack in the market for lower-skilled workers rose slightly.  Forexample, retailers generally reported fewer difficultiescompared with last year in meeting their demand fortemporary staff at Christmas.  In addition to an increasedsupply of migrant labour, there were some reports that thelatest increase in the national minimum wage had dampenedlabour demand.  
In November, the Agents carried out a survey of their contacts
regarding the use of migrant labour.  The survey — whosequestions largely replicated those in an earlier survey carriedout in November 2005 — covered over 200 companies with atotal workforce of about 300,000.  Overall, firms hademployed a larger number of migrant workers in the pasttwelve months and were anticipating a further increase in theiruse over the next twelve months, perhaps to a slightly greaterextent than over the past year.  The hospitality and agriculturalsectors continued to have the highest proportion of migrant
2101234
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06Scores(a)
Services
Manufacturing+
_
(a) See footnote to Chart 1 .Chart 2 Investment intentionsworkers in their workforces, but there was a greater use of
migrants compared with last year’s survey by firms in thebusiness services sector.  Respondents continued to report thatthe main reasons for employing foreign workers were thescarcity of local workers and migrants’ willingness to takehard-to-fill jobs ( Chart 3 ).  The proportion of firms employing
foreign workers because of their greater productivity hadincreased in the latest survey, but nonetheless remained quitesmall at just over 10%.          
Capacity utilisation  
Capacity pressures intensified a little.  In manufacturing, morebusinesses were working at, or close to, full capacity and somehad introduced additional shifts and overtime working.  Evenso, most were reluctant to install new capacity without firmerevidence that recent strong demand growth would persist.  Inbusiness services, more firms were turning away less-profitablework owing to skill shortages.  But companies were also moreadept at flexing capacity to relieve supply bottlenecks, forexample by flying in temporary staff from overseas, locatingmore low-value functions offshore and investing in IT to raiseefficiency (see above).  
Costs and prices
Pay Pay settlements were broadly stable.  Growing skill shortageshad some upward effect on wage drift and there was anacceleration in the gap between the pay of lower and higher-skilled employees.  Employers of professional staffreported increased poaching and staff turnover, and many hadoffered large pay increases to retain key personnel.  Lookingahead, employers expected pay settlements next year wouldbe similar to, or slightly higher than, those in 2006, mostly
depending on trends in profitability.   
Input prices  
Input price inflation was steady in November ( Chart 4 ).  Lower
oil prices had started to feed through to a reduced cost ofsome energy-intensive products such as ethylene.  By contrast,the prices of grain and some metals had risen, and furtherincreases were expected soon for materials such as timber andpaper due to global supply and demand imbalances.  Thedollar’s recent depreciation had contributed to a slightdeceleration in prices of imported finished goods. 
Output and consumer prices  
Manufacturing output price inflation crept up again inNovember, as firms looked to rebuild margins.  Consumer priceinflation was broadly unchanged.  There was some accelerationin the prices of consumer services, including hotel room rates.Goods price inflation eased slightly, partly reflecting lowerpetrol prices.  And there were some reports that pricediscounts had been greater than usual recently to stimulatenew car sales.  By contrast, food price inflation continued toincrease.  4 Agents’ summary of business conditions December 2006
01020304050
Scarcity of
skilled local
workersWilling to
take hard-to
-ﬁll unskilled
jobsCheaper than
local workersMore
productive
than localOther2005
2006
Per cent
workers
(a) The responses reflect firms’ primary motivation only for employing non-UK nationals.Chart 3 Reasons why companies employ non-UK
nationals(a) 
10505101520
1999 2000 01 02 03 04 05 0632101234Percentage change, three months on
same period a year earlier Score(a)
ONS (left-hand scale)Agents (right-hand scale)
+
_+
_Chart 4 Input price inflation
(a) See footnote to Chart 1 .