Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2006/october-2006.pdf
Date: 2006-10-31

•Consumer spending growth was steady.
•The housing market recovery continued.  Supply rose to match demand and house price inflation
stabilised. 
•Export growth continued to strengthen modestly.
•Investment intentions rose a little further.
•Manufacturing production growth increased, with a marked pickup evident in domestic demand.
•Construction output growth also ticked up.
•Service sector output growth was steady.
•Employment intentions rose and skill shortages intensified.
•Capacity pressures rose slightly.
•Pay pressures were generally little changed, but were expected to grow next year.  
•Input price inflation eased back, reflecting lower prices of oil and some metals.
•Manufacturing output price inflation was steady.  Consumer price inflation eased slightly.
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by the
Bank of England’s Agents, following discussions with over 700businesses in the period between late August 2006 and lateSeptember 2006.  It provides information on the state of businessconditions, from firms across all sectors of the economy.  Thereport does not represent the Bank’s own views, nor does itrepresent the views of any particular firm or region.  The Bank’sMonetary Policy Committee uses the intelligence provided by theAgents, in conjunction with information from other sources, toassist its understanding and assessment of current economicconditions.  A copy of this publication can be found at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/agentssummary/index.htmThe Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, 
the East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the NorthWest, Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, the South West, Wales, the West Midlands & Oxfordshire, andYorkshire & the Humber.
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic
conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in theInflation Report , obtained from: 
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/inflationreport/index.htmAgents’ summary of business conditions
October 2006Demand
Consumption and housing  
Overall, the annual growth rate of consumer demand in
September was little changed compared with the previousmonth.  Retail sales accelerated slightly.  But new car saleswere lower than a year earlier and growth of consumerspending on services eased a little.  
Spending on durable goods (other than cars) continued to
strengthen slightly.  There was a modest pickup in demand forhousing-related goods such as furniture, and sustained stronggrowth in sales of high-tech electronics including flat-screenTVs.  The squeeze on household discretionary spending hadbenefited discount, ‘value’ retailers, dealers of used and nearly-new cars, and internet retailers which continued to gainmarket share.  Up-market retailers also reported relativelystrong demand growth.  That chimed with new car sales inSeptember.  Total new car sales were reported to be down on ayear ago.  But sales of prestige marques had held up ratherbetter.  Looking ahead, some retailers were apprehensiveabout prospects between now and Christmas and had cut backon stocks.     
Reports of consumer demand for services were marginally
weaker compared with the previous month, with reducedgrowth of spending on leisure activities, including restaurantsand gaming.  Travel operators and airports also reportedweaker than expected demand.  But that at least partlyreflected the continued impact of the security alert on 10 August, and was mostly offset by a sizable boost to thedomestic tourism industry.  Legal and financial servicescontinued to benefit from the strengthening housing market,though there was a further slowdown in the demand forunsecured credit.       The housing market continued to strengthen.  Most Agencies
reported further increases in demand.  That was despite apersistent shortage of first-time buyers and a slight slowdownin investor demand in the buy-to-let market.  But an increasednumber of estate agents had also noted a pickup in newinstructions.  House price inflation stopped rising.  By contrast,in a few regions — most notably Northern Ireland andScotland — the shortage of supply remained acute.  InNorthern Ireland, investor demand was particularly buoyantand annual house price inflation remained at around 25%.   
House builders remained confident about demand prospects.
Rising demand, especially for low to mid-priced properties, hadreduced stocks of unsold new houses and some contacts weremore willing to build speculatively to replenish stocks.    
Exports and imports  
Exports accelerated a little further.  Some Agencies noted aslight slowdown in US demand.  But that was counterbalancedby a pickup in sales to the euro area, especially France andGermany.  The strongest demand remained for capital goodsand construction materials, partly based on the surge in globalcapital expenditure in the oil, gas and mining industries.Exports of luxury consumer goods had also picked up.  Overall,growth of imports continued to match or exceed that ofexports.  That mostly reflected an acceleration in imports ofconsumer goods and manufactured components, especiallyfrom countries that priced in dollars.     
Investment  
Investment intentions continued a steady revival.  A moreoptimistic mood among manufacturers was reflected in theirplans to raise the amount of capital spending in the yearahead.  In some industries, most notably aerospace, highercapital spending was planned to address growing capacityconstraints.  But, more often, investment was focused onimproving productivity and reducing energy consumption, inorder to raise cost competitiveness.  In the service sector, thepickup in investment intentions remained more modest.  Thegrowth in corporate demand for new office space, warehousingand retail premises had been steady.  In the wholesale andretail sector, national chains continued to open new stores asthey sought to gain market share from independent retailers.By contrast, investment had been cut back by some HighStreet pub chains, bars and restaurants that mostly targetedyounger adults.  
Output
Primary production
North Sea oil and gas production continued to decline.Output was being constrained by acute shortages of skilledstaff and equipment, especially rigs, which were often beingassigned to projects in other parts of the world.        2 Agents’ summary of business conditions October 2006
20246810
2001 02 03 04 05 060.500.000.501.001.502.002.50Percentage change, three months on
same period a year earlier Score(b)
ONS (left-hand scale)Agents (right-hand scale)
+ +
_ _
(a) For more information on the Agents’ scores, see Ellis, C and Pike, T (2005), 
‘Introducing the Agents’ scores’, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin , Winter, pages 424–30,
available at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/quarterlybulletin/qb050401.pdf. 
(b) A score of zero indicates that sales or turnover were unchanged in the latest three months
compared to a year earlier.  A positive (negative) score indicates sales or turnover werehigher (lower) than a year earlier.  For more information see Ellis and Pike (2005).Chart 1 Retail sales values(a)Agents’ summary of business conditions October 2006 3
Manufacturing  
Manufacturing output growth rose further.  Activity was
buoyed by a marked pickup in domestic demand andcontinued solid growth in exports.  Some manufacturersreported that legislative changes had stimulated domesticdemand.  For example, demand for new trucks had increasedahead of new EU emissions controls in October.  And somefirms had accumulated stocks of steel, and manufactures witha high steel content, in anticipation of further steel priceincreases.  
Construction  
Construction output continued its steady acceleration sincethe start of the year.  Large contractors continued to report fullorder books from public sector projects.  In the private sector,utilities companies reported increased spending on electricitytransmission, water and sewerage infrastructure and nucleardecommissioning work.  There was also continued steadygrowth in the construction of shopping centres and city centreoffices.  
Services  
Output growth in the service sector was steady in September.Professional and financial services activity continued toaccelerate slightly.  That was offset by a slight easing in growthof consumer services (see above).
Accountants noted that compliance work emanating from
Sarbanes Oxley legislation in the United States had probablypeaked, but that corporate mergers and acquisitions activityhad become stronger.  Lawyers reported an increase inproperty-related activity.  Generally, the pipeline of work forcontacts in professional and financial services suggested thatactivity would remain strong at least until the new year.  Inother business services such as advertising and promotion andcorporate hospitality, growth remained subdued.  The squeezeon corporate margins continued to limit clients’ discretionaryspending on those services.  And some consultancy firms hadseen less work commissioned from local authorities.  Bycontrast, there was stronger demand for telecommunicationsservices, partly reflecting greater take-up of technologicalinnovations such as broadband and voice over internetprotocol (VOIP).
Employment  
Contacts’ employment intentions over the next six monthsrose further in September.  That appeared to reflect growingbusiness confidence in the economic outlook.  Recruitmentdifficulties also increased.  While there remained some slack in the market for unskilled workers, many firms reported that it had become more difficult to find skilled and semi-skilled staff to fill vacancies across a broad range ofoccupations.  Capacity utilisation  
Capacity utilisation increased slightly, although apart fromprofessional and financial services, most firms continued tohave an adequate amount of capacity so that growth was notyet being constrained.  Where skill shortages were a constrainton activity, some firms were able to find short-term solutionsby increased use of agency and temporary staff or byoutsourcing and offshoring work.  
Costs and prices
Pay  
Pay settlements remained at around 3% and overall wageinflation was stable in most sectors.  Industries with relativelyhigh earnings levels tended to report increased pay pressure,reflecting growing problems in recruiting and retaining staff.  Inindustries where pay levels were relatively low, such as retail,some contacts were concerned that the 5.9% increase in theNational Minimum Wage on 1 October would add to labourcosts at a time when their margins were already tight.  Lookingahead, some employers expected to concede larger payincreases in 2007, mostly reflecting their firms’ currentprofitable trading and a tightening labour market.  That wasespecially the case in financial services.
Input prices  
Input price inflation eased, mostly reflecting significantly lowerprices of oil, gas and some metals.  Lower oil prices had startedto feed through into lower prices of plastics and basicchemicals.  But many firms purchased utilities at fixed priceson annual contracts and had yet to benefit from lowerwholesale gas prices.  Overall, costs of imported finishedgoods continued to accelerate moderately, though inflationarypressures were ameliorated by the weaker dollar.  There weremore reports of increased inflationary pressure in low-costeconomies, including China. 
10505101520
1999 2000 01 02 03 04 05 0632101234Percentage change, three months on
same period a year earlier Score
ONS (left-hand scale)Agents (right-hand scale)
+
_+
_Chart 2 Input costsOutput prices  
Manufacturers’ output price inflation was little changed in
September.  A growing number of manufacturers reported thatthey were able to raise prices, though typically still notsufficiently to maintain margins.  In many cases, thoseincreases were confined to covering higher costs of materials— for which the rate of price inflation had eased recently (seeabove).     
Agents’ price-setting survey
During August and September the Agencies carried out asurvey of their contacts regarding price setting.  The surveycovered around 300 companies with a total turnover of about£45 billion.  Overall, contacts reported that they reviewed andchanged prices quite often, with about half changing prices atleast five times a year.  But the frequency of price changesvaried greatly between sectors.  Retailers changed their pricesvery often.  By contrast, manufacturers changed their pricesless frequently, with most changing them just once a year.  Fora majority of firms the frequency of price changes had risenover the past decade.  That partly reflected increasedcompetitive pressures and technological advances such as theinternet.  
Many contacts reported that prices were usually set flexibly,
for example they often varied according to the customer andthe overall level of demand.  Regarding the current squeeze onmargins, nearly two thirds of firms had responded by cuttingcosts and roughly half had increased prices (Chart 3).  About aquarter of respondents reported that margins were likely toremain lower, even after remedial measures.          
Consumer prices
The Agencies judged that consumer goods price inflation wasbroadly unchanged in September.  Higher prices of utilities andseasonal foods were broadly offset by lower petrol prices.Most consumer goods prices continued to fall steadily.Consumer services price inflation eased a little.  That largelyreflected greater competition and over capacity in a fewspecific services including air travel, foreign holidays andhousehold insurance.  But car insurance premia were expectedto rise in the months ahead. 4 Agents’ summary of business conditions October 2006
Not applicable
051015202530354045
and ﬁnancial
servicesHotels,
catering
and Logistics 
transportRetail and
wholesaleRaise prices
Cut costs
Margins permanently lower
05101520253035404550
Business Construction Manufacturing OtherPer cent
and
leisure
(a) Firms were asked:  ‘If margins have been squeezed in the recent past, how do you plan to
address this?’Chart 3 Agents’ price-setting survey(a)