Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2006/january-2006.pdf
Date: 2006-01-31

Bank of England
Agents’ summary of business conditions
January 2006
G Consumer spending growth picked up.
G Activity continued to improve in the housing market ;  prices were flat.  
G Export growth rose.
G Investment intentions were unchanged.
G Domestic manufacturing sales stabilised.  
G Construction output growth remained steady.
G Growth in professional and financial services remained strong;  consumer services growth was more subdued.
G The state of the labour market was unchanged, as were capacity pressures.
G There was little sign of any upward pressure on pay.
G Overall, input price inflation fell. 
G Consumer price inflation edged higher;  discounting in the January ‘sales’ may be less marked than usual.
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by the Bank of England’s Agents, following discussions with over
680 businesses in the period between late November and late December 2005.  It provides information on the state ofbusiness conditions, from firms across all sectors of the economy.  The report does not represent the Bank’s own views, nordoes it represent the views of any particular firm or region.  The Bank’s Monetary Policy Committee uses the intelligenceprovided by the Agents, in conjunction with information from other sources, to assist its understanding and assessment ofcurrent economic conditions.  A copy of this publication can be found atwww.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/agentssummary/index.htm.
The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, the East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the
North West, Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, the South West, Wales, the West Midlands, andYorkshire & the Humber.
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in the
Inflation Report , obtained from:  www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/inflationreport/index.htm.DEMAND
Consumption and housing
Overall, consumer spending growth picked up in
December.(1)A number of retail contacts, particularly
department stores, reported an upturn in annual salesgrowth ahead of Christmas;  in several instances, thecolder weather was cited as a factor behind improvedsales of clothing and footwear.  There was some regional variation in spending, with some Agenciesreporting strong sales of electronic items, such as high-specification televisions, while others noted muchweaker demand for the same goods.  But sales ofhousehold items, such as kitchens, bedrooms and DIYgoods, generally remained weak.  Sales growth via theinternet outpaced high street sales growth yet again,although the proportion of total retail spendingremained relatively small. 
Given the better-than-expected sales before Christmas,
and retailers having previously chosen to hold lowerinventories than last year, stocks fell to low levels.  That could have had some impact on post-Christmasdiscounting.
Consumer services growth was slightly higher in
December.  Pub chains continued to report weakdemand and Christmas bookings at some restaurantswere at best unchanged on a year ago.  Travel servicesfared better, with passenger numbers holding up well.
Chart 1 shows the overall Agents’ scores for retail sales
values and consumer services turnover.
(2)The recentpickup in growth appears to have continued.  However,
overall growth rates remain lower than during 2004.
Activity in the housing market recovered further in
December.  But the extent of the pickup was uncertaingiven the quiet time of year.  Estate agents reportedmore enquiries from first-time buyers, although thesewere still at a relatively low level.  The stock of homes forsale remained high, but sales were continuing to takeplace.  Overall, prices were probably unchangedcompared to a year ago.
In the new-build market, housebuilders continued to cut
prices and to offer incentives in order to sell completedstock and ease cashflow constraints.  But the scale ofthose discounts and incentives generally eased.
A number of contacts commented on the recent
clarification of the rules for including residentialproperty in self-invested pension plans (SIPPs).  Inparticular, demand for new flats was thought to havepreviously been buoyed by investors wanting to includethose properties in their SIPPs.  Now, some of thosereservations were likely to fall through.  But as theimpact of SIPPs on the property market was previouslythought to have been small prior to the Pre-BudgetReport (PBR), the impact of these cancellations resultingfrom the PBR clarification was likely to be insignificant.
Exports and imports
Overall, export growth picked up in December.  Demandremained strong from the United States, the Middle Eastand the Far East.  But there were also some reports ofincreased demand for UK products from the euro area.The general picture was unchanged, with UK exports inniche markets performing well, but manufacturers ofmore ‘commoditised’ products struggling in the face ofgrowing overseas competition and import penetration.
There was little news on import growth this month, 
with import penetration continuing as UK companies re-sourced materials and components.  These continueto be increasingly bought from India and China:  somecontacts recently commented on improvements in thequality of those imports.
Investment
Contacts’ investment intentions were broadly unchangedin December compared with November, with servicesector firms planning to increase spending over the next
January 2006Chart 1
Consumption indicators
0.50.00.51.01.52.02.5
2000 01 02 03 04 05Scores(a)
Retail sales valuesConsumer services turnover
–+
(a) A score of zero indicates that sales or turnover were unchanged in the latest 
three months compared to a year earlier.  A positive (negative) score indicates sales or turnover were higher (lower) than a year earlier.  For more information see Ellis and Pike (2005).
(1) This summary is largely based on information gathered up to 22 December 2005;  the exception is retail sales, 
where it is based on information gathered up to 30 December.
(2) For more information on the Agents’ scores, see Ellis, C and Pike, T (2005), ‘Introducing the Agents’ scores’, Bank of England 
Quarterly Bulletin , Winter, pages 424–30.AGENTS’ SUMMARY OF BUSINESS CONDITIONSsix months and manufacturers planning to reduce it.
Few manufacturing contacts expect to invest to increasecapacity in the United Kingdom.  Retailers were stillplanning to continue expanding and refurbishing stores,despite weaker sales growth.  Other service companies’investment was generally concentrated in IT, with thefocus primarily on improving efficiency rather thandirectly increasing capacity.
OUTPUT
Manufacturing
Exports continued to outpace domestic orders and salesin the manufacturing sector.  But after previously falling,output for domestic markets may have stabilised:  inDecember, it was broadly unchanged on a year ago.  Theaerospace, defence and pharmaceutical sectorscontinued to perform most strongly.  Contacts remainedconcerned about high energy prices, particularly spotgas prices.  But only a small number of companies shutdown production for longer than usual in December.  
Construction
Demand for construction continued to grow steadily,underpinned by relatively stable demand growth fromthe public sector for schools, hospitals and socialhousing.  This was expected to persist for some time.Investment demand for commercial property remainedstrong, but there were some tentative signs thatdevelopers were starting to become more cautious.Occupier demand for commercial property remainedsomewhat weaker in most instances.  Homebuildingactivity was relatively weak, with some major builderscontinuing to scale back housing starts.  
Services
Growth in business services turnover was broadlyunchanged.  As in previous months, financial andprofessional firms continued to see robust growth.However, some contacts were not confident that theywould be able to maintain growth at current levelsduring 2006.  In particular, accountancy firms expecteddemand growth to slow when much of the regulatorywork they are currently undertaking is completed.Forward bookings for training and corporate events fell.On a related note, there were some signs that publicsector demand for consultancy services has weakened.Demand for other business services, such as logistics, PRand advertising, remained weaker than for professionaland financial services.  And demand for consumerservices was still weaker than demand for other services,but growth was slightly higher in December.EMPLOYMENT
Overall, labour market conditions were broadlyunchanged in December.  Generally recruitmentdifficulties were low (Chart 2).  The pattern ofemployment intentions by sector persisted, withmanufacturing companies expecting to reduce the size oftheir labour force, business services firms planning torecruit workers, and consumer service providersanticipating unchanged staff numbers.  Contactscontinued to recruit a significant number of workersfrom overseas.
CAPACITY UTILISATION
Utilisation was broadly unchanged.  Generally, capacitywas not a constraint on meeting current or expectedlevels of demand.  Skill shortages in professional andfinancial services were once again the main example ofcapacity constraints across regions, although these didnot increase.  In other services, labour was also therelevant factor, but there was sufficient flexibility tocope with significant variations in demand.
COSTS AND PRICES
Pay
Reports continued to suggest that pay settlements in2006, and also increases in overall pay, are likely to besimilar to those seen in 2005.  For most firms, RPI stillprovides a benchmark for pay reviews even ifperformance-related pay is significant.  Perhaps partlyreflecting the recent easing in RPI inflation, companieswere relaxed about pay pressures overall, with the onlyreal upward pressure in isolated areas of skill shortagessuch as professional services.  In financial services,bonus pools were higher than last year, particularly inmore successful business areas such as mergers andacquisitions.Chart 2
Recruitment difficulties(a)
1.00.50.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.5
1999 2000 01 02 03 04 05Score
–+
(a) Score refers to skill shortages prior to January 2005.  For more information 
see Ellis and Pike (2005).Input prices
Annual input price inflation eased in December.  But the
high level of oil and gas prices remained a concern formost contacts.  Many businesses are on annual orlonger-term contracts, and some of these will berenegotiated in 2006.  So it will take time for the fulleffect of the rise in the level of oil and gas prices to bepassed through.  Thus far, there were only limitedreports of companies closing for longer than originallyplanned in December due to the high level of gas prices.
Output and consumer prices
Output price inflation was broadly stable.  There waslittle evidence of inflationary pressure being passed onfrom earlier in the supply chain, with contacts typicallymaking efficiency savings where they could not fully passon the higher costs of fuel and materials.
In the retail sector, the recent pickup in growth may
have curbed the need for pre-Christmas discounting:annual retail goods price inflation increased a touch inDecember, while services inflation was broadlyunchanged.  And with retail stocks at unusually lowlevels, less merchandise may be discounted in theJanuary ‘sales’.
January 2006