Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2006/may-2006.pdf
Date: 2006-05-31

Bank of England
Agents’ summary of business conditions
May 2006
G Consumer spending growth may have started to stabilise following the volatility seen in recent months.
G The housing market recovery continued, but contacts were nervous about its fragility.
G Investment intentions picked up slightly;  services firms expected to increase investment spending over the next 
six months.
G Domestic manufacturing sales were broadly unchanged on a year earlier, while export sales accelerated.
G Construction output accelerated.
G Growth in business services turnover picked up.
G Employment intentions were unchanged, with staff levels falling in manufacturing and rising in business services.
G Capacity pressures remained generally muted;  only professional and financial services companies were 
experiencing significant difficulties.
G Pay settlements were similar to the levels seen last year, with little sign of upward pressure from employees 
following the recent energy price rises.
G Input price inflation stayed high, reflecting a further pass-through from energy prices. 
G Output price inflation rose, but competitive pressures held down consumer price inflation .
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by the Bank of England’s Agents, following discussions with over
740 businesses in the period between late March 2006 and late April 2006.  It provides information on the state of businessconditions, from firms across all sectors of the economy.  The report does not represent the Bank’s own views, nor does itrepresent the views of any particular firm or region.  The Bank’s Monetary Policy Committee uses the intelligence provided bythe Agents, in conjunction with information from other sources, to assist its understanding and assessment of currenteconomic conditions.  A copy of this publication can be found atwww.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/agentssummary/index.htm.
The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, the East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the
North West, Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, the South West, Wales, the West Midlands &Oxfordshire, and Yorkshire & the Humber.
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in the
Inflation Report , obtained from:  www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/inflationreport/index.htm.DEMAND
Consumption and housing
There were signs that consumer spending growth has
started to stabilise, following volatility in recent months.Retail sales growth picked up slightly during April,following a lull in the aftermath of the strong spendingseen over the Christmas and New Year period.  Contactsreported a modest increase in sales over Easter, althoughthis was based on a limited amount of feedback.
(1)A
number of Agencies noted some polarisation acrossretailers, with luxury goods and items aimed at higherincome groups performing more strongly than otheritems.  There were further signs that demand wasimproving in areas close to the housing market, such ascarpets and furniture.  But generally retailers remainedcautious, and were continuing to hold ‘thin’ levels ofstock.
The recent pattern of spending on cars was similar to
that of retail sales, with ‘luxury’ models outperformingless prestigious brands.  There were some signs that totalnew car sales in March may have exceeded dealers’cautious expectations, although some of this may havereflected late pre-registrations to meet manufacturers’sales targets.  Overall, new car sales were still fairly weak.
Consumer services growth edged higher in April, but
remained close to levels seen since the turn of the year.Spending on holidays and air travel was strong.Restaurants, hotels and pubs generally reported weakerdemand, although there were some reports that spendingmay have picked up a little recently.  
Housing market activity rose, continuing the pickup
since the autumn of last year.  But some contactsexpressed concern about the fragility of the recovery,citing affordability as a concern that was deterring first-time buyers.  The demand for new apartments incity centres continued to fall short of supply.  Elsewherethere was a shortage of housing stock for sale, but thiswas starting to ease following an improvement ininstructions.  As such, contacts expected the recentmodest rises in selling prices to tail off gradually over thecoming months.
Exports and imports
Export sales continued to accelerate (Chart 1),particularly to Asia and the Middle East.  Contactsreported increased demand from overseas for high-techcapital products and luxury consumer items.  There werealso signs that demand was recovering in the euro area,with several reports of a pickup in orders from Germany.Contacts were generally bullish about the prospects forexports.Imports of consumer goods were a little weaker in April,
reflecting the recent weakness in retail spending.  Butthe trend to increasingly source these goods from abroadcontinued.
Investment  
Investment intentions picked up in April.  Manufacturingfirms were continuing to scale back on investment in theUnited Kingdom, but the pace of decline eased.  Servicesfirms continued to increase investment spending, andtheir planned spending over the next six months rose alittle.  The focus was still on reducing costs rather thanexpanding capacity:  the exceptions were retailers, whowere continuing to expand and refurbish stores despitethe recent slowing in demand.  Overall, investmentspending was still somewhat subdued, with the scores forintentions remaining a little below their averages 
May 2006(1) This month’s reports were written immediately after the Easter weekend, so information on spending over that weekend was mor e uncertain than usual.105051015
2001 02 03 04 05 062.01.51.00.50.00.51.01.52.02.5Percentage change, three months on same period a year earlier Score
ONS (left-hand scale)(c) Agents (right-hand scale)(b)
+
–+
–Chart 1
Exports of goods(a)
Chart 2Investment intentions
(a) Averages calculated since July 1997.  For more information on the scores see 
Ellis and Pike (2005).2.52.01.51.00.50.00.51.01.52.0
2001 02 03 04 05 06Difference from average scores(a)
ManufacturingServices+
–(a) For more information on the Agents’ scores, see Ellis, C and Pike, T (2005), 
‘Introducing the Agents’ scores’, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin , Winter, 
pages 424–30, available atwww.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/quarterlybulletin/qb050401.pdf. 
(b) The score is for manufacturing exports.  A score of zero indicates that sales or 
turnover were changed in the latest three months compared to a year earlier.  A positive (negative) score indicates sales or turnover were higher (lower) than a year earlier.  For more information see Ellis and Pike (2005).
(c) Includes missing trader intra-community (MTIC) fraud.AGENTS’ SUMMARY OF BUSINESS CONDITIONS(Chart 2).  There were some reports that the
requirement to reduce pension fund deficits continuedto inhibit companies’ investment spending.
OUTPUT
Primary production
Poultry production was declining, a fall that pre-datedthe discovery of avian influenza in the United Kingdom,although there were signs that demand had weakenedsince.  Contacts were watching developments closely, butfor some the risks were not considered to be muchgreater than they were prior to the discovery.  Therewere a few reports that crop yields and demand haveimproved recently.  North Sea oil and gas production haspicked up since the start of the year, althoughproduction was still expected to decline in the longerterm.
Manufacturing
Contacts report that manufacturing production rose inApril.  Output for domestic sale picked up slightly, andwas now just above last year’s levels.  Exports alsoaccelerated, with growth matching the recent peak in2004.  In both markets high-tech producers such aspharmaceuticals and aerospace companies wereperforming the strongest.  In contrast, lower value-addedproduction continued to move overseas.
Construction
Construction output accelerated, reflecting robust demand across a variety of areas.  Government-sponsored projects on education andinfrastructure were strong, and order books werepointing to further strength over the next twelve months.The pace of commercial activity was also increasing, andmore housebuilders were starting new projects after lastyear’s lull.
Services  
Growth in business services turnover rose, with demandespecially strong in professional and financial services.That partly reflected work arising from regulatoryrequirements, but mergers and acquisitions and otherbanking activity were also robust and IT companiescontinued to experience strong demand.  Contacts inother business services such as marketing, advertisingand logistics reported more modest growth, which hadbeen broadly steady since the end of 2005.  Once againconsumer services saw the weakest increase in turnover,but growth did edge higher, with estate agents andmortgage suppliers benefiting from the ongoing revivalin the housing market.  EMPLOYMENT  
There was little change to contacts’ employmentintentions this month, with the manufacturing sectorplanning to lay off staff, consumer services companiesexpecting broadly unchanged employment over the nextsix months, and business services firms looking to recruitmore staff in the face of strong demand.  But publicsector recruitment slowed.  Across different sectors,professional and financial services were experiencing themost pronounced shortages in skills, leading to more in-house training.  Companies were also continuing torecruit from abroad, and there were more examples ofmigrants filling higher-skilled roles.  
CAPACITY UTILISATION
Capacity pressures picked up a little, but were broadlysteady at the levels seen since Autumn 2005.  There wasenough spare capacity in most sectors to meet expecteddemand over the next year, with the main exceptionsbeing professional and financial services companies whowere facing the aforementioned skills shortages.  
COSTS AND PRICES
Pay  
Pay pressures were subdued, with most settlementssimilar to those seen in the previous year.  Contactsreported little sign of pay pressure, despite the recentrises in petrol and household utility prices.  There weresome signs of wage drift in professional and financialservices, but otherwise sharp rises in pay were onlyoccurring in isolated instances where companies facedspecific skill shortages.  There appeared to be a generalappreciation by employees of the margin pressures thatbusinesses were facing.  
Input prices  
Input price inflation stayed high — the direct upwardpressure on costs from fuel, electricity and gas pricescontinued to feed through as supply contracts wererenewed.  Energy costs were still the biggest concern formost businesses, and were encouraging contacts tosource other inputs increasingly from abroad.  Theprices of these imports were also rising, albeit at a moresubdued pace.  The prices of energy-intensive materials,such as plastics and some chemicals, were alsoincreasing, as were a range of metals.  
Output and consumer prices  
Manufacturing output price inflation edged higher(Chart 3), as more of the recent rises in oil and energyprices were passed through the supply chain.  The extentof pass-through varied from company to company,depending on competitive pressure and the ability tooffset the rises in input costs by sourcing materials from
cheaper suppliers or other efficiencies.
However, these rises in output prices were generally not
being passed on to the consumer, with contactsreporting that both retail goods and services priceinflation were unchanged in April.  Competition in theretail sector was intense, which was restraining any pricerises.  Meanwhile, consumer service providers’experience was mixed, with some contacts able to postprice increases in the face of robust demand, whileothers reported discounting to encourage consumerspending.
May 2006Chart 3
Domestic manufacturing output prices
1.51.00.50.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.0
2001 02 03 04 05 061.00.50.00.51.01.52.0Percentage change, three months on same period a year earlier Score(a)
ONS (left-hand scale) 
Agents (right-hand scale) 
+
–+
–
(a) For more information see Ellis and Pike (2005).