Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2006/february-2006.pdf
Date: 2006-02-28

Bank of England
Agents’ summary of business conditions
February 2006
G Annual growth in consumer spending was broadly unchanged from December, but retailers remained cautious.
G Activity continued to improve in the housing market , and prices started to edge up.  
G Export growth outpaced domestic manufacturing sales.
G Investment intentions eased a little.
G Construction output growth remained steady.
G Growth in business services eased, but was still strong;  consumer services growth increased slightly.
G Employment intentions rose a little, but continued hiring of workers from overseas helped to ease pressure in 
the labour market. 
G Capacity pressures picked up a little, but remained modest.
G Most payrises were likely to be broadly similar to last year, but rises in overall labour costs may be larger.
G Input price inflation increased following the rise in gas prices. 
G Consumer price inflation edged higher, with less discounting in the January ‘sales’ than usual.
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by the Bank of England’s Agents, following discussions with over
600 businesses in the period between late December 2005 and late January 2006.  It provides information on the state ofbusiness conditions, from firms across all sectors of the economy.  The report does not represent the Bank’s own views, nordoes it represent the views of any particular firm or region.  The Bank’s Monetary Policy Committee uses the intelligenceprovided by the Agents, in conjunction with information from other sources, to assist its understanding and assessment ofcurrent economic conditions.  A copy of this publication can be found atwww.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/agentssummary/index.htm.
The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, the East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the
North West, Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, the South West, Wales, the West Midlands &Oxfordshire, and Yorkshire & the Humber.
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in the
Inflation Report , obtained from:  www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/inflationreport/index.htm.DEMAND
Consumption and housing
Overall, the Agents reported that annual growth in
consumer spending levelled off in January.  In December,sales picked up sharply, although they were also volatilefrom week to week.  Spending in January was steadierthrough the month, but year-on-year growth was broadlyin line with December as a whole.  Sales of electronicitems remained strongest.  Once again, demand for moretraditional household goods was weaker.  Most retailerswere surprised by the extent of the upturn in sales overthe festive period.  In contrast to previous years, theresulting low stocks of goods meant that stores were ableto sell more goods at full price, rather than reducingmargins.  But despite the continued growth in sales into January, many retail contacts remained cautiousabout the outlook for the near future and throughout2006.
Consumer services growth picked up slightly in January
(Chart 1).
(1)Demand for leisure services was good, with
encouraging signs for summer holiday bookingsalongside the continued popularity of air travel.Spending in pubs and restaurants was generally weak,but there were some reports that demand had begun topick up.
The recent resurgence in housing market activity
continued, with estate agents reporting that themomentum in demand was sustained into the New Year.More first-time buyers were making enquiries, and sales
continued to increase.  Given the variable quality ofunsold property remaining on the market, some estateagents were even chasing new instructions in an attemptto meet demand.  House prices have started to edge up,and most contacts expect modest inflation over thecourse of 2006.
This pickup in demand was also evident in the new 
build market:  housebuilders were finding it a little easierto sell properties, and in some cases were able to scaleback the incentives they were offering.  There stillappeared to be an over-supply of apartments.  Delays andproblems in getting planning permission for newdevelopments were continuing to restrain new housingsupply.
Exports and imports
Export growth was broadly unchanged in January.  TheUnited States, the Middle East and the Far East were thestrongest markets for UK export growth.  But there werefurther reports of a gradual increase in demand from theeuro area.  Those firms performing strongest weretypically producing specialised products, includingcapital and construction equipment to meet demandfrom the Far and Middle East.   
Import growth may also have strengthened, partly
reflecting retailers restocking following the better-than-expected Christmas.  Growth was strongestin goods from the Far East, as UK manufacturers re-sourced materials and components.
Investment
Contacts’ investment intentions edged down in January (Chart 2).  The price of energy has influencedinvestment decisions by some contacts, but there was also a general mood of greater caution in the face of uncertainty about future demand and other calls on cash, notably for pension funding.  Some capital goods suppliers have seen customers deferorders.  Investment that was taking place was normallyfocused on reducing cost rather than expandingcapacity.  The two main exceptions were retail, wherecompanies continued to invest in new stores andupgrading older ones;  and professional and financialservices, where demand in the economy has beenstrongest.  
February 2006(1) For more information on the Agents’ scores, see Ellis, C, and Pike, T (2005), ‘Introducing the Agents’ scores’, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin , Winter, pages 424–30,
available at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/quarterlybulletin/qb050401.pdf. 0.50.00.51.01.52.02.5
2001 02 03 04 05 06Scores(a)
Retail sales valuesConsumer services
  turnover
+
–Chart 1
Consumption indicators
(a) A score of zero indicates that sales or turnover were unchanged in the latest three 
months compared to a year earlier.  A positive (negative) score indicates sales or turnover were higher (lower) than a year earlier.  For more information see Ellis and Pike (2005).AGENTS’ SUMMARY OF BUSINESS CONDITIONSOUTPUT
Primary production
Agricultural output continued to fall modestly.  Oil and
gas production rose recently, but the long-term declinein those sectors also looked set to continue.  And therewere signs that coal production could decline further, assome mines shut down without replacements opening.
Manufacturing
Output for domestic sale was broadly unchanged on ayear ago.  Exports took up the slack to some degree.Output growth was increasingly concentrated inparticular sectors, such as aerospace and chemicals.Only a small number of companies had shut downproduction for longer than usual in December inresponse to high gas prices;  and, given the recent easingin the spot price, contacts were generally moreoptimistic that output could be maintained at the higherprice level.  
Construction
Construction output continued to grow steadily.  But thecomposition of demand may change in the future.  Inparticular, although public sector demand was strong,contacts from several regions were concerned that itscurrent strength would not be sustained.  However,there were signs that demand from the private sectormay be increasing:  commercial office activitystrengthened, alongside robust demand from the retailsector.  And some housebuilders were reviewing theirbuilding plans in the light of the recent upturn in thehousing market.Services
While growth in most areas of business servicesremained rapid, with strong activity in areas such asmergers and acquisitions and IT services, the overallpace of expansion eased a little in January.  Manycontacts, particularly in accountancy, also noted thelikely fall-off in new work during the course of this year,following the completion of work arising from theregulatory changes last year.  Demand for other businessservices was also a little patchier than it had been in2005, with a mixed picture of demand in the training,advertising and haulage sectors.  But growth inconsumer services turnover was slightly higher inJanuary, continuing the gradual pickup in growth seen inrecent months.
EMPLOYMENT  
There were some tentative signs that companies may bestarting to revise up their employment plans in 2006,but with some variation around the United Kingdom.While the manufacturing sector continued to shed jobsin the face of overcapacity, employment intentions inthe services sector, and particularly business services,picked up a little.  This was due to several sectors —notably the professional and financial services sectors —seeing continued rapid growth in demand.  However, atthe same time, public sector demand was easing.Recruitment from abroad was also strong, with a number of contacts increasingly hiring migrant workersto fill more skilled roles than had previously been thecase.  Overall, labour market conditions slackenedslightly.  
CAPACITY UTILISATION
Capacity pressures picked up slightly in January (Chart 3).  In manufacturing, continuing consolidationand the relocation of production overseas was graduallyreducing the degree of spare capacity remaining in theUnited Kingdom.  And some areas of manufacturing,where demand had picked up, were facing more capacitypressure.  Most service sector companies had amplespare capacity to meet demand.  But a lack of capacity to meet demand was present in specific sectors, such as in professional and financial services.  In theseinstances, offshoring was alleviating some of theconstraints.Chart 2Investment intentions
210123
2001 02 03 04 05 06Services
ManufacturingScores
+
–COSTS AND PRICES
Pay  
There was very little sign of pay pressure this month.
Most reports continued to show that 2006 settlementsare likely to be broadly similar to 2005 — in severalinstances, agreed settlements were actually lower than ayear ago.  Some contacts also reported that pay drift wasgenerally likely to be at or below last year’s levels.  Themain exception was in financial services, where therewere still some skill shortages and strong performanceduring 2005 meant that bonus pools were higher thanlast year.  But generally employers were keen to keep atight rein on regular pay, given that pension liabilitiesremained a key concern for many companies.In December 2005 and January 2006, the Agents
carried out a survey of their contacts regarding theprospects for pay and labour costs during 2006.  Thesurvey covered around 290 companies employing a totalof over 560,000 workers.  The results from this surveysuggested that settlements might be a little higher in2006 than in 2005 (Chart 4).  But overall labour costswere likely to pick up a little more strongly, partlyreflecting the continued costs of funding companypensions, but also the need to retain specialist staff andrecruit new employees.  
Input prices  
Annual input price inflation picked up in January, partlyreflecting the first pass-through of higher spot gas pricesin the supply chain.  And although the recent easing inthe spot price had allayed contacts’ worries, they werestill concerned about the longer-term impact of theprice rise, given that many of them are on fixed-pricecontracts for a year or more.  Aside from energy costs,there was little sign of more widespread input pricepressure.  
Output and consumer prices  
Annual output price inflation was broadly stable inJanuary.  Firms continued to find it difficult to pass onhigher input costs to customers, and were often cuttingcosts elsewhere to compensate.  Those firms that couldraise their prices were typically either niche producersof specialised goods or less exposed to competition fromimports. 
In the retail sector, contacts from several regions noted
that post-Christmas discounting had been less ferociousthan last year.  That reflected the lower level ofinventories that retailers had carried into the festiveperiod, and the surprising strength in sales.  Consumerservices inflation remained steady.  But several contactscited the likelihood of large increases in consumer gasprices during 2006.  Although the extent and timing ofthese rises was uncertain, they could exert upwardpressure on headline inflation.
February 2006Chart 3Capacity constraints
(a)
432101234
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06Services
ManufacturingScores
+
–
(a) Over the next six months.  Before January 2005, scores refer to utilisation relative to
normal. 
Chart 4
Changes in settlements(a)
6420246810121416
2003 04 05 06Percentage balances
+
–
(a) Net balances of firms in each sector reporting that settlements in 2006 were (likely to be)
higher than in 2005.  Individual responses have been weighted by numbers employed.