Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2006/june-2006.pdf
Date: 2006-06-30

Bank of England
Agents’ summary of business conditions
June 2006
G Consumer spending growth picked up.
G The housing market recovery continued, with demand outpacing supply.
G Export sales accelerated again;  import growth was less pronounced. 
G Investment intentions rose:  the pace of decline in UK manufacturing investment eased, and services companies 
expected their investment spending to accelerate.
G Alongside strong export sales, domestic manufacturing production picked up.
G Construction output grew steadily.
G Business services turnover was strong, particularly in the professional and financial sector.
G Employment intentions strengthened, with business services recruiting vigorously, but there was still slack in the
labour market.
G The degree of spare capacity in the manufacturing sector narrowed;  capacity pressures in the services sector 
were unchanged.
G There were few signs of pay pressures , or any second-round effects from higher energy prices.   
G Input price inflation stayed high, reflecting the impact of energy prices.
G Output price inflation rose;  there was limited pass-through to consumer prices .
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by the Bank of England’s Agents, following discussions with over
900 businesses in the period between late April 2006 and late May 2006.  It provides information on the state of businessconditions, from firms across all sectors of the economy.  The report does not represent the Bank’s own views, nor does itrepresent the views of any particular firm or region.  The Bank’s Monetary Policy Committee uses the intelligence provided bythe Agents, in conjunction with information from other sources, to assist its understanding and assessment of currenteconomic conditions.  A copy of this publication can be found atwww.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/agentssummary/index.htm.
The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, the East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the
North West, Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, the South West, Wales, the West Midlands &Oxfordshire, and Yorkshire & the Humber.
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in the
Inflation Report , obtained from:  www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/inflationreport/index.htm.DEMAND
Consumption and housing
Consumer spending growth picked up in May.  But the
picture was mixed:  while some contacts reported amodest rise in sales over Easter, others reported weakerdemand.  Overall retail sales picked up slightly, due inpart to the late timing of Easter, warmer weather, andhigh demand for specific products — notably beer andhigh-specification televisions — ahead of the footballWorld Cup.  Abstracting from these factors, spendingremained a little soft compared with recent years,although well above last year’s lows.  Retail contactsremained cautious about the outlook for sales over theremainder of 2006.  For example, demand for DIYproducts and other household goods was still fairly weak:the tentative signs of an increase in spending did notmatch the extent of the recovery in housing marketactivity.  
While overall retail sales growth was a little higher,
growth in spending on consumer services was unchangedin May.  Once again demand was polarised, withrestaurant and pub chains reporting weak trading whilespending on budget airlines was very strong.  Leisureattractions benefited from the warmer weather overEaster, but holiday bookings were slow, partly due to theWorld Cup.
The recovery in housing market activity gathered pace,
with estate agents reporting further improvements indemand after the lull in 2005.  However, this wasexacerbating the shortage of available stock for sale.Contacts noted that, as well as pushing up asking andselling prices, this was discouraging some homeownersfrom putting their property on the market, because of
the increasing difficulty in finding their next home. 
Housebuilding activity was rising in response to better
sales, but was lagging behind the recovery in housingtransactions.  In some areas, the rate of new builds wasstill lower than in 2005.  And while the use of incentivesto sell stock had declined they were still available in anumber of instances.  Planning approval was delayingmany projects, and was becoming more of a concern asbuilders tried to increase production.
Exports and imports
Export sales accelerated again, with UK companiesreporting strong demand from Asia, the United Statesand the Middle East.  The revival in European demandalso gained impetus, with UK companies reportinghigher orders from their French and Germancounterparts.  UK engineering companies reported thestrongest demand, particularly in the aerospace andchemical sectors.  But more generally manufacturerswere seeing stronger demand from abroad than in theirdomestic markets (see later).
UK imports also rose in May, but the pace of growth was
more modest than for UK exports.  While manycompanies were continuing to source materials andcomponents from overseas, the relative weakness inimports of consumer goods continued.  Some portcontacts even noted that import volumes were lowerthan a year ago. 
Investment  
Contacts’ investment intentions picked up.Manufacturing firms were scaling back on investment inthe United Kingdom, but the pace of decline eased again.What UK investment was planned would focus on cuttingcosts and improving productivity following the recentsqueeze in margins resulting from energy price rises:indeed, some current investment was aimed at cuttingenergy costs.  While service sector firms were investingto cut costs too, some sectors were also investing in newcapacity.  In retailing, there were renewed reports oflarger retailers investing in new floor space (alongsiderefurbishing existing sites), and banks were also looking to increase their presence on the high street.Telecoms companies continued to invest heavily, as didutility firms, and demand for IT investment remainedstrong.
OUTPUT
Primary production
Agricultural contacts reported some recent firming inprices:  that had improved confidence if not production,
June 200620246810
2001 02 03 04 05 060.50.00.51.01.52.02.5Percentage change, three months on 
same period a year earlier Score(b)
ONS (left-hand scale) Agents (right-hand scale)
+
_+
_Chart 1
Retail sales values(a)
(a) For more information on the Agents’ scores, see Ellis, C and Pike, T (2005), 
‘Introducing the Agents’ scores’, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin , Winter, pages 424–30,
available at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/quarterlybulletin/qb050401.pdf. 
(b) A score of zero indicates that sales or turnover were unchanged in the latest 
three months compared to a year earlier.  A positive (negative) score indicates sales or turnover were higher (lower) than a year earlier.  For more information see Ellis and Pike (2005).AGENTS’ SUMMARY OF BUSINESS CONDITIONSwhich was little changed.  Given recent rises in energy
prices, coal-fired power stations were producing energyat close to full capacity.  But North Sea oil and gasproduction weakened following recent rises.
Manufacturing
Manufacturing production rose, with output for bothdomestic and export markets rising.  Export demandstrengthened again (Chart 2), with the score at itshighest since 1997.  Domestic output growth alsopicked up, with demand improving across a range ofgoods, reflecting the recent improvements in businessinvestment and consumer demand.  Overall, demand wasstrongest for engineering and pharmaceutical firms, withprinting and automotive production continuing to moveoverseas.
Construction
Construction output growth was broadly steady in May.Government-sponsored work was still buoying demand,but there were some reports of a slowdown in publicsector spending.  Offsetting that, commercialconstruction activity gathered pace.  The expansion inthe retail sector was a key source of demand;  andspeculative demand for new office developmentsremained strong.  The recovery in housing marketactivity had led to a rise in new housing starts, althoughthe rise in building activity was patchy.
Services  
Once again business services turnover outshone othersectors of the economy, with high and stable growth.The strong demand for professional and financialservices was unabated, and reports from contacts fromacross the regions were uniformly positive.  The buoyantdemand for professional services reflected both the needto comply with new regulations and tax legislation, andalso strong credit demand from certain sectors such as
commercial property projects and M&A activity.  Thepace of demand for these services had a knock-on impacton some other business services, such as taxi and courierfirms.  But generally demand for other business serviceswas less buoyant than demand for professional andfinancial services.  Demand for consumer services wasweaker still, but broadly stable.
EMPLOYMENT  
Contacts’ employment intentions over the next sixmonths picked up across all major sectors, to varyingdegrees.  The rate of lay-offs in manufacturing eased alittle, consumer services companies were now expectinga modest increase in headcount, and business servicesfirms were actively trying to recruit in the face of strongdemand.  But while the outlook for private sectoremployment improved, the state of the labour marketwas unchanged, with contacts still reporting a significantdegree of slack (Chart 3).  That reflected further inwardmigration, and also a slowing in public sectorrecruitment.
CAPACITY UTILISATION
The degree of spare capacity in the manufacturingsector narrowed slightly, reflecting the stronger demandseen by UK companies.  But there was still enough sparecapacity to meet expected demand, and manufacturerswere also able to ‘flex’ capacity if necessary.  Capacitypressures in the services sector were unchanged:  thesewere most pressing in professional and financial services,due to a lack of skilled staff.  However, in the same waythat some manufacturers were able to shift capacityoverseas, some larger professional services companieswere also increasing capacity temporarily — for exampleby flying in staff from overseas offices during busyperiods.Chart 2
Manufacturing output
210123
2001 02 03 04 05 06Scores
DomesticExport+
–Chart 3
Recruitment difficulties(a)
101234
2001 02 03 04 05 06Score
+
_
(a) Skill shortages before January 2005.COSTS AND PRICES
Pay
No significant pay pressures were reported.  Settlements
were at or below last year’s levels, and increases inoverall pay bills were fairly similar to a year ago.Contacts reported very few instances of workersdemanding higher pay increases following the recentrises in petrol and domestic utility bills — indeed, manycontacts noted that workers were aware that firms’margins were also being squeezed, with some unionseven offering pay cuts to preserve employment.  Therewere isolated instances of large pay rises, but thesereflected particular skill shortages.  
Input prices  
Input price inflation remained high.  The direct upwardpressure on costs from energy prices continued to feedthrough as supply contracts were renewed.  Energy costswere still the biggest concern for most businesses, andwere encouraging contacts to investigate ways toimprove energy efficiency and to source materialsincreasingly from abroad.  The prices of importedcomponents were also rising, and at an increasing pace.Manufacturers were most affected by the rise in energycosts, with many services companies — particularlybusiness services firms — noting that energy costs wereinsignificant compared with the cost of labour, whichwas rising at a much more subdued pace (see above).Aside from the impact of energy (and metals) prices,other cost pressures were subdued. 
Output and consumer prices  
Manufacturing output price inflation stayed high, as thepass-through of higher energy costs to output pricescontinued.  There were some signs that strengtheningdemand was making it easier for firms to pass on the costincreases, although this was more prevalent in theservice sector — where energy costs were a relativelysmall proportion of total costs in the first place — thanin manufacturing.  Even those manufacturers withenergy surcharges in place were finding it hard toenforce the full recovery of costs.  During May, the Agents carried out a survey of their
contacts regarding their profit margins.  The surveycovered around 250 companies with a total turnover of£36 billion.  The results suggested that most contactshad seen margins fall slightly over the past twelvemonths;  the main exceptions were professional andfinancial services companies, where margins had risen(Chart 4).  In response to lower margins, most contactswere likely to increase productivity and/or reduceemployment to compensate.  But many contacts simplysaid they would have to accept a lower profit margin, atleast in part.  In contrast, few contacts said they wouldreduce investment or increase their selling prices inorder to regain profitability.
Most of the increase in energy costs was still being
absorbed by manufacturers’ margins.  And some of theprice increases posted by manufacturers were beingabsorbed in the distribution sector.  As such, the impacton consumer goods prices was still fairly small, althoughinflation did pick up.  Consumer services price inflationalso rose a little as firms passed on energy costs.  Butoverall, contacts saw little evidence that underlyinginflation (ie excluding energy price effects) wasincreasing.
June 2006Chart 4
Profit margins(a)
504030201001020304050Percentage net balances
Manufacturing
ConstructionConsumer 
servicesOther 
business
servicesOther Professional
 and financial
services+
_
(a) Net balances of firms reporting that that margins had risen or fallen.  
Individual responses have been weighted by turnover.