Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2006/july-2006.pdf
Date: 2006-07-31

Bank of England
Agents’ summary of business conditions
July 2006
G Consumer spending growth picked up, although the pattern of sales was affected by the World Cup.
G The housing market recovery continued, but contacts were cautious about the near-term outlook.
G Export sales accelerated again;  import growth also rose. 
G Manufacturing investment intentions strengthened:  contacts now expected broadly unchanged investment 
spending over the next twelve months.
G Manufacturing production for domestic markets rose, but less quickly than exports.
G Construction output growth was steady.
G Professional and financial services activity continued to grow strongly.
G Employment intentions picked up, but recruitment difficulties remained low.
G Capacity utilisation increased a little in both the manufacturing and service sectors.
G There was no evidence of widespread pay pressure .
G Input price inflation remained high, reflecting energy prices.
G Manufacturing output price inflation also stayed high;  there was some further pass-through of energy costs to 
consumer prices .
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by the Bank of England’s Agents, following discussions with over
750 businesses in the period between late May 2006 and late June 2006.  It provides information on the state of businessconditions, from firms across all sectors of the economy.  The report does not represent the Bank’s own views, nor does itrepresent the views of any particular firm or region.  The Bank’s Monetary Policy Committee uses the intelligence provided bythe Agents, in conjunction with information from other sources, to assist its understanding and assessment of currenteconomic conditions.  A copy of this publication can be found atwww.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/agentssummary/index.htm.
The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, the East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the
North West, Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, the South West, Wales, the West Midlands &Oxfordshire, and Yorkshire & the Humber.
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in the
Inflation Report , obtained from:  www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/inflationreport/index.htm.DEMAND
Consumption and housing
Consumer demand growth improved modestly in June.
Retail sales were affected by the football World Cup andthe good weather, with some goods such as flat screentelevisions, beer and convenience foods selling well.Offsetting this strength, there was a dearth of shoppersduring the first England game, which led to notablyweaker sales that weekend.  Underlying salesstrengthened slightly across a range of goods, and thegeneral mood among contacts was more positive, withsales higher than a year earlier in most regions.However, sales of basic and luxury items continued tooutpace ‘middle market’ items, and many retail contactswere still cautious about the outlook for the rest of theyear.  There were some reports that demand wasimproving in the car market, but this was patchy at best:many contacts still reported weak sales.
Consumer services growth also edged higher in June.
Leisure services showed signs of improving demand,although the extent was mixed from region to region andthe usual pattern of spending on overseas holidays wasdisrupted by the World Cup.   
The recovery in housing market activity continued at a
modest pace, with small price rises being driven by ashortage of supply.  The main exceptions were still citycentre apartments, where prices were weak due to supplyoutstripping demand.  In most areas, estate agents werecautious about the prospects for further price rises andactivity during the rest of 2006, noting that affordabilityremained an issue for most first-time buyers.  Set againstthat, there were some reports of increased demand frombuy-to-let investors.
House building activity was still rising in response to
better sales, but at a slower pace than the rise in housingtransactions.  Planning constraints were the main factorimpeding new building, although there were also morereports of skill shortages in specialised areas.
Exports and imports
Export growth picked up again, with UK producersseeing robust demand from many areas of the world.  In particular, demand from the United States, the Middle East and Asia was strong.  European sales werealso improving, reflecting both a pickup in orders fromestablished markets such as Germany and newopportunities in Eastern Europe.  
UK imports also rose in June.  In recent months import
growth has been outpaced by export growth, but therewere signs that the gap may be closing.  Imports ofcomponents and finished goods from lower-cost
producers continued to rise at a marked rate, asmanufacturers sought to reduce other costs followingthe recent energy price rises.  But there were also signsthat imports of consumer goods started to accelerate,reflecting the modest recovery in consumer demand.
Investment  
Manufacturing investment intentions picked up:  overthe next twelve months contacts now expected domesticmanufacturing investment spending to be broadlyunchanged, rather than falling (Chart 1).  With manymanufacturers continuing to outsource productionabroad, this improvement in domestic investmentspending was primarily driven by companies with highervalue-added or niche products.  These companies haverecently seen strong demand, and were investing toincrease capacity and ease bottlenecks.  Service sectorinvestment intentions remained positive, with thedistribution sector continuing to invest in new floorspace.  As ever, new investment plans in bothmanufacturing and services were concentrated in ICT.But there were also a number of plans that focused onreducing costs (particularly energy costs).  
OUTPUT
Manufacturing
Manufacturing production rose, with production forforeign markets accelerating while growth in domesticoutput was broadly unchanged.  The strength of exportsales and relative weakness of production for domesticmarkets was a pattern seen across a range of industries.High-tech and niche manufacturers were performing the
July 20062101234
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06Scores(b)
Services
Manufacturing–+Chart 1
Investment intentions(a)
(a) For more information on the Agents’ scores, see Ellis, C and Pike, T (2005), 
‘Introducing the Agents’ scores’, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin , Winter, pages 424–30,
available at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/quarterlybulletin/qb050401.pdf. 
(b) A score of zero indicates that UK investment spending over the next twelve months is
expected to be unchanged, compared with current spending.  A positive (negative) scoreindicates investment spending is expected to be higher (lower) than current spending.For more information see Ellis and Pike (2005).AGENTS’ SUMMARY OF BUSINESS CONDITIONSstrongest, but there were also tentative reports that
some firms producing more ‘commoditised’ products hadseen the decline in their sales slow.  
Construction
Construction output growth was robust and steady.Government-sponsored work was an importantcomponent of demand, but private sector projects werealso significant, including retail investment, new officespace, and increased house building activity.  Contacts’views about the outlook for activity over the rest of 2006were somewhat mixed:  while many reported good orderbooks, some others noted declining enquiries forindustrial and commercial projects.   
Services
The strong growth in professional and financial servicesactivity was sustained in June.  The recent high volumesof regulation and tax-related accountancy work, mergersand acquisitions, and consultancy (notably IT) activitywere maintained, and contacts were still having difficultykeeping up with the pace of demand.  Demand for otherbusiness services also rose, but at a less pronouncedpace.  The advertising market was seeing weaker growth,but logistics and warehousing activity picked up.Growth in consumer services activity also edged higher,with some leisure attractions reporting strongerdemand.
EMPLOYMENT  
Contacts’ employment intentions over the next sixmonths were slightly stronger in June.  Consumerservices companies expected a small increase inheadcount;  the expected rate of job losses inmanufacturing slowed;  and business services firmsraised their employment plans again.  But despite thisincreased demand for labour, most companies were ableto fill vacancies with little difficulty (Chart 2).  The mainexceptions were when contacts were recruiting for
particular skilled roles.  These shortages were especiallyprevalent in the professional and financial servicessector, although there were also some reports ofspecialised skill shortages in other sectors, such asconstruction.
CAPACITY UTILISATION
Capacity utilisation rose somewhat, both inmanufacturing (reflecting increased demand) and in theservices sector.  Capacity pressures were mostpronounced for professional and financial services,reflecting a lack of skilled staff.  Outside of professionalservices, other sectors saw signs of rising utilisation, butgenerally capacity pressures were still relatively subdued.
COSTS AND PRICES
Pay
There was no evidence of widespread pay pressure.  Avery high proportion of settlements in bothmanufacturing and services were around 2% to 3%,broadly unchanged from a year earlier.  There were someinstances of larger increases, for example higher payawards or wage drift in sectors experiencing skillshortages, but these were relatively few and far between.Pension costs continued to be a more pressing concernfor contacts with a defined-benefit scheme, with manyalso noting the significant amount of management timetaken up with addressing pension fund shortfalls.
During May and June, the Agents carried out a survey of
their contacts regarding their pension funds.  The surveycovered around 210 companies with a total turnover ofover £270 billion, and included a number of companieswho were known to have pension fund deficits.  Themajority of contacts reported pension deficits of lessthan 10% of annual turnover, although a significantnumber faced higher funding shortfalls. 
In response to the deficits, companies had made several
changes over the past year.  The main changes had beento the structure of their pension schemes, and associatedfunding decisions;  there had also been an impact onpensionable wage increases.  A number of respondentsalso noted that deficits had affected mergers andacquisitions activity, in terms of buying and sellingcompanies.  Only a small minority of companies hadchanged employment, selling prices or capitalexpenditure as a result of pension deficits (Chart 3),although the impact on investment spending had beenmore pronounced for smaller companies.
Over the next twelve months, companies expected
further changes to the structure and funding of their
Chart 2
Recruitment difficulties(a)
101234
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06Score
–+
(a) The score refers to skill shortages before January 2005.pension schemes, and also to pensionable pay.  But the
impact on headcount, pricing and investment wasexpected to be negligible.
Input prices  
Input price inflation stayed high.  The main concern wasagain the rising cost of energy.  Some contacts still hadnot felt the full impact of the recent price increases dueto long-term contracts, but those contacts wereincreasingly nervous about the eventual impact whenthose contracts expired.  For many companies, energyand import prices were still a relatively small componentof total costs, compared with the cost of labour.  Butcompanies were continuing to minimise their energy useand cut back on other costs to compensate for the rise inenergy prices, for example by sourcing inputs more
cheaply from abroad.  Even here the impact of energyprices and other inflationary pressures was being felt,with contacts noting rises in the prices of goodsimported from lower-cost economies.  Other input priceswere generally less of an issue, but several contactsnoted a recent firming in the price of steel.
Output and consumer prices  
Manufacturing output price inflation remained relativelyhigh, as the pass-through of higher energy costs tooutput prices continued.  It was easiest to raise priceswhere firms could demonstrate a clear link fromincreasing energy costs;  at the same time, contacts werestill unable to pass the full extent of the energy cost riseson in higher prices.  Business services inflation wassomewhat higher than manufacturing output priceinflation, with services companies generally finding iteasier to force through higher prices thanmanufacturers.
Retail goods price inflation picked up in June, partly
reflecting consumer utility prices but also due to greaterpass-through of energy costs from producer prices toconsumer prices more generally.  However, thecontinued downward competitive pressure on pricesmeant that the full rise in costs was still not reflected inthe price faced by consumers.  Retail services priceinflation was unchanged.  Where possible, leisureoperators and travel companies were passing on theirhigher energy costs.  But apart from either direct orindirect energy price effects, contacts saw little evidencethat underlying inflation was rising for either goods orservices.
July 2006Chart 3
The impact of pension fund deficits
01 0 2 0 3 0 4 0 5 0 6 0New investmentSelling pricesChanging headcountDividends paidOtherWages paidFunding of scheme Structure of scheme
Percentage of respondents(a)Past twelve months
Next twelve months
(a) Individual responses have been weighted by turnover.