Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2006/march-2006.pdf
Date: 2006-03-31

Bank of England
Agents’ summary of business conditions
March 2006
G Consumer spending growth fell back following the pickup over Christmas and the New Year.
G Housing market activity grew steadily.
G Domestic manufacturing sales were broadly unchanged;  export sales rose.
G Investment intentions eased a little;  overall companies expected modest increases in investment spending.
G Construction output growth was steady.
G Business services growth remained strong.
G There was little change in employment or intentions, and recruitment difficulties were generally low.  
G Capacity pressures were subdued.
G So far, there has been little sign of increased wage pressure from the ongoing pay round.
G Rising energy costs boosted input price inflation ;  output price inflation also picked up. 
G Consumer price inflation was broadly unchanged.
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by the Bank of England’s Agents, following discussions with over
700 businesses in the period between late January 2006 and late February 2006.  It provides information on the state ofbusiness conditions, from firms across all sectors of the economy.  The report does not represent the Bank’s own views, nordoes it represent the views of any particular firm or region.  The Bank’s Monetary Policy Committee uses the intelligenceprovided by the Agents, in conjunction with information from other sources, to assist its understanding and assessment ofcurrent economic conditions.  A copy of this publication can be found atwww.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/agentssummary/index.htm.
The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, the East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the
North West, Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, the South West, Wales, the West Midlands &Oxfordshire, and Yorkshire & the Humber.
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in the
Inflation Report , obtained from:  www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/inflationreport/index.htm.DEMAND
Consumption and housing
After picking up over the Christmas period, consumer
spending growth has fallen back.  The weakness was mostpronounced in retail sales, where contacts from severalregions reported a notable easing in sales growth.  Thegloomier picture has left many retailers cautious aboutthe outlook for spending in the rest of 2006, with somechoosing to keep inventories below last year’s levels.Sales growth was strongest for electronic items such asflat-screen televisions and mobile phones, but spendingwas weaker on other items such as clothing and footwear.Sales of more traditional household goods such asfurniture were also subdued.  And new car salesremained weak:  although it was normally a quiet time ofyear for sales (ahead of the March registration platechange), some contacts noted that forward orders forcars with the new plate were lower than a year ago.  
Consumer services growth showed more resilience than
retail sales, but growth also eased (Chart 1).
(1)Overall,
demand for leisure travel was strong, especially overseas,but UK hotels and restaurants generally reported a weakstart to the year.  
Housing market activity continued to increase.  Estate
agents reported more interest from first-time buyers and a sustained pickup in sales.  Some estate agentsreported that instructions were currently weaker thansales, and they were having some difficulty finding goodenough quality properties to meet demand.  Pricesgenerally remained stable, or were starting to rise gently.Housebuilding activity was a little firmer, and contacts
were more optimistic following an improvement in newreservations and the recovery in the housing market as awhole.  But there were still some causes for concern.Apartment sales were once again weaker than house salesand, in places, there was still an over-supply of new flats.  
Exports and imports
Exports continued to rise at a healthy rate in February,with demand again strongest from the United States andthe Middle and Far East.  In addition, sales to neweroverseas markets such as Eastern Europe werecontinuing to rise.  There were further reports of amodest improvement in demand from the euro area,although the picture was patchy.  Apart from thestronger manufacturing sectors, professional andfinancial service contacts also reported increasedbusiness from overseas.
Import growth continued to strengthen, with goods and
components increasingly bought from China and otherAsian economies.  Many contacts were outsourcing toEastern Europe as companies continued to try andreduce the cost of intermediate goods in the face ofstrong price competition and higher energy bills.
Investment
Investment intentions eased in February, and overallcontacts expected investment spending to increasemodestly over the next six months.  The easing ininvestment intentions was most apparent in themanufacturing sector, where contacts’ future investmentplans were increasingly focused on shifting productionabroad.  So investment in the United Kingdom for thesecompanies was expected to fall.  What UK investment hastaken place was mostly focused on reducing cost andraising efficiency rather than expanding physicalcapacity.  Service sector intentions held up better, butremained at a relatively subdued level, with contactsexpecting only moderate increases in investmentspending.  Within services, professional and financialservices firms and retailers continued to invest to expandcapacity.  Overall, contacts were cautious aboutcommitting to large investment plans in the face ofuncertain demand prospects and high energy prices.
OUTPUT
Manufacturing
Output for domestic sale was broadly unchanged on ayear ago, while export sales continued to perform rather
March 2006(1) For more information on the Agents’ scores, see Ellis, C and Pike, T (2005), ‘Introducing the Agents’ scores’, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin , Winter, pages 424–30,
available at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/quarterlybulletin/qb050401.pdf. 0.50.00.51.01.52.02.5
2001 02 03 04 05 06Scores(a)
Retail sales valuesConsumer services
turnover
–+Chart 1
Consumption indicators
(a) A score of zero indicates that sales or turnover were unchanged in the latest 
three months compared to a year earlier.  A positive (negative) score indicates sales or turnover were higher (lower) than a year earlier.  For more information see Ellis and Pike (2005).AGENTS’ SUMMARY OF BUSINESS CONDITIONSmore strongly.  Alongside the aerospace and chemical
sectors, manufacturers of capital goods have also seenstrong sales, both from overseas, but also more generallyfor energy-saving equipment.  Where possible,manufacturers were trying to move into producing moreadvanced products in terms of design and technology.However, some manufacturers were less concerned withvolume growth and were more focused on coping withrecent cost increases and rebuilding profitability.
Construction
Construction output grew steadily, underpinned by thestrength of government-sponsored work.  Based on thecurrent state of order books, growth was likely to remainhealthy for much of this year.  But further ahead,contacts expected a significant easing in public sectordemand.  The recent upturn in private commercialactivity was sustained in February, but industrialconstruction was more mixed.  Housebuilding was a littlefirmer, as optimism continued to improve on the back ofhigher turnover. 
Services
Business services turnover grew strongly.  This wasparticularly pronounced in professional and financialservices, where the healthy growth seen in 2005 haspersisted into the new year.  Apart from the ongoingwork arising from new financial regulations, strongmergers and acquisitions also boosted activity.  Demandfor other business services, such as PR, advertising,training, haulage and marketing, was more subdued, butgrowth in turnover was still reasonably firm.  Generallythe outlook among contacts was positive for 2006.Consumer services growth remained somewhat weaker,following the slight easing in growth in February.
EMPLOYMENT
There was little change in the state of the labour marketin February.  Overall private sector employment wasfairly steady, with declines in manufacturing jobs offsetby increased employment in services.  And aside from aslight easing in the consumer services sector, contacts’employment intentions were broadly unchanged:manufacturers expected to shed jobs and businessservices companies were looking to recruit.  Recruitmentdifficulties were generally subdued, with migrant labouran important resource for filling both skilled andunskilled job vacancies.  Shortages were again mostprevalent in professional and financial services.  Therewere some signs that the recent deceleration inproductivity may have reflected labour hoarding, withemployees working less intensively.  As activity has
picked up in recent months, employment has beenbroadly unchanged, reflecting higher labour utilisation.
During February, the Agents carried out a survey of their
contacts regarding the prospects for employment during2006.  The survey covered around 220 companiesemploying a total of over 450,000 workers.  The resultsfrom this survey suggested that, having reduced the sizeof their workforce over the past six months, contactsexpected to employ more workers over the next sixmonths.  The expected increase in employment wasdriven by high recruitment intentions in the businessservices sector, and fewer job losses in consumer services(Chart 2).  Strong demand was the main reason forhigher employment, although in several sectors this was offset by the need to reduce costs by sheddinglabour.
CAPACITY UTILISATION
The slight pickup in capacity pressure seen last monthreversed in February.  Capacity pressures in the servicesector eased a little, to around normal levels.  Mostservice companies had sufficient spare capacity to meetcurrent demand, the exception being professional andfinancial services.  Capacity pressures in themanufacturing sector also eased in February;  moregenerally there was a considerable amount of sparecapacity in the sector as a whole.  In the longer term,consolidation and off-shoring were slowly eroding thedegree of that capacity remaining in the UnitedKingdom.  Many contacts, both in manufacturing andservices, were able to flex capacity in response tochanges in demand.Chart 2Changes in employment
(a)
40302010010203040Previous six months
Next six monthsPercentage net balances
Business 
servicesConsumer
servicesManufacturing
ConstructionOther–+
(a) Net balances of firms in each sector reporting that employment over the 
past six months (over the next six months) was (likely to be) higher or lower.  Individual responses have been weighted by numbers employed.COSTS AND PRICES
Pay
The majority of contacts reported little pressure on pay,
with settlements and overall wage inflation very similarto that seen last year.  Companies were continuing tobear down on pay increases in the face of pensions andenergy costs.  There have been few reports of resistanceby employees, with some reports that workers wereaware of the pressure on firms’ margins and in somecases were nervous about job security.  The main sign ofstrong earnings growth was bonuses in professional andfinancial services, which were high following strongprofits in 2005.
Input prices
Input price inflation rose in February (Chart 3),reflecting higher energy prices.  In particular, gas pricesfaced by contacts continued to rise as more long-termcontracts came up for renewal.  Energy prices were thebiggest concern for contacts, with many having to acceptsmaller margins due to a lack of pricing power.  However,other contacts had no choice but to try and pass on theprice rises.  Higher gas and electricity prices have beencompounded by the rise in the oil price since December,which also affected distribution costs and relatedproducts such as plastics.  Aside from energy costs, othermaterials prices were generally more subdued, and wereless of a concern for contacts.
Output and consumer prices
Output price inflation rose in February, as companiespassed on some of the recent increase in input prices totheir customers.  Contacts had varying success in doing
so, but more companies managed to raise prices than inprevious months, as customers were more willing toconcede price increases that reflected higher materialand energy costs.  
Despite this rise in output prices, and the continued
increase in imported inflation, retail goods pricescontinued to fall in February.  This was partly due tostrong competition, particularly on the High Street.Consumer services inflation was broadly unchanged;although some companies were starting to cut prices inorder to stimulate demand, other prices, such as travel,had picked up.  Overall, consumer price inflation inFebruary was similar to its level in recent months.
March 2006Chart 3Input prices
(a)
10505101520
2001 02 03 04 05 061.51.00.50.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.0Percentage change, three months on
same period a year earlier Score
ONS 
(left-hand scale)Agents 
(right-hand scale)
–+–+
(a)  Agents’ score refers to material costs.