Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2007/july-2007.pdf
Date: 2007-07-31

•Consumption growth remained firm but eased a little, driven by a slowdown in discretionary spending.
•Demand for housing also eased in most areas outside London.
•In contrast, investment intentions remained robust.
•Demand for exports was again buoyant overall, though less so from the United States.
•Growth in manufacturing remained well supported by external and domestic demand.
•Output in the construction and service sectors maintained a rapid rate of expansion. 
•Employment intentions were elevated, with labour demand continuing to be strongest in the service
sector.  Recruitment difficulties increased in most parts of the United Kingdom.
•Capacity pressures persisted and became more widespread across industries.
•Growth in pay awards remained well contained.  And while growth in total labour costs eased, it
remained higher than that in regular pay owing to additional leave provisions and other non-wagecompensation.
•Annual input price inflation increased again in June, as did output price inflation .  There was further
evidence of margin rebuilding by manufacturers.
•Annual consumer price inflation ticked down but remained above its average of recent years.
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by
the Bank of England’s Agents, following discussions with nearly800 businesses in the period between late May and late June .  It
provides information on the state of business conditions, fromcompanies across all sectors of the economy.  The report does notrepresent the Bank’s own views, nor does it represent the views ofany particular company or region.  The Bank’s Monetary PolicyCommittee uses the intelligence provided by the Agents, inconjunction with information from other sources, to assist itsunderstanding and assessment of current economic conditions.  Acopy of this publication can be found at:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/agentssummary/index.htm.The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, the
East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the North West,Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, theSouth West, Wales, the West Midlands & Oxfordshire, andYorkshire & the Humber.
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic
conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in theInflation Report, obtained from:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/inflationreport/index.htm.Agents’ summary of business conditions
July 2007Demand
Consumption
The Agents’ score for the value of retail sales fell in June,
though the overall pace of growth in spending remained firm(Chart 1 ).  Reports of a modest easing in sales growth were
evident in most regions, and appeared to reflect a slowdown indiscretionary spending.
Most Agents reported an easing in sales of consumer durables
(especially furniture and audiovisual equipment) anddisappointing sales of new season fashion, with the lattercompounded by adverse weather.  There were also morereports of softer spending on consumer services, after anextended period of strong growth.  Despite the easing indiscretionary spending, the overall pace of consumptionremained firm, supported by healthy growth in expenditure onstaple goods (such as food and basic homewares).
Housing market
Housing demand also eased in June in most areas outsideLondon.  In the market for established housing, estate agenciesreported a slight fall in transactions growth.  At the same time,there was an increase in the number of instructions.  Incombination, these factors contributed to modest downwardpressure on expected price inflation for established homes insome regions.
Demand for new housing also eased in parts of the United
Kingdom.  With discounts still prevalent, builders’ marginsremained compressed, and price inflation for new dwellingswas lower than for established homes.  In contrast, demand forrental accommodation strengthened further, particularly inareas with the greatest employment opportunities, leading toupward pressure on rents.  Rental yields, however, remainedlower than historical averages.Overseas trade
External demand for goods and services remained strongoverall.  The high value of the pound relative to the dollarweighed on margins and orders for firms exporting to theUnited States and dollar-denominated markets.  However, thiswas offset by strength in demand elsewhere.  There was furthergrowth in exports of goods to Europe and the Middle East,while service exports expanded rapidly to eastern Europe, andemerging economies in Asia and Africa.  Demand for both finaland intermediate imports also remained high, consistent withhealthy domestic production and the strength of the currency.
Investment
Investment intentions remained high in June.  In the serviceand manufacturing sectors, Agents’ scores were onlymarginally below their recent peaks.  Firms in both sectorscontinued to report intentions to invest in IT.  Engineeringinvestment increased, buoyed by infrastructure projects.  Andthere was also increased investment in buildings andstructures, especially in the business service sector wherestrong demand required expansion of premises, and amongmajor retailers with refurbishment plans.
Output
Primary production
Agricultural producers reported ongoing strong demand forlocally grown grains, given disruptions to global supply and theexpansion of the biofuels market.  In contrast, productiondecisions about livestock were being affected by the increasedshare of imported meat in the domestic market.
Manufacturing
Manufacturing output growth remained solid in June.  Thegreatest impetus to growth came from exports, consistentwith other reports of strong external demand.  Thosemanufacturers facing intense competition from imports indomestic markets were increasingly engaging in higher valueadded production, or in activities where they could securefaster and more reliable delivery than foreign producers.  Andthere was ongoing stimulus from the current boom in non-residential construction activity.
Construction
Construction output growth edged higher to its fastest ratesince the Agents began recording scores in mid 1997, andcapacity pressures intensified.  Activity continued to besupported by infrastructure projects, along with demand fornew retail, industrial and commercial space.  Many contactsreported full order books for the year ahead.  More Olympics-related projects were under way, and the clustering2 Agents’ summary of business conditions July 2007
20246810
2001 02 03 04 05 06 070.50.00.51.01.52.02.53.0Three months on same period a year ago
Score 
ONS (left-hand scale)Agents (right-hand scale)
+
_+
_Percentage changeChart 1 Retail sales valuesAgents’ summary of business conditions July 2007 3
of these projects was expected to exacerbate capacity
constraints in the year ahead.
Services
Service sector output continued to expand at a rapid pace,though the rate of growth appeared to have levelled out.Growth in professional and financial services remained strong,boosted by high levels of mergers and acquisitions.  Growth in‘Other business services’ was also strong, reflecting ongoingbuoyant demand for IT services and logistics.  However, theAgents’ score for consumer services, while high, fell in June,consistent with the reported easing in households’discretionary spending.
Employment
Employment intentions remained elevated.  Labour demandwas still strongest in the service sector, and employmentintentions in manufacturing had stabilised after a sustainedperiod of labour shedding.  Demand for skilled labourcontinued to exceed supply, particularly in the business serviceand construction industries, so that overall recruitmentdifficulties climbed further ( Chart 2 ), and became more
geographically widespread.  Migrant labour continued to playan important role in alleviating shortages of less-skilled labour,though there were some reports by businesses that the inflowof migrants was insufficient to meet their needs.
Capacity utilisation
Consistent with ongoing recruitment difficulties, capacitypressures persisted ( Chart 3 ).  Driven largely by business
service companies, capacity pressures remained greatest in theservice sector, and had plateaued at a level close to that at theturn of the decade.  But capacity pressures increased in themanufacturing sector, exceeding those during the previous
local peak in 2004.  Furthermore, capacity remained tightlyconstrained in the construction sector.  This mainly reflectedshortages of professional staff, though shortages of materialswere also reported.
Costs and prices
Labour costs
The Agents’ scores for labour costs were at a high level in June,though remained below their peak at the beginning of the year.These scores continued to suggest a stronger signal thanofficial data on aggregate earnings growth.  This was attributedto reports by firms of increased incentive payments and otherforms of employee compensation.  And many firms cited theimportance of additional leave.  Across-the-board paysettlements had edged up only slightly, but were expected bycontacts to increase further in the year ahead given tighterlabour market conditions.  
Input and output prices
Input cost inflation rose again in June ( Chart 4 ), with firms
reporting renewed increases in the prices of oil, oil derivatives,metals and construction materials.  Contacts in the foodprocessing and retail sectors continued to emphasise globaldemand and supply factors contributing to the rising cost offood inputs.
Against a background of higher input costs, the score for
manufacturing output price inflation picked up further in themonth, as some firms took advantage of stronger demand toraise prices and recover costs.  Scores for manufacturers’ inputand output prices were consistent with additional marginrecovery, continuing the trend evident since the beginning ofthe year.  Furthermore, Agents’ scores on pre-tax profitability101234
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07Score
+
_Relative to normal
(a) Skill shortages before January 2005.Chart 2 Recruitment difficulties(a)32101234
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07Scores
ManufacturingServices
+
_Relative to normalChart 3 Capacity constraints expected over the next six
monthshad increased for manufacturers in the past six months.
Manufacturers reported intentions to continue rebuildingmargins to levels prevailing before the 2005–06 energy priceshock.
In addition to the increase in prices and margins in the
manufacturing sector, business-to-business service priceinflation persisted at a high rate, consistent with the relativelyhigh labour cost growth in the sector, and strong demand forbusiness services.Consumer prices
Goods price inflation eased in June as the effects of the earliersharp increases in energy prices began to fall out of annualcomparisons and recent price cuts took effect.  In contrast,service price inflation edged down only marginally to remain ata high rate, leaving overall consumer price inflation elevated.Even though services have had a higher trend rate of priceinflation, the sustained strength in service prices over the pastyear was said by contacts to reflect higher labour costs androbust demand.
Looking ahead, contacts expected that consumer price
inflation would fall, driven by cuts in utilities prices, increasedpenetration of low-cost imports and competition amongmajor retailers.  Nonetheless, some contacts expected thatthese influences would be partly offset by elevated food pricesand upward pressure on road transport costs.4 Agents’ summary of business conditions July 2007
(a) Manufacturers’ non-labour input and output prices.32101234
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07Input
OutputScores
+
_Three months on same period a year agoChart 4 Input and output prices(a)