Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2007/october-2007.pdf
Date: 2007-10-31

•Growth in the value of consumer spending slowed further, reflecting aggressive discounting.
•Demand for housing also eased further in most parts of the United Kingdom, though it was too soon to
gauge the extent to which this slowing had been amplified by changed credit conditions.
• Investment intentions fell from their earlier high levels, driven by developments in the service sector.
These predated recent financial turbulence , which has had limited effect on investment decisions so far.
•Total demand for exports remained generally buoyant.
•Growth in manufacturing was solid, and that in construction remained very strong.  However, 
service sector output growth continued to ease.
• Capacity pressures lessened noticeably in service industries, but persisted elsewhere.
• Employment intentions eased somewhat, largely owing to developments in the service sector.
Recruitment difficulties persisted, but became slightly less pronounced.
•Growth in pay awards remained well contained and that in total labour costs eased further.
•Annual input price inflation fell in the month and output price inflation rose, supporting further margin
recovery by manufacturers.
•Annual consumer price inflation ticked down.  While discounting by major retailers restrained goods
price inflation overall, recent floods and rising commodity prices were putting upward pressure on retailfood prices. 
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by
the Bank of England’s Agents, following discussions with over700 businesses in the period between late August and late
September .  It provides information on the state of business
conditions, from companies across all sectors of the economy.  The report does not represent the Bank’s own views, nor does itrepresent the views of any particular company or region.  TheBank’s Monetary Policy Committee uses the intelligence providedby the Agents, in conjunction with information from other sources,to assist its understanding and assessment of current economicconditions.  A copy of this publication can be found at:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/agentssummary/index.htm.The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, the
East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the North West,Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, theSouth West, Wales, the West Midlands & Oxfordshire, andYorkshire & the Humber.
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic
conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in theInflation Report, obtained from:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/inflationreport/index.htm.Agents’ summary of business conditions
October 2007Demand
Consumption
The Agents’ score for the value of retail sales fell slightly
further in September and was well down on levels early in theyear ( Chart 1 ).  Agents reported that growth in discretionary
spending remained subdued, especially for housing-relatedexpenditures.  There were also widespread reports of weakerspending on consumer services.  And while weather conditionswere less adverse than in the past few months, they continuedto depress clothing sales and those goods and servicestypically consumed outdoors.  Part of the slowdown in thevalue of sales reflected aggressive discounting as retailerssought to avoid unwanted inventories of summer stock.Consequently, growth in sales volumes was more resilient.
Housing market
In the market for established housing, estate agencies reporteda further easing in demand.  This was combined with aslowdown in the growth of new instructions, with theintroduction of Home Information Packs now deterring somesellers.  Some Agents noted that the slowing in activity hadextended to higher-priced properties.  Sale periods werelengthening, and estate agencies claimed there had been anincrease in the share of properties sold at a discount to theasking price.  Consequently, price inflation for establishedhomes eased in most regions.
Demand for new housing had also eased in response to rises in
Bank Rate.  This had prompted greater use of incentives anddiscounting, so that price inflation for new homes had slowed.It was too soon to assess the impact of recent financialturbulence on the housing market, though some contacts hadreported an associated weakening in sentiment.  In contrast,demand for rental accommodation continued to rise in mostareas, placing further upward pressure on rents.Investment
Following an extended period of strength, investmentintentions fell quite sharply in September, though remained ata high level.  This reduction was driven by developments in theservice sector, while investment intentions of manufacturersremained robust ( Chart 2 ).  In recent months there had been
some reports that investment decisions were being reviewedor deferred, given past increases in Bank Rate.  This was mostevident in the service sector.  Importantly, downward revisionsto investment intentions predated the current financialturbulence.  Few large firms claimed that their investmentintentions had yet changed substantially, given generallystrong balance sheets and pre-existing lines of credit.  Somesmaller firms were, however, facing tighter credit conditions.But overall, it remained too early to judge the impact offinancial turbulence on investment, with many contacts at thisearly stage reporting greater concern about its potential effecton demand than the cost of capital.
Overseas trade
Given the strength of the global economy, external demandfor both capital goods and business services remainedbuoyant.  Difficult conditions for those exporting to the UnitedStates (and some dollar-denominated markets) were offset bya further strengthening in demand elsewhere.  This was mostso for exports of goods and services to Europe (notably theaccession economies) and the Middle East.  Service exportsalso continued to expand rapidly to Asia and Africa.  
Import demand by UK companies remained high.  This
included demand for consumption imports, with retailers’concerns about a possible weakening in sales not reflected intheir forward orders.2 Agents’ summary of business conditions October 2007
1.00.01.02.03.04.05.06.07.08.0
2001 02 03 04 05 06 071.51.00.50.00.51.01.52.02.53.0
Agents (right-hand scale) 
ONS (left-hand scale)Percentage change ScoreThree months on same period a year earlier
+
–
+
–Chart 1 Retail sales values
2101234
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07Scores
Services
ManufacturingInvestment intentionsThree months on same period a year earlier
+
–Chart 2 Investment intentions over the next twelve
monthsAgents’ summary of business conditions October 2007 3
Output
Primary production
Lower-than-usual yields had weighed on the volume of grain
produced, though the value of production remained wellsupported by high world grain prices.  Livestock productionhad been adversely affected by recent outbreaks of disease,particularly foot and mouth, which had restricted themovement of animals.  And there were growing reports oflivestock producers exiting the industry.
Manufacturing
Manufacturing output growth remained solid in September(Chart 3 ), supported by strong external demand for
manufactured exports, especially high-value capital goods.Production for domestic markets was also firm, particularlyamong those manufacturers exposed to non-residentialconstruction activity.  Prospects remained good, with somecontacts reporting a lengthening of order books.
Construction
Growth in construction output remained very strong (Chart 3 ).  Activity continued to be supported by
infrastructure projects, health and education, and demand fornew retail, industrial and commercial space.  And for manycontacts, order books were full for an extended period.Contacts, especially in the south, claimed that the industrywas close to full capacity, with Olympics-related projectsexpected to exacerbate capacity pressures. 
Services
In contrast to the strength in manufacturing and construction,service sector output slowed further in September ( Chart 4 ).
Following a protracted period of very strong growth, theeffects of earlier one-off boosts to demand were beginning towane.  This was most evident in the demand for professionaland business services where Agents’ scores had fallen steadily
since April, with a sharp decline recorded in September.  Thisreflected an easing in demand for services related to mergersand acquisitions, accounting standards and property.  Scoresfor ‘other’ business services had also fallen, but moremodestly.  And the Agents’ score for consumer services fellnoticeably further in September, consistent with the easing inhousehold spending.  The slowing in service sector growth wasunder way ahead of recent financial turbulence, and Agentsreported that it was too soon to identify how much of therecent easing was credit related.
Capacity utilisation
Capacity pressures remained higher than the average of recentyears, though were expected to ease somewhat over the nextsix months ( Chart 5 ).  In part this reflected additions to
capacity from recent investment decisions.  But it alsoreflected the current slowing in activity, which would make iteasier for companies to meet demand with existing resources.This was expected to be most apparent in the consumer 
2101234
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07ManufacturingConstructionScoresThree months on same period a year earlier
+
–Chart 3 Manufacturing and construction
101234
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07Consumer servicesBusiness servicesScoresThree months on same period a year earlier
+
–Chart 4 Service sector output
32101234
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07Scores
ManufacturingServicesRelative to normal
+
–Chart 5 Capacity constraints over the next six monthsservices sector.  In contrast, pressures were expected to persist
in business services, manufacturing and construction, wherecompanies were most affected by shortages of professionalstaff and, in some cases, materials and equipment.
Employment
Despite elevated levels of capacity utilisation, growth inemployment had been relatively modest.  The Agentsconducted a special survey of around 600 firms (accountingfor 1 million employees) to investigate this puzzle further.  The results indicated that several factors had inhibitedemployment growth over the past year.  Prominent amongthese were improvements in productivity, heightenedrecruitment difficulties, and raised materials and non-wagelabour costs ( Chart 6 ).  
Looking ahead, companies’ employment intentions eased in
September, driven by developments in the service sector.Despite this easing in overall labour demand, recruitmentdifficulties persisted, reflecting a structural shortage of skilledlabour in the business service, manufacturing and constructionindustries.  These difficulties were being compounded byincreased rates of staff turnover, particularly in businessservices and construction.  In contrast, there were fewshortages of less-skilled labour, given the large pool of migrantworkers.
Costs and prices
Labour costs
The Agents’ score for total labour cost growth was littlechanged in September, but was well below its level at thebeginning of the year.  Agents also reported that across-the-board pay settlements remained stable.  This benign picture of aggregate wage growth masked
significant wage dispersion across occupational groups ascompanies grappled with skill shortages.  And some forms ofcompensation designed to attract and retain workers (such asmore generous leave entitlements), raised unit labour costsbut were not captured in official measures of earnings.
Input and output prices
Input price inflation eased a little in September, reflecting fallsin the prices of energy, base metals and steel products.  Andthe strength of sterling continued to have a disinflationaryeffect on the cost of imported semi-finished goods.  In themonth, these factors offset the ongoing increases in othercommodity prices (notably food inputs, oil, oil derivatives, andtimber), along with rising freight charges.
Manufacturing output price inflation was little changed in
September, and well up on its level of a year ago.Consequently, inflation of output prices continued to outstripthat for input prices, supporting further margin recovery bymanufacturers.  This outcome was consistent with reports bysome companies of increased pricing power.  Also reflective ofmargin recovery, the Agents’ scores on manufacturers’ pre-taxprofitability jumped higher in the month, having increasedsteadily over the past year.
Business-to-business service price inflation fell in September.
Contacts attributed this fall to a combination of an easing indemand and increased competition in the tendering for‘commoditised’ services.
Consumer prices
Annual goods price inflation edged down again in September,partly reflecting the path of utilities prices over the past year.Annual service price inflation was unchanged, so that overallconsumer price inflation also fell.
The unusually high degree of discounting this summer had
placed downward pressure on retail goods prices.  Discountinghad occurred in response to the build-up of inventories ofsummer stock, stemming from unseasonable weather.  It alsostemmed from intense competition between majorsupermarket chains, which are currently engaged in a ‘pricewar’ on a large range of dry grocery items.  However, risingglobal commodity prices and supply disruptions from localfloods had resulted in sizable increases in wholesale fresh foodprices, with many suppliers reporting that they were no longerable to absorb cost increases.  Consequently, retailers werefaced with higher wholesale prices and substantial increases inretail food prices were expected in coming months.4 Agents’ summary of business conditions October 2007
80 60 40 20 0 20Hoarding labourAgency staffDemand uncertaintyUse of capitalNon-wage employment costsNon-labour input costsRecruitment difﬁcultiesProductivity
Per cent balance+ –Chart 6 Factors inhibiting employment growth