Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2007/august-2007.pdf
Date: 2007-08-31

•Consumption growth slowed, with an easing in expenditure on both goods and services.
•Demand for housing also eased in most parts of the United Kingdom.
•In contrast, investment intentions remained robust in the service and manufacturing sectors.
•Overall, demand for exports was again buoyant.  
•Recent flooding had affected agricultural output and disrupted production in local economies.  But
growth in manufacturing was solid, and construction output continued to expand rapidly.  Service sector
output growth also remained strong, though may have peaked.
•Employment intentions were elevated, with labour demand remaining strongest in the service sector.
Recruitment difficulties became more pronounced.
•Capacity pressures persisted in the construction and service sectors and also rose in manufacturing.
•Growth in pay awards remained well contained.  Total labour costs continued to increase more rapidly
than the official earnings data, but had eased slightly.
•Annual input price inflation increased again in the month, as did output price inflation , and the process
of margin rebuilding by manufacturers continued.
• Annual consumer price inflation ticked down, but remained higher than the average of recent years.
Despite discounting by retailers, recent floods created uncertainty about the outlook for food prices. 
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by
the Bank of England’s Agents, following discussions with nearly700 businesses in the period between late June and late July .  It
provides information on the state of business conditions, fromcompanies across all sectors of the economy.  The report does notrepresent the Bank’s own views, nor does it represent the views ofany particular company or region.  The Bank’s Monetary PolicyCommittee uses the intelligence provided by the Agents, inconjunction with information from other sources, to assist itsunderstanding and assessment of current economic conditions.  Acopy of this publication can be found at:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/agentssummary/index.htm.The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, the
East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the North West,Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, theSouth West, Wales, the West Midlands & Oxfordshire, andYorkshire & the Humber.
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic
conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in theInflation Report, obtained from:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/inflationreport/index.htm.Agents’ summary of business conditions
August 2007Demand
Consumption
The Agents’ score for the value of retail sales fell further in July,
with the pace of spending growth well below its peak at thebeginning of the year ( Chart 1 ).
An easing in sales growth was evident for both goods and
services.  Most Agents reported an easing in sales of consumerdurables (such as furniture and household fittings) anddisappointing sales of summer fashion.  Outside London, asimilar easing was evident for sales of consumer services.Contacts claimed that the slowdown in spending, while mostevident for discretionary items, was amplified by the effects ofadverse weather.  Reflecting these developments, there werereports of an unintended build-up of stocks and active pricediscounting.
Housing market
Housing demand also eased again in the month, withindications of this cooling extending to London and NorthernIreland.  In the market for established housing, estate agenciesreported another modest fall in transactions growth.  Thenumber of new instructions remained higher than earlier thisyear, and there was a further downward revision to sellers’asking prices, so that price inflation for established homesmoderated in most parts of the United Kingdom.
Demand for new housing also eased, though supply-side issues
remained the key constraint on additions to the dwelling stock.Discounts were prevalent, and builders’ margins weretightening, weighing on price inflation for new dwellings.
Investment
In contrast to softer household spending, spending bybusinesses remained robust.  Investment intentions stabilisedat a high level in July and pointed to continued growth in
business investment over the coming year ( Chart 2 ).  Firms in
all sectors continued to report intentions to invest in IT.Investment in buildings and structures increased, especially in the business service and retail sectors, as did investment in transport and utilities.  And there were ongoing reports of investment designed to achieve environmental goals.
Overseas trade
Overall, external demand remained strong.  While the highvalue of the pound relative to the dollar weighed on marginsand orders for firms exporting to the United States, demand inother markets continued to strengthen.  There was growth inexports of goods and services to Europe (particularly easternEurope) and the Middle East.  Service exports also expandedrapidly to emerging economies in Asia and Africa.  Demand forboth final and intermediate imports remained high, consistentwith the appreciation of sterling and healthy domesticproduction.
Output
In the United Kingdom as a whole, output growth remainedfirm in July.  But recent floods greatly disrupted some localeconomies.  Companies in flood-affected counties faceddamage to property, and limited access to labour and non-labour inputs.  Within these counties, output growth inmany industries was temporarily restricted, thoughconstruction companies experienced a partially offsettingincrease in demand for repair work.  At this stage, beyondagriculture, there had been little effect on economy-wideproduction.  The effects on agriculture would become cleareras the harvesting and cropping season proceeds.2 Agents’ summary of business conditions August 2007
Three months on same period a year earlier
1.00.01.02.03.04.05.06.07.08.0
2001 02 03 04 05 06 071.51.00.50.00.51.01.52.02.53.0
Agents (right-hand scale)
ONS (left-hand scale)Percentage change Score
_+
_+Chart 1 Retail sales values
2101234
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07Scores
Services
ManufacturingThree months on same period a year earlier
_+Chart 2 Investment intentions over the next twelve
monthsAgents’ summary of business conditions August 2007 3
Primary production
In key growing districts, floods caused significant damage to
crops, and difficulty in both harvesting and planting for thenext season.  The resulting shortages of local supplyencouraged increased importation of a range of fresh produce.
Manufacturing
Manufacturing output growth remained solid in July.  Theimpetus to manufacturing growth was greatest from exports(particularly of capital goods) but domestic production wasalso firm.  Manufacturers competing in domestic markets withimports were increasingly engaging in higher value-addedproduction, and in activities where they could offer morereliable delivery or follow-up service than foreign suppliers.And the current boom in non-residential construction activityremained supportive of manufacturing activity.
Construction
Construction output growth rose further in July, havingincreased sharply for much of the past year.  Many contactsreported that the industry was close to full capacity.  Activitycontinued to be supported by infrastructure projects, alongwith demand for new retail, industrial and commercial space.Spending on health and education was also stimulatinggrowth.  With many firms reporting full order books for theyear ahead, Olympics-related projects were expected toexacerbate capacity constraints.
Services
Activity in the service sector remained strong, though therewere signs this month that it may have peaked.  Agents’ scoresfor professional and financial services ticked down for thesecond month, reflecting a slight easing in merger andacquisitions activity, and in demand for compliance andproperty-related work.  This induced a small fall in the score fortotal business services, after a period of protracted strength.The Agents’ score for consumer services fell again in July,consistent with evidence of an easing in households’discretionary spending.
Employment
Employment intentions remained elevated, but had flattenedout in recent months.  Labour demand was still strongest inthe service sector, while employment intentions inmanufacturing had hovered around an unchanged level formuch of this year, after an extended period of labour shedding.Demand for skilled labour continued to exceed supply,especially in the business services and construction industries.Consequently, recruitment difficulties rose further ( Chart 3 ),and became more geographically widespread.  Contacts
emphasised the global nature of skill shortages forprofessionals, and the likelihood of these persisting.  However,the influx of migrants continued to alleviate shortages of less-skilled labour in a range of industries.
Capacity utilisation
Consistent with recruitment difficulties, capacity pressureswere expected to persist in coming months ( Chart 4 ).  Scores
remained highest in the service sector, where they hadplateaued close to levels at the turn of the decade.  However,those for the manufacturing sector rose to their highest levelsince the late 1990s.  And capacity remained tightlyconstrained in the construction sector.  These pressures mainlyreflected shortages of professional staff, though there weresome reports of shortages of materials and equipment whichwere delaying the completion of work.101234
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07Score
_+Relative to normal
(a) Skill shortages before January 2005.Chart 3 Recruitment difficulties(a)
32101234
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07Scores
ManufacturingServicesRelative to normal
_+Chart 4 Capacity constraints expected over the next six
monthsCosts and prices
Labour costs
The Agents’ score for labour costs remained high in July,
though was below its peak at the beginning of the year.Agents’ scores continued to provide a stronger signal thanofficial data, with firms reporting increased use of incentivepayments and other forms of employee compensation,particularly leave benefits.  There were also more reports ofpayments designed to attract and retain staff in a tighterlabour market.  Across-the-board pay settlements remainedwell contained, but some contacts expected them to increasein the year ahead given greater tightness of the labour market.
Input and output prices
Annual input cost inflation rose again in July ( Chart 5 ), with
firms reporting renewed increases in the prices of a broadrange of commodities and goods used in the early stages ofproduction.  Prominent among the cost increases were sharprises in the price of food inputs, oil, oil derivatives, metals,timber and other building materials.  The rise in these inputcosts more than offset recent reductions in utilities prices.And despite the high value of sterling, some contacts reportedthat their contract prices for goods imported from China hadrisen in recent months. The score for manufacturing output price inflation was little
changed in July, but remained well up on its level early in theyear.  During the course of the year, some firms had takenadvantage of stronger demand to raise prices and recovercosts.  Consistent with this process of margin recovery, theAgents’ scores on pre-tax profitability for manufacturers rosefurther in the month.
Business-to-business service price inflation also persisted at a
high rate, reflecting ongoing strength in labour costs in thesector and buoyant demand for business services.  However,there were tentative signs that price inflation had stabilised inresponse to increased competition between large serviceproviders and smaller, less established firms.
Consumer prices
Annual goods price inflation ticked down again in July as earliersharp increases in energy prices fell out of annual comparisonsand recent price cuts took effect.  Service price inflation alsoedged down from its rates earlier in the year, but remainedhigh, so that overall consumer price inflation exceeded itsaverage of recent years.
Global commodity price movements and local floods had
placed upward pressure on the retail prices of fresh food.  Thesharpest increases were for root vegetables, and thosevegetables in scarce supply in Europe at this time of year.Nonetheless, fierce competition between major supermarketswas said to be restraining growth in retail food price inflationoverall.  And non-food price inflation was expected to fall, withreports of aggressive discounting as retailers sought to avoidholding excess stock, given the recent slowdown in salesgrowth.4 Agents’ summary of business conditions August 2007
(a) Manufacturers’ non-labour input and output prices.32101234
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07Input and output prices
Input
OutputScoresThree months on same period a year earlier
_+Chart 5 Manufacturers’ input and output prices(a)