Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2007/june-2007.pdf
Date: 2007-06-30

•Consumption growth remained strong overall, though discretionary spending appeared to ease.
•Demand for housing was firm nationally, but a little more disparate across regions.
•Investment intentions strengthened further.
•Demand for exports remained buoyant overall, though orders were weaker from the United States.
•Growth in manufacturing remained solid, supported by increases in both external and domestic demand.
•Output in the construction and service sectors continued to expand at a strong pace.
•Employment intentions were high, with labour demand strongest in the service sector.  And recruitment
difficulties became more pronounced in most regions.
•Capacity pressures persisted, especially in the construction and service sectors, but also became more
evident in manufacturing.
•Growth in pay awards increased modestly.  Other forms of employee compensation continued to drive
somewhat stronger annual growth in total labour costs than indicated by official data.
•Annual input price inflation increased again in the month, and output price inflation edged up.  And
there was more evidence of margin rebuilding.
•Annual consumer price inflation remained relatively high.
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by
the Bank of England’s Agents, following discussions with nearly700 businesses in the period between late April and late May .  It
provides information on the state of business conditions, fromcompanies across all sectors of the economy.  The report does notrepresent the Bank’s own views, nor does it represent the views ofany particular company or region.  The Bank’s Monetary PolicyCommittee uses the intelligence provided by the Agents, inconjunction with information from other sources, to assist itsunderstanding and assessment of current economic conditions.  Acopy of this publication can be found at:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/agentssummary/index.htm.The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, the
East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the North West,Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, theSouth West, Wales, the West Midlands & Oxfordshire, andYorkshire & the Humber.
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic
conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in theInflation Report, obtained from:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/inflationreport/index.htm.Agents’ summary of business conditions
June 2007Demand
Consumption
The Agents’ score for the value of retail sales was little
changed in May, with the overall pace of annual growth inspending remaining firm.  This relatively strong overall growthrate did, however, mask variations in the performance of keyexpenditure classes.
Robust growth in spending was evident for staple goods
(particularly food and basic homewares).  But a number ofAgents reported an easing in sales of consumer durables(especially furniture and audiovisual equipment).  And therewere some reports of a modest slowing in spending onconsumer services, after an extended period of strong growth.This was considered by retailers to be an early signal of aneasing in discretionary spending, consistent with the effects oftighter monetary policy.
Housing market
Housing demand remained firm nationally, though there weresigns that it had eased in some regions.  In the market forestablished housing, estate agencies reported a slightslowdown in transactions growth in the month.  There hadbeen a modest increase in the number of new instructions,induced by the (now delayed) introduction of HomeInformation Packs.  The increase in supply of establishedhousing did little to contain house price rises, however, as thelevel of demand continued to exceed the supply of homes. 
Rental demand remained strong and there were further reports
of interest by investors in the buy-to-let market.  Demand fornew housing remained weaker than for established homes, andsupply-side issues continued to constrain additions to thedwelling stock.  With discounts still prevalent, builders’margins remained tight, and price inflation for new dwellingswas again lower than for established homes.
Overseas trade
External demand for both goods and services remained strong.Particular strength was evident in exports of goods to Europeand the Middle East, while service exports were expandingrapidly to emerging economies in Asia and Africa.  But anumber of contacts reported that the appreciation of sterlingagainst the dollar was now weighing on export orders from theUnited States.  Beyond this market, the rise in sterling over thepast year continued to be reflected in lower margins ratherthan export orders.  Demand for imports (both final andintermediate) also remained high, consistent with healthydomestic spending and the high value of the pound.  As aresult, there were reports of congestion at some UK ports.Investment
Investment intentions strengthened further.  In the servicesector, Agents’ scores reached their highest level since theseries began in mid-1997 ( Chart 1 ).  And investment intentions
in the manufacturing sector were at their highest level in closeto a decade, having risen sharply in recent months.  Firms werereportedly investing heavily in IT.  Those in the service sectorhad increased IT investment in order to expand capacity, whilemanufacturers were focusing on IT to enhance productivityand competitiveness.  There were also reports of increasedinvestment in buildings and structures, particularly in theservice sector where strong demand conditions were requiringexpansion of premises.
Output
Primary production
Agricultural producers continued to report strong demand forlocally grown grains, given weak harvests elsewhere in theworld, coupled with expansion of the market for biofuels.Higher grain prices were encouraging some switching ofproduction from livestock to crops.
Manufacturing
Manufacturing output growth remained solid in May, withincreases in both external and domestic demand.  The impetusto growth from external demand was strongest, with highvalue-added manufacturers expanding their export markets.Manufacturers competing with imports in domestic marketswere also increasing their focus on higher value-addedproduction.  Others continued to benefit from the currentboom in non-residential construction activity.
Construction
Construction output growth rose in May to its fastest ratesince the Agents have recorded scores in mid-1997, and2 Agents’ summary of business conditions June 2007
2101234
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07Scores
Services
ManufacturingInvestment intentions
Three months on same period a year ago
_+Chart 1 Investment intentions over the next twelve
monthsAgents’ summary of business conditions June 2007 3
capacity pressures intensified.  Activity continued to be
supported by infrastructure projects, along with high levels ofdemand for new retail, warehousing and commercial space.Most contacts expected demand to remain strong over thecoming year, so that forward orders were plentiful.  However,the clustering of projects associated with the Olympics wasexpected to exacerbate capacity constraints.
Services
Growth in service sector output also continued at a rapid pace,and the Agents’ score for annual growth in the value ofbusiness services remained close to its recent high.  Growth ofprofessional and financial services remained strong, buoyed bymergers and acquisitions, though there was a modest easingfrom the exceptional rate seen last month in some regions.Growth in ‘Other business services’ picked up sharply,reflecting greater demand for IT services and logistics.  Growthin consumer services, while high, ticked down in May.
Employment
Employment intentions remained high in May.  And whilelabour demand was still strongest in the service sector,employment intentions in manufacturing were stabilising aftera decade of labour shedding.  Demand for skilled labourcontinued to outstrip supply, particularly in the businessservice and construction industries, so that recruitmentdifficulties rose further ( Chart 2 ), and became more
widespread across regions.  Migrant labour continued to playan important role in alleviating shortages of less skilled labour.But even here there were reports that it had become moredifficult to obtain migrant workers as recruitment from A8countries slowed and that from the newest accession countrieswas yet to have an impact.Capacity utilisation
Consistent with these recruitment difficulties, capacitypressures persisted ( Chart 3 ).  Pressures were most acute in
the service sector.  But they had steadily increased in themanufacturing sector, so that rates of capacity utilisation werenow clearly above the ‘comfortable’ levels that correspondedto a zero score, and exceeded the previous local peak in 2004.Capacity was also tightly constrained in the constructionsector, mainly reflecting shortages of professional staff.
Most firms were responding to capacity constraints by seeking
to increase their capital and labour input, including importedlabour.  But these efforts were often insufficient to avoidturning away lower-margin work or increasing prices,particularly in business service industries.  Firms in both thebusiness services and construction sectors reportedexpectations that order books were likely to remain full for anextended period.
Costs and prices
Labour costs
The Agents’ scores for annual growth in total labour costs peremployee remained high in the service sector, but easedfurther in manufacturing, so that overall labour cost growthwas slightly slower.  Despite this easing, the Agents’ scores forlabour costs continued to suggest a somewhat strongerpicture than official data on aggregate earnings growth.
In the service sector, labour cost pressures were geographically
widespread, with half the Agents recording scores as high asthat for London.  This cost pressure was commonly attributedto incentive payments and other forms of employeecompensation (such as pension payments, health insurance
101234
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07Score Three months on same period a year ago
_+
Note:  Skill shortages before January 2005.
(a) Relative to normal.  Agents are asked to place a value on their assessment of the degree of
difficulty on a scale from -5 to +5 consistent with their reports.  Note:  Capacity utilisation relative to normal before January 2005.
Chart 2 Recruitment difficulties(a)3201234
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07Scores
ManufacturingServicesThree months on same period a year ago
1+
–Chart 3 Capacity constraints expected over the next six
monthsand additional leave benefits).  Across-the-board pay
settlements were said to have risen modestly, as firmsresponded to a perceived tightening in labour marketconditions.  A number of contacts claimed that the climate forwage bargaining had become more difficult.
Input and output prices
Input cost inflation rose again in May ( Chart 4 ), with firms
reporting renewed increases in the prices of oil, oil derivatives,metals and construction materials.  But many contactsengaged in food processing or retailing also emphasised therising cost of food inputs, and thought this would be a sourceof sustained cost pressure.  The growing market for bio-fuelswas reported as a driver of higher food costs, as crop supplieswere diverted from production of food to energy.  Climaticevents (such as drought in Australia) had also weighed onglobal supply of key food inputs.  And food demand from Asiahad been rising rapidly.  Manufacturers were reportedlyaccepting higher prices for food inputs in return for greatersecurity of supply.
The score for manufacturing output price inflation picked up in
May, with some firms taking advantage of strong demand toraise prices and recover costs ( Chart 4 ).  The difference
between the Agents’ scores for input and output pricessuggested that margin recovery in the manufacturing sectorhad been under way over the past six months or so, after anextended period of margin compression.  This was alsoconsistent with Agents’ scores on pre-tax profitability, whichhad increased most clearly for manufacturers in recentmonths.  Manufacturers reported intentions to rebuild marginsfurther this year, but typically indicated a desire for margins tobe gradually restored to the level prevailing before the2005–06 energy price shock, rather than to a higher level.  Inaddition to these developments, annual business-to-businessservice price inflation persisted at a high rate.  This reflectedwage outcomes in the service sector, and greater pricing
power, given the strong demand for business services.
Consumer prices
Consumer price inflation remained relatively high in May.Within this, however, goods price inflation had eased as theeffects of earlier sharp increases in energy prices began to fallout of annual comparisons and recent price cuts took effect.Service price inflation, on the other hand, persisted at a highrate.  While services tend to have a higher trend rate ofinflation, the steady pickup in service prices over the past eightmonths reflected higher labour costs and robust demand.  
With upstream inflationary pressures evident in the input and
output price prices of producers, an important question wasthe extent to which they would be reflected in the final pricesfaced by consumers.  During April and May, the Agentsconducted a survey of retailers to gauge expected increases incosts, prices and margins over the year ahead.  The surveycovered 160 retailers, including the largest retailers in theUnited Kingdom, with a combined turnover of £144 billion.  Akey finding was that more retailers of consumer servicesexpected prices to rise than expected costs to rise, with higherprices facilitating margin recovery ( Chart 5 ).  Retailers of
goods, on the other hand, did not expect significant price rises,despite being faced with rising costs.  Nonetheless, they stillanticipated margin recovery, presenting a puzzle.  Inattempting to explain the puzzle it was found that cost growthwas likely to have been overstated, as some respondentsreported on the cost of labour and materials, excluding othercosts (such as distribution) where savings were being made.But a common theme was that retailers would achieve highermargins through increases in the share of high-margin goodssold and more active use of their buying power to enhancesupply-chain efficiencies.4 Agents’ summary of business conditions June 2007
Note:  Manufacturers’ output prices.1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 0732101234
OutputInputScores
_+Chart 4 Input and output prices
101030507090
Costs Prices MarginsGoods
Services Net percentage balance
expecting an increase
_+Chart 5 Expected changes for retailers over the next
twelve months