Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2007/may-2007.pdf
Date: 2007-05-31

• Consumption growth picked up, with retail sales boosted by unseasonably warm weather.
•Demand for housing was firm, and there was continued upward pressure on house prices.
• Investment intentions strengthened further, especially in the service sector.
•Demand for exports remained buoyant and exceeded companies’ expectations.
• Manufacturing activity remained well supported by external demand.
•Output growth in both the construction and service sectors continued to rise.
• Employment intentions increased, driven largely by demand for labour in the service sector.  And
recruitment difficulties became more pronounced in most regions.
• Capacity pressures remained high, especially in the construction and service sectors, but also became
more evident in manufacturing.
•Growth in pay awards increased only slightly, though increases in other forms of employee compensation
continued to drive stronger reported growth in total labour costs than suggested by official data.
•The recent sharp fall in input price inflation was arrested in the month, while output price inflation
edged up — consistent with margin rebuilding.
• Consumer price inflation remained elevated.
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by
the Bank of England’s Agents, following discussions with nearly900 businesses in the period between late March and late April .  It
provides information on the state of business conditions, fromcompanies across all sectors of the economy.  The report does notrepresent the Bank’s own views, nor does it represent the views ofany particular company or region.  The Bank’s Monetary PolicyCommittee uses the intelligence provided by the Agents, inconjunction with information from other sources, to assist itsunderstanding and assessment of current economic conditions.  Acopy of this publication can be found at:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/agentssummary/index.htm.The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, the
East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the North West,Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, theSouth West, Wales, the West Midlands & Oxfordshire, andYorkshire & the Humber.
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic
conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in theInflation Report, obtained from:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/inflationreport/index.htm.Agents’ summary of business conditions
May 2007Demand
Consumption
The Agents’ score for retail sales picked up in April ( Chart 1 ).
While the increase was not evident in all regions, most Agentsreported that sales had benefited from unseasonably warmweather, particularly during the Easter period.
Reflecting warmer weather, strong sales were reported for
new-season clothing, and goods used in gardening and homerenovation.  Demand for high-tech electronics remainedbuoyant.  And spending on consumer leisure services wasgenerally strong, further supporting growth in totalconsumption.
While retailers’ sentiment had been boosted by unexpectedly
strong sales, they were still cautious about the outlook, giventhe extent of media speculation about future interest rate risesand reports of tighter lending criteria.
Housing market
Demand for housing remained firm overall.  In the market forestablished housing, demand continued to outstrip thenumber of instructions so upward pressure on house pricespersisted.  
The high cost of house purchase continued to stimulate 
rental demand from would-be buyers, and migrants alsoboosted demand for rental accommodation.  Consequently,there were reports of growing interest by investors in the buy-to-let market, most notably in London and southernregions.
Demand for new housing was again less robust than for
established homes.  With incentives still prevalent in someregions, price inflation for new dwellings was slower than for
established homes and builders’ margins remained tight.
Overseas trade
External demand for both goods and services remained strong,and continued to exceed expectations.  Strength in exportswas evident to a broad range of markets;  this included theUnited States, despite the appreciation of sterling against thedollar.  While the high value of sterling had made exportersless competitive, the response of companies had so far been tolower their margins so that orders were little affected.Demand for imports (both final and intermediate) alsoremained high, consistent with healthy domestic spending andthe rise in the value of the pound over the past year.
Investment
Investment intentions strengthened again.  In the servicesector, Agents’ scores continued to climb and were at theirhighest level since the series began in mid-1997 ( Chart 2 ).  But
investment intentions in the manufacturing sector were also attheir highest level in close to a decade, with particular strengthin the automotive industry.  Across the economy, companiesreported they were investing heavily in IT.  Those in the servicesector had increased IT investment in order to help meetdemand, while manufacturers were more heavily focused on ITto enhance productivity and competitiveness.  There were alsoreports of increased investment in buildings and structures,particularly in the service sector where demand conditionswere the most buoyant.
Output
Primary production
Agricultural producers reported that crops were progressingwell and that demand for locally grown cereal remained firm,2 Agents’ summary of business conditions May 2007
2001 02 03 04 05 06 07Score 
0.50.00.51.01.52.02.53.0
+
_
20246810
+
_ONS 
  (left-hand scale)Agents (right-hand scale)Three months on same period a year earlier
Percentage changeChart 1 Retail sales values
2101234
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07Scores
Services
Manufacturing+
_Three months on same period a year earlierChart 2 Investment intentions over the next yearAgents’ summary of business conditions May 2007 3
buoyed by weak harvests elsewhere in the world coupled with
expansion of the market for biofuels.  Furthermore, risingworld prices of timber had also stimulated activity in theforestry industry.  Contacts did, however, refer to risks to thenear-term outlook for agricultural production stemming frompersistent dry conditions.
Manufacturing
Manufacturing output growth remained solid in April, mainlydue to strength in external demand.  Domestic demand formanufactures was less strong, but greater than levels of recentyears.  Those manufacturers who are particularly exposed toimport competition were increasingly engaging in high value-added production.  Others, such as producers of buildingmaterials, continued to benefit from the current boom inconstruction activity.
Construction
Construction output growth rose in April to its fastest ratesince the Agents have recorded scores in mid-1997.  Activitycontinued to be supported by public and private infrastructureprojects, along with high levels of demand for new retail andcommercial space.  Forward orders were plentiful, and werebeginning to include projects related to the Olympics.Capacity constraints, especially with respect to labour,inhibited even stronger growth in construction.
Services
Growth in service sector output also continued at a rapid pace,and the Agents’ score for business services reached a recordhigh.  The strength in service sector activity was broad-based,both geographically and across industries.  While growthremained most rapid for professional and financial services, italso picked up in ‘Other business services’, reflecting greaterdemand for IT services and logistics.  Similarly, demand forconsumer services continued to accelerate.
Employment
Employment intentions remained high in April,notwithstanding the weakening in the official data.  As hasbeen evident for some time, labour demand remainedstrongest in the service sector, though across most industriesemployment intentions were a touch lower than in theprevious month.  Demand for skilled labour continued tooutstrip supply, particularly in the business service andconstruction industries, so that recruitment difficulties becamemore pronounced ( Chart 3 ).  While there was considerable
regional variation in the level of recruitment difficulties, morethan half of the Agents reported that it had become harder tofind skilled staff over the past few months.  Migrant labourcontinued to play an important role in alleviating shortages of
less-skilled labour.
Capacity utilisation
Consistent with growing recruitment difficulties, capacitypressures rose further.  Capacity utilisation remained mostacute in the service sector, but had steadily increased in themanufacturing sector so that rates of capacity utilisation werenow clearly above comfortable levels.  Capacity was alsogenerally constrained in the construction sector, reflectingshortages of professional staff.  Expectations were for capacitypressures to increase over the next six months ( Chart 4 ).
Most companies were responding to capacity constraints by
increasing their investment and labour input.  Greater labourinput was being achieved through an increase in average hours101234
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07Score
+
_Three months on same period a year earlier
Note:  Skill shortages before January 2005.
(a) Relative to normal.  Agents are asked to place a value on their assessment of the degree of
difficulty on a scale from -5 to +5 consistent with their reports.  
Note:  Capacity utilisation relative to normal before January 2005.Chart 3 Recruitment difficulties(a)
32101234
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07Scores
ManufacturingServices
+
_Three months on same period a year earlierChart 4 Capacity constraints expected over the next six
monthsworked, along with outsourcing work to overseas offices or
importing labour.  These efforts were often insufficient toavoid turning away lower-margin work or increasing prices,particularly in business service industries.
Costs and prices
Labour costs
The Agents’ scores for labour cost growth ticked down in April.Nonetheless, in most regions, growth in labour costs remainedwell above its long-run average and continued to provide adifferent signal to official data on aggregate earnings.
Labour cost pressures remained highest in the service sector.
Furthermore, these pressures were becoming increasinglywidespread, and Agents in a number of regions recorded scoresas high as that for London.  Much of this cost pressure wasattributed to greater bonuses and other forms of employeecompensation (such as pension payments, health insuranceand additional leave benefits).  In contrast, across-the-boardpay settlements rose only slightly from their pace of a yearago.
Input and output prices
The recent sharp fall in input cost inflation was arrested inApril ( Chart 5 ), with many companies reporting renewed
increases in the prices of metals and construction materials.However, input cost inflation stayed well down on rates of ayear ago, as energy costs continued to ease and the high valueof sterling contained import price inflation.  Many companiesreported that the appreciation of the currency over the pastyear had offset the effect of rising prices of goods from China.
The score for manufacturing output price inflation picked up
slightly in April with some companies reportedly takingadvantage of strong demand to raise prices ( Chart 5 ).
Furthermore, some manufacturers were retaining part of thebenefit of the overall fall in input cost inflation, so thatmargins could be rebuilt.  In fact, the difference between theAgents’ scores for input and output prices is consistent withmargin recovery in the manufacturing sector over the past six
months, after an extended period of margin compression.Manufacturers reported plans to rebuild margins further thisyear, and typically indicated an intention for margins to begradually restored to the levels prevailing before the run-up incosts since 2004.  
In addition to the edging up of prices and margins in the
manufacturing sector, business to business service priceinflation persisted at a high rate.  This reflected wageoutcomes in the service sector, and greater perceived pricingpower given the strength in demand for services.
Consumer prices
Consumer price inflation for both goods and services remainedrelatively high in April.  Price inflation for services continued tosignificantly exceed that for goods;  while it is typical for theprice of services to have a faster trend rate of increase thanthat of goods, the recent outcome reflects strength in demandand rising labour costs.  Goods price inflation stemmed fromthe earlier sharp increase in energy and output prices.  Lookingahead, contacts expected that consumer price inflation wouldslow, given cuts in utilities prices, subdued import prices andthe effects of competition among major retailers.  4 Agents’ summary of business conditions May 2007
Note:  Manufacturers’ output prices.1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 0732101234
OutputInputScores
+
_Three months on same period a year earlierChart 5 Input and output prices