Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2007/march-2007.pdf
Date: 2007-03-31

•Growth in consumer spending eased, but remained firm.
•Overall housing demand was still robust, though the outlook for new home building had become less
certain.
•Investment intentions persisted at high levels, particularly in the service sector.
•Demand for exports remained healthy despite sterling’s appreciation.
•Growth in manufacturing output eased a little.
•Construction output rose further, supported by both public and private sector projects.
•Service sector output growth continued at a rapid pace.
•Employment intentions increased, driven by demand for labour in the service sector. 
•Recruitment difficulties increased, with skill shortages becoming more broad-based.
•Capacity pressures remained high in some sectors, and were greatest in construction and services.
•Growth in labour costs strengthened, consistent with increased recruitment difficulties.
•Growth in materials costs slowed from its earlier rapid pace so that input price inflation eased again.
•Consumer price inflation remained steady at its recent relatively high rate.
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by
the Bank of England’s Agents, following discussions with over700 businesses in the period between late January and late
February .  It provides information on the state of business
conditions, from firms across all sectors of the economy.  Thereport does not represent the Bank’s own views, nor does itrepresent the views of any particular firm or region.  The Bank’sMonetary Policy Committee uses the intelligence provided by theAgents, in conjunction with information from other sources, toassist its understanding and assessment of current economicconditions.  A copy of this publication can be found at:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/agentssummary/index.htm.The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, the
East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the North West,Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, theSouth West, Wales, the West Midlands & Oxfordshire, andYorkshire & the Humber.
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic
conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in theInflation Report, obtained from:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/inflationreport/index.htm.Agents’ summary of business conditions
March 2007Demand
Consumption
Following unexpectedly strong sales in the Christmas period,
most Agencies reported that growth in retail spending hadslowed somewhat since mid-January, but remained firm (Chart 1 ).
Most classes of retail spending grew at a slower pace in
February than in January, though demand remained strongestfor high-tech electronics and was weakest for clothing,footwear and some consumer durables.  Private car sales werealso soft in February.  However, demand for consumer servicesremained strong, particularly for tourism-related services,supporting the ongoing strength in consumption overall.
Looking ahead, retailers had become slightly more cautious
about the outlook.  They emphasised that sales were beingboosted by those customers purchasing high-value products.Spending by the general customer continued to be held backby high levels of personal indebtedness, and retailers claimedthere were more cases of householders seeking individualvoluntary arrangements. 
Housing
Demand for housing remained robust, despite recent increasesin interest rates.  With land shortages and planning restrictionsinhibiting additions to the housing stock, upward pressure onestablished housing prices persisted.  There were, however,more reports that the pace of house price inflation had begunto ease in regions where the run-up had been mostpronounced.
Continued high house prices, combined with recent interest
rate rises, had weighed further on affordability.  Consequently,rental demand remained strong, boosted by demand fromwould-be first-home buyers and immigrants.  This wasreflected in an additional modest increase in rents.
Nonetheless, yields in the buy-to-let market remained lowrelative to the cost of borrowing, so that investor demand wasstill subdued.
In the market for new housing, house builders were less
optimistic this month.  The number of viewings remainedlower than normal, and builders continued to offer incentivesin order to secure sales.  Building costs and land prices rosefurther, and with limited scope to pass on higher costs to potential buyers, builders’ margins remained underdownward pressure.  Reflecting these developments, priceinflation for new dwellings was again below that forestablished homes.
Exports and imports
External demand remained solid, with continued stronggrowth in the volume of exports to a range of markets.Exporters had experienced a loss of price competitivenessarising from sterling’s recent appreciation, especially in dollar-based markets.  But so far this had mostly beenreflected in lower margins, with limited evidence of falls inorders.  Demand for imports remained high.  Strength indemand was evident for both intermediate and consumptionimports, consistent with the healthy level of domesticspending and sterling’s appreciation.
Investment
Investment intentions remained strong.  This was particularlyso in the service sector, where Agents’ scores had risen steadilyand were now above those at the turn of the decade.  Servicesector firms continued to invest in additional capacity,including offices, information systems, warehousing and retail space.  Investment intentions in the manufacturingsector, while ticking down in February, remained much higherthan a year ago.  Manufacturers remained focused oninvestment that would enhance their productivity andcompetitiveness.
In addition to generally high levels of business confidence and
liquidity, regulatory and environmental requirementscontinued to spur investment decisions.  This was most evidentin the energy sector.
Output
Primary production
Agricultural production was little affected by the recent caseof avian flu:  demand for poultry and poultry products hadremained resilient.  Both domestic and external demand forother meat products was said to be strengthening, and grainplantings increased in response to continued high world pricesfor grain.2 Agents’ summary of business conditions March 2007
20246810
2001 02 03 04 05 06 070.50.00.51.01.52.02.53.0Percentage change, three months on
same period a year earlier Score
ONS (left-hand scale)Agents (right-hand scale)
_++
_Chart 1 Retail salesAgents’ summary of business conditions March 2007 3
Manufacturing
Manufacturing output growth eased again in February, but
remained at a high level.  The recent slowing was evident in both domestic and external markets.  Against thebackground of a trend rise in import penetration, sterling’srecent appreciation had further increased demand forimported goods and brought forward plans to move capacityoverseas.  Nonetheless, positive sentiment was reported bythose manufacturers that were adapting to increasedinternational competition, and trading conditions continued to be supported by the strength in global and domesticdemand.
Construction
Output growth rose in February to its fastest rate in more thana decade.  Mild weather facilitated the advancement of variouspublic sector infrastructure projects.  Private sector activityalso remained strong, fuelled by retail and commercialprojects.  Forward orders were plentiful, though faster outputgrowth was impeded by capacity constraints;  prominentamong these constraints were shortages of skilled labour andinsufficient land with planning permission.
Services
Growth in service sector output continued at a rapid pace.  TheAgents’ score for business services rose to its highest levelsince the series began in mid-1997.  Strength in businessservices was again driven by strong demand for professionaland financial services, consistent with buoyant asset markets,high levels of M&A activity and increased regulatoryrequirements.  Accountants and lawyers expected to seecontinued strong growth in output throughout 2007.  Outputgrowth in ‘Other business services’ remained firm, reflectinggreater demand for ICT services and logistics.  Demand forconsumer services also strengthened.
Employment
Employment intentions increased further.  This was driven bythe strength in demand for labour in the business servicessector, while labour demand in the manufacturing sector hadstabilised.  Demand for skilled labour significantly exceeded itssupply in the business service sector, contributing to the rise inoverall recruitment difficulties ( Chart 2 ).  And even in the
market for unskilled workers, where labour supply is moreabundant, the Agents reported that recruitment difficultieshad also increased.
Capacity utilisation
Consistent with growing recruitment difficulties, capacitypressures remained high ( Chart 3 ).  Pressures were particularly
marked in the business service sector where skill shortageswere more severe.  However, capacity pressures were also said
to be evident in the construction sector.  Manufacturers, onthe other hand, were not generally capacity constrained.
Firms were responding to capacity constraints by increasing
their investment, increasing the average hours worked by theirstaff, outsourcing work to overseas offices and importing staffduring peak periods.  In some cases, firms were turning awaylower-margin work.  In other cases, firms were more active inincreasing prices.
Costs and prices
Pay
Growth in labour costs per employee rose further.  Theincrease was sharpest in the service sector, consistent with themore pronounced difficulties recruiting skilled labour in thissector.  However, labour costs in the manufacturing sector hadalso increased steadily over the past year.  Much of the101234
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07Score
+
_
Note:  Skill shortages before January 2005.
(a) Relative to normal.  Agents are asked to place a value on their assessment of the degree of
difficulty on a scale from -5 to +5 consistent with their reports.  Chart 2 Recruitment difficulties(a)
32101234
2001 02 03 04 05 06 07Scores
ManufacturingServices
+
_Chart 3 Capacity constraints over the next six months
Note:  Capacity utilisation relative to normal before January 2005.increased growth in labour costs was attributed to greater
bonuses and other non-wage remuneration.  Across the board,pay awards had only increased moderately.  In most sectors,pay awards were expected to be slightly higher in 2007 than in2006, given growing recruitment difficulties and higherinflation.  
Input prices
Material cost inflation eased further.  Part of this slowdownreflected the recent strength of sterling, which had loweredthe domestic price of imported inputs.  Lower world prices ofoil, gas and some metals had also helped to contain growth inthe cost of inputs.  However, given the lags in contractrenegotiation, it would be some time before lower spot pricesfor these key inputs were evident in prices faced by manyproducers.  Indeed, reflecting the earlier sharp run-up in fuelcosts, some Agents reported that fuel surcharges remained inplace.  
Output and consumer prices
Manufacturing output price inflation remained broadlyunchanged in February.  Manufacturers were passing on onlysome of the reduction in input costs to their customers, sothat margins could be rebuilt.  Manufacturers indicated thatthey planned to rebuild margins further this year, to the extentthat competitive pressures would allow.  Similarly, business tobusiness service price inflation remained steady, but at ahigher rate than inflation in the manufacturing sector.  Thisreflected stronger wage growth in the service sector, andgreater pricing power in a climate of strong demand forservices.Consumer price inflation for both goods and services also
remained relatively high in February.  Consumer service priceinflation largely reflected rising labour costs.  Goods priceinflation continued to reflect the earlier sharp increases in thecost of energy and commodity inputs ( Chart 4 ).  However,
these input costs were no longer escalating, and sterling’sappreciation had reduced the prices of imported final goods.And there had been announced reductions in utilities priceswith the prospect that other energy providers will announcesimilar falls.  Consequently, contacts indicated that upstreampressures on goods prices might be less pronounced in theperiod ahead, especially given continued intense competitionamong major retailers.4 Agents’ summary of business conditions March 2007
32101234
1998 2000 02 04 06Scores
Materials inputs
Retail goods+
_
07 99 01 03 05Chart 4 Input and retail prices