Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2007/december-2007.pdf
Date: 2007-12-31

•Growth in the value of consumer spending eased further, though growth in sales volumes remained more
resilient, supported by discounting.
•The easing in demand for housing accelerated in most regions;  house price inflation also fell.
• Investment intentions fell again, though they had been pared back ahead of the recent financial turmoil.
The Agents conducted a survey on credit conditions (see box), and found that a small majority of
companies were not affected by tighter credit conditions.  Of those affected, it was most common forcompanies to take no action or to change financial arrangements.  But around one third of companieswere changing investment plans.
•Total demand for exports remained firm.
•Growth in manufacturing output was solid.  Growth in construction , while very strong, eased noticeably,
and service sector activity slowed sharply.
• Employment intentions and recruitment difficulties eased, reflecting softer demand in the service sector.
• Capacity pressures lessened in service industries, but persisted elsewhere.
•Growth in total labour costs remained well contained.  The outlook was for slightly higher growth in
settlements but an easing in the variable component of earnings.  
•Annual input price inflation jumped higher in the month, while output price inflation was little changed.
• Annual consumer price inflation ticked up, driven by higher prices of fuel and food. 
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by
the Bank of England’s Agents, following discussions with nearly700 businesses in the period between late October and late
November .  It provides information on the state of business
conditions, from companies across all sectors of the economy.  The report does not represent the Bank’s own views, nor does itrepresent the views of any particular company or region.  TheBank’s Monetary Policy Committee uses the intelligence providedby the Agents, in conjunction with information from other sources,to assist its understanding and assessment of current economicconditions.  A copy of this publication can be found at:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/agentssummary/index.htm.The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, the
East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the North West,Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, theSouth West, Wales, the West Midlands & Oxfordshire, andYorkshire & the Humber.
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic
conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in theInflation Report, obtained from:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/inflationreport/index.htm.Agents’ summary of business conditions
December 2007Demand
Consumption
The Agents’ score for the value of retail sales fell slightly
further in November, and was well down on its level in the firsthalf of the year.  However, most of the easing in spendinggrowth occurred ahead of the recent financial market turmoil(Chart 1 ).
Agents continued to report subdued growth in discretionary
spending.  Softer spending was most evident for housing-related expenditures, consistent with the easing inhousing demand.  And there were further reports of weak salesfor product lines typically purchased by those middle-incomegroups facing increased interest costs.  Spending on consumerservices also remained subdued in most parts of the UnitedKingdom, but had stabilised in recent months. 
Price discounting remained prevalent, as retailers sought to
stimulate demand and reduce unwanted inventories.Consequently, growth in the volume of sales remainedstronger than sales values, particularly for clothing.Nonetheless, retailers expressed concern about the outlook forconsumer spending, and some had revised down theirexpectations for the first quarter of 2008.
Housing market
The slowdown in housing demand accelerated in November.In the market for established housing, estate agencies reported lower levels of enquiries, and claimed that somepotential buyers were deferring decisions until anticipatedreductions in interest rates were realised.  Others were beingdeterred by tighter credit conditions.  And given recentreductions in house price expectations, there were fewer newinstructions.  Overall market conditions were described asunseasonably weak across the United Kingdom, with saleperiods lengthening and vendors accepting discounts on saleprices.  Consequently, price inflation for established homeseased further.In the market for new housing, demand continued to weaken.
Contacts attributed this to the cumulative effect of increasesin Bank Rate and uncertainty stemming from financial marketturmoil.  Discounts and incentives were being used moreactively to secure sales, so that price inflation for new homesslowed further.  The reduction in overall building activity was modest, however, owing to the volume of pre-committedwork.  But given recent sharp falls in commitments to build, a slowdown in housing construction was expected nextyear.
Investment
Investment intentions fell in November for the fourthconsecutive month, and were well below their peak in May.This reduction was largely driven by developments in theservice sector;  manufacturers’ investment intentions edgeddown but remained firm ( Chart 2 ).  An easing in investment
intentions had already been under way in response to earlierincreases in Bank Rate.  However, that easing had beenreinforced by recent financial turmoil, especially the associatedweakening in demand for commercial property development.While a small majority of contacts interviewed still reportedno adverse effects from tighter credit conditions, a growingshare was now being affected, mainly in the business andconsumer services sectors.  Most affected companies weretaking no action at this stage, or were seeking to alter thetiming and nature of their external finance.  But around onethird were now reducing or deferring planned investment.  Formore details, see the box on the Agents’ survey.
Overseas trade
External demand remained buoyant overall, as the fall in USdemand was offset by strength in demand elsewhere.  Theaccession economies of Europe, the Middle East and emergingeconomies in Asia and Africa all remained sources of strongdemand.  By product, demand remained strongest for businessservices and capital goods.2 Agents’ summary of business conditions December 2007
1.51.00.50.00.51.01.52.02.53.0
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07ScoreThree months on same period a year earlier
+
–Chart 1 Retail sales values
2101234
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07Scores
Services
ManufacturingThree months on same period a year earlier
+
–Chart 2 Investment intentions over the next twelve
monthsAgents’ summary of business conditions December 2007 3
Demand by UK companies for intermediate imports remained
high.  But, there were reports of a modest slowing in imports of consumption goods, consistent with the easing inretail spending and reductions in desired inventories ofretailers.
Output
Manufacturing
Manufacturing output growth remained solid in November(Chart 3 ), buoyed by strong external demand for
manufactured exports, especially high-value capital goods.Production for domestic markets also remained firm,particularly for manufacturers supplying the non-residentialconstruction sector.  UK manufacturers reported generallyfavourable prospects, with many having secured niche exportmarkets.
Construction
Growth in construction output remained strong, though hadeased from its recent exceptional pace ( Chart 3 ).  There
remained large amounts of pre-committed work across abroad range of construction activities.  This was temporarilyinsulating the sector from the fall in demand for commercialproperty development that had followed the recent financialturmoil.  But looking ahead, contacts’ forecasts for growth inconstruction output had been revised down.
Services
Service sector output growth slowed further in November(Chart 4 ).  The slowdown was concentrated in professional
and business services, though demand for other businessservices had also eased.  The slowdown in growth inprofessional and business services had become evident earlier in the year but had been amplified by recent financialturmoil.Employment
Consistent with the slowdown in activity, employmentintentions eased again in November.  This outcome was largelydriven by the business services sector, where the slowing inactivity had been most pronounced.  However, slightly weakeremployment intentions were also evident in other sectors,notably consumer services and manufacturing.  Some contactsattributed the reduction in hiring intentions to uncertaintyabout demand.  There was also further evidence of a modesteasing in recruitment difficulties, mainly in business services.In contrast, recruitment difficulties persisted for professionalsin the manufacturing and construction industries, wherestructural skill shortages were evident.
Capacity utilisation
Contacts reported that capacity pressures were expected toease over the next six months, though would remain higherthan the average of recent years ( Chart 5 ).  The anticipated
easing was partly due to recent additions to capacity.  But italso reflected expectations of a slowing in activity, whichwould make it easier for companies to meet demand with2101234
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07ManufacturingConstructionScores
+
–Three months on same period a year earlierChart 3 Manufacturing and construction101234
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07Consumer servicesBusiness servicesScoresThree months on same period a year earlier
1+
–Chart 4 Service sector output
32101234
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07Scores
ManufacturingServicesRelative to normal
–+Chart 5 Capacity constraints over the next six monthsexisting resources.  Capacity pressures were expected to ease
most in the service sector.
Costs and prices
Labour costs
Agents reported that growth in across-the-board paysettlements remained stable in November.  And the Agents’score for total labour cost growth was little changed in themonth, remaining well below its level at the beginning of theyear.  While overall earnings growth appeared well contained,contacts continued to highlight the dispersion of wageoutcomes across occupational groups, with rapid wage growthstill evident for various classes of skilled labour.
Looking ahead, contacts expected settlements in January 
to be somewhat higher in response to recent increases in RPI inflation.  However, growth in the variable component ofpay was expected to fall.  Reductions in commission-basedearnings and bonuses were expected to be most evident in theservice sector.  In fact, some contacts reported that growth incommission-based earnings had already slowed, given reducedresidential property transactions and the easing in the value ofconsumer spending.
Input and output prices
Input price inflation had rebounded in the past two months(Chart 6 ).  This owed to sharp increases in the prices of energy,
oil derivatives, metals, building materials and food inputs.These costs increased despite the strength of sterling againstthe US dollar, and reflected higher world prices.  With thesurge in oil prices, many contacts were also faced with fuelsurcharges on their transport costs.  But a theme of discussionswith contacts was the rising cost of importing finished andintermediate goods from China.  This was said to reflectunderlying inflationary pressure in China along with China’srecent removal of exporters’ tax concessions.The score for manufacturing output prices was little changed
again in November.  With input price inflation displayingrenewed strength, manufacturers’ margins were reported to beunder greater pressure.  Consistent with this, the Agents’ scorefor manufacturers’ pre-tax profitability fell in November.  Inpart, margin compression reflected lags in the adjustment ofoutput prices to cost shocks.  Some contacts reported anintention to pass on higher costs.  While competitive pressureswere limiting the extent of pass-through, it was expected thatmanufacturers of food products would have greater pricingpower, should retailers be concerned about securing longer-term supplies.
The score for business-to-business service price inflation was
unchanged again in November, but was clearly lower than inthe middle of the year.  The moderation in service priceinflation reflected increased commoditisation of commonlyprovided services, but also the effects of the easing in demand.
Consumer prices
The Agents’ score for annual goods price inflation picked up inNovember reflecting higher prices for fuel and food.  Withannual service price inflation little changed, overall consumerprice inflation also ticked up.
The increase in food prices was in direct response to the rising
input costs faced by suppliers.  Price increases had been mostpronounced for dairy and cereal products, and further riseswere in prospect.  In contrast, discounting remained prevalentfor non-food items as retailers sought to stimulate demandand avoid unwanted stocks.  However, some contactsemphasised that the current phase of deep discounting wasdrawing to a close as retailers sought to arrest the erosion oftheir margins.4 Agents’ summary of business conditions December 2007
(a) Manufacturers’ non-labour input and output prices.32101234
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07Input
OutputScores
+
–Three months on same period a year earlierChart 6 Manufacturers’ input and output prices(a)Agents’ credit conditions survey
In recent months, credit conditions have been a focus of
Agents’ interviews with contacts.  In November, Agentsconducted a formal survey of 260 companies to explore creditissues in more detail.  The sample covered companies from allkey sectors of the economy and a range of firm sizes.  (Resultswere weighted by turnover.)  This box summarises the mainresults from the survey.
Many companies interviewed were relying on internal finance,
and so were not directly affected by tighter credit conditions.Of those reliant on external finance, banks and capital marketswere the main sources of finance, with the latter beingimportant for large companies.  It was also found that mostcompanies had some degree of insulation from tighter creditconditions, as the majority of those accessing external financehad a combination of fixed and floating-rate loans.
Nearly half of the companies surveyed reported that credit
conditions were tighter, this being a larger share of companiesthan apparent in earlier discussions with Agents’ contacts(Chart B1 ).  A small majority still reported that credit
conditions were not tighter.
By firm size, a greater share of larger companies (those with
more than £250 million annual turnover) experienced tightercredit conditions than did smaller companies ( Chart B2 ).  A
majority of smaller companies reported that credit conditionswere unchanged, and a sizable share did not know whethertheir conditions had changed, as they were yet to seek newfinance.When asked about how they might respond to changed credit
conditions, nearly half of respondents to the Agents’ survey didnot intend to take action at this stage.  A sizable shareindicated that they would alter their financial strategies, withchanged investment plans being the third ranked response.Consistent with their access to more diverse sources offinance, a greater share of large companies reported anintention to change financial strategies than did smallercompanies.Agents’ summary of business conditions December 2007
05101520253035404550
Conditions
tighterUnchanged Conditions
looserDon’t knowPer cent
Not tighterChart B1 Credit conditions0102030405060
Conditions
tighterUnchanged Conditions
looserDon’t knowLarge companies (>£250 million annual turnover)
Small companies (<£250 million annual turnover)Per centChart B2 Credit conditions by firm size
0102030405060
No action Change type
or timing
of ﬁnanceChange
investment
plansChange
employment
plansChange
product
pricesPer centChart B3 Expected response to changed credit
conditions