Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2007/january-2007.pdf
Date: 2007-01-31

•Consumer spending growth picked up, with many retailers seeing strong growth over the Christmas
period. 
•Activity in the housing market was relatively robust.
•Export growth remained strong, with buoyant demand from several parts of the world. 
•Investment intentions rose again, with service companies looking to expand capacity.
•Domestic manufacturing output improved.  
•Construction output growth was robust.
•Professional and financial services activity grew strongly, and other business services activity accelerated.
•Employment intentions were broadly unchanged;  skill shortages were most pronounced in professional
services.
•Capacity pressures were little changed.
•So far, concerns about intensified paypressure have had only a limited impact on companies’ pay and
settlements.
•Input price inflation fell slightly;  most of the impact from past higher energy prices had now been felt.
•Consumer price inflation edged higher.
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by
the Bank of England’s Agents, following discussions with over740 businesses in the period between late November and lateDecember 2006.  It provides information on the state of businessconditions, from firms across all sectors of the economy.  Thereport does not represent the Bank’s own views, nor does itrepresent the views of any particular firm or region.  The Bank’sMonetary Policy Committee uses the intelligence provided by theAgents, in conjunction with information from other sources, toassist its understanding and assessment of current economicconditions.  A copy of this publication can be found at:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/agentssummary/index.htm.The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, the
East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the North West,Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, theSouth West, Wales, the West Midlands & Oxfordshire, andYorkshire & the Humber.
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic
conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in theInflation Report, obtained from:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/inflationreport/index.htm.Agents’ summary of business conditions
January 2007Demand
Consumption and housing
Consumption growth strengthened in December.  Retail sales
growth picked up, exceeding retailers’ expectations in mostinstances.  Chart 1 shows results from a small survey of
Agency contacts conducted at the end of December, whichasked about sales over the Christmas period.  Mostrespondents reported that sales were higher than a year earlier,with many citing that sales were ‘substantially’ higher. 
As in recent years, several contacts noted that sales had picked
up markedly during the month, after pre-Christmas spendinghad started fairly slowly.  Footfall fell in some areas, but thecontinuing shift to internet shopping probably compensatedfor this.  The strongest demand was again for home electricalitems, particularly audio-visual equipment.  However, clothingsales had been adversely affected by unseasonably warmweather.  
Private car sales continued to show some signs of
improvement, despite December being a typically weakmonth.  But any pickup in demand was limited, and variedacross regions.  The level of sales was still relatively low,compared to the previous year.
Consumer services growth was broadly unchanged in
December.  Leisure spending was robust, with air travel andhotels seeing healthy demand.  There were also reports fromsome contacts that pubs and restaurants were starting to see stronger demand, although so far this increase had beensmall.  
Activity in the housing market was relatively robust, given the
usual seasonal slowdown around Christmas.  Demand frominvestors was healthy, but contacts noted that first-time
buyers were increasingly nervous given the recent interest raterises.  Overall, demand continued to outpace supply, withrelatively few new instructions coming on to the market.  Sohouse prices continued to rise in most regions, and goodproperties were selling quickly.  Contacts in several regionsnoted a difference between secondary transactions and sales of new homes:  the latter were often weaker, due toplanning policies resulting in some over-supply of high-densityhousing. 
Nevertheless, house builders were generally optimistic about
the outlook for next year.  While many were still usingincentives in order to sell completed properties, they had alsobenefited from the rise in demand during the past year —some contacts were once again selling developments at theplanning stage, rather than when they were built.  As a result,contacts generally expected to build at least the same numberof units in 2007 as in 2006.  But planning restrictions couldimpede those plans.
Exports and imports
Export growth remained strong in December, with contactscontinuing to report buoyant demand from several regionsincluding the Middle East, Far East and Eastern Europe.  Euro-area demand was more variable:  while some contactssaw healthy growth, others noted that the pickup in euro-areaactivity had not been reflected in stronger orders from theireuro-area customers.  Overall, euro-area demand was stilloutpaced by demand from the United States, despite concernsabout the outlook for US activity and the recent moves in thedollar/sterling exchange rate.
Imports were strong from lower-cost economies, such as
China, India and Eastern Europe, as companies continued tosource more components and products from abroad.However, consumer goods imports were somewhat weakerthan intermediate goods imports.
Investment
Investment intentions rose in both the manufacturing andservice sectors.  Service sector intentions were particularlystrong, with contacts planning to invest in a range of assets toexpand capacity including new office space, IT and telecoms,and transport equipment.  Retailers were continuing to investin new stores, and refurbish existing ones.  Manufacturinginvestment was generally more focused on reducingproduction costs rather than increasing potential output.  Butthere were further reports of higher value-added producersinvesting to expand capacity, although, across manufacturingas a whole, much expansion was still happening abroad.Utilities companies were still investing heavily.2 Agents’ summary of business conditions January 2007
01020304050
Fell
substantiallyFell slightly Unchanged Risen
slightlyRisen
substantiallyPercentage of respondentsChart 1 Retail sales over Christmas
(a) Unweighted responses of 110 contacts to the question:  over the Christmas/‘sales’ period to
date, compared with the same period last year, has the value of your sales fallensubstantially/fallen slightly/unchanged/risen slightly/risen substantially?Agents’ summary of business conditions January 2007 3
Output
Manufacturing 
Export sales growth was broadly steady in December,
continuing the strong increases in sales seen in previousmonths.  At the same time growth in production for domesticmarkets rose, although it was still somewhat weaker thanexport growth ( Chart 2 ).  The specialisation of UK
manufacturing towards high value-added activities continued,with low-value activity moving offshore.  Generally contactswere quite optimistic about the outlook for sales over the nextyear, although some were also concerned about the impact onoutput of residual margin pressure from the input (energy)cost rises seen over the past twelve months.
Construction  
Output growth was robust in December.  Once again publicsector demand underpinned activity:  education and healthprojects were likely to keep some contacts’ order books full forsome time.  But there were some signs that the overall pace ofpublic sector demand growth was easing.  However, privatesector demand was strong, particularly for officedevelopments and civil engineering projects, and constructioncompanies were seeing high levels of enquiries.
Services 
Professional and financial services activity grew strongly.Contacts reported robust demand across a range of activities,such as consultancy, legal services, accountancy and banking.The outlook for activity in 2007 was positive, although somecontacts noted that the recent strong growth in activity couldease, for example as the demand for accountancy work relatedto Sarbanes-Oxley weakened.  Activity in other businessservices accelerated in December, partly due to increasedspending on hotels, travel and corporate events fromprofessional services companies.  Recruitment companies were
also seeing strong demand from the business services sector,consistent with contacts’ employment intentions (see later).But some other areas were still relatively weak, such aslogistics and advertising.  Consumer services demand wasbroadly unchanged (see earlier).
Employment
Employment intentions were unchanged in December.Manufacturing employment was broadly stable, but there wasa chance that small net job losses could occur in the comingmonths if demand growth flattened off.  Consumer servicecontacts were looking to recruit at a relatively modest pace,while demand for new workers was still strongest in thebusiness services sector.  Skill shortages in the professional andfinancial services sector were widespread, despite furtherreports that companies were increasingly looking to migrantsfrom a variety of countries to fill even more specialisedpositions.  In contrast, companies were having little troublefilling unskilled vacancies, partly reflecting the continued readysupply of migrant labour.
Capacity utilisation
Capacity pressures were little changed.  In manufacturing,capacity utilisation picked up slightly in the face of the recentrise in demand.  But there were still a number of industrieswhere there was excess capacity to be shed.  Capacitypressures in the service sector were unchanged, withprofessional services most under pressure, reflecting frequentskill shortages.  A number of contacts also expressed concernabout skill shortages in the construction sector, which couldact as a restraint on growth going forwards.
Costs and prices
PPay  ay  
Contacts’ concern about pay pressures intensified in
December, with many noting that the rise in RPI inflationcould lead to higher wage demands.  However, so far thatpressure had been contained, with most settlements early onin the main pay round remaining close to 3%.  There weresome isolated sectors, such as financial services, where payawards had been higher, reflecting a combination of skillshortages and strong profitability.  Those higher pay awardsoften reflected rises in components of pay other thansettlements;  for example, more companies were using variableremuneration such as bonuses.  But, overall, there was littlesign yet of a widespread upturn in pay growth.  And althoughhigher wage pressure could feed into higher pay in the nextfew months, contacts expected any pickup in wage inflation tobe less than the rise in RPI inflation over the past year.2101234
2001 02 03 04 05 06Export
DomesticScores(a)
_+
(a) A score of zero indicates that output over the past three months was broadly unchanged,
compared with the same period a year earlier.  A positive (negative) score indicates thatoutput was higher (lower) than a year earlier.  For more information see Ellis, C and Pike, T(2005), ‘Introducing the Agents’ scores’, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin , Winter, 
pages 424–30.Chart 2 Manufacturing outputInput prices  
Input price inflation eased, continuing the slowdown from its
recent peak ( Chart 3 ).  Some past rises in energy prices were
still feeding through to companies, via higher material costssuch as plastics (reflecting higher oil prices) or as fixed-termcontracts were renewed (eg gas and electricity prices).However, most of the impact from the past rises in energycosts had now been felt, so input price inflation was expectedto fall back in the next few months.  The recent change in thedollar/sterling exchange rate had also helped to containcompanies’ input costs.Output and consumer prices  
Manufacturing output price inflation edged higher inDecember, as companies continued to take advantage ofstrong demand to pass on past cost increases and rebuildprofit margins.  Yet despite continued capacity pressure andskill shortages, business to business services price inflation wasstable.
Consumer price inflation also edged higher in December.
While retail services price inflation was broadly unchanged,goods price inflation picked up again.  That reflected retailers’increased readiness to pass on wholesale price increases toconsumers, particularly for foodstuffs.  However, pricecompetition for non-food items remained intense.4 Agents’ summary of business conditions January 2007
10505101520
2001 02 03 04 05 062101234Percentage change, three months on
same period a year earlier Score(a)
ONS (left-hand scale)Agents (right-hand scale)
_+
_+Chart 3 Input price inflation
(a) See footnote to Chart 2 .