Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2007/april-2007.pdf
Date: 2007-04-30

•Consumption growth stabilised, having slowed in the previous month.
•Demand for housing remained firm, though house price inflation was slightly weaker.
•Investment intentions persisted at high levels, especially in the service sector.
•Demand for exports remained buoyant, despite the continued high value of sterling.
•Growth in manufacturing output picked up, boosted by external demand.
•Output growth in both the construction and service sectors continued to strengthen.
•Employment intentions increased, driven largely by demand for labour in the service sector.  And
recruitment difficulties increased, with skill shortages becoming more broad-based across types of labour
in some regions.
•Capacity pressures remained high, particularly in the construction and service sectors.
•Growth in across-the-board pay settlements increased modestly, though increases in other forms of
remuneration became more pronounced, consistent with greater recruitment difficulties.
•In contrast, growth in materials costs slowed further, so that input price inflation eased again.  However,
output price inflation remained stable as firms rebuilt margins.
•Consumer price inflation also remained steady at its recent relatively high rate.
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by
the Bank of England’s Agents, following discussions with around850 businesses in the period between late February and late
March .  It provides information on the state of business conditions,
from firms across all sectors of the economy.  The report does notrepresent the Bank’s own views, nor does it represent the views ofany particular firm or region.  The Bank’s Monetary PolicyCommittee uses the intelligence provided by the Agents, inconjunction with information from other sources, to assist itsunderstanding and assessment of current economic conditions.  Acopy of this publication can be found at:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/agentssummary/index.htm.The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, the
East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the North West,Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, theSouth West, Wales, the West Midlands & Oxfordshire, andYorkshire & the Humber.
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic
conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in theInflation Report, obtained from:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/inflationreport/index.htm.Agents’ summary of business conditions
April 2007Demand
Consumption
Most Agents reported that growth in the value of retail sales
stabilised in March at a firm pace, having slowed noticeably inFebruary ( Chart 1 ).
Recent patterns of spending were maintained in March, 
with demand remaining strongest for high-tech electronicsand weakest for clothing, footwear and some consumerdurables (such as furniture).  In most regions, private car sales also remained subdued.  In contrast, demand forconsumer services retained broad-based strength, withparticularly healthy demand for tourism-related services.  This supported continued strength in consumption overall.
Looking ahead, retailers were cautious about the outlook,
referring to recent increases in interest rates and council taxesas factors weighing on disposable income.  They noted thatsome lower-income households were showing signs offinancial stress, and that this could restrain sales growth in theperiod ahead.
Housing market
Overall, demand for housing remained firm, despite recentincreases in interest rates.  In the market for establishedhousing, strong demand and a lack of new instructions fuelledfurther house price inflation, though prices rose at a less rapidpace than in recent months.
High house prices and recent interest rate rises continued to
erode affordability.  Consequently, rental demand remainedstrong, boosted by demand from both would-be buyers andimmigrants.  But with yields in the buy-to-let market still low,investor demand was subdued in most regions, thoughremained strong in London.Demand for new housing was less buoyant than for
established homes.  And with a shortage of land available withplanning permission, builders had difficulty adding to thedwelling stock.  Faced with limited scope to pass on costincreases to potential buyers, builders’ margins remained tight,and increases in prices of new dwellings were again slowerthan those for established homes.
Overseas trade
External demand for both goods and services remained strong,and was said to be outstripping growth in domestic demand.Furthermore, strength in exports was evident to a broad rangeof destinations.  While exporters had experienced a loss ofprice competitiveness arising from the continued high value ofsterling, this was so far largely reflected in reduced margins,with orders remaining resilient.  Demand for imports alsoremained high, consistent with robust domestic spending andthe relatively high value of the pound.
Investment
Investment intentions strengthened further.  This wasparticularly so in the service sector, where the Agents’ score reached its highest level since the series began in mid1997.  Service sector firms continued to invest in additionalcapacity to meet current high levels of demand.  Investmentintentions in the manufacturing sector remained much higher than a year ago, reflecting a continued focus onenhancing productivity and competitiveness.  Strength inconstruction activity was aslo stimulating investment, as wereregulatory requirements, especially in the transport and utilitysectors.
Output
Primary production
Agricultural production was assisted by generally mild weatherand favourable growing conditions.  Livestock producersbenefited from a strengthening of both domestic and externaldemand for meat, along with rising land prices.  Grainplantings increased in response to continued high world pricesfor grain.
Manufacturing
Manufacturing output growth ticked up in March, owinglargely to strength in export demand.  Domestic demand for manufactures was less strong, though remained well up on levels of recent years.  Despite the trend rise inimport penetration, many domestically orientedmanufacturers were reportedly adapting to increasedinternational competition by engaging in higher value-addedproduction.  Others were benefiting from the currentexceptional strength in construction activity and energyinvestment.2 Agents’ summary of business conditions April 2007
20246810
2001 02 03 04 05 06 070.50.00.51.01.52.02.53.0Percentage change, three months on
same period a year earlier Score 
ONS 
  (left-hand scale)Agents (right-hand scale)
+
_+
_Chart 1 Retail salesAgents’ summary of business conditions April 2007 3
Construction
Output growth rose in March to its fastest rate since the
Agents began recording scores in mid 1997, with mild weatherfacilitating faster progress on a range of projects.  Activity wassupported by public and private infrastructure projects, alongwith high levels of demand for new retail and commercialspace.  Forward orders were plentiful, with even strongergrowth in construction output inhibited by capacityconstraints, particularly the shortage of managerial staff.
Services
Growth in service sector output continued at a rapid pace, andthe Agents’ score for business services was at its highest in thedecade for which scores have been compiled.  While strengthin business services was again dominated by demand forprofessional and financial services, output growth in ‘Otherbusiness services’ also firmed, reflecting greater demand forICT services and logistics.  And demand for consumer servicescontinued to increase.
Employment
Employment intentions rose further in March.  This largelyreflected the growing strength in demand for labour in theservice sector, while labour demand in the manufacturingsector remained close to recent levels.  Demand for skilledlabour continued to outstrip supply, particularly in thebusiness service and construction industries, so thatrecruitment difficulties became more pronounced ( Chart 2 ).
But even in the markets for unskilled workers, where labour ismore plentiful, some Agents reported that recruitmentdifficulties had also increased.
Capacity utilisation
Consistent with growing recruitment difficulties, capacitypressures remained high, especially in the business service andconstruction sectors, and were expected to remain so over the
next six months.  And while manufacturers were generally notcapacity constrained, there were more reports of capacityutilisation being at above normal levels.
Most firms were responding to capacity constraints by
increasing their investment and the average hours worked bytheir staff, though it was also common to hear reports of firmsoutsourcing work to overseas offices or importing labour.These responses did not, however, avoid the need for otheractions:  some firms were turning away lower-margin work,while others, particularly business service firms, wereincreasing prices.
Costs and prices
Labour costs
The Agents’ scores for labour costs in the manufacturing andservice sectors remained elevated ( Chart 3 ).  Pressures were
most pronounced in the service sector, consistent with itsgreater recruitment difficulties.  However, labour costs in themanufacturing sector had also increased significantly over thepast year.  Across the economy as a whole, Agents observedthat growth in labour costs was somewhat stronger thansuggested by the official data.
With basic pay settlements having increased only modestly,
much of the reported increase in labour costs was attributedto other forms of employee compensation.  Incentivepayments were being applied to a larger share of theworkforce, and were aimed at enhancing a firm’s ability toattract and retain labour without permanently increasing thelevel of labour costs.  Firms were also increasing pensionpayments, health insurance and providing additional leavebenefits.
Input and output prices
Input cost inflation eased further in March ( Chart 4 ).  Much of
this slowdown reflected slower growth in the cost of101234
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07Score
+
_
Note:  Skill shortages before January 2005.
(a) Relative to normal.  Agents are asked to place a value on their assessment of the degree of
difficulty on a scale from -5 to +5 consistent with their reports.  Chart 2 Recruitment difficulties(a)
101234
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07ManufacturingServicesScores
+
_Chart 3 Labour costs per employeecommodities and the recent strength of sterling, which had
lowered the domestic price of imported inputs.  Falls in thecost of energy were also significant for many firms.Nonetheless, given lags in contract renegotiation, some firmsreported that they were yet to enjoy the benefits of recentreductions in spot energy prices. 
The score for manufacturing output price inflation was
unchanged in March, having been static at a high level forsome months (also Chart 4 ).  With the effects of earlier cost
shocks now abating, manufacturers appeared to be holding onto recent cost reductions to rebuild margins.  Business tobusiness service price inflation also remained steady, but at ahigher rate than inflation in the manufacturing sector,reflecting higher wage outcomes and greater pricing power inthis buoyant sector.
Given recent evidence of margin rebuilding, the Agents
conducted a survey of 230 consumer-oriented firms in themanufacturing, service and retail sectors to examine the issuemore closely.  Firms were asked to describe the extent towhich their unit costs and prices had changed over the pastyear, and the extent to which they were expected to changeover the year ahead.  They were also asked to report on the
direction of change in their margins over the past year, and theexpected change in the year ahead.  The survey revealedexpectations of a clear fall in cost inflation over the nexttwelve months.  Many firms did not intend to pass on costreductions in full so that margins could be rebuilt, shoulddemand conditions allow.  Consequently, a large net balanceof respondents expected margins to increase in the comingyear ( Chart 5 ).
Consumer prices
Consumer price inflation for both goods and services remained
relatively high in March.  Consumer service price inflationlargely reflected rising labour costs.  Goods price inflationstemmed from the earlier sharp increase in output prices.Looking ahead, however, contacts expected that consumerprice inflation would fall back, given the stabilisation of outputprice inflation, flat or falling import prices and intensecompetition among major retailers.  The extent to whichslower consumer price inflation would results was, however,said to be sensitive to the timing and degree of marginrebuilding by both suppliers and retailers of final consumergoods and services. 4 Agents’ summary of business conditions April 2007
Note: Manufacturers’ output prices.1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 0732101234
OutputInputScores
+
–Chart 4 Input and output prices
010203040506070
Down Unchanged UpPast twelve months
Next twelve months
Per centChart 5 Change in gross profit margins