Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2007/september-2007.pdf
Date: 2007-09-30

•Consumption growth slowed further, particularly spending on consumer services.
•Demand for housing also eased in most regions, as did house price inflation.
•In contrast, companies maintained healthy investment intentions .
•Total demand for exports was buoyant overall.
•Growth in manufacturing was solid, and construction output remained exceptionally strong.  However,
service sector activity seemed to have passed its peak.
•Employment intentions eased, largely owing to developments in the consumer service sector, but overall
intentions remained elevated and recruitment difficulties continued to rise.
•Capacity pressures lessened in consumer service industries, but persisted elsewhere.
•Growth in pay awards remained well contained and that in total labour costs eased slightly, though
pointed to stronger earnings growth than official data.
•While changing little in the month, annual output price inflation outstripped input price inflation so that
the process of margin rebuilding by manufacturers continued.
•Annual consumer price inflation ticked down.  Despite the impact of recent floods and rising commodity
prices, aggressive discounting by major retailers was restraining final goods price inflation. 
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by
the Bank of England’s Agents, following discussions with over700 businesses in the period between late July and late August .  It
provides information on the state of business conditions, fromcompanies across all sectors of the economy.  The report does notrepresent the Bank’s own views, nor does it represent the views ofany particular company or region.  The Bank’s Monetary PolicyCommittee uses the intelligence provided by the Agents, inconjunction with information from other sources, to assist itsunderstanding and assessment of current economic conditions.  Acopy of this publication can be found at:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/agentssummary/index.htm.The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, the
East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the North West,Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, theSouth West, Wales, the West Midlands & Oxfordshire, andYorkshire & the Humber.
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic
conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in theInflation Report, obtained from:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/inflationreport/index.htm.Agents’ summary of business conditions
September 2007Demand
Consumption
The Agents’ score for the value of retail sales ticked down in
August, having fallen in the two preceding months.Consequently, the pace of growth in retail spending was wellbelow its peak at the beginning of the year ( Chart 1 ).
Agents reported a further easing in discretionary spending,
with subdued sales of consumer durables (such as furnitureand major appliances).  And there were reports in most regionsof weaker spending on consumer services (including catering,personal and tourism-related services).  Compounding theeffects of softer discretionary spending was the unusually wetweather, which depressed sales of summer clothing and thosegoods and services typically consumed outdoors.  Given thesedevelopments, there were reports of a further build-up ofstocks, and efforts by retailers to stimulate demand throughprice discounting.  Consequently, growth in sales volumesslowed by less than that in values.
Housing market
Housing demand also eased again in the month.  In the marketfor established housing, estate agencies reported lower levelsof enquiries and another fall in transactions growth.  Thenumber of new instructions remained higher than a year ago,as homeowners had brought forward sales to avoid theintroduction of HIPs.  Sale periods were reported to belengthening, and price inflation for established homes eased inmost regions. 
Investment
Despite softer household spending, spending by businessesgenerally remained robust.  Investment intentions remainedhigh in August, though were slightly below their peak of mid-year ( Chart 2 ).  Companies continued to invest in IT to
enhance efficiency or facilitate on-line sales.  Investment inbuildings and structures was supported by business service
companies expanding their premises, and by retailers’refurbishment plans.  Investment in transport and utilitiesremained strong, as did investment designed to achieveenvironmental goals.  Nonetheless, there were a few reportsthat some investment decisions were being reviewed ordeferred given the rising cost of finance and tighter creditconditions.  It was, however, too early to gauge the extent towhich this reflected the impact of recent turmoil in financialmarkets.
Overseas trade
External demand for both capital goods and business servicesremained strong.  While the high value of the pound relative tothe dollar continued to erode margins and orders forcompanies exporting to the United States, demand elsewherestrengthened.  This was most evident in exports of goods andservices to Europe and to the Middle East.  Service exports alsoexpanded rapidly to emerging economies in Asia and Africa.Demand by UK companies for intermediate imports remainedhigh, reflecting the strength of the currency and solid growthin domestic production.
Primary production
In some key growing districts, agricultural productionremained affected by recent flooding and earlier unseasonablyheavy rain, which had inhibited the harvesting of vegetablesand new plantings.  However, more recent improvements inweather facilitated satisfactory grain harvests, though yieldshad been lower than usual.
Manufacturing
Manufacturing output growth remained firm in August,buoyed by strong external demand for manufactured exports,particularly high-value capital goods.  Domestic production2 Agents’ summary of business conditions September 2007
1.00.01.02.03.04.05.06.07.08.0
2001 02 03 04 05 06 071.51.00.50.00.51.01.52.02.53.0
Agents (right-hand scale)
ONS (left-hand scale)Percentage change Score
+
–+
–Three months on same period a year earlierChart 1 Retail sales values
2101234
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07Scores
Services
ManufacturingInvestment intentionsThree months on same period a year earlier
+
–Chart 2 Investment intentions over the next twelve
monthsAgents’ summary of business conditions September 2007 3
was also firm, most notably among those manufacturers
benefiting from the current boom in non-residentialconstruction activity.
Construction
Construction output continued apace, with all Agentsobserving exceptional growth in this sector.  Many contactsclaimed that the industry was close to full capacity.  Activitycontinued to be supported by infrastructure projects, healthand education, and demand for new retail, industrial andcommercial space.  Numerous companies reported full orderbooks for extended periods.  Consequently, Olympics-relatedprojects were expected to exacerbate capacity pressures.
Services
There were clearer signs in August that service sector activitymay have passed its peak ( Chart 3 ).  Following a protracted
period of very strong growth, Agents’ scores for professionaland financial services had fallen steadily since April.  Thisreflected a slight easing in the demand for services related tomergers and acquisitions, accounting standards and property.Scores for other business services had been little changed overthis period.  However, the Agents’ score for consumer servicesfell conspicuously in August, consistent with recentdevelopments in household spending.
Employment
Reflecting developments in demand and output, employmentintentions eased in August, though remained elevated.  Thisoutcome was driven by weaker employment intentions in theservice sector, especially consumer services, thoughemployment intentions in manufacturing had also tickeddown.  Nonetheless, demand for skilled labour continued toexceed supply, especially in the business service,manufacturing and construction industries.  Consequently,
recruitment difficulties rose further in August ( Chart 4 ).
Contacts emphasised the structural nature of skill shortagesfor key occupations.  In contrast, there was an adequate supplyof less-skilled labour, given the abundance of migrant labour.
Capacity utilisation
Consistent with the modest easing in activity, capacitypressures also eased somewhat in August, but remained at ahigh level.  Alleviation of capacity pressures was concentratedin the consumer service sector, where a slowing in activity wasmost apparent.  In contrast, capacity pressures remainedpronounced in business services and manufacturing, and wereacute in much of the construction sector.  These pressuresmainly reflected shortages of professional staff, though someshortages of materials and equipment were reported.  
Contacts in the capacity-constrained sectors reported an
increase in completion times and deferral of projects.  Inresponse to capacity pressures, companies were increasinginvestment and average working hours.  In some cases theywere also turning away lower-margin work or increasing prices.
Costs and prices
Labour costs
The Agents’ score for labour cost growth ticked down again inAugust, partly reflecting a reduced need for employers to makecapital contributions to pension schemes.  But despite thismoderation, Agents’ scores continued to provide a strongersignal than official data.  That reflected ongoing reports ofgreater use of non-wage forms of employee compensation,101234
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07Consumer servicesBusiness servicesScoresThree months on same period a year earlier
+
–(a) Skill shortages before January 2005.
Chart 3 Service sector output101234
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07ScoreRelative to normal
+
–Chart 4 Recruitment difficulties(a)including leave benefits that raised unit labour costs but were
not captured in all official measures of earnings.  In areas ofskill shortages, there were reports of an increase in startingsalaries, along with benefits designed to retain existingworkers.  Across-the-board pay settlements, however,remained well contained.  
Input and output prices
Renewed strength in manufacturers’ input costs has beenevident for much of this year ( Chart 5 ).  Despite recent falls in
spot prices, many contacts had faced increases in theircontract prices for food inputs, oil or oil-related products,metals, and building materials.  Freight rates had also risen.The rise in these input costs had more than offset recent fallsin utilities prices and insurance premiums.  And while thestrength of sterling had contained the domestic price ofimported inputs, many contacts noted that their contractprices for goods imported from China continued to rise,amplified by China’s recent removal of some tax concessionson exports. The score for manufacturing output price inflation was little
changed in August, though was well up on its level of a yearago.  Furthermore, inflation of output prices continued tooutstrip that for input prices, consistent with margin recoveryand observations by some Agents of increased pricing powerby manufacturers, especially non-food manufacturers.  Alsoreflective of margin recovery, the Agents’ scores on pre-taxprofitability edged higher for manufacturers in the month,having increased steadily during the past year.
Business-to-business service price inflation persisted at a high
rate, but was lower than in recent months.  Contactsattributed this recent fall to increases in the tendering for‘commoditised’ services.
Consumer prices
According to the Agents’ scores, annual goods price inflationticked down again in August, reflecting the path of utilitiesprices over the past year.  Annual service price inflation wasstatic, but remained higher than for goods.  Consequently,while overall consumer price inflation edged down, it stillexceeded the average of recent years.
Rising global commodity prices and supply disruptions from
local floods had placed significant upward pressure on thewholesale prices of fresh food.  The impact of diminishedsupply of produce on retail food prices was expected tobecome more evident in September.  But while the pricingpower of food suppliers was said to have increased, contactsreported that retail price increases would be less pronounced,given fierce competition between the major supermarkets, andconsiderable scope for imports.  
In contrast to developments in food price inflation, retail price
inflation for other goods was under downward pressure, asretailers engaged in aggressive discounting of summer stock toavoid unwanted inventories.4 Agents’ summary of business conditions September 2007
(a) Manufacturers’ non-labour input and output prices.32101234
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07Input
OutputScores
+
–Three months on same period a year earlierChart 5 Manufacturers’ input and output prices(a)