Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2007/february-2007.pdf
Date: 2007-02-28

•Consumer spending was stronger than anticipated over the Christmas period but was more mixed in
January. 
•Activity in the housing market remained mostly firm, though the outlook was less certain.
•Export growth weakened a little, largely reflecting the stronger pound. 
•Investment intentions remained robust, particularly in the service sector.
•Manufacturing output growth eased a little, but confidence was still upbeat.  
•Growth in construction output accelerated, helped by the mild weather in January
•Service sector output growth continued to accelerate on a broad front.
•Employment intentions and recruitment difficulties increased, largely in professional and financial
services.
•Capacity pressures rose further.
•Payawards were expected to rise modestly in most sectors in 2007, but by rather less than the increase in
retail price inflation over the past year.
•Input price inflation eased again.
•Consumer price inflation increased further.
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by
the Bank of England’s Agents, following discussions with around700 businesses in the period between late December and lateJanuary 2007.  It provides information on the state of businessconditions, from firms across all sectors of the economy.  Thereport does not represent the Bank’s own views, nor does itrepresent the views of any particular firm or region.  The Bank’sMonetary Policy Committee uses the intelligence provided by theAgents, in conjunction with information from other sources, toassist its understanding and assessment of current economicconditions.  A copy of this publication can be found at:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/agentssummary/index.htm.The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, the
East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the North West,Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, theSouth West, Wales, the West Midlands & Oxfordshire, andYorkshire & the Humber.
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic
conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in theInflation Report, obtained from:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/inflationreport/index.htm.Agents’ summary of business conditions
February 2007Demand
Consumption and housing
Demand in the Christmas and immediate post-Christmas
period was stronger than retailers had anticipated, and theirconfidence improved.  The picture for January as a whole was alittle more mixed.  Most Agencies indicated that, havingallowed for seasonal factors, demand growth in January heldup well.  But a few Agencies reported a more subdued picturein January, with a fairly sharp falloff in consumer demand.Overall, it appeared that retail sales had not slowed downafter Christmas to the same extent as last January;  the Agents’score for retail sales therefore rose further ( Chart 1 ).  Private
new car sales in January were down slightly on a year ago.  Butspending on consumer services accelerated a little, with arather more uniform picture across the regions than for retailsales.  
Demand for high-tech electronics, such as flat-screen TVs,
remained exceptionally strong in January, with internetretailers reporting especially rapid sales growth.  New Yearbookings at restaurants, hotels and pubs were comparativelystrong, and high numbers of international tourists alsoboosted consumption of services.  In contrast, demand forwinter clothing continued to be depressed by the relativelymild weather.  
Confidence and activity in the housing market mostly
remained firm.  While still too early to be sure, the majority ofestate agents expected that the January interest rate risewould not damage sentiment unduly, and the market wouldbe underpinned by a continuing shortage of new instructions.Even though estate agents expected that regional differencesin house price inflation would persist, on average, house priceswere expected to rise in 2007 by around the growth inearnings.  But some estate agents were more nervousfollowing the latest Bank Rate increase and anticipated a sharpslowdown in housing demand should interest rates rise muchfurther.  Investor demand in the buy-to-let market was a little
weaker, consistent with reports that credit availability hadtightened.  The cost of borrowing had risen by more than rentsin recent months, and some buy-to-let investors were facedwith increasing cash shortfalls.  Some estate agents wereconcerned that the proposed introduction of HomeInformation Packs in June in England and Wales would bringforward new instructions into the first half of 2007, butthereafter would raise costs and depress supply in thesecondary market.    
Optimism among house builders was a little more guarded in
January than it had been at the end of 2006.  There were somereports that the number of viewings and sales had been lowerthan normal.  In order to stimulate demand, the use ofincentives such as inclusive fixtures and fittings remainedwidespread, as did the offer of part-exchange deals.  Buildingcosts and land prices had risen and there was limited scope to pass on these higher costs by raising the prices of new houses, due to the affordability concerns of potentialbuyers.  As a result, house builders’ margins continued to besqueezed.
Exports and imports  
Export growth weakened slightly in January.  That mostlyreflected a loss of price competitiveness of manufacturersarising from sterling’s recent appreciation, especially in dollar-based markets.  While the main impact to date hadbeen a loss of margin on exports, there were now more reportsof orders being lost.  And there was some perception of a slighteasing in the growth of global activity.  By contrast, importsmay have accelerated a little.  Apart from sterling’sappreciation, that reflected the recent buoyancy of demand forconsumer durables and strong investment.  
Investment  
The Agents’ scores pointed to continued strong investmentintentions in January.  Service sector firms invested inadditional capacity, including offices, warehousing and retailspace.  Growth of investment by manufacturers remainedmore subdued, and was mostly focused on efficiencyimprovements.  
Apart from a fairly high level of business confidence and
liquidity, other factors said to be boosting investment includedincreased rates of technological progress and industrialconsolidation in some sectors of the economy, and regulatoryand environmental requirements.  Consolidation in some hard-hit manufacturing sectors such as food processing hadspurred investment in more modern plant and machinery.  Andsome of the current surge in investment by power generatingcompanies had been necessary to offset the effects on outputfrom environmental regulations.2 Agents’ summary of business conditions February 2007
0.50.00.51.01.52.02.53.0
2001 02 03 04 05 06 07Scores 
Retail sales valuesConsumer services turnover
+
_Chart 1 Retail sales and consumer services turnoverAgents’ summary of business conditions February 2007 3
Output
Primary production
North Sea output of oil and gas continued to decline.Increases in oil and gas prices in 2006 had extended theeconomic life of some fields.  But that had necessitatedincreased investment in repair and maintenance for olderfields, so that periods of ‘down time’ were becoming longer.    
Manufacturing  
Output growth was a little weaker in January, reflecting theslight downturn in the growth of exports.  Domestic demandgrowth was unchanged.  Although demand for consumer andinvestment goods had been fairly strong recently, domesticproducers continued to lose market share, partly on account ofsterling’s appreciation.  There were some reports that this hadgiven a renewed fillip to moving capacity overseas.  Even so,the confidence of most manufacturers was more upbeat thanfor some time, largely reflecting the robust pickup in the globaleconomy in 2006 which was expected to continue.
Construction  
Output growth rose in January, helped by the spell of mildweather.  Forward order books remained strong.  There wassome nervousness regarding prospects for public sector fundedprojects in view of anticipated budgetary pressures, and futuredemand for commercial property due to higher interest ratesand low yields.  However, a larger number of contacts wereconcerned about factors holding back supply, in particularshortages of skilled labour and land with planning permission.
Services  
Service sector output continued to accelerate.  Within businessservices, strong demand growth for professional and financialservices reflected a wide range of factors including buoyantasset markets, high levels of mergers and acquisitions activityand increased Government regulation and taxation.Accountants and lawyers expected to see good growth ofactivity continue in 2007.  But there were some concernsexpressed by City contacts that prices in equity andcommercial property markets had risen too high and werevulnerable to further interest rate increases.  Privately owned,highly geared businesses were thought to be most at risk.Output growth in ‘Other business services’ rose slightly,reflecting stronger demand for information, communicationsand technology-related services, and logistics.  Consumerservices demand also accelerated (see above).
Employment  
Employment intentions increased, largely reflecting thebuoyancy of the professional and financial services sector.Growing demand for skilled labour had not been matched by
additional supply and recruitment difficulties worsened.  Whilethe market for unskilled workers remained adequatelysupplied, partly reflecting continued inward migration, overallthe Agents judged that recruitment difficulties had risen toslightly above normal levels, the first such assessment forfifteen months ( Chart 2 ).
Capacity utilisation  
Capacity pressures rose further ( Chart 3 ), particularly in
professional and financial services where skill shortages weremore severe.  Those pressures were typically reflected in firmsworking their staff more intensively for longer periods;outsourcing work to overseas offices and/or flying in staff fromoverseas during busy periods;  turning away lower-marginwork;  and increasing prices to balance demand to capacity.Skill shortages in the construction sector — includingarchitects, surveyors, engineers and project managers — hadalso increased.  In manufacturing, contacts had become moreadept at flexing capacity when its normal limits were beingapproached.  Sometimes that entailed greater use oftemporary (often migrant) labour, and/or outsourcingproduction overseas.   
Costs and prices
Pay  Growth of labour costs in manufacturing and the servicesectors rose a little further.  But overall, most contacts werenot unduly concerned about the magnitude of prospective payincreases.  
In December 2006 and January 2007 the Agents carried out a
survey of their contacts regarding the prospects for pay and101234
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07Score
+
–
Note:  Skill shortages before January 2005.
(a) Relative to normal.  Agents are asked to place a value on their assessment of the degree of
difficulty on a scale from -5 to +5 consistent with their reports.  Chart 2 Recruitment difficulties(a)labour costs during 2007.  The survey covered around 
460 companies employing a total of over 680,000 workers.  Aweighted net balance of 16% of firms expected their paysettlement to be higher in 2007 than the previous year.  Theaverage expected settlement for 2007 was 3.4%, broadly inline with the level of settlements at the end of 2006, butslightly above the average for 2006 as a whole.
(1)Contacts
expected the rise in settlements to feed through to an increasein total labour cost growth ( Chart 4 ).  Respondents suggested
that the expected pickup in labour cost growth in 2007reflected the higher level of inflation and difficulties in therecruitment and retention of staff.  But some of this impactwas expected to be offset by improvements in labourproductivity. According to the survey, companies planned to continue to
make greater use of forms of compensation other thansettlements, such as one-off bonus payments.  
Input prices  
Input price inflation continued to ease.  That reflected furtherfalls in the dollar, lower prices of oil, gas and some metals, andmuch smaller increases in energy costs when annual contractswere renewed.  But the full benefit of lower spot energy priceswas not expected to be felt for another six months or so.Costs of imported finished goods had also risen at a slowerrate.  A weaker dollar and lower transport costs more thanoffset signs of higher inflation for goods produced in emergingeconomies such as China and India.  
Output and consumer prices  
Manufacturers’ annual rate of output price inflation edgedlower in January.  Overall, manufacturers were able to passsome of the benefits of lower non-wage costs on to theircustomers, while still being able to raise margins.Manufacturers reported that they planned to rebuild marginsfurther this year, though in the past that had been thwarted bycompetitive pressures.  Business to business services priceinflation increased, reflecting higher wage inflation and insome cases improved margins as firms looked to profit fromexcess demand.
Consumer goods price inflation increased further.  Overall,
better-than-expected demand before Christmas had reducedretailers’ stocks for clearance in the January sales, anddiscounting was perhaps slightly less than usual as a result.The exception was clothing and footwear, with retailersreporting heavier discounting this year.  Poor global harvests,coupled with growing demand for arable crops from producersof bio-fuels, continued to underpin higher rates of annual foodprice inflation.  Nevertheless, retail food price pressures wereexpected to ease soon as output recovered.  Consumerservices price inflation rose slightly, partly due to relativelylarge increases in rail fares.4 Agents’ summary of business conditions February 2007
2.01.51.00.50.00.51.01.52.0
1998 2000 02 04 06Difference from average scores since 1998
ServicesManufacturing
+
_Chart 3 Capacity constraints over the next six months
(1) See Table 4.A on page 34 of the February 2007 Inflation Report .0510152025303540
Signiﬁcantly
lowerA little lower Same A little higher Signiﬁcantly
higherPercentage of employees
(a) Based on 457 responses to a survey of companies by the Bank of England’s regional Agents in
December 2006 and January 2007, weighted by respondents’ number of employees.  Thesurvey asked respondents:  ‘in the next twelve months, how do you expect the annualpercentage change of total labour costs per employee to compare with the previous twelvemonths?’.Chart 4 Agents’ survey:  total expected labour cost
growth in 2007(a)