Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2008/june-2008.pdf
Date: 2008-06-30

• Consumption growth eased further. 
•Weakness in housing demand and transactions intensified and new housing starts contracted sharply.
• Investment intentions fell in the service sector.  Tighter credit conditions affected a growing number of
companies, especially in the residential and commercial property sectors.
•Demand for exports was firm and was expected to remain so over the next six months (see the box on
the Agents’ survey of export conditions).
•Growth in domestically orientated manufacturing eased slightly, and there was more pronounced
weakness in construction and services .  
• Employment intentions remained depressed, having fallen sharply last month.  The net inflow of migrant
labour slowed and recruitment difficulties eased further.
• Capacity pressures eased a little.
•Growth in total labour costs remained well contained.   
•Annual input price inflation remained at very high levels and annual output price inflation increased as
manufacturers sought to maintain margins.
•Annual consumer price inflation increased, largely reflecting higher prices of fuel, energy and food.
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by
the Bank of England’s Agents, following discussions with over670 businesses in the period between late April and late May .  
It provides information on the state of business conditions, fromcompanies across all sectors of the economy.  The report does notrepresent the Bank’s own views, nor does it represent the views ofany particular company or region.  The Bank’s Monetary PolicyCommittee uses the intelligence provided by the Agents, inconjunction with information from other sources, to assist itsunderstanding and assessment of current economic conditions.  Acopy of this publication can be found at:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/agentssummary/index.htm.The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, the
East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the North West,Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, theSouth West, Wales, the West Midlands & Oxfordshire, andYorkshire & the Humber.
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic
conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in theInflation Report, obtained from:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/inflationreport/index.htm.Agents’ summary of business conditions
June 2008Demand
Consumption
Agents reported a further easing in consumption growth, to its
weakest pace since the autumn of 2005 ( Chart 1 ).   
With regard to spending on consumer goods, households had
responded to the growing squeeze on their real incomes byrestraining discretionary spending on perceived luxuries and/orsearching for better value, including trading down tounbranded products.  That had increased the market share of‘value’ retailers of food, clothing and other essentials, and ofinternet retailers of bigger-ticket items such as electronicgoods.  Demand for homeware goods such as carpets andfurniture had declined most sharply, which contacts partlyascribed to the rapid tail-off in housing transactions.  Bycontrast, sales of new motor vehicles were steady, althoughcar dealers reported that some consumers were trading downto cheaper models, partly on account of sharp increases in fuelprices.  
The Agents’ score for growth in spending on consumer services
eased again and was at its lowest level since 1999.  There werefurther signs of weakness in leisure spending, especially oneating and drinking out and cinema visits.  The rapid decline inhousing transactions had reduced the demand forconveyancing and home removal services.  Contactsconsidered that the volume of bookings for summer holidayswas stable, however, after adjusting for seasonal factors.  Butconsumers were trading down to cheaper and nearerdestinations.
Housing market
Housing demand decelerated further.  In the market forestablished homes, many estate agencies reported that saleswere at least 50% down on a year ago.  First-time buyers werescarce, owing to a lack of finance;  transactions were takinglonger to complete;  and stocks of unsold houses weregrowing.  In addition to the shortage of mortgage funds andthe widespread expectation that house prices had further to
fall, a further constraint on housing transactions was the largeincrease in interest rates faced by existing homeowners whenrefinancing their mortgages.  House prices were judged to befalling in most regions.  In the rental market, demand hadstrengthened on account of the lack of mortgage availabilityfor prospective first-time buyers, and rents were rising as aresult.   
In the new housing sector the shortage of mortgage finance
was constraining demand, particularly from buy-to-letinvestors, and cancellations were at record levels despiteincreased incentives.  Stocks of unsold new houses wereincreasing and house builders were mothballing new sites sothat activity was largely confined to completing housesalready started.  Some builders reported that the volume ofconstruction was currently around 50% lower than a year ago. 
Investment
Agents’ scores for the investment intentions of contacts in theservice sector fell further.  But intentions stabilised inmanufacturing.
Agents largely associated the rapid decline in investment
intentions in the service sector with the weakness of thecommercial property market.  Growing uncertainty about theeconomic outlook and tighter credit conditions had resulted ina sharp decline in demand for additional warehousing, officesand retail space.  
By contrast, the slowdown in the investment intentions of
manufacturers in recent months had been more restrained.That reflected a number of factors.  First, demand in overseasmarkets had held up well and confidence among exporters wassolid, helped by sterling’s depreciation.  Second, somemanufacturers had still to catch up from past periods ofunderinvestment.  Third, there was still considerable scope formany manufacturers to increase productivity andcompetitiveness through additional capital spending onmachinery and IT.  
The direct effects of tighter credit conditions on contacts had
intensified over the past month.  This was most apparent in theresidential and commercial property sectors where lenders hadtightened banking covenants, reduced loan to value ratios andsignificantly lowered property valuations, causing someprojects to be postponed.  These changes in bank lendingpolicies had also affected (albeit to a lesser degree) companiesin other sectors, particularly those where margins remainedunder severe pressure such as retail, car distribution and foodmanufacturing.  Finally, with less, and more costly, access tobank overdraft facilities, invoice discounting and trade credit,many contacts reported greater strains on working capital andan increase in debtor days.  That was most evident for smallerand medium-sized companies, some of which were deferring2 Agents’ summary of business conditions June 2008
0.50.00.51.01.52.02.53.0
2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08ServicesGoodsScores
+
–Three months on same period a year earlierChart 1 Consumption valuesAgents’ summary of business conditions June 2008 3
capital spending in order to conserve cash.  Estate agents had
been particularly affected.  Some were unable to negotiateoverdraft facilities and had been forced to close.  
Overseas trade
External demand remained firm in May and the score formanufacturers’ exports was close to its record high since theseries began in 1997.  Weakening demand, especially forconsumer goods and construction equipment, was evident inthe United States, Spain and Ireland.  But that was offset byfurther acceleration in exports to emerging economies inEastern Europe, the Middle East and Asia.  In other EUcountries, growth in the volume of demand was reported to besteady with several contacts singling out the solidity ofGerman industrial demand.  And the sterling value of exportsto the euro area continued to be boosted by favourablecurrency movements.  The results of a special survey of exportconditions are reported in the box below.   
Contacts reported slower growth in the volume of imports,
mostly reflecting weaker consumer demand and residentialinvestment.  Faced with higher prices due to the stronger euro,some importers of euro-area goods had searched foralternative suppliers, including in the United Kingdom, but sofar this had largely proved fruitless.  By contrast, the rising costof some goods manufactured in China — largely associatedwith higher local wage inflation — had resulted in manydistributors sourcing from lower-cost countries such as Indiaand Vietnam, where low value-added, commoditised productswere also readily available.  
Output
Primary
Farmers continued to grapple with sharply rising costs of fuel,fertiliser and feed and, in some regions, an impending shortageof migrant workers for the summer harvest.  Arable farmersreported that total acreage under production would be about5% up this year, reflecting the relaxation of set-asideregulations and the stimulus from elevated grain prices.  Manyfarmers had chosen to increase acreage devoted to wheat.
Manufacturing
Manufacturing output growth slowed a little further, driven bysofter domestic demand ( Chart 2 ).  Even so, the Agents’ scores
suggested that this remained the steadiest sector of theeconomy, with a continuation of modestly positive growth.Manufacturers of building materials and consumer goods forthe domestic market continued to report the mostpronounced easing in demand.  By contrast, car productionremained firm due to strong growth in overseas sales.  Formany contacts, vibrant world markets in aerospace, oil and gasexploration and mining, and power generation, continued tounderpin the strength of their export orders.Construction
Growth in construction output declined quite sharply in Mayand was significantly down on a year earlier.  That mostlyreflected the slowdown in housing starts.  Small builders alsoreported lower demand from households for homeimprovements.  While the pace of non-residential constructionremained brisk, there were tentative signs of softer demand,reflected for example in greater competition at tenders, aneasing in price pressures and lower order books.  Some largepublic sector projects had been delayed.   
Services
The Agents’ score for business services output fell again, with asimilar rate of decline in both professional/financial and otherbusiness services.  The slowdown in the residential andcommercial property markets had depressed demand for anumber of professional and financial services.  Activity levels inmergers and acquisitions, corporate finance and private equitytransactions all remained weak, while the growth in demandfor legal services continued to slow.  Contacts in the morecyclical parts of the financial services sector such asinvestment banking expected the recovery to be delayed until2010.  But not all sectors were in decline.  For example,employment agencies were busy and the demand foradvertising, marketing and public relations services remainedbuoyant as clients sought to defend market shares in a toughereconomic climate.  Regarding the demand for other businessservices, cost-saving measures had reduced the amount ofcorporate discretionary spending on travel, hotels andconferences.   
Capacity utilisation
Contacts reported that capacity pressures expected over thenext six months had eased slightly and were significantly lowercompared with their peak last summer, particularly in theservice sector.  The rapid build-up of surplus capacity in thehome building industry had resulted in a sharp deterioration inThree months on same period a year earlier
Scores 
2101234
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08+
–Export
DomesticChart 2 Manufacturing outputprofitability and contacts anticipated that a substantial
downsizing in operations would be set in train shortly tocorrect that imbalance.
Employment
The scores for employment intentions remained depressed,having fallen sharply in April, and were suggestive of somemodest contraction in labour demand over the next sixmonths.  Property-related sectors — especially house buildersand estate agencies — had already started to make sizablelayoffs and larger redundancies were anticipated.  Given theuncertain outlook, more contacts were looking to increase theflexibility in their workforces by recruiting temporary and/orfreelance staff in preference to permanent employees.  Butmany contacts, especially in professional and financial services,were hoarding skills and had no wish to lose staff that wouldbe difficult to replace at a later date.  Larger professionalservices firms continued to recruit new graduates to ensure anadequate skills base in the longer term.  
Consistent with the easing in labour demand, recruitment
difficulties eased further.  Staff turnover continued tomoderate as employees became less confident about seekingalternative positions.   
There were growing concerns that the future availability of
migrant workers might not be sufficient to meet demand.  Thenet inflow of migrants from A8 countries continued to slow.Also, recent changes to work permit regulations were limitingthe supply of non-EU nationals, increasing skill shortages of,for example, chefs and pharmacists.  
Costs and prices
Labour costs
Pay settlements were steady in May.  Contacts reported thatthe weaker economic climate, coupled with a great deal ofnegative media commentary on the outlook, had taken someof the heat out of employees’ pay expectations, giving theadvantage in negotiations to employers.  That was despite acontinued perception by employees that inflation was higherthan recorded by official figures.  Many employees in salespositions whose remuneration was largely determined bycommission payments had seen either flat or falling take-home pay recently, reflecting the economic slowdown.Looking forward, bonus payments in the financial sector in2009 were expected to be substantially lower on average thanin 2008.
Input and output prices
The Agents’ score for manufacturers’ input prices remained atrecord levels since the series began in 1997 ( Chart 3 ).  The
surge in oil prices continued to raise the costs of a wide rangeof oil-based materials and other inputs, notably of utilities and
transportation charges.  There were some reports that steelprices were expected to increase sharply later this year.Construction costs faced by commercial property developerswere also rising rapidly and some expected this would feedthrough to higher rents once the market started to recover.The cost of imported finished and intermediate goodscontinued to accelerate, mostly reflecting increasing costpressures in Asia and the strength of the euro.
The Agents’ score for manufacturing output prices rose further.
Manufacturers’ perceptions of their pricing power continued toincrease and higher input costs were feeding through to outputprices more speedily, though not usually one-for-one.  Formany contacts, the resultant downward pressure on marginshas necessitated vigorous cost control in production andpurchasing.
Price inflation for business-to-business services eased slightly
this month, with slower growth in rates for professionalservices, industrial cleaning, hotels and conferences more thanoffsetting the higher prices charged by freight and financeproviders.  
Consumer prices
The Agents’ score for retail goods prices increased sharply inMay due to further acceleration in the prices of fuel, energyand food.  The score for retail services prices also rose, albeit toa lesser extent, largely reflecting the same factors.  Fuelsurcharges were increased by many airlines and holidaycompanies.  Restaurants and bars passed on a little of theirhigher food and drink costs to customers, althoughcompetitive pressures resulted in most of the increases beingabsorbed within the business so that margins were squeezedfurther.4 Agents’ summary of business conditions June 2008
Three months on same period a year earlier
Scores
321012345
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08Input(a)
Output +
–Chart 3 Manufacturers’ input and output prices
(a) Non-labour input prices.Agents’ survey of export conditions
As highlighted in the May Inflation Report , weaker growth in
overseas markets is expected to bear down on the growth ofUK exports.  But the gain in competitiveness associated withsterling’s depreciation should help to boost the contribution ofnet trade to GDP growth over the next few years.  During Apriland May, the Agents surveyed around 200 of their contacts,across all the main sectors of the economy, to identify currenttrends in exports of goods and services.  This box summarisesthe main findings. 
When asked what had happened to the sterling value of export
sales over the past six months, the majority of contactsreported either slight or significant increases, resulting in astrong net positive balance ( Chart A ).  The minority reporting
falls were primarily exporting to the United States, otherdollar-denominated destinations or the Republic of Ireland.Exports of goods were slightly stronger than those of services.There were no major differences in export conditions asreported by small and large firms.
An even stronger pattern emerged when contacts were asked
about expectations for the next six months, with very fewexpecting a significant fall in exports ( Chart B ).  Goods
exporters were again more positive than those in the servicesector. 
Respondents were also asked how the depreciation of sterling
was affecting or expected to affect export sales.  The strongesteffect was an improvement in margins, marginally ahead of anincrease in export volumes ( Chart C ).  The range of products
exported and the number of markets entered had alsoincreased, though to a lesser extent. Given the significant depreciation of sterling over the past
year, a rather larger proportion of the responses might havebeen expected in higher volumes.  Contacts suggested thismight be delayed because of the long-term nature of manyexport contracts and the use of hedging arrangements thatwere already in place — thereby delaying the benefit of aweaker exchange rate.Agents’ summary of business conditions June 2008
010203040
Fallen
signiﬁcantlyFallen
slightlyNo
changeRisen
slightlyRisen
signiﬁcantlyNet 
balancePercentage of respondentsChart A Export values over the past six months01020304050
Fall
signiﬁcantlyFall 
slightlyNo
changeRise 
slightlyRise
signiﬁcantlyNet 
balancePercentage of respondentsChart B Export values over the next six months
05101520
Volume of 
exportsMargin on
exportsRange of
products
exportedNumber
of markets
enteredNet percentage balanceChart C Effect of sterling’s depreciation on exports
Note:  The net balance is calculated by giving weights of 0.5 for a ‘slightly’ response and 1.0 for a
‘significantly’ response.Note:  The net balance is calculated by giving weights of 0.5 for a ‘slightly’ response and 1.0 for a
‘significantly’ response.