Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2008/may-2008.pdf
Date: 2008-05-31

• Consumption growth remained well down on rates of six months ago.
•Weakness in housing demand intensified.
• Investment intentions fell sharply further in the services sector, and eased across most industries.  Tighter
credit conditions continued to weigh on investment plans, with more companies being directly affected
by changes to the cost or availability of finance.
•Demand for exports remained robust, though there was a slight easing in orders growth.
•Growth in domestically orientated manufacturing fell, as did growth in construction and services sector
output.  
• Labour demand softened noticeably, with a marked fall in employment intentions in the services sector.
The inflow of migrant labour was reported to be slowing and recruitment difficulties eased.
• Capacity pressures lessened and were expected to be below average for the next six months.
•Growth in total labour costs remained well contained, though there were more reports of modest
upward pressure on settlements in response to increases in the cost of living. 
•Annual input price inflation rose sharply and annual output price inflation increased as manufacturers
sought to restore margins.
•Annual consumer price inflation also increased.
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by
the Bank of England’s Agents, following discussions with around650 businesses in the period between late March and late April .  
It provides information on the state of business conditions, fromcompanies across all sectors of the economy.  The report does notrepresent the Bank’s own views, nor does it represent the views ofany particular company or region.  The Bank’s Monetary PolicyCommittee uses the intelligence provided by the Agents, inconjunction with information from other sources, to assist itsunderstanding and assessment of current economic conditions.  Acopy of this publication can be found at:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/agentssummary/index.htm.The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, the
East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the North West,Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, theSouth West, Wales, the West Midlands & Oxfordshire, andYorkshire & the Humber.
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic
conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in theInflation Report, obtained from:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/inflationreport/index.htm.Agents’ summary of business conditions
May 2008Demand
Consumption
Agents reported no material change in consumption growth in
April, but confirmed that the pace of spending was well belowthat of six months ago ( Chart 1 ).
While the Agents’ score for spending on retail goods was 
little changed in the month, it had been on a downward trendsince early 2007.  The slowdown remained sharpest forspending on fashion, homewares, and leisure goods, withparticular weakness in spending on durables.  For these non-food items, discounting was still prevalent.  In contrast,growth in the value of food sales was firm, boosted by risingprices.  
The Agents’ score for spending on consumer services was also
little changed in April, but had fallen markedly over the past sixmonths ( Chart 1 ).  Households had curtailed their
discretionary spending on services provided by domestictourism operators, hotels, clubs and restaurants.  The earlyEaster had significantly reduced the seasonal element ofspending on services, and businesses reported that householdswere increasing the share of sales paid in cash.
Housing market
The weakness in housing demand intensified.  In the market forestablished homes, estate agencies reported a furtherreduction in enquiries.  Sale periods continued to lengthen andthere was a rise in the cancellation of sales, attributed totighter credit conditions.  Vendors were commonly acceptingsizable discounts on asking prices.  Reflecting thesedevelopments, price inflation for established homes fell furtherand there were reports of estate agencies shedding staff.
Demand for new housing also continued to weaken,
compounded by tighter credit conditions.  Home builders wereoffering more incentives and discounting heavily to dispose ofstock.  This had seen price inflation for new homes slow by
more than for established homes.  Developers were sellingland to maintain cash flows which was, in turn, contributing tofalling land prices in some regions.
Investment
Agents’ scores for investment intentions fell again in April,having decreased sharply over the past six months ( Chart 2 ).
The fall was most pronounced in the services sector, and wasgeographically broad based.  Investment intentions also fell inmanufacturing and in other sectors for which Agents do notassign scores.  This was especially so in commercial property,and there were more reports of retailers scaling back theirstore expansions.  While investment intentions had beeneasing since April 2007, the recent sharp slowdown wasattributed to uncertainty about growth prospects and,increasingly, tighter credit conditions.
For some time Agents had been reporting that the main effects
of tighter credit conditions were indirect.  That is, companieswere anticipating that tighter credit would induce slowereconomic growth and were adjusting their investmentintentions accordingly.  Few direct effects on investmentintentions had been reported, other than by companies in thecommercial property and finance sectors, or with highleverage.  But in April, there were reports of a wider range ofcompanies being directly affected.  Credit rationing was more evident, and credit providers were adhering strictly tolending guidelines, with fewer customers being grantedpreferential arrangements.  Some companies had self-imposedborrowing restrictions, as they were concerned about futuredebt obligations if tight lending criteria, or weak demand,persisted.
Overseas trade
Overall, external demand remained firm in April.  Weakerdemand from the United States continued to be offset bystrength in the volume of sales elsewhere.  This was evident for2 Agents’ summary of business conditions May 2008
Three months on same period a year earlier
0.50.00.51.01.52.02.53.0
2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08ServicesGoodsScores
+
–Chart 1 Consumption values
Three months on same period a year earlier
2101234
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08Scores
Services
Manufacturing+
–Chart 2 Investment intentions over the next twelve
monthsAgents’ summary of business conditions May 2008 3
exports of both goods and services.  The depreciation of
sterling had enhanced margins on exports, particularly thoseto Europe, but was yet to have a significant effect on volumes.It was, however, encouraging some exporters to considerentering new markets.  Orders remained supportive of near-term strength in external demand, though some contacts reported that the growth of their orders had easedslightly. 
Demand by UK companies for intermediate imports remained
solid.  But growth in orders of consumer goods continued toease, consistent with the slowdown in household spending andthe depreciation of sterling. 
Output
Manufacturing
Manufacturing output growth slowed in April ( Chart 3 ), driven
by an easing in production for domestic markets.Manufacturers of building materials and consumer goodsreported the most pronounced easing in activity.  In contrast,manufacturers of exports experienced continued buoyantconditions.  Orders pointed to these trends being sustainedover the near term.
Construction
Growth in construction output edged down again in themonth, though the level of activity remained high.  Recenttrends in construction output masked divergent conditions forresidential and non-residential builders.  Residentialconstruction was weakening markedly, as earlier backlogs ofwork had largely been completed and commitments to buildwere falling.  In contrast, non-residential construction wasstrong, and it was expected to remain so in the near term,given large amounts of pre-committed work.  But lookingfurther ahead, fewer private sector developments wereprogressing to the construction stage owing to fundingproblems or uncertainty about the outlook.Services
The Agents’ score for business services output fell again in Aprilto its lowest level in over four years ( Chart 4 ).  The slowdown
had been under way for some time, but had been amplified byfinancial events.  Scores for professional and financial serviceshad fallen most since the onset of financial turmoil.  Recently,there had also been a reduction in scores for other businessservices (like logistics and business catering), pointing to abroader slowdown in the sector and some strengthening ofspillover effects from tighter credit conditions.
Capacity utilisation
Capacity pressures were expected to ease significantly over thenext six months.  This partly reflected earlier additions tocapacity, but a larger factor was the current and projectedslowing in activity.  Capacity pressures were expected to easemost in the services sector, where the fall in demand had beenpronounced.  They were also expected to ease inmanufacturing.  Residential builders were already operatingwell below capacity, as were many retailers.
Employment
The slowdown in activity, and associated easing in overallcapacity pressures, has resulted in a clear softening in labourdemand ( Chart 5 ).  The score for total employment intentions
was now at its lowest level since scores commenced in mid 1997.  Weakness in labour demand was most evident inthe services sector, with sharp falls in employment intentionsin both business and consumer services.  A further modest fall was also evident in manufacturers’ employmentintentions.
The reduction in employment intentions was slightly sharper
than the slowdown in current output growth, consistent withcontacts’ heightened uncertainty about the outlook andconcerns that difficult conditions might persist.  Contacts wereThree months on same period a year earlier
2101234
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08Export
DomesticScores
–+Chart 3 Manufacturing outputThree months on same period a year earlier
0.50.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.0
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08Business servicesScores
Professional and ﬁnancial
Other business services
+
–Chart 4 Business services outputachieving desired levels of labour input by reducing the
number of hours of paid work and increasing their reliance ontemporary workers (even in management roles).  Manycontacts were also leaving vacancies unfilled, allowingheadcount to be reduced through natural attrition.
Consistent with the easing in labour demand, recruitment
difficulties eased further in April.  In part this reflected areduction in staff turnover, as employees became lessconfident about seeking alternative positions.  And given asofter labour market, there were further reports from contactsproviding services to migrants that the inflow of workers fromA8 countries had slowed.  The effect of sterling’s depreciationon the home currency value of earnings was also said to beaccelerating the return of some migrants.
Costs and prices
Labour costs
Agents reported that across-the-board pay settlementsremained fairly stable in April.  There were some reports of atick-up in settlements in response to rises in the cost of living(and perceptions of higher inflation than recorded in either theCPI or RPI).  However, outcomes remained well contained,given recent increases in job insecurity.
Input and output prices
The Agents’ score for manufacturers’ input prices climbedagain in April to its highest level since scores were firstrecorded in mid 1997 ( Chart 6 ).  As had been the case for
much of the past year, this reflected increases in the worldprices of basic inputs (energy, oil derivatives, building materialsand food) combined with the effects of sterling’s depreciation.And contacts continued to report increases in the cost ofimporting finished and intermediate goods from Asia, wheredomestic price pressures were becoming more pronounced.The Agents’ score for manufacturing output prices was little
changed in the month, but had stepped up sharply since thestart of the year.  Given the escalation of input costs, andconsequent compression of margins, manufacturers hadbecome more active in passing on cost increases in recentmonths.  Food and beverage manufacturers remained themost successful in raising their prices, though more producersof other goods were also now able to pass on commodity-based cost increases.
Price inflation for business-to-business services was unchanged
in the month.  Increased prices for specialist business servicesand transport services had been offset by downward pressureon prices of more commoditised services.
Consumer prices
The Agents’ score for retail goods prices increased again inApril, reflecting ongoing increases in the prices of energy andfood.  With the score for service prices little changed in themonth, overall consumer prices were higher.
The outlook was for further upward pressure on consumer
price inflation in the near term.  Retailers were becoming moreactive in passing on commodity-based cost increases toconsumers.  The cost of imports being ordered by contacts wasincreasing and was being reflected in higher retail prices.  Andthere were expectations of further increases in utilities pricesby the summer.  More large retailers indicated a reluctance tocontinue the depth of discounting of recent months, claimingthat customers were becoming ‘immune’ to such discounts.But while these factors were putting upward pressure onconsumer prices in aggregate, many retailers remained keen toalter the composition of their product offerings in an effort tooffset higher price inflation for some products with lower priceinflation for others.4 Agents’ summary of business conditions May 2008
Three months on same period a year earlier
321012345
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08Input(a)
OutputScores
+
–Chart 6 Manufacturers’ input and output prices
Three months on same period a year earlier
1.00.50.00.51.01.52.02.53.0
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08OutputScores
Employment 
intentions+
–Chart 5 Employment intentions and output(a)
(a) Employment before January 2005;  total employment is the weighted average of scores for
manufacturing and services employment;  ouput is the weighted average of output scores forservices, construction and manufacturing.(a) Non-labour input prices.