Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2008/february-2008.pdf
Date: 2008-02-29

• Consumption growth eased, driven by slower growth in spending on consumer services.  Growth in
spending on goods stabilised in the month.
•The easing in demand for housing continued, and house price inflation fell.
• Investment intentions fell further in both the service and manufacturing sectors.  Tighter credit
conditions weighed on investment intentions, mainly through their effect on uncertainty about demand.
•Demand for exports remained firm, as did forward orders.
•Growth in manufacturing remained healthy, while that in the construction and service sectors slowed.
• Employment intentions fell across all main sectors, and recruitment difficulties eased.
• Capacity pressures lessened, especially in service industries.
•Growth in total labour costs remained well contained.  The Agents’ pay survey identified that companies
expected little change in pay settlements for 2008, and only modest upward pressure on total labourcosts.  (For details see the box.)
•For manufacturers, annual input price inflation picked up sharply, while annual output price inflation was
little changed.  Consequently, margins were compressed, though a growing share of companies wereintending to pass on recent cost increases.
•Annual consumer price inflation increased, driven by increases in the prices of energy and food. 
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by
the Bank of England’s Agents, following discussions with over650 businesses in the period between late December and late
January .  It provides information on the state of business
conditions, from companies across all sectors of the economy.  The report does not represent the Bank’s own views, nor does itrepresent the views of any particular company or region.  TheBank’s Monetary Policy Committee uses the intelligence providedby the Agents, in conjunction with information from other sources,to assist its understanding and assessment of current economicconditions.  A copy of this publication can be found at:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/agentssummary/index.htm.The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, the
East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the North West,Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, theSouth West, Wales, the West Midlands & Oxfordshire, andYorkshire & the Humber.
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic
conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in theInflation Report, obtained from:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/inflationreport/index.htm.Agents’ summary of business conditions
February 2008Demand
Consumption
Agents reported that overall consumption growth slowed in
January, and their scores for the value of spending on goodsand services converged ( Chart 1 ).
The Agents’ score for retail sales of goods was little changed in
January owing to a late surge in spending in the holiday period.Nonetheless, in the month as a whole, total sales growth waswell below rates in the first half of 2007.  Housing-relatedspending remained weak, as did spending by age groups mostexposed to mortgage debt.  In contrast, spending onelectronics, food, fashion and leisure goods was firm.  Sincedemand had been stimulated by heavy price discounting, thevalue of sales was likely to have grown more slowly thanvolumes.
Spending on consumer services slowed sharply in January, with
the Agents’ score falling to match that for goods ( Chart 1 ).
This slowdown was largely driven by softer domestic demandfor services provided by hotels and restaurants as householdsreined in discretionary spending.  Demand for new motorvehicles also eased noticeably in the month.
Housing market
The weakness in housing demand continued in January.  In themarket for established housing, tighter credit conditionsweighed on sentiment.  Estate agencies reported fewerenquiries and instructions.  Sale periods had lengthened, andthere were reports of a sharp rise in the cancellation of sales.Vendors were commonly accepting discounts on asking pricesof 10% or more.  Consequently, price inflation for establishedhomes slowed further.
Demand for new housing continued to weaken.  Discounts and
incentives remained prevalent, so that price inflation for newhomes also slowed further.  Despite a sharp fall in demand, theslowdown in house-building activity had been cushioned by
pre-committed work.  Contacts were responding to weakerdemand by slowing the pace of development or seekingcontracts for social housing.
Investment
Investment intentions fell again in January ( Chart 2 ).  Recent
financial market turmoil had weighed on investmentintentions, and compounded the effects of earlier increases inBank Rate.  This was especially so in the service sector.However, January also saw weaker intentions in a range ofother industries.  In particular, domestically orientedmanufacturers were deferring investment decisions due to anexpected slowing in UK growth.  And some manufacturers ofexports attributed reductions in investment intentions toincreased uncertainty about world growth in 2008.
The direct effects of tighter credit conditions remained
concentrated in the commercial property and finance sectors,and for highly geared companies seeking to refinance theirdebt.  The majority of contacts were still not directly affectedby changes to the cost or availability of finance.  But concernsabout the possible future effects of tighter credit conditions ongrowth were causing more companies to review theirinvestment plans even if they were not directly affected bytighter credit conditions. 
Overseas trade
External demand remained firm, despite ongoing difficulties forthose exporting to the United States.  The fall in US demandcontinued to be offset by strength in Europe, the Middle East,Asia and Africa.  Some contacts reported an ability to divertsales from the United States to these more rapidly growingmarkets, a process aided by the depreciation of sterling.External demand was expected to remain buoyant in the nearterm, given the strength in export orders.  However,expectations for the year ahead had been revised down slightlysince the onset of financial turbulence.2 Agents’ summary of business conditions February 2008
Three months on same period a year earlier
0.50.00.51.01.52.02.53.0
2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08ServicesGoodsScores
+
–Chart 1 Consumption values
2101234
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08Scores
Services
ManufacturingThree months on same period a year earlier
+
–Chart 2 Investment intentions over the next twelve
monthsAgents’ summary of business conditions February 2008 3
Demand by UK companies for intermediate imports remained
solid.  But there were reports of a slowing in imports of motorvehicles and some consumer goods, consistent with theslowdown in household spending.
Output
Manufacturing
Manufacturing output growth ticked down again in January,but remained firm ( Chart 3 ).  External demand continued to
provide significant impetus to growth, and production fordomestic markets was maintained at a healthy pace.However, domestic orders pointed to a prospective slowdownin production for the UK market, especially for manufacturersof building materials or consumer goods.  In contrast, exportorders remained elevated.
Construction
Growth in construction output eased again in January, drivenby a softening in private sector housing activity outsideLondon ( Chart 4 ).  While the pace of activity remained strong
— given the volume of work already commenced —commitments to build had fallen.  Some commercialdevelopments were under review due to the effects of recent financial turmoil, and there were fewer speculativebuilding projects.  Consequently, contacts were revising down their expectations for output growth for the year ahead.
Services
The Agents’ scores for both business and consumer services fellfurther in January, though remained at a high level.  The fall inthe business services score from its recent peak reflectedweaker demand for professional and financial services.Financial market turmoil had amplified this decline, reducingdemand for services relating to capital market transactions andproperty development.  But in January, there was also asoftening in demand for other business services (such aslogistics and business catering).  Furthermore, many business
service contacts had become more pessimistic about theoutlook.
Employment
Given the slowdown in activity, employment intentionscontinued to ease ( Chart 5 ).  Agents’ scores for employment
intentions fell in business services, consumer services and manufacturing.  There were also reports of significantlyreduced labour demand by house builders.  More generally,companies reported an increased tendency to leave vacancies unfilled, particularly for less-skilled positions.  In addition, there were some localised reports of reducedreliance on temporary migrant labour to meet productiontargets.
Consistent with the easing in labour demand, recruitment
difficulties were less pronounced in January than in mid-2007.Nonetheless, structural skill shortages persisted for specificprofessions and trades.
2101234
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08Export
DomesticScoresThree months on same period a year earlier
+
_
(a) Recruitment difficulties relative to normal;  employment intentions (average across sectors)
over next six months.Chart 3 Manufacturing output0.50.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.0
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08Business services
ConstructionScoresThree months on same period a year earlier
+
–Chart 4 Output growth
1.00.50.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.0
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08Scores
Recruitment difﬁculties
Employment intentions+
–Chart 5 Employment intentions(a)Capacity utilisation
Contacts reported that capacity pressures were expected to
ease considerably over the next six months, and the Agentslowered their scores accordingly.  While the expectedreduction in capacity pressures partly reflected recentadditions to capacity, increasingly it was also being attributedto a projected slowing in activity.  Capacity pressures wereexpected to ease most in the services sector, where a clearslowdown in activity was already evident.  But pressures werealso expected to ease in manufacturing and construction.
Costs and prices
Labour costs
Agents reported that across-the-board pay settlementsremained stable in January.  Companies also reported a furthereasing in total labour cost growth in the month, due to slowergrowth in the variable component of pay.  Looking ahead,responses to the Agents’ latest pay survey suggested thatsettlements would remain broadly the same as in 2007, whilegrowth in total labour costs would increase modestly.  Skillshortages were the main source of upward pressure on paysettlements.  This effect was being offset by expectedreductions in company profitability.  (See the box on theAgents’ pay survey.)
Input and output prices
Input price inflation picked up sharply in January due toincreases in the world prices of energy, oil derivatives, buildingmaterials and food inputs ( Chart 6 ).  There were further
reports of increases in the cost of international freight, alongwith a greater tendency for local suppliers to impose explicitfuel surcharges.  Many contacts reported increases in the costof importing finished and intermediate goods from China and,to a lesser extent, India.  These cost increases reflectedincreases in the domestic price of goods from these countries,along with the effects of the recent depreciation of sterling.
The score for manufacturing output prices was little changed
in January.  Given the renewed strength in input price inflation,manufacturers reported a compression in margins.  Consistentwith this, the Agents’ score for manufacturers’ pre-tax
profitability fell again in January.  But a growing share ofcontacts reported an intention to pass on recent costincreases, so that output price inflation was expected to rise. 
Business-to-business service price inflation fell in January and
was well down on levels in the first half of 2007, givenincreased commoditisation of services and an easing indemand.  Recently there were also reports of lower insurancepremia coming into effect.
Consumer prices
The Agents’ score for annual goods price inflation ticked upagain in January, reflecting further increases in the prices ofenergy and food.  With annual service price inflation littlechanged, overall consumer price inflation also edged up.
Significant increases in the cost of food inputs continued to
place upward pressure on retail food prices.  Whilesupermarkets had absorbed part of this increase in margins, they had become more active in passing oncommodity-related cost increases to consumers.  In contrastto higher food price inflation, discounting remained a featureof non-food prices, with discounting in January being deeperand of longer duration than usual.4 Agents’ summary of business conditions February 2008
(a) Manufacturers’ non-labour input and output prices.32101234
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08Input
OutputScores
+
–Three months on same period a year earlierChart 6 Manufacturers’ input and output prices(a)Agents’ pay survey
With around half of private sector pay settlements taking
place in the first four months of the year, the Agents conductan annual survey of their contacts to give an early read on payprospects in the year ahead.  This year, around 350 companieswere interviewed across industries that are broadlyrepresentative of the structure of the economy.  Across allcompanies, settlements were expected to average 3.3% in2008, with only modest variation across sectors ( Chart B1 ). 
Overall, the expected level of settlements was marginally
lower than in the same period a year earlier ( Chart B2 ).
Expected settlements in the consumer services andconstruction sectors were markedly lower than those of a yearearlier.  The reduction in expected settlements forconstruction, of around 1 1/$percentage points, appeared to be
in response to recent reductions in housing demand.  While settlements were expected to be little changed in the
year ahead, a positive net balance of respondents anticipatedmodest upward pressure on broader measures of labour costs(Chart B3 ).  This included pressure on total pay (which
includes overtime and bonuses) and total labour costs (whichalso includes pensions and leave).
Companies attributed the upward pressure on total labour cost
growth to the persistence of skill shortages, expected increasesin inflation and non-wage labour costs (such as leaveentitlements) ( Chart B4 ).Agents’ summary of business conditions February 2008
2.72.82.93.03.13.23.33.43.53.6
All companies Consumer
servicesConstruction Business
servicesManufacturingAnnual percentage changeChart B1 Expected pay settlements in 2008
1.41.21.00.80.60.40.20.00.20.40.6
All companies Business
servicesManufacturing Consumer
servicesConstructionPercentage points
+
–Expected settlements in 2008 less 2007Chart B2 Change in expectations05101520253035
Net balance Signiﬁcantly
lowerA little
lowerSame A little
higherSigniﬁcantly
higherNet balance, per centChart B3 Expectations for growth in total labour costs in
2008
30 20 10 0 10 20 30 40RecruitmentOther factorsInﬂation outlookPensionsOvertimeMigrant labourProductivityPass on cost increasesPerformance payProﬁtability
Net balance, per cent–+Chart B4 Factors influencing growth in total labour
costs