Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2008/december-2008.pdf
Date: 2008-12-31

• Consumers’ expenditure had contracted further, with both retail sales values and consumer services
demand falling in recent months.
• Investment intentions had been cut back sharply, driven by both the weakening outlook for demand and
concerns over financing.
•Many contacts reported a tightening in the cost and availability of working capital relative to the
position a few months earlier (see box).  
• Export orders had continued to grow, but at a slower rate than experienced earlier in the year.  
• Manufacturing and business services output was reported to be falling more rapidly than earlier in the
year.  Construction output was also contracting as substantial falls in private sector building work more
than offset demand from public sector projects.
• Employment intentions had been reduced further across all sectors.
•Growth in per capita labour costs had slowed as average hours were cut and bonus payments were
scaled back.  Looking forward, most contacts expected next year’s settlement would be lower than thisyear’s.
• Annual input and output price inflation had fallen back sharply as falling foreign currency prices more
than offset the impact of sterling’s depreciation for many materials.
• Retail goods and service price inflation had also fallen amidst reports of increased promotional activity.
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by
the Bank of England’s Agents, following discussions with contacts in the period between late October and late November.  It provides information on the state of business conditions, fromcompanies across all sectors of the economy.  The report does notrepresent the Bank’s own views, nor does it represent the views ofany particular company or region.  The Bank’s Monetary PolicyCommittee uses the intelligence provided by the Agents, inconjunction with information from other sources, to assist itsunderstanding and assessment of current economic conditions.  Acopy of this publication can be found at:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/agentssummary/index.htm.The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, the
East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the North West,Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, theSouth West, Wales, the West Midlands & Oxfordshire, andYorkshire & the Humber.
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic
conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in theInflation Report, obtained from:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/inflationreport/index.htm.Agents’ summary of business conditions
December 2008Demand
Consumption
The Agents’ scores for both retail sales values and consumer
services turnover were reduced further.  New and used carsales remained particularly weak, despite sharp discounting.  
Across most parts of the United Kingdom, the value of retail
sales was lower now than it had been a year earlier.  Keythemes flagged in recent months had persisted.  Consumershad continued to shift towards cheaper, unbranded products inthe face of budgetary pressures, leading to loss of market shareamong mid-range stores.  Sales of furniture and white goodswere still falling particularly rapidly as consumers deferredreplacement expenditure.  However, for many contacts,weaker sales had been anticipated — leading to cutbacks inorders earlier in the year.  There were only sporadic reports ofunplanned increases in retailers’ stocks.  
Demand for a range of consumer services had continued to
shrink.  Most notably, there were widespread reports of lowerspending on services associated with housing, financialservices, and on entertainment outside the home.  There wassome evidence of trading down in leisure expenditure with, forexample, increased demand for fast food relative to otherrestaurants.
Housing market
Activity remained very weak.  Contacts reported fewtransactions in the markets for both new and establishedhomes.  The key drivers of the weakness in demand were seento be expectations of further falls in price and difficulties insecuring mortgage funding.  There were signs that financingdifficulties were now affecting sales of social housing asprospective tenants were less able to borrow to fund sharedownership.  While there were tentative signs that the rate ofcontraction in demand was flattening off in some parts of theUnited Kingdom, most contacts expected the level of activityto remain weak through much of 2009.
Investment
The Agents’ scores for manufacturing and service sectorinvestment intentions were reduced sharply ( Chart 1 ).  That
followed material reductions in scores over the past fewmonths.
As in recent months, contacts described investment as having
been pared back to essentials.  Where feasible, businesses wereprolonging the use of existing assets.  And in some cases,capital expenditure was expected to fall below levels normally associated with depreciation.  Among service sectorcontacts, there were reports of falls in retail and hotelrefurbishment expenditure, lower demand for new warehousedevelopment, and cutbacks in IT spending and commercialvehicle fleet sizes.  The outlook for demand continued to be cited as a significant
factor driving cutbacks in investment plans.  But concerns over availability of working capital and external projectfinancing were cited by a growing number of contacts.  Theresults of a special survey on the availability of trade credit arereported in the box.  The majority of respondents hadexperienced a tightening in the availability of working capital.And around 45% had cut capital expenditure as a result of thattightening.
Overseas trade
Export orders had continued to grow, but at a slower rate thanexperienced earlier in the year.  While most contacts reportedweakening demand, there were more exceptions to thatpicture than was the case for other aspects of economicactivity.  However, many contacts reported that the slowdownin world growth had — so far — more than offset the impact ofsterling’s recent depreciation on export orders.  Exports of steeland automotive components had fallen sharply.  And therewere some reports of orders for capital goods being cancelledin the wake of tighter credit conditions in some developingcountries.  There were also occasional reports that difficultiesin accessing trade credit insurance were affecting sales.  
Imports of finished goods continued to shrink, reflecting the
downscaling of retailers’ orders.  And shipping and logisticsfirms continued to report a contraction in freight volumes.  
Inventories
In recent months, retailers had scaled back orders — primarilyin anticipation of weaker-than-normal Christmas sales, butalso in the face of pressures on working capital.  There weresigns that this had led to an involuntary build-up of stocksfurther down the supply chain.  For example, distributioncompanies reported that warehouses were fuller than normalfor the time of year.  Stocks of new and used cars had alsoincreased sharply, following the material contraction indemand experienced in recent months.2 Agents’ summary of business conditions December 2008
32101234
2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08Scores
ManufacturingServices
+
–Over the next twelve monthsChart 1 Investment intentionsAgents’ summary of business conditions December 2008 3
Output
Business services
Business services turnover was materially lower than it had
been a year earlier.  There were widespread examples of fallingexpenditure on professional services — ranging from cutbacksin use of recruitment agencies, through demand for corporatefinance and property-related services.  Growth in spending onIT consultancy had slowed.  And there had been a contractionin demand for transport and logistics, reflecting the falls inaggregate demand and output seen in recent months.  Thisweakness more than offset growth in demand forcountercyclical services — such as business advisory work andcorporate litigation.  
Manufacturing output
There were further reductions in the Agents’ scores formanufacturing output ( Chart 2 ).  That followed material
reductions in scores the previous month.  Automotiveproduction had fallen particularly sharply in the wake of veryweak demand for new vehicles in the United Kingdom andabroad.  A number of contacts in the automotive sectorreported temporary cuts in shifts.  Construction-relatedbusinesses had continued to see reductions in orders.Elsewhere, orders for capital and consumer-facing goods hadfallen — mirroring recent trends in investment and consumerdemand.  There were, however, a few exceptions to the pictureof falling output:  for example, food processors and theaerospace industry. 
Construction
Construction output was lower than a year earlier.  Substantialfalls in private house-building and commercial propertyactivity were now reported to be more than offsetting demandfrom public sector projects.  Looking forward, many contactsexpected construction output to contract more rapidly nextyear.  Much of the ongoing private sector activity representedcompletion of existing projects:  the pipeline of new projectshad slowed to a trickle.  Employment
Demand for labour had contracted further.  There were morereports of falls in average hours, for example through cutbacksin shifts.  And the majority of contacts were looking to reducehead count over the next few months.  For many, this could beachieved without redundancies — for example by cutting backon graduate recruitment and on the use of agency staff.  Butfor a substantial and growing proportion, reduction in headcount would require redundancies.
Capacity utilisation
The Agents’ scores for capacity utilisation and recruitmentdifficulties were reduced further.  It was very rare for contactsto mention recruitment difficulties or capacity as prospectiveconstraints on activity.  That was perhaps unsurprising, giventhe recent significant reductions in Agents’ scores for outputand contacts’ expectations that weak demand conditionswould persist next year.  The scores might, however, mask areduction in the capacity to meet any future growth indemand.  Some of the recent reduction in output has beenachieved without impairment to capital stock — for example,by temporary mothballing of production lines.  But in recentmonths, there have also been reports of disinvestment, forexample through closure of retail outlets, offices andproduction lines.  Moreover, as noted above, capital spendingplans had been scaled back sharply across the second half of2008.  On the labour supply side, very few firms remained in aposition to hoard labour in an environment of falling ordersand tight financing conditions.  
Costs and prices
Labour costs
There were reductions in the Agents’ scores for labour costs inboth the services and manufacturing sectors ( Chart 3 ).  
0.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.0
2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08Scores
ManufacturingServicesThree months on same period a year earlierChart 3 Labour costs
2101234
2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08Scores
DomesticExport
+
–Three months on same period a year earlierChart 2 Manufacturing outputGrowth in per capita labour costs had slowed further as
average hours were cut back.  And there were widespreadreports of falls in elements of flexible pay, with some contactsreporting cancellations and cutbacks in bonus plans while formany others bonuses were tied to (falling) sales or profits.  
Looking forward, most contacts expected next year’s
settlement would be lower than this year’s.  In part, thatreflected the anticipated profile for inflation.  But there werealso more widespread reports of plans for wage freezes.  Thosecontacts that had retained defined-benefit pension schemessaid that they might have to increase contributions in the wakeof recent falls in equity prices.  
Input and output prices
Inflation in sterling materials costs has fallen sharply in recentmonths ( Chart 4 ), with falling foreign currency prices more
than offsetting the impact of sterling’s recent depreciation.The most notable falls in price were seen for construction-related materials — such as steel and concrete —where global demand had contracted.  Shipping rates had alsofallen.  The Agents’ score for manufacturing output prices was also
marked down ( Chart 4 ).  At all stages in the supply chain, the
desire to avoid any build-up of stock levels was having adownward effect on goods prices.  Consumer-facing firms andfood processors reported themselves to be under pressurefrom retailers to reduce prices.  And construction tenders wereat materially lower rates, reflecting the sharp slowdown inconstruction activity.  
Consumer prices
Agents’ scores for both retail goods and services prices werereduced.  New and used car prices had fallen significantly.More generally, discounting of retail goods was running aboveseasonal norms, in the wake of falling demand and a continuedshift towards cheaper, unbranded products.  Looking forward,contacts expected food prices to fall as more retailerspositioned themselves to compete on price with discountstores.4 Agents’ summary of business conditions December 2008
21012345
2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08Scores
Materials costs
Manufacturers’ 
  domestic output prices+
–Three months on same period a year earlierChart 4 Manufacturers’ input and output pricesAgents’ survey of the availability of trade
credit
During November the Agencies undertook a survey of their
contacts, asking how they were being affected by changes inthe availability of trade credit.  The survey followed a broaderreview of corporate credit conditions conducted in September2008.
(1)It covered around 300 companies from all sectors of
the economy and a range of firm sizes.  All figures reported areweighted by respondents’ turnover.
Respondents were asked about the availability of a range of
types of working capital or ‘trade credit’.  The most widelyused were short-term bank finance and trade credit insurance(Chart A ).  
Around a quarter of respondents had not been directly
affected by tightening in any types of trade credit.  Focusing onthe most widely used forms:  just over a third had experienceda tightening in the availability of short-term finance, whilealmost 50% reported tighter trade credit insurance.  Contactsreported that where trade credit insurance had become harderto access, it had often been withdrawn at short notice.Moreover, 15% of all respondents had experienced tighteningof both trade credit insurance and short-term financing, whichmay leave them unable to absorb any impact of lost insurancecover through short-term borrowing.  
Respondents were also asked about trends in the time taken to
receive payment for the goods and services they provide toother firms.  Payment periods had increased for a substantialminority of both large and small firms — potentiallyamplifying the impact of any tightening in the availability ofworking capital ( Chart B ).  Around 45% also reported some
increase in bad debts.Respondents were asked what changes to strategy had been
adopted as a direct result of any tightening in trade credit.Around a quarter had taken no action ( Chart C ).  That
suggested that the credit crunch was having a wider impactthan in the September survey, when a majority of respondentsreported that they had taken no action.  
The most common response was to cut back on capital
expenditure plans.  For many contacts, concerns over theprospective availability of working capital have led them tofocus on cash management — reducing their appetite forinternally funded investment projects.  It was also striking thataround a quarter of firms had chosen to refuse potentiallyprofitable orders as a direct result of tighter trade credit.Agents’ summary of business conditions December 2008
(1) See October 2008 Agents’ Summary of Business Conditions ,
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/agentssummary/index.htm.01020304050607080
Short-term
bank ﬁnanceTrade credit
insuranceLeasing and
factoringOverseas
trade facilitiesOther
short-term
ﬁnanceRelevant to business
No change
TighterPer cent of respondents(a)Chart A Recent changes in the availability of working
capital
(a) Responses weighted by respondents’ turnover.0102030405060
Decreased No change IncreasedLarge ﬁrms(b)
Small ﬁrmsPer cent of respondents(a)Chart B Recent trends in payment times for goods and
services provided
(a) Responses weighted by respondents’ turnover.
(b) Large firms defined as those with annual turnover in excess of £50 million.
0102030405060
No
changeCut
capital
expenditureCut
jobsLater
paymentsCut
stocksRefuse
ordersPer cent of respondents(a)(b)Chart C Responses to tighter working capital
(a) Responses weighted by respondents’ turnover.
(b) Some respondents selected multiple options.