Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2008/july-2008.pdf
Date: 2008-07-31

• Consumption growth eased further, reflecting weaker demand for consumer services.
•The sharp downturn in housing demand continued.
•Companies remained cautious in terms of their investment intentions .  The majority still remained
largely unaffected by the tightening in credit conditions , though firms seeking external finance had more
hurdles to satisfy.
•Demand for exports remained firm.
•Growth in services and domestically orientated manufacturing eased further, and there was a sharp
decline in construction .  
• Labour demand softened and recruitment difficulties eased.
• Capacity pressures continued to ease.
•Growth in total labour costs rose slightly but nonetheless remained moderate.  
•Manufacturers’ annual input and output price inflation rose further, though their margins continued to
be squeezed.
•Annual consumer price inflation increased sharply.
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by
the Bank of England’s Agents, following discussions with about870 businesses in the period between late May and late June .  
It provides information on the state of business conditions, fromcompanies across all sectors of the economy.  The report does notrepresent the Bank’s own views, nor does it represent the views ofany particular company or region.  The Bank’s Monetary PolicyCommittee uses the intelligence provided by the Agents, inconjunction with information from other sources, to assist itsunderstanding and assessment of current economic conditions.  Acopy of this publication can be found at:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/agentssummary/index.htm.The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, the
East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the North West,Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, theSouth West, Wales, the West Midlands & Oxfordshire, andYorkshire & the Humber.
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic
conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in theInflation Report, obtained from:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/inflationreport/index.htm.Agents’ summary of business conditions
July 2008Demand
Consumption
The Agents’ score for the value of spending on consumer goods
was stable in June ( Chart 1 ).  
Spending on necessities such as food, utilities and fuel
increased due to rising inflation.  The volume of retail spending on food and drink to consume at home had also beenboosted as households curtailed their visits to restaurants andbars.  By contrast, spending on durable goods continued todecline, particularly on high-tech electrical goods such as flat-screen TVs.  New and used car sales weakened significantlyin June, having been supported in previous months by higher-than-normal levels of price discounting.  Demand forhome-ware goods such as carpets and furniture remainedexceptionally weak.  
In contrast to the official data, few contacts had seen
especially strong demand in May.  Warm snaps during parts ofMay had stimulated demand for summer clothing andfootwear somewhat.  But this had largely unwound in June. 
The Agents’ score for spending on consumer services fell
sharply in June, reaching its lowest level since the scores beganin 1997.  Reports of a slowdown were widespread, includingweaker demand for transport and communications, visitorattractions and restaurants and bars.  The contraction inhousing transactions had further reduced demand forconveyancing and other housing-related services such asremovals. 
Housing market
Housing demand continued to contract at a rapid pace.  Manycontacts judged that the level of activity was currently moredepressed than during the early 1990s.  The number ofrepossessions remained low, however.  In the market forestablished homes more transactions were falling through,with some estate agents reporting a cancellation rate of up to40% recently.  That was partly due to the unwillingness of
many sellers to accept a lower offer.  Also, increasing numbersof potential buyers had either had mortgage offers withdrawnor had pulled out of transactions due to fears of capital losses.Both of these factors were exacerbated by the lengtheningperiod of time between the acceptance of an offer and thepurchase being completed, due to a rising number oftransactions breaking down elsewhere in the housing chain.Confidence of estate agents continued to decline and morewere either making staff redundant and/or closing offices.There were a number of reports of estate agencies refusing toaccept new instructions, particularly if the seller was unwillingto negotiate on price, and some had raised their fees to reflectthe increased cost of finding buyers.  
In the market for new housing, the number of starts continued
to dwindle.  With rising amounts of unsold stock on theirbooks, some house builders were attracting buyers by payingthe deposit themselves — having first obtained the agreementof the mortgage lender — or by offering shared equityschemes.  Prices of new houses were generally falling fasterthan in the market for established homes.  In some towns andcities, prices of newly built apartments had fallen by over 25%in the past year, reflecting the degree of excess supply.  
Investment
The Agents’ scores for investment intentions were littlechanged this month.
Some businesses with longer product cycles — for example
aerospace, telecommunications and utilities — were able tolook beyond the current slowdown and their investment planshad been little affected by recent events.  But others remainedcautious about implementing major capital expenditureprojects.  Some had postponed investment decisions until atleast next year, reflecting uncertainty about future levels ofdemand, the deterioration in cash flow recently and thetightening in credit markets.  Those contacts most exposed tothe slowdown — particularly in property-related businessesand retailers of bigger ticket home-ware goods — had eitherscaled back their expansion plans or were looking to sell offcapital assets.  
The majority of businesses were still largely unaffected by the
tightening in credit conditions.  That was either because theyhad access to adequate amounts of internal finance or theircommitted facilities remained sufficient — particularly whereinvestment plans had been cut back.  However, even high-quality borrowers reported having more hurdles to satisfyto gain access to new loan facilities and that the cost offinance had risen.  
Overseas trade
External demand remained firm in June and the score formanufacturers’ exports increased slightly.  Export growth to2 Agents’ summary of business conditions July 2008
0.50.00.51.01.52.02.53.0
2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08ServicesGoodsScoresThree months on same period a year earlier
+
–Chart 1 Consumption valuesAgents’ summary of business conditions July 2008 3
the euro area was steady, supported by resilient German
markets, and demand in Eastern Europe continued toaccelerate.  With the exception of consumer goods andconstruction equipment, US demand growth was reported tobe stable.  But the strongest growth remained in Asia, and alsothe Middle East where pricing in euros had become morecommon — to the advantage of UK manufacturers.  In theservice sector, architects and consulting engineers hadsuccessfully expanded their sales overseas in response toweakening demand at home.  
The volume of imports decelerated further.  There were a few
reports suggesting that import growth had not slowed by asmuch as consumer spending, however.  Because the slowdownin consumer demand had exceeded contacts’ expectations,stocks of imported goods were accumulating in the supplychain.   
Output
Manufacturing
Manufacturing output growth was unchanged in June,reflecting slightly weaker domestic demand but slightlystronger overseas demand.  Production of capital goodscontinued to expand strongly in areas such as commercial and military aerospace, agricultural machinery and a variety of energy-related sectors.  But demand continued to weaken in domestic markets for consumer goods and buildingmaterials.
Construction
The score for construction output fell sharply in June ( Chart 2 ).
The rapid decline in recent months reflected the speed of thedownturn in private house building, which contacts reportedwas unprecedented.  House building financed by the publicsector had also slowed, though not to the same degree.Activity in the commercial property market remained fairlysteady, underpinned by the pipeline of work in progress.However, contacts anticipated weakening demand goingforward.  Until recently, the volume of work arising from the
2012 London Olympics had been expected to add to analready overheated construction sector.  But many contactsnow viewed the Olympics as an important stabiliser.   
Services
The Agents’ score for business services output fell again inJune, its fourteenth successive monthly decline since its peakin April 2007.  There were declines of similar magnitude in thescores for professional and financial services, and otherbusiness services.  In professional and financial services, thetightening in credit conditions continued to restrict theavailability of funds for commercial property developers andprivate equity companies.  That had contributed to sharplyreduced volumes of corporate transactions for lawyers andaccountants.  Insolvency practitioners were expecting a sharpincrease in their workload this year but most reported that ithad yet to materialise.  In other business services, advertisingagencies had suffered a sudden slowdown in demand fromhouse builders and retailers.  And hotels had seen reducedbusiness spending on banqueting and conferencing facilities,which they attributed to cost-cutting measures by theircustomers. 
Capacity utilisation
Capacity constraints in manufacturing and services continuedto ease.  Some manufacturers reported lower levels ofoutstanding orders and a reduced backlog of work, suggestingcapacity utilisation would weaken in the coming months.  Inthe service sector, the score for capacity constraints fellsharply this month.  That largely reflected the rapid weakeningin demand for property-related services, which had also begunto induce a reduction in supply capacity, especially of estateagents.  Capacity constraints had also declined in the retailsector.  Professional services firms such as accountants andlawyers reported that capacity utilisation had returned tomore normal levels, having been elevated in recent years.  
Employment
All of the Agents’ national average scores for labour marketquantities declined in June.  
Many contacts reported fewer recruitment difficulties and
reduced turnover of skilled workers.  Labour demand had fallensharply in the house building industry and in property-relatedservices such as estate agencies and conveyancing, withwidespread reports of redundancies and business closures.  Inother parts of the economy, redundancies were uncommon —though some firms had reduced staffing through naturalwastage and some had either frozen or cut back onrecruitment.  By contrast, firms with a preponderance of highlyskilled workers such as in professional and financial serviceswere prepared to hold on to labour during the slowdown and
01234
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08    ScoreThree months on same period a year earlierChart 2 Construction outputmany were continuing with their graduate recruitment
programmes.     
Costs and prices
Labour costs
The Agents’ scores for labour costs in manufacturing andservices rose fractionally in June ( Chart 3 ).  That largely
reflected employees seeking to maintain real earnings in theface of rising price inflation.  Conflict in pay negotiations wasmostly confined to the public sector.  Some private sectoremployers with unionised workforces were more apprehensiveabout their next pay round.  But the majority of firms whichhad settled recently indicated that employees were moreconcerned about job security than receiving a larger pay rise.Many of those firms hit hardest by the slowdown had awardedsmaller basic pay rises than last year.  And those thatincentivised staff with commission and bonus payments hadseen a sharp reduction in their total remuneration bills.  In theconstruction sector, some contacts reported that pay rises thisyear would be well below the negotiated percentage increases,which applied only to workers on minimum pay levels.  Paydifferentials would thus be compressed as employers looked toreduce their wage costs.    
Input and output prices
The Agents’ score for manufacturers’ input prices edged higherin June.  Most input price increases were related to the spike incrude oil prices;  for example contacts cited sharply highercosts of petrochemicals, plastics, foam, packaging andtransportation.  But food manufacturers’ input costs alsoaccelerated due to further increases in soft commodity andmeat prices, and there were renewed reports of rising costs ofiron ore, steel, tin and scrap metal.  Many contacts anticipatedfurther cost increases in the months ahead as their annual ormulti-year utility contracts expired;  some planned to move toshorter-term purchases in the expectation that wholesaleprices would decline from current levels.  The cost of importedfinished and intermediate goods continued to accelerate,
mostly reflecting increasing world cost pressures and thestrength of the euro ( Chart 4 ).
The Agents’ score for manufacturing output prices rose sharply
in June.  Notwithstanding that, the score for manufacturers’profitability continued to decline.  Contacts reported that,although they had much greater scope to pass on highermaterial costs, full pass-through was rare so that marginscontinued to be squeezed.  Most manufacturers had notanticipated the magnitude of input cost inflation in 2008.Consequently the selling prices agreed with customers inadvance had proven to be too low.  Some would requestfurther large price increases.  However, customers wereexpected to resist, especially in the retail sector. 
Overall price inflation for business-to-business services was
unchanged this month.  Advertising rates and fees charged forlegal services had softened, but freight transportation chargescontinued to escalate.   
Consumer prices
The Agents’ score for retail goods price inflation increasedsharply in June due to further acceleration in the prices of fuel,energy and food.  Abstracting from those price hikes, however,consumer price inflation for other goods was slightly lower,reflecting weakening consumer demand.  Many retailers hadlaunched their summer sales earlier than normal this year inorder to clear surplus inventory, examples including retailers offurniture, electrical goods and summer fashions.  Lookingforward, there were some reports that the annual rate of retailfood price inflation was likely to remain elevated until theautumn, but would then start to fall back due to priceincreases a year earlier dropping out of the annual comparison.Weakening demand had also restrained consumer servicesprice inflation, with the Agents’ score little changed in June.Hotels in particular were reported to have cut their room ratesto stimulate demand.4 Agents’ summary of business conditions July 2008
01234
1998 2000 02 04 06 08  Scores
Services
ManufacturingThree months on same period a year earlier
99 01 03 05 07Chart 3 Labour costsThree months on same period a year earlier
54321012345
2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 0854321012345
Agents (right-hand scale)
ONS (left-hand scale)Score
+
–+
–Percentage changeChart 4 Imported finished goods pricesAgents’ survey of migrant labour
Net migration is of interest to monetary policy makers
because it may affect the balance of labour demand andsupply, wages, and firms’ investment decisions.  Following asteady upward trend in the previous decade, net migration tothe United Kingdom increased sharply in 2004, and it hasremained at a high level in much of the period since then.Recently, however, there have been reports that flows haveeased back somewhat.    
To investigate this issue, the Agents surveyed over 200
contacts regarding their use of migrant labour during May andJune.  The survey had a particular focus on those sectors of theeconomy which employ large numbers of migrants such ashospitality and catering.  This box summarises the mainfindings. 
The majority of contacts reported that migrants made up
between 1%–10% of their workforce.  For over one fifth ofrespondents the proportion was over 20%.   
In the Agents’ previous survey of migrant labour undertaken in
December 2006, a large net balance of contacts reported thatthe proportion of migrant workers in their workforces had risenover the previous year, and was expected to increase furtherover the following twelve months ( Chart A ).  
By contrast, in the latest survey the majority of contacts
reported little change in the proportion of migrant workersover the past six months;  and anticipated little significantchange over the next six months ( Chart B ).  
In part that weaker outlook may reflect lower demand for
labour from businesses experiencing or anticipating weakeroutput growth.  That would be consistent with the sharpdecline in the Agents’ scores for employment intentions in
recent months.
Contacts also reported on whether migrant workers were
becoming:  more difficult to recruit;  less skilled;  more likely toreturn home;  or if they had employed fewer migrants becauseof changes to work permit regulations.  While the majority ofemployers had not observed a marked change in those factors,nearly half reported that migrant workers were more likely toreturn home and one third said that migrants were moredifficult to recruit.  
Employment agencies reported that Poland had been the main
source of workers in the early wave of migration from A8countries.  Many of the early Polish migrants were graduateswho had found employment in lesser-skilled occupations.However, the zloty’s rapid appreciation against sterling andimproved economic prospects in Poland had encouraged somePolish migrants to return home recently.  While employmentagencies had found a sufficient number of migrants fromelsewhere to replace those Poles returning home, these hadtended on average to be somewhat less highly skilled.  Agents’ summary of business conditions July 2008
010203040506070
Decreased Broadly stable IncreasedPercentage of employmentPast twelve months
Next twelve monthsChart A Changes in the migrant share of the workforce
(December 2006 Agents’ survey)Decreased Broadly stable IncreasedPast six months
Next six monthsPercentage of employment
020406080100Chart B Changes in the migrant share of the workforce
(2008 survey)