Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2008/january-2008.pdf
Date: 2008-01-31

• Consumption growth remained well below its rate earlier in 2007.  Growth in the value of Christmas sales
was also less than at the same time a year earlier, and retailers resorted to extensive discounting.  See thebox on the Agents’ retail survey .
•The easing in demand for housing continued, and house price inflation fell.
• Investment intentions fell further, with weaker intentions evident in both the services and manufacturing
sectors, in part reflecting tighter credit conditions .
•In contrast to the slowdown in domestic spending, demand for exports remained buoyant.
• Growth in manufacturing was solid.  Growth in construction and service sector output slowed further,
albeit from high levels, so that growth in aggregate output also slowed.
• Employment intentions fell, and recruitment difficulties eased somewhat.
• Capacity pressures lessened, especially in service industries.
•Growth in total labour costs remained well contained, with little change expected in 2008.
• Annual input price inflation was unchanged in December following a rebound in preceding months.
Annual output price inflation was unchanged.
• Annual consumer price inflation increased, with the effects of non-food discounting more than offset by
increases in the prices of fuel and food. 
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by
the Bank of England’s Agents, following discussions with around760 businesses in the period between late November and late
December .  It provides information on the state of business
conditions, from companies across all sectors of the economy.  The report does not represent the Bank’s own views, nor does itrepresent the views of any particular company or region.  TheBank’s Monetary Policy Committee uses the intelligence providedby the Agents, in conjunction with information from other sources,to assist its understanding and assessment of current economicconditions.  A copy of this publication can be found at:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/agentssummary/index.htm.The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, the
East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the North West,Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, theSouth West, Wales, the West Midlands & Oxfordshire, andYorkshire & the Humber.
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic
conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in theInflation Report, obtained from:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/inflationreport/index.htm.Agents’ summary of business conditions
January 2008Demand
Consumption
The Agents’ score for the value of retail sales was unchanged in
December, but was well down on its level in the first half of theyear ( Chart 1 ).  
A slowdown in consumer spending had been under way ahead
of the recent financial market turmoil, though tighter creditconditions had become a factor in some spending decisions.Weakness remained evident in housing-related expenditure,consistent with weaker housing demand.  There were alsoongoing reports of weaker spending by age groups mostexposed to mortgage debt.  In contrast, spending on food,electronics and leisure goods displayed its usual seasonalstrength.
Sales growth over Christmas was ‘better than feared’.
Nonetheless, it was lower than in the previous Christmasperiod.  This was despite a late surge in spending in response toextensive discounting by retailers.  Retailers were nervousabout the outlook for early 2008.  For further details see thebox on the ‘Agents’ retail survey’. 
Spending on consumer services was more resilient than for
retail goods, though it too grew at a slower pace than in thefirst half of the year ( Chart 1 ).  International and domestic
tourism remained supportive of demand for services.
Housing market
The slowdown in housing demand continued in December.  Inthe market for established housing, tighter credit conditionsand the extension of Home Information Packs weighed onsentiment.  Estate agencies reported fewer enquiries frompotential buyers.  With sellers uncertain about the outlook forhouse prices, there were also fewer instructions and moreproperties were taken off the market than in earlier months.Sale periods had lengthened, and some vendors were
accepting sizable discounts on sale prices.  Accordingly, priceinflation for established homes fell further.
In the market for new housing, demand also continued to
weaken.  This was increasingly attributed to the effects offinancial turmoil, as well as the cumulative effect of pastinterest rate rises.  Discounts and incentives werecommonplace, so that price inflation for new homes slowedfurther.  So far, however, the reduction in building activity had been modest, owing to the volume of pre-committedwork.
Investment
Investment intentions fell again in December, though the fallwas less pronounced than in earlier months ( Chart 2 ).
Financial market turmoil had weighed on investmentintentions, compounding the effects of past increases in BankRate.  This was most evident in the service sector, whereinvestment intentions had fallen sharply since July.  However,part of the recent easing in manufacturers’ intentions wasbecause capacity expansion was now well advanced, withfinancial events having only a small role to play.  While themajority of contacts interviewed in the month were still notdirectly exposed to tighter credit conditions, a significant shareof companies was reviewing their investment plans.  This waslargely in response to concern about the effect of tighter creditconditions on the outlook for demand.
Overseas trade
As for much of 2007, external demand remained buoyantoverall, despite difficulties for those exporting to the UnitedStates.  The fall in US demand was offset by strength in Europe,the Middle East, Asia and Africa.  Demand remained strongestfor business services and capital goods.  Some contactscommented on their ability to divert sales from the UnitedStates to more rapidly growing markets.2 Agents’ summary of business conditions January 2008
1.00.50.00.51.01.52.02.53.0
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07Consumer services
Retail salesScores
+
–Three months on same period a year earlierChart 1 Consumption values
2101234
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07Scores
Services
ManufacturingThree months on same period a year earlier
+
–Chart 2 Investment intentions over the next twelve
monthsAgents’ summary of business conditions January 2008 3
Demand by UK companies for intermediate imports was still
high.  But consistent with the reductions in desired inventoriesof retailers, there were reports of a slowing in imports ofconsumption goods.
Output
Manufacturing
Manufacturing output growth ticked down slightly inDecember though remained firm ( Chart 3 ).  External demand
continued to provide the main impetus to growth, thoughproduction for domestic markets was maintained at a healthypace.  Looking ahead, domestic orders pointed to a slowdownin production for the UK market.  This was especially so formanufacturers of building materials who are exposed toresidential construction.  In contrast, export orders remainedelevated, particularly for manufacturers of high-value capitalgoods.
Construction
Growth in construction output had now clearly eased from itsrecent exceptional pace ( Chart 4 ), though the level of activity
remained high and capacity pressures persisted.  There was alarge amount of pre-committed work across a broad range ofconstruction activities.  Output was yet to be significantlyaffected by the downturn in demand for commercial propertydevelopment.  However, forecast output growth for 2008 hadbeen revised down.
Services
The Agents’ scores for both business and consumer serviceswere unchanged in December, but were well below theirrecent peak in April.  The fall in business services was mostpronounced ( Chart 4 ), reflecting a sharp slowing in demand
for ‘professional and financial’ services.  The slowdown inbusiness service activity had been amplified by recent financialmarket turmoil, with demand for services relating to largecapital market transactions and commercial property
development most seriously hit.  Other business serviceproviders continued to report satisfactory trading conditions.However, many business service contacts had become morepessimistic about the outlook.
Employment
Consistent with the slowdown in activity, employmentintentions continued to ease from their levels earlier in 2007.  This had largely been driven by weaker employmentintentions in the business service sector, where the recentslowing in activity had been most pronounced.  However, inDecember, weaker intentions were also evident in consumerservices and manufacturing.  Most contacts attributed the reduction in intended hiring to uncertainty about demand;  others cited the costs associated with increasedstatutory leave and the desire to achieve productivityimprovements.
Structural skill shortages persisted for a range of professionals
and skilled tradespersons.  Nonetheless, there was furtherevidence of an easing in recruitment difficulties in December,mainly for staff in the service sector.  Some contacts suggestedthat this easing in recruitment difficulties occurred despitethere being fewer migrants looking for work.
Capacity utilisation
Contacts expected capacity pressures to ease over the next sixmonths ( Chart 5 ).  While this anticipated easing partly
reflected recent additions to capacity, it was increasinglyattributed to expectations of a slowing in activity.  Capacitypressures were expected to ease most in the services sector,where there had been a sharp slowdown in demand for variousbusiness services.  They were also expected to ease inmanufacturing and construction.2101234
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07Export
DomesticScoresThree months on same period a year earlier
+
–Chart 3 Manufacturing output0.50.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.0
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07Business services
ConstructionScores
+
–Three months on same period a year earlierChart 4 Sources of slower output growthCosts and prices
Labour costs
Agents reported that across-the-board pay settlements
remained stable in December.  Their score for total labour costgrowth was little changed in the month, and well below itslevel at the beginning of the year.  Most contacts wereexpecting little change in settlements in 2008, despiteincreases in the cost of living.  In part this reflected increaseduncertainty about the outlook for demand.  Weaker demandwas also expected to reduce the variable component of pay,with anticipated reductions in commission-based earnings andbonuses for those in the service sector. 
Input and output prices
Input price inflation was unchanged in December following arebound in the preceding months ( Chart 6 ).  This increase on
levels of mid year owed to sharp increases in the world pricesof energy, oil derivatives, building materials and food inputs.Increases in the cost of international freight were also reportedin the month, along with an increased tendency for localsuppliers to impose explicit fuel surcharges.  Many contactsreported increases in the cost of importing goods from China.There were also some reports of increased costs of importingfrom India.
The score for manufacturing output prices was unchanged in
December.  Given renewed strength in input price inflation inpreceding months, manufacturers’ margins were compressed,
reversing the recovery evident earlier in the year.  But part ofthis margin compression reflected a lag in adjustment ofoutput prices.  A growing share of manufacturers reported anintention to pass on recent cost increases.  
Business-to-business service price inflation was unchanged
again in December, but was clearly lower than in the first halfof the year.  Some Agents reported greater difficulty insecuring price rises, given increased commoditisation ofservices and the recent easing in demand.
Consumer prices
The Agents’ score for annual goods price inflation picked upagain in December, largely reflecting higher prices for fuel andfood.  With annual service price inflation little changed, overallconsumer price inflation also increased.
The increase in some retail food prices was in direct 
response to the rising costs charged by suppliers.  Somesuppliers reported significant increases in their contract prices with supermarkets on certain product lines.  And while supermarkets had absorbed part of this increase inmargins, they had become more active in passing oncommodity-related cost increases to consumers.  In contrast,increased discounting was a feature of prices for non-fooditems.4 Agents’ summary of business conditions January 2008
(a) Manufacturers’ non-labour input and output prices.32101234
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07Scores
ManufacturingServicesRelative to normal
+
–Chart 5 Capacity constraints over the next six months
32101234
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07Input
OutputScores
+
–Three months on same period a year earlierChart 6 Manufacturers’ input and output prices(a)Agents’ retail survey
In late December and early January of each year, the Agents
contact a broad range of retailers in an effort to gauge thestrength of retail sales over the Christmas period.  This year,over 150 retailers were approached.  The findings from theseinterviews are summarised in this box.
Compared with a year earlier, a larger share of respondents
reported that sales growth had fallen, while a smaller shareindicated that it had risen.  Consequently, the net balance ofrespondents reporting an increase in sales growth was muchsmaller than in the previous year, when demand conditionshad been buoyant ( Chart B1 ).
Nonetheless, retailers reported a late surge in sales that had
been facilitated by discounting.  A larger share of retailersreported that discounting commenced earlier than was thecase last year.  These discounts were sustained, so that theduration of discounting was longer than a year ago.Furthermore, the depth of discounting was reported to begreater ( Chart B2 ).  While this did not avoid some build-up of
stock, the increase in retailers’ inventories was modest.Partly as a consequence of discounting, sales outcomes were
approximately as expected for a net balance of respondents.However, the majority of respondents expected that salesgrowth would slow in the first quarter of 2008 ( Chart B3 ).
This outlook was more pessimistic than at the same time ayear earlier.Agents’ summary of business conditions January 2008
05101520253035404550
Fallen
signiﬁcantlyFallen
slightlyUnchanged Risen
slightlyRisen
signiﬁcantlyNet
balance2006
2007Percentage balanceChart B1 Growth in Christmas sales10505101520253035
Earlier
discountsLonger
discountsLarger
discountsStock
build-up2006
2007Percentage balance
+
–Chart B2 Retail discounting
0102030405060
Weaker Same StrongerChristmas compared with expectations
Expectations for 2008 Q1PercentageChart B3 Outcomes and expectations