Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2008/september-2008.pdf
Date: 2008-09-30

• Consumption growth eased reflecting weaker retail sales and consumer services.
•The deceleration in housing demand continued.
• Investment intentions declined sharply.  With regard to credit conditions , the cost of finance rose and
availability diminished.  
• Inventories of consumer durables increased.
•Demand for exports weakened slightly but was still relatively strong.
•Growth in domestically orientated manufacturing fell and there was further deceleration in construction
and services output.  
• Labour demand softened and recruitment difficulties eased.
• Capacity pressures continued to fall.
•Growth in total labour costs remained well contained.   
•Annual input price inflation and output price inflation remained elevated.
•Annual consumer price inflation was steady.
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by
the Bank of England’s Agents, following discussions with over600 contacts in the period between late July and late August.  It provides information on the state of business conditions, fromcompanies across all sectors of the economy.  The report does notrepresent the Bank’s own views, nor does it represent the views ofany particular company or region.  The Bank’s Monetary PolicyCommittee uses the intelligence provided by the Agents, inconjunction with information from other sources, to assist itsunderstanding and assessment of current economic conditions.  Acopy of this publication can be found at:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/agentssummary/index.htm.The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, the
East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the North West,Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, theSouth West, Wales, the West Midlands & Oxfordshire, andYorkshire & the Humber.
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic
conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in theInflation Report, obtained from:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/inflationreport/index.htm.Agents’ summary of business conditions
September 2008Demand
Consumption
The Agents’ scores for retail sales and consumer services both
declined ( Chart 1 ).   
The score for the value of retail sales fell in August, having
been broadly flat in recent months.  With little perceivedchange in goods price inflation in the month, the Agentsreported a corresponding decline in the growth of retail salesvolumes.
Consumers continued to rein in their discretionary spending,
especially for big-ticket household items such as carpets andfurniture.  Growth in sales volumes of electrical goods — whichuntil recently had been comparatively buoyant — declinedsharply.  Demand contracted even for some low-priced itemssuch as greeting cards, newspapers and magazines.    
Demand for new and used cars declined significantly.  Dealers
attributed that to several factors, including waning consumerconfidence and increased finance costs for car buyers.  Also,recent sharp falls in resale values had discouraged manypotential buyers from part-exchanging their used vehicles fornew cars.    
The Agents’ score for spending on consumer services
continued to decline, and had fallen by much more than thescore for retail sales since their respective peaks in early 2007.Where possible, households had been cutting discretionaryspending, for example by making less use of mobile phonesand switching from taxis to public transport.  Non-essentialservicing and repair of motor vehicles had been delayed.  Pubsand restaurants reported a further weakening in sales, withsome contacts noting that the poor summer weather and TVcoverage of the Olympics had encouraged consumers to stayat home.  Demand for housing-related services such asconveyancing and removals contracted further. Housing market  
The number of transactions for established homes continuedto decelerate.  The number of transactions had fallen byaround 50%–60% on a year earlier and was increasinglyconfined to forced sales arising from job relocations, probateand repossessions.  The collapse in transactions by first-timebuyers had increased rental demand.  But the supply of rentalproperty had also risen, leaving rents little changed.  Forexample, with little demand for new housing, house builderswere increasingly renting out unsold properties (see below).Investor demand in the buy-to-let market had declined sharplyin recent months.  But there were as yet still few reports offorced sales or financial distress among investors. 
Investment  
Agents’ scores for investment intentions declined, with thescore for the service sector falling sharply.      
An increasing number of firms had deferred or cancelled
investment, mostly reflecting deteriorating businessconfidence in the short-term economic outlook and a growingamount of spare capacity.  For example, retailers had scaledback plans to refurbish stores and open new ones.  Withrelatively few firms looking to expand capacity, most hadfocused their capital spending on raising efficiency — forexample by upgrading IT systems and power generatingequipment — and legislative compliance.  
There were comparatively few reports of companies deferring
capital spending on account of financing difficulties.  But somecontacts were more cautious in planning future investment incase credit conditions deteriorated further.  Some banks hadrepriced loans to small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs)based on current market interest rates such as Libor ratherthan Bank Rate.  The value of collateral, especially property,was being scrutinised more carefully and loan to value ratioshad been reduced, reflecting the risk of further falls inresidential and commercial property prices.  Some non-bankcontacts were concerned that their banks would be unwillingto increase their lending facilities should the need arise.  Thathad engendered a more cautious stance with regard toinvestment intentions, cash flow and the amount of tradecredit extended to customers.  Firms reported a furtherincrease in delays receiving payment from debtors.  But therewere few reports of any significant rise in bad debts. 
Inventories
Retailers and distributors reported significant, unanticipatedstockbuilding of a variety of consumer durables, especially newand used cars, furniture and TVs.  Looking forward, retailersplanned to reduce orders and hold less stock than in previousyears in the run-up to Christmas.  Inventory accumulation hadalso been problematic for house builders, who had attemptedto improve cash flow by trying to let out completed properties,2 Agents’ summary of business conditions September 2008
1.00.50.00.51.01.52.02.53.0
2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08Input and output prices
ServicesRetail salesScores
+Three months on same period a year earlier
–Chart 1 Consumption valuesAgents’ summary of business conditions September 2008 3
offering shared equity schemes to prospective buyers and
increasing sales to housing associations.  
Exports and imports  
External demand growth fell slightly in August ( Chart 2 ).  Even
so, the Agents reported that export growth remainedsubstantially more robust than other components of aggregatedemand.  Euro-area and US markets were a little weaker on themonth.  By contrast, buoyant demand growth continued inemerging markets for intermediate and capital goods, oftenused in energy and infrastructure projects.  Demand remainedparticularly strong for engineering consultancy and projectmanagement services, for instance for the construction ofpetrochemical refineries.      
Import growth was reported to have slowed, mostly reflecting
weaker growth in domestic demand.  There were alsoincreasing reports of UK manufacturers gaining share indomestic markets at the expense of Far Eastern suppliers,largely reflecting customer dissatisfaction with the latter’sproduct quality, delivery delays and rising prices.    
Output
Services  
The Agents’ score for business services output declined inAugust.  Within business services, the score for professionaland financial services was broadly unchanged, but otherbusiness services weakened.  In professional and financialservices, many accountancy firms had shifted resources awayfrom corporate finance and transactions work towardsbusiness recovery and outsourcing.  In the legal sector, the continued sharp fall in demand for conveyancing andproperty-related services had been offset by increased activityin law firms’ insolvency, litigation and employmentdepartments.  Corporate demand for recruitment, advertisingand marketing services weakened.  In other business services,corporate discretionary spending continued to ease for avariety of services including travel, hotels and conferencing.Logistics companies reported weaker demand growth, mostly
reflecting the slowdown in consumption and house building.  
Manufacturing  
Manufacturing output growth declined in August ( Chart 2 ).
Weaker production for domestic markets mostly reflectedfurther contraction in demand from the construction industryfor products such as bricks.  Newspapers reported a sharp fallin advertising income which had reduced value added.  Bycontrast, car production was steady despite weaker demand.Manufacturers of equipment used in aerospace, energyproduction and commercial waste disposal continued to reportbuoyant activity and strong domestic order books.   
Construction  
Construction output growth slowed further.  The volume ofhouse building continued to contract.  Work had ceased onmany uncompleted properties, which were being mothballedin the absence of confirmed purchasers.  New housing startswere at very low levels.  Activity in the commercial propertymarket eased further.  However, output continued to besupported by the relatively high volume of work in progress,reflecting the long lead times between starting and completingdevelopments.  There was a steady volume of public sectorcommissioned construction.     
Capacity utilisation
Capacity constraints in manufacturing and services declined inAugust.  Overall, contacts reported that the slowdown indemand had been quicker than anticipated and the amount ofspare capacity was greater than normal.  That had contributedto the recent sharp fall in firms’ investment intentions (Chart 3 ).  Actions taken so far to reduce spare capacity had
largely been incremental — for example most firms had notmade cuts in their workforce commensurate with ananticipation of a further weakening in demand growth.  Evenso, a sizable minority of firms — especially those SMEs with
2101234
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08Capacity constraintsInvestment intentions Scores
+
–Chart 3 Capacity constraints over the next six months
and investment intentions(a)
(a) The aggregate scores for capacity constraints and investment intentions are weighted
averages of the respective scores for manufacturing and services.32101234
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08Scores 
DomesticExport
+Three months on same period a year earlier
–Chart 2 Manufacturing outputlow profit margins and limited access to external finance —
had responded more speedily to the slowdown by aggressivelyreducing capacity, for example by cutting staff and sub-lettingunwanted office space.    
Employment
Labour demand continued to soften in August.  Many firmshad implemented a freeze on recruitment recently.  Reports ofredundancies were more common and had spread to a broaderrange of industries such as retailing and newspaper publishing.Investment banks had recently implemented a further round oflabour shedding and more job cuts were expected soon in thesector.  Across the economy as a whole, recruitmentdifficulties declined, although vacancies remained hard to fillfor a few skills such as engineering and accountancy.  In recentmonths contacts had noted a much better supply of suitableindigenous workers available to fill lesser-skilled jobs, butmigrants were somewhat less easy to find.     
Costs and prices
Labour costs 
The Agents’ scores for the growth of labour costs were littlechanged in August.  Over the past year the manufacturingscore had been broadly flat.  But the score for the servicesector had declined steadily, mostly reflecting lowercommission and other performance-related payments (Chart 4 ). 
The Agents had little news on wage settlements this month as
comparatively few contacts had annual pay reviews in July andAugust.  Looking forward, the majority of firms anticipatedthat their next annual pay settlement would be broadlyunchanged compared with their previous award.  For manycontacts, the recent weakening in demand growth and risingnon-wage costs had weighed heavily on profitability and theywere unwilling to countenance larger increases given theuncertain outlook.  While some planned to increase theirawards, mostly on account of the rise in RPI inflation, there
was a broadly similar number of firms looking to give a smallerpay rise and a growing number anticipated a pay freeze.
Input and output prices 
The Agents’ score for manufacturers’ input price inflation wasunchanged in August.  Spot prices of most commodities hadfallen over the past month, especially for oil.  However,contacts continued to report rising costs of manufacturedmaterials such as plastics and packaging, reflecting lags in thesupply chain between changes in input and output prices.Looking forward, many firms were concerned about expectedfurther increases in the prices of steel and energy as contractscame up for renewal.    
The cost of imported finished and intermediate goods
accelerated a little further.  That partly reflected increasingcost pressures in emerging markets and partly the recentweakness of sterling.    
The Agents’ score for manufacturing output price inflation
remained elevated.  Overall, manufacturers had not fullyrecovered previous sharp increases in their material costs andthey continued to pass these on to customers.  Contactsexpected further increases in their prices in the next fewmonths.  However, the scope to make those increases stickwas reducing as the economy slowed, and some expected amuch tougher climate for negotiating price rises.  
The score for business-to-business services price inflation
eased slightly this month.  There was an increasing number ofreports that the slowdown in demand for business services wasreflected in weaker pricing, for example advertising companieshad started to discount their charges for advertising spacemore heavily.  By contrast, many haulage companies, includingthose with fuel escalator clauses, had not yet passed on therecent fall in fuel prices to their customers and instead hadrecovered some of the margin erosion suffered when fuelprices had been rising.      
Consumer prices  
The scores for retail goods and services price inflation werelittle changed in August.  For retail goods, higher energy priceswere broadly offset by lower prices of clothing, electricalgoods, furniture and motor vehicles (especially used cars).Annual food price inflation was little changed on the monthbut was expected to ease going forward due to recentcommodity price falls for cereals etc and the dropping out ofthe annual comparison of retail food price increases a yearearlier.  In the service sector, Agents’ reports suggested thatretail price inflation may have started to level out, largelyreflecting the slowdown in consumer demand.  Prices hadfallen in August for motor insurance premia and for someproperty-related financial services.      4 Agents’ summary of business conditions September 2008
01234
04 06 08Scores
Services
Manufacturing
1998 2000 02Three months on same period a year earlierChart 4 Labour costs