Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2008/april-2008.pdf
Date: 2008-04-30

• Consumption growth eased further, driven by slower growth in discretionary spending.
• Housing demand remained weak.
• Investment intentions fell sharply again in the services sector, and eased across most industries and
regions.  Tighter credit conditions continued to weigh on investment plans, mainly through their effect on
uncertainty about demand.
•Demand for exports remained at a high level, though growth of export orders had eased slightly.
•Growth in manufacturing output remained firm while that in construction and services sector output
slowed further.  (An Agents’ survey examined the gap between actual and expected outcomes.)
• Labour demand softened, with a marked fall in employment intentions in the services sector.  The inflow
of migrant labour had slowed and recruitment difficulties eased.
• Capacity pressures were expected to ease significantly over the coming six months.
•Growth in total labour costs remained well contained, though there were some reports of modest
upward pressure on settlements in response to increases in the cost of living. 
•Annual input price inflation rose sharply and annual output price inflation increased as manufacturers
sought to restore margins.
•Annual consumer price inflation increased, driven by higher prices of both goods and services.
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by
the Bank of England’s Agents, following discussions with around800 businesses in the period between late February and late
March .  It provides information on the state of business conditions,
from companies across all sectors of the economy.  The report does not represent the Bank’s own views, nor does itrepresent the views of any particular company or region.  TheBank’s Monetary Policy Committee uses the intelligence providedby the Agents, in conjunction with information from other sources,to assist its understanding and assessment of current economicconditions.  A copy of this publication can be found at:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/agentssummary/index.htm.The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, the
East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the North West,Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, theSouth West, Wales, the West Midlands & Oxfordshire, andYorkshire & the Humber.
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic
conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in theInflation Report, obtained from:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/inflationreport/index.htm.Agents’ summary of business conditions
April 2008Demand
Consumption
The Agents reported a slowdown in overall consumption
growth in March, driven largely by a further easing indiscretionary spending ( Chart 1 ).
The Agents’ score for growth in retail sales of goods was little
changed in March, but had been on a downward trend formuch of the past year.  That slowdown had been mostpronounced for spending on homewares, fashion and leisuregoods, with particular weakness in spending on ‘big ticket’items.  In contrast, growth in spending on food remained firm,largely reflecting higher prices.
The Agents’ score for growth in spending on consumer services
fell sharply again in March ( Chart 1 ).  The easing in demand
was most pronounced for services provided by domestictourism operators, hotels, clubs and restaurants.  Within thesecategories, contacts also reported a tendency for householdsto reduce the average value of their purchases.
Housing market
Housing demand remained weak.  In the market forestablished homes, estate agencies reported that enquirieswere well down on a year ago.  Given the resultant excesssupply, sale periods were unusually long.  There was a rise inthe cancellation of sales, attributed to tighter creditconditions, and vendors were accepting sizable discounts onasking prices.  In response to these developments, annual priceinflation for established homes fell further.
Demand for new housing continued to weaken, reflecting
tighter credit conditions.  As a result, home builders hadaccumulated unwanted stock and were discounting heavily.Consequently, annual price inflation for new homes alsoslowed further.  Given the subdued volume of sales andextensive discounting, some developers were reportedly selling
land to maintain cash flows.
Investment
Agents’ scores for investment intentions fell in March,continuing the steady decline seen over much of the past year(Chart 2 ).  The fall was most pronounced in the services sector,
for which Agents in eight of the twelve regions lowered theirscore.  Agents’ scores also fell in manufacturing.  And growth inintentions continued to fall in other sectors for which Agentsdo not assign scores, including commercial property and, to alesser extent, retailing and utilities.  
While investment intentions had been easing since April 2007,
much of the recent sharp slowdown was attributed touncertainty stemming from financial market events.  Agentsreported that the direct effects of tighter credit conditionsremained greatest for contacts in the commercial property andfinance sectors, and for highly leveraged companies seeking torefinance their debt.  Most other contacts were still notreporting material increases in borrowing costs.  Many hadaccess to internal funds or funds from a parent company, whileothers had secured credit during the earlier, more lenientborrowing environment.  They were, however, reassessing thelikely returns to investment projects in view of the predictedslowdown in domestic and global growth.  As a result, morecompanies were scaling back or suspending their investmentplans even if their access to finance was little changed.
Overseas trade
Overseas demand remained robust in March.  Weaker demandfrom the United States continued to be offset by strength inthe volume of sales elsewhere.  The depreciation of sterlinghad enhanced margins on exports, particularly those toEurope.  And forward orders remained supportive of near-termstrength in external demand.  Nonetheless, some contactsreported a slight easing in the growth of orders.2 Agents’ summary of business conditions April 2008
0.50.00.51.01.52.02.53.0
2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08ServicesGoodsScoresThree months on same period a year earlier
+
–Chart 1 Consumption values
Three months on same period a year earlier
2101234
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08Scores
Services
Manufacturing+
–Chart 2 Investment intentions over the next twelve
monthsAgents’ summary of business conditions April 2008 3
Demand by UK companies for intermediate imports remained
elevated.  There were, however, more reports of a slowing inimports of consumer goods, consistent with a slowdown inhousehold spending. 
Output
Manufacturing
Manufacturing output growth slowed in March, but remainedfirm ( Chart 3 ).  Overseas demand remained the key driver of
growth.  In contrast, production for domestic markets easedmarkedly, particularly for manufacturers of building materialsand consumer goods.  Domestic orders pointed to a furtherslowing in production for local markets, while export ordersremained healthy. 
Construction
Growth in construction output eased again, largely driven byslower private sector house building ( Chart 4 ).  But so far, the
level of activity remained high, supported by non-residentialbuilding.  And with large amounts of non-residential workalready pre-committed, the level of activity was set to remainhigh in the near term.  But more commercial projects wereunder review due to recent financial events, and there waslittle appetite for speculative building.  This, combined withconcerns about the outlook for property prices, was weighingon expectations for construction activity later this year andinto 2009.
Services
The Agents’ score for growth in business services output fell inMarch to its lowest level in over four years ( Chart 4 ).  While
the slowdown in business services from its earlier rapid pacehad been under way for some time, it had clearly beenamplified by financial events.  This was most evident in scoresfor professional and financial services, which fell sharplyfollowing the financial turmoil.  But in recent months therehad also been a reduction in scores for other business services(like logistics and business catering), pointing to a broader
slowdown in the services sector and possible spillover effectsfrom tighter credit conditions.
Capacity utilisation
Contacts reported that capacity pressures were expected toease significantly over the next six months ( Chart 5 ).
Although that partly reflected earlier additions to capacity, themain influence was an actual and projected slowing in activity.Capacity pressures were expected to ease most in the servicessector, to be below their average of the past decade.  Theywere also expected to ease in manufacturing and in othersectors not scored by the Agents.  In residential construction,for example, builders were already operating well belowcapacity.
Employment
The slowdown in activity, and attendant easing in overallcapacity pressures, was reflected in a marked softening inlabour demand.  For the first time since 2003, Agents’ scoresfor employment intentions indicated that private-sectorThree months on same period a year earlier
2101234
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08Export
DomesticScores
+
–Chart 3 Manufacturing outputThree months on same period a year earlier
0.50.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.0
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08Business services
ConstructionScores
+
–Chart 4 Sectoral output 
2.52.01.51.00.50.00.51.01.52.02.5
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08Manufacturing
ServicesDeviation from average score
+
–Chart 5 Capacity constraints over the next six monthsemployers did not expect to add to their workforce.  Weakness
in labour demand was most evident in the services sector.  Toachieve desired levels of labour input, some contacts werereducing the number of hours of paid work.  Others wereincreasing their reliance on temporary workers.  There was alsoa greater tendency to leave existing vacancies unfilled so thatheadcount could be reduced through natural attrition.
Consistent with the easing in labour demand, recruitment
difficulties were now falling back towards more normal levels.This easing had been associated with a reduction in staffturnover as employees became less confident about seekingalternative positions.  Employers were still hoarding skilledlabour, however, given the structural shortages of selectedoccupations. 
Against the background of a softer labour market, there were
reports from employers and employment agencies that theinflow of migrant workers from the A8 accession countries hadslowed.
Costs and prices
Labour costs
Agents reported that across-the-board pay settlementsremained little changed in March, though there were a fewreports of modest upward pressure in some areas.  The rise inthe cost of living was the most commonly cited factor puttingupward pressure on settlements as employees sought topreserve their real incomes.  
Broader measures of labour cost growth were stable in the
month.  In the services sector, however, growth in total labourcosts eased slightly as a result of smaller contributions fromthe variable component of pay.
Input and output prices
The Agents’ score for input price inflation surged again inMarch to its highest level since scores began in mid 1997(Chart 6 ).  This reflected ongoing increases in the world prices
of basic inputs — energy, oil derivatives, building materials andfood — combined with the effects of sterling’s depreciation.  Inaddition, contacts reported further increases in the cost ofimporting finished and intermediate goods from China, wheredomestic price pressures were evident.
The Agents’ score for manufacturing output prices also
increased in the month.  Following sharp increases in inputcosts over the past year, and a consequent compression ofmargins, manufacturers had become more active in passing oncost increases.  While food and beverage manufacturers hadexperienced the greatest success in securing price rises, otherproducers were also successfully passing on commodity-basedcost increases.Business-to-business service price inflation remained little
changed.  Some contacts had increased prices for specialistbusiness services and transport services.  Offsetting this,however, was the downward pressure on prices from increasedcommoditisation of services and the easing in demand.
Consumer prices
The Agents’ score for annual goods price inflation increasedagain in March, reflecting further increases in the prices ofenergy and food.  Annual service price inflation also increasedfor the second consecutive month, driven by higher prices fortransport, utilities and services provided by hotels andrestaurants.  Consequently, overall consumer price inflationwas higher.
The outlook was for additional upward pressure on consumer
price inflation in the near term.  Major retailers were awardinghigher contract prices to suppliers — in some cases for the firsttime in several years – and were becoming more active inpassing on commodity-related cost increases to consumers.The cost of final imports was increasing.  Furthermore, severallarge retailers indicated a reluctance to continue the depth ofdiscounting of recent months, claiming that the frequency ofsuch discounts had reduced their effectiveness in stimulatingdemand and was eroding profitability.  But while theseinfluences were putting upward pressure on consumer prices,many retailers remained keen to offset higher price inflationfor some products with lower price inflation elsewhere, asindictated in the Agents’ survey on cost pass-through reportedon in last month’s Summary .4 Agents’ summary of business conditions April 2008
Three months on same period a year earlier
32101234
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08Input(a)
OutputScores
+
–Chart 6 Manufacturers’ input and output prices
(a) Non-labour input prices.Agents’ survey of demand conditions
As highlighted in recent Inflation Reports , the MPC has
anticipated a slowing in activity during 2008.  Preliminary GDPfor Q4 indicated that stocks had increased sharply, and impliedthat consumption growth may have been weaker thanbusinesses were expecting.  Consequently, an importantquestion is whether demand conditions faced by companieshave differed from their expectations.  During March, theAgents surveyed around 250 of their contacts, across all keysectors of the economy, to explore this issue.  This boxsummarises the main findings.
When asked whether actual sales had differed from expected
levels over the past six months, most respondents reportedthat sales were at or close to expectations.  Only a small netbalance indicated they were below expectations ( Chart A ).
However, this outcome was still consistent with forecasts ofslower economic growth, as for many respondents salesgrowth had slowed in line with their projections.
Actual sales had fallen most below expectations in the
construction and consumer services industries ( Chart B ).  The
small negative expectations gap for  business services reflectedthe diversity of this sector, with weakness in financial servicesbeing partly offset by strength in other business services.  In  contrast, conditions in manufacturing had continued toexceed expectations, consistent with positive feedback fromexport-oriented manufacturers for much of the past year.
Where sales outcomes had differed from expectations,
respondents were asked about the consequences of this fortheir businesses.  As shown in Chart C , the largest adjustment
over the past six months had occurred in terms of a build-up ofstocks.  Other firms experiencing an expectations gap hadincreased prices or lowered production.Looking ahead to the next six months, much of the recent
stock build-up was expected to dissipate as firms ran downexisting inventories.  Consistent with this, a greater share offirms anticipated reducing their production.  Furthermore, agreater share of firms expected that the length of their orderbooks would fall.  But a positive net balance still expected toincrease their output prices in response to upstream costpressures.Agents’ summary of business conditions April 2008
Over the past six months
1050510152025303540
Well below Slightly
belowAs expected Slightly
aboveWell abovePercentage of respondents
Net balance+
–Chart A Actual sales compared with expectationsOver the past six months
201510505101520
Manufacturing Construction Consumer
servicesBusiness
servicesOtherNet balance of respondents
+
–Chart B Expectations gap by sector
For ﬁrms reporting a gap between actual and expected sales
30201001020304050
Level of stocks Length of order
bookPrices charged ProductionPast six months
Next six months
Net balance of respondents
+
–Chart C Response to expectations gap