Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2008/march-2008.pdf
Date: 2008-03-31

• Consumption growth eased, driven by slower growth in the value of retail spending.
•The easing in demand for housing continued, and house price inflation fell further.
• Investment intentions fell in both the services and manufacturing sectors.  Tighter credit conditions
continued to weigh on investment intentions, mainly through their effect on uncertainty about demand.
•Demand for exports remained robust, as did forward orders.
•Growth in manufacturing edged down, while that in construction and service sector output slowed
further.
• Labour demand softened and recruitment difficulties became less pronounced.
• Capacity pressures lessened and were expected to ease further.
•There was little change in pay settlements and growth in total labour costs remained well contained. 
•Annual input price inflation rose sharply and annual output price inflation increased as manufacturers
sought to restore margins.  (See box on the Agents’ cost pass-through survey.)
•Annual consumer price inflation increased, driven by increases in the prices of both goods and services.
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by
the Bank of England’s Agents, following discussions with over700 businesses in the period between late January and late
February .  It provides information on the state of business
conditions, from companies across all sectors of the economy.  The report does not represent the Bank’s own views, nor does itrepresent the views of any particular company or region.  TheBank’s Monetary Policy Committee uses the intelligence providedby the Agents, in conjunction with information from other sources,to assist its understanding and assessment of current economicconditions.  A copy of this publication can be found at:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/agentssummary/index.htm.The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, the
East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the North West,Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, theSouth West, Wales, the West Midlands & Oxfordshire, andYorkshire & the Humber.
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic
conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in theInflation Report, obtained from:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/inflationreport/index.htm.Agents’ summary of business conditions
March 2008Demand
Consumption
Agents reported that overall consumption growth slowed
further in February, with growing evidence of householdsreining in discretionary spending on goods and services (Chart 1 ).  
The Agents’ score for retail sales of goods resumed its
downward trend as the stimulus to demand from unusuallyextensive discounting around the Christmas period had waned.Housing-related spending remained weak, and sales of fashionand leisure goods had slowed sharply.  There were also furtherreports of weak spending by age groups most exposed tomortgage debt.  In contrast, spending on electronics and foodremained firm.  Discounting was still prevalent, especially fornon-food items.
The Agents’ score for spending on consumer services was
unchanged in February, but was well down on its level inrecent months as households reduced their spending onservices provided by tourism operators, hotels, clubs andrestaurants.
Housing market
The weakness in housing demand persisted in February.  In themarket for established housing, credit conditions had becomemore constrained as lenders set higher loan to valuation ratios.This, along with uncertainty about the economic outlook, wasweighing on demand.  Estate agencies reported that enquiriesand instructions remained subdued.  Sale periods continued tolengthen and the cancellation of sales rose.  Vendors werecommonly accepting sizable discounts on asking prices forhouses, which was one factor behind the fall in price inflationfor established homes.
Demand for new housing also continued to weaken, as access
to finance became more difficult and potential buyers deferreddecisions in anticipation of price falls.  House builders werekeen to shed unsold stock and were discounting heavily.
Reflecting this, price inflation for new homes slowed further.However, some contacts thought that demand for newhousing may have reached its trough.
Investment
Investment intentions ticked down in February, having easedfor much of the past year ( Chart 2 ).  Recent financial market
turmoil had weighed on investment intentions, compoundingthe effects of earlier increases in Bank Rate.  The direct effectsremained concentrated in the commercial property andfinance sectors, and for highly geared companies seeking torefinance their debt.  Most contacts were still not affected bychanges to the cost or availability of credit.  But more contactswere concerned about the possible effects of tighter creditconditions on both domestic and global growth.Consequently, more companies were deferring or scaling downtheir investment plans even if their access to finance wasunchanged.
Overseas trade
External demand remained robust, with weaker demand fromthe United States continuing to be offset by strength in thevolume of sales to Europe, the Middle East, China, India andAfrica.  The depreciation of sterling had also enhanced themargins for exporters to these destinations.  And externaldemand was expected to remain buoyant in the near term,given the strength in export orders and the depreciation ofsterling.  Some UK exporters were benefiting from their abilityto supply economies (such as Middle Eastern countries andIndia) that had adopted British standards in aspects ofproduction, with many of these economies remaining in arapid growth phase.
Demand by UK companies for intermediate imports also
remained solid.  But there were reports of a slowing in importsof some consumer goods, consistent with the slowdown inhousehold spending. 2 Agents’ summary of business conditions March 2008
0.50.00.51.01.52.02.53.0
2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08ServicesGoodsScores
+
–Three months on same period a year earlierChart 1 Consumption spending
2101234
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08Scores
Services
ManufacturingThree months on same period a year earlier
+
–Chart 2 Investment intentions over the next twelve
monthsAgents’ summary of business conditions March 2008 3
Output
Manufacturing
Total output growth in manufacturing slowed in February, but
remained firm ( Chart 3 ).  External demand was still the key
driver of growth, and export orders remained elevated.However, production for domestic markets eased noticeably inthe month.  This was particularly so for manufacturers ofbuilding materials and consumer goods.  Domestic orderspointed to a further slowing in production for local markets.
Construction
Growth in construction output eased further in February(Chart 4 ), driven by slower private sector house building.  
The overall pace of construction growth, however, remainedhigh, supported by strength in non-residential construction.And with large amounts of non-residential work already pre-committed, construction activity was set to remain robustin the near term.  But more commercial projects were nowunder review due to the effects of recent financial turmoil, andthere was a general reduction in the appetite for speculativebuilding.  Consequently, some contacts were revising downtheir expectations for output growth beyond mid-2008.
Services
The Agents’ score for business services output edged down inFebruary to its lowest level in four years ( Chart 4 ).  A
slowdown in demand for business services from its previousrapid pace had been under way since last April, but had beenamplified by financial events.  This slowing was still mostevident in demand for professional and financial services,which fell abruptly following the onset of financial turmoil.But in the past two months, there had also been a reduction indemand for other business services (such as logistics andbusiness catering), suggesting a broader slowing in the sectorand possible spillover effects from tighter credit conditions.Consistent with this, many business service contacts hadbecome more pessimistic about the outlook.Employment
Given the slowdown in activity, growth in labour demandsoftened a little in February.  Some contacts in sectors wherethe moderation in activity had been most pronouncedreported reducing the number of hours of paid work.  Othersreported an increased tendency to leave existing vacanciesunfilled.  Looking ahead, employers had become morecautious about adding to their workforce.  Reflecting this, theAgents’ score for employment intentions over the next sixmonths fell in February ( Chart 5 ).  The fall in intentions was
concentrated in the business and consumer services sectors.But it was also evident in residential construction and, to alesser extent, manufacturing where efforts to enhanceproductivity and contain growth in variable costs wereweighing on labour demand.
In keeping with the easing in labour demand, recruitment
difficulties were less prevalent in February than in mid-2007.In part this reflected a reduction in labour turnover asemployees became less confident about seeking alternativepositions.  Some employers had also become more active in2101234
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08Export
DomesticScoresThree months on same period a year earlier
+
–
(a) Recruitment difficulties relative to normal;  employment intentions (average across sectors)
over next six months.Chart 3 Manufacturing output
0.50.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.0
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08Business services
ConstructionScores
+
–Three months on same period a year earlierChart 4 Sectoral output
1.00.50.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.0
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08Scores
Recruitment difﬁculties
Employment intentions+
–Chart 5 Labour market(a)hoarding skilled labour, given the persistence of structural
shortages of a range of professionals and skilled trades people.
Capacity utilisation
Contacts reported that capacity pressures were expected toease over the next six months.  This reflected the combinedimpact of additions to capacity over the past year or two alongwith the recent projected slowing in activity.  Capacitypressures were expected to ease most in the services sector,where a pronounced slowdown in activity was already underway, and in manufacturing and construction.
Costs and prices
Labour costs
Agents reported that across-the-board pay settlementsremained stable in February.  Consistent with the results fromthe Agents’ latest pay survey, recently negotiated settlementswere little changed from those in the previous year;  this wasdespite relatively high RPI inflation and the resurgence ofenergy costs.  Companies also reported that growth in totallabour costs had eased since mid last year, due to slowergrowth in the variable component of pay.  But looking ahead, aslight pickup in labour cost growth was expected.
Input and output prices
Input price inflation jumped again in February ( Chart 6 ).  This
was due to further substantial increases in the world prices ofenergy, oil derivatives, building materials and food inputs.  Inaddition, contacts continued to report increases in the cost ofimporting finished and intermediate goods from China andIndia.  These higher input prices reflected increases in worldprices, and increasingly the effects of the depreciation ofsterling.
The Agents’ score for manufacturing output prices increased in
February.  Following sharp increases in input costs in recentmonths, and a consequent compression of margins,manufacturers had become more active in passing on costincreases.  (For more details see the box on cost pass-through.)Food and beverage manufacturers had experienced thegreatest success in securing price rises.  However, higher priceswere sometimes being imposed at the expense of marketshare as companies sought to restore margins to moresustainable levels.Business-to-business service price inflation also rose in
February having eased for much of the past year.  Contacts inspecialist business services reportedly increased prices inresponse to earlier wage pressures, while providers of transportservices had become more successful in passing on higher fuelcosts.
Consumer prices
The Agents’ score for annual goods price inflation ticked upagain in February, reflecting further increases in the prices ofenergy and food.  Annual service price inflation also increased,driven by higher transport and utilities prices.  Consequently,overall consumer price inflation was higher.
The near-term outlook was for further upward pressure on
consumer price inflation.  With higher contract prices beingawarded to suppliers, some large retailers were becomingmore active in passing on commodity-related cost increases toconsumers.  And the cost of final imports was anticipated bycontacts to increase further.  So the relative prices of variousclasses of goods in the CPI were set to rise.  But contacts werealso keen to offset higher price inflation for some productswith lower price inflation elsewhere.  Consistent with this,when asked about their average product price, the majority ofretailers who responded to the Agents’ survey on cost pass-through indicated that they would not be passing onrecent cost increases in the near term.4 Agents’ summary of business conditions March 2008
(a) Manufacturers’ non-labour input and output prices.32101234
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08Input
OutputScores
+
–Three months on same period a year earlierChart 6 Manufacturers’ input and output prices(a)Agents’ cost pass-through survey
Given the acceleration of growth in input costs in recent
months, prospects for inflation will be influenced by the extentto which these cost increases are passed on to prices.  Toinvestigate this issue, the Agents conducted a survey of around200 of their contacts across all key sectors in the economy.The findings are summarised in this box.
Most respondents reported that their variable costs were
higher than a year ago, and more than half reported that thesecosts were substantially higher ( Chart A ).  Looking ahead,
some further increases in variable costs were expected, albeitat a moderate pace.
Respondents indicated that the cost of energy, labour and
commodities had been the key drivers of total cost increasesover the past year, and were expected to remain so over theyear ahead ( Chart B ).  This was most evident for energy and
labour (the latter dominating most companies’ cost base sothat even modest increases can drive materially higher totalcosts).  However, the impetus to growth in total costs fromincreases in commodity prices was expected to become less
pronounced in the year ahead.
Given the significant increases in input costs that had
occurred, and remained in prospect, respondents were askedhow much would be passed on to their prices.  A distinctionwas made between those consumer-facing respondents whoseprices directly enter the CPI, and all other respondents whoseprices are ‘upstream’ producer prices.  As shown in Chart C ,
most consumer-facing respondents did not expect to pass oncost increases to their customers within the next twelvemonths.  In contrast, most other respondents did.  Of these,more than 50% expected to pass on at least half of the costincrease they had experienced.
In terms of the timing of pass-through, the bulk of respondents
in upstream industries intending to pass on cost increasesexpected to do so by mid-year ( Chart D ).  Of those few
consumer-facing respondents intending to pass on costincreases, most already had done so, or were expecting to doso in the next few months.Agents’ summary of business conditions March 2008
01020304050607080
Substantially
lowerSlightly
lowerUnchanged Slightly
higherSubstantially
higherPast twelve months
Next twelve monthsPercentage of respondentsChart A Variable costs
01020304050607080
Energy Labour costs Commodity
pricesExchange
ratePercentage of respondentsCompared with same period a year earlier
Past twelve months
Next twelve monthsChart B Drivers of cost increases0102030405060708090
None Less than
halfMore than
halfAllPercentage of respondents
Consumer facing
‘Upstream’ industriesChart C Expected extent of cost pass-through within
next twelve months
0102030405060708090
Already
haveNext few
monthsBy mid-year By end of
yearNot at allPercentage of respondents
Consumer facing
‘Upstream’ industriesChart D Speed of pass-throughNote:  Contacts could nominate more than one cost so that results sum to more than 100%.