Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2008/october-2008.pdf
Date: 2008-10-31

• Consumers’ expenditure contracted during the third quarter.  
•The weakening in housing demand continued in September.
•There had been a widespread slowdown in capital spending , primarily reflecting falling capacity
constraints and the weaker demand outlook.
•Many firms had also experienced a further tightening in their own credit conditions , according to a
special survey carried out this month (see box).  But this was still seen to be less critical to investmentplans than the outlook for demand.
• Inventories of consumer durables and new cars increased.  In other sectors, however, firms had reduced
stocks in response to prospective weaker demand and to conserve cash.
•Demand for exports weakened slightly.
•Growth in domestically orientated manufacturing fell and there was further deceleration in services
output.  
• Employment intentions had fallen sharply and recruitment difficulties had declined.
• Capacity pressures continued to fall.
•Growth in total labour costs remained well contained.   
•Annual input price inflation eased slightly, but output price inflation remained elevated.
•Annual consumer price inflation was steady.
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by
the Bank of England’s Agents, following discussions with contacts inthe period between late August and late September.  It provides information on the state of business conditions, fromcompanies across all sectors of the economy.  The report does notrepresent the Bank’s own views, nor does it represent the views ofany particular company or region.  The Bank’s Monetary PolicyCommittee uses the intelligence provided by the Agents, inconjunction with information from other sources, to assist itsunderstanding and assessment of current economic conditions.  Acopy of this publication can be found at:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/agentssummary/index.htm.The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, the
East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the North West,Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, theSouth West, Wales, the West Midlands & Oxfordshire, andYorkshire & the Humber.
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic
conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in theInflation Report, obtained from:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/inflationreport/index.htm.Agents’ summary of business conditions
October 2008Demand
Consumption
The Agents’ scores for both retail sales and consumer services
fell in September ( Chart 1 ).   
The Agents’ score for spending on consumer services became
significantly negative.  That reflected a contraction in demandfor a broad range of services:  from financial services to pubs,restaurants and leisure attractions.  In contrast, tour operatorsreported steady demand, with an increasing number ofhouseholds switching towards holidays in the United Kingdom.
Retail sales had slowed further as households reacted to
mounting budgetary pressures.  There had been a slowdown indemand for smaller-ticket discretionary purchases such asclothing and footwear.  And consumers appeared to haveswitched spending towards lower-priced unbranded products,discount supermarkets and internet sales.  Sales of furnitureand big-ticket items associated with housing moves had alsocontracted further, as had spending on housing-relatedservices such as home removals.  Demand for cars with thenew registration plate was well below sales a year earlier. 
Housing market  
Activity in the market for established homes had slowedfurther.  Widespread expectations of further house price falls,tighter credit conditions and the decline in consumerconfidence had all curtailed demand.  
Investment  
The Agents’ scores for investment intentions fell further inSeptember ( Chart 2 ).
The slowdown in capital spending was widespread, affecting
most industries and asset classes.  Plans for investment incommercial property had been cut back, with some majorretail development schemes being delayed and office-buildingactivities slowing as existing projects were completed.  Anincreasing number of firms in other sectors had deferred
investment plans — though investment in utilities andtelecommunications infrastructure remained robust.  
The reduction in investment plans was due principally to falling
capacity constraints and to elevated uncertainties surroundingthe macroeconomic environment.  While many firms hadexperienced a tightening in their own credit conditions inrecent months, this was still not seen to be as critical toinvestment plans as was the outlook for demand.  The resultsof a special survey on corporate credit conditions are reportedin the box. 
Inventories
There were further reports of growing stocks of consumerdurables and of new cars.  Looking forward, many retailerswere planning to hold lower stocks than normal in the lead upto Christmas.  However, firms in other sectors had generallyreduced inventories in anticipation of weaker demand, and inorder to conserve cash.
Exports and imports  
External demand growth fell slightly during the third quarter,with exports of consumer durables and their componentsslowing most markedly.  Nevertheless, external demandremained substantially more robust than other components ofaggregate demand.  The current weakness of sterling hadimproved the profitability of exports, but there was littleevidence yet among contacts of foreign currency prices beingreduced to gain market share. 
The recent slight deceleration in exports was largely due to
weakening demand from euro-area customers, with demandgrowth from the Middle and Far East remaining strong.Looking forward, however, contacts had become morepessimistic about the outlook for demand. 
Import growth slowed markedly, reflecting falling volumes of
imported consumer and capital goods.2 Agents’ summary of business conditions October 2008
1.51.00.50.00.51.01.52.02.53.0
2000   01  02  03  04   05   06   07   08Retail sales
Consumer services
  turnover ScoresThree months on same period a year earlier
+
–Chart 1 Consumption values
3.02.01.00.01.02.03.04.0
2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08ManufacturingServicesScoresThree months on same period a year earlier
+
–Chart 2 Investment intentions over the next twelve
monthsAgents’ summary of business conditions October 2008 3
Output
Manufacturing  
Manufacturing output growth had slowed.  
Construction-related demand for products such as brickscontinued to contract.  Production of consumer durables alsofell, partly reflecting a number of recent plant closures bymanufacturers.  And both car and commercial vanmanufacturers had started to curtail production to avoidfurther stockbuilding.  In contrast, manufacturers ofequipment used in the pharmaceuticals, medical equipment,aerospace and energy industries continued to report robustdemand.
Construction  
Construction output had fallen.  With little demand for newhousing, builders were mothballing many of their sites —completing houses only where there was a known buyer.  Andcommercial property activity eased further, in part reflectingchanges to firms’ investment plans.  The aggregate impact ofthis slowdown continued to be ameliorated by steady growthof public-commissioned construction projects.
Services
The Agents’ scores for business services output fell further inSeptember ( Chart 3 ).  In professional and financial services, a
reduction in the number of corporate transactions hadweakened demand for the services of banks, accountants andlawyers.  This was partially offset for some of these firms by acountercyclical increase in demand for business recovery andinsolvency services.
The Agents’ score for other business services also fell.  
That reflected a broad-based slowdown in corporatediscretionary spending on travel, hospitality, conferencing andtelecommunications.  Logistics companies continued to reportweaker demand growth, mostly reflecting the slowdown inconsumption and residential investment.  Capacity utilisation
Capacity constraints declined.  In the service sector that wasreflected in, for example, lower hotel occupancy rates andaircraft load factors and in vacant commercial properties.Contacts had taken a range of actions to reduce spare capacity,including temporary plant shutdowns by some manufacturersand shorter working hours in the retail sector. 
Employment
The Agents’ scores for employment intentions fell further inSeptember ( Chart 4 ).
Labour demand softened in September.  While most firms
were still relying on natural wastage to reduce staff numbers,redundancies had increased in some parts of the country.Contacts expected further labour shedding in the monthsahead.  A growing number of manufacturing workers had beenput on short time (for example in the motor and buildingmaterials industries) and service providers had reducedopening times.  Staff turnover had continued to fall, largelyreflecting the perceived risks to employees of changingemployers.  Recruitment difficulties had declined across theeconomy as a whole.
Costs and prices
Labour costs 
The Agents’ scores for growth of labour costs were littlechanged in September ( Chart 5 ).  Over the past year, inflation
in manufacturing labour costs has been little changed.  But the score for the service sector has declined steadily,largely reflecting a decline in commission and otherperformance-related payments. 0.50.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.5
2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08Professional and ﬁnancial
Business servicesScoresOver the next twelve months
Other business services+
–Chart 3 Business services output2.52.01.51.00.50.00.51.01.52.02.53.0
2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08ManufacturingServicesScoresOver the next six months
+
–Chart 4 Employment intentions over the next six
monthsThe majority of contacts anticipated offering below-inflation
pay rises next year, with a few expecting either to delay theirnext settlement by up to six months or to impose a pay freeze.There was little reported evidence of employee resistance tobelow-inflation pay awards, reflecting heightened perceptionsof job insecurity.
Input and output prices 
The Agents’ score for manufacturers’ input price inflationeased.  While contacts reported that input price inflationremained elevated, there was a growing belief that theinflation rate may have peaked.  That reflected the recentsharp fall in oil prices and the weakening world economy.  Butthe picture was mixed.  Prices of oil derivative products, suchas plastics, had not yet started to fall.  And some furtherincreases in utility prices were anticipated as fixed contractsexpired.
Cost inflation of imported finished and intermediate goods
was steady.  Some contacts had switched the sourcing ofinputs away from the Far East to other regions where domesticinflation was better contained, such as parts of Eastern Europe.
The Agents’ score for manufacturing output price inflation
remained elevated.  Nevertheless, many manufacturers hadbeen unable to pass on higher material costs in their entirety.A number of manufacturers had re-engineered productionmethods to reduce the input content of products.
There had been a broad-based easing in business-to-business
services price inflation.  Growth of fees charged by professionalfirms had weakened in response to the slowdown in demand,as had the pricing of hotel and conference facilities.  Hauliers’fuel surcharges had been reduced.  
Consumer prices  
The Agents’ scores for retail goods and services price inflationwere little changed in September, with both remaining atelevated levels.  For retail goods, increases in annual utilityprice inflation were broadly offset by lower fuel prices.  Annual
food price inflation was little changed.  In the service sector,Agents’ reports suggested that retail price inflation hadcontinued to level out, largely reflecting the sharp slowdown inconsumer demand.4 Agents’ summary of business conditions October 2008
0.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.0
2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08ManufacturingServicesScoresThree months on same period a year earlierChart 5 Labour costs per employeeAgents’ survey of corporate credit conditions
During September the Agencies undertook a survey of their
contacts asking how they were being affected by changes incredit conditions.  The survey updated a similar exerciseconducted in November 2007 and covered around 260companies from all sectors of the economy and a range of firmsizes.
(1)All figures reported are weighted by respondents’
turnover.
Most respondents made some use of external finance — as
opposed to relying exclusively on internal funds.  And for thosewhose primary source of funds was external, borrowing from
banks was much more common than use of capital markets.
Respondents were asked whether the price, terms or
availability of credit had changed in recent months.  For thosefirms making at least some use of external funds, the majorityreported that conditions had tightened ( Chart A ).  That was a
material change from the November 2007 survey, in which amajority had not reported tighter conditions. 
The implications of tighter credit conditions for firms’
behaviour were mixed, however.  Around half of those forwhom credit conditions had tightened had reduced or deferredinvestment plans as a result.  But around 40% had notchanged investment or other plans in the face of tighter creditconditions.  That was similar to the results of the November2007 survey ( Chart B ).  Moreover, a sizable minority of
respondents had not experienced any tightening of externalcredit conditions.  Adding these respondents back in, over 60%of all respondents to the survey did not report changes toplans as a direct result of shifts in credit conditions.  That wasconsistent with the more general observation among Agents’contacts that the outlook for demand has been the prime driver of any scaling back in investment plans.In both surveys more large firms than small firms reported
tighter credit conditions.  But the general finding — of a sizableproportion taking no action as a direct result of tighter credit— held true of firms of all sizes ( Chart C ).  Relative to larger
firms, a higher proportion of small firms reported reductions intheir employment intentions as a direct result of tighter creditconditions.  Larger firms were more likely than small firms tohave changed the type or timing of their finance — consistentwith their greater ability to access a more diverse range offinancing sources.Agents’ summary of business conditions October 2008
November 2007
September 2008Per cent of responses(a) 
010203040506070
Conditions
tighterUnchanged Conditions
looserDon’t know Chart A Corporate credit conditions experienced by firms
using external financePer cent of ﬁrms that reported tighter conditions(a)(b)  
0102030405060
Investment
plansEmployment
plansProduct Type or timing
of ﬁnanceNo action
prices takenNovember 2007
September 2008Chart B Response to tighter credit conditions
(a) Responses weighted by respondents’ turnover.Per cent of ﬁrms that reported tighter conditions(a)(b)
0102030405060
Investment
plansEmployment
plansProduct Type or timing
of ﬁnanceNo action
prices takenLarge (annual turnover in excess of £250 million)
SmallChart C Response to tighter credit conditions, by firm
size
(a) Responses restricted to those firms reporting tighter credit conditions;  weighted by
respondents’ turnover.
(b) Some respondents selected multiple options.(a) Responses restricted to those firms reporting tighter credit conditions;  weighted by
respondents’ turnover.
(b) Some respondents selected multiple options.
(1) See December 2007 Agents’ Summary of Business Conditions :
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/agentssummary/index.htm.