Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2008/august-2008.pdf
Date: 2008-08-31

• Consumption growth eased further, reflecting weakness in demand for consumer services.
•The slowdown in housing demand continued.
• Investment intentions declined.  With regard to credit conditions , the costs of finance and trade credit
insurance had risen and availability had diminished.
•Growth in the demand for exports was broadly stable.
•Growth in domestically orientated manufacturing output was steady, having fallen sharply in previous
months.  But there was a further pronounced deceleration in construction and services output.  
• Labour demand softened.  Recruitment difficulties were little changed, partly reflecting reduced labour
supply.
• Capacity pressures continued to ease.
•Growth in total labour costs remained well contained.   
•Annual input price inflation was little changed but annual output price inflation increased.
•Annual consumer price inflation continued to rise.
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by
the Bank of England’s Agents, following discussions with nearly700 businesses in the period between late June and late July.  It provides information on the state of business conditions, fromcompanies across all sectors of the economy.  The report does notrepresent the Bank’s own views, nor does it represent the views ofany particular company or region.  The Bank’s Monetary PolicyCommittee uses the intelligence provided by the Agents, inconjunction with information from other sources, to assist itsunderstanding and assessment of current economic conditions.  Acopy of this publication can be found at:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/agentssummary/index.htm.The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, the
East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the North West,Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, theSouth West, Wales, the West Midlands & Oxfordshire, andYorkshire & the Humber.
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic
conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in theInflation Report, obtained from:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/inflationreport/index.htm.Agents’ summary of business conditions
August 2008Demand
Consumption
The Agents’ score for growth in retail sales values was little
changed this month but the score for consumer services fellagain ( Chart 1 ).   
Growth in spending on consumer goods appeared to have
stabilised recently, following previous sharp declines.  But theregional picture was mixed.  In London, stronger inboundtourism had helped to maintain steady growth.  But severalother regions reported a slowdown in consumer demand forgoods in July. 
Rising food and fuel prices in recent months had diverted
spending away from the non-food sector, while fallingconsumer confidence had depressed spending on big-ticketdurable goods.  In July, the deceleration in non-food volumesabated, with some retailers, for example in clothing,discounting surplus inventory more heavily in the summersales.  But demand for bigger-ticket items such as furnitureremained depressed, while the volume of sales of flat-screenTVs and other electrical goods had also started to wane.  Newand used car sales weakened further in July.  
The Agents’ score for spending on consumer services
continued to fall.  Recent trends persisted, especially thedecline in the growth of spending on food and drink at pubs,clubs and restaurants.  Tour operators continued to report briskdemand for overseas summer holidays, but stays were shorterand with fewer bookings for long-haul destinations.  Latecancellations of package holidays had increased, whichcontacts ascribed to some households reassessing theiraffordability in the light of budgetary pressures.  The furthercontraction in housing transactions had continued to reducedemand for conveyancing and other housing-related servicessuch as removals. Housing market
The slowdown in housing demand had continued.  The growingshortage of mortgage funds, especially for first-time buyers,had contributed to a lack of liquidity in the market forestablished homes.  That had made valuing propertyincreasingly difficult.  Uncertainty regarding valuations was, inturn, discouraging potential buyers, some of whom werereported to require discounts of at least 10%–20% off theasking price to proceed.  Mostly only forced sellers wouldaccept discounts of that magnitude.  Repossessions hadincreased slightly and had started to depress prices.  Estateagents and mortgage brokers continued to close offices andlay off staff.      
The market for new housing was similarly depressed and there
were more reports of national house builders closing regionaloffices to reduce overheads.  Builders reported very littledemand for residential land and the values of their land bankshad been written down.  Despite the availability of large pricediscounts, housing associations had not entered the market fornew town-centre apartments, since they were typically notsuitable for housing families.   
Investment
Agents’ scores for investment intentions declined.  The scorefor the service sector fell to its lowest level since the seriesbegan in 1997 ( Chart 2 ).     
With declining valuations being placed on companies, firms
looking to expand were more likely to consider acquiringassets through M&A activity than investing directly in fixedcapital.  Contacts with the greatest exposure to the slowdowncontinued to cut back investment plans and/or divest assets.In the service sector, examples included hauliers cancellingorders for new trucks, car rental companies deferring fleetpurchases, airlines leasing fewer aircraft and retailers eitherpostponing expansion plans or attempting to sub-let surplusfloor space.  Some motor traders had closed branches.  Inmanufacturing, there were increasing reports of contacts2 Agents’ summary of business conditions August 2008
0.50.00.51.01.52.02.53.0
2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08ServicesGoodsScores
+
_Three months on same period a year earlierChart 1 Consumption values
2101234
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08Scores
Services
Manufacturing+
–Three months on same period a year earlierChart 2 Investment intentionsAgents’ summary of business conditions August 2008 3
cancelling investment projects for new plant and equipment,
mostly reflecting the deteriorating outlook for demand.  
The impact of tighter credit conditions was still mostly
confined to a few sectors and to individual companies withhigh gearing.  Many contacts were more concerned about thedirect impact of the tightening credit conditions on theircustomers rather than themselves.  Nevertheless, the Agentsreported generally more pervasive effects of tighter creditconditions this month.  Some house builders were underpressure from bank covenants.  Finance for commercialproperty developments was increasingly expensive or scarce.Faced with sharply declining capital values, some investors hadchosen to relinquish non-returnable deposits of as much as10% on planned commercial and residential property projects.Banks had reduced their lending to pubs and restaurants,partly reflecting the recent decline in profitability of thatsector.  
Some contacts were faced with higher costs of borrowing as
their lenders passed on their own higher cost of capital.Others reported a significant increase in delays receivingpayment from debtors.  There was also a significant tighteningin the provision of trade credit insurance.  Cover was being cutback or removed and the cost of insurance had risen sharply.Finally, some large firms had unilaterally extended the periodbetween receiving and paying for supplies, in some cases from30 to 90 days.  
Exports and imports  
Most Agencies reported fairly steady growth in externaldemand.  But some noted that demand had weakened recentlyin the euro area, and were nervous of further deterioration inthat region going forward.  
Growth of imported finished goods continued to weaken in
response to the slowdown in domestic demand.  There weresome reports of increased substitution from imported todomestically produced goods, reflecting sterling’s depreciationagainst the euro and increased transport costs.    
Output
Manufacturing  
Manufacturing output growth was little changed in July.Domestic demand had weakened for UK manufacturedconsumer durables and products used by the constructionindustry.  By contrast, manufacturers of capital andintermediate goods used by the domestic power generationand aerospace industries reported stronger domestic demand.     
Construction  
The score for construction output fell further in July.  The sharpfall in housing starts that had began around Easter had yet tohave its maximum impact on output, and some Agencies
expected further score reductions in the months ahead.Activity in the commercial property sector had also weakened,albeit only slightly.  Public sector commissioned constructionof infrastructure, schools, hospitals and prisons continued togrow steadily.     
Services  
The Agents’ score for business services output fell sharply inJuly, its largest monthly decline for nearly seven years (Chart 3 ).  Within business services, the scores for professional
and financial services, and for other business services such aslogistics, declined by similar magnitudes.  The deceleration inprofessional and financial services was fairly broad based,consistent with a reported general loss of business confidencewithin the sector.  Even so, some sectors continued to flourish.That included accountancy firms specialising in corporaterestructuring and insolvency work, and some IT serviceproviders who reported increased demand from customerslooking to implement improvements in efficiency.  In otherbusiness services, contacts reported a further slowdown incorporate discretionary spending, including on travel,banqueting and conferences.  Logistics companies reportedweaker demand growth, mostly reflecting the slowdown inconsumption and residential investment.  
Capacity utilisation
Capacity constraints in manufacturing and services declined.Overcapacity in parts of the service sector had becomepronounced.  That included housing-related services, retail, airtravel and parts of investment banking.  In some cases thathad resulted in part of the spare capacity being eliminatedthrough a reduction in staffing and or closure of premises.There were also an increasing number of reports of excesscapacity in the manufacturing sector.  A few contacts hadresorted to a temporary shutdown, especially those exposed tothe retail and house building sectors. 0.50.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.0
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08Business servicesScores
Professional and ﬁnancial
Other business services
+
–Three months on same period a year earlierChart 3 Business services outputEmployment
Labour demand continued to weaken in July, particularly in
construction and housing-related services.  Many firms werelooking to reduce the volume of labour inputs as productdemand slowed.  In most cases that had so far been achievedby the non-replacement of staff lost to natural wastage,reduced use of agency workers and reductions in averagehours.  With the exception of the housing sector, redundancieshad so far been rare but were expected to pick up goingforward.  Recruitment difficulties were little changed in July.While labour demand had weakened, so had the supply of newlabour.  That was partly because employees had become morerisk averse about changing employers, and partly due to areduced supply of migrant labour.     
Costs and prices
Labour costs 
In July, the Agents’ scores for labour costs declined in services,but rose fractionally in the manufacturing sector. 
The deceleration in service sector labour costs was mostly
attributable to lower commission payments to staff,particularly in housing-related businesses.  The slowdown indemand for business services this year had resulted in somereduction in pay settlements for those firms who had madeannual reviews recently.  In manufacturing, there was modestupward pressure on settlements, mostly emanating from RPI-linked pay agreements.  
Input and output prices
The Agents’ score for manufacturers’ input prices was littlechanged in July ( Chart 4 ).  News on input prices was more
balanced this month.  Some base and precious metals prices(including zinc, nickel and platinum) had declined sharply.Prices of some soft commodities such as wheat had fallen, inpart reflecting upward revisions to world harvests this year.Finally, fuel prices had eased a little by the end of the period.By contrast, rising costs of utilities remained a concern formany contacts, and earlier sharp rises in oil prices continued tofeed through to higher costs of oil-based materials such asplastics and fertilisers.  
The cost of imported finished and intermediate goods
continued to accelerate, partly reflecting increasing costpressures in Asia.  The sustained strength of the euro washaving a growing impact on import prices.  That was becauseforward cover had expired for an increasing number of firms,who had hedged at much higher sterling-euro exchange ratesthan the current rate.  The Agents’ score for manufacturing output prices rose in July
(Chart 4 ).  Some Agencies reported that in the current climate
of rising inflation, businesses were anticipating price increasesfrom their suppliers and were more relaxed about acceptingthem.  Even so, most manufacturers were unable to pass on allof their higher input costs, so margins continued to besqueezed.  The Agents’ score for manufacturing profitabilitydeclined sharply in July.   
The score for business-to-business services price inflation was
unchanged this month and had been steady for much of theyear.  Some sectors of business services (for example haulage)reported rapid material cost and output price inflationrecently, largely due to higher fuel costs.  However, mostservice providers had proportionately fewer material inputsthan their manufacturing counterparts.  Furthermore, thedeceleration in demand for business services this year hadrestricted firms’ ability to pass on higher costs.  The Agents’score for service sector profitability continued to declinerapidly, mostly reflecting the slowdown in demand and, to alesser extent, the squeeze on margins.   
Consumer prices  
The score for retail goods price inflation increased a little inJuly, reflecting emerging news about the scale of energy costincreases offset somewhat by weaker price inflation in thenon-food sector.  The latter included discounts in the summersales (especially by fashion and department stores) that werelarger than last year.  Also, growing oversupply of new andused cars had put downward pressure on prices, particularly forused cars with high fuel consumption.  Food price inflation wasstable this month, but remained at a high level.  Retail servicesprice inflation rose further in July, largely reflecting increasedtransport prices.  Tour operators and airlines had increased fuelsurcharges, particularly for long-haul destinations. 4 Agents’ summary of business conditions August 2008
321012345
1998 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08Input
OutputScores
+
–Three months on same period a year earlierChart 4 Manufacturers’ input and output prices(a)
(a) Non-labour input prices.