Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2008/november-2008.pdf
Date: 2008-11-30

•Contacts painted a weak picture of most aspects of economic activity, with further reductions in the
Agents’ scores from the low levels reported last month.
•Demand for consumer services continued to shrink, and retail sales values were broadly unchanged
relative to a year earlier.
• Investment intentions had been further reduced, with an increasing number of contacts citing tighter
financing conditions as a factor in their decisions over and above the outlook for demand. 
• Manufacturing output for domestic sales fell and a range of construction and business service activities
also contracted.
•Growth in export orders had slowed sharply — after having been broadly stable across much of the year.  
• Employment intentions were scaled back further across all sectors.
•Growth in labour costs remained subdued, with most contacts expecting next year’s pay rises to be no
larger than this year’s.
•Annual input and output price inflation eased slightly.  
• Retail goods and service price inflation also eased amidst reports of increased promotional activity.
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by
the Bank of England’s Agents, following discussions with contacts in the period between late September and late October.  It provides information on the state of business conditions, fromcompanies across all sectors of the economy.  The report does notrepresent the Bank’s own views, nor does it represent the views ofany particular company or region.  The Bank’s Monetary PolicyCommittee uses the intelligence provided by the Agents, inconjunction with information from other sources, to assist itsunderstanding and assessment of current economic conditions.  Acopy of this publication can be found at:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/agentssummary/index.htm.The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, the
East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the North West,Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, theSouth West, Wales, the West Midlands & Oxfordshire, andYorkshire & the Humber.
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic
conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in theInflation Report, obtained from:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/inflationreport/index.htm.Agents’ summary of business conditions
November 2008Demand
Consumption
The Agents’ scores for retail sales values and consumer
services turnover fell further in October ( Chart 1 ).  
Demand for a broad range of consumer services had continued
to shrink.  Consumption of housing-related services wascontracting rapidly.  Pubs and restaurants had seen reducedturnover as consumers cut back on discretionary leisureexpenditure, with contacts flagging a continuing trend towardshome consumption of food and drink.  Domestic tourismremained an exception, with hotels reporting steady leisurebookings.
The value of retail sales was broadly unchanged on a year
earlier, as the key drivers highlighted in recent monthspersisted.  Consumers were shifting expenditure towardsunbranded, or ‘value’ products in the face of budgetarypressures.  Factory outlets and discount stores continued togain market share.  Sales of furniture and other big-tickethousehold items were still falling.  More generally,discretionary expenditure was seen to be shrinking, withretailers reporting that fewer consumers were treatingshopping as a leisure activity — reflected in reductions in bothimpulse spending and visitor numbers at major shoppingcentres.
Housing market
Activity remained weak.  While there had been occasionalreports of a pickup in viewings, contacts were not optimisticthat these marked a sustained improvement in demand.Rather, the prevailing sense was that sales were largely limitedto moves forced by job changes, repossessions, or changes infamily circumstance.
Investment
Agents’ scores for manufacturing and service sectorinvestment intentions fell further in October.  The slowdown incapital spending plans was widespread, affecting mostindustries.  Many contacts reported that investment plans had
been pared back to essentials — for example, to satisfyregulatory requirements.  And where possible, firms wereprolonging the use of existing assets.  A number of contactshad, however retained projects aimed at securing energyefficiencies, some of which were large in scale. 
The outlook for demand continued to be cited as a significant
factor driving reduced investment intentions.  Many contactsfelt that demand uncertainties had risen in the wake of thefinancial turbulence experienced in recent months.  However,there had also been an increase in the proportion of contactsciting financing concerns as an additional factor limitinginvestment.  
Contacts reported a tightening in their own credit conditions
since September.  The all-in cost of finance had increased asset-up and management fees were raised and loans wereincreasingly priced relative to Libor rather than Bank Rate.Some contacts expected future cutbacks in facilities.  Therewas also a wide-ranging perception that banks have becomemore active in responding to breaches in covenants.  
Only a small number of October’s contacts reported that their
day-to-day business was immediately threatened bytightening external credit conditions.  But concerns over thepotential for future pressures on working capital had led someto cut back on internally funded investment plans.  And therewere also reports of investment plans being shelved as a resultof doubts over the prospective availability of external funds.
Inventories
Actual and perceived pressures on working capital had ledsome contacts to cut back on planned inventories.  And retailcontacts reported some scaling back of orders in anticipationof a weaker-than-normal consumer demand around Christmas.
Overseas trade
The Agents’ score for goods exports had been reducedsignificantly ( Chart 2 ).  2 Agents’ summary of business conditions November 2008
2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08Scores
Retail sales values 
Consumer services
1.51.00.50.00.51.01.52.02.53.0
–+Three months on same period a year earlierChart 1 Consumption values
2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08Score
2101234
–+Three months on same period a year earlierChart 2 Manufacturing exportsAgents’ summary of business conditions November 2008 3
Across much of the year, growth of export demand had been
broadly stable.  In recent months, however, contacts havereported a sharp slowdown in orders.  The slowdown in orderslargely reflected the pronounced weakness in demand in mostdeveloped countries.  Orders from the euro area had shrunk aseconomic conditions had deteriorated — particularly in Ireland— and US consumer demand remained weak.  However,contacts also reported some slowing of Middle and Far Easterndemand for capital goods.  This reflected both the globaleffects of the credit crunch and overcapacity in some sectors.  
A number of contacts cited trade credit and credit insurance as
constraints on export sales.  For many, trade credit andinsurance had become harder to access and more expensive.For others, increased concerns over counterparty risk meantthat insurance was seen to be more critical to trade than hadpreviously been the case.
Volumes of imported consumer and capital goods continued
to shrink.  This had been reflected in declines in shippingactivity.  Some contacts reported plans to shift componentsupply back from China to domestic manufacturers.  
Output
Business services
The Agents’ score for business services turnover fell further(Chart 3 ).  
A few isolated areas had seen increased growth in recent
months — typically in countercyclical activities such ascorporate recovery work and legal services related toemployment law.  But these were more than offset byshrinkage in activity elsewhere.  For example, contactsreported a reduction in discretionary business expenditure onmarketing and conference bookings.  Reflecting the shrinkagein aggregate demand and output seen in recent months, anumber of contacts also reported slowing demand fortransport and logistics.  Manufacturing output
Manufacturing output had continued to fall in aggregate,though there was a broad dispersion of experience acrossdifferent subsectors.  On the downside, construction-relatedbusinesses had experienced a particularly marked slowdown inorders.  And there were signs that cutbacks by buildingmaterials suppliers were having an impact further along thesupply chain — for example, on the chemicals industry.  On theupside, public and quasi-public transport investmentprogrammes were generating significant demand for somefirms.  And firms supplying sectors that have so far been lessaffected by the downturn — for example, agriculture andpharmaceuticals — reported stable order books.
Construction
Construction output slowed further.  Levels of house-buildingand commercial property activity remained sharply lower thana year earlier.  The volume of land transactions had also slowedmarkedly.  However, public sector projects continued toprovide some support to construction output in all regions.  
Capacity utilisation
Capacity constraints had continued to decline.  Weakeningdemand had led many contacts to cut output.  But mostbusinesses had retained capacity by cutting back on shift workand temporarily mothballing production lines.  There were onlyinfrequent reports of longer-term adjustments to capacity —for example through business closures or exiting aspects ofbusiness.
Employment
As in September, contacts reported declining demand forlabour.  The Agents’ scores for employment intentions werereduced further across all sectors ( Chart 4 ).  In recent months,
the scores for employment intentions in the services sectorhave been reduced particularly sharply and are now at theirlowest level since Agents began scoring in 1997.  
2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08Scores
Business services 
Consumer services
2101234
–+Three months on same period a year earlierChart 3 Services turnover
2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08Scores
ManufacturingServices
2.52.01.51.00.50.00.51.01.52.02.53.0
–+Over the next six monthsChart 4 Employment intentionsFewer businesses were advertising for vacancies through 
Job Centres.  A number of retailers had scaled back on theirChristmas hiring plans.  And construction companiescontinued to cut back on their demand for labour from sub-contractors.  Moreover, reports of small-scaleredundancies and plant closures had become morewidespread.  And more firms were entering redundancyconsultations.
Costs and prices
Labour costs
The Agents’ scores for labour cost growth were little changedin October.  Most contacts expected next year’s pay increasesto be no larger than this year’s.  And some contacts reportedwage freezes or postponement of settlements.  As inSeptember, a number of contacts felt that employee resistanceto below-inflation settlements was lower than normal —reflecting heightened job insecurity.
Input and output prices
The Agents’ score for materials cost inflation was cut inOctober, reflecting the sharp falls in spot commodity pricesseen in recent months.  However, input price inflationremained elevated relative to historic norms.  In large part, thisreflected long lags in passing through increases in energyprices earlier in the year.  For example, many contacts werestill locked into annual energy contracts set prior to the oilprice rises experienced during the first half of 2008 andtherefore anticipated price rises when contracts were renewed.Some contacts also reported that sterling’s recent depreciationhad dampened the impact of falling international commodityprices. 
Manufacturers’ ability to raise prices was limited both by the
sharp slowdown in demand and by pressures to reduce stocksand hence preserve working capital.  Wholesale food prices
were stabilising.  And contacts reported increased pricediscounting in sectors where discretionary corporate spendinghad weakened, including conference, corporate hotel andadvertising rates.    
Consumer prices
The Agents’ scores for both retail goods and retail servicesprices were reduced slightly, though they remained elevatedrelative to historic norms ( Chart 5 ).  
Contacts reported faster than normal deflation in used car
prices and increased promotional activity in both the retail andleisure sectors.  Looking forward, the weakening outlook fordemand was felt to have reduced the scope for consumer-facing firms to pass on cost increases.  A number ofcontacts expected retail food prices to fall, under thecombined impact of stabilising wholesale prices and anincrease in price competition by supermarkets.  4 Agents’ summary of business conditions November 2008
2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08Scores
GoodsServices
2101234
–+Three months on same period a year earlierChart 5 Retail prices