Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2009/january-2009.pdf
Date: 2009-01-31

• Consumers’ expenditure had contracted further during late November and early December.  And for
most retailers, sales over the Christmas period had been lower than in the previous year.  
• Investment intentions had been reduced sharply during 2008 Q4.
• Exports had slowed sharply.  More industries were now experiencing shrinkage in export demand.
• Output had contracted more rapidly than earlier in the year.  During 2008 Q4, the slowdown had been
most marked in the manufacturing sector, as firms cut production in the wake of a mounting excess of
stocks over planned levels.
•Contacts’ concerns over availability of working capital remained elevated.  This reflected both an
ongoing tightening in availability of bank funding and trade credit and the pressures on corporate cash flow arising from the deteriorating macroeconomic outlook.  
• Employment intentions had been scaled back further, with an increase in redundancies.  Further
redundancies were planned for 2009.
•Growth in per capita labour costs had slowed.  Looking forward, there had been a material increase in the
proportion of firms planning for a settlement freeze.
• Annual input inflation had fallen back sharply for many imported raw materials, as falling foreign
currency prices more than offset the impact of sterling’s recent depreciation.  
• Retail goods and service price inflation had also fallen sharply.  The VAT cut had been widely
implemented.  And pre-Christmas discounting had been deep.
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by
the Bank of England’s Agents, following discussions with contacts in the period between late November and late December.  It provides information on the state of business conditions, fromcompanies across all sectors of the economy.  The report does notrepresent the Bank’s own views, nor does it represent the views ofany particular company or region.  The Bank’s Monetary PolicyCommittee uses the intelligence provided by the Agents, inconjunction with information from other sources, to assist itsunderstanding and assessment of current economic conditions.  Acopy of this publication can be found at:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/agentssummary/index.htm.The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, the
East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the North West,Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, theSouth West, Wales, the West Midlands & Oxfordshire, andYorkshire & the Humber.
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic
conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in theInflation Report, obtained from:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/inflationreport/index.htm.Agents’ summary of business conditions
January 2009Demand
Consumption
For most contacts, retail sales values were down relative to 
the same period a year earlier ( Chart 1 ).  In some parts of 
the United Kingdom, the rate of slowdown in retail salesvolumes appeared to have stabilised during late November
and early December after particularly weak sales earlier in thequarter.  However, sales values had continued to fall as many
retailers had offered deep discounts in the run-up toChristmas.  
Demand had continued to shrink for a wide range of consumer
services.  Most notably, there were further reports of reduceddemand for financial services and lower sales at restaurantsand pubs.  Consumer demand for foreign travel had weakened.And despite sharp discounting, new and used car salesremained particularly low.
Given the importance of seasonal trading, the Agents contact
a broad range of retailers in late December and early Januaryeach year, to get an early view of sales over the Christmasperiod.  For the majority of retailers, sales values had fallensubstantially relative to the previous Christmas.  But thisexperience was not universal — a significant minority reportedsome increase in sales values.
Looking forward, many contacts expected consumer demand
to weaken further during 2009 Q1, with some anticipating apickup in precautionary savings in the face of mountingconcerns over job security.  The number of retailers in financialdistress had increased, with some reports of difficulties inmeeting up-front rental payments.  
Housing market
There had been little change from the picture of very weakactivity painted in recent months.  In all parts of the United Kingdom, transactions in the markets for new andestablished homes had remained at low levels.  Where therewere reports of increases in pockets of activity, these were not
seen as representative of any broader turnaround:  forexample, increases in sales at auction were attributed to apickup in repossessions.  Difficulties in securing mortgagefinance remained the most widely reported driver of weakhousing demand.  But expectations of future price falls andheightened concerns over job security were also seen to bedepressing demand.
Business investment
Throughout 2008 Q4, there had been widespread reports ofsubstantial reductions in investment intentions, with theAgents’ scores reduced significantly ( Chart 2 ).  Cutbacks and
deferrals in capital expenditure plans had become the norm forcontacts visited in recent months.  
Contacts’ expectations of future demand had weakened
materially, and the outlook for demand was cited frequently asa prime driver of reductions in investment plans.  Concernsover availability of working capital and external project financeremained important factors for many firms.  There were alsoreports that some commercial property investments had beenshelved in anticipation of future falls in property values.  
Overseas trade
The Agents’ score for goods export volumes was reducedsharply again, following material reductions in the score earlierin the quarter ( Chart 3 ).  Indeed, the fall in scores through
2008 Q4 was, by some margin, the largest quarterly reductionsince the Agents started scoring in 1997.  While export demandwas still seen to be stronger than domestic demand formanufactured goods, more industries were now experiencingshrinkage in exports.
Many contacts reported that the slowdown in world growth
had, so far, more than offset any improvements incompetitiveness arising from sterling’s depreciation.  In part,however, this was because some exporters had takenadvantage of the depreciation to improve margins — by raisingtheir sterling export prices.  2 Agents’ summary of business conditions January 2009
1.51.00.50.00.51.01.52.02.53.0
2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08Score Three months on same period a year earlier
+
–Chart 1 Retail sales values
432101234
2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08Scores
ManufacturingServices+Over the next twelve months
–Chart 2 Business investment intentionsAgents’ summary of business conditions January 2009 3
Inventories
Throughout the second half of 2008, manufacturing contacts
have described a build-up in stocks across the supply chain.Weakening consumer demand and widespread cutbacks incapital expenditure had impacted on orders.  This had beenmost marked in the automotive sector, where the collapse indemand had led to a material build-up in stocks.  But the trendtowards involuntary stockbuilding had been pervasivethroughout the production sector.  Manufacturers’ concernsover the mounting excess of stocks over planned levels hadbeen exacerbated by doubts over the availability of workingcapital — a picture that had become more acute over the pastmonth.  That had led many contacts to cut productionaggressively (see below).  
Output
Manufacturing output
There were further material reductions in the Agents’ scoresfor the output of manufactured goods ( Chart 3 ).  During 
2008 Q4, the deceleration in manufacturing output appearedmore extreme than that experienced in the service sector,where the slowdown in output had started earlier.  
Orders for construction-related goods, consumer goods and
capital goods were all lower than a year earlier.  And manycontacts had cut their production even more sharply thanorders had declined.  Looking forward, few contacts expected arapid bounceback in output, with widespread reports of plansto cut production further to manage stock levels down andmany contacts anticipating persistently weak orders.  Therewere, however, some exceptions to that picture in sectors suchas medical equipment, rail and environmental products.  
Business services
The decline in demand for business services appeared broad-based, with a further fall in the Agents’ score.  As inrecent months, demand for ‘countercyclical’ services — such as insolvency and employment advice — had continuedto grow.  But even within the accountancy and legal sectors,
this growth had not been sufficient to offset shrinkage indemand for other activities.  More generally, there werewidespread reports of falling expenditure on professionalservices, such as financial services and recruitment services.Demand for transport, logistics and distribution services hadalso contracted, in line with the shrinkage in aggregatedemand and output.
Construction
Construction output was significantly lower than a year earlier, with a further reduction in the Agents’ score.  As inrecent months, contacts reported that substantial falls inhouse building and commercial property development weremore than offsetting growth in public sector work.  Lookingforward, the pipeline of new private sector projects wasnegligible.  As a result, the majority of contacts had seen orderbooks shortening and expected the decline in constructionoutput to accelerate early in 2009, as existing projectscomplete.
Credit conditions
Contacts’ concerns over the availability of working capitalremained elevated — if anything, more acute than at the timeof the previous report.  In part, that reflected a furthertightening in the availability of bank funding and trade credit.But contacts’ concerns also reflected the deterioration in themacroeconomic outlook, with attendant pressures oncorporate cash flow.  In particular, where firms relied oninvoice discounting, falling orders would reduce cash flow asthere were fewer sales to discount.  
Availability of trade credit insurance was a material financing
concern for a significant number of contacts.  Some had seenblanket reductions in cover for some sectors, at little notice.There were also widespread reports of increases in paymentperiods for goods and services supplied — with no cleardifferentiation in experience between large and small firms.Bad debts from customers had increased through 2008 Q4,but remained at modest levels.
Employment
The broad picture remained one of shrinking demand forlabour, with the Agents’ scores reduced further across sectors(Chart 4 ).  
There had been some reduction in hours per head, with a
number of firms introducing or extending short-time workingor extending normal Christmas shutdowns.  However, manycontacts had sought to reduce head count.  As in recentmonths, some retail contacts had made lower-than-normaluse of temporary seasonal workers.  There had also been a32101234
2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08Scores
Domestic manufacturing
  sales Goods exports
+Three months on same period a year earlier
–Chart 3 Manufacturing outputfurther increase in the flow of redundancies — most markedly
in the manufacturing sector.  Looking forward, redundancieswere expected to increase during 2009, across many sectors.
Capacity utilisation
The Agents’ scores for capacity utilisation and recruitmentdifficulties were reduced further.  Contacts felt that theworsening outlook for demand left little prospect of capacityconstraints binding during 2009.  Efforts had been made toretain capacity as production fell:  so far, the norm had been tocut shifts, extend Christmas shutdowns and mothball plant,rather than scrapping capital or closing sites morepermanently.  That said, there were reports of disinvestmentby a minority of contacts — for example through closure ofretail and leisure outlets.  
Costs and prices
Labour costs
Growth in labour costs per head had slowed further, leading tosignificant reductions in the Agents’ scores ( Chart 5 ).  The
prime drivers remained reductions in hours per head and lowerbonus and commission payments.
Looking forward, there was mounting evidence that 2009’s
settlements would be lower than 2008’s for the majority of contacts.  Across the United Kingdom, there had been amaterial increase in the proportion of contacts planningsettlement freezes.  And there were some reports of plans 
for wage cuts.  However, for a minority of firms, the impact onlabour cost inflation would be at least partially offset by theneed to increase contributions to defined benefit pensionschemes.
Input prices
Inflation in materials costs had fallen sharply, leading tofurther reductions in the Agents’ score.  For many firms, fallingforeign currency materials prices had more than offset theimpact of sterling’s recent depreciation.  The trend was lessmarked for imports of finished goods.  The most notable fallsin price were seen for construction-related materials.  Andthere had been some pass-through of lower oil prices to theprice of oil-based products.  However, for many contacts,lower spot energy prices had yet to impact on their ownenergy costs — indeed, some were still seeing price rises as(long) fixed-price contracts unwound.  
Consumer prices
The Agents’ scores for retail goods and services prices weremarked down significantly.  This reflected widespread reportsof deep discounting as retailers sought to shift stock throughDecember — though for many, discounting had been targetedon specific ‘discount days’ and hence might not be picked upby official measures of inflation.  The VAT cut had been widely,but not universally implemented.  The exceptions weretypically smaller stores.  The VAT cut had also affected someservices prices, and there were also reports of discounting inthe leisure sector.4 Agents’ summary of business conditions January 2009
+
-
43210123
2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08Scores
ManufacturingServicesOver the next six months
+
–Chart 4 Employment intentions
0.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.0
2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08Scores
ManufacturingServicesThree months on same period a year earlierChart 5 Labour costs per head