Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2009/august-2009.pdf
Date: 2009-08-31

• Consumer spending had continued to stabilise.
•The recovery in housing market activity had continued.
• Investment intentions remained depressed, driven primarily by the weak and uncertain outlook for
demand.
•There had been little change to the pace of contraction in export volumes .
•There were further, widespread reports that the pace of de-stocking had slowed. 
•There was more evidence that manufacturing output was stabilising.  Recent reports from business
services providers had been more mixed.  And construction activity remained severely depressed.
• Employment intentions were less negative than earlier in the year — while many firms expected to
reduce head count further, there were fewer plans for large scale redundancies.
• Per capita labour costs remained lower than the same period a year earlier, while inflation in materials
costs had eased further.  
•There was little evidence of inflation in manufactured output prices .  And many business services prices
were lower than a year earlier.
• Consumer goods price inflation remained low but positive.  
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by
the Bank of England’s Agents, following discussions with contacts in the period between late June 2009 and late July 2009.  It provides information on the state of business conditions, fromcompanies across all sectors of the economy.  The report does notrepresent the Bank’s own views, nor does it represent the views ofany particular company or region.  The Bank’s Monetary PolicyCommittee uses the intelligence provided by the Agents, inconjunction with information from other sources, to assist itsunderstanding and assessment of current economic conditions.  A copy of this publication can be found at:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/agentssummary/index.htm.The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, the
East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the North West,Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, theSouth West, Wales, the West Midlands & Oxfordshire, andYorkshire & the Humber.
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic
conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in theInflation Report, obtained from:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/inflationreport/index.htm.Agents’ summary of business conditions
August 2009Demand
Consumption
As in recent months, reports from retailers suggested that
sales had increased through the second quarter — reflected inan upward drift in the Agents’ scores ( Chart 1 ).  The value of
food sales was higher than a year earlier.  And a growingnumber of non-food retailers had reported year on yeargrowth.  Sales of ‘big ticket’ items remained well down on thesame period a year earlier.  But there had been some modestgrowth of new car sales during the second quarter.  And usedcar sales had remained at the higher levels seen in recentmonths.  
The pace of contraction in demand for consumer services had
eased further.  Spending on domestic tourism had continued togrow through the early summer.  For example, occupancy ratesat campsites and self-catering accommodation were higherthan normal and visitor numbers at tourist attractions hadincreased.  Spending at pubs and restaurants remained welldown relative to the same period a year earlier, though therewere occasional reports that the pace of contraction haddeclined.  
Against the backdrop of stabilising consumer spending, the
Agents had continued to hear widespread reports ofconsumers trading down.  The loss of market share by mid-market stores had been a long-standing theme ofcontacts’ reports.  And in the tourism sector, campsites andbed and breakfast accommodation had seen larger increases indemand than had more expensive hotels.  Retailers still viewedconsumers as more value conscious than they were a few yearsago — a view reflected in their pricing decisions.
Housing market
The pickup in primary and secondary housing market activityhad continued.  There had been some further growth ininterest from first-time buyers — though such activityremained well down on recent years.  The potential supply ofnew homes had increased a little, as house builders releasedmothballed sites.  But supply remained weak in the secondary
market, with instructions to sell remaining at low levels.  Lowsupply had led to some stabilisation in prices — indeed, therehad been occasional reports of gazumping.  
Business investment
The picture remained one of very depressed investmentintentions — driven primarily by the weak and uncertainoutlook for demand, and exacerbated by the tightness ofcorporate credit conditions.  The vast majority of contacts hadcut capital expenditure plans during 2009.  The norm was forany capital expenditure to be limited to maintenance, small-scale investments aimed at realising near-termefficiency gains, or projects necessary to ensure regulatorycompliance.  But there were a few more reports of plans forretail and hotel refurbishment than there had been earlier inthe year — albeit such plans remained considerably lessambitious than in previous years.
Exports and Imports
For most contacts, the pace of contraction in exports had notchanged in recent months.  Sterling’s earlier depreciation hadled to improvements in competitiveness for some firms,leading to reports of growth in market share.  But shrinkage ofglobal demand had continued to dominate.  There were,however, some further reports of a pickup in demand fromChina and the Far East.
The broad picture remained one of import volumes
significantly down on the same period a year earlier.  Againstthat backdrop, there were tentative signs that imports of rawmaterials had picked up over the past month — possiblyreflecting the slowing pace of de-stocking.
Inventories
There were further widespread reports that the pace of de-stocking had slowed, as an increasing number of firms hadnow unwound any excess inventories.  There were someexceptions, as the process of de-stocking continued to workthrough supply chains.  But these were balanced by reportsfrom firms that were looking to re-stock.  Looking forward,many contacts planned to hold stock levels below recentnorms.  That followed from the weakness of expected demand,exacerbated by tightness of working capital.
Output
Services
As described above, the pace of decline in consumer serviceshad continued to ease, as the domestic tourism sectorexperienced growth in demand.  Recent reports from businessservices providers had been more mixed ( Chart 2 ).  
On the one hand, there had been further signs of a small
increase in commercial property and acquisitions activity in2 Agents’ summary of business conditions August 2009
3210123
2004 05 06 07 08 09Scores
Retail sales  values
Consumer services turnover–+Three months on same period a year earlierChart 1 Consumer spendingAgents’ summary of business conditions August 2009 3
recent months.  And there were very occasional reports that
demand for logistics may have bottomed as retail sales pickedup and de-stocking slowed.  But on the other hand, there wereno indications that recent sharp cuts in corporate‘discretionary’ expenditure on conferences and business travelhad been reversed.  Any growth had come from a low base —in contrast to the consumer services sector, it was rare to hearfrom contacts whose turnover was up on the same period ayear earlier.  
Manufacturing
There was more evidence that orders and production werestabilising — though the level of activity remained significantlydown relative to the same period a year earlier.  On the upside,there had been further reports from contacts that had seen apickup in orders as their customers completed moves to de-stock and as firms switched from foreign suppliers.  But onthe downside, demand for capital goods remained weak andthere were mounting signs that aerospace production wasslowing as the pipeline of orders diminished.  Looking forward,many contacts described their order books as ‘short’.  As aresult, few were confident that there would be a significantpickup in demand during the second half of 2009.
Construction
Construction activity remained severely depressed, as privatebuilding work contracted rapidly ( Chart 3 ).  There had been
some reports of renewed growth in house-building in the wakeof the pickup in housing market activity.  But the new workwas typically small in scale — limited to re-opening of a fewsites rather than wholesale resumption of development.  Anyimpact on overall construction activity had been more thanoffset by rapid shrinkage in commercial property work asexisting projects were completed and the pipeline of new workremained negligible.  
For some time, work on public sector projects had provided a
prop for the construction sector.  While some projects hadbeen cancelled or deferred, others had been brought forward.On average, the level of public sector demand appeared steadyas the tail of previously agreed projects moved into
development.  But looking forward, the pipeline of publicsector work was shortening.
Credit conditions
There were further reports from large firms that had madesuccessful rights issues.  And there had been a slight increase inthe proportion of contacts reporting growth in bankborrowing.  But the Agents had continued to hear from firmsthat had encountered difficulties in securing funding.  Suchfunding difficulties appeared most prevalent amongst smallerfirms.  As had been the case throughout 2009, many contactshad found it hard to access trade credit insurance.  
Demand for finance was low relative to previous years.  In part,
that reflected firms’ weak investment plans.  But somecontacts also felt that the cost of finance was prohibitive givencurrent demand conditions.  And there continued to beoccasional reports from firms that were reluctant to approachbanks for new funding for fear of triggering an unfavourablereview of existing terms.  
Employment
There had been further reports of shrinkage in contacts’headcount, including some more announcements of significantredundancies.  Looking forward, employment intentionsremained weak, but less weak than earlier in the year —reflected in upward adjustment to the Agents’ forward-lookingscores for employment intentions ( Chart 4 ).  Many firms were
not recruiting — aiming instead to trim head count bymaintaining freezes on replacement hires.  Only a minorityreported firm plans for further large-scale redundancies.  Someothers would review the case for large-scale redundancies inthe autumn, by which time the outlook for demand would beclearer.  But others were comfortable now that they had madethe bulk of the adjustment in headcount warranted by theweaker outlook for demand.+
–
4321012345
2004 05 06 07 08 09ScoreThree months on same period a year earlierChart 3 Construction output
4321012345
2004 05 06 07 08 09Scores
Other business services Professional and ﬁnancial services
Consumer services +
–Three months on same period a year earlierChart 2 Services turnoverCapacity utilisation
As had been the case throughout 2009, the majority of
contacts reported a significant margin of spare capacity.  It wasvery rare to hear from contacts for whom capacity constraintswere binding.  The majority felt that the weak outlook fordemand left little prospect that capacity constraints wouldbind during the remainder of the year.  Looking furtherforward, most considered the cuts they had made toproduction to be temporary and easily reversible.  There were,however, a few concerns that the external environment mightimpair contacts’ ability to raise production.  Some worried thatunemployment might lead to loss of skills — particularly in theconstruction sector, where redundancies and layoffs by sub-contractors had been very significant.  Others raisedconcerns over the potential impact of future corporate failureson their supply chains — though so far, insolvencies had notrisen as sharply as many contacts had feared.
Costs and prices
Labour costs
There had been little change to the picture painted by contactsvisited earlier in the year.  Per capita labour costs were widelyreported to have fallen through 2009.  For some, introductionof restrictions on overtime or shorter working weeks had led tosubstantial per capita savings.  Bonus and commissionpayments had also been reduced, and a majority of contactshad reported pay freezes.  Looking forward, some contacts hadraised concerns over the prospective impact of asset price fallson employers’ contributions to defined benefit pensionschemes.  
Non-labour costs
Inflation in materials costs had slowed further.  In part, thatreflected sharp increases in prices a year earlier dropping out ofthe twelve month comparison.  In recent months, contacts’experience appeared broadly balanced between those forwhom input costs were rising and those whose costs werefalling.  On the upside, pass-through from sterling’s earlierdepreciation was still cited occasionally as a factor leading to
increases in prices when orders and contracts were renewed.On the downside, there were further reports from firms whoseenergy costs had fallen as fixed price contracts expired.  Andsome had seen pass-through of earlier falls in the global priceof steel and other non-food commodities.
Output prices
There was little evidence of inflation in manufactured outputprices.  And many business services prices were lower than thesame period a year earlier.  The weak outlook for demand hadweighed on any potential for price increases and led manycustomers to press suppliers for discounts.  Moreover, theslowdown in materials and labour cost inflation had reducedthe imperative for suppliers to press for increases in price.  
Consumer prices
As had been the case for some time, consumer goods priceinflation remained low, but positive ( Chart 5 ).  In recent
months, there had been tentative indications that downwardpressure from widespread promotional activity had eased.  Butthat had been offset by a marginal diminution in the upwardpressure from pass-through of sterling’s depreciation.  
Through 2009, contacts had reported high levels of
promotional activity, motivated by a widespread perceptionthat consumers were more value conscious than normal.Discounting was still reported to be widespread — in both theleisure services and retail goods sectors.  But some contactshad reduced the scope of their promotional activity asstronger-than-anticipated demand had enabled them tounwind excess stocks.  
Over the past month, there had been further reports of 
pass-through of higher import prices.  As in recent months,some contacts anticipated further pass-through in theautumn.  But a few others had been surprised by the sensitivityof demand to recent price increases, leading them to scaleback plans for future pass-through.4 Agents’ summary of business conditions August 2009
5432101234
2004 05 06 07 08 09Scores
ManufacturingBusiness services
Consumer services
+
–Over the next six monthsChart 4 Employment intentions
2101234
2004 05 06 07 08 09Scores
Retail goods prices Imported ﬁnished 
  goods prices 
+
–Three months on same period a year earlierChart 5 Retail goods and imported finished goods prices