Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2009/april-2009.pdf
Date: 2009-04-30

• Consumer spending had remained weak, but there were some further reports that the rate of contraction
of retail sales had eased.  
•There had been a further pickup in housing market activity — albeit from a very low base.
• Investment intentions remained weak.
• Export volumes had shrunk further, as the slowdown in global demand outweighed any gains to
competitiveness arising from sterling’s depreciation.  Imports had continued to contract sharply.
• Destocking had continued throughout the first quarter.
•There was little change to the picture of sharply contracting output across the manufacturing ,
construction and services sectors. 
• Credit conditions had continued to be a major concern for many firms, with no signs of easing in recent
months.
• Labour demand had continued to shrink.  While many firms had made further cuts to average hours,
headcount had also contracted.  Cuts in average hours, lower bonuses and low pay settlements had leftper capita labour costs lower than a year earlier. 
•On average, there had been little change in the rate of inflation in materials prices .  Inflation in output
prices had slowed further as weak demand conditions had continued to press down on suppliers’ margins.
• Consumer goods prices :  promotional activity had continued to push against the impact of rising import
prices, and of increases in the prices of some products to pricing points seen before the VAT cut.
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by
the Bank of England’s Agents, following discussions with contacts in the period between late February and late March 2009.  It provides information on the state of business conditions, fromcompanies across all sectors of the economy.  The report does notrepresent the Bank’s own views, nor does it represent the views ofany particular company or region.  The Bank’s Monetary PolicyCommittee uses the intelligence provided by the Agents, inconjunction with information from other sources, to assist itsunderstanding and assessment of current economic conditions.  A copy of this publication can be found at:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/agentssummary/index.htm.The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, the
East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the North West,Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, theSouth West, Wales, the West Midlands & Oxfordshire, andYorkshire & the Humber.
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic
conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in theInflation Report, obtained from:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/inflationreport/index.htm.Agents’ summary of business conditions
April 2009Demand
Consumption
While retail sales had remained weak, there were some
tentative indications that the rate of contraction had eased.Most non-food retailers reported that sales values were downrelative to the same period a year earlier.  But there were somefurther reports that the rate of decline had stabilised, or thatsales had outperformed expectations.  There were widespreadreports that the value of food sales had continued to grow —in large part, reflecting inflation in food prices.  Overall, thenews on retail sales values had motivated a tickup in theAgents’ score ( Chart 1 ).
Demand for consumer services had continued to contract.  As
in recent months, pubs and restaurants had seen particularlyweak spending.  But as with retail sales, there were tentativesigns that demand for some services had stabilised or evenpicked up — most notably with reports of increased spendingon domestic holidays.  Car sales remained much weaker thanmost other aspects of consumer spending.  But even here,there were reports that the rate of decline in spending waseasing — particularly in the market for used cars.
Housing market
Across all parts of the United Kingdom, there had been furtherreports of growth in enquiries and viewings.  And there werenow more signs that the increase in buyer interest had led to apickup in sales.  However, any turnaround had come from alow base so that the volume of transactions remained verydepressed.  And there was little indication that any pickup inactivity had broadened far beyond investors with substantialliquid assets.  Reports of activity from first-time buyers hadremained rare, with financial constraints widely seen to bebinding.Business investment
There was little change to the picture of extremely depressedinvestment intentions ( Chart 2 ).  It remained rare for contacts
to approve any capital expenditure that did not either have aquick payback or support compliance with regulatoryrequirements.
As in recent months, pessimism and uncertainty surrounding
the outlook for sales were described as a significant deterrentto capital expenditure.  The cost and availability of projectfinance was also important for some firms.  For many others,concerns over the availability of working capital remainedacute, leading to reluctance to draw down on cash balances tosupport investment.
Overseas trade
External demand was still seen to be stronger than domesticdemand for manufactured goods.  But most contacts reportedshrinkage in export volumes during 2009 Q1.  Weakness inworld demand had continued to outweigh any impact ofsterling’s depreciation — most notably in the automotivesector where the trend of destocking was global.  Sterling’sdepreciation had led to improvements in competitiveness forsome firms.  However, there were further reports of exporterspreferring to maintain foreign currency prices and hence raisemargins, rather than seeking higher volumes.  And for someothers, the rising cost of imported components had limited thescope to cut foreign currency prices.
Import volumes had continued to contract sharply, as
evidenced by much reduced shipping and freight forwardingactivity.  In part, the contraction reflected cutbacks in retailorders and lower sales of capital goods.  Destocking had alsoled to cuts in imports of components.  There were furtherreports that the rising cost of imported intermediate andfinished goods had led to substitution from foreign towardsdomestic suppliers.  2 Agents’ summary of business conditions April 2009
3210123
2004 05 06 07 08 09Scores
Retail sales values
Consumer services turnover+
–Three months on same period a year earlierChart 1 Consumer spending
5432101234
2004 05 06 07 08 09Scores
ManufacturingServices
+
–Over the next twelve monthsChart 2 Business investment intentionsAgents’ summary of business conditions April 2009 3
Inventories
In light of ONS estimates of substantial destocking during
2008 Q4, the Agents had focused their discussions withcontacts more closely on inventories than was normally thecase.  Many firms had revised their expectations of future salesdown in the wake of the sharp fall in demand experienced inlate 2008.  Taken alongside concerns over the availability ofworking capital, that had led many to scale down plannedstockholdings.  
The process of adjustment had continued into the first
quarter of 2009, with widespread reports of destocking.Stocks were being run down aggressively in thosemanufacturing subsectors that had seen the most acutefalls in demand during late 2008.  And work in progress inthe construction sector had fallen as building activity hadcontracted.
Looking forward, many contacts still regarded current
stock levels as too high.  Where sales had fallen most sharply,it would take some time to draw down stocks of materialsacross the entire supply chain.  There were, however, signsthat the process of destocking had been completed in someconsumer-facing sectors.  Notably, car dealers reported thatstocks of used cars were now low, while many non-foodretailers had succeeded in shifting stock through promotionalactivity.  
Output
Services
Services output had continued to fall.  The ongoing shrinkagein demand for consumer services is described above.  Manybusiness services providers had also reported decliningturnover — most markedly outside the professional servicesarena ( Chart 3 ).  Demand for haulage and distribution services had fallen
sharply.  And cutbacks in a wide range of corporatediscretionary expenditure had continued.  As in recent months,demand for ‘countercyclical’ professional services, such asinsolvency work and employment advice, had continued togrow.  And the Agents had not heard many further reports ofdeclines in demand for ‘core’ professional services such asauditing.  But other aspects of professional services were stillexperiencing sharp falls in demand — most notably in thecorporate finance, advertising, property and recruitmentsectors.
Manufacturing
There was little change to the picture of sharply reducedmanufacturing output.  Both external and domestic demandwere well down on the same period a year earlier.  Destockinghad led to cuts in orders for intermediate goods.  And manyfirms had cut production more sharply than sales had fallen inorder to unwind their own excess stocks.  
As in recent months, the aggregate picture masked material
differences between subsectors.  Across the automotive,construction materials and capital goods supply chains the fallin output was exceptional.  While these supply chains accountfor a substantial part of total manufacturing output, someother sizable subsectors — defence, pharmaceuticals and foodprocessing — had experienced stable orders or even somegrowth.
Construction
Construction activity had contracted further during 2009 Q1.Residential construction had remained at very low levels —though in a few localities the recent tickup in housing marketactivity had stimulated a resumption of building work.Commercial property activity was also weak and the pipelineof new projects remained negligible.  For some time, sharpdeclines in private house-building and commercial propertyactivity had more than offset continued growth in publicsector demand.  There was little evidence (yet) that publicsector projects had been bought forward.
Credit conditions
Credit conditions had continued to be a major concern formany firms, with no signs of easing in recent months.
Trade credit
The availability and cost of trade credit insurance hadcontinued to be cited frequently as a significant burden.  As inrecent months, many suppliers had responded to loss of coverby taking counterparty risk onto their own balance sheets ordemanding up-front payments, rather than by refusing orders.Notwithstanding such demands for early payment, the generaltrend was towards increasing delays between delivery andpayment for goods and services provided.  
4321012345
2004 05 06 07 08 09Scores
Other business 
  services Professional and ﬁnancial services
Consumer servicesThree months on same period a year earlier
+
–Chart 3 Services turnoverBank finance
There had been little change in contacts’ views of the cost and
availability of bank finance.  For many, the cost of existingfacilities had not fallen anything like in line with Bank Rate, asspreads were typically widened and fees increased whenfacilities came up for review.  There were few reports of growthin new lending.  In part, that was due to low demand for creditas investment intentions remained extremely depressed and assome firms remained wary of approaching banks for finance forfear of triggering changes in the terms attached to theirexisting borrowing.  Some non-banking contacts perceivedbanks’ appetite for lending to have remained low.
Employment
Labour demand had continued to shrink.  There had beenfurther reports of firms seeking to reduce labour costswithout making substantive cuts to headcount, with manyfirms cutting average hours.  In some cases, this had beenachieved through reductions in use of overtime.  But othershad taken more drastic steps, such as imposing shorterworking weeks or introducing unpaid leave programmes.Nevertheless, there were widespread reports of actual andplanned cuts to headcount, and employment intentionsremained depressed.  In some cases, cuts to headcount werebeing achieved through freezes on recruitment.  But therehad continued to be widespread reports of new redundancyprogrammes.  
Costs and prices
Labour costs
Across all sectors of the economy, per capita labour costs werewidely reported to be lower than a year earlier — leaving theAgents’ scores negative for the first time since scoring began in1998 ( Chart 4 ).  In part, that reflected the cuts in average
hours that had been instituted to minimise the need for jobcuts (see above).  Additionally, bonus and commissionpayments were well down on the previous year.  Pay pressureshad also eased.  Reports of settlements in excess of 3% wererare, while pay freezes were widespread.  And a few contactshad either imposed cuts in salaries or were planning to do so.
Other input costs 
On average, there did not appear to have been much change inthe rate of inflation in materials prices.  But that averagemasked significant differences in the pricing profiles ofimported intermediate goods, commodities and domesticallysourced components.  Many contacts had reported sharpincreases in the price of imported intermediate goods and inthe price of basic foodstuffs.  But the trend was less clear forimported commodities, where falls in global prices had pushedagainst the impact of sterling’s depreciation.  Inflation indomestic component prices had fallen.Output prices
Last month’s Agents’ special survey on cost pass-through hadrevealed an asymmetry between pass-through of falls and risesin costs:  where costs had fallen, many suppliers had alreadyreduced prices, while most of those whose costs had risenexpected to pass on less than half of any increase.  Recentreports suggested that that asymmetry had persisted, as weakdemand had led to pressures on suppliers’ margins.  Sodomestic output price inflation had slowed further.  
Consumer prices
Contacts had reported a range of upward and downwardpressures on consumer goods prices.  On the upside, used carprices had risen as any stock overhang was unwound;  anumber of retailers had restored prices of VAT-able goods tothe pricing points that had prevailed prior to the VAT cut; andthere were widespread reports that higher imported finishedgoods prices had been passed through to retail prices.  On thedownside, many retail contacts had described ongoingpromotional activity.  While such activity appeared lessprevalent than in recent months, it was still significant relativeto normal practice for the time of year.  The challenge inassessing the overall profile of inflation in consumer goodsprices lay in gauging the breadth of promotional activityacross product lines.  On balance, the Agents’ sense was thatconsumer goods price inflation was little changed.4 Agents’ summary of business conditions April 2009
101234
2004 05 06 07 08 09Scores
ManufacturingServices
+
–Three months on same period a year earlierChart 4 Labour costs per head