Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2009/october-2009.pdf
Date: 2009-10-31

•There had been little change to the picture of modest growth in consumer spending and housing market
activity .
• Investment intentions remained muted, weighed down by the margin of spare capacity and uncertainty
over the sustainability of any pickup in demand.  But the number of exceptions to that depressed picturehad grown through the summer.
•There had been a further slight improvement in the tone of reports from exporters .
•Most contacts had now completed the process of de-stocking , leaving relatively few still concerned that
their inventories remained above sustainable levels.
• Manufacturing output appeared to have stabilised.  And a growing number of business services providers
had reported a pickup in demand.  Construction activity remained severely depressed despite a
small-scale increase in house building.
•Some larger firms had experienced easier credit conditions .  But many other firms still perceived credit
supply to be very tight.
•The pace of decline in employment had eased.  A special survey of the Agents’ contacts suggested that
few expected to make substantial cuts to headcount over the next few months (see box).
• Per capita labour costs remained below their levels a year earlier.  There was no clear directional sense to
firms’ reports of changes in their materials costs.
• Consumer goods price inflation remained low, but some prices had drifted up in recent months.
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by
the Bank of England’s Agents, following discussions with contacts in the period between late August 2009 and late September 2009.  It provides information on the state of business conditions, fromcompanies across all sectors of the economy.  The report does notrepresent the Bank’s own views, nor does it represent the views ofany particular company or region.  The Bank’s Monetary PolicyCommittee uses the intelligence provided by the Agents, inconjunction with information from other sources, to assist itsunderstanding and assessment of current economic conditions.  A copy of this publication can be found at:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/agentssummary/index.htm.The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, the
East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the North West,Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, theSouth West, Wales, the West Midlands & Oxfordshire, andYorkshire & the Humber.
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic
conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in theInflation Report, obtained from:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/inflationreport/index.htm.Agents’ summary of business conditions
October 2009Demand
Consumption
Consumer spending had grown modestly over the past few
months, with mounting evidence of a pickup in sales ofconsumer durables.  One theme of the weakness in consumerspending through the recession had been a sharp reduction insales of big-ticket items, such as furniture.  While furnituresales remained well down on pre-crisis levels, the Agents hadheard widespread reports that demand had ticked up.  Tradingdown towards cheaper brands was another major theme of therecent slowdown.  The Agents had continued to hear reports ofrelatively weak demand for premium brands.  And retailers stillregarded consumers as more price-sensitive than they hadbeen prior to the crisis.  But recently, there had been tentativesigns that some consumers were switching back towards moreexpensive brands.
Demand for consumer services was weaker than that for retail
items — though here too, the trend in recent months had beentowards less negative reports.  As had been the case for sometime, there was widespread evidence of growth in domestictourism.  Outside the tourism sector, there were reports ofgrowth in sales at pubs and restaurants and of a pickup inhousehold demand for professional services.  But such reportsremained patchy and any growth was described as comingfrom a low base.
Housing market
There had been further modest growth in housing marketactivity.  It had become easier to secure mortgages for thoseable to place a significant deposit.  But estate agents felt thatcredit remained tight for other clients — ‘headline’ products athigher loan to value ratios typically required strong creditscores.  As a result, the number of first-time buyers was widelyregarded as low relative to pre-crisis flows.
Business investment
Contacts had continued to describe their capital expenditureas sharply down on previous years, with frequent reports ofdeferral or cancellation of previous plans.  Looking forward,most contacts planned to keep the level of capital expenditurerelatively muted — albeit with few plans for further shrinkagefrom current weak levels of expenditure.  But the number ofexceptions to that depressed picture had grown, with morereports of plans for hotel or retail refurbishment and somere-tooling by consumer-facing manufacturers.  Coupled with abroader sense that there were fewer plans for further sharpcuts in capital expenditure from current weak levels, thesereports had motivated an increase in the Agents’forward-looking scores for investment intentions ( Chart 1 ).
The weak level of capital spending plans was widely attributed
to the significant margin of spare capacity suffered by mostfirms and to their reluctance to commit to spending at a timewhen the outlook for demand was highly uncertain.  Financing
constraints continued to be cited as a secondary factor. 
Exports
There had been a further slight improvement in the tone ofrecent reports from exporters, as weakness in global demandwas pressing down less heavily on sales than had been the caseearlier in the year.  There were further reports of growth indemand from the Far East.  And many — but not all — hadseen some pickup in demand from the euro area.  However,reports of stabilisation in demand were far from uniform — forexample, aerospace orders had fallen off in recent months.And most exporters’ sales remained below pre-crisis levels.There had been no change to contacts’ perceptions of theimpact of sterling’s earlier depreciation on demand.  Some hadseen improvements in competitiveness.  But a significantnumber reported higher sterling prices, and hence enhancedmargins rather than increases in market share.
Inventories
Most contacts had now completed the process of de-stocking,leaving relatively few still concerned that their inventoriesremained above sustainable levels.  While there were a fewexceptions where de-stocking remained significant — forexample in the aerospace and construction materialsindustries — these were balanced by reports of re-stockingwhere inventories had fallen to uncomfortably low levels.Looking forward, many contacts planned to hold stock-salesratios below previous norms, in light of both the cost ofworking capital and uncertainties over the outlook for demand.
Output
Business services
During the summer, a growing number of business serviceproviders had described a pickup in demand ( Chart 2 ).  But
evidence of stabilisation in business service activity appearedmore tentative than was the case for consumer spending ormanufacturing output.  2 Agents’ summary of business conditions October 2009
5432101234
2004 05 06 07 08 09Scores
ManufacturingServicesOver the next twelve months
+
–Chart 1 Business investment intentionsAgents’ summary of business conditions October 2009 3
There were some reports of increased demand for services
related to corporate finance and property investment — asasset prices were now sufficiently low to be attractive topotential investors.  A growing number of accounting and legalservices providers reported a pickup in activity.  And somehaulage and logistics companies had seen growth in demand asthe stock adjustment had run its course.  But weighing againstthese reports of a pickup in demand for business services,many contacts noted that any growth had come from a lowbase.  And sharp reductions in fees and charge-out rates wereweighing down on some firms’ turnover despite stabilisation inactivity.  There was little evidence of any growth in corporatediscretionary spending, for example on conferencing.
Manufacturing
Manufacturing output appeared to have bottomed outthrough the summer, though activity remained well downrelative to the same period a year earlier.  Food processors hadcontinued to report growth in sales.  The success of Europeancar scrappage schemes had led some of the majormanufacturers to increase global production and thereforeorders for components.  And many others had seen a modestincrease in orders as their customers were no longer looking tode-stock.  The aerospace and construction materials sectorsremained exceptions to the sense of stabilisation in demand.  
Looking forward, contacts described forward order books as
‘short’.  The strategic push to minimise inventory holdings hadled to more frequent but smaller orders for components andfinished goods.  In turn, that had left the flow of orders morevolatile from week to week than had been the case prior to thecrisis.
Construction
Construction activity remained severely depressed.Commercial property work had shrunk throughout 2009 aslong-term projects completed with no replacement work inthe pipeline.  That picture had not changed in recent months.While reports of resumption of residential building work hadbecome more widespread through the summer, such activitywas still widely regarded as small in scale.  Over the past year, public sector demand had provided a
backstop for some construction companies.  Looking forward,however, many contacts were planning on the basis that therewould be sharp cuts in public capital expenditure.  There weresome reports that this had led construction companies tochange their own spending decisions — for example, by hiringrather than buying any new equipment.
Credit conditions
There had been a further flow of reports from large firms thathad successfully accessed non-bank finance.  And somecontacts felt that banks’ appetite for renewing facilities hadincreased through spring and summer.  But despite thesetentative signs of slightly easier credit, the Agents’ intelligencesuggested that the net flow of bank lending had remainednegative in recent months.  There had been further reportsfrom contacts that had paid down debts.  And low capitalspending meant little demand for project finance.  One reasonfor low demand for finance was its perceived high cost.  Overand above the cost, there was still a perception — particularlyamong smaller firms and those linked to the construction andproperty sectors — that credit was hard to access at any price.Management of working capital had continued to dominatemany contacts’ agendas during their meetings with the Agents.
Employment
The pace of decline in employment appeared to have easedthrough the summer.  Looking forward, the majority ofcontacts did not plan to make further significant cuts toemployment over the next few months.  The major exceptionswere the construction sector — where firms expected furtherfalls in activity — and the financial sector, where furtherconsolidation was expected in the wake of recent mergers.This picture of few plans for substantial cuts had beencorroborated by a recent survey of the Agents’ contacts — seebox — and had been reflected in increases in the Agents’forward-looking scores for employment intentions ( Chart 3 ).4321012345
2004 05 06 07 08 09Scores
Other business servicesProfessional and ﬁnancial services
Consumer services+
–Three months on same period a year earlierChart 2 Services turnover
5432101234
2004 05 06 07 08 09Scores
ManufacturingBusiness services
Consumer
  services+
–Over the next six monthsChart 3 Employment intentionsBut while there were few plans for further big cuts, there were
also few plans for significant expansion in headcount.  Somecontacts noted that they could expand their use of labour bysimply unwinding earlier moves to shorter hours.  Othersreported tight restrictions on recruitment of permanent staffor new graduates, pending evidence that any recovery indemand will be lasting.
Capacity utilisation
There was widespread spare capacity throughout theUnited Kingdom.  A pickup in demand through the summerhad led some firms to reinstate mothballed capital or toreverse earlier cuts to working weeks.  That slight increase infactor utilisation had been reflected in modest increases in theAgents’ scores ( Chart 4 ).  But the overriding sense among
contacts was that any prospective increase in demand could bemet comfortably with available resources.  
Costs and prices
Labour costs
There had been little change to the picture painted by privatesector contacts visited earlier in the year.  Per capita labourcosts were widely reported to have fallen during 2009.  Therecent Agents’ survey showed that a substantial proportion offirms had cut average hours during 2009.  It remained rare forcontacts to report pay settlements in excess of 3% — indeed,around half had instituted pay freezes.  Looking forward,some contacts had started planning for their 2010settlements.  There were few plans for above-inflationincreases during 2010.  
Non-labour costs
Few contacts regarded materials costs as a significant issue forsenior management at present.  The bulk of any impact ofsterling’s earlier depreciation appeared to have been passedthrough to material prices already as contracts had expiredearlier in the year — indeed, some contacts had already seen
falls in price motivated by sterling’s appreciation during thespring.  More generally, the Agents’ recent intelligence hadbeen dominated by idiosyncratic factors specific to particularcommodities.  
Output prices
There was little evidence of inflation in manufacturers’ outputprices.  The substantial degree of spare capacity weighedagainst any recovery of margins to cover losses incurredearlier.  The downward impetus from spare capacity was seenmore dramatically in business services pricing.  In recentmonths, there had been widespread reports of cuts in fees,across a range of professions.  Commercial rents were widelydescribed as under acute downward pressure.
Consumer prices
While inflation in retail goods prices had remained low,some prices had drifted up in recent months ( Chart 5 ).
Fuel prices were higher than earlier in the summer.  Carprices had continued to increase.  And reports from non-foodretailers also pointed towards slightly higher inflation —some described further pass-through of higher import pricesto retail prices and some had reduced the intensity ofpromotional activity as stocks had cleared.  Promotionalactivity had remained significant across a range ofconsumer services.
Looking forward, some retailers expected year-on-year data to
show a pickup in twelve-month inflation rates early in theNew Year as the impact of last year’s abnormally deepChristmas sales dropped out of the calculations.  But therewere also signs that prospective upward pressure from higherimport prices had diminished.  While some retailers planned toincrease prices for imported goods through the autumn, someothers had scaled back their plans for pass-through in the wakeof consumer resistance to earlier price increases.  Inflation inimported finished goods prices had also eased — in part due tothe impact of surplus capacity on foreign currency prices.4 Agents’ summary of business conditions October 2009
432101234
2004 05 06 07 08 09Scores
ManufacturingServices
+
–Relative to normalChart 4 Capacity utilisation
2101234
2004 05 06 07 08 09Scores
Retail goods prices Imported ﬁnished
  goods prices Retail services prices
+
–Three months on same period a year earlierChart 5 Retail and imported finished goods pricesAgents’ survey on employment
Official data suggest that employment has not fallen as far
relative to output as it had at similar points in the 1980s or1990s recessions.  It is possible that employment is takinglonger to respond to the weakness in output in the currentrecession.  But it is also possible that adoption of flexibleworking practices and moderation in pay growth have helpedlimit the fall in employment.
(1)To explore this issue, the
Agents conducted a survey of more than 450 of their privatesector contacts, operating in a range of industries.  All figuresreported are weighted by total employment.
Respondents were asked how their sales and their
employment had changed over the past twelve months.Around three quarters reported cuts to their staffing levels —in one fifth of cases, these amounted to more than 10% of thetotal workforce ( Chart A ).  
Cuts to staffing levels were reported across all industries, but
appeared most significant in the construction sector, wheremore than 90% of the sample had made cuts.  Evidence ofwidespread falls in employment was not surprising — duringthe first half of the year, the Agents had heard many reports ofsharp reductions in employment.  One puzzle in the responseswas that fewer firms reported falls in their sales than in theirheadcount.
Respondents were also asked about their use of a range of
changes to pay and conditions — that is, their use of flexibleworking practices in cutting labour costs.  Around threequarters had made changes to pay or working hours ( Chart B ).
Just over half the sample had implemented pay freezes —consistent with reports to the Agents throughout the year.Cuts in bonus and commission schemes were also fairlycommon.  As well as making changes to remuneration, many
firms had cut working hours — most often through cuts in useof overtime.
Looking forward, respondents were asked how they expected
their sales and headcount to evolve over the next six months.Only a quarter expected sales to fall further — consistent withthe Agents’ broader intelligence that the level of outputappeared to have stabilised during the summer.  Morerespondents expected to cut employment further.  But, incontrast with their reports of experience over the past twelvemonths, very few expected to make substantial cuts toheadcount.
020406080
Fallen very
sharply
(>10%)Fallen
signiﬁcantly
(5% to 10%)Fallen
slightly(<5%)Unchanged/
increasedSales
HeadcountPercentages of respondentsChart A Change in employment and sales over the past
twelve months
020406080
Fall very
sharply
(>10%)Fall
signiﬁcantly
(5% to 10%)Fall slightly
(<5%)No change/
increaseSales
HeadcountPercentages of respondentsChart C Changes in employment and sales expected
over the next six months0 10 20 30 40 50 60Pay freeze/
deferral
Cuts in
overtime
Unpaid leave
Short-time
working
Cuts in salary/
hourly rate
Other
None of
the above
Percentage of respondentsCuts to bonus/
commissionChart B Changes to pay and conditions made over the
past twelve months(a)
(a) Respondents could tick more than one box.Agents’ summary of business conditions October 2009
(1) For a fuller discussion of the picture of employment and output painted by official
data, see the box ‘Employment and output in the current recession’ on page 29 of theAugust 2009 Inflation Report .