Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2009/march-2009.pdf
Date: 2009-03-31

• Retail sales values were down relative to the same period a year earlier.  But demand had not contracted
as sharply following the New Year sales as many retailers had feared.  
• Investment intentions remained weak, primarily because of the depressed outlook for demand and the
high level of uncertainty surrounding future prospects.
•Many contacts had reported shrinking export volumes .  Weakness in world demand had outweighed any
gains to competitiveness arising from sterling’s depreciation.
• Manufacturing output had continued to contract as firms ran down stocks.  Construction and services
output had also fallen relative to the same period a year earlier.
• Credit conditions remained a major concern for many firms.
• Labour demand had continued to shrink.  Many firms had cut average hours, and there were widespread
reports of actual and planned cuts to headcount.  Growth in per capita labour costs had slowed.
•On average, there had been little change in the rate of inflation in materials prices .  A special survey of
the Agents’ contacts showed that there were significant differences between trends in the prices ofenergy, imported components and domestically sourced components (see box).
•Inflation in domestic output prices had eased further.  The special survey on cost pass-through suggested
that suppliers were encountering resistance to pass-through of any increases in costs, while beingpressured to pass on any cuts in costs.
•Inflation in imported finished goods prices remained elevated.  There were some signs of pass-through to
retail food prices, but less widespread evidence for other goods prices.
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by
the Bank of England’s Agents, following discussions with contacts in the period between late January and late February 2009.  It provides information on the state of business conditions, fromcompanies across all sectors of the economy.  The report does notrepresent the Bank’s own views, nor does it represent the views ofany particular company or region.  The Bank’s Monetary PolicyCommittee uses the intelligence provided by the Agents, inconjunction with information from other sources, to assist itsunderstanding and assessment of current economic conditions.  A copy of this publication can be found at:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/agentssummary/index.htm.The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, the
East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the North West,Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, theSouth West, Wales, the West Midlands & Oxfordshire, andYorkshire & the Humber.
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic
conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in theInflation Report, obtained from:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/inflationreport/index.htm.Agents’ summary of business conditions
March 2009Demand
Consumption
Contacts had continued to report that retail sales values were
down relative to the same period a year earlier.  And manyretailers had maintained deep discounting to stimulatedemand.  However, sales had not contracted as sharplyfollowing the New Year sales as many retailers had feared.Indeed, some contacts felt that the rate of contraction in non-food sales had eased during late January — reflected in atickup in the Agents’ score ( Chart 1 ).  However, in many parts
of the United Kingdom, severe weather conditions had had anadverse impact on footfall during early February.  Lookingforward, few non-food retailers expected a material recoveryin demand in the near term.  That, together with concerns overavailability of working capital, had led them to order less stockthan normal for the time of year.  
Demand for consumer services was contracting more rapidly
than retail goods sales.  Many pubs and restaurants had seenvery weak spending, while demand for property-related andfinancial services had also fallen sharply.  There was someevidence of switching from foreign towards domestic holidays,in the wake of sterling’s depreciation.
Housing market
While the volume of housing transactions had remained atvery low levels, reports of growth in enquiries and viewingshad become considerably more prevalent.  There were nowsome signs that increases in buyer interest had led to a tickupin sales.  However, the recent increase in enquiries andviewings had been limited to households and investors thathad substantial liquid assets or housing equity.  The dearth ofmortgage availability at higher loan to value ratios hadcontinued to exclude many first-time buyers from the market.Many estate agents felt that these financing constraints,coupled with widespread fear of unemployment, wouldpreclude any substantive recovery in activity over the nearterm.Business investment
Investment intentions remained weak.  As in recent months,the majority of contacts had either cut capital spending plansor deferred previously approved projects.  While someconsumer-facing firms planned to maintain spending onrefurbishment, capital expenditure plans were more typicallylimited to projects with a quick pay-off or that were necessaryto meet regulatory requirements.  
The depressed outlook for demand, coupled with substantial
spare capacity, was often described as the prime driver ofcutbacks in capital expenditure.  The high level of uncertaintyover future prospects was also widely cited as a factor leadingto deferral of major spending decisions.  Concerns overavailability of working capital and project finance alsoremained important for many firms.
External demand
External demand was still seen to be stronger than domesticdemand for manufactured goods.  But many contacts reportedshrinkage in export volumes, motivating further cuts to theAgents’ score ( Chart 2 ).  Weakness in world demand had
continued to outweigh any impact of sterling’s recentdepreciation.  That depreciation had led to improvements incompetitiveness for some firms — particularly those for whichlabour or domestically sourced components accounted for alarge part of costs.  But for many others, the rising cost ofimported materials had limited the scope to cut foreigncurrency prices. 
Import volumes had continued to contract sharply:  as demand
for consumer and capital goods had fallen, destocking had ledto reduced orders for imported components, and sterling’srecent depreciation had raised import prices.  The rising cost of imported finished goods had led some retailers to switch to domestic suppliers.  And, for companies earlier in the supply chain, there were some further reports of substitutionfrom imported inputs towards domestically producedalternatives.2 Agents’ summary of business conditions March 2009
2004 05 06 07 08 09Scores
Retail sales values
Consumer services turnover
3210123
–+Three months on same period a year earlierChart 1 Consumer spending
2004 05 06 07 08 09Scores
Export volumes
Domestic sales
432101234
–+Three months on same period a year earlierChart 2 Manufacturing outputAgents’ summary of business conditions March 2009 3
Inventories
There were widespread reports of destocking by
manufacturers.  Stocks were being run down fairly aggressivelyin those subsectors that had seen the most acute falls indemand during late 2008 — that is, the automotive,construction and capital goods sectors.  Many contacts inthese sectors continued to report excess stocks;  particularlythose at the early stages of the supply chain.  But this was notsurprising given the scale of excess stocks towards the end of2008.  Indeed, some contacts felt that their stock overhangwas being unwound faster than they had previously expected.
Output
Business services
Turnover had fallen further for firms in a wide range ofbusiness services subsectors.  Spending on haulage anddistribution had fallen sharply.  There were further reports ofreductions in firms’ non-contractual (discretionary) spending— for example on business travel.  Commercial letting activityhad remained moribund, with reports of deferrals to plannedoffice moves as firms cut back on capital spending.  Andweakening labour demand had led to reductions in recruitmentagencies’ fee income.  
For some time, demand for ‘countercyclical’ services such as
litigation and insolvency work, had been the main element ofgrowth in the business services sector.  But for many auditingand legal practices, growth in these areas had been offset byshrinkage in demand for acquisitions-related, tax advisory andother work.  Falling workloads had led some large professionalservices providers to cut headcount and make reductions toaverage hours.
Manufacturing
There was little change to the broad picture of substantial falls in manufacturing output ( Chart 2 ).  However, the
aggregate picture masks material differences betweensubsectors.  Output had collapsed across the automotive,construction-related and capital goods supply chains.  Othersizable subsectors, such as aerospace and food processing, hadnot seen such a sharp change in demand.  But even in thoseareas, growth in orders had slowed.
Construction
The level of construction activity had continued to contract.The sharp decline in private activity had more than offsetcontinued growth in public sector demand.  Private house-building activity remained much lower than at the startof 2008 — reflecting the weakness in housing demand and anoverhang of stocks of new flats and houses.  Commercialproperty activity had also contracted, and the pipeline of newprojects was negligible.  There had been further retail closures,leading to an excess of retail space in some parts of the United Kingdom.  While some developers were still goingahead with planning applications, local authorities had seen a
considerable reduction in planning activity.  
Credit conditions
Concerns over the availability of working capital remained amajor concern for many firms.
Trade credit
Senior management was focusing more acutely than normalon interfirm credit.  The general trend was towards increasingdebtor days — the time taken to receive payment for goodsand services provided.  But there were exceptions to this trend.In particular, there were reports of demands for upfrontpayments from customers for whom trade credit insurancecover had been withdrawn.  Insolvencies had continued to rise.But so far, bad debts were rarely reported as having reachedproblematic levels for suppliers.
Bank finance
There were widespread reports that the cost of existing bankloans and facilities had not fallen in line with Bank Rate.Spreads on these loans and facilities had been widened and awide range of fees had been increased or introduced.  
The flow of new lending had slowed.  In part, that was due to
lower demand.  Capital expenditure plans had been cut andsome firms were deleveraging to avoid breaching covenants.More generally, firms were wary of approaching banks forfinance for fear of triggering an unfavourable review of existingterms.  In addition to slowing demand for finance, a number ofcontacts felt that banks had tightened the criteria applied torequests for new lending.  That reflected both a reducedappetite for risk and perceptions that the risks attached tocorporate lending had increased.
Employment
The broad picture remained one of shrinking demand forlabour in the wake of falls in aggregate demand and output.Many firms had cut average hours.  In part, that had occurredthrough reductions in overtime and cuts to shifts.  Some firmshad also sought to inject flexibility into hours through changesto working practices, such as introduction of short-timeworking.  Freezes on recruitment of permanent staff werecommonplace.  And, as in recent months, a significant numberof contacts had made cuts to permanent staffing levels.  Manycontacts had contingency plans to cut staffing if demand didnot improve.
Costs and prices
Labour costs
Inflation in per capita labour costs had slowed further in recentmonths, reflected in reductions in the Agents’ scores ( Chart 3 ).In part, that was the result of cuts in average hours — moves
to shorter working weeks and cuts to expensive night andweekend shifts had had a substantial impact on labour costsfor some firms.  There were also widespread reports of lowerbonus payments or suspension of bonus schemes.  
Regular pay pressures had also eased.  As in recent months,
many contacts felt that elevated concerns over job securityhad increased employees’ willingness to accept lowersettlements.  The Agents had continued to hear widespreadreports of plans for wage freezes.  And a growing minority ofcontacts intended to impose pay cuts.  
Producer prices
On average, there had been little change in the rate ofinflation in materials prices ( Chart 4 ).  The results of a special
survey on cost pass-through are reported in the box.  Thatsurvey suggested that there were significant differencesbetween trends in the prices of energy, imported componentsand domestically sourced components.  Inflation in the price ofmany domestically produced components had eased in thewake of weak demand.  But many contacts were now reportingsharp increases in the price of imported components, followingsterling’s recent depreciation.  And, despite recent falls inwholesale gas prices and global oil prices, the Agents had
continued to hear reports that energy bills were rising, as long-term fixed price contracts expired.  The net effect of thesechanges to energy, imported and domestically sourcedcomponent prices varied across respondents to the survey —depending on the structure of their cost bases.  
Further down the supply chain, there were widespread reports
that weakening demand had shifted the balance of negotiatingpower from suppliers towards purchasers, leading to pressureon suppliers’ margins.  These reports were consistent withresponses to the special survey on cost pass-through whichsuggested that suppliers were encountering resistance to pass-through of any increase in costs, while being pressured topass on any cuts.  Weak demand had also led to a reduction ininflation in business services prices.  
Consumer prices
Sterling’s recent depreciation had led to increases in thewholesale price of a wide range of imported finished goods.Increases in wholesale prices were perhaps most prevalent forimported food and wine, but there had also been reports ofincreases in clothing, electrical goods and car prices.  Therewere some signs of pass-through to retail food prices.  Butthere was less widespread evidence of pass-through to othergoods prices.  There, the picture had continued to bedominated by promotional activity, leading to furtherreductions in the Agents’ scores for retail goods prices (Chart 5 ).  4 Agents’ summary of business conditions March 2009
2004 05 06 07 08 09Scores
ManufacturingServices
0.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.0Three months on same period a year earlierChart 3 Labour costs per head
2004 05 06 07 08 09Scores
Retail goods prices Imported ﬁnished 
goods prices
2101234
–+Three months on same period a year earlierChart 5 Retail goods and imported finished goods prices
2004 05 06 07 08 09Scores
Materials prices
Manufacturers’ domestic
output prices
1012345
–+Three months on same period a year earlierChart 4 Manufacturers’ input and output pricesAgents’ survey on cost pass-through
While sterling has depreciated significantly over the past
twelve months, falling global demand has led to downwardpressure on both global commodity prices and suppliers’margins.  To gauge the net impact on firms’ costs, the Agentsconducted a survey of around 250 of their contacts, across allsectors of the economy.  The survey updated a similar exerciseconducted in February 2008.  All figures reported are weightedby turnover.
Respondents were asked which factors had most affected their
variable costs over the past six months.  For some time,contacts had been reporting that their energy bills were risingas long-term fixed price contracts expired.  That was borne outby responses to the survey, as energy costs were the mostwidely reported upward pressure on costs ( Chart A ).  While
the cost of imported goods and components was also widelyreported to have risen — as might have been expected in thewake of sterling’s depreciation — many respondents notedthat domestically sourced goods and components had becomecheaper.
The survey suggested that the net impact of these various
changes in costs had varied markedly across firms ( Chart B ).
That diversity of experience across respondents to the 2009survey contrasted with the results of the 2008 survey, in whichthe majority of respondents had reported substantiallyincreased costs.  In the 2009 survey, there was tentativeevidence that retailers and manufacturers of consumer goodshad experienced greater upward pressure on costs thanaverage.  
Looking forward, more respondents expected costs to fall over
the next six months than expected them to rise.  Thatsuggested that any further impact of sterling’s depreciation on
imported component prices was expected to be offset byeasing of other costs.
The survey suggested that pass-through of any falls in firms’
costs was expected to be more complete than pass-through ofany increases in costs.  The majority of respondents whoseaverage variable costs had fallen expected to pass on most ofthe falls ( Chart C ) — indeed, 50% had already cut prices.  By
contrast, most of those respondents whose costs had risenexpected to pass less than half of any increases on tocustomers.  This picture appeared consistent with moregeneral reports from contacts that weakening demand hadshifted the balance of negotiating power from supplierstowards purchasers, leading to pressure on suppliers’ margins.Agents’ summary of business conditions March 2009
Slightly lower Unchanged Slightly higher2009 survey — past six months
2008 survey — past twelve months
Percentages of respondents(a)
0102030405060
Substantially
lowerSubstantially
higherChart B Change in variable costs
(a) Weighted by turnover.
Net balance of ﬁrms reporting factor as 
increasing costs(a)
30201001020304050
–+
componentsEnergy Distribution Imported Per capita Business Domestically
goods and labour costs services sourced
components goods andChart A Factors most affecting variable costs over the
past six months
(a) Weighted by turnover, respondents could select more than one option.
No pass through Minority Majority Full pass throughBy ﬁrms whose costs have fallen
By ﬁrms whose costs have risen
Percentages of respondents(a)
Proportion of change in costs expected to be passed through01020304050Chart C Degree to which changes in variable costs are
expected to be passed through
(a) Weighted by turnover.