Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2009/december-2009.pdf
Date: 2009-12-31

• Consumer spending had grown relative to the same period a year earlier.
•In most parts of the United Kingdom, the gradual pickup in housing market activity had continued, but
the volume of transactions remained well down on pre-crisis norms.
• Investment intentions remained weak (see box), with many firms planning to hold or reduce spending a
little further during 2010.  But throughout the fourth quarter, there had been more exceptions to thatweak picture than had been the case earlier in the year.
•There had been a further improvement in the tone of recent reports from exporters as global demand —
particularly from Asia — had picked up and sterling’s depreciation was more widely seen to be boostingexport orders than was the case earlier in the year.
•Most contacts had completed any material downward adjustment of their stocks , but remained cautious
about rebuilding inventory.
• Business services turnover and manufacturing output remained down on the same period a year earlier,
but with few reports of further contraction in recent months.  Construction activity remained severely
depressed.
•The pace of decline in employment had eased through the second half of 2009, and few firms were
actively planning for significant future cuts.  Those firms that were planning for their 2010 pay
settlements expected pay growth to remain subdued.
•With few contacts anticipating any marked increase in demand over the next few months, capacity
constraints were rarely regarded as a concern.
•Inflation in materials costs appeared low.  But the majority view among contacts was that inflation was
likely to rise as global demand recovered.
• Consumer goods price inflation remained low but positive.
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by
the Bank of England’s Agents, following discussions with contacts inthe period between late October 2009 and late November 2009.It provides information on the state of business conditions, fromcompanies across all sectors of the economy.  The report does notrepresent the Bank’s own views, nor does it represent the views ofany particular company or region.  The Bank’s Monetary PolicyCommittee uses the intelligence provided by the Agents, inconjunction with information from other sources, to assist itsunderstanding and assessment of current economic conditions.  A copy of this publication can be found at:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/agentssummary/index.htm.The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, the
East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the North West,Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, theSouth West, Wales, the West Midlands & Oxfordshire, andYorkshire & the Humber.
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic
conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in theInflation Report, obtained from:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/inflationreport/index.htm.Agents’ summary of business conditions
December 2009Demand
Consumption
Retailers had continued to report sales ahead of their levels a
year earlier ( Chart 1 ).  While twelve-month comparisons were
increasingly seen to be dominated by weak year-earliercomparators, the Agents’ sense was that sales — particularly offood — had grown during the second half of 2009.  Lookingforward, many retailers described themselves as moreoptimistic about prospects for the Christmas period than theyhad been earlier in the year.  But beyond that, many voicedconcerns over prospects for 2010, and had tailored their ordersfor consumer goods accordingly.
Demand for consumer services also appeared less weak than
earlier in the year ( Chart 1 ).  But the profile of demand for
consumer services remained weak relative to retail sales.  Andany recovery in activity had occurred against a backdrop ofconsumers’ reluctance to spend heavily — as an illustrativeexample, restaurants reported lower spend per visit.
Housing market
In some parts of the United Kingdom, the pace of growth indemand had tailed-off or even halted as current levels oftransactions were all that could be supported by the availablepool of buyers able to secure finance.  Elsewhere, the gradualincrease in activity had continued.  But while activity hadgrown through much of 2009, the flow of transactionsremained well down relative to levels prevailing in early 2008.There were widespread reports of shortages of stock for salethat had contributed to further increases in price.
Business investment
Levels of capital expenditure continued to be widely describedas well down on the previous year.  That impression had beenreinforced by the results of an Agents’ special survey oninvestment (see box).  Investment in property remainedparticularly weak, with the notable exception of the majorretailers who had continued to grow their investment in new
stores and space for sale of non-food products.
Looking forward, most contacts still described their investment
plans as weak, with many intending to hold or reduce spendingfurther next year.  But, as had been the case throughout theautumn, there were more exceptions to the picture of weakplanned investment than had been the case in the spring.  And,more generally, there were relatively few plans for a secondround of sharp cuts to capital expenditure following this year’ssizable reductions.
Exports
There had been a further improvement in the tone of reportsfrom exporters ( Chart 2 ) — albeit from a low base.  The news
through the second half of the year had been that globaldemand had picked up, most notably from Asia.  Sterling’sdepreciation was described more frequently as having led togrowth in orders — perhaps in part because exporters sawmore potential to compete for market share in an environmentof growing, as opposed to ‘collapsing’ world demand.  Thatsaid, growth in world demand had come from a low base andsome exporters felt that sterling’s depreciation had had less ofan upward impact than expected.
Inventories
As had been the case throughout the autumn, most contactsfelt they had completed any major de-stocking necessary tobring inventories down to levels commensurate with currentactivity.  Many contacts had drawn attention to the challengeof managing their business with significantly reduced stocks.Some had been surprised by the productivity gains in inventorymanagement that they had achieved during the recession, andplanned to lock those gains in.  Others described uncertaintyover demand and availability of working capital as factorsbearing down temporarily on planned inventory levels.2 Agents’ summary of business conditions December 2009
Chart 1 Consumer spending
3210123
2005 06 07 08 09Scores
Retail sales values
Consumer services turnover Three months on same period a year earlier
+
–Chart 2 Manufacturing exports
32101234
2005 06 07 08 09ScoreThree months on same period a year earlier
+
–Agents’ summary of business conditions December 2009 3
Output
Business services
There had been little change to the broad picture that while
business services turnover was well down on the same period ayear earlier, few contacts were reporting further contractionduring the second half of 2009.
As last month, some professional services providers felt that
demand had grown — for example, sales of advertising hadrisen from a very low base;  and employment agencies hadseen some increase in demand for temporary staff.  But othersreported that cuts in fees had continued to dominate, pressingdown on their turnover.  The profile of demand for professionalservices remained stronger than that for other businessservices ( Chart 3 ) — for whom the dominant theme was one
of customers managing their overheads extremely tightly in anenvironment of low activity.
Manufacturing
While there was further evidence that manufacturing outputhad bottomed out during the summer, there was no sense thatgrowth had picked up at all strongly through the autumn.Looking forward, contacts were not confident that the modestincreases in orders seen recently would be sustained.Consumer-facing manufacturers and those in the automotivesupply chain were most likely to have experienced growth inactivity in recent months, while some capital goods and manyconstruction materials producers continued to reportshrinkage in demand.
Construction
Construction activity remained well down relative to the sameperiod a year earlier.  Although there had been widespreadreports of growth in house building, such growth was typicallydescribed as small in scale with some house builders reportingdifficulties in securing finance for larger scale expansion oftheir activities, while others had held back pending more solidevidence that the recovery in housing demand would prove
lasting.  Commercial property work had continued to shrink asprojects were completed with only a weak pipeline ofreplacement work.
Throughout 2009, public sector demand had proved a key
source of income for many construction companies.  Manycontacts had raised concerns over prospects for future publicsector demand.  But there was, as yet, limited evidence thatactivity had already slowed, with reports of ongoingtendering for public sector work weighing against those ofpostponements.  Nor were there many reports fromconstruction contacts that were further reducing their capacityin anticipation of future public spending cuts.
Credit conditions
Larger firms had continued to make use of non-bank finance.And there had been a further flow of reports from firms thathad been able to access bank finance.  But more generally, theAgents continued to hear from many small and medium-sizedfirms that had been rejected for finance or had seen the termsof their existing borrowing tighten.  The Agents’ sensetherefore remained that while credit conditions had probablyeased since the spring, they remained (considerably) tighterthan in mid-2008.
Employment
There were further signs that the pace of decline inemployment had eased through the second half of 2009.While there had been a few further significant redundancies,such reports were rarer than earlier in the year.  And on theupside, a few contacts had ended earlier freezes onrecruitment as demand had picked up.  More typically, firmswere responding to any growth in demand by increasingaverage hours or hiring temporary staff — that is, throughmeasures that would be easy to reverse were demand to fallback.
Looking forward, there were relatively few plans to increase
permanent staffing levels significantly.  It was more commonto hear of plans to let headcount drift down throughnon-replacement of leavers.  But few firms were planningactively for significant cuts — the pervading sense amongcontacts was that so long as demand did not fall further, anymaterial rationalisation of their labour forces was substantiallycomplete.  One risk to that picture was that employment mayfall further if the rate of insolvencies picked up sharply —something that a number of contacts anticipated becausethey expected creditors’ forbearance to wane and becausefirms’ balance sheets had been weakened through therecession.Chart 3 Business services turnover
4321012345
2005 06 07 08 09Scores
Professional and ﬁnancial 
Other business services Three months on same period a year earlier
+
–Capacity utilisation
The broad picture remained one of widespread spare capacity.
And, with few contacts anticipating any marked increase indemand over the next few months, capacity constraints wererarely regarded as a concern.  While the recent small pickup insome firms’ sales had led them to increase output, most hadmanaged this through reversal of earlier cuts in hours andthrough use of temporary staff.  That had motivated smallincreases in the Agents’ scores for capacity utilisation —though the scores remained firmly negative ( Chart 4 ).
Were demand to rise further than most firms anticipated,
however, one risk was that they would find it hard to respondto the increase in demand.  Many contacts felt that availabilityof working capital would limit their ability to finance rapidincreases in production — a position exacerbated by the muchreduced stocks that some had chosen to hold.
Costs and prices
Labour costs
As had been the case for some time, private sector contactsdescribed their per capita labour costs as down on the sameperiod a year earlier — following changes to average hours,reduced bonus and commission payments, and widespread payfreezes imposed earlier in the year.  Looking forward, thosethat were planning for their 2010 settlements expected paygrowth to remain subdued.  While a few of those who hadfrozen pay this year expected to offer small increases, therewere also reports from firms that would freeze pay in 2010after giving increases in 2009.  Some of those who had frozenpay in 2009 planned to offer small bonuses to reflect growth
in demand without committing to permanent increases in pay.
Non-labour costs
On average, inflation in materials costs was muted.  Aroundthis average, there continued to be significant variation acrossindividual contacts’ experience.  In part, that variation wasattributed to the recent volatility of commodity prices, whichled to differences in prices paid depending on the point atwhich contract prices were fixed.
Looking forward, the majority view among contacts was that
inflation in materials costs was likely to rise as recovery inglobal demand impacted on spot commodity prices andreduced the incentive for suppliers to negotiate on price.Indeed, there were some reports from firms whose costs hadincreased over the past few months as — for them — higher oiland metals prices had been passed through quickly.
Output prices
There remained little sign of inflation in output prices assubstantial spare capacity weighed against price increases.Downward pressure on prices remained most clearly evident inthe business services sector where year-on-year cuts in feesremained commonplace, as were reports from firms offeringadditional services for the same fee.
Consumer prices
The Agents’ intelligence suggested that inflation in consumergoods and leisure prices had remained low but positive.  Onthe upside, there had been further reports of pass-through ofhigher import prices.  But on the downside, twelve-monthinflation in food prices had eased.  The Agents had been toldthat more consumers were spreading their grocery shoppingacross several stores — focusing their purchases on specificlines that were on promotion.  Discounting in leisure servicesremained pervasive.
Looking forwards, the majority view among retailers was that
there was likely to be less discounting over Christmas and theNew Year than was the case last year — reflecting the low levelof orders they had placed earlier in the year.  But any changesin pricing were likely to be relatively marginal at a time whenmost retailers still regarded consumers as abnormallyprice-sensitive and evidence of trading up remained tentative.Few retailers had reported firm plans for dealing with theforthcoming increase in VAT — preferring to review in light ofsales performance in the run-up to the New Year.4 Agents’ summary of business conditions December 2009
Chart 4 Capacity utilisation
432101234
2005 06 07 08 09Scores
ManufacturingServicesRelative to normal
+
–Agents’ survey on business investment
Business investment had fallen sharply during the recession —
substantially further than during previous recessions.  Lookingforward, credit conditions remained tight and the outlook fordemand remained uncertain, which might weigh down oninvestment.  But on the upside, business surveys suggestedsome recovery of confidence during the second half of 2009while low levels of Bank Rate may have contained the cost ofservicing outstanding debts.  To explore the implications ofthese factors for business investment, the Agents conducted asurvey of more than 400 of their private sector contacts,operating in a range of industries.  All figures reported areweighted by UK turnover.
Respondents were asked how their capital expenditure had
changed over the past twelve months.  Almost half reportedcuts in excess of 10% to their capital spending, 11% had cutinvestment by more than a half.  While cuts to spending hadbeen pervasive, small and medium-sized firms had cut capitalspending by more — on average — than had the largestrespondents ( Chart A )
Looking forward, respondents were asked how they expected
to change their capital expenditure over the next twelvemonths.  The forward view suggested a broad balance betweenthose expecting to cut spending and those planning to grow it(Chart B ).  The absence of any widespread sharp bounce back
in firms’ plans corroborated the picture of muted investmentintentions that the Agents had picked up from their routinevisits with contacts in recent months.  As with thebackward-looking question, a greater proportion of small andmedium-sized firms had described plans for substantial cuts toinvestment than was the case for the larger firms.Respondents were also asked about the key factors driving
their capital spending plans.  Demand conditions were citedfrequently by those planning to cut investment, with asignificant minority viewing internal financing as a factor —perhaps reflecting a reluctance to commit to drawing downcash balances at a time when future demand was particularlyuncertain and working capital tight.  While availability ofexternal finance appeared less important across the fullsample, there was a clear difference between largerrespondents and small and medium-sized firms — for whomexternal financing conditions were often a factor driving downcapital spending plans.  That chimes with the Agents’ broaderintelligence on credit conditions, which suggested a cleardifference between the ease with which larger firms andsmaller firms could access finance, as discussed above.Agents’ summary of business conditions December 2009 5
Chart A Change in capital expenditure over the past
twelve months
05101520253035404550
Far less
(over 50%
less)Less (10%
to 50%
less)Around
the sameMore (10%
to 50%
more)Far more
(over 50%
more)Large ﬁrms(a)
Small and medium-sized ﬁrms
Capital expenditure relative to the previous twelve monthsPercentage of respondents
(a) Large firms defined as those with UK turnover of £400 million or more.Chart B Change in capital expenditure expected over the
next twelve months
Percentage of respondents
05101520253035404550
Large ﬁrms(a)
Small and
  medium-sized ﬁrms
Far less
(over 50%
less)Less (10%
to 50%
less)Around
the sameMore (10%
to 50%
more)Far more
(over 50%
more)
Capital expenditure relative to the previous twelve months
(a) Large firms defined as those with UK turnover of £400 million or more.
Chart C Key drivers of investment decisions cited by
those expecting to cut capital spending
010203040506070
Demand Capacity External ﬁnance Internal ﬁnancePercentage of respondents(b)
Large ﬁrms(a)
Small and medium-sized ﬁrms
(a) Large firms defined as those with UK turnover of £400 million or more.
(b) Respondents could select more than one option.