Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2009/june-2009.pdf
Date: 2009-06-30

•There was further evidence that the rate of contraction had eased for both retail sales and consumer
services .
•There were further reports of a pickup in housing market activity in both the new build and secondary
markets, albeit from a low base.
• Investment intentions remained exceptionally subdued.  
•In manufacturing , export volumes had contracted further, but there was evidence that the pace of
contraction in domestic activity had started to ease. 
•The pace of de-stocking was reported to have slowed.
•The rate of decline in business services activity had started to stabilise for some contacts.  
• Construction activity remained significantly lower than in the same period a year earlier.
• Credit conditions remained tight overall.  Difficulties accessing trade credit insurance remained a
significant issue for many contacts (see box).
• Labour demand had continued to shrink although some firms had stopped reducing staff numbers.
•Contacts had continued to report higher materials prices than a year earlier although the rate of inflation
had eased.
• Consumer price inflation remained positive.
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by
the Bank of England’s Agents, following discussions with contacts in the period between late April 2009 and late May 2009.  It provides information on the state of business conditions, fromcompanies across all sectors of the economy.  The report does notrepresent the Bank’s own views, nor does it represent the views ofany particular company or region.  The Bank’s Monetary PolicyCommittee uses the intelligence provided by the Agents, inconjunction with information from other sources, to assist itsunderstanding and assessment of current economic conditions.  A copy of this publication can be found at:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/agentssummary/index.htm.The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, the
East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the North West,Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, theSouth West, Wales, the West Midlands & Oxfordshire, andYorkshire & the Humber.
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic
conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in theInflation Report, obtained from:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/inflationreport/index.htm.Agents’ summary of business conditions
June 2009Demand
Consumption
The rate of contraction in retail sales values had eased
markedly since the start of the year ( Chart 1 ).  The value of
food sales remained higher than a year earlier.  And there werean increasing number of reports that the rate of decline of non-food sales, particularly clothing and smaller valueelectronic goods, had eased.  However, sales of ‘big ticket’items remained subdued.  New car sales remained weak, butthere were widespread reports that the introduction of theGovernment financed scrappage scheme had resulted in anincrease in enquiries, particularly about smaller cars.  Demandfor used cars was reported to have exceeded expectations inrecent weeks.
There was further evidence that the pace of contraction in
demand for consumer services had eased.  Contacts across theUnited Kingdom reported that spending on domestic holidayshad increased, particularly at venues with budgetaccommodation.  Some contacts had also highlighted anincrease in the number of overseas tourists.  However,spending in pubs and restaurants remained low.
Retail sales had exceeded some contacts’ expectations.  But
many consumer-facing contacts had also expressed concernsthat the recent improvement in demand may prove to betemporary.  Contacts had suggested that rising unemploymentmay result in weaker demand than in recent years. 
Housing market 
There had been further reports of growth in enquiries,viewings, reservations and sales, albeit from a low base.  Thispickup had occurred across all parts of the United Kingdom,and in both the new build and secondary markets.  Cash buyershad been active purchasers, particularly at auctions.  Contactshad started to report a slight improvement in the availability ofmortgages, but in many cases lenders’ requirements for higherdeposits and conservative valuations (sometimes below theagreed sale price) had hindered the progression of enquiriesinto sales. Business investment 
Contacts had continued to cite uncertainty over prospects fordemand as the key factor underpinning weak investmentintentions in the manufacturing and services sectors.  For somecontacts, weak demand coupled with excess spare capacity,had obviated the need to undertake substantial investment.Moreover, many contacts had continued to highlight apreference for preserving cash which had the benefit ofreducing reliance on bank finance.  Larger projects were alsofaced with financing constraints.  However, projects with aquick payback, or that were necessary to meet regulatoryrequirements, continued to be progressed.  
Overseas trade  
While sterling’s depreciation had led to improvedcompetitiveness, export volumes had nevertheless continuedto fall.  There were some reports that the pace of the fall indemand from the euro area had started to ease and that therehad been a pickup in demand from Chinese markets.  Contactshad also continued to report that the rising cost of importedgoods had encouraged some substitution towards domesticsuppliers.  Import volumes remained sharply below the levelsseen over the same period a year earlier.  
Inventories  
De-stocking had continued as firms had sought to reduce theamount of working capital tied up in stock and had beenadjusting to lower demand.  But the pace of de-stocking wasreported to have slowed.  Some contacts had expressedconcern that the reduced availability of trade finance andcredit would be a constraint when firms begin to rebuildstocks.  
Retailers in particular had reduced their inventory levels.  But
suppliers further down the retail supply chain and contacts inother sectors had highlighted that stocks remained abovedesired levels and would take several months to fully adjust.And there were increasing reports that demand had eased inthe aerospace sector and that de-stocking had started to occur.  
Output
Services  
As described above, the pace of decline in consumer serviceshad eased further.  Contacts in the business services sectorscontinued to report that activity remained below levels seen ayear ago.  But for some contacts the rate of decline had startedto stabilise ( Chart 2 ).  
Contacts continued to report weakness in residential and
commercial property, which had reduced demand in a numberof related sectors (eg conveyancing, valuations).  Firms hadalso continued to cut back on discretionary spending, forexample, training, business travel, corporate functions and use2 Agents’ summary of business conditions June 2009
3210123
2004 05 06 07 08 09Scores
Retail sales values
Consumer services turnover+
–Three months on same period a year earlierChart 1 Consumer spendingAgents’ summary of business conditions June 2009 3
of hotels, as well as advertising and corporate entertainment.
And contacts in the logistics sector had continued to reportreduced activity levels compared to the same period a yearearlier.  However, demand for ‘core’ professional services suchas auditing and compliance work had remained relativelystable.  This had been complemented by increased demand forservices linked to insolvencies and litigation.  Public sectordemand for professional business services was also reported tohave been robust. 
Manufacturing  
Manufacturing output remained significantly below its level inthe middle of last year.  And many contacts had noted thattheir forward order books remained weak.  But, for anincreasing number of contacts, the rate of decline in domesticactivity had started to ease ( Chart 3 ).  However, despite some
positive news on activity in the United Kingdom’s main exportmarkets, exports had continued to contract.   
Demand in the automotive and construction subsectors had
remained exceptionally weak.  However, some other sizablesubsectors, for example food processing and parts of the oiland gas industries, had been able to maintain activity levels oreven generate some growth.  There had been some reportsthat growth in the defence and aerospace sectors was now
starting to ease although these were mixed.
Construction 
Construction activity remained significantly lower than in thesame period a year earlier and many contacts expectedactivity to fall further.  The pipeline of activity in thecommercial property sector remained exceptionally weak.Contacts reported that few potential speculativedevelopments were viable — because of a lack of finance,lower valuations, and an oversupply in many commercial andindustrial markets.  The imposition of business rates on emptybuildings was a further negative factor that had also ledowners to demolish some vacant properties.  There were a fewsigns of a resumption of residential construction, albeit froman extremely low base and only for selected types ofproperties, for example, small family homes.  
As in recent months, public sector demand for schools,
hospitals and other healthcare buildings had helped to offsetsome of the declines in demand from the private sector.However, many contacts had observed that additionalspending on public sector projects had yet to be broughtforward as indicated by earlier Government announcements.Some contacts had also become increasingly uncertain aboutthe financing prospects for these public sector projects.  Butfirms had reported continued fierce competition for thesecontracts.
Credit conditions
Credit conditions remained tight.  The box describes the resultsof a special survey of Agency contacts on corporate creditconditions.  Over 80% of respondents to the survey reportedthat external finance, including bank finance and trade creditinsurance, had become more expensive and harder to obtainover the past year.
Bank finance 
Although the majority of non-bank contacts had continued tocite difficulties in securing finance, some had reported animprovement in the major UK banks’ appetite for lending.However, there had been further reports that lenders weretaking longer to process financing requests, and wereundertaking greater due diligence, than in recent years.Although the absolute cost of financing had fallen for somefirms, there were further reports of sharp increases in spreadsand fees on existing borrowings at the time of renewal orextension.  
Trade credit  
As in recent months, the availability and cost of trade creditinsurance remained a burden, particularly among firmssupplying the retail, construction and automotive industries.Most contacts were reluctant for the withdrawal of trade coverto break customer relationships.  Instead, they had responded+
–
5432101234
2004 05 06 07 08 09Scores
Export volumes
Domestic salesThree months on same period a year earlierChart 3 Manufacturing output4321012345
2004 05 06 07 08 09Scores
Other business services Professional and ﬁnancial services
Consumer services+
–Three months on same period a year earlierChart 2 Services turnoverby making extra efforts to assess the creditworthiness of
customers, and some were now demanding payment beforedelivery or tightening credit terms.  Notwithstanding thesemeasures, many firms had also increased the time taken to payfor goods and services. 
Employment
Although employment intentions remained weak ( Chart 4 ), 
a growing minority of contacts reported that they were nowimplementing plans to recruit staff.  For example,supermarkets and value retailers — whose market share hadincreased — were recruiting in line with new store openings.And there were signs that some other firms had stoppedreducing staff numbers.  However, there were further reports ofcuts in shifts, overtime and working days suggesting that,overall, labour demand had continued to shrink. 
If demand conditions weakened further, a majority of contacts
expected that they would have to reduce staff numbers again through recruitment freezes or further redundancies.  If that were to occur, some contacts had expressed concernsthat they would have to lose some of their more highly skilledstaff.
Costs and prices
Labour costs  
Pay pressures had eased further.  Earlier in the year, a third ofrespondents to the Agents’ survey on pay settlements andlabour costs had reported a pay freeze.  More recently, amajority of contacts had reported pay freezes.  And asignificant minority had implemented sharp cuts in the pay ofsenior employees.  Reductions in bonuses were alsowidespread.  This weakness in pay, coupled with the reductionsin hours, overtime and working days seen in recent months,meant that per capita labour costs continued to fall on a yearearlier.  Pay awards in excess of 3% remained rare. Non-labour costs 
Contacts had reported higher material costs than a year earlier,although the rate of inflation had eased.  Inflation in basicfoodstuffs remained elevated.  The prices of many globally traded inputs had fallen, but sterling weakness hadlargely offset these falls.  Contacts with forward currencycontracts had previously been protected from sterlingweakness.  But, as those contracts were increasingly coming toan end, a growing number of contacts had reported increasedimport costs.  At the same time, shipping and energy costs forsome contacts had fallen as contracts negotiated when energyprices were substantially higher came to an end. 
Output prices  
Except for niche products, contacts remained unable toincrease prices significantly due to weak demand ( Chart 5 ).
The downward pressure on business services prices hadintensified, and there were further reports of falls in fees andcharge out rates as firms competed aggressively for business,often agreeing fees at (or even below) cost.  Firms withestablished brands and reputation had reported the leastpressure to keep prices low.  Across the United Kingdom,downward pressure on rents had persisted due to theoversupply of retail and office space.  And tender pricesremained under pressure in the construction sector.
Consumer prices
Consumer price inflation remained positive.  Many retail andservice sector contacts had continued to report promotionalactivity in excess of seasonal norms.  Retailers were seeking toaccommodate consumer preferences for budget or valueitems.  But, as in recent months, many contacts held the viewthat the second half of 2009 would see substantial pricepressure from imported goods as existing stocks werereplenished at significantly higher import prices.  This hadalready been in evidence for new car list prices which hadstrengthened due to sterling’s weakness against the euro.  Usedcar prices were also reported to have risen from recent lowlevels due to higher demand and, for some models, a shortageof supply. 4 Agents’ summary of business conditions June 2009
21012345
2004 05 06 07 08 09Scores
Materials prices
Manufacturers’ domestic 
  output prices 
Business services prices+
–Three months on same period a year earlierChart 5 Input and output prices
543210123
2004 05 06 07 08 09Scores
ManufacturingServices
+
–Over the next six monthsChart 4 Employment intentionsAgents’ survey on credit conditions
Recent business surveys had suggested that companies still
faced difficulties accessing credit, constraining their ability toinvest and, in some cases, meet demand.  To explore this issue,Agents conducted a survey of around 300 of their contacts,across all sectors of the economy.  The survey updated similarexercises conducted in September 2008 and November 2007.All figures reported are weighted by turnover.
As in the earlier Agents’ surveys, respondents were asked to
assess whether the cost and availability of external finance hadchanged over the past year.  Since the previous survey inSeptember 2008 there had been a 4.5 percentage points fall inBank Rate and other lending reference rates had also fallen.Financing costs for some firms could therefore have fallen evenif lenders’ margins and charges such as non-utilisation fees hadrisen. Nevertheless, over 80% of respondents considered thatexternal finance had been more expensive and harder to obtainover the past year.  This compared to around 60% reportingthat credit conditions had tightened in recent months in theSeptember 2008 survey. 
Respondents were asked how their use of various types of
finance had changed over the past twelve months.  Thesharpest decreases in usage had occurred for trade creditinsurance and bank finance ( Chart A ).  The fall in usage of trade
credit insurance was in line with reports that the Agents hadbeen receiving over the past few months.
However, a significant number of respondents had also
reported higher usage of bank finance.  In part this may reflectfirms’ reaction to loss of trade credit insurance:  increasingborrowings to fund suppliers’ demands for upfront paymentson uninsured deals.  Lenders may also have been seeking tochange the composition of their borrower base by shifting theirlending towards less risky customers. More than half of respondents had reported a decline in usage
of at least one form of external finance.  These firms wereasked what had led to that decline.  It could have been demanddriven — business conditions had worsened — or the cost offinance could have become prohibitive.  It may also have beenbecause of supply-side constraints, reflecting reducedavailability.  In the event, most firms reported that they hadreduced their usage of external finance because of loweravailability ( Chart B ). 
Around half of those respondents facing tighter credit
conditions reported that they had responded by reducinginvestment, and around a third had reduced stocks, refusedorders or increased the time taken to pay for goods andservices ( Chart C ). Agents’ summary of business conditions June 2009
010203040
Bank ﬁnance Capital markets Leasing, factoring 
  and invoice   discountingTrade credit 
  insuranceIncreased
DecreasedPer cent of ﬁrms accessing external ﬁnance(a)(b)Chart A Change in corporate use of external finance
(a) Responses weighted by respondents’ turnover.
(b) Respondents could select more than one option.020406080100
Business conditions Cost of ﬁnance Availability of ﬁnancePer cent of ﬁrms that reported reduced usage(a)(b)Chart B Factors behind reduced use of external finance
(a) Responses weighted by respondents’ turnover.
(b) Respondents could select more than one option.
0102030405060
No impact Reduction in
      capexRefusal of
   ordersReduction in
    stocksLonger 
payment
timesPer cent of ﬁrms that reported tighter credit conditions(a)(b)Chart C Response to tighter credit conditions
(a) Responses weighted by respondents’ turnover.
(b) Respondents could select more than one option.