Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2009/september-2009.pdf
Date: 2009-09-30

• Consumer spending had grown modestly.
•The recovery in housing market activity had continued.
• Investment intentions remained weak, though somewhat less so than at the trough of the recession.
•The rate of contraction in export volumes had slowed.
•The extent of de-stocking had continued to moderate and the majority of contacts now judged the 
de-stocking cycle to be drawing to a close.
•There was more evidence that manufacturing and service sector output had stabilised.  Construction
activity had continued to shrink.
•While some larger firms had made successful rights issues, a significant number of small firms had
continued to encounter difficulties in securing bank funding.
• Employment intentions were less negative than earlier in the year — a growing proportion of contacts
judged that the cuts in staffing they had already made would be sufficient so long as demand conditionsdid not deteriorate.
• Per capita labour costs remained lower than the same period a year earlier.  Annual inflation in materials
costs had eased further.  
•Spare capacity had continued to press down on prices of business services and manufactured output —
both of which were lower than the same period a year earlier. 009
• Consumer goods and services price inflation remained low but positive.  Over the past few months, the
scope of promotional activity had been scaled back as retailers had cleared excess stocks.  
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by
the Bank of England’s Agents, following discussions with contacts in the period between late July 2009 and late August 2009.  It provides information on the state of business conditions, fromcompanies across all sectors of the economy.  The report does notrepresent the Bank’s own views, nor does it represent the views ofany particular company or region.  The Bank’s Monetary PolicyCommittee uses the intelligence provided by the Agents, inconjunction with information from other sources, to assist itsunderstanding and assessment of current economic conditions.  A copy of this publication can be found at:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/agentssummary/index.htm.The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, the
East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the North West,Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, theSouth West, Wales, the West Midlands & Oxfordshire, andYorkshire & the Humber.
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic
conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in theInflation Report, obtained from:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/inflationreport/index.htm.Agents’ summary of business conditions
September 2009Demand
Consumption
Growth in retail sales had strengthened in recent months
(Chart 1 ).  Growth in the value of food sales remained strong.
And while sales of ‘big ticket’ items — such as furniture andwhite goods — remained lower than the same period a yearearlier, there had been a modest pickup in demand in recentmonths.  
Sales of new cars had continued to grow.  A number of car
dealerships attributed the recent growth in demand to thegovernment scrappage scheme.  Growth in used car sales hadremained at the higher levels seen in recent months, thoughthere had been some reports of stock shortages.  In part, those shortages reflected the decline in demand for new carsearlier in the year, which had led to a reduced supply of part-exchange vehicles. 
Demand for consumer services had increased in recent
months, leaving the level of activity broadly unchanged on thesame period a year earlier ( Chart 1 ).  Contacts had continued
to report growing spending on domestic tourism, which mostattributed to increased numbers of people holidaying in theUnited Kingdom.  Demand for housing-related services — suchas mortgage finance and home removals — had also picked upin recent months, in the wake of the recovery in housingmarket activity through much of 2009.  And applications forfurther education places had risen as school leavers deferredentering the labour market.  
Housing market
The pickup in primary and secondary housing market activityhad continued, with further growth in housing completionsfrom the depressed levels seen earlier in the year.  Growth indemand had been most marked for the cheapest properties.That reflected growth in demand from buy-to-let investors, amarginal improvement in access to mortgage finance for first-time buyers and the impact of government schemes such
as HomeBuy.  As demand had grown, the Agents had heard anincreasing number of reports of shortages in the number ofproperties for sale.  Estate agents described the flow of newinstructions to sell as low.  And house builders had largelycleared their stock of unsold properties.  Low supply had led toan increase in prices in recent months.  
Business investment
Most contacts had cut investment significantly over the pastyear.  As had been the case for some months, contactstypically reported that any capital expenditure was limited tomaintenance, relatively small-scale investments in IT, orprojects necessary to ensure regulatory compliance.  
Looking forward, investment intentions remained weak,
though somewhat less so than at the troughs of the recession.Most contacts planned to keep the level of capital expenditurelow relative to a few years earlier — driven primarily by theconjunction of high levels of spare capacity and expectationsthat demand would remain weak.  Contacts expected fallingoccupancy of retail units, office space and warehouses to delayany recovery in investment in commercial property.
Exports and imports
There was mounting evidence that the pace of contraction inexports had eased in recent months — reflected in an increasein the Agents’ score for manufactured export volumes (Chart 2 ).  While exports remained lower than the same
period a year earlier, exporters of durable goods had seensome recovery in demand.  Sterling’s earlier depreciation had led to improvements in competitiveness for many firms.And some felt that the downward impetus to demand fromglobal moves to cut inventories had begun to ease.  Themodest recovery in demand had been apparent in most export markets, but especially in the Far Eastern emergingeconomies.  2 Agents’ summary of business conditions September 2009
3210123
2004 05 06 07 08 09Scores
Retail sales values
Consumer services turnover+
–Three months on same period a year earlierChart 1 Consumer spending
32101234
2004 05 06 07 08 09Score
+
–Three months on same period a year earlierChart 2 Manufacturing export volumesAgents’ summary of business conditions September 2009 3
The broad picture remained one of import volumes down
relative to the same period a year earlier.  Over and above anyimpact of weak domestic demand, the Agents had continuedto hear from contacts that were switching to domesticsuppliers of components and finished goods.  Most attributedthis to sterling’s earlier depreciation.  But some had switchedin order to reduce the length of supply chains — therebyminimising inventories.  
Inventories
Most contacts reported that they had now unwound anyexcess inventories.  Indeed, a few were concerned that theirsuppliers had cut inventories too far, with emerging signs ofstock shortages.  Looking forward, many contacts expected tohold stock levels below recent norms.  That followed fromboth the weakness of expected demand and a strategic push toreduce their dependence on external finance.
Output
Services
Demand for consumer services had increased in recentmonths, as described above.  There was some evidence thatdemand for business services had stabilised, with furtherreports that turnover had flattened off after earlier falls —though such reports remained far from universal ( Chart 3 ). 
A number of logistics companies had noted a slight pickup in
activity from a low base.  That pickup was driven by increasesin orders for components and finished goods following theintense bout of de-stocking earlier in the year.  Whilecorporate discretionary spending on business travel andconferences had continued to be cut back, the rate of declinewas much reduced.  
In the professional and financial services sector, there was
mounting evidence that demand for services related tocorporate finance and property investment had stabilised afteran extended period of severe decline.  Public sector demand
for consultancy services had strengthened further, as hadcorporate recovery, insolvency and restructuring work.  Bycontrast, landlords reported declining occupancy ofcommercial property and a greater preponderance of rentreductions and deferrals.  And public relations and advertisingbudgets remained depressed.  
Manufacturing
Many manufacturers had reported some growth in output,albeit from depressed levels.  The modest recovery in exportdemand is described above.  Consumer-facing contacts alsoreported a pickup in domestic orders — car production being anotable example.  By contrast, demand for capital goods —especially those with long lead times such as in aerospace and power generation — had continued to weaken.  Lookingforward, many contacts described the flow of orders as erratic,so that few were confident that any pickup in demand wouldbe sustained.
Construction
The picture remained one of depressed and shrinkingconstruction activity.  Throughout 2009, contacts haddescribed contraction in commercial property work as thepipeline of new office, retail and warehouse developmentsremained well down on recent years.  That trend hadcontinued.  By contrast, public sector demand was a littleabove the same period a year earlier.  While the number ofhealthcare projects was declining, spending on studentaccommodation and large civil and infrastructure projects hadincreased.  Looking further forward, many contacts wereplanning on the basis of slowing public sector demand.
Credit conditions
There were further reports from large firms that had been ableto access non-bank finance.  And some contacts felt that bankshad become more willing to support large firms, for exampleby renegotiating the covenants of highly indebted companiesto avoid crystallising losses on those loans.  But contactsthought that banks were reluctant to increase their exposureto commercial property, construction, retail and motor dealers— sectors that had accounted for much of their lending growthin the past.  And the Agents had continued to hear fromsmaller firms that had encountered difficulties in securing bankfinance or whose directors had been asked to put up more oftheir personal assets as guarantees for additional loans.  Takentogether, the Agents judged the availability of credit to havebecome marginally looser in recent months.  
Employment
While there had been further reports of cuts to employment,the rate of labour shedding had eased.  Looking forward, a4321012345
2004 05 06 07 08 09Scores
Other business services Professional and ﬁnancial services
Consumer services+
–Three months on same period a year earlierChart 3 Services turnovergrowing number of contacts judged that the downward
adjustments they had already made to the size of theirworkforces  would be sufficient, provided there was no furthercontraction in demand for their goods and services.  That wasreflected in a further upward adjustment to the Agents’forward-looking scores for employment intentions ( Chart 4 ).
Despite the recent pickup, those scores remained significantlynegative, in part reflecting contacts’ views that corporatefailures would rise further in the near term.
Costs and prices
Labour costs
Per capita labour costs were widely reported to be lower thanthe same period a year earlier.  Reports of pay freezes hadbecome increasingly common.  The number of pay cuts hadalso increased — albeit to a much less degree.  Of those firmsthat had made a positive award in 2009, most expected toreduce the size of the settlement next year.  As had been thecase for some time, the Agents were told that total per capitalabour cost inflation had been further depressed by reductionsin overtime, commission payments and bonuses.  Anincreasing number of firms were planning to close their finalsalary pension schemes to existing members.  
Non-labour costs
Inflation in materials costs had slowed further ( Chart 5 ).
Contacts ascribed this to weak global demand, sterling’s recentappreciation against the US dollar and the expiry of fixed-pricecontracts taken out during 2008’s spike in commodity prices.Looking forward, however, many contacts were planning onthe basis that the recent strengthening of the world economyand the pickup in oil prices would lead to increases in materials
costs.
Output prices
Spare capacity had continued to press down on the prices ofbusiness services and manufactured goods, reflected in a driftdown in the Agents’ scores ( Chart 5 ).  That had been most
marked for business services, where most contacts hadreported prices down relative to the same period a year earlier.Many professional service providers had cut fees and charge-out rates;  hotel room rates and air travel prices hadfallen;  and the excess of retail and office space had led todownward pressure on rents.  Manufacturers had also reportedthat their output prices were under downward pressure.  Butwith very low gross profit margins, many had sought to resistthat pressure, so that the trend in prices was less stark thanwas the case for business services. 
Consumer prices
As had been the case for some time, consumer goods priceinflation remained low, but positive.  New car prices hadcontinued to rise as dealers passed on manufacturers’ priceincreases.  And there had been some further reports of pass-through of higher import prices.  Some contactsanticipated further pass-through in the autumn.  But as in theprevious report, others had scaled back plans for future pass-through having been surprised by the sensitivity ofdemand to recent changes in price.  There was further evidencethat the downward pressure from widespread promotionalactivity had eased as consumer demand had picked up andretailers had cleared excess stocks.  A similar picture wasevident in the services sector, where the slight improvement inconsumer demand in recent months had ameliorated earlierdownward pressure on price inflation.  4 Agents’ summary of business conditions September 2009
5432101234
2004 05 06 07 08 09Scores
ManufacturingBusiness services
Consumer services+
–Over the next six monthsChart 4 Employment intentions
321012345
2004 05 06 07 08 09Scores
Materials prices
Manufacturers’ domestic output prices 
Business services prices+
–Three months on same period a year earlierChart 5 Input and output prices