Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2009/may-2009.pdf
Date: 2009-05-31

Agents’ summary of business conditions
May 2009
•There were further reports that the pace of contraction in consumer spending had eased.
•The pickup in housing market activity had continued — albeit from a low base.
• Investment intentions remained very weak.
• Manufacturing export volumes had shrunk further, as the slowdown in global demand outweighed any
gains to competitiveness arising from sterling’s depreciation.  
• De-stocking had continued throughout 2009, but recent reports suggested that the pace of de-stocking
may have eased over the past month.
• Business services turnover remained significantly lower than the same period a year earlier.  
• Construction activity had continued to contract sharply.
•While credit conditions remained tight, some contacts felt that the major British banks’ appetite for
lending had increased a little.
• Labour demand had continued to shrink and employment intentions remained weak.  Cuts in average
hours, lower bonuses and commissions, and low pay settlements had continued to reduce per capitalabour costs. 
•On average, there had been little change in the rate of inflation in materials prices .  Weak demand
conditions had continued to press down on suppliers’ margins.
• Consumer goods price inflation remained positive but modest, as promotional activity and falls in
domestic energy prices pushed against the impact of rising import prices.
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by
the Bank of England’s Agents, following discussions with contacts in the period between late March and late April 2009.  It provides information on the state of business conditions, fromcompanies across all sectors of the economy.  The report does notrepresent the Bank’s own views, nor does it represent the views ofany particular company or region.  The Bank’s Monetary PolicyCommittee uses the intelligence provided by the Agents, inconjunction with information from other sources, to assist itsunderstanding and assessment of current economic conditions.  A copy of this publication can be found at:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/agentssummary/index.htm.The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, the
East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the North West,Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, theSouth West, Wales, the West Midlands & Oxfordshire, andYorkshire & the Humber.
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic
conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in theInflation Report, obtained from:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/inflationreport/index.htm.Demand
Consumption
There were further reports that the rate of contraction in retail
sales values had eased ( Chart 1 ).  The value of food sales
remained higher than a year earlier.  As in the previous month,most non-food retailers’ sales values were down relative to thesame period a year earlier.  But there were more widespreadreports that sales had outperformed retailers’ (depressed)expectations.  Most notably, there were signs of a pickup inspending on clothing and other small-scale durables.  New carsales remained much weaker than most other aspects ofconsumer spending.  However, there were reports that sales ofused cars were continuing to pick up.
There were a few reports that the pace of contraction in
demand for consumer services was easing — though theevidence was less widespread than was the case for retail sales.Spending at pubs remained particularly weak.  But spending onholidays in the United Kingdom had increased;  some foodwholesalers had seen increased orders by large restaurantchains;  and there were reports of a modest tickup in demandfor personal financial services.  
Looking forward, few consumer-facing contacts expected
significant growth in demand over the coming months.  Somecontacts felt that the recent picture may have been distortedby warm weather and the late Easter in 2009.  And some didnot expect retail spending to be sustained wereunemployment to increase later in the year.  Retailers’ doubtsover future demand were reflected in a cautious approach tostock management.
Housing market
Across all parts of the United Kingdom, there had been furtherreports of growth in the number of enquiries.  And there wasmore evidence that the increase in buyer interest had led to apickup in sales.  That said, the conversion rate from enquiriesto sales was below historical norms, and any pickup intransactions had come from a low base.  There was some
evidence that availability of mortgage finance had improved.
Business investment
Investment intentions remained very weak.  As in recentmonths, most contacts reported cuts to capital spending ordeferral of approved projects.  The broad picture remained oneof capital spending being limited to projects with either a quick(and relatively certain) payback or that were necessary to meetregulatory requirements.  
The weak outlook for demand and ensuing spare capacity were
often cited as a prime driver of cutbacks in capital spending.Elevated levels of uncertainty over future prospects were alsoweighing down on investment.  And many contacts werereluctant to draw down on cash balances to supportinvestment — as firms’ normal tendency to hoard cash at atime of uncertain demand was being exacerbated by concernsover the availability of working capital.  The high cost ofproject finance was also important for some firms.
Overseas trade
Many contacts had seen a contraction in export volumesthrough 2009.  Sterling’s depreciation had led toimprovements in competitiveness for some contacts — forexample, in the farming and tourism sectors.  However, therewere further reports of exporters preferring to maintain foreigncurrency prices and hence preserve margins, rather thanseeking a larger share of shrinking world markets.  Overall, theweakness of world demand had outweighed any impact ofsterling’s depreciation.
Inventories
De-stocking had continued throughout 2009, as firmsresponded to the step down in sales experienced from Autumn 2008.  However, the most recent reports suggestedthat the pace of de-stocking may have slowed as inventoriesapproached planned levels for an increasing number of firms.  
There were further signs that the process of de-stocking had
been largely completed for many retailers;  there had been afew reports of shortages in some manufacturing supplychains and stocks of used cars were low.  However, manyother contacts still felt that their inventories were excessive.Some of these contacts expected to finish any stockadjustment over the next few months.  But for others —most notably in sectors such as car production where saleshad fallen most sharply through late 2008 — it would takesome time to draw down stocks of materials and componentsacross the entire supply chain.
Output
Services
Tentative signs that the pace of contraction in demand forconsumer services was easing are described above.  Business2 Agents’ summary of business conditions May 2009
3210123
2004 05 06 07 08 09Scores
Retail sales values
Consumer services turnoverThree months on same period a year earlier
+
–Chart 1 Consumer spendingAgents’ summary of business conditions May 2009 3
services activity had remained significantly lower than the
same period a year earlier.  However, the pace of contractiondid not appear to have increased ( Chart 2 ).  In late 2008 and
early 2009 there had been a pronounced skew towards reportsthat activity had fallen below contacts’ expectations.  Morerecently, reports had been more balanced — on average,activity had been in line with contacts’ expectations;  albeitthat those expectations were sharply down relative to theprevious year.
As in recent months, weak levels of demand had been
experienced by a wide range of business services providers.Corporate discretionary spending — for example on businesstravel and advertising — had been cut back further in the wakeof the step down in aggregate demand from Autumn 2008.Similarly, haulage and distribution service providers hadreported sales sharply down relative to the same period a yearearlier.  And activity in the commercial property and corporatefinance sectors had continued to be very weak.  The exceptionswere demand for ‘core’ professional services such as auditingwork, which had remained relatively stable;  and demand for‘countercyclical’ services such as insolvency work, which wasup on a year earlier.  
Manufacturing
Manufacturing output remained well down relative to thesame period a year earlier.  Many contacts had seen significantfalls in demand from Autumn 2008, and had cut productionmore sharply than sales had fallen in order to unwind excessstocks.  As noted above, export orders had contracted furtherin recent months ( Chart 3 ).  Domestic orders remained
relatively weak, though in some parts of the United Kingdom,recent reports of weaker-than-anticipated domestic demandhad been broadly balanced by reports of sales above contacts’(depressed) expectations. 
The broad picture of substantial differences between
subsectors had continued.  Across the automotive andconstruction materials supply chains, the level of salesremained exceptionally weak.  But, as in recent months, someother sizable subsectors — defence, pharmaceuticals and food
processing — had experienced stable orders, or even somegrowth.  There were further reports of slowing export orders inthe aerospace sector.
Construction
Construction activity had continued contracting.  For sometime, sharp year-on-year declines in private house-buildingand commercial property activity have more than offsetcontinued growth in public sector demand.  And in recentmonths, there had been further reports that growth in publicsector work was slowing, or that projects were being delayed.  
Residential construction remained at very low levels.  And
commercial property activity had shrunk further in recentmonths as existing projects were completed while the pipelineof new projects remained negligible.  Looking forward,contacts did not expect any recovery in the coming months.There was an excess of retail and office space in many parts ofthe United Kingdom.  And the viability of prospectivecommercial property projects remained constrained by lowerproperty valuations and the cost and availability of externalfinance.  
Credit conditions
Trade credit
The availability and cost of trade credit insurance hadcontinued to be cited frequently as a significant burden —particularly among firms supplying the retail, construction andautomotive industries.  As in recent months, many suppliershad responded to loss of cover by taking counterparty riskonto their own balance sheets, or demanding upfrontpayments, rather than by refusing orders.  
Bank finance
Some contacts felt that the major British banks’ appetite forlending had increased a little.  However, this sense was by nomeans universal among contacts.  As in recent months, many4321012345
2004 05 06 07 08 09Scores
Other business servicesProfessional and ﬁnancial services
Consumer servicesThree months on same period a year earlier
+
–Chart 2 Services turnover
5432101234
2004 05 06 07 08 09Scores
Export volumes
Domestic salesThree months on same period a year earlier
–+Chart 3 Manufacturing outputcontacts had reported high costs of finance.  The Agents had
continued to hear of sharp increases in spreads and fees onrenewal or extension of existing facilities.  And there had beenfurther reports that charges applied to undrawn facilities hadbeen increased.  
Employment
Labour demand had continued to shrink.  Average hours hadbeen cut through early 2009 — typically via reductions inovertime and the imposition of shorter working weeks.  Therehad also been further reports of cuts to permanent staffinglevels.  Looking forward, some contacts felt that they hadalready adjusted employment levels in line with the weakeroutlook for demand.  And a small minority had resumedrecruitment.  But many others anticipated furtherredundancies.  Overall, employment intentions remainedweak.
Costs and prices
Labour costs
As in the April report, the broad picture was one of per capitalabour costs being below their levels a year earlier ( Chart 4 ).
In part, that reflected cuts in average hours — with moves toshorter working weeks and cuts to expensive night andweekend shifts having a material impact on costs for somefirms.  Pay pressures had also eased, with recent evidencesuggesting even weaker settlements than had been reported inthe Agents’ special survey on Pay Prospects earlier in the year.Reports of pay freezes had become more widespread and agrowing minority of contacts had either imposed cuts tosalaries or planned to do so.  Settlements in excess of 3%remained rare.
Non-labour costs
On average, there did not appear to have been much change inthe rate of inflation in materials prices.  Inflation in basic foodprices remained elevated.  But for other imported
commodities the trend in price inflation was less clear, aslower global prices had pushed against the impact of sterling’sdepreciation.  Until recently, contacts had reported year-on-year increases in energy costs as previous fixed-pricecontracts unwound.  But in recent months, such reports hadbeen balanced by reports of lower energy bills from firms onshorter contracts — reflecting falls in global spot pricesthrough late 2008.
Output prices
The broad picture remained one of manufacturers’ marginsbeing squeezed, as many contacts had been unable to passthrough the full impact of increases in costs in a climate ofweak demand.  There were, however, a few exceptions inindustries where business failure had led to reductions insupply.  The step down in demand through Autumn 2008 hadled to downward pressure on a range of business servicesprices ( Chart 5 ).  There were widespread reports of absolute
falls in fees and charge out rates.  And in many parts of theUnited Kingdom, the excess of retail and office space had ledto downward pressure on rents.  
Consumer prices
Consumer goods price inflation remained positive, but modest.On the downside, domestic energy prices had fallen throughearly 2009.  And many retail contacts reported ongoingpromotional activity — reduced in scope relative to the earlypart of 2009, but still significant relative to normal practice forthe time of year.  On the upside, inflation in imported finishedgoods prices remained elevated, with clear evidence of pass-through to higher food and electrical goods prices.Looking forward, some retail contacts expected upwardpressure on non-food prices to intensify later in 2009, as stockpurchased at exchange rates prevailing in 2008 unwound.  Forexample, Spring 2009 fashions had been ordered in thesummer of 2008 — before the sharp depreciation of sterling.4 Agents’ summary of business conditions May 2009
1.00.50.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.0
2004 05 06 07 08 09Scores
ManufacturingServicesThree months on same period a year earlier
+
–Chart 4 Labour costs per head
1012345
2004 05 06 07 08 09Scores
Materials prices
Manufacturers’ domestic
  output pricesBusiness services pricesThree months on same period a year earlier
–+Chart 5 Input and output prices