Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2009/november-2009.pdf
Date: 2009-11-30

• Consumer spending had grown during the third quarter, though some contacts described sales as volatile
from week to week.
• Housing market activity remained above the very weak levels prevailing a year ago.
• Investment intentions remained muted — weighed down by the margin of spare capacity and
uncertainty over demand.  
•There had been a further slight improvement in the tone of reports from exporters .
•There was a clear sense that many contacts had completed any de-stocking needed to bring inventories
down to levels commensurate with the lower level of economic activity.
• Manufacturing output had bottomed out during the summer, though some contacts found it hard to be
confident of any trend in demand.  While there were few reports of further contraction in business
services activity , evidence of growth was patchy.  Construction activity remained well down relative to
the same period a year earlier.
• Availability of credit may have eased slightly — particularly for larger firms outside the property and
construction sectors — but remained tighter than in mid-2008.  
•Few contacts anticipated making substantial additional cuts to employment over the next few months as
past cuts to headcount and average hours, coupled with lower pay settlements, had been sufficient torein in labour costs.
• Per capita labour costs remained below their levels a year earlier and there were no signs of widespread
inflation in materials costs .
• Consumer goods price inflation remained low but positive.
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by
the Bank of England’s Agents, following discussions with contacts inthe period between late September 2009 and late October 2009.  It provides information on the state of business conditions, fromcompanies across all sectors of the economy.  The report does notrepresent the Bank’s own views, nor does it represent the views ofany particular company or region.  The Bank’s Monetary PolicyCommittee uses the intelligence provided by the Agents, inconjunction with information from other sources, to assist itsunderstanding and assessment of current economic conditions.  A copy of this publication can be found at:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/agentssummary/index.htm.The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, the
East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the North West,Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, theSouth West, Wales, the West Midlands & Oxfordshire, andYorkshire & the Humber.
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic
conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in theInflation Report, obtained from:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/inflationreport/index.htm.Agents’ summary of business conditions
November 2009Demand
Consumption
Many retailers reported that sales were up relative to the same
period a year earlier ( Chart 1 ).  While twelve-month
comparisons were increasingly seen to be dominated byexceptionally weak year-earlier comparators, the Agents’ sensewas that retail spending had grown during the third quarter.But some contacts described sales as volatile from week toweek, and so regarded any recovery as fragile.
Two themes of the weakness in consumer spending through
the recession had been sharp falls in spending on big-ticketitems, such as furniture, and a tendency for consumers to tradedown towards cheaper brands.  In recent months, there hadbeen tentative signs that both themes may have started tounwind.  Spending on big-ticket items had picked up slightly,albeit from a low base.  And some discount retailers hadreported loss of market share to mid-priced brands — thoughmany retailers still regarded consumers as abnormally price-sensitive.  
As had been the case for some time, demand for consumer
services appeared weaker than for retail goods ( Chart 1 ).  More
foreign tourists and UK residents had holidayed in the United Kingdom than normal — as evidenced by higherattendance at visitor attractions.  But while visitor numberswere up, secondary spending at visitor attractions had fallen.And some attractions reported that demand had fallen backfurther than expected following the summer holidays.  Moregenerally, there was no sense of widespread growth in demandfor consumer services.  
New car sales had grown through the third quarter.  Used car
sales had not grown as fast, after having increased during thespring.  And while there were very few reports of contraction inthe value of used car sales, volumes may have been weakergiven the rises in used car prices through the early part of thethird quarter.Housing market
As in recent months, the broad picture was one of a pickup insales activity in new-build and secondary markets.  But whileactivity had grown, the flow of transactions remained welldown relative to levels prevailing in early 2008.  First-timebuyers were still described as scarce, reflecting the tightness inmortgage availability for those without substantial deposits.There were reports of growth in buy-to-let sales in some partsof the United Kingdom.  But in some other areas, growth inoverall demand was reported to have flattened out in recentmonths, as the current low level of transactions was all thatcould be supported by the available pool of buyers able tosecure finance.  Estate agents continued to describe the stockof houses for sale as small.  
Business investment
Levels of capital expenditure were well down relative to pre-crisis levels.  Looking forward, the majority of contactsdescribed their investment plans as muted.  But, as last month,there were more exceptions to that picture than there hadbeen during the spring.  Some contacts had reinstated plansfor re-tooling to support new products.  And for some,previous deferral of purchases of replacement equipment nowrequired increased spending on maintenance.  
As in recent months, the weakness of capital spending plans
was widely attributed to firms’ reluctance to commit tospending at a time when the outlook for demand wasuncertain.  Levels of spare capacity were sufficient that manysaw no pressing need to invest in machinery or buildings.Financing constraints continued to be cited as a secondaryfactor pressing down on investment plans.  Pushing the otherway, low prices for physical capital and building work werecited as motivating spending.
Exports
There had been a further slight improvement in the tone ofreports from exporters.  The news through the third quarterhad been that weakness in global demand was pressing downless strongly on sales than earlier in the year.  The most recentreports from the Agents also suggested a greater impact fromsterling’s depreciation than had been the case earlier in theyear, as some exporters saw more potential to compete formarket share in an environment of stabilising, as opposed tocollapsing, world demand.  
Inventories
As last month, there was a clear sense that many contacts hadcompleted any de-stocking needed to bring inventories downto levels commensurate with the lower level of economicactivity.  While there had continued to be exceptions — forexample, in the construction equipment and materials sectors— there were also reports of re-stocking where inventories hadpreviously been reduced too far.  Looking forward, it wascommon to hear of plans to hold stock-sales ratios below2 Agents’ summary of business conditions November 2009
3210123
2004 05 06 07 08 09Scores
Retail sales values
Consumer services turnoverThree months on same period a year earlier
+
–Chart 1 Consumer spendingAgents’ summary of business conditions November 2009 3
previous norms.  Consistent with such plans, manufacturers
had observed their customers placing smaller but morefrequent orders.
Output
Business services
Most business services providers described demand as welldown on the same period a year earlier.  And for many,turnover had fallen more sharply than activity as fees had been cut.  The fall in demand reflected the success of theircustomers’ moves to cut their overheads in the wake of the sharp slowdown from Autumn 2008.  Few businessservices providers reported any further contraction in demandthrough the third quarter, but evidence of growth remainedpatchy.  
Manufacturing
The Agents’ sense remained that manufacturing output hadbottomed out during the summer.  The improved tone ofrecent reports from exporters is described above.  Manycontacts also reported stabilisation or growth in domesticsales.  And more generally, twelve-month comparisons werestarting to be affected by weak year-earlier comparators —motivating sharp increases in the Agents’ score ( Chart 2 ).
But while the overall picture was one of stabilisation in output,
there was a wide range of experience across contacts.  In part,that reflected differences between subsectors.  While foodprocessors had seen further growth and consumer goodsdemand had picked up, global demand for aerospace productshad only started to contract in the spring.  The wide range ofexperience across contacts may also have reflected thevolatility of orders from week to week.  Several noted thatcustomers were placing smaller, more frequent orders as partof their efforts to maintain low inventory levels.  That had ledto a reduction in forward order books that made it harder formanufacturers to identify trends in demand.Construction
Construction activity remained well down relative to the sameperiod a year earlier ( Chart 3 ).  While house building activity
had picked up in the wake of the recovery in housingtransactions, such work was described as small in scale — inline with the flow of housing transactions.  Commercialproperty development had continued to shrink, with anegligible pipeline of new projects to replace completing work.Through 2009, public sector demand had proved critical tomany construction companies.  Recent intelligence suggestedthat such demand had continued through the third quarter.  
Credit conditions
Regional banking sector contacts described their appetite forlending as having increased.  And some non-bank contacts —in particular larger firms outside the construction and propertysectors — felt that availability of finance had eased.  But manyothers continued to report concerns over access to finance.The Agents’ sense therefore remained that while creditconditions may have eased since the spring, they remainedtighter than they had been in mid-2008.  
There were very few reports of significant growth in bad debts
on payments due to the Agents’ contacts.  Many weresurprised at the relatively small increase in insolvenciesthrough the recession so far.  In part, that was attributed tosupport from cash-positive customers, in the form of earlypayment (for a discount on price).  But many also attributedlow insolvency rates to forbearance by creditors:  banks weredescribed as unwilling to foreclose where loan covenants werebreached because collateral values were so low;  somelandlords had amended payment schedules to support clients;and Her Majesty’s Revenue and Customs had permitted manyfirms to delay tax payments as part of their Business PaymentSupport Service.  All these themes were long-standing, havingbeen reported to the Agents over a number of months.Recently, however, contacts had raised concerns that thepotential for further forbearance was limited.
5432101234
2004 05 06 07 08 09Scores
Manufactured exports
Domestic manufactures+
–Three months on same period a year earlierChart 2 Manufacturing output4321012345
2004 05 06 07 08 09Score
+
–Three months on same period a year earlierChart 3 Construction outputEmployment
There were further signs that the pace of decline in
employment had eased through the third quarter.  Relativelyfew contacts had announced significant cuts to headcountsince late spring — though the Agents had heard occasionalreports from firms whose redundancy programmes weresufficiently protracted that layoffs had yet to work throughfully.  More generally, many contacts had been able to reducepaybills temporarily through changes to average hours or cutsto expensive shifts.  Looking forward, the pervading senseamong contacts outside the construction sector was that anymaterial rationalisation of their labour forces was substantiallycomplete — so long as demand picked up in line withexpectations.  Many felt that any further headcount reductioncould be accommodated by limits on replacement of departingstaff.  This mildly negative outlook is reflected in the Agents’forward-looking scores ( Chart 4 ).  
Capacity utilisation
The pickup in demand through the summer had led to an
increase in factor utilisation.  But the overriding sense amongcontacts was that spare capacity remained pervasive, whilethose looking to recruit had not encountered any significantdifficulties.  Indeed, some noted that the relatively smallincrease in insolvencies had precluded any significantconsolidation among suppliers, leaving a greater number withsurplus capacity.  However, despite that spare capacity, somewere concerned that lack of working capital could constrainany rapid turnaround in production.
Costs and prices
Labour costs
As had been the case for some time, private sector contactsdescribed their labour costs as down on the same period a yearearlier.  Most changes had been made earlier in the year, so
that contacts visited in recent months simply echoed newsreported earlier — namely, of pervasive cuts to average hoursand widespread pay freezes.  Looking forward, those contactsthat were planning for their 2010 settlements expected paygrowth to remain subdued in light of the prevailing low ratesof inflation and labour market slack.  
Non-labour costs
Recent intelligence had confirmed the Agents’ impression thatfew contacts regarded materials costs as a significant issue forsenior management at present.  There was no clear trendacross individual firms’ reports of recent changes to materialscosts.  While there were some reports that sterling’s recentdepreciation had led to upward pressure — for example onchemicals prices — global spare capacity was widely describedas offsetting much of the impact of the depreciation.    
Output prices
There remained little sign of inflation in output prices.Substantial spare capacity continued to weigh against anyrecovery of margins to cover losses incurred earlier.  As hadbeen the case for some time, the downward pressure fromspare capacity was seen most dramatically in business servicepricing where rents and charge-out rates had been cut, anddiscounts were frequently offered to retain business.  Mostrecently, however, higher fuel costs had led to an increase inhaulage rates.
Consumer prices
The Agents’ intelligence suggested that consumer goods priceinflation had remained low, but positive.  While there weresome further reports of pass-through of higher import prices,the Agents had also heard from contacts that had opted to re-engineer products — for example, reducing product sizes —rather than shift pricing points.  More generally, consumerswere still widely seen to be abnormally price-sensitive so thatany diminution of promotional activity in the wake of growingconsumer demand had been marginal.  Inflation in food priceshad eased.  And while twelve-month inflation rates in used carprices remained elevated, there were tentative indications thatprices had stabilised over the past month.
Looking forward, some retailers expected inflation rates to pick
up around the New Year as last year’s deep discounting startedto affect twelve-month comparisons.  There was no clearmessage on prospects for pass-through in the wake ofsterling’s most recent depreciation.  While some planned to bemore aggressive in passing on any increase in costs at a timewhen stocks were tight, others argued that global sparecapacity had enabled them to limit the pass-through to theirown buying prices.4 Agents’ summary of business conditions November 2009
543210123
2004 05 06 07 08 09Scores
ManufacturingServices
+
–Over the next six monthsChart 4 Employment intentions