Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2009/july-2009.pdf
Date: 2009-07-31

•There was further evidence that levels of consumer spending had started to stabilise during the second
quarter.
•The recovery in housing market activity had continued.
• Investment intentions remained very weak.
• Export volumes had continued to fall.  
•There were widespread reports that the pace of de-stocking had slowed.  An increasing number of
contacts had now unwound any excess inventories.
•Contacts’ reports continued to point to some stabilisation in manufacturing output , albeit at levels well
below the previous peak.  Professional services activity may also have started to stabilise.  But demand
for haulage and corporate spending on discretionary activities remained very weak.
•The availability and cost of finance remained a key concern for many firms.
• Employment had continued to decline.  Many firms expected to trim staffing levels further, but a growing
number felt that they had now completed the bulk of any adjustment to head count in the wake of weakdemand.
• Per capita labour costs remained lower than the same period a year earlier.  Business services prices were
also falling, while inflation in materials prices had eased.
• Consumer goods price inflation remained low but positive, as ongoing promotional activity pushed
against rising import prices.  There were, however, occasional reports that promotional activity wasbecoming less aggressive as retailers’ concerns over excess stock levels receded.
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by
the Bank of England’s Agents, following discussions with contacts in the period between late May 2009 and late June 2009.  It provides information on the state of business conditions, fromcompanies across all sectors of the economy.  The report does notrepresent the Bank’s own views, nor does it represent the views ofany particular company or region.  The Bank’s Monetary PolicyCommittee uses the intelligence provided by the Agents, inconjunction with information from other sources, to assist itsunderstanding and assessment of current economic conditions.  A copy of this publication can be found at:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/agentssummary/index.htm.The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, the
East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the North West,Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, theSouth West, Wales, the West Midlands & Oxfordshire, andYorkshire & the Humber.
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic
conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in theInflation Report, obtained from:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/inflationreport/index.htm.Agents’ summary of business conditions
July 2009Demand
Consumption
There was further evidence that levels of consumer spending
had started to stabilise during the second quarter ( Chart 1 ).  
As in recent months, the value of food sales was widely
reported to be higher than a year earlier.  And most contactsfelt that non-food sales had started to stabilise.  But whilethere was a clear sense that sales were running ahead of theweak levels retailers had anticipated earlier in the year, by nomeans all contacts felt sales were growing consistently fromweek to week.  For some, the most recent weeks’ trading hadnot matched the strong sales seen earlier in the quarter.  
On average, the pace of contraction in demand for consumer
services had eased.  But this masked significant differencesbetween day to day leisure spending and domestic tourism.Pubs, restaurants and gyms had continued to see sharplyreduced demand relative to the same period a year earlier.  Bycontrast, many contacts had reported increased spending onholidays in the United Kingdom.  
Used car sales had continued to pick up.  And the pace of
contraction in new car sales appeared to have eased slightlyfrom earlier very sharp rates of shrinkage.  A number of cardealerships felt that the government scrappage scheme hadresulted in an increase in enquiries and sales (largely ofcheaper models).
Housing market
Housing market activity had continued to pick up, with furtherreports of growth in enquiries, offers and completedtransactions — albeit from a low base.  Looking forward, someestate agents were concerned that the flow of newinstructions to sell remained well below recent norms and thatthis would limit scope for further recovery in activity.  On thedemand side, there were more reports of activity by first timebuyers.  But tightness in availability of mortgages was stillcited widely as a constraint on activity.Business investment
Investment intentions remained very weak.  That weaknesstypically reflected the outlook for demand, exacerbated by thetightness of corporate credit conditions.  Few contactsexpected a pronounced recovery in activity in the near term.And many were reluctant to draw down cash balances at atime of elevated uncertainty over future demand and theavailability of working capital.  Taken together with concernsover the likely cost and availability of external project finance,these factors had led some firms to increase the hurdle rateapplied to candidate projects.  
Exports and imports
Export volumes had continued to contract, as the weakness ofglobal demand dominated the impact of any changes to theterms of trade.  Recently, however there had been somereports of a pickup in demand from China.  Import volumeswere down sharply relative to the same period a year earlier.Over and above any impact of weak domestic demand, therehad been further reports that firms were switching to domesticsuppliers of components and finished goods.  Most attributedthis to sterling’s earlier depreciation.  But for some, importsubstitution had been driven by a strategic push to minimiseinventories — as shipping times were shorter for domesticallysourced items.
Inventories
There were widespread reports that the pace of de-stockinghad slowed.  And an increasing number of contacts had nowunwound any excess inventories.  While there were someexceptions — for example, in the aerospace sector, wheredemand had recently slowed — many manufacturers werenow comfortable with their inventory levels.  That had led tosome resumption of orders for components to meet sales.  TheAgents’ sense was that some contacts had completed de-stocking slightly faster than they had expected earlier in theyear.  Looking forward, contacts planned to hold stock levelswell down on their levels a year earlier — reflecting both theoutlook for demand and concerns over the cost and availabilityof working capital.
Output
Services
As described above, the pace of decline in consumer serviceshad continued to ease.  There were also further signs ofstabilisation in demand for some professional services(Chart 2 ).  For example, there had been small increases in
commercial property and mergers and acquisitions activity inrecent months.  And print media had recently seen a pickup inrevenues from residential property and used car advertisements(reflecting the recent trends in consumer spending and housingmarket activity).  In both cases, however, any growth had comefrom a very low base so that activity remained well below thelevels seen during the first half of 2008. 2 Agents’ summary of business conditions July 2009
2004 05 06 07 08 09Scores
Retail sales values
Consumer services turnover
3210123
–+Three months on same period a year earlierChart 1 Consumer spendingAgents’ summary of business conditions July 2009 3
In contrast to professional services, many other business
services had continued to suffer falling turnover.  Haulage anddistribution companies reported very weak activity.  Andcorporate demand for hotel and conference facilities had fallenduring 2009, as many firms had embarked on a further roundof cuts to ‘discretionary’ expenditure in the wake of the falls intheir own sales during late 2008 and early 2009.  
Manufacturing
As last month, there was some evidence that orders andoutput were holding stable — albeit at levels that weresignificantly down relative to the same period a year earlier.On the upside, a few contacts had seen a pickup in orders astheir customers completed moves to de-stock or as firmsswitched from foreign suppliers.  But on the downside, therewas mounting evidence that activity in the previously robustaerospace sector had slowed.  
Construction
Rapid shrinkage in private building activity had continued tomore than offset work on public sector projects.  Thatshrinkage had been most obvious in the commercial propertysector.  There, the pipeline of new projects remained negligibleso that activity was shrinking rapidly as existing projects werecompleted.  There had been further reports of a resumption ofresidential construction, as the pickup in housing marketactivity had been sufficient to clear the overhanging stock ofnew houses in some localities.  But any recovery in growthremained small in scale — it was typical for house-builders toreport activity at around half normal rates.  
Credit conditions
Availability of credit remained a key concern for manycontacts, notwithstanding any impact of the scaling back ofcapital expenditure plans on demand for finance.  Some feltthat banks’ appetite for lending had increased, and a numberof larger firms had been able to make successful rights issues.But many others had continued to encounter difficulties in
securing finance.  The Agents’ sense was that contacts’experience was becoming increasingly polarised as lenderssought to focus their activities on the least risky credits.  Thatwould be consistent with ongoing reports of tight limits beingapplied to banks’ exposures to some sectors — notably, theproperty and construction sectors and some retail activities.There were further widespread reports that spreads and feeswere being increased sharply on renewal or review of facilities.
Employment
As in recent months, a significant number of contactsreported that they had cut employees’ hours in response tothe slowdown in demand from late 2008.  Many had also cutpermanent staffing levels so that the level of employmentwas significantly lower than a year earlier.  And a number hadfurther cuts to headcount in the pipeline — announcedredundancies that were working through the consultationprocess.
Looking forward, many firms expected to trim headcount a
little further — for example, by maintaining freezes onreplacement of retiring staff.  And construction companiescontinued to expect job cuts as the commercial propertypipeline empties.  But a growing number of contacts felt thatthey had now made the bulk of the adjustment in headcountwarranted by the weaker outlook for demand.  And some hadstepped back from contingency plans for significant cuts tostaffing levels, in light of a better-than-feared tradingperformance.  The increased flow of ‘non-negative’ reports hasbeen reflected in upward adjustment to the Agents’ forward-looking scores for employment, to less negative levels(Chart 3 ).
2004 05 06 07 08 09Scores
ManufacturingServices
543210123
–+Over the next six monthsChart 3 Employment intentions2004 05 06 07 08 09Scores
Other business 
servicesProfessional and ﬁnancial services
Consumer services
4321012345
–+Three months on same period a year earlierChart 2 Services turnoverCapacity utilisation
The Agents’ scores for capacity utilisation remained at low
levels ( Chart 4 ).  It was very rare to hear from contacts for
whom capacity constraints were binding.  And the majority feltthat the weak outlook for demand left little prospect that theywould bind during 2009.  One issue was how far this near-termperception masked a reduction in supply potential.  The Agentshad therefore focused their questions to contacts more tightlyon issues of supply than would normally be the case.
Most contacts considered the cuts they had made to
production to be temporary and easily reversible.  As describedelsewhere, many had used cuts to hours and take home pay tominimise any reductions in staffing levels.  Reports ofmothballed plant were considerably more prevalent thanreports of scrapping or sale of capital.  Indeed, a few contactshad used extended shutdown periods to bring forwardmaintenance work.  The transport industry was an exception,with an ongoing flow of reports of reductions to fleet sizes.  
There were, however, some concerns that the external
environment might impair contacts’ ability to raise production.For some, lack of working capital could make it hard to fundpurchases of sufficient components and re-employ sufficientstaff to satisfy any sharp increase in orders.  And others raisedconcerns over the potential impact of future corporate failureson their supply chains.
Costs and prices
Labour costs
Per capita labour costs were widely reported to be lower thantheir levels a year earlier ( Chart 5 ).  In part, that reflected cuts
in average hours made during 2009.  Bonus and commissionpayments had also been reduced, while pay pressures hadcontinued to ease.  For some time, a majority of contactshave reported freezes to pay and very few have reported
settlements in excess of 3%.
Non-labour costs
Inflation in materials costs had eased.  In part, that reflectedsharp increases in prices a year earlier dropping out of thetwelve-month comparison.  There were further reports fromfirms whose energy costs had fallen as fixed price contractsexpired.  But pass-through from the depreciation of sterlingduring 2008 was still cited as a factor leading to increases inprices when orders and contracts were renewed.  As yet, therewere very few reports of prices falling as a result of sterling’smost recent appreciation.  
Output prices
The broad picture remained one of suppliers’ margins beingsqueezed in the wake of weak demand.  There were, however,some exceptions — manufacturers of niche products and thosefor whom the cost of key materials had risen sufficiently farthat maintaining previous prices was not viable.  Thedownward pressure on business services prices had intensifiedfurther.  There were widespread reports of absolute falls in feesand charge out rates.  And the excess of retail and office spacehad led to downward pressure on rents.  
Consumer prices
Consumer goods price inflation remained low, but positive.Food price inflation was easing, and non-food prices hadbeen affected by the continuation of promotional activity.There were, however, occasional reports that discountingwas becoming less aggressive than in previous months asretailers’ concerns over excess stock levels receded.  Indeed,shortages of stock had already led to upward pressure onused car prices.  Inflation in imported finished goods pricesremained elevated.  And looking forward, a number of retailcontacts planned to raise clothing and consumer durablesprices in the autumn — in part, reflecting the lagged passthrough from sterling’s depreciation during 2008.4 Agents’ summary of business conditions July 2009
2004 05 06 07 08 09Scores
ManufacturingServices
1.51.00.50.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.0
–+Three months on same period a year earlierChart 5 Labour costs per head
2004 05 06 07 08 09Scores
ManufacturingServices
432101234
–+Relative to normalChart 4 Capacity utilisation