Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2009/february-2009.pdf
Date: 2009-02-28

• Consumers’ expenditure had continued to contract.  There were signs that the pickup in non-food sales
in the period immediately after Christmas had been short-lived.
• Investment intentions remained at the weak levels reported in recent months.
• External demand had continued to slow sharply, with the volume of manufactured goods exports now
lower than a year earlier.
•Contacts’ concerns over the cost and availability of working capital remained elevated.
• Employment intentions had been scaled back further across all sectors.  Average hours had been cut.
And permanent staffing levels had also been reduced, with further redundancies expected during early 2009.
•Growth in per capita labour costs had slowed.  Respondents to a special survey on pay prospects
expected 2009’s wage settlements to be markedly lower than those made during 2008, with manyplanning pay freezes (see box).
• Annual input and output price inflation had fallen further.  
•Inflation in imported finished goods prices remained elevated.  So far there had been only tentative signs
of pass-through to retail goods prices .  There, the picture had continued to be dominated by the depth
and persistence of discounting.  Looking forward, however, a number of retailers and distributors plannedto raise prices if sterling remained at its current level.
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by
the Bank of England’s Agents, following discussions with contacts in the period between late December 2008 and late January 2009.  It provides information on the state of business conditions, fromcompanies across all sectors of the economy.  The report does notrepresent the Bank’s own views, nor does it represent the views ofany particular company or region.  The Bank’s Monetary PolicyCommittee uses the intelligence provided by the Agents, inconjunction with information from other sources, to assist itsunderstanding and assessment of current economic conditions.  A copy of this publication can be found at:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/agentssummary/index.htm.The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England,
the East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the NorthWest, Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, theSouth West, Wales, the West Midlands & Oxfordshire, andYorkshire & the Humber.
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic
conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in theInflation Report, obtained from:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/inflationreport/index.htm.Agents’ summary of business conditions
February 2009Demand
Consumption
Consumers’ expenditure had continued to contract, with the
Agents’ scores reduced slightly from the previous month’s lowlevels ( Chart 1 ).  While many retailers reported some pickup in
non-food sales in the period immediately after Christmas,there were signs that the recovery had since petered outdespite the maintenance of deep discounting.  The value offood sales had continued to grow, in part due to ongoinginflation in food prices.  This had contributed to supermarkets’strong performance relative to the retail sector as a whole.  
Many contacts expected consumer demand to weaken further
during 2009 Q1.  This had been reflected in some furthercutbacks in retailers’ orders for consumer goods.  Contacts’expectations reflected a widespread anticipation of a pickup inprecautionary savings in the face of concerns over job security.Indeed, some described a growing reluctance amongconsumers to commit to large purchases, or instalmentpayments.  That was consistent with the sharp fall in new carsales seen in recent months and with falling renewal rates forannual gym and club membership.
Housing market
The volume of housing transactions had remained at very lowlevels.  While reports of increases in enquiries had becomemore widespread, there was little evidence (yet) that thesewould translate to a marked increase in activity.  Difficulties insecuring mortgage financing continued to be the most widelyreported driver of weak housing demand;  primarily becausedeposit requirements remained elevated relative to theexperience of recent years.  
Business investment
Investment intentions remained weak, with many firmsseeking to prolong the life of existing assets.  Some firms hadintroduced capital spending freezes — though most plannedsome limited capital expenditure, where paybacks were quickor to cover essentials such as satisfying health and safety
requirements.
For many contacts, the outlook for demand had worsened in
recent months;  as order books had shortened, majorcustomers had cut production, and the macroeconomicclimate had deteriorated.  Moreover, some contacts reportedthat uncertainties over demand had made forward planningmore difficult, leading them to defer major decisions (includingon capital expenditure).  Concerns over the outlook fordemand remained the prime driver of weak capital expenditureplans.  But concerns over the availability of working capital andexternal project financing also remained important factors formany firms.
External demand
The Agents’ score for the volume of manufactured goodsexports was reduced sharply, following the marked step downduring 2008 Q4 ( Chart 2 ).  
Many contacts reported that the slowdown in world demand
had, so far, more than offset the impact of any improvementsin competitiveness arising from sterling’s depreciation.  Formany firms, sterling’s depreciation had led to an increase inmargins, at least relative to home sales.  For some, this wasbecause export contracts embodied fixed foreign currencyprices.  But for others, the rise in margins reflected an activedecision not to cut foreign currency prices.
Inventories
During the latter part of 2008, manufacturers had experienceda mounting excess of stocks over planned levels, in the wake ofunexpectedly sharp falls in demand.  Despite significant cuts inproduction and component orders, stocks remained elevatedin those sectors where the drop in demand had been mostacute — that is, the automotive supply chain andconstruction-related industries.  Where falls in demand hadnot been so marked, for example in aerospace, there was lessevidence of excess stocks.  And retailers reported that stock2 Agents’ summary of business conditions February 2009
2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09Scores
Retail sales values
Consumer services turnover
3210123
–+Three months on same period a year earlierChart 1 Consumer spending
2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09Score
2101234
–+Three months on same period a year earlierChart 2 Manufacturing export volumesAgents’ summary of business conditions February 2009 3
levels were not higher than seasonal norms, as consumer
demand had been no weaker than anticipated over theChristmas period.
Output
Business services
The ongoing contraction in aggregate demand and output hadbeen reflected in falling demand for a wide range of businessservices.  Spending on haulage and distribution had beenreduced further as consumer demand and production hadfallen.  And weakening labour demand had led to reductions inrecruitment agencies’ fee income.  The Agents had continuedto hear reports of reductions in firms’ non-contractual(discretionary) spending, such as demand for business traveland marketing.  For a number of accountancy and legalservices providers, workload had fallen as some long-termcontracts had not been renewed in the wake of the sharp stepdown in economic activity during 2008 Q4.  
Manufacturing output
Production had slowed sharply through 2008 Q4 and into2009.  However, this aggregate picture masked materialdifferences between subsectors.  Across the automotive andconstruction-related supply chains, orders had collapsed.Other sizable subsectors — such as food processing andaerospace — had not seen such a sharp change in demand.But even in those sectors, growth in orders had slowed.
Construction
The level of construction activity remained lower than thesame period a year earlier.  The broad themes mentioned inrecent reports had continued.  Private house-building activityremained materially down relative to the start of 2008.Looking forward, the pipeline of new work was negligible andwas expected to remain so given the sizable stocks of unsoldnew housing and tightness of financing conditions.Commercial property work had also contracted.  The sharpdecline in private activity had more than offset continuedgrowth in public sector project work.  Indeed, there werereports of slowing public sector demand, with some smallschemes being cancelled.  
Credit conditions
Contacts’ concerns over the availability of working capitalremained elevated.  There were widespread reports that thecost of banking facilities had risen over the past few months,most notably through increases in arrangement fees.  Asignificant minority also felt that the availability of banklending had declined.  Some contacts reported that unusedfacilities had been withdrawn — in some cases, removing apotential cushion for cash-flow management.  And therecontinued to be reports that firms were reluctant to approachbanks for finance, due in part to concerns that doing so might
trigger an unfavourable review of existing terms.
Reductions in the availability of trade credit insurance
remained a concern for many contacts.  This had led some torefuse orders.  But many other suppliers had been able tomaintain business either by successfully requiring upfrontpayments or by taking counterparty risk onto their ownbalance sheets.  More generally, there had been a furtherincrease in debtor days — the time taken to receive paymentfor goods and services provided.
Employment
The broad picture remained one of rapidly shrinking demandfor labour, with the Agents’ scores reduced further acrosssectors ( Chart 3 ).  There were reports that some supermarkets
planned to increase recruitment.  But these were more thanoffset by lower demand elsewhere in the retail sector and inother sectors.  There had been further reports of redundancies.  
As the recession had deepened, an increasing number of firms
had faced difficult decisions over staffing levels.  In light of theshrinkage in labour demand, the Agents had focused theirdiscussions with contacts more tightly on employmentdecisions than was normally the case.  Chart 4 summarises
the Agents’ views of the broad decision-points faced by typicalfirms across different sectors of the economy.  There was, ofcourse, some variation in experience across firms — with somecontinuing to recruit throughout 2008, while others had faceddifficult decisions over staffing earlier than the typical firm intheir sector.
The chart shows that early in 2008, firms in most sectors were
considering whether to cease expansion of staffing levels — inanticipation of slowing demand.  In the construction sector,however, a number of house builders were already facing moreacute decisions over their permanent staffing levels, reflecting2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09Scores
ManufacturingServices
3210123
–+
4Over the next six monthsChart 3 Employment intentionsthe early slowdown in that sector.  By late 2008, it had
become increasingly common for contacts in all sectors toreport that they were reviewing permanent staffing levels —considering options for trimming.  That was reflected indownward adjustments to the Agents’ scores for employmentintentions.  But until a few months ago, very few firms outsideof the construction sector had reached the more extremedecision-points over whether to adjust permanent staffinglevels substantially.
In recent months, however, a growing number of firms had
been forced to consider whether to make significant cuts tostaffing levels — in the wake of the intensification of thecontraction in economic activity during 2008 Q4.  In somecases, such reviews had been followed by introduction ofredundancy programmes.  More were either planning to do soduring 2009 Q1 or would review staffing again if demand didnot pick up over the next few months.  
Against this backdrop, firms had made further cuts to average
hours.  There had continued to be reports of reductions inovertime.  And some firms had sought to inject flexibility intohours through changes to working practices, such asintroduction of short-time working.
Costs and prices
Labour costs
Labour cost inflation had slowed further in recent months.This reflected falls in hours worked, lower bonuses and slowinggrowth of regular pay.  The results of a special survey onprospects for pay and labour costs are reported in the box.  Themajority of respondents expected labour costs to growsignificantly more slowly during 2009 than they had a year
earlier.  And a material number of contacts had either imposedpay freezes or were planning to do so.  
One major driver of the expected slowdown in wage growth
was the worsening outlook for demand.  Rising insecurityabout employment prospects and expectations of lowerinflation had both increased employees’ willingness to acceptlower wage settlements.  However, there was less scope toreduce per capita labour costs in sectors where a significantproportion of employees were paid the National MinimumWage.  
Prices
Inflation in many materials costs had eased further as falls inglobal prices had not yet been fully offset by the impact ofsterling’s depreciation.  There were, however, some exceptionssuch as the price of imported timber which had increased.Further down the supply chain, there were widespread reportsthat weakening demand had shifted the balance of negotiatingpower towards purchasers.  The need to cover fixed costs hadled some manufacturers to take on orders at margins thatwere too low to sustain in the medium term.
Inflation in the price of imported finished goods remained
elevated ( Chart 5 ).  As yet, there were only tentative signs of
pass-through to retail goods prices.  There, the picturecontinued to be dominated by the depth and persistence ofdiscounting activity.  Looking forward, however, a number ofretailers and distributors planned to raise prices if sterlingremained at its current weak levels.  These plans were mostprevalent among food and clothing retailers.4 Agents’ summary of business conditions February 2009
2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09Scores
Retail goods prices Imported ﬁnished 
goods prices
2101234
–+Three months on same period a year earlierChart 5 Retail goods and imported finished goods pricesConstruction
Manufacturing
Professional and
ﬁnancial services
Cease net 
recruitmentLate 2007 Early 2008 
Cut hours or shifts Mid-2008 
non-permanent
employeesLate 2008 
Consider signiﬁcant
cuts to permanent Current Current Current CurrentDecision-point reached by
typical ﬁrmEarly 2008 Early 2008 Early 2008 
Other business
services
Retail/consumer
services
Early 2008 Early 2008 
Early 2008 
Early 2008 Mid-2008 
Mid-2008 Mid-2008 
Mid-2008 Late 2008 Late 2008 Late 2008 Late 2008 
headcountConsider cutting
permanent headcountConsider trimmingn.a.
n.a.Chart 4 Type of employment decisions being made by
typical firms across different sectors(a)
(a) The chart describes the Agents’ views of the decision-points reached by typical firms in each sector.  There
was some variation in experience across firms within each sector.Agents’ survey on prospects for pay and
labour costs
A significant number of private sector pay settlements take
place in the first four months of the year.  To provide an earlyread on prospects for pay in the year ahead, the Agentstherefore conduct a survey of their contacts each January.  Thisyear, just over 350 private sector firms from all sectors of theeconomy responded.  All figures reported are weighted by totalemployment.
One feature of this year’s survey was that around a quarter of
respondents were unsure about their likely settlement for2009.  That was higher than in previous years and is consistentwith more general reports from contacts that elevateduncertainties about the economic outlook were complicatingplanning.
For the three quarters of respondents that had reported plans
for wage settlements, the average settlement was 1.9% —markedly lower than the results of the 2008 survey (3.5%).More than a third of those respondents expected to apply apay freeze.  And very few planned settlements in excess of 3%(Chart A ).  Reports of lower settlements were broad-based
across sectors.
Basic pay is only a part of firms’ total labour costs.  Other
payments — such as bonuses, commissions, merit pay andpension contributions — also play a role.  Taking these factorsinto account, the majority of firms expected total per capitalabour costs to grow significantly more slowly than during2008 ( Chart B ).  
Many respondents attributed the downward pressure on
labour cost growth to factors relating to the weakeningoutlook for demand — that is to prospects for profitability,easing recruitment conditions and lower performance-related
pay.  Lower inflation expectations and concerns over jobsecurity were seen to be increasing employees’ willingness toagree to lower settlements.Agents’ summary of business conditions February 2009
Pay freeze 0% to 1% 1% to 2% 2% to 3% 3% to 4% >4%2008 survey
2009 surveyPercentages of responses(a)
0102030405060Chart A Expected pay settlements in 2009 and 2008
(a) Weighted by employment, excludes firms that were ‘uncertain’ about prospective settlements.Signiﬁcantly
lowerA little lower Same A little higher Signiﬁcantly
higher010203040506070Pay settlement
Total labour costs per employeePercentages of responses(a)Chart B Expected difference between growth of total
labour costs in 2009 and 2008
(a) Weighted by employment.