Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2010/january-2010.pdf
Date: 2010-01-31

•Over the Christmas period, most retailers had experienced stronger demand than during the same period
a year earlier (see box).  
•In most parts of the United Kingdom, the gradual pickup in housing market activity had continued.
•While investment intentions remained muted, few firms planned a second round of sharp cuts following
last year’s sizable reductions in spending.
•An increasing number of contacts had reported growth in exports relative to the same period a year
earlier.
•Many contacts planned to maintain their inventories at low levels after a bout of de-stocking earlier in
the year.
• Business services and manufacturing output remained down on the same period a year earlier.  While
there were few reports of further contraction in recent months, there was no consistent sense of robustrecovery in activity.  Construction remained severely depressed.
• Credit conditions had eased during the second half of 2009, though that loosening had not been
experienced uniformly across contacts.
•Few firms were planning actively for further material cuts in employment .  But few were looking to
recruit significant numbers of permanent staff — the typical response to any growth in activity being toreverse previous cuts to average hours or make use of temporary staff.
• Pay growth was expected to remain subdued through 2010.  Inflation in materials costs remained low,
but was expected to rise over the next year.
• Consumer goods price inflation remained low, but positive.  Looking forward, most retailers planned to
pass at least a part of the 1 January 2010 increase in VAT on to their customers (see box).
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by
the Bank of England’s Agents, following discussions with contacts in the period between late November and late December 2009.  It provides information on the state of business conditions, fromcompanies across all sectors of the economy.  The report does notrepresent the Bank’s own views, nor does it represent the views ofany particular company or region.  The Bank’s Monetary PolicyCommittee uses the intelligence provided by the Agents, inconjunction with information from other sources, to assist itsunderstanding and assessment of current economic conditions.  A copy of this publication can be found at:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/agentssummary/index.htm.The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, the
East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the North West,Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, theSouth West, Wales, the West Midlands & Oxfordshire, andYorkshire & the Humber.
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic
conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in theInflation Report, obtained from:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/inflationreport/index.htm.Agents’ summary of business conditions
January 2010Demand
Consumption
Retailers had continued to report sales ahead of their 
levels a year earlier.  In part, that reflected last year’s weakcomparators, with twelve-month growth rates furtherflattered by gains to market share in the wake of retail failuresearlier in the recession.  Looking through seasonal variation,many Agents sensed that sales had grown through the secondhalf of 2009.  And a number of contacts had reported strongsales in recent weeks — an impression reinforced by the resultsof an Agents’ Special Survey on retail trading over theChristmas period (see box).  
There were widespread reports of growth in sales of big-ticket
items — such as white goods and home furnishings —corroborating the impression given by earlier reports.  Someretailers attributed this growth to the pickup in housing marketactivity through much of 2009.  But some also felt thatcustomers had brought spending forward in anticipation of theforthcoming rise in VAT.  That had contributed to retailers’concerns that sales could fall back during early 2010.
New car sales had continued to grow.  The increase in sales
was widely attributed to ‘transient’ factors — the scrappagescheme and customers bringing spending forward ahead of theVAT rise.  Used car sales had been broadly stable in recentmonths.
Consumer services turnover appeared less weak than earlier in
the year.  Demand for housing-related services — such asremovals work — had picked up as the number of housingmarket transactions had risen.  Many leisure services providersreported growth in footfall, though spending per visit wasdescribed as down relative to pre-recession levels.  The profileof demand for consumer services remained weaker than thatof retail sales.
Housing market
The gradual increase in housing market activity had continuedin most parts of the United Kingdom.  But that growth hadcome from a low base so that transactions remained welldown on pre-crisis levels.  As had been the case throughout theyear, first-time buyers were widely described as scarce and thestock of properties for sale as low.  While the Agents hadcontinued to receive reports of marginal easing in mortgageavailability, many estate agents still regarded the availability offinance as a drag on activity.
Business investment
Recent intelligence on investment plans had been in line withthe picture painted by last month’s Agents’ Special Survey oncapital spending.  On the upside, some major retailers plannedto maintain their programmes of store expansion andrefurbishment.  And some utility companies expected to raise
capital spending in line with the new regulatory investmentcycle.  More generally, while most contacts described theirinvestment plans as muted, few planned a second round ofsharp cuts following last year’s sizable reductions in spending.As a result, base effects were increasingly seen to beinfluencing twelve-month comparisons — motivating furtherincreases in the Agents’ scores, to less negative levels (Chart 1 ).
Spare capacity and concerns over the sustainability of any
growth in demand continued to be cited frequently as factorsholding investment below ‘normal’ levels.  Indeed, where firmsdid plan to grow their capital spending, investment wastypically focused on improving efficiency rather thansupporting increased output.  Reluctance to draw on cashreserves had continued to be cited fairly often as a secondaryfactor pressing down on investment.
Exports
An increasing number of contacts had reported growth inexports.  There were, however, significant differences inexperience between sectors and markets.  As had been thecase through much of 2009 H2, demand from developingeconomies had grown.  But reports of trends in demand fromthe euro area and the United States had been more mixed.Moreover, any growth in external demand had come from alow base — the level of world demand was still seen to be welldown on pre-recession levels.
It had become more common to hear reports of sterling’s
depreciation leading to growth in export orders.  This reflecteda number of factors.  For some, fixed-price contracts haddelayed price adjustment earlier in the year.  Additionally,some saw more potential to compete for market share thanthey had when global demand was ‘collapsing’.  For example,some exporters had increased spending on marketing, aftersharp cuts earlier in the recession.  2 Agents’ summary of business conditions January 2010
5432101234
2005 06 07 08 09Scores
ManufacturingServices
–+Over the next twelve monthsChart 1 Business investment intentionsAgents’ summary of business conditions January 2010 3
Inventories
Many contacts described their inventory levels as lower than
normal, after a bout of de-stocking earlier in the year.  Mostplanned to hold stocks at low levels — either because ofimprovements in inventory management put in place duringthe recession, or because pressures on working capitalremained intense and the outlook for demand uncertain.  
Output
Business services
The broad picture had not changed materially during thefourth quarter.  It had been rare to hear of significant furtherfalls in demand through the second half of 2009.  And theAgents had heard further reports from contacts whose activityhad grown over the past few months.  But there was noconsistent sense of robust recovery in demand across any subsectors.  The overarching impression was of patchy andvolatile demand, with customers managing their overheadsextremely tightly.  Turnover appeared more subdued in thebusiness services sector than the consumer services sector,reflected in a divergence between the Agents’ scores ( Chart 2 ).
Manufacturing
Throughout the second half of 2009, reports from
manufacturers had painted an increasingly clear picture of demand having bottomed out during the summer.  In recent months, the Agents’ sense was that reports of quarter-on-quarter growth had outweighed those of shrinkage.But there was still no sense that growth had picked up at allstrongly or consistently, with contacts continuing to complainof short order books and volatility in demand.  Reports ofgrowth in activity were most common among consumer goodsmanufacturers, food processors, and those in the automotivesupply chain.Construction
Construction activity remained well down relative to the sameperiod a year earlier — the sector was the most depressed bysome margin.  Commercial property activity remainedparticularly weak, with no material pipeline of replacementwork for projects that were completed.  However, spending onrepair and maintenance work had grown.  And some housebuilders had resumed land purchase programmes.  But whilethere had been further widespread reports of growth in housebuilding, such growth was from a low base, with some reportsof activity below half of pre-recession levels.  
Throughout 2009, public sector construction projects had
provided a key source of revenue for many firms.  While manywere concerned about prospects for public spending, therewere few reports of any slowdown as yet.
Credit conditions
The Agents’ sense was that the availability of finance hadimproved slightly through the second half of 2009.  A growingnumber of firms had been able to raise funds in capitalmarkets.  And, on balance, the availability of bank credit hadincreased marginally.  But, as had been the case for some time,contacts’ experiences (and expectations) of credit conditionsvaried markedly according to their sector and size.  Forexample, reports of improved access to finance were moreprevalent among larger companies, particularly those withlower levels of gearing.  By contrast, reports of improved creditconditions from smaller businesses, and those operating in theconstruction and property sectors, were less common.Demand for bank finance had remained muted as many firmschose to pay down debts.
Employment
There had been little change to the broad picture of a slowingrate of decline in employment.  While there continued to besporadic reports of significant redundancies, such reports wererarer than they had been earlier in the year.  There were,however, few reports of growth in employment — where firms’sales had picked up, it was more common to hear of moves tohire temporary staff or reverse earlier cuts to average hoursthan of recruitment of permanent staff.  
Looking ahead, the outlook for employment continued to
improve slightly, as reflected in a further tickup in the Agents’scores ( Chart 3 ).  Barring a further fall in demand, few firms
were planning significant additional cuts to staffing levels.  Butat the same time, there were very few plans for any substantialrecruitment of permanent staff — the majority of contactsexpected headcount to remain broadly stable over the comingmonths, with any growth in activity supported by use oftemporary employees and increases in average hours.32101234
2005 06 07 08 09Scores
Business services 
Consumer services +
–Three months on same period a year earlierChart 2 Services turnoverCapacity utilisation
The recent pickup in some firms’ sales had led them to
increase capacity utilisation — for example by relaxingovertime bans, or unwinding short-time workingarrangements.  But the broad picture remained one ofwidespread spare capacity.  Looking forward, few contactsanticipated any marked increase in demand over the next fewmonths.  As a result, capacity constraints were rarely expectedto bind in the near term.  
Costs and prices
Labour costs
Private sector contacts continued to describe their per capitalabour costs as down relative to the same period a year earlier.Many had frozen pay during the year.  And many had restrictedovertime or introduced short-time working arrangements —for them, per capita labour costs had fallen sharply as a result.While some had responded to growth in demand by reversingearlier cuts to average hours, there were still plenty ofexamples of short-time working.  As a result, the Agents’scores remained negative ( Chart 4 ).Looking forward, those that were planning for their 2010
settlements expected pay growth to remain subdued.  But theAgents’ sense was that a marginally greater number ofcontacts planned to offer positive awards than had been thecase a few months earlier.  Nevertheless, many still expectedto freeze pay — in some cases, offering one-off payments torecognise improved demand, rather than committing topermanent increases in pay.  And where positive awards wereplanned, it was very rare to hear of moves to make awards inexcess of 2%.  
Non-labour costs
On average, inflation in materials costs was muted.  On thedownside, many contacts had reported lower energy bills thana year earlier, while inflation in basic foodstuffs had eased.  Onthe upside, diesel prices had risen through the second half of2009, as had the price of oil-based products such as plastics.And cutbacks in global supply had reportedly led to increasesin the price of some commodities, including metals andScandinavian timber.  The incidence of such reports hadincreased in recent months.
Looking forward, many contacts expected inflation in
materials costs to rise as recovery in global demand impactedboth on spot commodity prices and on suppliers’ incentives tonegotiate on pricing.  However, sterling’s depreciation waswidely regarded as being already passed through to materialsprices.
Output prices
Substantial spare capacity continued to push down on outputprices.  That pressure remained most clearly evident in theconstruction sector and for business services providers —where reports of discounting and fee negotiations werewidespread.  
Consumer prices
The Agents’ intelligence continued to suggest that inflation inconsumer goods prices remained low but positive.  On theupside, petrol prices had risen and the Agents had continued tohear reports of pass-through of higher imported goods prices.On the downside, twelve-month inflation in food prices hadeased.  
Looking forward, many retailers expected post-Christmas
discounting to be either less pervasive (applied to a smallerproportion of product lines) or shallower than in early 2009 —a result of the relatively low stock levels that they had orderedin the run-up to the Christmas period.  An Agents’ SpecialSurvey of retail and leisure services providers suggested thatthe majority of contacts expected to pass on at least a part ofthe 1 January 2010 rise in VAT (see box).  4 Agents’ summary of business conditions January 2010
543210123
2005 06 07 08 09Scores
ManufacturingServices +
–Over the next six monthsChart 3 Employment intentions
+
–
2101234
2005 06 07 08 09Scores
ManufacturingServicesThree months on same period a year earlierChart 4 Labour costs per headAgents’ survey on retail trading over the
Christmas period
Given the importance of seasonal trading, the Agents contact
a broad range of retailers and leisure services providers in late December each year, to get an early view of sales over theChristmas period.  In the 2009 Survey, the Agents contactedaround 170 of their contacts during the last two weeks ofDecember.  The sample size was small relative to other Agents’ Special Surveys run during 2009 — reflecting thecompressed timescale and the focus on a single sector — butnevertheless covered a substantial proportion of the Agents’retail and leisure services contacts.  All figures reported areweighted by UK turnover.
Respondents were asked how their sales had changed relative
to the same period a year earlier.  A large majority of retailers reported growth in sales — almost two thirds havingseen growth in excess of 5% ( Chart A ).  Most felt that their
Christmas trading had exceeded expectations —notwithstanding any disruption caused by adverse weatherconditions.  That said, several commented that growth hadbeen flattered by last year’s weak comparators, with retailsales remaining below 2007’s levels.  Most leisure servicesproviders also reported growth in sales.
Respondents were also asked about the timing and magnitude
of their promotional activity.  In the 2008 survey, many hadreported having started promotional activity earlier than in theprevious year and having offered more and deeper discounts.In 2009, most had started their promotional activity no earlierthan the previous year and had offered broadly similardiscounts ( Chart B ).  In part, that may have reflected the
strong sales many had recorded.  Additionally, many retailershad entered the Christmas period with a lower level of
inventories than last year, and hence had less stock to shift.
Looking forward, contacts were asked whether and how far
they planned to pass the 1 January 2010 rise in VAT through totheir prices.  Around 80% planned to pass through at least apart of the VAT rise, with almost half planning to pass itthrough in full ( Chart C ).Agents’ summary of business conditions January 2010
020406080
Earlier timing(b)Larger discounts2006
20072008
2009
Net balance of ﬁrms(a)Chart B Timing and magnitude of promotional activity
relative to the previous year
(a) Proportion of firms engaging in earlier/larger discounting less those engaging in later/smaller
discounting.
(b) The net balance of respondents reporting earlier promotional activity was close to zero in 2009.
020406080
Fallen 
substantially 
(>-5%)Fallen 
slightly 
(-2% to -5%)  Unchanged
     (-1% to +1%)     Risen slightly
(+2% to +5%)Risen 
substantially
(>+5%)Retail
LeisurePer cent of ﬁrms 
Change in sales relative to the same period a year earlier Chart A Sales over the Christmas period
Full pass-throughDo not plan to pass through
Pass-through less than halfPass-through 50%–100%
4%46%
33%17%Chart C Plans for pass-through of the 1 January 2010
VAT increase