Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2014/september-2014.pdf
Date: 2014-09-30

•    Retail sales values growth had eased, but this was due to lower food price inflation;  consumer services values had
continued to grow steadily.
• 
   Housing market activity had stabilised at lower transaction levels, after a weakening in earlier months, which
contacts largely attributed to the implementation of the Mortgage Market Review.  House price inflation had
eased.
• 
   Investment intentions for the next twelve months had remained steady, and were consistent with more rapid
growth in services investment than manufacturing.
• 
   Business services turnover growth had remained strong.
• 
   Manufacturing output growth for the domestic market had eased.  Fragile European demand, sterling’s
appreciation and the crisis in Ukraine had affected export volumes.
• 
   Construction output growth had eased slightly but remained robust.
• 
   Corporate credit conditions had improved further.
• 
   Employment intentions had weakened in manufacturing and consumer services but had increased further for
business services.
• 
   Recruitment difficulties had edged up, and were affecting a widening range of sectors.
• 
   Capacity utilisation had eased over the month, as investment and recruitment had boosted capacity at some firms
ahead of expected demand growth.
• 
   Growth in total labour costs per employee had remained steady.
• 
   Materials costs and imported finished goods prices had continued to fall on a year earlier.
• 
   Output price inflation had edged lower, but profitability had continued to rise modestly.
• 
   Consumer price inflation had remained modest.
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by
theBank of England’s Agents following discussions withcontacts inthe period between late July2014 and late August2014.Itprovides information on the state of business conditions fromcompanies across all sectors of the economy.  The report does notrepresent the Bank’s own views, nor does it represent the views ofany particular company or region.  The Bank’s Monetary PolicyCommittee uses the intelligence provided by the Agents, inconjunction with information from other sources, to assist itsunderstanding and assessment of current economic conditions.Acopy of this publication can be found at:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/agentssummary/default.aspx.The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, 
the East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the North
West, Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, 
the SouthWest, Wales, the West Midlands & Oxfordshire, and
Yorkshire & the Humber.
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic
conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in the
Inflation Report, obtained from:
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/inflationreport/
default.aspx.Agents’ summary of business conditions
September2014Demand
Consumption
Annual growth of retail sales values had eased.  That was
largely attributed to intense competition between grocery
retailers that had resulted in lower food price inflation, ratherthan any pronounced weakness in retail sales volumes.Growth in demand for household durable goods such asfurniture, new kitchens and white goods had remained robust.
Consumer services values had continued to grow at a steady
rate.  The tourism industry had reported some growth overallin visitor numbers during the summer, compared with lastyear, resulting in higher rates of hotel occupancy.  Pubs,coffeebars and restaurants had continued to report goodgrowth in demand.
Housing market
Housing market activity had stabilised at lower transactionlevels than at the start of the year, following a softening in Q2.
The slowdown had been especially marked in Central London,where the appreciation of sterling had also deterred someforeign buyers.  More generally, demand had been dampened
by the implementation of the Mortgage Market Review (MMR)— principally because of the lengthening of mortgageprocessing times.  Contacts suggested that underwritingstandards would be tighter over the longer term as a result ofthe MMR, although overall, contacts felt the longer-termimpact on housing market activity would be relatively limited.House price inflation had slowed, especially in areas that hadseen significant earlier increases in prices.  Some estate agents
felt that this reflected a more balanced market, with supply inthe secondary market gradually improving, though that wasnot even across regions and shortages of properties for salewere said to be persisting in some areas.  Shortages ofsurveyors, solicitors and authorised mortgage advisers were
also having an impact on activity in some regions.
Business investment
Investment intentions for the next twelve months hadremained steady, and were consistent with more rapid growthin services investment than manufacturing.  Investmentgrowth was underpinned by sustained positive sentimentabout demand, and improvements in credit conditions hadremoved a constraint to investment for some firms.Investment in both new-build and refurbished commercial,retail and industrial property had strengthened in recentmonths.  Across sectors, previously deferred projects toreplace or update assets were now taking place.  IT spendinghad remained strong.  For the minority of firms that wereinvesting less than in prior years, capital spending was typicallylower because previous investment programmes had providedadequate capacity for expansion plans.Exports
Manufacturing export volumes growth had weakened
(Chart1).  Goods exports to the United States, Asia and the
Middle East had continued to increase.  But demand from
Europe was still fragile and there were concerns that growth in
the emerging economies was slowing.  Political instability in
Ukraine was having an adverse impact on exports to the wider
region and the Russian embargo on certain Western productshad resulted in a loss of trade for some exporters.  Sterling’s
appreciation had primarily affected exporters’ margins, but
there were an increasing number of examples of adverse
effects on export volumes.  Services exports growth had
continued at a steady rate.  Strong growth in professional
services firms’ work for clients globally had been maintained.
UK engineering and construction consultancy had remained in
strong demand outside Europe.  Inbound tourism, both leisureand business, was often reported to be rising, though some
contacts in London reported overseas visitor numbers had
been below expectations. 
Output
Business services
Business services turnover growth had remained robust.  In
professional and financial services, greater confidence in
economic prospects had led to increasing activity across a
range of services such as consultancy, recruitment and
corporate finance.  Mergers and acquisition activity had held
up and there was more evidence this month that UK funds and
institutions were acquiring commercial property assets outsideLondon.  The number of initial public offerings had fallen backa little recently and new public sector work was reported to be
starting to slow in the run-up to the 2015 general election.
Other business services turnover had remained strong,
especially IT.  Demand for warehousing and distribution
services had strengthened, particularly for firms providing
services to the construction sector.  Spending on business
travel, hotel stays and conferencing had increased, with
growth in these subsectors stimulating demand for otherservices such as laundry, cleaning and security.2                                                                                                                           Agents’ summary of business conditions September 2014
5 4 3 2 1 0 1 2 3 4 
2 0 0 5  0 6  0 7  0 8  0 9  1 0  1 1  1 2  13 14 Scores 
Exports
Output for the 
  domestic market+
–Three months on the same period a year earlierChart 1Manufacturing outputAgents’ summary of business conditions September 2014                                                                                                                           3
Manufacturing
Manufacturing output growth had eased a little (Chart 1).
Manufacturers of construction products and materials had
reported the strongest growth in demand.  Manufacturers of
consumer goods had reported, for the most part, steadygrowth with rising demand for home improvement productsand furniture.  Food and drink manufacturers had benefitedfrom better weather.  Output in the engineering supply chainhad continued to grow at a steady rate reflecting sustaineddemand by UK manufacturers supplying the overseasautomotive and aerospace sectors.  But growth in output hadeased a little in some other export supply chains and in the
energy sector there had been a softening in near-term demandfrom the nuclear sector and for oil and gas exploration.
Construction
Construction output growth had eased a little but remained
strong.  There was growing evidence that shortages of labourand, to a lesser extent, materials were delaying projects andpushing up costs.  Activity was increasingly broad based,including house building, industrial and commercialdevelopment (especially warehousing) and transport projects,such as highways and railways.  Utility companies were alsoinvesting significantly in infrastructure improvements.Increasing demand for office accommodation was said to beleading to some speculative development outside London.
Public sector backed schemes were said to be supportingactivity across the United Kingdom, although some contactshad concerns that this activity might ease back around thegeneral election in 2015.  House builders’ output was rising,but still at a relatively modest rate and, according to someforecasts, growth in the number of housing starts wasexpected to slow in 2015.
Credit conditions
Corporate credit availability and pricing had continued toimprove gradually.  That picture included conditions for somesmall and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), although thoseoperating in sectors like house building or leisure hadcontinued to struggle to obtain finance.  Many SMEs hadremained wary of relying on bank borrowing and hadcontinued to pay down debt.  Non-traditional fundingproviders — such as crowdfunding or peer-to-peer lenders —were often more expensive than high street banks, but couldprovide funds more flexibly or quickly, did not requirecovenants, and were willing to look at lending opportunitiesthat other banks had turned away.  There had appeared to besome increase in the availability of commercial real estatedevelopment funding from a low base.  The trend forcorporates to extend payment terms and offer supply-chainfinance to enable suppliers to manage the effects on theircashflow had continued.Employment 
Employment intentions pointed to continued growth in staff
numbers, despite having diverged somewhat across sectors(Chart 2).  Business services intentions had edged up further,
with particular strength in professional and property-related
services, IT and logistics.  In banking, consolidation was stilltaking place, but the effects on employment were being partly
offset by job creation in areas such as compliance.  Consumer
services intentions had eased back.  There had also been a
slight weakening in intentions in manufacturing, in partreflecting an anticipated pickup in productivity, often on theback of past or planned capital expenditure.  Recruitment
difficulties had picked up further, and were spreading beyond
IT, engineering, and construction and associated sectors.Those difficulties partly reflected a lack of graduate
recruitment and apprenticeships during the downturn, with
increasing reports of a shortage of experienced qualified
professionals and skilled manual labour.  While many
companies had reinstated trainee programmes, those would
only address skills shortages over a number of years.  Unskilled
labour had appeared to remain readily available, in some cases
reflecting the supply of migrant workers.  Attrition rates had
remained low relative to pre-recession norms for most
contacts, but reports of greater churn and some poaching of
staff had increased, particularly within construction andprofessional services.
Capacity utilisation
Capacity utilisation across both manufacturing and serviceshad eased over the month, though remained close to normal
(Chart 3).  Capacity constraints for both labour and materials
in the construction sector had persisted and had led to delays
on some projects.  In manufacturing, utilisation of labourremained higher than for capital.  For a minority of
manufacturing contacts, investment had added to capacity.
Most reported comfortable levels of physical capacity with,
some skills shortages aside, sufficient labour capacity readily
available through the addition of overtime and extra shifts.  In5 4 3 2 1 0 1 2 3 4 
2 0 0 5  0 6  0 7  0 8  0 9  1 0  1 1  1 2  13 14 Scores 
Business services 
Manufacturing Consumer services  +
–Over the coming six monthsChart 2Employment intentionsthe service sector, investment and increases in staffing had
lowered capacity utilisation for some companies.  The balancebetween labour and capital utilisation was more even acrossthe service sector than for manufacturing.  Some professionalservices, retail and estate agency firms had reported skilled
labour constraints, although in some other subsectors there
was reported to be some excess labour capacity followingrecruitment made in expectation of higher demand to come.In retailing, new store openings by large discounters andgrowth in e-commerce had continued to place demands onlogistics and warehousing capacity.  Hotel occupancy rateshad continued to rise.
Costs and prices
Labour costs
Steady growth in labour costs per employee had continued(Chart 4), with the majority of pay settlements continuing tobe in the 2%–3% range.  There was increased evidencehowever that pressure on pay costs was emerging, either as aresult of some catch-up after periods of wage restraint or toretain and attract specific skills in areas where there were skills
shortages.  That had led to some targeted or discretionaryawards that were somewhat above 3%.  Overtime paymentsand performance-related bonuses were reported to bemoderately higher than a year ago.  There were continuedreports of employers taking on more apprentices/trainees,hiring more junior or lower skilled staff to train up, oroutsourcing jobs to reduce wage growth, all of which wouldbear down on average salaries to a small extent.  In addition,other costs of employing people, such as pensionauto-enrolment costs, ‘salary sacrifice’ schemes and otherbenefits may have led to lower wage growth in somecompanies.  The increase in the National Minimum Wage inOctober 2014 was reported to be putting upward pressure onsome pay awards to maintain differentials between staff.Non-labour costs
Material costs had remained lower than a year earlier.  The
main exception had continued to be construction materialswhere reports of double-digit increases for some building
materials were widespread.  Outside construction, the recent
appreciation of sterling and a softening of global demand had
continued to dampen inflation in imported commodities andcomponents prices.  Energy cost inflation had moderated and
some businesses had reported lower prices on renewal of
annual contracts.  Imported finished goods price inflation had
remained slightly negative.  The use of exchange rate hedges
or fixed price sterling contracts meant that some of the
impact of the recent appreciation of sterling had yet to feed
through.  For some contacts, such as clothing businesses, risingproduction costs in emerging market economies had to someextent offset the downward pressures on import costs from
the recent strength of sterling.
Output prices and margins
Inflation in manufacturing output prices had eased.  The scopeto increase prices had remained limited for most
manufacturing contacts as material costs had continued to fall
and competition remained intense, including from imports asa result of sterling’s recent appreciation.  Companies supplying
the retail sector had been under increased pressure from the
major supermarkets to reduce prices.  Some niche producers,
however, had been able to make limited increases to prices.
Price inflation for construction products remained stronger
than for other manufacturing subsectors.  Business servicesoutput price inflation had edged down slightly.  Contacts
reported that clients were highly price sensitive, with the use
of competitive tendering widespread.  In professional services,
some companies had been able to increase fees modestly asdemand had picked up, especially in recruitment and specialist
areas such as engineering services.  Profitability had continuedto rise modestly in both manufacturing and services sectors, asincreased volumes had lowered average costs and efficiency
had risen.  Sterling’s recent appreciation had reduced input2 1 0 1 2 3 4 
20 0 5  0 6  0 7  0 8  0 9  1 0  1 1  1 2  13 14 Scores 
Manufacturing  Services 
+
–Three months on the same period a year earlierChart 4Total labour costs per employee4                                                                                                                           Agents’ summary of business conditions September 2014
4 3 2 1 0 1 2 3 4 
20 0 5  0 6  0 7  0 8  0 9  1 0  1 1  1 2  1 3  14 Scores 
Total services Manufacturing +
–Over the coming six months, ‘relative to normal’Chart 3Capacity utilisationcosts, although for manufacturing exporters those effects had
been more than offset by pressure on their selling prices.  
Consumer prices
Consumer price inflation had remained modest.  The rate offood price inflation had fallen further, and was expected toremain low in the light of weakening commodity prices, theearlier rise in sterling, and intense competition amongretailers.  Vehicle and heating oil prices had softened a little,reflecting past falls in the price of oil.  In contrast, graduallyrising consumer spending had enabled more householddurables, clothing and footwear to be sold at full price than ayear ago.  Consumer services price inflation had remained a
little stronger than for goods, but contacts were cautious
about pricing prospects.  For example, hotel room rates had
continued to edge higher, but the stock of available package
holidays was higher than a year earlier and had begun to be
discounted;  and inflation in ticket prices for many leisure
attractions and events was generally restrained.  A number of
service contacts, however, reported that future increases in
labour costs, such as those arising from the increase in the
national minimum wage, would be reflected in consumer
prices relatively quickly.Agents’ summary of business conditions September 2014                                                                                                                           5