Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2014/december-2014.pdf
Date: 2014-12-31

•    Retail sales values growth had eased, although there was some optimism about seasonal trading prospects. 
Consumer services values growth had been steady. 
•    Housing market activity had continued to slow and house price inflation had softened. 
•    Investment intentions for the next twelve months had eased slightly but remained consistent with moderate 
growth overall. 
•    Business services turnover growth had remained relatively strong and broad-based across subsectors. 
•    Manufacturing output growth for the domestic market had eased, and manufacturing export growth had slowed 
further. 
•    Construction output growth had remained robust, with activity continuing to shift towards commercial 
development. 
•    Corporate credit conditions had improved further, with signs of an increase in lenders’ risk appetite. 
•    Employment intentions had eased slightly for manufacturers, but overall remained consistent with modest 
headcount growth. 
•    Recruitment difficulties had remained somewhat above normal. 
•    Capacity utilisation had remained broadly around normal. 
•    Growth in total labour costs per employee had been steady, although there was some evidence of increasing 
wage pressures in some subsectors with skills shortages. 
•    Materials costs , other than for certain construction inputs, had continued to fall on a year earlier.  Imported 
finished goods prices had declined. 
•    Output price inflation had remained subdued in manufacturing, but had increased for business services. 
•    Consumer price inflation had eased further for goods and remained subdued overall. 
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by 
the Bank of England’s Agents following discussions with contacts in 
the period between late October 2014 and late November 2014. 
It provides information on the state of business conditions from 
companies across all sectors of the economy.  The report does not 
represent the Bank’s own views, nor does it represent the views of 
any particular company or region.  The Bank’s Monetary Policy 
Committee uses the intelligence provided by the Agents, in 
conjunction with information from other sources, to assist its 
understanding and assessment of current economic conditions. 
Acopy of this publication can be found at: 
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/agentssummary/ 
default.aspx .The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, 
the East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the North 
West, Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, 
the South West, Wales, the West Midlands & Oxfordshire, and 
Yorkshire & the Humber. 
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic 
conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in the 
Inflation Report , obtained from: 
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/inflationreport/ 
default.aspx .Agents’ summary of business conditions 
December 2014 Demand 
Consumption 
Annual growth of retail sales values had continued to ease 
(Chart 1), partly reflecting the impact of lower retail price 
inflation.  Unseasonably mild weather had continued into 
November, reducing demand for autumn clothing and 
footwear lines.  The pattern of demand growth for household 
goods, such as furniture and flooring, had been mixed.  New 
car sales growth had eased from the elevated rates seen in the 
first half of the year.  Looking ahead to the Christmas trading 
period, retailers were, on balance, optimistic about the 
outlook, suggesting that the recent softening in activity 
growth might be temporary.  Some of the larger retailers had 
forecast a significant uplift around ‘Black Friday’ this year 
(28 November), especially in the electrical sector.  Consumer 
services turnover growth had been steady.  Demand had 
continued to grow for restaurants, pubs and leisure 
attractions.  Consumer demand for wealth management and 
pensions planning had remained strong.  Rail and road 
journeys had continued to increase. 
Housing market 
Housing market activity had slowed and house price inflation 
had softened.  This included in the new-build market, where 
some developers had increased incentives for buyers, to 
boost sales and prevent stock overhang.  The slowdown was 
most evident in London and parts of the South East, with a 
drop in new enquiries and some deals falling through. 
Contacts cited a range of factors for the softer environment 
including:  the effects of the Mortgage Market Review on 
mortgage availability and approval times, softening foreign 
demand in central London and a waning impetus from earlier 
pent-up demand.  Nonetheless, some estate agents had 
continued to report stock shortages as an issue.  The rental 
market remained buoyant, with shortages of supply boosting 
rents in certain areas.  And the buy-to-let market had 
remained robust. Business investment 
Business investment intentions had eased slightly, but 
remained consistent with moderate growth overall.  In 
manufacturing, intentions had softened where international 
orders had been below expectations or when existing 
investment projects had been completed.  Productivity 
improvements, efficiency gains and replacement programmes 
were generally seen as higher investment priorities than new 
capacity.  Service sector firms’ intentions had also eased.  In 
retail, several large chains were looking to consolidate across 
stores rather than expand, with investment plans focusing 
instead on distribution and IT.  However, discount retailers had 
maintained or increased strong expansion plans.  UK oil and 
gas investment had shown tentative signs of weakening due to 
falling oil prices and relatively high exploration costs. 
Exports 
Manufacturing export growth had continued to slow, with 
weak euro-area demand cited as the principal driver.  Other 
contributory factors included a broader slowing of world 
activity growth, geopolitical tensions and sterling’s 
appreciation.  However, there had been little mention of a 
slowdown in exports to China.  Services exports, though also 
affected by subdued euro-area demand, had continued to 
grow at a faster rate than for goods.  Inbound UK leisure and 
business tourism had continued to grow robustly.  Engineering 
consultancy had continued to grow strongly and professional 
services firms maintained their strong growth in work for 
overseas clients. 
Output 
Business services 
Business services turnover had continued to expand robustly. 
Continuing strength in commercial property activity and 
infrastructure construction had generated increasing demand 
for a wide range of associated professional services.  Demand 
from the financial sector for legal, accountancy and audit work 
had increased, reflecting legacy asset disposal and 
transactional work.  There were reports, however, of some 
initial public offerings having been put on hold as a result of 
increased equity market volatility and there had been signs 
that decisions on some large mergers and acquisitions deals 
had started slowing in the run-up to the General Election, 
potentially affecting future workloads.  Growth in other 
business services had continued at a steady rate.  Robust 
online sales and a busy construction sector had together 
boosted demand for ports, haulage and warehousing. 
Corporate travel, hospitality and conferencing had continued 
to recover, and bookings for Christmas entertainment had 
increased on a year earlier.  IT services had been supported by 
growing demand from the finance sector and increased 
interest in cloud services from most sectors.  Digital advertising 
had grown strongly but print media continued to shrink. 2                                                                                                                             Agents’ summary of business conditions December 2014 
Three months on the same period a year earlier 
3210123
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 Scores 
Consumer services turnover Retail sales values 
+
–Chart 1 Retail sales values Agents’ summary of business conditions December 2014                                                                                                                             3
Manufacturing 
Growth in manufacturing output for the domestic market had 
eased ( Chart 2), due in part to slowing demand for 
intermediate products in export supply chains.  Contacts had 
reported a slowdown in a number of subsectors since the 
summer, including automotive components, plastics, printing 
and chemicals, with some contacts suggesting that a period of 
UK restocking was coming to an end.  Growth in the food and 
drink sector had remained moderate.  In contrast, suppliers of 
goods for infrastructure construction had continued to report 
strong growth.  The immediate outlook was uncertain and 
many small and medium-sized companies reported 
poorer -than-usual visibility on future orders. 
Construction 
Growth in construction output had remained robust, with a 
continuing shift towards commercial development offsetting 
an easing of house builders’ output, as some responded to the 
softening of demand.  Growth in commercial development 
had been broad-based, including industrial property, 
warehousing, infrastructure spending.  Office construction 
remained modest in most regional markets but was expected 
to increase as existing capacity was used up. 
Credit conditions 
Corporate credit availability had improved further, with signs 
of an increase in lenders’ risk appetite.  Capital market finance 
remained readily available for larger companies at low cost. 
Banks had continued to compete fiercely for high-quality 
lending business, and reported significant refinancing activity, 
sometimes involving an extension of facilities.  Some 
covenants had eased under competitive pressures.  Banks’ 
interest in lending to smaller firms appeared to be increasing, 
suggesting some increase in lenders’ risk appetites, although 
unsecured lending remained rare.  In sectors where access to 
finance had been very difficult, such as hospitality, there were 
some reports of companies once again being able to access 
bank credit. Employment 
Employment intentions had eased in recent months ( Chart 3)
but had remained consistent with modest headcount growth. 
In manufacturing, easing plans had been attributed to 
softening orders, particularly for exporters, alongside the 
effects of automation.  The recent moderation in business 
services intentions had in part reflected a move to more 
normal hiring patterns following a period of strong 
recruitment earlier in the year.  But hiring intentions remained 
stronger there than for other sectors, reflecting the relative 
strength of activity.  Intentions in consumer services had also 
moderated in recent months with fewer new retail and leisure 
venue openings.  Recruitment of apprentices, school leavers 
and graduates had intensified across all sectors, partly to 
address current or future skill shortages, but also to restrain 
wage bill growth by adjusting the composition of workforces 
towards more junior or lower-skilled roles. 
Recruitment difficulties were unchanged, remaining somewhat 
above normal.  Skill shortages had remained most acute for IT, 
engineering, some professional services, haulage, and 
construction employers, although there continued to be a 
ready supply of labour for unskilled work that often included 
migrant workers.  Some contacts, particularly in business 
services, had reported that staff churn was rising as employees 
were becoming more confident about changing employers, 
whether in pursuit of a higher salary or career progression.  For 
the majority of contacts, however, staff turnover had 
remained lower than pre-crisis levels.  Only in a small number 
of cases had recruitment difficulties led contacts to turn work 
away. 
Capacity utilisation 
Capacity utilisation had remained at broadly normal levels. 
Manufacturing capital utilisation had eased slightly in recent 
months, probably as a result of weakening output growth, Three months on the same period a year earlier 
5432101234
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 Scores 
Manufacturing 
  for export 
Manufacturing for the
  domestic market +
–Chart 2 Manufacturing output growth 
Over the coming six mon ths 
5432101234
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 Scores 
Business services
ManufacturingConsumer services +
–Chart 3 Employment intentions by sector particularly among some export-focused firms.  The 
construction sector had continued to be the area with the 
most notable capacity constraints, although constraints on the 
supply of materials had loosened slightly.  Service sector 
capacity utilisation was little changed on the month.  Contacts 
had continued to report intensive use of labour in professional 
and financial services, with less pressure evident elsewhere. 
Capital utilisation in services had also increased, with lower 
void rates for commercial property, higher occupancy rates for 
business hotels and rising loads for airlines.  In retailing, 
however, there had been a growing recognition of excess 
capacity and this had led to a consolidation of physical store 
presence, demand having been met instead through online 
distribution channels. 
Costs and prices 
Labour costs 
Growth in total labour costs had remained moderate, but 
contacts reported further evidence of some upward pressure 
where skills were scarce.  The 3% increase in the National 
Minimum Wage (NMW) had increased pay growth for affected 
businesses, either directly or in order to maintain differentials 
relative to the NMW.  Those businesses introducing 
autoenrolment into workplace pension schemes also reported 
higher labour cost growth, although a small minority of these 
had reduced this year’s pay awards to offset at least part of 
the increased cost.  The majority of pay settlements had 
remained in the range of 2%–3%, with very little pressure for 
higher increases outside areas affected by skills shortages. 
Some businesses were concerned that next year might see an 
increase in average pay awards, although they noted that 
lower retail price inflation might offset at least part of that 
pressure.  There had been a number of multi-year deals, where 
employers had looked to secure longer agreements while 
inflation remained very low.  The results of an Agents’ survey 
on paybills are detailed in the box on pages 6–7. 
Non-labour costs 
Materials costs, other than for certain construction inputs, had 
generally continued to decline ( Chart 4).  This reflected lower 
commodity prices, sterling’s appreciation and heightened price 
competition from suppliers targeting the United Kingdom in 
the wake of weakness in euro-area demand.  The most marked 
decreases had been in products derived from crude oil or 
wheat.  Energy costs had also declined but some contacts 
expected unit costs of gas and electricity to increase due to 
tight UK generating capacity.  Costs of imported finished 
goods had also continued to decline in response to sterling’s 
recent appreciation, as hedges unwound and earlier forward 
orders were renewed.  Retail contacts had reported falling 
costs for imported clothes, food and drink. Output prices and margins 
Manufacturing output price inflation had remained subdued 
with little upward pressure on prices from input costs. 
Suppliers to the supermarket sector had reported intensifying 
pressure to reduce prices.  In contrast, construction materials 
manufacturers had continued to increase prices, albeit at a 
slower rate than earlier in the year.  Business services price 
inflation had increased.  As demand had picked up, the pricing 
environment was gradually improving for many contacts.  For 
example, fee rates in some areas of professional services, such 
as architects, specialised audit work and fund management 
had risen as a result of growing business volumes, although 
legal sector fee inflation had been muted as a result of excess 
capacity.  Rents on new commercial property lettings had 
edged up, as incentives such as rent-free periods had been 
reduced. 
Manufacturing profitability growth had slowed further. 
Although higher volumes, efficiency gains and lower input 
costs had supported manufacturing profitability, margins had 
remained compressed and sterling’s appreciation had hit 
margins for many exporters.  Service sector profitability had 
continued to grow modestly.  In construction, fixed-price 
contracts agreed previously had depressed profitability for 
some contacts as material and labour costs had risen sharply; 
some firms had responded by raising prices on future tenders 
and holding prices for shorter periods. 
Consumer prices 
Consumer price inflation had remained subdued.  Food prices 
were generally reported to be under downward pressure 
across many lines due to heightened competition among 
grocery multiples and the pass-through of lower food 
commodity costs.  But prices for some less frequently 
purchased foodstuffs had firmed a little, as retailers offset the 
reductions being offered for ‘everyday’ items.  The influence of 
discount grocery retailers had reportedly begun to spread to 
the pricing of some categories of non-foods.  There were 
reports of widespread discounting of autumn clothing, unsold 4                                                                                                                            Agents’ summary of business conditions December 2014 
Three months on the same period a year earlier 
321012345
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 Scores 
Materials costs
Imported ﬁnished g oods prices +
–Chart 4 Raw materials and imported finished goods prices because of warm weather.  Domestic heating oil, petrol and 
diesel had continued to fall in price.  Inflation for consumer 
services prices remained somewhat stronger than for goods, 
supported by stronger demand for some services, including 
leisure, accommodation and premium holidays.  Prices at some restaurants and cafés were also said to have ticked up a 
little.  In the near term, the slowing in headline inflation 
indices, such as RPI, was expected to result in lower increases 
in some regulated prices than last year, such as those for 
commuter travel and social housing. Agents’ summary of business conditions December 2014                                                                                                                              5Agents’ survey on paybill growth 
To gain insights into the recent disparity between growth in 
pay awards and average wages, the Agents asked businesses 
about their latest pay settlements, the annual growth in 
paybills per employee in the latest quarter, and factors causing 
any differential between the two.  The survey also asked about 
the expected impact of recruitment and retention difficulties 
on the growth of firms’ paybills per employee in 2015.  Some 
420 companies participated in the survey, with a combined 
employment of just over 700,000 staff.  The results were 
weighted by employment, and then re-weighted according to 
Office for National Statistics (ONS) employment sector 
weights to adjust for differences in the composition of the 
survey compared with the economy as a whole.  Given the 
nature of the Agents’ contact base, larger firms accounted for 
a bigger share of employment in the sample than in the 
economy as a whole. (1) 
Overall, respondents’ latest reported pay settlements 
averaged 2.3% ( Chart A), little changed on the comparable 
figure of 2.2% in the Agents’ pay survey conducted in the 
previous December and January.  The survey recorded average 
annual growth of paybills per employee of 2.6% in the latest 
quarter, substantially higher than the latest comparable 
official data for annual growth of total private sector pay 
(average weekly earnings) of 1.1% in the three months to 
September.  There are a number of factors that might explain 
the difference.  For example, the survey would not capture any 
compositional shifts in the employed labour force towards 
lower-paying industries in the past year.  In addition, the 
ONS’ Annual Survey of Hours and Earnings suggested that 
small firms, which were under-represented in the survey, 
had particularly low annual growth of total earnings in 
April 2014. Across sectors, differentials between growth of paybills per 
employee and settlements were most marked in business 
services and construction ( Chart A ).  Settlements and paybill 
per employee growth were reported to be broadly similar in 
manufacturing and consumer services. 
Firms were asked about the factors pushing up or down annual 
growth of paybills per employee, relative to their latest annual 
settlement.  Chart Bsummarises the results, expressed as net 
balances of firms reporting upward pressure from each factor 
on paybills per employee relative to pay settlements, minus 
those reporting downward pressure.  Positive net balances 
were recorded for seven of the eight categories, with the need 
to reward key staff (+49%), promotion payments (+37%) and 
pay rises for comparable recruits (+31%) the most important 
factors.  Only staff experience recorded a negative balance 
(-9%), suggesting growth in employment of less skilled or 
more junior staff relative to more senior workers. 
Finally, firms were asked whether recruitment and retention 
difficulties were expected to put upward or downward 
pressure on the growth of their paybills per employee in the 
year ahead, compared with the past year ( Chart C ).  About 
40% of firms reported anticipated upward pressure on paybills 
arising from prospective recruitment and retention difficulties, 
with a ‘slight’ effect reported much more frequently than a 
‘major’ impact.  Only a very small proportion of firms reported 
anticipated downward pressure on paybills arising from these 
sources. 6                                                                                                                            Agents’ summary of business conditions December 2014 
0.0 0.5 1.01.52.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 
Total Manufacturing Construction Consumer 
servicesBusiness 
services Pay award 
Paybill per employee Per cent Chart A Pay settlements and growth of paybill per 
employee by sector 20 10 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 Payments to 
retain key staff
Promotion payments 
Pay of comparable recruits 
Overtime payments
Average hours
Other
Bonuses 
Staff experienceNet balances (per cent) 
–+Chart B Factors causing differential growth of paybill 
per employee and pay settlements 
(1) Firms with fewer than 50 employees accounted for less than 1% of employment in 
the survey, compared with over one third of private sector employment according to 
business population estimates of the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills. 
Given a relatively low number of small firms in the survey, the results were not 
re -weighted according to firm size. Agents’ summary of business conditions December 2014                                                                                                                              7
010 20 30 40 50 60 70 
Major
downward
effectSlight 
downward
effectNo effect Slight 
upward
effectMajor
upwa rd 
effect Recruitment difﬁculties 
Retention difﬁculties Per cent of employment Chart C Impact of recruitment and retention difficulties 
on prospective paybill growth 