Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2014/november-2014.pdf
Date: 2014-11-30

•    Growth in retail sales values and consumer services turnoverhad eased. 
•    Housing market activity had shown little sign of a significant pickup after its summer slowdown, although it had 
remained higher than a year ago.  
•    Investment intentions for the next twelve months had remained consistent with moderate growth overall, and 
had eased for manufacturing. 
•    Business services turnovergrowth had remained relatively strong and broad-based across subsectors.  
•    Manufacturing output growth for the domestic market had eased slightly.  Manufacturing export growth had 
slowed further.  
•    Construction output growth had remained robust and had continued to broaden out beyond house building. 
•    Corporate credit conditions had continued to improve.  
•    Employment intentions had eased for business and consumer services, but overall remained consistent with 
modest headcount growth. 
•    Recruitment difficulties had been unchanged, remaining somewhat above normal.  Staff churn had picked up. 
•    Capacity utilisation had remained close to normal levels.  Conditions had tightened in the service sector but had 
eased slightly for manufacturers. 
•    Growth in total labour costs per employee had remained steady, reflecting modest growth in pay settlements but 
with some increased wage pressures in subsectors with skills shortages. 
•    Other than for construction goods, most materials costs had continued to fall on a year earlier.  Imported finished 
goods price inflation had remained negative.  
•    Output price inflation had remained subdued, particularly for manufacturing companies.  Profitability growth had 
been steady for services but had edged lower for manufacturers.  
•    Consumer price inflation had remained modest.  Price inflation had weakened for retail goods and had remained 
broadly flat for retail services. 
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by 
the Bank of England’s Agents following discussions with contacts in 
the period between late September 2014 and late October 2014. 
It provides information on the state of business conditions from 
companies across all sectors of the economy.  The report does not 
represent the Bank’s own views, nor does it represent the views of 
any particular company or region.  The Bank’s Monetary Policy 
Committee uses the intelligence provided by the Agents, in 
conjunction with information from other sources, to assist its 
understanding and assessment of current economic conditions. 
Acopy of this publication can be found at: 
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/agentssummary/ 
default.aspx .The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, 
the East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the North 
West, Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, 
the South West, Wales, the West Midlands & Oxfordshire, and 
Yorkshire & the Humber. 
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic 
conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in the 
Inflation Report , obtained from: 
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/inflationreport/ 
default.aspx .Agents’ summary of business conditions 
November 2014 Demand 
Consumption 
Annual growth of retail sales values had eased.  Grocery sales 
values had been affected both by downward price pressure 
and by marginally weaker volumes.  Unse asonably warm 
weather had reduced demand for some autumn lines of 
clothing and footwear, although there had been some signs of 
demand recovering during October.  Demand had remained 
strong for furniture and household goods, despite a slowing in 
housing transaction growth.  But new car sales growth had 
continued to ease back from the elevated rates seen in the 
first half of the year.  Consumer services turnover growth had 
continued to ease, but had remained firmer than for r etail 
sales.  Increasingly, turnover of some services, including air 
travel and leisure attractions, was being sustained by greater 
use of promotional activity.  But demand had continued to 
grow strongly in many restaurants and hotels.  
Housing market 
There had been little evidence of a significant pickup in 
activity after the summer slowdown, although transaction 
numbers had remained higher than a year ago both for the 
secondary market and for new homes.  Demand was reported 
to have softened over recent months, particularly for the 
highest -priced properties, and had become more closely 
aligned with the supply of properties available for sale.  As a 
result, house price inflation had slowed.  Indeed, in London 
and parts of the South East, house prices had fallen in some 
areas.  Most contacts felt that mortgage providers had now 
adjusted to the Mortgage Market Review, with mortgage 
approval times thought to have been permanently lengthened 
by a few weeks as a result of its introduction.  
Business investment 
Contacts’ plans continued to poi nt to further, moderate, 
growth in business investment over the next twelve months. 
In the service sector, the shrinking av ailability of office and 
distribution space and relaxation of some financial constraints 
were supporting investment in new commercial and industrial 
property development.  And while some retailers had curtailed 
store opening programmes, shopping centres had increased 
their spending on refurbishment.  Spending on energy 
efficiency programmes and cost-saving technology 
improvements were expected to remain widespread. 
However, among manufacturers, the expected rate of growth 
of capital spending had slowed ( Chart 1 ).  That was attributed 
to the completion of earlier investment projects and to a 
reduction in confidence about growth prospects, particularly in 
export markets.  
Exports 
Growth i n manufacturing exports had continued to slow 
(Chart 2 ).  Sales growth to the euro area had remained weak, 
and demand from both the Middle East and Russia had fallen back.  But growth in exports to the United States had 
continued, and some contacts had reported the successful 
penetration of other, new, markets, as well as sales growth 
through the introduction of new — often niche — products. 
Automotive exports had remain ed relatively robust.  The 
appreciation of sterling had increasingly begun to affect export 
sales volumes.  Growth in services exports had eased slightly. 
Professional services firms had maintained their strong growth 
rate, inbound tourism numbers had continued to increase, and 
some universities were anticipating record nu mbers of 
overseas students.  For some contacts, weaker European 
demand had been offset by increased sales to other markets. 
For some others, activity had slowed as trade restrictions 
between the European Union and Russia had taken effect. 
And while foreign demand for construction consultancy had 
remained generally strong, a number of projects in the 
Middle East had stalled. 
Output 
Business services 
Turnover had continued to grow at a robust pace ( Chart 3 ). 
In the professional and financial services sector, activity at 
legal and accountancy firms was increasing across most 2                                                                                                                            Agents’ summary of business conditions November 2014 
5432101234Scores 
Services
Manufacturing
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 +
–Over the coming twelve monthsChart 1 Business investment intentions 
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 +
–Three months on the same period a year earlier 
5432101234Scores 
Manufacturing 
  for export 
Manufacturing for the 
  domestic market Chart 2 Manufacturing output Agents’ summary of business conditions November 2014                                                                                                                             3
departments, including advisory and mergers and acquisitions 
work in particular.  Investor and occupier demand for 
commercial real estate had spread beyond London, increasing 
the demand for associated services, though some contacts had 
become concerned that investment flows had driven yields 
down to levels that were not justified by market 
fundamentals.  Architects, surveyors and civil engineers had 
benefited from prospective growth in construction output. 
Bank lending growth had been more positive, and securities 
trading and investment management contacts had reported 
steady growth.  The markets for insurance, insolvency and 
restructuring services had remained challenging.  Growth in 
other business services turnover had remained firm. 
IT services had remained one of the strongest subsectors, as 
clients increased the use of cloud comp uting, and sought to 
increase digital information usage or address cyber security 
risks.  More generally, steady growth was reported across a 
wide range of business areas including, travel, hospitality and 
marketing.  Demand for facilities management services had 
increased as occupier demand improved.  Wholesalers, 
transport and logistics companies also reported firm growth, 
although those serving the grocery sector reported more 
challenging conditions.  
Manufacturing 
Grow th in manufacturing output for the domestic market had 
eased but remained positive ( Chart 2 ).  While demand for 
construction materials production had remained strong, 
broadening beyond housing, elsewhere contacts reported a 
slowing in output growth.  In particular, there had been a 
slowdown in the demand for intermediate products from 
export supply chains.  There had also been some signs of an 
easing in demand for steel and chemicals production.  
Construction 
Robust growt h in construction output had been maintained 
and had continued to broaden out beyond house building. 
Reports of commercial developm ent activity had spread from 
logistics and student accommodation to include industrial units and factory expansions.  Office development activity had 
also picked up, a proportion of which was now speculative in 
nature.  Demand from the health and education sectors and 
from the nuclear industry had increased.  Material and labour 
shortages had led to some delays in house building, although 
house builders had not yet scaled back their build programmes 
in response to softening housing demand.  
Credit conditions 
Overall, credit conditions had continued to improve.  Banks 
were competing hard for lower-risk business lending on both 
price and non-price terms, although they had continued to 
favour larger and asset-rich businesses and higher value loans. 
The desire among some companies to increase capacity, either 
through acquisition or organic growth, had led some to 
consider borrowing once more, having spent several years 
building their cash positions instead.  For some small firms, 
access to bank finance had remained difficult or subject to 
unattractive terms.  But awareness of non-bank alternative 
funding sources had grown, and investment capital had started 
to feed through to smaller firms, usually through non-bank 
intermediaries. 
Employment 
Employment intentions had e ased back in recent months but 
had continued to be consistent with modest headcount 
growth ( Chart 4 ).  Moderation in employment intentions had 
often reflected an increased contribution from productivity 
growth to meet demand and, for some, had reflected a 
restructuring of operations.  Recruitment plans reflected 
expanding output, a pickup in staff churn and, in some cases, a 
desire to catch-up on apprenticeship and trainee programmes, 
where numbers had faltered since the recession.  Across 
sectors, employment intentions were strongest for business 
services companies ( Chart 4 ), particularly among IT, legal, 
accountancy and property firms.  Consumer services 
intentions were largely being driven by the expansion of café 
and restaurant chains, with job creation for online retailing 
roles offset by headcount reductions in physical stores. 
Employment grow th was expected to remain positive within 
manufacturing, though tempered by a focus on efficiency 
gains. 
Recruitment difficulties were unchanged, remaining somewhat 
above normal.  Skill shortages had remained most acute for IT, 
engineering, s ome professional services, haulage, and 
construction employers, although there continued to be a 
ready supply of labour for unskilled work that often included 
migrant workers.  Some contacts, particularly in business 
services, had reported that staff churn was rising as employees 
were becoming more confident about changing employers, 
whether in pursuit of a higher salary or career progression. +
–Three months on the same period a year earlier 
432101234
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 Scores  
Professional and 
  ﬁnanci al services 
 
Other business services Chart 3 Business services turnover growth For the majority of contacts, however, staff turnover had 
remained lower than normal.  Only in a small number of cases 
had recruitment difficulties led contacts to turn work away, 
although some had admitted to paring back business 
development activity in anticipation of future staffing 
constraints. 
Capacity utilisation 
Capacity utilisation had remained close to normal levels. 
In manufacturing, capital utilisation had eased slightly and 
labour utilisation h ad become more aligned with current 
activity, although there remained some areas of tight 
capacity — notably in the production of building materials. 
In construction, house builders had continued to report 
shortages of both materials and labour.  Service sector 
capacity utilisation had increased and was tightest in 
professional and financial services, especially those relating to 
property and construction.  Elsewhere both investment and 
recruitment had eased the pressure of activity growth.  But as 
retail demand continued to shift from physical stores to online 
sales, some consumer services firms had reported a mismatch 
between the structure of their distribution capacity and that 
of retail demand.  
Costs and prices 
Labour costs 
Pay settlements had mostly remained modest.  A tightening 
labour market had led to some upward wage pressure in 
subsectors with skills sho rtages.  In particular, in construction 
and some business services subsectors, contacts had reported 
increasing incidence of special awards or payments to retain 
staff.  But, in some cases, a shift towards lower-skilled 
employees had helped to offset higher pay growth among 
existing staff.  And where manufacturers had reduced 
overtime in the face of lower demand, this too had also 
reduced growth in labour costs.  October’s increase in the 
National Minimum Wage (NMW) would raise the pay of lower-paid staff by a rate around the top of the 2% –3% range 
still typical of most settlements.  But other than in subsectors 
that were significantly affected by the NMW, there had been 
relatively few recent general pay decisions.  Contacts looking 
ahead to 2015 thought that a lower rate of consumer price 
inflation might alleviate some of the upward pressure that had 
developed since the beginning of this year.  
Non-labour costs 
Materials cost inflati on had fallen ( Chart 5 ), other than 
for construction goods, where it had generally remained 
above 5%.  Falling oil prices had led to lower costs for 
oil -based materials, such as plastics, in addition to exerting 
downward pressure on haulage costs.  Wholesale gas and 
electricity costs had also moderated.  Food input costs had 
fallen in response to good global harvests and the indirect 
impact of sanctions on exports to Russia, which had led to 
greater competition to sell into European markets, including 
the United Kingdom.  Many imported finished goods costs had 
also continued to fall ( Chart 5 ), although some contacts had 
seen inflation in goods costs from China, as su ppliers had 
begun to pass on increased labour rates. 
Output prices and margins 
Manufacturing output price inflation had remained subdued. 
Most manufacturing contacts had reported that it was difficult 
to raise prices given competitive markets and low input costs. 
Those supplying the retail sector had continued to experience 
significant downward pricing pressure.  Business services 
output price inflation had been unchanged, with service 
sector companies also reporting a difficult pricing climate, 
particularly for more ‘commoditised’ services.  Professional 
and financial services had been able to increase prices for more 
specialised services, however, as demand had improved.  In the 
haulage sector, lower fuel surcharges had been offset by 
higher pay pressures, so that output prices had been fairly 
static.  There had been only limited scope for price increases in 
sectors with excess capacity or strong competition prevalent, 
such as security and cleaning. 4                                                                                                                            Agents’ summary of business conditions November 2014 
+
–
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 Over the coming six months 
5432101234Scores 
Business se rvices 
Manufacturing Consumer services Chart 4 Employment intentions 
+
–
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 Three months on the same period a year earlier 
321012345Scores 
Materials costs
Imported ﬁnished
  goods prices Chart 5 Raw materials and imported finished goods prices Manufacturing profitability growth had reduced slightly.  For 
some, declining input costs and increased efficiency, coupled 
with higher volumes, had allowed some improvement in 
profit, even though margins had remained slender.  But 
sterling’s appreciation over the past year had reduced the 
operating margins of many exporters.  Service sector 
profitability had continued to grow steadily largely reflecting 
improved volumes, efficiency gains from previous investment 
and, for some firms, a greater ability to accept only higher 
margin work.  But some construction firms’ margins had come 
under more pressur e b ecause sharp rises in labour and 
material costs had reduced the profitability of some previously 
agreed fixed-price contracts. 
Consumer prices 
Retail goods price inflation had weakened further.  Prices for 
many groceries had remained under downward pressure, reflecting falls in food commodity prices and intense 
competition among retailers.  Some department stores’ 
autumn sales had been brought forward following 
disappointing clothing and footwear sales.  Vehicle fuel prices 
had fallen further.  Overall, services price inflation had 
remained broadly flat.  Stronger summer visitor numbers in 
many regions had supported higher prices for some 
accommodation and catering services.  A number of public 
transport providers, also benefiting from stronger demand, 
had increased prices, but some air fares had fallen back. 
Domestic utility prices had remained flat.  Domestic rents, 
which had been increasing modestly, had shown signs of 
flattening off, but some household insurance bills had drifted 
up.  Consumers of discretionary services had remained highly 
price sensitive, a reflection of the continued pressure on many 
households’ budgets.  Agents’ summary of business conditions November 2014                                                                                                                             5