Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2014/october-2014.pdf
Date: 2014-10-31

•    Retail sales values growth had eased, reflecting a continued fall in food price inflation.  Consumer services values 
growth had also edged lower. 
•    Housing market demand and supply had become more closely aligned and house price inflation had moderated 
across much of the United Kingdom. 
•    Investment intentions for the next twelve months had remained consistent with moderate growth in capital 
spending. 
•    Business services turnover growth had been robust and broad-based across subsectors. 
•    Manufacturing output growth for the domestic market had been steady.  Manufacturing export volume growth 
had continued to slow, reflecting softening global demand, adverse geopolitical developments and sterling’s 
appreciation. 
•    Construction output growth had remained strong. 
•    Corporate credit conditions had remained close to normal overall, though they continued to vary by firm size and 
across sectors. 
•    Employment intentions had increased further for business services, but had eased in manufacturing and consumer 
services. 
•    Recruitment difficulties had picked up, reflecting a broadening of skills shortages as the economy strengthened. 
•    Capacity utilisation had been close to normal for both manufacturing and services. 
•    Growth in total labour costs per employee had increased slightly. 
•    Material costs and imported finished goods prices had continued to fall on a year earlier, reflecting lower global 
commodity prices and the effects of sterling’s appreciation. 
•    Output price inflation had slowed further in manufacturing, but was little changed for business services. 
Profitability had continued to rise gently. 
•    Consumer price inflation had remained modest. 
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by 
the Bank of England’s Agents following discussions with contacts in 
the period between late August 2014 and late September 2014. 
It provides information on the state of business conditions from 
companies across all sectors of the economy.  The report does not 
represent the Bank’s own views, nor does it represent the views of 
any particular company or region.  The Bank’s Monetary Policy 
Committee uses the intelligence provided by the Agents, in 
conjunction with information from other sources, to assist its 
understanding and assessment of current economic conditions. 
Acopy of this publication can be found at: 
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/agentssummary/ 
default.aspx .The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, 
the East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the North 
West, Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, 
the South West, Wales, the West Midlands & Oxfordshire, and 
Yorkshire & the Humber. 
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic 
conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in the 
Inflation Report , obtained from: 
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/inflationreport/ 
default.aspx .Agents’ summary of business conditions 
October 2014 Demand 
Consumption 
Annual growth in retail sales values had continued to ease 
(Chart 1 ).  That in part reflected a fall in food price inflation, 
which had turned negative for some products, as large retailers 
vied for market share.  Warm weather in September had 
resulted in a challenging start to autumn for clothing and 
footwear retailers.  But sales growth had held up well for 
furniture, kitchens and bathrooms, which continued to benefit 
from the recovery of the housing market and some catch-up in 
previously deferred replacement spending.  Consumer services 
demand growth had slowed, but remained ahead of retail 
sales.  After a good summer, domestic tourism spending was 
reported to have eased slightly in September.  Spending 
volumes had continued to grow in many restaurants, hotels 
and leisure attractions, albeit sometimes generated through 
the use of discounting and promotions.  
Housing market 
The balance of housing demand and supply was reported to be 
more closely aligned than earlier in the year, as demand had 
eased.  But transactions were still reported to be restrained by 
shortages of homes for sale, albeit by varying degrees across 
regions and by less than earlier in the year overall.  Some 
contacts thought that the slower market seen during the 
summer months indicated a return to a normal seasonal 
pattern and there were mixed views about whether activity 
had picked up in September.  The Mortgage Market Review 
had affected both the availability of finance and mortgage 
approval times, which were thought to have permanently 
increased by several weeks.  House price inflation had 
moderated across much of the United Kingdom.  In the prime 
London market, both prices and transaction levels had been 
lower than a year earlier, in part reflecting a fall in overseas 
buyer activity as sterling had risen.  More generally, some 
housebuilders reported a reduction in sales and site visitors in 
recent months. Business investment 
Business investment intentions had continued to suggest 
moderate growth in capital spending for the year ahead. 
Those contacts looking to increase investment were most 
often motivated by the need to increase capacity in light of 
stronger demand.  These included some services firms that had 
taken the decision, often long delayed, to upgrade existing 
buildings or move into new premises.  For many businesses, 
easier credit conditions than in recent years had meant that 
finance was no longer a significant barrier to investment. 
And contacts reported making more widespread use of 
government initiatives such as research and development tax 
credits and Regional Growth Fund investment grants.  The 
results of an Agents’ survey on investment spending are 
summarised in a box on pages 6 –7. 
Exports 
Manufacturing export volumes growth had slowed further 
(Chart 2 ) due to the effects of softening global demand, 
geopolitical problems and sterling’s recent appreciation. 
Adverse geopolitical developments had started to affect 
export sales and confidence.  Some contacts were concerned 
about the effects of political instability in Ukraine, with some 
UK farmers being affected by trade restrictions between the 
European Union and Russia, more often indirectly than 
directly.  Despite rising tensions in the Middle East, overall 
export sales there had risen.  Exports to North America had 
continued to grow moderately, but sales to the euro area 
had flattened off and sales growth to emerging markets 
had slowed.  There were increasing reports of sterling’s 
appreciation reducing export volumes, as well as margins, 
and concerns that the full impact would only be felt when 
annual contracts were renewed over the next few months. 
Growth in services exports had continued at a steady rate. 
For example, professional services firms continued to report 
growing demand from overseas clients, including for services 
associated with a pickup in UK mergers and acquisitions and 
commercial property deals.  2                                                                                                                                Agents’ summary of business conditions October 2014 
3Consumer services turnover Retail sales values 
210123Scores 
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 +
–Three months on the same period a year earlier Chart 1 Consumer spending growth 
5432101234Scores 
Manufacturing 
  (export)
Manufacturing 
  (do mestic) 
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 +
–Three months on the same period a year earlier Chart 2 Manufacturing output growth Agents’ summary of business conditions October 2014                                                                                                                                 3
Output 
Business services 
Business services turnover had continued to grow robustly 
(Chart 3 ).  Stronger activity across a broad range of financial 
and professional services had reflected higher levels of deal 
activity in both corporate finance and commercial property. 
That in turn had generated healthy growth in a range of 
associated services.  And employment agencies reported 
strong activity, particularly in areas where there were skills 
shortages.  But growth in other professional services, such as 
litigation and insolvency work, had been more subdued. 
Among other business services, IT services growth had 
remained healthy, driven by website and app design, alongside 
the continuing shift to cloud technology.  Business travel and 
accommodation had also grown strongly, although the 
recovery in demand for conferencing facilities had been more 
muted.  Logistics activity, including among hauliers, port 
operators and warehousing, had continued to be supported by 
the pickup in construction and online retailing. 
Manufacturing 
Growth in manufacturing output for the domestic market had 
remained steady ( Chart 3 ).  The strongest growth was 
generally reported in the supply chains for construction, 
automotive, aerospace and non-nuclear energy.  Growth in the 
food and drink sector had remained moderate overall.  There 
had been more positive reports from producers of durable 
consumer goods, particularly furniture;  and also from 
suppliers of goods to the hospitality sector, such as ceramics 
and catering equipment.  Sales of defence equipment had 
been broadly flat.  
Construction 
Growth of construction output had remained stronger than 
for other sectors ( Chart 3 ), with increasing numbers of 
commercial projects adding to the earlier impetus from 
housebuilding.  Areas of particular strength had included industrial development, particularly logistics, and work on 
education and healthcare facilities.  But demand for new office 
and retail space in some regional centres had also improved as 
existing stocks of available prime accommodation were being 
depleted.  And some areas had seen significant growth in 
infrastructure projects.  Residential development had been 
maintained at a steady pace despite weaker demand in some 
areas, helped by quicker planning decisions from some 
authorities.  However, the reduced availability and increasing 
cost of materials and labour had posed a significant challenge 
to the sector, particularly where prices for projects had been 
agreed before the recent upturn.  Financial pressures among 
some construction companies had risen as a result, and some 
commercial and residential schemes had been put on hold 
because higher costs had rendered them economically 
unviable. 
Credit conditions 
Credit conditions had remained close to normal overall, but 
continued to vary by company size and sector.  Large 
corporates described credit conditions as easy, but not as 
loose as in the run-up to the financial crisis, as covenant 
standards had been maintained for the most part.  Small and 
medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) reported that a number of 
banks were typically willing to offer finance, but that many 
companies had maintained their cash surpluses partly to avoid 
dependency on banks.  Some SMEs had also looked at 
alternative forms of funding such as supply chain finance, 
vendor finance, crowdfunding or venture funds.  Credit had 
remained more difficult to obtain for the smallest firms, and 
also for particular sectors including contractors, hospitality, 
and some legal firms.  Contacts continued to report some 
extension of payment terms.  There were mixed reports as to 
whether pressures on cash flow were increasing as a result.  
Employment 
Employment intentions had remained consistent with 
moderate headcount growth.  Expanding workloads had led to 
stronger intentions in business services — particularly in IT, 
accountancy, legal and property — than in consumer services 
or manufacturing, where planned growth of staffing had eased 
a little.  Consumer services’ employment intentions were 
generally modest.  Manufacturing employment intentions had 
eased back a little, but remained positive.  Within the sector, 
intentions had been strongest where contacts were confident 
that higher output would be sustained, although even here, 
there were cases where investment in automation had 
reduced employment plans.  Recruitment difficulties had 
picked up further ( Chart 4 ).  Skills shortages had remained 
most apparent in IT, engineering, construction, professional 
services and haulage, but had gradually become more 
widespread as the economy strengthened.  Many companies Construction output Business services turnover 
Manufacturing 
  output for the
  domestic market 
5432101235
4Scores 
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 +
–Three months on the same period a year earlier Chart 3 Agents’ scores for output growth had been increasing their intake of apprentices, graduates and 
trainees as a result.  In other cases, however, businesses had 
been focused on targeted, experienced hires that would 
improve their skill mix.  Although most contacts reported staff 
attrition remaining relatively low, there was some concern 
that it had started to pick up.  Unskilled workers had 
continued to be readily available, in some cases from other 
parts of Europe. 
Capacity utilisation 
Capacity utilisation had remained close to normal for both 
manufacturing and services.  In manufacturing, labour had still 
been the dominant constraint, with the utilisation of capital 
remaining lower.  Some manufacturing contacts were 
concerned that limited availability of skilled labour would 
make it difficult to increase production through the addition of 
extra shifts.  Capacity utilisation in the service sector had been 
tightest for professional and financial services firms, especially 
those relating to property and construction where it was 
difficult to find experienced staff.  But for some service sector 
firms, investment and increases in employment had eased 
pressures on existing assets and employees.  Capital utilisation 
in many services companies had increased, as shown in lower 
void rates for commercial property, higher occupancy rates for 
business hotels, and higher load factors for airlines.  There 
remained spare capacity in parts of the retail sector, and 
indeed capacity utilisation had fallen for some retailers.  High 
demand for building materials and labour had led to a number 
of capacity constraints in the construction sector.  
Costs and prices 
Labour costs 
Pay settlements had remained modest in the majority of 
cases.  But there had been signs of pressures starting to build 
where there were skills shortages or where attrition had picked 
up, such as in construction, IT, engineering and parts of 
professional and financial services.  In some cases, higher labour cost growth had reflected special awards to particular 
groups of staff on top of more general awards.  Some 
businesses had been forced to offer higher salaries to attract 
new recruits.  While in most cases growth in labour costs had 
not yet shown any significant increase, contacts often 
expected awards in 2015 to be a little higher than in 2014, 
reflecting concerns about staff retention combined with 
improved profitability.  Contacts thought changes in the 
composition of the workforce, such as replacing senior staff 
with more junior employees, or taking on new recruits at a 
lower level than before, could be pressing down on average 
weekly earnings, but it was difficult to quantify many of these 
factors with any precision.  And in some cases an opposite 
trend was reported, such as where greater use of IT or 
automation of processes reduced the proportion of low-skilled 
labour.  Contacts reported mixed views on the short-term 
impact of the forthcoming increase in the National Minimum 
Wage.  
Non-labour costs 
Materials costs had fallen on a year earlier ( Chart 5 ). 
Sterling’s appreciation had increasingly fed through as 
currency hedges and contracts were renewed.  Global 
commodity prices had softened further, particularly for 
agricultural goods.  And lower oil prices had reduced transport 
costs.  Imported finished goods costs had also fallen, as prices 
of new season stock had more fully reflected sterling’s 
appreciation.  Foreign currency import prices had remained 
broadly flat.  But reports of double-digit inflation in 
construction material prices had continued to be widespread.  
Output prices and margins 
Manufacturing output price inflation had slowed further in 
the face of falling input costs and limited pricing power, 
particularly for food manufacturers dealing with supermarkets 
that were seeking lower prices to win market share. 
Construction product suppliers had remained an exception, 
where increased activity had allowed for further price 
increases.  Business services output price inflation had 3Materials costs 
Imported ﬁnished 
  goods prices 
21012345Scores 
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 +
–Three months on the same period a year earlier Chart 5 Raw materials and imported finished goods prices 4                                                                                                                                Agents’ summary of business conditions October 2014 
543210123Score 
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 +
–In the past three months, ‘relative to normal’ Chart 4 Recruitment difficulties remained modest.  Professional and financial services 
companies reported that clients were a little more receptive to 
higher fees, if less so for the more standard services they 
offered.  Corporate room rates, especially in city centre hotels, 
had risen marginally as business travel increased.  Commercial 
property rents were stable or rising for prime sites, but 
remained under downward pressure elsewhere.  And insurance 
premiums were flat or falling on a year earlier.  
Manufacturing profitability growth had remained modest, 
benefiting from higher volumes, efficiency gains and subdued 
input costs.  But the exchange rate had kept exporters’ 
margins under pressure.  Service sector profitability had also 
benefited from higher volumes, as well as from new services 
provided to existing clients and increasing opportunities to 
take on higher margin work. 
Consumer prices 
Consumer price inflation had remained moderate and softer 
for goods than for services.  Food price inflation had continued to weaken, with falls in fresh produce prices reflecting both 
competition between retailers and good harvests.  Some 
contacts expected that weaker export demand, in part 
following trade restrictions between Russia and the 
European Union, would lead to further downward pressure on 
domestic food prices in the coming months.  And fuel prices 
had remained well below last year’s levels.  But stronger sales 
of some high street goods had reduced the need for 
discounting by a number of retailers, and new car prices had 
crept up a little.  Consumer service providers reported that 
their customers had continued to focus on value for money, 
maintaining the pressure for discounts and promotions to 
support sales volumes where spending flagged.  But in certain 
cases, higher spending had allowed some increase in realised 
prices, including among providers of accommodation, meals 
and transport.  Stronger demand for rental property in some 
areas had supported moderate increases in rents.  Consumer 
energy prices appeared likely to remain flat in the coming 
quarters.  Agents’ summary of business conditions October 2014                                                                                                                                 5Agents’ survey on UK capital investment 
intentions 
The Agents asked businesses about the change in their capital 
investment over the past twelve months, relative to the 
previous year, and their plans for the twelve months ahead. 
The survey also explored the factors that were driving firms’ 
investment spending or were acting as constraints.  In 
addition, firms were asked to describe the amount of slack in 
their total physical capacity, relative to current levels of 
demand for their products or services.  Some 400 companies 
participated in the survey, with a combined turnover of over 
£98 billion and total employment of around 450,000 staff. 
The results were weighted by employment, and then 
reweighted according to ONS employment sector weights 
to adjust for differences in the composition of the survey 
compared with the economy as a whole. 
Overall, firms reported there had been a modest increase in 
their capital investment over the past twelve months, with 
expectations for the next year consistent with slightly stronger 
growth in spending ( Chart A ).  
The outlook for investment was strongest within construction 
and consumer services, but manufacturing investment was 
also expected to increase, and the biggest improvement in 
expectations, relative to actual spending growth over the past 
year, was in business services.  This was partially offset by an 
expected decline in investment within the utilities and 
extraction sector.  
The primary drivers of investment growth over the next year 
were expected to be demand for firms’ products and services, and the pursuit of future efficiency and productivity gains, 
with around half of all respondents citing these as important 
(Chart B ). 
Very few firms indicated that financial factors were a major 
constraint on their investment plans ( Chart C ).  The cost or 
availability of external finance were pushing down investment 
for only a small proportion of the weighted sample, although 
it was constraining a slightly higher proportion of small and 
medium-sized firms.  Pension fund contributions were 
primarily a constraint for large firms, although the effect was 
reported to be minor for the vast majority of those affected. 
Debt levels and gearing were a limiting factor for just over 
one third of all respondents, but only to a minor extent for 
most of these firms.  
A relatively small number of firms described their physical 
capacity levels as ‘plentiful’, with the exception of consumer 
services ( Chart D ), despite strong investment plans in that 
sector.  In some cases this represented a mismatch between 
firms’ spare capacity and the type of physical capital that was 010 20 30 40 50 Net balance Weighted percentage of respondentsPast twelve months 
Next tw elve months 
Around the same 
(within 10% of 
previous year) (more than 50% 
below previous year) Far less 
below previous year) Less (10%–50% 
above previous year) More (10%–50% 
(over 50% above 
previous year) Far more Chart A Investment over the past twelve months and 
intentions for the next twelve months 
0 10 20 30 40 50 Cost or availability of 
external ﬁnance
Availability of
internal ﬁnance
Pension fund 
contributions 
Company targets 
for debt levels A minor constraint 
A major constraint 
Weig hted percentage of respondents Chart C Constraints on investment 20 10 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 Demand for
products/se rvices 
Uncertainty about 
economic outlook 
Major maintenance 
needs/repl acement 
Future efﬁciency/
productivity gains
Other facto rs 
Weig hted net balance of respondents –+Chart B Drivers of investment 6                                                                                                                                Agents’ summary of business conditions October 2014 required to meet the changing structure of demand and 
distribution.  Physical capacity was tightest within 
construction and utilities, and around half the weighted 
sample of business services firms also reported little or 
no spare physical capacity. 
010 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 
Plentiful Moderate spare 
capacityLittle or no spare 
physical  capacity Manufacturing 
Construction 
Consumer services Business services 
Utilities and extractio n 
Weighted average
Weighted percentage of respondentsChart D Availability of physical capitalAgents’ summary of business conditions October 2014                                                                                                                                 7