Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2015/april-2015.pdf
Date: 2015-04-30

•    Consumer demand had continued to grow moderately. 
•    Housing market transactions had picked up modestly since the start of the year, but were lower than a year 
earlier. 
•    Investment intentions had pointed to modest growth in capital expenditure over the next twelve months. 
•    Business services turnover growth had been robust across a range of subsectors. 
•    Manufacturing output growth for both domestic and export markets had picked up slightly. 
•    Construction output growth had moderated a little further, but remained robust. 
•    Corporate credit availability had improved further. 
•    Employment intentions had continued to point to modest headcount growth overall, and had edged a little higher 
for business services. 
•    Recruitment difficulties had remained somewhat higher than normal. 
•    Capacity utilisation in manufacturing had eased somewhat and was now a little below normal, but had remained 
slightly above normal in services. 
•    Growth in total labour costs per employee had remained moderate. 
•    Materials costs had eased further and, along with imported finished goods prices , were lower than a year earlier. 
•    Output prices had fallen for manufacturers, but had increased modestly in business services relative to a year 
earlier.  Profitability growth had eased marginally. 
•    Consumer price inflation had fallen further for goods, but remained moderate for services. 
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by 
the Bank of England’s Agents following discussions with contacts in 
the period between late February 2015 and late March 2015. 
It provides information on the state of business conditions from 
companies across all sectors of the economy.  The report does not 
represent the Bank’s own views, nor does it represent the views of 
any particular company or region.  The Bank’s Monetary Policy 
Committee uses the intelligence provided by the Agents, in 
conjunction with information from other sources, to assist its 
understanding and assessment of current economic conditions. 
Acopy of this publication can be found at: 
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/agentssummary/ 
default.aspx .The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, 
the East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the North 
West, Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, 
the South West, Wales, the West Midlands & Oxfordshire, and 
Yorkshire & the Humber. 
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic 
conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in the 
Inflation Report , obtained from: 
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/inflationreport/ 
default.aspx .Agents’ summary of business conditions 
April 2015 Demand 
Consumption 
Annual growth of retail sales values had eased a little 
(Chart 1), although there were some signs of a pickup in sales 
volumes.  A slowdown in product innovation was said to be 
bearing down on spending growth for bigger-ticket household 
items such as electrical and white goods.  New car sales 
growth had remained robust, especially for premium brands, 
supported by attractive finance deals.  Consumer services 
turnover growth had picked up ( Chart 1 ).  Demand for leisure 
attractions, restaurants and hotel accommodation had been 
boosted by an improvement in household disposable incomes, 
in part as a result of lower fuel prices.  Summer bookings for 
travel to European destinations had grown strongly on a year 
earlier, stimulated by sterling’s appreciation against the euro.  
Housing market 
Housing market transactions had picked up modestly over the 
year to date, but remained lower than a year earlier.  Buyer 
enquiries had increased more strongly than instructions to sell, 
so supply was still short in some regions.  Activity was 
expected to remain sluggish until after the general election, 
especially in central London, where prices had continued to 
fall.  House price growth had remained modest in most other 
regions.  
Business investment 
Investment intentions had edged higher in recent months, and 
were consistent with modest spending growth in the year 
ahead ( Chart 2 ).  Intentions in services had remained stronger 
than those in manufacturing, with previously deferred 
expansion and refurbishment of premises now coming to 
fruition and investment in IT remaining robust.  Capital 
expenditure growth in manufacturing had most often been 
targeted at efficiency or productivity gains, with significant 
capacity expansion seldom reported.  Some contacts supplying 
products or services to the oil and gas sector had revised down 
their investment prospects as a result of slowing customer demand.  Uncertainty ahead of the general election had 
unsettled some firms, but any changes in investment plans 
were largely confined to companies that were particularly 
exposed to government policy.  
Exports 
Manufacturing export growth had edged up marginally, but 
remained weak overall.  Demand from the euro area had 
remained fragile, and competition was intensifying due to the 
euro depreciation.  US demand had continued to pick up, with 
growth opportunities reported across a range of sectors, 
including defence.  Good growth prospects had also been 
reported in other global markets, but demand from Russia, 
Brazil and Turkey was slowing.  The rate of services export 
growth had eased slightly compared with a year earlier, but it 
remained generally stronger than for manufacturing.  Demand 
had continued to grow for professional services firms as a 
result of buoyant overseas investor activity in the 
United Kingdom.  
Output 
Business services 
Turnover growth had remained robust across a range of 
business services ( Chart 3 ).  Growth in professional and 
financial services had been driven by increasing corporate 
finance activity and commercial real estate (CRE) transactions. 
Demand for commercial insurance had also increased as 
businesses expanded operations and employment. 
Demand had remained strong for suppliers of IT and 
construction -related services, while recruitment agencies were 
growing on the back of sustained employment growth and 
increased staff attrition.  Advertising revenues had been 
boosted by increased demand for digital and online marketing. 
Improved business confidence had been reflected in higher 
spending on accommodation and conferencing than a year 
earlier.  Subdued corporate credit demand, however, had 
continued to constrain banking sector growth.  And contacts 
exposed to the oil and gas sector had noted a slowing in 
activity.  2                                                                                                                                       Agents’ summary of business conditions April 2015 
3210123
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 Three months on the same period a year earlier 
Consumer services 
  turnoverRetail sales 
  values
+
–Chart 1 Retail sales values and consumer services 
turnover 2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 Over the co ming twelve months 
5432101234
Services
Manufacturing+
–Chart 2 Investment intentions Agents’ summary of business conditions April 2015                                                                                                                                        3
Manufacturing 
Domestic manufacturing output growth had picked up slightly 
(Chart 3 ).  Contacts supplying goods to the civil aerospace, 
automotive, rail, medical and construction sectors had 
reported sustained growth.  There were signs that lower 
energy costs had encouraged some firms to increase capital 
goods orders and consumer goods producers had benefited 
from rising consumer confidence.  Suppliers to the oil and gas 
extraction sector, however, had reported a further softening in 
demand as the impact of oil price falls filtered along the 
supply chain. 
Construction 
Construction output growth had remained robust, although 
the pace of increase on a year earlier had eased a little further 
(Chart 3 ).  Growth had remained strong across a range of 
sectors, especially higher education.  Speculative development 
was still largely concentrated around London, with limited 
activity in a few other geographical areas generally restricted 
to distribution and warehousing.  Growth in private new house 
building had slowed on a year ago, reflecting a combination of 
factors, including skills shortages and large house builders 
concentrating on improving margins.  
Credit conditions 
Credit availability had increased a little further.  Corporate 
loan rates had fallen, revolving credit facility tenors had 
moved out further and the availability of mezzanine finance 
had risen, often reflecting greater competition among credit 
providers.  Access to finance had improved slightly for small 
firms, but some difficulties in borrowing from banks were still 
reported, and often the small sums needed precluded the use 
of venture capital.  This had led some contacts to increasingly 
consider alternative borrowing options, such as crowd funding. 
Asset finance had also been reported to be widely available to 
small firms, often on favourable terms arranged by capital 
equipment suppliers.  Trade credit insurance rates had eased 
back and coverage had increased significantly. Employment 
Employment intentions had continued to imply modest 
headcount growth.  Expectations of hiring had edged a little 
higher within business services, particularly in accountancy, 
CRE, IT and distribution.  Modest employment growth was 
expected in consumer services, such as leisure, catering and 
retail.  Manufacturing employment intentions had slowed over 
recent months and were broadly flat relative to a year ago. 
Reports of job cuts within the oil and gas sector and its supply 
chain had increased, but these had been offset by moderate 
recruitment in more buoyant industries.  Recruitment 
difficulties had remained somewhat above normal.  Skill 
shortages had remained most prevalent in construction, 
engineering, professional services, IT, haulage and healthcare 
but had now spread to middle management more broadly. 
Alongside this, attrition had gradually picked up and there 
were increased reports of poaching by competitors.  In 
response, hiring programmes for graduates, apprentices and 
school leavers had been expanded.  Unskilled labour had 
remained generally more readily available than pre-recession 
norms, but some contacts noted fewer responses to recent job 
adverts.  Migrants had continued to bolster the supply of 
unskilled staff and, increasingly, skilled staff. 
Capacity utilisation 
Capacity utilisation had eased in manufacturing and was now 
a little below normal, while it had remained slightly above 
normal within services.  The slight reduction in manufacturing 
utilisation had reflected subdued export growth, while 
productivity improvements had augmented capacity for some 
firms.  There had been generally less spare capacity within 
labour than in physical capital.  In services, a shortage of both 
physical and labour capacity had been reported by 
professional and financial services contacts, as a result of 
strong demand growth.  Elsewhere in the sector, labour had 
remained the principal constraint, although some firms were 
able to scale operations through greater use of IT and 
outsourcing of back-office processes.  Fixed asset utilisation 
had increased across services, with the exception of retail, and 
a shortage of prime office space was becoming more evident 
in many centres.  Scarce labour resources had persisted as the 
primary constraint in construction. 
Costs and prices 
Labour costs 
Growth in total labour costs had remained moderate overall. 
The rate of pay growth in manufacturing had eased slightly 
over recent months, but had been sustained in services, 
reflecting greater skills shortages and increased churn within 
that sector.  Some companies had made larger individually 
targeted awards to key staff, within a modest overall increase 2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 Three months on the same period a year earlier 
55
432101234
+
–
Construction output Business services turnover 
Manufacturing  output Chart 3 Activity in average pay.  Some others reported a small upward 
movement in pay awards driven by National Minimum Wage 
increases or pressure to move towards the living wage.  Low 
inflation had enabled a few firms, where trading conditions 
had been challenging, to award lower settlements this year. 
Such reports, however, were limited as many employers were 
mindful of sub-inflation awards made in previous years.  Pay 
freezes were generally rare, but had been more frequently 
reported within the oil and gas sector and its supply chain. 
Pay pressure had remained much higher in construction, 
where skills shortages were more prevalent. 
Non-labour costs 
A range of materials costs had remained lower than a year 
ago, primarily driven by recent falls in global commodities 
prices, particularly those that were agriculture and oil-related. 
The impact of lower oil prices had been felt most immediately 
in contacts’ distribution costs.  Outside this, pass-through had 
continued at a relatively slow pace as existing contracts 
expired, and was expected to be restricted as suppliers tried to 
recover margins.  Building materials inflation had slowed from 
a high level as supply constraints had abated.  Imported 
finished goods costs had remained lower than a year ago, in 
part reflecting pass-through of sterling’s appreciation since 
2013 as forward contracts expired. 
Output prices and margins 
Manufacturing output prices had edged down and were now a 
little lower than a year ago ( Chart 4 ).  Price rises had become 
increasingly difficult to justify, and some producers supplying 
to supermarkets were under pressure to pass through input 
cost savings.  Increased price competition from European 
producers had added further pressure, in part a result of the 
depreciation of the euro.  Business services prices had 
continued to increase modestly ( Chart 4 ).  Professional 
services firms had achieved modest fee increases on the back 
of stronger activity levels.  But in some other services sectors, such as real estate and telecoms, intense competition had 
hampered price rises.  In transport and oil services, prices had 
fallen on the back of lower fuel costs.  Profitability growth had 
eased slightly.  Competitive pressures were limiting margin 
growth, exacerbated for some exporters by sterling’s recent 
appreciation against the euro. 
Consumer prices 
Consumer goods prices had edged down further as a result of 
continued falls in grocery prices.  Competitive pressures, along 
with the continued pass-through of sterling’s appreciation 
from around 2013, were expected to lead to further price 
reductions.  There had been a reversal of some of the recent 
reductions in road fuel prices however.  New car list prices had 
edged up, but transaction values were broadly flat as a result 
of promotional activity.  Retail services inflation had 
maintained its moderate pace.  Regulated fares, affordable 
rents and some water/sewerage charges had risen at a slower 
rate than a year ago because of lower RPI/CPI inflation.  Many 
tourism and leisure services’ prices had firmed, but the weaker 
euro was bearing down on foreign holiday price rises.  Motor 
insurance premia had firmed, reflecting increasing repair costs. 4                                                                                                                                       Agents’ summary of business conditions April 2015 
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 Three months on the same period a year earlier 
4
3210123
+
–Manufacturing 
Business to busin ess services Chart 4 Manufacturing and services prices Agents’ survey on UK corporate pricing 
To help assess businesses’ expectations about UK sales price 
inflation, the Agents conducted a survey of contacts’ 
UK corporate pricing.  The Agents asked about:  how output 
price inflation was evolving;  the factors influencing price 
inflation;  and how profit margins compared to ‘normal’.  The 
survey also asked about the use of hedging to manage input 
costs, including those where there was a currency exposure.  A 
total of 424 companies responded to the survey, representing 
£90 billion of turnover. 
Weighting the results by turnover, the vast majority (84%) of 
respondents reported that prices had remained broadly stable 
or had increased over the past year, with a positive net balance 
of 19% ( Chart A ).  Looking forward to the next year, 
expectations were also positive, although a little weaker than 
the past year.  Across sectors, manufacturers on balance 
expected continued price falls over the next year while 
respondents in consumer and business services expected price 
increases.  Small businesses expected slightly higher price 
increases over the next year than medium and large 
businesses.  
Among the factors influencing changes to output prices over 
the next year relative to the past year, only planned changes 
to margins were reported to be exerting an upward effect 
(Chart B ).  Energy and oil-related costs, along with domestic 
competition, were the factors most often cited as dragging on 
output price inflation, but general inflation in the economy 
and imported input/finished goods costs also had significant 
negative net balances.  Although just over half (52%) of businesses described their 
profit margins (operating profit as a proportion of turnover) as 
‘normal’, around four out of ten respondents described their 
profit margins as below normal, resulting in a net balance of 
-18% ( Chart C ). 
Just under half of businesses responding to the survey 
indicated that their non-labour costs were exposed to 
changes in currency, and around one fifth actively hedged 
against input cost and currency changes.  There were notable 
differences by firm size, with large firms more likely to hedge 
actively against currency changes and input cost exposures 
than small and medium sized firms.  They were also more 
likely to hedge for longer durations and to hedge a higher 
proportion of their foreign currency and input cost exposures 
than smaller firms. 010 20 30 40 50 
<-4 -4 to <-1 -1 to  1 
Per cent >1 to 4 >4 Net balancePer cent 
Past year 
Next yearChart A Output price change 
30 20 10 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 
<-4 below -4 to <-1 
below -1 to  1 
Percentage points >1 to 4 
above >4 above Net 
balancePer cent 
+
–Chart C Profit margins relative to normal 40 30 20 10 0 10 20 30 40 Planned changes to your margins General inﬂati on in the economy 
Competition from producers abroad Domestic competition 
UK inputs/ﬁnished goods costs Imported inputs/ﬁnished goods costs Other o il-related costs Energy costs Net balance, per cent 
+ –Chart B Factors influencing change in output prices over 
next year relative to last year Agents’ summary of business conditions April 2015                                                                                                                                        5