Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2015/august-2015.pdf
Date: 2015-08-31

This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by 
the Bank of England’s Agents following discussions with contacts 
in the period between late June 2015 and late July 2015.  The 
report does not represent the Bank’s own views, nor does it represent the views of any particular company or region.  More 
information on the Bank’s Agencies can be found at 
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/agentssummary 
/default.aspx .Changes to the Agents’ summary of business 
conditions 
Following a review of the Agents’ published output, some 
changes are planned to the content and frequency of the 
Agents’ summary of business conditions (ASBC ).  In future, 
the Agents will publish a Quarterly ASBC , with an improved 
executive summary and a greater amount of macrofinancial 
content to complement its traditional focus on the 
macroeconomy.  This quarterly publication will be 
supplemented by shorter Update editions after the monetary policy rounds in between.  The results of any 
special topic surveys conducted by the Agents will be 
included in Quarterly or Update editions, depending on 
which is most timely.  The Agents’ scores will be published 
alongside each Quarterly and Update ASBC .
The first Quarterly edition will be published on 
16 September, with Updates to follow on 14 October and 
11 November. •    Growth of consumer services turnover had eased slightly.  Retail sales values growth had been steady. 
•    Housing market activity had been stronger than at the start of the year, despite a continued shortage of properties 
available for sale. 
•    Investment intentions had edged down for manufacturing, but remained consistent with moderate growth overall. 
•    Business services turnover growth had remained robust and broad-based. 
•    Manufacturing output growth had been steady. 
•    Construction output growth had edged up slightly. 
•    Corporate credit conditions had been little changed. 
•    Employment intentions had eased slightly, but remained consistent with moderate growth. 
•    Recruitment difficulties had risen, and were at their highest level since 2007. 
•    Capacity utilisation had remained slightly above normal in services, and marginally below normal in manufacturing. 
•    Growth in total labour costs per employee had changed little in services, although there were signs of building 
pressures.  Manufacturing pay growth had edged lower. 
•    The rate of decline in materials costs had eased.  Imported finished goods prices had remained slightly lower than 
ayear earlier. 
•    Manufacturing output prices had remained slightly lower than a year earlier.  Business services price inflation had 
fallen slightly. 
•    The rate of decline of consumer goods prices had eased slightly, and retail services inflation had edged higher. Agents’ summary of business conditions 
August 2015 Demand 
Consumption 
Annual growth in retail sales values had been unchanged, 
remaining moderate.  In the food sector, sales values had 
shown signs of stabilising, as downward pressure on some 
prices had eased.  Sales growth in household goods was 
generally reported to be stronger than for food — often 
reflecting sales made on -line — and assisted by a recovery in 
real incomes.  Contacts continued to report that consumers 
were increasingly looking to make purchases of aspirational 
brands or indulgent items:  for example, premium car marques 
reported strong sales activity but sales of mid -market vehicles 
had flattened off.  Growth in consumer services turnover had 
remained stronger than for retail sales, although it had eased 
slightly.  Independent financial advisors reported high levels of 
activity related to changes in pension rules and interest in 
wealth planning.  Restaurants, hotels and transport providers 
continued to report robust growth.  But some contacts 
reported that recent overseas holiday bookings had been 
affected by events in Tunisia and uncertainty in Greece. 
Housing market 
Activity in the housing market had generally been stronger 
than at the start of the year, but the post -election rebound in 
activity had been patchier than many contacts had hoped. 
Outside London and other higher-value property markets, 
there had been few signs of a significant upturn in secondary 
market activity, although most contacts continued to expect 
strengthening later in the year.  A continuing shortage of 
properties available for sale had appeared to be 
self -perpetuating, as potential vendors were reluctant to put 
their homes on the market if they could not see properties 
they wanted to buy.  In some areas, this was reported to be 
pushing up prices.  Elsewhere, limited past house price 
inflation had resulted in limited equity for some home owners, 
which was reported to be hindering housing transactions. 
Activity in the new -build market had generally been stronger 
than the secondary market, supported by the government’s 
Help -to -Buy scheme.  Some contacts thought it was likely 
that the Budget reforms to tax relief for buy-to-let landlords 
were likely to dampen the appetite of some property 
investors, but it was too early to say to what extent. 
Investment intentions 
Investment intentions had remained consistent with modest 
growth overall.  Manufacturing investment intentions had 
weakened slightly overall, which for some firms reflected a 
consolidation of spending following a period of growth. 
Within that, intentions remained relatively robust in 
automotive supply chains and construction materials 
production.  But investment by manufacturing companies 
involved in steel production or producing equipment for oil 
and gas exploration/production or agriculture was reported to be weak, reflecting wider conditions in those markets. 
Investment growth by firms in the service sector was 
somewhat stronger than for manufacturing, and was often 
focused on physical premises, IT systems and distribution 
facilities.  In some cases, premises investment was being 
motivated by a need to attract staff in a tightening labour 
market.  The results of a survey on investment intentions, 
including the key drivers of spending and the main sources of 
finance, can be found on page 5. 
Exports 
Manufacturing export growth had remained modest. 
Sterling’s appreciation against the euro had negatively 
affected volumes for a minority of exporters so far, with 
margins affected more significantly.  Export volumes to Europe 
were expected to slow more markedly, however, as the effects 
of reduced competitiveness came through with a lag, for 
example as contracts expired.  Contacts had remained more 
positive about US dollar -linked markets — such as the 
United States, Asia and the Middle East — especially in sectors 
such as aerospace.  But demand from China and Russia had 
continued to moderate across a range of products.  In the 
service sector, growth was reported across a range of 
professional and financial services exports.  Some tourism 
contacts reported reduced visitor numbers from the euro area, 
although tourism from outside Europe appeared to be 
strengthening. 
Output 
Business and financial services 
Business services turnover growth had remained robust overall 
(Chart 1).  There were signs that activity had rebounded in 
some areas of professional and financial services where growth 
had softened ahead of the election.  Rising confidence and the 
steady increase in corporate finance, mergers and acquisitions 
and real estate transactions had continued to underpin robust 
growth in a range of legal and advisory services.  And demand 
for commercial and industrial space had continued to rise. 
Recruitment agencies reported further growth in activity in 
response to increased staff churn and skills shortages among 
their clients.  Demand in logistics had remained strong, 
underpinned by the recovery in construction output and 
growth in online sales.  The pace of growth in IT services had 
been sustained, with a wide range of businesses investing in 
new or upgraded customer -facing and back-office systems, 
and increasingly cyber security.  Advertising spending was said 
to be increasing as firms made use of a wider range of 
marketing channels.  Spending on hotel overnight stays, 
conferences and training had continued to rise steadily.  In the 
oil and gas sector, however, demand for a range of associated 
engineering, advisory and equipment services had continued 
to fall. 2                                                                                                                                   Agents’ summary of business conditions August 2015 Agents’ summary of business conditions August 2015                                                                                                                                    3
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing output growth for the domestic market had 
remained positive but lower than at the end of 2014 ( Chart 1). 
Contacts reported relatively strong demand growth in 
construction materials and automotive supply chains.  And a 
period of destocking, associated with easing growth in 
aerospace supply chains, appeared to have been completed. 
But a greater number of sectors — including food, metals and 
capital goods — reported output as flat, however.  Demand for 
equipment related to the oil and gas sector had remained 
weak. 
Construction 
Construction output growth had edged up ( Chart 1). 
Commercial activity had continued to strengthen, particularly 
warehouse construction, but new office building was also 
increasingly reported in regional centres.  The number of 
infrastructure projects reported was increasing and was set to 
rise further, although there were some concerns about delays 
to major rail projects.  Steady growth in private house building 
had continued. 
Credit conditions 
Credit availability had changed little overall.  Large firms 
reported that credit remained readily available, and in some 
cases was comparable to pre -crisis conditions.  Availability for 
small and medium-sized enterprises had remained more 
variable.  Banks’ risk appetite had continued to increase, and 
the cost of bank credit had fallen further for lower risk 
businesses.  Asset -based finance was reported to be readily 
available for most firms.  But access to unsecured lending, 
such as overdrafts for working capital, had continued to be 
difficult to obtain for some small firms. 
Employment 
Employment intentions had edged down marginally, but 
remained consistent with modest headcount growth.  The use of new technology and automation were said to be 
contributing to productivity growth and softening the 
employment outlook across all sectors.  Intentions had 
remained stronger in services than manufacturing.  In business 
services, employment growth had been driven by expanding 
workloads and a related tightening supply of skills within 
firms.  Consumer services jobs growth had been primarily in 
labour -intensive leisure services, warehousing and logistics. 
Manufacturing employment had remained flat overall. 
Recruitment difficulties had picked up quite markedly 
(Chart 2), with the range of skill shortages broadening. 
Shortages were pronounced in IT, engineering, construction 
trades and property -related skills, professional services, 
HGV drivers, and middle/senior management.  Difficulties 
were often attributed to a legacy of headcount reductions, 
limited recruitment and staff progression, and cuts to training 
budgets and programmes.  Recruitment agencies reported 
difficulty in filling semi and unskilled positions and that 
reliance on migrant workers was increasing in a range of areas. 
As unemployment had fallen, competition for scarce resources 
had led to increased staff turnover and poaching.  Although 
attrition rates had often remained below pre -recession norms, 
that was said partly to reflect the use of pre -emptive or 
counter pay offers to retain key staff. 
Capacity utilisation 
Capacity utilisation had remained slightly below normal in 
manufacturing and slightly above normal in services. 
Although some spare capacity was reported in manufacturing 
overall, utilisation remained elevated in automotive and 
aerospace supply chains, with shortages of skills — mainly 
engineers — and in some cases a lack of suitable industrial 
space.  Production of some construction materials remained 
constrained by available capacity.  Capacity utilisation in 
services had edged lower.  Excess retail space in the groceries 
sector and on the high street had persisted.  Service providers +
–
54321012345
Con st ructio n ou tpu tBusin ess  services tur no ver
Manu factur in g ou tpu t
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15Th ree  mon ths on  t he  s ame pe rio d a y ea r ea rlierScoresChart 1 Activity 
+
–
543210123
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15Latest three months, relative to normal ScoresChart 2 Recruitment difficulties to the oil and gas sector reported increased slack as activity 
had fallen back sharply.  For the most part business services 
reported high levels of staff utilisation and constraints were 
said to be rising in some sectors, such as distribution. 
Utilisation rates for hotels, airports and rail infrastructure had 
continued to rise across most regions. 
Costs and prices 
Labour costs 
Steady growth in total labour costs had continued.  There 
were however increasing signs of wage pressure building in the 
services sector, largely reflecting recruitment and retention 
difficulties.  Bonuses and commission payments had risen, 
often driven by increased profitability and, in some cases, a 
desire to retain key skills, so that total earnings had grown 
faster than average pay settlements.  And for lower -skilled 
service sector staff, there had been some upwards pressure on 
earnings growth from above -inflation increases in the 
National Minimum Wage and its impact on pay differentials. 
In manufacturing, however, lower profitability for some 
businesses was putting some downwards pressure on pay 
growth, with low inflation helping to make low settlements 
more palatable.  A reduction in overtime and shift working had 
also reduced total labour cost growth in manufacturing. 
Non-labour costs 
Materials costs had generally remained well below their level 
ayear earlier ( Chart 3).  That had partly reflected sterling’s 
appreciation against the euro and weaker demand in some 
emerging markets.  Domestically, the rate of inflation in 
construction materials had fallen, as their availability had 
increased.  The costs of imported finished goods had 
remained slightly lower than a year earlier, in part reflecting 
recent sterling appreciation.  Prices of dollar -denominated 
imports from the Far East had increased recently, however, as 
the earlier decline in sterling against the dollar fed through. Output prices and margins 
Manufacturing output prices had remained lower than a year 
earlier, although the pace of decline had slowed a little. 
Downward pressures on output prices had included intense 
competition from euro-area competitors, domestic grocery 
sector competition, low commodity costs and weaker activity 
in the oil and gas sector.  Manufacturers of construction 
materials were able to achieve price rises, but the rate of 
inflation had fallen.  Business services price inflation had 
eased, with strong competitive pressures reported, sometimes 
linked to growth in internet -based trading.  Output prices had 
declined in telecoms, freight transport and commoditised 
financial services.  Professional services firms had increased 
their fees as activity had improved, especially in areas related 
to property transactions or recruitment activity.  Commercial 
property rents had risen for industrial premises, particularly 
warehousing, city centre offices and prime retail shopping 
centres, although inflation in other retail rents remained weak. 
Growth of profitability in the manufacturing and service 
sectors had been broadly unchanged, although sterling’s 
appreciation against the euro had reduced manufacturers’ 
margins on sales to the euro area and increased margin 
pressure in some domestic markets. 
Consumer prices 
The pace of decline in consumer goods prices had moderated 
slightly.  Although further falls in dairy and some fresh food 
prices were reported, a number of contacts thought that the 
rate of food deflation had reached its trough.  More generally, 
consumer cost -consciousness, internet price competition and 
the strength of sterling had continued to put downward 
pressure on inflation across a range of household goods. 
Consumer services price inflation had edged up slightly, in part 
reflecting rising demand.  Across the leisure sector, including 
hotels, theatres and visitor attractions, prices were reported to 
be increasing moderately.  In parts of the private residential 
property market, rental growth had increased.  In contrast, 
inflation for RPI -linked services, including domestic passenger 
transport, social rents and water bills, had fallen. 4                                                                                                                                  Agents’ summary of business conditions August 2015 
Materials costs 
Imported ﬁ nished 
  goods prices +
–
321012345
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15Three months on the same period a year earlier ScoresChart 3 Raw materials and imported finished goods 
prices Agents’ survey on investment intentions 
The Agents conducted a survey to ask business contacts 
about the change in their capital investment over the past 
twelve months, relative to the previous year, and their plans 
for the twelve months ahead.  The survey also explored the 
factors acting as drivers of firms’ investment spending.  In 
addition firms were asked to indicate their expectations of 
mergers and acquisitions spending and the primary source of 
finance for investment over the coming twelve months.  Some 
400 firms responded to the survey, with a combined turnover 
of £114 billion and total employment of around 722,000 staff. 
The results were weighted by employment, and then 
reweighted according to ONS sector employment weights to 
adjust for differences in the composition of the survey 
compared with the economy as a whole. 
Overall, firms reported a modest increase in capital 
investment over the past twelve months, with expectations 
consistent with stronger spending over the coming year 
(Chart A). 
The survey indicated expectations of broad -based investment 
growth across sectors over the coming year.  The strongest 
intentions for growth were in utilities and extraction, following 
a reported fall in investment over the past year.  Investment 
intentions were also relatively strong for business services, 
despite an expected weakening of spending for those firms 
providing services to the oil and gas sector.  The weakest 
expectations for growth were in manufacturing, although 
these were positive. 
The most commonly reported driver of investment growth 
over the next year was achieving future efficiency and 
productivity gains, with a weighted net balance of over half of respondents citing this as important ( Chart B).  Demand for 
products and services, and major maintenance/replacement 
needs were also factors pushing up investment for a net 
balance of around a third of firms in each case.  Access to 
finance was a positive influence on intentions for the coming 
year overall, although not for small firms, for whom access to 
finance was a modestly negative factor.  Uncertainty about 
the economic outlook was reported to be the greatest drag on 
firms’ investment intentions over the year ahead. 
In terms of mergers and acquisitions activity, a net balance of 
some 17% of respondents expected a rise in their spending 
over the coming year, compared with the previous 
twelve months.  Across sectors, business and consumer 
services contacts were the most acquisitive. 
Looking at the sources of finance for investment — either 
capital spending or mergers and acquisitions activity — the 
majority of respondents expected to utilise internally 
generated funds.  This was true of firms of all sizes ( Chart C). 
Medium-sized firms planned to use bank borrowing more than 
smaller or larger firms did, with larger firms being more likely 
to use capital market finance instead. 010 20 30 40 50 60 
Net 
balance Far less 
(more than 
50% below 
previous 
year) Less 
(10–50% 
below 
previous 
year) More 
(10–50% 
above 
previous 
year) Far more 
(over 50% 
above 
previous 
year) Weighted percentage of 
respondents, per cent 
Around 
the same 
(within 
10% of 
previous 
year) Past twelve months 
Next twelve months Chart A Investment over the past twelve months and 
intentions for the next twelve months 
010 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 
Internal ly-generated 
funds Bank
borrowing Capital markets Other Weighted percentage of respondentsSmal l ﬁrms 
Medium ﬁrmsLarge ﬁrms Chart C Primary source of investment finance over the 
next twelve months 30 20 10 0 10 20 
Weighted net balance of respondents, per cent30 40 50 60 Achieving future efﬁciency/
productivity gains
Demand for yo ur 
products/services
Major maintenance
needs/replacement
Access to ﬁnance
Other facto rs 
Uncertainty about the po litical 
or regulatory outlook 
Uncertainty about the
economic outlook 
+ –Chart B Drivers of investment intentions Agents’ summary of business conditions August 2015                                                                                                                                    5