Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2015/2015-q3.pdf
Date: 2015-09-30

This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by the Bank of England’s Agents between late May 2015 and late August 2015.
It generally makes comparisons with activity and prices a year earlier.  The report does not represent the Bank’s own views, nor does it represent 
the views of any particular company or region.  More information on the Bank’s Agencies can be found at 
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/agentssummary/default.aspx.Agents’ summary of business conditions 
2015 Q3 
Consumer spending had continued to grow at a moderate 
rate, supported by rising real incomes and increasing 
availability of low -cost finance.
Business services turnover growth had remained firm, with a 
range of professional services buoyed by increasing corporate 
finance and mergers and acquisitions activity.
Manufacturing output growth had been modest overall, partly 
reflecting weak export demand due to sterling’s appreciation 
and subdued world demand growth.
Construction output growth had edged up as commercial 
development activity had risen alongside robust house 
building activity.
Investment intentions remained consistent with modest 
growth in capital spending.  Services companies’ intentions 
were generally stronger than manufacturers’.
Corporate credit availability had increased slightly, with 
pricing and terms of credit reported to have eased.
Occupier demand had risen further in the commercial real 
estate market , and investor demand had remained strong.Housing market activity had increased, but remained 
constrained by a shortage of properties available for sale 
(see Box 1 on page 4).
Capacity utilisation was slightly above normal in services 
firms and slightly below normal for manufacturing.
Employment intentions pointed to continued modest growth 
in staffing numbers, but recruitment difficulties had risen.
Growth in labour costs had remained moderate, although 
there were signs of building pressure in services.
Materials costs were lower than a year ago, though the pace 
of decline had eased.  Imported finished goods prices were 
slightly lower than a year earlier.
Manufacturing output prices were lower than a year earlier 
but, as for materials costs, the rate of decline had eased.
Business services price inflation had eased slightly.
Consumer price inflation for goods had remained negative,
having stabilised after sharp declines earlier in the year.
Consumer services price inflation had edged higher but 
remained modest overall.•Activity had generally grown solidly on a year earlier, with contacts attributing increased demand to rises in 
real incomes and credit availability.  Growth among export -oriented companies had been subdued overall.
•In property markets, demand for commercial property had increased alongside economic activity, and 
investment into the sector had remained strong.  Housing market activity had picked up by less than many 
contacts had expected.
•Recruitment difficulties had increased in recent months, with signs of building pressure on labour cost growth 
in the service sector.  But services price inflation had remained modest and goods prices were lower than a 
year ago.2                                                                                                                                                             Agents’ summary of business conditions 2015 Q3 
Consumer services and retail sales 
Annual growth in retail sales values had remained 
modest, and had eased over the past three months.
Annual comparisons for some goods had been adversely 
affected by poor weather relative to a year earlier and the 
boost from the 2014 World Cup at that time.  More 
generally, the rate of sales values growth had remained 
depressed by falls in prices of some retail goods.  Within 
the total, food sales had remained broadly flat, but sales 
growth of some larger household durables, including 
furniture and cars, was reported to be fairly robust,
supported both by rising real incomes and increasingly 
available low -cost credit.  Consumer services turnover 
growth had continued at a somewhat stronger pace than 
retail sales.  Contacts reported robust growth persisting 
across a range of leisure services, including hotels,
restaurants, visitor attractions, theatres and cinemas.
Early bookings for Summer 2016 holidays were generally 
ahead of earlier expectations.
Business and financial services 
Growth in business and financial services turnover had 
remained firm overall ( Chart 1).  Steady growth in 
accountancy, legal and consultancy services had been driven 
by increasing corporate finance and mergers and acquisitions 
activity.  That activity had been associated with a modest 
increase in demand for bank lending.  Some professional and 
financial services contacts had reported a rebound in activity 
following a pre -general election softening.  IT services growth 
had remained robust, driven by systems upgrades, cloud 
computing and cyber security.  Marketing, advertising and 
recruitment agencies reported continued growth.  There had 
been significant delays for some transport and logistics firms 
as a result of channel port and rail disruption, but that had 
not appeared to affect overall growth in business activity 
significantly.  Growth in exports of business and financial 
services had eased, in part reflecting sterling’s appreciation 
against the euro and a decline in demand for oil and gas 
related services exports.Production 
Growth in manufacturing output for the domestic market 
had slowed a little, remaining modest overall ( Chart 1).
Automotive and aerospace companies had continued to 
report solid output growth.  But the impact of weakening 
demand from the oil and gas sector had continued to feed 
through related manufacturing supply chains, even though 
UK oil and gas output itself had risen as previous investment 
in capacity came on stream.  The appreciation of sterling 
against the euro had led to increasing competition from 
other European manufacturers in domestic and export 
markets.  Alongside weak global demand growth, that had 
contributed to subdued manufacturing export growth.  For 
some contacts, export volumes into continental Europe had 
started to decline.  Demand from China had weakened over 
recent months for a range of goods, including capital 
equipment, infrastructure products, pharmaceuticals and 
cars.  But exports to the United States had continued to 
grow.
Construction 
Construction output growth had edged up ( Chart 1).  Private 
house building had been robust and was expected to remain 
so, although contacts reported increased uncertainty about 
prospects for social house building following government 
announcements of Right to Buy proposals and social housing 
rent reductions.  Rising demand for office and industrial space 
had encouraged more commercial development, including 
some speculative projects in prime locations.  Older office 
space had increasingly been converted into residential or 
student accommodation.  Growth in retail construction had 
remained relatively subdued, however, due to reductions in 
larger superstore projects.
Investment 
Investment intentions had remained consistent with moderate 
growth in spending over the coming year.  Service sector 
intentions had strengthened a little over the past 
three months ( Chart 2).  Increasing investment in IT to 
+
–
54321012345
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 Scores 
Construction output Business services turnover
Manufacturing output 
  for the domestic market Three months on the same period a year earlier Chart 1 Activity 
+
–Services 
Manufacturing 
5432101234
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 Scores Over the co ming twelve months Chart 2 Investment intentions improve security, productivity and competitiveness continued 
to be reported.  A boost to profits from the low oil price had 
encouraged spending by transportation companies, for 
example on new vehicles.  In contrast, manufacturers’
intentions had eased ( Chart 2).  Companies in several 
subsectors, including food processing and the oil and gas 
supply chain, reported increased caution about investing.
Sterling’s appreciation had dampened intentions for some 
exporters.
Corporate financing conditions 
Credit was reported to be readily available for large and 
medium -sized corporates, with terms and rates having eased 
alongside rising competition.  Contacts at larger companies 
reported that availability was above normal.  For those firms,
current borrowing conditions were often said to be 
comparable to those before the crisis, although lenders’ credit 
assessment was reported to be more robust than at that time.
Credit availability for smaller firms had improved and was 
approaching normal, although it remained tighter than for 
other firms ( Chart 3).  Peer -to -peer lending and crowd funding 
were reported to be providing funds to some smaller 
companies that banks were reluctant to lend to.  Demand for 
credit had been fairly subdued, but was reported to be rising 
alongside a gradual pickup in confidence and investment.
Refinancing activity was reported to be particularly strong,
with companies being able to reduce the cost of their finance 
or ease covenants on lending.
Property markets 
Commercial real estate 
Occupier demand for commercial property had continued to 
strengthen overall.  That, combined with low levels of new 
development over recent years, had led to emerging shortages 
of good quality space, particularly in the office market.  Some 
rents had risen as a result, but were yet to reach the levels required to stimulate speculative development outside prime 
locations.  Take -up of industrial space had increased further,
but there were fewer imbalances between demand and supply 
than in the office sector, as capacity had started to grow 
earlier.  Demand for existing prime retail space had been 
strong and the secondary and tertiary retail market had also 
shown some signs of rising occupier interest, from a lower 
base.  Investor demand had remained strong and had spread 
further outside London, with both UK and overseas 
institutional funds active.  While bank funding had been 
generally available for property investment, average 
loan -to -value ratios offered by UK banks had remained 
below pre -crisis levels.
Housing market 
Housing transactions had picked up slightly over the past 
three months, but by less than many contacts had expected,
reflecting a continued low level of properties available for sale 
(see Box 1 on page 4).  Price inflation had remained generally 
modest, aside from localised hot spots where bids could 
sometimes rise above asking prices.  Activity had been 
relatively weak among the highest -value properties, leading 
to some price falls.  Activity in the new build market was 
generally stronger than the secondary market, with builders 
reporting strong demand and improved planning conditions 
and land availability.  Rental demand had remained strong,
although investor sentiment towards the buy -to -let (BTL) 
sector had become more mixed following tax reforms 
announced in the Budget.
Activity in the mortgage market had been buoyed by strong 
remortgaging activity, against a background of high levels of 
competition among lenders and low fixed rates.  Mortgage 
availability was reported to be good overall, including at 
loan to value (LTV) ratios at 80% or higher.  Some continuing 
impacts of the Mortgage Market Review were reported, such 
as longer transaction times and tighter affordability criteria.
Competition to lend to BTL landlords/purchasers had 
pushed down rates on BTL mortgage products and had 
led to higher LTV ratios being offered by some new 
entrants.
Capacity utilisation 
Capacity utilisation had been little changed, remaining 
slightly above normal in services and slightly below normal 
in manufacturing.  Professional services firms reported high 
rates of labour utilisation and a scarcity of office space to 
accommodate their rising staff numbers.  Shortages of 
suitable warehousing space had constrained growth at 
some logistics companies.  Hotel occupancy had risen 
further.  But excess capacity was reported in some other 
parts of the service sector, for example among those 
servicing the oil and gas industry and in the retail sector.                                                                                                                                                               Agents’ summary of business conditions 2015 Q3                                                        3
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 
Small
Medium
Large2013 14 15 Chart 3 Agents’ assessment of corporate credit 
availability by company size (a) 
(a)  This mapping is based on individual Agencies’ national assessments of corporate credit 
availability, weighted by the gross value added of their regions or countries.  2015 Q3 uses 
Agents’ latest assessment as of August.  2013 Q1 uses assessment as at end -2012.  The 
greater the intensity of red, the tighter credit availability;  the greater the intensity of green,
the looser credit availability.  Yellow indicates normal conditions.  Includes bank and 
non -bank credit.  For more details, see England,D, Hebden,A, Henderson,T and Pattie,T
(2015), ‘The Agencies and ‘One Bank’, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin , Vol.55, No.1,
pages 47 –55, available at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/ 
quarterlybulletin/2015/q104.pdf .Box 1 
Recent developments in housing market 
activity 
One focus of Agents’ recent discussions with housing market 
contacts has been the reasons for continuing subdued levels of 
housing transactions.  Over the past quarter, estate agent 
contacts have cited shortages of properties for sale as the 
single biggest constraint on housing market activity across the 
country, whereas reports were much more variable across 
regions earlier in the year.  These shortages — combined with 
increased pressure on estate agents’ fees as competition has 
risen — have also been reflected in slowing growth in estate 
agents’ reported turnover ( Chart A).
The most common explanation provided for low levels of 
properties for sale has been householders’ reluctance to put 
their homes on the market until they can find a property they 
want to buy, such that a shortage of properties has been 
self -reinforcing.  The high cost of moving home was also 
reported as a disincentive for some.  Longer -term factors such 
as the growing popularity and availability of rented 
accommodation were also reported to be depressing 
transaction levels.  And in some cases, the failure of wage 
growth to keep pace with house price inflation over recent 
years had restricted the ability of some existing homeowners 
to move up the housing ladder.Estate agents’ continuing uncertainty as to what will generate 
a pickup in properties for sale has dampened their 
expectations of transactions growth.  Nonetheless, they 
generally indicate expectations of a gradual increase in 
housing activity over the coming year, consistent with 
reported expectations for turnover growth that are somewhat 
higher than that seen over the past year ( Chart A).
Manufacturers overall reported a little more slack than 
normal.  Some companies reported retaining employees 
in anticipation of a rebound in orders and due to skill 
shortages.  In the automotive and aerospace industries,
however, companies were often operating above normal 
levels of utilisation.
Employment and pay 
Employment intentions had edged down marginally but 
remained consistent with modest employment growth.
The use of new technology and automation was said to be 
contributing to productivity growth and had softened the 
employment outlook slightly across sectors.  Employment 
was reported to be rising across a broad range of business 
services, with the strongest growth in property and 
construction -related services, IT, accountancy, legal, and 
regulatory compliance.  An easing in consumer services 
intentions had partly reflected some planned cuts in 
retail -sector management and head office roles aimed 
at lowering costs.  Manufacturing employment intentions 
had remained marginally positive overall, due largely to 
expectations of further hiring in the aerospace and 
automotive sectors ( Chart 4).Recruitment difficulties had increased over the past 
three months, and were above normal.  Skill shortages were 
said to be constraining employment growth at the margin,
mainly for some companies around London and the 
South East.  Recruitment difficulties had spread further in 
skilled and semi-skilled positions across sectors.  Job -to -job 
flows were reported to be picking up gradually, though they 
remained lower than pre -recession for most contacts.
Atightening labour market had led companies to recruit 4                                                                                                                                                            Agents’ summary of business conditions 2015 Q3 
1 0 1 2 3 4 
20 1 2  1 3  14 1 5  1 6  Year-ahead 
  expectations Output 
+
–Scores Chart A Estate agents’ current and projected turnover (a) 
(a)  Six -month moving averages of Agents’ company visit scores.  Scores are for turnover for the 
past three months relative to a year earlier.  Expectations have been moved forward 
twelve months.
Business se rvices 
Manufacturing Consumer services +
–
5432101234
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 Scores Over the co ming six months Chart 4 Employment intentions                                                                                                                                                                Agents’ summary of business conditions 2015 Q3                                                        5
more trainees, graduates and apprentices rather than seek to 
hire experienced staff;  and to focus on productivity 
improvements.  Lower skilled roles had remained relatively 
easy to fill, however.
Growth in total labour costs had remained moderate.  Outside 
sectors where the availability of skills was tightest, the 
majority of pay awards had been around 2%.  While there 
were signs of wage pressure building in the service sector,
higher pay awards had continued to be largely limited to 
specific recruitment or retention issues, rather than increases 
across the board.  Labour cost growth in manufacturing had 
softened, reflecting a reduction in overtime and shift working.
Some intensive employers of lower -skilled labour were 
concerned about the potential impact on their future labour 
costs of the Budget announcement on the National Living 
Wage (NLW).  Those concerns were less where younger 
employees, not subject to the NLW, accounted for a high 
proportion of staff, such as in parts of the tourism industry.
Pricing 
Supply chain pricing 
Materials costs had generally remained lower than a year ago,
though the pace of deflation had eased a little during the 
quarter.  A wide range of commodities had fallen in price on 
ayear earlier, including foods, metals and oil.  In contrast,
construction materials prices were higher than a year earlier,
although the pace of increase had moderated as supply 
increased.  Imported finished goods prices were slightly 
below levels a year earlier, in part reflecting recent sterling 
appreciation.  Some contacts reported being reluctant to 
pass on those cost reductions as changes in prices would be 
difficult to reverse, for example if sterling fell back.
Manufacturing output prices had remained slightly lower than 
a year ago although, as for materials costs, the rate of decline 
had eased ( Chart 5).  Sterling’s rise against the euro had led to 
increased competition from European producers in domestic 
and export markets, putting output prices and margins under 
downward pressure.  In construction, companies had generally 
been able to pass through their cost increases to new tender 
prices, but margins on existing contracts agreed prior to recent cost inflation had continued to be squeezed.  Business 
services price inflation had eased on the quarter, remaining 
modest ( Chart 5).  Strong competitive pressure was reported 
in parts of the sector, sometimes linked to internet trading.
But prices in a number of business services had risen, notably 
hotel room rates and services related to construction.  And 
while commoditised professional services prices were often 
reported to be broadly flat, fees on more bespoke work had 
risen.  Overall, a trend towards higher -value work had 
contributed towards moderate growth in business services 
profitability.
Consumer prices 
Annual consumer goods price inflation had remained negative,
but there had been signs that price falls were reaching their 
trough.  That partly reflected base effects from falls in 
commodity prices in late 2014 dropping out of the annual 
comparison, although contacts noted that more recent 
declines in commodity prices indicated a quick rebound to 
positive annual goods price inflation was unlikely.  There was 
mixed evidence on the timing and extent of discounting in the 
summer sales.  New car prices had remained broadly stable.
Consumer services price inflation had edged up slightly over 
the past three months, but remained modest.  Prices for hotel 
stays and leisure attractions had risen moderately in response 
to rising demand.  Private housing rents appeared to be rising 
gently overall, although conditions varied widely across the 
country.Manufacturing 
Business- to-business 
  services +
–
32101234
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 Scores Three months on the same period a year earlier Chart 5 Output prices 