Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2015/2015-q4.pdf
Date: 2015-12-31

This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by the Bank of England’s Agents between late August 2015 and late 
November 2015.  It generally makes comparisons with activity and prices a year earlier.  The report does not represent the Bank’s own 
views, nor does it represent the views of any particular company or region.  More information on the Bank’s Agencies can be found at 
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/agentssummary/default.aspx.Agents’ summary of business conditions 
2015 Q4 
Consumer spending growth had remained steady, supported 
by rising incomes, resilient consumer confidence and 
increasing availability of low-cost finance.
Business services turnover growth had remained buoyant 
overall, albeit stronger among professional services firms than 
for many other services, where competitive pressures were 
restraining price inflation more.
Manufacturing output growth had slowed, reflecting weak 
demand in export supply chains due to sterling’s appreciation 
and sluggish global demand growth.  
Construction output growth had remained moderate in 
recent months, although there were some mixed signals from 
different sectors.  While some contacts reported some easing 
of housing starts during recent months, commercial 
construction activity had continued to strengthen.
Investment intentions remained consistent with modest 
growth in capital spending.  Service companies’ intentions had 
remained buoyant, but manufacturers’ intentions had eased,
consistent with the relative strength of activity growth.
Credit availability had increased slightly for many firms,
although some very large firms reported a reduction in risk 
appetite in corporate debt markets.  Businesses continued to 
report soft demand for credit, reflected in high levels of 
holdings of cash (see Box 1 on page 3).   
Occupier demand had risen further in the commercial real 
estate market , and investor demand had remained strong.Housing market activity had remained relatively subdued,
albeit generally above levels reported a year earlier.  Demand 
among buy-to-let investors had remained robust, reflected in 
strong buy-to-let mortgage growth.
Capacity utilisation had risen slightly further above normal in 
services, but had fallen in the manufacturing sector.
Employment intentions had fallen on the quarter and were 
consistent with modest growth in staffing numbers outside 
the manufacturing sector.  Recruitment difficulties had 
broadened somewhat, but growth in labour costs had 
remained moderate, with evidence that downward pressures 
from low inflation were offsetting upwards pressures from 
skills shortages (see Box 2 on page 5).
Materials costs had remained lower than a year ago,
reflecting price declines across a wide range of inputs.
Imported finished goods prices were slightly lower than a 
year earlier.
The rate of decline in manufacturing output prices had 
increased as falls in input costs were passed through.  Business 
services price inflation had edged higher, as increasing demand 
had allowed some professional services to increase prices.  
A survey on corporate pricing indicated expectations for 
output price inflation remained subdued (see Box 3 on page 6).
Consumer price inflation for goods had remained negative,
mainly reflecting falls in prices earlier in the year.  Consumer 
services price inflation had edged lower, remaining modest.  •Activity had generally grown steadily on a year earlier, alongside rising real incomes and resilient consumer 
confidence.  However, manufacturing output growth had slowed as the strength of sterling and sluggish world 
growth had adversely affected export supply chains.
•Corporate credit availability had increased slightly further for many contacts, although some very large 
companies reported that risk appetite in corporate debt markets had eased back a little recently.  Credit demand 
had remained subdued, reflected in high levels of cash holdings among companies.
•Employment intentions had eased overall, reflecting some increased uncertainty about business prospects and a 
greater focus on raising productivity to offset expected increases in labour costs.  However, an increasing 
number of contacts reported that low inflation had started to hold back wage growth.2                                                                                                                                                             Agents’ summary of business conditions  2015 Q4 
Consumer services and retail sales 
Annual consumer spending growth had remained steady 
overall, supported by rising incomes, resilient consumer 
confidence and an increasing availability of low-cost 
consumer credit.  Annual retail sales values growth had 
remained modest, restrained by declines in retail goods 
prices on a year ago.  Contacts reported subdued demand 
for clothing and footwear due to the mild autumn 
weather, and some possible delay in purchasing electrical 
goods ahead of Black Friday.  Retailers were reasonably 
optimistic about prospects for the Christmas period.
Demand growth for new cars had continued to moderate.
Consumer services turnover growth had picked up a little.
Leisure travel was reported to be growing strongly and 
hotel occupancy had risen.  Pubs and restaurants had 
continued to report robust growth.
Business and financial services 
Businesses services turnover growth had remained 
buoyant ( Chart 1 ), particularly among professional 
services firms.  Some companies reported a recent 
strengthening in activity growth, as some mergers and 
acquisitions and corporate finance activity, that had been 
delayed prior to the general election, had fed through 
with a lag.  Strong commercial real estate activity was 
boosting demand for property-related services.
Consultancy and project management services were 
supported by a continuing drive for cost-cutting and 
digital transformation, but demand for oil and gas-related 
consultancy had fallen.  Turnover growth in some parts of 
the financial sector had been held back by slow growth in 
credit demand from small and medium-sized enterprises 
(SMEs), alongside downward pressures on fees and 
spreads in corporate lending.  Other business services 
turnover was also generally weaker than for professional 
services, reflecting clients’ focus on costs and a 
competitive environment, embodied in relatively weak 
price inflation.  Among the areas of strongest growth 
were warehousing and logistics, supported by general 
economic growth and the expansion of e-commerce.
Demand for IT services was reported to be increasing 
rapidly, but excess capacity in some parts of the sector 
— such as data storage — was weighing down on pricing.
And falls in ticket prices had dampened revenue growth 
in business air travel.  Business services export growth 
had moderated, reflecting sterling’s strength and a 
slowing in demand from emerging economies. 
Production 
Manufacturing output growth for the domestic market 
had slowed but remained positive overall ( Chart 1 ).
Moderate demand growth was reported in a range of 
subsectors, including construction materials,
pharmaceuticals, scientific products, consumer goods,
automotive and the civil aerospace supply chain.  But the strength of sterling and sluggish world demand growth 
had adversely affected exports, which were reported to 
be below levels seen a year earlier, with second-round 
effects on the associated supply chains.  Businesses 
supplying the oil and gas sector had seen sharp 
contractions in activity.  And domestic steel output had 
fallen as a result of rising imports and global 
overcapacity.  More generally, tougher competition was 
reported from imports from continental Europe, limiting 
the growth potential of many UK manufacturers.  
Construction 
Annual growth in construction had remained moderate 
over the past quarter ( Chart 1 ).  Housing completions 
had continued to grow, although some contacts had 
reported an easing of housing starts during the past 
six months.  Social housebuilding had slowed, partly 
attributed to increased uncertainty around the sector.
But commercial construction activity had continued to 
increase, with a focus on development within the major 
cities.  University-related construction had remained 
buoyant, including student housing.  
Investment 
Investment intentions had eased in manufacturing, but 
remained firm among services companies, pointing to 
moderate growth overall ( Chart 2 ).  In manufacturing,
intentions had been affected adversely by a weakening 
international outlook.  But there remained areas of 
capital spending growth, including capacity expansion in 
the aerospace and automotive sectors.  Some producers 
reported maintaining investment in research, new 
product development and efficiency gains, such as 
automation, as a response to highly competitive 
conditions.  Service sector intentions remained 
comparatively stronger, often with a focus on IT spending 
to improve productivity, service levels and system 
resilience.  Spending on transport facilities and premises 
expansion or refurbishment was also rising.54321012345
2 0 0 5  0 6  0 7  0 8  0 9  1 0  1 1  1 2  1 3  14 15 Scores
Construction output Business services turnover
Manufacturing output 
  for the domestic market Three months on the same period a year earlier 
+ 
–Chart 1 Activity Corporate financing conditions 
Credit availability had increased a little further, but at a 
slower rate than earlier in the year ( Chart 3 ).  Strong 
competition to lend was reported by banks, reflected in 
lending rates and terms that borrowers often reported 
were attractive.  However, a small number of larger 
businesses reported a recent increase in loan spreads —or 
expected an increase — which their lenders had attributed 
to higher regulatory and capital costs.  There had been a 
slight easing in credit availability for asset-owning smaller 
businesses.  However, some SMEs reported that their 
finance options were limited to invoice discounting,
which could be costly.  Overall, corporate loan demand 
had remained muted, reflected in high holdings of cash 
(Box 1).  The availability of non-bank finance had increased further.  There were reports of increasing 
private equity activity, including lending.  Competition 
among asset-based lenders had increased and pricing had 
fallen.  Crowd funding and peer-to-peer lending had also 
continued to grow, albeit from a low base as a share of 
total lending.  The cost of debt raised in capital markets 
had remained low, but had increased slightly in recent 
months due to market volatility.   
Property markets 
Commercial real estate 
Occupier demand for commercial property had continued 
to increase gradually.  Demand growth was reported to 
be strongest for office space in London and the larger 
regional cities, and for good-quality industrial/warehouse 
space more generally.  In some regional city centres,
rental values had risen to levels that would justify new                                                                                                                                                                Agents’ summary of business conditions 2015 Q4                                                        3
5 4 3 2 1 0 1 2 3 4 
2 0 0 5  0 6  0 7  0 8  0 9  1 0  1 1  1 2  1 3  14 15 Scores 
Services 
Manufacturing Over the co ming year 
+
–Chart 2 Investment intentions Box 1 
Agency intelligence on drivers of high 
corporate holdings of cash 
For some time, a common feature of Agents’ discussions with 
business contacts has been their high levels of cash holdings,
reflected also in strong corporate money growth data.
Contacts have offered a wide range of reasons for recent high 
levels of corporate deposits.  Those have included gently rising 
profitability for many firms, still-modest levels of investment,
and for many — particularly among smaller companies — a 
persistent distrust of banks following their experience of the 
financial crisis.  Some smaller businesses have also reported 
holding surplus cash due to their overdrafts having been 
replaced with invoice discounting facilities.  At the other end 
of the corporate spectrum, some very large companies have 
reported that high levels of cash may act as an insurance 
against the possibility of illiquidity in capital markets, by providing companies with flexibility about the timing of 
corporate debt issuance:  the benefits of that flexibility 
can potentially far outweigh the opportunity costs of 
holding cash.  
When asked why they have chosen to hold deposits rather 
than other assets that might pay a higher return, companies 
have often cited long-term precautionary motives.  Businesses 
report valuing the liquidity and security of cash, and the 
relative ease of managing any associated risk exposures (such 
as through exposure limits).  In many cases, companies note 
that the financial crisis highlighted how firms fail when they 
run out of cash, and how, during periods of financial stress,
credit availability can dry up, credit lines can be withdrawn or 
covenant terms become more strictly enforced.  But 
businesses also report holding cash ready for opportunities for 
expansion, especially by company acquisition, as bank finance 
for such deals may not be sufficiently timely or may not be 
forthcoming.  
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 
Small
Medi um 
Large2013 14 15 Chart 3 Heat map of credit availability relative to 
normal by size of business (a) 
(a)  This mapping is based on individual Agencies’ national assessments of corporate credit 
availability, weighted by the gross value added of their regions or countries.  2015 Q4 uses 
Agents’ latest assessment as of November.  The greater the intensity of red, the tighter 
credit availability;  the greater the intensity of green, the looser credit availability.  Yellow 
indicates normal conditions.  Includes bank and non-bank credit.4                                                                                                                                                            Agents’ summary of business conditions 2015 Q4 
development, though contacts expected that supply 
would take some years to respond fully.  In other occupier 
markets demand and rental values were generally 
increasing more slowly.  Substantial inflows of overseas 
and UK investment into the sector were reported,
including from sovereign wealth funds, private equity 
firms and institutional funds, with investor demand 
spreading across regions and sectors.  That had 
contributed to increases in asset values, often beyond the 
rate of increase of rents.  The main UK banks were 
reported to be reluctant to fund speculative development,
but bank funding was generally reported to be available 
for other forms of commercial real estate investment,
albeit at loan to value (LTV) ratios that remained below 
those available before the crisis .
Housing market 
Housing market activity had remained relatively subdued,
but generally above levels a year earlier.  There was some 
evidence that secondary market supply had started to 
pick up in some areas.  However, the availability of 
properties for sale had continued to constrain growth in 
activity in most parts of the United Kingdom, supporting 
price inflation.  Activity in higher-price brackets had 
remained particularly weak.  And some developers had 
noted a recent softening in demand for new-build 
housing, particularly from foreign investors in the London 
market.  Private rental demand had continued to grow 
steadily, leading to some rental inflation.  Demand 
among buy-to-let (BTL) investors to purchase properties 
had remained robust, reflected in strong growth in 
mortgage lending to the sector.  Lenders, particularly 
those smaller in size, were responding to strong demand 
by increasing the range of BTL products available and 
lowering rates, although LTV ratios had tended to remain 
low by pre-crisis standards.  Competition had remained 
intense in the owner-occupier mortgage market, with 
some increase in the availability of higher LTV lending.
Capacity utilisation 
Over the quarter, capacity utilisation had fallen further 
below normal in manufacturing and risen further above 
normal in services.  Slack in manufacturing had increased 
as a result of investment in productivity enhancements 
and the recent weakening in output growth, especially 
among exporters.  By contrast, services capacity 
utilisation had risen alongside rising activity, with some 
capacity constraints reported.  Those constraints were 
centred around areas experiencing skills shortages, such 
as IT, haulage and professional services.  Occupancy of 
commercial property had increased overall, with 
warehousing space in increasingly short supply.Employment and pay 
Employment intentions had fallen on the quarter and 
were consistent with modest workforce growth ( Chart 4 ).
Productivity improvements were expected to make a 
stronger contribution to meeting future demand growth 
than in the recent past, as businesses sought to offset 
rising labour costs.  Intentions had turned negative in the 
manufacturing sector, reflecting weaker activity in export 
markets, the steel industry and oil and gas sector, along 
with intense pressure to reduce costs within supermarket 
supply chains.  The employment outlook remained 
strongest within business services, but some professional 
and IT companies that had increased staffing strongly 
over the past few years were becoming more circumspect 
about future hiring.  For some contacts, moderating 
intentions also reflected skills shortages, which made it 
difficult to fill certain positions and, for a minority of 
contacts, was constraining output growth.  Recruitment 
difficulties had remained above normal and, while not 
intensifying, had become slightly more widespread.   
Growth in total labour costs had remained moderate, and 
lower than might be expected from companies’ reports of 
recruitment difficulties (Box 2), with the majority of pay 
awards remaining in the 1% –3% range.  Some easing in 
the momentum of pay growth had been reported, as low 
inflation had started to offset upward pressures on pay 
from recruitment difficulties.  The outlook for wage 
growth had remained strongest in parts of the services 
sector where skills were reported to be tightest, such as 
professional services.  Manufacturing labour cost growth 
was slower than for services, in part reflecting relatively 
weaker demand growth and strong competitive 
pressures.  Contacts continued to express some concerns 
about second round effects on pay from the introduction 
of the National Living Wage, arising from pressure to 5432101234
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 Scores 
Business se rvices 
Manufacturing Consumer services 
+
_Over the co ming six months Chart 4 Employment intentions                                                                                                                                                                Agents’ summary of business conditions 2015 Q4                                                        5
Box 2 
Recent trends in Agents’ company visit scores 
for pay and recruitment difficulties 
Agents’ scores for total labour cost growth have been 
relatively steady over the past year, having increased during 
2014 alongside tightening recruitment conditions and the 
introduction of auto-enrolment to larger companies.  As 
Chart A shows, that steady pattern of labour cost growth over 
the past year contrasts with a continued increase in 
recruitment difficulties, such that the current average labour 
costs growth score from company visits is lower than might be 
expected given the level of recruitment difficulties.  That could 
indicate an upside risk to labour costs growth, if recruitment 
difficulties were to feed through to pay growth with a lag,
perhaps as staff churn increases.  But it could also indicate that 
some other factor is suppressing labour cost growth.  In 
particular, weak inflation has been cited by Agents’ contacts 
more frequently in recent months as a factor holding down 
pay awards.  And in the manufacturing sector, Agents’ contacts 
report that pay growth has also been negatively affected by 
weak demand growth and reduced overtime and shift work.Monitoring pay growth will be an important part of the 
Agents’ work over coming months, especially as many pay 
settlements are agreed around the turn of the year.  Agents 
conduct a regular annual pay survey during December and 
January, the results of which will be published in the Agents’
February Summary update.
3 2 1 0 1 2 3 
20 0 8  0 9  1 0  1 1  1 2  1 3  14 15 Total labour costs Recruitment difﬁculties Standard deviations from mean 
+
–Chart A Agents’ company visit scores for labour costs 
and recruitment difficulties 
maintain pay differentials.  Those with large low-paid 
workforces planned to react in a range of different ways,
often seeking to offset higher costs through efficiency or 
productivity gains. 
Pricing 
Supply chain pricing 
Materials costs had remained substantially lower than a 
year earlier, largely reflecting the effect of weaker global 
demand conditions on a range of materials prices,
including food, energy and metals.  Construction 
materials price inflation had slowed to a modest rate.
Prices of imported finished goods were also lower than a 
year earlier overall, although the pattern was uneven,
reflecting the divergent effects of sterling’s appreciation 
against the euro on one hand and depreciation against 
the US dollar on the other.  In some cases, overcapacity 
in Chinese production had acted to offset upward 
pressures on import prices from the strength of the dollar 
and increases in labour costs.
Manufacturing output price inflation had become more 
negative as falls in material costs were increasingly 
passed on.  Manufacturers reported difficulty in justifying 
output price increases given the weakness of non-labour 
input costs.  As a result, increases in wage costs were 
often leading to a narrowing in margins for some, unless offsetting productivity gains could be generated.  In 
contrast, business services price inflation and profitability 
had edged marginally higher in recent months, reflecting 
relatively buoyant demand conditions.  Box 3 on page 6 
presents the results of a recent Agents’ survey on 
corporate pricing.
Consumer prices 
Annual consumer goods price inflation had remained 
negative, albeit mainly due to falls in prices earlier in the 
year.  Retailers’ expectations were for inflationary 
pressures to remain subdued  in the near term, as some 
input cost reductions were still to work through to prices.
Recent mild weather had left some contacts with excess 
stock of winter clothing and footwear, which they 
expected would be cleared through deeper-than-normal 
discounting during the upcoming sales season.  
Black Friday was expected again to be a major event,
although some retailers were looking to be more targeted 
in promotions this year.  Retail services price inflation 
remained modest and had edged lower as input cost falls 
were passed on, and as earlier falls in RPI inflation were 
reflected in some index-linked regulated services prices 
with a lag, such as social rents and utilities.  However,
buoyant demand growth was allowing margins to 
increase in some consumer services, most notably in 
rented private housing and the leisure sector, where spare 
capacity had been eroded. Box 3 
Agents’ survey on corporate pricing 
The Bank’s Agents undertook a survey during October and 
November to investigate past and expected changes in 
domestic prices, the factors affecting pricing decisions and the 
frequency with which companies changed prices.  Some 
350 companies responded to the survey with a combined 
UK turnover of about £70 billion.  The results, as presented 
here, were weighted by turnover and reweighted by sectoral 
shares of gross value added to adjust for differences in the 
composition of the survey compared with the economy as a 
whole.
A modest net balance of respondents had seen prices fall over 
the past year ( Chart A ).  Almost half of businesses surveyed 
had reduced their prices over the past year, while only a small 
minority of companies had raised prices significantly.  Looking 
ahead a slightly smaller net balance expected a further fall in 
prices over the coming year, with almost half of respondents 
still expecting prices to fall by more than 1%.  Again, relatively 
few businesses expected to be able to raise prices significantly.
Across sectors, only construction firms reported a positive 
balance of price changes over the past year;  and expectations 
within the sector were for further price increases during the 
coming twelve months ( Chart B ).  Manufacturers reported the 
most negative net balance for price changes during the past 
year, and expected further price declines.  Expectations for 
services firms over the next year were more mixed, however,
with a modest balance of retailers expecting an increase in 
prices, business services firms expecting prices to be little 
changed overall, and consumer services respondents expecting 
a further decline in prices. The factors most frequently cited as driving prices lower over 
the past year were energy costs, competition from abroad,
productivity and domestic competition.  Those factors had 
more than offset upwards pressures from labour costs,
planned changes in margins and UK input/finished goods costs 
(Chart C ).  The pattern of factors expected to influence prices 
over the next twelve months was broadly similar, but the 
balance of contacts expecting upward pressure from imported 
finished goods costs had turned slightly positive;  downwards 
pressures from demand/excess capacity were expected to be 
smaller, and ‘other’ factors were no longer expected to drag 
on prices.
Finally, the survey asked about the frequency with which 
companies changed prices.  Some 40% of respondents 
reported changing their prices at least monthly, while just over 
20% of companies changed their prices annually or more;  and 
just over 20% changed their prices ‘as the need arose’.  The 
remaining firms reported changing their prices either quarterly 
or six-monthly.  20 10 010 20 30 40 
Net balance <-4% -4% to 
<-1% -1% to 
+1% >1% to 
4% >4% Past year 
Next ye ar Per cent of ﬁrms 
+
–Chart A Price changes over the past year and expected 
next year 80 60 40 20 020 40 60 80 
Manufacturing Construction Retail 
goods Consumer 
servicesBusine ss 
servicesNet percentage balances  Past year 
Next year
+
–Chart B Changes in prices by sector 
40 20 0 20 40 60 Labour costs
Planned changes to 
  your margins
UK inputs/ﬁnished 
  goods costs 
(Other) Imported inputs/
ﬁnished g oods costs 
Demand conditions/
pressure on capacity
Other
Domestic competition 
Productivity 
Competition from 
producers abro ad 
Energy and other
oil-related input costs Net percentage balances Past year 
Next year
+ –Chart C Factors influencing prices 6                                                                                                                                                            Agents’ summary of business conditions 2015 Q4 