Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2015/january-2015.pdf
Date: 2015-01-31

•    Retail sales values growth had edged higher and consumer services turnover growth had picked up slightly. 
•    Housing market activity had been subdued relative to levels a year earlier. 
•    Investment intentions for the next twelve months had continued to ease slightly, but were consistent with 
moderate growth overall. 
•    Business services turnover growth had edged down slightly, but remained relatively robust. 
•    Manufacturing output growth for the domestic market had eased slightly, and manufacturing export growth had 
slowed further. 
•    Construction output growth had remained strong. 
•    Corporate credit conditions had continued to improve, with evidence of increased competition among lenders. 
•    Employment intentions had eased for manufacturers, but were consistent with modest headcount growth overall. 
•    Recruitment difficulties had been little changed at a level somewhat above normal. 
•    Capacity utilisation was at broadly normal levels in manufacturing, but slightly above normal for services. 
•    Growth in total labour costs per employee had been steady, though there were signs of increasing wage pressures 
in some subsectors with skills shortages. 
•    Materials costs and imported finished goods prices had remained lower than a year earlier. 
•    Output prices were little changed on a year earlier in manufacturing, though had increased moderately in business 
services. 
•    Consumer price inflation had turned negative for goods.  Moderate rates of inflation in services prices had 
continued. 
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by 
the Bank of England’s Agents following discussions with contacts in 
the period between late November 2014 and late December 2014. 
It provides information on the state of business conditions from 
companies across all sectors of the economy.  The report does not 
represent the Bank’s own views, nor does it represent the views of 
any particular company or region.  The Bank’s Monetary Policy 
Committee uses the intelligence provided by the Agents, in 
conjunction with information from other sources, to assist its 
understanding and assessment of current economic conditions. 
Acopy of this publication can be found at: 
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/agentssummary/ 
default.aspx .The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, 
the East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the North 
West, Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, 
the South West, Wales, the West Midlands & Oxfordshire, and 
Yorkshire & the Humber. 
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic 
conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in the 
Inflation Report , obtained from: 
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/inflationreport/ 
default.aspx .Agents’ summary of business conditions 
January 2015 Demand 
Consumption 
Annual growth in retail sales values had edged higher, largely 
reflecting ‘Black Friday’ sales promotions at the end of 
November that had covered a wider range of goods than last 
year.  Some retailers, especially those of electrical goods, had 
witnessed somewhat softer demand growth in the first half of 
December.  Supermarkets reported that food sales values 
growth had slowed due to further price discounting.  But, 
overall, most retailers expected solid growth in sales values 
over the seasonal trading period.  Consumer services demand 
growth had picked up slightly.  Hotels and visitor attractions 
reported strong growth, possibly assisted by seasonally mild 
weather.  Restaurants, pubs and coffee bars had sustained 
steady growth in sales, with Christmas restaurant bookings 
higher than a year ago.  Passenger numbers for road, rail and 
domestic flights had continued to grow, although there were 
some recent reports of a slowing in holiday bookings for 2015. 
Housing market 
Activity in the housing market had remained subdued relative 
to levels a year earlier.  That was partly ascribed to an earlier 
release of pent-up demand that had run its course, a shortage 
of properties for sale and, in London and parts of the 
South East, to high house prices, which were said to be 
deterring some potential homebuyers.  On balance, contacts 
expected that Stamp Duty changes announced in the 
Autumn Statement would provide modest support to housing 
market activity.  House builders provided mixed reports about 
demand for newly built homes, but reservations generally had 
been lower than a year earlier. 
Business investment 
Investment intentions for the next twelve months had 
continued to ease slightly, but remained consistent with 
moderate growth overall ( Chart 1).  Manufacturing intentions 
had weakened as existing investment projects approached 
completion and as uncertainty about the global outlook had 
risen.  Some firms had adopted a more cautious approach to 
investment, with spending on efficiency, productivity and 
replacement being prioritised.  Service sector firms’ intentions 
indicated steady growth in capital spending.  Investment in the 
refurbishment of premises was widely reported, although 
tightness in the supply of prime commercial space had also 
encouraged investment in new development in some areas. 
UK oil and gas firms had become reluctant to commit to new 
capital expenditure plans following the sharp fall in the price 
of oil.  However, contacts expected this effect on capital 
spending to be offset over time as lower energy costs for other 
companies generated additional funds for investment. 
Exports 
Manufacturing export growth had slowed further.  Weak 
euro -area demand was cited as the principal driver, although there were some reports of a pickup in growth in Spain and 
Ireland.  The volume of exports to Russia had also fallen, 
largely reflecting trade restrictions and payment problems. 
Exports to China had eased.  Middle-East demand had 
remained robust, although falling oil prices were seen as a risk 
to growth there going forward.  Companies that exported to 
the United States had continued to report strong sales growth. 
Although services export growth remained stronger than for 
goods, it had also eased.  Professional services firms had 
maintained strong growth in work for overseas clients, notably 
legal and architectural services.  Growth in export sales of 
IT services had remained robust.  Overall, both leisure and 
business tourism had continued to grow.  But consultancy 
services in oil and gas reported a sharp fall in demand as 
investment plans in the sector were shelved. 
Output 
Business services 
Business services turnover growth had edged down slightly, 
but remained relatively strong overall ( Chart 2).  Corporate 
finance, real estate and M&A activity had continued to act as 
drivers of growth in accountancy, law and banking.  Workloads 
for advertising, marketing and PR firms had risen further, as a 
result of larger corporate marketing budgets.  Growth in 
activity at architects and engineering services firms had 
continued to be driven by strengthening domestic 
construction activity, although some contacts reported that 
workloads could be adversely affected by a weaker global 
outlook and reduced demand from the oil and gas sector. 
Wholesalers reported that growth in volumes had been robust 
over the past three months, with building materials the 
strongest subsector.  IT services continued to be supported by 
robust demand, especially for cloud-based services.  Demand 
for hotel nights, conferencing and travel had continued to 
increase, but companies’ travel budgets remained tighter than 
pre-recession. 2                                                                                                                                  Agents’ summary of business conditions January 2015 
5432101234
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14Scores
Servic es  
Manu facturing +
–Over the coming twelve months Chart 1 Investment intentions Agents’ summary of business conditions January 2015                                                                                                                                   3
Manufacturing 
Growth in manufacturing output for the domestic market had 
eased slightly ( Chart 2).  Companies supplying construction, 
civil aerospace and automotive sectors reported strong 
growth.  But output growth in some export supply chains had 
eased, and some capital goods manufacturers also reported 
that orders had softened following cuts to UK oil and gas 
investment.  Contacts across the engineering sector reported 
an increase in uncertainty about the outlook for growth. 
Construction 
Growth in construction output had remained robust ( Chart 2), 
although demand had remained variable across regions. 
Where activity was particularly strong, some firms had 
preferred to maintain activity at current levels, rather than 
expand, due to widespread skills shortages.  Repair and 
maintenance work, infrastructure projects and commercial 
development activity had picked up.  House builders 
continued to increase output, although some had moderated 
plans for next year and the demand for land had eased a little 
from the first half of the year. 
Credit conditions 
Credit availability had continued to improve, with banks 
competing to lend to larger firms or lower risk companies. 
Competition among funding providers appeared to have 
intensified.  Fees and margins had fallen and loan maturities 
had lengthened, but there was little evidence of any 
widespread weakening of covenants.  Smaller businesses 
reported an increase in refinancing activity, often at lower 
margins and improved terms, but conditions were reported to 
be markedly less competitive than those reported for larger 
firms.  Companies with weaker profitability or less collateral 
continued to struggle to access bank finance, but there were 
increasing reports that banks were lending again to companies 
in sectors that had previously found access to finance difficult, 
such as construction and hospitality.  Lending by challenger 
banks, peer to peer and alternative lenders had continued to increase strongly, but still represented only a small share of 
corporate lending. 
Employment 
Employment intentions had remained consistent with modest 
headcount growth overall ( Chart 3).  In manufacturing, 
employment growth had eased, reflecting a combination of 
slower global demand growth, consolidation of recent 
headcount growth, and a focus on gains in efficiency or 
productivity.  Intentions in business services had picked up 
slightly as robust activity growth had boosted recruitment 
plans, especially in professional services and IT.  Consumer 
services intentions continued to point to modest growth. 
Recruitment difficulties had been little changed at a level 
somewhat above normal.  Skill shortages were reported across 
a wide range of sectors, although they had remained most 
pronounced in engineering, IT, construction and haulage. 
Anumber of contacts had responded by increasing 
recruitment at junior and trainee levels, alongside using IT or 
automation to deskill some work, while some looked overseas 
to source skills.  Difficulties had eased recently for some 
manufacturers alongside a weakening of their employment 
intentions.  Few issues had been reported in sourcing unskilled 
labour, and migrant workers continued to bolster supply. 
Capacity utilisation 
Capacity utilisation had continued at broadly normal levels in 
manufacturing, but was slightly above normal in services 
overall.  Manufacturers’ capacity utilisation had eased a little 
as output growth had slowed and as earlier investment had 
increased physical capacity.  Service sector capacity utilisation 
had continued to edge up.  Professional and financial contacts 
reported high levels of staff utilisation, with a rising proportion 
of contacts identifying skills as the main capacity constraint. 
Strong online sales had led to a sharp reduction in spare 
capacity among delivery and courier firms.  Leasing companies 54321012345Scores 
Con struction ou tpu t
 Busin ess s er vices t urno ver 
Manu factur in g ou tpu t 
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14+
–Three months on the same period a year earlier Chart 2 Output growth 
5432101234Scores
Busin ess  services
Manu factur ingConsume r servic es  
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14Over the coming six months 
+
–Chart 3 Employment intentions reported a high level of utilisation of trains and rolling stock. 
Elsewhere in services, spare capacity persisted, most notably 
in retailing where the growth in online trading had left some 
national chains with excess floorspace.  Across sectors, 
construction had continued to experience the most notable 
capacity constraints, with building delays caused by the 
shortage of skills, although delays caused by material 
shortages had eased. 
Costs and prices 
Labour costs 
Growth in total labour costs had been steady.  Some pressures 
had been building where there were skills shortages including 
in construction, some parts of professional services and for 
some IT specialists.  But overall, those had been met by 
carefully targeted increases without having a large impact on 
overall pay growth.  Despite falls in retail price inflation, many 
contacts expected settlements in 2015 to be similar to, or only 
slightly higher than, those awarded in 2014, although the 
balance of risks was often thought to be to the upside.  Shifts 
in the composition of workforces towards less-experienced 
staff had reduced average earnings growth for a number of 
firms, although it was uncertain how long those effects would 
continue.  Acting in the other direction, pension contributions 
had continued to add to labour cost growth for some contacts, 
either because of auto-enrolment or the need to address 
pension fund deficits. 
Non-labour costs 
Material costs had continued to be lower than a year earlier 
(Chart 4).  Metals prices were significantly lower as a result of 
increased production capacity and weakening global demand. 
Oil prices had fallen sharply, but there had been little direct 
feed through to businesses’ costs — high oil-intensity 
manufacturers aside — as many major users of fuel had 
hedged some months or in some cases, years, ahead.  Some 
manufacturers were looking to lock in lower energy costs by 
renewing contracts with suppliers well in advance of expiry of 
existing deals.  The main reported area of upward cost 
pressure was in construction materials, although future cost 
increases were expected to be more modest as supply capacity 
had increased.  The rise in sterling since early 2013 was feeding 
through in lower costs for imported finished goods as fixed 
term contracts were renewed. 
Output prices and margins 
Manufacturing output price inflation had remained subdued. 
Contacts reported that falls in input costs and strong 
competition had made it difficult to justify price rises, except 
where products had been redesigned.  Many suppliers to the 
supermarket sector had needed to pass through falls in 
ingredient costs in full.  Business services price inflation had 
remained steady and at a stronger rate than for manufacturing (Chart 5).  Some companies had started to increase prices 
modestly as demand improved, particularly for more 
specialised services.  Those supplying the construction sector 
had seen slightly higher increases as activity had strengthened 
and capacity had been reduced.  However, upward pressure 
on haulage rates had eased as fuel prices had fallen, offsetting 
the effects of increased pay inflation from driver shortages. 
Profitability growth remained modest in both manufacturing 
and services.  Exporters’ margins had remained squeezed 
because of sterling’s appreciation, although a recent fall 
against the US dollar had eased the pressure for some. 
Retail and consumer services companies reported that 
margins were under pressure as intense competition had led 
to heavy discounting. 
Consumer prices 
Retail goods inflation had turned negative driven by falls in 
food and fuel prices ( Chart 6).  Contacts in the grocery market 
expected further price reductions in early 2015, in part due to 
falls in the cost of some goods, but also in response to 
continuing intense supermarket competition.  Heavy 
discounting of non-foods — including electrical goods, 4                                                                                                                                 Agents’ summary of business conditions January 2015 
321012345Scores 
Material s costs 
Im po rted  ﬁni shed good s pric es 
 
 
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14Three months on the same period a year earlier 
+
–Chart 4 Raw materials and imported finished goods 
prices 
32101234Scor es 
Manufacturing
Business to bu sines s services 
 
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14+
–Three months on the same period a year earlier Chart 5 Manufacturing and services prices clothing and footwear — during ‘Black Friday’ had been much 
more extensive than for last year.  Some retailers also reported 
short -term discounting of winter clothing due to the effect of 
mild weather on sales.  Consumer services inflation had 
remained steady and stronger than for goods.  As demand had 
increased and capacity had tightened, the prices of a range of 
travel, leisure and catering services had increased.  Private 
rents had continued to edge up.  But for some services where 
competition had remained intense, such as estate agency and 
insurance, prices had remained broadly flat.  The slowing in 
RPI inflation was expected to result in lower increases in 
regulated public transport prices than in 2014. Agents’ summary of business conditions January 2015                                                                                                                                   5
2101234Scores 
Retail goo ds 
Retail s er vices 
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14+
–Three months on the same period a year earlier Chart 6 Retail goods and consumer services prices 