Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2015/june-2015.pdf
Date: 2015-06-30

•    Consumer services and retail sales turnover had continued to grow moderately.
•    Housing market transactions remained lower than a year earlier, with some contacts reporting shortages in the 
supply of homes for sale as the driver of this weakness.
•    Investment intentions had pointed to moderate growth in capital expenditure over the following twelve months.
•    Business services turnover growth had remained robust and broad -based.
•    Manufacturing output growth had edged higher for the domestic market.  Growth in goods exports had remained 
subdued overall.
•    Construction output growth had eased further, but pointed to moderate growth.
•    Corporate credit conditions had remained at a level somewhat above normal, though they continued to vary by 
firm size and sector.
•    Employment intentions had continued to edge higher and were consistent with modest headcount growth.
•    Recruitment difficulties had increased slightly, becoming somewhat more broad -based.
•    Capacity utilisation had eased slightly in manufacturing, but remained slightly above normal for services.
•    Growth in total labour costs per employee had been steady.
•    Materials costs had continued to fall overall.  The rate of decline in some imported finished goods prices had 
eased.
•    Output prices had continued to fall on a year earlier for manufacturers, but had risen moderately for business 
services firms.
•    Profitability growth had edged down for manufacturers, and remained modest for services.
•    Consumer price inflation had remained negative for goods;  retail service prices had continued to increase 
modestly.
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by 
the Bank of England’s Agents following discussions with contacts in 
the period between late April2015 and late May 2015.  It provides 
information on the state of business conditions from companies 
across all sectors of the economy.  The report does not represent 
the Bank’s own views, nor does it represent the views of any 
particular company or region.  The Bank’s Monetary Policy 
Committee uses the intelligence provided by the Agents, in 
conjunction with information from other sources, to assist its 
understanding and assessment of current economic conditions.
Acopy of this publication can be found at:
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/agentssummary/ 
default.aspx .The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, 
the East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the North 
West, Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, 
the South West, Wales, the West Midlands & Oxfordshire, and 
Yorkshire & the Humber.
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic 
conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in the 
Inflation Report , obtained from:
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/inflationreport/ 
default.aspx .Agents’ summary of business conditions 
June 2015 Demand 
Consumption 
Annual growth in retail sales values had remained moderate.
For some retailers, sales volumes growth was outpacing sales 
values growth, reflecting falls in retail prices.  There had been 
further reports of consumers trading up in value terms, for 
example to aspirational brands or premium car marques.
However, some contacts reported a slowing of sales growth of 
some higher -priced goods in the run -up to the general
election.  Consumer services turnover growth had been steady.
Restaurant visits, hotel stays and holiday bookings had 
continued to show robust growth.  Some leisure attractions 
had reported increasing spending by visitors.  Independent 
Financial Advisors had experienced a sharp increase in 
enquiries, in part reflecting recent pension reforms.
Housing market 
The number of transactions had remained lower than a year 
ago.  Sales of new homes had held up better than those in the 
secondary market, where shortages of properties for sale were 
the most frequently cited cause of weakness in activity.
Contacts reported that those shortages had partly reflected 
vendors’ reluctance to offer properties for sale prior to the 
general election.  Since then, the London market had showed 
signs of stronger activity, most notably in the highest price 
bands.  Contacts now expected strengthening price inflation in 
the capital, in contrast to recent trends.
Business investment 
Investment intentions had changed little, and pointed to 
moderate growth.  Manufacturers’ capital expenditure plans 
often focused on new technology, seeking to reduce either 
energy or labour costs:  spending on extra capacity was 
relatively uncommon.  In services, plans centred on expanding,
updating or reconfiguring property after a period of 
under -investment.  Intentions to spend on IT systems, for 
more efficient service provision, also remained prominent.
Consumer -facing firms’ spending plans were concentrated on 
logistics, to support online retailing, rather than on generating 
additional retail space.  Across sectors, few companies cited 
the availability of funding as a constraint on capital spending.
Exports 
Export volumes growth had remained subdued.  For some,
euro -area economic conditions and sterling’s rise against the 
euro had led to a decline in European sales volumes, although 
the effect had been more pronounced for sales values.
Demand had strengthened for some more technologically 
advanced products sold in US dollars.  More generally,
UK firms were increasingly investing in production facilities 
close to their foreign customers, rather than expanding 
domestic production.  Growth in exports of services had 
continued at a steady pace.  Professional services firms, for 
example, had seen robust growth in demand from overseas investors in UK commercial real estate (CRE) and in corporate 
transactions.  But service provision to the overseas oil and gas 
sector had been adversely affected by the fall in oil prices,
particularly in locations where costs of extraction were high.
Abox on page 5 provides the results of an Agents’ survey on 
exports over the past year and expectations for the next 
twelve months.
Output 
Business and financial services 
Growth in professional and financial services turnover had 
remained robust ( Chart 1).  Consultancy services were 
experiencing healthy growth as client companies focused on 
expansion and restructuring.  CRE -related services had also 
continued to expand, as transactions increased and a 
strengthening of occupier demand had spread out from prime 
space to parts of the secondary office market.  Insurers had 
reported stronger growth in demand, and spending on 
marketing, recruitment and training had picked up.  Demand 
had grown for cloud computing, e -commerce and socialmedia 
services, as well as cyber security advice.  A wide range of 
transport and distribution businesses reported rising volumes.
And corporate demand for hotel services had continued to 
grow steadily, though it remained restrained relative to the 
pre -recession period.  Earlier falls in oil prices had begun to 
slow activity throughout the oil and gas supply chain, and 
there had been signs that the pass through of lower oil prices 
to some other services, such as transport, had been associated 
with slower turnover growth.
Manufacturing 
Growth in manufacturing output for the domestic market had 
remained modest.  Among subsectors, growth in output of 
construction products had remained robust, although some 
suppliers to the housing sector had reported a softening of 
demand from builders.  While food processors supplying the 
major supermarkets had reported very modest output growth,
output of some specialist food products had strengthened.2                                                                                                                                       Agents’ summary of business conditions June 2015 
+
–Three months on the same period a year earlier 
432101234
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 Scores 
Professional and 
  ﬁnanci al services 
Other ser vices Chart 1 Services turnover Agents’ summary of business conditions June 2015                                                                                                                                        3
Manufacturers supplying the oil and gas sector had spoken of 
falling order books, with existing projects subject to delay,
respecification or occasionally outright cancellation.
Construction 
Construction output growth had continued to ease.  House 
building growth had been more modest than a year ago, partly 
due to skills shortages.  There were reports that 
election -related delays had affected construction output in 
some public sector related projects.  But, overall, steady 
growth in commercial construction and infrastructure was 
reported.  There had been some signs of a shift of activity 
away from major schemes in London and the South East 
towards smaller projects in other regions.
Credit conditions 
There had been a further slight increase in credit availability 
over recent months.  Banks, including some from overseas,
were competing hard on both price and non -price terms for 
good business.  Across companies, credit had remained most 
readily available for the largest firms and those with strong 
cash flow and security more generally.  For large companies in 
particular, the capital markets had remained a good source of 
competitively priced finance.  There had been a slight increase 
in demand for credit, reflecting investment intentions,
corporate transactions, and companies refinancing existing 
facilities to take advantage of current low interest rates and 
attractive terms.
Employment 
Employment intentions had edged up a little.  Across sectors,
intentions were strongest within business services, particularly 
in professional services and distribution.  Manufacturers’
employment growth had continued to be mildly positive,
largely due to job creation in the construction products,
defence and automotive subsectors.  Consumer services 
employment intentions were modest and mainly evident 
within labour -intensive leisure services and online retail.
Recruitment difficulties were gradually becoming more 
broad -based.  The most acute skill shortages continued to be 
within professional services, IT, construction and engineering,
but were also increasing for middle management positions,
and even some lower -skilled roles.  Migrant labour, however,
was bolstering labour supply for low -skilled jobs and 
increasingly for some higher -skilled roles.  Increased 
confidence among employees was leading to a pickup in staff 
churn.
Capacity utilisation 
Contacts reported a slight easing of capacity utilisation in 
manufacturing, while in the service sector it had remained slightly above normal.  The easing across manufacturing had 
reflected investment in new capacity as well as softening 
demand;  where there were constraints those were generally 
labour -related.  Manufacturing capacity utilisation was 
expected to tighten again later this year.  Within the 
construction sector, capacity had remained tight, with the 
availability of skills a persistent concern.  In the service sector,
industrial space had become scarcer.  Prime city -centre office 
space was also in short supply, with new building starting in 
locations where rental values warranted the build costs.  In 
retail, hotel and transport services, investment had kept up 
with demand growth so that some spare capacity had 
remained.
Costs and prices 
Labour costs 
Growth in total labour costs ( Chart 2) had remained modest,
the major determinants still being company performance,
skills shortages and industry comparators.  Most contacts were 
still planning for moderate future pay awards, sometimes 
including an element of catch -up after subdued real pay 
growth in recent years.  Recruitment and retention issues were 
leading to some higher increases in pay, particularly in 
construction and professional services.  But in some other 
cases, the need to control costs was leading to awards of 
below 2%.  In the oil and gas sector, pay freezes had become 
more common.
Non-labour costs 
Material costs had remained lower than a year ago.  Annual
price declines were reported for many metals, and for oil
based products including plastics.  Various food ingredient 
costs had also fallen as a result of good harvests and 
competition from imports.  Overall, few firms outside of 
construction had reported increases in materials costs.  The 
rate of decline of imported finished goods costs had lessened,
as the appreciation of the US dollar fed through to import 
prices for some consumer goods from the Far East.Manufacturing Services 
+
–Three months on the same period a year earlier 
2101234Scores 
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 Chart 2 Total labour costs per employee Output prices and margins 
Manufacturers’ output prices had fallen slightly on a year ago,
as firms passed through falling input costs and reacted to 
increased competition from the euro area.  But prices had 
picked up for some goods less exposed to European 
competition or where supply growth had lagged demand.
Business services prices inflation had edged up, with increased 
activity enabling modest fee growth at some firms, including 
in professional and financial services and recruitment 
consultancy.  In some areas, skill shortages had also resulted in 
stronger annual output price inflation.  And increased occupier 
demand had been reported as supporting gradual rent 
inflation, especially for prime space.  Manufacturing 
profitability growth had eased further ( Chart 3).  Margins had 
increased for companies able to retain some of the benefit of 
lower input costs, but a weak domestic pricing environment 
was constraining profitability, and the rise in sterling against 
the euro had continued to restrain some exporters’ margins.
Service sector profitability growth had remained steady.
Benign input cost inflation, and greater opportunity to 
increase fees as demand conditions had improved, had helped 
to support margin growth.  However, the main supermarkets 
had continued to face pressure on margins from the strength 
of competition in the sector.Consumer prices 
Consumer goods prices had continued to fall on a year ago 
(Chart 4).  That largely reflected weakness in grocery prices,
which was expected to continue in the coming months.  But 
discounting of clothing and footwear prices had eased 
somewhat.  Sales incentives had held the price of new cars 
broadly flat.  Retail service price inflation had remained 
modestly positive.  Although inflation in services such as car 
repair and casual dining had remained restrained by 
consumers’ price sensitivity, increasing demand had meant 
that there was less downward pressure on the prices of leisure 
activities such as hotel stays, holidays and admission to visitor 
attractions.  Motor and other personal insurance premia had 
continued to firm.4                                                                                                                                       Agents’ summary of business conditions June 2015 
Retail goods Retail services Three months on the same period a year earlier 
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 Scores 
+
–
32101234Chart 4 Consumer goods and services prices 
Services 
Manufacturing 
 +
–Three months on the same period a year earlier 
432101234
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 Scores Chart 3 Pre -tax profitability Agents’ survey on exports 
The Agents conducted a survey of business contacts to ask:
how the sterling value of their UK exports had changed over 
the past three months on a year earlier;  their expectations for 
the next year;  and the factors likely to affect the sterling value 
of exports.  Some 310 companies responded.  The results were 
weighted by export turnover and, for aggregate results,
reweighted by sectoral shares of UK exports.
On balance, respondent firms reported a decline in the sterling 
value of exports over the past three months compared to the 
same period a year ago.  In contrast, respondents on balance 
expected a modest increase in export values over the coming 
twelve months ( Chart A).  That expectations balance was,
however, lower than those in the previous Agents’ exports 
surveys conducted since the recession.
Among those whose main market was the euro area or Asia,
exports had, on balance, declined over the past year, while 
among those whose main market was the United States or 
‘other’, exports had, on balance, increased.  In contrast,
expectations for export value growth during the year ahead 
were generally positive across markets, albeit only weakly so 
for the euro area, and with firms whose main market was the 
United States expecting slower growth than during the past 
year.
Across sectors, goods exporters accounted for the decline in 
export values reported over the past year, with services 
exporters recording a slightly positive net balance.
Expectations of growth in export values were strongest 
among services companies, with goods exports expected to 
be fairly flat.
Overseas demand, entry to new markets and the quality of the 
products/services sold were all expected to boost export values over the next twelve months.  In contrast, price 
competitiveness was not, on balance, expected to support or 
detract from exports ( Chart B).
Contacts were also asked about the impact of the appreciation 
of the sterling exchange rate since early 2013 on export 
margins, volumes and sterling values.  In aggregate, a negative 
effect was more commonly reported on export margins than 
on export volumes ( Chart C).
The aggregate results mask differences between contacts who 
sell their exports in a foreign currency or sterling (some 70% 
of respondents priced in a foreign currency and 30% in 
sterling).  Among the latter group, the impact of movements 
in the sterling exchange rate had mainly been seen in reduced 
volumes, probably reflecting lower competitiveness.  For the 
former group the impact had been mainly on margins 
(Chart C).  Looking forward, there were indications that, over 
time, more firms in both groups would change prices in 
response to the pressure on margins or competitiveness.Agents’ summary of business conditions June 2015                                                                                                                                        5
+
–
20 10 010 20 30 40 50 
Net
balanceDecrease 
subs tantially 
(<-10%) Decrease
slightly 
(-5% to
-10%)No change 
(-5% to 5%)Increase 
slightly 
(5% to
10%)Increase 
subs tantially 
(>10%) Past three months 
  on a year earlierPercentage of respondents 
Next tw elve months Chart A Export values growth 0 10 20 30 OtherPrice competitiveness 
in foreign markets Quality of 
product/se rvice Entry to new markets/ 
exit from ma rkets Overseas de mand 
Percentage balance of respondents Chart B Factors affecting export values over the next 
twelve months 
+
–
40 30 20 10 010 20 30 
Export margins Export volumes Sterling export values Sterl ing exporters 
Foreign currency exporters Percentage balance of respondents 
All ﬁrms Chart C Impact of movements in sterling exchange rate 
since early 2013 