Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2015/february-2015.pdf
Date: 2015-02-28

•    Consumer demand had continued to grow at a moderate pace.  
•    Housing market activity had remained subdued relative to levels in 2014 H1.
•  
  Investment intentions for the next twelve months were consistent with modest growth overall.
•  
  Business services turnover growth had remained robust.
•  
  Manufacturing output growth for the domestic market had eased further.
•  
  Construction output growth had eased slightly, but had been robust overall.
•  
  Corporate credit availability had improved slightly over recent months. 
•  
  Employment intentions had eased slightly for manufacturing and business services firms, but were consistent with
modest headcount growth overall.
•  
  Recruitment difficulties had changed little, at a level somewhat above normal.
•  
  Capacity utilisation was at broadly normal levels in manufacturing, but slightly above normal for services.
•  
  Growth in total labour costs per employee had been steady, although contacts reported increasing wage pressures
in some subsectors with skills shortages.
• 
   Materials costs and imported finished goods prices had remained lower than a year earlier.
• 
   Output prices were broadly flat for manufacturers on a year earlier, although they had risen moderately for
business services.  Profitability growth had edged higher.
•  
  Consumer price inflation had fallen further for goods.  Moderate rates of inflation in services prices had continued.
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by
the Bank of England’s Agents following discussions with contacts inthe period between late December 2014 and late January 2015.It provides information on the state of business conditions fromcompanies across all sectors of the economy.  The report does notrepresent the Bank’s own views, nor does it represent the views ofany particular company or region.  The Bank’s Monetary PolicyCommittee uses the intelligence provided by the Agents, inconjunction with information from other sources, to assist itsunderstanding and assessment of current economic conditions.A copy of this publication can be found at:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/agentssummary/default.aspx.The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, the East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the NorthWest, Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, the South West, Wales, the West Midlands & Oxfordshire, andYorkshire & the Humber.
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic
conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in theInflation Report, obtained from:www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/inflationreport/default.aspx.Agents’ summary of business conditions
February 2015Demand
Consumption
Retail sales values had continued to grow at a moderate pace
during the past three months, although some contactsreported an easing in growth since November, when demandhad been boosted by ‘Black Friday’.  Seasonal trading had beenstrongest in the non-food retail sector, where sales growthwas reported to have been higher than a year earlier.However, sales values growth in the grocery sector had slowedfurther, in part reflecting further price discounting.  Someretailers reported slightly weaker-than-expected levels ofdemand during their January Sales.  Demand for consumerservices was increasing more quickly than for goods.  Annualgrowth of spending at pubs, restaurants, hotels and leisureattractions had picked up a little over Christmas.  And thenumber of rail journeys and passengers at regional airportshad seen robust growth in recent months.  There were somereports that a revival in household real disposable incomes, inpart reflecting falls in fuel prices, was starting to have apositive impact on consumer demand.
Housing market
Housing market activity had remained subdued in mostregions compared with a year earlier.  However, some earlysigns of a pickup in activity were reported, particularly in thenew build sector, where some large house builders notedimproved levels of reservations.  In the secondary market,activity appeared to be relatively stronger in the market forlower value homes, reflecting demand among first-timebuyers, downsizers and investors.
Business investment
Investment intentions in manufacturing had eased backfurther this month, but indicated a modest increase over thenext twelve months (Chart 1).  Some contacts had delayedinvestment programmes, often due to the weakness inoverseas demand.  Falls in oil prices had also led to aretrenchment in spending plans within the oil and gas sector.Intentions were relatively stronger in services, implyingmodest growth in capital spending.  Two particular factorswere often cited as drivers:  catch-up spending following aperiod of underinvestment and plans for commercial propertyrelated investment, though some supermarkets had reducedtheir expansion plans.  The forthcoming General Election hadcreated a degree of uncertainty, but that was rarely reportedto have affected investment spending.  
Exports
Manufacturing export growth had steadied somewhat, albeitat a low rate, after recent falls.  US demand had continued tostrengthen.  But growth in the euro area had slowed slightly,and export volumes to Russia had weakened, in part reflectingthe effect of trade restrictions.  Services export growth hadremained stronger than for manufactured goods.  Professionalservices companies had reported growth in a range of markets.Contacts in construction-related services had generally seendemand in the Middle East holding up well to date.  Acrossmanufacturing and services, suppliers to the oil and gas sectorwere expecting the fall in oil prices to depress their exportactivity over the next year.  
Output
Business services
Growth in business services turnover had remained robust(Chart 2).  Rising corporate finance, commercial real estateand M&A activity had acted as drivers of growth in law,accountancy and banking.  Architects, surveyors andengineering consultants had seen increasing workloads fromcommercial property development and infrastructure projects.Haulage, warehousing, and courier services contacts reportedincreasing activity, as demand within retail and constructioncompanies had continued to strengthen.  Private sectordemand for IT services had remained robust.  Businessdiscretionary spending on travel, conferencing and hospitalityhad risen.  Publishing had remained weak, however, due tostructural changes in the sector, with growth in digital salesinsufficient to offset the continuing decline in demand forprinted media.  Service companies exposed to the oil industryexpected a sharp fall in demand during 2015.
Manufacturing
Growth in manufacturing output for the domestic market hadeased further (Chart 2).  Companies in automotive-relatedsupply chains reported continued robust growth in production.Manufacturers of construction products had also reportedstrong output growth.  Household consumer goods producershad benefited from rising consumer confidence.  The fall in oilprices had reduced new orders across oil and gas supplychains.  Declines in food commodity prices over the past yearhad decreased demand for agricultural machinery.2                                                                                                                               Agents’ summary of business conditions February 2015
5 4 3 2 1 0 1 2 3 4 
20 0 5  0 6  07 08 0 9  1 0  1 1  1 2  1 3  14 15 Services 
Manufacturing Over the coming twelve months
+
–Chart 1Investment intentionsAgents’ summary of business conditions February 2015                                                                                                                               3
Construction
Construction output growth had eased slightly but remained
robust (Chart 2).  Construction growth had become morebroad-based over the past year, as a slowing in house buildinggrowth had been largely offset by a recovery in commercialactivity.  Large house builders had continued to plan increasesin output in 2015, although some smaller house buildersreported that tight funding conditions and materials or skillsshortages were constraining their activity.  Commercialconstruction had continued to grow robustly, including somespeculative development of warehousing and industrial units.Infrastructure investment had also risen.  
Credit conditions 
Credit availability had increased slightly over recent months,although there remained a disparity between the experiencesof large and some smaller firms.  Intense competition amongbanks to lend to larger firms had led to significant reductionsin finance costs for some contacts.  Bank lending conditionshad remained tighter than pre-crisis for many small andmedium-sized companies, but were improving:  somestronger businesses described conditions now as reasonablygood.  However, a distrust of banks among smaller companieshad continued to bear down on their demand for bank credit.In the commercial real estate sector, banks were reported tobe increasing the amount of funds available at higherloan to value ratios.  More generally, a rise in the availability offunds from private equity investors was reported, as some hadbeen able to sell earlier investments made before the financialcrisis.  Bad debts and arrears had remained contained,although some fears had been expressed that significant cutsin the oil and gas sector’s cost base could lead to insolvencieswithin the supply chain.
Employment 
Employment intentions over recent months had beenconsistent with easing growth (Chart 3).  This had reflected acombination of factors, including:  a slight easing in thedemand outlook;  a sense that many firms had reachedappropriate employment levels following recruitment lastyear;  and a focus on gains in efficiency or productivity.Manufacturing intentions were now broadly flat overall.Intentions in business services had eased a little, but remainedconsistent with moderate employment growth.  A broad rangeof sectors were recruiting, with plans strongest among IT andsome professional services firms.  Modest headcount growthin consumer services had continued.  Recruitment difficultieshad remained at elevated levels.  Skill shortages had remainedmost pronounced within IT, engineering, construction trades.There were reports of companies using migrant workers to fillvacancies in some higher-skilled occupations, as well as forless-skilled roles.  More generally, staff attrition rates hadcontinued to pick up from low levels.
Capacity utilisation
Capacity utilisation had remained close to normal inmanufacturing, but was slightly above normal in services.Within manufacturing, some companies had seen utilisationrates ease due to slowing demand or as earlier investment hadincreased physical capacity.  But that had been broadly offsetby tightening capacity elsewhere in the sector, such as forcompanies producing construction materials.  Within services,hotel occupancy levels had been reported as strong, and someshortages of high-grade office space and warehousing wereemerging.  But reports of excess sales space within the retailsector had persisted.  In terms of labour, there had been anincrease in reports of skill shortages acting as a constraintwithin professional services.  Across sectors, capacityutilisation was most intense in the construction sector.  
Costs and prices
Labour costs
Growth in labour costs per employee had remained steady.The results of a pay survey (summarised in a box on pages 5)5 4 3 2 1 0 1 2 3 4 5 
2 0 0 5  0 6  07 08 0 9  1 0  1 1  1 2  1 3  14 15 Three months on the same period a year earlier 
Construction output Business services turnover 
Manufacturing output 
+
–Chart 2Output growth
5 4 3 2 1 0 1 2 3 4 
2 0 0 5  0 6  07 0 8  0 9  1 0  1 1  1 2  1 3  14 15 Over the coming six months
Business services 
Manufacturing Consumer services  +
–Chart 3Employment intentionsindicated a very slight increase in wage settlements in 2015.
There remained a number of sectors where skills shortages hadexerted more pressure on labour costs, often addressedthrough targeted awards or special payments with limitedeffect on average pay growth.  Contacts typically regarded therecent decline in inflation as easing upwards pressures on paygrowth.  The increase in the National Minimum Wage inOctober had led to larger wage increases for some staff at thelower end of the pay scale.
Non-labour costs
A broad range of materials costs had fallen on a year earlier.However, most contacts had not yet benefited fully from thelarge reductions in oil prices, given extensive forwardpurchasing of oil.  Users of oil-based intermediate materialswere also yet to see major decreases in their costs.  Shippingrates had fallen but this was largely attributed to overcapacity,rather than fuel costs.  A range of non-oil input costs haddeclined, including silver, scrap metal, chemicals and cotton,as a result of lower global demand.  Construction materialcosts, however, had continued to increase.  There had been afurther fall in the costs of imported finished goods, in part asforward contracts were renewed following sterling’sappreciation since early 2013, but in some cases also due torecent falls in the value of the euro.  
Output prices and margins
Manufacturing output price inflation had fallen, with pricesnow broadly flat on a year earlier (Chart 4).  A combination offalling raw material costs and competitive markets hadprovided little scope for price increases for most companies.Suppliers to the large supermarkets had experiencedcontinuing downward pressure on prices.  Business servicesprice inflation had edged lower, remaining modest (Chart 4).Professional services firms had continued to increase pricesmoderately, especially for more specialised services, asdemand had improved and spare capacity had eroded.Commercial property rents had continued to rise as demandimproved.  But elsewhere in the sector, limited pricing powerwas reported.  In haulage, lower fuel costs had led to pricereductions due to fuel indexation clauses in contracts.Manufacturing profitability had edged up, as some companieshad seen improvements to their margins from reductions ininput costs.  Service sector profitability growth had alsoincreased overall, due to increasing business volumes,efficiency gains and some price increases.
Consumer prices
Consumer goods price inflation had been negative, althoughmodest inflation in services prices had continued (Chart 5).Food and fuel prices had continued to fall.  Looking ahead,contacts expected that price competition in the grocery sectorwould intensify further.  Some further falls in grocery priceshad been announced early in the New Year.  In the non-foodsector, discounting in the post-Christmas sales period hadappeared little changed on a year earlier.  Retail services priceinflation had edged lower, remaining modest (Chart 5).  Amoderate recovery in discretionary spending had continued tosupport price rises for a range of leisure services.  Privatesector rents had increased a little.  But inflation in regulatedtransport fares had declined following the earlier slowing ofRPI inflation, and for some unregulated transport fares, therehad been signs of lower fuel costs being passed through to theconsumer.  A number of utility companies had announcedprice reductions that would start to take effect in the nearfuture.4                                                                                                                               Agents’ summary of business conditions February 2015
3 2 1 0 1 2 3 4 
20 0 5  0 6  07 0 8  0 9  1 0  1 1  1 2  1 3  14 15 Three months on the same period a year earlier
Manufacturing 
Business to business services  +
–Chart 4Manufacturing and services output prices
2 1 0 1 2 3 4 
2 0 0 5  0 6  07 08 0 9  1 0  1 1  1 2  1 3  14 15 Three months on the same period a year earlier
Retail goods  Retail services  +
–Chart 5Retail goods and consumer services pricesAgents’ survey on pay and labour costs 
The Agents have conducted an annual pay survey since 1998, 
asking private-sector contacts about their expected pay 
settlements for the year ahead, and the key drivers of any 
changes to growth in total labour costs per employee.  This 
year 436 firms responded, with a combined UK employment 
of 977,000 staff.  The results of the survey have been 
weighted by employment. 
The average pay settlement was expected to increase slightly 
to 2.5% in 2015, from 2.4% in 2014 ( Chart A ).  These figures 
remain well below pre-crisis growth rates, although there has 
been a very gradual drift upwards in settlements over the past 
few years.  Looking across sectors, pay settlements in 2014 
and those expected for 2015 were a little higher in 
construction than in other parts of the economy.  
This year’s survey, in common with recent years, saw a clear 
majority of expected settlements in the range 2% to 3%. 
Fewer firms were expecting to freeze pay in 2015 than in the 
previous year, and there were no reductions in pay reported 
for 2014 or expected for 2015.  Around 9% of firms in the 
sample (covering 12% of employees), reported that collective 
wage bids had been made for 2015.  A little over half of those 
bids were reported to have been higher in 2015 than in 2014.  
A modest balance of respondents expected total labour costs 
per employee to increase more rapidly in the coming year than 
in the previous twelve months ( Chart B ).  That balance 
suggests that the pickup in growth of total labour costs 
per employee in 2015 may be a little greater than that for 
settlements.  Across sectors, expectations of increases in 
growth of labour costs per employee were strongest  for 
construction. As in last year’s survey, the factor most commonly cited as 
expected to increase growth in total labour costs 
per employee in the coming year was staff retention and 
recruitment ( Chart C ).  As well as upward pressure from 
higher productivity growth, a number of respondents also 
cited a positive influence from the National Minimum Wage, 
or pressure to pay the Living Wage (captured within ‘other’ in 
Chart C ).  But there were some countervailing downward 
pressures, particularly from inflation expectations and from 
the ability to pass on cost increases in to price.  These 
reflected the significant fall in inflation and reports from some 
contacts that competition in their markets made it difficult to 
raise prices, particularly in a low-inflation environment. 0123
Total Manufacturing Construction Consumer 
servicesBusine ss 
servi ces 2014 settlement
Expectations for 2015Per cent  Chart A Pay settlements by sector010 20 30 40 50 Net balance 
Signiﬁcantly lower 
(> 1.0 percentage points) 
Slightly lower 
(0.1 percentage points– 
1.0 percentage points )
Unchanged 
Slightly higher 
(0.1 percentage points –
1.0 percentage points )
Signiﬁcantly higher 
( >1.0 percentage points )2014 versus 2013
2015 versus 2014Percentage of employment 
 Chart B Expected growth in total labour costs relative to 
the previous year
40 20 0 20 40 Inﬂation 
expectatio ns Ability to pass on cost 
increases to price Changes to employer 
pension contributions Changes to composition 
of employment Changes in average 
hours worked OtherChanges in 
productivityRetention and 
recruit ment 
Net ba lance, per cent  
+ –Chart C Influences on expected growth in total labour
costs per employee in 2015 relative to 2014 Agents’ summary of business conditions February 2015                                                                                                                                5