Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2015/july-2015.pdf
Date: 2015-07-31

•    Growth of consumer services turnover had been steady, but retail sales values growth had eased. 
•    Housing market transactions had picked up and house prices had risen. 
•    Investment intentions pointed to moderate growth in capital expenditure over the next twelve months. 
•    Business services turnover growth remained firm overall, with growth in professional services outpacing other 
business services. 
•    Manufacturing output growth remained modest, although growth in manufacturing exports had edged up from a 
low base.  
•    Construction output growth had been steady. 
•    Corporate credit conditions had eased further. 
•    Employment intentions had continued to increase. 
•    Recruitment difficulties had risen to their highest level since 2007, having broadened across sectors. 
•    Capacity utilisation had edged higher overall, and was slightly above normal in the service sector and marginally 
below normal in manufacturing. 
•    Growth in total labour costs per employee had been little changed, but there were signs of building wage 
pressures.  
•    The pace of decline of materials costs and imported finished goods prices had slowed slightly. 
•    Manufacturing output prices had continued to fall on a year earlier, but business services prices had risen 
modestly. 
•    The rate of decline of consumer prices had stabilised for goods.  Consumer services price inflation had remained 
modest. 
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by 
the Bank of England’s Agents following discussions with contacts in 
the period between late May 2015 and late June 2015.  It provides 
information on the state of business conditions from companies 
across all sectors of the economy.  The report does not represent 
the Bank’s own views, nor does it represent the views of any 
particular company or region.  The Bank’s Monetary Policy 
Committee uses the intelligence provided by the Agents, in 
conjunction with information from other sources, to assist its 
understanding and assessment of current economic conditions. 
Acopy of this publication can be found at: 
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/agentssummary/ 
default.aspx .The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, 
the East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the North 
West, Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, 
the South West, Wales, the West Midlands & Oxfordshire, and 
Yorkshire & the Humber. 
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic 
conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in the 
Inflation Report , obtained from: 
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/inflationreport/ 
default.aspx .Agents’ summary of business conditions 
July 2015 Demand 
Consumption 
Annual growth in retail sales values had eased, though 
consumer services turnover growth had remained steady 
(Chart 1 ).  Demand growth for some seasonal lines, such as 
summer fashions, had eased, partly on account of 
cooler-than-normal weather.  More generally, annual 
comparisons had been adversely affected by somewhat 
elevated levels of retail sales a year ago, partly reflecting a 
boost from the 2014 World Cup.  The value of food sales had 
been little changed on a year ago, while non-food retailers 
reported only modest growth.  New car sales to private buyers 
had slowed recently from high levels.  Some contacts ascribed 
that to a steadying of the frequency of car replacement, which 
had been rising alongside growing use of personal contract 
rental purchase agreements in car sales.  Consumer services 
turnover growth was steady.  Demand growth had benefited 
from increased discretionary spending:  for example 
cinema-visit numbers had grown strongly.  Leisure occupancy 
of hotels had increased and demand for overseas packaged 
holidays had risen. 
Housing market 
The number of transactions in the housing market had picked 
up in most regions.  The pickup had been strongest for higher 
priced properties.  Shortages of homes for sale were cited as a 
constraint on the number of transactions in most areas, 
contributing to higher house price inflation.  Nonetheless, the 
majority of estate agents anticipated stronger activity growth 
in the second half of the year than in the first.  Demand for 
new homes had remained strong, supported in part by 
continued use of the Government’s Help to Buy scheme.  
Buy-to-let activity had continued to expand, underpinned by 
steady growth in demand for rented accommodation. Investment intentions 
Investment intentions were consistent with continued 
moderate growth in capital spending over the next twelve 
months.  Manufacturers were increasing investment steadily, 
in particular with the aim of re-tooling for new products, or 
increasing energy efficiency or automation — in the latter 
case, partly to address skills shortages.  But suppliers to the oil 
and gas sector had deferred non-essential capital expenditure. 
Investment growth by firms in the services sector had 
remained somewhat stronger, reinforced by relatively greater 
confidence in the strength of demand.  Spending was often 
focused on ICT equipment or physical premises, including 
distribution facilities.  Increased investment by consumer 
services firms in leisure facilities was also reported.  However, 
some companies, such as large supermarkets, were fully or 
over-invested and had sharply reduced capital budgets.  
Exports 
Growth of manufacturing export volumes had risen slightly, 
mostly reflecting a modest pickup in demand from the 
euro area.  However, downward pressure on many exporters’ 
margins had increased alongside a further rise in sterling. 
Overall, exporters remained more positive about prospects in 
US dollar-denominated markets than other destinations.  For 
example, demand from the Middle East had continued to 
increase, with good medium-term growth prospects 
particularly for defence and infrastructure projects.  Sales of 
manufactured goods to China had slowed and exports to 
Russia had fallen markedly.  
Output 
Business and financial services 
Growth in professional and financial services turnover had 
remained robust ( Chart 2 ).  Corporate mergers and 
acquisitions (M&A) activity had continued to increase, 
supporting demand for financial, legal, accounting and 
advisory services.  Commercial real estate transaction volumes 
were rising steadily, in part reflecting improved credit 
conditions.  That had increased demand for professional 
services such as architects, surveyors and commercial property 
advisors.  Recruitment agencies had benefited from increased 
labour demand and staff turnover among their clients.  In 
contrast, consultancies offering engineering and investment 
project expertise to the oil and gas sector reported a sharp 
drop in demand volumes and contract prices.  The growth of 
turnover in other business services was steady at slightly 
below trend rates.  Growth in demand for logistics and 
transportation services had remained robust, underpinned by 
the recovery in construction and expansion in retail and 
distribution activity.  Corporate travel and hotel occupancy 
rates had continued to recover.  2                                                                                                                                         Agents’ summary of business conditions July 2015 
Scores 
Consumer services 
  turnover  Retail sales 
  values Three months on the same period a year earlier 
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 +
–
3210123Chart 1 Retail sales values and consumer services 
turnover Agents’ summary of business conditions July 2015                                                                                                                                         3
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing output growth for the domestic market had 
been steady, if slightly below rates at the end of last year. 
Growth in demand for companies operating in export supply 
chains had remained more subdued.  Contacts reported 
continued output growth in the automotive supply chain and 
in the production of construction materials, while the 
production of high-end consumer electronics had picked up 
over the year to date.  But demand for capital and 
intermediate goods from the oil and gas sector had weakened. 
Import penetration had increased for lower value added 
products in the wake of the euro’s depreciation. 
Construction 
Construction output had grown steadily.  Large house builders 
had revised up planned build rates, while smaller firms were 
increasingly acquiring sites that larger competitors considered 
insufficiently profitable.  Commercial activity — most notably 
warehouse construction — had continued to recover. 
Contacts reported continued growth of repair and 
maintenance work. 
Credit conditions 
Credit conditions had eased further.  Credit supply had often 
outstripped demand, and competition between lenders was 
increasing on price and non-price terms, at least for lending to 
companies perceived to be of good credit quality.  Demand for 
external finance for M&A activity had risen slightly.  Despite 
the availability of finance at relatively low cost, many firms 
remained eager to pay down debts, or to fund investment or 
acquisitions from internal funds where possible.  Loan 
refinancing was increasingly common, however, usually with 
the aim of reducing finance costs or improving lending terms. 
Non-bank lending had continued to grow and was increasingly 
accessible to small and medium-sized enterprises, for example 
through crowd-funding.  Commercial property developers 
reported continued improvement in funding conditions, from 
bank and non-bank lenders. Employment 
Employment intentions had picked up a little further.  The 
employment outlook remained strongest in professional 
services, where contacts were recruiting as a result of 
expanding workloads.  A modest pickup in consumer services’ 
staffing intentions over recent months had largely reflected 
job creation in labour-intensive leisure sectors, such as hotels 
and restaurants.  Only a minority of manufacturers anticipated 
significant recruitment this year, due to relatively subdued 
output growth and plans to raise productivity. 
Recruitment difficulties had edged up and were at levels last 
seen during 2007, having broadened recently across a wide 
range of skills, levels of experience and occupations.  For 
example, reports of a scarcity of experienced middle and 
senior managers had become fairly common.  Reports of 
businesses struggling to source unskilled and semi-skilled 
workers had risen.  In consequence, companies’ reliance on 
skilled and unskilled migrant labour had increased, while 
apprenticeship, graduate and school-leaver recruitment 
programmes had been either maintained or increased.  But 
some contacts had reported a slight easing of skills shortages, 
sometimes reflecting increased automation reducing their 
needs for skilled labour. 
Capacity utilisation 
Capacity utilisation in manufacturing had declined marginally, 
but had risen for services.  In manufacturing, utilisation was 
slightly below normal.  An increase in capacity had, to some 
degree, reflected capital investment over the past year and in 
some cases, the recruitment of skilled labour beyond 
immediate needs.  Some constraints remained in the 
manufacture of construction materials (although capacity was 
being increased) and skills shortages, especially for engineers, 
were increasingly mentioned by contacts.  In construction 
itself, capacity constraints were being alleviated by the 
recruitment of migrant labour.  Capacity utilisation in services 
had increased and was slightly above normal overall.  Contacts 
in professional services often reported that labour was fully or 
over-utilised.  And capacity constraints had also increased in 
some other business services, such as for prime warehouse 
space.  Utilisation rates for hotels, airports and rail 
infrastructure had remained above their historic averages.  By 
contrast, there was excess space in some parts of the retail 
sector.  And firms providing services to the energy sector 
(principally oil and gas exploration and production) reported 
increased slack owing to sharp falls in demand. +
–Three months on the same period a year earlier 
432101234
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 Scores 
Professional and 
  ﬁnanci al services 
Other ser vices Chart 2 Business services turnover Costs and prices 
Labour costs 
Growth in labour costs per employee had been little changed. 
Contacts’ reports suggested that wage pressures had edged 
higher, especially in the services sector, but those pressures 
had been largely restrained so far by countervailing effects, 
such as competitive pressures that were causing companies to 
bear down on cost growth.  Concerns over staff recruitment 
and retention were, for the most part, reflected in targeted 
awards at key staff, rather than higher general pay awards. 
However, there was some concern that such pressures may 
intensify and, in construction, more widespread skills 
shortages had already resulted in some elevated pay rises. 
Increases in the National Minimum Wage in October last 
year had raised pay growth for the lowest-paid employees and 
in some cases for those paid slightly more, in order to 
maintain differentials.  Improved trading performance for 
some firms had led to growth of commission, bonuses and 
profit-related pay.  But in some cases, especially in 
manufacturing, companies had reported reduced overtime and 
shift working which had lowered growth in labour costs per 
employee.   
Non-labour costs 
The pace of decline in material costs had slowed slightly, 
although many input prices remained well below those of a 
year ago.  The price of some oil-based materials, such as 
plastics, had risen during the past few months, following an 
increase in oil prices that had since reversed.  Food commodity 
costs had remained around their recent lows, largely due to 
good harvests, excess supply in Europe (in some cases because 
supplies had been diverted from Russia) and the impact of a 
weaker euro.  By contrast, after a period of rapid increases, 
construction materials inflation had slowed.  Imported finished 
goods deflation had lessened a little further, as the 
appreciation of the US dollar fed through to import prices for 
consumer goods from the Far East. 
Output prices and margins 
Manufacturers’ output prices had declined slightly on a year 
ago ( Chart 3 ), in part reflecting greater price competition from 
euro-area manufacturers.  Food manufacturers and firms 
supplying the non-food retail sector had been under pressure 
to pass on lower input costs.  Output prices for companies in 
the oil and gas supply chain had fallen sharply.  Manufacturers 
of construction materials continued to raise prices — albeit at 
lower rates of inflation than last year.  Business services price 
inflation had remained moderate.  Competitive pressures and 
a continuing tendency for clients to negotiate on fees had 
often made it difficult for professional firms to obtain 
significant price rises, while suppliers to the public sector 
reported further pressure to reduce prices.  However, faced 
with capacity constraints, some professional services firms had 
increased fees and were able to be increasingly selective in the work they undertook.  And while lower fuel prices had reduced 
the cost of haulage, pass-through to customers had been 
incomplete as hauliers sought to recover increased wage costs. 
Profit growth had been steady in both the manufacturing and 
services sectors.  
Consumer prices 
The rate of decline in consumer goods prices had stabilised 
(Chart 4 ).  Forecourt fuel prices had risen.  Prices had fallen 
further for groceries and clothing, although there were signs 
that the pace of decreases was starting to ease.  More 
generally, price inflation for a range of consumer goods had 
been suppressed by the competitive effects of internet 
retailing.  Consumer services price inflation was steady 
(Chart 4 ).  Inflation was reported to be rising for hotels, 
restaurants and tourism alongside growing demand.  The rate 
of increase in private rents had also risen, in part reflecting 
housing shortages.  By contrast, inflation for services where 
prices were linked to the retail prices index, such as railway 
transport and water, had fallen.  Sectors exposed to 
e-commerce (such as car and property insurance) reported 
sustained downward pressure on inflation. 4                                                                                                                                        Agents’ summary of business conditions July 2015 
Retail goods Retail services Three months on the same period a year earlier 
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 Scores 
+
–
32101234Chart 4 Consumer goods and services prices +
–
32101234
Manu factur ing 
Busin ess -to-bu sin ess
  servicesTh ree  mon ths on  t he  s ame pe rio d a y ea r ea rlier
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15ScoresChart 3 Manufacturing and services output prices 