Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2015/may-2015.pdf
Date: 2015-05-31

•    Consumer services and retail sales turnover had risen moderately. 
•    Housing market activity remained below that of a year earlier, with some contacts reporting a slowing in the 
run -up to the General Election. 
•    Investment intentions for the next twelve months were consistent with moderate growth overall. 
•    Business services turnover growth had remained robust and broadly based. 
•    Manufacturing output growth, both for the domestic market and for export, had edged lower. 
•    Construction output growth had continued to ease on a year earlier, but remained fairly robust overall. 
•    Corporate credit availability had improved further. 
•    Employment intentions had edged higher and were consistent with modest headcount growth overall. 
•    Recruitment difficulties had changed little, at a level somewhat above normal. 
•    Capacity utilisation had remained at broadly normal levels in manufacturing, but slightly above normal for 
services. 
•    Growth in total labour costs per employee had been steady. 
•    Materials costs and imported finished goods prices had remained lower than a year earlier. 
•    Output prices had fallen on a year earlier for manufacturers, although they had risen moderately for business 
services firms. 
•    Profitability growth had edged higher for services, but had fallen for manufacturers. 
•    Consumer price inflation had remained negative for goods.  Retail service prices had continued to increase 
modestly. 
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by 
the Bank of England’s Agents following discussions with contacts in 
the period between late March 2015 and late April 2015. 
It provides information on the state of business conditions from 
companies across all sectors of the economy.  The report does not 
represent the Bank’s own views, nor does it represent the views of 
any particular company or region.  The Bank’s Monetary Policy 
Committee uses the intelligence provided by the Agents, in 
conjunction with information from other sources, to assist its 
understanding and assessment of current economic conditions. 
Acopy of this publication can be found at: 
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/agentssummary/ 
default.aspx .The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, 
the East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the North 
West, Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, 
the South West, Wales, the West Midlands & Oxfordshire, and 
Yorkshire & the Humber. 
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic 
conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in the 
Inflation Report , obtained from: 
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/inflationreport/ 
default.aspx .Agents’ summary of business conditions 
May 2015 Demand 
Consumption 
Annual retail sales values growth had remained steady.  Food 
prices had continued to decline but growth in sales volumes 
had increased.  The patterns of growth had been mixed for 
non -food sales.  A slowdown in the housing market and 
limitations in technological innovation were reported to have 
led to easing growth in household durable goods sales. 
However, consumers had been trading up in value terms, for 
example through shifting their purchasing towards aspirational 
brands.  New car sales growth, supported by finance deals and 
manufacturers’ incentives, had remained robust.  Consumer 
services turnover growth had eased very slightly, but remained 
pretty robust.  UK hoteliers reported a slight easing in 
occupancy rates — but that was probably a temporary effect 
from poor Easter weather.  Forward holiday bookings in the 
United Kingdom were reported to be robust, as was trading by 
restaurants, coffee shops and internet -based service providers. 
Independent Financial Advisors had reported a sharp increase 
in demand for personal financial planning advice following 
recent reforms to pensions. 
Housing market 
Housing market activity had remained below that of a year 
earlier.  There were reports of a slowing in housing market 
activity in the run -up to the General Election, especially 
among potential sellers, some of whom were holding off from 
putting their property on the market in the expectation that 
conditions would be more buoyant in H2.  That had 
exacerbated existing supply shortages in some areas.  House 
price inflation had remained generally modest.  The rental 
market had continued to expand, supporting growth in 
buy -to -let activity.  There had been no evidence as yet that 
recent reforms to pensions had stimulated investment in 
property. 
Business investment 
Manufacturers’ investment intentions had picked up modestly 
(Chart 1).  In the main, manufacturing investment had been 
aimed at increasing efficiency and productivity, although there 
were increasing reports of spending to increase capacity. 
Services investment intentions had eased but pointed towards 
moderate growth.  Spending on new IT had remained a 
frequent driver of growth, although growing numbers reported 
having completed the necessary catch -up in technology over 
the past year or so.  In consumer services, the need to respond 
to changing buying habits, such as the popularity of coffee 
shops and smaller convenience stores, was often driving 
growth.  On the whole, businesses had not delayed investment 
spending due to the General Election beyond those whose 
revenue was most dependent on public funding and potential 
policy changes. Exports 
Manufacturing exports growth had remained stable but 
subdued.  Conditions across markets were mixed, with weak 
euro -area demand and the appreciation of sterling against the 
euro having made exporting to Europe more difficult, offset by 
rising demand from the United States, aided by the 
depreciation of sterling against the dollar.  Sales to Russia had 
been adversely affected by trade sanctions, unfavourable 
exchange rates and the general state of the economy. 
Services exports had continued to grow at a modest rate. 
Legal and commercial property services reported rising 
demand for advice from overseas clients seeking to invest in 
the United Kingdom.  But overseas demand for advisory 
services related to the oil and gas industry had weakened. 
There had been increasing signs of services exports being 
affected by the appreciation of sterling against the euro. 
Output 
Business and financial services 
Turnover growth had continued to be robust ( Chart 2).  Strong 
corporate transaction and commercial real estate activity had 
increased demand for legal, advisory, accountancy, 
architectural and surveyors’ services.  Digital transformation 2                                                                                                                                        Agents’ summary of business conditions May 2015 
+
–Over  t he  c omin g t welve m on ths
5432101234
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15Scores
Services
Manu facturing
 Chart 1 Investment intentions 
+
–
54321012345
Con st ructio n ou tpu t
 Busin ess  services tur no ver  
Manu factur in g ou tpu t 
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15Th ree  mon ths on  t he  s ame pe rio d a y ea r ea rlierScoresChart 2 Activity Agents’ summary of business conditions May 2015                                                                                                                                         3
across sectors was increasing demand for management 
consultants and IT activity.  Some insurance companies 
reported that sales of additional cover to corporate clients 
were increasing.  Distribution and storage firms reported 
strong volume growth.  Recruitment agencies had remained 
busy, although some reported that the rate of growth was 
moderating.  There were reports of strengthening corporate 
travel, conferencing and entertainment.  But demand from the 
oil and gas industry for professional services had fallen. 
Manufacturing 
Manufacturing output growth had eased very slightly and 
remained modest ( Chart 2).  Demand had softened in 
aerospace supply chains, which contacts attributed mainly to 
the industry entering the ‘de -stocking phase’ of the product 
cycle.  There were mixed reports from the automotive sector, 
mainly due to weakness in some export -related supply chains. 
Demand for operational equipment for the oil and gas sector 
had fallen, although orders of exploration equipment had held 
up.  Manufacturers of capital equipment for the food sector 
reported increasing demand, although reports from food 
manufacturers about their output were mixed.  Output of 
capital goods for the agricultural sector had declined further. 
Construction 
Construction output had continued to grow on a year earlier, 
although the rate of increase had eased ( Chart 2).  That 
slowing had reflected both self -imposed constraints, such as 
firms’ desire to grow their margins rather than output and/or a 
reluctance to take on additional overheads, and constraints 
from skills shortages and rising build costs.  Some public sector 
construction projects had been delayed in the pre -election 
period, although there were strong pipelines of work in many 
areas including infrastructure.  Commercial construction had 
continued to grow overall, but the picture was patchy:  for 
example, speculative building was limited to a few major cities 
and some energy -related schemes had been mothballed.  In 
house building, the picture was mixed, but affordable house 
completions were reported to have picked up in March ahead 
of the end of the Homes and Communities Agency grant 
period and there were reports of a gradual increase in activity 
among small builders. 
Credit conditions 
Credit conditions had improved further, with lending spreads 
coming under more downward pressure, loan tenors gradually 
extending and covenants easing slightly.  The supply of 
non -bank finance, including from capital markets, had 
remained strong and at costs that were often reported as at 
record lows.  Large corporates had been readily able to access 
funding from a range of sources, with banks reported to be 
competing aggressively for lending business.  Medium -sized 
businesses had also increasingly benefited from greater competition among banks.  Availability of funding had 
improved slightly further for small companies, but it had 
remained tighter than normal for some firms, such as for those 
involved in construction and property. 
Employment 
Employment intentions had edged a little higher, pointing to 
modest job creation over the next six months ( Chart 3). 
Intentions were often strongest among business services 
contacts, particularly in the professional services and 
IT subsectors.  Headcount growth in consumer services had 
been most evident in roles supporting online sales, or on the 
back of physical footprint expansion, partially offset by 
reductions in employment numbers among the major 
supermarkets.  Manufacturing employment intentions were 
marginally positive.  Recruitment difficulties had remained 
elevated for many contacts.  Skill shortages still tended to be 
role or sector specific, but they had become more broad -based 
as economic activity had risen.  Alongside this, attrition rates 
had picked up as employees had become more confident 
about moving jobs.  Some contacts reported increasing 
difficulties in finding good quality candidates for lower -skilled 
jobs as the labour market had tightened.  Migrant labour had 
continued to help fill gaps in unskilled and, in some cases, 
more highly skilled occupations. 
Capacity utilisation 
Capacity utilisation had remained unchanged overall. 
Utilisation was around normal for manufacturing and slightly 
above normal in services.  Within manufacturing, the effects of 
modest demand growth, recent investment and continuing 
productivity improvements meant that capacity utilisation 
was likely to remain marginally below normal levels for the 
next six months.  In services there had been a notable 
reduction in utilisation for oil and gas related businesses. 
Utilisation across the sector overall had remained steady Busin ess  services  
Manu facturing
 Con sumer services
 +
–Over  t he  c omin g six m on ths
5432101234
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15ScoresChart 3 Employment intentions however as fixed asset utilisation was rising in other services, 
such as hotel occupancy and warehousing.  Labour shortages 
were constraining output in some companies, in particular in 
professional services and construction. 
Costs and prices 
Labour costs 
Growth in total labour costs had remained modest, but 
slightly faster in services than in manufacturing.  Most 
settlements had remained in the 2% –3% range, although 
there had been some signs of manufacturing settlements 
tailing off a little in recent months, and pay freezes were 
reported in the oil and gas sector, and its supply chain, as the 
effect of lower oil prices fed through.  Overall, upward 
pressures on wage growth from skills shortages had been 
balanced by downward pressures from low inflation, which 
was reported by some contacts to have allowed settlements 
to be lower than would otherwise have been the case, for 
example, where companies were struggling to afford pay rises. 
Non-labour costs 
Material costs had remained lower than a year earlier 
(Chart 4).  Contacts linked substantial falls in agricultural 
commodity costs to high global stocks, following good 
harvests and a sharp decline in sales of produce from Europe 
to Russia.  The decline in oil prices earlier in the year had fed 
through to plastics prices but had not been fully reflected in 
transport costs, due to offsetting increases in driver pay, and 
earlier forward purchases of oil.  The rate of decline of 
imported finished goods prices had moderated a little 
(Chart 4).  Although some importers reported lower prices 
from the euro area as a result of the decline in the euro, others 
who paid for their imports in sterling had seen no adjustment 
in prices.  And some contacts reported upward price pressure 
from some European suppliers due to higher costs for 
dollar -denominated inputs.  The cost of dollar -denominated 
imports from China had increased as a result of sterling’s 
depreciation against the dollar and Chinese wage inflation. Output prices and margins 
Manufacturing output prices had fallen slightly further on a 
year earlier ( Chart 5).  Although some firms reported being 
able to raise prices modestly year on year, many were coming 
under increased pressure from customers to reduce pricing as 
input costs had fallen.  Business services output price inflation 
had been little changed ( Chart 5).  For many standardised 
services, there had been continued downward price pressure as 
contracts come up for renewal or procurement departments 
sought further year -on -year cost savings.  Financial services 
prices were also under pressure because of increased 
competition.  Elsewhere in business services, however, modest 
price increases were generally reported.  Across the oil and gas 
sector supply chain, prices were falling significantly on a year 
ago as the lower oil price led to repricing.  Overall, growth in 
manufacturing profitability had eased further, in part 
reflecting the effects of sterling’s appreciation on exporters’ 
margins.  Service sector profitability growth had increased 
slightly, because of modest price increases and, in some cases, 
lower non -labour costs or moves away from lower margin 
work. 
Consumer prices 
Consumer goods price inflation had remained negative and 
little changed.  Annual reductions continued to be focused 
primarily on food, fuel and energy with relatively little sign of 
price falls for other goods.  Strong competition among 
supermarkets had continued to bear down on groceries 
inflation.  Elsewhere, goods prices in high street or 
out -of -town stores had appeared broadly flat.  In some cases, 
goods prices had risen at a slower pace than normal due to the 
pass -through of lower input costs and sterling’s appreciation. 
But forecourt fuel prices had shown signs of creeping back up a 
little in recent weeks.  Consumer service price inflation had 
remained positive but modest.  For example, prices for some 
leisure and hospitality services had risen gradually alongside 
rising demand.  Inflation in index -linked services prices, such as 
social housing rents and utility bills, had moderated over 
recent months. 4                                                                                                                                       Agents’ summary of business conditions May 2015 
+
–
321012345 
Mater ial s cost s 
Impo rted  ﬁni she d
  good s prices
 Th ree  mon ths on  t he  s ame pe rio d a y ea r ea rlier
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15ScoresChart 4 Input costs +
–
32101234
Manufactur ing 
 
Busin ess -to-bu sin ess
  services Th ree  mon ths on  t he  s ame pe rio d a y ea r ea rlier
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15ScoresChart 5 Output prices 