Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2015/march-2015.pdf
Date: 2015-03-31

•    Consumer demand had continued to grow steadily.
•    There were signs of a pickup in housing market activity since the start of the year.
•    Investment intentions for the next twelve months were consistent with moderate growth overall.
•    Business services turnover growth had remained robust and broadly based.
•    Manufacturing output growth for the domestic market had edged lower.  But manufacturing export growth had 
picked up slightly from low levels.
•    Construction output growth had continued to ease slightly, but remained robust overall.
•    Corporate credit availability had continued to improve.
•    Employment intentions had eased further for business services firms, but were consistent with modest headcount 
growth overall.
•    Recruitment difficulties had changed little, at a level somewhat above normal.
•    Capacity utilisation had remained at broadly normal levels in manufacturing, but slightly above normal for 
services.
•    Growth in total labour costs per employee had been broadly steady.
•    Materials costs and imported finished goods prices had remained lower than a year earlier.
•    Output prices had been broadly flat on a year earlier for manufacturers, although they had risen moderately for 
business services firms.  Profitability had increased modestly.
•    Consumer price inflation had fallen further for goods.  Moderate rates of inflation in services prices had continued.
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by 
the Bank of England’s Agents following discussions with contacts in 
the period between late January 2015 and late February 2015.
It provides information on the state of business conditions from 
companies across all sectors of the economy.  The report does not 
represent the Bank’s own views, nor does it represent the views of 
any particular company or region.  The Bank’s Monetary Policy 
Committee uses the intelligence provided by the Agents, in 
conjunction with information from other sources, to assist its 
understanding and assessment of current economic conditions.
Acopy of this publication can be found at:
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/agentssummary/ 
default.aspx .The Bank of England has Agencies for Central Southern England, 
the East Midlands, Greater London, the North East, the North 
West, Northern Ireland, Scotland, the South East & East Anglia, 
the South West, Wales, the West Midlands & Oxfordshire, and 
Yorkshire & the Humber.
The Bank’s assessment of current monetary and economic 
conditions, and the outlook for inflation, are contained in the 
Inflation Report , obtained from:
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/inflationreport/ 
default.aspx .Agents’ summary of business conditions 
March 2015 Demand 
Consumption 
Annual growth of retail sales values had been steady.  Grocery 
sales volumes had risen, although price falls — partly reflecting 
competitive pressures within the sector — meant that sales 
values had changed less.  Demand growth for larger household 
goods, such as furniture, kitchens and bathrooms, had been 
robust.  Clothing and footwear retailers reported improved 
trading of seasonal lines.  New car sales had also started the 
year well.  Growth in turnover of consumer services had 
continued to be stronger than for goods.  Restaurants, pubs 
and leisure attractions had reported robust growth.  More 
generally, contacts reported that a recovery in real disposable 
incomes, in part reflecting lower fuel prices, was acting to 
stimulate consumer demand.
Housing market 
There had been some signs of a pickup in housing market 
activity since the start of the year, with a number of estate 
agent contacts reporting modest increases in new instructions 
to sell and viewings.  Activity had remained weaker than a year 
ago in most areas, which some contacts attributed to 
shortages in the available stock of properties for sale.  Overall,
housing supply and demand was now seen to be more 
balanced.  The rental market had continued to grow strongly,
supporting steady growth in buy -to -let activity.  Mortgage 
availability was reported to have remained constrained for 
some borrowers, such as those with volatile incomes, although 
mortgage rates had fallen overall.
Business investment 
Having eased over previous months, investment intentions 
had stabilised and indicated a moderate increase in capital
expenditure over the coming twelve months ( Chart 1).
Intentions remained stronger among services companies than 
for manufacturing businesses, often reflecting plans to 
increase spending on existing or new premises.  Some 
non -food retailers had become more confident on the back of sustained demand growth, and were looking to invest in 
logistics and distribution and store renovation, contrasting 
with decisions by some supermarkets to cut back their plans 
for new stores.  Manufacturers’ investment plans pointed to 
modest growth in 2015, often focusing on efficiency rather 
than capacity growth.  Lower energy costs were weighing on 
investment plans in the oil and gas sector and related supply 
chains.
Exports 
Manufacturing export growth had edged up slightly, after 
slowing in recent months.  Demand from the euro area had 
remained weak, as had demand from Russia.  But US demand 
had strengthened further, partly reflecting the appreciation of 
the dollar.  Services export growth had continued at a steady 
rate and was often reported to be stronger than for 
manufactured goods.  Real estate and law firms had benefited 
from strong foreign demand for UK assets, including property 
and businesses.  While lower oil prices were beginning to 
depress overseas earnings for some firms in the energy sector,
they had also acted as a stimulus for some to seek out 
contracts abroad as domestic activity had fallen.  Inbound 
tourism had continued to show robust growth.
Output 
Business services 
Robust growth in business services turnover had continued 
(Chart 2).  Activity in the commercial real estate sector, and 
among associated professional and construction -related 
services, had been buoyed by strong occupier and investor 
demand.  Although mergers and acquisitions activity among 
larger firms had flattened out following a strong 2014, it had 
picked up among smaller firms.  Rising e -commerce had 
supported activity in warehousing and transportation, as well
as among IT and digitalmedia companies.  Corporate demand 
for hotel nights, conferencing and travel had continued to 
increase.  But lower prices arising from strong competition or 
excess capacity had slowed turnover growth in some 
consultancy and commoditised services, such as data storage.
And suppliers to the oil industry had seen some softening in 
demand.
Manufacturing 
Growth in manufacturing output for the domestic market 
had edged lower ( Chart 2).  The strongest upside reports 
remained in the construction materials sector.  Automotive 
and civil aerospace supply chains had seen steady growth in 
output.  But food volumes had remained flat on average.
Falling agricultural commodity prices had reduced demand 
for agricultural capital goods.  And the deferral of oil and gas 
exploration projects was starting to feed through to supply 
chains, although many firms reported healthy order books 
for 2015.2                                                                                                                                    Agents’ summary of business conditions March 2015 
+
–
5432101234
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 Scores 
Services
ManufacturingOver the comin g twelve months Chart 1 Investment intentions Agents’ summary of business conditions March 2015                                                                                                                                     3
Construction 
Construction output growth had remained robust, although it 
had eased slightly over recent months, compared with a year 
earlier ( Chart 2).  That easing had partly reflected the strength 
of activity at the same time a year ago, although some 
contacts also noted recent weakness in repair and 
maintenance spending.  Looking ahead, major house builders 
expected to raise output at a slightly slower rate in 2015 than 
in 2014, as some focused on improving margins rather than 
increasing volumes.  Smaller builders planned to increase 
output a little relative to last year, aided by improved access 
to finance.  Elsewhere, infrastructure projects had continued to 
support activity, along with industrial investment,
warehousing, and offices in some cities.  Continuing supply 
constraints, notably of labour, were expected to moderate 
future growth.
Credit conditions 
Credit availability had eased further, including for most small
and medium -sized companies.  The number of credit suppliers 
had expanded, with foreign and ‘challenger’ banks, private 
equity and sovereign wealth funds seeking to provide funding,
and major banks more willing to lend alongside others.
Overall there had been little evidence of a material loosening 
of bank underwriting standards;  any such easing was reported 
to be restricted to lending to companies with strong balance 
sheets and a track record of good profitability.  Finance had 
remained more difficult for smaller firms with short trading 
histories, and more generally for those with limited or 
intangible assets, although their funding options were also 
reported to be improving.  Commercial real estate developers 
had begun to see greater availability of funds outside London,
alongside increasing activity by institutional investors.
Cash -flow difficulties among companies had picked up a little,
but insolvency numbers had remained low.Employment 
Employment intentions had eased, but were consistent with 
modest headcount growth overall ( Chart 3).  In business 
services the easing reflected a return to more normal hiring 
patterns after a period of strong staffing growth, although 
recruitment had remained strong for a range of professional
services.  Consumer service employment growth had been 
concentrated in labour -intensive leisure services and discount 
and online retailing, partially offset by consolidation among 
supermarkets.  Manufacturing employment intentions were 
broadly flat.  Recruitment difficulties had become less acute in 
some areas such as engineering due to retrenchment in the oil
and gas sector.  But, across the economy overall, they 
remained somewhat above normal and had become more 
broad -based.  Skill shortages had remained most prevalent 
within IT, professional services and construction.  Migrants had 
continued to bolster the supply of unskilled and, increasingly,
skilled staff.  Staff attrition had picked up on the back of 
greater confidence among workers to move on for higher pay,
career progression or to improve their work -life balance.
Capacity utilisation 
Capacity utilisation had remained broadly at normal levels in 
manufacturing and slightly above normal in services.  Where 
there were capacity constraints within manufacturing 
companies, such as in parts of the automotive sector, firms 
were often able to subcontract to other manufacturers where 
resources were under -employed.  In services, strong demand 
growth for professional and financial services had left some 
firms short of office space and labour.  There were also some 
constraints in warehousing and logistics.  Hotels had reported 
improved occupancy levels.  In construction, constraints in the 
supply of materials had eased a little, but skilled labour 
remained scarce.+
–
54321012345
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 Scores 
Construction output Business services turnover
Manufacturing  output Three months on the same period a year earlier Chart 2 Activity 
+
–
5432101234
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 Scores 
Business services
Manufacturing
Consumer services Over the comin g six months Chart 3 Employment intentions Costs and prices 
Labour costs 
Steady growth in total labour costs had continued.  Most 
settlements had remained in the 2%–3% range, although pay 
freezes had become commonplace in the oil and gas sector.
Where pay growth was above 2%–3%, concerns over staff 
retention were usually cited, but those had not increased 
significantly since last year.  Upward pressures were still most 
evident in construction and parts of IT and professional
services.  Average wage growth in some services companies 
had been moderated by the use of a greater proportion of 
more junior staff.  Falls in CPIinflation were rarely reported to 
be reducing the level of realised wage settlements, with 
companies’ own profitability and wider labour market 
conditions generally seen to be more important in determining 
pay.
Non -labour costs 
Costs had remained lower than a year ago across a broad 
range of inputs, largely driven by falls in global commodity 
prices.  Energy costs had not yet fallen for many contacts,
however, often because of firms’ forward purchasing or 
hedging.  Greater pass -through of lower oil prices was 
anticipated over time as existing contracts expired, but the 
extent of that pass -through was likely to diminish through 
supply chains as firms attempted to rebuild margins.  The rate 
of inflation for construction materials had eased back as a 
result of improved supply, increased inventories and 
moderating demand.  Imported finished goods prices were 
also lower than a year earlier, largely reflecting a fall in 
shipping rates in response to overcapacity and the impact of 
the appreciation of sterling around 2013 feeding through as 
forward contracts had expired.  Some importers had also 
benefited from lower costs as a result of the recent 
appreciation of sterling against the euro.
Output prices and margins 
Manufacturing output prices had remained broadly flat overall.
Suppliers to supermarkets had quickly passed on lower 
ingredient costs under strong competitive pressures.  Firms 
supplying into the oil and gas sector were experiencing comparable pricing pressures.  Across manufacturing, output 
price inflation had remained highest in construction materials,
although it had shown signs of easing.  Business services prices 
had continued to increase modestly overall, in part reflecting a 
cost base that, outside haulage, was generally less affected by 
commodity price falls.  Pricing power had been limited by a 
combination of strong competition and customer resistance to 
price increases, especially in relatively commoditised services,
such as parts of IT.  Slowing RPIinflation had started to be 
reflected in regulated prices, such as airport landing fees, but 
the main effect was still to come.  Profitability had continued 
to grow modestly, in part reflecting increasing efficiency and,
for some, falling non -labour input costs.
Consumer prices 
Consumer goods price inflation had fallen further ( Chart 4).
Competition for grocery sales had intensified and further 
reductions in the cost of domestic energy were expected.
New car list prices were creeping up, but some dealers 
expected increased discounting to come in an effort to reach 
ambitious sales targets for the year.  Retail services price 
inflation had remained modest.  Many consumer services firms 
continued to report that customers were highly price sensitive,
notwithstanding rising demand.  Household rents had been 
slowly increasing.  Falling oil prices were prompting some 
passenger transport firms to reconsider planned fare increases,
but air fares had not fallen yet.4                                                                                                                                    Agents’ summary of business conditions March 2015 
+
–
2101234
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 Scores 
Retail goods Retail services Three months on the same period a year earlier Chart 4 Retail prices 