Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2015/october-2015.pdf
Date: 2015-10-31

This Update covers intelligence gathered from business contacts between late August2015 and late September2015.  A fuller report for
2015 Q4 will be published on 16 December.  This report generally makes comparisons with activity and prices over the past three months
on a year earlier.  It represents the aggregate view offered from business contacts across the whole of the United Kingdom.  More 
information on the Bank’s Agencies can be found at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/agentssummary/default.aspx.Agents’ summary of business conditions
October 2015 Update 
Consumer spending had continued to grow at a moderate 
rate on a year earlier (Chart 1), supported by rising real
incomes and increasing availability of low -cost finance.
Business services turnover growth had remained relatively 
robust (Chart 2), with a range of professional services buoyed 
by increasing corporate finance and mergers and acquisitions
activity.  Turnover growth for some other services had eased.
Manufacturing output growth had slowed further (Chart 2),
largely reflecting the effects on export supply chains of
sterling’s appreciation over the past 18 months and subdued 
world demand growth, as well as weak oil and gas investment.
Construction output growth had increased further (Chart 2),
reflecting strengthening commercial development and 
infrastructure activity.
Investment intentions were unchanged, remaining consistent
with modest growth in capital spending.
Credit availability for medium and large -sized firms had 
increased slightly, although more slowly than earlier in the 
year (Chart 3).  There was some evidence of growing 
competition for lending to smaller companies with strong 
balance sheets.
Occupier demand had risen in the commercial real estate 
market , with rents reported to have increased in many areas.
Strong investor demand was reported to be putting upward 
pressure on property values.Housing market activity had risen modestly, but remained 
constrained by a shortage of properties available for sale.
Intense competition was reported in the mortgage market,
driving increased remortgaging activity.
Capacity utilisation was slightly above normal in services
firms and slightly below normal for manufacturing.
Employment intentions continued to point to rising staff
numbers (Chart 4).  A survey indicated that companies’
vacancies had risen over the past year and had become harder
to fill;  over half of respondents reported that recruitment 
difficulties were constraining workforce growth, albeit only 
slightly in most cases (see the box on page 2).
There were reports of rising wage pressure in the service 
sector, but weak consumer price inflation had reduced the 
pressure on some employers to raise pay growth.  Labour cost 
growth had remained moderate overall (Chart 5).
Materials costs and imported finished goods prices were 
lower than a year earlier, reflecting sterling’s earlier
appreciation and lower freight costs.
Manufacturing output prices were slightly lower than a year
ago, reflecting the pass-through of weak input costs.  Business
services price inflation had remained modest.
Consumer price inflation for goods had remained negative,
having stabilised following sharp declines earlier in the year
(Chart 6).  Consumer services inflation had remained modest.• Activity had continued to grow at a solid rate on a year earlier, driven by services and construction output, but
the pace of growth had eased a little overall.  In particular, manufacturing growth had slowed, partly reflecting 
the effects of sterling’s earlier appreciation and subdued world demand on export supply chains.
• Housing market activity had picked up modestly, though it remained constrained by the number of properties
available for sale.  High levels of competition were reported among lenders, which had led to falls in mortgage 
rates and increased remortgaging activity.
• Employment intentions indicated continued growth in the workforce.  Recruitment difficulties were reported to 
be contributing to rising wage pressure in the service sector, but weak consumer price inflation had reduced the 
pressure on some employers to raise pay growth.Agents’ survey on prospects for employment 
The Bank’s Agents ran a survey from mid-August to 
mid -September to examine trends in employment, vacancies
and recruitment difficulties over the past twelve months,
expectations for employment growth for the coming year, and 
businesses’ planned response to any recruitment difficulties.
Some 360 companies responded to the survey, with combined 
employment of more than 300,000.  All of the results in this
box have been weighted by employment and adjusted to 
reflect the actual employment shares of each sector, based on 
ONS data.
A net balance of respondents had increased employment over
the past year;  and a comparable balance expected to increase 
employment over the coming twelve months (Chart A).
Fewer companies reported plans to either greatly increase or
decrease their workforces than the number that had made 
such changes during the past twelve months.  The survey 
revealed that small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs)
expected employment growth to be slower over the coming 
year than over the past twelve months, whereas expectations
for large businesses’ employment intentions were in line with 
employment growth over the past year.  The survey also asked 
how companies’ ‘desired’ workforce had changed over the past
twelve months and found that for the majority of contacts,
changes in employment had been close to what they had 
planned.
Alongside rising employment the survey indicated a rise in 
vacancies over the past year, and increasing difficulties in 
filling those vacancies (Chart B), affecting all business sizes
and sectors.  Across firms, smaller businesses and consumer
services firms reported the largest increase in recruitment
difficulties.
Although firms had generally been able to adjust employment
as they desired over the past year, more than half of the 
weighted sample of contacts — in particular large businesses,
construction and consumer services companies — reported 
that recruitment difficulties were now binding on workforce 
growth, albeit only slightly in most cases (Chart C).
Recruitment difficulties were less commonly reported to be 
binding on workforce growth for SMEs and for firms in 
business services and manufacturing, compared with the 
sample overall.
Businesses reported three main planned responses to 
recruitment difficulties:  to increase training and 
apprenticeship programmes;  to utilise existing staff more 
productively;  and to target pay increases on key skills and new 
hires (with around half of firms reporting each of these 
responses).  There were noticeable sectoral differences in 
responses however:  for example, construction firms were 
much more likely to plan to increase pay across the board, hire foreign labour and even turn some work away, than was the 
average survey respondent, as they reported little scope to 
improve productivity.  In contrast, consumer services firms
planned productivity improvements as their primary response 
to recruitment difficulties.
0510 15 20 25 30 Greatly 
reduced 
<-10% 
Reduced 
-5% to -10% 
Reduced a little 
-1% to -5% 
Unchanged 
-1%> 0 <1% 
Increased a little 
1% to 5% 
Increased 
5% to 10% 
Greatly 
increased 
>10% 
Net balance Change in past tw elve 
  months
Change in coming
  twelve months Per cent Chart A Change in size of workforce:  distribution of 
responses 
010 20 30 40 50 60 
Less difﬁcult Unchanged Slightly more 
difﬁcult Much mo re 
difﬁcult Net balance Per cent Chart B Difficulty in filling vacancies relative to a year earlier 
010 20 30 40 50 60 70 
Not binding BindingLeavers cannot be replaced 
  so my workforce is declining 
Strongly 
Slightly Per cent Chart C Impact of recruitment difficulties on workforce 
growth 2                                                                                                                                                             Agents’ summary of business conditions October 2015 Update 2101234
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 Scores  
Manufacturing 
 Services  Three months on the same period a year earlier 
+
_Chart 5 Total labour costs per employee 
32101234
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 Scores  
Retail goods 
 Retail services  Three months on the same period a year earlier 
+
_Chart 6 Retail goods and consumer services prices 54321012345
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 Scores 
Construction output Business services turnover
Manufacturing  output Three months on the same period a year earlier 
+
_Chart 2 Activity 
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 
Small
Medium
Large2013 14 15 Chart 3 Credit availability (a) 
5432101234
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 Scores 
Business services
ManufacturingConsumer services 
+
_Over the co ming six months Chart 4 Employment intentions 
For data on the full set of Agents’ scores see 
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/agentssummary/agentsscores.xlsx.Selected charts of the Agents’ national scores 
(a) The mapping is based on individual Agencies’ national assessments of corporate credit
availability, weighted by the gross value added of their regions or countries.  2013 Q1 uses
assessment as at end-2012.  The greater the intensity of red, the tighter credit availability;
the greater the intensity of green, the looser the credit availability.  Yellow indicates normal
conditions.  Includes bank and non-bank credit.3210123
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 Scores 
Consumer services turnover 
 Retail sales values 
 
+
_Three months on the same period a year earlier Chart 1 Retail sales values and consumer services values                                                                                                                                                                Agents’ summary of business conditions October 2015 Update                                3