Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2016/2016-q4.pdf
Date: 2016-12-31

This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by the Bank of England’s Agents between late August 2016 and late 
November 2016.  It generally makes comparisons with activity and prices a year earlier.  The report does not represent the Bank’s own views, 
nor does it represent the views of any particular company or region.  More information on the Bank’s Agencies can be found at  
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/agentssummary/default.aspx.Consumer spending growth had remained resilient.  Growth in 
retail sales values had picked up, in part as tourist spending 
had risen.  There were expectations of slowing demand growth 
next year as higher inflation squeezed spending power.
Business services  turnover growth had picked up, following 
some weakness in the summer.  But contacts remained 
cautious about business prospects.
Growth in manufacturing  output remained modest but had 
risen.  That was partly due to increased production in export 
supply chains.  Some customers had switched to domestic 
suppliers from foreign ones following the fall in sterling. 
Construction  output growth was modest and had eased 
during recent months.
Investment intentions  pointed to only small increases in 
spending over the coming year.  Many companies were 
choosing to hold more cash instead, given high uncertainty.  
A box on page 3 looks at a new measure of uncertainty from 
Agency intelligence.
Bank credit availability  had remained stable and generally 
exceeded companies’ demand for loans.  Peer‑to‑peer lending 
had continued to grow.  A box on page 5 introduces a new set 
of Agents’ scores for corporate credit availability.
Investor demand in commercial real estate  had edged higher 
from a low base.  However, there were signs that occupier 
demand had started to soften in London.Housing market activity  had recovered, but remained weak in 
central London.  Strong competition was reported in mortgage 
lending.
Capacity utilisation  had risen slightly in manufacturing and 
remained stable in services.
Employment intentions  pointed to little change in staff levels 
over the next six months.  Recruitment difficulties had eased 
alongside lower hiring activity.
Growth in labour costs  per employee had been steady.  Most 
pay awards were in the 1% to 3% range.  Some contacts 
expected upward pressure next year, including from higher 
inflation.
Materials costs  and imported finished goods  price inflation 
had risen sharply.  The recent fall in the exchange rate had 
started to feed through to higher sterling prices.
Manufacturing output price inflation  had also risen.  Business 
services price inflation had remained modestly positive overall.  
A box on page 7 presents the results of an Agents’ survey on 
pricing.
Consumer price inflation  had picked up.  Strong competition 
among grocery retailers had restrained the pass‑through of 
higher import costs.  But prices were expected to rise more 
noticeably in the New Year.•	Activity growth had edged up, but businesses remained cautious about prospects.  The fall in sterling since June 
had led to higher goods export volumes.  Consumer demand had been boosted by rising tourist spending.
•	Contacts expected consumer spending to slow next year as higher inflation squeezed consumers’ spending 
power.  Firms’ intentions pointed to only small increases in investment over the coming twelve months.  Many 
companies were choosing to hold a larger amount of cash given high levels of uncertainty.
•	Input cost inflation had picked up sharply.  That was expected to start affecting consumer prices more noticeably 
in the New Year.  Wage growth had remained stable, but some contacts expected upward pressures, including 
from higher inflation next year.Agents’ summary of business conditions
2016 Q42 Agents’ summary of business conditions  2016 Q4
Consumer services and retail sales
Growth in retail sales values had picked up ( Chart 1 ).  Some 
households were thought to have brought forward purchases 
of larger items such as furniture and electrical goods in the 
expectation that prices would rise next year.  Retail spending 
by foreign tourists had risen, as UK retail prices had fallen in 
foreign currency terms due to sterling’s deprecation.  Their 
spending on hotels, meals out and visitor attractions was also 
higher.  Increased ‘staycationing’ was also supporting 
consumer services growth, which had remained resilient.  
Contacts expected consumer demand to slow next year as 
higher inflation squeezed spending power.
Business and financial services
Business services turnover growth had increased during the 
autumn, following some weakness in the summer ( Chart 2 ).  
Professional services contacts reported that mergers and 
acquisitions and foreign direct investment activity had picked 
up.  But both remained weaker than before the referendum.  
Demand growth for IT services had been supported by firms’ 
continuing efforts to raise productivity and reduce vulnerability to cyber attacks.  Recruitment agency activity 
had recovered, except for positions in finance.  Advertising, 
media and PR activity growth had been softer than a year 
earlier.  Some architects and surveyors reported slower 
turnover growth as commercial construction activity growth 
had weakened.  However, some companies reported improving 
prospects for work overseas.  Some professional and financial 
services companies were considering establishing European 
offices to service continental clients locally.  Those offices 
would replace exports from the United Kingdom.
Production
Manufacturing output growth had risen but remained modest 
(Chart 3 ).  Some contacts had seen a pickup in orders after a 
period of destocking among customers following the EU vote.  
Sterling’s fall had boosted volumes in export supply chains.  It 
had also, to a lesser extent, led some companies to switch 
from foreign suppliers to domestic ones.  Consumer goods 
producers and those supplying house builders and public 
infrastructure projects reported robust demand.  Capital goods 
production was sluggish.  That was due to some delays in 
investment decisions among customers and weak profitability 
in the steel and oil and gas sectors.  Growth in goods export 
volumes had continued to pick up but remained modest, with 
some firms focusing on increasing margins instead.  But some 
firms reported gains in market share overseas.  That was 
mainly the case for products where demand was 
price‑sensitive, not tied to fixed long‑term contracts, or where 
goods had low import content (so that cost pressures were 
less affected by sterling’s fall and firms were more able to 
reduce foreign currency prices).
Construction
Construction output growth was modest and had eased over 
the past three months.  Housebuilding was relatively more 
resilient than commercial building or local authority funded 
work.  Materials shortages and recruitment difficulties had 
eased over the year.  Planning processes continued to be cited 
as a constraint on output growth.  Announcements in the +
–
3210123
2006 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16Scores
Consumer services turnoverRetail sales valuesThree months on the same period a year earlierChart 1  Retail sales values and consumer services 
turnover
+
–
432101234
Professional and
  ﬁnancial services
Other services
2006 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16ScoresThree months on the same period a year earlierChart 2  Professional and financial services and other 
services turnoverManufacturing (export)
Manufacturing (domestic)+
–
4
532101234
2006 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16ScoresThree months on the same period a year earlierChart 3  Manufacturing output — domestic and exports Agents’ summary of business conditions   2016 Q4 3
Box 1
Gauging uncertainty from Agents’ company 
visit reports
The degree of economic uncertainty is a key issue at present, 
as highlighted in the Bank’s latest Inflation Report .(1)  This box 
looks at how often ‘uncertainty’ — and similar terms — have 
been used in Agents’ company visit reports to provide a new 
measure of business uncertainty.
Chart A  shows a time series of the share of paragraphs in 
Agents’ company visit records that contain the words 
uncertainty, uncertainties or uncertain, up to the end of 
2016 Q3.  Those references picked up sharply in the run‑up to 
the EU referendum.  They then stayed at elevated levels over 
the third quarter.  That could reflect Agents simply asking 
companies more often about their uncertainty.  But an analysis 
of the paragraphs containing uncertainty words indicates that 
positive terms such as ‘increased’ or ‘more’ were used twice as 
often as negative terms such as ‘no’ or ‘reduced’.  That 
suggests a genuine increase in business uncertainty.
A wordcloud of terms appearing most often in the paragraphs 
including uncertainty terms provides further insights 
(Figure A ).  The cloud indicates that referendum is the most 
frequently appearing word.  This is in line with contacts’ 
reports that the United Kingdom’s future relationship with the 
EU is the main source of uncertainty at present.  ‘More’ is the 
second most frequent term.  The word ‘investment’ appears 
more often than ‘staffing’.  That is perhaps because investment 
spending can be more affected by uncertainty than staffing, as 
it can be harder to reverse.
The analysis can be extended using Agents’ company visit 
scores.  Chart B  shows the distribution of scores for expected investment spending both for those companies mentioning 
uncertainty during visits and those that don’t — as reflected in 
Agents’ meeting records.  Contacts that mention uncertainty 
are less likely to report notable growth in investment plans 
than those who do not.  Otherwise the distributions of scores 
are fairly similar.  On its own, that suggests uncertainty has, at 
least so far, had a relatively limited impact on investment 
intentions.  However, Agents scores for investment intentions 
have softened since the referendum.  They currently point to 
only small increases in spending for the coming year.  A recent 
Agents’ survey indicated that uncertainty was the largest 
single drag on companies’ investment plans in the year ahead.
(1) For example, see the measures of uncertainty in Chart 2.4, page 16, of the November 
Inflation Report .Figure A  Words appearing most commonly in the same 
paragraph as ‘uncertain’, ‘uncertainty’ or ‘uncertainties’ 
— for visits undertaken during 2016 Q2 and Q3
0.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.5
2008 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16Per cent of paragraphs
Scottish
  independence
  referendum
UK general
  election Eurozone
  crisis
  heightens UK general
  electionLehman  Brothers
  collapse
EU referendumChart A  Proportion of  paragraphs  in Agency visit 
write‑ups referencing ‘uncertain’, ‘uncertainty’ or 
‘uncertainties’
0510152025303540
Signiﬁcant
fallSlight
fallUnchanged Slight
growthSigniﬁcant
growthMentions uncertainty
Does not mention uncertainty
CVS scorePer cent Chart B  Expected investment score:  for firms discussing 
uncertainty or not:  2016 Q2 and Q34 Agents’ summary of business conditions  2016 Q4
Autumn Statement of increased public sector spending on 
infrastructure and housing had boosted sentiment about 
future activity.
Investment
Investment intentions were consistent with small increases in 
spending over the coming year ( Chart 4 ).  Many firms were 
looking to hold more cash in the face of uncertainty, rather 
than raise spending.  Increased costs for imported capital 
equipment were starting to deter some capital spending.  But 
there were also examples of spending being brought forward 
ahead of expected price rises.  Some manufacturing exporters 
were continuing to invest to meet any rise in demand due to 
the fall in sterling.  Service sector intentions were slightly 
positive.  IT spending continued to grow where there were 
clear benefits to productivity or due to cyber security needs.  
Investment in distribution and logistics remained resilient, 
aimed at raising efficiency in supply chains.  But a range of 
service sector firms reported tightening their capital spending 
budgets for 2017.
Corporate financing conditions
Bank credit availability had changed little since the 
EU referendum.  There was strong appetite to lend to 
companies with strong balance sheets.  But there appeared to 
be little appetite to lend for speculative property development.  
The cost of debt for small house builders and commercial 
property developers had risen.  Loan to value ratios available 
for property loans had fallen.  Some lenders were also reported 
to be more cautious about exposure to hospitality and leisure 
sectors, and to some wholesale and importing firms, due to 
rising costs.  But overall, banks’ appetite to lend had remained 
greater than firms’ desire to borrow.  Demand for credit was 
reported to be subdued.  In part, this reflected subdued 
investment plans.  In some cases, especially among smaller 
companies, firms were choosing to finance spending internally 
rather than by borrowing.  Demand for asset finance had weakened during the year.  That was partly due to a weaker 
appetite to borrow for plant and machinery investment.  
Demand for refinance facilities had risen due to falls in the cost 
of credit.  For larger companies, subdued demand for bank 
credit partly reflected the even lower rates available from 
capital markets.
Availability of non‑bank finance had remained strong.  In 
capital markets, some firms were looking to refinance early to 
take advantage of low bond yields.  Peer‑to‑peer lending had 
continued to grow as a funding source.  The British Business 
Bank was reported to be becoming more active in lending.  
There were some concerns about how current EU funded 
schemes would be replaced in future.
Property markets
Commercial real estate
Investor demand for UK commercial property had edged 
higher from a low base, following sharp falls after the 
EU referendum.  Capital values were generally reported to be 
stabilising or increasing modestly.  Occupier demand had 
shown some signs of softening in London.  Vacancy rates there 
had ticked up from low levels and the rate of rental growth 
was easing.  Elsewhere in the United Kingdom, occupier 
demand had been steadier and rents had remained flat or risen 
modestly.
Housing market
Activity in the housing market had recovered following a 
period of weakness after the EU referendum.  Purchases had 
remained concentrated in lower‑price brackets and in the 
new‑build market.  But transactions were muted for property 
values above £1 million.  That was adversely affecting volumes 
in prime London property in particular.  The fall in sterling had 
increased overseas interest in London property.  But that was 
yet to convert into increased transactions.  Investment activity 
in the buy‑to‑let market overall had recovered a little, though 
some smaller landlords had exited the market by selling their 
properties.  Low numbers of properties available for sale were 
supporting modest price inflation overall, although high‑value 
house prices were falling in central London.  Strong 
competition was reported between mortgage lenders.  Most 
lending to first‑time buyers was reported to be at loan to value 
ratios below 90%.  These buyers were often using large 
deposits from savings made over many years, or had help from 
older relatives.
Capacity utilisation
Capacity utilisation in manufacturing had edged higher, 
although it was a little lower than normal.  Automotive, food 
and some construction related manufacturing companies 
reported less slack due to increasing output.  Services Services
Manufacturing+
–
4
532101234
2006 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16ScoresOver the coming twelve monthsChart 4  Investment intentions Agents’ summary of business conditions   2016 Q4 5
Box 2
Agents’ scores for corporate credit availability
Over the past year the Agents have published a heatmap of 
corporate credit availability in the Agents’ summary.  From 
now on, the Agents will supplement that by publishing their 
underlying scores for corporate credit availability.  This is part 
of their regular scoring of the economy. (1)  These scores are the 
Agents’ assessment of corporate credit availability for small, 
medium and large‑sized firms.  They cover bank and non‑bank 
credit, including for example bond finance and peer‑to‑peer 
lending.  The scores are for availability relative to normal, on a 
scale of ‑5 to +5.  A score of 0 would indicate normal credit 
conditions with +/‑5 representing extremely high or low 
availability, respectively.  These scores are embodied in 
Chart A , the Agents’ heatmap of corporate credit availability.  Currently, the scores show that credit availability is well above 
normal for large and medium‑sized businesses, and more 
modestly so for small businesses. (2)
(1) The Agents’ scores are available at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/
agentssummary/default.aspx .
(2) Small businesses defined as those with fewer than 50 employees, medium businesses 
between 50 and 250, and large over 250. 
utilisation remained close to normal.  Passenger transport 
companies, notably air and rail, reported increased capacity 
pressures.  Utilisation had also risen in warehousing and 
logistics.  New capacity had been created in the hotel and 
restaurant sectors.
Employment and pay
Staffing intentions indicated little change in job numbers over 
the next six months ( Chart 5 ).  The outlook for manufacturing 
jobs had improved slightly due to a pickup in export sales.  But 
plans in consumer services suggested falls in staff numbers.  
Companies were looking to offset costs from the National 
Living Wage (NLW) and rising import costs.  There was little 
net job creation in business services.  That was largely due to 
uncertainty about future demand prospects.
Recruitment difficulties remained slightly above normal but 
had become less widespread.  That partly reflected the 
softening outlook for hiring.  Acute skills shortages had remained in a few sectors, such as construction, IT, engineering 
and professional services.  Contacts in those sectors were often 
relying on overseas labour to fill gaps.  There were occasional 
reports of workers from other parts of the EU becoming more 
reticent about moving to the United Kingdom since the 
referendum.
Growth in total labour costs had remained moderate.  Most 
pay awards were in the 1%–3% range.  Some contacts were 
worried that rising inflation may cause some upward pressure 
on pay growth in 2017.  Contacts also noted legislative 
increases in labour costs from the Apprenticeship Levy, NLW 
and pensions auto‑enrolment.
Pricing
Supply chain pricing
Non‑labour input cost pressures were reported to be 
increasing due to the fall in sterling since the EU vote 
(Chart 6 ).  Global commodity prices had also risen.  Further 
increases in input costs were expected to come through in 
early 2017.  Some importers had put pressure on overseas 
suppliers to offset some of sterling’s impact on costs by 
lowering their foreign currency prices, with varying degrees of 
success.  Manufacturing output price inflation had picked up 
notably as costs increases started to be passed through.  
Business services price inflation had remained moderate.  
A box on page 7 provides a summary of an Agent’s survey of 
pricing.
Consumer prices
Consumer price inflation had increased overall, but remained 
modest.  Food price deflation had eased slightly.  Grocery 
retailers reported that strong competition had held back price 
increases.  They were reluctant to raise prices before the start 
of 2017.  For non‑food retailers, most Black Friday promotions Business services
ManufacturingConsumer services
+
–
4
532101234
2006 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16ScoresOver the coming six monthsChart 5  Employment intentionsQ1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
Small
Medium
Large16 2013 14 15Chart A  Agent’s assessment of corporate credit availability(a)
(a) This mapping is based on individual Agencies’ national assessments of corporate credit availability, weighted 
by the gross value added of their regions or countries.  The greater the intensity of red, the tighter credit 
availability;  the greater the intensity of green, the looser credit availability.  Yellow indicates normal 
conditions.  Includes bank and non‑bank credit.6 Agents’ summary of business conditions  2016 Q4
had been lengthier than previously.  But that had been coupled 
with less dramatic price cuts.  Within consumer services, 
inflation remained modest and little changed.  Buoyant 
demand had supported moderate increases in restaurant 
prices and hotel room rates.
Materials costsImported ﬁnished
  goods prices
2006 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16Three months on the same period a year earlier
+
–
321012345ScoresChart 6  Material costs and imported finished goods 
prices Agents’ summary of business conditions   2016 Q4 7
Box 3
Agents’ survey on corporate pricing
The Bank’s Agents ran a survey in October and November to 
investigate changes in domestic prices and the factors 
affecting pricing decisions in the year ahead.  They also asked 
about contacts’ expectations of pass‑through from sterling’s 
depreciation to prices, compared with the fall in sterling in 
2007–08.  Around 350 companies responded with a combined 
UK turnover of about £75 billion.  The results, as presented 
here, were weighted by turnover and reweighted by sectoral 
shares of gross value added to adjust for differences in the 
composition of the survey compared with the economy as a 
whole.
A net balance of respondents had seen prices increase over the 
past year ( Chart A ).  Over half of businesses surveyed had 
increased their prices over the past year, while relatively few 
companies had reduced prices.  Over the coming year, a 
significantly larger net balance of companies expected 
increases in prices, with nearly 80% of respondents expecting 
prices to rise by more than 1%.
Across sectors, only goods retailers reported a negative 
balance of price change over the past year ( Chart B ).  Over the 
coming twelve months, retail goods prices were expected to 
rise.  Average prices were expected to increase across all 
sectors of the economy.  Manufacturing companies reported 
the most positive net balance for price expectations.
The factors most often cited as driving prices higher over the 
next year were, in descending order:  imported inputs and 
finished goods costs, labour costs, UK input and finished goods 
costs, and energy costs.  Downward price pressures were 
reported to be coming from overseas and domestic 
competition and productivity.The survey asked about the effects of sterling’s decline on 
costs and prices.  Around half of respondents expected that the 
speed of pass‑through to import costs, and from import costs 
to output prices, would be broadly the same as that seen in 
2007–08 ( Chart C ).  In both cases though, a net balance of 
respondents expected the speed of pass‑through to be faster 
this time than during that earlier episode.
A majority of respondents expected the total size of 
pass‑through of the fall in sterling to output and retail prices 
to be broadly comparable to that of  2007–08.  However, a 
modest net balance of some 10% of companies expected 
pass‑through to be greater overall.  The vast majority of those 
responding expected that pass‑through to their output or retail 
prices would be completed within twelve months.0102030405060
Net
balance<-4% -4% to
<-1%-1% to
+1%>1% to
4%>4%Past year
Next yearPercentage of ﬁrms Chart A  Price changes over the past year and next year+
–
4020020406080
Manufacturing Construction Retail
goodsConsumer
servicesBusiness
servicesNet percentage balance
Past year
Next yearChart B  Changes in prices by sector
0102030405060
Faster Broadly the same SlowerPercentage of ﬁrms 
£ fall to import costs
Import costs to
  output pricesChart C  Expected speed of pass‑through of the fall in 
sterling to import costs and from import costs to output 
prices compared to the 2007–08 sterling depreciation