Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2016/2016-q2.pdf
Date: 2016-06-30

This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by the Bank of England’s Agents between late February 2016 and late May 2016.  
It generally makes comparisons with activity and prices a year earlier.  The report does not represent the Bank’s own views, nor does it 
represent the views of any particular company or region.  More information on the Bank’s Agencies can be found at  
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/agentssummary/default.aspx.Consumer spending growth  had remained resilient.  Growth in 
spending on consumer services had risen, remaining stronger than 
for retail goods.  
Business services  turnover growth had slowed.  The flow of new 
work for professional and financial services in particular had 
moderated, with some clients delaying major business decisions 
ahead of the EU referendum period.  
Growth in manufacturing  output for the domestic market had 
increased a little, with volumes marginally higher than year earlier.  
The pace of contraction in manufactured export volumes had eased, 
in part reflecting the recent depreciation of sterling.
Construction  output growth had been stable, with reports of 
moderate rates of expansion across commercial, infrastructure and 
private housing construction.  
Investment intentions  for the year ahead were little changed and 
pointed to modest growth in investment.  There were some reports 
of delays in decision-taking on corporate spending until after the 
EU referendum. 
Bank credit availability  had remained stable, after a long period of 
easing.  Capital market issuance had slowed, alongside other 
corporate finance activity, with investor appetite reported to have 
been negatively affected by uncertainty around the EU referendum.  
The availability of other sources of non-bank finance had continued 
to expand.  A box on page 4 looks at recent developments in peer to 
peer lending.
Occupier demand for commercial real estate  had remained robust.  
Investor demand for London property had slowed.  Elsewhere, investor demand had held up better, though some slowing of 
decision-making was reported.
Housing market  activity had fallen back in April and May, following 
heightened transaction numbers in Q1.
Capacity utilisation  was slightly above normal in services and 
below normal in the manufacturing sector.
Services employment growth  had slowed, largely reflecting an 
easing of demand growth in business services, but manufacturing 
intentions had become less negative.  A box on page 3 presents the 
results of a survey on employment and productivity prospects.  
Recruitment difficulties  had eased, though remained moderately 
above normal.  
Growth in labour costs  per employee had edged higher, largely 
reflecting the introduction of the National Living Wage in April.
The annual rate of decline of materials costs  had eased as some 
commodity prices had risen in recent months, and as the recent 
exchange rate depreciation had increased imported materials prices.  
Imported finished goods prices were little changed on a year ago, 
having risen in recent months as falls in sterling were passed 
through.
Manufacturing output prices  had fallen on a year earlier, though the 
rate of decline had slowed.  Business services price inflation had 
remained modestly positive overall.  
Consumer price inflation  had edged higher and was modestly 
negative for goods and positive for services.•	The annual rate of activity growth had remained moderate.  Turnover growth had eased further in the business 
services sector, partly reflecting some delays in clients’ decision-making ahead of the EU referendum, but it had 
picked up in consumer services.  The annual rate of decline in manufacturing output had waned.
•	Bank credit availability had stabilised, after a prolonged period of easing, remaining above normal for most 
contacts.  Capital market issuance and corporate finance activity had slowed recently.  Peer-to-peer lending had 
continued to expand.  
•	Employment growth and recruitment difficulties had eased, partly reflecting slower demand growth among 
business services companies.  But total labour costs per employee had edged higher due to the introduction of 
the National Living Wage.  Inflation had remained subdued.Agents’ summary of business conditions
2016 Q22 Agents’ summary of business conditions  2016 Q2
Consumer services and retail sales
Annual growth of consumer spending had remained resilient.  
Retail sales values growth had changed little over the quarter.  
Demand growth for larger-value items such as furniture and 
white goods had been robust, but growth had weakened for 
clothing and footwear.  Growth in new car sales had softened.  
Consumer services turnover growth had picked up over the 
past three months.  UK holiday companies and visitor 
attractions reported increasing domestic tourism, in part 
reflecting perceptions of heightened threats of terrorism 
overseas and the depreciation of sterling, which had increased 
the cost of holidaying abroad.  Demand growth was reported 
to be strong at restaurants and coffee bars.  Growth in 
consumer credit had remained robust, driven by low interest 
rates, interest-free periods on lending and confidence about 
personal financial prospects.
Business and financial services
Growth in business services turnover had slowed further 
(Chart 1 ).  The flow of new work for professional and financial 
services firms had weakened, with some clients delaying major 
business decisions during the pre-referendum period.  That was 
reflected in a slowing of M&A, IPO, and commercial real estate 
investment activity.  However, demand growth for corporate 
services including accommodation, conferencing and 
exhibitions had risen, suggesting that underlying business 
confidence was still positive.  Some IT businesses reported 
strong growth as customers continued to build online and 
mobile sales platforms or improve cyber security and data 
analytics.  
Production
Growth in manufacturing output for the domestic market had 
increased a little, with volumes marginally higher than a year 
earlier ( Chart 1 ).  Growth in aerospace and automotive sector 
output had continued.  Demand for construction products and 
equipment had risen.  Output of medical products and 
pharmaceuticals had continued to expand.  But sales of capital 
goods, especially those within the oil and gas supply chain, had fallen.  The pace of contraction in manufactured export 
volumes had eased, in part reflecting the recent depreciation 
of sterling.  Rising euro-area demand was reported for a range 
of products.  But Chinese demand for luxury consumer goods 
and some industrial goods had softened.
Construction
Growth in construction output had been stable.  Growth in 
construction of new industrial property and educational 
facilities and prime office space had remained solid.  Demand 
for the refurbishment of commercial space had increased 
further.  Infrastructure work, for example in transport and 
telecommunications, had risen steadily.  Output of new homes 
had risen, but some social housing projects had been put on 
hold, reflecting regulatory changes to housing associations’ 
rents. 
Investment
There had been some reports of delays in decision-taking on 
corporate spending until after the EU referendum.  However, 
investment intentions for the year ahead were little changed 
overall, consistent with modest growth ( Chart 2 ).  
Manufacturing investment intentions were generally weaker 
than for services firms, reflecting relative demand conditions.  
For some manufacturing firms, sterling’s depreciation had 
increased the cost of capital goods, reducing the attractiveness 
of investment.  Some subsectors, however, were expanding 
capacity, including both automotive and construction goods.  
In the service sector, capital expenditure was often aimed at 
reducing the labour intensity of production.  Within consumer 
services, resilient demand growth was reported to be driving 
expansion and refurbishment spending in leisure services, retail 
and higher education.  
5 4 3 2 1 0 1 2 3 4 5 
2006 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 Scores 
Construction output Business services turnover 
Manufacturing output for
  the domestic market Three months on the same period a year earlier
+
–Chart 1  Activity
5 4 3 2 1 0 1 2 3 4 
2006 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 Scores 
Services Manufacturing 
+
–Over the coming twelve monthsChart 2  Investment Agents’ summary of business conditions   2016 Q2 3
Box 1
Agents’ survey on employment intentions and 
productivity
The Agents conducted a survey to ask business contacts about 
the change in employment and activity over the last twelve 
months, and their expectations and plans for the twelve 
months ahead.  The survey also asked how factors were 
affecting employment plans.  In addition, firms were asked to 
indicate how other factors were affecting productivity and if 
there were any significant restraints on businesses’ ability to 
raise productivity.  Over 400 businesses responded to the 
survey, with total employment of nearly 700,000 staff.  The 
results were weighted by employment.
The survey results showed that over the past twelve months 
employment had increased modestly and by less than activity 
(Chart A ).  This suggests that, for the survey sample,  
productivity had risen somewhat  over the past twelve 
months.  Expectations for employment and activity over the 
next twelve months were both expected to be slower than 
over the last twelve months, but more so for employment than 
for activity.  This would be consistent with expectations for 
slightly stronger growth in productivity in the year ahead.
Looking at how changes in the economic environment were 
affecting employment plans for the next twelve months, the 
only significant reason given to increase employment was 
higher demand ( Chart B ).  Heightened uncertainty about the 
economic outlook had a mildly depressing effect on 
employment plans, with a greater negative impact from both 
staff costs and opportunities to increase productivity.  The 
National Living Wage was cited by only some of those 
concerned by staff costs — mainly consumer services and 
manufacturing respondents.
 Among changes expected to influence productivity growth 
over the next twelve months, businesses planned a range of 
activities to boost productivity in the next twelve months 
(Chart C );  including the improvement of both physical capital 
and labour efficiency.  A balance of respondents expected that 
regulation and compliance would lower productivity growth, 
particularly for business services  respondents.   
 
In terms of constraints on businesses’ ability to raise 
productivity, access to skills was a commonly-reported 
concern.  Consistent with the findings shown in Chart C , 
respondents also indicated that regulation was a barrier to 
improving productivity, including ‘red tape’ and delays in the 
planning system for property and construction businesses.  
Some respondents reported a need to maintain minimum 
staffing levels or to hoard labour  where skills were in short 
supply. 05101520253035
Past twelve months Next twelve monthsEmployment
ActivityNet balance Chart A  Change in employment and activity, past twelve 
months and expectations for next twelve months100 75 50 25 02 55 07 51 00Expected demand
Recruitment/
retention
Uncertainty about
economic outlook
Other factors
Staff costs
of which National
Living Wage
Planned
productivity
Net balance (per cent)+ –Chart B  Factors affecting employment plans for the next 
twelve months
20100102030405060
Buildings,
equipment
or ITWorking
practicesStaff
utilisationSkills
levelOther Regulation
or complianceNet balance (per cent)
 
+
–Chart C  Factors affecting productivity growth in the 
next twelve months4 Agents’ summary of business conditions  2016 Q2
Corporate financing conditions
Bank credit availability had stabilised after a prolonged period 
of easing, remaining above normal for most corporate 
borrowers ( Chart 3 ).  Lending spreads were thought to have 
reached a trough, although some contacts reported that 
non-price terms had continued to improve.  Competition had 
remained particularly strong in the invoice discounting market 
and for lending secured on property.  But loan-to-value ratios 
had remained below those available during the pre-crisis 
period.  Demand for bank lending had eased in recent months.  
More generally, companies continued to be cautious about 
increasing their gearing levels.  Challenger banks continued to 
increase their lending to smaller companies. 
Capital market issuance had appeared to have slowed recently, 
with reports that uncertainty around the EU referendum had 
negatively affected investor appetite.  Availability of some 
other forms of non-bank finance had continued to expand.  For 
example, increased institutional investment had allowed peer 
to peer lenders to finance larger deals (see Box 2 for more 
detail on recent trends in peer to peer lending).  Asset financing 
had remained readily available at very competitive — and 
falling — rates. Property markets
Commercial real estate
Occupier demand for UK commercial real estate had remained 
robust, most notably for warehouses but also for prime office 
and retail space in both London and the major UK cities.  Rents 
had risen but, London apart, they had often not reached levels 
sufficient to spur new speculative development.  Where such 
development was taking place, it was generally funded by 
overseas investors or property funds, rather than by bank 
lending.  Investor appetite for London property had slowed, 
with expectations for prime properties’ asset values having Box 2
Recent trends in peer-to-peer lending
Agents had focused on gathering intelligence on peer-to-peer 
(P2P) lending recently, to gauge how the use of this form of 
finance was developing among corporate borrowers.  That 
intelligence suggested that growth in P2P lending had 
continued to be strong throughout 2015 and into 2016.  
The supply of P2P funds was supported by an inflow of 
institutional money into the sector, which had allowed P2P 
lenders to offer larger loans.  That had made P2P a more 
attractive option for a wider range of borrowers and for 
property investors in particular:  property-related lending had 
accounted for a large part of the recent growth in lending for 
some P2P platforms.  More generally, the number of P2P 
lending platforms had continued to grow and the range of 
financing options had increased, including for working capital, 
such as certain types of invoice finance.  There were reports of 
a pipeline of plans to introduce new P2P lending platforms.  
Overall, contacts saw P2P lending as providing a useful and 
growing source of finance to smaller businesses.  But some 
were cautious about its rapid expansion, noting a risk that, 
given the complexity of the sector, difficulties at any individual 
P2P lender could lead to reputational risks for the sector more 
widely.Contacts reported that the main driver of demand for P2P 
loans was a continued perception of a lack of access to bank 
funding on terms that some, often smaller, borrowers were 
comfortable with.  In practice, P2P lending was most popular 
with start-ups and micro firms not able to access bank finance; 
or more generally among borrowers for projects that might be 
outside banks’ lending criteria.  In some of those latter cases, 
banks were reported to be referring clients to P2P lenders as a 
supplementary source of funds.  But in most cases, borrowers 
were reported to be approaching P2P lenders directly.  
Although growth of P2P lending had been rapid, that was from 
a low base and some contacts noted factors constraining 
businesses’ use of P2P lending platforms.  For example, P2P 
lending was said to not yet meet the full range of borrowers’ 
funding needs.  Some contacts noted that the range and 
complexity of funding options was confusing to potential 
borrowers, and there were some concerns about the extent to 
which P2P platforms would exercise forebearance in the event 
of short-term repayment difficulties.  And some businesses 
were reported to be reluctant to make the public disclosures 
required to attract funds.  More generally, contacts noted that 
competition from other traditional forms of lending had 
increased over the past year, as the availability of those funds 
increased.
Q2 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
Small
Medium
Large2013 14 15 16
Q1Chart 3  Heatmap of credit conditions relative to normal by 
size of business(a)
(a) This mapping is based on individual Agencies’ national assessments of corporate credit availability, 
weighted by the gross value added of their regions or countries.  2016 Q2 uses Agents’ latest 
assessment as of May.  The greater the intensity of red, the tighter credit availability;  the greater the 
intensity of green, the looser credit availability.  Yellow indicates normal conditions.  Includes bank 
and non-bank credit. Agents’ summary of business conditions   2016 Q2 5
moderated.  In other regions, although contacts reported some 
slowing in decision-taking, investor appetite had generally held 
up better, both from overseas and domestic investors. 
Housing market
Housing market activity had fallen back in April and May, 
following heightened transaction numbers in Q1 as buy-to-let 
investors had brought forward purchases ahead of the 
introduction of a rise in stamp duty on additional properties in 
April.  Underlying activity in the owner-occupier market was 
little changed, although there were some reports of a 
softening, especially in higher price brackets. (1)  Demand for 
new-build properties had remained robust.  Shortages in the 
availability of properties for sale had persisted in the secondary 
market.  Mortgage rates had edged lower overall and there 
were signs that availability had increased further, including for 
self-employed and older borrowers.  
Capacity Utilisation
Capacity utilisation was slightly above normal in services and 
below normal in manufacturing.  In manufacturing that 
reflected subdued levels of activity.  Among business services 
companies, utilisation of staff had remained above normal, 
and skilled labour availability was reported to be fairly tight, 
especially in IT.  Logistics businesses reported being 
increasingly short of warehouse space.  But some slack had 
opened up in a number of legal, financial and advisory 
businesses, as demand growth had eased.  Among consumer 
services contacts, resilient demand growth was keeping 
capacity utilisation above normal levels, with little slack 
reported in the air and rail industries in particular.  In 
construction, the availability of skilled labour remained an 
impediment to growth although recruitment difficulties had 
eased recently.
Employment and pay
Services employment intentions had eased, but manufacturing 
intentions had become less negative ( Chart 4 ).  Business 
services contacts’ employment plans had moderated, 
reflecting weakening output growth and a renewed focus on 
productivity gains to mitigate skills shortages.  Employment 
intentions in consumer services were consistent with little 
change in staffing levels, with the introduction of the National 
Living Wage (NLW) weighing on recruitment plans for some 
contacts.  Manufacturing employment intentions had 
increased slightly, but were still consistent with reductions in 
staffing overall, particularly among commodity-processers 
such as steel producers.  
Recruitment difficulties had eased in recent months, though 
were still moderately higher than normal.  The share of 
companies reporting severe hiring difficulties had fallen back markedly since 2015 Q3.  That easing largely reflected a 
slowing of employment growth and an improved flow of 
qualified staff — attributed to past investment in training.  
Reduced employment in the oil and gas sector had increased 
the availability of skilled engineers, but some specific 
technical, professional and managerial skills had remained in 
short supply. 
Growth in total labour costs per employee had edged higher in 
services and remained little changed in manufacturing.  The 
former mostly reflected the introduction of the NLW.  
Measures taken by contacts to ameliorate the impact of the 
NLW on margins had varied.  For example, some contacts were 
reviewing wage differentials and bonus and commission 
payments to limit the potential impact on total labour costs.  
But in some cases, the NLW had been extended to employees 
under the age of 25 who were not legally required to be paid 
the higher rate.  The majority of pay awards remained in a 
range between 1%–3%, with upward momentum restrained by 
the persistence of low inflation.  Manufacturers reported 
subdued pay pressures, reflecting the recent weakness of 
output.
Pricing
Supply chain pricing
Materials costs had risen recently, but remained slightly lower 
than a year earlier.  Recent increases had reflected a 
combination of global commodity price rises and the 
weakening of sterling since the start of the year.  Imported 
finished goods prices had also increased as the impact of 
sterling’s fall had started to be passed through to customers.  
Nonetheless, prices were flat on a year earlier ( Chart 5 ). 
As higher non-labour input costs started to be passed on, the 
annual rate of decline in manufacturing output prices had 
(1) See the box on page 2 of the Agents’ Summary of Business Conditions, May 2016 
Update  for more details on contacts’ views of housing market prospects, available at  
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/agentssummary/2016/may.aspx .5 4 3 2 1 0 1 2 3 4 
2006 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 Scores 
Business services 
Manufacturing Consumer services 
+
–Over the coming six monthsChart 4  Employment intentions6 Agents’ summary of business conditions  2016 Q2
eased.  Business services price inflation had remained modestly 
positive, albeit with substantial variation in contacts’ ability to 
raise prices.  For example, IT outsourcing and insurance prices 
had continue to fall, whereas commercial property rents had 
risen alongside higher occupancy, and some professional 
services firms reported improved pricing power for specialist 
services.  
Consumer prices
Consumer price inflation had edged higher and was modestly 
negative for goods and positive for services ( Chart 6 ).  Annual 
grocery price declines had persisted, reflecting strong 
competition in the sector, although the pace of decline had eased slightly over the quarter.  Some retailers thought that 
clothing prices could weaken in the near term, due to 
disappointing sales of seasonal lines and a build-up in stocks.  
However, prices were expected to strengthen further ahead 
due to the recent decline in sterling against the dollar.  There 
were tentative signs that an increased supply of used cars had 
started to reduce prices.  Consumer services price inflation had 
edged higher.  Sustained demand growth had increased the 
pricing power of some providers, particularly in the leisure and 
private rented housing sectors.  And some firms had started to 
pass through higher wage costs of the NLW into prices, 
although most expected that to be a gradual process.
3 2 1 0 1 2 3 4 5 
2006 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 Scores 
Materials costs 
Imported ﬁnished
  goods prices  
+
–Three months on the same period a year earlier Chart 5  Raw materials and imported finished goods
3 2 1 0 1 2 3 4 
2006 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 Scores 
Retail goods  Retail services  
+
–Three months on the same period a year earlierChart 6  Retail goods and consumer services prices