Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2016/2016-q3.pdf
Date: 2016-09-30

Consumer spending  growth and confidence had remained 
resilient over the past three months.  Growth in spending on 
consumer services had been stable, remaining stronger than 
for retail goods.
Business services  turnover growth had slowed, with 
heightened uncertainty affecting activity among professional 
services companies and those servicing the commercial real 
estate market in particular.  Business sentiment had recovered 
slightly in August following a marked dip in the immediate 
aftermath of the referendum result.
Growth in manufacturing  output for the domestic market had 
increased a little.  Manufacturing export volume growth had 
turned positive.
Construction  output growth had slowed, partly reflecting 
easing growth among house builders.
Investment intention scores  had fallen, particularly among 
services companies, and pointed to flat business investment 
over the year ahead.
Corporate credit availability  had remained broadly 
unchanged over the past three months, although there were 
some reports of tighter terms and conditions for lending to the 
commercial real estate sector.Investor demand for commercial real estate  had fallen, 
particularly in London and from foreign investors.  Occupier 
demand had showed some early signs of easing.
Housing market  activity had slowed markedly in London and 
in some parts of the surrounding area, but had held up better 
in other parts of the United Kingdom.
Capacity utilisation  was close to normal among services 
companies and slightly below normal in manufacturing.
Employment  intentions had fallen overall, and were consistent 
with stable private sector employment over the coming 
six months.  Recruitment difficulties  had changed little, 
remaining modestly above normal.
Growth in labour costs  per employee had edged higher 
among manufacturers, but had eased slightly in services.
The recent depreciation of sterling had started to feed through 
to higher raw materials and imported finished goods prices .
Manufacturing output prices  were little changed on a year 
earlier.  Business services price inflation had remained 
modestly positive overall.
Consumer price inflation  had edged higher.•	The annual rate of activity growth had slowed overall as uncertainty had risen following the EU referendum, 
although it had remained positive.  However, business sentiment had improved slightly in August following a 
marked dip in the immediate aftermath of the referendum.
•	Consumer spending growth and confidence had been more resilient.  Although housing market activity had 
fallen markedly in London and in parts of the surrounding area, it had held up relatively well in other parts of the 
United Kingdom.
•	Companies’ investment and employment intentions had fallen, and were consistent with broadly flat levels of 
capital spending and employment over the coming six to twelve months.Agents’ summary of business conditions
2016 Q3
Changes to the publication arrangements for the Agents’ summary and scores
The Agents’ summary is generally published on the Wednesday after the Monetary Policy Committee meeting minutes are published.  So as 
the MPC meeting schedule moves to eight meetings a year (see www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/news/2016/051.aspx ), the 
Agents’ summary will move to a schedule of eight publications a year.  Consequently, there will not be an Agents’ summary published in 
October, with the remaining Agents’ summary publications for 2016 scheduled for Wednesday 9 November and Wednesday 21 December.  
In addition, the timing of Agent’s scoring of the economy will move to eight sets of scores a year alongside the publication of the Agents’ 
summary.  The next set of Agents’ scores will be published on Wednesday 9 November.
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by the Bank of England’s Agents between late May 2016 and late August 2016.  
It generally makes comparisons with activity and prices a year earlier.  The report does not represent the Bank’s own views, nor does it 
represent the views of any particular company or region.2 Agents’ summary of business conditions  2016 Q3
Consumer services and retail sales
Overall, most contacts reported modest growth in retail sales 
values during the summer months, with annual growth picking 
up in the three months to August, after a fall in the 
three months to July ( Chart 1 ).  Clothing and footwear sales 
growth in particular had been boosted by improved weather 
relative to that seen earlier in the summer.  Growth in demand 
for new cars had continued to slow, with some increase in 
caution about purchases reported since the EU referendum.  
Consumer credit demand growth was reported to be steady 
overall.  Consumer services turnover growth had changed little 
(Chart 1 ).  Within the total, tourism spending growth had 
picked up, with evidence of both increased ‘staycationing’ and 
higher overseas visitor numbers.
Business and financial services
Growth in business services turnover had slowed over the past 
three months ( Chart 2 ).  That had mainly reflected heightened 
uncertainty, which had reduced demand for a range of 
professional and financial services.  In particular, transactional 
activity relating to real estate had slowed.  Haulage and 
distribution companies reported a weakening of turnover 
growth, as companies sought to keep stock levels low to 
preserve cash in the face of higher uncertainty.  Publishing and 
broadcasting contacts had seen advertising revenues weaken.  
Services exports growth had picked up moderately.  For 
example, inward tourism for short breaks had benefited from 
sterling’s depreciation, notably into London.  Consultancy 
services noted improved overseas revenues in Europe, in areas 
such as online retail and IT.  Many professional and financial 
services companies were waiting to see whether business 
growth recovered after the traditionally quiet summer months, 
to assess better underlying demand conditions and inform 
strategic decision‑making.  Some contacts — such as advisory 
firms — were hopeful that demand in certain areas of work 
would rebound, as firms started to take major business 
decisions in light of the EU referendum vote.  Business 
sentiment had recovered slightly in August following a marked 
dip in the immediate aftermath of the referendum.Production
The pace of growth in manufacturing output for the domestic 
market had remained modest ( Chart 3 ).  Output growth in 
automotive and aerospace supply chains had strengthened.  
However, a softening of investment intentions had led to 
reduced orders for capital goods, and a slowing in 
housebuilding activity was affecting demand for building 
materials.  Some manufacturers hoped to benefit from import 
substitution as a result of sterling’s weakness, but there were 
few examples of that so far.  Growth in exports of 
manufactured goods had edged up, with volumes marginally 
higher on a year ago ( Chart 3 ).  That had largely reflected 
sterling’s earlier depreciation since November 2015 and a 
pickup in underlying export demand growth in the 
United States and the Far East.  Export order books pointed to 
stronger growth over the next year.
Construction
Construction output growth had eased and remained 
moderate.  The growth rate of private housebuilding had 
slowed overall, although reports were mixed across regions.  
Construction activity for industrial units and student 3 2 1 0 1 2 3 
2006 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 Scores 
Consumer services turnover  Retail sales values 
+
–Three months on the same period a year earlierChart 1  Retail sales values and consumer services turnover4 3 2 1 0 1 2 3 4 
2006 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 Scores 
Professional and
  ﬁnancial services  
Other business
  services +
–Three months on the same period a year earlierChart 2  Business and financial services turnover
5 4 3 2 1 0 1 2 3 4 
2006 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 Scores 
Manufacturing (export)  
Manufacturing (domestic)  +
–Three months on the same period a year earlierChart 3  Manufacturing output Agents’ summary of business conditions   2016 Q3 3
accommodation had been robust, albeit in some cases 
constrained by skill shortages.  Growth in repair and 
maintenance work had remained firm.  Demand growth for 
construction related to rail, road and utilities had remained 
steady.  Across the sector overall, a majority of projects that 
had been underway before the referendum were continuing, 
but there were concerns among contacts that the pipeline of 
work over the next six to 18 months could weaken.
Investment
Investment intentions had fallen since the EU referendum and 
pointed to broadly flat business investment over the next year 
(Chart 4 ).  There were reports of projects being challenged 
more rigorously and, in some cases, being scaled back or 
deferred.  Projects already underway were largely continuing, 
however, and contacts across all sectors were still investing to 
generate cost efficiencies and increase productivity.  The 
slowing in capital spending had been most pronounced among 
companies providing professional services to the commercial 
real estate (CRE) market.  In contrast, investment among 
consumer services firms had remained more resilient.
Corporate financing conditions
Corporate credit availability had been little changed over the 
past three months.  There were exceptions however, with 
reports of some tightening of terms and conditions on bank 
lending to CRE companies and for certain borrowers most 
exposed to import price rises.  More generally, competition for 
lending to companies with strong balance sheets had remained 
strong.  There had been an increase in the number of 
syndicated deals for larger corporates looking to refinance 
their debt early, at narrow spreads.  Banks reported that 
borrower demand had generally held up following the 
EU referendum, although demand had eased somewhat for 
term lending associated with investment projects and for 
CRE transactions.  Access to non‑bank finance had continued 
to improve.  There was evidence that the cost of sterling bond market finance had fallen.  Some peer‑to‑peer lenders were 
reported to be moving increasingly into mainstream small to 
medium‑sized enterprise funding.  However, contacts reported 
a tightening in trade credit insurance markets, particularly in 
construction‑related supply chains.
Property markets
Commercial real estate
Transactions and investor demand for CRE had fallen since the 
EU referendum.  Investor demand for large prime office blocks 
had declined, particularly in London.  But there had been some 
areas of positive demand growth for warehousing space and 
student accommodation, as well as for smaller regional 
properties.  Investor demand for retail space had been mixed, 
with continued interest in prime shopping centres but weaker 
demand for secondary sites.  The investment appetite of 
UK property funds had fallen as they sought to preserve 
liquidity, with some properties sold rapidly with a discount.  
Demand by foreign investors was unusually low, but there 
remained a modest flow of purchases being made, in some 
cases encouraged by the depreciation in sterling.  Commercial 
property prices were reported to have fallen overall, 
particularly in London, although there was considerable 
uncertainty around valuations.  In the occupier market, there 
were some signs of easing demand.  Occupier enquiries and 
viewings had declined and many tenants had put their 
intentions to move on hold.  However, vacancy rates had 
remained low and rents were generally unchanged.
Housing market
In London and in some surrounding areas, contacts reported 
that transaction numbers were materially lower than a year 
earlier, reflecting the effects on demand of the vote to leave 
the EU and, in some areas, earlier changes made to stamp 
duty.  Housing market activity had held up much better 
elsewhere in the United Kingdom, however, especially in the 
market for lower‑to‑medium value homes.  The major house 
builders had remained bullish about the prospects for demand 
for new homes, with little evidence that the referendum had 
materially affected site visits, reservations, or fall‑through 
rates outside parts of the South East.  Mortgage availability 
had remained highly favourable, although increased caution 
about lending at loan to value ratios above 95% was reported 
and surveyors’ had been more cautious in valuations.  Demand 
for mortgages had eased a little overall, but with considerable 
variability by region.
Capacity utilisation
Capacity utilisation had fallen in services but had risen in 
manufacturing over the past three months, reflecting the 
pattern of developments in output.  Overall, utilisation was 
close to normal in services and slightly below normal in 5 4 3 2 1 0 1 2 3 4 
2006 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 Scores 
Services 
Manufacturing +
–Over the coming twelve monthsChart 4  Investment intentions4 Agents’ summary of business conditions  2016 Q3
manufacturing.  For manufacturing, some excess capital 
capacity was reported in many subsectors, partly offset by 
high rates of staff utilisation, which were being managed by 
altering shift patterns, using temporary workers and 
subcontracting.  In services, there was excess capacity in retail 
and, as a result of weaker activity, in property‑related 
professional services.  That was offset in aggregate by higher 
utilisation in other services, such as warehousing and hotels.
Employment and pay
Employment intentions had softened overall, and were 
consistent with broadly flat staffing levels over the coming 
six months ( Chart 5 ).  Among professional and financial 
services firms, hiring activity had slowed following the 
EU referendum and leavers were being replaced only where the 
business case was strong.  In some cases, primarily in 
CRE‑related subsectors, all non‑essential recruitment had been 
frozen.  In consumer services, subdued recruitment plans 
largely reflected efforts to bear down on costs in the face of 
the National Living Wage (NLW) and, for retailers in particular, 
intense competition.  Manufacturing intentions still suggested 
small falls in employment, but at a slightly slower pace, as a 
period of scaling back production, for example in the oil and 
gas sector, had been completed and as sterling’s depreciation 
had improved export prospects.  Recruitment difficulties were 
little changed and remained modestly above normal.  Slowing 
employment intentions had resulted in a narrowing in the 
range of reported skill shortages, although certain job roles 
remained difficult to fill, including IT specialisms, construction, 
logistics, health care and sales.  To date, there had been no 
material change in the availability of migrant labour since the 
EU referendum result, although many contacts reported 
seeking to address concerns expressed by their foreign workers.  
Growth in total labour costs had remained moderate.  Few 
contacts cited the outcome of the referendum as having a 
direct influence on pay decisions over the past two months.  Contacts saw pressures acting in opposite directions:  on the 
one hand, slowing turnover growth could put downwards 
pressure on wage inflation, but on the other, expectations of 
rising consumer price inflation could lead to pressure to 
increase pay awards to maintain real wages.  Manufacturing 
wage inflation was lower than for services, partly reflecting 
skills shortages and retention issues among some professional 
services and finance companies.  The impact of the NLW on 
aggregate labour cost growth had been modest, although was 
having a more sizable impact for those companies with a high 
proportion of low paid staff.  While some companies had 
sought to mitigate the effects on their labour costs this year by 
reviewing other terms and conditions, there was thought to be 
less scope for further such adjustments in future years.
Pricing
Supply chain pricing
Sterling’s depreciation had started to feed through to higher 
costs of imported raw materials and finished goods (see 
Chart A  in the box on page 5).  Suppliers to supermarkets 
reported intense pressure to maintain existing prices 
notwithstanding higher costs.  In other supply chains, however, 
customers had been more accepting of some increase in price 
inflation.  As a result, a period of declining manufacturing 
output prices had come to an end.  The pass‑through of higher 
raw materials and import prices to output prices was likely to 
increase later in the year as more currency hedges and forward 
contracts started to expire.  Within business services, pricing 
had increased where a high proportion of employees had been 
affected by the NLW, such as cleaning and security, but 
professional service providers remained reluctant to raise 
prices in a softening market.
Consumer prices
Consumer price inflation had edged higher, as earlier falls in 
fuel and food prices had dropped out of the calculation.  Food 
price inflation remained negative, and the extent of exchange 
rate pass‑through in the coming months would largely depend 
on the evolution of price competition between grocery 
retailers.  In non‑food goods, some contacts were seeking to 
increase prices in response to rising materials costs, but the 
impact was expected to be seen more fully next year.  
Consumer services price inflation had remained moderate.  
Resilient demand growth had generated some increase in 
pricing power, allowing some pass‑through of increases in 
labour costs arising from the NLW. 
5 4 3 2 1 0 1 2 3 4 
2006 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 Scores 
Business services 
Manufacturing Consumer services 
+
–Over the coming six monthsChart 5  Employment intentions Agents’ summary of business conditions   2016 Q3 5
Box 1
How is the fall in the exchange rate feeding 
through to the economy?
The sterling ERI has fallen by some 10% since the 
EU referendum and by around 15% relative to its 
November 2015 peak.  This box summarises the early 
intelligence on how the fall in the exchange rate has been 
feeding through the economy.
The fall in sterling had led to an increase in margins for many 
exporters, offset in some cases by previous hedges against 
moves in the exchange rate.  Recent growth in manufacturing 
export volumes was reported to reflect the earlier depreciation 
seen between November 2015 and early 2016;  export 
volumes were described as being yet to respond to the 
post‑referendum depreciation.  Contacts had not seen a step 
change in manufacturing export growth as yet following the 
referendum, probably reflecting the time required for 
companies to break into new markets, and for overseas 
customers to realise the benefits of switching suppliers.  
Inward tourism numbers were, however, already picking up on 
the back of sterling’s post‑referendum fall.
There had also been a switch domestically to UK‑based 
tourism away from overseas holidays.  Beyond that, there were 
as yet few examples of import substitution in response to the 
fall in the exchange rate, partly reflecting the fact that it would 
take some time (if at all) for companies to source domestic 
alternatives, particularly in parts of manufacturing.  Indeed, 
the early intelligence suggested that import substitution for 
manufactured goods was expected to be limited, given that in 
many cases there were no UK suppliers available.
There were signs of prices starting to respond to the fall in 
sterling, with Agents’ scores for annual inflation in material 
costs and imported finished goods prices having risen to their 
highest levels since 2013 ( Chart A ).  Further cost increases were expected over the next twelve months as supplier 
contracts were renewed and pre‑referendum hedging expired.  
There had been little evidence of greater than usual hedging of 
foreign currency exposures ahead of the referendum:  if 
anything there were more reports of less hedging given 
expectations of a Remain vote, and in some cases protection 
had been bought for smaller moves than had actually 
occurred.
There was little evidence of pass‑through to retail pricing as 
yet, but there were signs that would begin over the coming 
months, with the extent of the depreciation helping persuade 
some retailers of the need for higher prices.  That said, retailers 
were very cautious about any increases in prices, given that 
consumers remained highly price sensitive, and so the extent 
and timing of pass‑through would largely depend on 
competitors’ actions, particularly in food retail.  Some food 
retailers were re‑engineering products to maintain existing 
prices.  In non‑food goods, some retailers were starting to 
increase prices in response to rising material costs, particularly 
for products sourced in US dollars, but the impact was 
expected to be seen more fully through 2017.3 2 1 0 1 2 3 4 5 
2006 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 Scores 
Materials costs Imported ﬁnished
  goods prices  
+
–Three months on the same period a year earlierChart A  Material costs and imported finished goods