Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2017/2017-q3.pdf
Date: 2017-09-30

•	Households	had	responded	 to	squeezed	incomes	by	 trading	down	or	focusing	on	essential	purchases.		 As	a	result,	 demand	
growth	had	slowed	across	a	number	 of	consumer-facing	sectors,	and	modest	nominal	consumer	spending	growth	primarily	
reflected	price	inflation.
•	Investment	intentions	indicated	 weaker	growth	 within	services,	but	 were	more	positive	 for	goods	exporters.
•	Growth	in	labour	costs	per	employee	had	been	subdued,	 with	settlements	clustered	around	2%	 to	3%.		Recruitment	
difficulties	remained	elevated,	 with	conditions	becoming	 very	tight	for	some	skills.
•	The	impact	 of	past	falls	in	sterling	 on	consumer	goods	price	inflation	appeared	 to	have	reached	its	peak.		 Consumer	services	
price	inflation	 was	steady	 overall.Retail sales growth  had remained subdued in values terms, with 
volumes falling in several categories including for big-ticket  
items.   Consumer services  turnover growth had eased slightly 
further, with increased reports of tightening discretionary 
spending. 
Business services  turnover growth was stable overall.  Contacts 
reported buoyant demand for corporate transactions. 
Growth in manufacturing  output was steady.  Exporters 
continued to report growth above normal levels, though some 
contacts questioned the sustainability of this over the medium 
term.
Construction  output growth had remained modest, with some 
signs of a slowing.
Investment intentions  indicated weaker growth within services, 
mostly reflecting the perceived subdued outlook for consumer 
demand.  For manufacturers there was some continued evidence 
of a modest rebalancing towards exports, driven by  
macroeconomic factors.
Credit availability  for corporates was generally accommodative, 
but with some evidence of increased discrimination in lending 
decisions in a toughening macroeconomic environment.
Occupier demand for commercial real estate  continued to ease.  
Investor demand growth and transactions had remained strong, 
reflecting in part increased appetite among foreign investors. This 
was resulting in below-normal yields. 
Housing market  activity had been subdued in most parts of  
the United Kingdom, in particular in the secondary market and  in higher price brackets.  Price inflation had continued to 
moderate. 
Capacity utilisation  in manufacturing had increased modestly, 
but remained around normal levels in services. 
Employment intentions  indicated a modest planned increase in 
staffing in manufacturing, however employment intentions in 
services were weaker, with headcount reductions planned in some 
sectors.  Recruitment difficulties  remained elevated, with 
conditions becoming very tight for some skills.
Growth in labour costs per employee had remained subdued.  
Settlements had been clustered around 2% to 3%.
Materials costs  and imported finished goods  price inflation were 
broadly unchanged but remained elevated.  Pass-through effects 
appeared to be easing slightly, but rises in some commodity prices 
had added to cost pressures.
Manufacturing output price inflation  was stable, as contacts 
struggled to achieve full pass-through of input cost inflation. 
Business services price inflation had picked up slightly.
The impact of past falls in sterling on consumer goods price 
inflation  appeared to have reached its peak (absent a further 
material depreciation of sterling), and was expected to ease 
slightly by year end.  Consumer services price inflation  was 
steady overall.  The past falls in sterling had squeezed companies’ 
profit margins, with margins currently below normal levels. 
Results from the Decision Maker Panel suggest that Brexit is an 
important source of uncertainty for many but not all companies, 
and that Brexit is likely to weigh on investment over the next year.
This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by the Bank of England’s Agents between late May 2017 and late August 2017.   
It generally makes comparisons with activity and prices a year earlier.  The report does not represent the Bank’s own views, nor does it 
represent the views of any particular company or region.  More information on the Bank’s Agencies can be found at  
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/agentssummary/default.aspx.
This publication also includes a summary of information on business expectations gathered by the Bank’s recently established  
Decision Maker Panel.  Further background is provided in Box 2 on pages 7–8.Agents’ summary of business conditions
and results from the Decision Maker Panel    
2017 Q32 Agents’ summary of business conditions  2017 Q3
Consumer services and retail sales
Retail sales growth had remained subdued in values terms, 
especially in non-food sectors;  there were more reports of 
consumers trading down and focusing on essential purchases.  
Growth was challenged by modest rises in earnings and 
weakening consumer confidence;  some contacts also reported 
weaker growth in sales associated with housing transactions, 
such as carpets and curtains.  Value growth primarily reflected 
price inflation;  volume growth had been weaker overall and 
volumes had fallen across several sectors, notably bigger-ticket 
items including new cars.  And demand for clothing and 
footwear had been depressed by poor weather. 
Consumer services turnover growth had slowed ( Chart 1 ), but 
reports across sectors were more mixed.  Tourism contacts 
generally reported resilient demand, though some hotels, 
music venues and visitor attractions reported a softening.  
Terror incidents were thought to have weighed on demand for 
some domestic travel services, but had not affected foreign 
travel materially.  In other sectors, contacts reported that 
consumers were becoming more price-sensitive and seeking to 
tighten discretionary spending — some leisure contacts 
reported slower growth and heightened competition and 
communications contacts reported more consumers switching 
to SIM-only mobile phone deals.  However, sales of private 
health insurance were increasing.
Business and financial services
Business services turnover growth had been stable overall.  
Buoyant demand for corporate transactions (eg mergers and 
acquisitions (M&A)) had boosted activity for some financial 
and professional services contacts.  Strategic advisory work 
had picked up, including on Brexit-related issues, while 
demand was also solid for IT and logistics services.  In contrast, 
turnover growth had been subdued for insurance, audit and 
insolvency services, and for architects and surveyors.
Services exports growth had continued at a solid pace, helped 
by stronger international demand and the part fall in the exchange rate.  Business services export providers had reported 
strengthening demand for their services — this included legal 
and accounting firms supporting overseas clients on corporate 
transactions.  IT and software providers also reported robust 
growth.  Inbound tourist numbers had increased markedly this 
summer.  Demand for services supporting the oil and gas 
sector had remained weak, though the sector appeared to be 
stabilising.
Production
Domestic manufacturing output growth was stable, remaining 
around normal levels ( Chart 2 ).  Food and drink producers had 
continued to see good growth in demand, although those 
supplying supermarkets reported consumers switching to 
lower-value products as their incomes were squeezed.  
Manufacturers of products for use in housing construction and 
renovations continued to report strong growth, but volumes in 
parts of the wider construction sector were flattening.  Activity 
remained buoyant in the aerospace and automotive sectors.  
The weaker exchange rate meant that some UK buyers were 
re-sourcing from domestic suppliers to mitigate increased 
import costs, though in some areas such as electronics the 
opportunity to do so was limited by shallow UK supply.
Growth in goods exports volumes was steady overall and 
remained slightly above normal levels ( Chart 2 ).  Firms 
producing luxury or niche consumer goods and high-tech 
goods reported stronger growth in demand, and aerospace and 
defence contacts also reported strong sales.  Export growth 
was supported by the past fall in the exchange rate, and the 
continuing strengthening in global demand.  But some 
contacts noted that generating additional export volume 
growth could take time given the need to win first orders from 
new clients, re-focus internal resources and realign 
international supply chains.  Some exporters described the 
current environment as a ‘sweet spot’, but noted future risks 
around market access and supply chains following the  
United Kingdom’s departure from the European Union.Three months on the same period a year earlier
3210123
2006 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17Scores
Consumer services turnover Retail sales values  
+
–Chart 1  Retail sales values and consumer services 
turnover 
Three months on the same period a year earlier 
5432101234
2006 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17Scores
Manufacturing (export) 
 
Manufacturing (domestic)  +
–Chart 2  Manufacturing exports Agents’ summary of business conditions   2017 Q3 3
Construction
Construction growth had remained modest, with signs of 
softening and some contacts expressing concern over the 
sector’s near-term prospects.  Although housebuilding 
remained the strongest segment, signs of weakening in the 
housing market had prompted some builders to reduce their 
growth rates, with others standing ready to do so if market 
conditions worsened.  Skills shortages may also limit further 
growth in some parts of the country.  Commercial construction 
was growing slowly overall, and was weaker in retail than 
elsewhere.  Contacts expressed mixed views on infrastructure, 
with some contacts expressing concern about potential delays 
or deferrals of major projects, which could leave a shortfall in 
work when current projects concluded.
Investment
Investment intentions had softened somewhat in services, 
reflecting the perceived subdued outlook for consumer 
demand.  Lower UK growth prospects, sterling depreciation 
and a pickup in demand from outside the United Kingdom had 
begun to encourage a modest rebalancing towards exports, 
supporting investment in business systems, plant, and 
infrastructure such as ports.  Conversely, there were some 
reports of firms, particularly larger corporates, favouring direct 
investment overseas.  And uncertainties regarding the  
United Kingdom’s future trading arrangements continued to 
deter investment for some firms.  There had also been further 
reports of funds flowing into overseas or cross-border facilities, 
such as office space and storage, as a contingency. 
Capacity constraints were prompting some producers to 
expand, though there was still reluctance from some contacts 
to commit to major investment schemes.  In business services, 
many firms were pursuing more productive use of office space.  
Investment in consumer leisure facilities continued but the 
expansion of retail services was slowing.  
Corporate financing conditions
Finance generally remained readily available, including lending 
to support M&A activity.  While there were signs that credit 
was becoming slightly more difficult to access for smaller 
companies in some sectors, availability was stable on balance.  
Certain foreign and challenger banks were starting to lend to a 
wider range of firms, such as regional house builders.  But 
there was also some evidence of increased discrimination in 
lending decisions in a toughening macroeconomic 
environment.  Demand for finance had remained subdued 
relative to normal, with reports pointing to a further softening 
in recent months.Property markets
Commercial real estate
Enquiries from foreign investors for London commercial real 
estate had continued to ease, and valuations remained 
stretched despite recent modest declines.  Elsewhere in the 
United Kingdom, demand from domestic and foreign investors 
had remained strong, resulting in below-normal yields.  
Investor and occupier demand had remained highest for 
distribution sheds and warehouses, in response to the shift 
towards online buying, and more mixed for office space.  
Investors were scrutinising potential rental income streams 
more carefully and as a result, transactions were taking longer 
to negotiate.  Land values were softening, reflecting easing 
demand growth from house builders and uncertainties about 
longer-term prospects for UK farming.  Occupier demand for 
retail space was also softening.  With footfall in shopping 
centres declining and business rates rising for some, retailers 
were less willing to commit to additional space, which acted as 
a drag on rents.
Housing market
Activity and price inflation in the housing market had 
continued to soften, with the slowdown concentrated in the 
secondary market and especially in higher price brackets.  For 
many contacts, the market had slowed around the general 
election.  But there were some signs of a further weakening 
following the election, and the market had remained subdued 
during the summer.  Contacts in London and surrounding areas 
reported the weakest sentiment across regions;  in contrast, 
parts of the Midlands, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland 
were more buoyant.  Supply and demand appeared to be 
broadly in balance across the overall market.  Demand had 
proved more resilient in the new-build sector, though some 
contacts pointed to early signs of a slight weakening in this 
market.  Help to Buy was regarded as crucial to sustaining 
demand among first-time buyers.
In the residential mortgage market, both lender and broker 
contacts reported that competition remained intense, driven 
by new market entrants and low funding costs.  However, this 
competition was mainly concentrated on customers with the 
cleanest credit history.  More customers were taking out 
fixed-rate deals;  mortgages with longer terms, in many cases 
over 30 years, were becoming more popular.  There were more 
reports of transactions falling through due to surveyors 
down-valuing properties, reflecting concerns about falling 
prices.
Capacity utilisation
There had been a modest increase in capacity utilisation in 
manufacturing over the past quarter ( Chart 3 ).  Capacity was 
tighter than normal for some exporters that have been 4 Agents’ summary of business conditions  2017 Q3
Box 1
Survey:  UK profit margins
During August, the Bank’s Agents undertook a survey of 
business contacts to assess trends in UK profit margins, as well 
as the drivers of changes in margins over the past 18 months 
and the next 18 months.  Over 250 companies responded to 
the survey.  For firms in the sample, the current average 
operating profit margin on UK sales was 13%, but there was a 
wide range of reported margins among respondents.
On balance companies’ margins on UK sales were judged to be 
around ‘normal’ levels in early 2016, but had since 
deteriorated to below normal levels ( Chart A ).  And firms 
expected margins to weaken a little further over the coming  
18 months. 
The fall in margins had been seen across sectors, but was most 
pronounced for consumer sector firms ( Chart B ).  Further 
worsening in margins was only expected in services sectors.  
While manufacturers reported lower margins on UK sales in 
the survey, many may have seen increased margins on their 
exports.
Respondents were asked about the impact of certain factors on 
their profit margins ( Chart C ).  Over the past 18 months, the 
drag on margins from cost increases had more than 
outweighed benefits from productivity growth, price increases 
and changes in product mix.  Among the most important 
influences on costs were the impact of the depreciation of 
sterling on import costs, and increases in pay including those 
relating to increases in the National Living Wage. Over the next 18 months, a stronger balance of firms said they 
would attempt to rebuild margins by raising productivity, for 
example by investing in automation, and also by raising prices.  
Non-labour cost pressures were thought likely to abate 
slightly, having affected consumer-facing firms in particular 
over the past 18 months.  But the overall picture is of 
continued increases in costs, which firms are struggling to pass 
through, particularly in competitive and price-conscious 
markets. 
40200204060
Unusually
lowSlightly 
below
normalAround 
normal 
levelsSlightly 
above 
normalUnusually
highNet
balance(a)Early 2016
Current
Late 2018Percentage of respondents 
+
–Chart A   Operating profit margins on UK sales relative to 
normal
(a) Net balances show the balance of ‘above normal’ minus ‘below normal’ responses, weighted 
by the degree to which margins differed from normal.80604020020
Manufacturing Construction Consumer 
sectorBusiness
servicesPercentage net balance of respondents Early 2016
Current
Late 2018
+
–Chart B   Operating profit margin on UK sales, relative to 
normal — net balances by sector
60 40 20 02 04 0Productivity — output per
employee
Output prices/retail prices
Mix of products or
services sold
Volume of output/sales
Non-labour costs  — ﬁxed
Other labour costs
per employee
Non-labour costs — variable
(including import costs)
Pay per employeePast 18 months
Next 18 months
Percentage net balance of respondents
 + –Chart C   Impact of factors on profit margins — past  
18 months and next 18 months — net balances Agents’ summary of business conditions   2017 Q3 5
benefiting from sterling’s depreciation.  Capacity constraints 
remained around normal levels in services, though some skills 
shortages persisted in areas such as IT and parts of professional 
services.  Fixed-asset utilisation had increased in some parts of 
the service sector, eg commercial property and transport 
infrastructure, but there was considerable spare capacity in 
retail.
Employment and pay
Employment intentions ( Chart 4 ) had pointed to only modest 
headcount growth as, rather than increasing staff numbers, 
firms sought to improve productivity through efficiency gains 
and increased automation.  This was particularly the case for 
firms heavily exposed to increasing labour costs, such as the 
National Living Wage and the apprenticeship levy.  
Manufacturing employment intentions had edged up a little, 
notably for exporters.  In business and consumer services 
employment intentions had eased slightly.  There were reports 
of planned reductions in headcount for some estate agencies 
and firms in the oil and gas supply chain.  Some financial firms 
were more reluctant to hire given the uncertainty around 
future passporting arrangements, and given the continuing 
shifts towards customers banking on-line or through mobile 
apps.  Conversely, there was strong headcount growth within 
IT firms.Recruitment difficulties remained elevated.  Conditions were 
becoming very tight for some skills — these included finance, 
IT, construction, engineering, healthcare, and hospitality 
(including chefs).  In an increasing number of cases, skills 
shortages were resulting in ad-hoc  double digit pay inflation to 
retain existing staff or recruit new ones;  employers were also 
increasing training and recruiting more apprentices to address 
recruitment difficulties.  Some sectors were adversely affected 
by a weaker supply of migrant labour, including agri-food, 
construction and haulage.  Overall staff turnover generally 
remained at low levels.
Growth in total labour costs was modest overall, with the 
majority of pay settlements clustered around 2% to 3%.  
Labour cost inflation was greatest across a range of IT skills 
and within construction, where skills shortages were most 
acute.  The National Living Wage continued to put upwards 
pressure on total labour costs as more employees were 
included.  A number of firms reported focusing on addressing 
pay differentials, including skewing pay increases towards 
lower paid staff.
Pricing
Supply chain pricing
The initial effects of pass-through of the past fall in sterling 
into manufacturers’ materials cost and output price inflation 
(Chart 5 ) appeared to have reached its peak.  Increases in 
global commodity prices, including for dairy products, added 
to cost pressures in many manufacturing processes. 
Professional and IT services contacts painted a mixed picture 
on business services prices.  For some, persistent growth in 
activity had allowed them to increase fees, particularly for 
niche activities.  But for most other services, the pace of 
economic growth had been insufficient to drive widespread 
changes in rates.  And competition in provision of baseline 
services remained intense as technological progress 
‘commoditised’ more activities. Over the coming six months, relative to normal
432101234
2006 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17Scores
Total services
 Manufacturing 
+
–Chart 3  Capacity utilisation
5432101234
2006 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17Scores 
Business services 
Manufacturing
 Consumer services Over the coming six months
+
–Chart 4  Employment intentions
321012345
2006 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17Scores
Materials costs
 Imported ﬁnished
  goods prices Three months on the same period a year earlier 
+
–Chart 5  Material costs and imported finished goods 
prices 6 Agents’ summary of business conditions  2017 Q3
Consumer prices
Contacts believed that, absent any significant further 
depreciation, the impact of sterling’s past falls on annual 
consumer price inflation had peaked and was likely to ease 
slightly by the year end.  Competitive pressure continued to 
moderate retail goods price rises by the major grocery 
multiples, in spite of upward pressure on commodities.  Prices 
for new cars had continued to increase.  As noted in Box 1 on 
page 4, the past falls in sterling had squeezed companies’ 
profit margins, with margins currently below normal levels. 
In retail services, a shortage of private rental housing stock was 
supporting further increases in private rents.  But catering 
prices were being held back by the level of competition and 
scope to reconfigure menus.  Across a range of leisure services 
— hotel rooms, shows, concerts, visitor attractions — prices 
had risen, but suppliers were becoming more cautious about 
what further increases would be achievable. Agents’ summary of business conditions   2017 Q3 7
Box 2
Results from the Decision Maker Panel
Overview
To better understand the uncertainty facing British businesses 
ahead of the United Kingdom’s withdrawal from the European 
Union, the Bank has recently established the Decision Maker 
Panel (DMP) in partnership with Stanford University and the 
University of Nottingham. (1)  The role of panel members, 
comprising a large number of UK Chief Financial Officers 
(CFOs), is to provide direct insight into business expectations 
and complement the more qualitative intelligence gathered 
from the Bank’s Agents’ contacts. 
So far, around 2,500 executives from small, medium and large 
UK companies, operating in a broad range of industries, have 
agreed to participate, with a large majority not previously 
being contacts of the Bank’s Agency network.  The panel is 
designed to be representative of the UK business population, 
excluding a small number of sectors such as finance.  It 
includes questions on topical policy issues and it can provide 
valuable insights into firms’ perceptions of the challenges and 
opportunities facing the UK economy.
Since August 2016, panel members have been asked about 
their employment, investment, prices and sales.  Decision 
makers are asked to provide five scenarios for each variable:  
from the worst case to the best case, and to specify how likely 
they think each scenario is. (2)  From this, it is possible to 
calculate average expected growth rates and measures of 
uncertainty around those expectations.  Participants are also 
asked special questions, which so far have mostly related to 
Brexit.
Although this project runs independently of the Agents’ 
intelligence gathering, regular summaries of information 
provided by decision makers will be published on a quarterly 
basis alongside the Agents’ reports.  Aggregate level data will 
also be available on the Bank website. (3)
Business expectations
The expected average growth rates for employment, nominal 
sales and prices over the next year are shown in Chart A  
alongside growth rates from the past year.  Companies expect 
some slowing in nominal sales growth over the next year.  
Over the year to 2017 Q2, sales are estimated to have grown 
by an average of 7.6%, but growth over the year to 2018 Q2 is 
expected to be lower at around 5.3%.  Expectations for year 
ahead sales growth have slowed over the past two quarters (as 
shown by the dashed orange line on Chart A ).  Employment 
growth is also expected to slow over the next year, although 
expectations for employment growth during the year to  
2018 Q3 have picked up.DMP members have reported that annual price inflation has 
risen over recent quarters to 3.2% in 2017 Q3 (as shown by the 
solid blue line on Chart A ).  Price inflation is, however, 
expected to slow slightly to 2.7% in the year to 2018 Q3.
The survey indicates that firms are uncertain about their 
predictions for the year ahead.  For example, while, on average, 
panel members thought that there was a one-in-four chance 
of sales growth being above 10% over the year to 2018 Q1, 
they thought that the probability of a fall in sales was around 
one-in-eight ( Chart B ).  The latest responses show that while 
expected average sales growth over the year to 2018 Q2 was 
little changed from Q1 ( Chart A ), the size of both tails of the 
distribution had become larger ( Chart B ), indicating that there 
has been some increase in uncertainty.
Role of Brexit
In the August 2017 DMP survey, around 40% of respondents 
cited EU withdrawal as at least one of the top two or three 
sources of uncertainty facing their business ( Chart C ).  In that 
August survey, a greater proportion of businesses reported that 
Brexit was a source of uncertainty for them than when the 
same question was asked in September 2016. 
On two occasions in the past twelve months, panel members 
have been asked about how they expected Brexit to affect 
their plans for capital expenditure over the next year.  In the 02468
Q3
2016 17 18Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3Employment(c)Nominal sales(b)
Prices(c)Percentage change on a year earlier Solid lines:  past year
Dashed lines:  expectations for next yearChart A   Realised and expected growth in employment, 
nominal sales and prices(a) 
Sources:  DMP and Bank calculations.
(a) Questions about employment and prices refer to latest month.  Questions about sales refer 
to the last complete quarter.
(b) Data for year to 2017 Q2 and expectations for year to 2018 Q2 are based on data collected 
in August only.
(c) Data for year to 2017 Q3 and expectations for year to 2018 Q3 are based on data collected 
in August only.
(1) This project is supported by the Economic and Social Research Council grant number 
ES/P010385/1.
(2) For details on the methodology see www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/
quarterlybulletin/2017/q2/a3.aspx .  All results are weighted.
(3) For aggregate data and details on the questions asked to panel members see  
www.bankofengland.co.uk/research/Documents/datasets/DMPresults  
September2017.xlsx . Agents’ summary of business conditions   2017 Q3 8
May to July 2017 surveys, a greater proportion of companies 
thought that it was more likely that Brexit would have no 
material impact on their investment over the next year than 
was the case in October 2016 ( Chart D ).  That said, in the 
most recent surveys, companies indicated that there was still 
about a 25% chance, on average, that Brexit will have a 
negative impact on investment, with only an 8% chance of 
there being a positive impact.020406080
Minor
negative
effectLarge
negative
effectLarge
positive
effectMinor
positive
effectNo impactOctober 2016
May to July 2017Probability (per cent)Chart D  Expected impact of Brexit on investment over 
the next year 
Sources:  DMP and Bank calculations. 
Between May and July, panel members were asked about the 
possibility of moving parts of their business abroad.  The vast 
majority of respondents indicated that they are not planning 
to move, but firms accounting for 7% of employment reported 
that there was at least a 50% chance of moving part of their 
business overseas ( Table A ).  If they were to move, those who 
attached higher probabilities to moving some operations 
abroad were also more likely to say that they would move 
within two years than those who reported lower (but  
non-zero) probabilities.051015202530
<-5 -5 to
00 to
2.52.5 to
55 to
1010 to
1515 to
20≥20Year to 2018 Q1(a)
Year to 2018 Q2(b)
Annual nominal sales growth (per cent)Average probability in each range (per cent)Chart B   Probability distribution of expected nominal 
sales growth over the next year 
Sources:  DMP and Bank calculations.
(a) Data collected between May and July.
(b) Data collected in August only.
01020304050
Not important One of
many sourcesOne of two
or three top
sourcesLargest
current sourceSeptember 2016
February to April 2017August 2017
Percentage of respondents
(employment weighted)Chart C   Brexit as a source of uncertainty 
Sources:  DMP and Bank calculations.Table A  Probability of moving some operations abroad
Probability of Respondents’ share of Share that would move  
  moving employment (per cent) within two years  (per cent)
0 79 –
>0–10 4 –
≥10–25 7 27
≥25–50 3 43
≥50–75 3 58
≥75 4 87  
Sources:  DMP and Bank calculations.