Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2017/2017-q4.pdf
Date: 2017-12-31

This publication includes a summary of economic reports compiled by the Bank of England’s Agents between late August 2017 and late 
November 2017.  It generally makes comparisons with activity and prices a year earlier.  The report does not represent the Bank’s own views, 
nor does it represent the views of any particular company or region.  More information on the Bank’s Agencies can be found at  
www.bankofengland.co.uk/about/people/agents .
This publication also includes a summary of information gathered by the Bank’s recently established Decision Maker Panel.  Further 
background is provided in Box 2 on pages 7–8.Retail sales values  growth had slowed, reflecting squeezed real 
incomes and possibly some deferral of spending ahead of Black Friday.  
Consumer services  turnover growth had been maintained at a steady 
pace, but ancillary spending had started to soften.
Business services  turnover growth remained moderate as pockets of 
more cautious demand were offset by strength in IT and advisory 
work.
Domestic manufacturing  output had continued to grow relatively 
strongly;  export volumes had strengthened, supported by an 
improving global economic outlook.
Construction  output growth had eased.  Increased risk aversion in the 
private sector, reflecting greater uncertainty, and delays to major 
projects had slowed activity across commercial and infrastructure 
projects.
Investment intentions  had remained consistent with modest growth.
Credit availability  for corporates generally remained good although 
banks’ risk appetite towards consumer‑facing businesses had fallen 
slightly.  Demand for finance  continued to grow alongside activity 
but appetite for increased gearing remained muted.
Domestic and overseas investor demand for UK commercial real 
estate  had stabilised as sentiment continued to recover from its 
Summer 2016 low.
Housing market  activity had moderated in Q4 after a post‑summer 
pickup.  Demand remained weaker in the secondary market and in 
London, notably for the most expensive properties.  Demand for new 
housing showed signs of softening nationally.Overall capacity utilisation  was broadly at normal rates, with only a 
slight skew towards greater than normal spare capacity.
Employment intentions  continued to point towards modest 
headcount growth.  Recruitment difficulties  continued to intensify, 
becoming more broadly based across sectors and skill levels.
Pay growth  had risen slightly.  A significant number of contacts 
expected pay awards to increase towards 2½%–3½% over the next 
year, from 2%–3% in 2017.  That uplift showed some signs of coming 
through for the minority making decisions in late 2017.
Input cost inflation had persisted due to higher global market prices 
for materials and ingredients.  Sterling depreciation continued to 
contribute to high imported finished goods  price inflation albeit 
down from rates seen in 2016 H2 and 2017 H1.
Manufacturers had been able to increase domestic output prices  
modestly, particularly in food processing, but price increases had 
typically been insufficient to restore margins  in domestic business.  
Business services margins remained under pressure.
Consumer goods price  inflation had edged up, driven by 
pass‑through of higher input costs, for example in food and drink.  
Consumer services price inflation  was steady.
Results from the Decision Maker Panel suggested that companies 
expected some weakening in sales and employment growth over the 
next year.  Brexit was expected to reduce sales in 2020, but was 
considered unlikely to influence wage growth.•	Recruitment difficulties were a growing concern for businesses as labour shortages had become more 
generalised across sectors and skill levels.
•	Despite this, pay growth had only increased a little, reflecting greater focus on non‑pay benefits, a limited 
number of pay reviews in Q4, and rising input costs.  Staff retention and recruitment, and to a lesser degree, 
inflation, were expected to push pay settlements moderately higher in 2018.
•	Consumption growth had eased slightly, reflecting squeezed real incomes and possibly some anticipation of 
Black Friday.  Purchases of big ticket items had eased, and mild weather earlier in the period had weighed on 
clothing sales.Agents’ summary of business conditions
and results from the Decision Maker Panel
2017 Q42 Agents’ summary of business conditions  2017 Q4
Consumer services and retail sales
Agents completed the majority of their intelligence gathering 
prior to Black Friday.  Retail sales values growth ( Chart 1 ) had 
slowed ahead of the Black Friday sales.  Several Agencies 
reported that consumers may have delayed spending on 
consumer durables in order to take advantage of discounts 
during the Black Friday week.  Mild weather had also weighed 
on demand for winter clothing.  Replacement cycles had 
lengthened for big‑ticket items (such as fitted kitchens and 
cars), suggesting that the squeeze on household real incomes 
continued.  Car manufacturers had significantly reduced sales 
targets for next year, in the expectation that current economic 
growth rates would continue in 2018.  Nominal demand 
growth for consumer services had remained steady.  Tourism 
and leisure demand had remained strong, but ancillary 
spending had started to soften, and expectations for 2018 had 
weakened slightly.  Consumer credit remained readily available 
at relatively low cost, but demand for such credit had 
weakened a little, in part reflecting lower demand for new cars 
and associated finance.
Business and financial services
Business services turnover growth had remained moderate 
overall.  There was some evidence that corporates had 
exercised greater caution in their spending on marketing, travel 
and hospitality, in response to cost pressures and a more 
challenging business environment.  Some firms linked to the 
commercial real estate sector, such as property consultants 
and architects, also reported a softening in demand.  However, 
demand for a variety of IT services remained robust, partly to 
adopt new technology but also to drive efficiency gains.  And 
some transport and logistics services firms had benefited from 
increased UK exports.  Finance and insurance companies had 
reported modest growth in activity, while advisory work for 
accountants and lawyers had been strong.
Services exports values growth had remained steady, helped 
by the past fall in the sterling exchange rate.  Overseas tourism visitor numbers and related spending had risen strongly since 
sterling had begun falling, although annual growth rates had 
probably peaked.  Demand from overseas students for higher 
education in the United Kingdom had also started to slow.  
Professional services firms across law, accountancy and 
consultancy reported robust demand for advice related to 
acquisition of UK assets, or to the establishment of 
UK operations by EU clients to retain market access.  
Overseas activity had edged up from a low base for domestic 
oil and gas companies.
Production
Domestic manufacturing output ( Chart 2 ) had continued to 
grow relatively strongly.  The past fall in sterling had helped 
manufacturers facing overseas competition to grow domestic 
market share, and to raise output for those in the supply chain 
of exporters.  Although still limited, an increasing number of 
producers had also gained from some reshoring of activity, for 
example in the food and construction material sectors.  
Strength in construction sector activity had been supporting 
growth in output of building materials and components, but 
was expected to ease as construction activity started to 
moderate.  Capital equipment manufacturers and supply 
chains had benefited from increased demand from the 
aerospace, nuclear, renewables and defence sectors, and there 
was continued growth in chemicals and pharmaceuticals.  
Food and drink sector volumes had continued to increase 
solidly, although non‑food consumer‑facing manufacturers 
had been affected by weaker household spending.  Suppliers to 
the oil and gas sector continued to report moderately 
improved demand, but many had also diversified to seek 
growth.
Growth in goods exports had strengthened further to a robust 
pace.  An improving global economic outlook continued to 
support UK exports, notably in Europe, but also in the 
United States and Far East.  Existing exporters had also 
become more willing to step into new markets such as +
–Three months on the same period a year earlier
3210123
2006 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17Scores
Consumer services turnoverRetail sales values  Chart 1  Retail sales values and consumer services 
turnover
+
–
5432101234
Manufacturing (export)
Manufacturing (domestic)Three months on the same period a year earlier
2006 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17ScoresChart 2  Domestic manufacturing output and 
manufacturing exports Agents’ summary of business conditions   2017 Q4 3
Australia and India.  Export demand strength was relatively 
widespread across sectors such as construction materials, 
automotive and chemicals.  But some exporters were taking 
the benefit of sterling’s depreciation in higher profit margins, 
rather than cutting foreign currency prices to generate volume 
growth.  And there were fewer examples of domestically 
focused businesses considering exports for the first time than 
might have been expected, given the fall in sterling.  In 
addition, some EU clients had started to switch from UK to 
EU suppliers where contract expiry dates spanned 2019 and 
beyond.
Construction
Construction output growth had slowed recently ( Chart 3 ). 
Housebuilding remained the strongest sector but growth rates 
had eased, reflecting continuing constraints such as planning, 
land availability and skills.  Increased risk aversion in the 
private sector, reflecting greater uncertainty, and delays to 
major projects had weighed on activity across commercial and 
infrastructure projects.  Slowing demand and escalating costs 
were raising pressure on margins, and there was some concern 
about near ‑term prospects for the sector.
Investment
Investment intentions remained modest.  Some manufacturers 
were deferring or scaling back investment plans due to 
uncertainty about future trading arrangements with the 
European Union, and a minority of contacts were diverting 
some investment overseas.  Some companies had 
strengthened their investment plans due to increased product 
demand, but for others capital spending had risen due to 
higher import costs for plant and materials.  Investment in 
service sectors remained steady.  Some investment had 
focused on maintaining the customer experience to remain 
competitive.  But elsewhere, for example in car dealerships, 
investment was being scaled back due to the anticipation of 
lower demand.Corporate financing conditions
Banks continued to report slower growth in net business 
lending in line with economic activity.  Lending was mostly to 
fund working capital and acquisitions rather than capacity 
expansion.  But many firms remained reluctant to increase 
gearing, preferring to use cash flow.  Competition among the 
banks for good quality credits remained intense and price 
driven, with limited changes to terms.  Banks’ risk appetite for 
lending to the consumer‑facing sector had fallen slightly.  Risk 
appetite remained limited for commercial property lending for 
new development, although overseas funds were willing to 
lend for UK property developments.  Asset‑backed finance 
remained readily available at competitive rates.
Property markets
Commercial real estate
Domestic and foreign investor demand for UK commercial real 
estate had stabilised, as sentiment recovered from its 
Summer 2016 low.  In aggregate, there was modest excess 
investor demand, and values had increased slightly.  This was 
underpinned by continued high occupancy rates and flat to 
modestly rising rents, but the outlook appeared fragile.  
UK investor and occupier demand for logistic space remained 
strong nationally, reflecting the shift towards e‑commerce.  
But more broadly contacts reported a weakening in confidence 
and delays in decisions by most prospective tenants, notably in 
retail where some stores had been closed.  In the office sector, 
growth in demand remained steady.  This was set against a 
backdrop of scant new prime office stock across all major 
UK cities, supporting valuations and rents.  In London, there 
continued to be modest excess supply:  investor sentiment had 
marginally weakened and occupier demand remained subdued.  
On the occupier side, some contacts suggested that London 
was in the early stages of a downturn.
Housing market
Housing market activity had moderated in Q4 after a 
post‑summer pickup.  Demand remained weaker in the 
secondary than primary market, though modest price inflation 
persisted in some areas due to weak supply.  The London 
market remained weak;  stretched affordability was leading 
many would‑be purchasers to rent.  Prices of the most 
expensive properties were being reduced significantly in order 
to sell stock that had been on the market for some time.  
New‑build sales remained strong nationally, underpinned by 
the Help to Buy scheme, but there had also been some signs of 
a softening in demand for new houses, as evidenced by greater 
use of incentives.  The rental market had remained steady;  
rents had grown modestly, partly due to a marginal reduction 
in supply as some smaller landlords continued to exit.+
–
4321012345Three months on the same period a year earlier
2006 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17ScoreChart 3  Construction output4 Agents’ summary of business conditions  2017 Q4
Residential mortgage availability had remained reasonable, 
and keen competition for the strongest credits was expected 
to keep pricing low.  There had been an increase in mortgages 
with terms over 30 years to enable applicants to meet 
affordability requirements.  Few contacts anticipated much 
impact on mortgage demand from the increase in Bank Rate.  
Lenders typically reported strong demand, especially for 
fixed‑rate products, much of it driven by remortgaging as 
borrowers had sought to lock‑in low rates in anticipation of 
further interest rate rises.
Capacity utilisation
Capacity utilisation was broadly around normal, with a slight 
skew towards greater than normal spare capacity, other than in 
the construction sector, where contacts reported some 
tightness in capacity.  Labour availability was cited as the most 
likely factor that would inhibit contacts’ ability to meet 
growth, as covered in the Agents’ survey in Box 1 on page 5.
Employment and pay
Employment intentions pointed towards modest headcount 
growth, reflecting higher activity in manufacturing (including 
exports) and business services.  Marginally negative intentions 
within consumer services indicated a rationalisation of labour 
in retail in response to the impact of the National Living Wage 
on labour costs, and a continued shift towards online sales.  In 
the majority of cases, employee numbers were growing more 
slowly than output as rising costs brought the need for 
productivity improvements into greater focus.  For a small but 
growing number of contacts, headcount growth had become 
constrained by skill shortages.
Recruitment difficulties had continued to intensify ( Chart 4 ), 
becoming more broadly based across sectors and skill levels.  
And while less skilled posts were generally easier to fill than 
skilled ones, this too had tightened for some contacts, notably 
those that relied heavily on seasonal workers (for example in 
horticulture and agriculture), mostly from the European Union.  
Such individuals had become less inclined to travel to the 
United Kingdom due to Brexit uncertainty and the negative 
impact of sterling’s depreciation on pay when translated into 
their home currency.
There had been limited upward movement in pay settlements 
(Chart 5 ).  But a significant number of contacts expected pay 
awards to edge up a little towards 2½%–3½% over the next 
year, from 2%–3% in 2017.  That uplift showed some signs of 
coming through for the minority making decisions in late 2017.  
The National Living Wage continued to exert upward pressure 
on labour costs in consumer services.  And, although there 
were few inflation‑linked pay rises in place outside unionised 
workforces, CPI was cited more often by contacts as a potential source of upward pay pressure.  There had been a 
small number of reports of companies increasing EU workers’ 
wages partly to offset the impact of weaker sterling on 
repatriated pay, but contacts were more likely to have 
enhanced non‑pay benefits, such as subsidised 
accommodation.
Pricing
Supply chain pricing
Input cost increases had persisted due to higher global market 
prices for materials and ingredients.  Sterling depreciation had 
continued to contribute to high imported finished goods price 
inflation albeit down from rates seen in 2016 H2 and 2017 H1.  
Manufacturers had generally been able to increase domestic 
output prices modestly, particularly in food processing, but 
price increases had typically been insufficient to restore 
margins in domestic business.  Some manufacturing exporters 
selling in foreign currency denominated prices had achieved a 
margin gain due to the weaker sterling exchange rate.  Business 
services pricing had continued to increase modestly overall, 
constrained by competitive markets.  And business services 
margins had remained under pressure as a result both of higher +
–
43210123
5In the past three months, ‘relative to normal’
2006 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17ScoreChart 4  Recruitment difficulties
+
–
2101234
Manufacturing ServicesThree months on the same period a year earlier
2006 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17ScoresChart 5  Total labour costs per employee Agents’ summary of business conditions   2017 Q4 5
Box 1
Survey:  capacity for growth
The Agents surveyed business contacts about their capacity for 
growth now and over the next twelve months.  The survey 
asked four questions:  ‘how fast did contacts expect their 
output, headcount and physical capacity to grow?’;  ‘what did 
this mean for productivity?’;  ‘how much spare capacity did 
contacts have if demand growth were to exceed 
assumptions?’;  and ‘what were the main factors constraining 
output?’.  A total of 362 businesses responded to the survey, 
accounting for just over 372,000 UK employees.  The survey 
results were weighted by employment unless otherwise stated 
below.
Overall, firms’ responses were skewed towards expectations 
for output growth ( Chart A  blue bars).  All sectors expected 
output to grow over the next twelve months, with the fastest 
growth expected in the manufacturing sector.  Contacts 
expected to grow their output without a proportionate 
increase in headcount, suggesting that they were factoring in 
some future growth in productivity.  The majority of contacts 
had also seen some growth in productivity over the past 
twelve months, and more than suggested by the official data.
In order to identify capacity excess or shortages, the Agents 
asked contacts about their ability to service demand were 
output to grow faster than expected.  The bulk of respondents 
(around two thirds) described their capacity to meet 
unanticipated demand as ‘normal’ ( Chart B ).  Contacts 
reporting capacity excesses and shortfalls were approximately 
in balance, with only a slight skew towards greater than 
normal spare capacity.  This was true of all sectors barring the 
construction sector, where there was less spare capacity than 
normal.Although the survey did not flag significant capacity 
constraints in aggregate, it did highlight labour availability as 
the most likely pinch‑point were contacts to need to add 
resources.  Chart C shows the pattern of free‑text responses to 
the question ‘What would be the pinch‑point, if any?’.  40% of 
respondents had no concerns to cite.  But the remainder 
appeared materially more concerned about labour market 
issues (magenta bars) than other possible pinch‑points 
(blue bars).  That is consistent with broader intelligence on 
recruitment difficulties — set out in the main text.  A number 
of contacts mentioned Brexit as a factor likely to constrain 
output in the future due to its effect on further labour market 
tightness and headwind for physical capacity investment.+
–
2010010203040506070
More able than
normal to meet
any extra
demandNo more or less
able than normal
to cope with any
extra demandLess able than
normal to meet
any extra
demandNet balancePercentage of respondentsChart B  Capacity for above-budget growth
0102030405060
Full
sampleManufacturing Construction Consumer
servicesBusiness
servicesOutput
EmploymentCapital
Net balanceChart A  Expected output, employment and capital 
growth over the next twelve months (sector balances 
unweighted)
(a) Chart shows the pattern of responses for the 60% of respondents who identified one or more 
production constraints.05 10 15 20 25 30Management
capacityBrexitLand/planningRegulationFinanceOtherLabour qualitySupply chainSpace/premisesMachinery and ITSpeciﬁc skillsGeneral labour
market tightnessPercentage of pinch-pointsChart C  Potential pinch-points identified by 
respondents(a)6 Agents’ summary of business conditions  2017 Q4
salaries to retain and recruit skilled professionals, plus the 
additional costs of National Living Wage related increases in 
outsourced services such as cleaning and security.
Consumer prices
Agents’ scores for consumer goods price inflation had edged 
up, driven by pass‑through of higher input costs, for example 
in food and drink.  Continuing pass‑through of sterling 
depreciation was expected to cause suppliers to raise prices 
again in 2018.  In some product markets, including groceries, 
higher commodity costs were the reason for some recent price rises.  In the car market, used car values were expected to fall 
owing to an emerging excess of supply.  Black Friday had 
remained a key feature of the retail calendar;  this year retailers 
had sought to lengthen the Black Friday period to a week or 
more, but early indications suggested that retailers had sought 
to protect margin by focusing discounts on specific stock lines.  
Consumer services price inflation had remained steady.  
Pass‑through of higher input and labour costs (led by rises in 
the National Living Wage) was reflected in prices increasing 
typically by 2%–3%. Agents’ summary of business conditions   2017 Q4 7
Box 2
Results from the Decision Maker Panel
Overview
To help understand the implications of the United Kingdom’s 
withdrawal from the European Union, the Bank established 
the Decision Maker Panel (DMP) in partnership with 
Stanford University and the University of Nottingham. (1)  The 
panel comprises a large number of Chief Financial Officers 
(CFOs), who can provide direct insight into businesses’ 
expectations.  The DMP complements the broader intelligence 
gathered from the Bank’s Agents’ contacts.
At the time of the November DMP survey, the panel contained 
around 2,500 executives, from small, medium and large 
UK companies operating in a broad range of industries.  
Typically 50%–60% of panel members respond to each 
monthly survey.  The panel is designed to be representative of 
the UK business population, excluding a small number of 
sectors such as finance.
Since the launch in August 2016, panel members have been 
regularly asked about their employment, investment, prices 
and sales.  Decision makers are asked to provide five scenarios 
for each variable:  from the worst case to the best case, and to 
specify how likely they think each scenario is. (2)  From this, it is 
possible to assess businesses’ expectations and measure 
uncertainty.  Participants are also asked special questions, 
which so far have mostly related to Brexit.  Aggregate‑level 
data from the DMP are available on the Bank’s website and are 
updated on a quarterly basis. (3)  This box summarises the latest 
results.
Business expectations
Chart A  summarises panel members’ expectations of key 
variables (dashed lines) and actual values (solid lines).  This 
shows that CFOs continue to expect some weakening in sales 
growth over the next year.  Panel members expect annual sales 
growth to slow to 3.7% by 2018 Q3 after nominal sales 
growth of 5.7% and 4.9% over the year to 2017 Q2 and Q3 
respectively.  Actual sales growth over the year to 2017 Q3 
was lower than expectations reported in 2016 Q3 (as shown 
by the dashed orange line on Chart A , which is above the solid 
orange line).
Employment growth has slowed over recent quarters too.  
However, it remained positive at around 2% for the year to 
2017 Q4 and was higher than expected a year ago (as shown 
by the solid green line versus the dashed green line on 
Chart A ).  But over the next year, the pace of employment 
growth is expected to remain lower than its present value.
DMP members reported that annual price inflation rose to 
3.1% in 2017 Q4 (as shown by the solid blue line on Chart A ).  That was close to what was expected by panel members a year 
ago.  Over the year to 2018 Q4, price inflation is expected to 
slow modestly to 2.6%.
Between August and October 2017, panel members were asked 
about wage growth for the first time. (4)  Chart B  shows that, 
(1) This project is supported by the Economic and Social Research Council grant 
number ES/P010385/1.
(2) For details on the methodology, see www.bankofengland.co.uk/quarterly‑
bulletin/2017/tracking‑the‑views‑of‑british‑businesses‑evidence‑from‑the‑dmp .  
All results are weighted.
(3) For aggregate data and details on questions asked to panel members, see  
www.bankofengland.co.uk/‑/media/boe/files/statistics/research‑datasets/
dmp‑results‑december ‑2017.xlsx .
(4) Questions about wages are only expected to be included in the survey on an 
occasional basis and not in every quarter.Sources:  DMP and Bank calculations.
(a) Questions about employment and prices refer to latest month.  Questions about sales refer 
to the last complete quarter.
(b) Data for year to 2017 Q3 and expectations for year to 2018 Q3 are based on data collected 
in November only.
(c) Data for year to 2017 Q4 and expectations for year to 2018 Q4 are based on data collected 
in November only.02468
Q3
2016 17 18Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4Employment(c)Nominal sales(b)
Prices(c)Percentage changes on a year earlierSolid lines:  past year
Dashed lines:  expectations for the next yearChart A  Realised and expected growth in employment, 
nominal sales and prices(a)
Sources:  DMP and Bank calculations.
(a) Data were collected between August and October and refer to those months.010203040Past year
Next yearPer cent in each range (past year) or average
probability in each range (next year)
Annual nominal wage growth (per cent)<0 0 to 11  to 22  to 33  to 44  to 5≥ 5Chart B  Distribution of nominal wage growth over the 
past year and expectations for next year(a)8 Agents’ summary of business conditions  2017 Q4
on average, respondents expected wages in their business to 
grow by 2.5% in the next twelve months, similar to the 2.6% 
reported for the past year.  The distribution of expected wage 
growth was also similar to that for the past year ( Chart B ).  
However, intelligence gathered by the Agency network since 
these wage questions were asked in the DMP has begun to 
provide evidence of some  limited upward movement in pay 
awards (as discussed in the main Agents’ summary).
Role of Brexit
Brexit could be one of the factors influencing wage growth.  To 
investigate this, panel members were asked to estimate how 
they think EU withdrawal is likely to affect wages in their 
business over the next year.  On average, respondents did not 
see Brexit as an important factor influencing wages.  Just over 
half of panel members thought that Brexit would have no 
material impact ( Chart C ).  Among the remainder there was a 
relatively even split between those firms thinking that Brexit 
would add or detract from wages.  Additional comments 
provided suggest that the most common reason for a positive 
effect was wages having to keep up with the higher cost of 
living.  A negative effect was linked with the higher cost of 
imported raw materials squeezing profits and reducing the 
funds available for pay increases.
Between August and October, companies were also asked how 
they expect Brexit to eventually impact on their sales in 2020.  
The average probability attached to Brexit reducing sales was 
45% (sum of the first two left‑hand bars in Chart D ), 
compared to 18% for a positive effect (sum of the last 
two right‑hand bars).  Overall the distribution was largely 
unchanged from when the same question was asked 
six months earlier, although there was a slight increase in the 
probability attached to a large negative effect.Views on the eventual impact of Brexit on sales vary by 
industry ( Chart E ).  The average probability of Brexit reducing 
sales in 2020 was highest in professional and administrative 
services, other services and wholesale and retail.  It was lowest 
in human health and accommodation and food.  The 
probability of Brexit reducing sales was also higher than 
average for firms who export to the European Union.
Sources:  DMP and Bank calculations.
(a) Data were collected between August and October.  Question:  ‘Could you say how the 
UK’s decision to vote ‘leave’ in the EU referendum is likely to influence your average wage 
growth per employee over the next year?’.Adding 1% or more
Adding less than 1%No material impact
Subtracting less than 1%
Subtracting 1% or more
53%
13%
13% 8%13%Chart C  Expected impact of Brexit on wages over the 
next year(a)Sources:  DMP and Bank calculations.
(a) Data collected between August and October.  Question:  ‘The Prime Minister has said that 
the UK government does ‘not seek membership of the Single Market.  Instead we seek the 
greatest possible access to it through a new, comprehensive, bold and ambitious Free Trade 
Agreement’.  How likely do you think it is that the eventual agreement will have the 
following effects, compared to what would have been the case had the UK remained a 
member of the EU?’.01020304050
Subtracting
≥10%Subtracting
<10%No impact Adding
<10%Adding
≥10%February to April 2017
August to October 2017Average probability (per cent)Chart D  Expected impact of Brexit on sales in 2020(a)
Sources:  DMP and Bank calculations.
(a) Net probability of Brexit reducing sales is defined as the probability of Brexit reducing sales 
less the probability of Brexit increasing sales.  Data were collected between August and 
October.  Question is the same as reported in the footnote to Chart D .01 02 03 04 0Professional and
administration
Other services
Wholesale and retail
Transport and
information
Total
Manufacturing
Construction
Real estate
Accommodation
and food
Human health
Average net probability of Brexit reducing sales (per cent)Chart E  Expected impact of Brexit on sales in 2020 by 
industry(a)