Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2017/2017-q2.pdf
Date: 2017-06-30

This publication is a summary of monthly reports compiled by the Bank of England’s Agents between late February 2017 and late May 2017.  
It generally makes comparisons with activity and prices a year earlier.  The report does not represent the Bank’s own views, nor does it 
represent the views of any particular company or region.  More information on the Bank’s Agencies can be found at  
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/agentssummary/default.aspx .Growth in retail sales values  was broadly unchanged, and 
consumer services  turnover growth continued to ease slightly.  
In light of the further increase in price inflation for retail goods, 
this suggested that annual sales growth in volume terms had 
continued to slow.
Business services  turnover had continued to increase 
moderately.  Contacts had reported robust growth for 
accountancy, legal, corporate finance and IT services.   
Growth in manufacturing  output had picked up, and the fall in 
sterling and a stronger world economy had led to a marked 
increase in export volume growth .
Construction  output had shown continued modest growth.
Investment intentions  had strengthened a little further, 
mostly reflecting planned investment in technology to 
improve efficiency.  However, heightened uncertainty 
remained a drag on some businesses’ willingness to invest. 
Bank credit availability  for corporates was generally 
accommodative.  There had been continued growth in SMEs’ 
and larger corporates’ use of alternative sources of funding.
Occupier demand for commercial real estate  had been broadly 
resilient, but with some pockets of weaker activity.  Investor 
demand growth and transaction volumes had continued to 
recover. Housing market  activity had been subdued in most parts of 
the United Kingdom, as demand weakened relative to supply.  
The mortgage market had remained competitive among both 
established and new lenders.
Capacity utilisation  had changed little, though there had been 
a small tightening in manufacturing. 
Employment intentions  indicated a modest increase in 
staffing over the coming six months.  Recruitment difficulties  
had increased, and were moderately above normal.  A survey 
highlighted tightened labour market conditions, in particular 
for key skills (see Box 2 on page 5). 
Growth in labour costs  per employee had remained subdued. 
Settlements continued to be clustered around 2% to 2.5%.
Price inflation for materials costs  and imported finished 
goods was stable but remained elevated.  Pass-through effects 
on material cost inflation may have passed their peak.
Manufacturing output price inflation  had increased a little 
further, though contacts struggled to achieve full pass-through 
of input cost inflation.  Business services price inflation  had 
remained subdued. 
Consumer goods price inflation  had risen further as the fall in 
sterling passed through to retail prices.  Consumer services 
price inflation  had been steady.•	Moderate underlying growth in activity had continued overall.  Annual sales growth in volume terms had 
continued to slow.  Export volume growth had continued to increase, supported by the lower sterling exchange 
rate and stronger world growth.
•	Investment intentions had strengthened a little further, including investment in technology and to support 
increased export demand.  However, heightened uncertainty remained a drag on some businesses’ willingness to 
invest.
•	The direct impact of the fall in sterling on cost inflation for manufacturers’ raw materials had eased, but 
increased costs continued to pass through supply chains into retail prices.Agents’ summary of business conditions
2017 Q22 Agents’ summary of business conditions  2017 Q2
Consumer services and retail sales 
Growth in retail sales values was broadly unchanged ( Chart 1 ). 
In light of the further increase in price inflation for retail goods, 
this suggested that annual sales growth in volume terms had 
continued to slow.  Higher price inflation in areas such as food 
had also squeezed consumers’ ability to fund discretionary 
big-ticket purchases such as homeware.
Growth in consumer services spending had continued to ease 
slightly ( Chart 1 ).  This was largely attributed to 
‘belt -tightening’ by consumers, with growth in spending on 
restaurants and leisure activities in particular slowing. 
Business and financial services
Business services had continued to grow at a moderate pace 
(Chart 2 ), albeit activity had been patchy across sub-sectors.  
Generally strong transactional activity (including mergers and 
acquisitions) was driving growth for contacts in accountancy, 
legal and corporate finance.  IT companies had reported robust 
demand for digital and cyber security services.  Strong price 
competition had, however, continued to hold back turnover 
growth in some commoditised services (for example audit).  
And there were some indications of businesses reducing 
discretionary spending such as advertising and corporate 
hospitality.  Services exports growth had continued at a steady 
pace, boosted by stronger underlying global demand and the 
fall in the exchange rate.
Production
There had been a further pickup in domestic manufacturing 
output growth ( Chart 3 ).  Growth was strongest for companies 
in the pharmaceutical, aerospace, automotive and 
construction-related sectors.  A very modest recovery in 
output for those in the oil and gas supply chain was in train, on 
the back of a more stable outlook for the sector.  Across 
different sectors a small number of contacts were benefiting 
from import substitution on the back of the depreciation in 
sterling.Goods export volume growth had increased further ( Chart 3 ), 
with a broader range of sectors (including automotive and 
pharmaceuticals) reporting increasing export volumes than in 
previous periods.  This increase had been supported by the fall 
in the exchange rate and by strengthened demand in key 
international markets.
Construction
Construction output had shown continued modest growth. 
Housebuilding had again made the most significant 
contribution to growth, including from the private rental 
sector and social housing.  Some contacts reported supply 
constraints to future growth, including planning requirements 
and shortage of materials and skilled labour.  Commercial 
development was strongest for industrial, logistics and some 
prime city office space, and comparatively less strong in retail.  
In line with previous reports, larger infrastructure projects were 
expected to provide strong support in the medium term.
Investment
Investment intentions had strengthened a little further 
(Chart 4 ).  Investment in technology to drive efficiencies was 
prevalent across most sectors.  And a few manufacturing 
exporters were expanding capacity on the back of improving 3210123
2006 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17Scores Three months on the same period a year earlier
Consumer services turnoverRetail sales values
+
–Chart 1  Retail sales values and consumer services 
turnover
432101234
2006 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 
 Professional and 
  ﬁnancial services  
Other servicesScores 
+
–Three months on the same period a year earlierChart 2  Professional and financial services and other 
services turnover 
5432101234
2006 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 1617Manufacturing (export) 
Manufacturing (domestic)Scores Three months on the same period a year earlier
+
–Chart 3  Manufacturing output — domestic and exports Agents’ summary of business conditions   2017 Q2 3
demand.  In services, there were several reports of business 
services companies investing in modernising offices, in part to 
aid recruitment and retention of staff.  Spending had also 
remained robust within leisure industries.  Conversely, some 
contacts remained cautious around investment, particularly 
firms heavily exposed to domestic consumer demand or trade 
with the European Union.Corporate financing conditions
Credit conditions had remained accommodative overall — 
competition between lenders on price and covenants for large 
firms had been intense.  However, some smaller companies 
reported greater difficulty in gaining access to banks’ 
relationship managers in recent months.  Over the past 
quarter, there had been some reports of banks increasing 
interest rates on loans to sectors they perceived to be more 
vulnerable, such as retail, construction and hospitality.
For non-bank finance, provision of asset finance, 
crowd-funding and peer-to-peer lending for SMEs had 
continued to increase, and larger corporates had been able to 
access long-term debt funding from pension funds and 
insurance companies.  There had also been continuing growth 
in funding from venture capital, business angels, 
high-net -worth individuals and private equity investors.  
Some contacts expressed concern around the prospects for 
replacing European Investment Bank funding following the 
United Kingdom’s departure from the European Union.
On the demand side, growth in credit demand had remained 
steady but muted, reflecting some firms’ low appetite for 
gearing.Box 1
Recent developments in UK car sales
One recent area of focus for the Agents has been 
developments in car sales;  this box provides a brief overview 
of key developments.
New car sales have fluctuated in recent months:  sales eased 
over 2016, then spiked higher in 2017 Q1 — the most 
commonly cited factor was consumers bringing forward 
purchases ahead of Vehicle Excise Duty tax changes.  Sales 
have fallen subsequently.  Looking through those short-run 
effects, contacts have revised down their previous projections 
for 2017, given reports that UK demand was weakening.  
Contacts reported a range of potential headwinds, including 
the slowdown in real pay growth, upward pressure on new car 
prices arising from sterling’s depreciation and, for high-volume 
manufacturers, weaker second-hand car residual values, which 
had raised the costs of depreciation and so car finance.  
Demand for premium cars had remained relatively more 
buoyant than for higher -volume manufacturers.
In terms of pricing, the UK market for car sales was reported to 
be highly competitive, and so manufacturers had not sought 
to pass through the effect of sterling’s depreciation fully into final car prices.  Instead, producers had typically made a series 
of smaller increases, estimated to total around 4% to 5% over 
the past twelve months.  Manufacturers’ profitability on UK car 
sales had fallen, and further gradual price rises were expected 
over the next few years as they sought to rebuild margins.  In 
contrast, profitability on global sales had increased alongside a 
stronger world economy.
Increases in the sterling cost of new cars and decreases in the 
expected future residual values of many used cars had put 
some upward pressure on monthly finance payments on 
Personal Contract Purchase (PCP) plans (where consumers pay 
a deposit and make monthly finance payments for a fixed 
period, and have the option to buy the car outright at the end 
of that period).  Car companies had sought to offset this in a 
number of ways, including increasing the length of PCP 
contracts.  In addition, there had been an increase in the 
availability of Personal Contract Hire plans (long-term rental 
agreements where the customer does not have the option to 
buy the car), which tend to have slightly lower monthly 
payments.
Over the coming twelve months
5432101234
2006 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17Scores
Services 
Manufacturing +
–Chart 4  Investment intentions4 Agents’ summary of business conditions  2017 Q2
Property markets
Commercial real estate
Contacts reported a mixed picture on occupier demand for 
UK commercial property, with rental values increasing further 
for warehouses, but falling for some retail space.  Investor 
demand growth and sales transaction volumes had continued 
to recover, partly reflecting increased appetite among foreign 
investors following the fall in the exchange rate.  Conversely, 
some contacts reported that a lack of visibility around the 
United Kingdom’s future trading arrangements was weighing 
on investor appetite in the short term.  Investor demand was 
shifting away from London towards other major UK cities, 
reflecting a search for yield.
Housing market
Activity in the housing market had been subdued in most parts 
of the United Kingdom, in line with previous updates.  Demand 
had weakened recently relative to supply, bringing the market 
closer to balance.  House builders remained positive and 
continued to increase output, though some contacts indicated 
that they may reassess development plans if weakness in the 
wider market persisted.  The prime London market remained 
depressed, and there were signs that weaker sentiment was 
spreading to surrounding areas. 
The mortgage market remained competitive among both 
established and new lenders, with high overall availability and 
low lending rates.  More products were available at higher 
loan-to-value ratios, but availability of lending remained 
constrained for borrowers with impaired credit histories.  
Mortgage lending for buy to let had remained subdued, partly 
reflecting recent taxation and policy changes.  Pressure on 
margins was forcing many small lenders to focus more on 
niche segments of the market such as shared ownership, older 
borrowers and self-build.  Arrears and repossessions remained 
very low.
Capacity utilisation
Capacity utilisation had changed little.  There had been a small 
tightening in manufacturing, with exporters, the automotive 
supply chain and producers of construction-related products 
continuing to report the most material constraints.  Generally 
though, capacity was not constraining growth.
In services, the picture was mixed.  Utilisation of fixed assets 
(such as office, warehousing and distribution space) was 
highest in business services, and some capacity shortages were 
reported.  Some IT and professional services firms also 
reported skills shortages.  Conversely, in consumer services, 
the growth in hotel and restaurant capacity was outpacing the 
growth in demand, and there also remained an excess of 
in-store retail space.Employment and pay
Employment intention scores ( Chart 5 ) indicated a modest 
increase in headcount.  Employment intentions among 
manufacturers had edged up further, reflecting strengthening 
output growth among exporters in particular — though firms 
were primarily pursuing productivity improvements and 
efficiency gains to meet expected demand growth, to a greater 
extent than expanding headcount.  In consumer services, firms’ 
hiring to support new premises was broadly offset by 
rationalisation to mitigate higher labour costs associated with 
the National Living Wage, in line with previous updates.
A number of firms across sectors were taking on more 
apprentices and trainees to address current or future 
recruitment difficulties.  In some cases this was encouraged by 
the Apprenticeship Levy.
Recruitment difficulties had picked up slightly since the start of 
the year as the labour market continued to tighten (see Box 2 
on page 5).  Skills shortages were most common in 
construction, IT, engineering, professional services and health 
care, and in a few cases this was constraining employment 
growth.
There was little evidence of greater numbers of existing 
EU migrants leaving the United Kingdom, however there were 
more reports of a reduction in inflows of new labour from 
continental Europe.  Contacts believed that this reflected 
uncertainty about their status following the United Kingdom’s 
departure from the European Union, and the negative impact 
of the lower exchange rate. 
Growth in total labour costs had remained subdued across 
sectors, despite the tightening labour market.  The majority of 
pay settlements remained clustered around 2% to 2.5%.  Pay 
growth had edged up slightly in manufacturing, due to higher 
overtime payments and productivity bonuses in response to 
robust output growth, especially for exporters. 5432101234
2006 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17Scores 
Business services 
Manufacturing Consumer services Over the coming six months
+
–Chart 5  Employment intentions Agents’ summary of business conditions   2017 Q2 5
Box 2
Survey:  Labour market tightness
During April and May, the Bank’s Agents undertook a survey of 
business contacts to gauge whether labour markets were 
tightening, and to identify the tactical responses businesses 
were making to any staffing challenges.  Over 400 companies 
responded to the survey.  
Nearly 40% of businesses surveyed had seen employment rise 
over the past twelve months, while only 15% had reduced 
employment ( Chart A ).  A smaller but still positive net balance 
of companies expected to increase staff numbers over the next 
twelve months.  Across sectors, reports of growth in headcount 
were most common among construction and business services 
contacts and least common among consumer services firms.
Survey responses indicate increasing recruitment and retention 
difficulties — most acutely for key skills, but with increased 
challenges for all positions ( Chart B ).
58% of respondents said they made significant use of non-UK 
EU national employees.  For those firms, responses showed 
that availability of these employees had tightened on balance 
over the past twelve months.  However, it did not appear to 
have done so sufficiently to change these respondents’ views 
of overall labour market tightness:  responses to questions on 
overall labour market tightness were similar whether 
respondents made significant use of non-UK EU nationals or 
not. Respondents were also asked whether they had made changes 
as a result of any recruitment/retention challenges they faced.  
A small majority had made changes;  of those, the most 
common response was to increase the pay offered to new 
recruits or to key existing personnel ( Chart C ).  Such responses 
were common across all sectors, and were most frequently 
cited in construction.  By contrast, broad-based increases in 
pay were rarely applied as a response to labour market 
tightness.Past twelve months
Next twelve months
0102030405060
Fall by 
>5%Fall by 
>1% to 5%Around
the same 
+/-1%Rise by 
>1% to 5%Rise by 
>5%Net 
balancePercentage of respondentsChart A   Change in employment over the past year and 
next year(a) 
(a) Results are weighted by employment within respondents’ sector and by sectoral shares of 
national employment.0102030405060
Much 
easierSlightly 
easierUnchanged Slightly 
harderMuch 
harderNet 
balancePercentage of respondents
All positionsKey personnelChart B   Change in recruitment and retention difficulties 
over the past twelve months  
01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 0Increase pay for new recruits
or for key existing staff
Increase training of staff/
apprenticeship programmes
Increase spending on recruitment
(eg with agencies)
Increase capital spending/
automation
Keep positions vacant for longer
Increase pay award for all existing 
staff (due to hiring difﬁculties)
Increase use of labour from abroad
Compromise on skill requirements
Limit expansion plans/
turn business away
Percentage of ﬁrms making changesImprove non-pay termsChart C   Changes made as a result of recruitment/
retention challenges  — by those making any changes6 Agents’ summary of business conditions  2017 Q2
Pricing
Supply chain pricing
Inflation of raw materials costs ( Chart 6 ) had stabilised.  
Pass-through of the effects of previous sterling depreciation to 
cost inflation for manufacturers’ raw materials appeared to 
have passed its peak, but the costs of construction materials 
were reportedly still rising.  Manufacturers had reported 
further cost increases as suppliers of intermediate goods, 
including packaging, passed through their own cost inflation.Manufacturers’ output price inflation had picked up slightly.  In 
many cases, though, contacts had continued to struggle to 
achieve full pass-through of input cost inflation, particularly 
where their customers were larger retailers with significant 
purchasing power.  This was squeezing profit margins on 
domestic sales.  Growth in business to business prices 
remained subdued.
Consumer prices
Inflation in retail goods prices had picked up further, as the 
depreciation of sterling continued to pass through to retail 
prices.  Patterns of pass-through had been mixed;  in groceries 
this had begun to pick up but had been slower than expected 
due to competition and compressed margins along the entire 
supply chain.  Prices for imported clothing had been subject to 
small increases, with prices expected to continue increasing 
until well into next year.  List prices for new cars were rising in 
small increments.  Inflation in retail services prices had been 
steady.  The announced price rises in gas and electricity were 
starting to affect household bills.
321012345
2006 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17Scores Three months on the same period a year earlier
Imported ﬁnished
  goods prices 
Materials costs  +
–Chart 6  Material costs and imported finished goods 
prices 