Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2017/2017-q1.pdf
Date: 2017-03-31

Growth in the value of consumer spending  had remained 
moderate.  But retail sales volumes growth had eased.  A 
survey pointed to a slowdown in consumer demand growth in 
the year ahead (see Box 1 on page 4).  That was concentrated 
in goods rather than services.
Business services  turnover had grown moderately.  Some 
contacts in the sector remained cautious about longer-term 
prospects.  
Growth in manufacturing  output remained modest.  Some 
suppliers had benefited from increased domestic sourcing.  
The fall in sterling and a stronger world economy had led to  
a marked rise in export volume growth .
Construction  output growth had changed little.
Investment intentions  had picked up.  That reflected 
continued steady demand growth and some reduction in 
uncertainty about economic prospects, particularly in the  
near term.  A lack of visibility around the United Kingdom’s 
future trading arrangements continued to weigh on  
longer-term investment plans for some contacts.
Bank credit availability  had remained stable.  There had been 
a small pickup in the demand for loans.  A targeted survey of 
companies suggested little change in the availability or cost of 
foreign exchange hedging products since the EU referendum 
(Box 2 on page 5).
Occupier demand for commercial real estate  had remained 
resilient overall.  That had driven some modest rental growth.  But downward pressure was reported on rents on some 
properties in the City of London.  
Housing market  activity had been little changed.  There were 
signs of gently rising demand for housing, outstripping the 
number of properties available for sale overall.  Strong 
competition was reported in mortgage lending.
Capacity utilisation  had risen in manufacturing alongside 
increased demand, and to a lesser extent in services.  Slack in 
companies was close to normal overall.
Employment intentions  pointed to very slight growth in 
staffing over the coming six months.  Recruitment difficulties  
had increased and were moderately above normal.   
Growth in labour costs  per employee had remained subdued.  
Settlements were clustered around 2% to 2½%.
Materials costs  and imported finished goods  price inflation 
had risen further.  That was largely due to the fall in sterling.
Manufacturing output price inflation  had risen sharply.  
Higher costs were being passed on to prices.  Business services 
price inflation had edged higher, but it remained moderate. 
Consumer goods price inflation  had picked up markedly 
following the fall in sterling.  Consumer services price 
inflation  had edged up.  That partly reflected continued  
steady demand growth.• Moderate rates of activity growth had continued overall.  Retail sales volumes growth had eased.  It was 
expected to slow further during the year ahead as the fall in sterling fed through to higher prices, reducing 
households’ purchasing power.  In contrast, export volume growth had picked up.  That was due to the fall in 
sterling and stronger world growth.
• Investment intentions had picked up, pointing to modest growth in spending in the year ahead.  That reflected 
continued moderate demand growth and less uncertainty about economic prospects, particularly in the near 
term.  But a lack of visibility of the United Kingdom’s future trading arrangements was weighing on longer-term 
plans for some contacts.
• The fall in sterling was being passed through into higher manufacturing output and consumer goods price 
inflation.  Business and consumer services price inflation had edged higher.
This publication is a summary of economic reports compiled by the Bank of England’s Agents between late November 2016 and late 
February 2017.  It generally makes comparisons with activity and prices a year earlier.  The report does not represent the Bank’s own views, 
nor does it represent the views of any particular company or region.  More information on the Bank’s Agencies can be found at  
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/agentssummary/default.aspx .Agents’ summary of business conditions
2017 Q12 Agents’ summary of business conditions  2017 Q1
Consumer services and retail sales 
Retail sales values growth had slowed slightly ( Chart 1 ).  And 
higher price inflation implied a larger easing in volumes 
growth.  In contrast, private new car demand growth — and 
growth in the associated consumer finance — had risen.  That 
perhaps reflected some consumers bringing forward purchases, 
ahead of vehicle tax changes.  Demand growth for consumer 
services had been little changed.  Restaurants, bars, hotels and 
tour operators had reported fairly robust growth.  The weaker 
pound had boosted overseas tourist numbers and spending.  It 
had also encouraged greater domestic tourism.  An Agents’ 
survey on consumer demand pointed to slowing consumption 
growth over the year ahead (see Box 1 on page 4).  That 
reflected reduced consumer purchasing power, as the fall in 
the exchange rate fed through to higher prices.  Consumer 
credit growth was expected to slow alongside weaker spending 
growth.  Consumer credit arrears were reported to be very low.
Business and financial services
Business services turnover had grown moderately overall, at a 
broadly similar pace to 2016 Q4 ( Chart 2 ).  But firms remained 
cautious about business prospects.  A range of financial 
services companies reported strong growth.  An improving 
pipeline of infrastructure investment projects was boosting 
growth for architects and consulting engineers.  Demand for IT 
services was especially buoyant.  That reflected upgrades to 
software and hardware, growing concern about cyber security 
issues and increased use of cloud-based services.  Sales growth 
was mixed among law firms and advertisers.  Cost cutting by 
some firms was adversely affecting corporate spending on 
hotels and conferencing.  Business service exports had been 
boosted by a pickup of global demand growth and the fall in 
sterling.  The response had been muted in some sectors 
though, such as engineering and IT services, where foreign 
demand was less responsive to lower prices.  
Production
Manufacturing output growth for the domestic market had 
risen a little further ( Chart 3 ).  Demand growth was strongest 
in the automotive, aerospace, industrial chemicals, pharmaceuticals and construction products subsectors.  A 
large proportion of that reflected activity in export supply 
chains.  Goods export volumes growth had increased further 
(Chart 3 ).  That reflected the fall in sterling and stronger world 
demand growth.  The pickup continued to broaden across 
subsectors.  Domestically, many manufacturers were 
benefiting from increased price competitiveness compared 
with overseas firms.  Some firms reported increased domestic 
sourcing, especially in the food and drink sector.  Suppliers into 
the oil and gas sector continued to see weak demand.  
Construction
Growth in construction output had remained modest.  There 
was steady demand growth for construction work from 
utilities.  The Government’s commitment to major 
infrastructure projects was expected to generate more work as 
those came on stream.  However, some smaller-scale projects 
were restrained by tight local authority budgets.  There was 
some modest rise in commercial development activity.  
Residential construction output had continued to grow overall.  
That was less the case for social housing than for private 
housebuilders.  Looking ahead, there were some fears that 
further housebuilding growth could be capacity constrained, 
notably by skills shortages.  +
–
3210123
2006 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17Consumer services turnoverRetail sales valuesScores Three months on the same period a year earlierChart 1  Retail sales values and consumer services turnover432101234
2006 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17Scores 
Professional and 
  ﬁnancial services 
Other servicesThree months on the same period a year earlier
+
–Chart 2  Professional and financial services and other 
services turnover
5432101234
2006 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17Scores 
Manufacturing (export) 
Manufacturing (domestic)+
–Three months on the same period a year earlierChart 3  Manufacturing output — domestic and exports Agents’ summary of business conditions   2017 Q1 3
Investment
Investment intentions had edged higher.  They pointed to 
modest growth in spending over the next year.  The pickup 
reflected stronger demand and an easing in uncertainty around 
the likely returns of projects, particularly shorter-term plans 
(Chart 4 ).  Firms had been going ahead with plans designed to 
mitigate increased energy, labour and materials costs.  That 
typically entailed investment in technologies such as 
renewables, robotics, or enhanced business systems.  Increased 
R&D spending on new products was seen as vital for many 
firms.  And there were some signs of investment in additional 
capacity in automotive, defence, food and drink, and 
construction equipment.  Resilient consumer demand and  
UK tourism growth was supporting retail and leisure 
refurbishment projects.  The shift to e-commerce was 
encouraging investment in online capacity and logistics.   
The low cost of credit was seen as helpful but the sterling  
cost of some equipment had risen.  A lack of visibility of the 
United Kingdom’s future trading arrangements continued to 
weigh on longer-term plans for some contacts.
Corporate financing conditions
Credit availability had generally remained higher than normal.  
There was robust competition between banks.  This was 
leading to pressure to ease non-price terms and conditions.  
However, banks’ credit assessments were reported to be more 
rigorous than before the financial crisis.  Banks were said to be 
reluctant to fund management buyouts by smaller firms.  
Funding choices were reported to be more limited for some 
groups, including smaller developers and construction 
companies.  Challenger banks were increasingly active in these 
sectors.  Non-bank finance, such as peer-to-peer funding, had 
become a major part of some small and medium-sized 
enterprises’ (SMEs’) funding.  Private equity firms and debt 
funds had continued to provide funds for larger corporate 
finance deals.  They were willing to lend at higher gearing than 
banks.  Lenders reported some rise in demand for loans.  That reflected continued activity growth and slightly higher 
business investment intentions.  Invoice and asset finance were 
reported to be growing strongly by some contacts.  A targeted 
survey on companies’ access to foreign exchange hedging 
products, focusing on SMEs, reported little change either in 
their ability to access those products or the costs of doing so, 
since the EU referendum.  
Property markets
Commercial real estate
Occupier demand for commercial property was mostly 
resilient.  There was a shortage of modern industrial and 
logistics space.  Demand was strongest for offices in most 
major city centres;  and also for prime retail space, particularly 
in large regional centres.  That was supporting some rental 
growth for such properties.  But occupier demand was weaker 
elsewhere.  In the City of London, some rents had fallen as 
additional space had come on stream against a backdrop of 
heightened business uncertainty.  Investor demand continued 
to be supported by the low exchange rate, and sustained 
demand from UK funds, local authorities, and individual 
investors looking for yield.  However, some caution was 
evident from a focus towards prime property assets, and away 
from assets perceived as higher risk. 
 
Housing market
Housing market activity had been little changed.  There were 
signs of gently rising demand for housing, outstripping the 
number of properties available for sale overall.  Some estate 
agents noted the number of properties on their books was less 
than half pre-crisis norms.  Modest excess demand was 
supporting low-level house price inflation.  There was 
significant variation, however, even within localities.  In 
London, house price inflation had eased significantly and 
properties were taking longer to sell.  More generally, activity 
was relatively stronger in lower price segments.  This was 
especially the case among first-time buyers, and in new-build.  
But activity was depressed for houses over £1 million.  
Contacts reported that the mortgage market remained highly 
competitive, with a further increase in credit availability, 
including at higher LTVs.  Lending activity was being sustained 
by higher levels of remortgaging as borrowers looked to lock in 
low rates.  New buy-to-let lending had slowed, due to weaker 
demand and a tightening of underwriting conditions by some 
lenders.
Capacity utilisation
Capacity utilisation had increased slightly due to rising 
demand.  In manufacturing, constraints were greatest in 
automotive and construction product supply chains and 
among exporters.  Labour was more often cited as a constraint 5432101234
2006 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17Scores 
Services 
Manufacturing Over the coming twel ve months
+
–Chart 4  Investment intentions4 Agents’ summary of business conditions  2017 Q1
Box 1
Agents’ survey on consumer demand
 
The Agents surveyed business contacts about changes to 
consumer spending over the past twelve months and their 
expectations for the year ahead.  The survey also asked firms 
about how a range of factors were expected to affect 
consumer demand and about their pricing intentions for the 
coming year.  A total of 275 businesses responded to the 
survey, with a combined turnover of £102 billion.  The survey 
results were weighted by turnover. 
Firms had seen strong growth in volumes over the past year, 
but expected a slowdown in growth in the year ahead  
(Chart A ).  That slowing was entirely accounted for by firms 
selling consumer goods ( Chart B ).  In contrast, consumer 
services firms (including for example hotels, restaurants and 
transport operators) overall expected no change in volumes 
growth. 
The main factors expected to reduce consumer demand 
growth were expected changes in consumers’ real disposable 
incomes and changes in firms’ own pricing — both linked to 
the impact of the weaker pound ( Chart C ).  A fall in consumer 
confidence was also thought likely to be a drag on growth.  
Several factors were expected to push up modestly on 
demand, the most significant of which was changing consumer 
preferences — including a ‘staycation’ effect as households 
shift some leisure spending to the United Kingdom.0123456
Goods Consumer servicesPast twelve months
Next twelve monthsPer centChart B   Approximate sales volumes growth, past three months 
versus a year ago and expectations for next twelve months, 
broken down by goods(a) and consumer services
Reduce growthNo impact on growth
Increase growth
02 04 06 08 01 00Changes in consumers’
real disposable incomes
Change in your pricing
Change in consumer conﬁdence
Change in credit conditions
Change in consumer preferences
Other factors
Change in demand from foreign
tourists/foreign buyers
Consumers making purchases
ahead of expected price changes
Per centChart C   Factors driving the expected change in 
consumer demand growth over the next twelve months 
Past twelve months
Next twelve months
0123456
 Implied approximate growth ratePer centChart A   Estimated sales volumes growth,(a) past three 
months versus a year ago and expectations for next  
twelve months  
(a) Implied growth rates are calculated from broad response buckets, rather than point 
estimates of growth, so are broad approximations only.(a) The ‘goods’ category includes retailers (store-based and online) as well as consumer-facing 
goods producers and wholesalers.
The chart shows, for each factor, the turnover-weighted percentage of firms for whom the factor
will reduce growth, have no impact on growth or increase growth. Agents’ summary of business conditions   2017 Q1 5
than physical capital.  There was plenty of spare capacity in 
manufacturers exposed to the oil and gas sector.  In services, 
more capacity was being added in the logistics/warehousing 
sector, where there were constraints.  Labour utilisation had 
increased in accountancy, legal services, IT service providers, 
distribution and leisure, but elsewhere the picture was mixed.  
Firms reported that margin pressures were making it harder to 
sustain any underutilisation of staff.  As a result, some retail 
businesses had taken action to reduce staffing.  Headcount 
had also been lowered in some parts of banking.
Employment and pay
Manufacturing employment intentions had edged a little 
higher.  They were now slightly positive ( Chart 5 ), largely 
reflecting expectations of expanding output.  But that was 
partly offset by job reductions due to greater automation or 
weak demand in specific subsectors, such as oil and gas supply 
chains.  Employment intentions within services were 
unchanged.  In business services, intentions pointed to limited 
headcount growth.  That reflected steady activity growth.  
Consumer services employment intentions were broadly flat.  
Some firms were creating jobs where they planned to open 
new premises.  But that was offset by a more general 
rationalisation to mitigate higher labour costs associated  
with the National Living Wage (NLW).    
Recruitment difficulties were slightly above normal and had 
tightened a little further.  Shortages of skilled and experienced 
staff had risen.  That reflected slightly increased labour 
demand.  Contacts in construction, engineering, distribution, 
IT, healthcare and catering most often reported hiring 
difficulties.  There was little evidence of EU migrant workers 
leaving the United Kingdom due to its plans to leave the 
European Union.  Some had left though, as the fall in sterling 
had reduced the value of their repatriated earnings.  However, 
there were more reports of difficulties recruiting new EU 
migrant workers, due to a shrinking pool of candidates.  Growth in labour costs remained subdued.  Settlements were 
largely clustered around 2% to 2½%.  Higher awards were 
mostly targeted to address particular skill shortages or, for 
firms most affected by the NLW, skewed towards lower-paid 
workers.  For most firms, pay awards were related to company 
and/or individual performance.  Some contacts were 
concerned that higher inflation might lead to upward pay 
pressures.  Many contacts had exceeded the statutory 
requirements concerning the NLW last year, for example by 
extending the NLW to include staff under 25.  That had 
provided a temporary boost to wage inflation that would not 
be repeated in 2017.
Pricing
Supply chain pricing
Manufacturers’ output price inflation had risen.  Customers 
were more willing to accept price increases.  However, price 
rises were often below those of imported goods and raw 
materials costs ( Chart 6 ).  Business services price inflation had 
edged up.  For some companies with more low-paid staff price 
increases were not enough to cover the extra costs of 
implementing the NLW.  5432101234
2006 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17Scores 
Business services 
Manufacturing Consumer services Over the coming six months
+
–Chart 5  Employment intentionsBox 2
A targeted survey on foreign exchange 
hedging
Companies may hedge exposures to changes in the exchange 
rate by using hedging products or may be naturally hedged by 
the nature of their business.  Agents ran a targeted survey in 
January and February of some 80 companies who use foreign 
exchange (FX) hedging products, focusing on small and 
medium-sized enterprises.  The aim of the survey was to help 
assess whether any vulnerabilities arising from the fall in 
sterling — either from higher import costs or foreign currency 
debt service costs — had been exacerbated by changes in 
companies’ hedging behaviour or reduced access to  
FX hedging products.  A majority of companies in the survey reported using  
FX hedging products to hedge supply chain costs.  Only a few 
used those products to hedge FX debt obligations.  While some 
firms had increased their FX hedging, relative to normal, before 
the referendum, most had not done so.  That suggested there 
was not an unusually large ‘hump’ of re-hedging to come.  
Companies reported little change in their ability to access  
FX hedging products since the EU referendum or in the cost  
of doing so, despite the fall in sterling.  And few companies 
reported any obstacles in accessing the market for  
FX hedging products.  Overall, the survey indicated little 
reason to think that companies’ FX hedging practices around 
the EU referendum, or their access to FX hedging products 
since, had materially increased any vulnerabilities associated 
with the fall in sterling.6 Agents’ summary of business conditions  2017 Q1
Consumer prices
Consumer goods price inflation had risen sharply.  Fuel price 
inflation had increased further.  Higher food and drink and 
household goods prices were starting to push up inflation.  
That was mostly due to the fall in the pound.  There was some 
evidence that pass-through of that fall to groceries prices had 
been slower than expected.  That was due to supermarkets’ 
concerns about losing market share.  List prices for new cars 
had picked up a little.  But effective purchase prices were hard 
to gauge given the finance packages through which most cars 
were bought.  Inflation in consumer services prices had edged 
higher.  That partly reflected continued moderate demand 
growth and the passing on of increasing costs — either import 
costs or in some cases labour costs — in some subsectors such 
as hotels, pubs and restaurants. 321012345
2006 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17Scores Three months on the same period a year earlier
+
–Imported ﬁnished
  goods prices 
Materials costs  Chart 6  Material costs and imported finished goods