Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2018/2018-q1.pdf
Date: 2018-03-31

Growth in retail sales values  had slowed, reflecting weaker 
spending on white goods and homewares. This was potentially 
associated with subdued housing market activity, consumers 
bringing forward spending to the Black Friday sales in November, 
and the continued squeeze on household incomes.
Consumer services  turnover growth had held up, though there 
were some signs of a slowdown in Q1, for example in casual dining.
Business services  turnover growth had been modest but had 
strengthened, reflecting growth in demand for legal, accounting 
and advisory services, as well as work related to insolvency and 
restructuring which has picked up from a low base.
Domestic manufacturing output  growth had eased slightly, 
though exporters continued to report strong growth, and demand 
from the EU had picked up.
Growth in construction output  slowed further, with the overall 
level of activity little changed on a year earlier.
Investment intentions  remained modest, but had picked up 
slightly among manufacturers, reflecting expansion to cope with 
strong export demand and investment in automation to relieve 
recruitment difficulties and improve productivity.
Overall growth in corporate credit demand  remained subdued, 
reflecting a persistent aversion to gearing following the financial 
crisis. However, there was some demand among firms to borrow to 
facilitate growth and enhance efficiency.
In commercial real estate , capacity had tightened, reflecting a 
lack of properties coming onto the market combined with a 
modest rise in demand from investors. Across the UK, there 
continued to be appetite from foreign investors, most notably 
from Asia. In London, however, many institutional investors 
continued to view the market as overvalued, and were less active 
as a result.Housing market  activity had remained subdued. Lack of stock in 
the secondary market was depressing demand by limiting choice 
for prospective buyers. However, demand for new‑build property 
was robust, supported by the Help To Buy scheme. Mortgage 
activity was dominated by remortgaging deals as homeowners 
looked to lock‑in low fixed‑rate deals in anticipation of further 
interest rate rises.
Capacity utilisation  had increased slightly in manufacturing, and 
constraints were beginning to bite among exporters. Capacity 
utilisation remained around normal in services.
Employment intentions  continued to point to modest headcount 
growth. At sectoral level, hiring intentions in accountancy, legal 
and logistics had picked up slightly, but had edged down in 
consumer services. Recruitment difficulties remained elevated and 
were a primary concern raised by many contacts.
Growth in total labour costs  remained modest, though average 
pay settlements this year were a little higher than in 2017 for many 
contacts, at between 2½% and 3½%.
Input cost inflation  eased slightly and firms regarded the 
inflationary impact of sterling’s depreciation on input and 
imported finished goods costs as having largely peaked, except for 
in energy, where forward‑contracting meant there was further 
pass‑through to come. A survey on corporate pricing by the Agents 
showed that firms expected output price inflation to fall back this 
year as import price inflation eased (see Box 1 on page 4).
Consumer goods price inflation  had eased but remained elevated, 
though contacts expected it to abate over the coming year, 
especially for imported goods such as clothing and cars, as the 
effect of sterling’s depreciation wanes. Consumer services firms 
had been able to implement small price rises in order to partially 
cover cost increases.
This publication includes a summary of economic reports compiled by the Bank of England’s Agents between late December 2017 and late 
February 2018. It generally makes comparisons with activity and prices a year earlier. The report does not represent the Bank’s own views, 
nor does it represent the views of any particular company or region. More information on the Bank’s Agencies can be found at  
www.bankofengland.co.uk/about/people/agents .
This publication also includes a summary of information gathered by the Bank’s recently established Decision Maker Panel Survey. Further 
background is provided in Box 2 on pages 7–9.Agents’ summary of business conditions
and results from the Decision Maker Panel Survey
2018 Q1
•	Robust growth in goods exports had tightened capacity and, together with improving profit margins, 
strengthened investment intentions in manufacturing slightly.
•	Recruitment difficulties remained a primary concern, though the impact on pay growth had been limited.
•	Some evidence of financial distress in retail and leisure, reflecting weak consumer spending growth. Agents’ summary of business conditions  2018 Q1  2
Consumer services and retail sales
Growth in retail sales values had eased a little further in Q1, 
reflecting weaker spending on white goods and homewares 
(Chart 1 ). This may have been in part associated with subdued 
housing market activity. The slowdown in Q1 may also have 
reflected a change in seasonality, with the Black Friday sales in 
November attracting a growing share of spending on big‑ticket 
items at the expense of the January sales. Store‑based retailers 
continued to lose share to online retailers, putting some at risk 
of failure. Budget retailers had been gaining market share, 
helped by the continued squeeze on household incomes, 
though high‑end brands also reported strong growth. Demand 
for new cars had continued to weaken. Growth in spending on 
consumer services had remained relatively resilient ( Chart 1 ), 
although here too there were some signs of a slowdown in Q1, 
for example in casual dining. By contrast, growth in spending 
on holiday flights and cruises remained buoyant.
Business and financial services
Growth in business services turnover had been modest but had 
strengthened ( Chart 2 ). Professional services contacts 
reported a broad increase in activity, particularly in legal and 
accounting or advisory services. These firms were benefiting 
from clients outsourcing both ongoing work, such as payroll 
services following the introduction of pension auto enrolment, 
and one‑off pieces of work such as General Data Protection 
Regulation (GDPR) and gender pay gap analysis. There was 
further growth in mergers and acquisitions activity, and 
advisory work related to insolvency and restructuring had 
picked up, albeit from a low base. Recruitment firms generally 
reported being busy, indicating growing pressure on the labour 
market. Growth in IT services remained strong, particularly for 
work relating to GDPR and cyber security. There was also 
strength in warehousing and distribution, driven by online 
retailing, and among providers of support services to 
manufacturing exporters.Services export values had been growing at a steady pace and 
around trend. Exports had improved across professional 
services, such as legal and accountancy, where firms had 
provided support for foreign investment. Demand for UK 
expertise on foreign projects had also been strong, notably in 
IT consultancy. Business conference attendance by overseas 
visitors had also picked up. The stronger global economy was 
boosting demand for support services provided by shipping 
ports, and for engineers to assist with equipment installation 
overseas, for example in the mining sector. By contrast, 
demand for oil and gas services had yet to materially improve, 
despite some recovery in oil prices. Within consumer services 
exports there were signs of slower growth in tourism following 
strong growth rates last year.
Production
Domestic manufacturing output growth had eased slightly and 
remained modest ( Chart 3 ). Manufacturers involved in export 
supply chains continued to report the strongest growth, 
especially for engineered products and equipment. A very 
modest pickup in activity had been reported in the oil and gas 
sector. There was evidence that substitution away from 
imports had provided some benefit to firms in soft furnishings 
and brewing. And growth remained positive for those 
supplying automotive components and housebuilding 
materials. Packaging suppliers reported buoyant demand, in 
part supported by continued growth in online retailing. They 
also reported a shift away from plastics to more 
environmentally friendly materials.
Growth in export volumes of manufactured goods had 
remained strong ( Chart 3 ), supported by the pickup in global 
activity as well as by the past depreciation of sterling. Demand 
from the EU had picked up further, with little sign to date of 
customers switching away from UK suppliers. However, as 
products were often tied to multi‑year supply contracts and 
model runs, there was a risk this would impact growth in the 
future. Higher global commodity prices had also supported 
demand for mining equipment to increase capacity from +
–Three months on the same period a year earlie r
3210123
20060 70 80 91 01 11 21 31 41 51 61 718Scores
Consumer services turnoverRetail sales valuesChart 1 Retail sales values and consumer services 
turnover+
–
432101234Scores
Professional and ﬁnancial services
Other servicesThree months on the same period a year earlie r
20060 70 80 91 01 11 21 31 41 51 61 718Chart 2 Business services turnover Agents’ summary of business conditions  2018 Q1  3
commodity‑exporting countries such as Australasia. Demand 
from the Middle East, however, was more mixed. Exports of 
high value‑added products in the pharmaceuticals, aerospace 
and automotive sectors generally continued to perform 
strongly.
Construction
Construction output growth had slowed modestly, suggesting 
activity was only a little higher than a year ago. Housebuilding 
remained the strongest segment, although growth in that 
sector had slowed too. Within the commercial sector, there 
had been continuing demand for construction of logistics and 
warehouse premises but much less demand for retail space. 
Infrastructure activity was falling back as there was not enough 
new work to replace projects that were finishing, reflecting a 
combination of slow decision‑making and budgetary 
constraints in the public authorities. There was likely to be a 
hiatus in some projects following the failure of Carillion, but a 
lot of this work was being picked up by other firms, including 
joint‑venture partners. Recent intelligence had been consistent 
with an earlier assessment that the failure of Carillion was 
likely to have a limited impact on activity, and there had so far 
been little evidence of a significant impact on the supply chain 
or on the availability of credit to the sector.
Investment
Overall, investment intentions remained modest and 
dampened by economic uncertainty. Nonetheless, investment 
intentions had picked up slightly in manufacturing ( Chart 4 ), 
reflecting expansion by some exporters to cope with strong 
overseas demand, and by some domestic‑facing firms 
benefiting from import substitution. A few companies were 
considering investing in infrastructure to gain or maintain 
Authorised Economic Operator status for UK facilities after 
EU withdrawal, or setting up new distribution hubs in the EU to 
protect future access to European markets. A number of firms 
reported investing in increased automation to relieve 
recruitment difficulties and improve productivity. Business 
services firms were investing in their IT and digital capability, refurbishing workspaces to increase flexibility, or considering 
automation, for example Artificial Intelligence, to improve 
productivity or create the capacity to focus on higher 
value‑added activities. Investment intentions remained 
subdued for consumer services firms. Investment in 
store‑based retailing was declining.
Corporate financing conditions
Overall growth in demand for corporate credit remained 
relatively subdued, reflecting high corporate cash balances 
built up in recent years and a persistent aversion to gearing 
following the financial crisis. However, there was some 
demand among firms to borrow to facilitate growth and 
enhance efficiency. For the majority of contacts access to bank 
and non‑bank finance was not reported as a constraint on 
business. Competition among lenders for creditworthy 
borrowers remained intense, reflecting a greater appetite 
among incumbent banks, competition from challenger banks 
and growth in non‑bank finance. But banks’ lending appetite 
had softened towards areas of perceived risk, such as 
store‑based retail, consumer goods wholesalers, car 
dealerships and care services, where there had also been 
reports of financial stress. There were signs of a small increase 
in corporate financial distress, with many contacts reporting 
greater demand for extended payment terms.
Following Carillion’s collapse, contacts expected tighter credit 
conditions in construction and facilities management — 
especially for cash flow and working capital. So far, there had 
been little distress reported by Carillion’s suppliers, supported 
in part by an accommodative stance from UK banks.+
–
5432101234
Manufacturing (export)
Manufacturing (domestic)Three months on the same period a year earlier
20060 70 80 91 01 11 21 31 41 51 61 718ScoresChart 3 Manufacturing output
Services 
Manufacturing
 Over the coming 12 months
20060 70 80 91 01 11 21 31 41 51 61 718+
–
5432101234ScoresChart 4 Investment intentions Agents’ summary of business conditions  2018 Q1  4
Box 1
Survey: corporate pricing
The Agents surveyed business contacts about the factors 
affecting their output prices over the past 12 months and over 
the next 12 months, and the time profile of the pass‑through 
of higher import prices into output prices that they expected 
to achieve. A total of 308 businesses responded to the survey, 
employing 435,580 staff and with a combined UK turnover of 
£70.3 billion. The survey results were weighted by turnover.
Overall, firms expected output price inflation to fall back in 
2018 ( Chart A ), and this was the case for all sectors except 
consumer services ( Chart B ), reflecting easing pressure from 
import price inflation ( Chart C ). 
Among the factors driving pricing decisions, labour cost 
inflation was expected to contribute slightly more to output 
price inflation in 2018 than in 2017, consistent with the  
pickup in pay growth indicated by the Agents’ survey on pay 
in January.Respondents who had experienced higher import prices were 
asked to estimate the time profile over which they expected to 
be able to pass through these higher input costs ( Chart D ). 
Firms responded that they had so far been able to pass through 
52% of what they expected to be able to pass through in total, 
with a further 10% expected to be passed through over the 
coming year and a further 3% beyond that — a total of 65%. 
This means they were unsure of the time horizon over which 
they would be able to pass through the remaining 35% that 
they expected to be able to pass through.
Some 86% of respondents said they would pass through 
‘if conditions allowed’ (the ‘opportunistic’ in Chart D ) and 
around 40% of respondents expected to take a permanent hit 
on their margins. Along with the ‘unallocated 35% pass 
through’ these answers suggest that residual inflationary 
pressure from earlier import price inflation remains. The 
survey’s findings are broadly consistent with data from the 
Decision Maker Panel Survey (see Box 2).010203040506070
Manufacturing Construction Retail
goodsConsumer
servicesBusiness
servicesNet balance, per cent
Past year
Next yearChart B Sector prices changes in the past and next year(a)
(a) Weighted by turnover.0102030405060
2018
survey<-4% -4% to
<-1%-1% to
+1%>1% to
4%>4%Past year
Next year
Per cent
net
balancePercentage of respondentsChart A Price changes in the past and next year(a)
(a) Double‑weighted by turnover.+ – 0.2 0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.40 .5Domestic competitionProductivityChanges to marginsCompetition from
producers abroadDemand conditions/
pressure on capacityEnergy and other
oil-related costs(Other) imported inputs/
ﬁnished goods costsUK inputs/ﬁnished
goods costsLabour costs (including
National Living Wage)Net balance, per cent
Next yearPast yearChart C Factors expected to affect changes in prices next year 
relative to factors that affected prices in the past year(a)
(a) Double‑weighted by turnover.
52%
10%
2% 1%020406080100
Up to
nowNext
12 monthsNext
1–2 years+3 years Opport-
unisticPermanent
hitProﬁle of import price pass-through
(timing of percentage of what companies
expect they can achieve)Share of responses, per cent
Only 65% of 100% identiﬁedChart D Import price pass‑through profile, opportunists 
and expected permanent margin hit(a)(b)(c)
(a) Blue bars show the double‑weighted average responses over four‑time horizons.
(b) Orange and green bars show the proportion of respondents that expected to 
opportunistically pass‑through more if conditions allowed and expected a permanent hit to 
their margins respectively.
(c) All percentages are relative to the population who responded to this question. Agents’ summary of business conditions  2018 Q1  5
Property markets
Commercial real estate
Capacity in the UK commercial real estate market had 
tightened, reflecting a lack of properties coming onto the 
market combined with a modest rise in demand from 
investors. Investor demand was becoming slightly more 
focused on higher‑quality assets, such as prime industrial, 
office and retail premises.
Across the UK, there continued to be appetite from foreign 
investors, most notably from Asia. In London, however, many 
institutional investors continued to view the market as 
overvalued, and were less active as a result.
Valuations on distribution sheds and warehouses had 
continued to increase in response to the shift towards online 
retail. Investor demand for office space had been mixed. New 
and more flexible ways of working have been leading to greater 
occupier demand for smaller office premises, rendering older 
buildings less attractive. The lack of new office stock, however, 
had helped to support valuations. Occupier demand for prime 
retail space had remained decent. However, in secondary retail 
property, investor demand had continued to decline, reflecting 
the challenging retail environment.
Housing market
The housing market had been subdued overall, with both 
demand and supply weak, and activity steady at relatively low 
levels. In the secondary market, estate agents had continued 
to report that lack of stock was their biggest challenge. Rather 
than generating significant house price inflation, this had 
tended to depress already muted demand by limiting choice 
for prospective buyers. Demand for new‑build property was 
relatively robust, remaining heavily supported by the 
Help to Buy scheme. Housebuilders had reported a good start 
to 2018. Output from smaller builders was increasing, 
although there were a few reports of supply‑side constraints 
biting on activity. In relatively buoyant markets, such as the 
Midlands and North West, prices were typically rising by up to 
5% a year. The market in London and the South East remained 
weak, with prices relatively flat and greater discounting needed 
to secure sales. The strong rental market was stimulating 
further investment in build to rent, especially in cities such as 
Manchester and Birmingham, and rents were rising steadily.
The mortgage market remained highly competitive, with 
activity dominated by remortgaging as existing homeowners 
looked to lock‑in low fixed‑rate deals in anticipation of further 
interest rate rises. Although demand from movers remained 
muted, there was strong demand for loans from first‑time 
buyers. Intense price competition for standard mortgage 
products was driving some smaller lenders, notably building 
societies, into more specialist areas such as buy‑to‑let.Capacity utilisation
Capacity utilisation in manufacturing had increased, while it 
remained around normal in services ( Chart 5 ). In 
manufacturing, capacity constraints were beginning to bind 
among exporters, producers of capital goods, automotive 
suppliers and chemicals processors. Investment in equipment 
was delivering additional capacity for some, but others had 
been deterred from large‑scale investment by Brexit‑related 
uncertainty. In services, constraints were easing in the hotel, 
distribution and warehousing sectors as new capacity was 
added, and there remained considerable excess supply of 
physical retail space.
Employment and pay
Overall employment intentions were little changed, with the 
picture remaining one of modest headcount growth. But the 
outlook within sectors had altered slightly. Intentions in 
business services had picked up slightly, reflecting stronger 
activity in areas such as accountancy, legal and logistics. In 
contrast, employment intentions in consumer services had 
edged down a little due to cost‑cutting in retail amid slowing 
consumption growth, rises in the National Living Wage (NLW), 
pension auto‑enrolment contributions, and the shift towards 
online retail. Manufacturing intentions had weakened 
marginally but remained positive. Headcount growth had been 
driven primarily by exporters but offset to a degree by a 
slightly weaker employment outlook within some 
domestic‑facing sectors.
Recruitment difficulties had remained elevated and were one 
of the primary concerns raised by many contacts. In a small 
but growing number of cases, the inability to fill positions was 
constraining growth. The list of regularly reported skill 
shortages was broadening out from construction, engineering, 
software development, professional services and logistics to 
hospitality, warehousing, agriculture and food. This often +
–
432101234
Total services
 Manufacturing Over the coming six months, ‘relative to normal’
20060 70 80 91 01 11 21 31 41 51 61 718ScoresChart 5 Capacity utilisation Agents’ summary of business conditions  2018 Q1  6
reflected the reduced availability of EU migrant labour on 
which such sectors are heavily reliant. Overall, there had been 
relatively few issues with staff attrition, although it was 
reported to be driving up wages in some sectors, including 
construction and accountancy.
Growth in total labour costs had remained modest, although 
average pay settlements this year were a little higher than in 
2017 for many contacts ( Chart 6 ). Most settlements were 
between 2½%–3½%, driven by a combination of improved 
profitability among exporters, the annual NLW increase and 
higher consumer price inflation. Where higher awards had 
been made, contacts said this was for the recruitment or 
retention of key staff or skills. Often employers and staff 
considered the broader reward package, including non‑pay 
elements, such as flexible working and healthcare, which 
allowed some companies to limit pay increases. Growth in 
total labour costs was expected to be boosted this year by an 
increase in the minimum auto‑enrolment pension 
contribution.
Pricing
Supply‑chain pricing
The inflationary impact of sterling’s depreciation on input and 
imported finished goods costs was widely regarded as having 
peaked ( Chart 7 ). One exception to this was in energy, where 
widespread forward‑contracting meant there was further 
pass‑through to come. Moreover, although the effect of sterling’s depreciation had waned, price rises in a range of 
commodities, notably oil and metals, were now affecting 
materials cost inflation. Further down the supply chain, firms 
facing commodity price rises saw this as an opportunity to 
renew pressure on customers for fuller recognition of the 
import cost inflation they had borne to date. By contrast, in 
markets where there was excess capacity, such as retail, 
contacts were pushing suppliers for cost reductions with a view 
to reversing past price increases.
In business services, there had been signs of slightly higher 
inflation in fees for specialist skills and for service providers 
that employ a high proportion of staff on the NLW, for 
example cleaning firms. But there was intense price 
competition among other more commoditised services, such 
as audit, exacerbated by the trend towards automation and 
offshoring of some services.
Consumer prices
Agents’ scores for consumer price inflation had inched down 
but remained elevated. However, contacts expected consumer 
price inflation to abate over the coming 12 months, especially 
for imported products such as clothing and cars, as the effect 
of sterling’s depreciation wanes. Contacts described conditions 
as challenging, particularly for supermarkets and sectors with a 
high online presence, and so there was little opportunity to 
rebuild margins. Consumer services firms had been able to 
implement small price rises in order to partially recoup cost 
increases.+
–
2101234
Manufacturing ServicesThree months on the same period a year earlier
20060 70 80 91 01 11 21 31 41 51 61 718ScoresChart 6 Total labour costs+
–
321012345
Imported ﬁnished
goods prices
Material costsThree months on the same period a year earlier
20060 70 80 91 01 11 21 31 41 51 61 718ScoresChart 7 Raw materials costs and imported finished goods 
prices Agents’ summary of business conditions  2018 Q1  7
Box 2
Results from the Decision Maker Panel Survey
Overview
Together with academics from Stanford University and the 
University of Nottingham, the Bank has developed the 
Decision Maker Panel (DMP) Survey to help monitor the 
implications for UK businesses of the United Kingdom’s 
withdrawal from the European Union. (1) The Survey provides 
direct insight into businesses’ expectations, complementing 
the broader intelligence gathered from Bank Agents’ contacts.
The panel comprises Chief Financial Officers (CFOs) from 
small, medium and large UK companies operating in a broad 
range of industries. It is designed to be representative of the 
population of UK businesses, with only a small number of 
sectors, such as finance, being excluded. Over 3,000 members 
were part of the panel at the time of the February DMP Survey. 
The average monthly response rate has been around 50% 
since the DMP was launched in August 2016.
Aggregate‑level data from the DMP Survey are available on the 
Bank’s website. (2)(3) This box summarises the latest findings.
Sales expectations
Average four‑quarter growth in nominal sales among panel 
members has slowed during the course of 2017 from 7.3% in 
2017 Q1 to 4.6% in Q4 (solid red line on Chart A ). Sales 
growth in the second half of 2017 was lower than expectations 
reported in 2016 H2 (as shown by the solid red line on Chart A  
being below the dashed red line). Reported nominal sales 
growth from the DMP closely corresponds to aggregate total 
final expenditure from the National Accounts, which is the 
nearest equivalent measure (solid red line versus the green line 
on Chart A ), indicating that the DMP data are providing a 
representative view. (4)
Panel members expect a modest strengthening in sales growth 
over the next year. Annual nominal sales growth is expected to 
pick up from 4.6% in 2017 Q4 to 5.3% in 2018 Q4 (shown by 
the red diamond on Chart A ).
External factors appear to have been an important factor in 
explaining recent trends in sales growth. Chart B  shows that 
companies who export experienced higher sales growth than 
domestically focused firms in 2017 H1. That is likely to reflect 
the exchange rate depreciation boosting the growth of 
nominal exports. Among exporters, sales growth in 2017 H1 
was slightly stronger for companies whose largest export 
market is outside of the EU than for those who export more to 
the EU. In the second half of 2017, the nominal sales growth of 
exporters has slowed as the effects of the exchange rate have 
begun to dissipate, although exporters still reported annual 
sales growth around a percentage point higher than domestic firms in 2017 Q4. A similar difference is expected to persist 
over the year to 2018 Q4.
Price expectations
DMP members reported that annual output price inflation rose 
slightly to 3% in 2018 Q1, but they expect inflation to slow to 
2.5% over the year ahead ( Chart C ). An easing in output price 
inflation is consistent with the results from the Agents’ latest 
pricing survey reported in Box 1.3
04567891011
Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4DMP: nominal sales
over past year
DMP: expected nominal
sales next year
ONS: nominal total
ﬁnal expenditurePercentage changes on a year earlier
2016 17 18Chart A Realised and expected growth in nominal sales(a)
Sources: DMP, ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Questions about sales refer to the last complete quarter. Data for year to 2017 Q4 and 
expectations for year to 2018 Q4, shown by the diamond, are based on responses for 
one third of the sample that were collected in February only.
Domestic ﬁrmsEU exportersNon-EU exportersSolid lines: past year
Dashed lines: expectations
for next year
Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
2016 17 183
04567891011Percentage changes on a year earlierChart B Realised and expected growth in sales of 
exporters and non‑exporters(a)
Sources: DMP and Bank calculations.
(a) Data for year to 2017 Q4 and expectations for year to 2018 Q4, shown by the diamonds, are 
based on responses for one third of the sample that were collected in February only. Firms 
that did not sell abroad prior to the EU referendum are defined as domestic companies. 
EU and non‑EU exporter definitions are based on largest export market prior to the 
EU referendum.
(1) This project is supported by the Economic and Social Research Council (grant number 
ES/P010385/1).
(2) For details on the methodology, see www.bankofengland.co.uk/quarterly‑
bulletin/2017/q2/tracking‑the‑views‑of‑british‑businesses‑evidence‑from‑the‑dmp . 
All results are weighted.
(3) For aggregate data and details on questions asked to panel members please refer to 
the Bank of England website; www.bankofengland.co.uk/‑/media/boe/files/statistics/
research‑datasets/dmp‑results‑march‑2018.xlsx .
(4) Total final expenditure is defined as GDP before imports are deducted.  Agents’ summary of business conditions  2018 Q1  8
The main reason why companies expect output price inflation 
to fall appears to be a diminishing effect from imported cost 
pressures. Chart D  shows that companies who rely more on 
imported goods and services have seen larger price increases 
over the past year than firms who are less reliant on imports. 
However, this difference is expected to narrow over the next 
year as price inflation is expected to fall back by more for more 
import‑intensive companies.
Planning ahead of Brexit
To help better understand the scenarios that companies are 
basing their planning for Brexit on, DMP members have been 
asked when they think that the UK will leave the EU, after 
taking into account any transition period. Chart E  shows how 
companies attach probabilities to a wide range of possible outcomes, indicating that they are very uncertain about how 
Brexit will be implemented. In November 2017, the highest 
probabilities were attached to the UK leaving the EU in 2019 
and 2021. However, the results in January 2018 were a little 
different, with companies attaching more weight to the 
UK leaving in 2021 and less in 2019, indicating that the 
December summit of EU leaders had some impact on 
companies’ views about when the UK will leave. (5)
In February, panelists were also asked a slightly different 
question about the probability that they attached to a 
disorderly Brexit where no deal is reached in negotiations by 
the end of March 2019. The median probability of a disorderly 
Brexit was 40%. (6)
(5) The differences for 2019, 2021 and 2022 were statistically different from zero at 5% 
significance level as indicated by a two‑sided t‑test.
(6) This figure is based on responses for one third of the sample that collected in February. 
The exact question was: ‘What probability, in per cent, do you attach to a disorderly 
Brexit, whereby no deal is reached by the end of March 2019?’.1
02345
DMP: output price
inﬂation over past year
DMP: expected output price
inﬂation next year
ONS: CPI inﬂationPer cent
Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
2016 17 18 19Chart C Realised and expected output price inflation(a)
Sources: DMP, ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Data for year to 2018 Q1 and expectations for year to 2019 Q1, shown by the diamond, are 
based on responses for one third of the sample that were collected in February only.
1
02345
More import intensive
Less import intensive
Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
2016 17 18 19Per cent
Solid lines: past year
Dashed lines: expectations
for next yearChart D Realised and expected output price inflation for 
more and less import‑intensive companies(a)
Sources: DMP and Bank calculations.
(a) Data for year to 2018 Q1 and expectations for year to 2019 Q1, shown by the diamond, are 
based on responses for one third of the sample that were collected in February only. Firms for 
whom imports accounted for more than 20% of total costs prior to the EU referendum are 
defined as more import intensive (around 30% of the sample). The remainder are defined as 
less import intensive.05101520253035
2019 20 21 22 23+ NeverNov. 2017
Jan. 2018Average probability (per cent)Chart E Expected timing of EU withdrawal after any 
transition period(a)
Sources: DMP and Bank calculations.
(a) Question: ‘What do you think is the percentage likelihood (probability) of the UK leaving the 
EU (after the end of any transitional arrangements) in each of the following years?’. One third 
of the panel were asked this question in November 2017 and the remaining two thirds were 
asked in January 2018.
Table 1 Number of hours a week spent on preparing for Brexit 
(share of respondents)(a)
 CEO CFO
None 41% 38%
Up to 1 hour 37% 39%
1 to 5 hours 14% 18%
6 to 10 hours 3% 3%
More than 10 hours 1% 1%
Don’t know 4% 2% 
Sources: DMP and Bank calculations.
(a) Question: ‘On average, how many hours a week are the CEO and CFO of your business spending on 
preparing for Brexit at the moment? Please select one option: i) None, ii) Up to 1 hour, iii) 1 to 5 hours, 
iv) 6 to 10 hours, v) More than 10 hours, vi) Don’t know’. One third of the panel were asked this question in 
November 2017 and the remaining two thirds were asked in January 2018. Agents’ summary of business conditions  2018 Q1  9
As well as being asked about the outcomes that they expect, 
companies have also been asked about the amount of time 
they are spending on preparing for Brexit. Panel members were 
asked how many hours a week, on average, the Chief Executive 
Officer (CEO) and CFO in their business are currently spending 
on preparing for Brexit. Around 40% of CEOs and CFOs are spending no time preparing for Brexit, with a further 40% 
spending no more than one hour a week ( Table 1 ). However, 
for around 20% of respondents it is taking up more time. CFOs 
and CEOs in larger or exporting companies tend to spend more 
time preparing for Brexit compared to executives of smaller 
and non‑exporting firms.