Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2018/2018-q3.pdf
Date: 2018-09-30

This publication includes a summary of economic reports compiled by the Bank of England’s Agents between early June and late  
August 2018. It generally makes comparisons with activity and prices a year earlier. The report does not represent the Bank’s own views,  
nor does it represent the views of any particular company or region. More information on the Bank’s Agencies can be found at  
www.bankofengland.co.uk/about/people/agents . This publication also includes a summary of information gathered by the  
Bank’s Decision Maker Panel survey . Further background is provided in Box 1 on pages 6–7.Annual consumer spending  growth rose slightly, supported by the 
warmer weather, which boosted demand for seasonal food and outdoor 
leisure goods and activities. The underlying picture remained one of 
modest growth, however. Contacts reported weak demand growth for 
new cars, white goods and homewares, due to weak real income growth 
and housing market activity.
Growth in business services  activity eased somewhat, and contacts 
indicated that there was tighter cost control on discretionary spending 
due to heightened uncertainty ahead of Brexit. Corporate financing and 
mergers and acquisition activity softened, following a period of elevated 
demand. IT and recruitment firms continued to report strong growth in 
demand. 
Growth in services export  values was broadly steady, supported by 
inbound tourism and demand for IT and recruitment services, as well for 
advisory services from overseas investors.
Growth in domestic manufacturing output  eased slightly but remained 
above its long-run average. Companies in consumer goods-related 
supply chains faced headwinds from weaker demand growth, especially 
for cars and other big-ticket items. Some contacts reported weaker 
demand in construction supply chains, but demand from the oil and gas 
sector continued to improve. Growth in manufacturing export volumes  
also moderated, as global demand softened and the boost from 
sterling’s past depreciation began to wane, but growth remained above 
average.
Construction  output growth edged up, but remained sluggish. Growth 
in housebuilding slowed in some regions and some large commercial 
and infrastructure projects were delayed or put on hold. Conditions were 
more resilient in the private rental sector and student accommodation. 
Contacts cited skills shortages as a constraint on growth. 
Investment intentions  for the next 12 months softened slightly, 
depressed by economic and political uncertainty. Concern focused on 
the possibility of increased trade frictions with the EU after withdrawal, 
which some firms cited as a reason to put investment on hold or divert 
it to other countries or subsidiaries. Corporate credit demand  remained subdued, partly reflecting strong 
corporate cash balances and scarring from the financial crisis. Some  
larger contacts reported refinancing early in case of pre-Brexit volatility 
but such activity was expected to wane as Brexit approaches. Bank 
credit remained readily available for larger companies and those with 
strong balance sheets. 
There was modest excess demand among investors for commercial real 
estate , but the underlying picture was mixed. Contacts reported 
increasing vacancies in secondary retail premises, albeit from a low base. 
Growth in demand for London office space weakened, while demand for 
logistics and warehouse premises remained buoyant. 
The housing market  softened a little in some areas, with some contacts 
reporting that properties were taking longer to sell. Activity was stronger 
at lower price levels. Demand for new-build houses continued to be 
supported by the Help-to-Buy scheme.
Capacity utilisation  remained higher than normal in both 
manufacturing and services, with contacts citing availability of labour as 
the main constraint on output.
Employment intentions  remained positive in most sectors except for 
consumer services, which weakened slightly. Recruitment difficulties  
remained elevated. Average pay settlements were a little higher than a 
year ago, in a range of 2½%–3½%. Growth in total labour costs picked 
up due to the increase in employers’ pension auto-enrolment 
contributions, the Apprenticeship Levy, and ad hoc payments to retain 
staff with key skills. 
Materials cost inflation  remained elevated, reflecting higher global 
demand for commodities, and increased prices for fuel, energy and food. 
Many contacts reported being able to implement small increases in 
output prices. 
Consumer goods price inflation  held steady but contacts in the grocery 
sector expected upward pressure on food prices to emerge due to the 
dry weather reducing yields of some vegetable and  
arable crops. • Consumer spending growth ticked up, boosted by the warmer weather, but remained modest. 
• Rising uncertainty, mostly related to concerns around Brexit, contributed to a slight softening in investment 
intentions.
• Export and domestic manufacturing output growth slowed modestly, but remained above average.
• Recruitment difficulties remained elevated; average pay settlements were a little higher than a year ago.Agents’ summary of business conditions  
and results from the Decision Maker Panel survey
2018 Q3 Agents’ summary of business conditions  2018 Q3  2
Consumer services and retail sales
Agents’ scores for consumption continued to rise following 
weakness earlier this year. Growth in retail sales values  
(Chart 1 ) was supported by the warm weather: sales growth in 
the grocery sector was driven by sales of fresh food, meat and 
alcoholic beverages. Growth in demand for new cars, white 
goods and homewares remained weak, however, suggesting 
little change to the underlying picture of modest consumption 
growth. Growth in demand for consumer services was also 
modest. The pickup in spending at pubs and on tourism (both 
inbound and domestic), which had been related to the warm 
weather, was partially offset by weaker growth in casual 
dining, cinemas and public transport. 
Business and financial services
Growth in business services activity was slightly weaker but 
remained healthy. Softer corporate financing and mergers and 
acquisition activity followed a period of elevated demand as 
some companies sought to complete deals before Brexit. 
Marketing companies reported weaker demand as some 
consumer goods retailers cut advertising budgets. While asset 
managers reported solid growth and demand for accountancy 
services held up, contacts indicated there was tighter cost 
control on some business-to-business spending, such as travel 
and hospitality, partly due to heightened uncertainty ahead of 
Brexit. IT companies continued to report strong growth, and 
demand for recruiters remained supported by the tight labour 
market. Banks reported reasonable growth in revenues, 
reflecting financial market activity, and insurers reported that 
pensions annuity business supported growth.
Growth in services export values was broadly steady, 
supported by inbound tourism and demand for IT, recruitment 
and architectural services, as well as for advisory services  
from overseas investors. Demand for services from the oil  
and gas sector continued to pick up, albeit from a relatively 
low level. Production
Growth in domestic manufacturing output eased slightly but 
remained above average ( Chart 2 ). Some contacts reported 
weaker demand in parts of the construction supply chain, 
linked to delays on some large infrastructure projects and a 
softening in some commercial property developments. 
Companies in supply chains for consumer goods and 
automotive faced headwinds from weaker demand growth. 
Engineering companies continued to report strong demand 
from the oil and gas sector. Domestic manufacturers 
continued to benefit from suppliers looking to source more 
goods from the UK.
Growth in manufacturing export volumes also slowed a little, 
but remained above average, and global demand was firm for 
aerospace, pharmaceuticals, consumer goods and food.  
Contacts attributed slower exports growth to the waning 
effect of the past depreciation of sterling. Nonetheless, 
demand from non-EU countries, particularly the United States, 
had held up or strengthened. Contacts reported only limited 
direct effects from US tariffs. Demand from Asia-Pacific, South 
America and Africa was also strong. Contacts said that, to date, 
there had been little impact on export volumes from Brexit. 
However, some contacts were examining supply chains and 
considering stock building to mitigate any impact from 
potential trade frictions.
Construction
Construction output growth edged up further, but remained 
modest. Growth in housebuilding slowed in some regions,  
but growth in the private rental sector and student 
accommodation was firm. Some large and commercial 
infrastructure projects had been delayed or put on hold, but 
contacts said there was a large number of projects in the 
pipeline. Contacts also cited skills shortages as a constraint on 
growth. Although the hot weather had caused some challenges 
— for example through health and safety requirements or 
difficulties working with some materials — these were on a 
much smaller scale than in the winter, and contacts said that +
–Three months on the same period a year earlier
3210123
2006 08 09 11 13 15 17 07 10 12 14 16 18Scores
Retail sales values
Consumer services turnoverChart 1 Retail sales values and consumer services 
turnover
+
–Three months on the same period a year earlier
5432101234Scores
Manufacturing (domestic)Manufacturing (export)
2006 08 09 11 13 15 17 07 10 12 14 16 18Chart 2 Manufacturing output Agents’ summary of business conditions  2018 Q3  3
the dry weather had helped them to catch up on progress lost 
due to adverse weather-related disruption earlier in the year. 
Investment
Investment intentions for the next 12 months softened 
modestly ( Chart 3 ). Contacts’ references to uncertainty had 
picked up, mostly related to concerns around Brexit. Concern 
focused on the possibility of trade frictions, which a few 
contacts cited as a reason to postpone investment or divert it 
to other countries or subsidiaries. 
Some companies with export markets or international supply 
chains said that they were reluctant to expand capacity until 
there was more clarity on future market access to the EU. 
Some companies are developing contingency plans — such as 
increasing stocks of components imported from the EU, 
seeking Authorised Economic Operator status, or reassessing 
their transport and logistics arrangements — although only a 
small minority of firms has started to implement them. 
Contacts continued to invest in meeting regulatory or 
compliance standards as well as for security and maintenance, 
and the tightening labour market provided some impetus for 
firms to invest in automation to improve productivity. 
Corporate financing conditions
Corporate credit demand remained subdued, reflecting strong 
corporate cash balances and scarring from the financial crisis. 
Some larger contacts reported refinancing early in case of 
pre-Brexit volatility but such activity was expected to wane as 
Brexit approaches. SMEs reported subdued, steady demand for 
working capital, asset finance and invoice financing.  
Bank credit remained readily available for larger companies 
and those with strong balance sheets, with banks competing 
on price and non-price terms to win creditworthy borrowers. 
However, conditions were less favourable for small companies, 
and availability of all forms of credit, including trade credit 
insurance, has tightened for construction, consumer-facing 
and agricultural firms in recent months. Contacts reported that a growing number of small firms were 
taking out non-bank finance — for example via crowdfunding 
or online business loan providers — when they have been 
unable to access bank funding, or when they need a quick 
decision. Larger borrowers reported strong availability of 
non-bank term finance from institutions and debt funds with 
an interest in the returns offered by longer-term projects. 
Corporate distress and restructuring edged up on a year ago 
from a low base, mainly in the retail, casual dining and 
construction sectors. 
Property markets
Commercial real estate
There was modest excess demand among investors for 
commercial real estate, but the picture was mixed at a sectoral 
level. Contacts reported increasing vacancies in secondary 
retail premises, albeit from a low base. Investors continued to 
reduce their exposure to retail property, especially in 
secondary locations and out-of-town premises. Retail 
valuations and rents have fallen moderately. 
Growth in demand for London office space has weakened, and 
was only partially offset by increasing demand from the 
creative and digital industries. In other UK cities, rental growth 
for prime office space continued to be underpinned by a lack 
of new development and growing demand across the UK for 
more flexible space. 
Investor demand for logistics and warehouse premises 
remained buoyant and exceeded supply. Contacts thought 
demand for warehousing could increase further as more 
businesses might seek to build inventory in the run-up to 
Brexit. However, there was reported to be limited spare 
warehousing capacity, especially in southern England. 
There were signs that private equity funds were increasing 
investment in CRE, and contacts reported continued demand 
for UK commercial real estate from Asian investors, attracted 
by yields that were higher than in some other EU countries. 
Housing market
The housing market appeared to have softened a little, with 
fewer transactions and weaker price inflation in many areas. 
The market was stronger in the north, especially in Scotland, 
but there was a shortage of properties being put up for sale on 
the secondary market. The new-build market remained 
stronger than the secondary market, though some large 
housebuilders reported slightly weaker demand and the need 
for greater use of incentives, especially for higher-priced 
properties. Sales of lower-priced new-build houses continued 
to be supported by the Help-to-Buy scheme.Over the coming twelve months
Services
Manufacturing
2006 08 09 11 13 15 17 07 10 12 14 16 18+
–
5432101234ScoresChart 3 Investment intentions Agents’ summary of business conditions  2018 Q3  4
Mortgage availability continued to be favourable and most 
contacts believed that strong competition in the sector would 
keep lending rates low, despite the rise in Bank Rate. 
Capacity utilisation
Capacity utilisation remained higher than normal in both 
manufacturing and services, mainly due to labour shortages. 
Capacity constraints were particularly elevated in electronics 
manufacturing due to global supply issues for components, 
while constraints eased in the automotive sector. Business 
services firms reported capacity constraints in labour and fixed 
assets. By contrast, many consumer-facing businesses reported 
excess capacity in labour — albeit with some flexibility to 
reduce hours — and fixed assets. 
Employment and pay
Employment intentions were modestly positive, though 
intentions in consumer services weakened slightly, as 
contracting headcount in retail offset growth in tourism and 
hospitality. Recruitment difficulties remained elevated  
(Chart 4 ), and labour market tightness was cited by some 
construction, haulage and IT contacts as a binding constraint. 
A continued slowing in the inward flow of EU migrants was 
reported to have exacerbated skills shortages in agriculture, 
manufacturing and hospitality. Firms were addressing 
recruitment difficulties by hiring and training lower-skilled 
workers, upskilling existing staff, taking on more apprentices 
and graduates, and investing in automation to improve 
productivity. An increasing number of contacts reported 
expanding non-salary benefits such as flexible working and 
changes to working conditions to attract and retain staff. 
Some contacts reported reducing the number of hours worked 
by staff. Reasons for reducing hours included: containing 
overall labour costs; realising efficiency gains from automation; 
and improving work/life balance. Average pay settlements were a little higher than a year ago, in 
a range of 2½%–3½%. Growth in total labour costs picked up 
due to the increase in employers’ pension auto-enrolment 
contributions; the rise in the National Living Wage — and 
pressure to maintain pay differentials in line with it; the 
Apprenticeship Levy, and ad hoc  payments to retain staff with 
key skills ( Chart 5 ). 
Pricing
Supply chain pricing
Materials cost inflation remained elevated ( Chart 6 ), driven by 
rising prices for fuel, food ingredients, metals, packaging 
materials, construction products, and energy, where contacts 
reported increases of up to 20% on renewal of contracts. Many 
contacts reported being able to implement small increases in 
output prices, though competitive pressures limited the ability 
of some manufacturers and suppliers of commoditised services 
to increase prices. +
–Three months on the same period a year earlier
2101234Scores
Manufacturing Services
2006 08 09 11 13 15 17 07 10 12 14 16 18Chart 5 Total labour costs per employee
+
–In the past three months ‘relative to normal’
543210123Score
2006 08 09 11 13 15 17 07 10 12 14 16 18Chart 4 Recruitment difficulties
+
–Three months on the same period a year earlier
321012345
2006 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18Scores
Materials costsImported ﬁnished 
goods pricesChart 6 Raw materials and imported finished goods Agents’ summary of business conditions  2018 Q3  5
Consumer prices
Consumer goods price inflation held steady at an elevated 
level, reflecting past exchange rate effects and higher fuel 
prices. Price growth was limited in the retail sector, and was 
modest in the services sector more broadly ( Chart 7 ). Looking 
ahead, contacts in the grocery sector expected upward 
pressure on food prices due to the dry weather reducing yields 
of some vegetable and arable crops. 
+
–Three months on the same period a year earlier
32101234Scores
Retail goods Retail services 
2006 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18Chart 7 Retail goods and services prices Agents’ summary of business conditions  2018 Q3  6
Box 1
Results from the Decision Maker Panel survey
Overview
Together with academics from Stanford University and the 
University of Nottingham, the Bank has developed the 
Decision Maker Panel (DMP) survey to help monitor recent 
developments in the UK economy and to track businesses’ 
expectations and the uncertainty surrounding them. (1) The 
DMP is particularly valuable in helping to assess the 
implications for UK businesses ahead of the UK’s withdrawal 
from the EU. The more quantitative responses from the  
DMP survey complement the more qualitative intelligence 
gathered from Bank Agents’ contacts.
The panel comprises Chief Financial Officers from small, 
medium and large UK companies operating in a broad range of 
industries and it is designed to be representative of the 
population of UK businesses. (2) Around 4,400 businesses had 
agreed to be part of the panel at the time of the July survey. 
The response rate has averaged around 45% in recent months. 
Aggregate-level data from the DMP survey are available on the 
Bank’s website. (3)(4) This box summarises the latest findings.
Sales expectations
DMP members reported that nominal sales rose, on average, 
by 3.5% over the year to 2018 Q1 and they expected sales to 
increase by 4.6% over the next year ( Chart A ). In line with 
recent macroeconomic data, businesses experienced a 
slowdown in sales growth in Q1 compared to previous 
quarters. But businesses anticipate this slowdown will be 
temporary as expected year-ahead sales growth did not fall 
substantially. Chart A  also shows that the DMP sales growth 
data have followed a similar pattern to the nearest equivalent 
measure in the National Accounts, total final expenditure. (5)
This indicates that the DMP data are providing a representative 
view.  
Now that the DMP has been running for around two years, 
there are sufficient data to be able to compare the reported 
sales growth out turns for panel members to their expectations 
a year earlier. In aggregate, reported annual sales growth 
between 2017 Q3 and 2018 Q1 has been slightly lower than 
was expected by DMP members a year earlier (as shown by the 
solid red line on Chart A  being below the dotted red line). But 
the prediction that sales growth would slow during this period 
has been accurate.  
At the individual firm level, predictions made by DMP 
members for the sales growth of the business that they 
represent have proved to be well correlated with subsequent 
out turns. That is evident in Chart B , which splits firms into 
twenty-five quantiles according to their previous sales 
expectations and compares realised sales growth with earlier expectations for the same period. Businesses who previously 
expected higher sales growth have had significantly higher 
sales growth than those who had lower expectations. As well 
as collecting information on the central expectations of 
businesses, the DMP also collects information about the 
uncertainty surrounding those expectations. Errors in 
(1) This project is supported by the Economic and Social Research Council (grant number 
ES/P010385/1).
(2) When it was launched, the DMP initially excluded a small number of sectors, such  
as agriculture, mining and finance. Those sectors are excluded from the results 
reported in this box, but the survey is now being expanded to include these industries 
and they will be included in future reports as soon as sufficiently large samples have 
been built up.
(3) For details on the methodology, please see www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/
Pages/quarterlybulletin/2017/q2/a3.aspx. All results are weighted. 
(4) For aggregate data and details on questions, please see www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/
media/boe/files/statistics/research-datasets/dmp-results-september-2018.xlsx.
(5) Total final expenditure is defined as GDP before imports are deducted.0246810
Q1 Q1 Q1 Q3 Q4 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q2 Q3 Q4
2016 17 18 19DMP: nominal sales
over past year
DMP: expected nominal
sales next year
ONS: nominal total
ﬁnal expenditurePercentage change on a year earlierChart A Average realised and expected growth in 
nominal sales
Sources: DMP, ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Questions about sales refer to the last complete quarter. Latest DMP data are for year to 
2018 Q1 and expectations for year to 2019 Q1, which are shown by the diamond.
+
–
+ –505101520
10 01 02 03 0Realised annual sales growth (per cent)
Predicted annual sales growth a year earlier (per cent)Chart B Realised and expected growth in nominal sales 
at firm level
Sources: DMP and Bank calculations.
(a) Comparison of average realised firm-level sales growth for 2017 Q3 to 2018 Q1 with 
predictions for the same business made a year earlier. Individual responses are divided into  
25 quantiles according to previous sales expectations. Average responses are shown for those 
25 groups. Agents’ summary of business conditions  2018 Q3  7
predicting year-ahead sales growth appear to be correlated 
with the uncertainty around those predictions.
Exporters versus domestic businesses
In the year following the June 2016 EU referendum, businesses 
who export experienced significantly higher annual sales 
growth than domestically focussed firms ( Chart C ). That is 
likely to have reflected the depreciation of the exchange rate 
boosting the growth of nominal exports. More recently, the 
gap in sales growth between exporters and non-exporters has 
narrowed. But sales growth is still reported to have been 
slightly higher among exporters and is expected to remain so 
over the year to 2019 Q1.  
Although the exchange rate depreciation appears to have 
helped boost the sales of exporters since the referendum, firms 
thought that Brexit was more likely to lead to lower than 
higher exports over the longer term. The average probability of 
Brexit eventually decreasing foreign sales was put at 40%, 
while the average probability of a positive impact was 14%, 
with a 46% chance of no impact ( Chart D ).
The depreciation of sterling may also have boosted the profit 
margins of exporters if it allowed them to receive high sterling 
prices for their exports without raising foreign currency prices. 
To investigate this, DMP panel members were asked about 
their profit margins for the first time between May 2018 and  
July 2018.  
Exporters reported higher profit margins than more 
domestically focussed businesses in 2018 Q1. But the results 
also highlight the important effects that higher imported costs 
have had on profit margins too, given that the exchange rate 
depreciation will have increased these costs. Profit margins were reported to be highest for exporters who did not also 
import any goods or services ( Chart E ). Firms who both export 
and import had similar margins to those who did neither, 
indicating that the positive export and negative import effects 
on margins are likely to have largely offset each other for these 
firms. Margins were reported to be lowest for domestically 
focussed firms who import.
024681012Percentage changes on a year earlier
Solid lines: past year
Dashed lines: expectations for next year
Exporters
Domestic ﬁrms
Q1 Q1 Q1 Q3 Q4 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q2 Q3 Q4
2016 17 18 19Chart C Average realised and expected growth in sales of 
exporters and non‑exporters
Sources: DMP and Bank calculations. 
(a) Questions about sales refer to the last complete quarter. Latest data are for year to 2018 Q1 
and expectations for year to 2019 Q1, which are shown by the diamonds.01020304050
No impact Large
negative
effectSmall
negative
effectSmall
positive
effectLarge
positive
effectAverage probability (per cent)Chart D Expected eventual impact of Brexit on exports
Sources: DMP and Bank calculations. 
(a) Question: ‘How do you think the eventual Brexit agreement will affect the revenue your 
business generates by selling UK-sourced goods and services in international markets, 
compared to what would have been the case had the UK remained a member of the EU?’.  
A large effect corresponds to changing exports by 10% or more, a small effect is defined as 
less than 10%. Question asked to exporters only between May and July 2018.
0246810121416
AllAverage operating proﬁt margin in 2018 Q1 (per cent)
Does not
export or
importImports,
does not
exportExports,
does not
importExports
and
importsChart E Operating profit margins
Sources: DMP and Bank calculations.
(a) Profit margin data were collected between May 2018 and July 2018 and refer to 2018 Q1.  
Breakdown by use of exports and imports is for a subsample who has responded to questions 
about their exports and imports in previous surveys.