Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2018/2018-q2.pdf
Date: 2018-06-30

Agents’ summary of business conditions  
and results from the Decision Maker Panel Survey
2018 Q2
There had been a tick up in retail sales growth , helped by stronger 
sales of seasonal clothing and footwear. However, this was not 
sufficient to fully make up for sales lost due to the adverse weather in 
Q1. There was ongoing weak demand for new cars, white goods and 
homewares. Growth in consumer services  slowed, particularly in 
travel and tourism. Contacts attributed cautious consumer sentiment 
to squeezed real incomes, higher pensions auto‑enrolment 
contributions and political uncertainty. 
Business services  turnover had grown relatively solidly, with fee 
growth driven by Mergers & Acquisition (M&A) activity by overseas 
buyers. Preparations for Brexit and activity relating to insolvency, 
restructuring and company voluntary arrangements, as well as 
regulatory changes such as GDPR and IFRS9 had also supported 
activity. 
Services exports  values had grown at a moderate pace, with strength 
among professional services firms, engineering, IT and 
pharmaceuticals research and development. 
Growth in domestic manufacturing output  edged up, with some 
manufacturers benefiting from suppliers looking to source more 
goods from the UK. Growth in export manufacturing output  eased 
slightly but remained firm. The slight slowdown reflected a modest 
easing in global demand for some products such as UK ‑produced 
vehicles, and materials for processing destined for China.
Construction output  remained little changed on a year ago, and 
contacts were cautious about the short ‑term outlook. 
Investment intentions  remained modestly positive among 
manufacturers and in business services. Some manufacturers were 
investing in capacity in order to meet export demand, others in 
automation to overcome labour shortages or in diversification to 
insure against weak consumer activity and competition. 
Corporate demand for credit  remained subdued. Bank credit 
continued to be readily available for medium and large companies, 
and firms with strong balance sheets. However, bank credit 
availability  was still tightening for consumer‑facing, construction and 
property development firms, and trade credit insurance for these firms had also tightened. Moreover, small firms reported increasing 
difficulty accessing traditional bank finance.
 
There was modest excess demand among investors for commercial 
real estate . In London, high values had dampened demand from 
domestic buyers, but the weak exchange rate supported demand from 
overseas. In other parts of the UK, valuations had risen for good 
quality assets in prime locations. Nonetheless, there were some signs 
of investors becoming more cautious.
In the housing market , supply and demand were broadly in balance 
across the whole market, with excess supply more prevalent in the 
south, while excess demand was more evident in parts of the north. 
Mortgage availability  was generally regarded as favourable for 
borrowers, reflecting strong competition in the market, though a few 
contacts noted that affordability assessments had tightened 
somewhat.
Capacity constraints  in manufacturing remained tighter than normal, 
notably for exporters. In services, capacity utilisation was around 
normal overall, reflecting tight capacity in business services and 
excess capacity in consumer ‑facing sectors. 
Employment intentions  in consumer services had weakened further, 
indicating contracting headcount. Intentions in business services and 
manufacturing remained consistent with modest employment 
growth. Planned productivity improvements through automation 
were expected to constrain headcount growth. Recruitment 
difficulties  remained elevated and widespread across sectors and job 
roles. Pay settlements had generally been a little higher this year.
Materials costs inflation  was steady. Pass‑through of the past 
depreciation of sterling to the cost of imported goods had abated, but 
there had been quite significant increases in some material costs, 
particularly construction materials, metals and oil‑derived products. 
Nonetheless, profit margins  in manufacturing were stable and export 
margins remained attractive. 
Consumer goods price inflation  had eased, reflecting the diminishing 
effect of the past fall in sterling, and widespread competitive 
pressures. •	Retail sales growth had ticked up over the past month, boosted by stronger sales of seasonal clothing and 
footwear; growth in consumer services had slowed.
•	Growth in domestic manufacturing output had edged up; growth in export output had eased slightly but 
remained robust.
This publication includes a summary of economic reports compiled by the Bank of England’s Agents between late March and late May 2018.  
It generally makes comparisons with activity and prices a year earlier. The report does not represent the Bank’s own views, nor does it 
represent the views of any particular company or region.  More information on the Bank’s Agencies can be found at  
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/agentssummary/default.aspx. Agents’ summary of business conditions  2018 Q2  2
Consumer services and retail sales
Growth in consumer services turnover had softened a little 
further ( Chart 1 ), reflecting slower growth in discretionary 
spending on smaller ‑ticket leisure services (travel and tourism, 
hotel bookings, etc). However, forward bookings for summer 
holidays had held up well. By contrast, there had been a tick up 
in retail sales growth, assisted by stronger sales of seasonal 
clothing and footwear. Growth in demand for consumer goods 
had not recovered sufficiently to make up for sales lost due to 
the adverse weather in Q1, however, and there was ongoing 
weak demand for new cars, white goods and homewares. 
Contacts attributed more cautious consumer sentiment to 
squeezed real incomes, higher pensions auto‑enrolment 
contributions and political uncertainty. Third‑sector contacts 
suggested that delays in benefit payments and benefits 
sanctions were increasing the pressure on low‑income 
households.
The Agents conducted a survey of consumer demand (see 
Box 1). Overall, the results indicated that there had been a 
significant drop in sales volumes in Q1 due to the adverse 
weather, with lost sales likely to be only partially recovered in 
subsequent quarters. However, improvements in consumers’ 
real disposable incomes and in confidence were both expected 
to boost volume growth in the year ahead, in contrast to the 
survey results from 2017.  
Business and financial services
Business services turnover had been growing relatively solidly 
and more strongly than most other sectors. This was despite 
some hesitancy around client investment decisions that 
contacts reported had been driven by political uncertainty.
For professional services firms, Mergers and Acquisition (M&A) 
activity from overseas buyers, Brexit preparations, and 
insolvency and restructuring activity had driven fee growth. 
Regulatory changes such as GDPR and IFRS9 had also 
supported activity. In addition, demand for recruitment 
services had been helped by a tight labour market. Law firms reported some domestic growth, though this remained slower 
than overseas work.
Financial services firms remained under pressure to improve 
shareholder returns, for example by exiting low‑margin 
lending. Competitive pressures were considered particularly 
strong in UK retail lending markets, and in global wholesale 
markets. Developments in technology continued to enable 
greater competition in some sectors. Growth was weak in the 
UK retail market for financial services, but the UK asset 
management industry was able to grow, benefiting from the 
rise in global savings.
In other business services, turnover growth had been strongest 
in IT businesses, followed by logistics and haulage. 
Retail‑focused wholesalers and distributors had suffered from 
the knock ‑on impact of weaker consumer activity. 
Services exports values had continued to grow at a moderate 
pace. Appetite from overseas investors looking to purchase 
UK businesses continued to boost exports growth among 
professional services firms. Demand for specialist services such 
as engineering, IT and research and development in 
pharmaceuticals was also strong. The past depreciation of 
sterling appeared to continue to support inward tourism from 
abroad and related spending, although contacts suggested 
that over the past year terrorism concerns had reduced 
tourism in London. 
Production
Growth in domestic manufacturing output edged up. Growth 
remained stronger for those in export supply chains, though 
domestic ‑faced manufacturers benefited from suppliers 
looking to source more goods from the UK. Consumer goods 
manufacturers reported that weaker consumer confidence had 
dampened demand for big‑ticket items. In the food and drink 
sector, output had been growing modestly, although retailers 
were paring back on some product ranges. Construction 
products suppliers were still benefiting from growth in 
housebuilding, but activity had been more muted in other 
parts of the sector. Automotive manufacturing and its 
domestic supply chain was subdued as a result of lower 
demand for cars and commercial vehicles, especially diesel 
models. Higher oil prices were supporting growth in the 
production of capital equipment and components for the oil 
and gas sector.
Growth in export volumes of manufactured goods had eased 
slightly ( Chart 2 ), but remained firm and outpaced growth for 
the domestic market. The slight slowdown mainly reflected a 
modest easing in global demand for some products such as 
UK‑produced vehicles, and materials for processing destined 
for China. Volumes continued to be supported by the past 
depreciation of sterling, although somewhat less so than +
–Three months on the same period a year earlier
3210123
20060 70 80 91 01 11 21 31 41 51 61 718Scores
Consumer services turnoverRetail sales valuesChart 1 Retail sales values and consumer services turnover Agents’ summary of business conditions  2018 Q2  3
Box 
Box 1
Survey: consumer demand
The Agents surveyed business contacts about how consumer 
demand had been affected by bad weather in recent months, and how sales volumes had changed in the past 12 months and were expected to evolve over the next 12 months. Contacts were also asked how different factors would affect sales volume growth in the coming 12 months, and how prices would change in that period. Around 230 companies responded. Results were weighted by turnover; one large response was reduced in weight to match its market share of 
the relevant sub ‑sector. 
The survey showed that, in the past three months, sales volumes had dropped by around 1½% due to bad weather.
Sales weakness was spread across goods and services and 
suppliers. Contacts expected that just over a third of these lost sales would eventually be recouped, with 80% of that by Q2 (Chart A). Consumer service providers were less confident than goods retailers that they would recoup lost sales. 
The survey showed that sales volumes growth over the past 
12 months was modest at around a% (Chart B). Consumer 
service providers and online retailers registered the strongest 
growth, offset by weakness in traditional bricks and mortar retailers and goods wholesalers. Contacts expected volumes growth to pick up to around 3% in the year ahead, with all sectors expecting to grow. 
Among the factors likely to affect consumer sales volumes 
over the next 12 months (Chart C), the World Cup was expected to give a positive sales boost, for example in sales of electronics and alcoholic drinks. Changes to consumer confidence and consumers’ real disposable incomes were expected to make a small positive contribution to demand, in contrast to last year’s survey where they were significant drags on demand growth. 
We asked firms how they expected unit prices to change over 
the coming 12 months. Inflation expectations for the next 
12 months averaged 1.5% across our sample. By sector, 
consumer service providers expected the highest inflation at just over 2%, with more modest expectations by goods retailers as the effects of sterling’s past depreciation continue to fade. Recouped volumes (percentage points)
2.01.51.00.50.0
–
Initial loss Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
2018Per cent
(b)Chart A Impact of bad weather on past three months’ 
sales volumes,(a) and subsequent recovery by quarter
(a) The initial lost sales volumes estimate is based on broad response buckets rather than point 
estimates. In calculating the overall impact, a judgement was applied to the results for one 
bucket, as written responses had suggested the impact was towards the smaller end of the 
range for that bucket. 
(b) The dotted line denotes the lost sales that retailers expected eventually to be recouped.0123
Implied approximate growth ratePer centPast 12 months
Next 12 monthsChart B Estimates of sales volumes growth(a) 
(a) Implied gr owth rates are calculated from broad response buckets, rather than point estimates 
of growth, so are broad approximations only. 
80 60 40 20 02 04 06 0The World Cup(b)
Change in 
your pricing
Other factors
Change in consumer 
conﬁdence
Change in consumers’
real disposable incomes
Change in consumer 
preferences
Net balance (per cent)
 2018 survey
2017 survey
+ –Chart C Factors affecting sales volumes over next 
12 months — 2018 and 2017 survey results(a)
(a) Last year’s survey was conducted in January and February 2017. 
(b) Not r elevant in 2017. Agents’ summary of business conditions  2018 Q2  4
previously. Nevertheless, most exporters continued to report 
strong volume growth to major markets such as the EU and 
US, notably in pharmaceuticals, food, drink and textiles. Brexit 
was causing exporters and clients to examine their supply 
chains due to potential tariff and non‑tariff barriers, and there 
were growing concerns about global trade protectionism.
Construction
Activity in construction remained little changed on a year ago 
and contacts were cautious about the short ‑term outlook. 
Although the level of activity had recovered from the effects of 
adverse weather in Q1, in many cases lost activity had not 
been fully made up because of capacity constraints within the 
sector. As a result some completion times had been delayed. 
Housebuilding remained the strongest part of the sector, but 
growth had slowed and contacts were finding it harder to sell 
new houses than last year. Elsewhere, there was some 
weakness in infrastructure, where there was not enough new 
work to offset completing projects, and in retail where store 
expansion had been significantly curtailed. However, there was 
stronger activity in warehousing and logistics.
Investment
Investment intentions remained modestly positive among 
manufacturers and in business services. Some manufacturers 
were investing in capacity in order to meet export demand, 
others in automation to overcome labour shortages or in 
diversification to insure against weak consumer activity and 
competition. However, intentions among consumer ‑facing 
businesses had been depressed by concerns about soft 
consumer activity and tight margins. Brexit uncertainty was 
weighing down discretionary or expansionary investment for 
some medium to larger ‑sized businesses, or those with a 
greater international focus. SMEs and domestic ‑facing 
businesses were more likely to maintain a business as usual 
approach to investment as potential Brexit effects remained 
unclear. Corporate financing conditions
Corporate demand for credit remained subdued. Bank credit 
(Chart 3 ) continued to be readily available for medium and 
large companies, and firms with strong balance sheets. 
Growing competition among non‑bank lenders was leading to 
looser price and non‑price conditions for larger companies.
However, bank credit availability was still tightening for 
consumer ‑facing, construction and development firms, and the 
availability of trade credit insurance for such firms had also 
reduced. Moreover, small firms reported increasing difficulty 
accessing traditional bank finance. 
Suppliers to consumer ‑facing businesses had reported an 
increased incidence of bad debts, and contacts expected 
continued retail and restaurant company voluntary 
arrangements (CVAs) and administrations as rising costs and 
over‑supply put pressure on balance sheets. 
Property markets
Commercial real estate
There was modest excess demand among investors for 
commercial real estate. In London, high valuations had 
dampened demand from domestic buyers, but the past fall in 
the exchange rate had supported demand from overseas. In 
other parts of the UK, valuations had risen for good quality 
assets in prime locations, which offered better yields than in 
London. Nonetheless, there were some signs that investors 
were becoming more cautious. Local authorities were buying 
less than last year. There was little appetite among investors 
for retail assets, amid concerns that valuations may come 
under pressure. There was strong occupier demand for 
industrial and warehouse premises and city centre offices, 
where availability was relatively low and rents were rising, 
albeit not sufficiently to stimulate a significant rise in new 
building. Vacancy rates continued to rise in the retail sector +
–Three months on the same period a year earlier
5432101234Scores
Manufacturing (export)
Manufacturing (domestic)
20060 70 80 91 01 11 21 31 41 51 61 718Chart 2 Manufacturing output
+
–Relative to normal
101234
May Aug. Nov. Feb. May Aug. Nov. Feb. May Aug. Nov.F eb. MayScores
Medium
SmallLarge
2015 16 17 18Chart 3 Credit availability Agents’ summary of business conditions  2018 Q2  5
and contacts reported that CVAs were being used by a number 
of large tenants to push through rent reductions or accelerate 
store closures.
Housing market
In the housing market, supply and demand were broadly in 
balance across the whole market, with excess supply more 
prevalent in southern regions, while excess demand was more 
evident in parts of the north. The secondary market remained 
much weaker than the new‑build market, which had been 
supported by the Help to Buy scheme. Nonetheless, there 
were some reports that new‑build properties were taking 
longer to sell than a year ago and required greater use of 
incentives. Overall, contacts expected activity to remain 
subdued, and house price inflation was expected to remain 
modest. Mortgage availability was generally regarded as 
favourable for borrowers, reflecting strong competition in the 
market, though a few contacts noted that affordability 
assessments had tightened somewhat.
Capacity utilisation
Capacity constraints in manufacturing remained tighter than 
normal, especially for exporters. The impact of suppliers 
looking to source more goods from the UK was increasing 
capacity constraints for some domestically focused producers. 
Slower demand had eased capacity constraints for producers 
of construction materials. 
In services, capacity utilisation was around normal overall, 
reflecting tight capacity in business services and excess 
capacity in consumer ‑facing sectors. Business‑facing contacts 
in sectors such as professional services, warehousing and 
distribution reported above‑normal capacity constraints, 
mostly reflecting limited availability of skilled labour. Fixed 
asset utilisation was expected to ease with continued 
investment in warehousing and distribution. Higher capacity 
constraints among business‑facing services was offset by a 
growing excess capacity in retail, while capacity utilisation in 
hotels and other consumer services businesses had eased 
somewhat.
Employment and pay
Employment intentions in consumer ‑facing sectors had 
weakened further, indicating contracting headcount ( Chart 4 ). 
This primarily reflected job cuts in retail on the back of store 
closures and rationalisation of management and support roles, 
as well as closures in parts of the hospitality sector. Intentions 
in business services and manufacturing remained consistent 
with modest employment growth. Planned productivity 
improvements through automation were expected to 
constrain headcount growth.  Recruitment difficulties remained elevated and were 
widespread across sectors and job roles. There were a growing 
number of reports of vacancies taking longer to fill and, in a 
small number of cases, labour shortages were constraining 
headcount growth. This was particularly the case where skill 
shortages were most acute, eg construction trades, drivers, 
specialist engineering and IT. A continued slowing in the 
inward flow of EU migrants for lower skilled and/or seasonal 
work was reported to be acting as a constraint in sectors such 
agriculture and food, hospitality and warehousing. Employee 
churn remained manageable for most contacts, due to a 
combination of companies making counter ‑offers to retain key 
skills, and reduced employee turnover in some sectors, such as 
retail and construction.  
Pay settlements were generally a little higher this year 
compared with 2017, averaging 2½%–3½%. That was 
attributed to a combination of a tighter labour market and 
recent above‑target CPI inflation. The National Living Wage 
was the main factor driving stronger pay growth in consumer 
services and a few other sectors that employ a high proportion 
of low‑paid workers. But the impact on average wage bills was 
often limited by making lower or no awards to more senior 
staff. There were continued reports of companies awarding 
bigger pay increases to address skill shortages, but these were 
normally targeted at relatively small numbers of key 
employees. Total labour costs growth had risen for some 
contacts due to the increase in employers’ pensions 
auto‑enrolment contributions.
Pricing
Supply chain pricing
Materials costs inflation was steady overall ( Chart 5 ). 
Pass‑through of the past depreciation of sterling to the cost of 
imported goods had abated, so imported finished goods prices 
inflation had continued to moderate. However, there had been 
quite significant increases in some material costs, particularly 
construction materials, metals and oil‑derived products.+
–Over the coming six months
5432101234Scores
Business services
ManufacturingConsumer services
20060 70 80 91 01 11 21 31 41 51 61 718Chart 4 Employment intentions Agents’ summary of business conditions  2018 Q2  6
Output price inflation eased slightly for manufactured 
products, but was significantly higher for construction 
products. Business services providers continued to achieve 
modest annual fee increases for bespoke or specialised services 
but were less able to raise fees for commoditised services. 
Profit margins in manufacturing remained stable as import 
cost inflation abated, and export margins remained attractive. 
Margins on services, by contrast, remained squeezed as higher 
costs of specialist labour in professional services and entry 
level labour in consumer services could not be fully passed 
through.
Consumer prices
Consumer goods price inflation had eased ( Chart 6 ), reflecting 
the diminishing effect of the past fall in sterling and 
widespread competitive pressures. In the grocery sector, price 
growth was expected to be materially lower in 2018 than in 
2017. Car list prices had risen due to the lagged pass‑through 
of sterling’s depreciation. Consumer services inflation 
remained steady, although inflation among hotels and 
restaurants, which have expanded capacity considerably in 
recent years was slowing. Meanwhile, energy, utility and fuel 
prices had been increasing recently. 
 
 +
–Three months on the same period a year earlier
321012345Scores
Materials costsImported ﬁnished
goods prices
20060 70 80 91 01 11 21 31 41 51 61 718Chart 5 Raw materials costs and imported finished goods prices
+
–Three months on the same period a year earlier
32101234Scores
Retail goods Retail services 
20060 70 80 91 01 11 21 31 41 51 61 718Chart 6 Consumer goods and services prices Agents’ summary of business conditions  2018 Q2  7
Box 
Box 2
Results from the Decision Maker Panel survey
Overview
Together with academics from Stanford University and the 
University of Nottingham, the Bank has developed the 
Decision Maker Panel (DMP) survey to help monitor recent 
developments in the UK economy and to track businesses’ 
expectations and the uncertainty surrounding them. (1) The 
DMP is particularly valuable in helping to assess the 
implications for UK businesses ahead of the United Kingdom’s 
withdrawal from the European Union. The more quantitative 
responses from the DMP survey complement the more 
qualitative intelligence gathered from Bank Agents’ contacts.
The panel comprises Chief Financial Officers (CFOs) from 
small, medium and large UK companies operating in a broad 
range of industries and is designed to be representative of the 
population of UK businesses. (2) The panel is continuing to 
expand; at the time of the April DMP survey around 4,000 
members had agreed to be part of the panel, of which 1,000 
had been added over the preceding three months. The 
response rate has been between 40% and 50% in recent 
surveys. Aggregate‑level data from the DMP survey are 
available on the Bank’s website. (3)(4) This box summarises the 
latest findings.
Latest views on Brexit
One of the key purposes of the DMP is to track how 
businesses’ attitudes to Brexit are evolving. Between February 
and April 2018, panel members were asked to assign 
probabilities to potential impacts that the eventual Brexit deal 
may have on their sales, relative to what would have been the 
case if the United Kingdom had remained a member of the 
European Union. On average, companies attached higher 
probabilities to negative impacts than to positive ones 
(Chart A ). An estimate of the expected eventual change in 
sales due to Brexit can be calculated for each respondent by 
multiplying some simple mid‑points for the five response 
categories shown on Chart A  by the probabilities assigned to 
them. (5) The average eventual change in sales was negative and 
stood at around ‑3%. Using the same methodology would 
suggest that the most pessimistic 10% of businesses expected 
a reduction in sales of more than 10% due to Brexit, while the 
most optimistic 10% of respondents expected a boost of 1% 
or more. 
Relative to a year earlier, in the most recent surveys businesses 
attached slightly higher average probabilities to Brexit 
eventually reducing sales and slightly lower average 
probabilities to Brexit improving sales ( Chart A ). As a result, 
using the same approach as above to quantify the importance 
of Brexit for sales implies that the expected eventual negative 
impact of Brexit on sales has risen from just over 2% to 3%.In addition to lowering future sales, Brexit is also an important 
source of uncertainty for a number of businesses. In the most 
recent surveys, 37% of panel members thought that Brexit was 
currently in the top three sources of uncertainty for the 
business that they represent ( Chart B ). Relative to a year 
(1) This project is supported by the Economic and Social Research Council (grant number 
ES/P010385/1).
(2) When it was launched the DMP initially excluded a small number of sectors, such as 
agriculture, mining and finance. Those sectors are excluded from the results reported 
in this box, but the survey is now being expanded to cover these industries and they 
will be included in future reports as soon as sufficiently large samples have been built 
up.
(3) For details on the methodology please see www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/
Pages/quarterlybulletin/2017/q2/a3.aspx . 
(4) Aggregate data and details on questions are available on the Bank of England website: 
www.bankofengland.co.uk/‑/media/boe/files/statistics/research‑datasets/
dmp‑results‑june‑2018.xlsx . All results are weighted.
(5) Values of ±15% are used for large positive/negative effect and ±5% for a small 
positive/negative effect. Zero is used for no impact.01020304050
Large
negative
effectNo impact Small
positive
effectLarge
positive
effectFebruary to April 2017
August to October 2017
February to April 2018Average probability (per cent)
Small
negative
effectChart A Expected eventual impact of Brexit on sales(a)
Sources: DMP and Bank calculations.
(a) Question: ‘The Prime Minister has said that the UK government does ‘not seek membership 
of the Single Market. Instead we seek the greatest possible access to it through a new, 
comprehensive, bold and ambitious Free Trade Agreement.’ How likely do you think it is that 
the eventual agreement will have the following effects, compared to what would have been 
the case had the UK remained a member of the EU?’. A large effect corresponds to changing 
sales at home and abroad by 10% or more, a small effect is defined as less than 10%.
01020304050
Not importantSeptember 2016
February to April 2017August to October 2017
February to April 2018
Percentage of respondents
One of many
sourcesOne of top two
or three sourcesLargest current
sourceChart B Brexit as a source of uncertainty(a)
Sources: DMP and Bank calculations.
(a) Question: ‘How much has the result of the EU referendum affected the level of uncertainty 
affecting your business?’. Agents’ summary of business conditions  2018 Q2  8
earlier, slightly fewer firms saw Brexit as an important source 
of uncertainty, although these changes have been modest, and 
overall, substantial uncertainty persists.
The impact of Brexit on investment
Brexit is also affecting businesses’ current decisions. As 
discussed in the February Inflation Report , evidence from the 
DMP implies that Brexit has held back investment growth 
since the referendum. (6) This section updates that analysis.
Data from the DMP survey can provide more quantitative 
evidence on how investment has been affected by Brexit than 
is available from other surveys. This is done by comparing 
relative differences in nominal investment growth for 
businesses with different exposure to Brexit, based on 
responses to the questions described in the section above.  This 
allows for effects through two channels: (i) businesses 
lowering investment because they expect lower future sales 
due to Brexit; and (ii) businesses investing less because Brexit 
has increased uncertainty.
In the year following the Brexit referendum, four ‑quarter 
investment growth is estimated to have been materially lower 
for businesses who expect Brexit to eventually reduce their 
sales than for those who expect either no impact on future 
sales or a positive effect ( Chart C ). Similarly, investment was 
also reported to have been lower over this period for 
businesses who viewed Brexit as being in their top three 
sources of uncertainty than for companies who saw Brexit 
uncertainty as less important ( Chart D ). A simple regression 
analysis of these data, taking account of both effects together, 
implies that Brexit is likely to have lowered aggregate nominal 
investment growth by 3–4 percentage points in the year to 
2017 H1.
Unlike the previous period, in 2017 H2 there were no 
significant differences in investment growth between 
businesses with different degrees of exposure to Brexit on 
either definition ( Charts C  and D). This is likely to be related to 
the fact that growth in 2017 H2 is a comparison of investment 
levels in two post ‑referendum periods, while four ‑quarter 
growth over the preceding year was a comparison of a post ‑
referendum period with a pre‑referendum period. As 
businesses with greater exposure to Brexit in 2017 H2 did not 
experience higher investment growth, this implies that the 
Brexit effect on the level of investment has not yet unwound, 
although the results suggest that the impact has not got larger 
either.
This analysis of the effects of Brexit on investment assumes 
that more exposed firms would have otherwise behaved like 
companies with limited exposure to Brexit. Moreover, the 
approach only captures exchange rate effects on nominal 
investment to the extent they are correlated with expected 
Brexit effects on future sales or uncertainty. It will not capture any additional effects on real investment from the price of 
imported investment goods having increased for all firms, 
which may encourage businesses to buy less of them. This 
would be likely to increase the size of the impact of Brexit on 
real investment. The impact may also be larger, if a weaker 
economy leads to further second‑round reductions on 
investment.10505101520
Little or positive
NegativeExpected eventual change in sales due to Brexit:  Average annual growth in nominal investment (per cent) 
Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
2016 17+
–Chart C Investment growth over the past year by 
expected eventual change in sales due to Brexit(a)
Sources: DMP and Bank calculations.
(a) Investment growth is calculated using Davis, Haltiwanger and Schuh (DHS) growth rates. 
This is the change between two periods, divided by the average of those two periods. The 
expected eventual change in sales due to Brexit is calculated for each business using 
responses to the question reported in Chart A  and by multiplying them by some simple 
mid‑points for the five response categories. Values of ± 15% are used for large positive/
negative effect and ± 5% for small positive/negative effect. This question is only asked every 
six months. Response from the closest corresponding survey is used. Negative change in sales 
is defined as ‑0.5% or lower, while little or positive change as ‑0.5% or higher.
86420246
Less important
Top 3Brexit as a source of uncertainty: Average annual growth in nominal investment (per cent) 
Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
2016 17+
–Chart D Investment growth over the past year by 
importance of Brexit as a source of uncertainty(a)
Sources: DMP and Bank calculations.
(a) Investment growth is calculated using DHS growth rates, as defined in the footnote to 
Chart C . Whether Brexit is in the top three source of uncertainty for a business is calculated 
using responses to the question reported in Chart B . This question is only asked every 
six months. Response from the closest corresponding survey is used.
(6) See the box on page 17: www.bankofengland.co.uk/‑/media/boe/files/inflation‑
report/2018/february/inflation‑report ‑february‑2018.pdf .