Source: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/2019/2019-q1.pdf
Date: 2019-03-31

This publication includes a summary of economic reports compiled by the Bank of England’s Agents during February 2019. References to 
activity and prices relate to the past three months compared with a year earlier. The Agents’ scores are available at www.bankofengland.
co.uk/-/media/boe/files/agents-summary/agentsscores.xlsx . The report does not represent the Bank’s own views, nor does it represent the 
views of any particular company or region. More information on the Bank’s Agencies can be found at www.bankofengland.co.uk/about/
people/agents . This publication also includes a summary of information gathered by the Bank’s Decision Maker Panel survey. Further detail 
is provided in Box 2 on pages 8–9.  Growth in the value of retail sales  weakened, as uncertainty 
about Brexit and the wider economy weighed on spending.
Business and financial services  activity slowed a little, 
reflecting caution in the run-up to Brexit and wider economic 
and political uncertainty. 
Growth in exports of services  slowed, in part due to weaker 
demand for consultancy services. 
Growth in domestic manufacturing output  slowed. This 
reflected a fall in output in the automotive sector and weaker 
construction output growth, which was only partially offset by 
growth generated by stockbuilding. The latest Agents’ survey 
on preparations for EU withdrawal showed that around two 
fifths of all respondents have been building inventories (Box 1).
Weaker demand from Europe and China weighed on growth in 
exports of manufactured goods , with the Agents’ score for 
this measure falling to its lowest level in more than two years. 
Construction  output growth eased as weakening housing 
market conditions and business investment weighed on 
activity. 
Investment intentions fell sharply in manufacturing, mostly 
due to Brexit uncertainty. There was a modest decline in 
investment intentions in the services sector. Demand for credit  from corporates softened. Credit 
availability tightened a little, particularly for contacts in the 
retail and construction sectors. 
There was slower demand for commercial real estate  from 
both domestic and overseas investors, but demand continued 
to outweigh supply.
Housing market activity  weakened for new-build homes as 
well as for second-hand properties, but the rental market 
remained buoyant. 
Capacity constraints  remained above normal, particularly in 
the logistics sector, partly due to stockpiling activity.
Recruitment difficulties continued to intensify and remained 
widespread. Employment intentions weakened a little, 
however, and pay growth appeared to be levelling off.
Consumer goods price inflation  slowed sharply but consumer 
services price inflation moderated less, partly due to  
wage-driven price increases in some sectors. • Contacts reported a further softening in activity over the past few months compared with a year ago.
• Growth in consumer demand slowed a little further, especially for major household purchases.
• A majority of contacts in the Agents’ Brexit survey said they were making contingency plans in case of a  
‘no deal’ Brexit.
• Investment intentions continued to weaken, particularly in manufacturing.Agents’ summary of business conditions  
and results from the Decision Maker Panel survey
2019 Q1 Agents’ summary of business conditions  2019 Q1  2
Consumer demand 
Over the past three months, annual growth in the value of 
retail sales weakened ( Chart 1 ), and remained below its 
long-run average. This mostly reflected softening activity in 
store-based retail. Demand for furniture and household 
appliances slowed, which contacts attributed to rising 
uncertainty related to Brexit and subdued housing market 
activity. Spending on essential items held up. For example, 
supermarket contacts reported better-than-expected food 
sales, possibly reflecting lower spending on restaurant dining. 
However, there were isolated reports of smaller basket sizes 
and trading down.
Annual growth in consumer services values remained modest 
— even compared with a year ago when activity was adversely 
affected by the severe winter weather. 
Business and financial services
Business and financial services activity slowed a little but grew 
at a modest rate ( Chart 2 ). Activity began to soften in some 
areas where growth had previously been strong, such as 
professional services and mergers and acquisitions. The stalling 
of some commercial property deals had a negative impact on 
businesses in the legal, consultancy and financial sectors. 
Contacts said weaker demand reflected Brexit uncertainty and 
concerns about UK political stability as well as worries about 
trade tensions between the US and China, which could have a 
knock-on effect on professional services. However, contacts 
thought that activity could pick up again if Brexit-related 
uncertainty cleared.
To date, there has been limited evidence of business service 
contacts or their customers moving activity out of the UK. 
Where changes have been made, this has usually involved 
replicating a modest proportion of the UK business in 
continental Europe, for example distribution or regulatory 
approvals processing. Some firms, such as those offering professional advice on 
Brexit-related planning, reported stronger activity. 
Employment agencies benefited from continued tightness in 
the labour market, corporate restructuring and the relocation 
of some roles to continental Europe. This had generated 
activity and allowed some contacts to increase their fees. 
Difficulties in the retail sector and corporate distress more 
broadly had generated some additional business for 
insolvency-related services. 
Exports of services
Growth in services export values eased to below average rates, 
due to slower global demand and Brexit-related uncertainty. 
Demand for consultancy services weakened. Higher education 
organisations found it harder to attract foreign students due to 
Brexit concerns and visa issues. There were signs that demand 
for UK assets from foreign investors had eased, albeit from a 
high level. 
There has been little evidence so far of a marked shift away 
from UK services by EU customers, however. Indeed, some 
Europe-based firms have sought to secure access to UK 
markets post-Brexit by investing in UK businesses, 
infrastructure and commercial real estate, which has 
supported exports of services. And inbound tourism continued 
to grow, helped by the weakness of sterling. 
Manufacturing
The Agents’ score measuring growth in domestic 
manufacturing output weakened to its lowest in around two 
years ( Chart 3 ), but remained above its long-run average. 
Although stockbuilding by companies provided some support 
to output growth, this was offset by weakness in other areas. 
The Agents’ latest survey on preparations for EU withdrawal 
showed that around two thirds of manufacturers were building 
inventories (Box 1).+
–
3210123
2006 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 1819Scores
Consumer services valuesConsumer goods valuesThree months on the same period a year earlierChart 1 Consumer goods and services values+
–
432101234
Other business servicesThree months on the same period a year earlier
Professional and ﬁnancial services
2006 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 1819ScoresChart 2 Business and financial services turnover Agents’ summary of business conditions  2019 Q1  3
Box 1
Agents’ survey on preparations for  
EU withdrawal
The Agents surveyed almost 300 business contacts about their 
preparations for EU withdrawal between 29 January and 
1 March. (1) The results of this survey — referred to as the  
‘March survey’ — are summarised in this box. 
The March survey indicated that companies had stepped up 
their preparations for a ‘no deal, no transition Brexit’ and that 
their reported readiness for this scenario had improved 
compared with the previous survey in January. (2)  
In March, around two thirds of respondents said that they had 
started implementing contingency plans — both agreed and in 
development — for a ‘no deal, no transition’ Brexit ( Chart A ). 
This compared with just under half of respondents in the 
January survey. 
However, there was still a significant minority — just under a 
third of contacts — who were not making any plans. This was 
mostly because they did not think they would be affected by a 
‘no deal, no transition’ Brexit, or were waiting for more clarity 
about potential outcomes. 
The survey showed that businesses were taking a range of 
steps to mitigate risks from a ‘no deal, no transition’ Brexit 
(Charts B (i) and (ii)). Those steps included putting resource 
into Brexit planning, engaging with customers directly to 
manage risks and applying for certifications that may be 
needed to continue trading with the EU after Brexit.Around two fifths of respondents said that they were 
stockbuilding, down slightly from the January survey. The scale 
of stockbuilding varied by sector as well as the size of the 
business and the size, nature and source of the components, 
materials or goods. 
Results from the January and March surveys suggested that 
manufacturers were most likely to be building inventories, with 0102030405060
Not
affectedExpecting
a dealAwaiting
more
clarity
 about the
outcomeHave
started
imple-
menting
 those
plansHave not
started
 imple-
menting
those
plansHave
started
imple-
menting
 those
plansHave not
started 
imple-
menting
those
plansNot making plans In the process of
developing plans Have an agreed
plan in placePercentages of respondentsDark bars: Mar ch surveyLight bars: January surveyChart A Contingency planning for a ‘no deal,  
no transition’ Brexit(a)
(a) Companies were asked ‘How advanced is your contingency planning for a ‘no deal and no 
transition’ Brexit?’. The question asks about ‘plans for the end of March 2019’.  010203040506070
Brexit
planning
resourcesBuilding
cash
reservesStock-
buildingExtra
warehouse
spaceChanging
haulage/
portsAlternative
input
suppliersPercentages of all respondentsJanuary survey
March surveyChart B (i)  Type of contingency actions being  
undertaken or planned(a)
(a) Respondents were asked what types of actions they had undertaken, were planning or were 
carrying out for the end of March 2019. They were asked to select all actions that applied 
from a range of options. As a result, the figures are not additive.   
(1) The survey was conducted between 29 January and 1 March 2019. There were  
286 responses from companies with 373,000 employees and with a combined 
turnover of £127 billion. Responses were weighted by employment and then by sector.
(2) The January survey was conducted between 17 December 2018 and 28 January 2019. 
The results were published in the ‘ Agents’ update on business conditions ’ in the 
February Inflation Report . Results from the December 2018 vintage of the survey  
were published on 4 December 2018 in the ‘ Agents’ survey on preparations for  
EU withdrawal ’. 010203040506070
Necessary
certiﬁcationsCustomer
risk
engagementOperations
elsewhere
in EUAdditional
hedgingBorder
customs
check plansPercentages of all respondentsJanuary survey
March surveyChart B (ii)  Type of contingency actions being 
undertaken or planned(a)
(a) Respondents were asked what types of actions they had undertaken, were planning or were 
carrying out for the end of March 2019. They were asked to select all actions that applied 
from a range of options. As a result, the figures are not additive.    Agents’ summary of business conditions  2019 Q1  4
construction businesses least likely to be doing so. Wider 
agency intelligence suggests that contacts have been building 
inventories of up to three-times normal levels. 
The March survey suggested that as companies have increased 
contingency planning for a ‘no deal, no transition’ Brexit, their 
reported readiness for this scenario has also increased. 
The March survey showed that around 80% of companies 
judged themselves ‘ready’ for a ‘no deal, no transition’ Brexit 
scenario, compared with around 50% of companies in the 
January survey.  
Nevertheless, many companies reported that there were limits 
to the degree of readiness that was feasible in the face of the 
range of possible outcomes in that scenario. These included 
issues relating to tariffs, border frictions, exchange rate 
movements and recognition of certifications — which many 
companies felt were outside their control. 
Indeed, the March survey also showed that respondents — 
even those that felt ‘ready’ — still expected output, 
employment and investment over the next 12 months to be 
significantly weaker under a ‘no deal, no transition’ Brexit than 
under a ‘deal’ scenario. 
On average, companies expected output and employment to 
fall, though to a lesser extent in March than in the January and 
December surveys ( Chart C (i) ). Investment in the UK was 
expected to fall more sharply in the March survey than in the 
previous surveys. The differences between the survey results 
may be partly due to sampling issues. The differences between 
expectations for the two scenarios were broadly similar across 
the three surveys.  5040302010010203040
Output Employment Investment
in UKInvestment
outside UKExportsNet percentage balances(b)
+
–Deal and transition (December)
Deal and transition (January)
Deal and transition (March)No deal, no transition (December)
No deal, no transition (January)
No deal, no transition (March)Chart C (i)  Expectations for the impact on business of 
Brexit(a)
(a) Companies were asked ‘Relative to the last 12 months, what is the likely impact on the 
following for your business over the next year in each scenario: (a) a deal and transition 
period and (b) no deal and no deal and no transition period?’. For each relevant business 
factor, respondents were asked to choose between ‘Fall greater than 10%’; ‘-10 to -2%’; 
‘Little change’; ‘+2 to +10%’ and ‘Rise greater than 10%’.  
(b) Net percentage balances of companies reporting increases or declines in each factor, 
weighted by employment. Half weight was given to the +/-2%–10% response and full weight 
was given to those that responded ‘Rise/Fall greater than 10%’.   
Imports Stocks Demand for
fundingTotal
production
costsSales prices5040302010010203040
+
–Net percentage balances(b)Deal and transition (December)
Deal and transition (January)
Deal and transition (March)No deal, no transition (December)
No deal, no transition (January)
No deal, no transition (March)Chart C (ii)  Expectations for the impact on business of 
Brexit(a)
(a) Companies were asked ‘Relative to the last 12 months, what is the likely impact on the 
following for your business over the next year in each scenario: (a) a deal and transition 
period and (b) no deal and no deal and no transition period?’. For each relevant business 
factor, respondents were asked to choose between ‘Fall greater than 10%’; ‘-10 to -2%’; 
‘Little change’; ‘+2 to +10%’ and ‘Rise greater than 10%’.  
(b) Net percentage balances of companies reporting increases or declines in each factor, 
weighted by employment. Half weight was given to the +/-2%–10% response and full weight 
was given to those that responded ‘Rise/Fall greater than 10%’.  
  Agents’ summary of business conditions  2019 Q1  5
Contacts in the automotive sector and in related supply chain 
businesses reported declines in output compared with a year 
ago. And output is expected to fall in 2019 Q2 as a result of 
extended shutdowns scheduled by some manufacturers. 
Many producers of building materials reported a slowdown in 
output growth due to weaker construction activity. Suppliers 
to the retail sector also reported weak demand, particularly for 
furniture and household appliances. 
In the food sector, manufacturers of low-cost products 
reported growth as consumers traded down. However, there 
was strong growth in vegan products. 
Contacts in aerospace and high-tech engineering said demand 
remained strong.  
The score for growth in the volume of manufactured goods 
exports was also its lowest in around two years ( Chart 3 ).  
The slowdown was concentrated in the consumer goods and 
automotive sectors, largely due to weaker demand from 
Europe and China. 
Suppliers to the aerospace and automotive sectors reported a 
small boost to demand from stockbuilding by overseas 
customers, but they expected it to be short-lived. In addition, 
some contacts reported building stocks of finished goods in 
continental Europe to mitigate the risk of outbound delays in 
the event of a ‘no deal, no transition’ Brexit. 
There was little sign to date of European customers pulling 
away from UK products, though most contacts expected this 
would only become visible over the medium term. 
There was robust demand from US-based customers for a 
range of UK-manufactured products. And demand from the oil 
and gas sector also continued to strengthen. Construction
Output growth in the construction sector weakened. Some of 
the large developers have scaled back planned projects due to 
the softer housing market, though this was less the case for 
smaller developers. 
Heightened caution around business investment has resulted 
in some commercial developments being paused or delayed. 
However, demand for repair and maintenance work remained 
steady. Continuing demand for distribution warehousing was 
also providing some impetus to commercial construction 
output.
On the supply side, planning delays and rising costs added 
further challenges. And reports of a weaker pipeline of projects 
suggested that the year ahead could be more challenging for 
the sector. 
Investment
The Agents’ score for investment intentions in the 
manufacturing sector for the next 12 months fell to its lowest 
in nine years ( Chart 4 ). Contacts mostly cited Brexit 
uncertainty as the main reason for holding back investment, 
with some choosing instead to build cash reserves or 
inventories (see also Box 1). 
However, companies continued to invest in replacing essential 
kit, or in projects with a short pay-back period. Contacts in 
some companies, particularly those with overseas owners, said 
that investment was being diverted outside the UK. But many 
contacts believed there could be a rebound in investment if a 
Brexit deal was agreed. 
Investment intentions edged down in the services sector but 
remained positive. Investment in IT and digital capabilities 
continued to grow. Many professional and financial services 
firms continued to invest in artificial intelligence and 
automation, often in response to tight labour market 
conditions. +
–
5432101234
Manufacturing (export)
Manufacturing (domestic)Three months on the same period a year earlier
2006 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 1819ScoresChart 3 Manufacturing output
+
–
5432101234
2006 08 10 12 14 16 18Scores
Services
ManufacturingOver the coming 12 monthsChart 4 Investment intentions Agents’ summary of business conditions  2019 Q1  6
Some contacts in the logistics and transport sectors reported 
investing in additional capacity. But investment in the retail 
sector remained mostly weak. 
Corporate financing conditions
Corporate credit demand continued to slow as contacts 
sought to reduce leverage and strengthen their balance sheets 
ahead of Brexit. Contacts said that banks remained cautious 
about lending to the retail and construction sectors. 
Contacts in most other sectors said they had not experienced 
constraints on credit but felt its availability was gradually 
tightening. For example, there were some reports of banks 
applying tighter lending criteria to loan applications from 
companies exposed to Brexit uncertainty. 
Large companies — which usually have easier access to credit 
— have also signalled that credit conditions have become 
somewhat less favourable in recent months. For example, 
some believed that raising bond finance might be more 
expensive at present due to Brexit uncertainty.
Some contacts said that availability of supplier finance was 
tightening and trade credit insurance cover was being reduced. 
However, providers of asset finance continued to compete 
aggressively. 
Property markets
Commercial real estate
Demand for UK commercial property from domestic and 
overseas investors slowed more sharply than in previous 
months, reflecting heightened uncertainty ahead of Brexit. 
The weakening in demand had become more broadly based 
across the commercial real estate (CRE) market and UK 
regions. However, there was still some appetite for UK CRE 
from high net-worth overseas investors and overseas funds. 
And overall demand for CRE continued to marginally outpace 
supply — supply growth had softened in recent months. 
Demand continued to be strongest for build-to-rent apartment 
buildings, flexible office space and distribution warehousing for 
online retailers. By contrast, investors have tried to limit their 
exposure to secondary and tertiary retail property. Although 
valuations for retail property have already fallen, contacts 
believed they could fall further. 
Housing market
Sentiment in the housing market continued to weaken a little. 
Contacts reported that Brexit-related uncertainty had deterred 
many buyers. And excess supply, particularly in southern 
England, had led to a widening gap between asking and offered 
prices. Sales of new-build homes also slowed, causing housebuilders 
to offer significant incentives in order to complete sales. 
Lettings remained buoyant, though contacts said that some 
tenants had been seeking shorter leases and break-clauses.
Mortgage activity was mostly concentrated in refinancing 
deals for home-owners switching to fixed-rates and longer 
mortgage tenors in order to lock in low interest rates. 
Contacts said that weaker demand for mortgages combined 
with high competition among lenders was keeping down 
mortgage rates. 
Capacity utilisation
Capacity constraints stabilised but remained above normal 
across the economy as a whole. Contacts in logistics and 
warehouses reported tight capacity, reflecting the structural 
shift towards online retailing, as well as some Brexit-related 
stockpiling. 
Contacts in professional services cited labour and skills 
shortages as major constraints on output. In contrast, contacts 
in the retail sector continued to report excess physical 
capacity, despite consolidation in the sector. 
Employment and pay
Employment intentions weakened a little further and were 
broadly flat across the economy, reflecting caution due to 
slower output growth and Brexit uncertainty. 
Employment intentions were modestly positive in business 
services, driven by job creation in IT, professional services and 
logistics. 
But employment intentions continued to fall in consumer 
services, as retailers responded to weakening trading 
conditions and sought to mitigate the effect of the annual 
increase in the National Living Wage. 
In manufacturing, the Agents’ employment intentions score 
fell to its lowest in more than two years. Job losses in sectors 
such as automotive were only partially offset by employment 
growth in aerospace and other high-tech industries. 
Despite weakening employment intentions, recruitment 
difficulties increased a little ( Chart 5 ). Contacts reported 
labour shortages across a broad range of sectors and skill 
levels. They continued to report particular shortages in IT, 
professional services, engineering and haulage. Many contacts 
said recruitment difficulties was one of their biggest 
challenges. 
They also said that a lack of EU migrant workers had 
exacerbated conditions in some sectors, such as   Agents’ summary of business conditions  2019 Q1  7
food-processing, logistics, hospitality, agriculture, horticulture 
and health and social care. 
However, some reported that recruitment difficulties had 
eased in sectors undergoing consolidation or experiencing 
weaker demand, such as property-related services. 
Pay settlements remained on average in the range 2½% to 
3½%, and pay growth appeared to be flattening off after  
past rises. Nonetheless, contacts continued to give targeted 
pay awards to address skill shortages. And companies with a 
high proportion of low-paid staff concentrated pay  
increases on staff who were on or just above the National 
Living Wage. 
Some contacts said that the increase in employer  
auto-enrolment pension contributions this year would add to 
total labour cost growth. Costs and prices
Consumer goods price inflation slowed sharply as a result of 
lower fuel prices and the new cap on some energy tariffs 
(Chart 6 ). 
Food price inflation also eased, despite issues with the 2018 
harvest. Competition in the retail sector was reported to have 
limited margin growth at all stages of the supply chain. 
In consumer services, contacts said that some sectors, such as 
leisure, tourism and private domestic care, had scope to pass 
through higher wage costs via price increases. However, the 
ability of contacts in the food and beverage sector to raise 
prices was limited by overcapacity in the sector.
Material cost inflation eased slightly but remained close to its 
long-run average. Contacts said this was mostly linked to the 
depreciation of sterling falling out of year-on-year comparisons 
and an associated slowdown in imported finished goods price 
inflation. It was also attributed to a slight easing in commodity 
price inflation.    +
–
32101234
Consumer goods pricesConsumer services pricesThree months on the same period a year earlier
2006 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 1819ScoresChart 6 Consumer goods and services prices
+
–
5432101234
2006 08 10 12 14 16 18Scores
Recruitment difﬁculties(b)Manufacturing(a)Total services(a)Chart 5 Recruitment difficulties and employment 
intentions
(a) Over the coming six months.
(b) In the past three months, ‘relative to normal’. Agents’ summary of business conditions  2019 Q1  8
Box 2
Results from the Decision Maker Panel survey
Overview
In August 2016, together with academics from Stanford 
University and the University of Nottingham, the Bank set up 
the Decision Maker Panel (DMP) survey to help monitor 
developments in the UK economy and to track businesses’ 
expectations and the uncertainties surrounding them. (1) The 
responses from the DMP survey have been a valuable source of 
information, complementing the intelligence gathered from 
Agents’ contacts. (2)   
This box summarises results from the November 2018 to 
January 2019 surveys, focusing on businesses’ views about 
Brexit and investment. (3)   
Importance of Brexit as a source of uncertainty
Recent data indicate that Brexit is becoming an increasingly 
important source of uncertainty for businesses ( Chart A ). In 
the latest November to January surveys, 54% of businesses 
reported that Brexit is currently one of the top three sources of 
uncertainty for them. This proportion has increased from just 
below 40% in the first half of 2018 and is now at the highest 
value recorded since the survey was launched.
Investment decisions and Brexit
Official economic data suggest that investment growth has 
been weak in recent years, especially in the post-referendum 
period. DMP members are also asked about their current and 
past level of capital spending as well as their expectations for 
investment over the next year. According to the latest results, 
averaging across firms, annual growth in nominal capital 
expenditure fell back from around 4% in 2018 Q2, to around 1% in 2018 Q3. It has generally been subdued since the 
referendum (shown by the solid red line in Chart B ). Looking a 
year ahead, investment growth is expected to remain modest 
with capital spending expected to grow by around 2.3% in the 
year to 2019 Q3 (the dashed red line in Chart B ).
Brexit uncertainty appears to have had a substantial 
dampening effect on investment growth. Companies who view 
Brexit as an important source of uncertainty reported that the 
level of their investment was around 5% lower than a year ago 
in 2018 Q3 (shown by the red line in Chart C ), while firms who 
did not view Brexit as an important source of uncertainty 
reported an increase of almost 10% (shown by the blue line in 
Chart C ).
Over the period since the referendum, there appears to have 
been three phases to the impact of Brexit uncertainty on 
investment ( Chart C ). In the first year after the referendum, 
investment growth was lower for firms who reported that 
Brexit was an important source of uncertainty than it was for 
firms who reported that Brexit was a less important source of 
uncertainty. There was then a period when investment growth 
for these two groups was more similar, before a third phase 
since the middle of 2018 when investment growth has 
weakened again for firms who say that they are more exposed 
to Brexit uncertainty.0255075100
Aug.–Sep.
2016Feb.–Apr.
17Aug.–Oct.
17Feb.–Apr.
18Aug.–Oct.
18Nov. 18–
Jan. 19
Survey periodNot important
One of many sourcesTwo or three top sources
Top source of uncertainty
Percentages of businessesChart A Importance of Brexit as a source of uncertainty(a)
Sources: DMP and Bank calculations.
(a) Question: ‘How much has the result of the EU referendum affected the level of uncertainty 
affecting your business?’.642024681012
Q3
2016Q4 Q1
17Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
18Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
19Q2 Q3
Reference periodExpectedPercentage changes on a year earlier
Past
+
–Chart B Realised and expected growth in capital 
expenditure
Sources: DMP and Bank calculations.
(1) This project is supported by the Economic and Social Research Council (grant number 
ES/P010385/1).
(2) The DMP comprises Chief Financial Officers (CFOs) from small, medium and large UK 
companies operating in a broad range of industries. It is designed to be representative 
of the population of UK businesses. Around 7,300 businesses had agreed to be part of 
the panel at the time of the January 2019 survey. The survey runs monthly with panel 
members receiving one third of a quarterly questionnaire each month. The response 
rate has averaged around 40% in recent months. Aggregate data from surveys up to 
January 2019 and details on questions are available at www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/
media/boe/files/statistics/research-datasets/dmp-results-march-2019.xlsx .
(3) For details on the methodology please visit www.bankofengland.co.uk/quarterly-
bulletin/2017/q2/tracking-the-views-of-british-businesses-evidence-from-the-dmp . 
All results are weighted.  Agents’ summary of business conditions  2019 Q1  9
Brexit may weigh on future investment decisions too. In the 
latest November to January surveys, panel members thought, 
on average, that there was a 33% chance that Brexit would 
reduce capital expenditure over the following year ( Chart D ). 
The probability of Brexit increasing investment spending was 
estimated at 8%, with a 59% chance of no impact. (4) The 
probability attached to Brexit reducing investment over the 
next year was higher in the latest survey than when the 
question was last asked in May-July 2018, although it was 
similar to the level reported shortly after the referendum in 
September-October 2016.Preparing for Brexit 
Responses to the most recent surveys suggested that three 
quarters of CFOs were spending some time planning for Brexit 
in November-January 2019, up from around 60% a year earlier 
(Chart E ). The amount of time spent planning for Brexit was 
also reported to have increased. For example, the share of 
CFOs spending more than one hour a week on Brexit planning 
increased from 21% to 43%.  
15105051015
Q3
2016Q4 Q1
17Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
18Q2 Q3
Reference periodBrexit less important
Brexit in top three
sources of uncertaintyPercentage changes on a year earlier
+
–Chart C Realised and expected growth in capital 
expenditure by importance of Brexit as a source of 
uncertainty(a)
Sources: DMP and Bank calculations.
(a) Brexit uncertainty question is defined in the footnote to Chart A .
(4) This question was referring to the level rather than growth of investment. Some 
businesses may have already reduced investment due to Brexit and their responses 
may be relative to their current level of investment.  020406080100
Sep.–Oct. 
2016May–July 
17Nov. 17–
Jan. 18May–July 
18Nov. 18–
Jan. 19
Survey periodNegative impactNo impactPositive imapct
Average probability, per centChart D Expected impact of Brexit on capital 
expenditure(a)
Sources: DMP and Bank calculations.
(a) Question: ‘Could you say how the UK’s decision to vote <<leave>> in the EU referendum is 
likely to influence your capital expenditure over the next year? What is the percentage 
likelihood (probability) that it will: i) Have a large positive influence on capital expenditure, 
adding 5% or more ii) Have a minor positive influence on capital expenditure, adding less 
than 5% iii) Have no material impact on capital expenditure iv) Have a minor negative 
influence on capital expenditure, subtracting less than 5% v) Have a large negative influence 
on capital expenditure, subtracting 5% or more’.01020304050
None Up to
1 hour1 to
5 hours6 to
10 hoursMore
than
10 hoursDon’t
knowNovember 2017–January 2018
November 2018–January 2019
Percentages of respondentsChart E Business executives planning for Brexit(a)
Sources: DMP and Bank calculations.
(a) Question: ‘On average, how many hours a week are the CEO and CFO of your business 
spending on preparing for Brexit at the moment? Please select one of the options: i) None 
ii) Up to 1 hour iii) 1 to 5 hours iv) 6 to 10 hours v) More than 10 hours vi) Don’t know’. 