Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
Vol. 52
No. 8

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
Deutsche Bundesbank
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 1460431 Frankfurt am Main
P .O.B. 10 06 02
60006 Frankfurt am MainFederal Republic of Germany
Telephone (0 69) 95 66-1
or (0 69) 95 66 . . . plus extension number
Telex 41 227 within Germany
4 14 431 from abroad
Fax (0 69) 5 60 10 71
Internet http://www.bundesbank.deReproduction permitted only if source is stated.ISSN 0418-8292The German original of this Report went to
press on August 16, 2000Annual and weekly publishing schedules for
selected statistics of the Deutsche Bundes-bank are available and can be downloadedfrom our Internet address. The relevant dataare also published on the Internet.
The Monthly Report is published autono-
mously by the Deutsche Bundesbank, Frank-furt am Main, by virtue of section 18 of theBundesbank Act of July 26, 1957. It is avail-able to interested parties free of charge.

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
ContentsThe economic scene in Germany
in summer 2000 5
The international and Europeansetting 6Financial markets in Germany 21Economic conditions in Germany 31Foreign trade and payments 41Public finance 50
Statistical Section 1*
Key economic data for EMU 6*
Overall monetary survey in the EMU 8*Consolidated financial statementof the Eurosystem 16*Banks 20*Minimum reserves 42*Interest rates 43*Capital market 48*Public finance in Germany 52*Economic conditions 60*Foreign trade and payments 67*
Overview of publications by the
Deutsche Bundesbank 77*

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
4

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
5The economic scene
in Germanyin summer 2000

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
6The international
and EuropeansettingDevelopments in the world economy
In the first half of 2000, the world economy
was characterised by great dynamism. Con-tinued economic recovery in the east Asianemerging economies, the distinct improve-ment in the Latin American economic situ-ation, and exceptionally favourable develop-ments in the central and east European econ-omies have all made an important contribu-tion to this expansion. In addition, the indus-trialised countries were able to record rela-tively strong growth. The US economy, whichcan now pride itself on having the longest-running economic upswing in a century, hasuntil recently grown extremely vigorously.However, private final demand, which is atthe heart of cyclical trends, did lose steam inspring of this year; hence a “soft landing” isstill expected. The outlook for growth andemployment in western Europe brightenedfurther in the first half of 2000, becomingmore optimistic than at any time since theend of the eighties. In Japan, there are moreand more signs of a cyclical recovery, but theeconomic situation remains difficult.
The further the worldwide expansion pro-
gresses, however, the more cyclical risks toprice stability will tend to increase. Yet it isdifficult to assess how much significanceshould be attached to those dangers at thecurrent juncture. Some point out that the in-creased use of information and communica-tions technology (ICT) accelerates productivitygrowth, sustainably boosts the expansion ofan economy’s production capacity and in-creases the latitude for tension-free outputgrowth. The US economy seems to have beenWorld economy
remains on a
path of
expansion
Increased price
risks

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
7under such a positive influence on productiv-
ity gains since the mid-nineties. This increasein productivity, often attributed to the “neweconomy”, has probably helped the UnitedStates achieve very strong growth – also incomparison to western Europe – while keep-ing inflation at a moderate level for a longtime. However, favourable special factorshave also played a role. In the other industri-alised countries, the increasing use of ICT –according to OECD studies, for instance – hasup to now, for the most part, not been re-flected in any significant tangible strengthen-ing of macroeconomic productivity growth.That could be because use of the new tech-nologies there is (still) relatively minor. How-ever, the discrepancy between the UnitedStates and most other industrial countries ap-pearing in the official statistics also is partlydue to methodological differences, especiallyin recording the manufacture of ICT goodsand their use. Therefore, the “technologygap” and the growth divide between theUnited States and Germany are probably notas large as a comparison of official statisticswould indicate (for more information see ex-planations on page 8).
The drastic increase in oil prices has had a
negative impact on the global price climate.In addition, the change in the terms of tradeaccompanying the higher oil prices has result-ed in a considerable transfer of income fromoil-consuming countries to oil-exporting na-tions. The dampening effects of the increasein the price of energy imports on industrialcountries’ economic growth, however, aredistinctly less significant than in the mid-seventies and early eighties, since those coun-tries’ dependence on oil, measured in terms
of gross domestic product (GDP), has de-clined considerably since then, and the condi-tions for price stability are more favourable.In a global perspective, the decline in pur-chasing power of the oil-importing countrieswent hand in hand with real income gains ofthe oil-producing countries, which contrib-uted in great measure to a stabilisation of theeconomic situation, particularly in Russia andin some Latin American countries.
The risks entailed by the sharp rise in oil price
quotations tend to be on the price side rightnow, especially if they give cause for furtherprice and cost increases in the oil-consumingcountries. It is true that there have hardlybeen any signs of this in the industrial coun-tries so far; however, the longer the pricepressure from that side persists, the greaterthe danger of such second-round effects oc-curring and of (home-made) core inflationundergoing a sustained increase. This risk isparticularly present in countries where cap-acity utilisation is already high, and the num-ber of these countries is likely to balloon dueto the increasingly parallel movement ofworldwide business cycles. The central banksin North America and western Europe there-fore countered the increased price risks earlyon by raising interest rates. Thus, monetarypolicy is also contributing to the stabilisationof overall economic development. This will beall the more successful the more support itgets from fiscal policy.
Alongside price risks, a close eye should be
kept on growing discrepancies in the cross-border trade in goods and services, with the
Impact of
higher oil prices
Further weak
points

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
8Problems of international comparisons of growth caused by dissimilar methods of
deflation – with IT equipment in Germany and the United States as a case in point
An important feature of the “new economy” in the
United States has been the major surge in macroeco-nomic productivity since the mid-nineties, which hasalso contributed to correspondingly stronger, tension-free economic growth. By contrast, most of the otherindustrialised countries did not report a similar “prod-uctivity boom” in the last few years. This discrepancy islargely attributed to the relatively sizeable share of themanufacture of information and communications tech-nology goods and their greater use in the various sec-tors of the US economy.
The figures from the national accounts seem to put
Germany, too, far behind the United States in themanufacture and the use of new technologies, particu-larly information processing. If we use as an exampleinvestment in IT equipment (excluding purchased andself-produced software) as an indicator of the use ofnew technologies, for which both countries have offi-cial and relatively comparable information, from 1992to 1999 real expenditure on IT hardware and equip-ment in the United States (private sector) rose by anaverage of around 40% per year.
1By contrast, official
statistics put their increase in Germany at only 6%. 2
The discrepancy between the two countries in develop-ments in real IT equipment, however, is overstated dueto different methods of measuring the prices of thesegoods.
3In the United States, for quite some time now
the so-called “hedonic” approach has been used to cal-culate price indices for IT goods (and for other selectedgoods), particularly in order to take quality changesinto account, which is indispensable for reliable pricemeasurement.
4By contrast, Germany uses more con-
ventional methods of evaluating quality changes. Theyoften amount to estimating the monetary value of thequality change on a case-by-case basis according torules laid down by the Federal Statistical Office.
5There
is ample reason to believe that conventional ap-proaches reach their limits once extremely large qualitychanges occur which are reflected either not at all oronly in part in corresponding price increases or de-creases. In the area of IT goods, a particular hallmarkof which has for a long time been rapid and compre-hensive technological progress, they probably tend tolead to quality change, and thus the real price reduc-tion, being understated. The hedonic price measure-ment approach, which is based on econometricmethods and raises methodological problems of its
own, rests on the basic assumption that different var-ieties of a heterogeneous good can be represented asdifferent combinations of individual and distinctly de-fined product characteristics. In competitive markets,price differences at a given time can be explained bydeviations in the characteristics of the different“models” of a good. Thus, hedonic price equations forcomputers usually contain elements such as the clockrate, RAM and hard disk memory as “explanatory vari-ables”.
To approximate the effects of the differences in defla-
tion of IT goods between the United States and Ger-many, we begin by calculating the implicit deflators ofIT equipment. The result is that according to US statis-tics, between 1991 and 1999 prices for computers andperipherals went down by four-fifths, after adjustmentfor quality variations, whereas according to Germanprice statistics the decline was “only” one-fifth. In asecond step, the nominal expenditure on IT equipmentin Germany is adjusted with the corresponding USprice deflator. This approach, which is theoreticallyfounded on the “law of one price” for tradable goods,implies that the deviations in price trends between theUnited States and Germany are solely attributable tothe aforementioned methodological differences. In1998 IT investment in Germany, after adjustment withthe US price deflator, was, at an estimated DM 64 bil-lion, more than twice as high as real investment ac-cording to official statistics. In 1999 the discrepancywas even well over 170%. In the years since 1991, onthe basis of US prices, real expenditure on IT equip-ment in Germany rose by an annual average of 27
12%,
compared with 6% according to the conventionalapproach.
Adjusting real expenditure on IT equipment in Ger-
many in these dimensions would amount to, in math-ematical terms, investment in machinery and equip-ment making a larger contribution to GDP growth andthus also, when seen in isolation, stronger economicgrowth. The actual size of the “growth effect” of ahedonic price measurement of IT goods in Germany,however, can be estimated only by performing com-prehensive calculations which would also have to takeinto account the IT goods contained in other demandcomponents.
1To improve comparability, the information published by
the Federal Statistical Office on investment in “office ma-chinery and computers” was adjusted for the (estimated)investment in office machinery. — 2Information for 1999
is estimated since no such official data for Germany areavailable yet. — 3See also: OECD Economic Outlook,
No. 67, June 2000, page 182. — 4The west European coun-
tries that also use hedonic price indices to deflate theprices of IT products are France, Sweden and Denmark.See: Scarpetta, S. et al, Economic Growth in the OECD Area:
Recent Trends at the Aggregate and Sectoral Level, OECDEconomics Department Working Papers, No. 248, June2000, page 92. — 5For more details see: Szenzenstein, J.,
Die Behandlung von Qualitätsänderungen im Preisindex
für die Lebenshaltung, in: Deutsche Bundesbank (ed.), Zur
Diskussion über den Verbraucherindex als Inflationsindi-
kator, Frankfurt, 1999, page 41ff. (available only in
German).
Deutsche Bundesbank

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
9persistently growing US current-account def-
icit deserving centre stage. In addition, therecontinue to be weak points in some emergingeconomies and in Japan, having their originsin the not-yet sufficiently stabilised financialsituation in the banking and corporate sectorand in an excessively large government debt,respectively. All the same, the world econom-ic upswing rests on a more solid foundationthan a year ago.
In the United States, macroeconomic output,
according to initial calculations and after ad-justment for seasonal and working-day vari-ations, rose by around 1
14% in the second
quarter, or as much as in the first quarter ofthe year. The year-on-year rise was 6%. Atfirst glance this does not fit in with the gener-ally expected scenario of a “soft landing”,i.e. a distinct slow-down of growth over thecourse of this year. However, a closer look atthe individual demand components showsthat private consumption, for a long time apillar of the economic upswing in the UnitedStates, recently moved into calmer waters.After adjustment for price and seasonal vari-ations, it rose by “only”
34% in spring (fol-
lowing a rise of 112% to 2% in the two pre-
ceding periods). In the spring months pur-chases of durable consumer goods (a privateconsumption component), around four-tenths of which (in terms of volume) are ac-counted for by automobiles and auto parts,were even lower than at the beginning of theyear, which is probably closely related to high-er interest rates on consumer loans and re-ceding wealth effects. If one factors in grossfixed capital formation, the growth of which,at a seasonally adjusted 3
12%, was not quiteas strong as in the previous quarter, then pri-
vate final demand seems to have swung ontoa flatter path of growth in spring. However,this contrasted with a steep rise in govern-ment spending and comprehensive stock-building. The sharp rise in new orders for dur-able goods in June does not diminish thebasic validity of the fact that the underlyingmomentum of the US economy has dimin-ished somewhat of late, since large orders tothe aircraft industry were the main factor be-hind that rise. Exporters were able to visiblyexpand their deliveries abroad, yet importswent up even more sharply. Consequently,the deficit in cross-border trade in goods andservices reached a new high, amounting to4
12% of GDP in spring.
Consumer price inflation picked up notice-
ably, its year-on-year increase going up from3.0% in April to 3.5% in July. This is largelydue to the renewed oil price surge. Core in-flation, i.e. excluding energy and food prices,has likewise gone up since the beginning ofthe year. The annual growth rate rose from1.9% in January to 2.4% in July.
No clear upward trend is discernible so far in
Japan, yet the economy seems to have over-come its cyclical trough. Between April andJune industrial production surpassed the first-quarter result by a seasonally adjusted 1
12%
and was 634% higher than in the corres-
ponding period a year ago. One motor of theeconomic revival is sharply growing foreigndemand, especially for electronics goods andmotor vehicles. Another is that the concomi-tant higher utilisation of production capacityin conjunction with the further improvementUnited States
Japan

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
10in profitability has increased the propensity of
Japanese enterprises to invest. By contrast,private consumption tended to remain weak,not least because once again there was a netloss of jobs, with wages and salaries per em-ployee practically stagnant.
The sluggish consumer demand was a major
reason consumer prices – despite the drasticrise in oil prices – were down 0.7% in theperiod from April to July from their level ayear before. The chances are good that, onaccount of the cyclical recovery, the employ-ment situation, and with it consumption, willundergo a sustained improvement. Until thattime, though, the Japanese economy will re-main vulnerable as long as its main pillar, ex-ports, are heavily biased towards the UnitedStates; they would be affected considerably ifthere were a relatively sharp downturn inthis, Japan’s most important purchasingcountry. In addition, it should be pointed outthat the Japanese government has so far notreoriented its policy towards budget consoli-dation, which will be necessary sooner orlater.
In spring, real GDP in the United Kingdom
picked up, according to initial estimates, by1% over the previous quarter, after adjust-ment for seasonal and working-day vari-ations; this made it 3% higher than in thesame period of the previous year. Since spring1992, when the economy began to recover,macroeconomic output has gone up by one-quarter, i.e. by an annual rate of 3%. Com-pared with the winter half-year, the rate ofgrowth accelerated again of late. The mainreason is that industrial output, which in sea-sonally adjusted terms had stagnated in au-
tumn 1999 and dropped visibly at the begin-ning of 2000, has picked up distinctly. Theboom in global demand for ICT productsgave output a “shot in the arm”. The privateservices sector, long the pillar supporting theupswing in the United Kingdom, contributeda great deal to macroeconomic growth. InJune the unemployment rate fell to a season-ally adjusted 3.8% (or 5
12% in the standard-
ised definition), its lowest rate in 25 years. Allthe same, the price climate has not yet beenaffected by any tensions in the goods andfactor markets. Consumer prices includingfood and energy, but excluding mortgagerates, were up in July by 2.2% over their pre-vious year’s level. The core inflation ratecalculated by Eurostat even showed a slightdecline in prices in the spring as against theprevious year’s levels.
Macroeconomic trends in the euro area
Owing to favourable international trends,
business activity in the euro area has pickedup considerably of late. In the first quarterthe cyclical recovery continued at an un-abated pace. As in the previous two quarters,macroeconomic output increased by roughly1% in seasonally adjusted terms (the first esti-mate of GDP growth in mid-June had still in-dicated a marked slowdown). At 3
12%, the
twelve-month growth rate is the highest ratemeasured since the upswing at the beginningof the nineties. Again, a strong boost wasgiven by export activity, which went hand inhand with high increases in imports, however.Fixed capital formation and private consump-United
KingdomRobust growth
in the first
quarter

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
11tion both contributed one-half percentage
point to GDP growth, which shows that theupswing in the euro area has now becomebroadly based.
In the second quarter, for which data on GDP
growth are not yet available, economicgrowth appears to have accelerated evenmore. In April-May industrial production wasa seasonally adjusted 2% up on the previousquarter and 6
34% up on the year. In June-
July the industrial confidence indicator ex-ceeded for the first time its peak reached dur-ing the 1987–91 upswing. Capacity utilisa-tion in industry likewise experienced a further– albeit only slight – increase this spring.These developments are also in line with thesurvey results of March-April 2000, which in-dicate that the manufacturing sector of theeuro area has revised its investment plans
sharply upwards compared with the surveyresults of autumn 1999. Consumer confi-dence has remained very high of late. Thesustained economic growth in the euro areaalso was a decisive factor in the further im-provement of the labour market situation.The standardised unemployment rate droppedfrom a seasonally adjusted 9.4% in March to9.1% in June. A year ago it was as high as9.9%. Recently, in five of the eleven euro-area countries less than 5% of the labourforce was registered as unemployed. Onlytwo countries (Spain and Italy) continued torecord double-digit unemployment figures.
Towards the middle of the year consumer
price inflation rose even further. Measured interms of the year-on-year increase in theChange in the Harmonised Indices of Consumer Prices from the previous year in %
%
Euro-area average
1999
Jan. to June 2000
Ireland
LuxembourgSpain1999
Jan. to June 2000
FinlandItaly
BelgiumPortugal
GermanyAustria
NetherlandsFranceConsumer prices in the euro area
Deutsche Bundesbank5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0
Particularly
strong
economic
growth in
spring
Price develop-
ments heavily
influenced by
oil prices

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
12Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices, overall
inflation stood at 2.4% in June, clearly out-pacing the price increases registered in theprevious five months, which had sometimesbeen below 2%. In seven out of eleven coun-tries, the inflation rates in the first half of thisyear exceeded the euro area’s reference valuefor price stability. The accelerated price in-creases were mainly due to the renewed dras-tic rise in energy prices. Despite repeated an-nouncements of a production expansion bythe OPEC countries, the world market pricesfor crude oil, petroleum and other fuels onlymoderated temporarily. By contrast, increasesin the prices of other goods and services wererather subdued. Core inflation, i. e. excludingenergy and food prices, did not exceed 1.3%in June, either. Price increases were kept atbay in particular by manufactured goods (ex-cluding energy) which were only
12% more
expensive around the middle of the year thana year ago. In addition, consumer prices forfood only rose at a below-average rate. Theprices for services went up by around 1
34%
compared with twelve months earlier.
Current account and exchange-rate
developments in the euro area
The favourable world economic environment
continued to fuel the export activities of theeuro-area countries. Over the last twomonths (April-May) for which euro-area ex-ternal trade data are available, the value ofeuro-area exports to third countries exceededits previous year’s level by no less than25
12%. Export growth was on a similar scale
when measured in real terms, i. e. at constantprices, since the price increases that occurred
over the last year were relatively low on theexports side.
By contrast, import prices are estimated to
have risen by more than 20%, which is main-ly attributable to the much more expensivecrude oil imports but also to the low euroexchange rate. Therefore, at a growth rate of31
12%, imports far outpaced exports in
terms of value. Owing to this marked shift inthe terms of trade and in spite of strongexport activity, the trade surplus of the euroarea in the two months under review wentdown from last year’s level of almost 314 bil-
lion to 311 billion.
As regards the net “invisible” current-account
transactions of the euro area with third coun-tries, outflows likewise increased more thaninflows. On balance, in April–May the euro-area countries ran a deficit of just over 314
12
billion on the services balance, the income ac-
count and the current transfers balance,taken together, compared with 310
12billion
a year ago. Therefore, the current account ofthe euro area recorded a deficit of almost 34
billion in the period under review, after hav-ing shown a surplus of just over 33 billion
last year.
In the period under review the euro strength-
ened only temporarily. After the exchangerates against the major global currencies hittheir all-time low at the beginning of May,the subsequent trend up to early June wascharacterised by a clear recovery. However,this appreciation was not of a lasting nature.Exports to
non-euro-area
countriesImports
Current
account
Exchange-rate
developments

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
13The decisive factor in the temporary rally of
the euro in the foreign exchange marketswas increasing evidence that euro-areagrowth was distinctly picking up in the earlysummer, whereas economic activity in theUnited States appeared to slacken markedly.Consequently, the euro strengthened vis-à-visthe US dollar from the low level of US$ 0.89at the beginning of May to US$ 0.97 in earlyJune. However, it subsequently tended to besomewhat weaker again. After data on thesurprisingly high rate of GDP growth in theUS became available, the euro distinctly lostground at the end of July. Of late, it wasquoted at US$ 0.91 and thus close to its nadirof May. Compared to the euro’s exchangerate at its introduction in January 1999, thisrepresents a depreciation of 23%.
Against the Japanese yen, too, the euro
recovered only temporarily from its low levelin mid-May. However, the brief appreciationvis-à-vis the yen was slightly lower thanagainst the US dollar. In the last few monthsthe yen’s exchange rate was mainly influ-enced by the ever-changing assessment ofthe Japanese central bank’s “zero interestrate policy”, which was ultimately aban-doned. While the growth prospects for theJapanese economy as a whole graduallyseemed to brighten, problems of individualenterprises raised doubts as to the sustain-ability of this development. Of late, the eurowas quoted at ¥ 98.45, i.e. only just under3% above the record low of mid-May and26
12% lower than in early 1999.
By contrast, the euro’s appreciation against
the pound sterling was of a slightly more last-ing nature. By mid-June the euro had risen by
12% compared with its low level at the be-ginning of May, thus returning to its ex-change rate of November 1999. This develop-ment reflects the fact that the inflation risksfor the British economy were perceived to belower than previously expected, which led toan adjustment of interest-rate expectations.However, here too, the euro was unable tomaintain this exchange rate vis-à-vis theDaily values
Effective exchange rate 1Exchange rate of the euro
92
9190
89
88
87
86
85
84
83
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug
2000
%Depreciation of the euro since
early 1999
(as at August 15, 2000)
against the ...
... US dollar... Japanese
    yen
... pound
    sterlingEffective
1According to ECB calculations made using
the weighted averages of the euro ex-
change rates against the currencies of
13 countries (1 s tqtr 1999 = 100).
Deutsche Bundesbank30
252015
10
5
0US dollar
Yen and ...
... pound
sterling

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
14pound sterling and lost some ground again.
Of late, it was quoted at £ 0.61, i. e. still 6%above its all-time low and almost 15%beneath its level at the start of Stage Three ofEMU in January 1999.
On balance, when measured as a weighted
average against the currencies of the 13 mostimportant trading partners of the euro area,the euro has appreciated by some 2
12%
since its nadir of early May. However, com-pared with its level at the start of monetaryunion at the beginning of last year, the totaldepreciation still amounts to just over 18%.The asymmetric response of the euro’s ex-change rate to macroeconomic trends, whichhas become apparent some time ago, stillseems to affect the market despite the tem-porary consolidation of quotations. Thus, thesuccessful passage of the German tax reform,for instance, hardly had any impact onexchange-rate movements, while, as men-tioned above, the US data on the surprisinglyhigh GDP growth during the second quarterwhich were published at the end of July re-sulted relatively quickly in a correspondingweakening of the euro’s exchange rate. Froma monetary policy perspective it is crucial tocontinue to foster the inherent strength ofthe euro. The other policy areas need to com-mit themselves to continue their current pathof growth-enhancing structural reforms, sothat the appreciation potential will becomeclearly noticeable.Monetary policy and the financial
markets in the euro area
In June the Governing Council of the ECB
once again tightened its monetary policy.With effect from June 9 it raised the interestrates on the marginal lending facility and thedeposit facility by one-half percentage pointeach to 5.25% and 3.25%, respectively. Inaddition, with effect from June 15, the Gov-erning Council raised the interest rate on itsmain refinancing operations, which at thattime were still conducted as fixed-rate ten-ders, from 3.75% to 4.25%. Thus, all thekey interest rates in the euro-area moneymarket stood 1
34percentage points above
their all-time low of last autumn. This fourthinterest rate increase during the year in pro-gress was designed to counteract the upsiderisks to price stability which continued to risein the spring. Growth of the monetary aggre-gate M3, which exceeded the referencevalue, and mounting price pressure in theleading indicators, especially import prices,pointed to increasing risks.
Moreover, the Governing Council of the ECB
decided that, starting with the last operationto be settled in June, it would conduct itsmain refinancing operations as variable-ratetenders using the multiple-rate auction tech-nique until further notice. A minimum bidrate of 4.25%, the level previously applied tofixed-rate tenders, was set. The minimum bidrate assumed the monetary policy signallingfunction hitherto performed by the fixed ratein the old tender procedure. The switch tothe variable-rate tender did not constitute afurther change in the monetary policy stanceEffective
exchange rate
of the euroCentral bank
interest rates
raised in June
Successful
transition to
variable-rate
tender

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
15but was instead a reaction to the severe over-
bidding that had previously occurred underthe fixed-rate procedure. The bid volume ac-tually did fall drastically, dropping to aroundtwice or three times the amounts allotted; bycontrast, bids had surpassed more than onehundred times the allotted amounts in thelatest fixed-rate tenders. In interest-rate-policy terms, too, the switch to the variable-rate tender went smoothly. The marginal al-lotment rates initially were in a tight and ra-ther stable corridor which was limited toaround five basis points above the minimumbid rate. In mid-August this margin increasedsomewhat. The overnight interest rate(EONIA), having moved away from the fixed-rate tender rate in the spring, remained closeto the marginal refinancing rate.
Forward rates had started to increase in the
run-up to the increase in central bank interestrates expected by the markets. After theinterest-rate move, the strength of whichtook many market participants by surprise,forward rates continued their rise. On bal-ance, in mid-August they were 30 to 40 basispoints higher than their level at the beginningof June. The yield curve on the money marketthus remained rather steep.
Since the end of June the announcement of
the main refinancing operations has been ac-companied by information on the liquidityneeds of the banking system estimated bythe Eurosystem. This is calculated on the basisof the trends in autonomous factors, such asbanknotes in circulation or government de-posits with the Eurosystem, which are esti-mated by the national central banks. Its aver-Daily values
% p.a.
 5 
billion
 5 
billion
 5 
billion
0Main and longer-term
refinancing operations
MayImpact of market factors
on liquidity (cumulative)3
Total
Of which
− Government
− Banknotes in circulation0Central bank balances
of credit institutionsRequiredreserves
2Overnight interestrate (EONIA)Marginal lending rate
Deposit rateTender rate
 1Interest-rate movements and
liquidity management in theEurosystem
1Interest rate for main refinancing oper-
ations, single allotment rate (for fixed-rate
tenders) or marginal allotment rate (for
variable-rate tenders). — 2 Maintenance
periods: May 24 to June 23, June 24 to
July 23, and July 24 to August 23, 2000. —
3 Banknotes in circulation, government de-
posits with the Eurosystem, net foreign cur-
rency reserves of the Eurosystem and other
factors; provision (+) or absorption (−) of
central bank balances.
Deutsche Bundesbank250
230
210
190
17040+
20+
0
20−140
120
100
805.50
5.00
4.50
4.00
3.50
3.00
2.50                          
June July August
2000Rise in money
market rates
Publication of
estimated
liquidity needs

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
16age value is published for the period from the
date of the announcement of the main refi-nancing operation to the date of settlementof the next main refinancing operation (i.e.generally for nine days) or, in the last oper-ation of a reserve maintenance period, up tothe end of the maintenance period. Althoughthis estimate does contain an element of un-certainty, it enables credit institutions – alongwith information on the required reserves,the amount of funds hitherto provided andreserve maintenance so far – to gain an ideaof the allotment volume of the upcomingmain refinancing operation. In the final analy-sis, the estimated liquidity needs are only oneof many factors the ECB must look at beforemaking a decision on allotment.
During the period under review the Eurosys-
tem’s ongoing money market managementconsisted almost exclusively of main refinan-cing operations. Their significance will tendto rise further, since the allotments for thelonger-term refinancing operations that re-main to be settled between end-July and theend of the year will only amount to 315 bil-
lion each, compared with the previous vol-ume of 320 billion. On June 21 the ECB re-
sponded to unexpectedly heavy recourse tothe deposit facility on the preceding eveningby conducting a liquidity-providing reverseoperation with overnight maturity. On bal-ance, it was possible to successfully containmajor fluctuations in the EONIA at the endsof the reserve maintenance periods and atthe end-of-semester mark.
The net liquidity-absorbing impact of the
autonomous factors on credit institutions’Factors determining bank liquidity*
5billion;
calculated on the basis of daily averages
of the maintenance periods
2000
ItemMay 24
to
June 23June 24
to
July 23May 24
to
July 23
I. Provision (+) or absorption (–)
of central bank balances by
1. Change in banknotes in
circulation (increase: –) – 0.3 – 2.9 – 3.2
2. Change in government de-
posits with the Eurosystem + 3.6 – 12.1 – 8.5
3. Change in net foreign
exchange reserves 1 – 0.7 + 2.7 + 2.0
4. Other factors 2 –0 . 3 –4 . 7 –5 . 0
Total + 2.3 – 17.1 – 14.8
II. Monetary policy operations
of the Eurosystem
1. Open market operations
a) Main refinancing
operations – 1.7 + 17.0 + 15.3
b) Longer-term refinan-
cing operations – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.1
c) Other operations + 0.2 – 0.2 /C127 0.0
2. Standing facilities
a) Marginal lending
facility – 0.1 + 0.1 – 0.0
b) Deposit facility
(increase: –) + 1.5 + 0.3 + 1.8
Total – 0.2 + 17.1 + 17.0
III. Change in credit institutions’
current accounts (I. + II.) + 2.2 – 0.0 + 2.2
IV. Change in the minimum
reserve requirement
(increase: –) – 2.1 + 0.1 – 2.0
Memo items 3
Main refinancing operations 140.9 157.9 157.9
Longer-term refinancing
operations 59.9 59.9 59.9
Other operations 0.2 – –
Marginal lending facility 0.3 0.4 0.4
Deposit facility 0.8 0.5 0.5
*For longer-term trends and the contribution of the Deutsche
Bundesbank, see pages 14* and 15* in the Statistical Section of
this Report. — 1Including end-of-quarter valuation adjustments
with no impact on liquidity. — 2Including monetary policy
operations initiated in Stage Two and outstanding at the begin-
ning of Stage Three (outright transactions and the issuance of
debt certificates). — 3Levels as an average of the maintenance
period under review or the last maintenance period.
Deutsche BundesbankLiquidity
management
through main
refinancing
operations ...
... and
fine-tuning
operations
Rise in liquidity
needs

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
17liquidity was 314.8 billion between May and
July (see table on page 16). Also, the min-imum reserve requirement rose by 32.0 bil-
lion. Those changes were accompanied by anet replenishment of the open market trans-actions of the Eurosystem by 315.2 billion
and by reduced recourse to the deposit facil-ity.
Following strong growth of the money stock
M3 in the first quarter of this year, monetaryexpansion in the second quarter sloweddown, seasonally adjusted. The Eurosystem’sinterest rate increases probably played a rolein this. In June, when M3 went down in abso-lute terms, special factors apparently arose,leading to strong growth of central govern-ment deposits with MFIs, which are notcounted towards the money stock. At theend of June euro-area M3 was 5.4% higherthan a year before, as against 6.5% at theend of March. The three-month moving aver-age of twelve-month rates was 6.0% be-tween April and June; that put monetarygrowth 1
12percentage points above the ref-
erence value of 412%. Consequently, the
provision of liquidity to the economy con-tinues to be abundant.
Among the individual components of the
money stock M3, in the second quarter of2000 growth of overnight deposits was par-ticularly weaker. The year-on-year growthrate of overnight deposits declined from11.1% at the end of March to 7.1% at theend of June. In the second quarter currency incirculation once again grew moderately, afterhaving declined at the beginning of the year.On the whole, the money stock M1 surpassedits previous year’s level by 6.8% at the end of
June, compared with 10.0% at the end ofMarch. The main reason for the reduced pref-erence of investors for liquid funds probablylies in the increased money market rates,which promoted shifts to forms of investmentbearing higher interest. Especially depositswith an agreed maturity of up to two yearsprofited from that development. Investmentin marketable instruments, by contrast, wasincreased rather moderately in the secondquarter. Deposits redeemable at a period ofnotice of up to three months, which are lessattractive in terms of their interest rates, weredepleted.
MFIs’ lending to the private sector likewise
weakened in the second quarter of 2000.MFIs’ credit to households and enterprises inChange from previous year in %, monthly
%
%
Memo item
German contribution
to M3
scale reducedEuro area
Three-month
moving average
Reference value: 4 ½ %Growth of the money stock
M3 in the euro area
Deutsche Bundesbank12
10
8
6
47
6
5
4
3
1997 1998 1999 2000Weakened
monetary
growth
Components
of the money
stock M3
Balance-sheet
counterparts

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
18the euro area surpassed its previous year’s
level by 9.8% at the end of June, as against10.8% at the end of March. Securitised lend-ing, characterised by sizeable forward trans-actions of German MFIs, and loans contrib-uted to the slowdown. In seasonally adjustedand annualised terms, they rose by 8% be-tween April and June, compared with 13
12%
in the first quarter. Much like the moneystock, this difference in the rate of change islikely to have been influenced in part by theinterest-rate-policy environment. At the be-ginning of the year, expectations of a rise ininterest rates seem to have given a boost tocredit demand; in the meantime, the actualinterest rate rise has tended to slow downsuch demand. Lending to the public sectorwas cut back distinctly in the second quarter;securitised lending was particularly affected.In addition, the central governments stronglyreplenished their deposits with MFIs, whichdo not count towards the money stock. Inpayments of resident non-MFIs with non-euro-area countries, there were inflows offunds in the second quarter for the first timein quite a while. However, they mostly oc-curred in June and to a certain degree werelinked to the comprehensive forward transac-tions of German MFIs with non-euro-areacountries.
The German contribution to M3 in the euro
area, which has been growing more sluggish-ly since the end of last year than the euro-area monetary aggregate, declined in thesecond quarter of this year after seasonal ad-justment. At the end of June it was still 3.6%higher than a year ago. Even this rate,though, probably overstates the expansion ofliquidity in Germany in statistical terms, since
investors outside the euro area continued topurchase German money market paper, ac-cording to the balance-of-payments statis-tics.
1In the weak growth of Germany’s con-
tribution, the fact that money from Germanyhas been flowing out to the other euro-areacountries lately following the large inflows offunds from abroad after the launch of monet-ary union could be playing a role.
Capital market rates and stock prices
On balance, the long-term capital market
rates in the euro area declined slightly duringthe summer months. As this Report went topress, the average yield on ten-year govern-ment bonds in the euro-area countries stoodat just over 5
13% in mid-August. In the light
of the favourable growth prospects for theeuro area, capital market rates in Europe con-tinue to be extremely low. The Eurosystem’sforward-looking monetary policy, which issteadfastly geared towards the objective ofprice stability, played a crucial role in this con-text. Apparently it succeeded in stabilising thelong-term inflation expectations of the mar-ket participants at a low level. In addition, un-certainty about the future interest-rate pat-tern in the capital market has continued todecrease. Thus, the implied volatility of theBund future, which measures the degree ofprice volatility market participants expect in
1Since the outstanding amount of such paper is reported
exclusive of the holdings of domestic MFIs and – owing
to statistical difficulties – up to now no distinction has
been made between purchasers from the euro area and
those from non-euro-area countries, such liabilities of
MFIs to investors residing outside the euro area go into
the monetary aggregate M3.Germany’s
contributionCapital market
rates still low

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
19the forward market in the near future, again
dropped distinctly up to mid-August. In linewith the contrasting movements of interestrates in the long and the short end of themarket, the spread between capital marketrates and money market rates has decreasedfurther during the last few months, i.e. com-pared to the level of mid-May by almost 70basis points to only just over one-half per-centage point.
In addition to the impact of “home-grown”
factors, the favourable interest-rate patternin the capital market was underpinned byinterest-rate movements in the US bond mar-ket. In the United States the yield on ten-yeargovernment bonds outstanding dropped bythree-quarters of a percentage point fromMay to mid-August, causing the spread often-year US Treasuries over comparable euro-area bonds to decline to approximately one-half percentage point. Measured in terms ofthe difference between the fixed interestrates on ten-year interest swaps, the interest-rate advantage of the United States over theeuro area was reduced even more during thatperiod, i. e. from almost two to some 1
14per-
centage points. The decrease in long-terminterest rates in the US was mainly attribut-able to higher expectations of a “soft land-ing” of the US economy which market par-ticipants perceive as a necessary condition forcontaining price pressures.
In the course of the summer stock prices in
the euro area recovered slightly from the con-siderable price adjustment which had oc-curred in the spring and are still relatively highaccording to conventional assessment cri-teria. Measured in terms of the Dow Jones
Euro STOXX broad index, in mid-AugustEuropean equity price quotations were barely7% below their peak of early March and thusonly slightly above the levels recorded at theend of 1999. However, this price trend masksconsiderable sectoral differences. While theprices of shares of the more traditional sec-tors increased constantly and rather smooth-ly, the highly volatile shares of high-tech seg-Daily values
%
%Per-
centage
points
SOND J F MA MJ JA
1999 2000Volatility2Yield spread
of the US bond market
over the euro-area
averageYields on ten-year government
bonds outstanding,
euro-area average 1Euro-area
bond market yields
1Weighted average yield on ten-year
government bonds of the euro-area coun-
tries; weighted by GDP. — 2Implied volatil-
ity of the Bund future.
Deutsche Bundesbank8
7
6
5
41.50+
1.25+
1.00+
0.75+
0.50+6.00
5.75
5.50
5.25
5.00
US rates exert
downward
pressure
Stock prices
stabilised at a
high level

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
20ments determined the pronounced cyclical
pattern of the stock market as a whole(see page 24). The drop in the prices fortechnology-heavy growth stocks last springappears to be mainly due to a more realisticassessment of the risks associated with in-vesting in such shares which first affected the
US stock exchange NASDAQ and then seizedthe European financial centres, too. Sincethat time, the traditionally rather close correl-ation between stock prices in Europe and inthe United States has continuously increased.

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
21Financial markets
in GermanyCapital market and bank interest rates
Long-term interest rates in the German cap-
ital market fell slightly in the second quarterof 2000 amid minor fluctuations. The yield onten-year Federal bonds outstanding in mid-August stood at just under 5
14%. The very
close convergence between rates in the Ger-man bond market and yields in the othereuro-area countries persisted. Thanks to theirbenchmark position within the euro area,however, ten-year Federal bonds were pricedjust over
14percentage point lower than the
euro-area average (excluding Germany). Un-like the yields on long-term Federal bonds,interest rates on Federal securities with short-er residual maturities again rose distinctly inthe summer months. Consequently, the bondmarket yield curve has been virtually flat sincethe end of July. In mid-August yields on ten-year Federal bonds observable in the marketactually fell slightly below those on one-yearpaper, whereas they had showed a yieldspread of just under
23percentage point
three months earlier and almost 112percent-
age points at the end of 1999. In fact, ten-year Federal bonds – owing to their bench-mark status and associated liquidity advan-tage – have recently tended to attract aslightly lower interest rate than Federal bondswith medium-term residual maturities.
However, the interest rate movement of the
most liquid Federal bonds was influenced byspecial factors which render it hard to make areliable assessment of the general interestrate trend in the German bond market. Thechief factor was the expectation on the partof market participants that the governmentCapital market
rates stable and
yield curve even
flatter
Wider spread of
Federal bonds
due to special
factors

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
22would significantly reduce its borrowing in
the bond market in the course of this year asa result of the anticipated substantial add-itional receipts from the auction of mobilephone licences and from further privatisationproceeds. Assuming that Federal bond issueswould thus be in relatively short supply, mar-ket players hastened to buy long-term public-sector bonds, in particular, thereby drivingdown the yield. As yields on private-sectordebt securities did not match this downwardtrend but instead rose somewhat comparedwith their levels at the end of April, the inter-est rate differential between many private-sector debt securities and Federal bondswidened considerably. For instance, thespread between ten-year debt securities is-sued by domestic banks and comparable Fed-eral bonds increased by about 20 basis pointsbetween the end of April and the beginning
of June. In mid-August it amounted to about
23percentage point; this gap is almost twice
as great as the average for the nineties. Asrates for ten-year interest rate swaps largelytrack the yield on bank debt securities out-standing, the spread between swaps andFederal bonds likewise widened distinctly dur-ing the past few months.
1Besides leading to
a flatter yield curve, the widening of interestrate differentials resulted in the fact that – forthe first time since the early nineties – theaverage yield on all domestic bonds outstand-ing was significantly higher than the yield onten-year Federal bonds
The emergence of a virtually flat yield curve in
the market for Federal securities coupled withonly slightly changed long-term interest ratesindicates that market participants’ inflationexpectations are very subdued, despite theimproved economic outlook for both Ger-many and the whole euro area. This estima-tion is borne out by direct indicators of eco-nomic agents’ long-term inflation expect-ations. Thus the expected inflation rate forGermany for the average of the next tenyears, as culled from surveys (Consensus Fore-cast) in the first half of 2000, was no morethan 1.6%. If this measure is subtracted fromthe yield on domestic debt securities out-standing, the real capital market rate in theten-year maturity range in June was 3
34%,
compared with just over 4% on average dur-ing the nineties. Therefore, the financingDaily values
%
Percent-
age
points%
SOND J F MA MJ J A
1999 2000Yield spread of ten-year over
one-year Federal bondsYield on Federal securities
outstanding...
...with a residual maturity
   of ten years
...with a residual maturity of one yearYields
in the German bond market
Deutsche Bundesbank2.0+
1.5+
1.0+
0.5+
06.0
5.5
5.04.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
1By means of interest rate swaps the counterparties ex-
change future interest payments (fixed coupons against
floating rates linked to a money market rate). Such
swaps are mostly concluded between banks. Hence swap
rates and yields on bank debt securities are very similar.Flat yield curve
reflects low
inflation
expectations

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
23terms for the German economy remain com-
paratively favourable in both nominal andreal terms.
Bank interest rates were raised further across
the board during the summer months. In par-ticular, banks increased their short-term lend-ing and deposit rates noticeably. For example,in July banks charged more than 8
12%o n
average for current account credit (from DM 1million to less than DM 5 million) and 12%on average for personal credit lines, which inboth cases corresponds to an increase ofmore than 50 basis points compared withApril. The terms offered for short-term timedeposits were adjusted on a comparablescale. Thus the rates of interest paid in Julyon time deposits running for one monthand three months (deposit amount fromDM 100,000 to less than DM 1 million) – justover 3
12%a n d334% – were both more
than 60 basis points higher than they hadbeen three months earlier. By contrast, the in-crease in long-term bank rates was moremoderate. Thus mortgage loans with interestrates locked in for ten years cost just under6
34% on average in July, which was around
15 basis points more than in April. The inter-est charged on long-term fixed-rate loans toenterprises increased by roughly
14percent-
age point. In July their effective rates aver-aged around 7
14% (credit volume of
DM 200,000 to less than DM 1 million) and7% (credit volume of DM 1 million to lessthan DM 10 million).Share prices
Following their record high in March, equity
prices in the German share market fell by13% up to mid-August, as measured by thebroad CDAX share price index. At the sametime the advantage over average Europeanshare prices which they had enjoyed duringthe first few months of 2000, and which attimes had amounted to almost 10%, was allbut wiped out. German equities neverthelessremained approximately 5% ahead of theirend-1999 level. The stock price correctionduring the past few months also caused un-certainty on the German stock exchanges toabate considerably. Thus the implied volatilityof German blue-chip share prices captured bythe VDAX index has fallen continuously bymore than one-third from the beginning ofMonthly averages
%
Current account credit 1
Mortgage
loans2
Time deposits4Yields on
bank bonds3Bank interest rates
in Germany
1DM 1 million and more, but less than DM
5 million. — 2 On residential property;
effective interest rate, fixed rate over ten
years. — 3 With a mean residual maturity
of over nine to ten years. — 4 Time de-
posits with an agreed maturity of onemonth (up to and including October 1996:
a maturity of between one and three
months), for amounts of DM 100,000 and
more, but less than DM 1 million.
Deutsche Bundesbank8.5
7.5
6.5
5.54.5
3.5
2.5
1996 1997 1998 1999 2000Further rise in
bank interest
rates
Equity market
stable following
correction

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
24this year to below 20%. Since the end of
May, actual price volatility has also decreased.
However, the development of the overall
market continues to mask significant differ-ences in the price movements of individualequity market segments. While the “growthstocks” in the technology, media and tele-communications (TMT) industries, followingtheir earlier dynamic price surge, plummetedfrom spring onwards, quotations in the moretraditional sectors rose steadily. By the timethis Report went to press, high-tech stockshad lost nearly 40% of their market valuecompared with their peak at the beginning ofMarch and were down by more than 5%compared with their level at the end of lastyear; by contrast, non-TMT equities rose tonew all-time highs and in mid-August were
7% up on end-December.
2
Equities which are listed on the Neuer Markt
are mainly issued by very young and innova-tive companies from high-tech sectors whoseprofit potential is dependent on market de-velopments which lie quite a long way in thefuture. Attempts to assess the underlyingvalue of such shares is therefore subject tomajor uncertainty; moreover, their prices gen-erally react more strongly to new informationor even to mere market rumours. This notonly leads to a greater degree of price volatil-ity compared with the shares of firms in es-tablished economic sectors, it also meansthat the valuation level of such growth stockis more dependent on changes in investors’risk propensity. For example, fears expressedin the United States and then Germany aboutthe possibly insufficient solvency of somehigh-tech companies triggered dramatic pricefalls across the entire market segment. TheNEMAX-All-Share price index, which com-prises all equities traded on the Neuer Markt ,
was latterly more than 40% below its peakrecorded in mid-March. Nevertheless, shareprices in that market were still 12% abovetheir level at the end of 1999.
Borrowing in the securities markets
Borrowing via the issuance of domestic debt
securities increased slightly in the secondquarter. Gross sales of bonds and notes is-sued by domestic borrowers, calculated atDaily values, log. scale
TMT equities 1
non-TMT equities 2Share
price index
Start of June
1999 = 100Price movements in the
equity market
Source: Primark - Datastream. — 1Shares of
firms in the technology, media and tele-
communications (TMT) industries. — 2Total
market excluding TMT shares.
Deutsche Bundesbank270
253
236
219
202
185
168
151
134
117
100
90
ASO NDJFM A MJ JA
1999 2000
2Measured by Primark-Datastream’s market-wide sector-
al indices.Contrasting
trends in
individual
market
segments
Sales of bonds

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
25market prices, totalled 3183 billion, which
was roughly the same as between Januaryand March 2000. However, after subtractingthe lower redemptions and taking account ofthe changes in issuers’ holdings of their ownbonds, net domestic bond sales raised 352
12
billion between April and June and thus more
than in the preceding quarter ( 347 billion).3
By contrast, sales of foreign bonds, at 31012
billion, were considerably lower than in the
first quarter ( 334 billion). For one thing, Ger-
man investors bought foreign debt securitiesdenominated in euro or one of its nationalcurrency units only to the amount of 314 bil-
lion (after 329
12billion in the previous quar-
ter and 32812billion in the second quarter of
1999). Most of these issues were launched byresidents of other euro-area countries. Foranother thing, residents sold debt securitiesdenominated in foreign currencies in theamount of 33
12billion net between April
and June, after having bought such securitiesto the value of 34
12billion in the previous
quarter.
Credit institutions were the principal benefi-
ciaries of the higher amount of resourcesraised from sales of domestic debt securities.Between April and June they sold their owndebt securities for 345
12billion net, com-
pared with 33612billion in the first quarter.
For the first time in two quarters, longer-dated debt securities (with maturities of morethan four years) were predominant. The bankdebt securities sold again primarily took theform of communal bonds ( Öffentliche Pfand-
briefe ), which once more accounted for 319
billion. However, sales of other bank debtsecurities, designed to refinance lending tothe private sector, rose considerably from
39
12billion to 316 billion. At 3912billion,
the amount raised from bond sales by special-ised credit institutions remained virtually un-changed. The net proceeds raised by govern-ment debt securities between April and Junewas distinctly lower than in the previousquarter ( 38 billion) and amounted to 33
12
billion. The main reason for this was the sub-
dued issuing activity of the Federal Govern-ment ( 33 billion), whose cash situation is ra-
ther favourable. Corporate bonds were soldin the net amount of 33 billion, which was
half as much again as in the first quarter.Investment activity in the German
securities markets
5billion
2000 1999
ItemJan. to
MarchApril to
JuneApril to
June
Bonds and notes 1
Residents 75.8 27.8 51.9
Credit institutions 2 37.9 22.2 37.4
of which
Foreign bonds and notes 3 15.2 5.6 19.2
Non-banks 4 37.9 5.7 14.5
of which
Domestic bonds and notes 19.1 0.8 4.8
Non-residents 3 5.0 34.9 26.9
Shares
Residents – 2.5 – 4.8 11.6
Credit institutions 2 45.8 – 28.1 – 13.7
of which
Domestic shares 43.0 – 31.7 – 16.0
Non-banks 4 – 48.3 23.3 25.3
of which
Domestic shares – 100.0 – 0.6 12.2
Non-residents 3 62.0 40.2 22.0
Investment fund certificates
Investment in specialised funds 9.5 8.5 14.3Investment in funds opento the general public 16.3 8.0 9.6of which: Share-based funds 12.9 9.1 3.2
1Since the beginning of 2000 including debt securities is-
sued by non-banks with an original maturity of up to and in-cluding one year plus commercial paper. — 2Book values,
statistically adjusted. — 3Transaction values. — 4Residual.
Deutsche Bundesbank
3As from the beginning of the year 2000, the figures dis-
cussed here also contain debt securities issued by non-
banks with an original maturity of up to and including
one year plus commercial paper.Sharp increase
in sales of bank
debt securities

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
26Between April and June, domestic enterprises
placed new shares in the German equitymarket to the market value of 38 billion,
compared with 35 billion in the preceding
quarter. Foreign enterprises accommodatedequities worth 327
12billion net in the
domestic market, as against 35412billion in
the first quarter, which had been bloated by alarge cross-border takeover. The Neuer Markt
was again the main conduit for new issues inGermany, launching 39 and 41 initial public
offerings (IPOs) in the first and second quar-ter, even though the climate for stock marketflotations deteriorated perceptibly from mid-March in the wake of growing investorrestraint caused by the sharp drop in shareprices and greater uncertainty. More andmore enterprises that went public were un-able to maintain their issuing price, with theresult that a number of planned IPOs werepostponed. Nevertheless, the total number ofenterprises listed on the Neuer Markt has in-
creased to 300 since the end of July. Justunder one-sixth of them are foreign firms.The share of foreign investors, too, rosesignificantly compared with last year toaround 20%.
Investment activity in the securities
markets
Foreign investors were the principal buyers in
the bond market in the second quarter. Onbalance, they bought domestic debt secur-ities for 335 billion, compared with 35 billion
between January and March. They weremainly interested in short-term bank debtsecurities; they also purchased public debtsecurities totalling 312
12billion net. Domes-
tic credit institutions increased their bondportfolios by 322 billion, compared with 338
billion in the previous quarter. Whereas theybought bank debt securities to the value of323 billion and foreign bonds totalling 35
12
billion, they sold public paper in the amount
of3612billion. While domestic non-banks
had acquired a fairly large amount of bondeddebt in the first quarter ( 338 billion), they 5 
millionlin. scale
Issue volume
(right-hand scale)
lin. scale
Number of
new issues
(left-hand scale)log. scale
NEMAX-All-Share
price index
End-1997 = 1000
(monthly averages)Price movements
and issuing activity
in the Neuer Markt
Source: Daily data of Deutsche Börse.
Deutsche Bundesbank4000
3000
2000
1000
08000
7000
6000
5000
4000
3000
2000
1998 1999 200020
15
10
5
0
Persistently
buoyant issuing
activity in the
equity marketPurchases of
bonds

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
27reduced their investment in the bond market
considerably between April and June to just35
12billion. Their interest in domestic and
foreign debt securities alike waned notice-ably.
On balance, foreign investors were the main
purchasers of domestic shares in the secondquarter. They bought German equities to thenet value of 340 billion, compared with 362
billion between January and March. Domesticnon-banks increased their stock portfolios by323
12billion on balance, buying exclusively
foreign shares. Credit institutions sold Ger-man shares worth 331
12billion and pur-
chased foreign equities for 3312billion, thus
reducing their total stock holdings by 328 bil-
lion. However, the related shift in the owner-ship of German shares away from domesticbanks and towards foreign investors wasmainly due to maturing forward transactions.
Sales of investment fund certificates fell be-
tween April and June, just as they had donein the first quarter of 2000. Domestic invest-ment funds sold certificates to the net valueof316
12billion, compared with 326 billion
in the first quarter. Net sales of foreign mu-tual fund units in the period under review, at310 billion, were likewise well down on the
previous quarter ( 317
12billion).
Domestic specialised funds, which are open
only to institutional investors, raised new re-sources amounting to 38
12billion between
April and June, compared with 3912billion in
the previous quarter. At 34 billion, almost
half of this sum accrued to share-basedfunds. Domestic funds open to the generalpublic sold certificates for 38 billion net dur-
ing the period under review, after having at-tracted significantly larger inflows of capitalin the first quarter of 2000 ( 316
12billion
net). In this segment, too, investors predom-inantly favoured share-based funds, which re-corded inflows of 39 billion. This means that
in the first six months of this year retail invest-ors invested far more in share-based funds onbalance ( 322 billion) than they had done in
the whole of 1999 ( 317 billion). Neither the
muted share price trend in the second quarternor the greater uncertainty in some marketsegments have evidently dented the growingpopularity of share-based fund certificates.Retail investors perhaps regard this type of in-vestment vehicle as an appropriate means ofdiversifying their portfolios, because theyshow a clear preference, on the one hand, for%
%
1993 2000 94 95 96 97 98 99Share of equity investment
in the assets of all domestic
securities-based funds 1, 3Share of equity-based and mixed
securities-based fundsin the amount raised
by all domestic
investment funds
 1 ,  2Equity investment
through investment funds
1 Funds open to the general public and
specialised funds. — 2 Average of the last
four quarters. — 3 End-of-quarter levels.
Deutsche Bundesbank60
50
40
30
20
10
080
70
60
50
40
30Purchases
of shares
Investment
fund
certificates
Ongoing
growth of
share-based
funds

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
28investment funds with a European or inter-
national investment profile and, on the otherhand, for investment funds focused on “neweconomy” growth stocks. Such securities arelikely to be subject to comparatively high pricevolatility. In contrast to their growing appetitefor share-based funds, private investors re-duced their involvement in bond-based fundsand money market funds by 32 billion each on
balance during the period under review.
Deposit and lending business
of monetary financial institutions (MFIs)with domestic customers
In the deposit business of German MFIs, the
overnight deposits of domestic customers de-clined considerably on balance in the secondquarter of 2000, measured on a seasonally
adjusted basis. While these deposits had in-creased significantly during the first fourmonths of this year against the backgroundof expectations of rising interest rates, achange in investment behaviour occurred inMay and June. Rising short-term interest ratespushed up the opportunity cost of liquid cashholding, as a result of which savings wereswitched from sight deposits to better remu-nerated forms of investment.
This switch primarily benefited deposits with
an agreed maturity of up to two years, whoseattractiveness was appreciably enhanced bythe quite steep increase in interest rates onshorter-term time deposits during the secondquarter amounting to more than
12percent-
age point. They grew by 34.3 billion in the
second quarter after having contracted by37.7 billion in the previous three months.
Deposits with an agreed maturity of morethan two years rose by 32.6 billion between
April and June, thereby growing faster thanthey had done in the second quarter of lastyear ( 31.0 billion). While domestic insurance
companies continued to invest in longer-termdeposits, employed and other individuals not-ably decreased their holdings of longer-datedfixed-term deposits.
The fall in deposits with an agreed period
of notice of three months, which has beenapparent for some time, persisted in thesecond quarter. For almost a year now thisdecline has affected not only traditionalsavings deposits but also special savings facil-ities attracting a higher rate of interest,whose negative interest rate gap vis-à-visMovement of the lending and deposits
of monetary financial institutions(MFIs) in Germany
*
5billion
2000 1999
ItemApril to
JuneApril
to June
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight + 0.6 + 26.2
With agreed maturities
up to 2 years + 4.3 – 12.0over 2 years + 2.6 + 1.0
At agreed notice
up to 3 months – 20.1 + 2.2over 3 months
2 + 2.3 – 7.1
Lending
Lending to domestic enterprisesand individuals
Loans + 25.3 + 34.2Lending against securities – 22.1 – 5.2
Lending to domestic publicauthorities
Loans – 1.7 – 3.3Lending against securities – 6.6 – 0.4
*As well as banks (including building and loan associ-
ations, but excluding the Bundesbank), monetary finan-cial institutions (MFIs) here also include money marketfunds; see also Table IV.1 in the Statistical Section of thisReport. — 1Enterprises, individuals and public author-
ities. — 2Savings deposits.
Deutsche Bundesbank
Weak demand
for overnight
depositsMarked rise
in shorter-
term time
deposits, ...
... moderate
increase in
longer-term
time deposits
Marked fall in
savings deposits
at three
months’ notice

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
29comparable fixed-term deposits with a ma-
turity of three months has widened notice-ably of late. To some extent domestic house-holds appear to have switched their short-term savings deposits not only into fixed-termdeposits but also into deposits redeemable ata period of notice of more than threemonths; in the period under review the latterincreased substantially in seasonally adjustedterms.
MFI lending to domestic enterprises and indi-
viduals was noticeably lower in the secondquarter than in the first. However, this wasmainly a consequence of extensive disposalsof securities by German MFIs in June in con-nection with large-scale forward transactionsconcluded in March 2000 with non-residentsboth inside and outside the euro area.Altogether, German MFIs ran down theirholdings of securities issued by domesticenterprises by 322.1 billion between April
and June. Loans grew somewhat less rapidlyin the second quarter. They expanded at aseasonally adjusted annual rate of 4
12%, fol-
lowing 712% in the first quarter. A slightly
stronger demand was recorded for mediumand long-term borrowing in the second quar-ter on a seasonally adjusted basis; in particu-lar, employees and other individuals increasedtheir indebtedness to German MFIs. By con-trast, short-term loans, which had increasedconsiderably in the preceding quarter, grewfar more slowly in the period under review.With regard to the different categories ofborrowers, credit utilisation by enterprisesand households decreased in the secondquarter while lending to the housing sectorrose marginally. Within the enterprise sector,credit demand weakened especially in whole-
sale/retail trade, transport, communicationand other financial mediation services. Bycontrast, it showed a surge in the manufac-turing sector.
The level of indebtedness of German public
authorities to domestic MFIs decreased by38.4 billion in the second quarter of 2000,
compared with a decline of 33.7 billion one
year earlier. This owed much to the govern-ment sector’s markedly improved budgetarysituation. On balance banks’ holdings of se-curities issued by public authorities decreasedby36.6 billion in the second quarter, while
loans were curtailed by 31.7 billion. In add-
ition, the government increased its depositswith German MFIs in the period under reviewby the unusually substantial amount of 35.1Seasonally adjusted
DM
billion 5 
billion
%lin. scale
Change from the previous year in %2150
2050
1950
1850
1750log. scale
Loans1
oLoans to domestic
enterprises and individuals
1End-of-month level; excluding statistical
changes. — oFigures in euro from 1999.
Deutsche Bundesbank8
64
2
04200
4000
3800
3600
3400
1997 1998 1999 2000Lower lending
to the private
sector
Fall in public
sector debt

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
30billion. For the most part this increase oc-
curred in June in the context of the issuanceof a further tranche of shares in Deutsche
Telekom in that month.

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
31Economic conditions
in GermanyUnderlying trends
The consolidation of the upswing has con-
tinued in Germany: growth accelerated inspring 2000. According to the Bundesbank’sinitial calculations, overall output in thesecond quarter – adjusted for seasonal andworking-day variations – could have risen byslightly more than 1% compared with thepreceding three-month period, when it hadalready increased quite sharply at around
34%. The year-on-year increase in (real) gross
domestic product (GDP) – adjusted forworking-day variations – is likely to havegone up to 3
14%, having been 214% in the
first quarter of 2000. In calendar-monthterms, this signifies a growth of 3%.
The stimuli generated by global trade re-
mained strong, although the high propensityto import meant that the contribution togrowth made by foreign trade was not aspronounced, on balance, as export activityindicates. Furthermore, there has been afurther shift in foreign trade prices to thedisadvantage of the German economy –mainly as a result of the increase in oil pricesand the strength of the US dollar. The accom-panying losses in real income, taken by them-selves, represent a notable contractionary fac-tor. Nevertheless, the deterioration in theterms of trade has not been as great so far asin the first half of the seventies and in theearly eighties – the two previous comparableperiods of a sharp surge in oil prices. Al-though the DM price of imported crude oilhas tripled within a short space of time, theGerman economy’s low degree of structuraldependence on oil means that the amount itSharp growth
in GDP
External
influences

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
32pays for oil has not had such a severe impact
as in the two previous cases. Whereas net im-ports of crude oil and oil products accountedfor around 3% of GDP in 1974, and as muchas 4
14% in 1981, the figure for this year is
estimated to be no more than 114%. Added
to this was the fact that prices for other rawmaterials and finished goods showed only amoderate rise. A further major factor wasthat the negative terms-of-trade effect, atleast in most cases, did not have an adverse
impact on enterprises’ profitability and pro-pensity to invest. Indeed, moderate paysettlements ensured that these influenceswere offset to a large extent, with surges inexternal prices being accompanied by domes-tic cost discipline. Overall, the way in whichthe terms-of-trade effect was distributed in-ternally was not so detrimental to the con-tinued expansion of economic activity as ithad been earlier.
The rise in output in the first half of 2000,
which – at an annualised rate – can be put ataround 3
14%, was considerably sharper than
the concurrent rise in the overall productionpotential; there has thus been a noticeableincrease in capacity utilisation. The availableindicators suggest that the propensity to in-vest has become much greater. According tothe surveys of the ifo institute, there are moreplans than before to increase capacity. This islikely to result in more jobs and rising employ-ment. This is undoubtedly due in part to thefact that there has been a perceptible overallimprovement in enterprises’ profitability – al-beit to markedly differing degrees in individ-ual cases – since its deterioration last year.This is suggested by the fact that labour costsper unit of turnover have also had an alleviat-ing effect under the impact of a sharp rise inproductivity. Capital market rates are not aslow as they were at the start of 1999,although this also reflects the strength of thecurrent global upswing. Furthermore, therelevant real rate of interest for long-termcorporate loans can by no means be rated ashigh – the opposite is more likely to be thecase. Not least, what should be consideredBalance
Balance
Households’ assessment
of the economic situation2Business climate in the
industrial sector 1
Monthly
Five-month
moving averageSentiment in the
industrial sector and
among households
1Seasonally adjusted ifo data; western Ger-
many. — 2Bundesbank calculations on the
basis of data from the “Gesellschaft für
Konsumforschung”.
Deutsche Bundesbank50+
40+
30+
20+
10+
0
10−
20−
30−20+
10+
0
10−
20−
30−
1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000Increasing
capacity
utilisation
and rising
propensity
to invest

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
33more than ever is the fact that, for many en-
terprises, access to equity capital has becomeeasier and more attractive. That applies to thestock market in general and to the Neuer
Markt in particular as well as to the venture
capital segment, which is now very dynamic.The financing base of the economy has thusbecome broader and more consistent withdemand.
Consumer spending picked up in the spring
months, although the oil-price increase wasan adverse factor. According to the surveysundertaken by the consumer research insti-tution, Gesellschaft für Konsumforschung,
households felt that the outlook for the econ-omy in general was quite positive; neverthe-less, the propensity to make major purchasesstill tended to be subdued. This was reflected,not least, by the comparatively small numbersof new motor vehicle registrations. Other re-tail sales, however, showed a sharp seasonallyadjusted rise in the months from April toJune.
Output and labour market
Manufacturing output has been further ex-
panded during the past few months. On anaverage of the period from April to June
1,i t
was nearly 3% up on the preceding wintermonths in seasonally adjusted terms
2; year-
on-year, the increase went up to just under7
12%, compared with 612% previously.
Owing to the sharp rise, utilisation of existingproduction capacity remained high. Accord-ing to the surveys of the ifo institute, utilisa-tion in June remained around 2 percentagepoints up on the previous year’s level. Taking
turnover as a yardstick, there were again avery large number of deliveries to foreign cus-tomers. Year-on-year growth increased to justover one-sixth. However, more deliveries arenow being made to domestic customers aswell: for the first time in a long whole, theyear-on-year rates of increase came near tobeing in double figures.
In particular, producers of capital goods
achieved year-on-year increases in output ofmore than 10%, with the manufacturers ofSeasonally adjusted, quarterly
%Capacity utilisation 1
lin. scale
0Output
1995 = 100, log. scaleOutput and utilisation
in the manufacturing sector
1Results of the ifo business survey.
Deutsche Bundesbank86
84
82
80
78118
115
112
109
106
103
100
97
1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000
1One of the reasons why it is advisable to combine the
period from April to June in the analysis is the unusual
way the holidays fell this year.
2Output in the first three months of 2000, for which fac-
tors from last year were used in an initial provisional ad-
justment of the monthly figures to the quarterly survey,
has been revised downwards by 0.5 index points in line
with the results of the current quarterly survey.Consumer
spending more
buoyant
Manufacturing
as an engine of
the economy

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
34telecommunications equipment and installa-
tions as well as of office and computer equip-ment continuing – as for some while – to bethe pace-setters in this area. In the field ofconsumer durables, the production of radio,television and video equipment was at a highlevel.
The positive development in manufacturing
also had an impact on commercial serviceproviders. According to surveys, in the secondquarter they reported that the outlook forbusiness had shown a marked improvementfollowing a somewhat more subdued devel-opment at the turn of 1999-2000. This ap-plies particularly to computer companies andmanagement consultancy firms, although carand plant hire firms, as well as the advertisingindustry, also rated the situation and outlookas favourable. According to the reports by
their associations, much the same applies tomany skilled trades.
In spring, the construction sector was, by
contrast, still unable to extricate itself fromthe adjustment pressure under which it hasbeen for some time, especially in eastern Ger-many. In the second quarter, in fact, itshowed a further sharp decline, following thefirst few months of the year which had bene-fited from the comparatively mild weatherconditions. At around 8%, the year-on-yearfigure also shows a sharp fall. The develop-ment in building construction was especiallyunfavourable, with all construction subsec-tors – residential, commercial and public con-struction – being affected. Civil engineeringfared better by comparison, but still sufferedcutbacks in output of 4
12%.
The sharp growth in overall output has led
not only to a rise in the average number ofworking hours but also to an increase in de-mand for labour. There was a further slightreduction in unemployment. According tothe calculations of the Federal StatisticalOffice, the seasonally adjusted number ofpersons in work rose to 36.27 million up toMay (more recent data are unavailable atpresent), which was 45,000 more than at theend of the first quarter, and 145,000, or0.4%, more than a year before. The largestincrease was in the labour-intensive servicessector. For industry, the indicators suggestthat the long-prevailing reduction in employ-ment has now probably come to an end, al-though it is unlikely that new employees havebeen recruited on a significant scale so far.Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
%Capacity utilisation 1
lin. scale
0Output
1995 =100, log. scale
xOutput and utilisation
in the construction sector
1Results of the ifo business survey; western
Germany. — xProvisional pending adjust-
ment to the annual overall survey.
Deutsche Bundesbank65
60
55105
100
95
90
85
80
1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000
Development
also positive
in the case
of service
providersConstruction,
by contrast,
remains weak
Rise in
employment

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
35The trend in the construction sector was still
pointing downwards at the end of the periodunder review.
An overall increase in demand for labour is
indicated by the development in vacanciesreported to the labour exchanges. Althoughthis indicator comprises only part of totaldemand, it is likely that it is largely an accur-ate reflection of the economy’s needs. Afteradjustment for seasonal variations, the num-ber of vacancies had increased to just over520,000 by the end of July. This is the highestfigure recorded in Germany since the earlynineties, and signifies a rise of around 40,000compared with the end of 1999: the year-on-year increase is almost twice as high.
Rising employment was accompanied by a re-
duction in joblessness. Although the pace ofthe reduction has slowed down recently, thisis likely to have been partly due to special fac-tors, such as the start of the summer holidayperiod. Falling unemployment is the under-lying trend. Seasonally adjusted, 3.89 millionpersons were registered as unemployed atthe Federal Labour Office at the end of July,i.e. 25,000 fewer than on an average of thesecond quarter. Compared with 12 monthsbefore, this was a reduction of roughly225,000.
This development was accompanied by a
marked cut-back in the deployment oflabour-market-policy instruments in compari-son with 1999. At just over 650,000 at theend of July, the number of persons attendingvocational training courses and taking part injob-creation schemes, which still representsthe largest single item of government assist-
ance, was roughly 115,000 down on itsearlier level.
At the end of July, the seasonally adjusted
share of registered unemployed persons inthe total (civilian) labour force was 9.5%. Inwestern Germany, the unemployment ratewas 7.7%, compared with 17.4% in easternGermany. This illustrates the fact that the la-Quarterly
Millions
%Thou-
sands
0Unemployment rate
(seasonally adjusted)
JulyJulyChange from previous yearUnemployed
(seasonally adjusted)
JulyApr./
MayChange from previous yearApr./MayEmployed
(seasonally adjusted)Labour market
Deutsche Bundesbank12
11
10
9400+
0
400−4.6
4.2
3.8
3.4400+
0
400−36.8
36.4
36.0
35.6
- - 
1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000Higher number
of vacancies
Reduction in
unemployment
Labour-
market-policy
instrumentsHigh
unemployment
in eastern
Germany

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
36bour market situation in eastern Germany
remains much less favourable than in thewestern part of the country. Not only aremore persons affected by unemployment ineastern Germany, developments over thepast few months, if anything, still tended tobe negative. There has been scarcely any de-cline in unemployment of late, for example,and the number of persons registered asunemployed persisted at 1.37 million.A quantitative comparison of the increase in
employment in Germany as a whole and theconcurrent fall in unemployment reveals aclear discrepancy. Whereas the number ofpersons in work on an average of the monthsApril and May was around 120,000 higherthan 12 months previously, unemploymentduring the same period fell by almost185,000. The declining number of membersof the workforce shows once again that thelabour market is not a closed system. A majorrole in the current context is played by demo-graphic factors which are bringing about adecline in the potential workforce. The Insti-
tut für Arbeitsmarkt- und Berufsforschung(Institute for Employment Research) estimatesthis effect to be as much as 175,000 on anannual average of 2000 compared with1999.
Orders
There has been a further perceptible rise in
the volume of new manufacturing orders,indicating a speedy continuation of the up-swing. On an average of the second quarter,seasonally adjusted orders were around5
12% up on the level reached in the winter
months. The year-on-year increase, whichhad already been in double figures, went upto 14
12%. At 2012% year-on-year, the rise
in foreign orders was sharper still. The in-crease in domestic orders was, by contrast,below-average, although a rate of around10
14% likewise testifies to a notable pace of
growth. Furthermore, the seasonally adjustedincrease in business on the domestic salesmarket over the past few months was notSeasonally adjusted, quarterly, log. scale
DomesticForeignNew orders
Volume, 1995 = 100
TotalDemand in the
manufacturing sector
Deutsche Bundesbank95115
100110
105
10095155
105150
110145
100140
135
130
125
120
115
110130
125
120
115
110
105
100
95
1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000Decline in the
potential
workforce
Large volume
of orders
received by
industry

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
37much less than the increase in new orders
from abroad. A number of particularly large-scale orders played a part in this.
In contrast to the first quarter, demand was
centred on the capital goods sector. Demandfor intermediate and consumer goods did notattain the same level but likewise achievedsharp rates of growth. With a growth inorders reaching nearly 20%, capital goodswere also in the lead when measured interms of the development in the previous12 months. The figure for orders placed withmanufacturers of other transport equipment(which includes aeroplanes, ships and rail-ways) was even considerably higher. Further-more, the situation remained positive in thecase of office and communications equip-ment, whereas the manufacturers of motorvehicles and structural metal products laggedbehind.
In contrast to manufacturing, demand for
construction work was still subdued in spring.Nevertheless, recent incoming constructionorders point to a stabilisation at a low level.On an average of the months April and May,the seasonally adjusted level was slightly upon the first quarter, which had been as highas at the end of 1999. At around 8%, com-pared with just over 7% previously, thedecline over 12 months became larger, how-ever.
The commercial construction sector, in par-
ticular, provides some indications that thesituation has bottomed out. Seasonally ad-justed, commercial construction orders re-ceived in the two-month period of April andMay were around 2
12% up on the winter
months in terms of volume. Although thisfigure was still significantly (5
12%) down on
the previous year’s level, the year-on-year fallwas no longer significantly greater than inthe first quarter. Over the past few months,the volume of orders placed by public sectorcontractors was likewise somewhat higherthan in the winter quarter: at slightly lessthan 7%, there was no more than a lower-Seasonally adjusted, quarterly, log. scale
...in housing
   construction...of the
   public sector...of industrial
   enterprisesVolume, 1995 = 100
Construction orders...
...total
Apr./ MayDemand for
construction work
Deutsche Bundesbank110
100
90
80
70110
100
90
80110
100
90
80110
100
90
80
1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000- - - - Sectoral focal
points
Construction
demand
remained
subdued
Commercial
and public
non-residential
building

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
38than-average decline compared with the pre-
vious year.
By contrast, the situation in residential con-
struction remained quite unfavourable. Theslight improvement in incoming orders duringthe first few months of the year was notmaintained. Seasonally adjusted, there was afurther decline in new orders. The year-on-year fall, which had amounted to around11% in the first quarter, increased to 13
12%.
Construction permits for dwellings do not
point to a turnaround in the near futureeither. Although a reorganisation of the stat-istics has meant that the relevant data havebeen incomplete since the start of the year,the information that is available (which doesnot contain some of the Länder) shows a con-tinuing year-on-year fall in the number of
dwelling units for which a permit has beengranted. In the spring months of April andMay, in fact, the negative rates slipped downwell into double figures. This does not applyjust to the construction of rented housing,i.e. apartments in buildings with three ormore dwelling units. Recently, there has alsobeen a noticeable decline in the number ofpermits for the construction of houses withone or two dwellings. This is also the case inwestern Germany, where the situation hadhitherto been comparatively favourable.
Prices
According to the calculations of the Federal
Statistical Office, consumer prices in Germanywere 1.9% up on the year in July. This wasthe same rate as in June and again signifi-cantly more than in April and May, when theyear-on-year figure had been no more than1.5%.
The recent increase in inflation was mainly
due to sharp price rises for energy sources –especially in the case of petrol and light heat-ing oil, which also had an impact on gasprices and on contributions for hot water andheating. Consumer prices were thus follow-ing the dictates of the international markets.Including the “ecological” tax increases onJanuary 1, prices for energy sources reacheda new peak.
Excluding energy, the year-on-year rate of in-
flation in July amounted to 0.9%, which wasnot much more than on an average of thePrice trend indicators for Germany
Change from previous year in %
1999 2000
Item4th
qtr1st
qtr2nd
qtr July
Headline rate of
inflation
Consumer prices 1.0 1.7 1.6 1.9
Statistical core rates 1
Consumer prices
excluding seasonalfood and energy 0.2 0.7 0.8 0.8
Consumer prices with
modified weights
2 0.5 0.8 0.8 0.8
5% trimmed mean 3 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2
Weighted median 4 0.7 1.0 0.9 1.2
1Bundesbank calculations. — 2Reduction of the
weights of volatile components. — 35% exclusion of
components showing a high/low degree of volatility. —4Price change for the component at which the cumula-
tive individual weights reach 50%.
Deutsche Bundesbank
Residential
construction
Construction
permits for
dwellingsRise in year-on-
year rate of
consumer price
increase
Sharp price
increases for
sources of
energy ...
... albeit at a
moderate
underlying rate

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
39second quarter. The rise was evident both in
services, at a year-on-year rate of latterly1.5%, and in rents, at 1.3%. Industrialgoods and food exerted stabilising influences,however. In the industrial goods sector, severecompetitive pressure – further intensified bythe advancing use of modern informationmedia and the concomitant increase in mar-ket transparency – means that suppliers canmake only modest increases to their prices.In the food product markets, competitionamong major discount chains continued. As aresult, consumers did not have to pay more atthe end of the period under review than theydid in July 1999.
The core inflation rate, which seeks to cap-
ture the trend rise in annual consumer priceinflation excluding short-term fluctuationsand special factors, amounted to around 1%recently. This was only slightly more than inthe first few months of this year. This meansthat inflationary pressures, in terms of theunderlying trend, have not increased signifi-cantly so far despite the heavy impact of oilprices. Future developments will have to bewatched carefully, however.
That is not least the case because prices on
the international oil markets are fluctuatingsharply at present and no easing is identifi-able in terms of the exchange rate. BrentNorth Sea Oil, for example, was quoted ataround US$ 30 in mid-August, which was al-most back up to its end-June level, havingfallen to US$ 26
12in the interim. At the end
of the period under review, the spot marketprices for heating oil in Rotterdam – whichact as a signal for supplies in Europe – even1995 = 100, seasonally adjusted
% lin. scale
Change from previous
year in % JulyConsumer prices2Producer prices
of industrial productsScale enlarged
Import priceslog. scale
Raw material prices 1Prices at various stages
of the economic process
1HWWA index of raw material prices;
Deutsche Mark basis; not seasonally adjus-
ted. — 2Consumer price index.
Deutsche Bundesbank4+
2+
0109
106
103
100
97103
100
97112
109
106
103
100
97170
160
150
140
130
120
110
100
90
80
1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000Volatile oil
markets

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
40went above their previous mid-year peak, al-
though petrol prices continued to be welldown on their previous levels.
Overall, there has been scarcely any let-up so
far in external price pressure. The year-on-year rate of increase in import prices fell backonly slightly, from 11.7% in May to 11.5% inJune. The seasonally adjusted monthly rate ofinflation, which had been almost 1% on anaverage of the period from January to May,did decelerate at the end of the period underreview, although it still amounted to around
12%. This was also the main reason for the
terms of trade, after adjustment for seasonalvariations, again becoming less favourable inJune and for the year-on-year deteriorationremaining unchanged at just over 7%. Sea-sonally adjusted, the rise in export prices didnot continue of late: the year-on-year in-crease went down from 3.8% in May to3.6% in June. Nevertheless, given a favour-able market situation and competitiveposition as well as the fact that depreciationmade it possible to use some leeway inpricing, selling prices in foreign business – cal-culated in D-Mark – had been raised quitesteadily up to May.Domestic prices for industrial products con-
tinued to rise slightly up to June in seasonallyadjusted terms. The increase over 12 monthswent up to 2.9%, having been 2.4% at theend of the first quarter. Excluding energy, theyear-on-year rate of price increase wentdown somewhat to 1.9% in June, comparedwith 2.0% in May.
Seasonally adjusted, construction work was
hardly any more expensive in the secondquarter of 2000 than it had been in the firstquarter. Even so, the difference when com-pared with the price level in the same periodof 1999 increased to 0.8%, having been0.4% at the start of this year owing to falls inprices a year before. There was a significantlyhigher-than-average rate of price increase inroad building, the input costs of which rosecomparatively sharply as a result of the oil-price increase. Year-on-year price rises in thissector amounted to 2.3%. By contrast, pricerises in residential construction were not aspronounced, the year-on-year rate of increasebeing no more than half as high as the overallaverage.
Further
deterioration
in the terms
of tradeFurther rise in
industrial
producer prices
Construction
prices largely
stable

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
41Foreign trade
and paymentsForeign trade and current account
The rapid upswing in German exports which
had begun in the spring of 1999 continuedvirtually unabated up to the end of the periodunder review. The rate of growth in foreigndemand for German products has now beenin double figures for a year. In the secondquarter of 2000, for example, the exportorders received by German industry exceededtheir level in the same period last year by22% – a larger rate of increase than in theprevious export upswing in 1997. There ishardly a sign of a downturn at the currentend of the series either. New export ordersrose by a seasonally adjusted 6
12% in the
second quarter of the year compared withthe first quarter, which is equivalent to anannualised growth rate of almost 30%.
Export deliveries also rose sharply as a result
of the strong demand, albeit with a certaintime lag; however, they were unable to keeppace with the flood of incoming orders. Thevalue of German exports rose by a seasonallyadjusted 4
12% in the second quarter com-
pared with the first quarter of the year, whichmeans that between April and June they ex-ceeded their performance in the correspond-ing period last year by 16
12%. In the light of
all these figures it is not surprising that,according to surveys by the ifo institute,German industry is expecting the very buoy-ant export business to continue. At anyevent, export expectations for the comingthree months were still rising in seasonally ad-justed terms when this Report went to pressand have now almost reached the recordlevels quoted in the corresponding corporateForeign trade
trends
Exports

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
42reports in the boom years of 1997 and 1994.
It is possible that shortages of capacity insome sectors of German industry are alreadylimiting the export trend. The sharper rise inexport prices since the beginning of this yearcould be a sign of this. Enterprises are evi-dently using the favourable market conditionsto pass on cost increases resulting fromhigher oil prices and depreciation-related in-creases in the price of other imported inputsin their selling prices. In the second quarter
seasonally adjusted export prices rose bymore than 1% compared with the first quar-ter and were therefore 3
12% above the level
a year earlier. Owing to the considerabledepreciation of the euro, this is hardly likelyto be resulting in a deterioration in Germany’sprice competitiveness – at least, not in rela-tion to competitors in non-euro-area coun-tries. Even so, the rise in export prices mustbe carefully monitored. This is true not leastfor the eventuality that the euro firms againon the foreign exchange markets.
The centre of German export growth had
already been shifting increasingly to the euroarea during the previous few months whereasin the initial period of the export revival it wasthe demand from non-euro-area countriesthat had been providing the momentum. Thedepreciation of the euro that has now set inhas therefore gradually become somewhatless important for the German export trade.Admittedly, the main driving force behindGermany’s export performance had longbeen the growth of foreign markets, and thisgrowth shifted more sharply in favour of theEuropean markets as a result of the economicrecovery in the euro area.
In the last three months for which the rele-
vant regional data are available (March toMay) Germany’s exports of goods to the euroarea, which absorbs 45% of the country’stotal exports, rose by just over 8%, seasonallyadusted, compared with the previous three-month period; this means that they were19
12% above their level in the corresponding
period a year earlier. Although German ex-DM
billion 5 
billion
%Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
lin. scale
Export expectations 1Orders received
from abroad
values, 1995 = 100125130135140145
olog. scale
ExportsExport trend
1Results of the ifo business survey; bal-
ances of positive and negative company re-
ports. — oFrom 1999 on all data in euro.
Deutsche Bundesbank20+
15+
10+
5+
0
5−150
145
140
135
130
125
120
115155160280
270
260
250
240
230
220
210
1997 1998 1999 2000Regional focal
points

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
43ports to countries outside the euro area also
continued to grow significantly at the sametime, the rates of growth in sales here wereless vigorous, at approximately 6% in season-ally adjusted terms. Exports to customers inthe United States, in particular, recently roseless sharply in seasonally adjusted termswhen compared with the substantial rates ofgrowth in the course of last year. By contrast,German exports to the developing countriesand the emerging economies as well as tothe countries in transition in central and east-ern Europe again proved to be fairly buoyant.Sales to South-East Asia, for example, grew indouble figures on a year-on-year comparison.However, exports to the OPEC countries alsorose appreciably on a similar comparisonwhereas the demand from those countrieshad hardly increased at first despite the con-siderable growth in revenue from oil sales.
German imports have likewise been growing
sharply in line with the economic recovery inGermany; with a growth rate of 3
12%, the –
real – growth in imports was equivalent tothat of exports. On a year-on-year compari-son, however, import growth, at 7
12%, was
significantly lower than on the exports side(12
12%). However, import prices rose sharply
at the same time (11% in the second quartercompared with the same period last year andapproximately 2
12%, seasonally adjusted,
compared with the first quarter of this year)with the result that nominal imports grewmuch more strongly than real imports. At justover 5
12% compared with the previous quar-
ter and 1912% compared with the second
quarter of 1999, payments for importedgoods were therefore considerably greater
than the additional proceeds from exports.
Expenditure on energy imports increased par-
ticularly sharply following the steep rise in oilprices until March; it rose by a seasonally ad-justed 23% between March and May com-pared with the previous three-month period.Compared with the same period in 1999, ex-penditure on energy imports actually morethan doubled although German crude oil im-ports alone rose by only 7
12% by volume on
a year-on-year comparison.
Even if sources of energy are excluded, how-
ever, the value of industrial imports rose sig-nificantly on a year-on-year comparison. Thisis not least the result of the substantial year-on-year rise (36%) in the nominal imports ofraw materials and semi-finished goods. Largetwo-digit price increases likewise played arole here, especially in the case of non-ferrousmetals, iron and steel products and basicchemicals. These goods were affected notonly by the weakness of the euro but also bythe discernible upward pressure on prices onworld markets. By contrast, the rise in the im-ports of finished products, which, at justunder 18% year on year, was likewise consid-erable, was probably due more to an expan-sion in the real purchases of goods in connec-tion with the high export demand and the as-sociated intensification of interindustrial tradebetween the various production locationsboth in and outside Europe. At all events,similarly sharp rates of growth in importswere previously observed in this sector duringearlier export-driven periods of economic re-vival.
ImportsBreakdown of
imported goods

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
44Despite the sustained buoyancy in exports,
Germany’s trade surplus declined somewhatas a result of higher import prices in thesecond quarter; it declined from almost 316
billion (seasonally adjusted) in the first quarterto315 billion in the quarter under review.
Furthermore, the traditionally large deficit on
invisible transactions with non-residents hada detrimental effect on the German currentaccount, the seasonally adjusted deficit hererising from 317
12billion in the first quarter
to321 billion in the second. The deficit on
services rose by 3112billion to just under
31212billion. However, the increase did not
so much affect foreign travel, which accountsfor by far the largest deficit on the Germanservices account, as the other services such asengineering and other technical services aswell as communications. Net payments of
factor income to beneficiaries abroad re-mained unchanged at 31
12billion during the
month under review. Current transfers ran alarger deficit (just over 37 billion) than in the
first quarter ( 35
12billion). This was mainly
due to larger net payments by Germany tothe EU budget. All in all, the German currentaccount therefore showed a seasonally ad-justed deficit of 37 billion in the second quar-
ter compared with one of 33 billion in the
first quarter of this year.
Financial transactions
During the past few months the international
financial markets have experienced severalchanges in direction. After a bullish period onmajor equity markets a somewhat more real-istic appraisal of the future profitability of theNew Economy initially set in during the springand gave rise to a perceptible change incourse. The bond markets benefited from thisin particular. The euro firmed for a time onthe foreign exchange markets but lost mostof the ground it had gained later in the sum-mer. Overall, the interest rate and exchangerate trends appear to have boosted the fundsaccruing to the German market in the secondquarter while the global sharp fall in theprices of technological company shares leftbarely a mark on German financial transac-tions. At all events, 339 billion net flowed
into Germany as a result of securities transac-tions between April and June 2000. By con-trast, there were net capital outflows throughcredit transactions while direct investmentwas virtually in balance. This means that theCurrent account
3billion; seasonally adjusted
1999 2000
Item 4th qtr 1st qtr 2nd qtr
1. Foreign trade
Exports (f.o.b.) 132.4 140.2 146.4Imports (c.i.f.) 115.4 124.3 131.4
Balance 17.0 15.8 15.0
2. Services (balance) – 12.1 – 10.7 – 12.3
of which
Foreign travel (balance) – 8.0 – 7.9 – 8.2
3. Factor income (balance) – 4.3 – 1.4 – 1.5
of which
Investment income(balance) – 4.0 – 1.2 – 1.3
4. Current transfers (balance) – 7.5 – 5.5 – 7.2
Balance on current account
1–7 . 8 –2 . 9 –6 . 9
1Includes supplementary trade items.
Deutsche Bundesbank
Trade balance
Current
accountTrends in
financial
transactions

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
45volume of capital flows to and from Germany
and their structure normalised again in thesecond quarter of 2000 whereas at the be-ginning of the year the take-over of a majorGerman enterprise by a foreign investor hadresulted in significant distortions in the dataon both direct investment and portfolio in-vestment.
The relatively large net capital imports
through portfolio investment were the resultof the considerable interest on the part of for-eign investors in German securities and thefairly low demand from German investors forforeign paper. Non-resident investors ac-quired German securities worth 377 billion
during the period under review; in the corres-ponding three-month period of 1999 the fig-ure had been 347 billion.
1Just over one-half
of these funds – 340 billion – were invested
in the German equity market, a developmentwhich is certainly also to be seen in connec-tion with the sale of part of the Reconstruc-tion Loan Corporation’s holdings of FederalGovernment shares in Deutsche Telekom. Atall events, the placing of this tranche in themarket also generated an enormous responsefrom non-residents. The fact that in June for-eign investors exercised a substantial amountof the forward contracts of German corpor-ate shares that they had concluded in the pre-vious quarter apparently also played a role.Major items of the balance
of payments
5billion
1999 2000
Item 2nd qtr 1st qtr 2nd qtr
I. Current account
1. Foreign trade
Exports (f.o.b.) 126.5 140.6 147.7Imports (c.i.f.) 110.9 125.8 132.4
Balance + 15.6 + 14.8 + 15.2
2. Services (balance) – 9.4 – 9.8 – 12.23. Factor income (balance) + 0.6 – 1.8 + 0.24. Current transfers (balance) – 5.1 – 5.4 – 6.5
Balance on current account
1 + 0.7 – 3.3 – 4.2
II. Balance of capital transfers – 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0
III. Financial account 2
Direct investment – 22.3 + 137.6 + 0.1
Portfolio investment + 8.8 – 186.9 + 38.8
German investmentabroad – 38.0 – 100.4 – 38.2Foreign investment inGermany
3 + 46.8 – 86.5 + 77.1
Financial derivatives + 0.1 – 1.2 + 3.5Credit transactions
4 + 25.9 + 79.2 – 36.8
Overall balance on financial
account + 12.4 + 28.8 + 5.6
IV. Change in the foreign reserves
at transaction values(increase: –)
5 – 0.3 – 0.8 + 2.4
V. Balance of unclassifiable trans-
actions – 12.7 – 24.9 – 3.8
1Includes supplementary trade items. — 2Net capital exports: –. —
3The figures for money market paper have been revised for the
period from September 1999 to May 2000. — 4Including Bundes-
bank investment and other public and private investment. — 5Ex-
cluding allocation of SDRs and changes due to value adjustments.
Deutsche Bundesbank1The comparision with the period from January to
March 2000 is distorted by the corporate takeover which
was mentioned above and which initially resulted in for-
eigners purchasing shares in Germany but subsequently
to the replacement of portfolio investment by direct in-
vestment. If these special developments are eliminated by
way of approximation, foreign interest in the German
market in the period under review turns out to be much
greater than in the first quarter of 2000 as well.Portfolio
investment
Foreign
investment
in German ...
... shares

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
46Non-resident investors again showed greater
interest in German bonds and notes duringthe period under review, investing 320 billion
net in this paper, which was almost threetimes as much as in the previous period. Sincethe start of monetary union non-residents hadbeen focusing their attention on bank bonds,but in the period from April to June publicbonds were in greater demand, at 311
12bil-
lion, than bank issues ( 3812billion). This shift
could be a sign that market players are ex-pecting a lower demand for funding from theFederal Government in the second half of theyear – partly as a result of the revenue fromthe auction of mobile phone licences – andhad already met their requirements with veryliquid Federal bonds during the run-up to theauction. This assumption is partly supportedby interest rate developments on the bondmarket where the interest rate spread haswidened perceptibly between bank bondsand Federal bonds (see also page 22).
In the light of rising short-term interest rates
in the euro area non-residents also addedgreater amounts of German money marketpaper to their portfolios again ( 315 billion)
whereas in the previous quarter they had soldthis type of paper on balance (minus 32 bil-
lion).
2It is likely that, in addition to the inter-
est rate uncertainty and the increased infla-tion risk in the euro area, the trend towardssecuritising money market operations playeda major role here. However, considering thetotal amount of bank bonds outstanding thatGerman credit institutions have issued with amaturity of up to and including one year, theFinancial transactions
5billion, net capital exports: –
1999 2000
Item 2nd qtr 1st qtr 2nd qtr1. Direct investment – 22.3 +137.6 + 0.1
German investment
abroad – 35.7 – 33.3 – 31.7Foreign investmentin Germany + 13.3 +171.0 + 31.8
2. Portfolio investment + 8.8 –186.9 + 38.8
German investment
abroad – 38.0 –100.4 – 38.2
Shares – 6.9 – 49.1 – 17.6
Investment fundcertificates – 2.2 – 17.3 – 10.2Bonds and notes – 28.9 – 32.9 – 9.3Money market paper – 0.1 – 1.1 – 1.2
Foreign investment
in Germany + 46.8 – 86.5 + 77.1
Shares + 22.2 – 96.6 + 40.2
Investment fundcertificates – 1.1 + 5.1 + 1.9Bonds and notes + 19.5 + 6.9 + 19.8Money market paper
1+ 6.3 – 1.8 + 15.1
3. Financial derivatives 2 + 0.1 – 1.2 + 3.5
4. Credit transactions + 26.3 + 79.8 – 36.3
Credit institutions + 14.5 + 58.5 – 1.1
Long-term – 5.6 + 6.5 – 5.0
Short-term + 20.1 + 52.0 + 3.9
Enterprises and indivi-
duals + 4.0 – 11.4 – 5.1
Long-term – 0.9 + 0.0 – 0.8
Short-term + 4.8 – 11.5 – 4.3
General government + 0.2 + 0.0 – 4.3
Long-term – 1.2 – 0.1 – 0.3
Short-term + 1.3 + 0.1 – 4.0
Bundesbank + 7.6 + 32.8 – 25.8
5. Other investment – 0.4 – 0.6 – 0.56. Balance of all statistically
recorded capital flows + 12.4 + 28.8 + 5.6
Memo item
Change in the foreignreserves at transactionvalues (increase: –)
3 – 0.3 – 0.8 + 2.4
1The figures for money market paper have been re-
vised for the period from September 1999 to May2000. — 2Securitised and non-securitised options and
financial futures contracts. — 3Excluding allocation of
SDRs and changes due to value adjustments.
Deutsche Bundesbank2The figures for money market paper have been revised
for the period from September 1999 to May 2000.... bonds and
notes
... money
market paper

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
47expansion of this market segment appears to
have slowed down somewhat recently fromthe rapid rates of growth in the second halfof 1999.
In contrast to foreign investment in Germany,
German investment in foreign securities inthe second quarter of 2000 was little more,at338 billion, than a year earlier.
3The main
reason for the relatively modest demand forforeign securities was that German residentspurchased bonds and notes abroad for nomore than 39
12billion compared with 329
billion in the corresponding period last yearand 333 billion in the first quarter of 2000.
Furthermore, the securities concerned wereexclusively euro-denominated paper that, forthe most part, had been issued by residents inother euro-area countries; by contrast, therewere net sales in the case of foreign currencybonds. Evidently, residents, including creditinstitutions and capital investment com-panies, recently invested less in foreign bankbonds than they had done at the beginningof the year. This may have been partly due tothe fact that the return on certificates heldwith German investment funds declined inthe second quarter of the year. This same re-luctance on the part of German savers is alsoseen in the purchases of certificates issued byforeign funds. While these had amounted to317
12billion between January and March,
they amounted to only 310 billion in the fol-
lowing three-month period.
In contrast to how they reacted in the other
market segments, German residents investedfairly heavily in foreign equity markets in theperiod under review. At 317
12billion, theyinvested more than twice as much in foreign
shares as they had done in the second quarterof 1999 ( 37 billion). If the transactions in
connection with the aforementioned corpor-ated takeover had been excluded, therewould have been a small increase over theQuarterly
 5 
billion
Basis
points
Interest rate differential3Foreign demand 1
Private bonds 2
Public bondsForeign demand and interest
rates on the bond market
1German bonds and notes. — 2Predom-
inantly bank bonds. — 3Interest rate differ-
ential between ten-year bank bonds and
the equivalent Federal bonds (benchmark);
highest and lowest daily differential as well
as the quarterly average in each case.
Deutsche Bundesbank70
60
50
4030
2030
25
201510
5
0
1999 2000
3Compared with the first quarter of 2000 and after ad-
justment for the transactions arising in connection with
the aforementioned corporate takeover, there was an
estimated decline of approximately 40% in capital out-
flows.German
investment
in foreign ...
... shares

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
48first quarter of 2000. The sharp decline in
prices on many foreign exchanges in Marchevidently did not lead to any permanentuncertainty on the part of German investors,especially as the economic environment is stillvery friendly and most markets have quicklyrecovered. In contrast to what happened inthe case of bonds and notes, German invers-tors acquired participations in enterprises thatfor the most part are domiciled outside theeuro area.
In the field of direct investment cross-border
acquisitions of participating interests normal-ised following the statistical recording of theaforementioned corporate takeover in thefirst quarter. With the decline in the grossvariables direct investment was almost in bal-ance after the substantial inflows betweenJanuary and March 2000.
In the period under review German enter-
prises invested 331
12billion abroad and
thereby strengthened their position outsidethe euro area in particular. The target coun-tries preferred by German direct investorswere the United Kingdom and the UnitedStates, which is continuing to expand dynam-ically. This process was fostered by the in-creasing international positioning of Germanenterprises, not least from the financial andtelecommunications sectors as well as fromthe entertainment and tourism sectors. Ifthese enterprises are to be able to offer aglobally oriented clientele a broad range ofservices worldwide, a local presence is oftenessential. The global orientation of Germanfirms seems to be particularly pronouncedwhen compared with that of enterprises inother euro-area countries. In the first five
months of this year – more recent data onthe euro-area balance of payments are notyet available – German shareholders account-ed for almost 40% of the equity capital in-vested by euro-area enterprises in non-euro-area countries. The ratio is therefore largerthan, for example, Germany’s share (ofalmost one-third) of the euro-area GDP .
The same trend is also apparent in the inward
direct investment in the euro area from non-euro-area countries: with a share of 85%, Ger-man enterprises have received the lion’s shareof these investible funds so far this year –although the aforementioned major invest-ment in the first quarter of the year played adecisive role here. Foreign enterprises invest-ed332 billion in Germany between April and
June. This foreign investment was clearlydominated by short-term financial transac-tions between affiliated enterprises. 330
12
billion alone flowed into Germany through
this financial instrument during the quarterwhile only 31 billion in the form of equity
capital was made available to the subsidiariesof foreign enterprises domiciled in Germany.When assessing the various types of financingfrom the point of view of locational policy,however, it should be remembered that therevolving provision of short-term loans maynot signify less interest in an economic terri-tory than the establishment of longer-termparticipating interests of a more formal na-ture. This is especially true if tax consider-ations have a substantial influence on thefinancing structure.Direct
investment
German direct
investment
abroadForeign direct
investment in
Germany

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
49As in other segments of the financial account,
non-securitised credit flows as a whole werealso significantly weaker than in the previousthree-month period. For example, the trans-actions of the non-banks resulted in com-paratively small net capital exports (of 39
12
billion) whereas at the beginning of the year
there had been outflows of 31112billion. In
contrast to the situation in the previous quar-ter, when German enterprises and individualshad again built up their deposits considerablywith foreign banks after the customary with-drawals towards the end of the year, the out-flows here were largely the result of extensiveredemptions of short-term liabilities vis-à-visnon-residents. Public authorities also export-ed capital ( 34
12billion net). In the light of
the favourable liquidity situation the FederalGovernment stocked up its balances with for-eign banks discernibly.
As a reflection, as it were, of the statistically
recorded inflows in the other areas of pay-ment transactions with non-residents, the netexternal position of the entire banking system(excluding the foreign reserves of the Bundes-bank) increased by 327 billion after declining
by391 billion in the previous period. The in-
crease was mainly due to the balances in theBundesbank’s foreign payment transactions
(326 billion) which are classified as credit
transactions and which arise essentially inconnection with the payment systemTARGET. There were only minor outflows offunds ( 31 billion) as a result of the non-
securitised external operations of the creditinstitutions. These occurred exclusively at thelong end of the market while there was asmall influx of funds through short-term ad-vances.
The foreign reserves of the Bundesbank
declined by 32
12billion at transaction values
between April and June. Just under 31 billion
of this sum was due to the reduction of the re-serve position (including the special drawingrights) at the IMF, which, in turn, was the resultof the repayments of euro-denominated loansto the IMF by an emerging economy. By con-trast, the foreign reserves grew by 31
12billion
as result of the regular revaluation at marketprices which takes place at the end of eachquarter. Book profits arising from the continu-ing recovery in the gold price played the majorrole here. At the end of June 2000 the foreignreserves stood at 396 billion compared with
393 billion at the end of 1999.Credit
transactions ...
... of non-banks
... of banksForeign
reserves of the
Bundesbank

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
50Public financeCentral, regional and local authorities
Current trendsIn the second quarter of 2000, the central
and regional authorities (no results are avail-able for the local authorities yet) recorded asurplus of 34
34billion, which was 312billion
more than one year earlier. While receiptsrose by just under 2%, increase in expend-iture amounted to 1
12%. The receipts side
for the second quarter was characterised by asharp rise in tax revenue, accompanied by adecline in the profits distributed by theBundesbank, which were down around 34
12
billion on the year. Among factors having a
moderating impact on expenditure were adecline in labour-market induced spendingand the delayed impact of the public sectorpay settlement.
For 2000 as a whole, the budgets of the cen-
tral, regional and local authorities will show,on balance, a considerably more favourablefinancial position than last year, when they re-corded an aggregate deficit of 328 billion.
Thanks to exceptional Federal Governmentreceipts from the sale of mobile-phone li-cences, the public authorities are even likelyto post an appreciable surplus. They will alsobenefit from the fact that actual tax revenuewill surpass original budget estimates. More-over, the central, regional and local author-ities intend to continue disposing of assets ona large scale. Not least among the factorsworking to reduce expenditure will be im-provements in the labour market situation,this year’s pay settlement (which was moreUnderlying
trends

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
51moderate than in 1999) and the favourable
interest-rate level.
At almost 9%, tax receipts1grew at an even
more rapid pace in the second quarter. Theextremely favourable developments in as-sessed taxes were the main reason for thisimprovement. The reduction in special taxallowances over the past few years and therenewed upward trend in profits allowed as-sessed income tax, which reached 34 billion,
to exceed its corresponding 1999 level bythree-quarters. Gains in enterprise profitabil-ity also had an impact on corporation tax, re-ceipts from which were more than one-thirdup on the year, amounting to 37
12billion.
Moreover, larger profit distributions helpedreceipts from non-assessed taxes on earningsrise by 40% to slightly over 35 billion. By
contrast, wage tax receipts increased by nomore than
12%; here measures which came
into effect at the beginning of the year,i.e. the second stage of the tax-rate cut andthe rise in child benefit, were continuing toexert downward pressure.
Indirect taxes also contributed to the sharp
growth in revenue. Following implementationof the second stage of the “ecological tax re-form” at the beginning of the year, total re-ceipts from mineral oil tax and electricity taxwere up not quite 15% on the correspondingperiod in 1999; at that time, only some of thetax increases associated with the first stagehad begun to exert an impact on revenue. Inaddition, revenue from turnover tax rose byalmost 5%.The remarkably positive trend for the second
quarter suggests that tax revenue in 2000 willexceed the official May tax estimate by awide margin. In the first six months of theyear, revenue growth (excluding local author-ity tax receipts, which are not yet known)amounted to almost 7%, topping estimatesmade for 2000 at that time by four percent-age points. There is some evidence that rev-enue growth will decelerate slightly in thesecond half of the year; thus, a year-on-yearcomparison of energy consumption taxes in-dicates that the first round of last year’s taxincreases will cease to have an impact. More-over, retrospective payments of assessedtaxes are likely to decrease markedly as moreChange from previous year in %
%
Tax receipts, total 1
1st hf 2nd hf 1st hf 2nd hf1st
qtr2nd
qtrTrends in tax revenue *
*Out-turn in Germany as a whole. —
1Including EU shares in German tax rev-
enue, but excluding receipts from local
authority taxes, which are not yet known
for the last quarter recorded.
Deutsche Bundesbank9.0+
7.5+
6.0+
4.5+
3.0+
1.5+
0
1998 1999 2000
1Including the EU shares in German tax revenue but ex-
cluding receipts from local authority taxes, which are not
yet known.Tax receipts in
the second
quarter ...
... and in 2000
as a whole

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
52and more tax returns for 1999, which was a
“low-profit”year, are assessed. Nevertheless,the figures forecast in May will lag substan-tially behind the actual outcome, especiallywith regard to receipts from assessed incomeand corporation taxes. Turnover tax will prob-ably yield additional revenue as well in thewake of stronger economic growth. Contraryto initial expectations, it appears unlikely thatthe overall tax ratio will decline.
In the second quarter, the Federal Govern-
ment recorded a budgetary surplus of 31
14
billion, compared with a deficit of 3312bil-
lion for the same period in 1999. The mainreason for this improved position was a steeprise in receipts amounting to slightly morethan 6
12%, which was, in turn, chiefly attrib-
utable to an increase in tax revenue of justover 712%. Although the Federal Govern-
ment will receive a redistribution dividendfrom the sale of its shares in Deutsche Tele-kom AG, which it had transferred to thestate-owned Reconstruction Loan Corpor-ation (Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau (KfW)),
no such payments have yet been posted inthe Federal budget as revenue. Expenditurefell 1
12%. Although additional payments fi-
nanced through the second stage of the“ecological tax reform” boosted grants to thestatutory pension insurance scheme by al-most 17%, labour-market related spending,in particular, fell considerably short of the cor-responding 1999 figures.
For 2000 as a whole, the Federal Government
budget assumes that the deficit will narrow byjust under 31 billion to 325
12billion. The
year-on-year decline in the deficit for thefirst six months of 2000, taken together,which amounted to 32
12billion, suggests
that the budgetary position will improve sub-stantially during the remainder of this year.Still, the year 2000 will entail additional ex-penditure beyond that envisaged in budgetestimates. Current plans, for example, call forindemnification payments amounting to 32
12
billion, which had not been set aside in the
budget for 2000, to be issued to personsforced into slave labour under National Social-ism as early as this year. Moreover, transfers tothe Post Office benefit funds and spendingon unemployment assistance will presumablybe larger than expected. By contrast, the Fed-eral Labour Office’s demand for grants is like-ly to be much smaller than previously. On thereceipts side, it looks as if tax revenue willoutstrip budget estimates significantly. Never-Trends in the revenue from major taxes
Revenue
in5billion
1st half-year
Type of tax 1999 2000Change
frompre-viousyearin %
Wage tax 60.9 61.9 + 1.6
Assessed income tax 2.2 3.9 + 80.1Corporation tax 11.1 13.8 + 23.6Turnover tax 66.8 70.3 + 5.4
of which: 2nd quarter
Wage tax 31.1 31.3 + 0.5
Assessed income tax 2.3 4.1 + 74.4Corporation tax 5.5 7.5 + 36.4Turnover tax 33.2 34.8 + 4.8
Deutsche Bundesbank
Federal
Government
in the second
quarter ...... and in 2000
as a whole

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
53theless, what will tip the budgetary balance
in favour of receipts will be the large proceedsfrom the auction of UMTS licences, for whichno provision had been made in the budget.Thanks to these exceptional one-off receipts,the Federal Government will record a budget-ary surplus for the first time in 30 years.
The special funds showed an aggregate
surplus of nearly 31 billion in the second
quarter, which was 35 billion less than one
year before. The main reason for this declinewas the appreciably smaller Bundesbankprofit, which resulted in the amount beingtransferred to the Redemption Fund forInherited Liabilities – not quite 3
12billion –
falling short of the 1999 figure by almost34
12billion.
The Länder Governments’ budgets continued
to improve slightly. The surplus of 3212bil-
lion achieved in the second quarter was largerthan the surplus of the corresponding 1999period by almost 31 billion. This larger sur-
plus may be attributed chiefly to the rapidrise in tax receipts; at 7
12%, this rise
comfortably exceeded expenditure growth,which, when viewed in isolation, was ratherhigh at approximately 3
12%. The budget fig-
ures for the remainder of the year are also ex-pected to be more favourable than the cor-responding 1999 figures. However, the de-gree of improvement will depend not least onwhether the public sector pay settlement willbe extended to include civil servants and pen-sion recipients or whether – as originally en-visaged in the Federal Government’s austerityprogramme – pay increases for these groupswill be calculated on the basis of last year’s in-flation rate. Given the impending shortfalls in
revenue associated with the tax reform, it isabsolutely imperative that expenditure onpersonnel, which places a particularly largeburden on Länder Government budgets, belowered if the required reduction in regionalauthority deficits, which continue to be large,is to be achieved.
At this stage, data for the local authorities
cover the first quarter only. According tothese figures, the local authorities’ aggregatedeficit, which was slightly over 32 billion,
widened by almost 3
12billion on the year. Ex-
penditure rose by almost 2%, partly in thewake of a strong expansion in constructionspending, whereas receipts grew by no morethan nearly 1%. The outcome for 2000 as awhole is also likely to be less favourable thanDM
billion 5 
billion
+  5.0
+  2.5
−  2.50
−  5.0
−  7.5
− 10.0
− 12.5− 15.0
I II III IV I II III IV I II
oThe Federal Government’s
financial balance
o From 1999 in euro.
Deutsche Bundesbank10+
5+
0
5−
10−
15−
20−
25−
30−
1998 1999 2000Special funds
Länder
Governments
Local
authorities

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
54in 1999. After the sharp rise recorded in the
past two years, tax receipts look set to in-crease only moderately, while expendituregrowth will probably accelerate somewhat.However, the large increase in the fundsdistributed per quota by the Länder Govern-ments, which was fuelled by ample taxreceipts, is expected to lighten the localauthorities’ budgetary burden. It seems thatthe aggregate budget for the local authoritieswill again close the year with a surplus.
The central, regional and local authorities’ in-
debtedness declined by just under 31
12bil-
lion in the second quarter; by contrast, netborrowing in the first three months of thisyear amounted to 314 billion. Ample tax re-
ceipts and the Bundesbank’s profit distribu-tion of not quite 34 billion combined to limitborrowing needs in the second quarter. The
public authorities obtained slightly less than34
12billion in the capital market; at the
same time, they cut back their money marketliabilities by just over 35
12billion. Among
the individual levels of government, the Fed-eral Government reduced its debt by slightlymore than 33
12billion, concentrating its
efforts on the money market, where itpaid back over 36 billion net. By contrast, it
tapped the capital market for almost 32
12
billion on balance, largely through the sale of
Federal bonds and five-year special Federalbonds. The Länder Governments expandedtheir debt by just under 31 billion, primarily
by taking up loans against borrowers’ notesto the tune of not quite 32 billion. The sale
of bonds yielded slightly over 31 billion. At
the same time, they redeemed what were forthe most part cash advances from banks inthe amount of 32 billion. The special funds’
total debt rose by almost 31 billion. At an
estimated 3
12billion, local authorities’ net
borrowing is likely to have remained withinnarrow limits.
Intermediate reflection:
“Tax reform 2000”
Important measuresFollowing an inter-House mediation hearing,
theBundesrat, the Upper House of the Ger-
man parliament representing the Länder, ap-proved the Federal Government’s tax reformpackage on July 14. The final package hadbeen amended to include additional conces-sions, which are supposed to be passed intoNet borrowing in the market by the
central, regional and local authorities
To end-1998: DM billion/from 1999: 5billion
of which
Period Total SecuritiesLoans
againstborrowers’notes
1MemoitemAcquisitionof publicdebt in-strumentsby non-residents
1991
2 + 106.0 + 71.3 + 34.9 + 50.9
1992 + 102.6 + 95.0 + 8.1 + 59.41993 + 159.1 + 120.3 + 39.3 + 109.11994
3 + 86.0 + 45.6 + 40.8 – 20.9
1995 4 + 97.7 + 32.6 + 81.4 + 62.1
1996 + 123.8 + 65.2 + 74.1 + 57.31997 + 95.5 + 65.9 + 39.9 + 80.71998 + 66.9 + 53.6 + 15.6 + 71.01999
p + 34.8 + 44.8 – 10.2 + 17.1
of which1st qtr + 12.7 + 14.1 – 2.0 + 1.22 n d q t r +2 . 9 +2 . 9 +0 . 0 +1 . 0
2000
1st qtr + 14.0 + 7.5 + 6.4 + 0.42nd qtr
pe – 1.4 + 3.8 – 5.2 ...
1Including cash advances and money market borrowing. — 2Excluding
Federal Railways debt assumed by the Federal Government. — 3From
1994 including Federal Railways Fund. — 4From 1995 including
Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities.
Deutsche Bundesbank
Indebtedness Extent of
tax relief

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
55Financial implications of the Tax Reduction Act (“Tax Reform 2000”)
(Federal Ministry of Finance estimate including Federal Government pledges not yet enacted into law)
Revenue losses (–) or gains (+)
in DM billion
Accounting year
MeasureYear of
oper-ation 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005
I. Reform of business taxation, total – 14.0 – 17.7 – 23.1 – 20.6 – 18.8 – 19.8
Measures affecting corporations, total – 20.4 – 18.2 – 27.9 – 28.4 – 27.0 – 27.0
of which– Lowering of corporation tax rate on retained profits
from 40% to 25% – 14.0 – 11.3 – 14.6 – 15.9 – 17.1 – 18.4
– Lowering of corporation tax rate on distributed profits
from 30% to 25% – 2.0 – 5.3 – 4.7 – 3.3 – 3.2 – 3.4
– Lowering of investment income tax rate on dividends
from 25% to 20% (from 2002) – 0.1 – – 3.2 – 2.4 – 0.9 – 0.6
– Replacement of the imputation system on dividends by an
income tax relief + 5.0 – + 3.9 + 5.1 + 5.6 + 5.9
– Transitional arrangement for system change – 4.1 – – 5.4 – 6.8 – 6.1 – 5.1– Tax exemption for capital gains from disposal of domestic
participating interests (from 2002) – 4.2 – 1.6 – 3.4 – 4.1 – 4.2 – 4.2
Measures affecting non-corporations, total – 8.2 – 5.0 – 6.8 – 8.7 – 8.5 – 8.6
of which– Reduction of income tax liability by 1.8 times the basic
amount of trade tax – 9.9 – 6.9 – 9.2 – 12.1 – 11.9 – 12.8
– Reintroduction of 50% tax-rate cut on business sales and
raising of tax allowance for business sales from DM 60,000to DM 100,000 – 2.6 – 1.1 – 1.7 – 2.4 – 2.6 – 2.5
– Abolition of business earnings tax rate limit pursuant to
section 32c of the Income Tax Act + 5.2 + 3.6 + 4.8 + 6.7 + 6.8 + 7.5
Financing measures in connection with the reform, total + 14.6 + 5.6 + 11.6 + 16.5 + 16.7 + 15.8
of which– Reduction of diminishing-balance depreciation rate for
investment in machinery and equipment from 30% to20% p.a. + 13.0 + 5.4 + 10.9 + 14.8 + 14.4 + 13.1
– Reduction of linear depreciation rate for commercial
buildings from 4% to 3% p.a. + 0.5 – + 0.2 + 0.8 + 1.3 + 1.7
II. Adjustment of official depreciation tables to “more
realistic” write-off periods +3 . 5 +0 . 7 +2 . 7 +5 . 2 +7 . 0 +8 . 6
(by administrative regulation)
Sum total of the business taxation measures, including
adjusted depreciation tables – 10.6 – 17.0 – 20.5 – 15.5 – 11.8 – 11.2
III. Reform of income tax schedule, total – 51.9 – 28.4 + 1.3 – 13.8 – 13.2 – 51.5
of which– Bringing forward tax change from 2002 to 2001 (– 27.8) – 28.7 + 1.4 – 0.5 – –– Tax changes in 2003, raising basic tax allowance by
DM 500 to DM 14,500, lowering entry rate to 17% andtop rate to 47% (– 13.5) – – – 13.6 – 13.5 + 0.1
– Tax changes in 2005, raising basic tax allowance further to
DM 15,000, cutting entry rate to 15% and top rate to4 2 % – 5 2 . 2 –––– – 5 1 . 9
All measures, taken together – 62.5 – 45.4 – 19.2 – 29.3 – 25.1 – 62.8
of which: Federal Government – 28.8 – 21.7 – 10.4 – 15.0 – 12.9 – 30.1
Länder Governments – 24.8 – 19.2 – 8.7 – 12.5 – 10.5 – 25.8Local authorities – 8.8 – 4.5 – 0.1 – 1.8 – 1.7 – 6.9
Revenue losses (–) or gains (+) vis-à-vis Bundestag act of May 18,
2000 – 17.5 – 0.7 + 0.7 + 2.3 + 5.6 – 11.4
Deutsche Bundesbank

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
56law by the end of the year. On the whole, the
net relief which it will provide for householdsand enterprises, estimated at slightly over323 billion or around DM 45 billion (just over
1% of GDP), is substantial, compared withcurrent tax law. After a temporary decline,net relief will go on to rise to about 332 bil-
lion (approximately DM 63 billion or 1
14%o f
GDP) by 2005 (for more details, see the tableon page 55).
2
The top rate of income tax will be loweredfrom its present level of 51% to 48.5% in2001 and then to 47% in 2003 and, finally,to 42% in 2005. By contrast, a resolutionadopted by the Lower House (Bundestag) last
May would only have reduced the top in-come-tax rate to 45%. From 2005 onwards,the top income-tax bracket will start from ataxable income of DM 102,000 for singlepersons and from a taxable income of twicethat amount for married couples (at present,the corresponding level of taxable income forsingle persons lies at just under DM 115,000).The bottom rate will be reduced in stagesfrom the present level of not quite 23% to15%; this had already been envisaged in theoriginal Government tax reform bill. The basictax allowance will be raised successively fromthe current level of DM 13,500 to DM 15,000by 2005.
As part of the reform of business taxation,
the corporation tax rate will be lowered fromthe present rates of 40% (for retained profits)and 30% (for distributed profits) to a uniformrate of 25% in 2001. The current system fortaxing distributed profits will also be replacedin that year. Under the prevailing imputationsystem, domestic shareholders are able to
credit the corporation tax already paid ondividends against their personal income taxliability, with the result that the possibility ofdistributed profits being taxed twice has beenruled out. This procedure will be replaced bya system which makes no allowance for im-putation but is based instead on income taxrelief on dividends. In addition to the corpor-ation tax already paid on dividends, the newsystem will require shareholders to pay in-come tax on the corporate profits distributed,albeit for only one-half. This, in principle,opens the door to renewed dual taxation;still, while shareholders whose earnings aresubject to a marginal tax rate of up to 40%will be paying more in taxes than under thecurrent system, the tax burden for sharehold-ers subject to a marginal tax rate exceeding40% will actually be less. The Federal Gov-ernment has calculated that adherence to theimputation system would have led to evenlarger shortfalls in tax receipts. Moreover, injustifying the changeover, the Governmenthas argued that it would eliminate currentdisparities in the way profits distributed toshareholders by foreign and domestic corpor-ations are taxed.
After the change in dividends taxation, cor-
porate capital gains from the sale of partici-pating interests in German firms will be ex-empt from taxation (capital gains resultingfrom the disposal of shareholdings in foreignenterprises are already tax-exempt). The rea-
2In addition, the Tax Relief Act, which came into effect
in 1999, will contribute to a further easing of the tax bur-
den. In 2002, for example, the corresponding relief meas-
ures will amount to around 310 billion or DM 20 billion.Income tax
scale
Corporate
taxation

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
57son cited by the Federal Government for their
tax-exempt status is that the reserves of theaffiliated company, which largely account forany capital gains acquired through its sale,have already been taxed or will be in the nearfuture. Tax-exempt status cannot be claimeduntil 2002, since the imputation system willstill be in use next year.
The tax reform not only provides relief for
non-corporations (i.e. partnerships) at lowerincome tax rates but – effective next year –also allows them to credit, in part, trade taxpaid against their income-tax liability, andthat at an amount corresponding to a collec-tion multiplier of 180%. This relief measure,together with the still viable option of de-ducting the trade tax paid in full as operation-al expenditure from taxable income, amountsde facto to an almost complete elimination of
the additional burden that had been placedon non-corporations by trade tax. By con-trast, it has been decided, on account of thecomplications involved, not to introduce anoption that would have allowed non-corporations to pay corporation tax ratherthan having a part of their trade tax pay-ments count towards their income tax. Thisnotwithstanding, some measures specificallygeared towards providing relief for non-corporations were approved. These includethe reintroduction of a specific tax law provi-sion for co-entrepreneurs
3and – subject to
specific conditions – of the 50 per cent cut inthe tax rate for capital gains from a one-offbusiness sale. Also, the repeal of savings andspecial depreciation facilities for small andmedium-sized enterprises, which had origin-ally been planned, was not carried out.The comprehensive relief package will be fi-
nanced, in part, through a broadening of thetax assessment base for enterprises. This willentail, notably, a significant tightening of therules for claiming depreciation allowances. In2001, the diminishing-balance depreciationrate for investment in machinery and equip-ment will be reduced from 30% to 20% peryear, and the linear depreciation rate for com-mercial buildings will be cut from 4% to 3%per year. Moreover, an extension of depreci-ation allowance deadlines, although not yetfinalised, is expected to be implemented byadministrative regulation.
EffectsThe tax reform represents a major step for-
ward in improving the underlying conditionsfor economic growth and employment inGermany. The substantial reduction in taxrates means that the disruptive effects whichthe tax system had hitherto exerted on workincentives will, in principle, become less pro-nounced and that the government – assum-ing public sector expenditure is reduced ac-cordingly – is reducing its claim to nationaleconomic resources. In addition, the tax ex-emption granted to corporations for capitalgains deriving from the sale of participatinginterests will also encourage corporate re-structuring. At the moment, the entiremacroeconomic constellation – in particular,the cost discipline already acquired in Ger-many and the impetus to new investment im-parted by technological innovation – suggests
3This provision allowed co-entrepreneurs to transfer
assets tax-free (in their capacity as partners) in exchange
for partnership rights.Non-corporate
taxationCounter-
financing
Major step
forward for
growth and
employment

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
58A note on some allocation effects of tax reform
The possibility of different kinds of distortion affecting enterprises’ financing and appropriation of profits, the
equal distribution of the tax burden among different types of business ownership, and the non-preferentialtreatment of profits vis-à-vis other forms of income has been discussed in connection with the envisaged tax re-form. In the following, some basic comparative figures are used to examine whether the tax reform will, in fact,give rise to such distortions and, if so, to determine their extent.
The first table compares the tax reform with current tax law in terms of their effect on marginal tax rates for
corporate profit appropriation:
%
Retained profitsProfits distributed to shareholders (taxed at
top rate of income tax)
ItemUnder current
tax lawAfter reform
of businesstaxationUnder current
tax law (impu-tation system)After reform
of businesstaxation(income taxrelief ondividends)New tax rates,
assumingadherence toimputationsystem
Pre-tax profits 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0
./. Trade tax (assuming a 400% collection multiplier)
1 16.7 16.7 16.7 16.7 16.7
= Profits after trade tax 83.3 83.3 83.3 83.3 83.3
./. Corporation tax 2 33.3 20.8 25.0 20.8 20.8
./. Solidarity surcharge on corporation tax (5.5%) 1.8 1.1 1.4 1.1 1.1
= Corporate profits after taxes 48.2 61.4 57.0 61.4 61.4
./. Income tax paid by shareholder 3 . . 42.5 12.9 35.0
./. Solidarity surcharge on shareholder’s income tax liability . . 2.3 0.7 1.9+ Tax credit . . 26.4 . 22.0
= Profits minus total tax liability 48.2 61.4 38.5 47.8 46.4
Total marginal tax rate for profits 51.8 38.6 61.5 52.2 53.6Tax bias against profit distribution vis-à-vis retention(in percentage points) . . 9.7 13.6 14.9
1The collection multiplier used approximates to the weighted
average collection multiplier applied in Germany. In individual cases,the actual collection multiplier may deviate considerably from thispercentage. — 2Under current tax law, the rate for profit retention
lies at 40%, for distribution at 30%. On implementation of the taxreform, the corporation tax rate will be a uniform 25%. Althoughinvestment income tax on dividends is levied on distributed profits as
a further form of deduction at source, it is disregarded here, since ithas no impact on the eventual tax liability of domestic shareholders,who receive an additional tax credit associated with such deductionsat source. — 3Top rate currently at 51%; after the tax reform in 2005
it will be 42%.
Assuming an average trade tax collection multiplier of 400%, the reform will reduce the total marginal tax on
retained corporate profits from the present level of approximately 52% to 3812%. If the shareholder is assumed
to be in the uppermost income-tax bracket both now and in 2005, the reform will result in the marginal tax ratefor dividends being lowered from 61
12% to slightly more than 52%. The bias towards profit retention over
profit distribution, which has been inherent in tax law up to the present time, would increase by around fourpercentage points to 13
12percentage points. Given the actual combination of tax rates, however, it would be
wrong to ascribe the additional distorting effect on profit appropriation to the changeover from the imputationsystem to the income tax relief system. Indeed, adherence to the imputation system would, in conjunction withthe new tax rates, result in an even greater distortion, albeit only marginally greater. Retained profits receiveeven more pronounced preferential tax treatment primarily because the decrease in the corporation tax reten-tion rate is far more substantial than that in the top rate of income tax.
Deutsche Bundesbank

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
59Assuming the top rate of income tax is applied and the partial trade tax credit is included in the overall taxation
picture, a comparison of the tax treatment of non-corporations with that of corporations would yield the follow-ing results:
%
Corporations Non-corporations
Retained profitsProfits distributed to shareholders
(taxed at top rate of income tax)Under
currenttaxlaw
1Partial trade tax credit(at top rate of incometax)
2
Item 2000from
20012000
51%2001
48,5% 3200347%2005
42%2000
43%2001
48,5%2003
47%2005
42%
Pre-tax profits 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0
./. Trade tax (assuming 400% collection
multiplier)
4 16.7 16.7 16.7 16.7 16.7 16.7 16.7 16.7 16.7 16.7
= Profits after trade tax 83.3 83.3 83.3 83.3 83.3 83.3 83.3 83.3 83.3 83.3
./. Corporation tax 5 3 3 . 3 2 0 . 8 2 5 . 0 2 0 . 8 2 0 . 8 2 0 . 8....
./. Solidarity surcharge on corporation
t a x ( 5 . 5 % ) 1 . 8 1 . 1 1 . 4 1 . 1 1 . 1 1 . 1....
= Corporate profits after taxes 48.2 61.4 57.0 61.4 61.4 61.4 ....
General income tax rate . . 42.5 14.9 14.4 12.9 35.8 40.4 39.2 35.0Deductible share of trade tax paid
6 ....... 7 . 5 7 . 5 7 . 5
./. Income tax . . 42.5 14.9 14.4 12.9 35.8 32.9 31.7 27.5./. Solidarity surcharge on income tax . . 2.3 0.8 0.8 0.7 2.0 1.8 1.7 1.5+ T a x c r e d i t .. 2 6 . 4.......
= Profits less total tax liability 48.2 61.4 38.5 45.7 46.1 47.8 45.5 48.6 49.9 54.3
Total marginal tax rate for profits 51.8 38.6 61.5 54.3 53.9 52.2 54.5 51.4 50.1 45.7Added for purposes of comparison:
Total marginal tax rate for other types ofi n c o m e ...... 5 3 . 8 5 1 . 2 4 9 . 6 4 4 . 3
1Including the ceiling on tax rates for industrial earnings. — 2Assum-
ing a basic tax rate of 5%, which presupposes that profits exceedDM 144,000. — 3Strictly speaking, the figures in this column apply
only for the period after 2001, since the imputation system will con-tinue to be in use throughout 2001. — 4See footnote 1 of previous
table. — 5See footnote 2 of previous table. — 6A share of trade tax
equivalent to a collection multiplier of 180% is offset against theincome tax liability.
During the final stage of the tax reform in 2005, non-corporate profits will be taxed at a marginal rate amount-
ing, at most, to not quite 46% (assuming a trade tax collection multiplier of 400%). Although this tax rate issignificantly higher than the rate at which retained corporate profits are taxed, an overall comparison of thesetwo forms of legal ownership must take into account the fact that corporate profit distributions, which accountfor a large portion of profit appropriation, are subject to far higher tax rates. If lower income tax rates are ap-plied, or if average tax rates rather than marginal tax rates are used, a slight shift in bias results in favour of non-corporations. Thus, the manner in which operating results are taxed would appear to provide no evidence thatcorporate ownership has been given an unfair tax advantage over the non-corporate form of legal ownership,although it should not be forgotten that many of the income tax cuts will not come into effect until 2005. Evenwhen other types of income are taken as a basis of comparison, using the top tax rate for each category, nomajor distortions are to be expected during the final stage of tax reform in 2005.
Thus, it seems safe to conclude that corporations’ financing and appropriation of profits will be the “only” areas
to be noticeably affected by additional distortions associated with the new reform, this outcome being attribut-able to the new combination of tax rates, which favours self-financing over external financing to an evengreater degree than previously.

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
60that such tax relief will fall on “fertile soil”.
The positive effects associated with a lower-ing of tax rates are, however, partly offset bya marked deterioration in the conditions gov-erning depreciation allowances, which makedomestic fixed capital expenditure appearless attractive than financial investments.
Given the good economic prospects for
2001, the coming-into-force of the first stageof reform, which will be accompanied by adeterioration in the general government fiscalbalance, is likely to have a pro-cyclical effect.At all events, the resulting surge in domesticdemand – attributable, in particular, to a risein private consumption – is estimated to ac-count for around
12% of GDP . Still, the in-
tense competition in the retail trade sectorand the fact that the consumer goods sectorhas spare capacity would seem to indicatethat the effect on consumer prices will be re-strained. The expansionary fiscal stimulus hasalready been taken into account in the eco-nomic forecasts for 2001, which assume thatdomestic demand will increasingly come toreplace foreign demand as the engine foreconomic growth. Generally speaking, it isdifficult, given the long preparatory period in-volved in designing far-reaching reforms, toschedule the timing of tax reforms in such away that they will conform to the then pre-vailing economic conditions.
As for the individual elements of the new tax
rate pattern, the large cut in the corporationtax rate will reduce the marginal burden forretained corporate profits, including trade taxand the solidarity surcharge, from its currentlevel of well over 50% to under 40%. Ger-many’s standing in this respect will then be
somewhere in the middle of the internationaltax-league table. The tax disadvantages towhich enterprises had previously been subjectwill be reduced. Although even during thefinal stage of tax reform in 2005 the largestburden for non-corporate profits, at almost46%, will still be significantly higher than thecorresponding burden for retained corporateprofits, such a comparison also has to takeinto account the fact that corporate dividendsare subject to a much larger tax burden (fordetails, see the accompanying overview onpage 59). Besides, the tax situation of non-corporations improves if attention is called tothe fact that the average tax burden here islower. Thus, overall, the operating results ofnon-corporations are not likely to be taxedmore severely than those of corporations. Tothe extent that they will suffer from a tax dis-advantage, it is because most of the applic-able income tax cuts will not come into effectuntil 2005 and because the tax concessionsassociated with the sale of participating inter-ests are smaller than those awarded corpor-ations.
As things stand, the manner in which the
present imputation system treats retainedand distributed corporate profits amounts toprivileged tax treatment of retained profitsfor shareholders with high incomes since thecorporation tax rate for retained profits is sig-nificantly lower than the top rate of incometax. As the overview on page 58 also makesclear, the changeover to a system of incometax relief on dividends will, in conjunctionwith a substantial lowering of the corporationtax rate, lead to an even greater bias in favour
Cyclical effects
Corporate and
non-corporate
taxationTax bias in
favour of profit
retention
strengthened

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
61of profit retention over distribution. Even as
late as 2005 distributed profits will still besubject to a peak tax burden totalling 52%.The clear favouring of self-financing overequity financing will tend to interfere withthe allocation function of capital marketsand will put young firms at a disadvantage.“Saving” within corporations is thus beingencouraged at the expense of other forms ofsaving, which might ultimately be used tofinance investment as well. Future efforts atreform should therefore concentrate on elim-inating the remaining tax distortions.
Outlook
The Federal draft budget for next year, which
was approved by the Federal Cabinet onJune 21, envisages net borrowing of 323.6
billion, which is slightly less than the esti-mated amount for 2000 ( 325.3 billion) but in
keeping with the medium-term financial planapproved last year. The budget for 2001 hadto make allowance, however, for an addition-al burden of over 310 billion, most of which
is attributable to a loss of revenue associatedwith the tax reform. Public finances in 2001will also be adversely affected by the fact thatlast year’s austerity programme has not yetbeen fully implemented. However, these fac-tors will be offset by reductions, especially inlabour-market related expenditure, and by aconsiderable increase in receipts from privat-isation.
Federal Government receipts are projected to
be 0.8% higher than the correspondingbudget item for the year 2000. Expected taxreceipts were based on the May tax estimate,
after adjustment for the Government’s taxreform bill. As a result, tax receipts will fall1.1% short of this year’s target figure, not-withstanding the fact that the budget as-sumes favourable economic conditions and afurther increase in taxes on energy consump-tion. As a counterweight, the budget fore-casts strong growth in privatisation proceeds(which should rise by around 34 billion to
almost 39 billion).
At3245 billion, expenditure remained virtu-
ally unaltered from the 2000 budget. Al-though this includes larger transfers to thestatutory pension insurance scheme ( 35 bil-
lion), to the “German Unity” Fund ( 31
12bil-
lion) and to the Post Office benefit funds ( 31
billion), this additional expenditure will be off-set by the cessation of grants to the FederalLabour Office (2000 target figure: not quite34 billion) in expectation of an improving la-
bour market and by the Labour Office’s tak-ing responsibility for certain elements of ac-tive labour-market policies which had hither-to been financed by the Federal Government.Budget appropriations for unemployment as-sistance have remained unchanged vis-à-vis2000. In addition, the budget presupposesthat transfers to the Federal Railways Fundmay be lowered significantly, given that thesale of railway workers’ dwellings, whichfailed several times in the past, is to be closedin 2001, with a corresponding reduction inthe grants needed to cover this special fund.Federal Government investment was valuedat328 billion and was thus 31
12billion less
than this year’s target figure, the differencebeing attributable, inter alia, to savings asso-Federal draft
budget for
2001
Weak growth
in receiptsNo increase in
expenditure

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
62ciated with the Federal Labour Office’s as-
suming responsibility for structural adjust-ment measures, to a decline in those invest-ments associated with the Government’smove to Berlin, and to the abandonment ofconstruction plans for a high-speed magnetic-levitation train, the Transrapid.
All in all, the amount shown in the 2001 draft
budget for net borrowing would appear ad-equate. This notwithstanding, the structuralbudgetary position will deteriorate next year.Despite positive cyclical conditions, which willresult in savings in expenditure, especially inlabour-market related spending, and in in-creased tax receipts, the narrowing of thedeficit, which the budget puts at a slight 31
12
billion, will be due entirely to an increase of
36 billion in receipts from asset disposals,which, after all, cannot be regarded as mak-
ing a lasting contribution to consolidation.4
The main reasons for the limited progress inconsolidation are an increase in the size ofcertain benefits (i.e. housing allowance,benefits paid under the Federal Act on thePromotion of Education, subsidies for farm-ers’ purchases of mineral oil, child-rearingbenefits), and sizeable losses in revenue asso-ciated with the tax reform. This situationmakes it all the more important to pursuesustainable progress towards consolidation.In order to achieve this goal, it is especiallyimportant that any additional tax revenue thisyear or any interest payments saved by apply-ing licence sale proceeds to the national debtbe used to bring the deficit down more quick-ly. Generally speaking, positive phases of theeconomic cycle should be seen as an oppor-tunity to intensify consolidation efforts – anobjective which, at the European level, hasfound the approval of all EU member states.
Like last year’s financial plan, the new
medium-term financial plan presented by theFederal Government (see adjacent table)envisages a reduction in net borrowing to315
12billion by 2003. Towards the end of
the period covered by the financial plan,i.e. in 2004, new borrowing is supposed todecline further to 310 billion. These figures
are based on estimates that place real eco-nomic growth at 2
34% in 2001 and at an an-
nual average of 214% for the period from
2002 to 2004. On the revenue side, the newThe Federal Government’s financial
planning over the medium term
5billion
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004
Expenditure 244.8 244.8 249.4 253.2 256.9
of which
Investments 29.4 27.9 27.1 26.6 26.6
Revenue 219.5 221.2 228.3 237.6 246.7
of which
Taxes 198.1 195.9 207.5 216.7 228.3Privatisationsales 4.7 8.7 4.3 4.6 4.9
Net borrowing 25.3 23.6 21.1 15.5 10.2Memo item
Change in
expenditurein % – 0.8 – 0.0 + 1.9 + 1.5 + 1.5
Deutsche Bundesbank
4These receipts include privatisation proceeds and the
Federal Railways Fund’s receipts from the sale of railway
workers’ dwellings, which will be reflected in a reduction
of Federal grants to that special fund.Deterioration in
the structural
budgetary
positionMedium-term
financial plan

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
63financial plan is based on the May tax
estimate, as amended in the light of theGovernment’s tax reform bill. Privatisationproceeds for the period from 2002 to 2004have been set at around 34 billion to 35 bil-
lion per year. Average annual expendituregrowth is projected to be 1.6% during thatperiod, with investment expenditure fallingsomewhat further.
The Federal Government intends to balance
its budget by 2006. Starting in 2005, how-ever, substantial additional shortfalls in rev-enue associated with the tax reform (around310 billion less than in 2004) will make at-
taining this objective more difficult. If theseshortfalls are to be compensated for in thebudget, the Federal Government will have noother alternative but to adopt further consoli-dation measures. A structurally balancedbudget, which the Federal Government isstriving to achieve, is essential, not least withregard to the requirements of the EuropeanStability and Growth Pact and in view of thechallenges posed by demographic trends.
The central, regional and local authorities,
taken together, will again incur a substantialdeficit in 2001. Their budgetary positionwould have worsened even if this year’s ex-ceptional licence receipts had not been takeninto account. The reason is the loss in revenueassociated with tax reform. As a result, totaltax receipts will decline even though the eco-nomic trend is expected to be favourable;only if expenditure growth were to remainwell below the 2% limit specified by theFinancial Planning Council could this loss intax revenue be countered.Social security funds
In the second quarter of 2000, the wage and
salary earners’ pension insurance scheme re-corded a deficit of 3
12billion, compared with
a surplus of 334billion for the same period
last year. The main reason for the weakenedfinancial position is that it is no longer neces-sary, as it still was in 1999, to replenish thestatutory fluctuation reserves by generating asizeable surplus. This factor, in combinationwith the forecast trends in non-contributoryreceipts and in expenditure, made it possibleto lower contribution rates from 19.5% to19.3% at the beginning of the year.
Total contribution receipts in the second quar-
ter were down by just over 1
12% on the year.
A 1% rise in wage and salary earners’ com-pulsory contributions was offset by a declineof slightly more than one-quarter in contribu-tions paid on behalf of recipients of wagesubstitutes; this decline was the result of alowering of the contribution rates for un-employment assistance and of more favour-able labour market conditions. By contrast,contributions for Federal Government assist-ance during periods of child-rearing, whichwere paid for the first time in June 1999,yielded considerable additional revenue. As aresult, total receipts increased by 1
12%. At
slightly less than 4%, pension payments con-tinued to rise rather sharply. The steep climbin pension payments reflected not only the in-creased number of pensions but also the ef-fects of the pension adjustment of mid-1999,which was still indexed to the trend in netwages. As of July 1, 2000, pensions in bothwestern and eastern Germany were raised byObjective:
a balanced
budget
Central,
regional and
local authorities
running
substantial
deficit again
in 2001Statutory
pension
insurance
scheme
Current trends

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
640.6% to adjust for last year’s inflation rate.
Consequently, expenditure is expected to in-crease more moderately in the second half of2000. All in all, it remains likely that the pen-sion insurance scheme will run a small surplusthis year.
The debate concerning a reform of the statu-
tory pension insurance scheme, made neces-sary by demographic trends, has not yet beenconcluded. Significantly, the key data pre-sented by the Federal Government includemore moderate annual pension adjustmentsand – from 2011 onwards – a deduction inpension payments for people entering retire-ment, i.e. for those persons who will havehad time beforehand to make their own pro-visions. These measures would contribute toa more balanced distribution of the demo-graphically-induced financing burden among
current and future pensioners. Moreover, theplanned reliance on an additional funded sys-tem would place the financing of old-ageprovision on a broader basis. It should also beborne in mind that any ceiling that might beplaced on contribution rates for the unfund-ed pay-as-you-go pension scheme as a conse-quence of a reduction in pension size wouldcreate additional leeway for private old-ageprovision; the Federal Government has plansto introduce other incentives such as taxadvantages and transfer payments to low-income earners to encourage future retireesto take advantage of this leeway.
In the second quarter the Federal Labour Of-
fice deficit narrowed to just over 3
14billion,
compared with a deficit of almost 3112bil-
lion for the same period in 1999. An increasein revenue totalling just over 2
12% was ac-
companied by a decrease in expenditure ofslightly less than 6%. A decline in the num-ber of unemployed brought expenditure onunemployment benefits down by slightly over8%. Total expenditure on active labour mar-ket policies fell by almost 6%. The fact thatthe labour market situation improved overthe year suggests that the Federal LabourOffice may expect a reduction in its financialburden for the remainder of 2000 as well. Bycontrast, a recent ruling by the Federal Con-stitutional Court, which stipulates that one-off wage-related payments be taken into ac-count when determining wage substitutes,will result in a substantial increase in expend-iture during the last six months of this year.Still, it seems highly unlikely that all of thealmost 34 billion that has been earmarked inQuarterly
DM
billion 5 
billion
+ 6
+ 4
+ 2
0
−2Surplus (+) or
deficit (−)
o56
5452504846Expenditure
RevenueWage and salary earners’
pension insurance scheme
oFrom 1999 in euro.
Deutsche Bundesbank12+
8+
4+
0
4−110
106
102
9894
90
1998 1999 2000
Debate on
reformFederal Labour
Office

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
65the Federal budget in the form of a grant will
be spent.
No Federal grants are planned for next year,
which seems realistic at this point. The Fed-eral Labour Office will probably continue tobenefit from the decline in unemployment,which is cyclical as well as demographic innature. However, the Labour Office’s budgetwill be adversely affected by its having to as-sume responsibility for job creation schemesthat had hitherto been financed by the Fed-eral Government direct. In addition, expend-iture on wage substitutes will be subject tosubstantial increases owing to the aforemen-tioned ruling of the Federal ConstitutionalCourt, which will result in a benefits boost ofup to 10%. Insofar as this amounts to a sig-nificant improvement in the degree of protec-tion afforded to unemployed persons – whichis already quite generous by internationalstandards – it poses new problems, especiallywith regard to work incentive.
The financial situation of the statutory health
insurance funds improved marginally in thefirst quarter of 2000 (more recent data arenot yet available), accompanied by a relativelysmall increase in expenditure (+ 1.5%). At al-most 31 billion, the deficit narrowed some-
what, compared with the same period lastyear, although the data differ widely, depend-ing on the individual health insurance institu-tion. Nevertheless, there is some evidencethat the financial situation will deteriorateover the remainder of the year. For example,the above-mentioned Constitutional Courtruling will also cause a rise in payments forsickness benefits. Moreover, the obligation topay contributions for part-time workers
below a certain earnings level, which becamelaw in April 1999, will no longer result in ayear-on-year increase in revenue.Quarterly
DM
billion 5 
billion
   0
−1
−2
oSurplus (+) or deficit (−)234567891011121314Expenditure,
total
Revenue 1
Expenditure on...
...unemployment benefits and
   short-time working benefits
...vocational
   training 2Federal Labour Office
1Excluding Federal Government liquidity
assistance. — 2Including job creation meas-
ures. — oFrom 1999 in euro.
Deutsche Bundesbank0
2−
4−28
26
24
22
20
1816
14
1210
8
6
4
1998 1999 2000Outlook for
2001
Statutory
health
insurance funds

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
66Outlook for the general government
sector as a whole
On balance, the aggregate general govern-
ment sector for 2000 will show a muchstronger financial position than it did in 1999,when, according to the provisional calcula-tions provided by the Federal Statistical Of-fice, the deficit ratio, as defined in the nation-al accounts, was equivalent to 1.1%. This im-provement may be attributed primarily to theadditional inflow of funds to the Federal Gov-ernment budget from the auction of mobile-phone licences, which, in keeping with a de-cision of the Statistical Office of the EuropeanCommunities, must be booked as receipts inthe year they were generated. As a result, theaggregate general government budget for2000 will probably show a surplus in the na-tional accounts as well. In the absence of li-cence proceeds, it would have been possible,at this point in time, to detect only a slightimprovement at best in comparison with lastyear.Given that the tax reform will result in a
corresponding loss of revenue, it seems likelythat the trend for 2000, which was decisivelyinfluenced by this exceptional revenuesource, will again give way to a substantialdeficit in 2001. At the present time, the Fed-eral Government expects the deficit ratio toreach 1
12%. By contrast, most of the other
EU countries believe that their financial bal-ances will continue to improve. In 2001, Ger-many is likely to have one of the highest def-icit ratios in Europe. This is all the more reasonfor the general government sector to imposelasting constraints on expenditure whichwould allow it to attain structurally balancedfiscal positions in line with the objectives laiddown in the European Stability and GrowthPact as quickly as possible. With its updatedstability programme of January 2000, whichwas amended to take account of the effectsof the tax reform, the Federal Government isendeavouring to reduce the deficit ratio to
12% by 2003.Aggregate
general
government
sector in
2000 ...... and in 2001

Statistical
SectionDeutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
1*

ContentsI. Key economic data for European
monetary union
1. Monetary developments and interest
rates 6*
2. Foreign trade and payments 6*3. General economic indicators 7*
II. Overall monetary survey in the
European monetary union
1. The money stock and its counterparts 8*
2. Consolidated balance sheet of mon-
etary financial institutions (MFIs) 10*
3. Banking system’s liquidity position 14*
III. Consolidated financial statement
of the Eurosystem
1. Assets 16*
2. Liabilities 18*
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary
financial institutions (excluding theBundesbank) in Germany 20*
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks
(MFIs) in Germany, by category ofbanks 24*
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-à-vis residents 26*
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents 28*Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
2*

5. Lending of banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) 30*
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic enterprises and individuals,housing loans, sectors of economicactivity 32*
7. Deposits of domestic
non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs)in Germany 34*
8. Deposits of domestic individuals and
non-commercial organisations atbanks (MFIs) in Germany 36*
9. Deposits of domestic public author-
ities at banks (MFIs) in Germany, bycreditor group 36*
10. Savings deposits and bank savings
bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germanysold to non-banks (non-MFIs) 38*
11. Debt securities and money market
paper outstanding of banks (MFIs)in Germany 38*
12. Building and loan associations (MFIs)
in Germany 39*
13. Assets and liabilities of the foreign
branches and foreign subsidiaries ofGerman banks (MFIs) 40*
V. Minimum reserves
1. Reserve ratios 42*
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany up
to the end of 1998 42*
3. Reserve maintenance in the Euro-
pean monetary union 42*VI. Interest rates
1. ECB interest rates 43*
2. Discount and lombard rates of the
Bundesbank 43*
3. Base rate per Discount Rate Transi-
tion Act 43*
4. Eurosystem monetary policy opera-
tions allotted through tenders 43*
5. Money market rates, by month 44*6. Euro area retail bank interest rates 44*7. Lending and deposit rates of banks
(MFIs) in Germany 45*
8. Selected central bank rates abroad 47*9. Money market rates abroad 47*
VII. Capital market
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities
and shares in Germany 48*
2. Sales of debt securities issued by
borrowers domiciled in Germany 49*
3. Outstanding amount of debt secur-
ities issued by borrowers domiciledin Germany 50*
4. Circulation of shares issued by resi-
dents of Germany 50*
5. Yields and indices on German
securities 51*
6. Sales and purchases of investment
fund certificates in Germany 51*Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
3*

VIII. Public finance in Germany
1. Finances of the public sector 52*
2. Finances of the Federal
Government, Länder Governmentsand local authorities 52*
3. Finances of the Government
in the national accounts 53*
4. Tax revenue of the central,
regional and local authorities 53*
5. Tax revenue, by type 54*6. Individual taxes of the Federal
Government, Länder Governmentsand local authorities 54*
7. Indebtedness of the public sector 55*8. Changes in public sector
indebtedness 57*
9. Loans raised by public authorities
against borrowers’ notes 57*
10. Indebtedness of the Federal
Government 58*
11. Federal finance on a cash basis 58*12. Receipts, expenditure and assets of
the wage and salary earners’pension insurance funds 59*
13. Receipts and expenditure of the
Federal Labour Office 59*
IX. Economic conditions
1. Origin and expenditure of
domestic product, distribution ofnational income 60*
2. Output in the producing sector 61*3. Orders received by the
manufacturing sector 62*
4. Orders received by construction 63*5. Retail turnover 63*6. Labour market 64*7. Prices 65*8. Households’ income 66*
9. Pay rates and actual earnings 66*
X. Foreign trade and payments
1. Major items of the balance of pay-
ments of the European monetaryunion 67*
2. Major items of the balance of pay-
ments of the Federal Republic ofGermany 68*
3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the
Federal Republic of Germany, bygroup of countries and country 69*
4. Services and factor income of the
Federal Republic of Germany 70*
5. Current transfers of the Federal
Republic of Germany 70*
6. Capital transfers 70*7. Financial account of the Federal
Republic of Germany 71*
8. External position of the Bundesbank 72*9. External position of the Bundesbank
in the European monetary union 72*
10. Assets and liabilities of enterprises
in Germany (other than banks)vis-à-vis non-residents 73*
11. Deutsche Mark exchange rates for
the national currencies of the EMUcountries, the Deutsche Mark valueof the ECU and euro conversionrates 74*
12. Exchange rates of the Deutsche
Mark and the euro against othercurrencies 74*
13. Effective exchange rates of the euro
and selected foreign currencies 75*Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
4*

Abbreviations and symbols
eEstimated
pProvisional
pePartly estimated
rRevised
...Figure available at a later date
.Figure unknown or not to be published
or not meaningful
0Less than 0.5 but more than nil
–Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to round-
ing.Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
5*

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
 I. Key economic data for European monetary union
 
1. Monetary developments and interest rates
  
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions  1 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
 MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
enterprises Monetary pean govern-
 MFI lending, and capital 3−month ment bonds
M1 M2 M3 total individuals formation  2 EONIA  3, 5 EURIBOR  4, 5 outstanding  6 
Period Change from previous year,in % % p. a. as a monthly average
1998         Dec. 9.2 6.0 4.7 7.4 9.6 5.0 . . 4.0
1999         Jan. 14.7 7.8 5.9 8.4 10.7 5.8 3.14 3.13 3.8
         Feb. 12.6 6.5 5.2 7.9 9.8 5.4 3.12 3.09 3.9         Mar. 11.7 6.8 5.4 8.3 10.0 5.4 2.93 3.05 4.2
         Apr. 11.5 6.3 5.3 7.9 9.9 6.3 2.71 2.70 4.0
         May 12.1 6.4 5.4 8.4 10.4 5.6 2.55 2.58 4.2         June 11.5 6.3 5.5 8.5 11.1 5.6 2.56 2.63 4.5
         July 14.1 7.7 5.9 8.3 11.0 5.8 2.52 2.68 4.8
         Aug. 12.8 7.0 5.7 8.3 11.0 5.7 2.44 2.70 5.0         Sep. 12.8 6.9 5.9 8.4 10.5 5.9 2.43 2.73 5.2
         Oct. 13.0 7.0 5.7 8.8 10.5 7.2 2.50 3.38 5.5
         Nov. 11.8 6.3 6.1 9.1 10.8 7.5 2.94 3.47 5.2         Dec. 10.0 5.2 6.1 8.7 10.3 8.2 3.04 3.45 5.3
2000         Jan. 9.3 4.1 5.2 7.9 9.4 7.5 3.04 3.34 5.7
         Feb. 10.7 5.2 6.1 8.3 10.4 7.6 3.28 3.54 5.7         Mar. 10.0 5.0 6.5 8.2 10.8 7.4 3.51 3.75 5.5
         Apr. 11.2 5.4 6.6 8.5 11.3 7.2 3.69 3.93 5.4
         May 8.6 4.6 5.9 8.0 11.1 7.5 3.92 4.36 5.6         June 6.8 4.1 5.4 6.9 9.8 7.1 4.29 4.50 5.4
         July ... ... ... ... ... ... 4.31 4.58 5.4
1 Source: ECB. — 2 Longer-term liabilities to euro area non-MFIs. — also footnotes to table VI.5., p. 44*. — 6 GDP-weighted yield on ten-year
3Euro OverNight Index Average. — 4 Euro InterBank Offered Rate. — 5 See government bonds; excluding Luxembourg. 
 
 
2. Foreign trade and payments  * 
  
 
Selected items of the EMU balance of payments Euro exchange rates
Current account Capital account  1 Effective exchange rate
of which: Direct Securities Credit Monetary
Balance Trade balance Balance investment transactions reserves Dollar rate nominal real transactions  2 
Period until the end of 1998 ECU million, from 1999 euro million Euro/US-$ 1st q 1999=100
1998         Dec. + 5,323 + 10,273 − 33,785 − 3,193 − 12,169 − 33,866 + 15,443 . 103.4 103.2
1999         Jan. − 2,370 + 4,799 + 399 − 4,741 + 6,944 + 324 − 2,128 1.1608 102.0 101.8
         Feb. + 2,289 + 6,921 + 6,783 − 6,195 − 26,814 + 34,836 + 4,956 1.1208 99.9 99.9         Mar. + 6,436 + 9,793 − 40,308 − 4,623 − 36,215 − 2,128 + 2,658 1.0883 98.3 98.3
         Apr. + 4,756 + 7,980 − 5,078 − 14,562 + 17,040 − 9,337 + 1,781 1.0704 97.1 96.9
         May − 1,549 + 5,852 − 11,013 − 19,125 − 32,432 + 36,997 + 3,547 1.0628 96.6 96.5         June + 5,377 + 11,008 − 12,168 − 18,905 + 7,757 − 2,325 + 1,305 1.0378 94.7 94.7
         July + 6,428 + 14,589 − 24,420 − 9,842 − 2,307 − 11,469 − 803 1.0353 94.8 95.2
         Aug. + 1,276 + 6,488 + 27,165 − 7,230 + 13,881 + 20,027 + 486 1.0604 95.4 95.6         Sep. − 3,184 + 5,563 − 9,456 − 6,267 + 19,702 − 24,627 + 1,735 1.0501 93.6 93.4
         Oct. + 2,239 + 10,451 + 14,653 − 7,333 − 15,331 + 37,184 + 132 1.0706 94.4 94.2
         Nov. + 1,628 + 8,391 − 4,541 − 19,406 + 15,231 − 975 + 608 1.0338 92.0 92.0         Dec. − 504 + 7,663 − 6,292 − 20,580 + 2,589 + 12,246 − 548 1.0110 90.1 90.4
2000         Jan. − 9,026 − 507 + 19,185 + 833 − 6,106 + 26,673 − 2,215 1.0137 90.2 90.8
         Feb. − 26 + 4,217 − 1,885 + 146,030 − 151,027 + 2,836 + 276 0.9834 89.2 89.8         Mar. + 1,188 + 5,566 + 30,460 + 1,132 − 33,003 + 61,838 + 493 0.9643 87.7 88.3
         Apr. − 3,166 + 5,978 + 5,019 − 6,225 − 5,793 + 16,790 + 247 0.9470 86.1 86.6
         May − 638 + 4,981 + 7,019 − 10,680 − 4,764 + 21,212 + 1,251 0.9060 84.5 85.0         June ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0.9492 87.4 88.1
         July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0.9397 86.9 88.0
 
*  Source: ECB. — 1  Series to which data from January 1999 are not closely   
comparable with earlier observations. — 2  Including financial derivatives.   
   
6* I. Key economic data for European monetary union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
I.  Key economic data for European monetary union 
 
3. General economic indicators
  
                   
Period Belgium Germany Finland France Ireland Italy Luxembourg Netherlands Austria Portugal Spain EMU
Real gross domestic product 1
1997 3.5 1.5 6.3 1.9 10.7 1.8 7.3 3.8 1.2 3.7 3.8 2.3
1998 2.7 2.2 5.5 3.2 8.6 1.5 5.0 3.7 2.9 3.5 4.0 2.71999 2.5 1.5 4.0 2.9 9.8 1.4 7.5 3.6 2.1 2.9 3.7 2.4
1998         4th qtr 0.9 1.9 5.1 3.0 6.7 0.4 3.3 2.0 3.7 3.5 2.0
1999         1st qtr 1.0 0.8 4.3 2.7 8.8 0.7 3.0 1.0 ... 3.3 1.8
         2nd qtr 1.4 1.3 4.4 2.6 8.1 1.0 3.1 1.4 ... 3.9 2.0         3rd qtr 3.2 1.5 3.5 3.1 11.0 1.6 3.6 2.5 ... 3.9 2.5         4th qtr 4.5 2.3 3.9 3.2 ... 2.4 4.6 3.3 ... 3.9 3.1
2000         1st qtr 5.1 3.3 5.2 3.4 ... 3.5 4.7 3.9 ... 4.7 3.4
Industrial production 1, 2
1997 4.7 3.5 9.2 3.8 15.3 3.8 5.8 3.1 6.4 2.6 6.8 4.3
1998 3.4 4.2 7.8 5.1 15.7 1.2 −0.1 1.4 8.2 5.7 5.4 4.2
1999 0.9 1.6 5.5 2.2 ... −0.1 11.5 0.5 5.4 3.0 2.6 1.8
1999         1st qtr −1.5 −0.4 5.8 0.8 9.1 −1.6 −0.8 −0.3 3.1 3.0 1.3 0.3
         2nd qtr −1.3 0.8 5.2 2.0 7.9 −2.9 4.5 0.0 4.5 2.5 2.4 0.6
         3rd qtr 1.4 2.0 3.8 2.4 ... 1.4 22.1 0.9 4.2 2.8 3.5 2.4         4th qtr 5.0 3.7 7.0 3.7 ... 3.4 23.6 1.4 9.4 3.9 3.4 4.0
2000         1st qtr 4.6 5.6 7.3 5.3 ... 2.5 10.3 1.2 11.2 −1.0 8.4 4.7
         2nd qtr 4.6
6 p 6.5 9.4 ... ... 6.5 ... ... ... ... ... ...
Capacity utilisation 3
1997 81.4 83.2 87.2 82.3 75.9 76.4 82.4 84.4 82.0 80.9 78.3 81.0
1998 82.7 85.5 88.9 83.8 76.6 78.5 88.0 85.3 83.7 81.4 80.3 83.01999 80.9 84.0 86.1 85.3 75.9 76.0 84.9 84.0 81.9 80.8 79.7 81.8
1999         2nd qtr 80.8 83.7 86.5 84.7 73.2 76.3 83.1 84.3 81.4 80.2 80.0 81.8
         3rd qtr 81.5 83.6 86.4 85.5 78.4 75.9 84.6 83.8 81.1 80.5 79.5 81.6         4th qtr 81.5 84.2 86.4 84.9 78.8 75.8 86.3 83.9 83.1 81.1 78.5 81.9
2000         1st qtr 82.9 85.0 87.0 86.5 76.5 77.4 86.8 84.7 83.3 81.7 80.8 83.0
         2nd qtr 84.5 86.1 86.5 86.3 77.7 79.1 87.9 84.6 84.6 80.3 80.5 83.7         3rd qtr 84.2 86.0 88.8 87.7 79.4 78.9 88.0 84.1 85.1 82.0 80.3 83.9
Unemployment rate 4
1997 9.4 9.9 12.7 12.3 9.9 11.7 2.7 5.2 4.4 6.8 20.8 11.51998 9.5 9.4 11.4 11.8 7.6 11.8 2.7 4.0 4.5 5.2 18.8 10.91999 9.1 8.8 10.2 11.3 5.7 11.3 2.3 3.3 3.8 4.5 15.9 10.0
1999         Nov. 8.9 8.7 10.1 10.8 5.2 11.1 2.2 2.8 3.6 4.2 15.1 9.6
         Dec. 8.8 8.6 10.1 10.6 5.1 11.2 2.2 2.8 3.7 4.2 15.2 9.6
2000         Jan. 8.7 8.5 10.2 10.5 5.0 11.2 2.2 2.7 3.7 4.3 15.1 9.6
         Feb. 8.7 8.5 10.2 10.3 5.0 11.0 2.2 2.9 3.6 4.4 15.1 9.5         Mar. 8.5 8.4 10.1 10.1 4.9 10.8 2.2 2.9 3.5 4.3 14.8 9.4
         Apr. 8.5 8.5 10.0 10.0 4.8 10.7 2.2 3.0 3.4 4.4 14.6 9.3
         May 8.5 8.4 9.8 9.8 4.7 ... 2.2 2.8 3.3 4.5 14.4 9.2         June 8.4 8.4 9.7 9.6 4.5 ... 2.2 ... 3.3 4.4 14.1 9.1
Harmonised index of consumer prices 1
1997 1.5 1.5 1.2 1.3 1.2 1.9 1.4 1.9 1.2 1.9 1.9 1.61998 0.9 0.6 1.4 0.7 2.1 2.0 1.0 1.8 0.8 2.2 1.8 1.11999 1.1 0.6 1.3 0.6 2.5 1.7 1.0 2.0 0.5 2.2 2.2 1.1
1999         Nov. 1.6 1.0 1.9 1.0 3.0 2.0 1.9 2.0 1.0 1.9 2.7 1.5
         Dec. 2.1 1.4 2.2 1.4 3.9 2.1 2.3 1.9 1.7 1.7 2.8 1.7
2000         Jan. 1.8 1.9 2.3 1.7 4.4 2.2 3.5 1.6 1.4 1.9 2.9 1.9
         Feb. 2.1 2.1 2.7 1.5 4.6 2.4 2.6 1.5 2.0 1.6 3.0 2.0         Mar. 2.5 2.1 3.2 1.7 5.0 2.6 3.0 1.6 2.0 1.4 3.0 2.1
         Apr. 2.3 1.6 2.5 1.4 5.0 2.4 3.2 1.7 1.8 1.9 3.0 1.9
         May 2.4 1.5 2.7 1.6 5.1 2.5 2.9 2.0 1.6 2.4 3.2 1.9         June 3.0 2.0 3.1 1.9 5.4 2.7 4.4 2.5 2.4 2.8 3.5 2.4
         July 3.1 2.0 ... ... ... ... 4.7 2.8 ... ... 3.7 ...
General government financial balance 5
1997 −2.0 −2.6 −1.5 −3.0 0.8 −2.7 3.6 −1.2 −1.9 −2.6 −3.2 −2.6
1998 −1.0 −1.7 1.3 −2.7 2.1 −2.8 3.2 −0.8 −2.5 −2.1 −2.6 −2.0
1999 −0.9 7 −1.1 2.3 −1.8 2.0 −1.9 2.4 0.5 −2.0 −2.0 −1.1 −1.2
General government debt 5
1997 123.0 60.9 54.1 59.0 65.3 119.8 6.0 70.3 63.9 60.3 66.7 74.6
1998 117.4 60.7 49.0 59.3 55.6 116.3 6.4 67.0 63.5 56.5 64.9 73.01999 114.4
7 61.0 47.1 58.6 52.4 114.9 6.2 63.8 64.9 56.8 63.5 72.1
Sources: National data, European Commission, Eurostat, European a percentage of persons in civilian employment; seasonally ad-
Central Bank. Latest data are partly based on press reports and are justed. —5  As a percentage of GDP; Maastricht Treaty definition,
provisional. —1  Annual percentage changes; GDP of France, Portu- ESA95. —6  Adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical Office by way of
gal and EMU are calculated from seasonally adjusted data. —2  Manufactu- estimates to the results of the Quarterly Production Survey for the second
ring, mining, gas and electricity; adjusted for working-day variations quarter (manufacturing sector in Germany: + 0.6 %). —7  GDP results of
(except France and Spain). —3  Manufacturing, in %; seasonally adjusted; March 2000. 
data are collected in January, April, July and October. —4  Standardised, as
7*I.  Key economic data for European monetary union 

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
 
1. The money stock and its counterparts*)
  
  
 
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II. Net claims on III. Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area  3 non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises Public
and individuals authorities Debt
Deposits Deposits securities
Liabil- with an at agreed with
Claims ities to agreed notice of maturitieson non- non-euro- maturity over of over 2 Capital
of which: of which: euro-area area of over 3 months years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total  
4 6 (net)  7 reserves 2 years  4,5 Securities Securities
 European monetary union (euro billion) 1
 
1999         Jan. 107.7 88.6 12.8 19.0 20.2 −33.8 122.7 156.5 37.4 1.3 −1.1 25.9 11.3
         Feb. 23.2 −1.5 −1.2 24.7 24.6 −54.8 −116.1 −61.3 14.5 4.1 −1.3 12.4 −0.7
         Mar. 93.9 63.1 20.8 30.8 34.0 − 3.6 51.8 55.4 22.8 4.6 −0.8 4.9 14.1
         Apr. 27.4 40.5 19.1 −13.1 −4.4 −14.2 − 7.5 6.7 25.7 1.8 −2.2 14.6 11.5
         May 64.5 49.7 18.2 14.8 14.7 −41.0 −60.3 −19.3 3.3 −2.8 −3.6 4.5 5.2
         June 79.2 90.3 −4.5 −11.1 −17.7 18.4 127.4 109.0 28.8 9.3 −1.0 6.0 14.4
         July 12.6 37.3 −0.2 −24.7 −16.7 9.4 −36.2 −45.6 12.3 5.2 −2.3 4.3 5.0
         Aug. 7.7 2.0 7.8 5.7 9.8 −39.0 −44.0 − 5.0 9.3 5.7 −0.9 3.7 0.8
         Sep. 57.5 28.5 −12.7 29.1 24.0 15.9 20.1 4.2 29.0 2.3 0.2 21.0 5.5
         Oct. 73.4 41.8 −1.5 31.6 22.5 −33.7 20.9 54.6 25.6 6.1 −0.6 12.7 7.5
         Nov. 94.6 77.8 16.5 16.8 4.1 −11.5 20.9 32.3 17.8 8.1 0.1 5.6 4.1
         Dec. 17.2 54.2 19.1 −37.0 −31.9 10.5 −77.4 −87.8 42.8 11.5 2.1 −2.4 31.5
2000         Jan. 52.1 46.2 4.6 5.9 13.9 −44.8 23.0 67.8 18.8 1.9 −0.9 −0.9 18.6
         Feb. 58.2 53.8 19.1 4.4 9.1 7.7 32.8 25.1 18.1 0.7 1.0 11.2 5.3         Mar. 94.2 96.4 29.9 −2.3 −7.2 −73.1 33.3 106.4 18.3 −2.1 0.8 2.5 17.1
         Apr. 50.4 70.1 17.5 −19.7 −21.4 −21.6 13.6 35.2 22.9 −0.8 −0.4 14.6 9.5
         May 33.6 47.7 20.5 −14.1 −7.8 −14.9 11.3 26.2 12.8 1.0 1.2 7.3 3.3
         June − 1.9 21.3 −32.3 −23.2 −19.8 94.0 14.2 −79.9 16.5 0.0 1.5 7.4 7.6
 German contribution (euro billion) 2
1999         Jan. 20.5 16.8 −0.7 3.7 0.1 −20.4 13.3 33.7 18.9 3.8 −1.3 15.8 0.5
         Feb. 11.6 5.7 0.8 6.0 1.4 −26.0 −35.1 −9.1 14.6 3.3 −1.7 9.7 3.3
         Mar. 30.2 28.5 19.3 1.8 3.6 24.3 28.7 4.4 10.4 3.3 −0.5 3.9 3.7
         Apr. 15.6 12.4 7.8 3.2 6.6 − 2.4 6.8 9.2 13.1 0.1 −2.3 10.8 4.5
         May 27.6 13.1 5.1 14.5 15.1 −16.0 −10.3 5.8 1.3 −1.4 −3.5 2.5 3.7
         June − 3.4 4.9 −17.0 −8.2 −10.8 21.9 17.9 −4.0 5.3 2.6 −1.6 1.6 2.8
         July 7.8 5.8 0.5 1.9 3.0 22.6 24.7 2.0 5.3 2.7 −2.1 3.5 1.2
         Aug. 4.4 6.2 1.4 −1.8 −1.0 −27.1 −13.3 13.8 8.2 3.1 −0.9 5.5 0.4
         Sep. 23.9 15.5 1.7 8.4 8.0 5.5 0.1 −5.5 19.8 1.9 0.7 15.8 1.4
         Oct. 27.3 10.5 0.5 16.8 6.3 −10.3 2.5 12.8 5.0 2.0 −0.6 1.3 2.2
         Nov. 23.1 18.7 5.7 4.4 0.9 −23.8 1.4 25.2 10.2 3.3 0.1 5.6 1.1
         Dec. 18.3 31.3 11.2 −13.0 −5.2 − 5.7 −1.8 3.9 4.4 3.4 2.1 −5.1 4.1
2000         Jan. 17.7 5.3 1.7 12.4 10.7 −15.3 2.0 17.3 −3.4 2.4 −0.9 −7.2 2.2
         Feb. 15.0 14.0 5.7 1.1 5.8 4.7 18.5 13.9 6.1 1.9 1.0 2.4 0.8         Mar. 38.7 43.0 31.3 −4.3 −5.7 −25.3 7.8 33.2 5.8 −0.1 0.8 0.5 4.6
         Apr. 15.2 15.2 5.6 −0.0 −1.7 − 7.3 10.5 17.8 11.3 0.6 −0.4 10.1 1.1
         May 12.9 16.2 8.2 −3.3 −3.7 2.0 12.8 10.7 9.6 0.2 1.3 6.9 1.2
         June −32.2 −25.4 −32.0 −6.8 −3.0 12.5 −21.5 −34.1 4.7 0.9 1.5 0.6 1.7
 German contribution (DM billion) 2
1999         Jan. 40.1 32.8 −1.3 7.3 0.2 −39.9 26.0 65.9 36.9 7.4 −2.6 30.9 1.1
         Feb. 22.7 11.1 1.6 11.7 2.7 −50.9 −68.6 −17.7 28.6 6.4 −3.3 19.0 6.5
         Mar. 59.1 55.7 37.8 3.5 7.0 47.5 56.1 8.6 20.3 6.4 −1.0 7.6 7.3
         Apr. 30.5 24.3 15.2 6.2 12.9 − 4.7 13.3 18.0 25.7 0.2 −4.5 21.1 8.9
         May 54.0 25.7 9.9 28.3 29.6 −31.4 −20.1 11.3 2.6 −2.7 −6.8 4.8 7.3
         June − 6.6 9.5 −33.2 −16.1 −21.0 42.8 35.0 −7.8 10.4 5.1 −3.2 3.1 5.5
         July 15.2 11.4 1.0 3.8 5.8 44.3 48.2 4.0 10.3 5.3 −4.1 6.9 2.3
         Aug. 8.6 12.1 2.6 −3.5 −2.0 −52.9 −26.0 26.9 16.0 6.0 −1.7 10.8 0.9
         Sep. 46.8 30.3 3.3 16.5 15.6 10.8 0.2 −10.7 38.6 3.6 1.4 30.9 2.7
         Oct. 53.3 20.5 1.0 32.8 12.3 −20.2 4.8 25.0 9.7 4.0 −1.2 2.6 4.4
         Nov. 45.2 36.6 11.2 8.6 1.7 −46.6 2.7 49.3 19.9 6.5 0.3 11.0 2.2
         Dec. 35.7 61.2 21.8 −25.5 −10.2 −11.1 −3.5 7.6 8.6 6.6 4.1 −10.1 8.0
2000         Jan. 34.7 10.4 3.2 24.3 21.0 −29.9 3.9 33.8 −6.7 4.7 −1.7 −14.1 4.4
         Feb. 29.4 27.3 11.2 2.1 11.3 9.2 36.3 27.1 11.8 3.7 2.0 4.7 1.5         Mar. 75.8 84.2 61.1 −8.4 −11.1 −49.5 15.3 64.8 11.4 −0.3 1.6 1.0 9.1
         Apr. 29.7 29.7 11.0 −0.0 −3.3 −14.3 20.5 34.8 22.2 1.1 −0.9 19.7 2.1
         May 25.3 31.7 15.9 −6.5 −7.3 3.9 24.9 21.0 18.8 0.4 2.5 13.5 2.4
         June −63.0 −49.7 −62.6 −13.3 −5.8 24.5 −42.1 −66.6 9.2 1.8 2.9 1.2 3.2
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of instead of bill holdings. —4For the German contribution: up to December
monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (table II.2); statistical breaks have been 1998, including liabilities arising from loans on a trust basis. —5For the
eliminated from the flow figures. —1Source: ECB. —2Owing to changes in German contribution: from 1999 including deposits under savings and loan
the definitions of the items and differences in the range of reporting contracts (see table IV.12). —6For the German contribution: up to the end
institutions, the figures are not comparable with those published for of 1998 including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see alsoGermany up to end of 1998. —3For the German contribution: up to footnote 5). —7Excluding MFIs portfolios; for the German contribution:
December 1998, including loans on a trust basis and bill-based lending excluding German MFIs portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro
8*II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
    
 
VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  9 
Money stock M2
Money
Money stock M1 market Debt
Deposits fund securitieswith an Deposits with certificates
IV. De- agreed at agreed and money maturities
posits of Currency maturity notice of Repo- market of up to    
V. Other in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac- paper 2 years    central gov-
ernments factors  
8 Total Total Total lation  10 tions  14 (net)  7 (net)  7    Period deposits  11 2 years  11,12  months  11,13  
European monetary union (euro billion) 1
 
− 5.4 0.7 41.2 34.3 21.6 − 9.2 30.8 − 2.6 15.3 − 1.2 13.6 − 5.4 1999         Jan.
8.9 −36.7 −18.3 −46.1 −32.2 − 0.4 −31.8 −16.4 2.4 12.3 15.1 0.5          Feb.
− 7.7 59.5 15.8 14.8 19.4 4.7 14.7 − 2.2 − 2.4 − 5.4 6.4 0.0          Mar.
−17.6 −28.9 34.0 18.6 14.0 2.1 11.9 − 0.3 5.0 − 6.6 20.9 1.1          Apr.
4.9 −16.3 31.6 25.0 30.5 1.7 28.8 −10.2 4.7 0.8 1.3 4.6          May
4.2 43.2 21.4 24.6 42.5 2.4 40.0 −23.7 5.8 − 6.0 1.3 1.4          June
10.0 −13.2 12.9 20.5 1.6 8.0 − 6.5 14.2 4.8 − 2.7 − 7.8 2.9          July
2.9 −22.1 −21.3 −34.3 −36.3 − 5.5 −30.8 2.1 − 0.1 − 1.1 13.1 1.0          Aug.
− 4.7 34.7 14.3 9.0 25.4 0.9 24.5 −13.4 − 3.0 − 2.0 6.5 0.8          Sep.
1.8 − 5.3 17.6 16.1 5.8 2.2 3.6 12.2 − 1.9 − 3.2 6.6 − 1.9          Oct.
11.0 9.6 44.7 25.1 32.7 0.5 32.2 − 2.5 − 5.2 1.1 17.8 0.7          Nov.
− 4.0 −91.0 79.9 96.3 52.9 19.5 33.4 20.8 22.6 −14.4 −14.7 12.8          Dec.
− 8.4 − 6.1 2.9 − 6.5 10.4 −16.9 27.4 −17.7 0.8 10.7 0.8 − 2.1 2000         Jan.
10.8 15.2 21.8 − 5.4 −10.5 − 1.8 − 8.7 16.4 −11.3 4.5 19.0 3.7          Feb.
−14.3 −18.6 35.8 7.0 10.5 3.4 7.0 7.0 −10.5 17.6 12.1 − 0.9          Mar.
1.4 −34.8 39.4 35.0 36.9 3.3 33.7 5.6 − 7.6 2.3 2.2 − 0.1          Apr.
−17.7 19.7 3.9 − 5.7 −15.0 − 0.2 −14.8 18.9 − 9.6 1.4 9.8 − 1.6          May
30.6 47.6 − 2.6 5.2 13.1 3.7 9.4 − 0.8 − 7.0 −11.6 0.9 2.8          June
 German contribution (euro billion) 2
0.9 −18.1 − 1.5 − 0.6 − 9.1 − 2.5 − 6.5 6.4 2.1 0.1 − 2.1 1.1 1999          Jan.
0.9 −36.8 6.9 2.9 2.0 0.3 1.7 − 1.9 2.8 0.5 2.5 1.0          Feb.
− 1.0 44.7 0.4 − 3.4 − 1.4 2.4 − 3.8 0.2 − 2.2 − 0.2 2.1 1.9          Mar.
0.1 − 8.3 8.4 3.1 7.6 0.4 7.2 − 5.5 1.1 − 0.5 3.4 2.3          Apr.
0.0 −12.1 22.4 13.9 11.8 − 0.1 11.9 − 0.1 2.2 0.2 3.5 4.8          May
1.1 10.2 1.8 3.0 10.3 0.1 10.2 − 6.2 − 1.0 0.1 2.1 − 3.4          June
− 0.6 29.4 − 3.6 − 3.1 − 4.6 1.6 − 6.2 2.1 − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.8 0.9          July
0.5 −34.3 3.0 − 0.8 − 1.0 − 1.0 0.0 1.8 − 1.6 0.5 4.7 − 1.4          Aug.
− 0.4 2.0 8.1 1.8 6.0 0.3 5.7 − 2.6 − 1.5 − 0.4 4.9 1.9          Sep.
0.7 2.2 9.1 5.4 0.8 0.2 0.6 6.1 − 1.5 0.7 2.1 0.9          Oct.
− 0.4 −47.3 36.8 25.4 27.8 1.2 26.6 0.8 − 3.2 − 0.1 13.0 − 1.4          Nov.
0.1 −13.3 21.3 16.9 − 6.7 4.8 −11.6 14.0 9.7 0.3 1.9 2.2          Dec.
− 1.2 23.1 −16.0 −12.6 2.0 − 5.0 6.9 −10.3 − 4.3 − 0.1 − 4.8 1.5 2000          Jan.
0.8 5.3 7.5 1.7 4.7 − 0.7 5.4 2.0 − 5.0 − 0.8 5.0 1.7          Feb.
− 0.6 16.0 − 7.8 − 9.6 − 4.4 0.9 − 5.3 1.2 − 6.4 − 0.2 − 1.0 3.1          Mar.
0.4 − 4.8 1.0 0.9 10.8 0.4 10.4 − 3.7 − 6.1 1.8 − 3.1 1.4          Apr.
− 0.5 10.4 − 4.6 − 6.5 − 8.5 − 0.1 − 8.4 9.2 − 7.2 0.2 2.4 − 0.7          May
6.2 −24.2 − 6.4 − 9.8 − 0.4 0.1 − 0.5 − 2.5 − 6.9 − 1.0 6.9 − 2.4          June
 German contribution (DM billion) 2
1.7 −35.4 − 3.0 − 1.1 −17.7 − 5.0 −12.8 12.6 4.0 0.2 − 4.1 2.1 1999          Jan.
1.7 −71.9 13.5 5.6 4.0 0.6 3.4 − 3.8 5.5 1.0 4.9 2.0          Feb.
− 1.9 87.4 0.9 − 6.6 − 2.8 4.6 − 7.4 0.4 − 4.2 − 0.3 4.1 3.6          Mar.
0.1 −16.2 16.3 6.2 14.9 0.7 14.2 −10.8 2.1 − 1.0 6.7 4.5          Apr.
0.0 −23.7 43.7 27.2 23.1 − 0.2 23.3 − 0.2 4.2 0.4 6.9 9.4          May
2.2 20.0 3.6 5.9 20.1 0.2 19.9 −12.2 − 2.0 0.2 4.1 − 6.6          June
− 1.2 57.4 − 7.1 − 6.1 − 9.0 3.1 −12.1 4.2 − 1.2 − 1.1 − 1.7 1.7          July
1.0 −67.2 5.9 − 1.6 − 2.0 − 2.0 0.0 3.4 − 3.1 1.1 9.1 − 2.7          Aug.
− 0.7 3.9 15.8 3.5 11.7 0.5 11.2 − 5.2 − 3.0 − 0.9 9.5 3.6          Sep.
1.3 4.3 17.8 10.5 1.5 0.4 1.1 11.9 − 2.9 1.3 4.2 1.8          Oct.
− 0.8 −92.5 72.0 49.7 54.4 2.4 52.0 1.6 − 6.3 − 0.3 25.3 − 2.7          Nov.
0.3 −25.9 41.7 33.1 −13.2 9.4 −22.6 27.4 18.9 0.6 3.7 4.3          Dec.
− 2.4 45.2 −31.3 −24.7 3.8 − 9.7 13.5 −20.2 − 8.3 − 0.2 − 9.3 3.0 2000          Jan.
1.6 10.4 14.7 3.3 9.2 − 1.4 10.6 3.9 − 9.8 − 1.6 9.7 3.2          Feb.
− 1.1 31.3 −15.2 −18.8 − 8.6 1.8 −10.4 2.4 −12.5 − 0.4 − 2.0 6.0          Mar.
0.7 − 9.3 1.9 1.7 21.0 0.8 20.2 − 7.3 −12.0 3.6 − 6.2 2.7          Apr.
− 1.0 20.4 − 9.1 −12.6 −16.5 − 0.1 −16.4 18.0 −14.1 0.3 4.6 − 1.4          May
12.2 −47.3 −12.5 −19.2 − 0.8 0.2 − 1.0 − 4.9 −13.5 − 2.0 13.4 − 4.7          June
area. —8For the European monetary union: including the counterparts of circulation denominated in Deutsche Mark, excluding German MFIs cash in
monetary liabilities of central governments. —9The German contributions hand denominated in all currencies of euro-area member states. —11For
to the Eurosystem ’s monetary aggregates should on no account be the European monetary union: including the monetary liabilities of central
interpreted as national monetary aggregates, and are therefore not governments (Post Office, Treasury). —12For the German contribution: up
comparable to the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2 or M3. — to December 1998, with maturities of less than 4 years. —13In Germany,
10Excluding euro-area MFIs cash in hand denominated in euros or in only savings deposits. —14For the German contribution: data collected
currencies of the euro area; for the German contribution: currency in separately only from 1999. 
9*II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
 
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
  
 
Assets  3 
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area  4 
Enterprises and individuals Public authorities
Claims
Total Shares and on non-assets  
3  or Debt other Debt euro-area Other
Period Total Total Advances  4 securities  5 equities Total Advances  4 securities  6 residents assets liabilities  7 
 European monetary union (euro billion) 1
 
1999         Jan. 10,936.7 7,670.2 5,637.9 5,109.3 209.2 319.4 2,032.3 839.5 1,192.8 2,049.4 1,217.1
         Feb. 10,877.8 7,687.6 5,640.1 5,111.3 202.1 326.7 2,047.5 839.7 1,207.8 1,958.9 1,231.4         Mar. 10,966.3 7,761.7 5,700.8 5,158.2 195.3 347.3 2,060.9 837.2 1,223.7 2,053.6 1,151.0
         Apr. 10,969.5 7,791.3 5,741.9 5,179.5 202.5 359.9 2,049.4 830.0 1,219.3 2,058.6 1,119.6
         May 10,976.1 7,859.9 5,793.6 5,211.9 208.8 372.9 2,066.3 830.2 1,236.1 2,009.4 1,106.8         June 11,221.3 7,935.5 5,882.8 5,305.5 213.3 364.1 2,052.7 836.9 1,215.8 2,145.6 1,140.2
         July 11,160.6 7,951.2 5,918.5 5,340.2 216.7 361.6 2,032.7 828.8 1,204.0 2,082.1 1,127.3
         Aug. 11,119.1 7,953.7 5,920.6 5,335.3 224.9 360.4 2,033.1 824.8 1,208.3 2,056.0 1,109.4         Sep. 11,182.1 8,004.0 5,949.8 5,374.9 218.5 356.4 2,054.2 829.8 1,224.3 2,081.3 1,096.9
         Oct. 11,333.1 8,070.9 5,995.3 5,421.3 216.3 357.7 2,075.6 839.1 1,236.5 2,118.9 1,143.3
         Nov. 11,540.3 8,168.9 6,082.4 5,486.0 224.2 372.2 2,086.4 852.1 1,234.4 2,175.0 1,196.4         Dec. 11,516.6 8,193.0 6,138.1 5,517.1 227.7 393.3 2,054.9 847.2 1,207.7 2,103.0 1,220.6
2000         Jan. 11,641.3 8,246.6 6,188.5 5,563.1 228.6 396.9 2,058.0 839.3 1,218.7 2,148.2 1,246.5
         Feb. 11,754.3 8,305.4 6,243.2 5,597.1 234.7 411.4 2,062.2 834.7 1,227.5 2,186.1 1,262.9         Mar. 11,935.1 8,401.8 6,345.5 5,667.5 228.8 449.3 2,056.3 838.7 1,217.5 2,243.6 1,289.7
         Apr. 12,137.3 8,462.7 6,426.5 5,727.0 236.9 462.6 2,036.2 840.8 1,195.4 2,343.1 1,331.4
         May 12,158.4 8,494.9 6,476.2 5,755.5 244.0 476.7 2,018.7 834.4 1,184.3 2,331.4 1,332.0         June 12,154.0 8,497.2 6,502.7 5,817.3 242.3 443.1 1,994.4 830.8 1,163.6 2,328.5 1,328.3
 German contribution (euro billion) 2
1999         Jan. 3,673.8 2,940.8 2,235.5 2,010.4 48.5 176.5 705.3 505.5 199.9 560.9 172.1
         Feb. 3,657.5 2,953.3 2,241.9 2,016.0 46.5 179.3 711.4 510.2 201.3 531.0 173.2         Mar. 3,724.4 2,983.5 2,270.4 2,025.0 49.0 196.4 713.2 508.4 204.8 565.4 175.4
         Apr. 3,746.8 2,999.3 2,282.9 2,029.7 49.1 204.1 716.4 506.5 209.9 574.7 172.8
         May 3,771.8 3,027.4 2,296.4 2,038.2 48.2 210.0 731.0 505.9 225.1 567.0 177.4         June 3,791.1 3,024.3 2,301.5 2,060.1 48.6 192.8 722.9 508.5 214.4 586.1 180.7
         July 3,810.3 3,032.8 2,308.1 2,066.2 48.1 193.7 724.7 507.4 217.3 604.1 173.4
         Aug. 3,810.9 3,038.0 2,314.8 2,071.5 49.6 193.6 723.2 506.7 216.5 594.2 178.7         Sep. 3,835.7 3,062.0 2,330.3 2,085.2 48.4 196.6 731.7 507.2 224.5 596.9 176.9
         Oct. 3,877.3 3,089.9 2,341.2 2,095.7 47.6 197.9 748.6 517.7 230.9 603.6 183.8
         Nov. 3,923.9 3,114.4 2,361.0 2,109.6 47.5 203.9 753.4 521.4 232.0 612.7 196.7         Dec. 3,941.9 3,131.8 2,391.7 2,129.3 46.4 216.0 740.1 513.6 226.5 612.2 197.9
2000         Jan. 3,967.7 3,152.3 2,400.0 2,136.2 45.6 218.1 752.3 515.4 237.0 618.7 196.7
         Feb. 4,003.5 3,167.2 2,414.0 2,144.5 47.2 222.3 753.2 510.7 242.5 638.3 198.0         Mar. 4,057.5 3,206.7 2,457.7 2,156.5 46.1 255.1 749.0 512.1 236.8 652.0 198.8
         Apr. 4,102.0 3,223.7 2,474.5 2,167.6 46.3 260.6 749.2 514.0 235.2 674.2 204.1
         May 4,126.1 3,235.6 2,489.9 2,174.9 46.9 268.1 745.7 514.3 231.4 680.7 209.7         June 4,063.5 3,201.7 2,463.0 2,181.0 48.6 233.4 738.6 510.4 228.2 655.6 206.2
 German contribution (DM billion) 2
1999         Jan. 7,185.4 5,751.7 4,372.2 3,932.1 94.9 345.3 1,379.5 988.6 390.9 1,097.0 336.6
         Feb. 7,153.4 5,776.1 4,384.7 3,943.0 91.0 350.8 1,391.4 997.8 393.6 1,038.5 338.8         Mar. 7,284.3 5,835.3 4,440.4 3,960.5 95.8 384.1 1,394.9 994.4 400.5 1,105.9 343.1
         Apr. 7,328.2 5,866.2 4,465.0 3,969.8 96.1 399.1 1,401.2 990.7 410.6 1,124.1 337.9
         May 7,376.9 5,921.1 4,491.4 3,986.3 94.3 410.8 1,429.7 989.5 440.2 1,108.9 346.9         June 7,414.8 5,915.1 4,501.3 4,029.3 95.0 377.0 1,413.8 994.5 419.3 1,146.3 353.4
         July 7,452.3 5,931.6 4,514.2 4,041.2 94.1 378.9 1,417.4 992.4 425.0 1,181.5 339.2
         Aug. 7,453.5 5,941.7 4,527.3 4,051.5 97.1 378.7 1,414.5 991.0 423.4 1,162.2 349.6         Sep. 7,502.1 5,988.7 4,557.6 4,078.4 94.7 384.5 1,431.1 991.9 439.1 1,167.4 346.0
         Oct. 7,583.3 6,043.3 4,579.0 4,098.8 93.1 387.1 1,464.2 1,012.6 451.6 1,180.5 359.5
         Nov. 7,674.4 6,091.3 4,617.7 4,126.1 92.8 398.8 1,473.6 1,019.8 453.8 1,198.4 384.7         Dec. 7,709.6 6,125.3 4,677.8 4,164.6 90.8 422.4 1,447.5 1,004.5 443.0 1,197.3 387.0
2000         Jan. 7,760.1 6,165.4 4,693.9 4,178.0 89.3 426.7 1,471.4 1,008.0 463.5 1,210.0 384.8
         Feb. 7,830.2 6,194.6 4,721.4 4,194.3 92.2 434.9 1,473.2 998.8 474.4 1,248.3 387.3         Mar. 7,935.9 6,271.8 4,806.9 4,217.8 90.1 498.9 1,464.8 1,001.7 463.2 1,275.2 388.9
         Apr. 8,022.9 6,305.0 4,839.7 4,239.5 90.5 509.7 1,465.4 1,005.3 460.1 1,318.6 399.3
         May 8,069.9 6,328.3 4,869.8 4,253.7 91.7 524.3 1,458.5 1,006.0 452.6 1,331.3 410.2         June 7,947.5 6,261.9 4,817.3 4,265.6 95.1 456.5 1,444.7 998.3 446.3 1,282.3 403.3
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building holdings. —4For the German contribution: up to December 1998, including
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank loans on a trust basis and bill-based lending instead of bill holdings. —
and central banks (the Eurosystem). —1Source: ECB. —2Owing to changes 5Including money market paper of enterprises. —6Including Treasury bills
in the definitions of the items and differences in the range of reporting and other money market paper of public authorities. —7For the German
institutions, the figures are not comparable with those published for contribution: up to December 1998, including liabilities incurred in theGermany up to the end of 1998. —3For the German contribution: up to banks own name but on behalf of third parties and including endorsement
December 1998, including trust funds and bill-based lending instead of bill liabilities on rediscounted bills. —8Excluding the cash in hand (in euros) of
10*II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
    
 
Liabilities  7 
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area  9 
Enterprises and individuals
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  14 
over
Currency 1 year
in of which: up to up to over up to over
Total in euros  10 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years  11 3 months 3 months  15   Period circulation  8 2 years  9, 12, 13  
European monetary union (euro billion) 1
 
313.2 4,844.8 4,559.9 4,586.0 1,365.4 770.3 73.8 1,068.6 1,185.4 122.4 1999          Jan.
312.8 4,824.2 4,533.7 4,555.9 1,337.8 757.0 72.0 1,080.3 1,187.7 121.1          Feb.317.4 4,824.4 4,540.9 4,573.6 1,349.8 759.7 72.0 1,085.7 1,186.1 120.2          Mar.
319.5 4,827.8 4,556.9 4,589.7 1,360.1 759.9 72.0 1,088.2 1,191.6 117.9          Apr.
321.2 4,852.9 4,576.4 4,606.9 1,392.2 747.0 72.0 1,085.7 1,195.6 114.4          May323.7 4,893.8 4,610.6 4,641.6 1,436.5 722.7 72.6 1,095.4 1,201.1 113.4          June
331.7 4,910.0 4,618.0 4,650.8 1,424.9 734.6 74.2 1,100.5 1,205.5 111.1          July
326.2 4,891.9 4,591.9 4,627.9 1,395.8 735.9 73.8 1,106.6 1,205.5 110.2          Aug.327.1 4,901.4 4,609.8 4,642.7 1,424.6 726.4 70.6 1,108.4 1,202.3 110.4          Sep.
329.4 4,922.6 4,626.5 4,661.0 1,425.6 740.5 71.5 1,113.7 1,199.9 109.8          Oct.
329.9 4,971.4 4,658.5 4,691.4 1,456.4 736.4 71.5 1,122.5 1,194.7 109.8          Nov.349.6 5,047.6 4,743.6 4,769.6 1,488.3 748.2 76.5 1,133.7 1,211.0 111.9          Dec.
332.7 5,053.8 4,751.8 4,784.7 1,514.9 734.1 77.0 1,135.8 1,211.9 111.0 2000          Jan.
330.9 5,064.6 4,752.5 4,782.8 1,508.3 746.8 77.3 1,137.6 1,200.8 112.0          Feb.334.3 5,056.0 4,754.5 4,790.1 1,519.7 753.3 77.8 1,136.4 1,190.1 112.8          Mar.
337.4 5,093.7 4,783.2 4,820.8 1,548.8 762.2 77.7 1,136.7 1,183.1 112.3          Apr.
337.2 5,071.8 4,781.7 4,814.4 1,536.2 776.0 76.7 1,138.1 1,173.8 113.6          May340.9 5,102.6 4,782.2 4,810.2 1,538.7 775.1 76.4 1,138.0 1,167.0 115.1          June
 German contribution (euro billion) 2
120.2 1,932.9 1,855.6 1,820.5 371.7 210.3 8.1 608.2 501.2 121.0 1999          Jan.
120.5 1,945.4 1,864.0 1,831.3 371.4 209.6 7.9 619.1 503.9 119.4          Feb.122.9 1,942.0 1,862.2 1,831.2 370.2 209.1 8.0 623.1 502.1 118.7          Mar.
123.2 1,942.9 1,862.9 1,833.4 377.4 204.5 8.2 623.8 503.1 116.4          Apr.
123.1 1,952.3 1,871.4 1,837.1 388.2 200.0 8.2 622.7 505.1 112.9          May123.2 1,957.6 1,872.3 1,840.6 397.8 193.5 8.4 625.5 504.1 111.3          June
124.8 1,952.2 1,868.5 1,837.5 393.1 195.3 8.5 628.0 503.4 109.2          July
123.8 1,955.5 1,870.2 1,838.5 392.0 196.3 8.4 631.6 501.9 108.3          Aug.124.1 1,959.2 1,874.7 1,843.4 398.5 194.2 8.2 633.0 500.5 109.1          Sep.
124.2 1,966.9 1,880.9 1,849.7 397.9 201.0 9.1 634.1 499.2 108.4          Oct.
125.5 1,995.1 1,908.8 1,875.2 424.7 198.7 9.4 637.8 496.0 108.5          Nov.130.3 2,012.9 1,927.8 1,887.5 412.6 208.3 9.6 640.7 505.6 110.6          Dec.
125.3 2,006.0 1,921.9 1,886.4 421.5 200.6 9.9 643.2 501.4 109.7 2000          Jan.
124.6 2,012.3 1,928.4 1,892.0 427.0 201.5 9.3 646.9 496.4 110.8          Feb.125.5 2,002.5 1,917.4 1,884.3 422.5 203.1 9.7 647.4 490.1 111.6          Mar.
125.9 2,004.8 1,916.8 1,884.7 430.8 199.6 10.3 648.8 484.0 111.1          Apr.
125.9 1,998.8 1,912.1 1,877.3 423.0 204.8 10.6 649.6 476.9 112.4          May126.0 1,996.9 1,905.3 1,866.5 419.3 202.4 10.5 650.3 470.1 113.9          June
 German contribution (DM billion) 2
235.1 3,780.5 3,629.3 3,560.7 727.0 411.3 15.8 1,189.6 980.2 236.7 1999          Jan.
235.7 3,804.9 3,645.7 3,581.7 726.5 410.0 15.4 1,210.8 985.6 233.5          Feb.240.3 3,798.2 3,642.1 3,581.5 724.0 408.9 15.7 1,218.7 982.0 232.2          Mar.
241.0 3,799.9 3,643.4 3,585.7 738.1 400.0 16.0 1,220.0 983.9 227.7          Apr.
240.8 3,818.4 3,660.2 3,593.0 759.3 391.2 16.0 1,217.8 987.9 220.9          May241.0 3,828.7 3,661.9 3,599.8 778.1 378.5 16.4 1,223.4 985.9 217.7          June
244.1 3,818.1 3,654.4 3,593.9 768.8 382.0 16.5 1,228.4 984.6 213.6          July
242.1 3,824.6 3,657.7 3,595.9 766.7 384.0 16.4 1,235.2 981.7 211.9          Aug.242.6 3,831.8 3,666.7 3,605.4 779.3 379.8 16.0 1,238.0 978.9 213.3          Sep.
243.0 3,847.0 3,678.7 3,617.7 778.2 393.2 17.9 1,240.1 976.3 212.0          Oct.
245.4 3,902.1 3,733.3 3,667.6 830.7 388.6 18.4 1,247.5 970.1 212.2          Nov.254.8 3,936.9 3,770.5 3,691.5 807.0 407.3 18.8 1,253.1 988.9 216.3          Dec.
245.1 3,923.5 3,758.9 3,689.5 824.5 392.4 19.4 1,258.0 980.7 214.6 2000          Jan.
243.7 3,935.7 3,771.5 3,700.3 835.1 394.0 18.3 1,265.3 971.0 216.6          Feb.245.5 3,916.6 3,750.2 3,685.4 826.4 397.1 18.9 1,266.2 958.5 218.2          Mar.
246.3 3,921.0 3,748.9 3,686.1 842.6 390.3 20.2 1,268.9 946.7 217.3          Apr.
246.2 3,909.2 3,739.7 3,671.7 827.2 400.5 20.7 1,270.6 932.8 219.9          May246.4 3,905.6 3,726.4 3,650.5 820.0 395.8 20.6 1,271.8 919.5 222.8          June
MFIs; for the German contribution: currency in circulation denominated in 4 years. —12For the German contribution: up to December 1998, with
Deutsche Mark, excluding German MFIs cash in hand denominated in all maturities of 4 years and more. —13For the German contribution: from
currencies of euro-area member states. —9For the German contribution: 1999 including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see table
up to December 1998, including liabilities arising from loans on a trust IV.12). —14In Germany, only saving deposits. —15For the German
basis. —10Excluding central governments deposits. —11For the German contribution: up to the end of 1998 including deposits under savings and
contribution: up to December 1998, with maturities of 1 year to less than loan contracts (see also footnote 13). 
11*II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
 
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (cont ’d)*
 
 
 
Liabilities (cont ’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont ’d) 3 
Public authorities Repo transactions
with counterparties
Other public authorities in the euro area  9 
With agreed At agreed Money
maturities of notice of  7 market
fund
over of which: certificates1 year Enterprises and money
Central up to up to over up to over and market paper
Period governments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years  
4 3 months 3 months  8 Total individuals (net)  10, 11  2 years  3, 5, 6  
 European monetary union (euro billion) 1
 
1999         Jan. 132.3 126.5 50.4 42.7 0.9 27.8 4.0 0.7 171.4 169.3 340.0
         Feb. 141.2 127.0 51.0 42.9 1.0 27.5 3.8 0.7 183.7 180.3 355.4         Mar. 133.4 117.4 45.8 39.4 0.8 27.2 3.6 0.7 178.3 175.4 366.1
         Apr. 115.8 122.3 51.0 39.1 1.0 26.7 3.7 0.7 171.7 168.5 387.6
         May 120.7 125.3 50.6 42.6 0.8 26.7 3.9 0.7 172.4 169.7 389.1         June 125.0 127.2 52.0 43.1 0.9 26.5 3.9 0.8 166.4 164.6 391.5
         July 134.9 124.3 49.8 42.8 0.9 26.1 3.9 0.8 163.7 160.8 383.3
         Aug. 137.9 126.2 49.9 44.8 1.0 26.0 3.7 0.8 162.6 160.0 396.6         Sep. 133.2 125.5 49.8 43.9 1.0 26.4 3.6 0.8 160.6 157.9 403.5
         Oct. 135.0 126.6 51.3 44.0 1.0 26.0 3.5 0.8 157.5 153.9 410.5
         Nov. 146.0 134.1 55.3 47.1 1.2 26.2 3.4 0.9 158.6 155.8 428.9         Dec. 142.0 136.0 52.8 51.2 1.1 26.6 3.4 0.9 144.2 142.0 425.2
2000         Jan. 133.6 135.5 55.3 47.5 1.6 26.8 3.3 0.9 154.9 150.0 430.1
         Feb. 144.4 137.4 54.8 49.3 1.8 27.5 3.3 0.8 159.4 155.2 449.1         Mar. 130.2 135.8 52.1 50.6 1.7 27.2 3.3 0.9 177.1 173.8 461.7
         Apr. 131.6 141.4 58.6 49.7 1.9 27.2 3.2 0.9 179.5 176.0 510.4
         May 113.9 143.5 56.0 54.5 1.9 27.3 3.1 0.8 180.8 175.3 517.1         June 144.5 147.9 61.5 53.7 1.7 27.3 2.9 0.8 169.2 164.0 522.3
 German contribution (euro billion) 2
1999         Jan. 45.8 66.6 11.5 26.5 0.3 24.8 2.7 0.7 1.5 1.5 34.5
         Feb. 46.7 67.5 13.7 25.5 0.3 24.5 2.8 0.7 2.0 2.0 37.0         Mar. 45.5 65.3 11.3 26.3 0.3 24.1 2.6 0.7 1.9 1.9 39.2
         Apr. 45.6 64.0 11.4 25.3 0.3 23.6 2.7 0.7 1.3 1.3 42.7
         May 45.6 69.6 12.5 29.7 0.3 23.6 2.8 0.7 1.5 1.5 46.2         June 46.7 70.3 13.2 29.8 0.3 23.5 2.8 0.7 1.6 1.6 48.4
         July 46.1 68.6 11.5 30.0 0.3 23.2 2.8 0.7 1.0 1.0 47.4
         Aug. 46.6 70.4 12.8 30.8 0.4 23.0 2.7 0.7 1.6 1.6 52.2         Sep. 46.2 69.5 12.0 30.5 0.4 23.4 2.6 0.7 1.2 1.2 56.9
         Oct. 46.9 70.3 13.3 30.4 0.4 23.0 2.5 0.7 1.8 1.8 59.1
         Nov. 46.5 73.4 13.3 33.4 0.4 23.1 2.4 0.8 1.7 1.7 72.2         Dec. 46.7 78.8 13.9 37.6 0.4 23.7 2.4 0.8 2.0 2.0 74.1
2000         Jan. 45.4 74.2 12.1 34.3 0.9 23.9 2.4 0.8 1.9 1.9 69.3
         Feb. 46.2 74.1 12.0 34.2 1.0 23.8 2.4 0.8 1.1 1.1 74.3         Mar. 45.8 72.4 11.3 33.5 0.9 23.6 2.3 0.8 0.9 0.9 73.6
         Apr. 46.1 74.0 13.8 32.6 1.0 23.5 2.3 0.8 2.7 2.7 70.7
         May 45.6 75.8 12.0 36.3 1.0 23.6 2.2 0.8 2.9 2.9 72.8         June 51.9 78.5 15.0 36.2 1.0 23.5 2.1 0.8 1.8 1.8 79.6
 German contribution (DM billion) 2
1999         Jan. 89.6 130.2 22.5 51.8 0.5 48.6 5.4 1.4 2.9 2.9 67.4
         Feb. 91.3 132.0 26.8 49.9 0.5 48.0 5.4 1.4 4.0 4.0 72.4         Mar. 89.0 127.7 22.1 51.5 0.6 47.1 5.0 1.4 3.6 3.6 76.7
         Apr. 89.1 125.1 22.3 49.4 0.6 46.2 5.2 1.4 2.6 2.6 83.5
         May 89.1 136.2 24.5 58.1 0.6 46.2 5.5 1.4 3.0 3.0 90.4         June 91.3 137.5 25.8 58.3 0.6 46.0 5.4 1.4 3.1 3.1 94.6
         July 90.1 134.1 22.6 58.6 0.6 45.4 5.5 1.4 2.0 2.0 92.8
         Aug. 91.1 137.6 25.0 60.2 0.8 45.1 5.3 1.4 3.1 3.1 102.0         Sep. 90.4 136.0 23.4 59.6 0.7 45.8 5.1 1.4 2.2 2.2 111.3
         Oct. 91.7 137.5 26.0 59.5 0.8 45.0 4.8 1.4 3.6 3.6 115.6
         Nov. 91.0 143.5 26.0 65.3 0.7 45.2 4.7 1.5 3.3 3.3 141.2         Dec. 91.2 154.1 27.1 73.5 0.9 46.3 4.8 1.6 3.9 3.9 144.9
2000         Jan. 88.8 145.1 23.6 67.0 1.7 46.7 4.6 1.6 3.6 3.6 135.6
         Feb. 90.4 144.9 23.5 66.8 1.9 46.5 4.6 1.5 2.1 2.1 145.3         Mar. 89.5 141.7 22.2 65.4 1.8 46.1 4.6 1.5 1.7 1.7 143.9
         Apr. 90.2 144.7 27.0 63.8 2.0 46.0 4.4 1.5 5.3 5.3 138.2
         May 89.3 148.3 23.4 71.0 2.0 46.1 4.3 1.5 5.6 5.6 142.4         June 101.4 153.6 29.3 70.8 2.0 45.9 4.1 1.5 3.6 3.6 155.7
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building December 1998, with maturities of 4 years and more. —6For the German
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank contribution: from 1999 including deposits under savings and loan contrac ts
and central banks (the Eurosystem). —1Source: ECB. —2Owing to changes (see table IV.12). —7In Germany: only savings deposits. —8For the
in the definitions of the items and differences in the range of reporting German contribution: up to the end of 1998 including deposits underinstitutions, the figures are not comparable with those published for savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 6). —9For the German
Germany up to the end of 1998. —3For the German contribution: up to contribution: data collected separately from 1999 only; up to December
December 1998, including liabilities arising from loans on a trust basis. — 1998, included in the deposits with agreed maturities of up to 1 year. —
4For the German contribution: up to December 1998, with maturities of 10Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the German contribution: excluding
1 year to less than 4 years. —5For the German contribution: up to
12*II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
    
 
 Memo item
Monetary aggregates  13 
Debt securities issued (net)  10 
With maturities of
Monetaryliabilitiesof central
Liabilities govern-
of which: over to non- Excess Monetary mentsdenom- 1 year euro-area Capital of capital (Postinated up to up to over and inter-MFI Other formation Office,
residents
Total in euros 1 year  11 2 years 2 years 12 reserves liabilities liabilities M1  14 M2 15 M3 16 17   Period Treasury)  18 
European monetary union (euro billion) 1
 
1,417.3 1,234.6 20.6 34.0 1,362.8 1,682.6 755.5 − 21.8 1,433.7 1,796.8 3,935.2 4,501.1 3,337.7 129.0 1999          Jan.
1,433.6 1,239.1 21.6 33.9 1,378.1 1,643.0 753.5 − 7.2 1,378.8 1,765.8 3,891.7 4,486.4 3,361.3 125.7          Feb.
1,436.6 1,240.4 17.1 31.8 1,387.7 1,715.9 767.2 11.7 1,348.6 1,786.5 3,909.4 4,502.6 3,388.7 134.7          Mar.
1,453.4 1,252.4 16.2 36.6 1,400.6 1,731.0 778.0 0.4 1,300.1 1,800.9 3,929.0 4,541.1 3,412.2 131.0          Apr.
1,463.8 1,257.1 15.0 42.6 1,406.2 1,720.7 782.6 15.5 1,257.8 1,831.9 3,955.1 4,574.2 3,416.3 129.1          May1,472.4 1,259.0 19.3 39.9 1,413.2 1,837.9 793.3 12.6 1,329.5 1,874.8 3,980.8 4,598.0 3,442.7 124.4          June
1,476.8 1,263.6 21.6 40.0 1,415.1 1,770.4 797.9 13.7 1,313.2 1,875.3 3,998.8 4,607.4 3,451.4 130.5          July
1,484.8 1,267.2 23.4 39.7 1,421.7 1,776.9 796.6 1.0 1,282.4 1,839.8 3,966.2 4,588.5 3,462.0 129.6          Aug.1,505.2 1,284.4 20.8 54.7 1,429.7 1,777.3 807.1 16.2 1,283.7 1,864.6 3,974.5 4,614.1 3,482.9 125.3          Sep.
1,518.5 1,292.8 19.8 54.3 1,444.5 1,847.6 816.3 21.7 1,309.1 1,871.4 3,994.3 4,636.2 3,511.1 127.6          Oct.
1,529.6 1,306.7 24.0 51.6 1,454.0 1,909.0 821.4 18.4 1,373.1 1,905.8 4,023.0 4,686.1 3,534.8 127.0          Nov.1,539.8 1,314.0 33.2 54.8 1,451.8 1,824.5 869.2 14.6 1,301.9 1,959.0 4,119.5 4,776.9 3,594.0 137.3          Dec.
1,538.6 1,303.5 31.1 55.1 1,452.5 1,909.6 885.2 − 6.1 1,342.4 1,970.4 4,114.9 4,786.1 3,612.2 136.6 2000          Jan.
1,553.8 1,314.3 32.3 57.6 1,463.9 1,939.1 889.1 7.8 1,360.5 1,960.0 4,108.2 4,806.7 3,630.8 135.1          Feb.1,556.8 1,313.1 29.0 60.8 1,467.1 2,066.3 905.1 − 15.4 1,393.1 1,971.8 4,117.8 4,846.4 3,649.4 134.8          Mar.
1,576.5 1,320.9 25.4 63.5 1,487.6 2,143.6 914.9 − 33.4 1,414.8 2,010.8 4,157.3 4,936.0 3,679.5 134.8          Apr.
1,578.3 1,331.3 23.5 63.1 1,491.6 2,148.8 916.1 − 19.3 1,427.5 1,992.4 4,148.1 4,932.6 3,687.6 132.8          May
1,583.0 1,335.9 27.9 59.2 1,495.9 2,047.5 927.3 5.1 1,456.0 2,004.3 4,150.6 4,929.2 3,704.4 132.8          June
 Germany contribution (euro billion) 2
674.8 603.7 − 10.5 664.2 415.2 243.6 − 55.0 306.2 503.5 1,252.5 1,299.0 1,662.7 −1999         Jan.
687.0 609.1 − 11.6 675.4 410.5 246.9 − 67.6 275.6 505.6 1,255.6 1,306.3 1,686.0 −         Feb.
694.1 616.5 − 13.5 680.6 418.3 252.2 − 42.5 296.3 504.4 1,252.8 1,307.3 1,699.4 −         Mar.
707.7 627.6 − 18.5 689.1 429.2 256.8 − 37.9 281.0 512.0 1,256.0 1,318.5 1,710.5 −         Apr.
715.6 632.7 − 23.3 692.2 436.8 260.5 − 33.4 269.1 523.9 1,270.0 1,341.1 1,712.6 −         May
714.5 631.3 − 20.0 694.5 434.6 262.4 − 27.7 276.6 534.2 1,273.1 1,343.1 1,717.8 −         June
717.7 634.0 − 20.9 696.8 432.0 263.8 − 8.4 279.9 529.4 1,269.7 1,339.0 1,721.8 −         July
723.1 636.9 − 19.5 703.6 448.0 264.2 − 41.4 284.0 528.6 1,269.1 1,342.3 1,731.5 −         Aug.
740.9 656.0 − 21.5 719.4 441.5 269.2 − 48.2 291.0 534.5 1,270.8 1,350.4 1,754.8 −         Sep.
744.3 657.4 − 22.5 721.9 457.7 271.5 − 45.6 297.3 535.4 1,278.0 1,361.4 1,759.6 −         Oct.
749.3 666.1 − 21.2 728.2 489.3 272.6 − 77.1 295.3 563.5 1,303.8 1,398.8 1,771.0 −         Nov.
747.2 665.2 − 23.4 723.9 494.1 277.0 − 88.5 292.8 556.8 1,320.8 1,420.2 1,776.7 −         Dec.
744.0 656.1 − 24.9 719.1 515.5 279.4 − 62.5 288.7 558.9 1,308.4 1,404.5 1,776.0 −2000         Jan.
748.5 661.1 − 26.6 722.0 530.5 280.1 − 53.0 285.2 563.6 1,308.4 1,410.3 1,784.3 −         Feb.
754.3 665.0 − 29.7 724.6 568.7 284.9 − 43.1 290.2 559.4 1,299.0 1,403.1 1,792.8 −         Mar.
768.2 673.4 − 31.2 737.0 597.2 286.0 − 47.7 294.2 570.5 1,300.4 1,404.9 1,807.2 −         Apr.
772.3 681.4 − 30.4 741.9 602.3 287.3 − 34.3 298.1 560.8 1,292.6 1,398.7 1,815.6 −         May
769.4 676.6 − 28.0 741.4 562.9 290.6 − 67.0 303.3 560.2 1,282.5 1,391.9 1,820.5 −         June
 Germany contribution (DM billion) 2
1,319.7 1,180.8 − 20.6 1,299.1 812.1 476.4 −107.6 598.8 984.7 2,449.6 2,540.6 3,251.9 −1999         Jan.
1,343.7 1,191.3 − 22.7 1,321.0 803.0 483.0 −132.2 538.9 989.0 2,455.8 2,554.9 3,297.5 −         Feb.
1,357.5 1,205.7 − 26.4 1,331.0 818.2 493.4 − 83.0 579.5 986.4 2,450.2 2,556.9 3,323.7 −         Mar.
1,384.1 1,227.5 − 36.2 1,347.8 839.4 502.2 − 74.2 549.7 1,001.4 2,456.5 2,578.8 3,345.4 −         Apr.
1,399.5 1,237.4 − 45.7 1,353.9 854.4 509.5 − 65.3 526.3 1,024.6 2,483.8 2,622.9 3,349.6 −         May
1,397.4 1,234.7 − 39.1 1,358.2 850.0 513.1 − 54.1 540.9 1,044.9 2,489.9 2,626.8 3,359.8 −         June
1,403.7 1,239.9 − 40.8 1,362.9 844.8 515.9 − 16.5 547.5 1,035.5 2,483.3 2,618.9 3,367.5 −         July
1,414.3 1,245.7 − 38.2 1,376.2 876.2 516.7 − 81.0 555.4 1,033.8 2,482.1 2,625.3 3,386.5 −         Aug.
1,449.2 1,283.1 − 42.0 1,407.1 863.5 526.5 − 94.2 569.1 1,045.4 2,485.5 2,641.1 3,432.2 −         Sep.
1,455.8 1,285.8 − 43.9 1,411.9 895.2 530.9 − 89.3 581.5 1,047.2 2,499.6 2,662.7 3,441.4 −         Oct.
1,465.5 1,302.7 − 41.4 1,424.2 957.0 533.1 −150.7 577.6 1,102.1 2,550.0 2,735.8 3,463.7 −         Nov.
1,461.5 1,300.9 − 45.7 1,415.8 966.3 541.8 −173.2 572.7 1,089.0 2,583.2 2,777.6 3,474.9 −         Dec.
1,455.1 1,283.2 − 48.7 1,406.4 1,008.3 546.4 −122.2 564.7 1,093.1 2,558.9 2,746.9 3,473.6 −2000         Jan.
1,464.0 1,292.9 − 52.0 1,412.0 1,037.6 547.9 −103.7 557.7 1,102.4 2,559.0 2,758.4 3,489.9 −         Feb.
1,475.2 1,300.7 − 58.1 1,417.1 1,112.4 557.3 − 84.2 567.6 1,094.1 2,540.6 2,744.2 3,506.4 −         Mar.
1,502.5 1,317.1 − 61.0 1,441.5 1,168.1 559.4 − 93.3 575.5 1,115.9 2,543.4 2,747.8 3,534.6 −         Apr.
1,510.5 1,332.6 − 59.5 1,451.0 1,178.1 561.8 − 67.1 583.1 1,096.8 2,528.1 2,735.6 3,550.9 −         May
1,504.8 1,323.4 − 54.7 1,450.1 1,100.9 568.4 −131.0 593.2 1,095.7 2,508.4 2,722.4 3,560.6 −         June
German MFIs portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro area. — governments ’monetary liabilities, which are not included in the
11In Germany, bank debt securities with maturities of up to one year count consolidated balance sheet. —15M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities
as money market paper. —12Excluding liabilities arising from securities of up to 2 years and at agreed notice of up to 3 months (excluding central
issued. —13The German contributions to the Eurosystem ’s monetary governments ’deposits). —16M2 plus repo transactions, money market
aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national monetary fund certificates, money market paper and debt securities up to 2 years. —
aggregates, and are therefore not comparable to the erstwhile German 17Deposits with agreed maturities of over 2 years and at agreed notice of
money stocks M1, M2 or M3. —14Currency in circulation, overnight over 3 months, debt securities with maturities of over 2 years, capital and
deposits (excluding central governments ’deposits), and (for EMU) central reserves. — 18 Non-existent in Germany. 
13*II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
II. Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  European  monetary  union
  
 3. Banking system ’s liquidity position  *)
Stocks
  
Euro billions; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions ‘
current
Net assets Longer- Other Other accounts
Maintenance in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (includingperiod and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Baseending in  
1) currency operations operations facility facility circulation deposits (net)  4) reserves)  5) money  6) operations  3) operations  3)
Eurosystem  2)
  
1999         Feb. 328.2 104.6 34.2 3.8 30.2 1.3 0.2 329.3 41.0 28.9 100.3 430.9
         Mar. 323.6 136.4 45.0 0.4 − 1.4 − 326.9 49.8 25.0 102.2 430.5
         Apr. 338.4 130.1 45.0 0.7 − 0.3 − 331.0 42.9 39.0 101.1 432.3
         May 342.5 121.6 45.0 0.8 − 0.4 − 333.9 36.3 38.0 101.2 435.5
         June 339.8 132.0 45.0 0.4 − 0.6 − 337.0 40.4 37.2 101.9 439.6
         July 342.4 143.1 45.0 0.4 − 0.5 − 342.1 45.7 39.5 102.9 445.6
         Aug. 343.2 150.1 45.0 0.5 − 1.0 − 344.8 47.3 42.1 103.6 449.4
         Sep. 343.5 150.4 45.0 0.2 − 0.7 − 342.1 51.4 41.6 103.2 446.0
         Oct. 349.7 143.0 45.0 0.3 − 0.6 − 342.5 45.4 45.9 103.5 446.7
         Nov. 351.8 140.5 53.7 0.3 − 0.4 − 343.1 51.5 47.3 104.2 447.6
         Dec. 351.7 150.4 65.0 0.3 − 1.0 − 354.3 59.0 47.5 105.6 460.8
2000         Jan. 362.3 138.5 75.0 1.9 − 0.5 3.3 363.0 41.0 61.2 108.7 472.3
         Feb. 367.8 130.9 70.5 0.1 − 0.2 − 347.6 49.2 64.2 108.1 455.9
         Mar. 369.2 136.1 66.2 0.2 − 0.3 − 347.6 51.7 63.5 108.6 456.4
         Apr. 377.1 136.7 61.0 0.2 − 0.9 − 349.7 45.6 69.1 109.7 460.3
         May 378.8 142.6 60.0 0.4 − 2.3 − 353.8 41.9 71.8 112.0 468.2
         June 378.1 140.9 59.9 0.3 0.2 0.8 − 354.1 38.3 72.1 114.2 469.1
         July 380.8 157.9 59.9 0.4 − 0.5 − 357.0 50.4 76.8 114.2 471.7
         Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .         Sep. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Oct. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .         Dec. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Deutsche Bundesbank
1999         Feb. 80.5 55.0 18.2 2.0 19.4 0.9 − 127.2 0.2 16.4 30.5 158.5
         Mar. 79.1 64.2 26.1 0.3 − 0.6 − 126.7 0.1 11.4 30.9 158.2
         Apr. 83.0 67.7 27.7 0.5 − 0.2 − 128.1 0.1 19.9 30.6 158.9
         May 84.6 60.0 25.5 0.6 − 0.2 − 128.9 0.1 10.9 30.5 159.7
         June 84.7 67.5 25.0 0.3 − 0.4 − 129.4 0.1 16.9 30.8 160.6
         July 85.1 70.3 26.5 0.3 − 0.2 − 129.9 0.1 20.6 31.3 161.4
         Aug. 85.3 71.7 29.2 0.3 − 0.2 − 130.4 0.1 24.4 31.4 162.0
         Sep. 85.6 68.5 28.3 0.1 − 0.3 − 130.3 0.1 20.5 31.2 161.8
         Oct. 87.3 66.6 25.6 0.2 − 0.2 − 130.2 0.1 17.8 31.4 161.8
         Nov. 87.8 68.7 28.6 0.2 − 0.2 − 130.5 0.1 22.8 31.7 162.3
         Dec. 88.0 57.5 34.7 0.2 − 0.6 − 134.4 0.1 13.1 32.1 167.1
2000         Jan. 90.6 49.0 32.7 1.4 − 0.3 0.5 136.6 0.1 3.0 33.3 170.2
         Feb. 91.5 65.4 33.5 0.1 − 0.2 − 132.0 0.1 24.5 33.7 165.8
         Mar. 91.9 61.8 34.4 0.1 − 0.2 − 131.6 0.1 22.7 33.6 165.4
         Apr. 93.7 62.0 43.2 0.2 − 0.6 − 131.8 0.1 32.7 34.0 166.4
         May 93.7 60.1 39.5 0.3 − 1.8 − 132.3 0.1 24.8 34.5 168.6
         June 93.3 59.6 35.4 0.2 0.1 0.3 − 132.0 0.1 21.2 35.1 167.3
         July 93.4 67.9 33.3 0.2 − 0.4 − 131.8 0.1 27.6 35.1 167.2
         Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .         Sep. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Oct. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .         Dec. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. —*The banking system ’s liquidity minimum reserve system starts on the 24th of each month and ends on the
position is defined as the current account holdings in euro of credit in- 23rd of the following month (the first reserve maintenance period lastedstitutions in the euro area with the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from from January 1, 1999 to February 23, 1999). —2Source: ECB. —3Includes
the consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the statement monetary policy operations initiated by national central banks in Stage Tw o
of the Bundesbank. —1The reserve maintenance period of the ESCB and outstanding at the start of Stage Three (excluding outright operations
14*II. Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  European  monetary  union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
II. Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  European  monetary  union
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions ‘
current
Net assets Longer- Other Other accountsin gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Maintenanceand foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base periodcurrency operations operations facility facility circulation deposits (net)  
4) reserves)  5) money  6) ending in  1) operations  3) operations  3)
Eurosystem  2)
  
. . . . . . . . . . . . 1999          Feb.
− 4.6 + 31.8 + 10.8 −3.4 − 30.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 2.4 + 8.8 −3.9 + 1.9 − 0.4          Mar.
+ 14.8 − 6.3 − 0.0 + 0.3 −− 1.1 − + 4.1 − 6.9 + 14.0 − 1.1 + 1.8          Apr.
+ 4.1 − 8.5 − 0.0 + 0.1 − + 0.1 − + 2.9 − 6.6 −1.0 + 0.1 + 3.2          May
− 2.7 + 10.4 + 0.0 −0.4 − + 0.2 − + 3.1 + 4.1 −0.8 + 0.7 + 4.1          June
+ 2.6 + 11.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 −− 0.1 − + 5.1 + 5.3 + 2.3 + 1.0 + 6.0          July
+ 0.8 + 7.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 − + 0.5 − + 2.7 + 1.6 + 2.6 + 0.7 + 3.8          Aug.
+ 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.0 −0.3 −− 0.3 −− 2.7 + 4.1 −0.5 − 0.4 − 3.4          Sep.
+ 6.2 − 7.4 + 0.0 + 0.1 −− 0.1 − + 0.4 − 6.0 + 4.3 + 0.3 + 0.7          Oct.
+ 2.1 − 2.5 + 8.7 + 0.0 −− 0.2 − + 0.6 + 6.1 + 1.4 + 0.7 + 0.9          Nov.
− 0.1 + 9.9 + 11.3 −0.0 − + 0.6 − + 11.2 + 7.5 + 0.2 + 1.4 + 13.2          Dec.
+ 10.6 −11.9 + 10.0 + 1.6 −− 0.5 + 3.3 + 8.7 −18.0 + 13.7 + 3.1 + 11.5 2000          Jan.
+ 5.5 − 7.6 − 4.5 −1.8 −− 0.3 − 3.3 −15.4 + 8.2 + 3.0 − 0.6 − 16.4          Feb.
+ 1.4 + 5.2 − 4.3 + 0.1 − + 0.1 − + 0.0 + 2.5 −0.7 + 0.5 + 0.5          Mar.
+ 7.9 + 0.6 − 5.2 + 0.0 − + 0.6 − + 2.1 − 6.1 + 5.6 + 1.1 + 3.9          Apr.
+ 1.7 + 5.9 − 1.0 + 0.2 − + 1.4 − + 4.1 − 3.7 + 2.7 + 2.3 + 7.9          May
− 0.7 − 1.7 − 0.1 −0.1 + 0.2 −1.5 − + 0.3 − 3.6 + 0.3 + 2.2 + 0.9          June
+ 2.7 + 17.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.2 −0.3 − + 2.9 + 12.1 + 4.7 − 0.0 + 2.6          July
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Aug.. . . . . . . . . . . .          Sep.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Nov.. . . . . . . . . . . .          Dec.
Deutsche Bundesbank
... . . . − . . . . . 1999          Feb.
− 1.4 + 9.2 + 7.9 −1.7 − 19.4 −0.3 −− 0.5 − 0.0 −5.0 + 0.4 − 0.4          Mar.
+ 3.9 + 3.4 + 1.6 + 0.2 −− 0.4 − + 1.4 + 0.0 + 8.5 − 0.3 + 0.7          Apr.
+ 1.5 − 7.7 − 2.2 + 0.1 −− 0.0 − + 0.8 − 0.0 −9.0 − 0.0 + 0.8          May
+ 0.2 + 7.5 − 0.5 −0.4 − + 0.2 − + 0.5 − 0.0 + 6.0 + 0.3 + 0.9          June
+ 0.4 + 2.7 + 1.5 −0.0 −− 0.1 − + 0.5 + 0.0 + 3.7 + 0.5 + 0.9          July
+ 0.2 + 1.4 + 2.7 + 0.1 − + 0.0 − + 0.5 − 0.0 + 3.8 + 0.2 + 0.6          Aug.
+ 0.3 − 3.2 − 0.9 −0.2 − + 0.1 −− 0.1 + 0.0 −3.8 − 0.3 − 0.3          Sep.
+ 1.7 − 1.8 − 2.7 + 0.1 −− 0.1 −− 0.1 − 0.0 −2.8 + 0.2 + 0.0          Oct.
+ 0.6 + 2.1 + 3.0 −0.1 −− 0.0 − + 0.3 + 0.0 + 5.0 + 0.3 + 0.5          Nov.
+ 0.2 −11.2 + 6.1 + 0.0 − + 0.4 − + 3.9 + 0.0 −9.7 + 0.5 + 4.8          Dec.
+ 2.6 − 8.5 − 2.0 + 1.2 −− 0.3 + 0.5 + 2.2 − 0.0 −10.1 + 1.2 + 3.1 2000          Jan.
+ 0.9 + 16.4 + 0.8 −1.4 −− 0.1 − 0.5 − 4.6 − 0.0 + 21.5 + 0.3 − 4.4          Feb.
+ 0.4 − 3.6 + 0.9 + 0.1 −− 0.0 −− 0.3 + 0.0 −1.8 − 0.1 − 0.4          Mar.
+ 1.8 + 0.3 + 8.8 + 0.0 − + 0.4 − + 0.2 − 0.0 + 9.9 + 0.4 + 1.0          Apr.
− 0.0 − 1.9 − 3.7 + 0.1 − + 1.2 − + 0.5 + 0.0 −7.8 + 0.5 + 2.2          May
− 0.4 − 0.5 − 4.1 −0.0 + 0.1 −1.5 −− 0.3 + 0.0 −3.6 + 0.5 − 1.3          June
+ 0.2 + 8.3 − 2.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 −− 0.1 − 0.0 + 6.4 − 0.0 − 0.1          July
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Aug.. . . . . . . . . . . .          Sep.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Nov.. . . . . . . . . . . .          Dec.
and the issuance of debt certificates); for the Bundesbank: including banks ’ as the sum of the "deposit facility", "banknotes in circulation" and "credit
recourse to rediscount quotas. —4Remaining items in the consolidated institutions ’current account holdings" or, alternatively, as the difference
financial statement of the Eurosystem and the statement of the between the sum of liquidity-providing factors and the sum of governmentBundesbank. —5Equal to the difference between the sum of liquidity- deposits and other factors (net). 
providing factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors. —6Calculated
15*II. Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  European  monetary  union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1. Assets *
  
Euro billion
Claims on non-euro area residents Claims on non-euro area
in foreign currency residents in euro
Balances with
banks, security
investments, Claims on Balances Claimsexternal loans euro area with banks, arising from
On Gold and other residents security the creditreporting Total and gold- Receivables external in foreign investments facility underdate assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans  
2 the ERM II
 Eurosystem 1
 
1999         Jan. 694.6 99.6 233.0 29.1 203.9 7.4 9.1 9.1 −
         Feb. 692.6 99.6 228.8 26.0 202.8 9.3 4.4 4.4 −
         Mar. 699.4 99.6 228.5 26.6 202.0 8.9 3.8 3.8 −
         Apr. 698.3 105.3 240.7 30.0 210.8 11.7 4.0 4.0 −
         May 705.1 105.3 237.6 29.6 208.1 12.4 4.4 4.4 −
         June 695.6 105.3 238.4 29.2 209.1 11.9 3.9 3.9 −
         July 739.7 101.8 245.4 29.0 216.4 12.8 4.2 4.2 −
         Aug. 734.0 101.8 245.4 28.8 216.7 12.6 4.1 4.1 −
         Sep. 728.6 101.8 246.1 27.7 218.3 13.1 4.9 4.9 −
         Oct. 742.6 115.0 240.2 28.0 212.1 13.7 5.7 5.7 −
         Nov. 743.1 115.0 239.6 27.8 211.7 12.8 5.3 5.3 −
         Dec. 3 803.2 3 116.5 3 254.9 3 29.8 3 225.0 3 14.4 4.8 4.8 −
2000         Jan. 772.7 116.3 256.3 29.5 226.8 14.8 4.8 4.8 −
         Feb. 752.2 115.9 255.6 29.2 226.4 15.5 4.7 4.7 −
         Mar. 3 774.4 115.7 3 267.1 3 30.3 3 236.9 3 16.9 4.1 4.1 −
         Apr. 783.0 115.7 267.4 27.4 240.0 17.3 4.8 4.8 −
2000 May                 5 786.5 115.7 266.5 27.3 239.2 17.5 4.8 4.8 −
                              12 768.1 115.7 264.2 27.1 237.0 18.2 4.7 4.7 −
                              19 775.9 115.7 270.6 27.1 243.5 17.8 5.0 5.0 −
                              26 779.2 115.7 267.5 26.9 240.6 17.6 5.0 5.0 −
         June                 2 774.9 115.7 265.4 26.9 238.5 19.3 4.9 4.9 −
                                9 770.0 115.7 264.8 26.9 237.9 18.3 4.7 4.7 −
                              16 774.8 115.7 264.2 26.9 237.3 18.1 4.7 4.7 −
                              23 776.8 115.7 263.5 26.9 236.7 18.3 4.5 4.5 −
                              30 3 812.5 3 121.2 263.9 26.5 237.4 18.3 4.1 4.1 −
         July                 7 793.5 120.9 262.2 26.4 235.8 18.3 4.3 4.3 −
                              14 791.2 120.9 261.5 26.4 235.1 18.1 4.4 4.4 −
                              21 786.7 120.9 262.9 26.3 236.6 17.5 4.0 4.0 −
                              28 800.7 120.9 264.1 26.2 237.9 16.7 3.8 3.8 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
1999         Jan. 221.8 27.5 54.0 8.5 45.6 − 4.5 4.5 −
         Feb. 214.8 27.5 53.0 7.1 45.9 − 3.7 3.7 −
         Mar. 215.2 27.5 53.0 7.1 45.9 − 13.7 13.7 −
         Apr. 214.9 29.0 57.1 9.1 48.0 − 18.7 18.7 −
         May 218.9 29.0 57.2 8.8 48.4 − 12.8 12.8 −
         June 228.6 29.0 57.1 8.4 48.8 − 33.1 33.1 −
         July 255.4 28.1 58.7 8.4 50.2 − 34.2 34.2 −
         Aug. 230.3 28.1 59.0 8.2 50.8 − 18.0 18.0 −
         Sep. 231.8 28.1 59.0 7.9 51.1 − 25.5 25.5 −
         Oct. 235.2 31.8 57.5 8.0 49.5 − 15.3 15.3 −
         Nov. 229.1 31.8 57.8 7.9 49.8 − 3.1 3.1 −
         Dec. 3 242.2 3 32.3 3 60.8 3 8.3 3 52.4 − 9.1 9.1 −
2000         Jan. 235.2 32.3 60.7 8.3 52.4 − 0.8 0.8 −
         Feb. 243.2 32.3 61.1 8.2 52.9 − 6.2 6.2 −
         Mar. 3 242.7 32.2 3 64.6 8.7 3 55.9 − 10.5 10.5 −
         Apr. 239.8 32.2 63.3 7.7 55.6 − 8.3 8.3 −
2000 May                 5 232.5 32.2 63.1 7.7 55.4 − 9.3 9.3 −
                              12 230.5 32.2 62.9 7.7 55.2 − 17.7 17.7 −
                              19 240.3 32.2 63.1 7.7 55.3 − 9.9 9.9 −
                              26 228.9 32.2 63.1 7.7 55.4 − 11.4 11.4 −
         June                 2 232.2 32.2 63.0 7.7 55.3 − 20.4 20.4 −
                                9 231.3 32.2 62.7 7.7 55.0 − 24.2 24.2 −
                              16 239.7 32.2 62.5 7.7 54.8 − 21.9 21.9 −
                              23 226.8 32.2 62.3 7.7 54.7 − 6.3 6.3 −
                              30 3 242.3 3 33.7 62.3 7.6 54.7 − 4.5 4.5 −
         July                 7 235.1 33.7 61.9 7.5 54.5 − 12.0 12.0 −
                              14 244.9 33.7 61.6 7.4 54.2 − 17.1 17.1 −
                              21 242.3 33.7 61.2 7.4 53.8 − 19.7 19.7 −
                              28 242.2 33.7 61.1 7.4 53.7 − 14.6 14.6 −
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the area. —The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold and
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the statements of the financial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quarter. —
national central banks of the EU member countries (NCBs) of the euro 1Source: ECB. —2Whereas the consolidated financial statement of the
16*III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
    
 
Lending to financial sector counterparties of euro area in euro
 
   
Credits Securities General
Main Longer-term Fine-tuning Structural Marginal related government    On of euro area
refinancing refinancing reverse reverse lending to margin Other residents debt Other    reporting
Total operations operations operations operations facility calls lending in euro in euro assets    date
Eurosystem 1
 
182.9 128.0 45.0 −− 8.7 0.1 1.1 22.1 60.2 80.4 1999          Jan.
186.4 139.9 45.0 −− 0.4 0.1 1.0 24.3 60.2 79.6          Feb.
192.2 146.0 45.0 −− 0.2 0.1 0.9 26.1 60.2 80.0          Mar.
174.3 128.0 45.0 −− 0.5 0.0 0.8 26.1 60.2 75.9          Apr.
184.9 139.0 45.0 −− 0.4 0.1 0.5 25.8 60.2 74.4          May
170.6 125.0 45.0 −− 0.2 0.0 0.4 26.1 60.2 79.2          June
214.0 167.0 45.0 −− 1.5 0.1 0.5 25.8 60.2 75.7          July
205.2 159.1 45.0 −− 0.3 0.1 0.7 26.0 60.2 78.8          Aug.
198.5 153.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.1 0.4 25.4 60.2 78.8          Sep.
205.3 149.0 55.0 −− 0.7 0.1 0.6 23.4 60.2 79.2          Oct.
209.0 143.0 65.0 −− 0.0 0.2 0.7 23.9 60.1 77.3          Nov.
250.1 162.0 75.0 −− 11.4 0.4 1.3 23.5 59.2 3 79.8          Dec.
216.7 146.0 70.0 −− 0.0 0.1 0.6 24.0 59.3 80.6 2000          Jan.
193.3 122.0 70.0 −− 0.0 0.1 1.3 24.6 59.3 83.3          Feb.
201.7 140.9 60.0 −− 0.1 0.1 0.7 25.3 59.0 3 84.5          Mar.
209.9 147.2 60.0 −− 1.6 0.0 1.2 24.9 59.0 83.8          Apr.
214.2 152.8 60.0 −− 0.1 0.0 1.2 25.3 59.0 83.4 2000 May                  5
196.9 135.6 60.0 −− 0.1 0.0 1.1 25.2 59.0 84.2                               12
198.6 137.5 60.0 −− 0.1 0.0 0.9 25.1 59.0 84.1                               19
205.4 144.1 60.0 −− 0.2 0.0 1.1 25.2 59.0 83.9                               26
202.0 140.3 59.9 −− 0.3 0.1 1.3 25.0 59.0 83.7          June                  2
198.2 136.7 59.9 −− 0.2 0.1 1.4 25.2 59.0 84.1                                 9
204.4 142.8 59.9 −− 0.1 0.0 1.6 24.9 59.0 83.9                               16
206.5 142.0 59.9 −− 3.1 0.1 1.4 25.2 59.0 84.2                               23
234.5 173.0 59.9 −− 0.1 0.1 1.4 25.1 59.0 3 86.3                               30
218.3 157.0 59.9 −− 0.4 0.1 1.0 25.1 59.0 85.3          July                  7
217.4 157.0 59.9 −− 0.1 0.0 0.4 25.1 59.0 84.7                               14
212.4 152.0 59.9 −− 0.2 0.0 0.3 25.3 59.0 84.6                               21
226.3 171.0 54.9 −− 0.0 0.0 0.3 25.4 59.0 84.6                               28
 Deutsche Bundesbank
95.4 71.0 23.9 −− 0.4 − 0.0 − 4.4 35.9 1999          Jan.
92.4 65.9 26.2 −− 0.3 − 0.0 − 4.4 33.8          Feb.
99.5 71.5 27.8 −− 0.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 17.1          Mar.
88.5 63.0 25.0 −− 0.4 − 0.0 − 4.4 17.2          Apr.
98.3 72.9 25.0 −− 0.3 − 0.0 − 4.4 17.2          May
87.5 62.3 25.0 −− 0.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 17.4          June
112.6 81.6 29.6 −− 1.5 − 0.0 − 4.4 17.3          July
103.2 74.8 28.2 −− 0.3 − 0.0 − 4.4 17.6          Aug.
97.2 68.9 28.2 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 17.5          Sep.
108.9 79.6 29.1 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 17.4          Oct.
84.1 49.1 35.0 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 47.8          Nov.
90.6 48.4 32.7 −− 9.4 − 0.0 − 4.4 3 45.0          Dec.
102.8 69.2 33.6 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 34.1 2000          Jan.
93.0 59.4 33.6 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 46.1          Feb.
112.5 67.2 45.3 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 3 18.4          Mar.
103.9 64.2 38.9 −− 0.9 − 0.0 − 4.4 27.6          Apr.
105.1 66.1 38.9 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.3 2000 May                  5
94.9 56.0 38.9 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.3                               12
93.7 54.7 38.9 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 37.0                               19
99.5 60.4 38.9 −− 0.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.3                               26
93.9 59.5 34.2 −− 0.3 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.3          June                  2
89.4 55.1 34.2 −− 0.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.3                                 9
100.2 65.9 34.2 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.4                               16
93.5 57.4 34.2 −− 1.9 − 0.0 − 4.4 28.0                               23
93.1 59.8 33.2 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 44.2                               30
104.5 71.0 33.2 −− 0.4 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.5          July                  7
109.5 76.3 33.2 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.5                               14
104.7 71.5 33.2 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.5                               21
109.9 74.8 35.1 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.5                               28
 
Eurosystem shows the bilateral TARGET balances of the individual non-Eurosystem NCBs. —3Changes are due mainly to revaluations at the
non-Eurosystem NCBs as an aggregated (net) figure, the Bundesbank state- end of the quarter. ment reports gross figures for the claims on and liabilities to the individual
17*III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2. Liabilities *
  
Euro billion
Liabilities to financial sector counterparties Liabilities to
in the euro area in euro other euro area
residents in euro
 
Current
accounts(coveringthe Fine- Deposits Debt
On Banknotes minimum tuning related to certifi-reporting Total in cir- reserve Deposit Fixed-term reverse margin cates General Otherdate culation Total system) facility deposits operations calls issued Total government liabilities liabilities
 Eurosystem 1
 
1999         Jan. 694.6 326.5 85.4 84.6 0.7 −− 0.0 11.7 56.7 52.4 4.3
         Feb. 692.6 325.2 100.0 99.3 0.7 −− 0.0 11.7 62.1 57.4 4.7
         Mar. 699.4 327.1 100.4 100.3 0.1 −− 0.0 11.7 64.3 60.7 3.6
         Apr. 698.3 332.3 104.4 104.2 0.1 −− 0.0 10.2 45.0 41.6 3.4
         May 705.1 335.1 109.5 109.3 0.1 −− 0.0 10.2 43.9 40.4 3.5
         June 695.6 337.9 97.5 97.4 0.1 −− 0.0 10.2 40.9 37.6 3.4
         July 739.7 345.8 109.8 109.8 0.0 −− 0.0 10.2 62.1 58.7 3.4
         Aug. 734.0 340.6 110.5 110.4 0.0 −− 0.0 10.2 57.8 54.3 3.5
         Sep. 728.6 340.3 104.0 103.9 0.1 −− 0.0 10.2 59.0 55.0 4.0
         Oct. 742.6 343.6 109.9 109.4 0.4 −− 0.1 8.6 59.5 55.3 4.1
         Nov. 743.1 343.3 106.3 106.1 0.1 −− 0.2 7.9 65.7 61.7 4.0
         Dec. 3 803.2 375.0 117.1 114.5 2.6 −− 0.0 7.9 60.6 56.5 4.1
2000         Jan. 772.7 348.0 115.7 115.5 0.1 −− 0.0 7.9 56.8 52.3 4.5
         Feb. 752.2 345.0 95.5 95.4 0.1 −− 0.0 7.9 60.8 57.3 3.5
         Mar. 3 774.4 347.9 111.2 110.1 1.1 −−− 6.3 52.3 48.7 3.6
         Apr. 783.0 354.3 111.9 101.5 10.4 −− 0.0 6.3 53.8 50.3 3.6
2000 May                 5 786.5 355.9 122.2 122.1 0.0 −− 0.0 6.3 45.5 42.0 3.6
                              12 768.1 354.7 104.6 104.3 0.3 −− 0.0 6.3 46.1 42.5 3.6
                              19 775.9 352.1 118.6 118.4 0.2 −− 0.0 6.3 37.7 34.2 3.5
                              26 779.2 350.9 115.9 115.9 0.0 −− 0.0 6.3 47.7 44.0 3.7
         June                 2 774.9 355.5 114.7 114.6 0.0 −− 0.0 6.3 40.2 36.3 3.8
                                9 770.0 357.1 109.7 109.7 0.0 −− 0.0 6.3 39.5 36.1 3.4
                              16 774.8 354.7 116.1 116.1 0.0 −− 0.0 6.3 41.3 37.8 3.5
                              23 776.8 353.6 109.8 108.4 1.4 −− 0.0 6.3 50.8 47.4 3.5
                              30 3 812.5 355.7 120.4 120.3 0.1 −− 0.0 6.3 65.2 61.5 3.7
         July                 7 793.5 359.4 112.9 112.8 0.2 −− 0.0 6.3 53.0 49.5 3.5
                              14 791.2 359.5 109.9 109.9 0.0 −− 0.0 6.3 54.1 50.8 3.3
                              21 786.7 357.6 114.9 111.1 3.8 −− 0.0 6.3 45.9 42.5 3.4
                              28 800.7 358.5 113.5 113.4 0.0 −− 0.0 6.3 60.1 56.7 3.4
 Deutsche Bundesbank
1999         Jan. 221.8 126.0 31.1 30.4 0.7 −−−− 0.8 0.1 0.7
         Feb. 214.8 125.9 28.2 27.6 0.5 −−−− 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Mar. 215.2 126.7 28.6 28.5 0.1 −−−− 0.4 0.1 0.3
         Apr. 214.9 128.3 33.4 33.3 0.1 −−−− 0.5 0.1 0.4
         May 218.9 128.8 27.7 27.6 0.1 −−−− 0.5 0.1 0.4
         June 228.6 128.9 25.9 25.8 0.1 −−−− 0.5 0.1 0.3
         July 255.4 130.2 33.8 33.7 0.0 −−−− 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Aug. 230.3 129.7 29.6 29.6 0.0 −−−− 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Sep. 231.8 129.7 25.7 25.6 0.1 −−−− 0.4 0.1 0.3
         Oct. 235.2 130.2 42.1 41.7 0.4 −−−− 0.7 0.2 0.4
         Nov. 229.1 131.0 31.1 31.1 0.1 −−−− 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Dec. 3 242.2 140.2 41.9 39.8 2.1 −−−− 0.5 0.1 0.4
2000         Jan. 235.2 131.8 30.1 30.0 0.1 −−−− 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Feb. 243.2 130.9 29.1 29.0 0.1 −−−− 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Mar. 3 242.7 131.2 39.0 38.0 1.0 −−−− 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Apr. 239.8 132.5 42.2 31.8 10.4 −−−− 0.5 0.1 0.4
2000 May                 5 232.5 133.1 34.4 34.4 0.0 −−−− 0.5 0.1 0.4
                              12 230.5 132.5 34.3 34.1 0.3 −−−− 0.5 0.1 0.4
                              19 240.3 131.7 43.0 42.9 0.1 −−−− 0.4 0.1 0.3
                              26 228.9 130.9 34.1 34.1 0.0 −−−− 0.5 0.1 0.4
         June                 2 232.2 132.6 34.5 34.5 0.0 −−−− 0.7 0.1 0.6
                                9 231.3 133.1 31.1 31.0 0.0 −−−− 0.5 0.1 0.4
                              16 239.7 132.1 38.2 38.1 0.0 −−−− 0.5 0.1 0.4
                              23 226.8 131.6 32.2 31.7 0.5 −−−− 0.4 0.1 0.4
                              30 3 242.3 131.5 45.2 45.2 0.0 −−−− 0.6 0.1 0.6
         July                 7 235.1 132.7 33.1 33.0 0.1 −−−− 0.5 0.1 0.4
                              14 244.9 132.3 35.5 35.4 0.0 −−−− 0.5 0.1 0.4
                              21 242.3 131.7 34.5 31.6 2.9 −−−− 0.4 0.1 0.3
                              28 242.2 131.4 35.8 35.8 0.0 −−−− 0.5 0.1 0.4
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the area. —The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold and
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the statements of the financial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quarter. —
national central banks of the EU member countries (NCBs) of the euro 1Source: ECB. —2Whereas the consolidated financial statement of the
18*III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
    
 
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents inforeign currency
 
 
Liabilities Liabilities Liabilities Counterpart  to non-euro to euro area Deposits, arising of special  area residents balances from the drawing  Capital    Onresidents in foreign and other Other Revaluation and    reporting credit facility rights allocated
in euro  
2 currency Total liabilities by the IMF liabilities accounts reserves    date under the ERM II
Eurosystem 1
 
14.0 1.6 4.3 4.3 − 5.8 77.8 59.7 51.3 1999          Jan.
7.7 0.8 6.4 6.4 − 5.8 62.1 59.7 51.3          Feb.
7.7 0.9 7.8 7.8 − 5.8 62.9 59.7 51.3          Mar.
7.2 1.0 7.9 7.9 − 6.0 51.2 78.5 54.6          Apr.
7.8 0.9 8.8 8.8 − 6.0 49.5 78.5 54.8          May
7.1 0.7 9.3 9.3 − 6.0 54.3 78.5 53.2          June
6.7 0.9 10.6 10.6 − 6.2 51.8 82.5 53.2          July
7.5 1.0 9.3 9.3 − 6.2 55.2 82.5 53.2          Aug.
7.3 0.9 10.5 10.5 − 6.2 54.7 82.5 53.2          Sep.
7.1 1.3 9.8 9.8 − 6.2 53.5 89.8 53.2          Oct.
7.3 1.0 8.7 8.7 − 6.2 53.6 89.8 53.2          Nov.
7.8 0.9 3 11.9 3 11.9 − 6.5 3 54.7 3 107.3 53.4          Dec.
7.0 1.2 13.3 13.3 − 6.5 55.6 107.5 53.4 2000          Jan.
7.8 0.8 10.5 10.5 − 6.5 55.7 107.4 54.2          Feb.
7.0 0.9 9.9 9.9 − 6.8 3 59.9 3 118.0 54.3          Mar.
7.7 0.8 13.5 13.5 − 6.8 55.3 118.0 54.6          Apr.
7.4 0.8 13.3 13.3 − 6.8 55.7 118.0 54.7 2000 May                  5
7.1 0.9 12.4 12.4 − 6.8 56.5 118.0 54.7                               12
7.2 0.9 17.9 17.9 − 6.8 55.5 118.0 55.0                               19
7.3 0.8 14.7 14.7 − 6.8 55.9 118.0 55.0                               26
7.2 0.8 14.4 14.4 − 6.8 56.1 118.0 55.0          June                  2
7.8 0.8 13.2 13.2 − 6.8 55.7 118.0 55.1                                 9
7.1 0.8 12.6 12.6 − 6.8 56.0 118.0 55.1                               16
7.1 0.8 12.3 12.3 − 6.8 56.1 118.0 55.1                               23
7.3 0.8 13.3 13.3 − 6.7 3 60.7 3 120.9 55.1                               30
7.4 0.8 11.7 11.7 − 6.7 59.2 120.9 55.1          July                  7
7.2 0.8 11.3 11.3 − 6.7 59.3 120.9 55.1                               14
7.4 0.8 11.2 11.2 − 6.7 59.9 120.9 55.1                               21
7.3 0.8 11.8 11.8 − 6.7 59.7 120.9 55.1                               28
 Deutsche Bundesbank
14.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.5 17.4 25.3 5.1 1999          Jan.
14.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.5 13.8 25.3 5.1          Feb.
7.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.5 20.6 25.3 5.1          Mar.
7.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.5 10.0 28.7 5.1          Apr.
8.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.5 17.6 28.7 5.1          May
7.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.5 31.0 28.7 5.1          June
6.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.6 48.9 29.4 5.1          July
13.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.6 21.1 29.4 5.1          Aug.
16.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.6 23.3 29.4 5.1          Sep.
6.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.6 18.0 31.4 5.1          Oct.
18.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.6 10.4 31.4 5.1          Nov.
6.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 3 11.7 3 35.0 5.1          Dec.
18.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 12.3 35.0 5.1 2000          Jan.
28.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 12.8 35.0 5.1          Feb.
13.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 13.6 3 38.0 5.1          Mar.
10.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 9.3 38.0 5.1          Apr.
9.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 10.4 38.0 5.1 2000 May                  5
6.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 12.2 38.0 5.1                               12
10.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 9.9 38.0 5.1                               19
6.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 11.7 38.0 5.1                               26
7.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 11.6 38.0 5.1          June                  2
7.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 14.5 38.0 5.1                                 9
6.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 17.2 38.0 5.1                               16
7.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 10.2 38.0 5.1                               23
8.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 3 11.1 3 39.0 5.1                               30
6.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 16.7 39.0 5.1          July                  7
6.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 24.8 39.0 5.1                               14
6.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 23.4 39.0 5.1                               21
6.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 22.0 39.0 5.1                               28
 
Eurosystem shows the bilateral TARGET balances of the individual non-Eurosystem NCBs. —3Changes are due mainly to revaluations at the
non-Eurosystem NCBs as an aggregated (net) figure, the Bundesbank state- end of the quarter. ment reports gross figures for the claims on and liabilities to the individual
19*III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
IV. Banks
 
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
   Assets
 
 Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 euro billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area  3 Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other member countries to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and indi-
viduals
Secur- Secur-
Balance- ities itiessheet Cash Ad- issued Ad- issued Ad-
Period total  
2 in hand Total Total vances  3 by banks Total vances  3 by banks Total Total Total vances  3 
 End of year or month
 
1990 5,412.4 22.1 1,706.8 1,573.7 1,146.0 427.8 133.1 115.6 17.4 3,134.8 3,081.4 2,412.5 2,336.41991 5,751.6 23.9 1,713.9 1,576.9 1,122.9 454.0 137.0 117.2 19.8 3,437.9 3,380.2 2,665.2 2,573.71992 6,143.1 27.8 1,779.6 1,638.4 1,168.0 470.4 141.2 116.8 24.3 3,727.7 3,665.2 2,898.1 2,775.01993 6,799.5 27.8 1,940.4 1,757.5 1,212.6 544.9 182.9 151.9 31.0 4,085.0 4,005.8 3,156.8 2,980.31994 7,205.7 26.2 2,030.1 1,854.1 1,285.1 569.1 175.9 145.0 30.9 4,411.4 4,333.2 3,391.3 3,143.2
1995 7,778.7 27.3 2,210.2 2,019.0 1,399.8 619.3 191.2 158.0 33.2 4,723.3 4,635.0 3,548.8 3,298.7
1996 8,540.5 30.3 2,523.0 2,301.1 1,585.7 715.4 221.9 181.2 40.7 5,084.7 4,981.9 3,812.8 3,543.01997 9,368.2 30.7 2,836.0 2,580.7 1,758.6 822.1 255.3 208.8 46.5 5,408.8 5,269.5 4,041.3 3,740.81998 10,355.5 29.9 3,267.4 2,939.4 1,977.4 962.0 328.1 264.9 63.1 5,833.9 5,615.9 4,361.0 3,966.51999 5,678.5 17.2 1,836.9 1,635.0 1,081.4 553.6 201.9 161.8 40.1 3,127.4 2,958.6 2,326.4 2,093.4
1998         Sep. 9,982.8 26.7 3,104.5 2,820.8 1,889.9 930.9 283.6 227.6 56.1 5,652.5 5,473.0 4,211.5 3,857.0
         Oct. 10,122.0 25.8 3,193.9 2,899.1 1,947.3 951.8 294.8 234.5 60.3 5,701.9 5,506.0 4,230.5 3,873.5
         Nov. 10,309.8 25.2 3,277.2 2,958.9 1,996.5 962.4 318.3 255.6 62.7 5,757.0 5,555.9 4,267.3 3,894.6         Dec. 10,355.5 29.9 3,267.4 2,939.4 1,977.4 962.0 328.1 264.9 63.1 5,833.9 5,615.9 4,361.0 3,966.5
1999         Jan. 5,306.1 13.3 1,720.8 1,516.4 1,015.4 501.1 204.4 178.4 26.1 2,936.4 2,812.4 2,182.4 1,980.0
         Feb. 5,258.1 12.9 1,686.2 1,494.5 988.1 506.4 191.7 165.6 26.1 2,948.8 2,828.6 2,190.7 1,986.9         Mar. 5,297.8 12.8 1,681.5 1,493.9 977.8 516.1 187.6 160.0 27.5 2,979.1 2,846.1 2,213.6 1,992.6
         Apr. 5,351.8 12.7 1,711.3 1,518.3 993.2 525.2 193.0 163.1 29.8 2,994.9 2,857.3 2,227.8 1,999.1
         May 5,394.1 13.4 1,723.0 1,528.3 998.2 530.1 194.7 163.9 30.8 3,023.0 2,877.5 2,239.2 2,006.4         June 5,412.9 13.5 1,735.4 1,536.2 1,001.2 534.9 199.2 167.1 32.1 3,019.9 2,871.9 2,243.1 2,027.3
         July 5,437.2 13.1 1,749.2 1,546.1 1,010.1 536.1 203.1 168.9 34.1 3,028.3 2,877.2 2,248.1 2,032.2
         Aug. 5,486.7 13.2 1,782.1 1,576.3 1,035.3 541.0 205.8 170.9 34.9 3,033.5 2,879.8 2,255.0 2,038.3         Sep. 5,541.7 13.3 1,818.2 1,605.2 1,056.8 548.4 213.0 175.9 37.1 3,057.5 2,900.4 2,271.4 2,052.1
         Oct. 5,612.0 13.5 1,840.1 1,624.7 1,070.0 554.7 215.3 176.7 38.6 3,085.4 2,922.3 2,280.6 2,060.3
         Nov. 5,697.7 13.2 1,868.8 1,645.3 1,086.2 559.1 223.5 184.2 39.3 3,110.0 2,944.7 2,298.3 2,073.7         Dec. 5,678.5 17.2 1,836.9 1,635.0 1,081.4 553.6 201.9 161.8 40.1 3,127.4 2,958.6 2,326.4 2,093.4
2000         Jan. 5,706.5 13.5 1,836.5 1,624.2 1,065.9 558.3 212.2 171.2 41.0 3,147.9 2,975.0 2,333.3 2,098.5
         Feb. 5,725.8 13.5 1,823.6 1,611.1 1,047.1 564.0 212.5 169.2 43.3 3,162.8 2,986.2 2,345.6 2,106.7         Mar. 5,804.8 13.1 1,856.6 1,639.4 1,060.6 578.8 217.2 171.9 45.3 3,202.3 3,022.9 2,388.6 2,118.1
         Apr. 5,860.7 14.2 1,863.5 1,647.9 1,059.0 588.9 215.6 169.8 45.8 3,219.3 3,038.4 2,403.5 2,128.7
         May 5,910.4 13.9 1,899.3 1,677.6 1,076.0 601.7 221.6 172.4 49.3 3,231.2 3,050.7 2,418.7 2,136.7         June 5,848.4 13.3 1,887.5 1,665.5 1,066.8 598.6 222.0 171.5 50.6 3,197.2 3,016.9 2,391.1 2,143.6
 Changes 1
1991 70.2 4.2 12.6 11.8 7.4 4.4 0.8 0.5 0.3 52.5 52.0 48.4 47.01992 7.5 3.3 −31.5 −29.1 −29.2 0.1 −2.3 − 2.6 0.2 49.9 50.9 46.3 39.5
1993 135.5 2.1 16.2 0.4 −12.9 13.3 15.8 14.7 1.1 71.8 67.1 67.9 54.6
1994 115.6 2.1 31.5 19.3 22.1 −2.8 12.2 12.5 −0.3 45.6 46.8 39.9 15.0
1995 107.8 3.7 41.8 36.5 26.8 9.7 5.3 5.5 −0.2 47.7 46.2 43.0 41.0
1996 111.6 6.7 18.1 7.7 5.6 2.1 10.4 9.8 0.7 58.0 53.1 74.2 73.71997 41.8 6.2 2.0 −3.3 −0.4 −2.9 5.3 6.6 −1.3 20.4 16.9 52.7 50.7
1998 52.7 4.7 −7.4 −18.8 −18.5 −0.2 11.3 11.0 0.3 80.5 65.5 99.1 77.2
1999 −18.3 4.0 −31.2 −9.6 −4.8 −4.8 −21.6 − 22.4 0.8 18.3 14.7 28.3 19.7
1998         Oct. 135.5 −1.0 89.2 78.2 57.4 20.8 11.0 6.9 4.0 48.3 32.5 18.5 16.0
         Nov. 180.9 −0.6 83.3 59.8 49.2 10.6 23.5 21.1 2.4 54.6 49.7 36.5 20.8
         Dec. 52.7 4.7 −7.4 −18.8 −18.5 −0.2 11.3 11.0 0.3 80.5 65.5 99.1 77.2
1999         Jan. 109.5 −2.0 63.8 20.9 15.3 5.6 42.8 42.9 −0.1 20.5 14.4 15.6 15.7
         Feb. −53.5 −0.4 −34.6 −21.8 −27.3 5.5 −12.8 − 12.8 0.0 11.6 15.7 7.8 6.4
         Mar. 35.7 −0.2 −4.8 −0.6 −10.3 9.7 −4.2 − 5.5 1.3 30.2 17.9 23.1 6.0
         Apr. 52.0 −0.1 29.8 24.4 15.4 9.0 5.3 3.1 2.3 15.6 11.2 14.2 6.4
         May 40.1 0.8 11.7 10.0 5.1 4.9 1.7 0.7 1.0 27.6 19.8 11.1 7.0         June 16.2 0.0 12.3 7.8 3.0 4.8 4.5 3.2 1.3 −3.4 −5.7 3.7 20.8
         July 28.4 −0.4 13.8 10.0 8.8 1.1 3.9 1.8 2.0 7.8 4.3 4.1 4.0
         Aug. 45.8 0.1 32.7 30.1 25.3 4.8 2.6 1.9 0.7 4.4 2.3 6.6 5.8         Sep. 55.6 0.1 36.0 28.8 21.4 7.4 7.2 5.0 2.2 23.9 20.5 16.4 13.7
         Oct. 66.3 0.1 21.8 19.5 13.3 6.3 2.3 0.9 1.4 27.3 21.6 8.9 8.0
         Nov. 77.8 −0.3 28.6 20.6 16.2 4.4 8.0 7.4 0.6 23.1 21.6 16.9 12.7
         Dec. −18.3 4.0 −31.2 −9.6 −4.8 −4.8 −21.6 − 22.4 0.8 18.3 14.7 28.3 19.7
2000         Jan. 23.6 −3.7 1.1 −9.2 −15.5 6.3 10.3 9.4 0.9 17.7 13.9 4.0 2.0
         Feb. 19.2 −0.0 −12.3 −12.6 −18.8 6.2 0.3 − 2.0 2.3 15.0 11.3 12.3 8.2
         Mar. 73.4 −0.4 33.0 28.4 13.5 14.8 4.6 2.8 1.9 38.7 36.6 42.9 11.2
         Apr. 44.9 1.0 6.8 8.5 −1.6 10.1 −1.7 − 2.1 0.4 15.2 14.2 13.7 9.4
         May 55.7 −0.2 35.8 29.7 17.6 12.2 6.1 2.6 3.5 12.9 12.9 15.8 8.6
         June −55.8 −0.6 −11.6 −12.0 −9.1 −2.9 0.5 − 0.9 1.4 −32.2 −32.3 −26.3 7.2
*This table serves to supplement the Overall monetary survey of section II; includes −in addition to the figures reported by banks (including building
it is planned to compare the figures for MFIs in the euro area with the data and loan associations) −the data of money market funds. —1Statistical
for Germany. Notwithstanding the other tables in section IV, this table breaks have been eliminated from the flow figures. —2Up to December
20*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
IV. Banks
    
 
euro area  3 Claims on
non-euro-area
to non-banks in other member countries residents
 Public Enterprises and Public
 authorities individuals authorities
of which: of which:
Secur- Ad- Secur- Ad- Ad- Secur- Ad- Otherities Total vances  
3 ities 4 Total Total vances  3 Total vances  3 ities Total vances  3 assets   Period
End of year or month
 
76.1 668.9 527.3 141.6 53.4 34.7 34.7 18.7 6.6 12.1 425.1 394.5 123.5 199091.5 715.0 582.9 132.1 57.7 35.2 35.2 22.5 6.7 15.8 437.1 399.8 138.7 1991
123.1 767.1 556.3 210.8 62.5 35.1 35.1 27.5 6.7 20.8 446.1 398.5 162.0 1992176.5 849.0 599.6 249.4 79.1 44.5 44.5 34.6 8.4 26.3 565.2 504.8 181.1 1993248.1 941.9 650.1 291.8 78.2 39.6 39.6 38.6 8.3 30.3 548.8 479.6 189.2 1994
250.0 1,086.3 792.2 294.1 88.2 39.4 39.2 48.8 11.3 37.6 608.5 526.0 209.4 1995
269.7 1,169.1 857.8 311.4 102.8 36.8 36.8 66.0 17.2 48.8 678.1 575.3 224.4 1996300.6 1,228.2 911.0 317.2 139.2 41.9 41.2 97.3 23.4 73.9 839.6 710.2 253.1 1997394.5 1,254.9 939.1 315.8 218.0 62.5 56.0 155.5 35.6 119.9 922.0 758.0 302.2 1998233.0 632.1 488.4 143.7 168.8 65.3 35.9 103.6 20.7 82.8 511.2 404.2 185.8 1999
354.5 1,261.5 927.5 334.0 179.5 54.6 51.2 124.9 27.3 97.6 904.0 751.9 295.1 1998          Sep.
357.0 1,275.5 933.7 341.7 195.9 56.3 51.2 139.6 27.6 112.0 900.8 743.1 299.7          Oct.
372.7 1,288.6 937.2 351.4 201.1 58.6 52.5 142.5 27.8 114.7 945.3 782.7 305.1          Nov.394.5 1,254.9 939.1 315.8 218.0 62.5 56.0 155.5 35.6 119.9 922.0 758.0 302.2          Dec.
202.4 630.0 482.8 147.2 124.0 53.1 30.5 70.8 18.2 52.6 475.8 396.4 159.8 1999          Jan.
203.7 637.9 487.6 150.3 120.3 51.2 29.1 69.0 18.1 51.0 447.6 365.7 162.5          Feb.220.9 632.5 485.6 147.0 133.0 56.8 32.3 76.2 18.4 57.8 459.8 378.0 164.7          Mar.
228.7 629.5 483.5 146.1 137.6 55.1 30.7 82.5 18.6 63.8 470.9 387.8 162.1          Apr.
232.8 638.3 482.7 155.6 145.5 57.2 31.8 88.3 18.8 69.5 468.1 377.5 166.6          May215.8 628.9 483.8 145.1 148.0 58.4 32.9 89.6 20.2 69.3 474.2 374.3 169.9          June
215.8 629.2 483.0 146.2 151.1 60.0 34.0 91.1 20.0 71.1 484.0 383.4 162.6          July
216.6 624.9 482.3 142.6 153.7 59.8 33.2 93.9 20.0 73.8 490.0 387.4 167.9          Aug.219.3 629.0 482.7 146.3 157.1 58.9 33.2 98.3 20.0 78.3 486.6 382.2 166.1          Sep.
220.3 641.7 493.2 148.5 163.1 60.6 35.3 102.5 20.1 82.4 500.0 396.9 173.0          Oct.
224.5 646.5 496.2 150.3 165.2 62.7 35.9 102.5 20.8 81.7 519.8 415.1 185.8          Nov.233.0 632.1 488.4 143.7 168.8 65.3 35.9 103.6 20.7 82.8 511.2 404.2 185.8          Dec.
234.8 641.7 490.2 151.5 172.9 66.7 37.7 106.2 20.7 85.5 524.0 414.3 184.7 2000          Jan.
238.8 640.6 485.5 155.2 176.6 68.4 37.8 108.2 20.8 87.4 539.9 425.0 186.0          Feb.270.5 634.3 487.1 147.2 179.4 69.2 38.5 110.2 20.6 89.6 545.8 425.7 187.0          Mar.
274.8 634.9 488.9 146.0 180.9 71.0 38.9 109.9 20.7 89.2 571.5 449.1 192.2          Apr.
281.9 632.0 489.1 142.9 180.5 71.2 38.1 109.3 20.8 88.5 568.9 446.4 197.2          May247.5 625.8 485.4 140.4 180.3 71.9 37.4 108.4 20.6 87.8 556.1 432.0 194.2          June
Changes 1
1.4 3.6 5.9 −2.3 0.5 0.1 0.1 0.3 0.0 0.3 2.4 1.7 −1.5 1991
6.8 4.5 −9.9 14.5 −1.0 −0.8 −0.8 −0.2 −0.1 −0.1 −9.3 −9.4 −4.8 1992
13.3 −0.8 4.9 −5.7 4.8 3.3 3.3 1.4 0.5 0.9 39.1 36.9 6.3 1993
24.9 6.9 4.1 2.8 −1.3 −1.3 −1.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 29.2 26.5 7.2 1994
1.9 3.2 10.0 −6.7 1.5 0.8 0.8 0.8 1.5 −0.7 4.3 −0.6 10.3 1995
0.6 −21.2 −10.1 −11.1 5.0 1.8 1.9 3.2 1.5 1.7 22.7 20.9 6.0 1996
2.1 −35.8 −19.4 −16.4 3.5 0.9 0.8 2.6 4.3 −1.7 11.2 13.7 1.9 1997
21.8 −33.6 1.9 −35.5 15.1 2.2 1.8 12.8 7.8 5.0 −22.2 −23.7 −2.8 1998
8.6 −13.5 −7.2 −6.3 3.5 2.5 −0.0 1.0 −0.1 1.1 −9.3 −11.7 −0.0 1999
2.5 14.0 6.2 7.8 15.8 1.7 0.0 14.1 0.3 13.7 −5.6 −10.5 4.6 1998          Oct.
15.7 13.2 3.5 9.6 4.9 2.2 1.1 2.7 0.1 2.6 38.3 34.2 5.4          Nov.21.8 −33.6 1.9 −35.5 15.1 2.2 1.8 12.8 7.8 5.0 −22.2 −23.7 −2.8          Dec.
−0.1 −1.2 3.7 −4.8 6.1 1.2 1.8 4.9 −0.0 5.0 21.9 26.7 5.3 1999          Jan.
1.4 7.9 4.8 3.1 −4.1 −2.1 −1.5 −2.0 −0.2 −1.7 −32.9 −34.8 2.8          Feb.
17.0 −5.2 −2.1 −3.1 12.4 5.4 3.1 7.0 0.3 6.7 8.3 9.1 2.1          Mar.
7.8 −3.0 −3.6 0.6 4.4 −1.8 −1.7 6.2 0.2 6.0 9.2 8.3 −2.5          Apr.
4.1 8.7 −0.8 9.5 7.8 2.0 1.1 5.8 0.1 5.6 −4.4 −11.8 4.5          May
−17.1 −9.4 1.1 −10.5 2.3 1.1 1.0 1.2 1.4 −0.2 4.0 −4.9 3.3          June
0.1 0.3 −0.8 1.1 3.4 1.8 1.3 1.7 −0.2 1.8 14.5 13.1 −7.3          July
0.8 −4.3 −0.8 −3.5 2.1 −0.4 −1.0 2.5 0.0 2.5 3.3 1.7 5.3          Aug.
2.7 4.1 0.5 3.6 3.4 −0.9 0.1 4.3 −0.0 4.3 −2.7 −4.6 −1.8          Sep.
0.9 12.7 10.5 2.2 5.6 1.6 2.0 4.0 −0.0 4.0 10.2 11.9 6.9          Oct.
4.2 4.7 2.9 1.8 1.5 1.8 0.3 −0.3 0.6 −0.9 13.6 13.1 12.8          Nov.
8.6 −13.5 −7.2 −6.3 3.5 2.5 −0.0 1.0 −0.1 1.1 −9.3 −11.7 −0.0          Dec.
2.0 9.8 1.8 8.1 3.9 1.3 1.7 2.6 −0.1 2.7 9.6 6.9 −1.1 2000          Jan.
4.1 −1.0 −4.8 3.8 3.7 1.7 0.1 2.0 0.1 2.0 15.2 9.9 1.3          Feb.
31.6 −6.3 1.7 −7.9 2.2 0.2 0.6 2.0 −0.3 2.3 1.1 −3.4 1.0          Mar.
4.3 0.5 1.7 −1.2 0.9 1.5 0.1 −0.5 −0.0 −0.5 16.8 15.8 5.2          Apr.
7.2 −2.9 0.2 −3.1 −0.0 0.4 −0.6 −0.4 0.2 −0.6 2.1 1.3 5.2          May
−33.5 −6.0 −3.7 −2.4 0.1 0.9 −0.6 −0.8 −0.2 −0.6 −8.4 −9.6 −3.0          June
1998, volume of business (balance-sheet total plus endorsement liabilities bill-based lending instead of bill holdings. —4Including debt securities
and bills sent for collection from the banks ’portfolios prior to maturity) and arising from the exchange of equalisations claims. 
trust funds. —3Up to December 1998, including loans an a trust basis and
21*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
IV. Banks
 
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
   Liabilities
 
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 euro billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area  4 
in the euro area  3 
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities  X notice  XX 
 
Balance- in the in other of which: of which:sheet home member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total  
2 Total country countries Total Total night Total  4 Total 3 months Total night 2 years  5 
 End of year or month
 
1990 5,412.4 1,359.9 1,281.0 78.9 2,479.9 2,352.5 400.4 1,068.2 432.5 883.9 515.6 47.2 2.31991 5,751.6 1,365.7 1,282.7 83.0 2,617.5 2,482.5 410.5 1,182.8 511.7 889.3 513.4 49.7 2.41992 6,143.1 1,405.6 1,304.2 101.4 2,743.6 2,585.3 444.5 1,228.2 563.5 912.6 522.4 60.6 3.01993 6,799.5 1,556.3 1,438.2 118.1 2,981.8 2,810.6 489.6 1,312.6 628.5 1,008.4 587.7 70.4 3.51994 7,205.7 1,650.9 1,483.5 167.4 3,082.2 2,894.4 510.4 1,288.3 549.2 1,095.8 654.6 79.6 4.1
1995 7,778.7 1,761.5 1,582.0 179.6 3,260.0 3,038.9 549.8 1,289.0 472.0 1,200.1 749.5 110.1 4.5
1996 8,540.5 1,975.3 1,780.2 195.1 3,515.9 3,264.0 638.1 1,318.5 430.6 1,307.4 865.7 137.3 7.51997 9,368.2 2,195.6 1,959.1 236.5 3,647.1 3,376.2 654.5 1,364.9 426.8 1,356.9 929.2 162.5 7.31998 10,355.5 2,480.3 2,148.9 331.4 3,850.8 3,552.1 751.6 1,411.0 461.5 1,389.6 971.9 187.4 9.41999 5,678.5 1,288.1 1,121.8 166.3 2,012.4 1,854.7 419.5 820.6 247.0 614.7 504.4 111.1 6.5
1998         Sep. 9,982.8 2,360.1 2,059.6 300.6 3,680.9 3,384.2 665.1 1,376.0 415.4 1,343.1 935.3 188.4 9.2
         Oct. 10,122.0 2,426.4 2,107.0 319.3 3,697.7 3,402.3 679.1 1,377.4 419.1 1,345.8 938.5 187.7 10.7
         Nov. 10,309.8 2,510.6 2,155.3 355.4 3,747.2 3,450.5 726.5 1,374.6 418.0 1,349.4 941.6 188.6 12.6         Dec. 10,355.5 2,480.3 2,148.9 331.4 3,850.8 3,552.1 751.6 1,411.0 461.5 1,389.6 971.9 187.4 9.4
1999         Jan. 5,306.1 1,273.9 1,068.3 205.6 1,932.1 1,786.6 374.7 791.1 238.4 620.8 500.5 99.8 7.8
         Feb. 5,258.1 1,220.2 1,042.4 177.8 1,945.0 1,790.3 378.5 790.1 237.6 621.7 503.2 108.0 6.3         Mar. 5,297.8 1,210.7 1,031.8 179.0 1,941.3 1,786.1 374.4 792.5 238.1 619.2 501.2 109.8 6.5
         Apr. 5,351.8 1,228.7 1,045.0 183.7 1,942.4 1,786.5 382.2 786.1 232.7 618.2 502.2 110.3 6.1
         May 5,394.1 1,244.6 1,064.2 180.5 1,951.8 1,796.5 393.5 786.0 232.8 616.9 504.4 109.8 6.8         June 5,412.9 1,242.4 1,062.7 179.7 1,956.9 1,796.6 400.8 781.6 226.2 614.2 503.4 113.6 9.5
         July 5,437.2 1,265.1 1,087.9 177.3 1,951.7 1,795.6 397.9 786.1 227.7 611.6 502.8 110.0 6.3
         Aug. 5,486.7 1,279.9 1,100.4 179.5 1,955.0 1,798.9 398.6 791.1 229.8 609.1 501.2 109.6 5.7         Sep. 5,541.7 1,293.4 1,102.8 190.5 1,958.6 1,802.5 404.2 790.0 227.1 608.3 499.6 109.9 5.6
         Oct. 5,612.0 1,317.8 1,130.9 186.9 1,966.3 1,808.1 405.2 796.7 232.2 606.2 498.1 111.3 5.3
         Nov. 5,697.7 1,326.1 1,132.2 193.8 1,994.4 1,834.0 428.8 802.1 234.1 603.1 494.9 114.0 8.6         Dec. 5,678.5 1,288.1 1,121.8 166.3 2,012.4 1,854.7 419.5 820.6 247.0 614.7 504.4 111.1 6.5
2000         Jan. 5,706.5 1,311.9 1,124.7 187.2 2,005.4 1,848.8 424.4 814.9 239.0 609.5 500.2 111.2 8.5
         Feb. 5,725.8 1,297.9 1,105.2 192.6 2,011.7 1,855.1 431.2 818.3 240.3 605.6 495.2 110.3 7.2         Mar. 5,804.8 1,327.9 1,135.5 192.4 2,001.9 1,844.2 426.0 818.2 239.4 600.0 488.9 112.0 7.4
         Apr. 5,860.7 1,317.4 1,122.3 195.1 2,004.3 1,844.7 435.2 816.0 236.5 593.5 482.8 113.4 9.0
         May 5,910.4 1,341.9 1,134.2 207.6 1,998.2 1,842.8 428.3 826.9 245.8 587.6 475.7 109.8 6.1         June 5,848.4 1,308.6 1,112.6 196.0 1,996.3 1,833.9 425.5 826.1 243.7 582.3 468.8 110.6 8.2
 Changes 1
1991 70.2 2.4 4.1 −1.7 82.4 82.0 16.5 25.7 19.9 39.7 23.0 −1.0 −0.1
1992 7.5 −14.7 −15.6 0.9 38.8 35.7 −1.1 −1.0 −2.1 37.8 20.2 0.6 0.0
1993 135.5 23.2 20.2 3.0 102.1 98.2 7.7 37.9 35.2 52.6 33.2 1.8 0.11994 115.6 30.0 11.9 18.1 37.2 44.2 3.8 1.8 −7.4 38.6 22.4 −8.9 −0.9
1995 107.8 23.6 27.7 −4.1 86.8 74.0 19.7 8.4 1.2 45.9 32.8 9.8 0.4
1996 111.6 17.4 15.5 1.8 118.0 109.3 46.7 20.7 14.0 41.9 32.0 4.7 2.01997 41.8 −7.0 5.9 −12.9 74.9 72.8 12.9 21.8 16.5 38.0 27.1 0.8 −0.1
1998 52.7 −30.3 −6.3 −24.0 103.9 101.9 25.2 36.5 43.6 40.2 29.6 −1.1 −3.3
1999 −18.3 −38.0 −10.5 −27.5 17.8 20.6 −9.4 18.4 13.0 11.6 9.5 −3.0 −2.1
1998         Oct. 135.5 66.2 47.5 18.8 16.6 18.1 13.9 1.4 3.7 2.8 3.2 −0.8 1.4
         Nov. 180.9 84.2 48.2 36.0 48.6 47.8 47.0 −2.8 −1.1 3.5 3.1 0.4 2.0
         Dec. 52.7 −30.3 −6.3 −24.0 103.9 101.9 25.2 36.5 43.6 40.2 29.6 −1.1 −3.3
1999         Jan. 109.5 49.7 13.5 36.2 5.2 −0.9 −9.8 8.1 5.4 0.8 3.6 5.1 3.0
         Feb. −53.5 −46.9 −25.8 −21.0 5.3 3.5 3.7 −1.1 −0.9 0.9 2.8 1.0 −1.6
         Mar. 35.7 −9.5 −10.7 1.2 −4.2 −4.6 −4.2 2.1 0.4 −2.6 −2.1 1.5 0.2
         Apr. 52.0 18.0 13.3 4.7 0.9 0.4 7.7 −6.3 −5.5 −1.0 1.1 0.4 −0.3
         May 40.1 15.9 19.1 −3.2 9.1 9.8 11.2 −0.2 0.0 −1.3 2.2 −0.7 0.7
         June 16.2 −2.2 −1.5 −0.7 4.8 0.0 7.2 −4.5 −6.6 −2.7 −1.0 3.6 2.8
         July 28.4 22.1 24.6 −2.5 −4.5 −0.7 −2.8 4.7 1.6 −2.6 −0.6 −3.2 −3.2
         Aug. 45.8 14.8 12.5 2.3 3.0 3.1 0.6 4.9 2.1 −2.5 −1.6 −0.6 −0.6
         Sep. 55.6 13.5 2.5 11.0 3.6 3.7 5.7 −1.2 −2.7 −0.8 −1.5 0.3 −0.1
         Oct. 66.3 24.4 28.0 −3.6 7.2 5.4 0.9 6.6 5.0 −2.1 −1.5 1.2 −0.3
         Nov. 77.8 8.3 1.3 7.0 27.2 25.5 23.3 5.3 1.8 −3.1 −3.3 2.2 3.3
         Dec. −18.3 −38.0 −10.5 −27.5 17.8 20.6 −9.4 18.4 13.0 11.6 9.5 −3.0 −2.1
2000         Jan. 23.6 21.4 2.7 18.7 −7.5 −6.1 4.8 −5.8 −8.0 −5.1 −4.2 −0.1 2.0
         Feb. 19.2 −14.1 −19.5 5.4 6.2 6.3 6.8 3.5 1.3 −4.0 −5.0 −0.9 −1.3
         Mar. 73.4 30.0 30.2 −0.2 −10.4 −11.1 −5.5 −0.1 −0.9 −5.5 −6.3 1.3 0.1
         Apr. 44.9 −10.5 −13.2 2.7 1.1 −0.1 8.8 −2.4 −3.0 −6.5 −6.1 0.8 1.6
         May 55.7 24.5 11.9 12.6 −5.4 −1.6 −5.6 9.9 9.3 −5.9 −7.1 −3.3 −2.8
         June −55.8 −33.3 −21.6 −11.7 −1.3 −8.7 −2.6 −0.7 −2.1 −5.4 −6.9 1.1 2.0
*This table serves to supplement the Overall monetary survey of section II; breaks have been eliminated from the flow figures. —2Up to December
it is planned to compare the figures for MFIs in the euro area with the data 1998, volume of business (balance-sheet total plus endorsement liabilitiesfor Germany. Notwithstanding the other tables in section IV, this table and bills sent for collection from the banks ’portfolios prior to maturity) and
includes −in addition to the figures reported by banks (including building liabilities incurred in the banks ’own name but on behalf of third parties. —
and loan associations) −the data of money market funds. —1Statistical 3Up to December 1998, including liabilities arising from loans on a trust
22IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
IV. Banks
    
 
 Debt securities
issued
in other member countries  6 Deposits of Money
market central governments  4 
With agreed At agreed papermaturities notice and
of which: money of which: Liabilitiesdomestic market with to non- Liabilities
of which: of which: central arising fund euro- Capital maturities
up to up to govern- from of up to area and Other certificates
Total  
4 Total 3 months Total ments repos  7 issued Total 2 years reserves   Period 2 years  5 residents  8 Liabilities
End of year or month
 
40.5 4.6 4.4 4.4 80.2 80.2 − 2.8 918.3 33.9 203.1 209.6 238.9 1990
42.6 4.8 4.6 4.6 85.3 85.3 − 4.4 1,054.8 36.0 213.7 229.2 266.3 1991
52.0 5.9 5.6 5.6 97.6 97.6 − 9.4 1,165.7 44.6 260.9 256.6 301.4 1992
60.3 6.8 6.5 6.5 100.8 100.8 − 18.7 1,309.0 66.8 302.5 278.3 353.0 1993
68.5 11.8 7.0 7.0 108.2 108.2 − 53.8 1,418.7 59.4 337.3 305.2 357.8 1994
97.3 11.4 8.3 8.3 111.0 111.0 − 60.5 1,586.7 48.9 393.9 325.0 391.0 1995
120.6 9.0 9.2 9.2 114.6 114.6 − 53.2 1,785.1 35.2 422.1 350.0 438.8 1996
145.8 9.2 9.4 9.4 108.3 108.3 − 54.6 1,973.3 37.5 599.2 387.2 511.3 1997
168.3 13.8 9.7 9.7 111.2 111.2 − 84.1 2,209.9 41.9 739.8 415.9 574.8 1998
99.7 8.9 4.8 3.7 46.6 45.9 2.0 96.1 1,274.0 47.8 487.9 237.0 281.1 1999
169.9 12.0 9.3 9.3 108.4 108.4 − 72.0 2,187.6 41.7 657.7 406.8 617.7 1998          Sep.
167.7 11.5 9.4 9.4 107.7 107.7 − 74.1 2,196.1 42.5 697.5 409.1 621.0          Oct.
166.5 12.4 9.4 9.4 108.1 108.1 − 81.0 2,215.2 41.5 741.7 411.3 602.8          Nov.
168.3 13.8 9.7 9.7 111.2 111.2 − 84.1 2,209.9 41.9 739.8 415.9 574.8          Dec.
87.1 6.7 4.9 3.4 45.8 45.2 1.5 42.1 1,153.9 17.3 400.7 213.2 288.8 1999          Jan.
96.8 5.7 5.0 3.5 46.6 44.6 2.0 44.6 1,172.1 19.4 396.0 216.5 261.7          Feb.98.5 5.6 4.9 3.5 45.4 44.8 1.9 45.5 1,188.5 22.5 411.4 218.4 280.1          Mar.
99.5 5.5 4.7 3.5 45.5 44.8 1.3 50.4 1,211.3 28.3 421.8 222.9 272.9          Apr.
98.4 5.4 4.6 3.5 45.5 44.8 1.5 53.5 1,225.4 33.9 429.9 226.7 260.6          May99.4 5.8 4.6 3.5 46.7 45.6 1.6 55.6 1,232.9 32.6 428.0 227.9 267.7          June
99.2 6.3 4.5 3.5 46.0 45.1 1.0 55.1 1,238.0 34.7 426.0 229.3 271.0          July
99.3 6.0 4.6 3.5 46.5 45.4 1.6 61.6 1,248.1 34.5 436.4 229.7 274.4          Aug.99.6 6.1 4.6 3.5 46.2 44.9 1.2 69.2 1,270.3 37.5 435.4 232.7 281.1          Sep.
101.4 8.8 4.6 3.5 46.9 45.1 1.8 73.9 1,278.4 43.3 451.5 235.0 287.4          Oct.
100.7 7.8 4.6 3.5 46.5 45.1 1.7 91.4 1,285.5 46.0 477.7 236.1 284.8          Nov.
99.7 8.9 4.8 3.7 46.6 45.9 2.0 96.1 1,274.0 47.8 487.9 237.0 281.1          Dec.
97.9 6.6 4.8 3.6 45.4 44.3 1.9 90.2 1,277.4 50.6 504.1 239.3 276.4 2000          Jan.
98.3 5.6 4.8 3.6 46.2 44.7 1.1 96.4 1,288.2 55.1 518.3 240.1 272.2          Feb.99.9 7.7 4.7 3.5 45.7 44.8 0.9 99.5 1,300.4 58.4 555.3 241.8 277.2          Mar.
99.8 7.0 4.7 3.5 46.1 44.4 2.7 99.9 1,321.9 60.5 586.8 242.9 284.9          Apr.
99.0 6.9 4.7 3.4 45.6 44.2 2.9 101.7 1,339.6 61.7 594.5 244.1 287.5          May97.7 6.4 4.7 3.4 51.8 50.0 1.8 109.2 1,339.0 62.7 554.9 246.5 292.2          June
Changes 1
−0.9 −0.1 −0.1 −0.1 1.5 1.5 − 0.7 1.2 0.7 −4.4 1.4 −13.5 1991
0.5 0.1 0.1 0.1 2.5 2.5 −− 1.4 −8.4 −1.7 2.0 4.1 −12.8 1992
1.3 0.1 0.4 0.4 2.1 2.1 − 0.6 −4.8 9.8 6.2 2.4 5.8 1993
−8.1 1.3 0.2 0.2 1.8 1.8 − 21.9 12.5 −16.7 15.7 1.4 −3.2 1994
9.0 −2.3 0.4 0.4 3.0 3.0 − 7.6 9.6 −0.7 −3.8 2.8 −18.8 1995
2.4 0.4 0.3 0.3 4.0 4.0 −− 2.0 −0.2 0.7 4.5 1.7 −27.9 1996
0.6 0.6 0.3 0.3 1.4 1.4 − 0.0 −12.5 −0.5 1.3 3.4 −18.4 1997
2.0 1.3 0.2 0.2 3.1 3.1 − 3.2 −6.1 0.4 −0.4 4.6 −22.0 1998
−1.0 1.0 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.8 0.3 4.7 −11.7 1.8 9.3 0.9 −1.6 1999
−2.4 −0.4 0.1 0.1 −0.7 −0.7 − 2.3 4.4 0.6 38.4 2.4 5.2 1998          Oct.
−1.6 0.9 0.1 0.1 0.4 0.4 − 6.7 17.7 −1.0 38.6 2.2 −17.1          Nov.
2.0 1.3 0.2 0.2 3.1 3.1 − 3.2 −6.1 0.4 −0.4 4.6 −22.0          Dec.
2.2 1.1 −0.1 −1.5 0.9 0.3 0.1 −0.9 23.1 2.6 26.4 0.5 5.4 1999          Jan.
2.4 −1.0 0.2 0.0 0.8 −0.6 0.5 2.4 16.7 2.1 −9.0 3.3 −25.9          Feb.
1.4 −0.1 −0.1 −0.0 −1.0 0.4 −0.2 0.9 15.0 3.1 11.9 1.9 19.8          Mar.
0.9 −0.1 −0.2 0.0 0.1 −0.1 −0.5 4.8 22.3 3.1 8.8 4.5 −6.8          Apr.
−1.3 −0.1 −0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.2 3.0 13.5 5.6 6.5 3.7 −11.8          May
0.9 0.4 0.0 −0.0 1.2 0.8 0.1 2.1 6.7 −1.3 −4.0 1.2 7.6          June
0.2 0.6 −0.1 −0.0 −0.6 −0.4 −0.6 −0.4 6.4 2.1 2.7 1.2 1.5          July
−0.1 −0.3 0.0 0.0 0.5 0.3 0.5 6.4 8.6 −0.3 8.2 0.4 3.9          Aug.
0.4 0.1 0.0 0.0 −0.4 −0.5 −0.4 7.6 22.2 3.0 −0.0 3.0 6.1          Sep.
1.5 1.0 0.0 0.0 0.7 0.2 0.7 4.7 6.8 5.7 12.8 2.2 7.5          Oct.
−1.2 −1.0 0.0 0.0 −0.4 −0.1 −0.1 17.3 4.7 2.6 19.8 1.1 −0.4          Nov.
−1.0 1.0 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.8 0.3 4.7 −11.7 1.8 9.3 0.9 −1.6          Dec.
−2.1 −2.3 −0.0 −0.0 −1.3 −1.5 −0.1 −5.9 2.6 2.8 12.1 2.2 −1.2 2000          Jan.
0.4 0.7 −0.0 −0.0 0.9 0.4 −0.8 6.3 10.8 4.5 13.0 0.8 −3.0          Feb.
1.2 2.1 −0.0 −0.0 −0.6 0.0 −0.2 2.7 10.0 3.2 31.9 1.7 7.7          Mar.
−0.8 −0.8 −0.0 −0.0 0.4 −0.5 1.8 0.2 18.8 2.0 20.8 1.1 11.6          Apr.
−0.5 −0.1 −0.0 −0.1 −0.5 −0.2 0.2 2.0 19.2 1.2 13.4 1.2 0.7          May
−1.0 −0.4 −0.0 −0.1 6.3 5.7 −1.0 7.6 0.6 1.0 −34.3 2.4 3.5          June
basis and liabilities arising from rediscounted bills (endorsement with agreed maturities of up to 2 years. —8Excluding liabilities arising
liabilities). —4Up to December 1998, including liabilities arising from loans from securities issued. —XFor the German contribution: from 1999
on a trust basis. —5Up to December 1998, with maturities of less than 4 including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see table IV.12). —
years. —6Excluding central governments ’deposits. —7Data collected XXFor the German contribution: up to the end of 1998 including deposits
separately only from 1999; up to December 1998, included in the deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote X). 
23*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
IV. Banks
 
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks *
  
euro billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
  of which: of which: 
Loans and advances
 not evidenced
 Cash in by certificates for hand and
Number of balancesreporting Balance with Balances Parici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by up to over issued by pating Othermonth tions total  
1 banks Total advances banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets
All categories of banks
 
2000         Jan. 2,987 5,767.2 56.7 1,988.2 1,416.1 553.7 3,329.1 403.5 2,415.5 8.0 453.8 110.1 283.1
         Feb. 2,986 5,785.6 47.5 1,991.6 1,411.9 560.4 3,347.6 406.0 2,420.1 7.9 465.8 110.6 288.3         Mar. 2,980 5,864.3 55.0 2,011.0 1,414.4 573.5 3,397.3 419.9 2,426.3 8.0 496.3 111.2 289.8
         Apr. 2,970 5,921.2 53.3 2,032.2 1,425.4 580.5 3,427.9 430.9 2,440.0 8.1 501.8 112.3 295.5
         May 2,947 5,971.7 50.7 2,072.0 1,449.7 596.4 3,434.7 426.4 2,447.6 8.1 507.3 113.5 300.9         June 2,913 5,910.8 62.3 2,046.6 1,426.0 593.8 3,388.2 412.6 2,451.2 7.8 470.7 115.5 298.2
Commercial banks
2000         May 289 1,690.3 18.3 550.5 409.2 134.7 936.1 223.9 510.1 4.1 185.4 70.4 114.9
         June 289 1,614.3 31.1 511.6 378.5 126.7 886.7 202.9 512.8 3.9 154.1 71.9 112.9
   Big banks 7
2000         May 4 943.3 9.0 278.4 212.5 61.9 526.9 122.9 290.3 2.3 108.4 60.8 68.3
         June 4 907.7 23.0 257.8 196.5 57.5 495.7 111.1 292.7 2.2 86.3 62.2 69.0
   Regional banks and other commercial banks 8, 9
2000         May 198 625.3 8.3 212.5 145.2 65.0 359.4 77.4 206.9 1.2 64.3 8.1 36.8
         June 198 596.3 7.1 198.3 134.7 61.4 348.0 74.4 207.6 1.2 55.2 8.2 34.7
   Branches of foreign banks
2000         May 87 121.7 1.0 59.6 51.6 7.8 49.8 23.7 12.8 0.6 12.7 1.6 9.8
         June 87 110.3 1.0 55.6 47.3 7.9 43.1 17.4 12.5 0.5 12.6 1.6 9.2
Land banks 10
2000         May 13 1,178.8 3.0 568.0 459.3 95.7 525.0 50.3 383.6 0.6 75.1 17.7 65.1
         June 13 1,177.5 2.8 568.3 458.3 96.3 525.0 52.9 381.4 0.5 74.6 17.9 63.6
Savings banks
2000         May 565 917.0 17.7 211.1 51.5 159.0 652.2 72.2 487.5 1.9 85.6 10.6 25.5
         June 565 921.8 16.3 213.8 54.2 159.1 656.0 74.7 488.6 1.9 85.9 10.7 25.0
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives (including Deutsche Genossenschaftsbank)  
 
2000         May 4 214.1 0.3 132.8 91.5 40.9 65.6 15.3 28.6 0.3 14.9 7.7 7.7
         June 4 215.6 0.7 136.6 94.6 41.5 63.2 15.1 28.5 0.3 12.7 7.8 7.3
Credit cooperatives
2000         May 2,000 522.0 10.7 129.2 53.6 75.2 360.6 50.2 272.7 1.2 35.7 3.1 18.4
         June 1,966 523.1 10.2 128.6 53.5 74.8 363.0 52.1 273.3 1.2 35.7 3.1 18.2
Mortgage banks
2000         May 31 864.9 0.4 224.9 169.6 53.3 611.6 7.1 527.4 − 74.7 2.2 25.7
         June 31 868.6 0.5 224.8 167.9 54.8 614.2 7.8 528.9 − 75.1 2.4 26.7
Building and loan associations 11
2000         May 32 148.0 0.0 32.6 21.8 9.9 107.6 1.8 96.3 − 9.5 0.6 7.3
         June 32 148.8 0.0 33.3 22.4 10.1 107.7 1.9 96.9 − 9.0 0.6 7.2
Banks with special functions 12
2000         May 13 436.6 0.2 222.9 193.1 27.6 176.0 5.6 141.3 0.0 26.4 1.1 36.4
         June 13 441.1 0.6 229.7 196.6 30.3 172.3 5.2 140.9 0.1 23.6 1.1 37.4
Memo item: Foreign banks 13
2000         May 144 254.0 2.6 112.9 95.1 17.5 111.8 40.0 45.8 0.8 21.9 2.6 24.1
         June 144 229.8 2.2 100.3 83.3 16.6 102.8 33.4 45.4 0.8 19.9 2.6 21.9
  of which: Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 14
2000         May 57 132.3 1.6 53.3 43.6 9.7 62.0 16.4 33.0 0.3 9.1 1.0 14.3
         June 57 119.5 1.3 44.8 36.0 8.7 59.7 16.0 32.9 0.3 7.3 1.0 12.7
*For the period up to December 1998, section IV (except for table IV.1) from rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks ’
shows the assets and liabilities of banks (excluding building and loan portfolios prior to maturity). —2Since the inclusion of building and loan
associations) in Germany; from January 1999, the assets and liabilities of associations in January 1999, including deposits under savings and loanmonetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets and liabilities contracts (see table IV. 12). —3Included in time deposits. —4Up to
of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are likewise classified as December 1998, including loans on a trust basis. —5Excluding deposits
MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). —6Including
respective items, see the footnotes to table IV.3. —1Up to December 1998, subordinated negotiable bearer debt securities; excluding non-negotiable
volume of business (balance sheet total plus endorsement liabilities arising bearer debt securities. —7Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner Bank AG,
24*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
IV. Banks
    
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs)  4 Capital
  (including
of which: of which: published
reserves,
Savings deposits  5 partici- Time deposits for  2 
pation
Memo rightsitem: Bearer capital,
of which: debt Liabilities
funds for
arising At three Bank general securities
Sight Time Sight up to over from savings out- banking Other   End of months ’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year  2 repos  3 Total notice bonds risks   month standing  6 liabilities
All categories of banks
 
1,639.4 234.1 1,405.0 2,189.0 456.4 281.6 714.8 15.7 621.5 509.2 114.7 1,338.7 239.3 360.8 2000          Jan.
1,638.4 223.1 1,415.1 2,195.5 465.0 278.8 720.1 15.2 617.5 504.2 114.2 1,354.8 240.1 356.8          Feb.1,688.9 237.0 1,451.6 2,202.0 467.8 282.0 726.5 15.0 611.9 497.8 113.8 1,370.0 241.8 361.6          Mar.
1,707.1 243.5 1,463.4 2,209.1 480.0 277.0 733.1 14.9 605.3 491.6 113.7 1,392.4 242.9 369.7          Apr.
1,730.4 232.4 1,497.8 2,211.8 472.1 293.8 732.6 21.1 599.4 484.4 113.9 1,412.6 244.1 372.7          May1,675.0 239.1 1,435.7 2,191.3 462.1 289.0 732.5 11.2 593.9 477.4 113.9 1,420.4 246.5 377.5          June
Commercial banks
658.0 138.4 519.5 587.2 211.8 124.5 141.0 18.0 97.3 78.0 12.7 213.9 87.7 143.6 2000          May
603.2 142.9 460.1 566.9 200.0 118.6 140.2 8.9 95.5 76.1 12.6 211.7 88.6 144.0          June
Big banks 7
373.1 82.3 290.7 304.3 108.7 74.8 87.8 16.5 31.3 28.6 1.8 145.1 54.9 65.9 2000          May
347.4 88.2 259.2 288.0 98.8 69.4 87.6 8.2 30.3 27.7 1.8 144.3 55.2 72.9          June
Regional banks and other commercial banks 8, 9
203.5 34.0 169.3 271.2 97.9 46.4 50.1 0.9 66.0 49.4 10.8 68.6 29.3 52.7 2000          May
182.3 37.4 144.8 266.4 95.7 45.2 49.5 0.1 65.2 48.4 10.8 67.3 29.9 50.5          June
Branches of foreign banks
81.5 22.0 59.4 11.6 5.2 3.3 3.1 0.6 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 3.6 25.0 2000          May
73.5 17.3 56.1 12.5 5.5 4.0 3.0 0.6 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 3.6 20.6          June
Land banks 10
427.8 46.1 381.8 276.1 32.2 39.3 188.7 2.8 15.0 13.3 1.0 370.7 45.0 59.2 2000          May
417.8 55.5 362.4 277.2 34.5 38.0 189.0 2.1 14.8 13.1 1.0 376.0 45.5 61.0          June
Savings banks
208.5 7.8 200.7 581.6 136.1 62.1 7.3 − 306.5 243.8 69.7 46.1 39.2 41.6 2000          May
214.7 6.6 208.1 577.4 134.8 61.2 7.2 − 304.4 241.0 69.8 46.3 39.7 43.7          June
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives  (including Deutsche Genossenschaftsbank)
 
120.6 24.7 95.9 28.1 5.2 4.3 18.6 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 45.9 8.9 10.7 2000          May
119.8 20.0 99.8 31.7 5.9 6.0 19.8 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 44.6 8.9 10.6          June
Credit cooperatives
75.9 2.2 73.7 371.5 84.8 55.8 20.3 − 180.3 149.0 30.3 29.5 26.5 18.6 2000          May
78.3 2.9 75.3 369.5 84.7 55.3 20.4 − 178.9 146.9 30.3 29.7 26.7 19.0          June
Mortgage banks
95.7 8.8 86.9 139.7 0.9 2.0 136.5 − 0.1 0.1 0.2 589.9 16.7 22.8 2000          May
97.8 5.1 92.7 140.6 1.1 2.0 137.2 − 0.1 0.0 0.2 590.1 16.9 23.1          June
Building and loan associations 11
25.8 2.8 23.0 97.0 0.3 0.4 96.0 − 0.3 0.3 0.1 4.1 6.9 14.3 2000          May
26.4 2.2 24.2 96.6 0.3 0.4 95.6 − 0.3 0.3 0.1 4.2 6.9 14.8          June
Banks with special functions 12
118.0 1.5 116.5 130.7 0.9 5.4 124.4 −−−− 112.6 13.3 62.1 2000          May
117.0 3.8 113.2 131.4 0.9 7.5 123.0 −−−− 117.8 13.3 61.5          June
Memo item: Foreign banks 13
127.9 35.4 92.4 57.0 23.3 14.7 12.8 0.8 5.0 4.0 1.3 14.9 10.4 43.8 2000          May
109.7 29.2 80.5 58.0 24.5 14.6 12.8 0.6 4.8 3.9 1.3 14.0 10.3 37.7          June
of which: Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 14
46.4 13.4 33.0 45.4 18.1 11.4 9.7 0.2 4.9 3.9 1.3 14.8 6.8 18.8 2000          May
36.3 11.8 24.4 45.4 19.0 10.6 9.8 − 4.8 3.9 1.3 13.9 6.8 17.1          June
Commerzbank AG and, from 1999, Bayerische Hypo- und Postbank AG; see footnote 8. —13Sum of the banks majority-owned by
Vereinsbank AG. —8From January 1999 including institutions of the foreign banks and included in other categories of banks and of the category
discontinued category "Private bankers" and including Deutsche Postbank ”Branches (of dependent legal status) of foreign banks ”— 14Separate
AG.—9Up to December 1998, including Bayerische Hypo- und Vereinsbank presentation of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks included in the
AG; see footnote 7. —10 Previously known as: ”Regional giro categories ”Regional banks and other commercial banks ”and, up to
institutions ”.—11Assets and liabilities of building and loan associations December 1998, in the categories ”Private bankers ” and ”Mortgage banks ”. 
included from 1999 only. —12Up to December 1998, including Deutsche
25*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
IV. Banks
 
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis- à-vis residents *
 
 
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 euro billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs)  2, 3 Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3, 8 
Balances Treasury
Cash in and loans Negotiable Loans and bills andhand and ad- money advances negotiable
Balances market Memo not money mar- (euro-area vances not Securities
notes with the evidenced paper item: evidenced ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- by certi- issued by issued by Trust by certi- issued by by non-
Period coins)  
1 bank Total ficates Bills  4 banks  5 banks  6 loans  7 Total ficates Bills  4 non-banks banks  9 
End of year or month *
 
1990 21.1 96.6 1,420.8 1,001.7 16.8 − 396.8 5.5 2,875.0 2,546.9 61.1 19.7 171.7
1991 22.8 90.0 1,424.9 976.5 22.5 − 419.5 6.3 3,147.0 2,813.8 62.5 11.7 181.5
1992 26.8 88.2 1,483.5 1,020.8 19.0 − 435.1 8.6 3,478.2 3,034.9 52.1 9.6 237.8
1993 26.7 75.3 1,596.8 1,076.2 14.7 3.3 493.2 9.3 3,826.4 3,291.6 44.7 5.6 327.71994 25.0 61.5 1,695.6 1,150.6 17.4 4.6 513.6 9.5 4,137.2 3,502.8 45.9 2.2 433.7
1995 26.0 61.0 1,859.9 1,264.9 17.5 4.3 561.9 11.4 4,436.9 3,802.0 46.8 1.4 427.3
1996 28.9 59.7 2,134.0 1,443.3 17.9 3.4 657.2 12.2 4,773.1 4,097.9 44.8 5.9 437.21997 29.3 60.2 2,397.9 1,606.3 18.1 3.6 758.9 11.1 5,058.4 4,353.9 44.7 2.9 473.31998 28.5 63.6 2,738.2 1,814.7 14.6 12.2 887.7 9.1 5,379.8 4,639.7 32.8 5.0 527.81999 16.8 45.6 1,556.9 1,033.4 0.0 19.2 504.2 3.9 2,904.5 2,569.6 7.0 3.0 287.5
1999         Jan. 12.8 37.0 1,450.7 976.3 0.1 6.0 468.2 4.4 2,765.0 2,449.3 7.5 4.3 267.3
         Feb. 12.4 37.2 1,427.9 948.4 0.1 5.6 473.8 4.5 2,781.3 2,460.7 8.1 3.1 272.9         Mar. 12.1 37.4 1,427.2 938.1 0.1 4.7 484.3 4.4 2,798.1 2,464.1 8.4 3.8 285.2
         Apr. 12.0 40.7 1,449.2 950.0 0.1 5.6 493.4 4.3 2,808.1 2,468.6 8.2 5.7 287.3
         May 12.8 39.2 1,459.8 956.0 0.1 5.0 498.6 4.2 2,827.5 2,475.3 8.0 4.6 301.2         June 12.8 34.3 1,472.6 964.5 0.1 4.9 503.1 4.1 2,821.9 2,497.6 7.9 4.1 274.0
         July 12.4 39.4 1,477.3 968.6 0.0 5.1 503.6 3.9 2,826.6 2,502.0 7.7 4.4 275.4
         Aug. 12.6 40.0 1,506.0 992.4 0.0 6.9 506.6 4.1 2,829.6 2,507.6 7.5 4.1 273.1         Sep. 12.8 44.1 1,529.0 1,010.0 0.0 9.5 509.5 4.1 2,846.8 2,521.9 7.4 3.7 276.5
         Oct. 13.0 48.7 1,543.9 1,019.0 0.0 11.8 513.0 4.0 2,868.4 2,540.8 7.3 4.5 278.5
         Nov. 12.7 40.4 1,572.7 1,043.5 0.0 16.3 512.9 4.0 2,890.9 2,557.2 7.3 3.8 285.2         Dec. 16.8 45.6 1,556.9 1,033.4 0.0 19.2 504.2 3.9 2,904.5 2,569.6 7.0 3.0 287.5
2000         Jan. 13.0 43.1 1,547.4 1,019.8 0.0 17.9 509.7 4.1 2,922.0 2,576.5 6.8 4.2 297.0
         Feb. 13.0 34.0 1,542.8 1,010.2 0.0 18.7 513.9 3.8 2,933.2 2,580.1 6.7 3.6 305.3         Mar. 12.6 41.7 1,563.5 1,016.5 0.0 22.2 524.8 3.8 2,969.8 2,593.2 6.8 2.7 329.6
         Apr. 13.7 38.9 1,575.1 1,018.0 0.0 25.8 531.3 3.8 2,984.8 2,605.5 6.8 2.7 332.1
         May 13.2 36.7 1,607.0 1,037.2 0.0 25.4 544.5 3.8 2,996.7 2,613.8 6.8 2.4 336.1         June 12.7 48.9 1,583.0 1,016.0 0.0 26.3 540.8 3.7 2,961.4 2,617.2 6.6 2.2 297.8
Changes *
1991 + 1.7 −6.6 + 46.4 + 13.4 + 5.8 − + 26.5 + 0.8 + 285.7 + 281.1 + 1.3 −8.0 + 13.4
1992 + 2.8 + 6.3 + 77.6 + 61.0 −3.5 − + 17.8 + 2.3 + 294.3 + 249.2 −10.4 −2.2 + 57.1
1993 −0.1 −12.9 + 133.3 + 75.2 −4.3 + 0.1 + 61.5 + 0.7 + 339.8 + 259.1 −7.4 −4.5 + 102.0
1994 −1.7 −13.8 + 99.1 + 73.6 + 2.7 + 1.3 + 21.3 + 0.1 + 320.5 + 240.2 + 1.2 −3.3 + 86.7
1995 + 1.0 −0.5 + 193.5 + 139.4 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 54.3 + 0.2 + 312.8 + 303.6 + 1.0 −0.8 + 2.9
1996 + 2.9 −1.3 + 257.8 + 161.8 + 0.4 − 1.1 + 95.8 + 0.8 + 336.3 + 311.7 −2.0 + 4.7 + 10.6
1997 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 262.5 + 160.7 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 102.6 −1.1 + 285.2 + 255.5 −0.1 −3.0 + 36.5
1998 −0.8 + 3.4 + 343.3 + 210.3 −3.6 + 8.6 + 130.0 −2.0 + 335.3 + 302.1 −11.9 + 2.1 + 52.1
1999 + 2.2 + 13.2 + 122.1 + 66.3 + 0.0 + 12.9 + 42.8 −0.7 + 156.1 + 136.9 + 2.6 + 0.4 + 16.7
1999         Jan. −1.8 + 4.5 + 17.6 + 11.9 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 5.8 −0.2 + 18.4 + 19.4 + 3.2 + 1.7 − 5.9
         Feb. −0.4 + 0.2 −23.1 −28.4 −0.0 − 0.5 + 5.7 + 0.0 + 15.8 + 10.8 + 0.6 −1.2 + 5.7
         Mar. −0.2 + 0.2 − 1.1 −10.7 −0.0 − 0.9 + 10.5 −0.1 + 17.0 + 3.6 + 0.2 + 0.7 + 12.3
         Apr. −0.1 + 3.4 + 21.8 + 11.7 −0.0 + 1.0 + 9.2 −0.2 + 9.9 + 4.4 −0.2 + 1.9 + 3.6
         May + 0.7 −1.5 + 10.4 + 5.8 −0.0 − 0.6 + 5.2 −0.1 + 19.0 + 6.4 −0.2 −1.1 + 13.9
         June −0.0 −4.9 + 12.6 + 8.3 −0.0 − 0.1 + 4.4 −0.1 − 5.6 + 22.2 −0.1 −0.5 −27.2
         July −0.3 + 5.1 + 5.2 + 4.4 −0.0 + 0.2 + 0.5 −0.2 + 3.7 + 3.4 −0.2 + 0.2 + 1.4
         Aug. + 0.2 + 0.7 + 28.4 + 23.6 −0.0 + 1.8 + 3.0 + 0.2 + 2.7 + 5.3 −0.2 −0.3 − 2.3
         Sep. + 0.1 + 4.0 + 23.0 + 17.6 −0.0 + 2.4 + 3.0 −0.0 + 17.1 + 14.2 −0.1 −0.4 + 3.4
         Oct. + 0.2 + 4.6 + 14.5 + 8.6 + 0.0 + 2.3 + 3.5 −0.0 + 21.2 + 18.5 −0.0 + 0.8 + 2.0
         Nov. −0.2 −8.3 + 28.1 + 23.7 − + 4.5 − 0.1 −0.1 + 21.6 + 15.6 −0.0 −0.7 + 6.8
         Dec. + 4.1 + 5.2 −15.3 −10.2 −0.0 + 2.9 − 7.9 −0.1 + 15.2 + 13.2 −0.3 −0.8 + 3.0
2000         Jan. −3.7 −2.5 − 8.4 −14.2 −0.0 − 1.3 + 7.1 + 0.1 + 14.9 + 3.8 −0.1 + 1.2 + 10.0
         Feb. −0.0 −9.1 − 4.2 − 9.6 + 0.0 + 0.8 + 4.6 −0.2 + 11.3 + 3.6 −0.1 −0.6 + 8.4
         Mar. −0.4 + 7.7 + 20.2 + 5.6 −0.0 + 3.5 + 11.1 −0.0 + 36.4 + 12.9 + 0.1 −0.9 + 24.4
         Apr. + 1.1 −2.7 + 10.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 3.6 + 6.5 −0.0 + 13.5 + 10.9 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 2.5
         May −0.5 −2.2 + 32.6 + 20.5 −0.0 − 0.4 + 12.5 −0.1 + 13.1 + 9.5 −0.0 −0.3 + 3.9
         June −0.5 + 12.2 −23.4 −20.7 −0.0 + 0.9 − 3.6 −0.0 −33.7 + 3.9 −0.2 −0.2 −37.2
*See table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the from rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks ’
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as portfolios prior to maturity). —5Up to November 1993, included in
provisional. Subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following securities (see also footnote 6). —6Up to November 1993, including
Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Up to December 1998: negotiable money market paper; excluding registered debt securities. —
domestic notes and coins. —2Up to December 1998, excluding loans to 7From 1999, no longer included in loans or deposits (see also footnote
domestic building and loan associations. —3Up to December 1998, 3). —8Up to December 1998, including loans to domestic building and loan
including loans on a trust basis; see also footnote 7. —4Up to December associations. —9Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of
1998, bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising equalisation claims; see also footnote 10. —10Including debt securities
26*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
IV. Banks
    
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3, 11, 12  Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3, 17 
Partici-patinginterestsin
Memo domestic Bills Memo Memo
Equalisa- item: banks Sight Time redis- item: Sight Time Savings Bank item:tion Trust and deposits deposits counted Trust deposits deposits deposits savings Trust
loans  
7 Total 13, 14  14, 15  16 loans  7 Total 13 15, 18  19 bonds  20 loans  7   Period claims  10 enterprises
End of year or month *
 
1.7 73.9 39.5 1,249.7 256.4 878.1 93.4 21.9 2,334.5 424.6 866.3 755.2 226.5 61.8 19902.4 75.1 41.3 1,249.6 226.9 913.1 87.8 21.7 2,462.7 431.3 976.6 754.1 236.7 64.0 1991
64.3 79.5 49.4 1,266.2 301.2 864.7 78.0 22.4 2,570.4 468.3 1,020.9 770.7 240.0 70.4 199275.3 81.6 59.5 1,395.2 380.2 917.9 69.2 27.9 2,788.1 513.6 1,123.6 859.4 219.1 72.4 199368.1 84.4 70.7 1,427.9 342.8 976.9 75.2 33.1 2,875.7 540.2 1,109.3 940.5 206.9 78.8 1994
71.3 88.1 83.2 1,539.4 363.9 1,065.1 75.5 35.0 3,021.1 579.9 1,086.1 1,046.1 227.4 81.6 1995
81.3 106.0 89.7 1,731.0 401.1 1,202.4 75.4 52.2 3,241.5 675.1 1,109.8 1,143.0 227.8 85.8 199676.0 107.6 95.1 1,902.3 427.6 1,349.1 75.6 50.0 3,341.9 689.8 1,146.9 1,182.1 236.9 86.1 199771.6 102.8 129.2 2,086.9 472.5 1,505.2 59.4 49.7 3,520.3 799.5 1,194.1 1,211.0 234.9 80.9 199837.5 58.0 75.6 1,122.0 114.4 1,007.3 0.3 29.8 1,905.3 420.4 759.6 614.7 110.7 42.1 1999
36.5 58.0 66.4 1,067.6 152.9 914.3 0.4 30.6 1,835.4 376.5 720.5 620.8 117.6 41.6 1999          Jan.
36.5 58.1 66.6 1,041.5 135.1 906.0 0.4 30.6 1,838.8 379.4 722.1 621.7 115.6 41.7          Feb.36.6 58.2 67.4 1,031.5 128.9 902.2 0.4 30.5 1,835.2 375.5 725.9 619.2 114.6 41.2          Mar.
38.3 57.9 66.8 1,045.1 135.6 909.1 0.3 30.4 1,835.8 382.9 720.7 618.2 114.1 41.6          Apr.
38.3 58.1 67.7 1,063.2 132.7 930.2 0.3 30.0 1,845.9 394.3 721.4 616.9 113.3 41.6          May38.3 58.1 67.9 1,062.3 126.3 935.7 0.3 29.9 1,846.8 401.9 718.0 614.2 112.7 41.7          June
37.2 58.2 68.8 1,087.2 113.0 973.8 0.3 29.9 1,845.4 398.6 723.5 611.6 111.8 41.5          July
37.4 57.9 68.1 1,099.3 115.1 983.9 0.3 29.9 1,849.4 399.5 729.4 609.1 111.4 41.6          Aug.37.4 57.6 73.3 1,102.3 119.2 982.9 0.2 29.9 1,852.5 405.2 728.1 608.3 110.8 41.4          Sep.
37.4 57.8 74.0 1,130.9 115.1 1,015.4 0.3 29.7 1,858.1 406.1 734.9 606.2 110.9 41.7          Oct.
37.4 57.8 74.3 1,132.6 126.6 1,005.7 0.3 29.7 1,884.1 429.7 740.5 603.1 110.9 42.0          Nov.37.5 58.0 75.6 1,122.0 114.4 1,007.3 0.3 29.8 1,905.3 420.4 759.6 614.7 110.7 42.1          Dec.
37.5 57.8 74.1 1,125.2 125.7 999.2 0.3 29.8 1,897.5 424.9 754.1 609.6 109.0 42.1 2000          Jan.
37.5 58.1 74.5 1,105.8 119.7 985.9 0.2 29.7 1,904.2 432.1 758.1 605.6 108.4 42.4          Feb.37.5 57.9 74.8 1,135.8 126.9 1,008.7 0.2 29.6 1,893.4 426.6 759.0 600.0 107.8 42.3          Mar.
37.6 57.9 75.6 1,122.7 126.9 995.6 0.2 29.6 1,893.5 435.7 756.7 593.5 107.6 42.4          Apr.
37.6 57.9 76.0 1,134.6 119.0 1,015.3 0.2 29.5 1,891.5 429.0 767.1 587.7 107.7 42.3          May37.6 57.9 77.9 1,112.9 116.8 996.0 0.2 29.5 1,888.2 426.2 772.2 582.3 107.6 42.3          June
Changes *
−0.3 −1.9 + 3.9 + 37.8 − 7.9 + 51.3 −5.6 −0.2 + 125.0 + 4.6 + 110.2 + 0.9 + 10.2 −0.9 1991
−1.0 + 1.5 + 7.9 + 39.7 + 74.0 −25.5 −9.8 + 1.0 + 126.0 + 33.6 + 69.6 + 16.3 + 3.3 + 3.2 1992
−11.4 + 2.1 + 9.8 + 145.3 + 75.1 + 77.1 −8.8 + 1.9 + 216.7 + 43.8 + 96.9 + 88.7 −14.6 + 2.0 1993
−6.9 + 2.6 + 11.3 + 32.4 −31.4 + 53.0 + 6.0 + 4.9 + 85.0 + 28.3 −14.1 + 81.2 −12.2 + 1.8 1994
−1.2 + 7.3 + 12.5 + 134.2 + 20.4 + 111.5 + 0.4 + 2.0 + 158.3 + 48.9 −14.2 + 105.6 + 11.7 + 6.3 1995
+ 8.0 + 3.3 + 6.5 + 175.9 + 36.6 + 137.7 −0.2 + 1.7 + 218.4 + 94.3 + 23.2 + 96.9 + 0.7 + 3.3 1996
−5.3 + 1.6 + 5.4 + 175.9 + 31.6 + 146.7 + 0.2 −2.6 + 100.5 + 13.0 + 37.1 + 39.1 + 9.2 + 2.1 1997
−4.4 −4.8 + 34.1 + 179.0 + 39.7 + 156.4 −16.2 −0.9 + 179.3 + 110.6 + 47.2 + 28.9 −2.1 −5.3 1998
−0.6 + 0.1 + 9.3 + 69.0 − 1.8 + 81.8 −11.1 −0.4 + 67.3 + 32.7 + 48.4 − 4.5 −9.3 + 0.7 1999
−0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 18.9 + 39.2 − 9.4 −10.9 −0.1 − 1.0 − 9.6 + 9.3 + 1.7 −2.4 + 0.2 1999          Jan.
−0.0 + 0.1 + 0.3 −26.5 −18.2 − 8.2 −0.1 + 0.1 + 3.1 + 2.6 + 1.6 + 0.9 −2.0 + 0.0          Feb.
+ 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.8 −10.4 − 6.6 − 3.9 + 0.0 −0.1 − 3.8 − 4.1 + 3.8 − 2.6 −1.0 −0.4          Mar.
+ 0.2 −0.2 −0.6 + 13.4 + 6.5 + 7.0 −0.1 −0.1 + 0.5 + 7.3 − 5.2 − 1.0 −0.5 + 0.3          Apr.
−0.0 + 0.1 + 0.8 + 17.4 − 3.1 + 20.5 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 9.9 + 11.2 + 0.7 − 1.3 −0.8 + 0.0          May
+ 0.0 −0.0 + 0.3 − 1.0 − 6.5 + 5.5 −0.0 −0.1 + 0.8 + 7.5 − 3.3 − 2.7 −0.6 + 0.1          June
−1.1 + 0.1 + 0.9 + 24.7 −12.8 + 37.6 −0.0 −0.1 − 1.1 − 3.0 + 5.4 − 2.6 −0.9 −0.1          July
+ 0.2 −0.2 −0.7 + 11.9 + 1.9 + 10.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 3.9 + 0.7 + 5.9 − 2.5 −0.4 + 0.0          Aug.
−0.0 −0.4 + 5.1 + 2.9 + 4.0 − 1.0 −0.0 −0.0 + 3.1 + 5.8 − 1.3 − 0.8 −0.6 −0.2          Sep.
+ 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.8 + 27.3 − 4.5 + 31.8 + 0.0 −0.2 + 5.4 + 0.6 + 6.8 − 2.1 + 0.1 + 0.4          Oct.
−0.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 1.0 + 10.7 − 9.7 −0.0 −0.0 + 25.5 + 23.1 + 5.6 − 3.1 −0.0 + 0.3          Nov.
+ 0.1 + 0.2 + 1.3 −10.7 −12.3 + 1.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 21.2 − 9.4 + 19.1 + 11.6 −0.2 + 0.1          Dec.
+ 0.0 −0.1 −1.5 + 2.4 + 10.8 − 8.4 −0.0 + 0.0 − 8.1 + 4.2 − 5.4 − 5.1 −1.7 + 0.0 2000          Jan.
+ 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.4 −19.5 − 6.2 −13.3 −0.0 −0.1 + 6.6 + 7.2 + 4.0 − 4.0 −0.6 + 0.2          Feb.
−0.0 −0.2 + 0.3 + 29.5 + 6.7 + 22.8 −0.0 −0.1 −11.1 − 5.9 + 0.8 − 5.5 −0.5 −0.1          Mar.
+ 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.7 −14.4 − 1.3 −13.1 −0.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 8.5 − 2.3 − 6.5 −0.2 + 0.1          Apr.
−0.0 −0.0 + 0.4 + 12.5 − 7.2 + 19.8 −0.0 −0.1 − 1.6 − 6.3 + 10.4 − 5.9 + 0.1 −0.1          May
−0.0 −0.0 + 1.9 −21.2 − 1.8 −19.4 −0.0 −0.1 − 2.9 − 2.5 + 5.1 − 5.4 −0.1 + 0.0          June
arising from the exchange of equalisation claims. —11Including liabilities acceptances and promissory notes outstanding and, up to December 1998,
arising from registered debt securities, registered money market paper and including endorsement liabilities arising from rediscounted bills. —17Up to
non-negotiable bearer debt securities; including subordinated liabilities. — December 1998, including liabilities to domestic building and loans
12Up to December 1998, excluding liabilities to domestic building and loan associations and money market funds. —18Since the inclusion of building
associations and money market funds. —13Up to December 1998, and loan associations in January 1999, including deposits under savings and
including time deposits for less than 1 month. —14Including liabilities loan contracts (see table IV. 12). —19Excluding deposits under savings and
arising from monetary policy operations with the Bundesbank. —15Up to loan contracts (see also footnote 18). —20Including liabilities arising from
December 1998, excluding time deposits for less than 1 month. —16Own non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
27*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
IV. Banks
 
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis- à-vis non-residents *
 
 
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 euro billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
Balances and loans and Loans and advances not Treasury
advances not evidenced by evidenced by certificates, bills and
Cash in certificates, bills  3 bills 3 negotiable Negotiable
hand money money
(non- Medium market Memo Medium marketeuro-area and paper Securities item: and paper Securitiesnotes and Short- long- issued by issued by Trust Short- long- issued by of
Period coins)  
1 Total Total term term banks  4 banks  5 loans  6 Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
1990 1.0 422.4 400.6 303.3 97.3 − 14.6 7.2 167.5 130.9 29.2 101.7 0.6 24.0
1991 1.1 419.6 395.8 266.5 129.3 − 17.5 6.4 188.7 142.6 27.7 114.8 1.4 31.3
1992 1.0 405.6 377.4 250.0 127.4 − 21.3 6.8 217.8 157.3 30.2 127.1 0.4 45.2
1993 1.2 533.8 498.3 360.5 137.7 0.1 24.3 11.2 262.5 184.0 48.3 135.7 0.0 63.01994 1.2 492.3 455.0 309.0 146.0 0.1 23.7 13.5 257.4 173.0 35.0 138.0 0.6 66.5
1995 1.2 538.4 500.8 349.7 151.1 0.1 25.6 11.8 289.2 191.1 42.1 148.9 1.7 79.7
1996 1.4 588.9 544.2 386.6 157.6 0.3 31.5 13.0 352.0 230.4 60.2 170.2 4.9 103.91997 1.5 689.1 635.3 456.1 179.2 0.2 43.1 10.5 474.8 312.7 96.2 216.5 6.0 140.31998 1.5 774.9 706.9 533.6 173.3 0.4 58.7 9.0 610.3 364.9 93.9 270.9 11.6 211.01999 0.4 427.1 383.5 279.5 104.1 0.4 43.2 4.2 396.1 235.8 52.7 183.1 7.5 152.7
1999         Jan. 0.5 455.7 426.6 336.6 90.1 0.2 28.9 4.9 307.2 192.6 49.7 142.9 7.2 107.4
         Feb. 0.6 409.5 380.8 291.0 89.8 0.1 28.6 4.9 308.0 193.9 46.3 147.6 5.5 108.6         Mar. 0.6 413.3 383.1 291.7 91.4 0.2 30.1 4.2 324.6 202.0 49.1 153.0 6.1 116.4
         Apr. 0.6 420.6 388.0 294.6 93.4 0.3 32.3 4.6 337.6 208.6 52.2 156.4 6.2 122.8
         May 0.7 406.4 372.3 275.5 96.8 0.6 33.4 4.1 352.8 216.0 56.0 160.0 5.2 131.6         June 0.7 415.2 379.1 280.8 98.2 0.2 36.0 4.2 350.4 212.3 48.2 164.1 5.2 132.9
         July 0.7 423.5 385.5 285.9 99.5 0.2 37.8 4.0 357.6 217.3 53.5 163.9 4.5 135.7
         Aug. 0.6 428.5 389.8 289.3 100.5 0.2 38.5 4.1 362.3 217.9 50.5 167.4 6.4 138.0         Sep. 0.6 424.8 384.2 283.1 101.1 0.3 40.3 4.1 372.7 223.1 52.9 170.3 7.0 142.6
         Oct. 0.5 437.0 394.7 293.1 101.6 0.3 42.1 4.2 384.3 230.1 56.4 173.7 6.9 147.3
         Nov. 0.5 458.7 415.6 314.7 100.9 0.4 42.7 4.2 393.1 236.4 57.6 178.8 6.7 150.0         Dec. 0.4 427.1 383.5 279.5 104.1 0.4 43.2 4.2 396.1 235.8 52.7 183.1 7.5 152.7
2000         Jan. 0.5 440.8 396.4 292.2 104.2 0.4 44.0 4.2 407.1 243.6 56.7 186.9 6.7 156.8
         Feb. 0.5 448.8 401.8 294.2 107.6 0.5 46.5 4.3 414.4 247.1 59.5 187.7 6.8 160.5         Mar. 0.5 447.4 398.0 288.6 109.5 0.7 48.7 4.2 427.5 254.3 62.9 191.4 6.6 166.7
         Apr. 0.5 457.1 407.5 295.6 111.9 0.5 49.1 4.3 443.1 266.7 68.8 198.0 6.8 169.6
         May 0.7 465.0 412.6 303.1 109.5 0.5 51.9 4.8 438.0 261.4 64.6 196.8 5.4 171.2         June 0.6 463.6 410.1 301.1 109.0 0.5 53.0 5.2 426.9 247.8 52.2 195.6 6.2 172.9
Changes *
1991 + 0.1 − 3.6 − 5.9 −38.1 + 32.2 − + 3.2 −0.9 + 22.6 + 12.3 −1.3 + 13.7 + 0.7 + 8.0
1992 −0.1 −18.4 −22.6 −20.4 −2.2 − + 3.8 + 0.4 + 28.6 + 13.6 + 2.5 + 11.0 −1.0 + 14.1
1993 + 0.1 + 117.3 + 117.2 + 103.9 + 13.3 −0.0 + 0.5 −0.4 + 31.9 + 12.6 + 6.2 + 6.3 −0.4 + 19.5
1994 + 0.0 −24.0 −27.5 −41.4 + 13.9 −0.0 + 0.1 + 3.4 − 1.6 −5.5 −12.3 + 6.7 + 0.6 + 5.1
1995 + 0.1 + 59.1 + 57.6 + 49.2 + 8.4 + 0.0 + 2.9 −1.4 + 38.3 + 21.3 + 7.8 + 13.6 + 1.1 + 16.1
1996 + 0.2 + 34.2 + 29.9 + 27.2 + 2.7 + 0.2 + 5.2 −1.1 + 58.4 + 36.2 + 17.0 + 19.2 + 3.1 + 21.4
1997 + 0.1 + 80.6 + 71.5 + 53.3 + 18.2 −0.1 + 10.4 −1.2 + 109.3 + 73.0 + 33.7 + 39.3 + 0.7 + 32.9
1998 −0.0 + 100.8 + 89.5 + 79.3 + 10.2 + 0.0 + 13.1 −1.8 + 122.0 + 42.7 −6.4 + 49.1 + 5.5 + 66.0
1999 −0.3 + 17.7 + 5.7 − 5.3 + 11.0 + 0.2 + 11.7 −0.0 + 85.8 + 42.8 + 8.4 + 34.4 + 1.3 + 41.8
1999         Jan. −0.2 + 60.8 + 62.0 + 61.1 + 0.9 −0.0 −1.2 + 0.2 + 11.1 + 10.6 + 7.7 + 3.0 + 1.2 −0.8
         Feb. + 0.1 −48.9 −48.4 −47.5 −0.8 −0.1 −0.4 + 0.0 − 1.6 −0.7 −3.8 + 3.2 −1.8 + 0.8
         Mar. + 0.0 + 1.3 + 0.1 − 1.0 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 1.2 −0.7 + 14.6 + 6.6 + 2.4 + 4.3 + 0.6 + 7.4
         Apr. + 0.0 + 6.1 + 3.7 + 2.0 + 1.7 + 0.2 + 2.1 + 0.4 + 11.9 + 5.6 + 2.9 + 2.7 + 0.0 + 6.2
         May + 0.0 −15.9 −17.2 −19.8 + 2.5 + 0.3 + 1.1 −0.0 + 14.0 + 6.4 + 3.5 + 2.8 −1.0 + 8.7
         June + 0.0 + 8.0 + 5.9 + 4.7 + 1.2 −0.4 + 2.4 + 0.1 − 3.4 −4.4 −8.0 + 3.6 −0.1 + 1.1
         July −0.0 + 10.5 + 8.6 + 6.7 + 1.9 −0.1 + 2.0 −0.1 + 9.3 + 6.9 + 5.8 + 1.1 −0.6 + 3.0
         Aug. −0.1 + 3.3 + 2.9 + 2.3 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 2.9 −0.6 −3.2 + 2.6 + 1.9 + 1.6
         Sep. −0.0 − 3.8 − 5.8 − 6.4 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 1.8 −0.0 + 10.5 + 5.4 + 2.3 + 3.0 + 0.7 + 4.5
         Oct. −0.0 + 10.3 + 8.8 + 8.8 −0.0 −0.0 + 1.5 + 0.0 + 9.2 + 5.1 + 3.2 + 1.9 −0.1 + 4.3
         Nov. −0.0 + 18.2 + 17.9 + 19.4 −1.5 + 0.1 + 0.2 −0.0 + 4.4 + 3.0 + 0.6 + 2.4 −0.3 + 1.7
         Dec. −0.0 −32.2 −32.7 −35.7 + 3.0 + 0.1 + 0.4 −0.0 + 2.8 −1.2 −4.9 + 3.8 + 0.8 + 3.2
2000         Jan. + 0.0 + 11.6 + 10.9 + 11.3 −0.4 + 0.0 + 0.7 −0.0 + 8.6 + 5.2 + 3.6 + 1.7 −0.9 + 4.3
         Feb. + 0.0 + 7.8 + 5.1 + 1.8 + 3.4 + 0.1 + 2.6 + 0.0 + 7.1 + 3.0 + 2.7 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 4.0         Mar. + 0.0 − 4.4 − 6.4 − 7.4 + 1.0 + 0.2 + 1.8 −0.1 + 9.4 + 4.7 + 2.8 + 1.8 −0.3 + 5.0
         Apr. −0.0 + 5.0 + 5.2 + 4.3 + 0.9 −0.2 −0.1 + 0.0 + 8.7 + 6.7 + 4.6 + 2.0 + 0.1 + 1.9
         May + 0.2 + 11.4 + 8.3 + 9.6 −1.3 −0.0 + 3.1 + 0.6 − 0.7 −1.6 −3.5 + 1.8 −1.3 + 2.3
         June −0.1 + 1.1 − 0.3 − 0.8 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 1.4 + 0.4 − 8.3 −10.1 −11.8 + 1.7 + 0.9 + 1.0
*See table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the domestic notes and coins. —2Up to December 1998, including loans on a
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as trust basis; see also footnote 6. —3Up to December 1998, bill-based
provisional. Subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from redisco unted
Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Up to December 1998: bills and bills sent for collection from the banks ’portfolios prior to
28*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
IV. Banks
    
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
 Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bankinterests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memoitem: and and item: and item:Trust enter- Sight Short- long- Trust Sight Short- long- Trustloans  
6 prises  7 Total Total  9 term  9 term loans  6 Total Total  9 term  9 term loans  6   Period deposits  8 deposits  8 
End of year or month *
 
11.9 20.9 246.0 54.6 182.1 74.5 107.5 9.3 83.0 11.6 65.9 21.6 44.2 5.5 199013.5 22.8 253.3 58.8 184.2 88.3 95.9 10.3 93.0 11.5 76.1 24.2 51.8 5.3 199114.8 25.8 297.0 66.7 219.7 119.2 100.5 10.5 125.8 15.8 103.6 34.4 69.2 6.4 199215.5 30.1 328.1 82.9 236.0 122.5 113.5 9.2 162.8 16.9 139.2 39.1 100.1 6.7 199317.3 34.0 402.3 111.6 283.7 150.8 132.9 7.1 181.5 20.6 155.3 41.7 113.6 5.6 1994
16.7 38.8 463.7 116.9 339.7 191.6 148.2 7.0 224.4 22.1 198.0 45.3 152.6 4.4 1995
12.7 45.8 486.5 147.1 335.7 172.0 163.7 3.8 273.5 34.3 237.2 50.0 187.2 2.1 199615.7 54.7 670.3 226.0 440.2 254.3 185.9 4.0 333.9 43.5 285.7 63.0 222.7 4.8 199722.9 62.9 875.7 309.5 562.5 359.1 203.4 3.7 390.3 51.3 329.6 71.8 257.8 9.5 199813.6 33.9 483.6 65.6 418.0 332.3 85.6 2.0 284.4 23.8 260.6 64.9 195.7 5.8 1999
11.6 22.4 491.5 152.4 339.1 241.9 97.2 1.9 217.4 25.8 191.6 49.6 142.0 4.9 1999          Jan.
11.8 22.7 449.0 112.6 336.4 248.6 87.8 1.9 237.7 27.0 210.7 54.5 156.2 5.1          Feb.13.0 22.8 457.2 112.5 344.7 259.3 85.4 2.0 245.4 23.7 221.7 54.4 167.3 6.1          Mar.
13.3 23.4 467.2 96.9 370.4 283.4 87.0 2.0 250.4 22.5 227.9 58.5 169.4 6.2          Apr.
13.4 23.5 473.0 95.5 377.5 288.4 89.2 2.0 250.1 24.0 226.1 57.2 168.9 6.2          May13.7 29.9 471.3 112.8 358.6 266.6 91.9 2.0 252.6 26.8 225.8 54.7 171.1 6.4          June
13.5 30.5 464.8 80.4 384.4 288.2 96.2 2.0 250.7 23.0 227.8 56.1 171.7 6.2          July
12.6 30.8 476.4 90.4 385.9 288.2 97.8 1.9 252.2 24.9 227.3 53.4 173.9 5.3          Aug.12.7 30.8 478.7 96.8 381.9 284.7 97.2 1.9 259.6 26.2 233.4 56.0 177.4 5.2          Sep.
12.9 31.1 489.1 78.7 410.4 311.7 98.7 2.0 263.8 23.4 240.4 60.8 179.5 5.5          Oct.
13.3 31.1 500.8 95.1 405.7 319.0 86.7 2.0 287.1 27.1 260.0 63.9 196.1 5.7          Nov.13.6 33.9 483.6 65.6 418.0 332.3 85.6 2.0 284.4 23.8 260.6 64.9 195.7 5.8          Dec.
13.7 36.0 514.2 108.4 405.8 314.9 90.8 2.0 291.4 31.5 259.9 61.6 198.4 5.9 2000          Jan.
13.8 36.1 532.6 103.5 429.1 335.3 93.8 2.0 291.3 32.8 258.5 58.3 200.1 5.9          Feb.13.9 36.3 553.0 110.2 442.9 347.5 95.3 2.0 308.6 41.2 267.4 62.0 205.4 5.9          Mar.
14.2 36.7 584.4 116.6 467.8 369.7 98.1 2.1 315.6 44.3 271.3 61.4 209.9 6.2          Apr.
14.2 37.5 595.9 113.4 482.5 386.0 96.5 2.0 320.3 43.1 277.3 69.9 207.4 6.8          May13.9 37.6 562.0 122.3 439.7 345.5 94.3 2.1 303.1 35.9 267.2 61.5 205.7 6.8          June
Changes *
+ 1.6 + 1.9 + 6.3 + 4.3 + 1.2 + 14.0 −12.7 + 0.8 + 9.6 −0.2 + 10.0 + 2.5 + 7.5 −0.2 1991
+ 1.9 + 3.8 + 41.3 + 7.3 + 33.2 + 28.8 + 4.4 + 0.7 + 32.5 + 4.2 + 27.0 + 10.1 + 16.9 + 1.2 1992+ 0.2 + 4.1 + 23.8 + 14.1 + 11.1 − 0.4 + 11.5 −1.4 + 34.3 + 1.0 + 33.2 + 4.0 + 29.1 + 0.2 1993
−1.7 + 4.2 + 85.6 + 31.3 + 56.0 + 33.9 + 22.1 −1.7 + 23.1 + 3.9 + 19.8 + 3.4 + 16.4 −0.7 1994
−0.2 + 5.2 + 71.0 + 7.9 + 64.6 + 45.9 + 18.7 −1.5 + 47.8 + 2.2 + 46.5 + 4.1 + 42.4 −0.9 1995
−2.3 + 5.9 + 11.3 + 27.1 − 13.9 − 26.6 + 12.7 −1.9 + 44.7 + 11.7 + 35.0 + 3.7 + 31.3 −2.0 1996
+ 2.7 + 7.9 + 157.3 + 67.7 + 89.5 + 71.8 + 17.7 + 0.1 + 51.0 + 5.4 + 43.3 + 11.4 + 31.9 + 2.3 1997+ 7.7 + 8.8 + 215.6 + 87.7 + 128.1 + 108.1 + 20.0 −0.3 + 64.7 + 10.4 + 48.9 + 10.3 + 38.6 + 5.5 1998
+ 1.1 + 10.9 + 37.4 −9.2 + 46.6 + 47.6 −1.0 −0.0 + 61.0 + 7.2 + 53.8 + 15.9 + 37.9 + 0.1 1999
−0.2 + 0.3 + 43.7 + 79.8 − 36.1 − 30.6 −5.4 −0.0 + 23.3 + 10.0 + 13.3 + 3.3 + 10.0 −0.1 1999          Jan.
+ 0.1 + 0.2 −39.5 −40.3 + 0.8 + 4.0 −3.2 + 0.0 + 11.8 + 1.0 + 10.8 + 4.4 + 6.4 + 0.1          Feb.
+ 1.0 − 0.0 + 4.9 −0.5 + 5.4 + 8.4 −3.0 −0.0 + 6.7 −3.4 + 10.1 −0.4 + 10.5 + 0.9          Mar.
+ 0.2 + 0.6 + 8.3 −15.9 + 24.2 + 22.9 + 1.4 + 0.0 + 4.0 −1.3 + 5.4 + 3.9 + 1.5 −0.0          Apr.
+ 0.1 + 0.0 + 3.9 −1.6 + 5.5 + 3.6 + 1.9 −0.0 −1.1 + 1.5 −2.6 −1.6 −1.0 + 0.0          May
+ 0.1 + 6.3 − 3.0 + 17.2 − 20.2 − 22.7 + 2.5 + 0.0 + 2.1 + 2.7 −0.7 −2.6 + 1.9 + 0.1          June
−0.0 + 0.9 − 2.3 −31.7 + 29.4 + 24.4 + 5.0 + 0.0 −0.8 −3.7 + 2.9 + 2.1 + 0.8 −0.1          July
−1.0 + 0.2 + 9.7 + 9.8 − 0.1 − 1.3 + 1.2 −0.1 + 0.3 + 1.8 −1.6 −2.9 + 1.4 −0.9          Aug.
+ 0.2 + 0.0 + 2.6 + 6.3 − 3.7 − 3.2 −0.5 + 0.0 + 7.5 + 1.4 + 6.1 + 2.6 + 3.4 −0.0          Sep.
+ 0.0 + 0.1 + 8.3 −18.5 + 26.8 + 25.8 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 2.6 −2.9 + 5.5 + 3.8 + 1.7 + 0.1          Oct.
+ 0.2 − 0.3 + 18.9 + 15.9 + 3.0 + 3.7 −0.7 −0.0 + 8.3 + 3.5 + 4.7 + 2.5 + 2.3 −0.0          Nov.
+ 0.3 + 2.7 −18.2 −29.7 + 11.4 + 12.7 −1.3 + 0.0 −3.4 −3.3 −0.1 + 0.8 −0.9 + 0.1          Dec.
−0.0 + 1.9 + 24.6 + 42.5 − 17.8 − 20.7 + 2.9 −0.0 + 4.9 + 7.6 −2.7 −3.8 + 1.1 −0.1 2000          Jan.
+ 0.0 − 0.0 + 17.7 −5.0 + 22.7 + 19.8 + 2.9 + 0.0 −0.3 + 1.3 −1.6 −2.7 + 1.1 −0.1          Feb.
−0.0 − 0.0 + 16.2 + 6.0 + 10.1 + 9.3 + 0.8 −0.0 + 14.6 + 8.2 + 6.4 + 3.3 + 3.1 −0.1          Mar.
+ 0.0 − 0.2 + 21.9 + 5.0 + 16.9 + 15.6 + 1.3 + 0.0 + 2.3 + 2.7 −0.4 −1.5 + 1.1 −0.1          Apr.
+ 0.1 + 1.2 + 18.1 −2.2 + 20.3 + 20.9 −0.6 −0.0 + 8.4 −1.0 + 9.5 + 9.1 + 0.4 + 0.8          May
−0.1 + 0.4 −29.0 + 9.6 − 38.7 − 37.1 −1.5 + 0.1 −15.0 −7.0 −8.0 −8.0 + 0.0 + 0.2          June
maturity). —4Up to November 1993, included in securities; see also 1998, including working capital supplied to branches abroad. —8Up to
footnote 5. —5Up to November 1993, including negotiable money market December 1998, including time deposits for less than 1 month. —9Up to
paper; excluding registered debt securities. —6From 1999, no longer December 1998, excluding time deposits for less than 1 month. 
included in loans and deposits (see also footnote 2). —7Up to December
29*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
IV. Banks
 
5. Lending of banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
  
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 euro billion
Short-term lending Medium and long-term
to public authorities to enter- to enterprises and individuals  1 
Lending to domestic
Loans and non-banks, total  1, 2 
   advances Loans and
including excluding not evi- Negoti- advancesnegotiable money denced by able not evi-market paper, certifi- money denced bysecurities, cates and market certifi- Treasury
Period equalisation claims Total Total paper Total cates bills  
5 Total Total bills 3, 4 
End of year or month *
 
1990 2,875.0 2,681.9 548.2 521.0 520.9 0.1 27.1 7.5 19.6 2,326.9 1,750.51991 3,147.0 2,951.4 602.0 575.8 575.5 0.4 26.1 14.7 11.4 2,545.0 1,941.81992 3,478.2 3,166.6 597.2 571.2 571.0 0.2 26.0 16.7 9.3 2,881.0 2,167.51993 3,826.4 3,417.8 563.2 544.2 540.8 3.4 19.0 16.8 2.2 3,263.2 2,441.81994 4,137.2 3,633.1 583.5 549.1 548.6 0.4 34.4 32.7 1.8 3,553.7 2,661.9
1995 4,436.9 3,936.9 615.2 584.0 583.3 0.7 31.3 30.5 0.8 3,821.7 2,785.5
1996 4,773.1 4,248.7 662.2 617.2 616.2 1.0 45.1 40.2 4.9 4,110.8 3,007.21997 5,058.4 4,506.2 667.8 625.8 624.8 1.0 41.9 40.1 1.9 4,390.6 3,223.41998 5,379.8 4,775.4 704.3 661.3 660.8 0.5 43.0 38.5 4.5 4,675.5 3,482.41999 2,904.5 2,576.5 355.3 328.9 328.7 0.2 26.4 23.6 2.8 2,549.2 1,943.6
1999         Jan. 2,765.0 2,456.9 348.0 319.9 318.8 1.1 28.0 24.8 3.2 2,417.0 1,815.3
         Feb. 2,781.3 2,468.8 352.2 319.4 318.9 0.4 32.9 30.2 2.6 2,429.1 1,824.3         Mar. 2,798.1 2,472.4 354.7 320.7 320.2 0.5 34.0 30.7 3.3 2,443.4 1,845.1
         Apr. 2,808.1 2,476.8 349.9 318.2 317.3 0.9 31.7 26.9 4.8 2,458.2 1,860.6
         May 2,827.5 2,483.3 348.5 318.6 317.9 0.7 30.0 26.0 4.0 2,478.9 1,870.8         June 2,821.9 2,505.5 360.0 330.5 329.7 0.7 29.5 26.1 3.4 2,461.9 1,862.8
         July 2,826.6 2,509.7 349.9 321.4 320.9 0.5 28.5 24.6 3.9 2,476.7 1,876.2
         Aug. 2,829.6 2,515.1 343.5 316.5 315.9 0.7 27.0 23.6 3.4 2,486.1 1,888.4         Sep. 2,846.8 2,529.3 348.8 321.9 321.1 0.7 26.9 23.9 3.0 2,498.0 1,896.1
         Oct. 2,868.4 2,548.1 355.5 320.4 319.9 0.5 35.1 31.1 3.9 2,512.9 1,906.4
         Nov. 2,890.9 2,564.5 357.7 324.4 323.9 0.5 33.2 29.9 3.3 2,533.2 1,920.1         Dec. 2,904.5 2,576.5 355.3 328.9 328.7 0.2 26.4 23.6 2.8 2,549.2 1,943.6
2000         Jan. 2,922.0 2,583.3 358.9 328.8 328.3 0.5 30.1 26.5 3.6 2,563.1 1,951.6
         Feb. 2,933.2 2,586.8 357.9 332.4 331.8 0.6 25.6 22.6 3.0 2,575.2 1,960.4         Mar. 2,969.8 2,600.0 367.7 341.3 340.9 0.4 26.4 24.2 2.3 2,602.1 1,994.3
         Apr. 2,984.8 2,612.3 373.0 347.4 347.1 0.2 25.7 23.2 2.5 2,611.8 2,002.7
         May 2,996.7 2,620.6 372.3 347.2 346.9 0.4 25.1 23.0 2.1 2,624.4 2,017.6         June 2,961.4 2,623.8 370.4 349.3 348.8 0.4 21.1 19.3 1.8 2,590.9 1,986.4
Changes *
1991 + 285.7 + 280.5 + 70.9 + 72.0 + 71.7 + 0.2 − 1.0 + 7.2 −8.2 + 214.7 + 186.9
1992 + 294.3 + 240.3 + 16.9 + 18.1 + 18.3 −0.1 − 1.2 + 0.8 −2.0 + 277.4 + 229.7
1993 + 339.8 + 253.7 −15.1 − 9.2 −11.9 + 2.7 − 5.9 + 1.2 −7.2 + 354.9 + 251.7
1994 + 320.5 + 244.0 + 13.2 + 7.0 + 9.9 −2.9 + 6.2 + 6.6 −0.4 + 307.2 + 249.1
1995 + 312.8 + 311.9 + 35.9 + 37.9 + 37.7 + 0.2 − 1.9 − 1.0 −1.0 + 276.9 + 185.1
1996 + 336.3 + 312.9 + 44.3 + 32.6 + 32.2 + 0.4 + 11.7 + 7.4 + 4.3 + 292.0 + 221.51997 + 285.2 + 256.9 + 2.7 + 5.9 + 5.9 + 0.0 − 3.2 − 0.1 −3.0 + 282.5 + 219.9
1998 + 335.3 + 285.5 + 51.7 + 50.6 + 51.2 −0.6 + 1.1 − 1.6 + 2.7 + 283.6 + 258.3
1999 + 156.1 + 139.5 + 9.6 + 6.3 + 6.4 −0.0 + 3.3 + 2.9 + 0.4 + 146.4 + 146.4
1999         Jan. + 18.4 + 22.6 + 4.5 − 0.5 − 1.3 + 0.8 + 5.0 + 4.1 + 0.8 + 13.8 + 18.1
         Feb. + 15.8 + 11.4 + 3.7 − 1.2 − 0.5 −0.6 + 4.8 + 5.4 −0.6 + 12.2 + 9.1
         Mar. + 17.0 + 3.9 + 2.8 + 1.7 + 1.6 + 0.1 + 1.2 + 0.5 + 0.6 + 14.2 + 20.6
         Apr. + 9.9 + 4.2 − 4.9 − 2.6 − 3.0 + 0.4 − 2.3 − 3.8 + 1.5 + 14.8 + 15.4
         May + 19.0 + 6.2 − 1.7 + 0.1 + 0.3 −0.2 − 1.8 − 0.9 −0.9 + 20.7 + 10.2
         June − 5.6 + 22.1 + 11.3 + 11.8 + 11.7 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.1 −0.6 − 17.0 − 8.1
         July + 3.7 + 3.2 −10.2 − 9.2 − 8.9 −0.3 − 1.0 − 1.5 + 0.5 + 13.9 + 12.6
         Aug. + 2.7 + 5.1 − 6.7 − 5.2 − 5.4 + 0.2 − 1.5 − 1.1 −0.5 + 9.4 + 12.1
         Sep. + 17.1 + 14.1 + 5.2 + 5.3 + 5.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.4 −0.5 + 11.9 + 7.7
         Oct. + 21.2 + 18.4 + 6.4 − 1.8 − 1.6 −0.2 + 8.2 + 7.2 + 1.0 + 14.8 + 10.3
         Nov. + 21.6 + 15.5 + 1.3 + 3.1 + 3.1 + 0.0 − 1.9 − 1.2 −0.7 + 20.3 + 13.7
         Dec. + 15.2 + 12.8 − 2.1 + 4.8 + 5.1 −0.3 − 6.8 − 6.4 −0.5 + 17.3 + 24.5
2000         Jan. + 14.9 + 3.7 + 2.7 − 1.0 − 1.3 + 0.3 + 3.7 + 2.9 + 0.8 + 12.1 + 6.0
         Feb. + 11.3 + 3.5 − 1.0 + 3.5 + 3.5 + 0.0 − 4.5 − 3.9 −0.6 + 12.3 + 8.8
         Mar. + 36.4 + 13.0 + 9.6 + 8.7 + 8.9 −0.1 + 0.9 + 1.6 −0.7 + 26.9 + 33.9
         Apr. + 13.5 + 10.9 + 3.9 + 4.6 + 4.8 −0.2 − 0.8 − 1.0 + 0.2 + 9.7 + 8.3
         May + 13.1 + 9.5 + 0.5 + 1.1 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.2 −0.4 + 12.6 + 14.9
         June − 33.7 + 3.7 − 2.8 + 1.3 + 1.2 + 0.1 − 4.1 − 3.8 −0.3 − 31.0 − 28.6
*See table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the December 1998, including loans on a trust basis; see also footnote 9. —3Up
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as to December 1998, bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsementprovisional. Subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following liabilities arising from rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from
Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Up to December 1998, the banks ’portfolios prior to maturity). —4From 1999, including small
including loans to domestic building and loan associations. —2Up to amounts of medium-term series of bills. —5From December 1993, including
30*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
IV. Banks
    
 
lending  2, 6 
prises and individuals  1, 2 to public authorities  2 
Loans and advances not Loans and advances not
evidenced by certificates evidenced by certificates
Memo Memo
item: Equal- item:
Medium- Long- Trust Medium- Long- Secur- isation Trust
Total term  7 term  8 loans  9 Total Total term  7 term  8 loans  9   Period Securities  6 ities 6, 10 claims  11 
End of year or month *
 
1,635.9 159.9 1,476.0 53.1 61.5 637.1 443.7 42.8 401.0 118.7 1.7 12.4 19901,814.1 213.7 1,600.3 65.8 62.0 682.9 472.0 51.3 420.8 115.5 2.4 13.1 19912,011.5 263.5 1,748.0 90.3 65.7 734.1 487.8 47.6 440.2 147.2 64.3 13.9 19922,241.5 253.9 1,987.5 134.2 66.1 821.4 537.1 36.8 500.3 193.5 75.3 15.5 19932,390.4 228.3 2,162.0 203.2 68.3 891.8 577.0 34.5 542.5 230.5 68.1 16.1 1994
2,522.0 214.1 2,307.9 192.9 70.6 1,036.2 713.0 74.5 638.4 234.4 71.3 17.5 1995
2,713.3 215.8 2,497.5 205.9 88.0 1,103.6 773.0 69.5 703.6 231.3 81.3 18.0 19962,900.0 216.2 2,683.8 234.1 89.3 1,167.2 833.8 53.0 780.8 239.2 76.0 18.3 19973,104.5 206.8 2,897.8 292.4 85.4 1,193.2 868.8 33.1 835.7 235.4 71.6 17.3 19981,764.8 182.5 1,582.3 178.9 49.2 605.6 459.5 30.9 428.6 108.6 37.5 8.7 1999
1,661.1 181.4 1,479.8 154.1 49.1 601.8 452.1 34.9 417.2 113.2 36.5 8.9 1999          Jan.
1,668.0 186.1 1,481.9 156.3 49.2 604.8 451.7 34.5 417.2 116.6 36.5 8.9          Feb.1,672.5 187.8 1,484.7 172.7 49.3 598.3 449.1 32.0 417.1 112.5 36.6 8.8          Mar.
1,681.8 189.0 1,492.7 178.8 49.0 597.6 450.8 32.2 418.6 108.5 38.3 8.9          Apr.
1,688.4 186.7 1,501.8 182.4 49.1 608.1 451.0 32.0 419.0 118.9 38.3 8.9          May1,697.5 186.3 1,511.2 165.2 49.1 599.2 452.1 31.7 420.4 108.8 38.3 9.0          June
1,711.3 188.2 1,523.1 164.9 49.4 600.5 452.8 31.9 420.9 110.5 37.2 8.8          July
1,722.5 189.4 1,533.1 165.9 49.1 597.8 453.2 31.6 421.6 107.2 37.4 8.8          Aug.1,730.9 186.3 1,544.6 165.2 48.8 601.9 453.3 31.8 421.5 111.3 37.4 8.7          Sep.
1,740.4 185.9 1,554.5 166.0 49.0 606.5 456.6 32.4 424.3 112.5 37.4 8.7          Oct.
1,749.8 182.7 1,567.1 170.3 49.1 613.1 460.8 33.5 427.2 114.9 37.4 8.8          Nov.1,764.8 182.5 1,582.3 178.9 49.2 605.6 459.5 30.9 428.6 108.6 37.5 8.7          Dec.
1,770.2 183.1 1,587.0 181.4 49.1 611.4 458.4 31.0 427.4 115.6 37.5 8.7 2000          Jan.
1,774.9 183.0 1,591.9 185.5 49.4 614.9 457.5 30.2 427.4 119.8 37.5 8.7          Feb.1,777.2 183.3 1,593.9 217.1 49.3 607.8 457.7 31.1 426.7 112.5 37.5 8.6          Mar.
1,781.6 184.3 1,597.3 221.1 49.3 609.1 460.4 31.5 429.0 111.1 37.6 8.6          Apr.
1,789.9 185.7 1,604.2 227.7 49.3 606.8 460.8 32.5 428.3 108.4 37.6 8.6          May1,794.7 186.5 1,608.3 191.7 49.3 604.6 460.9 32.5 428.4 106.1 37.6 8.6          June
Changes *
+ 175.2 + 39.4 + 135.8 + 14.2 −2.4 + 33.1 + 28.3 + 8.5 + 19.8 − 0.9 − 0.3 + 0.5 1991
+ 204.1 + 29.6 + 174.5 + 24.8 + 0.8 + 41.2 + 15.7 − 3.6 + 19.3 + 32.2 − 1.0 + 0.7 1992
+ 214.1 −28.9 + 243.0 + 37.1 + 0.5 + 104.1 + 48.2 −10.8 + 59.0 + 65.1 −11.4 + 1.6 1993
+ 198.7 −29.2 + 227.9 + 48.5 + 1.9 + 58.2 + 26.2 − 2.4 + 28.5 + 38.3 − 6.9 + 0.7 1994
+ 176.0 − 1.9 + 177.9 + 3.3 + 5.9 + 91.8 + 91.8 + 15.3 + 76.6 − 0.4 − 1.2 + 1.5 1995
+ 204.4 + 1.6 + 202.8 + 14.0 + 3.1 + 70.4 + 65.7 − 5.5 + 71.2 − 3.3 + 8.0 + 0.1 1996
+ 189.0 + 0.3 + 188.7 + 29.5 + 1.4 + 62.6 + 60.6 −18.0 + 78.6 + 7.0 − 5.3 + 0.2 1997
+ 205.7 − 8.9 + 214.6 + 56.5 −3.9 + 25.3 + 35.0 −20.0 + 55.0 − 4.4 − 4.4 −0.9 1998
+ 121.8 + 25.1 + 96.8 + 24.6 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 8.5 + 6.2 + 2.3 − 7.8 − 0.6 −0.1 1999
+ 18.7 + 16.6 + 2.1 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 4.3 + 1.1 + 10.5 − 9.4 − 5.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 1999          Jan.
+ 6.9 + 6.4 + 0.5 + 2.2 + 0.0 + 3.1 − 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 3.5 − 0.0 + 0.0          Feb.
+ 4.4 + 1.6 + 2.8 + 16.2 + 0.2 − 6.4 − 2.6 − 2.6 − 0.0 − 3.9 + 0.1 −0.1          Mar.
+ 9.3 + 0.7 + 8.6 + 6.2 −0.4 − 0.7 + 1.7 − 0.4 + 2.2 − 2.5 + 0.2 + 0.1          Apr.
+ 6.7 − 1.2 + 7.9 + 3.5 + 0.1 + 10.5 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 10.4 − 0.0 −         May
+ 9.1 − 0.2 + 9.3 −17.2 −0.0 − 8.9 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 1.1 −10.1 + 0.0 + 0.0          June
+ 12.9 + 1.0 + 11.9 − 0.3 + 0.3 + 1.3 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 1.7 − 1.1 −0.2          July
+ 11.2 + 1.3 + 9.9 + 1.0 −0.2 − 2.7 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.7 − 3.3 + 0.2 −0.0          Aug.
+ 8.5 − 0.0 + 8.5 − 0.7 −0.3 + 4.2 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 4.1 − 0.0 −0.1          Sep.
+ 9.5 − 0.3 + 9.8 + 0.8 + 0.2 + 4.5 + 3.3 + 0.4 + 2.9 + 1.2 + 0.0 + 0.0          Oct.
+ 9.4 − 2.2 + 11.7 + 4.3 + 0.0 + 6.6 + 4.2 + 1.2 + 3.0 + 2.5 − 0.0 + 0.0          Nov.
+ 15.4 + 1.5 + 13.9 + 9.1 + 0.2 − 7.2 − 1.3 − 2.7 + 1.4 − 6.0 + 0.1 −0.0          Dec.
+ 3.2 − 1.0 + 4.2 + 2.8 −0.1 + 6.1 − 1.1 + 0.1 − 1.2 + 7.2 + 0.0 −0.0 2000          Jan.
+ 4.7 − 0.1 + 4.8 + 4.0 + 0.3 + 3.6 − 0.9 − 0.8 − 0.0 + 4.4 + 0.0 −0.0          Feb.
+ 2.3 + 0.3 + 2.0 + 31.6 −0.1 − 7.1 + 0.2 + 0.9 − 0.7 − 7.3 − 0.0 −0.0          Mar.
+ 4.4 + 1.0 + 3.4 + 4.0 + 0.0 + 1.3 + 2.7 + 0.4 + 2.3 − 1.5 + 0.1 −0.0          Apr.
+ 8.3 + 1.2 + 7.1 + 6.7 + 0.0 − 2.3 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 2.7 − 0.0 −0.0          May
+ 6.5 − 0.8 + 7.3 −35.1 −0.1 − 2.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 2.1 − 0.0 + 0.0          June
other negotiable money market paper; excluding mobilisation and liquidity December 1998, maturity or period of notice of 4 years and more; from
paper. —6From 1999, breakdown of lending against securities by medium 1999, of more than 5 years. —9From 1999, no longer included in lending
and long-term lending no longer possible. —7Up to December 1998, (see also footnote 2). —10Excluding debt securities arising from the
maturity or period of notice of more than one year to less than 4 years; exchange of equalisation claims, see also footnote 11. —11Including debt
from 1999, more than 1 year up to and including 5 years. —8Up to securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims. 
31*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
IV. Banks
 
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and individuals, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
 
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 euro billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and individuals (excluding portfolios of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities  portfolios) 1 
of which  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
 
Financialinstitu-
Mortgage tions  
4 
loans Trans- (excluding
secured Energy Whole- Agri- port MFIs) andby and sale culture and insur-
Mortgage residen- Other of which water and and tele- anceloans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- supply, Construc- retail forestry, commu- enter-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing mining  
2 tion trade  3 fisheries nications prises
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
1997 3,614.1 1,335.7 1,543.9 968.2 575.7 2,225.2 574.4 318.5 66.6 122.7 334.9 60.5 77.2 116.01998 3,850.8 1,430.2 1,654.9 1,040.9 614.0 2,367.1 614.9 331.5 70.7 124.2 343.1 63.7 80.9 132.8
1999         June 2,028.1 854.1 940.2 644.9 295.4 1,178.6 317.9 168.6 31.9 68.3 172.6 30.4 40.7 29.4
         Sep. 2,052.8 877.1 960.7 662.2 298.5 1,184.7 323.0 166.5 32.3 68.1 172.2 30.9 41.5 30.0         Dec. 2,094.2 899.3 991.3 691.5 299.9 1,209.0 332.0 166.2 33.7 67.1 173.0 31.1 47.2 27.5
2000         Mar. 2,118.8 917.4 997.2 706.8 290.4 1,228.1 335.0 166.8 33.1 67.4 173.8 31.0 54.9 33.7
         June 2,144.2 931.3 1,009.7 719.2 290.5 1,243.4 338.6 170.5 33.0 68.5 172.8 31.6 52.7 37.0
 Short-term lending
1997 624.8 − 34.6 − 34.6 534.4 26.3 114.5 6.1 37.5 132.0 8.7 11.8 27.9
1998 660.8 − 36.7 − 36.7 561.3 27.9 120.6 8.8 36.1 133.9 8.8 12.1 28.5
1999         June 330.5 − 18.7 − 18.7 279.1 12.8 62.5 3.0 19.4 62.1 4.7 6.8 12.1
         Sep. 321.9 − 18.0 − 18.0 270.3 12.2 58.6 3.6 18.9 60.8 4.6 6.9 11.7
         Dec. 329.4 − 17.6 − 17.6 276.9 11.8 57.3 4.3 17.9 61.4 4.5 10.6 8.8
2000         Mar. 341.5 − 16.3 − 16.3 289.4 11.2 57.9 3.6 18.1 62.0 4.3 16.2 15.8
         June 349.5 − 16.5 − 16.5 295.8 11.0 60.5 3.9 19.2 61.2 4.6 13.7 18.1
 Medium-term lending  
8 
1997 216.2 − 42.3 − 42.3 137.8 17.8 17.6 1.6 10.0 16.7 4.7 7.7 17.0
1998 206.8 − 39.3 − 39.3 132.2 17.4 16.1 1.5 9.3 16.1 4.5 6.8 17.3
1999         June 186.3 − 47.9 − 47.9 108.0 14.9 16.3 1.3 7.4 13.9 3.5 5.4 4.3
         Sep. 186.3 − 46.0 − 46.0 109.1 14.6 16.6 1.3 7.2 13.7 3.6 5.5 4.5
         Dec. 182.5 − 42.6 − 42.6 109.1 13.4 16.7 1.7 6.9 13.0 3.4 6.3 4.0
2000         Mar. 183.3 − 40.9 − 40.9 110.1 13.1 16.8 1.8 6.8 13.2 3.4 7.2 3.5
         June 186.5 − 40.7 − 40.7 112.9 13.0 16.9 1.5 6.8 13.2 3.4 7.4 5.1
 Long-term lending  1, 9 
1997 2,773.1 1,335.7 1,467.0 968.2 498.8 1,553.0 530.3 186.5 58.9 75.2 186.1 47.2 57.7 71.1
1998 2,983.2 1,430.2 1,578.9 1,040.9 538.0 1,673.5 569.6 194.8 60.4 78.8 193.1 50.4 62.0 87.0
1999         June 1,511.2 854.1 873.7 644.9 228.8 791.6 290.2 89.8 27.7 41.6 96.7 22.3 28.5 13.0
         Sep. 1,544.6 877.1 896.8 662.2 234.6 805.2 296.2 91.2 27.4 42.0 97.7 22.8 29.1 13.7         Dec. 1,582.3 899.3 931.1 691.5 239.7 823.0 306.8 92.3 27.7 42.2 98.7 23.3 30.3 14.7
2000         Mar. 1,593.9 917.4 939.9 706.8 233.1 828.6 310.7 92.1 27.6 42.4 98.6 23.4 31.5 14.4
         June 1,608.3 931.3 952.4 719.2 233.3 834.7 314.6 93.2 27.5 42.6 98.4 23.5 31.7 13.9
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
1999         3rd qtr + 23.4 + 22.4 + 20.4 + 16.8 + 3.6 + 4.8 + 5.4 − 2.2 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.8 + 0.2
         4th qtr + 40.9 + 22.1 + 21.1 + 18.3 + 2.8 + 23.6 + 5.5 − 0.1 + 1.4 − 1.0 + 0.9 + 0.2 + 5.8 − 2.2
2000         1st qtr + 21.2 + 9.4 + 4.6 + 8.4 − 3.8 + 17.5 + 1.8 + 0.6 − 0.6 + 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 7.6 + 6.5
         2nd qtr + 26.1 + 10.4 + 10.7 + 8.9 + 1.8 + 15.5 + 3.0 + 3.8 − 0.1 + 1.2 − 1.0 + 0.5 − 2.1 + 2.8
 Short-term lending
1999         3rd qtr − 9.2 −− 0.1 −− 0.1 − 9.5 + 0.0 − 3.9 + 0.6 − 0.5 − 1.6 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.7
         4th qtr + 6.6 −− 0.1 −− 0.1 + 5.7 − 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.7 − 1.0 + 0.6 − 0.1 + 3.8 − 2.8
2000         1st qtr + 11.0 −− 1.3 −− 1.3 + 11.2 − 0.8 + 0.6 − 0.7 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 5.5 + 7.0
         2nd qtr + 7.0 − + 0.2 − + 0.2 + 5.4 − 0.2 + 2.6 + 0.2 + 1.0 − 0.8 + 0.3 − 2.5 + 2.3
 Medium-term lending  8 
1999         3rd qtr + 2.2 −− 0.5 −− 0.5 + 2.0 − 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2
         4th qtr − 1.0 −− 1.8 −− 1.8 + 1.2 − 0.7 + 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.7 − 0.5
2000         1st qtr − 0.7 −− 1.2 −− 1.2 + 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.9 − 0.5
         2nd qtr + 1.3 −− 0.4 −− 0.4 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1
 Long-term lending  1, 9 
1999         3rd qtr + 30.3 + 22.4 + 21.0 + 16.8 + 4.2 + 12.4 + 5.5 + 1.1 − 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.9 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.7
         4th qtr + 35.3 + 22.1 + 23.0 + 18.3 + 4.6 + 16.8 + 6.3 + 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.4 + 1.3 + 1.1
2000         1st qtr + 11.0 + 9.4 + 7.1 + 8.4 − 1.3 + 5.8 + 2.8 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.2 + 0.0
         2nd qtr + 17.8 + 10.4 + 10.9 + 8.9 + 2.0 + 8.9 + 3.2 + 1.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.5
*Excluding lending by foreign branches. Up to December 1998: lending by always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent alterations, which will
banks (excluding building and loan associations) in Germany; including appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Up
lending to building and loan associations. From 1999: lending by monetary to December 1998, including loans on a trust basis; from 1999, loans on afinancial institutions (MFIs) in Germany; breakdown of lending by building trust basis are no longer included in lending. —2Including the extraction of
and loan associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical alterations stones and earths. —3Including the maintenance and repair of motor
have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest date are vehicles and durable consumer goods. —4Up to December 1998, excluding
32*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
IV. Banks
    
 
  Lending to
 non-commercial
 Lending to employed and other individuals organisations
Memorandum items Other lending Services sector (including the professions)  
5 
of which of which
Debit
balanceson wage
and salary
Other Lending accountsreal to self- Lending and of which
Housing estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Investment Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total credit  
7 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises enterprises persons  6 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
1,128.8 277.6 56.3 270.9 781.1 139.8 1,360.4 960.8 399.6 201.7 42.6 28.5 8.6 19971,220.2 305.9 70.1 285.8 821.2 143.6 1,455.0 1,031.2 423.7 207.7 44.6 28.8 8.8 1998
636.6 153.0 38.3 147.1 444.9 74.1 836.2 618.8 217.4 103.0 23.8 13.3 3.5 1999          June
643.2 155.8 36.7 162.3 447.6 73.6 854.7 634.2 220.5 106.2 24.3 13.5 3.6          Sep.663.1 154.1 42.8 168.3 449.4 73.9 871.4 655.7 215.7 105.7 23.6 13.7 3.6          Dec.
667.4 154.8 46.7 168.1 449.5 74.8 876.7 658.6 218.1 107.3 23.9 13.9 3.6 2000          Mar.
677.3 157.7 43.8 174.9 452.6 75.6 887.1 667.4 219.6 108.0 24.8 13.7 3.6          June
Short-term lending
195.9 34.9 21.5 54.2 103.4 33.0 87.3 8.2 79.1 4.2 42.6 3.1 0.1 1997
212.6 41.5 26.6 54.2 106.6 32.3 97.0 8.8 88.2 4.4 44.6 2.5 0.0 1998
108.5 20.2 15.5 25.8 57.4 16.9 50.0 5.9 44.2 2.2 23.8 1.5 0.0 1999          June
105.2 19.9 13.0 26.7 56.5 16.5 50.2 5.7 44.5 2.4 24.3 1.3 0.0          Sep.112.2 18.6 17.1 27.5 55.9 15.6 51.1 5.7 45.4 2.5 23.6 1.3 0.0          Dec.
111.5 18.0 19.7 26.0 55.7 16.4 50.7 5.1 45.6 2.4 23.9 1.4 0.0 2000          Mar.
114.6 19.0 17.6 27.4 56.2 16.8 52.4 5.5 47.0 2.4 24.8 1.3 0.0          June
Medium-term lending  
8
62.6 10.8 5.1 13.5 40.2 6.6 77.8 24.3 53.4 39.3 − 0.7 0.1 1997
60.5 10.0 5.3 12.5 36.8 6.4 74.0 21.8 52.2 37.6 − 0.6 0.1 1998
56.0 7.1 3.8 10.6 36.5 6.1 77.7 32.9 44.8 31.4 − 0.6 0.1 1999          June
56.7 7.1 4.4 12.8 35.7 5.9 76.6 31.4 45.2 32.3 − 0.6 0.1          Sep.
57.0 7.1 4.0 12.3 33.3 5.6 72.7 29.2 43.5 31.0 − 0.7 0.1          Dec.
57.4 7.0 4.3 12.0 33.0 5.6 72.5 27.8 44.7 32.4 − 0.6 0.1 2000          Mar.
58.7 6.7 4.9 12.5 33.0 5.6 72.9 27.6 45.3 33.1 − 0.6 0.1          June
Long-term lending  1, 9
870.4 231.8 29.8 203.2 637.5 100.2 1,195.4 928.3 267.1 158.3 − 24.7 8.5 1997
947.1 254.4 38.1 219.1 677.9 104.9 1,283.9 1,000.6 283.3 165.8 − 25.7 8.7 1998
472.0 125.7 19.0 110.7 351.0 51.1 708.4 580.0 128.4 69.4 − 11.2 3.4 1999          June
481.3 128.7 19.4 122.7 355.5 51.2 727.9 597.1 130.8 71.5 − 11.5 3.5          Sep.
493.9 128.5 21.8 128.5 360.1 52.7 747.5 620.8 126.7 72.2 − 11.7 3.5          Dec.
498.5 129.7 22.7 130.2 360.8 52.9 753.5 625.7 127.8 72.5 − 11.9 3.5 2000          Mar.
503.9 132.0 21.2 135.1 363.5 53.1 761.7 634.3 127.4 72.5 − 11.8 3.5          June
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
+ 6.1 + 2.7 − 1.9 + 4.0 + 2.2 − 0.4 + 18.3 + 14.9 + 3.4 + 1.9 + 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.1 1999          3rd qtr
+ 18.7 + 1.7 + 6.1 + 2.9 + 1.9 + 0.0 + 17.0 + 15.6 + 1.5 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 0.3 + 0.0          4th qtr
+ 3.2 + 1.0 + 3.9 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 3.6 + 2.8 + 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.2 −2000         1st qtr
+ 10.4 + 2.6 − 2.4 + 6.5 + 2.7 + 0.7 + 10.8 + 7.7 + 3.1 + 1.4 + 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.0          2nd qtr
Short-term lending
− 3.5 − 0.2 − 2.4 + 0.1 − 1.3 − 0.4 + 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 1999          3rd qtr
+ 5.7 − 0.2 + 4.1 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.9 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 0.9 + 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0          4th qtr
− 1.2 − 0.1 + 2.6 − 1.2 − 0.2 + 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.0 2000          1st qtr
+ 2.3 + 0.9 − 2.7 + 1.4 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 1.7 + 0.3 + 1.3 + 0.0 + 0.9 − 0.1 + 0.0          2nd qtr
Medium-term lending  8
+ 1.0 − 0.0 + 0.5 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.6 + 0.6 − + 0.0 + 0.0 1999          3rd qtr
+ 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 1.5 − 0.2 − 2.3 − 1.0 − 1.2 − 0.8 − + 0.0 − 0.0          4th qtr
+ 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 1.2 − 0.9 − 0.2 + 0.1 −− 0.0 + 0.0 2000          1st qtr
+ 1.1 − 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.6 + 0.6 −− 0.0 − 0.0          2nd qtr
Long-term lending  1, 9
+ 8.5 + 3.0 + 0.0 + 3.3 + 3.6 + 0.0 + 17.6 + 15.4 + 2.1 + 1.2 − + 0.4 + 0.1 1999          3rd qtr
+ 12.0 + 2.0 + 2.4 + 3.6 + 3.8 + 1.2 + 18.3 + 16.6 + 1.7 + 0.6 − + 0.2 + 0.0          4th qtr
+ 4.4 + 1.2 + 0.9 + 1.8 + 0.7 + 0.2 + 5.0 + 4.3 + 0.8 + 0.5 − + 0.1 + 0.0 2000          1st qtr
+ 7.0 + 2.2 − 0.1 + 4.7 + 2.3 + 0.2 + 8.9 + 7.7 + 1.1 + 0.8 −− 0.0 − 0.0          2nd qtr
credit institutions (other than building and loan associations); from 1999, loans, even in the form of instalment credit. —8Up to December 1998,
excluding banks (MFIs) and excluding finance leasing institutions; see also maturity or period of notice of more than 1 year to less than 4 years; fromfootnote 5. —5From 1999, including finance leasing institutions. —6From 1999, more than 1 year up to and including 5 years. —9Up to December
1999, including sole proprietors; up to December 1998, sole proprietors 1998, maturity or period of notice of 4 years and more; from 1999, of morewere assigned to enterprises. —7Excluding mortgage loans and housing than 5 years. 
33*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
IV. Banks
 
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
  
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 euro billion
Sight deposits  2 Time deposits  3, 4, 5    Memo item:
  
for more than 1 year
of which: Subordin- Included
ated in timeliabilities deposits:
for up for (excluding liabilities
for less to and for for less 4 years Savings Bank Loans on negoti- arising
Deposits, on than up to than and deposits savings a trust able debt from
including
Period total  1 Total demand 1 month Total 1 year  4 Total 4 years more  6 bonds  7 basis  8 securities) repos  9 2 years  5 
Domestic non-banks, total 10 End of year or month *
 
1997 3,341.9 689.8 659.7 30.2 1,146.9 382.0 765.0 . 10.9 754.0 1,182.1 236.9 86.1 40.9 .1998 3,520.3 799.5 760.2 39.3 1,194.1 398.8 795.3 . 13.4 781.9 1,211.0 234.9 80.9 45.6 .1999 1,905.3 420.4 420.4 . 759.6 239.7 519.9 4.5 . . 614.7 110.7 42.1 25.6 0.4
1999         Aug. 1,849.4 399.5 399.5 . 729.4 223.3 506.1 4.2 . . 609.1 111.4 41.6 24.9 0.9
         Sep. 1,852.5 405.2 405.2 . 728.1 220.5 507.6 4.1 . . 608.3 110.8 41.4 25.0 0.8
         Oct. 1,858.1 406.1 406.1 . 734.9 225.4 509.5 4.1 . . 606.2 110.9 41.7 25.2 0.7
         Nov. 1,884.1 429.7 429.7 . 740.5 226.6 513.9 4.3 . . 603.1 110.9 42.0 25.6 0.6         Dec. 1,905.3 420.4 420.4 . 759.6 239.7 519.9 4.5 . . 614.7 110.7 42.1 25.6 0.4
2000         Jan. 1,897.5 424.9 424.9 . 754.1 229.1 525.0 5.0 . . 609.6 109.0 42.1 25.8 −
         Feb. 1,904.2 432.1 432.1 . 758.1 229.5 528.6 5.3 . . 605.6 108.4 42.4 25.8 0.0         Mar. 1,893.4 426.6 426.6 . 759.0 229.0 530.0 5.4 . . 600.0 107.8 42.3 25.9 −
         Apr. 1,893.5 435.7 435.7 . 756.7 224.5 532.1 6.0 . . 593.5 107.6 42.4 26.1 −
         May 1,891.5 429.0 429.0 . 767.1 232.6 534.4 6.0 . . 587.7 107.7 42.3 26.1 0.0         June 1,888.2 426.2 426.2 . 772.2 236.2 536.1 5.8 . . 582.3 107.6 42.3 26.1 0.0
Changes *
1998 + 179.3 + 110.6 + 101.5 + 9.1 + 47.2 + 16.8 + 30.4 . + 2.5 + 27.9 + 28.9 −2.1 −5.3 + 4.7 .
1999 + 67.3 + 32.7 + 32.7 . + 48.4 + 18.6 + 29.8 . . . −4.5 −9.3 + 0.7 + 2.3 .
1999         Aug. + 3.9 + 0.7 + 0.7 . + 5.9 + 2.4 + 3.5 + 0.1 . . −2.5 −0.4 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.4
         Sep. + 3.1 + 5.8 + 5.8 . −1.3 −2.7 + 1.4 −0.1 . . −0.8 −0.6 −0.2 + 0.1 −0.1
         Oct. + 5.4 + 0.6 + 0.6 . + 6.8 + 4.9 + 1.9 + 0.1 . . −2.1 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.2 −0.1
         Nov. + 25.5 + 23.1 + 23.1 . + 5.6 + 1.2 + 4.4 + 0.2 . . −3.1 −0.0 + 0.3 + 0.3 −0.1
         Dec. + 21.2 − 9.4 − 9.4 . + 19.1 + 13.1 + 6.0 + 0.2 . . + 11.6 −0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 −0.2
2000         Jan. − 8.1 + 4.2 + 4.2 . −5.4 −10.6 + 5.1 + 0.5 . . −5.1 −1.7 + 0.0 + 0.1 −0.4
         Feb. + 6.6 + 7.2 + 7.2 . + 4.0 + 0.4 + 3.6 + 0.3 . . −4.0 −0.6 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0
         Mar. −11.1 − 5.9 − 5.9 . + 0.8 −0.5 + 1.3 + 0.2 . . −5.5 −0.5 −0.1 + 0.2 −0.0
         Apr. − 0.5 + 8.5 + 8.5 . −2.3 −4.5 + 2.2 + 0.5 . . −6.5 −0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 −
         May − 1.6 − 6.3 − 6.3 . + 10.4 + 8.1 + 2.3 + 0.0 . . −5.9 + 0.1 −0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0
         June − 2.9 − 2.5 − 2.5 . + 5.1 + 3.5 + 1.6 −0.2 . . −5.4 −0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 −0.0
Domestic public authorities End of year or month *
1997 280.0 31.6 24.1 7.5 162.2 37.8 124.4 . 0.8 123.6 5.9 6.3 74.0 2.6 .
1998 288.3 36.7 29.1 7.6 170.3 44.8 125.5 . 1.0 124.5 6.4 6.3 68.7 2.6 .1999 124.4 14.7 14.7 . 104.4 42.0 62.4 0.4 . . 3.2 2.0 35.9 1.2 −
1999         Aug. 115.2 13.6 13.6 . 96.3 35.1 61.2 0.4 . . 3.4 2.0 35.2 1.1 −
         Sep. 114.2 13.0 13.0 . 95.9 34.8 61.1 0.4 . . 3.3 2.0 35.1 1.1 −
         Oct. 115.0 14.0 14.0 . 95.8 34.7 61.1 0.4 . . 3.2 2.0 35.4 1.1 −
         Nov. 118.1 14.1 14.1 . 98.9 37.2 61.6 0.4 . . 3.2 2.0 35.6 1.2 −
         Dec. 124.4 14.7 14.7 . 104.4 42.0 62.4 0.4 . . 3.2 2.0 35.9 1.2 −
2000         Jan. 118.4 12.5 12.5 . 100.8 37.3 63.5 0.8 . . 3.2 2.0 36.0 1.3 −
         Feb. 118.6 12.9 12.9 . 100.6 36.8 63.8 0.9 . . 3.1 2.0 36.2 1.3 −
         Mar. 117.2 11.9 11.9 . 100.1 36.9 63.1 0.9 . . 3.1 2.0 36.2 1.3 −
         Apr. 118.3 14.3 14.3 . 98.9 35.2 63.6 1.0 . . 3.1 2.0 36.2 1.3 −
         May 119.9 12.7 12.7 . 102.2 38.2 64.1 0.9 . . 3.0 2.0 36.3 1.3 −
         June 128.3 15.6 15.6 . 107.7 43.7 64.0 0.9 . . 2.9 2.1 36.4 1.3 −
Changes *
1998 + 8.3 + 5.1 + 5.0 + 0.1 + 8.3 + 7.2 + 1.1 . + 0.2 + 1.0 + 0.5 + 0.1 −5.7 −0.0 .
1999 + 12.4 − 0.2 − 0.2 . + 13.7 + 15.3 −1.5 . . . −0.0 −1.2 + 0.7 −0.2 .
1999         Aug. + 2.1 + 1.4 + 1.4 . + 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.1 . . −0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −
         Sep. − 1.0 − 0.6 − 0.6 . −0.3 −0.2 −0.1 −0.0 . . −0.1 + 0.0 −0.2 + 0.0 −
         Oct. + 0.8 + 1.0 + 1.0 . −0.1 −0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 . . −0.1 −0.0 + 0.3 −0.0 −
         Nov. + 3.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 . + 3.0 + 2.5 + 0.5 −0.0 . . −0.0 −0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 −
         Dec. + 6.2 + 0.6 + 0.6 . + 5.5 + 4.8 + 0.7 + 0.1 . . + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 −
2000         Jan. − 6.0 − 2.3 − 2.3 . −3.6 −4.7 + 1.1 + 0.4 . . −0.1 −0.0 + 0.1 + 0.2 −
         Feb. + 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.4 . −0.2 −0.5 + 0.3 + 0.1 . . −0.0 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 −
         Mar. − 1.4 − 0.9 − 0.9 . −0.5 + 0.1 −0.6 −0.0 . . −0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −
         Apr. + 1.1 + 2.4 + 2.4 . −1.2 −1.7 + 0.5 + 0.1 . . −0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 −0.0 −
         May + 1.6 − 1.6 − 1.6 . + 3.3 + 2.9 + 0.4 −0.0 . . −0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 −
         June + 8.4 + 2.9 + 2.9 . + 5.5 + 5.6 −0.0 −0.0 . . −0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −
*See table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from to December 1998, including time deposits for less than 1 month. —
the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as 3Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from registered
provisional. Subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following debt securities. —4Up to December 1998, excluding time deposits for less
Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Up to December 1998, than 1 month; see also footnote 2. —5Since the inclusion of building and
including deposits from loans on a trust basis; see also footnote 8. —2Up
34*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
IV. Banks
 
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont ’d)
  
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 euro billion
Sight deposits  2 Time deposits  3, 4, 5    Memo item:
  
for more than 1 year
of which: Subordin- Included
ated in timeliabilities deposits:
for up for (excluding liabilities
for less to and for for less 4 years Savings Bank Loans on negoti- arising
Deposits, on than up to than and deposits savings a trust able debt from
including
Period total  1 Total demand 1 month Total 1 year  4 Total 4 years more  6 bonds  7 basis  8 securities) repos  9 2 years  5 
Domestic enterprises and individuals 10 End of year or month *
 
1997 3,061.8 658.2 635.5 22.7 984.7 344.2 640.5 . 10.1 630.4 1,176.2 230.6 12.1 38.3 .1998 3,231.9 762.8 731.2 31.7 1,023.8 354.0 669.8 . 12.4 657.4 1,204.6 228.6 12.1 43.0 .1999 1,781.0 405.7 405.7 . 655.2 197.6 457.6 4.1 . . 611.4 108.7 6.2 24.5 0.4
1999         Aug. 1,734.2 385.9 385.9 . 633.1 188.2 445.0 3.8 . . 605.7 109.4 6.4 23.8 0.9
         Sep. 1,738.3 392.3 392.3 . 632.2 185.7 446.5 3.7 . . 605.0 108.8 6.3 23.9 0.8
         Oct. 1,743.2 392.1 392.1 . 639.1 190.7 448.4 3.7 . . 603.0 108.9 6.3 24.1 0.7
         Nov. 1,765.9 415.5 415.5 . 641.6 189.3 452.2 3.9 . . 599.9 108.9 6.4 24.4 0.6         Dec. 1,781.0 405.7 405.7 . 655.2 197.6 457.6 4.1 . . 611.4 108.7 6.2 24.5 0.4
2000         Jan. 1,779.1 412.4 412.4 . 653.4 191.8 461.6 4.2 . . 606.4 107.0 6.2 24.4 −
         Feb. 1,785.6 419.3 419.3 . 657.6 192.7 464.9 4.4 . . 602.4 106.4 6.2 24.4 0.0         Mar. 1,776.3 414.6 414.6 . 658.9 192.1 466.8 4.6 . . 596.9 105.8 6.1 24.6 −
         Apr. 1,775.3 421.4 421.4 . 657.8 189.3 468.5 5.0 . . 590.5 105.6 6.1 24.7 −
         May 1,771.6 416.3 416.3 . 664.9 194.5 470.4 5.1 . . 584.7 105.7 6.0 24.7 0.0         June 1,760.0 410.6 410.6 . 664.5 192.4 472.1 4.9 . . 579.4 105.5 5.9 24.7 0.0
Changes *
1998 + 171.0 + 105.5 + 96.5 + 9.0 + 38.8 + 9.6 + 29.3 . + 2.3 + 26.9 + 28.4 −2.2 + 0.4 + 4.7 .
1999 + 54.9 + 32.8 + 32.8 . + 34.7 + 3.4 + 31.3 . . . −4.5 −8.1 + 0.0 + 2.4 .
1999         Aug. + 1.8 −0.7 −0.7 . + 5.2 + 1.7 + 3.4 + 0.0 . . −2.3 −0.4 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.4
         Sep. + 4.1 + 6.4 + 6.4 . −1.0 −2.5 + 1.5 −0.1 . . −0.7 −0.6 −0.0 + 0.1 −0.1
         Oct. + 4.6 −0.4 −0.4 . + 6.9 + 5.0 + 1.9 + 0.0 . . −2.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.2 −0.1
         Nov. + 22.3 + 22.9 + 22.9 . + 2.5 −1.3 + 3.9 + 0.2 . . −3.1 −0.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 −0.1
         Dec. + 14.9 −10.0 −10.0 . + 13.6 + 8.3 + 5.3 + 0.1 . . + 11.5 −0.2 −0.1 + 0.1 −0.2
2000         Jan. −2.1 + 6.5 + 6.5 . −1.8 −5.9 + 4.0 + 0.1 . . −5.1 −1.7 −0.1 −0.0 −0.4
         Feb. + 6.4 + 6.8 + 6.8 . + 4.2 + 0.9 + 3.3 + 0.2 . . −3.9 −0.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0
         Mar. −9.7 −5.0 −5.0 . + 1.3 −0.6 + 1.9 + 0.2 . . −5.5 −0.5 −0.1 + 0.2 −0.0
         Apr. −1.6 + 6.1 + 6.1 . −1.1 −2.8 + 1.7 + 0.4 . . −6.4 −0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 −
         May −3.3 −4.7 −4.7 . + 7.1 + 5.2 + 1.9 + 0.1 . . −5.8 + 0.1 −0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0
         June −11.3 −5.4 −5.4 . −0.4 −2.0 + 1.7 −0.2 . . −5.3 −0.2 −0.0 −0.0 −0.0
of which: Domestic enterprises 10, 11 End of year or month *
1997 1,020.8 244.4 227.1 17.3 713.5 123.9 589.6 . 4.6 585.0 9.7 41.7 11.5 20.7 .
1998 1,108.1 292.1 267.8 24.3 748.9 128.9 620.0 . 5.9 614.0 11.1 44.3 11.8 24.1 .1999 593.2 142.1 142.1 . 421.8 82.3 339.5 1.5 . . 5.5 23.7 6.1 13.7 0.4
1999         Aug. 564.5 131.5 131.5 . 403.8 73.5 330.3 1.6 . . 5.5 23.7 6.2 13.4 0.9
         Sep. 569.5 135.7 135.7 . 404.6 73.2 331.5 1.5 . . 5.6 23.7 6.1 13.4 0.8
         Oct. 573.9 133.0 133.0 . 411.7 77.8 333.9 1.4 . . 5.6 23.6 6.1 13.5 0.7
         Nov. 584.3 141.4 141.4 . 413.7 76.4 337.3 1.5 . . 5.5 23.7 6.2 13.6 0.6         Dec. 593.2 142.1 142.1 . 421.8 82.3 339.5 1.5 . . 5.5 23.7 6.1 13.7 0.4
2000         Jan. 596.7 145.2 145.2 . 422.3 78.2 344.1 1.6 . . 5.5 23.7 6.0 13.8 −
         Feb. 600.4 145.0 145.0 . 426.1 79.2 346.9 1.7 . . 5.5 23.7 6.0 13.9 0.0         Mar. 598.7 141.4 141.4 . 428.0 79.5 348.5 1.8 . . 5.5 23.8 5.9 14.0 −
         Apr. 604.6 147.2 147.2 . 428.1 78.2 349.9 1.7 . . 5.5 23.8 6.0 14.1 −
         May 609.9 146.7 146.7 . 433.9 81.5 352.4 1.7 . . 5.5 23.8 5.8 14.1 0.0         June 606.3 142.7 142.7 . 434.4 79.5 354.9 1.8 . . 5.4 23.8 5.8 14.1 0.0
Changes *
1998 + 88.6 + 48.5 + 41.6 + 7.0 + 35.5 + 5.0 + 30.5 . + 1.3 + 29.2 + 1.4 + 2.5 + 0.6 + 3.4 .1999 + 43.7 + 6.6 + 6.6 . + 36.0 + 7.5 + 28.5 . . . −0.2 + 1.2 + 0.0 + 1.3 .
1999         Aug. + 4.3 −0.5 −0.5 . + 4.7 + 1.1 + 3.6 −0.0 . . + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.4
         Sep. + 5.1 + 4.2 + 4.2 . + 0.8 −0.3 + 1.2 −0.1 . . + 0.0 −0.0 −0.0 + 0.1 −0.1
         Oct. + 4.1 −2.9 −2.9 . + 7.1 + 4.6 + 2.4 −0.1 . . −0.0 −0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 −0.1
         Nov. + 10.0 + 7.9 + 7.9 . + 2.1 −1.4 + 3.4 + 0.1 . . −0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 −0.1
         Dec. + 8.7 + 0.6 + 0.6 . + 8.1 + 5.9 + 2.2 −0.0 . . −0.0 + 0.0 −0.1 + 0.1 −0.2
2000         Jan. + 3.3 + 2.8 + 2.8 . + 0.5 −4.1 + 4.5 + 0.1 . . + 0.0 −0.0 −0.1 + 0.2 −0.4
         Feb. + 3.6 −0.2 −0.2 . + 3.8 + 1.0 + 2.8 + 0.1 . . + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0
         Mar. −2.0 −3.9 −3.9 . + 1.9 + 0.2 + 1.7 + 0.1 . . + 0.0 + 0.0 −0.1 + 0.1 −0.0
         Apr. + 5.2 + 5.2 + 5.2 . + 0.1 −1.3 + 1.4 −0.0 . . −0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 −
         May + 5.8 −0.1 −0.1 . + 5.8 + 3.3 + 2.5 −0.0 . . + 0.0 + 0.0 −0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0
         June −3.3 −3.7 −3.7 . + 0.5 −1.9 + 2.4 + 0.1 . . −0.1 −0.1 −0.0 + 0.0 −0.0
loan associations in January 1999, including deposits under savings and in time deposits (see also footnote 1). —9Collected separately from 1999
loan contracts (see table IV. 12). —6Excluding deposits under savings and only. —10Up to December 1998, including liabilities to domestic building
loan contracts (see also footnote 5). —7Including liabilities arising from and loan associations and money market funds. —11Up to the End 1998,
non-negotiable bearer debt securities. —8From 1999, no longer included including sole proprietors. 
35*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
IV. Banks
 
8. Deposits of domestic individuals and non-commercial organisations at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
   
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 euro billion
Sight deposits  2 Time deposits  4, 5, 6  
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits Domestic individuals Domestic individuals
of domesticindividuals Domestic Domesticand non- non-com- non-com-commercial mercial mercialorganisa- Selfem- Other organisa- Selfem- Other organisa-
Period Total Total ployed  
3 Employees tions Total Total ployed  3 Employees tions tions, total  1 individuals individuals
End of year or month *
 
1997 2,041.0 413.8 396.5 79.7 264.3 52.4 17.3 271.2 240.9 73.3 129.8 37.8 30.31998 2,123.9 470.8 452.1 93.4 298.0 60.7 18.6 275.0 243.5 72.3 132.6 38.7 31.41999 1,187.8 263.5 254.6 50.2 170.3 34.1 9.0 233.4 216.6 35.2 161.6 19.9 16.8
2000         Jan. 1,182.4 267.2 257.6 50.8 171.8 35.0 9.6 231.1 214.6 34.6 160.4 19.6 16.5
         Feb. 1,185.2 274.2 264.3 51.0 177.3 36.0 9.9 231.5 214.6 34.3 160.6 19.6 16.9         Mar. 1,177.5 273.2 263.5 49.4 177.8 36.4 9.7 230.9 213.6 34.1 160.1 19.4 17.3
         Apr. 1,170.7 274.2 264.0 50.2 177.9 35.9 10.2 229.7 212.7 33.9 159.4 19.4 17.0
         May 1,161.6 269.6 259.3 50.1 173.9 35.2 10.4 231.0 213.4 34.1 159.8 19.6 17.6         June 1,153.7 267.8 257.0 48.0 173.8 35.2 10.8 230.1 212.5 33.7 159.4 19.5 17.6
Changes *
1998 + 82.5 + 57.0 + 55.6 + 13.7 + 33.5 + 8.4 + 1.3 + 3.3 + 2.8 −1.0 + 2.7 + 1.0 + 0.6
1999 + 11.2 + 26.2 + 25.9 + 3.7 + 18.8 + 3.4 + 0.3 −1.3 −1.0 −2.6 + 2.1 −0.5 −0.3
2000         Jan. −5.4 + 3.7 + 3.1 + 0.6 + 1.5 + 0.9 + 0.6 −2.3 −2.0 −0.5 −1.2 −0.3 −0.3
         Feb. + 2.8 + 7.0 + 6.7 + 0.2 + 5.5 + 1.0 + 0.3 + 0.4 −0.0 −0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.4
         Mar. −7.7 −1.0 −0.8 −1.6 + 0.4 + 0.3 −0.2 −0.6 −1.0 −0.3 −0.5 −0.2 + 0.4
         Apr. −6.9 + 1.0 + 0.5 + 0.9 + 0.1 −0.5 + 0.5 −1.2 −0.9 −0.1 −0.7 −0.1 −0.3
         May −9.1 −4.6 −4.7 −0.1 −3.9 −0.7 + 0.1 + 1.3 + 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.5
         June −7.9 −1.8 −2.2 −2.1 −0.1 −0.1 + 0.5 −0.9 −0.9 −0.4 −0.4 −0.1 + 0.0
*See table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the including deposits arising from loans on a trust basis; see also footnote 9.—
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as 2Up to December 1998, including time deposits for less than 1 month. —
provisional. Subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following 3Up to the End 1998, including sole proprietors. —4Including subordi-
Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Up to December 1998, nated liabilities and liabilities arising from registered debt securities. —5UpDeutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
 
  
9. Deposits of domestic public authorities at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group 
*
 
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 euro billion
Deposits  1 
   
Federal Government and its special funds  2 Länder Governments
Time deposits  4 Time deposits  4 
Savings Memo Savings Memo
Domestic for up deposits item: for up deposits item:public to and for more and bank Loans on to and for more and bank Loans on
Sight including than savings a trust Sight including than savings a trust authorities,
Period total Total 1 year 1 year bonds  
5 basis  6 Total 1 year 1 year bonds  5 basis  6 deposits  3 deposits  3 
End of year or month *
 
1997 280.0 108.3 1.9 3.6 79.8 0.1 23.0 83.0 4.5 1.1 26.5 0.1 50.81998 288.3 111.2 4.0 1.9 80.9 0.0 24.3 80.1 6.8 1.9 27.1 0.2 44.21999 124.4 45.9 1.0 4.6 40.3 0.0 12.7 21.0 2.8 4.2 14.0 0.1 23.1
2000         Jan. 118.4 44.3 0.5 3.1 40.7 0.0 12.8 19.7 2.2 2.5 14.9 0.1 23.1
         Feb. 118.6 44.7 1.0 2.7 41.0 0.0 12.9 18.1 1.8 1.3 14.9 0.1 23.2         Mar. 117.2 44.8 0.7 3.5 40.6 0.0 12.9 18.8 2.1 1.9 14.8 0.1 23.1
         Apr. 118.3 44.4 0.6 2.7 41.1 0.0 12.9 19.9 3.3 1.6 14.8 0.1 23.2
         May 119.9 44.2 0.8 1.9 41.4 0.0 13.0 18.8 2.1 1.8 14.8 0.1 23.2         June 128.3 50.0 0.7 7.6 41.5 0.0 13.0 22.8 4.2 3.7 14.8 0.1 23.2
Changes *
1998 + 8.3 + 2.5 + 2.2 −1.7 + 1.1 −0.0 + 0.9 −2.9 + 2.4 + 0.8 + 0.6 + 0.0 −6.6
1999 + 12.4 + 1.6 −0.9 + 3.5 −1.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 2.6 −0.4 + 3.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.5
2000         Jan. −6.0 −1.5 −0.5 −1.4 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.1 −1.4 −0.6 −1.7 + 0.9 −0.0 −0.0
         Feb. + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.5 −0.5 + 0.3 − + 0.1 −0.6 −0.3 −0.2 −0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1
         Mar. −1.4 + 0.1 −0.3 + 0.8 −0.4 −0.0 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.3 + 0.5 −0.1 −0.0 −0.0
         Apr. + 1.1 −0.5 −0.1 −0.9 + 0.5 + 0.0 −0.0 + 1.0 + 1.2 −0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1
         May + 1.6 −0.2 + 0.2 −0.7 + 0.4 − + 0.1 −1.1 −1.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 −0.0 + 0.0
         June + 8.4 + 5.7 −0.1 + 5.7 + 0.1 − + 0.0 + 4.0 + 2.1 + 1.9 −0.1 −0.0 −0.0
*See table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to
its successor organisations and of the Federal Railways, east German be regarded as provisional. Subsequent alterations, which will appear in theRailways and Federal Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Up to December
Deutsche Post AG and Deutsche Telekom AG, and of publicly-owned 1998, including deposits arising from loans on a trust basis; see alsoenterprises, which are included in ”Enterprises ”. Statistical breaks have been footnote 6. —2Federal Railways Fund, Indemnification Fund, Redemption
36*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
IV. Banks
     
 
 Savings deposits  7  Memo item:
 
by maturity
 more than 1 year  6 
Included Subordinated
 of which: Domestic liabilities in time
non-com- (excluding deposits:
up to and up to and mercial Bank Loans on negotiable liabilitiesincluding including less than 4 years Domestic organisa- savings a trust debt arising1 year  
5 Total 2 years 4 years and more Total tions bonds  8 basis  9   Period individuals securities)  10 from repos  11 
End of year or month *
 
220.3 50.9 . 5.5 45.4 1,166.5 1,148.6 17.9 188.9 0.6 17.6 . 1997225.1 49.9 . 6.5 43.4 1,193.5 1,174.1 19.4 184.2 0.4 18.9 . 1998115.4 118.0 2.5 . . 605.9 595.5 10.4 85.0 0.2 10.8 −1999
113.6 117.5 2.6 . . 600.9 590.5 10.3 83.3 0.2 10.6 −2000         Jan.
113.4 118.0 2.7 . . 596.9 586.6 10.3 82.6 0.2 10.6 −         Feb.
112.6 118.3 2.8 . . 591.4 581.1 10.3 82.1 0.2 10.6 −         Mar.
111.1 118.6 3.3 . . 585.0 574.7 10.3 81.8 0.2 10.7 −         Apr.
113.0 118.0 3.4 . . 579.2 569.0 10.2 81.8 0.2 10.6 −         May
112.9 117.2 3.1 . . 574.0 563.9 10.1 81.7 0.2 10.6 −         June
Changes *
+ 4.6 −1.3 . + 1.0 −2.3 + 27.1 + 25.5 + 1.6 −4.7 −0.3 + 1.3 . 1998
− 4.1 + 2.8 . . . − 4.3 − 4.8 + 0.5 −9.3 −0.0 + 1.1 . 1999
− 1.8 −0.5 + 0.1 . . − 5.1 − 5.0 −0.1 −1.7 −0.0 −0.2 −2000         Jan.
− 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.1 . . − 3.9 − 3.9 −0.0 −0.6 −0.0 −0.0 −         Feb.
− 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.1 . . − 5.5 − 5.5 + 0.0 −0.6 −0.0 + 0.1 −         Mar.
− 1.5 + 0.3 + 0.5 . . − 6.4 − 6.4 −0.0 −0.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 −         Apr.
+ 1.9 −0.6 + 0.1 . . − 5.8 − 5.7 −0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 −0.0 −         May
− 0.1 −0.8 −0.3 . . − 5.2 − 5.2 −0.1 −0.1 −− 0.0 −         June
to December 1998, excluding time deposits for less than 1 month; see also footnote 6). —8Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
footnote 2. —6Since the inclusion of building and loan associations in securities. —9From 1999, no longer included in time deposits (see also
January 1999, including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see table footnote 1) —10Included in time deposits. —11Collected separately from
IV. 12). —7Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also 1999 only. Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
 
   
 
 
 
Local authorities and local authority associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  4, 7 Time deposits  4 
Savings Memo Savings Memo
for up deposits item: for up deposits item:to and for more and bank Loans on to and for more and bank Loans on
Sight including than savings a trust Sight including than savings a trust
Total 1 year 1 year bonds  
5, 8 basis  6 Total 1 year 1 year bonds  5 basis  6   Period deposits  3 deposits  3 
End of year or month *
 
39.8 14.5 17.0 2.0 6.1 0.0 48.9 10.8 16.0 16.2 5.8 0.2 199745.3 16.5 19.8 2.4 6.6 0.1 51.7 9.3 21.2 15.2 5.8 0.2 199828.5 8.2 14.4 2.2 3.7 0.1 28.9 2.8 18.9 5.8 1.4 0.1 1999
25.8 6.8 13.3 2.0 3.7 0.1 28.6 3.0 18.4 5.9 1.4 0.1 2000          Jan.
27.2 7.3 14.2 2.0 3.7 0.1 28.5 2.7 18.5 5.9 1.4 0.1          Feb.26.0 6.7 13.6 2.0 3.7 0.1 27.5 2.5 18.0 5.8 1.3 0.1          Mar.
26.1 7.5 12.9 2.0 3.7 0.1 27.9 2.9 18.1 5.8 1.3 0.1          Apr.
28.1 7.6 14.8 2.0 3.7 0.1 28.8 2.2 19.6 5.7 1.2 0.1          May27.1 7.7 13.8 2.0 3.6 0.1 28.4 3.0 18.5 5.7 1.2 0.1          June
Changes *
+ 5.5 + 2.0 + 2.7 + 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 3.1 −1.4 + 5.4 −0.9 + 0.1 + 0.0 1998
+ 4.6 + 0.7 + 3.1 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 3.5 + 0.5 + 5.6 −1.0 −1.6 −0.0 1999
−2.8 −1.4 −1.1 −0.2 −0.1 −− 0.3 + 0.2 −0.5 + 0.0 −0.0 −2000         Jan.
+ 1.5 + 0.6 + 0.9 + 0.0 −0.0 −− 1.0 −0.3 −0.7 + 0.0 −0.0 −         Feb.
−1.3 −0.7 −0.6 −0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −1.0 −0.3 −0.6 −0.1 −0.0 −0.0          Mar.
+ 0.1 + 0.9 −0.7 + 0.0 −0.0 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.1 −0.0 −0.1 −         Apr.
+ 2.0 + 0.0 + 2.0 + 0.0 −0.0 + 0.0 + 0.9 −0.6 + 1.6 −0.0 −0.1 −         May
−1.0 + 0.1 −1.0 −0.0 −0.0 + 0.0 −0.4 + 0.7 −1.1 −0.0 −0.0 −         June
Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special Fund, ”German Unity ”Fund, longer included in time deposits (see also footnote 1) —7Since the inclusion
Equalisation of Burdens Fund. —3Up to December 1998, including time of building and loan associations in January 1999, including deposits under
deposits for less than 1 month. —4Up to December 1998, excluding time savings and loan contracts. —8Excluding deposits under savings and loan
deposits for less than 1 month; see also footnote 3. —5Including liabilities contracts (see also footnote 7). 
arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. —6From 1999, no
37*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
IV. Banks
 
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs) *
  
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 euro billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at three months ’ Memo at over three months ’
notice notice item: of which:
Interest With
of which: of which: of which: credited maturitiesSpecial Special At three on of moresavings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months ’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years  
4 facilities  2 facilities  2 non-banks
End of year or month *
 
1997 1,205.0 1,182.1 928.8 531.7 253.2 201.4 22.9 16.9 38.8 244.6 236.9 216.7 7.71998 1,234.2 1,211.0 971.4 582.8 239.6 189.6 23.2 17.3 39.5 243.9 234.9 211.1 9.11999 626.6 614.7 504.4 338.8 110.2 88.3 11.9 9.1 20.0 116.4 110.7 101.8 5.7
2000         Feb. 617.5 605.6 495.2 333.4 110.4 90.6 11.9 9.0 0.5 114.2 108.4 99.0 5.8
         Mar. 611.9 600.0 488.9 329.2 111.2 91.5 11.9 8.9 0.5 113.8 107.8 98.3 6.0
         Apr. 605.3 593.5 482.8 325.6 110.7 91.2 11.8 8.8 0.4 113.7 107.6 97.9 6.1
         May 599.4 587.7 475.7 322.0 112.0 92.6 11.7 8.7 0.4 113.9 107.7 97.5 6.2         June 593.9 582.3 468.8 317.4 113.4 94.1 11.6 8.6 0.4 113.9 107.6 97.1 6.3
Changes *
1998 + 29.2 + 28.9 + 41.6 + 51.2 −12.7 −12.1 + 0.3 + 0.4 . −0.7 −2.1 −5.6 + 1.4
1999 −4.4 −4.5 + 7.3 + 14.6 −11.8 −8.4 + 0.1 + 0.3 . −8.2 −9.3 −8.9 + 1.1
2000         Feb. −4.0 −4.0 −5.0 −2.9 + 1.0 + 1.2 −0.0 −0.1 . −0.5 −0.6 −0.8 + 0.1
         Mar. −5.6 −5.5 −6.3 −4.2 + 0.8 + 1.0 −0.0 −0.1 . −0.4 −0.5 −0.7 + 0.1
         Apr. −6.6 −6.5 −6.1 −3.6 −0.4 −0.3 −0.1 −0.1 . −0.1 −0.2 −0.4 + 0.1
         May −5.9 −5.9 −7.1 −3.6 + 1.3 + 1.3 −0.1 −0.1 . + 0.2 + 0.1 −0.4 + 0.2
         June −5.5 −5.4 −6.9 −4.6 + 1.5 + 1.5 −0.1 −0.1 . −0.1 −0.1 −0.4 + 0.1
*See table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the building and loan associations, which are classified as time deposits. —
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as 2Savings deposits bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the minimum or
provisional. Subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following basic rate of interest. —3Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable
Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Other than deposits with bearer debt securities. — 4 Up to December 1998, of 4 years and more. 
 
   
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany 
*
 
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 eurobillion
Non-negotiable bearer debt securities
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper and money market paper  7 
of which: of which
with maturities of Subordinated
with maturities of
Certifi- non-
Floating- Zero- Foreign cates up to and up to and negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of including over over including over over debt debt
Period Total notes  1 deposit 1 year Total 1 year bonds  1, 2 bonds  3, 4 2 years  5 2 years  5 4 years  6 4 years  6 securities securities
End of year or month *)
 
1997 1,942.2 217.7 7.8 160.5 11.8 24.1 1,914.9 1,539.6 5.1 0.9 4.2 1.8 45.5 2.61998 2,200.4 289.2 10.6 204.3 14.3 47.2 2,147.0 1,787.7 4.7 1.0 3.6 1.5 46.6 2.91999 1,310.3 208.2 14.7 98.7 13.1 73.6 1,189.8 . 2.6 0.5 1.3 . 32.7 2.5
2000         Feb. 1,321.4 215.9 15.9 100.2 5.5 71.2 1,195.9 . 2.6 0.5 1.3 . 33.4 2.5
         Mar. 1,335.7 227.3 16.4 102.8 4.2 74.2 1,203.9 . 2.5 0.4 1.3 . 34.3 2.5
         Apr. 1,357.9 235.8 16.5 109.4 4.8 75.2 1,222.9 . 2.6 0.5 1.3 . 34.6 2.6
         May 1,378.2 245.9 18.1 106.5 5.3 77.7 1,239.6 . 2.4 0.3 1.2 . 34.5 2.5         June 1,385.1 257.5 18.6 111.8 9.6 86.1 1,237.2 . 2.3 0.2 1.2 . 35.3 2.5
Changes *
1998 + 258.3 + 67.5 + 2.8 + 38.8 + 2.5 + 23.1 + 232.2 + 250.1 −0.3 + 0.1 −0.6 −0.3 + 1.2 + 0.3
1999 + 183.5 + 56.2 + 9.3 + 20.0 + 5.8 + 49.5 + 96.4 . + 0.3 + 0.0 −0.5 . + 8.8 + 1.0
2000         Feb. + 15.9 + 4.2 + 1.5 + 0.8 −0.2 + 5.3 + 6.1 . −0.0 −0.0 + 0.0 . + 0.2 −0.0
         Mar. + 14.3 + 4.8 + 0.6 + 2.6 −1.3 + 3.0 + 8.0 . −0.0 −0.1 −0.0 . + 0.9 + 0.0
         Apr. + 22.1 + 8.5 + 0.1 + 6.6 + 0.6 + 1.0 + 19.1 . + 0.1 + 0.1 −0.0 . + 0.3 + 0.0
         May + 20.3 + 10.1 + 1.6 −2.9 + 0.5 + 2.5 + 16.7 . −0.2 −0.2 −0.0 . −0.1 −0.0
         June + 7.0 + 8.9 + 0.5 + 5.3 + 4.4 + 8.4 − 2.3 . −0.0 −0.0 −0.0 . + 0.8 −0.0
*See table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the 3Including floating-rate notes and zero-coupon bonds denominated in
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as foreign currencies. —4From 1999, bonds denominated in non-euro-area
provisional. Subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following currencies. —5Up to December 1998, 2 years and more. —6From 1999, no
Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Including debt securities longer collected. —7Non-negotiable bearer debt securities are classified
denominated in foreign currencies. —2Issue value when floated. — among bank savings bonds; see also table IV. 10, footnote 2. 
38*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
IV.  Banks
  
12.  Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *
  Interim statements
  
Euro billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs)  6 banks (non-MFIs)
Building loans Secur- Memo
item: ities (in-
Bal- cluding Bearer Newances Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- and under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber loans Bank savings Interim and savings savings Sight ities ing pub- enteredof Balance (except debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan and time out- lished into in
End of year sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- deposits stand- year or associ- reserves)
or month ations total loans  
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans  4 tracts deposits tracts 7 ing 8 month  9 loans)  1 paper)  5 
All  building  and  loan  associations
1999 33 146.3 22.0 0.1 9.1 44.2 47.4 5.8 9.6 1.2 23.0 95.3 2.7 3.1 6.8 85.2
2000         Apr. 32 146.8 21.7 0.1 10.1 43.8 48.0 6.0 9.4 1.0 23.7 94.7 2.5 3.3 6.7 5.8
         May 32 148.0 21.7 0.1 10.7 43.6 48.5 6.0 9.5 1.0 24.8 94.4 2.5 4.1 6.9 5.6         June 32 148.8 22.2 0.1 10.9 43.7 49.0 6.1 9.0 0.9 25.4 94.1 2.5 4.2 6.9 5.6
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2000         Apr. 20 104.8 18.0 0.1 4.9 28.9 33.1 5.5 7.5 0.7 17.6 65.1 2.5 3.3 4.1 4.0
         May 20 106.2 18.2 0.1 5.5 28.8 33.6 5.5 7.6 0.7 18.6 65.0 2.5 4.1 4.2 3.7         June 20 106.8 18.7 0.1 5.7 28.8 34.0 5.6 7.1 0.7 18.9 64.9 2.5 4.2 4.2 3.7
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2000         Apr. 12 42.0 3.7 0.1 5.2 14.9 14.9 0.5 1.8 0.3 6.2 29.6 0.0 − 2.6 1.9
         May 12 41.8 3.5 0.1 5.2 14.8 14.9 0.5 1.8 0.3 6.3 29.4 0.0 − 2.6 1.9
         June 12 42.0 3.5 0.1 5.2 14.9 14.9 0.5 1.9 0.3 6.5 29.2 0.0 − 2.6 1.8
Trends in building and loan association business
  
Euro billion
Changes in deposits Capital promised Capital paid out Outpayment Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts  10 Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans  11 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings andments loan contracts Newly loan contracts  
10 
Amounts Interest of granted
credited deposits interim paid into of which: of which:
savings on under Applied Applied and ofaccounts deposits bridging which: of Memo
cancelled to settle- to settle-
under under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which: item:savings savings and which: interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housingand loan and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonusescon- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during received
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter
13 tions  12 tracts  10 
All  building  and  loan  associations
1999 24.6 2.7 4.8 48.9 30.5 45.0 18.7 4.7 9.2 3.3 17.1 11.0 7.1 16.9 14.2 0.4
2000         Apr. 1.9 0.0 0.4 4.8 3.6 4.1 1.9 0.5 1.0 0.4 1.2 11.3 7.9 1.1 0.0
         May 1.7 0.0 0.4 4.2 2.6 3.9 1.7 0.3 0.9 0.2 1.3 11.5 7.7 1.2 0.1         June 1.7 0.0 0.4 4.3 3.1 4.0 1.8 0.4 1.0 0.3 1.3 11.5 7.9 1.2 . 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2000         Apr. 1.3 0.0 0.3 3.6 2.6 3.1 1.4 0.4 0.7 0.3 1.0 6.8 4.0 0.8 0.0
         May 1.2 0.0 0.3 2.8 1.5 2.8 1.2 0.2 0.6 0.1 1.0 6.7 3.8 0.8 0.0         June 1.2 0.0 0.3 2.7 1.8 2.7 1.1 0.3 0.6 0.2 1.0 6.6 3.7 0.8 . 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2000         Apr. 0.6 0.0 0.1 1.2 1.0 1.0 0.5 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.2 4.5 3.8 0.3 0.0
         May 0.5 0.0 0.2 1.5 1.1 1.1 0.5 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.3 4.7 3.9 0.4 0.0         June 0.5 0.0 0.1 1.6 1.3 1.3 0.6 0.1 0.4 0.1 0.3 4.9 4.1 0.4 . 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of the foreign branches. deposits. —8Including participation rights capital; from December 1993
From August 1990 including assets and liabilities and/or transactions with including fund for general banking risks. —9Total amount covered by the
building and loan association savers in the former GDR. The figures for the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for which the contract fee ha s
latest date are always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent alterations, been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted count as new contracts .—
which will appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially 10For outpayments of deposits under savings and loan contracts arising
marked. —1Including postal giro account balances, claims on building and from the allocation of contracts see "Capital paid out". —11Including
loan associations, claims arising from registered debt securities and central housing bonuses credited. —12Only allocations accepted by the
bank balances. —2Loans under savings and loan contracts and interim and beneficiaries; including allocations applied to settlement of interim and
bridging loans. —3Including money market paper and small amounts of bridging loans. —13The amounts already credited to the accounts of savers
other securities issued by banks. —4Up to December 1998 including loans or borrowers are also included in "Amounts paid into savings accounts
on a trust basis. —5Including equalisation claims. —6Including liabilities under savings and loan contracts" and "Interest and repayments received
to building and loan associations. —7Including small amounts of savings on building loans". 
39*IV.  Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
IV.  Banks
  
13. Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
    
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 euro billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
Loans and advances Balances  and loans  and advances
German   not evidenced by certificates  3 not evidenced  by certificates    3 
banks(MFIs)   to German
with non-banks
foreign foreignbranches Money of which Money
branches  1 
and/or and/or market enter- to marketforeign foreign balance paper, prises foreign paper,subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- and indi- non- secur- Other
Period diaries diaries total  
2 Total Total banks  4 banks Total Total Total viduals banks ities  5 assets  7 ities 5,  6 
Foreign  branches End of year or month *
  
1997 62 165 1,837.4 1,068.1 927.0 207.5 719.4 141.1 728.4 505.8 68.1 35.2 437.7 222.6 40.91998 68 183 2,195.3 1,230.0 1,069.2 279.2 789.9 160.8 875.7 624.7 66.1 37.0 558.6 251.0 89.61999 66 187 1,311.9 714.6 614.2 177.0 437.2 100.4 533.9 386.2 26.6 20.8 359.6 147.7 63.4
1999         Oct. 66 186 1,299.3 722.1 612.6 157.2 455.4 109.5 513.5 384.0 28.7 20.0 355.3 129.6 63.6
         Nov. 67 187 1,350.8 743.1 641.0 166.7 474.4 102.0 546.9 397.7 26.3 20.0 371.4 149.2 60.8         Dec. 66 187 1,311.9 714.6 614.2 177.0 437.2 100.4 533.9 386.2 26.6 20.8 359.6 147.7 63.4
2000         Jan. 68 192 1,389.6 781.8 674.9 190.2 484.8 106.9 556.7 410.6 28.7 21.6 381.9 146.1 51.0
         Feb. 68 193 1,411.7 787.5 678.8 188.4 490.5 108.6 564.8 416.7 27.8 20.9 388.9 148.1 59.5         Mar. 73 203 1,444.5 805.4 695.3 202.3 493.0 110.0 581.0 432.0 27.9 21.3 404.1 149.1 58.1
         Apr. 73 204 1,486.0 845.9 734.4 217.9 516.5 111.5 596.1 442.0 27.6 21.3 414.5 154.1 44.0
         May 72 203 1,466.9 815.2 703.7 221.2 482.5 111.5 596.7 445.9 26.4 20.2 419.5 150.8 54.9
Changes *
1998 + 6 + 18 +406.2 +187.9 +163.5 + 71.9 + 91.5 + 24.5 +168.5 +136.2 −1.6 + 2.1 +137.8 + 32.3 + 49.8
1999 −2 + 4 + 73.2 + 5.3 + 7.7 + 18.1 −10.3 −2.5 + 52.2 + 33.5 −8.1 + 1.0 + 41.6 + 18.8 + 15.6
1999         Oct. − + 2 + 26.8 + 10.4 + 8.2 + 4.1 + 4.1 + 2.1 + 14.4 + 11.4 + 0.3 + 1.1 + 11.1 + 3.0 + 2.0
         Nov. + 1 + 1 + 24.0 −5.7 + 16.5 + 9.1 + 7.4 −22.3 + 32.9 + 3.5 −2.5 −0.2 + 6.0 + 29.4 −3.2
         Dec. −1 −− 44.0 −31.1 −29.1 + 10.3 −39.3 −2.0 −15.6 −13.6 + 0.2 + 0.8 −13.8 −2.0 + 2.6
2000         Jan. + 2 + 5 + 63.8 + 59.8 + 54.4 + 13.1 + 41.3 + 5.4 + 16.5 + 19.5 + 2.0 + 0.7 + 17.5 −3.0 −12.5
         Feb. − + 1 + 21.4 + 4.9 + 3.1 −1.7 + 4.9 + 1.7 + 8.2 + 6.4 −0.8 −0.7 + 7.2 + 1.8 + 8.4
         Mar. + 5 + 10 + 10.0 + 7.8 + 7.6 + 13.5 −5.9 + 0.3 + 3.8 + 5.0 −0.3 + 0.0 + 5.3 −1.2 −1.6
         Apr. − + 1 + 5.3 + 21.5 + 22.3 + 15.2 + 7.1 −0.9 −2.1 −3.2 −0.6 −0.3 −2.6 + 1.1 −14.0
         May −1 −1 + 8.4 −16.6 −18.8 + 3.6 −22.4 + 2.1 + 13.9 + 14.7 −0.8 −0.8 + 15.6 −0.8 + 11.1
  
  
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month *
  
1997 37 131 764.9 429.5 366.8 122.1 244.6 62.7 292.0 214.4 67.5 54.9 147.0 77.6 43.41998 37 137 830.8 469.0 373.1 160.1 213.0 95.9 311.0 237.5 71.4 62.3 166.1 73.5 50.81999 39 161 530.6 242.0 178.6 71.1 107.5 63.4 234.6 174.2 41.5 37.5 132.7 60.4 53.9
1999         Oct. 39 157 525.4 251.3 197.2 77.9 119.3 54.1 219.6 162.8 40.4 36.9 122.4 56.8 54.5
         Nov. 39 157 538.9 255.2 193.1 75.6 117.5 62.1 228.6 170.1 40.1 36.4 130.0 58.5 55.2         Dec. 39 161 530.6 242.0 178.6 71.1 107.5 63.4 234.6 174.2 41.5 37.5 132.7 60.4 53.9
2000         Jan. 39 161 525.1 238.4 179.0 74.3 104.6 59.5 232.8 173.7 42.8 38.6 130.8 59.1 53.9
         Feb. 40 162 536.1 244.6 186.5 76.0 110.5 58.1 239.0 177.5 43.0 38.2 134.5 61.6 52.5         Mar. 41 164 539.3 239.5 179.6 75.6 104.0 59.9 249.0 184.4 42.7 38.6 141.7 64.5 50.8
         Apr. 41 164 546.6 243.3 183.3 74.9 108.5 60.0 249.7 185.1 42.0 38.4 143.1 64.7 53.5
         May 41 164 542.9 245.5 184.7 78.2 106.5 60.8 246.4 183.8 42.6 38.6 141.2 62.6 51.0
Changes *
1998 + 0 + 6 + 79.5 + 47.8 + 13.7 + 39.7 −26.1 + 34.1 + 24.2 + 27.0 + 4.1 + 7.5 + 22.9 −2.8 + 7.5
1999 + 2 + 24 + 86.6 + 5.2 −5.0 −0.6 −4.4 + 10.3 + 69.9 + 56.0 + 5.1 + 5.8 + 50.9 + 13.8 + 11.5
1999         Oct. −− 1 −2.1 + 1.7 + 2.6 + 3.0 −0.4 −0.9 + 1.5 + 1.8 + 1.3 + 1.2 + 0.6 −0.4 −5.2
         Nov. −− + 7.5 + 0.8 −6.2 −2.3 −3.9 + 7.0 + 6.5 + 5.2 −0.3 −0.5 + 5.5 + 1.3 + 0.2
         Dec. − +4 −9.6 −13.9 −15.0 −4.5 −10.5 + 1.1 + 5.6 + 3.6 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 2.2 + 2.0 −1.3
2000         Jan. −− − 9.2 −5.4 −0.9 + 3.2 −4.1 −4.5 −3.5 −2.3 + 1.3 + 1.0 −3.6 −1.2 −0.4
         Feb. + 1 + 1 + 10.8 + 6.2 + 7.5 + 1.7 + 5.8 −1.3 + 6.2 + 3.5 + 0.1 −0.4 + 3.4 + 2.6 −1.5
         Mar. + 1 + 2 −1.6 −7.4 −8.3 −0.4 −7.8 + 0.9 + 7.7 + 5.5 −0.2 + 0.4 + 5.7 + 2.2 −1.9
         Apr. −− − 1.2 −0.1 + 1.2 −0.7 + 1.9 −1.3 −3.1 −3.2 −0.7 −0.2 −2.4 + 0.0 + 2.0
         May −− + 2.5 + 5.2 + 3.4 + 3.4 + 0.0 + 1.8 −0.7 + 1.1 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.5 −1.8 −2.0
*From March 2000, including the foreign branches of building and loan plus endorsement liabilities arising from rediscounted bills and bills sent for
associations. In this table “foreign “also includes the country of domicile of collection from the banks ’portfolios prior to maturity); for foreign
the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical alterations have subsidiaries, volume of business even after 1998. —3For foreign branches:
been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest date are up to December 1998, including bill-based lending (bill holdings plusalways to be regarded as provisional; subsequent alterations, which will endorsement liabilities and bills sent for collection from the banks ’
appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. — portfolios prior to maturity); from 1999, including bill holdings; up to
1Several branches in a given country of domicile are regarded as a single December 1998, including loans on a trust basis. For foreign subsidiaris,
branch. —2Up to December 1998, volume of business (balance sheet total bill-based lending included even after 1998; up to December 1998,
40*IV.  Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
IV.  Banks
        
  
Deposits  8 
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  9 
Money
Short-term market Medium  and long-term
paper
of which of which and debtenter- enter- Working
securities
out- capital Other prises  and prises  and
German foreign indi- indi- Foreign standing and own liabilities
Total Total banks Total Total Total viduals Total viduals 10 funds 11   Period banks  4 non-banks
End of year or month * Foreign  branches
  
1,518.6 1,002.8 221.3 781.5 515.7 164.9 161.2 136.1 3.7 3.6 350.9 198.0 17.3 103.5 19971,756.4 1,181.3 259.6 921.7 575.1 173.6 171.1 145.9 2.5 2.2 401.5 270.0 20.0 148.8 1998
988.6 671.8 148.3 523.6 316.7 60.7 57.9 52.8 2.8 2.7 256.0 234.4 14.0 75.0 1999
1,024.4 681.2 127.9 553.3 343.2 69.1 66.4 60.7 2.7 2.5 274.1 196.2 13.9 64.8 1999          Oct.
1,052.4 709.3 140.6 568.7 343.1 67.2 64.5 59.5 2.6 2.5 275.9 215.7 13.9 68.7          Nov.
988.6 671.8 148.3 523.6 316.7 60.7 57.9 52.8 2.8 2.7 256.0 234.4 14.0 75.0          Dec.
1,095.3 725.6 141.4 584.3 369.6 65.5 62.3 57.2 3.2 3.1 304.1 221.2 14.0 59.1 2000          Jan.
1,098.4 718.7 143.2 575.4 379.7 69.5 66.3 61.1 3.2 3.1 310.2 230.5 17.9 64.9          Feb.1,111.3 723.5 133.7 589.8 387.7 71.5 68.0 63.9 3.5 3.3 316.2 251.1 18.7 63.4          Mar.
1,151.3 756.9 139.2 617.7 394.4 73.0 69.5 65.9 3.5 3.3 321.4 257.4 18.7 58.5          Apr.
1,145.3 742.4 142.1 600.3 402.9 68.2 64.7 59.9 3.6 3.3 334.7 244.5 18.9 58.2          May
Changes *
+ 278.4 +202.7 + 39.3 +163.5 + 75.6 + 9.2 + 10.4 + 10.3 −1.2 −1.4 + 66.5 + 72.0 + 2.7 + 53.2 1998
− 2.8 + 5.6 + 13.4 −7.8 −8.4 −28.6 −30.2 −22.4 + 1.6 + 1.6 + 20.2 + 96.3 + 3.7 −24.1 1999
+ 16.1 + 14.1 + 7.4 + 6.7 + 2.1 −0.1 −0.4 −0.9 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 2.2 + 17.9 −2.7 −4.7 1999          Oct.
+ 5.1 + 12.9 + 12.3 + 0.6 −7.7 −2.0 −1.9 −1.3 −0.1 + 0.0 −5.7 + 19.5 + 0.0 −0.7          Nov.
−68.1 −40.2 + 7.5 −47.7 −28.0 −6.5 −6.7 −6.7 + 0.2 + 0.2 −21.5 + 18.6 + 0.0 + 5.4          Dec.
+ 95.6 + 46.2 −7.2 + 53.4 + 49.4 + 4.7 + 4.3 + 4.3 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 44.6 −13.2 + 0.1 −18.6 2000          Jan.
+ 2.2 −8.1 + 1.9 −10.0 + 10.2 + 4.0 + 4.0 + 4.0 −0.0 + 0.0 + 6.2 + 9.3 + 3.9 + 6.1          Feb.
− 5.7 −5.8 −10.1 + 4.3 + 0.1 + 1.8 + 1.7 + 2.7 + 0.2 + 0.1 −1.7 + 20.6 + 0.7 −5.6          Mar.
+ 10.0 + 13.2 + 4.9 + 8.3 −3.2 + 1.3 + 1.3 + 1.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 −4.5 + 6.3 + 0.1 −11.1          Apr.
+ 15.9 −0.7 + 3.4 −4.1 + 16.6 −4.6 −4.6 −5.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 21.2 −12.9 + 0.2 + 5.2          May
  
  
End of year or month * Foreign  subsidiaries
  
600.8 412.3 58.2 354.1 188.5 52.1 45.0 42.0 7.1 7.0 136.4 84.4 27.0 52.7 1997638.7 450.5 85.5 365.0 188.2 50.2 44.2 41.6 6.0 5.9 138.1 87.7 33.8 70.6 1998383.4 250.7 56.9 193.8 132.7 21.6 19.8 18.3 1.7 1.7 111.1 51.5 29.0 66.7 1999
382.1 251.8 53.8 198.0 130.3 21.8 20.4 19.4 1.4 1.3 108.5 53.8 28.1 61.5 1999          Oct.
393.1 258.4 55.0 203.4 134.8 21.7 20.0 19.1 1.7 1.7 113.0 53.7 28.2 63.9          Nov.383.4 250.7 56.9 193.8 132.7 21.6 19.8 18.3 1.7 1.7 111.1 51.5 29.0 66.7          Dec.
382.5 248.9 52.2 196.7 133.6 20.9 19.2 18.6 1.7 1.7 112.7 50.9 29.6 62.1 2000          Jan.
394.5 252.9 50.3 202.6 141.5 22.5 20.7 20.4 1.7 1.7 119.1 49.9 30.0 61.8          Feb.397.9 256.6 51.3 205.3 141.4 23.8 21.3 20.7 2.6 2.6 117.5 49.0 30.6 61.8          Mar.
403.8 259.5 48.2 211.2 144.3 24.7 21.9 21.1 2.8 2.7 119.7 49.2 31.6 62.0          Apr.
399.9 261.5 49.9 211.5 138.5 22.6 19.9 19.6 2.7 2.7 115.8 51.1 31.2 60.6          May
Changes *
+ 51.6 + 48.4 + 28.1 + 20.3 + 3.2 −1.4 −0.4 −0.0 −1.0 −1.1 + 4.6 + 3.2 + 6.8 + 17.9 1998
+ 54.7 + 11.6 + 13.9 −2.3 + 43.1 −2.3 −2.8 −3.0 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 45.3 + 6.7 + 11.7 + 13.5 1999
− 4.9 −2.3 + 2.4 −4.7 −2.6 −0.6 −0.6 −0.5 + 0.1 + 0.1 −2.1 + 1.1 + 0.2 + 1.6 1999          Oct.
+ 6.2 + 3.4 + 1.2 + 2.2 + 2.8 −0.0 −0.4 −0.3 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 2.8 −0.1 + 0.1 + 1.2          Nov.
−11.0 −8.4 + 1.9 −10.3 −2.6 −0.2 −0.2 −0.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 −2.5 −2.2 + 0.8 + 2.8          Dec.
− 4.2 −3.7 −4.7 + 0.9 −0.5 −0.7 −0.6 + 0.3 −0.0 −0.0 + 0.1 −0.6 + 0.6 −5.0 2000          Jan.
+ 11.9 + 4.0 −1.9 + 5.9 + 7.9 + 1.5 + 1.5 + 1.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 6.4 −1.0 + 0.4 −0.4          Feb.
− 0.8 + 0.7 + 1.0 −0.3 −1.5 + 1.4 + 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.8 + 0.8 −2.9 −0.9 + 0.6 −0.5          Mar.
− 1.6 −1.9 −3.1 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 0.8 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 −0.5 + 0.2 + 1.0 −0.8          Apr.
+ 2.1 + 5.7 + 1.7 + 4.0 −3.5 −2.0 −2.0 −1.5 −0.0 −0.0 −1.5 + 1.9 −0.4 −1.2          May
including loans on a trust basis (see also footnote 7). —4In the case of liabilities arising from loans on a trust basis (see also footnote 11). —
foreign branches, from December 1993 including transactions with the 9Excluding subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt securities
head office and with other branches in Germany; in the case of foreign and money market paper. —10Issues of negotiable and non-negotiable
subsidiaries, including transactions with the parent institution. — debt securities and money market paper. —11Including subordinated
5Treasury bills, Treasury discount paper and other money market paper, liabilities. From 1999, including liabilities arising from loans on a trust
debt securities. —6Including own debt securities. —7From 1999, basis. 
including loans on a trust basis. —8Up to Dezember 1998, including
41*IV.  Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
V. Minimum reserves
 
1. Reserve ratios
Germany European monetary union
 
% of liabilities subject to reserve requirements % of reserve base  1 
Sight Time
Applicable from liabilities liabilities Applicable from Ratio Savings deposits
1995  August 1 2    2    1.5    1999  January 1 2    
    
1Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank of 1 December
1998 on the application of minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to whicha reserve ratio of 0 % applies, pursuant to article 4 (1)). 
 
  
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany up to the end of 1998
− pursuant to the Minimum Reserves Order of the Bundesbank −
 
DM million
Liabilities subject to reserve requirements Excess reserves  4 
Monthly Required as % of the
average  1 Total reserves  2 Level Sight liabilities Time liabilities Savings deposits Actual reserves  3 required  reserves Shortfall, total
1995         Dec. 2,066,565 579,337 519,456 967,772 36,492 37,337 845 2.3 3
1996         Dec. 2,201,464 655,483 474,342 1,071,639 38,671 39,522 851 2.2 4
1997         Dec. 2,327,879 734,986 476,417 1,116,477 40,975 41,721 745 1.8 3
1998         Dec. 2,576,889 865,444 564,878 1,146,567 45,805 46,432 627 1.4 4
1Pursuant to sections 5 to 7 of the Minimum Reserves Order. —2Amount balances of the credit institutions subject to reserve requirements on their
after applying the reserve ratios to the liabilities subject to reserve require- giro accounts at the Bundesbank. — 4 Actual reserves less required reserves. 
ments (section 5 (1) of the Minimum Reserves Order). —3Average credit
 
 
3. Reserve maintenance in the European monetary union
− from 1999, pursuant to the ECB Regulation governing minimum reserves according to article 19.1 of the
ECB/ESCB Statute −
 
Maintenance Required reserves
period before deduction Required reserves
of lump-sum Lump-sum beginning in  1 after deduction of
Reserve base  2 allowance  3 allowance  4 lump-sum allowance Actual reserves  5 Excess reserves  6 Shortfall, total  7 
European monetary union (euro billion)
 
1999         Oct. 5,203.3 104.1 0.6 103.4 104.0 0.5 0.0
         Nov. 5,274.8 105.5 0.6 104.9 105.4 0.5 0.0         Dec. 5,418.4 108.4 0.6 107.7 108.5 0.8 0.0
2000         Jan. 5,406.2 108.1 0.6 107.5 107.9 0.4 0.0
         Feb. 5,429.4 108.6 0.6 108.0 108.4 0.4 0.0         Mar. 5,468.6 109.4 0.6 108.7 109.5 0.8 0.0
         Apr. 5,598.7 112.0 0.6 111.3 111.8 0.5 0.0
         May  
r 5,702.9 114.1 0.6 113.4 113.9 0.5 0.0
         June  p 5,693.4 113.9 0.6 113.3 114.0 0.6 0.0
         July . . . . . . .
Of which: Germany (euro million)
1999         Oct. 1,585,141 31,703 296 31,407 31,613 205 2
         Nov. 1,609,527 32,191 295 31,896 32,086 190 10         Dec. 1,666,782 33,336 294 33,041 33,296 255 10
2000         Jan. 1,688,614 33,772 294 33,478 33,625 147 4
         Feb. 1,681,806 33,636 293 33,343 33,521 178 7         Mar. 1,697,966 33,959 293 33,666 33,981 314 6
         Apr. 1,730,410 34,608 293 34,316 34,493 178 5
         May 1,758,285 35,166 292 34,874 35,053 179 20         June  
p 1,753,043 35,061 289 34,772 35,015 243 2
         July . . . . . . .
1The reserve maintenance period of the ESCB minimum reserve system base. —4Article 5 (2) of the Regulation of the European Central Bank of
starts on the 24th of each month and ends on the 23rd of the following 1 December 1998 on the application of minimum reserves. —5Average
month (the first reserve maintenance period lasted from January 1, 1999 to credit balances of the credit institutions subject to minimum reserve requ ire-
February 23, 1999). —2Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central ments on their reserve accounts at the respective national central bank. —
Bank of 1 December 1998 on the application of minimum reserves 6Actual reserves less required reserves after the deduction of the lump-sum
(excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio o f 0 % applies, pursuant to allowance. —7Required reserves after the deduction of the lump-sum
article 4 (1)). —3Amount after applying the reserve ratios to the reserve allowance. 
42*V. Minimum reserves

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
VI. Interest rates
  
1. ECB interest rates 2. Discount and lombard rates 3. Base rate per Discount
    of the Bundesbank     Rate Transition Act
  
% p.a. % p.a. % p.a.
Main Marginal
Deposit refinancing lending Lombard
Applicable from facility operations  1 facility Applicable from Discount rate rate  3, 4 Applicable from Base rate  5 
1999 Jan.                 1 2.00 3.00 4.50 1994 Feb.                18 5 1/4 6 3/4 1999 Jan.                 1 2.50
         Jan.                 4  2 2.75 3.00 3.25          Apr.                15 5 6 1/2          May                 1 1.95
         Jan.               22 2.00 3.00 4.50          May                13 4 1/2 6 
         Apr.                 9 1.50 2.50 3.50 2000 Jan.                  1 2.68
         Nov.                 5 2.00 3.00 4.00 1995 Mar.                31 4 6          May                  1 3.42
         Aug.               25 3 1/2 5 1/2
2000 Feb.                 4 2.25 3.25 4.25          Dec.                15 3 5 
         Mar.               17 2.50 3.50 4.50   
         Apr.               28 2.75 3.75 4.75 1996 Apr.                19 2 1/2 4 1/2
         June                 9 3.25 4.25 5.25          to
1998 Dec.               31
1Up to June 21, 2000 fixed rate tenders, from June 28, 2000 variable rate Rate Transition Regulation, the lombard rate is replaced from January 1,
tenders at minimum bid rate. —2On December 22, 1998 the European 1999 by the rate applied by the ECB for its marginal lending facility
Central Bank (ECB) announced that, as an exceptional measure between wherever the lombard rate is used as a reference variable for interest andJanuary 4 and 21, 1999, a narrow corridor of 50 basis points would be other payments. —5Pursuant to the Discount Rate Transition Act, read in
applied between the interest rates for the marginal lending facility and the conjunction with the Regulation Governing the Use of the Base Rate as adeposit facility, aimed at facilitating the transition to the new regime by Reference Variable, this rate replaces the discount rate from January 1, 1 999
market participants. —3From August 1, 1990 to December 31, 1993 this wherever the latter is used in contracts and regulations as a reference
was also the rate for cash advances; since January 1, 1994 cash advances variable for interest and other payments. This base rate is the discount ratehave no longer been granted. Wherever reference is made in an Act to the of the Bundesbank which applied on December 31, 1998. It changes frominterest rate applicable for cash advances of the Federal Government, the January 1, May 1 and September 1 of each year, and will change for the firstrate will be replaced by the base rate increased by 1.5 percentage points time on May 1, 1999 if the interest rate applied by the ECB to itspursuant to the Discount Rate Transition Act (see footnote 5).—4Pursuant longer-term refinancing operations (marginal rate) has changed by at least
to the Discount Rate Transition Act, read in conjunction with the Lombard 0.5 percentage points. 
  
    
4. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders 
*
    
  
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bids Allotment Weighted
Amount Amount Fixed rate Minimum bid rate Marginal rate  1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement EUR millions % p.a. ... days
Main refinancing operations
2000 Apr.               27 5,492,939 89,000 3.50 −−− 13
       May                 4 4,624,944 64,000 3.75 −−− 13
       May               10 6,352,776 72,000 3.75 −−− 14
       May               17 6,574,441 66,000 3.75 −−− 14
       May               24 7,057,234 78,000 3.75 −−− 14
       May               31 7,127,001 62,000 3.75 −−− 15
       June                 7 8,491,195 75,000 3.75 −−− 14
       June               15 3,544,808 68,000 4.25 −−− 13
       June               21 1,867,673 74,000 4.25 −−− 14
       June               28 201,612 99,000 − 4.25 4.29 4.32 14
       July                 5 171,848 58,000 − 4.25 4.29 4.30 14
       July               12 192,977 99,000 − 4.25 4.29 4.30 14
       July               19 160,519 53,000 − 4.25 4.29 4.30 14
       July               26 211,485 118,000 − 4.25 4.30 4.31 14
       Aug.                 2 172,252 45,000 − 4.25 4.31 4.31 14
       Aug.                 9 199,922 111,000 − 4.25 4.30 4.31 14
Longer-term refinancing operations
1999 Aug.               26 52,416 15,000 −− 2.65 2.66 91
       Sep.               30 41,443 15,000 −− 2.66 2.67 84
       Oct.               28 74,430 25,000 −− 3.19 3.42 91
       Nov.               25 74,988 25,000 −− 3.18 3.27 98
       Dec.               23 91,088 25,000 −− 3.26 3.29 98
2000 Jan.               27 87,052 20,000 −− 3.28 3.30 91
       Mar.                 2 72,960 20,000 −− 3.60 3.61 91
       Mar.               30 74,929 20,000 −− 3.78 3.80 91
       Apr.               27 64,094 20,000 −− 4.00 4.01 91
       June                 1 64,317 20,000 −− 4.40 4.42 91
       June               29 41,833 20,000 −− 4.49 4.52 91
       July               27 40,799 15,000 −− 4.59 4.60 91
Other tender operations
2000 Jan.                 5  2 14,420 14,420 −− 3.00 3.00 7
       June               21 18,845 7,000 −− 4.26 4.28 1
*Source: ECB. —1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were   
allotted or collected. — 2 Collection of fixed-term deposits.  
  
43*VI. Interest rates

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
VI. Interest rates
 
5.  Money market rates, by month
  
% p.a.
Money market rates reported by Frankfurt banks  1 EURIBOR  3 
One- One- Three- Six- Nine- Twelve-
week month month month month month
Day-to-day money Three-month funds EONIA  2 funds funds funds funds funds funds
Monthly Lowest and Monthly Lowest and
Period averages highest rates averages highest rates Monthly averages
1998         July 3.39 2.50 −4.20 3.52 3.48 −3.55 . ......
         Aug. 3.48 3.32 −4.50 3.48 3.43 −3.51 . ......
         Sep. 3.48 3.36 −4.40 3.46 3.42 −3.55 . ......
         Oct. 3.41 3.38 −3.70 3.54 3.50 −3.59 . ......
         Nov. 3.42 3.38 −3.65 3.61 3.55 −3.65 . ......
         Dec. 3.14 4 2.96 −4.00 3.36 3.17 −3.64 . ......
1999         Jan. 3.14 2.96 −3.28 3.11 3.02 −3.21 3.14 3.17 3.16 3.13 3.09 3.07 3.06
         Feb. 3.11 3.00 −3.20 3.07 3.03 −3.11 3.12 3.13 3.13 3.09 3.04 3.03 3.03
         Mar. 2.93 2.05 −3.13 3.03 2.94 −3.11 2.93 3.05 3.05 3.05 3.02 3.02 3.05
         Apr. 2.68 2.45 −3.15 2.65 2.54 −2.94 2.71 2.71 2.69 2.70 2.70 2.75 2.76
         May 2.55 2.49 −3.20 2.55 2.52 −2.58 2.55 2.56 2.57 2.58 2.60 2.66 2.68
         June 2.57 2.20 −2.75 2.60 2.53 −2.68 2.56 2.59 2.61 2.63 2.68 2.78 2.84
         July 2.51 1.65 −2.65 2.65 2.62 −2.70 2.52 2.61 2.63 2.68 2.90 2.95 3.03
         Aug. 2.43 1.70 −2.59 2.67 2.64 −2.70 2.44 2.57 2.61 2.70 3.05 3.13 3.24
         Sep. 2.42 1.65 −2.60 2.71 2.65 −3.09 2.43 2.55 2.58 2.73 3.11 3.19 3.30
         Oct. 2.49 1.70 −2.80 3.36 3.08 −3.50 2.50 2.63 2.76 3.38 3.46 3.55 3.68
         Nov. 2.92 2.50 −3.20 3.44 3.39 −3.52 2.94 2.99 3.06 3.47 3.48 3.58 3.69
         Dec. 3.03 5 2.75 −3.70 3.43 3.28 −3.47 3.04 3.27 3.51 3.45 3.51 3.66 3.83
2000         Jan. 3.03 2.79 −3.35 3.32 3.26 −3.49 3.04 3.08 3.15 3.34 3.56 3.76 3.95
         Feb. 3.27 3.12 −3.52 3.52 3.45 −3.63 3.28 3.31 3.36 3.54 3.73 3.93 4.11
         Mar. 3.50 3.26 −4.00 3.73 3.59 −3.83 3.51 3.52 3.59 3.75 3.94 4.11 4.27
         Apr. 3.67 3.00 −4.00 3.90 3.79 −4.09 3.69 3.73 3.79 3.93 4.08 4.25 4.36
         May 3.92 2.85 −4.23 4.34 4.06 −4.48 3.92 4.05 4.16 4.36 4.54 4.72 4.85
         June 4.28 4.02 −4.85 4.48 4.37 −4.55 4.29 4.31 4.37 4.50 4.68 4.85 4.96
         July 4.30 3.80 −4.51 4.56 4.50 −4.64 4.31 4.36 4.41 4.58 4.84 4.98 5.11
1Money market rates are not fixed or quoted officially; the monthly aver- Telerate. —3Euro Interbank Offered Rate: unweighted average rate
ages computed from daily quotations are unweighted. —2Euro OverNight calculated by Bridge Telerate since December 30, 1998 according to the
Index Average: weighted average overnight rate for interbank operations act/360 method. —4At the end of December 3.50% to 4.00%. —5At the
calculated by the European Central Bank since January 4, 1999 on the basis end of December 3.35% to 3.70%. of real turnover according to the act/360 method and published via Bridge
 
 
6. Euro area retail bank interest rates *, o
  
% p.a.; period averages
Deposit interest rates Lending interest rates
With agreed maturity Redeemable at notice To enterprises To householdsUp to Up to Over Up to Over Up to Over Consumer For house
Period Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months 1 year 1 year lending purchase
1997 1.46 3.41 3.63 4.40 2.80 3.09 7.58 6.64 10.61 6.63
1998 1.10 3.20 3.22 4.06 2.61 3.25 6.74 5.80 10.05 5.871999 0.65 2.44 2.45 3.57 2.15 2.76 5.66 5.10 9.38 5.29
1999         June 0.60 2.22 2.22 3.30 2.15 2.45 5.49 4.78 9.29 4.96
         July 0.60 2.24 2.24 3.45 2.14 2.63 5.40 4.96 9.21 5.18
         Aug. 0.60 2.25 2.26 3.67 2.00 2.73 5.42 5.16 9.31 5.47         Sep. 0.60 2.32 2.32 3.79 1.99 2.80 5.38 5.19 9.29 5.53
         Oct. 0.61 2.52 2.52 4.03 2.00 2.93 5.58 5.55 9.36 5.79
         Nov. 0.63 2.62 2.62 3.96 2.02 3.01 5.74 5.54 9.36 5.77         Dec. 0.67 2.70 2.71 4.02 2.04 3.05 5.82 5.51 9.37 5.80
2000         Jan. 0.69 2.74 2.74 4.19 2.05 3.18 5.92 5.74 9.51 6.03
         Feb. 0.70 2.80 2.81 4.25 2.06 3.18 6.01 5.85 9.52 6.13         Mar. 0.72 2.96 2.96 4.28 2.07 3.33 6.09 5.84 9.54 6.10
         Apr. 0.76 3.04 3.05 4.27 2.09 3.44 6.26 5.99 9.62 6.12
         May 0.77 3.24 3.24 4.44 2.11 3.65 6.42 6.16 9.70 6.30         June 0.82 3.47 3.47 4.63 2.14 3.87 6.58 6.24 9.81 6.35
*These euro area retail bank interest rates should be used with caution and Member States. Furthermore, the national interest rates are not harmonised
for statistical purposes only, primarily to analyse their development over in terms of their coverage (new business and/or outstanding amounts), th e
time rather than their level. They are calculated as the weighted average of nature of the data (nominal or effective) or the compilation method. Thenational interest rates provided by the national central banks. The national country weights for the euro area retail bank interest rates are derived from
rates represent those rates that are currently available from national MFI balance sheet statistics or close proxies. The weights reflect thesources and which are judged to fit the standard categories. These national country-specific proportions of the relevant instruments within the eur o
rates have been aggregated to derive information for the euro area, in area, measured as outstanding amounts. The weights are adjusted monthly,some cases relying on proxies and working assumptions due to the so that interest rates and weights always refer to the same month. heterogeneity observed in the national financial instruments across MU
      
o Tables and notes taken from the ECB. 
44*VI. Interest rates

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
VI. Interest rates
 
7. Lending and deposit rates of banks (MFIs) in Germany *
    Lending rates
 
% p.a.
Current account credit Bills discounted
Bills of less than DM 100,000
DM 200,000 and more DM 1 million and more refinancable
less than DM 200,000 but less than DM 1 million but less than DM 5 million at the Bundesbank
Reporting Average Average Average Average
period  1 interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread
1999         Sep. 9.83 7.50 −11.75 8.71 6.25 −11.25 7.37 5.50 −10.50 5.27 3.50 −8.50
         Oct. 9.89 7.75 −11.75 8.75 6.50 −11.25 7.40 5.70 −10.50 5.40 3.50 −8.50
         Nov. 9.93 7.50 −11.75 8.84 6.75 −11.25 7.51 5.75 −10.50 5.56 3.85 −8.75
         Dec. 10.02 7.50 −11.75 8.94 6.75 −11.50 7.65 5.80 −10.50 5.64 4.00 −8.75
2000         Jan. 10.02 7.50 −11.75 8.97 6.75 −11.25 7.68 5.80 −10.50 5.69 4.00 −9.00
         Feb. 10.08 7.50 −11.75 9.02 7.00 −11.50 7.80 6.00 −10.50 5.73 4.13 −9.00
         Mar. 10.14 7.75 −11.75 9.14 7.00 −11.50 7.88 6.00 −10.75 5.86 4.27 −8.75
         Apr. 10.28 7.75 −12.00 9.26 7.00 −11.75 8.06 6.25 −11.00 5.95 4.40 −9.00
         May 10.41 8.00 −12.25 9.34 7.05 −11.75 8.20 6.50 −11.00 6.21 4.60 −9.50
         June 10.57 8.00 −12.50 9.59 7.25 −12.00 8.39 6.50 −11.00 6.42 4.80 −9.75
         July 10.84 8.50 −12.75 9.81 7.50 −12.50 8.58 6.75 −11.50 6.49 4.84 −9.50
 
 
Long-term fixed-rate loans
to enterprises and self-employed persons
Instalment credits (excluding lending to the housing sector)  5 
DM 10,000 and more but not more than DM 30,000  2 DM 200,000 and more DM 1 million and more
Personal credit lines but less than DM 1 million but less than DM 10 million
(overdraft facilities Effectivegranted to individuals) Monthly rate  
3 annual interest rate  4 Effective interest rate
Reporting Average Average Average Average Average
period  1 interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread
1999         Sep. 11.09 9.75 −12.25 0.38 0.30 −0.48 10.09 7.90 −12.27 6.39 5.40 −8.00 6.23 5.27 −7.56
         Oct. 11.09 9.75 −12.25 0.39 0.31 −0.48 10.15 8.05 −12.33 6.65 5.62 −8.23 6.48 5.59 −7.87
         Nov. 11.14 9.75 −12.25 0.39 0.30 −0.48 10.09 8.03 −12.10 6.56 5.59 −7.96 6.41 5.50 −7.72
         Dec. 11.22 10.25 −12.25 0.39 0.30 −0.48 10.14 8.14 −12.11 6.60 5.65 −8.12 6.42 5.38 −7.77
2000         Jan. 11.24 10.25 −12.25 0.39 0.31 −0.48 10.18 8.17 −12.10 6.86 5.90 −8.21 6.68 5.75 −8.07
         Feb. 11.27 10.25 −12.25 0.39 0.32 −0.48 10.18 8.33 −12.11 6.94 6.05 −8.41 6.79 5.90 −8.28
         Mar. 11.38 10.25 −12.50 0.39 0.31 −0.48 10.18 8.33 −12.11 6.91 6.09 −8.50 6.74 5.91 −8.10
         Apr. 11.48 10.50 −12.50 0.39 0.31 −0.48 10.17 8.32 −12.11 6.89 5.96 −8.48 6.72 5.80 −8.10
         May 11.60 10.50 −12.75 0.40 0.31 −0.48 10.28 8.29 −12.27 7.09 6.07 −8.59 6.91 5.95 −8.30
         June 11.81 10.75 −13.00 0.40 0.32 −0.48 10.44 8.44 −12.58 7.11 6.10 −8.75 6.93 5.97 −8.49
         July 12.01 10.75 −13.00 0.40 0.32 −0.48 10.50 8.57 −12.58 7.17 6.20 −8.85 6.99 6.07 −8.35
 
 
Mortgage loans secured by residential real estate
with interest rates fixed (effective interest rate)  6 
with variable interest rates
for 2 years for 5 years for 10 years (effective interest rate)  6 
Reporting Average Average Average Average
period  1 interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread
1999         Sep. 5.19 4.59 −5.91 5.70 5.33 −6.13 6.35 5.25 −6.69 5.77 4.60 −6.97
         Oct. 5.52 4.86 −6.17 6.00 5.43 −6.43 6.56 5.54 −6.96 5.92 4.86 −7.07
         Nov. 5.46 4.91 −6.06 5.86 5.56 −6.33 6.36 6.12 −6.75 5.94 4.89 −6.97
         Dec. 5.56 5.07 −6.18 5.90 5.64 −6.28 6.40 6.14 −6.75 5.97 4.95 −7.07
2000         Jan. 5.79 5.27 −6.38 6.19 5.91 −6.62 6.69 6.34 −7.07 6.11 5.07 −7.34
         Feb. 5.87 5.38 −6.43 6.28 5.96 −6.70 6.76 6.34 −7.13 6.20 5.12 −7.48
         Mar. 5.90 5.43 −6.39 6.19 5.96 −6.59 6.64 6.38 −7.02 6.22 5.22 −7.45
         Apr. 5.90 5.43 −6.43 6.15 5.85 −6.63 6.54 6.27 −6.97 6.26 5.38 −7.50
         May 6.27 5.70 −6.86 6.42 5.90 −6.82 6.73 6.34 −7.08 6.49 5.64 −7.67
         June 6.35 5.80 −6.97 6.41 6.10 −6.86 6.64 6.34 −7.07 6.56 5.64 −7.77
         July 6.45 5.91 −7.10 6.48 6.15 −6.91 6.70 6.43 −7.13 6.67 5.89 −7.77
*The average rates are calculated as unweighted arithmetic means from on the basis of reported monthly rates (see footnote 3) and reported annual
the interest rates reported to be within the spread. The spread is as- rates on the respective amount of debt and on the basis of the respectivecertained by eliminating the reports in the top 5% and the bottom 5% of processing fees, taking due account of reported maturities. —5Lending to
the interest rate range. The figures for the latest date are always to be re- enterprises (with agreed maturities of more than five years) with agreedgarded as provisional; subsequent alterations, which will appear in the interest rates locked in for more than five years. —6The figures refer to
following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Second and third the time when the contract was concluded and not to the entire duration of
weeks of the months indicated. —2With maturities between 36 months the contract. The calculation of the effective interest rate is based on an an-
and 60 months. —3Interest rates as % per month of original amount of nual redemption rate of 1% plus interest saved; the repayment conditions
credit taken up. Besides interest, most banks charge a one-off processing agreed upon in each case by the credit institutions involved are taken intofee (generally 2%, in some cases 3%, of the credit amount). —4Calculated account (at present mostly monthly payment and inclusion). 
45*VI. Interest rates

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
VI. Interest rates
 
7. Lending and deposit rates of banks (MFIs) in Germany *  (cont ’d)
    Deposit rates
 
% p.a.
Time deposits with agreed maturitiesof 1 month of 3 months
Higher-yieldingsight deposits DM 100,000 and more but DM 1 million and more but DM 100,000 and more butof individuals  
7 less than DM 100,000 less than DM 1 million less than DM 5 million less than DM 1 million
Reporting Average Average Average Average Average
period  1 interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread
1999         Sep. 1.69 0.50 −2.50 1.99 1.50 −2.30 2.25 1.90 −2.50 2.40 2.00 −2.64 2.33 2.00 −2.60
         Oct. 1.68 0.50 −2.50 2.04 1.50 −2.40 2.30 2.00 −2.60 2.49 2.15 −2.77 2.61 2.10 −3.15
         Nov. 1.74 0.50 −2.50 2.17 1.65 −2.55 2.44 2.00 −2.75 2.66 2.25 −3.00 2.81 2.20 −3.25
         Dec. 1.79 0.50 −2.83 2.41 1.75 −3.05 2.71 2.10 −3.25 3.02 2.35 −3.50 2.86 2.25 −3.25
2000         Jan. 1.80 0.50 −2.70 2.32 1.75 −2.80 2.64 2.20 −3.00 2.87 2.40 −3.20 2.84 2.25 −3.20
         Feb. 1.83 0.50 −2.75 2.37 1.80 −2.85 2.68 2.20 −3.00 2.91 2.50 −3.20 2.89 2.35 −3.25
         Mar. 1.89 0.50 −2.96 2.53 1.95 −3.15 2.85 2.20 −3.35 3.12 2.50 −3.60 3.04 2.50 −3.50
         Apr. 1.93 0.50 −3.00 2.62 2.00 −3.20 2.96 2.25 −3.40 3.27 2.55 −3.65 3.14 2.50 −3.60
         May 2.00 0.50 −3.22 2.88 2.00 −3.55 3.23 2.45 −3.83 3.59 2.75 −4.10 3.43 2.75 −4.10
         June 2.11 0.50 −3.50 3.10 2.25 −3.80 3.49 2.70 −4.00 3.82 3.00 −4.25 3.66 2.90 −4.25
         July 2.17 0.50 −3.50 3.19 2.30 −3.90 3.59 2.75 −4.10 3.92 3.15 −4.35 3.76 3.00 −4.29
 
 
Savings deposits
Bank savings bondswith regular with minimum rates of with higher rates of return  
9 
interest payments return  8 (without a duration of contract being agreed)
with agreed notice of 3 months
with agreed notice DM 10,000 and more DM 20,000 and more
maturity of 4 years of 3 months less than DM 10,000 but less than DM 20,000 but less than DM 50,000
Reporting Average Average Average Average Average
period  1 interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread
1999         Sep. 3.88 3.00 −4.30 1.23 1.00 −1.75 1.92 1.50 −2.50 2.08 1.50 −2.63 2.24 1.75 −2.75
         Oct. 4.11 3.25 −4.70 1.23 1.00 −2.00 1.94 1.38 −2.95 2.13 1.50 −2.75 2.30 1.75 −2.81
         Nov. 4.15 3.25 −4.50 1.24 1.00 −2.00 2.00 1.50 −2.95 2.22 1.55 −2.80 2.38 1.95 −3.00
         Dec. 4.21 3.50 −4.60 1.24 1.00 −2.00 2.03 1.50 −2.95 2.28 1.55 −2.91 2.45 1.85 −3.00
2000         Jan. 4.39 3.50 −4.85 1.24 1.00 −2.00 2.03 1.50 −2.77 2.28 1.75 −2.90 2.44 1.85 −3.00
         Feb. 4.49 3.50 −5.00 1.24 1.00 −1.85 2.04 1.40 −2.85 2.30 1.75 −2.90 2.46 1.90 −3.00
         Mar. 4.54 3.50 −5.00 1.24 1.00 −2.00 2.06 1.50 −3.00 2.36 1.75 −3.05 2.53 2.00 −3.20
         Apr. 4.54 3.50 −5.00 1.24 1.00 −1.75 2.10 1.50 −3.00 2.40 1.75 −3.20 2.57 2.00 −3.25
         May 4.74 3.90 −5.20 1.24 1.00 −2.00 2.12 1.25 −3.45 2.53 1.75 −3.50 2.72 2.00 −3.59
         June 4.82 4.00 −5.25 1.24 1.00 −2.00 2.20 1.50 −3.45 2.66 1.75 −3.65 2.87 2.00 −3.80
         July 4.90 4.00 −5.25 1.25 1.00 −2.00 2.23 1.50 −3.50 2.73 1.75 −3.70 2.94 2.00 −3.90
 
 
Savings deposits with higher rates of return  9  and with duration of contract being agreed for
DM 20,000 and more but less than DM 50,000 (total rate of return) 10
with agreed notice of 3 months with agreed notice of more than 3 months
and a duration of contract of and a duration of contract of
more than 1 year and up to
up to and including 1 year and including 4 years more than 4 years up to and including 1 year more than 4 years
Reporting Average Average Average Average Average
period  1 interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread
1999         Sep. 2.61 2.00 −3.05 3.34 2.50 −4.00 4.09 3.00 −5.09 2.80 2.10 −3.50 3.69 2.75 −4.51
         Oct. 2.78 2.10 −3.40 3.49 2.29 −4.30 4.23 3.00 −5.15 2.93 2.25 −3.50 3.81 2.75 −4.60
         Nov. 2.89 2.25 −3.50 3.63 2.50 −4.25 4.28 3.02 −5.15 3.01 2.20 −3.50 3.98 2.75 −4.58
         Dec. 2.96 2.25 −3.50 3.71 2.50 −4.25 4.33 3.14 −5.15 3.05 2.20 −3.50 4.06 2.75 −4.58
2000         Jan. 3.03 2.25 −3.65 3.91 3.05 −4.53 4.44 3.15 −5.53 3.18 2.10 −3.75 4.28 2.75 −5.12
         Feb. 3.08 2.25 −3.75 4.00 3.25 −4.61 4.52 3.20 −5.40 3.18 2.00 −3.80 4.40 2.75 −5.12
         Mar. 3.20 2.25 −3.85 4.04 3.00 −4.68 4.53 3.25 −5.50 3.33 2.25 −4.00 4.56 3.46 −5.12
         Apr. 3.26 2.40 −4.00 4.15 3.30 −4.75 4.55 3.25 −5.50 3.44 2.25 −4.20 4.59 3.60 −5.17
         May 3.55 2.50 −4.35 4.19 2.35 −5.00 4.65 3.25 −5.49 3.65 2.25 −4.50 4.67 3.60 −5.25
         June 3.82 2.50 −4.50 4.36 2.80 −5.00 4.71 3.58 −5.75 3.87 2.25 −4.50 4.78 3.60 −5.13
         July 3.93 2.50 −4.60 4.46 3.25 −5.07 4.76 3.58 −5.83 3.94 2.25 −4.75 4.83 4.35 −5.21
For footnotes *, 1to6see page 45*. —7Only such interest rates are taken and/or a premium or a bonus is granted. —10Rate of return which is paid
into account as are above the relevant standard terms of the banks included when savings plans are held until maturity or when savings objectives havein the survey. —8Only a minimum rate of return is granted, but no pre- been achieved. 
mium or bonus. —9An interest rate above the minimum rate of return
46*VI. Interest rates

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
VI.  Interest rates
 
8. Selected central bank rates abroad
  
 
New rate Previous rate New rate Previous rate
Applicable Applicable Applicable Applicable
Country/Interest rate % p.a. from % p.a. from Country/Interest rate % p.a. from % p.a. from
1. EU-countries  1 3. Non European countries
Denmark Canada  4 
Discount rate       4 1/4  June   8,              ’00       3 3/4  Apr. 27,              ’00 Discount rate       6   May 17,               ’00       5 1/2  Mar. 22,              ’00 
Repurchase/CD selling rate           4.70   June   8,               ’00           4.10   Apr. 27,               ’00 
Japan
Greece Discount rate          1/2  Sep.   8,              ’95          1   Apr. 14,               ’95 
Deposit rate  2       7 1/4  June 28,              ’00          8   Apr. 20,               ’00 
Repurchase rate       8 1/4  June 28,              ’00          8 3/4  Apr. 20,              ’00 United States
Lombard rate       9   June 28,               ’00          9 1/2  Apr. 20,              ’00 Discount rate       6   May 16,               ’00       5 1/2  Mar. 21,              ’00 
Federal funds rate  5       6 1/2  May 16,              ’00          6   Mar. 21,               ’00 
Sweden
Deposit rate       2 3/4  Feb. 17,              ’99          3 1/4  Nov. 12,              ’98 
Repurchase rate       3 3/4  Feb.   4,              ’00          3 1/4  Nov. 17,              ’99 
Lombard rate       4 1/4  Feb. 17,              ’99          4 3/4  Nov. 12,              ’98 
United Kingdom
Repurchase rate  3       6   Feb. 10,               ’00          5 3/4  Jan. 13,              ’00 
2. Switzerland
Three-month Libor target   2 1/2
         3 −  4   June 15,               ’00   −         3 1/2  Mar. 23,              ’00 
1Only those member countries which are not participating in the euro area 4Bank of Canada ’s ceiling rate for call money. —5Rate targeted for inter-
for the time being. —2Basic tranche. —3Bank of England key rate. — bank trade in central bank money. 
9. Money market rates abroad
Monthly or weekly averages of daily figures  1 
%  p.a.
London New York Tokyo Zurich Hong Kong Euro-Dollar market
Memorandum
Treasury Treasury item
bills bills Swap rates in the
(three (three Gensaki open market  10 
Month Day-to- months) months) Day-to- rate Three- Day-to- Exchange Day-to- One- Three-or day Tender Federal Tender day (three month day fund day month month US$/DM £/DMweek money  
2 rate 3 funds  4 rate 3 money months) funds  5 money  6 bills 7 money  8 funds  9 funds  9 Euro/US-$ Euro/£
1998         Apr. 7.09 7.02 5.45 5.00 0.44 0.27 0.88 4.47 5.84 5.55 5.55 5.65 −2.02 −3.78
         May 7.13 6.99 5.49 5.03 0.43 0.28 1.08 5.13 6.47 5.53 5.58 5.63 −2.04 −3.76
         June 7.47 7.29 5.56 4.99 0.44 0.28 1.44 6.72 9.07 5.61 5.56 5.63 −2.09 −4.04
         July 7.29 7.22 5.54 4.96 0.41 0.29 1.31 5.78 7.86 5.58 5.59 5.63 −2.14 −4.13
         Aug. 7.37 7.19 5.55 4.94 0.43 0.29 1.00 9.84 9.78 5.56 5.59 5.63 −2.14 −4.11
         Sep. 7.44 6.95 5.51 4.74 0.32 0.18 0.84 5.83 8.37 5.58 5.52 5.45 −2.00 −3.89
         Oct. 7.44 6.54 5.07 4.08 0.24 0.11 0.50 4.52 6.33 5.30 5.27 5.22 −1.69 −3.52
         Nov. 6.55 6.31 4.83 4.44 0.20 0.11 0.94 4.61 5.60 5.13 5.20 5.28 −1.67 −3.21
         Dec. 6.21 5.71 4.68 4.42 0.25 0.11 0.69 4.23 5.22 4.95 5.54 5.20 −1.89 −3.04
1999         Jan. 5.87 5.28 4.63 4.34 0.23 0.14 0.56 3.96 5.64 4.79 4.98 5.00 + 1.85 + 2.61
         Feb. 5.63 5.08 4.76 4.45 0.18 0.13 0.56 4.96 5.63 4.74 4.94 5.00 + 1.87 + 2.27         Mar. 5.43 5.07 4.81 4.48 0.04 0.08 0.56 4.50 5.28 4.83 4.94 5.01 + 1.95 + 2.24
         Apr. 5.38 4.90 4.74 4.28 0.03 0.06 0.38 4.44 4.92 4.75 4.92 5.00 + 2.29 + 2.52
         May 5.29 4.93 4.74 4.51 0.03 0.05 0.44 4.47 4.82 4.78 4.91 5.02 + 2.47 + 2.69         June 5.05 4.76 4.76 4.59 0.03 0.04 0.50 5.21 5.13 4.88 5.04 5.18 + 2.60 + 2.50
         July 4.92 4.76 4.99 4.60 0.03 0.03 0.51 5.51 5.47 5.05 5.18 5.31 + 2.67 + 2.39
         Aug. 4.84 4.85 5.07 4.76 0.03 0.03 0.51 5.55 5.80 5.12 5.29 5.45 + 2.82 + 2.47         Sep. 4.89 5.08 5.22 4.73 0.03 0.02 1.14 5.12 5.68 5.29 5.38 5.57 + 2.85 + 2.60
         Oct. 5.01 5.24 5.20 4.88 0.02 0.02 1.38 5.37 5.49 5.25 5.41 6.18 + 2.86 + 2.55
         Nov. 5.18 5.24 5.42 5.07 0.03 0.02 1.34 5.01 5.11 5.40 5.56 6.10 + 2.68 + 2.34         Dec. 5.01 5.46 5.30 5.23 0.02 0.04 1.24 3.58 4.65 5.45 6.40 6.13 + 2.75 + 2.48
2000         Jan. 5.28 5.78 5.45 5.34 0.02 0.03 1.38 3.33 5.18 5.55 5.81 6.04 + 2.70 + 2.66
         Feb. 5.77 5.92 5.73 5.57 0.03 0.03 1.78 5.37 5.64 5.73 5.89 6.10 + 2.54 + 2.54         Mar. 5.69 5.93 5.85 5.72 0.02 0.03 2.26 5.41 5.65 5.87 6.05 6.20 + 2.47 + 2.36
         Apr. 5.82 6.01 6.02 5.67 0.02 0.03 2.76 6.32 6.06 6.03 6.15 6.31 + 2.42 + 2.22
         May 5.87 6.00 6.27 5.92 0.02 0.02 2.55 6.04 6.63 6.30 6.55 6.76 + 2.44 + 1.83         June 5.88 5.95 6.53 5.74 0.02 0.03 3.05 5.95 6.36 6.55 6.65 6.79 + 2.31 + 1.60
         July  
p 5.85 5.92 6.54 5.92 0.02 0.04 3.04 5.97 6.12 6.55 6.63 6.73 + 2.17 + 1.48
week ending  p 
2000 July                 7 5.65 5.91 6.85 5.83 0.02 0.04 3.05 5.54 6.19 6.69 6.63 6.75 + 2.22 + 1.52
                              14 5.79 5.91 6.44 5.90 0.02 0.05 . 6.56 6.18 6.49 6.63 6.73 + 2.21 + 1.52
                              21 6.15 5.93 6.50 5.96 0.02 0.05 . 6.24 6.11 6.48 6.63 6.74 + 2.15 + 1.44
                              28 5.85 5.93 6.50 6.01 0.02 0.04 3.04 5.56 6.02 6.51 6.62 6.71 + 2.10 + 1.44
1Unless stated otherwise. —2Overnight money rate in the interbank deposits. —9From January 1999 US dollar-denominated London Interbank
market. —3Months: average of the tender rates in the weekly Treasury bill Offered Rate (LIBOR). Previously the rates were based on quotations
auctions; weeks: average of the tender rates on the day of issue. — reported by Frankfurt and Luxemburg banks. —10Rates for three-month
4Weekly average (Thursday to Wednesday) —5Three month deposits with contracts. Owing to the indirect quotation, the forward points between the
big banks in Zurich; months: average of end-of-month figures. Figure for euro and the foreign currency for the repurchase date of the swap arethe fourth week is that for the last day of the month. —6Hong Kong calculated in the foreign currency as from January 1999; previously the
dollar-denominated Hong Kong Interbank Offered Rates (HIBOR). — calculation was expressed in DM. As a result the previous discount ( −)
7Money market paper issued regularly by the Hong Kong Monetary changes into a premium (+). 
Authority; maturity of 91 days. —8From January 1999 rates for overnight  
47*VI.  Interest rates

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
VII. Capital market
 
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  *)
  
Debt securities
Sales PurchasesDomestic debt securities  
1 Residents
Credit in- Bundes-
Sales stitutions bank
= Public Foreign including opentotal Bank Indus- debt debt building marketpur- debt trial secur- secur- and loan Non- oper- Non-
Period chases Total securities bonds ities  
2 ities 3 Total  4 assc. 5 banks  6 ations  5 residents  7 
DM million
1986 103,497 87,485 29,509 200 57,774 16,012 45,927 31,192 13,667 1,068 57,570
1987 112,285 88,190 28,448 − 27 59,768 24,095 78,193 45,305 33,599 − 711 34,093
1988 88,425 35,100 −11,029 − 100 46,228 53,325 86,657 36,838 49,417 402 1,769
1989 118,285 78,409 52,418 344 25,649 39,876 96,073 20,311 76,448 − 686 22,212
1990 244,827 220,340 136,799 − 67 83,609 24,487 225,066 91,833 133,266 − 33 19,763
1991 231,965 219,346 131,670 667 87,011 12,619 173,099 45,095 127,310 694 58,8661992 291,762 284,054 106,857 − 175 177,376 7,708 170,873 132,236 37,368 1,269 120,887
1993 395,110 382,571 151,812 200 230,560 12,539 183,195 164,436 20,095 − 1,336 211,915
1994 303,339 276,058 117,185 − 65 158,939 27,281 279,989 126,808 154,738 − 1,557 23,349
1995 227,099 203,029 162,538 − 350 40,839 24,070 141,282 49,193 94,409 − 2,320 85,815
1996 254,359 233,519 191,341 649 41,529 20,840 148,250 117,352 31,751 − 853 106,109
1997 332,655 250,688 184,911 1,563 64,214 81,967 204,353 144,177 60,176 − 128,301
1998 417,693 308,201 254,367 3,143 50,691 109,492 254,293 203,342 50,951 − 163,397
Euro million
1999 290,874 198,068 156,399 2,184 39,485 92,806 161,953 74,728 87,225 − 128,921
2000         Feb. 36,369 19,240 12,896 1,315 5,030 17,129 31,784 17,004 14,780 − 4,585
         Mar. 17,935 11,544 14,219 − 274 − 2,402 6,391 7,065 3,861 3,204 − 10,870
         Apr. 22,489 20,722 17,551 1,158 2,013 1,767 13,281 9,299 3,982 − 9,208
         May 29,088 25,052 18,824 1,076 5,151 4,036 15,764 10,064 5,700 − 13,324
         June 11,146 6,483 9,023 907 − 3,447 4,663 − 1,209 2,798 − 4,007 − 12,355
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-purchases shares  
8 shares  9 Total  10 tutions  5 , 11  Non-banks  6 residents  12 
Period
DM million
1986 32,371 16,394 15,976 17,195 5,022 12,173 15,174
1987 15,845 11,889 3,955 16,439 2,153 14,286 − 594
1988 21,390 7,528 13,862 18,436 1,177 17,259 2,9531989 35,511 19,365 16,147 10,231 4,913 5,318 25,277
1990 50,070 28,021 22,048 52,631 7,215 45,416 − 2,561
1991 33,478 13,317 20,161 32,247 2,466 29,781 1,2301992 32,595 17,226 15,370 40,651 2,984 37,667 − 8,055
1993 39,355 19,512 19,843 30,871 4,133 26,738 8,4851994 55,125 29,160 25,966 54,466 1,622 52,844 659
1995 46,422 23,600 22,822 49,354 11,945 37,409 − 2,931
1996 72,491 34,212 38,280 55,962 12,627 43,335 16,5291997 118,786 22,239 96,546 96,133 8,547 87,586 22,6521998 239,757 48,796 190,962 138,390 20,252 118,138 101,366
Euro million
1999 148,986 36,010 112,976 96,910 18,637 78,273 52,077
2000         Feb. 38,164 1,851 36,313 − 3,200 2,641 − 5,841 41,364
         Mar. 13,141 1,873 11,268 5,450 39,966 − 34,516 7,691
         Apr. 7,796 4,397 3,399 10,794 3,938 6,856 − 2,998
         May 8,842 1,557 7,285 8,801 7,657 1,144 41         June 18,788 2,002 16,786 − 24,367 − 39,695 15,328 43,155
*Until the end of 1999, debt securities comprise the bonds and money ment funds. —7Net purchases or net sales ( −) of domestic debt securities by
market paper of domestic banks, from January 2000 all fixed-interest non-residents; transaction values. —8At issue prices. —9Net purchases or
securities. Investment fund certificates see Table VII.6. —1Net sales at net sales ( −) of foreign shares (including direct investment) by residents;
market values plus/less changes in issuers ’portfolios of their own debt transaction values. —10Domestic and foreign shares. —11Up to the end
securities. —2Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and of 1998, excluding shares under syndicate agreement. —12Net purchases
Treuhand agency. —3Net purchases or net sales ( −) of foreign debt or net sales ( −) of domestic shares (including direct investment) −before
securities by residents; transaction values. —4Domestic and foreign debt 1989 also including domestic investment fund certificates −by
securities. —5Book values; statistically adjusted. —6Residual; also non-residents; transaction values. —The figures for the latest data are to be
including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic invest- regarded as provisional; corrections are not specially marked.  
48*VII. Capital market

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
VII. Capital market
 
2. Sales of debt securities issued by borrowers domiciled in Germany  * 
  
Until the end of 1998 DM million nominal value, from 1999 euro million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item:
 Foreign  DM/euro
Mortgage Communal bonds issued Debt securities
bonds bonds issued by spe- by German-
All bank debt (Hypotheken- ( Öffentliche Other bank Industrial Public managed cialised credit
Period Total securities pfandbriefe) Pfandbriefe) institutions bonds  2 syndicates debt securities debt securities  3 
Gross sales  4 
1990 428,698 286,709 14,923 70,701 89,755 111,326 − 141,990 35,168
1991 442,089 292,092 19,478 91,489 80,738 100,386 707 149,288 32,8321992 572,767 318,522 33,633 134,363 49,195 101,333 − 254,244 57,282
1993 733,126 434,829 49,691 218,496 34,028 132,616 457 297,841 87,3091994 627,331 412,585 44,913 150,115 39,807 177,750 486 214,261 61,465
1995 620,120 470,583 43,287 208,844 41,571 176,877 200 149,338 102,719
1996 731,992 563,076 41,439 246,546 53,508 221,582 1,742 167,173 112,3701997 846,567 621,683 53,168 276,755 54,829 236,933 1,915 222,972 114,8131998 1,030,827 789,035 71,371 344,609 72,140 300,920 3,392 238,400 149,542
Euro million
1999 571,269 448,216 27,597 187,661 59,760 173,200 2,570 120,483 57,202
1999         Dec. 38,238 31,041 1,219 9,362 5,473 14,987 5 7,192 962
2000         Jan. 59,554 41,550 2,259 11,454 11,029 16,808 50 17,953 4,602
         Feb. 53,569 43,126 2,309 12,893 8,086 19,838 524 9,919 10,426         Mar. 50,133 41,439 2,445 17,392 6,211 15,390 − 8,695 6,367
         Apr. 55,355 45,157 5,165 16,442 7,495 16,055 − 10,198 1,492
         May 66,437 51,495 3,102 19,863 7,971 20,559 20 14,922 641         June 41,579 34,389 1,318 7,990 7,721 17,361 1,075 6,114 1,730
of which: Debt securities with a maturity of over 4 years  5 
1990 272,642 133,347 10,904 43,250 26,767 52,425 − 139,295 29,791
1991 303,326 172,171 11,911 65,642 54,878 39,741 707 130,448 22,7721992 430,479 211,775 28,594 99,627 40,267 43,286 − 218,703 51,939
1993 571,533 296,779 43,365 160,055 26,431 66,923 230 274,524 82,0491994 429,369 244,806 36,397 109,732 29,168 69,508 306 184,255 53,351
1995 409,469 271,763 30,454 141,629 28,711 70,972 200 137,503 85,221
1996 473,560 322,720 27,901 167,811 35,522 91,487 1,702 149,139 92,5821997 563,333 380,470 41,189 211,007 41,053 87,220 1,820 181,047 98,4131998 694,414 496,444 59,893 288,619 54,385 93,551 2,847 195,122 139,645
Euro million
1999 324,888 226,993 16,715 124,067 37,778 48,435 2,565 95,331 44,013
1999         Dec. 15,785 13,543 753 5,118 3,222 4,450 − 2,242 135
2000         Jan. 25,239 12,809 771 5,978 2,322 3,739 50 12,380 4,368
         Feb. 26,092 17,179 1,041 9,160 1,218 5,760 475 8,438 9,816         Mar. 25,363 21,711 418 14,063 2,838 4,393 − 3,652 5,347
         Apr. 26,004 21,785 3,153 12,354 3,433 2,845 − 4,219 1,492
         May 36,951 22,953 2,421 15,430 2,312 2,790 − 13,998 625
         June 16,459 14,043 555 5,867 3,090 4,532 1,075 1,341 1,730
Net sales  6 
1990 226,707 140,327 − 3,922 − 72 73,287 71,036 − 67 86,449 21,717
1991 227,822 139,396 4,729 22,290 65,985 46,390 558 87,868 18,5831992 304,751 115,786 13,104 58,235 19,585 24,864 − 175 189,142 34,114
1993 403,212 159,982 22,496 122,917 −13,156 27,721 180 243,049 43,701
1994 270,088 116,519 18,184 54,316 − 6,897 50,914 − 62 153,630 21,634
1995 205,482 173,797 18,260 96,125 3,072 56,342 − 354 32,039 61,020
1996 238,427 195,058 11,909 121,929 6,020 55,199 585 42,788 69,9511997 257,521 188,525 16,471 115,970 12,476 43,607 1,560 67,437 63,1811998 327,991 264,627 22,538 162,519 18,461 61,111 3,118 60,243 84,308
Euro million
1999 209,096 170,069 2,845 80,230 31,754 55,238 2,185 36,840 22,728
1999         Dec. − 7,788 − 4,908 − 2,529 − 7,707 2,654 2,674 − 8 − 2,872 − 4,809
2000         Jan. 11,022 5,320 − 905 14 5,939 272 50 5,652 − 1,566
         Feb. 22,690 16,003 − 62 7,106 2,067 6,893 524 6,163 6,220
         Mar. 11,105 15,227 627 10,595 1,059 2,945 −− 4,122 346
         Apr. 18,952 17,576 2,082 9,620 3,020 2,854 − 10 1,386 − 2,478
         May 26,692 21,081 − 184 11,402 3,017 6,846 20 5,591 − 2,455
         June 8,954 9,668 − 735 78 3,768 6,558 531 − 1,246 − 1,254
*For definitions see the notes in the Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. —4Gross sales means only
Report 2, Capital market statistics. —1Excluding registered bank debt initial sales of newly issued securities. —5Maximum maturity according to
securities. —2Debt securities of enterprises. —3Including Federal Railways the terms of issue. — 6 Gross sales less redemptions. 
49*VII. Capital market

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
VII. Capital market
 
3. Outstanding amount of debt securities issued by borrowers domiciled in Germany  * 
  
Until the end of 1998 DM million nominal value, from 1999 euro million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item:
 Foreign  DM/euro
Mortgage Communal bonds issued
bonds bonds by German- Debt securities of
End of year All bank specialised Other bank Industrial Public managed (Öffentliche (Hypotheken-
or month Total bonds syndicates credit institutions debt securities debt securities debt securities Pfandbriefe) pfandbriefe)
DM million
1990 1,458,943 900,977 138,025 369,901 155,045 238,005 2,604 555,362 223,176
1991 1,686,765 1,040,374 142,757 392,190 221,031 284,396 3,161 643,230 241,7601992 1,991,515 1,156,162 155,862 450,424 240,616 309,259 2,983 832,370 275,8731993 2,394,728 1,316,142 178,357 573,341 227,463 336,981 3,163 1,075,422 319,5751994 2,664,814 1,432,661 196,541 627,657 219,214 389,249 3,101 1,229,053 341,210
1995 2,870,295 1,606,459 214,803 723,781 222,286 445,589 2,746 1,261,090 402,229
1996 3,108,724 1,801,517 226,711 845,710 228,306 500,790 3,331 1,303,877 472,1801997 3,366,245 1,990,041 243,183 961,679 240,782 544,397 4,891 1,371,313 535,3591998 3,694,234 2,254,668 265,721 1,124,198 259,243 605,507 8,009 1,431,558 619,668
Euro million
1999 2,097,926 1,322,863 134,814 655,024 163,284 369,741 6,280 768,783 339,560
2000         Feb. 2,143,117 1,344,186 133,847 662,144 171,289 376,906 6,854 792,077 344,213
         Mar. 2,154,223 1,359,413 134,475 672,739 172,348 379,851 6,854 787,955 344,560
         Apr. 2,173,175 1,376,989 136,557 682,359 175,368 382,705 6,844 789,342 342,082
         May 2,199,867 1,398,070 136,373 693,762 178,385 389,551 6,864 794,933 339,627         June 2,208,821 1,407,738 135,637 693,840 146,157 432,105 7,395 793,688 338,373
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  2                 Position at end-June 2000 
Maturity in years
726,231 515,045 44,850 215,180 51,036 203,976 886 210,300 77,632  less than 2
576,412 381,835 41,302 189,496 37,511 113,527 935 193,641 99,790   2 to less than 4
364,098 238,032 19,047 136,375 23,434 59,176 3,440 122,626 48,975   4 to less than  6
182,320 120,561 17,992 71,945 10,829 19,796 1,844 59,915 40,210   6 to less than  8
200,202 104,457 11,893 55,817 14,902 21,844 188 95,557 50,577   8 to less than 10
46,457 35,512 544 22,334 7,297 5,337 102 10,842 12,342 10 to less than 15
50,390 4,985 9 722 767 3,487 − 45,405 4,692 15 to less than 20
62,713 7,312 − 1,970 380 4,961 − 55,401 4,155 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers ’portfolios. — debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of the residual
1Excluding debt securities handed to the trustee for temporary safe amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc. 
custody. —2Calculated from month under review until final maturity for
50* 
 
4. Circulation of shares issued by residents of Germany
  
Until the end of 1998 DM million nominal value, from 1999 euro million nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies ’ capital due to
Share contribution
capital= of shares, Net increase or cash payment
merger reduction circulation at net decrease(-) and exchange contribution mining shares,
issue of change of of capital end of period during period of convertible of claims and GmbH shares, and transfer
Period bonds  1 etc. of assets legal form under review under review bonus shares other real assets and liquidation
DM million
1990 144,686 12,650 7,362 751 3,715 1,049 − 43 1,284 − 1,466
1991 151,618 6,932 3,656 610 2,416 407 − 182 411 − 386
1992 160,813 9,198 4,295 728 1,743 1,073 − 732 3,030 − 942
1993 168,005 7,190 5,224 772 387 876 10 707 − 783
1994 o 190,012 14,237 6,114 1,446 1,521 1,883 − 447 5,086 − 1,367
1995 211,231 21,217 5,894 1,498 1,421 1,421 − 623 13,739 − 2,133
1996 2 216,461 7,131 8,353 1,355 396 1,684 − 3,056 833 − 2,432
1997 221,575 5,115 4,164 2,722 370 1,767 − 2,423 197 − 1,678
1998 238,156 16,578 6,086 2,566 658 8,607 − 4,055 3,905 − 1,188
Euro million
1999 133,513 11,747 5,519 2,008 190 1,075 2,099 1,560 − 708
2000         Feb. 135,616 791 205 558 1 97 41 52 − 163
         Mar. 135,678 63 170 48 34 60 − 83 7 − 279
         Apr. 137,340 1,662 425 170 21 1,218 − 195 50 − 27
         May 137,879 539 158 307 49 76 − 11 25 − 64
         June 142,511 4,632 313 226 77 4,010 − 68 94 − 20
oFrom January 1994 including the shares of east German companies share issues out of company profits. —2Figure reduced by DM 1,902 million
(resultant increase in share circulation: DM 7,771 million). —1Including owing to revisions. 
50*VII. Capital market

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
VII. Capital market
 
5. Yields and indices on German securities
  
Yields on bonds outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices  2 , 3 
Public bonds Bank debt securities Bonds Shares
Memo item:
Listed ForeignFederal securities DM/euro
bonds
With re- With re- issued by German Germansidual matur- sidual matur- German- bond CDAX share
Industrial managed index share price index ities of over 9 ities of over 9
Total Total Total Total to 10 years bonds (REX) index (DAX) to 10 years  
4 syndicates  1, 5 
Period Average End- End-
% p.a. daily rate 1987=100 1987=1000
1990 8.9 8.8 8.8 8.7 9.0 8.9 9.0 9.2 93.50 145.00 1,398.23
1991 8.7 8.6 8.6 8.5 8.9 8.6 8.9 9.2 96.35 148.16 1,577.981992 8.1 8.0 8.0 7.8 8.3 8.1 8.7 8.8 101.54 134.92 1,545.051993 6.4 6.3 6.3 6.5 6.5 6.8 6.9 6.8 109.36 191.13 2,266.681994 6.7 6.7 6.7 6.9 6.8 7.2 7.0 6.9 99.90 176.87 2,106.58
1995 6.5 6.5 6.5 6.9 6.5 7.2 6.9 6.8 109.18 181.47 2,253.88
1996 5.6 5.6 5.6 6.2 5.5 6.4 5.8 5.8 110.37 217.47 2,888.691997 5.1 5.1 5.1 5.6 5.0 5.9 5.2 5.5 111.01 301.47 4,249.691998 4.5 4.4 4.4 4.6 4.5 4.9 5.0 5.3 118.18 343.64 5,002.391999 4.3 4.3 4.3 4.5 4.3 4.9 5.0 5.4 110.60 445.95 6,958.14
2000         Jan. 5.4 5.4 5.3 5.5 5.4 5.9 6.0 6.2 109.61 445.21 6,835.60
         Feb. 5.4 5.4 5.4 5.5 5.5 5.9 6.2 6.3 109.74 506.08 7,644.55         Mar. 5.3 5.2 5.2 5.3 5.4 5.8 6.2 6.1 110.77 499.99 7,599.39
         Apr. 5.3 5.2 5.1 5.2 5.3 5.7 6.1 6.1 110.15 486.69 7,414.68
         May 5.5 5.4 5.4 5.4 5.7 5.9 6.4 6.4 109.83 461.09 7,109.67         June 5.4 5.2 5.2 5.2 5.6 5.8 6.2 6.3 109.97 449.31 6,898.21
         July 5.5 5.3 5.3 5.3 5.7 5.9 6.3 6.4 109.62 460.77 7,190.37
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of included in the calculation. Monthly figures are calculated on the basis of
issue of over 4 years, if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Conver- the yields on all the business days of a month. The annual figures are the un-
tible debt securities, etc., debt securities with unscheduled redemption, weighted means of the monthly figures. —2End of year or month. —
zero-coupon bonds, floating-rate notes and bonds not denominated in DM 3Source: German Stock Exchange plc. —4Only bonds eligible as underlying
or euros are not included. Group yields for the various categories of secu- instruments for futures contracts are included; calculated as unweightedrities are weighted with the amounts outstanding of the debt securities averages. — 5 As far as quoted on German stock exchanges. 
51* 
  
6. Sales and purchases of investment fund certificates in Germany
 
Sales of investment fund certificates Purchases
Domestic funds (sales receipts) Residents
Investment funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Non-banks  2 and loan associations  1 
of which
of which of which
Sales Open- Special- Foreign Foreign= Secur- end ised invest- invest-total Money ities- real invest- ment mentpur- market based estate ment Foreign fund cer- fund cer- Non-resi-chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  
3 Total Total tificates Total tificates dents  4 
Period
DM million
1990 25,788 26,857 7,904 − 8,032 −128 18,952 −1,069 25,766 4,296 − 362 21,470 −707 22
1991 50,064 37,492 13,738 − 11,599 2,144 23,754 12,572 49,890 8,594 − 5 41,296 12,577 174
1992 81,514 20,474 −3,102 −− 9,189 6,087 23,575 61,040 81,518 10,495 2,152 71,023 58,888 − 4
1993 80,259 61,672 20,791 − 6,075 14,716 40,881 18,587 76,258 16,982 2,476 59,276 16,111 4,001
1994 130,995 108,914 63,263 31,180 24,385 7,698 45,650 22,081 125,943 9,849 − 689 116,094 22,770 5,052
1995 55,246 54,071 16,777 6,147 3,709 6,921 37,294 1,175 56,295 12,172 188 44,123 987 −1,049
1996 83,386 79,110 16,517 −4,706 7,273 13,950 62,592 4,276 85,704 19,924 1,685 65,780 2,591 −2,318
1997 145,805 138,945 31,501 −5,001 30,066 6,436 107,445 6,860 149,977 35,924 340 114,053 6,520 −4,172
1998 187,216 169,748 38,998 5,772 27,814 4,690 130,750 17,468 190,309 43,937 961 146,372 16,507 −3,093
Euro million
1999 111,079 97,197 37,684 3,347 23,269 7,395 59,513 13,882 105,370 19,862 − 637 85,508 14,519 5,709
2000         Jan. 21,246 14,258 6,519 1,815 3,922 124 7,738 6,988 19,620 857 − 428 18,763 7,416 1,626
         Feb. 9,815 3,724 4,804 969 3,855 −630 −1,080 6,091 8,032 414 53 7,618 6,038 1,783
         Mar. 12,120 7,886 5,003 110 4,645 −422 2,883 4,234 10,396 1,046 1 9,350 4,233 1,724
         Apr. 11,020 7,088 3,366 − 697 3,735 −336 3,722 3,932 10,319 1,259 − 85 9,060 4,017 701
         May 10,291 6,770 2,567 − 485 2,829 −438 4,205 3,521 9,694 2,111 40 7,583 3,481 597
         June 5,450 2,707 2,117 − 981 2,593 − 48 590 2,743 4,815 28 − 71 4,787 2,814 635
1Book values. —2Residual. —3Net purchases or net sales ( −) of foreign non-residents; transaction values (before 1989 classified as shares). —The
investment fund certificates by residents; transaction values. —4Net figures for the latest data are to be regarded as provisional; corrections are
purchases or net sales ( −) of domestic investment fund certificates by not specially marked. 
51*VII. Capital market

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
1. Finances of the public sector *
    
Central, regional and local authorities  1 Social security funds  2 Public sector, total
Receipts Expenditure
of which
Balance Balance Balance
Other of of of
Person- operat- receipts receipts receipts
of nel ex- ing ex- Capital Finan- and Ex- and Ex- andwhich pend- pend- Current Interest forma- cial expend- Re- pend- expend- Re- pend- expend-
Period Total Taxes  
3 Total  4 iture iture grants paid tion aid  5 iture ceipts  6 iture iture ceipts iture iture
DM billion
1992 904.1 731.7 1,013.9 285.7 134.0 304.8 100.6 101.1 86.1 −109.8 609.1 617.4 −8.3 1,436.0 1,554.2 −118.1
1993 928.7 749.1 1,060.2 296.8 136.0 340.5 102.1 97.0 87.3 −131.5 660.8 658.7 + 2.1 1,492.1 1,621.5 −129.4
1994 995.2 786.2 1,102.2 315.5 137.3 353.4 114.0 93.2 86.5 −106.9 694.1 693.7 + 0.4 1,596.4 1,702.9 −106.5
1995 1,026.4 814.2 1,136.4 324.8 135.5 367.2 129.0 90.1 86.3 −110.1 731.2 743.8 −12.5 1,664.9 1,787.5 −122.6
1996 1,000.3 800.0 1,121.8 326.2 137.0 362.2 130.7 83.9 80.1 −121.5 769.4 784.0 −14.6 1,665.6 1,801.6 −136.1
1997  p 1,014.3 797.2 1,108.9 325.0 135.7 356.3 132.1 80.1 79.2 −94.5 797.0 794.4 + 2.7 1,704.9 1,796.8 −91.9
1998  pe 1,074.0 833.0 1,128.5 326.0 136.5 371.5 133.5 80.0 78.5 −54.5 813.0 809.0 + 4.0 1,768.5 1,819.0 −50.5
1999  pe 1,106.0 886.1 1,161.5 330.5 141.5 395.5 137.0 81.5 73.5 −55.5 839.0 830.0 + 9.0 1,809.5 1,856.0 −46.5
1999         2nd qtr 272.1 215.0 261.5 78.4 31.5 93.7 26.8 16.1 13.6 + 10.6 207.2 207.2 −0.0 445.1 434.5 + 10.6
         3rd qtr 262.6 219.6 291.3 78.6 33.9 105.1 36.2 20.2 17.7 −28.7 208.8 206.3 + 2.5 436.6 462.9 −26.3
         4th qtr p 324.8 255.2 329.3 96.9 43.5 99.1 31.0 29.3 28.8 −4.5 221.0 212.9 + 8.1 516.3 512.6 + 3.6
2000         1st qtr p 245.9 205.2 281.7 76.6 33.6 103.4 41.0 12.9 14.4 −35.8 208.1 208.3 −0.2 413.3 449.3 −36.0
Euro billion
1999  pe 565.5 453.1 593.9 169.0 72.3 202.2 70.0 41.7 37.6 −28.4 429.0 424.4 + 4.6 925.2 949.0 −23.8
1999         2nd qtr 139.1 109.9 133.7 40.1 16.1 47.9 13.7 8.2 6.9 + 5.4 105.9 105.9 −0.0 227.6 222.1 + 5.4
         3rd qtr 134.2 112.3 148.9 40.2 17.3 53.7 18.5 10.3 9.0 −14.7 106.7 105.5 + 1.3 223.2 236.7 −13.4
         4th qtr p 166.1 130.5 168.4 49.5 22.3 50.7 15.8 15.0 14.7 −2.3 113.0 108.9 + 4.2 264.0 262.1 + 1.9
2000         1st qtr p 125.7 104.9 144.0 39.2 17.2 52.8 21.0 6.6 7.4 −18.3 106.4 106.5 −0.1 211.3 229.7 −18.4
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical the latter are all provisional. The quarterly figures for some fields of
Office. —*The budgetary definition used here differs from the methods insurance are estimated. —3The tax revenue shown here is taken from the
employed for the government account of the national accounts and, in case budget statistics and may differ from the data given in Table VIII. 4, whichof the quarterly figures, in some respects also from the financial statistics. — are based on the tax statistics. 4Including discrepancies in clearing
1Incl. subsidiary budgets. The quarterly figures, unlike the annual figures transactions between the central, regional and local authorities. —
based on the annual accounts statistics of the Federal Statistical Office, do 5Expenditure on investment grants, loans and acquisition of participating
not include municipal special-purpose associations and various special interests. —6Including Federal Government liquidity assistance to the
accounts. For the receipts of Bundesbank profit see footnote 1 to Table VIII. Federal Labour Office. 2.—2The annual figures differ from the sum of the quarterly figures, as
2. Finances of the Federal Government, L änder Governments and local authorities *
  
  
Federal Government L änder Governments Local authorities
Western  2,  3 Eastern  3 Western  3 Eastern  3 
Period Receipts  1 Expenditure Receipts Expenditure Receipts Expenditure Receipts Expenditure Receipts Expenditure
DM billion
1992 398.4 431.7 318.2 336.3 73.0 86.0 212.6 221.6 50.3 57.5
1993 401.6 462.5 326.5 352.8 76.4 92.5 222.5 230.9 54.4 59.01994 439.6 478.9 328.8 357.0 79.3 95.9 228.9 235.1 53.9 59.2
1995 439.3 489.9 338.6 370.2 88.4 101.5 225.6 237.9 58.7 60.8
1996 411.9 490.4 344.8 379.7 93.7 105.5 227.7 232.9 55.0 57.71997  
p 416.8 480.3 349.2 376.5 94.3 105.2 222.9 226.9 52.6 54.2
1998  pe 439.5 496.0 360.5 381.0 96.0 103.5 232.5 226.5 52.0 52.5
1999  pe 470.0 521.5 371.5 385.5 97.5 103.5 237.5 232.0 51.0 51.5
1999         2nd qtr 112.3 119.1 90.6 87.6 23.1 22.7 55.6 53.2 12.1 12.0
         3rd qtr 111.1 137.3 89.6 92.5 24.7 24.9 58.9 57.3 12.6 12.5         4th qtr
p 151.1 142.4 106.4 111.6 27.6 33.5 71.3 67.4 15.7 15.8
2000         1st qtr p 98.8 128.3 87.3 94.6 23.0 22.3 50.1 54.0 10.4 10.8
Euro billion
1999  pe 240.3 266.6 189.9 197.1 49.9 52.9 121.4 118.6 26.1 26.3
1999         2nd qtr 57.4 60.9 46.3 44.8 11.8 11.6 28.4 27.2 6.2 6.1
         3rd qtr 56.8 70.2 45.8 47.3 12.6 12.7 30.1 29.3 6.5 6.4         4th qtr
p 77.2 72.8 54.4 57.1 14.1 17.1 36.5 34.4 8.0 8.1
2000         1st qtr p 50.5 65.6 44.6 48.4 11.7 11.4 25.6 27.6 5.3 5.5
52*Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Fund for Inherited Liabilities. —2Including Berlin, Bremen, Hamburg.
Office. —*See corresponding footnote to Table VIII. 1. —1The Including Berlin (East). —3The quarterly figures, unlike the annual figures
Bundesbank profit transfer is shown in full until 1994; from 1995 only the based on the annual accounts statistics of the Federal Statistical Office, d o
DM 7 billion scheduled in the budget is shown. Since that time, receipts not include various special accounts. over and above the scheduled amount accrue directly to the Redemption
52*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
3. Finances of the Government in the national accounts *
    
Up to the end of 1998, DM billion / from 1999, euro billion
Item 1992 1993 1994 1995  1,  p 1996  p 1997  p 1998  p 1999  p 
Receipts 1,465.7 1,514.9 1,605.7 1,652.0 1,704.4 1,727.6 1,781.1 946.2
of which
Taxes 750.1 767.0 804.4 828.8 849.3 855.9 898.2 490.9Social security contributions 554.6 588.2 632.2 662.4 696.4 719.7 726.1 375.4
Expenditure 1,544.3 1,618.3 1,689.3 1,763.2 1,825.6 1,824.1 1,845.6 967.0
Intermediate input  
2 139.2 140.3 140.6 143.1 145.1 142.8 141.0 75.0
Employee compensation 290.2 301.7 306.8 315.9 319.5 318.4 319.6 165.8Interest 102.7 108.5 113.5 129.0 132.0 133.4 134.4 69.4Social security benefits  
3 738.2 792.4 848.8 902.4 968.2 982.8 995.0 521.5
Gross capital formation 92.0 90.9 90.3 80.6 76.7 70.2 66.9 35.8
Financial balance − 78.6 − 103.4 − 83.5 − 111.2 − 121.2 − 96.5 − 64.5 − 20.9
as a percentage of the grossdomestic product − 2.5 − 3.2 − 2.5 − 3.2 − 3.4 − 2.6 − 1.7 − 1.1
Memo item
Deficit of the Treuhand agency − 29.6 − 38.1 − 37.1 .....
Debt as defined in
Maastricht Treatyas a percentage of the grossdomestic product  
4 43.1 47.1 49.4 57.1 59.8 60.9 60.7 61.0
Source: Federal Statistical Office. —*Figures according to ESA 95. sector, mainly in connection with the winding-up of the Treuhand agency.
Notwithstanding the figures shown by the Federal Statistical Office, In unadjusted terms, the deficit amounted to 9.8% of GDP. —2Excluding
calculated including −with no impact on the balance −customs duties, the social benefits in kind. —3Monetary social security benefits and social
EU share in VAT revenue and EU subsidies. —1Adjusted for the balance of benefits in kind. —4Owing to some conversions, the level of debt differs
notional capital transfers between the public sector and the corporate from that shown in tables VIII. 7 and VIII. 8. 
4. Tax revenue of the central, regional and local authorities
    
Federal and L änder Governments and European Union Local authorities  4 
Länder Governments
of which Balance of
Federal of which European in the untransferred
Period Total Total  1 Government  2 Total New L änder Union  3 Total New L änder tax shares  5 
DM million
1998 833,013 727,888 379,491 306,127 . 42,271 104,960 8,841 + 166
1999 886,124 775,945 414,101 322,172 . 39,672 110,178 9,408 + 2
2000         1st qtr p 206,337 178,929 90,022 76,771 . 12,136 20,019 1,710 + 7,390
         2nd qtr p . 202,663 107,629 84,400 . 10,634 . . .
2000         Mar. . 65,870 36,024 27,068 . 2,778 . . .
         Apr. . 52,664 26,424 22,526 . 3,714 . . .
         May . 64,681 35,292 25,587 . 3,802 . . .         June
p . 85,318 45,913 36,286 . 3,119 . . .
Euro million
1998 425,913 372,163 194,031 156,520 . 21,613 53,665 4,520 + 85
1999 453,068 396,734 211,726 164,724 . 20,284 56,333 4,810 + 1
2000         1st qtr p 105,498 91,485 46,027 39,252 . 6,205 10,235 874 + 3,778
         2nd qtr p . 103,620 55,030 43,153 . 5,437 . . .
2000         Mar. . 33,679 18,419 13,840 . 1,420 . . .
         Apr. . 26,927 13,510 11,517 . 1,899 . . .
         May . 33,071 18,045 13,082 . 1,944 . . .         June
p . 43,622 23,475 18,553 . 1,595 . . .
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. —1Including receipts from the revenue. —4Including local authority taxes of Berlin, Bremen and
Equalisation of Burdens levies.  —2Before deduction of supplementary Hamburg. —5Difference between the local authorities ’share in the
Federal grants and shares in the revenue of mineral oil tax remitted to the income taxes received by the L änder cash offices in the period in question
Länder Governments. —3Including the (GNP-related) receipts accruing to (see Table VIII. 5) and the amounts passed on to the local authorities during
the EU from 1988 to the detriment of the Federal Government ’s tax the same period. 
53*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
5. Tax revenue, by type
    
Joint taxes Memo
item
Income taxes  2 Turnover taxes  5,  6 Local
author-
As- Invest- ities’
sessed ment Value- Turnover Share EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income added tax on in trade Federal L änder customs income
Period Total  1 Total tax  3 tax tion tax taxes  4 Total tax imports tax  6,  7 taxes  8 taxes  8 duties taxes  9 
DM million
1998 775,028 340,231 258,276 11,116 36,200 34,640 250,214 203,684 46,530 10,284 130,513 37,300 6,486 47,140
1999 825,383 360,671 261,708 21,293 43,731 33,940 268,253 218,271 49,982 10,685 141,280 38,263 6,231 49,438
2000         1st qtr 189,972 82,190 59,973 −313 12,220 10,310 69,470 55,089 14,381 221 26,815 9,746 1,530 11,043
         2nd qtr p 214,765 96,945 61,139 7,992 14,701 13,113 68,090 52,004 16,086 2,538 36,133 9,410 1,649 12,102
2000         Mar. 69,497 33,645 18,553 2,205 10,937 1,950 19,132 13,958 5,175 60 12,655 3,474 530 3,627
         Apr. 55,965 21,271 19,128 −804 198 2,749 20,798 16,336 4,462 1,805 8,768 2,830 494 3,301
         May 68,180 24,705 21,009 −1,714 1,628 3,782 24,486 18,556 5,930 730 14,284 3,394 582 3,500
         June p 90,619 50,968 21,002 10,509 12,876 6,582 22,807 17,113 5,694 3 13,082 3,186 573 5,301
Euro million
1998 396,266 173,958 132,054 5,684 18,509 17,711 127,932 104,142 23,790 5,258 66,730 19,071 3,316 24,102
1999 422,012 184,408 133,809 10,887 22,359 17,353 137,155 111,600 25,555 5,463 72,235 19,564 3,186 25,277
2000         1st qtr 97,131 42,023 30,664 −160 6,248 5,271 35,519 28,167 7,353 113 13,710 4,983 782 5,646
         2nd qtr p 109,807 49,567 31,260 4,086 7,517 6,704 34,814 26,589 8,224 1,298 18,475 4,811 843 6,187
2000         Mar. 35,533 17,202 9,486 1,127 5,592 997 9,782 7,136 2,646 31 6,471 1,776 271 1,855
         Apr. 28,615 10,876 9,780 −411 101 1,406 10,634 8,352 2,281 923 4,483 1,447 252 1,688
         May 34,860 12,632 10,742 −876 832 1,934 12,519 9,487 3,032 373 7,303 1,735 297 1,789
         June p 46,333 26,060 10,738 5,373 6,583 3,365 11,661 8,749 2,911 2 6,689 1,629 293 2,710
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. —1This total, unlike that in Table VIII. 1999 5.63% went to the Federal Government in advance to finance the
4, includes neither the revenue from Equalisation of Burdens levies, trade supplementary Federal grant to the pension insurance funds; 2.2% of thetax on returns and capital (less Federal and L änder shares in trade tax), the balance went to the local authorities, of the new balance: 50.5% to the
taxes on land and buildings and other local authority taxes, nor the balance Federal Government, 49.5% to the L änder Governments, from 2000 50.25%
of untransferred tax shares. —2The yield of wage tax and assessed income to the Federal Government, 49.75% to the L änder Governments. The EU
tax was distributed among the Federal Government, the L änder share must likewise be deducted from the Federal Government ’s share
Governments and the local authorities in the ratio of 42.5 : 42.5 : 15 from stated. —6Since 1991 the distribution of turnover tax and the level and
1980, and the yield of corporation tax and investment income tax between distribution of the share in trade tax have been affected by the financing ofthe Federal Government and the L änder Governments in the ratio of 50 : 50 the debt service of the "German Unity" Fund. —7Federal Government and
from 1970. —3From 1996, after deduction of child benefit. —4From L änder Governments 50% each. From 1998 Federal Government 42.2%,
February 1993 including revenue from the tax on interest income, in which L änder Governments 57.8%. —8For breakdown see Table VIII. 6. —9From
the local authorities have a share of 12%. —5From 1998 3.64% and from 1998 including the share in turnover taxes. 
6. Individual taxes of the Federal Government, L änder Governments and local authorities
    
Federal taxes L änder taxes Local authority taxes
Insur- Electri- Other Motor Inherit- Other Taxes on Other
Mineral Tobacco Spirits ance city Federal vehicle Property ance Beer L änder Trade land and local
Period oil tax tax tax tax tax taxes  1 tax tax tax tax taxes tax  2 buildings taxes  3 
DM million
1998 66,677 21,652 4,426 13,951 . 23,807 15,171 1,063 4,810 1,662 14,594 50,508 16,228 1,532
1999 71,278 22,795 4,367 13,917 3,551 25,373 13,767 1,050 5,977 1,655 15,815 52,924 16,890 1,612
2000         1st qtr p 8,697 3,692 697 6,503 1,061 6,165 3,717 257 1,457 377 3,939 12,336 3,833 417
         2nd qtr p 18,854 5,782 915 2,478 1,647 6,458 3,712 208 1,645 439 3,406 . . .
2000         Mar. 5,512 2,403 544 844 559 2,795 1,360 99 546 133 1,336 . . .
         Apr. 4,977 1,021 210 722 374 1,464 1,151 52 459 123 1,045 . . .         May 7,831 2,596 340 1,040 735 1,742 1,334 104 549 143 1,264 . . .         June
p 6,046 2,165 366 717 538 3,251 1,227 52 637 173 1,097 . . .
Euro million
1998 34,091 11,071 2,263 7,133 . 12,172 7,757 543 2,459 850 7,462 25,825 8,297 783
1999 36,444 11,655 2,233 7,116 1,816 12,973 7,039 537 3,056 846 8,086 27,060 8,636 824
2000         1st qtr p 4,447 1,888 356 3,325 543 3,152 1,900 131 745 193 2,014 6,307 1,960 213
         2nd qtr p 9,640 2,956 468 1,267 842 3,302 1,898 106 841 225 1,741 . . .
2000         Mar. 2,818 1,228 278 431 286 1,429 695 51 279 68 683 . . .
         Apr. 2,545 522 107 369 191 749 589 26 235 63 534 . . .         May 4,004 1,327 174 532 376 891 682 53 281 73 646 . . .         June
p 3,091 1,107 187 366 275 1,662 627 27 326 88 561 . . .
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. —1Other excise taxes and the income until mid-1992, and again since the beginning of 1995. —2On returns and
and corporation tax surcharge ("solidarity surcharge") levied from mid-1991 capital. — 3 Including tax-like receipts.   
54*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
7. Indebtedness of the public sector *
    
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999, euro million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
5−year lending owing to
Bundes- Treasury special Federal Debt by credit Social German Equalisa-
End of year bank discount Treasury Federal savings secur- institu- security unifica- tionor month Total advances paper  
1 notes  2 bonds  2 bonds ities  2 tions  3 funds Other  3 tion 4 claims Other  5 
Public authorities
1994 1,659,632 − 20,506 169,181 181,737 59,334 465,408 644,459 1,337 28,997 1,391 87,098 184
1995 1,993,476 − 8,072 219,864 170,719 78,456 607,224 764,875 1,263 40,621 15,106 87,079 198
1996 2,126,320 − 27,609 217,668 176,164 96,391 631,696 836,582 770 39,450 9,960 89,826 203
1997 2,215,893 − 26,336 241,268 177,721 99,317 670,755 879,021 663 29,907 1,315 89,376 216
1998 2,280,154 − 25,631 221,524 199,774 92,698 729,416 894,456 550 26,073 1,249 88,582 202
1999         Mar. 1,178,094 − 12,569 107,781 106,552 45,415 391,250 456,337 271 11,856 636 45,321 106
         June 1,180,551 − 11,952 104,589 111,259 44,646 394,020 456,171 263 11,567 636 45,342 107
         Sep. 1,190,614 − 11,793 101,767 114,905 43,212 410,025 450,457 262 12,192 637 45,260 104
         Dec. p 1,199,975 − 12,594 99,544 120,998 41,621 418,871 450,111 281 10,200 476 45,175 105
2000         Mar. p 1,213,985 − 11,790 99,731 121,722 40,925 426,924 457,058 282 9,733 431 45,281 108
Federal Government 6,  7
1994 712,488 − 15,870 66,987 181,737 59,334 359,833 16,654 50 875 1,391 9,576 183
1995 756,834 − 8,072 52,354 170,719 78,456 402,307 26,572 15 8,119 1,360 8,684 176
1996 839,883 − 26,789 55,289 176,164 96,391 434,295 32,988 5 7,766 1,330 8,684 183
1997 905,691 − 25,286 78,848 177,721 99,317 481,619 31,845 5 870 1,300 8,684 197
1998 957,983 − 24,666 84,760 199,274 92,698 519,718 24,125 − 2,603 1,270 8,684 186
1999         Mar. 506,312 − 12,077 41,245 106,040 45,415 277,684 17,450 − 1,218 645 4,440 100
         June 509,514 − 11,749 39,775 107,737 44,646 281,350 17,931 − 1,140 645 4,440 102
         Sep. 712,654 − 11,685 46,956 114,405 43,212 372,129 73,386 61 4,820 637 45,260 104
         Dec. 714,069 − 11,553 44,335 120,498 41,621 379,808 67,872 60 2,568 476 45,175 104
2000         Mar. 726,998 − 11,412 43,587 121,222 40,925 387,394 74,248 59 2,331 431 45,281 108
West German L änder Governments
1994 415,052 −− 68,643 . . 20,451 311,622 623 11,453 . 2,259 2
1995 442,536 −− 72,001 . . 19,151 339,084 358 11,940 . − 2
1996 477,361 − 320 80,036 . . 11,934 372,449 54 12,567 . − 2
1997 505,297 − 350 79,901 . . 6,739 406,499 47 11,760 . − 2
1998 525,380 − 520 78,878 . . 4,512 430,709 43 10,716 . − 2
1999         Mar. 268,623 − 266 39,806 . . 2,256 221,697 25 4,573 . − 1
         June 270,796 − 102 40,401 . . 2,146 223,502 22 4,622 . − 1
         Sep. 269,993 − 26 40,525 . . 1,962 222,878 21 4,581 . − 1
         Dec. p 274,208 − 150 40,979 . . 2,054 226,022 23 4,979 . − 1
2000         Mar. p 275,718 − 50 42,080 . . 2,002 226,700 23 4,861 . − 1
East German L änder Governments
1994 55,650 −− 19,350 . . 1,000 35,065 5 230 . . .
1995 69,151 −− 23,845 . . 1,500 43,328 17 461 . . .
1996 80,985 − 500 25,320 . . 1,500 53,483 − 182 . . .
1997 90,174 − 700 26,040 . . 1,500 61,697 15 222 . . .
1998 98,192 − 445 25,728 . . 1,500 70,289 − 230 . . .
1999         Mar. 49,502 − 227 13,065 . . 767 35,361 − 8 3...
         June 49,351 − 101 13,031 . . 767 35,370 − 8 3...
         Sep. 50,402 − 83 14,030 . . 767 35,445 − 7 8...
         Dec. p 53,199 − 891 13,750 . . 767 37,602 − 189 . . .
2000         Mar. p 52,201 − 328 13,584 . . 767 37,415 − 107 . . .
West German local authorities 8
1994 153,375 . . − . . 100 147,558 288 5,429 . . .
1995 157,271 . . − . . 1,000 151,127 283 4,861 . . .
1996 158,613 . . 200 . . 1,280 152,311 174 4,648 . . .1997 160,162 . . 300 . . 1,330 154,145 149 4,238 . . .1998 158,960 . . 300 . . 1,330 153,208 119 4,003 . . .
1999         Mar. 80,661 . . 153 . . 680 77,732 51 2,045 . . .
         June 80,119 . . 153 . . 680 77,190 51 2,045 . . .         Sep. 80,401 . . 153 . . 680 77,471 51 2,045 . . .         Dec.
p 81,511 . . 153 . . 680 78,726 53 1,898 . . .
2000         Mar. p 81,704 . . 153 . . 680 78,903 51 1,917 . . .
East German local authorities  8
1994 32,235 . . 125 . . 400 30,837 364 509 . . .
1995 36,830 . . 225 . . 400 35,427 347 431 . . .1996 38,976 . . 225 . . 400 37,922 308 121 . . .1997 38,688 . . 225 . . 400 37,623 273 167 . . .1998 39,873 . . 225 . . 460 38,777 255 156 . . .
1999         Mar. 20,421 . . 115 . . 335 19,761 128 82 . . .
         June 20,431 . . 102 . . 335 19,784 128 82 . . .         Sep. 20,452 . . 102 . . 335 19,804 128 82 . . .         Dec.
p 20,726 . . 51 . . 335 20,138 124 78 . . .
2000         Mar. p 20,758 . . 51 . . 335 20,167 128 77 . . .
For footnotes see end of the table. 
55*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
7. Indebtedness of the public sector * (cont ’d)
    
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999, euro million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
5−year lending owing to
Bundes- Treasury special Federal Debt by credit Social German Equalisa-
End of year bank discount Treasury Federal savings secur- institu- security unifica- tionor month Total advances paper  
1 notes  2 bonds  2 bonds ities  2 tions  3 funds Other  3 tion 4 claims Other  5 
“German Unity “Fund / Indemnification Fund 6
1994 89,187 . 897 8,867 − . 43,859 33,744 5 1,816 . . .
1995 87,146 . − 8,891 − . 44,398 31,925 5 1,927 . . .
1996 83,556 . −−− . 44,321 38,020 5 1,210 . . .
1997 79,717 . −−− . 44,347 34,720 5 645 . . .
1998 79,413 . −−− . 47,998 30,975 − 440 . . .
1999         Mar. 40,613 . −−− . 26,723 13,691 − 199 . . .
         June 40,715 . −− 500 . 26,478 13,542 − 194 . . .
         Sep. 40,345 . −− 500 . 27,822 11,834 − 189 . . .
         Dec. 40,234 . − 275 500 . 28,978 10,292 − 189 . . .
2000         Mar. 40,572 . − 275 500 . 29,315 10,292 − 189 . . .
ERP Special Fund 6
1994 28,043 . .... 10,298 17,745 −− ...
1995 34,200 . .... 10,745 23,455 −− ...
1996 34,135 . .... 10,750 23,385 −− ...
1997 33,650 . .... 10,810 22,840 −− ...
1998 34,159 . .... 11,944 20,988 − 1,227 . . .
1999         Mar. 17,428 . .... 6,426 10,410 − 592 . . .
         June 16,995 . .... 6,408 10,169 − 418 . . .
         Sep. 16,368 . .... 6,331 9,639 − 398 . . .
         Dec. 16,028 . .... 6,250 9,458 21 299 . . .
2000         Mar. 16,034 . .... 6,429 9,333 21 251 . . .
Federal Railways Fund 6,  7
1994 71,173 . . 5,208 . . 29,467 29,232 − 7,265 . . .
1995 78,400 . . 3,848 . . 28,992 39,005 140 6,415 . . .1996 77,785 . . 1,882 . . 28,749 41,537 130 5,489 . . .1997 77,254 . . 1,927 − . 25,634 44,807 115 4,772 . . .
1998 77,246 . . − 500 . 31,648 42,488 79 2,531 . . .
1999         Mar. 39,177 . . − 511 . 16,883 20,710 40 1,033 . . .
         June 39,231 . . − 1,023 . 16,805 20,401 34 968 . . .
Debt-Processing Fund / Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities 6,  7
1994 102,428 . 3,740 . . . . 22,003 2 1,420 . 75,263 .
1995 328,888 . − 58,699 − . 98,731 72,732 98 6,468 13,745 78,395 21
1996 331,918 . − 54,718 − . 98,468 81,380 95 7,468 8,630 81,142 19
1997 322,032 . − 54,028 − . 98,377 81,616 54 7,233 15 80,692 17
1998 304,978 . − 31,633 − . 110,006 79,226 54 4,167 −20 79,899 15
1999         Mar. 153,109 . − 13,397 − . 59,343 37,433 27 2,031 −9 40,881 6
         June 151,097 . − 11,127 2,000 . 58,897 36,133 27 2,015 −9 40,902 4
“Use of Hard Coal “Equalisation Fund 6,  7
1995 2,220 . .... − 2,220 −− ...
1996 3,108 . .... − 3,108 −− ...
1997 3,229 . .... − 3,229 −− ...
1998 3,971 . .... 3 0 0 3,671 −− ...
1999         Mar. 2,247 . .... 1 5 3 2,094 −− ...
         June 2,302 . .... 1 5 3 2,148 −− ...
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical accordance with the London Debts agreement; excluding debt securities i n
Office. —*Excluding public authorities ’mutual indebtedness. — own portfolios. —6The debt incurred through the joint issue of Federal
1Predominantly Treasury discount paper. —2Excluding paper in the securities is recorded here −in contrast to the capital market statistics −
issuers ’portfolios. —3Mainly loans against borrowers ’notes. Including under the Federal Government and its special funds in accordance with the
loans raised abroad. Other loans from non-banks, including loans from agreed distribution ratios. —7Since July 1, 1999 the Federal Government
supplementary public pension funds and liabilities arising from the has assumed joint responsibility for the debts of the Redemption Fund forinvestment assistance levy. —4Old liabilities arising from residential Inherited Liabilities, the Federal Railway Fund and the Equalisation Fund for
construction and liabilities arising from residential construction by the Safeguarding the Use of Coal. The special funds mentioned are onlyformer GDR ’s armed forces and from residential construction in connection recorded under the Federal Government from July. —8Data other than
with the return of the troops of the former USSR in eastern Germany to end-of-year figures have been estimated. Including indebtedness of munici-their home country. —5Old debt mainly expressed in foreign currency, in pal special-purpose associations. 
56*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
8. Changes in public sector indebtedness *
    
Net borrowing  1 
Level at end of 1999 20001998 Dec. 1999  
p Total  p 1st qtr 2nd qtr 3th qtr 4th qtr  p 1st qtr  p Mar. 2000  p 
Item DM million Euro million
Borrowers
Federal Government  2 957,983 1,396,597 714,069 726,998 + 31,738 + 16,503 + 3,202 + 10,536 + 1,497 + 12,926
"German Unity" Fund 79,270 78,433 40,102 40,422 − 428 − 2+ 8 9 − 386 − 129 + 320
ERP Special Fund 34,159 31,348 16,028 16,034 −1,437 − 37 − 432 − 627 − 340 + 6
Federal Railways Fund  2 77,246 −− − − 265 − 318 + 53 −−−
Inherited Liabilities Fund  2 304,978 −− − − 4,882 −2,852 −2,030 −−−
"Use of Hard Coal" Equal-isation Fund  
2 3,971 −− − + 271 + 217 + 55 −−−
Indemnification Fund 143 258 132 150 + 59 + 12 + 12 + 17 + 18 + 18
West  German  Länder 525,380 536,304 274,208 275,718 + 5,585 + 1 + 2,172 − 803 + 4,215 + 1,510 Governments
East German  Länder 98,192 104,049 53,199 52,201 + 2,995 − 703 − 151 + 1,051 + 2,797 − 998 Governments
West German local authorities  3 158,960 159,421 81,511 81,704 + 751 − 207 − 66 + 332 + 692 + 194
East German local authorities  3 39,873 40,537 20,726 20,758 + 428 + 68 + 10 + 26 + 325 + 32
Total 2,280,154 2,346,948 1,199,975 1,213,985 + 34,816 + 12,680 + 2,914 + 10,146 + 9,075 + 14,006
Types of debt
Treasury discount paper  4 25,631 24,632 12,594 11,790 − 511 − 535 − 617 − 159 + 801 − 804
Treasury notes  5 221,524 194,690 99,544 99,731 −13,720 −5,482 −3,192 −2,822 −2,224 + 187
Five-year special Federal bonds  5 199,774 236,651 120,998 121,722 + 18,855 + 4,408 + 4,708 + 3,646 + 6,093 + 725
Federal savings bonds 92,698 81,403 41,621 40,925 −5,775 −1,981 − 769 −1,434 −1,591 − 696
Debt securities  5 729,416 819,241 418,871 426,924 + 45,927 + 18,306 + 2,770 + 16,005 + 8,846 + 8,052
Direct lending by
credit institutions  6 894,456 880,340 450,111 457,058 −6,613 − 552 + 309 −5,658 − 712 + 6,947
Loans from social security funds 550 549 281 282 − 0− 85 − 75 + 142 + 18 + 1
Other loans  6 25,993 19,871 10,160 9,693 −3,130 −1,399 − 223 + 482 −1,990 − 467
Old debt  7 1,451 1,137 581 539 − 161 − 0+ 1 − 1− 160 − 42
Equalisation claims 88,582 88,355 45,175 45,281 − 55 − 0+ 4 − 57 − 3 + 102
Investment assistance levy 79 79 40 40 − 0− 0− 0− 0− 0− 0
Total 2,280,154 2,346,948 1,199,975 1,213,985 + 34,816 + 12,680 + 2,914 + 10,146 + 9,075 + 14,006
Creditors
Banking system
Bundesbank 8,684 8,684 4,440 4,440 −−−−−−
Credit institutions 1,179,700 1,164,800 595,553 600,100 −7,005 −7,536 − 803 −3,267 + 4,601 + 4,547
Domestic non-banks
Social security funds  8 550 550 281 282 − 0− 51 − 102 + 153 − 0+ 0
Other  9 314,320 363,514 185,862 194,913 + 25,204 + 19,041 + 2,798 + 1,244 + 2,121 + 9,050
Foreign creditors  pe 776,900 809,400 413,840 414,250 + 16,617 + 1,227 + 1,022 + 12,015 + 2,352 + 409
Total 2,280,154 2,346,948 1,199,975 1,213,985 + 34,816 + 12,680 + 2,914 + 10,146 + 9,075 + 14,006
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical 6Including loans raised abroad. —7Old liabilities arising from residential
Office. —*Excluding public authorities ’mutual indebtedness. —1Net construction and liabilities arising from the residential construction of the
borrowing differs from the change in indebtedness, which includes the former GDR ’s armed forces and from residential construction in connection
assumption and reduction of debts. —2See Table VIII. 7, footnote 6. — with the return of the troops of the former USSR based in eastern Germany
3Data other than end-of-year figures have been estimated. Including to their home country, and old debt in accordance with the London Debts
indebtedness of municipal special-purpose associations and municipal Agreement. —8Excluding public bonds acquired by supplementary pension
hospitals. —4Excluding mobilisation and liquidity paper. Predominantly funds for government employees. — 9 Ascertained as a difference. 
Treasury discount paper. —5Excluding paper in the issuers ’portfolios. —
9. Loans raised by public authorities against borrowers ’ notes
    
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999, euro million
End of year Federal "German ERP L änder Local Federal Inherited "Use of Hard
or month Govern- Unity" Special Govern- authorities Railways Liabilites Coal" Equal-
Total  1 ment  2,  3 Fund Fund ments 4,  5 Fund  3 Fund  3 isation Fund  3 
1996 851,245 33,817 39,235 23,385 428,292 187,311 47,155 88,942 3,108
1997 883,260 25,914 35,370 22,840 471,224 186,087 49,694 88,902 3,2291998 898,030 23,094 31,415 22,215 504,148 184,942 45,098 83,447 3,671
1999 Mar. 448,234 8,486 13,890 11,002 257,568 93,920 21,783 39,491 2,094
June 447,080 7,931 13,736 10,587 259,940 93,158 21,403 38,176 2,148Sep. 441,961 66,954 12,023 10,037 259,427 93,519 −− −
Dec. 
p 444,031 64,704 10,481 9,778 264,158 94,909 −− −
2000 Mar.  p 442,190 62,289 10,481 9,605 264,958 94,857 −− −
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical 3See Table VIII. 7, footnote 6. —4Data other than end-of-year figures have
Office. —1Excluding Debt Register claims and cash advances. Including been estimated. Including municipal special-purpose associations and
small amounts of: mortgage loans, land charges in annuity and other forms, municipal hospitals. — 5 Including contractually agreed loans. 
and debts outstanding. —2Including Equalisation of Burdens Fund. —
57*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
10. Indebtedness of the Federal Government
    
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999, euro million
Treasury Indebtedness
discount paper  1 to non-banks Old debt
Federal Direct
of which Treasury 5 −year Debt lending owing to
Bundes- Treasury paper/ special Federal secur- by credit Social German Equal-
End of year bank financing Treasury Federal savings ities institu- security Other unifica- isationor month Total advances Total paper notes  
2 bonds  2 bonds 2 tions  3,  4 funds  5 3,  6 tion 7 claims Other  8 
1993 685,283 − 23,276 22,904 60,565 188,767 46,093 325,201 26,129 546 3,395 1,421 9,698 194
1994 712,488 − 15,870 14,578 66,987 181,737 59,334 359,833 16,654 55 862 1,391 9,576 183
1995 756,834 − 8,072 7,681 52,354 170,719 78,456 402,307 26,572 23 8,111 1,360 8,684 176
1996 839,883 − 26,789 7,166 55,289 176,164 96,391 434,295 32,988 10 7,761 1,330 8,684 183
1997 905,691 − 25,286 5,221 78,848 177,721 99,317 481,619 31,845 10 865 1,300 8,684 197
1998 957,983 − 24,666 4,558 84,760 199,274 92,698 519,718 24,125 − 2,603 1,270 8,684 186
1999         July 9 709,542 − 11,733 1,681 46,206 112,332 44,293 373,545 71,785 61 4,608 637 44,237 104
         Aug. 711,795 − 11,684 1,631 46,772 116,834 43,879 374,380 68,410 61 4,820 637 44,214 104
         Sep. 712,654 − 11,685 1,633 46,956 114,405 43,212 372,129 73,386 61 4,820 637 45,260 104
         Oct. 718,304 − 11,581 1,612 47,274 114,741 42,606 374,872 76,101 61 5,036 636 45,294 103
         Nov. 726,100 − 13,055 1,614 44,928 119,111 41,880 379,735 76,416 61 4,987 639 45,183 104
         Dec. 714,069 − 11,553 1,584 44,335 120,498 41,621 379,808 67,872 60 2,568 476 45,175 104
2000         Jan. 722,754 − 11,400 1,573 44,478 118,311 40,857 387,735 71,486 60 2,568 475 45,279 106
         Feb. 725,066 − 11,412 1,586 44,692 123,723 40,884 387,504 68,365 60 2,570 470 45,279 106
         Mar. 726,998 − 11,412 1,586 43,587 121,222 40,925 387,394 74,248 59 2,331 431 45,281 108
         Apr. 725,260 − 11,534 1,570 44,175 122,229 41,045 386,828 71,229 59 2,332 435 45,283 111
         May 727,073 − 11,617 1,652 44,512 122,534 40,445 391,132 68,614 59 2,334 437 45,281 109
         June 723,195 − 11,654 1,690 43,929 122,593 39,200 389,761 67,927 58 2,268 418 45,281 107
         July p 729,828 − 11,698 1,701 44,308 122,604 39,263 393,645 71,298 58 2,268 418 44,161 107
1Excluding mobilisation and liquidity paper. In November 1999, including with the return of the troops of the former USSR based in eastern Germany
cash bills. —2Excluding paper in the issuers ’portfolios. —3Including loans to their home country. —8Commutation and compensation debt and old
raised abroad. —4Including money market debt. —5Including loans debt mainly expressed in foreign currency. —9Since July 1, 1999 the
granted by supplementary pension funds for government employees. — Federal Government has assumed joint responsibility for the debts of the
6Including liabilities arising from the investment assistance levy. — Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, the Federal Railway Fund and the
7Assumption of liabilities arising from residential construction of the Equalisation Fund for Safeguarding the Use of Coal. The special funds
former GDR ’s armed forces and from residential construction in connection mentioned are ascribed to the Federal Government from July. 
11. Federal finance on a cash basis
    
Up to the end of 1998, DM billion / from 1999, euro billion
Financing  3 
Change
Cash
surplus (+)
in Bundes- Items or deficit (-),
in cash bank ad- in market in course of cumulative
Cash Cash resources  4 vances debt settlement Seigniorage from
Cash expenditure surplus (+) beginning
Period receipts  1 1,  2 or deficit (-) (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) of year
1993 450.28 512.30 − 62.01 + 12.95 − 4.35 + 78.54 − 0.78 −62.01
1994 463.72 497.55 − 33.83 − 6.12 − + 27.21 − 0.50 −33.83
1995 501.56 549.77 − 48.20 − 3.49 − + 44.35 − 0.37 −48.20
1996 532.67 609.26 − 76.60 + 6.62 − + 83.05 − 0.17 −76.60
1997 568.83 638.04 − 69.21 − 3.33 − + 65.81 − 0.07 −69.21
1998 597.48 655.33 − 57.84 − 5.43 − + 52.29 − 0.12 −57.84
1999 315.59 345.39 − 29.80 + 1.81 − + 31.63 −− 0.02 −29.80
1999         July 24.35 32.96 − 8.61 − 1.21 − + 7.40 −− 0.00 −27.10
         Aug. 21.86 23.93 − 2.07 + 0.19 − + 2.25 − 0.01 −29.18
         Sep. 26.75 27.30 − 0.55 + 0.31 − + 0.86 − 0.00 −29.73
         Oct. 20.37 26.68 − 6.31 − 0.66 − + 5.65 −− 0.00 −36.04
         Nov. 22.19 30.42 − 8.24 − 0.45 − + 7.80 −− 0.01 −44.28
         Dec. 50.47 36.00 + 14.47 + 2.44 −− 12.03 −− 0.01 −29.80
2000         Jan. 22.39 32.23 − 9.83 − 1.12 − + 8.69 − 0.03 − 9.83
         Feb. 22.35 24.57 − 2.22 + 0.09 − + 2.31 −− 0.00 −12.05
         Mar. 23.95 26.09 − 2.14 − 0.22 − + 1.93 −− 0.01 −14.19
         Apr. 25.05 23.53 + 1.52 − 0.22 −− 1.74 −− 0.00 −12.67
         May 23.60 25.50 − 1.90 − 0.10 − + 1.81 −− 0.01 −14.57
         June 28.61 25.10 + 3.51 − 0.37 −− 3.88 −− 0.00 −11.07
         July p 24.08 30.55 − 6.48 + 0.17 − + 6.63 − 0.01 −17.54
1The cash transactions recorded as cash receipts and cash expenditure actions on behalf of the European Communities (which are not entered in
comprise payments into and out of the accounts carried by the Bundesbank the Federal budget) are conducted through the accounts of the Federalfor the Federal Government. The cash receipts and cash expenditure differ Government. —2Including small amounts of special transactions. —3Cash
from those shown in the official financial statistics primarily because these balance = column (a) less (b) less (c) less (d) less (e). —4Deposits at the
transactions are recorded not at the time they are entered in the budgetary Bundesbank and in the money market. accounts but at the time of the actual inflow or outflow, and because trans-
58*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
12. Receipts, expenditure and assets of the wage and
salary earners ’ pension insurance funds
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999, euro million
Receipts  1 Expenditure  1 Assets  5 
of which of which Memor-
Balance Mort- andum
Pen- of receipts gage item
Pension sioners ’ and and Adminis-
Contri- Federal pay- health expend- other Real trative
Period Total butions  2 payments Total ments  3 insurance  4 iture Total Deposits  6 Securities loans  7 estate assets
Western Germany
1993 243,119 196,357 41,837 248,866 207,633 13,064 −5,747 39,786 29,957 8,499 1,100 229 6,297
1994 267,265 215,758 48,108 266,443 220,744 14,375 + 822 33,578 24,194 8,170 909 305 6,8901995 276,302 225,324 47,979 279,226 230,222 15,923 −2,924 21,756 16,801 3,948 746 262 7,800
1996  
8 288,761 236,036 50,478 288,716 237,464 16,809 + 45 14,456 9,608 2,119 2,500 229 8,863
1997 305,606 248,463 54,896 295,635 246,011 17,892 + 9,971 14,659 10,179 1,878 2,372 230 9,2611998 317,340 250,063 65,191 304,155 254,783 18,636 + 13,185 18,194 14,201 1,493 2,274 226 9,573
1999  
p 169,124 128,191 39,884 159,819 134,408 9,910 + 9,305 13,623 11,559 824 1,127 114 4,904
1999         2nd qtr 41,190 31,230 9,711 39,086 33,192 2,438 + 2,103 8,136 5,854 993 1,145 144 4,850
         3rd qtr 42,519 31,671 10,608 40,166 33,939 2,489 + 2,353 8,950 6,788 893 1,135 134 4,911         4th qtr 46,089 35,130 10,666 40,578 33,972 2,527 + 5,512 13,623 11,559 824 1,127 114 4,904
2000         1st qtr 41,290 30,016 10,987 40,856 34,574 2,531 + 434 12,612 9,817 1,538 1,126 130 4,899
         2nd qtr 42,199 30,986 10,910 40,428 34,516 2,532 + 1,772 11,636 8,980 1,409 1,119 128 4,936
Eastern Germany
1993 53,241 36,051 10,834 55,166 45,287 2,834 −1,925 . . . . . .
1994 63,001 40,904 13,783 65,811 53,136 3,376 −2,810 . . . . . .
1995 70,774 44,970 16,408 77,780 63,812 4,362 −7,006 . . . . . .
1996 74,790 46,580 17,910 83,830 68,316 4,851 −9,040 . . . . . .
1997 79,351 48,939 20,065 87,424 70,500 5,388 −8,073 . . . . . .
1998 81,072 47,764 23,564 90,863 73,040 5,757 −9,791 . . . . . .
1999  p 43,214 24,015 14,744 47,641 38,339 3,040 −4,426 . . . . . .
1999         2nd qtr 10,383 5,935 3,680 11,713 9,473 748 −1,330 . . . . . .
         3rd qtr 10,532 5,901 3,608 12,040 9,719 767 −1,508 . . . . . .
         4th qtr 11,523 6,398 3,927 12,057 9,713 772 − 534 . . . . . .
2000         1st qtr 10,477 5,434 3,838 12,174 9,846 776 −1,697 . . . . . .
         2nd qtr 10,054 5,564 3,865 12,241 9,839 774 −2,187 . . . . . .
Source: Federal Minister of Labour and Social Affairs and Association of including nursing insurance scheme for pensioners . —5Largely
German Pension Insurance Funds. —1The annual figures differ from the corresponds to fluctuation reserves. Level at the end of the year or quarter.
sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. From 1993 From 1992 figures for the whole of Germany. —6Including cash
including financial compensation payments. —2Including contributions for resources. —7Excluding loans to other social security funds; including
recipients of public financial benefits. —3Payments by pension insurance participating interests. —8Excluding receipts arising from the higher
funds to health insurance institutions under section 50 of the Social Security valuation of participating interests. Code V have been deducted from pension payments. —4From 1995
13. Receipts and expenditure of the Federal Labour Office
    
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999, euro million
Receipts Expenditure
Subsidies
of which of which or work-
ing fund
Promotion of vocational Promo- Balance credits
Unemployment relief  3,  4 training  4,  5 tion of of receipts of the
winter and Federal
Contri- Western Eastern Western Eastern con- expend- Govern-
Period Total  1 butions Levies  2 Total Total Germany Germany Total Germany Germany struction iture ment
Germany
1993 85,109 79,895 1,829 109,536 48,005 34,149 13,856 36,891 15,895 20,996 1,919 −24,426 24,419
1994 89,658 81,536 3,822 99,863 48,342 35,163 13,179 31,273 14,382 16,891 1,822 −10,205 10,142
1995 90,211 84,354 2,957 97,103 49,254 36,161 13,094 34,441 16,745 17,696 1,586 −6,892 6,887
1996 91,825 85,073 3,346 105,588 57,123 40,186 16,938 36,478 18,368 18,111 903 −13,763 13,756
1997 93,149 85,793 2,959 102,723 60,273 40,309 19,964 31,418 16,117 15,301 443 −9,574 9,574
1998 91,088 86,165 2,868 98,852 53,483 35,128 18,355 34,279 16,784 17,496 471 −7,764 7,719
1999 47,954 45,141 1,467 51,694 25,177 16,604 8,573 20,558 10,480 10,078 279 −3,740 3,739
1999         2nd qtr 11,792 10,917 391 13,224 6,578 4,334 2,244 5,227 2,661 2,566 94 −1,432 1,208
         3rd qtr 11,908 11,247 401 12,430 5,964 3,899 2,064 5,043 2,588 2,455 7 − 521 443
         4th qtr 13,466 12,578 577 13,509 6,132 4,014 2,118 5,721 2,987 2,734 3 − 43 −2,098
2000         1st qtr 11,304 10,788 85 12,062 6,094 3,998 2,096 4,414 2,265 2,149 177 − 758 3,083
         2nd qtr 12,113 11,086 334 12,445 6,052 3,894 2,158 4,923 2,560 2,362 106 − 332 491
Source: Federal Labour Office. —1Excluding Federal Government liquidity replacement for the unemployment benefits. —4Including contributions to
assistance. —2Levies to promote winter construction and to pay bank- the statutory health insurance, and to the pension insurance funds. —
ruptcy compensation to employees. —3Unemployment benefits, 5Vocational training, measures to foster the commencement of work,
short-time-working benefits. Including the integration allowance paid to rehabilitation and job creation measures. resettlers from eastern Europe and emigrants from the GDR as a
59*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
IX. Economic conditions
  
1. Origin and expenditure of domestic product, distribution of national income    Germany
    
  1993   1994   1995   1996 p   1997 p   1998 p   1999 p   1999 p   1996 p   1997 p   1998 p   1999 p   1999 p 
Euro Change from % of
Item DM billion billion previous year in % total
at  1995  prices
I.Origin of domestic product
Producing sector(excluding construction) 812.3 833.2 837.8 828.5 848.7 883.1 891.5 455.8 −1.1 2.4 4.0 1.0 23.9
Construction 216.0 228.5 223.0 215.4 211.4 200.6 198.5 101.5 −3.4 −1.9 −5.1 −1.0 5.3
Distribution, catering trade,and transportation  
1 565.4 574.2 585.8 588.8 603.1 623.4 640.9 327.7 0.5 2.4 3.4 2.8 17.2
Financing, rents and corporateservices  
2 851.1 867.5 911.4 954.6 989.6 1,030.1 1,066.9 545.5 4.7 3.7 4.1 3.6 28.6
Public and private services  3 686.8 700.7 713.6 718.6 719.0 722.8 723.9 370.1 0.7 0.1 0.5 0.1 19.4
All economic sectors 3,174.1 3,244.3 3,313.7 3,351.1 3,416.8 3,506.3 3,569.0 1,824.8 1.1 2.0 2.6 1.8 95.6
Memo item: Enterprise sector 2,731.2 2,795.6 2,863.6 2,900.1 2,970.0 3,061.3 3,126.0 1,598.3 1.3 2.4 3.1 2.1 83.8
Economic sectors, adjusted  4 3,048.0 3,112.1 3,176.6 3,202.2 3,254.5 3,329.2 3,376.0 1,726.1 0.8 1.6 2.3 1.4 90.5
Gross domestic product 3,383.8 3,463.2 3,523.0 3,549.6 3,601.1 3,678.6 3,732.3 1,908.3 0.8 1.5 2.2 1.5 100
II.Expenditure of domestic product
Private consumption  5 1,942.0 1,961.3 2,001.6 2,017.3 2,032.2 2,078.8 2,122.7 1,085.3 0.8 0.7 2.3 2.1 56.9
Government consumption 671.1 687.3 697.8 712.8 704.7 708.0 709.5 362.7 2.1 −1.1 0.5 0.2 19.0
Machinery and equipment 256.2 251.3 253.9 257.1 265.9 290.3 305.0 156.0 1.2 3.4 9.2 5.1 8.2Construction 482.1 515.5 506.0 491.5 484.4 465.7 465.7 238.1 −2.9 −1.4 −3.9 0.0 12.5
Other investment  
6 26.8 29.0 30.6 33.4 35.3 40.7 44.5 22.8 8.9 5.9 15.1 9.4 1.2
Changes in stocks  7 −13.1 −3.9 8.1 −5.1 8.7 34.7 51.2 26.2 . . . . 1.4
Domestic expenditure 3,365.1 3,440.5 3,498.1 3,507.0 3,531.3 3,618.1 3,698.6 1,891.0 0.3 0.7 2.5 2.2 99.1
Foreign balance 18.7 22.7 25.0 42.6 69.8 60.5 33.7 17.2 . . . . 0.9
Exports 758.0 815.7 862.3 906.4 1,005.3 1,075.6 1,121.1 573.2 5.1 10.9 7.0 4.2 30.0Imports 739.4 793.0 837.4 863.8 935.6 1,015.0 1,087.4 556.0 3.2 8.3 8.5 7.1 29.1
Gross domestic product 3,383.8 3,463.2 3,523.0 3,549.6 3,601.1 3,678.6 3,732.3 1,908.3 0.8 1.5 2.2 1.5 100
at  current  prices
III.Expenditure of domestic product
Private consumption  5 1,857.5 1,925.1 2,001.6 2,055.4 2,106.8 2,174.7 2,238.8 1,144.7 2.7 2.5 3.2 2.9 57.7
Government consumption 643.0 669.2 697.8 717.5 714.2 719.4 736.2 376.4 2.8 −0.5 0.7 2.3 19.0
Machinery and equipment 254.8 250.9 253.9 258.5 270.0 297.0 310.7 158.9 1.8 4.5 10.0 4.6 8.0Construction 462.8 505.1 506.0 488.0 479.8 460.7 458.2 234.3 −3.6 −1.7 −4.0 −0.5 11.8
Other investment  
6 27.6 29.3 30.6 32.9 35.2 39.5 42.8 21.9 7.3 6.9 12.3 8.4 1.1
Changes in stocks  7 −17.3 1.9 8.1 −5.6 7.1 29.6 47.1 24.1 . . . . 1.2
Domestic expenditure 3,228.4 3,381.5 3,498.1 3,546.7 3,613.0 3,720.9 3,833.8 1,960.2 1.4 1.9 3.0 3.0 98.9
Foreign balance 7.0 13.0 25.0 39.3 53.6 63.3 43.3 22.1 . . . . 1.1
Exports 736.5 800.1 862.3 908.8 1,020.9 1,092.1 1,132.1 578.9 5.4 12.3 7.0 3.7 29.2Imports 729.5 787.1 837.4 869.5 967.3 1,028.9 1,088.9 556.7 3.8 11.2 6.4 5.8 28.1
Gross domestic product 3,235.4 3,394.4 3,523.0 3,586.0 3,666.6 3,784.2 3,877.1 1,982.3 1.8 2.2 3.2 2.5 100
IV.Prices (1995=100)
Private consumption 95.6 98.2 100.0 101.9 103.7 104.6 105.5 . 1.9 1.7 0.9 0.8 .Gross domestic product 95.6 98.0 100.0 101.0 101.8 102.9 103.9 . 1.0 0.8 1.0 1.0 .Terms of trade 98.5 98.8 100.0 99.6 98.2 100.2 100.8 . −0.4 −1.4 2.0 0.7 .
V.Distribution of national income
Wages and salaries 1,829.5 1,874.7 1,941.4 1,965.7 1,971.2 2,001.8 2,044.6 1,045.4 1.3 0.3 1.6 2.1 71.4Entrepreneurial and propertyincome 626.7 673.2 715.9 735.9 780.3 821.4 818.6 418.6 2.8 6.0 5.3 −0.3 28.6
National income 2,456.2 2,547.9 2,657.3 2,701.6 2,751.5 2,823.2 2,863.3 1,464.0 1.7 1.8 2.6 1.4 100
Memo item: Gross national
income 3,248.9 3,380.6 3,504.4 3,570.1 3,649.4 3,754.1 3,839.5 1,963.1 1.9 2.2 2.9 2.3 .(Gross nat. product)
Source: Federal Statistical Office. —1Including telecommunications. —2Fi- dies on products). —5Including private non-commercial organisations. —
nancial intermediation, real estate activities, rents and corporate services. — 6Intangible fixed capital formation (inter alia, EDP software, copyrights)
3Including care-at-home services. —4Gross value added after deduction of and economically useful animals and plants. —7Including net increase in
assumed bank charges, but excluding taxes on products (offset against subsi- valuables. 
60*IX. Economic conditions

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
  IX.  Economic  conditions
  
2.  Output in the producing sector         
    
Adjusted for working-day variations
of which:Manufacturing sector
Producing sector, Intermediate Capital goods Durable consumer Other consumer
total Total goods industries  
1 industries goods industries goods industries Construction
Change Change Change Change Change Change Change
from from from from from from fromprevious previous previous previous previous previous previousyear year year year year year year
Period in % in % in % in % in % in % in %
1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 
Germany   
    
1996 99.8 −0.2 100.4 + 0.4 99.8 −0.2 101.0 + 1.0 101.1 + 1.1 100.6 + 0.6 93.5 −6.7
1997 102.5 + 2.7 104.4 + 4.0 105.8 + 6.0 105.2 + 4.2 101.9 + 0.8 100.9 + 0.3 89.6 −4.2
1998 106.0 + 3.4 109.5 + 4.9 110.6 + 4.5 113.2 + 7.6 108.3 + 6.3 100.6 −0.3 86.8 −3.1
1999 107.6 + 1.5 111.3 + 1.6 113.5 + 2.6 113.2 + 0.0 112.3 + 3.7 101.9 + 1.3 87.5 + 0.8
    
1999         June 112.2 + 2.0 116.2 + 2.0 117.5 + 2.1 121.4 + 1.2 118.4 + 6.9 101.9 + 1.0 100.6 + 1.2
         July 108.2 −0.5 111.1 −0.4 114.9 + 1.1 112.8 −2.8 102.5 −2.2 102.1 + 0.9 100.2 −0.5
         Aug. 99.8 + 3.1 102.0 + 3.9 107.0 + 4.0 100.6 + 2.9 89.6 + 10.5 97.8 + 2.7 91.5 + 0.8         Sep. 116.4 + 2.7 120.7 + 3.5 122.4 + 4.7 125.2 + 2.7 124.0 + 2.4 106.7 + 2.3 104.1 + 0.8
         Oct. 116.1 + 2.3 120.0 + 3.1 121.4 + 3.4 120.8 + 2.3 127.0 + 2.3 110.6 + 3.6 100.8 + 0.7
         Nov. 116.7 + 4.1 121.2 + 5.0 122.1 + 7.2 124.0 + 2.7 128.5 + 6.1 110.5 + 3.7 92.5 + 1.1         Dec. 104.7 + 4.4 109.7 + 4.5 105.7 + 9.9 125.7 −0.6 99.1 + 4.3 98.0 + 1.9 67.6 + 7.3
2000         Jan. 98.0 + 2.3 102.6 + 3.8 108.3 + 3.9 98.1 + 7.0 103.7 + 3.4 95.1 −1.8 59.3 −6.6
         Feb. 105.0 + 8.4 111.1 + 8.5 114.3 + 9.8 111.4 + 9.9 121.1 + 8.7 96.9 + 2.3 68.5 + 22.8         Mar.
2 118.8 + 4.7 125.9 + 6.8 127.7 + 6.6 132.2 + 10.8 133.7 + 7.6 106.6 −0.6 2 80.5 −8.2
         Apr.  px 2 110.4 + 3.8 115.9 + 6.2 117.1 + 4.2 120.3 + 10.2 121.6 + 7.9 102.4 + 4.4 2 84.9 −9.3
         May  px 3 2 113.5 + 9.1 118.8 + 11.1 121.9 + 10.7 121.7 + 14.7 124.6 + 14.0 103.3 + 5.4 2 90.9 −1.3
         June  px 3 2 114.8 + 2.3 121.9 + 4.9 122.0 + 3.8 131.6 + 8.4 122.4 + 3.4 105.2 + 3.2 2 87.8 −12.7
Western  Germany   
    
1996 99.5 −0.5 100.0 + 0.0 99.5 −0.5 100.8 + 0.7 100.8 + 0.8 99.7 −0.3 92.5 −7.7
1997 102.2 + 2.7 103.8 + 3.8 105.2 + 5.7 104.9 + 4.1 101.3 + 0.5 99.4 −0.3 88.9 −3.9
1998 105.8 + 3.5 108.5 + 4.5 109.4 + 4.0 112.9 + 7.6 107.2 + 5.8 99.0 −0.4 87.4 −1.7
1999 106.9 + 1.0 109.8 + 1.2 111.6 + 2.0 112.3 −0.5 110.8 + 3.4 99.9 + 0.9 88.4 + 1.1
    
1999         June 111.2 + 1.6 114.5 + 1.6 115.3 + 1.4 120.8 + 0.8 116.9 + 6.5 99.7 + 0.8 101.4 + 1.3
         July 107.3 −0.9 109.6 −0.8 112.8 + 0.6 112.7 −2.8 100.9 −2.9 100.1 + 0.2 101.0 −0.4
         Aug. 98.7 + 2.9 100.4 + 3.6 105.3 + 3.9 99.1 + 2.1 88.6 + 11.0 96.3 + 2.6 91.1 + 1.7         Sep. 115.6 + 2.6 119.0 + 3.2 120.3 + 4.4 124.3 + 2.6 122.4 + 2.0 104.6 + 1.9 105.6 + 1.6
         Oct. 115.3 + 2.0 118.1 + 2.6 119.1 + 2.7 120.0 + 2.1 125.5 + 1.9 108.3 + 3.1 102.5 + 1.6
         Nov. 115.8 + 3.8 119.2 + 4.5 119.6 + 6.4 122.7 + 2.1 126.8 + 5.9 108.0 + 3.0 93.3 + 1.9         Dec. 104.2 + 3.8 107.9 + 3.8 103.8 + 9.1 124.4 −1.7 97.7 + 4.5 95.6 + 1.6 68.2 + 7.7
2000         Jan. 97.9 + 2.6 101.1 + 3.5 106.2 + 3.2 97.3 + 7.3 102.6 + 4.2 93.4 −2.2 60.9 −3.8
         Feb. 104.9 + 8.0 109.4 + 7.7 112.0 + 8.8 110.5 + 9.3 119.7 + 8.6 95.2 + 1.8 71.4 + 26.6         Mar.
2 118.8 + 4.9 124.3 + 6.5 125.1 + 5.7 132.0 + 11.6 132.1 + 7.6 104.3 −1.0 2 84.0 −5.8
         Apr.  px 2 110.0 + 4.0 114.0 + 5.8 114.5 + 3.4 119.4 + 9.9 120.0 + 7.7 100.2 + 4.3 2 89.0 −6.6
         May  px 3 2 113.0 + 9.4 116.9 + 10.9 119.0 + 9.8 121.3 + 15.2 123.2 + 13.9 100.8 + 5.1 2 94.8 + 1.1
         June  px 3 2 114.5 + 3.0 120.0 + 4.8 119.2 + 3.4 131.1 + 8.5 120.8 + 3.3 103.2 + 3.5 2 90.9 −10.4
Eastern  Germany   
    
1996 102.0 + 2.0 105.9 + 5.9 104.4 + 4.3 103.9 + 3.9 108.7 + 8.6 110.5 + 10.4 96.8 −3.3
1997 105.6 + 3.5 115.8 + 9.3 116.5 + 11.6 110.9 + 6.7 121.4 + 11.7 118.9 + 7.6 92.2 −4.8
1998 109.0 + 3.2 127.1 + 9.8 133.4 + 14.5 119.9 + 8.1 142.3 + 17.2 120.5 + 1.3 84.9 −7.9
1999 114.4 + 5.0 137.2 + 7.9 146.4 + 9.7 128.5 + 7.2 157.9 + 11.0 125.3 + 4.0 84.1 −0.9
    
1999         June 121.3 + 4.7 143.5 + 7.1 156.2 + 9.8 131.1 + 4.3 165.7 + 16.0 128.9 + 2.5 97.4 + 0.5
         July 118.0 + 3.9 137.2 + 6.4 152.8 + 8.9 117.2 −1.3 154.6 + 15.6 127.5 + 7.5 97.4 −1.1
         Aug. 112.2 + 4.1 129.6 + 7.6 136.7 + 5.2 130.4 + 16.7 122.0 + 0.7 116.4 + 2.8 93.1 −2.4
         Sep. 125.6 + 3.7 150.2 + 7.4 160.3 + 9.1 143.3 + 4.4 176.7 + 11.3 133.4 + 6.2 98.7 −2.7
         Oct. 125.1 + 5.0 149.2 + 9.0 162.2 + 13.2 133.3 + 2.1 175.3 + 12.6 137.3 + 6.7 94.8 −2.7
         Nov. 127.0 + 8.4 155.0 + 13.6 164.9 + 16.5 147.1 + 12.4 184.5 + 12.8 139.2 + 8.8 89.7 −1.6
         Dec. 110.3 + 11.8 139.4 + 15.0 139.8 + 20.7 148.4 + 19.0 144.7 + 2.8 127.6 + 3.7 65.4 + 5.7
2000         Jan. 100.9 + 1.6 129.4 + 7.7 145.1 + 13.6 113.2 + 4.5 142.7 −10.0 116.1 + 3.8 53.2 −16.9
         Feb. 107.2 + 14.3 139.4 + 18.0 154.5 + 21.6 127.7 + 20.0 167.4 + 11.3 118.6 + 9.9 57.7 + 7.6         Mar.
2 118.8 + 1.6 154.0 + 9.1 172.4 + 17.7 134.1 −3.2 188.7 + 12.9 135.0 + 4.6 2 67.8 −17.8
         Apr.  px 2 115.7 + 3.2 148.4 + 13.0 161.7 + 13.8 137.1 + 16.1 175.2 + 15.4 131.6 + 7.8 2 70.2 −19.2
         May  px 3 2 119.5 + 7.9 151.7 + 15.9 171.9 + 22.5 128.8 + 7.2 172.6 + 20.4 135.9 + 10.7 2 76.6 −10.7
         June  px 3 2 119.5 −1.5 152.8 + 6.5 171.0 + 9.5 138.1 + 5.3 177.3 + 7.0 130.6 + 1.3 2 76.7 −21.3
Source: Federal Statistical Office.  —1  Excluding electricity and gas supply vance by the Federal Statistical Office by way of estimates to the results of
and excluding mining and quarrying.  —2  Provisional until the adjustment the Quarterly Production Survey for the second quarter (manufacturing
to the figures of the annual overall survey in construction.  —3  Figures in- sector in Germany:  +  0.6%). 
fluenced by the exceptional working-day situation.  —px  Adjusted in ad-
61*  IX.  Economic  conditions

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
 IX. Economic conditions
 
3. Orders received by the manufacturing sector *)  
  
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Manufacturing
 Durable and non-durable
Intermediate goods consumer goods
Total Domestic orders Foreign orders industries industries Capital goods industries
Change Change Change Change Change Change
from from from from from fromprevious previous previous previous previous previousyear year year year year year
Period 1995=100 in % 1995=100 in % 1995=100 in % 1995=100 in % 1995=100 in % 1995=100 in %
Germany  
  
1996 99.9 − 0.1 96.8 − 3.2 105.5 + 5.4 98.2 − 1.9 101.6 + 1.5 101.4 + 1.4
1997 107.1 + 7.2 99.0 + 2.3 121.6 + 15.3 107.1 + 9.1 108.8 + 7.1 103.4 + 2.01998 110.9 + 3.5 102.9 + 3.9 125.4 + 3.1 108.6 + 1.4 116.1 + 6.7 107.0 + 3.51999 113.3 + 2.2 102.7 − 0.2 132.3 + 5.5 110.8 + 2.0 117.6 + 1.3 111.3 + 4.0
 
1999         June 115.2 + 0.9 104.7 + 0.5 134.0 + 1.2 111.7 − 1.7 124.3 + 3.2 107.1 + 3.6
         July 113.5 + 1.3 103.9 − 2.0 130.6 + 6.4 113.3 + 3.8 116.1 − 2.4 108.6 + 2.7
         Aug. 109.0 + 8.9 99.4 + 3.3 126.3 + 17.8 104.7 + 6.0 114.4 + 12.3 110.0 + 9.6         Sep. 123.2 + 4.8 109.6 − 0.3 148.0 + 12.5 118.4 + 6.2 130.4 + 3.3 121.9 + 4.3
         Oct. 120.3 + 8.9 109.3 + 6.4 139.9 + 12.5 119.3 + 10.8 123.9 + 8.1 115.7 + 5.7
         Nov. 121.0 + 12.8 109.0 + 7.2 142.7 + 21.3 120.4 + 14.3 125.2 + 12.8 114.3 + 8.5         Dec. 112.2 + 9.9 97.7 + 6.8 138.1 + 13.8 109.1 + 13.2 122.4 + 7.7 100.1 + 5.7
2000         Jan. 113.1 + 7.7 99.4 + 2.2 137.9 + 16.1 113.6 + 8.7 116.6 + 10.9 104.8 − 1.2
         Feb. 121.6 + 14.1 107.4 + 11.5 146.9 + 17.9 118.3 + 17.1 124.7 + 13.3 124.0 + 9.1         Mar. 137.7 + 15.6 118.3 + 7.9 172.6 + 26.8 132.5 + 14.7 145.9 + 21.8 135.1 + 6.1
         Apr. 126.3 + 15.9 110.7 + 12.2 154.6 + 21.4 125.3 + 17.3 133.3 + 19.0 115.5 + 6.3
         May 124.6 + 18.4 110.0 + 13.8 151.0 + 25.1 125.8 + 20.2 129.5 + 20.2 111.7 + 9.4         June  
p 134.2 + 16.5 116.0 + 10.8 166.8 + 24.5 131.6 + 17.8 148.6 + 19.5 112.1 + 4.7
Western Germany  
  
1996 100.2 + 0.1 97.0 − 3.1 105.7 + 5.6 97.9 − 2.2 102.8 + 2.7 101.3 + 1.3
1997 107.1 + 6.9 98.8 + 1.9 121.2 + 14.7 106.4 + 8.7 110.0 + 7.0 103.1 + 1.81998 110.2 + 2.9 102.3 + 3.5 123.5 + 1.9 107.2 + 0.8 116.4 + 5.8 106.0 + 2.81999 112.2 + 1.8 101.8 − 0.5 130.2 + 5.4 108.9 + 1.6 117.9 + 1.3 110.2 + 4.0
 
1999         June 113.9 + 0.4 103.7 + 0.6 131.5 + 0.4 109.5 − 2.3 124.3 + 2.6 105.6 + 3.4
         July 112.5 + 0.9 102.7 − 2.8 129.1 + 6.3 111.2 + 3.4 116.8 − 3.1 107.5 + 2.8
         Aug. 107.8 + 9.2 98.7 + 3.2 123.6 + 18.5 101.9 + 4.7 115.2 + 14.6 109.6 + 10.4         Sep. 122.5 + 4.7 108.5 − 0.8 146.4 + 12.8 116.3 + 6.3 131.8 + 3.0 120.6 + 4.2
         Oct. 119.2 + 9.5 108.2 + 6.0 137.9 + 14.6 117.2 + 10.3 124.5 + 10.4 114.1 + 5.6
         Nov. 118.9 + 12.0 107.5 + 6.8 138.6 + 19.8 118.4 + 14.2 123.0 + 10.8 112.3 + 8.4         Dec. 111.2 + 10.0 97.0 + 7.2 135.7 + 14.2 107.5 + 12.9 122.8 + 8.8 99.0 + 6.0
2000         Jan. 112.4 + 8.2 98.4 + 2.1 136.3 + 16.8 111.6 + 8.3 117.8 + 12.6 104.0 − 0.8
         Feb. 120.6 + 13.8 106.5 + 11.1 144.7 + 17.5 116.0 + 16.6 125.7 + 13.1 122.8 + 8.7         Mar. 136.2 + 15.1 117.0 + 7.1 168.8 + 26.0 129.9 + 14.1 146.1 + 21.6 133.5 + 5.4
         Apr. 124.6 + 15.2 108.5 + 10.9 152.1 + 20.7 122.9 + 16.9 132.7 + 17.7 113.6 + 5.6
         May 123.2 + 17.9 108.5 + 13.1 148.1 + 24.2 123.0 + 19.5 130.3 + 20.2 109.8 + 8.7         June  
p 132.4 + 16.2 114.6 + 10.5 162.9 + 23.9 129.2 + 18.0 148.1 + 19.1 110.3 + 4.5
Eastern Germany  
  
1996 95.9 − 3.9 95.3 − 4.5 98.5 − 1.4 103.5 + 3.5 84.7 −15.0 105.4 + 5.5
1997 107.5 + 12.1 101.6 + 6.6 137.3 + 39.4 120.2 + 16.1 91.9 + 8.5 112.8 + 7.01998 124.1 + 15.4 109.7 + 8.0 196.3 + 43.0 132.9 + 10.6 112.0 + 21.9 132.4 + 17.41999 130.1 + 4.8 114.0 + 3.9 210.1 + 7.0 142.8 + 7.4 112.9 + 0.8 140.3 + 6.0
 
1999         June 136.8 + 7.0 118.7 + 1.1 226.9 + 25.6 147.4 + 4.2 123.1 + 11.0 143.2 + 6.0
         July 129.4 + 8.2 118.2 + 7.7 184.9 + 9.7 149.4 + 10.4 106.2 + 8.1 133.6 + 0.6
         Aug. 127.1 + 3.6 107.3 + 3.1 226.1 + 4.7 150.3 + 22.6 103.9 −14.8 118.2 − 6.3
         Sep. 136.2 + 6.6 122.4 + 6.2 203.9 + 6.8 152.9 + 3.8 111.8 + 10.9 156.1 + 6.1
         Oct. 139.0 + 0.7 124.2 + 12.3 212.5 −22.9 154.3 + 15.1 116.9 −16.4 156.5 + 7.0
         Nov. 156.3 + 23.9 128.4 + 12.3 295.9 + 60.1 153.6 + 14.5 157.1 + 41.3 163.2 + 11.4         Dec. 127.4 + 3.7 107.1 + 4.5 229.7 + 2.5 136.5 + 16.4 116.7 − 7.9 130.5 + 0.5
2000         Jan. 125.4 + 1.2 111.5 + 2.5 194.6 − 2.3 148.2 + 13.2 100.6 − 9.7 123.5 −12.3
         Feb. 137.4 + 20.2 119.0 + 16.6 229.9 + 31.7 157.6 + 24.5 110.0 + 15.9 154.7 + 15.9         Mar. 162.6 + 24.1 132.6 + 16.0 313.5 + 46.3 176.9 + 23.7 143.3 + 25.2 174.8 + 23.0
         Apr. 156.6 + 29.1 138.3 + 25.5 247.3 + 39.7 166.0 + 23.0 143.6 + 41.1 165.7 + 21.3
         May 149.7 + 26.6 128.3 + 20.5 256.6 + 45.8 176.6 + 31.6 117.3 + 20.9 158.9 + 22.7         June  
p 163.1 + 19.2 133.5 + 12.5 311.7 + 37.4 173.8 + 17.9 153.4 + 24.6 156.2 + 9.1
Source  of unadjusted figures:  Federal Statistical Office.  —*  Excluding activity units; figures excluding value-added tax.  —o  Bundesbank cal-
manufacture of food products, beverages and tobacco; results for kinds of culation. 
62* IX. Economic conditions

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
 IX. Economic conditions
 
4. Orders received by construction *   
  
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Germany Western Germany Eastern Germany
Housing Public Housing Public Housing Public Industrial Industrial Industrial
con- construc- construc- con- construc- construc- con- construc- construc-
Total struction tion  1 tion Total struction tion  1 tion Total struction tion  1 tion
 Change Change Change
 from from from
 previous previous previous
 year year year
Period 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 in % 1995 = 100 in % 1995 = 100 in %
1996 92.1 −7.8 101.3 89.1 88.5 90.9 −9.0 97.6 90.8 86.2 94.8 −5.2 108.8 85.0 95.0
1997 84.4 −8.4 87.4 81.0 86.2 86.1 −5.3 87.7 85.5 85.7 80.4 −15.2 86.9 70.8 87.7
1998 84.0 −0.5 82.4 79.9 90.1 86.6 + 0.6 83.3 86.7 88.8 77.7 −3.4 80.4 64.6 93.8
1999 82.1 −2.3 78.2 80.3 87.6 87.3 + 0.8 84.0 88.7 88.1 70.0 −9.9 66.2 61.2 86.2
   
1999         May 89.5 + 3.6 84.4 84.6 99.5 94.5 + 5.4 89.2 92.7 100.4 77.6 −1.3 74.7 66.3 96.8
         June 98.5 −0.7 90.3 96.5 107.3 101.7 + 0.3 94.8 102.0 106.3 90.8 −3.1 81.0 84.1 110.0
         July 91.3 −3.6 85.5 83.8 105.0 98.2 + 0.8 93.5 93.8 106.7 75.0 −14.9 69.1 61.4 100.2
         Aug. 85.2 + 0.4 82.2 79.0 95.1 90.3 + 5.4 88.0 88.6 94.0 73.0 −12.0 70.4 57.3 98.0
         Sep. 93.3 −8.6 85.8 90.3 102.8 98.3 −6.2 94.0 100.1 99.2 81.5 −14.9 68.9 68.0 113.0
         Oct. 82.2 −2.6 70.2 83.0 90.5 90.1 + 1.0 80.6 94.8 91.4 63.5 −12.9 49.0 56.3 88.2
         Nov. 65.9 −11.3 63.8 67.6 65.5 69.6 −6.2 72.3 73.8 63.0 57.1 −23.4 46.5 53.6 72.4
         Dec. 71.7 −5.4 68.0 69.9 77.0 77.3 −1.7 77.9 76.5 77.7 58.6 −15.4 47.8 54.6 74.8
2000         Jan. 56.0 −8.5 56.9 60.2 50.3 60.5 −7.9 63.8 66.5 51.2 45.5 −10.3 42.7 45.9 47.6
         Feb. 62.0 −11.2 58.6 68.1 57.3 67.6 −9.6 65.2 76.2 59.4 48.9 −15.8 45.1 49.8 51.3
         Mar. 89.5 −2.2 86.0 87.8 94.3 96.3 −3.1 92.5 96.7 98.6 73.4 + 0.8 72.7 67.4 82.5
         Apr. 79.4 −7.2 73.9 74.6 89.4 85.7 −2.2 79.6 84.5 91.5 64.3 −20.5 62.2 52.3 83.6
         May 82.8 −7.5 70.5 82.4 92.9 90.1 −4.7 77.9 93.6 94.7 65.4 −15.7 55.3 56.7 87.8
Source  of unadjusted figures:  Federal Statistical Office.  —*  Values exclu- parts thereof;  civil engineering".  —o  Bundesbank calculation.  —1  In-
sive of value-added tax.  The figures refer to the economic classifi- cluding the railways and post office. cations  "Site preparation"  and  "Building of complete constructions or
 
 
5. Retail turnover *   
    Germany
  
Retail trade, total of which: By enterprises ’ main product range:
Pharmaceutical
including excluding and medical
goods, cosmetic Clothing, Furniture retail sales of motor vehicles retail sales of motor vehicles
and motorcycles and of and motorcycles and Food, beverages, and toilet footwear and and lightingautomotive fuel of automotive fuel tobacco  
2 articles  2 leather goods  2 equipment  2 Motor vehicles  3 
 Change from  Change from  Change  Change  Change  Change  Change
from from from from from previous year in % previous year in %
previous previous previous previous previous
Period not not year year year year year price- price-
in % in % in % in % in % 1995 = 100 adjusted adjusted  1 1995 = 100 adjusted adjusted  1 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100
1996 101.3 + 1.3 + 0.3 100.3 + 0.3 −0.7 100.0 + 0.0 103.9 + 3.9 99.2 −0.8 98.4 −1.6 105.4 + 5.4
1997 100.9 −0.4 −0.9 99.0 −1.3 −1.8 98.6 −1.4 105.8 + 1.8 97.2 −2.0 95.8 −2.6 109.1 + 3.5
1998 102.7 + 1.8 + 1.6 100.1 + 1.1 + 1.1 99.9 + 1.3 111.9 + 5.8 96.1 −1.1 99.6 + 4.0 115.1 + 5.5
1999 103.8 + 1.1 + 0.8 100.8 + 0.7 + 0.5 100.8 + 0.9 119.9 + 7.1 96.0 −0.1 97.7 −1.9 119.5 + 3.8
 
1998         Dec. 124.2 + 3.7 + 3.7 126.6 + 1.9 + 2.4 121.1 + 3.9 138.3 + 9.1 122.3 −4.5 126.8 + 5.3 118.1 +13.6
1999         Jan. 91.9 −1.8 −1.7 91.8 −1.6 −1.4 91.6 −1.8 115.0 + 9.4 87.8 −3.8 87.0 −2.7 95.8 −0.2
         Feb. 88.5 −1.0 −0.8 86.8 −0.1 + 0.5 90.5 + 1.7 110.8 + 9.8 65.9 −7.6 87.4 −5.2 98.7 −2.0
         Mar. 114.2 + 3.1 + 2.5 107.5 + 6.3 + 6.1 107.6 +10.2 126.9 +12.2 102.9 +13.6 108.6 −6.0 146.4 −5.0
         Apr. 104.8 + 2.8 + 2.6 98.9 −1.8 −1.9 101.8 −2.5 116.3 + 6.7 97.7 −2.3 96.3 + 1.2 132.0 +23.1
         May 100.8 −1.0 −0.9 95.8 −2.4 −2.3 98.6 −2.7 113.4 + 6.6 97.3 −3.4 88.5 −1.4 123.6 + 5.8
         June 102.8 + 5.1 + 5.1 95.9 + 3.5 + 3.7 98.1 + 2.8 119.2 +10.8 88.7 + 8.7 91.4 + 2.0 134.4 +12.0
         July 105.3 + 0.0 −0.1 100.3 −0.5 −0.6 103.3 + 1.4 122.8 + 5.2 97.4 + 2.4 92.2 −4.2 128.7 + 2.2
         Aug. 96.2 + 2.8 + 2.4 93.6 + 1.8 + 1.5 95.1 −0.2 113.5 + 9.8 84.7 + 0.8 84.8 + 1.6 108.5 + 7.7
         Sep. 99.3 −0.2 −0.9 96.4 −1.3 −1.9 95.8 + 0.8 117.7 + 7.1 87.8 −14.1 94.0 −2.0 113.5 + 4.1
         Oct. 106.3 + 0.7 + 0.0 104.9 + 0.8 + 0.2 100.8 −1.3 119.7 + 2.8 113.5 + 3.9 104.9 −3.3 115.3 + 0.9
         Nov. 110.4 + 1.9 + 1.2 109.1 + 2.3 + 1.5 104.5 + 1.8 123.2 + 6.3 105.8 + 0.8 111.4 −0.6 119.5 + 0.9
         Dec. 125.6 + 1.1 + 0.2 128.7 + 1.7 + 0.8 122.4 + 1.1 140.3 + 1.4 122.5 + 0.2 125.4 −1.1 117.0 −0.9
2000         Jan. 91.1 −0.9 −1.8 91.1 −0.8 −1.5 91.3 −0.3 121.3 + 5.5 78.0 −11.2 83.6 −3.9 94.0 −1.9
         Feb. 96.3 + 8.8 + 7.2 93.8 + 8.1 + 6.5 94.4 + 4.3 119.2 + 7.6 78.1 +18.5 96.9 +10.9 109.7 +11.1         Mar. 110.7 −3.1 −4.2 104.7 −2.6 −3.6 107.7 + 0.1 125.8 −0.9 90.8 −11.8 105.1 −3.2 138.4 −5.5
         Apr. 104.4 −0.4 −1.1 101.5 + 2.6 + 2.2 103.7 + 1.9 117.8 + 1.3 103.4 + 5.8 92.5 −3.9 117.7 −10.8
         May 111.9 +11.0 +10.0 106.7 +11.4 +10.6 108.8 +10.3 132.3 +16.7 102.4 + 5.2 96.3 + 8.8 136.0 +10.0         June 100.0 −2.7 −3.8 95.6 −0.3 −1.3 101.4 + 3.4 121.7 + 2.1 82.3 −7.2 83.4 −8.8 119.4 −11.2
Source: Federal Statistical Office.  —*  Excluding value-added tax; figures 3   Including motor vehicle parts and accessories. 
from 1999 provisional.  —1  At 1995 prices.  —2  Retail sales in stores.  —
63* IX. Economic conditions

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
 IX. Economic conditions
 
6. Labour market * 
  
 
Persons in
Employed  1,2 Employees  1 employment  3 Unemployed
Persons
Mining employed Personsand under under-manu- employ- goingfactur- Short- ment pro- Change vocational
Change from Change ing Con- time motion further from Unem-previous year from sector workers training previous ploy- schemes  
5 struction  4 
previous year, ment Vacancies,
Thou- Thou- Thou- year Thou- thou- rate  6 thou-
Period sands in % sands sands in % Thousands sands sands in % sands
Germany  
  
1997 35,868 −0.8 −288 31,949 −1.1 6,316 8 1,225 183 302 431 4,384 + 419 11.4 337
1998 35,996 + 0.4 + 128 32,001 + 0.2 7 6,400 1,159 115 385 9 343 4,279 −105 11.1 422
1999 36,113 + 0.3 + 117 32,100 + 0.3 6,370 1,111 119 430 358 4,099 −180 10.5 456
1999         July 36,242 + 0.3 + 98 6,374 1,133 107 422 344 4,027 −107 10.3 482
         Aug. 36,364 + 0.1 + 37 32,367 + 0.1 6,400 1,140 88 407 329 4,024 − 72 10.3 479
         Sep. 36,528 −0.1 − 48 6,409 1,138 86 390 342 3,943 − 22 10.1 458
         Oct. 36,570 −0.2 − 78 6,386 1,134 90 380 351 3,883 − 8 9.9 431
         Nov. 36,447 −0.2 − 61 32,386 −0.2 6,380 1,124 90 372 346 3,901 − 45 10.0 412
         Dec. 36,189 −0.1 − 20 6,350 1,095 85 358 324 4,047 −150 10.3 402
2000         Jan. 35,545 + 0.1 + 44 6,321 1,028 101 327 323 4,293 −162 11.0 438
         Feb. 35,621 + 0.2 + 73 31,658 + 0.2 6,322 1,006 121 319 332 4,277 −188 10.9 498
         Mar. 35,846 + 0.2 + 76 6,331 p 1,020 126 312 345 4,141 −148 10.6 536
         Apr. 36,047 + 0.3 + 93 6,333 p 1,030 107 306 350 3,986 −159 10 9.8 560
         May o 36,215 o + 0.4 o + 147 ... ... 6,343 p 1,039 97 309 363 3,788 −210 9.3 567
         June ... ... ... 6,361 ... 81 314 356 3,724 −214 9.1 560
         July ... ... ... ... ... 66 320 332 3,804 −224 9.3 553
Western Germany  
  
1997 . . . . . 5,753 8 836 133 68 248 3,021 + 225 9.8 282
1998 . . . . . 7 5,813 804 81 71 9 193 2,904 −117 9.4 342
1999 . . . . . 5,775 775 92 82 215 2,756 −149 8.8 386
1999         July . . . . . 5,779 788 83 83 210 2,692 −126 8.6 413
         Aug. . . . . . 5,801 794 69 81 202 2,678 −124 8.5 409
         Sep. . . . . . 5,804 794 66 78 207 2,622 −111 8.3 391
         Oct. . . . . . 5,779 789 71 76 211 2,591 −113 8.2 368
         Nov. . . . . . 5,773 784 70 74 208 2,604 −141 8.3 356
         Dec. . . . . . 5,746 768 66 70 195 2,690 −195 8.6 354
2000         Jan. . . . . . 5,720 727 77 69 194 2,827 −198 9.0 388
         Feb. . . . . . 5,720 717 89 69 201 2,797 −226 8.9 439
         Mar. . . . . . 5,727 p 730 90 68 209 2,691 −206 8.6 467
         Apr. . . . . . 5,727 p 738 74 69 211 2,586 −214 10 7.9 489
         May . . . . . 5,735 p 743 68 70 219 2,459 −236 7.5 497
         June . . . . . 5,752 ... 56 71 212 2,427 −227 7.4 491
         July . . . . . ... ... 45 72 198 2,466 −226 7.5 488
Eastern Germany  
  
1997 . . . . . 564 8 389 49 235 184 1,364 + 195 18.1 56
1998 . . . . . 7 586 355 34 314 9 149 1,375 + 11 18.2 79
1999 . . . . . 595 336 27 348 143 1,344 − 31 17.6 70
1999         July . . . . . 595 345 24 338 134 1,335 + 19 17.4 69
         Aug. . . . . . 599 346 20 327 127 1,346 + 52 17.6 70         Sep. . . . . . 604 345 21 313 134 1,321 + 89 17.2 67
         Oct. . . . . . 607 345 19 304 139 1,293 + 105 16.9 63
         Nov. . . . . . 607 340 19 299 139 1,297 + 96 16.9 55         Dec. . . . . . 604 327 19 287 129 1,357 + 45 17.7 48
2000         Jan. . . . . . 602 301 24 259 129 1,467 + 37 19.1 51
         Feb. . . . . . 602 289 32 250 131 1,480 + 38 19.3 59         Mar. . . . . . 604
p 290 36 243 136 1,450 + 59 18.9 69
         Apr. . . . . . 606 p 292 33 236 138 1,401 + 55 10 17.8 71
         May . . . . . 607 p 295 29 239 144 1,329 + 26 16.9 70
         June . . . . . 609 ... 26 243 144 1,298 + 13 16.5 69
         July . . . . . ... ... 22 248 134 1,337 + 2 17.0 65
Source: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Labour Office.  —*  Monthly fig- measures (SAM).  —6Relative to the total civilian labour force.  —7From
ures: levels at end of month; employed persons and employees: averages; January 1998, figures favourably affected by including, for the first time,short-time workers: levels at mid-month; annual and quarterly figures: aver- enterprises which were identified in the 1995 survey of craft enterpri ses and
ages.  —1Work-place concept;  from 1996 provisional.  —2Annual figures, which are now required to report.  —8From March 1997, figures favour-
calculated by the Bundesbank; deviations from the official figures are due ably affected by including, for the first time, building contractors who w ere
to rounding.  —3Including active proprietors.  —4The figures refer to the identified in the 1995 survey of craft enterprises and are now required to re-
economic classifications ”Site preparation ”and ”Building of complete port.  —9Comparison with previous periods not possible because of the de-
constructions or parts thereof; civil engineering ”.  —5Employees involved letion of payments towards on-the-job training, vocational assistance meas-
in job creation schemes and receiving productive grants towards labour ures and methodological changes in the collection of statistics.  —10From
costs (up to December 1997 approved cases) and (from January 1998 ap- April 2000 calculated on the basis of new labour force figures.  —oFirst pre-
proved, but from April 1998 statistically recorded) structural adjustment liminary estimate. 
64* IX. Economic conditions

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
 IX. Economic conditions
 
7. Prices
 Germany
  
Consumer price index for all households Indices of
foreign trade prices
By region By product group  1 Index of
producer Index of
Other prices of worlddurable Overall industrial Index of marketand non- Services con- products producer pricesdurable excluding struction prices of raw sold on the
Western Eastern consumer house House price domestic of farm materials
Total Germany Germany Food goods rents rents level  
1 market  2 products Exports Imports 3 
Period 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1991 = 100
Index level  
  
1996 101.4 101.3 101.9 100.9 100.5 101.6 103.4 99.8 98.8 91.1 100.0 100.4 108.5
1997 103.3 103.2 104.2 102.1 101.8 104.1 106.3 99.0 99.9 92.5 101.5 104.0 122.81998 104.3 104.1 105.3 103.0 101.9 106.1 108.0 98.8 99.5 87.1 101.4 100.7 97.01999 104.9 104.8 105.7 101.9 102.8 106.4 109.2 98.5 98.5 82.7 100.9 100.2 113.5
 
1998         Sep. 104.4 104.2 105.4 101.9 102.0 106.5 108.3 99.4 85.8 101.1 99.0 93.4
         Oct. 104.2 104.0 105.2 101.4 101.9 106.1 108.3 98.9 84.2 100.7 98.0 87.5
         Nov. 104.2 104.1 105.3 101.7 102.0 105.9 108.3 98.7 98.5 82.7 100.6 97.7 86.2         Dec. 104.3 104.1 105.3 102.1 101.9 106.2 108.4 98.3 86.2 100.4 97.2 80.1
1999         Jan. 104.1 103.9 105.0 103.1 101.6 105.2 108.7 97.8 83.5 100.1 97.1 83.2
         Feb. 104.3 104.1 105.3 103.1 101.4 106.2 108.8 98.5 97.7 84.2 100.2 97.2 83.7         Mar. 104.4 104.3 105.3 103.0 101.6 106.2 108.9 97.7 84.7 100.3 98.0 93.9
         Apr. 104.8 104.6 105.6 103.4 102.8 105.4 109.0 98.3 83.5 100.4 98.7 104.2
         May 104.8 104.7 105.7 103.5 102.5 105.8 109.1 98.4 98.3 84.0 100.5 99.0 106.3         June 104.9 104.8 105.7 102.9 102.7 106.2 109.1 98.4 85.4 100.7 99.3 109.8
         July 105.4 105.3 106.1 101.9 103.1 107.8 109.3 98.7 84.4 100.9 100.2 118.1
         Aug. 105.3 105.3 105.9 100.8 103.2 107.8 109.3 98.5 98.8 83.9 101.0 100.7 121.4         Sep. 105.1 105.0 105.8 100.2 103.4 106.7 109.4 98.9 83.8 101.3 101.7 131.4
         Oct. 105.0 104.9 105.7 99.9 103.5 106.2 109.5 99.1 82.9 101.5 102.1 126.4
         Nov. 105.2 105.1 105.8 100.1 103.7 106.4 109.7 98.7 99.2 84.0 101.7 103.5 138.1         Dec. 105.5 105.5 106.0 100.4 104.0 107.0 109.7 99.4 84.8 102.1 105.2 145.2
2000         Jan. 105.8 105.7 106.4 101.3 104.4 106.9 110.0 99.8 83.7 102.4 106.0 146.5
         Feb. 106.2 106.1 106.9 102.0 104.6 107.6 110.2 98.9 100.0 86.4 102.8 107.8 157.1         Mar. 106.4 106.3 107.0 101.3 105.3 107.4 110.3 100.0 88.5 103.1 108.7 161.5
         Apr. 106.4 106.3 107.0 101.9 104.9 107.7 110.4 100.4 88.3 103.6 108.4 149.9
         May 106.3 106.2 107.0 102.2 105.0 107.0 110.5 99.2 101.0
p 89.0 104.3 110.6 172.1
         June 106.9 106.8 107.5 102.2 105.8 107.9 110.6 101.3 p 90.1 104.3 110.7 170.2
         July 107.4 107.3 107.9 101.8 106.2 109.4 110.7 ... ... ... ... 167.7
Change from previous year in %  
  
1996 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 1.9 + 0.9 + 0.5 + 1.6 + 3.4 − 0.2 − 1.2 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 8.5
1997 + 1.9 + 1.9 + 2.3 + 1.2 + 1.3 + 2.5 + 2.8 − 0.8 + 1.1 + 1.5 + 1.5 + 3.6 + 13.2
1998 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 1.1 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 1.9 + 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 5.8 − 0.1 − 3.2 −21.0
1999 + 0.6 + 0.7 + 0.4 − 1.1 + 0.9 + 0.3 + 1.1 − 0.3 − 1.0 − 5.1 − 0.5 − 0.5 + 17.0
 
1998         Sep. + 0.6 + 0.6 + 0.6 + 0.4 −0.2 + 1.1 + 1.6 − 1.0 − 8.9 − 0.9 − 5.4 −25.3
         Oct. + 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.0 −0.5 + 1.5 + 1.5 − 1.4 − 8.9 − 1.3 − 6.2 −31.0
         Nov. + 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.7 + 0.1 −0.3 + 1.2 + 1.4 + 0.0 − 1.8 −11.3 − 1.4 − 6.1 −29.1
         Dec. + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.2 −0.2 + 0.9 + 1.4 − 1.9 − 7.3 − 1.5 − 6.6 −31.7
1999         Jan. + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.4 −0.2 + 0.3 + 1.3 − 2.3 − 9.4 − 1.9 − 6.6 −24.1
         Feb. + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.4 −0.2 + 0.3 + 1.2 + 0.1 − 2.4 − 9.8 − 1.8 − 6.2 −21.4
         Mar. + 0.4 + 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.0 −0.1 + 0.6 + 1.2 − 2.3 − 8.6 − 1.7 − 4.9 − 9.5
         Apr. + 0.7 + 0.7 + 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.9 + 0.3 + 1.1 − 1.7 − 8.1 − 1.6 − 3.9 − 1.0
         May + 0.4 + 0.5 + 0.3 − 0.8 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 1.1 − 0.7 − 1.7 − 5.4 − 1.3 − 3.0 + 4.4
         June + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.2 − 1.5 + 0.8 + 0.0 + 1.0 − 1.5 − 4.4 − 1.0 − 1.8 + 11.8
         July + 0.6 + 0.7 + 0.4 − 1.6 + 0.9 + 0.6 + 1.1 − 1.0 − 4.3 − 0.7 − 0.4 + 21.6
         Aug. + 0.7 + 0.8 + 0.3 − 1.7 + 1.4 + 0.2 + 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.7 − 3.2 − 0.4 + 0.8 + 28.3
         Sep. + 0.7 + 0.8 + 0.4 − 1.7 + 1.4 + 0.2 + 1.0 − 0.5 − 2.3 + 0.2 + 2.7 + 40.7
         Oct. + 0.8 + 0.9 + 0.5 − 1.5 + 1.6 + 0.1 + 1.1 + 0.2 − 1.5 + 0.8 + 4.2 + 44.5
         Nov. + 1.0 + 1.0 + 0.5 − 1.6 + 1.7 + 0.5 + 1.3 + 0.0 + 0.7 + 1.6 + 1.1 + 5.9 + 60.2
         Dec. + 1.2 + 1.3 + 0.7 − 1.7 + 2.1 + 0.8 + 1.2 + 1.1 − 1.6 + 1.7 + 8.2 + 81.3
2000         Jan. + 1.6 + 1.7 + 1.3 − 1.7 + 2.8 + 1.6 + 1.2 + 2.0 + 0.2 + 2.3 + 9.2 + 76.1
         Feb. + 1.8 + 1.9 + 1.5 − 1.1 + 3.2 + 1.3 + 1.3 + 0.4 + 2.4 + 2.6 + 2.6 + 10.9 + 87.7
         Mar. + 1.9 + 1.9 + 1.6 − 1.7 + 3.6 + 1.1 + 1.3 + 2.4 + 4.5 + 2.8 + 10.9 + 72.0
         Apr. + 1.5 + 1.6 + 1.3 − 1.5 + 2.0 + 2.2 + 1.3 + 2.1 + 5.7 + 3.2 + 9.8 + 43.9
         May + 1.4 + 1.4 + 1.2 − 1.3 + 2.4 + 1.1 + 1.3 + 0.8 + 2.7 p + 6.0 + 3.8 + 11.7 + 61.9
         June + 1.9 + 1.9 + 1.7 − 0.7 + 3.0 + 1.6 + 1.4 + 2.9 p + 5.5 + 3.6 + 11.5 + 55.0
         July + 1.9 + 1.9 + 1.7 − 0.1 + 3.0 + 1.5 + 1.3 ... ... ... ... + 42.0
Source: Federal Statistical Office; for index of world market prices: HWWA provided by the Federal Statistical Office.  —2  Excluding value-added
Institute.  —1  Calculated by the Bundesbank on the basis of figures tax.  — 3  HWWA index of raw material prices, on a Deutsche Mark basis. 
65* IX. Economic conditions

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
IX. Economic conditions
  
8. Households ’ income *
Germany
    
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries  1 salaries  2 Saving  6 ratio  7 benefits received  3 "Mass income"  4 Disposable income  5 
Change Change Change Change Change Change
from from from from from fromprevious previous previous previous previous previous
Period year in % year in % year in % year in % year in % year in % % DM billion DM billion DM billion DM billion DM billion DM billion
1991 1,351.4 . 937.4 . 427.6 . 1,365.1 . 1,915.5 . 250.1 . 13.1
1992 1,463.0 8.3 998.8 6.5 475.4 11.2 1,474.2 8.0 2,051.4 7.1 265.4 6.1 12.91993 1,501.0 2.6 1,028.0 2.9 512.8 7.9 1,540.8 4.5 2,120.8 3.4 263.3 −0.8 12.4
1994 1,522.7 1.4 1,024.1 −0.4 531.3 3.6 1,555.3 0.9 2,178.5 2.7 253.4 −3.7 11.6
1995 1,570.0 3.1 1,030.9 0.7 555.6 4.6 1,586.5 2.0 2,253.7 3.5 252.1 −0.5 11.2
1996  
p 1,585.7 1.0 1,024.5 −0.6 596.8 7.4 1,621.3 2.2 2,304.7 2.3 249.3 −1.1 10.8
1997  p 1,579.8 −0.4 1,004.6 −1.9 611.0 2.4 1,615.6 −0.4 2,351.3 2.0 244.6 −1.9 10.4
1998  p 1,605.8 1.6 1,021.6 1.7 620.2 1.5 1,641.7 1.6 2,416.6 2.8 241.9 −1.1 10.0
1999  p 1,639.9 2.1 1,040.1 1.8 641.5 3.4 1,681.6 2.4 2,469.6 2.2 230.9 −4.5 9.3
1999         1st qtr p 374.7 2.2 239.6 1.6 161.1 4.3 400.8 2.7 610.8 1.1 76.8 −8.6 12.6
         2nd qtr p 394.8 2.7 247.0 2.5 158.0 1.9 404.9 2.3 609.8 2.2 54.6 −6.3 9.0
         3rd qtr p 409.8 2.3 267.9 2.3 159.4 3.1 427.3 2.6 608.3 2.5 48.9 −0.1 8.0
         4th qtr p 460.5 1.4 285.6 1.0 163.0 4.5 448.6 2.3 640.7 3.0 50.6 −0.1 7.9
2000         1st qtr p 385.1 2.8 245.8 2.6 166.9 3.6 412.7 3.0 624.8 2.3 78.5 2.3 12.6
Euro billion
1999  p 838.4 . 531.8 . 328.0 . 859.8 . 1,262.7 . 118.0 . .
1999         1st qtr p 191.6 . 122.5 . 82.4 . 204.9 . 312.3 . 39.2 . .
         2nd qtr p 201.9 . 126.3 . 80.8 . 207.0 . 311.8 . 27.9 . .
         3rd qtr p 209.5 . 137.0 . 81.5 . 218.5 . 311.0 . 25.0 . .
         4th qtr p 235.5 . 146.0 . 83.4 . 229.4 . 327.6 . 25.9 . .
2000         1st qtr p 196.9 . 125.7 . 85.3 . 211.0 . 319.5 . 40.1 . .
Source: Federal Statistical Office. —*Households including non-profit salaries plus monetary social benefits received. —5"Mass income" plus
institutions which serve households. —1Residence concept. —2After operating surplus, self-employed persons ’income, property income (net),
deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages and salaries and other current transfers received, income of non-profit organisations whichemployees ’contributions to the social security funds. —3Cash benefits serve households, less taxes (excluding wage tax and consumption-related
from the social security funds, central, regional and local authorities and taxes) and other current transfers paid. Including the increase in claim so n
foreign countries, pension payments (net), social security benefits from company pension funds. —6Including the increase in claims on company
private insurance schemes, less social security contributions on social pension funds. — 7 Saving as a percentage of disposable income. 
benefits, consumption-related taxes and public charges. —4Net wages and
  
  
9. Pay rates and actual earnings
Germany
    
Overall economy Producing sector (including construction)
Negotiated wage and salary level  1 Wages and salaries Negotiated wage and salary level  1 Wages and salaries
per employee per employee
on an hourly basis on a monthly basis on an hourly basis on a monthly basis (work-place concept)  2 (work-place concept)  3 
% from % from % from % from % from % from
previous previous previous previous previous previous
Period 1995=100 year 1995=100 year 1995=100 year 1995=100 year 1995=100 year 1995=100 year
1991 76.7 . 78.6 . 81.8 . 73.4 . 76.9 . 77.6 .
1992 85.8 11.9 87.2 11.0 90.5 10.5 82.9 12.9 85.9 11.7 88.4 13.91993 92.2 7.5 92.9 6.5 94.6 4.6 90.6 9.3 92.0 7.1 92.3 4.41994 95.3 3.4 95.6 2.9 96.6 2.2 94.3 4.1 94.8 3.0 96.1 4.1
1995 100.0 4.9 100.0 4.6 100.0 3.5 100.0 6.1 100.0 5.5 100.0 4.1
1996  
p 102.7 2.7 102.4 2.4 101.9 1.9 103.8 3.8 102.9 2.9 102.9 2.9
1997  p 104.2 1.5 103.9 1.5 102.7 0.8 105.8 1.9 104.6 1.7 104.7 1.7
1998  p 106.2 1.9 105.8 1.8 104.2 1.5 107.7 1.8 106.4 1.7 106.4 1.6
1999  p 109.2 2.8 108.6 2.7 106.1 1.8 110.9 3.0 109.4 2.8 108.3 1.8
1999         1st qtr p 99.9 2.9 99.4 2.8 98.4 1.4 101.0 4.0 99.7 3.9 100.9 1.6
         2nd qtr p 100.8 3.0 100.3 2.9 102.4 2.1 101.7 2.9 100.3 2.8 109.8 2.5
         3rd qtr p 112.8 3.1 112.2 3.0 105.3 2.2 118.6 3.2 116.9 3.0 104.5 1.9
         4th qtr p 123.4 2.4 122.7 2.3 118.2 1.6 122.4 2.0 120.7 1.9 117.7 1.1
2000         1st qtr p 101.6 1.7 101.0 1.6 101.0 2.6 102.4 1.4 101.0 1.2 104.3 3.4
         2nd qtr p 102.6 1.8 102.1 1.8 . . 103.6 1.9 102.2 1.9 . .
1999         Dec.  p 101.2 2.9 100.7 2.8 . . 101.8 2.7 100.4 2.6 110.7 −0.4
2000         Jan.  p 101.3 1.5 100.8 1.5 . . 101.8 0.8 100.4 0.7 103.6 4.6
         Feb.  p 101.3 1.5 100.8 1.4 . . 101.8 0.7 100.4 0.6 104.0 5.3
         Mar.  p 102.1 2.0 101.5 1.9 . . 103.5 2.6 102.0 2.5 105.4 0.6
         Apr.  p 102.7 2.1 102.1 2.1 . . 103.8 2.4 102.4 2.4 106.9 0.6
         May  p 102.7 1.7 102.1 1.7 . . 103.7 1.4 102.3 1.4 115.5 5.5
         June  p 102.6 1.7 102.0 1.7 . . 103.4 1.7 102.0 1.7 . .
1Current data are normally revised upwards on account of additional and building completion work. Calculated by the Bundesbank on the basis
reports. —2Source: Federal Statistical Office. —3Producing sector, exclud- of data from the Federal Statistical Office, using the old and new classifica-
ing electricity, gas, steam and hot water supply, and excluding installation tions of the economic sectors. 
66*IX. Economic conditions

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the European monetary union *
  
Until the end of 1998 ECU million, from 1999 euro million
1999 2000
Item 1998 1999 3rd qtr 4th qtr 1st qtr Mar. Apr. May
Current account + 43,325 + 22,822 + 4,520 + 3,363 −7,864 + 1,188 −3,166 − 638 A.
1. Foreign trade
Exports (f.o.b.) incl. supplementary items 772,393 795,973 199,853 223,391 221,163 83,759 72,327 83,418
Imports (f.o.b.) incl. supplementary items 653,590 696,475 173,213 196,886 211,887 78,193 66,349 78,437
Balance + 118,807 + 99,498 + 26,640 + 26,505 + 9,276 + 5,566 + 5,978 + 4,981
2. Services
Receipts 231,967 235,997 62,481 63,551 58,519 21,718 20,033 22,004
Expenditure 232,834 243,463 63,622 66,833 63,842 22,787 21,205 22,223
Balance − 866 −7,463 −1,138 −3,282 −5,323 −1,069 −1,172 − 219
3. Factor income (balance) −28,832 −26,403 −6,409 −6,493 −6,275 − 263 −3,939 −2,835
4. Current transfers
Transfer payments from non-residents 61,119 66,776 12,895 15,253 25,188 5,485 4,832 6,461
Transfer payments to non-residents 106,899 109,595 27,468 28,626 30,730 8,531 8,865 9,026
Balance −45,780 −42,813 −14,573 −13,370 −5,539 −3,045 −4,033 −2,565
Balance of capital transfers + 12,660 + 13,295 + 1,651 + 5,461 + 2,840 + 1,293 + 1,547 + 637B.
Financial account (net capital exports: −) 1 −69,113 −64,276 −6,711 + 3,820 + 47,760 + 30,460 + 5,019 + 7,019 C.
1. Direct investment −102,590 −138,809 −23,339 −47,319 + 147,995 + 1,132 −6,225 −10,680
Investment outside the euro area −182,968 −212,902 −26,935 −72,740 −63,301 −36,217 −18,577 −35,563
Foreign investment in the euro area + 80,380 + 74,093 + 3,596 + 25,421 + 211,296 + 37,349 + 12,352 + 24,883
2. Investment in securities −85,262 −28,923 + 29,814 + 2,967 −192,617 −34,402 −7,866 −5,074
Investment outside the euro area −302,069 −316,457 −64,269 −101,246 −153,859 −43,150 −25,811 −29,657
Equities −98,720 −153,719 −37,220 −53,915 −116,892 −26,469 −18,238 −17,953
Bonds and notes −187,098 −148,957 −20,982 −31,678 −38,596 −14,092 −4,737 −8,600
Money market paper −16,253 −13,781 −6,067 −15,653 + 1,629 −2,589 −2,836 −3,104
Foreign investment in the euro area + 216,808 + 287,534 + 94,083 + 104,213 −38,758 + 8,748 + 17,945 + 24,583
Equities + 98,298 + 97,714 + 27,088 + 44,783 −105,724 −20,369 −4,651 + 4,080
Bonds and notes + 102,727 + 119,242 + 42,328 + 40,360 + 46,812 + 22,203 + 13,859 + 15,410
Money market paper + 15,784 + 70,578 + 24,667 + 19,070 + 20,154 + 6,914 + 8,737 + 5,093
3. Financial derivatives −8,232 −1,032 + 1,462 − 478 + 2,481 + 1,399 + 2,073 + 310
4. Credit transactions and other
investment (balance) + 118,519 + 90,753 −16,069 + 48,455 + 91,347 + 61,838 + 16,790 + 21,212
Eurosystem + 2,719 + 9,400 − 289 + 2,332 −5,113 −3,453 + 3,093 −2,382
Public authorities −9,009 −14,109 −3,928 −3,638 −8,743 −1,883 + 1,460 + 1,529
Credit institutions + 155,529 + 112,649 + 1,720 + 38,025 + 133,161 + 83,378 + 13,922 + 18,646
long-term + 606 −10,707 −6,213 + 4,785 + 8,863 + 3,851 − 209 −1,259
short-term + 154,926 + 123,334 + 7,931 + 33,240 + 124,293 + 79,525 + 14,131 + 19,905
Enterprises and individuals −30,725 −17,196 −13,572 + 11,733 −27,958 −16,204 −1,685 + 3,419
5. Change in the monetary reserves of
    the eurosystem (Increase: −) + 8,453 + 13,729 + 1,418 + 192 −1,446 + 493 + 247 + 1,251
Balance of unclassifiable transactions  1 + 13,127 + 28,162 + 543 −12,641 −42,736 −32,941 −3,400 −7,018 D.
*Source: European Central Bank. —1Series for which data from January   
1999 are not closely comparable with earlier observations.  
67*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(Balances)
 
 
Current account Memo item:
Change inthe Bundes-
Change in bank ’s net
Supple- external the monetary
Balance of mentary reserves at Balance of assets at
on current Foreign trade Factor Current Capital Financial transaction transaction unclassifiable
Period account trade  
1  2 items  3  4 Services  5 income transfers transfers account  6 values  7 values  7 transactions
DM million
1985 + 52,613 + 73,353 −1,848 − 2,947 + 13,638 −29,583 −2,501 −53,373 −5,043 + 8,303 −1,843
1986 + 86,482 + 112,619 −3,520 − 6,467 + 11,381 −27,530 −2,147 −76,783 −11,187 + 3,635 −5,964
1987 + 82,114 + 117,735 −4,288 −11,177 + 9,378 −29,535 −2,186 −40,282 −37,901 − 1,745 −41,219
1988 + 92,585 + 128,045 −2,791 −16,365 + 16,630 −32,933 −2,029 −122,721 + 27,662 + 4,503 + 34,676
1989 + 107,346 + 134,576 −4,107 −15,210 + 26,872 −34,784 −2,064 −110,286 −5,405 + 10,409 + 18,997
1990  o + 79,475 + 105,382 −3,833 −19,664 + 32,859 −35,269 −4,975 −89,497 −11,611 + 26,608 −10,976
1991 −30,416 + 21,899 −2,804 −24,842 + 33,144 −57,812 −4,565 + 12,614 + 9,605 + 12,762 − 319
1992 −22,924 + 33,656 −1,426 −37,894 + 33,962 −51,222 −1,963 + 69,792 −52,888 + 7,983 −68,745
1993  8 −16,155 + 60,304 −3,038 −45,080 + 27,373 −55,714 −1,915 + 21,442 + 22,795 −26,167 + 35,766
1994  8 −38,805 + 71,762 −1,104 −54,374 + 4,852 −59,940 −2,637 + 57,871 + 2,846 −19,276 −12,242
1995  8 −29,671 + 85,303 −4,722 −54,720 + 178 −55,710 −3,845 + 63,647 −10,355 −19,776 −17,754
1996  8 −11,959 + 98,538 −5,264 −55,330 + 1,391 −51,294 −3,283 + 23,613 + 1,882 −10,253 + 1,610
1997  8 − 4,846 + 116,467 −6,160 −59,942 − 2,488 −52,722 + 52 −1,164 + 6,640 − 681 + 8,468
1998  8 − 8,019 + 126,970 −2,554 −67,568 −11,569 −53,298 + 1,289 + 17,254 −7,128 − 3,397 −8,231
1999  8 −35,466 + 127,983 −10,015 −79,767 −23,353 −50,314 − 252 r −57,091 + 24,517 + 68,292 −72,364
1998         4th qtr 8 − 1,036 + 32,258 + 249 −14,981 − 4,796 −13,766 − 100 −31,143 −1,264 + 33,542 −4,777
1999         1st qtr 8 − 9,547 + 30,026 −3,686 −18,700 − 6,674 −10,514 + 424 −88,086 + 26,083 + 71,126 −31,672
         2nd qtr 8 + 1,281 + 30,560 −2,071 −18,394 + 1,233 −10,047 − 109 + 24,243 − 577 −24,837 + 14,219
         3rd qtr 8 −17,459 + 31,148 −2,420 −23,645 − 7,626 −14,916 −1,656 r −4,655 − 812 + 24,583 −28,794
         4th qtr 8 − 9,740 + 36,249 −1,839 −19,028 −10,286 −14,837 + 1,089 r + 11,408 − 177 − 2,579 −26,117
2000         1st qtr 8 − 6,386 + 29,009 −2,109 −19,137 − 3,603 −10,545 + 313 r + 56,295 −1,469 −48,752 + 62,618
         2nd qtr 8p − 8,166 + 29,779 −1,869 −23,808 + 417 −12,685 + 20 + 10,974 + 4,671 − 7,499 −45,858
1999         Sep.  8 − 4,982 + 10,883 − 150 − 8,214 − 2,564 − 4,938 − 228 r −17,056 − 260 + 22,526 −36,170
         Oct.  8 − 3,530 + 11,037 − 388 − 5,691 − 3,673 − 4,815 + 298 r + 7,402 + 224 − 4,394 + 29,352
         Nov.  8 − 290 + 15,269 − 629 − 7,322 − 2,400 − 5,208 + 312 r −18,074 − 692 + 18,743 −38,939
         Dec.  8 − 5,920 + 9,943 − 822 − 6,015 − 4,212 − 4,814 + 479 r + 22,079 + 291 −16,928 −16,531
2000         Jan.  8 −15,536 + 5,195 −1,193 − 7,846 − 8,463 − 3,229 + 337 r + 28,450 − 81 −13,170 + 51,212
         Feb.  8 + 1,496 + 12,998 − 376 − 5,999 − 1,222 − 3,904 − 285 r −12,800 − 857 + 12,446 −3,782
         Mar.  8 + 7,653 + 10,817 − 541 − 5,292 + 6,082 − 3,412 + 262 r + 40,645 − 531 −48,029 + 15,188
         Apr.  8 − 3,345 + 9,385 − 641 − 7,222 + 104 − 4,970 + 379 r −6,732 + 2,648 + 7,051 −18,192
         May  8 − 6,338 + 7,387 − 775 − 8,064 − 1,576 − 3,310 − 44 + 38,649 + 335 −32,602 + 5,196
         June  8p + 1,516 + 13,008 − 453 − 8,523 + 1,888 − 4,404 − 315 −20,943 + 1,688 + 18,053 −32,862
 Euro million
1999  8 −18,134 + 65,437 −5,121 −40,784 −11,940 −25,725 − 129 r −29,190 + 12,535 + 34,917 −36,999
1999         1st qtr 8 − 4,881 + 15,352 −1,884 − 9,561 − 3,412 − 5,376 + 217 −45,038 + 13,336 + 36,366 −16,194
         2nd qtr 8 + 655 + 15,625 −1,059 − 9,405 + 630 − 5,137 − 56 + 12,395 − 295 −12,699 + 7,270
         3rd qtr 8 − 8,927 + 15,926 −1,237 −12,089 − 3,899 − 7,626 − 847 r −2,380 − 415 + 12,569 −14,722
         4th qtr 8 − 4,980 + 18,534 − 940 − 9,729 − 5,259 − 7,586 + 557 r + 5,833 − 90 − 1,319 −13,354
2000         1st qtr 8 − 3,265 + 14,832 −1,078 − 9,785 − 1,842 − 5,392 + 160 r + 28,783 − 751 −24,927 + 32,016
         2nd qtr 8p − 4,175 + 15,226 − 956 −12,173 + 213 − 6,486 + 10 + 5,611 + 2,388 − 3,834 −23,447
1999         Jan.  8 − 6,115 + 4,216 −1,620 − 3,776 − 3,541 − 1,394 + 490 −31,183 + 12,445 + 24,364 −13,841
         Feb.  8 − 230 + 5,513 − 240 − 2,276 − 650 − 2,578 − 183 + 9,188 + 996 − 9,770 + 1,858
         Mar.  8 + 1,464 + 5,623 − 24 − 3,510 + 779 − 1,404 − 90 −23,042 − 105 + 21,772 −4,211
         Apr.  8 + 2,418 + 5,646 − 386 − 3,207 + 2,155 − 1,789 − 75 + 6,434 − 125 − 8,652 − 139
         May  8 − 4,587 + 3,177 − 465 − 3,284 − 2,439 − 1,576 + 50 + 3,399 − 116 + 1,254 + 8,332
         June  8 + 2,823 + 6,802 − 207 − 2,914 + 915 − 1,773 − 30 + 2,562 − 54 − 5,301 − 923
         July  8 − 1,810 + 7,337 − 293 − 3,778 − 2,722 − 2,352 − 550 −3,334 + 146 + 5,547 + 13,576
         Aug.  8 − 4,570 + 3,025 − 867 − 4,112 + 134 − 2,749 − 180 + 9,674 − 429 − 4,496 −9,805
         Sep.  8 − 2,547 + 5,564 − 77 − 4,200 − 1,311 − 2,525 − 116 r −8,720 − 133 + 11,517 −18,494
         Oct.  8 − 1,805 + 5,643 − 198 − 2,910 − 1,878 − 2,462 + 152 r + 3,784 + 115 − 2,247 + 15,008
         Nov.  8 − 148 + 7,807 − 322 − 3,744 − 1,227 − 2,663 + 160 r −9,241 − 354 + 9,583 −19,909
         Dec.  8 − 3,027 + 5,084 − 420 − 3,075 − 2,154 − 2,462 + 245 r + 11,289 + 149 − 8,655 −8,452
2000         Jan.  8 − 7,943 + 2,656 − 610 − 4,011 − 4,327 − 1,651 + 172 r + 14,546 − 42 − 6,734 + 26,184
         Feb.  8 + 765 + 6,646 − 192 − 3,067 − 625 − 1,996 − 146 r −6,545 − 438 + 6,364 −1,934
         Mar.  8 + 3,913 + 5,530 − 277 − 2,706 + 3,110 − 1,744 + 134 r + 20,781 − 271 −24,557 + 7,766
         Apr.  8 − 1,710 + 4,798 − 328 − 3,692 + 53 − 2,541 + 194 r −3,442 + 1,354 + 3,605 −9,302
         May  8 − 3,241 + 3,777 − 396 − 4,123 − 806 − 1,692 − 22 + 19,761 + 171 −16,669 + 2,657
         June  8p + 775 + 6,651 − 232 − 4,358 + 965 − 2,252 − 161 −10,708 + 863 + 9,230 −16,802
oFrom July 1990 including the external transactions of the former GDR. — warehouse transactions for account of residents and deduction of goods
1Special trade according to the official foreign trade statistics: imports c.i.f., returned. —4See footnote 2. —5Excluding the expenditure on freight and
exports f.o.b. —2From January 1993 including additional estimates for insurance included in the c.i.f. import value. —6Capital exports: −.—
external transactions which do not have to be reported and which are 7Increase: -. —8Figures subject to significant uncertainty owing to changes
included up to December 1992 in Supplementary trade items. —3Mainly in the method of data collection in foreign trade. 
68*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
by group of countries and country *
 
 Until the end of 1998 DM million, from 1999 euro million
2000
Group of countries / Country 1997 1998 1999 1 January February March April May June  p 
All countries  2 Exports 888,616 955,170 510,418 42,045 46,446 52,137 45,253 52,153 50,257
Imports 772,149 828,200 444,981 39,389 39,801 46,607 40,455 48,377 43,607Balance + 116,467 + 126,970 + 65,437 + 2,656 + 6,646 + 5,530 + 4,798 + 3,777 + 6,651
I. Exports 667,038 728,539 396,084 33,348 36,878 40,720 35,818 40,120 ...Industrialised
Imports 585,621 628,089 332,478 29,023 29,096 34,783 29,963 35,546 ... countries
Balance + 81,417 + 100,450 + 63,606 + 4,325 + 7,781 + 5,937 + 5,856 + 4,574 ...
Exports 493,554 539,793 293,373 25,336 27,115 29,793 27,089 29,281 ... 1. EU member countries
Imports 424,430 452,037 240,079 20,920 20,795 24,381 21,180 25,343 ...Balance + 69,124 + 87,757 + 53,294 + 4,416 + 6,321 + 5,412 + 5,909 + 3,938 ...
of  which
Exports 375,758 413,055 225,669 19,699 20,648 23,010 20,904 22,565 ... EMU member
Imports 337,439 361,921 192,072 16,629 16,215 19,305 16,941 20,018 ... countries
Balance + 38,319 + 51,134 + 33,598 + 3,070 + 4,433 + 3,706 + 3,963 + 2,547 ...
of which
Austria Exports 46,680 51,760 28,194 2,362 2,493 2,729 2,615 2,666 ...
Imports 29,082 33,078 18,182 1,577 1,645 1,788 1,636 1,771 ...Balance + 17,598 + 18,683 + 10,012 + 785 + 848 + 941 + 979 + 895 ...
Belgium and Exports 51,666 54,288 28,836 2,478 2,583 3,103 2,672 2,828 ...
Luxemburg Imports 47,421 46,437 23,145 2,019 2,198 2,325 2,070 2,470 ...
Balance + 4,245 + 7,851 + 5,691 + 459 + 386 + 778 + 602 + 358 ...
France Exports 94,420 105,901 58,667 5,162 5,454 5,652 5,433 6,051 ...
Imports 81,090 88,914 46,017 3,818 3,460 4,833 4,120 4,731 ...Balance + 13,330 + 16,987 + 12,650 + 1,344 + 1,993 + 819 + 1,313 + 1,320 ...
Italy Exports 65,053 70,533 38,378 3,281 3,667 3,954 3,601 3,944 ...
Imports 61,074 64,513 33,331 2,837 2,657 3,234 2,935 3,271 ...Balance + 3,978 + 6,020 + 5,047 + 444 + 1,010 + 720 + 665 + 673 ...
Netherlands Exports 63,054 66,910 34,277 2,966 3,030 3,572 3,154 3,203 ...
Imports 67,537 69,425 35,853 3,695 3,459 3,966 3,666 4,334 ...Balance − 4,483 − 2,515 − 1,576 − 729 − 429 − 394 − 512 −1,132 ...
Spain Exports 33,071 38,454 22,681 2,006 2,132 2,428 2,117 2,491 ...
Imports 25,941 27,801 14,307 1,284 1,351 1,557 1,301 1,637 ...Balance + 7,130 + 10,653 + 8,374 + 722 + 781 + 871 + 816 + 854 ...
Sweden Exports 20,630 21,874 11,654 1,025 1,072 1,226 1,140 1,129 ...
Imports 14,819 16,331 8,303 705 805 776 892 912 ...Balance + 5,812 + 5,543 + 3,351 + 320 + 267 + 450 + 248 + 217 ...
United Exports 74,962 81,356 43,228 3,554 4,251 4,350 3,918 4,431 ...
Kingdom Imports 54,342 56,694 30,759 2,721 2,922 3,573 2,558 3,554 ...
Balance + 20,620 + 24,662 + 12,470 + 834 + 1,328 + 777 + 1,360 + 878 ...
Exports 62,869 66,640 33,559 2,503 3,120 3,463 2,819 3,418 ... 2. Other European
Imports 56,705 58,057 30,515 2,680 2,751 3,064 2,706 3,054 ... industrial countries
Balance + 6,164 + 8,582 + 3,044 − 177 + 368 + 399 + 113 + 363 ...
of which
Switzerland Exports 39,847 42,686 22,844 1,724 2,026 2,320 1,849 2,126 ...
Imports 29,858 32,550 17,084 1,287 1,502 1,657 1,411 1,608 ...Balance + 9,989 + 10,136 + 5,761 + 436 + 525 + 663 + 438 + 517 ...
Exports 110,615 122,107 69,152 5,509 6,642 7,464 5,911 7,421 ... 3. Non-European
Imports 104,487 117,995 61,884 5,423 5,551 7,338 6,076 7,149 ... industrial countries
Balance + 6,128 + 4,111 + 7,268 + 86 + 1,092 + 126 − 165 + 272 ...
of which
Japan Exports 20,476 18,310 10,460 887 1,039 1,110 905 1,093 ...
Imports 37,478 41,047 21,467 1,888 1,967 2,626 2,167 2,427 ...Balance −17,002 −22,737 −11,007 −1,002 − 928 −1,516 −1,261 −1,334 ...
Exports 76,617 89,751 51,557 4,042 4,948 5,607 4,344 5,586 ... United States
Imports 59,039 68,307 36,389 3,201 3,226 4,218 3,551 4,217 ...Balance + 17,578 + 21,444 + 15,169 + 841 + 1,722 + 1,389 + 794 + 1,369 ...
II. Exports 102,960 115,463 56,757 4,357 4,886 5,833 4,835 6,186 ...Countries in transition
Imports 96,792 108,819 62,325 5,711 6,229 6,695 5,821 7,171 ...Balance + 6,168 + 6,645 − 5,568 −1,353 −1,343 − 862 − 987 − 985 ...
of which
Central and east Exports 90,282 101,499 49,060 3,748 4,256 4,992 4,177 5,290 ...European countries Imports 74,304 84,280 47,640 4,235 4,750 5,215 4,564 5,458 ...in transition Balance + 15,978 + 17,220 + 1,421 − 487 − 494 − 223 − 388 − 168 ...
China  
3 Exports 10,629 11,900 6,949 540 571 757 598 824 ...
Imports 21,534 23,181 13,677 1,381 1,351 1,348 1,156 1,591 ...Balance −10,906 −11,280 − 6,728 − 840 − 780 − 591 − 558 − 766 ...
III. Exports 116,124 108,860 56,410 4,239 4,570 5,460 4,500 5,689 ...Developing countries
Imports 88,792 90,249 48,185 4,608 4,428 5,071 4,623 5,601 ...Balance + 27,332 + 18,610 + 8,226 − 368 + 142 + 389 − 123 + 88 ...
of which
Newly industrial- Exports 48,444 36,657 18,779 1,539 1,730 1,959 1,676 2,042 ...ising countries in Imports 40,094 42,310 22,238 2,186 2,012 2,415 2,132 2,554 ...south-east Asia  
4 Balance + 8,350 − 5,653 − 3,459 − 647 − 282 − 456 − 456 − 511 ...
OPEC-countries Exports 20,024 19,213 9,137 646 723 924 697 871 ...
Imports 13,932 11,215 6,414 742 685 672 769 843 ...Balance + 6,092 + 7,998 + 2,723 − 97 + 37 + 251 − 72 + 28 ...
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (f.o.b.) by country of destination, region for Non-EU countries. —2Including fuel and other supplies for ships
imports (c.i.f.) by country of origin. Inclusion of individual countries in and aircraft and other data not classifiable by region. —3Excluding Hong
groups of countries according to the current position. —1The figures on Kong. —4Brunei, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore,
"All countries" include revisions which have not yet been broken down by South Korea, Taiwan and Thailand. 
69*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
4. Services and factor income of the Federal Republic of Germany
(Balances)
 
Until the end of 1998 DM million, from 1999 euro million
Services
other services
of which
 
Patents Compen- Services  of Construction
Trans- Financial and sation of Investment Government selfemployed and  assembly
Period Total Travel services licences Total income portation  1 transactions  2 persons  3 work,  repairs employees  4 
1995 −54,720 −51,404 + 5,064 + 2,675 −4,020 + 6,848 −13,883 −1,765 − 955 −1,417 + 1,595
1996 −55,330 −53,025 + 4,873 + 2,653 −3,772 + 6,699 −12,757 −2,180 −1,216 −1,779 + 3,171
1997 −59,942 −54,142 + 5,702 + 2,315 −4,148 + 6,649 −16,318 −2,402 −1,649 −1,698 − 790
1998 −67,568 −56,542 + 5,461 + 3,011 −2,933 + 5,468 −22,033 −2,582 −2,505 −1,634 −9,935
1999 −40,784 −29,796 + 3,126 + 1,065 −1,299 + 2,010 −15,891 −2,104 − 642 − 888 −11,052
1998         4th qtr −14,981 −11,545 + 1,571 + 648 − 810 + 1,174 −6,020 − 697 − 633 − 490 −4,306
1999         1st qtr − 9,561 − 5,875 + 513 + 242 − 371 + 539 −4,610 − 459 − 361 + 91 −3,504
         2nd qtr − 9,405 − 7,787 + 836 + 262 − 200 + 486 −3,002 − 505 − 45 − 246 + 876
         3rd qtr −12,089 −10,070 + 812 + 535 − 370 + 484 −3,480 − 529 − 224 − 461 −3,438
         4th qtr − 9,729 − 6,064 + 966 + 25 − 359 + 502 −4,799 − 610 − 12 − 272 −4,987
2000         1st qtr − 9,785 − 6,493 + 775 + 76 − 632 + 536 −4,047 − 732 − 391 + 93 −1,935
         2nd qtr −12,173 − 8,518 + 1,158 + 470 − 539 + 423 −5,166 − 543 − 365 − 285 + 498
1999         Aug. − 4,112 − 3,688 + 303 + 375 − 184 + 191 −1,109 − 212 − 75 − 152 + 286
         Sep. − 4,200 − 3,347 + 158 + 172 − 129 + 192 −1,245 − 134 − 22 − 152 −1,158
         Oct. − 2,910 − 2,540 + 247 + 57 − 42 + 124 − 757 − 130 − 28 − 107 −1,771
         Nov. − 3,744 − 1,962 + 199 − 93 − 227 + 144 −1,804 − 231 − 2 − 89 −1,138
         Dec. − 3,075 − 1,562 + 520 + 60 − 90 + 234 −2,238 − 249 + 19 − 76 −2,077
2000         Jan. − 4,011 − 2,173 + 86 + 19 − 230 + 141 −1,854 − 204 − 7+ 2 4 −4,351
         Feb. − 3,067 − 1,732 + 284 + 45 − 203 + 159 −1,621 − 258 − 319 + 28 − 653
         Mar. − 2,706 − 2,588 + 405 + 12 − 199 + 235 − 572 − 270 − 65 + 40 + 3,069
         Apr. − 3,692 − 2,478 + 252 + 387 − 197 + 101 −1,758 − 182 − 24 − 103 + 156
         May − 4,123 − 2,769 + 530 − 94 − 191 + 169 −1,767 − 172 − 84 − 80 − 726
         June − 4,358 − 3,271 + 376 + 177 − 151 + 153 −1,641 − 189 − 257 − 102 + 1,067
1Excluding the expenditure on freight included in the c.i.f. import value. — vices supplied. —3Engineering and other technical services, research and
2Including the receipts from foreign military agencies for goods and ser- development, commercial services etc. — 4 Wages and salaries. 
5. Current transfers of the Federal Republic of Germany 6. Capital transfers
(Balances) (Balances)
Until the end of 1998 DM million, from 1999 euro million DM million / euro million
Public  1 Private  1 
International
Organisations  2 
 
of which other Remittances other
European current by foreign current
Period Total Total Total Communities Total workers transfers Total  4 Public  1 Private  1 transfers  3 
1995 −55,710 −40,247 −33,188 −29,961 −7,060 −15,463 −7,600 −7,863 −3,845 −4,394 + 549
1996 −51,294 −35,281 −30,674 −27,553 −4,607 −16,013 −7,401 −8,612 −3,283 −2,617 − 666
1997 −52,722 −36,823 −31,509 −28,502 −5,313 −15,900 −7,519 −8,381 + 52 −2,821 + 2,873
1998 −53,298 −37,263 −33,077 −30,382 −4,186 −16,035 −6,936 −9,099 + 1,289 −2,443 + 3,732
1999 −25,725 −17,162 −15,253 −13,837 −1,909 −8,563 −3,429 −5,134 − 129 −1,342 + 1,213
1998         4th qtr −13,766 −9,824 −8,258 −7,740 −1,567 −3,942 −1,734 −2,208 − 100 − 873 + 773
1999         1st qtr −5,376 −3,459 −2,734 −2,207 − 724 −1,917 − 857 −1,060 + 217 − 206 + 423
         2nd qtr −5,137 −3,209 −3,186 −2,972 − 23 −1,928 − 857 −1,071 − 56 − 278 + 222
         3rd qtr −7,626 −5,603 −5,027 −4,581 − 576 −2,024 − 857 −1,166 − 847 − 297 − 550
         4th qtr −7,586 −4,892 −4,306 −4,078 − 586 −2,694 − 857 −1,837 + 557 − 561 + 1,118
2000         1st qtr −5,392 −3,515 −2,576 −2,063 − 939 −1,877 − 834 −1,042 + 160 − 237 + 397
         2nd qtr −6,486 −4,482 −4,674 −4,435 + 192 −2,003 − 834 −1,169 + 10 − 290 + 300
1999         Aug. −2,749 −2,030 −1,721 −1,612 − 309 − 720 − 286 − 434 − 180 − 86 − 95
         Sep. −2,525 −1,882 −1,718 −1,650 − 164 − 643 − 286 − 357 − 116 − 103 − 13
         Oct. −2,462 −1,812 −1,511 −1,476 − 301 − 649 − 286 − 363 + 152 − 104 + 256
         Nov. −2,663 −1,854 −1,519 −1,382 − 335 − 809 − 286 − 523 + 160 − 203 + 363
         Dec. −2,462 −1,225 −1,275 −1,219 + 50 −1,236 − 286 − 951 + 245 − 254 + 499
2000         Jan. −1,651 −1,012 − 575 − 432 − 436 − 639 − 278 − 361 + 172 − 81 + 253
         Feb. −1,996 −1,393 −1,145 − 869 − 248 − 604 − 278 − 326 − 146 − 76 − 70
         Mar. −1,744 −1,111 − 856 − 762 − 254 − 634 − 278 − 356 + 134 − 80 + 214
         Apr. −2,541 −1,908 −1,931 −1,802 + 23 − 634 − 278 − 355 + 194 − 74 + 267
         May −1,692 − 960 −1,209 −1,154 + 249 − 733 − 278 − 455 − 22 − 95 + 73
         June −2,252 −1,615 −1,535 −1,479 − 81 − 637 − 278 − 359 − 161 − 121 − 40
1The classification of "public" and "private" transfers depends on which (excluding capital transfers). —3Payments to developing countries, pension
sector the participating domestic body belongs to. —2Current contri- payments, tax revenue and refunds, etc. —4Where identifiable; in
butions to the budgets of international organisations and to the EU budget particular, debt forgiveness. 
70*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
7. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
  
Until the end of 1998 DM million, from 1999 euro million
1999 r 2000
Item 1997 1998 1999 r 3rd qtr 4th qtr 1st qtr  r 2nd qtr Apr.  r May June
I. Net German investment abroad
(Increase/capital exports: −) −385,626 −569,874 −332,427 −60,630 −87,552 −150,242 −99,312 −40,088 −32,265 −26,959
1. Direct investment  1 −70,634 −160,409 −92,882 + 3,718 −39,625 −33,344 −31,666 − 9,811 −21,852 − 3
Equity capital −42,595 −106,380 −74,830 −10,405 −43,599 −15,485 −14,111 − 3,771 − 3,628 − 6,712
Reinvested earnings  2 − 6,200 −12,500 − 5,113 − 1,278 − 1,278 − 1,278 − 1,278 − 426 − 426 − 426
Credit transactions ofGerman direct investors −14,944 −34,073 − 6,098 + 17,337 + 7,527 −15,185 −14,707 − 5,285 −16,956 + 7,534
Other capital − 6,895 − 7,455 − 6,842 − 1,937 − 2,274 − 1,396 − 1,570 − 329 − 842 − 398
2. Portfolio investment −156,104 −248,176 −176,340 −38,686 −38,472 −100,377 −38,244 − 7,071 −12,687 −18,485
Equities  
3 −66,486 −113,543 −66,652 −16,690 −23,044 −49,092 −17,582 − 1,373 − 5,130 −11,079
Investment fund certificates  4 − 6,860 −17,468 −13,882 − 2,562 − 5,580 −17,313 −10,196 − 3,932 − 3,521 − 2,743
Bonds and notes  5 −81,966 −109,492 −92,806 −17,880 − 9,508 −32,892 − 9,268 − 1,156 − 4,714 − 3,398
Money market instruments − 791 − 7,673 − 3,000 − 1,554 − 340 − 1,081 − 1,198 − 611 + 678 − 1,265
3. Financial derivatives  6 −15,377 −11,812 + 1,924 + 4,639 − 4,194 − 1,164 + 3,498 + 1,589 + 519 + 1,390
4. Credit transactions −139,156 −141,235 −63,925 −29,821 − 5,070 −14,672 −32,380 −24,438 + 1,829 − 9,771
Credit institutions  7 −139,672 −135,479 −44,270 −17,661 − 647 −22,778 − 8,132 −11,647 − 6,939 + 10,455
Long-term −52,665 −61,397 −42,728 − 9,951 − 9,765 − 7,848 − 5,566 − 2,979 − 631 − 1,957
Short-term −87,008 −74,082 − 1,542 − 7,710 + 9,118 −14,931 − 2,566 − 8,668 − 6,309 + 12,411
Enterprises and individuals + 4,023 − 4,103 + 20,124 − 150 + 8,919 −24,727 + 5,799 − 2,318 + 6,817 + 1,300
Long-term − 2,102 − 575 − 1,975 + 526 − 387 + 841 − 601 + 31 − 483 − 148
Short-term  7 + 6,124 − 3,529 + 22,099 − 676 + 9,306 −25,568 + 6,400 − 2,349 + 7,300 + 1,448
General government − 4,007 − 1,501 + 7,764 + 2,254 − 91 + 32 − 4,137 + 235 − 617 − 3,756
Long-term − 3,110 − 1,722 − 376 − 92− 252 − 90− 319 − 218 − 44− 57
Short-term  7 − 897 + 220 + 8,140 + 2,346 + 161 + 122 − 3,818 + 453 − 573 − 3,699
Bundesbank + 500 − 151 −47,544 −14,264 −13,251 + 32,801 −25,910 −10,708 + 2,568 −17,770
5. Other investment  8 − 4,354 − 8,243 − 1,203 − 479 − 190 − 685 − 521 − 357 − 74− 90
II. Net foreign investment in Germany
(Increase/capital imports: +) + 384,461 + 587,128 + 303,237 + 58,249 + 93,384 + 179,025 + 104,923 + 36,646 + 52,026 + 16,251
1. Direct investment  1 + 19,242 + 37,420 + 49,238 − 6,474 + 31,277 + 170,965 + 31,805 + 8,136 + 10,144 + 13,525
Equity capital + 8,195 + 9,443 + 21,166 + 2,663 + 18,427 + 159,607 + 761 + 1,052 − 3,243 + 2,952
Reinvested earnings  2 − 800 − 1,000 −−−−−−−−
Credit transactions offoreign direct investors + 12,492 + 29,833 + 28,268 − 9,143 + 12,996 + 11,484 + 31,139 + 7,119 + 13,401 + 10,619
Other capital − 645 − 857 − 197 + 6 − 146 − 126 − 96− 35− 13− 47
2. Portfolio investment + 157,723 + 254,783 + 155,792 + 49,289 + 40,846 −86,476 + 77,055 + 6,914 + 13,958 + 56,184
Equities  
3 + 27,284 + 100,938 + 27,385 + 10,765 + 11,832 −96,627 + 40,234 − 2,996 + 36 + 43,193
Investment fund certificates − 4,172 − 3,094 + 5,709 + 576 + 3,720 + 5,133 + 1,934 + 701 + 597 + 635
Bonds and notes  5 + 122,524 + 144,658 + 83,847 + 24,179 + 8,266 + 6,861 + 19,793 + 5,212 + 8,415 + 6,165
Money market instruments + 12,087 + 12,281 + 38,852 + 13,768 + 17,027 − 1,843 + 15,095 + 3,996 + 4,909 + 6,190
3. Credit transactions + 208,264 + 294,983 + 98,252 + 15,432 + 21,273 + 94,493 − 3,925 + 21,611 + 27,921 −53,457
Credit institutions  7 + 204,283 + 279,437 + 94,526 + 16,934 + 14,867 + 81,259 + 7,025 + 23,707 + 27,101 −43,783
Long-term + 49,505 + 61,270 + 34,255 + 11,387 + 835 + 14,376 + 584 + 2,287 − 120 − 1,583
Short-term + 154,778 + 218,167 + 60,271 + 5,547 + 14,032 + 66,883 + 6,440 + 21,420 + 27,221 −42,200
Enterprises and individuals + 17,662 + 14,643 + 16,965 + 495 + 9,186 + 13,284 −10,905 − 2,198 + 969 − 9,676
Long-term + 270 + 12,875 + 1,527 − 1,254 − 237 − 829 − 166 − 416 − 462 + 713
Short-term  7 + 17,392 + 1,768 + 15,438 + 1,749 + 9,423 + 14,112 −10,739 − 1,782 + 1,431 −10,389
General Government −13,038 − 2,685 −11,249 − 1,953 − 2,768 − 16− 119 + 49 − 66− 103
Long-term − 7,351 − 8,580 − 8,300 − 1,715 − 2,952 − 22 + 29 + 133 − 115 + 11
Short-term  7 − 5,687 + 5,895 − 2,949 − 238 + 184 + 6 − 148 − 84 + 50 − 114
Bundesbank − 643 + 3,588 − 1,991 − 43− 12− 34 + 75 + 53 − 83 + 104
4. Other investment − 768 − 57− 46 + 2 − 11 + 43 − 13− 15 + 3 − 0
III. Balance of all statistically
recorded financial movements(Net capital exports: −) − 1,164 + 17,254 −29,190 − 2,380 + 5,833 + 28,783 + 5,611 − 3,442 + 19,761 −10,708
1From 1996, new definition for direct investment. —2Estimated. — action values shown here are mostly derived from changes in stocks. As far
3Including participation rights. —4From 1991 including accumulated as possible, purely statistical changes have been eliminated. —8In
earnings. —5From 1975 excluding accrued interest. —6Options, whether particular, subscriptions of the Federal Government to International
or not evidenced by securities, and financial futures contracts. —7The trans- Organisations. 
71*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
8. External position of the Bundesbank *
 
 
DM million
Monetary reserves and other claims on non-residents Liabilities to non-residents
Monetary reserves
Reserve
positionin theInter- Liabilitiesnational arising Net Liabilities
Monetary arising from externalFund and Claims Loans and from liquidity position
Foreign special on the external Treasury (col. 1 other claims
End of year currency drawing ECB  
2 on non- trans- discount less
or month Total Total Gold rights (net) Total paper col. 8) balances  1 residents  3 actions  4 
1234567891 0 1 1
1993 122,763 120,143 13,688 61,784 8,496 36,176 2,620 39,541 23,179 16,362 83,222
1994 115,965 113,605 13,688 60,209 7,967 31,742 2,360 24,192 19,581 4,611 91,774
1995 123,261 121,307 13,688 68,484 10,337 28,798 1,954 16,390 16,390 − 106,871
1996 120,985 119,544 13,688 72,364 11,445 22,048 1,441 15,604 15,604 − 105,381
1997 127,849 126,884 13,688 76,673 13,874 22,649 966 16,931 16,931 − 110,918
1998 135,085 134,005 17,109 100,363 16,533 − 1,079 15,978 15,978 − 119,107
1998         Oct. 134,128 133,662 13,688 79,380 17,473 23,122 466 19,776 19,776 − 114,351
         Nov. 140,284 139,818 13,688 85,429 17,580 23,122 466 14,516 14,516 − 125,768
         Dec. 135,085 134,005 17,109 100,363 16,533 − 1,079 15,978 15,978 − 119,107
*Valuation of the gold holdings and the claims on non-residents according Monetary Cooperation Fund −EMCF). —3Including loans to the World
to section 26 (2) of the Bundesbank Act and the provisions of the Bank. —4Including liquidity paper sold to non-residents by the
Commercial Code, especially section 253. In the course of the year, valuation Bundesbank; excluding the liquidity Treasury discount paper sold toat the balance sheet rates of the preceding year. —1Mainly US dollar non-residents between March 1993 and March 1995, as shown in column 10. 
assets. —2European Central Bank (until 1993 claims on the European
 
 
 
9. External position of the Bundesbank in the European monetary union *
Euro million
Monetary reserves and other claims on non-residents
Monetary reserves
Reserve
position
in the Inter-
national OtherMonetary Other claims on Net externalFund and claims on residents position of the
Gold special Foreign non-euro- Claims in other Bundesbank
End of year and gold drawing currency area within the EMU member Liabilities to (col.1 lessor month Total Total rights reserves Eurosystem countries col.9) receivables residents  
1 non-residents
1234567891 0
1999         Jan.  2 95,316 93,940 29,312 8,461 56,167 140 1,225 11 8,169 87,146
1999         Jan. 116,482 81,495 27,475 8,458 45,562 4,506 30,460 21 15,494 100,988
         Feb. 114,235 80,499 27,475 7,146 45,878 3,730 30,000 6 15,106 99,129         Mar. 115,913 85,979 29,048 7,518 49,414 20,588 9,337 8 7,197 108,715
         Apr. 116,365 86,105 29,048 9,091 47,966 18,672 11,578 10 7,510 108,855
         May 107,532 86,221 29,048 8,779 48,394 13,505 7,799 8 7,010 100,522         June 108,811 86,925 28,106 8,551 50,269 25,786 − 3,910 9 6,714 102,096
         July 94,544 86,779 28,106 8,445 50,229 34,256 − 26,500 8 6,024 88,520
         Aug. 109,943 87,208 28,106 8,212 50,890 18,006 4,722 7 11,619 98,325         Sep. 125,037 89,368 31,762 8,046 49,560 21,924 13,735 10 6,191 118,846
         Oct. 110,021 89,254 31,762 7,980 49,512 15,328 5,426 13 6,183 103,838
         Nov. 135,346 89,607 31,762 7,938 49,908 4,406 41,323 9 11,599 123,747         Dec. 141,958 93,039 32,287 8,332 52,420 9,162 39,746 11 6,179 135,779
2000         Jan. 120,993 93,080 32,287 8,202 52,592 2,743 25,162 8 11,398 109,595
         Feb. 123,747 93,519 32,287 8,238 52,994 5,989 24,230 9 12,218 111,529         Mar. 120,291 96,835 32,208 8,681 55,946 10,537 12,909 10 13,482 106,808
         Apr. 126,571 95,481 32,208 7,688 55,585 8,346 22,735 8 10,461 116,110
         May 121,282 95,310 32,208 7,700 55,402 17,563 8,396 12 7,828 113,453         June 139,873 96,018 33,744 7,581 54,693 4,551 39,296 9 8,047 131,826
*Assets and liabilities vis- à-vis all EMU member countries and non-EMU figures are shown on the basis of revaluation at market rates. —1Including
member countries. Within a quarter the stock figures are computed on the loans to the World Bank. —2Euro opening balance sheet of the Bundes-
basis of cumulative transaction values. At the end of each quarter the stock bank as at January 1, 1999. 
72*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
10. Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
Until the end of 1998 DM million, from 1999 euro million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities to non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  to foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms paymentsor month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received
operations operations
All countries
 
1996 441,888 155,956 285,932 114,420 171,512 155,722 15,790 351,943 73,713 278,230 162,435 115,795 75,721 40,0741997 461,760 141,722 320,038 132,372 187,666 172,843 14,823 392,071 80,743 311,328 181,987 129,341 85,746 43,5951998 502,610 140,729 361,881 169,889 191,992 176,485 15,507 429,240 81,092 348,148 220,628 127,520 87,576 39,9441999 277,331 52,774 224,557 115,564 108,993 100,777 8,216 293,849 56,632 237,217 166,026 71,191 52,047 19,144
2000         Mar. 325,782 71,766 254,016 136,671 117,345 108,689 8,656 329,251 66,654 262,597 187,557 75,040 54,730 20,310
         Apr. 328,014 70,092 257,922 140,966 116,956 108,548 8,408 333,416 64,614 268,802 194,755 74,047 53,545 20,502
         May 339,883 63,510 276,373 157,596 118,777 110,164 8,613 350,743 65,637 285,106 209,999 75,107 53,926 21,181         June 337,049 59,217 277,832 158,523 119,309 111,239 8,070 357,043 54,313 302,730 225,659 77,071 56,491 20,580
EU countries
 
1996 287,183 141,428 145,755 63,748 82,007 73,261 8,746 204,124 62,940 141,184 89,223 51,961 41,443 10,5181997 287,024 130,611 156,413 68,161 88,252 80,199 8,053 236,747 68,777 167,970 110,157 57,813 46,097 11,7161998 307,523 130,398 177,125 84,422 92,703 83,927 8,776 265,214 68,873 196,341 137,494 58,847 46,896 11,9511999 157,617 47,992 109,625 56,450 53,175 48,500 4,675 194,809 49,243 145,566 111,605 33,961 27,532 6,429
2000         Mar. 185,449 66,742 118,707 60,307 58,400 53,654 4,746 213,814 58,986 154,828 118,810 36,018 29,091 6,927
         Apr. 185,972 64,398 121,574 63,489 58,085 53,556 4,529 212,273 56,755 155,518 120,151 35,367 28,317 7,050
         May 187,296 58,089 129,207 69,814 59,393 54,704 4,689 221,665 57,988 163,677 127,690 35,987 28,655 7,332         June 188,363 54,129 134,234 74,712 59,522 55,228 4,294 233,190 47,557 185,633 148,075 37,558 30,070 7,488
of which: EMU member countries
 
1996 171,830 74,597 97,233 36,309 60,924 54,529 6,395 153,278 48,060 105,218 66,594 38,624 30,771 7,8531997 174,416 66,022 108,394 42,064 66,330 60,694 5,636 177,629 51,339 126,290 82,879 43,411 35,206 8,2051998 190,953 68,418 122,535 54,167 68,368 62,491 5,877 197,566 50,579 146,987 103,899 43,088 35,021 8,0671999 104,071 25,946 78,125 38,747 39,378 36,074 3,304 151,179 38,117 113,062 88,763 24,299 20,173 4,126
2000         Mar. 112,260 32,691 79,569 35,891 43,678 40,335 3,343 160,486 40,720 119,766 93,652 26,114 21,526 4,588
         Apr. 112,232 32,857 79,375 35,862 43,513 40,423 3,090 153,846 37,657 116,189 90,668 25,521 20,829 4,692
         May 109,374 30,674 78,700 34,042 44,658 41,438 3,220 152,396 34,741 117,655 91,538 26,117 21,229 4,888         June 109,137 28,135 81,002 36,196 44,806 41,837 2,969 160,419 30,738 129,681 102,518 27,163 22,135 5,028
Other industrial countries
 
1996 78,545 8,212 70,333 37,293 33,040 30,219 2,821 93,654 7,181 86,473 57,768 28,705 22,731 5,9741997 89,482 6,436 83,046 45,814 37,232 34,050 3,182 95,662 7,884 87,778 55,306 32,472 26,280 6,1921998 109,682 8,246 101,436 61,999 39,437 36,162 3,275 102,058 7,655 94,403 61,741 32,662 26,292 6,3701999 71,958 3,595 68,363 45,540 22,823 21,220 1,603 68,024 4,870 63,154 44,518 18,636 15,387 3,249
2000         Mar. 89,394 3,622 85,772 60,871 24,901 23,332 1,569 83,115 5,111 78,004 58,451 19,553 16,127 3,426
         Apr. 90,083 4,280 85,803 61,343 24,460 22,885 1,575 89,056 5,304 83,752 64,388 19,364 15,924 3,440
         May 98,330 3,987 94,343 69,963 24,380 22,736 1,644 95,399 5,124 90,275 71,286 18,989 15,377 3,612         June 94,207 3,840 90,367 65,989 24,378 22,767 1,611 89,490 4,478 85,012 65,349 19,663 16,144 3,519
Countries in transition
 
1996 22,025 200 21,825 4,092 17,733 16,123 1,610 9,342 45 9,297 613 8,684 3,458 5,2261997 27,427 296 27,131 5,916 21,215 19,487 1,728 10,690 90 10,600 595 10,005 4,007 5,9981998 30,107 360 29,747 7,914 21,833 20,218 1,615 11,383 135 11,248 657 10,591 4,941 5,6501999 16,402 231 16,171 4,603 11,568 10,934 634 6,256 78 6,178 481 5,697 3,119 2,578
2000         Mar. 17,059 218 16,841 4,702 12,139 11,354 785 6,787 127 6,660 479 6,181 3,574 2,607
         Apr. 17,153 231 16,922 4,657 12,265 11,577 688 6,609 100 6,509 493 6,016 3,356 2,660
         May 17,407 222 17,185 4,653 12,532 11,831 701 6,860 101 6,759 520 6,239 3,532 2,707         June 17,944 218 17,726 4,855 12,871 12,138 733 7,045 114 6,931 588 6,343 3,728 2,615
Developing countries
 
1996 54,135 6,116 48,019 9,287 38,732 36,119 2,613 44,823 3,547 41,276 14,831 26,445 8,089 18,3561997 57,827 4,379 53,448 12,481 40,967 39,107 1,860 48,972 3,992 44,980 15,929 29,051 9,362 19,6891998 55,298 1,725 53,573 15,554 38,019 36,178 1,841 50,585 4,429 46,156 20,736 25,420 9,447 15,9731999 31,354 956 30,398 8,971 21,427 20,123 1,304 24,760 2,441 22,319 9,422 12,897 6,009 6,888
2000         Mar. 33,880 1,184 32,696 10,791 21,905 20,349 1,556 25,535 2,430 23,105 9,817 13,288 5,938 7,350
         Apr. 34,806 1,183 33,623 11,477 22,146 20,530 1,616 25,478 2,455 23,023 9,723 13,300 5,948 7,352
         May 36,850 1,212 35,638 13,166 22,472 20,893 1,579 26,819 2,424 24,395 10,503 13,892 6,362 7,530         June 36,535 1,030 35,505 12,967 22,538 21,106 1,432 27,318 2,164 25,154 11,647 13,507 6,549 6,958
* Including the assets and liabilities vis- à-vis non-residents of individuals in and decreases have not been eliminated; to this extent the changes in totals
Germany. The assets and liabilities vis- à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in are not comparable with the figures shown in Table X, 7. 
Germany are shown in Table 4 of Section IV, "Banks". Statistical increases
73*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
X. Foreign trade and payments
11. Deutsche Mark exchange rates for the national currencies of the EMU countries,
the Deutsche Mark value of the ECU * and euro conversion rates
Yearly France Italy Netherlands Belgium/ Austria Spain Finland Ireland Portugal ECU values  1 
or monthly Luxembourg 1  ECU
average 100  FRF 1,000  ITL 100  NLG 100  BEF/LUF 100  ATS 100  ESP 100  FIM 1  IEP 100  PTE = ... DM
Spot middle rates on the Frankfurt exchange in DM
   
1991 29.409 1.3377 88.742 4.857  14.211 1.597  41.087 2.671  1.149  2.050761992 29.500 1.2720 88.814 4.857  14.211 1.529  34.963 2.656  1.157  2.020311993 29.189 1.0526 89.017 4.785  14.214 1.303  28.915 2.423  1.031  1.936391994 29.238 1.0056 89.171 4.8530 14.214 1.2112 31.108 2.4254 0.9774 1.92452
1995 28.718 0.8814 89.272 4.8604 14.214 1.1499 32.832 2.2980 0.9555 1.87375
1996 29.406 0.9751 89.243 4.8592 14.214 1.1880 32.766 2.4070 0.9754 1.909541997 29.705 1.0184 88.857 4.8464 14.210 1.1843 33.414 2.6297 0.9894 1.964381998 29.829 1.0132 88.714 4.8476 14.213 1.1779 32.920 2.5049 0.9763 1.96913
1998         Aug. 29.828 1.0135 88.676 4.8492 14.213 1.1783 32.887 2.5103 0.9770 1.96980
         Sep. 29.823 1.0122 88.650 4.8476 14.212 1.1776 32.858 2.5035 0.9756 1.96381
         Oct. 29.824 1.0108 88.677 4.8472 14.213 1.1767 32.868 2.4942 0.9751 1.95626
         Nov. 29.823 1.0105 88.693 4.8478 14.214 1.1760 32.890 2.4870 0.9751 1.95791         Dec. 29.820 1.0099 88.734 4.8482 14.214 1.1754 32.895 2.4838 0.9753 1.95733
      
Irrevocable euro conversion rates (EUR 1 = ... currency units) 2
   
6.55957 1936.27 2.20371 40.3399 13.7603 166.386 5.94573 0.787564 200.482 3 1.95583
*Calculated from daily quotations. —1According to data from the Euro- conversion rate. 
pean Commission. —2Applicable from January 1, 1999. —3Deutsche Mark
12. Exchange rates of the Deutsche Mark and the euro against other currencies *
Yearly Japan Denmark Sweden Norway Switzerland Canada Australia New Zealand United States United Kingdom
or monthly
average USD JPY DKK SEK GBP NOK CHF CAD AUD  1 NZD 1 
Spot middle rates on the Frankfurt exchange (1 or 100 currency units = ... DM)
      
1991 1.6612 1.2346 25.932 27.421 2.926  25.580 115.740 1.4501 1.2942 0.95891992 1.5595 1.2313 25.869 26.912 2.753  25.143 111.198 1.2917 1.1476 0.84061993 1.6544 1.4945 25.508 21.248 2.483  23.303 111.949 1.2823 1.1235 0.89401994 1.6218 1.5870 25.513 21.013 2.4816 22.982 118.712 1.1884 1.1848 0.9605
1995 1.4338 1.5293 25.570 20.116 2.2620 22.614 121.240 1.0443 1.0622 0.9399
1996 1.5037 1.3838 25.945 22.434 2.3478 23.292 121.891 1.1027 1.1782 1.03571997 1.7348 1.4378 26.249 22.718 2.8410 24.508 119.508 1.2533 1.2889 1.14531998 1.7592 1.3484 26.258 22.128 2.9142 23.297 121.414 1.1884 1.1070 0.9445
1998         Aug. 1.7887 1.2363 26.254 21.991 2.9209 23.136 119.651 1.1674 1.0554 0.8883
         Sep. 1.7030 1.2648 26.257 21.531 2.8614 22.469 121.424 1.1187 1.0031 0.8583
         Oct. 1.6378 1.3623 26.301 20.894 2.7760 22.048 122.618 1.0625 1.0135 0.8767
         Nov. 1.6816 1.3973 26.302 21.040 2.7928 22.567 121.490 1.0920 1.0660 0.9021         Dec. 1.6686 1.4217 26.286 20.711 2.7884 21.984 122.878 1.0825 1.0334 0.8737
      
Euro reference exchange rates published by the European Central Bank (EUR 1 = ... currency units) 2
      
1999 1.0658 121.32 7.4355 8.8075 0.65875 8.3104 1.6003 1.5840 1.6523 2.0145
1999         Jan. 1.1608 131.35 7.4412 9.0826 0.70312 8.6512 1.6055 1.7646 1.8387 2.1588
         Feb. 1.1208 130.78 7.4352 8.9077 0.68851 8.6497 1.5979 1.6786 1.7515 2.0623         Mar. 1.0883 130.20 7.4325 8.9403 0.67127 8.5065 1.5954 1.6510 1.7260 2.0451
         Apr. 1.0704 128.16 7.4327 8.9140 0.66502 8.3186 1.6015 1.5944 1.6684 1.9723
         May 1.0628 129.71 7.4333 8.9722 0.65825 8.2348 1.6025 1.5527 1.6046 1.9249         June 1.0378 125.32 7.4314 8.8284 0.65025 8.1676 1.5951 1.5244 1.5805 1.9479
         July 1.0353 123.71 7.4388 8.7446 0.65779 8.1811 1.6040 1.5403 1.5757 1.9664
         Aug. 1.0604 120.10 7.4376 8.7519 0.66014 8.2602 1.6004 1.5833 1.6451 2.0154         Sep. 1.0501 112.39 7.4337 8.6337 0.64683 8.2270 1.6015 1.5518 1.6186 2.0097
         Oct. 1.0706 113.52 7.4334 8.7272 0.64587 8.2885 1.5943 1.5808 1.6414 2.0798
         Nov. 1.0338 108.25 7.4366 8.6330 0.63702 8.1907 1.6051 1.5160 1.6179 2.0178         Dec. 1.0110 103.72 7.4403 8.5865 0.62651 8.0977 1.6012 1.4906 1.5798 1.9891
2000         Jan. 1.0137 106.53 7.4439 8.5968 0.61834 8.1215 1.6103 1.4687 1.5421 1.9716
         Feb. 0.9834 107.64 7.4453 8.5114 0.61466 8.0991 1.6069 1.4270 1.5642 2.0057         Mar. 0.9643 102.59 7.4473 8.3884 0.61063 8.1110 1.6042 1.4082 1.5827 1.9674
         Apr. 0.9470 99.92 7.4505 8.2671 0.59802 8.1545 1.5740 1.3890 1.5878 1.9097
         May 0.9060 98.09 7.4570 8.2410 0.60151 8.1994 1.5562 1.3549 1.5703 1.9355         June 0.9492 100.71 7.4607 8.3177 0.62927 8.2490 1.5608 1.4018 1.5968 2.0174
         July 0.9397 101.39 7.4589 8.4070 0.62304 8.1763 1.5505 1.3886 1.5978 2.0394
*Calculated from daily quotations. —1Exchange rates from Australia and rates, which are calculated on the basis of the concertation between the
New Zealand; those for New Zealand calculated from rates as at the middle central banks at 2.15 p.m. and end of the month. —2The ECB publishes daily reference exchange
74*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2000
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
13. Effective exchange rates * of the euro and selected foreign currencies
  
1st qtr 1999 = 100
Memo item:
Effective exchange rate of the euro against the Indicators of the German economy ’s Effective nominal exchange rates of selected foreign
currencies of... price competitiveness  3  against... currencies against 18 industrial countries  3  4 
39 countries  1 13 countries  2 38 countries  4 18 industrial countries  4 
Real Real on the basis
of the on the basis on the basis
on the basis of Pound Canadian Swiss Japanese of consumer of consumer deflators of
Nominal prices Nominal prices consumer prices US dollar sterling dollar franc yen total sales  5 
1990 . . 109.5 111.8 . 100.7 99.7 94.7 100.9 129.8 94.4 74.5
1991 . . 106.2 106.7 . 98.2 98.3 93.3 101.1 131.7 92.7 81.01992 . . 110.0 110.4 . 101.8 102.0 91.2 97.3 123.7 90.9 84.51993 74.7 105.9 103.9 104.7 . 104.6 103.9 93.7 88.1 116.3 92.8 102.81994 84.0 104.5 102.7 103.6 . 104.8 103.8 91.9 88.2 108.8 98.7 110.9
1995 93.2 107.8 107.8 108.7 109.0 109.6 108.9 86.1 84.0 106.2 105.4 115.5
1996 95.4 105.9 107.9 108.8 104.4 106.7 106.1 90.9 85.9 108.6 104.2 100.51997 90.4 96.6 99.1 99.4 98.5 101.4 100.5 98.8 99.8 109.5 97.9 95.81998 96.6 99.1 101.5 101.3 100.1 101.4 100.8 103.4 103.3 103.3 99.9 89.61999 96.6 95.8 95.7 95.7 97.4 97.7
p 97.5 100.8 102.3 102.1 98.2 105.2
1995         1st qtr 90.6 107.1 106.1 107.2 109.1 109.1 108.3 88.3 86.3 104.1 102.5 114.1
         2nd qtr 92.9 108.0 107.1 108.0 110.3 110.1 109.5 82.8 83.1 105.0 105.5 126.9         3rd qtr 93.7 107.8 108.3 109.3 108.4 109.3 108.5 85.8 83.5 107.5 105.2 114.9         4th qtr 95.4 108.5 109.5 110.5 108.4 109.9 109.4 87.7 83.0 108.1 108.2 105.9
1996         1st qtr 95.5 107.6 108.9 110.2 106.6 108.7 108.0 89.8 83.1 107.7 106.8 102.7
         2nd qtr 94.5 105.3 107.1 108.1 103.8 106.0 105.5 91.1 84.4 108.6 104.2 102.3         3rd qtr 96.3 106.3 108.6 109.5 104.5 106.9 106.1 90.9 85.2 108.0 104.8 100.0         4th qtr 95.5 104.5 106.9 107.4 102.7 105.2 104.8 91.8 91.0 110.0 100.7 97.0
1997         1st qtr 91.8 99.6 102.4 103.2 100.2 103.5 102.7 96.9 96.4 111.1 96.0 93.7
         2nd qtr 90.0 96.4 99.5 99.7 98.2 101.6 101.0 98.1 98.9 109.1 97.5 96.5         3rd qtr 87.7 93.2 95.5 95.7 96.7 99.6 98.3 99.5 101.4 109.7 97.9 100.0         4th qtr 92.1 97.0 99.1 99.2 98.9 100.8 99.9 100.5 102.4 108.1 100.2 92.8
1998         Jan. 93.4 97.6 99.7 99.6 99.4 100.4 . 103.6 103.9 106.5 100.2 91.3
         Feb. 92.5 96.4 98.8 98.8 98.8 100.0 99.0 102.6 103.8 106.6 100.6 94.0         Mar. 91.8 95.4 97.9 97.8 97.8 99.7 . 103.3 105.9 108.3 99.6 91.8
         Apr. 92.3 95.6 98.4 98.2 98.0 100.0 . 104.0 106.4 107.4 98.1 89.4
         May 94.9 98.1 101.2 101.0 99.7 101.5 100.5 104.2 102.9 106.3 98.7 86.8         June 95.5 98.5 101.1 101.0 99.9 101.7 . 106.2 105.1 105.3 98.7 83.9
         July 95.4 98.4 100.8 101.0 100.0 102.0 . 106.8 104.9 104.0 97.8 83.8
         Aug. 96.8 99.6 102.2 102.3 100.6 102.6 101.6 108.4 104.4 101.0 99.1 81.5         Sep. 101.3 102.8 104.6 104.3 102.4 102.8 . 103.7 103.0 100.4 101.2 85.5
         Oct. 102.8 103.8 105.7 105.2 102.4 102.6 . 99.0 100.0 97.7 102.3 94.1
         Nov. 100.6 101.3 103.6 103.2 101.0 101.8 101.9 100.1 99.7 98.1 100.7 95.3         Dec. 101.6 102.1 103.4 103.2 101.5 101.9 . 99.0 99.6 97.7 101.9 97.3
1999         Jan. 101.4 101.4 102.0 101.8 100.7 101.0 . 97.9 98.5 98.7 100.3 101.4
         Feb. 100.0 100.0 99.9 99.9 100.1 100.0
p 100.0 99.9 99.7 101.0 100.1 99.9
         Mar. 98.7 98.6 98.3 98.3 99.0 99.1 . 102.2 101.7 100.3 99.7 98.8
         Apr. 97.5 97.2 97.1 96.9 98.3 98.5 . 102.4 102.1 102.3 98.8 99.4
         May 96.9 96.4 96.6 96.5 97.9 98.4 p 98.0 102.8 103.1 104.6 98.6 97.8
         June 95.1 94.5 94.7 94.7 96.7 97.6 . 103.6 103.4 104.2 98.4 100.0
         July 95.1 94.5 94.8 95.2 97.1 98.1 . 103.8 102.1 102.9 97.8 101.3
         Aug. 96.3 95.5 95.4 95.6 97.3 97.6 p 96.7 101.0 101.8 101.7 98.1 105.7
         Sep. 95.2 93.8 93.6 93.4 96.0 96.0 . 99.3 102.9 102.2 97.0 112.1
         Oct. 96.4 94.7 94.4 94.2 96.3 96.1 . 98.2 103.6 102.0 97.9 112.0
         Nov. 94.0 92.4 92.0 92.0 95.0 95.1 p 95.1 99.1 103.7 103.0 96.2 115.4
         Dec. 92.2 90.7 90.1 90.4 94.0 94.3 . 99.4 104.5 102.5 95.7 118.9
2000         Jan. 92.4 90.8 90.2 90.8 94.2 95.0 . 99.6 106.2 104.5 95.3 115.8
         Feb. 91.2 89.5 89.2 89.8 93.6 94.5 p 93.5 102.2 106.3 105.1 95.2 112.9
         Mar. 89.7 88.1 87.7 88.3 92.4 93.4 . 102.2 106.0 104.5 94.6 117.3
         Apr. 88.4 86.8 86.1 86.6 91.4 92.3 . 102.8 107.4 104.0 95.8 119.2
         May 86.9 85.1 84.5 85.0 90.4 91.2 p 91.6 106.1 105.7 103.0 96.2 118.9
         June 89.9 88.1 87.4 88.1 92.1 92.8 . 103.4 102.3 103.5 97.0 118.8
         July 89.4 87.6 86.9 88.0 p 92.2 p 93.0 . 104.3 103.1 103.7 97.6 117.3
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of goods trade between 1995 and 1997 with the trading partners USA, Japan,
the currency concerned. —1ECB calculations; in addition to the countries Switzerland, United Kingdom, Sweden, Denmark, Greece, Norway, Canada,
belonging to the narrow group (see footnote 2), this group also includes the Australia, Hong Kong, South Korea and Singapore, and capturefollowing countries: Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, China, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech third-market effects. Where consumer prices are not yet available , estimates
Republic, Estonia, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, have been used. For the definition of the method see ECB, Monthly Bulletin,Morocco, New Zealand, Philippines, Poland, Romania, Russia, Slovakia, April 2000, page 39 ff. —3The method of calculation is largely consistent
Slovenia, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand and Turkey. 2ECB calculations with the procedure used by the ECB to compute the effective exchange
based on the weighted averages of the effective exchange rates of the euro rates of the euro. Up to 1998, the figures for Germany are identical to theor, prior to 1999, of the exchange rates of the currencies preceding the previously published data on the real external value of the Deutscheeuro. The weights used in these calculations are based on manufactured Mark. — 4 Including EMU countries. — 5 Annual and quarterly averages. 
75*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
76*

Overview of
publicationsby the DeutscheBundesbankThis overview is designed to inform
readers about selected recent eco-nomic and statistical publications bythe Deutsche Bundesbank. Exceptwhere stated, these publications arepublished both in German and English,and on the Internet.
The publications are available to inter-
ested parties free of charge from thePress and Public Relations Division.Against reimbursement of the costs, amonthly updated file with approxi-mately 40,000 time series published bythe Bundesbank can also be obtainedon magnetic tape or on ZIP diskettefrom the Statistical Data ProcessingDivision. Please submit orders in writ-ing, using the addresses specified onthe back of the title page.
Annual Report
Monthly Report
For information on the articles published between
1980 and 1999 see the index attached to the Jan-uary 2000 Monthly Report.
September 1999
– Germany’s relations with the International
Monetary Fund following the introduction ofthe euroDeutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
77*

– External economic adjustments in the industrial
countries after the crises in major emergingmarkets
– The changeover from the seasonal adjustment
method Census X-11 to Census X-12-ARIMA
October 1999
– Germany’s relative position in the central and
east European countries in transition
– Corporate finance in Germany and France: a
comparative analysis
– The labour market in the euro area
November 1999
– The economic scene in Germany in autumn
1999
December 1999
– Prospects for, and obstacles to, a stronger reli-
ance on funding in the statutory system of old-age provision in Germany
– Recent approaches to involving the private sec-
tor in the resolution of international debt crises
– Income, saving and capital formation in the
nineties: results of the new ESA ’95
January 2000
– The integration of the German money market
in the single euro money market
– The relationship between bank lending and the
bond market in Germany
– Longer-term trend in German credit institu-
tions’ interbank operationsFebruary 2000
– The economic scene in Germany at the turn of
the year 1999-2000
March 2000
– Monetary policy transparency– West German enterprises’ profitability and
financing in 1998
– German balance of payments in 1999
April 2000
– The impact of financial market crises on the
German securities markets
– Cyclical adjustment of the public sector
financial balance in Germany – a disaggregated
approach
– Core inflation rates as a tool of price analysis
May 2000
– The economic scene in Germany in spring
2000
June 2000
– Overall financial flows in 1999
– Trends in local authority finance since the mid-
nineties
– RTGSplus– The Bundesbank’s new system for
individual payments
July 2000
– Determinants and macroeconomic significance
of product wage and consumption wage
– Deposit protection and investor compensation
in Germany
– Germany’s role in international service trans-
actions
August 2000
– The economic scene in Germany in summer
2000Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
78*

Statistical Supplements to the
Monthly Report1
1 Banking statistics (monthly)
2 Capital market statistics (monthly)
3 Balance of payments statistics (monthly)
4 Seasonally adjusted business statistics (monthly)5 Exchange rate statistics (quarterly)
Discussion papers
February 2000 1/00
How Safe was the “Safe Haven”? Financial MarketLiquidity during the 1998 Turbulences.
May 2000 2/00
The determinants of the euro-dollar exchange rate.
Synthetic fundamentals and a non-existing currency.
July 2000 3/00
Concepts to Calculate Equilibrium Exchange Rates:
An Overview.
Summaries of former discussion papers can be
found on the Internet.
Special Publications
The monetary policy of the Bundesbank,
October 19952
Makro-ökonometrisches Mehr-Länder-
Modell, November 19963
Macroeconometric model of the German eco-
nomy, April 19944
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im Bereich
von Währung und Wirtschaft, April 19973
Europäische Organisationen und Gremien im Be-
reich von Währung und Wirtschaft, Mai 19973
The market for German Federal securities,
May 2000
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 bis
1989, August 19933
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model:
MEMMOD, June 2000Special Statistical Publications
1 Banking statistics guidelines and customer clas-
sification, June 20005
2 Bankenstatistik Kundensystematik Firmenver-
zeichnisse, Juni 20003
3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen,
Januar 20003
4 Financial accounts for Germany 1990 to 1998,
July 1999
5 Annual accounts of west German enterprises
1971 to 1996, March 19996
(The data of this Special Statistical Publicationcan also be obtained on diskette for a fee ofcurrently 50 DM)
6 Ratios from the annual accounts of west and
east German enterprises for 1996, September
1999
1
(The data of this Special Statistical Publication
can also be obtained on diskette for a fee ofcurrently 50 DM)
7 Erläuterungen zum Leistungsverzeichnis der
Außenwirtschaftsverordnung,März 1994
o,3
8 Balance of payments statistics of the Federal
Republic of Germany, 2nd edition, February
1991o
9 Securities deposits, August 2000Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
79*1Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data
contained in the German originals are available in English.
2Also available (in different editions) in French, Spanish,
Russian and Chinese.
3Available in German only.
4Available in English only.
5Only the sections “Monthly Balance Sheet Statistics”,
“External position” and “Customer classification” (“Over-
all survey on sectoral classification”, “Survey on break-
down by industry or activity” and “Explanatory notes on
the system of customer classification by industry or activ-
ity”) will shortly be available in English translation.
6Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data
contained in the German original will shortly be available
in English.
7This publication will shortly be available in English.oNot on the Internet.

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2000
80*10 International capital links, May 20006
11 Balance of payments by region,
August 2000
12 Technological services in the balance of pay-
ments, May 20006
Banking regulations
1 Bundesbank Act and Statute of the European
System of Central Banks and of the EuropeanCentral Bank, June 1998
2 Banking Act, March 2000
2a Grundsatz I über die Eigenmittel der Institute,
Oktober 1998
72b Grundsatz II über die Liquidität der Institute,
August 19993
7 Merkblatt für die Abgabe der Groß- und Mil-
lionenkreditanzeigen nach §§ 13 bis 14 KWG,
September 19987
Publications on EMU
Informationsbrief zur Europäischen Wirtschafts-
und Währungsunion3
euro 2002 – Informationen zur Euro-Bargeldein-
führung Nr. 1, Juli 20003
Der Euro ist da. Wir sagen Ihnen, worauf es an-
kommt. (Faltblatt)3
For footnotes, see p. 79*.

