Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
Vol. 53
No. 1 1

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
Deutsche Bundesbank
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 1460431 Frankfurt am Main
P .O.B. 10 06 02
60006 Frankfurt am MainFederal Republic of Germany
Telephone (0 69) 95 66-1
or (0 69) 95 66 . . . plus extension number
Telex 41 227 within Germany
4 14 431 from abroad
Fax (0 69) 5 60 10 71
Internet http://www.bundesbank.deReproduction permitted only if source is stated.ISSN 0418-8292The German original of this Report went to
press on November 16, 2001Annual and weekly publishing schedules for
selected statistics of the Deutsche Bundes-bank are available and can be downloadedfrom our Internet address. The relevant dataare also published on the Internet.
The Monthly Report is published autono-
mously by the Deutsche Bundesbank, Frank-furt am Main, by virtue of section 18 of theBundesbank Act of July 26, 1957. It is avail-able to interested parties free of charge.

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
ContentsThe economic scene in Germany
in autumn 2001 5
The international and European
setting 6Financial markets in Germany 22Economic conditions in Germany 30Appendix: Price analysis in theperiod of changeover from the D-Markto the euro 39Foreign trade and payments 43Public finance 54
Statistical Section 1*
Key economic data for EMU 6*
Overall monetary survey in the EMU 8*Consolidated financial statementof the Eurosystem 16*Banks 20*Minimum reserves 42*Interest rates 43*Capital market 48*Public finance in Germany 52*Economic conditions 60*Foreign trade and payments 67*
Overview of publications by the
Deutsche Bundesbank 77*

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
4

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
5The economic scene
in Germanyin autumn 2001

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
6The international
and EuropeansettingDevelopments in the world economy
The world economy, which was passing
through a tricky period anyway around themiddle of the year, has been additionallyhandicapped by the terrorist attacks on theUnited States. The global slowdown in busi-ness activity intensified in the autumn. Imme-diately after the events of September 11,there was substantial disruption of intra-USand international air traffic, which spread toother sectors as well. In some firms in theUnited States, production had to be curbedor even halted altogether at times owing tothe shortage of intermediate inputs. To date,such production losses have apparently beenmade good only in part. Moreover, the tour-ism sector has likewise sustained severe lossessince then – not just in the United States, butworldwide.
But more severe than these direct economic
effects are the adverse psychological implica-tions, even if they cannot at present be quan-tified reliably. US consumers, in particular,appear to be profoundly unsettled. Privateconsumption, which had previously been theprimary buttress of US economic activity,showed distinct signs of weakness afterSeptember 11. In the equity markets, by con-trast, the pronounced downturn in prices wasfollowed by a rally, accompanied by highvolatility. In the major foreign exchange mar-kets, the swings remained within relativelynarrow bounds, whereas prices in the inter-national commodity markets dropped sharply.That led, on the one hand, to losses of rev-enue in the supplier countries, while, on theTerrorist attacks
pose serious
problems

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
7other, it contributed to an improvement in
price movements in the industrialised nations.
Not least on account of the adverse economic
consequences of the terrorist assaults, the ex-pansionary stimuli expected in the UnitedStates from the marked easing of monetarypolicy since the beginning of this year, andfrom bringing forward tax-relief measures (asdecided in the spring), have not materialisedup to now. In the third quarter, seasonally ad-justed aggregate output fell below the level ofthe previous quarter, for the first time sinceearly 1991. Since most leading indicators arepointing downwards, that tendency mightwell persist for the time being, with the resultthat a “technical recession” (i.e. a decline inreal GDP in two successive quarters) can nolonger be ruled out. In specific economic sec-tors, moreover, a need for adjustment hadbuilt up which is becoming evident now, dur-ing the period of sluggish activity. Notably inthe areas of information technology and com-munications technology, the over-investmentof the past few years is exerting a greater im-pact than had originally been supposed.
In western Europe, real GDP probably rose
only a little after mid-year. Japan once againslid into recession during the summer half. Inthe emerging economies of eastern Asia(other than China), the pace of the cyclicalslowdown has intensified in recent months,especially in view of the waning of US andJapanese demand for electronic products.Latin American nations were likewise ad-versely affected by the slackening of thegrowth of world trade; that applies particu-larly to Mexico, which dispatches about nine-1995=100, seasonally adjusted, log. scale
JapanUnited KingdomEuro areaof which
United StatesSelected
countries 1three-month moving average
monthlyIndustrial output *
in selected countries
Source: National statistics, Eurostat and the
Bundesbank’s own calculations. — *Includ-
ing mining and energy, excluding construc-
tion. — 1Besides euro-area countries and
the countries specified, the list includes
Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland
and Canada; weighted with the respectiveshare in the gross value added by industry
in those countries in 1995.
Deutsche Bundesbank108
104
100
96
92108
104
100
96104120
100116
96112
96108
104116132
112128
108124
104120
100116
98120
116
112
108
104
100
98
1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001United States
in a “technical
recession”
Sluggish
business activity
in the rest of
the world

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
8tenths of its exports to the United States and
Canada. In addition, the financial crisis in Ar-gentina, which is spreading to neighbouringcountries to some extent, worsened furtherin the summer months, and energy bottle-necks in Brazil hampered aggregate outputagain. Only a few countries have been able torecord brisk economic growth in the currentyear. Besides China, they include the oil-exporting nations of the Near East and theCommonwealth of Independent States (CIS),above all Russia.
In November, the staff of the IMF once again
revised its GDP forecast for the world econ-omy downwards, viz. to 2.4% in the wholeof 2001; that represents the lowest growthrate since 1993. That rate also reflects theeconomic consequences of the terrorist at-tacks in the United States. The expansion ofthe volume of world trade, which apparentlycame to a halt, or even gave way to a con-traction, in the second half of this year, willslow down, according to the IMF’s forecast,to an annual average of 1
12% (compared
with 1212% in 2000). The IMF’s staff lowered
its forecast for global GDP growth in 2002,compared with the World Economic Outlookof October 2001, by a good percentage pointto 2.4%.
Even so, there are prospects of a global
change for the better in the course of nextyear. For one thing, purchasing power in theoil-consuming countries has strengthened oflate owing to the fall in the market prices ofcrude oil. For another, US economic policymakers have set the signals at “expansion”more unmistakably than before. In westernEurope, too, central banks have perceptibly
lowered official interest rates. Fiscal policy islikely to buttress business activity (mainly be-cause of tax cuts in major countries). InJapan, monetary and fiscal policy makershave tried – within the narrow leeway avail-able to them – to counteract the contraction-ary process under way in the economy. Fur-thermore, adjustments of inventories have al-ready made considerable headway in most in-dustrialised countries, so that output will notbe impeded so much from that angle in 2002as it has been in the current year. However,this forecast is subject to distinctly greater un-certainty than other predictions have been inrecent years. At present, for instance, it ishardly possible to foresee how much longerthe uncertainty of investors and consumers,especially in the United States, will last.
As is being demonstrated again at the
moment, the development of the worldeconomy depends crucially on business activ-ity in the United States. In earlier years, theUnited States made a massive contributionto strengthening global growth; in the courseof the present year, however, and especiallysince mid-year, strong retarding effectshave been emanating from that country.After adjustment for seasonal and working-day variations, aggregate output in theUnited States in the summer quarter wasmarginally (– 0.1%) lower than in the spring.The level of the previous year was overshotby
34%. This poor outturn is only partly dueRevised
forecast by
the IMF
The chances of
a worldwide
recovery in
2002US economic
activity in the
third quarter

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
9to the events of September 11.1US business
activity had already slackened perceptibly inthe months before the attacks. That appliesespecially to industry, where capacity utilisa-tion has gone down continuously sinceOctober 2000, and was lower in Septemberthan at any time since the spring of 1983.The loss of jobs in that sector has been offsetever less as the year has progressed by add-itional jobs created in the services sector.Hence the number of wage and salary earn-ers in the economy as a whole has declinedsharply since the early spring, and the season-ally adjusted unemployment rate rose by0.9 percentage point during the period fromAugust to October, to 5.4%. Since its nadir inOctober 2000, it has gone up by 1
12percent-
age points.
In the summer months, the deterioration in
labour-market conditions noticeably de-pressed consumer sentiment, which hadpicked up somewhat in the spring. Theundermining of US residents’sense of securityby the terrorist attacks of September 11 re-sulted in a further, in part dramatic, erosionof consumer confidence. In that inauspiciousenvironment, the tax reform which came intoeffect on July 1 was unable to generate thehoped-for upturn in demand. After adjust-ment for price and seasonal variations, pri-vate consumption grew in the summer quar-ter by only
14%, compared with over12%i n
each of the two preceding quarters. At thesame time, however, households’ seasonallyadjusted disposable income expanded by 3%against the spring as a result of tax refunds.This increase in income accrued primarily tosaving, so that households’ saving ratio shotup from a seasonally adjusted 1.1% in the
second quarter to 3.8% in the third; in Sep-tember, it actually reached 4.7%. Real invest-ment by trade and industry again droppedsharply in the summer, and was just over6
12% below its level a year before. Although
housing investment still rose somewhat, it in-creased far less steeply than it had done earl-ier. The reduction in inventories that startedat the beginning of 2001 continued at a fast-er pace; that curbed aggregate growth in thesummer quarter, but at the same time im-proved the conditions for an economic turn-around. Exports and imports both tended todecline significantly; the deficit on real exter-nal trade diminished somewhat.
Price pressures at the consumer stage have
eased perceptibly in the past few months, pri-marily on account of the relaxation of ten-sions on the energy markets. The year-on-year inflation rate, which had stood at 3.6%in May, fell to 2.1% in October. The statisticalcore inflation rate (excluding energy and
1The Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA), which is re-
sponsible for compiling the US national accounts, re-
frained from quantifying the adverse effects of the terror-
ist attacks on aggregate output in the third quarter since
– as the Bureau states – they cannot be separated out of
the primary statistics underlying the computation of GDP
and its components. In certain items, however (including
some of the most recent, which are not yet corroborated
by primary statistics, and hence are estimated), adjust-
ments have been made affecting, above all, the nominal
account and movements in the implied deflators, but
hardly impinging on real GDP . On the expenditure side,
the September 11 attacks are reflected mainly in nominal
consumption and imports of insurance services. More-
over, aggregate fixed assets were adjusted downwards,
and the income account was modified. For instance, de-
preciation was raised, the figures for the wages and salar-
ies of employees in trade and industry were reduced be-
cause of the production hold-ups and dismissals immedi-
ately after the terrorist assaults, and those of public sec-
tor employees were raised on account of the many hours
of overtime worked by the rescue teams.

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
10food), which is less volatile, remained virtually
unchanged, at 2.6%.
According to the available indicators (most of
which are pointing downwards), a steeperdecline in real GDP is to be expected in thefourth quarter of 2001 than in the summer.Hence a recovery of US business activity is notlikely until some time next year. Hopes arebeing pinned, firstly, on the underlying opti-mism of US consumers and investors gradual-ly regaining the upper hand. Secondly, sub-stantial monetary and fiscal stimuli have beenimparted. At the beginning of November, theUS central bank lowered its interest rates, forthe tenth time this year, to 2.0% – a levelsuch as has not been seen since the early six-ties. Since September 11, fiscal policy haslikewise taken a number of measures thatmay help to buttress aggregate demand. Forinstance, immediately after the terrorist as-saults, US$ 40 billion of additional expend-iture on immediate assistance and securitymeasures and US$ 15 billion of spending oncredit guarantees and subsidies to airlineswere approved. For fiscal 2002, which beganon October 1, the Administration has alsoproposed an economic package which hasbeen increased by the House of Representa-tives to a magnitude of US$ 100 billion. Itcomprises both accelerated tax cuts and in-creases in spending. If it remains unchanged(the deliberations in Congress are still in pro-gress), the fiscal measures, including a num-ber of extra increases in spending, willamount to some 1
12% of nominal GDP .
In the Japanese economy, the recessionary
tendencies have strengthened since thespring of 2001, after distinct signs of weak-
ness had been discernible as early as the pre-ceding quarters. In the second quarter, sea-sonally adjusted real GDP fell by
34% against
the previous year. The adverse economictrends persisted after mid-year (although na-tional accounts data are not yet available). In-dustrial output declined once more in thesummer quarter, namely by 4%, seasonallyadjusted, against the preceding quarter. Thusit was one-tenth down on the year. That out-come owed something to weak domesticfinal demand, the consistently sizeable exces-sive inventories and the decline in exports, es-pecially of IT products. The shedding of jobshas continued, and the seasonally adjustedunemployment rate reached a new all-timepeak in September, at 5.3%. The sustainedfall in consumer prices fits into this picture; inOctober, they were almost 1% lower than ayear before. At present, there is little evidencethat the Japanese economy will be able tobring about a cyclical turnaround in the nearfuture by its own efforts. Hence the country isheavily dependent on expansionary externalstimuli deriving from a recovery of the worldeconomy in general, and the US economy inparticular. According to the latest IMF fore-cast, Japanese real GDP will contract by 1%in 2001 and 1
14% in 2002.
According to preliminary calculations, aggre-
gate output in the United Kingdom in thesummer, after adjustment for seasonal andworking-day variations, was just over
12%
higher than in the spring, and a good 2% upon the year. The growth was fuelled by theservices sector and the construction industry,whereas industrial output once again de-Turnaround in
economic
activity not
likely until 2002
JapanUnited
Kingdom

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
11creased. However, the provisional GDP data
for the third quarter may have to be adjusteddownwards, since industrial output in Septem-ber, which was not known when the annualaccounts data were computed, turned out tobe distinctly worse than had been expected.The recessionary pressures in industry aremainly attributable to the sluggishness of ex-ports, which has been evident for some timenow, and which might be reinforced by anyfurther economic slowdown in major custom-er countries, especially the United States. Bycontrast, retail turnover once again increasedstrongly in the summer months. Sectoral dif-ferences in business activity were reflected inprices as well. The comparatively steep rise inthe costs of services has been accompanied oflate by falling import prices, which havefavourably affected the prices of domesticindustrial products. The inflation rate at theconsumer level (excluding mortgage rates)decelerated to 2.3% in September-October(compared with 2.6% in August, when abaseline effect made itself felt).
Overall economic trends in the euro area
Seasonally adjusted economic growth in the
euro area came to a halt during the springmonths. That was primarily because realgross fixed capital formation and exports con-tracted noticeably. In particular, intra-euro-area exports appear to have gone down; atany rate, according to the balance-of-payments statistics, seasonally adjusted mer-chandise exports to non-euro-area countriesremained at the level of late 2000 in the firsthalf of this year. By contrast, households’ realconsumption tended to continue rising. In
purely arithmetical terms, GDP growth wasbuttressed by the fact that real imports de-creased again. (National accounts data forthe third quarter are not yet available.)
After mid-year, the cyclical slowdown con-
tinued (according to the data at hand). Dur-ing the period from July to August, seasonallyadjusted industrial output was
14% lower
than in the second quarter, and was thus alsolower than a year before, for the first timesince spring 1996. The decline comparedwith the previous year focused on intermedi-ate products and consumer durables, whilethe production of capital goods stagnatedand there was a distinct increase in the out-put of consumer goods. In September, indus-trial output in the euro area probably wentdown again, judging by the – already avail-able – national figures for France, Germany,Italy, the Netherlands and Spain.
The increasing sluggishness of industrial activ-
ity is likewise reflected in the faster decline incapacity utilisation since mid-year. Since thelast peak (early in 2001), the degree of utilisa-tion of production facilities in the manufac-turing sector of the euro area has dropped by2
12percentage points; even so, in October it
was still slightly above the long-term average.Judging by the outcome of the latest EU sur-vey, sentiment in industry in the euro area hascontinued to deteriorate in the past fewmonths, especially in September-October. Inparticular, production expectations have beenadjusted downwards. However, sentiment inindustry has been less depressed than it wasin the recession year 1993. Consumer confi-Marked
slowdown in
economic
activity in the
summer halfEU survey

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
12dence has deteriorated, too, since mid-year.
Although households have continued to ratetheir own financial situation (and that fornext year) as rather favourable, they haveturned out to be more and more concernedabout general economic trends. Even thoughthe overall findings of the survey point down-wards, they do not warrant the conclusionthat the euro area is currently in recession.
The economic slowdown in the euro area has
hardly been mirrored as yet in the labour mar-ket. In September the (seasonally adjusted)standardised unemployment rate remained at8.3%, a level which has been unchangedsince July. At any rate, the period of decreas-ing unemployment, during which the un-employment rate in the euro area has fallenno fewer than three percentage points sincemid-1997, has come to an end, at least for
the time being. In the period from July to Oc-tober, seasonally adjusted consumer prices,as measured by the harmonised consumerprice index (HCPI), rose at an annual rate oflittle more than 1
12%. In October, admitted-
ly, the year-on-year rise still came to 2.4%,but that was primarily due to the price surgesemanating from food and energy prices dur-ing the first half of the year. Of late, energyprices have gone down slightly, and foodprices have stabilised at a high level. Hencethe chances of the inflation rate soon return-ing to the fold of price stability (i.e. rates ofunder 2%) have distinctly improved.Capacity utilisation in the euro-area manufacturing sector*
Seasonally-adjusted data in %
2001
CountryAnnual
average(AA) 1990-2000 Total January April July OctoberOctober
2001against AA1990-2000;in % points
Euro area 81.7 83.2 84.4 83.6 83.0 81.9 + 0.2
of which:
Belgium 79.9 82.3 84.8 82.7 81.4 80.2 + 0.3
France 84.4 87.6 88.8 86.9 87.7 87.0 + 2.6Germany 84.2 85.1 86.9 85.7 84.3 83.3 – 0.9Italy 77.0 78.9 79.5 79.4 78.7 77.9 + 0.9Netherlands 84.0 84.6 85.2 84.8 84.6 83.8 – 0.2Spain 77.8 79.6 80.1 79.7 80.1 78.3 + 0.5
Memo item:
EU 81.8 82.7 84.0 83.1 82.3 81.4 – 0.4
*Source: EU economic survey; weighted overall outcome
of the country data.
Deutsche Bundesbank
Labour market
and prices

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
13Euro-area current account and
exchange-rate trends
During the summer months, the foreign trade
of the euro area remained under the impactof the worldwide slowdown in growth. In thelast three months for which figures are avail-able (June to August), the export turnover ofthe euro-area countries with nations outsidethe eurozone remained unchanged comparedwith the preceding three-month period. Atthe same time, the markedly slower pace ofbusiness activity in the euro area curbed thegrowth of merchandise imports. In the threemonths under review, such imports (after sea-sonal adjustment) were only
12% higher than
in the preceding three months (March-May).That represented a continuation of the side-ways movement discernible since the spring,after there had been a perceptible decline inimport turnover at the beginning of the year,mainly on price grounds.
In the summer months (June to August), the
seasonally adjusted trade surplus, at almost313
12billion, was again rather substantial,
and fell only a little (about 31 billion) short of
the outturn of the previous period. The “in-visible” current transactions of the euro areawith non-euro-area nations were likewise vir-tually unchanged during the period under re-view; on balance, the seasonally adjusted def-icit came to 324
12billion, as in the previous
period. Overall, the euro area ran a currentaccount deficit of 311
12billion in the three
months from June to August, compared with310
12billion during the period from March
to May. Thanks to the higher trade surplusessince the beginning of this year, the cumula-tive (seasonally adjusted) current account def-
icit in the first eight months of 2001, at324
12billion, has halved compared with the
same period of last year.
In the foreign exchange markets, the euro
had initially strengthened noticeably againstall major currencies in the late summer of thisyear. However, in the ensuing period, a sus-tained and radical revaluation of exchange-rate relationships among the major world cur-rencies failed to materialise, after the growthprospects of the world economy and theeuro-area countries had deteriorated morestrongly than had been expected. The furtherrevaluations of the single European currencywere only short-lived. That was the casewhen the European markets were faced withstronger demand following the terrorist at-tacks on the United States and the associateddisruption of the major US financial centres.On balance, however, the undermining ofmarket players’ sense of security as to the fur-ther development of the world economy inthe wake of the events of September 11 wasreflected primarily in the frequently changingsigns of the movements of the US dollar.
After the euro had fallen below the level of
US$ 0.84 at the beginning of July, it rose againto over US$ 0.91 at the end of August. This ad-justment was sparked off by a reference by theUS central bank to the ongoing risks besettingUS business activity. The already burgeoningdoubts about any rapid recovery of US eco-nomic activity were additionally fostered whenthe figures on US economic growth in thesecond quarter were adjusted downwards andthe International Monetary Fund questionedForeign trade
Current
accountExchange-rate
trends
US dollar

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
14the sustainability of the high US current ac-
count deficit. But as early as the beginning ofSeptember, sentiment in the market started toswing in favour of the dollar again after newfigures had presented US business activity in asomewhat more favourable light.
But that development was interrupted once
more a short time later by the terrorist attacks inthe United States on September 11, when theUS dollar temporarily depreciated against all
currencies. Against the background of thechanged security situation, however, the US cur-rency, in its traditional role of a “safe haven”,had made good the preceding losses by the endof September. Besides, the ever more gloomyoutlook for growth in Europe handicapped thefurther development of the euro in Septemberand October. Following the publication, at theend of October, of data on the downturn inconsumer confidence in the United States, andin the light of other bad news on conditions inthe US economy, market sentiment shifted for awhile in favour of the euro; most recently, how-ever, the euro has again been perceptibly losingground again. When this Report went to press,the euro was standing at US$ 0.88, and wasthus back at the level of early August.
Against the yen, in August and September the
euro moved in a comparatively narrow bandbetween ¥ 107 and ¥ 110, with the Japanesecurrency remaining conspicuously firm despitethe highly critical state of the Japanese econ-omy. This may have owed something to the re-patriation of sizeable amounts from abroad byJapanese financial institutions (shortly beforethe end of the Japanese financial half-year onSeptember 30). During that period, the Bankof Japan tried to mitigate the upward pressureon the yen by means of foreign-exchange-mar-ket interventions, because of the associatedloss of price competitiveness by Japanese ex-porters. But the yen did not weaken until thepublication of the Bank of Japan’s “Tankan” re-port (which is heeded all over the world) haddrawn market players’ attention more clearlyto the deterioration in economic conditions inJapan. Towards the end of the period under re-Daily data, log. scale
US $
¥
£¥
Effective nominal exchange rate 1
1st qtr 1999 = 100... pound sterling... yenAgainst the ...
... US dollarExchange rate of the euro
1According to ECB calculations, against the
currencies of 13 countries (12 countries
from 2001).
Deutsche Bundesbank92
89
86
83
800.64
0.62
0.60
0.5897115
94112
91109
88106
103
100
970.97
0.94
0.91
0.88
0.85
0.82
OND J FMAMJ J A SOND
2000 2001Yen

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
15view, however, the euro depreciated against
the yen as well, being quoted only a littleabove ¥ 107.
The movement of the euro against the pound
sterling was rather more stable, even if thevirtual synchronism of the movements of thepound sterling and the US dollar observed inthe past persisted. The single currency initiallyappreciated distinctly against sterling at thebeginning of August, although it had to relin-quish a large part of those gains before theend of the month. In September, the UK cur-rency was adversely affected by the tempor-ary weakness of the dollar, following the ter-rorist assaults of September 11. More recent-ly, however, the pound sterling has strength-ened again in line with the US dollar.
On balance, the euro, expressed as a weight-
ed average against the currencies of thetwelve most important trading partners ofthe euro area, has changed but little duringthe period under review despite repeatedswings in either direction. Latterly, it has beenabout 3% below its value at the beginning ofthe year, and just under 17% below the rateruling at the launch of monetary union at thebeginning of 1999. In other words, economicgrowth in the euro area is not being handi-capped by exchange-rate movements.
Monetary policy and the financial
markets in the euro area
After the Eurosystem had left its interest rates
unchanged during the summer months, atthe level to which they had been lowered inMay, the ECB Governing Council reduced of-
ficial interest rates in three steps, by a total of1
14percentage points, between late August
and early November. Since November 9, theinterest rates for the marginal lending facilityand the deposit facility have stood at 4.25%and 2.25%, respectively; since November 14,main refinancing operations have been con-ducted in the form of variable-rate tenderswith a minimum bid rate of 3.25%. Alreadyduring the summer, the analysis of monetaryand macroeconomic data compiled with theaid of the two pillars of the Eurosystem’smonetary policy strategy implied a slackeningof inflationary pressures in the euro area andwarranted the lowering of official interestrates by
14percentage point on August 30.
That assessment was reinforced after the ter-rorist attacks in the United States onSeptember 11. On September 17, the ECBGoverning Council, as part of a concerted op-eration along with other central banks,lowered the official interest rates of the Euro-system by
12percentage point. Thereafter,
the price prospects brightened up some morein the light of the ongoing deterioration ineconomic conditions in the euro area. Hencethe ECB Governing Council further relaxed itsmonetary policy at the beginning of Novem-ber, and lowered official interest rates by an-other
12percentage point. The latterly strong
monetary growth was not incompatible withan interest-rate cut since, on account of port-folio effects, it is hardly likely to pose any riskof inflation (see page 17f.).
The interest-rate cuts by the ECB Governing
Council had been expected by the market.Accordingly, forward quotations in thePound sterling
Effective
exchange rate
of the euroInterest-rate
cuts by the
Eurosystem
from August to
November
Decline in
money-market
rates

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
16money market went down ahead of those
decisions, although the interest-rate reduc-tions in mid-September and early Novemberexceeded the expectations of some marketplayers. The term structure of interest rates inthe money market, which had been inversesince last December, levelled off distinctlyafter the September key-rate reduction, butthen widened again (partly under the impactof falling capital-market yields). In mid-No-vember, forward quotations in the moneymarket were some 90 to 100 basis pointsbelow their level of mid-August.
Developments in the overnight money mar-
ket and credit institutions’ compliance withthe reserve requirements were both ratherunsettled in the autumn months. The Euro-system responded to the rise in EONIA afterthe terrorist attacks in the United States byconducting fixed-rate quick tenders withone-day maturities to boost liquidity onSeptember 12 and 13. The ECB accepted allbids, amounting to totals of 369.3 billion
and 340.5 billion, respectively. That oper-
ation enhanced the functionality of the finan-cial markets. The same thing applies to theswap agreement between the US Federal Re-serve System and the ECB, which served tomeet the dollar liquidity needs of banks in theeuro area. Thanks to the abundant supply ofliquidity, the overnight money rate droppeddistinctly below the main tender rate towardsthe end of the September maintenanceperiod, resulting briefly in heavier recourse tothe deposit facility. Because of the prevailingexpectations of interest-rate cuts, credit insti-tutions’ participation in main tenders dwin-dled early in October. In the main refinancingDaily data
% p.a.
 5 
billion
 5 
billion
 5 
billion
0Main and longer-term
refinancing operations
Aug.Impact of market factors
on liquidity (cumulative)3
Total
− General governmentOf which
− Banknotes in circulation0Central bank balances
of credit institutions
Requiredreserves
2Overnight interestrate (EONIA)Marginal lending rate
Deposit rateTender rate
 1Interest-rate movements and
liquidity management in theEurosystem
1Interest rate for main refinancing oper-
ations, single allotment rate (for fixed-rate
tenders) or marginal allotment rate (for
variable-rate tenders) — 2 Maintenance
periods: 24 Aug. to 23 Sep., 24 Sep. to
23 Oct., and 24 Oct. to 23 Nov. 2001. —
3 Banknotes in circulation, government de-
posits with the Eurosystem, net foreign cur-
rency reserves of the Eurosystem and other
factors; provision (+) or absorption (−) of
central bank balances.
Deutsche Bundesbank220
200
180
16060+
40+
20+
0
20−180
160140
120
100
805.50
5.00
4.50
4.003.50
3.00
2.50
2.00  
    
                
  
September October November
2001Safeguarding
orderly market
conditions after
the terrorist
attacks

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
17operation conducted on October 10, the vol-
ume of bids fell substantially short of creditinstitutions’ short-term liquidity requirements,and the overnight money rate rose. Since theECB failed to meet all the remaining require-ments with the final tender of the mainten-ance period, the overnight money rate wentup to the level of the marginal refinancingrate, and the banks temporarily drew heavilyon that facility. Early in November the maintender was again underbid, and the ECBresponded, following the latest reduction inofficial interest rates, by massively increasingthe volume of tenders.
Between August and October funds totalling
323.5 billion accrued to credit institutions
owing to autonomous factors determiningliquidity (see the adjacent table). That wasmainly due to the exceptionally sharp fall inbanknotes in circulation, which decreasedsignificantly with the approach of the issu-ance of euro banknotes after the turn of theyear. Another expansionary factor was the re-duction in public sector deposits with theEurosystem. Finally, the required minimumreserves dropped by 32.8 billion. The Euro-
system reduced the volume of open marketoperations accordingly during the periodunder review, viz. by 327.3 billion, to an
average of 3136.7 billion.
The pace of monetary growth in the euro
area continued to quicken in the third quarterof this year, after the money stock M3 had in-creased distinctly in the first half of the year.Especially in September, the money stock rosestrongly. That seems to have owed a gooddeal to portfolio-shift operations in the wakeFactors determining bank liquidity*
5billion; calculated on the basis of
daily averages of the maintenance periods
2001
Item24 Aug.
to
23 Sep.24 Sep.
to
23 Oct.24 Aug.
to
23 Oct.
I. Provision (+) or absorption (–)
of central bank balances by
1. Change in banknotes in
circulation (increase: –) + 12.2 + 10.2 + 22.4
2. Change in general govern-
ment deposits with the
Eurosystem (increase: –) + 3.6 + 1.6 + 5.2
3. Change in net foreign
exchange reserves 1 – 0.8 – 11.4 – 12.2
4. Other factors 2 – 3.6 + 11.8 + 8.2
Total + 11.4 + 12.1 + 23.5
II. Monetary policy operations
of the Eurosystem
1. Open market operations
a) Main refinancing
operations – 16.9 – 10.4 – 27.3
b) Longer-term refinan-
cing operations € 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0
c) Other operations + 3.5 – 3.5 € 0.0
2. Standing facilities
a) Marginal lending
facility + 0.4 + 0.6 + 1.0
b) Deposit facility
(increase: –) – 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.1
Total – 13.2 – 13.0 – 26.2
III. Change in credit institutions’
current accounts (I. + II.) – 1.7 – 1.0 – 2.7
IV. Change in the minimum
reserve requirement
(increase: –) + 1.9 + 0.9 + 2.8
Memo items 3
Main refinancing operations 147.1 136.7 136.7
Longer-term refinancing
operations 60.0 60.0 60.0
Other operations 3.5 – –
Marginal lending facility 0.5 1.1 1.1
Deposit facility 0.4 0.1 0.1
*For longer-term trends and the contribution of the Deutsche
Bundesbank, see pages 14* and 15* of the Statistical Section of
this Report. — 1Including end-of-quarter valuation adjustments
with no impact on liquidity. — 2Including monetary policy
operations concluded in Stage Two and still outstanding in Stage
Three (outright transactions and the issuance of debt
certificates). — 3Levels as an average of the maintenance period
under review or the last maintenance period.
Deutsche BundesbankDecrease in
liquidity
requirements
Monetary
growth
reinforced by
the events of
September 11

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
18of the terrorist attacks of September 11. The
long-standing uncertainties in the inter-national equity markets suddenly multiplied,with the result that many investors apparentlypreferred to hold their funds in liquid andshort-term asset forms. At the end of Sep-tember, M3 throughout the euro area was7.6% up on the year, compared with 6.3%at the end of June; the moving 3-month aver-age of the year-on-year rates amounted to6.9% between July and September, against5.4% between April and June. Despite thesehigh growth rates, monetary expansion ispresumably posing little risk of inflation at thepresent time. Besides the above-mentionedportfolio shifts, it must be borne in mind,when interpreting the statistical growth ofthe money stock in the euro area, that suchgrowth overstates the expansion of liquidityin the eurozone because purchases of
money-market paper and short-term debtsecurities by non-residents of the euro areahave not yet been eliminated from the fig-ures. At present, such purchases are probablycontributing three-quarters of a percentagepoint to the annual growth rate of M3.
2
Among the individual components of themoney stock M3, it was particularly overnightdeposits that grew noticeably in the thirdquarter; they were increased massively, espe-cially in September. On balance, the seasonal-ly adjusted money stock M1 expanded morethan in the previous quarter, despite the fast-er decline in currency in circulation in view ofthe imminent introduction of euro currency.At the end of September, it was 5.2% higherthan a year before. The other short-termbank deposits, viewed as a whole, likewisebenefited from investors’ marked propensityto place funds at short term. While time de-posits with an agreed maturity of up to twoyears rose only moderately, deposits at anagreed notice of up to three months in-creased strongly between July and Septem-ber. The simultaneous reduction in longer-term savings deposits, the interest-rate ad-vantage of which has diminished significantlysince the spring, suggests that shifts in suchassets have occurred. Marketable instrumentsearning interest at market-related rates in-creased steeply again in the third quarter, al-Change from previous year, seasonally adjusted
%
%
Memo item
German contribution to M3
Scale reducedEuro area
Three-month
moving average
Reference value: 4 ½ %Growth of the money stock
M3 in the euro area
Deutsche Bundesbank12
10
8
6
4
2
008
7
65
4
1998 1999 2000 2001
2See the ECB Press Release, Monetary developments
in the euro area – September 2001, 26 October 2001.
Moreover, the ECB has announced that it will publish, to-
wards the end of November, an M3 time-series that is ad-
justed for distortions due to all marketable financial in-
struments held by EU non-residents. See ECB, Monthly
Bulletin, November 2001, page 5.Components
of the money
stock

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
19though the pace of their growth has recently
slackened somewhat.
Lending to the private sector slackened per-
ceptibly in the third quarter. At the end ofSeptember, loans by MFIs to the private sec-tor were 6.9% higher than a year before,compared with 8.4% at the end of June.Seasonally adjusted loans by MFIs to enter-prises and individuals went up at an annualrate of 5% between July and September,compared with 6% between April and June.At the end of September, they were 6.6%higher than a year earlier, against 7.9% atthe end of June. Direct lending by MFIs to thepublic sector decreased again in the thirdquarter. Monetary capital formation, whichhad slowed down in the previous quarter,continued to lose momentum during theperiod under review. Monetary expansionwas fostered in the third quarter by residentnon-MFIs’ payments to euro-area non-residents; according to the available data,there were inflows in securities transactionsin this sphere, especially in September, pre-sumably in connection with the terroristattacks on New York and Washington.
The German contribution to the money stock
M3 in the euro area, which, after seasonaladjustment, had increased faster than the ag-gregate as a whole in the first half of theyear, again expanded somewhat more strong-ly than the euro-area money stock M3 in thethird quarter. At the end of September, it was7.1% up on the year, against 3.7% at theend of June. Rather as at EMU level, thegrowth of the German contribution to M3was marked by a steep rise in overnight de-posits in September (see page 27f.). In add-
ition, debt securities issued with maturities ofup to two years and money-market-fund cer-tificates issued by German MFIs rose relativelystrongly.
On balance, long-term capital-market rates in
the euro area dropped further in the autumnmonths. Taking the average of the euro-areacountries, the yields on ten-year governmentbonds stood at just under 4
34% in mid-
November. Hence they were14percentage
point lower than in mid-August. The terroristattacks in the United States on September 11exerted no direct impact on the level of long-term yields. Up to the end of September, therates remained relatively constant, at around5%. But, as concern about further economicdevelopments in the euro area increased, adownward trend set in and was fostered bythe slightly declining inflation expectations ofmarket participants (manifest from surveys byexperts and from inflation-indexed bonds).Most recently, however, yields have gone upagain in the light of rising equity prices anddiminishing expectations of interest-rate cuts.
The interest-rate differential between the
capital market and the money marketwidened abruptly to over 140 basis pointsafter the interest-rate reduction by the Euro-system on September 17, but then narroweddistinctly again because of falling capital-mar-ket rates. After the latest interest-rate cut onNovember 8, the gap between long-term andshort-term rates widened again. At the timeof writing, at just over 1
14percentage points,
it was perceptibly above the level of mid-August (some 60 basis points). The uncer-Balance-sheet
counterparts
The German
contributionCapital-market
rates continue
to fall
Wider gap
between
money-market
and capital-
market rates

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
20tainty of market players about future move-
ments in bond prices, which is reflected in theimplicit volatility of options on futures con-tracts in long-term Federal bonds, increasednoticeably in the short run after the events ofSeptember 11. Not least on account of theswift and confidence-building liquidity andinterest-rate measures taken by the Euro-system, however, conditions largely calmeddown again there as early as the end of Sep-
tember.
Against the backdrop of the distinct slowdown
in economic activity expected in the UnitedStates, the yields on 10-year US Treasuries havedropped faster in recent months than those onsimilar bonds issued in euro-area countries. Asar e s u l t ,t h ey i e l da d v a n t a g eo fU Sg o v e r n m e n tbonds that has invariably been discernible inthe past few years changed in September intoan interest-rate gap in favour of euro-areabonds amounting at times to
13percentage
point. After the interest-rate cut by the US cen-tral bank at the beginning of October, that gapnarrowed slightly because the yields on USgovernment securities rose somewhat in hopesof an early recovery of US business activity. Butwhen those hopes had been largely dashed,and signs of a more pronounced slowdown ingrowth had emerged in the euro area, too, theinterest-rate advantage of euro-area bondsdiminished again, to latterly 12 basis points.
Risk premiums for corporate bonds of low
credit standing shot up (dramatically in somecases) after the uncertainties caused by theevents of September 11 – not only in theUnited States, but also in the euro area. Up tonow, such premiums have declined only inpart, in view of the generally poorer earningsprospects of enterprises, especially those incyclically more vulnerable segments of themarket.
In the euro-area equity markets, the persist-
ent price erosion since the spring of 2000continued during the summer months of2001, and right into the autumn. BetweenDaily data
%
%Per-
cent-
age
points
Volatility2
2000 2001Yield spread
between the US bond market
and the euro-area averageYields on ten-year government
bonds outstanding
Euro-area average1
GermanyBond-market yields
in the euro area
1Weighted average yield on ten-year gov-
ernment bonds issued by all euro-area
countries; weighted by GDP. — 2Implied
volatility of Bund futures.
Deutsche Bundesbank5.5
4.5
3.50.75+
0.50+
0.25+
0
0.25−
0.50−5.50
5.25
5.00
4.75
4.50
4.25
OND J FMAMJ J A SONDLong-term
interest rates
in the euro area
and the
United States
converge
Higher risk
premiums for
corporate
bonds of low
credit standing
Rally after
equity-market
downturn

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
21mid-August and the time of writing in No-
vember, the Dow Jones EURO STOXX indexfell altogether by a further 6%. Since theirall-time peaks in March 2000, the valuationsof listed European enterprises have thus de-clined by more than one-third. During theperiod under review, quotations came undermarked pressure, especially towards the endof August. After the announcement of terror-ist attacks on New York and Washington onSeptember 11, they downright plummeted.When equity trading resumed in Wall Streeton September 17, after an interruption dueto the assaults, prices plunged further in theUnited States and Europe alike. At the sametime, uncertainty about price movements (asmeasured by the implied volatility of optionson the Dow Jones EURO STOXX 50 index) as-sumed proportions such as had not been re-corded since the financial market crisis ofSeptember 1998. As early as the end of Sep-tember, however, conditions in the equitymarkets calmed down appreciably. By mid-October, prices in almost all major stock-market centres were on average above theirlevels prior to September 11.
Thus, the terrorist attacks directly affected
general market trends only temporarily. Butprice movements since then in the individualeconomic sectors have been rather diverse.Whereas, previously, it was securities fromthe high-tech and telecommunications sec-
tors that were under particular pressure, sub-sequently it was more equities from theconsumer-goods and capital-goods fields andthe transportation sector (and from banking)that fared worse than the average. Despitethe generally somewhat more moderate levelof valuations, it is now primarily the inauspi-cious economic outlook that is depressingequities in fundamental terms, and has al-ready led in some cases to noticeable reduc-tions in expected entrepreneurial earnings.
Daily data
Basis
points
0lin. scale  
Yield premium of corporate bonds
with a BBB rating relative to 10-year
Federal bonds2log. scale  
Dow Jones EURO STOXX
price index 1Valuations of firms
in the euro-area equity
and bond markets
1 End-1991 = 100; Source: Deutsche Börse
AG. — 2 Source: Bloomberg; rating as per
Standard & Poor’s.
Deutsche Bundesbank350
300
250
200
150400
350
300
250
July Aug. Sep. Oct. Nov.
2001
But diverse
price
movements in
different
sectors

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
22Financial markets
in GermanyCapital market and bank interest rates
German capital market interest rates declined
markedly for a time in the autumn months,before rising again towards the end of theperiod. The yield on ten-year Federal bondsoutstanding fell between mid-August andmid-November by
14percentage point to
412%. Interest rates on Federal securities
with a shorter residual maturity, which are in-fluenced more by conditions in the moneymarket, decreased over the same period by asmuch as
34percentage point. The interest
rate range of Federal bonds widened, particu-larly following the interest rate cuts made bythe Eurosystem. The estimated yield curve isnow likewise correspondingly steeper. In mid-November the interest rate spread betweenten-year and one-year Federal bonds observ-able in the market amounted to more than1
14percentage points, compared with34per-
centage point in mid-August. The gap be-tween German capital market rates and yieldsin the other euro-area countries again nar-rowed somewhat. In November ten-year Fed-eral bonds (Bunds) were about
14percentage
point lower than the average euro-area cap-ital market rate in that maturity range.
The interest rate spread between ten-year
debt securities issued by domestic banks andcomparable Federal bonds has narrowedsince mid-August. Of late it amounted tojust over
13percentage point. By contrast, the
interest rate spread of domestic corporatebonds over government bonds widened con-siderably during the same period. When thisReport went to press, the coupon of bonds is-sued by industrial enterprises in Germany wasDeclining
capital market
rates
Divergent risk
spread trends

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
23more than 112percentage points higher than
that of Federal securities. These divergenttrends are presumably due to different assess-ments of the respective credit standing of thetwo private bond categories, which were val-ued anew following the events of Septem-ber 11 in the United States. As in the Euro-pean segment, the dimmer economic outlookled to a larger risk premium for corporatebonds (which have a higher default risk) butnot for bank debt securities, which generallycarry a top-notch rating.
The yield curve has grown steeper at both
ends since mid-August in the wake of thesharper fall in the shorter-term segment. How-ever, the yields on longer-dated paper indicateno increase in market players’ inflation expect-ations. That conclusion is borne out by surveysof economic agents’ assessment of the long-term price outlook. The inflation expectationscomputed in this way for the average of thenext ten years in Germany amounted to 1.8%in October. The expected real capital marketrate for the ten-year maturity range in October(calculated as nominal yields less inflationexpectations) was 2
34%, compared with
around 4% on average during the 1990s.
Bank interest rates declined in autumn 2001 in
line with money and capital market rates. Inter-est rates paid on short-term deposits fell par-ticularly sharply between July and October. InOctober time deposits with a maturity of onemonth and three months (for an investmentvolume of DM 100,000 to less than DM 1 mil-lion) attracted only 3.1% interest, which wasaround
23percentage point less than in July.
Banks’ long-term lending rates decreased byroughly13percentage point. Mortgage loans
at a rate of interest locked in for ten years cost5.9% in October compared with 6.2% in July.The effective interest rates for long-term fixed-rate loans to enterprises fell to 6.4% (for acredit volume of DM 200,000 to less thanDM 1 million) and 6.2% (for a credit volumeof DM 1 million to less than DM 10 million). Intheir short-term lending rates, credit institu-tions passed on only part of the cut in centralbank rates to their customers. In Octoberbanks charged 8.6% for current account credit(for a credit volume of DM 1 million to lessthan DM 5 million), which was 20 basis pointsless than in July. The interest rate charged onpersonal credit lines was also reduced margin-ally to 12.6% on average when this Reportwent to press, which was almost 10 basispoints less than in July.Daily data
%
Percent-
age
points
OND J F MAMJ J A SOND
2000 2001Yield spread of ten-year over
one-year Federal bondsYield on Federal securities
outstanding...
...with a residual maturity of ten years
...with a residual maturity
   of one yearYields in the
German bond market
Deutsche Bundesbank1.5+
1.0+
0.5+
05.5
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
Steeper yield
curve
Lower bank
rates

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
24Share prices
The downward slide in the German equity
market initially continued in late summeragainst the background of the marked overalleconomic slowdown. Measured by the broadCDAX share price index, equity prices fell by13% between the middle of August andSeptember 10, the day before the terror at-tacks in New York and Washington. Follow-ing the attacks, share prices plummeted.Price volatility of German blue-chip stocksconcurrently soared to levels last seen duringthe turbulence on the international financialmarkets in 1998. Share trading in Germany –unlike in New York – was not suspended inthe wake of the events in the United States;turnover was more or less normal. However,open-outcry trading in US equities was haltedand the scheduled introduction of electronic
trading in US stocks on Xetra was postponed.In addition, German collective investmentcompanies temporarily discontinued the com-putation of unit shares also of mutual fundsthat do not invest in the United States.
By end-September the situation on the Ger-
man equity market had already calmeddown. Share prices rebounded and, whenthis Report went to press in mid-November,were 6% above the level of September 10.Although price volatility abated, it remainedat a comparatively high level. On balance,German equities have lost more than 40% oftheir stock market value since reaching theirhistorical peak in March 2000; this contrastswith a drop of just over one-third on the DowJones Euro STOXX share price index.
The recovery in stock market prices did not
embrace all market segments to the sameextent. The recovery was particularly pro-nounced on the Neuer Markt segment. In
mid-November the NEMAX All-Share priceindex was 24% higher than before the at-tacks. However, these gains need to be seenin the context of the very heavy losses overthe past 18 months. Even after the latest in-crease, the NEMAX index was 80% belowthe peak which it had attained in March2000. Hence the Neuer Markt has not yet
fully recovered from the crisis.
Borrowing in the securities markets
A significantly higher amount of funds were
again procured in the German bond marketMonthly averages
%
Current account credit 1
Mortgage
loans2
Time deposits4Yields on bank
debt securities3Bank interest rates
in Germany
1DM 1 million and more, but less than
DM 5 million. — 2 On residential property;
effective interest rate, fixed rate over ten
years. — 3 With a mean residual maturity
of over nine to ten years. — 4 Time de-
posits with an agreed maturity of onemonth for amounts of DM 100,000 and
more, but less than DM 1 million.
Deutsche Bundesbank9
8
7
65
4
32
1997 1998 1999 2000 2001
Terror attacks
at first
accelerated
fall in share
prices ...... then prices
recovered
Rising share
prices on the
Neuer Markt
segment
Sales of bonds

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
25in the third quarter than in the preceding
three months. Gross sales of bonds and notesissued by domestic borrowers, calculated atmarket prices, totalled 3202 billion (previous
quarter: 3178 billion). In the context of small-
er redemptions and smaller increases in is-suers’ holdings of their own bonds, net do-mestic bond sales raised 336
12billion, thus
surpassing the corresponding figure for thewhole of the first half of 2001 ( 330 billion).
This total includes short-dated paper withmaturities up to one year in the amount of34 billion, which in the previous quarter had
recorded net redemptions amounting to314 billion. By contrast, sales of foreign debt
securities, which on balance were exclusivelydenominated in euro, totalled less than 37 bil-
lion during the period under review, whichfell far short of the comparable figure in thesecond quarter ( 329 billion). The combined
net resources yielded by sales of both domes-tic and foreign debt securities in the Germanbond market in the third quarter of 2001thus came to 343 billion.
The increase in the volume of funds raised in
the bond market was due to buoyant issuingactivity both by domestic private borrowersand by public authorities. Between July andSeptember German credit institutions issuedproprietary debt securities for 312
12billion
net, compared with only 32 billion in the
second quarter. Other bank debt securitieswere once again to the fore, their outstand-ing volume rising by nearly 39 billion. Sales
of bank debt securities issued by specialisedcredit institutions brought in 36 billion, while
mortgage Pfandbriefe yielded just under 33
billion net. By contrast, the net outstandingamount of public Pfandbriefe again fell (by
35 billion). The banks likewise further re-
duced their liabilities arising from money mar-ket paper. Net sales of corporate debt secur-ities reached a record level of 38
12billion.
Enterprises predominantly issued money mar-ket paper ( 35 billion). At 315
12billion net,
government likewise borrowed considerablymore in the third quarter than in the preced-ing three months ( 35
12billion). The Federal
Government accounted for 314 billion of
this; the Länder Governments sold bondsworth 39
12billion. Debt securities issued by
the Federal special funds were redeemed inthe period under review in the amount of justover 38 billion.
Issuing activity in the German equity market
picked up a little in the third quarter of 2001but remained well below the comparablelevels of the past few years. Between July andSeptember domestic enterprises placed newshares in the German equity market with amarket value of 34
12billion, as against not
quite 33 billion in the previous three months.
IPO business virtually ground to a halt, how-ever. Only one enterprise was newly listed onthe stock exchange in the third quarter, com-pared with nine in the second quarter.
Investment activity in the securities
markets
Domestic non-banks, in particular, bought
bonds and notes on a sizeable scale in thethird quarter. On balance, they increasedtheir portfolios of debt securities by a further335 billion, compared with 318
12billion be-Buoyant issuing
activity by both
private and
public
borrowersIssuing activity
in the equity
market
Purchases of
bonds

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
26tween April and June. They mainly favoured
paper issued by domestic borrowers ( 331 bil-
lion). Foreign investors were likewise pur-chasers of domestic debt securities during thesummer months ( 316
12billion), preferring al-
most exclusively public bonds ( 315 billion).
Non-residents’ purchases were heavily con-centrated on September. This was no doubtconnected with the events of September 11.By contrast, German credit institutions resold38 billion net of bonded debt. While they
added 33 billion worth of foreign debt secur-
ities to their portfolios, they ran down theirholdings of both domestic government bondsand bank debt securities (by 38
12billion and
just under 33 billion, respectively).
Foreign investors were the principal pur-
chasers on the German share market in thethird quarter. They bought equities to the net
value of 310 billion. Domestic non-banks ac-
quired shares in German enterprises addingup to 39 billion net. This contrasts with the
German credit institutions, which again soldsuch securities on balance (for 314
12net). In
addition, both groups of domestic investorsreduced their holdings of foreign equities byaround 32 billion. In the case of non-banks a
key factor was the large-scale repatriation ofinternational shareholdings in Septemberwhen the uncertainty in the markets con-cerning the implications of the terror attacksin the USA was especially great.
Although sales of mutual fund certificates of
domestic collective investment companies re-covered somewhat in the third quarter of2001, they remained at a low level comparedwith their longer-term trend. Between Julyand September domestic collective invest-ment companies marketed units worth 310
12
billion net, compared with 3812billion be-
tween April and June. Net sales of foreign in-vestment certificates, by contrast, showeda slight quarter-on-quarter decrease to notquite 34 billion.
Between July and September domestic funds
open to the general public raised 34
12billion
net from the sale of certificates, which wasagain a little less than in the previous quarter(35
12billion). Given the volatile stock market
situation, retail investors were again moreinterested in liquid and comparatively safe in-vestment vehicles. This chiefly benefited themoney market funds, to which 33
12billion
accrued in the third quarter. Open-end realestate funds likewise remained popular, at-Investment activity in the German
securities markets
5billion
2001 2000
ItemApr. to
JuneJuly to
Sep.July to
Sep.
Bonds and notes 1
Residents 41.7 26.7 40.9
Credit institutions 2 23.1 – 8.2 19.6
of which
Foreign bonds and notes 3 14.1 2.9 8.6
Non-banks 4 18.6 34.9 21.3
of which
Domestic bonds and notes 3.8 31.0 10.2
Non-residents 3 – 3.4 16.5 18.1
Shares
Residents – 23.6 – 9.6 39.8
Credit institutions 2 – 26.1 – 16.3 – 2.6
of which
Domestic shares – 28.4 – 14.3 – 1.0
Non-banks 4 2.4 6.7 42.4
of which
Domestic shares – 39.5 8.9 – 4.2
Non-residents 3 70.9 9.9 10.8
Investment fund certificates
Investment in specialised funds 2.9 5.9 9.5Investment in funds opento the general public 5.6 4.5 7.7of which: Share-based funds 2.0 – 2.1 8.9
1Since the start of 2000 including non-bank debt securities
with an original maturity of up to and including one yearplus commercial paper. — 2Book values, statistically
adjusted. — 3Transaction values. — 4Residual.
Deutsche Bundesbank
Purchases of
sharesInvestment
fund certificates
Investors mainly
motivated by
security
considerations

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
27tracting 32 billion of fresh resources. These
two types of fund together raised the consid-erable sum of 314
12billion from investors in
the first nine months of this year. Share-basedfunds, on the other hand, were out of favour.They were obliged to repurchase certificateswith a total value of around 32 billion in the
third quarter. This means that the cumulativeamount of resources raised by such funds be-tween January and September was only 32
12
billion. In 2000 the sale of equity fund units
brought in the record total of 33812billion.
Institutional investors again showed greaterinterest in domestic specialised funds in thethird quarter, pumping in almost 36 billion
net. Almost half of this sum accrued to mixedfunds and another third to bond-based mu-tual funds. In the case of specialised funds,too, there are signs of restrained investmentbehaviour. In the wake of the bear marketand the related restructuring of portfolios,the percentage of resources invested bymixed securities funds in equities fell of lateto well below half.
Deposit and lending business of
monetary financial institutions (MFIs)with domestic customers
Domestic customers substantially increased
their overnight deposits with German MFIs inthe third quarter of 2001, measured on a sea-sonally adjusted basis. The pronounced prefer-ence shown by investors right since the startof the year for this particularly liquid form ofsaving appears to have been reinforced in thethird quarter by the growing liquidation ofstored cash, the fall in interest rates and thecontinuing decline in stock market prices. The
terrorist assaults in the USA on September 11had a similar effect as they caused un-certainty in the financial markets to swell ap-preciably. In particular, other financial inter-mediaries and households significantlystepped up their overnight deposits with do-mestic MFIs in the third quarter; at the end ofSeptember 2001 the sum total of overnightdeposits of all domestic non-banks lodged
%
0lin. scale
Share of assets of mixed
specialised funds invested in equities
End-of-quarter levelsREX performance index 1
End-1987 = 100log. scale
DAX
performance index 1
End-1987 = 1000Capital market trends
and equity investments
of mixed specialised funds
1 End-of-month levels. Source: Deutsche
Börse AG.
Deutsche Bundesbank60
55
50
45
40
35260
230
200
1708000
7000
6000
5000
4000
3000
1997 1998 1999 2000 2001
Large increase
in overnight
deposits

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
28with German MFIs was 15.6% higher than at
the same time last year.
By contrast, deposits with an agreed maturity
of up to two years expanded only moderatelyin the third quarter. In this case, too, the risewas principally attributable to other financialintermediaries and households. Deposits withan agreed maturity of up to two years ex-panded overall between July and Septemberby35.4 billion; in the third quarter of 2000
the increase had amounted to 312.3 billion.
Deposits with an agreed maturity of morethan two years were virtually unchanged dur-ing the period under review after havinggrown briskly in the second quarter (+ 32.3
billion) and moderately between July andSeptember last year (+ 30.6 billion). Domes-
tic insurance enterprises, which are tradition-ally the most important investor group for de-
posits with an agreed maturity of more thantwo years, have displayed marked restraint oflate in the pattern of their longer-term savingwith German MFIs. They were thus unable tocounterbalance the sustained fall in longer-term time deposits on the part of households.
Contrary to the usual seasonal pattern, de-
posits with an agreed period of notice ofthree months hardly decreased at all in thethird quarter of 2001 (– 30.1 billion). This
was because the first noticeable increase ob-served since the beginning of 1999 in specialsavings facilities attracting a higher rate ofinterest largely offset the ongoing decline of“conventional” savings deposits redeemableat three months’ notice. The apparent rise inattractiveness of more highly remuneratedshort-term savings deposits is presumablydue mainly to the far less pronounced slide intheir interest rates compared with longer-term savings deposits. Savings deposits re-deemable at a period of notice of over threemonths, which grew strongly during lastyear’s phase of rising interest rates, have con-tracted distinctly since the spring months;they decreased by 33.2 billion between July
and September. Some of this may have beenrechannelled into short-term savings de-posits.
Lending by German MFIs to domestic enter-
prises and individuals rose slightly in the thirdquarter, after having actually fallen in the pre-ceding three months, not least as a result ofextensive disposals of securities by GermanMFIs in connection with forward transactions.However, even unsecuritised loans to the do-Lending and deposits of monetary
financial institutions (MFIs)in Germany
*
5billion
2001 2000
ItemJuly to
Sep.July to
Sep.
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight + 17.6 – 13.6
With agreed maturities
up to 2 years + 5.4 + 12.3over 2 years – 0.1 + 0.6
At agreed notice
2
up to 3 months – 0.1 – 16.6over 3 months – 3.2 + 5.1
Lending
To domestic enterprises andindividuals
Unsecuritised + 7.6 + 23.0Securitised – 7.9 + 5.0
To domestic public authorities
Unsecuritised – 2.4 – 8.8Securitised – 8.2 – 5.8
*As well as banks (including building and loan associ-
ations, but excluding the Bundesbank), monetary finan-cial institutions (MFIs) here also include money marketfunds; see also Table IV.1 in the Statistical Section of thisReport. — 1Enterprises, individuals and public author-
ities (excluding the Federal Government). — 2Savings
deposits.
Deutsche Bundesbank
Moderate
increase in
short-term
time deposits
Stagnation of
longer-term
time depositsSavings
deposits at
three months’
notice virtually
unchanged ...
... also owing
to shifts within
savings deposits
Slight rise in
lending to the
private sector ...

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
29mestic private sector, which are not affected
by such transactions, grew during the periodunder review only at a seasonally adjusted an-nual rate of just over 2%. The growth ofloans was again fuelled principally by a mod-erate increase in medium and long-term bor-rowing, whereas short-term loans showed amarginal decrease after seasonal adjustment.
Of the main groups of borrowers, enterprises
expanded their credit from domestic MFIs alittle in the third quarter after having cut it ap-preciably in the preceding three months.Above all service providers, but also otherfinancial intermediaries and insurance enter-prises, took up considerably more resourcesfrom German MFIs in the period under reviewthan between April and June (measured on aseasonally adjusted basis). A certain counter-weight to this came from a sharp drop inbank loans to transport and communicationenterprises (in part this was a counterswingfollowing the steep rise in the second quarter)and the persistent decline in loans to themanufacturing sector. The moderate expan-sion of housing loans seen in the previousquarters continued; by contrast, borrowingby employees declined slightly.
As in the second quarter, the level of indebt-
edness of German public authorities to do-mestic MFIs decreased by 310.6 billion; in
the third quarter of 2000 the decline hadamounted to 314.6 billion. In contrast to the
pattern seen during the spring months, whensolely the volume of unsecuritised loans wasreduced, the decline in government debtowed to banks this time mainly took the formof a fall in domestic MFIs’ holdings of securi-tised claims on German public authorities(–38.2 billion). The decrease in loans by 32.4
billion chiefly concerned lending to the Fed-eral Government, whose deposits held withGerman MFIs similarly decreased by 31.2 bil-
lion. Seasonally adjusted
DM
billion 5 
billion
%lin. scale
Change from the previousyear18001900200021002200
log. scale
Loans1
oLoans to domestic
enterprises and individuals
1End-of-month level; excluding statistical
changes. — oFigures in euro from 1999.
Deutsche Bundesbank8
64
2
04300
4100
3900
3700
3500
1998 1999 2000 2001... and to
enterprises
Further
decrease in
public sector
debt

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
30Economic conditions
in GermanyUnderlying trends
The cyclical stagnation in the German econ-
omy persisted after mid-year. After ceasing toexpand in the spring months, overall outputremained largely at its previously attainedlevel in the summer. According to the Bun-desbank’s initial calculations, the figure forthe second quarter is likely to have been justabout maintained in seasonally adjustedterms. Even after adjustment for working-dayvariations, output was thus no more thanaround
14% up on the year. In the period
from April to June, the year-on-year figurehad been just over +
12%. Taking the first
three quarters together gives a year-on-yeargrowth rate of
34%.
The tendency to sluggishness in the economy
as a whole has become stronger recently.As is revealed by various surveys, there hasbeen a further clear deterioration in senti-ment both in the business sector and amonghouseholds. This is likely to be due, above all,to the general feeling of uncertainty in thewake of the terrorist attacks in the UnitedStates. There was a sharp fall in manufactur-ing orders in September, suggesting that, inmany cases, spending decisions have beenput on hold for the time being. On the labourmarket, the cyclical strains have remainedlimited. The fact that the rate of price increasehas gone back down significantly again is tobe rated positively.
It was essentially services that were a main-
stay of output in the summer months. Withinthe services sector, it was probably moreconsumption-oriented service providers thatStagnation of
GDP in the
third quarter
Acute
uncertainty as
a result of
terrorist attacks
Services have
stabilising
effect

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
31achieved positive results rather than the busi-
ness services sector, where the slowdown inmanufacturing and the continuing difficultsituation in construction had a dampeningimpact on business activity. This is also con-firmed by the surveys of the Centre for Euro-pean Economic Research (ZEW), which indi-cate a worsening of the situation for the ad-vertising industry and for firms of architectsand planners, in particular.
As far as it is possible to tell, exports have
held up at a fairly high level. In fact, there islikely to have been a significant increase inreal net exports in the third quarter. Althoughmanufacturing activity was still tending toweakness, this was also due to the fact thatmany enterprises were endeavouring to re-duce their high inventory positions. Moreover,the business sector was also hesitant to en-gage in new investment projects owing tothe depressed level of demand for industrialproducts caused by uncertainties about thefuture development of international trade.Restraint was exercised, in particular, in termsof orders in the telecommunications and ITsectors.
Sentiment among households has become
considerably gloomier over the past fewmonths, not least on account of the unpre-dictable political situation. Above all, the eco-nomic outlook was rated as unfavourable. In-come expectations, too, tended to be lesspositive, although current information on thelevel of incomes, by itself, hardly gives causefor a negative assessment. Rather, house-holds’ income in the summer months prob-ably remained at roughly the same level as inthe second quarter. Actual earnings in manu-
facturing (excluding construction and energy)are likely to have fallen by
14%, seasonally
adjusted, in July and August in comparisonwith the average of the second quarter. How-ever, the remuneration of wage and salaryearners in the public sector was raised by2.4% as of 1 September. Nevertheless, inorder to strengthen savings, households havecut back their consumption expenditureBalance
Balance
Households’ assessment
of the economic situation2Business climate in the
industrial sector 1
monthly
five-month
moving averageSentiment in the
industrial sector and
among households
1Seasonally adjusted data of the Ifo Insti-
tute; western Germany. — 2Bundesbank
calculations on the basis of data from the
“Gesellschaft für Konsumforschung”.
Deutsche Bundesbank50+
40+
30+
20+
10+
0
10−
20−
30−20+
10+
0
10−
20−
30−
1994 95 96 97 98 99 2001 00High level of
exports, and
destocking
Consumer
confidence and
consumption
behaviour

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
32somewhat when compared with the preced-
ing months, when the lowering of income taxhad been having a stimulating impact.
Output and labour market
Seasonally adjusted manufacturing output in
summer was somewhat lower than in thesecond quarter. While it was initially possibleto make up for most of the shortfalls in pro-
duction that had occurred in July owing tothe increased number of works holidays, thelevel of output was not quite maintained inSeptember. Seasonally adjusted, the volumeof production in the third quarter was morethan
12% down on the average of the pre-
ceding three months, in which there had al-ready been perceptible cutbacks. In summer,output was down over 12 months for thefirst time since early 1999 (by around 1
12%).
The decline in manufacturing output was ac-
companied by a fall in the level of capacityutilisation. According to the surveys of the ifoinstitute, seasonally adjusted capacity utilisa-tion was around 1 percentage point lower inSeptember than it had been three monthsearlier, and roughly 3 percentage points downon the year. The degree of capacity utilisationwas thus nearly corresponding again to themedium-term average, which is an approxi-mate reflection of neutral standard utilisation.
According to information on manufacturing
turnover, business with foreign customerswas holding up comparatively well up to theend of the period under review. Even thoughthe third quarter no longer showed a quarter-on-quarter rise in seasonally adjusted terms,year-on-year growth was still around 1%.The increase in turnover over 12 months wasmuch sharper in the case of producers of con-sumer goods. Capital goods producers, too,reported a higher-than-average increase indeliveries. By contrast, the result for the basicgoods sector was significantly down on theyear. This was likewise the case for domesticsales in that sector. Since the other sectorsSeasonally adjusted, quarterly
%%
Capacity utilisation 1
0Mean 1993-2000lin. scale
Change from previous yearOutput
1995 = 100, log. scaleOutput and utilisation
in the manufacturing sector
1Results of the Ifo business survey.
Deutsche Bundesbank88
8582
799+
6+
3+
0
3−124
121
118
115
112
109
106
103
100
1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001
Slight decline in
manufacturing
outputLower capacity
utilisation
Turnover only
slightly weaker

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
33also failed to achieve quite the same levels as
one year earlier, domestic deliveries were, onthe whole, noticeably down in the summermonths.
Output in the construction sector – and prob-
ably in the ancillary sectors, too – remained ata low level in summer. This means that thedownward trend, which had begun in themid-nineties and had intensified further atthe turn of 1999-2000, was at least interrupt-ed. Whether a turn for the better is in the off-ing must still remain an open question, how-ever. At all events, seasonally adjusted outputon an average of the third quarter wasaround
34% higher than in the spring quar-
ter. However, it was still considerably lower(– 9
12%) than the level in the comparable
period of 2000. In the period of April to June,however, the decline had been as much as12
14%, and in the first few months of the
year even as large as 1414%.
The year-on-year fall was especially large in
building construction. This was due, in par-ticular, to the sharp cut-back in business activ-ity in residential construction, which – meas-ured by turnover – was almost one-fifthlower at the end of the period under review.The slight increase in output in industrialbuilding, by contrast, had scarcely any im-pact. The situation in civil engineering wasmuch more favourable, the comparable turn-over figures for 2000 being largely matchedin both the industrial and public sectors.
So far, the labour market’s reaction to the
continuing stagnation of overall output hastended to be subdued. In particular, employ-ment has been cut back only slightly. By
August (more recent information from theFederal Statistical Office is unavailable atpresent), the seasonally adjusted number ofpersons in work had fallen to 38.76 million.Since the start of the present cyclical slow-down on the labour market, which set in atthe turn of 2000-01, employment has beenreduced in seasonally adjusted terms by atotal of 35,000 persons, or 0.1%. Besides theSeasonally adjusted, quarterly
%%
Capacity utilisation 1
0lin. scale
Change from previous yearOutput
1995 = 100, log. scale
xOutput and utilisation
in the construction sector
1Results of the Ifo business survey; western
Germany. — xProvisional pending adjust-
ment to the annual overall survey.
Deutsche Bundesbank65
60555010+
5+
0
5−
10−
15−
20−105
100
95
90
85
80
75
70
1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001Slight recovery
in construction
output
Subdued
reaction of
employment

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
34construction sector, which continued to show
a need for labour-employment adjustment,industry has recently also cut back its man-power levels slightly. In the services sector,staffing arrangements have likewise becomemore cautious. All in all, the year-on-yearincrease in employment was still just under30,000 in July/August, compared with around60,000 in spring.The number of persons registered as un-
employed rose between the most recent lowin December 2000 and the end of October by140,000 to a seasonally adjusted 3.92 million.The level in October was 115,000 up on theyear. The seasonally adjusted unemploymentrate, as defined by the Federal Labour Office,amounted to 9.5% at the end of the periodunder review; according to the InternationalLabour Office (ILO) definition, the figure was8.0%.
The deployment of labour-market-policy
measures has been further reduced overthe past few months. At 330,000 persons,around 60,000 fewer persons were attendingvocational training courses than one year pre-viously. Over the past 12 months, the numberof persons employed on job creation schemesand in structural adjustment measures fell by85,000 to 230,000. Even though this reduc-tion especially affected eastern Germany, thispart of the country still accounted for three-quarters of those employed by such meas-ures. By contrast, the number of older un-employed persons (58 years and above), whono longer have to be available for a jobplacement and are also not counted as un-employed, has increased to 245,000 over thepast few months. This was 55,000 more than12 months previously.
Orders
New orders received by German manufactur-
ers showed a further decline in summer 2001.On an average of the period from July to Sep-tember, they were 2
34% lower, seasonallyQuarterly
Millions
%Thou-
sands
0Unemployment rate
(seasonally adjusted)
Oct.Oct.Change from previous yearUnemployed
(seasonally adjusted)
Oct.July /
Aug.Change from
previous yearJuly /
Aug.Employed
(seasonally adjusted)Labour market
Deutsche Bundesbank12
1110
9400+
0
400−4.6
4.2
3.8
3.4800+
400+
0
400−38.8
38.4
38.0
37.637.236.8
- - 
1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001Unemployment
on an upward
trend
Cut-back in
labour-market
policy
Perceptible
decline in
incoming
orders

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
35adjusted, than in the preceding three-month
period. In September, especially, there wereacute shortfalls – probably as an immediatereaction to the terrorist attacks in the UnitedStates. This means that the fall in demand,which had begun in autumn last year, has sig-nificantly intensified of late. The year-on-yearfigure turned from + 10
12% in the final quar-
ter of 2000 to – 512% at the end of the
period under review. This chiefly reflects thesharp rise in orders that persisted up to theend of 2000.
In particular, there have been fewer orders
from abroad recently. This followed an inter-mittent recovery in spring, which was due,not least, to a number of large-scale orders.During the past three months, orders were,on average, a seasonally adjusted 4
14%
lower than in the second quarter and 6%down on the year. Since autumn 2000, exportorders have declined by almost 10% in sea-sonally adjusted terms, and were thus nohigher at the end of the period under reviewthan they were 18 months ago. By contrast,orders received from domestic customershave been cut back somewhat less. Above allrecently, they have held up better. This hasplayed a crucial role in their decline sinceautumn of last year being less marked, at aseasonally adjusted 5
12%, than that of ex-
port orders.
Demand for construction work fell again sig-
nificantly in the summer months. In seasonal-ly adjusted terms, new construction orders onan average of July and August were 6
14%
down on the spring, when demand had tem-porarily picked up. At all events, incomingorders were at roughly the same level as at
the beginning of the year, which meant thatno new low was produced. The figure was2
12% down on the year, compared with
114% in the second quarter.
In residential construction, in particular, the
situation with regard to demand has deterior-ated significantly. The year-on-year shortfallin orders latterly increased to nearly one-fifthSeasonally adjusted, quarterly, log. scale
DomesticForeignNew orders
Volume, 1995 = 100
TotalmonthlyDemand in the
manufacturing sector
Deutsche Bundesbank95115
100110
105
100120160
115155
105150
110145
100140
135
130
125
120165130
125
120
115
110
105
100
95
1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001
Declining
construction
demand

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
36again, having intermittently gone down to
1212%. The main reason for this was the fact
that demand in western Germany – whichhad been more or less stable for some time –witnessed a further dramatic fall. In seasonal-ly adjusted terms, it decreased in July/Augustby nearly 15% compared with the precedingmonths. Taking construction permits as a yard-stick, construction work is likely to have beenstarted on a smaller number of both single-
family houses and rental apartments.
The level of orders placed by public sector
and industrial customers in July and Augustwas also no longer as high as it had been be-fore. Specifically, the decline compared withthe second quarter in the public sector, at aseasonally adjusted 6
34%, was much sharper
than that in industry, where demand fell byonly 1
34%. Although this meant that there
was no continuation of the upturn observedin both sectors in the spring months, the levelof early 2001 was, at all events, at least notundershot and, in fact, continued to be ex-ceeded in the industrial sector. Even at theend of the period under review, orders werestill up on the year, i.e. by 1
12% in the case
of public sector contractors, and by 314%i n
the case of industrial customers.
Prices
The price climate in Germany was continuing
to improve up to the end of the period underreview. By October, the year-on-year rate ofincrease in the consumer price index hadgone down to 2.0%, having been 3.2% inthe second quarter of 2001. For the first timein some while, the current rate of price in-crease matched the rise reflected by the stat-istical core rates. This means that price devel-opments, measured year-on-year, are, on bal-ance, scarcely influenced at present by larger-scale special movements.
In seasonally adjusted terms, consumer prices
from the middle of the year onwards wereSeasonally adjusted, quarterly, log. scale
...in housing
   construction...of the
   public sector
- ...of industrial
   enterprises
- Volume, 1995 = 100
Construction orders...
...total
- 
July/
Aug.Demand for
construction work
Deutsche Bundesbank110
100
90
80
70
60
55100
90
80100
90
80
70100
90
80
70
1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001- Price develop-
ments more
favourable
again

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
37largely stable, whereas they had risen more
than 112% between January and June. This
was mainly due to the fall in energy prices,where lower prices for mineral oil products,in particular, have more than made up for thepersistent price increases in tenants’ costs forhot water and heating.
Furthermore, the rate of price increase for food
has been tending to slow down, since thesignificantly price-boosting effects of the BSEand foot-and-mouth disease crises haveabated, as has the impact of the intermittentlyunfavourable weather conditions. In the periodfrom January to June, food prices went up byaround 4
12% in seasonally adjusted terms, but
by no more than 0.7% in the months thatfollowed. Nevertheless, the year-on-year rise inOctober still amounted to 6.6%.
Price rises for manufactured goods were
much lower than this, with a year-on-yearrate increase of no more than 1.1% even atthe end of the period under review. Seasonal-ly adjusted, prices had risen by less than0.1% per month since mid-year. Rents riseswere likewise very subdued, with the year-on-year increase having been less than 1
14%
for some time. Inflation was much more pro-nounced in the case of services. This was not,however, due to current developments, butrather, for the most part, to increases in ad-ministered prices at the start of the year,which continue to affect the year-on-yearrate.
International oil prices during the past few
weeks were in the order of roughly US$ 21per barrel of Brent Oil. They were thus around1995 = 100, seasonally adjusted
Producer prices of agricultural
productsProducer prices
of industrial productsScale enlarged
Import priceslog. scale
Raw material prices 1Prices at various stages
of the economic process
1HWWA index of raw material prices;
Deutsche Mark basis; not seasonally ad-
justed.
Deutsche Bundesbank106
103
100
97
94
91100 100
9710310697112
100109
103106
103115118200
190
180
170
160
150
140
130
120
110
100
90
80
1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001Price
movements for
major groups of
goods
Lower oil prices
and import
prices

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
38one-third cheaper than one year previously,
when upward price fluctuations had been es-pecially large. Much the same applies to spotmarket prices for petrol and light heating oil.This was clearly reflected in German importprices and was a main factor in imports being3.6% cheaper overall in September than 12months earlier. Furthermore, iron and steelproducts as well as units for producing and
distributing electricity were much less expen-sive to buy than in 2000.
In September, domestic selling prices for Ger-
man industrial products were 1.9% up onthe year. This was much lower than in April,when the most recent peak had beenreached (5%). In addition to cheaper energy,lower prices were charged by producers ofintermediate goods. In summer, constructionwork cost scarcely more than 12 months pre-viously. In seasonally adjusted terms, the con-struction price level even went down slightlycompared with the spring. By contrast, agri-cultural prices at the producer level have re-cently started to rise again somewhat. Theyear-on-year rate of increase, which had fall-en to 3.2% in July, went back up to 4.8% inSeptember. This was due, firstly, to strong up-ward price pressure in the case of potatoes,owing to the fact that this year’s harvest wasnot as good as in previous years. Secondly,the fall in pig prices since the end of the win-ter has not continued. Following a slump inprices in the wake of the BSE crisis, beef cat-tle, too, have been becoming slightly moreexpensive again since February.Consumer price index
2001; Changes from previous year in %
Item 1st qtr 2nd qtr 3rd qtr Oct.
Energy sources 11.2 12.3 4.8 – 0.4
of which
Mineral oil prod-ucts 5.2 9.3 – 3.4 – 9.8
Food 2.7 6.2 6.4 6.6of which
Seasonal products 2.9 9.6 7.5 8.4
Meat and fish
products 4.6 8.4 8.8 8.3
Manufactured
goods 0.5 0.9 1.0 1.1
Services 3.0 2.9 3.0 3.2Rents 1.2 1.2 1.2 1.2
Total 2.5 3.2 2.5 2.0
Deutsche BundesbankPrice develop-
ments at the
producer level

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
39Appendix:
Price analysisin the periodof changeoverfrom the D-Markto the euroMany consumers fear that there will be unjus-
tified price rises during the changeover fromthe D-Mark to euro banknotes and coins atthe start of next year. The Federal StatisticalOffice and the Deutsche Bundesbank havetherefore decided to monitor and analyse theperiod of changeover to prices in euro in aparticular way. The studies will be conductedbetween spring 2001 and autumn 2002, andwill be based on individual data derived fromprice surveys on roughly 35 goods jointly se-lected from the consumer price index by theFederal Statistical Office and the Bundesbank.
The Federal Statistical Office will concentrate
on the question of whether changes in pricesassociated with the euro replacing the D-Markas legal tender will lead to prices that are “at-tractive” when converted into euro. As de-fined by the Federal Statistical Office, “at-tractive” means “smooth” prices ending in 0or 5 or “threshold” prices ending in 8 or 9.
1
Converting a threshold price of DM 1.99using the conversion factor of EUR 1 =DM 1.95583 produces a euro price of EUR1.02 (rounded to two decimal places). Sincethis is a disadvantageous price in psycho-logical terms, the retail trade – given an un-changed price strategy – might endeavour toachieve a price rounded down to EUR 0.99 orone rounded up to EUR 1.09. As long as pay-ment has to be made in D-Mark, these priceswould correspond to DM 1.94 and DM 2.13,respectively. The Federal Statistical Officedescribes such price changes as “euro-induced”, although this does not imply a
1Press release of the Federal Statistical Office,
23 October 2001, Preisdynamik beim Übergang auf
Euro-Preise.The study
method
employed by
the Federal
Statistical
Office

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
40claim to be stating anything about the rea-
sons for the price change in question.
By contrast, the Bundesbank will monitor
how frequently certain prices occur in thetotal number of individual data collected forthe price analysis, i.e. the frequency distribu-tions will be analysed. This will make it pos-sible to verify whether the categories of“smooth” prices and “threshold” prices, re-spectively, are especially well represented in
line with the theory of “psychological price-setting”. Furthermore, the changes in the dis-tributions will reveal what adjustments aremade in the majority of cases towards achiev-ing the attractive euro prices that are likely tobe desired in the end.
The analyses undertaken by the Federal Stat-
istical Office on the basis of the figures forthe past few months have shown that achangeover to attractive euro prices is ob-servable only in a small number of casesat present. The estimated impact of euro-induced price changes in the case of, say,grade-A butter, pasta products (made witheggs), and milk chocolate ranges between0.2 and 0.4 percentage points. The overallprice changes observed in the case of thethree products ranged between 3% (pastaproducts) and 6% (grade-A butter), meas-ured by the year-on-year rate of price in-crease between August 2000 and August2001, with no more than about 10% com-plying with the above-mentioned definitionof “euro-induced”.
The studies conducted by the Bundesbank so
far show that the empirical price distributionsare dominated by typical threshold prices. Inthe case of low prices for, say, food, the vastmajority of prices have the figure “9” in thesecond Pfennig place. For example, 22% ofall prices for pasta products observed bythose surveying prices at the start of the yearwere at DM 1.99, 9% were at DM 0.99. Inthe case of butter, 44% of reported priceswere at DM 1.89, and 22% were at DM 1.99.Percent-
age
shares
Percent-
age
shares
DMSeptember 2001Milk 1
January 2001September 2001Pasta products 1
January 2001Distribution
of consumer prices
1Owing to adjustment of extreme values,
figures do not add up to 100 %.
Deutsche Bundesbank60
50
40
30
20
10
040
30
20
10
020
10
020
10
0
2.25 2.00 1.75 1.50 1.25 1.00 0.75
Analytical
approach
taken by the
BundesbankInitial findings
of the Federal
Statistical
Office
Bundesbank
findings so far

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
41Price increases for some goods can be clearly
identified by shifts in the frequency distribu-tions for the individual months. This appliesespecially to food, but less so to technologicalproducts. In early 2001, 58% of all prices re-ported for UHT milk fell into the price cat-egories DM 0.95 and DM 0.99. In mid-year,the majority of prices (54%) had shifted toDM 1.19 (not DM 1.09). In the case of sugar,the reference figures were 58% for DM 1.69in January 2001, and 60% for DM 1.79 inSeptember.
These price increases are likely to have been
due to a number of factors, such as hardwheat becoming more expensive as well asshifts in supply and demand on account ofBSE and foot-and-mouth disease. It should benoted as a basic point that strict conversionfrom D-Mark into euro, followed by an ad-justment to threshold prices, often results in“lower” prices. For example, the changeoverfrom DM 1.99 to EUR 1.02 and an ensuingadjustment to EUR 0.99 results in a fall inprice of almost 3% – something which sup-pliers of food products are hardly likely to ac-cept gladly, given the (in many cases) narrowmargins in this area. Raising the price to EUR1.05, however, results in what looks like amuch less favourable price. Given the com-petitive situation and the growing awarenessof customers, increasing the price to EUR1.09 might be difficult to put into effect. Fur-thermore, the retail trade has committed it-self to convert existing selling prices correctlyat the time of the changeover to the neweuro currency and to apply the rounding rulesin accordance with the relevant EU regula-tion. It therefore appears to be the obviousthing to attempt price increases prior to the
changeover in order to gain leeway for pricereductions at a later date.
Upward price adjustments may also appear
desirable at present because of the intenseprice competition between large retailers atthe end of the nineties and in early 2000. Thiseven led to the Federal Cartel Office interven-ing to prohibit sales below cost price. As a re-sult, the intensity of retail trade competitionhas abated somewhat, and price increaseshave been easier to put into effect. Also, asalready mentioned, retail trade cost priceshave risen sharply in some cases. This is espe-cially the case for meat and milk products.
There is a possibility – which cannot be ruled
out – that the change in the appearance of
1995 = 100, log. scale
MilkPasta
productsConsumer prices
for pasta products and milk
Deutsche Bundesbank110
108
106
104
102
100
98
96
1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
42prices and the fact that they “look” lower as
a result of the currency changeover are seenas helpful in terms of price adjustments.Nevertheless, it would undoubtedly be in-accurate to regard the movements in foodprices over the past few months as being pre-dominantly euro-induced.Overall, the analyses so far do not permit
a final judgement to be formed concerningprice changes in connection with the change-over to euro prices. Reporting on this subjectwill be continued.

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
43Foreign trade and
paymentsForeign trade and current account
Owing to the growing gloom of the global
economic climate, German exporters havebeen trading in a sharply deteriorated envir-onment so far this year. The terrorist attacksin New York and Washington on 11 Septem-ber have greatly increased the uncertaintysurrounding future world economic develop-ments. It is true that foreign orders were stillat a relatively high level until the summer des-pite the adverse effects of the downturn inthe international economy, but new businesshas weakened markedly since then. The rapiddeterioration in business sentiment in foreignmarkets is even more clearly reflected in theexport expectations of German industry out-lined in the ifo business survey. In Septemberthese fell below their last lowest point at thebeginning of 1999. Despite that, exports re-mained surprisingly robust although that maybe largely due to the usual time lag betweenthe receipt of an order and its actual delivery.Even so, exports in the third quarter rose by2
12% at constant prices and after the elimin-
ation of seasonal factors; in terms of value,they were 2% above the corresponding levelin the previous period. After increasing in Julyand even more so in August, however, ex-ports were considerably more sluggish in Sep-tember.
Data on the breakdown of foreign trade by
country and category of goods are availableup to the end of August; exports of goodsrose by a total of just over 2
12% in the period
from June to August compared with the pre-vious three-month period. Deliveries to theeuro-area countries accounted for a sizeableExports
Breakdown of
exports

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
44part of this increase. Despite the cyclical
downturn in the euro area, this significantmarket for almost all sections of Germanbusiness represented an important mainstayduring the period under review with an in-crease in exports of 2
12%. The increase in ex-
ports to some non-euro-area countries waseven greater, however. One probable reasonfor this was that German exporters are highlycompetitive and in trade with customers out-side the euro area were benefiting from the
decline in the external value of the new singlecurrency.
1For example, exports to the United
States increased very steeply, at just over 7%,despite the cyclical downturn there. Orders formotor vehicles from the United States played aparticularly strong part in this development.This, incidentally, is consistent with the factthat this industrial sector – in contrast to othersectors such as mechanical engineering and in-formation and communications technology(ICT) – recorded a particularly favourable resultwith a 7
12%i n c r e a s ei ne x p o r t s .
Sales of goods to the central and east Euro-
pean countries in transition, whose share ofGerman exports is as large as that of theUnited States, also grew at an above-averagerate (3%) during the past few months. Bycontrast, exports of goods to South-East Asiadeclined sharply (– 5%). Demand for Germanproducts from this region weakened appre-ciably after a particularly sharp fall in incomein these countries that was associated withthe collapse in the ICT sector and the weakgrowth in the US economy.
Growth in imports also declined as a result of
the cyclical downturn in Germany. The sea-sonally adjusted value of imported goods inthe third quarter was as much as almost1
12% below the corresponding figure in the
second quarter. In the same period importDM
billion 5 
billion
%Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
lin. scale
Export expectations 1Orders received
from abroad
values, 1995 = 100140145150155160
135
130
125
120
olog. scale
ExportsExport trend
1Results of the ifo business survey; bal-
ances of positive and negative company re-
ports. — oFrom 1999 all data in euro.
Deutsche Bundesbank20+
15+
10+
5+
0
5−150
145
140
135
130
125
120155160165170175310
300
290
280
270
260
250
240
230230230
1998 1999 2000 2001
1The Bundesbank has adjusted its calculation of the indi-
cators of the price competitiveness of the German econ-
omy to take account of the procedure used by the Euro-
pean Central Bank for determining the real external value
of the euro. In terms of approach this method of calcula-
tion is virtually the same as that previously used for calcu-
lating the external value of the Deutsche Mark. Details
appear in the appendix to this article on page 50ff.Imports

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
45prices fell somewhat more sharply (– 2%).
The weaker demand from Germany equallyaffected both imports from the other euro-area countries, which supply almost one-halfof German imports, and purchases of goodsfrom non-euro-area countries. The closecross-border interdependence of modern in-dustrial production is a major reason forthe high degree of synchronisation betweenoverall economic demand and developmentsin foreign trade.
This is why the success of the German motor
industry in foreign markets also indirectlyboosts economic developments in the Euro-pean partner countries. For example, importsof motor vehicles and vehicle parts during thelast three months for which data are available(June – August) rose extremely sharply, at al-most 16
12%, compared with the previous
three-month period. By contrast, purchasesof goods in the ICT sector declined by morethan 3% compared with the previous period.Imports from the emerging markets in South-East Asia were particularly affected by this.Overall, these were 8
12% down on the previ-
ous period. Fewer goods were imported fromJapan, too; at 5
12%, however, the downturn
was not quite so pronounced in this case.
The improvement in the terms of trade for Ger-
many, a development which is associated withthe more relaxed situation on the crude oilmarkets during the year, and the growth in ex-ports, which was more robust than that of im-ports, resulted in a substantial increase in thesurplus on trade in goods in the third quarter;seasonally adjusted and at current prices, theoverall export surplus amounted to 324 billionRegional trend in foreign trade
June-August 2001; seasonally adjusted
Group of countries/country 5billionPercentage
changefromMarch-May
Exports
All countries 162.6 + 2.7
of which
Euro-area countries 70.0 + 2.5
Other EU countries 19.6 + 3.1United States 17.7 + 7.2Japan 3.4 + 4.9Central and east
European countriesin transition 17.7 + 3.2
OPEC countries 3.6 + 6.3Emerging markets in
South-East Asia 6.2 – 5.0
Imports
All countries 139.1 + 0.9
of which
Euro-area countries 58.2 + 0.8
Other EU countries 14.0 – 2.7United States 12.1 + 4.5Japan 5.6 – 5.5Central and east
European countriesin transition 17.7 + 6.9
OPEC countries 2.3 + 14.6Emerging markets in
South-East Asia 6.5 – 8.4
Deutsche Bundesbank
Current
account

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
46compared with 319 billion in the second quar-
ter. Developments in the field of invisible cur-rent transactions with non-residents also had afavourable impact on the external balancesheet of German business in the third quarter.An important part was played here by the factthat factor income in seasonally adjusted termswas almost in balance in the third quarterwhereas in the previous quarter it had run adeficit of just under 34
12billion. Other factors
were that, at 3512billion net, 33 billion less in
current transfers was paid on balance to non-r e s i d e n t si nt h et h i r dq u a r t e rc o m p a r e dw i t hthe second while the deficit on services, at 311
billion, was virtually unchanged. All in all, therew a sas u r p l u so nc u r r e n ta c c o u n to f 35
12bil-
lion after the elimination of seasonal factorswhereas in the quarter earlier there had been adeficit of 36
12billion. This means that in the
current year the cumulated current accountdeficit amounted to 32
12billion. Compared
with the deficit of more than 311 billion
incurred in the period from January toSeptember 2000, there has so far been an ap-preciable improvement in the current accountin 2001.
Financial transactions
The terrorist attacks of 11 September in the
United States also shook the financial worldand increased the uncertainty in the marketseven further. Internationally operating invest-ors reacted to the shock with a “flight toquality” and, additionally, with a reduction inthe cross-border components of their port-folios in some cases. The result was a sharpfall in the yields of bonds issued by first-classMajor items of the balance
of payments
5billion
2000 2001
Position 3rd qtr 2nd qtr 3rd qtr
I. Current account
1. Foreign trade 1
Exports (fob) 146.0 r 160.7 156.6
Imports (cif) 132.9 r 141.0 133.6
Balance + 13.1 + 19.7 + 23.0
2. Services (balance) – 12.6 – 11.2 – 14.03. Factor income (balance) – 1.8 – 1.9 – 1.24. Current transfers (balance) – 7.1 – 7.6 – 6.3
Balance on current account
2 – 10.0 – 2.4 – 0.3
Memo item
Balances, seasonally adjusted
1. Foreign trade + 14.0 + 19.0 + 24.12. Services – 9.4 – 11.2 – 11.03. Factor income – 2.1 – 4.3 – 0.64. Current transfers – 6.3 – 8.6 – 5.6
Current account
2 – 5.1 – 6.3 + 5.4
II. Balance of capital transfers 3 + 15.9 – 0.6 – 0.4
III. Balance on financial account 4 – 25.1 – 7.0 – 14.4
IV. Change in the foreign reserves
at transaction values(increase: –)
5 + 2.2 + 2.0 – 2.2
V. Balance of unclassifiable
transactions + 17.1 + 8.0 + 17.4
1Special trade according to the official foreign trade statistics
(source: Federal Statistical Office). — 2Includes supplementary
trade items. — 3Including the acquisition/disposal of non-
produced non-financial assets. — 4For details see the table
“Financial transactions” on page 47. — 5Excluding allocation of
SDRs and changes due to value adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankTrends in
financial
transactions

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
47borrowers and a temporary slump in the
share markets. Central banks on both sides ofthe Atlantic provided large amounts of liquid-ity and cut interest rates, not least in an effortto nip potential systemic risks in the bud andto counter the general feeling of uncertainty.
German financial transactions clearly exem-
plified the changed conditions on the inter-national financial markets: securities transac-tions led to net capital imports of 317 billion
in September alone. In the third quarter as awhole aggregate imports of funds amountedto326
12billion (compared with 322 billion
in the quarter before). Substantial inflows offunds from foreign investors were a particu-larly important factor here while German resi-dents were discernibly restrained in their in-vestment abroad in view of the events men-tioned. Although in the third quarter as awhole their net acquisitions of foreign paperamounted to 34
12billion, that was the small-
est amount they had invested abroad in asingle quarter since the start of monetaryunion (second quarter: 344
12billion). More-
over, they made their purchases exclusively inJuly and August; in September it was salesthat predominated ( 35
12billion).
In the case of transactions in foreign shares
selling actually predominated throughout thequarter. Between July and September Ger-man investors withdrew a net sum of 36
12
billion from foreign share markets; already in
the first six months of 2001 they had been in-creasingly cautious about investing in foreignshares owing to the growing cyclical risksworldwide and negative corporate reports.Even so, it is remarkable that in the periodFinancial transactions
5billion, net capital exports: –
2000 2001
Item 3rd qtr 2nd qtr 3rd qtr
1. Direct investment + 25.8 – 27.1 + 17.3
German investment
abroad + 7.6 – 33.1 + 2.8Foreign investmentin Germany + 18.2 + 6.0 + 14.6
2. Portfolio investment – 29.8 + 22.1 + 26.7
German investment
abroad – 56.4 – 44.7 – 4.3
Shares – 29.8 – 11.1 + 6.3
Investment fundcertificates – 5.9 – 4.7 – 3.8Bonds and notes – 22.4 – 28.1 – 6.4Money market paper + 1.6 – 0.8 – 0.5
Foreign investment
in Germany + 26.6 + 66.8 + 31.0
Shares + 6.9 + 70.8 + 15.0
Investment fundcertificates + 1.5 – 0.6 – 0.5Bonds and notes + 19.0 + 11.0 + 18.7Money market paper – 0.8 – 14.4 – 2.1
3. Financial derivatives
1 – 0.8 + 2.6 – 4.3
4. Credit transactions – 19.5 – 4.2 – 53.5
Credit institutions – 26.8 – 35.0 – 43.6
Long-term – 11.2 – 0.2 – 4.9
Short-term – 15.6 – 34.8 – 38.6
Enterprises and indivi-
duals + 1.8 + 8.2 + 0.6
Long-term – 0.5 + 1.5 + 1.1
Short-term + 2.4 + 6.7 – 0.5
General government – 15.0 + 3.5 + 0.6
Long-term – 1.1 + 0.1 – 0.2
Short-term – 13.9 + 3.4 + 0.8
Bundesbank + 20.4 + 19.1 – 11.2
5. Other investment – 0.8 – 0.3 – 0.66. Balance of all statisti-
cally recorded capitalflows – 25.1 – 7.0 – 14.4
Memo item
Change in the foreignreserves at transactionvalues (increase: –)
2 + 2.2 + 2.0 – 2.2
1Securitised and non-securitised options and financial
futures contracts. — 2Excluding allocation of SDRs and
changes due to value adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankPortfolio
investment
German invest-
ment abroad
Shares

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
48under review it was not, say, US stocks that
they were selling but, instead, mainly Euro-pean ones.
The funds that thus became available did not
result in German investors increasing theirpurchases of foreign bonds and notes. On thecontrary, between July and September Ger-man residents spent no more than 36
12bil-
lion in acquiring debt certificates issued bynon-resident borrowers whereas in the previ-ous three-month period they had invested328 billion in this segment. In the period
under review – in contrast to the secondquarter – there was a shift from foreign cur-rency paper into euro paper. This may bepartly due to the fact that the interest rateadvantage of long-term dollar assets overcomparable (German) Federal Governmentbonds with a ten-year maturity, which at the
end of June had still been over 40 basispoints, declined sharply during the summerand following the terrorist attacks in theUnited States actually turned into a tempor-ary interest rate disadvantage for the US dol-lar amounting for a time to just under 20basis points.
While German residents, in other words, had
been extremely cautious in their investmentin foreign paper, Germany, on the otherhand, was again proving to be a safe havenfor international financial investors. However,this is not immediately apparent from the ag-gregate figures. Overall, non-resident invest-ors acquired German securities worth 331
billion between July and September; in termsof the amount that was only about one-halfof the sum they had invested in the threemonths earlier. At that time, however, the fig-ures had been considerably distorted as a re-sult of one large equity swap in connectionwith a corporate takeover and the settlementof option and futures contracts that had pre-viously been concluded. The changed situ-ation therefore does not become clear until acomparison is made with the first quarterwhen foreign investors had sold Germanpaper for 34
12billion net.
There were also shifts with respect to the in-
struments preferred by buyers, presumably asa result of risk reassessments. For example,Federal bonds, which in view of their high de-gree of liquidity and security are regarded asfirst-class quality paper, clearly gained groundduring the quarter under review. In eachof the three previous quarters, by contrast,Capital exports: +
 5 
billion
 5 
billion
Bonds and notes
2nd qtr 3rd qtr 4th qtr 1st qtr 2nd qtr 3rd qtrEquities 1German portfolio investment
abroad
1Including investment fund certificates.
Deutsche Bundesbank40+
30+
20+
10+
040+
30+
20+
10+
0
10−
2000 2001
Bonds and
notesForeign
investment
in German ...
... bonds and
notes

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
49foreign investors had been reducing the
amounts of Federal bonds in their portfolios.Overall, that is to say, including the acquisi-tion of bank bonds, foreign capital amount-ing to 318
12billion flowed into the German
bond market between July and Septembercompared with 311 billion in the previous
three-month period.
Foreign investors also purchased German cor-
porate shares worth 315 billion. They were
evidently taking advantage of the lowerprices to “make a start”, thereby defying thefairly unfriendly stock exchange climate inGermany during the period under review.
In the field of direct investment international
investors operate in accordance with a strat-egy that only indirectly takes account of themotive of caution related to the given situ-ation. Thus, the recent events in internationalpolitics have had a very much smaller impacton this segment of the financial account thanwas the case in cross-border portfolio invest-ment. With gross turnover of entirely normalproportions there were net capital imports ofjust over 317
12billion in the three months of
July, August and September whereas in theprevious quarter there had been net capitaloutflows (of 327 billion), largely as a result
of one single transaction. The outcome of theperiod under review was principally deter-mined by foreign firms which – primarilythrough short-term intra-group credit oper-ations – provided their subsidiaries domiciledin Germany with funds amounting to a totalof314
12billion. US proprietors were not the
least active in strengthening their position inGermany in this way. In the period under re-view, however, there were also net capital im-
ports (of 33 billion) through German firms
doing exactly the opposite, that is to say,through transactions with their subsidiariesoperating abroad in which it was creditsgranted or repaid by subsidiaries domiciled inother euro-area countries to their Germanparent companies that played a major role.As has happened fairly frequently in the re-cent past, developments in the field of directinvestment were again dominated by enter-prises in the telecommunications sector.
Even if only to a very limited extent, there
were also net imports of funds through thestatistically recorded non-securitised credittransactions of the non-banks between Julyand September. For example, there was an in-flux of 3
12billion net through the activities of
German enterprises and individuals. Thesewere mainly financial transactions with for-eign enterprises that are not classified underdirect investment. The cross-border financialoperations of general government were ofthe same order of magnitude.
Among the elements forming the counterpart
to the aforementioned capital imports throughforeign payments were the fairly substantialnet capital exports of the banking system(credit institutions and the Bundesbank)amounting to just under 355 billion. Non-
securitised credit transactions of credit institu-tions with business partners abroad account-ed for 343
12billion of this. A further 311 bil-
lion was exported through the accounts ofthe Bundesbank; as usual, this was mainlydue to the balances arising within the large-value payment system TARGET.... shares
Direct
investmentCredit
transactions ...
... of non-banks
... of the
banking system

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
50The foreign reserves of the Bundesbank, the
change in which is not included in the figuresmentioned, rose – at transaction values – byjust over 32 billion in the three months of
July, August and September whereas be-tween April and June they had declined byvirtually the same amount. The increase inthe German reserve position in the IMF,which came about as a result of the drawingsof other IMF member countries, was recentlyof importance.
2However, the reserve hold-
ings, which are valued at current marketprices and exchange rates, were, at 394
12
billion, somewhat lower at the end of Sep-tember than at the end of the second quarter
(just under 396 billion). The exchange rate
losses of the US dollar in the period under re-view had a particularly negative effect on thelevel of these holdings.
Appendix
New calculation of the indicators of the price
competitiveness of the German economy
As a supplement to the effective exchange rates of
the euro published by the ECB, the Bundesbankhas been publishing indicators of the Germaneconomy’s price competitiveness vis-à-vis othercountries since the beginning of 1999. The pur-pose of these indicators is to measure price trendsin Germany in relation to the prices of foreigncompetitors taking due consideration of exchangerate movements. To that extent the indicators havethe same objective as the indices of the real exter-nal value of the Deutsche Mark that were pro-duced up to the end of 1998 and until now werecalculated in the same way.
3This method is now
being adjusted to take account of the approachused by the ECB for the real effective exchangerates of the euro. To enable a consistent interpret-ation to be made of the results the external com-petitiveness of the German economy will be meas-ured in future using the same procedure and thesame database as for the competitiveness of the
entire euro area.
The calculation methods used by the ECB
4and the
Bundesbank were already very similar. They dif-fered only in the measurement of the domesticsupply of goods on the markets of competitorcountries. While up until now the domestic supply,which together with the imports from other coun-tries constitutes the competition facing Germanexporters of goods on a given export market, wasrepresented by the gross value added by themanufacturing sector (excluding mineral oil refin-ing) of that country, the gross value added which isnow used for the purpose is extended to includethe net imports of manufactured goods. As in theprevious method, however, this is only a makeshift2Furthermore, the Bundesbank has changed the organ-
isation and method of recording certain investment oper-
ations (reciprocal repos). Consequently, those transac-
tions, which used to cancel out, are now shown gross;
they therefore show up both in the foreign reserves and
in the external liabilities of the Bundesbank. At the end
of September the external liabilities arising from this
amounted to 31.8 billion. The relevant data are regularly
published on the Bundesbank’s website in accordance
with the Data Dissemination Standard of the IMF.
3See Deutsche Bundesbank, Updating the calculation of
the external value of the Deutsche Mark and adjusting it
to the conditions of European monetary union, Monthly
Report, November 1998, page 53 ff.
4See ECB, Effective exchange rates for the euro, Month-
ly Bulletin, October 1999, page 29 ff.Foreign
reserves of the
Bundesbank

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
51Weighting pattern of the original and the recalculated indicators of the price
competitiveness of the German economy
Weight in the total index in thousandths
German economy’s competitiveness vis-à-vis ...... a narrow group of countries ... a broad group of countries
Group of countries/countryOriginally
1
19 industrial
countriesNow 2
19 industrial
countriesOriginally 1
39 countriesNow 2
49 countries
Narrow group of countries 1,000.0 1,000.0 793.3 772.8
EU countries 654.3 702.5 553.8 559.0
Euro-area countries 512.3 553.0 436.1 441.2
Austria 53.8 56.3 46.9 44.1Belgium
3 66.5 65.5 3 56.7 53.3
Luxembourg 3 .4 . 8 3 .4 . 1
Finland 14.1 15.0 11.6 10.7France 140.2 143.4 119.4 116.0Greece 5.1 5.7 4.4 4.6Ireland 10.3 12.4 8.9 10.1Italy 108.5 113.7 91.4 86.1Netherlands 64.1 80.1 54.1 65.8Portugal 11.7 12.4 10.4 10.8Spain 38.1 43.7 32.4 35.6
Other EU countries 142.0 149.5 117.7 117.8
Denmark 17.2 19.0 14.7 15.6Sweden 28.7 27.6 24.1 21.3United Kingdom 96.2 102.8 78.8 80.9
Other countries belonging to thenarrow group 345.7 297.5 239.6 213.8
Norway 7.9 8.8 6.7 7.3Switzerland 55.9 50.1 47.8 41.3Canada 10.8 10.8 8.2 8.3United States 148.3 133.5 101.5 94.9Japan 122.8 94.4 75.2 61.9
Countries additionally included in thebroad group . . 206.7 227.2
Countries originally included . . 206.7 206.0
Poland . . 15.5 18.0Russian Federation . . 16.0 12.5Slovenia . . 5.1 5.0Czech Republic . . 14.2 16.5Hungary . 8.5 11.4China . . 29.3 25.7Hong Kong,
Special administrative region . . 9.1 10.2
India . . 6.8 7.8Indonesia . . 5.1 5.3Israel . . 4.4 4.4Korea, Republic of . . 16.3 15.9Malaysia . . 7.1 7.7Singapore . . 10.7 9.7Taiwan . . 16.2 13.2Thailand . . 8.8 6.6Turkey . . 11.4 13.4Brazil . . 8.4 8.1Mexiko . . 4.3 4.7Australia . . 3.9 4.4South Africa . . 5.4 5.5
Countries recently added . . . 21.2
Estonia . . . 0.5Croatia . . . 2.6Romania . . . 3.8Slovakia . . . 6.4Cyprus . . . 0.3Philippines . . . 2.6Argentina . . . 1.9New Zealand . . . 0.9Algeria . . . 0.4Morocco . . . 1.6
Total 1,000.0 1,000.0 1,000.0 1,000.0
1Based on the years 1993 to 1995. — 2Based on the years
1995 to 1997. — 3The figures for Belgium include those
for Luxembourg, with which Belgium had a currency asso-ciation.
Deutsche Bundesbank

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
52means of adequately quantifying the relative im-
portance of the domestic supply of goods and thesupply of goods provided by foreign competitorson the market of the country concerned. There isno single approach that satisfies all aspects of theproblem. Basically, imports are given as gross vari-ables which could be compared with the domesticsupply correspondingly defined as the sum of do-mestic turnover. Owing to intermediate industrialturnover, however, this aggregate, when com-pared with imports, would be excessively inflated
by the double counting of inputs within the manu-facturing sector. In comparison with imports, onthe other hand, the gross value added by themanufacturing sector appears to be too low be-cause it does not include the inputs of other do-mestic economic sectors or inputs from abroad,which likewise contribute to the value of compet-ing home-produced industrial products. Owing toa lack of the necessary statistics, an attempt ismade to arrive at a gross variable for output that ismore comparable with the level of imports by ex-tending the gross value added by at least the in-dustrial inputs which are purchased abroad andwhich are estimated on the basis of the importedmanufactured products. To make a rough estimateof the domestically produced supply of goods onthe home market the exports are then deductedfrom total domestic output which is approximatedas the sum of gross value added and imports.
5
The Bundesbank is taking over from the ECB notonly the calculation method but also the period forderiving the weighting pattern (1995 to 1997) andthe database for quantifying the weights. The dataon exchange rates and consumer prices for estab-lishing historical and current values also come fromthis source. Besides using the consumer price in-dices, the Bundesbank will also continue to drawon the deflators of total sales in the national ac-counts as price indicators. The ECB has not takenthese into account so far. However, these calcula-tions by the Bundesbank are necessarily restrictedto the industrial countries which are already in-cluded and for which data are available. The nar-row group of countries was therefore retained as itwas whereas the broad group of countries – in-1st qtr of 1999 = 100, log. scale 1
88
92
96
100
104
108
112...a broad group
   of countries
   (based on consumer prices)
New index
(49 countries)Original index
(39 countries)
1992 200188
92
96
100
104
108
112Competitiveness vis-à-vis...
...a narrow group
   of countries
   (based on the deflator
   of total sales)
Original
index
New
indexIndicators of the
price competitiveness
of the German economy
1 Inverted scale: rise in the curve (decline in
values) represents an increase in competi-
tiveness.
Deutsche Bundesbank93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00
5See P . Turner and J. Van’t dack, Measuring International
Price and Cost Competitiveness, BIS Economic Papers
No. 39, 1993, page 22 f.

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
53cluding the euro-area countries – now comprises
all of the countries selected by the ECB.
As can be seen from the overview, no major
changes have arisen as a result of the updating ofthe weighting base and the methodological modi-fications. Despite the inclusion of additional coun-tries, this also applies to the indices of the broader
group of countries because these new countrieshave only a small overall weight. The trend of thenewly calculated indicators therefore correspondsto a very large degree with the earlier results (seethe chart on page 52).

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
54Public financeCentral, regional and local authorities
In the third quarter of 2001, the central and
regional authorities (the figures for the localauthorities are not yet known) recorded adeficit of 39
12billion. This was 31 billion
lower than during the same period last year(excluding UMTS proceeds). The individuallevels of government developed very differ-ently. While the deficit of the Federal Govern-ment decreased by 34 billion, particularly in
connection with substantial privatisation pro-ceeds, the deficit of the Länder Governmentsrose by 34
12billion. The main reasons for
this were the steep drop in tax receipts andthe fact that the large capital injection pro-vided to Bankgesellschaft Berlin had an im-pact on the budgetary position. The off-budget special funds were 31
12billion up on
the figure for the same period last year.
The final budget positions of the central, re-
gional and local authorities for 2001 will beconsiderably less favourable than at the endof last year, when the aggregate deficitreached 334 billion. This is mainly due to the
tax cuts which came into force at the begin-ning of the year, whereas the additional bur-dens resulting from the general economicslowdown should be fairly limited, judgingfrom the present perspective. Revenue willdecrease overall, although non-tax receipts –above all privatisation proceeds and the profittransferred by the Bundesbank – will besignificantly higher than in 2000. The verylarge non-tax receipts should therefore leadto an improved budget position for the Fed-eral Government and the special funds com-pared with 2000. The financial balances ofThird quarter
2001 as a
whole

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
55the Länder Governments and the local au-
thorities will deteriorate considerably, how-ever.
Next year, tax revenue will increase again
while non-tax receipts should decrease andtotal revenue growth will be muted. In orderto achieve a perceptible reduction in the highgovernment budgetary deficit, expendituregrowth, as things now stand, needs to bekept below 1%.
Tax receipts
1of the central, regional and local
authorities fell by a further 3.3% in the thirdquarter in comparison with last year. This wasdue not only to the tax shortfalls resultingfrom the tax reform but also to the economicslowdown. In the case of income taxes, wagetax – following the income tax rate cut intro-duced at the start of 2001 – yielded 4.5%less than in the same period last year. Rev-enue from assessed income tax also de-creased further (– 3.5%) in the wake of thetax rate cut. However, tax prepayments werereduced less than expected, apparently be-cause entrepreneurs have made only limiteduse so far of the new facility to partly offsettrade tax against their income tax liability atthe tax prepayment stage. A sharp drop inreceipts was recorded for corporation tax; inthe third quarter outflows in the form ofrefunds outweighed inflows for the first timein a long while (– 30.6 billion). This repre-
sents a year-on-year decrease of 35.5 billion.
Besides the substantial cut in tax rates, thedownward trend in corporate profits alsoplayed a role in this. In addition, corporationtax receipts continued to be reduced consid-erably by the disbursement of profits retainedin earlier years (under the “EK 45” tax rule),
evidently as a reaction by many enterprises tothe cancellation of the lower corporation taxdistribution rate at the turn of 2001/02. Onthe other hand, these special profit distri-butions led to another sharp increase in rev-enue from non-assessed taxes on earnings(by31.8 billion or 47%).
Among the indirect taxes, turnover tax re-
ceipts increased by only 0.9%. They were de-pressed by the general economic slowdownas well as a further fall in taxable public andhousing investment. By contrast, mineral oiltax yielded a growth of 6.8% owing to theChange from previous year
%
Tax receipts, total 1
1st hf 2nd hf 1st hf 2nd hf1st
qtr2nd
qtr3rd
qtr4th
qtrTax revenue *
*Out-turn in Germany as a whole. —
1Including EU shares in German tax rev-
enue, but excluding receipts from local
authority taxes, which are not yet known
for the last quarter recorded.
Deutsche Bundesbank8+
6+
4+
2+
0
2−
4−
6−
8−
1999 2000 2001
1Including the EU shares in German tax revenue but ex-
cluding receipts from local authority taxes, which are not
yet known.Outlook
Tax receipts in
the third
quarter ...

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
56further tax rate increase which came into ef-
fect at the beginning of the year.
On account of the economic slowdown, tax
revenue for the whole year will be less thanwas expected in the spring.
2According to the
new official tax estimate, tax receipts will de-crease by 3.9% compared with last year; thiswould imply 36.6 billion less than predicted
in the May forecast. Particularly due to thelarge revenue shortfalls related to the tax re-form, the overall tax ratio will decline sub-stantially this year by 1.4 percentage pointsto 21.7% – as defined in the government fi-nancial statistics.
The expected revenue shortfalls vis-à-vis the
spring forecast primarily concern turnovertax, corporation tax and trade tax. They willbe offset to some extent by additional re-
ceipts from non-assessed taxes on earnings.In addition, wage tax and assessed incometax also look likely to show a more favourableout-turn than was expected in spring. This ispartly related to a somewhat stronger growthof average actual earnings and to the factthat – contrary to original expectations – thepartial offsetting of trade tax against incometax liability will only reduce income tax re-ceipts after 2001.
Next year the tax shortfalls will increase con-
siderably compared with earlier expectationsas a result of the slackening economy. Thenew official tax estimate predicts that tax rev-enue – adjusted for the changes in tax legis-lation – will be 39.8 billion smaller than the
figure estimated in May 2001.
3In contrast to
2001, however, tax revenue will rise signifi-cantly in a year-on-year comparison. Includ-ing the expected additional receipts from rais-ing the taxes on tobacco and insurance aswell as the measures to combat turnover taxfraud, tax revenue will increase by almost 4%based on the new official estimate. Lifted alsoby the effects of income tax progression, taxrevenue should therefore grow by roughly1 percentage point more than nominal GDPso that the overall tax ratio will increase by0.2 percentage point to 21.9%.
The Federal Government recorded a deficit of
34 billion between July and September 2001,Trends in the revenue from major taxes
Revenue
in5billion
1st to 3rd quarter
Type of tax 2000 2001Change
frompre-viousyearin %
Wage tax 94.9 93.7 – 1.3
Assessed income tax 7.3 4.1 – 44.0Corporation tax 18.6 1.5 – 92.1Turnover tax 104.5 103.3 – 1.2
of which: 3rd quarter
Wage tax 33.0 31.5 – 4.5
Assessed income tax 3.4 3.2 – 3.5
Corporation tax 4.9 – 0.6 .Turnover tax 34.2 34.5 + 0.9
Deutsche Bundesbank
2Whereas economic growth of 312% in nominal terms
and 2% in real terms was expected in spring, the new
official tax estimate envisages nominal GDP growth in
2001 of 2% and real GDP growth of34%.
3Nominal economic growth is now put at about 3%,
1 percentage point lower than before.... and in 2001
as a wholeTax receipts in
2002
Federal
Government

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
57compared with a budget gap of 38 billion in
the same period last year. The reason for thisimprovement was the buoyant growth inrevenue (6
12%). Although tax receipts de-
creased by 112%, non-tax revenue doubled
to39 billion because, in contrast to last year,
substantial proceeds from asset disposalswere booked in the government’s budget ac-counts. Expenditure decreased by 0.8%. TheFederal Government’s budget for this yearpredicts a deficit reduction of 31
12billion to
32212billion. From the present perspective
this target seems attainable. It seems likelythat additional burdens, especially with re-spect to tax revenue and labour market-related expenditure, will be offset throughfavourable trends in other areas (especiallytransfers to the EU, interest payments, guar-antees and non-tax receipts). Next year theFederal Government’s net borrowing – ac-cording to the recently concluded deliber-ations of the budget committee – should besomewhat lower than the correspondingtotal budgeted for 2001. The figure whichwas already included in the draft budget for2002 therefore remains unchanged.
4The rev-
enue shortfalls resulting from the revised taxestimate plus the additional burdens arisingfrom labour market-related expenditure areto be compensated not least by additionalprivatisation proceeds. The Federal Govern-ment’s decision not to incur additional debtdespite the worsening cyclical position is apositive fiscal sign. However, the expedient ofselling public assets will not improve theunderlying budgetary position.
The special funds broke even in the third
quarter of 2001, following a deficit of 31 bil-lion in the third quarter of last year. A large
surplus is expected for the year as a whole,after a deficit of 31
12billion in 2000. The rea-
son for this is that any surplus of the Bundes-bank profit exceeding 33.6 billion (DM 7 bil-
lion) is allocated to paying off the debt of theRedemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities. Thisyear the income share from the Bundesbank’sprofit increased sharply from 3
12billion to
almost 35 billion.
The deficits in the Länder Government
budgets showed a further sharp rise in thethird quarter. They increased to 35.6 billion,
a deterioration over twelve months of 34.5 5 
billion
 5 
billion
cumulative
20012000
1
1st qtr. 2nd qtr. 3rd qtr. 4th qtr.Quarterly results
2000
12001The Federal Government’s
financial balance in
2000 and 2001
1 Excluding UMTS proceeds.
Deutsche Bundesbank10−
15−
20−
25−5+
0
5−
10−
15−
4Given a somewhat higher deficit than in the draft
budget, this is to be achieved by increasing the estimated
income from coin seigniorage – which reduces net bor-
rowing but not the deficit.Special fundsLänder
Governments

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
58billion. Tax receipts contracted by 5%, while
total revenue decreased by 3%. Expenditureincreased sharply by 4
12%. However, this in-
crease was mainly attributable to the cost in-curred by the Berlin Land Government in con-nection with the capital increase at Bankge-sellschaft Berlin (see adjacent box). In 2001 asa whole the deficits will be significantly high-er than last year’s figure of over 310 billion.
In view of the looming tax shortfalls andextraordinary burdens, above all in Berlin,they will distinctly exceed the original plannedlevel of 318 billion. The task of reducing the
deficits will be hampered in 2002 by the fore-cast declines in tax revenue, by the increasedrecruitment of teachers announced by mostLänder Governments and by the additionalexpenditure on strengthening national secur-ity in the wake of the terrorist attacks in theUnited States.
The figures for the local authorities’ fiscal
out-turn for the third quarter are not yetknown. However, a marked worsening of thefinancial situation was already evident afterthe first six months, when the running deficithad reached 32.8 billion (after 30.9 billion at
the half-way stage in 2000). This was chieflydue to a fall in tax revenue which led to a re-duction of 1.2% in overall revenue. At thesame time expenditure rose by 1.5% in total,despite lower capital formation (– 2.3%). Asthe year continues, the deficit accumulatedduring the first six months could increase fur-ther. Thus initial survey results for the thirdquarter point to a further accelerated de-crease in trade tax receipts. Moreover, thesharp fall in the Länder Governments’ tax rev-Financial situation of Berlin
In order to overcome the crisis of Bankge-
sellschaft Berlin, the Land Government of Berlin(as the majority shareholder) approved a supple-mentary budget for 2001. This includes an in-creased authorisation for 53 billion of new bor-
rowing in order, firstly, to facilitate the capital in-jection needed to ensure the bank’s continuedexistence and, secondly, offset privatisation pro-ceeds foregone because of the crisis. As a result,Berlin’s estimated new net borrowing require-ment (amounting to almost 55 billion) exceeds
by almost 51 billion the gross capital formation
volume (even without deducting the receivedinvestment grants of 51
14billion, which in the
opinion of the other Länder Governments and ofthe Federal Government should be deductedfrom the overall volume of gross capital forma-tion) stipulated in the Land Constitution as theceiling for new borrowing. Ever since the de-crease in the special financial assistance measuresto the western part of the city at the beginningof the nineties, Berlin, owing to its very highlevel of expenditure, has had an extraordinarilylarge deficit which is being run down very slowly.During the current year this financing shortfallhas widened further, mainly as a result of theBankgesellschaft crisis and the tax reform. Evenbefore the most recent tax estimate, the Senate(Berlin’s governing body) also assumed, in thelight of the halting inflow of the other budgetedprivatisation proceeds, that despite the sharplyincreased borrowing authorisation, there will bea shortfall of 51
34billion. Under budgetary law,
this amount must be covered in 2003, which isthus under a heavy strain in advance. Berlin musttherefore urgently redress its budgetary position,especially by critically reviewing expenditure insearch of potential savings. Other Länder Govern-ments are likewise currently managing to keepbelow the statutory ceiling for new borrowingonly by resorting to special measures, such as theliquidation of reserves. They, too, face consider-able consolidation requirements.
Deutsche BundesbankLocal
authorities

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
59enue is likely to prompt them soon to cut
their important grants to the local authorities.
The indebtedness of the central and regional
authorities increased sharply in the thirdquarter, expanding by 316.3 billion. Much of
this increase was attributable to the FederalGovernment, whose net borrowing rose by36.8 billion. The Federal Government raised
338 billion gross on the capital market while
concurrently redeeming 333.5 billion. There
were net increases in the outstanding volumeof Treasury notes (+ 34.6 billion), Bubills
(+34.3 billion) and notably Federal bonds
(Bunds) (+32.7 billion). By contrast, net re-
demptions were recorded for Bobls, in par-
ticular (– 32.9 billion). The indebtedness of
the Länder Governments registered an excep-tionally sharp increase of 38.8 billion. They
covered their credit requirements predomin-antly by issuing Treasury notes. The indebted-ness of the special funds and the local author-ities probably increased only marginally.
Social security funds
In the third quarter of 2001, the wage and
salary earners’ pension insurance scheme re-corded a deficit of 31.5 billion. This was 30.9
billion higher than last year’s correspondingfigure, although there had been no increaseat the six-month stage. Total revenue fromJuly to September exceeded last year’s figureby 2.1%, with contribution receipts going uponly marginally by 0.4% (following 1.5% inthe first two quarters). By contrast, the grantsfrom the Federal budget increased at themuch faster rate of 6.7%. Expenditure hasincreased at an accelerated pace since the
middle of the year, primarily due to the rela-tively sharp rise in pensions on 1 July. Themid-year rise in pensions in 2000 had beenlimited to the rate of inflation (0.6%). Basedon a new adjustment formula, pensions wereraised this year by 1.9% in western Germanyand 2.1% in eastern Germany. The numberof pensions also rose further. By contrast, ex-penditure was held down by the growing im-pact of pension cuts for persons taking earlyretirement. Total expenditure on pensions inthe third quarter exceeded the figure for thesame period of last year by 3.8% (after2.7% in the first half of the year).
In 2001 as a whole, the statutory pension in-
s u r a n c es c h e m ew i l lp r o b a b l yc l o s ew i t had e f -icit, whereas it recorded a small surplus inNet borrowing in the market by the
central, regional and local authorities
5billion
of which
Period TotalSecuri-
ties 1Loansagainstborrow-ers’notes
2MemoitemAcquisi-tion bynon-resi-dents
2000 + 16.1 + 29.1 – 11.8 + 21.2
of which
1st qtr + 14.0 + 7.5 + 6.5 – 1.02nd qtr – 1.3 + 3.8 – 5.1 + 14.63 r d q t r +9 . 1 +4 . 8 +5 . 4 +8 . 64th qtr – 5.7 + 13.1 – 18.6 – 1.0
2001
1st qtr – 10.4 + 13.9 + 9.7 – 12.22nd qtr – 6.1 + 7.5 – 13.7 – 0.33rd qtr
pe + 16.3 + 18.5 – 1.1 ...
1Excluding equalisation claims. — 2Including cash ad-
vances and money market borrowing.
Deutsche BundesbankIndebtedness
Statutory
pension
insurance
scheme
Trend in
reserves

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
602000. Consequently, the fluctuation reserves at
the end of December will not quite reach theprescribed statutory level of one month’s ex-penditure. Next year, the current contributionrate of 19.1% would have to be raised in orderto meet the minimum fluctuation reserves (par-ticularly on account of the probable weaktrend in contribution receipts). In order toavoid such a step in the current downturn, thisreserve requirement is to be reduced to 0.8month’s expenditure. The resources released bythis measure are to be used to plug the finan-cial gap that will occur if the contribution rateis maintained at its present rate, which will giverise to a deficit next year. Avoiding a contribu-tion rate increase in 2002, however, will meanthat the pension increase in the following yearwill be somewhat larger, which in turn, ceterisparibus, will result in a somewhat heavier con-
tribution burden.
In the third quarter of 2001, as last year,
the Federal Labour Office achieved a surplusof30.1 billion. While total expenditure in-
creased by 2.7%, revenue rose by 2.9%. Thisfavourable revenue trend was influenced,however, by exceptional factors, above allhigher payments from the European SocialFund.
5By contrast, the increase in contribu-
tion receipts continued to slow down andaveraged only 1.2% in the third quarter.Moreover, as from the start of this year theFederal Government no longer reimbursesthe costs of the structural adjustment meas-ures relating to recipients of unemploymentassistance.
Expenditure on unemployment benefits in
the third quarter was only 2.4% above thelevel in the same period of last year. In com-parison with the first half of the year, the risein these costs has decelerated significantly.This is because the new requirement to takeaccount of one-off payments (such as Christ-mas bonuses or holiday pay) when calculatingwage substitutes, which has pushed up ex-penditure, no longer shows up in the year-on-year comparison as from July. Some 0.7%more was spent on active labour market pol-icy measures than in the third quarter of lastyear. The shift in favour of vocational trainingand retraining continued. By contrast, far lesswas spent on job creation measures. PaymentQuarterly
 5 
billion
 5 
billion
Surplus (+) or deficit (−)Revenue
ExpenditureWage and salary earners’
pension insurance scheme
Deutsche Bundesbank6+
4+
2+
0
2−58
56
54
52
50
48
1999 2000 2001
5The Federal Labour Office receives payments from the
European Social Fund to finance additional labour market
policy measures. In addition, the immediate programme
aimed at reducing youth unemployment as well as labour
market and employment research projects are subsidised.Federal Labour
Office

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
61of net earnings over three months before
bankruptcy proceedings are opened rose par-ticularly sharply.
The cumulative deficit after the first nine
months of 2001 ( 32.4 billion) exceeded last
year’s corresponding total by 31.4 billion. It
has been evident for some time that thegrant of 30.6 billion earmarked in the Federal
budget will be significantly overshot. In 2002the less favourable labour market trend willnecessitate additional expenditure, so that(if benefit entitlements remain unchanged)once again a grant from the Federal Govern-ment will be required. No reduction in contri-bution rates can be expected in the short run.
In the statutory health insurance funds, for
which only the data for the first two quartersare available, expenditure exceeded revenueby32.7 billion. In comparison to the same
period in 2000, this is a deterioration of 31.5
billion. While contribution receipts rose by1.5%, spending on benefits increased morethan twice as sharply by 3.6%. This was pri-marily due to the cost of pharmaceuticals, onwhich 11% more was expended. Therefore,many health insurance funds will probablyhave to raise their contribution rate sharply –especially if it proves impossible to halt thesurge in the cost of pharmaceuticals. As aconsequence of greater financial burden-sharing, west and east German health institu-tions continue to show markedly differentfinancial trends. Thus the deficit was concen-trated on the western part of the country,whereas eastern Germany almost broke even.The average contribution rate in the eastdropped by almost 0.2 percentage point tojust under 13.7% while the rate for the west
at the midpoint in 2001 was 13.6%, 0.1%higher than in 2000.
Outlook for the general government
sector as a whole
This year the general government sector def-
icit (as defined in the national accounts) willQuarterly
 5 
billion
 5 
billion
Surplus (+) or deficit (−)Expenditure, total
Revenue 1
Expenditure on...
...unemployment benefits and
   short-time working benefits
...vocational
   training 2Federal Labour Office
1Excluding Federal Government liquidity
assistance. — 2Including job creation meas-
ures.
Deutsche Bundesbank1+
0
1−
2−14
13
12
11
10
98
7
65
4
3
1999 2000 2001Statutory
health
insurance funds
Sharp increase
in deficit ratio

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
62grow significantly. Following last year’s def-
icit ratio of 1.3% (excluding the UMTS pro-ceeds), an increase to around 2
12%i st ob e
expected for 2001. The principal reason forthis is the revenue shortfalls resulting from thetax reform, which come to approximately 1%of GDP . Another factor is the poorer financialposition of the social security funds– in particular the health insurance funds. Inaddition, new government benefits wereintroduced or existing benefit levels raised.
6
However, these will be partly offset by savingsin other areas. The central, regional and localauthorities are generally pursuing a policy ofspending restraint. The moderate public sectorpay settlement and the low interest rate levelare also keeping expenditure down, while theFederal Government’s interest payments arebeing pushed down in addition by the debt re-demptions financed out of the UMTS pro-ceeds. Last but not least, a higher distributionof Bundesbank profit and significantly lowerpayments to the EU budget were recorded.
The cyclical rise in the general government
deficit will remain limited this year, despite alow growth rate of real GDP – and thereforea perceptible reduction in the overall degreeof capacity utilisation. It should be noted thataverage unemployment will not increasecompared with last year, nor will the level ofemployment decrease. Gross compensationper employee, which is the key determinantof the amount of revenue from wage tax andsocial security contributions, is developingrelatively robustly. On the whole, nominaleconomic growth, which is ultimately thebasis for the evolution of government rev-enue, is weakening far less than real growth.In fact, nominal GDP growth will only be just
under the average for the second half of the1990s. Whereas last year public finance wasgiven only a marginally positive boost by thecyclical momentum, with aggregate realgrowth of 3% (and nominal growth of2.6%), this year the boost will be negativebut will likewise have only a small impact.
These cyclical influences – which measure the
current development against the medium-term macroeconomic trend – need to be dis-tinguished from the additional burdens whichare caused by a less favourable overall eco-nomic development vis-à-vis the originalbudget figures for this year. The German Sta-bility Programme approved in autumn lastyear, which predicts a general governmentdeficit ratio of roughly 1
12%, is based on
the assumption of real economic growth of2
34%, which is well above the trend rate,
and a noticeable drop in unemployment. Thedeterioration of the budgetary position dueto the worsening of the overall economic out-look compared with the expectations onwhich the original budgets were based is thusgreater than the cyclical influence. As evi-dence of this, the latest tax estimate – basedon an unchanged tax legislation regime – pro-jected tax shortfalls of just over 37 billion
compared with the spring 2000 estimate(on which the last Stability Programme wasbased). Furthermore, additional (mostly la-bour market-related) expenditure has been
6Unemployment benefit, sickness benefits, housing al-
lowances and student grants were all increased and, at
the turn of 2000/01, a heating cost grant was paid to
low-income earners. In addition, expenditure in connec-
tion with the grant to home buyers has increased be-
cause of the additional year’s intake into the eight-year
assistance cycle.Cyclical burden
fairly moderateHigher
additional
burdens
compared with
the original
budget figures

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
63incurred in the form of the Federal grant to
the Federal Labour Office and unemploymentassistance (roughly 33 billion). In total, these
additional burdens look set to amount toaround 0.5% of GDP . The deviations fromthe targets set in the Stability Programme inthe other areas, will be of a similar magni-tude. While the Stability Programme (inter-preted with non-rounded figures) alreadyprojected a deficit ratio of 1.6% to 1.8%,non-cyclical supplementary spending was in-curred by the health insurance schemes, inparticular. Finally, the deficit ratio for 2000was revised from 1.0% to 1.3%, which alsotends to push up this year’s ratio.
In the coming year, the general government
deficit ratio could be reduced again. Toachieve this, however, expenditure growthmust be kept within very narrow bounds– despite the greater expenditure require-ments in respect of national and internationalsecurity and the increase in child benefit. Ad-mittedly, the cyclical development will place alarger burden on public finance than in 2001,even though the economy is expected to pickup next year. However, various measures forcounter-financing the tax reductions alreadyin force will make themselves felt morestrongly. Diverse tax and levy increases willalso bring relief. Thus the average contribu-tion rate to the health insurance funds is likelyto rise, and tax on mineral oil, tobacco prod-ucts and insurance is to go up. Finally, add-itional revenue is hoped for from stepping upefforts to combat turnover tax fraud.
Debt-financed stimulus programmes, includ-
ing the proposed idea of bringing forwardthe planned tax cuts, are not appropriate to
the current economic and fiscal situation inGermany. In the first place, it should be notedthat fiscal policy has shown an expansionarystance this year anyway. Excluding the years1990 and 1991, which were influenced byGerman reunification, the deficit ratio in2001 should record its highest rise sincethe mid-seventies. In addition, fundamentaldoubts about the efficiency of an active anti-cyclical government economic policy are war-ranted in view of past experience. Firstly, sucha programme takes a long time to have animpact. Secondly, its effects on demand areuncertain. Thirdly, the forecasts for next yearassume an economic recovery anyway.
Deficit-increasing measures must be assessed
above all in the European context. The Euro-pean Stability and Growth Pact that was initi-ated by Germany, which is considered a cen-tral institutional component for fostering con-fidence in the new single currency, stipulatesa fiscal position over the course of the busi-ness cycle that is close to balance or in sur-plus. The Pact thereby guarantees fiscalsoundness in the EU and is important formaintaining confidence in a stable monetaryand real economic development. The Pacttakes account of different cyclical constella-tions because it allows the automatic stabil-isers to take effect. Germany has yet to reacha fundamental position close to balance. Asalready mentioned, the deficit ratio for thecurrent year will actually increase to around2
12%. In this context it is important to point
out that the goal of a balanced budget is notbeing abandoned and remains a key elementof fiscal policy strategy in Germany.Reduction in
the deficit
possible in
2002Debt-financed
stimulus
programmes
not appropriate
Danger of
undermining
the Stability
and Growth
Pact

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
64Expansionary fiscal programmes would not
only hamper the medium-term reduction ofthe deficits in Germany but would also giveundesirable signals to other countries. At-tempts are already being made to soften therules of the Stability and Growth Pact, e.g. bya “complementary” golden rule which wouldpermit deficits equalling total capital forma-tion. This would be tantamount to a per-manent deviation from the Pact’s objectivesand hence from the fiscal underpinning of astability-oriented monetary policy in the euroarea.
The medium-term goal of balanced general
government budgets is concentrated on thecentral, regional and local authorities. The so-cial security budgets are already approximate-ly balanced because emerging deficits arefunded largely automatically by higher socialsecurity contributions. The deficit of the statu-tory pension insurance funds following thereduction of the required fluctuation reservesis an exception. It is therefore up to the cen-
tral, regional and local authorities to ensurethat the expenditure growth in their budgetsis strictly limited. This is even more essentialas, over and above the required deficit reduc-tion, further tax cuts have been decided. Anational Stability Pact, which would imple-ment the European requirements at the vari-ous government budgetary levels in Germany,has not yet been brought into being. A rigor-ous national implementation could entail anobligation on the part of the Federal Govern-ment and the Länder Governments each toaim for a fundamentally balanced fiscal pos-ition and to enshrine this in budgetary law. Itmay be easier to achieve this objective bystipulating a ceiling for expenditure growth.In view of the tax cuts already agreed, a capon expenditure growth of well under 1% forthe central, regional and local authoritieswould be needed in order to ensure that thegeneral government deficits are eliminated by2004.
General
government
strategy
necessary

Statistical
SectionDeutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
1*

ContentsI. Key economic data for European
monetary union
1. Monetary developments and interest
rates 6*
2. Foreign trade and payments 6*3. General economic indicators 7*
II. Overall monetary survey in the
European monetary union
1. The money stock and its counterparts 8*
2. Consolidated balance sheet of mon-
etary financial institutions (MFIs) 10*
3. Banking system’s liquidity position 14*
III. Consolidated financial statement
of the Eurosystem
1. Assets 16*
2. Liabilities 18*
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary
financial institutions (excluding theBundesbank) in Germany 20*
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks
(MFIs) in Germany, by category ofbanks 24*
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-à-vis residents 26*
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents 28*Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
2*

5. Lending of banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) 30*
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic enterprises and individuals,housing loans, sectors of economicactivity 32*
7. Deposits of domestic
non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs)in Germany 34*
8. Deposits of domestic individuals and
non-commercial organisations atbanks (MFIs) in Germany 36*
9. Deposits of domestic public author-
ities at banks (MFIs) in Germany, bycreditor group 36*
10. Savings deposits and bank savings
bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germanysold to non-banks (non-MFIs) 38*
11. Debt securities and money market
paper outstanding of banks (MFIs)in Germany 38*
12. Building and loan associations (MFIs)
in Germany 39*
13. Assets and liabilities of the foreign
branches and foreign subsidiaries ofGerman banks (MFIs) 40*
V. Minimum reserves
1. Reserve ratios 42*
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany up
to the end of 1998 42*
3. Reserve maintenance in the Euro-
pean monetary union 42*VI. Interest rates
1. ECB interest rates 43*
2. Discount and lombard rates of the
Bundesbank 43*
3. Base rate per Discount Rate Transi-
tion Act 43*
4. Eurosystem monetary policy opera-
tions allotted through tenders 43*
5. Money market rates, by month 44*6. Euro area retail bank interest rates 44*7. Lending and deposit rates of banks
(MFIs) in Germany 45*
8. Selected central bank rates abroad 47*9. Money market rates abroad 47*
VII. Capital market
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities
and shares in Germany 48*
2. Sales of debt securities issued by
borrowers domiciled in Germany 49*
3. Outstanding amount of debt secur-
ities issued by borrowers domiciledin Germany 50*
4. Circulation of shares issued by resi-
dents of Germany 50*
5. Yields and indices on German
securities 51*
6. Sales and purchases of investment
fund certificates in Germany 51*Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
3*

VIII. Public finance in Germany
1. Finances of the public sector 52*
2. Finances of the Federal
Government, Länder Governmentsand local authorities 52*
3. Finances of the Government
in the national accounts 53*
4. Tax revenue of the central,
regional and local authorities 53*
5. Tax revenue, by type 54*6. Individual taxes of the Federal
Government, Länder Governmentsand local authorities 54*
7. Indebtedness of the public sector 55*8. Changes in public sector
indebtedness 57*
9. Loans raised by public authorities
against borrowers’ notes 57*
10. Indebtedness of the Federal
Government 58*
11. Federal Government borrowing
in the market 58*
12. Receipts, expenditure and assets of
the wage and salary earners’pension insurance funds 59*
13. Receipts and expenditure of the
Federal Labour Office 59*
IX. Economic conditions
1. Origin and expenditure of
domestic product, distribution ofnational income 60*
2. Output in the producing sector 61*3. Orders received by the
manufacturing sector 62*
4. Orders received by construction 63*5. Retail turnover 63*6. Labour market 64*7. Prices 65*
8. Households’ income 66*9. Pay rates and actual earnings 66*
X. Foreign trade and payments
1. Major items of the balance of pay-
ments of the European monetaryunion 67*
2. Major items of the balance of pay-
ments of the Federal Republic ofGermany 68*
3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the
Federal Republic of Germany, bygroup of countries and country 69*
4. Services and factor income of the
Federal Republic of Germany 70*
5. Current transfers of the Federal
Republic of Germany 70*
6. Capital transfers 70*7. Financial account of the Federal
Republic of Germany 71*
8. External position of the Bundesbank 72*9. External position of the Bundesbank
in the European monetary union 72*
10. Assets and liabilities of enterprises
in Germany (other than banks)vis-à-vis non-residents 73*
11. Deutsche Mark exchange rates for
the national currencies of the EMUcountries, the Deutsche Mark valueof the ECU and euro conversionrates 74*
12. Exchange rates of the Deutsche
Mark and the euro against othercurrencies 74*
13. Effective exchange rates of the euro
and selected foreign currencies 75*Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
4*

Abbreviations and symbols
eEstimated
pProvisional
pePartly estimated
rRevised
...Figure available at a later date
.Figure unknown or not to be published
or not meaningful
0Less than 0.5 but more than nil
–Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to round-
ing.Note
From January 2001 the Bundesbank is mak-
ing available on the Internet, for download-ing, a selection of the time series that arepublished in the Monthly Reports and theStatistical Supplements.Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
5*

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
 I. Key economic data for European monetary union
 
1. Monetary developments and interest rates
  
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions  1  2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
 M 3  3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3−month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
moving average MFI lending, and capital 3−month ment bonds
M1 M2 (centred) total individuals formation  4 EONIA  5, 7 EURIBOR  6, 7 outstanding  8 
Period Change from previous year,in % % p. a. as a monthly average
2000         Mar. 10.3 5.1 6.6 6.4 8.0 11.0 6.6 3.51 3.75 5.5
         Apr. 10.5 5.2 6.3 6.3 8.2 11.5 6.6 3.69 3.93 5.4
         May 9.0 4.8 6.0 5.9 7.7 11.3 6.8 3.92 4.36 5.6         June 7.3 4.2 5.3 5.4 6.7 10.0 6.9 4.29 4.50 5.4
         July 6.4 3.6 5.1 5.3 6.7 9.9 7.1 4.31 4.58 5.4
         Aug. 7.2 4.3 5.4 5.2 6.7 10.2 7.3 4.42 4.78 5.4         Sep. 6.4 4.0 5.0 5.1 6.8 10.9 7.0 4.59 4.85 5.5
         Oct. 5.9 3.9 5.0 4.9 6.2 10.8 6.7 4.76 5.04 5.4
         Nov. 5.3 3.8 4.7 4.8 5.6 10.1 5.7 4.83 5.09 5.3         Dec. 5.2 3.6 4.8 4.8 6.0 10.1 4.5 4.83 4.94 5.1
2001         Jan. 2.2 2.9 4.8 4.8 5.7 10.1 4.5 4.76 4.77 5.0
         Feb. 2.3 3.0 4.7 4.6 5.4 9.7 4.3 4.99 4.76 5.0         Mar. 1.6 3.0 4.5 4.6 5.3 9.3 4.6 4.78 4.71 4.9
         Apr. 1.4 3.2 4.7 4.8 5.4 9.1 3.8 5.06 4.68 5.1
         May 2.9 3.5 5.1 5.4 5.4 8.5 3.5 4.65 4.64 5.3         June 4.0 4.3 6.3 6.0 5.7 8.4 3.4 4.54 4.45 5.2
         July 3.5 4.4 6.5 6.5 5.8 8.1 2.6 4.51 4.47 5.2
         Aug. 3.7 4.4 6.7 6.9 5.5 7.6 2.2 4.49 4.35 5.0         Sep. 5.2 5.3 7.6 ... 5.1 6.9 2.1 3.99 3.98 5.0
         Oct. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3.97 3.60 4.8
1 Source: ECB. — 2 Saisonally adjusted. — 3 Excluding holdings of money Average. — 6 Euro InterBank Offered Rate. — 7 See also footnotes to table
market fund shares
/units by non-residents of the euro area. — 4 Longer- VI.5., p. 44*. — 8 GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds; from
term liabilities to euro area non-MFIs. — 5Euro OverNight Index 2001 Euro12. 
 
 
2. Foreign trade and payments  * 
  
 
Selected items of the EMU balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1 
Current account Capital account  2 Effective exchange rate  4 
of which: Direct Securities Credit Monetary
Balance Trade balance Balance investment transactions reserves Dollar rate nominal real  5 transactions  3 
Period until the end of 1998 ECU million, from 1999 euro million Euro/US-$ 1st q 1999=100
2000         Mar. + 1,717 + 4,930 + 26,723 − 1,793 − 36,258 + 64,336 + 439 0.9643 87.7 88.3
         Apr. − 9,386 + 2,436 + 19,144 + 961 + 4,540 + 14,362 − 719 0.9470 86.1 86.6
         May − 4,684 + 2,553 + 7,904 − 13,391 + 2,007 + 17,701 + 1,587 0.9060 84.5 85.0         June − 2,626 + 4,211 − 6,851 − 8,595 + 67,084 − 67,782 + 2,442 0.9492 87.4 88.1
         July − 5,120 + 7,087 − 4,665 − 19,104 − 11,493 + 26,378 − 445 0.9397 86.9 87.9
         Aug. − 6,714 + 1,843 + 7,045 − 35,419 + 13,524 + 27,880 + 1,061 0.9041 84.6 85.5         Sep. − 2,985 + 2,822 − 7,637 − 32,648 − 2,014 + 22,976 + 4,050 0.8721 82.8 83.6
         Oct. − 5,449 + 4,332 + 759 − 18,352 − 1,524 + 19,911 + 724 0.8552 81.6 82.4
         Nov. − 4,958 + 1,895 + 3,716 + 1,415 − 263 − 5,098 + 7,662 0.8564 82.3 83.3         Dec. − 6,982 + 3,290 + 21,243 + 3,423 + 5,904 + 9,627 + 2,289 0.8973 85.4 86.4
2001         Jan. − 11,072 − 3,859 + 2,261 − 9,892 − 47,418 + 57,212 + 2,358 0.9383 89.2 90.3
         Feb. + 1,153 + 3,348 + 7,718 + 2,447 − 3,010 + 3,794 + 4,486 0.9217 88.3 89.7         Mar. − 611 + 5,970 + 20,592 − 33,202 + 9,912 + 41,191 + 2,690 0.9095 88.4 90.0
         Apr. − 6,710 + 2,942 + 12,479 + 746 − 18,897 + 23,662 + 6,967 0.8920 87.6 89.2
         May − 2,977 + 4,079 − 8,711 − 40,890 + 19,481 + 16,278 − 3,581 0.8742 85.9 87.6         June − 1,647 + 8,070 − 13,976 − 10,351 + 27,167 − 29,944 − 849 0.8532 84.7 86.4
         July − 4,140 + 8,458 − 12,020 + 7,193 − 3,169 − 16,025 − 19 0.8607 85.4 87.3
         Aug. + 4,163 + 5,969 + 280 − 5,991 + 14,761 − 12,581 + 4,091 0.9005 87.7 89.6         Sep. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0.9111 88.0 89.8
         Oct. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0.9059 88.0 89.8
 
*  Source: ECB. — 1  See also tables X.12 and 13, p. 74−75. — 2  Series to observations. — 3  Including financial derivatives. — 4  Vis-a-vis a narrow
which data from January 1999 are not closely comparable with earlier group of countries. — 5  Based on consumer prices. 
6* I. Key economic data for European monetary union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
I.  Key economic data for European monetary union 
 
3. General economic indicators
  
                   
Period Belgium Germany Finland France Greece Ireland Italy Luxembourg Austria Portugal Spain EMU 7 Netherlands
Real gross domestic product 1
1998 2.2 2.0 5.3 3.4 3.0 8.6 1.8 5.9 4.3 3.5 4.5 4.3 2.9
1999 3.0 1.8 4.0 2.9 3.4 10.8 1.6 5.7 3.7 2.8 3.4 4.1 2.6
2000 4.0 3.0 5.7 3.1 4.3 11.5 2.9 9.5 3.5 3.0 3.4 4.1 3.42000         1st qtr 6.1 4.1 5.9 4.2 10.2 3.6 4.7 4.1 3.4 4.9 3.6
         2nd qtr 4.3 3.9 5.1 3.3 13.4 3.2 4.0 4.2 2.9 4.3 3.9         3rd qtr 2.9 2.6 6.3 2.9 10.1 2.8 3.1 2.4 3.8 3.6 3.2         4th qtr 2.9 1.5 5.5 2.8 12.1 2.1 2.2 2.8 3.5 3.6 2.8
2001         1st qtr 1.9 1.4 3.6 2.7 13.2 2.8 1.4 2.6 2.2 3.7 2.4
         2nd qtr 1.5 0.6 0.3 2.3 ... 1.9 1.4 0.9 2.5 2.7 1.7
Industrial production 1, 2
1998 3.4 4.1 8.1 5.1 7.1 19.8 1.2 −0.1 2.2 8.2 5.7 5.4 4.3
1999 0.9 1.4 5.5 2.0 3.9 14.8 −0.1 11.5 1.9 6.0 3.0 2.6 2.0
2000 5.5 6.3 11.4 3.4 0.5 15.4 4.8 4.3 3.7 9.2 0.5 4.0 5.52000         2nd qtr 6.3 6.8 9.9 2.4 2.8 20.9 6.5 7.2 4.8 11.6 −1.9 5.0 6.0
         3rd qtr 4.5 7.2 13.2 2.7 −3.6 14.7 5.2 0.2 3.7 8.4 2.8 1.8 5.7
         4th qtr 5.5 5.9 14.9 2.5 −1.7 20.1 5.0 −0.4 4.1 5.9 1.9 0.7 5.2
2001         1st qtr 5.2 5.5 7.1 1.5 2.6 31.7 2.9 3.3 1.3 6.0 2.4 −0.9 4.1
         2nd qtr −1.3 1.4 −2.2 1.2 0.2 12.5 −0.8 0.2 0.6 3.0 5.4 −1.3 0.8
         3rd qtr ... 6 p −1.6 −3.3 ... ... ... ... ... −0.1 ... ... −0.2 ...
Capacity utilisation 3
1999 80.9 84.0 86.1 85.3 75.7 75.9 76.0 84.9 84.0 81.9 80.8 79.7 81.8
2000 84.0 85.9 86.8 87.5 78.1 78.6 78.8 87.8 84.7 84.5 81.2 80.6 83.8
2001 82.3 85.1 85.7 87.6 77.6 78.4 78.9 88.7 84.6 83.1 81.7 79.6 83.2
2000         3rd qtr 84.2 86.0 87.0 87.9 77.8 78.5 78.9 88.0 85.0 85.0 82.0 80.3 83.9
         4th qtr 84.5 86.3 86.7 89.1 78.4 81.5 79.8 88.3 84.6 85.0 80.9 80.8 84.6
2001         1st qtr 84.8 86.9 87.3 88.8 78.2 79.8 79.5 89.2 85.2 84.2 82.5 80.1 84.4
         2nd qtr 82.7 85.7 86.0 86.9 79.3 80.4 79.4 88.9 84.8 84.0 82.0 79.7 83.6         3rd qtr 81.4 84.3 85.1 87.7 76.1 78.0 78.7 88.9 84.6 82.7 82.4 80.1 83.0         4th qtr 80.2 83.3 84.5 87.0 76.8 75.2 77.9 87.8 83.8 81.4 79.7 78.3 81.9
Unemployment rate 4
1998 9.5 9.3 11.4 11.8 10.9 7.5 11.8 2.7 4.0 4.5 5.2 18.8 10.81999 8.8 8.6 10.2 11.2 11.6 5.6 11.3 2.4 3.4 3.9 4.5 15.9 9.9
2000 7.0 7.9 9.8 9.5 11.1 4.2 10.5 2.4 3.0 3.7 4.1 14.1 8.92001         Apr. 6.9 7.8 9.1 8.6 3.8 9.5 2.4 2.3 3.7 4.2 13.2 8.4
         May 6.9 7.8 9.0 8.5 3.8 9.5 2.4 2.4 3.8 4.2 13.2 8.4         June 6.8 7.9 9.0 8.5 3.8 9.5 2.4 2.3 3.8 4.2 13.1 8.4
         July 6.8 7.9 9.1 8.6 3.8 9.4 2.5 2.2 3.9 4.3 13.0 8.4
         Aug. 6.8 7.9 9.1 8.6 3.8 9.3 2.5 2.2 3.9 4.4 13.0 8.3         Sep. 6.9 7.9 9.2 8.6 3.8 9.2 2.5 ... 3.9 4.4 13.0 8.3
         Oct. ... 8.0 ... ... 3.9 ... ... ... 4.0 ... ... ...
Harmonised index of consumer prices 1
1998 0.9 0.6 1.4 0.7 4.5 2.1 2.0 1.0 1.8 0.8 2.2 1.8 1.2
1999 1.1 0.6 1.3 0.6 2.1 2.5 1.7 1.0 2.0 0.5 2.2 2.2 1.1
2000 2.7 2.1 3.0 1.8 2.9 5.3 2.6 3.8 2.3 2.0 2.8 3.5 2.42001         Mar. 2.2 2.5 2.5 1.4 3.2 4.1 2.6 3.0 5.0 1.9 5.1 4.0 2.6
         Apr. 2.9 2.9 2.8 2.0 3.7 4.3 3.0 2.7 5.5 2.6 4.6 4.0 3.0
         May 3.1 3.6 3.3 2.5 3.9 4.1 2.9 3.8 5.4 2.9 4.9 4.2 3.4         June 3.0 3.1 3.0 2.2 4.5 4.3 2.9 2.7 5.1 2.6 4.6 4.2 3.1
         July 2.7 2.6 2.6 2.2 4.2 4.0 2.8 2.4 5.3 2.9 4.3 3.8 2.8
         Aug. 2.5 2.6 2.7 2.0 4.0 3.7 2.8 2.5 5.2 2.5 4.0 3.8 2.8         Sep. 1.9 2.1 2.6 1.6 4.0 3.8 2.6 1.9 5.3 2.5 4.1 3.4 2.5
         Oct. 1.9 2.0 2.4 1.8 3.2 3.8 2.5 1.7 5.0 ... ... 3.2 ...
General government financial balance 5
1998 −0.8 −2.2 1.3 −2.7 −2.4 2.3 −2.8 3.5 −0.8 −2.4 −2.4 −2.6 −2.2
1999 −0.6 −1.6 1.9 −1.6 −1.8 2.3 −1.8 3.7 0.4 −2.2 −2.1 −1.1 −1.3
2000 0.1 1.2 6.9 −1.3 −1.1 4.5 −0.3 6.1 2.2 −1.1 −1.5 −0.3 0.3
General government debt 5
1998 119.7 60.9 48.8 59.7 105.0 54.8 116.4 6.4 66.8 63.9 54.7 64.7 73.7
1999 115.9 61.3 47.3 58.5 103.9 49.3 114.6 6.0 63.1 64.7 54.5 63.4 72.7
2000 110.3 60.3 44.0 57.6 102.7 38.6 110.5 5.3 56.1 63.1 53.7 60.7 70.1
Sources: National data, European Commission, Eurostat, European in January, April, July and October. —4  Standardised, as a percentage of
Central Bank. Latest data are partly based on press reports and are persons in civilian employment; seasonally adjusted. —5  As a percen-
provisional. —1  Annual percentage changes; GDP of Portugal and EMU are tage of GDP; Maastricht Treaty definition, ESA95. —6  Adjusted in advance
calculated from seasonally adjusted data. —2  Manufacturing, mining, gas by the Federal Statistical Office by way of estimates to the results of the
and electricity; adjusted for working-day variations (except France and Quarterly Production Survey for the third quarter (industry in Germany:Spain). —3  Manufacturing, in %; seasonally adjusted; data are collected + 1 % on average).   — 7  Recalculation including Greece. 
7*I.  Key economic data for European monetary union 

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
 
1. The money stock and its counterparts*)
  
  
 
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II. Net claims on III. Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area  3 non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises Public
and individuals authorities Debt
Deposits Deposits securities
Liabil- with an at agreed with
Claims ities to agreed notice of maturitieson non- non-euro- maturity over of over 2 Capital
of which: of which: euro-area area of over 3 months years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents
6 (net)  7 2 years  4,5 Securities Securities reserves  8 
 European monetary union (euro billion) 1 X
 
2000         Apr. 48.7 72.2 18.6 −23.5 −25.8 −23.1 13.0 36.1 25.5 −0.8 −0.4 17.5 9.2
         May 33.6 48.3 19.6 −14.8 −8.5 −16.8 11.8 28.5 13.4 1.3 1.3 8.2 2.6
         June 7.3 30.1 −30.9 −22.8 −22.4 85.9 7.9 −78.0 33.2 −1.0 1.5 13.9 18.9
         July 6.5 33.9 10.4 −27.4 −26.2 −12.4 − 3.5 8.9 19.8 −0.8 1.4 3.9 15.4
         Aug. 0.9 20.0 4.4 −19.1 −10.5 − 8.0 4.0 12.0 15.2 0.4 1.7 8.2 4.9
         Sep. 69.1 76.7 5.7 −7.6 −3.5 −24.8 17.7 42.4 21.1 −2.5 2.2 2.6 18.8
         Oct. 32.0 47.0 8.4 −15.0 −17.0 −10.4 10.3 20.7 16.6 −0.0 0.8 10.8 5.0
         Nov. 43.4 41.6 −0.5 1.8 −5.3 − 3.1 8.0 11.2 −19.9 −4.9 1.6 −4.7 −11.9
         Dec. 50.1 59.2 8.0 −9.2 −19.0 22.6 6.9 −15.7 −16.1 8.8 2.5 −3.9 −23.5
2001         Jan. 34.6 47.4 16.0 −12.8 −15.7 −54.6 60.5 115.1 20.6 −0.8 0.2 24.1 −2.8
         Feb. 34.8 38.5 16.3 −3.7 4.5 − 3.9 16.1 19.9 10.2 −1.1 0.1 8.5 2.8
         Mar. 91.2 84.6 25.2 6.6 4.2 −35.8 102.2 138.0 27.0 1.6 −0.5 9.5 16.5
         Apr. 64.2 65.6 24.3 −1.4 6.7 −37.3 −19.4 17.9 −2.9 −2.6 −1.9 −0.1 1.7
         May 32.1 16.4 5.7 15.8 21.4 − 9.7 4.4 14.1 4.1 0.3 −1.4 −3.9 9.1
         June 36.3 25.5 −33.5 10.8 13.7 41.8 26.4 −15.4 27.9 0.2 −1.1 11.3 17.5
         July 13.1 18.7 4.3 −5.7 −3.2 21.7 −44.7 −66.4 −7.3 −4.6 −1.4 5.2 −6.5
         Aug. −22.7 −12.9 2.9 −9.8 −6.1 26.2 52.2 26.0 1.6 −2.2 −1.2 −1.9 6.9
         Sep. 36.9 38.5 −7.0 −1.6 −1.5 44.3 63.5 19.2 15.3 0.6 −0.9 13.5 2.2
 German contribution (euro billion) 2 X 
2000         Apr. 15.2 15.2 5.6 −0.0 −1.7 − 7.2 10.5 17.8 11.6 0.6 −0.4 10.1 1.3
         May 12.9 16.2 8.2 −3.3 −3.7 2.0 12.7 10.8 6.6 0.2 1.3 6.9 −1.8
         June −32.2 −25.3 −32.2 −7.0 −2.8 12.5 −21.5 −34.0 9.3 0.9 1.5 0.6 6.3
         July 1.4 2.6 3.6 −1.3 −3.5 15.8 14.5 −1.3 12.0 0.5 1.3 8.4 1.8
         Aug. 8.8 10.9 1.6 −2.1 −0.2 − 5.8 5.1 10.9 6.1 1.4 1.7 2.6 0.5
         Sep. 6.5 19.2 0.9 −12.7 −3.4 − 4.8 −0.1 4.7 5.7 −1.3 2.2 −0.3 5.2
         Oct. 12.0 4.3 0.9 7.7 3.4 − 2.2 14.6 16.7 3.1 0.4 0.7 1.9 0.1
         Nov. 15.2 13.6 4.2 1.6 1.0 5.2 17.3 12.2 −7.4 −1.9 1.6 −8.7 1.6
         Dec. 12.0 14.4 5.5 −2.5 −3.3 10.3 5.5 −4.8 −7.6 1.9 2.6 −4.6 −7.5
2001         Jan. 2.1 7.9 6.1 −5.8 −13.5 −19.9 8.3 28.1 7.7 −0.8 −0.0 9.2 −0.7
         Feb. 15.6 18.0 7.2 −2.4 1.5 10.0 23.7 13.7 7.5 −0.7 −0.0 6.4 1.9
         Mar. 26.2 23.3 16.3 2.8 2.5 −50.9 17.2 68.1 −0.1 1.3 −0.4 −1.7 0.8
         Apr. 2.7 9.9 12.2 −7.2 −1.7 12.6 19.2 6.6 −13.1 −0.9 −2.0 −6.9 −3.3
         May 7.7 5.9 0.2 1.8 3.3 −10.1 −5.6 4.5 1.1 3.2 −1.1 −3.8 2.8
         June −26.5 −22.7 −27.8 −3.9 2.2 22.9 −2.8 −25.7 12.5 −0.5 −0.9 3.2 10.6
         July 4.4 −7.1 −1.4 11.5 10.8 5.1 −20.9 −26.0 −4.3 −2.1 −1.3 −1.1 0.1
         Aug. − 5.3 −1.4 −3.1 −3.9 −3.4 8.8 32.2 23.5 5.4 −0.3 −1.3 2.3 4.6
         Sep. − 6.1 7.9 −4.6 −14.0 −10.9 25.6 24.2 −1.4 0.1 0.6 −0.8 2.6 −2.3
 German contribution (DM billion) 2 X 
2000         Apr. 29.7 29.7 11.0 −0.0 −3.3 −14.2 20.6 34.7 22.6 1.1 −0.9 19.7 2.6
         May 25.3 31.7 15.9 −6.5 −7.3 3.9 24.9 21.0 12.9 0.4 2.5 13.5 −3.5
         June −63.1 −49.4 −63.0 −13.6 −5.4 24.4 −42.1 −66.5 18.2 1.7 2.9 1.2 12.3
         July 2.7 5.1 7.0 −2.5 −6.9 30.9 28.3 −2.6 23.4 1.0 2.5 16.4 3.4
         Aug. 17.2 21.4 3.2 −4.2 −0.4 −11.4 10.0 21.3 12.0 2.6 3.2 5.2 0.9
         Sep. 12.7 37.6 1.8 −24.9 −6.7 − 9.4 −0.2 9.2 11.2 −2.6 4.2 −0.6 10.2
         Oct. 23.4 8.4 1.8 15.0 6.7 − 4.2 28.5 32.7 6.0 0.7 1.4 3.7 0.3
         Nov. 29.8 26.6 8.1 3.2 2.0 10.1 33.9 23.8 −14.5 −3.7 3.2 −17.1 3.1
         Dec. 23.4 28.2 10.7 −4.9 −6.4 20.1 10.8 −9.3 −14.8 3.8 5.1 −9.1 −14.6
2001         Jan. 4.1 15.5 11.9 −11.4 −26.4 −38.9 16.1 55.0 15.0 −1.6 −0.0 18.1 −1.4
         Feb. 30.5 35.2 14.1 −4.7 2.9 19.6 46.3 26.8 14.8 −1.4 −0.0 12.4 3.8
         Mar. 51.2 45.6 31.8 5.5 4.9 −99.5 33.7 133.1 −0.1 2.5 −0.8 −3.3 1.5
         Apr. 5.3 19.3 23.8 −14.0 −3.3 24.6 37.5 13.0 −25.6 −1.8 −3.9 −13.4 −6.5
         May 15.1 11.6 0.4 3.5 6.4 −19.7 −10.9 8.8 2.2 6.3 −2.2 −7.5 5.6
         June −51.9 −44.3 −54.3 −7.6 4.2 44.9 −5.5 −50.3 24.4 −1.0 −1.8 6.4 20.8
         July 8.6 −13.9 −2.8 22.5 21.1 10.0 −40.9 −50.8 −8.5 −4.0 −2.4 −2.2 0.2
         Aug. −10.4 −2.7 −6.0 −7.7 −6.7 17.2 63.1 45.9 10.5 −0.5 −2.5 4.6 8.9
         Sep. −11.9 15.4 −9.0 −27.3 −21.4 50.1 47.4 −2.7 0.2 1.1 −1.5 5.1 −4.5
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of 1998, including liabilities arising from loans on a trust basis. —5For the
monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (table II.2); statistical breaks have been German contribution: from 1999 including deposits under saving s and loan
eliminated from the flow figures. —1Source: ECB. —2Owing to changes in contracts (see table IV.12). —6For the German contribution: up to the end
the definitions of the items and differences in the range of reporting of 1998 including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see alsoinstitutions, the figures are not comparable with those published for footnote 5). —7Excluding MFIs portfolios; for the German contribution:
Germany up to end of 1998. —3For the German contribution: up to excluding German MFIs portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro
December 1998, including loans on a trust basis and bill-based lending area. —8After deduction of inter-MFI participations. —9For the European
instead of bill holdings. —4For the German contribution: up to December monetary union: including the counterparts of monetary liabilities of
8*II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
    
 
VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10,11  
Money stock M2
Money
Money stock M1 market Debt
Deposits fund securitieswith an Deposits with certificates
IV. De- agreed at agreed and money maturities
posits of Currency maturity notice of Repo- market of up to    
V. Other in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac- paper 2 years    central gov-
ernments factors  
9 Total Total Total lation  12 tions  16 (net)  7    Period deposits  13 2 years  13,14  months  13,15  (net)  7,11 
European monetary union (euro billion) 1 X
 
1.6 −41.9 40.4 37.3 39.2 3.3 36.0 5.7 − 7.6 2.4 − 0.7 1.4 2000          Apr.
−17.9 18.1 3.2 − 5.1 −14.9 − 0.2 −14.7 19.0 − 9.2 1.4 8.6 − 1.7          May
32.1 35.2 − 7.4 9.2 16.2 3.6 12.6 0.3 − 7.3 −13.9 − 4.4 1.7          June
−11.3 −18.6 4.2 − 0.5 − 1.3 1.9 − 3.2 8.3 − 7.5 4.7 10.7 −10.7          July
5.9 −20.7 − 7.4 −13.9 −36.3 − 5.1 −31.1 28.9 − 6.5 − 2.7 6.1 3.2          Aug.
18.7 9.0 − 4.4 2.9 11.3 1.0 10.3 1.7 −10.1 2.0 −10.0 0.7          Sep.
13.1 −19.1 11.1 2.7 − 1.8 − 2.2 0.4 13.8 − 9.3 − 0.9 3.8 5.4          Oct.
− 3.6 25.8 37.9 26.5 20.4 0.1 20.3 15.1 − 9.0 3.0 − 1.8 10.3          Nov.
− 4.2 − 2.6 95.7 98.5 68.2 10.7 57.5 11.0 19.3 1.5 −13.4 9.1          Dec.
−19.1 − 6.3 −15.3 −52.2 −70.7 −20.1 −50.6 14.6 3.9 18.6 18.2 0.1 2001          Jan.
8.7 −16.5 28.5 5.9 − 1.1 − 1.0 − 0.1 12.4 − 5.4 1.9 12.7 8.1          Feb.
− 5.2 − 8.8 42.4 23.4 9.7 1.3 8.4 13.7 − 0.1 10.1 4.9 4.0          Mar.
2.2 −15.1 42.7 37.6 32.4 − 0.1 32.5 1.6 3.7 − 1.1 0.7 5.5          Apr.
− 5.6 − 9.4 33.4 13.4 17.1 − 3.3 20.4 − 3.2 − 0.5 12.4 1.6 6.0          May
17.4 −19.5 52.3 47.6 39.8 0.1 39.7 − 2.0 9.8 −11.6 5.0 11.2          June
− 8.8 49.0 1.8 − 8.4 −21.7 − 5.0 −16.7 8.9 4.4 0.7 9.1 0.4          July
− 3.1 1.7 3.4 −15.9 −39.9 − 8.8 −31.0 18.1 5.9 7.5 6.9 4.8          Aug.
1.2 17.8 46.8 48.1 60.1 − 9.7 69.8 −18.1 6.1 − 4.6 3.7 − 0.4          Sep.
 German contribution (euro billion) 2 X
0.4 − 5.0 1.0 0.9 10.8 0.4 10.4 − 3.7 − 6.1 1.8 − 3.1 1.4 2000          Apr.
− 0.5 13.5 − 4.6 − 6.5 − 8.5 − 0.1 − 8.4 9.2 − 7.2 0.2 2.3 − 0.7          May
6.3 −28.9 − 6.4 − 9.9 − 0.5 0.1 − 0.6 − 2.5 − 6.9 − 1.0 6.9 − 2.4          June
0.3 12.9 − 8.0 − 9.7 − 4.7 − 0.2 − 4.5 1.3 − 6.3 − 0.1 1.4 0.3          July
− 0.6 2.4 − 5.0 − 7.5 − 9.0 − 1.0 − 8.0 7.0 − 5.5 − 0.1 − 0.4 3.0          Aug.
19.8 −16.1 − 7.8 − 3.1 − 2.2 0.3 − 2.5 4.1 − 5.0 − 0.7 − 2.5 − 1.4          Sep.
2.4 1.5 2.8 − 1.2 2.9 − 1.1 4.0 0.4 − 4.4 0.3 3.4 0.2          Oct.
−10.7 18.4 20.2 22.6 22.2 − 0.0 22.2 5.5 − 5.1 − 0.0 − 3.7 1.3          Nov.
6.7 − 3.5 26.6 25.0 4.3 1.1 3.2 12.4 8.3 − 0.9 1.8 0.8          Dec.
−12.2 5.8 −19.1 −18.4 −15.7 − 5.3 −10.5 1.4 − 4.1 1.4 − 4.5 2.4 2001          Jan.
0.5 3.0 14.6 10.1 9.8 − 0.4 10.2 2.5 − 2.1 − 0.2 0.1 4.6          Feb.
− 0.3 −28.3 4.0 2.6 − 0.3 0.0 − 0.3 4.1 − 1.2 − 0.6 1.8 0.3          Mar.
0.5 21.6 6.3 5.6 9.3 − 0.4 9.7 − 2.8 − 0.9 0.5 − 1.0 1.2          Apr.
0.9 −10.8 6.4 3.7 2.2 − 1.9 4.1 3.2 − 1.7 0.4 − 2.8 5.1          May
− 0.1 −25.5 9.5 7.6 6.0 − 1.7 7.6 1.9 − 0.3 − 0.7 − 4.6 7.3          June
0.9 11.0 1.9 − 5.7 − 6.2 − 2.5 − 3.7 1.6 − 1.1 0.6 1.4 5.7          July
0.1 −10.4 8.4 2.7 − 1.0 − 3.3 2.3 3.7 0.1 2.9 − 0.3 3.0          Aug.
− 3.0 6.6 15.8 14.4 14.5 − 4.6 19.1 − 1.2 1.0 − 1.7 1.3 1.8          Sep.
 German contribution (DM billion) 2 X
0.7 − 9.8 2.0 1.7 21.0 0.8 20.2 − 7.3 −12.0 3.6 − 6.0 2.7 2000          Apr.
− 1.0 26.3 − 9.1 −12.6 −16.5 − 0.1 −16.4 18.0 −14.1 0.3 4.6 − 1.4          May
12.4 −56.6 −12.6 −19.3 − 0.9 0.2 − 1.1 − 4.9 −13.5 − 2.0 13.5 − 4.7          June
0.7 25.2 −15.7 −19.0 − 9.2 − 0.3 − 8.9 2.5 −12.3 − 0.1 2.8 0.6          July
− 1.1 4.6 − 9.8 −14.6 −17.6 − 2.0 −15.6 13.8 −10.8 − 0.1 − 0.8 5.8          Aug.
38.7 −31.4 −15.2 − 6.0 − 4.3 0.6 − 4.9 8.0 − 9.8 − 1.4 − 5.0 − 2.8          Sep.
4.7 3.0 5.4 − 2.3 5.6 − 2.2 7.8 0.7 − 8.7 0.7 6.6 0.5          Oct.
−21.0 35.9 39.4 44.2 43.3 − 0.0 43.3 10.8 − 9.9 − 0.1 − 7.3 2.6          Nov.
13.1 − 6.9 52.1 48.9 8.5 2.2 6.3 24.2 16.2 − 1.8 3.5 1.5          Dec.
−23.8 11.3 −37.3 −36.0 −30.8 −10.3 −20.4 2.8 − 8.1 2.8 − 8.8 4.8 2001          Jan.
1.1 5.8 28.5 19.8 19.1 − 0.8 19.9 4.8 − 4.1 − 0.5 0.1 9.0          Feb.
− 0.6 −55.4 7.9 5.1 − 0.6 0.1 − 0.7 8.1 − 2.4 − 1.3 3.4 0.6          Mar.
0.9 42.2 12.3 11.0 18.2 − 0.8 19.0 − 5.4 − 1.7 0.9 − 1.9 2.3          Apr.
1.8 −21.1 12.6 7.2 4.3 − 3.7 8.0 6.2 − 3.3 0.8 − 5.5 10.0          May
− 0.2 −49.8 18.6 14.9 11.7 − 3.3 15.0 3.7 − 0.5 − 1.4 − 9.0 14.2          June
1.8 21.6 3.7 −11.2 −12.1 − 4.9 − 7.2 3.1 − 2.2 1.1 2.7 11.1          July
0.2 −20.4 16.4 5.3 − 2.0 − 6.4 4.5 7.2 0.1 5.7 − 0.5 5.9          Aug.
− 5.8 12.9 30.8 28.2 28.5 − 9.0 37.4 − 2.3 2.0 − 3.4 2.5 3.5          Sep.
central governments. —10The German contributions to the Eurosystem ’s denominated in all currencies of euro-area member states. —13For the
monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national European monetary union: including the monetary liabilities of centralmonetary aggregates, and are therefore not comparable to the erstwhile governments (Post Office, Treasury). —14For the German contribution: up
German money stocks M1, M2 or M3. —11Excluding holdings of money to December 1998, with maturities of less than 4 years. —15In Germany,
market fund shares/units by non-residents of the euro area. —12Excluding only savings deposits. —16For the German contribution: data collected
euro-area MFIs cash in hand denominated in euros or in currencies of the separately only from 1999. —XFrom January 2001: Enlargement of the
euro area; for the German contribution: currency in circulation euro area. denominated in Deutsche Mark, excluding German MFIs cash in hand
9*II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
 
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
  
 
Assets  3 
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area  4 
Enterprises and individuals Public authorities
Claims
Total Shares and on non-assets  
3  or Debt other Debt euro-area Other
Period Total Total Advances  4 securities  5 equities Total Advances  4 securities  6 residents assets liabilities  7 
 European monetary union (euro billion) 1 X
 
2000         May 12,132.6 8,582.8 6,559.1 5,779.1 244.2 535.9 2,023.7 835.8 1,187.9 2,351.4 1,198.4
         June 12,143.7 8,597.2 6,594.9 5,846.3 244.2 504.3 2,002.3 835.6 1,166.8 2,343.3 1,203.2
         July 12,232.3 8,610.6 6,636.0 5,874.6 252.4 509.0 1,974.5 833.8 1,140.7 2,370.5 1,251.2
         Aug. 12,316.9 8,611.0 6,660.4 5,893.1 256.6 510.7 1,950.6 822.0 1,128.6 2,415.8 1,290.2         Sep. 12,371.5 8,696.9 6,750.6 5,978.5 258.2 513.8 1,946.4 818.0 1,128.4 2,458.7 1,215.9
         Oct. 12,533.2 8,735.2 6,799.8 6,021.5 264.3 514.0 1,935.4 819.9 1,115.5 2,511.3 1,286.7
         Nov. 12,495.2 8,775.5 6,836.3 6,056.8 263.7 515.8 1,939.2 827.0 1,112.2 2,484.3 1,235.5         Dec. 12,411.3 8,802.9 6,877.6 6,090.9 265.1 521.5 1,925.3 835.9 1,089.4 2,402.9 1,205.5
2001         Jan. 12,715.7 9,002.0 6,998.3 6,185.0 270.6 542.7 2,003.7 858.1 1,145.6 2,459.3 1,254.4
         Feb. 12,765.0 9,041.4 7,035.4 6,206.2 279.6 549.6 2,006.0 849.9 1,156.1 2,479.7 1,243.9         Mar. 13,066.2 9,145.5 7,127.8 6,273.1 287.6 567.1 2,017.7 852.6 1,165.2 2,632.5 1,288.2
         Apr. 13,117.3 9,208.9 7,193.1 6,312.4 293.8 586.9 2,015.7 844.4 1,171.4 2,608.3 1,300.1
         May 13,241.3 9,250.8 7,220.1 6,332.7 300.1 587.3 2,030.6 839.3 1,191.3 2,668.7 1,321.8         June 13,302.5 9,284.8 7,243.2 6,386.7 301.0 555.5 2,041.5 836.3 1,205.2 2,696.5 1,321.2
         July 13,169.1 9,291.0 7,257.1 6,392.9 314.1 550.1 2,033.9 833.5 1,200.4 2,610.5 1,267.7
         Aug. 13,126.7 9,253.5 7,233.9 6,368.2 322.6 543.1 2,019.6 829.4 1,190.2 2,615.0 1,258.3         Sep. 13,299.7 9,292.5 7,270.2 6,415.3 324.9 530.1 2,022.3 829.4 1,192.9 2,691.1 1,316.1
 German contribution (euro billion) 2 X 
2000         May 4,127.8 3,235.6 2,489.9 2,174.9 46.9 268.1 745.7 514.3 231.4 682.4 209.7
         June 4,065.1 3,201.6 2,463.0 2,180.9 48.6 233.4 738.6 510.4 228.2 657.3 206.2
         July 4,098.0 3,204.2 2,467.3 2,181.7 49.4 236.3 736.8 512.1 224.7 679.3 214.5
         Aug. 4,126.1 3,211.3 2,479.8 2,192.5 49.7 237.7 731.5 506.7 224.8 694.0 220.8         Sep. 4,151.8 3,218.6 2,499.8 2,211.5 50.3 238.0 718.8 497.5 221.3 698.2 235.0
         Oct. 4,197.8 3,232.6 2,505.8 2,216.4 50.7 238.6 726.8 501.9 225.0 723.7 241.4
         Nov. 4,219.1 3,247.1 2,519.0 2,225.5 50.7 242.8 728.1 502.4 225.8 732.2 239.8         Dec. 4,201.9 3,254.3 2,529.4 2,230.8 51.0 247.7 724.9 502.9 222.0 716.9 230.6
2001         Jan. 4,208.4 3,270.3 2,539.8 2,233.8 52.1 254.0 730.5 514.4 216.1 709.7 228.3
         Feb. 4,250.8 3,285.8 2,557.7 2,244.5 54.7 258.5 728.1 510.5 217.6 734.2 230.7         Mar. 4,319.7 3,313.8 2,582.7 2,253.1 57.4 272.2 731.1 511.0 220.1 764.5 241.3
         Apr. 4,342.6 3,316.3 2,592.4 2,250.6 59.0 282.8 723.9 505.5 218.5 782.5 243.7
         May 4,368.0 3,327.5 2,601.1 2,259.0 61.0 281.2 726.4 504.2 222.2 790.4 250.1         June 4,332.5 3,300.3 2,578.0 2,263.6 60.6 253.8 722.3 498.1 224.2 789.9 242.3
         July 4,288.4 3,302.8 2,569.5 2,256.5 62.0 250.9 733.4 498.7 234.6 759.8 225.8
         Aug. 4,297.7 3,293.6 2,566.3 2,256.4 62.8 247.0 727.3 498.1 229.3 780.0 224.1         Sep. 4,322.6 3,288.3 2,575.0 2,269.7 63.6 241.6 713.4 495.0 218.3 808.1 226.1
 German contribution (DM billion) 2 X 
2000         May 8,073.2 6,328.3 4,869.8 4,253.7 91.7 524.3 1,458.5 1,006.0 452.6 1,334.7 410.2
         June 7,950.7 6,261.8 4,817.2 4,265.5 95.1 456.5 1,444.7 998.3 446.3 1,285.6 403.3
         July 8,014.9 6,266.8 4,825.7 4,267.0 96.6 462.1 1,441.1 1,001.6 439.5 1,328.7 419.4
         Aug. 8,070.0 6,280.8 4,850.1 4,288.1 97.2 464.8 1,430.7 991.1 439.6 1,357.4 431.8         Sep. 8,120.2 6,295.0 4,889.1 4,325.2 98.4 465.4 1,405.9 973.0 432.9 1,365.7 459.6
         Oct. 8,210.2 6,322.4 4,900.8 4,334.9 99.2 466.8 1,421.6 981.6 440.0 1,415.5 472.2
         Nov. 8,251.9 6,350.8 4,926.7 4,352.8 99.1 474.8 1,424.1 982.6 441.5 1,432.0 469.1         Dec. 8,218.1 6,364.9 4,947.1 4,363.0 99.8 484.4 1,417.7 983.6 434.1 1,402.2 451.0
2001         Jan. 8,230.8 6,396.2 4,967.5 4,369.0 101.8 496.7 1,428.7 1,006.1 422.6 1,388.1 446.5
         Feb. 8,313.8 6,426.5 5,002.5 4,389.9 106.9 505.7 1,424.0 998.5 425.5 1,436.0 451.3         Mar. 8,448.5 6,481.3 5,051.3 4,406.7 112.3 532.4 1,429.9 999.5 430.5 1,495.3 471.9
         Apr. 8,493.3 6,486.2 5,070.3 4,401.7 115.5 553.1 1,415.9 988.6 427.3 1,530.5 476.6
         May 8,543.0 6,508.0 5,087.4 4,418.1 119.2 550.0 1,420.6 986.1 434.5 1,545.9 489.1         June 8,473.7 6,454.9 5,042.1 4,427.3 118.5 496.4 1,412.7 974.3 438.5 1,544.9 473.9
         July 8,387.3 6,459.8 5,025.4 4,413.3 121.3 490.8 1,434.3 975.4 458.9 1,486.0 441.6
         Aug. 8,405.6 6,441.7 5,019.2 4,413.2 122.9 483.1 1,422.5 974.1 448.4 1,525.5 438.4         Sep. 8,454.2 6,431.4 5,036.2 4,439.2 124.5 472.5 1,395.2 968.2 427.0 1,580.6 442.2
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building holdings. —4For the German contribution: up to December 1998, including
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank loans on a trust basis and bill-based lending instead of bill holdings. —
and central banks (the Eurosystem). —1Source: ECB. —2Owing to changes 5Including money market paper of enterprises. —6Including Treasury bills
in the definitions of the items and differences in the range of reporting and other money market paper of public authorities. —7For the German
institutions, the figures are not comparable with those published for contribution: up to December 1998, including liabilities incurred in theGermany up to the end of 1998. —3For the German contribution: up to banks own name but on behalf of third parties and including endorsement
December 1998, including trust funds and bill-based lending instead of bill liabilities on rediscounted bills. —8Excluding the cash in hand (in euros) of
10*II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
    
 
Liabilities  7 
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area  9 
Enterprises and individuals
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  14 
over
Currency 1 year
in of which: up to up to over up to over
Total in euros  10 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years  11 3 months 3 months  15   Period circulation  8 2 years  9, 12, 13  
European monetary union (euro billion) 1 X
 
337.5 5,089.1 4,798.2 4,831.3 1,541.9 778.9 78.1 1,139.6 1,179.5 113.2 2000          May
341.2 5,124.1 4,800.0 4,829.9 1,547.0 778.6 78.1 1,138.6 1,172.8 114.7          June
343.0 5,112.8 4,802.2 4,835.5 1,546.9 790.4 78.4 1,138.9 1,165.1 115.8          July
337.9 5,117.9 4,795.1 4,833.8 1,518.7 821.0 78.3 1,140.0 1,158.4 117.4          Aug.338.9 5,145.2 4,799.6 4,840.0 1,531.3 821.5 77.9 1,140.6 1,149.1 119.6          Sep.
336.7 5,167.8 4,799.2 4,850.1 1,531.2 838.0 79.3 1,141.6 1,139.5 120.5          Oct.
336.8 5,182.7 4,820.4 4,865.6 1,547.2 848.4 81.5 1,135.9 1,130.5 122.1          Nov.347.5 5,259.9 4,919.2 4,945.6 1,598.8 855.3 76.8 1,141.5 1,148.7 124.6          Dec.
335.2 5,312.6 4,960.9 5,012.5 1,559.6 906.1 77.6 1,142.9 1,200.1 126.1 2001          Jan.
334.2 5,328.1 4,967.8 5,018.5 1,559.2 919.1 78.3 1,142.0 1,193.7 126.2          Feb.335.4 5,352.2 4,993.8 5,053.3 1,575.1 933.1 80.7 1,145.0 1,193.6 125.8          Mar.
335.3 5,384.8 5,027.9 5,078.7 1,600.1 935.1 80.4 1,142.7 1,196.6 123.9          Apr.
332.0 5,404.3 5,040.4 5,101.6 1,626.0 931.9 81.5 1,143.0 1,196.6 122.5          May332.1 5,467.6 5,092.1 5,149.2 1,667.6 928.8 81.9 1,143.3 1,206.1 121.5          June
327.2 5,443.9 5,082.9 5,136.0 1,648.4 937.7 81.7 1,137.8 1,210.3 120.1          July
318.4 5,425.4 5,071.6 5,121.0 1,617.4 953.5 81.4 1,134.6 1,215.2 118.9          Aug.308.6 5,484.5 5,133.9 5,175.0 1,682.0 937.1 81.4 1,135.7 1,220.9 118.0          Sep.
 German contribution (euro billion) 2 X
125.9 1,998.8 1,912.1 1,877.3 423.0 204.8 10.6 649.6 476.9 112.4 2000          May
126.0 1,996.9 1,905.2 1,866.5 419.3 202.4 10.5 650.3 470.1 113.9          June
125.8 1,990.3 1,898.1 1,863.9 417.5 205.5 10.9 651.7 463.5 114.9          July
124.8 1,987.3 1,895.3 1,860.6 410.0 211.3 11.2 653.7 458.0 116.5          Aug.125.1 2,005.0 1,891.2 1,858.6 407.7 214.9 11.7 652.7 453.0 118.7          Sep.
124.0 2,009.5 1,891.1 1,862.3 411.4 216.2 12.8 653.8 448.6 119.5          Oct.
124.0 2,020.2 1,913.2 1,882.4 433.9 217.8 14.8 651.3 443.6 121.1          Nov.125.1 2,051.8 1,944.1 1,900.3 434.1 224.7 15.5 650.6 451.8 123.7          Dec.
119.8 2,026.4 1,929.2 1,890.8 426.4 225.8 16.9 650.0 447.9 123.8 2001          Jan.
119.4 2,036.8 1,940.0 1,899.4 434.3 229.0 17.1 649.3 445.8 123.8          Feb.119.5 2,041.0 1,941.6 1,906.4 436.0 233.9 17.4 651.1 444.7 123.4          Mar.
119.0 2,044.7 1,946.9 1,909.9 444.7 232.1 17.5 650.3 443.8 121.4          Apr.
117.1 2,054.5 1,953.0 1,915.9 449.9 231.8 18.2 653.5 442.2 120.4          May115.5 2,062.1 1,960.8 1,921.9 456.0 233.6 17.9 653.0 441.9 119.5          June
113.0 2,055.6 1,955.4 1,917.4 453.9 235.7 18.3 650.5 440.8 118.2          July
109.7 2,059.2 1,960.9 1,922.0 455.6 240.7 18.1 649.7 440.9 117.0          Aug.105.1 2,075.2 1,979.0 1,939.6 472.7 240.0 18.3 650.4 441.9 116.2          Sep.
 German contribution (DM billion) 2 X
246.2 3,909.2 3,739.7 3,671.7 827.2 400.5 20.7 1,270.6 932.8 219.9 2000          May
246.4 3,905.6 3,726.2 3,650.5 820.0 395.8 20.6 1,271.8 919.5 222.8          June
246.0 3,892.7 3,712.4 3,645.5 816.6 401.9 21.2 1,274.6 906.5 224.7          July
244.1 3,886.9 3,706.9 3,639.1 801.9 413.3 21.8 1,278.4 895.7 227.9          Aug.244.7 3,921.4 3,698.9 3,635.2 797.3 420.3 22.8 1,276.5 886.0 232.2          Sep.
242.5 3,930.3 3,698.7 3,642.3 804.6 422.9 25.1 1,278.6 877.4 233.6          Oct.
242.5 3,951.2 3,741.8 3,681.7 848.6 426.1 28.9 1,273.9 867.5 236.8          Nov.244.7 4,013.0 3,802.3 3,716.7 849.0 439.4 30.3 1,272.4 883.6 241.9          Dec.
234.4 3,963.3 3,773.2 3,698.1 833.9 441.7 33.0 1,271.3 876.0 242.1 2001          Jan.
233.6 3,983.6 3,794.4 3,714.8 849.5 447.9 33.5 1,269.9 872.0 242.1          Feb.233.7 3,991.8 3,797.5 3,728.7 852.7 457.4 34.0 1,273.5 869.7 241.4          Mar.
232.8 3,999.2 3,807.9 3,735.4 869.8 453.9 34.2 1,271.9 868.1 237.5          Apr.
229.1 4,018.2 3,819.8 3,747.2 879.9 453.3 35.6 1,278.2 864.8 235.4          May225.8 4,033.1 3,834.9 3,758.9 891.9 456.8 35.0 1,277.2 864.3 233.7          June
221.0 4,020.4 3,824.5 3,750.2 887.7 461.1 35.7 1,272.2 862.2 231.2          July
214.5 4,027.4 3,835.2 3,759.1 891.1 470.8 35.4 1,270.7 862.3 228.8          Aug.205.6 4,058.7 3,870.7 3,793.6 924.5 469.4 35.9 1,272.2 864.3 227.3          Sep.
MFIs; for the German contribution: currency in circulation denominated in maturities of 4 years and more. —13For the German contribution: from
Deutsche Mark, excluding German MFIs cash in hand denominated in all 1999 including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see tablecurrencies of euro-area member states. —9For the German contribution: IV.12). —14In Germany, only saving deposits. —15For the German
up to December 1998, including liabilities arising from loans on a trust contribution: up to the end of 1998 including deposits under savings andbasis. —10Excluding central governments deposits. —11For the German loan contracts (see also footnote 13). —XFrom January 2001: Enlargement
contribution: up to December 1998, with maturities of 1 year to less than of the euro area. 4 years. —12For the German contribution: up to December 1998, with
11*II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
 
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (cont ’d)*
 
 
 
Liabilities (cont ’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont ’d) 3 
Public authorities Repo transactions
with counterparties
Other public authorities in the euro area  9 
With agreed At agreed Money
maturities of notice of  7 market
fund
over of which: certificates1 year Enterprises and money
Central up to up to over up to over and market paper
Period governments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years  
4 3 months 3 months  8 Total individuals 2 years  3, 5, 6  (net)  10, 11, 12  
 European monetary union (euro billion) 1 X
 
2000         May 113.9 144.0 56.1 54.7 2.0 27.4 3.1 0.8 181.2 175.6 456.7
         June 146.0 148.2 61.6 53.8 1.8 27.3 2.9 0.8 167.3 161.9 452.3
         July 134.7 142.7 58.2 51.7 1.9 27.2 2.9 0.8 172.0 166.0 463.3
         Aug. 140.6 143.5 58.9 51.7 1.9 27.3 2.9 0.8 169.4 163.0 470.6         Sep. 159.3 146.0 58.2 54.5 1.8 27.8 2.7 0.8 171.4 166.1 461.5
         Oct. 172.3 145.4 59.6 52.7 1.9 27.8 2.7 0.8 170.6 166.6 466.5
         Nov. 168.8 148.3 61.7 53.3 1.9 27.8 2.8 0.8 173.5 169.2 463.6         Dec. 164.6 149.7 59.9 56.5 2.0 27.8 2.8 0.8 174.9 172.6 439.6
2001         Jan. 147.1 153.0 64.1 56.0 2.0 27.4 2.8 0.7 213.8 209.1 456.1
         Feb. 155.6 154.0 66.3 54.9 2.0 27.2 2.8 0.7 215.8 210.1 468.8         Mar. 150.3 148.6 61.0 54.8 1.9 27.5 2.7 0.7 225.9 221.3 475.2
         Apr. 152.5 153.5 66.8 54.2 2.3 27.0 2.6 0.7 224.9 218.9 476.8
         May 146.9 155.8 65.7 57.2 2.1 27.5 2.7 0.6 237.3 231.6 480.2         June 164.3 154.1 64.3 57.5 2.0 27.2 2.5 0.6 225.8 220.8 485.2
         July 155.5 152.4 64.2 56.0 1.7 27.4 2.5 0.6 226.4 221.1 493.3
         Aug. 152.4 152.0 63.8 56.1 1.8 27.3 2.5 0.6 233.9 228.3 499.1         Sep. 153.6 155.9 69.4 54.8 1.6 27.0 2.5 0.6 229.3 223.7 503.6
 German contribution (euro billion) 2 X
2000         May 45.6 75.8 12.0 36.3 1.0 23.6 2.2 0.8 2.9 2.9 71.7
         June 52.0 78.4 14.9 36.2 1.0 23.5 2.1 0.8 1.8 1.8 78.4
         July 52.3 74.1 12.4 34.2 1.1 23.5 2.0 0.8 1.8 1.8 80.1
         Aug. 51.7 74.9 12.2 35.2 1.1 23.5 2.0 0.8 1.7 1.7 80.3         Sep. 71.5 74.8 12.1 35.3 1.1 23.5 2.0 0.8 1.0 1.0 78.0
         Oct. 73.9 73.3 12.7 33.4 1.1 23.4 1.9 0.8 1.3 1.3 82.0
         Nov. 63.2 74.6 12.2 35.1 1.2 23.4 1.9 0.8 1.3 1.3 77.6         Dec. 69.9 81.6 14.6 39.6 1.3 23.4 2.0 0.8 0.4 0.4 77.9
2001         Jan. 57.7 77.9 12.1 38.7 1.3 23.2 1.9 0.7 1.8 1.8 73.4
         Feb. 58.0 79.4 14.5 37.7 1.4 23.2 1.9 0.7 1.6 1.6 73.5         Mar. 57.7 76.9 12.9 36.9 1.4 23.2 1.8 0.6 0.9 0.9 75.8
         Apr. 58.2 76.7 14.1 35.6 1.5 23.1 1.8 0.6 1.4 1.4 74.8
         May 59.1 79.5 13.4 39.0 1.5 23.2 1.8 0.6 1.8 1.7 72.8         June 59.0 81.2 14.9 39.5 1.4 23.1 1.8 0.6 1.1 1.1 68.0
         July 59.9 78.3 13.1 38.8 1.1 23.1 1.7 0.6 1.7 1.7 69.0
         Aug. 60.0 77.2 13.3 37.6 1.0 23.1 1.7 0.6 4.6 4.6 68.2         Sep. 57.0 78.6 15.4 36.9 1.0 23.0 1.7 0.6 2.8 2.8 69.6
 German contribution (DM billion) 2 X
2000         May 89.3 148.3 23.4 71.0 2.0 46.1 4.3 1.5 5.6 5.6 140.2
         June 101.6 153.4 29.2 70.7 2.0 45.9 4.1 1.5 3.6 3.6 153.4
         July 102.3 144.9 24.3 66.9 2.2 46.0 4.0 1.5 3.5 3.5 156.7
         Aug. 101.2 146.6 23.9 68.9 2.2 46.0 4.0 1.6 3.4 3.4 157.1         Sep. 139.9 146.3 23.7 69.1 2.2 45.9 3.9 1.5 1.9 1.9 152.5
         Oct. 144.6 143.4 24.9 65.2 2.2 45.7 3.8 1.5 2.6 2.6 160.3
         Nov. 123.6 145.9 23.8 68.7 2.3 45.8 3.7 1.5 2.5 2.5 151.7         Dec. 136.6 159.7 28.5 77.4 2.5 45.9 3.8 1.5 0.7 0.7 152.4
2001         Jan. 112.8 152.4 23.6 75.7 2.6 45.3 3.7 1.4 3.5 3.5 143.5
         Feb. 113.5 155.4 28.4 73.8 2.6 45.4 3.7 1.4 3.1 3.1 143.7         Mar. 112.8 150.3 25.2 72.2 2.6 45.4 3.5 1.3 1.8 1.8 148.3
         Apr. 113.8 150.0 27.5 69.7 3.0 45.1 3.4 1.3 2.7 2.7 146.2
         May 115.5 155.4 26.2 76.2 3.0 45.3 3.4 1.2 3.6 3.4 142.3         June 115.3 158.9 29.1 77.3 2.7 45.2 3.4 1.2 2.1 2.1 133.1
         July 117.1 153.2 25.6 75.9 2.1 45.2 3.3 1.1 3.2 3.2 134.9
         Aug. 117.3 151.0 26.0 73.5 2.0 45.1 3.3 1.1 8.9 8.9 133.4         Sep. 111.5 153.6 30.1 72.2 2.0 45.0 3.3 1.1 5.6 5.6 136.2
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building contribution: from 1999 including deposits under savings and loan cont racts
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank (see table IV.12). —7In Germany: only savings deposits. —8For the
and central banks (the Eurosystem). —1Source: ECB. —2Owing to changes German contribution: up to the end of 1998 including deposits under
in the definitions of the items and differences in the range of reporting savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 6). —9For the German
institutions, the figures are not comparable with those published for contribution: data collected separately from 1999 only; up to DecemberGermany up to the end of 1998. —3For the German contribution: up to 1998, included in the deposits with agreed maturities of up to 1 year. —
December 1998, including liabilities arising from loans on a trust basis. — 10Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the German contribution: excluding
4For the German contribution: up to December 1998, with maturities of German MFIs portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro area. —11In
1 year to less than 4 years. —5For the German contribution: up to Germany, bank debt securities with maturities of up to one year count as
December 1998, with maturities of 4 years and more. —6For the German
12*II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
    
 
 Memo item
Monetary aggregates  15 
Debt securities issued (net)  10 
With maturities of
Monetaryliabilitiesof central
Liabilities govern-
of which: over to non- Excess Monetary mentsdenom- 1 year euro-area Capital of capital (Postinated up to up to over and inter-MFI Other formation Office,
residents
Total in euros 1 year  11 2 years 2 years 13 liabilities liabilities M1  16 M2 17 M3 12,18  19   Period Treasury)  20 reserves  14 
European monetary union (euro billion) 1 X
 
1,575.9 1,323.7 24.3 63.2 1,488.5 2,220.3 853.5 − 6.5 1,424.8 2,000.3 4,166.3 4,891.6 3,623.0 134.6 2000          May
1,585.1 1,327.3 27.6 59.2 1,498.3 2,124.7 877.5 30.8 1,440.9 2,015.3 4,172.5 4,878.9 3,657.2 134.7          June
1,584.0 1,318.5 19.1 57.6 1,507.2 2,160.9 893.9 26.4 1,475.8 2,015.3 4,174.9 4,886.9 3,683.9 136.5          July
1,604.1 1,326.5 19.3 61.8 1,523.1 2,209.6 898.2 9.1 1,500.2 1,981.0 4,164.6 4,885.6 3,706.7 134.9          Aug.1,611.4 1,327.9 19.3 62.2 1,529.9 2,267.0 926.3 10.4 1,439.4 1,993.4 4,169.8 4,884.2 3,745.1 133.8          Sep.
1,636.8 1,339.5 26.3 61.9 1,548.6 2,328.2 932.8 12.0 1,481.6 1,993.6 4,176.8 4,902.2 3,772.2 135.3          Oct.
1,634.4 1,341.4 33.1 64.2 1,537.2 2,306.5 920.7 − 0.1 1,477.0 2,012.1 4,199.5 4,933.9 3,744.5 135.3          Nov.
1,631.7 1,351.0 40.1 66.4 1,525.2 2,216.7 892.9 11.5 1,436.7 2,076.4 4,288.2 5,009.1 3,712.8 140.0          Dec.
1,662.3 1,379.4 37.5 69.5 1,555.3 2,332.5 908.8 20.8 1,473.6 2,027.9 4,344.9 5,121.8 3,761.2 141.3 2001          Jan.
1,679.2 1,388.2 44.2 70.9 1,564.2 2,356.0 911.2 − 19.4 1,491.2 2,027.1 4,351.3 5,150.9 3,771.5 140.8          Feb.
1,696.5 1,396.7 51.9 67.7 1,576.9 2,539.5 926.7 − 21.9 1,536.7 2,038.7 4,379.1 5,199.8 3,802.5 140.7          Mar.
1,703.1 1,397.2 55.8 69.5 1,577.8 2,552.6 927.9 − 12.5 1,524.4 2,071.2 4,416.5 5,243.6 3,799.9 143.2          Apr.
1,718.4 1,394.1 58.0 75.9 1,584.5 2,622.3 939.9 − 13.5 1,520.4 2,091.1 4,437.2 5,288.6 3,818.0 141.4          May
1,737.8 1,407.5 60.5 84.0 1,593.2 2,603.1 963.9 − 17.0 1,504.1 2,130.6 4,483.8 5,339.3 3,849.7 140.9          June
1,735.8 1,409.4 56.0 87.2 1,592.5 2,500.6 953.3 − 6.0 1,494.6 2,107.4 4,471.7 5,334.7 3,831.7 141.9          July
1,731.3 1,408.0 56.6 90.0 1,584.7 2,480.6 957.9 − 9.0 1,489.2 2,065.8 4,451.3 5,330.8 3,824.0 141.3          Aug.
1,745.5 1,419.2 54.0 92.4 1,599.1 2,504.6 961.8 5.6 1,556.0 2,126.1 4,499.9 5,379.2 3,842.2 141.6          Sep.
 German contribution (euro billion) 2 X
772.3 681.4 − 30.4 741.9 605.2 231.2 21.8 298.1 560.8 1,292.6 1,397.6 1,759.5 −2000         May
769.4 676.6 − 28.0 741.4 565.7 239.3 − 15.7 303.3 560.2 1,282.4 1,390.7 1,769.2 −         June
779.6 681.3 − 28.3 751.3 571.4 241.1 0.2 307.7 555.7 1,272.9 1,383.2 1,783.2 −         July
788.2 684.3 − 31.4 756.8 591.7 241.5 3.4 307.2 547.0 1,265.9 1,379.3 1,792.8 −         Aug.
787.4 681.8 − 30.0 757.4 600.3 248.3 − 20.3 327.1 544.9 1,262.9 1,371.9 1,801.3 −         Sep.
792.3 682.9 − 30.4 761.9 627.2 248.5 − 16.4 329.4 548.1 1,262.2 1,375.9 1,807.8 −         Oct.
782.4 676.4 − 31.6 750.8 631.0 250.2 − 4.5 336.9 570.0 1,284.4 1,394.9 1,797.6 −         Nov.
773.4 673.7 − 32.2 741.2 609.1 241.4 − 11.7 334.5 573.8 1,308.6 1,419.1 1,781.0 −         Dec.
785.0 683.8 − 34.6 750.4 635.6 240.7 − 3.1 328.8 558.3 1,290.8 1,400.6 1,788.8 −2001         Jan.
796.1 693.3 − 39.2 756.9 650.1 242.6 − 1.0 331.6 568.3 1,301.2 1,415.5 1,796.5 −         Feb.
797.0 692.2 − 38.9 758.1 729.9 243.7 − 25.7 337.6 568.3 1,304.3 1,419.9 1,800.3 −         Mar.
791.1 685.4 − 40.0 751.1 735.3 240.5 − 3.2 338.9 577.8 1,310.1 1,426.3 1,787.0 −         Apr.
796.4 687.0 − 45.3 751.1 754.2 243.3 − 4.5 332.4 580.4 1,314.9 1,434.8 1,792.0 −         May
806.1 695.9 − 52.6 753.5 727.6 256.2 − 30.4 326.4 586.4 1,322.4 1,444.1 1,805.9 −         June
808.3 701.2 − 58.1 750.2 692.2 256.4 − 24.7 317.0 579.9 1,316.3 1,445.1 1,799.0 −         July
811.9 705.5 − 61.4 750.5 703.4 260.9 − 39.5 319.2 578.6 1,318.6 1,452.8 1,801.7 −         Aug.
816.8 709.0 − 63.2 753.5 703.7 259.6 − 39.5 329.2 593.2 1,333.1 1,468.8 1,803.4 −         Sep.
 German contribution (DM billion) 2 X
1,510.5 1,332.6 − 59.5 1,451.0 1,183.6 452.2 42.6 583.1 1,096.8 2,528.1 2,733.4 3,441.3 −2000         May
1,504.8 1,323.4 − 54.7 1,450.1 1,106.5 468.0 − 30.8 593.3 1,095.6 2,508.2 2,720.0 3,460.2 −         June
1,524.8 1,332.6 − 55.4 1,469.3 1,117.5 471.5 0.4 601.8 1,086.9 2,489.7 2,705.3 3,487.6 −         July
1,541.5 1,338.3 − 61.4 1,480.1 1,157.3 472.4 6.6 600.8 1,069.9 2,475.8 2,697.7 3,506.4 −         Aug.
1,540.0 1,333.5 − 58.7 1,481.3 1,174.1 485.7 − 39.7 639.7 1,065.8 2,470.1 2,683.2 3,523.1 −         Sep.
1,549.6 1,335.7 − 59.4 1,490.2 1,226.6 486.0 − 32.0 644.3 1,072.1 2,468.7 2,691.0 3,535.7 −         Oct.
1,530.3 1,323.0 − 61.8 1,468.4 1,234.1 489.4 − 8.8 659.0 1,114.8 2,512.1 2,728.2 3,515.8 −         Nov.
1,512.5 1,317.7 − 62.9 1,449.6 1,191.3 472.1 − 22.9 654.2 1,122.3 2,559.4 2,775.5 3,483.3 −         Dec.
1,535.4 1,337.4 − 67.7 1,467.7 1,243.1 470.7 − 6.1 643.0 1,091.9 2,524.7 2,739.4 3,498.6 −2001         Jan.
1,557.1 1,355.9 − 76.7 1,480.4 1,271.6 474.5 − 1.9 648.6 1,111.5 2,545.0 2,768.4 3,513.7 −         Feb.
1,558.7 1,353.8 − 76.0 1,482.7 1,427.6 476.6 − 50.3 660.2 1,111.5 2,551.0 2,777.1 3,521.0 −         Mar.
1,547.3 1,340.5 − 78.3 1,469.1 1,438.1 470.3 − 6.3 662.9 1,130.1 2,562.4 2,789.6 3,495.2 −         Apr.
1,557.6 1,343.6 − 88.6 1,468.9 1,475.1 475.8 − 8.8 650.2 1,135.2 2,571.6 2,806.1 3,504.9 −         May
1,576.5 1,361.0 − 102.8 1,473.7 1,423.0 501.1 − 59.5 638.3 1,146.8 2,586.4 2,824.4 3,532.1 −         June
1,581.0 1,371.4 − 113.7 1,467.3 1,353.8 501.4 − 48.3 620.0 1,134.2 2,574.5 2,826.3 3,518.5 −         July
1,588.0 1,379.9 − 120.1 1,467.9 1,375.8 510.3 − 77.2 624.4 1,131.7 2,579.0 2,841.5 3,523.9 −         Aug.
1,597.5 1,386.6 − 123.7 1,473.8 1,376.2 507.7 − 77.2 643.9 1,160.2 2,607.2 2,872.6 3,527.1 −         Sep.
money market paper. —12Excluding holdings of money market fund consolidated balance sheet. —17M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities
shares/units by non-residents of the euro area. —13Excluding liabilities of up to 2 years and at agreed notice of up to 3 months (excluding central
arising from securities issued. —14After deduction of Inter-MFI governments ’deposits) and (for EMU) central governments ’monetary
participations. —15The German contributions to the Eurosystem ’s liabilities which such maturities. —18M2 plus repo transactions, money
monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national market fund certificates, money market paper and debt securities up to 2monetary aggregates, and are therefore not comparable to the erstwhile years. —19Deposits with agreed maturities of over 2 years and at agreed
German money stocks M1, M2 or M3. —16Currency in circulation, notice of over 3 months, debt securities with maturities of over 2 years,
overnight deposits (excluding central governments ’deposits), and (for EMU) capital and reserves. —20Non-existent in Germany. —XFrom January
central governments ’monetary liabilities, which are not included in the 2001: Enlargement of the euro area. 
13*II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
II. Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  European  monetary  union
  
 3. Banking system ’s liquidity position  * 
Stocks
  
Euro billions; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions ‘
current
Net assets Longer- Other Other accounts
Maintenance in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (includingperiod and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Baseending in  
1 currency operations operations facility operations facility operations circulation deposits (net)  3 reserves)  4 money  5 
Eurosystem   2  
  
1999         Apr. 338.4 130.1 45.0 0.7 − 0.3 − 331.0 42.9 39.0 101.1 432.3
         May 342.5 121.6 45.0 0.8 − 0.4 − 333.9 36.3 38.0 101.2 435.5
         June 339.8 132.0 45.0 0.4 − 0.6 − 337.0 40.4 37.2 101.9 439.6
         July 342.4 143.1 45.0 0.4 − 0.5 − 342.1 45.7 39.5 102.9 445.6
         Aug. 343.2 150.1 45.0 0.5 − 1.0 − 344.8 47.3 42.1 103.6 449.4
         Sep. 343.5 150.4 45.0 0.2 − 0.7 − 342.1 51.4 41.6 103.2 446.0
         Oct. 349.7 143.0 45.0 0.3 − 0.6 − 342.5 45.4 45.9 103.5 446.7
         Nov. 351.8 140.5 53.7 0.3 − 0.4 − 343.1 51.5 47.3 104.2 447.6
         Dec. 351.7 150.4 65.0 0.3 − 1.0 − 354.3 59.0 47.5 105.6 460.8
2000         Jan. 362.3 138.5 75.0 1.9 − 0.5 3.3 363.0 41.0 61.2 108.7 472.3
         Feb. 367.8 130.9 70.5 0.1 − 0.2 − 347.6 49.2 64.2 108.1 455.9
         Mar. 369.2 136.1 66.2 0.2 − 0.3 − 347.6 51.7 63.5 108.6 456.4
         Apr. 377.1 136.7 61.0 0.2 − 0.9 − 349.7 45.6 69.1 109.7 460.3
         May 378.8 142.6 60.0 0.4 − 2.3 − 353.8 41.9 71.8 112.0 468.2
         June 378.1 140.9 59.9 0.3 0.2 0.8 − 354.1 38.3 72.1 114.2 469.1
         July 380.8 157.9 59.9 0.4 − 0.5 − 357.0 50.4 76.8 114.2 471.7
         Aug. 382.0 163.1 55.4 0.1 − 0.3 − 359.2 48.8 80.0 112.4 471.9
         Sep. 381.6 173.1 51.1 0.3 − 0.2 − 354.8 56.6 81.2 113.3 468.3
         Oct. 396.3 176.5 45.7 0.5 − 0.2 − 354.5 47.4 102.5 114.4 469.1
         Nov. 398.6 183.7 45.0 0.2 − 0.2 − 352.7 49.8 109.2 115.7 468.6
         Dec. 394.4 210.4 45.0 0.4 − 0.2 − 360.4 61.1 111.1 117.4 478.0
2001         Jan.  6 383.7 205.3 45.0 0.5 − 0.6 − 368.3 52.2 94.2 119.1 488.0
         Feb. 377.9 188.9 49.8 2.6 − 0.4 − 354.8 57.0 86.3 120.7 476.0
         Mar. 375.6 185.2 54.1 0.4 − 0.5 − 353.0 53.0 87.7 121.0 474.5
         Apr. 382.1 172.4 58.4 2.2 − 0.5 − 354.6 49.5 89.1 121.4 476.4
         May 384.4 144.0 59.1 0.4 17.0 0.6 − 352.7 39.4 87.5 124.8 478.1
         June 385.0 161.7 59.1 0.2 − 0.4 − 351.1 41.3 87.5 125.7 477.3
         July 397.6 161.9 59.9 0.2 − 0.4 − 350.8 42.5 98.8 127.1 478.3
         Aug. 402.1 164.0 60.0 0.1 − 0.2 − 347.6 48.8 101.8 127.8 475.6
         Sep. 401.3 147.1 60.0 0.5 3.5 0.4 − 335.4 45.2 105.4 126.1 461.9
         Oct. 389.9 136.7 60.0 1.1 − 0.1 − 325.2 43.6 93.6 125.1 450.4
Deutsche Bundesbank
1999         Apr. 83.0 67.7 27.7 0.5 − 0.2 − 128.1 0.1 19.9 30.6 158.9
         May 84.6 60.0 25.5 0.6 − 0.2 − 128.9 0.1 10.9 30.5 159.7
         June 84.7 67.5 25.0 0.3 − 0.4 − 129.4 0.1 16.9 30.8 160.6
         July 85.1 70.3 26.5 0.3 − 0.2 − 129.9 0.1 20.6 31.3 161.4
         Aug. 85.3 71.7 29.2 0.3 − 0.2 − 130.4 0.1 24.4 31.4 162.0
         Sep. 85.6 68.5 28.3 0.1 − 0.3 − 130.3 0.1 20.5 31.2 161.8
         Oct. 87.3 66.6 25.6 0.2 − 0.2 − 130.2 0.1 17.8 31.4 161.8
         Nov. 87.8 68.7 28.6 0.2 − 0.2 − 130.5 0.1 22.8 31.7 162.3
         Dec. 88.0 57.5 34.7 0.2 − 0.6 − 134.4 0.1 13.1 32.1 167.1
2000         Jan. 90.6 49.0 32.7 1.4 − 0.3 0.5 136.6 0.1 3.0 33.3 170.2
         Feb. 91.5 65.4 33.5 0.1 − 0.2 − 132.0 0.1 24.5 33.7 165.8
         Mar. 91.9 61.8 34.4 0.1 − 0.2 − 131.6 0.1 22.7 33.6 165.4
         Apr. 93.7 62.0 43.2 0.2 − 0.6 − 131.8 0.1 32.7 34.0 166.4
         May 93.7 60.1 39.5 0.3 − 1.8 − 132.3 0.1 24.8 34.5 168.6
         June 93.3 59.6 35.4 0.2 0.1 0.3 − 132.0 0.1 21.2 35.1 167.3
         July 93.4 67.9 33.3 0.2 − 0.4 − 131.8 0.1 27.6 35.1 167.2
         Aug. 93.0 71.6 34.9 0.1 − 0.1 − 131.9 0.1 33.1 34.5 166.5
         Sep. 92.6 81.9 33.8 0.3 − 0.1 − 131.4 0.1 42.6 34.4 165.9
         Oct. 97.0 87.2 30.7 0.3 − 0.1 − 131.1 0.1 49.5 34.5 165.7
         Nov. 98.2 99.1 30.7 0.2 − 0.1 − 130.1 0.1 63.0 34.9 165.1
         Dec. 97.6 103.5 31.1 0.2 − 0.1 − 132.0 0.1 65.0 35.2 167.4
2001         Jan. 93.0 103.1 28.4 0.3 − 0.3 − 131.2 0.1 57.7 35.6 167.1
         Feb. 90.3 93.2 28.3 1.3 − 0.2 − 126.7 0.1 50.0 36.2 163.1
         Mar. 89.1 87.6 33.2 0.2 − 0.4 − 126.2 0.1 47.6 35.9 162.4
         Apr. 90.1 84.5 37.4 1.5 − 0.2 − 126.2 0.1 50.7 36.4 162.8
         May 90.0 67.4 37.8 0.2 7.5 0.5 − 124.8 0.1 47.6 37.4 162.7
         June 89.7 79.9 37.5 0.1 − 0.3 − 123.6 0.1 45.7 37.5 161.4
         July 92.8 85.4 37.0 0.1 − 0.3 − 121.8 0.1 55.5 37.7 159.7
         Aug. 94.2 77.0 38.2 0.1 − 0.2 − 119.3 0.1 52.0 37.8 157.3
         Sep. 93.7 73.3 38.9 0.1 1.3 0.1 − 115.4 0.1 54.6 37.1 152.7
         Oct. 91.3 66.3 40.2 0.5 − 0.1 − 110.8 0.1 50.1 37.3 148.2
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. —*The banking system ’s liquidity of the Bundesbank. —1The reserve maintenance period of the ESCB
position is defined as the current account holdings in euro of credit in- minimum reserve system starts on the 24th of each month and ends on thestitutions in the euro area with the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from 23rd of the following month. —2Source: ECB. —3Remaining items in the
the consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the statement consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the statement of
14*II. Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  European  monetary  union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
II. Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  European  monetary  union
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions ‘
current
Net assets Longer- Other Other accountsin gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Maintenanceand foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base periodcurrency operations operations facility operations facility operations circulation deposits (net)  
3 reserves)  4 money  5 ending in  1 
Eurosystem   2  
  
+ 14.8 − 6.3 − 0.0 + 0.3 −− 1.1 − + 4.1 − 6.9 + 14.0 − 1.1 + 1.8 1999          Apr.
+ 4.1 − 8.5 − 0.0 + 0.1 − + 0.1 − + 2.9 − 6.6 −1.0 + 0.1 + 3.2          May
− 2.7 + 10.4 + 0.0 −0.4 − + 0.2 − + 3.1 + 4.1 −0.8 + 0.7 + 4.1          June
+ 2.6 + 11.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 −− 0.1 − + 5.1 + 5.3 + 2.3 + 1.0 + 6.0          July
+ 0.8 + 7.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 − + 0.5 − + 2.7 + 1.6 + 2.6 + 0.7 + 3.8          Aug.
+ 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.0 −0.3 −− 0.3 −− 2.7 + 4.1 −0.5 − 0.4 − 3.4          Sep.
+ 6.2 − 7.4 + 0.0 + 0.1 −− 0.1 − + 0.4 − 6.0 + 4.3 + 0.3 + 0.7          Oct.
+ 2.1 − 2.5 + 8.7 + 0.0 −− 0.2 − + 0.6 + 6.1 + 1.4 + 0.7 + 0.9          Nov.
− 0.1 + 9.9 + 11.3 −0.0 − + 0.6 − + 11.2 + 7.5 + 0.2 + 1.4 + 13.2          Dec.
+ 10.6 −11.9 + 10.0 + 1.6 −− 0.5 + 3.3 + 8.7 −18.0 + 13.7 + 3.1 + 11.5 2000          Jan.
+ 5.5 − 7.6 − 4.5 −1.8 −− 0.3 − 3.3 −15.4 + 8.2 + 3.0 − 0.6 − 16.4          Feb.
+ 1.4 + 5.2 − 4.3 + 0.1 − + 0.1 − + 0.0 + 2.5 −0.7 + 0.5 + 0.5          Mar.
+ 7.9 + 0.6 − 5.2 + 0.0 − + 0.6 − + 2.1 − 6.1 + 5.6 + 1.1 + 3.9          Apr.
+ 1.7 + 5.9 − 1.0 + 0.2 − + 1.4 − + 4.1 − 3.7 + 2.7 + 2.3 + 7.9          May
− 0.7 − 1.7 − 0.1 −0.1 + 0.2 −1.5 − + 0.3 − 3.6 + 0.3 + 2.2 + 0.9          June
+ 2.7 + 17.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.2 −0.3 − + 2.9 + 12.1 + 4.7 − 0.0 + 2.6          July
+ 1.2 + 5.2 − 4.5 −0.3 −− 0.2 − + 2.2 − 1.6 + 3.2 − 1.8 + 0.2          Aug.
− 0.4 + 10.0 − 4.3 + 0.2 −− 0.1 −− 4.4 + 7.8 + 1.2 + 0.9 − 3.6          Sep.
+ 14.7 + 3.4 − 5.4 + 0.2 − + 0.0 −− 0.3 − 9.2 + 21.3 + 1.1 + 0.8          Oct.
+ 2.3 + 7.2 − 0.7 −0.3 − + 0.0 −− 1.8 + 2.4 + 6.7 + 1.3 − 0.5          Nov.
− 4.2 + 26.7 − 0.0 + 0.2 − + 0.0 − + 7.7 + 11.3 + 1.9 + 1.7 + 9.4          Dec.
−10.7 − 5.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − + 0.4 − + 7.9 − 8.9 −16.9 + 1.7 + 10.0 2001          Jan.  6 
− 5.8 −16.4 + 4.8 + 2.1 −− 0.2 −− 13.5 + 4.8 −7.9 + 1.6 − 12.0          Feb.
− 2.3 − 3.7 + 4.3 −2.2 − + 0.1 −− 1.8 − 4.0 + 1.4 + 0.3 − 1.5          Mar.
+ 6.5 −12.8 + 4.3 + 1.8 −− 0.0 − + 1.6 − 3.5 + 1.4 + 0.4 + 1.9          Apr.
+ 2.3 −28.4 + 0.7 −1.8 + 17.0 + 0.1 −− 1.9 −10.1 −1.6 + 3.4 + 1.7          May
+ 0.6 + 17.7 + 0.0 −0.2 − 17.0 −0.2 −− 1.6 + 1.9 + 0.0 + 0.9 − 0.8          June
+ 12.6 + 0.2 + 0.8 + 0.0 − + 0.0 −− 0.3 + 1.2 + 11.3 + 1.4 + 1.0          July
+ 4.5 + 2.1 + 0.1 −0.1 −− 0.2 −− 3.2 + 6.3 + 3.0 + 0.7 − 2.7          Aug.
− 0.8 −16.9 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 3.5 + 0.2 −− 12.2 − 3.6 + 3.6 − 1.7 − 13.7          Sep.
−11.4 −10.4 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 3.5 −0.3 −− 10.2 − 1.6 −11.8 − 1.0 − 11.5          Oct.
Deutsche Bundesbank
+ 3.9 + 3.4 + 1.6 + 0.2 −− 0.4 − + 1.4 + 0.0 + 8.5 − 0.3 + 0.7 1999          Apr.
+ 1.5 − 7.7 − 2.2 + 0.1 −− 0.0 − + 0.8 − 0.0 −9.0 − 0.0 + 0.8          May
+ 0.2 + 7.5 − 0.5 −0.4 − + 0.2 − + 0.5 − 0.0 + 6.0 + 0.3 + 0.9          June
+ 0.4 + 2.7 + 1.5 −0.0 −− 0.1 − + 0.5 + 0.0 + 3.7 + 0.5 + 0.9          July
+ 0.2 + 1.4 + 2.7 + 0.1 − + 0.0 − + 0.5 − 0.0 + 3.8 + 0.2 + 0.6          Aug.
+ 0.3 − 3.2 − 0.9 −0.2 − + 0.1 −− 0.1 + 0.0 −3.8 − 0.3 − 0.3          Sep.
+ 1.7 − 1.8 − 2.7 + 0.1 −− 0.1 −− 0.1 − 0.0 −2.8 + 0.2 + 0.0          Oct.
+ 0.6 + 2.1 + 3.0 −0.1 −− 0.0 − + 0.3 + 0.0 + 5.0 + 0.3 + 0.5          Nov.
+ 0.2 −11.2 + 6.1 + 0.0 − + 0.4 − + 3.9 + 0.0 −9.7 + 0.5 + 4.8          Dec.
+ 2.6 − 8.5 − 2.0 + 1.2 −− 0.3 + 0.5 + 2.2 − 0.0 −10.1 + 1.2 + 3.1 2000          Jan.
+ 0.9 + 16.4 + 0.8 −1.4 −− 0.1 − 0.5 − 4.6 − 0.0 + 21.5 + 0.3 − 4.4          Feb.
+ 0.4 − 3.6 + 0.9 + 0.1 −− 0.0 −− 0.3 + 0.0 −1.8 − 0.1 − 0.4          Mar.
+ 1.8 + 0.3 + 8.8 + 0.0 − + 0.4 − + 0.2 − 0.0 + 9.9 + 0.4 + 1.0          Apr.
− 0.0 − 1.9 − 3.7 + 0.1 − + 1.2 − + 0.5 + 0.0 −7.8 + 0.5 + 2.2          May
− 0.4 − 0.5 − 4.1 −0.0 + 0.1 −1.5 −− 0.3 + 0.0 −3.6 + 0.5 − 1.3          June
+ 0.2 + 8.3 − 2.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 −− 0.1 − 0.0 + 6.4 − 0.0 − 0.1          July
− 0.4 + 3.7 + 1.6 −0.2 −− 0.3 − + 0.1 − 0.0 + 5.6 − 0.6 − 0.8          Aug.
− 0.5 + 10.3 − 1.1 + 0.2 −− 0.0 −− 0.5 + 0.0 + 9.5 − 0.1 − 0.6          Sep.
+ 4.5 + 5.3 − 3.1 + 0.0 − + 0.0 −− 0.3 + 0.0 + 6.9 + 0.1 − 0.2          Oct.
+ 1.2 + 11.8 − 0.0 −0.2 − + 0.0 −− 1.0 + 0.0 + 13.4 + 0.4 − 0.6          Nov.
− 0.6 + 4.5 + 0.5 + 0.1 − + 0.0 − + 1.9 + 0.0 + 2.1 + 0.4 + 2.3          Dec.
− 4.6 − 0.5 − 2.7 + 0.1 − + 0.2 −− 0.8 − 0.0 −7.4 + 0.3 − 0.2 2001          Jan.
− 2.7 − 9.8 − 0.1 + 1.0 −− 0.1 −− 4.6 − 0.0 −7.7 + 0.6 − 4.0          Feb.
− 1.2 − 5.6 + 4.8 −1.2 − + 0.1 −− 0.5 − 0.0 −2.4 − 0.4 − 0.7          Mar.
+ 1.0 − 3.1 + 4.3 + 1.3 −− 0.2 −− 0.0 + 0.0 + 3.1 + 0.5 + 0.4          Apr.
− 0.1 −17.2 + 0.3 −1.2 + 7.5 + 0.3 −− 1.4 + 0.0 −3.1 + 1.1 − 0.1          May
− 0.3 + 12.5 − 0.3 −0.1 − 7.5 −0.2 −− 1.2 + 0.0 −1.9 + 0.1 − 1.3          June
+ 3.2 + 5.5 − 0.5 + 0.0 − + 0.0 −− 1.9 − 0.0 + 9.9 + 0.2 − 1.7          July
+ 1.3 − 8.4 + 1.2 −0.1 −− 0.2 −− 2.4 − 0.0 −3.5 + 0.2 − 2.4          Aug.
− 0.4 − 3.7 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 1.3 −0.0 −− 3.9 + 0.0 + 2.6 − 0.7 − 4.7          Sep.
− 2.4 − 7.0 + 1.3 + 0.4 − 1.3 −0.0 −− 4.7 − 0.0 −4.5 + 0.2 − 4.5          Oct.
the Bundesbank. —4Equal to the difference between the sum of liquidity- between the sum of liquidity-providing factors and the sum of government
providing factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors. —5Calculated deposits and other factors (net). —6Entry of Greece into the euro area on
as the sum of the "deposit facility", "banknotes in circulation" and "credit January 1, 2001. institutions ’current account holdings" or, alternatively, as the difference
15*II. Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  European  monetary  union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1. Assets *
  
Euro billion
Claims on non-euro area Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
investments, euro area Balances Claimsexternal loans residents with banks, arising from
On Gold and other denominated security the creditreporting Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility underdate assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans  
2 ERM II
 Eurosystem 1
 
2000         Jan. 772.7 116.3 256.3 29.5 226.8 14.8 4.8 4.8 −
         Feb. 752.2 115.9 255.6 29.2 226.4 15.5 4.7 4.7 −
         Mar. 774.4 115.7 267.1 30.3 236.9 16.9 4.1 4.1 −
         Apr. 783.0 115.7 267.4 27.4 240.0 17.3 4.8 4.8 −
         May 779.2 115.7 267.5 26.9 240.6 17.6 5.0 5.0 −
         June 812.5 121.2 263.9 26.5 237.4 18.3 4.1 4.1 −
         July 800.7 120.9 264.1 26.2 237.9 16.7 3.8 3.8 −
         Aug. 797.0 120.9 263.7 26.3 237.4 15.3 4.2 4.2 −
         Sep. 826.3 124.9 281.7 27.5 254.2 16.6 4.0 4.0 −
         Oct. 822.1 124.9 282.4 27.2 255.2 14.2 3.7 3.7 −
         Nov. 833.1 124.9 272.0 26.9 245.1 16.3 4.0 4.0 −
         Dec. 835.1 117.1 258.7 26.7 232.0 15.8 3.7 3.7 −
2001         Jan. 5 853.5 118.6 266.5 27.9 238.6 19.6 4.5 4.5 −
         Feb. 871.6 118.6 263.7 27.2 236.5 20.3 5.5 5.5 −
         Mar. 848.0 118.5 271.6 27.5 244.1 20.1 5.4 5.4 −
         Apr. 839.3 118.5 266.5 27.3 239.2 23.1 5.1 5.1 −
         May 825.4 118.5 267.7 28.1 239.6 23.0 5.4 5.4 −
         June 3 862.8 3 128.5 3 279.0 3 29.7 3 249.4 3 22.5 5.7 5.7 −
         July 862.1 128.4 279.8 29.9 249.8 24.0 5.6 5.6 −
2001 Aug.                 3 852.1 128.4 278.1 29.9 248.2 23.8 5.6 5.6 −
                              10 841.0 128.4 276.0 29.9 246.1 23.5 5.5 5.5 −
                              17 840.6 128.3 277.7 30.0 247.8 22.7 5.4 5.4 −
                              24 832.4 128.3 277.5 29.8 247.7 21.9 5.4 5.4 −
                              31 833.4 128.3 275.4 29.8 245.6 24.8 5.3 5.3 −
         Sep.                 7 828.1 128.3 274.3 29.8 244.5 24.2 5.4 5.4 −
                              14 820.7 128.2 274.5 32.0 242.5 21.5 5.3 5.3 −
                              21 806.1 128.2 272.7 31.8 241.0 22.1 5.3 5.3 −
                              28 3 817.4 128.2 3 262.3 3 32.4 3 229.9 3 22.1 5.2 5.2 −
         Oct.                 5 798.9 128.2 260.7 32.4 228.4 21.8 5.1 5.1 −
                              12 782.1 128.2 263.8 32.2 231.6 21.6 5.4 5.4 −
                              19 810.4 128.2 264.6 31.8 232.8 22.1 5.5 5.5 −
                              26 810.0 128.2 265.0 31.5 233.5 21.5 5.6 5.6 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2000         Jan. 235.2 32.3 60.7 8.3 52.4 − 0.8 0.8 −
         Feb. 243.2 32.3 61.1 8.2 52.9 − 6.2 6.2 −
         Mar. 242.7 32.2 64.6 8.7 55.9 − 10.5 10.5 −
         Apr. 239.8 32.2 63.3 7.7 55.6 − 8.3 8.3 −
         May 228.9 32.2 63.1 7.7 55.4 − 11.4 11.4 −
         June 242.3 33.7 62.3 7.6 54.7 − 4.5 4.5 −
         July 242.2 33.7 61.1 7.4 53.7 − 14.6 14.6 −
         Aug. 269.3 33.7 60.9 7.4 53.4 − 32.6 32.6 −
         Sep. 244.8 34.9 65.9 7.8 58.1 − 5.6 5.6 −
         Oct. 263.3 34.9 65.3 7.7 57.6 − 16.5 16.5 −
         Nov. 287.7 34.9 65.0 7.6 57.4 − 29.8 29.8 −
         Dec. 256.9 32.7 61.1 7.8 53.4 − 0.3 0.3 −
2001         Jan. 243.5 32.7 59.9 7.9 52.0 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Feb. 255.2 32.7 58.7 7.6 51.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Mar. 245.3 32.7 60.5 7.8 52.7 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Apr. 239.1 32.7 59.4 7.7 51.7 − 0.3 0.3 −
         May 229.8 32.7 58.8 7.7 51.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
         June 3 247.3 3 35.5 3 60.3 3 8.2 3 52.2 − 0.3 0.3 −
         July 241.0 35.4 60.4 8.2 52.3 − 0.3 0.3 −
2001 Aug.                 3 235.8 35.4 60.4 8.1 52.3 − 0.3 0.3 −
                              10 236.0 35.4 60.4 8.2 52.2 0.1 0.3 0.3 −
                              17 231.8 35.4 60.8 8.2 52.6 − 0.3 0.3 −
                              24 229.6 35.4 60.5 8.1 52.4 − 0.3 0.3 −
                              31 238.4 35.4 60.0 8.1 51.9 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Sep.                 7 234.5 35.4 59.6 8.1 51.5 − 0.3 0.3 −
                              14 230.5 35.4 60.2 9.1 51.2 − 0.3 0.3 −
                              21 228.8 35.4 60.2 9.0 51.2 − 0.3 0.3 −
                              28 3 233.4 35.4 3 59.1 3 9.0 3 50.2 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Oct.                 5 220.7 35.4 57.3 9.0 48.3 − 0.3 0.3 −
                              12 219.5 35.4 58.6 8.9 49.7 − 0.3 0.3 −
                              19 228.2 35.4 59.1 8.9 50.2 − 0.3 0.3 −
                              26 226.6 35.4 59.5 8.8 50.7 − 0.3 0.3 −
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quarter. —
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the statements of the 1Source: ECB. —2Since November 30, 2000, the Bundesbank ’s claims on
national central banks of the EU member countries (NCBs) of the euro and liabilities to non-Eurosystem NCBs arising from TARGET have beenarea. —The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold and shown as a balance under "Other assets" and "Other liabilities". —
16*III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
    
 
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations
denominated in euro
 Other
 claims on euro area credit Securities General
Credits institutions of euro area government
Main Longer-term Fine-tuning Structural Marginal related denomi- residents debt    Onrefinancing refinancing reverse reverse lending to margin nated in denominated denominated Other    reporting
Total  
4 operations operations operations operations facility calls euro  4 in euro in euro assets    date
Eurosystem 1
 
216.7 146.0 70.0 −− 0.0 0.1 0.6 24.0 59.3 80.6 2000          Jan.
193.3 122.0 70.0 −− 0.0 0.1 1.3 24.6 59.3 83.3          Feb.
201.7 140.9 60.0 −− 0.1 0.1 0.7 25.3 59.0 84.5          Mar.
209.9 147.2 60.0 −− 1.6 0.0 1.2 24.9 59.0 83.8          Apr.
205.4 144.1 60.0 −− 0.2 0.0 1.1 25.2 59.0 83.9          May
234.5 173.0 59.9 −− 0.1 0.1 1.4 25.1 59.0 86.3          June
226.3 171.0 54.9 −− 0.0 0.0 0.3 25.4 59.0 84.6          July
222.7 167.0 54.9 −− 0.6 0.0 0.1 25.5 59.0 85.7          Aug.
230.3 185.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.1 0.1 25.6 58.9 84.3          Sep.
228.5 183.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.5 25.8 58.9 83.7          Oct.
243.3 198.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.3 26.0 58.8 87.8          Nov.
268.6 223.0 45.0 −− 0.6 0.1 0.6 26.0 57.7 87.0          Dec.
255.2 205.0 50.0 −− 0.2 0.0 1.0 28.2 70.3 89.6 2001          Jan. 5 
274.0 220.3 50.0 −− 3.6 0.0 0.9 27.5 70.2 90.9          Feb.
244.3 185.0 59.1 −− 0.1 0.1 0.6 27.9 70.2 89.5          Mar.
236.2 177.0 59.1 −− 0.1 0.1 0.5 27.8 70.2 91.5          Apr.
221.2 162.0 59.1 −− 0.1 0.0 0.4 27.8 70.2 91.3          May
236.2 176.0 60.0 −− 0.2 0.0 0.5 27.7 70.2 3 92.5          June
233.0 173.0 60.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.3 28.1 70.2 92.7          July
225.0 165.0 60.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.3 28.1 70.2 92.6 2001 Aug.                  3
222.4 162.0 60.0 −− 0.3 0.1 0.3 28.1 70.2 86.6                               10
221.1 161.0 60.0 −− 0.0 0.1 0.2 28.3 70.2 86.7                               17
213.1 153.0 60.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.3 28.3 70.2 87.4                               24
213.5 153.0 60.0 −− 0.4 0.0 0.3 28.4 70.2 87.3                               31
212.1 152.0 60.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.3 28.3 70.2 85.1          Sep.                  7
206.1 143.0 60.0 −− 3.1 0.0 0.4 28.3 70.2 86.2                               14
192.5 132.0 60.0 −− 0.5 0.0 0.4 28.3 70.2 86.4                               21
213.4 152.0 60.0 −− 1.4 0.0 0.4 28.7 70.2 86.8                               28
197.1 137.0 60.0 −− 0.0 0.1 0.3 28.7 70.2 86.7          Oct.                  5
176.5 116.5 60.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.8 28.3 70.2 87.3                               12
203.2 142.5 60.0 −− 0.6 0.0 0.8 28.1 70.2 87.6                               19
203.1 143.0 60.0 −− 0.1 0.0 0.4 28.4 70.2 87.7                               26
 Deutsche Bundesbank
102.8 69.2 33.6 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 34.1 2000          Jan.
93.0 59.4 33.6 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 46.1          Feb.
112.5 67.2 45.3 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.4          Mar.
103.9 64.2 38.9 −− 0.9 − 0.0 − 4.4 27.6          Apr.
99.5 60.4 38.9 −− 0.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.3          May
93.1 59.8 33.2 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 44.2          June
109.9 74.8 35.1 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.5          July
118.7 83.0 35.1 −− 0.6 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.9          Aug.
108.3 78.0 30.3 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 25.7          Sep.
123.1 92.4 30.7 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.2          Oct.
134.3 103.5 30.7 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.3          Nov.
139.2 110.7 27.9 −− 0.6 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.1          Dec.
126.8 98.3 28.3 −− 0.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.4 2001          Jan.
140.0 109.9 28.3 −− 1.8 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.1          Feb.
119.3 81.2 38.0 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 28.0          Mar.
124.0 86.3 37.7 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.2          Apr.
115.1 77.3 37.7 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.4          May
128.2 91.2 36.9 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.6          June
121.8 83.5 38.3 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.7          July
116.6 78.4 38.3 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.7 2001 Aug.                  3
113.0 74.4 38.3 −− 0.3 − 0.0 − 4.4 22.5                               10
111.1 72.8 38.3 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.8                               17
109.9 71.6 38.3 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.1                               24
114.0 74.5 39.1 −− 0.4 − 0.0 − 4.4 24.2                               31
116.0 76.8 39.1 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.9          Sep.                  7
111.2 71.7 39.1 −− 0.4 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.0                               14
109.7 70.5 39.1 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.8                               21
111.7 70.2 40.3 −− 1.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 22.4                               28
102.4 62.1 40.3 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 20.8          Oct.                  5
101.9 61.6 40.3 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.7                               12
110.2 69.8 40.3 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.8                               19
108.2 69.8 38.4 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.7                               26
 
3Changes are due mainly to revaluations at the end of the quarter. — credit institutions denominated in euro" have been shown as a separate
4Until December 22, 2000, "Other claims" were included in "Lending to item. —5Enlargement of the euro area on January 1, 2001 through the
euro area counterparties related to monetary policy operations accession of Greece. denominated in euro". Since December 29, 2000 "Other claims on euro area
17*III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2. Liabilities *
  
Euro billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilitiesaccounts to euro(covering Fine- area creditthe tuning Deposits institutions Debt
On Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
reporting Total in cir- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Otherdate liabilities culation Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment liabilities
 Eurosystem 1
 
2000         Jan. 772.7 348.0 115.7 115.5 0.1 −− 0.0 . 7.9 56.8 52.3 4.5
         Feb. 752.2 345.0 95.5 95.4 0.1 −− 0.0 . 7.9 60.8 57.3 3.5
         Mar. 774.4 347.9 111.2 110.1 1.1 −−− . 6.3 52.3 48.7 3.6
         Apr. 783.0 354.3 111.9 101.5 10.4 −− 0.0 . 6.3 53.8 50.3 3.6
         May 779.2 350.9 115.9 115.9 0.0 −− 0.0 . 6.3 47.7 44.0 3.7
         June 812.5 355.7 120.4 120.3 0.1 −− 0.0 . 6.3 65.2 61.5 3.7
         July 800.7 358.5 113.5 113.4 0.0 −− 0.0 . 6.3 60.1 56.7 3.4
         Aug. 797.0 353.8 106.5 106.5 0.0 −− 0.0 . 6.3 65.5 61.9 3.5
         Sep. 826.3 354.8 115.3 114.9 0.4 −−− . 4.6 58.1 54.3 3.8
         Oct. 822.1 352.1 121.7 121.7 0.1 −−− . 4.6 49.4 45.7 3.7
         Nov. 833.1 350.1 113.7 113.6 0.1 −−− . 3.8 67.4 63.4 4.0
         Dec. 835.1 371.4 124.6 124.4 0.2 −−− 0.3 3.8 57.0 53.4 3.7
2001         Jan. 4 853.5 355.6 123.5 123.4 0.0 −− 0.0 8.0 3.8 73.8 68.0 5.7
         Feb. 871.6 352.0 144.5 143.7 0.8 −−− 7.5 3.8 74.0 68.0 6.0
         Mar. 848.0 351.7 126.9 126.7 0.1 −−− 6.1 3.8 60.5 54.6 5.9
         Apr. 839.3 352.7 133.2 133.1 0.0 −− 0.0 6.1 3.8 53.9 48.1 5.8
         May 825.4 350.2 121.1 121.0 0.1 −− 0.0 6.2 3.8 52.9 47.2 5.7
         June 3 862.8 350.2 117.8 117.6 0.3 −−− 6.1 3.8 69.7 63.9 5.8
         July 862.1 348.3 128.5 128.5 0.0 −− 0.0 4.1 3.8 62.8 57.3 5.5
2001 Aug.                 3 852.1 351.6 125.2 125.2 0.0 −− 0.0 4.2 3.8 54.0 48.6 5.4
                              10 841.0 349.3 127.3 126.2 1.1 −− 0.0 4.3 3.8 51.4 45.9 5.5
                              17 840.6 345.6 129.7 129.7 0.0 −− 0.0 4.2 3.8 51.5 45.9 5.6
                              24 832.4 338.9 125.0 125.0 0.0 −− 0.0 4.1 3.8 54.8 49.3 5.6
                              31 833.4 337.7 118.8 118.7 0.1 −− 0.0 4.2 3.8 62.8 57.3 5.5
         Sep.                 7 828.1 338.2 128.0 127.9 0.0 −− 0.0 4.8 3.8 47.9 42.5 5.4
                              14 820.7 334.3 114.0 113.9 0.1 −− 0.0 4.9 3.8 49.9 44.3 5.5
                              21 806.1 329.2 118.9 115.5 3.4 −− 0.0 4.9 3.8 45.9 40.4 5.5
                              28 3 817.4 327.9 131.7 131.7 0.0 −− 0.0 4.8 3.8 55.9 50.5 5.4
         Oct.                 5 798.9 329.1 120.6 120.5 0.1 −− 0.0 5.2 3.8 49.1 43.7 5.4
                              12 782.1 325.2 105.0 104.8 0.2 −− 0.0 5.5 3.8 48.1 42.7 5.5
                              19 810.4 320.0 143.6 143.4 0.1 −− 0.0 5.5 3.8 40.6 35.1 5.5
                              26 810.0 315.2 129.6 129.6 0.0 −− 0.0 5.7 3.8 58.8 53.3 5.5
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2000         Jan. 235.2 131.8 30.1 30.0 0.1 −−− . − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Feb. 243.2 130.9 29.1 29.0 0.1 −−− . − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Mar. 242.7 131.2 39.0 38.0 1.0 −−− . − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Apr. 239.8 132.5 42.2 31.8 10.4 −−− . − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         May 228.9 130.9 34.1 34.1 0.0 −−− . − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         June 242.3 131.5 45.2 45.2 0.0 −−− . − 0.6 0.1 0.6
         July 242.2 131.4 35.8 35.8 0.0 −−− . − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Aug. 269.3 130.9 34.3 34.3 0.0 −−− . − 0.4 0.1 0.4
         Sep. 244.8 131.3 37.2 37.1 0.1 −−− . − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Oct. 263.3 130.1 32.2 32.2 0.0 −−− . − 0.4 0.1 0.4
         Nov. 287.7 129.3 31.0 30.9 0.1 −−− . − 0.4 0.1 0.3
         Dec. 256.9 133.9 47.0 46.9 0.1 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
2001         Jan. 243.5 126.8 33.1 33.1 0.0 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Feb. 255.2 126.2 46.1 45.8 0.3 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Mar. 245.3 125.3 45.1 45.0 0.1 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Apr. 239.1 125.0 40.8 40.8 0.0 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         May 229.8 124.1 32.6 32.5 0.1 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         June 3 247.3 121.9 42.7 42.5 0.2 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         July 241.0 119.9 33.6 33.6 0.0 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
2001 Aug.                 3 235.8 120.5 38.3 38.3 0.0 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.5
                              10 236.0 119.8 43.0 41.9 1.1 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
                              17 231.8 118.6 39.6 39.6 0.0 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
                              24 229.6 116.9 31.2 31.2 0.0 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
                              31 238.4 116.5 48.0 48.0 0.0 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Sep.                 7 234.5 116.5 37.6 37.5 0.0 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
                              14 230.5 114.9 32.2 32.1 0.1 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.6
                              21 228.8 113.0 33.3 32.6 0.7 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
                              28 3 233.4 112.0 48.3 48.2 0.0 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Oct.                 5 220.7 112.5 36.8 36.8 0.1 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.5
                              12 219.5 110.5 32.9 32.8 0.1 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
                              19 228.2 108.6 44.3 44.2 0.1 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
                              26 226.6 106.7 34.0 34.0 0.0 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the area. —The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold and
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the statements of the financial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quarter. —
national central banks of the EU member countries (NCBs) of the euro 1Source: ECB. —2Whereas the consolidated financial statement of the
18*III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
    
 
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated inforeign currency
 
Liabilities  
Liabilities to euro area Liabilities Counterpart  to non-euro residents Deposits, arising of special  area residents denominated balances from the drawing  Capital    Ondenominated in foreign and other credit facility rights allocated Other Revaluation and    reportingin euro  
2 currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF liabilities accounts reserves    date
Eurosystem 1
 
7.0 1.2 13.3 13.3 − 6.5 55.6 107.5 53.4 2000          Jan.
7.8 0.8 10.5 10.5 − 6.5 55.7 107.4 54.2          Feb.
7.0 0.9 9.9 9.9 − 6.8 59.9 118.0 54.3          Mar.
7.7 0.8 13.5 13.5 − 6.8 55.3 118.0 54.6          Apr.
7.3 0.8 14.7 14.7 − 6.8 55.9 118.0 55.0          May
7.3 0.8 13.3 13.3 − 6.7 60.7 120.9 55.1          June
7.3 0.8 11.8 11.8 − 6.7 59.7 120.9 55.1          July
8.1 0.8 10.7 10.7 − 6.7 62.5 120.9 55.1          Aug.
9.2 0.9 11.7 11.7 − 7.1 65.4 144.2 55.1          Sep.
9.3 0.9 11.8 11.8 − 7.1 65.9 144.2 55.1          Oct.
11.4 0.9 10.3 10.3 − 7.1 69.1 144.2 55.2          Nov.
10.8 0.8 12.4 12.4 − 6.7 73.5 117.7 56.1          Dec.
11.1 5.1 13.0 13.0 − 7.2 78.9 119.3 54.4 2001          Jan. 4 
10.2 5.0 14.5 14.5 − 7.2 78.4 119.3 55.4          Feb.
8.5 3.8 13.0 13.0 − 7.0 82.5 126.3 58.0          Mar.
8.4 3.8 12.4 12.4 − 7.0 72.6 126.3 59.2          Apr.
8.9 3.8 13.6 13.6 − 7.0 71.8 126.3 59.9          May
10.2 3.9 3 17.0 3 17.0 − 7.2 3 75.0 3 141.3 60.5          June
8.6 4.0 18.6 18.6 − 7.2 74.4 141.3 60.5          July
8.5 4.0 17.0 17.0 − 7.2 74.8 141.3 60.5 2001 Aug.                  3
8.7 4.0 15.2 15.2 − 7.2 68.0 141.3 60.5                               10
8.5 4.1 15.4 15.4 − 7.2 68.9 141.3 60.5                               17
8.5 4.0 14.7 14.7 − 7.2 69.5 141.3 60.5                               24
8.5 4.0 15.6 15.6 − 7.2 69.1 141.3 60.5                               31
8.5 4.0 14.7 14.7 − 7.2 69.3 141.3 60.5          Sep.                  7
18.7 3.9 12.4 12.4 − 7.2 69.8 141.3 60.5                               14
9.0 3.9 11.3 11.3 − 7.2 70.1 141.3 60.5                               21
8.5 2.5 3 16.3 3 16.3 − 6.9 3 73.6 3 125.0 60.5                               28
8.2 2.5 14.6 14.6 − 6.9 73.5 125.0 60.5          Oct.                  5
8.8 2.4 17.4 17.4 − 6.9 73.5 125.0 60.5                               12
8.5 2.4 19.4 19.4 − 6.9 74.3 125.0 60.5                               19
8.6 2.5 19.6 19.6 − 6.9 73.8 125.0 60.5                               26
 Deutsche Bundesbank
18.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 12.3 35.0 5.1 2000          Jan.
28.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 12.8 35.0 5.1          Feb.
13.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 13.6 38.0 5.1          Mar.
10.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 9.3 38.0 5.1          Apr.
6.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 11.7 38.0 5.1          May
8.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 11.1 39.0 5.1          June
6.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 22.0 39.0 5.1          July
7.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 50.9 39.0 5.1          Aug.
10.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.8 13.5 45.2 5.1          Sep.
7.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.8 40.7 45.2 5.1          Oct.
8.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.8 66.1 45.2 5.1          Nov.
6.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 22.9 39.2 5.1          Dec.
6.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 30.4 39.2 5.1 2001          Jan.
6.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 29.5 39.2 5.1          Feb.
6.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 19.2 41.4 5.1          Mar.
6.8 0.0 −−− 1.7 17.8 41.4 5.1          Apr.
7.2 0.0 −−− 1.7 17.1 41.4 5.1          May
6.8 0.0 −−− 1.8 23.2 3 45.2 5.1          June
6.8 0.0 −−− 1.8 28.0 45.2 5.1          July
6.8 0.0 −−− 1.8 17.6 45.2 5.1 2001 Aug.                  3
6.8 0.0 −−− 1.8 13.8 45.2 5.1                               10
6.8 0.0 −−− 1.8 14.2 45.2 5.1                               17
6.8 0.0 −−− 1.8 22.0 45.2 5.1                               24
6.8 0.0 −−− 1.8 14.4 45.2 5.1                               31
6.9 0.0 −−− 1.8 20.9 45.2 5.1          Sep.                  7
6.8 0.0 −−− 1.8 23.8 45.2 5.1                               14
7.1 0.0 −−− 1.8 22.7 45.2 5.1                               21
6.8 0.0 1.8 1.8 − 1.7 15.3 3 41.8 5.1                               28
6.8 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 1.7 15.4 41.8 5.1          Oct.                  5
7.0 0.0 1.7 1.7 − 1.7 18.1 41.8 5.1                               12
6.8 0.0 2.5 2.5 − 1.7 16.8 41.8 5.1                               19
6.9 0.0 3.0 3.0 − 1.7 26.8 41.8 5.1                               26
 
Eurosystem shows the bilateral TARGET balances of the individual non-Eurosystem NCBs. —3Changes are due mainly to revaluations at the
non-Eurosystem NCBs as an aggregated (net) figure, the Bundesbank state- end of the quarter. —4Enlargement of the euro area on January 1, 2001
ment reports gross figures for the claims on and liabilities to the individual through the accession of Greece. 
19*III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
IV. Banks
 
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
   Assets
 
 Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 euro billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area  3 Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other member countries to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and indi-
viduals
Secur- Secur-
Balance- ities itiessheet Cash Ad- issued Ad- issued Ad-
Period total  
2 in hand Total Total vances  3 by banks Total vances  3 by banks Total Total Total vances  3 
 End of year or month
 
1991 5,751.6 23.9 1,713.9 1,576.9 1,122.9 454.0 137.0 117.2 19.8 3,437.9 3,380.2 2,665.2 2,573.71992 6,143.1 27.8 1,779.6 1,638.4 1,168.0 470.4 141.2 116.8 24.3 3,727.7 3,665.2 2,898.1 2,775.01993 6,799.5 27.8 1,940.4 1,757.5 1,212.6 544.9 182.9 151.9 31.0 4,085.0 4,005.8 3,156.8 2,980.31994 7,205.7 26.2 2,030.1 1,854.1 1,285.1 569.1 175.9 145.0 30.9 4,411.4 4,333.2 3,391.3 3,143.2
1995 7,778.7 27.3 2,210.2 2,019.0 1,399.8 619.3 191.2 158.0 33.2 4,723.3 4,635.0 3,548.8 3,298.7
1996 8,540.5 30.3 2,523.0 2,301.1 1,585.7 715.4 221.9 181.2 40.7 5,084.7 4,981.9 3,812.8 3,543.01997 9,368.2 30.7 2,836.0 2,580.7 1,758.6 822.1 255.3 208.8 46.5 5,408.8 5,269.5 4,041.3 3,740.81998 10,355.5 29.9 3,267.4 2,939.4 1,977.4 962.0 328.1 264.9 63.1 5,833.9 5,615.9 4,361.0 3,966.51999 5,678.5 17.2 1,836.9 1,635.0 1,081.4 553.6 201.9 161.8 40.1 3,127.4 2,958.6 2,326.4 2,093.4
2000 6,083.9 16.1 1,977.4 1,724.2 1,108.9 615.3 253.2 184.5 68.6 3,249.9 3,062.6 2,445.7 2,186.61999         Nov. 5,697.7 13.2 1,868.8 1,645.3 1,086.2 559.1 223.5 184.2 39.3 3,110.0 2,944.7 2,298.3 2,073.7
         Dec. 5,678.5 17.2 1,836.9 1,635.0 1,081.4 553.6 201.9 161.8 40.1 3,127.4 2,958.6 2,326.4 2,093.4
2000         Jan. 5,706.5 13.5 1,836.5 1,624.2 1,065.9 558.3 212.2 171.2 41.0 3,147.9 2,975.0 2,333.3 2,098.5
         Feb. 5,725.8 13.5 1,823.6 1,611.1 1,047.1 564.0 212.5 169.2 43.3 3,162.8 2,986.2 2,345.6 2,106.7         Mar. 5,804.8 13.1 1,856.6 1,639.4 1,060.6 578.8 217.2 171.9 45.3 3,202.3 3,022.9 2,388.6 2,118.1
         Apr. 5,860.7 14.2 1,863.5 1,647.9 1,059.0 588.9 215.6 169.8 45.8 3,219.3 3,038.4 2,403.5 2,128.7
         May 5,910.4 13.9 1,899.3 1,677.6 1,076.0 601.7 221.6 172.4 49.3 3,231.2 3,050.7 2,418.7 2,136.7         June 5,848.3 13.3 1,887.5 1,665.5 1,066.9 598.6 222.0 171.5 50.6 3,197.2 3,016.9 2,391.1 2,143.6
         July 5,861.8 13.4 1,876.6 1,656.9 1,047.5 609.4 219.6 168.1 51.5 3,199.7 3,019.0 2,392.2 2,142.6
         Aug. 5,917.1 13.5 1,900.5 1,667.9 1,055.9 612.0 232.7 178.8 53.9 3,206.9 3,024.2 2,401.9 2,151.7         Sep. 5,945.4 13.6 1,903.9 1,658.9 1,044.9 614.0 244.9 189.2 55.8 3,214.2 3,029.3 2,421.7 2,169.2
         Oct. 6,019.6 14.0 1,927.4 1,684.1 1,068.1 616.0 243.3 185.6 57.7 3,228.2 3,040.6 2,425.9 2,173.9
         Nov. 6,076.1 13.4 1,961.1 1,714.5 1,100.0 614.5 246.5 185.3 61.3 3,242.7 3,055.6 2,436.8 2,181.2         Dec. 6,083.9 16.1 1,977.4 1,724.2 1,108.9 615.3 253.2 184.5 68.6 3,249.9 3,062.6 2,445.7 2,186.6
2001         Jan. 6,064.0 13.4 1,952.1 1,695.0 1,069.7 625.3 257.1 186.6 70.5 3,265.9 3,058.4 2,452.1 2,187.6
         Feb. 6,141.3 13.6 1,985.8 1,728.3 1,097.6 630.8 257.4 187.1 70.3 3,281.4 3,072.2 2,468.1 2,198.0         Mar. 6,259.3 13.1 2,037.0 1,749.6 1,111.2 638.4 287.4 215.0 72.3 3,309.4 3,095.3 2,487.6 2,204.2
         Apr. 6,283.6 13.7 2,036.3 1,750.8 1,101.7 649.1 285.5 211.3 74.2 3,311.9 3,092.6 2,492.9 2,202.3
         May 6,312.3 13.9 2,038.9 1,756.7 1,106.2 650.5 282.2 206.5 75.7 3,323.1 3,095.6 2,497.6 2,210.5         June 6,283.8 13.8 2,050.4 1,753.5 1,112.4 641.1 296.9 221.0 75.9 3,295.9 3,070.6 2,473.6 2,212.8
         July 6,225.8 13.8 2,036.5 1,748.3 1,100.6 647.7 288.2 213.2 75.0 3,298.4 3,073.9 2,466.3 2,206.8
         Aug. 6,236.5 13.5 2,037.6 1,751.9 1,113.0 638.9 285.7 210.6 75.1 3,289.2 3,061.6 2,464.3 2,207.2         Sep. 6,295.9 13.7 2,070.9 1,778.2 1,142.2 635.9 292.7 216.8 75.9 3,283.9 3,056.0 2,471.5 2,218.7
 Changes 1
1992 417.2 3.9 70.7 66.5 50.1 16.4 4.2 − 0.4 4.6 311.1 306.3 266.3 234.7
1993 656.3 0.0 160.8 119.1 44.6 74.5 41.7 35.1 6.6 357.3 340.7 258.7 205.31994 406.2 −1.6 89.7 96.6 72.4 24.2 −6.9 − 6.9 −0.1 326.5 327.4 257.5 185.9
1995 587.7 1.1 184.6 169.3 114.7 54.6 15.2 13.0 2.3 322.1 312.1 201.2 188.1
1996 761.8 3.0 312.8 282.1 186.0 96.1 30.7 23.2 7.5 361.5 346.9 264.0 244.31997 825.6 0.5 313.1 279.6 172.9 106.7 33.5 27.6 5.9 324.0 287.5 228.4 197.61998 1,000.8 −0.8 422.2 355.7 215.1 140.6 66.4 56.2 10.2 440.4 363.3 337.5 245.2
1999 455.6 1.8 179.9 140.1 81.4 58.7 39.8 26.3 13.5 206.9 158.4 156.6 126.1
2000 400.9 −1.2 143.0 91.7 28.1 63.6 51.3 22.8 28.5 123.1 105.4 116.7 89.5
1999         Dec. −18.3 4.0 −31.2 −9.6 −4.8 −4.8 −21.6 − 22.4 0.8 18.3 14.7 28.3 19.7
2000         Jan. 23.6 −3.7 1.1 −9.2 −15.5 6.3 10.3 9.4 0.9 17.7 13.9 4.0 2.0
         Feb. 19.2 −0.0 −12.3 −12.6 −18.8 6.2 0.3 − 2.0 2.3 15.0 11.3 12.3 8.2
         Mar. 73.4 −0.4 33.0 28.4 13.5 14.8 4.6 2.8 1.9 38.7 36.6 42.9 11.2
         Apr. 44.9 1.0 6.8 8.5 −1.6 10.1 −1.7 − 2.1 0.4 15.2 14.2 13.7 9.4
         May 55.7 −0.2 35.8 29.7 17.6 12.2 6.1 2.6 3.5 12.9 12.9 15.8 8.6
         June −55.8 −0.6 −11.6 −12.0 −9.1 −2.9 0.5 − 0.9 1.4 −32.2 −32.4 −26.0 7.6
         July 6.6 0.0 −11.0 −8.6 −19.3 10.7 −2.5 − 3.4 0.9 1.4 1.3 0.4 −1.8
         Aug. 49.4 0.1 23.8 10.9 8.3 2.6 12.9 10.7 2.2 8.8 7.6 8.5 7.9         Sep. 26.2 0.1 3.3 −9.0 −11.0 2.0 12.2 10.4 1.8 6.5 4.5 19.2 16.9
         Oct. 63.5 0.3 23.5 25.1 23.2 1.9 −1.6 − 3.6 1.9 12.0 10.0 2.9 3.4
         Nov. 64.5 −0.6 33.8 30.5 31.9 −1.4 3.3 − 0.4 3.7 15.2 15.0 11.0 7.4
         Dec. 29.7 2.7 16.9 10.0 8.9 1.1 6.9 − 0.7 7.6 12.0 10.4 12.2 8.7
2001         Jan. −18.9 −2.6 −26.0 −29.1 −39.2 10.1 3.1 1.3 1.8 2.1 −3.7 6.6 1.1
         Feb. 76.9 0.1 33.8 33.5 27.9 5.6 0.3 0.4 −0.1 15.6 13.9 16.1 10.5
         Mar. 107.1 −0.5 51.3 21.4 13.6 7.7 30.0 28.0 2.0 26.2 21.9 18.3 5.0
         Apr. 24.1 0.6 −2.0 −0.1 −10.9 10.7 −1.9 − 3.7 1.8 2.7 −2.5 5.5 −1.7
         May 14.0 0.1 2.4 5.9 4.6 1.3 −3.5 − 4.8 1.3 7.7 0.7 2.4 6.0
         June −27.0 −0.1 11.6 −3.2 6.2 −9.4 14.8 14.5 0.3 −26.5 −24.5 −23.6 2.7
         July −48.4 −0.0 −13.8 −5.2 −11.8 6.6 −8.7 − 7.8 −0.8 4.4 4.4 −6.2 −4.9
         Aug. 24.5 −0.3 1.2 3.6 12.4 −8.9 −2.3 − 2.6 0.2 −5.3 −9.0 −0.6 1.8
         Sep. 57.2 0.3 33.3 26.3 29.2 −2.9 7.0 6.2 0.8 −6.1 −6.4 6.5 10.7
*This table serves to supplement the Overall monetary survey of section II; includes −in addition to the figures reported by banks (including building
it is planned to compare the figures for MFIs in the euro area with the data and loan associations) −the data of money market funds. —1Statistical
for Germany. Notwithstanding the other tables in section IV, this table breaks have been eliminated from the flow figures. —2Up to December
20*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
IV. Banks
    
 
euro area  3 Claims on
non-euro-area
to non-banks in other member countries residents
 Public Enterprises and Public
 authorities individuals authorities
of which: of which:
Secur- Ad- Secur- Ad- Ad- Secur- Ad- Otherities Total vances  
3 ities 4 Total Total vances  3 Total vances  3 ities Total vances  3 assets   Period
End of year or month
 
91.5 715.0 582.9 132.1 57.7 35.2 35.2 22.5 6.7 15.8 437.1 399.8 138.7 1991
123.1 767.1 556.3 210.8 62.5 35.1 35.1 27.5 6.7 20.8 446.1 398.5 162.0 1992176.5 849.0 599.6 249.4 79.1 44.5 44.5 34.6 8.4 26.3 565.2 504.8 181.1 1993248.1 941.9 650.1 291.8 78.2 39.6 39.6 38.6 8.3 30.3 548.8 479.6 189.2 1994
250.0 1,086.3 792.2 294.1 88.2 39.4 39.2 48.8 11.3 37.6 608.5 526.0 209.4 1995
269.7 1,169.1 857.8 311.4 102.8 36.8 36.8 66.0 17.2 48.8 678.1 575.3 224.4 1996300.6 1,228.2 911.0 317.2 139.2 41.9 41.2 97.3 23.4 73.9 839.6 710.2 253.1 1997394.5 1,254.9 939.1 315.8 218.0 62.5 56.0 155.5 35.6 119.9 922.0 758.0 302.2 1998233.0 632.1 488.4 143.7 168.8 65.3 35.9 103.6 20.7 82.8 511.2 404.2 185.8 1999
259.1 616.9 478.5 138.4 187.3 83.8 44.2 103.5 20.0 83.5 622.4 481.7 218.1 2000224.5 646.5 496.2 150.3 165.2 62.7 35.9 102.5 20.8 81.7 519.8 415.1 185.8 1999          Nov.
233.0 632.1 488.4 143.7 168.8 65.3 35.9 103.6 20.7 82.8 511.2 404.2 185.8          Dec.
234.8 641.7 490.2 151.5 172.9 66.7 37.7 106.2 20.7 85.5 524.0 414.3 184.7 2000          Jan.
238.8 640.6 485.5 155.2 176.6 68.4 37.8 108.2 20.8 87.4 539.9 425.0 186.0          Feb.270.5 634.3 487.1 147.2 179.4 69.2 38.5 110.2 20.6 89.6 545.8 425.7 187.0          Mar.
274.8 634.9 488.9 146.0 180.9 71.0 38.9 109.9 20.7 89.2 571.5 449.1 192.2          Apr.
281.9 632.0 489.1 142.9 180.5 71.2 38.1 109.3 20.8 88.5 568.9 446.4 197.2          May247.5 625.8 485.4 140.4 180.3 71.9 37.4 108.4 20.6 87.8 556.1 432.0 194.2          June
249.6 626.7 487.9 138.8 180.8 75.1 39.1 105.6 19.7 85.9 569.7 439.2 202.4          July
250.2 622.3 482.4 139.9 182.7 78.0 40.8 104.8 19.9 84.9 587.5 456.6 208.7          Aug.252.5 607.6 473.0 134.6 184.9 78.1 42.3 106.8 20.0 86.7 591.3 456.4 222.4          Sep.
252.0 614.8 477.4 137.4 187.6 79.9 42.5 107.7 20.1 87.6 621.2 482.7 228.9          Oct.
255.6 618.8 477.8 141.0 187.1 82.2 44.4 104.9 20.2 84.7 631.6 490.4 227.4          Nov.259.1 616.9 478.5 138.4 187.3 83.8 44.2 103.5 20.0 83.5 622.4 481.7 218.1          Dec.
264.5 606.3 483.7 122.6 207.5 87.7 46.2 119.8 26.3 93.5 616.5 479.8 216.1 2001          Jan.
270.1 604.1 482.3 121.7 209.2 89.6 46.5 119.6 23.7 95.8 642.0 500.1 218.6          Feb.283.4 607.7 482.5 125.2 214.1 95.1 49.0 119.0 24.1 94.9 670.6 522.6 229.3          Mar.
290.7 599.6 477.1 122.5 219.3 99.5 48.3 119.9 24.0 95.9 689.7 536.9 231.9          Apr.
287.1 598.0 475.5 122.5 227.5 103.5 48.4 123.9 24.3 99.7 698.1 541.1 238.4          May260.7 597.1 469.2 127.8 225.2 104.4 50.8 120.8 24.5 96.3 693.2 535.9 230.4          June
259.5 607.6 470.3 137.3 224.5 103.2 49.7 121.4 24.0 97.3 663.1 510.4 214.1          July
257.0 597.3 469.5 127.8 227.5 102.0 49.2 125.6 24.1 101.5 683.8 531.3 212.6          Aug.252.9 584.5 466.8 117.7 227.9 103.4 51.0 124.5 23.8 100.7 712.8 558.0 214.6          Sep.
Changes 1
31.6 40.0 −38.9 78.9 4.8 −0.1 −0.1 4.9 −0.0 5.0 8.2 −2.0 23.3 1992
53.4 82.0 43.3 38.6 16.6 9.5 9.5 7.1 1.7 5.5 119.1 106.3 19.2 199371.6 69.9 27.5 42.4 −0.9 −4.9 −4.9 4.0 −0.0 4.0 −16.4 −25.1 8.1 1994
13.1 110.9 113.1 −2.1 10.0 −0.2 −0.4 10.2 3.0 7.3 59.7 46.3 20.2 1995
19.7 82.9 65.5 17.3 14.6 −2.6 −2.5 17.2 6.0 11.2 69.5 49.3 15.1 1996
30.8 59.1 53.3 5.8 36.5 5.1 4.4 31.4 6.1 25.3 159.4 132.9 28.6 199792.3 25.8 28.1 −2.3 77.1 18.9 13.0 58.3 12.5 45.7 83.7 51.9 55.3 1998
30.4 1.9 8.3 −6.4 48.5 12.2 6.4 36.3 2.1 34.2 35.7 16.2 31.3 1999
27.3 −11.4 −6.8 −4.6 17.8 16.8 7.2 1.0 −0.3 1.2 103.5 71.5 32.5 2000
8.6 −13.5 −7.2 −6.3 3.5 2.5 −0.0 1.0 −0.1 1.1 −9.3 −11.7 −0.0 1999          Dec.
2.0 9.8 1.8 8.1 3.9 1.3 1.7 2.6 −0.1 2.7 9.6 6.9 −1.1 2000          Jan.
4.1 −1.0 −4.8 3.8 3.7 1.7 0.1 2.0 0.1 2.0 15.2 9.9 1.3          Feb.
31.6 −6.3 1.7 −7.9 2.2 0.2 0.6 2.0 −0.3 2.3 1.1 −3.4 1.0          Mar.
4.3 0.5 1.7 −1.2 0.9 1.5 0.1 −0.5 −0.0 −0.5 16.8 15.8 5.2          Apr.
7.2 −2.9 0.2 −3.1 −0.0 0.4 −0.6 −0.4 0.2 −0.6 2.1 1.3 5.2          May
−33.5 −6.4 −4.0 −2.4 0.1 0.7 −0.6 −0.6 −0.2 −0.4 −8.4 −9.6 −3.0          June
2.1 0.9 2.5 −1.6 0.1 2.3 0.8 −2.2 −0.2 −2.0 7.9 2.4 8.3          July
0.6 −0.9 −2.0 1.1 1.2 2.5 1.4 −1.3 0.0 −1.3 10.4 11.3 6.2          Aug.
2.3 −14.7 −9.4 −5.3 1.9 0.0 1.4 1.9 0.1 1.8 2.6 −1.0 13.8          Sep.
−0.5 7.1 4.3 2.8 1.9 1.4 −0.1 0.6 −0.1 0.7 21.3 18.9 6.4          Oct.
3.6 4.0 0.4 3.6 0.2 2.6 2.1 −2.4 0.2 −2.6 17.5 13.8 −1.5          Nov.
3.6 −1.8 0.8 −2.5 1.5 2.2 0.3 −0.7 0.0 −0.8 7.4 5.2 −9.3          Dec.
5.5 −10.4 5.2 −15.6 5.8 1.3 0.7 4.5 2.4 2.1 9.6 4.1 −2.0 2001          Jan.
5.6 −2.2 −1.4 −0.8 1.7 1.9 0.3 −0.2 −2.5 2.3 25.0 19.8 2.4          Feb.
13.3 3.6 0.1 3.5 4.2 5.0 2.1 −0.8 0.2 −1.0 19.3 14.3 10.7          Mar.
7.2 −8.1 −5.4 −2.7 5.3 4.4 −0.6 0.9 −0.1 1.0 20.1 15.2 2.6          Apr.
−3.6 −1.7 −1.6 −0.1 7.0 3.5 −0.3 3.5 0.1 3.4 −2.7 −5.3 6.4          May
−26.3 −0.9 −6.2 5.4 −2.0 1.0 2.4 −3.0 0.2 −3.2 −4.1 −4.5 −8.0          June
−1.3 10.6 1.0 9.6 −0.1 −0.9 −0.8 0.9 −0.3 1.2 −22.5 −19.1 −16.4          July
−2.4 −8.4 −0.7 −7.7 3.7 −0.8 −0.2 4.5 0.2 4.3 30.5 29.5 −1.6          Aug.
−4.2 −12.9 −2.7 −10.1 0.3 1.4 1.8 −1.1 −0.3 −0.8 27.7 25.4 2.1          Sep.
1998, volume of business (balance-sheet total plus endorsement liabilities bill-based lending instead of bill holdings. —4Including debt securities
and bills sent for collection from the banks ’portfolios prior to maturity) and arising from the exchange of equalisations claims. 
trust funds. —3Up to December 1998, including loans an a trust basis and
21*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
IV. Banks
 
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
   Liabilities
 
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 euro billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area  4 
in the euro area  3 
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities  5 notice  6 
 
Balance- in the in other of which: of which:sheet home member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total  
2 Total country countries Total Total night Total  4 Total 3 months Total night 2 years  7 
 End of year or month
 
1991 5,751.6 1,365.7 1,282.7 83.0 2,617.5 2,482.5 410.5 1,182.8 511.7 889.3 513.4 49.7 2.41992 6,143.1 1,405.6 1,304.2 101.4 2,743.6 2,585.3 444.5 1,228.2 563.5 912.6 522.4 60.6 3.01993 6,799.5 1,556.3 1,438.2 118.1 2,981.8 2,810.6 489.6 1,312.6 628.5 1,008.4 587.7 70.4 3.51994 7,205.7 1,650.9 1,483.5 167.4 3,082.2 2,894.4 510.4 1,288.3 549.2 1,095.8 654.6 79.6 4.1
1995 7,778.7 1,761.5 1,582.0 179.6 3,260.0 3,038.9 549.8 1,289.0 472.0 1,200.1 749.5 110.1 4.5
1996 8,540.5 1,975.3 1,780.2 195.1 3,515.9 3,264.0 638.1 1,318.5 430.6 1,307.4 865.7 137.3 7.51997 9,368.2 2,195.6 1,959.1 236.5 3,647.1 3,376.2 654.5 1,364.9 426.8 1,356.9 929.2 162.5 7.31998 10,355.5 2,480.3 2,148.9 331.4 3,850.8 3,552.1 751.6 1,411.0 461.5 1,389.6 971.9 187.4 9.41999 5,678.5 1,288.1 1,121.8 166.3 2,012.4 1,854.7 419.5 820.6 247.0 614.7 504.4 111.1 6.5
2000 6,083.9 1,379.4 1,188.9 190.5 2,051.4 1,873.6 441.4 858.8 274.3 573.5 450.5 107.9 6.9
1999         Nov. 5,697.7 1,326.1 1,132.2 193.8 1,994.4 1,834.0 428.8 802.1 234.1 603.1 494.9 114.0 8.6
         Dec. 5,678.5 1,288.1 1,121.8 166.3 2,012.4 1,854.7 419.5 820.6 247.0 614.7 504.4 111.1 6.5
2000         Jan. 5,706.5 1,311.9 1,124.7 187.2 2,005.4 1,848.8 424.4 814.9 239.0 609.5 500.2 111.2 8.5
         Feb. 5,725.8 1,297.9 1,105.2 192.6 2,011.7 1,855.1 431.2 818.3 240.3 605.6 495.2 110.3 7.2         Mar. 5,804.8 1,327.9 1,135.5 192.4 2,001.9 1,844.2 426.0 818.2 239.4 600.0 488.9 112.0 7.4
         Apr. 5,860.7 1,317.4 1,122.3 195.1 2,004.3 1,844.7 435.2 816.0 236.5 593.5 482.8 113.4 9.0
         May 5,910.4 1,341.9 1,134.2 207.6 1,998.2 1,842.8 428.3 826.9 245.8 587.6 475.7 109.8 6.1         June 5,848.3 1,308.5 1,112.6 196.0 1,996.3 1,833.8 425.5 826.1 243.7 582.3 468.8 110.5 8.1
         July 5,861.8 1,292.0 1,110.3 181.7 1,989.8 1,827.9 422.3 829.0 245.1 576.6 462.2 109.7 7.2
         Aug. 5,917.1 1,318.3 1,130.5 187.7 1,986.8 1,824.5 415.0 836.7 251.8 572.7 456.7 110.7 6.8         Sep. 5,945.4 1,303.6 1,110.2 193.4 2,004.4 1,822.6 412.4 840.2 256.4 570.0 451.8 110.4 6.9
         Oct. 6,019.6 1,339.3 1,151.0 188.4 2,009.0 1,824.0 416.7 841.1 257.3 566.2 447.3 111.1 6.9
         Nov. 6,076.1 1,373.3 1,189.5 183.8 2,019.7 1,846.0 438.1 845.2 262.4 562.7 442.3 110.6 7.5         Dec. 6,083.9 1,379.4 1,188.9 190.5 2,051.4 1,873.6 441.4 858.8 274.3 573.5 450.5 107.9 6.9
2001         Jan. 6,064.0 1,345.5 1,145.1 200.4 2,025.9 1,860.9 429.9 861.6 276.3 569.3 446.3 107.4 8.0
         Feb. 6,141.3 1,377.4 1,159.8 217.5 2,036.3 1,872.7 442.1 863.3 278.2 567.2 444.2 105.6 6.2         Mar. 6,259.3 1,396.1 1,179.9 216.2 2,040.4 1,874.4 440.7 868.1 281.8 565.6 443.0 108.4 7.6
         Apr. 6,283.6 1,399.2 1,170.1 229.1 2,044.2 1,878.0 450.8 864.5 279.0 562.7 442.1 108.0 7.5
         May 6,312.3 1,397.2 1,169.6 227.7 2,053.8 1,883.9 453.9 870.1 282.1 559.9 440.4 110.9 8.8         June 6,283.8 1,390.9 1,183.6 207.3 2,061.5 1,893.3 462.1 872.4 283.7 558.7 440.1 109.2 8.2
         July 6,225.8 1,374.9 1,168.1 206.8 2,055.1 1,888.4 458.8 873.2 285.8 556.4 439.0 106.9 7.6
         Aug. 6,236.5 1,367.7 1,168.2 199.4 2,058.6 1,893.2 461.9 876.2 289.0 555.1 439.0 105.5 6.6         Sep. 6,295.9 1,399.0 1,196.0 203.0 2,074.6 1,912.0 479.2 877.4 289.0 555.4 440.0 105.6 8.3
 Changes 1
1992 417.2 46.3 28.0 18.4 148.2 128.1 33.9 70.9 51.9 23.3 9.0 11.0 0.61993 656.3 150.7 134.0 16.7 238.5 225.2 45.1 84.4 64.9 95.8 65.3 10.0 0.51994 406.2 94.6 45.3 49.3 100.6 83.8 20.8 −24.3 −79.3 87.4 66.9 9.4 0.6
1995 587.7 110.7 98.5 12.2 189.3 156.5 47.2 4.9 −76.5 104.3 99.1 30.0 0.4
1996 761.8 213.7 198.2 15.5 256.0 225.2 88.3 29.5 −41.4 107.3 116.2 27.2 3.0
1997 825.6 223.7 185.5 38.3 130.8 112.1 16.3 46.4 −3.8 49.4 60.3 25.0 −0.3
1998 1,000.8 277.0 182.8 94.2 205.9 176.8 97.8 46.3 34.8 32.7 42.0 26.2 2.01999 455.6 70.2 66.4 3.7 75.5 65.8 34.3 36.8 13.5 −5.3 7.4 7.8 1.7
2000 400.9 87.5 66.0 21.5 38.7 19.8 22.5 37.8 27.0 −40.5 −53.6 −4.3 0.3
1999         Dec. −18.3 −38.0 −10.5 −27.5 17.8 20.6 −9.4 18.4 13.0 11.6 9.5 −3.0 −2.1
2000         Jan. 23.6 21.4 2.7 18.7 −7.5 −6.1 4.8 −5.8 −8.0 −5.1 −4.2 −0.1 2.0
         Feb. 19.2 −14.1 −19.5 5.4 6.2 6.3 6.8 3.5 1.3 −4.0 −5.0 −0.9 −1.3
         Mar. 73.4 30.0 30.2 −0.2 −10.4 −11.1 −5.5 −0.1 −0.9 −5.5 −6.3 1.3 0.1
         Apr. 44.9 −10.5 −13.2 2.7 1.1 −0.1 8.8 −2.4 −3.0 −6.5 −6.1 0.8 1.6
         May 55.7 24.5 11.9 12.6 −5.4 −1.6 −5.6 9.9 9.3 −5.9 −7.1 −3.3 −2.8
         June −55.8 −33.3 −21.7 −11.7 −1.3 −8.7 −2.6 −0.7 −2.1 −5.4 −6.9 1.0 2.0
         July 6.6 −16.6 −2.3 −14.3 −7.2 −6.3 −3.4 2.1 1.1 −5.0 −6.3 −1.2 −1.0
         Aug. 49.4 26.3 20.3 6.1 −4.0 −3.9 −7.5 7.5 6.7 −3.9 −5.5 0.5 −0.4
         Sep. 26.2 −14.7 −20.4 5.7 17.2 −2.1 −2.7 3.3 4.5 −2.7 −4.9 −0.6 0.1
         Oct. 63.5 35.7 40.8 −5.1 3.4 0.9 4.0 0.7 0.8 −3.8 −4.5 0.1 0.0
         Nov. 64.5 32.6 37.7 −5.0 11.6 22.4 21.6 4.3 5.2 −3.5 −5.0 −0.1 0.6
         Dec. 29.7 6.1 −0.6 6.6 35.1 30.1 3.8 15.5 12.1 10.8 8.2 −1.6 −0.5
2001         Jan. −18.9 −34.9 −43.8 8.9 −26.2 −12.8 −11.4 2.8 1.9 −4.1 −4.1 −1.2 0.9
         Feb. 76.9 31.9 14.7 17.2 10.3 11.5 11.9 1.7 1.9 −2.1 −2.1 −1.8 −1.8
         Mar. 107.1 15.3 16.6 −1.3 3.0 1.2 −1.7 4.6 3.5 −1.6 −1.2 2.2 1.4
         Apr. 24.1 2.1 −10.7 12.8 3.6 3.6 10.0 −3.5 −2.8 −2.9 −0.9 −0.4 −0.3
         May 14.0 −2.2 −0.5 −1.7 8.6 5.3 2.8 5.3 3.0 −2.8 −1.7 2.3 1.3
         June −27.0 −6.3 14.0 −20.3 7.8 9.4 8.2 2.4 1.6 −1.2 −0.3 −1.6 −0.6
         July −48.4 −16.0 −15.5 −0.6 −5.5 −4.5 −3.1 1.0 2.2 −2.4 −1.1 −1.9 −0.5
         Aug. 24.5 −7.2 0.1 −7.4 4.6 5.3 3.4 3.1 3.2 −1.2 0.0 −0.8 −1.1
         Sep. 57.2 31.3 27.8 3.5 15.8 18.7 17.3 1.2 −0.0 0.2 1.0 −0.0 1.7
*This table serves to supplement the Overall monetary survey of section II; breaks have been eliminated from the flow figures. —2Up to December
it is planned to compare the figures for MFIs in the euro area with the data 1998, volume of business (balance-sheet total plus endorsement liabilitiesfor Germany. Notwithstanding the other tables in section IV, this table and bills sent for collection from the banks ’portfolios prior to maturity) and
includes −in addition to the figures reported by banks (including building liabilities incurred in the banks ’own name but on behalf of third parties. —
and loan associations) −the data of money market funds. —1Statistical 3Up to December 1998, including liabilities arising from loans on a trust
22*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
IV. Banks
    
 
 Debt securities
issued
in other member countries  8 Deposits of Money
market central governments  4 
With agreed At agreed papermaturities notice and
of which: money of which: Liabilitiesdomestic market with to non- Liabilities
of which: of which: central arising fund euro- Capital maturities
up to up to govern- from of up to area and Other certificates
Total  
4 Total 3 months Total ments repos  9 issued Total 2 years reserves   Period 2 years  7 residents  10 Liabilities
End of year or month
 
42.6 4.8 4.6 4.6 85.3 85.3 − 4.4 1,054.8 36.0 213.7 229.2 266.3 1991
52.0 5.9 5.6 5.6 97.6 97.6 − 9.4 1,165.7 44.6 260.9 256.6 301.4 1992
60.3 6.8 6.5 6.5 100.8 100.8 − 18.7 1,309.0 66.8 302.5 278.3 353.0 1993
68.5 11.8 7.0 7.0 108.2 108.2 − 53.8 1,418.7 59.4 337.3 305.2 357.8 1994
97.3 11.4 8.3 8.3 111.0 111.0 − 60.5 1,586.7 48.9 393.9 325.0 391.0 1995
120.6 9.0 9.2 9.2 114.6 114.6 − 53.2 1,785.1 35.2 422.1 350.0 438.8 1996
145.8 9.2 9.4 9.4 108.3 108.3 − 54.6 1,973.3 37.5 599.2 387.2 511.3 1997
168.3 13.8 9.7 9.7 111.2 111.2 − 84.1 2,209.9 41.9 739.8 415.9 574.8 1998
99.7 8.9 4.8 3.7 46.6 45.9 2.0 96.1 1,274.0 47.8 487.9 237.0 281.1 1999
96.3 6.7 4.7 3.3 69.9 67.6 0.4 108.6 1,367.6 63.7 599.8 258.5 318.4 2000
100.7 7.8 4.6 3.5 46.5 45.1 1.7 91.4 1,285.5 46.0 477.7 236.1 284.8 1999          Nov.
99.7 8.9 4.8 3.7 46.6 45.9 2.0 96.1 1,274.0 47.8 487.9 237.0 281.1          Dec.
97.9 6.6 4.8 3.6 45.4 44.3 1.9 90.2 1,277.4 50.6 504.1 239.3 276.4 2000          Jan.
98.3 5.6 4.8 3.6 46.2 44.7 1.1 96.4 1,288.2 55.1 518.3 240.1 272.2          Feb.99.9 7.7 4.7 3.5 45.7 44.8 0.9 99.5 1,300.4 58.4 555.3 241.8 277.2          Mar.
99.8 7.0 4.7 3.5 46.1 44.4 2.7 99.9 1,321.9 60.5 586.8 242.9 284.9          Apr.
99.0 6.9 4.7 3.4 45.6 44.2 2.9 101.7 1,339.6 61.7 594.5 244.1 287.5          May97.7 6.4 4.7 3.4 51.9 50.0 1.8 109.2 1,339.0 62.7 554.9 246.5 292.2          June
97.9 6.6 4.6 3.3 52.3 49.9 1.8 112.4 1,360.7 64.5 561.9 247.0 296.3          July
99.3 7.0 4.6 3.3 51.7 50.3 1.7 112.8 1,373.9 66.7 581.0 247.5 295.1          Aug.99.0 6.6 4.5 3.2 71.5 69.2 1.0 109.6 1,377.6 64.9 587.4 248.4 313.6          Sep.
99.6 6.3 4.6 3.2 73.9 71.6 1.3 113.3 1,385.8 62.7 606.3 249.3 315.2          Oct.
98.5 6.5 4.6 3.2 63.2 62.2 1.3 108.6 1,379.3 63.0 621.6 250.1 322.2          Nov.96.3 6.7 4.7 3.3 69.9 67.6 0.4 108.6 1,367.6 63.7 599.8 258.5 318.4          Dec.
94.4 6.5 5.0 3.5 57.7 55.7 1.8 104.1 1,390.2 67.2 626.3 258.4 311.9 2001          Jan.
94.4 7.0 5.0 3.5 58.0 55.5 1.6 101.3 1,409.4 71.7 640.7 260.5 314.1          Feb.95.8 7.7 5.0 3.5 57.6 56.1 0.9 102.4 1,417.7 73.7 720.4 262.9 318.5          Mar.
95.6 7.7 5.0 3.5 58.1 55.5 1.4 99.8 1,422.1 78.2 725.9 263.4 327.6          Apr.
97.1 8.4 5.0 3.5 59.0 55.1 1.8 96.0 1,433.2 84.4 744.6 265.2 320.5          May96.1 8.7 5.0 3.5 58.9 55.2 1.1 89.9 1,442.1 92.0 717.9 267.4 313.0          June
94.2 8.0 5.0 3.5 59.8 55.3 1.7 88.5 1,453.0 103.5 682.5 266.9 303.3          July
94.0 8.4 5.0 3.6 59.9 54.5 4.6 86.5 1,451.5 107.0 693.7 269.1 304.9          Aug.92.3 7.3 5.0 3.6 57.0 54.0 2.8 86.6 1,456.5 111.0 692.2 270.2 314.0          Sep.
Changes 1
9.4 1.1 1.0 1.0 9.1 9.1 − 5.1 110.9 8.7 46.7 26.9 33.1 1992
8.3 0.9 1.2 1.2 3.2 3.2 − 9.2 143.3 22.2 41.4 21.7 51.6 1993
8.3 5.0 0.4 0.4 7.4 7.4 − 35.1 109.7 −7.5 34.5 26.9 4.8 1994
28.6 −0.4 1.0 1.0 2.8 2.8 − 6.8 168.0 −10.4 57.2 19.8 36.0 1995
23.3 −2.4 0.9 0.9 3.6 3.6 −− 7.3 198.5 −13.7 28.1 25.0 47.8 1996
25.1 0.2 0.2 0.2 −6.2 −6.2 − 1.3 189.0 2.3 172.3 37.1 71.2 1997
24.0 4.6 0.3 0.3 2.9 2.9 − 29.9 239.8 4.5 151.3 28.7 68.4 1998
6.3 1.5 −0.2 −1.3 1.9 1.2 0.6 52.5 134.1 30.1 93.3 24.1 5.4 1999
−4.5 −0.5 −0.1 −0.3 23.1 21.6 −1.6 12.6 90.4 15.8 97.1 21.3 54.9 2000
−1.0 1.0 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.8 0.3 4.7 −11.7 1.8 9.3 0.9 −1.6 1999          Dec.
−2.1 −2.3 −0.0 −0.0 −1.3 −1.5 −0.1 −5.9 2.6 2.8 12.1 2.2 −1.2 2000          Jan.
0.4 0.7 −0.0 −0.0 0.9 0.4 −0.8 6.3 10.8 4.5 13.0 0.8 −3.0          Feb.
1.2 2.1 −0.0 −0.0 −0.6 0.0 −0.2 2.7 10.0 3.2 31.9 1.7 7.7          Mar.
−0.8 −0.8 −0.0 −0.0 0.4 −0.5 1.8 0.2 18.8 2.0 20.8 1.1 11.6          Apr.
−0.5 −0.1 −0.0 −0.1 −0.5 −0.2 0.2 2.0 19.2 1.2 13.4 1.2 0.7          May
−1.0 −0.5 −0.0 −0.1 6.4 5.7 −1.0 7.6 0.6 1.0 −34.2 2.4 3.5          June
−0.2 0.2 −0.0 −0.0 0.3 −0.1 −0.1 2.9 20.1 1.8 0.1 0.5 6.8          July
0.9 0.4 −0.0 −0.0 −0.6 0.4 −0.1 −0.2 10.1 2.1 9.6 0.6 7.1          Aug.
−0.6 −0.4 −0.1 −0.1 19.8 19.0 −0.7 −3.4 2.7 −1.9 2.5 0.8 21.9          Sep.
0.0 −0.4 0.1 0.1 2.4 2.3 0.3 3.0 5.4 −2.3 8.8 1.0 5.7          Oct.
−0.6 0.3 0.0 −0.0 −10.7 −9.4 −0.0 −4.0 −4.0 0.4 23.6 0.7 4.0          Nov.
−1.2 0.3 0.1 0.1 6.7 5.4 −0.9 1.4 −6.0 0.9 −4.6 8.3 −9.8          Dec.
−2.2 −0.5 −0.0 −0.0 −12.2 −11.9 1.4 −4.4 22.8 3.5 28.0 −0.0 −5.6 2001          Jan.
0.0 0.6 0.0 0.0 0.5 0.0 −0.2 −2.8 19.2 4.5 13.6 2.1 2.9          Feb.
0.8 0.7 0.0 0.0 −0.4 0.6 −0.6 0.5 6.2 2.7 68.0 2.4 12.4          Mar.
−0.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.5 −0.7 0.5 −2.5 4.6 4.5 6.7 0.5 8.6          Apr.
1.1 0.1 −0.0 0.0 0.9 −0.4 0.4 −4.6 6.9 6.1 4.4 1.7 −1.1          May
−0.9 0.3 0.0 0.0 −0.1 0.1 −0.7 −5.9 9.7 7.6 −25.8 2.2 −8.0          June
−1.4 −0.6 0.0 0.0 0.9 0.1 0.6 −1.0 13.3 11.6 −26.0 −0.5 −13.2          July
0.3 0.4 0.0 0.0 0.1 −0.8 2.9 −1.5 0.4 3.2 23.4 2.2 −0.2          Aug.
−1.8 −1.1 0.0 0.0 −2.9 −0.5 −1.7 0.0 4.6 4.0 −3.1 1.1 9.2          Sep.
basis and liabilities arising from rediscounted bills (endorsement savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 5). —7Up to December 1998,
liabilities). —4Up to December 1998, including liabilities arising from loans with maturities of less than 4 years. —8Excluding central governments ’
on a trust basis. —5For the German contribution: from 1999 including deposits. —9Data collected separately only from 1999; up to December
deposits under savings and loan contracts (see table IV.12). —6For the 1998, included in the deposits with agreed maturities of up to 2 years. —
German contribution: up to the end of 1998 including deposits under 10 Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued. 
23*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
IV. Banks
 
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks *
  
euro billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
  of which: of which: 
Loans and advances
 not evidenced
 Cash in by certificates for hand and
Number of balancesreporting Balance with Balances Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by up to over issued by pating Othermonth tions total  
1 banks Total advances banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets
All categories of banks
 
2001         Apr. 2,703 6,344.1 54.0 2,232.5 1,542.9 667.5 3,583.3 486.0 2,520.4 7.0 555.7 134.7 339.6
         May 2,697 6,371.9 57.8 2,230.3 1,537.4 672.7 3,602.5 483.8 2,536.0 6.9 560.8 135.6 345.7         June 2,663 6,342.2 59.9 2,239.7 1,555.8 665.5 3,570.0 473.6 2,539.0 6.7 537.4 135.2 337.5
         July 2,620 6,283.0 64.3 2,201.7 1,511.7 673.6 3,557.8 461.8 2,538.6 6.6 535.8 138.7 320.4
         Aug. 2,600 6,292.1 62.8 2,225.8 1,545.8 665.1 3,545.7 456.3 2,541.5 6.5 527.1 138.8 319.1         Sep. 2,559 6,349.3 65.0 2,278.6 1,601.3 664.1 3,547.0 466.9 2,545.3 6.5 512.9 138.2 320.5
Commercial banks 7
2001         Aug. 283 1,774.3 27.5 580.7 436.5 140.4 950.4 232.9 530.2 3.2 177.6 88.3 127.4
         Sep. 282 1,784.9 26.0 596.5 454.3 139.0 944.5 238.6 531.6 3.3 163.3 88.2 129.7
   Big banks 8
2001         Aug. 4 1,026.3 19.9 297.9 228.3 67.8 548.7 137.8 296.3 2.0 110.4 79.6 80.3
         Sep. 4 1,027.8 17.6 307.0 237.3 68.3 541.8 141.7 297.4 2.0 97.6 79.4 82.0
   Regional banks and other commercial banks 9, 10
2001         Aug. 195 620.4 7.0 219.4 153.2 64.6 349.9 74.1 219.2 1.0 51.8 8.7 35.4
         Sep. 196 625.2 7.8 222.4 158.6 62.2 351.0 76.2 219.5 1.1 50.3 8.7 35.3
   Branches of foreign banks
2001         Aug. 84 127.6 0.6 63.4 55.0 8.1 51.8 21.0 14.7 0.2 15.5 0.0 11.7
         Sep. 82 131.9 0.5 67.2 58.4 8.4 51.7 20.6 14.7 0.2 15.5 0.0 12.4
Land banks 11
2001         Aug. 13 1,257.6 3.0 622.5 491.3 122.5 546.0 65.7 393.8 0.5 80.4 22.9 63.2
         Sep. 13 1,282.7 6.3 644.2 512.8 123.1 545.1 64.0 393.9 0.4 81.2 22.9 64.3
Savings banks
2001         Aug. 541 952.7 17.9 221.3 62.5 158.2 676.8 77.5 506.0 1.7 91.1 11.4 25.3
         Sep. 540 959.4 18.0 224.2 66.1 157.8 680.3 80.3 506.8 1.7 91.0 11.4 25.5
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives  
 
2001         Aug. 3 220.2 2.0 142.7 94.8 47.5 59.8 14.8 29.0 0.1 15.5 8.5 7.2
         Sep. 3 225.4 2.5 147.2 100.2 46.6 59.9 15.8 28.8 0.1 14.8 8.6 7.2
Credit cooperatives
2001         Aug. 1,687 533.8 10.9 132.3 56.9 75.2 369.2 50.8 281.6 0.9 35.7 3.3 18.2
         Sep. 1,651 537.2 11.0 134.4 58.7 75.5 370.4 52.2 281.7 0.9 35.3 3.3 18.2
Mortgage banks
2001         Aug. 29 912.1 0.7 233.9 160.8 72.8 648.4 8.0 545.3 − 94.8 2.2 26.9
         Sep. 27 915.0 1.0 236.6 162.8 73.5 649.4 8.4 545.8 − 95.0 1.9 26.1
Building and loan associations 12
2001         Aug. 30 155.0 0.0 34.1 22.5 11.6 112.6 1.6 101.6 . 9.3 0.6 7.7
         Sep. 29 155.6 0.0 34.2 22.8 11.4 113.0 1.6 102.0 . 9.4 0.4 7.9
Banks with special functions 13
2001         Aug. 14 486.4 0.7 258.3 220.7 36.9 182.6 5.0 153.9 − 22.7 1.6 43.2
         Sep. 14 489.1 0.2 261.4 223.7 37.3 184.3 5.9 154.8 − 22.9 1.6 41.6
Memo item: Foreign banks 13
2001         Aug. 140 297.7 1.8 133.6 107.9 24.9 136.5 40.0 64.8 0.4 28.4 0.9 24.8
         Sep. 138 302.7 1.8 137.5 112.0 24.7 137.2 40.0 64.7 0.4 28.6 0.9 25.3
  of which: Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 15
2001         Aug. 56 170.1 1.1 70.2 52.9 16.9 84.7 19.0 50.2 0.2 12.9 0.9 13.1
         Sep. 56 170.8 1.2 70.4 53.6 16.3 85.5 19.4 49.9 0.2 13.1 0.9 12.9
*For the period up to December 1998, section IV (except for table IV.1) from rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks ’
shows the assets and liabilities of banks (excluding building and loan portfolios prior to maturity). —2For building and loan associations: Since
associations) in Germany; from January 1999, the assets and liabilities of the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999, includin g
monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets and liabilities deposits under savings and loan contracts (see table IV. 12). —3Included in
of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are likewise classified as time deposits. —4Up to December 1998, including loans on a trust basis. —
MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the 5Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote
respective items, see the footnotes to table IV.3. —1Up to December 1998, 2). —6Including subordinated negotiable bearer debt securities; excluding
volume of business (balance sheet total plus endorsement liabilities arising non-negotiable bearer debt securities. —7Commercial banks comprise the
24*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
IV. Banks
    
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs)  4 Capital
  (including
of which: of which: published
reserves,
Savings deposits  5 partici- Time deposits for  2 
pation
Memo rightsitem: Bearer capital,
of which: debt Liabilities
funds for
arising At three Bank general securities
Sight Time Sight up to over from savings out- banking Other   End of months ’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year  2 repos  3 Total notice bonds risks   month standing  6 liabilities
All categories of banks
 
1,872.2 282.3 1,589.5 2,303.5 499.0 347.5 766.2 41.5 574.4 450.3 116.5 1,492.4 263.4 412.5 2001          Apr.
1,873.8 274.5 1,598.9 2,329.0 508.7 354.2 777.7 46.7 571.6 448.7 116.7 1,499.5 265.2 404.5          May1,859.2 278.5 1,580.4 2,317.4 510.7 339.2 780.6 23.7 570.4 448.4 116.6 1,501.4 267.4 396.8          June
1,803.7 248.7 1,554.7 2,315.6 503.3 351.1 776.7 38.8 568.0 447.2 116.5 1,510.2 266.9 386.6          July
1,808.1 226.1 1,581.7 2,321.5 501.2 364.0 773.2 38.9 566.7 447.3 116.4 1,505.2 269.1 388.1          Aug.1,841.7 281.8 1,559.6 2,331.9 516.9 355.9 776.0 31.5 567.0 448.3 116.1 1,508.9 270.2 396.6          Sep.
Commercial banks 7
666.8 135.8 530.6 626.6 216.6 167.8 142.7 35.1 88.6 70.3 10.9 228.2 100.3 152.4 2001          Aug.
674.7 166.9 507.5 625.1 221.8 159.4 144.3 28.5 88.8 70.6 10.7 228.5 101.2 155.4          Sep.
Big banks 8
385.7 77.0 308.7 337.0 109.2 108.2 90.9 33.8 27.4 25.0 1.3 158.9 65.7 79.1 2001          Aug.
388.8 106.8 282.0 333.2 110.3 102.0 92.5 27.2 27.3 24.9 1.1 159.6 65.7 80.5          Sep.
Regional banks and other commercial banks 9, 10
193.4 37.5 155.5 277.3 101.9 55.6 48.8 1.1 61.2 45.3 9.6 68.9 32.6 48.3 2001          Aug.
195.9 39.1 156.5 278.9 105.8 53.2 48.8 0.4 61.5 45.6 9.6 68.5 33.5 48.4          Sep.
Branches of foreign banks
87.7 21.3 66.4 12.4 5.4 4.0 2.9 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.5 2.0 25.1 2001          Aug.
90.0 21.1 68.9 13.0 5.7 4.2 3.0 0.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.5 2.0 26.5          Sep.
Land banks 11
461.5 48.9 412.6 297.6 31.6 44.7 206.3 2.7 14.2 12.9 0.9 392.4 50.5 55.5 2001          Aug.
475.1 64.3 410.8 304.6 38.8 43.3 207.5 1.7 14.3 13.0 0.8 395.2 50.6 57.3          Sep.
Savings banks
220.2 4.5 215.7 596.8 151.3 68.9 8.8 − 294.4 226.9 73.4 47.3 42.3 46.0 2001          Aug.
221.7 4.6 217.1 599.6 153.5 69.2 9.1 − 294.4 227.4 73.4 47.1 42.4 48.6          Sep.
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives
 
117.2 27.0 90.2 38.6 6.3 12.1 20.2 1.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 46.9 9.7 7.9 2001          Aug.
123.0 33.0 89.9 38.5 6.5 12.1 20.0 1.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 46.1 9.7 8.1          Sep.
Credit cooperatives
77.7 1.5 76.1 377.2 92.1 61.8 23.0 − 169.2 136.8 31.0 31.3 27.7 20.1 2001          Aug.
78.7 2.4 76.3 378.5 93.0 62.4 23.0 − 169.2 137.1 30.9 31.3 27.7 21.0          Sep.
Mortgage banks
111.9 3.7 108.2 141.7 1.6 3.1 136.8 − 0.1 0.0 0.2 616.5 16.9 25.0 2001          Aug.
113.5 4.0 109.5 142.2 1.3 3.6 137.1 − 0.1 0.0 0.2 615.9 16.9 26.5          Sep.
Building and loan associations 12
29.2 1.9 27.2 96.4 0.2 0.6 95.2 − 0.3 0.3 0.1 6.9 7.7 14.9 2001          Aug.
29.3 2.1 27.1 96.6 0.3 0.6 95.3 − 0.3 0.3 0.1 6.8 7.5 15.4          Sep.
Banks with special functions 13
123.7 2.7 121.0 146.6 1.5 5.0 140.1 −−−− 135.8 14.1 66.3 2001          Aug.
125.9 4.4 121.4 146.9 1.8 5.4 139.7 0.0 −−− 138.0 14.1 64.3          Sep.
Memo item: Foreign banks 14
143.3 34.3 108.8 72.0 31.0 17.0 17.9 0.2 4.5 4.2 1.6 29.9 9.6 42.8 2001          Aug.
145.9 36.6 109.2 73.4 32.9 16.2 18.1 0.8 4.6 4.2 1.6 29.6 9.6 44.2          Sep.
of which: Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 15
55.6 13.1 42.3 59.7 25.5 13.0 15.0 − 4.5 4.1 1.6 29.4 7.6 17.8 2001          Aug.
55.9 15.5 40.3 60.5 27.2 12.0 15.1 − 4.5 4.2 1.6 29.1 7.6 17.7          Sep.
sub-groups ”Big banks ”,”Regional banks and other commercial banks ”and only. —13Up to December 1998, including Deutsche Postbank AG; see
”Branches of foreign banks ”.—8Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner Bank AG, footnote 9. —14Sum of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks and
Commerzbank AG and, from 1999, Bayerische Hypo- und Vereins- included in other categories of banks and of the category ”Branches (of
bank AG. —9From January 1999 including institutions of the discontinued dependent legal status) of foreign banks ”— 15Separate presentation of
category "Private bankers" and including Deutsche Postbank AG. —10Up the banks majority-owned by foreign banks included in the categories
to December 1998, including Bayerische Hypo- und Vereinsbank AG; see ”Regional banks and other commercial banks ”and, up to December 1998,
footnote 8. —11Previously known as: ”Regional giro institutions ”.— in the categories ”Private bankers ” and ”Mortgage banks ”. 
12Assets and liabilities of building and loan associations included from 1999
25*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
IV. Banks
 
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis- à-vis residents *
 
 
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 euro billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs)  2, 3 Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3, 8 
Balances Treasury
Cash in and loans Negotiable Loans and bills andhand and ad- money advances negotiable
Balances market Memo not money mar- (euro-area vances not Securities
notes with the evidenced paper item: evidenced ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- by certi- issued by issued by Trust by certi- issued by by non-
Period coins)  
1 bank Total ficates Bills  4 banks  5 banks  6 loans  7 Total ficates Bills  4 non-banks banks  9 
End of year or month *
 
1991 22.8 90.0 1,424.9 976.5 22.5 − 419.5 6.3 3,147.0 2,813.8 62.5 11.7 181.5
1992 26.8 88.2 1,483.5 1,020.8 19.0 − 435.1 8.6 3,478.2 3,034.9 52.1 9.6 237.8
1993 26.7 75.3 1,596.8 1,076.2 14.7 3.3 493.2 9.3 3,826.4 3,291.6 44.7 5.6 327.71994 25.0 61.5 1,695.6 1,150.6 17.4 4.6 513.6 9.5 4,137.2 3,502.8 45.9 2.2 433.7
1995 26.0 61.0 1,859.9 1,264.9 17.5 4.3 561.9 11.4 4,436.9 3,802.0 46.8 1.4 427.3
1996 28.9 59.7 2,134.0 1,443.3 17.9 3.4 657.2 12.2 4,773.1 4,097.9 44.8 5.9 437.21997 29.3 60.2 2,397.9 1,606.3 18.1 3.6 758.9 11.1 5,058.4 4,353.9 44.7 2.9 473.31998 28.5 63.6 2,738.2 1,814.7 14.6 12.2 887.7 9.1 5,379.8 4,639.7 32.8 5.0 527.81999 16.8 45.6 1,556.9 1,033.4 0.0 19.2 504.2 3.9 2,904.5 2,569.6 7.0 3.0 287.5
2000 15.6 50.8 1,639.6 1,056.1 0.0 26.8 556.6 3.6 3,003.7 2,657.3 6.5 2.3 304.7
2000         Apr. 13.7 38.9 1,575.1 1,018.0 0.0 25.8 531.3 3.8 2,984.8 2,605.5 6.8 2.7 332.1
         May 13.2 36.7 1,607.0 1,037.2 0.0 25.4 544.5 3.8 2,996.7 2,613.8 6.8 2.4 336.1         June 12.7 48.9 1,583.0 1,016.0 0.0 26.3 540.8 3.7 2,961.4 2,617.2 6.6 2.2 297.8
         July 12.7 41.9 1,581.7 1,003.8 0.0 28.0 549.9 3.8 2,963.4 2,618.9 6.6 3.1 298.7
         Aug. 12.9 42.9 1,591.7 1,011.2 0.0 28.4 552.1 3.7 2,968.0 2,626.2 6.5 2.9 300.0         Sep. 13.1 41.1 1,585.0 1,002.3 0.0 27.8 554.9 3.7 2,972.0 2,634.3 6.4 2.3 296.5
         Oct. 13.4 35.3 1,616.2 1,031.3 0.0 27.9 557.0 3.7 2,982.9 2,643.4 6.4 2.4 298.2
         Nov. 12.9 39.1 1,642.5 1,059.0 0.0 27.1 556.4 3.6 2,997.2 2,651.1 6.5 2.3 305.0         Dec. 15.6 50.8 1,639.6 1,056.1 0.0 26.8 556.6 3.6 3,003.7 2,657.3 6.5 2.3 304.7
2001         Jan. 12.9 40.5 1,620.7 1,027.2 0.0 26.7 566.8 3.5 2,998.4 2,664.7 6.1 2.4 320.5
         Feb. 12.9 43.4 1,649.8 1,051.7 0.0 24.2 573.8 3.5 3,010.9 2,674.0 5.9 3.3 323.3         Mar. 12.6 46.3 1,668.2 1,062.3 0.0 22.4 583.5 3.4 3,033.2 2,680.2 6.0 2.8 339.2
         Apr. 13.2 40.3 1,675.2 1,058.9 0.0 20.6 595.7 3.5 3,030.3 2,673.1 6.0 2.5 343.9
         May 13.4 43.9 1,677.9 1,060.1 0.0 18.5 599.2 3.4 3,032.7 2,679.8 5.9 2.9 339.3         June 13.2 46.1 1,671.6 1,063.4 0.0 16.8 591.5 3.4 3,007.7 2,676.1 5.8 2.3 318.7
         July 13.2 50.5 1,661.4 1,046.9 0.0 14.4 600.0 3.4 3,008.2 2,671.1 5.7 4.4 323.0
         Aug. 13.0 49.3 1,665.7 1,060.7 0.0 12.9 592.1 2.8 2,995.3 2,671.0 5.6 3.7 311.1         Sep. 13.2 51.2 1,689.6 1,087.9 0.0 11.2 590.6 2.8 2,989.9 2,679.6 5.6 4.9 295.7
Changes *
1992 + 2.8 + 6.3 + 77.6 + 61.0 −3.5 − + 17.8 + 2.3 + 294.3 + 249.2 −10.4 −2.2 + 57.1
1993 −0.1 −12.9 + 133.3 + 75.2 −4.3 + 0.1 + 61.5 + 0.7 + 339.8 + 259.1 −7.4 −4.5 + 102.0
1994 −1.7 −13.8 + 99.1 + 73.6 + 2.7 + 1.3 + 21.3 + 0.1 + 320.5 + 240.2 + 1.2 −3.3 + 86.7
1995 + 1.0 −0.5 + 193.5 + 139.4 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 54.3 + 0.2 + 312.8 + 303.6 + 1.0 −0.8 + 2.9
1996 + 2.9 −1.3 + 257.8 + 161.8 + 0.4 − 1.1 + 95.8 + 0.8 + 336.3 + 311.7 −2.0 + 4.7 + 10.6
1997 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 262.5 + 160.7 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 102.6 −1.1 + 285.2 + 255.5 −0.1 −3.0 + 36.5
1998 −0.8 + 3.4 + 343.3 + 210.3 −3.6 + 8.6 + 130.0 −2.0 + 335.3 + 302.1 −11.9 + 2.1 + 52.1
1999 + 2.2 + 13.2 + 122.1 + 66.3 + 0.0 + 12.9 + 42.8 −0.7 + 156.1 + 136.9 + 2.6 + 0.4 + 16.7
2000 −1.1 + 5.1 + 83.6 + 21.7 −0.0 + 7.6 + 54.3 −0.3 + 100.7 + 83.7 −0.5 −0.8 + 19.0
2000         Apr. + 1.1 −2.7 + 10.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 3.6 + 6.5 −0.0 + 13.5 + 10.9 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 2.5
         May −0.5 −2.2 + 32.6 + 20.5 −0.0 − 0.4 + 12.5 −0.1 + 13.1 + 9.5 −0.0 −0.3 + 3.9
         June −0.5 + 12.2 −23.4 −20.7 −0.0 + 0.9 − 3.6 −0.0 −33.7 + 3.9 −0.2 −0.2 −37.2
         July −0.0 −7.0 − 2.2 −13.0 + 0.0 + 1.7 + 9.1 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.8 + 0.9
         Aug. + 0.2 + 1.0 + 8.9 + 6.4 −0.0 + 0.4 + 2.2 −0.0 + 6.8 + 5.9 −0.1 −0.2 + 1.3
         Sep. + 0.1 −1.8 − 7.3 − 9.6 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 2.8 −0.0 + 3.3 + 7.4 −0.0 −0.5 − 3.5
         Oct. + 0.4 −5.7 + 30.0 + 27.8 −0.0 + 0.0 + 2.1 −0.0 + 9.5 + 7.7 −0.0 + 0.1 + 1.7
         Nov. −0.6 + 3.8 + 27.5 + 28.8 −0.0 − 0.7 − 0.6 −0.1 + 14.5 + 8.0 + 0.0 −0.1 + 6.7
         Dec. + 2.8 + 11.6 − 0.4 − 0.6 −0.0 − 0.3 + 0.5 −0.1 + 10.1 + 9.5 −− 0.1 − 0.2
2001         Jan. −2.7 −10.3 −18.5 −28.7 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 10.4 −0.1 − 4.5 + 7.6 −0.3 + 0.1 + 16.4
         Feb. −0.0 + 2.9 + 29.2 + 24.5 −0.0 − 2.5 + 7.1 −0.0 + 12.6 + 9.5 −0.3 + 0.9 + 2.8
         Mar. −0.3 + 3.0 + 17.2 + 9.3 −− 1.9 + 9.7 −0.1 + 21.1 + 4.9 + 0.1 −0.5 + 16.0
         Apr. + 0.6 −6.1 + 5.8 − 4.6 + 0.0 − 1.8 + 12.2 + 0.0 − 2.7 − 6.9 −0.0 −0.3 + 4.6
         May + 0.1 + 3.6 + 0.7 − 0.7 −0.0 − 2.1 + 3.5 −0.1 − 0.1 + 4.3 −0.1 + 0.4 − 4.6
         June −0.1 + 2.2 − 6.0 + 3.5 −0.0 − 1.7 − 7.8 −0.0 −24.5 − 3.3 −0.1 −0.6 −20.6
         July + 0.0 + 4.4 − 9.2 −15.4 −0.0 − 2.4 + 8.6 + 0.0 + 1.7 − 3.7 −0.0 + 2.1 + 4.3
         Aug. −0.3 −1.2 + 5.7 + 15.2 −− 1.5 − 8.0 −0.6 − 9.6 + 1.3 −0.1 −0.7 −10.1
         Sep. + 0.3 + 1.9 + 23.5 + 26.7 −0.0 − 1.7 − 1.5 −0.0 − 6.3 + 7.8 + 0.0 + 0.6 −14.7
*See table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the from rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks ’
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as portfolios prior to maturity). —5Up to November 1993, included in
provisional. Subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following securities (see also footnote 6). —6Up to November 1993, including
Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Up to December 1998: negotiable money market paper; excluding registered debt securities. —
domestic notes and coins. —2Up to December 1998, excluding loans to 7From 1999, no longer included in loans or deposits (see also footnote
domestic building and loan associations. —3Up to December 1998, 3). —8Up to December 1998, including loans to domestic building and loan
including loans on a trust basis; see also footnote 7. —4Up to December associations. —9Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of
1998, bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising equalisation claims; see also footnote 10. —10Including debt securities
26*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
IV. Banks
    
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3, 11, 12  Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3, 17 
Partici-patinginterestsin
Memo domestic Bills Memo Memo
Equalisa- item: banks Sight Time redis- item: Sight Time Savings Bank item:tion Trust and deposits deposits counted Trust deposits deposits deposits savings Trust
loans  
7 Total 13, 14  14, 15  16 loans  7 Total 13 15, 18  19 bonds  20 loans  7   Period claims  10 enterprises
End of year or month *
 
2.4 75.1 41.3 1,249.6 226.9 913.1 87.8 21.7 2,462.7 431.3 976.6 754.1 236.7 64.0 1991
64.3 79.5 49.4 1,266.2 301.2 864.7 78.0 22.4 2,570.4 468.3 1,020.9 770.7 240.0 70.4 199275.3 81.6 59.5 1,395.2 380.2 917.9 69.2 27.9 2,788.1 513.6 1,123.6 859.4 219.1 72.4 199368.1 84.4 70.7 1,427.9 342.8 976.9 75.2 33.1 2,875.7 540.2 1,109.3 940.5 206.9 78.8 1994
71.3 88.1 83.2 1,539.4 363.9 1,065.1 75.5 35.0 3,021.1 579.9 1,086.1 1,046.1 227.4 81.6 1995
81.3 106.0 89.7 1,731.0 401.1 1,202.4 75.4 52.2 3,241.5 675.1 1,109.8 1,143.0 227.8 85.8 199676.0 107.6 95.1 1,902.3 427.6 1,349.1 75.6 50.0 3,341.9 689.8 1,146.9 1,182.1 236.9 86.1 199771.6 102.8 129.2 2,086.9 472.5 1,505.2 59.4 49.7 3,520.3 799.5 1,194.1 1,211.0 234.9 80.9 199837.5 58.0 75.6 1,122.0 114.4 1,007.3 0.3 29.8 1,905.3 420.4 759.6 614.7 110.7 42.1 1999
33.1 58.5 82.7 1,189.2 113.4 1,075.3 0.4 30.1 1,945.8 443.4 819.9 573.5 109.0 42.1 2000
37.6 57.9 75.6 1,122.7 126.9 995.6 0.2 29.6 1,893.5 435.7 756.7 593.5 107.6 42.4 2000          Apr.
37.6 57.9 76.0 1,134.6 119.0 1,015.3 0.2 29.5 1,891.5 429.0 767.1 587.7 107.7 42.3          May37.6 57.9 77.9 1,112.9 116.8 996.0 0.2 29.5 1,888.2 426.2 772.2 582.3 107.6 42.3          June
36.1 58.5 78.1 1,110.6 100.1 1,010.3 0.2 30.2 1,882.2 422.9 775.0 576.6 107.7 42.4          July
32.5 58.6 78.8 1,130.9 105.6 1,025.0 0.2 29.9 1,879.2 415.6 783.2 572.7 107.7 42.6          Aug.32.5 58.7 79.6 1,110.3 110.3 999.7 0.2 30.0 1,896.5 413.0 805.7 570.0 107.8 42.8          Sep.
32.5 58.5 80.1 1,151.3 111.1 1,039.9 0.2 30.1 1,900.3 417.5 808.8 566.2 107.9 42.7          Oct.
32.3 58.7 80.9 1,189.6 133.0 1,056.4 0.2 30.1 1,912.9 438.7 802.8 562.7 108.7 42.3          Nov.33.1 58.5 82.7 1,189.2 113.4 1,075.3 0.4 30.1 1,945.8 443.4 819.9 573.5 109.0 42.1          Dec.
4.7 58.3 83.2 1,145.5 117.8 1,027.3 0.4 30.0 1,921.8 431.1 812.0 569.3 109.3 42.0 2001          Jan.
4.4 58.4 85.4 1,160.2 123.9 1,035.9 0.4 29.9 1,933.8 443.3 813.8 567.2 109.5 42.5          Feb.4.9 58.5 85.8 1,180.2 124.5 1,055.5 0.2 29.8 1,935.3 442.1 817.8 565.6 109.8 42.6          Mar.
4.9 58.4 86.1 1,169.9 127.7 1,041.9 0.2 29.8 1,938.3 451.9 813.8 562.7 109.8 42.7          Apr.
4.8 57.2 86.5 1,169.5 119.5 1,049.8 0.2 28.3 1,944.0 454.9 819.2 559.9 110.0 42.9          May4.9 56.8 86.5 1,183.9 127.1 1,056.5 0.2 28.3 1,953.3 465.0 819.8 558.8 109.8 42.7          June
4.0 56.7 89.4 1,168.2 116.2 1,051.8 0.2 28.1 1,948.4 461.4 821.0 556.4 109.7 42.7          July
4.0 57.6 89.6 1,167.9 119.2 1,048.4 0.2 28.1 1,953.2 463.5 825.0 555.1 109.6 42.8          Aug.4.0 57.4 89.0 1,196.4 137.1 1,059.1 0.2 28.1 1,971.0 480.2 826.1 555.4 109.3 42.7          Sep.
Changes *
−1.0 + 1.5 + 7.9 + 39.7 + 74.0 −25.5 −9.8 + 1.0 + 126.0 + 33.6 + 69.6 + 16.3 + 3.3 + 3.2 1992
−11.4 + 2.1 + 9.8 + 145.3 + 75.1 + 77.1 −8.8 + 1.9 + 216.7 + 43.8 + 96.9 + 88.7 −14.6 + 2.0 1993
−6.9 + 2.6 + 11.3 + 32.4 −31.4 + 53.0 + 6.0 + 4.9 + 85.0 + 28.3 −14.1 + 81.2 −12.2 + 1.8 1994
−1.2 + 7.3 + 12.5 + 134.2 + 20.4 + 111.5 + 0.4 + 2.0 + 158.3 + 48.9 −14.2 + 105.6 + 11.7 + 6.3 1995
+ 8.0 + 3.3 + 6.5 + 175.9 + 36.6 + 137.7 −0.2 + 1.7 + 218.4 + 94.3 + 23.2 + 96.9 + 0.7 + 3.3 1996
−5.3 + 1.6 + 5.4 + 175.9 + 31.6 + 146.7 + 0.2 −2.6 + 100.5 + 13.0 + 37.1 + 39.1 + 9.2 + 2.1 1997
−4.4 −4.8 + 34.1 + 179.0 + 39.7 + 156.4 −16.2 −0.9 + 179.3 + 110.6 + 47.2 + 28.9 −2.1 −5.3 1998
−0.6 + 0.1 + 9.3 + 69.0 − 1.8 + 81.8 −11.1 −0.4 + 67.3 + 32.7 + 48.4 − 4.5 −9.3 + 0.7 1999
−0.8 + 0.5 + 7.1 + 64.7 − 2.3 + 66.9 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 41.3 + 22.3 + 61.1 −40.5 −1.7 −0.0 2000
+ 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.7 −14.4 − 1.3 −13.1 −0.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 8.5 − 2.3 − 6.5 −0.2 + 0.1 2000          Apr.
−0.0 −0.0 + 0.4 + 12.5 − 7.2 + 19.8 −0.0 −0.1 − 1.6 − 6.3 + 10.4 − 5.9 + 0.1 −0.1          May
−0.0 −0.0 + 1.9 −21.2 − 1.8 −19.4 −0.0 −0.1 − 2.9 − 2.5 + 5.1 − 5.4 −0.1 + 0.0          June
−1.4 + 0.6 + 0.3 − 3.0 −17.4 + 14.4 + 0.0 + 0.7 − 6.5 − 3.7 + 2.0 − 5.0 + 0.1 + 0.2          July
−0.0 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 19.3 + 4.6 + 14.7 + 0.0 −0.3 − 3.5 − 7.9 + 8.2 − 3.9 + 0.0 + 0.2          Aug.
−0.0 + 0.0 + 0.8 −20.9 + 4.5 −25.3 −0.0 + 0.0 + 17.0 − 2.8 + 22.5 − 2.7 + 0.0 + 0.2          Sep.
−0.0 −0.2 + 0.5 + 40.0 − 0.2 + 40.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 3.3 + 3.9 + 3.0 − 3.8 + 0.1 −0.1          Oct.
−0.1 + 0.2 + 0.8 + 38.4 + 22.9 + 15.6 −0.0 + 0.0 + 13.1 + 21.8 − 6.0 − 3.5 + 0.8 −0.4          Nov.
+ 0.8 −0.2 + 1.8 + 1.6 −17.6 + 19.0 + 0.2 −0.1 + 35.5 + 5.7 + 18.6 + 10.8 + 0.4 −0.2          Dec.
−28.4 −0.2 + 0.5 −43.6 + 4.5 −48.1 + 0.0 −0.0 −24.0 − 12.3 − 7.9 − 4.1 + 0.3 −0.1 2001          Jan.
−0.3 −0.0 + 2.2 + 14.7 + 6.1 + 8.6 −0.0 −0.2 + 13.1 + 12.1 + 2.9 − 2.1 + 0.2 + 0.4          Feb.
+ 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 15.3 − 0.6 + 16.1 −0.2 −0.1 + 0.9 − 1.7 + 4.0 − 1.6 + 0.3 + 0.1          Mar.
−0.1 −0.1 + 0.3 −11.0 + 2.5 −13.5 −0.0 −0.0 + 2.9 + 9.8 − 4.0 − 2.9 −0.0 + 0.1          Apr.
−0.0 −1.2 + 0.5 − 2.3 −10.2 + 7.9 + 0.0 −1.5 + 5.0 + 2.2 + 5.4 − 2.8 + 0.2 + 0.2          May
+ 0.1 −0.3 + 0.0 + 14.6 + 7.9 + 6.7 + 0.0 −0.0 + 9.4 + 10.2 + 0.6 − 1.2 −0.1 −0.2          June
−0.9 −0.1 + 3.0 −14.5 − 9.8 − 4.7 −0.0 −0.2 − 4.4 − 3.1 + 1.2 − 2.4 −0.1 + 0.1          July
+ 0.0 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 1.1 + 4.5 − 3.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 5.3 + 2.7 + 4.0 − 1.2 −0.1 + 0.1          Aug.
+ 0.0 −0.1 −0.5 + 28.1 + 17.4 + 10.7 −0.0 −0.0 + 17.8 + 16.7 + 1.2 + 0.2 −0.3 −0.2          Sep.
arising from the exchange of equalisation claims. —11Including liabilities acceptances and promissory notes outstanding and, up to December 1998,
arising from registered debt securities, registered money market paper and including endorsement liabilities arising from rediscounted bills. —17Up to
non-negotiable bearer debt securities; including subordinated liabilities. — December 1998, including liabilities to domestic building and loans
12Up to December 1998, excluding liabilities to domestic building and loan associations and money market funds. —18Since the inclusion of building
associations and money market funds. —13Up to December 1998, and loan associations in January 1999, including deposits under savings and
including time deposits for less than 1 month. —14Including liabilities loan contracts (see table IV. 12). —19Excluding deposits under savings and
arising from monetary policy operations with the Bundesbank. —15Up to loan contracts (see also footnote 18). —20Including liabilities arising from
December 1998, excluding time deposits for less than 1 month. —16Own non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
27*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
IV. Banks
 
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis- à-vis non-residents *
 
 
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 euro billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
Balances and loans and Loans and advances not Treasury
advances not evidenced by evidenced by certificates, bills and
Cash in certificates, bills  3 bills 3 negotiable Negotiable
hand money money
(non- Medium market Memo Medium marketeuro-area and paper Securities item: and paper Securitiesnotes and Short- long- issued by issued by Trust Short- long- issued by of
Period coins)  
1 Total Total term term banks  4 banks  5 loans  6 Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
1991 1.1 419.6 395.8 266.5 129.3 − 17.5 6.4 188.7 142.6 27.7 114.8 1.4 31.3
1992 1.0 405.6 377.4 250.0 127.4 − 21.3 6.8 217.8 157.3 30.2 127.1 0.4 45.2
1993 1.2 533.8 498.3 360.5 137.7 0.1 24.3 11.2 262.5 184.0 48.3 135.7 0.0 63.01994 1.2 492.3 455.0 309.0 146.0 0.1 23.7 13.5 257.4 173.0 35.0 138.0 0.6 66.5
1995 1.2 538.4 500.8 349.7 151.1 0.1 25.6 11.8 289.2 191.1 42.1 148.9 1.7 79.7
1996 1.4 588.9 544.2 386.6 157.6 0.3 31.5 13.0 352.0 230.4 60.2 170.2 4.9 103.91997 1.5 689.1 635.3 456.1 179.2 0.2 43.1 10.5 474.8 312.7 96.2 216.5 6.0 140.31998 1.5 774.9 706.9 533.6 173.3 0.4 58.7 9.0 610.3 364.9 93.9 270.9 11.6 211.01999 0.4 427.1 383.5 279.5 104.1 0.4 43.2 4.2 396.1 235.8 52.7 183.1 7.5 152.7
2000 0.4 507.7 441.4 325.4 116.0 1.3 65.0 3.6 475.8 286.8 71.1 215.7 6.5 182.5
2000         Apr. 0.5 457.1 407.5 295.6 111.9 0.5 49.1 4.3 443.1 266.7 68.8 198.0 6.8 169.6
         May 0.7 465.0 412.6 303.1 109.5 0.5 51.9 4.8 438.0 261.4 64.6 196.8 5.4 171.2         June 0.6 463.6 410.1 301.1 109.0 0.5 53.0 5.2 426.9 247.8 52.2 195.6 6.2 172.9
         July 0.7 465.1 409.5 297.5 112.0 0.5 55.1 5.3 434.0 253.4 52.6 200.8 6.3 174.3
         Aug. 0.6 483.8 426.3 313.2 113.1 0.5 57.1 4.4 447.6 266.7 60.0 206.7 6.6 174.2         Sep. 0.6 491.4 432.3 316.7 115.6 0.5 58.6 4.5 458.3 272.7 62.0 210.7 5.4 180.3
         Oct. 0.6 507.0 445.5 327.3 118.2 0.6 60.9 4.5 471.9 282.5 64.6 217.8 6.1 183.3
         Nov. 0.5 518.1 452.9 335.5 117.4 1.3 63.9 3.9 474.5 285.1 68.2 216.9 6.2 183.3         Dec. 0.4 507.7 441.4 325.4 116.0 1.3 65.0 3.6 475.8 286.8 71.1 215.7 6.5 182.5
2001         Jan. 0.5 506.2 438.5 324.0 114.4 1.3 66.5 3.4 493.7 298.4 80.9 217.5 7.1 188.1
         Feb. 0.7 520.8 452.5 337.0 115.5 0.9 67.3 3.5 506.7 302.9 81.9 221.0 6.2 197.6         Mar. 0.5 552.8 482.5 365.5 117.0 1.2 69.1 3.6 536.3 326.1 97.5 228.6 5.9 204.3
         Apr. 0.5 557.3 484.1 366.9 117.3 1.3 71.8 3.5 553.0 334.4 104.4 230.0 6.8 211.8
         May 0.5 552.5 477.5 358.4 119.1 1.5 73.5 3.6 569.7 340.9 103.6 237.3 7.3 221.5         June 0.6 568.1 492.6 369.3 123.3 1.5 74.0 3.6 562.2 337.5 97.6 239.9 6.0 218.7
         July 0.5 540.4 465.0 341.1 123.9 1.8 73.6 3.5 549.6 330.2 92.8 237.4 6.6 212.8
         Aug. 0.5 560.0 485.2 358.5 126.7 1.8 73.0 3.5 550.4 327.7 95.2 232.6 6.7 215.9         Sep. 0.5 589.0 513.6 384.2 129.4 1.8 73.6 3.5 557.1 333.4 98.4 235.1 6.5 217.2
Changes *
1992 −0.1 −18.4 −22.6 −20.4 −2.2 − + 3.8 + 0.4 + 28.6 + 13.6 + 2.5 + 11.0 −1.0 + 14.1
1993 + 0.1 + 117.3 + 117.2 + 103.9 + 13.3 −0.0 + 0.5 −0.4 + 31.9 + 12.6 + 6.2 + 6.3 −0.4 + 19.5
1994 + 0.0 −24.0 −27.5 −41.4 + 13.9 −0.0 + 0.1 + 3.4 − 1.6 −5.5 −12.3 + 6.7 + 0.6 + 5.1
1995 + 0.1 + 59.1 + 57.6 + 49.2 + 8.4 + 0.0 + 2.9 −1.4 + 38.3 + 21.3 + 7.8 + 13.6 + 1.1 + 16.1
1996 + 0.2 + 34.2 + 29.9 + 27.2 + 2.7 + 0.2 + 5.2 −1.1 + 58.4 + 36.2 + 17.0 + 19.2 + 3.1 + 21.4
1997 + 0.1 + 80.6 + 71.5 + 53.3 + 18.2 −0.1 + 10.4 −1.2 + 109.3 + 73.0 + 33.7 + 39.3 + 0.7 + 32.9
1998 −0.0 + 100.8 + 89.5 + 79.3 + 10.2 + 0.0 + 13.1 −1.8 + 122.0 + 42.7 −6.4 + 49.1 + 5.5 + 66.0
1999 −0.3 + 17.7 + 5.7 − 5.3 + 11.0 + 0.2 + 11.7 −0.0 + 85.8 + 42.8 + 8.4 + 34.4 + 1.3 + 41.8
2000 −0.0 + 78.9 + 56.5 + 44.6 + 11.8 + 0.9 + 21.6 −0.7 + 72.0 + 45.0 + 17.4 + 27.7 −1.2 + 28.2
2000         Apr. −0.0 + 5.0 + 5.2 + 4.3 + 0.9 −0.2 −0.1 + 0.0 + 8.7 + 6.7 + 4.6 + 2.0 + 0.1 + 1.9
         May + 0.2 + 11.4 + 8.3 + 9.6 −1.3 −0.0 + 3.1 + 0.6 − 0.7 −1.6 −3.5 + 1.8 −1.3 + 2.3
         June −0.1 + 1.1 − 0.3 − 0.8 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 1.4 + 0.4 − 8.3 −10.1 −11.8 + 1.7 + 0.9 + 1.0
         July + 0.1 − 1.4 − 3.3 − 5.3 + 2.0 + 0.0 + 1.8 + 0.1 + 2.9 + 1.9 −0.2 + 2.1 + 0.0 + 0.9
         Aug. −0.1 + 15.0 + 13.6 + 13.0 + 0.6 −0.1 + 1.5 −0.9 + 7.7 + 8.9 + 6.6 + 2.4 + 0.2 −1.4
         Sep. −0.0 + 7.3 + 6.0 + 3.6 + 2.3 + 0.0 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 8.1 + 3.7 + 1.6 + 2.1 −1.3 + 5.7
         Oct. −0.0 + 10.9 + 8.8 + 7.6 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 2.0 −0.1 + 6.8 + 4.5 + 1.6 + 2.8 + 0.6 + 1.7
         Nov. −0.0 + 15.9 + 11.7 + 11.1 + 0.6 + 0.8 + 3.4 −0.5 + 8.6 + 7.4 + 4.5 + 3.0 + 0.1 + 1.1
         Dec. −0.1 − 1.2 − 3.2 − 4.1 + 0.9 + 0.0 + 2.0 −0.2 + 12.9 + 10.8 + 4.8 + 5.9 + 0.5 + 1.6
2001         Jan. + 0.1 − 1.0 − 2.5 − 1.1 −1.4 −0.0 + 1.5 −0.2 + 18.6 + 11.9 + 9.9 + 1.9 + 0.6 + 6.1
         Feb. + 0.2 + 14.5 + 13.9 + 12.8 + 1.1 −0.4 + 0.9 + 0.0 + 12.7 + 4.1 + 0.9 + 3.2 −0.9 + 9.5
         Mar. −0.2 + 27.4 + 25.6 + 25.4 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 1.5 + 0.1 + 22.1 + 17.0 + 14.3 + 2.6 −0.4 + 5.6
         Apr. + 0.0 + 4.8 + 1.9 + 1.4 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 2.7 −0.0 + 17.4 + 8.9 + 7.1 + 1.9 + 0.9 + 7.5
         May −0.0 −11.3 −12.5 −13.1 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 1.0 −0.0 + 6.9 −1.0 −2.7 + 1.7 + 0.3 + 7.5
         June + 0.1 + 16.7 + 16.1 + 11.6 + 4.5 −0.0 + 0.6 −0.0 − 6.6 −3.0 −5.8 + 2.8 −1.3 −2.3
         July −0.0 −23.7 −24.0 −25.6 + 1.6 + 0.3 −0.0 −0.0 − 6.3 −2.4 −3.6 + 1.2 + 0.7 −4.7
         Aug. −0.0 + 24.0 + 24.2 + 20.2 + 4.1 −0.0 −0.2 + 0.0 + 8.6 + 4.3 + 4.0 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 4.1
         Sep. + 0.0 + 28.1 + 27.5 + 25.2 + 2.3 + 0.1 + 0.5 −0.0 + 5.7 + 4.9 + 3.0 + 1.9 −0.2 + 1.0
*See table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the domestic notes and coins. —2Up to December 1998, including loans on a
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as trust basis; see also footnote 6. —3Up to December 1998, bill-based
provisional. Subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from redisco unted
Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Up to December 1998: bills and bills sent for collection from the banks ’portfolios prior to
28*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
IV. Banks
    
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
 Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bankinterests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memoitem: and and item: and item:Trust enter- Sight Short- long- Trust Sight Short- long- Trustloans  
6 prises  7 Total Total  9 term  9 term loans  6 Total Total  9 term  9 term loans  6   Period deposits  8 deposits  8 
End of year or month *
 
13.5 22.8 253.3 58.8 184.2 88.3 95.9 10.3 93.0 11.5 76.1 24.2 51.8 5.3 199114.8 25.8 297.0 66.7 219.7 119.2 100.5 10.5 125.8 15.8 103.6 34.4 69.2 6.4 199215.5 30.1 328.1 82.9 236.0 122.5 113.5 9.2 162.8 16.9 139.2 39.1 100.1 6.7 199317.3 34.0 402.3 111.6 283.7 150.8 132.9 7.1 181.5 20.6 155.3 41.7 113.6 5.6 1994
16.7 38.8 463.7 116.9 339.7 191.6 148.2 7.0 224.4 22.1 198.0 45.3 152.6 4.4 1995
12.7 45.8 486.5 147.1 335.7 172.0 163.7 3.8 273.5 34.3 237.2 50.0 187.2 2.1 199615.7 54.7 670.3 226.0 440.2 254.3 185.9 4.0 333.9 43.5 285.7 63.0 222.7 4.8 199722.9 62.9 875.7 309.5 562.5 359.1 203.4 3.7 390.3 51.3 329.6 71.8 257.8 9.5 199813.6 33.9 483.6 65.6 418.0 332.3 85.6 2.0 284.4 23.8 260.6 64.9 195.7 5.8 1999
13.9 47.4 586.0 113.7 472.2 382.9 89.3 1.7 314.9 35.4 279.5 62.5 217.0 5.6 2000
14.2 36.7 584.4 116.6 467.8 369.7 98.1 2.1 315.6 44.3 271.3 61.4 209.9 6.2 2000          Apr.
14.2 37.5 595.9 113.4 482.5 386.0 96.5 2.0 320.3 43.1 277.3 69.9 207.4 6.8          May13.9 37.6 562.0 122.3 439.7 345.5 94.3 2.1 303.1 35.9 267.2 61.5 205.7 6.8          June
14.2 37.7 549.3 110.7 438.6 345.9 92.7 2.1 308.1 33.3 274.8 65.0 209.9 7.1          July
14.3 38.2 568.7 124.0 444.7 352.8 91.9 2.1 313.9 34.0 280.0 66.8 213.1 6.4          Aug.14.3 38.6 578.3 132.0 446.2 353.3 92.9 2.1 316.2 36.4 279.8 63.1 216.7 6.4          Sep.
14.5 40.4 579.5 127.3 452.3 358.8 93.5 1.9 329.9 34.8 295.1 69.6 225.5 6.5          Oct.
14.4 40.5 589.2 130.8 458.3 365.1 93.2 1.9 329.5 36.1 293.5 71.5 222.0 6.3          Nov.13.9 47.4 586.0 113.7 472.2 382.9 89.3 1.7 314.9 35.4 279.5 62.5 217.0 5.6          Dec.
14.2 48.5 608.9 140.2 468.8 381.4 87.4 1.7 328.2 38.7 289.5 73.4 216.1 5.6 2001          Jan.
14.5 47.8 631.6 150.3 481.3 396.0 85.3 1.7 335.3 37.9 297.4 76.3 221.1 5.6          Feb.14.5 48.6 700.4 163.9 536.5 453.4 83.1 1.8 347.0 41.3 305.7 80.0 225.7 5.9          Mar.
14.6 48.6 702.1 154.5 547.6 464.7 82.9 1.7 365.3 47.1 318.2 92.0 226.1 5.8          Apr.
14.9 49.1 704.1 155.0 549.1 462.0 87.1 1.7 385.0 53.9 331.1 96.3 234.8 6.1          May14.8 48.6 675.1 151.3 523.8 435.2 88.6 1.6 364.1 45.8 318.3 81.5 236.8 6.1          June
14.7 49.3 635.4 132.5 502.8 414.1 88.7 1.5 367.1 42.0 325.2 91.5 233.6 6.0          July
14.3 49.2 640.1 106.9 533.3 445.0 88.3 1.5 368.3 37.7 330.6 100.6 230.0 5.7          Aug.14.2 49.1 645.2 144.7 500.5 409.0 91.6 1.5 360.8 36.7 324.2 92.2 231.9 5.7          Sep.
Changes *
+ 1.9 + 3.8 + 41.3 + 7.3 + 33.2 + 28.8 + 4.4 + 0.7 + 32.5 + 4.2 + 27.0 + 10.1 + 16.9 + 1.2 1992+ 0.2 + 4.1 + 23.8 + 14.1 + 11.1 − 0.4 + 11.5 −1.4 + 34.3 + 1.0 + 33.2 + 4.0 + 29.1 + 0.2 1993
−1.7 + 4.2 + 85.6 + 31.3 + 56.0 + 33.9 + 22.1 −1.7 + 23.1 + 3.9 + 19.8 + 3.4 + 16.4 −0.7 1994
−0.2 + 5.2 + 71.0 + 7.9 + 64.6 + 45.9 + 18.7 −1.5 + 47.8 + 2.2 + 46.5 + 4.1 + 42.4 −0.9 1995
−2.3 + 5.9 + 11.3 + 27.1 − 13.9 − 26.6 + 12.7 −1.9 + 44.7 + 11.7 + 35.0 + 3.7 + 31.3 −2.0 1996
+ 2.7 + 7.9 + 157.3 + 67.7 + 89.5 + 71.8 + 17.7 + 0.1 + 51.0 + 5.4 + 43.3 + 11.4 + 31.9 + 2.3 1997+ 7.7 + 8.8 + 215.6 + 87.7 + 128.1 + 108.1 + 20.0 −0.3 + 64.7 + 10.4 + 48.9 + 10.3 + 38.6 + 5.5 1998
+ 1.1 + 10.9 + 37.4 −9.2 + 46.6 + 47.6 −1.0 −0.0 + 61.0 + 7.2 + 53.8 + 15.9 + 37.9 + 0.1 1999
−0.2 + 12.8 + 90.0 + 47.0 + 43.0 + 42.9 + 0.1 −0.4 + 24.4 + 11.1 + 13.3 −2.9 + 16.2 −0.8 2000
+ 0.0 − 0.2 + 21.9 + 5.0 + 16.9 + 15.6 + 1.3 + 0.0 + 2.3 + 2.7 −0.4 −1.5 + 1.1 −0.1 2000          Apr.
+ 0.1 + 1.2 + 18.1 −2.2 + 20.3 + 20.9 −0.6 −0.0 + 8.4 −1.0 + 9.5 + 9.1 + 0.4 + 0.8          May
−0.1 + 0.4 −29.0 + 9.6 − 38.7 − 37.1 −1.5 + 0.1 −15.0 −7.0 −8.0 −8.0 + 0.0 + 0.2          June
+ 0.1 − 0.3 −19.1 −12.5 − 6.6 − 4.2 −2.4 −0.0 + 2.0 −2.8 + 4.9 + 2.9 + 2.0 −0.0          July
−0.1 − 0.0 + 11.8 + 12.5 − 0.7 + 1.3 −2.0 + 0.0 + 1.7 + 0.3 + 1.4 + 1.0 + 0.3 −0.9          Aug.
−0.1 + 0.1 + 6.9 + 7.5 − 0.6 − 1.2 + 0.5 −0.1 + 0.2 + 2.3 −2.1 −4.1 + 2.0 −0.1          Sep.
−0.0 + 1.3 − 7.5 −6.1 − 1.4 − 0.8 −0.6 −0.2 + 9.0 −2.0 + 11.0 + 5.6 + 5.3 −0.2          Oct.
+ 0.1 + 0.7 + 16.7 + 4.7 + 12.0 + 11.4 + 0.7 −0.0 + 4.6 + 1.5 + 3.1 + 2.6 + 0.5 + 0.1          Nov.
−0.1 + 7.8 + 11.9 −15.0 + 26.9 + 28.8 −1.9 −0.1 −8.1 + 0.1 −8.1 −7.3 −0.8 −0.3          Dec.
+ 0.3 + 1.2 + 23.4 + 26.5 − 3.1 − 1.3 −1.9 −0.1 + 13.9 + 3.3 + 10.6 + 11.0 −0.4 + 0.0 2001          Jan.
+ 0.2 − 0.7 + 22.5 + 10.1 + 12.4 + 14.6 −2.2 −0.0 + 5.6 −0.8 + 6.4 + 2.5 + 3.9 + 0.0          Feb.
−0.2 + 0.1 + 58.9 + 11.9 + 47.0 + 50.2 −3.2 + 0.0 + 6.8 + 3.0 + 3.8 + 2.7 + 1.1 −0.1          Mar.
+ 0.0 + 0.1 + 2.7 −9.3 + 12.0 + 12.2 −0.1 −0.1 + 18.5 + 5.8 + 12.8 + 12.2 + 0.6 −0.0          Apr.
−0.0 − 0.3 −11.9 −1.2 − 10.8 − 12.6 + 1.8 −0.1 + 14.0 + 6.2 + 7.8 + 2.9 + 4.9 −0.0          May
−0.0 − 0.4 −28.0 −3.4 − 24.5 − 26.2 + 1.7 −0.1 −20.0 −8.1 −11.9 −14.7 + 2.8 −0.0          June
+ 0.0 + 1.1 −32.2 −17.6 − 14.6 − 15.5 + 0.9 −0.0 + 7.6 −3.3 + 10.9 + 10.8 + 0.1 + 0.1          July
−0.0 + 0.5 + 14.3 −24.3 + 38.7 + 38.1 + 0.5 −0.0 + 6.7 −3.9 + 10.6 + 10.2 + 0.3 + 0.1          Aug.
−0.1 − 0.2 + 3.4 + 37.7 − 34.2 − 37.4 + 3.1 −0.0 −8.4 −1.1 −7.4 −8.7 + 1.3 −0.0          Sep.
maturity). —4Up to November 1993, included in securities; see also 1998, including working capital supplied to branches abroad. —8Up to
footnote 5. —5Up to November 1993, including negotiable money market December 1998, including time deposits for less than 1 month. —9Up to
paper; excluding registered debt securities. —6From 1999, no longer December 1998, excluding time deposits for less than 1 month. 
included in loans and deposits (see also footnote 2). —7Up to December
29*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
IV. Banks
 
5. Lending of banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
  
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 euro billion
Short-term lending Medium and long-term
to public authorities to enter- to enterprises and individuals  1 
Lending to domestic
Loans and non-banks, total  1, 2 
   advances Loans and
including excluding not evi- Negoti- advancesnegotiable money denced by able not evi-market paper, certifi- money denced bysecurities, cates and market certifi- Treasury
Period equalisation claims Total Total paper Total cates bills  
5 Total Total bills 3, 4 
End of year or month *
 
1991 3,147.0 2,951.4 602.0 575.8 575.5 0.4 26.1 14.7 11.4 2,545.0 1,941.81992 3,478.2 3,166.6 597.2 571.2 571.0 0.2 26.0 16.7 9.3 2,881.0 2,167.51993 3,826.4 3,417.8 563.2 544.2 540.8 3.4 19.0 16.8 2.2 3,263.2 2,441.81994 4,137.2 3,633.1 583.5 549.1 548.6 0.4 34.4 32.7 1.8 3,553.7 2,661.9
1995 4,436.9 3,936.9 615.2 584.0 583.3 0.7 31.3 30.5 0.8 3,821.7 2,785.5
1996 4,773.1 4,248.7 662.2 617.2 616.2 1.0 45.1 40.2 4.9 4,110.8 3,007.21997 5,058.4 4,506.2 667.8 625.8 624.8 1.0 41.9 40.1 1.9 4,390.6 3,223.41998 5,379.8 4,775.4 704.3 661.3 660.8 0.5 43.0 38.5 4.5 4,675.5 3,482.41999 2,904.5 2,576.5 355.3 328.9 328.7 0.2 26.4 23.6 2.8 2,549.2 1,943.6
2000 3,003.7 2,663.7 371.2 348.2 347.7 0.5 22.9 21.2 1.7 2,632.5 2,038.6
2000         Apr. 2,984.8 2,612.3 373.0 347.4 347.1 0.2 25.7 23.2 2.5 2,611.8 2,002.7
         May 2,996.7 2,620.6 372.3 347.2 346.9 0.4 25.1 23.0 2.1 2,624.4 2,017.6         June 2,961.4 2,623.8 370.4 349.3 348.8 0.4 21.1 19.3 1.8 2,590.9 1,986.4
         July 2,963.4 2,625.5 362.2 337.7 337.3 0.4 24.5 21.8 2.6 2,601.2 1,999.1
         Aug. 2,968.0 2,632.6 360.7 337.3 336.9 0.3 23.4 20.9 2.5 2,607.3 2,008.6         Sep. 2,972.0 2,640.8 367.2 350.6 349.9 0.6 16.6 14.9 1.7 2,604.8 2,013.9
         Oct. 2,982.9 2,649.9 372.9 349.0 348.5 0.5 23.9 22.0 1.9 2,610.0 2,019.2
         Nov. 2,997.2 2,657.6 373.0 349.5 348.8 0.7 23.5 21.9 1.6 2,624.1 2,028.9         Dec. 3,003.7 2,663.7 371.2 348.2 347.7 0.5 22.9 21.2 1.7 2,632.5 2,038.6
2001         Jan. 2,998.4 2,670.8 379.9 350.6 349.8 0.8 29.3 27.7 1.6 2,618.6 2,041.7
         Feb. 3,010.9 2,679.9 390.4 358.1 357.2 0.9 32.3 29.9 2.4 2,620.5 2,048.8         Mar. 3,033.2 2,686.2 396.4 362.7 361.6 1.2 33.7 32.1 1.7 2,636.7 2,062.9
         Apr. 3,030.3 2,679.0 391.1 361.8 360.8 1.0 29.3 27.8 1.5 2,639.2 2,069.0
         May 3,032.7 2,685.7 390.0 362.3 361.0 1.3 27.7 26.1 1.6 2,642.7 2,072.6         June 3,007.7 2,681.8 385.0 363.3 362.0 1.3 21.7 20.7 1.0 2,622.7 2,047.4
         July 3,008.2 2,676.9 380.0 353.5 352.2 1.2 26.6 23.4 3.2 2,628.2 2,047.3
         Aug. 2,995.3 2,676.6 371.3 345.9 344.6 1.4 25.4 23.1 2.3 2,624.0 2,052.4         Sep. 2,989.9 2,685.2 379.9 354.4 352.5 1.9 25.5 22.4 3.0 2,610.0 2,051.2
Changes *
1992 + 294.3 + 240.3 + 16.9 + 18.1 + 18.3 −0.1 − 1.2 + 0.8 −2.0 + 277.4 + 229.7
1993 + 339.8 + 253.7 −15.1 − 9.2 −11.9 + 2.7 − 5.9 + 1.2 −7.2 + 354.9 + 251.7
1994 + 320.5 + 244.0 + 13.2 + 7.0 + 9.9 −2.9 + 6.2 + 6.6 −0.4 + 307.2 + 249.1
1995 + 312.8 + 311.9 + 35.9 + 37.9 + 37.7 + 0.2 − 1.9 − 1.0 −1.0 + 276.9 + 185.1
1996 + 336.3 + 312.9 + 44.3 + 32.6 + 32.2 + 0.4 + 11.7 + 7.4 + 4.3 + 292.0 + 221.51997 + 285.2 + 256.9 + 2.7 + 5.9 + 5.9 + 0.0 − 3.2 − 0.1 −3.0 + 282.5 + 219.9
1998 + 335.3 + 285.5 + 51.7 + 50.6 + 51.2 −0.6 + 1.1 − 1.6 + 2.7 + 283.6 + 258.3
1999 + 156.1 + 139.5 + 9.6 + 6.3 + 6.4 −0.0 + 3.3 + 2.9 + 0.4 + 146.4 + 146.4
2000 + 100.7 + 83.2 + 14.5 + 18.1 + 17.8 + 0.3 − 3.6 − 2.5 −1.1 + 86.1 + 93.8
2000         Apr. + 13.5 + 10.9 + 3.9 + 4.6 + 4.8 −0.2 − 0.8 − 1.0 + 0.2 + 9.7 + 8.3
         May + 13.1 + 9.5 + 0.5 + 1.1 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.2 −0.4 + 12.6 + 14.9
         June − 33.7 + 3.7 − 2.8 + 1.3 + 1.2 + 0.1 − 4.1 − 3.8 −0.3 − 31.0 − 28.6
         July + 1.0 + 0.7 − 9.2 −12.5 −12.5 −0.0 + 3.3 + 2.5 + 0.8 + 10.2 + 12.6
         Aug. + 6.8 + 5.8 − 2.8 − 1.8 − 1.7 −0.1 − 1.1 − 0.9 −0.1 + 9.7 + 9.5
         Sep. + 3.3 + 7.4 + 5.8 + 12.5 + 12.2 + 0.3 − 6.8 − 6.0 −0.8 − 2.5 + 5.4
         Oct. + 9.5 + 7.7 + 4.8 − 2.5 − 2.3 −0.1 + 7.3 + 7.0 + 0.2 + 4.7 + 4.8
         Nov. + 14.5 + 8.0 + 1.8 + 2.2 + 1.9 + 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.0 −0.3 + 12.7 + 8.3
         Dec. + 10.1 + 9.5 + 1.4 + 1.9 + 2.1 −0.2 − 0.6 − 0.7 + 0.2 + 8.7 + 9.9
2001         Jan. − 4.5 + 7.3 + 8.9 + 2.6 + 2.3 + 0.2 + 6.4 + 6.5 −0.1 − 13.4 + 3.3
         Feb. + 12.6 + 9.2 + 10.7 + 7.7 + 7.5 + 0.1 + 3.0 + 2.2 + 0.8 + 1.9 + 7.1         Mar. + 21.1 + 5.0 + 4.7 + 3.3 + 3.0 + 0.3 + 1.4 + 2.2 −0.8 + 16.4 + 14.2
         Apr. − 2.7 − 7.0 − 5.2 − 0.7 − 0.6 −0.2 − 4.4 − 4.3 −0.1 + 2.4 + 6.1
         May − 0.1 + 4.2 − 2.8 − 2.0 − 2.3 + 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.9 + 0.1 + 2.8 + 3.6
         June − 24.5 − 3.4 − 4.5 + 1.5 + 1.5 + 0.0 − 6.0 − 5.4 −0.6 − 20.0 − 25.1
         July + 1.7 − 3.8 − 3.8 − 8.7 − 8.6 −0.1 + 4.9 + 2.7 + 2.2 + 5.5 − 0.3
         Aug. − 9.6 + 1.2 − 7.2 − 6.1 − 6.2 + 0.1 − 1.2 − 0.3 −0.9 − 2.4 + 5.1
         Sep. − 6.3 + 7.8 + 7.1 + 7.7 + 7.1 + 0.5 − 0.6 − 0.7 + 0.1 − 13.4 − 1.2
*See table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the December 1998, including loans on a trust basis; see also footnote 9. —3Up
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as to December 1998, bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsementprovisional. Subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following liabilities arising from rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from
Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Up to December 1998, the banks ’portfolios prior to maturity). —4From 1999, including small
including loans to domestic building and loan associations. —2Up to amounts of medium-term series of bills. —5From December 1993, including
30*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
IV. Banks
    
 
lending  2, 6 
prises and individuals  1, 2 to public authorities  2 
Loans and advances not Loans and advances not
evidenced by certificates evidenced by certificates
Memo Memo
item: Equal- item:
Medium- Long- Trust Medium- Long- Secur- isation Trust
Total term  7 term  8 loans  9 Total Total term  7 term  8 loans  9   Period Securities  6 ities 6, 10 claims  11 
End of year or month *
 
1,814.1 213.7 1,600.3 65.8 62.0 682.9 472.0 51.3 420.8 115.5 2.4 13.1 19912,011.5 263.5 1,748.0 90.3 65.7 734.1 487.8 47.6 440.2 147.2 64.3 13.9 19922,241.5 253.9 1,987.5 134.2 66.1 821.4 537.1 36.8 500.3 193.5 75.3 15.5 19932,390.4 228.3 2,162.0 203.2 68.3 891.8 577.0 34.5 542.5 230.5 68.1 16.1 1994
2,522.0 214.1 2,307.9 192.9 70.6 1,036.2 713.0 74.5 638.4 234.4 71.3 17.5 1995
2,713.3 215.8 2,497.5 205.9 88.0 1,103.6 773.0 69.5 703.6 231.3 81.3 18.0 19962,900.0 216.2 2,683.8 234.1 89.3 1,167.2 833.8 53.0 780.8 239.2 76.0 18.3 19973,104.5 206.8 2,897.8 292.4 85.4 1,193.2 868.8 33.1 835.7 235.4 71.6 17.3 19981,764.8 182.5 1,582.3 178.9 49.2 605.6 459.5 30.9 428.6 108.6 37.5 8.7 1999
1,838.9 192.8 1,646.0 199.7 50.1 593.9 455.9 30.4 425.5 104.9 33.1 8.4 2000
1,781.6 184.3 1,597.3 221.1 49.3 609.1 460.4 31.5 429.0 111.1 37.6 8.6 2000          Apr.
1,789.9 185.7 1,604.2 227.7 49.3 606.8 460.8 32.5 428.3 108.4 37.6 8.6          May1,794.7 186.5 1,608.3 191.7 49.3 604.6 460.9 32.5 428.4 106.1 37.6 8.6          June
1,805.3 189.9 1,615.4 193.7 50.0 602.2 461.1 31.9 429.2 105.0 36.1 8.6          July
1,814.7 192.0 1,622.7 193.8 50.1 598.8 460.1 31.6 428.5 106.2 32.5 8.6          Aug.1,819.2 192.1 1,627.1 194.7 50.1 590.9 456.7 30.6 426.0 101.8 32.5 8.5          Sep.
1,825.3 192.1 1,633.2 193.9 50.0 590.8 454.0 29.7 424.3 104.3 32.5 8.5          Oct.
1,832.4 193.0 1,639.4 196.5 50.2 595.2 454.5 30.7 423.8 108.4 32.3 8.5          Nov.1,838.9 192.8 1,646.0 199.7 50.1 593.9 455.9 30.4 425.5 104.9 33.1 8.4          Dec.
1,837.8 191.7 1,646.1 203.9 49.8 576.9 455.6 30.6 425.0 116.6 4.7 8.5 2001          Jan.
1,840.8 191.2 1,649.6 208.0 49.9 571.7 452.0 28.8 423.3 115.2 4.4 8.5          Feb.1,842.6 190.5 1,652.1 220.3 50.0 573.9 450.0 27.4 422.5 119.0 4.9 8.4          Mar.
1,841.5 188.2 1,653.3 227.5 50.0 570.2 449.0 27.1 421.9 116.4 4.9 8.4          Apr.
1,849.5 190.4 1,659.2 223.0 48.8 570.2 449.1 27.3 421.8 116.2 4.8 8.4          May1,850.8 189.4 1,661.4 196.6 48.5 575.3 448.3 26.8 421.5 122.1 4.9 8.3          June
1,854.6 188.8 1,665.8 192.7 48.5 580.9 446.7 26.6 420.1 130.2 4.0 8.2          July
1,862.7 189.7 1,672.9 189.7 49.4 571.6 446.2 26.6 419.7 121.4 4.0 8.2          Aug.1,866.1 190.0 1,676.1 185.1 49.2 558.8 444.1 25.7 418.4 110.7 4.0 8.2          Sep.
Changes *
+ 204.1 + 29.6 + 174.5 + 24.8 + 0.8 + 41.2 + 15.7 − 3.6 + 19.3 + 32.2 − 1.0 + 0.7 1992
+ 214.1 −28.9 + 243.0 + 37.1 + 0.5 + 104.1 + 48.2 −10.8 + 59.0 + 65.1 −11.4 + 1.6 1993
+ 198.7 −29.2 + 227.9 + 48.5 + 1.9 + 58.2 + 26.2 − 2.4 + 28.5 + 38.3 − 6.9 + 0.7 1994
+ 176.0 − 1.9 + 177.9 + 3.3 + 5.9 + 91.8 + 91.8 + 15.3 + 76.6 − 0.4 − 1.2 + 1.5 1995
+ 204.4 + 1.6 + 202.8 + 14.0 + 3.1 + 70.4 + 65.7 − 5.5 + 71.2 − 3.3 + 8.0 + 0.1 1996
+ 189.0 + 0.3 + 188.7 + 29.5 + 1.4 + 62.6 + 60.6 −18.0 + 78.6 + 7.0 − 5.3 + 0.2 1997
+ 205.7 − 8.9 + 214.6 + 56.5 −3.9 + 25.3 + 35.0 −20.0 + 55.0 − 4.4 − 4.4 −0.9 1998
+ 121.8 + 25.1 + 96.8 + 24.6 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 8.5 + 6.2 + 2.3 − 7.8 − 0.6 −0.1 1999
+ 71.8 + 6.9 + 64.9 + 22.1 + 0.8 − 7.7 − 3.8 − 0.4 − 3.5 − 3.1 − 0.8 −0.3 2000
+ 4.4 + 1.0 + 3.4 + 4.0 + 0.0 + 1.3 + 2.7 + 0.4 + 2.3 − 1.5 + 0.1 −0.0 2000          Apr.
+ 8.3 + 1.2 + 7.1 + 6.7 + 0.0 − 2.3 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 2.7 − 0.0 −0.0          May
+ 6.5 − 0.8 + 7.3 −35.1 −0.1 − 2.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 2.1 − 0.0 + 0.0          June
+ 10.5 + 3.6 + 7.0 + 2.1 + 0.7 − 2.4 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 1.1 − 1.4 −0.1          July
+ 9.4 + 2.1 + 7.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.7 + 1.2 − 0.0 −0.0          Aug.
+ 4.5 + 0.1 + 4.4 + 0.9 + 0.1 − 7.9 − 3.4 − 1.0 − 2.5 − 4.4 − 0.0 −0.0          Sep.
+ 5.6 + 0.0 + 5.6 − 0.8 −0.1 − 0.1 − 2.7 − 0.6 − 2.1 + 2.6 − 0.0 −0.1          Oct.
+ 5.6 − 0.1 + 5.8 + 2.6 + 0.2 + 4.4 + 0.4 + 1.0 − 0.5 + 4.1 − 0.1 −0.0          Nov.
+ 6.7 + 0.6 + 6.0 + 3.3 −0.1 − 1.2 + 1.5 − 0.3 + 1.8 − 3.4 + 0.8 −0.0          Dec.
− 1.1 − 2.5 + 1.3 + 4.4 −0.3 − 16.8 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.6 + 11.9 −28.4 + 0.0 2001          Jan.
+ 3.0 − 0.5 + 3.5 + 4.1 −0.0 − 5.2 − 3.6 − 1.8 − 1.7 − 1.3 − 0.3 −0.0          Feb.
+ 1.9 − 0.6 + 2.5 + 12.3 + 0.1 + 2.2 − 2.1 − 1.3 − 0.8 + 3.7 + 0.6 −0.0          Mar.
− 1.1 − 2.3 + 1.2 + 7.2 −0.1 − 3.6 − 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.6 − 2.6 − 0.1 −0.0          Apr.
+ 8.0 + 2.2 + 5.9 − 4.5 −1.2 − 0.8 − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 −0.0          May
+ 1.3 − 1.0 + 2.2 −26.4 −0.2 + 5.1 − 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.3 + 5.8 + 0.1 −0.1          June
+ 3.8 − 0.6 + 4.4 − 4.0 −0.0 + 5.8 − 1.6 − 0.2 − 1.4 + 8.3 − 0.9 −0.1          July
+ 8.1 + 0.9 + 7.2 − 3.0 + 0.9 − 7.4 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 7.0 + 0.0 −0.0          Aug.
+ 3.4 + 0.3 + 3.1 − 4.6 −0.1 − 12.2 − 2.1 − 0.8 − 1.3 −10.1 + 0.0 −0.0          Sep.
other negotiable money market paper; excluding mobilisation and liquidity December 1998, maturity or period of notice of 4 years and more; from
paper. —6From 1999, breakdown of lending against securities by medium 1999, of more than 5 years. —9From 1999, no longer included in lending
and long-term lending no longer possible. —7Up to December 1998, (see also footnote 2). —10Excluding debt securities arising from the
maturity or period of notice of more than one year to less than 4 years; exchange of equalisation claims, see also footnote 11. —11Including debt
from 1999, more than 1 year up to and including 5 years. —8Up to securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims. 
31*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
IV. Banks
 
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and individuals, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
 
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 euro billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and individuals (excluding portfolios of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities  portfolios) 1 
of which  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
 
Financialinstitu-
Mortgage tions  
4 
loans Trans- (excluding
secured Energy Whole- Agri- port MFIs) andby and sale culture and insur-
Mortgage residen- Other of which water and and tele- anceloans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- supply, Construc- retail forestry, commu- enter-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing mining  
2 tion trade  3 fisheries nications prises
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
1998 3,850.8 1,430.2 1,654.9 1,040.9 614.0 2,367.1 614.9 331.5 70.7 124.2 343.1 63.7 80.9 132.81999 2,094.2 899.3 991.3 691.5 299.9 1,209.0 332.0 166.2 33.7 67.1 173.0 31.1 47.2 27.5
2000         Sep. 2,169.9 944.2 1,018.7 727.5 291.2 1,259.9 340.7 173.4 34.3 69.4 173.6 32.0 50.6 39.4
         Dec. 2,187.3 955.2 1,030.8 737.6 293.2 1,267.8 344.1 174.9 35.9 68.2 173.2 31.4 49.1 34.2
2001         Mar. 2,204.8 961.9 1,031.8 742.4 289.4 1,286.5 343.5 177.7 36.0 69.2 174.0 31.3 50.6 42.9
         June 2,213.5 966.0 1,038.2 746.6 291.6 1,288.2 344.8 177.8 34.1 69.6 172.5 31.5 54.3 37.9         Sep. 2,219.3 974.2 1,047.8 754.0 293.9 1,284.7 345.6 175.9 34.8 69.4 172.3 31.9 49.3 38.2
 Short-term lending
1998 660.8 − 36.7 − 36.7 561.3 27.9 120.6 8.8 36.1 133.9 8.8 12.1 28.5
1999 329.4 − 17.6 − 17.6 276.9 11.8 57.3 4.3 17.9 61.4 4.5 10.6 8.8
2000         Sep. 350.7 − 15.7 − 15.7 296.6 10.3 62.4 4.4 19.0 62.5 4.7 10.8 17.9
         Dec. 348.4 − 15.9 − 15.9 294.6 10.7 61.5 6.2 17.9 62.2 4.2 10.1 10.5
2001         Mar. 362.2 − 15.6 − 15.6 310.8 10.6 64.0 5.8 18.7 64.0 4.4 11.0 19.9
         June 362.7 − 16.1 − 16.1 310.6 10.8 63.9 4.4 19.2 63.3 4.5 13.5 15.9
         Sep. 353.2 − 15.9 − 15.9 300.9 10.6 60.9 4.2 19.0 62.4 4.7 8.8 15.2
 Medium-term lending  
8 
1998 206.8 − 39.3 − 39.3 132.2 17.4 16.1 1.5 9.3 16.1 4.5 6.8 17.3
1999 182.5 − 42.6 − 42.6 109.1 13.4 16.7 1.7 6.9 13.0 3.4 6.3 4.0
2000         Sep. 192.1 − 40.5 − 40.5 118.1 13.1 17.2 1.7 6.9 13.2 3.5 7.7 7.5
         Dec. 192.8 − 39.3 − 39.3 120.1 12.8 17.6 1.5 7.0 13.3 3.4 6.9 9.1
2001         Mar. 190.5 − 38.5 − 38.5 118.1 12.6 18.3 1.5 6.8 13.2 3.2 7.0 7.9
         June 189.4 − 38.0 − 38.0 116.8 12.4 18.2 1.3 6.7 13.0 3.2 8.1 6.5
         Sep. 190.0 − 37.9 − 37.9 117.9 12.5 18.0 1.7 6.6 13.3 3.2 7.4 7.3
 Long-term lending  1, 9 
1998 2,983.2 1,430.2 1,578.9 1,040.9 538.0 1,673.5 569.6 194.8 60.4 78.8 193.1 50.4 62.0 87.0
1999 1,582.3 899.3 931.1 691.5 239.7 823.0 306.8 92.3 27.7 42.2 98.7 23.3 30.3 14.7
2000         Sep. 1,627.1 944.2 962.5 727.5 235.0 845.2 317.3 93.8 28.1 43.4 98.0 23.7 32.1 14.0
         Dec. 1,646.0 955.2 975.5 737.6 238.0 853.1 320.6 95.9 28.2 43.4 97.7 23.9 32.1 14.6
2001         Mar. 1,652.1 961.9 977.7 742.4 235.3 857.7 320.4 95.4 28.6 43.7 96.7 23.7 32.7 15.1
         June 1,661.4 966.0 984.1 746.6 237.5 860.9 321.7 95.7 28.4 43.7 96.1 23.8 32.7 15.4         Sep. 1,676.1 974.2 994.0 754.0 240.0 865.9 322.6 96.9 28.9 43.8 96.6 24.0 33.1 15.8
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2000         4th qtr + 19.6 + 9.7 + 10.8 + 8.7 + 2.1 + 10.5 + 2.6 + 1.7 + 1.7 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.6 − 1.8 − 5.3
2001         1st qtr + 16.6 + 5.3 + 2.5 + 4.3 − 1.8 + 17.5 + 0.6 + 2.9 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.8 − 0.2 + 1.4 + 8.9
         2nd qtr + 6.9 + 4.9 + 6.4 + 4.4 + 2.0 − 0.1 + 1.3 + 0.1 − 1.7 + 0.4 − 1.6 + 0.2 + 3.7 − 5.2
         3rd qtr + 7.6 + 7.1 + 9.2 + 6.8 + 2.4 − 1.3 + 0.9 − 1.9 + 0.4 − 0.3 − 1.2 + 0.5 − 5.3 + 0.4
 Short-term lending
2000         4th qtr + 1.7 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 + 1.9 + 0.4 − 0.5 + 1.8 − 1.1 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.7 − 7.4
2001         1st qtr + 12.8 −− 0.4 −− 0.4 + 15.3 − 0.1 + 2.6 − 0.4 + 0.8 + 1.8 + 0.2 + 0.7 + 9.5
         2nd qtr − 1.3 − + 0.5 − + 0.5 − 2.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 1.4 + 0.5 − 0.7 + 0.2 + 2.5 − 3.9
         3rd qtr − 7.7 −− 0.1 −− 0.1 − 7.9 − 0.2 − 3.0 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 1.1 + 0.2 − 4.8 − 0.9
 Medium-term lending  8 
2000         4th qtr + 0.5 −− 0.9 −− 0.9 + 1.5 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.8 + 1.5
2001         1st qtr − 3.5 −− 1.1 −− 1.1 − 2.4 − 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 1.1
         2nd qtr − 1.2 −− 0.5 −− 0.5 − 1.3 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 1.1 − 1.6
         3rd qtr + 0.6 −− 0.2 −− 0.2 + 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.7 + 0.9
 Long-term lending  1, 9 
2000         4th qtr + 17.4 + 9.7 + 11.4 + 8.7 + 2.7 + 7.1 + 2.3 + 1.8 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.6
2001         1st qtr + 7.4 + 5.3 + 3.9 + 4.3 − 0.4 + 4.6 + 1.1 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.1 + 0.6 + 0.5
         2nd qtr + 9.4 + 4.9 + 6.4 + 4.4 + 2.0 + 3.3 + 1.2 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.3
         3rd qtr + 14.7 + 7.1 + 9.6 + 6.8 + 2.7 + 5.4 + 1.1 + 1.3 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.4
*Excluding lending by foreign branches. Up to December 1998: lending by always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent alterations, which will
banks (excluding building and loan associations) in Germany; including appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Up
lending to building and loan associations. From 1999: lending by monetary to December 1998, including loans on a trust basis; from 1999, loans on afinancial institutions (MFIs) in Germany; breakdown of lending by building trust basis are no longer included in lending. —2Including the extraction of
and loan associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical alterations stones and earths. —3Including the maintenance and repair of motor
have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest date are vehicles and durable consumer goods. —4Up to December 1998, excluding
32*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
IV. Banks
    
 
  Lending to
 non-commercial
 Lending to employed and other individuals organisations
Memorandum items Other lending Services sector (including the professions)  
5 
of which of which
Debit
balanceson wage
and salary
Other Lending accountsreal to self- Lending and of which
Housing estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Investment Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total credit  
7 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises enterprises persons  6 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
1,220.2 305.9 70.1 285.8 821.2 143.6 1,455.0 1,031.2 423.7 207.7 44.6 28.8 8.8 1998
663.1 154.1 42.8 168.3 449.4 73.9 871.4 655.7 215.7 105.7 23.6 13.7 3.6 1999
687.1 159.8 44.9 179.1 456.2 75.4 896.3 674.4 221.9 109.2 25.1 13.7 3.6 2000          Sep.
700.8 162.3 46.8 183.1 459.0 75.0 905.5 683.0 222.6 108.6 24.3 14.0 3.7          Dec.
704.9 163.9 49.4 184.0 457.5 75.6 904.5 684.6 219.8 108.6 23.3 13.8 3.6 2001          Mar.
710.6 165.7 48.5 188.2 459.3 75.7 911.4 689.8 221.7 109.6 23.6 13.8 3.6          June712.9 168.7 49.0 190.3 458.5 75.5 920.6 698.6 222.0 110.3 23.9 13.9 3.6          Sep.
Short-term lending
212.6 41.5 26.6 54.2 106.6 32.3 97.0 8.8 88.2 4.4 44.6 2.5 0.0 1998
112.2 18.6 17.1 27.5 55.9 15.6 51.1 5.7 45.4 2.5 23.6 1.3 0.0 1999
114.8 18.7 17.5 28.4 56.1 16.7 52.9 5.4 47.5 2.5 25.1 1.2 0.0 2000          Sep.
122.1 19.6 18.1 30.0 57.1 16.2 52.6 5.2 47.4 2.3 24.3 1.2 0.0          Dec.
123.0 19.6 20.1 29.8 56.0 17.1 50.3 5.0 45.3 2.5 23.3 1.1 0.0 2001          Mar.
125.8 20.5 19.1 31.4 56.8 17.1 50.9 5.3 45.7 2.6 23.6 1.2 0.0          June125.6 20.7 19.7 32.2 56.3 16.8 51.0 5.3 45.6 2.9 23.9 1.3 0.0          Sep.
Medium-term lending  
8
60.5 10.0 5.3 12.5 36.8 6.4 74.0 21.8 52.2 37.6 − 0.6 0.1 1998
57.0 7.1 4.0 12.3 33.3 5.6 72.7 29.2 43.5 31.0 − 0.7 0.1 1999
60.3 6.9 5.5 12.7 33.3 5.6 73.4 27.4 46.0 33.6 − 0.6 0.1 2000          Sep.
61.4 6.8 6.3 13.6 33.1 5.5 72.2 26.4 45.8 33.0 − 0.6 0.1          Dec.
60.2 6.9 6.1 13.7 32.6 5.5 71.9 25.8 46.1 33.4 − 0.6 0.1 2001          Mar.
59.7 6.8 6.3 13.9 32.4 5.5 72.0 25.6 46.4 33.9 − 0.6 0.1          June
60.5 7.0 5.6 14.8 31.7 5.4 71.6 25.4 46.2 33.9 − 0.6 0.1          Sep.
Long-term lending  1, 9
947.1 254.4 38.1 219.1 677.9 104.9 1,283.9 1,000.6 283.3 165.8 − 25.7 8.7 1998
493.9 128.5 21.8 128.5 360.1 52.7 747.5 620.8 126.7 72.2 − 11.7 3.5 1999
512.0 134.2 21.9 138.0 366.8 53.1 770.1 641.7 128.4 73.2 − 11.9 3.5 2000          Sep.
517.3 135.9 22.5 139.5 368.7 53.2 780.8 651.4 129.4 73.3 − 12.2 3.6          Dec.
521.6 137.4 23.2 140.5 369.0 53.1 782.3 653.8 128.5 72.7 − 12.1 3.5 2001          Mar.
525.1 138.3 23.0 142.9 370.1 53.1 788.5 658.9 129.6 73.1 − 12.0 3.5          June
526.8 141.0 23.7 143.4 370.4 53.3 798.1 667.9 130.2 73.5 − 12.1 3.5          Sep.
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
+ 16.2 + 2.5 + 1.8 + 4.0 + 2.4 − 0.4 + 8.9 + 8.2 + 0.7 − 0.5 − 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.0 2000          4th qtr
+ 3.4 + 1.6 + 2.5 + 0.9 − 1.8 + 0.6 − 0.7 + 1.9 − 2.5 − 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 2001          1st qtr
+ 4.0 + 2.2 − 1.0 + 4.0 + 1.8 + 0.1 + 6.9 + 5.1 + 1.8 + 1.3 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.0          2nd qtr
+ 6.2 + 2.0 + 0.2 + 2.4 − 0.8 − 0.2 + 8.8 + 8.3 + 0.5 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0          3rd qtr
Short-term lending
+ 10.2 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 1.6 + 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 2000          4th qtr
+ 0.0 − 0.0 + 2.0 − 0.3 − 1.1 + 0.8 − 2.4 − 0.3 − 2.1 + 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 2001          1st qtr
+ 1.0 + 1.0 − 1.0 + 1.7 + 0.9 − + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.0          2nd qtr
+ 2.1 + 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.7 − 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0          3rd qtr
Medium-term lending  8
+ 1.0 − 0.1 + 0.8 + 0.9 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 1.0 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.6 −− 0.0 − 0.0 2000          4th qtr
− 1.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 1.1 − 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.1 − + 0.0 − 0.0 2001          1st qtr
− 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.4 + 0.6 − + 0.0 − 0.0          2nd qtr
+ 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.8 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 −− 0.1 − 0.0          3rd qtr
Long-term lending  1, 9
+ 5.1 + 1.7 + 0.4 + 1.5 + 1.7 + 0.1 + 10.0 + 9.0 + 1.0 + 0.1 − + 0.3 + 0.1 2000          4th qtr
+ 4.6 + 1.5 + 0.7 + 1.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 2.8 + 2.9 − 0.1 − 0.0 −− 0.1 − 0.0 2001          1st qtr
+ 3.4 + 1.3 − 0.2 + 2.1 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 6.2 + 5.1 + 1.0 + 0.6 −− 0.1 − 0.0          2nd qtr
+ 3.4 + 1.6 + 0.3 + 0.9 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 9.2 + 8.4 + 0.8 + 0.5 − + 0.1 + 0.0          3rd qtr
credit institutions (other than building and loan associations); from 1999, loans, even in the form of instalment credit. —8Up to December 1998,
excluding banks (MFIs) and excluding finance leasing institutions; see also maturity or period of notice of more than 1 year to less than 4 years; fromfootnote 5. —5From 1999, including finance leasing institutions. —6From 1999, more than 1 year up to and including 5 years. —9Up to December
1999, including sole proprietors; up to December 1998, sole proprietors 1998, maturity or period of notice of 4 years and more; from 1999, of morewere assigned to enterprises. —7Excluding mortgage loans and housing than 5 years. 
33*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
IV. Banks
 
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
  
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 euro billion
Sight deposits  2 Time deposits  3, 4, 5    Memo item:
  
for more than 1 year  5 
of which: Subordin- Included
ated in timeliabilities deposits:
for up for (excluding liabilities
for less to and for for less 4 years Savings Bank Loans on negoti- arising
Deposits, on than up to than and deposits savings a trust able debt from
including
Period total  1 Total demand 1 month Total 1 year  4 Total 2 years 4 years more  6 bonds  7 basis  8 securities) repos  9 
Domestic non-banks, total 10 End of year or month *
 
1998 3,520.3 799.5 760.2 39.3 1,194.1 398.8 795.3 . 13.4 781.9 1,211.0 234.9 80.9 45.6 .1999 1,905.3 420.4 420.4 . 759.6 239.7 519.9 4.5 . . 614.7 110.7 42.1 25.6 0.42000 1,945.8 443.4 443.4 . 819.9 274.7 545.2 9.0 . . 573.5 109.0 42.1 25.9 −
2000         Nov. 1,912.9 438.7 438.7 . 802.8 260.1 542.7 8.5 . . 562.7 108.7 42.3 26.0 −
         Dec. 1,945.8 443.4 443.4 . 819.9 274.7 545.2 9.0 . . 573.5 109.0 42.1 25.9 −
2001         Jan. 1,921.8 431.1 431.1 . 812.0 263.6 548.4 10.2 . . 569.3 109.3 42.0 25.8 0.6
         Feb. 1,933.8 443.3 443.3 . 813.8 265.4 548.4 10.3 . . 567.2 109.5 42.5 25.7 1.0         Mar. 1,935.3 442.1 442.1 . 817.8 268.2 549.6 10.3 . . 565.6 109.8 42.6 25.8 0.1
         Apr. 1,938.3 451.9 451.9 . 813.8 263.8 550.0 10.5 . . 562.7 109.8 42.7 25.9 0.1
         May 1,944.0 454.9 454.9 . 819.2 266.3 552.9 10.5 . . 559.9 110.0 42.9 26.0 0.2         June 1,953.3 465.0 465.0 . 819.8 266.0 553.8 10.3 . . 558.8 109.8 42.7 25.9 0.1
         July 1,948.4 461.4 461.4 . 821.0 268.0 553.1 10.3 . . 556.4 109.7 42.7 25.9 0.0
         Aug. 1,953.2 463.5 463.5 . 825.0 271.8 553.2 10.0 . . 555.1 109.6 42.8 26.1 0.9         Sep. 1,971.0 480.2 480.2 . 826.1 272.1 554.0 10.2 . . 555.4 109.3 42.7 26.2 0.5
Changes *
1999 + 67.3 + 32.7 + 32.7 . + 48.4 + 18.6 + 29.8 . . . −4.5 −9.3 + 0.7 + 2.3 .
2000 + 41.3 + 22.3 + 22.3 . + 61.1 + 34.8 + 26.2 + 4.5 . . −40.5 −1.7 −0.0 + 0.3 −0.4
2000         Nov. + 13.1 + 21.8 + 21.8 . −6.0 −7.0 + 1.1 + 1.5 . . −3.5 + 0.8 −0.4 −0.1 −
         Dec. + 35.5 + 5.7 + 5.7 . + 18.6 + 14.6 + 4.0 + 0.5 . . + 10.8 + 0.4 −0.2 −0.1 −
2001         Jan. −24.0 −12.3 −12.3 . −7.9 −11.1 + 3.2 + 1.2 . . −4.1 + 0.3 −0.1 −0.1 + 0.6
         Feb. + 13.1 + 12.1 + 12.1 . + 2.9 + 1.8 + 1.1 + 0.1 . . −2.1 + 0.2 + 0.4 −0.0 + 0.4
         Mar. + 0.9 − 1.7 − 1.7 . + 4.0 + 2.8 + 1.3 + 0.0 . . −1.6 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 −0.9
         Apr. + 2.9 + 9.8 + 9.8 . −4.0 −4.4 + 0.4 + 0.2 . . −2.9 −0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 −0.0
         May + 5.0 + 2.2 + 2.2 . + 5.4 + 2.5 + 2.8 + 0.0 . . −2.8 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1
         June + 9.4 + 10.2 + 10.2 . + 0.6 −0.3 + 0.9 −0.2 . . −1.2 −0.1 −0.2 −0.1 −0.0
         July − 4.4 − 3.1 − 3.1 . + 1.2 + 1.9 −0.7 −0.0 . . −2.4 −0.1 + 0.1 −0.0 −0.1
         Aug. + 5.3 + 2.7 + 2.7 . + 4.0 + 3.9 + 0.1 −0.3 . . −1.2 −0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.8
         Sep. + 17.8 + 16.7 + 16.7 . + 1.2 + 0.3 + 0.8 + 0.1 . . + 0.2 −0.3 −0.2 + 0.1 −0.4
Domestic public authorities End of year or month *
1998 288.3 36.7 29.1 7.6 170.3 44.8 125.5 . 1.0 124.5 6.4 6.3 68.7 2.6 .
1999 124.4 14.7 14.7 . 104.4 42.0 62.4 0.4 . . 3.2 2.0 35.9 1.2 −
2000 149.1 16.6 16.6 . 127.7 62.1 65.5 1.2 . . 2.7 2.1 36.0 1.4 −
2000         Nov. 136.7 12.7 12.7 . 119.1 53.8 65.3 1.1 . . 2.7 2.1 36.1 1.4 −
         Dec. 149.1 16.6 16.6 . 127.7 62.1 65.5 1.2 . . 2.7 2.1 36.0 1.4 −
2001         Jan. 133.5 13.3 13.3 . 115.5 49.7 65.8 1.4 . . 2.6 2.1 36.0 1.4 −
         Feb. 134.8 15.6 15.6 . 114.5 49.0 65.5 1.4 . . 2.6 2.2 36.3 1.4 −
         Mar. 132.9 14.2 14.2 . 114.1 49.1 65.0 1.4 . . 2.5 2.2 36.3 1.4 −
         Apr. 132.1 15.2 15.2 . 112.3 46.9 65.4 1.6 . . 2.4 2.2 36.3 1.4 −
         May 134.5 14.3 14.3 . 115.6 50.0 65.6 1.6 . . 2.4 2.2 36.6 1.4 −
         June 136.3 17.7 17.7 . 114.1 48.9 65.2 1.4 . . 2.4 2.2 36.4 1.4 −
         July 133.6 15.6 15.6 . 113.5 48.3 65.1 1.1 . . 2.3 2.2 36.4 1.4 −
         Aug. 131.6 14.9 14.9 . 112.3 47.0 65.3 1.1 . . 2.3 2.1 36.6 1.4 −
         Sep. 132.5 16.3 16.3 . 111.8 47.3 64.4 1.1 . . 2.2 2.2 36.4 1.4 −
Changes *
1999 + 12.4 − 0.2 − 0.2 . + 13.7 + 15.3 −1.5 . . . −0.0 −1.2 + 0.7 −0.2 .
2000 + 24.8 + 1.9 + 1.9 . + 23.3 + 20.1 + 3.2 + 0.8 . . −0.5 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.3 −
2000         Nov. − 7.7 − 0.6 − 0.6 . −7.2 −7.6 + 0.4 + 0.0 . . −0.0 + 0.0 −0.4 + 0.0 −
         Dec. + 12.5 + 3.9 + 3.9 . + 8.6 + 8.3 + 0.3 + 0.1 . . + 0.0 + 0.0 −0.1 −0.0 −
2001         Jan. −15.6 − 3.4 − 3.4 . −12.2 −12.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 . . −0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 −0.1 −
         Feb. + 1.3 + 2.3 + 2.3 . −1.0 −0.7 −0.3 + 0.0 . . −0.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 −−
         Mar. − 1.9 − 1.4 − 1.4 . −0.4 + 0.1 −0.5 − .. −0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −
         Apr. − 0.8 + 1.0 + 1.0 . −1.7 −2.2 + 0.5 + 0.2 . . −0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −
         May + 2.4 − 0.9 − 0.9 . + 3.3 + 3.1 + 0.2 −0.0 . . −0.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.0 −
         June + 1.9 + 3.3 + 3.3 . −1.5 −1.1 −0.4 −0.2 . . −0.0 −0.0 −0.2 −0.0 −
         July − 2.8 − 2.0 − 2.0 . −0.7 −0.6 −0.1 −0.3 . . −0.1 −0.0 + 0.0 −0.1 −
         Aug. − 2.0 − 0.7 − 0.7 . −1.2 −1.4 + 0.2 −0.0 . . −0.0 −0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 −
         Sep. + 0.9 + 1.4 + 1.4 . −0.6 + 0.4 −0.9 −0.0 . . −0.0 + 0.0 −0.2 −−
*See table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from to December 1998, including time deposits for less than 1 month. —
the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as 3Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from registered
provisional. Subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following debt securities. —4Up to December 1998, excluding time deposits for less
Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Up to December 1998, than 1 month; see also footnote 2. —5Since the inclusion of building and
including deposits from loans on a trust basis; see also footnote 8. —2Up
34*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
IV. Banks
 
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont ’d)
  
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 euro billion
Sight deposits  2 Time deposits  3, 4, 5    Memo item:
  
for more than 1 year  5 
of which: Subordin- Included
ated in timeliabilities deposits:
for up for (excluding liabilities
for less to and for for less 4 years Savings Bank Loans on negoti- arising
Deposits, on than up to than and deposits savings a trust able debt from
including
Period total  1 Total demand 1 month Total 1 year  4 Total 2 years 4 years more  6 bonds  7 basis  8 securities) repos  9 
Domestic enterprises and individuals 10 End of year or month *
 
1998 3,231.9 762.8 731.2 31.7 1,023.8 354.0 669.8 . 12.4 657.4 1,204.6 228.6 12.1 43.0 .1999 1,781.0 405.7 405.7 . 655.2 197.6 457.6 4.1 . . 611.4 108.7 6.2 24.5 0.42000 1,796.7 426.8 426.8 . 692.2 212.6 479.6 7.8 . . 570.8 106.9 6.1 24.5 −
2000         Nov. 1,776.2 426.0 426.0 . 683.7 206.3 477.4 7.4 . . 560.0 106.5 6.2 24.6 −
         Dec. 1,796.7 426.8 426.8 . 692.2 212.6 479.6 7.8 . . 570.8 106.9 6.1 24.5 −
2001         Jan. 1,788.3 417.9 417.9 . 696.5 213.9 482.6 8.9 . . 566.7 107.2 6.0 24.4 0.6
         Feb. 1,799.0 427.7 427.7 . 699.3 216.4 482.9 8.9 . . 564.6 107.4 6.2 24.4 1.0         Mar. 1,802.3 427.8 427.8 . 703.7 219.1 484.7 8.9 . . 563.1 107.6 6.3 24.5 0.1
         Apr. 1,806.1 436.7 436.7 . 701.5 216.9 484.6 8.9 . . 560.3 107.6 6.3 24.5 0.1
         May 1,809.5 440.5 440.5 . 703.6 216.3 487.3 8.9 . . 557.6 107.8 6.3 24.6 0.2         June 1,817.0 447.3 447.3 . 705.7 217.1 488.6 8.9 . . 556.4 107.7 6.3 24.5 0.1
         July 1,814.9 445.7 445.7 . 707.5 219.6 487.9 9.2 . . 554.1 107.5 6.3 24.5 0.0
         Aug. 1,821.6 448.6 448.6 . 712.7 224.8 487.9 8.9 . . 552.9 107.4 6.2 24.7 0.9         Sep. 1,838.6 463.9 463.9 . 714.4 224.8 489.6 9.1 . . 553.1 107.2 6.2 24.9 0.5
Changes *
1999 + 54.9 + 32.8 + 32.8 . + 34.7 + 3.4 + 31.3 . . . −4.5 −8.1 + 0.0 + 2.4 .
2000 + 16.5 + 20.4 + 20.4 . + 37.8 + 14.8 + 23.1 + 3.7 . . −40.0 −1.8 −0.1 + 0.0 −0.4
2000         Nov. + 20.8 + 22.3 + 22.3 . + 1.2 + 0.5 + 0.7 + 1.5 . . −3.4 + 0.8 −0.0 −0.1 −
         Dec. + 23.0 + 1.8 + 1.8 . + 10.0 + 6.3 + 3.7 + 0.4 . . + 10.7 + 0.4 −0.1 −0.1 −
2001         Jan. −8.4 −8.9 −8.9 . + 4.3 + 1.3 + 3.0 + 1.0 . . −4.0 + 0.3 −0.1 −0.1 + 0.6
         Feb. + 11.8 + 9.7 + 9.7 . + 4.0 + 2.5 + 1.4 + 0.0 . . −2.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 −0.0 + 0.4
         Mar. + 2.8 −0.4 −0.4 . + 4.4 + 2.7 + 1.7 + 0.0 . . −1.5 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 −0.9
         Apr. + 3.7 + 8.8 + 8.8 . −2.2 −2.2 −0.1 −0.0 . . −2.8 −0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −0.0
         May + 2.7 + 3.1 + 3.1 . + 2.1 −0.6 + 2.7 + 0.0 . . −2.7 + 0.2 −0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1
         June + 7.6 + 6.8 + 6.8 . + 2.0 + 0.8 + 1.3 −0.0 . . −1.2 −0.1 + 0.0 −0.1 −0.0
         July −1.7 −1.1 −1.1 . + 1.9 + 2.5 −0.6 + 0.3 . . −2.3 −0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 −0.1
         Aug. + 7.2 + 3.4 + 3.4 . + 5.1 + 5.2 −0.1 −0.3 . . −1.2 −0.1 −0.0 + 0.2 + 0.8
         Sep. + 16.9 + 15.2 + 15.2 . + 1.7 −0.0 + 1.8 + 0.1 . . + 0.3 −0.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 −0.4
of which: Domestic enterprises 10, 11 End of year or month *
1998 1,108.1 292.1 267.8 24.3 748.9 128.9 620.0 . 5.9 614.0 11.1 44.3 11.8 24.1 .
1999 593.2 142.1 142.1 . 421.8 82.3 339.5 1.5 . . 5.5 23.7 6.1 13.7 0.42000 635.1 158.1 158.1 . 447.6 89.0 358.5 2.7 . . 5.2 24.2 5.9 14.1 −
2000         Nov. 623.8 149.0 149.0 . 445.4 85.8 359.5 2.7 . . 5.2 24.3 6.0 14.0 −
         Dec. 635.1 158.1 158.1 . 447.6 89.0 358.5 2.7 . . 5.2 24.2 5.9 14.1 −
2001         Jan. 628.1 151.3 151.3 . 447.4 86.1 361.3 3.4 . . 5.2 24.2 5.8 14.0 0.6
         Feb. 632.2 154.5 154.5 . 448.4 87.0 361.4 3.4 . . 5.1 24.2 6.0 14.0 1.0         Mar. 629.9 150.2 150.2 . 450.6 87.5 363.1 3.3 . . 5.1 24.0 6.1 14.1 0.1
         Apr. 631.8 155.4 155.4 . 447.5 84.2 363.3 3.2 . . 5.0 23.9 6.1 14.1 0.1
         May 633.6 155.4 155.4 . 449.2 82.9 366.3 3.2 . . 5.1 23.9 6.1 14.1 0.2         June 635.1 156.0 156.0 . 450.2 82.7 367.6 3.1 . . 5.0 23.8 6.1 14.1 0.1
         July 633.1 153.6 153.6 . 450.8 83.4 367.5 3.3 . . 5.0 23.7 6.1 14.1 0.0
         Aug. 637.2 154.6 154.6 . 453.8 86.4 367.4 2.9 . . 5.0 23.7 6.0 14.3 0.9         Sep. 645.9 162.3 162.3 . 455.2 86.3 368.9 3.0 . . 4.8 23.6 6.0 14.4 0.5
Changes *
1999 + 43.7 + 6.6 + 6.6 . + 36.0 + 7.5 + 28.5 . . . −0.2 + 1.2 + 0.0 + 1.3 .
2000 + 42.8 + 15.3 + 15.3 . + 27.3 + 6.7 + 20.5 + 1.2 . . −0.3 + 0.5 −0.1 + 0.4 −0.4
2000         Nov. + 7.8 + 7.1 + 7.1 . + 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.9 . . −0.1 + 0.2 −0.0 −0.1 −
         Dec. + 13.8 + 10.1 + 10.1 . + 3.7 + 3.2 + 0.5 + 0.0 . . + 0.1 −0.0 −0.1 + 0.1 −
2001         Jan. −7.1 −6.8 −6.8 . −0.1 −2.9 + 2.8 + 0.7 . . −0.1 −0.1 −0.1 −0.1 + 0.6
         Feb. + 5.2 + 3.2 + 3.2 . + 2.1 + 0.8 + 1.2 −0.1 . . −0.1 − + 0.1 −0.0 + 0.4
         Mar. −2.9 −4.8 −4.8 . + 2.2 + 0.5 + 1.6 −0.1 . . −0.0 −0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 −0.9
         Apr. + 1.9 + 5.1 + 5.1 . −3.1 −3.3 + 0.2 −0.1 . . −0.1 −0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 −0.0
         May + 1.1 −0.8 −0.8 . + 1.8 −1.2 + 3.0 −0.0 . . + 0.1 −0.0 −0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1
         June + 1.5 + 0.7 + 0.7 . + 1.0 −0.3 + 1.3 −0.1 . . −0.1 −0.1 + 0.0 −− 0.0
         July −1.5 −2.0 −2.0 . + 0.6 + 0.7 −0.1 + 0.3 . . −0.0 −0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 −0.1
         Aug. + 4.6 + 1.6 + 1.6 . + 3.0 + 3.1 −0.1 −0.4 . . + 0.0 −0.0 −0.0 + 0.2 + 0.8
         Sep. + 8.7 + 7.6 + 7.6 . + 1.4 −0.2 + 1.6 + 0.1 . . −0.2 −0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 −0.4
loan associations in January 1999, including deposits under savings and in time deposits (see also footnote 1). —9Collected separately from 1999
loan contracts (see table IV. 12). —6Excluding deposits under savings and only. —10Up to December 1998, including liabilities to domestic building
loan contracts (see also footnote 5). —7Including liabilities arising from and loan associations and money market funds. —11Up to the End 1998,
non-negotiable bearer debt securities. —8From 1999, no longer included including sole proprietors. 
35*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
IV. Banks
 
8. Deposits of domestic individuals and non-commercial organisations at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
   
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 euro billion
Sight deposits  2 Time deposits  4, 5, 6  
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits Domestic individuals Domestic individuals
of domesticindividuals Domestic Domesticand non- non-com- non-com-commercial mercial mercialorganisa- Selfem- Other organisa- Selfem- Other organisa-
Period Total Total ployed  
3 Employees tions Total Total ployed  3 Employees tions tions, total  1 individuals individuals
End of year or month *
 
1998 2,123.9 470.8 452.1 93.4 298.0 60.7 18.6 275.0 243.5 72.3 132.6 38.7 31.41999 1,187.8 263.5 254.6 50.2 170.3 34.1 9.0 233.4 216.6 35.2 161.6 19.9 16.82000 1,161.5 268.7 259.3 47.7 176.0 35.6 9.4 244.6 225.5 34.9 168.9 21.7 19.2
2001         Apr. 1,174.3 281.3 270.9 49.5 184.8 36.5 10.5 254.0 234.5 35.9 175.4 23.1 19.6
         May 1,175.9 285.2 272.9 49.8 186.5 36.7 12.2 254.4 236.0 36.3 176.4 23.3 18.4         June 1,181.9 291.3 279.2 49.0 192.3 37.9 12.1 255.4 236.5 36.3 176.8 23.4 18.9
         July 1,181.8 292.2 279.9 50.7 191.5 37.7 12.3 256.7 238.2 36.8 177.6 23.8 18.5
         Aug. 1,184.4 294.0 282.4 52.0 192.4 38.0 11.6 258.9 240.3 37.2 179.0 24.1 18.6         Sep. 1,192.7 301.6 290.0 51.1 199.0 39.9 11.6 259.2 240.4 37.0 178.8 24.6 18.8
Changes *
1999 + 11.2 + 26.2 + 25.9 + 3.7 + 18.8 + 3.4 + 0.3 −1.3 −1.0 −2.6 + 2.1 −0.5 −0.3
2000 −26.3 + 5.2 + 4.7 −2.5 + 5.7 + 1.5 + 0.4 + 10.6 + 8.2 −0.2 + 6.8 + 1.7 + 2.4
2001         Apr. + 1.8 + 3.7 + 4.1 + 2.1 + 1.8 + 0.2 −0.4 + 0.9 + 1.0 + 0.1 + 0.8 + 0.1 −0.2
         May + 1.6 + 3.9 + 2.1 + 0.3 + 1.6 + 0.2 + 1.8 + 0.3 + 1.5 + 0.4 + 0.9 + 0.2 −1.2
         June + 6.0 + 6.1 + 6.3 −0.7 + 5.8 + 1.2 −0.2 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.5
         July −0.2 + 0.9 + 0.7 + 1.6 −0.8 −0.2 + 0.2 + 1.3 + 1.7 + 0.5 + 0.8 + 0.4 −0.4
         Aug. + 2.7 + 1.8 + 2.5 + 1.3 + 0.9 + 0.3 −0.7 + 2.1 + 2.0 + 0.4 + 1.3 + 0.3 + 0.1
         Sep. + 8.3 + 7.6 + 7.6 −0.9 + 6.6 + 1.9 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.1 −0.2 −0.2 + 0.6 + 0.2
*See table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the including deposits arising from loans on a trust basis; see also footnote 9.—
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as 2Up to December 1998, including time deposits for less than 1 month. —
provisional. Subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following 3Up to the End 1998, including sole proprietors. —4Including subordi-
Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Up to December 1998, nated liabilities and liabilities arising from registered debt securities. —5UpDeutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
 
  
9. Deposits of domestic public authorities at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group 
*
 
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 euro billion
Deposits  1 
   
Federal Government and its special funds  2 Länder Governments
Time deposits  4 Time deposits  4 
Savings Memo Savings Memo
Domestic for up deposits item: for up deposits item:public to and for more and bank Loans on to and for more and bank Loans on
Sight including than savings a trust Sight including than savings a trust authorities,
Period total Total 1 year 1 year bonds  
5 basis  6 Total 1 year 1 year bonds  5 basis  6 deposits  3 deposits  3 
End of year or month *
 
1998 288.3 111.2 4.0 1.9 80.9 0.0 24.3 80.1 6.8 1.9 27.1 0.2 44.21999 124.4 45.9 1.0 4.6 40.3 0.0 12.7 21.0 2.8 4.2 14.0 0.1 23.12000 149.1 67.6 2.1 22.6 42.8 0.0 12.5 20.3 3.1 2.1 15.0 0.1 23.3
2001         Apr. 132.1 55.5 1.2 11.4 42.8 0.0 12.8 22.0 3.6 3.3 15.0 0.1 23.4
         May 134.5 55.1 1.0 11.2 42.9 0.0 13.0 20.6 2.7 2.7 15.1 0.1 23.5         June 136.3 55.2 2.9 9.5 42.7 0.0 12.8 23.3 3.7 4.5 15.0 0.1 23.4
         July 133.6 55.3 2.6 9.7 43.0 0.0 12.9 22.2 2.9 4.4 14.8 0.1 23.4
         Aug. 131.6 54.5 1.7 9.6 43.2 0.0 13.0 20.5 2.5 3.1 14.8 0.1 23.4         Sep. 132.5 54.0 1.0 10.6 42.4 0.0 12.8 23.3 4.8 3.7 14.7 0.1 23.4
Changes *
1999 + 12.4 + 1.6 −0.9 + 3.5 −1.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 2.6 −0.4 + 3.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.5
2000 + 24.8 + 21.6 + 1.2 + 18.0 + 2.5 −0.0 −0.2 + 0.5 + 0.3 −0.9 + 1.1 + 0.0 + 0.2
2001         Apr. −0.8 −0.7 −0.2 −0.9 + 0.4 −− 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 −0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0
         May + 2.4 −0.4 −0.2 −0.3 + 0.1 − + 0.2 −1.3 −0.9 −0.6 + 0.1 −0.0 + 0.1
         June + 1.9 + 0.1 + 1.9 −1.6 −0.2 −− 0.2 + 2.7 + 1.0 + 1.7 −0.1 + 0.0 −0.1
         July −2.8 + 0.1 −0.3 + 0.2 + 0.2 −0.0 + 0.1 −1.1 −0.8 −0.1 −0.2 + 0.0 −0.0
         Aug. −2.0 −0.8 −1.0 −0.1 + 0.3 − + 0.1 −1.7 −0.4 −1.3 −0.0 −0.0 + 0.0
         Sep. + 0.9 −0.5 −0.6 + 1.0 −0.9 −− 0.2 + 2.8 + 2.3 + 0.6 −0.1 + 0.0 −0.0
*See table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to
its successor organisations and of the Federal Railways, east German be regarded as provisional. Subsequent alterations, which will appear in theRailways and Federal Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Up to December
Deutsche Post AG and Deutsche Telekom AG, and of publicly-owned 1998, including deposits arising from loans on a trust basis; see alsoenterprises, which are included in ”Enterprises ”. Statistical breaks have been footnote 6. —2Federal Railways Fund, Indemnification Fund, Redemption
36*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
IV. Banks
     
 
 Savings deposits  7  Memo item:
 
by maturity
 more than 1 year  6 
Included Subordinated
 of which: Domestic liabilities in time
non-com- (excluding deposits:
up to and up to and mercial Bank Loans on negotiable liabilitiesincluding including less than 4 years Domestic organisa- savings a trust debt arising1 year  
5 Total 2 years 4 years and more Total tions bonds  8 basis  9   Period individuals securities)  10 from repos  11 
End of year or month *
 
225.1 49.9 . 6.5 43.4 1,193.5 1,174.1 19.4 184.2 0.4 18.9 . 1998115.4 118.0 2.5 . . 605.9 595.5 10.4 85.0 0.2 10.8 −1999
123.6 121.1 5.1 . . 565.5 555.8 9.7 82.7 0.2 10.4 −2000
132.7 121.3 5.7 . . 555.3 545.7 9.5 83.7 0.2 10.4 0.0 2001          Apr.
133.4 121.0 5.8 . . 552.5 543.0 9.5 83.8 0.2 10.5 0.0          May134.4 121.0 5.8 . . 551.3 541.9 9.5 83.8 0.2 10.4 −         June
136.3 120.5 5.9 . . 549.1 539.6 9.4 83.8 0.2 10.4 −         July
138.4 120.5 6.0 . . 547.8 538.4 9.4 83.7 0.2 10.4 −         Aug.
138.5 120.7 6.1 . . 548.4 539.0 9.3 83.5 0.2 10.4 −         Sep.
Changes *
− 4.1 + 2.8 . . . − 4.3 − 4.8 + 0.5 −9.3 −0.0 + 1.1 . 1999
+ 8.0 + 2.5 + 2.5 . . −39.7 −39.0 −0.7 −2.3 + 0.0 −0.4 −2000
+ 1.1 −0.3 + 0.1 . . − 2.8 − 2.7 −0.0 + 0.1 − + 0.0 −2001         Apr.
+ 0.7 −0.3 + 0.0 . . − 2.8 − 2.8 −0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 −         May
+ 1.1 −0.0 + 0.1 . . − 1.1 − 1.1 −0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −0.1 −0.0          June
+ 1.8 −0.5 + 0.1 . . − 2.3 − 2.3 −0.0 −0.0 + 0.0 −0.0 −         July
+ 2.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 . . − 1.2 − 1.2 −0.0 −0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 −         Aug.
+ 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 . . + 0.5 + 0.6 −0.1 −0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 −         Sep.
to December 1998, excluding time deposits for less than 1 month; see also footnote 6). —8Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
footnote 2. —6Since the inclusion of building and loan associations in securities. —9From 1999, no longer included in time deposits (see also
January 1999, including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see table footnote 1) —10Included in time deposits. —11Collected separately from
IV. 12). —7Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also 1999 only. Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
 
   
 
 
 
Local authorities and local authority associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  4, 7 Time deposits  4 
Savings Memo Savings Memo
for up deposits item: for up deposits item:to and for more and bank Loans on to and for more and bank Loans on
Sight including than savings a trust Sight including than savings a trust
Total 1 year 1 year bonds  
5, 8 basis  6 Total 1 year 1 year bonds  5 basis  6   Period deposits  3 deposits  3 
End of year or month *
 
45.3 16.5 19.8 2.4 6.6 0.1 51.7 9.3 21.2 15.2 5.8 0.2 199828.5 8.2 14.4 2.2 3.7 0.1 28.9 2.8 18.9 5.8 1.4 0.1 199930.2 8.9 15.7 2.0 3.6 0.1 31.1 2.5 21.7 5.7 1.2 0.1 2000
27.3 8.1 13.9 1.9 3.3 0.1 27.4 2.3 18.3 5.8 1.1 0.1 2001          Apr.
29.4 8.4 15.8 1.9 3.3 0.1 29.3 2.2 20.3 5.8 1.1 0.1          May28.3 8.5 14.7 1.8 3.3 0.1 29.6 2.5 20.3 5.7 1.1 0.1          June
27.5 8.1 14.3 1.8 3.2 0.1 28.6 2.0 19.9 5.6 1.1 0.1          July
29.6 8.6 16.0 1.8 3.2 0.1 27.1 2.1 18.3 5.5 1.1 0.1          Aug.28.2 8.0 15.2 1.9 3.2 0.1 27.0 2.5 17.9 5.5 1.1 0.1          Sep.
Changes *
+ 4.6 + 0.7 + 3.1 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 3.5 + 0.5 + 5.6 −1.0 −1.6 −0.0 1999
+ 1.7 + 0.8 + 1.3 −0.2 −0.2 + 0.0 + 1.0 −0.3 + 1.7 −0.1 −0.2 −0.0 2000
−0.1 + 0.6 −0.7 −0.1 −0.0 + 0.0 −0.3 + 0.4 −0.8 + 0.1 −0.0 −2001         Apr.
+ 2.2 + 0.3 + 1.9 −0.0 −0.0 − + 1.9 −0.1 + 2.0 + 0.0 −0.0 −         May
−1.1 + 0.1 −1.2 −0.0 −0.0 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.3 −0.0 −0.1 + 0.0 −0.0          June
−0.8 −0.4 −0.4 −0.0 −0.1 + 0.0 −1.0 −0.5 −0.3 −0.1 −0.0 −         July
+ 2.1 + 0.5 + 1.7 −0.0 −0.0 + 0.0 −1.5 + 0.1 −1.6 −0.0 + 0.0 −         Aug.
−1.4 −0.6 −0.8 + 0.1 −0.0 −− 0.0 + 0.4 −0.4 −0.0 + 0.0 −         Sep.
Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special Fund, ”German Unity ”Fund, longer included in time deposits (see also footnote 1) —7Since the inclusion
Equalisation of Burdens Fund. —3Up to December 1998, including time of building and loan associations in January 1999, including deposits under
deposits for less than 1 month. —4Up to December 1998, excluding time savings and loan contracts. —8Excluding deposits under savings and loan
deposits for less than 1 month; see also footnote 3. —5Including liabilities contracts (see also footnote 7). 
arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. —6From 1999, no
37*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
IV. Banks
 
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs) *
  
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 euro billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at three months ’ Memo at over three months ’
notice notice item: of which:
Interest With
of which: of which: of which: credited maturitiesSpecial Special At three on of moresavings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months ’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years  
4 facilities  2 facilities  2 non-banks
End of year or month *
 
1998 1,234.2 1,211.0 971.4 582.8 239.6 189.6 23.2 17.3 39.5 243.9 234.9 211.1 9.11999 626.6 614.7 504.4 338.8 110.2 88.3 11.9 9.1 20.0 116.4 110.7 101.8 5.72000 585.2 573.5 450.5 309.0 123.0 104.4 11.7 8.3 19.3 115.9 109.0 94.4 6.8
2001         May 571.6 559.9 440.4 307.7 119.5 104.0 11.6 8.2 0.5 116.7 110.0 91.7 6.8
         June 570.4 558.8 440.1 307.7 118.6 103.2 11.6 8.2 0.4 116.6 109.8 91.2 6.8
         July 568.0 556.4 439.0 308.0 117.4 101.9 11.6 8.2 0.6 116.5 109.7 90.7 6.8
         Aug. 566.7 555.1 439.0 309.2 116.1 100.7 11.6 8.3 0.5 116.4 109.6 90.3 6.8         Sep. 567.0 555.4 440.0 310.6 115.4 99.9 11.6 8.3 0.5 116.1 109.3 90.0 6.8
Changes *
1999 −4.4 −4.5 + 7.3 + 14.6 −11.8 −8.4 + 0.1 + 0.3 . −8.2 −9.3 −8.9 + 1.1
2000 −40.7 −40.5 −53.6 −31.1 + 13.1 + 15.8 −0.2 −0.8 . −0.5 −1.7 −7.4 + 1.1
2001         May −2.8 −2.8 −1.7 + 0.1 −1.1 −1.1 −0.0 −0.0 . + 0.2 + 0.2 −0.3 + 0.0
         June −1.2 −1.2 −0.3 + 0.0 −0.9 −0.8 −0.0 + 0.0 . −0.1 −0.1 −0.5 + 0.0
         July −2.4 −2.4 −1.1 + 0.3 −1.2 −1.3 −0.0 + 0.0 . −0.1 −0.1 −0.5 + 0.0
         Aug. −1.2 −1.2 + 0.0 + 1.2 −1.2 −1.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 . −0.1 −0.1 −0.4 + 0.0
         Sep. + 0.3 + 0.2 + 1.0 + 1.0 −0.8 −0.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 . −0.3 −0.3 −0.3 + 0.0
*See table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the building and loan associations, which are classified as time deposits. —
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as 2Savings deposits bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the minimum or
provisional. Subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following basic rate of interest. —3Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable
Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Other than deposits with bearer debt securities. — 4 Up to December 1998, of 4 years and more. 
 
   
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany 
*
 
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 eurobillion
Non-negotiable bearer debt securities
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper and money market paper  7 
of which: of which
with maturities of Subordinated
with maturities of
Certifi- non-
Floating- Zero- Foreign cates up to and up to and negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of including over over including over over debt debt
Period Total notes  1 deposit 1 year Total 1 year bonds  1, 2 bonds  3, 4 2 years  5 2 years  5 4 years  6 4 years  6 securities securities
End of year or month *)
 
1998 2,200.4 289.2 10.6 204.3 14.3 47.2 2,147.0 1,787.7 4.7 1.0 3.6 1.5 46.6 2.91999 1,310.3 208.2 14.7 98.7 13.1 73.6 1,189.8 . 2.6 0.5 1.3 . 32.7 2.52000 1,412.5 283.1 22.1 128.2 19.7 87.9 1,261.9 . 2.7 0.4 1.3 . 38.3 2.4
2001         May 1,457.4 310.8 21.1 133.1 18.7 71.1 1,302.9 . 2.8 0.5 1.3 . 42.1 2.5
         June 1,459.3 318.2 19.2 132.1 16.6 64.2 1,304.2 . 2.8 0.5 1.3 . 42.1 2.5
         July 1,467.9 325.7 19.4 130.9 17.1 62.0 1,303.5 . 2.8 0.4 1.2 . 42.3 2.4
         Aug. 1,462.8 325.8 19.7 128.2 17.7 58.5 1,298.4 . 2.7 0.4 1.2 . 42.5 2.4         Sep. 1,466.8 327.8 18.7 129.6 19.2 57.1 1,299.8 . 2.6 0.4 1.2 . 42.1 2.4
Changes *
1999 + 183.5 + 56.2 + 9.3 + 20.0 + 5.8 + 49.5 + 96.4 . + 0.3 + 0.0 −0.5 . + 8.8 + 1.0
2000 + 102.0 + 65.5 + 7.0 + 26.6 + 6.4 + 14.1 + 72.1 . + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 . + 5.6 −0.1
2001         May + 5.3 + 3.5 + 1.0 + 3.9 −0.2 −3.9 + 3.0 . + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 . + 1.8 + 0.1
         June + 1.9 + 7.4 −1.9 −1.0 −2.0 −6.9 + 1.3 . −0.0 −0.0 −0.0 . + 0.0 −0.0
         July + 8.6 + 7.5 + 0.2 −1.2 + 0.5 −2.2 − 0.7 . −0.0 −0.0 −0.0 . + 0.2 −0.0
         Aug. − 5.6 + 0.1 + 0.3 −2.7 + 0.6 −3.6 − 5.1 . −0.0 −0.0 + 0.0 . + 0.2 −0.0
         Sep. + 4.0 + 2.0 −1.0 + 1.3 + 1.5 −1.4 + 1.4 . −0.1 −0.0 −0.0 . −0.4 + 0.0
*See table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the 3Including floating-rate notes and zero-coupon bonds denominated in
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as foreign currencies. —4From 1999, bonds denominated in non-euro-area
provisional. Subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following currencies. —5Up to December 1998, 2 years and more. —6From 1999, no
Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Including debt securities longer collected. —7Non-negotiable bearer debt securities are classified
denominated in foreign currencies. —2Issue value when floated. — among bank savings bonds; see also table IV. 10, footnote 2. 
38*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
IV.  Banks
  
12.  Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *
  Interim statements
  
Euro billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs)  6 banks (non-MFIs)
Building loans Secur- Memo
item: ities (in-
Bal- cluding Bearer Newances Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- and under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber loans Bank savings Interim and savings savings Sight ities ing pub- enteredof Balance (except debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan and time out- lished into in
End of year sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- deposits stand- year or associ- reserves)
or month ations total loans  
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans  4 tracts deposits tracts 7 ing 8 month  9 loans)  1 paper)  5 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2000 31 153.6 23.0 0.2 11.3 43.5 51.2 6.5 9.2 0.8 27.6 95.6 2.5 5.7 6.9 73.0
2001         July 30 155.3 22.4 0.2 12.0 43.6 52.5 7.0 9.7 0.6 29.1 93.7 2.8 6.8 7.7 6.0
         Aug. 30 155.0 22.3 0.2 11.6 43.3 52.9 7.0 9.3 0.6 28.6 93.5 2.9 6.9 7.7 5.7         Sep. 29 155.6 22.6 0.2 11.4 43.3 53.3 7.0 9.4 0.5 28.7 93.6 3.0 6.8 7.5 5.7
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2001         July 19 111.9 18.5 0.1 6.7 28.6 36.6 6.4 7.6 0.4 21.6 63.9 2.7 6.8 4.8 3.9
         Aug. 19 111.6 18.4 0.1 6.4 28.4 36.9 6.5 7.2 0.4 21.0 63.8 2.8 6.9 4.8 3.7         Sep. 18 111.9 18.5 0.1 6.2 28.4 37.3 6.5 7.3 0.4 21.1 63.8 3.0 6.8 4.6 3.7
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2001         July 11 43.4 3.9 0.1 5.3 15.0 15.9 0.5 2.1 0.2 7.5 29.8 0.0 − 2.9 2.0
         Aug. 11 43.5 3.9 0.1 5.2 14.9 16.0 0.5 2.1 0.2 7.6 29.8 0.0 − 2.9 2.0
         Sep. 11 43.7 4.2 0.1 5.2 14.9 16.0 0.5 2.1 0.2 7.6 29.8 0.0 − 2.9 2.0
Trends in building and loan association business
  
Euro billion
Changes in deposits Capital promised Capital paid out Outpayment Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts  10 Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans  11 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings andments loan contracts Newly loan contracts  
10 
Amounts Interest of granted
credited deposits interim paid into of which: of which:
savings on under Applied Applied and ofaccounts deposits bridging which: of Memo
cancelled to settle- to settle-
under under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which: item:savings savings and which: interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housingand loan and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonusescon- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during received
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter
13 tions  12 tracts  10 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2000 22.0 2.8 4.9 47.7 33.6 45.8 20.0 4.6 10.8 3.4 14.9 10.5 7.6 14.3 11.8 0.5
2001         July 1.7 0.0 0.4 4.5 3.3 4.4 2.0 0.5 1.1 0.4 1.3 10.8 7.9 1.2 0.0
         Aug. 1.6 0.0 0.4 3.5 2.4 3.4 1.4 0.3 0.8 0.2 1.2 10.7 7.9 1.2 0.0         Sep. 1.7 0.0 0.3 3.2 2.2 3.2 1.3 0.3 0.8 0.2 1.1 10.6 7.8 1.2 . 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2001         July 1.2 0.0 0.3 3.3 2.3 3.2 1.5 0.4 0.7 0.3 1.0 6.4 4.0 0.9 0.0
         Aug. 1.1 0.0 0.3 2.5 1.6 2.4 1.0 0.2 0.5 0.1 0.9 6.4 4.1 0.8 0.0         Sep. 1.1 0.0 0.2 2.3 1.5 2.3 0.9 0.2 0.5 0.2 0.8 6.4 4.1 0.8 . 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2001         July 0.5 0.0 0.1 1.2 1.0 1.2 0.5 0.1 0.4 0.1 0.3 4.4 3.9 0.4 0.0
         Aug. 0.5 0.0 0.1 1.0 0.8 1.0 0.4 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.3 4.3 3.8 0.4 0.0         Sep. 0.5 0.0 0.1 0.9 0.7 0.9 0.4 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.2 4.2 3.8 0.4 . 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of the foreign branches. deposits. —8Including participation rights capital; from December 1993
From August 1990 including assets and liabilities and/or transactions with including fund for general banking risks. —9Total amount covered by the
building and loan association savers in the former GDR. The figures for the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for which the contract fee ha s
latest date are always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent alterations, been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted count as new contracts .—
which will appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially 10For outpayments of deposits under savings and loan contracts arising
marked. —1Including postal giro account balances, claims on building and from the allocation of contracts see "Capital paid out". —11Including
loan associations, claims arising from registered debt securities and central housing bonuses credited. —12Only allocations accepted by the
bank balances. —2Loans under savings and loan contracts and interim and beneficiaries; including allocations applied to settlement of interim and
bridging loans. —3Including money market paper and small amounts of bridging loans. —13The amounts already credited to the accounts of savers
other securities issued by banks. —4Up to December 1998 including loans or borrowers are also included in "Amounts paid into savings accounts
on a trust basis. —5Including equalisation claims. —6Including liabilities under savings and loan contracts" and "Interest and repayments received
to building and loan associations. —7Including small amounts of savings on building loans". 
39*IV.  Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
IV.  Banks
  
13. Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
    
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 euro billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
Loans and advances Balances  and loans  and advances
German   not evidenced by certificates  3 not evidenced  by certificates    3 
banks(MFIs)   to German
with non-banks
foreign foreignbranches Money of which Money
branches  1 
and/or and/or market enter- to marketforeign foreign balance paper, prises foreign paper,subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- and indi- non- secur- Other
Period diaries diaries total  
2 Total Total banks  4 banks Total Total Total viduals banks ities  5 assets  7 ities 5,  6 
Foreign  branches End of year or month *
  
1998 68 183 2,195.3 1,230.0 1,069.2 279.2 789.9 160.8 875.7 624.7 66.1 37.0 558.6 251.0 89.61999 66 187 1,311.9 714.6 614.2 177.0 437.2 100.4 533.9 386.2 26.6 20.8 359.6 147.7 63.42000 71 212 1,558.2 829.4 722.1 211.0 511.1 107.3 656.7 501.5 21.7 17.1 479.9 155.2 72.0
2000         Dec. 71 212 1,558.2 829.4 722.1 211.0 511.1 107.3 656.7 501.5 21.7 17.1 479.9 155.2 72.0
2001         Jan. 70 213 1,581.6 841.7 726.9 215.4 511.5 114.8 678.2 514.4 21.3 17.0 493.1 163.8 61.6
         Feb. 70 213 1,625.5 867.5 750.8 226.9 523.8 116.8 690.5 521.3 21.2 17.3 500.1 169.2 67.5         Mar. 71 217 1,662.9 916.0 807.9 277.6 530.2 108.1 699.9 549.8 20.9 17.2 528.9 150.1 47.0
         Apr. 71 218 1,724.7 930.9 815.2 269.7 545.5 115.7 731.0 559.2 20.8 16.8 538.4 171.8 62.8
         May 71 220 1,799.8 957.9 841.1 268.1 572.9 116.9 772.5 591.6 21.1 17.1 570.6 180.9 69.4         June 71 220 1,723.2 921.7 806.7 258.4 548.3 115.0 751.7 576.2 20.6 17.2 555.6 175.5 49.8
         July 70 218 1,699.2 910.0 802.6 228.9 573.7 107.5 725.4 549.5 19.7 16.7 529.8 175.9 63.8
         Aug. 70 217 1,698.1 928.6 823.7 234.1 589.6 104.9 698.3 522.3 19.1 16.2 503.2 176.0 71.2
Changes *
1999 −2 + 4 + 73.2 + 5.3 + 7.7 + 18.1 −10.3 −2.5 + 52.2 + 33.5 −8.1 + 1.0 + 41.6 + 18.8 + 15.6
2000 + 5 + 25 +214.0 + 97.0 + 92.3 + 33.7 + 58.6 + 4.7 +108.3 +104.0 −5.3 −4.1 +109.4 + 4.3 + 8.7
2000         Dec. −1 −− 9.3 −4.3 −4.6 −1.7 −2.8 + 0.3 −11.0 + 0.2 −1.1 −0.7 + 1.4 −11.2 + 6.0
2001         Jan. −1 + 1 + 26.5 + 13.4 + 5.7 + 4.5 + 1.3 + 7.7 + 23.4 + 14.5 −0.3 −0.0 + 14.8 + 8.9 −10.2
         Feb. −− + 42.3 + 24.9 + 23.0 + 11.5 + 11.5 + 1.8 + 11.6 + 6.4 −0.1 + 0.3 + 6.5 + 5.1 + 5.9
         Mar. + 1 + 4 + 4.5 + 32.0 + 43.0 + 50.3 −7.4 −11.0 −6.5 + 16.0 −0.5 −0.3 + 16.5 −22.5 −21.0
         Apr. − + 1 + 63.9 + 16.1 + 8.4 −7.9 + 16.3 + 7.7 + 32.0 + 10.1 −0.0 −0.4 + 10.2 + 21.9 + 15.8
         May − + 2 + 22.6 + 3.0 + 4.4 −2.3 + 6.7 −1.5 + 13.9 + 11.1 −0.1 −0.1 + 11.2 + 2.8 + 5.8
         June −− − 68.6 −33.1 −31.4 −9.6 −21.9 −1.6 −16.3 −12.0 −0.4 + 0.2 −11.6 −4.2 −19.3
         July −1 −2 + 7.4 + 2.9 + 9.0 −29.1 + 38.1 −6.1 −9.9 −13.9 −0.7 −0.3 −13.2 + 4.0 + 14.4
         Aug. −− 1 + 35.3 + 36.5 + 37.2 + 5.5 + 31.7 −0.7 −9.4 −13.2 −0.5 −0.4 −12.7 + 3.8 + 8.2
  
  
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month *
  
1998 37 137 830.8 469.0 373.1 160.1 213.0 95.9 311.0 237.5 71.4 62.3 166.1 73.5 50.81999 39 161 530.6 242.0 178.6 71.1 107.5 63.4 234.6 174.2 41.5 37.5 132.7 60.4 53.92000 40 170 580.5 248.1 183.8 82.2 101.6 64.3 263.5 203.4 45.4 42.3 158.0 60.1 69.0
2000         Dec. 40 170 580.5 248.1 183.8 82.2 101.6 64.3 263.5 203.4 45.4 42.3 158.0 60.1 69.0
2001         Jan. 41 170 580.6 259.0 194.1 82.1 112.1 64.8 259.2 195.1 44.4 40.7 150.7 64.1 62.5
         Feb. 41 171 579.0 252.9 186.0 80.2 105.8 66.9 262.3 197.1 44.1 40.8 153.1 65.1 63.8         Mar. 41 203 763.0 311.2 236.6 87.5 149.1 74.5 363.7 277.1 45.4 42.0 231.7 86.6 88.1
         Apr. 42 206 756.2 306.3 231.5 86.6 145.0 74.8 362.0 273.8 44.8 41.5 229.0 88.2 87.9
         May 43 208 773.3 310.7 235.4 85.2 150.3 75.3 372.8 281.0 46.3 42.7 234.7 91.8 89.7         June 43 208 785.3 322.2 247.0 91.9 155.1 75.2 375.3 288.2 48.4 45.3 239.7 87.2 87.7
         July 43 206 778.2 330.0 253.5 95.1 158.4 76.5 362.5 275.4 48.0 44.5 227.4 87.1 85.7
         Aug. 44 207 751.9 317.2 239.7 81.1 158.7 77.4 350.8 265.6 48.1 43.7 217.5 85.2 83.9
Changes *
1999 + 2 + 24 + 86.6 + 5.2 −5.0 −0.6 −4.4 + 10.3 + 69.9 + 56.0 + 5.1 + 5.8 + 50.9 + 13.8 + 11.5
2000 + 1 + 9 + 38.4 + 2.1 + 2.4 + 11.1 −8.7 −0.3 + 21.8 + 21.8 + 3.9 + 4.8 + 17.9 + 0.0 + 14.5
2000         Dec. −1 − + 3.4 −7.2 −8.9 + 8.1 −17.0 + 1.7 + 10.9 + 12.9 + 1.2 + 1.3 + 11.7 −2.0 −0.3
2001         Jan. + 1 − + 0.8 + 11.3 + 10.6 −0.2 + 10.8 + 0.7 −4.1 −8.2 −1.0 −1.7 −7.2 + 4.1 −6.4
         Feb. − +1 −2.0 −6.2 −8.2 −1.9 −6.3 + 2.0 + 2.9 + 1.9 −0.3 + 0.1 + 2.2 + 1.1 + 1.3
         Mar. − + 32 +176.5 + 54.9 + 48.4 + 7.3 + 41.2 + 6.5 + 98.0 + 76.3 + 1.3 + 1.2 + 75.0 + 21.7 + 23.5
         Apr. + 1 + 3 −6.2 −4.6 −4.9 −0.9 −4.0 + 0.3 −1.4 −2.9 −0.5 −0.5 −2.4 + 1.5 −0.2
         May + 1 + 2 + 6.6 −0.1 + 1.4 −1.4 + 2.8 −1.5 + 5.8 + 3.2 + 1.5 + 1.1 + 1.6 + 2.7 + 0.9
         June −− + 13.3 + 12.0 + 11.8 + 6.7 + 5.1 + 0.2 + 3.2 + 7.4 + 2.1 + 2.6 + 5.3 −4.1 −2.0
         July −− 2 + 0.4 + 11.3 + 8.7 + 3.2 + 5.5 + 2.6 −9.4 −9.7 −0.4 −0.8 −9.2 + 0.3 −1.5
         Aug. + 1 + 1 −17.2 −8.2 −10.6 −14.0 + 3.4 + 2.4 −8.1 −6.2 + 0.1 −0.8 −6.3 −1.9 −0.9
*From March 2000, including the foreign branches of building and loan 1Several branches in a given country of domicile are regarded as a single
associations. In this table “foreign “also includes the country of domicile of branch. —2Up to December 1998, volume of business (balance sheet total
the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical alterations have plus endorsement liabilities arising from rediscounted bills and bil ls sent for
been eliminated from the changes. (Breaks owing to changes in the range collection from the banks ’portfolios prior to maturity); for foreign
of reporting institutions have not been eliminated from the flow figures in subsidiaries, volume of business even after 1998. —3For foreign branches:
the case of the foreign subsidiaries). The figures for the latest date are up to December 1998, including bill-based lending (bill holdings plusalways to be regarded as provisional; subsequent alterations, which will endorsement liabilities and bills sent for collection from the banks ’
appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. — portfolios prior to maturity); from 1999, including bill holdings; up to
40*IV.  Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
IV.  Banks
        
  
Deposits  8 
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  9 
Money
Short-term market Medium  and long-term
paper
of which of which and debtenter- enter- Working
securities
out- capital Other prises  and prises  and
German foreign indi- indi- Foreign standing and own liabilities
Total Total banks Total Total Total viduals Total viduals 10 funds 11   Period banks  4 non-banks
End of year or month * Foreign  branches
  
1,756.4 1,181.3 259.6 921.7 575.1 173.6 171.1 145.9 2.5 2.2 401.5 270.0 20.0 148.8 1998
988.6 671.8 148.3 523.6 316.7 60.7 57.9 52.8 2.8 2.7 256.0 234.4 14.0 75.0 1999
1,186.1 799.5 158.2 641.4 386.5 60.9 58.4 51.6 2.5 2.4 325.7 272.3 22.0 77.9 2000
1,186.1 799.5 158.2 641.4 386.5 60.9 58.4 51.6 2.5 2.4 325.7 272.3 22.0 77.9 2000          Dec.
1,209.0 805.3 149.5 655.8 403.7 58.7 56.3 53.2 2.5 2.4 345.0 282.6 21.9 68.1 2001          Jan.
1,270.1 822.4 160.4 662.1 447.7 61.1 58.6 55.8 2.5 2.4 386.6 267.2 22.0 66.3          Feb.1,284.0 833.7 165.7 668.0 450.2 58.2 55.6 52.5 2.6 2.5 392.0 289.4 22.1 67.4          Mar.
1,335.5 899.9 165.1 734.9 435.6 59.2 56.5 53.7 2.7 2.5 376.4 294.7 23.2 71.4          Apr.
1,389.3 923.8 166.1 757.7 465.5 55.9 53.2 50.1 2.7 2.6 409.6 312.7 23.7 74.1          May1,333.8 909.9 176.3 733.6 423.9 54.7 52.0 49.2 2.7 2.5 369.2 299.3 23.7 66.3          June
1,318.1 890.0 151.8 738.2 428.1 57.6 55.0 52.3 2.7 2.5 370.5 299.0 23.5 58.6          July
1,318.8 904.4 165.6 738.8 414.4 57.9 55.2 52.1 2.7 2.5 356.5 291.3 23.8 64.3          Aug.
Changes *
− 2.8 + 5.6 + 13.4 −7.8 −8.4 −28.6 −30.2 −22.4 + 1.6 + 1.6 + 20.2 + 96.3 + 3.7 −24.1 1999
+ 170.8 +108.8 + 9.1 + 99.6 + 62.0 −0.0 + 0.4 −1.3 −0.4 −0.4 + 62.0 + 37.9 + 8.0 −2.7 2000
−27.5 + 0.1 −2.0 + 2.2 −27.6 + 1.1 + 2.0 −1.3 −0.9 −0.8 −28.8 −9.5 + 0.0 + 27.6 2000          Dec.
+ 25.5 + 7.1 −8.6 + 15.6 + 18.4 −2.1 −2.1 + 1.7 −0.0 −0.0 + 20.5 + 10.3 −0.1 −9.2 2001          Jan.
+ 59.5 + 16.0 + 10.8 + 5.2 + 43.5 + 2.3 + 2.3 + 2.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 41.2 −15.4 + 0.1 −1.9          Feb.
−15.0 −7.2 + 4.8 −12.0 −7.8 −3.0 −3.1 −3.4 + 0.1 + 0.1 −4.8 + 22.3 + 0.1 −2.9          Mar.
+ 53.2 + 67.4 −0.6 + 68.0 −14.2 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 −15.1 + 5.3 + 1.1 + 4.4          Apr.
+ 9.0 −6.1 + 0.3 −6.4 + 15.1 −3.4 −3.4 −3.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 18.5 + 18.0 + 0.5 −5.0          May
−49.0 −9.6 + 10.3 −19.9 −39.5 −1.2 −1.2 −0.8 −0.0 −0.0 −38.2 −13.4 + 0.1 −6.3          June
+ 10.4 −2.3 −24.2 + 21.8 + 12.7 + 3.0 + 3.0 + 3.2 −0.0 −0.0 + 9.7 −0.3 −0.3 −2.4          July
+ 31.8 + 35.3 + 14.2 + 21.1 −3.5 + 0.4 + 0.4 −0.1 −0.0 −0.0 −3.9 −7.7 + 0.3 + 10.9          Aug.
  
  
End of year or month * Foreign  subsidiaries
  
638.7 450.5 85.5 365.0 188.2 50.2 44.2 41.6 6.0 5.9 138.1 87.7 33.8 70.6 1998383.4 250.7 56.9 193.8 132.7 21.6 19.8 18.3 1.7 1.7 111.1 51.5 29.0 66.7 1999414.6 267.9 61.0 207.0 146.7 32.5 29.2 21.9 3.2 3.2 114.2 56.3 34.7 74.9 2000
414.6 267.9 61.0 207.0 146.7 32.5 29.2 21.9 3.2 3.2 114.2 56.3 34.7 74.9 2000          Dec.
415.6 278.0 59.3 218.7 137.6 27.3 23.5 21.7 3.8 3.8 110.3 58.7 36.1 70.2 2001          Jan.
415.2 273.2 55.0 218.2 142.0 26.3 22.5 19.8 3.8 3.8 115.7 58.0 35.5 70.3          Feb.546.7 351.1 63.6 287.4 195.7 28.9 25.0 22.1 3.9 3.9 166.8 83.3 46.7 86.3          Mar.
539.5 348.1 63.5 284.6 191.4 27.2 23.2 20.2 4.0 3.9 164.2 83.3 46.8 86.7          Apr.
547.2 347.1 66.7 280.4 200.2 30.0 26.0 23.0 4.0 4.0 170.2 86.2 48.2 91.8          May556.7 356.4 74.9 281.5 200.3 26.8 22.7 21.7 4.1 4.1 173.5 92.7 47.9 88.0          June
552.6 352.1 73.8 278.2 200.6 32.0 28.1 27.1 3.8 3.8 168.6 93.0 47.4 85.2          July
534.2 341.3 62.3 279.0 192.9 28.0 23.6 22.8 4.3 4.3 164.9 90.6 46.5 80.5          Aug.
Changes *
+ 54.7 + 11.6 + 13.9 −2.3 + 43.1 −2.3 −2.8 −3.0 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 45.3 + 6.7 + 11.7 + 13.5 1999
+ 20.6 + 9.9 + 2.9 + 7.0 + 10.7 + 10.9 + 9.4 + 3.6 + 1.5 + 1.5 −0.3 + 4.8 + 5.4 + 7.6 2000
+ 2.2 + 10.0 + 10.3 −0.3 −7.8 −6.6 −7.2 −0.9 + 0.6 + 0.6 −1.2 −0.7 −0.5 + 2.5 2000          Dec.
+ 1.7 + 10.5 −1.7 + 12.2 −8.8 −5.2 −5.7 −0.2 + 0.5 + 0.5 −3.6 + 2.4 + 1.4 −4.8 2001          Jan.
− 0.7 −4.9 −4.3 −0.6 + 4.3 −1.0 −1.0 −2.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 5.2 −0.5 −0.6 −0.2          Feb.
+ 125.2 + 73.8 + 8.7 + 65.2 + 51.4 + 2.6 + 2.5 + 2.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 48.8 + 25.2 + 11.1 + 14.8          Mar.
− 6.8 −2.7 −0.2 −2.5 −4.1 −1.8 −1.8 −1.9 + 0.1 + 0.1 −2.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.4          Apr.
− 0.8 −7.0 + 3.2 −10.2 + 6.2 + 2.8 + 2.8 + 2.9 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 3.4 + 2.9 + 1.4 + 3.2          May
+ 10.6 + 10.3 + 8.2 + 2.1 + 0.4 −3.2 −3.3 −1.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 3.6 + 6.5 −0.2 −3.6          June
+ 2.2 + 0.1 −1.1 + 1.2 + 2.2 + 5.2 + 5.5 + 5.4 −0.3 −0.3 −3.0 + 0.3 −0.5 −1.6          July
−10.9 −5.8 −11.5 + 5.7 −5.1 −4.0 −4.5 −4.4 + 0.5 + 0.5 −1.1 −2.4 −0.9 −3.0          Aug.
December 1998, including loans on a trust basis. For foreign subsidiaris, including loans on a trust basis. —8Up to Dezember 1998, including
bill-based lending included even after 1998; up to December 1998, liabilities arising from loans on a trust basis (see also footnote 11). —
including loans on a trust basis (see also footnote 7). —4In the case of 9Excluding subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt securities
foreign branches, from December 1993 including transactions with the and money market paper. —10Issues of negotiable and non-negotiable
head office and with other branches in Germany; in the case of foreign debt securities and money market paper. —11Including subordinated
subsidiaries, including transactions with the parent institution. — liabilities. From 1999, including liabilities arising from loans on a trust
5Treasury bills, Treasury discount paper and other money market paper, basis. 
debt securities. —6Including own debt securities. —7From 1999,
41*IV.  Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
V. Minimum reserves
 
1. Reserve ratios
Germany European monetary union
 
% of liabilities subject to reserve requirements % of reserve base  1 
Sight Time
Applicable from liabilities liabilities Applicable from Ratio Savings deposits
1995  August 1 2    2    1.5    1999  January 1 2    
    
1Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank of 1 December
1998 on the application of minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to whicha reserve ratio of 0 % applies, pursuant to article 4 (1)). 
 
  
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany up to the end of 1998
− pursuant to the Minimum Reserves Order of the Bundesbank −
 
DM million
Liabilities subject to reserve requirements Excess reserves  4 
Monthly Required as % of the
average  1 Total reserves  2 Level Sight liabilities Time liabilities Savings deposits Actual reserves  3 required  reserves Shortfall, total
1995         Dec. 2,066,565 579,337 519,456 967,772 36,492 37,337 845 2.3 3
1996         Dec. 2,201,464 655,483 474,342 1,071,639 38,671 39,522 851 2.2 4
1997         Dec. 2,327,879 734,986 476,417 1,116,477 40,975 41,721 745 1.8 3
1998         Dec. 2,576,889 865,444 564,878 1,146,567 45,805 46,432 627 1.4 4
1Pursuant to sections 5 to 7 of the Minimum Reserves Order. —2Amount balances of the credit institutions subject to reserve requirements on their
after applying the reserve ratios to the liabilities subject to reserve require- giro accounts at the Bundesbank. — 4 Actual reserves less required reserves. 
ments (section 5 (1) of the Minimum Reserves Order). —3Average credit
 
 
3. Reserve maintenance in the European monetary union
− from 1999, pursuant to the ECB Regulation governing minimum reserves according to article 19.1 of the
ECB/ESCB Statute −
 
Maintenance Required reserves
period before deduction Required reserves
of lump-sum Lump-sum beginning in  1 after deduction of
Reserve base  2 allowance  3 allowance  4 lump-sum allowance Actual reserves  5 Excess reserves  6 Shortfall, total  7 
European monetary union (euro billion)
 
2000         Dec.  8 5,983.3 119.7 1.2 118.5 119.0 0.5 0.0
2001         Jan.  8 6,035.2 120.7 0.6 120.1 120.6 0.5 0.0
         Feb.  8 6,048.5 121.0 0.6 120.4 120.9 0.5 0.0
         Mar.  8 6,070.9 121.4 0.6 120.8 121.3 0.5 0.0
         Apr.  8 6,238.0 124.8 0.6 124.2 124.8 0.7 0.0
         May  8 6,281.6 125.6 0.6 125.0 125.6 0.6 0.0
         June  8 6,350.2 127.0 0.6 126.4 127.0 0.6 0.0
         July  8 6,390.0 127.8 0.6 127.2 127.7 0.5 0.0
         Aug.  8 r 6,294.7 125.9 0.6 125.3 126.0 0.7 0.0
         Sep.  8 p 6,249.7 125.0 0.6 124.4 125.0 0.5 0.0
Of which: Germany (euro million)
2000         Dec. 1,780,022 35,600 269 35,332 35,532 200 6
2001         Jan. 1,813,577 36,272 267 36,005 36,177 172 1
         Feb. 1,795,119 35,902 266 35,636 35,831 195 1         Mar. 1,820,155 36,403 266 36,137 36,329 193 6
         Apr. 1,872,624 37,452 265 37,187 37,391 203 6
         May 1,873,714 37,474 264 37,210 37,455 244 8         June 1,882,510 37,650 261 37,389 37,605 216 1
         July 1,892,993 37,860 256 37,604 37,777 173 2
         Aug. 1,853,167 37,063 252 36,812 37,067 255 2         Sep.  
p 1,862,074 37,241 249 36,993 37,254 262 2
1The reserve maintenance period of the ESCB minimum reserve system 1 December 1998 on the application of minimum reserves. —5Average
starts on the 24th of each month and ends on the 23rd of the following credit balances of the credit institutions subject to minimum reserve require-month (the first reserve maintenance period lasted from January 1, 1999 to ments on their reserve accounts at the respective national central bank. —
February 23, 1999). —2Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central 6Actual reserves less required reserves after the deduction of the lump-sum
Bank of 1 December 1998 on the application of minimum reserves allowance. —7Required reserves after the deduction of the lump-sum
(excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio o f 0 % applies, pursuant to allowance. —8Owing to the adoption of the euro by Greece on January 1,
article 4 (1)). —3Amount after applying the reserve ratios to the reserve 2001, including credit institutions in Greece. 
base. —4Article 5 (2) of the Regulation of the European Central Bank of
42*V. Minimum reserves

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
VI. Interest rates
  
1. ECB interest rates 2. Discount and lombard rates 3. Base rate per Discount
    of the Bundesbank     Rate Transition Act
  
% p.a. % p.a. % p.a.
Main Marginal
Deposit refinancing lending Lombard
Applicable from facility operations  1 facility Applicable from Discount rate rate  3, 4 Applicable from Base rate  5 
1999 Jan.                 1 2.00 3.00 4.50 1994 Feb.                18 5 1/4 6 3/4 1999 Jan.                 1 2.50
         Jan.                 4  2 2.75 3.00 3.25          Apr.                15 5 6 1/2          May                 1 1.95
         Jan.               22 2.00 3.00 4.50          May                13 4 1/2 6 
         Apr.                 9 1.50 2.50 3.50 2000 Jan.                  1 2.68
         Nov.                 5 2.00 3.00 4.00 1995 Mar.                31 4 6          May                  1 3.42
         Aug.               25 3 1/2 5 1/2          Sep.                 1 4.26
2000 Feb.                 4 2.25 3.25 4.25          Dec.                15 3 5 
         Mar.               17 2.50 3.50 4.50   2001 Sep.                  1 3.62
         Apr.               28 2.75 3.75 4.75 1996 Apr.                19 2 1/2 4 1/2
         June                 9 3.25 4.25 5.25          to
         Sep.                 1 3.50 4.50 5.50 1998 Dec.                31
         Oct.                 6 3.75 4.75 5.75
  
2001 May               11 3.50 4.50 5.50
         Aug.               31 3.25 4.25 5.25
         Sep.               18 2.75 3.75 4.75
         Nov.                 9 2.25 3.25 4.25
1Up to June 21, 2000 fixed rate tenders, from June 28, 2000 variable rate Rate Transition Regulation, the lombard rate is replaced from January 1,
tenders at minimum bid rate. —2On December 22, 1998 the European 1999 by the rate applied by the ECB for its marginal lending facility
Central Bank (ECB) announced that, as an exceptional measure between wherever the lombard rate is used as a reference variable for interest andJanuary 4 and 21, 1999, a narrow corridor of 50 basis points would be other payments. —5Pursuant to the Discount Rate Transition Act, read in
applied between the interest rates for the marginal lending facility and the conjunction with the Regulation Governing the Use of the Base Rate as adeposit facility, aimed at facilitating the transition to the new regime by Reference Variable, this rate replaces the discount rate from January 1, 1 999
market participants. —3From August 1, 1990 to December 31, 1993 this wherever the latter is used in contracts and regulations as a reference
was also the rate for cash advances; since January 1, 1994 cash advances variable for interest and other payments. This base rate is the discount ratehave no longer been granted. Wherever reference is made in an Act to the of the Bundesbank which applied on December 31, 1998. It changes frominterest rate applicable for cash advances of the Federal Government, the January 1, May 1 and September 1 of each year, and will change for the firstrate will be replaced by the base rate increased by 1.5 percentage points time on May 1, 1999 if the interest rate applied by the ECB to itspursuant to the Discount Rate Transition Act (see footnote 5).—4Pursuant longer-term refinancing operations (marginal rate) has changed by at least
to the Discount Rate Transition Act, read in conjunction with the Lombard 0.5 percentage points. 
  
    
4. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders 
*
    
  
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bids Allotment Weighted
Amount Amount Fixed rate Minimum bid rate Marginal rate  1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement EUR millions % p.a. ... days
Main refinancing operations
2001 Aug.                 8 132,809 91,000 − 4.50 4.50 4.51 14
       Aug.               15 111,157 70,000 − 4.50 4.50 4.51 14
       Aug.               22 142,012 83,000 − 4.50 4.50 4.51 14
       Aug.               29 72,907 70,000 − 4.50 4.50 4.50 14
       Sep.                 5 132,696 82,000 − 4.25 4.27 4.28 14
       Sep.               12 118,708 61,000 − 4.25 4.26 4.27 14
       Sep.               19 110,778 71,000 − 3.75 3.76 3.77 14
       Sep.               26 111,927 81,000 − 3.75 3.76 3.77 14
       Oct.                 3 76,444 56,000 − 3.75 3.75 3.76 14
       Oct.               10 60,510 60,510 − 3.75 3.75 3.75 14
       Oct.               17 143,828 82,000 − 3.75 3.78 3.79 14
       Oct.               24 73,932 61,000 − 3.75 3.75 3.76 14
       Oct.               31 99,611 66,000 − 3.75 3.75 3.76 14
       Nov.                 7 38,368 38,368 − 3.75 3.75 3.75 14
       Nov.               14 174,732 116,000 − 3.25 3.37 3.40 14
Longer-term refinancing operations
2001 Apr.               25 43,416 20,000 −− 4.67 4.70 92
       May               31 46,448 20,000 −− 4.49 4.51 91
       June               28 44,243 20,000 −− 4.36 4.39 91
       July               26 39,369 20,000 −− 4.39 4.42 91
       Aug.               30 37,855 20,000 −− 4.20 4.23 91
       Sep.               27 28,269 20,000 −− 3.55 3.58 85
       Nov.               25 42,308 20,000 −− 3.50 3.52 98
Other tender operations
2001 Apr.               30 105,377 73,000 − 4.75 4.77 4.79 7
       Sep.               12 69,281 69,281 4.25 −−− 1
       Sep.               13 40,495 40,495 4.25 −−− 1
Source: ECB. —*Enlargement of the euro area on January 1, 2001 to allotted or collected. 
include Greece. —1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were
43*VI. Interest rates

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
VI. Interest rates
 
5.  Money market rates, by month
  
% p.a.
Money market rates reported by Frankfurt banks  1 EURIBOR  3 
One- One- Three- Six- Nine- Twelve-
week month month month month month
Day-to-day money Three-month funds EONIA  2 funds funds funds funds funds funds
Monthly Lowest and Monthly Lowest and
Period averages highest rates averages highest rates Monthly averages
1999         Oct. 2.49 1.70 −2.80 3.36 3.08 −3.50 2.50 2.63 2.76 3.38 3.46 3.55 3.68
         Nov. 2.92 2.50 −3.20 3.44 3.39 −3.52 2.94 2.99 3.06 3.47 3.48 3.58 3.69
         Dec. 3.03 4 2.75 −3.70 3.43 3.28 −3.47 3.04 3.27 3.51 3.45 3.51 3.66 3.83
2000         Jan. 3.03 2.79 −3.35 3.32 3.26 −3.49 3.04 3.08 3.15 3.34 3.56 3.76 3.95
         Feb. 3.27 3.12 −3.52 3.52 3.45 −3.63 3.28 3.31 3.36 3.54 3.73 3.93 4.11
         Mar. 3.50 3.26 −4.00 3.73 3.59 −3.83 3.51 3.52 3.59 3.75 3.94 4.11 4.27
         Apr. 3.67 3.00 −4.00 3.90 3.79 −4.09 3.69 3.73 3.79 3.93 4.08 4.25 4.36
         May 3.92 2.85 −4.23 4.34 4.06 −4.48 3.92 4.05 4.16 4.36 4.54 4.72 4.85
         June 4.28 4.02 −4.85 4.48 4.37 −4.55 4.29 4.31 4.37 4.50 4.68 4.85 4.96
         July 4.30 3.80 −4.51 4.56 4.50 −4.64 4.31 4.36 4.41 4.58 4.84 4.98 5.11
         Aug. 4.40 3.85 −4.80 4.76 4.60 −4.92 4.42 4.48 4.57 4.78 5.01 5.14 5.25
         Sep. 4.58 4.00 −4.99 4.83 4.77 −5.00 4.59 4.64 4.70 4.85 5.04 5.14 5.22
         Oct. 4.75 4.50 −5.02 5.02 4.95 −5.14 4.76 4.80 4.85 5.04 5.10 5.16 5.22
         Nov. 4.82 4.70 −4.98 5.07 5.00 −5.14 4.83 4.86 4.92 5.09 5.13 5.16 5.19
         Dec. 4.82 5 4.69 −5.40 4.92 4.81 −5.02 4.83 4.86 4.95 4.94 4.92 4.90 4.88
2001         Jan. 4.75 4.15 −4.88 4.75 4.65 −4.84 4.76 4.81 4.80 4.77 4.68 4.60 4.57
         Feb. 4.98 4.73 −5.75 4.74 4.67 −4.81 4.99 4.83 4.80 4.76 4.67 4.61 4.59
         Mar. 4.77 4.20 −4.93 4.69 4.52 −4.78 4.78 4.82 4.78 4.71 4.58 4.49 4.47
         Apr. 5.04 4.71 −5.80 4.66 4.52 −4.80 5.06 4.88 4.78 4.68 4.57 4.50 4.48
         May 4.64 4.41 −4.90 4.62 4.49 −4.81 4.65 4.66 4.66 4.64 4.56 4.53 4.52
         June 4.53 4.30 −4.85 4.43 4.37 −4.50 4.54 4.56 4.53 4.45 4.35 4.33 4.31
         July 4.51 4.25 −4.63 4.45 4.38 −4.50 4.51 4.54 4.52 4.47 4.39 4.33 4.31
         Aug. 4.49 4.35 −4.53 4.33 4.21 −4.43 4.49 4.51 4.46 4.35 4.22 4.14 4.11
         Sep. 3.97 2.95 −5.50 3.96 3.60 −4.27 3.99 4.08 4.05 3.98 3.88 3.80 3.77
         Oct. 3.96 3.65 −4.76 3.58 3.48 −3.65 3.97 3.83 3.72 3.60 3.46 3.39 3.37
1Money market rates are not fixed or quoted officially; the monthly aver- Telerate. —3Euro Interbank Offered Rate: unweighted average rate
ages computed from daily quotations are unweighted. —2Euro OverNight calculated by Bridge Telerate since December 30, 1998 according to the
Index Average: weighted average overnight rate for interbank operations act/360 method. —4At the end of December 3.35% to 3.70%. —5At the
calculated by the European Central Bank since January 4, 1999 on the basis end of December 5.00% to 5.40%. of real turnover according to the act/360 method and published via Bridge
 
 
6. Euro area retail bank interest rates *, o
  
% p.a.; period averages
Deposit interest rates Lending interest rates
With agreed maturity Redeemable at notice To enterprises To householdsUp to Up to Over Up to Over Up to Over Consumer For house
Period Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months 1 year 1 year lending purchase
1998 1.10 3.20 3.22 4.06 2.61 3.25 6.73 5.80 10.05 5.87
1999 0.65 2.44 2.45 3.57 2.15 2.76 5.65 5.10 9.39 5.292000 0.85 3.45 3.44 4.52 2.25 3.79 6.60 6.23 9.86 6.34
2000         Sep. 0.94 3.85 3.83 4.77 2.38 4.20 6.92 6.44 10.03 6.56
         Oct. 0.97 3.96 3.96 4.76 2.40 4.14 7.13 6.60 10.15 6.57
         Nov. 0.99 4.04 4.03 4.77 2.47 4.25 7.16 6.63 10.20 6.56         Dec. 1.01 3.96 3.96 4.58 2.49 4.21 7.18 6.45 10.19 6.43
2001         Jan.
1 1.01 3.88 3.88 4.39 2.52 4.01 7.19 6.40 10.32 6.29
         Feb. 1.01 3.84 3.83 4.35 2.50 3.99 7.11 6.44 10.26 6.24         Mar. 1.02 3.81 3.81 4.32 2.50 3.99 7.04 6.32 10.22 6.18
         Apr. 1.03 3.76 3.76 4.26 2.50 3.91 7.07 6.34 10.24 6.14
         May 1.01 3.75 3.74 4.27 2.48 3.91 7.03 6.34 10.22 6.17         June 0.98 3.65 3.65 4.25 2.46 3.85 6.97 6.25 10.17 6.13
         July 0.97 3.66 3.65 4.22 2.44 3.80 6.89 6.21 10.10 6.05
         Aug. 0.96 3.60 3.59 4.15 2.41 3.68 6.88 6.19 10.16 5.96         Sep. 0.91 3.31 3.31 3.99 2.36 3.33 6.72 6.07 10.08 5.86
*These euro area retail bank interest rates should be used with caution and Member States. Furthermore, the national interest rates are not harmonised
for statistical purposes only, primarily to analyse their development over in terms of their coverage (new business and/or outstanding amounts), th e
time rather than their level. They are calculated as the weighted average of nature of the data (nominal or effective) or the compilation method. Thenational interest rates provided by the national central banks. The national country weights for the euro area retail bank interest rates are derived from
rates represent those rates that are currently available from national MFI balance sheet statistics or close proxies. The weights reflect thesources and which are judged to fit the standard categories. These national country-specific proportions of the relevant instruments within the eur o
rates have been aggregated to derive information for the euro area, in area, measured as outstanding amounts. The weights are adjusted monthly,some cases relying on proxies and working assumptions due to the so that interest rates and weights always refer to the same month. —1En-
heterogeneity observed in the national financial instruments across MU largement of the euro area on January 1, 2001 to include Greece. 
      
o Tables and notes taken from the ECB. 
44*VI. Interest rates

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
VI. Interest rates
 
7. Lending and deposit rates of banks (MFIs) in Germany *
    Lending rates
 
% p.a.
Current account credit Bills discounted
Bills of less than DM 100,000
DM 200,000 and more DM 1 million and more refinancable
less than DM 200,000 but less than DM 1 million but less than DM 5 million at the Bundesbank
Reporting Average Average Average Average
period  1 interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread
2000         Dec. 11.39 8.90 −13.25 10.27 8.00 −12.75 9.12 7.00 −12.00 6.98 5.05 −10.00
2001         Jan. 11.35 8.75 −13.50 10.30 8.00 −12.95 9.12 7.00 −12.25 6.99 5.50 −10.00
         Feb. 11.13 8.00 −13.25 10.15 7.50 −12.95 8.95 7.00 −12.00 6.98 5.40 −9.81
         Mar. 11.17 7.00 −13.25 10.03 6.50 −13.00 8.86 6.00 −12.00 7.00 5.50 −10.00
         Apr. 11.14 6.80 −13.25 10.07 6.50 −13.00 8.85 6.00 −12.25 6.96 5.39 −10.00
         May 11.12 6.50 −13.25 10.09 6.00 −12.75 8.84 5.60 −12.00 6.86 4.78 −10.00
         June 11.21 6.50 −13.25 10.13 6.50 −12.95 8.79 5.50 −12.00 6.91 5.42 −10.00
         July 11.12 6.50 −13.25 9.99 6.00 −12.95 8.73 5.50 −12.00 6.91 5.43 −10.00
         Aug. 11.11 6.20 −13.25 10.03 6.00 −12.95 8.79 5.50 −12.10 6.84 5.18 −10.00
         Sep. 11.06 6.00 −13.25 9.98 6.00 −12.75 8.75 5.50 −12.10 6.69 5.00 −10.00
         Oct. 10.97 5.50 −13.25 9.93 5.50 −12.75 8.57 5.00 −12.00 6.57 4.55 −10.25
 
 
Long-term fixed-rate loans
to enterprises and self-employed persons
Instalment credits (excluding lending to the housing sector)  6 
DM 10,000 and more but not more than DM 30,000  2 DM 200,000 and more DM 1 million and more
Personal credit lines but less than DM 1 million but less than DM 10 million
(overdraft facilities Effectivegranted to individuals) Monthly rate  
3 annual interest rate  4, 5 Effective interest rate  5 
Reporting Average Average Average Average Average
period  1 interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread
2000         Dec. 12.61 11.25 −13.50 0.41 0.35 −0.50 10.80 8.95 −12.83 7.04 6.05 −8.70 6.84 5.85 −8.30
2001         Jan. 12.63 11.00 −13.50 0.41 0.34 −0.50 10.82 8.95 −12.95 6.89 5.82 −8.57 6.66 5.68 −8.25
         Feb. 12.61 10.75 −13.50 0.41 0.34 −0.50 10.82 8.88 −12.91 6.89 5.79 −8.64 6.65 5.63 −8.25
         Mar. 12.67 11.25 −13.75 0.41 0.34 −0.50 10.76 8.77 −12.77 6.78 5.75 −8.50 6.56 5.64 −8.05
         Apr. 12.70 11.25 −13.75 0.41 0.33 −0.49 10.71 8.76 −12.77 6.77 5.75 −8.57 6.53 5.57 −8.05
         May 12.70 11.50 −13.50 0.41 0.33 −0.49 10.75 8.69 −12.89 6.81 5.83 −8.65 6.60 5.69 −8.01
         June 12.68 11.50 −13.50 0.41 0.34 −0.49 10.76 8.76 −12.89 6.82 5.81 −8.66 6.62 5.75 −8.20
         July 12.68 11.25 −13.50 0.41 0.35 −0.49 10.78 8.92 −12.91 6.82 5.85 −8.63 6.60 5.70 −8.30
         Aug. 12.66 11.25 −13.50 0.41 0.35 −0.49 10.80 8.89 −12.76 6.74 5.63 −8.60 6.52 5.50 −8.30
         Sep. 12.66 11.25 −13.50 0.41 0.35 −0.49 10.80 8.95 −12.89 6.64 5.49 −8.50 6.43 5.38 −8.25
         Oct. 12.61 11.25 −13.50 0.41 0.35 −0.49 10.76 8.80 −12.95 6.44 5.26 −8.50 6.21 5.17 −8.17
 
 
Mortgage loans secured by residential real estate
with interest rates fixed (effective interest rate)  5, 7 
with variable interest rates
for 2 years for 5 years for 10 years (effective interest rate)  5, 7 
Reporting Average Average Average Average
period  1 interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread
2000         Dec. 6.20 5.64 −6.98 6.19 5.81 −6.75 6.44 6.17 −6.86 6.81 5.90 −8.03
2001         Jan. 5.95 5.41 −6.60 5.93 5.59 −6.54 6.22 5.96 −6.70 6.72 5.64 −8.11
         Feb. 5.94 5.43 −6.59 5.90 5.59 −6.51 6.17 5.96 −6.54 6.71 5.61 −8.03
         Mar. 5.85 5.27 −6.49 5.80 5.47 −6.35 6.12 5.85 −6.54 6.67 5.56 −8.03
         Apr. 5.80 5.27 −6.54 5.78 5.43 −6.33 6.11 5.85 −6.54 6.64 5.48 −8.03
         May 5.88 5.34 −6.59 5.87 5.54 −6.43 6.20 5.77 −6.64 6.66 5.59 −8.03
         June 5.80 5.27 −6.54 5.84 5.54 −6.33 6.22 5.85 −6.59 6.64 5.48 −8.03
         July 5.78 5.22 −6.45 5.85 5.54 −6.37 6.24 5.77 −6.59 6.64 5.43 −8.03
         Aug. 5.62 5.06 −6.35 5.69 5.43 −6.22 6.13 5.88 −6.54 6.57 5.43 −8.03
         Sep. 5.41 4.75 −6.22 5.57 5.22 −6.22 6.08 5.85 −6.43 6.45 5.38 −7.82
         Oct. 5.12 4.49 −5.96 5.36 5.01 −6.03 5.91 5.64 −6.43 6.30 4.96 −7.73
*The average rates are calculated as unweighted arithmetic means from processing fees, taking due account of reported maturities. —5From the
the interest rates reported to be within the spread. The spread is as- reporting month September 2000, effective interest rates are calculatedcertained by eliminating the reports in the top 5% and the bottom 5% of according to the ISMA method (International Securities Market Association).the interest rate range. The figures for the latest date are always to be re- The use of the ISMA method (non-linear remuneration of less than onegarded as provisional; subsequent alterations, which will appear in the year) in this context tends to result in slightly lower effective annual inte rest
following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Second and third rates. —6Lending to enterprises (with agreed maturities of more than five
weeks of the months indicated. —2With maturities between 36 months years) with agreed interest rates locked in for more than five years. —7The
and 60 months. —3Interest rates as % per month of original amount of figures refer to the time when the contract was concluded and not to the
credit taken up. Besides interest, most banks charge a one-off processing entire duration of the contract. The calculation of the effective interest rate
fee (generally 2%, in some cases 3%, of the credit amount). —4Calculated is based on an annual redemption rate of 1% plus interest saved; the repay-
on the basis of reported monthly rates (see footnote 3) and reported annual ment conditions agreed upon in each case by the credit institutions involve d
rates on the respective amount of debt and on the basis of the respective are taken into account (at present mostly monthly payment and inclu sion). 
45*VI. Interest rates

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
VI. Interest rates
 
7. Lending and deposit rates of banks (MFIs) in Germany *  (cont ’d)
    Deposit rates
 
% p.a.
Time deposits with agreed maturitiesof 1 month of 3 months
Higher-yieldingsight deposits DM 100,000 and more but DM 1 million and more but DM 100,000 and more butof individuals  
8 less than DM 100,000 less than DM 1 million less than DM 5 million less than DM 1 million
Reporting Average Average Average Average Average
period  1 interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread
2000         Dec. 2.41 0.50 −4.00 3.62 2.65 −4.35 4.05 3.10 −4.60 4.42 3.50 −4.92 4.19 3.35 −4.80
2001         Jan. 2.43 0.50 −4.00 3.56 2.60 −4.25 3.96 3.20 −4.50 4.33 3.60 −4.75 4.06 3.39 −4.60
         Feb. 2.50 0.50 −4.00 3.46 2.55 −4.15 3.87 3.20 −4.45 4.21 3.50 −4.70 4.01 3.30 −4.50
         Mar. 2.48 0.50 −4.00 3.53 2.75 −4.25 3.95 3.25 −4.50 4.31 3.50 −4.75 4.05 3.40 −4.50
         Apr. 2.49 0.50 −4.00 3.48 2.59 −4.20 3.91 3.20 −4.50 4.27 3.50 −4.70 3.99 3.25 −4.50
         May 2.44 0.50 −4.00 3.46 2.50 −4.20 3.85 3.10 −4.40 4.20 3.50 −4.65 3.95 3.20 −4.50
         June 2.42 0.50 −3.90 3.34 2.50 −4.00 3.73 3.10 −4.25 4.07 3.50 −4.44 3.84 3.15 −4.35
         July 2.41 0.50 −3.88 3.34 2.50 −4.00 3.73 3.10 −4.20 4.08 3.50 −4.50 3.83 3.20 −4.41
         Aug. 2.39 0.50 −3.75 3.31 2.50 −4.00 3.70 3.00 −4.20 4.05 3.40 −4.45 3.76 3.10 −4.30
         Sep. 2.26 0.50 −3.50 3.00 2.20 −3.85 3.38 2.70 −4.00 3.66 2.95 −4.15 3.47 2.60 −4.00
         Oct. 2.10 0.50 −3.24 2.69 2.00 −3.40 3.07 2.40 −3.50 3.36 2.75 −3.75 3.12 2.40 −3.65
 
 
Savings deposits
Bank savings bondswith regular with minimum rates of with higher rates of return  
10 
interest payments return  9 (without a duration of contract being agreed)
with agreed notice of 3 months
with agreed notice DM 10,000 and more DM 20,000 and more
maturity of 4 years of 3 months less than DM 10,000 but less than DM 20,000 but less than DM 50,000
Reporting Average Average Average Average Average
period  1 interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread
2000         Dec. 4.76 4.30 −5.25 1.25 1.00 −2.00 2.39 1.50 −4.00 2.99 1.75 −4.20 3.22 2.00 −4.34
2001         Jan. 4.47 4.10 −5.00 1.26 1.00 −2.00 2.37 1.50 −3.80 2.95 1.80 −4.10 3.21 2.00 −4.33
         Feb. 4.42 4.00 −4.75 1.25 1.00 −2.00 2.35 1.50 −3.75 2.94 1.80 −4.00 3.17 2.00 −4.25
         Mar. 4.37 4.00 −4.75 1.24 1.00 −2.00 2.36 1.50 −3.75 2.97 1.80 −4.00 3.20 2.00 −4.32
         Apr. 4.27 3.95 −4.60 1.23 1.00 −2.00 2.36 1.50 −3.75 2.95 1.95 −4.00 3.18 2.00 −4.30
         May 4.31 4.00 −4.65 1.24 1.00 −2.00 2.33 1.50 −3.75 2.92 1.80 −4.00 3.14 2.00 −4.26
         June 4.31 3.95 −4.60 1.21 1.00 −2.00 2.29 1.50 −3.66 2.87 1.75 −4.00 3.09 2.00 −4.00
         July 4.26 3.90 −4.60 1.20 1.00 −2.00 2.26 1.50 −3.50 2.85 1.75 −4.00 3.07 2.00 −4.00
         Aug. 4.16 3.75 −4.50 1.18 1.00 −1.75 2.20 1.50 −3.35 2.77 1.75 −3.75 3.02 2.00 −4.00
         Sep. 3.99 3.60 −4.35 1.16 1.00 −1.75 2.11 1.35 −3.25 2.63 1.60 −3.50 2.88 1.85 −3.90
         Oct. 3.77 3.40 −4.20 1.14 1.00 −1.75 2.01 1.25 −3.05 2.47 1.50 −3.50 2.69 1.85 −3.50
 
 
Savings deposits with higher rates of return  10  and with duration of contract being agreed for
DM 20,000 and more but less than DM 50,000 (total rate of return) 11
with agreed notice of 3 months with agreed notice of more than 3 months
and a duration of contract of and a duration of contract of
more than 1 year and up to
up to and including 1 year and including 4 years more than 4 years up to and including 1 year more than 4 years
Reporting Average Average Average Average Average
period  1 interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread
2000         Dec. 4.15 2.50 −4.75 4.51 3.25 −5.15 4.74 3.64 −5.62 4.21 2.30 −4.75 4.82 4.28 −5.40
2001         Jan. 3.98 3.00 −4.50 4.18 3.25 −4.75 4.59 3.60 −5.30 4.01 2.30 −4.50 4.51 4.04 −5.05
         Feb. 3.86 2.90 −4.40 4.11 3.25 −4.75 4.54 3.60 −5.30 3.99 2.50 −4.50 4.49 4.08 −4.83
         Mar. 3.84 2.99 −4.35 4.06 3.30 −4.62 4.52 3.60 −5.30 3.99 2.50 −4.50 4.42 3.95 −4.78
         Apr. 3.71 2.90 −4.25 3.96 3.25 −4.50 4.47 3.60 −5.25 3.91 2.50 −4.50 4.33 3.95 −4.75
         May 3.74 3.00 −4.25 3.99 3.25 −4.35 4.50 3.64 −5.22 3.91 2.60 −4.35 4.36 3.95 −4.75
         June 3.67 2.80 −4.20 3.93 3.25 −4.30 4.48 3.64 −5.22 3.85 2.50 −4.25 4.35 3.90 −4.78
         July 3.64 2.80 −4.15 3.91 3.25 −4.45 4.48 3.64 −5.25 3.80 2.50 −4.05 4.33 3.90 −4.75
         Aug. 3.52 2.60 −4.00 3.83 3.20 −4.30 4.42 3.60 −5.40 3.68 2.50 −4.00 4.22 3.84 −4.73
         Sep. 3.32 2.40 −3.90 3.62 2.61 −4.25 4.32 3.36 −5.42 3.33 2.50 −3.65 4.06 3.72 −4.73
         Oct. 2.94 2.25 −3.45 3.36 2.60 −3.88 4.17 3.00 −5.40 3.01 2.50 −3.50 3.85 3.50 −4.50
For footnotes *, 1to7see page 45*. —8Only such interest rates are taken and/or a premium or a bonus is granted. —11Rate of return which is paid
into account as are above the relevant standard terms of the banks included when savings plans are held until maturity or when savings objectives havein the survey. —9Only a minimum rate of return is granted, but no pre- been achieved. 
mium or bonus. —10An interest rate above the minimum rate of return
46*VI. Interest rates

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
VI.  Interest rates
 
8. Selected central bank rates abroad
  
 
New rate Previous rate New rate Previous rate
Applicable Applicable Applicable Applicable
Country/Interest rate % p.a. from % p.a. from Country/Interest rate % p.a. from % p.a. from
1. EU-countries  1 3. Non European countries
Denmark Canada  3 
Discount rate       3 1/4  Nov.   8,              ’01       3 3/4  Sep. 17,              ’01 Discount rate       3   Oct. 23,               ’01       3 3/4  Sep. 17,              ’01 
Repurchase/CD selling rate       3.60   Nov.   8,               ’01       4.10   Oct.   5,               ’01 
Japan
Sweden Discount rate       0.10   Sep. 18,               ’01          0.25   Mar.   1,               ’01 
Deposit rate       3   Sep. 17,               ’01       3 1/2  July   6,              ’01 
Repurchase rate       3 3/4  Sep. 17,              ’01       4 1/4  July   6,              ’01 United States
Lombard rate       4 1/2  Sep. 17,              ’01       5   July   6,               ’01 Federal funds rate  4       2   Nov.   6,               ’01       2 1/2  Oct.   2,              ’01 
United Kingdom
Repurchase rate  2       4   Nov.   8,               ’01          4 1/2  Oct.   4,              ’01 
2. Switzerland
Three-month Libor target   1 3/4   2 1/4
  −         2 3/4  Sep. 24,              ’01   −         3 1/4  Sep. 17,              ’01 
1Only those member countries which are not participating in the euro area ceiling rate for call money. —4Rate targeted for interbank trade in central
for the time being. —2Bank of England key rate. —3Bank of Canada ’s bank money. 
9. Money market rates abroad
Monthly or weekly averages of daily figures  1 
%  p.a.
London New York Tokyo Zurich Hong Kong Euro-Dollar market
Memorandum
Treasury Treasury item
bills bills Swap rates in the
(three (three Gensaki open market  8 
Month Day-to- months) months) Day-to- rate Three- Day-to- Exchange Day-to- One- Three-or day Tender Federal Tender day (three month day fund day month month US$/DM £/DMweek money  
2 rate 3 funds  4 rate 3 money months) funds  5 money  6 bills 7 money funds funds Euro/US-$ Euro/£
1999         Apr. 5.38 4.90 4.74 4.28 0.03 0.06 0.38 4.44 4.92 4.75 4.92 5.00 + 2.29 + 2.52
         May 5.29 4.93 4.74 4.51 0.03 0.05 0.44 4.47 4.82 4.78 4.91 5.02 + 2.47 + 2.69         June 5.05 4.76 4.76 4.59 0.03 0.04 0.50 5.21 5.13 4.88 5.04 5.18 + 2.60 + 2.50
         July 4.92 4.76 4.99 4.60 0.03 0.03 0.51 5.51 5.47 5.05 5.18 5.31 + 2.67 + 2.39
         Aug. 4.84 4.85 5.07 4.76 0.03 0.03 0.51 5.55 5.80 5.12 5.29 5.45 + 2.82 + 2.47         Sep. 4.89 5.08 5.22 4.73 0.03 0.02 1.14 5.12 5.68 5.29 5.38 5.57 + 2.85 + 2.60
         Oct. 5.01 5.24 5.20 4.88 0.02 0.02 1.38 5.37 5.49 5.25 5.41 6.18 + 2.86 + 2.55
         Nov. 5.18 5.24 5.42 5.07 0.03 0.02 1.34 5.01 5.11 5.40 5.56 6.10 + 2.68 + 2.34         Dec. 5.01 5.46 5.30 5.23 0.02 0.04 1.24 3.58 4.65 5.45 6.40 6.13 + 2.75 + 2.48
2000         Jan. 5.28 5.78 5.45 5.34 0.02 0.03 1.38 3.33 5.18 5.55 5.81 6.04 + 2.70 + 2.66
         Feb. 5.77 5.92 5.73 5.57 0.03 0.03 1.78 5.37 5.64 5.73 5.89 6.10 + 2.54 + 2.54         Mar. 5.69 5.93 5.85 5.72 0.02 0.03 2.26 5.41 5.65 5.87 6.05 6.20 + 2.47 + 2.36
         Apr. 5.82 6.01 6.02 5.67 0.02 0.03 2.76 6.32 6.06 6.03 6.15 6.31 + 2.42 + 2.22
         May 5.87 6.00 6.27 5.92 0.02 0.02 2.55 6.04 6.63 6.30 6.55 6.76 + 2.44 + 1.83         June 5.88 5.95 6.53 5.74 0.02 0.03 3.05 5.95 6.36 6.55 6.65 6.79 + 2.31 + 1.60
         July 5.85 5.92 6.55 5.92 0.02 0.04 3.04 5.86 6.12 6.55 6.63 6.73 + 2.17 + 1.48
         Aug. 5.81 5.90 6.50 6.11 0.16 0.14 3.12 5.49 5.76 6.47 6.62 6.69 + 1.92 + 1.33         Sep. 6.10 5.88 6.52 5.99 0.25 0.24 3.00 6.88 6.04 6.50 6.62 6.67 + 1.79 + 1.20
         Oct. 5.79 5.83 6.51 6.10 0.25 0.27 3.00 5.32 5.82 6.48 6.62 6.78 + 1.71 + 1.01
         Nov. 5.94 5.78 6.51 6.19 0.25 0.27 3.00 5.16 5.66 6.51 6.64 6.75 + 1.65 + 0.89         Dec. 5.70 5.71 6.40 5.90 0.24 0.29 2.88 6.44 5.73 6.52 6.69 6.55 + 1.57 + 0.92
2001         Jan. 5.95 5.62 5.98 5.27 0.25 0.28 3.09 5.57 5.14 6.03 5.87 5.70 + 0.90 + 0.95
         Feb. 5.86 5.51 5.49 4.93 0.25 0.27 2.86 5.22 4.92 5.52 5.52 5.35 + 0.56 + 0.86         Mar. 5.41 5.32 5.31 4.50 0.11 0.09 2.96 5.05 4.71 5.36 5.13 4.96 + 0.26 + 0.74
         Apr. 5.31 5.15 4.80 3.92 0.02 0.03 2.60 4.49 4.46 4.82 4.80 4.61 −0.07 + 0.64
         May 5.53 5.04 4.21 3.68 0.02 0.01 2.59 3.88 3.63 4.21 4.16 4.10 −0.58 + 0.50
         June 4.74 5.04 3.97 3.51 0.02 0.01 2.62 3.99 3.47 3.96 3.91 3.83 −0.67 + 0.74
         July 5.26 5.05 3.77 3.54 0.01 0.01 2.84 3.69 3.45 3.79 3.82 3.75 −0.76 + 0.70
         Aug. 4.69 4.78 3.65 3.39 0.01 0.01 2.76 3.48 3.26 3.66 3.64 3.57 −0.83 + 0.57
         Sep. 4.89 4.48 3.07 2.87 0.01 0.01 1.90 3.11 2.76 3.19 3.15 3.03 −0.96 + 0.68
         Oct.  
p 4.56 4.20 2.49 2.22 0.00 0.01 1.74 2.11 1.99 2.53 2.48 2.40 −1.25 + 0.76
week ending  p 
2001 Sep.               28 5.04 4.33 2.99 2.38 0.00 0.01 1.90 2.93 2.21 3.16 2.65 2.60 −1.05 + 0.82
         Oct.                 5 5.50 4.20 2.71 2.32 0.00 0.01 . 2.29 2.12 2.67 2.60 2.53 −1.07 + 0.83
                              12 4.73 4.23 2.44 2.18 0.00 0.01 . 2.04 1.95 2.47 2.53 2.44 −1.22 + 0.78
                              19 4.15 4.21 2.44 2.20 0.00 0.01 . 2.09 1.99 2.48 2.49 2.40 −1.29 + 0.75
                              26 4.09 4.16 2.49 2.17 0.00 0.01 1.74 2.10 2.03 2.48 2.40 2.32 −1.31 + 0.72
1Unless stated otherwise. —2Overnight money rate in the interbank dollar-denominated Hong Kong Interbank Offered Rates (HIBOR). —
market. —3Months: average of the tender rates in the weekly Treasury bill 7Money market paper issued regularly by the Hong Kong Monetary
auctions; weeks: average of the tender rates on the day of issue. — Authority; maturity of 91 days. —8Rates for three-month contracts. Owing
4Weekly average (Thursday to Wednesday) —5Three month deposits with to the indirect quotation, the forward points between the euro and the
big banks in Zurich; months: average of end-of-month figures. Figure for foreign currency for the repurchase date of the swap are calculated in thethe fourth week is that for the last day of the month. —6Hong Kong foreign currency as from January 1999. 
47*VI.  Interest rates

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
VII. Capital market
 
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  *)
  
Debt securities
Sales PurchasesDomestic debt securities  
1 Residents
Credit in- Bundes-
Sales stitutions bank
= Public Foreign including opentotal Bank Indus- debt debt building marketpur- debt trial secur- secur- and loan Non- oper- Non-
Period chases Total securities bonds ities  
2 ities 3 Total  4 assc. 5 banks  6 ations  5 residents  7 
DM million
1986 103,497 87,485 29,509 200 57,774 16,012 45,927 31,192 13,667 1,068 57,570
1987 112,285 88,190 28,448 − 27 59,768 24,095 78,193 45,305 33,599 − 711 34,093
1988 88,425 35,100 −11,029 − 100 46,228 53,325 86,657 36,838 49,417 402 1,769
1989 118,285 78,409 52,418 344 25,649 39,876 96,073 20,311 76,448 − 686 22,212
1990 244,827 220,340 136,799 − 67 83,609 24,487 225,066 91,833 133,266 − 33 19,763
1991 231,965 219,346 131,670 667 87,011 12,619 173,099 45,095 127,310 694 58,8661992 291,762 284,054 106,857 − 175 177,376 7,708 170,873 132,236 37,368 1,269 120,887
1993 395,110 382,571 151,812 200 230,560 12,539 183,195 164,436 20,095 − 1,336 211,915
1994 303,339 276,058 117,185 − 65 158,939 27,281 279,989 126,808 154,738 − 1,557 23,349
1995 227,099 203,029 162,538 − 350 40,839 24,070 141,282 49,193 94,409 − 2,320 85,815
1996 254,359 233,519 191,341 649 41,529 20,840 148,250 117,352 31,751 − 853 106,109
1997 332,655 250,688 184,911 1,563 64,214 81,967 204,378 144,177 60,201 − 128,276
1998 418,877 308,201 254,367 3,143 50,691 110,676 245,983 203,342 42,641 − 172,894
Euro million
1999 292,758 198,068 156,399 2,184 39,485 94,690 157,420 74,728 82,692 − 135,338
2000 228,773 157,994 120,154 12,605 25,234 70,779 156,249 91,447 64,802 − 72,524
2001         June 4,203 − 1,876 − 312 − 1,725 161 6,079 2,212 859 1,353 − 1,991
         July 34,459 29,768 13,025 5,248 11,494 4,691 32,901 15,508 17,393 − 1,558
         Aug. − 125 − 1,521 − 3,574 1,951 102 1,396 − 6,086 − 10,162 4,076 − 5,961
         Sep. 8,914 8,178 3,100 1,246 3,831 736 − 73 − 13,535 13,462 − 8,987
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-purchases shares  
8 shares  9 Total  10 tutions  5 , 11  Non-banks  6 residents  12 
Period
DM million
1986 32,371 16,394 15,976 17,195 5,022 12,173 15,174
1987 15,845 11,889 3,955 16,439 2,153 14,286 − 594
1988 21,390 7,528 13,862 18,436 1,177 17,259 2,9531989 35,511 19,365 16,147 10,231 4,913 5,318 25,277
1990 50,070 28,021 22,048 52,631 7,215 45,416 − 2,561
1991 33,478 13,317 20,161 32,247 2,466 29,781 1,2301992 32,595 17,226 15,370 40,651 2,984 37,667 − 8,055
1993 39,355 19,512 19,843 30,871 4,133 26,738 8,4851994 55,125 29,160 25,966 54,466 1,622 52,844 659
1995 46,422 23,600 22,822 49,354 11,945 37,409 − 2,931
1996 72,491 34,212 38,280 55,962 12,627 43,335 16,5291997 119,522 22,239 97,280 96,844 8,547 88,297 22,6771998 249,460 48,796 200,665 149,751 20,252 129,499 99,709
Euro million
1999 150,156 36,010 114,146 102,313 18,637 83,676 47,845
2000 143,567 22,733 120,834 164,355 23,293 141,062 − 20,787
2001         June − 777 1,485 − 2,262 − 27,509 − 35,917 8,408 26,732
         July 8,237 2,139 6,098 1,399 − 6,485 7,884 6,838
         Aug. − 1,263 1,109 − 2,372 − 1,609 − 6,532 4,923 346
         Sep. − 6,676 1,241 − 7,917 − 9,385 − 3,233 − 6,152 2,709
*Until the end of 1999, debt securities comprise the bonds and money ment funds. —7Net purchases or net sales ( −) of domestic debt securities by
market paper of domestic banks, from January 2000 all fixed-interest non-residents; transaction values. —8At issue prices. —9Net purchases or
securities. Investment fund certificates see Table VII.6. —1Net sales at net sales ( −) of foreign shares (including direct investment) by residents;
market values plus/less changes in issuers ’portfolios of their own debt transaction values. —10Domestic and foreign shares. —11Up to the end
securities. —2Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and of 1998, excluding shares under syndicate agreement. —12Net purchases
Treuhand agency. —3Net purchases or net sales ( −) of foreign debt or net sales ( −) of domestic shares (including direct investment) −before
securities by residents; transaction values. —4Domestic and foreign debt 1989 also including domestic investment fund certificates −by
securities. —5Book values; statistically adjusted. —6Residual; also non-residents; transaction values. —The figures for the latest data are to be
including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic invest- regarded as provisional; corrections are not specially marked.  
48*VII. Capital market

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
VII. Capital market
 
2. Sales of debt securities issued by borrowers domiciled in Germany  * 
  
Until the end of 1998 DM million nominal value, from 1999 euro million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item:
 Foreign  DM/euro
Mortgage Communal bonds issued Debt securities
bonds bonds issued by spe- by German-
All bank debt (Hypotheken- ( Öffentliche Other bank Industrial Public managed cialised credit
Period Total securities pfandbriefe) Pfandbriefe) institutions bonds  2 syndicates debt securities debt securities  3 
Gross sales  4 
1990 428,698 286,709 14,923 70,701 89,755 111,326 − 141,990 35,168
1991 442,089 292,092 19,478 91,489 80,738 100,386 707 149,288 32,8321992 572,767 318,522 33,633 134,363 49,195 101,333 − 254,244 57,282
1993 733,126 434,829 49,691 218,496 34,028 132,616 457 297,841 87,3091994 627,331 412,585 44,913 150,115 39,807 177,750 486 214,261 61,465
1995 620,120 470,583 43,287 208,844 41,571 176,877 200 149,338 102,719
1996 731,992 563,076 41,439 246,546 53,508 221,582 1,742 167,173 112,3701997 846,567 621,683 53,168 276,755 54,829 236,933 1,915 222,972 114,8131998 1,030,827 789,035 71,371 344,609 72,140 300,920 3,392 238,400 149,542
Euro million
1999 571,269 448,216 27,597 187,661 59,760 173,200 2,570 120,483 57,202
2000 659,148 500,895 34,528 143,107 94,556 228,703 8,114 150,137 31,5972001         Apr. 48,340 37,122 2,224 9,505 6,857 18,535 695 10,523 586
         May 52,777 37,687 1,777 5,619 6,061 24,230 2,105 12,984 −
         June 49,057 37,080 2,836 5,992 7,778 20,474 876 11,101 1,950
         July 67,332 43,499 1,862 8,756 10,731 22,150 3,300 20,534 450
         Aug. 45,757 34,362 2,019 10,076 4,452 17,816 155 11,240 102         Sep. 56,644 34,031 4,219 6,131 6,638 17,043 661 21,952 −
of which: Debt securities with a maturity of over 4 years  5 
1990 272,642 133,347 10,904 43,250 26,767 52,425 − 139,295 29,791
1991 303,326 172,171 11,911 65,642 54,878 39,741 707 130,448 22,7721992 430,479 211,775 28,594 99,627 40,267 43,286 − 218,703 51,939
1993 571,533 296,779 43,365 160,055 26,431 66,923 230 274,524 82,0491994 429,369 244,806 36,397 109,732 29,168 69,508 306 184,255 53,351
1995 409,469 271,763 30,454 141,629 28,711 70,972 200 137,503 85,221
1996 473,560 322,720 27,901 167,811 35,522 91,487 1,702 149,139 92,5821997 563,333 380,470 41,189 211,007 41,053 87,220 1,820 181,047 98,4131998 694,414 496,444 59,893 288,619 54,385 93,551 2,847 195,122 139,645
Euro million
1999 324,888 226,993 16,715 124,067 37,778 48,435 2,565 95,331 44,013
2000 319,330 209,187 20,724 102,664 25,753 60,049 6,727 103,418 27,0082001         Apr. 19,164 16,496 1,269 7,956 1,931 5,341 148 2,519 586
         May 23,464 9,785 201 4,138 536 4,910 1,850 11,829 −
         June 13,240 10,509 669 2,925 1,691 5,223 700 2,031 1,950
         July 25,882 15,294 202 3,124 6,277 5,691 3,097 7,491 400
         Aug. 20,457 10,871 488 5,356 1,120 3,907 45 9,542 92         Sep. 26,098 13,073 3,015 4,602 480 4,975 656 12,368 −
Net sales  6 
1990 226,707 140,327 − 3,922 − 72 73,287 71,036 − 67 86,449 21,717
1991 227,822 139,396 4,729 22,290 65,985 46,390 558 87,868 18,5831992 304,751 115,786 13,104 58,235 19,585 24,864 − 175 189,142 34,114
1993 403,212 159,982 22,496 122,917 −13,156 27,721 180 243,049 43,701
1994 270,088 116,519 18,184 54,316 − 6,897 50,914 − 62 153,630 21,634
1995 205,482 173,797 18,260 96,125 3,072 56,342 − 354 32,039 61,020
1996 238,427 195,058 11,909 121,929 6,020 55,199 585 42,788 69,9511997 257,521 188,525 16,471 115,970 12,476 43,607 1,560 67,437 63,1811998 327,991 264,627 22,538 162,519 18,461 61,111 3,118 60,243 84,308
Euro million
1999 209,096 170,069 2,845 80,230 31,754 55,238 2,185 36,840 22,728
2000 155,615 122,774 5,937 29,999 30,089 56,751 7,320 25,522 −16,705
2001         Apr. 5,240 1,297 54 1,060 532 − 349 695 3,248 − 1,917
         May 6,047 1,894 120 − 2,464 − 1,330 5,568 1,744 2,410 − 4,296
         June 1,629 1,294 325 − 658 − 236 1,863 856 − 521 − 535
         July 27,360 12,649 321 639 5,323 6,365 3,115 11,596 − 1,932
         Aug. − 452 − 1,095 8 − 1,513 − 514 923 118 525 − 2,027
         Sep. 7,853 3,909 2,730 − 3,306 1,643 2,842 154 3,790 − 2,688
*For definitions see the notes in the Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. —4Gross sales means only
Report 2, Capital market statistics. —1Excluding registered bank debt initial sales of newly issued securities. —5Maximum maturity according to
securities. —2Debt securities of enterprises. —3Including Federal Railways the terms of issue. — 6 Gross sales less redemptions. 
49*VII. Capital market

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
VII. Capital market
 
3. Outstanding amount of debt securities issued by borrowers domiciled in Germany  * 
  
Until the end of 1998 DM million nominal value, from 1999 euro million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item:
 Foreign  DM/euro
Mortgage Communal bonds issued
bonds bonds by German- Debt securities of
End of year All bank specialised Other bank Industrial Public managed (Öffentliche (Hypotheken-
or month Total bonds syndicates credit institutions debt securities debt securities debt securities Pfandbriefe) pfandbriefe)
DM million
1990 1,458,943 900,977 138,025 369,901 155,045 238,005 2,604 555,362 223,176
1991 1,686,765 1,040,374 142,757 392,190 221,031 284,396 3,161 643,230 241,7601992 1,991,515 1,156,162 155,862 450,424 240,616 309,259 2,983 832,370 275,8731993 2,394,728 1,316,142 178,357 573,341 227,463 336,981 3,163 1,075,422 319,5751994 2,664,814 1,432,661 196,541 627,657 219,214 389,249 3,101 1,229,053 341,210
1995 2,870,295 1,606,459 214,803 723,781 222,286 445,589 2,746 1,261,090 402,229
1996 3,108,724 1,801,517 226,711 845,710 228,306 500,790 3,331 1,303,877 472,1801997 3,366,245 1,990,041 243,183 961,679 240,782 544,397 4,891 1,371,313 535,3591998 3,694,234 2,254,668 265,721 1,124,198 259,243 605,507 8,009 1,431,558 619,668
Euro million
1999 2,097,926 1,322,863 134,814 655,024 163,284 369,741 6,280 768,783 339,560
2000 2,265,121 1,445,736 140,751 685,122 157,374 462,488 13,599 805,786 322,8562001         June 2,293,756 1,485,606 144,903 689,298 161,795 489,610 18,578 789,572 307,336
         July 2,321,116 1,498,255 145,225 689,937 167,118 495,975 21,693 801,168 305,404
         Aug. 2,320,664 1,497,160 145,233 688,424 166,605 496,898 21,811 801,693 303,377         Sep. 2,328,517 1,501,069 147,963 685,118 168,248 499,740 21,966 805,483 300,689
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  2                 Position at end-September 2002 
Maturity in years
849,986 593,582 55,124 234,492 59,292 244,673 3,316 253,087 92,379  less than 2
537,490 371,824 34,225 182,721 38,899 115,979 5,841 159,825 76,240   2 to less than 4
353,874 234,531 22,602 119,488 31,250 61,190 6,446 112,895 39,309   4 to less than  6
249,306 149,872 22,285 79,785 18,183 29,619 654 98,780 57,691   6 to less than  8
212,602 109,396 11,078 54,487 15,461 28,370 4,856 98,351 20,358   8 to less than 10
30,167 22,781 2,639 9,620 3,057 7,466 406 6,980 7,265 10 to less than 15
15,470 8,293 9 2,696 1,749 3,839 422 6,756 3,528 15 to less than 20
79,623 10,790 − 1,832 354 8,603 25 68,808 3,920 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers ’portfolios. — debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of the residual
1Excluding debt securities handed to the trustee for temporary safe amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc. 
custody. —2Calculated from month under review until final maturity for
50* 
 
4. Circulation of shares issued by residents of Germany
  
Until the end of 1998 DM million nominal value, from 1999 euro million nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies ’ capital due to
Share contribution
capital= of shares, Net increase or cash payment
merger reduction circulation at net decrease(-) and exchange contribution mining shares,
issue of change of of capital end of period during period of convertible of claims and GmbH shares, and transfer
Period bonds  1 etc. of assets legal form under review under review bonus shares other real assets and liquidation
DM million
1990 144,686 12,650 7,362 751 3,715 1,049 − 43 1,284 − 1,466
1991 151,618 6,932 3,656 610 2,416 407 − 182 411 − 386
1992 160,813 9,198 4,295 728 1,743 1,073 − 732 3,030 − 942
1993 168,005 7,190 5,224 772 387 876 10 707 − 783
1994 o 190,012 14,237 6,114 1,446 1,521 1,883 − 447 5,086 − 1,367
1995 211,231 21,217 5,894 1,498 1,421 1,421 − 623 13,739 − 2,133
1996 2 216,461 7,131 8,353 1,355 396 1,684 − 3,056 833 − 2,432
1997 221,575 5,115 4,164 2,722 370 1,767 − 2,423 197 − 1,678
1998 238,156 16,578 6,086 2,566 658 8,607 − 4,055 3,905 − 1,188
Euro million
1999 133,513 11,747 5,519 2,008 190 1,075 2,099 1,560 − 708
2000 147,629 14,115 3,620 3,694 618 8,089 − 1,986 1,827 − 1,745
2001         June 156,598 560 493 494 58 56 − 239 42 − 344
         July 157,435 838 377 347 73 49 − 34 141 − 115
         Aug. 157,851 416 685 68 17 52 − 12 −201 − 193
         Sep. 163,074 5,223 370 564 125 3,418 611 285 − 148
oFrom January 1994 including the shares of east German companies share issues out of company profits. —2Figure reduced by DM 1,902 million
(resultant increase in share circulation: DM 7,771 million). —1Including owing to revisions. 
50*VII. Capital market

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
VII. Capital market
 
5. Yields and indices on German securities
  
Yields on bonds outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices  2 , 3 
Public bonds Bank debt securities Bonds Shares
Memo item:
Listed ForeignFederal securities DM/euro
bonds
With re- With re- issued by German Germansidual matur- sidual matur- German- bond CDAX share
Industrial managed index share price index ities of over 9 ities of over 9
Total Total Total Total to 10 years bonds (REX) index (DAX) to 10 years  
4 syndicates  1, 5 
Period Average End- End-
% p.a. daily rate 1987=100 1987=1000
1990 8.9 8.8 8.8 8.7 9.0 8.9 9.0 9.2 93.50 145.00 1,398.23
1991 8.7 8.6 8.6 8.5 8.9 8.6 8.9 9.2 96.35 148.16 1,577.981992 8.1 8.0 8.0 7.8 8.3 8.1 8.7 8.8 101.54 134.92 1,545.051993 6.4 6.3 6.3 6.5 6.5 6.8 6.9 6.8 109.36 191.13 2,266.681994 6.7 6.7 6.7 6.9 6.8 7.2 7.0 6.9 99.90 176.87 2,106.58
1995 6.5 6.5 6.5 6.9 6.5 7.2 6.9 6.8 109.18 181.47 2,253.88
1996 5.6 5.6 5.6 6.2 5.5 6.4 5.8 5.8 110.37 217.47 2,888.691997 5.1 5.1 5.1 5.6 5.0 5.9 5.2 5.5 111.01 301.47 4,249.691998 4.5 4.4 4.4 4.6 4.5 4.9 5.0 5.3 118.18 343.64 5,002.391999 4.3 4.3 4.3 4.5 4.3 4.9 5.0 5.4 110.60 445.95 6,958.14
2000 5.4 5.3 5.2 5.3 5.6 5.8 6.2 6.3 112.48 396.59 6,433.612001         May 5.1 5.0 5.0 5.1 5.1 5.5 5.9 6.0 111.20 373.26 6,123.26
         June 5.0 4.9 4.9 5.0 5.1 5.5 5.8 5.9 111.91 368.48 6,058.38
         July 5.0 4.9 4.9 5.0 5.1 5.5 5.8 6.2 112.89 355.94 5,861.19
         Aug. 4.8 4.7 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.3 5.6 6.1 113.66 321.43 5,188.17         Sep. 4.7 4.7 4.6 4.8 4.7 5.2 5.6 6.2 114.23 272.65 4,308.15
         Oct. 4.5 4.4 4.4 4.6 4.5 5.0 6.1 6.3 116.03 289.02 4,559.13
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of included in the calculation. Monthly figures are calculated on the basis of
issue of over 4 years, if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Conver- the yields on all the business days of a month. The annual figures are the un-
tible debt securities, etc., debt securities with unscheduled redemption, weighted means of the monthly figures. —2End of year or month. —
zero-coupon bonds, floating-rate notes and bonds not denominated in DM 3Source: German Stock Exchange plc. —4Only bonds eligible as underlying
or euros are not included. Group yields for the various categories of secu- instruments for futures contracts are included; calculated as unweightedrities are weighted with the amounts outstanding of the debt securities averages. — 5 As far as quoted on German stock exchanges. 
51* 
 
6. Sales and purchases of investment fund certificates in Germany
  
Sales of investment fund certificates Purchases
Domestic funds (sales receipts) Residents
Investment funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Non-banks  2 and loan associations  1 
of which
of which of which
Sales Open- Special- Foreign Foreign= Secur- end ised invest- invest-total Money ities- real invest- ment mentpur- market based estate ment Foreign fund cer- fund cer- Non-resi-chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  
3 Total Total tificates Total tificates dents  4 
Period
DM million
1990 25,788 26,857 7,904 − 8,032 −128 18,952 −1,069 25,766 4,296 − 362 21,470 −707 22
1991 50,064 37,492 13,738 − 11,599 2,144 23,754 12,572 49,890 8,594 − 5 41,296 12,577 174
1992 81,514 20,474 −3,102 −− 9,189 6,087 23,575 61,040 81,518 10,495 2,152 71,023 58,888 − 4
1993 80,259 61,672 20,791 − 6,075 14,716 40,881 18,587 76,258 16,982 2,476 59,276 16,111 4,001
1994 130,995 108,914 63,263 31,180 24,385 7,698 45,650 22,081 125,943 9,849 − 689 116,094 22,770 5,052
1995 55,246 54,071 16,777 6,147 3,709 6,921 37,294 1,175 56,295 12,172 188 44,123 987 −1,049
1996 83,386 79,110 16,517 −4,706 7,273 13,950 62,592 4,276 85,704 19,924 1,685 65,780 2,591 −2,318
1997 145,805 138,945 31,501 −5,001 30,066 6,436 107,445 6,860 149,977 35,924 340 114,053 6,520 −4,172
1998 187,216 169,748 38,998 5,772 27,814 4,690 130,750 17,468 190,309 43,937 961 146,372 16,507 −3,093
Euro million
1999 111,079 97,197 37,684 3,347 23,269 7,395 59,513 13,882 105,370 19,862 − 637 85,508 14,519 5,709
2000 117,020 85,160 39,712 −2,188 36,818 −2,824 45,448 31,860 106,197 14,454 92 91,743 31,768 10,823
2001         May 2,290 902 1,146 − 6 385 420 −244 1,388 2,964 − 466 164 3,430 1,224 −674
         June 4,558 3,292 1,741 794 25 702 1,551 1,266 4,366 1,467 461 2,899 805 192
         July 6,866 5,977 2,402 663 786 661 3,574 889 7,068 − 956 97 8,024 792 −202
         Aug. 5,061 3,935 2,273 1,464 60 690 1,662 1,126 5,293 503 148 4,790 978 −232
         Sep. 2,158 412 −220 1,471 −2,193 651 632 1,746 2,205 849 687 1,356 1,059 − 47
1Book values. —2Residual. —3Net purchases or net sales ( −) of foreign non-residents; transaction values (before 1989 classified as shares). —The
investment fund certificates by residents; transaction values. —4Net figures for the latest data are to be regarded as provisional; corrections are
purchases or net sales ( −) of domestic investment fund certificates by not specially marked. 
51*VII. Capital market

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
1. Finances of the public sector *
    
Central, regional and local authorities  1 Social security funds  2 Public sector, total
Receipts Expenditure
of which
Balance Balance Balance
Other of of of
Person- operat- receipts receipts receipts
of nel ex- ing ex- Capital Finan- and Ex- and Ex- andwhich pend- pend- Current Interest forma- cial expend- Re- pend- expend- Re- pend- expend-
Period Total Taxes  
3 Total  4 iture iture grants paid tion aid  5 iture ceipts  6 iture iture ceipts iture iture
DM billion
1997 1,014.3 797.2 1,108.9 325.0 135.7 356.3 132.1 80.1 79.2 −94.5 797.3 794.5 + 2.9 1,705.3 1,797.0 −91.7
1998  p 1,072.1 833.0 1,128.8 325.5 137.4 373.7 133.7 79.7 79.8 −56.7 811.9 808.5 + 3.4 1,765.6 1,818.9 −53.3
1999  pe 1,107.0 886.1 1,162.0 330.0 143.0 395.5 136.5 81.0 74.5 −55.0 840.0 832.0 + 8.0 1,810.5 1,857.5 −47.0
2000  pe 1,198.0 913.9 1,164.5 330.5 145.0 401.0 132.5 80.5 74.5 + 33.5 849.0 848.5 + 0.5 1,907.5 1,873.5 + 34.0
2000         2nd qtr 277.6 231.6 265.3 77.4 32.4 98.3 25.5 16.3 14.3 + 12.3 208.9 210.6 −1.7 451.0 440.5 + 10.6
         3rd qtr 362.8 222.9 282.2 77.0 33.7 98.1 36.1 19.7 17.9 + 80.5 210.4 211.5 −1.1 539.4 459.9 + 79.5
         4th qtr p 304.8 254.5 329.0 96.8 43.2 103.6 29.1 28.3 27.6 −24.2 221.9 218.1 + 3.8 497.3 517.8 −20.4
2001         1st qtr p,  7 247.9 205.6 289.2 77.3 32.0 108.5 43.0 12.8 15.2 −41.3 212.9 214.6 −1.7 417.6 460.6 −43.0
         2nd qtr p 272.4 216.9 267.5 76.9 30.9 105.6 24.6 15.7 12.5 + 5.0 215.4 218.7 −3.3 449.0 447.3 + 1.6
Euro billion
1999  pe 566.0 453.1 594.1 168.7 73.1 202.2 69.8 41.4 38.1 −28.1 429.5 425.4 + 4.1 925.7 949.7 −24.0
2000  pe 612.5 467.3 595.4 169.0 74.1 205.0 67.7 41.2 38.1 + 17.1 434.1 433.8 + 0.3 975.3 957.9 + 17.4
2000         2nd qtr 141.9 118.4 135.7 39.6 16.6 50.3 13.0 8.3 7.3 + 6.3 106.8 107.7 −0.9 230.6 225.2 + 5.4
         3rd qtr 185.5 113.9 144.3 39.4 17.2 50.1 18.5 10.1 9.1 + 41.2 107.6 108.1 −0.5 275.8 235.1 + 40.6
         4th qtr p 155.8 130.1 168.2 49.5 22.1 53.0 14.9 14.5 14.1 −12.4 113.5 111.5 + 1.9 254.3 264.7 −10.4
2001         1st qtr p,  7 126.7 105.1 147.8 39.5 16.4 55.5 22.0 6.5 7.8 −21.1 108.8 109.7 −0.9 213.5 235.5 −22.0
         2nd qtr p 139.3 110.9 136.7 39.3 15.8 54.0 12.6 8.0 6.4 + 2.5 110.1 111.8 −1.7 229.6 228.7 + 0.8
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical insurance are estimated. —3The tax revenue shown here is taken from the
Office. —*The budgetary definition used here differs from the methods budget statistics and may differ from the data given in Table VIII. 4, which
employed for the government account of the national accounts and, in case are based on the tax statistics. —4Including discrepancies in clearing
of the quarterly figures, in some respects also from the financial statistics. — transactions between the central, regional and local authorities. —
1Incl. subsidiary budgets. The quarterly figures, unlike the annual figures 5Expenditure on investment grants, loans and acquisition of participating
based on the annual accounts statistics of the Federal Statistical Office, do interests. —6Including Federal Government liquidity assistance to the
not include municipal special-purpose associations and various special Federal Labour Office. —7Owing to modifications of the system of
accounts. For the receipts of Bundesbank profit see footnote 1 to Table VIII. classification, especially shifts between Other operating expenditur e and
2.—2The annual figures differ from the sum of the quarterly figures, as Current grants. 
the latter are all provisional. The quarterly figures for some fields of
2. Finances of the Federal Government, L änder Governments and local authorities *
  
  
Federal Government L änder Governments Local authorities
Western  2,  3 Eastern  3 Western  3 Eastern  3 
Period Receipts  1 Expenditure Receipts Expenditure Receipts Expenditure Receipts Expenditure Receipts Expenditure
DM billion
1997 416.8 480.3 349.2 376.5 94.3 105.2 222.9 226.9 52.6 54.2
1998 439.0 495.6 360.5 380.3 96.4 104.7 231.4 226.3 51.5 52.41999  
pe 470.0 521.5 374.5 385.0 97.5 105.0 236.0 232.0 51.0 51.5
2000  pe 570.0 517.5 381.5 393.0 98.0 106.0 238.0 235.5 50.0 50.0
2000         2nd qtr 119.8 117.4 96.5 91.5 22.8 22.7 57.0 55.1 12.1 11.5
         3rd qtr 4 214.1 130.8 88.9 91.1 25.0 25.0 59.0 57.5 12.2 12.3
         4th qtr p 137.4 140.8 103.8 113.9 27.3 33.9 71.6 67.6 15.1 15.0
2001         1st qtr p 99.4 129.9 87.7 97.5 23.5 22.7 50.0 56.3 10.3 10.7
         2nd qtr p 112.6 117.1 90.5 93.0 22.5 23.2 56.3 55.0 11.4 11.4
Euro billion
1999  pe 240.3 266.6 191.5 196.8 49.9 53.7 120.7 118.6 26.1 26.3
2000  pe 291.4 264.6 195.1 200.9 50.1 54.2 121.7 120.4 25.6 25.6
2000         2nd qtr 61.3 60.0 49.3 46.8 11.7 11.6 29.1 28.2 6.2 5.9
         3rd qtr 4 109.4 66.9 45.5 46.6 12.8 12.8 30.2 29.4 6.2 6.3
         4th qtr p 70.2 72.0 53.1 58.2 14.0 17.3 36.6 34.6 7.7 7.7
2001         1st qtr p 50.8 66.4 44.8 49.8 12.0 11.6 25.5 28.8 5.2 5.5
         2nd qtr p 57.6 59.9 46.3 47.5 11.5 11.8 28.8 28.1 5.8 5.8
52*Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Fund for Inherited Liabilities. —2Including Berlin, Bremen, Hamburg.
Office. —*See corresponding footnote to Table VIII. 1. —1The Including Berlin (East). —3The quarterly figures, unlike the annual figures
Bundesbank profit transfer is shown in full until 1994; from 1995 only the based on the annual accounts statistics of the Federal Statistical Office, d o
DM 7 billion scheduled in the budget is shown. Since that time, receipts not include various special accounts. —4Including receipts from the UMTS
over and above the scheduled amount accrue directly to the Redemption licence auctions. 
52*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
3. Finances of the Government in the national accounts *
    
Up to the end of 1998, DM billion / from 1999, euro billion
Item 1993 1994 1995  1 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000  2 
Receipts 1,517.6 1,607.7 1,647.4 1,703.5 1,726.1 1,775.7 943.1 963.2
of which
Taxes 771.0 807.6 825.7 849.7 856.9 897.2 490.3 511.6Social security contributions 588.2 632.2 662.4 696.6 719.9 727.5 375.5 378.4
Expenditure 1,618.5 1,689.7 1,764.3 1,826.0 1,826.0 1,859.2 973.8 990.1
of which
Intermediate input 140.3 140.6 143.1 142.5 140.1 144.4 77.3 79.1Employee compensation 301.7 306.8 315.9 319.6 319.0 319.3 165.1 164.5Interest 108.5 113.5 129.0 131.9 133.3 136.3 70.0 68.1Social security benefits  
3 792.4 848.8 902.4 970.3 984.4 998.2 522.7 532.6
Gross capital formation 90.9 90.3 80.6 76.4 69.4 69.9 37.5 37.6
Financial balance − 100.9 − 82.0 − 116.8 − 122.5 − 99.9 − 83.5 − 30.7 − 26.9
as a percentage of the grossdomestic product − 3.1 − 2.4 − 3.3 − 3.4 − 2.7 − 2.2 − 1.6 − 1.3
Memo item
Deficit of the Treuhand agency − 38.1 − 37.1 . .....
Debt as defined in
Maastricht Treatyas a percentage of the grossdomestic product 47.1 49.4 57.1 59.8 61.0 60.9 61.3 60.3
Source: Federal Statistical Office. —*Figures according to ESA 95. In unadjusted terms, the deficit amounted to 10.0% of GDP. —2Adjusted
Notwithstanding the figures shown by the Federal Statistical Office, for receipts from UMTS licence auctions. In the accounts of the Federalcalculated including −with no impact on the balance −customs duties, the Statistical Office, such receipts (50.85 euro billion) are recorded under "net
EU share in VAT revenue and EU subsidies. —1Adjusted for the balance of increase in non-produced assets", with the result that government spending
notional capital transfers between the public sector and the corporate is lower and a surplus (23.9 euro billion or 1.2% of GDP) is shown. —
sector, mainly in connection with the winding-up of the Treuhand agency. 3 Monetary social security benefits and social benefits in kind. 
4. Tax revenue of the central, regional and local authorities
    
Federal and L änder Governments and European Union Local authorities  4 
Länder Governments
of which Balance of
Federal of which European in the untransferred
Period Total Total  1 Government  2 Total New L änder Union  3 Total New L änder tax shares  5 
DM million
1999 886,124 775,945 414,101 322,172 . 39,672 110,178 9,408 + 2
2000 913,867 802,118 428,394 331,022 . 42,702 111,953 9,574 − 204
2001         2nd qtr 215,144 188,350 99,395 77,895 . 11,061 26,437 2,259 + 357
         3rd qtr p . 188,451 104,396 76,392 . 7,663 . . .
2001         June . 78,912 41,737 33,521 . 3,654 . . .
         July . 60,941 32,835 24,352 . 3,754 . . .
         Aug. . 57,464 34,201 22,642 . 622 . . .         Sep.
p . 70,045 37,360 29,399 . 3,287 . . .
Euro million
1999 453,068 396,734 211,726 164,724 . 20,284 56,333 4,810 + 1
2000 467,253 410,116 219,034 169,249 . 21,833 57,241 4,895 − 104
2001         2nd qtr 110,001 96,302 50,820 39,827 . 5,655 13,517 1,155 + 183
         3rd qtr p . 96,353 53,377 39,059 . 3,918 . . .
2001         June . 40,347 21,340 17,139 . 1,868 . . .
         July . 31,159 16,788 12,451 . 1,920 . . .
         Aug. . 29,381 17,487 11,576 . 318 . . .         Sep.
p . 35,814 19,102 15,031 . 1,680 . . .
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. —1Including receipts from the revenue. —4Including local authority taxes of Berlin, Bremen and
Equalisation of Burdens levies.  —2Before deduction of supplementary Hamburg. —5Difference between the local authorities ’share in the
Federal grants and shares in the revenue of mineral oil tax remitted to the income taxes received by the L änder cash offices in the period in question
Länder Governments. —3Including the (GNP-related) receipts accruing to (see Table VIII. 5) and the amounts passed on to the local authorities during
the EU from 1988 to the detriment of the Federal Government ’s tax the same period. 
53*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
5. Tax revenue, by type
    
Joint taxes Memo
item
Income taxes  2 Turnover taxes  5,  6 Local
author-
As- Invest- ities’
sessed ment Value- Turnover Share EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income added tax on in trade Federal L änder customs income
Period Total  1 Total tax  3 tax tion tax taxes  4 Total tax imports tax  6,  7 taxes  8 taxes  8 duties taxes  9 
DM million
1999 825,383 360,671 261,708 21,293 43,731 33,940 268,253 218,271 49,982 10,685 141,280 38,263 6,231 49,438
2000 852,966 376,266 265,471 23,909 46,109 40,777 275,520 209,547 65,974 10,797 147,672 36,072 6,638 50,849
2001         2nd qtr 200,133 84,413 60,612 6,210 840 16,752 65,899 49,050 16,850 2,683 35,663 9,948 1,527 11,783
         3rd qtr p 200,423 80,818 61,642 6,353 −1,251 14,074 67,485 50,763 16,722 2,858 38,179 9,461 1,622 11,972
2001         June 84,171 47,046 20,973 10,341 7,659 8,074 21,245 15,901 5,344 10 12,329 3,066 476 5,259
         July 64,511 21,718 22,602 −2,925 −3,132 5,173 23,116 17,008 6,109 2,104 13,690 3,305 576 3,569
         Aug. 60,821 20,436 20,466 −2,072 −3,907 5,949 22,764 17,080 5,684 708 13,046 3,318 549 3,356
         Sep. p 75,092 38,664 18,574 11,350 5,788 2,951 21,604 16,675 4,929 46 11,444 2,838 497 5,047
Euro million
1999 422,012 184,408 133,809 10,887 22,359 17,353 137,155 111,600 25,555 5,463 72,235 19,564 3,186 25,277
2000 436,115 192,382 135,733 12,225 23,575 20,849 140,871 107,139 33,732 5,521 75,503 18,444 3,394 25,998
2001         2nd qtr 102,327 43,160 30,991 3,175 429 8,565 33,694 25,079 8,615 1,372 18,234 5,086 781 6,025
         3rd qtr p 102,475 41,322 31,517 3,248 −639 7,196 34,504 25,955 8,550 1,461 19,521 4,837 829 6,121
2001         June 43,036 24,054 10,723 5,287 3,916 4,128 10,862 8,130 2,732 5 6,304 1,567 243 2,689
         July 32,984 11,104 11,556 −1,496 −1,601 2,645 11,819 8,696 3,123 1,076 7,000 1,690 295 1,825
         Aug. 31,097 10,449 10,464 −1,059 −1,997 3,042 11,639 8,733 2,906 362 6,670 1,696 280 1,716
         Sep. p 38,394 19,768 9,497 5,803 2,959 1,509 11,046 8,526 2,520 23 5,851 1,451 254 2,580
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. —1This total, unlike that in Table VIII. 1999 5.63% went to the Federal Government in advance to finance the
4, includes neither the revenue from Equalisation of Burdens levies, trade supplementary Federal grant to the pension insurance funds; 2.2% of thetax on returns and capital (less Federal and L änder shares in trade tax), the balance went to the local authorities, of the new balance: 50.5% to the
taxes on land and buildings and other local authority taxes, nor the balance Federal Government, 49.5% to the L änder Governments, from 2000 50.25%
of untransferred tax shares. —2The yield of wage tax and assessed income to the Federal Government, 49.75% to the L änder Governments. The EU
tax was distributed among the Federal Government, the L änder share must likewise be deducted from the Federal Government ’s share
Governments and the local authorities in the ratio of 42.5 : 42.5 : 15 from stated. —6Since 1991 the distribution of turnover tax and the level and
1980, and the yield of corporation tax and investment income tax between distribution of the share in trade tax have been affected by the financing ofthe Federal Government and the L änder Governments in the ratio of 50 : 50 the debt service of the "German Unity" Fund. —7Federal Government and
from 1970. —3From 1996, after deduction of child benefit. —4From L änder Governments 50% each. From 1998 Federal Government 42.2%,
February 1993 including revenue from the tax on interest income, in which L änder Governments 57.8%. —8For breakdown see Table VIII. 6. —9From
the local authorities have a share of 12%. —5From 1998 3.64% and from 1998 including the share in turnover taxes. 
6. Individual taxes of the Federal Government, L änder Governments and local authorities
    
Federal taxes L änder taxes Local authority taxes
Insur- Electri- Other Motor Inherit- Other Taxes on Other
Mineral Tobacco Spirits ance city Federal vehicle Property ance Beer L änder Trade land and local
Period oil tax tax tax tax tax taxes  1 tax tax tax tax taxes tax  2 buildings taxes  3 
DM million
1999 71,278 22,795 4,367 13,917 3,551 25,373 13,767 1,050 5,977 1,655 15,815 52,924 16,890 1,612
2000 73,982 22,381 4,207 14,166 6,563 26,374 13,720 847 5,832 1,650 14,024 52,857 17,307 1,534
2001         2nd qtr 19,160 4,890 909 2,554 2,060 6,091 4,448 145 1,504 427 3,425 12,197 5,097 400
         3rd qtr p 19,858 6,080 977 3,068 2,308 5,888 4,020 131 1,496 451 3,364 . . .
2001         June 6,419 1,117 317 759 711 3,006 1,432 38 427 176 993 . . .
         July 6,851 2,891 403 682 1,086 1,778 1,475 42 553 138 1,096 . . .         Aug. 6,527 2,164 310 1,758 697 1,589 1,349 44 590 152 1,183 . . .         Sep.
p 6,480 1,025 265 628 526 2,521 1,196 45 352 160 1,085 . . .
Euro million
1999 36,444 11,655 2,233 7,116 1,816 12,973 7,039 537 3,056 846 8,086 27,060 8,636 824
2000 37,826 11,443 2,151 7,243 3,356 13,485 7,015 433 2,982 844 7,170 27,025 8,849 784
2001         2nd qtr 9,796 2,500 465 1,306 1,053 3,114 2,274 74 769 218 1,751 6,236 2,606 204
         3rd qtr p 10,153 3,109 500 1,569 1,180 3,011 2,055 67 765 230 1,720 . . .
2001         June 3,282 571 162 388 364 1,537 732 19 219 90 508 . . .
         July 3,503 1,478 206 349 555 909 754 22 283 71 561 . . .         Aug. 3,337 1,106 158 899 356 813 690 22 302 78 605 . . .         Sep.
p 3,313 524 135 321 269 1,289 611 23 180 82 555 . . .
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. —1Other excise taxes and the income until mid-1992, and again since the beginning of 1995. —2On returns and
and corporation tax surcharge ("solidarity surcharge") levied from mid-1991 capital. — 3 Including tax-like receipts.   
54*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
7. Indebtedness of the public sector *
    
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999, euro million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
5−year lending owing to
Bundes- Treasury special Federal Debt by credit Social German Equalisa-
End of year bank discount Treasury Federal savings secur- institu- security unifica- tionor month Total advances paper  
1 notes  2,  3 bonds  2 bonds ities  2 tions  4 funds Other  4 tion 5 claims Other  6 
Public authorities
1994 1,659,632 − 20,506 190,632 181,737 59,334 443,958 644,459 1,337 28,997 1,391 87,098 184
1995 1,993,476 − 8,072 240,514 170,719 78,456 586,573 764,875 1,263 40,621 15,106 87,079 198
1996 2,126,320 − 27,609 231,102 176,164 96,391 618,262 836,582 770 39,450 9,960 89,826 203
1997 2,215,893 − 26,336 249,507 177,721 99,317 662,516 879,021 663 29,907 1,315 89,376 216
1998 2,280,154 − 25,631 227,536 199,774 92,698 723,403 894,456 550 26,073 1,249 88,582 202
1999 1,199,975 − 12,594 102,364 120,998 41,621 416,051 450,111 281 10,200 476 45,175 105
2000         Sep. 1,221,702 − 11,850 106,308 123,235 38,131 430,134 457,350 280 9,720 434 44,146 114
         Dec. 1,211,439 − 11,616 109,951 126,276 35,991 438,887 433,443 211 10,524 285 44,146 108
2001         Mar. 1,200,555 − 11,798 118,818 127,739 34,560 443,726 443,378 203 9,882 238 10,103 111
         June 1,194,812 − 13,746 124,493 129,892 30,245 445,785 429,114 185 10,876 238 10,125 113
Federal Government 7,  8
1994 712,488 − 15,870 66,987 181,737 59,334 359,833 16,654 50 875 1,391 9,576 183
1995 756,834 − 8,072 52,354 170,719 78,456 402,307 26,572 15 8,119 1,360 8,684 176
1996 839,883 − 26,789 55,289 176,164 96,391 434,295 32,988 5 7,766 1,330 8,684 183
1997 905,691 − 25,286 78,848 177,721 99,317 481,619 31,845 5 870 1,300 8,684 197
1998 957,983 − 24,666 84,760 199,274 92,698 519,718 24,125 − 2,603 1,270 8,684 186
1999 714,069 − 11,553 44,335 120,498 41,621 379,808 67,872 60 2,568 476 45,175 104
2000         Sep. 730,423 − 11,775 44,416 121,601 38,131 392,785 74,820 57 2,145 434 44,146 113
         Dec. 715,819 − 11,516 44,678 123,642 35,991 400,490 52,836 29 2,099 285 44,146 107
2001         Mar. 699,682 − 11,798 45,431 121,605 34,560 409,855 64,045 29 1,908 238 10,103 110
         June 691,437 − 13,656 48,966 123,758 30,245 411,401 51,182 29 1,725 238 10,125 113
West German L änder Governments
1994 415,052 −− 89,094 . . − 311,622 623 11,453 . 2,259 2
1995 442,536 −− 91,152 . . − 339,084 358 11,940 . − 2
1996 477,361 − 320 91,969 . . − 372,449 54 12,567 . − 2
1997 505,297 − 350 86,639 . . − 406,499 47 11,760 . − 2
1998 525,380 − 520 83,390 . . − 430,709 43 10,716 . − 2
1999 274,208 − 150 43,033 . . − 226,022 23 4,979 . − 1
2000         Sep. 275,454 −− 46,196 . . − 224,238 23 4,997 . . 1
         Dec. 282,431 −− 48,702 . . − 227,914 22 5,792 . . 1
2001         Mar. 285,738 −− 52,396 . . − 227,800 23 5,518 . . 1
         June 288,048 −− 54,295 . . − 227,395 10 6,347 . . 1
East German L änder Governments
1994 55,650 −− 20,350 . . − 35,065 5 230 . . .
1995 69,151 −− 25,345 . . − 43,328 17 461 . . .
1996 80,985 − 500 26,820 . . − 53,483 − 182 . . .
1997 90,174 − 700 27,540 . . − 61,697 15 222 . . .
1998 98,192 − 445 27,228 . . − 70,289 − 230 . . .
1999 53,199 − 891 14,517 . . − 37,602 − 189 . . .
2000         Sep. 53,773 − 75 15,217 . . − 38,377 − 103 . . .
         Dec. 55,712 − 100 16,092 . . − 39,339 − 182 . . .
2001         Mar. 56,030 −− 17,011 . . − 38,908 − 111 . . .
         June 56,184 − 90 17,303 . . − 38,360 − 432 . . .
West German local authorities 9
1994 153,375 . . − . . 100 147,558 288 5,429 . . .
1995 157,271 . . − . . 1,000 151,127 283 4,861 . . .
1996 158,613 . . 200 . . 1,280 152,311 174 4,648 . . .1997 160,162 . . 300 . . 1,330 154,145 149 4,238 . . .1998 158,960 . . 300 . . 1,330 153,208 119 4,003 . . .1999 81,511 . . 153 . . 680 78,726 53 1,898 . . .
2000         Sep. 82,420 . . 153 . . 680 79,618 51 1,917 . . .
         Dec. 81,414 . . 153 . . 680 78,656 33 1,891 . . .
2001         Mar. 81,935 . . 153 . . 680 79,184 26 1,892 . . .
         June 82,676 . . 153 . . 680 79,925 26 1,892 . . .
East German local authorities  9
1994 32,235 . . 125 . . 400 30,837 364 509 . . .1995 36,830 . . 225 . . 400 35,427 347 431 . . .1996 38,976 . . 225 . . 400 37,922 308 121 . . .1997 38,688 . . 225 . . 400 37,623 273 167 . . .1998 39,873 . . 225 . . 460 38,777 255 156 . . .1999 20,726 . . 51 . . 335 20,138 124 78 . . .
2000         Sep. 20,682 . . 51 . . 335 20,091 128 77 . . .
         Dec. 17,048 . . 51 . . 335 16,497 114 50 . . .
2001         Mar. 16,873 . . 51 . . 335 16,322 112 51 . . .
         June 16,796 . . − . . 335 16,297 112 51 . . .
For footnotes see end of the table. 
55*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
7. Indebtedness of the public sector * (cont ’d)
    
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999, euro million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
5−year lending owing to
Bundes- Treasury special Federal Debt by credit Social German Equalisa-
End of year bank discount Treasury Federal savings secur- institu- security unifica- tionor month Total advances paper  
1 notes  2,  3 bonds  2 bonds ities  2 tions  4 funds Other  4 tion 5 claims Other  6 
“German Unity “Fund / Indemnification Fund 7
1994 89,187 . 897 8,867 − . 43,859 33,744 5 1,816 . . .
1995 87,146 . − 8,891 − . 44,398 31,925 5 1,927 . . .
1996 83,556 . −−− . 44,321 38,020 5 1,210 . . .
1997 79,717 . −−− . 44,347 34,720 5 645 . . .
1998 79,413 . −−− . 47,998 30,975 − 440 . . .
1999 40,234 . − 275 500 . 28,978 10,292 − 189 . . .
2000         Sep. 41,189 . − 275 1,634 . 29,298 9,814 − 169 . . .
         Dec. 40,629 . − 275 2,634 . 29,797 7,790 − 133 . . .
2001         Mar. 41,398 . − 3,775 6,134 . 24,883 6,529 − 7 7...
         June 40,680 . − 3,775 6,134 . 24,948 5,746 − 7 7...
ERP Special Fund 7
1994 28,043 . .... 10,298 17,745 −− ...
1995 34,200 . .... 10,745 23,455 −− ...
1996 34,135 . .... 10,750 23,385 −− ...
1997 33,650 . .... 10,810 22,840 −− ...
1998 34,159 . .... 11,944 20,988 − 1,227 . . .
1999 16,028 . .... 6,250 9,458 21 299 . . .
2000         Sep. 17,761 . .... 7,036 10,392 21 312 . . .
         Dec. 18,386 . .... 7,585 10,411 13 377 . . .
2001         Mar. 18,899 . .... 7,972 10,588 13 326 . . .
         June 18,990 . .... 8,420 10,209 8 353 . . .
Federal Railways Fund 7,  8
1994 71,173 . . 5,208 − . 29,467 29,232 − 7,265 . . .
1995 78,400 . . 3,848 − . 28,992 39,005 140 6,415 . . .
1996 77,785 . . 1,882 − . 28,749 41,537 130 5,489 . . .
1997 77,254 . . 1,927 − . 25,634 44,807 115 4,772 . . .
1998 77,246 . . − 500 . 31,648 42,488 79 2,531 . . .
1999         June 39,231 . . − 1,023 . 16,805 20,401 34 968 . . .
Debt-Processing Fund / Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities 7,  8
1994 102,428 . 3,740 . . . . 22,003 2 1,420 . 75,263 .
1995 328,888 . − 58,699 − . 98,731 72,732 98 6,468 13,745 78,395 21
1996 331,918 . − 54,718 − . 98,468 81,380 95 7,468 8,630 81,142 19
1997 322,032 . − 54,028 − . 98,377 81,616 54 7,233 15 80,692 17
1998 304,978 . − 31,633 − . 110,006 79,226 54 4,167 −20 79,899 15
1999         June 151,097 . − 11,127 2,000 . 58,897 36,133 27 2,015 −9 40,902 4
“Use of Hard Coal “Equalisation Fund 7,  8
1995 2,220 . .... − 2,220 −− ...
1996 3,108 . .... − 3,108 −− ...
1997 3,229 . .... − 3,229 −− ...
1998 3,971 . .... 3 0 0 3,671 −− ...
1999         June 2,302 . .... 1 5 3 2,148 −− ...
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical accordance with the London Debts agreement; excluding debt securities i n
Office. —*Excluding public authorities ’mutual indebtedness. — own portfolios. —7The debt incurred through the joint issue of Federal
1Predominantly Treasury discount paper. —2Excluding paper in the securities is recorded here −in contrast to the capital market statistics −
issuers ’portfolios. —3Länder Treasury paper also covers the long-term under the Federal Government and its special funds in accordance with the
maturity category. —4Mainly loans against borrowers ’notes. Including agreed distribution ratios. —8Since July 1, 1999 the Federal Government
loans raised abroad. Other loans from non-banks, including loans from has assumed joint responsibility for the debts of the Redemption Fund forsupplementary public pension funds and liabilities arising from the Inherited Liabilities, the Federal Railway Fund and the Equalisation Fund forinvestment assistance levy. —5Old liabilities arising from residential Safeguarding the Use of Coal. The special funds mentioned are only
construction and liabilities arising from residential construction by the recorded under the Federal Government from July. —9Data other than
former GDR ’s armed forces and from residential construction in connection end-of-year figures have been estimated. Including indebtedness of munici-
with the return of the troops of the former USSR in eastern Germany to pal special-purpose associations. their home country. —6Old debt mainly expressed in foreign currency, in
56*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
8. Changes in public sector indebtedness *
    
Net borrowing  1 
Level at end of 2000 20012000 Juni 2001 Total 1st qtr 2nd qtr 3rd qtr 4th qtr 1st half 1st qtr 2nd qtr
Item Euro million
Borrowers
Federal Government  2 715,819 691,437 + 1,755 + 12,926 −3,803 + 7,227 −14,594 −24,393 −16,138 −8,256
"German Unity" Fund 40,425 40,433 + 323 + 320 + 455 + 128 − 580 + 9 + 748 − 739
ERP Special Fund 18,386 18,990 + 2,358 + 6 + 343 + 1,385 + 625 + 604 + 513 + 91Indemnification Fund 204 247 + 72 + 18 + 14 + 20 + 20 + 43 + 21 + 22
West  German  Länder 282,431 288,048 + 8,223 + 1,510 + 136 − 400 + 6,976 + 5,617 + 3,307 + 2,310 Governments
East German  Länder 55,712 56,184 + 2,513 − 999 + 755 + 817 + 1,940 + 472 + 318 + 154 Governments
West German local authorities  3 81,414 82,676 + 701 + 194 + 703 − 26 − 170 + 1,250 + 815 + 435
East German local authorities  3 17,048 16,796 + 109 + 32 + 66 − 77 + 87 − 124 − 22 − 102
Total 1,211,439 1,194,812 + 16,055 + 14,006 −1,330 + 9,074 −5,695 −16,524 −10,438 −6,086
Types of debt
Treasury discount paper  4 11,616 13,746 − 978 − 804 − 62 + 121 − 233 + 2,129 + 182 + 1,948
Treasury notes  5 109,951 124,493 + 7,587 + 136 + 1,660 + 2,149 + 3,643 + 14,542 + 8,866 + 5,676
Five-year special Federal bonds  5 126,276 129,892 + 5,278 + 725 + 1,371 + 143 + 3,041 + 3,616 + 1,464 + 2,153
Federal savings bonds 35,991 30,245 −5,630 − 696 −1,725 −1,069 −2,140 −5,746 −1,431 −4,315
Debt securities  5 438,887 445,785 + 22,837 + 8,103 + 2,517 + 3,463 + 8,754 + 6,897 + 4,838 + 2,059
Direct lending by
credit institutions  6 433,443 429,114 −12,082 + 6,947 −5,152 + 5,472 −19,349 −4,213 + 10,382 −14,596
Loans from social security funds 211 185 − 70 + 1 − 1− 1− 70 − 26 − 8− 18
Other loans  6 10,484 10,836 + 324 − 467 + 76 − 90 + 805 + 351 − 643 + 994
Old debt  7 393 351 − 188 − 42 − 13 + 22 − 155 − 43 − 45 + 2
Equalisation claims 44,146 10,125 −1,024 + 102 − 1−1,135 + 10 −34,033 −34,044 + 11
Investment assistance levy 40 40 − 0− 0− 0− 0− 0+ 0 − 0+ 0
Total 1,211,439 1,194,812 + 16,055 + 14,006 −1,330 + 9,074 −5,695 −16,524 −10,438 −6,086
Creditors
Banking system
Bundesbank 4,440 4,440 −−−−−−−−
Credit institutions 565,438 550,252 −25,933 + 4,546 −10,632 −3,401 −16,446 −15,083 −3,235 −11,848
Domestic non-banks
Social security funds 205 200 − 77 + 0 + 0 − 0− 77 − 5− 0− 5
Other  8,  r 200,674 211,662 + 20,846 + 10,431 −5,269 + 3,834 + 11,850 + 10,988 + 4,966 + 6,022
Foreign creditors  pe, r 440,682 428,258 + 21,219 − 971 + 14,572 + 8,641 −1,023 −12,424 −12,169 − 256
Total 1,211,439 1,194,812 + 16,055 + 14,006 −1,330 + 9,074 −5,695 −16,524 −10,438 −6,086
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Treasury discount paper. —5Excluding paper in the issuers ’portfolios. —
Office. —*Excluding public authorities ’mutual indebtedness. —1Net 6Including loans raised abroad. —7Old liabilities arising from residential
borrowing differs from the change in indebtedness, which includes the construction and liabilities arising from the residential construction of th e
assumption and reduction of debts. —2See Table VIII. 7, footnote 8. — former GDR ’s armed forces and from residential construction in connection
3Data other than end-of-year figures have been estimated. Including with the return of the troops of the former USSR based in eastern Germany
indebtedness of municipal special-purpose associations and municipal to their home country, and old debt in accordance with the London Debtshospitals. —4Excluding mobilisation and liquidity paper. Predominantly Agreement. — 8 Ascertained as a difference. 
9. Loans raised by public authorities against borrowers ’ notes
    
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999, euro million
End of year Federal "German ERP L änder Local Federal Inherited "Use of Hard
or month Govern- Unity" Special Govern- authorities Railways Liabilites Coal" Equal-
Total  1 ment  2,  3 Fund Fund ments 4,  5 Fund  3 Fund  3 isation Fund  3 
1997 883,260 25,914 35,370 22,840 471,224 186,087 49,694 88,902 3,229
1998 898,030 23,094 31,415 22,215 504,148 184,942 45,098 83,447 3,6711999 444,031 64,704 10,481 9,778 264,158 94,909 −− −
2000 June 443,410 62,018 10,466 9,772 266,855 94,299 −− −
Sep. 436,742 57,651 9,277 10,725 264,691 94,398 −− −
Dec. 431,364 54,731 7,178 10,801 268,362 90,292 −− −
2001 Mar. 423,714 49,333 5,184 10,927 268,760 89,510 −− −
June 422,367 48,818 5,159 10,570 268,552 89,267 −− −
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical 3See Table VIII. 7, footnote 8. —4Data other than end-of-year figures have
Office. —1Excluding Debt Register claims and cash advances. Including been estimated. Including municipal special-purpose associations and
small amounts of: mortgage loans, land charges in annuity and other forms, municipal hospitals. — 5 Including contractually agreed loans. 
and debts outstanding. —2Including Equalisation of Burdens Fund. —
57*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
10. Indebtedness of the Federal Government
    
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999, euro million
Treasury Indebtedness
discount paper  1 to non-banks Old debt
Federal Direct
of which Treasury 5 −year Debt lending owing to
Bundes- Treasury paper/ special Federal secur- by credit Social German Equal-
End of year bank financing Treasury Federal savings ities institu- security Other unifica- isationor month Total advances Total paper notes  
2 bonds  2 bonds 2 tions  3,  4 funds 3,  5,  6  tion 7 claims Other  8 
1996 839,883 − 26,789 7,166 55,289 176,164 96,391 434,295 32,988 5 7,766 1,330 8,684 183
1997 905,691 − 25,286 5,221 78,848 177,721 99,317 481,619 31,845 5 870 1,300 8,684 197
1998 957,983 − 24,666 4,558 84,760 199,274 92,698 519,718 24,125 − 2,603 1,270 8,684 186
1999  9 714,069 − 11,553 1,584 44,335 120,498 41,621 379,808 67,872 60 2,568 476 45,175 104
2000 715,819 − 11,516 1,804 44,678 123,642 35,991 400,490 52,836 29 2,099 285 44,146 107
2000         Sep. 730,423 − 11,775 1,778 44,416 121,601 38,131 392,785 74,820 57 2,145 434 44,146 113
         Oct. 725,875 − 11,469 1,757 44,121 122,118 38,130 396,905 66,235 57 2,145 434 44,147 114
         Nov. 724,073 − 11,489 1,777 43,940 122,672 35,991 399,752 63,337 57 2,153 434 44,136 111
         Dec. 715,819 − 11,516 1,804 44,678 123,642 35,991 400,490 52,836 29 2,099 285 44,146 107
2001         Jan. 696,637 − 11,669 1,780 45,391 123,881 35,959 402,794 64,383 29 2,030 288 10,105 107
         Feb. 696,201 − 11,722 1,833 45,557 120,949 34,929 408,471 61,995 29 2,054 283 10,105 107
         Mar. 699,682 − 11,798 1,909 45,431 121,605 34,560 409,855 64,045 29 1,908 238 10,103 110
         Apr. 694,836 − 13,697 1,936 46,075 121,646 33,637 409,536 58,003 29 1,743 237 10,125 110
         May 695,854 − 13,667 1,906 46,884 122,904 32,585 410,081 57,476 29 1,752 236 10,127 113
         June 691,437 − 13,656 1,896 48,966 123,758 30,245 411,401 51,182 29 1,725 238 10,125 113
         July 699,506 − 17,884 1,851 49,421 124,059 30,319 415,815 51,226 29 1,418 231 8,994 111
         Aug. 698,468 − 17,830 1,791 49,614 119,537 30,339 416,438 53,932 29 1,418 232 8,992 108
         Sep. 698,268 − 17,799 1,760 53,517 120,825 28,823 414,102 52,312 26 1,541 226 8,992 107
         Oct. p 702,460 − 21,176 1,698 54,525 121,162 28,253 416,240 50,214 26 1,541 225 8,992 105
1Excluding mobilisation and liquidity paper. In November 1999, including with the return of the troops of the former USSR based in eastern Germany
cash bills. —2Excluding paper in the issuers ’portfolios. —3Including loans to their home country. —8Commutation and compensation debt and old
raised abroad. —4Including money market debt. —5Including loans debt mainly expressed in foreign currency. —9Since July 1, 1999 the
granted by supplementary pension funds for government employees. — Federal Government has assumed joint responsibility for the debts of the
6Including liabilities arising from the investment assistance levy. — Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, the Federal Railway Fund and the
7Assumption of liabilities arising from residential construction of the Equalisation Fund for Safeguarding the Use of Coal. The special funds
former GDR ’s armed forces and from residential construction in connection mentioned are ascribed to the Federal Government from July 1999. 
11. Federal Government borrowing in the market
    
Up to the end of 1998, DM billion / from 1999, euro billion
of which
5−year special Loans against Change in
Total new borrowing Debt Securities Federal bonds Other securities  2 borrowers ’ notes Money money
market market
Period gross  1 net gross  1 net gross  1 net gross  1 net gross net debt deposits
1996 + 185,696 + 83,049 + 54,038 + 31,988 + 45,445 + 5,445 + 67,015 + 39,586 + 15,050 + 1,906 + 4,148 + 6,548
1997 + 250,074 + 65,808 + 79,323 + 47,323 + 59,557 + 1,557 + 98,275 + 24,983 + 12,950 − 8,009 − 30 − 3,304
1998 + 228,050 + 52,292 + 78,304 + 38,099 + 55,078 + 21,553 + 85,706 − 1,327 + 12,023 − 2,927 − 3,065 − 5,440
1999 + 139,865 + 31,631 + 53,931 + 114,080 + 22,229 + 18,610 + 44,904 − 5,836 + 14,861 + 52,897 + 3,937 + 1,832
2000 + 122,725 + 1,750 + 49,395 + 20,682 + 26,342 + 3,144 + 45,278 − 5,323 + 7,273 − 9,973 − 5,563 − 940
2000         Jan.-Oct. + 111,785 + 11,806 + 41,007 + 17,098 + 19,057 + 1,620 + 38,167 − 3,788 + 6,384 − 9,233 + 7,171 − 1,801
2001         Jan.-Oct.  p + 117,241 − 13,359 + 36,557 + 15,751 + 12,815 − 2,480 + 59,567 + 11,769 + 4,195 − 7,289 + 4,106 − 976
2000         Sep. + 8,794 − 652 + 522 + 522 + 807 + 807 + 5,169 − 703 + 631 − 2,942 + 1,665 + 255
         Oct. + 11,985 − 4,548 + 12,596 + 4,120 + 517 + 517 + 4,898 − 601 + 379 − 2,179 − 6,406 − 72
         Nov. + 7,820 − 1,801 + 2,847 + 2,847 + 6,515 + 554 + 302 − 2,299 + 679 − 367 − 2,522 − 218
         Dec. + 3,120 − 8,254 + 5,541 + 738 + 770 + 970 + 6,809 + 764 + 211 − 373 −10,211 + 1,080
2001         Jan. + 25,914 − 19,182 + 7,235 + 2,305 + 239 + 239 + 5,852 + 834 + 672 − 437 + 11,915 − 36
         Feb. + 9,423 − 436 + 5,677 + 5,677 + 2,017 − 2,933 + 599 − 811 + 240 − 3,255 + 890 − 859
         Mar. + 11,354 + 3,481 + 1,383 + 1,383 + 657 + 657 + 4,871 − 419 + 832 − 1,707 + 3,611 + 892
         Apr. + 1,271 − 4,845 − 319 − 319 + 41 + 41 + 7,394 + 1,619 + 114 − 249 − 5,958 − 293
         May + 11,835 + 1,018 + 5,447 + 545 + 5,134 + 1,258 + 1,000 − 272 + 562 − 210 − 308 − 273
         June + 5,202 − 4,417 + 1,320 + 1,320 + 854 + 854 + 9,181 − 268 + 113 − 56 − 6,266 + 1,238
         July + 17,120 + 8,069 + 6,323 + 4,414 + 301 + 301 + 9,809 + 4,757 + 643 − 307 + 44 + 225
         Aug. + 6,015 − 1,039 + 624 + 624 + 1,948 − 4,522 + 555 + 158 + 179 − 2 + 2,708 − 1,262
         Sep. + 17,190 − 200 + 6,728 − 2,337 + 1,287 + 1,287 + 9,032 + 2,357 + 621 − 1,022 − 478 − 345
         Oct. p + 11,917 + 4,192 + 2,139 + 2,139 + 338 + 338 + 11,274 + 3,815 + 219 − 45 − 2,053 − 263
1After deduction of repurchases. —2Federal Treasury notes, Federal   
savings bonds, Treasury discount paper, Treasury financing paper.    
58*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
12. Receipts, expenditure and assets of the wage and
salary earners ’ pension insurance funds
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999, euro million
Receipts  1 Expenditure  1 Assets  5 
of which of which Memor-
Balance Mort- andum
Pen- of receipts gage item
Pension sioners ’ and and Adminis-
Contri- Federal pay- health expend- other Real trative
Period Total butions  2 payments Total ments  3 insurance  4 iture Total Deposits  6 Securities loans  7 estate assets
Western Germany
1994 267,265 215,758 48,108 266,443 220,744 14,375 + 822 33,578 24,194 8,170 909 305 6,890
1995 276,302 225,324 47,979 279,226 230,222 15,923 −2,924 21,756 16,801 3,948 746 262 7,800
1996  8 288,761 236,036 50,478 288,716 237,464 16,809 + 45 14,456 9,608 2,119 2,500 229 8,863
1997 305,606 248,463 54,896 295,635 246,011 17,892 + 9,971 14,659 10,179 1,878 2,372 230 9,2611998 317,340 250,063 65,191 304,155 254,783 18,636 + 13,185 18,194 14,201 1,493 2,274 226 9,573
1999 169,124 128,191 39,884 159,819 134,536 9,910 + 9,305 13,623 11,559 824 1,127 114 4,904
2000  
p 173,020 128,057 43,638 166,569 139,189 10,253 + 6,451 14,350 11,459 1,676 1,105 110 4,889
2000         3rd qtr 42,891 31,757 10,802 42,262 35,068 2,580 + 628 10,653 7,936 1,483 1,114 121 4,909
         4th qtr 46,523 35,287 10,864 41,994 35,047 2,594 + 4,529 14,350 11,459 1,676 1,105 110 4,889
2001         1st qtr 42,472 30,565 11,548 42,251 35,634 2,608 + 221 13,807 10,385 1,601 1,711 109 4,917
         2nd qtr 43,823 31,800 11,657 42,420 35,572 2,610 + 1,403 13,315 10,098 1,406 1,709 102 4,956         3rd qtr 44,023 32,123 11,530 43,229 36,469 2,688 + 795 11,543 8,201 1,532 1,704 106 4,973
Eastern Germany
1994 63,001 40,904 13,783 65,811 53,136 3,376 −2,810 . . . . . .
1995 70,774 44,970 16,408 77,780 63,812 4,362 −7,006 . . . . . .
1996 74,790 46,580 17,910 83,830 68,316 4,851 −9,040 . . . . . .
1997 79,351 48,939 20,065 87,424 70,500 5,388 −8,073 . . . . . .
1998 81,072 47,764 23,564 90,863 73,040 5,757 −9,791 . . . . . .
1999 43,214 24,015 14,744 47,641 38,383 3,040 −4,426 . . . . . .
2000  p 43,513 22,655 15,224 49,385 39,414 3,112 −5,871 . . . . . .
2000         3rd qtr 11,100 5,581 3,894 12,394 9,928 780 −1,294 . . . . . .
         4th qtr 11,364 6,074 3,810 12,399 9,892 780 −1,035 . . . . . .
2001         1st qtr 10,748 5,284 4,084 12,489 10,000 782 −1,741 . . . . . .
         2nd qtr 10,954 5,465 4,117 12,512 9,989 777 −1,557 . . . . . .
         3rd qtr 10,540 5,372 4,070 12,881 10,240 796 −2,342 . . . . . .
Source: Federal Minister of Labour and Social Affairs and Association of including nursing insurance scheme for pensioners . —5Largely cor-
German Pension Insurance Funds. —1The annual figures differ from the responds to fluctuation reserves. Level at the end of the year or quarter.
sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. From 1993 From 1992 figures for the whole of Germany. —6Including cash
including financial compensation payments. —2Including contributions for resources. —7Excluding loans to other social security funds; including
recipients of public financial benefits. —3Payments by pension insurance participating interests. —8Excluding receipts arising from the higher
funds to health insurance institutions under section 50 of the Social Security valuation of participating interests. Code V have been deducted from pension payments. —4From 1995
13. Receipts and expenditure of the Federal Labour Office
    
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999, euro million
Receipts Expenditure
Subsidies
of which of which or work-
ing fund
Promotion of vocational Promo- Balance credits
Unemployment relief  3,  4 training  4,  5 tion of of receipts of the
winter and Federal
Contri- Western Eastern Western Eastern con- expend- Govern-
Period Total  1 butions Levies  2 Total Total Germany Germany Total Germany Germany struction iture ment
Germany
1994 89,658 81,536 3,822 99,863 48,342 35,163 13,179 31,273 14,382 16,891 1,822 −10,205 10,142
1995 90,211 84,354 2,957 97,103 49,254 36,161 13,094 34,441 16,745 17,696 1,586 −6,892 6,887
1996 91,825 85,073 3,346 105,588 57,123 40,186 16,938 36,478 18,368 18,111 903 −13,763 13,756
1997 93,149 85,793 2,959 102,723 60,273 40,309 19,964 31,418 16,117 15,301 443 −9,574 9,574
1998 91,088 86,165 2,868 98,852 53,483 35,128 18,355 34,279 16,784 17,496 471 −7,764 7,719
1999 47,954 45,141 1,467 51,694 25,177 16,604 8,573 20,558 10,480 10,078 279 −3,740 3,739
2000 49,605 46,359 1,403 50,473 23,946 15,614 8,331 20,324 10,535 9,790 294 − 867 867
2000         3rd qtr 12,335 11,610 403 12,220 5,750 3,747 2,002 4,990 2,542 2,448 10 + 115 − 256
         4th qtr 13,854 12,875 582 13,746 6,050 3,975 2,075 5,997 3,168 2,830 1 + 108 −2,452
2001         1st qtr 11,470 11,092 57 12,842 6,303 4,139 2,165 4,860 2,633 2,226 150 −1,372 3,508
         2nd qtr 12,201 11,452 375 13,356 6,513 4,265 2,248 5,192 2,824 2,368 106 −1,155 1,194
         3rd qtr 12,692 11,748 437 12,550 5,899 3,974 1,926 5,024 2,664 2,361 8 + 143 0
Source: Federal Labour Office. —1Excluding Federal Government liquidity replacement for the unemployment benefits. —4Including contributions to
assistance. —2Levies to promote winter construction and to pay bank- the statutory health insurance, and to the pension insurance funds. —
ruptcy compensation to employees. —3Unemployment benefits, 5Vocational training, measures to foster the commencement of work,
short-time-working benefits. Including the integration allowance paid to rehabilitation and job creation measures. resettlers from eastern Europe and emigrants from the GDR as a
59*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
IX. Economic conditions
  
1. Origin and expenditure of domestic product, distribution of national income    Germany
    
1st half 1st half 1st half
  1997   1998   1999   2000   2001   1999   2000   2001   1998   1999   2000   2001   2000
Change from % of
Item DM billion Euro billion previous year in % total
at  1995  prices
I.Origin of domestic product
Producing sector(excluding construction) 838.3 851.4 840.2 885.9 438.8 429.6 453.0 224.3 1.6 −1.3 5.4 2.0 23.0
Construction 210.8 206.7 206.2 200.6 90.1 105.4 102.5 46.1 −1.9 −0.2 −2.7 −8.7 5.2
Distribution, catering trade,and transportation  
1 598.6 613.0 650.3 679.9 340.4 332.5 347.6 174.1 2.4 6.1 4.6 2.9 17.7
Financing, rents and corporateservices  
2 970.9 1,018.8 1,058.2 1,107.2 559.3 541.0 566.1 286.0 4.9 3.9 4.6 3.0 28.8
Public and private services  3 731.2 736.9 739.9 749.7 375.3 378.3 383.3 191.9 0.8 0.4 1.3 0.3 19.5
All economic sectors 3,394.6 3,472.7 3,542.3 3,670.6 1,827.7 1,811.2 1,876.8 934.5 2.3 2.0 3.6 1.5 95.3
Memo item: Enterprise sector 2,945.0 3,024.3 3,095.0 3,222.5 1,602.7 1,582.5 1,647.6 819.4 2.7 2.3 4.1 1.7 83.7
Economic sectors, adjusted  4 3,253.9 3,319.7 3,376.2 3,492.5 1,734.6 1,726.2 1,785.7 886.9 2.0 1.7 3.4 1.3 90.7
Gross domestic product 3,599.6 3,670.0 3,737.8 3,850.1 1,914.3 1,911.1 1,968.5 978.8 2.0 1.8 3.0 1.0 100
II.Expenditure of domestic product
Private consumption  5 2,035.5 2,071.4 2,136.1 2,167.1 1,079.2 1,092.2 1,108.0 551.8 1.8 3.1 1.5 1.1 56.3
Government consumption 712.8 721.5 732.9 741.9 371.6 374.7 379.3 190.0 1.2 1.6 1.2 1.4 19.3Machinery and equipment 268.0 292.5 313.7 341.0 163.7 160.4 174.3 83.7 9.2 7.2 8.7 2.5 8.9Construction 484.4 479.6 486.7 474.4 217.8 248.9 242.6 111.4 −1.0 1.5 −2.5 −6.5 12.3
Other investment  
6 36.1 40.0 45.4 49.4 25.5 23.2 25.3 13.1 10.8 13.5 8.9 5.8 1.3
Changes in stocks  7 −7.9 8.7 −7.5 6.4 3.0 −3.8 3.3 1.5 . . . . 0.2
Domestic demand 3,528.8 3,613.7 3,707.3 3,780.2 1,860.9 1,895.5 1,932.8 951.4 2.4 2.6 2.0 0.1 98.2
Net exports 70.8 56.3 30.5 69.9 53.4 15.6 35.7 27.3 . . . . 1.8
Exports 1,008.4 1,077.3 1,137.9 1,288.4 671.9 581.8 658.8 343.5 6.8 5.6 13.2 7.8 33.5Imports 937.6 1,021.0 1,107.3 1,218.5 618.4 566.2 623.0 316.2 8.9 8.5 10.0 5.5 31.6
Gross domestic product 3,599.6 3,670.0 3,737.8 3,850.1 1,914.3 1,911.1 1,968.5 978.8 2.0 1.8 3.0 1.0 100
at  current  prices
III.Expenditure of domestic product
Private consumption  5 2,111.1 2,172.0 2,248.1 2,313.0 1,168.7 1,149.4 1,182.6 597.6 2.9 3.5 2.9 3.2 58.4
Government consumption 712.9 722.8 740.1 752.0 367.8 378.4 384.5 188.1 1.4 2.4 1.6 2.5 19.0Machinery and equipment 268.4 293.5 311.7 341.9 165.4 159.3 174.8 84.6 9.4 6.2 9.7 3.4 8.6Construction 481.1 475.3 479.7 470.6 216.8 245.3 240.6 110.8 −1.2 0.9 −1.9 −6.0 11.9
Other investment  
6 35.1 38.1 41.9 44.4 22.6 21.4 22.7 11.5 8.7 9.8 6.0 3.8 1.1
Changes in stocks  7 1.8 17.0 6.9 24.3 16.6 3.5 12.4 8.5 . . . . 0.6
Domestic demand 3,610.4 3,718.7 3,828.3 3,946.1 1,957.9 1,957.4 2,017.6 1,001.1 3.0 2.9 3.1 1.7 99.6
Net exports 50.2 55.0 32.9 15.6 25.9 16.8 8.0 13.2 . . . . 0.4
Exports 1,022.0 1,094.6 1,147.2 1,336.3 704.9 586.6 683.3 360.4 7.1 4.8 16.5 10.2 33.7Imports 971.8 1,039.7 1,114.3 1,320.8 679.0 569.8 675.3 347.2 7.0 7.2 18.5 9.1 33.3
Gross domestic product 3,660.6 3,773.6 3,861.2 3,961.6 1,983.8 1,974.2 2,025.5 1,014.3 3.1 2.3 2.6 2.1 100
IV.Prices (1995=100)
Private consumption 103.7 104.9 105.2 106.7 108.3 . . . 1.1 0.4 1.4 2.1 .Gross domestic product 101.7 102.8 103.3 102.9 103.6 . . . 1.1 0.5 −0.4 1.1 .
Terms of trade 97.8 99.8 100.2 95.7 95.6 . . . 2.0 0.4 −4.5 −1.2 .
V.Distribution of national income
Wages and salaries 1,974.1 2,015.3 2,069.8 2,130.5 1,025.6 1,058.2 1,089.3 524.4 2.1 2.7 2.9 2.4 72.3Entrepreneurial and propertyincome 773.3 805.1 793.8 814.7 439.0 405.9 416.6 224.4 4.1 −1.4 2.6 0.5 27.7
National income 2,747.4 2,820.4 2,863.5 2,945.3 1,464.6 1,464.1 1,505.9 748.8 2.7 1.5 2.9 1.8 100
Memo item: Gross national
income 3,642.8 3,746.6 3,837.2 3,946.6 1,977.6 1,961.9 2,017.9 1,011.1 2.8 2.4 2.9 1.9 .(Gross nat. product)
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August 2001. —1In- ing taxes on products (offset against subsidies on products). —5Including
cluding telecommunications. —2Financial intermediation, real estate activi- private non-commercial organisations. —6Intangible fixed capital forma-
ties, rents and corporate services. —3Including care-at-home services. — tion (inter alia, EDP software, copyrights) and economically useful animals
4Gross value added after deduction of assumed bank charges, but exclud- and plants. — 7 Including net increase in valuables. 
60*IX. Economic conditions

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
 IX. Economic conditions
 
2. Output in the producing sector     
  
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Industry  1 
Producing sector, Intermediate
total Total goods  2 Capital goods  3 Consumer goods  4 Energy  5 Construction
Change Change Change Change Change Change Change
from from from from from from fromprevious previous previous previous previous previous previousyear year year year year year year
Period in % in % in % in % in % in % in %
1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 
Germany  
  
1997 102.7 + 2.8 104.7 + 4.2 105.5 + 6.0 106.8 + 4.7 100.5 + 0.5 101.7 −1.4 90.0 −3.5
1998 106.2 + 3.4 109.6 + 4.7 108.7 + 3.0 116.2 + 8.8 101.6 + 1.1 100.4 −1.3 87.0 −3.3
1999 107.7 + 1.4 111.5 + 1.7 110.7 + 1.8 118.0 + 1.5 103.2 + 1.6 100.0 −0.4 87.7 + 0.8
2000 113.4 + 5.3 119.1 + 6.8 116.9 + 5.6 130.9 + 10.9 105.7 + 2.4 99.7 −0.3 84.8 −3.3
  
2000         Sep. 122.2 + 5.8 128.9 + 7.7 123.8 + 3.9 145.6 + 14.6 112.9 + 2.5 93.7 + 1.5 97.1 −6.3
         Oct. 121.9 + 4.3 128.2 + 6.2 125.4 + 5.4 139.2 + 9.2 117.1 + 2.8 102.2 + 0.2 93.6 −7.7
         Nov. 122.0 + 4.6 128.7 + 6.2 123.5 + 5.4 144.0 + 10.3 115.3 + 0.8 106.5 −1.3 88.1 −3.6
         Dec. 110.4 + 5.5 117.5 + 7.5 105.7 + 5.0 142.6 + 13.5 100.6 + 0.7 106.8 −3.2 65.3 −4.8
2001         Jan. 104.9 + 5.4 112.7 + 8.7 112.7 + 6.5 121.3 + 14.3 100.3 + 3.7 107.4 −6.7 50.5 −15.8
         Feb. 108.8 + 4.6 117.4 + 7.1 114.8 + 4.8 131.1 + 11.8 101.8 + 3.4 97.8 −5.5 58.6 −11.5
         Mar. 6) 120.3 + 2.0 129.8 + 4.7 125.0 + 2.9 148.4 + 8.2 110.7 + 1.7 99.9 −7.5 6) 70.6 −15.6
         Apr. 6) 112.8 + 0.0 119.4 + 1.5 117.0 + 0.3 132.9 + 4.0 103.9 −0.4 98.6 + 0.6 6) 77.8 −15.3
         May 6) 111.9 −1.1 118.5 + 0.2 117.5 −0.6 130.6 + 2.1 102.7 −1.5 92.4 + 1.3 6) 81.3 −13.2
         June 6) 117.3 + 1.2 125.3 + 2.5 121.6 + 1.8 142.7 + 4.4 106.4 + 0.7 85.3 −1.8 6) 86.1 −8.4
         July  p) x 6) 112.0 −3.0 118.4 −1.9 117.3 −3.1 129.9 −1.1 103.5 −1.1 88.5 −6.2 6) 86.4 −9.6
         Aug.  p) x 6) 104.6 −1.1 110.1 + 0.0 109.8 −2.2 116.3 + 1.0 101.2 + 2.0 88.1 −1.9 6) 79.2 −10.4
         Sep.  p) x 6) 118.9 −2.7 126.0 −2.2 120.3 −2.8 143.4 −1.5 110.1 −2.5 93.0 −0.7 6) 89.1 −8.2
Western Germany  
  
1997 102.5 + 2.8 104.1 + 3.9 105.0 + 5.7 106.5 + 4.5 98.9 −0.3 102.4 −1.1 89.2 −3.4
1998 105.9 + 3.3 108.7 + 4.4 107.6 + 2.5 115.8 + 8.7 99.8 + 0.9 101.2 −1.2 87.6 −1.8
1999 107.1 + 1.1 110.0 + 1.2 109.0 + 1.3 117.1 + 1.1 101.0 + 1.2 100.6 −0.6 88.7 + 1.3
2000 112.7 + 5.2 117.1 + 6.5 114.3 + 4.9 129.9 + 10.9 102.8 + 1.8 99.8 −0.8 87.3 −1.6
  
2000         Sep. 121.4 + 5.8 126.8 + 7.4 120.7 + 3.0 144.8 + 15.0 110.1 + 2.1 93.7 + 1.1 99.9 −5.1
         Oct. 121.2 + 4.3 126.1 + 5.9 122.4 + 4.8 138.3 + 9.1 114.1 + 2.2 102.2 −0.3 97.0 −6.0
         Nov. 120.9 + 4.5 126.1 + 5.7 120.4 + 4.8 142.2 + 9.9 111.8 + 0.0 106.7 −1.7 90.2 −1.8
         Dec. 110.0 + 5.7 115.5 + 7.2 103.3 + 4.4 141.4 + 13.5 97.6 + 0.3 106.8 −3.7 67.5 −2.6
2001         Jan. 104.5 + 5.3 110.7 + 8.3 110.2 + 6.0 120.3 + 14.1 97.3 + 3.0 107.4 −7.2 51.9 −15.9
         Feb. 108.8 + 4.9 115.6 + 7.0 112.5 + 4.7 130.2 + 12.0 99.1 + 2.9 98.0 −5.6 62.0 −9.8
         Mar. 6) 120.1 + 2.0 127.7 + 4.3 122.6 + 2.7 147.1 + 7.8 107.4 + 1.1 99.8 −8.1 6) 75.0 −13.5
         Apr. 6) 112.3 + 0.2 117.3 + 1.5 114.2 + 0.1 132.0 + 4.3 100.6 −1.0 98.5 + 0.3 6) 82.2 −13.8
         May 6) 111.0 −1.1 116.1 −0.1 114.5 −0.9 129.3 + 2.0 99.1 −2.2 92.1 + 0.8 6) 85.3 −11.9
         June 6) 116.5 + 1.2 122.9 + 2.2 118.4 + 1.4 141.4 + 4.1 103.0 + 0.4 84.9 −2.3 6) 90.1 −6.9
         July  p) x 6) 111.2 −3.0 116.1 −2.2 114.3 −3.4 128.8 −1.2 100.2 −1.5 88.3 −6.5 6) 90.5 −7.6
         Aug.  p) x 6) 103.0 −1.4 107.2 −0.6 106.5 −2.8 114.5 + 0.7 97.3 + 1.2 87.7 −2.2 6) 81.2 −9.2
         Sep.  p) x 6) 118.0 −2.8 123.5 −2.6 117.0 −3.1 142.2 −1.8 106.7 −3.1 92.8 −1.0 6) 93.5 −6.4
Eastern Germany  
  
1997 106.0 + 3.6 115.6 + 9.3 113.1 + 9.6 113.1 + 8.5 121.9 + 9.4 96.2 −3.7 92.8 −4.2
1998 109.2 + 3.0 126.2 + 9.2 125.9 + 11.3 126.4 + 11.8 126.5 + 3.8 94.0 −2.3 85.1 −8.3
1999 114.4 + 4.8 135.8 + 7.6 137.1 + 8.9 135.7 + 7.4 134.0 + 5.9 95.1 + 1.2 84.2 −1.1
2000 121.5 + 6.2 152.8 + 12.5 157.0 + 14.5 153.2 + 12.9 145.7 + 8.7 98.3 + 3.4 75.6 −10.2
  
2000         Sep. 130.9 + 5.2 164.0 + 11.3 172.1 + 15.8 163.0 + 8.7 152.8 + 7.0 93.9 + 5.6 86.9 −11.0
         Oct. 130.4 + 4.2 164.4 + 11.0 172.0 + 12.3 157.9 + 11.6 159.1 + 8.2 102.3 + 4.6 81.5 −14.3
         Nov. 135.3 + 6.5 173.1 + 12.8 172.8 + 12.9 181.8 + 15.9 164.8 + 9.4 105.1 + 1.8 80.5 −10.2
         Dec. 115.3 + 4.6 150.4 + 10.1 143.6 + 10.5 167.9 + 13.9 143.5 + 5.5 106.4 + 1.1 57.4 −13.0
2001         Jan. 109.2 + 6.3 146.2 + 13.3 151.5 + 13.0 141.8 + 16.1 142.5 + 11.4 107.3 −2.8 45.5 −15.6
         Feb. 109.3 + 2.1 148.1 + 8.0 151.1 + 7.5 151.1 + 8.2 140.5 + 8.7 96.5 −4.8 46.4 −18.6
         Mar. 6) 122.1 + 1.6 165.2 + 9.3 163.3 + 5.7 175.9 + 15.9 157.6 + 8.2 100.6 −2.3 6) 54.9 −24.3
         Apr. 6) 118.6 −2.4 155.2 + 2.6 160.9 + 3.6 151.3 −1.3 150.3 + 5.0 99.0 + 2.6 6) 61.9 −21.3
         May 6) 122.1 −0.8 159.5 + 3.9 164.6 + 2.9 157.5 + 4.5 153.8 + 5.1 95.1 + 5.9 6) 66.8 −18.9
         June 6) 126.7 + 1.7 166.2 + 6.6 171.6 + 6.9 169.5 + 9.1 154.7 + 3.5 88.3 + 1.8 6) 71.7 −14.4
         July  p) x 6) 121.8 −3.3 157.2 + 1.4 164.6 + 0.1 153.2 + 1.5 149.8 + 3.4 90.5 −2.8 6) 71.7 −18.1
         Aug.  p) x 6) 123.1 + 1.8 159.0 + 7.4 162.6 + 5.4 155.8 + 8.0 156.5 + 10.1 91.1 + 0.8 6) 72.2 −15.0
         Sep.  p) x 6) 128.8 −1.6 167.8 + 2.3 172.5 + 0.2 169.9 + 4.2 158.7 + 3.9 94.8 + 1.0 6) 73.4 −15.5
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. —oBy means of gas, steam and hot water supply, mining and quarrying of energy-pro-
the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. —1Manufacturing sector, ducing materials, and especially manufacture of refined petroleum pro-
unless assigned to the main grouping energy, plus mining and quarrying. — ducts. —6Provisional up to adjustment to the figures of the annual overall
2Including mining and quarrying except energy-producing materials. —3In- survey in the construction sector. —xAdjusted in advance by the Federal
cluding manufacture of motor vehicles, trailers and semi-trailers. —4In- Statistical Office, by way of estimates, to the results of the Quarterly Produc-
cluding printing and service activities related to printing. —5Electricity, tion Survey for the third quarter (industry in Germany: + 1%). 
61* IX. Economic conditions

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
 IX. Economic conditions
 
3. Orders received by industry *  
  
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Industry
 
Total Domestic orders Foreign orders Intermediate goods Capital goods  1 Consumer goods  2 
Change Change Change Change Change Change
from from from from from fromprevious previous previous previous previous previousyear year year year year year
Period 1995=100 in % 1995=100 in % 1995=100 in % 1995=100 in % 1995=100 in % 1995=100 in %
Germany  
  
1997 107.1 + 7.2 99.0 + 2.2 121.7 + 15.4 105.7 + 9.0 111.1 + 7.4 99.4 + 1.2
1998 110.9 + 3.5 102.9 + 3.9 125.4 + 3.0 105.3 − 0.4 119.8 + 7.8 100.1 + 0.7
1999 113.2 + 2.1 102.6 − 0.3 132.2 + 5.4 106.3 + 0.9 123.9 + 3.4 101.0 + 0.9
2000 129.2 + 14.1 111.3 + 8.5 161.3 + 22.0 121.5 + 14.3 144.4 + 16.5 105.3 + 4.3
 
2000         Sep. 136.5 + 11.2 116.8 + 6.9 172.1 + 16.8 129.1 + 14.1 149.4 + 10.2 119.1 + 5.6
         Oct. 135.0 + 12.3 114.0 + 4.4 172.3 + 23.2 127.6 + 11.7 150.0 + 14.7 110.7 + 4.8
         Nov. 134.4 + 11.1 115.1 + 5.6 169.1 + 18.4 124.4 + 7.7 153.1 + 16.2 106.7 + 1.4         Dec. 129.8 + 16.2 105.6 + 8.5 173.2 + 26.0 113.0 + 8.5 156.8 + 24.4 96.0 + 6.5
2001         Jan. 127.6 + 11.7 108.6 + 8.0 161.6 + 16.4 121.3 + 10.4 140.9 + 13.6 105.3 + 8.2
         Feb. 130.8 + 6.4 111.2 + 3.0 165.8 + 10.7 120.4 + 4.3 146.3 + 9.3 113.7 + 2.2         Mar. 141.9 + 2.2 123.0 + 3.7 175.7 + 0.4 128.7 − 0.2 161.1 + 4.4 121.4 + 1.0
         Apr. 125.2 − 1.1 108.8 − 1.9 154.5 − 0.4 118.0 − 1.2 139.6 − 2.0 102.1 + 2.3
         May 126.9 + 1.0 107.4 − 2.8 162.2 + 6.2 119.5 − 2.2 143.4 + 3.5 99.4 + 2.6
         June 132.0 − 1.3 108.5 − 5.6 174.3 + 4.0 122.1 − 3.0 151.0 − 1.2 103.0 + 4.6
         July 125.7 − 3.8 108.5 − 4.3 156.6 − 3.0 116.6 − 6.6 141.4 − 3.3 104.3 + 3.5
         Aug. 116.8 − 3.9 103.9 − 2.8 140.1 − 5.3 108.1 − 7.7 128.1 − 2.1 107.8 + 1.5
         Sep.  
p 127.9 − 6.3 110.3 − 5.6 159.5 − 7.3 116.1 −10.1 143.5 − 3.9 114.8 − 3.6
Western Germany  
  
1997 107.1 + 6.9 98.8 + 1.9 121.3 + 14.8 104.9 + 8.6 112.1 + 7.4 98.6 + 0.9
1998 110.1 + 2.8 102.3 + 3.5 123.5 + 1.8 104.0 − 0.9 119.7 + 6.8 99.1 + 0.5
1999 112.2 + 1.9 101.7 − 0.6 130.1 + 5.3 104.5 + 0.5 123.8 + 3.4 99.7 + 0.6
2000 127.7 + 13.8 109.8 + 8.0 158.2 + 21.6 118.9 + 13.8 144.3 + 16.6 103.2 + 3.5
 
2000         Sep. 135.4 + 10.9 115.4 + 6.6 169.6 + 16.2 126.2 + 13.6 150.4 + 10.4 117.1 + 5.2
         Oct. 133.5 + 12.1 112.4 + 3.9 169.5 + 22.9 124.7 + 11.0 150.5 + 15.1 108.2 + 4.3
         Nov. 132.5 + 11.3 113.3 + 5.4 165.2 + 19.1 121.3 + 6.8 152.7 + 17.8 103.8 + 0.6         Dec. 127.2 + 15.0 102.9 + 6.6 168.4 + 24.7 110.6 + 7.9 154.2 + 22.4 93.4 + 5.5
2001         Jan. 126.1 + 11.1 107.2 + 7.5 158.2 + 15.4 118.6 + 10.0 141.1 + 13.0 103.0 + 7.7
         Feb. 128.8 + 5.5 109.9 + 2.5 161.0 + 9.0 116.1 + 2.3 146.6 + 9.0 111.6 + 1.7         Mar. 139.9 + 1.8 121.2 + 3.0 171.6 + 0.3 125.3 − 0.9 160.6 + 4.1 119.2 + 0.8
         Apr. 122.9 − 1.5 106.6 − 2.0 150.9 − 1.0 114.7 − 2.0 138.5 − 2.3 99.6 + 2.4
         May 125.0 + 0.6 105.6 − 3.4 157.9 + 5.4 116.4 − 2.5 142.6 + 2.7 96.8 + 1.9
         June 130.0 − 1.4 106.7 − 6.0 169.9 + 4.0 118.5 − 4.0 150.8 − 0.8 100.6 + 4.1
         July 123.9 − 3.7 106.6 − 4.6 153.4 − 3.0 113.0 − 7.3 141.4 − 2.8 102.3 + 3.4
         Aug. 114.8 − 4.8 102.1 − 3.4 136.5 − 6.6 104.3 − 8.8 127.8 − 3.0 105.7 + 0.9
         Sep.  
p 124.8 − 7.8 107.7 − 6.7 154.1 − 9.1 111.9 −11.3 141.3 − 6.1 112.3 − 4.1
Eastern Germany  
  
1997 107.6 + 12.3 101.7 + 6.7 137.5 + 39.6 118.0 + 15.2 95.4 + 10.7 117.5 + 7.3
1998 124.2 + 15.4 109.8 + 8.0 196.5 + 42.9 126.9 + 7.5 121.5 + 27.4 124.4 + 5.91999 130.0 + 4.7 114.0 + 3.8 210.0 + 6.9 135.1 + 6.5 124.8 + 2.7 131.7 + 5.9
2000 153.8 + 18.3 130.0 + 14.0 273.2 + 30.1 162.9 + 20.6 145.8 + 16.8 151.8 + 15.3
 
2000         Sep. 155.1 + 14.2 133.8 + 9.5 261.9 + 28.8 176.3 + 21.6 133.0 + 6.7 163.7 + 12.7
         Oct. 158.3 + 14.1 134.9 + 8.8 275.3 + 29.7 175.1 + 21.6 140.4 + 6.7 166.3 + 12.4
         Nov. 167.6 + 7.4 137.8 + 7.6 316.9 + 7.3 174.1 + 19.5 160.5 − 3.9 170.5 + 13.4
         Dec. 173.0 + 35.6 138.2 + 28.8 348.4 + 51.8 151.7 + 17.7 198.3 + 57.0 152.6 + 19.6
2001         Jan. 152.6 + 21.3 125.4 + 12.1 288.4 + 46.8 165.4 + 16.3 139.5 + 29.0 156.7 + 15.3
         Feb. 163.6 + 20.6 128.4 + 9.5 339.3 + 49.1 186.9 + 27.6 141.8 + 15.4 161.1 + 10.4         Mar. 176.9 + 9.1 146.2 + 11.9 330.2 + 3.1 184.0 + 9.3 171.2 + 9.6 172.1 + 5.3
         Apr. 164.3 + 5.1 137.8 + 0.4 296.3 + 18.0 169.3 + 8.1 160.0 + 2.8 161.5 + 2.7
         May 163.6 + 9.9 131.9 + 4.0 323.0 + 24.6 169.6 + 2.2 159.2 + 18.5 157.9 + 11.4         June 165.3 + 1.1 131.0 − 0.4 338.1 + 4.3 180.4 + 8.6 152.2 − 8.4 159.5 + 12.4
         July 157.2 − 2.4 133.7 − 2.4 275.6 − 2.0 174.4 + 2.6 142.3 − 9.2 151.2 + 5.4
         Aug. 150.2 + 8.3 126.1 + 2.4 270.9 + 25.4 168.6 + 4.5 131.6 + 12.4 155.0 + 11.8         Sep.  
p 178.8 + 15.3 142.2 + 6.3 362.7 + 38.5 180.5 + 2.4 179.5 + 35.0 169.2 + 3.4
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. —*Economic desbank calculation. —1Including manufacture of motor vehicles, trailers
activities of the manufacturing sector, in particular, excluding manufacture and semitrailers. —2Including printing and service activities related to
of food products, beverages, tobacco and refined petroleum products; printing. results for kinds of activity units; figures excluding value-added tax. —oBun-
62* IX. Economic conditions

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
 IX. Economic conditions
 
4. Orders received by construction *   
  
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Germany Western Germany Eastern Germany
Housing Public Housing Public Housing Public Industrial Industrial Industrial
con- construc- construc- con- construc- construc- con- construc- construc-
Total struction tion  1 tion Total struction tion  1 tion Total struction tion  1 tion
 Change Change Change
 from from from
 previous previous previous
 year year year
Period 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 in % 1995 = 100 in % 1995 = 100 in %
1997 84.4 −8.3 87.4 81.0 86.2 86.1 −5.3 87.7 85.5 85.7 80.4 −15.2 86.8 71.0 87.7
1998 84.0 −0.5 82.4 79.9 90.1 86.6 + 0.6 83.3 86.7 88.8 77.7 −3.4 80.4 64.7 93.8
1999 82.2 −2.1 78.2 80.2 87.6 87.3 + 0.8 84.1 88.7 88.1 69.9 −10.0 66.3 61.2 86.2
2000 75.1 −8.6 65.4 75.5 82.1 81.2 −7.0 73.3 84.9 82.7 60.5 −13.4 49.2 54.4 80.3
   
2000         Aug. 73.3 −14.0 63.9 68.8 86.1 76.7 −15.2 71.3 75.1 82.3 65.3 −10.7 48.7 54.7 96.7
         Sep. 84.4 −9.4 66.6 88.5 93.4 92.7 −5.7 76.9 102.4 92.9 64.8 −20.3 45.4 57.0 94.9
         Oct. 73.3 −10.8 60.3 71.6 85.6 81.0 −10.0 73.1 80.6 87.1 55.2 −13.1 34.0 51.5 81.3
         Nov. 63.1 −4.4 51.0 68.1 66.6 68.5 −1.7 60.3 76.3 65.3 50.6 −11.4 32.1 49.3 70.5
         Dec. 69.4 −3.2 50.9 75.2 76.7 77.2 −0.1 58.3 87.7 78.7 50.8 −13.3 35.7 46.9 71.2
2001         Jan. 51.2 −8.6 47.2 60.5 43.0 58.4 −3.5 58.0 70.1 45.1 34.3 −24.4 25.0 38.8 37.0
         Feb. 57.2 −7.9 49.0 58.2 62.4 65.1 −3.7 57.6 67.2 67.9 38.6 −21.1 31.3 38.0 46.7
         Mar. 79.6 −11.1 67.3 82.6 85.7 89.1 −7.6 81.7 93.4 89.3 57.3 −21.9 37.7 58.0 75.4
         Apr. 75.2 −5.2 59.1 77.2 85.3 85.9 + 0.2 70.9 91.6 90.1 49.7 −22.7 34.9 44.6 71.6
         May 80.6 −2.5 62.1 79.6 96.2 89.5 −0.7 71.5 93.1 98.1 59.5 −9.0 42.8 49.0 90.9
         June 90.2 + 3.2 71.6 84.0 112.3 98.4 + 7.8 83.0 95.7 112.3 71.0 −9.2 48.4 57.6 112.3
         July 74.5 −7.1 52.9 76.5 88.9 81.8 −6.2 62.3 87.3 89.3 57.2 −10.2 33.5 52.2 87.7
         Aug. 74.7 + 1.9 52.8 75.8 90.5 81.7 + 6.5 60.9 87.1 90.2 58.3 −10.7 36.3 50.2 91.4
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. —*Values exclusive gineering". —oBundesbank calculation. —1Including the railways and
of value-added tax. The figures refer to the economic classifications "Site pre- post office. paration" and "Building of complete constructions or parts thereof; civil en-
 
 
5. Retail turnover *   
    Germany
  
Retail trade, total of which: By enterprises ’ main product range:
Pharmaceutical
including excluding and medical
goods, cosmetic Clothing, Furniture retail sales of motor vehicles retail sales of motor vehicles
and motorcycles and of and motorcycles and Food, beverages, and toilet footwear and and lightingautomotive fuel of automotive fuel tobacco  
2 articles  2 leather goods  2 equipment  2 Motor vehicles  3 
 Change from  Change from  Change  Change  Change  Change  Change
from from from from from previous year in % previous year in %
previous previous previous previous previous
Period not not year year year year year price- price-
in % in % in % in % in % 1995 = 100 adjusted adjusted  1 1995 = 100 adjusted adjusted  1 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100
1997 100.9 −0.4 −0.9 99.0 −1.3 −1.8 98.6 −1.4 105.8 + 1.8 97.2 −2.0 95.8 −2.6 109.1 + 3.5
1998 102.7 + 1.8 + 1.6 100.1 + 1.1 + 1.1 99.9 + 1.3 111.9 + 5.8 96.1 −1.1 99.6 + 4.0 115.1 + 5.5
1999 103.8 + 1.1 + 0.7 100.8 + 0.7 + 0.4 100.8 + 0.9 120.0 + 7.2 96.1 + 0.0 97.4 −2.2 119.3 + 3.6
2000 105.0 + 1.2 + 0.0 103.0 + 2.2 + 1.0 102.8 + 2.0 126.8 + 5.7 95.6 −0.5 95.0 −2.5 115.9 −2.8
 
2000         Mar. 110.6 −3.1 −4.1 104.5 −2.8 −3.7 107.5 −0.2 126.1 −0.8 90.7 −11.9 103.0 −4.7 138.8 −4.8
         Apr. 105.1 + 1.1 + 0.4 101.8 + 3.6 + 3.1 103.7 + 2.4 118.5 + 2.4 103.7 + 7.1 91.5 −4.1 120.0 −7.6
         May 112.7 + 11.3 + 10.3 107.2 + 11.4 + 10.7 108.2 + 9.7 133.3 + 16.8 103.4 + 5.7 96.0 + 8.2 137.6 + 10.7         June 99.6 −3.0 −4.1 95.3 −0.6 −1.7 100.7 + 2.8 122.1 + 2.3 82.3 −7.2 82.9 −9.2 119.5 −10.9
         July 101.5 −3.7 −4.7 98.1 −2.5 −3.3 98.5 −4.6 124.5 + 1.5 89.5 −8.5 88.6 −3.7 117.7 −8.0
         Aug. 101.1 + 5.0 + 3.6 99.3 + 6.0 + 4.7 100.0 + 5.4 124.8 + 9.8 88.8 + 4.8 83.8 −0.9 110.0 + 1.2
         Sep. 102.0 + 2.9 + 0.9 101.2 + 5.3 + 3.2 98.8 + 3.2 123.5 + 4.7 99.5 + 12.8 91.2 −3.1 107.2 −5.9
         Oct. 105.2 −0.8 −2.5 104.5 −0.2 −1.9 101.1 + 0.6 128.7 + 7.6 105.7 −7.0 99.8 −4.3 110.9 −3.8
         Nov. 111.3 + 1.2 −0.4 111.0 + 2.1 + 0.5 107.2 + 2.7 132.9 + 7.8 103.4 −2.3 110.0 −0.8 116.5 −2.4
         Dec. 123.0 −2.3 −3.5 127.2 −1.4 −2.5 121.7 −0.6 146.0 + 3.8 123.2 −0.1 116.5 −6.5 108.8 −7.0
2001         Jan. 97.3 + 6.7 + 5.4 97.3 + 6.8 + 5.5 96.3 + 5.6 134.6 + 10.9 83.6 + 6.9 88.3 + 7.9 100.2 + 6.1
         Feb. 92.5 −4.3 −5.4 90.4 −4.0 −5.0 93.3 −1.4 121.8 + 1.8 72.9 −7.7 88.1 −7.4 103.2 −5.8
         Mar. 113.3 + 2.4 + 1.1 107.9 + 3.3 + 1.9 111.1 + 3.3 135.3 + 7.3 95.3 + 5.1 103.9 + 0.9 138.9 + 0.1
         Apr. 107.4 + 2.2 + 0.4 104.0 + 2.2 + 0.1 108.2 + 4.3 130.1 + 9.8 98.3 −5.2 92.3 + 0.9 123.9 + 3.3
         May 112.5 −0.2 −2.4 107.9 + 0.7 −1.6 112.4 + 3.9 138.8 + 4.1 103.4 +
 0.0 91.2 −5.0 132.6 −3.6
         June 104.0 + 4.4 + 2.1 99.8 + 4.7 + 2.2 107.5 + 6.8 131.8 + 7.9 83.8 + 1.8 85.4 + 3.0 123.3 + 3.2
         July 105.0 + 3.4 + 1.1 101.0 + 3.0 + 0.4 105.0 + 6.6 136.9 + 10.0 89.2 −0.3 84.2 −5.0 123.2 + 4.7
         Aug. 103.2 + 2.1 + 0.2 101.6 + 2.3 + 0.3 107.5 + 7.5 134.8 + 8.0 84.3 −5.1 83.1 −0.8 111.1 + 1.0
         Sep. 101.3 −0.7 −1.9 100.3 −0.9 −2.1 100.7 + 1.9 126.5 + 2.4 104.9 + 5.4 85.8 −5.9 108.0 + 0.7
Source: Federal Statistical Office. —*Excluding value-added tax; figures 3 Including motor vehicle parts and accessories. 
from 2000 provisional. —1At 1995 prices. —2Retail sales in stores. —
63* IX. Economic conditions

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
 IX. Economic conditions
 
6. Labour market * 
  
 
Persons in
Employed  1,2 Employees  1 employment  3 Unemployed
Persons
Mining employed Personsand under under-manu- employ- goingfactur- Short- ment pro- Change vocational
Change from Change ing Con- time motion further from Unem-previous year from sector workers training previous ploy- schemes  
5 struction  4 
previous year, ment Vacancies,
Thou- Thou- Thou- year Thou- thou- rate  6 thou-
Period sands in % sands sands in % Thousands sands sands in % sands
Germany  
  
1998 37,609 + 1.1 + 398 33,634 + 1.0 6,400 1,159 115 385 343 4,279 −105 11.1 422
1999 38,083 + 1.3 + 475 34,131 + 1.5 6,370 1,111 119 430 358 4,099 −180 10.5 456
2000 38,704 + 1.6 + 621 34,718 + 1.7 6,373 1,053 86 316 352 3,889 −211 9.6 514
2000         Oct. 39,240 + 1.3 + 518 6,420 1,054 66 319 389 3,611 −272 8.9 491
         Nov. 39,151 + 1.2 + 464 35,150 + 1.3 6,419 1,041 70 307 388 3,645 −255 8.9 468
         Dec. 38,988 + 1.0 + 392 6,393 1,012 70 287 359 3,809 −238 9.3 454
2001         Jan. 38,331 + 0.8 + 303 6,378 949 92 258 356 4,093 −200 10.0 484
         Feb. 38,312 + 0.6 + 237 34,388 + 0.7 6,382 918 122 252 359 4,113 −164 10.1 544
         Mar. 38,483 + 0.4 + 160 6,390 p 928 130 245 363 4,000 −141 9.8 578
         Apr. 38,630 + 0.3 + 103 6,384 p 942 119 246 365 3,868 −118 9.5 580
         May 38,688 + 0.1 + 51 34,699 + 0.2 6,385 p 950 111 248 368 3,721 − 687 9.0 559
         June 38,757 + 0.0 + 18 6,389 p 951 109 245 354 3,694 − 30 8.9 542
         July 38,787 + 0.1 + 22 6,413 p 949 103 242 324 3,799 − 5 9.2 522
         Aug. o 38,893 o + 0.1 o + 35 ... ... 6,435 p 952 92 240 322 3,789 + 8 9.2 508
         Sep. ... ... ... ... ... 114 233 329 3,743 + 58 9.0 485
         Oct. ... ... ... ... ... 140 232 329 3,725 + 114 9.0 443
Western Germany  
  
1998 . . . . . 5,813 804 81 71 193 2,904 −117 9.4 342
1999 . . . . . 5,775 775 92 82 215 2,756 −149 8.8 386
2000 . . . . . 5,761 749 62 70 212 2,529 −226 7.8 452
2000         Oct. . . . . . 5,797 752 48 71 235 2,343 −248 7.1 433
         Nov. . . . . . 5,797 744 52 70 236 2,360 −244 7.2 413
         Dec. . . . . . 5,774 727 53 66 219 2,454 −236 7.4 405
2001         Jan. . . . . . 5,761 687 69 64 215 2,622 −205 8.0 431
         Feb. . . . . . 5,764 670 91 64 218 2,623 −174 8.0 481
         Mar. . . . . . 5,769 p 679 97 63 222 2,539 −152 7.7 506
         Apr. . . . . . 5,761 p 689 8 888 648 225 8 2,474 8 −112 8 7.5 8 505
         May . . . . . 5,760 p 694 84 65 226 2,385 − 747 7.1 485
         June . . . . . 5,764 p 695 83 63 215 2,380 − 46 7.1 469
         July . . . . . 5,784 p 692 80 62 196 2,445 − 21 7.3 453
         Aug. . . . . . 5,801 p 694 70 60 194 2,447 + 3 7.3 440
         Sep. . . . . . ... ... 90 58 199 2,422 + 39 7.2 417
         Oct. . . . . . ... ... 9 114 9 599 197 9 2,413 9 +7 0 9 7.2 9 380
Eastern Germany  
  
1998 . . . . . 586 355 34 314 149 1,375 + 11 18.2 79
1999 . . . . . 595 336 27 348 143 1,344 − 31 17.6 70
2000 . . . . . 612 305 24 246 140 1,359 + 16 17.4 62
2000         Oct. . . . . . 623 302 18 248 154 1,268 − 24 16.1 59
         Nov. . . . . . 623 298 18 237 152 1,285 − 12 16.3 54
         Dec. . . . . . 619 286 17 221 140 1,355 − 2 17.2 50
2001         Jan. . . . . . 617 262 23 195 140 1,471 + 4 18.7 54
         Feb. . . . . . 619 249 30 188 140 1,490 + 10 18.9 63         Mar. . . . . . 620
p 249 33 182 140 1,461 + 10 18.6 72
         Apr. . . . . . 623 p 253 8 308 181 8 140 8 1,394 8 − 68 17.7 8 75
         May . . . . . 625 p 256 28 183 142 1,336 + 6 7 17.0 74
         June . . . . . 625 p 257 25 182 139 1,314 + 16 16.8 73
         July . . . . . 629 p 257 23 180 128 1,354 + 16 17.3 69
         Aug. . . . . . 633 p 258 23 180 129 1,342 + 5 17.1 68
         Sep. . . . . . ... ... 24 175 130 1,321 + 19 16.9 68
         Oct. . . . . . ... ... 9 269 173 9 132 9 1,313 9 +4 4 9 16.8 9 63
Source: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Labour Office. —*Monthly fig- tically recorded) structural adjustment measures (SAM). —6Relative to the
ures: levels at end of month; employed persons and employees: averages; total civilian labour force. —7From May 2001 calculated on the basis of
short-time workers: levels at mid-month; annual and quarterly figures: aver- new labour force figures. —8From April 2001, change against previous
ages. —1Work-place concept. —2Annual figures, calculated by the Bundes- periods overstated for western Germany and understated for eastern
bank; deviations from the official figures are due to rounding. —3In- Germany owing to restructuring of labour exchange districts in Berlin. —
cluding active proprietors. —4The figures refer to the economic classifica- 9From October 2001, change against previous periods understated for
tions ”Site preparation ”and ”Building of complete constructions or parts western Germany and overstated for eastern Germany owing to
thereof; civil engineering ”.—5Employees involved in job creation schemes restructuring of labour exchange districts in Berlin. —oFirst preliminary esti-
and receiving productive grants towards labour costs (up to December 1997 mate. approved cases) and (from January 1998 approved, but from April 1998 statis-
64* IX. Economic conditions

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
 IX. Economic conditions
 
7. Prices
 Germany
  
Consumer price index for all households Indices of
foreign trade prices
By region By product group Index of
producer
Other prices of Index ofdurable Overall industrial Index of worldand non- Services con- products producer marketdurable excluding struction prices prices sold on the
Western Eastern consumer house House price domestic of farm of raw
Total Germany Germany Food goods rents  
1 rents level  1 market  2 Exports Imports products  2 materials  3 
Period 1995 = 100
Index level  
  
1997 103.3 103.2 104.2 102.1 101.8 104.1 106.3 99.0 99.9 100.5 101.5 104.0 122.8
1998 104.3 104.1 105.3 103.0 101.9 106.1 108.0 98.8 99.5 95.6 101.4 100.7 97.01999 104.9 104.8 105.7 101.9 102.8 106.4 109.2 98.5 98.5 89.9 100.9 100.2 113.5
2000 106.9 106.9 107.5 101.5 106.1 108.0 110.6 99.2 101.8 95.1 104.4 111.4 172.2
 
1999         Dec. 105.5 105.5 106.0 100.4 104.1 107.0 109.7 99.4 91.9 102.1 105.2 145.2
2000         Jan. 105.8 105.7 106.4 101.3 104.5 106.9 110.0 99.8 90.7 102.4 106.0 146.5
         Feb. 106.2 106.1 106.9 102.0 104.7 107.6 110.2 98.9 100.0 92.9 102.8 107.8 157.1         Mar. 106.4 106.3 107.0 101.3 105.3 107.4 110.3 100.0 94.1 103.1 108.7 161.5
         Apr. 106.4 106.3 107.0 101.9 104.9 107.7 110.4 100.4 94.1 103.6 108.4 149.9
         May 106.3 106.2 107.0 102.2 105.1 107.0 110.5 99.2 101.0 94.7 104.3 110.6 172.1         June 106.9 106.8 107.5 102.2 105.9 107.9 110.6 101.3 96.1 104.3 110.7 170.2
         July 107.4 107.3 107.9 101.8 106.1 109.4 110.7 102.0 96.8 104.6 111.1 167.7
         Aug. 107.2 107.2 107.8 101.0 106.1 109.2 110.8 99.3 102.3 97.2 105.0 112.7 179.2         Sep. 107.7 107.6 108.0 100.7 107.6 108.3 110.9 103.2 97.3 105.6 115.3 197.6
         Oct. 107.5 107.4 107.8 100.6 107.4 107.7 111.0 103.7 98.8 105.9 115.8 198.2
         Nov. 107.7 107.7 108.3 101.1 107.8 108.1 111.0 99.5 103.9 99.9 105.9 116.4 201.1         Dec. 107.8 107.7 108.3 101.8 107.5 108.4 111.1 103.6 98.5 105.5 113.8 165.3
2001         Jan. 108.3 108.2 109.1 103.5 107.3 109.8 111.4 104.4 95.6 105.3 112.9 158.8
         Feb. 109.0 108.9 109.8 103.9 108.1 111.0 111.5 99.5 104.7 97.9 105.4 113.6 167.3         Mar. 109.1 109.0 110.0 105.1 108.2 110.7 111.6 104.9 102.1 105.6 113.3 161.2
         Apr. 109.5 109.3 110.4 107.0 108.5 110.4 111.7 105.4 102.4 105.7 113.9 166.4
         May 110.0 109.8 111.1 109.0 109.2 110.3 111.8 99.5 105.6 103.0 106.0 115.0 175.4         June 110.2 110.0 111.2 109.3 109.0 111.2 111.9 105.7 99.7 106.0 114.7 176.1
         July 110.2 110.0 111.3 108.7 108.4 112.7 112.0 105.2 99.9 105.8 113.0 166.0
         Aug. 110.0 109.8 111.0 107.3 108.4 112.5 112.1 99.4 105.1
p 101.3 105.4 111.7 160.8
         Sep. 110.0 109.8 111.0 107.1 108.9 111.7 112.2 105.2 p 102.0 105.3 111.1 157.2
         Oct. 109.7 109.5 110.7 107.2 108.2 111.2 112.3 ... ... ... ... 139.0
Change from previous year in %  
  
1997 + 1.9 + 1.9 + 2.3 + 1.2 + 1.3 + 2.5 + 2.8 − 0.8 + 1.1 + 1.0 + 1.5 + 3.6 + 13.2
1998 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 1.1 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 1.9 + 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 4.9 − 0.1 − 3.2 −21.0
1999 + 0.6 + 0.7 + 0.4 − 1.1 + 0.9 + 0.3 + 1.1 − 0.3 − 1.0 − 6.0 − 0.5 − 0.5 + 17.0
2000 + 1.9 + 2.0 + 1.7 − 0.4 + 3.2 + 1.5 + 1.3 + 0.7 + 3.4 + 5.8 + 3.5 + 11.2 + 51.7
 
1999         Dec. + 1.2 + 1.3 + 0.7 − 1.7 + 2.4 + 0.8 + 1.2 + 1.1 − 4.0 + 1.7 + 8.2 + 81.3
2000         Jan. + 1.6 + 1.7 + 1.3 − 1.7 + 3.0 + 1.6 + 1.2 + 2.0 − 2.1 + 2.3 + 9.2 + 76.1
         Feb. + 1.8 + 1.9 + 1.5 − 1.1 + 3.4 + 1.3 + 1.3 + 0.4 + 2.4 − 0.1 + 2.6 + 10.9 + 87.7
         Mar. + 1.9 + 1.9 + 1.6 − 1.7 + 3.6 + 1.1 + 1.3 + 2.4 + 0.9 + 2.8 + 10.9 + 72.0
         Apr. + 1.5 + 1.6 + 1.3 − 1.5 + 2.0 + 2.2 + 1.3 + 2.1 + 2.3 + 3.2 + 9.8 + 43.9
         May + 1.4 + 1.4 + 1.2 − 1.3 + 2.5 + 1.1 + 1.3 + 0.8 + 2.7 + 2.5 + 3.8 + 11.7 + 61.9
         June + 1.9 + 1.9 + 1.7 − 0.7 + 3.1 + 1.6 + 1.4 + 2.9 + 2.9 + 3.6 + 11.5 + 55.0
         July + 1.9 + 1.9 + 1.7 − 0.1 + 3.0 + 1.5 + 1.3 + 3.3 + 5.8 + 3.7 + 10.9 + 42.0
         Aug. + 1.8 + 1.8 + 1.8 + 0.2 + 2.7 + 1.3 + 1.4 + 0.8 + 3.5 + 6.1 + 4.0 + 11.9 + 47.6         Sep. + 2.5 + 2.5 + 2.1 + 0.5 + 4.0 + 1.5 + 1.4 + 4.3 + 6.8 + 4.2 + 13.4 + 50.4
         Oct. + 2.4 + 2.4 + 2.0 + 0.7 + 3.7 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 4.6 + 9.5 + 4.3 + 13.4 + 56.8
         Nov. + 2.4 + 2.5 + 2.4 + 1.0 + 4.0 + 1.6 + 1.2 + 0.8 + 4.7 + 9.3 + 4.1 + 12.5 + 45.6         Dec. + 2.2 + 2.1 + 2.2 + 1.4 + 3.3 + 1.3 + 1.3 + 4.2 + 7.2 + 3.3 + 8.2 + 13.8
2001         Jan. + 2.4 + 2.4 + 2.5 + 2.2 + 2.7 + 2.7 + 1.3 + 4.6 + 5.4 + 2.8 + 6.5 + 8.4
         Feb. + 2.6 + 2.6 + 2.7 + 1.9 + 3.2 + 3.2 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 4.7 + 5.4 + 2.5 + 5.4 + 6.5         Mar. + 2.5 + 2.5 + 2.8 + 3.8 + 2.8 + 3.1 + 1.2 + 4.9 + 8.5 + 2.4 + 4.2 − 0.2
         Apr. + 2.9 + 2.8 + 3.2 + 5.0 + 3.4 + 2.5 + 1.2 + 5.0 + 8.8 + 2.0 + 5.1 + 11.0
         May + 3.5 + 3.4 + 3.8 + 6.7 + 3.9 + 3.1 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 4.6 + 8.8 + 1.6 + 4.0 + 1.9         June + 3.1 + 3.0 + 3.4 + 6.9 + 2.9 + 3.1 + 1.2 + 4.3 + 3.7 + 1.6 + 3.6 + 3.5
         July + 2.6 + 2.5 + 3.2 + 6.8 + 2.2 + 3.0 + 1.2 + 3.1 + 3.2 + 1.1 + 1.7 − 1.0
         Aug. + 2.6 + 2.4 + 3.0 + 6.2 + 2.2 + 3.0 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 2.7
p + 4.2 + 0.4 − 0.9 −10.3
         Sep. + 2.1 + 2.0 + 2.8 + 6.4 + 1.2 + 3.1 + 1.2 + 1.9 p + 4.8 − 0.3 − 3.6 −20.4
         Oct. + 2.0 + 2.0 + 2.7 + 6.6 + 0.7 + 3.2 + 1.2 ... ... ... ... −29.9
Source: Federal Statistical Office; for index of world market prices: HWWA In- by the Federal Statistical Office. —2Excluding value-added tax. —3HWWA
stitute. —1Calculated by the Bundesbank on the basis of figures provided index of raw material prices, on a Deutsche Mark basis. 
65* IX. Economic conditions

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
IX. Economic conditions
  
8. Households ’ income *
Germany
    
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries  1 salaries  2 Saving  6 ratio  7 benefits received  3 "Mass income"  4 Disposable income  5 
Change Change Change Change Change Change
from from from from from fromprevious previous previous previous previous previous
Period year in % year in % year in % year in % year in % year in % % DM billion DM billion DM billion DM billion DM billion DM billion
1995 1,577.1 3.2 1,038.0 0.8 555.6 4.6 1,593.6 2.1 2,256.0 3.5 252.1 −0.5 11.2
1996 1,594.0 1.1 1,032.7 −0.5 597.7 7.6 1,630.4 2.3 2,307.2 2.3 249.7 −1.0 10.8
1997 1,591.3 −0.2 1,016.0 −1.6 611.7 2.3 1,627.7 −0.2 2,355.9 2.1 244.8 −2.0 10.4
1998 1,624.0 2.1 1,038.7 2.2 623.8 2.0 1,662.4 2.1 2,421.9 2.8 249.9 2.1 10.31999 1,671.4 2.9 1,072.7 3.3 643.9 3.2 1,716.6 3.3 2,493.9 3.0 245.8 −1.6 9.9
2000 1,726.8 3.3 1,114.8 3.9 660.8 2.6 1,775.6 3.4 2,563.3 2.8 250.3 1.8 9.8
2000         1st qtr 394.7 3.9 257.1 4.9 166.4 3.0 423.5 4.2 638.5 3.6 84.9 6.8 13.3
         2nd qtr 413.6 3.1 262.2 3.5 163.7 3.1 425.9 3.3 636.1 3.7 57.8 1.4 9.1         3rd qtr 432.7 3.5 287.4 3.8 163.9 2.2 451.3 3.2 630.0 2.9 51.1 0.1 8.1         4th qtr 485.8 2.9 308.1 3.6 166.9 2.2 474.9 3.1 658.6 1.1 56.5 −3.1 8.6
2001         1st qtr 406.6 3.0 266.9 3.8 169.3 1.8 436.2 3.0 660.8 3.5 90.2 6.3 13.7
         2nd qtr 422.8 2.2 271.4 3.5 167.9 2.6 439.3 3.2 660.6 3.9 62.5 8.2 9.5
Euro billion
1999 854.6 . 548.5 . 329.2 . 877.7 . 1,275.1 . 125.7 . .
2000 882.9 . 570.0 . 337.9 . 907.8 . 1,310.6 . 128.0 . .
2000         1st qtr 201.8 . 131.5 . 85.1 . 216.5 . 326.5 . 43.4 . .
         2nd qtr 211.5 . 134.0 . 83.7 . 217.7 . 325.2 . 29.5 . .         3rd qtr 221.2 . 147.0 . 83.8 . 230.7 . 322.1 . 26.1 . .         4th qtr 248.4 . 157.5 . 85.3 . 242.8 . 336.8 . 28.9 . .
2001         1st qtr 207.9 . 136.5 . 86.6 . 223.0 . 337.9 . 46.1 . .
         2nd qtr 216.2 . 138.8 . 85.9 . 224.6 . 337.8 . 32.0 . .
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August 2001. — charges. —4Net wages and salaries plus monetary social benefits
*Households including non-profit institutions which serve households. — received. —5"Mass income" plus operating surplus, self-employed persons ’
1Residence concept. —2After deducting the wage tax payable on gross income, property income (net), other current transfers received, income of
wages and salaries and employees ’contributions to the social security non-profit organisations which serve households, less taxes (excluding wage
funds. —3Cash benefits from the social security funds, central, regional tax and consumption-related taxes) and other current transfers paid. Includ-
and local authorities and foreign countries, pension payments (net), social ing the increase in claims on company pension funds. —6Including the
security benefits from private insurance schemes, less social security increase in claims on company pension funds. —7Saving as a percentage of
contributions on social benefits, consumption-related taxes and public disposable income. 
  
  
9. Pay rates and actual earnings
Germany
    
Overall economy Producing sector (including construction)
Negotiated wage and salary level  1 Wages and salaries Negotiated wage and salary level  1 Wages and salaries
per employee per employee
on an hourly basis on a monthly basis on an hourly basis on a monthly basis (work-place concept)  2 (work-place concept)  3 
% from % from % from % from % from % from
previous previous previous previous previous previous
Period 1995=100 year 1995=100 year 1995=100 year 1995=100 year 1995=100 year 1995=100 year
1991 76.7 . 78.6 . 82.4 . 73.4 . 76.9 . 77.6 .
1992 85.8 11.9 87.3 11.0 91.0 10.4 82.9 12.9 85.9 11.7 88.4 13.91993 92.2 7.5 92.9 6.5 95.0 4.4 90.6 9.3 92.0 7.1 92.3 4.41994 95.3 3.4 95.6 2.9 96.9 2.0 94.3 4.1 94.8 3.0 96.1 4.1
1995 100.0 4.9 100.0 4.6 100.0 3.2 100.0 6.1 100.0 5.5 100.0 4.1
1996 102.6 2.6 102.4 2.4 101.4 1.4 103.8 3.8 102.9 2.9 102.9 2.91997 104.2 1.5 103.9 1.5 101.7 0.3 105.8 1.9 104.6 1.7 104.7 1.71998 106.2 2.0 105.8 1.8 102.7 1.0 107.7 1.8 106.4 1.7 106.4 1.61999 109.2 2.9 108.7 2.7 104.2 1.4 111.0 3.0 109.5 2.9 108.3 1.8
2000 111.4 2.0 110.8 2.0 105.8 1.6 113.2 2.0 111.6 2.0 111.2 2.7
2000         1st qtr 101.6 1.7 101.1 1.7 98.3 2.1 102.5 1.5 101.0 1.3 104.0 3.1
         2nd qtr 103.0 2.2 102.4 2.1 101.7 0.8 103.8 2.0 102.4 2.0 112.9 2.8         3rd qtr 115.1 2.0 114.5 2.0 105.6 1.9 121.1 2.1 119.5 2.1 107.1 2.5         4th qtr 125.9 2.1 125.3 2.1 117.7 1.6 125.2 2.3 123.5 2.3 120.6 2.5
2001         1st qtr 103.8 2.1 103.2 2.1 100.6 2.3 104.1 1.6 102.6 1.6 107.3 3.2
         2nd qtr 104.8 1.8 104.2 1.8 103.8 2.0 105.3 1.4 103.8 1.4 115.7 2.5         3rd qtr 117.3 1.9 116.7 1.9 . . 123.4 1.9 121.7 1.9 . .
2001         Mar. 103.8 1.6 103.2 1.6 . . 104.0 0.5 102.6 0.5 108.3 2.6
         Apr. 104.4 1.4 103.8 1.4 . . 104.4 0.4 102.9 0.4 110.6 3.7
         May 105.1 2.0 104.5 2.0 . . 105.9 2.0 104.4 2.0 117.8 2.1         June 105.0 1.9 104.4 1.9 . . 105.6 1.8 104.1 1.8 118.6 1.7
         July 141.2 1.7 140.4 1.6 . . 158.7 2.0 156.5 2.0 112.0 3.5
         Aug. 105.2 1.9 104.6 1.9 . . 105.8 1.9 104.3 1.9 110.1 2.3         Sep. 105.7 2.2 105.1 2.2 . . 105.8 1.8 104.4 1.8 . .
1Current data are normally revised upwards on account of additional supply, and excluding installation and building completion work. Calculated
reports. —2Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August by the Bundesbank on the basis of data from the Federal Statistical Office,
2001. —3Producing sector, excluding electricity, gas, steam and hot water using the old and new classifications of the economic sectors. 
66*IX. Economic conditions

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the European monetary union *
  
Until the end of 1998 ECU million, from 1999 euro million
2000 2001 1 
Position 1998 1999 2000 4th qtr 1st qtr 2nd qtr June July Aug.
Current account + 31,880 −18,261 −59,865 −17,389 −10,530 −11,334 −1,647 −4,140 + 4,163 A.
1. Foreign trade
Exports (f.o.b.) incl. supplementary items 784,375 818,126 986,841 274,584 254,477 261,195 89,484 90,037 80,881
Imports (f.o.b.) incl. supplementary items 675,352 742,493 951,265 265,067 249,018 246,101 81,413 81,579 74,912
Balance + 109,024 + 75,633 + 35,576 + 9,517 + 5,459 + 15,091 + 8,070 + 8,458 + 5,969
2. Services
Receipts 231,907 244,523 279,546 75,139 68,718 82,238 28,100 28,572 27,720
Expenditure 233,048 256,420 295,654 80,755 73,746 76,019 26,175 27,700 26,914
Balance −1,140 −11,900 −16,108 −5,616 −5,028 + 6,216 + 1,924 + 872 + 806
3. Factor income (balance) −28,832 −35,682 −26,698 −3,892 −9,095 −15,605 −4,391 −8,084 + 313
4. Current transfers
Transfer payments from non-residents 62,954 64,819 67,249 14,908 29,591 14,903 4,238 4,762 4,374
Transfer payments to non-residents 110,122 111,134 119,887 32,309 31,454 31,945 11,490 10,148 7,299
Balance −47,169 −46,315 −52,635 −17,398 −1,863 −17,039 −7,251 −5,386 −2,925
Balance of capital transfers + 12,409 + 12,861 + 9,679 + 3,464 + 2,945 + 3,514 + 851 + 439 + 613B.
C. 2 −68,390 + 10,933 + 93,427 + 25,718 + 30,571 −10,208 −13,976 −12,020 + 280 Financial account (net capital exports: −)
1. Direct investment −81,326 −118,132 + 17,619 −13,514 −40,647 −50,495 −10,351 + 7,193 −5,991
Investment outside the euro area −172,812 −315,645 −382,370 −93,259 −65,369 −78,240 −20,304 −6,003 −12,194
Foreign investment in the euro area + 91,486 + 197,510 + 399,992 + 79,748 + 24,722 + 27,745 + 9,953 + 13,196 + 6,203
2. Investment in securities −110,046 −45,652 −111,538 + 12,655 −38,483 + 27,764 + 32,197 + 1,603 + 17,842
Investment outside the euro area −363,304 −311,403 −412,782 −78,415 −82,874 −71,558 −25,792 −12,377 −18,046
Equities −116,186 −156,328 −288,479 −59,934 −29,085 −36,810 −10,815 −8,377 −2,636
Bonds and notes −238,916 −154,392 −102,742 −15,588 −37,230 −44,607 −17,048 −7,897 −16,264
Money market paper −8,201 − 683 −21,564 −2,893 −16,559 + 9,862 + 2,072 + 3,897 + 854
Foreign investment in the euro area + 253,259 + 265,748 + 301,247 + 91,070 + 44,391 + 99,322 + 57,989 + 13,980 + 35,888
Equities + 103,956 + 92,366 + 44,930 + 38,392 + 18,684 + 108,922 + 40,920 + 12,799 + 15,348
Bonds and notes + 121,572 + 117,435 + 229,621 + 59,426 + 24,538 − 379 + 15,368 + 2,950 + 19,409
Money market paper + 27,728 + 55,947 + 26,702 −6,745 + 1,169 −9,221 + 1,701 −1,769 + 1,131
3. Financial derivatives −8,208 + 4,469 −1,719 −8,538 −2,033 − 13−5,030 −4,772 −3,081
4. Credit transactions and other
investment (balance) + 122,952 + 160,114 + 171,512 + 24,440 + 102,197 + 9,996 −29,944 −16,025 −12,581
Eurosystem + 2,717 + 4,587 − 217 + 1,948 −1,830 + 3,473 + 3,913 + 324 −2,293
Public authorities −7,101 −9,707 −1,494 + 9,089 −5,847 + 2,405 − 145 − 560 −1,870
Credit institutions + 169,779 + 179,187 + 158,298 −4,414 + 126,714 + 3,949 −36,509 −15,104 −7,436
long-term + 2,810 + 6,597 + 3,741 −10,889 −5,594 + 6,785 + 4,929 − 509 − 877
short-term + 166,969 + 172,598 + 154,556 + 6,473 + 132,311 −2,833 −41,437 −14,595 −6,559
Enterprises and individuals −42,441 −13,959 + 14,925 + 17,817 −16,843 + 172 + 2,798 − 685 − 982
5. Change in the monetary reserves of
    the eurosystem (Increase: −) + 8,238 + 10,128 + 17,559 + 10,675 + 9,534 + 2,537 − 849 − 19 + 4,091
Balance of unclassifiable transactions  2 + 24,099 −5,530 −43,244 −11,796 −22,986 + 18,028 + 14,772 + 15,721 −5,056 D.
*Source: European Central Bank. —1From January 2001, including   
Greece. —2Series for which data from January 1999 are not closely  
comparable with earlier observations. 
67*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(Balances)
 
 
Current account Memo item:
Change in Capital trans-
the Bundes- fers and pur-
Change in bank ’s net chases / sales
Supple- external of intangible the monetary
Balance of mentary non- reserves at Balance of assets aton current Foreign trade Factor Current produced Financial transaction transaction unclassifiable
Period account trade  
1  2 items  3  4 Services  5 income transfers assets  6 account  6 values  7 values  7 transactions
DM million
1988 + 92,585 + 128,045 −2,791 −16,365 + 16,630 −32,933 −2,029 −122,721 + 27,662 + 4,503 + 34,676
1989 + 107,346 + 134,576 −4,107 −15,210 + 26,872 −34,784 −2,064 −110,286 −5,405 + 10,409 + 18,997
1990  o + 79,475 + 105,382 −3,833 −19,664 + 32,859 −35,269 −4,975 −89,497 −11,611 + 26,608 −10,976
1991 −30,416 + 21,899 −2,804 −24,842 + 33,144 −57,812 −4,565 + 12,614 + 9,605 + 12,762 − 319
1992 −22,924 + 33,656 −1,426 −37,894 + 33,962 −51,222 −1,963 + 69,792 −52,888 + 7,983 −68,745
1993  8 −16,155 + 60,304 −3,038 −45,080 + 27,373 −55,714 −1,915 + 21,442 + 22,795 −26,167 + 35,766
1994  8 −38,805 + 71,762 −1,104 −54,374 + 4,852 −59,940 −2,637 + 57,871 + 2,846 −19,276 −12,242
1995  8 −29,671 + 85,303 −4,722 −54,720 + 178 −55,710 −3,845 + 63,647 −10,355 −19,776 −17,754
1996  8 −11,959 + 98,538 −5,264 −55,330 + 1,391 −51,294 −3,283 + 23,613 + 1,882 −10,253 + 1,610
1997  8 − 4,727 + 116,467 −7,360 −58,715 − 2,376 −52,742 + 52 − 76 + 6,640 − 1,889 + 8,468
1998  8 −11,834 + 126,970 −5,967 −66,748 −12,741 −53,348 + 1,289 + 32,086 −7,128 −14,414 −8,231
1999  8 −32,894 + 127,542 −13,601 −80,366 −16,044 −50,425 − 301 −69,114 + 24,517 + 77,792 −72,364
2000  8 −39,707 + 115,664 −12,487 −87,414 − 2,421 −53,048 + 29,916 + 19,175 + 11,429 −20,813 + 94,329
2000         4th qtr 8 −17,590 + 25,888 −4,369 −20,585 − 2,791 −15,735 − 798 −45,428 + 4,013 + 59,804 + 33,518
2001         1st qtr 8 − 1,630 + 38,740 −3,223 −24,798 − 1,965 −10,383 + 1,105 −16,506 + 7,965 + 9,066 −22,980
         2nd qtr 8 − 4,759 + 38,520 −2,739 −21,971 − 3,723 −14,846 −1,169 −13,623 + 3,988 + 15,563 + 41,266
         3rd qtr 8p − 633 + 45,064 −3,506 −27,422 − 2,376 −12,392 − 868 −28,228 −4,233 + 33,962 −26,131
2001         Jan.  8 −10,384 + 8,711 −1,371 − 8,471 − 8,457 − 796 + 1,030 −17,986 + 2,739 + 24,602 −11,712
         Feb.  8 + 2,613 + 12,642 −1,248 − 5,807 + 1,373 − 4,346 + 233 − 7,276 + 2,307 + 2,123 −7,576
         Mar.  8 + 6,142 + 17,387 − 604 −10,519 + 5,119 − 5,242 − 158 + 8,755 + 2,919 −17,658 −3,692
         Apr.  8 + 3,890 + 10,571 −1,065 − 4,572 + 3,236 − 4,281 − 289 − 1,607 + 2,357 − 4,351 + 18,392
         May  8 + 333 + 14,510 −1,024 − 7,415 − 880 − 4,859 −1,444 + 32,413 + 994 −32,295 − 104
         June  8 − 8,982 + 13,438 − 650 − 9,985 − 6,080 − 5,706 + 564 −44,429 + 638 + 52,209 + 22,978
         July  8 − 5,915 + 17,139 − 934 − 9,607 − 6,919 − 5,594 − 443 − 1,517 − 295 + 8,171 −20,709
         Aug.  8 + 6,435 + 16,179 −1,304 − 9,355 + 3,403 − 2,489 − 337 − 656 + 900 − 6,342 −8,307
         Sep.  8p − 1,152 + 11,745 −1,268 − 8,460 + 1,139 − 4,309 − 88 −26,054 −4,838 + 32,133 + 2,886
 Euro million
1999  8 −16,819 + 65,211 −6,954 −41,091 − 8,203 −25,782 − 154 −35,338 + 12,535 + 39,775 −36,999
2000  8 −20,302 + 59,138 −6,384 −44,694 − 1,238 −27,123 + 15,296 + 9,804 + 5,844 −10,641 + 48,230
1999         4th qtr 8 − 4,199 + 18,524 −1,584 − 9,614 − 3,906 − 7,619 + 532 + 1,129 − 90 + 2,628 −13,354
2000         1st qtr 8 + 68 + 16,374 −1,357 − 9,938 + 441 − 5,452 + 160 + 34,102 − 751 −33,579 + 32,016
         2nd qtr 8 − 1,422 + 16,408 −1,185 −11,661 + 1,528 − 6,513 − 330 + 24,061 + 2,388 −24,697 −23,447
         3rd qtr 8 − 9,953 + 13,119 −1,608 −12,570 − 1,780 − 7,114 + 15,874 −25,133 + 2,155 + 17,058 + 22,523
         4th qtr 8 − 8,994 + 13,237 −2,234 −10,525 − 1,427 − 8,045 − 408 −23,227 + 2,052 + 30,577 + 17,137
2001         1st qtr 8 − 833 + 19,807 −1,648 −12,679 − 1,005 − 5,309 + 565 −8,440 + 4,072 + 4,636 −11,749
         2nd qtr 8 − 2,433 + 19,695 −1,400 −11,234 − 1,904 − 7,591 − 598 −6,965 + 2,039 + 7,957 + 21,099
         3rd qtr 8p − 323 + 23,041 −1,793 −14,021 − 1,215 − 6,336 − 444 −14,433 −2,165 + 17,365 −13,360
1999         Dec.  8 − 3,039 + 5,082 − 666 − 3,165 − 1,754 − 2,536 + 220 + 11,048 + 149 − 8,377 −8,452
2000         Jan.  8 − 6,619 + 3,121 − 568 − 4,147 − 3,336 − 1,689 + 172 + 13,544 − 42 − 7,055 + 26,184
         Feb.  8 + 1,525 + 7,122 − 411 − 3,150 + 12 − 2,048 − 146 − 508 − 438 − 433 −1,934
         Mar.  8 + 5,162 + 6,131 − 378 − 2,641 + 3,765 − 1,716 + 134 + 21,067 − 271 −26,092 + 7,766
         Apr.  8 − 258 + 5,297 − 353 − 3,370 + 715 − 2,548 + 194 + 1,331 + 1,354 − 2,620 −9,302
         May  8 − 1,929 + 4,503 − 530 − 3,884 − 291 − 1,728 − 22 + 20,880 + 171 −19,099 + 2,657
         June  8 + 766 + 6,608 − 302 − 4,408 + 1,104 − 2,237 − 502 + 1,851 + 863 − 2,978 −16,802
         July  8 − 2,561 + 5,943 − 425 − 3,560 − 1,514 − 3,006 + 105 + 1,954 + 1,180 − 677 + 23,600
         Aug.  8 − 5,643 + 2,921 − 716 − 5,174 − 53 − 2,620 + 7,766 −12,628 + 345 + 10,160 + 11,758
         Sep.  8 − 1,749 + 4,255 − 468 − 3,835 − 213 − 1,487 + 8,003 −14,459 + 630 + 7,575 −12,834
         Oct.  8 − 453 + 6,795 − 874 − 4,370 + 968 − 2,972 − 125 −7,465 + 538 + 7,505 + 19,591
         Nov.  8 − 2,122 + 4,766 − 347 − 3,124 − 537 − 2,880 − 143 −5,654 + 466 + 7,452 + 5,015
         Dec.  8 − 6,419 + 1,676 −1,012 − 3,031 − 1,859 − 2,193 − 140 −10,108 + 1,047 + 15,620 −7,468
2001         Jan.  8 − 5,309 + 4,454 − 701 − 4,331 − 4,324 − 407 + 527 −9,196 + 1,400 + 12,579 −5,988
         Feb.  8 + 1,336 + 6,464 − 638 − 2,969 + 702 − 2,222 + 119 −3,720 + 1,180 + 1,085 −3,873
         Mar.  8 + 3,140 + 8,890 − 309 − 5,378 + 2,617 − 2,680 − 81 + 4,477 + 1,492 − 9,028 −1,888
         Apr.  8 + 1,989 + 5,405 − 544 − 2,337 + 1,655 − 2,189 − 148 − 822 + 1,205 − 2,225 + 9,404
         May  8 + 170 + 7,419 − 524 − 3,791 − 450 − 2,485 − 738 + 16,572 + 508 −16,512 − 53
         June  8 − 4,592 + 6,871 − 332 − 5,105 − 3,109 − 2,917 + 288 −22,716 + 326 + 26,694 + 11,749
         July  8 − 3,024 + 8,763 − 478 − 4,912 − 3,538 − 2,860 − 226 − 776 − 151 + 4,178 −10,589
         Aug.  8 + 3,290 + 8,272 − 667 − 4,783 + 1,740 − 1,273 − 172 − 336 + 460 − 3,242 −4,247
         Sep.  8p − 589 + 6,005 − 648 − 4,326 + 583 − 2,203 − 45 −13,321 −2,474 + 16,429 + 1,476
oFrom July 1990 including the external transactions of the former GDR. — warehouse transactions for account of residents and deduction of goods
1Special trade according to the official foreign trade statistics: imports c.i.f., returned. —4See footnote 2. —5Excluding the expenditure on freight and
exports f.o.b. —2From January 1993 including additional estimates for insurance included in the c.i.f. import value. —6Capital exports: −.—
external transactions which do not have to be reported and which are 7Increase: -. —8Figures subject to significant uncertainty owing to changes
included up to December 1992 in Supplementary trade items. —3Mainly in the method of data collection in foreign trade. 
68*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
by group of countries and country *
 
 Until the end of 1998 DM million, from 1999 euro million
2001
Group of countries / Country 1998 1999 2000 r Jan. / Aug. May June July August September  p 
All countries  1 Exports 955,170 510,008 597,481 427,232 54,511 53,464 55,319 51,627 49,653
Imports 828,200 444,797 538,343 370,694 47,092 46,593 46,555 43,354 43,647Balance + 126,970 + 65,211 + 59,138 + 56,538 + 7,419 + 6,871 + 8,763 + 8,272 + 6,005
I. Exports 728,539 395,748 460,075 324,281 40,537 40,559 41,463 38,082 ...Industrialised
Imports 628,089 332,891 389,761 270,251 35,137 34,137 33,606 30,720 ... countries
Balance + 100,450 + 62,857 + 70,314 + 54,030 + 5,400 + 6,422 + 7,857 + 7,362 ...
Exports 539,793 293,377 337,385 236,704 29,321 29,558 29,752 27,241 ... 1. EU member countries
Imports 452,037 239,652 273,961 193,385 25,281 24,821 24,100 21,867 ...Balance + 87,757 + 53,725 + 63,424 + 43,319 + 4,040 + 4,737 + 5,652 + 5,374 ...
of  which
Exports 420,000 229,837 264,877 185,491 22,749 23,365 23,266 20,761 ... EMU member
Imports 365,132 193,146 217,953 155,787 20,386 20,178 19,689 17,420 ... countries
Balance + 54,867 + 36,691 + 46,924 + 29,705 + 2,363 + 3,188 + 3,577 + 3,341 ...
of which
Austria Exports 51,760 28,295 32,437 21,668 2,623 2,696 2,742 2,563 ...
Imports 33,078 18,288 20,498 13,732 1,766 1,651 1,794 1,587 ...Balance + 18,683 + 10,007 + 11,939 + 7,936 + 857 + 1,045 + 948 + 976 ...
Belgium and Exports 54,288 28,821 32,730 23,180 2,914 2,857 2,736 2,521 ...
Luxemburg Imports 46,437 22,880 26,230 20,403 2,508 2,611 2,520 2,256 ...
Balance + 7,851 + 5,942 + 6,500 + 2,777 + 406 + 247 + 216 + 265 ...
France Exports 105,901 58,578 67,418 47,890 5,683 5,983 6,033 5,323 ...
Imports 88,914 45,559 50,863 34,776 4,530 4,486 4,279 3,802 ...Balance + 16,987 + 13,019 + 16,555 + 13,114 + 1,153 + 1,498 + 1,754 + 1,521 ...
Italy Exports 70,533 38,335 45,012 32,032 4,006 4,189 4,167 3,204 ...
Imports 64,513 33,107 35,778 24,030 3,200 3,156 3,171 2,576 ...Balance + 6,020 + 5,229 + 9,234 + 8,002 + 806 + 1,033 + 996 + 628 ...
Netherlands Exports 66,910 34,355 38,994 26,562 3,290 3,266 3,152 3,238 ...
Imports 69,425 36,089 44,740 31,164 3,845 3,864 3,721 3,541 ...Balance − 2,515 − 1,734 − 5,746 − 4,602 − 555 − 597 − 569 − 302 ...
Spain Exports 38,454 22,684 26,733 19,236 2,432 2,447 2,667 2,076 ...
Imports 27,801 14,666 16,088 10,921 1,514 1,421 1,310 1,036 ...Balance + 10,653 + 8,018 + 10,645 + 8,315 + 919 + 1,025 + 1,356 + 1,040 ...
Sweden Exports 21,874 11,657 13,525 8,511 1,034 1,066 921 993 ...
Imports 16,331 8,305 10,202 6,321 810 735 738 702 ...Balance + 5,543 + 3,352 + 3,323 + 2,189 + 224 + 331 + 184 + 291 ...
United Exports 81,356 43,124 49,377 35,796 4,691 4,252 4,711 4,557 ...
Kingdom Imports 56,694 30,757 36,925 25,342 3,412 3,220 2,833 3,003 ...
Balance + 24,662 + 12,367 + 12,453 + 10,454 + 1,279 + 1,032 + 1,878 + 1,554 ...
Exports 66,640 33,504 39,585 26,919 3,460 3,549 3,384 3,412 ... 2. Other European
Imports 58,057 30,588 36,618 25,461 3,216 2,967 3,516 2,806 ... industrial countries
Balance + 8,582 + 2,916 + 2,967 + 1,458 + 243 + 582 − 133 + 606 ...
of which
Switzerland Exports 42,686 22,808 25,596 18,593 2,480 2,372 2,330 2,244 ...
Imports 32,550 17,070 18,798 12,996 1,673 1,582 1,777 1,507 ...Balance + 10,136 + 5,738 + 6,798 + 5,597 + 807 + 790 + 553 + 737 ...
Exports 122,107 68,867 83,105 60,658 7,757 7,453 8,327 7,429 ... 3. Non-European
Imports 117,995 62,651 79,182 51,405 6,640 6,350 5,989 6,047 ... industrial countries
Balance + 4,111 + 6,216 + 3,923 + 9,253 + 1,117 + 1,103 + 2,338 + 1,383 ...
of which
Japan Exports 18,310 10,367 13,196 8,800 1,111 1,069 1,175 1,095 ...
Imports 41,047 21,779 26,848 15,744 2,049 1,877 1,761 1,674 ...Balance −22,737 −11,412 −13,653 − 6,944 − 938 − 807 − 586 − 579 ...
Exports 89,751 51,425 61,765 46,009 5,775 5,678 6,353 5,557 ... United States
Imports 68,307 36,790 47,124 32,146 4,130 4,016 3,777 3,974 ...Balance + 21,444 + 14,635 + 14,640 + 13,863 + 1,646 + 1,662 + 2,576 + 1,583 ...
II. Exports 115,463 56,717 70,328 54,042 7,391 6,914 7,294 7,225 ...Countries in transition
Imports 108,819 62,533 82,905 58,969 7,108 7,486 7,690 7,537 ...Balance + 6,645 − 5,816 −12,577 − 4,926 + 283 − 572 − 397 − 312 ...
of which
Central and east Exports 101,499 49,020 59,908 45,388 6,227 5,889 6,114 5,898 ...European countries Imports 84,280 47,723 62,784 45,273 5,434 5,877 5,926 5,636 ...in transition Balance + 17,220 + 1,297 − 2,877 + 115 + 793 + 12 + 188 + 262 ...
People ‘s Republic Exports 11,900 6,949 9,459 7,850 1,048 922 1,060 1,212 ...
of China  
2 Imports 23,181 13,795 18,555 12,472 1,519 1,437 1,613 1,739 ...
Balance −11,280 − 6,846 − 9,096 − 4,622 − 472 − 515 − 553 − 527 ...
III. Exports 108,860 56,377 65,401 47,904 6,433 5,853 6,415 6,186 ...Developing countries
Imports 90,249 48,835 64,934 41,011 4,791 4,916 5,202 5,046 ...Balance + 18,610 + 7,543 + 467 + 6,893 + 1,642 + 936 + 1,213 + 1,140 ...
of which
Newly industrial- Exports 36,657 18,775 24,031 16,878 2,349 1,974 2,236 2,119 ...ising countries in Imports 42,310 22,586 30,502 18,304 2,130 2,044 2,040 2,185 ...south-east Asia  
3 Balance − 5,653 − 3,811 − 6,472 − 1,426 + 219 − 70 + 196 − 66 ...
OPEC-countries Exports 19,213 9,135 10,758 8,800 1,144 1,087 1,302 1,232 ...
Imports 11,215 6,425 10,244 5,672 541 760 759 727 ...Balance + 7,998 + 2,710 + 514 + 3,129 + 603 + 327 + 543 + 504 ...
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (f.o.b.) by country of destination, region. —2Excluding Hong Kong. —3Brunei Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indo-
imports (c.i.f.) by country of origin. Inclusion of individual countries in nesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore, Republic of Korea, Taiwan and Thai-
groups of countries according to the current position. —1Including fuel land. 
and other supplies for ships and aircraft and other data not classifiable by
69*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
4. Services and factor income of the Federal Republic of Germany
(Balances)
 
Until the end of 1998 DM million, from 1999 euro million
Services
other services
of which
 
Patents Compen- Services  of Construction
Trans- Financial and sation of Investment Government selfemployed and  assembly
Period Total Travel services licences Total income portation  1 transactions  2 persons  3 work,  repairs employees  4 
1996 −55,330 −53,025 + 4,873 + 2,653 −3,772 + 6,699 −12,757 −2,180 −1,216 −1,779 + 3,171
1997 −58,715 −52,718 + 5,723 + 2,315 −4,341 + 6,616 −16,310 −2,403 −1,669 −1,698 − 678
1998 −66,748 −54,742 + 5,457 + 3,011 −4,052 + 5,462 −21,885 −2,564 −2,473 −1,584 −11,157
1999 −41,091 −29,947 + 2,882 + 1,073 −1,868 + 1,973 −15,204 −2,112 − 552 − 836 −7,367
2000 −44,694 −32,000 + 3,584 + 856 −2,871 + 2,149 −16,413 −2,594 −1,244 − 936 − 301
2000         1st qtr − 9,938 − 6,318 + 564 + 88 − 757 + 577 −4,091 − 696 − 380 + 45 + 397
         2nd qtr −11,661 − 8,463 + 946 + 475 − 450 + 407 −4,576 − 533 − 333 − 271 + 1,799
         3rd qtr −12,570 −11,111 + 1,073 + 42 − 572 + 576 −2,578 − 660 − 20 − 511 −1,269
         4th qtr −10,525 − 6,107 + 1,001 + 251 −1,092 + 589 −5,167 − 705 − 511 − 199 −1,228
2001         1st qtr −12,679 − 6,571 + 915 − 100 − 540 + 711 −7,093 − 620 − 655 + 99 −1,104
         2nd qtr −11,234 − 8,762 + 1,307 + 179 − 316 + 690 −4,331 − 575 − 380 − 173 −1,730
         3rd qtr −14,021 −10,519 + 1,100 + 168 − 637 + 756 −4,888 − 606 − 369 − 461 − 754
2000         Nov. − 3,124 − 1,702 + 214 + 172 − 399 + 202 −1,610 − 212 − 164 − 69 − 467
         Dec. − 3,031 − 1,614 + 478 + 5 − 314 + 254 −1,839 − 303 + 90 − 49 −1,810
2001         Jan. − 4,331 − 2,317 + 171 + 4 − 143 + 221 −2,267 − 246 − 445 + 27 −4,351
         Feb. − 2,969 − 1,880 + 363 − 77 − 392 + 253 −1,236 − 194 − 92 + 26 + 676
         Mar. − 5,378 − 2,374 + 381 − 26 − 5 + 236 −3,591 − 180 − 118 + 47 + 2,570
         Apr. − 2,337 − 2,735 + 348 + 9 − 49 + 167 − 78 − 215 − 56 − 81 + 1,736
         May − 3,791 − 2,822 + 580 + 151 − 166 + 265 −1,801 − 188 − 71 − 43 − 406
         June − 5,105 − 3,206 + 379 + 18 − 102 + 258 −2,453 − 171 − 253 − 49 −3,060
         July − 4,912 − 3,411 + 506 + 161 − 319 + 222 −2,071 − 281 − 82 − 155 −3,382
         Aug. − 4,783 − 3,834 + 420 − 19 − 106 + 286 −1,529 − 202 − 92 − 148 + 1,888
         Sep. − 4,326 − 3,274 + 174 + 26 − 212 + 249 −1,288 − 123 − 195 − 157 + 740
1Excluding the expenditure on freight included in the c.i.f. import value. — vices supplied. —3Engineering and other technical services, research and
2Including the receipts from foreign military agencies for goods and ser- development, commercial services etc. — 4 Wages and salaries. 
5. Current transfers of the Federal Republic of Germany 6. Capital transfers
(Balances) (Balances)
Until the end of 1998 DM million, from 1999 euro million DM million / euro million
Public  1 Private  1 
International
Organisations  2 
 
of which other Remittances other
European current by foreign current
Period Total Total Total Communities Total workers transfers Total  4 Public  1 Private  1 transfers  3 
1996 −51,294 −35,281 −30,674 −27,553 −4,607 −16,013 −7,401 −8,612 −3,283 −2,617 − 666
1997 −52,742 −36,812 −31,509 −28,502 −5,302 −15,930 −7,519 −8,411 + 52 −2,821 + 2,873
1998 −53,348 −37,317 −33,077 −30,382 −4,240 −16,031 −6,936 −9,095 + 1,289 −2,441 + 3,730
1999 −25,782 −17,409 −15,428 −13,846 −1,981 −8,373 −3,429 −4,944 − 154 −1,351 + 1,197
2000 −27,123 −19,057 −16,958 −15,406 −2,099 −8,066 −3,458 −4,609 −1,588 −1,186 − 402
2000         1st qtr −5,452 −3,473 −2,578 −2,064 − 896 −1,979 − 864 −1,114 + 160 − 237 + 397
         2nd qtr −6,513 −4,488 −4,707 −4,435 + 219 −2,024 − 864 −1,160 − 330 − 290 − 40
         3rd qtr −7,114 −5,102 −4,664 −4,213 − 437 −2,012 − 864 −1,148 −1,010 − 285 − 725
         4th qtr −8,045 −5,994 −5,009 −4,695 − 985 −2,051 − 864 −1,187 − 408 − 374 − 34
2001         1st qtr −5,309 −2,926 −2,117 −1,604 − 808 −2,383 − 880 −1,503 + 565 − 312 + 877
         2nd qtr −7,591 −5,118 −5,338 −4,919 + 219 −2,472 − 880 −1,592 − 598 − 251 − 347
         3rd qtr −6,336 −3,966 −3,043 −2,483 − 923 −2,370 − 880 −1,490 − 444 − 326 − 118
2000         Nov. −2,880 −2,116 −1,780 −1,617 − 337 − 764 − 288 − 475 − 143 − 117 − 25
         Dec. −2,193 −1,539 −1,440 −1,353 − 99 − 654 − 288 − 366 − 140 − 115 − 25
2001         Jan. − 407 + 310 + 676 + 847 − 366 − 717 − 293 − 423 + 527 − 137 + 663
         Feb. −2,222 −1,333 −1,093 − 779 − 240 − 889 − 293 − 595 + 119 − 82 + 201
         Mar. −2,680 −1,902 −1,700 −1,673 − 202 − 778 − 293 − 484 − 81 − 93 + 12
         Apr. −2,189 −1,368 −1,442 −1,388 + 74 − 821 − 293 − 527 − 148 − 72 − 76
         May −2,485 −1,608 −1,877 −1,663 + 269 − 877 − 293 − 583 − 738 − 84 − 654
         June −2,917 −2,143 −2,020 −1,867 − 123 − 775 − 293 − 481 + 288 − 95 + 383
         July −2,860 −1,991 −1,735 −1,466 − 256 − 870 − 293 − 576 − 226 − 126 − 100
         Aug. −1,273 − 506 − 168 + 89 − 338 − 767 − 293 − 473 − 172 − 100 − 72
         Sep. −2,203 −1,470 −1,141 −1,106 − 329 − 733 − 293 − 440 − 45 − 99 + 54
1The classification of "public" and "private" transfers depends on which (excluding capital transfers). —3Payments to developing countries, pension
sector the participating domestic body belongs to. —2Current contri- payments, tax revenue and refunds, etc. —4Where identifiable; in
butions to the budgets of international organisations and to the EU budget particular, debt forgiveness. 
70*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
7. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
  
Until the end of 1998 DM million, from 1999 euro million
2000 2001
Item 1998 1999 2000 4th qtr 1st qtr 2nd qtr 3rd qtr July Aug. Sep.
I. Net German investment abroad
(Increase/capital exports: −) −574,900 −355,558 −347,732 −33,783 −135,458 −62,131 −53,137 + 8,106 −31,452 −29,791
1. Direct investment  1 −155,873 −103,057 −52,705 + 12,366 −11,614 −33,072 + 2,770 + 7,115 − 1,575 − 2,770
Equity capital −104,000 −83,922 −45,063 + 10,762 − 23−35,616 −12,844 − 4,660 + 1,025 − 9,209
Reinvested earnings  2 −10,100 − 5,500 − 5,500 − 1,375 − 1,375 − 1,375 − 1,375 − 458 − 458 − 458
Credit transactions ofGerman direct investors −34,238 − 6,778 + 3,640 + 4,669 − 9,257 + 5,028 + 18,237 + 12,752 − 1,762 + 7,247
Other capital − 7,534 − 6,856 − 5,782 − 1,690 − 959 − 1,109 − 1,248 − 518 − 379 − 350
2. Portfolio investment −256,232 −178,153 −210,323 −30,314 −42,489 −44,700 − 4,314 − 7,831 − 2,075 + 5,592
Equities  
3 −121,050 −67,934 −107,684 −13,053 − 5,127 −11,068 + 6,272 − 2,251 + 448 + 8,075
Investment fund certificates  4 −17,892 −14,055 −31,861 − 3,992 − 5,832 − 4,716 − 3,762 − 889 − 1,126 − 1,746
Bonds and notes  5 −110,676 −94,688 −72,431 −10,210 −31,174 −28,116 − 6,367 − 4,449 − 2,271 + 353
Money market instruments − 6,613 − 1,477 + 1,652 − 3,060 − 356 − 800 − 457 − 243 + 875 − 1,090
3. Financial derivatives  6 −13,458 − 1,112 − 3,839 − 2,357 + 1,122 + 2,573 − 4,338 − 3,551 − 1,657 + 871
4. Credit transactions −141,250 −71,146 −78,673 −13,465 −82,207 + 13,334 −46,669 + 12,544 −25,928 −33,286
Credit institutions  7 −135,477 −43,076 −100,854 −39,404 −70,058 −10,041 −35,892 + 25,906 −28,792 −33,005
Long-term −61,395 −42,717 −39,476 −14,767 − 7,576 −11,596 −11,755 − 3,579 − 4,436 − 3,740
Short-term −74,082 − 359 −61,378 −24,637 −62,483 + 1,555 −24,136 + 29,486 −24,356 −29,266
Enterprises and individuals − 4,121 + 11,816 + 299 + 12,097 −17,290 + 2,391 + 2,394 − 2,950 + 7,266 − 1,922
Long-term − 593 − 1,967 + 1,030 + 1,199 − 298 − 158 − 40− 37 + 40 − 43
Short-term  7 − 3,529 + 13,783 − 731 + 10,899 −16,992 + 2,548 + 2,434 − 2,913 + 7,227 − 1,879
General government − 1,501 + 7,658 −20,091 − 1,198 + 21,140 + 1,995 + 379 + 191 + 161 + 27
Long-term − 1,722 − 376 − 1,250 − 183 + 159 + 179 − 88− 36− 39− 14
Short-term  7 + 220 + 8,034 −18,841 − 1,015 + 20,981 + 1,816 + 467 + 227 + 199 + 41
Bundesbank − 151 −47,544 + 41,972 + 15,040 −15,999 + 18,990 −13,551 −10,602 − 4,563 + 1,614
5. Other investment  8 − 8,088 − 2,090 − 2,191 − 13− 269 − 267 − 586 − 171 − 217 − 197
II. Net foreign investment in Germany
(Increase/capital imports: +) + 606,986 + 320,220 + 357,535 + 10,556 + 127,018 + 55,166 + 38,705 − 8,882 + 31,117 + 16,470
1. Direct investment  1 + 42,720 + 52,507 + 191,090 −36,613 + 389 + 5,975 + 14,559 + 7,073 + 2,179 + 5,307
Equity capital + 11,570 + 25,002 + 105,462 −72,158 + 21,197 + 4,134 + 813 + 558 − 1,028 + 1,283
Reinvested earnings  2 − 1,000 − 4,500 − 4,500 − 1,125 − 1,125 − 1,125 − 1,125 − 375 − 375 − 375
Credit transactions offoreign direct investors + 33,007 + 32,253 + 90,463 + 36,744 −19,657 + 3,016 + 14,897 + 6,905 + 3,589 + 4,404
Other capital − 857 − 249 − 336 − 74− 27− 50− 26− 15− 6− 5
2. Portfolio investment + 264,985 + 164,581 + 46,085 + 19,253 − 4,668 + 66,785 + 31,016 + 8,186 + 11,587 + 11,244
Equities  
3 + 101,294 + 22,694 −37,261 + 9,325 + 4,634 + 70,791 + 14,991 + 6,830 + 5,857 + 2,304
Investment fund certificates − 2,776 + 5,761 + 10,821 + 2,069 − 1,863 − 636 − 481 − 202 − 232 − 47
Bonds and notes  5 + 154,028 + 97,897 + 69,032 + 14,364 + 8,357 + 10,995 + 18,653 − 80 + 8,591 + 10,143
Money market instruments + 12,438 + 38,229 + 3,492 − 6,506 −15,797 −14,366 − 2,147 + 1,638 − 2,630 − 1,156
3. Credit transactions + 299,320 + 103,177 + 120,166 + 27,855 + 131,247 −17,577 − 6,880 −24,143 + 17,347 − 84
Credit institutions  7 + 279,437 + 95,379 + 117,943 + 26,961 + 131,163 −24,979 − 7,667 −24,779 + 21,283 − 4,171
Long-term + 61,270 + 35,226 + 18,314 + 3,214 − 2,605 + 11,385 + 6,845 + 1,077 + 1,134 + 4,634
Short-term + 218,167 + 60,153 + 99,629 + 23,747 + 133,768 −36,364 −14,512 −25,856 + 20,149 − 8,805
Enterprises and individuals + 16,246 + 21,044 + 1,053 − 360 + 3,029 + 5,822 − 1,817 − 290 − 2,902 + 1,375
Long-term + 13,306 + 3,953 − 272 + 606 + 4,412 + 1,668 + 1,161 + 320 − 338 + 1,179
Short-term  7 + 2,941 + 17,091 + 1,325 − 966 − 1,384 + 4,154 − 2,978 − 610 − 2,564 + 197
General Government + 49 −11,255 + 757 + 1,208 − 3,122 + 1,509 + 249 + 761 − 889 + 377
Long-term − 8,280 − 8,306 − 141 + 391 − 520 − 67− 100 − 90 + 8 − 18
Short-term  7 + 8,329 − 2,949 + 898 + 817 − 2,602 + 1,576 + 349 + 851 − 897 + 395
Bundesbank + 3,588 − 1,991 + 414 + 46 + 177 + 70 + 2,355 + 165 − 145 + 2,335
4. Other investment − 39− 45 + 195 + 62 + 50 − 1 6 +9 +2 +4 +3
III. Balance of all statistically
recorded financial movements(Net capital exports: −) + 32,086 −35,338 + 9,804 −23,227 − 8,440 − 6,965 −14,433 − 776 − 336 −13,321
1From 1996, new definition for direct investment. —2Estimated. — action values shown here are mostly derived from changes in stocks. As far
3Including participation rights. —4From 1991 including accumulated as possible, purely statistical changes have been eliminated. —8In
earnings. —5From 1975 excluding accrued interest. —6Options, whether particular, subscriptions of the Federal Government to International
or not evidenced by securities, and financial futures contracts. —7The trans- Organisations. 
71*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
8. External position of the Bundesbank *
 
 
DM million
Monetary reserves and other claims on non-residents Liabilities to non-residents
Monetary reserves
Reserve
positionin theInter- Liabilitiesnational arising Net Liabilities
Monetary arising from externalFund and Claims Loans and from liquidity position
Foreign special on the external Treasury (col. 1 other claims
End of year currency drawing ECB  
2 on non- trans- discount less
or month Total Total Gold rights (net) Total paper col. 8) balances  1 residents  3 actions  4 
1234567891 0 1 1
1989 99,959 97,527 13,688 58,308 8,229 17,303 2,432 51,642 51,642 − 48,317
1990 106,446 104,023 13,688 64,517 7,373 18,445 2,423 52,259 52,259 − 54,188
1991 97,345 94,754 13,688 55,424 8,314 17,329 2,592 42,335 42,335 − 55,010
1992 143,959 141,351 13,688 85,845 8,199 33,619 2,608 26,506 26,506 − 117,453
1993 122,763 120,143 13,688 61,784 8,496 36,176 2,620 39,541 23,179 16,362 83,2221994 115,965 113,605 13,688 60,209 7,967 31,742 2,360 24,192 19,581 4,611 91,774
1995 123,261 121,307 13,688 68,484 10,337 28,798 1,954 16,390 16,390 − 106,871
1996 120,985 119,544 13,688 72,364 11,445 22,048 1,441 15,604 15,604 − 105,381
1997 127,849 126,884 13,688 76,673 13,874 22,649 966 16,931 16,931 − 110,918
1998 135,085 134,005 17,109 100,363 16,533 − 1,079 15,978 15,978 − 119,107
*Valuation of the gold holdings and the claims on non-residents according Monetary Cooperation Fund −EMCF). —3Including loans to the World
to section 26 (2) of the Bundesbank Act and the provisions of the Bank. —4Including liquidity paper sold to non-residents by the
Commercial Code, especially section 253. In the course of the year, valuation Bundesbank; excluding the liquidity Treasury discount paper sold toat the balance sheet rates of the preceding year. —1Mainly US dollar non-residents between March 1993 and March 1995, as shown in column 10. 
assets. —2European Central Bank (until 1993 claims on the European
 
 
 
9. External position of the Bundesbank in the European monetary union o
Euro million
Monetary reserves and other claims on non-residents
Monetary reserves
Reserve
position
in the Inter-
national OtherMonetary Other claims on Net externalFund and claims on Claims residents position of the
Gold special Foreign non-euro- within the in other Bundesbank Liabilities
End of year and gold drawing currency area Eurosystem EMU member to non- (col.1 lessor month Total Total rights reserves (net)  
2 countries col.9) receivables residents  1  3 residents  3 
1234567891 0
1999         Jan.  4 95,316 93,940 29,312 8,461 56,167 140 1,225 11 8,169 87,146
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 8,332 52,420 9,162 39,746 11 6,179 135,779
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 7,762 53,377 313 6,620 14 6,592 94,170
1999         Mar. 115,913 85,979 29,048 7,518 49,414 20,588 9,337 8 7,197 108,715
         June 108,811 86,925 28,106 8,551 50,269 25,786 − 3,910 9 6,714 102,096
         Sep. 125,037 89,368 31,762 8,046 49,560 21,924 13,735 10 6,191 118,846         Dec. 141,958 93,039 32,287 8,332 52,420 9,162 39,746 11 6,179 135,779
2000         Mar. 120,291 96,835 32,208 8,681 55,946 10,537 12,909 10 13,482 106,808
         June 139,873 96,018 33,744 7,581 54,693 4,551 39,296 9 8,047 131,826         Sep. 126,332 100,750 34,874 7,815 58,061 5,616 19,958 8 10,141 116,191         Dec. 100,762 93,815 32,676 7,762 53,377 313 6,620 14 6,592 94,170
2001         Jan. 106,446 92,019 31,945 7,856 52,218 313 14,106 8 6,683 99,763
         Feb. 110,799 91,297 31,956 7,628 51,713 313 19,181 8 6,705 104,094         Mar. 116,133 93,187 32,710 7,752 52,726 313 22,626 8 6,770 109,364
         Apr. 106,431 91,768 33,100 7,617 51,051 313 14,337 13 6,685 99,746
         May 111,163 95,808 34,994 7,956 52,858 313 15,035 8 6,816 104,347         June 99,774 95,817 35,494 8,158 52,165 313 3,637 7 6,840 92,934
         July 107,438 92,879 33,708 7,980 51,191 313 14,240 6 7,005 100,433
         Aug. 109,011 89,890 33,414 7,765 48,711 313 18,803 6 6,860 102,151         Sep. 112,045 94,538 35,399 8,989 50,151 313 17,189 6 8,658 103,387
         Oct. 115,487 95,552 34,531 8,643 52,378 313 19,616 7 10,783 104,705
oClaims and liabilities vis- à-vis all countries within and outside EMU. Until Deutsche Bundesbank ’s cross-border payments within the Eurosystem. From
December 2000, the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, by virtue November 2000 including the TARGET positions which were previouslyof revaluations, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the levels shown (in columns 6 and 9) as bilateral assets and liabilities vis- à-vis national
are computed on the basis of cumulative transaction values. From January central banks outside the Eurosystem. —3See footnote 2. —4Euro
2001 onwards, all end-of-month levels will be valued at market prices. — opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at January 1, 1999. 
1Including loans to the World Bank. —2Including the balances in the
72*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
10. Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
Until the end of 1998 DM million, from 1999 euro million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities to non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  to foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms paymentsor month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received
operations operations
All countries
 
1997 461,760 141,722 320,038 132,372 187,666 172,843 14,823 392,071 80,743 311,328 181,987 129,341 85,746 43,5951998 502,610 140,729 361,881 169,889 191,992 176,485 15,507 429,240 81,092 348,148 220,628 127,520 87,576 39,9441999 277,331 52,774 224,557 115,564 108,993 100,777 8,216 293,849 56,632 237,217 166,026 71,191 52,047 19,1442000 320,874 43,462 277,412 152,752 124,660 116,971 7,689 439,560 52,663 386,897 302,524 84,373 63,093 21,280
2001         June 384,023 57,593 326,430 197,298 129,132 121,006 8,126 474,382 60,230 414,152 327,318 86,834 62,320 24,514
         July 372,940 68,625 304,315 178,798 125,517 117,265 8,252 479,621 63,314 416,307 333,762 82,545 59,365 23,180
         Aug.  
r 363,397 63,078 300,319 176,462 123,857 114,716 9,141 482,614 63,372 419,242 337,276 81,966 57,229 24,737
         Sep. 363,843 62,011 301,832 174,472 127,360 118,621 8,739 497,230 62,387 434,843 349,597 85,246 60,521 24,725
EU countries
 
1997 287,024 130,611 156,413 68,161 88,252 80,199 8,053 236,747 68,777 167,970 110,157 57,813 46,097 11,7161998 307,523 130,398 177,125 84,422 92,703 83,927 8,776 265,214 68,873 196,341 137,494 58,847 46,896 11,9511999 157,617 47,992 109,625 56,450 53,175 48,500 4,675 194,809 49,243 145,566 111,605 33,961 27,532 6,4292000 177,782 39,563 138,219 78,298 59,921 55,718 4,203 316,549 45,473 271,076 231,083 39,993 32,457 7,536
2001         June 208,655 53,147 155,508 92,496 63,012 58,498 4,514 333,580 52,633 280,947 239,417 41,530 32,778 8,752
         July 207,960 64,308 143,652 82,290 61,362 56,875 4,487 346,234 55,786 290,448 250,709 39,739 31,097 8,642
         Aug.  
r 204,151 58,377 145,774 85,037 60,737 55,444 5,293 352,095 56,438 295,657 257,217 38,440 29,363 9,077
         Sep. 196,189 57,378 138,811 76,656 62,155 57,201 4,954 358,454 55,594 302,860 262,463 40,397 31,533 8,864
of which: EMU member countries 1
 
1997 174,416 66,022 108,394 42,064 66,330 60,694 5,636 177,629 51,339 126,290 82,879 43,411 35,206 8,2051998 190,953 68,418 122,535 54,167 68,368 62,491 5,877 197,566 50,579 146,987 103,899 43,088 35,021 8,0671999 104,071 25,946 78,125 38,747 39,378 36,074 3,304 151,179 38,117 113,062 88,763 24,299 20,173 4,1262000 120,976 22,737 98,239 52,976 45,263 42,389 2,874 241,330 33,698 207,632 179,095 28,537 23,569 4,968
2001         June 137,354 30,383 106,971 57,622 49,349 46,119 3,230 263,385 38,115 225,270 194,294 30,976 24,228 6,748
         July 138,007 38,346 99,661 52,267 47,394 44,152 3,242 271,629 39,191 232,438 203,041 29,397 22,767 6,630
         Aug.  
r 133,016 33,768 99,248 53,128 46,120 42,681 3,439 272,630 39,796 232,834 204,765 28,069 21,132 6,937
         Sep. 125,275 33,797 91,478 43,938 47,540 44,231 3,309 281,054 39,252 241,802 212,082 29,720 22,809 6,911
Other industrial countries
 
1997 89,482 6,436 83,046 45,814 37,232 34,050 3,182 95,662 7,884 87,778 55,306 32,472 26,280 6,1921998 109,682 8,246 101,436 61,999 39,437 36,162 3,275 102,058 7,655 94,403 61,741 32,662 26,292 6,3701999 71,958 3,595 68,363 45,540 22,823 21,220 1,603 68,024 4,870 63,154 44,518 18,636 15,387 3,2492000 84,502 2,925 81,577 54,272 27,305 25,673 1,632 84,464 4,711 79,753 56,986 22,767 18,621 4,146
2001         June 110,386 2,908 107,478 80,783 26,695 25,104 1,591 99,053 5,264 93,789 70,982 22,807 17,928 4,879
         July 102,431 2,805 99,626 73,009 26,617 25,025 1,592 93,190 5,306 87,884 66,169 21,715 17,028 4,687
         Aug.  
r 96,328 3,004 93,324 68,005 25,319 23,705 1,614 89,562 4,701 84,861 63,318 21,543 16,703 4,840
         Sep. 102,842 2,916 99,926 74,054 25,872 24,212 1,660 96,961 4,618 92,343 70,093 22,250 17,369 4,881
Countries in transition
 
1997 27,427 296 27,131 5,916 21,215 19,487 1,728 10,690 90 10,600 595 10,005 4,007 5,9981998 30,107 360 29,747 7,914 21,833 20,218 1,615 11,383 135 11,248 657 10,591 4,941 5,6501999 16,402 231 16,171 4,603 11,568 10,934 634 6,256 78 6,178 481 5,697 3,119 2,5782000 19,082 240 18,842 5,028 13,814 13,104 710 8,202 113 8,089 928 7,161 4,384 2,777
2001         June 21,151 224 20,927 5,892 15,035 14,355 680 8,642 133 8,509 1,307 7,202 4,178 3,024
         July 20,592 255 20,337 5,915 14,422 13,708 714 8,581 134 8,447 1,333 7,114 4,322 2,792
         Aug. 20,678 266 20,412 5,945 14,467 13,707 760 8,528 132 8,396 1,336 7,060 4,189 2,871         Sep. 21,606 233 21,373 6,209 15,164 14,447 717 9,085 127 8,958 1,486 7,472 4,508 2,964
Developing countries
 
1997 57,827 4,379 53,448 12,481 40,967 39,107 1,860 48,972 3,992 44,980 15,929 29,051 9,362 19,6891998 55,298 1,725 53,573 15,554 38,019 36,178 1,841 50,585 4,429 46,156 20,736 25,420 9,447 15,9731999 31,354 956 30,398 8,971 21,427 20,123 1,304 24,760 2,441 22,319 9,422 12,897 6,009 6,8882000 39,508 734 38,774 15,154 23,620 22,476 1,144 30,345 2,366 27,979 13,527 14,452 7,631 6,821
2001         June 43,831 1,314 42,517 18,127 24,390 23,049 1,341 33,107 2,200 30,907 15,612 15,295 7,436 7,859
         July 41,957 1,257 40,700 17,584 23,116 21,657 1,459 31,616 2,088 29,528 15,551 13,977 6,918 7,059
         Aug. 42,240 1,431 40,809 17,475 23,334 21,860 1,474 32,429 2,101 30,328 15,405 14,923 6,974 7,949         Sep. 43,206 1,484 41,722 17,553 24,169 22,761 1,408 32,730 2,048 30,682 15,555 15,127 7,111 8,016
* Including the assets and liabilities vis- à-vis non-residents of individuals in and decreases have not been eliminated; to this extent the changes in totals
Germany. The assets and liabilities vis- à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in are not comparable with the figures shown in Table X, 7. —1Including
Germany are shown in Table 4 of Section IV, "Banks". Statistical increases Greece from January 2001. 
73*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
X. Foreign trade and payments
11. Exchange rates for the national currencies of the EMU countries, the Deutsche Mark value of the ECU *
and euro conversion rates
France Italy Netherlands Belgium/ Austria Spain Finland Ireland Portugal Greece ECU values  1 
Yearly Luxembourg GRD  100  2 ECU  1
average FRF  100 ITL  1,000 NLG  100 BEF/LUF  100 ATS  100 ESP  100 FIM  100 IEP  1 PTE  100 EUR  1  2 = DEM ...
Spot middle rates on the Frankfurt exchange in DEM
   
1991 29.409 1.3377 88.742 4.857  14.211 1.597  41.087 2.671  1.149  0.9103 2.050761992 29.500 1.2720 88.814 4.857  14.211 1.529  34.963 2.656  1.157  0.8178 2.020311993 29.189 1.0526 89.017 4.785  14.214 1.303  28.915 2.423  1.031  0.7213 1.936391994 29.238 1.0056 89.171 4.8530 14.214 1.2112 31.108 2.4254 0.9774 0.6683 1.92452
1995 28.718 0.8814 89.272 4.8604 14.214 1.1499 32.832 2.2980 0.9555 0.6182 1.87375
1996 29.406 0.9751 89.243 4.8592 14.214 1.1880 32.766 2.4070 0.9754 0.6248 1.909541997 29.705 1.0184 88.857 4.8464 14.210 1.1843 33.414 2.6297 0.9894 0.6349 1.964381998 29.829 1.0132 88.714 4.8476 14.213 1.1779 32.920 2.5049 0.9763 0.5952 1.969131999 . . . . . . . . . 325.76 .
2000 . . . . . . . . . 336.63 .
      
Irrevocable euro conversion rates (EUR 1 = currency units ...) 3
   
6.55957 1936.27 2.20371 40.3399 13.7603 166.386 5.94573 0.787564 200.482 4 340.750 5 1.95583
*Calculated from daily quotations. —1According to data from the Euro- ence exchange rates of the ECB (EU R 1 = GRD ...). —3Applicable from
pean Commission. —2Until 1998 reciprocal values of the exchange rates for January 1, 1999. —4Applicable from January 1, 2001. —5Deutsche Mark
the Deutsche Mark, published by the Bank of Greece; from 1999 euro refer- conversion rate. 
12. Exchange rates of the Deutsche Mark and the euro against other currencies *
Yearly Japan Denmark Sweden Norway Switzerland Canada Australia New Zealand United States United Kingdom
or monthly
average USD JPY DKK SEK GBP NOK CHF CAD AUD  1 NZD 1 
Spot middle rates on the Frankfurt exchange (1 or 100 currency units = DEM ...)
      
1991 1.6612 1.2346 25.932 27.421 2.926  25.580 115.740 1.4501 1.2942 0.95891992 1.5595 1.2313 25.869 26.912 2.753  25.143 111.198 1.2917 1.1476 0.84061993 1.6544 1.4945 25.508 21.248 2.483  23.303 111.949 1.2823 1.1235 0.89401994 1.6218 1.5870 25.513 21.013 2.4816 22.982 118.712 1.1884 1.1848 0.9605
1995 1.4338 1.5293 25.570 20.116 2.2620 22.614 121.240 1.0443 1.0622 0.9399
1996 1.5037 1.3838 25.945 22.434 2.3478 23.292 121.891 1.1027 1.1782 1.03571997 1.7348 1.4378 26.249 22.718 2.8410 24.508 119.508 1.2533 1.2889 1.14531998 1.7592 1.3484 26.258 22.128 2.9142 23.297 121.414 1.1884 1.1070 0.9445
      
Euro reference exchange rates published by the European Central Bank (EUR 1 = currency units ...) 2
      
1999 1.0658 121.32 7.4355 8.8075 0.65874 8.3104 1.6003 1.5840 1.6523 2.01452000 0.9236 99.47 7.4538 8.4452 0.60948 8.1129 1.5579 1.3706 1.5889 2.0288
1999         Oct. 1.0706 113.52 7.4334 8.7272 0.64587 8.2885 1.5943 1.5808 1.6414 2.0798
         Nov. 1.0338 108.25 7.4366 8.6330 0.63702 8.1907 1.6051 1.5160 1.6179 2.0178         Dec. 1.0110 103.72 7.4403 8.5865 0.62651 8.0977 1.6012 1.4906 1.5798 1.9891
2000         Jan. 1.0137 106.53 7.4439 8.5968 0.61834 8.1215 1.6103 1.4687 1.5421 1.9716
         Feb. 0.9834 107.64 7.4453 8.5114 0.61466 8.0991 1.6069 1.4270 1.5642 2.0057         Mar. 0.9643 102.59 7.4473 8.3884 0.61063 8.1110 1.6042 1.4082 1.5827 1.9674
         Apr. 0.9470 99.92 7.4505 8.2671 0.59802 8.1545 1.5740 1.3890 1.5878 1.9097
         May 0.9060 98.09 7.4570 8.2410 0.60151 8.1994 1.5562 1.3549 1.5703 1.9355         June 0.9492 100.71 7.4607 8.3177 0.62927 8.2490 1.5608 1.4018 1.5968 2.0174
         July 0.9397 101.39 7.4589 8.4070 0.62304 8.1763 1.5505 1.3886 1.5978 2.0394
         Aug. 0.9041 97.76 7.4578 8.3917 0.60710 8.0959 1.5506 1.3406 1.5575 2.0305         Sep. 0.8721 93.11 7.4627 8.4145 0.60773 8.0266 1.5307 1.2945 1.5749 2.0882
         Oct. 0.8552 92.75 7.4472 8.5245 0.58933 8.0032 1.5130 1.2924 1.6176 2.1346
         Nov. 0.8564 93.26 7.4564 8.6289 0.60039 7.9950 1.5216 1.3204 1.6387 2.1438         Dec. 0.8973 100.61 7.4580 8.6622 0.61342 8.1334 1.5137 1.3679 1.6422 2.0905
2001         Jan. 0.9383 109.57 7.4642 8.9055 0.63480 8.2355 1.5291 1.4098 1.6891 2.1103
         Feb. 0.9217 107.08 7.4630 8.9770 0.63400 8.2125 1.5358 1.4027 1.7236 2.1184         Mar. 0.9095 110.33 7.4643 9.1264 0.62915 8.1600 1.5355 1.4167 1.8072 2.1753
         Apr. 0.8920 110.36 7.4633 9.1120 0.62168 8.1146 1.5287 1.3903 1.7847 2.1975
         May 0.8742 106.50 7.4612 9.0576 0.61328 7.9927 1.5334 1.3473 1.6813 2.0723         June 0.8532 104.30 7.4539 9.2106 0.60890 7.9360 1.5225 1.3016 1.6469 2.0589
         July 0.8607 107.21 7.4447 9.2637 0.60857 7.9714 1.5135 1.3153 1.6890 2.1074
         Aug. 0.9005 109.34 7.4450 9.3107 0.62672 8.0552 1.5144 1.3857 1.7169 2.0895         Sep. 0.9111 108.20 7.4413 9.6744 0.62291 7.9985 1.4913 1.4260 1.8036 2.1781
         Oct. 0.9059 109.86 7.4367 9.5780 0.62393 7.9970 1.4793 1.4224 1.7955 2.1863
*Calculated from daily quotations. —1Exchange rates from Australia and rates, which are calculated on the basis of the concertation between the
New Zealand; those for New Zealand calculated from rates as at the middle central banks at 2.15 p.m. and end of the month. —2The ECB publishes daily reference exchange
74*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2001
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
13. Effective exchange rates * of the euro and selected foreign currencies
  
1st qtr 1999 = 100
Memo item:
Effective exchange rate of the euro against the Indicators of the German economy ’s Effective nominal exchange rates of selected foreign
currencies of a ... price competitiveness  3  4  against... currencies against 19 industrial countries  3  5  6 
narrow group  1 broad group  2 19 industrial countries  5 49 countries  7 
Real Real on the basis
of the on the basis on the basis
on the basis of Pound Canadian Swiss Japanese of consumer of consumer deflators of
Nominal prices Nominal prices consumer prices US dollar sterling dollar franc yen total sales  8 
1995 107.8 108.8 93.2 107.8 109.8 110.4 110.2 86.1 84.0 106.4 105.4 115.6
1996 107.9 108.8 95.4 105.9 106.4 106.8 105.2 90.9 85.9 108.8 104.2 100.61997 99.1 99.5 90.4 96.6 100.7 101.4 99.0 98.8 99.8 109.7 97.9 95.91998 101.5 101.3 96.6 99.1 101.0 101.1 100.1 103.4 103.3 103.5 99.9 89.71999 95.7 95.7 96.6 95.8 97.9 98.0 97.7 100.8 102.3 102.2 98.3 105.1
2000 85.7 86.5 88.2 86.3 91.9 93.2 91.7 105.4 105.2 103.6 96.8 117.9
1996         1st qtr 108.9 110.2 95.5 107.6 108.3 108.9 107.6 89.8 83.1 108.0 106.8 102.9
         2nd qtr 107.1 108.1 94.5 105.3 105.8 106.3 104.6 91.1 84.4 108.8 104.2 102.4         3rd qtr 108.6 109.5 96.3 106.3 106.3 107.1 105.4 90.9 85.2 108.2 104.8 100.1         4th qtr 106.9 107.4 95.5 104.5 105.0 104.9 103.3 91.8 91.0 110.2 100.7 97.1
1997         1st qtr 102.4 103.2 91.8 99.6 102.7 103.5 100.9 96.9 96.4 111.3 96.0 93.8
         2nd qtr 99.5 99.7 90.0 96.4 101.0 101.7 98.9 98.1 98.9 109.3 97.5 96.6         3rd qtr 95.5 95.7 87.7 93.2 98.8 99.8 97.1 99.5 101.4 109.9 97.9 100.0         4th qtr 99.1 99.2 92.1 97.0 100.3 100.4 99.0 100.5 102.4 108.2 100.2 92.9
1998         1st qtr 98.8 98.8 92.6 96.4 99.6 99.8 98.8 103.2 104.5 107.3 100.1 92.5
         2nd qtr 100.2 100.1 94.2 97.4 100.8 100.7 99.1 104.8 104.8 106.5 98.5 86.8         3rd qtr 102.5 102.5 97.8 100.2 101.7 102.1 100.9 106.3 104.1 102.0 99.4 83.7         4th qtr 104.2 103.8 101.7 102.4 101.9 101.8 101.5 99.4 99.8 98.0 101.6 95.7
1999         Jan. 102.0 101.8 101.4 101.4 . 100.9 100.8 97.9 98.5 98.9 100.3 101.5
         Feb. 99.9 99.9 100.0 100.1 100.0 100.0 100.1 99.8 99.7 101.0 100.1 99.9         Mar. 98.3 98.3 98.7 98.6 . 99.1 99.2 102.0 101.6 100.2 99.6 98.8
         Apr. 97.1 96.9 97.5 97.2 . 98.6 98.5 102.3 102.1 102.2 98.8 99.4
         May 96.6 96.5 96.9 96.4 98.5 98.4 98.0 102.6 103.1 104.4 98.6 97.7         June 94.7 94.7 95.1 94.5 . 97.8 97.0 103.5 103.4 104.0 98.4 99.8
         July 94.8 95.2 95.1 94.4 . 98.5 97.4 103.7 102.1 102.8 97.8 101.1
         Aug. 95.4 95.6 96.3 95.5 97.2 98.3 97.8 101.1 101.9 101.7 98.1 105.5         Sep. 93.6 93.4 95.2 93.8 . 96.7 96.5 99.4 103.1 102.5 97.2 112.0
         Oct. 94.4 94.3 96.4 94.7 . 96.8 96.7 98.3 103.7 102.2 98.0 111.9
         Nov. 92.0 92.0 94.0 92.4 95.8 95.8 95.4 99.2 103.9 103.3 96.4 115.1         Dec. 90.1 90.4 92.2 90.7 . 95.1 94.4 99.7 104.7 102.8 95.8 118.6
2000         Jan. 90.2 90.8 92.4 90.7 . 95.9 94.8 99.7 106.5 104.8 95.4 115.5
         Feb. 89.2 89.8 91.2 89.6 93.8 95.5 94.1 102.3 106.5 105.2 95.2 112.5         Mar. 87.7 88.3 89.7 88.1 . 94.3 92.9 102.4 106.3 104.6 94.7 116.8
         Apr. 86.1 86.6 88.4 86.7 . 93.2 91.9 103.0 107.7 104.3 95.9 118.6
         May 84.5 85.0 86.9 85.1 92.1 92.1 91.0 106.4 106.0 103.0 96.3 118.3         June 87.4 88.1 89.9 88.1 . 93.8 92.7 103.6 102.5 103.7 97.2 118.3
         July 86.9 87.9 89.4 87.5 . 94.3 92.7 104.5 103.4 103.9 97.7 116.8
         Aug. 84.6 85.5 87.0 85.1 91.5 92.8 90.9 106.3 104.9 104.0 96.7 118.6         Sep. 82.8 83.6 85.3 83.3 . 91.8 89.8 107.7 103.5 104.3 97.2 122.3
         Oct. 81.6 82.4 84.4 82.2 . 90.9 88.9 109.4 106.4 102.7 97.8 121.4
         Nov. 82.3 83.3 85.1 82.9 90.3 91.3 89.3 110.2 104.6 100.7 97.5 121.1         Dec. 85.4 86.4 88.1 85.8 . 92.8 91.3 108.7 104.1 101.5 99.4 115.1
2001         Jan. 89.2 90.3 91.7 89.2 . 95.1 93.3 107.7 102.4 102.7 100.0 108.3
         Feb. 88.3 89.7 91.0 88.7
p 92.7 95.0 93.1 108.8 102.0 101.6 99.2 109.9
         Mar. 88.4 90.0 91.4 89.2 . 94.9 93.2 111.5 102.9 99.7 99.3 106.0
         Apr. 87.6 89.2 91.0 88.6 . 94.2 92.7 113.0 103.7 100.0 99.4 104.9
         May 85.9 87.6 89.3 86.8 p 91.4 93.6 91.7 113.1 104.3 101.3 98.3 107.5
         June 84.7 86.4 88.1 85.5 . 93.1 90.9 114.1 104.4 102.7 98.5 108.3
         July 85.4 87.3 89.1 86.4 . 93.7 91.7 114.3 104.9 102.5 99.5 105.8
         Aug. 87.7 89.6 91.8 88.8 p 91.7 94.6 92.8 111.6 103.0 101.1 100.4 106.4
         Sep. 88.0 89.8 92.6 89.3 . 94.1 92.9 110.7 103.9 99.1 102.2 108.2
         Oct. 88.0 89.8 92.8 89.2 . 94.0 92.7 111.8 103.7 99.0 103.0 106.2
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of calculations; in addition to the countries belonging to the narrow group
the currency concerned. —1ECB calculations based on the weighted (see footnote 1), this group also includes the following countries: Algeria,
averages of the effective exchange rates of the euro or, prior to 1999, of the Argentina, Brazil, China, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Estonia, Hun gary,
exchange rates of the currencies preceding the euro against the following India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, New Zealand,countries: Australia, Canada, Denmark, Greece, Hong Kong, Japan, Norway, Philippines, Poland, Romania, Russia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa ,
Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom and United Taiwan, Thailand and Turkey. —3The method of calculation is consistent
States. The weights used in these calculations are based on manufactured with the procedure used by the ECB to compute the effective exchangegoods trade between 1995 and 1997 and capture third-market effects. From rates of the euro (see page 50 ff.). —4Decline in the values implies an
January 2001, Greece ceased to be a partner country in the effective increase in competitiveness. —5EMU countries and narrow group of the
exchange rate of the euro; the weighting scheme was adjusted accordingly. ECB except Australia, Hong Kong, Singapore and South Korea. —6Figures
Due to change in the weighting scheme, effective exchange rate data as up to end-1998, computed by linking with the figures published up tofrom January 2001 are not fully comparable with earlier observations. For October 2001. —7EMU countries and broad group of the ECB. —8Annual
the prices are not yet available, estimates have been used. For the definition and quarterly averages. of the method see: ECB, Monthly Bulletin, April 2000, page 39 ff. —2ECB
75*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
76*

Overview of
publicationsby the DeutscheBundesbankThis overview is designed to inform
readers about selected recent eco-nomic and statistical publications bythe Deutsche Bundesbank. Exceptwhere stated, these publications arepublished in both German and English,and on the Internet.
The publications are available free of
charge to interested readers from theBank’s Press and Public Relations Div-ision. Against reimbursement of thecosts, a monthly updated file with ap-proximately 40,000 time series pub-lished by the Bundesbank can be ob-tained on magnetic tape or on ZIP disk-ette from the Statistical Data Process-ing Division. Please submit orders inwriting, using the addresses listed onthe reverse of the title page. Moreover,selected time series may be down-loaded from the Internet.
Annual Report
Monthly Report
For information on the articles published between
1990 and 2000 see the index attached to the Jan-
uary 2001 Monthly Report.
December 2000
– Subsidy trends in Germany since the start of
the nineties
– The price effects of deregulation and privatisa-
tion in the product markets
– Electronic banking from a prudential super-
visory perspectiveDeutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
77*

January 2001
– Recent institutional developments in economic
and monetary cooperation
– The information content of survey data on ex-
pected price developments for monetary policy
– Structural current account balances: longer-
term trends and determinants
February 2001
– The economic scene in Germany around the
turn of 2000–01
March 2001
– The outlook for the enlargement of the EU
following the Nice European Council
– West German enterprises’ profitability and
financing in 1999
– Company pension schemes in Germany– German balance of payments in 2000
April 2001
– The new Basel Capital Accord (Basel II)– The role and behaviour of German
fund managers on the equity market
– Structure of German firms’ inter-
national capital links at end-1999
May 2001
– The economic scene in Germany in spring
2001
June 2001
– Overall financial flows in 2000– Monetary developments in the euro area since
the beginning of monetary union
– Trends in Länder Government finance since the
mid-nineties
– Ageing, financial markets and monetary policy –
the Bundesbank’s spring conference 2001July 2001
– Cross-border capital movements and the role
of the IMF
– Real interest rates: movements and determi-
nants
– Factor prices, employment and capital stock in
Germany: results of a simulation study
August 2001
– The economic scene in Germany in summer
2001
September 2001
– The performance of German credit institutions
in 2000
– Bank balance sheets, bank competition and
monetary policy transmission
– Uncertainty, freedom of action and investment
behaviour – empirical findings for Germany
October 2001
– Monetary aspects of the enlargement of the
EU
– Instruments used to analyse market expect-
ations; risk-neutral density functions
November 2001
– The economic scene in Germany in autumn
2001
Statistical Supplements to the
Monthly Report1
1 Banking statistics (monthly)
2 Capital market statistics (monthly)
3 Balance of payments statistics (monthly)
4 Seasonally adjusted business statistics (monthly)5 Exchange rate statistics (quarterly)Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
78*1Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data
contained in the German originals are available in English.

Discussion papers
of the Economic Research Centre
January 2001 5/01
Are Contemporary Central Banks Transparent
about Economic Models and Objectives and What
Difference Does it Make?
February 2001 6/01
What can we learn about monetary policy trans-
parency from financial market data?
March 2001 7/01
Budgetary Policy and Unemployment Dynamics
March 2001 8/01
Investment Behaviour of German Equity Fund
Managers
April 2001 9/01
Der Informationsgehalt von Umfragedaten zur er-warteten Preisentwicklung für die Geldpolitik
May 2001 10/01
Exchange-rate pass-through and real exchangerate in EU candidate countries
July 2001 11/01
Interbank lending and monetary policy transmis-
sion: evidence for Germany
September 2001 12/01
Precommitment, Transparency and Monetary Policy
September 2001 13/01
Ein disaggregierter Ansatz zur Berechnung kon-junkturbedingter Budgetsalden für Deutschland:Methoden und Ergebnisse
September 2001 14/01
Long-Run Links Among Money, Prices, and Out-put: World-Wide Evidence
Prior discussion papers are – in some cases as ab-
stracts – available on the Internet.
Special Publications
The monetary policy of the Bundesbank,October 1995
1Makro-ökonometrisches Mehr-Länder-Modell,November 1996
2
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im Bereichvon Währung und Wirtschaft, April 1997
2
Europäische Organisationen und Gremien im Be-reich von Währung und Wirtschaft, Mai 1997
2
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 bis1989, August 1993
2
The market for German Federal securities, May2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model: MEMMOD,
June 2000
Special Statistical Publications
1 Banking statistics guidelines and customer clas-
sification, June 20003
2 Bankenstatistik Kundensystematik Firmenver-
zeichnisse, Juni 20002,4
3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen,
Januar 20002
4 Financial accounts for Germany 1991 to 2000,
September 20015
5 Annual accounts of west German enterprises
1971 to 1996, March 19996Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
79*1Also available (in different editions) in French, Spanish,
Russian and Chinese.
2Available in German only.
3Only the sections “Monthly Balance Sheet Statistics”,
“External position” and “Customer classification”
(“Overall survey on sectoral classification”, “Survey on
breakdown by industry or activity” and “Explanatory
notes on the system of customer classification by industry
or activity”) are available in English translation.
4Updated version available on the Internet.
5Available on the Internet only.
6Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data
contained in the German originals are available in English.oNot on the Internet.

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2001
80*6 Ratios from the annual accounts of west and
east German enterprises for 1998, September2001
5,6
7 Erläuterungen zu den Leistungspositionen der
Zahlungsbilanz, September 20012
8 Balance of payments statistics of the Federal
Republic of Germany, 2nd edition, February1991
o
9 Securities deposits,
August 2001
10 International capital links,
May 20015,6
11 Balance of payments by region,
August 2001
12 Technological services in the balance of pay-
ments, May 20005,6
Banking regulations
1 Bundesbank Act and Statute of the European
System of Central Banks and of the European
Central Bank, June 1998
2 Gesetz über das Kreditwesen, Februar 200122a Grundsatz I über die Eigenmittel der Institute,
Januar 20012
2b Grundsatz II über die Liquidität der Institute,
August 19992
7 Instruction sheet for the reporting of large ex-
posures and loans of 3 million Deutsche Markor more pursuant to sections 13 to 14 of theBanking Act, September 1998
Publications on EMU
Informationsbriefe zur Europäischen Wirtschafts-und Währungsunion
2
euro 2002 – information on the introduction of euro
banknotes and coins
No. 1, July 2000No. 2, October 2000No. 3, February 2001
No. 4, May 2001
Der Euro ist da. Wir sagen Ihnen, worauf es an-
kommt. (Leaflet)
2
For footnotes, see p. 79*.

