Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
Vol. 53
No. 8

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
Deutsche Bundesbank
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 1460431 Frankfurt am Main
P .O.B. 10 06 02
60006 Frankfurt am MainFederal Republic of Germany
Telephone (0 69) 95 66-1
or (0 69) 95 66 . . . plus extension number
Telex 41 227 within Germany
4 14 431 from abroad
Fax (0 69) 5 60 10 71
Internet http://www.bundesbank.deReproduction permitted only if source is stated.ISSN 0418-8292The German original of this Report went to
press on August 15, 2001Annual and weekly publishing schedules for
selected statistics of the Deutsche Bundes-bank are available and can be downloadedfrom our Internet address. The relevant dataare also published on the Internet.
The Monthly Report is published autono-
mously by the Deutsche Bundesbank, Frank-furt am Main, by virtue of section 18 of theBundesbank Act of July 26, 1957. It is avail-able to interested parties free of charge.

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
ContentsThe economic scene in Germany
in summer 2001 5
The international and European
setting 6Appendix: Problems of internationalcomparisons of growth – a supplementaryanalysis 21Financial markets in Germany 28Economic conditions in Germany 36Foreign trade and payments 47Public finance 54
Statistical Section 1*
Key economic data for EMU 6*
Overall monetary survey in the EMU 8*Consolidated financial statementof the Eurosystem 16*Banks 20*Minimum reserves 42*Interest rates 43*Capital market 48*Public finance in Germany 52*Economic conditions 60*Foreign trade and payments 67*
Overview of publications by the
Deutsche Bundesbank 77*

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
4

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
5The economic scene
in Germanyin summer 2001

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
6The international
and EuropeansettingDevelopments in the world economy
In the spring months the global economic cli-
mate continued to cool off, with no majoreconomic region left untouched. World tradeis hardly likely to have increased. However,there are considerable differences in terms ofthe starting level, the pace and the determin-ing factors of the slowdown in the businesscycle. In the industrial countries, seasonallyadjusted macroeconomic production is likelyto have only inched up slightly in the secondquarter of 2001, on the heels of a distinctslowdown. At any rate, industrial productionwent down again in the period from April toJune; its 12-month decrease amounted to2
12%. However, this continued to contrast
with moderate growth in services. High en-ergy prices and several special factors putpressure on prices in many places and con-tributed substantially to the sluggishness ofreal domestic demand. The labour marketshave increasingly been coming under thespell of the economic slump. However, so farmajor layoffs and downsizing are likely tohave been limited to subsectors.
Given sluggish economic activity in the second
quarter and the continued absence of signs ofa turn for the better, opinion is becoming en-trenched that major downward revisions willhave to be made to the economic forecastsfor the current year published at the begin-ning of spring. However, the updated eco-nomic forecasts still assume that the economywill recover perceptibly next year.
The worldwide slump in the demand for in-
formation and communications technologyPersistent
slowdown in
the world
economy

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
7goods had a particularly severe effect on the
emerging economies in south-east Asia,which are heavily dependent on exports ofthose products. By contrast, the Chineseeconomy continued to experience stronggrowth following the turn of 2000-2001.Latin America has likewise been affected(though in varying degrees, depending on theintensity of trade relations) by declining USdemand for imported goods. This has beenexacerbated by the fact that Argentina is stillmired in a grave financial and economic crisiswhich has not only impaired trade in goodswith its neighbouring states, in particular, butis also potentially contagious. On top of that,the Brazilian economy is suffering from a pro-nounced energy crisis which might cause itsgrowth to take a hit this year, too. The eco-nomic slowdown in the industrial countrieshas also adversely affected the current situ-ation and the future outlook in the centraland east European transition countries. Bycontrast, crude petroleum and natural gas ex-porters have been benefiting from the highenergy prices. This group of countries in-cludes Russia; however, its economic growth,at an estimated 5
12% for the first half of the
year, did not quite match its average for 2000(+ 7
12%).
The outlook for the world economy has be-
come a bit brighter as of late insofar as crudeoil prices have been distinctly on the declinesince the beginning of June. The decision byOPEC in July to cut oil production once againhad little impact on oil prices. There are somesigns that the global growth-hindering effectsof last year’s increases in oil prices will weak-en gradually during the second half of the1995=100, seasonally adjusted, log. scale
JapanUnited KingdomEuro areaof which
United StatesSelected
countries 1three-month moving average
monthlyIndustrial production *
in selected countries
Source: National statistics, Eurostat and the
Bundesbank’s own calculations. — *Includ-
ing mining and energy, excluding construc-
tion. — 1In addition to euro-area countries
and countries already listed, the list in-
cludes Denmark, Greece, Norway, Sweden,
Switzerland and Canada; weighted withthe respective share in gross value added of
industry in those countries in 1995.
Deutsche Bundesbank108
104
100
96108
104
100104120
100116
98112
108
104116132
112128
108124
104120
100116
98120
116
112
108
104
100
98
1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001Slowdown in
the oil markets
towards
mid-year...

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
8year. Moreover, it is becoming apparent that
in western Europe special factors, which inspring had caused food prices to skyrocketand additionally depleted consumers’ pur-chasing power, are diminishing in import-ance. Then, the uplifting effects of the tax re-forms that entered into effect at the begin-ning of the year in several euro-area coun-tries, which so far have been cancelled out toa great degree by price increases, will prob-ably become more and more pronounced.
However, a sustained global recovery can
only be expected once the US economy,whose importance for the world economy isgreater than ever, begins to take off again.However, there are currently no signs thatthis will happen, and this view is shared bythe US Federal Reserve. Important businessindicators have been showing a downwardtrend as of late. Industry (which, however, ac-counts for less than one-fifth of overall valueadded) was in a deep recession in mid-year. InJune, seasonally adjusted production wentdown for the ninth consecutive month, withnew orders of durables likewise decreasingperceptibly. The results of the latest industryand consumer surveys indicated a renewedoutbreak of pessimism in July following aninkling of an improvement in the precedingmonths. This was confirmed by the wave ofprofit warnings announced by enterprises. Aneconomic recovery in the US is therefore notlikely to occur until sometime in autumn atthe earliest, when the interest-rate cuts takegreater effect and tax relief becomes per-ceptible.According to initial estimates, real US GDP in
spring was only up
14% on the previous
period, after adjustment for seasonal andworking-day variations. In the entire first halfof the year it only went up by an annualisedrate of just under 1
12%. In a year-on-year
comparison, second-quarter growth, at1
14%, was lower than at any time since the
end of 1991. Unlike in the winter months,where reductions in inventories, in particular,slowed down the pace of expansion, in springprivate final demand lost steam. Industrial in-vestment was hit hardest; it went down by aseasonally adjusted 3
12%, failing to reach its
previous year’s level for the first time sinceearly 1992. Growth in real consumer spend-ing by households went down from a season-ally adjusted winter level of +
34%t o12%,
yet it has remained relatively robust. Invest-ment in new housing construction, whichbenefited from falling interest rates, onceagain showed strong growth, going up by1
34% from the previous period. Seasonally
adjusted real net exports, despite weaker im-port activity, again slid somewhat deeper intodeficit. The main reason was the reduction inexports caused not only by the strength ofthe dollar but also by the repercussions ofsecond-round effects on the United States.
During a revision of the national accounts
data going back to 1998, some GDP growthrates were distinctly revised downwards. Forinstance, expansion in 2000 is “only” 4.1%compared with 5.0% prior to revision. Underthe new method of calculation, average1998-2000 growth, at 4.2%, is 0.3 percent-age point lower than if the old approach isused. The GDP data were revised primarily to...and stabilisa-
tion of purchas-
ing power in
western
Europe,...
...but economic
turnaround in
the United
States not yet
in sightMacro-
economic
production in
the second
quarter
Revision of
US national
accounts

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
9take account of adjustments in software in-
vestment, investment in inventories and pri-vate consumption. At the same time the sav-ing ratio for households was increased. Theparticularly pronounced revision for 2000,from – 0.1% to 1.0%, is especially a reflec-tion of a considerable increase in disposableincome and a reduction in consumer spend-ing. Using the new method of calculation,the ratio for the second quarter of 2001 wasa seasonally adjusted 1.2%. Another conse-quence of the revision in the national ac-counts data was that productivity growth wasscaled back; non-farming productivity growthwent down by one-half percentage point to2
12% as an average of the period from 1998
to 2000. This has also done something to putthe “US productivity miracle” into perspec-tive. Unit wage costs under the new methodof calculation went up by just over 2
12% per
anno since 1998, compared with 134% prior
to the revision.
In spring 2001 the outlook in the US labour
market became distinctly gloomier. Employ-ment tended to decrease, and the seasonallyadjusted unemployment rate reached 4.5%in July, returning to its summer 1998 level.The easing of the labour market situationcaused wage pressure in the private sector torecede a bit. Inflation decelerated from 3.6%in May to 3.2% in June. The main reasonwas the moderation in oil prices which couldbe observed since the beginning of June; interms of the tendency, this seems to haveheld steady for the time being. By contrast,core inflation (i.e. excluding energy and foodprices) rose from 2.5% in May to 2.7% inJune.Hopes of a revival of the US economy rest for
one thing on the reduction of inventories,which was begun following the turn of 2000-2001, ending soon. For another, the sharp re-duction in central bank lending rates by atotal of 275 basis points since the beginningof 2001 and the tax reform that entered intoeffect on 1 July 2001 are expected to have anexpansionary impact as the second half of theyear progresses. The tax reform package en-visages the gradual reduction of income taxrates, especially for medium and high-incomefamilies, by 2006. In the first stage, the tax re-duction will be accompanied by tax relief forthe “first” US$ 6,000 of taxable income forunmarried persons and US$ 12,000 for mar-ried couples, retroactive to 1 January 2001. Inthe summer months, most US householdswill receive tax refunds of up to US$ 300 andUS$ 600, respectively. On the whole, this willresult in estimated income tax relief for 2001coming to just under
12% of GDP; in terms
of the second half of the year, when theyhave an impact on household income, it willbe nearly 1% of GDP .
The envisaged tax reductions are part of a
longer-term reform programme, and experi-ence has shown that they will bolster house-holds’ further income expectations. They aretherefore likely to boost private consumption,taken by themselves. However, they are upagainst factors which put a strain on con-sumer confidence and thus on consumers’propensity to spend. The short-term “net ef-fect” of tax reform is therefore difficult to as-sess. Another problem is that the macroeco-nomic disequilibria in the United States, re-flected particularly in the high current ac-Labour market
and pricesThe
expansionary
effects of the
tax reform

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
10count deficit and the low level of household
saving, have not been noticeably reducedduring the present economic downturn.
In the spring, the Japanese economy was like-
wise mired in a pronounced slump. Duringthe period from April to June industrial pro-duction once again took a tumble; it was aseasonally adjusted 4% below its first-quarter level and thus 5
14% lower than in
the previous year. One key factor was thatthe export slump that had broken out in thesecond half of 2000 continued and worsenedin the spring. The fact that the bottom fellout of the demand for IT goods around theworld played an especially important role.The other key factor was that investment inmachinery and equipment, which had sup-ported the economy in the past year, hasprobably slackened. This is certainly indicatedby the perceptible decline in domestic deliver-ies of investment goods in April-May – na-tional accounts data for the second quarterare not yet available. Housing constructiontended downwards as well. The decline inhouseholds’ propensity to consume held firmthroughout; this is generally attributable topessimism concerning the labour market andthe worsening income outlook. It is fittingthat consumer prices in the period from Aprilto June, despite the rise in crude oil prices,once again went down, by
12% on the year.
On the whole, there are few signs so far thatthe Japanese economy will recover in thenear future. Strong expansionary effects canprobably only be expected from externalsources. The chances of domestic demand re-viving in the near future are very slight on thewhole, not least because neither monetarypolicy nor fiscal policy has any tangible room
for manoeuvre and because the recently an-nounced reform measures will take effectonly in the longer term.
In the United Kingdom, macroeconomic
growth continued to decelerate in the spring.Real GDP grew by a seasonally and working-day adjusted
14% from the first quarter of
the year, when it had gone up by12%. On
the year it went up by 2%. The services sec-tor did not expand as dynamically as it had inthe past, and industry remained in the grip ofa recession; second-quarter production wentdown by a seasonally adjusted 1% from thefirst quarter and was just over 1
12% lower
than a year before. The worsening of theworld economic climate, particularly the cyc-lical weakness in the United States and con-tinental Europe, as well as the strength of thepound sterling, were important factors. Therecent interest-rate cuts by the Bank of Eng-land should be seen in that light.
The most important demand-side pillar of the
British economy has been private consump-tion, which – measured in terms of retail turn-over – went up in the second quarter by justover 2%, seasonally adjusted, and by wellover 7% on the year. One reason is that la-bour market developments have continued tobe positive. Another is that the considerabledecline in mortgage lending rates has freedup funds for additional consumer spending.At first glance the favourable development inconsumption contrasts with weak industrialproduction. A closer look, though, revealsthat imports picked up strongly and thatprobably inventories were reduced as well.Japan
United
Kingdom

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
11Throughout the year as a whole, the expan-
sion of government spending on infrastruc-ture, education and health envisaged in the2001 budget is likely to stabilise the UK econ-omy. The rise in retail prices (excluding mort-gage lending rates) picked up from 2.0% inApril to 2.3% in the period from May to July.The major reason was the temporary sharprise in energy and food prices; after mid-yearthese prices went back down.
Macroeconomic trends in the euro area
Economic activity in the euro area continued
to cool off over the course of the first half of2001. Macroeconomic output in the firstquarter was a seasonally adjusted
12%u po n
the previous period, a pace similar to that ofthe two preceding quarters. However, theunderlying momentum of economic activityin the euro area is slowing down. In the con-text of the national accounts, the seasonallyadjusted GDP growth in the first threemonths of this year is due almost exclusivelyto a perceptible decline in imports. By con-trast, domestic demand and exports virtuallycame to a standstill. Year-on-year growth de-celerated from 3
12% in the summer half of
2000 to 212% in the first quarter of 2001.
(Comparable data are not yet available forthe second quarter of the year.)
In spring the economic slump in the euro area
continued, according to the available infor-mation so far. In April-May industrial outputwent down once again after seasonal adjust-ment, falling
34% below its level of the first
quarter of the year. Its year-on-year growthwas a paltry12%. The sluggish state of indus-
try is also expressed in the latest results of theEU survey, according to which capacity utilisa-tion in the manufacturing sector has con-tinued its slide. In July 2001 it was over 1
12
percentage points lower than in October2000, when it last peaked, yet it continued tooutpace its average for the nineties. The in-dustry confidence indicator slipped continu-ously since September 2000; in July of thisyear it fell below its long-term average. Bycontrast, one welcome development is thatindustry’s propensity to invest remainedstable in the winter half of 2000-2001. Ac-cording to the investment survey in March-April 2001, enterprises are adhering to theirautumn 2000 plans to increase real expend-iture on new equipment and plant by 3%after having spent 6% more in 2000. Con-sumer confidence, having been quite robustup to the beginning of spring, weakened dis-tinctly since that time. That is undoubtedly aconsequence of the depletion of purchasingpower caused by the extreme increase incrude oil and food prices. However, the pricerelief which is already in sight is also likely tohave a positive impact on the climate for con-sumption. Consumption did not receive anystimuli from the labour market as of late. Thedecline in unemployment came to a standstillin spring. In June, as in the two precedingmonths, the standardised unemployment ratewas a seasonally adjusted 8.3%.
Within the euro area, the extent of the slow-
down in economic activity has varied widelyfrom one country to another. Most southernEuropean countries’ economies continued togrow in the winter of 2000-2001 at a healthy
Underlying
momentum of
economic
activity
continuing to
slump
Heterogeneity
within the euro
area

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
12pace. In the past few months, though, the re-
tarding forces seem to have increasingly beengaining the upper hand. Germany will thisyear probably be one of the countries havingthe lowest level of economic growth. Themost remarkable thing about it is that thegrowth differential vis-à-vis France, which islikewise one of the core countries and isbeset with similar structural problems, espe-cially regarding the labour market, went backup since mid-2000 (for more details see the“Appendix” on pages 21ff.).
As mentioned above, the price climate has
grown distinctly gloomier in the springmonths despite a slowdown in business activ-ity. Consumer prices were over 1% up ontheir first-quarter levels, after seasonal adjust-ment; the annual percentage change acceler-ated from 2.6% to 3.2%. The key factor be-
hind the rise in inflation was that food priceswent up sharply, under the spell of animaldiseases and the extremely wet and cold wea-ther that afflicted some countries in the earlyspring. Energy prices went back up after hav-ing been down perceptibly in the wintermonths. Even the prices of industrial goodsand services, which are typically more stableand which are less strongly affected by specialfactors, went up at annual rates of more than2%. In the second quarter, inflation ratesranged from 2.3% for France to 5.2% forthe Netherlands. Thus, no country was in thestability corridor defined by the Eurosystemany longer. Relief seems to be in sight forprices in the summer months. Energy priceshave already tumbled owing to lower oilprices, and food prices seem to be pointeddownwards as well. A decisive factor in thesustainability of this moderating trend inprices will be whether labour costs in theeuro area remain at current levels.
Current account and exchange-rate
trends in the euro area
Due to the unfavourable world economic en-
vironment, euro-area foreign trade lost steamin the spring. In the March-May 2001 period,euro-area
1countries’ exports to non-euro-
area countries were up by 1112% from their
previous year’s level. While this increase wascertainly still steep, it did not match last year’sBeginning-of-quarter level, seasonally adjusted
%
1993 20011999-2000 averageCapacity utilisation
in the manufacturing
sector of the euro area
Source: European Commission business sur-
veys.
Deutsche Bundesbank85
84
83
82818079
78
77
94 95 96 97 98 99 00
1From January 2001, euro area including Greece. Year-
on-year data from 2000 were supplemented with Gree-
ce’s trade with non-euro-area countries and adjusted for
Greece’s trade with the euro area.Gloomy price
climateForeign trade
with non-euro-
area countries

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
13average growth of nearly 20%. According to
seasonally adjusted figures which the Euro-pean Central Bank has published for the firsttime, which provide a better picture of cur-rent developments than a simple year-on-year comparison, euro-area countries’ exportshave remained virtually unchanged in thepast few months. The value of euro-area im-ports from non-euro-area countries, accord-ing to the seasonally adjusted figures, stag-nated in the spring months, after havinggone down distinctly at the beginning of theyear.
The euro area’s trade surplus has remained
nearly constant in the past few months fol-lowing the sharp rise at the beginning of thisyear. In the three-month period from Marchto May 2001 it was a seasonally adjusted317
12billion, and thus 35 billion higher
than the comparable preceding period (De-cember to February). This reduced the euroarea’s current account deficit, although netspending on “invisible” current accounttransactions was up by just over 33 billion in
the period under review. On balance, theeuro-area current account deficit in theMarch-May reporting period, at (a seasonallyadjusted) 34 billion, was 31
12billion less
than in the preceding period.
From the beginning of the year to the begin-
ning of summer the euro went down percep-tibly. Only just recently has the euro been ableto recover and to regain some of its lostvalue. As usual, its rate against the US dollarwas the focus of action on foreign-exchangemarkets.The euro, after having fallen below US$ 0.90
by the beginning of May, seemed to stabiliseat that level. However, after the Federal Re-serve cut interest rates in mid-May, the eurolost even more of its value. The measure ap-parently reawakened confidence that the USeconomy would soon recover, whereas theoutlook for euro-area growth tended to be-come more pessimistic. It was only when theeuro hit the US$ 0.85 mark that some resist-ance became perceptible in early June; how-ever it was broken once again following theFederal Reserve’s next interest-rate move nearthe end of June. That caused the euro to fallto just under US$ 0.84 in the first few days ofJuly, nearly reaching its nadir of last October(US$ 0.83). In the following period, however,concerns became greater as to the long-termimpacts the extremely easy-money policy ofthe United States would have on price devel-opments. However, only the Federal Reserve’spronouncement of mid-July – that risks to theUS economy continued to exist – was capableof triggering an abrupt turnaround in theeuro’s fortunes. The euro was most recentlyquoted at around US$ 0.90, thus slightly sur-passing its level of early May. However, thisstill represents a drop of 5% below the euro-US dollar rate as at the beginning of the year.
In spring the euro started out by falling sharply
against the yen before recovering the lostground in the following period. After havingbeen quoted at just under ¥ 109 at the begin-ning of May, in June the euro fell below the¥ 101 mark, and thus more strongly thanagainst the US dollar. In that period, theUS dollar was also under selling pressurevis-à-vis the yen. The change of government in
Current
account
Exchange-rate
movementsUS dollar
Yen

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
14Japan had awakened hopes of a thorough
and rapid implementation of the urgentlyneeded structural reform and had caused theJapanese economy’s outlook for growth to re-turn to a more favourable light. However, atthe beginning of June the yen came under de-valuation pressure vis-à-vis nearly all currenciesafter the Bank of Japan, in its “tankan”
2sur-
vey, which is closely watched around theworld, indicated that Japanese economic sen-timent would become gloomier and revised its
assessment of the economic situation down-wards. In mid-August the euro was quoted atjust over ¥ 110 against the yen, thus slightlysurpassing its level of early May.
Against the pound sterling, the euro has
been moving since early May in a corridor be-tween around £ 0.63 and just under £ 0.60.Speculation that the United Kingdom wouldsoon join the euro area placed the poundsterling under selling pressure only briefly.
As a weighted average of the currencies of
the euro area’s 12 most important tradingpartners, the euro regained at least part ofthe ground it had lost after having slumped inthe spring months and at the beginning ofsummer; viewed in itself, this was similar towhat the euro did against the US dollar. Inmid-August the effective exchange rate wasslightly up on its level of early May and thusaround 1
12% below its value at the begin-
ning of the year.3Thus, the depreciating
euro’s negative impacts on the domestic priceclimate have receded a bit from the externalside; this ultimately also strengthens domesticpurchasing power without putting unwel-Daily values, log. scale
US $
¥
£¥
Effective exchange rate 1
1st qtr 1999 = 100... pound sterling... yenagainst the ...
... US dollarExchange rate of the euro
1According to ECB calculations against the
currencies of 13 countries (12 countries
from 2001).
Deutsche Bundesbank92
89
86
83
800.64
0.62
0.60
0.5897115
94112
91109
88106
103
100
970.97
0.94
0.91
0.88
0.85
0.82
OND J FMAMJ J A
2000 2001
2The Bank of Japan’s “tankan” survey is published quar-
terly and is based on a regular comprehensive survey con-
ducted among Japanese enterprises by the Bank of
Japan.
3Up to the turn of the year, this nominal effective ex-
change rate of the euro was calculated against the cur-
rencies of 13 trading partners of the euro area, including
the Greek drachma (see European Central Bank, Effective
exchange rates for the euro, Monthly Bulletin, October
1999, pages 29ff., and European Central Bank, The
nominal and real effective exchange rates for the euro,
Monthly Bulletin, April 2000, pages 39ff.). Since the
drachma has given way to the euro at the beginning of
the year, only the 12 remaining currencies have been
taken into account since then when calculating this
index.Pound sterling
The euro’s
effective
exchange rate

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
15come strains on European exporters’ inter-
national competitiveness.
Monetary policy and financial markets in
the euro area
Following the interest-rate cut on 10 May
2001, the Governing Council of the ECB leftthe Eurosystem’s interest rates unchanged.Since then, the Eurosystem’s main refinancingoperations have been conducted as variable-rate tenders with a minimum bid rate of4.50%; the interest rates on the marginallending facility and the deposit facility havebeen 5.50% and 3.50%, respectively, since11 May. Monetary and macroeconomic con-ditions both argued in favour of this steadycourse in interest-rate policy. M3 growth ac-celerated again in the past few months; how-ever, much of that was due to portfolio shifts.Even so, inflationary risks have diminishedover the medium term. Price pressure, havingpeaked under the influence of special factorsin May, began to diminish in June and July. Atthe same time, economic growth has sloweddown. On the whole, the “steady-as-she-goes” interest-rate policy appears tohave been suited to maintaining price stabilityover the medium term and thus to ensuringongoing economic growth.
During the period under review time deposit
rates went down, with interest rates on six-month to twelve-month funds declining morerapidly than shorter-term rates. In mid-August money market rates fell around 10 to35 basis points below their level of mid-May.Thus, the yield curve on the money marketDaily data
% p.a.
 5 
billion
 5 
billion
 5 
billion
0Main and longer-term
refinancing operations
MayImpact of market factors
on liquidity (cumulative)3
TotalOf which
− General government
− Banknotes in circulation0Central bank balances
of credit institutions Required
reserves2Overnight interest rate (EONIA)Marginal lending rate
Deposit rateTender rate 1Interest-rate movements and
liquidity management in theEurosystem
1Interest rate for main refinancing oper-
ations; uniform (for fixed-rate tenders) or
marginal (for variable-rate tenders) allot-
ment rates. — 2 Maintenance periods:
24 May to 23 June, 24 June to 23 July, and
24 July to 23 August 2001. — 3 Banknotes
in circulation, government deposits withthe Eurosystem, net foreign currency re-
serves of the Eurosystem and other factors;
provision (+) or absorption (−) of central
bank balances.
Deutsche Bundesbank250
230
210
190
17040+
20+
0
20−140
120
100
805.50
5.00
4.50
4.003.50
3.00                        
June July August
2001No change in
the Euro-
system’s
interest rates
Yield curve on
the money
market still
inverted

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
16continued to be inverted. That means market
participants expect the Eurosystem to cut keyinterest rates once more sometime before theend of the year.
The marginal allotment rates in the Eurosys-
tem’s main refinancing operations started outslightly above the minimum bid rate in theperiod under review; since the beginning ofJuly both interest rates have often been iden-tical. Although the number of bidding creditinstitutions has gone back down a bit, thebidding volumes have always been distinctlyhigher than the adequate allotment amounts.
In the summer months, liquidity management
consisted exclusively in the use of main ten-ders. When gauging them, the Eurosystemneeded to take particularly great account ofthe high volatility of general government de-posits. On the whole, it offset the liquidity ef-fects of autonomous market factors in quite atimely fashion and enabled credit institutionsto maintain their minimum reserves relativelyconstantly. Against that background, the vola-tility of the overnight interest rate (EONIA) re-mained tightly in check. Only at the end of thereserve maintenance periods and, as usual, atthe end of the half-year mark did the over-night interest rate deviate relatively sharplyfrom the Eurosystem’s minimum bid rate.
On the whole, 30.7 billion flowed to credit
institutions (see adjacent table) in the periodfrom May to July owing to autonomous fac-tors determining bank liquidity. This develop-ment, atypical of the season, is attributablefor one thing to the change in general gov-ernment deposits, the impact of which wasFactors determining bank liquidity*
5billion; calculated on the basis of
daily averages of the maintenance periods
2001
Item24 May
to
23 June24 June
to
23 July24 May
to
23 July
I. Provision (+) or absorption (–)
of central bank balances by
1. Change in banknotes in
circulation (increase: –) + 1.6 + 0.3 + 1.9
2. Change in general govern-
ment deposits with the
Eurosystem (increase: –) – 1.9 – 1.2 – 3.1
3. Change in net foreign
exchange reserves 1 + 0.6 + 12.6 + 13.2
4. Other factors 2 + 0.0 – 11.3 – 11.3
Total + 0.3 + 0.4 + 0.7
II. Monetary policy operations
of the Eurosystem
1. Open market operations
a) Main refinancing
operations + 17.7 + 0.2 + 17.9
b) Longer-term refinan-
cing operations € 0.0 + 0.8 + 0.8
c) Other operations – 17.0 – – 17.0
2. Standing facilities
a) Marginal lending
facility – 0.2 + 0.0 – 0.2
b) Deposit facility
(increase: –) + 0.2 – 0.0 + 0.2
Total + 0.7 + 1.0 + 1.7
III. Change in credit institutions’
current accounts (I. + II.) + 0.9 + 1.4 + 2.3
IV. Change in the minimum
reserve requirement
(increase: –) – 0.9 – 1.4 – 2.3
Memo items 3
Main refinancing operations 161.7 161.9 161.9
Longer-term refinancing
operations 59.1 59.9 59.9
Other operations – – –
Marginal lending facility 0.2 0.2 0.2
Deposit facility 0.4 0.4 0.4
*For longer-term trends and the contribution of the Deutsche
Bundesbank, see pages 14* and 15* of the Statistical Section of
this Report. — 1Including end-of-quarter valuation adjustments
with no impact on liquidity. — 2Including monetary policy
operations concluded in Stage Two and still outstanding in Stage
Three (outright transactions and the issuance of debt
certificates). — 3Levels as an average of the maintenance period
under review or the last maintenance period.
Deutsche BundesbankAllotment rates
close to
minimum bid
rate
Liquidity man-
agement
through main
refinancing
operations
Little change in
liquidity needs

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
17relatively non-contractionary. Another reason
is that the number of banknotes in circulationdid not go up as it normally does in the sum-mer months but instead went down in con-nection with the upcoming introduction ofeuro banknotes following the turn of the year.By contrast, the minimum reserve require-ments went up by 32.3 billion. The volume of
open market transactions was accordinglystepped up. Besides an increase in longer-termrefinancing operations to the envisaged totalvolume of 360 billion, the amount of main
tenders outstanding was raised sharply. Ac-count needed to be taken of the fact that theone-week other refinancing operation con-cluded at the end of April reached maturity.Recourse to standing facilities remainedmuted and was concentrated on the end ofthe reserve maintenance periods.
Seasonally adjusted euro-area M3 rose in the
second quarter of this year by a margin simi-lar to the first quarter. Portfolio shifts made akey contribution to this development. Con-tinuing uncertainty in the equity markets andthe flat yield curve led investors to prefershort-term liquid assets. At the end of Junearea-wide M3 surpassed its previous year’slevel by 6.1%, compared with 4.5% at theend of March; the three-month moving aver-age of twelve-month rates was 5.3% inApril-June, compared with 4.6% in January-March. The aforementioned rates have beenadjusted for purchases of money market fundshares by non-euro-area residents;
4addition-
ally they take account of the problem of ap-pearing calendar effects by being calculatedon the basis of time series adjusted for sea-sonal and working-day variations.
5However,when interpreting statistically reported mon-
etary growth in the euro area, account shouldbe taken not just of the aforementioned port-folio shifts but also of the fact that liquidityexpansion in the euro area is overstatedowing to the non-inclusion of purchases ofmoney market paper by non-euro-area resi-dents to date. At present these purchasesprobably add
34percentage point to the
annual M3 growth rate.6In June it was also
increased by a base effect.
Unlike in the preceding quarter, during the
period under review components remuner-Change from previous year, seasonally adjusted
%
%Memo item
German contribution to M3
Scale reducedEuro area
Three-month
moving average
Reference value: 4 ½ %Growth of the money stock
M3 in the euro area
Deutsche Bundesbank12
10
8
6
4
2
007
6
54
1998 1999 2000 2001
4See European Central Bank, Press release, Monetary
developments in the euro area: April 2001, 30 May
2001.
5See European Central Bank, Press release, Monetary
developments in the euro area: June 2001, 26 July 2001.
6See European Central Bank, Monthly Bulletin, August
2001, page 7.Monetary
developments
still marked by
portfolio shifts
Components of
the money
stock

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
18ated at close to market interest rates were
not alone in benefiting from investors’ pro-nounced propensity to invest in short-termfunds. It is true that marketable instruments,and particularly debt securities having a ma-turity of up to two years, went up stronglyonce again in the second quarter. However,sight deposits received a healthy dose of re-plenishment as well. Therefore, the seasonallyadjusted monetary aggregate M1 rose some-what faster than in the preceding quarter,despite the continuing decline in currency incirculation in the light of the approaching cur-rency changeover date. At end-June it was up3.8% on the year. On the whole, other short-term bank deposits rose relatively moderatelyfrom April to June, seasonally adjusted; how-ever, it was particularly the reduction of thesedeposits in May which had a pronounced im-pact.
Lending to the private sector became notice-
ably sluggish in the second quarter. At theend of June, MFI lending to the private sectorwas up 8.4% on the year compared with9.4% at the end of March. Particularly MFIloans to enterprises and households rose, at aseasonally adjusted annual rate of 5
12%, dis-
tinctly slower from April to June than in thepreceding quarter (8
12%). At the end of
June they surpassed their previous year’smark by 7.8%, following 8.7% at the end ofMarch. MFI loans to general governmentwere reduced in the second quarter, too.Monetary capital formation, which had beenrelatively strong in the preceding quarter, de-celerated during the period under review.There were minor outflows of funds in pay-ments by euro-area residents with counter-
parties outside the euro area.
The German contribution to euro-area M3,
having already grown more strongly in thefirst quarter (seasonally adjusted) than theoverall aggregate, went up somewhat moresharply than total euro-area M3 in the secondquarter, too, despite a slight deceleration inthe rate of growth. In June its year-on-year in-crease was 3.8%, following a March figureof 1.3%. However, this rate probably slightlydistorts the actual supply of liquidity in Ger-many owing to purchases of money marketpaper and short-term bank debt securities byinvestors from outside the euro area.
7By ana-
logy with the euro-area context, the develop-ment of the German contribution to M3 wasmarked by a sharp rise in debt securities is-sued by German MFIs having a maturity of upto two years; domestic investors likewise re-plenished their overnight deposits perceptibly.In addition, there was a marked increase inshort-term time deposits (see page 34).
On balance, long-term capital market rates in
the euro area went down a bit during theperiod under review. As an average of the en-tire euro area, ten-year government bondyields were just under 5% in mid-August.That meant that they were just over
34per-
centage point lower than in mid-May. Both inMay and at the end of June long-term capitalmarket rates picked up at times, to be sure,
7Since the outstanding amount of such instruments is
reported exclusive of the holdings of euro-area MFIs and
– owing to statistical difficulties – up to now no distinc-
tion has been made between purchasers from the euro
area and those from non-euro-area countries, such liabil-
ities of MFIs to investors residing outside the euro area
are included in the monetary aggregate M3.Balance-sheet
counterpartsGerman
contribution
Capital market
rates fell
slightly, on
balance, given
contrasting
stimuli

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
19when market participants’ inflation expect-
ations temporarily worsened in connectionwith the unexpectedly sharp rise in consumerprices and oil price inflation. Owing to thedampened business outlook, however, theywent back down somewhat more sharply.The more critical assessment of the profit out-look in business also lead to an increase in theyield spread between lower-quality corporatebonds and government bonds. The interestdifferential between the capital market andthe money market generally followed the upsand downs of capital market rates. As this Re-port went to press, the gap between long-term and short-term rates, at just under
23
percentage point, was around the same levelas in mid-May. Despite the partly contrastingmovements of individual factors influencingyields, market participants’ uncertainty onthe future movements in bond prices, ex-pressed in the implied volatility of options onthe Bund future, was relatively low and large-ly constant. That has been helped along bythe steady monetary policy of the Eurosystemand the recently receding inflation rates.
The gap between the yields on ten-year
US Treasuries and those on comparable euro-area bonds (just over one-quarter percentagepoint in mid-May) has been almost com-pletely erased. The interest-rate cuts by theUS Federal Reserve in May and June wereeach accompanied by a temporary rise inUS capital market yields that was sharperthan in the European capital market, causingthe yield spread between US and Europeanbonds at times to grow somewhat. Apparent-ly long-term inflation expectations in theUnited States, after having clouded over atthe beginning of the second quarter, took a
turn for the better; at least this is the con-clusion that may be drawn from comparingthe yields on nominal and inflation-indexedUS Treasury bonds. In July the yields on ten-year government bonds in the United Stateslikewise went down more sharply than inEurope.Daily data
%%
Per-
cent-
age
points
2000 2001Volatility2Yield spread
between the US bond marketand the euro-area averageYields on ten-year government
bonds outstanding
Euro-area average1
GermanyBond market yields
in the euro area
1Weighted average yield on ten-year gov-
ernment bonds of all euro-area countries;
weighted by GDP. — 2Implied volatility of
the Bund future.
Deutsche Bundesbank6
5
430.75+
0.50+
0.25+
05.75
5.505.255.00
4.75
4.50
ASONDJF M A MJ JA
Difference
between US
and euro-area
yields almost
completely
erased

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
20After having nosedived, share prices in the
euro area entered the second quarter by re-gaining some of their lost ground. However,this recovery proved unsustainable. Beginningin mid-May, in an environment of dampenedgrowth and profit expectations, uncertaintyconcerning the valuation level, expressed inthe implied volatility of options on the DowJones Euro STOXX share price index, wentback up. The share prices of many publiclimited companies came under heavy pres-sure. On balance, the rates of Europeanshareholdings in other enterprises continuedtheir slump. Since its all-time high in March2000, the Dow Jones Euro STOXX share priceindex has lost a total of more than one-quar-ter of its value. The gloomy sentiment in themarket was once again reflected in particular-ly large mark-downs of high-tech shares.
Share price movements in European equitymarkets were generally in line with those ofother major equity markets during the periodunder review; in Japan, since mid-May pricesfell even more sharply than in the euro area.However, as of late the otherwise rather closeparallelism of movements between Europeanand US share prices has perceptibly loosened.In terms of the Standard and Poor’s 500index, US share prices went down only to alimited extent. Share prices in the tech-heavyNasdaq remained rather stable, unlike thoseof European high-tech stocks. The sharpinterest-rate cuts by the US Federal Reserveover the course of this year probably contrib-uted to the somewhat more favourable pricemovements.
Equity markets
continuing their
nosedive

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
21Appendix:
The growthdifferential betweenGermany and FranceIn the past few years the growth of the
French economy was for the most part visiblystronger than that of the German economy.In the period from 1997 to 2000, French realGDP increased by an average of 2
34%, com-
pared with + 2% in Germany. For the firsttime since the beginning of the nineties theGerman economy showed some growth lastyear, mainly owing to a booming export de-mand. At 3.0%, this rise was significantlyabove the path of potential growth and onlyslightly lower than in France (3.1%). How-ever, in the course of 2000 the pace ofgrowth in German real GDP decelerated froman annualised 4% in the first six months to2% in the second half of 2000, whereas inFrance it remained unchanged at an annualgrowth rate of 3% in both periods. For thisreason the French “growth overhang” at theend of the year was, at 1
12percentage
points, twice as high as in Germany. Further-more, the underlying cyclical momentumshowed a slower decrease in France after theturn of the year. All in all, there are many indi-cations that as an average for 2001 theFrench growth lead will once again exceed itsprevious year’s level. According to the IMFspring forecast, though, this growth gap islikely to diminish in 2002.
This article aims to describe in somewhat
greater detail the main reasons for the differ-ences in growth in the second half of thenineties and in the recent past. In this con-text, the article critically examines the viewheld by many at present that the sluggishgrowth in Germany, compared with Franceand most of the other euro-area countries, isFrance’s higher
growth in
recent years

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
22not just a temporary slump but a long-term
problem instead.
A review of the nineties shows that the eco-
nomic implications of German reunification,in particular, caused the cyclical develop-ments in both countries to drift apart. Thewhole decade can be broken down into threeperiods. In 1991 and 1992, i.e. in the firstphase after political reunification, the Ger-man economy expanded much more stronglythan the French economy. After a significantcontraction in real GDP in 1993, the twocountries showed more or less the samegrowth from 1994 to 1996, most of the timeat rates beneath the respective path of poten-tial growth. In the following period (1997 to1999), the French economy acceleratedmarkedly, whereas growth in Germany re-mained subdued. It was only in the year 2000
that Germany managed to catch up andreached a pace of growth nearly as high asFrance. As an annual average over the 1991-2000 period, both economies grew at thesame pace, at 1
34%.1
The growth differential between Germanyand France at the beginning and the end ofthe nineties is mainly due to differing cyclicaldevelopments in construction investment andinvestment in machinery and equipment aswell as in private consumption. After the de-mise of the GDR, the demand for housing(which was boosted by massive governmentincentives), the need to eliminate public infra-structure shortages and also the housingshortage in the western part of Germany ledto a construction boom. During this period,though, capacity in the construction sectorand the supply of buildings, particularly in thenew Länder, rose significantly faster than theability of the real property market to absorbthem. In addition, the public demand for con-struction projects was – also owing to the in-creasingly precarious situation of general gov-ernment – reduced from 1993 on, and thenumerous fiscal incentives for buildingowners were gradually scaled back in thesecond half of the nineties. As a conse-GDP at 1995 prices
%
Percent-
age
points
1st qtr
1991 2001Differences in growth31Change from previous year
Germany
2FranceEconomic growth in
Germany and France
1Growth rate for 1991 as estimated by the
Bundesbank. — 2 Annual averages from
1991 to 2000. — 3 German GDP growth
rate less French GDP growth rate.
Deutsche Bundesbank2+
1+
0
1−4+
3+
2+
1+
0
1−
92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00
1The German national accounts include – on the basis of
the ESA 95 – data on the levels for GDP and its compon-
ents only from 1991; growth rates for the years from
1992 onwards can be derived from these data. It would
make sense, however, to include the year 1991 in the
growth comparison because the reunification boom
reached its peak at that time and the actual collapse of
production in eastern Germany already had a marked im-
pact on developments in Germany as a whole. For that
reason an estimated rate of change was included for
1991. There was no such approach with regard to the all-
German series for demand components and other rele-
vant ESA positions.A review of the
ninetiesDivergences
especially in
construction...

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
23quence, the construction sector ran into a
serious adjustment crisis in the mid-nineties,which it has yet to overcome. By contrast,real construction investment in France, whichhad sunk by one-sixth overall from 1991 to1997, has been showing a clear rising ten-dency since 1998. Yet in 2000 it was stillbelow 1990 levels.
The sharp decrease in German investment in
machinery and equipment (including other in-vestment) in the period from 1992 to 1994 islikewise a reaction to the excesses of thepast. During the reunification boom, the in-dustrial sector, in particular, created capacitieswhich could not be utilised in the short term.This had a restraining effect on the demandfor machinery and equipment in the follow-ing years. Only since 1998 has investment ac-tivity recovered substantially. In France, thecontraction of investment in machinery andequipment was markedly less pronounced inthe early nineties than in Germany. Thereafterit strengthened considerably. In 1999 and2000, the growth differential in investment inmachinery and equipment shifted in favour ofGermany.
A pattern of divergence similar to that in
overall GDP can also be seen in private con-sumption. In 1991 and 1992, when con-sumer demand from German households wasstill increasing strongly, the French propensityto buy rose only marginally. That was fol-lowed by a phase (1993 to 1997) marked byrelatively subdued consumption in both coun-tries. Since 1998 private consumption inFrance has expanded more strongly than inGermany. On average throughout the nine-ties, however, private consumption growth
was no higher in France than in Germany. Itmust be kept in mind, though, that in thenineties the saving ratio of households inFrance showed an upward trend, whereasthere was a marked decline in Germany.
Developments in French consumption over
the past few years benefited from develop-ments in employment being much more fa-1991 = 100, annual averages
Per-
centage
points
3lin. scale
Contribution to growth
by real net exports2
1991 2000Private consumptionInvestment in machinery
and equipment 1log. scale
Construction investment
Germany
FranceDemand components in
Germany and France
Sources: National statistics, OECD. — 1 In-
cluding other investment. — 2 Absolute
change in real net exports as a percentage
of the previous year’s GDP. — 3 No data
available for Germany for 1991.
Deutsche Bundesbank1.5+
1.0+
0.5+
0
0.5−
1.0−120
110
100140
130
120
110
100
90
80130
120
110
100
90
85
92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99...but also in
investment in
machinery and
equipment
and...
...in private
consumption

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
24vourable than in Germany. From 1998 to
2000, employment growth in France – whichwas supported by a generally moderate wagerate policy – was higher than in Germany; itrose by a cumulative 5
12%, compared with
+312% in Germany. This was due in no small
part to measures to expand public sector em-ployment. Furthermore, the compulsory re-duction in working hours in the private sectorentered into force at the beginning of 2000,accompanied (especially in large enterprises)by greater flexibility in working arrange-ments.
2Even if it is not quite clear to what
extent these measures have led to long-termemployment growth, there are many indica-tions that they had a stimulating effect onconsumption in the period under review.However, labour market trends in the two
countries had already begun to diverge be-fore then. The decline in employment in Ger-many in the early nineties had been signifi-cantly sharper than in France. Moreover, inGermany the decline in the number of peoplein work did not bottom out until 1997, whenthe French economy had already returned toits 1991 level of employment. In full-timeequivalents, i.e. after the conversion of part-time jobs into full-time jobs, the employmentrate differential was even greater in the nine-ties, owing in particular to the sharp increasein part-time low-paid jobs in Germany. Themain reasons for the significant shedding ofjobs in Germany in the years after reunifica-tion up to 1997 were wage policy excesses –especially during the economic upswing atthe beginning of the nineties – and the con-siderable shedding of jobs in the new Länder,the latter having been triggered by the col-lapse of the east German economy. Added tothis was the adjustment of east Germanwages to western German levels in the fol-lowing years which was pushed through des-pite the sizeable productivity lag.
The growth advantage of the French econ-
omy in the past few years does not reflect ad-vantages in foreign trade, though. In theperiod from 1997 to 2000, real exports as de-fined by the ESA increased in both countriesby an average of just over 9%, and importsin France rose, at 9
14%, even more strongly
than in Germany. Also in 1998-99 – when theAnnual averages
%
lin. scale
Standardised unemployment rates
G 1
F 1st
half
1991 20011991 = 100, log. scale
Employment in the
overall economy
GermanyFranceEmployment and
unemployment in
Germany and France
Sources: National statistics, Eurostat. —
1Western Germany until 1992, from 1993
(unified) Germany.
Deutsche Bundesbank15
12
9
6
3
0106
104
102
100
98
96
92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00
2The reduction in the statutory working week from 39
to 35 hours has been in force since the beginning of
2000 for enterprises with more than 20 employees and
since 1 January 2002 for all others.Differences in
developments
in consumption
are a reaction
to diverging
developments
in employment
Foreign trade
developments
at the end of
the nineties
largely similar

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
25crises in eastern Asia and Russia had a re-
straining effect on world trade – French ex-ports did not outpace German exports. Thesecrises could be felt much more in Germany,though, because the ratio of exports to GDPis traditionally much higher in Germany thanin its neighbour to the west. On an averageof the years 1997 to 2000, contributions togrowth by real net exports in Germany andFrance, i.e. taking imports into account, werevery similar to one another.
The growth gap between Germany and
France, which had disappeared at one time,widened again in the second half of 2000. Inparticular in the last quarter of 2000, theunderlying cyclical trend in Germany weak-ened substantially, whereas the French econ-omy was still running at full tilt. There weretwo main reasons for these diverging tenden-cies. On the one hand, construction invest-ment in France continued to witness stronggrowth, which contrasted again with a de-cline in Germany. French investment in ma-chinery and equipment also expanded rela-tively sharply. On the other hand, real importsgrew at a slower pace in France than in Ger-many. The result was a slightly positive contri-bution to growth by foreign trade in France,whereas in Germany it reduced overall eco-nomic growth – in purely mathematical terms–b y
14percentage point. The other demand
components moved more or less in sync withone another.
In the first quarter of 2001, French real GDP
increased in seasonally and working-day-adjusted terms by
12% compared with the
previous quarter and thus only slightly morestrongly than in Germany. This increase was
supported, however, by a robust final de-mand on the part of households which in-creased in France by 1%, whereas it fell inGermany by
34%.3For one thing, this reflects
the continuing contrasts in construction. Ger-man construction investment undershot itslevel in autumn 2000 by not less than 5
34%
in seasonally adjusted terms, compared withan increase of 1
12% in France. Secondly, the
stagnation of private consumption continuedin Germany, whereas a seasonally adjustedrise of 1
14% was recorded in France.
The stronger consumption growth in France
in 2000 and in the current year is partly attrib-utable to the fact that households do notspend such a large percentage of theirbudget on heating oil as do German privatehouseholds and were therefore not hit quiteas hard by the rise in oil prices. In the light ofthe negligible differences in dependence onoil and gas imports
4, however, it is likely that
the effect on the French economy as a wholewas similar to that on the German economy,since the increase in crude oil prices and thedepreciation of the euro influenced bothcountries to the same extent.
5In this context,
3This contrasted, however, with a sizeable reduction in
inventories in France associated with extraordinary high
exports of planes and ships. Hence the decline in inven-
tories is only to a minor extent the result of a cycle-
induced adjustment. In seasonally adjusted terms, French
exports stagnated during the winter months, whereas
German exports decreased by34%. When adjusted for
the aforementioned settlement of large orders, French
exports declined as well.
4Calculated on the basis of the OECD International
Trade by Commodities Statistics and measured as a per-
centage of GDP .
5According to the national accounts data, the deterior-
ation in the terms of trade in 2000 was smaller in France
than in Germany. This might be linked at least partly to
methodological differences regarding the deflators of ex-
ports and imports.Heterogeneous
cyclical
conditions in
the second half
of 2000 ...
... and in early
2001Differences in
households’
dependence
on oil

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
26the greater importance of nuclear energy for
power production in France is relatively insig-nificant, since in Germany not only nuclearenergy but also, and in particular, lignite andhard coal are used to manufacture electricity.Like those of nuclear fuels, the prices of thesecomponents are, at least in the short run,largely independent of oil prices.
Private consumption in France was also influ-
enced favourably by the fact that the Frenchgovernment, in its 2000 budget act, cut taxes(including the value-added tax as from 1 April2000) and, in late summer, instituted varioustax relief measures to cushion the oil-price-related losses incurred by households (andenterprises). All in all, the tax reduction pro-gramme brought relief amounting to 1% ofGDP in 2000.
6Added to this were tax relief
measures introduced at the beginning of2001 which will amount to a further 1% ofGDP in the year in progress and are largelydirected towards households. In Germany,the 1999-2000-2002 Tax Relief Act also ledto a tax cut for households in 2000; however,this reduction was smaller in Germany than inFrance. Furthermore, there was not any sig-nificant direct government assistance for con-sumers of mineral oil products – apart fromsome relatively minor “socio-political” meas-ures. The relief associated with the Germantax reform, which entered into force on1 January 2001, can be put at just over 1%of GDP . Moreover, the pension insurance con-tribution rate was lowered, as in the year be-fore. However, this contrasted with the deple-tion of purchasing power owing to the thirdstage of the energy consumption tax as wellas to increases in administered prices. The di-verging developments in indirect taxes and
administered prices in both countries alsomanifested themselves in the respective con-sumer price developments. Taking togetherboth of the aforementioned price-boostingfactors, inflation in Germany was pushed up-wards by around
12percentage point. Since
summer 2000 the rates of price increase havebeen higher in Germany than in Franceowing mainly to these factors.
In spring, the pace of economic activity in
Germany and France continued to slowdown. This is shown by a number of indica-tors. The index of industrial confidence de-creased significantly. In Germany and France,manufacturing output in the second quarterand in April-May, respectively, remained wellbelow the levels reached in the first quarter.For the first time in a long while, French con-sumer confidence deteriorated. Constructionactivity also lost momentum in France. Duringthe spring months, real GDP in France seemsto have increased only marginally in seasonal-ly and working-day-adjusted terms. However,there are no official data available yet. In Ger-many, economic growth appears to havecome to a standstill in the second quarter (formore details see pages 36ff.).
All in all, it is safe to say that the growth dif-
ferential between Germany and France whichhas reappeared since mid-2000 is mainly theresult of extremely weak construction outputin Germany, but construction could bottomout this year. The yearly increases of the“ecology tax” also had negative effects on
6See: OECD Economic Surveys, France, Paris, July 2000,
p. 55.Similarities and
differences in
taxation policy
Economic
conditions in
both countries
in spring
Summary of
the comparison
of economic
cycles

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
27the German economy which were even re-
inforced by increases in administered prices.
Overall, the past and present growth differen-
tial between Germany and France explainedin this article does not seem to be long-termin nature. It is primarily due to an asynchron-ous cyclical trend that is linked with specialfactors in the 1990s. This finding is supportedby international institutions’ estimates of po-tential growth, which estimate French poten-tial growth to be, on average, no higher than
14percentage point above that of Germany.
This difference is not only considerably small-er than that in average GDP growth of thepast few years but must also be seen against
the background of considerable uncertaintiesin the estimation of the medium-term pro-duction potential. As far as developments inthe labour markets are concerned, bothcountries are facing great challenges to rem-edy the lack of jobs. Over the past few years,France has managed – also with the help ofadministrative measures – to achieve greaterreductions in unemployment than Germany.In the middle of 2001, however, the seasonal-ly adjusted standardised unemployment ratewas still well above the corresponding Ger-man figure (8.5%, compared with 7.8% inGermany).
Growth of
potential
output and
challenges of
the labour
market

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
28Financial markets
in GermanyCapital market and bank interest rates
Since mid-May the yield on ten-year Federal
bonds outstanding has fallen somewhat onbalance and, when this Report went to pressin mid-August, it was just over 4
34%. This
development masked an uneven upward anddownward movement, as was also evident inforeign bond markets. However, Germancapital market rates fluctuated very little byinternational comparison. The implied volatil-ity of the Bund future, which measures theextent of the price swings in the futures mar-ket in the period ahead expected by marketplayers, likewise indicates low interest rateuncertainty. At the time of going to press, theyield on ten-year Federal bonds was morethan
14percentage point below the euro-area
average. The interest rate spread betweenten-year debt securities issued by domesticbanks and comparable Federal bonds hasscarcely changed since mid-May. At the endof the review period it was less than
12per-
centage point. The yield spread of domesticcorporate bonds over long-term governmentbonds likewise remained largely constant andis currently around 80 basis points. Overall,the market for German bonds is thereforecomparatively stable.
The yields on Federal securities with a shorter
residual maturity fell rather more markedly oflate, with the result that the estimated yieldcurve became slightly steeper. In mid-Augustthe interest rate spread of ten-year Federalbonds over one-year paper observable on themarket was just over
34percentage point,
compared with around23percentage point in
mid-May. The yield curve for one to two-yearSlight decrease
in capital
market rates
Slightly steeper
yield curve

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
29bonds is, however, still slightly inverse. By his-
torical comparison, the overall yield curvemay be considered flat. The medium to long-term inflation expectations prevailing in thebond market thus seem to be very restrained.The expected real capital market rate for ten-year bonds (calculated on the basis of nomin-al yields less inflation expectations derivedfrom surveys) remains relatively low, ataround 3%.
Short and long-term bank interest rates de-
veloped in opposite directions in the periodunder review. While the rates for long-termloans and deposits rose slightly, the short-term interest rates on banks’ asset and de-posit business fell slightly. For instance, in Julybanks charged an average of just under8
34% for current account credit (for a credit
volume of between DM 1 million and lessthan DM 5 million), 15 basis points less thanin April. In comparison, the rates for personalcredit lines fell only slightly to an average of12
23%. Similarly, in July the interest rate on
one-month time deposits (for an investmentvolume of DM 100,000 to less than DM 1million) was, at just under 3
34%, around 15
basis points lower than three months previ-ously. By contrast, a moderate increase wasrecorded in long-term bank rates. For in-stance, the interest rate charged on mort-gage loans with interest locked in for tenyears averaged just under 6
12% in July, this
being around 10 basis points more than inApril. The cost of long-term fixed-rate loansto enterprises rose even less. The effectiverates were on average around 6
34% (for a
credit volume of between DM 200,000 andless than DM 1 million) and just over 6
12%(for a credit volume of between DM 1 million
and less than DM 10 million). In July interestrates on savings deposits with an agreed con-tract period of more than four years wereonly slightly up on April and were on average4
12% (for deposits with an agreed notice
period of three months).
Share prices
After a temporary recovery in prices at the
start of the second quarter, the downwardslide on the German equity market resumedfrom mid-May onwards. Measured on thebroad CDAX share price index, equity pricesfell by 9% up to the time when this Reportwent to press in mid-August. Compared withtheir historical peak in March 2000, the priceDaily data
%
Percent-
age
points
ASON DJ F M A MJ JA
2000 2001Yield spread of ten-year over
one-year Federal bondsYield on Federal securities
outstanding...
...with a residual maturity of ten years
...with a residual maturity
   of one yearYields in the
German bond market
Deutsche Bundesbank1.00+
0.75+
0.50+
0.25+
05.75
5.50
5.25
5.00
4.75
4.504.254.00
Slight rise in
long-term bank
interest rates
Continued
slump on the
equity market

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
30of German shares fell by more than one-third,
compared with a loss of slightly more thanone-quarter for the Dow Jones Euro STOXXindex. With the recent slump, equity marketuncertainty also increased for a time. TheVDAX, which uses option prices to measurethe expected share price volatility of the Ger-man blue-chip companies which make up theDAX, rose quite steeply for a time. However,not all market segments were affected to thesame extent by the gloomy market senti-ment. For instance, the prices of what areknown as secondary stocks remained largelystable in the review period.
However, the mood on the Neuer Markt was
still particularly jittery. In June and July alonethe NEMAX-All-Share price index lost almostone-third of its value. Compared with itspeak in March 2000, the market for primarily
technology-related “growth stocks” fell bymore than 85%. At the end of the periodunder review, prices were on average onlyjust above the level at which the whole stockmarket segment was introduced in March1997. In the meantime, 14 companies havedeclared themselves insolvent. The high yieldexpectations of many investors in the oftenvery young enterprises – with the profitabilityof some of them being very difficult to predict– have, for the moment, mostly met with dis-appointment. In addition to marked specula-tive phases, the heavy dependence onchanges in the investors’ risk propensity hasso far made such stocks extremely susceptibleto wide fluctuations in price. As the euphoriaand the unprecedented surge in prices grad-ually gave way, from March 2000, to doubtsand disillusionment, the awareness of flawsin this market segment grew. The operator oftheDeutsche Börse reacted to the crisis of
confidence on the Neuer Markt at the start of
the year by setting stricter criteria for thequarterly reports of the listed enterprises and,at the end of the period under review, byamending the regulations aimed at excluding“penny-stock” issues and insolvent enter-prises from this trading segment from au-tumn onwards.
Borrowing in the securities markets
There was very little issuing activity in the
German bond market in the second quarter.Gross sales of debt securities issued by bor-rowers domiciled in Germany, calculated attheir market value, amounted to 3178 billion
Monthly averages
%
Current account credit 1
Mortgage
loans2
Time deposits4Yields on
bank debtsecurities
3Bank interest rates
in Germany
1DM 1 million and more, but less than
DM 5 million. — 2 On residential property;
effective interest rate, fixed rate over ten
years. — 3 With a mean residual maturity
of over nine to ten years. — 4 Time de-
posits with an agreed maturity of onemonth for amounts of DM 100,000 and
more, but less than DM 1 million.
Deutsche Bundesbank9
8
7
65
4
32
1997 1998 1999 2000 2001
Crisis of
confidence on
the Neuer
MarktSales of bonds
and notes

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
31(previous quarter: 3216 billion). Although re-
demptions of and additions to issuers’ hold-ings of their own bonds were also down, thefunds raised by sales of domestic fixed-inter-est securities fell very strongly from 320
12
billion in the first three months of the year to
3912billion. In particular, domestic issuers re-
duced their liabilities arising from short-termpaper with maturities of up to one year; theoutstanding stock of such securities fell by314 billion. By contrast, net sales of foreign
bonds and notes, at 329 billion, remained
virtually constant compared with the firstquarter ( 331
12billion). Foreign bonds were –
as in the previous months – mostly denomin-ated in euro ( 326 billion). Total net sales
of debt securities in the German bond marketin the second quarter of 2001 thereforeamounted to 338
12billion.
The lower amount of funds raised is essential-
ly attributable to severe cutbacks in the issu-ing activity of credit institutions. From April toJune they issued no more than 32 billion net
worth of their own bonds, compared with336
12billion in the first quarter. As at that
time, the banks massively reduced their out-standing stocks of short-dated bonds. Creditinstitutions concentrated on issuing otherbank debt securities ( 36
12billion net), which
are used mainly to refinance lending to tradeand industry. Sales of mortgage bonds(Hypothekenpfandbriefe ) were only just over
3
12billion. Communal bonds (Öffentliche
Pfandbriefe) and debt securities issued by
specialised credit institutions were redeemedfor34 billion and 31
12billion on balance.
From April to June public authorities againraised 35
12billion net in the bond market,after having reduced their bonded debt by
321 billion in the first quarter in connection
with the redemption of bonds of the Cur-rency Conversion Equalisation Fund. The Fed-eral Government issued 35
12billion net
worth of debt securities, while the LänderGovernments sold fixed-interest securities inthe amount of 32
12billion. Corporate bonds
were sold for 32 billion net, somewhat less
than in the first quarter ( 35 billion).
The slowdown in issuing activity in the Ger-
man equity market continued in the secondquarter. From April to June domestic enter-prises placed new shares to a market value of33 billion, compared with just over 34 billion
in the first three months of the year. At nine,the number of initial public offerings (IPOs)was the same as in the previous quarter, butcompared with the preceding two recordyears it was very low. Foreign enterprisesplaced 344
12billion worth of equities on the
domestic market. This was mainly due, how-ever, to the takeover of a US stock corpor-ation by a major German telecommunicationscompany.
Investment activity in the securities
markets
Domestic investors were again the principal
buyers in the bond market in the secondquarter of 2001, increasing their bond hold-ings by a total of just under 341 billion after
360 billion in the first quarter. This time the
credit institutions were predominant, adding323 billion to their bond portfolios. They
continued to focus on foreign bonds ( 314Sharp decline in
sales of bank
debt securitiesBorrowing in
the equity
market
Purchases of
bonds

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
32billion), while buying around 37 billion net of
domestic bank debt securities. By contrast,the activity of domestic non-banks in thebond market declined; their investments fellfrom 337 billion in the first quarter to less
than 318 billion between April and June. The
decline affected almost exclusively bonds ofdomestic private debtors, 3
12billion of which
were re-sold by non-banks in the secondquarter. By contrast, they purchased 314
12
billion worth of foreign securities, virtually the
same amount as in the previous threemonths. Foreign investors were once againsellers of bonds; their holdings of domesticbonds fell by 32
12billion.
On the other hand, non-residents invested
371 billion in German equities in the second
quarter, compared with 39 billion from Janu-ary to March. By contrast, domestic non-
banks sold German equities in the amount of339
12billion net and bought shares in for-
eign companies in the amount of 342 billion
– the vast majority of which as direct invest-ment. Similarly, domestic credit institutionssold a total of 328
12billion worth of shares
in German companies during the periodunder review and purchased 32
12billion
worth of foreign equities. The high net salesof German stocks by residents and the highnet purchases by non-residents were due to alarge extent to the aforementioned takeoverof a US enterprise by a large German concernand the associated ownership transfer to for-eign investors. In addition, considerable port-folio reallocations from residents to non-residents occurred as a result of commitmentsrelated to derivative transactions.
In the second quarter, sales of domestic in-
vestment fund certificates fell to their lowestlevel for five years. From April to June Ger-man investment companies issued 38
12bil-
lion net worth of certificates, compared with324
12billion in the first three months of
2001. Net sales of foreign investment fundcertificates also fell, from 36 billion in the
first quarter to 34
12billion in the second.
Domestic funds open to the general public is-
sued share certificates in the amount of 3512
billion net, after recording inflows of funds of
more than 312 billion in the first quarter of
2001. Savers in investment funds continuedto prefer share-based funds but allocatedonly 32 billion to them. In the first half of the
year the total amount raised by domesticshare-based funds, at less than 35 billion,Investment activity in the German
securities markets
5billion
2001 2000
ItemJan. to
Mar.Apr. to
JuneApr. to
June
Bonds and notes 1
Residents 59.6 40.9 19.0
Credit institutions 2 22.8 23.1 22.2
of which
Foreign bonds and
notes 3 17.5 14.1 5.6
Non-banks 4 36.8 17.8 – 3.1
of which
Domestic bonds and
notes 22.8 3.1 – 5.0
Non-residents 3 – 7.4 – 2.7 40.7
Shares
Residents 4.3 – 23.6 – 5.8
Credit institutions 2 29.8 – 26.1 – 28.1
of which
Domestic shares 23.3 – 28.4 – 31.7
Non-banks 4 – 25.5 2.4 22.3
of which
Domestic shares – 28.1 – 39.6 – 3.3
Non-residents 3 8.9 70.9 42.9
Investment fund certificates
Investment in specialised
funds 12.2 2.9 8.5
Investment in funds open to
the general public 12.1 5.6 8.0
of which: Share-based funds 2.8 2.0 9.1
1Since the start of 2000, including non-bank debt secu-
rities with an original maturity of up to and including
one year and commercial paper. — 2Book values, statis-
tically adjusted. — 3Transaction values. — 4Residual.
Deutsche Bundesbank
Purchases of
sharesInvestment
fund certificates
Investors
hesitant and
cautious

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
33was only a fraction of the record amount of
322 billion raised in the first half of 2000.
Following the general stock market euphoriaat the start of last year, the disappointment ofmany private investors at the developmentson the stock market is clearly affecting newinvestment. This can be seen, inter alia, from
the fact that the less risk-prone open-end realestate funds and money market funds, whichhad attracted little interest for a long time,found increased favour among investors inthe period under review. Around 31
12billion
worth of units in both types of fund weresold in the second quarter, with each selling34
12billion worth in the first half of 2001. In
2000, shares in money market funds andopen-end real estate funds had been re-turned in the amount of 32 billion and 33
billion respectively. From April to June theamount raised by domestic specialised invest-ment funds, which manage the assets of in-stitutional customers, was, at just under 33
billion, lower than in the previous quarters.On balance, these funds were invested al-most exclusively, and in roughly equal propor-tions, in share-based funds and mixed funds.
Deposit and lending business of
monetary financial institutions (MFIs)with domestic customers
In seasonally adjusted terms, the overnight
deposits of domestic customers with GermanMFIs increased markedly in the second quar-ter of 2001. Although at the start of the quar-ter non-financial enterprises also increasedtheir sight deposits, the overall upsurge wasdue, in particular, to the increase in individ-uals’ overnight deposits. As in the previous
quarter, this trend was prompted by the per-sistent decline in short-term interest rates andthe continued great uncertainty in the equitymarkets.
The preference for liquid forms of invest-
ment was also reflected in a perceptible sea-sonally adjusted increase in deposits with ana g r e e dm a t u r i t yo fu pt ot w oy e a r s ,a l - 5 
billion 5 
billion
... money market and open-end
real estate fundsNet private
investment
in ...
... share-based fundsDAX performance index 1Equity prices and
selected investment in funds
1 End-of-month levels; end-1987=1000.
Source: Deutsche Börse AG.
Deutsche Bundesbank8+
6+
4+
2+
0
2−14
12
10
8
6
4
2
08000
7000
6000
5000
4000
3000
1997 1998 1999 2000 2001
Clear increase
in overnight
deposits
Perceptible
increase in
short-term time
deposits...

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
34though on balance this was due solely to the
large transfers to this investment vehicle inJune. Even if the increase in the second quar-ter of 2001, at 31.8 billion, was less than in
the same quarter last year ( 34.3 billion), it
clearly exceeded the increase in earlier years.In particular, households accumulated exten-sive short-term time deposits in the secondquarter of 2001. Deposits with an agreedmaturity of over two years rose by 32.3 bil-
lion from April to June, compared with 32.6
billion in the same period of last year. Mainlyinsurance companies – which traditionallyrepresent the largest category of investorshaving recourse to this type of deposit – in-creased their holdings in longer-term timedeposits.Deposits with an agreed period of notice
were reduced further during the period underreview. From April to June 2001 domesticnon-banks reduced their short-term savingsdeposits by 32.9 billion and their long-term
deposits by 34.0 billion. However, the de-
crease in savings deposits with an agreedperiod of notice of three months was, for thefirst time since the third quarter of 1999, lessthan usual at this time of year.
After a marked increase in the previous
period, lending by German MFIs to domesticenterprises and individuals was perceptiblydown in the second quarter of 2001. This isdue to extensive sales of securities of Ger-man enterprises by domestic MFIs in con-nection with futures transactions. Overall,German MFIs reduced their holdings of se-curities issued by German enterprises by322.7 billion in the second quarter. How-
ever, banks also granted fewer loans to do-mestic enterprises and households in thesecond quarter of 2001 than in the firstquarter. The seasonally adjusted annualgrowth rate fell from just under 6% in thefirst quarter of 2001 to less than 1%. As inthe previous quarter, medium and long-termlending increased moderately, but short-term loans decreased.
Among the most important categories of bor-
rowers, loans to the housing sector continuedto expand at the moderate pace of the previ-ous quarter. Outstanding borrowing from do-mestic MFIs by employees remained virtuallyunchanged in the second quarter of 2001. Bycontrast, enterprises, which had strongly in-creased their demand for credit in the previ-Lending and deposits of monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) inGermany
*
5billion
2001 2000
ItemApr. to
JuneApr. to
June
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight + 21.0 + 0.6
With agreed maturities
up to 2 years + 1.8 + 4.3over 2 years + 2.3 + 2.6
At agreed notice
2
up to 3 months – 2.9 – 20.1over 3 months – 4.0 + 2.3
Lending
To domestic enterprises and indivi-duals
Unsecuritised + 5.8 + 25.6Securitised – 22.7 – 22.1
To domestic public authorities
Unsecuritised – 13.2 – 2.1Securitised + 2.6 – 6.6
*As well as banks (including building and loan associ-
ations, but excluding the Bundesbank), monetary finan-cial institutions (MFIs) here also include money marketfunds; see also Table IV.1 in the Statistical Section of thisReport. — 1Enterprises, individuals and public authori-
ties (excluding Federal Government). — 2Savings
deposits.
Deutsche Bundesbank
...and
moderate
increase in
longer-term
time depositsFurther
reduction in
savings deposits
Marked
decrease in
lending to the
private sector...
...and
especially to
enterprises

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
35ous quarter, reduced their indebtedness
markedly in seasonally adjusted terms. Thiswas mainly attributable to a perceptible de-cline in borrowing by financing institutions,whose pattern of debt incurrence is very vola-tile over the short run. However, the other en-terprise sectors, too, with the exception oftransport and communications and service in-dustries, reduced their borrowing from do-mestic MFIs.
The level of indebtedness of German public
authorities to domestic MFIs declined by310.6 billion in the second quarter of 2001,
compared with a reduction of 38.7 billion
year on year. This was caused solely by a re-duction of 313.2 billion in unsecured loans.
The Federal Government alone reduced itsborrowing from German MFIs in the periodunder review by 311.6 billion; at the same
time it ran down its deposits at German MFIsby31.0 billion. Securitised lending by domes-tic banks to German public authorities in-
creased, by contrast, by 32.6 billion.Seasonally adjusted
DM
billion 5 
billion
%lin. scale
Change from the previous
year in %18001900200021002200
log. scale
Loans 1
oLoans to domestic
enterprises and individuals
1End-of-month level; excluding statistical
changes. — oFigures in euro from 1999.
Deutsche Bundesbank8
6
4
2
04300
4100
3900
3700
3500
1998 1999 2000 2001Further
reduction in
public sector
debt

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
36Economic conditions
in GermanyUnderlying trends
Economic growth in Germany came to a halt
in spring. The weakening of demand whichbegan to emerge in the first quarter of 2001,but which did not affect output at that timebecause of sizeable order backlogs, had astrong impact in spring. Aggregate produc-tion mirrored the declining level of new busi-ness, especially as firms showed little inclin-ation to stockpile. According to the Bundes-bank’s initial calculations, real GDP in thesecond quarter of this year (adjusted for sea-sonal and working-day variations) remainedat the first-quarter level. This implies a year-on-year increase of around 1% (adjusted forworking-day variations and subject to an im-minent revision of the national accountsdata), compared with a year-on-year rise ofroughly 2% in the preceding three-monthperiod. On a calendar-month basis the year-on-year increase was likewise 1%, after1
12% in the first quarter.
As a result, aggregate capacity utilisation de-
creased further and the slight worsening ofthe situation on the labour market, whereemployment has been stagnant for somemonths now and the number of unemployedhas been growing in small steps, persisted.However, it would be unwarranted to inferthat the German economy is already headedfor a recession. Short pauses in growth orfalls in output during a cyclical slowdown byno means inevitably lead to a protracteddownswing. For example, the considerablestrains placed on the global economy in1997/98 by the problems in the east Asianemerging-market countries appear in retro-Weakening of
overall
economic
output
Headed for
recession?

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
37spect to have stunted the growth process in
Germany only temporarily and to a limited ex-tent. The word “recession” should only beused to denote a prolonged and broadlybased contraction of macroeconomic activityaffecting many sectors and regions. A viewwhich focuses solely on growth rates andwhich ignores the level of production and thedegree of capacity utilisation is too narrow, asis an approach which disregards the time di-mension. It is true, however, that the Germaneconomy has been in a difficult phase sincethe second half of last year. This is due notleast to the fact that, given only a rathermoderate potential growth, the interaction ofseveral distorting factors can easily lead toflat growth or stagnation of GDP . However,no self-reinforcing downward stimuli are ap-parent at the moment. Despite undeniablerisks, there is a good chance of a “resump-tion” of the upward momentum. Growth im-pulses exist in the form of the tax reductionswhich came into effect on 1 January 2001and the declining inflation rate.
Clear retarding effects are being exerted at
the moment by the weakening of domesticdemand for industrial products. AlthoughGermany’s product profile is far less concen-trated than that of some other countries onthe new economy sectors telecommunica-tions and data processing, the overall slacken-ing of investment has also affected the manu-facturers of “traditional” capital goods. Thishas doubtless contributed to the fact that –as the Ifo Institute reports – the assessment ofboth the current situation and of the near-term outlook have deteriorated. According tosurveys conducted by the Centre for Euro-pean Economic Research (ZEW), the gloomier
mood in the manufacturing sector has spreadto commercial service providers. Along withthe construction-related trades, which in-clude architectural and technical planning of-fices, such segments as advertisers and planthire firms have now also become noticeablymore guarded. The same applies to IT serviceproviders, which until recently were partici-pating in the new economy boom. On bal-
Balance
Balance
Households’ assessment
of the economic situation2Business climate in the
industrial sector 1
monthly
five-month
moving averageSentiment in the
industrial sector and
among households
1Seasonally adjusted data of the Ifo Insti-
tute; western Germany. — 2Bundesbank
calculations on the basis of data from the
“Gesellschaft für Konsumforschung”.
Deutsche Bundesbank50+
40+
30+
20+
10+
0
10−
20−
30−20+
10+
0
10−
20−
30−
1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001
Drop in
domestic
demand

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
38ance, the enterprises surveyed by the Centre
for European Economic Research down-graded their turnover expectations appre-ciably and were also less optimistic abouttheir staffing requirements in the periodahead.
However, demand for industrial products ap-
pears not to have decreased further duringMay/June. It is also possible that the structuraladjustment process in the construction indus-
try, which has been going on for a number ofyears now, may be approaching its lowerlimits. At any rate, the orders received by thesector of late were distinctly higher than atthe beginning of this year, and the year-on-year decline in volume was likewise not aspronounced as before. Hence one of thebrakes on domestic growth may be slowly let-ting up. The increase in retail purchases dur-ing the spring months indicates a slight im-provement in private consumption. Anotherfactor that is having an increasingly positiveeffect is that the extra cost burden caused byhigher energy prices has now eased and thatinflationary pressures in general appear tohave passed their peak.
Households’ incomes, which have benefited
since the start of this year from the loweringof income tax rates, continued to developpositively per se in the second quarter. Ac-
cording to the incomplete figures available sofar, wages and salaries per employee, whichin seasonally adjusted terms had alreadygrown by 2% in the first quarter comparedwith the preceding three months, appear tohave expanded further. In the producing sec-tor (excluding construction and energy sup-ply) actual earnings in April and May ex-ceeded the average level of the first quarterby
34% (after eliminating seasonal fluctu-
ations). In many services industries, too, em-ployees gained pay rises in spring that hadbeen agreed last year or, in the case of banks,insurance enterprises and the retail trade, inthis year’s pay round.Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
%%
Capacity utilisation 1
0Mean 1993-2000lin. scale
Change from previous yearmonthlyOutput
1995 = 100, log. scaleOutput and utilisation
in the manufacturing sector
1Results of the Ifo business survey.
Deutsche Bundesbank88
8582
799+
6+
3+
0
3−124
121
118
115
112
109
106
103
100
1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001
Signs of a slight
stabilisationPositive income
trend

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
39On the cost side, personnel expenditure re-
mained moderate, even though the improve-ment in labour productivity is likely to havelessened for cyclical reasons. The financingterms for industrial and housing investmentas well as the good competitive position ofGerman businesses likewise support the viewthat, despite the present economic lull, keyconditions for an upturn remain in place.
Output and labour market
In the second quarter of 2001 manufacturing
output failed to match the level achieved inthe first three months. On an average of theperiod from April to June, it was 2
34% down
in seasonally adjusted terms on the first quar-ter (which, however, had marked a high pointof production activity). Although a year-on-year increase of 1% was recorded in thesecond quarter of 2001, this contrasts withover 6% for the first quarter. According to Ifosurvey data, order levels fell sharply; in sea-sonally adjusted terms they amounted to 2.8production-months in June, compared with3.0 months previously.
Production was cut back most strongly by
manufacturers of capital goods. This appliesin particular to the producers of office ma-chinery and computers and of communica-tion equipment and apparatus, which lastyear achieved record results. But output alsocontracted in the intermediate goods sectorand in the field of consumer durables. By con-trast, the production of non-durable con-sumer goods held up comparatively well.The reduction in the level of business activity
lowered the utilisation of production capacityperceptibly. According to the calculations ofthe Ifo Institute, utilisation in June fell furtherby around 1
12percentage points compared
with March; it was 2 percentage pointsbelow the level of June 2000. Measured by itslonger-term “normal level”, however, the de-gree of utilisation of fixed assets was satisfac-tory.Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
%%
Capacity utilisation 1
0lin. scale
Change from previous yearmonthlyOutput
1995 = 100, log. scale
xOutput and utilisation
in the construction sector
1Results of the Ifo business survey; western
Germany. — xProvisional pending adjust-
ment to the annual overall survey.
Deutsche Bundesbank65
60555010+
5+
0
5−
10−
15−
20−105
100
95
90
85
80
75
70
1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001Key conditions
still in place
Fall in industrial
output
Lower capacity
utilisation

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
40In the construction sector a slight improve-
ment has been evident during recent months.Construction output in May/June distinctlyoutstripped the unfavourable outturn inMarch/April. However, seasonally adjustedoutput for the second quarter as a whole was5
12% down on the first quarter, when it had
benefited not least from the mild winter wea-ther. Just how low the level of business activ-ity in the construction sector is can be seenclearly from the year-on-year decline of
around 12
34% in the second quarter.
The labour market clearly mirrored the cyclic-
al slowdown during the second quarter. Ac-cording to the (revised) calculations of theFederal Statistical Office, employment in Maywas somewhat lower than at the end of2000, when the last peak was reached. Theseasonally adjusted number of persons inwork (38.76 million) was barely 20,000 morethan a year previously. In December the year-on-year increase had amounted to 385,000persons, or 1%. Whereas the number ofpeople employed in industry showed littlechange, the level of employment in the con-struction sector fell further. In the service sec-tor, too, the recruitment pattern was re-strained.
According to the Federal Labour Office, un-
employment (after taking account of season-al fluctuations) has risen slightly from monthto month in the course of this year. From De-cember 2000 to July 2001 the seasonally ad-justed number of registered jobless increasedby around 90,000 to 3.86 million. It was thusno longer lower than the comparable previ-ous year’s level. The seasonally adjusted un-employment rate at the end of July, accordingto calculations of the Federal Labour Office,was 9.3%; measured by the standard ILOyardstick, it was 7.9%.
At 17.6%, the seasonally adjusted share of
unemployed (according to the definition usedby the Federal Labour Office) in the total (ci-vilian) labour force in eastern Germany at theend of the second quarter was almost twoQuarterly
Millions
%Thou-
sands
0Unemployment rate
(seasonally adjusted)
JulyChange from previous yearUnemployed
(seasonally adjusted)
JulyApril /
MayChange from
previous yearApril /
MayEmployed
(seasonally adjusted)Labour market
Deutsche Bundesbank12
1110
9400+
0
400−4.6
4.2
3.8
3.4800+
400+
0
400−38.8
38.4
38.0
37.637.236.8
- - 
1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001
Construction
output showing
hopeful signsEmployment
unchanged
Unemployment
somewhat
higher

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
41and a half times as high as in western Ger-
many. However, the slight cyclical rise in un-employment has so far been largely confinedto the western part of the country, which ac-counted for around three-quarters of the in-crease since the low point reached in Decem-ber. As is customary during a cyclically in-duced weakening of economic momentum,it was mostly men who lost their jobs as it isthey who are mainly employed in goods-producing professions. The increase in un-employment among women was far smaller.
The deployment of labour market policy in-
struments was reduced further on balance.Job creation schemes, in particular, werepruned back considerably. Some 240,000persons were taking part in such schemes inJuly 2001, which was 80,000 fewer thantwelve months earlier. By contrast, reintegra-tion grants and discretionary assistance bythe Federal Labour Office were both expand-ed. Around 170,000 people benefited fromthese two measures, a year-on-year increaseof almost 25,000. At 325,000, the number ofindividuals attending vocational trainingcourses was roughly the same as a year earl-ier.
Orders
Manufacturing orders, which had reached a
very large volume at the end of 2000, re-ceded significantly during the spring months,although this decline did not persist in Mayand June. However, this was insufficient toprevent a net decrease for the second quarteras a whole compared with the first threemonths of 2001. Seasonally adjusted orders
were 2% below the level during the firstquarter of this year and 1
34% down on last
year’s corresponding level, after havinggrown by 4
14% in the first quarter.
The trend in domestic orders was particularly
unfavourable. In seasonally adjusted terms,new contracts signed in the second quarterwere 3
34% below the level in the first threeSeasonally adjusted, quarterly, log. scale
DomesticForeignNew orders
Volume, 1995 = 100
TotalmonthlyDemand in the
manufacturing sector
Deutsche Bundesbank95115
100110
105
100120160
115155
105150
110145
100140
135
130
125
120165130
125
120
115
110
105
100
95
1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001Limited use of
labour market
policy
instruments
Fewer orders
received by
industry

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
42months. The year-on-year decrease was
412%, following an increase of 3% on aver-
age between January and March. While thedeclines in orders for intermediate goods andespecially for durable and non-durable con-sumer goods was moderate, manufacturersof capital goods sustained a considerabledrop. A sharply negative change in trend wasregistered for communication equipment andapparatus – which notably include portabletelephones. Whereas in the first quarter
orders in this segment had exceeded the pre-vious year’s level by around one-fifth, theyshowed a year-on-year fall of almost one-tenth in the second quarter. A similar, albeitless drastic trend, was apparent in the case ofoffice machinery and computers – especiallythe latter.
By contrast, foreign orders did not decline in
the second quarter vis-à-vis the first threemonths on a seasonally adjusted basis. Onereason for this was a number of large-scaleorders received by producers of intermediategoods and capital goods. Another reason wasa persistently buoyant demand from foreigncustomers for German motor vehicles. Thecombination of the two factors was largelyresponsible for the fact that export orders inthe three-month period April to June were1
34% higher than a year before.
The demand for construction work picked up
noticeably at the beginning of spring. Theseasonally adjusted level of incoming con-struction orders on an average of the monthsApril and May was about 5% above the first-quarter figure. However, given the very lowlevel in the first quarter – partly due, perhaps,to delays in contract awards – the statisticalrise probably overstates the underlying cyclic-al movement to some extent. Nevertheless,the number of new orders at the end of theperiod under review was slightly higher thanthe equivalent position in the second half of2000. This indicates a stabilisation of theorder situation, albeit at a very low level. Theyear-on-year decrease narrowed from 9
12%Seasonally adjusted, quarterly, log. scale
...in housing
   construction
April/
May...of the
   public sector...of industrial
   enterprisesVolume, 1995 = 100
Constuction orders...
...totalDemand for
construction work
Deutsche Bundesbank110
100
90
80
70
60
55100
90
80100
90
80
70100
90
80
70
1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001- - - - 
Construction
demand firmer

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
43in the first quarter to less than 4% in the
two-month period April/May.
The improvement in the order situation was
most marked in the commercial constructionsector, where the gap vis-à-vis the prior-yearlevel was quite small. In western Germany, towhich the positive development was con-fined, there was a greater demand (measuredby building permits granted) for the construc-tion of both offices and factories. In addition,public sector contractors, whose demand forconstruction work had been very subdued atthe beginning of 2001, awarded a largernumber of orders during the spring months.
By contrast, demand for residential construc-
tion remained at a very low ebb. It wasaround 15% below the corresponding figurein the previous year, which in turn was nearlya third lower than the level in the mid-1990s.In eastern Germany, where there is a largestock of vacant dwellings, the decrease com-pared with 2000 was twice as large. Nomajor change in the situation is on the hori-zon at the moment.
Prices and wages
The rate of increase in consumer prices,
which in May reached a year-on-year peak of3.5%, declined to 2.6% in July. In seasonallyadjusted terms, too, inflation subsided fol-lowing quite sharp surges in April and May. InJuly the movement of prices was actuallysmaller than is usual at that time of the year.This was principally due to the easing of pricepressures on the oil markets. The prices ofservices, seasonally adjusted, showed no in-
crease in July; the year-on-year rate of pricegrowth slowed marginally to 3.0% after3.1% in the previous month. By contrast,consumer prices for foodstuffs rose further.At the end of the period under review theycost 6.8% more than twelve months previ-ously, as against 2% at the start of 2001. Onthe one hand, prices increased in the wake ofthe BSE and foot-and-mouth epidemics andtemporary adverse weather conditions. Onthe other hand, there are growing signs of ageneral upward movement of prices, presum-ably intended to offset the strong downwardpressure on selling margins that prevailed in1999 and 2000.
The growth of manufactured goods prices
was fairly moderate. Factoring out the usualConsumer price index
Changes from previous year in %
2000 2001
Item 4th qtr 1st qtr 2nd qtr July
Energy sources 15.8 11.2 12.3 6.6
of which
Mineral oil prod-ucts 19.3 5.2 9.3 – 0.6
Food 1.1 2.7 6.2 6.8of which
Seasonal products 2.5 2.9 9.6 8.9
Meat and fish
products 1.5 4.6 8.4 8.9
Manufactured
goods 0.4 0.5 0.9 0.9
Services 1.5 3.0 2.9 3.0Rents 1.3 1.2 1.2 1.2
Total 2.4 2.5 3.2 2.6
Deutsche Bundesbank
Inflation past its
peak

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
44seasonal fluctuations, these goods have be-
come only slightly dearer during the past fewmonths. The year-on-year rate of price in-crease amounted to about 1%. At 1.2%,house rents went up only a little more.
The core rate of inflation, which captures the
underlying trend stripped of short-term fluc-tuations or exceptional movements, recentlyhovered around 2% – using differentmethods of calculation. Compared with theend of 2000, the core rate increased in thefirst half of the current year. In the case ofsome products this reflects the “pass-througheffect” of the rise in energy prices and of thedepreciation of the euro. To that extent thecore rate – measured against the primaryprice disturbance – also contains an “after-math component”.The international price quotations for Brent
crude oil have settled at around US$ 25 in re-cent weeks. That is a substantial easing com-pared with last year, when prices had beenclose to US$ 30. The rate of increase of im-port prices, which had accelerated sharply inthe first spring months, weakened markedlylater in the second quarter. The year-on-yearprice growth slowed from 5.1% in April to3.6% in June. Excluding energy, it amountedto 2.4% of late.
The year-on-year increase in the level of pro-
ducer prices for industrial goods reached ahigh of 5.0% in April. By June it had recededto 4.3%. Excluding energy, it was only 2.1%.Whereas the prices of intermediate goodsand capital goods both grew at a distinctlybelow-average pace of 1%, the price expan-sion in the case of consumer goods (+3.3%)was well above the mean figure. This wascaused not least by a sharp rise in prices inthe food, drink and tobacco industry.
Producer prices of agricultural products in
May – the latest month for which statisticaldata are currently available – were 8.2%ahead over twelve months. At the start of2001 the comparable rate had been only5.4%. While the annual rate of price growthof animal products eased from 13.4% inMarch to 8.9% latterly as the effects of theepidemics waned, it expanded to 6.8% inthe case of vegetable products. The principalreason for this was poor weather conditionsin early spring which caused the prices of sea-sonal produce to shoot up. In the meantime,however, the upward thrust of prices hasprobably abated.
Indicators of consumer price
movements
Change from previous year in %
2000 2001
Item4th
qtr1st
qtr2nd
qtrJune/
July
Headline rate of
inflation
Consumer prices 2.4 2.5 3.2 2.8
Statistical core rates 1
Consumer prices
excluding seasonalfood and energy 1.0 1.6 2.0 2.1
Consumer prices with
modified weights
2 1.1 1.4 1.8 1.9
5% trimmed mean 3 1.3 1.8 2.6 2.4
Weighted median 4 1.1 1.2 1.4 1.5
Mean of core rates 1.1 1.5 2.0 2.0
1Bundesbank calculations. — 2Reduction of the
weights of volatile components. — 35% exclusion of
components showing a high/low degree of price volatil-ity. — 4Price change for the component at which the
cumulative individual weights reach 50%.
Deutsche Bundesbank
Core inflation
rate higherOil prices
stabilised,
import prices
more moderate
Deceleration of
price growth in
industry
Sharp rise in
producer prices
for farm
products

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
45Construction prices showed hardly any
change in the spring months. In the face ofthe persistently adverse construction climate,prices actually decreased slightly in some seg-ments, such as the building of factories orroads. In the housing construction segment,price reductions in the basic building tradescontrasted with price increases in the finish-ing trades and peripheral construction work;the net effect of these developments was anunchanged overall price level.
New pay negotiations are due this year in
only a few industries. Last year wage negoti-ators in many sectors agreed pay settlementslasting for more than one year – in mostcases until spring 2002 – providing for pay in-creases this year averaging just over 2%. Al-though those pay agreements which weresigned this spring were somewhat higher, thenational average rise in wages and salaries for2001 as a whole should be limited (as lastyear) to around 2% – in part because ofbaseline effects.
The first major settlement in the 2001 pay
round occurred in the private banking sector.The new agreement runs for 13 months; be-sides a flat-rate payment of DM 280 for April,it provides for a linear increase of 2.8% inbasic salary from 1 May 2001. In addition, thearrangements (which had been concludedearlier) for part-time working among olderstaff and for early retirement as well as theagreement that framework rules can be re-laxed for the purpose of safeguarding jobshave been extended by a further two yearsuntil the end of 2003. The basic pay of em-ployees in the insurance industry was likewise1995 = 100, seasonally adjusted
Producer prices of agricultural
productsProducer prices
of industrial products Scale enlarged
Import priceslog. scale
Raw material prices 1Prices at various stages
of the economic process
1HWWA index of raw material prices;
Deutsche Mark basis; not seasonally ad-
justed.
Deutsche Bundesbank106
103
100
97
94
91100 100
9710310697112
100109
103106
103115118200
190
180
170
160
150
140
130
120
110
100
90
80
1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001Construction
prices
unchanged
2001 pay round
Pay settlement
in the banking
sector,...

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
46raised by 2.8%. The agreement also runs for
13 months, with a lump sum of DM 200being paid for the first month. In the retailtrade, in which pay negotiations are tradition-ally conducted on a regional basis, newagreements have been signed in virtually allparts of western Germany. They envisage auniform increase of 2.7% with a term of12 months.
Many employees are receiving additional
benefits this year stemming from agreementssigned last year in several sectors regardingpre-retirement part-time working and com-pany-based pension schemes. Extendingcompany pension schemes was an importantcomponent of this year’s pay negotiations,too. For example, employers’ representativesand trade unions in the insurance industryagreed a further initial financing by employers
in 2002 of employees’ supplementary privatepension plans up to 1% of the employee’ssalary. Employees in the retail trade, likewisefrom 2002, are to receive an annual lump-sum payment of 3300, which will embrace
the employer’s traditional contribution to em-ployee savings; the payment must be chan-nelled to the company pension scheme. Forenterprises these grants are an additional costburden which will increase with the numberof employees who opt to join the companypension scheme. This partly nullifies the im-pact of the reduction of pension-related coststo the employer brought about by the lower-ing of the contribution rate to the statutoryretirement pension scheme from 19.3% to19.1% at the start of this year.
...the insurance
industry and in
the retail trade
Greater role of
company
pension
arrangements

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
47Foreign trade and
paymentsForeign trade and current account
The cyclical downturn in the world economy
clearly left its mark on German foreign tradein the spring. Export orders received by Ger-man industry had been declining since thebeginning of the year, and although the latestfigures are somewhat more favourable, theyare distorted as a result of large individualorders and therefore can hardly be taken as asign of another turn in the trend. The exportexpectations of German industry, which wererecorded as part of the ifo business surveyand which had been falling continuously upto the end of the period under review, sup-port this view. It was not long before theslower pace of exports was reflected in exportdeliveries, which declined slightly in thesecond quarter of 2001 compared with thefirst quarter. When seasonally adjusted andcalculated at constant prices, exports fell by
12% compared with the previous quarter; the
decline was somewhat smaller at currentprices.
Trade with customers in the other euro-area
countries, which account for more than 40%of German export turnover, was the main fac-tor in shaping this trend. Although a regionalbreakdown of the trade figures is availableonly up to the end of May, these figures showa slightly declining trend in German exportsto the other euro-area countries (see thechart on page 49). However, exports to theUnited States, which had provided a particu-larly strong stimulus to German exports untilthe beginning of this year, declined evenmore strongly. This might have been partlydue to the deterioration in the US motor mar-Exports
Breakdown of
exports

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
48ket. Although large German manufacturers
have recently been reporting a relatively fa-vourable business trend in the US market, ex-ports of German vehicles to the UnitedStates, which have accounted for almost one-third of total German exports of goods to theUnited States so far this year, were in declineat the end of the period under review. Ger-many’s exports to Japan showed a markedtendency to weaken in the months under re-view. Exports to the emerging markets of
South-East Asia, which have been more se-verely affected than other regions by the sig-nificant downturn in the US economy, alsolost momentum. By contrast, exports to thecentral and east European countries in transi-tion continued to be a mainstay of Germanforeign trade. The only exports which greweven more strongly in the spring were thoseto the OPEC countries. Owing to their fairlysmall volume overall, however, these exportsplay only a minor role in Germany’s total ex-port business.
The unmistakable downturn in exports led to
a marked slowdown in German imports.After seasonal adjustment real imports like-wise declined slightly (by
14%) in the second
quarter compared with the first. However,nominal imports (at current prices) wereslightly above their level in the first quarter of2001 (1%) as import prices had risen by1
14% at the same time. This was largely due
to higher oil prices and the depreciation ofthe euro up to the end of June.
Almost all major supplier countries were af-
fected by the weaker demand. The importsfrom other euro-area countries, which – as inthe case of exports – account for about 40%of Germany’s total imports of goods sloweddown after a period of strong growth. Ger-man imports of goods from the central andeast European countries in transition also ranmore or less in line with total German importsin the second quarter whereas those from theemerging markets in South-East Asia andfrom Japan decelerated somewhat moresharply. Imports from the United States hadDM
billion 5 
billion
%Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
lin. scale
Export expectations 1Orders received
from abroad
values, 1995 = 100140
135
130
125
120145
135
130
125
120150
135
130
125
120155
135
130
125
120160
135
130
125
120
olog. scale
ExportsExport trend
1Results of the ifo business survey; bal-
ances of positive and negative company re-
ports. — oFrom 1999 all data in euro.
Deutsche Bundesbank20+
15+
10+
5+
0
5−150
145
140
135
130
125
120155160165170175310
300
290
280
270
260
250
240
230230230
1998 1999 2000 2001Imports
Breakdown of
imports

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
49also been declining considerably since the be-
ginning of the year. The US economy is notonly being affected by the downturn in de-mand from major partner countries but, fol-lowing the strong appreciation of the dollar,is probably also suffering from a loss of pricecompetitiveness. By contrast, the importsfrom the OPEC countries, which had alreadybegun to decrease in the autumn of last year,are a different matter. The trend here is large-ly determined by oil imports, whose valuehad been declining sharply until this springfollowing the fall in prices on the internation-al oil markets. Later, however, the volume ofoil imports also declined in line with theslower rate of economic growth with the re-sult that Germany’s oil bill declined further inthe last few months before this Report wentto press despite the fact that oil prices hadagain been rising in the early summer.
Owing to the relatively minor significance of
oil imports, however, this development didnot affect the trade balance. The rise in im-port figures resulting from the overall increasein import prices together with the slight re-duction in exports led to a deterioration inthe German trade balance. After seasonal ad-justment and calculated at current prices, theexport surplus in the second quarter declinedby slightly more than 31
12billion to just
under 319 billion.
The balance of other current transactions,
which for structural reasons have continuallybeen in deficit during the past few years, like-wise deteriorated in the quarter under review– worsening by more than 34 billion to pro-
duce a seasonally adjusted deficit of morethan 324 billion. This was primarily the result
of larger (net) investment income paymentsto non-residents. Larger (net) payments tonon-residents were also recorded in currenttransfers during the period under reviewwhereas in the first quarter there had beenrelatively large refunds from the EU budget.Only the deficit on service transactions withnon-residents was smaller in the second quar-ter. The outcome was that the German cur-rent account ran a seasonally adjustedsecond-quarter deficit of almost 37 billion
compared with one of just over 31 billion in
the previous quarter.3rd qtr 2000 = 100, log. scale
Total
JapanEmerging markets
in South-East AsiaOPEC
SONDJ FM A MMoving average of the previousthree months in each case
Total
Euro areaUnited States
Central and east
European countries
in transitionExports by region
Deutsche Bundesbank124
120
116
112
108
104
100
96
92116
112
108
104
100
2000 2001
Trade balance
Current
account

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
50Financial transactions
A large corporate takeover in the telecommu-
nications sector largely determined the out-come of Germany’s financial transactionswith non-residents in the second quarter of2001. This involved the acquisition of a USservice provider by a German enterprise toenable the latter to strengthen its position inthe US market. Owing to the method offinancing the takeover, which consisted pre-dominantly of an exchange of shares but in-cluded a cash payment to existing sharehold-ers, the acquisition had a discernible impacton various segments of the German financialaccount. When measured in terms of this sin-gle transaction, recent developments on theinternational financial markets such as the re-duction in interest rates on both sides of theAtlantic, the rise and fall of prices on the
share and bond markets, the shifts in ex-change rates or the consequences of the fi-nancial crises in Turkey and Argentina hadonly a comparatively small effect on the cap-ital flows to and from Germany. The outcomewas that between April and June there werenet capital exports through direct investmentand credit transactions and net capital im-ports through portfolio investment.
Direct investment during the period under re-
view was largely determined by the corporateacquisition which was mentioned above andwhich accounted for the lion’s share of Ger-man enterprises’ total outward investment of333
12billion between April and June (Janu-
ary to March: 31112billion). If this single
transaction is excluded, however, direct in-vestment flows – as has been the case forsome time – reflect the retarding influence ofthe cyclical downturn and of the weakness inthe international share markets on enter-prises’ cross-border acquisitions of participat-ing interests. This also becomes fairly clear inthe case of the direct investment of foreignfirms in Germany, which amounted to only35
12billion in the second quarter. In the first
quarter direct investment had been extremelylow (at 3
12billion). Consequently, 328 billion
net flowed out of Germany in the periodunder review as a result of growing inter-national corporate ties.
Portfolio investment, by contrast, resulted in
net capital imports of 323 billion between
April and June (compared with net capital ex-ports of 347 billion in the previous three-
month period). However, this turnaroundCurrent account
3billion; seasonally adjusted
2000 2001
Item 4th qtr 1st qtr 2nd qtr
1. Foreign trade
Exports (fob) 159.4 159.7 159.3Imports (cif) 147.4 139.2 140.6
Balance + 12.1 + 20.5 + 18.8
2. Services (balance) – 13.1 – 13.5 – 11.3
of which
Foreign travel (balance) – 8.2 – 8.1 – 8.4
3. Factor income (balance) – 0.1 – 0.5 – 4.3
of which
Investment income(balance) + 0.1 – 0.3 – 4.1
4. Current transfers (balance) – 7.1 – 6.0 – 8.6
Balance on current account
1– 10.5 – 1.1 – 6.8
1Includes supplementary trade items.
Deutsche Bundesbank
Trends in
financial trans-
actionsDirect
investment
Portfolio
investment

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
51must be seen in connection with the above-
mentioned exchange of German shares forforeign participating interests. Even withoutthis special event, though, foreign interest inGerman shares was remarkably great. On bal-ance, non-resident investors acquired 371
billion worth of such paper without the in-creased foreign demand having any effect onprices in the German share market. Thismight also have been due to the fact thatsome of the transactions resulted from optionand futures contracts and therefore did nothave an immediate effect on prices.
By contrast, foreign investors were generally
very restrained in their acquisition of interest-bearing paper on the German market andconfined themselves mainly to making shiftsin the various maturity categories. Non-residents have been reducing their holdingsof money market paper, i.e. debt certificateswith a maturity of up to one year, since themiddle of last year. They reduced these againin the second quarter, this time by 314 billion
net, while investing in (somewhat) longer-term bank bonds ( 313
12billion). In view of
the temporary interest rate rise in the spring,however, they probably lengthened the ma-turity of their portfolios only slightly. This issuggested by the fact that German credit in-stitutions have been issuing more paper withmaturities of between one and two yearssince the beginning of the year and that for-eign investors have evidently been acquiringsome of this paper.
As in the previous two quarters, however,
sales by non-residents and redemptions pre-dominated in the case of public bonds. All inMajor items of the balance
of payments
5billion
2000 2001
Item 2nd qtr 1st qtr 2nd qtr
I. Current account
1. Foreign trade
Exports (fob) 146.9 159.6 160.8Imports (cif) 130.8 139.8 141.0
Balance + 16.2 + 19.8 + 19.8
2. Services (balance) – 11.7 – 12.7 – 11.33. Factor income (balance) + 1.5 – 1.0 – 1.84. Current transfers (balance) – 6.5 – 5.3 – 7.6
Balance on current account
1 –1 . 6–0 . 8–2 . 3
II. Balance of capital transfers 2 – 0.3 + 0.6 – 0.6
III. Financial account 3
Direct investment + 2.5 – 11.2 – 28.0
Portfolio investment + 52.2 – 47.2 + 22.9
German investmentabroad – 33.4 – 42.5 – 44.7Foreign investment inGermany + 85.6 – 4.7 + 67.6
Financial derivatives + 1.6 + 1.1 + 2.6Credit transactions
4 – 32.2 + 48.8 – 4.6
Overall balance on financial
account + 24.1 – 8.4 – 7.1
IV. Change in the foreign reserves
at transaction values(increase: –)
5 +2 . 4+4 . 1+2 . 0
V. Balance of unclassifiable
transactions – 24.5 + 4.6 + 7.9
1Includes supplementary trade items. — 2Including the acquisi-
tion/disposal of non-produced non-financial assets. — 3Net capital
exports: –. — 4Including Bundesbank investment and other public
and private investment. — 5Excluding allocation of SDRs and
changes due to value adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankForeign invest-
ment in ...
... German
shares
... German debt
certificates

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
52all, these amounted to 3212billion between
April and June compared with 311 billion in
the three-month period before. Another rea-son for non-residents’ comparatively smallpurchases of German government bondssince the beginning of monetary union mightbe that general government has greatly re-duced the issue of such paper.
Investment by German residents in the for-
eign share and bond markets also increasedsignificantly in the spring of 2001. BetweenApril and June they purchased securities is-sued by foreign borrowers worth 344
12bil-
lion net compared with 34212billion in the
previous quarter. Most of the investors wereGerman credit institutions and investmentcompanies although in the case of the latterthe inflows of funds fell dramatically in theperiod under review (on a quarterly compari-son from 324
12billion to 3812billion). The
bulk of the total sum invested by Germanresidents again flowed into foreign bondsand notes ( 328 billion compared with 331
billion). Although German investors con-tinued to favour euro-denominated debt cer-tificates, they also acquired a small amount offoreign currency bonds for the first time in awhile ( 32 billion).
Domestic demand for foreign shares likewise
showed a slight recovery in the period underreview. Despite falling corporate profits andincreasing signs of a downturn in the worldeconomy, German residents – essentially insti-tutional investors – invested 311 billion in
foreign shares between April and June andtherefore about twice as much as in the previ-ous three months. At the same time, GermanFinancial transactions
5billion, net capital exports: –
2000 2001
Item 2nd qtr 1st qtr 2nd qtr
1. Direct investment + 2.5 – 11.2 – 28.0
German investment
abroad – 38.2 – 11.6 – 33.5Foreign investmentin Germany + 40.7 + 0.4 + 5.5
2. Portfolio investment + 52.2 – 47.2 + 22.9
German investment
abroad – 33.4 – 42.5 – 44.7
Shares – 18.8 – 5.1 – 11.1
Investment fundcertificates – 7.1 – 5.8 – 4.7Bonds and notes – 8.8 – 31.2 – 28.0Money market paper + 1.4 – 0.4 – 0.8
Foreign investment
in Germany + 85.6 – 4.7 + 67.6
Shares + 42.8 + 4.6 + 70.8
Investment fundcertificates + 2.1 – 1.9 – 0.6Bonds and notes + 26.8 + 8.4 + 11.1Money market paper + 13.9 – 15.8 – 13.8
3. Financial derivatives
1 +1 . 6+1 . 1+2 . 6
4. Credit transactions – 31.6 + 49.0 – 4.3
Credit institutions – 0.6 + 61.1 – 35.0
Long-term – 5.1 – 10.2 – 0.2
Short-term + 4.4 + 71.3 – 34.8
Enterprises and indivi-
duals – 0.8 – 14.3 + 8.1
Long-term – 1.3 + 4.1 + 1.4
Short-term + 0.5 – 18.4 + 6.7
General government – 4.4 + 18.0 + 3.5
Long-term – 0.4 – 0.4 + 0.1
Short-term – 4.0 + 18.4 + 3.4
Bundesbank – 25.8 – 15.8 + 19.1
5. Other investment – 0.6 – 0.2 – 0.36. Balance of all statisti-
cally recorded capitalflows + 24.1 – 8.4 – 7.1
Memo item
Change in the foreignreserves at transactionvalues (increase: –)
2 +2 . 4+4 . 1+2 . 0
1Securitised and non-securitised options and financial
futures contracts. — 2Excluding allocation of SDRs and
changes due to value adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankGerman invest-
ment in ...
... foreign
bonds and
notes
... foreign
shares

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
53savers purchased certificates of foreign in-
vestment funds worth 3412billion (January
to March: 36 billion); presumably these funds
likewise mostly invest abroad.
The operations of non-banks resulted in a net
inflow of funds in statistically recorded non-securitised credit transactions during theperiod under review. For example, Germanenterprises and individuals imported 38 bil-
lion net because, firstly, they further reducedtheir balances with foreign banks and, sec-ondly, they took up loans abroad; it is likelythat the financing of the aforementionedcash payment to existing foreign shareholdersin connection with the corporate takeover inthe telecommunications sector played amajor role here. General government likewisedrew to a limited extent on foreign funds(33
12billion).
However, the non-securitised external trans-
actions of the banking system, which for themost part has ultimately to be seen as thecounterpart of the other foreign payments re-corded in the balance of payments, were ofgreater significance in terms of value. In thecourse of these external transactions, 335
billion net was exported by Germany’s creditinstitutions, a development which is reflectedin a corresponding reduction in their short-term external liabilities, which had previouslybeen rising sharply. By contrast, the Bundes-bank recorded inflows of foreign funds(amounting to 319 billion), mainly as a result
of the settlement of TARGET balances withinthe ESCB.The foreign reserves of the Bundesbank, the
change in which is not included in the figuresmentioned, declined – at transaction values –by a further 32 billion in the three months
from April to June; these reserves had alreadyfallen by 34 billion in the first quarter of
2001. However, this transaction-related de-cline is not reflected in the reserve holdings,which are valued at current market prices andexchange rates. At just under 396 billion, the
market value of the foreign reserves at theend of June 2001 was actually about 32 bil-
lion above the level at the end of December2000. This was due mainly to the appreci-ation of the dollar in the period under reviewand therefore – in euro terms – the higherprice of gold.Balances, net capital exports: −
 5 
billion
− 160
− 180Direct investment
Portfolio investmentFinancial transactions
with non-residents
Deutsche Bundesbank120+
100+
80+
60+
40+
20+
0
20−
40−
60−
80−
2000 2001... foreign
investment
fund certifi-
cates
Credit
transactions ...
... of non-banks
... of banksForeign
reserves of the
Bundesbank

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
54Public financeCentral, regional and local authorities
Current developmentsIn the second quarter of 2001, the central
and regional authorities (the figures for thelocal authorities are not yet known) reached afinancial surplus of 31
12billion. In compari-
son with the previous year this implies a sig-nificant decrease of 33 billion. This was due
to a drop in receipts (2
12%). In the second
quarter of the year, the distributed Bundes-bank profit was 34
12billion more than in
2000. This could not, however, compensatefor the pronounced decline in tax revenue.Compared with the preceding year, expend-iture increased only slightly.
In 2001 as a whole, too – despite a sharp in-
crease in proceeds from the sale of participat-ing interests – the central, regional and localauthorities’ budgetary position will be less fa-vourable than last year when a deficit of 334
billion (after adjustment for the UMTS pro-ceeds amounting to just under 351 billion)
was recorded. The significant pressure on thebudgetary situation is due to the revenueshortfalls following the tax reform. On theother hand, additional cyclical burdens due tothe decline in economic growth should re-main low.
After a marginal increase in the first quarter,
tax receipts
1in the second quarter were al-
most 7% lower than the corresponding fig-ure for the previous year. The revenue short-
1Including the EU shares in German tax revenue but ex-
cluding receipts from local authority taxes, which are not
yet known.Underlying
trends
Tax receipts in
the second
quarter ...

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
55falls caused by the tax reform are having a
greater influence on the trend in direct taxrevenue now than they did at the beginningof the year. Indirect taxes also declined, incomparison with the first quarter.
Of the direct taxes, corporation tax suffered a
severe slump in receipts. With 3
12billion it
only yielded just under 6% of the previousyear’s figure. On account of the tax reform,corporate prepayments have been consider-ably reduced and retrospective payments forprevious years have also sharply declined. Fi-nally, corporation tax revenue also fell asprofits retained in earlier years were distrib-uted, thereby reducing this tax burden. At thesame time, this factor was reflected in a fur-ther sharp revenue increase of 29% in non-assessed earnings tax. The receipts fromassessed income tax declined considerably(– 22%). This was due mainly to lower retro-spective payments for previous years. Untilnow, despite the tax reform, prepayments, bycomparison, have only been reduced slightly.Considering the significant tax cuts, the de-cline in wage tax (of slightly under 1%) hasalso remained particularly moderate.
Low revenue in the second quarter was also
due to a marked decline in turnover tax re-ceipts of just over 3%. Apparently this wasmainly because the capital spending on hous-ing construction – which is subject to tax-ation – was much lower than in the sameperiod in 2000. Government investment alsohad a dampening effect on turnover tax re-ceipts, whilst nominal private consumptionhas increased.
2Despite the introduction of a
further stage of the ecological tax reform atthe beginning of 2001, mineral oil tax still
only recorded a growth of 112%. This was
mainly attributable to consumer restraint fol-lowing the sharp price increase on mineral oilproducts.
The first half of the year saw a greater reduc-
tion in tax receipts (– 3
12% ) than – accord-
ing to the official tax estimate in May – wasexpected for the whole year (– 2
12%). The
figure for 2001 may therefore be lower thanestimated, even though, from the presentperspective, the shortfalls are likely to remainmoderate. The biggest losses may be record-Change from previous year
%
Tax receipts, total 1
1st hf 2nd hf 1st hf 2nd hf1st
qtr2nd
qtrTax revenue *
*Out-turn in Germany as a whole. —
1Including EU shares in German tax rev-
enue, but excluding receipts from local
authority taxes, which are not yet known
for the last quarter recorded.
Deutsche Bundesbank8+
6+
4+
2+
0
2−
4−
6−
8−
1999 2000 2001
2In the case of turnover tax trends, it should generally be
borne in mind that the revenue from this tax constitutes
only about one quarter of the gross revenue accruing
from the taxation of turnover before input tax deduc-
tions. Due to the large volume of input tax deductions,
any changes in the trends can have a strong impact on
net revenue.... and in 2001
as a whole

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
56ed on turnover tax, which in the first half of
the year yielded just over 2% less than a yearbefore. In addition, corporation tax revenuedecreased more substantially in the first halfof the year than was forecast for the wholeyear in the tax estimate. However, increaseddistributions of retained profit, concernedwith higher revenue from non-assessed taxon earnings, will thus provide a counterbal-ance. Furthermore, there is a chance thatwage tax revenue – after rising
12% in the
first half of the year despite the tax reform –will be higher than was expected in May.
In the second quarter, the Federal Govern-
ment saw a deficit of just under 32
12billion,
following a surplus of just over 31 billion in
the same period last year. This was due to thedecline in receipts – totalling 6% – influencedby the tax revenue trends. The Federal Gov-
ernment’s spending was moderately reduced.For instance, the interest payments after re-demptions from the UMTS proceeds werejust over 5% lower than in the second quar-ter of the preceding year. Labour market re-lated expenditure has, by comparison, risen.Admittedly, expenditure for unemploymentassistance and for the Federal Government’sactive labour market policy was down on lastyear’s figure. The Federal Labour Office, bycontrast, required significantly higher liquidityassistance.
For this year as a whole, a decrease in the
deficit by 31
12billion to 32212billion is pro-
vided for in the Federal Government budgetplan. The prospective trend for total revenueshould by and large run according to estima-tions. Lower transfers to the EU (which arededucted from the receipts) should largelycompensate for unexpected tax shortfalls.Non-tax receipts could also be higher thanexpected. On the expenditure side, labourmarket-induced costs, in particular, will ex-ceed budget appropriations. As with the sub-sidies for the Federal Labour Office, paymentsfor unemployment assistance will also beconsiderably higher than planned. Spendingon other items in the Federal Governmentbudget is, however, likely to decrease. Thisapplies, amongst others, to interest pay-ments. This was partly due – in the first halfof the year – to the topping up of securitiesissues because of the drop in interest rates re-sulting in a considerable premium (which isdeducted from the interest payments for thisyear). Calls on funds put aside for investmentgrants may also be lower than planned. Final-Trends in the revenue from major taxes
Revenue
in5billion
1st half-year
Type of tax 2001 2000Change
frompre-viousyearin %
Wage tax 62.2 61.9 + 0.4
Assessed income tax 0.8 3.9 – 78.6Corporation tax 2.1 13.8 – 84.7Turnover tax 68.8 70.3 – 2.2
Deutsche Bundesbank
Federal Govern-
ment in the
second
quarter ...... and in 2001
as a whole

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
57ly, expenditure on guarantees may also be
lower than expected. At this point, it seemstherefore possible for the Federal Govern-ment to keep net borrowing within thebudgeted amount.
In the second quarter, special funds reached a
surplus of 35
12billion, against 31 billion in
2000. This owed to the considerably higherdistribution of the Bundesbank profit. Theportion in excess of 33.6 billion (DM 7 billion)
was transferred, as in previous years, for debtredemption of the Redemption Fund for In-herited Liabilities. Therefore, almost 35 bil-
lion accrued to this special fund, comparedwith just under 3
12billion in the preceding
year.
The Länder Governments saw a budgetary
deficit of 3112billion in the second quarter,
compared with a surplus of 3212billion in
the same period last year. As was the casewith the Federal Government, revenue de-creased sharply while the volume of expend-iture hardly changed. Many Länder Govern-ments therefore resorted to a budget freeze.In 2001 as a whole, the budget deficits,which (based on the quarterly figures shownhere) in the preceding year reached just over310 billion, will sharply increase as a result of
the tax reform. They could even so much asdouble if the excess burdens – especially thatof the critical trend in the shareholdings ofthe Land of Berlin – fully materialise.
There are signs that the local authorities’ fis-
cal balance will also become more unfavour-able this year. In the first quarter, the deficitreached 33
12billion, compared with justover 32 billion a year ago. It is true that the
decline in tax revenue by nearly 412% could
partly be offset by additional revenue fromother sources. The increase in expenditure byalmost 3
12% is, however, putting pressure
on the budget. Along with personnel expend-iture and other operating expenses, social se-curity costs also markedly increased. By con-trast, spending on fixed capital formationwent down somewhat as the result of an-other sharp decrease in capital spending inthe new Länder. If the increase in expenditureis not successfully mitigated, 2001 as a wholewill see quite a significant deficit, following arecent surplus of 32 billion.
The indebtedness of the central and regional
authorities decreased – mainly through thetransfer of the Bundesbank profit – by just 5 
billion
I II III IV I II1The Federal Government’s
financial balance
1 Excluding UMTS proceeds.
Deutsche Bundesbank2+
0
2−
4−
6−
8−
10−
12−
14−
16−
2000 2001Special funds
Länder
Governments
Local
authorities
Indebtedness

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
58over 36 billion in the second quarter. Whilst
net liabilities in the money market wentdown by almost 313
1/C252billion, more than
37 billion net was raised in the capital mar-
ket. The amount outstanding of short andmedium-term securities, in particular, rose.Net redemptions were concentrated on theFederal Government,
3which reduced its total
debt by just over 38 billion. Furthermore, the
“German Unity” Fund was able to repay 33/C254
billion of its debt. By contrast, the L/C228nder
Governments stepped up their net liabilitiesby32
1/C252billion. The indebtedness of the local
authorities should hardly have changed at allin the second quarter.Outlook
The Federal draft budget for 2002 and the
medium-term financial plan until 2005 wereapproved by the Federal Cabinet in June thisyear. The deficit in the next year is to remainvirtually unchanged from the plan for 2001;this means that it will be some 31 billion
higher than stated in last year’ s financialplan.
4Revenue is to increase by 1.9%, with
tax receipts going up by 3.9%. These figuresare generally based on the recent tax esti-mate. Additionally this includes, on the onehand – following a decision made by the Fed-eral Constitutional Court – the required rise infamily assistance which will result in a revenueshortfall of 31.1 billion and, on the other
hand, measures combatting turnover taxfraud which should generate additional rev-enue of 31.2 billion. At the moment, the un-
certainties about the tax revenue of the Fed-eral Government tend to predominate. Thus,the result for the current year may bring anunfavourable baseline effect in its wake. TheFederal Government, in its draft budget, alsostill expects to halve the burdens created bythe intended increase in child benefits, while,in the meantime, the L/C228nder Governmentshave successfully demanded a higher sharefrom the Federal Government. Besides this,additional revenue from the improved meas-ures against turnover tax fraud can only bequantified with great uncertainty. In the caseNet borrowing in the market by the
central, regional and local authorities
5billion
of which
Period TotalSecuri-
ties 1Loansagainstborrow-ers’notes
2MemoitemAcquisi-tion bynon-resi-dents
2000
p + 16.1 + 29.1 – 11.8 + 18.9
of which
1st qtr + 14.0 + 7.5 + 6.5 + 0.32nd qtr – 1.3 + 3.8 – 5.1 + 13.13rd qtr + 9.1 + 4.8 + 5.4 + 7.74th qtr
p – 5.7 + 13.1 – 18.6 – 2.2
2001
1st qtr p – 10.4 + 13.9 + 9.7 – 11.8
2nd qtr pe – 6.2 + 7.6 – 13.8 ...
1Excluding equalisation claims. — 2Including cash ad-
vances and money market borrowing.
Deutsche Bundesbank
3Including the debt it has assumed, especially that of the
Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities.
4By contrast, net borrowing is to be reduced from 322.3
billion in 2001 to 321.1 billion in 2002 as envisaged in
last year’s financial plan. The difference between the def-
icit trends lies in the significantly higher appropriation for
the seigniorage ( 31.2 billion) in connection with the
introduction of the euro.Federal budget
for 2002

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
59of privatisation proceeds, a volume of 35 bil-
lion is planned for 2002, against the sum of38 billion assumed for this year.
In 2002, expenditure is expected to rise by
1.6% ( 34 billion) compared with the figure
budgeted for in 2001. 32
12billion of this
amount will be attributable to the increasedgrant for the pension insurance scheme –financed by another rise in “ecology tax”. Inaddition, the Federal Railways Fund will re-quire 32
12billion more than it did this year
because the same amount of extraordinaryrevenue budgeted for this year from the pro-ceeds of asset sales will fail to accrue. It mustalso be noted, however, that the increase inchildren’s benefit in the budgetary definitionis not reflected in an increase in spending,but will operate as a tax reduction factor onthe receipt side. As far as labour market ex-penditure is concerned, no more grants forthe Federal Labour Office and almost un-changed unemployment assistance paymentshave been budgeted. According to the plan,investment expenditure will decrease by 31
12
billion to 32812billion. This concerns,
amongst others, investment grants to theLänder Governments, calls on guarantees,and construction work linked to the Govern-ment’s move to Berlin.
Regarding the deficit trends, the medium-
term financial plan (see table above) largelycorresponds to last year’s figures. In light ofthe expected shortfalls following the latesttax estimate, it is now necessary to greatly re-duce the envisaged growth in spending. Itshould amount to an annual average of0.9% between 2003 and 2005. Therefore,the volume of expenditure in 2003 and 2004
will be 34 billion and 35 billion, respectively,
lower than that of the previous financial plan.The aim to be able to finance the Federalbudget in 2006 without incurring debt hasbeen retained.
The draft budget for 2002 signifies a contri-
bution to consolidation. Admittedly, the def-icit will not be reduced any further. However,the proceeds of asset sales (including the Fed-eral Railways Fund) – used for funding – willbe more than 35 billion lower than this year’s
budgeted figure so that financing from un-sustainable sources of revenue will be re-duced considerably. The trend stated indeedrequires – in particular for the medium term –a consequent retrenchment course with re-The Federal Government’s financial
planning over the medium term
5billion
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005
Expenditure 243.9 247.8 249.4 251.9 254.4
of which
Investments 29.6 28.3 27.7 26.2 26.2
Revenue 221.4 225.5 233.0 241.3 249.0
of which
Taxes 196.6 204.2 212.3 223.1 227.9Privatisationsales 8.0
1 5.0 5.1 5.4 5.7
Deficit – 22.5 – 22.3 – 16.4 – 10.6 – 5.4Seigniorage 0.1 1.2 0.9 0.4 0.4
Net borrowing 22.3 21.1 15.5 10.2 5.0Memo item
Change in
expenditurein % – 0.2 + 1.6 + 0.6 + 1.0 + 1.0
1Excluding proceeds of the federal Railways fund’s as-
set sales amounting to approximately 52
12billion.
Deutsche Bundesbank
Medium-term
financial planConsolidation
requires tight
spending limits

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
60strictions on benefits, especially since the rev-
enue trend is subject to some risk.
Social security funds
In the second quarter of 2001, the wage and
salary earners’ pension insurance schemeended up close to balance, following a deficitof3
12billion in the same period last year.
Despite the lowering of the contribution ratefrom 19.3% to 19.1% at the beginning ofthe year, contribution receipts experienced afairly sharp increase, at 2%. If the contribu-tion rate had not been lowered, the increasewould have been 3%. The grants from theFederal budget which were funded by the“ecology tax” rose much more substantially.Total receipts increased by 3
12%. Expend-iture went up by almost 3% in the second
quarter, with pension expenditure growing by2
12%. This can be put down to the increase
in the number of pensions by approximately2% and the mid-year rise in 2000 in pensionsby 0.6% in line with the rate of inflation.
In the first half of this year, the deficit was
just over 31
12billion and thus just as large as
last year. On 1 July 2001, pensions wereraised for the first time using the amendedpension adjustment formula
5adopted as part
of the recent reform. Following this, therewas a rise of 1.9% and 2.1% in the old andnew Länder respectively. Due to the higherpension adjustments this year, a steeper risein expenditure and – in comparison with lastyear – more adverse fiscal balances are to beexpected in the second half of 2001. The re-quired reserves of one month’s expenditure atthe end of the year could nevertheless bereached because the book value of the Fed-eral Insurance Office for Salaried Employees(BfA) was raised by just over 3
12billion in
February.
In the second quarter, the Federal Labour Of-
fice experienced a deficit of just over 31 bil-
lion against just under 312billion for the
same period in 2000. An increase in receiptsof slightly more than
12% was accompaniedQuarterly
 5 
billion
 5 
billion
Surplus (+) or deficit (−)Revenue
ExpenditureWage and salary earners’
pension insurance scheme
Deutsche Bundesbank6+
4+
2+
0
2−58
56
54
52
50
48
1999 2000 2001
5According to this formula, pensions are adjusted to cor-
respond to the rise in the average gross renumeration for
the previous year less contributions to the pension insur-
ance scheme and less a notional percentage paid as con-
tributions into a supplementary private pension plan. The
annual average contribution rate dropped from 19.7%
in 1999 to 19.3% last year. The wage and salary increase
per employee was 1.4% in the West and 1.6% in the
East. Only from 2003 will the contributions paid into pri-
vate pension plans cause the pension adjustment to be
just over a 0.6 percentage point lower.Statutory
pension
insurance
schemeFederal Labour
Office

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
61by a rise in expenditure of almost 712%. The
weak trend of receipts is, however, not re-lated to contributions – which with a growthof just under 3
12% have considerably picked
up – but rather due to the fact that since thestart of 2001 the structural adjustment meas-ures for the recipients of unemployment as-sistance are no longer paid from the Federalbudget. The Federal Labour Office also re-ceived considerably fewer payments from theEuropean Social Fund.
The expenditure on unemployment benefits
in the second quarter exceeded the corres-ponding figure of the previous year by justunder 7
12%. This sharp rise was due to the
stipulation that – since the middle of lastyear – one-off payments be taken into ac-count when determining claims for wagesubstitutes, thus the payments per un-employed person increased significantly. Be-cause the decline in the unemployment ratehas increasingly slowed down in comparisonwith last year, the trend of the labour markethas provided only slight relief. Admittedly, inthe second quarter, the active labour marketpolicy received 5
12% more funding, but still
the rate of increase slowed down. Within thistotal increase, there was a rise of 14% forvocational training and further trainingschemes, which owes much to the fact thatthe Federal Government transferred the spe-cial programme for the reintegration of thelong-term unemployed from its own budgetto that of the Federal Labour Office. By con-trast, job creation schemes received 21%less. An extremely steep (41%) drop wasseen in expenditure for structural adjustmentmeasures – which have particular significance
in the new Länder.
6
By the middle of the year, the Federal LabourOffice deficit had reached a level of 32
12bil-Quarterly
 5 
billion
 5 
billion
Surplus (+) or deficit (−)Expenditure, total
Revenue 1
Expenditure on...
...unemployment benefits and
   short-time working benefits
...vocational
   training 2Federal Labour Office
1Excluding Federal Government liquidity
assistance. — 2Including job creation meas-
ures.
Deutsche Bundesbank1+
0
1−
2−14
13
12
11
10
98
7
65
4
3
1999 2000 2001
6The Federal Labour Office can award grants for work
on the improvement of the environment, social services,
mass sport, cultural activities, residential amenities, the
economic infrastructure and preservation of historical
monuments. In the new Länder (including Berlin), indus-
trial and commercial companies can also claim these
grants.Outlook

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
62lion, compared with just over 31 billion last
year. It would seem possible – mainly due tothe unfavourable labour market trend – thatthe demand for grants this year will exceedthe30.6 billion predicted in the budgetary
plan. However, neither is a substantial in-crease on the mid-year deficit figure to be ex-pected, because the decision to take into ac-count one-off payments when determiningunemployment benefits will bring about veryfew additional burdens, compared with theprevious year. Due to the worsening financialposition this year, the scope for an earlylowering of the contribution rate is ratherlimited.
For statutory health insurance funds, only the
data for the first quarter are available. Theyshow that the deficit rose by 3
14billion, com-
pared with the previous year, to just over 31
billion. However, eastern and western Ger-many show different pictures. While the def-icit grew by almost 3
12billion to slightly
more than 31 billion in the old Länder, the
health insurance institutions in the new Län-der in fact saw a small surplus following apractically balanced result in 2000. The eastGerman health insurance funds are profitingfrom their increasing inclusion in the all-Ger-man risk structure compensation scheme.Furthermore, at the beginning of the year,the income limit for the assessment of contri-butions of the statutory health insurance inthe new Länder was raised to the same levelas that in western Germany.
These diverse trends are also reflected in the
contribution rates. In the first quarter, theaverage contribution rate in the new Länderwas lowered by almost 0.2% to just under
13.7%, while in the West the figure re-mained virtually unaltered (13.5%). The con-tribution rate increases announced since thenare initially confined to some individual westGerman health insurance institutions, whichare in particular affected by an exodus ofpeople with a “favourable risk structure”. Inaddition to the current steeper rise in expend-iture driven mainly by pharmaceuticals, struc-tural differences are also emerging betweenthe various health insurance institutions. Theconsequence may be an increasing diver-gence between contribution rates. However,there are already efforts under way to furtherdevelop the burden-sharing scheme betweenhealth insurance institutions.
Outlook for the general government sec-
tor as a whole
In 2001 as a whole, the deficits for the gen-
eral government sector – in ESA definition onwhich the criteria of the Maastricht treaty arealso based – will be considerably larger thanin 2000, when they totalled (excluding UMTSproceeds) 1.0% of GDP . This is due to the im-pact of the tax reform, which will lead on bal-ance to a shortfall in receipts of just over 1%of GDP . There will, by contrast, be an increasein energy taxation (of 0.1% of GDP). Thesereceipts will, however, be transferred to thestatutory pension insurance scheme so thatthe social security contributions will drop ac-cordingly.
The German stability programme for 2001
aims for a deficit ratio of around 1
12%. TheStatutory
health
insurance funds
Contribution
rate trendsDeficit increase
through tax
reform

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
63tight limits on the expenditure increase
are partly to compensate for the deficit-increasing impact of the tax reform. Even so,the planned growth in deficit represents anexpansionary fiscal policy stance in terms ofbusiness cycle policy, this is now to be regard-ed differently to last autumn when it was stillwidely criticised as pro-cyclical.
As things now stand, the government deficit
ratio could reach 2% (and slightly more) forthis year. The margin for the absolute deficitof between DM 65 billion and DM 75 billionstated in the stability programme has alreadyslightly exceeded the rounded target value of1
12%. Compared with original premises,
overall economic conditions are also more un-favourable now. Even so, the cyclical burdenson the general government budgets are likelyto remain limited this year. In addition, theseburdens will probably be accompanied by re-lief in other areas. Tax shortfalls, comparedwith plans, are likely to be moderate al-though the expectations for real aggregategrowth have worsened. It should be notedthat tax revenue trends are influenced bynominal economic growth which has beendecelerating less severely than real growth.The official tax estimate in May showed lossesof revenue of 33
12billion, most of which,
however will be offset by lower payments tothe EU. The slower economic activity is pri-marily reflected in turnover tax and, partly –with a lag – in profit-related taxes. Bycontrast – in the light of a continuously solidgrowth in gross wages and salaries – wagetax and the receipts of the social securityfunds show a fairly positive trend. On the ex-penditure side, there will also be additional la-bour market-related expenses, which, how-
ever, will be offset by savings in other sectors.
Next year, more buoyant economic growth is
generally expected again. A credit-financedactive governmental business cycle policy –such as, for instance, the early implemen-tation of the next few stages of the tax re-form – would, therefore, not be appropriatein the expected economic situation. It is alsoworth taking into account the bad experienceof similar measures in the past not least be-cause of “bad timing”.
In general, fiscal policy, like monetary policy,
should provide medium and long-term reli-able underlying conditions for private eco-nomic agents. A good start would be a tax re-form implemented in stages, which aims tolower the existing heavy tax and social secur-ity contributions burden while at the sametime reducing the sizeable deficits through acut-back in government spending. Since thedeficit ratio will rise again this year, furthercredit-financed tax decreases – which ultim-ately mean a relocation of financial burdensto the future and would lead to a significantrelaxation of consolidation efforts – wouldnot be suitable to enhance sustained eco-nomic activity. The hope for the implementa-tion of short and medium-term self-financingeffects of deficit-increasing tax cuts shouldnot be a central element of a fiscal strategythat is geared towards consolidation.
If Germany, as one of the biggest countries of
the euro area, were to relax its fiscal policystance in the next few years, the path to-wards medium-term balanced budgets or sur-
Limited cyclical
burden on the
general govern-
ment budgetsActive business
cycle policy in-
appropriate

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
64pluses – on which the EU countries agreed in
the European Stability and Growth Pact –would be highly jeopardised, particularly asother countries would be likely to follow thisexample. This would lead to the markets los-
ing trust in a long-term sustainable fiscal pol-icy for the euro area and have adverse effectson interest rates and overall economic trends.

Statistical
SectionDeutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
1*

ContentsI. Key economic data for European
monetary union
1. Monetary developments and interest
rates 6*
2. Foreign trade and payments 6*3. General economic indicators 7*
II. Overall monetary survey in the
European monetary union
1. The money stock and its counterparts 8*
2. Consolidated balance sheet of mon-
etary financial institutions (MFIs) 10*
3. Banking system’s liquidity position 14*
III. Consolidated financial statement
of the Eurosystem
1. Assets 16*
2. Liabilities 18*
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary
financial institutions (excluding theBundesbank) in Germany 20*
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks
(MFIs) in Germany, by category ofbanks 24*
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-à-vis residents 26*
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents 28*Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
2*

5. Lending of banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) 30*
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic enterprises and individuals,housing loans, sectors of economicactivity 32*
7. Deposits of domestic
non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs)in Germany 34*
8. Deposits of domestic individuals and
non-commercial organisations atbanks (MFIs) in Germany 36*
9. Deposits of domestic public author-
ities at banks (MFIs) in Germany, bycreditor group 36*
10. Savings deposits and bank savings
bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germanysold to non-banks (non-MFIs) 38*
11. Debt securities and money market
paper outstanding of banks (MFIs)in Germany 38*
12. Building and loan associations (MFIs)
in Germany 39*
13. Assets and liabilities of the foreign
branches and foreign subsidiaries ofGerman banks (MFIs) 40*
V. Minimum reserves
1. Reserve ratios 42*
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany up
to the end of 1998 42*
3. Reserve maintenance in the Euro-
pean monetary union 42*VI. Interest rates
1. ECB interest rates 43*
2. Discount and lombard rates of the
Bundesbank 43*
3. Base rate per Discount Rate Transi-
tion Act 43*
4. Eurosystem monetary policy opera-
tions allotted through tenders 43*
5. Money market rates, by month 44*6. Euro area retail bank interest rates 44*7. Lending and deposit rates of banks
(MFIs) in Germany 45*
8. Selected central bank rates abroad 47*9. Money market rates abroad 47*
VII. Capital market
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities
and shares in Germany 48*
2. Sales of debt securities issued by
borrowers domiciled in Germany 49*
3. Outstanding amount of debt secur-
ities issued by borrowers domiciledin Germany 50*
4. Circulation of shares issued by resi-
dents of Germany 50*
5. Yields and indices on German
securities 51*
6. Sales and purchases of investment
fund certificates in Germany 51*Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
3*

VIII. Public finance in Germany
1. Finances of the public sector 52*
2. Finances of the Federal
Government, Länder Governmentsand local authorities 52*
3. Finances of the Government
in the national accounts 53*
4. Tax revenue of the central,
regional and local authorities 53*
5. Tax revenue, by type 54*6. Individual taxes of the Federal
Government, Länder Governmentsand local authorities 54*
7. Indebtedness of the public sector 55*8. Changes in public sector
indebtedness 57*
9. Loans raised by public authorities
against borrowers’ notes 57*
10. Indebtedness of the Federal
Government 58*
11. Federal Government borrowing
in the market 58*
12. Receipts, expenditure and assets of
the wage and salary earners’pension insurance funds 59*
13. Receipts and expenditure of the
Federal Labour Office 59*
IX. Economic conditions
1. Origin and expenditure of
domestic product, distribution ofnational income 60*
2. Output in the producing sector 61*3. Orders received by the
manufacturing sector 62*
4. Orders received by construction 63*5. Retail turnover 63*6. Labour market 64*7. Prices 65*
8. Households’ income 66*9. Pay rates and actual earnings 66*
X. Foreign trade and payments
1. Major items of the balance of pay-
ments of the European monetaryunion 67*
2. Major items of the balance of pay-
ments of the Federal Republic ofGermany 68*
3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the
Federal Republic of Germany, bygroup of countries and country 69*
4. Services and factor income of the
Federal Republic of Germany 70*
5. Current transfers of the Federal
Republic of Germany 70*
6. Capital transfers 70*7. Financial account of the Federal
Republic of Germany 71*
8. External position of the Bundesbank 72*9. External position of the Bundesbank
in the European monetary union 72*
10. Assets and liabilities of enterprises
in Germany (other than banks)vis-à-vis non-residents 73*
11. Deutsche Mark exchange rates for
the national currencies of the EMUcountries, the Deutsche Mark valueof the ECU and euro conversionrates 74*
12. Exchange rates of the Deutsche
Mark and the euro against othercurrencies 74*
13. Effective exchange rates of the euro
and selected foreign currencies 75*Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
4*

Abbreviations and symbols
eEstimated
pProvisional
pePartly estimated
rRevised
...Figure available at a later date
.Figure unknown or not to be published
or not meaningful
0Less than 0.5 but more than nil
–Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to round-
ing.Note
From January 2001 the Bundesbank is mak-
ing available on the Internet, for download-ing, a selection of the time series that arepublished in the Monthly Reports and theStatistical Supplements.Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
5*

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
 I. Key economic data for European monetary union
 
1. Monetary developments and interest rates
  
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions  1  2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
 M 3  3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3−month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
moving average MFI lending, and capital 3−month ment bonds
M1 M2 (centred) total individuals formation  4 EONIA  5, 7 EURIBOR  6, 7 outstanding  8 
Period Change from previous year,in % % p. a. as a monthly average
1999         Dec. 10.7 5.5 6.3 5.9 8.7 10.3 7.6 3.04 3.45 5.3
2000         Jan. 9.2 4.3 5.3 6.0 8.0 9.5 6.8 3.04 3.34 5.7
         Feb. 10.7 5.4 6.3 6.1 8.4 10.5 6.9 3.28 3.54 5.7         Mar. 10.3 5.1 6.6 6.4 8.4 11.0 6.6 3.51 3.75 5.5
         Apr. 10.5 5.2 6.3 6.3 8.7 11.4 6.5 3.69 3.93 5.4
         May 9.0 4.8 6.0 5.9 8.2 11.2 6.7 3.92 4.36 5.6         June 7.3 4.2 5.3 5.4 7.2 10.0 6.8 4.29 4.50 5.4
         July 6.4 3.6 5.1 5.3 7.1 9.9 7.1 4.31 4.58 5.4
         Aug. 7.2 4.3 5.5 5.2 7.0 10.2 7.2 4.42 4.78 5.4         Sep. 6.4 4.1 5.0 5.2 7.1 11.0 7.0 4.59 4.85 5.5
         Oct. 5.9 3.9 5.0 4.9 6.5 10.9 6.8 4.76 5.04 5.4
         Nov. 5.3 3.8 4.7 4.9 5.9 10.2 5.7 4.83 5.09 5.3         Dec. 5.2 3.6 4.8 4.8 6.3 10.2 4.5 4.83 4.94 5.1
2001         Jan. 2.2 2.9 4.8 4.8 6.2 10.2 4.6 4.76 4.77 5.0
         Feb. 2.3 3.0 4.7 4.6 5.9 9.8 4.3 4.99 4.76 5.0         Mar. 1.6 3.0 4.5 4.6 5.8 9.4 4.7 4.78 4.71 4.9
         Apr. 1.4 3.2 4.6 4.8 5.9 9.1 3.9 5.06 4.68 5.1
         May 2.9 3.5 5.1 5.3 5.9 8.6 3.6 4.65 4.64 5.3         June 3.8 4.3 6.1 ... 6.1 8.4 3.3 4.54 4.45 5.2
         July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4.51 4.47 5.2
1 Source: ECB. — 2 Saisonally adjusted. — 3 From January 1999, excluding Average. — 6 Euro InterBank Offered Rate. — 7 See also footnotes to table
non-residents’ holdings of money market fund shares
/units. — 4 VI.5., p. 44*. — 8 GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds; from
 Longer-term liabilities to euro area non-MFIs. — 5Euro OverNight Index 2001 Euro12. 
 
 
2. Foreign trade and payments  * 
  
 
Selected items of the EMU balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1 
Current account Capital account  2 Effective exchange rate  4 
of which: Direct Securities Credit Monetary
Balance Trade balance Balance investment transactions reserves Dollar rate nominal real  5 transactions  3 
Period until the end of 1998 ECU million, from 1999 euro million Euro/US-$ 1st q 1999=100
1999         Dec. − 3,871 + 5,540 − 7,316 − 20,286 + 560 + 13,255 − 845 1.0110 90.1 90.4
2000         Jan. − 9,026 − 507 + 19,185 + 833 − 6,106 + 26,673 − 2,215 1.0137 90.2 90.8
         Feb. − 26 + 4,217 − 1,885 + 146,030 − 151,027 + 2,836 + 276 0.9834 89.2 89.8         Mar. + 1,188 + 5,566 + 30,460 + 1,132 − 33,003 + 61,838 + 493 0.9643 87.7 88.3
         Apr. − 5,873 + 4,338 + 2,733 + 1,098 − 3,758 + 5,146 + 247 0.9470 86.1 86.6
         May − 105 + 4,407 + 10,505 − 8,667 + 2,235 + 15,686 + 1,251 0.9060 84.5 85.0         June − 627 + 5,915 − 16,166 − 10,583 + 58,181 − 66,103 + 2,339 0.9492 87.4 88.1
         July − 2,240 + 8,076 − 12,042 − 24,562 − 13,340 + 26,286 − 427 0.9397 86.9 87.9
         Aug. − 3,946 + 4,056 + 579 − 41,066 + 12,687 + 27,799 + 1,158 0.9041 84.6 85.5         Sep. + 72 + 5,721 − 2,543 − 28,641 + 4,575 + 17,778 + 3,744 0.8721 82.8 83.6
         Oct. − 3,387 + 4,628 + 3,522 − 17,555 + 3,436 + 16,918 + 724 0.8552 81.6 82.4
         Nov. − 3,461 + 2,888 − 10,925 − 9,945 − 5,349 − 3,292 + 7,662 0.8564 82.3 83.2         Dec. − 7,307 + 2,922 − 16,612 − 30,859 + 1,478 + 10,481 + 2,289 0.8973 85.4 86.4
2001         Jan. − 9,429 − 3,170 − 2,891 − 10,047 − 47,079 + 51,862 + 2,372 0.9383 89.2 90.3
         Feb. + 2,313 + 3,592 − 3,188 + 212 − 3,032 − 4,868 + 4,499 0.9217 88.3 89.7         Mar. + 863 + 6,959 + 18,904 − 33,081 + 9,123 + 40,157 + 2,704 0.9095 88.4 90.0
         Apr. − 3,267 + 5,300 + 11,774 + 109 − 19,837 + 24,550 + 6,952 0.8920 87.6 89.2
         May − 828 + 5,281 − 4,570 − 40,357 + 28,310 + 11,074 − 3,597 0.8742 85.9 87.5         June ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0.8532 84.7 86.3
         July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0.8607 85.4 87.2
 
*  Source: ECB. — 1  See also tables X.12 and 13, p. 74−75. — 2  Series to observations. — 3  Including financial derivatives. — 4  Vis-a-vis a narrow
which data from January 1999 are not closely comparable with earlier group of countries. — 5  Based on consumer prices. 
6* I. Key economic data for European monetary union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
I.  Key economic data for European monetary union 
 
3. General economic indicators
  
                   
Period Belgium Germany Finland France Greece Ireland Italy Luxembourg Austria Portugal Spain EMU 8 Netherlands
Real gross domestic product 1
1998 2.4 2.1 5.3 3.4 3.0 8.6 1.8 5.0 4.1 3.3 3.8 4.3 2.9
1999 2.7 1.6 4.0 2.9 3.4 10.8 1.6 7.6 3.9 2.8 3.3 4.0 2.5
2000 4.0 3.0 5.7 3.1 4.1 11.5 2.9 8.5 3.9 3.2 3.3 4.1 3.4
1999         4th qtr 5.1 2.4 3.8 3.6 14.3 2.8 4.9 4.0 2.6 4.1 3.4
2000         1st qtr 5.4 3.7 5.9 4.1 10.2 3.5 4.9 4.1 3.3 4.7 3.5
         2nd qtr 4.5 3.5 5.1 3.2 13.4 3.1 4.3 4.2 2.9 4.7 3.8         3rd qtr 3.2 2.8 6.3 2.9 10.1 2.8 3.5 2.4 3.6 3.7 3.4         4th qtr 3.1 1.9 5.5 2.8 12.1 2.2 2.8 2.8 3.4 3.2 2.9
2001         1st qtr 2.4 1.6 3.4 2.8 ... 2.2 1.6 2.4 2.2 3.5 2.5
Industrial production 1, 2
1998 3.4 4.2 8.1 5.2 7.1 19.8 1.2 −0.1 2.4 8.2 5.7 5.4 4.4
1999 0.9 1.6 5.5 2.1 3.9 14.8 −0.1 11.5 2.2 6.0 3.0 2.6 2.0
2000 5.5 7 6.8 11.5 3.2 0.5 15.4 4.8 4.3 2.9 9.2 0.5 4.0 7 5.6
2000         1st qtr 5.7 5.9 7.6 5.7 5.4 5.3 2.5 10.3 1.8 11.3 −0.8 8.4 4.9
         2nd qtr 6.3 6.8 9.9 2.2 2.8 20.9 6.5 7.2 3.7 11.6 −1.9 5.0 6.1
         3rd qtr 4.5 7.0 13.7 2.7 −3.6 14.7 5.2 0.2 3.0 8.4 2.8 1.8 5.7
         4th qtr 5.5 7 7.2 14.9 2.2 −1.7 20.1 5.0 −0.4 3.2 5.9 1.9 0.7 7 5.5
2001         1st qtr 4.4 5.1 7.2 1.4 2.4 31.7 2.9 3.3 1.7 6.0 2.4 −0.8 4.0
         2nd qtr ... 6 p 0.9 −1.9 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Capacity utilisation 3
1998 82.7 85.5 88.9 83.8 75.8 76.6 78.5 88.0 85.3 83.7 81.4 80.3 82.9
1999 80.9 84.0 86.1 85.3 75.7 75.9 76.0 84.9 84.0 81.9 80.8 79.7 81.8
2000 84.0 85.9 86.8 87.5 78.1 78.6 78.8 87.8 84.7 84.5 81.2 80.6 83.8
2000         2nd qtr 84.5 86.1 86.5 86.3 78.0 77.7 79.1 87.9 84.6 84.6 80.3 80.5 83.6
         3rd qtr 84.2 86.0 87.0 87.9 77.8 78.5 78.9 88.0 85.0 85.0 82.0 80.3 83.9         4th qtr 84.5 86.3 86.7 89.1 78.4 81.5 79.8 88.3 84.6 85.0 80.9 80.8 84.6
2001         1st qtr 84.8 86.9 87.3 88.8 78.2 79.8 79.5 89.2 85.2 84.2 82.5 80.1 84.4
         2nd qtr 82.7 85.7 86.0 86.9 79.3 80.4 79.4 88.9 84.8 84.0 82.0 79.7 83.6         3rd qtr 81.4 84.3 84.5 87.2 76.1 78.0 78.7 88.9 84.6 82.7 82.4 80.1 82.9
Unemployment rate 4
1998 9.5 9.3 11.4 11.8 10.9 7.5 11.8 2.7 4.0 4.5 5.2 18.8 10.81999 8.8 8.6 10.2 11.2 11.6 5.6 11.3 2.4 3.4 3.9 4.5 15.9 9.9
2000 7.0 7.9 9.8 9.5 11.1 4.2 10.5 2.4 3.0 3.7 4.1 14.1 8.9
2001         Jan. 6.8 7.7 9.3 8.7 3.8 9.8 2.4 2.7 3.7 4.0 13.3 8.5
         Feb. 6.8 7.7 9.2 8.6 3.8 9.7 2.3 2.5 3.7 4.1 13.2 8.4         Mar. 6.8 7.7 9.1 8.6 3.8 9.6 2.3 2.4 3.7 4.1 13.1 8.4
         Apr. 6.8 7.8 9.0 8.5 3.8 9.5 2.4 2.3 3.7 4.0 13.1 8.3
         May 6.8 7.8 8.9 8.5 3.8 9.4 2.4 2.4 3.7 3.9 13.0 8.3         June 6.8 7.8 8.8 8.5 3.8 9.4 2.4 ... 3.8 4.0 12.9 8.3
         July ... ... ... ... 3.8 ... ... ... 3.8 ... 12.8 ...
Harmonised index of consumer prices 1
1998 0.9 0.6 1.4 0.7 4.5 2.1 2.0 1.0 1.8 0.8 2.2 1.8 1.2
1999 1.1 0.6 1.3 0.6 2.1 2.5 1.7 1.0 2.0 0.5 2.2 2.2 1.1
2000 2.7 2.1 3.0 1.8 2.9 5.3 2.6 3.8 2.3 2.0 2.8 3.5 2.4
2000         Dec. 3.0 2.3 2.9 1.7 3.7 4.6 2.8 4.3 2.9 1.8 3.8 4.0 2.6
2001         Jan. 2.7 2.2 2.9 1.4 3.2 3.9 2.7 2.9 4.5 2.2 4.4 3.8 2.5
         Feb. 2.5 2.5 2.7 1.4 3.5 3.9 2.7 2.9 4.9 1.8 4.9 4.0 2.6         Mar. 2.2 2.5 2.5 1.4 3.2 4.1 2.6 3.0 4.9 1.9 5.1 4.0 2.6
         Apr. 2.9 2.9 2.8 2.0 3.7 4.3 3.0 2.7 5.3 2.6 4.6 4.0 3.0
         May 3.1 3.6 3.3 2.5 3.9 4.1 2.9 3.8 5.4 2.9 4.9 4.2 3.4         June 3.0 3.1 3.0 2.2 4.5 4.3 2.9 2.7 5.0 2.6 4.6 4.2 3.1
         July 2.7 2.6 ... ... 4.2 4.0 2.8 2.4 5.2 ... ... ... ...
General government financial balance 5
1998 −0.9 −2.1 1.3 −2.7 −3.2 2.1 −2.8 3.2 −0.7 −2.3 −2.2 −2.6 −2.1
1999 −0.7 −1.4 1.8 −1.6 −1.8 2.1 −1.8 4.7 1.0 −2.1 −2.0 −1.2 −1.2
2000 0.0 1.5 6.7 −1.3 −0.9 4.5 −0.3 5.3 2.0 −1.1 −1.4 −0.3 0.4
General government debt 5
1998 119.8 60.7 48.8 59.7 105.5 55.0 116.2 6.4 66.8 63.9 55.3 64.7 73.6
1999 116.4 61.1 46.9 58.7 104.6 50.1 114.5 6.0 63.2 64.7 55.0 63.4 72.6
2000 110.9 60.3 44.0 58.0 103.9 39.1 110.2 5.3 56.3 62.8 53.8 60.6 70.1
Sources: National data, European Commission, Eurostat, European persons in civilian employment; seasonally adjusted. —5  As a percen-
Central Bank. Latest data are partly based on press reports and are tage of GDP; Maastricht Treaty definition, ESA95. —6  Adjusted in advance
provisional. —1  Annual percentage changes; GDP of Portugal and EMU are by the Federal Statistical Office by way of estimates to the results of the
calculated from seasonally adjusted data. —2  Manufacturing, mining, gas Quarterly Production Survey for the second quarter (manufacturing sector
and electricity; adjusted for working-day variations (except France and in Germany: + 0.5 % on average).  —7  Data for Germany presumably over-
Spain). —3  Manufacturing, in %; seasonally adjusted; data are collected estimated. — 8  Recalculation including Greece. 
in January, April, July and October. —4  Standardised, as a percentage of
7*I.  Key economic data for European monetary union 

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
 
1. The money stock and its counterparts*)
  
  
 
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II. Net claims on III. Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area  3 non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises Public
and individuals authorities Debt
Deposits Deposits securities
Liabil- with an at agreed with
Claims ities to agreed notice of maturitieson non- non-euro- maturity over of over 2 Capital
of which: of which: euro-area area of over 3 months years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents Total  
5 7 (net)  8 2 years  5,6 Securities Securities residents  4 reserves  9 
 European monetary union (euro billion) 1 X
 
2000         Jan. 51.5 45.2 5.1 6.3 13.8 −44.6 22.2 66.8 18.7 1.6 −0.9 −0.6 18.6
         Feb. 61.3 56.4 19.9 4.9 9.3 5.4 31.7 26.3 18.3 1.0 1.0 11.9 4.4         Mar. 97.3 99.7 32.3 −2.4 −7.0 −73.8 33.4 107.2 13.6 −2.0 0.8 2.2 12.7
         Apr. 52.9 72.0 18.4 −19.2 −21.4 −22.7 13.1 35.8 25.7 −0.8 −0.4 17.6 9.3
         May 34.8 48.7 19.9 −13.8 −7.5 −17.6 11.3 28.9 13.4 1.3 1.3 8.0 2.8
         June 11.5 30.1 −30.9 −18.6 −18.1 85.9 7.8 −78.0 33.3 −1.0 1.5 14.0 18.8
         July 6.6 34.8 11.3 −28.2 −26.9 −12.0 − 3.6 8.5 19.4 −0.8 1.4 3.6 15.2
         Aug. 2.7 21.1 5.5 −18.4 −9.8 − 7.9 3.8 11.8 15.3 0.4 1.7 8.5 4.7
         Sep. 70.6 77.8 6.4 −7.2 −3.1 −25.5 17.7 43.2 21.5 −2.5 2.2 2.7 19.1
         Oct. 33.9 47.4 8.8 −13.5 −15.4 −10.0 10.0 20.0 16.7 −0.0 0.8 10.8 5.1
         Nov. 47.8 42.1 0.2 5.8 −1.4 − 3.9 7.9 11.8 −20.1 −5.9 2.7 −5.0 −11.9
         Dec. 52.0 59.9 8.9 −7.9 −17.7 22.9 6.9 −16.1 −16.6 8.9 2.5 −4.0 −24.0
2001         Jan. 43.3 47.9 16.8 −4.6 −7.5 −54.2 61.3 115.5 22.0 −0.9 0.2 24.3 −1.6
         Feb. 39.1 38.7 17.0 0.4 8.6 − 4.6 15.4 19.9 9.0 −1.2 0.1 8.2 2.0
         Mar. 97.1 85.3 25.6 11.9 9.5 −35.6 102.5 138.2 27.9 1.5 −0.4 9.1 17.8
         Apr. 64.3 64.3 23.2 0.0 8.2 −37.2 −19.4 17.9 −2.6 −2.4 −2.0 0.0 1.8
         May 43.6 16.9 7.6 26.7 32.3 − 9.9 4.6 14.5 3.8 0.9 −2.2 −3.5 8.6
         June 27.4 21.3 −31.0 6.1 7.8 40.7 18.1 −22.6 26.7 −0.9 −0.3 7.7 20.2
 German contribution (euro billion) 2
2000         Jan. 17.7 5.3 1.7 12.4 10.7 −15.3 2.0 17.3 −3.5 2.4 −0.9 −7.2 2.1
         Feb. 15.0 14.0 5.7 1.1 5.8 4.7 18.5 13.9 5.6 1.9 1.0 2.4 0.3         Mar. 38.7 43.0 31.3 −4.3 −5.7 −25.3 7.9 33.2 −0.7 −0.1 0.8 0.5 −1.8
         Apr. 15.2 15.2 5.6 −0.0 −1.7 − 7.3 10.5 17.8 11.6 0.6 −0.4 10.1 1.3
         May 12.9 16.2 8.2 −3.3 −3.7 2.0 12.7 10.7 6.6 0.2 1.3 6.9 −1.8
         June −32.2 −25.3 −32.2 −7.0 −2.8 12.5 −21.5 −34.0 9.3 0.9 1.5 0.6 6.3
         July 1.4 2.6 3.6 −1.3 −3.5 15.8 14.5 −1.3 12.0 0.5 1.3 8.4 1.8
         Aug. 8.8 10.9 1.6 −2.1 −0.2 − 5.8 5.1 10.9 6.1 1.4 1.7 2.6 0.5
         Sep. 6.5 19.2 0.9 −12.7 −3.4 − 4.9 −0.1 4.8 5.7 −1.3 2.2 −0.3 5.2
         Oct. 12.0 4.3 0.9 7.7 3.4 − 2.2 14.6 16.8 3.1 0.4 0.7 1.9 0.1
         Nov. 15.2 13.6 4.2 1.6 1.0 5.1 17.3 12.2 −7.4 −1.9 1.6 −8.7 1.6
         Dec. 12.0 14.4 5.5 −2.5 −3.3 10.3 5.5 −4.8 −7.6 1.9 2.6 −4.6 −7.5
2001         Jan. 2.1 7.9 6.1 −5.8 −13.5 −19.9 8.3 28.1 7.7 −0.8 −0.0 9.2 −0.7
         Feb. 15.6 18.0 7.2 −2.4 1.5 10.0 23.7 13.7 7.5 −0.7 −0.0 6.4 1.9
         Mar. 26.2 23.3 16.3 2.8 2.5 −50.8 17.2 68.0 −0.1 1.3 −0.4 −1.7 0.8
         Apr. 2.7 9.9 12.2 −7.2 −1.7 12.5 19.2 6.6 −13.1 −0.9 −2.0 −6.9 −3.3
         May 6.3 4.5 0.2 1.8 3.3 −10.1 −5.6 4.5 1.1 3.2 −1.1 −3.8 2.8
         June −26.3 −22.3 −27.4 −4.0 2.1 23.1 −2.6 −25.7 12.4 −0.5 −0.9 3.2 10.6
 German contribution (DM billion) 2
2000         Jan. 34.7 10.4 3.2 24.3 21.0 −29.9 3.9 33.8 −6.9 4.7 −1.7 −14.1 4.2
         Feb. 29.4 27.3 11.2 2.1 11.3 9.2 36.3 27.1 10.9 3.7 2.0 4.7 0.6         Mar. 75.8 84.2 61.1 −8.4 −11.1 −49.4 15.5 64.9 −1.3 −0.3 1.6 1.0 −3.6
         Apr. 29.7 29.7 11.0 −0.0 −3.3 −14.3 20.6 34.8 22.6 1.1 −0.9 19.7 2.6
         May 25.3 31.7 15.9 −6.5 −7.3 3.9 24.9 21.0 12.9 0.4 2.5 13.5 −3.5
         June −63.1 −49.4 −63.0 −13.6 −5.4 24.4 −42.1 −66.5 18.2 1.7 2.9 1.2 12.3
         July 2.7 5.1 7.0 −2.5 −6.9 30.8 28.3 −2.5 23.4 1.0 2.5 16.4 3.4
         Aug. 17.2 21.4 3.2 −4.2 −0.4 −11.4 10.0 21.4 12.0 2.6 3.2 5.2 0.9
         Sep. 12.7 37.6 1.8 −24.9 −6.7 − 9.6 −0.2 9.4 11.2 −2.6 4.2 −0.6 10.2
         Oct. 23.4 8.4 1.8 15.0 6.7 − 4.2 28.5 32.8 6.0 0.7 1.4 3.7 0.3
         Nov. 29.8 26.6 8.1 3.2 2.0 10.1 33.9 23.9 −14.5 −3.7 3.2 −17.1 3.1
         Dec. 23.4 28.2 10.7 −4.9 −6.4 20.1 10.8 −9.3 −14.8 3.8 5.1 −9.1 −14.6
2001         Jan. 4.1 15.5 11.9 −11.4 −26.4 −38.8 16.1 55.0 15.0 −1.6 −0.0 18.1 −1.4
         Feb. 30.5 35.2 14.1 −4.7 2.9 19.6 46.3 26.7 14.8 −1.4 −0.0 12.4 3.8
         Mar. 51.2 45.6 31.8 5.5 4.9 −99.4 33.7 133.1 −0.1 2.5 −0.8 −3.3 1.5
         Apr. 5.3 19.3 23.8 −14.0 −3.3 24.5 37.5 13.0 −25.6 −1.8 −3.9 −13.4 −6.5
         May 12.3 8.8 0.4 3.5 6.4 −19.7 −10.9 8.8 2.2 6.3 −2.2 −7.5 5.6
         June −51.5 −43.7 −53.6 −7.8 4.0 45.1 −5.1 −50.2 24.3 −1.0 −1.8 6.3 20.8
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of German contribution: up to December 1998, including liabilities arising from
monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (table II.2); statistical breaks have been loans on a trust basis. —6For the German contribution: from 1999
eliminated from the flow figures. —1Source: ECB. —2Owing to changes in including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see table IV.12). —
the definitions of the items and differences in the range of reporting 7For the German contribution: up to the end of 1998 including deposits
institutions, the figures are not comparable with those published for under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 6). —8Excluding MFIs
Germany up to end of 1998. —3For the German contribution: up to portfolios; for the German contribution: excluding German MFIs portfolios
December 1998, including loans on a trust basis and bill-based lending of securities issued by MFIs in the euro area. —9For the German
instead of bill holdings. —4From January 1999, including liabilities of contribution: from April 2001, less inter-MFI participations. —10For the
non-residents ’holdings of money market fund shares/units. 5For the
8*II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
    
 
VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  11,12  
Money stock M2
Money
Money stock M1 market Debt
Deposits fund securitieswith an Deposits with certificates
IV. De- agreed at agreed and money maturities
posits of Currency maturity notice of Repo- market of up to    
V. Other in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac- paper 2 years    central gov-
ernments Total Total Total lation  
13 tions  17 (net)  8    Period factors  10 deposits  14 2 years  14,15  months  14,16  (net)  8,12 
European monetary union (euro billion) 1 X
 
− 8.3 − 6.7 3.2 − 6.1 10.4 −16.9 27.4 −17.7 1.1 10.7 0.4 − 1.9 2000         Jan.
10.9 15.2 22.2 − 4.4 −10.1 − 1.8 − 8.2 16.5 −10.9 4.5 18.4 3.7          Feb.
−14.5 −11.9 36.3 7.1 10.6 3.5 7.2 7.1 −10.6 17.8 12.3 − 1.0          Mar.
1.6 −37.9 40.8 37.3 39.2 3.3 36.0 5.7 − 7.6 2.4 − 0.4 1.4          Apr.
−17.9 18.9 2.8 − 5.1 −14.9 − 0.2 −14.7 19.0 − 9.2 1.4 8.2 − 1.7          May
32.1 39.3 − 7.4 9.2 16.2 3.6 12.6 0.3 − 7.3 −13.9 − 4.4 1.7          June
−11.3 −18.0 4.5 − 0.5 − 1.3 1.9 − 3.2 8.3 − 7.5 4.7 10.9 −10.7          July
5.9 −19.2 − 7.1 −13.9 −36.3 − 5.1 −31.1 28.9 − 6.5 − 2.7 6.3 3.2          Aug.
18.7 9.4 − 4.6 2.9 11.3 1.0 10.3 1.7 −10.1 2.0 −10.1 0.6          Sep.
13.1 −17.6 11.8 2.7 − 1.8 − 2.2 0.4 13.8 − 9.3 − 0.9 4.5 5.4          Oct.
− 3.6 30.4 37.1 26.4 20.4 0.1 20.3 14.6 − 8.6 3.0 − 2.5 10.3          Nov.
− 4.2 0.2 95.7 98.4 68.2 10.7 57.5 10.9 19.3 1.5 −13.4 9.1          Dec.
−19.1 1.7 −15.5 −52.5 −70.7 −20.1 −50.6 14.7 3.6 18.6 18.2 0.1 2001          Jan.
8.7 −11.9 28.7 6.0 − 1.0 − 1.0 − 0.0 12.4 − 5.4 1.9 12.7 8.1          Feb.
− 5.2 − 3.1 42.4 23.3 9.6 1.3 8.4 13.8 − 0.1 10.1 5.0 4.0          Mar.
2.2 −15.1 42.6 37.5 32.4 − 0.1 32.5 1.5 3.6 − 1.1 0.6 5.5          Apr.
− 5.6 2.3 33.3 13.4 17.1 − 3.3 20.4 − 3.3 − 0.5 12.4 1.6 6.0          May
17.6 −19.4 43.2 44.4 36.8 0.2 36.7 − 2.6 10.1 −10.1 − 1.6 10.5          June
 German contribution (euro billion) 2
− 1.2 23.2 −16.0 −12.6 2.0 − 5.0 6.9 −10.3 − 4.3 − 0.1 − 4.8 1.5 2000          Jan.
0.8 5.8 7.5 1.7 4.7 − 0.7 5.4 2.0 − 5.0 − 0.8 5.0 1.7          Feb.
− 0.6 22.5 − 7.8 − 9.6 − 4.4 0.9 − 5.3 1.2 − 6.4 − 0.2 − 1.0 3.1          Mar.
0.4 − 5.0 1.0 0.9 10.8 0.4 10.4 − 3.7 − 6.1 1.8 − 3.1 1.4          Apr.
− 0.5 13.5 − 4.6 − 6.5 − 8.5 − 0.1 − 8.4 9.2 − 7.2 0.2 2.4 − 0.7          May
6.3 −28.9 − 6.4 − 9.9 − 0.5 0.1 − 0.6 − 2.5 − 6.9 − 1.0 6.9 − 2.4          June
0.3 12.9 − 8.1 − 9.7 − 4.7 − 0.2 − 4.5 1.3 − 6.3 − 0.1 1.4 0.3          July
− 0.6 2.4 − 5.0 − 7.5 − 9.0 − 1.0 − 8.0 7.0 − 5.5 − 0.1 − 0.4 3.0          Aug.
19.8 −16.1 − 7.8 − 3.1 − 2.2 0.3 − 2.5 4.1 − 5.0 − 0.7 − 2.6 − 1.4          Sep.
2.4 1.5 2.8 − 1.2 2.9 − 1.1 4.0 0.4 − 4.4 0.3 3.4 0.2          Oct.
−10.7 18.4 20.1 22.6 22.2 − 0.0 22.2 5.5 − 5.1 − 0.0 − 3.8 1.3          Nov.
6.7 − 3.5 26.6 25.0 4.3 1.1 3.2 12.4 8.3 − 0.9 1.8 0.8          Dec.
−12.2 5.8 −19.1 −18.4 −15.7 − 5.3 −10.5 1.4 − 4.1 1.4 − 4.5 2.4 2001          Jan.
0.5 3.0 14.6 10.1 9.8 − 0.4 10.2 2.5 − 2.1 − 0.2 0.1 4.6          Feb.
− 0.3 −28.3 4.1 2.6 − 0.3 0.0 − 0.3 4.1 − 1.2 − 0.6 1.8 0.3          Mar.
0.5 21.6 6.3 5.6 9.3 − 0.4 9.7 − 2.8 − 0.9 0.5 − 1.0 1.2          Apr.
0.9 −12.2 6.4 3.7 2.2 − 1.9 4.1 3.2 − 1.7 0.4 − 2.8 5.1          May
− 0.2 −25.4 9.9 7.6 6.0 − 1.7 7.7 1.9 − 0.3 − 0.7 − 4.3 7.3          June
 German contribution (DM billion) 2
− 2.4 45.4 −31.3 −24.7 3.8 − 9.7 13.5 −20.2 − 8.3 − 0.2 − 9.3 3.0 2000          Jan.
1.6 11.3 14.7 3.3 9.2 − 1.4 10.6 3.9 − 9.8 − 1.6 9.7 3.2          Feb.
− 1.1 43.9 −15.2 −18.8 − 8.6 1.8 −10.4 2.4 −12.5 − 0.4 − 2.0 6.0          Mar.
0.7 − 9.8 1.9 1.7 21.0 0.8 20.2 − 7.3 −12.0 3.6 − 6.2 2.7          Apr.
− 1.0 26.3 − 9.1 −12.6 −16.5 − 0.1 −16.4 18.0 −14.1 0.3 4.6 − 1.4          May
12.4 −56.6 −12.6 −19.3 − 0.9 0.2 − 1.1 − 4.9 −13.5 − 2.0 13.5 − 4.7          June
0.7 25.2 −15.8 −19.0 − 9.2 − 0.3 − 8.9 2.5 −12.3 − 0.1 2.7 0.6          July
− 1.1 4.6 − 9.8 −14.6 −17.6 − 2.0 −15.6 13.8 −10.8 − 0.1 − 0.8 5.8          Aug.
38.7 −31.4 −15.3 − 6.0 − 4.3 0.6 − 4.9 8.0 − 9.8 − 1.4 − 5.1 − 2.8          Sep.
4.7 3.0 5.4 − 2.3 5.6 − 2.2 7.8 0.7 − 8.7 0.7 6.6 0.5          Oct.
−21.0 35.9 39.3 44.2 43.3 − 0.0 43.3 10.8 − 9.9 − 0.1 − 7.4 2.6          Nov.
13.1 − 6.9 52.1 48.9 8.5 2.2 6.3 24.2 16.2 − 1.8 3.5 1.5          Dec.
−23.8 11.3 −37.3 −36.0 −30.8 −10.3 −20.4 2.8 − 8.1 2.8 − 8.8 4.8 2001          Jan.
1.1 5.8 28.5 19.8 19.1 − 0.8 19.9 4.8 − 4.1 − 0.5 0.2 9.0          Feb.
− 0.6 −55.4 8.0 5.1 − 0.6 0.1 − 0.7 8.1 − 2.4 − 1.3 3.5 0.6          Mar.
0.9 42.2 12.3 11.0 18.2 − 0.8 19.0 − 5.4 − 1.7 0.9 − 1.9 2.3          Apr.
1.8 −23.9 12.6 7.2 4.3 − 3.7 8.0 6.2 − 3.3 0.8 − 5.5 10.0          May
− 0.3 −49.7 19.4 14.9 11.7 − 3.3 15.0 3.8 − 0.5 − 1.4 − 8.4 14.2          June
European monetary union: including the counterparts of monetary circulation denominated in Deutsche Mark, excluding German MFIs cash in
liabilities of central governments. —11The German contributions to the hand denominated in all currencies of euro-area member states. —14For
Eurosystem ’s monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as the European monetary union: including the monetary liabilities of central
national monetary aggregates, and are therefore not comparable to the governments (Post Office, Treasury). —15For the German contribution: up
erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2 or M3. —12From January 1999, to December 1998, with maturities of less than 4 years. —16In Germany,
excluding non-residents ’holdings of money market fund shares /units. — only savings deposits. —17For the German contribution: data collected
13Excluding euro-area MFIs cash in hand denominated in euros or in separately only from 1999. —XFrom January 2001: Enlargement of the
currencies of the euro area; for the German contribution: currency in euro area. 
9*II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
 
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
  
 
Assets  3 
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area  4 
Enterprises and individuals Public authorities
Claims
Total Shares and on non-assets  
3  or Debt other Debt euro-area Other
Period Total Total Advances  4 securities  5 equities Total Advances  4 securities  6 residents assets liabilities  7 
 European monetary union (euro billion) 1 X
 
2000         Feb. 11,725.7 8,387.7 6,320.9 5,617.3 234.8 468.7 2,066.9 836.1 1,230.7 2,203.4 1,134.5
         Mar. 11,905.4 8,487.4 6,427.0 5,688.6 228.9 509.5 2,060.4 839.7 1,220.7 2,262.0 1,155.9
         Apr. 12,109.0 8,549.3 6,508.3 5,749.0 237.0 522.2 2,041.0 842.4 1,198.6 2,362.9 1,196.9
         May 12,132.6 8,582.8 6,559.1 5,779.1 244.2 535.9 2,023.7 835.8 1,187.9 2,351.4 1,198.4         June 12,143.7 8,597.2 6,594.9 5,846.3 244.2 504.3 2,002.3 835.6 1,166.8 2,343.3 1,203.2
         July 12,232.3 8,610.6 6,636.0 5,874.6 252.4 509.0 1,974.5 833.8 1,140.7 2,370.5 1,251.2
         Aug. 12,316.9 8,611.0 6,660.4 5,893.1 256.6 510.7 1,950.6 822.0 1,128.6 2,415.8 1,290.2         Sep. 12,371.5 8,696.9 6,750.6 5,978.5 258.2 513.8 1,946.4 818.0 1,128.4 2,458.7 1,215.9
         Oct. 12,533.2 8,735.2 6,799.8 6,021.5 264.3 514.0 1,935.4 819.9 1,115.5 2,511.3 1,286.7
         Nov. 12,495.2 8,775.5 6,836.3 6,056.8 263.7 515.8 1,939.2 827.0 1,112.2 2,484.3 1,235.5         Dec. 12,411.3 8,802.9 6,877.6 6,090.9 265.1 521.5 1,925.3 835.9 1,089.4 2,402.9 1,205.6
2001         Jan. 12,716.4 9,001.7 6,998.0 6,184.8 270.6 542.7 2,003.7 858.1 1,145.6 2,460.2 1,254.4
         Feb. 12,764.8 9,041.2 7,035.2 6,206.0 279.6 549.6 2,006.0 849.9 1,156.1 2,479.7 1,243.9         Mar. 13,066.1 9,145.4 7,127.7 6,272.9 287.6 567.2 2,017.7 852.5 1,165.2 2,632.5 1,288.2
         Apr. 13,117.2 9,208.7 7,193.0 6,312.3 293.8 586.9 2,015.7 844.4 1,171.4 2,608.3 1,300.2
         May 13,241.1 9,250.6 7,219.9 6,332.5 300.1 587.3 2,030.6 839.3 1,191.3 2,668.7 1,321.8         June 13,316.0 9,272.1 7,236.6 6,380.3 301.7 554.6 2,035.5 837.5 1,198.0 2,690.3 1,353.6
 German contribution (euro billion) 2
2000         Feb. 4,003.5 3,167.2 2,414.0 2,144.5 47.2 222.3 753.2 510.7 242.5 638.3 198.0
         Mar. 4,057.5 3,206.7 2,457.7 2,156.5 46.1 255.1 749.0 512.1 236.8 652.0 198.8
         Apr. 4,102.0 3,223.7 2,474.5 2,167.6 46.3 260.6 749.2 514.0 235.2 674.2 204.1
         May 4,126.1 3,235.6 2,489.9 2,174.9 46.9 268.1 745.7 514.3 231.4 680.7 209.7         June 4,063.4 3,201.6 2,463.0 2,180.9 48.6 233.4 738.6 510.4 228.2 655.6 206.2
         July 4,096.3 3,204.2 2,467.3 2,181.7 49.4 236.3 736.8 512.1 224.7 677.6 214.5
         Aug. 4,124.4 3,211.3 2,479.8 2,192.5 49.7 237.7 731.5 506.7 224.8 692.3 220.8         Sep. 4,150.0 3,218.6 2,499.8 2,211.5 50.3 238.0 718.8 497.5 221.3 696.5 235.0
         Oct. 4,196.0 3,232.6 2,505.8 2,216.4 50.7 238.6 726.8 501.9 225.0 722.0 241.4
         Nov. 4,217.3 3,247.1 2,519.0 2,225.5 50.7 242.8 728.1 502.4 225.8 730.4 239.8         Dec. 4,200.2 3,254.3 2,529.4 2,230.8 51.0 247.7 724.9 502.9 222.0 715.2 230.6
2001         Jan. 4,206.7 3,270.3 2,539.8 2,233.8 52.1 254.0 730.5 514.4 216.1 708.0 228.3
         Feb. 4,249.1 3,285.8 2,557.7 2,244.5 54.7 258.5 728.1 510.5 217.6 732.5 230.7         Mar. 4,317.9 3,313.8 2,582.7 2,253.1 57.4 272.2 731.1 511.0 220.1 762.8 241.3
         Apr. 4,342.6 3,316.3 2,592.4 2,250.6 59.0 282.8 723.9 505.5 218.5 782.5 243.7
         May 4,368.0 3,327.5 2,601.1 2,259.0 61.0 281.2 726.4 504.2 222.2 790.4 250.1         June 4,332.8 3,300.5 2,578.3 2,263.6 60.6 254.1 722.2 498.1 224.1 790.0 242.3
 German contribution (DM billion) 2
2000         Feb. 7,830.2 6,194.6 4,721.4 4,194.3 92.2 434.9 1,473.2 998.8 474.4 1,248.3 387.3
         Mar. 7,935.9 6,271.8 4,806.9 4,217.8 90.1 498.9 1,464.8 1,001.7 463.2 1,275.2 388.9
         Apr. 8,022.9 6,305.0 4,839.7 4,239.5 90.5 509.7 1,465.4 1,005.3 460.1 1,318.6 399.3
         May 8,069.9 6,328.3 4,869.8 4,253.7 91.7 524.3 1,458.5 1,006.0 452.6 1,331.3 410.2         June 7,947.4 6,261.8 4,817.2 4,265.5 95.1 456.5 1,444.7 998.3 446.3 1,282.3 403.3
         July 8,011.6 6,266.8 4,825.7 4,267.0 96.6 462.1 1,441.1 1,001.6 439.5 1,325.3 419.4
         Aug. 8,066.7 6,280.8 4,850.1 4,288.1 97.2 464.8 1,430.7 991.1 439.6 1,354.0 431.8         Sep. 8,116.7 6,295.0 4,889.1 4,325.2 98.4 465.4 1,405.9 973.0 432.9 1,362.2 459.6
         Oct. 8,206.7 6,322.4 4,900.8 4,334.9 99.2 466.8 1,421.6 981.6 440.0 1,412.0 472.2
         Nov. 8,248.4 6,350.8 4,926.7 4,352.8 99.1 474.8 1,424.1 982.6 441.5 1,428.5 469.1         Dec. 8,214.8 6,364.9 4,947.1 4,363.0 99.8 484.4 1,417.7 983.6 434.1 1,398.9 451.0
2001         Jan. 8,227.5 6,396.2 4,967.5 4,369.0 101.8 496.7 1,428.7 1,006.1 422.6 1,384.8 446.5
         Feb. 8,310.5 6,426.5 5,002.5 4,389.9 106.9 505.7 1,424.0 998.5 425.5 1,432.7 451.3         Mar. 8,445.1 6,481.3 5,051.3 4,406.7 112.3 532.4 1,429.9 999.5 430.5 1,491.9 471.9
         Apr. 8,493.3 6,486.2 5,070.3 4,401.7 115.5 553.1 1,415.9 988.6 427.3 1,530.5 476.6
         May 8,543.0 6,508.0 5,087.4 4,418.1 119.2 550.0 1,420.6 986.1 434.5 1,545.9 489.1         June 8,474.3 6,455.3 5,042.8 4,427.3 118.5 497.0 1,412.5 974.3 438.2 1,545.1 473.9
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building holdings. —4For the German contribution: up to December 1998, including
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank loans on a trust basis and bill-based lending instead of bill holdings. —
and central banks (the Eurosystem). —1Source: ECB. —2Owing to changes 5Including money market paper of enterprises. —6Including Treasury bills
in the definitions of the items and differences in the range of reporting and other money market paper of public authorities. —7For the German
institutions, the figures are not comparable with those published for contribution: up to December 1998, including liabilities incurred in theGermany up to the end of 1998. —3For the German contribution: up to banks own name but on behalf of third parties and including endorsement
December 1998, including trust funds and bill-based lending instead of bill liabilities on rediscounted bills. —8Excluding the cash in hand (in euros) of
10*II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
    
 
Liabilities  7 
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area  9 
Enterprises and individuals
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  14 
over
Currency 1 year
in of which: up to up to over up to over
Total in euros  10 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years  11 3 months 3 months  15   Period circulation  8 2 years  9, 12, 13  
European monetary union (euro billion) 1 X
 
331.1 5,080.6 4,767.5 4,798.2 1,513.3 749.5 78.6 1,138.9 1,206.3 111.6 2000          Feb.
334.6 5,072.0 4,769.7 4,805.6 1,524.9 756.0 79.1 1,137.7 1,195.5 112.3          Mar.
337.7 5,109.8 4,798.4 4,836.3 1,553.9 764.9 79.1 1,137.9 1,188.5 111.9          Apr.
337.5 5,089.1 4,798.2 4,831.3 1,541.9 778.9 78.1 1,139.6 1,179.5 113.2          May341.2 5,124.1 4,800.0 4,829.9 1,547.0 778.6 78.1 1,138.6 1,172.8 114.7          June
343.0 5,112.8 4,802.2 4,835.5 1,546.9 790.4 78.4 1,138.9 1,165.1 115.8          July
337.9 5,117.9 4,795.1 4,833.8 1,518.7 821.0 78.3 1,140.0 1,158.4 117.4          Aug.338.9 5,145.2 4,799.6 4,840.0 1,531.3 821.5 77.9 1,140.6 1,149.1 119.6          Sep.
336.7 5,167.8 4,799.2 4,850.1 1,531.2 838.0 79.3 1,141.6 1,139.5 120.5          Oct.
336.8 5,182.7 4,820.4 4,865.6 1,547.2 848.0 81.4 1,134.9 1,130.9 123.2          Nov.347.5 5,259.9 4,919.2 4,945.6 1,598.8 854.9 76.6 1,140.6 1,149.1 125.7          Dec.
335.2 5,312.4 4,960.7 5,012.3 1,559.6 905.8 77.5 1,142.0 1,200.3 127.1 2001          Jan.
334.2 5,327.9 4,967.7 5,018.4 1,559.3 918.7 78.2 1,141.0 1,193.8 127.3          Feb.335.4 5,352.0 4,993.6 5,053.1 1,575.1 932.8 80.7 1,143.9 1,193.7 126.9          Mar.
335.3 5,384.6 5,027.8 5,078.6 1,600.2 934.8 80.1 1,141.8 1,196.7 125.0          Apr.
332.0 5,403.9 5,039.9 5,101.2 1,626.0 931.7 81.3 1,142.8 1,196.6 122.8          May332.2 5,463.3 5,087.9 5,144.5 1,663.8 927.8 82.0 1,142.0 1,206.3 122.6          June
 German contribution (euro billion) 2
124.6 2,012.3 1,928.4 1,892.0 427.0 201.5 9.3 646.9 496.4 110.8 2000          Feb.
125.5 2,002.5 1,917.4 1,884.3 422.5 203.1 9.7 647.4 490.1 111.6          Mar.
125.9 2,004.8 1,916.8 1,884.7 430.8 199.6 10.3 648.8 484.0 111.1          Apr.
125.9 1,998.8 1,912.1 1,877.3 423.0 204.8 10.6 649.6 476.9 112.4          May126.0 1,996.9 1,905.2 1,866.5 419.3 202.4 10.5 650.3 470.1 113.9          June
125.8 1,990.3 1,898.1 1,863.9 417.5 205.5 10.9 651.7 463.5 114.9          July
124.8 1,987.3 1,895.3 1,860.6 410.0 211.3 11.2 653.7 458.0 116.5          Aug.125.1 2,005.0 1,891.2 1,858.6 407.7 214.9 11.7 652.7 453.0 118.7          Sep.
124.0 2,009.5 1,891.1 1,862.3 411.4 216.2 12.8 653.8 448.6 119.5          Oct.
124.0 2,020.2 1,913.2 1,882.4 433.9 217.8 14.8 651.3 443.6 121.1          Nov.125.1 2,051.8 1,944.1 1,900.3 434.1 224.7 15.5 650.6 451.8 123.7          Dec.
119.8 2,026.4 1,929.2 1,890.8 426.4 225.8 16.9 650.0 447.9 123.8 2001          Jan.
119.4 2,036.8 1,940.0 1,899.4 434.3 229.0 17.1 649.3 445.8 123.8          Feb.119.5 2,041.0 1,941.6 1,906.4 436.0 233.9 17.4 651.1 444.7 123.4          Mar.
119.0 2,044.7 1,946.9 1,909.9 444.7 232.1 17.5 650.3 443.8 121.4          Apr.
117.1 2,054.5 1,953.0 1,915.9 449.9 231.8 18.2 653.5 442.2 120.4          May115.5 2,062.1 1,960.8 1,921.9 456.0 233.6 17.9 653.0 441.9 119.5          June
 German contribution (DM billion) 2
243.7 3,935.7 3,771.5 3,700.3 835.1 394.0 18.3 1,265.3 971.0 216.6 2000          Feb.
245.5 3,916.6 3,750.2 3,685.4 826.4 397.1 18.9 1,266.2 958.5 218.2          Mar.
246.3 3,921.0 3,748.9 3,686.1 842.6 390.3 20.2 1,268.9 946.7 217.3          Apr.
246.2 3,909.2 3,739.7 3,671.7 827.2 400.5 20.7 1,270.6 932.8 219.9          May246.4 3,905.6 3,726.2 3,650.5 820.0 395.8 20.6 1,271.8 919.5 222.8          June
246.0 3,892.7 3,712.4 3,645.5 816.6 401.9 21.2 1,274.6 906.5 224.7          July
244.1 3,886.9 3,706.9 3,639.1 801.9 413.3 21.8 1,278.4 895.7 227.9          Aug.244.7 3,921.4 3,698.9 3,635.2 797.3 420.3 22.8 1,276.5 886.0 232.2          Sep.
242.5 3,930.3 3,698.7 3,642.3 804.6 422.9 25.1 1,278.6 877.4 233.6          Oct.
242.5 3,951.2 3,741.8 3,681.7 848.6 426.1 28.9 1,273.9 867.5 236.8          Nov.244.7 4,013.0 3,802.3 3,716.7 849.0 439.4 30.3 1,272.4 883.6 241.9          Dec.
234.4 3,963.3 3,773.2 3,698.1 833.9 441.7 33.0 1,271.3 876.0 242.1 2001          Jan.
233.6 3,983.6 3,794.4 3,714.8 849.5 447.9 33.5 1,269.9 872.0 242.1          Feb.233.7 3,991.8 3,797.5 3,728.7 852.7 457.4 34.0 1,273.5 869.7 241.4          Mar.
232.8 3,999.2 3,807.9 3,735.4 869.8 453.9 34.2 1,271.9 868.1 237.5          Apr.
229.1 4,018.2 3,819.8 3,747.2 879.9 453.3 35.6 1,278.2 864.8 235.4          May225.8 4,033.1 3,835.0 3,758.9 891.9 456.8 35.0 1,277.2 864.3 233.7          June
MFIs; for the German contribution: currency in circulation denominated in maturities of 4 years and more. —13For the German contribution: from
Deutsche Mark, excluding German MFIs cash in hand denominated in all 1999 including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see tablecurrencies of euro-area member states. —9For the German contribution: IV.12). —14In Germany, only saving deposits. —15For the German
up to December 1998, including liabilities arising from loans on a trust contribution: up to the end of 1998 including deposits under savings andbasis. —10Excluding central governments deposits. —11For the German loan contracts (see also footnote 13). —XFrom January 2001: Enlargement
contribution: up to December 1998, with maturities of 1 year to less than of the euro area. 4 years. —12For the German contribution: up to December 1998, with
11*II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
 
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (cont ’d)*
 
 
 
Liabilities (cont ’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont ’d) 3 
Public authorities Repo transactions
with counterparties
Other public authorities in the euro area  9 
With agreed At agreed Money
maturities of notice of  7 market
fund
over of which: certificates1 year Enterprises and money
Central up to up to over up to over and market paper
Period governments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years  
4 3 months 3 months  8 Total individuals 2 years  3, 5, 6  (net)  10, 11, 12  
 European monetary union (euro billion) 1 X
 
2000         Feb. 144.6 137.8 54.9 49.5 1.9 27.5 3.3 0.8 159.5 155.2 430.9
         Mar. 130.2 136.1 52.2 50.8 1.8 27.3 3.3 0.8 177.3 174.0 443.7
         Apr. 131.8 141.8 58.7 49.9 2.0 27.2 3.2 0.8 179.8 176.3 451.6
         May 113.9 144.0 56.1 54.7 2.0 27.4 3.1 0.8 181.2 175.6 456.7         June 146.0 148.2 61.6 53.8 1.8 27.3 2.9 0.8 167.3 161.9 452.3
         July 134.7 142.7 58.2 51.7 1.9 27.2 2.9 0.8 172.0 166.0 463.6
         Aug. 140.6 143.5 58.9 51.7 1.9 27.3 2.9 0.8 169.4 163.0 471.2         Sep. 159.3 146.0 58.2 54.5 1.8 27.8 2.7 0.8 171.4 166.1 461.5
         Oct. 172.3 145.4 59.6 52.7 1.9 27.8 2.7 0.8 170.6 166.6 467.2
         Nov. 168.8 148.3 61.7 53.3 1.9 27.8 2.8 0.8 173.5 169.2 463.6         Dec. 164.6 149.7 59.9 56.4 2.0 27.8 2.8 0.8 174.9 172.6 439.6
2001         Jan. 147.1 153.0 64.1 56.0 2.0 27.4 2.8 0.7 213.8 209.1 456.1
         Feb. 155.6 154.0 66.3 54.9 2.0 27.2 2.8 0.7 215.8 210.1 468.8         Mar. 150.3 148.6 61.0 54.8 1.9 27.5 2.7 0.7 225.9 221.3 475.2
         Apr. 152.5 153.5 66.8 54.2 2.3 27.0 2.6 0.7 224.9 218.9 476.8
         May 146.9 155.8 65.7 57.2 2.1 27.5 2.7 0.6 237.3 231.6 480.2         June 164.5 154.3 64.4 57.5 2.0 27.2 2.6 0.6 227.2 222.3 478.5
 German contribution (euro billion) 2
2000         Feb. 46.2 74.1 12.0 34.2 1.0 23.8 2.4 0.8 1.1 1.1 73.1
         Mar. 45.8 72.4 11.3 33.5 0.9 23.6 2.3 0.8 0.9 0.9 72.4
         Apr. 46.1 74.0 13.8 32.6 1.0 23.5 2.3 0.8 2.7 2.7 69.5
         May 45.6 75.8 12.0 36.3 1.0 23.6 2.2 0.8 2.9 2.9 71.7         June 52.0 78.4 14.9 36.2 1.0 23.5 2.1 0.8 1.8 1.8 78.4
         July 52.3 74.1 12.4 34.2 1.1 23.5 2.0 0.8 1.8 1.8 80.1
         Aug. 51.7 74.9 12.2 35.2 1.1 23.5 2.0 0.8 1.7 1.7 80.3         Sep. 71.5 74.8 12.1 35.3 1.1 23.5 2.0 0.8 1.0 1.0 78.0
         Oct. 73.9 73.3 12.7 33.4 1.1 23.4 1.9 0.8 1.3 1.3 82.0
         Nov. 63.2 74.6 12.2 35.1 1.2 23.4 1.9 0.8 1.3 1.3 77.6         Dec. 69.9 81.6 14.6 39.6 1.3 23.4 2.0 0.8 0.4 0.4 77.9
2001         Jan. 57.7 77.9 12.1 38.7 1.3 23.2 1.9 0.7 1.8 1.8 73.4
         Feb. 58.0 79.4 14.5 37.7 1.4 23.2 1.9 0.7 1.6 1.6 73.5         Mar. 57.7 76.9 12.9 36.9 1.4 23.2 1.8 0.6 0.9 0.9 75.8
         Apr. 58.2 76.7 14.1 35.6 1.5 23.1 1.8 0.6 1.4 1.4 74.8
         May 59.1 79.5 13.4 39.0 1.5 23.2 1.8 0.6 1.8 1.7 72.8         June 58.9 81.3 14.9 39.6 1.4 23.1 1.8 0.6 1.1 1.1 68.4
 German contribution (DM billion) 2
2000         Feb. 90.4 144.9 23.5 66.8 1.9 46.5 4.6 1.5 2.1 2.1 143.0
         Mar. 89.5 141.7 22.2 65.4 1.8 46.1 4.6 1.5 1.7 1.7 141.6
         Apr. 90.2 144.7 27.0 63.8 2.0 46.0 4.4 1.5 5.3 5.3 136.0
         May 89.3 148.3 23.4 71.0 2.0 46.1 4.3 1.5 5.6 5.6 140.2         June 101.6 153.4 29.2 70.7 2.0 45.9 4.1 1.5 3.6 3.6 153.4
         July 102.3 144.9 24.3 66.9 2.2 46.0 4.0 1.5 3.5 3.5 156.7
         Aug. 101.2 146.6 23.9 68.9 2.2 46.0 4.0 1.6 3.4 3.4 157.1         Sep. 139.9 146.3 23.7 69.1 2.2 45.9 3.9 1.5 1.9 1.9 152.5
         Oct. 144.6 143.4 24.9 65.2 2.2 45.7 3.8 1.5 2.6 2.6 160.3
         Nov. 123.6 145.9 23.8 68.7 2.3 45.8 3.7 1.5 2.5 2.5 151.7         Dec. 136.6 159.7 28.5 77.4 2.5 45.9 3.8 1.5 0.7 0.7 152.4
2001         Jan. 112.8 152.4 23.6 75.7 2.6 45.3 3.7 1.4 3.5 3.5 143.5
         Feb. 113.5 155.4 28.4 73.8 2.6 45.4 3.7 1.4 3.1 3.1 143.7         Mar. 112.8 150.3 25.2 72.2 2.6 45.4 3.5 1.3 1.8 1.8 148.3
         Apr. 113.8 150.0 27.5 69.7 3.0 45.1 3.4 1.3 2.7 2.7 146.2
         May 115.5 155.4 26.2 76.2 3.0 45.3 3.4 1.2 3.6 3.4 142.3         June 115.2 158.9 29.1 77.4 2.7 45.2 3.4 1.2 2.1 2.1 133.7
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building contribution: from 1999 including deposits under savings and loan cont racts
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank (see table IV.12). —7In Germany: only savings deposits. —8For the
and central banks (the Eurosystem). —1Source: ECB. —2Owing to changes German contribution: up to the end of 1998 including deposits under
in the definitions of the items and differences in the range of reporting savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 6). —9For the German
institutions, the figures are not comparable with those published for contribution: data collected separately from 1999 only; up to DecemberGermany up to the end of 1998. —3For the German contribution: up to 1998, included in the deposits with agreed maturities of up to 1 year. —
December 1998, including liabilities arising from loans on a trust basis. — 10Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the German contribution: excluding
4For the German contribution: up to December 1998, with maturities of German MFIs portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro area. —11In
1 year to less than 4 years. —5For the German contribution: up to Germany, bank debt securities with maturities of up to one year count as
December 1998, with maturities of 4 years and more. —6For the German money market paper. —12From January 1999, excluding non-residents ’
12*II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
    
 
 Memo item
Monetary aggregates  17 
Debt securities issued (net)  10 
With maturities of
Monetaryliabilitiesof central
Liabilities Excess govern-
of which: over to non- of Monetary mentsdenom- 1 year euro-area Capital inter-MFI capital (Postinated up to up to over and liabilities Other formation Office,
residents
Total in euros 1 year  11 2 years 2 years 13,14  16 liabilities M1  18 M2 19 M3 12,20  21   Period Treasury)  22 reserves  15 
European monetary union (euro billion) 1 X
 
1,550.5 1,306.3 33.2 57.7 1,459.7 1,966.4 828.6 20.6 1,357.5 1,965.4 4,123.4 4,804.5 3,567.1 135.1 2000          Feb.
1,553.7 1,305.0 29.8 60.9 1,463.0 2,093.9 842.6 − 2.7 1,390.3 1,977.4 4,133.1 4,844.8 3,583.7 134.8          Mar.
1,573.6 1,312.9 26.2 63.6 1,483.9 2,212.8 852.4 − 20.4 1,411.7 2,018.6 4,174.9 4,896.0 3,614.2 137.1          Apr.
1,575.9 1,323.7 24.3 63.2 1,488.5 2,220.3 853.5 − 6.5 1,424.8 2,000.3 4,166.3 4,891.6 3,623.0 134.6          May
1,585.1 1,327.3 27.6 59.2 1,498.3 2,124.7 877.5 30.8 1,440.9 2,015.3 4,172.5 4,878.9 3,657.2 134.7          June
1,584.0 1,318.5 19.1 57.6 1,507.2 2,160.6 893.9 26.4 1,475.8 2,015.3 4,174.9 4,887.3 3,683.9 136.5          July
1,604.1 1,326.5 19.3 61.8 1,523.1 2,209.0 898.2 9.1 1,500.2 1,981.0 4,164.6 4,886.2 3,706.7 134.9          Aug.1,611.4 1,327.9 19.3 62.2 1,529.9 2,267.0 926.3 10.4 1,439.4 1,993.4 4,169.8 4,884.2 3,745.1 133.8          Sep.
1,636.8 1,339.5 26.3 61.9 1,548.6 2,327.5 932.8 12.0 1,481.6 1,993.6 4,176.8 4,902.8 3,772.2 135.3          Oct.
1,634.4 1,341.4 33.1 64.2 1,537.2 2,306.5 920.7 − 0.1 1,477.0 2,012.1 4,199.3 4,933.8 3,744.6 135.3          Nov.
1,631.7 1,351.0 40.1 66.4 1,525.2 2,216.3 892.9 11.8 1,436.7 2,076.4 4,288.1 5,009.0 3,712.9 140.0          Dec.
1,662.3 1,379.4 37.5 69.5 1,555.3 2,332.5 909.7 20.8 1,473.6 2,027.9 4,344.5 5,121.4 3,762.3 141.3 2001          Jan.
1,679.2 1,388.2 44.2 70.9 1,564.2 2,356.0 911.2 − 19.5 1,491.1 2,027.2 4,351.1 5,150.7 3,771.5 140.8          Feb.
1,696.5 1,396.7 51.9 67.7 1,576.9 2,539.5 926.8 − 21.9 1,536.7 2,038.7 4,378.8 5,199.5 3,802.6 140.7          Mar.
1,703.1 1,397.2 55.8 69.5 1,577.8 2,552.6 927.9 − 12.5 1,524.5 2,071.2 4,416.2 5,243.2 3,800.2 143.2          Apr.
1,718.4 1,394.1 58.0 75.9 1,584.5 2,622.3 939.9 − 13.3 1,520.4 2,091.2 4,436.8 5,288.2 3,818.1 141.5          May
1,733.5 1,403.0 60.5 83.5 1,589.5 2,595.7 966.6 − 16.5 1,535.6 2,127.7 4,480.3 5,329.9 3,848.5 141.7          June
 German contribution (euro billion) 2
748.5 661.1 − 26.6 722.0 531.7 280.1 − 53.0 285.2 563.6 1,308.4 1,409.2 1,784.3 −2000         Feb.
754.3 665.0 − 29.7 724.6 569.9 284.9 − 43.1 290.2 559.4 1,299.0 1,401.9 1,792.8 −         Mar.
768.2 673.4 − 31.2 737.0 598.4 286.0 − 47.7 294.2 570.5 1,300.4 1,403.8 1,807.2 −         Apr.
772.3 681.4 − 30.4 741.9 603.5 287.3 − 34.3 298.1 560.8 1,292.6 1,397.6 1,815.6 −         May
769.4 676.6 − 28.0 741.4 564.0 290.6 − 67.0 303.3 560.2 1,282.4 1,390.7 1,820.5 −         June
779.6 681.3 − 28.3 751.3 569.7 291.1 − 49.8 307.7 555.7 1,272.9 1,383.2 1,833.2 −         July
788.2 684.3 − 31.4 756.8 590.0 291.6 − 46.7 307.2 547.0 1,265.9 1,379.3 1,842.9 −         Aug.
787.4 681.8 − 30.0 757.4 598.5 298.6 − 70.6 327.1 544.9 1,262.9 1,371.9 1,851.6 −         Sep.
792.3 682.9 − 30.4 761.9 625.4 299.6 − 67.5 329.4 548.1 1,262.2 1,375.9 1,858.9 −         Oct.
782.4 676.4 − 31.6 750.8 629.2 300.4 − 54.7 336.9 570.0 1,284.4 1,394.9 1,847.8 −         Nov.
773.4 673.7 − 32.2 741.2 607.4 302.8 − 73.1 334.5 573.8 1,308.6 1,419.1 1,842.4 −         Dec.
785.0 683.8 − 34.6 750.4 633.9 302.7 − 65.2 328.8 558.3 1,290.8 1,400.6 1,850.9 −2001         Jan.
796.1 693.3 − 39.2 756.9 648.4 304.8 − 63.2 331.6 568.3 1,301.2 1,415.5 1,858.7 −         Feb.
797.0 692.2 − 38.9 758.1 728.2 309.4 − 91.4 337.6 568.3 1,304.3 1,419.9 1,866.0 −         Mar.
791.1 685.4 − 40.0 751.1 735.3 240.5 − 3.2 338.9 577.8 1,310.1 1,426.3 1,787.0 −         Apr.
796.4 687.0 − 45.3 751.1 754.2 243.3 − 4.5 332.4 580.4 1,314.9 1,434.8 1,792.0 −         May
806.1 695.9 − 52.5 753.5 727.6 256.2 − 30.4 326.4 586.4 1,322.4 1,444.4 1,805.9 −         June
 German contribution (DM billion) 2
1,464.0 1,292.9 − 52.0 1,412.0 1,039.9 547.9 −103.7 557.7 1,102.4 2,559.0 2,756.1 3,489.9 −2000         Feb.
1,475.2 1,300.7 − 58.1 1,417.1 1,114.7 557.3 − 84.2 567.6 1,094.1 2,540.6 2,741.9 3,506.4 −         Mar.
1,502.5 1,317.1 − 61.0 1,441.5 1,170.3 559.4 − 93.3 575.5 1,115.9 2,543.4 2,745.6 3,534.6 −         Apr.
1,510.5 1,332.6 − 59.5 1,451.0 1,180.3 561.8 − 67.1 583.1 1,096.8 2,528.1 2,733.4 3,550.9 −         May
1,504.8 1,323.4 − 54.7 1,450.1 1,103.2 568.4 −131.1 593.3 1,095.6 2,508.2 2,720.0 3,560.5 −         June
1,524.8 1,332.6 − 55.4 1,469.3 1,114.2 569.2 − 97.3 601.8 1,086.9 2,489.7 2,705.3 3,585.4 −         July
1,541.5 1,338.3 − 61.4 1,480.1 1,154.0 570.4 − 91.3 600.8 1,069.9 2,475.8 2,697.7 3,604.4 −         Aug.
1,540.0 1,333.5 − 58.7 1,481.3 1,170.6 584.1 −138.1 639.7 1,065.8 2,470.1 2,683.2 3,621.5 −         Sep.
1,549.6 1,335.7 − 59.4 1,490.2 1,223.1 586.0 −132.0 644.3 1,072.1 2,468.7 2,691.0 3,635.7 −         Oct.
1,530.3 1,323.0 − 61.8 1,468.4 1,230.6 587.6 −107.0 659.0 1,114.8 2,512.1 2,728.2 3,614.0 −         Nov.
1,512.5 1,317.7 − 62.9 1,449.6 1,188.0 592.2 −142.9 654.2 1,122.3 2,559.4 2,775.5 3,603.4 −         Dec.
1,535.4 1,337.4 − 67.7 1,467.7 1,239.8 592.1 −127.5 643.0 1,091.9 2,524.7 2,739.4 3,620.0 −2001         Jan.
1,557.1 1,355.9 − 76.7 1,480.4 1,268.3 596.1 −123.5 648.6 1,111.5 2,545.0 2,768.4 3,635.3 −         Feb.
1,558.7 1,353.8 − 76.0 1,482.7 1,424.2 605.2 −178.8 660.2 1,111.5 2,551.0 2,777.1 3,649.6 −         Mar.
1,547.3 1,340.5 − 78.3 1,469.1 1,438.1 470.3 − 6.3 662.9 1,130.1 2,562.4 2,789.6 3,495.2 −         Apr.
1,557.6 1,343.6 − 88.6 1,468.9 1,475.1 475.8 − 8.8 650.2 1,135.2 2,571.6 2,806.1 3,504.9 −         May
1,576.5 1,361.0 − 102.8 1,473.8 1,423.0 501.1 − 59.5 638.3 1,146.9 2,586.5 2,825.1 3,532.1 −         June
holdings of money market fund shares /units. —13From January 1999, central governments ’monetary liabilities, which are not included in the
including liabilities of non-residents ’holdings of money market fund consolidated balance sheet. —19M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities
shares/units. —14Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued. — of up to 2 years and at agreed notice of up to 3 months (excluding central
15 For the German contribution: from April 2001, less Inter-MFI governments ’deposits) and (for EMU) central governments ’monetary
participations. —16For the German contribution: from April 2001, not liabilities which such maturities. —20M2 plus repo transactions, money
including Inter-MFI participations. —17The German contributions to the market fund certificates, money market paper and debt securities up to 2
Eurosystem ’s monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as years. —21Deposits with agreed maturities of over 2 years and at agreed
national monetary aggregates, and are therefore not comparable to the notice of over 3 months, debt securities with maturities of over 2 years,erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2 or M3. —18Currency in circulation, capital and reserves. —22Non-existent in Germany. —XFrom January
overnight deposits (excluding central governments ’deposits), and (for EMU) 2001: Enlargement of the euro area. 
13*II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
II. Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  European  monetary  union
  
 3. Banking system ’s liquidity position  *)
Stocks
  
Euro billions; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions ‘
current
Net assets Longer- Other Other accounts
Maintenance in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (includingperiod and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Baseending in  
1) currency operations operations facility facility circulation deposits (net)  4) reserves)  5) money  6) operations  3) operations  3)
Eurosystem  2)
  
1999         Feb. 328.2 104.6 34.2 3.8 30.2 1.3 0.2 329.3 41.0 28.9 100.3 430.9
         Mar. 323.6 136.4 45.0 0.4 − 1.4 − 326.9 49.8 25.0 102.2 430.5
         Apr. 338.4 130.1 45.0 0.7 − 0.3 − 331.0 42.9 39.0 101.1 432.3
         May 342.5 121.6 45.0 0.8 − 0.4 − 333.9 36.3 38.0 101.2 435.5
         June 339.8 132.0 45.0 0.4 − 0.6 − 337.0 40.4 37.2 101.9 439.6
         July 342.4 143.1 45.0 0.4 − 0.5 − 342.1 45.7 39.5 102.9 445.6
         Aug. 343.2 150.1 45.0 0.5 − 1.0 − 344.8 47.3 42.1 103.6 449.4
         Sep. 343.5 150.4 45.0 0.2 − 0.7 − 342.1 51.4 41.6 103.2 446.0
         Oct. 349.7 143.0 45.0 0.3 − 0.6 − 342.5 45.4 45.9 103.5 446.7
         Nov. 351.8 140.5 53.7 0.3 − 0.4 − 343.1 51.5 47.3 104.2 447.6
         Dec. 351.7 150.4 65.0 0.3 − 1.0 − 354.3 59.0 47.5 105.6 460.8
2000         Jan. 362.3 138.5 75.0 1.9 − 0.5 3.3 363.0 41.0 61.2 108.7 472.3
         Feb. 367.8 130.9 70.5 0.1 − 0.2 − 347.6 49.2 64.2 108.1 455.9
         Mar. 369.2 136.1 66.2 0.2 − 0.3 − 347.6 51.7 63.5 108.6 456.4
         Apr. 377.1 136.7 61.0 0.2 − 0.9 − 349.7 45.6 69.1 109.7 460.3
         May 378.8 142.6 60.0 0.4 − 2.3 − 353.8 41.9 71.8 112.0 468.2
         June 378.1 140.9 59.9 0.3 0.2 0.8 − 354.1 38.3 72.1 114.2 469.1
         July 380.8 157.9 59.9 0.4 − 0.5 − 357.0 50.4 76.8 114.2 471.7
         Aug. 382.0 163.1 55.4 0.1 − 0.3 − 359.2 48.8 80.0 112.4 471.9
         Sep. 381.6 173.1 51.1 0.3 − 0.2 − 354.8 56.6 81.2 113.3 468.3
         Oct. 396.3 176.5 45.7 0.5 − 0.2 − 354.5 47.4 102.5 114.4 469.1
         Nov. 398.6 183.7 45.0 0.2 − 0.2 − 352.7 49.8 109.2 115.7 468.6
         Dec. 394.4 210.4 45.0 0.4 − 0.2 − 360.4 61.1 111.1 117.4 478.0
2001         Jan.  7) 383.7 205.3 45.0 0.5 − 0.6 − 368.3 52.2 94.2 119.1 488.0
         Feb. 377.9 188.9 49.8 2.6 − 0.4 − 354.8 57.0 86.3 120.7 476.0
         Mar. 375.6 185.2 54.1 0.4 − 0.5 − 353.0 53.0 87.7 121.0 474.5
         Apr. 382.1 172.4 58.4 2.2 − 0.5 − 354.6 49.5 89.1 121.4 476.4
         May 384.4 144.0 59.1 0.4 17.0 0.6 − 352.7 39.4 87.5 124.8 478.1
         June 385.0 161.7 59.1 0.2 − 0.4 − 351.1 41.3 87.5 125.7 477.3
         July 397.6 161.9 59.9 0.2 − 0.4 − 350.8 42.5 98.8 127.1 478.3
Deutsche Bundesbank
1999         Feb. 80.5 55.0 18.2 2.0 19.4 0.9 − 127.2 0.2 16.4 30.5 158.5
         Mar. 79.1 64.2 26.1 0.3 − 0.6 − 126.7 0.1 11.4 30.9 158.2
         Apr. 83.0 67.7 27.7 0.5 − 0.2 − 128.1 0.1 19.9 30.6 158.9
         May 84.6 60.0 25.5 0.6 − 0.2 − 128.9 0.1 10.9 30.5 159.7
         June 84.7 67.5 25.0 0.3 − 0.4 − 129.4 0.1 16.9 30.8 160.6
         July 85.1 70.3 26.5 0.3 − 0.2 − 129.9 0.1 20.6 31.3 161.4
         Aug. 85.3 71.7 29.2 0.3 − 0.2 − 130.4 0.1 24.4 31.4 162.0
         Sep. 85.6 68.5 28.3 0.1 − 0.3 − 130.3 0.1 20.5 31.2 161.8
         Oct. 87.3 66.6 25.6 0.2 − 0.2 − 130.2 0.1 17.8 31.4 161.8
         Nov. 87.8 68.7 28.6 0.2 − 0.2 − 130.5 0.1 22.8 31.7 162.3
         Dec. 88.0 57.5 34.7 0.2 − 0.6 − 134.4 0.1 13.1 32.1 167.1
2000         Jan. 90.6 49.0 32.7 1.4 − 0.3 0.5 136.6 0.1 3.0 33.3 170.2
         Feb. 91.5 65.4 33.5 0.1 − 0.2 − 132.0 0.1 24.5 33.7 165.8
         Mar. 91.9 61.8 34.4 0.1 − 0.2 − 131.6 0.1 22.7 33.6 165.4
         Apr. 93.7 62.0 43.2 0.2 − 0.6 − 131.8 0.1 32.7 34.0 166.4
         May 93.7 60.1 39.5 0.3 − 1.8 − 132.3 0.1 24.8 34.5 168.6
         June 93.3 59.6 35.4 0.2 0.1 0.3 − 132.0 0.1 21.2 35.1 167.3
         July 93.4 67.9 33.3 0.2 − 0.4 − 131.8 0.1 27.6 35.1 167.2
         Aug. 93.0 71.6 34.9 0.1 − 0.1 − 131.9 0.1 33.1 34.5 166.5
         Sep. 92.6 81.9 33.8 0.3 − 0.1 − 131.4 0.1 42.6 34.4 165.9
         Oct. 97.0 87.2 30.7 0.3 − 0.1 − 131.1 0.1 49.5 34.5 165.7
         Nov. 98.2 99.1 30.7 0.2 − 0.1 − 130.1 0.1 63.0 34.9 165.1
         Dec. 97.6 103.5 31.1 0.2 − 0.1 − 132.0 0.1 65.0 35.2 167.4
2001         Jan. 93.0 103.1 28.4 0.3 − 0.3 − 131.2 0.1 57.7 35.6 167.1
         Feb. 90.3 93.2 28.3 1.3 − 0.2 − 126.7 0.1 50.0 36.2 163.1
         Mar. 89.1 87.6 33.2 0.2 − 0.4 − 126.2 0.1 47.6 35.9 162.4
         Apr. 90.1 84.5 37.4 1.5 − 0.2 − 126.2 0.1 50.7 36.4 162.8
         May 90.0 67.4 37.8 0.2 7.5 0.5 − 124.8 0.1 47.6 37.4 162.7
         June 89.7 79.9 37.5 0.1 − 0.3 − 123.6 0.1 45.7 37.5 161.4
         July 92.8 85.4 37.0 0.1 − 0.3 − 121.8 0.1 55.5 37.7 159.7
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. —*The banking system ’s liquidity minimum reserve system starts on the 24th of each month and ends on the
position is defined as the current account holdings in euro of credit in- 23rd of the following month (the first reserve maintenance period lastedstitutions in the euro area with the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from from January 1, 1999 to February 23, 1999). —2Source: ECB. —3Includes
the consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the statement monetary policy operations initiated by national central banks in Stage Tw o
of the Bundesbank. —1The reserve maintenance period of the ESCB and outstanding at the start of Stage Three (excluding outright operations
14*II. Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  European  monetary  union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
II. Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  European  monetary  union
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions ‘
current
Net assets Longer- Other Other accountsin gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Maintenanceand foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base periodcurrency operations operations facility facility circulation deposits (net)  
4) reserves)  5) money  6) ending in  1) operations  3) operations  3)
Eurosystem  2)
  
. . . . . . . . . . . . 1999          Feb.
− 4.6 + 31.8 + 10.8 −3.4 − 30.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 2.4 + 8.8 −3.9 + 1.9 − 0.4          Mar.
+ 14.8 − 6.3 − 0.0 + 0.3 −− 1.1 − + 4.1 − 6.9 + 14.0 − 1.1 + 1.8          Apr.
+ 4.1 − 8.5 − 0.0 + 0.1 − + 0.1 − + 2.9 − 6.6 −1.0 + 0.1 + 3.2          May
− 2.7 + 10.4 + 0.0 −0.4 − + 0.2 − + 3.1 + 4.1 −0.8 + 0.7 + 4.1          June
+ 2.6 + 11.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 −− 0.1 − + 5.1 + 5.3 + 2.3 + 1.0 + 6.0          July
+ 0.8 + 7.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 − + 0.5 − + 2.7 + 1.6 + 2.6 + 0.7 + 3.8          Aug.
+ 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.0 −0.3 −− 0.3 −− 2.7 + 4.1 −0.5 − 0.4 − 3.4          Sep.
+ 6.2 − 7.4 + 0.0 + 0.1 −− 0.1 − + 0.4 − 6.0 + 4.3 + 0.3 + 0.7          Oct.
+ 2.1 − 2.5 + 8.7 + 0.0 −− 0.2 − + 0.6 + 6.1 + 1.4 + 0.7 + 0.9          Nov.
− 0.1 + 9.9 + 11.3 −0.0 − + 0.6 − + 11.2 + 7.5 + 0.2 + 1.4 + 13.2          Dec.
+ 10.6 −11.9 + 10.0 + 1.6 −− 0.5 + 3.3 + 8.7 −18.0 + 13.7 + 3.1 + 11.5 2000          Jan.
+ 5.5 − 7.6 − 4.5 −1.8 −− 0.3 − 3.3 −15.4 + 8.2 + 3.0 − 0.6 − 16.4          Feb.
+ 1.4 + 5.2 − 4.3 + 0.1 − + 0.1 − + 0.0 + 2.5 −0.7 + 0.5 + 0.5          Mar.
+ 7.9 + 0.6 − 5.2 + 0.0 − + 0.6 − + 2.1 − 6.1 + 5.6 + 1.1 + 3.9          Apr.
+ 1.7 + 5.9 − 1.0 + 0.2 − + 1.4 − + 4.1 − 3.7 + 2.7 + 2.3 + 7.9          May
− 0.7 − 1.7 − 0.1 −0.1 + 0.2 −1.5 − + 0.3 − 3.6 + 0.3 + 2.2 + 0.9          June
+ 2.7 + 17.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.2 −0.3 − + 2.9 + 12.1 + 4.7 − 0.0 + 2.6          July
+ 1.2 + 5.2 − 4.5 −0.3 −− 0.2 − + 2.2 − 1.6 + 3.2 − 1.8 + 0.2          Aug.
− 0.4 + 10.0 − 4.3 + 0.2 −− 0.1 −− 4.4 + 7.8 + 1.2 + 0.9 − 3.6          Sep.
+ 14.7 + 3.4 − 5.4 + 0.2 − + 0.0 −− 0.3 − 9.2 + 21.3 + 1.1 + 0.8          Oct.
+ 2.3 + 7.2 − 0.7 −0.3 − + 0.0 −− 1.8 + 2.4 + 6.7 + 1.3 − 0.5          Nov.
− 4.2 + 26.7 − 0.0 + 0.2 − + 0.0 − + 7.7 + 11.3 + 1.9 + 1.7 + 9.4          Dec.
−10.7 − 5.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − + 0.4 − + 7.9 − 8.9 −16.9 + 1.7 + 10.0 2001          Jan.  7)
− 5.8 −16.4 + 4.8 + 2.1 −− 0.2 −− 13.5 + 4.8 −7.9 + 1.6 − 12.0          Feb.
− 2.3 − 3.7 + 4.3 −2.2 − + 0.1 −− 1.8 − 4.0 + 1.4 + 0.3 − 1.5          Mar.
+ 6.5 −12.8 + 4.3 + 1.8 −− 0.0 − + 1.6 − 3.5 + 1.4 + 0.4 + 1.9          Apr.
+ 2.3 −28.4 + 0.7 −1.8 + 17.0 + 0.1 −− 1.9 −10.1 −1.6 + 3.4 + 1.7          May
+ 0.6 + 17.7 + 0.0 −0.2 − 17.0 −0.2 −− 1.6 + 1.9 + 0.0 + 0.9 − 0.8          June
+ 12.6 + 0.2 + 0.8 + 0.0 − + 0.0 −− 0.3 + 1.2 + 11.3 + 1.4 + 1.0          July
Deutsche Bundesbank
... . . . − . . . . . 1999          Feb.
− 1.4 + 9.2 + 7.9 −1.7 − 19.4 −0.3 −− 0.5 − 0.0 −5.0 + 0.4 − 0.4          Mar.
+ 3.9 + 3.4 + 1.6 + 0.2 −− 0.4 − + 1.4 + 0.0 + 8.5 − 0.3 + 0.7          Apr.
+ 1.5 − 7.7 − 2.2 + 0.1 −− 0.0 − + 0.8 − 0.0 −9.0 − 0.0 + 0.8          May
+ 0.2 + 7.5 − 0.5 −0.4 − + 0.2 − + 0.5 − 0.0 + 6.0 + 0.3 + 0.9          June
+ 0.4 + 2.7 + 1.5 −0.0 −− 0.1 − + 0.5 + 0.0 + 3.7 + 0.5 + 0.9          July
+ 0.2 + 1.4 + 2.7 + 0.1 − + 0.0 − + 0.5 − 0.0 + 3.8 + 0.2 + 0.6          Aug.
+ 0.3 − 3.2 − 0.9 −0.2 − + 0.1 −− 0.1 + 0.0 −3.8 − 0.3 − 0.3          Sep.
+ 1.7 − 1.8 − 2.7 + 0.1 −− 0.1 −− 0.1 − 0.0 −2.8 + 0.2 + 0.0          Oct.
+ 0.6 + 2.1 + 3.0 −0.1 −− 0.0 − + 0.3 + 0.0 + 5.0 + 0.3 + 0.5          Nov.
+ 0.2 −11.2 + 6.1 + 0.0 − + 0.4 − + 3.9 + 0.0 −9.7 + 0.5 + 4.8          Dec.
+ 2.6 − 8.5 − 2.0 + 1.2 −− 0.3 + 0.5 + 2.2 − 0.0 −10.1 + 1.2 + 3.1 2000          Jan.
+ 0.9 + 16.4 + 0.8 −1.4 −− 0.1 − 0.5 − 4.6 − 0.0 + 21.5 + 0.3 − 4.4          Feb.
+ 0.4 − 3.6 + 0.9 + 0.1 −− 0.0 −− 0.3 + 0.0 −1.8 − 0.1 − 0.4          Mar.
+ 1.8 + 0.3 + 8.8 + 0.0 − + 0.4 − + 0.2 − 0.0 + 9.9 + 0.4 + 1.0          Apr.
− 0.0 − 1.9 − 3.7 + 0.1 − + 1.2 − + 0.5 + 0.0 −7.8 + 0.5 + 2.2          May
− 0.4 − 0.5 − 4.1 −0.0 + 0.1 −1.5 −− 0.3 + 0.0 −3.6 + 0.5 − 1.3          June
+ 0.2 + 8.3 − 2.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 −− 0.1 − 0.0 + 6.4 − 0.0 − 0.1          July
− 0.4 + 3.7 + 1.6 −0.2 −− 0.3 − + 0.1 − 0.0 + 5.6 − 0.6 − 0.8          Aug.
− 0.5 + 10.3 − 1.1 + 0.2 −− 0.0 −− 0.5 + 0.0 + 9.5 − 0.1 − 0.6          Sep.
+ 4.5 + 5.3 − 3.1 + 0.0 − + 0.0 −− 0.3 + 0.0 + 6.9 + 0.1 − 0.2          Oct.
+ 1.2 + 11.8 − 0.0 −0.2 − + 0.0 −− 1.0 + 0.0 + 13.4 + 0.4 − 0.6          Nov.
− 0.6 + 4.5 + 0.5 + 0.1 − + 0.0 − + 1.9 + 0.0 + 2.1 + 0.4 + 2.3          Dec.
− 4.6 − 0.5 − 2.7 + 0.1 − + 0.2 −− 0.8 − 0.0 −7.4 + 0.3 − 0.2 2001          Jan.
− 2.7 − 9.8 − 0.1 + 1.0 −− 0.1 −− 4.6 − 0.0 −7.7 + 0.6 − 4.0          Feb.
− 1.2 − 5.6 + 4.8 −1.2 − + 0.1 −− 0.5 − 0.0 −2.4 − 0.4 − 0.7          Mar.
+ 1.0 − 3.1 + 4.3 + 1.3 −− 0.2 −− 0.0 + 0.0 + 3.1 + 0.5 + 0.4          Apr.
− 0.1 −17.2 + 0.3 −1.2 + 7.5 + 0.3 −− 1.4 + 0.0 −3.1 + 1.1 − 0.1          May
− 0.3 + 12.5 − 0.3 −0.1 − 7.5 −0.2 −− 1.2 + 0.0 −1.9 + 0.1 − 1.3          June
+ 3.2 + 5.5 − 0.5 + 0.0 − + 0.0 −− 1.9 − 0.0 + 9.9 + 0.2 − 1.7          July
and the issuance of debt certificates); for the Bundesbank: including banks ’ as the sum of the "deposit facility", "banknotes in circulation" and "credit
recourse to rediscount quotas. —4Remaining items in the consolidated institutions ’current account holdings" or, alternatively, as the difference
financial statement of the Eurosystem and the statement of the between the sum of liquidity-providing factors and the sum of governmentBundesbank. —5Equal to the difference between the sum of liquidity- deposits and other factors (net). —7Entry of Greece into the euro area on
providing factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors. —6Calculated January 1, 2001. 
15*II. Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  European  monetary  union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1. Assets *
  
Euro billion
Claims on non-euro area Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
investments, euro area Balances Claimsexternal loans residents with banks, arising from
On Gold and other denominated security the creditreporting Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility underdate assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans  
2 ERM II
 Eurosystem 1
 
2000         Jan. 772.7 116.3 256.3 29.5 226.8 14.8 4.8 4.8 −
         Feb. 752.2 115.9 255.6 29.2 226.4 15.5 4.7 4.7 −
         Mar. 774.4 115.7 267.1 30.3 236.9 16.9 4.1 4.1 −
         Apr. 783.0 115.7 267.4 27.4 240.0 17.3 4.8 4.8 −
         May 779.2 115.7 267.5 26.9 240.6 17.6 5.0 5.0 −
         June 812.5 121.2 263.9 26.5 237.4 18.3 4.1 4.1 −
         July 800.7 120.9 264.1 26.2 237.9 16.7 3.8 3.8 −
         Aug. 797.0 120.9 263.7 26.3 237.4 15.3 4.2 4.2 −
         Sep. 826.3 124.9 281.7 27.5 254.2 16.6 4.0 4.0 −
         Oct. 822.1 124.9 282.4 27.2 255.2 14.2 3.7 3.7 −
         Nov. 833.1 124.9 272.0 26.9 245.1 16.3 4.0 4.0 −
         Dec. 835.1 117.1 258.7 26.7 232.0 15.8 3.7 3.7 −
2001         Jan. 5 853.5 118.6 266.5 27.9 238.6 19.6 4.5 4.5 −
         Feb. 871.6 118.6 263.7 27.2 236.5 20.3 5.5 5.5 −
         Mar. 848.0 118.5 271.6 27.5 244.1 20.1 5.4 5.4 −
         Apr. 839.3 118.5 266.5 27.3 239.2 23.1 5.1 5.1 −
2001 May                 4 819.7 118.5 266.0 27.1 238.9 22.8 5.2 5.2 −
                              11 820.9 118.5 265.6 26.6 239.1 23.1 5.3 5.3 −
                              18 814.9 118.5 270.3 28.3 242.0 20.6 5.6 5.6 −
                              25 825.4 118.5 267.7 28.1 239.6 23.0 5.4 5.4 −
         June                 1 830.4 118.5 269.2 28.2 241.0 22.4 5.2 5.2 −
                                8 827.4 118.5 269.0 28.1 240.9 22.2 5.2 5.2 −
                              15 819.0 118.5 269.1 28.0 241.1 22.9 5.3 5.3 −
                              22 824.4 118.5 270.4 28.0 242.5 23.2 5.3 5.3 −
                              29 3 862.8 3 128.5 3 279.0 3 29.7 3 249.4 3 22.5 5.7 5.7 −
         July                 6 852.9 128.5 280.5 29.7 250.8 22.4 5.4 5.4 −
                              13 842.4 128.5 280.4 29.6 250.8 23.2 5.7 5.7 −
                              20 841.9 128.5 280.8 30.1 250.7 23.8 5.7 5.7 −
                              27 862.1 128.4 279.8 29.9 249.8 24.0 5.6 5.6 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2000         Jan. 235.2 32.3 60.7 8.3 52.4 − 0.8 0.8 −
         Feb. 243.2 32.3 61.1 8.2 52.9 − 6.2 6.2 −
         Mar. 242.7 32.2 64.6 8.7 55.9 − 10.5 10.5 −
         Apr. 239.8 32.2 63.3 7.7 55.6 − 8.3 8.3 −
         May 228.9 32.2 63.1 7.7 55.4 − 11.4 11.4 −
         June 242.3 33.7 62.3 7.6 54.7 − 4.5 4.5 −
         July 242.2 33.7 61.1 7.4 53.7 − 14.6 14.6 −
         Aug. 269.3 33.7 60.9 7.4 53.4 − 32.6 32.6 −
         Sep. 244.8 34.9 65.9 7.8 58.1 − 5.6 5.6 −
         Oct. 263.3 34.9 65.3 7.7 57.6 − 16.5 16.5 −
         Nov. 287.7 34.9 65.0 7.6 57.4 − 29.8 29.8 −
         Dec. 256.9 32.7 61.1 7.8 53.4 − 0.3 0.3 −
2001         Jan. 243.5 32.7 59.9 7.9 52.0 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Feb. 255.2 32.7 58.7 7.6 51.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Mar. 245.3 32.7 60.5 7.8 52.7 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Apr. 239.1 32.7 59.4 7.7 51.7 − 0.3 0.3 −
2001 May                 4 229.4 32.7 59.1 7.6 51.5 − 0.3 0.3 −
                              11 233.0 32.7 58.5 7.3 51.2 − 0.3 0.3 −
                              18 228.7 32.7 58.9 7.7 51.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
                              25 229.8 32.7 58.8 7.7 51.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
         June                 1 233.1 32.7 58.8 7.7 51.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
                                8 236.5 32.7 58.8 7.7 51.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
                              15 231.8 32.7 58.7 7.5 51.2 − 0.3 0.3 −
                              22 230.3 32.7 58.6 7.4 51.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
                              29 3 247.3 3 35.5 3 60.3 3 8.2 3 52.2 − 0.3 0.3 −
         July                 6 244.9 35.5 60.3 8.2 52.2 − 0.3 0.3 −
                              13 239.9 35.5 60.4 8.2 52.2 − 0.3 0.3 −
                              20 236.4 35.5 60.3 8.2 52.2 0.1 0.3 0.3 −
                              27 241.0 35.4 60.4 8.2 52.3 − 0.3 0.3 −
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quarter. —
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the statements of the 1Source: ECB. —2Since November 30, 2000, the Bundesbank ’s claims on
national central banks of the EU member countries (NCBs) of the euro and liabilities to non-Eurosystem NCBs arising from TARGET have beenarea. —The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold and shown as a balance under "Other assets" and "Other liabilities". —
16*III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
    
 
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations
denominated in euro
 Other
 claims on euro area credit Securities General
Credits institutions of euro area government
Main Longer-term Fine-tuning Structural Marginal related denomi- residents debt    Onrefinancing refinancing reverse reverse lending to margin nated in denominated denominated Other    reporting
Total  
4 operations operations operations operations facility calls euro  4 in euro in euro assets    date
Eurosystem 1
 
216.7 146.0 70.0 −− 0.0 0.1 0.6 24.0 59.3 80.6 2000          Jan.
193.3 122.0 70.0 −− 0.0 0.1 1.3 24.6 59.3 83.3          Feb.
201.7 140.9 60.0 −− 0.1 0.1 0.7 25.3 59.0 84.5          Mar.
209.9 147.2 60.0 −− 1.6 0.0 1.2 24.9 59.0 83.8          Apr.
205.4 144.1 60.0 −− 0.2 0.0 1.1 25.2 59.0 83.9          May
234.5 173.0 59.9 −− 0.1 0.1 1.4 25.1 59.0 86.3          June
226.3 171.0 54.9 −− 0.0 0.0 0.3 25.4 59.0 84.6          July
222.7 167.0 54.9 −− 0.6 0.0 0.1 25.5 59.0 85.7          Aug.
230.3 185.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.1 0.1 25.6 58.9 84.3          Sep.
228.5 183.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.5 25.8 58.9 83.7          Oct.
243.3 198.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.3 26.0 58.8 87.8          Nov.
268.6 223.0 45.0 −− 0.6 0.1 0.6 26.0 57.7 87.0          Dec.
255.2 205.0 50.0 −− 0.2 0.0 1.0 28.2 70.3 89.6 2001          Jan. 5 
274.0 220.3 50.0 −− 3.6 0.0 0.9 27.5 70.2 90.9          Feb.
244.3 185.0 59.1 −− 0.1 0.1 0.6 27.9 70.2 89.5          Mar.
236.2 177.0 59.1 −− 0.1 0.1 0.5 27.8 70.2 91.5          Apr.
217.1 85.0 59.1 − 73.0 0.0 0.0 0.6 27.9 70.2 91.4 2001 May                  4
218.2 159.0 59.1 −− 0.1 0.0 0.3 27.9 70.2 91.9                               11
210.2 151.0 59.1 −− 0.1 0.0 0.3 27.8 70.2 91.4                               18
221.2 162.0 59.1 −− 0.1 0.0 0.4 27.8 70.2 91.3                               25
226.4 167.0 59.1 −− 0.3 0.0 0.3 28.0 70.2 90.4          June                  1
224.2 165.0 59.1 −− 0.1 0.0 0.2 28.1 70.2 89.8                                 8
214.4 155.0 59.1 −− 0.3 0.0 0.2 28.1 70.2 90.3                               15
217.9 158.0 59.1 −− 0.8 0.0 0.2 28.0 70.2 90.7                               22
236.2 176.0 60.0 −− 0.2 0.0 0.5 27.7 70.2 3 92.5                               29
226.2 166.0 60.0 −− 0.2 0.0 0.3 28.1 70.2 91.4          July                  6
214.1 154.0 60.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.4 28.0 70.2 91.9                               13
212.1 152.0 60.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.4 28.0 70.2 92.5                               20
233.0 173.0 60.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.3 28.1 70.2 92.7                               27
 Deutsche Bundesbank
102.8 69.2 33.6 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 34.1 2000          Jan.
93.0 59.4 33.6 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 46.1          Feb.
112.5 67.2 45.3 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.4          Mar.
103.9 64.2 38.9 −− 0.9 − 0.0 − 4.4 27.6          Apr.
99.5 60.4 38.9 −− 0.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.3          May
93.1 59.8 33.2 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 44.2          June
109.9 74.8 35.1 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.5          July
118.7 83.0 35.1 −− 0.6 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.9          Aug.
108.3 78.0 30.3 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 25.7          Sep.
123.1 92.4 30.7 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.2          Oct.
134.3 103.5 30.7 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.3          Nov.
139.2 110.7 27.9 −− 0.6 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.1          Dec.
126.8 98.3 28.3 −− 0.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.4 2001          Jan.
140.0 109.9 28.3 −− 1.8 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.1          Feb.
119.3 81.2 38.0 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 28.0          Mar.
124.0 86.3 37.7 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.2          Apr.
114.5 44.6 37.7 − 32.2 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.3 2001 May                  4
109.4 71.6 37.7 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 27.6                               11
103.9 66.1 37.7 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 28.5                               18
115.1 77.3 37.7 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.4                               25
116.5 78.8 37.4 −− 0.3 − 0.0 − 4.4 20.4          June                  1
121.9 84.5 37.4 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.4                                 8
117.3 79.7 37.4 −− 0.3 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.3                               15
115.9 78.3 37.4 −− 0.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.4                               22
128.2 91.2 36.9 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.6                               29
125.7 88.6 36.9 −− 0.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.7          July                  6
120.7 83.8 36.9 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.7                               13
117.1 80.2 36.9 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.7                               20
121.8 83.5 38.3 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.7                               27
 
3Changes are due mainly to revaluations at the end of the quarter. — credit institutions denominated in euro" have been shown as a separate
4Until December 22, 2000, "Other claims" were included in "Lending to item. —5Enlargement of the euro area on January 1, 2001 through the
euro area counterparties related to monetary policy operations accession of Greece. denominated in euro". Since December 29, 2000 "Other claims on euro area
17*III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2. Liabilities *
  
Euro billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilitiesaccounts to euro(covering Fine- area creditthe tuning Deposits institutions Debt
On Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
reporting Total in cir- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Otherdate liabilities culation Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment liabilities
 Eurosystem 1
 
2000         Jan. 772.7 348.0 115.7 115.5 0.1 −− 0.0 . 7.9 56.8 52.3 4.5
         Feb. 752.2 345.0 95.5 95.4 0.1 −− 0.0 . 7.9 60.8 57.3 3.5
         Mar. 774.4 347.9 111.2 110.1 1.1 −−− . 6.3 52.3 48.7 3.6
         Apr. 783.0 354.3 111.9 101.5 10.4 −− 0.0 . 6.3 53.8 50.3 3.6
         May 779.2 350.9 115.9 115.9 0.0 −− 0.0 . 6.3 47.7 44.0 3.7
         June 812.5 355.7 120.4 120.3 0.1 −− 0.0 . 6.3 65.2 61.5 3.7
         July 800.7 358.5 113.5 113.4 0.0 −− 0.0 . 6.3 60.1 56.7 3.4
         Aug. 797.0 353.8 106.5 106.5 0.0 −− 0.0 . 6.3 65.5 61.9 3.5
         Sep. 826.3 354.8 115.3 114.9 0.4 −−− . 4.6 58.1 54.3 3.8
         Oct. 822.1 352.1 121.7 121.7 0.1 −−− . 4.6 49.4 45.7 3.7
         Nov. 833.1 350.1 113.7 113.6 0.1 −−− . 3.8 67.4 63.4 4.0
         Dec. 835.1 371.4 124.6 124.4 0.2 −−− 0.3 3.8 57.0 53.4 3.7
2001         Jan. 4 853.5 355.6 123.5 123.4 0.0 −− 0.0 8.0 3.8 73.8 68.0 5.7
         Feb. 871.6 352.0 144.5 143.7 0.8 −−− 7.5 3.8 74.0 68.0 6.0
         Mar. 848.0 351.7 126.9 126.7 0.1 −−− 6.1 3.8 60.5 54.6 5.9
         Apr. 839.3 352.7 133.2 133.1 0.0 −− 0.0 6.1 3.8 53.9 48.1 5.8
2001 May                 4 819.7 355.9 121.7 121.6 0.1 −− 0.0 6.1 3.8 42.4 36.6 5.8
                              11 820.9 353.6 126.3 126.3 0.1 −− 0.0 6.3 3.8 40.7 35.0 5.7
                              18 814.9 350.9 124.9 124.8 0.1 −− 0.0 6.3 3.8 38.4 32.8 5.6
                              25 825.4 350.2 121.1 121.0 0.1 −− 0.0 6.2 3.8 52.9 47.2 5.7
         June                 1 830.4 352.9 127.0 127.0 0.1 −− 0.0 6.1 3.8 49.6 43.9 5.7
                                8 827.4 353.5 127.2 127.2 0.1 −− 0.0 6.2 3.8 46.8 41.1 5.7
                              15 819.0 351.8 122.1 122.0 0.1 −−− 6.2 3.8 43.8 37.8 6.0
                              22 824.4 348.5 131.2 130.2 1.0 −− 0.0 6.1 3.8 41.8 36.0 5.8
                              29 3 862.8 350.2 117.8 117.6 0.3 −−− 6.1 3.8 69.7 63.9 5.8
         July                 6 852.9 353.6 132.8 132.6 0.1 −− 0.1 4.3 3.8 44.5 38.9 5.6
                              13 842.4 352.5 128.0 127.2 0.8 −− 0.0 4.4 3.8 38.9 33.5 5.4
                              20 841.9 349.8 131.7 130.4 1.3 −− 0.0 4.2 3.8 37.6 32.1 5.4
                              27 862.1 348.3 128.5 128.5 0.0 −− 0.0 4.1 3.8 62.8 57.3 5.5
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2000         Jan. 235.2 131.8 30.1 30.0 0.1 −−− . − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Feb. 243.2 130.9 29.1 29.0 0.1 −−− . − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Mar. 242.7 131.2 39.0 38.0 1.0 −−− . − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Apr. 239.8 132.5 42.2 31.8 10.4 −−− . − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         May 228.9 130.9 34.1 34.1 0.0 −−− . − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         June 242.3 131.5 45.2 45.2 0.0 −−− . − 0.6 0.1 0.6
         July 242.2 131.4 35.8 35.8 0.0 −−− . − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Aug. 269.3 130.9 34.3 34.3 0.0 −−− . − 0.4 0.1 0.4
         Sep. 244.8 131.3 37.2 37.1 0.1 −−− . − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Oct. 263.3 130.1 32.2 32.2 0.0 −−− . − 0.4 0.1 0.4
         Nov. 287.7 129.3 31.0 30.9 0.1 −−− . − 0.4 0.1 0.3
         Dec. 256.9 133.9 47.0 46.9 0.1 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
2001         Jan. 243.5 126.8 33.1 33.1 0.0 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Feb. 255.2 126.2 46.1 45.8 0.3 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Mar. 245.3 125.3 45.1 45.0 0.1 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Apr. 239.1 125.0 40.8 40.8 0.0 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
2001 May                 4 229.4 125.8 35.4 35.3 0.1 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
                              11 233.0 125.2 40.9 40.9 0.1 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
                              18 228.7 124.2 37.1 37.0 0.1 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
                              25 229.8 124.1 32.6 32.5 0.1 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         June                 1 233.1 124.3 41.0 41.0 0.1 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
                                8 236.5 124.2 39.3 39.3 0.0 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
                              15 231.8 123.7 32.1 32.0 0.1 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
                              22 230.3 122.2 35.5 35.1 0.3 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
                              29 3 247.3 121.9 42.7 42.5 0.2 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         July                 6 244.9 122.8 35.5 35.3 0.1 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
                              13 239.9 122.0 39.1 38.4 0.8 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.5
                              20 236.4 120.9 41.6 40.3 1.3 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
                              27 241.0 119.9 33.6 33.6 0.0 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the area. —The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold and
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the statements of the financial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quarter. —
national central banks of the EU member countries (NCBs) of the euro 1Source: ECB. —2Whereas the consolidated financial statement of the
18*III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
    
 
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated inforeign currency
 
Liabilities  
Liabilities to euro area Liabilities Counterpart  to non-euro residents Deposits, arising of special  area residents denominated balances from the drawing  Capital    Ondenominated in foreign and other credit facility rights allocated Other Revaluation and    reportingin euro  
2 currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF liabilities accounts reserves    date
Eurosystem 1
 
7.0 1.2 13.3 13.3 − 6.5 55.6 107.5 53.4 2000          Jan.
7.8 0.8 10.5 10.5 − 6.5 55.7 107.4 54.2          Feb.
7.0 0.9 9.9 9.9 − 6.8 59.9 118.0 54.3          Mar.
7.7 0.8 13.5 13.5 − 6.8 55.3 118.0 54.6          Apr.
7.3 0.8 14.7 14.7 − 6.8 55.9 118.0 55.0          May
7.3 0.8 13.3 13.3 − 6.7 60.7 120.9 55.1          June
7.3 0.8 11.8 11.8 − 6.7 59.7 120.9 55.1          July
8.1 0.8 10.7 10.7 − 6.7 62.5 120.9 55.1          Aug.
9.2 0.9 11.7 11.7 − 7.1 65.4 144.2 55.1          Sep.
9.3 0.9 11.8 11.8 − 7.1 65.9 144.2 55.1          Oct.
11.4 0.9 10.3 10.3 − 7.1 69.1 144.2 55.2          Nov.
10.8 0.8 12.4 12.4 − 6.7 73.5 117.7 56.1          Dec.
11.1 5.1 13.0 13.0 − 7.2 78.9 119.3 54.4 2001          Jan. 4 
10.2 5.0 14.5 14.5 − 7.2 78.4 119.3 55.4          Feb.
8.5 3.8 13.0 13.0 − 7.0 82.5 126.3 58.0          Mar.
8.4 3.8 12.4 12.4 − 7.0 72.6 126.3 59.2          Apr.
8.8 3.8 12.3 12.3 − 7.0 72.3 126.3 59.2 2001 May                  4
8.5 3.8 12.9 12.9 − 7.0 72.4 126.3 59.2                               11
8.7 3.8 13.6 13.6 − 7.0 72.0 126.3 59.3                               18
8.9 3.8 13.6 13.6 − 7.0 71.8 126.3 59.9                               25
8.6 3.8 14.2 14.2 − 7.0 70.8 126.3 60.5          June                  1
8.5 3.9 13.9 13.9 − 7.0 69.9 126.3 60.5                                 8
8.8 3.8 14.5 14.5 − 7.0 70.6 126.3 60.5                               15
8.7 3.9 15.9 15.9 − 7.0 70.9 126.3 60.5                               22
10.2 3.9 3 17.0 3 17.0 − 7.2 3 75.0 3 141.3 60.5                               29
8.7 3.9 18.0 18.0 − 7.2 74.2 141.3 60.5          July                  6
8.7 4.1 18.5 18.5 − 7.2 74.5 141.3 60.5                               13
8.5 4.2 18.5 18.5 − 7.2 74.6 141.3 60.5                               20
8.6 4.0 18.6 18.6 − 7.2 74.4 141.3 60.5                               27
 Deutsche Bundesbank
18.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 12.3 35.0 5.1 2000          Jan.
28.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 12.8 35.0 5.1          Feb.
13.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 13.6 38.0 5.1          Mar.
10.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 9.3 38.0 5.1          Apr.
6.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 11.7 38.0 5.1          May
8.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 11.1 39.0 5.1          June
6.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 22.0 39.0 5.1          July
7.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 50.9 39.0 5.1          Aug.
10.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.8 13.5 45.2 5.1          Sep.
7.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.8 40.7 45.2 5.1          Oct.
8.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.8 66.1 45.2 5.1          Nov.
6.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 22.9 39.2 5.1          Dec.
6.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 30.4 39.2 5.1 2001          Jan.
6.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 29.5 39.2 5.1          Feb.
6.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 19.2 41.4 5.1          Mar.
6.8 0.0 −−− 1.7 17.8 41.4 5.1          Apr.
7.0 0.0 −−− 1.7 12.5 41.4 5.1 2001 May                  4
6.8 0.0 −−− 1.7 11.3 41.4 5.1                               11
6.8 0.0 −−− 1.7 11.7 41.4 5.1                               18
7.2 0.0 −−− 1.7 17.1 41.4 5.1                               25
6.8 0.0 −−− 1.7 12.1 41.4 5.1          June                  1
6.7 0.0 −−− 1.7 17.4 41.4 5.1                                 8
6.8 0.0 −−− 1.7 20.3 41.4 5.1                               15
6.9 0.0 −−− 1.7 16.9 41.4 5.1                               22
6.8 0.0 −−− 1.8 23.2 3 45.2 5.1                               29
6.8 0.0 −−− 1.8 27.2 45.2 5.1          July                  6
6.8 0.0 −−− 1.8 19.4 45.2 5.1                               13
6.8 0.0 −−− 1.8 14.6 45.2 5.1                               20
6.8 0.0 −−− 1.8 28.0 45.2 5.1                               27
 
Eurosystem shows the bilateral TARGET balances of the individual non-Eurosystem NCBs. —3Changes are due mainly to revaluations at the
non-Eurosystem NCBs as an aggregated (net) figure, the Bundesbank state- end of the quarter. —4Enlargement of the euro area on January 1, 2001
ment reports gross figures for the claims on and liabilities to the individual through the accession of Greece. 
19*III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
IV. Banks
 
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
   Assets
 
 Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 euro billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area  3 Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other member countries to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and indi-
viduals
Secur- Secur-
Balance- ities itiessheet Cash Ad- issued Ad- issued Ad-
Period total  
2 in hand Total Total vances  3 by banks Total vances  3 by banks Total Total Total vances  3 
 End of year or month
 
1991 5,751.6 23.9 1,713.9 1,576.9 1,122.9 454.0 137.0 117.2 19.8 3,437.9 3,380.2 2,665.2 2,573.71992 6,143.1 27.8 1,779.6 1,638.4 1,168.0 470.4 141.2 116.8 24.3 3,727.7 3,665.2 2,898.1 2,775.01993 6,799.5 27.8 1,940.4 1,757.5 1,212.6 544.9 182.9 151.9 31.0 4,085.0 4,005.8 3,156.8 2,980.31994 7,205.7 26.2 2,030.1 1,854.1 1,285.1 569.1 175.9 145.0 30.9 4,411.4 4,333.2 3,391.3 3,143.2
1995 7,778.7 27.3 2,210.2 2,019.0 1,399.8 619.3 191.2 158.0 33.2 4,723.3 4,635.0 3,548.8 3,298.7
1996 8,540.5 30.3 2,523.0 2,301.1 1,585.7 715.4 221.9 181.2 40.7 5,084.7 4,981.9 3,812.8 3,543.01997 9,368.2 30.7 2,836.0 2,580.7 1,758.6 822.1 255.3 208.8 46.5 5,408.8 5,269.5 4,041.3 3,740.81998 10,355.5 29.9 3,267.4 2,939.4 1,977.4 962.0 328.1 264.9 63.1 5,833.9 5,615.9 4,361.0 3,966.51999 5,678.5 17.2 1,836.9 1,635.0 1,081.4 553.6 201.9 161.8 40.1 3,127.4 2,958.6 2,326.4 2,093.4
2000 6,083.9 16.1 1,977.4 1,724.2 1,108.9 615.3 253.2 184.5 68.6 3,249.9 3,062.6 2,445.7 2,186.61999         Sep. 5,541.7 13.3 1,818.2 1,605.2 1,056.8 548.4 213.0 175.9 37.1 3,057.5 2,900.4 2,271.4 2,052.1
         Oct. 5,612.0 13.5 1,840.1 1,624.7 1,070.0 554.7 215.3 176.7 38.6 3,085.4 2,922.3 2,280.6 2,060.3
         Nov. 5,697.7 13.2 1,868.8 1,645.3 1,086.2 559.1 223.5 184.2 39.3 3,110.0 2,944.7 2,298.3 2,073.7         Dec. 5,678.5 17.2 1,836.9 1,635.0 1,081.4 553.6 201.9 161.8 40.1 3,127.4 2,958.6 2,326.4 2,093.4
2000         Jan. 5,706.5 13.5 1,836.5 1,624.2 1,065.9 558.3 212.2 171.2 41.0 3,147.9 2,975.0 2,333.3 2,098.5
         Feb. 5,725.8 13.5 1,823.6 1,611.1 1,047.1 564.0 212.5 169.2 43.3 3,162.8 2,986.2 2,345.6 2,106.7         Mar. 5,804.8 13.1 1,856.6 1,639.4 1,060.6 578.8 217.2 171.9 45.3 3,202.3 3,022.9 2,388.6 2,118.1
         Apr. 5,860.7 14.2 1,863.5 1,647.9 1,059.0 588.9 215.6 169.8 45.8 3,219.3 3,038.4 2,403.5 2,128.7
         May 5,910.4 13.9 1,899.3 1,677.6 1,076.0 601.7 221.6 172.4 49.3 3,231.2 3,050.7 2,418.7 2,136.7         June 5,848.3 13.3 1,887.5 1,665.5 1,066.9 598.6 222.0 171.5 50.6 3,197.2 3,016.9 2,391.1 2,143.6
         July 5,861.8 13.4 1,876.6 1,656.9 1,047.5 609.4 219.6 168.1 51.5 3,199.7 3,019.0 2,392.2 2,142.6
         Aug. 5,917.1 13.5 1,900.5 1,667.9 1,055.9 612.0 232.7 178.8 53.9 3,206.9 3,024.2 2,401.9 2,151.7         Sep. 5,945.4 13.6 1,903.9 1,658.9 1,044.9 614.0 244.9 189.2 55.8 3,214.2 3,029.3 2,421.7 2,169.2
         Oct. 6,019.6 14.0 1,927.4 1,684.1 1,068.1 616.0 243.3 185.6 57.7 3,228.2 3,040.6 2,425.9 2,173.9
         Nov. 6,076.1 13.4 1,961.1 1,714.5 1,100.0 614.5 246.5 185.3 61.3 3,242.7 3,055.6 2,436.8 2,181.2         Dec. 6,083.9 16.1 1,977.4 1,724.2 1,108.9 615.3 253.2 184.5 68.6 3,249.9 3,062.6 2,445.7 2,186.6
2001         Jan. 6,064.0 13.4 1,952.1 1,695.0 1,069.7 625.3 257.1 186.6 70.5 3,265.9 3,058.4 2,452.1 2,187.6
         Feb. 6,141.3 13.6 1,985.8 1,728.3 1,097.6 630.8 257.4 187.1 70.3 3,281.4 3,072.2 2,468.1 2,198.0         Mar. 6,259.3 13.1 2,037.0 1,749.6 1,111.2 638.4 287.4 215.0 72.3 3,309.4 3,095.3 2,487.6 2,204.2
         Apr. 6,283.6 13.7 2,036.3 1,750.8 1,101.7 649.1 285.5 211.3 74.2 3,311.9 3,092.6 2,492.9 2,202.3
         May 6,312.3 13.9 2,038.9 1,756.7 1,106.2 650.5 282.2 206.5 75.7 3,323.1 3,095.6 2,497.6 2,210.5         June 6,283.8 13.8 2,050.1 1,753.5 1,112.4 641.1 296.6 221.0 75.6 3,296.1 3,070.8 2,473.8 2,213.0
 Changes 1
1992 7.5 3.3 −31.5 −29.1 −29.2 0.1 −2.3 − 2.6 0.2 49.9 50.9 46.3 39.5
1993 135.5 2.1 16.2 0.4 −12.9 13.3 15.8 14.7 1.1 71.8 67.1 67.9 54.6
1994 115.6 2.1 31.5 19.3 22.1 −2.8 12.2 12.5 −0.3 45.6 46.8 39.9 15.0
1995 107.8 3.7 41.8 36.5 26.8 9.7 5.3 5.5 −0.2 47.7 46.2 43.0 41.0
1996 111.6 6.7 18.1 7.7 5.6 2.1 10.4 9.8 0.7 58.0 53.1 74.2 73.71997 41.8 6.2 2.0 −3.3 −0.4 −2.9 5.3 6.6 −1.3 20.4 16.9 52.7 50.7
1998 52.7 4.7 −7.4 −18.8 −18.5 −0.2 11.3 11.0 0.3 80.5 65.5 99.1 77.2
1999 −18.3 4.0 −31.2 −9.6 −4.8 −4.8 −21.6 − 22.4 0.8 18.3 14.7 28.3 19.7
2000 29.7 2.7 16.9 10.0 8.9 1.1 6.9 − 0.7 7.6 12.0 10.4 12.2 8.7
1999         Oct. 66.3 0.1 21.8 19.5 13.3 6.3 2.3 0.9 1.4 27.3 21.6 8.9 8.0
         Nov. 77.8 −0.3 28.6 20.6 16.2 4.4 8.0 7.4 0.6 23.1 21.6 16.9 12.7
         Dec. −18.3 4.0 −31.2 −9.6 −4.8 −4.8 −21.6 − 22.4 0.8 18.3 14.7 28.3 19.7
2000         Jan. 23.6 −3.7 1.1 −9.2 −15.5 6.3 10.3 9.4 0.9 17.7 13.9 4.0 2.0
         Feb. 19.2 −0.0 −12.3 −12.6 −18.8 6.2 0.3 − 2.0 2.3 15.0 11.3 12.3 8.2
         Mar. 73.4 −0.4 33.0 28.4 13.5 14.8 4.6 2.8 1.9 38.7 36.6 42.9 11.2
         Apr. 44.9 1.0 6.8 8.5 −1.6 10.1 −1.7 − 2.1 0.4 15.2 14.2 13.7 9.4
         May 55.7 −0.2 35.8 29.7 17.6 12.2 6.1 2.6 3.5 12.9 12.9 15.8 8.6
         June −55.8 −0.6 −11.6 −12.0 −9.1 −2.9 0.5 − 0.9 1.4 −32.2 −32.4 −26.0 7.6
         July 6.6 0.0 −11.0 −8.6 −19.3 10.7 −2.5 − 3.4 0.9 1.4 1.3 0.4 −1.8
         Aug. 49.4 0.1 23.8 10.9 8.3 2.6 12.9 10.7 2.2 8.8 7.6 8.5 7.9         Sep. 26.2 0.1 3.3 −9.0 −11.0 2.0 12.2 10.4 1.8 6.5 4.5 19.2 16.9
         Oct. 63.5 0.3 23.5 25.1 23.2 1.9 −1.6 − 3.6 1.9 12.0 10.0 2.9 3.4
         Nov. 64.5 −0.6 33.8 30.5 31.9 −1.4 3.3 − 0.4 3.7 15.2 15.0 11.0 7.4
         Dec. 29.7 2.7 16.9 10.0 8.9 1.1 6.9 − 0.7 7.6 12.0 10.4 12.2 8.7
2001         Jan. −18.9 −2.6 −26.0 −29.1 −39.2 10.1 3.1 1.3 1.8 2.1 −3.7 6.6 1.1
         Feb. 76.9 0.1 33.8 33.5 27.9 5.6 0.3 0.4 −0.1 15.6 13.9 16.1 10.5
         Mar. 107.1 −0.5 51.3 21.4 13.6 7.7 30.0 28.0 2.0 26.2 21.9 18.3 5.0
         Apr. 24.1 0.6 −2.0 −0.1 −10.9 10.7 −1.9 − 3.7 1.8 2.7 −2.5 5.5 −1.7
         May 12.5 0.1 2.4 5.9 4.6 1.3 −3.5 − 4.8 1.3 6.3 −0.7 1.0 4.6
         June −26.9 −0.1 11.3 −3.2 6.1 −9.4 14.5 14.5 −0.0 −26.3 −24.3 −23.4 2.9
*This table serves to supplement the Overall monetary survey of section II; includes −in addition to the figures reported by banks (including building
it is planned to compare the figures for MFIs in the euro area with the data and loan associations) −the data of money market funds. —1Statistical
for Germany. Notwithstanding the other tables in section IV, this table breaks have been eliminated from the flow figures. —2Up to December
20*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
IV. Banks
    
 
euro area  3 Claims on
non-euro-area
to non-banks in other member countries residents
 Public Enterprises and Public
 authorities individuals authorities
of which: of which:
Secur- Ad- Secur- Ad- Ad- Secur- Ad- Otherities Total vances  
3 ities 4 Total Total vances  3 Total vances  3 ities Total vances  3 assets   Period
End of year or month
 
91.5 715.0 582.9 132.1 57.7 35.2 35.2 22.5 6.7 15.8 437.1 399.8 138.7 1991
123.1 767.1 556.3 210.8 62.5 35.1 35.1 27.5 6.7 20.8 446.1 398.5 162.0 1992176.5 849.0 599.6 249.4 79.1 44.5 44.5 34.6 8.4 26.3 565.2 504.8 181.1 1993248.1 941.9 650.1 291.8 78.2 39.6 39.6 38.6 8.3 30.3 548.8 479.6 189.2 1994
250.0 1,086.3 792.2 294.1 88.2 39.4 39.2 48.8 11.3 37.6 608.5 526.0 209.4 1995
269.7 1,169.1 857.8 311.4 102.8 36.8 36.8 66.0 17.2 48.8 678.1 575.3 224.4 1996300.6 1,228.2 911.0 317.2 139.2 41.9 41.2 97.3 23.4 73.9 839.6 710.2 253.1 1997394.5 1,254.9 939.1 315.8 218.0 62.5 56.0 155.5 35.6 119.9 922.0 758.0 302.2 1998233.0 632.1 488.4 143.7 168.8 65.3 35.9 103.6 20.7 82.8 511.2 404.2 185.8 1999
259.1 616.9 478.5 138.4 187.3 83.8 44.2 103.5 20.0 83.5 622.4 481.7 218.1 2000219.3 629.0 482.7 146.3 157.1 58.9 33.2 98.3 20.0 78.3 486.6 382.2 166.1 1999          Sep.
220.3 641.7 493.2 148.5 163.1 60.6 35.3 102.5 20.1 82.4 500.0 396.9 173.0          Oct.
224.5 646.5 496.2 150.3 165.2 62.7 35.9 102.5 20.8 81.7 519.8 415.1 185.8          Nov.233.0 632.1 488.4 143.7 168.8 65.3 35.9 103.6 20.7 82.8 511.2 404.2 185.8          Dec.
234.8 641.7 490.2 151.5 172.9 66.7 37.7 106.2 20.7 85.5 524.0 414.3 184.7 2000          Jan.
238.8 640.6 485.5 155.2 176.6 68.4 37.8 108.2 20.8 87.4 539.9 425.0 186.0          Feb.270.5 634.3 487.1 147.2 179.4 69.2 38.5 110.2 20.6 89.6 545.8 425.7 187.0          Mar.
274.8 634.9 488.9 146.0 180.9 71.0 38.9 109.9 20.7 89.2 571.5 449.1 192.2          Apr.
281.9 632.0 489.1 142.9 180.5 71.2 38.1 109.3 20.8 88.5 568.9 446.4 197.2          May247.5 625.8 485.4 140.4 180.3 71.9 37.4 108.4 20.6 87.8 556.1 432.0 194.2          June
249.6 626.7 487.9 138.8 180.8 75.1 39.1 105.6 19.7 85.9 569.7 439.2 202.4          July
250.2 622.3 482.4 139.9 182.7 78.0 40.8 104.8 19.9 84.9 587.5 456.6 208.7          Aug.252.5 607.6 473.0 134.6 184.9 78.1 42.3 106.8 20.0 86.7 591.3 456.4 222.4          Sep.
252.0 614.8 477.4 137.4 187.6 79.9 42.5 107.7 20.1 87.6 621.2 482.7 228.9          Oct.
255.6 618.8 477.8 141.0 187.1 82.2 44.4 104.9 20.2 84.7 631.6 490.4 227.4          Nov.259.1 616.9 478.5 138.4 187.3 83.8 44.2 103.5 20.0 83.5 622.4 481.7 218.1          Dec.
264.5 606.3 483.7 122.6 207.5 87.7 46.2 119.8 26.3 93.5 616.5 479.8 216.1 2001          Jan.
270.1 604.1 482.3 121.7 209.2 89.6 46.5 119.6 23.7 95.8 642.0 500.1 218.6          Feb.283.4 607.7 482.5 125.2 214.1 95.1 49.0 119.0 24.1 94.9 670.6 522.6 229.3          Mar.
290.7 599.6 477.1 122.5 219.3 99.5 48.3 119.9 24.0 95.9 689.7 536.9 231.9          Apr.
287.1 598.0 475.5 122.5 227.5 103.5 48.4 123.9 24.3 99.7 698.1 541.1 238.4          May260.7 597.1 469.2 127.8 225.3 104.6 50.6 120.7 24.5 96.2 693.3 535.9 230.4          June
Changes 1
6.8 4.5 −9.9 14.5 −1.0 −0.8 −0.8 −0.2 −0.1 −0.1 −9.3 −9.4 −4.8 1992
13.3 −0.8 4.9 −5.7 4.8 3.3 3.3 1.4 0.5 0.9 39.1 36.9 6.3 1993
24.9 6.9 4.1 2.8 −1.3 −1.3 −1.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 29.2 26.5 7.2 1994
1.9 3.2 10.0 −6.7 1.5 0.8 0.8 0.8 1.5 −0.7 4.3 −0.6 10.3 1995
0.6 −21.2 −10.1 −11.1 5.0 1.8 1.9 3.2 1.5 1.7 22.7 20.9 6.0 1996
2.1 −35.8 −19.4 −16.4 3.5 0.9 0.8 2.6 4.3 −1.7 11.2 13.7 1.9 1997
21.8 −33.6 1.9 −35.5 15.1 2.2 1.8 12.8 7.8 5.0 −22.2 −23.7 −2.8 1998
8.6 −13.5 −7.2 −6.3 3.5 2.5 −0.0 1.0 −0.1 1.1 −9.3 −11.7 −0.0 1999
3.6 −1.8 0.8 −2.5 1.5 2.2 0.3 −0.7 0.0 −0.8 7.4 5.2 −9.3 2000
0.9 12.7 10.5 2.2 5.6 1.6 2.0 4.0 −0.0 4.0 10.2 11.9 6.9 1999          Oct.
4.2 4.7 2.9 1.8 1.5 1.8 0.3 −0.3 0.6 −0.9 13.6 13.1 12.8          Nov.
8.6 −13.5 −7.2 −6.3 3.5 2.5 −0.0 1.0 −0.1 1.1 −9.3 −11.7 −0.0          Dec.
2.0 9.8 1.8 8.1 3.9 1.3 1.7 2.6 −0.1 2.7 9.6 6.9 −1.1 2000          Jan.
4.1 −1.0 −4.8 3.8 3.7 1.7 0.1 2.0 0.1 2.0 15.2 9.9 1.3          Feb.
31.6 −6.3 1.7 −7.9 2.2 0.2 0.6 2.0 −0.3 2.3 1.1 −3.4 1.0          Mar.
4.3 0.5 1.7 −1.2 0.9 1.5 0.1 −0.5 −0.0 −0.5 16.8 15.8 5.2          Apr.
7.2 −2.9 0.2 −3.1 −0.0 0.4 −0.6 −0.4 0.2 −0.6 2.1 1.3 5.2          May
−33.5 −6.4 −4.0 −2.4 0.1 0.7 −0.6 −0.6 −0.2 −0.4 −8.4 −9.6 −3.0          June
2.1 0.9 2.5 −1.6 0.1 2.3 0.8 −2.2 −0.2 −2.0 7.9 2.4 8.3          July
0.6 −0.9 −2.0 1.1 1.2 2.5 1.4 −1.3 0.0 −1.3 10.4 11.3 6.2          Aug.
2.3 −14.7 −9.4 −5.3 1.9 0.0 1.4 1.9 0.1 1.8 2.6 −1.0 13.8          Sep.
−0.5 7.1 4.3 2.8 1.9 1.4 −0.1 0.6 −0.1 0.7 21.3 18.9 6.4          Oct.
3.6 4.0 0.4 3.6 0.2 2.6 2.1 −2.4 0.2 −2.6 17.5 13.8 −1.5          Nov.
3.6 −1.8 0.8 −2.5 1.5 2.2 0.3 −0.7 0.0 −0.8 7.4 5.2 −9.3          Dec.
5.5 −10.4 5.2 −15.6 5.8 1.3 0.7 4.5 2.4 2.1 9.6 4.1 −2.0 2001          Jan.
5.6 −2.2 −1.4 −0.8 1.7 1.9 0.3 −0.2 −2.5 2.3 25.0 19.8 2.4          Feb.
13.3 3.6 0.1 3.5 4.2 5.0 2.1 −0.8 0.2 −1.0 19.3 14.3 10.7          Mar.
7.2 −8.1 −5.4 −2.7 5.3 4.4 −0.6 0.9 −0.1 1.0 20.1 15.2 2.6          Apr.
−3.6 −1.7 −1.6 −0.1 7.0 3.5 −0.3 3.5 0.1 3.4 −2.7 −5.3 6.4          May
−26.3 −0.9 −6.2 5.4 −2.0 1.1 2.2 −3.1 0.2 −3.3 −3.9 −4.4 −8.0          June
1998, volume of business (balance-sheet total plus endorsement liabilities bill-based lending instead of bill holdings. —4Including debt securities
and bills sent for collection from the banks ’portfolios prior to maturity) and arising from the exchange of equalisations claims. 
trust funds. —3Up to December 1998, including loans an a trust basis and
21*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
IV. Banks
 
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
   Liabilities
 
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 euro billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area  4 
in the euro area  3 
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities  5 notice  6 
 
Balance- in the in other of which: of which:sheet home member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total  
2 Total country countries Total Total night Total  4 Total 3 months Total night 2 years  7 
 End of year or month
 
1991 5,751.6 1,365.7 1,282.7 83.0 2,617.5 2,482.5 410.5 1,182.8 511.7 889.3 513.4 49.7 2.41992 6,143.1 1,405.6 1,304.2 101.4 2,743.6 2,585.3 444.5 1,228.2 563.5 912.6 522.4 60.6 3.01993 6,799.5 1,556.3 1,438.2 118.1 2,981.8 2,810.6 489.6 1,312.6 628.5 1,008.4 587.7 70.4 3.51994 7,205.7 1,650.9 1,483.5 167.4 3,082.2 2,894.4 510.4 1,288.3 549.2 1,095.8 654.6 79.6 4.1
1995 7,778.7 1,761.5 1,582.0 179.6 3,260.0 3,038.9 549.8 1,289.0 472.0 1,200.1 749.5 110.1 4.5
1996 8,540.5 1,975.3 1,780.2 195.1 3,515.9 3,264.0 638.1 1,318.5 430.6 1,307.4 865.7 137.3 7.51997 9,368.2 2,195.6 1,959.1 236.5 3,647.1 3,376.2 654.5 1,364.9 426.8 1,356.9 929.2 162.5 7.31998 10,355.5 2,480.3 2,148.9 331.4 3,850.8 3,552.1 751.6 1,411.0 461.5 1,389.6 971.9 187.4 9.41999 5,678.5 1,288.1 1,121.8 166.3 2,012.4 1,854.7 419.5 820.6 247.0 614.7 504.4 111.1 6.5
2000 6,083.9 1,379.4 1,188.9 190.5 2,051.4 1,873.6 441.4 858.8 274.3 573.5 450.5 107.9 6.91999         Sep. 5,541.7 1,293.4 1,102.8 190.5 1,958.6 1,802.5 404.2 790.0 227.1 608.3 499.6 109.9 5.6
         Oct. 5,612.0 1,317.8 1,130.9 186.9 1,966.3 1,808.1 405.2 796.7 232.2 606.2 498.1 111.3 5.3
         Nov. 5,697.7 1,326.1 1,132.2 193.8 1,994.4 1,834.0 428.8 802.1 234.1 603.1 494.9 114.0 8.6         Dec. 5,678.5 1,288.1 1,121.8 166.3 2,012.4 1,854.7 419.5 820.6 247.0 614.7 504.4 111.1 6.5
2000         Jan. 5,706.5 1,311.9 1,124.7 187.2 2,005.4 1,848.8 424.4 814.9 239.0 609.5 500.2 111.2 8.5
         Feb. 5,725.8 1,297.9 1,105.2 192.6 2,011.7 1,855.1 431.2 818.3 240.3 605.6 495.2 110.3 7.2         Mar. 5,804.8 1,327.9 1,135.5 192.4 2,001.9 1,844.2 426.0 818.2 239.4 600.0 488.9 112.0 7.4
         Apr. 5,860.7 1,317.4 1,122.3 195.1 2,004.3 1,844.7 435.2 816.0 236.5 593.5 482.8 113.4 9.0
         May 5,910.4 1,341.9 1,134.2 207.6 1,998.2 1,842.8 428.3 826.9 245.8 587.6 475.7 109.8 6.1         June 5,848.3 1,308.5 1,112.6 196.0 1,996.3 1,833.8 425.5 826.1 243.7 582.3 468.8 110.5 8.1
         July 5,861.8 1,292.0 1,110.3 181.7 1,989.8 1,827.9 422.3 829.0 245.1 576.6 462.2 109.7 7.2
         Aug. 5,917.1 1,318.3 1,130.5 187.7 1,986.8 1,824.5 415.0 836.7 251.8 572.7 456.7 110.7 6.8         Sep. 5,945.4 1,303.6 1,110.2 193.4 2,004.4 1,822.6 412.4 840.2 256.4 570.0 451.8 110.4 6.9
         Oct. 6,019.6 1,339.3 1,151.0 188.4 2,009.0 1,824.0 416.7 841.1 257.3 566.2 447.3 111.1 6.9
         Nov. 6,076.1 1,373.3 1,189.5 183.8 2,019.7 1,846.0 438.1 845.2 262.4 562.7 442.3 110.6 7.5         Dec. 6,083.9 1,379.4 1,188.9 190.5 2,051.4 1,873.6 441.4 858.8 274.3 573.5 450.5 107.9 6.9
2001         Jan. 6,064.0 1,345.5 1,145.1 200.4 2,025.9 1,860.9 429.9 861.6 276.3 569.3 446.3 107.4 8.0
         Feb. 6,141.3 1,377.4 1,159.8 217.5 2,036.3 1,872.7 442.1 863.3 278.2 567.2 444.2 105.6 6.2         Mar. 6,259.3 1,396.1 1,179.9 216.2 2,040.4 1,874.4 440.7 868.1 281.8 565.6 443.0 108.4 7.6
         Apr. 6,283.6 1,399.2 1,170.1 229.1 2,044.2 1,878.0 450.8 864.5 279.0 562.7 442.1 108.0 7.5
         May 6,312.3 1,397.2 1,169.6 227.7 2,053.8 1,883.9 453.9 870.1 282.1 559.9 440.4 110.9 8.8         June 6,283.8 1,390.9 1,183.6 207.3 2,061.5 1,893.3 462.1 872.4 283.7 558.7 440.1 109.3 8.2
 Changes 1
1992 7.5 −14.7 −15.6 0.9 38.8 35.7 −1.1 −1.0 −2.1 37.8 20.2 0.6 0.0
1993 135.5 23.2 20.2 3.0 102.1 98.2 7.7 37.9 35.2 52.6 33.2 1.8 0.11994 115.6 30.0 11.9 18.1 37.2 44.2 3.8 1.8 −7.4 38.6 22.4 −8.9 −0.9
1995 107.8 23.6 27.7 −4.1 86.8 74.0 19.7 8.4 1.2 45.9 32.8 9.8 0.4
1996 111.6 17.4 15.5 1.8 118.0 109.3 46.7 20.7 14.0 41.9 32.0 4.7 2.01997 41.8 −7.0 5.9 −12.9 74.9 72.8 12.9 21.8 16.5 38.0 27.1 0.8 −0.1
1998 52.7 −30.3 −6.3 −24.0 103.9 101.9 25.2 36.5 43.6 40.2 29.6 −1.1 −3.3
1999 −18.3 −38.0 −10.5 −27.5 17.8 20.6 −9.4 18.4 13.0 11.6 9.5 −3.0 −2.1
2000 29.7 6.1 −0.6 6.6 35.1 30.1 3.8 15.5 12.1 10.8 8.2 −1.6 −0.5
1999         Oct. 66.3 24.4 28.0 −3.6 7.2 5.4 0.9 6.6 5.0 −2.1 −1.5 1.2 −0.3
         Nov. 77.8 8.3 1.3 7.0 27.2 25.5 23.3 5.3 1.8 −3.1 −3.3 2.2 3.3
         Dec. −18.3 −38.0 −10.5 −27.5 17.8 20.6 −9.4 18.4 13.0 11.6 9.5 −3.0 −2.1
2000         Jan. 23.6 21.4 2.7 18.7 −7.5 −6.1 4.8 −5.8 −8.0 −5.1 −4.2 −0.1 2.0
         Feb. 19.2 −14.1 −19.5 5.4 6.2 6.3 6.8 3.5 1.3 −4.0 −5.0 −0.9 −1.3
         Mar. 73.4 30.0 30.2 −0.2 −10.4 −11.1 −5.5 −0.1 −0.9 −5.5 −6.3 1.3 0.1
         Apr. 44.9 −10.5 −13.2 2.7 1.1 −0.1 8.8 −2.4 −3.0 −6.5 −6.1 0.8 1.6
         May 55.7 24.5 11.9 12.6 −5.4 −1.6 −5.6 9.9 9.3 −5.9 −7.1 −3.3 −2.8
         June −55.8 −33.3 −21.7 −11.7 −1.3 −8.7 −2.6 −0.7 −2.1 −5.4 −6.9 1.0 2.0
         July 6.6 −16.6 −2.3 −14.3 −7.2 −6.3 −3.4 2.1 1.1 −5.0 −6.3 −1.2 −1.0
         Aug. 49.4 26.3 20.3 6.1 −4.0 −3.9 −7.5 7.5 6.7 −3.9 −5.5 0.5 −0.4
         Sep. 26.2 −14.7 −20.4 5.7 17.2 −2.1 −2.7 3.3 4.5 −2.7 −4.9 −0.6 0.1
         Oct. 63.5 35.7 40.8 −5.1 3.4 0.9 4.0 0.7 0.8 −3.8 −4.5 0.1 0.0
         Nov. 64.5 32.6 37.7 −5.0 11.6 22.4 21.6 4.3 5.2 −3.5 −5.0 −0.1 0.6
         Dec. 29.7 6.1 −0.6 6.6 35.1 30.1 3.8 15.5 12.1 10.8 8.2 −1.6 −0.5
2001         Jan. −18.9 −34.9 −43.8 8.9 −26.2 −12.8 −11.4 2.8 1.9 −4.1 −4.1 −1.2 0.9
         Feb. 76.9 31.9 14.7 17.2 10.3 11.5 11.9 1.7 1.9 −2.1 −2.1 −1.8 −1.8
         Mar. 107.1 15.3 16.6 −1.3 3.0 1.2 −1.7 4.6 3.5 −1.6 −1.2 2.2 1.4
         Apr. 24.1 2.1 −10.7 12.8 3.6 3.6 10.0 −3.5 −2.8 −2.9 −0.9 −0.4 −0.3
         May 12.5 −3.7 −1.9 −1.7 8.6 5.3 2.8 5.3 3.0 −2.8 −1.7 2.3 1.3
         June −26.9 −6.3 14.0 −20.3 7.8 9.4 8.2 2.3 1.6 −1.2 −0.3 −1.5 −0.6
*This table serves to supplement the Overall monetary survey of section II; breaks have been eliminated from the flow figures. —2Up to December
it is planned to compare the figures for MFIs in the euro area with the data 1998, volume of business (balance-sheet total plus endorsement liabilitiesfor Germany. Notwithstanding the other tables in section IV, this table and bills sent for collection from the banks ’portfolios prior to maturity) and
includes −in addition to the figures reported by banks (including building liabilities incurred in the banks ’own name but on behalf of third parties. —
and loan associations) −the data of money market funds. —1Statistical 3Up to December 1998, including liabilities arising from loans on a trust
22*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
IV. Banks
    
 
 Debt securities
issued
in other member countries  8 Deposits of Money
market central governments  4 
With agreed At agreed papermaturities notice and
of which: money of which: Liabilitiesdomestic market with to non- Liabilities
of which: of which: central arising fund euro- Capital maturities
up to up to govern- from of up to area and Other certificates
Total  
4 Total 3 months Total ments repos  9 issued Total 2 years reserves   Period 2 years  7 residents  10 Liabilities
End of year or month
 
42.6 4.8 4.6 4.6 85.3 85.3 − 4.4 1,054.8 36.0 213.7 229.2 266.3 1991
52.0 5.9 5.6 5.6 97.6 97.6 − 9.4 1,165.7 44.6 260.9 256.6 301.4 1992
60.3 6.8 6.5 6.5 100.8 100.8 − 18.7 1,309.0 66.8 302.5 278.3 353.0 1993
68.5 11.8 7.0 7.0 108.2 108.2 − 53.8 1,418.7 59.4 337.3 305.2 357.8 1994
97.3 11.4 8.3 8.3 111.0 111.0 − 60.5 1,586.7 48.9 393.9 325.0 391.0 1995
120.6 9.0 9.2 9.2 114.6 114.6 − 53.2 1,785.1 35.2 422.1 350.0 438.8 1996
145.8 9.2 9.4 9.4 108.3 108.3 − 54.6 1,973.3 37.5 599.2 387.2 511.3 1997
168.3 13.8 9.7 9.7 111.2 111.2 − 84.1 2,209.9 41.9 739.8 415.9 574.8 1998
99.7 8.9 4.8 3.7 46.6 45.9 2.0 96.1 1,274.0 47.8 487.9 237.0 281.1 1999
96.3 6.7 4.7 3.3 69.9 67.6 0.4 108.6 1,367.6 63.7 599.8 258.5 318.4 200099.6 6.1 4.6 3.5 46.2 44.9 1.2 69.2 1,270.3 37.5 435.4 232.7 281.1 1999          Sep.
101.4 8.8 4.6 3.5 46.9 45.1 1.8 73.9 1,278.4 43.3 451.5 235.0 287.4          Oct.
100.7 7.8 4.6 3.5 46.5 45.1 1.7 91.4 1,285.5 46.0 477.7 236.1 284.8          Nov.
99.7 8.9 4.8 3.7 46.6 45.9 2.0 96.1 1,274.0 47.8 487.9 237.0 281.1          Dec.
97.9 6.6 4.8 3.6 45.4 44.3 1.9 90.2 1,277.4 50.6 504.1 239.3 276.4 2000          Jan.
98.3 5.6 4.8 3.6 46.2 44.7 1.1 96.4 1,288.2 55.1 518.3 240.1 272.2          Feb.99.9 7.7 4.7 3.5 45.7 44.8 0.9 99.5 1,300.4 58.4 555.3 241.8 277.2          Mar.
99.8 7.0 4.7 3.5 46.1 44.4 2.7 99.9 1,321.9 60.5 586.8 242.9 284.9          Apr.
99.0 6.9 4.7 3.4 45.6 44.2 2.9 101.7 1,339.6 61.7 594.5 244.1 287.5          May97.7 6.4 4.7 3.4 51.9 50.0 1.8 109.2 1,339.0 62.7 554.9 246.5 292.2          June
97.9 6.6 4.6 3.3 52.3 49.9 1.8 112.4 1,360.7 64.5 561.9 247.0 296.3          July
99.3 7.0 4.6 3.3 51.7 50.3 1.7 112.8 1,373.9 66.7 581.0 247.5 295.1          Aug.99.0 6.6 4.5 3.2 71.5 69.2 1.0 109.6 1,377.6 64.9 587.4 248.4 313.6          Sep.
99.6 6.3 4.6 3.2 73.9 71.6 1.3 113.3 1,385.8 62.7 606.3 249.3 315.2          Oct.
98.5 6.5 4.6 3.2 63.2 62.2 1.3 108.6 1,379.3 63.0 621.6 250.1 322.2          Nov.96.3 6.7 4.7 3.3 69.9 67.6 0.4 108.6 1,367.6 63.7 599.8 258.5 318.4          Dec.
94.4 6.5 5.0 3.5 57.7 55.7 1.8 104.1 1,390.2 67.2 626.3 258.4 311.9 2001          Jan.
94.4 7.0 5.0 3.5 58.0 55.5 1.6 101.3 1,409.4 71.7 640.7 260.5 314.1          Feb.95.8 7.7 5.0 3.5 57.6 56.1 0.9 102.4 1,417.7 73.7 720.4 262.9 318.5          Mar.
95.6 7.7 5.0 3.5 58.1 55.5 1.4 99.8 1,422.1 78.2 725.9 263.4 327.6          Apr.
97.1 8.4 5.0 3.5 59.0 55.1 1.8 96.0 1,433.2 84.4 744.6 265.2 320.5          May96.1 8.7 5.0 3.5 58.9 55.2 1.1 89.9 1,442.1 92.0 718.0 267.4 313.0          June
Changes 1
0.5 0.1 0.1 0.1 2.5 2.5 −− 1.4 −8.4 −1.7 2.0 4.1 −12.8 1992
1.3 0.1 0.4 0.4 2.1 2.1 − 0.6 −4.8 9.8 6.2 2.4 5.8 1993
−8.1 1.3 0.2 0.2 1.8 1.8 − 21.9 12.5 −16.7 15.7 1.4 −3.2 1994
9.0 −2.3 0.4 0.4 3.0 3.0 − 7.6 9.6 −0.7 −3.8 2.8 −18.8 1995
2.4 0.4 0.3 0.3 4.0 4.0 −− 2.0 −0.2 0.7 4.5 1.7 −27.9 1996
0.6 0.6 0.3 0.3 1.4 1.4 − 0.0 −12.5 −0.5 1.3 3.4 −18.4 1997
2.0 1.3 0.2 0.2 3.1 3.1 − 3.2 −6.1 0.4 −0.4 4.6 −22.0 1998
−1.0 1.0 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.8 0.3 4.7 −11.7 1.8 9.3 0.9 −1.6 1999
−1.2 0.3 0.1 0.1 6.7 5.4 −0.9 1.4 −6.0 0.9 −4.6 8.3 −9.8 2000
1.5 1.0 0.0 0.0 0.7 0.2 0.7 4.7 6.8 5.7 12.8 2.2 7.5 1999          Oct.
−1.2 −1.0 0.0 0.0 −0.4 −0.1 −0.1 17.3 4.7 2.6 19.8 1.1 −0.4          Nov.
−1.0 1.0 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.8 0.3 4.7 −11.7 1.8 9.3 0.9 −1.6          Dec.
−2.1 −2.3 −0.0 −0.0 −1.3 −1.5 −0.1 −5.9 2.6 2.8 12.1 2.2 −1.2 2000          Jan.
0.4 0.7 −0.0 −0.0 0.9 0.4 −0.8 6.3 10.8 4.5 13.0 0.8 −3.0          Feb.
1.2 2.1 −0.0 −0.0 −0.6 0.0 −0.2 2.7 10.0 3.2 31.9 1.7 7.7          Mar.
−0.8 −0.8 −0.0 −0.0 0.4 −0.5 1.8 0.2 18.8 2.0 20.8 1.1 11.6          Apr.
−0.5 −0.1 −0.0 −0.1 −0.5 −0.2 0.2 2.0 19.2 1.2 13.4 1.2 0.7          May
−1.0 −0.5 −0.0 −0.1 6.4 5.7 −1.0 7.6 0.6 1.0 −34.2 2.4 3.5          June
−0.2 0.2 −0.0 −0.0 0.3 −0.1 −0.1 2.9 20.1 1.8 0.1 0.5 6.8          July
0.9 0.4 −0.0 −0.0 −0.6 0.4 −0.1 −0.2 10.1 2.1 9.6 0.6 7.1          Aug.
−0.6 −0.4 −0.1 −0.1 19.8 19.0 −0.7 −3.4 2.7 −1.9 2.5 0.8 21.9          Sep.
0.0 −0.4 0.1 0.1 2.4 2.3 0.3 3.0 5.4 −2.3 8.8 1.0 5.7          Oct.
−0.6 0.3 0.0 −0.0 −10.7 −9.4 −0.0 −4.0 −4.0 0.4 23.6 0.7 4.0          Nov.
−1.2 0.3 0.1 0.1 6.7 5.4 −0.9 1.4 −6.0 0.9 −4.6 8.3 −9.8          Dec.
−2.2 −0.5 −0.0 −0.0 −12.2 −11.9 1.4 −4.4 22.8 3.5 28.0 −0.0 −5.6 2001          Jan.
0.0 0.6 0.0 0.0 0.5 0.0 −0.2 −2.8 19.2 4.5 13.6 2.1 2.9          Feb.
0.8 0.7 0.0 0.0 −0.4 0.6 −0.6 0.5 6.2 2.7 68.0 2.4 12.4          Mar.
−0.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.5 −0.7 0.5 −2.5 4.6 4.5 6.7 0.5 8.6          Apr.
1.1 0.1 −0.0 0.0 0.9 −0.4 0.4 −4.6 6.9 6.1 4.4 1.7 −1.1          May
−0.9 0.3 0.0 0.0 −0.1 0.1 −0.7 −6.0 9.7 7.6 −25.7 2.2 −7.9          June
basis and liabilities arising from rediscounted bills (endorsement savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 5). —7Up to December 1998,
liabilities). —4Up to December 1998, including liabilities arising from loans with maturities of less than 4 years. —8Excluding central governments ’
on a trust basis. —5For the German contribution: from 1999 including deposits. —9Data collected separately only from 1999; up to December
deposits under savings and loan contracts (see table IV.12). —6For the 1998, included in the deposits with agreed maturities of up to 2 years. —
German contribution: up to the end of 1998 including deposits under 10 Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued. 
23*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
IV. Banks
 
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks *
  
euro billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
  of which: of which: 
Loans and advances
 not evidenced
 Cash in by certificates for hand and
Number of balancesreporting Balance with Balances Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by up to over issued by pating Othermonth tions total  
1 banks Total advances banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets
All categories of banks
 
2001         Jan. 2,717 6,126.8 54.0 2,126.9 1,465.5 633.2 3,492.1 451.2 2,510.8 7.2 508.6 131.7 322.1
         Feb. 2,717 6,203.4 57.2 2,170.6 1,504.1 641.2 3,517.6 462.0 2,513.8 6.9 520.9 133.2 324.8         Mar. 2,713 6,320.5 59.7 2,221.0 1,544.7 652.6 3,569.5 484.1 2,521.2 7.1 543.6 134.3 335.9
         Apr. 2,703 6,344.1 54.0 2,232.5 1,542.9 667.5 3,583.3 486.0 2,520.4 7.0 555.7 134.7 339.6
         May 2,697 6,371.9 57.8 2,230.3 1,537.4 672.7 3,602.5 483.8 2,536.0 6.9 560.8 135.6 345.7         June 2,663 6,342.2 59.9 2,240.0 1,556.1 665.5 3,569.9 473.6 2,539.0 6.7 537.4 134.8 337.5
Commercial banks 7
2001         May 285 1,880.0 21.3 610.4 451.9 154.1 1,015.2 261.5 530.0 3.4 212.1 85.9 147.2
         June 284 1,805.0 26.6 583.9 441.1 139.2 971.6 246.1 530.1 3.4 185.7 85.1 137.8
   Big banks 8
2001         May 4 1,101.4 12.5 329.1 247.5 79.9 589.1 148.5 297.4 2.1 137.3 77.0 93.7
         June 4 1,047.1 17.6 300.0 233.6 65.2 563.0 145.2 297.6 2.2 115.9 76.8 89.6
   Regional banks and other commercial banks 9, 10
2001         May 195 635.9 8.1 213.9 145.6 66.1 363.1 81.9 218.3 1.0 58.1 8.9 41.9
         June 195 625.0 8.2 214.8 147.3 65.5 355.9 79.0 218.7 1.1 53.5 8.3 37.8
   Branches of foreign banks
2001         May 86 142.8 0.7 67.5 58.7 8.1 63.0 31.1 14.3 0.2 16.6 0.0 11.6
         June 85 132.9 0.8 69.0 60.2 8.5 52.7 21.9 13.9 0.2 16.4 0.0 10.4
Land banks 11
2001         May 13 1,253.2 4.0 618.2 490.1 116.6 544.5 63.1 396.0 0.5 80.9 22.7 63.8
         June 13 1,264.8 2.5 631.2 498.7 121.3 543.8 62.6 396.2 0.5 80.4 22.6 64.7
Savings banks
2001         May 545 941.6 18.1 214.7 55.7 158.3 672.2 77.4 501.5 1.8 90.8 11.2 25.4
         June 544 947.3 16.3 217.9 58.2 159.0 676.5 80.3 501.7 1.7 92.2 11.3 25.4
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives (including Deutsche Genossenschaftsbank)  
 
2001         May 3 221.2 1.9 141.3 89.3 51.3 62.2 15.7 29.4 0.2 16.3 8.2 7.7
         June 3 229.3 2.4 146.7 95.6 50.5 63.6 16.7 29.5 0.1 16.8 8.2 8.3
Credit cooperatives
2001         May 1,777 529.2 11.3 129.1 54.3 74.4 367.4 51.2 279.4 1.0 35.6 3.2 18.2
         June 1,745 531.7 10.7 130.7 55.4 75.0 368.6 52.1 279.8 1.0 35.6 3.2 18.5
Mortgage banks
2001         May 30 909.4 0.9 232.4 162.6 69.5 644.2 8.0 544.2 − 91.5 2.5 29.5
         June 30 918.4 0.9 236.8 164.0 72.4 648.1 8.5 546.1 − 93.2 2.5 30.2
Building and loan associations 12
2001         May 30 154.7 0.1 34.7 22.6 12.2 111.8 1.6 100.6 . 9.7 0.6 7.6
         June 30 155.5 0.0 35.0 22.9 12.1 112.1 1.6 101.0 . 9.5 0.6 7.8
Banks with special functions 13
2001         May 14 482.5 0.4 249.6 210.9 36.4 185.0 5.3 154.8 0.0 23.8 1.3 46.2
         June 14 490.2 0.6 257.9 220.2 35.9 185.5 5.8 154.7 0.0 24.0 1.3 44.9
Memo item: Foreign banks 13
2001         May 140 314.6 2.3 133.5 106.6 25.6 149.3 55.5 60.9 0.4 29.3 0.9 28.6
         June 140 302.4 3.0 133.1 107.2 25.1 140.7 43.5 63.8 0.3 30.3 0.9 24.6
  of which: Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 15
2001         May 54 171.9 1.6 66.0 47.8 17.5 86.3 24.4 46.6 0.2 12.7 0.9 17.0
         June 55 169.4 2.2 64.1 47.0 16.6 88.0 21.6 50.0 0.2 13.9 0.9 14.2
*For the period up to December 1998, section IV (except for table IV.1) from rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks ’
shows the assets and liabilities of banks (excluding building and loan portfolios prior to maturity). —2Since the inclusion of building and loan
associations) in Germany; from January 1999, the assets and liabilities of associations in January 1999, including deposits under savings and loanmonetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets and liabilities contracts (see table IV. 12). —3Included in time deposits. —4Up to
of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are likewise classified as December 1998, including loans on a trust basis. —5Excluding deposits
MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). —6Including
respective items, see the footnotes to table IV.3. —1Up to December 1998, subordinated negotiable bearer debt securities; excluding non-negotiable
volume of business (balance sheet total plus endorsement liabilities arising bearer debt securities. —7Commercial banks comprise the sub-groups
24*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
IV. Banks
    
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs)  4 Capital
  (including
of which: of which: published
reserves,
Savings deposits  5 partici- Time deposits for  2 
pation
Memo rightsitem: Bearer capital,
of which: debt Liabilities
funds for
arising At three Bank general securities
Sight Time Sight up to over from savings out- banking Other   End of months ’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year  2 repos  3 Total notice bonds risks   month standing  6 liabilities
All categories of banks
 
1,754.6 257.9 1,496.1 2,249.9 469.8 328.7 754.2 23.2 581.0 454.6 116.1 1,467.7 258.4 396.2 2001          Jan.
1,791.9 274.2 1,517.1 2,269.1 481.2 333.4 759.4 25.7 578.9 452.5 116.3 1,483.1 260.5 398.8          Feb.1,880.7 288.4 1,591.9 2,282.3 483.3 339.8 765.3 26.8 577.3 451.2 116.5 1,491.2 262.9 403.5          Mar.
1,872.2 282.3 1,589.5 2,303.5 499.0 347.5 766.2 41.5 574.4 450.3 116.5 1,492.4 263.4 412.5          Apr.
1,873.8 274.5 1,598.9 2,329.0 508.7 354.2 777.7 46.7 571.6 448.7 116.7 1,499.5 265.2 404.5          May1,859.2 278.5 1,580.4 2,317.4 510.7 339.1 780.6 23.7 570.4 448.4 116.6 1,501.4 267.4 396.8          June
Commercial banks 7
746.4 175.2 570.9 637.6 231.4 162.5 143.0 42.1 89.4 70.3 11.3 225.2 99.3 171.6 2001          May
708.0 165.6 542.1 612.3 224.2 146.1 141.6 20.4 89.3 70.4 11.2 226.2 99.7 158.7          June
Big banks 8
445.2 111.3 333.9 344.5 121.5 103.0 90.7 39.5 27.8 25.4 1.4 156.9 64.9 89.9 2001          May
418.9 104.7 314.1 321.1 115.6 86.5 89.9 17.4 27.8 25.4 1.4 157.1 65.3 84.7          June
Regional banks and other commercial banks 9, 10
202.2 39.9 161.9 279.4 103.2 55.1 49.7 1.4 61.5 44.9 9.9 68.3 32.3 53.8 2001          May
196.3 40.2 155.8 277.7 102.8 54.5 49.2 1.4 61.5 45.1 9.8 69.0 32.4 49.5          June
Branches of foreign banks
99.0 23.9 75.1 13.7 6.7 4.4 2.6 1.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 2.1 27.8 2001          May
92.9 20.7 72.2 13.5 5.9 5.1 2.5 1.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 2.0 24.4          June
Land banks 11
454.1 53.8 400.4 300.3 32.2 46.8 206.3 3.3 14.1 12.8 0.9 393.1 49.3 56.4 2001          May
462.7 66.6 396.1 303.1 37.3 42.6 208.1 2.1 14.2 12.8 0.9 393.4 50.1 55.5          June
Savings banks
218.7 4.2 214.5 592.0 145.9 67.6 8.7 − 296.6 227.3 73.2 47.4 41.4 42.1 2001          May
219.6 5.0 214.6 593.5 148.3 67.2 8.7 − 296.0 227.3 73.3 47.4 41.9 44.9          June
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives  (including Deutsche Genossenschaftsbank)
 
119.3 28.6 90.7 36.0 6.9 8.7 20.3 1.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 47.6 9.4 8.9 2001          May
123.7 26.9 96.8 39.5 6.8 12.3 20.3 1.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 47.3 9.6 9.2          June
Credit cooperatives
77.8 2.0 75.8 374.5 88.9 60.6 22.9 − 171.1 137.9 31.0 30.9 27.3 18.6 2001          May
77.3 1.7 75.5 376.3 90.5 61.2 23.0 − 170.5 137.5 31.0 31.3 27.5 19.3          June
Mortgage banks
107.8 5.2 102.6 141.9 1.2 3.0 137.5 − 0.1 0.0 0.2 615.2 17.5 27.0 2001          May
114.2 7.5 106.7 142.8 1.5 3.7 137.4 − 0.1 0.0 0.2 616.0 17.6 27.8          June
Building and loan associations 12
29.4 2.7 26.6 97.1 0.3 0.5 96.1 − 0.3 0.3 0.1 6.2 6.9 15.1 2001          May
29.3 2.2 27.1 97.0 0.3 0.5 95.9 − 0.3 0.3 0.1 6.7 6.9 15.6          June
Banks with special functions 13
120.4 2.9 117.5 149.5 1.9 4.6 143.0 0.1 −−− 133.8 14.1 64.7 2001          May
124.4 2.8 121.6 152.9 1.9 5.5 145.5 0.0 −−− 133.0 14.1 65.8          June
Memo item: Foreign banks 14
152.4 40.3 112.0 74.4 33.1 18.1 17.1 1.5 4.5 4.1 1.6 29.0 9.4 49.4 2001          May
146.7 36.5 110.0 73.2 31.7 18.3 17.0 1.9 4.5 4.1 1.6 29.7 9.7 43.1          June
of which: Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 15
53.4 16.3 36.8 60.7 26.4 13.7 14.5 0.3 4.5 4.1 1.6 28.9 7.3 21.5 2001          May
53.9 15.8 37.9 59.7 25.9 13.2 14.5 0.3 4.5 4.1 1.6 29.6 7.6 18.7          June
”Big banks ”,”Regional banks and other commercial banks ”and ”Branches 13Up to December 1998, including Deutsche Postbank AG; see footnote
of foreign banks ”.—8Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner Bank AG, Commerz- 9. —14Sum of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks and included in
bank AG and, from 1999, Bayerische Hypo- und Vereinsbank AG. —9From other categories of banks and of the category ”Branches (of dependent
January 1999 including institutions of the discontinued category "Private legal status) of foreign banks ”— 15Separate presentation of the banks
bankers" and including Deutsche Postbank AG. —10Up to December 1998, majority-owned by foreign banks included in the categories ”Regional
including Bayerische Hypo- und Vereinsbank AG; see footnote 8. — banks and other commercial banks ”and, up to December 1998, in the
11Previously known as: ”Regional giro institutions ”.—12Assets and categories ”Private bankers ” and ”Mortgage banks ”. 
liabilities of building and loan associations included from 1999 only. —
25*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
IV. Banks
 
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis- à-vis residents *
 
 
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 euro billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs)  2, 3 Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3, 8 
Balances Treasury
Cash in and loans Negotiable Loans and bills andhand and ad- money advances negotiable
Balances market Memo not money mar- (euro-area vances not Securities
notes with the evidenced paper item: evidenced ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- by certi- issued by issued by Trust by certi- issued by by non-
Period coins)  
1 bank Total ficates Bills  4 banks  5 banks  6 loans  7 Total ficates Bills  4 non-banks banks  9 
End of year or month *
 
1991 22.8 90.0 1,424.9 976.5 22.5 − 419.5 6.3 3,147.0 2,813.8 62.5 11.7 181.5
1992 26.8 88.2 1,483.5 1,020.8 19.0 − 435.1 8.6 3,478.2 3,034.9 52.1 9.6 237.8
1993 26.7 75.3 1,596.8 1,076.2 14.7 3.3 493.2 9.3 3,826.4 3,291.6 44.7 5.6 327.71994 25.0 61.5 1,695.6 1,150.6 17.4 4.6 513.6 9.5 4,137.2 3,502.8 45.9 2.2 433.7
1995 26.0 61.0 1,859.9 1,264.9 17.5 4.3 561.9 11.4 4,436.9 3,802.0 46.8 1.4 427.3
1996 28.9 59.7 2,134.0 1,443.3 17.9 3.4 657.2 12.2 4,773.1 4,097.9 44.8 5.9 437.21997 29.3 60.2 2,397.9 1,606.3 18.1 3.6 758.9 11.1 5,058.4 4,353.9 44.7 2.9 473.31998 28.5 63.6 2,738.2 1,814.7 14.6 12.2 887.7 9.1 5,379.8 4,639.7 32.8 5.0 527.81999 16.8 45.6 1,556.9 1,033.4 0.0 19.2 504.2 3.9 2,904.5 2,569.6 7.0 3.0 287.5
2000 15.6 50.8 1,639.6 1,056.1 0.0 26.8 556.6 3.6 3,003.7 2,657.3 6.5 2.3 304.7
2000         Jan. 13.0 43.1 1,547.4 1,019.8 0.0 17.9 509.7 4.1 2,922.0 2,576.5 6.8 4.2 297.0
         Feb. 13.0 34.0 1,542.8 1,010.2 0.0 18.7 513.9 3.8 2,933.2 2,580.1 6.7 3.6 305.3         Mar. 12.6 41.7 1,563.5 1,016.5 0.0 22.2 524.8 3.8 2,969.8 2,593.2 6.8 2.7 329.6
         Apr. 13.7 38.9 1,575.1 1,018.0 0.0 25.8 531.3 3.8 2,984.8 2,605.5 6.8 2.7 332.1
         May 13.2 36.7 1,607.0 1,037.2 0.0 25.4 544.5 3.8 2,996.7 2,613.8 6.8 2.4 336.1         June 12.7 48.9 1,583.0 1,016.0 0.0 26.3 540.8 3.7 2,961.4 2,617.2 6.6 2.2 297.8
         July 12.7 41.9 1,581.7 1,003.8 0.0 28.0 549.9 3.8 2,963.4 2,618.9 6.6 3.1 298.7
         Aug. 12.9 42.9 1,591.7 1,011.2 0.0 28.4 552.1 3.7 2,968.0 2,626.2 6.5 2.9 300.0         Sep. 13.1 41.1 1,585.0 1,002.3 0.0 27.8 554.9 3.7 2,972.0 2,634.3 6.4 2.3 296.5
         Oct. 13.4 35.3 1,616.2 1,031.3 0.0 27.9 557.0 3.7 2,982.9 2,643.4 6.4 2.4 298.2
         Nov. 12.9 39.1 1,642.5 1,059.0 0.0 27.1 556.4 3.6 2,997.2 2,651.1 6.5 2.3 305.0         Dec. 15.6 50.8 1,639.6 1,056.1 0.0 26.8 556.6 3.6 3,003.7 2,657.3 6.5 2.3 304.7
2001         Jan. 12.9 40.5 1,620.7 1,027.2 0.0 26.7 566.8 3.5 2,998.4 2,664.7 6.1 2.4 320.5
         Feb. 12.9 43.4 1,649.8 1,051.7 0.0 24.2 573.8 3.5 3,010.9 2,674.0 5.9 3.3 323.3         Mar. 12.6 46.3 1,668.2 1,062.3 0.0 22.4 583.5 3.4 3,033.2 2,680.2 6.0 2.8 339.2
         Apr. 13.2 40.3 1,675.2 1,058.9 0.0 20.6 595.7 3.5 3,030.3 2,673.1 6.0 2.5 343.9
         May 13.4 43.9 1,677.9 1,060.1 0.0 18.5 599.2 3.4 3,032.7 2,679.8 5.9 2.9 339.3         June 13.2 46.1 1,671.9 1,063.7 0.0 16.8 591.5 3.4 3,007.7 2,676.1 5.8 2.3 318.7
Changes *
1992 + 2.8 + 6.3 + 77.6 + 61.0 −3.5 − + 17.8 + 2.3 + 294.3 + 249.2 −10.4 −2.2 + 57.1
1993 −0.1 −12.9 + 133.3 + 75.2 −4.3 + 0.1 + 61.5 + 0.7 + 339.8 + 259.1 −7.4 −4.5 + 102.0
1994 −1.7 −13.8 + 99.1 + 73.6 + 2.7 + 1.3 + 21.3 + 0.1 + 320.5 + 240.2 + 1.2 −3.3 + 86.7
1995 + 1.0 −0.5 + 193.5 + 139.4 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 54.3 + 0.2 + 312.8 + 303.6 + 1.0 −0.8 + 2.9
1996 + 2.9 −1.3 + 257.8 + 161.8 + 0.4 − 1.1 + 95.8 + 0.8 + 336.3 + 311.7 −2.0 + 4.7 + 10.6
1997 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 262.5 + 160.7 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 102.6 −1.1 + 285.2 + 255.5 −0.1 −3.0 + 36.5
1998 −0.8 + 3.4 + 343.3 + 210.3 −3.6 + 8.6 + 130.0 −2.0 + 335.3 + 302.1 −11.9 + 2.1 + 52.1
1999 + 2.2 + 13.2 + 122.1 + 66.3 + 0.0 + 12.9 + 42.8 −0.7 + 156.1 + 136.9 + 2.6 + 0.4 + 16.7
2000 −1.1 + 5.1 + 83.6 + 21.7 −0.0 + 7.6 + 54.3 −0.3 + 100.7 + 83.7 −0.5 −0.8 + 19.0
2000         Jan. −3.7 −2.5 − 8.4 −14.2 −0.0 − 1.3 + 7.1 + 0.1 + 14.9 + 3.8 −0.1 + 1.2 + 10.0
         Feb. −0.0 −9.1 − 4.2 − 9.6 + 0.0 + 0.8 + 4.6 −0.2 + 11.3 + 3.6 −0.1 −0.6 + 8.4
         Mar. −0.4 + 7.7 + 20.2 + 5.6 −0.0 + 3.5 + 11.1 −0.0 + 36.4 + 12.9 + 0.1 −0.9 + 24.4
         Apr. + 1.1 −2.7 + 10.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 3.6 + 6.5 −0.0 + 13.5 + 10.9 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 2.5
         May −0.5 −2.2 + 32.6 + 20.5 −0.0 − 0.4 + 12.5 −0.1 + 13.1 + 9.5 −0.0 −0.3 + 3.9
         June −0.5 + 12.2 −23.4 −20.7 −0.0 + 0.9 − 3.6 −0.0 −33.7 + 3.9 −0.2 −0.2 −37.2
         July −0.0 −7.0 − 2.2 −13.0 + 0.0 + 1.7 + 9.1 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.8 + 0.9
         Aug. + 0.2 + 1.0 + 8.9 + 6.4 −0.0 + 0.4 + 2.2 −0.0 + 6.8 + 5.9 −0.1 −0.2 + 1.3
         Sep. + 0.1 −1.8 − 7.3 − 9.6 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 2.8 −0.0 + 3.3 + 7.4 −0.0 −0.5 − 3.5
         Oct. + 0.4 −5.7 + 30.0 + 27.8 −0.0 + 0.0 + 2.1 −0.0 + 9.5 + 7.7 −0.0 + 0.1 + 1.7
         Nov. −0.6 + 3.8 + 27.5 + 28.8 −0.0 − 0.7 − 0.6 −0.1 + 14.5 + 8.0 + 0.0 −0.1 + 6.7
         Dec. + 2.8 + 11.6 − 0.4 − 0.6 −0.0 − 0.3 + 0.5 −0.1 + 10.1 + 9.5 −− 0.1 − 0.2
2001         Jan. −2.7 −10.3 −18.5 −28.7 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 10.4 −0.1 − 4.5 + 7.6 −0.3 + 0.1 + 16.4
         Feb. −0.0 + 2.9 + 29.2 + 24.5 −0.0 − 2.5 + 7.1 −0.0 + 12.6 + 9.5 −0.3 + 0.9 + 2.8
         Mar. −0.3 + 3.0 + 17.2 + 9.3 −− 1.9 + 9.7 −0.1 + 21.1 + 4.9 + 0.1 −0.5 + 16.0
         Apr. + 0.6 −6.1 + 5.8 − 4.6 + 0.0 − 1.8 + 12.2 + 0.0 − 2.7 − 6.9 −0.0 −0.3 + 4.6
         May + 0.1 + 3.6 + 0.7 − 0.7 −0.0 − 2.1 + 3.5 −0.1 − 0.1 + 4.3 −0.1 + 0.4 − 4.6
         June −0.1 + 2.2 − 5.7 + 3.8 −0.0 − 1.7 − 7.8 −0.0 −24.5 − 3.3 −0.1 −0.6 −20.6
*See table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the from rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks ’
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as portfolios prior to maturity). —5Up to November 1993, included in
provisional. Subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following securities (see also footnote 6). —6Up to November 1993, including
Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Up to December 1998: negotiable money market paper; excluding registered debt securities. —
domestic notes and coins. —2Up to December 1998, excluding loans to 7From 1999, no longer included in loans or deposits (see also footnote
domestic building and loan associations. —3Up to December 1998, 3). —8Up to December 1998, including loans to domestic building and loan
including loans on a trust basis; see also footnote 7. —4Up to December associations. —9Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of
1998, bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising equalisation claims; see also footnote 10. —10Including debt securities
26*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
IV. Banks
    
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3, 11, 12  Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3, 17 
Partici-patinginterestsin
Memo domestic Bills Memo Memo
Equalisa- item: banks Sight Time redis- item: Sight Time Savings Bank item:tion Trust and deposits deposits counted Trust deposits deposits deposits savings Trust
loans  
7 Total 13, 14  14, 15  16 loans  7 Total 13 15, 18  19 bonds  20 loans  7   Period claims  10 enterprises
End of year or month *
 
2.4 75.1 41.3 1,249.6 226.9 913.1 87.8 21.7 2,462.7 431.3 976.6 754.1 236.7 64.0 1991
64.3 79.5 49.4 1,266.2 301.2 864.7 78.0 22.4 2,570.4 468.3 1,020.9 770.7 240.0 70.4 199275.3 81.6 59.5 1,395.2 380.2 917.9 69.2 27.9 2,788.1 513.6 1,123.6 859.4 219.1 72.4 199368.1 84.4 70.7 1,427.9 342.8 976.9 75.2 33.1 2,875.7 540.2 1,109.3 940.5 206.9 78.8 1994
71.3 88.1 83.2 1,539.4 363.9 1,065.1 75.5 35.0 3,021.1 579.9 1,086.1 1,046.1 227.4 81.6 1995
81.3 106.0 89.7 1,731.0 401.1 1,202.4 75.4 52.2 3,241.5 675.1 1,109.8 1,143.0 227.8 85.8 199676.0 107.6 95.1 1,902.3 427.6 1,349.1 75.6 50.0 3,341.9 689.8 1,146.9 1,182.1 236.9 86.1 199771.6 102.8 129.2 2,086.9 472.5 1,505.2 59.4 49.7 3,520.3 799.5 1,194.1 1,211.0 234.9 80.9 199837.5 58.0 75.6 1,122.0 114.4 1,007.3 0.3 29.8 1,905.3 420.4 759.6 614.7 110.7 42.1 1999
33.1 58.5 82.7 1,189.2 113.4 1,075.3 0.4 30.1 1,945.8 443.4 819.9 573.5 109.0 42.1 2000
37.5 57.8 74.1 1,125.2 125.7 999.2 0.3 29.8 1,897.5 424.9 754.1 609.6 109.0 42.1 2000          Jan.
37.5 58.1 74.5 1,105.8 119.7 985.9 0.2 29.7 1,904.2 432.1 758.1 605.6 108.4 42.4          Feb.37.5 57.9 74.8 1,135.8 126.9 1,008.7 0.2 29.6 1,893.4 426.6 759.0 600.0 107.8 42.3          Mar.
37.6 57.9 75.6 1,122.7 126.9 995.6 0.2 29.6 1,893.5 435.7 756.7 593.5 107.6 42.4          Apr.
37.6 57.9 76.0 1,134.6 119.0 1,015.3 0.2 29.5 1,891.5 429.0 767.1 587.7 107.7 42.3          May37.6 57.9 77.9 1,112.9 116.8 996.0 0.2 29.5 1,888.2 426.2 772.2 582.3 107.6 42.3          June
36.1 58.5 78.1 1,110.6 100.1 1,010.3 0.2 30.2 1,882.2 422.9 775.0 576.6 107.7 42.4          July
32.5 58.6 78.8 1,130.9 105.6 1,025.0 0.2 29.9 1,879.2 415.6 783.2 572.7 107.7 42.6          Aug.32.5 58.7 79.6 1,110.3 110.3 999.7 0.2 30.0 1,896.5 413.0 805.7 570.0 107.8 42.8          Sep.
32.5 58.5 80.1 1,151.3 111.1 1,039.9 0.2 30.1 1,900.3 417.5 808.8 566.2 107.9 42.7          Oct.
32.3 58.7 80.9 1,189.6 133.0 1,056.4 0.2 30.1 1,912.9 438.7 802.8 562.7 108.7 42.3          Nov.33.1 58.5 82.7 1,189.2 113.4 1,075.3 0.4 30.1 1,945.8 443.4 819.9 573.5 109.0 42.1          Dec.
4.7 58.3 83.2 1,145.5 117.8 1,027.3 0.4 30.0 1,921.8 431.1 812.0 569.3 109.3 42.0 2001          Jan.
4.4 58.4 85.4 1,160.2 123.9 1,035.9 0.4 29.9 1,933.8 443.3 813.8 567.2 109.5 42.5          Feb.4.9 58.5 85.8 1,180.2 124.5 1,055.5 0.2 29.8 1,935.3 442.1 817.8 565.6 109.8 42.6          Mar.
4.9 58.4 86.1 1,169.9 127.7 1,041.9 0.2 29.8 1,938.3 451.9 813.8 562.7 109.8 42.7          Apr.
4.8 57.2 86.5 1,169.5 119.5 1,049.8 0.2 28.3 1,944.0 454.9 819.2 559.9 110.0 42.9          May4.9 56.8 86.5 1,183.9 127.1 1,056.5 0.2 28.3 1,953.3 465.0 819.8 558.8 109.8 42.7          June
Changes *
−1.0 + 1.5 + 7.9 + 39.7 + 74.0 −25.5 −9.8 + 1.0 + 126.0 + 33.6 + 69.6 + 16.3 + 3.3 + 3.2 1992
−11.4 + 2.1 + 9.8 + 145.3 + 75.1 + 77.1 −8.8 + 1.9 + 216.7 + 43.8 + 96.9 + 88.7 −14.6 + 2.0 1993
−6.9 + 2.6 + 11.3 + 32.4 −31.4 + 53.0 + 6.0 + 4.9 + 85.0 + 28.3 −14.1 + 81.2 −12.2 + 1.8 1994
−1.2 + 7.3 + 12.5 + 134.2 + 20.4 + 111.5 + 0.4 + 2.0 + 158.3 + 48.9 −14.2 + 105.6 + 11.7 + 6.3 1995
+ 8.0 + 3.3 + 6.5 + 175.9 + 36.6 + 137.7 −0.2 + 1.7 + 218.4 + 94.3 + 23.2 + 96.9 + 0.7 + 3.3 1996
−5.3 + 1.6 + 5.4 + 175.9 + 31.6 + 146.7 + 0.2 −2.6 + 100.5 + 13.0 + 37.1 + 39.1 + 9.2 + 2.1 1997
−4.4 −4.8 + 34.1 + 179.0 + 39.7 + 156.4 −16.2 −0.9 + 179.3 + 110.6 + 47.2 + 28.9 −2.1 −5.3 1998
−0.6 + 0.1 + 9.3 + 69.0 − 1.8 + 81.8 −11.1 −0.4 + 67.3 + 32.7 + 48.4 − 4.5 −9.3 + 0.7 1999
−0.8 + 0.5 + 7.1 + 64.7 − 2.3 + 66.9 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 41.3 + 22.3 + 61.1 −40.5 −1.7 −0.0 2000
+ 0.0 −0.1 −1.5 + 2.4 + 10.8 − 8.4 −0.0 + 0.0 − 8.1 + 4.2 − 5.4 − 5.1 −1.7 + 0.0 2000          Jan.
+ 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.4 −19.5 − 6.2 −13.3 −0.0 −0.1 + 6.6 + 7.2 + 4.0 − 4.0 −0.6 + 0.2          Feb.
−0.0 −0.2 + 0.3 + 29.5 + 6.7 + 22.8 −0.0 −0.1 −11.1 − 5.9 + 0.8 − 5.5 −0.5 −0.1          Mar.
+ 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.7 −14.4 − 1.3 −13.1 −0.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 8.5 − 2.3 − 6.5 −0.2 + 0.1          Apr.
−0.0 −0.0 + 0.4 + 12.5 − 7.2 + 19.8 −0.0 −0.1 − 1.6 − 6.3 + 10.4 − 5.9 + 0.1 −0.1          May
−0.0 −0.0 + 1.9 −21.2 − 1.8 −19.4 −0.0 −0.1 − 2.9 − 2.5 + 5.1 − 5.4 −0.1 + 0.0          June
−1.4 + 0.6 + 0.3 − 3.0 −17.4 + 14.4 + 0.0 + 0.7 − 6.5 − 3.7 + 2.0 − 5.0 + 0.1 + 0.2          July
−0.0 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 19.3 + 4.6 + 14.7 + 0.0 −0.3 − 3.5 − 7.9 + 8.2 − 3.9 + 0.0 + 0.2          Aug.
−0.0 + 0.0 + 0.8 −20.9 + 4.5 −25.3 −0.0 + 0.0 + 17.0 − 2.8 + 22.5 − 2.7 + 0.0 + 0.2          Sep.
−0.0 −0.2 + 0.5 + 40.0 − 0.2 + 40.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 3.3 + 3.9 + 3.0 − 3.8 + 0.1 −0.1          Oct.
−0.1 + 0.2 + 0.8 + 38.4 + 22.9 + 15.6 −0.0 + 0.0 + 13.1 + 21.8 − 6.0 − 3.5 + 0.8 −0.4          Nov.
+ 0.8 −0.2 + 1.8 + 1.6 −17.6 + 19.0 + 0.2 −0.1 + 35.5 + 5.7 + 18.6 + 10.8 + 0.4 −0.2          Dec.
−28.4 −0.2 + 0.5 −43.6 + 4.5 −48.1 + 0.0 −0.0 −24.0 − 12.3 − 7.9 − 4.1 + 0.3 −0.1 2001          Jan.
−0.3 −0.0 + 2.2 + 14.7 + 6.1 + 8.6 −0.0 −0.2 + 13.1 + 12.1 + 2.9 − 2.1 + 0.2 + 0.4          Feb.
+ 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 15.3 − 0.6 + 16.1 −0.2 −0.1 + 0.9 − 1.7 + 4.0 − 1.6 + 0.3 + 0.1          Mar.
−0.1 −0.1 + 0.3 −11.0 + 2.5 −13.5 −0.0 −0.0 + 2.9 + 9.8 − 4.0 − 2.9 −0.0 + 0.1          Apr.
−0.0 −1.2 + 0.5 − 2.3 −10.2 + 7.9 + 0.0 −1.5 + 5.0 + 2.2 + 5.4 − 2.8 + 0.2 + 0.2          May
+ 0.1 −0.3 + 0.0 + 14.6 + 7.9 + 6.7 + 0.0 −0.0 + 9.4 + 10.2 + 0.6 − 1.2 −0.1 −0.2          June
arising from the exchange of equalisation claims. —11Including liabilities acceptances and promissory notes outstanding and, up to December 1998,
arising from registered debt securities, registered money market paper and including endorsement liabilities arising from rediscounted bills. —17Up to
non-negotiable bearer debt securities; including subordinated liabilities. — December 1998, including liabilities to domestic building and loans
12Up to December 1998, excluding liabilities to domestic building and loan associations and money market funds. —18Since the inclusion of building
associations and money market funds. —13Up to December 1998, and loan associations in January 1999, including deposits under savings and
including time deposits for less than 1 month. —14Including liabilities loan contracts (see table IV. 12). —19Excluding deposits under savings and
arising from monetary policy operations with the Bundesbank. —15Up to loan contracts (see also footnote 18). —20Including liabilities arising from
December 1998, excluding time deposits for less than 1 month. —16Own non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
27*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
IV. Banks
 
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis- à-vis non-residents *
 
 
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 euro billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
Balances and loans and Loans and advances not Treasury
advances not evidenced by evidenced by certificates, bills and
Cash in certificates, bills  3 bills 3 negotiable Negotiable
hand money money
(non- Medium market Memo Medium marketeuro-area and paper Securities item: and paper Securitiesnotes and Short- long- issued by issued by Trust Short- long- issued by of
Period coins)  
1 Total Total term term banks  4 banks  5 loans  6 Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
1991 1.1 419.6 395.8 266.5 129.3 − 17.5 6.4 188.7 142.6 27.7 114.8 1.4 31.3
1992 1.0 405.6 377.4 250.0 127.4 − 21.3 6.8 217.8 157.3 30.2 127.1 0.4 45.2
1993 1.2 533.8 498.3 360.5 137.7 0.1 24.3 11.2 262.5 184.0 48.3 135.7 0.0 63.01994 1.2 492.3 455.0 309.0 146.0 0.1 23.7 13.5 257.4 173.0 35.0 138.0 0.6 66.5
1995 1.2 538.4 500.8 349.7 151.1 0.1 25.6 11.8 289.2 191.1 42.1 148.9 1.7 79.7
1996 1.4 588.9 544.2 386.6 157.6 0.3 31.5 13.0 352.0 230.4 60.2 170.2 4.9 103.91997 1.5 689.1 635.3 456.1 179.2 0.2 43.1 10.5 474.8 312.7 96.2 216.5 6.0 140.31998 1.5 774.9 706.9 533.6 173.3 0.4 58.7 9.0 610.3 364.9 93.9 270.9 11.6 211.01999 0.4 427.1 383.5 279.5 104.1 0.4 43.2 4.2 396.1 235.8 52.7 183.1 7.5 152.7
2000 0.4 507.7 441.4 325.4 116.0 1.3 65.0 3.6 475.8 286.8 71.1 215.7 6.5 182.5
2000         Jan. 0.5 440.8 396.4 292.2 104.2 0.4 44.0 4.2 407.1 243.6 56.7 186.9 6.7 156.8
         Feb. 0.5 448.8 401.8 294.2 107.6 0.5 46.5 4.3 414.4 247.1 59.5 187.7 6.8 160.5         Mar. 0.5 447.4 398.0 288.6 109.5 0.7 48.7 4.2 427.5 254.3 62.9 191.4 6.6 166.7
         Apr. 0.5 457.1 407.5 295.6 111.9 0.5 49.1 4.3 443.1 266.7 68.8 198.0 6.8 169.6
         May 0.7 465.0 412.6 303.1 109.5 0.5 51.9 4.8 438.0 261.4 64.6 196.8 5.4 171.2         June 0.6 463.6 410.1 301.1 109.0 0.5 53.0 5.2 426.9 247.8 52.2 195.6 6.2 172.9
         July 0.7 465.1 409.5 297.5 112.0 0.5 55.1 5.3 434.0 253.4 52.6 200.8 6.3 174.3
         Aug. 0.6 483.8 426.3 313.2 113.1 0.5 57.1 4.4 447.6 266.7 60.0 206.7 6.6 174.2         Sep. 0.6 491.4 432.3 316.7 115.6 0.5 58.6 4.5 458.3 272.7 62.0 210.7 5.4 180.3
         Oct. 0.6 507.0 445.5 327.3 118.2 0.6 60.9 4.5 471.9 282.5 64.6 217.8 6.1 183.3
         Nov. 0.5 518.1 452.9 335.5 117.4 1.3 63.9 3.9 474.5 285.1 68.2 216.9 6.2 183.3         Dec. 0.4 507.7 441.4 325.4 116.0 1.3 65.0 3.6 475.8 286.8 71.1 215.7 6.5 182.5
2001         Jan. 0.5 506.2 438.5 324.0 114.4 1.3 66.5 3.4 493.7 298.4 80.9 217.5 7.1 188.1
         Feb. 0.7 520.8 452.5 337.0 115.5 0.9 67.3 3.5 506.7 302.9 81.9 221.0 6.2 197.6         Mar. 0.5 552.8 482.5 365.5 117.0 1.2 69.1 3.6 536.3 326.1 97.5 228.6 5.9 204.3
         Apr. 0.5 557.3 484.1 366.9 117.3 1.3 71.8 3.5 553.0 334.4 104.4 230.0 6.8 211.8
         May 0.5 552.5 477.5 358.4 119.1 1.5 73.5 3.6 569.7 340.9 103.6 237.3 7.3 221.5         June 0.6 568.1 492.6 369.3 123.3 1.5 74.0 3.6 562.2 337.5 97.6 239.9 6.0 218.7
Changes *
1992 −0.1 −18.4 −22.6 −20.4 −2.2 − + 3.8 + 0.4 + 28.6 + 13.6 + 2.5 + 11.0 −1.0 + 14.1
1993 + 0.1 + 117.3 + 117.2 + 103.9 + 13.3 −0.0 + 0.5 −0.4 + 31.9 + 12.6 + 6.2 + 6.3 −0.4 + 19.5
1994 + 0.0 −24.0 −27.5 −41.4 + 13.9 −0.0 + 0.1 + 3.4 − 1.6 −5.5 −12.3 + 6.7 + 0.6 + 5.1
1995 + 0.1 + 59.1 + 57.6 + 49.2 + 8.4 + 0.0 + 2.9 −1.4 + 38.3 + 21.3 + 7.8 + 13.6 + 1.1 + 16.1
1996 + 0.2 + 34.2 + 29.9 + 27.2 + 2.7 + 0.2 + 5.2 −1.1 + 58.4 + 36.2 + 17.0 + 19.2 + 3.1 + 21.4
1997 + 0.1 + 80.6 + 71.5 + 53.3 + 18.2 −0.1 + 10.4 −1.2 + 109.3 + 73.0 + 33.7 + 39.3 + 0.7 + 32.9
1998 −0.0 + 100.8 + 89.5 + 79.3 + 10.2 + 0.0 + 13.1 −1.8 + 122.0 + 42.7 −6.4 + 49.1 + 5.5 + 66.0
1999 −0.3 + 17.7 + 5.7 − 5.3 + 11.0 + 0.2 + 11.7 −0.0 + 85.8 + 42.8 + 8.4 + 34.4 + 1.3 + 41.8
2000 −0.0 + 78.9 + 56.5 + 44.6 + 11.8 + 0.9 + 21.6 −0.7 + 72.0 + 45.0 + 17.4 + 27.7 −1.2 + 28.2
2000         Jan. + 0.0 + 11.6 + 10.9 + 11.3 −0.4 + 0.0 + 0.7 −0.0 + 8.6 + 5.2 + 3.6 + 1.7 −0.9 + 4.3
         Feb. + 0.0 + 7.8 + 5.1 + 1.8 + 3.4 + 0.1 + 2.6 + 0.0 + 7.1 + 3.0 + 2.7 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 4.0         Mar. + 0.0 − 4.4 − 6.4 − 7.4 + 1.0 + 0.2 + 1.8 −0.1 + 9.4 + 4.7 + 2.8 + 1.8 −0.3 + 5.0
         Apr. −0.0 + 5.0 + 5.2 + 4.3 + 0.9 −0.2 −0.1 + 0.0 + 8.7 + 6.7 + 4.6 + 2.0 + 0.1 + 1.9
         May + 0.2 + 11.4 + 8.3 + 9.6 −1.3 −0.0 + 3.1 + 0.6 − 0.7 −1.6 −3.5 + 1.8 −1.3 + 2.3
         June −0.1 + 1.1 − 0.3 − 0.8 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 1.4 + 0.4 − 8.3 −10.1 −11.8 + 1.7 + 0.9 + 1.0
         July + 0.1 − 1.4 − 3.3 − 5.3 + 2.0 + 0.0 + 1.8 + 0.1 + 2.9 + 1.9 −0.2 + 2.1 + 0.0 + 0.9
         Aug. −0.1 + 15.0 + 13.6 + 13.0 + 0.6 −0.1 + 1.5 −0.9 + 7.7 + 8.9 + 6.6 + 2.4 + 0.2 −1.4
         Sep. −0.0 + 7.3 + 6.0 + 3.6 + 2.3 + 0.0 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 8.1 + 3.7 + 1.6 + 2.1 −1.3 + 5.7
         Oct. −0.0 + 10.9 + 8.8 + 7.6 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 2.0 −0.1 + 6.8 + 4.5 + 1.6 + 2.8 + 0.6 + 1.7
         Nov. −0.0 + 15.9 + 11.7 + 11.1 + 0.6 + 0.8 + 3.4 −0.5 + 8.6 + 7.4 + 4.5 + 3.0 + 0.1 + 1.1
         Dec. −0.1 − 1.2 − 3.2 − 4.1 + 0.9 + 0.0 + 2.0 −0.2 + 12.9 + 10.8 + 4.8 + 5.9 + 0.5 + 1.6
2001         Jan. + 0.1 − 1.0 − 2.5 − 1.1 −1.4 −0.0 + 1.5 −0.2 + 18.6 + 11.9 + 9.9 + 1.9 + 0.6 + 6.1
         Feb. + 0.2 + 14.5 + 13.9 + 12.8 + 1.1 −0.4 + 0.9 + 0.0 + 12.7 + 4.1 + 0.9 + 3.2 −0.9 + 9.5
         Mar. −0.2 + 27.4 + 25.6 + 25.4 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 1.5 + 0.1 + 22.1 + 17.0 + 14.3 + 2.6 −0.4 + 5.6
         Apr. + 0.0 + 4.8 + 1.9 + 1.4 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 2.7 −0.0 + 17.4 + 8.9 + 7.1 + 1.9 + 0.9 + 7.5
         May −0.0 −11.3 −12.5 −13.1 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 1.0 −0.0 + 6.9 −1.0 −2.7 + 1.7 + 0.3 + 7.5
         June + 0.1 + 16.7 + 16.1 + 11.6 + 4.5 −0.0 + 0.6 −0.0 − 6.6 −3.0 −5.8 + 2.8 −1.3 −2.3
*See table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the domestic notes and coins. —2Up to December 1998, including loans on a
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as trust basis; see also footnote 6. —3Up to December 1998, bill-based
provisional. Subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from redisco unted
Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Up to December 1998: bills and bills sent for collection from the banks ’portfolios prior to
28*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
IV. Banks
    
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
 Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bankinterests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memoitem: and and item: and item:Trust enter- Sight Short- long- Trust Sight Short- long- Trustloans  
6 prises  7 Total Total  9 term  9 term loans  6 Total Total  9 term  9 term loans  6   Period deposits  8 deposits  8 
End of year or month *
 
13.5 22.8 253.3 58.8 184.2 88.3 95.9 10.3 93.0 11.5 76.1 24.2 51.8 5.3 199114.8 25.8 297.0 66.7 219.7 119.2 100.5 10.5 125.8 15.8 103.6 34.4 69.2 6.4 199215.5 30.1 328.1 82.9 236.0 122.5 113.5 9.2 162.8 16.9 139.2 39.1 100.1 6.7 199317.3 34.0 402.3 111.6 283.7 150.8 132.9 7.1 181.5 20.6 155.3 41.7 113.6 5.6 1994
16.7 38.8 463.7 116.9 339.7 191.6 148.2 7.0 224.4 22.1 198.0 45.3 152.6 4.4 1995
12.7 45.8 486.5 147.1 335.7 172.0 163.7 3.8 273.5 34.3 237.2 50.0 187.2 2.1 199615.7 54.7 670.3 226.0 440.2 254.3 185.9 4.0 333.9 43.5 285.7 63.0 222.7 4.8 199722.9 62.9 875.7 309.5 562.5 359.1 203.4 3.7 390.3 51.3 329.6 71.8 257.8 9.5 199813.6 33.9 483.6 65.6 418.0 332.3 85.6 2.0 284.4 23.8 260.6 64.9 195.7 5.8 1999
13.9 47.4 586.0 113.7 472.2 382.9 89.3 1.7 314.9 35.4 279.5 62.5 217.0 5.6 2000
13.7 36.0 514.2 108.4 405.8 314.9 90.8 2.0 291.4 31.5 259.9 61.6 198.4 5.9 2000          Jan.
13.8 36.1 532.6 103.5 429.1 335.3 93.8 2.0 291.3 32.8 258.5 58.3 200.1 5.9          Feb.13.9 36.3 553.0 110.2 442.9 347.5 95.3 2.0 308.6 41.2 267.4 62.0 205.4 5.9          Mar.
14.2 36.7 584.4 116.6 467.8 369.7 98.1 2.1 315.6 44.3 271.3 61.4 209.9 6.2          Apr.
14.2 37.5 595.9 113.4 482.5 386.0 96.5 2.0 320.3 43.1 277.3 69.9 207.4 6.8          May13.9 37.6 562.0 122.3 439.7 345.5 94.3 2.1 303.1 35.9 267.2 61.5 205.7 6.8          June
14.2 37.7 549.3 110.7 438.6 345.9 92.7 2.1 308.1 33.3 274.8 65.0 209.9 7.1          July
14.3 38.2 568.7 124.0 444.7 352.8 91.9 2.1 313.9 34.0 280.0 66.8 213.1 6.4          Aug.14.3 38.6 578.3 132.0 446.2 353.3 92.9 2.1 316.2 36.4 279.8 63.1 216.7 6.4          Sep.
14.5 40.4 579.5 127.3 452.3 358.8 93.5 1.9 329.9 34.8 295.1 69.6 225.5 6.5          Oct.
14.4 40.5 589.2 130.8 458.3 365.1 93.2 1.9 329.5 36.1 293.5 71.5 222.0 6.3          Nov.13.9 47.4 586.0 113.7 472.2 382.9 89.3 1.7 314.9 35.4 279.5 62.5 217.0 5.6          Dec.
14.2 48.5 608.9 140.2 468.8 381.4 87.4 1.7 328.2 38.7 289.5 73.4 216.1 5.6 2001          Jan.
14.5 47.8 631.6 150.3 481.3 396.0 85.3 1.7 335.3 37.9 297.4 76.3 221.1 5.6          Feb.14.5 48.6 700.4 163.9 536.5 453.4 83.1 1.8 347.0 41.3 305.7 80.0 225.7 5.9          Mar.
14.6 48.6 702.1 154.5 547.6 464.7 82.9 1.7 365.3 47.1 318.2 92.0 226.1 5.8          Apr.
14.9 49.1 704.1 155.0 549.1 462.0 87.1 1.7 385.0 53.9 331.1 96.3 234.8 6.1          May14.8 48.3 675.1 151.3 523.8 435.2 88.6 1.6 364.1 45.8 318.3 81.5 236.8 6.1          June
Changes *
+ 1.9 + 3.8 + 41.3 + 7.3 + 33.2 + 28.8 + 4.4 + 0.7 + 32.5 + 4.2 + 27.0 + 10.1 + 16.9 + 1.2 1992+ 0.2 + 4.1 + 23.8 + 14.1 + 11.1 − 0.4 + 11.5 −1.4 + 34.3 + 1.0 + 33.2 + 4.0 + 29.1 + 0.2 1993
−1.7 + 4.2 + 85.6 + 31.3 + 56.0 + 33.9 + 22.1 −1.7 + 23.1 + 3.9 + 19.8 + 3.4 + 16.4 −0.7 1994
−0.2 + 5.2 + 71.0 + 7.9 + 64.6 + 45.9 + 18.7 −1.5 + 47.8 + 2.2 + 46.5 + 4.1 + 42.4 −0.9 1995
−2.3 + 5.9 + 11.3 + 27.1 − 13.9 − 26.6 + 12.7 −1.9 + 44.7 + 11.7 + 35.0 + 3.7 + 31.3 −2.0 1996
+ 2.7 + 7.9 + 157.3 + 67.7 + 89.5 + 71.8 + 17.7 + 0.1 + 51.0 + 5.4 + 43.3 + 11.4 + 31.9 + 2.3 1997+ 7.7 + 8.8 + 215.6 + 87.7 + 128.1 + 108.1 + 20.0 −0.3 + 64.7 + 10.4 + 48.9 + 10.3 + 38.6 + 5.5 1998
+ 1.1 + 10.9 + 37.4 −9.2 + 46.6 + 47.6 −1.0 −0.0 + 61.0 + 7.2 + 53.8 + 15.9 + 37.9 + 0.1 1999
−0.2 + 12.8 + 90.0 + 47.0 + 43.0 + 42.9 + 0.1 −0.4 + 24.4 + 11.1 + 13.3 −2.9 + 16.2 −0.8 2000
−0.0 + 1.9 + 24.6 + 42.5 − 17.8 − 20.7 + 2.9 −0.0 + 4.9 + 7.6 −2.7 −3.8 + 1.1 −0.1 2000          Jan.
+ 0.0 − 0.0 + 17.7 −5.0 + 22.7 + 19.8 + 2.9 + 0.0 −0.3 + 1.3 −1.6 −2.7 + 1.1 −0.1          Feb.
−0.0 − 0.0 + 16.2 + 6.0 + 10.1 + 9.3 + 0.8 −0.0 + 14.6 + 8.2 + 6.4 + 3.3 + 3.1 −0.1          Mar.
+ 0.0 − 0.2 + 21.9 + 5.0 + 16.9 + 15.6 + 1.3 + 0.0 + 2.3 + 2.7 −0.4 −1.5 + 1.1 −0.1          Apr.
+ 0.1 + 1.2 + 18.1 −2.2 + 20.3 + 20.9 −0.6 −0.0 + 8.4 −1.0 + 9.5 + 9.1 + 0.4 + 0.8          May
−0.1 + 0.4 −29.0 + 9.6 − 38.7 − 37.1 −1.5 + 0.1 −15.0 −7.0 −8.0 −8.0 + 0.0 + 0.2          June
+ 0.1 − 0.3 −19.1 −12.5 − 6.6 − 4.2 −2.4 −0.0 + 2.0 −2.8 + 4.9 + 2.9 + 2.0 −0.0          July
−0.1 − 0.0 + 11.8 + 12.5 − 0.7 + 1.3 −2.0 + 0.0 + 1.7 + 0.3 + 1.4 + 1.0 + 0.3 −0.9          Aug.
−0.1 + 0.1 + 6.9 + 7.5 − 0.6 − 1.2 + 0.5 −0.1 + 0.2 + 2.3 −2.1 −4.1 + 2.0 −0.1          Sep.
−0.0 + 1.3 − 7.5 −6.1 − 1.4 − 0.8 −0.6 −0.2 + 9.0 −2.0 + 11.0 + 5.6 + 5.3 −0.2          Oct.
+ 0.1 + 0.7 + 16.7 + 4.7 + 12.0 + 11.4 + 0.7 −0.0 + 4.6 + 1.5 + 3.1 + 2.6 + 0.5 + 0.1          Nov.
−0.1 + 7.8 + 11.9 −15.0 + 26.9 + 28.8 −1.9 −0.1 −8.1 + 0.1 −8.1 −7.3 −0.8 −0.3          Dec.
+ 0.3 + 1.2 + 23.4 + 26.5 − 3.1 − 1.3 −1.9 −0.1 + 13.9 + 3.3 + 10.6 + 11.0 −0.4 + 0.0 2001          Jan.
+ 0.2 − 0.7 + 22.5 + 10.1 + 12.4 + 14.6 −2.2 −0.0 + 5.6 −0.8 + 6.4 + 2.5 + 3.9 + 0.0          Feb.
−0.2 + 0.1 + 58.9 + 11.9 + 47.0 + 50.2 −3.2 + 0.0 + 6.8 + 3.0 + 3.8 + 2.7 + 1.1 −0.1          Mar.
+ 0.0 + 0.1 + 2.7 −9.3 + 12.0 + 12.2 −0.1 −0.1 + 18.5 + 5.8 + 12.8 + 12.2 + 0.6 −0.0          Apr.
−0.0 − 0.3 −11.9 −1.2 − 10.8 − 12.6 + 1.8 −0.1 + 14.0 + 6.2 + 7.8 + 2.9 + 4.9 −0.0          May
−0.0 − 0.7 −28.0 −3.4 − 24.5 − 26.2 + 1.7 −0.1 −20.0 −8.1 −11.9 −14.7 + 2.8 −0.0          June
maturity). —4Up to November 1993, included in securities; see also 1998, including working capital supplied to branches abroad. —8Up to
footnote 5. —5Up to November 1993, including negotiable money market December 1998, including time deposits for less than 1 month. —9Up to
paper; excluding registered debt securities. —6From 1999, no longer December 1998, excluding time deposits for less than 1 month. 
included in loans and deposits (see also footnote 2). —7Up to December
29*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
IV. Banks
 
5. Lending of banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
  
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 euro billion
Short-term lending Medium and long-term
to public authorities to enter- to enterprises and individuals  1 
Lending to domestic
Loans and non-banks, total  1, 2 
   advances Loans and
including excluding not evi- Negoti- advancesnegotiable money denced by able not evi-market paper, certifi- money denced bysecurities, cates and market certifi- Treasury
Period equalisation claims Total Total paper Total cates bills  
5 Total Total bills 3, 4 
End of year or month *
 
1991 3,147.0 2,951.4 602.0 575.8 575.5 0.4 26.1 14.7 11.4 2,545.0 1,941.81992 3,478.2 3,166.6 597.2 571.2 571.0 0.2 26.0 16.7 9.3 2,881.0 2,167.51993 3,826.4 3,417.8 563.2 544.2 540.8 3.4 19.0 16.8 2.2 3,263.2 2,441.81994 4,137.2 3,633.1 583.5 549.1 548.6 0.4 34.4 32.7 1.8 3,553.7 2,661.9
1995 4,436.9 3,936.9 615.2 584.0 583.3 0.7 31.3 30.5 0.8 3,821.7 2,785.5
1996 4,773.1 4,248.7 662.2 617.2 616.2 1.0 45.1 40.2 4.9 4,110.8 3,007.21997 5,058.4 4,506.2 667.8 625.8 624.8 1.0 41.9 40.1 1.9 4,390.6 3,223.41998 5,379.8 4,775.4 704.3 661.3 660.8 0.5 43.0 38.5 4.5 4,675.5 3,482.41999 2,904.5 2,576.5 355.3 328.9 328.7 0.2 26.4 23.6 2.8 2,549.2 1,943.6
2000 3,003.7 2,663.7 371.2 348.2 347.7 0.5 22.9 21.2 1.7 2,632.5 2,038.6
2000         Jan. 2,922.0 2,583.3 358.9 328.8 328.3 0.5 30.1 26.5 3.6 2,563.1 1,951.6
         Feb. 2,933.2 2,586.8 357.9 332.4 331.8 0.6 25.6 22.6 3.0 2,575.2 1,960.4         Mar. 2,969.8 2,600.0 367.7 341.3 340.9 0.4 26.4 24.2 2.3 2,602.1 1,994.3
         Apr. 2,984.8 2,612.3 373.0 347.4 347.1 0.2 25.7 23.2 2.5 2,611.8 2,002.7
         May 2,996.7 2,620.6 372.3 347.2 346.9 0.4 25.1 23.0 2.1 2,624.4 2,017.6         June 2,961.4 2,623.8 370.4 349.3 348.8 0.4 21.1 19.3 1.8 2,590.9 1,986.4
         July 2,963.4 2,625.5 362.2 337.7 337.3 0.4 24.5 21.8 2.6 2,601.2 1,999.1
         Aug. 2,968.0 2,632.6 360.7 337.3 336.9 0.3 23.4 20.9 2.5 2,607.3 2,008.6         Sep. 2,972.0 2,640.8 367.2 350.6 349.9 0.6 16.6 14.9 1.7 2,604.8 2,013.9
         Oct. 2,982.9 2,649.9 372.9 349.0 348.5 0.5 23.9 22.0 1.9 2,610.0 2,019.2
         Nov. 2,997.2 2,657.6 373.0 349.5 348.8 0.7 23.5 21.9 1.6 2,624.1 2,028.9         Dec. 3,003.7 2,663.7 371.2 348.2 347.7 0.5 22.9 21.2 1.7 2,632.5 2,038.6
2001         Jan. 2,998.4 2,670.8 379.9 350.6 349.8 0.8 29.3 27.7 1.6 2,618.6 2,041.7
         Feb. 3,010.9 2,679.9 390.4 358.1 357.2 0.9 32.3 29.9 2.4 2,620.5 2,048.8         Mar. 3,033.2 2,686.2 396.4 362.7 361.6 1.2 33.7 32.1 1.7 2,636.7 2,062.9
         Apr. 3,030.3 2,679.0 391.1 361.8 360.8 1.0 29.3 27.8 1.5 2,639.2 2,069.0
         May 3,032.7 2,685.7 390.0 362.3 361.0 1.3 27.7 26.1 1.6 2,642.7 2,072.6         June 3,007.7 2,681.8 385.0 363.3 362.0 1.3 21.7 20.7 1.0 2,622.7 2,047.4
Changes *
1992 + 294.3 + 240.3 + 16.9 + 18.1 + 18.3 −0.1 − 1.2 + 0.8 −2.0 + 277.4 + 229.7
1993 + 339.8 + 253.7 −15.1 − 9.2 −11.9 + 2.7 − 5.9 + 1.2 −7.2 + 354.9 + 251.7
1994 + 320.5 + 244.0 + 13.2 + 7.0 + 9.9 −2.9 + 6.2 + 6.6 −0.4 + 307.2 + 249.1
1995 + 312.8 + 311.9 + 35.9 + 37.9 + 37.7 + 0.2 − 1.9 − 1.0 −1.0 + 276.9 + 185.1
1996 + 336.3 + 312.9 + 44.3 + 32.6 + 32.2 + 0.4 + 11.7 + 7.4 + 4.3 + 292.0 + 221.51997 + 285.2 + 256.9 + 2.7 + 5.9 + 5.9 + 0.0 − 3.2 − 0.1 −3.0 + 282.5 + 219.9
1998 + 335.3 + 285.5 + 51.7 + 50.6 + 51.2 −0.6 + 1.1 − 1.6 + 2.7 + 283.6 + 258.3
1999 + 156.1 + 139.5 + 9.6 + 6.3 + 6.4 −0.0 + 3.3 + 2.9 + 0.4 + 146.4 + 146.4
2000 + 100.7 + 83.2 + 14.5 + 18.1 + 17.8 + 0.3 − 3.6 − 2.5 −1.1 + 86.1 + 93.8
2000         Jan. + 14.9 + 3.7 + 2.7 − 1.0 − 1.3 + 0.3 + 3.7 + 2.9 + 0.8 + 12.1 + 6.0
         Feb. + 11.3 + 3.5 − 1.0 + 3.5 + 3.5 + 0.0 − 4.5 − 3.9 −0.6 + 12.3 + 8.8
         Mar. + 36.4 + 13.0 + 9.6 + 8.7 + 8.9 −0.1 + 0.9 + 1.6 −0.7 + 26.9 + 33.9
         Apr. + 13.5 + 10.9 + 3.9 + 4.6 + 4.8 −0.2 − 0.8 − 1.0 + 0.2 + 9.7 + 8.3
         May + 13.1 + 9.5 + 0.5 + 1.1 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.2 −0.4 + 12.6 + 14.9
         June − 33.7 + 3.7 − 2.8 + 1.3 + 1.2 + 0.1 − 4.1 − 3.8 −0.3 − 31.0 − 28.6
         July + 1.0 + 0.7 − 9.2 −12.5 −12.5 −0.0 + 3.3 + 2.5 + 0.8 + 10.2 + 12.6
         Aug. + 6.8 + 5.8 − 2.8 − 1.8 − 1.7 −0.1 − 1.1 − 0.9 −0.1 + 9.7 + 9.5
         Sep. + 3.3 + 7.4 + 5.8 + 12.5 + 12.2 + 0.3 − 6.8 − 6.0 −0.8 − 2.5 + 5.4
         Oct. + 9.5 + 7.7 + 4.8 − 2.5 − 2.3 −0.1 + 7.3 + 7.0 + 0.2 + 4.7 + 4.8
         Nov. + 14.5 + 8.0 + 1.8 + 2.2 + 1.9 + 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.0 −0.3 + 12.7 + 8.3
         Dec. + 10.1 + 9.5 + 1.4 + 1.9 + 2.1 −0.2 − 0.6 − 0.7 + 0.2 + 8.7 + 9.9
2001         Jan. − 4.5 + 7.3 + 8.9 + 2.6 + 2.3 + 0.2 + 6.4 + 6.5 −0.1 − 13.4 + 3.3
         Feb. + 12.6 + 9.2 + 10.7 + 7.7 + 7.5 + 0.1 + 3.0 + 2.2 + 0.8 + 1.9 + 7.1         Mar. + 21.1 + 5.0 + 4.7 + 3.3 + 3.0 + 0.3 + 1.4 + 2.2 −0.8 + 16.4 + 14.2
         Apr. − 2.7 − 7.0 − 5.2 − 0.7 − 0.6 −0.2 − 4.4 − 4.3 −0.1 + 2.4 + 6.1
         May − 0.1 + 4.2 − 2.8 − 2.0 − 2.3 + 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.9 + 0.1 + 2.8 + 3.6
         June − 24.5 − 3.4 − 4.5 + 1.5 + 1.5 + 0.0 − 6.0 − 5.4 −0.6 − 20.0 − 25.1
*See table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the December 1998, including loans on a trust basis; see also footnote 9. —3Up
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as to December 1998, bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsementprovisional. Subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following liabilities arising from rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from
Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Up to December 1998, the banks ’portfolios prior to maturity). —4From 1999, including small
including loans to domestic building and loan associations. —2Up to amounts of medium-term series of bills. —5From December 1993, including
30*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
IV. Banks
    
 
lending  2, 6 
prises and individuals  1, 2 to public authorities  2 
Loans and advances not Loans and advances not
evidenced by certificates evidenced by certificates
Memo Memo
item: Equal- item:
Medium- Long- Trust Medium- Long- Secur- isation Trust
Total term  7 term  8 loans  9 Total Total term  7 term  8 loans  9   Period Securities  6 ities 6, 10 claims  11 
End of year or month *
 
1,814.1 213.7 1,600.3 65.8 62.0 682.9 472.0 51.3 420.8 115.5 2.4 13.1 19912,011.5 263.5 1,748.0 90.3 65.7 734.1 487.8 47.6 440.2 147.2 64.3 13.9 19922,241.5 253.9 1,987.5 134.2 66.1 821.4 537.1 36.8 500.3 193.5 75.3 15.5 19932,390.4 228.3 2,162.0 203.2 68.3 891.8 577.0 34.5 542.5 230.5 68.1 16.1 1994
2,522.0 214.1 2,307.9 192.9 70.6 1,036.2 713.0 74.5 638.4 234.4 71.3 17.5 1995
2,713.3 215.8 2,497.5 205.9 88.0 1,103.6 773.0 69.5 703.6 231.3 81.3 18.0 19962,900.0 216.2 2,683.8 234.1 89.3 1,167.2 833.8 53.0 780.8 239.2 76.0 18.3 19973,104.5 206.8 2,897.8 292.4 85.4 1,193.2 868.8 33.1 835.7 235.4 71.6 17.3 19981,764.8 182.5 1,582.3 178.9 49.2 605.6 459.5 30.9 428.6 108.6 37.5 8.7 1999
1,838.9 192.8 1,646.0 199.7 50.1 593.9 455.9 30.4 425.5 104.9 33.1 8.4 2000
1,770.2 183.1 1,587.0 181.4 49.1 611.4 458.4 31.0 427.4 115.6 37.5 8.7 2000          Jan.
1,774.9 183.0 1,591.9 185.5 49.4 614.9 457.5 30.2 427.4 119.8 37.5 8.7          Feb.1,777.2 183.3 1,593.9 217.1 49.3 607.8 457.7 31.1 426.7 112.5 37.5 8.6          Mar.
1,781.6 184.3 1,597.3 221.1 49.3 609.1 460.4 31.5 429.0 111.1 37.6 8.6          Apr.
1,789.9 185.7 1,604.2 227.7 49.3 606.8 460.8 32.5 428.3 108.4 37.6 8.6          May1,794.7 186.5 1,608.3 191.7 49.3 604.6 460.9 32.5 428.4 106.1 37.6 8.6          June
1,805.3 189.9 1,615.4 193.7 50.0 602.2 461.1 31.9 429.2 105.0 36.1 8.6          July
1,814.7 192.0 1,622.7 193.8 50.1 598.8 460.1 31.6 428.5 106.2 32.5 8.6          Aug.1,819.2 192.1 1,627.1 194.7 50.1 590.9 456.7 30.6 426.0 101.8 32.5 8.5          Sep.
1,825.3 192.1 1,633.2 193.9 50.0 590.8 454.0 29.7 424.3 104.3 32.5 8.5          Oct.
1,832.4 193.0 1,639.4 196.5 50.2 595.2 454.5 30.7 423.8 108.4 32.3 8.5          Nov.1,838.9 192.8 1,646.0 199.7 50.1 593.9 455.9 30.4 425.5 104.9 33.1 8.4          Dec.
1,837.8 191.7 1,646.1 203.9 49.8 576.9 455.6 30.6 425.0 116.6 4.7 8.5 2001          Jan.
1,840.8 191.2 1,649.6 208.0 49.9 571.7 452.0 28.8 423.3 115.2 4.4 8.5          Feb.1,842.6 190.5 1,652.1 220.3 50.0 573.9 450.0 27.4 422.5 119.0 4.9 8.4          Mar.
1,841.5 188.2 1,653.3 227.5 50.0 570.2 449.0 27.1 421.9 116.4 4.9 8.4          Apr.
1,849.5 190.4 1,659.2 223.0 48.8 570.2 449.1 27.3 421.8 116.2 4.8 8.4          May1,850.8 189.4 1,661.4 196.6 48.5 575.3 448.3 26.8 421.5 122.1 4.9 8.3          June
Changes *
+ 204.1 + 29.6 + 174.5 + 24.8 + 0.8 + 41.2 + 15.7 − 3.6 + 19.3 + 32.2 − 1.0 + 0.7 1992
+ 214.1 −28.9 + 243.0 + 37.1 + 0.5 + 104.1 + 48.2 −10.8 + 59.0 + 65.1 −11.4 + 1.6 1993
+ 198.7 −29.2 + 227.9 + 48.5 + 1.9 + 58.2 + 26.2 − 2.4 + 28.5 + 38.3 − 6.9 + 0.7 1994
+ 176.0 − 1.9 + 177.9 + 3.3 + 5.9 + 91.8 + 91.8 + 15.3 + 76.6 − 0.4 − 1.2 + 1.5 1995
+ 204.4 + 1.6 + 202.8 + 14.0 + 3.1 + 70.4 + 65.7 − 5.5 + 71.2 − 3.3 + 8.0 + 0.1 1996
+ 189.0 + 0.3 + 188.7 + 29.5 + 1.4 + 62.6 + 60.6 −18.0 + 78.6 + 7.0 − 5.3 + 0.2 1997
+ 205.7 − 8.9 + 214.6 + 56.5 −3.9 + 25.3 + 35.0 −20.0 + 55.0 − 4.4 − 4.4 −0.9 1998
+ 121.8 + 25.1 + 96.8 + 24.6 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 8.5 + 6.2 + 2.3 − 7.8 − 0.6 −0.1 1999
+ 71.8 + 6.9 + 64.9 + 22.1 + 0.8 − 7.7 − 3.8 − 0.4 − 3.5 − 3.1 − 0.8 −0.3 2000
+ 3.2 − 1.0 + 4.2 + 2.8 −0.1 + 6.1 − 1.1 + 0.1 − 1.2 + 7.2 + 0.0 −0.0 2000          Jan.
+ 4.7 − 0.1 + 4.8 + 4.0 + 0.3 + 3.6 − 0.9 − 0.8 − 0.0 + 4.4 + 0.0 −0.0          Feb.
+ 2.3 + 0.3 + 2.0 + 31.6 −0.1 − 7.1 + 0.2 + 0.9 − 0.7 − 7.3 − 0.0 −0.0          Mar.
+ 4.4 + 1.0 + 3.4 + 4.0 + 0.0 + 1.3 + 2.7 + 0.4 + 2.3 − 1.5 + 0.1 −0.0          Apr.
+ 8.3 + 1.2 + 7.1 + 6.7 + 0.0 − 2.3 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 2.7 − 0.0 −0.0          May
+ 6.5 − 0.8 + 7.3 −35.1 −0.1 − 2.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 2.1 − 0.0 + 0.0          June
+ 10.5 + 3.6 + 7.0 + 2.1 + 0.7 − 2.4 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 1.1 − 1.4 −0.1          July
+ 9.4 + 2.1 + 7.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.7 + 1.2 − 0.0 −0.0          Aug.
+ 4.5 + 0.1 + 4.4 + 0.9 + 0.1 − 7.9 − 3.4 − 1.0 − 2.5 − 4.4 − 0.0 −0.0          Sep.
+ 5.6 + 0.0 + 5.6 − 0.8 −0.1 − 0.1 − 2.7 − 0.6 − 2.1 + 2.6 − 0.0 −0.1          Oct.
+ 5.6 − 0.1 + 5.8 + 2.6 + 0.2 + 4.4 + 0.4 + 1.0 − 0.5 + 4.1 − 0.1 −0.0          Nov.
+ 6.7 + 0.6 + 6.0 + 3.3 −0.1 − 1.2 + 1.5 − 0.3 + 1.8 − 3.4 + 0.8 −0.0          Dec.
− 1.1 − 2.5 + 1.3 + 4.4 −0.3 − 16.8 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.6 + 11.9 −28.4 + 0.0 2001          Jan.
+ 3.0 − 0.5 + 3.5 + 4.1 −0.0 − 5.2 − 3.6 − 1.8 − 1.7 − 1.3 − 0.3 −0.0          Feb.
+ 1.9 − 0.6 + 2.5 + 12.3 + 0.1 + 2.2 − 2.1 − 1.3 − 0.8 + 3.7 + 0.6 −0.0          Mar.
− 1.1 − 2.3 + 1.2 + 7.2 −0.1 − 3.6 − 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.6 − 2.6 − 0.1 −0.0          Apr.
+ 8.0 + 2.2 + 5.9 − 4.5 −1.2 − 0.8 − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 −0.0          May
+ 1.3 − 1.0 + 2.2 −26.4 −0.2 + 5.1 − 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.3 + 5.8 + 0.1 −0.1          June
other negotiable money market paper; excluding mobilisation and liquidity December 1998, maturity or period of notice of 4 years and more; from
paper. —6From 1999, breakdown of lending against securities by medium 1999, of more than 5 years. —9From 1999, no longer included in lending
and long-term lending no longer possible. —7Up to December 1998, (see also footnote 2). —10Excluding debt securities arising from the
maturity or period of notice of more than one year to less than 4 years; exchange of equalisation claims, see also footnote 11. —11Including debt
from 1999, more than 1 year up to and including 5 years. —8Up to securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims. 
31*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
IV. Banks
 
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and individuals, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
 
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 euro billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and individuals (excluding portfolios of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities  portfolios) 1 
of which  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
 
Financialinstitu-
Mortgage tions  
4 
loans Trans- (excluding
secured Energy Whole- Agri- port MFIs) andby and sale culture and insur-
Mortgage residen- Other of which water and and tele- anceloans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- supply, Construc- retail forestry, commu- enter-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing mining  
2 tion trade  3 fisheries nications prises
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
1998 3,850.8 1,430.2 1,654.9 1,040.9 614.0 2,367.1 614.9 331.5 70.7 124.2 343.1 63.7 80.9 132.81999 2,094.2 899.3 991.3 691.5 299.9 1,209.0 332.0 166.2 33.7 67.1 173.0 31.1 47.2 27.5
2000         June 2,144.2 931.3 1,009.7 719.2 290.5 1,243.4 338.6 170.5 33.0 68.5 172.8 31.6 52.7 37.0
         Sep. 2,169.9 944.2 1,018.7 727.5 291.2 1,259.9 340.7 173.4 34.3 69.4 173.6 32.0 50.6 39.4         Dec. 2,187.3 955.2 1,030.8 737.6 293.2 1,267.8 344.1 174.9 35.9 68.2 173.2 31.4 49.1 34.2
2001         Mar. 2,204.8 961.9 1,031.8 742.4 289.4 1,286.5 343.5 177.7 36.0 69.2 174.0 31.3 50.6 42.9
         June 2,213.5 966.0 1,038.2 746.6 291.6 1,288.2 344.8 177.8 34.1 69.6 172.5 31.5 54.3 37.9
 Short-term lending
1998 660.8 − 36.7 − 36.7 561.3 27.9 120.6 8.8 36.1 133.9 8.8 12.1 28.5
1999 329.4 − 17.6 − 17.6 276.9 11.8 57.3 4.3 17.9 61.4 4.5 10.6 8.8
2000         June 349.5 − 16.5 − 16.5 295.8 11.0 60.5 3.9 19.2 61.2 4.6 13.7 18.1
         Sep. 350.7 − 15.7 − 15.7 296.6 10.3 62.4 4.4 19.0 62.5 4.7 10.8 17.9
         Dec. 348.4 − 15.9 − 15.9 294.6 10.7 61.5 6.2 17.9 62.2 4.2 10.1 10.5
2001         Mar. 362.2 − 15.6 − 15.6 310.8 10.6 64.0 5.8 18.7 64.0 4.4 11.0 19.9
         June 362.7 − 16.1 − 16.1 310.6 10.8 63.9 4.4 19.2 63.3 4.5 13.5 15.9
 Medium-term lending  
8 
1998 206.8 − 39.3 − 39.3 132.2 17.4 16.1 1.5 9.3 16.1 4.5 6.8 17.3
1999 182.5 − 42.6 − 42.6 109.1 13.4 16.7 1.7 6.9 13.0 3.4 6.3 4.0
2000         June 186.5 − 40.7 − 40.7 112.9 13.0 16.9 1.5 6.8 13.2 3.4 7.4 5.1
         Sep. 192.1 − 40.5 − 40.5 118.1 13.1 17.2 1.7 6.9 13.2 3.5 7.7 7.5
         Dec. 192.8 − 39.3 − 39.3 120.1 12.8 17.6 1.5 7.0 13.3 3.4 6.9 9.1
2001         Mar. 190.5 − 38.5 − 38.5 118.1 12.6 18.3 1.5 6.8 13.2 3.2 7.0 7.9
         June 189.4 − 38.0 − 38.0 116.8 12.4 18.2 1.3 6.7 13.0 3.2 8.1 6.5
 Long-term lending  1, 9 
1998 2,983.2 1,430.2 1,578.9 1,040.9 538.0 1,673.5 569.6 194.8 60.4 78.8 193.1 50.4 62.0 87.0
1999 1,582.3 899.3 931.1 691.5 239.7 823.0 306.8 92.3 27.7 42.2 98.7 23.3 30.3 14.7
2000         June 1,608.3 931.3 952.4 719.2 233.3 834.7 314.6 93.2 27.5 42.6 98.4 23.5 31.7 13.9
         Sep. 1,627.1 944.2 962.5 727.5 235.0 845.2 317.3 93.8 28.1 43.4 98.0 23.7 32.1 14.0         Dec. 1,646.0 955.2 975.5 737.6 238.0 853.1 320.6 95.9 28.2 43.4 97.7 23.9 32.1 14.6
2001         Mar. 1,652.1 961.9 977.7 742.4 235.3 857.7 320.4 95.4 28.6 43.7 96.7 23.7 32.7 15.1
         June 1,661.4 966.0 984.1 746.6 237.5 860.9 321.7 95.7 28.4 43.7 96.1 23.8 32.7 15.4
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2000         3rd qtr + 22.6 + 11.7 + 10.1 + 9.1 + 0.9 + 12.3 + 2.2 + 2.8 + 1.3 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 0.4 − 2.1 + 2.5
         4th qtr + 19.6 + 9.7 + 10.8 + 8.7 + 2.1 + 10.5 + 2.6 + 1.7 + 1.7 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.6 − 1.8 − 5.3
2001         1st qtr + 16.6 + 5.3 + 2.5 + 4.3 − 1.8 + 17.5 + 0.6 + 2.9 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.8 − 0.2 + 1.4 + 8.9
         2nd qtr + 6.9 + 4.9 + 6.4 + 4.4 + 2.0 − 0.1 + 1.3 + 0.1 − 1.7 + 0.4 − 1.6 + 0.2 + 3.7 − 5.2
 Short-term lending
2000         3rd qtr − 1.9 −− 0.9 −− 0.9 − 2.2 − 0.7 + 1.9 + 0.5 − 0.2 + 1.3 + 0.1 − 2.9 − 0.2
         4th qtr + 1.7 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 + 1.9 + 0.4 − 0.5 + 1.8 − 1.1 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.7 − 7.4
2001         1st qtr + 12.8 −− 0.4 −− 0.4 + 15.3 − 0.1 + 2.6 − 0.4 + 0.8 + 1.8 + 0.2 + 0.7 + 9.5
         2nd qtr − 1.3 − + 0.5 − + 0.5 − 2.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 1.4 + 0.5 − 0.7 + 0.2 + 2.5 − 3.9
 Medium-term lending  8 
2000         3rd qtr + 5.8 −− 0.2 −− 0.2 + 5.2 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 2.5
         4th qtr + 0.5 −− 0.9 −− 0.9 + 1.5 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.8 + 1.5
2001         1st qtr − 3.5 −− 1.1 −− 1.1 − 2.4 − 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 1.1
         2nd qtr − 1.2 −− 0.5 −− 0.5 − 1.3 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 1.1 − 1.6
 Long-term lending  1, 9 
2000         3rd qtr + 18.7 + 11.7 + 11.1 + 9.1 + 2.0 + 9.4 + 2.8 + 0.6 + 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.2
         4th qtr + 17.4 + 9.7 + 11.4 + 8.7 + 2.7 + 7.1 + 2.3 + 1.8 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.6
2001         1st qtr + 7.4 + 5.3 + 3.9 + 4.3 − 0.4 + 4.6 + 1.1 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.1 + 0.6 + 0.5
         2nd qtr + 9.4 + 4.9 + 6.4 + 4.4 + 2.0 + 3.3 + 1.2 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.3
*Excluding lending by foreign branches. Up to December 1998: lending by always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent alterations, which will
banks (excluding building and loan associations) in Germany; including appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Up
lending to building and loan associations. From 1999: lending by monetary to December 1998, including loans on a trust basis; from 1999, loans on afinancial institutions (MFIs) in Germany; breakdown of lending by building trust basis are no longer included in lending. —2Including the extraction of
and loan associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical alterations stones and earths. —3Including the maintenance and repair of motor
have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest date are vehicles and durable consumer goods. —4Up to December 1998, excluding
32*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
IV. Banks
    
 
  Lending to
 non-commercial
 Lending to employed and other individuals organisations
Memorandum items Other lending Services sector (including the professions)  
5 
of which of which
Debit
balanceson wage
and salary
Other Lending accountsreal to self- Lending and of which
Housing estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Investment Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total credit  
7 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises enterprises persons  6 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
1,220.2 305.9 70.1 285.8 821.2 143.6 1,455.0 1,031.2 423.7 207.7 44.6 28.8 8.8 1998
663.1 154.1 42.8 168.3 449.4 73.9 871.4 655.7 215.7 105.7 23.6 13.7 3.6 1999
677.3 157.7 43.8 174.9 452.6 75.6 887.1 667.4 219.6 108.0 24.8 13.7 3.6 2000          June
687.1 159.8 44.9 179.1 456.2 75.4 896.3 674.4 221.9 109.2 25.1 13.7 3.6          Sep.700.8 162.3 46.8 183.1 459.0 75.0 905.5 683.0 222.6 108.6 24.3 14.0 3.7          Dec.
704.9 163.9 49.4 184.0 457.5 75.6 904.5 684.6 219.8 108.6 23.3 13.8 3.6 2001          Mar.
710.6 165.7 48.5 188.2 459.3 75.7 911.4 689.8 221.7 109.6 23.6 13.8 3.6          June
Short-term lending
212.6 41.5 26.6 54.2 106.6 32.3 97.0 8.8 88.2 4.4 44.6 2.5 0.0 1998
112.2 18.6 17.1 27.5 55.9 15.6 51.1 5.7 45.4 2.5 23.6 1.3 0.0 1999
114.6 19.0 17.6 27.4 56.2 16.8 52.4 5.5 47.0 2.4 24.8 1.3 0.0 2000          June
114.8 18.7 17.5 28.4 56.1 16.7 52.9 5.4 47.5 2.5 25.1 1.2 0.0          Sep.122.1 19.6 18.1 30.0 57.1 16.2 52.6 5.2 47.4 2.3 24.3 1.2 0.0          Dec.
123.0 19.6 20.1 29.8 56.0 17.1 50.3 5.0 45.3 2.5 23.3 1.1 0.0 2001          Mar.
125.8 20.5 19.1 31.4 56.8 17.1 50.9 5.3 45.7 2.6 23.6 1.2 0.0          June
Medium-term lending  
8
60.5 10.0 5.3 12.5 36.8 6.4 74.0 21.8 52.2 37.6 − 0.6 0.1 1998
57.0 7.1 4.0 12.3 33.3 5.6 72.7 29.2 43.5 31.0 − 0.7 0.1 1999
58.7 6.7 4.9 12.5 33.0 5.6 72.9 27.6 45.3 33.1 − 0.6 0.1 2000          June
60.3 6.9 5.5 12.7 33.3 5.6 73.4 27.4 46.0 33.6 − 0.6 0.1          Sep.
61.4 6.8 6.3 13.6 33.1 5.5 72.2 26.4 45.8 33.0 − 0.6 0.1          Dec.
60.2 6.9 6.1 13.7 32.6 5.5 71.9 25.8 46.1 33.4 − 0.6 0.1 2001          Mar.
59.7 6.8 6.3 13.9 32.4 5.5 72.0 25.6 46.4 33.9 − 0.6 0.1          June
Long-term lending  1, 9
947.1 254.4 38.1 219.1 677.9 104.9 1,283.9 1,000.6 283.3 165.8 − 25.7 8.7 1998
493.9 128.5 21.8 128.5 360.1 52.7 747.5 620.8 126.7 72.2 − 11.7 3.5 1999
503.9 132.0 21.2 135.1 363.5 53.1 761.7 634.3 127.4 72.5 − 11.8 3.5 2000          June
512.0 134.2 21.9 138.0 366.8 53.1 770.1 641.7 128.4 73.2 − 11.9 3.5          Sep.
517.3 135.9 22.5 139.5 368.7 53.2 780.8 651.4 129.4 73.3 − 12.2 3.6          Dec.
521.6 137.4 23.2 140.5 369.0 53.1 782.3 653.8 128.5 72.7 − 12.1 3.5 2001          Mar.
525.1 138.3 23.0 142.9 370.1 53.1 788.5 658.9 129.6 73.1 − 12.0 3.5          June
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
+ 6.7 + 2.0 + 1.1 + 4.2 + 2.6 − 0.1 + 10.2 + 7.9 + 2.3 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 2000          3rd qtr
+ 16.2 + 2.5 + 1.8 + 4.0 + 2.4 − 0.4 + 8.9 + 8.2 + 0.7 − 0.5 − 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.0          4th qtr
+ 3.4 + 1.6 + 2.5 + 0.9 − 1.8 + 0.6 − 0.7 + 1.9 − 2.5 − 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 2001          1st qtr
+ 4.0 + 2.2 − 1.0 + 4.0 + 1.8 + 0.1 + 6.9 + 5.1 + 1.8 + 1.3 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.0          2nd qtr
Short-term lending
− 2.8 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 2000          3rd qtr
+ 10.2 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 1.6 + 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0          4th qtr
+ 0.0 − 0.0 + 2.0 − 0.3 − 1.1 + 0.8 − 2.4 − 0.3 − 2.1 + 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 2001          1st qtr
+ 1.0 + 1.0 − 1.0 + 1.7 + 0.9 − + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.0          2nd qtr
Medium-term lending  8
+ 1.6 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.3 + 0.8 + 0.5 − + 0.0 + 0.0 2000          3rd qtr
+ 1.0 − 0.1 + 0.8 + 0.9 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 1.0 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.6 −− 0.0 − 0.0          4th qtr
− 1.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 1.1 − 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.1 − + 0.0 − 0.0 2001          1st qtr
− 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.4 + 0.6 − + 0.0 − 0.0          2nd qtr
Long-term lending  1, 9
+ 7.9 + 2.2 + 0.6 + 2.9 + 2.4 + 0.1 + 9.2 + 8.3 + 0.9 + 0.6 − + 0.1 + 0.0 2000          3rd qtr
+ 5.1 + 1.7 + 0.4 + 1.5 + 1.7 + 0.1 + 10.0 + 9.0 + 1.0 + 0.1 − + 0.3 + 0.1          4th qtr
+ 4.6 + 1.5 + 0.7 + 1.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 2.8 + 2.9 − 0.1 − 0.0 −− 0.1 − 0.0 2001          1st qtr
+ 3.4 + 1.3 − 0.2 + 2.1 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 6.2 + 5.1 + 1.0 + 0.6 −− 0.1 − 0.0          2nd qtr
credit institutions (other than building and loan associations); from 1999, loans, even in the form of instalment credit. —8Up to December 1998,
excluding banks (MFIs) and excluding finance leasing institutions; see also maturity or period of notice of more than 1 year to less than 4 years; fromfootnote 5. —5From 1999, including finance leasing institutions. —6From 1999, more than 1 year up to and including 5 years. —9Up to December
1999, including sole proprietors; up to December 1998, sole proprietors 1998, maturity or period of notice of 4 years and more; from 1999, of morewere assigned to enterprises. —7Excluding mortgage loans and housing than 5 years. 
33*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
IV. Banks
 
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
  
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 euro billion
Sight deposits  2 Time deposits  3, 4, 5    Memo item:
  
for more than 1 year
of which: Subordin- Included
ated in timeliabilities deposits:
for up for (excluding liabilities
for less to and for for less 4 years Savings Bank Loans on negoti- arising
Deposits, on than up to than and deposits savings a trust able debt from
including
Period total  1 Total demand 1 month Total 1 year  4 Total 4 years more  6 bonds  7 basis  8 securities) repos  9 2 years  5 
Domestic non-banks, total 10 End of year or month *
 
1998 3,520.3 799.5 760.2 39.3 1,194.1 398.8 795.3 . 13.4 781.9 1,211.0 234.9 80.9 45.6 .1999 1,905.3 420.4 420.4 . 759.6 239.7 519.9 4.5 . . 614.7 110.7 42.1 25.6 0.42000 1,945.8 443.4 443.4 . 819.9 274.7 545.2 9.0 . . 573.5 109.0 42.1 25.9 −
2000         Aug. 1,879.2 415.6 415.6 . 783.2 242.7 540.5 6.3 . . 572.7 107.7 42.6 26.1 −
         Sep. 1,896.5 413.0 413.0 . 805.7 266.1 539.7 6.4 . . 570.0 107.8 42.8 26.0 0.0
         Oct. 1,900.3 417.5 417.5 . 808.8 267.2 541.6 7.0 . . 566.2 107.9 42.7 26.2 −
         Nov. 1,912.9 438.7 438.7 . 802.8 260.1 542.7 8.5 . . 562.7 108.7 42.3 26.0 −
         Dec. 1,945.8 443.4 443.4 . 819.9 274.7 545.2 9.0 . . 573.5 109.0 42.1 25.9 −
2001         Jan. 1,921.8 431.1 431.1 . 812.0 263.6 548.4 10.2 . . 569.3 109.3 42.0 25.8 0.6
         Feb. 1,933.8 443.3 443.3 . 813.8 265.4 548.4 10.3 . . 567.2 109.5 42.5 25.7 1.0         Mar. 1,935.3 442.1 442.1 . 817.8 268.2 549.6 10.3 . . 565.6 109.8 42.6 25.8 0.1
         Apr. 1,938.3 451.9 451.9 . 813.8 263.8 550.0 10.5 . . 562.7 109.8 42.7 25.9 0.1
         May 1,944.0 454.9 454.9 . 819.2 266.3 552.9 10.5 . . 559.9 110.0 42.9 26.0 0.2         June 1,953.3 465.0 465.0 . 819.8 266.0 553.8 10.3 . . 558.8 109.8 42.7 25.9 0.1
Changes *
1999 + 67.3 + 32.7 + 32.7 . + 48.4 + 18.6 + 29.8 . . . −4.5 −9.3 + 0.7 + 2.3 .
2000 + 41.3 + 22.3 + 22.3 . + 61.1 + 34.8 + 26.2 + 4.5 . . −40.5 −1.7 −0.0 + 0.3 −0.4
2000         Aug. − 3.5 − 7.9 − 7.9 . + 8.2 + 6.3 + 1.9 + 0.1 . . −3.9 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 −
         Sep. + 17.0 − 2.8 − 2.8 . + 22.5 + 23.3 −0.8 + 0.1 . . −2.7 + 0.0 + 0.2 −0.1 + 0.0
         Oct. + 3.3 + 3.9 + 3.9 . + 3.0 + 1.1 + 1.9 + 0.6 . . −3.8 + 0.1 −0.1 + 0.1 −0.0
         Nov. + 13.1 + 21.8 + 21.8 . −6.0 −7.0 + 1.1 + 1.5 . . −3.5 + 0.8 −0.4 −0.1 −
         Dec. + 35.5 + 5.7 + 5.7 . + 18.6 + 14.6 + 4.0 + 0.5 . . + 10.8 + 0.4 −0.2 −0.1 −
2001         Jan. −24.0 −12.3 −12.3 . −7.9 −11.1 + 3.2 + 1.2 . . −4.1 + 0.3 −0.1 −0.1 + 0.6
         Feb. + 13.1 + 12.1 + 12.1 . + 2.9 + 1.8 + 1.1 + 0.1 . . −2.1 + 0.2 + 0.4 −0.0 + 0.4
         Mar. + 0.9 − 1.7 − 1.7 . + 4.0 + 2.8 + 1.3 + 0.0 . . −1.6 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 −0.9
         Apr. + 2.9 + 9.8 + 9.8 . −4.0 −4.4 + 0.4 + 0.2 . . −2.9 −0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 −0.0
         May + 5.0 + 2.2 + 2.2 . + 5.4 + 2.5 + 2.8 + 0.0 . . −2.8 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1
         June + 9.4 + 10.2 + 10.2 . + 0.6 −0.3 + 0.9 −0.2 . . −1.2 −0.1 −0.2 −0.1 −0.0
Domestic public authorities End of year or month *
1998 288.3 36.7 29.1 7.6 170.3 44.8 125.5 . 1.0 124.5 6.4 6.3 68.7 2.6 .
1999 124.4 14.7 14.7 . 104.4 42.0 62.4 0.4 . . 3.2 2.0 35.9 1.2 −
2000 149.1 16.6 16.6 . 127.7 62.1 65.5 1.2 . . 2.7 2.1 36.0 1.4 −
2000         Aug. 125.1 12.8 12.8 . 107.4 42.5 65.0 1.1 . . 2.8 2.1 36.6 1.4 −
         Sep. 144.0 12.7 12.7 . 126.4 61.9 64.5 1.0 . . 2.8 2.1 36.7 1.4 −
         Oct. 144.4 13.3 13.3 . 126.3 61.4 64.9 1.0 . . 2.7 2.1 36.5 1.4 −
         Nov. 136.7 12.7 12.7 . 119.1 53.8 65.3 1.1 . . 2.7 2.1 36.1 1.4 −
         Dec. 149.1 16.6 16.6 . 127.7 62.1 65.5 1.2 . . 2.7 2.1 36.0 1.4 −
2001         Jan. 133.5 13.3 13.3 . 115.5 49.7 65.8 1.4 . . 2.6 2.1 36.0 1.4 −
         Feb. 134.8 15.6 15.6 . 114.5 49.0 65.5 1.4 . . 2.6 2.2 36.3 1.4 −
         Mar. 132.9 14.2 14.2 . 114.1 49.1 65.0 1.4 . . 2.5 2.2 36.3 1.4 −
         Apr. 132.1 15.2 15.2 . 112.3 46.9 65.4 1.6 . . 2.4 2.2 36.3 1.4 −
         May 134.5 14.3 14.3 . 115.6 50.0 65.6 1.6 . . 2.4 2.2 36.6 1.4 −
         June 136.3 17.7 17.7 . 114.1 48.9 65.2 1.4 . . 2.4 2.2 36.4 1.4 −
Changes *
1999 + 12.4 − 0.2 − 0.2 . + 13.7 + 15.3 −1.5 . . . −0.0 −1.2 + 0.7 −0.2 .
2000 + 24.8 + 1.9 + 1.9 . + 23.3 + 20.1 + 3.2 + 0.8 . . −0.5 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.3 −
2000         Aug. + 1.2 − 0.3 − 0.3 . + 1.5 + 1.1 + 0.4 + 0.0 . . + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 −
         Sep. + 18.8 − 0.1 − 0.1 . + 19.0 + 19.4 −0.4 −0.0 . . −0.0 −0.0 + 0.2 −0.0 −
         Oct. + 0.4 + 0.7 + 0.7 . −0.2 −0.5 + 0.3 + 0.0 . . −0.1 + 0.0 −0.2 + 0.0 −
         Nov. − 7.7 − 0.6 − 0.6 . −7.2 −7.6 + 0.4 + 0.0 . . −0.0 + 0.0 −0.4 + 0.0 −
         Dec. + 12.5 + 3.9 + 3.9 . + 8.6 + 8.3 + 0.3 + 0.1 . . + 0.0 + 0.0 −0.1 −0.0 −
2001         Jan. −15.6 − 3.4 − 3.4 . −12.2 −12.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 . . −0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 −0.1 −
         Feb. + 1.3 + 2.3 + 2.3 . −1.0 −0.7 −0.3 + 0.0 . . −0.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 −−
         Mar. − 1.9 − 1.4 − 1.4 . −0.4 + 0.1 −0.5 − .. −0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −
         Apr. − 0.8 + 1.0 + 1.0 . −1.7 −2.2 + 0.5 + 0.2 . . −0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −
         May + 2.4 − 0.9 − 0.9 . + 3.3 + 3.1 + 0.2 −0.0 . . −0.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.0 −
         June + 1.9 + 3.3 + 3.3 . −1.5 −1.1 −0.4 −0.2 . . −0.0 −0.0 −0.2 −0.0 −
*See table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from to December 1998, including time deposits for less than 1 month. —
the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as 3Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from registered
provisional. Subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following debt securities. —4Up to December 1998, excluding time deposits for less
Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Up to December 1998, than 1 month; see also footnote 2. —5Since the inclusion of building and
including deposits from loans on a trust basis; see also footnote 8. —2Up
34*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
IV. Banks
 
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont ’d)
  
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 euro billion
Sight deposits  2 Time deposits  3, 4, 5    Memo item:
  
for more than 1 year
of which: Subordin- Included
ated in timeliabilities deposits:
for up for (excluding liabilities
for less to and for for less 4 years Savings Bank Loans on negoti- arising
Deposits, on than up to than and deposits savings a trust able debt from
including
Period total  1 Total demand 1 month Total 1 year  4 Total 4 years more  6 bonds  7 basis  8 securities) repos  9 2 years  5 
Domestic enterprises and individuals 10 End of year or month *
 
1998 3,231.9 762.8 731.2 31.7 1,023.8 354.0 669.8 . 12.4 657.4 1,204.6 228.6 12.1 43.0 .1999 1,781.0 405.7 405.7 . 655.2 197.6 457.6 4.1 . . 611.4 108.7 6.2 24.5 0.42000 1,796.7 426.8 426.8 . 692.2 212.6 479.6 7.8 . . 570.8 106.9 6.1 24.5 −
2000         Aug. 1,754.1 402.8 402.8 . 675.8 200.3 475.5 5.2 . . 569.9 105.7 6.1 24.7 −
         Sep. 1,752.5 400.3 400.3 . 679.3 204.2 475.1 5.4 . . 567.2 105.7 6.1 24.6 0.0
         Oct. 1,755.9 404.2 404.2 . 682.5 205.8 476.7 6.0 . . 563.5 105.8 6.2 24.7 −
         Nov. 1,776.2 426.0 426.0 . 683.7 206.3 477.4 7.4 . . 560.0 106.5 6.2 24.6 −
         Dec. 1,796.7 426.8 426.8 . 692.2 212.6 479.6 7.8 . . 570.8 106.9 6.1 24.5 −
2001         Jan. 1,788.3 417.9 417.9 . 696.5 213.9 482.6 8.9 . . 566.7 107.2 6.0 24.4 0.6
         Feb. 1,799.0 427.7 427.7 . 699.3 216.4 482.9 8.9 . . 564.6 107.4 6.2 24.4 1.0         Mar. 1,802.3 427.8 427.8 . 703.7 219.1 484.7 8.9 . . 563.1 107.6 6.3 24.5 0.1
         Apr. 1,806.1 436.7 436.7 . 701.5 216.9 484.6 8.9 . . 560.3 107.6 6.3 24.5 0.1
         May 1,809.5 440.5 440.5 . 703.6 216.3 487.3 8.9 . . 557.6 107.8 6.3 24.6 0.2         June 1,817.0 447.3 447.3 . 705.7 217.1 488.6 8.9 . . 556.4 107.7 6.3 24.5 0.1
Changes *
1999 + 54.9 + 32.8 + 32.8 . + 34.7 + 3.4 + 31.3 . . . −4.5 −8.1 + 0.0 + 2.4 .
2000 + 16.5 + 20.4 + 20.4 . + 37.8 + 14.8 + 23.1 + 3.7 . . −40.0 −1.8 −0.1 + 0.0 −0.4
2000         Aug. −4.7 −7.6 −7.6 . + 6.7 + 5.2 + 1.6 + 0.1 . . −3.9 + 0.0 + 0.0 −0.1 −
         Sep. −1.8 −2.7 −2.7 . + 3.5 + 3.9 −0.4 + 0.1 . . −2.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 −0.1 + 0.0
         Oct. + 2.8 + 3.3 + 3.3 . + 3.2 + 1.6 + 1.6 + 0.6 . . −3.7 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 −0.0
         Nov. + 20.8 + 22.3 + 22.3 . + 1.2 + 0.5 + 0.7 + 1.5 . . −3.4 + 0.8 −0.0 −0.1 −
         Dec. + 23.0 + 1.8 + 1.8 . + 10.0 + 6.3 + 3.7 + 0.4 . . + 10.7 + 0.4 −0.1 −0.1 −
2001         Jan. −8.4 −8.9 −8.9 . + 4.3 + 1.3 + 3.0 + 1.0 . . −4.0 + 0.3 −0.1 −0.1 + 0.6
         Feb. + 11.8 + 9.7 + 9.7 . + 4.0 + 2.5 + 1.4 + 0.0 . . −2.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 −0.0 + 0.4
         Mar. + 2.8 −0.4 −0.4 . + 4.4 + 2.7 + 1.7 + 0.0 . . −1.5 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 −0.9
         Apr. + 3.7 + 8.8 + 8.8 . −2.2 −2.2 −0.1 −0.0 . . −2.8 −0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −0.0
         May + 2.7 + 3.1 + 3.1 . + 2.1 −0.6 + 2.7 + 0.0 . . −2.7 + 0.2 −0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1
         June + 7.6 + 6.8 + 6.8 . + 2.0 + 0.8 + 1.3 −0.0 . . −1.2 −0.1 + 0.0 −0.1 −0.0
of which: Domestic enterprises 10, 11 End of year or month *
1998 1,108.1 292.1 267.8 24.3 748.9 128.9 620.0 . 5.9 614.0 11.1 44.3 11.8 24.1 .
1999 593.2 142.1 142.1 . 421.8 82.3 339.5 1.5 . . 5.5 23.7 6.1 13.7 0.42000 635.1 158.1 158.1 . 447.6 89.0 358.5 2.7 . . 5.2 24.2 5.9 14.1 −
2000         Aug. 609.0 138.0 138.0 . 441.9 83.7 358.2 1.8 . . 5.3 23.8 5.9 14.1 −
         Sep. 611.2 138.0 138.0 . 444.0 85.9 358.1 1.8 . . 5.3 23.9 5.9 14.0 0.0
         Oct. 616.6 142.5 142.5 . 444.8 85.3 359.5 1.8 . . 5.3 24.1 6.1 14.1 −
         Nov. 623.8 149.0 149.0 . 445.4 85.8 359.5 2.7 . . 5.2 24.3 6.0 14.0 −
         Dec. 635.1 158.1 158.1 . 447.6 89.0 358.5 2.7 . . 5.2 24.2 5.9 14.1 −
2001         Jan. 628.1 151.3 151.3 . 447.4 86.1 361.3 3.4 . . 5.2 24.2 5.8 14.0 0.6
         Feb. 632.2 154.5 154.5 . 448.4 87.0 361.4 3.4 . . 5.1 24.2 6.0 14.0 1.0         Mar. 629.9 150.2 150.2 . 450.6 87.5 363.1 3.3 . . 5.1 24.0 6.1 14.1 0.1
         Apr. 631.8 155.4 155.4 . 447.5 84.2 363.3 3.2 . . 5.0 23.9 6.1 14.1 0.1
         May 633.6 155.4 155.4 . 449.2 82.9 366.3 3.2 . . 5.1 23.9 6.1 14.1 0.2         June 635.1 156.0 156.0 . 450.2 82.7 367.6 3.1 . . 5.0 23.8 6.1 14.1 0.1
Changes *
1999 + 43.7 + 6.6 + 6.6 . + 36.0 + 7.5 + 28.5 . . . −0.2 + 1.2 + 0.0 + 1.3 .
2000 + 42.8 + 15.3 + 15.3 . + 27.3 + 6.7 + 20.5 + 1.2 . . −0.3 + 0.5 −0.1 + 0.4 −0.4
2000         Aug. + 0.0 −5.1 −5.1 . + 5.2 + 3.6 + 1.6 + 0.0 . . −0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −0.0 −
         Sep. + 2.0 −0.2 −0.2 . + 2.1 + 2.2 −0.1 −0.0 . . −0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 −0.1 + 0.0
         Oct. + 4.8 + 3.8 + 3.8 . + 0.8 −0.6 + 1.4 + 0.1 . . −0.0 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 −0.0
         Nov. + 7.8 + 7.1 + 7.1 . + 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.9 . . −0.1 + 0.2 −0.0 −0.1 −
         Dec. + 13.8 + 10.1 + 10.1 . + 3.7 + 3.2 + 0.5 + 0.0 . . + 0.1 −0.0 −0.1 + 0.1 −
2001         Jan. −7.1 −6.8 −6.8 . −0.1 −2.9 + 2.8 + 0.7 . . −0.1 −0.1 −0.1 −0.1 + 0.6
         Feb. + 5.2 + 3.2 + 3.2 . + 2.1 + 0.8 + 1.2 −0.1 . . −0.1 − + 0.1 −0.0 + 0.4
         Mar. −2.9 −4.8 −4.8 . + 2.2 + 0.5 + 1.6 −0.1 . . −0.0 −0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 −0.9
         Apr. + 1.9 + 5.1 + 5.1 . −3.1 −3.3 + 0.2 −0.1 . . −0.1 −0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 −0.0
         May + 1.1 −0.8 −0.8 . + 1.8 −1.2 + 3.0 −0.0 . . + 0.1 −0.0 −0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1
         June + 1.5 + 0.7 + 0.7 . + 1.0 −0.3 + 1.3 −0.1 . . −0.1 −0.1 + 0.0 −− 0.0
loan associations in January 1999, including deposits under savings and in time deposits (see also footnote 1). —9Collected separately from 1999
loan contracts (see table IV. 12). —6Excluding deposits under savings and only. —10Up to December 1998, including liabilities to domestic building
loan contracts (see also footnote 5). —7Including liabilities arising from and loan associations and money market funds. —11Up to the End 1998,
non-negotiable bearer debt securities. —8From 1999, no longer included including sole proprietors. 
35*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
IV. Banks
 
8. Deposits of domestic individuals and non-commercial organisations at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
   
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 euro billion
Sight deposits  2 Time deposits  4, 5, 6  
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits Domestic individuals Domestic individuals
of domesticindividuals Domestic Domesticand non- non-com- non-com-commercial mercial mercialorganisa- Selfem- Other organisa- Selfem- Other organisa-
Period Total Total ployed  
3 Employees tions Total Total ployed  3 Employees tions tions, total  1 individuals individuals
End of year or month *
 
1998 2,123.9 470.8 452.1 93.4 298.0 60.7 18.6 275.0 243.5 72.3 132.6 38.7 31.41999 1,187.8 263.5 254.6 50.2 170.3 34.1 9.0 233.4 216.6 35.2 161.6 19.9 16.82000 1,161.5 268.7 259.3 47.7 176.0 35.6 9.4 244.6 225.5 34.9 168.9 21.7 19.2
2001         Jan. 1,160.2 266.6 256.2 47.9 173.6 34.6 10.4 249.0 229.8 35.8 171.7 22.3 19.2
         Feb. 1,166.8 273.2 262.2 48.3 178.6 35.3 10.9 250.9 231.5 35.9 173.1 22.6 19.4         Mar. 1,172.5 277.6 266.8 47.5 183.1 36.3 10.9 253.2 233.4 35.9 174.6 23.0 19.7
         Apr. 1,174.3 281.3 270.9 49.5 184.8 36.5 10.5 254.0 234.5 35.9 175.4 23.1 19.6
         May 1,175.9 285.2 272.9 49.8 186.5 36.7 12.2 254.4 236.0 36.3 176.4 23.3 18.4         June 1,181.9 291.3 279.2 49.0 192.3 37.9 12.1 255.4 236.5 36.3 176.8 23.4 18.9
Changes *
1999 + 11.2 + 26.2 + 25.9 + 3.7 + 18.8 + 3.4 + 0.3 −1.3 −1.0 −2.6 + 2.1 −0.5 −0.3
2000 −26.3 + 5.2 + 4.7 −2.5 + 5.7 + 1.5 + 0.4 + 10.6 + 8.2 −0.2 + 6.8 + 1.7 + 2.4
2001         Jan. −1.3 −2.1 −3.1 + 0.2 −2.4 −1.0 + 1.0 + 4.4 + 4.4 + 0.9 + 2.8 + 0.6 + 0.0
         Feb. + 6.6 + 6.6 + 6.0 + 0.3 + 5.0 + 0.7 + 0.5 + 1.9 + 1.7 + 0.1 + 1.4 + 0.2 + 0.2         Mar. + 5.7 + 4.5 + 4.6 −0.8 + 4.5 + 0.9 −0.1 + 2.3 + 2.0 −0.0 + 1.5 + 0.4 + 0.3
         Apr. + 1.8 + 3.7 + 4.1 + 2.1 + 1.8 + 0.2 −0.4 + 0.9 + 1.0 + 0.1 + 0.8 + 0.1 −0.2
         May + 1.6 + 3.9 + 2.1 + 0.3 + 1.6 + 0.2 + 1.8 + 0.3 + 1.5 + 0.4 + 0.9 + 0.2 −1.2
         June + 6.0 + 6.1 + 6.3 −0.7 + 5.8 + 1.2 −0.2 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.5
*See table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the including deposits arising from loans on a trust basis; see also footnote 9.—
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as 2Up to December 1998, including time deposits for less than 1 month. —
provisional. Subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following 3Up to the End 1998, including sole proprietors. —4Including subordi-
Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Up to December 1998, nated liabilities and liabilities arising from registered debt securities. —5UpDeutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
 
  
9. Deposits of domestic public authorities at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group 
*
 
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 euro billion
Deposits  1 
   
Federal Government and its special funds  2 Länder Governments
Time deposits  4 Time deposits  4 
Savings Memo Savings Memo
Domestic for up deposits item: for up deposits item:public to and for more and bank Loans on to and for more and bank Loans on
Sight including than savings a trust Sight including than savings a trust authorities,
Period total Total 1 year 1 year bonds  
5 basis  6 Total 1 year 1 year bonds  5 basis  6 deposits  3 deposits  3 
End of year or month *
 
1998 288.3 111.2 4.0 1.9 80.9 0.0 24.3 80.1 6.8 1.9 27.1 0.2 44.21999 124.4 45.9 1.0 4.6 40.3 0.0 12.7 21.0 2.8 4.2 14.0 0.1 23.12000 149.1 67.6 2.1 22.6 42.8 0.0 12.5 20.3 3.1 2.1 15.0 0.1 23.3
2001         Jan. 133.5 55.7 1.3 11.1 43.3 0.0 12.2 21.7 2.9 3.7 14.9 0.1 23.6
         Feb. 134.8 55.5 1.2 11.4 42.9 0.0 12.7 22.0 3.5 3.4 15.0 0.1 23.4         Mar. 132.9 56.1 1.4 12.3 42.4 0.0 12.8 21.7 3.4 3.1 15.0 0.1 23.4
         Apr. 132.1 55.5 1.2 11.4 42.8 0.0 12.8 22.0 3.6 3.3 15.0 0.1 23.4
         May 134.5 55.1 1.0 11.2 42.9 0.0 13.0 20.6 2.7 2.7 15.1 0.1 23.5         June 136.3 55.2 2.9 9.5 42.7 0.0 12.8 23.3 3.7 4.5 15.0 0.1 23.4
Changes *
1999 + 12.4 + 1.6 −0.9 + 3.5 −1.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 2.6 −0.4 + 3.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.5
2000 + 24.8 + 21.6 + 1.2 + 18.0 + 2.5 −0.0 −0.2 + 0.5 + 0.3 −0.9 + 1.1 + 0.0 + 0.2
2001         Jan. −15.6 −11.9 −0.9 −11.5 + 0.5 −0.0 −0.3 + 1.4 −0.2 + 1.7 −0.1 + 0.0 + 0.3
         Feb. + 1.3 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.3 −0.4 − + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.3 −0.3 + 0.1 −− 0.0
         Mar. −1.9 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.9 −0.5 − + 0.1 −0.3 −0.1 −0.3 + 0.0 −0.0 −0.1
         Apr. −0.8 −0.7 −0.2 −0.9 + 0.4 −− 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 −0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0
         May + 2.4 −0.4 −0.2 −0.3 + 0.1 − + 0.2 −1.3 −0.9 −0.6 + 0.1 −0.0 + 0.1
         June + 1.9 + 0.1 + 1.9 −1.6 −0.2 −− 0.2 + 2.7 + 1.0 + 1.7 −0.1 + 0.0 −0.1
*See table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to
its successor organisations and of the Federal Railways, east German be regarded as provisional. Subsequent alterations, which will appear in theRailways and Federal Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Up to December
Deutsche Post AG and Deutsche Telekom AG, and of publicly-owned 1998, including deposits arising from loans on a trust basis; see alsoenterprises, which are included in ”Enterprises ”. Statistical breaks have been footnote 6. —2Federal Railways Fund, Indemnification Fund, Redemption
36*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
IV. Banks
     
 
 Savings deposits  7  Memo item:
 
by maturity
 more than 1 year  6 
Included Subordinated
 of which: Domestic liabilities in time
non-com- (excluding deposits:
up to and up to and mercial Bank Loans on negotiable liabilitiesincluding including less than 4 years Domestic organisa- savings a trust debt arising1 year  
5 Total 2 years 4 years and more Total tions bonds  8 basis  9   Period individuals securities)  10 from repos  11 
End of year or month *
 
225.1 49.9 . 6.5 43.4 1,193.5 1,174.1 19.4 184.2 0.4 18.9 . 1998115.4 118.0 2.5 . . 605.9 595.5 10.4 85.0 0.2 10.8 −1999
123.6 121.1 5.1 . . 565.5 555.8 9.7 82.7 0.2 10.4 −2000
127.8 121.3 5.5 . . 561.6 552.0 9.6 83.0 0.2 10.4 0.0 2001          Jan.
129.4 121.5 5.5 . . 559.5 550.0 9.6 83.2 0.2 10.4 0.0          Feb.131.6 121.6 5.6 . . 558.0 548.5 9.6 83.6 0.2 10.4 0.0          Mar.
132.7 121.3 5.7 . . 555.3 545.7 9.5 83.7 0.2 10.4 0.0          Apr.
133.4 121.0 5.8 . . 552.5 543.0 9.5 83.8 0.2 10.5 0.0          May134.4 121.0 5.8 . . 551.3 541.9 9.5 83.8 0.2 10.4 −         June
Changes *
− 4.1 + 2.8 . . . − 4.3 − 4.8 + 0.5 −9.3 −0.0 + 1.1 . 1999
+ 8.0 + 2.5 + 2.5 . . −39.7 −39.0 −0.7 −2.3 + 0.0 −0.4 −2000
+ 4.2 + 0.2 + 0.3 . . − 4.0 − 3.9 −0.1 + 0.3 −0.0 −0.0 + 0.0 2001          Jan.
+ 1.7 + 0.2 + 0.1 . . − 2.0 − 2.0 −0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 −         Feb.
+ 2.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 . . − 1.5 − 1.5 −0.0 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 −0.0          Mar.
+ 1.1 −0.3 + 0.1 . . − 2.8 − 2.7 −0.0 + 0.1 − + 0.0 −         Apr.
+ 0.7 −0.3 + 0.0 . . − 2.8 − 2.8 −0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 −         May
+ 1.1 −0.0 + 0.1 . . − 1.1 − 1.1 −0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −0.1 −0.0          June
to December 1998, excluding time deposits for less than 1 month; see also footnote 6). —8Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
footnote 2. —6Since the inclusion of building and loan associations in securities. —9From 1999, no longer included in time deposits (see also
January 1999, including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see table footnote 1) —10Included in time deposits. —11Collected separately from
IV. 12). —7Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also 1999 only. Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
 
   
 
 
 
Local authorities and local authority associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  4, 7 Time deposits  4 
Savings Memo Savings Memo
for up deposits item: for up deposits item:to and for more and bank Loans on to and for more and bank Loans on
Sight including than savings a trust Sight including than savings a trust
Total 1 year 1 year bonds  
5, 8 basis  6 Total 1 year 1 year bonds  5 basis  6   Period deposits  3 deposits  3 
End of year or month *
 
45.3 16.5 19.8 2.4 6.6 0.1 51.7 9.3 21.2 15.2 5.8 0.2 199828.5 8.2 14.4 2.2 3.7 0.1 28.9 2.8 18.9 5.8 1.4 0.1 199930.2 8.9 15.7 2.0 3.6 0.1 31.1 2.5 21.7 5.7 1.2 0.1 2000
26.8 6.8 14.6 2.0 3.4 0.1 29.3 2.2 20.3 5.6 1.2 0.1 2001          Jan.
28.4 8.1 14.9 2.0 3.4 0.1 28.9 2.9 19.3 5.6 1.2 0.1          Feb.27.4 7.5 14.6 1.9 3.3 0.1 27.7 1.9 19.0 5.6 1.1 0.1          Mar.
27.3 8.1 13.9 1.9 3.3 0.1 27.4 2.3 18.3 5.8 1.1 0.1          Apr.
29.4 8.4 15.8 1.9 3.3 0.1 29.3 2.2 20.3 5.8 1.1 0.1          May28.3 8.5 14.7 1.8 3.3 0.1 29.6 2.5 20.3 5.7 1.1 0.1          June
Changes *
+ 4.6 + 0.7 + 3.1 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 3.5 + 0.5 + 5.6 −1.0 −1.6 −0.0 1999
+ 1.7 + 0.8 + 1.3 −0.2 −0.2 + 0.0 + 1.0 −0.3 + 1.7 −0.1 −0.2 −0.0 2000
−3.4 −2.1 −1.1 −0.1 −0.1 −− 1.8 −0.2 −1.5 −0.0 + 0.0 −0.0 2001          Jan.
+ 1.6 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 0.0 −0.0 + 0.0 −0.4 + 0.6 −1.0 −0.0 −0.0 −         Feb.
−1.0 −0.6 −0.3 −0.0 −0.1 −0.0 −1.2 −1.0 −0.2 + 0.0 −0.0 −         Mar.
−0.1 + 0.6 −0.7 −0.1 −0.0 + 0.0 −0.3 + 0.4 −0.8 + 0.1 −0.0 −         Apr.
+ 2.2 + 0.3 + 1.9 −0.0 −0.0 − + 1.9 −0.1 + 2.0 + 0.0 −0.0 −         May
−1.1 + 0.1 −1.2 −0.0 −0.0 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.3 −0.0 −0.1 + 0.0 −0.0          June
Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special Fund, ”German Unity ”Fund, longer included in time deposits (see also footnote 1) —7Since the inclusion
Equalisation of Burdens Fund. —3Up to December 1998, including time of building and loan associations in January 1999, including deposits under
deposits for less than 1 month. —4Up to December 1998, excluding time savings and loan contracts. —8Excluding deposits under savings and loan
deposits for less than 1 month; see also footnote 3. —5Including liabilities contracts (see also footnote 7). 
arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. —6From 1999, no
37*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
IV. Banks
 
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs) *
  
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 euro billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at three months ’ Memo at over three months ’
notice notice item: of which:
Interest With
of which: of which: of which: credited maturitiesSpecial Special At three on of moresavings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months ’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years  
4 facilities  2 facilities  2 non-banks
End of year or month *
 
1998 1,234.2 1,211.0 971.4 582.8 239.6 189.6 23.2 17.3 39.5 243.9 234.9 211.1 9.11999 626.6 614.7 504.4 338.8 110.2 88.3 11.9 9.1 20.0 116.4 110.7 101.8 5.72000 585.2 573.5 450.5 309.0 123.0 104.4 11.7 8.3 19.3 115.9 109.0 94.4 6.8
2001         Feb. 578.9 567.2 444.2 307.5 123.0 107.4 11.7 8.2 0.5 116.3 109.5 93.0 6.8
         Mar. 577.3 565.6 443.0 307.6 122.6 107.1 11.7 8.2 0.6 116.5 109.8 92.5 6.7
         Apr. 574.4 562.7 442.1 307.6 120.6 105.1 11.7 8.2 0.5 116.5 109.8 92.0 6.7
         May 571.6 559.9 440.4 307.7 119.5 104.0 11.6 8.2 0.5 116.7 110.0 91.7 6.8         June 570.4 558.8 440.1 307.7 118.6 103.2 11.6 8.2 0.4 116.6 109.8 91.2 6.8
Changes *
1999 −4.4 −4.5 + 7.3 + 14.6 −11.8 −8.4 + 0.1 + 0.3 . −8.2 −9.3 −8.9 + 1.1
2000 −40.7 −40.5 −53.6 −31.1 + 13.1 + 15.8 −0.2 −0.8 . −0.5 −1.7 −7.4 + 1.1
2001         Feb. −2.1 −2.1 −2.1 −0.8 −0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 −0.0 . + 0.2 + 0.2 −0.5 −0.1
         Mar. −1.7 −1.6 −1.2 + 0.1 −0.4 −0.4 −0.0 −0.0 . + 0.2 + 0.3 −0.5 −0.0
         Apr. −2.9 −2.9 −0.9 −0.0 −2.0 −2.0 −0.0 + 0.0 . −0.0 −0.0 −0.5 −0.0
         May −2.8 −2.8 −1.7 + 0.1 −1.1 −1.1 −0.0 −0.0 . + 0.2 + 0.2 −0.3 + 0.0
         June −1.2 −1.2 −0.3 + 0.0 −0.9 −0.8 −0.0 + 0.0 . −0.1 −0.1 −0.5 + 0.0
*See table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the building and loan associations, which are classified as time deposits. —
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as 2Savings deposits bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the minimum or
provisional. Subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following basic rate of interest. —3Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable
Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Other than deposits with bearer debt securities. — 4 Up to December 1998, of 4 years and more. 
 
   
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany 
*
 
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 eurobillion
Non-negotiable bearer debt securities
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper and money market paper  7 
of which: of which
with maturities of Subordinated
with maturities of
Certifi- non-
Floating- Zero- Foreign cates up to and up to and negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of including over over including over over debt debt
Period Total notes  1 deposit 1 year Total 1 year bonds  1, 2 bonds  3, 4 2 years  5 2 years  5 4 years  6 4 years  6 securities securities
End of year or month *)
 
1998 2,200.4 289.2 10.6 204.3 14.3 47.2 2,147.0 1,787.7 4.7 1.0 3.6 1.5 46.6 2.91999 1,310.3 208.2 14.7 98.7 13.1 73.6 1,189.8 . 2.6 0.5 1.3 . 32.7 2.52000 1,412.5 283.1 22.1 128.2 19.7 87.9 1,261.9 . 2.7 0.4 1.3 . 38.3 2.4
2001         Feb. 1,444.2 295.3 17.9 127.8 18.7 78.4 1,295.2 . 2.7 0.4 1.3 . 38.8 2.4
         Mar. 1,451.6 302.6 18.7 130.2 20.2 78.3 1,300.7 . 2.7 0.4 1.3 . 39.6 2.4
         Apr. 1,452.1 306.7 20.1 129.2 18.9 75.0 1,299.9 . 2.7 0.4 1.3 . 40.3 2.4
         May 1,457.4 310.8 21.1 133.1 18.7 71.1 1,302.9 . 2.8 0.5 1.3 . 42.1 2.5         June 1,459.3 318.2 19.2 132.1 16.6 64.2 1,304.2 . 2.8 0.5 1.3 . 42.1 2.5
Changes *
1999 + 183.5 + 56.2 + 9.3 + 20.0 + 5.8 + 49.5 + 96.4 . + 0.3 + 0.0 −0.5 . + 8.8 + 1.0
2000 + 102.0 + 65.5 + 7.0 + 26.6 + 6.4 + 14.1 + 72.1 . + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 . + 5.6 −0.1
2001         Feb. + 15.0 + 6.7 −1.0 + 0.7 −0.1 −3.8 + 13.6 . + 0.0 + 0.0 −0.0 . + 0.4 −
         Mar. + 7.3 + 4.3 + 0.8 + 2.4 + 1.4 −0.1 + 5.5 . + 0.0 + 0.0 −0.0 . + 0.8 + 0.0
         Apr. + 0.5 + 4.1 + 1.4 −0.9 −1.3 −3.2 − 0.7 . −0.0 + 0.0 −0.0 . + 0.7 + 0.0
         May + 5.3 + 3.5 + 1.0 + 3.9 −0.2 −3.9 + 3.0 . + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 . + 1.8 + 0.1
         June + 1.9 + 7.4 −1.9 −1.0 −2.0 −6.9 + 1.3 . −0.0 −0.0 −0.0 . + 0.0 −0.0
*See table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the 3Including floating-rate notes and zero-coupon bonds denominated in
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as foreign currencies. —4From 1999, bonds denominated in non-euro-area
provisional. Subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following currencies. —5Up to December 1998, 2 years and more. —6From 1999, no
Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Including debt securities longer collected. —7Non-negotiable bearer debt securities are classified
denominated in foreign currencies. —2Issue value when floated. — among bank savings bonds; see also table IV. 10, footnote 2. 
38*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
IV.  Banks
  
12.  Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *
  Interim statements
  
Euro billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs)  6 banks (non-MFIs)
Building loans Secur- Memo
item: ities (in-
Bal- cluding Bearer Newances Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- and under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber loans Bank savings Interim and savings savings Sight ities ing pub- enteredof Balance (except debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan and time out- lished into in
End of year sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- deposits stand- year or associ- reserves)
or month ations total loans  
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans  4 tracts deposits tracts 7 ing 8 month  9 loans)  1 paper)  5 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2000 31 153.6 23.0 0.2 11.3 43.5 51.2 6.5 9.2 0.8 27.6 95.6 2.5 5.7 6.9 73.0
2001         Apr. 30 154.6 22.6 0.2 12.1 43.6 51.5 6.8 9.5 0.6 28.3 94.8 2.6 6.3 6.8 6.4
         May 30 154.7 22.4 0.2 12.2 43.4 51.9 6.8 9.7 0.6 28.7 94.5 2.6 6.2 6.9 6.0         June 30 155.5 22.7 0.2 12.1 43.4 52.3 6.9 9.6 0.6 28.7 94.3 2.7 6.7 6.9 5.8
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2001         Apr. 19 111.4 18.6 0.1 6.8 28.6 35.8 6.3 7.4 0.4 21.0 64.7 2.6 6.3 4.0 4.2
         May 19 111.4 18.5 0.1 6.8 28.5 36.1 6.3 7.6 0.4 21.4 64.5 2.6 6.2 4.0 3.9         June 19 112.2 18.8 0.1 6.8 28.5 36.4 6.4 7.4 0.4 21.3 64.4 2.7 6.7 4.0 3.9
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2001         Apr. 11 43.2 4.0 0.1 5.3 15.0 15.7 0.5 2.1 0.2 7.3 30.0 0.0 − 2.7 2.2
         May 11 43.3 3.9 0.1 5.4 14.9 15.8 0.5 2.1 0.2 7.3 30.0 0.0 − 2.9 2.1
         June 11 43.3 3.9 0.1 5.3 14.9 15.8 0.5 2.1 0.2 7.4 29.9 0.0 − 2.9 2.0
Trends in building and loan association business
  
Euro billion
Changes in deposits Capital promised Capital paid out Outpayment Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts  10 Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans  11 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings andments loan contracts Newly loan contracts  
10 
Amounts Interest of granted
credited deposits interim paid into of which: of which:
savings on under Applied Applied and ofaccounts deposits bridging which: of Memo
cancelled to settle- to settle-
under under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which: item:savings savings and which: interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housingand loan and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonusescon- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during received
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter
13 tions  12 tracts  10 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2000 22.0 2.8 4.9 47.7 33.6 45.8 20.0 4.6 10.8 3.4 14.9 10.5 7.6 14.3 11.8 0.5
2001         Apr. 2.0 0.0 0.4 4.7 3.6 4.3 2.1 0.5 1.1 0.4 1.1 10.9 8.0 1.2 0.1
         May 1.7 0.0 0.4 3.7 2.5 3.6 1.6 0.3 0.8 0.2 1.2 10.9 7.9 1.2 0.1         June 1.7 0.0 0.4 3.9 2.7 3.6 1.6 0.3 0.9 0.3 1.2 10.9 7.9 1.2 . 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2001         Apr. 1.3 0.0 0.2 3.6 2.7 3.3 1.6 0.5 0.8 0.3 0.9 6.5 4.1 0.8 0.0
         May 1.1 0.0 0.3 2.6 1.6 2.6 1.1 0.2 0.6 0.1 0.9 6.4 4.0 0.9 0.0         June 1.1 0.0 0.2 2.7 1.8 2.6 1.1 0.2 0.6 0.2 0.9 6.4 4.0 0.8 . 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2001         Apr. 0.7 0.0 0.1 1.2 0.9 1.0 0.5 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.2 4.4 3.9 0.4 0.0
         May 0.6 0.0 0.1 1.2 0.9 1.0 0.5 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.3 4.5 3.9 0.4 0.0         June 0.5 0.0 0.1 1.2 0.9 1.1 0.5 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.3 4.5 3.9 0.4 . 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of the foreign branches. deposits. —8Including participation rights capital; from December 1993
From August 1990 including assets and liabilities and/or transactions with including fund for general banking risks. —9Total amount covered by the
building and loan association savers in the former GDR. The figures for the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for which the contract fee ha s
latest date are always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent alterations, been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted count as new contracts .—
which will appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially 10For outpayments of deposits under savings and loan contracts arising
marked. —1Including postal giro account balances, claims on building and from the allocation of contracts see "Capital paid out". —11Including
loan associations, claims arising from registered debt securities and central housing bonuses credited. —12Only allocations accepted by the
bank balances. —2Loans under savings and loan contracts and interim and beneficiaries; including allocations applied to settlement of interim and
bridging loans. —3Including money market paper and small amounts of bridging loans. —13The amounts already credited to the accounts of savers
other securities issued by banks. —4Up to December 1998 including loans or borrowers are also included in "Amounts paid into savings accounts
on a trust basis. —5Including equalisation claims. —6Including liabilities under savings and loan contracts" and "Interest and repayments received
to building and loan associations. —7Including small amounts of savings on building loans". 
39*IV.  Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
IV.  Banks
  
13. Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
    
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 euro billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
Loans and advances Balances  and loans  and advances
German   not evidenced by certificates  3 not evidenced  by certificates    3 
banks(MFIs)   to German
with non-banks
foreign foreignbranches Money of which Money
branches  1 
and/or and/or market enter- to marketforeign foreign balance paper, prises foreign paper,subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- and indi- non- secur- Other
Period diaries diaries total  
2 Total Total banks  4 banks Total Total Total viduals banks ities  5 assets  7 ities 5,  6 
Foreign  branches End of year or month *
  
1998 68 183 2,195.3 1,230.0 1,069.2 279.2 789.9 160.8 875.7 624.7 66.1 37.0 558.6 251.0 89.61999 66 187 1,311.9 714.6 614.2 177.0 437.2 100.4 533.9 386.2 26.6 20.8 359.6 147.7 63.42000 71 212 1,558.2 829.4 722.1 211.0 511.1 107.3 656.7 501.5 21.7 17.1 479.9 155.2 72.0
2000         Sep. 73 210 1,542.9 816.8 706.1 209.4 496.7 110.7 656.5 494.5 24.8 19.5 469.8 161.9 69.7
         Oct. 72 212 1,635.7 851.3 738.2 205.8 532.3 113.1 717.1 537.5 23.5 18.3 514.0 179.6 67.3
         Nov. 72 212 1,629.8 863.0 753.1 213.5 539.6 109.9 700.4 526.2 23.2 18.1 503.0 174.3 66.4         Dec. 71 212 1,558.2 829.4 722.1 211.0 511.1 107.3 656.7 501.5 21.7 17.1 479.9 155.2 72.0
2001         Jan. 70 213 1,581.6 841.7 726.9 215.4 511.5 114.8 678.2 514.4 21.3 17.0 493.1 163.8 61.6
         Feb. 70 213 1,625.5 867.5 750.8 226.9 523.8 116.8 690.5 521.3 21.2 17.3 500.1 169.2 67.5         Mar. 71 217 1,662.9 916.0 807.9 277.6 530.2 108.1 699.9 549.8 20.9 17.2 528.9 150.1 47.0
         Apr. 71 218 1,724.7 930.9 815.2 269.7 545.5 115.7 731.0 559.2 20.8 16.8 538.4 171.8 62.8
         May 71 220 1,799.8 957.9 841.1 268.1 572.9 116.9 772.5 591.6 21.1 17.1 570.6 180.9 69.4
Changes *
1999 −2 + 4 + 73.2 + 5.3 + 7.7 + 18.1 −10.3 −2.5 + 52.2 + 33.5 −8.1 + 1.0 + 41.6 + 18.8 + 15.6
2000 + 5 + 25 +214.0 + 97.0 + 92.3 + 33.7 + 58.6 + 4.7 +108.3 +104.0 −5.3 −4.1 +109.4 + 4.3 + 8.7
2000         Sep. −1 − + 20.6 + 6.4 + 8.6 + 3.8 + 4.8 −2.3 + 10.4 + 12.4 + 0.9 + 1.0 + 11.5 −2.0 + 3.9
         Oct. −1 + 2 + 58.1 + 18.3 + 17.8 −4.0 + 21.8 + 0.5 + 42.6 + 28.8 −1.5 −1.4 + 30.3 + 13.8 −2.8
         Nov. −− + 30.4 + 27.7 + 28.9 + 8.2 + 20.8 −1.2 + 2.8 + 4.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 4.1 −1.3 −0.2
         Dec. −1 −− 9.3 −4.3 −4.6 −1.7 −2.8 + 0.3 −11.0 + 0.2 −1.1 −0.7 + 1.4 −11.2 + 6.0
2001         Jan. −1 + 1 + 26.5 + 13.4 + 5.7 + 4.5 + 1.3 + 7.7 + 23.4 + 14.5 −0.3 −0.0 + 14.8 + 8.9 −10.2
         Feb. −− + 42.3 + 24.9 + 23.0 + 11.5 + 11.5 + 1.8 + 11.6 + 6.4 −0.1 + 0.3 + 6.5 + 5.1 + 5.9
         Mar. + 1 + 4 + 4.5 + 32.0 + 43.0 + 50.3 −7.4 −11.0 −6.5 + 16.0 −0.5 −0.3 + 16.5 −22.5 −21.0
         Apr. − + 1 + 63.9 + 16.1 + 8.4 −7.9 + 16.3 + 7.7 + 32.0 + 10.1 −0.0 −0.4 + 10.2 + 21.9 + 15.8
         May − + 2 + 22.6 + 3.0 + 4.4 −2.3 + 6.7 −1.5 + 13.9 + 11.1 −0.1 −0.1 + 11.2 + 2.8 + 5.8
  
  
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month *
  
1998 37 137 830.8 469.0 373.1 160.1 213.0 95.9 311.0 237.5 71.4 62.3 166.1 73.5 50.81999 39 161 530.6 242.0 178.6 71.1 107.5 63.4 234.6 174.2 41.5 37.5 132.7 60.4 53.92000 40 170 580.5 248.1 183.8 82.2 101.6 64.3 263.5 203.4 45.4 42.3 158.0 60.1 69.0
2000         Sep. 41 168 562.1 244.7 181.2 73.6 107.5 63.5 255.2 194.1 43.2 39.6 150.8 61.1 62.2
         Oct. 41 170 585.0 253.4 189.0 74.6 114.3 64.4 264.1 199.9 44.8 41.0 155.1 64.2 67.6
         Nov. 41 170 590.6 261.2 196.4 74.1 122.3 64.7 258.7 195.6 44.1 41.0 151.4 63.1 70.7         Dec. 40 170 580.5 248.1 183.8 82.2 101.6 64.3 263.5 203.4 45.4 42.3 158.0 60.1 69.0
2001         Jan. 41 170 580.6 259.0 194.1 82.1 112.1 64.8 259.2 195.1 44.4 40.7 150.7 64.1 62.5
         Feb. 41 171 579.0 252.9 186.0 80.2 105.8 66.9 262.3 197.1 44.1 40.8 153.1 65.1 63.8         Mar. 41 203 763.0 311.2 236.6 87.5 149.1 74.5 363.7 277.1 45.4 42.0 231.7 86.6 88.1
         Apr. 42 206 756.2 306.3 231.5 86.6 145.0 74.8 362.0 273.8 44.8 41.5 229.0 88.2 87.9
         May 43 208 773.3 310.7 235.4 85.2 150.3 75.3 372.8 281.0 46.3 42.7 234.7 91.8 89.7
Changes *
1999 + 2 + 24 + 86.6 + 5.2 −5.0 −0.6 −4.4 + 10.3 + 69.9 + 56.0 + 5.1 + 5.8 + 50.9 + 13.8 + 11.5
2000 + 1 + 9 + 38.4 + 2.1 + 2.4 + 11.1 −8.7 −0.3 + 21.8 + 21.8 + 3.9 + 4.8 + 17.9 + 0.0 + 14.5
2000         Sep. − + 1 + 5.1 −2.4 −3.1 −1.0 −2.1 + 0.6 + 5.2 + 5.6 + 1.5 + 1.1 + 4.2 −0.4 + 2.3
         Oct. − + 2 + 15.1 + 5.3 + 5.7 + 1.0 + 4.6 −0.4 + 5.2 + 2.5 + 1.6 + 1.4 + 0.9 + 2.7 + 4.6
         Nov. −− + 13.2 + 11.4 + 9.7 −0.5 + 10.2 + 1.7 −2.0 −1.5 −0.7 + 0.1 −0.8 −0.5 + 3.8
         Dec. −1 − + 3.4 −7.2 −8.9 + 8.1 −17.0 + 1.7 + 10.9 + 12.9 + 1.2 + 1.3 + 11.7 −2.0 −0.3
2001         Jan. + 1 − + 0.8 + 11.3 + 10.6 −0.2 + 10.8 + 0.7 −4.1 −8.2 −1.0 −1.7 −7.2 + 4.1 −6.4
         Feb. − +1 −2.0 −6.2 −8.2 −1.9 −6.3 + 2.0 + 2.9 + 1.9 −0.3 + 0.1 + 2.2 + 1.1 + 1.3
         Mar. − + 32 +176.5 + 54.9 + 48.4 + 7.3 + 41.2 + 6.5 + 98.0 + 76.3 + 1.3 + 1.2 + 75.0 + 21.7 + 23.5
         Apr. + 1 + 3 −6.2 −4.6 −4.9 −0.9 −4.0 + 0.3 −1.4 −2.9 −0.5 −0.5 −2.4 + 1.5 −0.2
         May + 1 + 2 + 6.6 −0.1 + 1.4 −1.4 + 2.8 −1.5 + 5.8 + 3.2 + 1.5 + 1.1 + 1.6 + 2.7 + 0.9
*From March 2000, including the foreign branches of building and loan 1Several branches in a given country of domicile are regarded as a single
associations. In this table “foreign “also includes the country of domicile of branch. —2Up to December 1998, volume of business (balance sheet total
the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical alterations have plus endorsement liabilities arising from rediscounted bills and bil ls sent for
been eliminated from the changes. (Breaks owing to changes in the range collection from the banks ’portfolios prior to maturity); for foreign
of reporting institutions have not been eliminated from the flow figures in subsidiaries, volume of business even after 1998. —3For foreign branches:
the case of the foreign subsidiaries). The figures for the latest date are up to December 1998, including bill-based lending (bill holdings plusalways to be regarded as provisional; subsequent alterations, which will endorsement liabilities and bills sent for collection from the banks ’
appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. — portfolios prior to maturity); from 1999, including bill holdings; up to
40*IV.  Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
IV.  Banks
        
  
Deposits  8 
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  9 
Money
Short-term market Medium  and long-term
paper
of which of which and debtenter- enter- Working
securities
out- capital Other prises  and prises  and
German foreign indi- indi- Foreign standing and own liabilities
Total Total banks Total Total Total viduals Total viduals 10 funds 11   Period banks  4 non-banks
End of year or month * Foreign  branches
  
1,756.4 1,181.3 259.6 921.7 575.1 173.6 171.1 145.9 2.5 2.2 401.5 270.0 20.0 148.8 1998
988.6 671.8 148.3 523.6 316.7 60.7 57.9 52.8 2.8 2.7 256.0 234.4 14.0 75.0 1999
1,186.1 799.5 158.2 641.4 386.5 60.9 58.4 51.6 2.5 2.4 325.7 272.3 22.0 77.9 2000
1,193.6 791.9 154.2 637.8 401.7 70.1 66.8 58.8 3.3 3.1 331.6 267.6 21.9 59.8 2000          Sep.
1,258.2 829.4 159.2 670.1 428.8 65.3 61.9 58.8 3.4 3.2 363.6 287.4 22.0 68.1          Oct.
1,265.8 832.9 161.0 671.9 432.9 60.0 56.6 53.1 3.4 3.2 372.9 281.8 21.9 60.3          Nov.1,186.1 799.5 158.2 641.4 386.5 60.9 58.4 51.6 2.5 2.4 325.7 272.3 22.0 77.9          Dec.
1,209.0 805.3 149.5 655.8 403.7 58.7 56.3 53.2 2.5 2.4 345.0 282.6 21.9 68.1 2001          Jan.
1,270.1 822.4 160.4 662.1 447.7 61.1 58.6 55.8 2.5 2.4 386.6 267.2 22.0 66.3          Feb.1,284.0 833.7 165.7 668.0 450.2 58.2 55.6 52.5 2.6 2.5 392.0 289.4 22.1 67.4          Mar.
1,335.5 899.9 165.1 734.9 435.6 59.2 56.5 53.7 2.7 2.5 376.4 294.7 23.2 71.4          Apr.
1,389.3 923.8 166.1 757.7 465.5 55.9 53.2 50.1 2.7 2.6 409.6 312.7 23.7 74.1          May
Changes *
− 2.8 + 5.6 + 13.4 −7.8 −8.4 −28.6 −30.2 −22.4 + 1.6 + 1.6 + 20.2 + 96.3 + 3.7 −24.1 1999
+ 170.8 +108.8 + 9.1 + 99.6 + 62.0 −0.0 + 0.4 −1.3 −0.4 −0.4 + 62.0 + 37.9 + 8.0 −2.7 2000
+ 27.4 + 33.9 −2.5 + 36.4 −6.5 −1.4 −1.4 −5.5 −0.0 −0.0 −5.1 −0.6 + 0.0 −6.2 2000          Sep.
+ 35.9 + 18.8 + 4.5 + 14.3 + 17.1 −5.0 −5.1 −0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 22.0 + 19.8 + 0.1 + 2.3          Oct.
+ 37.1 + 21.7 + 2.5 + 19.2 + 15.4 −5.2 −5.2 −5.6 −0.0 −0.0 + 20.5 −5.6 −0.1 −1.0          Nov.
−27.5 + 0.1 −2.0 + 2.2 −27.6 + 1.1 + 2.0 −1.3 −0.9 −0.8 −28.8 −9.5 + 0.0 + 27.6          Dec.
+ 25.5 + 7.1 −8.6 + 15.6 + 18.4 −2.1 −2.1 + 1.7 −0.0 −0.0 + 20.5 + 10.3 −0.1 −9.2 2001          Jan.
+ 59.5 + 16.0 + 10.8 + 5.2 + 43.5 + 2.3 + 2.3 + 2.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 41.2 −15.4 + 0.1 −1.9          Feb.
−15.0 −7.2 + 4.8 −12.0 −7.8 −3.0 −3.1 −3.4 + 0.1 + 0.1 −4.8 + 22.3 + 0.1 −2.9          Mar.
+ 53.2 + 67.4 −0.6 + 68.0 −14.2 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 −15.1 + 5.3 + 1.1 + 4.4          Apr.
+ 9.0 −6.1 + 0.3 −6.4 + 15.1 −3.4 −3.4 −3.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 18.5 + 18.0 + 0.5 −5.0          May
  
  
End of year or month * Foreign  subsidiaries
  
638.7 450.5 85.5 365.0 188.2 50.2 44.2 41.6 6.0 5.9 138.1 87.7 33.8 70.6 1998383.4 250.7 56.9 193.8 132.7 21.6 19.8 18.3 1.7 1.7 111.1 51.5 29.0 66.7 1999414.6 267.9 61.0 207.0 146.7 32.5 29.2 21.9 3.2 3.2 114.2 56.3 34.7 74.9 2000
409.6 261.9 54.6 207.3 147.7 30.5 27.7 21.1 2.7 2.7 117.2 51.3 33.9 67.3 2000          Sep.
421.5 264.7 55.2 209.5 156.8 37.0 34.2 23.1 2.8 2.8 119.8 54.6 34.8 74.0          Oct.
423.1 265.5 50.6 214.9 157.7 39.1 36.4 22.7 2.7 2.7 118.5 57.0 35.2 75.2          Nov.414.6 267.9 61.0 207.0 146.7 32.5 29.2 21.9 3.2 3.2 114.2 56.3 34.7 74.9          Dec.
415.6 278.0 59.3 218.7 137.6 27.3 23.5 21.7 3.8 3.8 110.3 58.7 36.1 70.2 2001          Jan.
415.2 273.2 55.0 218.2 142.0 26.3 22.5 19.8 3.8 3.8 115.7 58.0 35.5 70.3          Feb.546.7 351.1 63.6 287.4 195.7 28.9 25.0 22.1 3.9 3.9 166.8 83.3 46.7 86.3          Mar.
539.5 348.1 63.5 284.6 191.4 27.2 23.2 20.2 4.0 3.9 164.2 83.3 46.8 86.7          Apr.
547.2 347.1 66.7 280.4 200.2 30.0 26.0 23.0 4.0 4.0 170.2 86.2 48.2 91.8          May
Changes *
+ 54.7 + 11.6 + 13.9 −2.3 + 43.1 −2.3 −2.8 −3.0 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 45.3 + 6.7 + 11.7 + 13.5 1999
+ 20.6 + 9.9 + 2.9 + 7.0 + 10.7 + 10.9 + 9.4 + 3.6 + 1.5 + 1.5 −0.3 + 4.8 + 5.4 + 7.6 2000
− 0.2 −0.3 + 3.0 −3.3 + 0.2 −0.4 −0.5 −5.4 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 2.7 2000          Sep.
+ 5.6 −1.3 + 0.7 −1.9 + 6.9 + 6.5 + 6.5 + 2.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 3.4 + 0.9 + 5.3          Oct.
+ 7.7 + 4.7 −4.6 + 9.3 + 3.1 + 2.1 + 2.2 −0.4 −0.1 −0.1 + 0.9 + 2.4 + 0.3 + 2.7          Nov.
+ 2.2 + 10.0 + 10.3 −0.3 −7.8 −6.6 −7.2 −0.9 + 0.6 + 0.6 −1.2 −0.7 −0.5 + 2.5          Dec.
+ 1.7 + 10.5 −1.7 + 12.2 −8.8 −5.2 −5.7 −0.2 + 0.5 + 0.5 −3.6 + 2.4 + 1.4 −4.8 2001          Jan.
− 0.7 −4.9 −4.3 −0.6 + 4.3 −1.0 −1.0 −2.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 5.2 −0.5 −0.6 −0.2          Feb.
+ 125.2 + 73.8 + 8.7 + 65.2 + 51.4 + 2.6 + 2.5 + 2.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 48.8 + 25.2 + 11.1 + 14.8          Mar.
− 6.8 −2.7 −0.2 −2.5 −4.1 −1.8 −1.8 −1.9 + 0.1 + 0.1 −2.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.4          Apr.
− 0.8 −7.0 + 3.2 −10.2 + 6.2 + 2.8 + 2.8 + 2.9 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 3.4 + 2.9 + 1.4 + 3.2          May
December 1998, including loans on a trust basis. For foreign subsidiaris, including loans on a trust basis. —8Up to Dezember 1998, including
bill-based lending included even after 1998; up to December 1998, liabilities arising from loans on a trust basis (see also footnote 11). —
including loans on a trust basis (see also footnote 7). —4In the case of 9Excluding subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt securities
foreign branches, from December 1993 including transactions with the and money market paper. —10Issues of negotiable and non-negotiable
head office and with other branches in Germany; in the case of foreign debt securities and money market paper. —11Including subordinated
subsidiaries, including transactions with the parent institution. — liabilities. From 1999, including liabilities arising from loans on a trust
5Treasury bills, Treasury discount paper and other money market paper, basis. 
debt securities. —6Including own debt securities. —7From 1999,
41*IV.  Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
V. Minimum reserves
 
1. Reserve ratios
Germany European monetary union
 
% of liabilities subject to reserve requirements % of reserve base  1 
Sight Time
Applicable from liabilities liabilities Applicable from Ratio Savings deposits
1995  August 1 2    2    1.5    1999  January 1 2    
    
1Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank of 1 December
1998 on the application of minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to whicha reserve ratio of 0 % applies, pursuant to article 4 (1)). 
 
  
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany up to the end of 1998
− pursuant to the Minimum Reserves Order of the Bundesbank −
 
DM million
Liabilities subject to reserve requirements Excess reserves  4 
Monthly Required as % of the
average  1 Total reserves  2 Level Sight liabilities Time liabilities Savings deposits Actual reserves  3 required  reserves Shortfall, total
1995         Dec. 2,066,565 579,337 519,456 967,772 36,492 37,337 845 2.3 3
1996         Dec. 2,201,464 655,483 474,342 1,071,639 38,671 39,522 851 2.2 4
1997         Dec. 2,327,879 734,986 476,417 1,116,477 40,975 41,721 745 1.8 3
1998         Dec. 2,576,889 865,444 564,878 1,146,567 45,805 46,432 627 1.4 4
1Pursuant to sections 5 to 7 of the Minimum Reserves Order. —2Amount balances of the credit institutions subject to reserve requirements on their
after applying the reserve ratios to the liabilities subject to reserve require- giro accounts at the Bundesbank. — 4 Actual reserves less required reserves. 
ments (section 5 (1) of the Minimum Reserves Order). —3Average credit
 
 
3. Reserve maintenance in the European monetary union
− from 1999, pursuant to the ECB Regulation governing minimum reserves according to article 19.1 of the
ECB/ESCB Statute −
 
Maintenance Required reserves
period before deduction Required reserves
of lump-sum Lump-sum beginning in  1 after deduction of
Reserve base  2 allowance  3 allowance  4 lump-sum allowance Actual reserves  5 Excess reserves  6 Shortfall, total  7 
European monetary union (euro billion)
 
2000         Sep. 5,713.8 114.3 0.6 113.7 114.2 0.5 0.0
         Oct. 5,782.9 115.7 0.6 115.1 115.5 0.4 0.0
         Nov. 5,860.6 117.2 0.6 116.6 117.2 0.6 0.0         Dec.  
8 5,983.3 119.7 1.2 118.5 119.0 0.5 0.0
2001         Jan.  8 6,035.2 120.7 0.6 120.1 120.6 0.5 0.0
         Feb.  8 6,048.5 121.0 0.6 120.4 120.9 0.5 0.0
         Mar.  8 6,070.9 121.4 0.6 120.8 121.3 0.5 0.0
         Apr.  8 6,238.0 124.8 0.6 124.2 124.8 0.7 0.0
         May  8 r 6,281.6 125.6 0.6 125.0 125.6 0.6 0.0
         June  8 p 6,349.1 127.0 0.6 126.4 127.0 0.6 0.0
Of which: Germany (euro million)
2000         Sep. 1,724,269 34,485 274 34,211 34,432 221 3
         Oct. 1,744,956 34,899 270 34,629 34,815 187 2
         Nov. 1,760,122 35,202 269 34,933 35,194 260 4         Dec. 1,780,022 35,600 269 35,332 35,532 200 6
2001         Jan. 1,813,577 36,272 267 36,005 36,177 172 1
         Feb. 1,795,119 35,902 266 35,636 35,831 195 1         Mar. 1,820,155 36,403 266 36,137 36,329 193 6
         Apr. 1,872,624 37,452 265 37,187 37,391 203 6
         May 1,873,714 37,474 264 37,210 37,455 244 8         June  
p 1,882,510 37,650 261 37,389 37,605 216 1
1The reserve maintenance period of the ESCB minimum reserve system 1 December 1998 on the application of minimum reserves. —5Average
starts on the 24th of each month and ends on the 23rd of the following credit balances of the credit institutions subject to minimum reserve require-month (the first reserve maintenance period lasted from January 1, 1999 to ments on their reserve accounts at the respective national central bank. —
February 23, 1999). —2Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central 6Actual reserves less required reserves after the deduction of the lump-sum
Bank of 1 December 1998 on the application of minimum reserves allowance. —7Required reserves after the deduction of the lump-sum
(excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio o f 0 % applies, pursuant to allowance. —8Owing to the adoption of the euro by Greece on January 1,
article 4 (1)). —3Amount after applying the reserve ratios to the reserve 2001, including credit institutions in Greece. 
base. —4Article 5 (2) of the Regulation of the European Central Bank of
42*V. Minimum reserves

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
VI. Interest rates
  
1. ECB interest rates 2. Discount and lombard rates 3. Base rate per Discount
    of the Bundesbank     Rate Transition Act
  
% p.a. % p.a. % p.a.
Main Marginal
Deposit refinancing lending Lombard
Applicable from facility operations  1 facility Applicable from Discount rate rate  3, 4 Applicable from Base rate  5 
1999 Jan.                 1 2.00 3.00 4.50 1994 Feb.                18 5 1/4 6 3/4 1999 Jan.                 1 2.50
         Jan.                 4  2 2.75 3.00 3.25          Apr.                15 5 6 1/2          May                 1 1.95
         Jan.               22 2.00 3.00 4.50          May                13 4 1/2 6 
         Apr.                 9 1.50 2.50 3.50 2000 Jan.                  1 2.68
         Nov.                 5 2.00 3.00 4.00 1995 Mar.                31 4 6          May                  1 3.42
         Aug.               25 3 1/2 5 1/2          Sep.                 1 4.26
2000 Feb.                 4 2.25 3.25 4.25          Dec.                15 3 5 
         Mar.               17 2.50 3.50 4.50   
         Apr.               28 2.75 3.75 4.75 1996 Apr.                19 2 1/2 4 1/2
         June                 9 3.25 4.25 5.25          to
         Sep.                 1 3.50 4.50 5.50 1998 Dec.                31
         Oct.                 6 3.75 4.75 5.75
  
2001 May               11 3.50 4.50 5.50
1Up to June 21, 2000 fixed rate tenders, from June 28, 2000 variable rate Rate Transition Regulation, the lombard rate is replaced from January 1,
tenders at minimum bid rate. —2On December 22, 1998 the European 1999 by the rate applied by the ECB for its marginal lending facility
Central Bank (ECB) announced that, as an exceptional measure between wherever the lombard rate is used as a reference variable for interest andJanuary 4 and 21, 1999, a narrow corridor of 50 basis points would be other payments. —5Pursuant to the Discount Rate Transition Act, read in
applied between the interest rates for the marginal lending facility and the conjunction with the Regulation Governing the Use of the Base Rate as adeposit facility, aimed at facilitating the transition to the new regime by Reference Variable, this rate replaces the discount rate from January 1, 1 999
market participants. —3From August 1, 1990 to December 31, 1993 this wherever the latter is used in contracts and regulations as a reference
was also the rate for cash advances; since January 1, 1994 cash advances variable for interest and other payments. This base rate is the discount ratehave no longer been granted. Wherever reference is made in an Act to the of the Bundesbank which applied on December 31, 1998. It changes frominterest rate applicable for cash advances of the Federal Government, the January 1, May 1 and September 1 of each year, and will change for the firstrate will be replaced by the base rate increased by 1.5 percentage points time on May 1, 1999 if the interest rate applied by the ECB to itspursuant to the Discount Rate Transition Act (see footnote 5).—4Pursuant longer-term refinancing operations (marginal rate) has changed by at least
to the Discount Rate Transition Act, read in conjunction with the Lombard 0.5 percentage points. 
  
    
4. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders 
*
    
  
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bids Allotment Weighted
Amount Amount Fixed rate Minimum bid rate Marginal rate  1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement EUR millions % p.a. ... days
Main refinancing operations
2001 May                 7 164,985 79,000 − 4.75 4.78 4.78 16
       May               15 160,715 72,000 − 4.50 4.54 4.56 15
       May               23 157,987 90,000 − 4.50 4.53 4.54 14
       May               30 159,877 77,000 − 4.50 4.55 4.55 14
       June                 6 120,631 88,000 − 4.50 4.51 4.53 14
       June               13 135,442 67,000 − 4.50 4.51 4.52 14
       June               20 148,877 91,000 − 4.50 4.51 4.52 14
       June               27 155,894 85,000 − 4.50 4.54 4.55 14
       July                 4 104,399 81,000 − 4.50 4.50 4.51 14
       July               11 141,842 73,000 − 4.50 4.51 4.52 14
       July               18 136,104 79,000 − 4.50 4.51 4.52 14
       July               25 126,040 94,000 − 4.50 4.51 4.52 14
       Aug.                 1 100,746 71,000 − 4.50 4.50 4.51 14
       Aug.                 8 132,809 91,000 − 4.50 4.50 4.51 14
Longer-term refinancing operations
2000 Aug.               31 35,417 15,000 −− 4.84 4.87 91
       Sep.               28 34,043 15,000 −− 4.84 4.86 92
       Oct.               26 43,085 15,000 −− 5.06 5.07 91
       Nov.               30 31,999 15,000 −− 5.03 5.05 91
       Dec.               29 15,869 15,000 −− 4.75 4.81 90
2001 Jan.               25 31,905 20,000 −− 4.66 4.69 90
       Mar.                 1 45,755 20,000 −− 4.69 4.72 91
       Mar.               29 38,169 19,101 −− 4.47 4.50 91
       Apr.               25 43,416 20,000 −− 4.67 4.70 92
       May               31 46,448 20,000 −− 4.49 4.51 91
       June               28 44,243 20,000 −− 4.36 4.39 91
       July               26 39,369 20,000 −− 4.39 4.42 91
Other tender operations
2001 Apr.               30 105,377 73,000 − 4.75 4.77 4.79 7
Source: ECB. —*Enlargement of the euro area on January 1, 2001 to allotted or collected. 
include Greece. —1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were
43*VI. Interest rates

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
VI. Interest rates
 
5.  Money market rates, by month
  
% p.a.
Money market rates reported by Frankfurt banks  1 EURIBOR  3 
One- One- Three- Six- Nine- Twelve-
week month month month month month
Day-to-day money Three-month funds EONIA  2 funds funds funds funds funds funds
Monthly Lowest and Monthly Lowest and
Period averages highest rates averages highest rates Monthly averages
1999         July 2.51 1.65 −2.65 2.65 2.62 −2.70 2.52 2.61 2.63 2.68 2.90 2.95 3.03
         Aug. 2.43 1.70 −2.59 2.67 2.64 −2.70 2.44 2.57 2.61 2.70 3.05 3.13 3.24
         Sep. 2.42 1.65 −2.60 2.71 2.65 −3.09 2.43 2.55 2.58 2.73 3.11 3.19 3.30
         Oct. 2.49 1.70 −2.80 3.36 3.08 −3.50 2.50 2.63 2.76 3.38 3.46 3.55 3.68
         Nov. 2.92 2.50 −3.20 3.44 3.39 −3.52 2.94 2.99 3.06 3.47 3.48 3.58 3.69
         Dec. 3.03 4 2.75 −3.70 3.43 3.28 −3.47 3.04 3.27 3.51 3.45 3.51 3.66 3.83
2000         Jan. 3.03 2.79 −3.35 3.32 3.26 −3.49 3.04 3.08 3.15 3.34 3.56 3.76 3.95
         Feb. 3.27 3.12 −3.52 3.52 3.45 −3.63 3.28 3.31 3.36 3.54 3.73 3.93 4.11
         Mar. 3.50 3.26 −4.00 3.73 3.59 −3.83 3.51 3.52 3.59 3.75 3.94 4.11 4.27
         Apr. 3.67 3.00 −4.00 3.90 3.79 −4.09 3.69 3.73 3.79 3.93 4.08 4.25 4.36
         May 3.92 2.85 −4.23 4.34 4.06 −4.48 3.92 4.05 4.16 4.36 4.54 4.72 4.85
         June 4.28 4.02 −4.85 4.48 4.37 −4.55 4.29 4.31 4.37 4.50 4.68 4.85 4.96
         July 4.30 3.80 −4.51 4.56 4.50 −4.64 4.31 4.36 4.41 4.58 4.84 4.98 5.11
         Aug. 4.40 3.85 −4.80 4.76 4.60 −4.92 4.42 4.48 4.57 4.78 5.01 5.14 5.25
         Sep. 4.58 4.00 −4.99 4.83 4.77 −5.00 4.59 4.64 4.70 4.85 5.04 5.14 5.22
         Oct. 4.75 4.50 −5.02 5.02 4.95 −5.14 4.76 4.80 4.85 5.04 5.10 5.16 5.22
         Nov. 4.82 4.70 −4.98 5.07 5.00 −5.14 4.83 4.86 4.92 5.09 5.13 5.16 5.19
         Dec. 4.82 5 4.69 −5.40 4.92 4.81 −5.02 4.83 4.86 4.95 4.94 4.92 4.90 4.88
2001         Jan. 4.75 4.15 −4.88 4.75 4.65 −4.84 4.76 4.81 4.80 4.77 4.68 4.60 4.57
         Feb. 4.98 4.73 −5.75 4.74 4.67 −4.81 4.99 4.83 4.80 4.76 4.67 4.61 4.59
         Mar. 4.77 4.20 −4.93 4.69 4.52 −4.78 4.78 4.82 4.78 4.71 4.58 4.49 4.47
         Apr. 5.04 4.71 −5.80 4.66 4.52 −4.80 5.06 4.88 4.78 4.68 4.57 4.50 4.48
         May 4.64 4.41 −4.90 4.62 4.49 −4.81 4.65 4.66 4.66 4.64 4.56 4.53 4.52
         June 4.53 4.30 −4.85 4.43 4.37 −4.50 4.54 4.56 4.53 4.45 4.35 4.33 4.31
         July 4.51 4.25 −4.63 4.45 4.38 −4.50 4.51 4.54 4.52 4.47 4.39 4.33 4.31
1Money market rates are not fixed or quoted officially; the monthly aver- Telerate. —3Euro Interbank Offered Rate: unweighted average rate
ages computed from daily quotations are unweighted. —2Euro OverNight calculated by Bridge Telerate since December 30, 1998 according to the
Index Average: weighted average overnight rate for interbank operations act/360 method. —4At the end of December 3.35% to 3.70%. —5At the
calculated by the European Central Bank since January 4, 1999 on the basis end of December 5.00% to 5.40%. of real turnover according to the act/360 method and published via Bridge
 
 
6. Euro area retail bank interest rates *, o
  
% p.a.; period averages
Deposit interest rates Lending interest rates
With agreed maturity Redeemable at notice To enterprises To householdsUp to Up to Over Up to Over Up to Over Consumer For house
Period Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months 1 year 1 year lending purchase
1998 1.10 3.20 3.22 4.06 2.61 3.25 6.73 5.80 10.06 5.87
1999 0.65 2.44 2.45 3.57 2.15 2.76 5.65 5.10 9.39 5.292000 0.85 3.45 3.44 4.52 2.25 3.79 6.60 6.23 9.86 6.34
2000         June 0.83 3.49 3.49 4.48 2.16 3.87 6.56 6.23 9.84 6.34
         July 0.87 3.58 3.58 4.71 2.33 3.94 6.77 6.37 9.95 6.46
         Aug. 0.90 3.67 3.67 4.75 2.36 4.06 6.81 6.44 10.00 6.51         Sep. 0.94 3.85 3.83 4.77 2.38 4.20 6.92 6.44 10.03 6.56
         Oct. 0.97 3.96 3.96 4.76 2.40 4.14 7.13 6.60 10.15 6.57
         Nov. 0.99 4.04 4.03 4.77 2.47 4.25 7.16 6.63 10.20 6.56         Dec. 1.01 3.96 3.96 4.58 2.49 4.21 7.18 6.45 10.19 6.43
2001         Jan.
1 1.01 3.88 3.87 4.39 2.52 4.01 7.19 6.40 10.32 6.29
         Feb. 1.01 3.84 3.83 4.35 2.50 3.99 7.11 6.44 10.26 6.24         Mar. 1.02 3.81 3.81 4.32 2.50 3.99 7.04 6.31 10.20 6.18
         Apr. 1.03 3.76 3.76 4.26 2.50 3.91 7.07 6.34 10.23 6.14
         May 1.01 3.75 3.74 4.27 2.48 3.91 7.03 6.34 10.20 6.17         June 0.98 3.65 3.65 4.25 2.45 3.85 6.96 6.25 10.16 6.13
*These euro area retail bank interest rates should be used with caution and Member States. Furthermore, the national interest rates are not harmonised
for statistical purposes only, primarily to analyse their development over in terms of their coverage (new business and/or outstanding amounts), th e
time rather than their level. They are calculated as the weighted average of nature of the data (nominal or effective) or the compilation method. Thenational interest rates provided by the national central banks. The national country weights for the euro area retail bank interest rates are derived from
rates represent those rates that are currently available from national MFI balance sheet statistics or close proxies. The weights reflect thesources and which are judged to fit the standard categories. These national country-specific proportions of the relevant instruments within the eur o
rates have been aggregated to derive information for the euro area, in area, measured as outstanding amounts. The weights are adjusted monthly,some cases relying on proxies and working assumptions due to the so that interest rates and weights always refer to the same month. —1En-
heterogeneity observed in the national financial instruments across MU largement of the euro area on January 1, 2001 to include Greece. 
      
o Tables and notes taken from the ECB. 
44*VI. Interest rates

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
VI. Interest rates
 
7. Lending and deposit rates of banks (MFIs) in Germany *
    Lending rates
 
% p.a.
Current account credit Bills discounted
Bills of less than DM 100,000
DM 200,000 and more DM 1 million and more refinancable
less than DM 200,000 but less than DM 1 million but less than DM 5 million at the Bundesbank
Reporting Average Average Average Average
period  1 interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread
2000         Sep. 11.02 8.75 −13.00 9.94 7.50 −12.50 8.83 7.00 −11.75 6.76 5.00 −10.00
         Oct. 11.22 8.75 −13.25 10.18 7.75 −12.75 9.03 7.00 −12.00 6.95 5.00 −10.00
         Nov. 11.29 8.75 −13.25 10.19 7.50 −12.95 9.10 7.00 −12.00 7.01 5.00 −10.00
         Dec. 11.39 8.90 −13.25 10.27 8.00 −12.75 9.12 7.00 −12.00 6.98 5.05 −10.00
2001         Jan. 11.35 8.75 −13.50 10.30 8.00 −12.95 9.12 7.00 −12.25 6.99 5.50 −10.00
         Feb. 11.13 8.00 −13.25 10.15 7.50 −12.95 8.95 7.00 −12.00 6.98 5.40 −9.81
         Mar. 11.17 7.00 −13.25 10.03 6.50 −13.00 8.86 6.00 −12.00 7.00 5.50 −10.00
         Apr. 11.14 6.80 −13.25 10.07 6.50 −13.00 8.85 6.00 −12.25 6.96 5.39 −10.00
         May 11.12 6.50 −13.25 10.09 6.00 −12.75 8.84 5.60 −12.00 6.86 4.78 −10.00
         June 11.21 6.50 −13.25 10.13 6.50 −12.95 8.79 5.50 −12.00 6.91 5.42 −10.00
         July 11.12 6.50 −13.25 9.99 6.00 −12.95 8.73 5.50 −12.00 6.91 5.43 −10.00
 
 
Long-term fixed-rate loans
to enterprises and self-employed persons
Instalment credits (excluding lending to the housing sector)  6 
DM 10,000 and more but not more than DM 30,000  2 DM 200,000 and more DM 1 million and more
Personal credit lines but less than DM 1 million but less than DM 10 million
(overdraft facilities Effectivegranted to individuals) Monthly rate  
3 annual interest rate  4, 5 Effective interest rate  5 
Reporting Average Average Average Average Average
period  1 interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread
2000         Sep. 12.28 11.00 −13.25 0.41 0.33 −0.49 10.64 8.76 −12.72 7.24 6.36 −8.83 7.04 6.16 −8.49
         Oct. 12.44 11.00 −13.50 0.41 0.34 −0.50 10.69 8.99 −12.73 7.25 6.24 −8.90 7.05 6.19 −8.52
         Nov. 12.57 11.25 −13.50 0.41 0.33 −0.51 10.73 8.95 −12.81 7.26 6.25 −8.89 7.05 6.17 −8.55
         Dec. 12.61 11.25 −13.50 0.41 0.35 −0.50 10.80 8.95 −12.83 7.04 6.05 −8.70 6.84 5.85 −8.30
2001         Jan. 12.63 11.00 −13.50 0.41 0.34 −0.50 10.82 8.95 −12.95 6.89 5.82 −8.57 6.66 5.68 −8.25
         Feb. 12.61 10.75 −13.50 0.41 0.34 −0.50 10.82 8.88 −12.91 6.89 5.79 −8.64 6.65 5.63 −8.25
         Mar. 12.67 11.25 −13.75 0.41 0.34 −0.50 10.76 8.77 −12.77 6.78 5.75 −8.50 6.56 5.64 −8.05
         Apr. 12.70 11.25 −13.75 0.41 0.33 −0.49 10.71 8.76 −12.77 6.77 5.75 −8.57 6.53 5.57 −8.05
         May 12.70 11.50 −13.50 0.41 0.33 −0.49 10.75 8.69 −12.89 6.81 5.83 −8.65 6.60 5.69 −8.01
         June 12.68 11.50 −13.50 0.41 0.34 −0.49 10.76 8.76 −12.89 6.82 5.81 −8.66 6.62 5.75 −8.20
         July 12.68 11.25 −13.50 0.41 0.35 −0.49 10.78 8.92 −12.91 6.82 5.85 −8.63 6.60 5.70 −8.30
 
 
Mortgage loans secured by residential real estate
with interest rates fixed (effective interest rate)  5, 7 
with variable interest rates
for 2 years for 5 years for 10 years (effective interest rate)  5, 7 
Reporting Average Average Average Average
period  1 interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread
2000         Sep. 6.53 5.96 −7.17 6.53 6.22 −6.91 6.72 6.49 −7.07 6.79 6.00 −7.87
         Oct. 6.51 6.00 −7.05 6.49 6.17 −6.95 6.68 6.47 −7.07 6.84 6.01 −8.03
         Nov. 6.48 5.96 −7.06 6.45 6.13 −6.91 6.64 6.43 −6.96 6.86 5.96 −8.03
         Dec. 6.20 5.64 −6.98 6.19 5.81 −6.75 6.44 6.17 −6.86 6.81 5.90 −8.03
2001         Jan. 5.95 5.41 −6.60 5.93 5.59 −6.54 6.22 5.96 −6.70 6.72 5.64 −8.11
         Feb. 5.94 5.43 −6.59 5.90 5.59 −6.51 6.17 5.96 −6.54 6.71 5.61 −8.03
         Mar. 5.85 5.27 −6.49 5.80 5.47 −6.35 6.12 5.85 −6.54 6.67 5.56 −8.03
         Apr. 5.80 5.27 −6.54 5.78 5.43 −6.33 6.11 5.85 −6.54 6.64 5.48 −8.03
         May 5.88 5.34 −6.59 5.87 5.54 −6.43 6.20 5.77 −6.64 6.66 5.59 −8.03
         June 5.80 5.27 −6.54 5.84 5.54 −6.33 6.22 5.85 −6.59 6.64 5.48 −8.03
         July 5.78 5.22 −6.45 5.85 5.54 −6.37 6.24 5.77 −6.59 6.64 5.43 −8.03
*The average rates are calculated as unweighted arithmetic means from processing fees, taking due account of reported maturities. —5From the
the interest rates reported to be within the spread. The spread is as- reporting month September 2000, effective interest rates are calculatedcertained by eliminating the reports in the top 5% and the bottom 5% of according to the ISMA method (International Securities Market Association).the interest rate range. The figures for the latest date are always to be re- The use of the ISMA method (non-linear remuneration of less than onegarded as provisional; subsequent alterations, which will appear in the year) in this context tends to result in slightly lower effective annual inte rest
following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Second and third rates. —6Lending to enterprises (with agreed maturities of more than five
weeks of the months indicated. —2With maturities between 36 months years) with agreed interest rates locked in for more than five years. —7The
and 60 months. —3Interest rates as % per month of original amount of figures refer to the time when the contract was concluded and not to the
credit taken up. Besides interest, most banks charge a one-off processing entire duration of the contract. The calculation of the effective interest rate
fee (generally 2%, in some cases 3%, of the credit amount). —4Calculated is based on an annual redemption rate of 1% plus interest saved; the repay-
on the basis of reported monthly rates (see footnote 3) and reported annual ment conditions agreed upon in each case by the credit institutions involve d
rates on the respective amount of debt and on the basis of the respective are taken into account (at present mostly monthly payment and inclu sion). 
45*VI. Interest rates

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
VI. Interest rates
 
7. Lending and deposit rates of banks (MFIs) in Germany *  (cont ’d)
    Deposit rates
 
% p.a.
Time deposits with agreed maturitiesof 1 month of 3 months
Higher-yieldingsight deposits DM 100,000 and more but DM 1 million and more but DM 100,000 and more butof individuals  
8 less than DM 100,000 less than DM 1 million less than DM 5 million less than DM 1 million
Reporting Average Average Average Average Average
period  1 interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread
2000         Sep. 2.29 0.50 −3.76 3.39 2.50 −4.05 3.79 3.00 −4.30 4.15 3.40 −4.55 4.00 3.25 −4.60
         Oct. 2.32 0.50 −3.88 3.48 2.50 −4.20 3.89 3.00 −4.50 4.27 3.45 −4.80 4.13 3.25 −4.75
         Nov. 2.38 0.50 −3.94 3.56 2.54 −4.30 3.97 3.00 −4.50 4.35 3.50 −4.83 4.22 3.30 −4.85
         Dec. 2.41 0.50 −4.00 3.62 2.65 −4.35 4.05 3.10 −4.60 4.42 3.50 −4.92 4.19 3.35 −4.80
2001         Jan. 2.43 0.50 −4.00 3.56 2.60 −4.25 3.96 3.20 −4.50 4.33 3.60 −4.75 4.06 3.39 −4.60
         Feb. 2.50 0.50 −4.00 3.46 2.55 −4.15 3.87 3.20 −4.45 4.21 3.50 −4.70 4.01 3.30 −4.50
         Mar. 2.48 0.50 −4.00 3.53 2.75 −4.25 3.95 3.25 −4.50 4.31 3.50 −4.75 4.05 3.40 −4.50
         Apr. 2.49 0.50 −4.00 3.48 2.59 −4.20 3.91 3.20 −4.50 4.27 3.50 −4.70 3.99 3.25 −4.50
         May 2.44 0.50 −4.00 3.46 2.50 −4.20 3.85 3.10 −4.40 4.20 3.50 −4.65 3.95 3.20 −4.50
         June 2.42 0.50 −3.90 3.34 2.50 −4.00 3.73 3.10 −4.25 4.07 3.50 −4.44 3.84 3.15 −4.35
         July 2.41 0.50 −3.88 3.34 2.50 −4.00 3.73 3.10 −4.20 4.08 3.50 −4.50 3.83 3.20 −4.41
 
 
Savings deposits
Bank savings bondswith regular with minimum rates of with higher rates of return  
10 
interest payments return  9 (without a duration of contract being agreed)
with agreed notice of 3 months
with agreed notice DM 10,000 and more DM 20,000 and more
maturity of 4 years of 3 months less than DM 10,000 but less than DM 20,000 but less than DM 50,000
Reporting Average Average Average Average Average
period  1 interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread
2000         Sep. 4.99 4.50 −5.37 1.26 1.00 −2.00 2.31 1.50 −3.72 2.89 1.75 −3.95 3.10 2.00 −4.07
         Oct. 4.98 4.40 −5.40 1.25 1.00 −2.00 2.32 1.50 −3.75 2.89 1.75 −4.01 3.12 2.00 −4.22
         Nov. 4.98 4.50 −5.30 1.26 1.00 −2.00 2.38 1.50 −4.00 2.96 1.75 −4.20 3.19 2.00 −4.32
         Dec. 4.76 4.30 −5.25 1.25 1.00 −2.00 2.39 1.50 −4.00 2.99 1.75 −4.20 3.22 2.00 −4.34
2001         Jan. 4.47 4.10 −5.00 1.26 1.00 −2.00 2.37 1.50 −3.80 2.95 1.80 −4.10 3.21 2.00 −4.33
         Feb. 4.42 4.00 −4.75 1.25 1.00 −2.00 2.35 1.50 −3.75 2.94 1.80 −4.00 3.17 2.00 −4.25
         Mar. 4.37 4.00 −4.75 1.24 1.00 −2.00 2.36 1.50 −3.75 2.97 1.80 −4.00 3.20 2.00 −4.32
         Apr. 4.27 3.95 −4.60 1.23 1.00 −2.00 2.36 1.50 −3.75 2.95 1.95 −4.00 3.18 2.00 −4.30
         May 4.31 4.00 −4.65 1.24 1.00 −2.00 2.33 1.50 −3.75 2.92 1.80 −4.00 3.14 2.00 −4.26
         June 4.31 3.95 −4.60 1.21 1.00 −2.00 2.29 1.50 −3.66 2.87 1.75 −4.00 3.09 2.00 −4.00
         July 4.26 3.90 −4.60 1.20 1.00 −2.00 2.26 1.50 −3.50 2.85 1.75 −4.00 3.07 2.00 −4.00
 
 
Savings deposits with higher rates of return  10  and with duration of contract being agreed for
DM 20,000 and more but less than DM 50,000 (total rate of return) 11
with agreed notice of 3 months with agreed notice of more than 3 months
and a duration of contract of and a duration of contract of
more than 1 year and up to
up to and including 1 year and including 4 years more than 4 years up to and including 1 year more than 4 years
Reporting Average Average Average Average Average
period  1 interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread
2000         Sep. 4.15 2.50 −4.80 4.64 3.25 −5.35 4.81 3.58 −5.83 4.20 2.25 −5.00 4.93 4.36 −5.40
         Oct. 4.18 2.50 −4.85 4.68 3.25 −5.35 4.82 3.58 −5.83 4.14 2.25 −4.80 4.97 4.36 −5.50
         Nov. 4.23 2.50 −4.80 4.65 3.25 −5.16 4.84 3.58 −5.83 4.25 2.25 −5.00 4.96 4.36 −5.50
         Dec. 4.15 2.50 −4.75 4.51 3.25 −5.15 4.74 3.64 −5.62 4.21 2.30 −4.75 4.82 4.28 −5.40
2001         Jan. 3.98 3.00 −4.50 4.18 3.25 −4.75 4.59 3.60 −5.30 4.01 2.30 −4.50 4.51 4.04 −5.05
         Feb. 3.86 2.90 −4.40 4.11 3.25 −4.75 4.54 3.60 −5.30 3.99 2.50 −4.50 4.49 4.08 −4.83
         Mar. 3.84 2.99 −4.35 4.06 3.30 −4.62 4.52 3.60 −5.30 3.99 2.50 −4.50 4.42 3.95 −4.78
         Apr. 3.71 2.90 −4.25 3.96 3.25 −4.50 4.47 3.60 −5.25 3.91 2.50 −4.50 4.33 3.95 −4.75
         May 3.74 3.00 −4.25 3.99 3.25 −4.35 4.50 3.64 −5.22 3.91 2.60 −4.35 4.36 3.95 −4.75
         June 3.67 2.80 −4.20 3.93 3.25 −4.30 4.48 3.64 −5.22 3.85 2.50 −4.25 4.35 3.90 −4.78
         July 3.64 2.80 −4.15 3.91 3.25 −4.45 4.48 3.64 −5.25 3.80 2.50 −4.05 4.33 3.90 −4.75
For footnotes *, 1to7see page 45*. —8Only such interest rates are taken and/or a premium or a bonus is granted. —11Rate of return which is paid
into account as are above the relevant standard terms of the banks included when savings plans are held until maturity or when savings objectives havein the survey. —9Only a minimum rate of return is granted, but no pre- been achieved. 
mium or bonus. —10An interest rate above the minimum rate of return
46*VI. Interest rates

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
VI.  Interest rates
 
8. Selected central bank rates abroad
  
 
New rate Previous rate New rate Previous rate
Applicable Applicable Applicable Applicable
Country/Interest rate % p.a. from % p.a. from Country/Interest rate % p.a. from % p.a. from
1. EU-countries  1 3. Non European countries
Denmark Canada  3 
Discount rate       4 1/2  May 11,              ’01       4 3/4  Oct.   6,              ’00 Discount rate       4 1/2  July 17,              ’01       4 3/4  May 29,              ’01 
Repurchase/CD selling rate       4.95   July   6,               ’01       5   May 11,               ’01 
Japan
Sweden Discount rate       0.25   Mar.   1,               ’01          0.35   Feb.   9,               ’01 
Deposit rate       3 1/4  Dec.   7,              ’00          2 3/4  Feb. 17,              ’99 
Repurchase rate       4 1/4  July   6,              ’01          4   Dec.   7,               ’00 United States
Lombard rate       4 3/4  Dec.   7,              ’00          4 1/4  Feb. 17,              ’99 Federal funds rate  4       3 3/4  June 27,              ’01          4   May 16,               ’01 
United Kingdom
Repurchase rate  2       5   Aug.   2,               ’01          5 1/4  May 11,              ’01 
2. Switzerland
Three-month Libor target   2 3/4
  −         3 3/4  Mar. 22,              ’01          3 −  4   June 15,               ’00 
1Only those member countries which are not participating in the euro area ceiling rate for call money. —4Rate targeted for interbank trade in central
for the time being. —2Bank of England key rate. —3Bank of Canada ’s bank money. 
9. Money market rates abroad
Monthly or weekly averages of daily figures  1 
%  p.a.
London New York Tokyo Zurich Hong Kong Euro-Dollar market
Memorandum
Treasury Treasury item
bills bills Swap rates in the
(three (three Gensaki open market  8 
Month Day-to- months) months) Day-to- rate Three- Day-to- Exchange Day-to- One- Three-or day Tender Federal Tender day (three month day fund day month month US$/DM £/DMweek money  
2 rate 3 funds  4 rate 3 money months) funds  5 money  6 bills 7 money funds funds Euro/US-$ Euro/£
1999         Jan. 5.87 5.28 4.63 4.34 0.23 0.14 0.56 3.96 5.64 4.79 4.98 5.00 + 1.85 + 2.61
         Feb. 5.63 5.08 4.76 4.45 0.18 0.13 0.56 4.96 5.63 4.74 4.94 5.00 + 1.87 + 2.27         Mar. 5.43 5.07 4.81 4.48 0.04 0.08 0.56 4.50 5.28 4.83 4.94 5.01 + 1.95 + 2.24
         Apr. 5.38 4.90 4.74 4.28 0.03 0.06 0.38 4.44 4.92 4.75 4.92 5.00 + 2.29 + 2.52
         May 5.29 4.93 4.74 4.51 0.03 0.05 0.44 4.47 4.82 4.78 4.91 5.02 + 2.47 + 2.69         June 5.05 4.76 4.76 4.59 0.03 0.04 0.50 5.21 5.13 4.88 5.04 5.18 + 2.60 + 2.50
         July 4.92 4.76 4.99 4.60 0.03 0.03 0.51 5.51 5.47 5.05 5.18 5.31 + 2.67 + 2.39
         Aug. 4.84 4.85 5.07 4.76 0.03 0.03 0.51 5.55 5.80 5.12 5.29 5.45 + 2.82 + 2.47         Sep. 4.89 5.08 5.22 4.73 0.03 0.02 1.14 5.12 5.68 5.29 5.38 5.57 + 2.85 + 2.60
         Oct. 5.01 5.24 5.20 4.88 0.02 0.02 1.38 5.37 5.49 5.25 5.41 6.18 + 2.86 + 2.55
         Nov. 5.18 5.24 5.42 5.07 0.03 0.02 1.34 5.01 5.11 5.40 5.56 6.10 + 2.68 + 2.34         Dec. 5.01 5.46 5.30 5.23 0.02 0.04 1.24 3.58 4.65 5.45 6.40 6.13 + 2.75 + 2.48
2000         Jan. 5.28 5.78 5.45 5.34 0.02 0.03 1.38 3.33 5.18 5.55 5.81 6.04 + 2.70 + 2.66
         Feb. 5.77 5.92 5.73 5.57 0.03 0.03 1.78 5.37 5.64 5.73 5.89 6.10 + 2.54 + 2.54         Mar. 5.69 5.93 5.85 5.72 0.02 0.03 2.26 5.41 5.65 5.87 6.05 6.20 + 2.47 + 2.36
         Apr. 5.82 6.01 6.02 5.67 0.02 0.03 2.76 6.32 6.06 6.03 6.15 6.31 + 2.42 + 2.22
         May 5.87 6.00 6.27 5.92 0.02 0.02 2.55 6.04 6.63 6.30 6.55 6.76 + 2.44 + 1.83         June 5.88 5.95 6.53 5.74 0.02 0.03 3.05 5.95 6.36 6.55 6.65 6.79 + 2.31 + 1.60
         July 5.85 5.92 6.55 5.92 0.02 0.04 3.04 5.86 6.12 6.55 6.63 6.73 + 2.17 + 1.48
         Aug. 5.81 5.90 6.50 6.11 0.16 0.14 3.12 5.49 5.76 6.47 6.62 6.69 + 1.92 + 1.33         Sep. 6.10 5.88 6.52 5.99 0.25 0.24 3.00 6.88 6.04 6.50 6.62 6.67 + 1.79 + 1.20
         Oct. 5.79 5.83 6.51 6.10 0.25 0.27 3.00 5.32 5.82 6.48 6.62 6.78 + 1.71 + 1.01
         Nov. 5.94 5.78 6.51 6.19 0.25 0.27 3.00 5.16 5.66 6.51 6.64 6.75 + 1.65 + 0.89         Dec. 5.70 5.71 6.40 5.90 0.24 0.29 2.88 6.44 5.73 6.52 6.69 6.55 + 1.57 + 0.92
2001         Jan. 5.95 5.62 5.98 5.27 0.25 0.28 3.09 5.57 5.14 6.03 5.87 5.70 + 0.90 + 0.95
         Feb. 5.86 5.51 5.49 4.93 0.25 0.27 2.86 5.22 4.92 5.52 5.52 5.35 + 0.56 + 0.86         Mar. 5.41 5.32 5.31 4.50 0.11 0.09 2.96 5.05 4.71 5.36 5.13 4.96 + 0.26 + 0.74
         Apr. 5.31 5.15 4.80 3.92 0.02 0.03 2.60 4.49 4.46 4.82 4.80 4.61 −0.07 + 0.64
         May 5.53 5.04 4.21 3.68 0.02 0.01 2.59 3.88 3.63 4.21 4.16 4.10 −0.58 + 0.50
         June 4.74 5.04 3.97 3.51 0.02 0.01 2.62 3.99 3.47 3.96 3.91 3.83 −0.67 + 0.74
         July  
p 5.26 5.05 3.77 3.54 0.01 0.01 2.84 3.69 3.45 3.79 3.82 3.75 −0.76 + 0.70
week ending  p 
2001 June               29 4.49 5.10 3.91 3.38 0.04 0.01 2.62 3.87 3.38 3.91 3.79 3.75 −0.72 + 0.76
         July                 6 5.53 5.08 3.89 3.58 0.01 0.01 . 3.67 3.42 3.88 3.85 3.82 −0.65 + 0.75
                              13 5.36 5.06 3.67 3.56 0.01 0.01 . 3.68 3.45 3.73 3.83 3.77 −0.77 + 0.67
                              20 4.86 5.03 3.76 3.55 0.01 0.01 . 3.68 3.47 3.76 3.82 3.74 −0.80 + 0.68
                              27 5.09 5.04 3.81 3.48 0.01 0.01 2.84 3.71 3.44 3.76 3.79 3.70 −0.82 + 0.69
1Unless stated otherwise. —2Overnight money rate in the interbank dollar-denominated Hong Kong Interbank Offered Rates (HIBOR). —
market. —3Months: average of the tender rates in the weekly Treasury bill 7Money market paper issued regularly by the Hong Kong Monetary
auctions; weeks: average of the tender rates on the day of issue. — Authority; maturity of 91 days. —8Rates for three-month contracts. Owing
4Weekly average (Thursday to Wednesday) —5Three month deposits with to the indirect quotation, the forward points between the euro and the
big banks in Zurich; months: average of end-of-month figures. Figure for foreign currency for the repurchase date of the swap are calculated in thethe fourth week is that for the last day of the month. —6Hong Kong foreign currency as from January 1999. 
47*VI.  Interest rates

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
VII. Capital market
 
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  *)
  
Debt securities
Sales PurchasesDomestic debt securities  
1 Residents
Credit in- Bundes-
Sales stitutions bank
= Public Foreign including opentotal Bank Indus- debt debt building marketpur- debt trial secur- secur- and loan Non- oper- Non-
Period chases Total securities bonds ities  
2 ities 3 Total  4 assc. 5 banks  6 ations  5 residents  7 
DM million
1986 103,497 87,485 29,509 200 57,774 16,012 45,927 31,192 13,667 1,068 57,570
1987 112,285 88,190 28,448 − 27 59,768 24,095 78,193 45,305 33,599 − 711 34,093
1988 88,425 35,100 −11,029 − 100 46,228 53,325 86,657 36,838 49,417 402 1,769
1989 118,285 78,409 52,418 344 25,649 39,876 96,073 20,311 76,448 − 686 22,212
1990 244,827 220,340 136,799 − 67 83,609 24,487 225,066 91,833 133,266 − 33 19,763
1991 231,965 219,346 131,670 667 87,011 12,619 173,099 45,095 127,310 694 58,8661992 291,762 284,054 106,857 − 175 177,376 7,708 170,873 132,236 37,368 1,269 120,887
1993 395,110 382,571 151,812 200 230,560 12,539 183,195 164,436 20,095 − 1,336 211,915
1994 303,339 276,058 117,185 − 65 158,939 27,281 279,989 126,808 154,738 − 1,557 23,349
1995 227,099 203,029 162,538 − 350 40,839 24,070 141,282 49,193 94,409 − 2,320 85,815
1996 254,359 233,519 191,341 649 41,529 20,840 148,250 117,352 31,751 − 853 106,109
1997 332,655 250,688 184,911 1,563 64,214 81,967 204,378 144,177 60,201 − 128,276
1998 418,877 308,201 254,367 3,143 50,691 110,676 245,983 203,342 42,641 − 172,894
Euro million
1999 292,758 198,068 156,399 2,184 39,485 94,690 157,420 74,728 82,692 − 135,338
2000 228,773 157,994 120,154 12,605 25,234 70,779 156,249 91,447 64,802 − 72,524
2001         Mar. 21,222 12,056 3,892 2,602 5,562 9,166 28,007 11,007 17,000 −− 6,785
         Apr. 15,252 4,970 1,204 1,011 2,754 10,282 20,366 11,518 8,848 −− 5,114
         May 18,890 6,335 1,010 2,632 2,693 12,555 19,137 10,737 8,400 −− 247
         June 4,115 − 1,876 − 312 − 1,725 161 5,991 1,408 859 549 − 2,707
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-purchases shares  
8 shares  9 Total  10 tutions  5 , 11  Non-banks  6 residents  12 
Period
DM million
1986 32,371 16,394 15,976 17,195 5,022 12,173 15,174
1987 15,845 11,889 3,955 16,439 2,153 14,286 − 594
1988 21,390 7,528 13,862 18,436 1,177 17,259 2,9531989 35,511 19,365 16,147 10,231 4,913 5,318 25,277
1990 50,070 28,021 22,048 52,631 7,215 45,416 − 2,561
1991 33,478 13,317 20,161 32,247 2,466 29,781 1,2301992 32,595 17,226 15,370 40,651 2,984 37,667 − 8,055
1993 39,355 19,512 19,843 30,871 4,133 26,738 8,4851994 55,125 29,160 25,966 54,466 1,622 52,844 659
1995 46,422 23,600 22,822 49,354 11,945 37,409 − 2,931
1996 72,491 34,212 38,280 55,962 12,627 43,335 16,5291997 119,522 22,239 97,280 96,844 8,547 88,297 22,6771998 249,460 48,796 200,665 149,751 20,252 129,499 99,709
Euro million
1999 150,156 36,010 114,146 102,313 18,637 83,676 47,845
2000 143,567 22,733 120,834 164,355 23,293 141,062 − 20,787
2001         Mar. − 6,351 1,077 − 7,428 − 13,903 19,705 − 33,608 7,552
         Apr. 12,285 978 11,307 12,459 13,886 − 1,427 − 174
         May 35,736 514 35,222 − 8,579 − 4,043 − 4,536 44,315
         June − 727 1,485 − 2,212 − 27,517 − 35,917 8,400 26,790
*Until the end of 1999, debt securities comprise the bonds and money ment funds. —7Net purchases or net sales ( −) of domestic debt securities by
market paper of domestic banks, from January 2000 all fixed-interest non-residents; transaction values. —8At issue prices. —9Net purchases or
securities. Investment fund certificates see Table VII.6. —1Net sales at net sales ( −) of foreign shares (including direct investment) by residents;
market values plus/less changes in issuers ’portfolios of their own debt transaction values. —10Domestic and foreign shares. —11Up to the end
securities. —2Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and of 1998, excluding shares under syndicate agreement. —12Net purchases
Treuhand agency. —3Net purchases or net sales ( −) of foreign debt or net sales ( −) of domestic shares (including direct investment) −before
securities by residents; transaction values. —4Domestic and foreign debt 1989 also including domestic investment fund certificates −by
securities. —5Book values; statistically adjusted. —6Residual; also non-residents; transaction values. —The figures for the latest data are to be
including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic invest- regarded as provisional; corrections are not specially marked.  
48*VII. Capital market

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
VII. Capital market
 
2. Sales of debt securities issued by borrowers domiciled in Germany  * 
  
Until the end of 1998 DM million nominal value, from 1999 euro million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item:
 Foreign  DM/euro
Mortgage Communal bonds issued Debt securities
bonds bonds issued by spe- by German-
All bank debt (Hypotheken- (Öffentliche Other bank Industrial Public managed cialised credit
Period Total securities pfandbriefe) Pfandbriefe) institutions bonds  2 syndicates debt securities debt securities  3 
Gross sales  4 
1990 428,698 286,709 14,923 70,701 89,755 111,326 − 141,990 35,168
1991 442,089 292,092 19,478 91,489 80,738 100,386 707 149,288 32,8321992 572,767 318,522 33,633 134,363 49,195 101,333 − 254,244 57,2821993 733,126 434,829 49,691 218,496 34,028 132,616 457 297,841 87,3091994 627,331 412,585 44,913 150,115 39,807 177,750 486 214,261 61,465
1995 620,120 470,583 43,287 208,844 41,571 176,877 200 149,338 102,719
1996 731,992 563,076 41,439 246,546 53,508 221,582 1,742 167,173 112,3701997 846,567 621,683 53,168 276,755 54,829 236,933 1,915 222,972 114,8131998 1,030,827 789,035 71,371 344,609 72,140 300,920 3,392 238,400 149,542
Euro million
1999 571,269 448,216 27,597 187,661 59,760 173,200 2,570 120,483 57,202
2000 659,148 500,895 34,528 143,107 94,556 228,703 8,114 150,137 31,5972001         Jan. 74,918 52,896 4,018 15,825 8,273 24,780 256 21,765 1,170
         Feb. 59,473 49,366 4,233 11,973 6,620 26,540 337 9,770 3,035         Mar. 54,977 41,572 2,418 7,618 12,371 19,164 1,215 12,189 260
         Apr. 48,340 37,122 2,224 9,505 6,857 18,535 695 10,523 586
         May 52,777 37,687 1,777 5,619 6,061 24,230 2,105 12,984 −         June 49,057 37,080 2,836 5,992 7,778 20,474 876 11,101 1,950
of which: Debt securities with a maturity of over 4 years  5 
1990 272,642 133,347 10,904 43,250 26,767 52,425 − 139,295 29,791
1991 303,326 172,171 11,911 65,642 54,878 39,741 707 130,448 22,7721992 430,479 211,775 28,594 99,627 40,267 43,286 − 218,703 51,9391993 571,533 296,779 43,365 160,055 26,431 66,923 230 274,524 82,0491994 429,369 244,806 36,397 109,732 29,168 69,508 306 184,255 53,351
1995 409,469 271,763 30,454 141,629 28,711 70,972 200 137,503 85,221
1996 473,560 322,720 27,901 167,811 35,522 91,487 1,702 149,139 92,5821997 563,333 380,470 41,189 211,007 41,053 87,220 1,820 181,047 98,4131998 694,414 496,444 59,893 288,619 54,385 93,551 2,847 195,122 139,645
Euro million
1999 324,888 226,993 16,715 124,067 37,778 48,435 2,565 95,331 44,013
2000 319,330 209,187 20,724 102,664 25,753 60,049 6,727 103,418 27,0082001         Jan. 45,552 29,993 2,955 13,246 3,522 10,270 35 15,524 770
         Feb. 33,119 24,212 3,482 11,058 890 8,782 − 8,907 1,620         Mar. 23,113 18,885 691 5,982 6,342 5,871 410 3,818 260
         Apr. 19,164 16,496 1,269 7,956 1,931 5,341 148 2,519 586
         May 23,464 9,785 201 4,138 536 4,910 1,850 11,829 −         June 13,240 10,509 669 2,925 1,691 5,223 700 2,031 1,950
Net sales  6 
1990 226,707 140,327 − 3,922 − 72 73,287 71,036 − 67 86,449 21,717
1991 227,822 139,396 4,729 22,290 65,985 46,390 558 87,868 18,5831992 304,751 115,786 13,104 58,235 19,585 24,864 − 175 189,142 34,1141993 403,212 159,982 22,496 122,917 − 13,156 27,721 180 243,049 43,7011994 270,088 116,519 18,184 54,316 − 6,897 50,914 − 62 153,630 21,634
1995 205,482 173,797 18,260 96,125 3,072 56,342 − 354 32,039 61,020
1996 238,427 195,058 11,909 121,929 6,020 55,199 585 42,788 69,9511997 257,521 188,525 16,471 115,970 12,476 43,607 1,560 67,437 63,1811998 327,991 264,627 22,538 162,519 18,461 61,111 3,118 60,243 84,308
Euro million
1999 209,096 170,069 2,845 80,230 31,754 55,238 2,185 36,840 22,728
2000 155,615 122,774 5,937 29,999 30,089 56,751 7,320 25,522 − 16,7052001         Jan. − 9,256 14,565 185 6,781 327 7,272 256 − 24,077 − 3,263
         Feb. 14,168 16,448 2,817 4,545 − 1,674 10,760 213 − 2,493 − 2,575         Mar. 10,808 4,373 651 − 5,088 6,802 2,008 1,215 5,220 − 2,934
         Apr. 5,240 1,297 54 1,060 532 − 349 695 3,248 − 1,917
         May 6,047 1,894 120 − 2,464 − 1,330 5,568 1,744 2,410 − 4,296         June 1,629 1,294 325 − 658 − 236 1,863 856 − 521 − 535
*For definitions see the notes in the Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. — 4Gross sales means only
Report 2, Capital market statistics. — 1Excluding registered bank debt initial sales of newly issued securities. — 5Maximum maturity according to
securities. — 2Debt securities of enterprises. — 3Including Federal Railways the terms of issue. — 6 Gross sales less redemptions. 
49*VII. Capital market

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
VII. Capital market
 
3. Outstanding amount of debt securities issued by borrowers domiciled in Germany  * 
  
Until the end of 1998 DM million nominal value, from 1999 euro million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item:
 Foreign  DM/euro
Mortgage Communal bonds issued
bonds bonds by German- Debt securities of
End of year All bank specialised Other bank Industrial Public managed (Öffentliche (Hypotheken-
or month Total bonds syndicates credit institutions debt securities debt securities debt securities Pfandbriefe) pfandbriefe)
DM million
1990 1,458,943 900,977 138,025 369,901 155,045 238,005 2,604 555,362 223,176
1991 1,686,765 1,040,374 142,757 392,190 221,031 284,396 3,161 643,230 241,7601992 1,991,515 1,156,162 155,862 450,424 240,616 309,259 2,983 832,370 275,8731993 2,394,728 1,316,142 178,357 573,341 227,463 336,981 3,163 1,075,422 319,5751994 2,664,814 1,432,661 196,541 627,657 219,214 389,249 3,101 1,229,053 341,210
1995 2,870,295 1,606,459 214,803 723,781 222,286 445,589 2,746 1,261,090 402,229
1996 3,108,724 1,801,517 226,711 845,710 228,306 500,790 3,331 1,303,877 472,1801997 3,366,245 1,990,041 243,183 961,679 240,782 544,397 4,891 1,371,313 535,3591998 3,694,234 2,254,668 265,721 1,124,198 259,243 605,507 8,009 1,431,558 619,668
Euro million
1999 2,097,926 1,322,863 134,814 655,024 163,284 369,741 6,280 768,783 339,560
2000 2,265,121 1,445,736 140,751 685,122 157,374 462,488 13,599 805,786 322,8562001         Mar. 2,280,840 1,481,121 144,404 691,360 162,830 482,527 15,283 784,435 314,085
         Apr. 2,286,080 1,482,418 144,458 692,420 163,361 482,179 15,978 787,684 312,167
         May 2,292,127 1,484,312 144,578 689,955 162,031 487,747 17,722 790,093 307,871         June 2,293,756 1,485,606 144,903 689,298 161,795 489,610 18,578 789,572 307,336
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  2                 Position at end-June 2001 
Maturity in years
817,381 574,692 50,140 229,377 58,850 236,326 3,586 239,102 90,813  less than 2
534,910 361,858 35,765 177,616 36,426 112,051 2,990 170,062 78,724   2 to less than 4
355,489 246,086 24,271 127,749 27,826 66,239 7,018 102,386 39,019   4 to less than  6
230,576 149,402 22,950 80,336 16,746 29,369 607 80,569 58,270   6 to less than  8
210,487 104,178 11,164 55,542 12,030 25,442 1,769 104,540 25,496   8 to less than 10
45,361 30,534 603 14,014 7,891 8,027 2,160 12,668 7,506 10 to less than 15
20,482 8,621 9 2,835 1,693 4,084 422 11,440 3,587 15 to less than 20
79,069 10,236 − 1,831 334 8,072 25 68,808 3,920 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers ’portfolios. — debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of the residual
1Excluding debt securities handed to the trustee for temporary safe amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc. 
custody. —2Calculated from month under review until final maturity for
50* 
 
4. Circulation of shares issued by residents of Germany
  
Until the end of 1998 DM million nominal value, from 1999 euro million nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies ’ capital due to
Share contribution
capital= of shares, Net increase or cash payment
merger reduction circulation at net decrease(-) and exchange contribution mining shares,
issue of change of of capital end of period during period of convertible of claims and GmbH shares, and transfer
Period bonds  1 etc. of assets legal form under review under review bonus shares other real assets and liquidation
DM million
1990 144,686 12,650 7,362 751 3,715 1,049 − 43 1,284 − 1,466
1991 151,618 6,932 3,656 610 2,416 407 − 182 411 − 386
1992 160,813 9,198 4,295 728 1,743 1,073 − 732 3,030 − 942
1993 168,005 7,190 5,224 772 387 876 10 707 − 783
1994 o 190,012 14,237 6,114 1,446 1,521 1,883 − 447 5,086 − 1,367
1995 211,231 21,217 5,894 1,498 1,421 1,421 − 623 13,739 − 2,133
1996 2 216,461 7,131 8,353 1,355 396 1,684 − 3,056 833 − 2,432
1997 221,575 5,115 4,164 2,722 370 1,767 − 2,423 197 − 1,678
1998 238,156 16,578 6,086 2,566 658 8,607 − 4,055 3,905 − 1,188
Euro million
1999 133,513 11,747 5,519 2,008 190 1,075 2,099 1,560 − 708
2000 147,629 14,115 3,620 3,694 618 8,089 − 1,986 1,827 − 1,745
2001         Mar. 150,653 918 445 28 153 586 497 55 − 846
         Apr. 152,598 1,945 453 1,252 103 28 10 136 − 38
         May 156,037 3,439 108 131 18 2,991 327 − 5 − 132
         June 156,598 560 493 494 58 56 − 239 42 − 344
oFrom January 1994 including the shares of east German companies share issues out of company profits. —2Figure reduced by DM 1,902 million
(resultant increase in share circulation: DM 7,771 million). —1Including owing to revisions. 
50*VII. Capital market

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
VII. Capital market
 
5. Yields and indices on German securities
  
Yields on bonds outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices  2 , 3 
Public bonds Bank debt securities Bonds Shares
Memo item:
Listed ForeignFederal securities DM/euro
bonds
With re- With re- issued by German Germansidual matur- sidual matur- German- bond CDAX share
Industrial managed index share price index ities of over 9 ities of over 9
Total Total Total Total to 10 years bonds (REX) index (DAX) to 10 years  
4 syndicates  1, 5 
Period Average End- End-
% p.a. daily rate 1987=100 1987=1000
1990 8.9 8.8 8.8 8.7 9.0 8.9 9.0 9.2 93.50 145.00 1,398.23
1991 8.7 8.6 8.6 8.5 8.9 8.6 8.9 9.2 96.35 148.16 1,577.981992 8.1 8.0 8.0 7.8 8.3 8.1 8.7 8.8 101.54 134.92 1,545.051993 6.4 6.3 6.3 6.5 6.5 6.8 6.9 6.8 109.36 191.13 2,266.681994 6.7 6.7 6.7 6.9 6.8 7.2 7.0 6.9 99.90 176.87 2,106.58
1995 6.5 6.5 6.5 6.9 6.5 7.2 6.9 6.8 109.18 181.47 2,253.88
1996 5.6 5.6 5.6 6.2 5.5 6.4 5.8 5.8 110.37 217.47 2,888.691997 5.1 5.1 5.1 5.6 5.0 5.9 5.2 5.5 111.01 301.47 4,249.691998 4.5 4.4 4.4 4.6 4.5 4.9 5.0 5.3 118.18 343.64 5,002.391999 4.3 4.3 4.3 4.5 4.3 4.9 5.0 5.4 110.60 445.95 6,958.14
2000 5.4 5.3 5.2 5.3 5.6 5.8 6.2 6.3 112.48 396.59 6,433.612001         Feb. 4.9 4.8 4.8 4.8 5.0 5.3 5.8 6.0 112.81 384.17 6,208.24
         Mar. 4.8 4.7 4.7 4.7 4.9 5.3 5.8 5.8 113.31 360.41 5,829.95
         Apr. 4.9 4.8 4.8 4.8 5.0 5.4 5.8 6.0 111.46 381.73 6,264.51
         May 5.1 5.0 5.0 5.1 5.1 5.5 5.9 6.0 111.20 373.26 6,123.26         June 5.0 4.9 4.9 5.0 5.1 5.5 5.8 5.9 111.91 368.48 6,058.38
         July 5.0 4.9 4.9 5.0 5.1 5.5 5.8 6.2 112.89 355.94 5,861.19
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of included in the calculation. Monthly figures are calculated on the basis of
issue of over 4 years, if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Conver- the yields on all the business days of a month. The annual figures are the un-
tible debt securities, etc., debt securities with unscheduled redemption, weighted means of the monthly figures. —2End of year or month. —
zero-coupon bonds, floating-rate notes and bonds not denominated in DM 3Source: German Stock Exchange plc. —4Only bonds eligible as underlying
or euros are not included. Group yields for the various categories of secu- instruments for futures contracts are included; calculated as unweightedrities are weighted with the amounts outstanding of the debt securities averages. — 5 As far as quoted on German stock exchanges. 
51* 
 
6. Sales and purchases of investment fund certificates in Germany
  
Sales of investment fund certificates Purchases
Domestic funds (sales receipts) Residents
Investment funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Non-banks  2 and loan associations  1 
of which
of which of which
Sales Open- Special- Foreign Foreign= Secur- end ised invest- invest-total Money ities- real invest- ment mentpur- market based estate ment Foreign fund cer- fund cer- Non-resi-chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  
3 Total Total tificates Total tificates dents  4 
Period
DM million
1990 25,788 26,857 7,904 − 8,032 −128 18,952 −1,069 25,766 4,296 − 362 21,470 −707 22
1991 50,064 37,492 13,738 − 11,599 2,144 23,754 12,572 49,890 8,594 − 5 41,296 12,577 174
1992 81,514 20,474 −3,102 −− 9,189 6,087 23,575 61,040 81,518 10,495 2,152 71,023 58,888 − 4
1993 80,259 61,672 20,791 − 6,075 14,716 40,881 18,587 76,258 16,982 2,476 59,276 16,111 4,001
1994 130,995 108,914 63,263 31,180 24,385 7,698 45,650 22,081 125,943 9,849 − 689 116,094 22,770 5,052
1995 55,246 54,071 16,777 6,147 3,709 6,921 37,294 1,175 56,295 12,172 188 44,123 987 −1,049
1996 83,386 79,110 16,517 −4,706 7,273 13,950 62,592 4,276 85,704 19,924 1,685 65,780 2,591 −2,318
1997 145,805 138,945 31,501 −5,001 30,066 6,436 107,445 6,860 149,977 35,924 340 114,053 6,520 −4,172
1998 187,216 169,748 38,998 5,772 27,814 4,690 130,750 17,468 190,309 43,937 961 146,372 16,507 −3,093
Euro million
1999 111,079 97,197 37,684 3,347 23,269 7,395 59,513 13,882 105,370 19,862 − 637 85,508 14,519 5,709
2000 117,020 85,160 39,712 −2,188 36,818 −2,824 45,448 31,860 106,197 14,454 92 91,743 31,768 10,823
2001         Feb. 10,661 8,537 5,236 931 933 2,437 3,301 2,124 12,591 1,039 − 12 11,552 2,136 −1,930
         Mar. 1,816 1,467 974 1,162 − 623 153 492 349 2,581 172 17 2,409 332 −765
         Apr. 6,362 4,300 2,719 585 1,487 386 1,580 2,062 6,517 714 267 5,803 1,795 −155
         May 2,290 902 1,146 − 6 385 420 −244 1,388 2,964 − 466 164 3,430 1,224 −674
         June 4,558 3,292 1,741 794 25 702 1,551 1,266 4,340 1,467 461 2,873 805 218
1Book values. —2Residual. —3Net purchases or net sales ( −) of foreign non-residents; transaction values (before 1989 classified as shares). —The
investment fund certificates by residents; transaction values. —4Net figures for the latest data are to be regarded as provisional; corrections are
purchases or net sales ( −) of domestic investment fund certificates by not specially marked. 
51*VII. Capital market

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
1. Finances of the public sector *
    
Central, regional and local authorities  1 Social security funds  2 Public sector, total
Receipts Expenditure
of which
Balance Balance Balance
Other of of of
Person- operat- receipts receipts receipts
of nel ex- ing ex- Capital Finan- and Ex- and Ex- andwhich pend- pend- Current Interest forma- cial expend- Re- pend- expend- Re- pend- expend-
Period Total Taxes  
3 Total  4 iture iture grants paid tion aid  5 iture ceipts  6 iture iture ceipts iture iture
DM billion
1997 1,014.3 797.2 1,108.9 325.0 135.7 356.3 132.1 80.1 79.2 −94.5 796.8 794.3 + 2.5 1,704.8 1,796.8 −92.0
1998  p 1,072.1 833.0 1,128.8 325.5 137.4 373.7 133.7 79.7 79.8 −56.7 811.8 808.4 + 3.4 1,765.6 1,818.9 −53.3
1999  pe 1,107.0 886.1 1,162.0 330.0 143.0 395.5 136.5 81.0 74.5 −55.0 839.0 831.0 + 8.0 1,809.5 1,856.5 −47.0
2000  pe 1,198.0 913.9 1,164.5 330.5 145.0 401.0 132.5 80.5 74.5 + 33.5 849.5 849.0 + 0.5 1,907.5 1,873.5 + 34.0
2000         1st qtr 245.9 205.2 281.9 76.6 33.7 103.5 41.0 12.9 14.4 −36.0 208.1 208.3 −0.2 413.3 449.6 −36.2
         2nd qtr 277.6 231.6 265.3 77.4 32.4 98.3 25.5 16.3 14.3 + 12.3 208.9 210.6 −1.7 451.0 440.5 + 10.6
         3rd qtr 362.8 222.9 282.2 77.0 33.7 98.1 36.1 19.7 17.9 + 80.5 210.4 211.5 −1.1 539.4 459.9 + 79.5
         4th qtr p 304.8 254.5 329.0 96.8 43.2 103.6 29.1 28.3 27.6 −24.2 221.9 218.1 + 3.8 497.3 517.8 −20.4
2001         1st qtr p,  7 247.9 205.6 289.2 77.3 32.0 108.1 43.0 12.8 15.2 −41.3 212.8 214.4 −1.6 417.5 460.4 −42.9
Euro billion
1999  pe 566.0 453.1 594.1 168.7 73.1 202.2 69.8 41.4 38.1 −28.1 429.0 424.9 + 4.1 925.2 949.2 −24.0
2000  pe 612.5 467.3 595.4 169.0 74.1 205.0 67.7 41.2 38.1 + 17.1 434.3 434.1 + 0.3 975.3 957.9 + 17.4
2000         1st qtr 125.7 104.9 144.1 39.2 17.2 52.9 21.0 6.6 7.4 −18.4 106.4 106.5 −0.1 211.3 229.9 −18.5
         2nd qtr 141.9 118.4 135.7 39.6 16.6 50.3 13.0 8.3 7.3 + 6.3 106.8 107.7 −0.9 230.6 225.2 + 5.4
         3rd qtr 185.5 113.9 144.3 39.4 17.2 50.1 18.5 10.1 9.1 + 41.2 107.6 108.1 −0.5 275.8 235.1 + 40.6
         4th qtr p 155.8 130.1 168.2 49.5 22.1 53.0 14.9 14.5 14.1 −12.4 113.5 111.5 + 1.9 254.3 264.7 −10.4
2001         1st qtr p,  7 126.7 105.1 147.8 39.5 16.4 55.3 22.0 6.5 7.8 −21.1 108.8 109.6 −0.8 213.5 235.4 −21.9
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical insurance are estimated. —3The tax revenue shown here is taken from the
Office. —*The budgetary definition used here differs from the methods budget statistics and may differ from the data given in Table VIII. 4, which
employed for the government account of the national accounts and, in case are based on the tax statistics. —4Including discrepancies in clearing
of the quarterly figures, in some respects also from the financial statistics. — transactions between the central, regional and local authorities. —
1Incl. subsidiary budgets. The quarterly figures, unlike the annual figures 5Expenditure on investment grants, loans and acquisition of participating
based on the annual accounts statistics of the Federal Statistical Office, do interests. —6Including Federal Government liquidity assistance to the
not include municipal special-purpose associations and various special Federal Labour Office. —7Owing to modifications of the system of
accounts. For the receipts of Bundesbank profit see footnote 1 to Table VIII. classification, especially shifts between Other operating expenditur e and
2.—2The annual figures differ from the sum of the quarterly figures, as Current grants. 
the latter are all provisional. The quarterly figures for some fields of
2. Finances of the Federal Government, L änder Governments and local authorities *
  
  
Federal Government L änder Governments Local authorities
Western  2,  3 Eastern  3 Western  3 Eastern  3 
Period Receipts  1 Expenditure Receipts Expenditure Receipts Expenditure Receipts Expenditure Receipts Expenditure
DM billion
1997 416.8 480.3 349.2 376.5 94.3 105.2 222.9 226.9 52.6 54.2
1998 439.0 495.6 360.5 380.3 96.4 104.7 231.4 226.3 51.5 52.41999  
pe 470.0 521.5 374.5 385.0 97.5 105.0 236.0 232.0 51.0 51.5
2000  pe 570.0 517.5 381.5 393.0 98.0 106.0 238.0 235.5 50.0 50.0
2000         1st qtr 98.8 128.3 87.3 94.6 23.0 22.3 50.1 54.0 10.4 10.8
         2nd qtr 119.8 117.4 96.5 91.5 22.8 22.7 57.0 55.1 12.1 11.5         3rd qtr
4 214.1 130.8 88.9 91.1 25.0 25.0 59.0 57.5 12.2 12.3
         4th qtr p 137.4 140.8 103.8 113.9 27.3 33.9 71.6 67.6 15.1 15.0
2001         1st qtr p 99.4 129.9 87.7 97.5 23.5 22.7 50.0 56.3 10.3 10.7
Euro billion
1999  pe 240.3 266.6 191.5 196.8 49.9 53.7 120.7 118.6 26.1 26.3
2000  pe 291.4 264.6 195.1 200.9 50.1 54.2 121.7 120.4 25.6 25.6
2000         1st qtr 50.5 65.6 44.6 48.4 11.7 11.4 25.6 27.6 5.3 5.5
         2nd qtr 61.3 60.0 49.3 46.8 11.7 11.6 29.1 28.2 6.2 5.9         3rd qtr
4 109.4 66.9 45.5 46.6 12.8 12.8 30.2 29.4 6.2 6.3
         4th qtr p 70.2 72.0 53.1 58.2 14.0 17.3 36.6 34.6 7.7 7.7
2001         1st qtr p 50.8 66.4 44.8 49.8 12.0 11.6 25.5 28.8 5.2 5.5
52*Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Fund for Inherited Liabilities. —2Including Berlin, Bremen, Hamburg.
Office. —*See corresponding footnote to Table VIII. 1. —1The Including Berlin (East). —3The quarterly figures, unlike the annual figures
Bundesbank profit transfer is shown in full until 1994; from 1995 only the based on the annual accounts statistics of the Federal Statistical Office, d o
DM 7 billion scheduled in the budget is shown. Since that time, receipts not include various special accounts. —4Including receipts from the UMTS
over and above the scheduled amount accrue directly to the Redemption licence auctions. 
52*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
3. Finances of the Government in the national accounts *
    
Up to the end of 1998, DM billion / from 1999, euro billion
Item 1993 1994 1995  1 1996 1997  p 1998  p 1999  p 2000  2,  e 
Receipts 1,517.6 1,607.7 1,647.4 1,703.5 1,726.5 1,779.7 943.7 966.1
of which
Taxes 771.0 807.6 825.7 849.7 856.9 897.2 490.3 512.0Social security contributions 588.2 632.2 662.4 696.6 719.9 727.7 375.1 379.3
Expenditure 1,618.5 1,689.7 1,764.3 1,826.0 1,825.8 1,857.5 971.9 987.1
of which
Intermediate input 140.3 140.6 143.1 142.5 140.1 143.8 76.5 78.3Employee compensation 301.7 306.8 315.9 319.6 319.0 319.7 165.1 164.7Interest 108.5 113.5 129.0 131.9 133.3 136.1 70.2 67.3Social security benefits  
3 792.4 848.8 902.4 970.3 984.4 997.9 522.4 532.3
Gross capital formation 90.9 90.3 80.6 76.4 69.2 68.6 36.7 36.9
Financial balance − 100.9 − 82.0 − 116.8 − 122.5 − 99.3 − 77.8 − 28.1 − 21.0
as a percentage of the grossdomestic product − 3.1 − 2.4 − 3.3 − 3.4 − 2.7 − 2.1 − 1.4 − 1.0
Memo item
Deficit of the Treuhand agency − 38.1 − 37.1 . .....
Debt as defined in
Maastricht Treatyas a percentage of the grossdomestic product 47.1 49.4 57.1 59.8 60.9 60.7 61.1 60.3
Source: Federal Statistical Office. —*Figures according to ESA 95. In unadjusted terms, the deficit amounted to 10.0% of GDP. —2Adjusted
Notwithstanding the figures shown by the Federal Statistical Office, for receipts from UMTS licence auctions. In the accounts of the Federalcalculated including −with no impact on the balance −customs duties, the Statistical Office, such receipts (50.85 euro billion) are recorded under "net
EU share in VAT revenue and EU subsidies. —1Adjusted for the balance of increase in non-produced assets", with the result that government spending
notional capital transfers between the public sector and the corporate is lower and a surplus (29.8 euro billion or 1.5% of GDP) is shown. —
sector, mainly in connection with the winding-up of the Treuhand agency. 3 Monetary social security benefits and social benefits in kind. 
4. Tax revenue of the central, regional and local authorities
    
Federal and L änder Governments and European Union Local authorities  4 
Länder Governments
of which Balance of
Federal of which European in the untransferred
Period Total Total  1 Government  2 Total New L änder Union  3 Total New L änder tax shares  5 
DM million
1999 886,124 775,945 414,101 322,172 . 39,672 110,178 9,408 + 2
2000 913,867 802,118 428,394 331,022 . 42,702 111,953 9,574 − 204
2001         1st qtr 206,830 179,775 92,768 75,915 . 11,092 19,243 1,786 + 7,812
         2nd qtr p . 188,350 99,376 77,914 . 11,061 . . .
2001         Mar. . 62,764 34,030 25,045 . 3,689 . . .
         Apr. . 52,073 26,654 21,763 . 3,657 . . .
         May p . 57,364 30,986 22,629 . 3,749 . . .
         June p . 78,912 41,736 33,522 . 3,654 . . .
Euro million
1999 453,068 396,734 211,726 164,724 . 20,284 56,333 4,810 + 1
2000 467,253 410,116 219,034 169,249 . 21,833 57,241 4,895 − 104
2001         1st qtr 105,751 91,918 47,432 38,815 . 5,671 9,839 913 + 3,994
         2nd qtr p . 96,302 50,810 39,837 . 5,655 . . .
2001         Mar. . 32,091 17,399 12,805 . 1,886 . . .
         Apr. . 26,625 13,628 11,127 . 1,870 . . .
         May p . 29,330 15,843 11,570 . 1,917 . . .
         June p . 40,347 21,339 17,140 . 1,868 . . .
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. —1Including receipts from the revenue. —4Including local authority taxes of Berlin, Bremen and
Equalisation of Burdens levies.  —2Before deduction of supplementary Hamburg. —5Difference between the local authorities ’share in the
Federal grants and shares in the revenue of mineral oil tax remitted to the income taxes received by the L änder cash offices in the period in question
Länder Governments. —3Including the (GNP-related) receipts accruing to (see Table VIII. 5) and the amounts passed on to the local authorities during
the EU from 1988 to the detriment of the Federal Government ’s tax the same period. 
53*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
5. Tax revenue, by type
    
Joint taxes Memo
item
Income taxes  2 Turnover taxes  5,  6 Local
author-
As- Invest- ities’
sessed ment Value- Turnover Share EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income added tax on in trade Federal L änder customs income
Period Total  1 Total tax  3 tax tion tax taxes  4 Total tax imports tax  6,  7 taxes  8 taxes  8 duties taxes  9 
DM million
1999 825,383 360,671 261,708 21,293 43,731 33,940 268,253 218,271 49,982 10,685 141,280 38,263 6,231 49,438
2000 852,966 376,266 265,471 23,909 46,109 40,777 275,520 209,547 65,974 10,797 147,672 36,072 6,638 50,849
2001         1st qtr 190,571 80,000 60,998 −4,569 3,284 20,288 68,634 51,862 16,772 87 30,027 10,282 1,541 10,796
         2nd qtr p 200,133 84,413 60,612 6,209 840 16,752 65,899 49,050 16,850 2,683 35,663 9,948 1,527 11,783
2001         Mar. 65,894 28,421 18,623 −1,227 5,993 5,032 19,545 13,618 5,928 22 13,770 3,625 511 3,130
         Apr. 55,212 20,241 19,455 −2,166 −2,281 5,232 19,662 14,654 5,008 1,375 10,068 3,386 479 3,138
         May p 60,750 17,126 20,184 −1,965 −4,538 3,446 24,992 18,494 6,498 1,298 13,266 3,497 571 3,386
         June p 84,171 47,045 20,973 10,340 7,659 8,074 21,245 15,901 5,344 10 12,329 3,066 476 5,259
Euro million
1999 422,012 184,408 133,809 10,887 22,359 17,353 137,155 111,600 25,555 5,463 72,235 19,564 3,186 25,277
2000 436,115 192,382 135,733 12,225 23,575 20,849 140,871 107,139 33,732 5,521 75,503 18,444 3,394 25,998
2001         1st qtr 97,437 40,904 31,188 −2,336 1,679 10,373 35,092 26,517 8,575 44 15,353 5,257 788 5,520
         2nd qtr p 102,326 43,159 30,990 3,175 429 8,565 33,694 25,079 8,615 1,372 18,234 5,086 781 6,025
2001         Mar. 33,691 14,531 9,522 −627 3,064 2,573 9,993 6,963 3,031 11 7,041 1,853 261 1,600
         Apr. 28,229 10,349 9,947 −1,107 −1,166 2,675 10,053 7,493 2,561 703 5,148 1,731 245 1,605
         May p 31,061 8,756 10,320 −1,005 −2,320 1,762 12,778 9,456 3,322 664 6,783 1,788 292 1,731
         June p 43,036 24,054 10,723 5,287 3,916 4,128 10,862 8,130 2,732 5 6,304 1,567 243 2,689
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. —1This total, unlike that in Table VIII. 1999 5.63% went to the Federal Government in advance to finance the
4, includes neither the revenue from Equalisation of Burdens levies, trade supplementary Federal grant to the pension insurance funds; 2.2% of thetax on returns and capital (less Federal and L änder shares in trade tax), the balance went to the local authorities, of the new balance: 50.5% to the
taxes on land and buildings and other local authority taxes, nor the balance Federal Government, 49.5% to the L änder Governments, from 2000 50.25%
of untransferred tax shares. —2The yield of wage tax and assessed income to the Federal Government, 49.75% to the L änder Governments. The EU
tax was distributed among the Federal Government, the L änder share must likewise be deducted from the Federal Government ’s share
Governments and the local authorities in the ratio of 42.5 : 42.5 : 15 from stated. —6Since 1991 the distribution of turnover tax and the level and
1980, and the yield of corporation tax and investment income tax between distribution of the share in trade tax have been affected by the financing ofthe Federal Government and the L änder Governments in the ratio of 50 : 50 the debt service of the "German Unity" Fund. —7Federal Government and
from 1970. —3From 1996, after deduction of child benefit. —4From L änder Governments 50% each. From 1998 Federal Government 42.2%,
February 1993 including revenue from the tax on interest income, in which L änder Governments 57.8%. —8For breakdown see Table VIII. 6. —9From
the local authorities have a share of 12%. —5From 1998 3.64% and from 1998 including the share in turnover taxes. 
6. Individual taxes of the Federal Government, L änder Governments and local authorities
    
Federal taxes L änder taxes Local authority taxes
Insur- Electri- Other Motor Inherit- Other Taxes on Other
Mineral Tobacco Spirits ance city Federal vehicle Property ance Beer L änder Trade land and local
Period oil tax tax tax tax tax taxes  1 tax tax tax tax taxes tax  2 buildings taxes  3 
DM million
1999 71,278 22,795 4,367 13,917 3,551 25,373 13,767 1,050 5,977 1,655 15,815 52,924 16,890 1,612
2000 73,982 22,381 4,207 14,166 6,563 26,374 13,720 847 5,832 1,650 14,024 52,857 17,307 1,534
2001         1st qtr 10,681 4,062 682 6,816 1,514 6,273 4,441 182 1,491 364 3,804 11,906 4,007 433
         2nd qtr p 19,160 4,890 909 2,554 2,060 6,091 4,448 145 1,504 427 3,424 . . .
2001         Mar. 5,963 2,617 546 1,107 818 2,720 1,619 53 546 114 1,293 . . .
         Apr. 5,910 1,090 250 764 547 1,507 1,437 55 566 121 1,209 . . .         May
p 6,830 2,684 342 1,031 801 1,578 1,579 53 511 130 1,223 . . .
         June p 6,419 1,117 317 759 711 3,006 1,432 38 427 176 993 . . .
Euro million
1999 36,444 11,655 2,233 7,116 1,816 12,973 7,039 537 3,056 846 8,086 27,060 8,636 824
2000 37,826 11,443 2,151 7,243 3,356 13,485 7,015 433 2,982 844 7,170 27,025 8,849 784
2001         1st qtr 5,461 2,077 349 3,485 774 3,207 2,271 93 762 186 1,945 6,087 2,049 221
         2nd qtr p 9,796 2,500 465 1,306 1,053 3,114 2,274 74 769 218 1,751 . . .
2001         Mar. 3,049 1,338 279 566 418 1,390 828 27 279 58 661 . . .
         Apr. 3,022 557 128 391 280 770 735 28 289 62 618 . . .         May
p 3,492 1,372 175 527 410 807 807 27 261 67 625 . . .
         June p 3,282 571 162 388 364 1,537 732 19 219 90 507 . . .
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. —1Other excise taxes and the income until mid-1992, and again since the beginning of 1995. —2On returns and
and corporation tax surcharge ("solidarity surcharge") levied from mid-1991 capital. — 3 Including tax-like receipts.   
54*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
7. Indebtedness of the public sector *
    
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999, euro million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
5−year lending owing to
Bundes- Treasury special Federal Debt by credit Social German Equalisa-
End of year bank discount Treasury Federal savings secur- institu- security unifica- tionor month Total advances paper  
1 notes  2,  3 bonds  2 bonds ities  2 tions  4 funds Other  4 tion 5 claims Other  6 
Public authorities
1994 1,659,632 − 20,506 190,632 181,737 59,334 443,958 644,459 1,337 28,997 1,391 87,098 184
1995 1,993,476 − 8,072 240,514 170,719 78,456 586,573 764,875 1,263 40,621 15,106 87,079 198
1996 2,126,320 − 27,609 231,102 176,164 96,391 618,262 836,582 770 39,450 9,960 89,826 203
1997 2,215,893 − 26,336 249,507 177,721 99,317 662,516 879,021 663 29,907 1,315 89,376 216
1998 2,280,154 − 25,631 227,536 199,774 92,698 723,403 894,456 550 26,073 1,249 88,582 202
1999 1,199,975 − 12,594 102,364 120,998 41,621 416,051 450,111 281 10,200 476 45,175 105
2000         June 1,212,346 − 11,729 104,160 123,093 39,200 426,671 451,597 281 9,809 418 45,281 108
         Sep. 1,221,702 − 11,850 106,308 123,235 38,131 430,134 457,350 280 9,720 434 44,146 114
         Dec. p 1,211,439 − 11,616 109,951 126,276 35,991 438,887 433,443 211 10,524 285 44,146 108
2001         Mar. p 1,200,555 . 11,798 118,818 127,739 34,560 443,726 443,378 203 9,882 238 10,103 111
Federal Government 7,  8
1994 712,488 − 15,870 66,987 181,737 59,334 359,833 16,654 50 875 1,391 9,576 183
1995 756,834 − 8,072 52,354 170,719 78,456 402,307 26,572 15 8,119 1,360 8,684 176
1996 839,883 − 26,789 55,289 176,164 96,391 434,295 32,988 5 7,766 1,330 8,684 183
1997 905,691 − 25,286 78,848 177,721 99,317 481,619 31,845 5 870 1,300 8,684 197
1998 957,983 − 24,666 84,760 199,274 92,698 519,718 24,125 − 2,603 1,270 8,684 186
1999 714,069 − 11,553 44,335 120,498 41,621 379,808 67,872 60 2,568 476 45,175 104
2000         June 723,195 − 11,654 43,929 122,593 39,200 389,761 67,927 58 2,268 418 45,281 107
         Sep. 730,423 − 11,775 44,416 121,601 38,131 392,785 74,820 57 2,145 434 44,146 113
         Dec. 715,819 − 11,516 44,678 123,642 35,991 400,490 52,836 29 2,099 285 44,146 107
2001         Mar. 699,682 − 11,798 45,431 121,605 34,560 409,855 64,045 29 1,908 238 10,103 110
West German L änder Governments
1994 415,052 −− 89,094 . . − 311,622 623 11,453 . 2,259 2
1995 442,536 −− 91,152 . . − 339,084 358 11,940 . − 2
1996 477,361 − 320 91,969 . . − 372,449 54 12,567 . − 2
1997 505,297 − 350 86,639 . . − 406,499 47 11,760 . − 2
1998 525,380 − 520 83,390 . . − 430,709 43 10,716 . − 2
1999 274,208 − 150 43,033 . . − 226,022 23 4,979 . − 1
2000         June 275,854 −− 45,169 . . − 225,681 23 4,980 . . 1
         Sep. 275,454 −− 46,196 . . − 224,238 23 4,997 . . 1
         Dec. p 282,431 −− 48,702 . . − 227,914 22 5,792 . . 1
2001         Mar. p 285,738 −− 52,396 . . − 227,800 23 5,518 . . 1
East German L änder Governments
1994 55,650 −− 20,350 . . − 35,065 5 230 . . .
1995 69,151 −− 25,345 . . − 43,328 17 461 . . .
1996 80,985 − 500 26,820 . . − 53,483 − 182 . . .
1997 90,174 − 700 27,540 . . − 61,697 15 222 . . .
1998 98,192 − 445 27,228 . . − 70,289 − 230 . . .
1999 53,199 − 891 14,517 . . − 37,602 − 189 . . .
2000         June 52,956 − 75 14,583 . . − 38,141 − 158 . . .
         Sep. 53,773 − 75 15,217 . . − 38,377 − 103 . . .
         Dec. p 55,712 − 100 16,092 . . − 39,339 − 182 . . .
2001         Mar. p 56,030 −− 17,011 . . − 38,908 − 111 . . .
West German local authorities 9
1994 153,375 . . − . . 100 147,558 288 5,429 . . .
1995 157,271 . . − . . 1,000 151,127 283 4,861 . . .
1996 158,613 . . 200 . . 1,280 152,311 174 4,648 . . .1997 160,162 . . 300 . . 1,330 154,145 149 4,238 . . .1998 158,960 . . 300 . . 1,330 153,208 119 4,003 . . .1999 81,511 . . 153 . . 680 78,726 53 1,898 . . .
2000         June 82,165 . . 153 . . 680 79,363 51 1,917 . . .
         Sep. 82,420 . . 153 . . 680 79,618 51 1,917 . . .         Dec.
p 81,414 . . 153 . . 680 78,656 33 1,891 . . .
2001         Mar. p 81,935 . . 153 . . 680 79,184 26 1,892 . . .
East German local authorities  9
1994 32,235 . . 125 . . 400 30,837 364 509 . . .
1995 36,830 . . 225 . . 400 35,427 347 431 . . .1996 38,976 . . 225 . . 400 37,922 308 121 . . .1997 38,688 . . 225 . . 400 37,623 273 167 . . .1998 39,873 . . 225 . . 460 38,777 255 156 . . .1999 20,726 . . 51 . . 335 20,138 124 78 . . .
2000         June 20,758 . . 51 . . 335 20,167 128 77 . . .
         Sep. 20,682 . . 51 . . 335 20,091 128 77 . . .         Dec.
p 17,048 . . 51 . . 335 16,497 114 50 . . .
2001         Mar. p 16,873 . . 51 . . 335 16,322 112 51 . . .
For footnotes see end of the table. 
55*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
7. Indebtedness of the public sector * (cont ’d)
    
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999, euro million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
5−year lending owing to
Bundes- Treasury special Federal Debt by credit Social German Equalisa-
End of year bank discount Treasury Federal savings secur- institu- security unifica- tionor month Total advances paper  
1 notes  2,  3 bonds  2 bonds ities  2 tions  4 funds Other  4 tion 5 claims Other  6 
“German Unity “Fund / Indemnification Fund 7
1994 89,187 . 897 8,867 − . 43,859 33,744 5 1,816 . . .
1995 87,146 . − 8,891 − . 44,398 31,925 5 1,927 . . .
1996 83,556 . −−− . 44,321 38,020 5 1,210 . . .
1997 79,717 . −−− . 44,347 34,720 5 645 . . .
1998 79,413 . −−− . 47,998 30,975 − 440 . . .
1999 40,234 . − 275 500 . 28,978 10,292 − 189 . . .
2000         June 41,041 . − 275 500 . 29,290 10,797 − 179 . . .
         Sep. 41,189 . − 275 1,634 . 29,298 9,814 − 169 . . .
         Dec. 40,629 . − 275 2,634 . 29,797 7,790 − 133 . . .
2001         Mar. 41,398 . − 3,775 6,134 . 24,883 6,529 − 7 7...
ERP Special Fund 7
1994 28,043 . .... 10,298 17,745 −− ...
1995 34,200 . .... 10,745 23,455 −− ...
1996 34,135 . .... 10,750 23,385 −− ...
1997 33,650 . .... 10,810 22,840 −− ...
1998 34,159 . .... 11,944 20,988 − 1,227 . . .
1999 16,028 . .... 6,250 9,458 21 299 . . .
2000         June 16,376 . .... 6,604 9,520 21 231 . . .
         Sep. 17,761 . .... 7,036 10,392 21 312 . . .
         Dec. 18,386 . .... 7,585 10,411 13 377 . . .
2001         Mar. 18,899 . .... 7,972 10,588 13 326 . . .
Federal Railways Fund 7,  8
1994 71,173 . . 5,208 − . 29,467 29,232 − 7,265 . . .
1995 78,400 . . 3,848 − . 28,992 39,005 140 6,415 . . .
1996 77,785 . . 1,882 − . 28,749 41,537 130 5,489 . . .
1997 77,254 . . 1,927 − . 25,634 44,807 115 4,772 . . .
1998 77,246 . . − 500 . 31,648 42,488 79 2,531 . . .
1999         June 39,231 . . − 1,023 . 16,805 20,401 34 968 . . .
Debt-Processing Fund / Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities 7,  8
1994 102,428 . 3,740 . . . . 22,003 2 1,420 . 75,263 .
1995 328,888 . − 58,699 − . 98,731 72,732 98 6,468 13,745 78,395 21
1996 331,918 . − 54,718 − . 98,468 81,380 95 7,468 8,630 81,142 19
1997 322,032 . − 54,028 − . 98,377 81,616 54 7,233 15 80,692 17
1998 304,978 . − 31,633 − . 110,006 79,226 54 4,167 −20 79,899 15
1999         June 151,097 . − 11,127 2,000 . 58,897 36,133 27 2,015 −9 40,902 4
“Use of Hard Coal “Equalisation Fund 7,  8
1995 2,220 . .... − 2,220 −− ...
1996 3,108 . .... − 3,108 −− ...
1997 3,229 . .... − 3,229 −− ...
1998 3,971 . .... 3 0 0 3,671 −− ...
1999         June 2,302 . .... 1 5 3 2,148 −− ...
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical accordance with the London Debts agreement; excluding debt securities i n
Office. —*Excluding public authorities ’mutual indebtedness. — own portfolios. —7The debt incurred through the joint issue of Federal
1Predominantly Treasury discount paper. —2Excluding paper in the securities is recorded here −in contrast to the capital market statistics −
issuers ’portfolios. —3Länder Treasury paper also covers the long-term under the Federal Government and its special funds in accordance with the
maturity category. —4Mainly loans against borrowers ’notes. Including agreed distribution ratios. —8Since July 1, 1999 the Federal Government
loans raised abroad. Other loans from non-banks, including loans from has assumed joint responsibility for the debts of the Redemption Fund forsupplementary public pension funds and liabilities arising from the Inherited Liabilities, the Federal Railway Fund and the Equalisation Fund forinvestment assistance levy. —5Old liabilities arising from residential Safeguarding the Use of Coal. The special funds mentioned are only
construction and liabilities arising from residential construction by the recorded under the Federal Government from July. —9Data other than
former GDR ’s armed forces and from residential construction in connection end-of-year figures have been estimated. Including indebtedness of munici-
with the return of the troops of the former USSR in eastern Germany to pal special-purpose associations. their home country. —6Old debt mainly expressed in foreign currency, in
56*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
8. Changes in public sector indebtedness *
    
Net borrowing  1 
Level at end of 1999 2000 20011999 2000  
p Total Total  p 1st qtr 2nd qtr 3rd qtr 4th qtr  p 1st qtr  p Mar. 2001  p 
Item Euro million
Borrowers
Federal Government  2 714,069 715,819 699,682 + 31,738 + 1,755 + 12,926 −3,803 + 7,227 −14,594 −16,138
"German Unity" Fund 40,102 40,425 41,173 − 428 + 323 + 320 + 455 + 128 − 580 + 748
ERP Special Fund 16,028 18,386 18,899 −1,437 + 2,358 + 6 + 343 + 1,385 + 625 + 513
Federal Railways Fund  2 −−− − 265 −−−−−−
Inherited Liabilities Fund  2 −−− − 4,882 −−−−−−
"Use of Hard Coal" Equal-isation Fund  
2 −−− + 271 −−−−−−
Indemnification Fund 132 204 225 + 59 + 72 + 18 + 14 + 20 + 20 + 21
West  German  Länder 274,208 282,431 285,738 + 5,585 + 8,223 + 1,510 + 136 − 400 + 6,976 + 3,307 Governments
East German  Länder 53,199 55,712 56,030 + 2,995 + 2,513 − 999 + 755 + 817 + 1,940 + 318 Governments
West German local authorities  3 81,511 81,414 81,935 + 751 + 701 + 194 + 703 − 26 − 170 + 815
East German local authorities  3 20,726 17,048 16,873 + 428 + 109 + 32 + 66 − 77 + 87 − 22
Total 1,199,975 1,211,439 1,200,555 + 34,816 + 16,055 + 14,006 −1,330 + 9,074 −5,695 −10,438
Types of debt
Treasury discount paper  4 12,594 11,616 11,798 − 511 − 978 − 804 − 62 + 121 − 233 + 182
Treasury notes  5 102,364 109,951 118,818 −13,973 + 7,587 + 136 + 1,660 + 2,149 + 3,643 + 8,866
Five-year special Federal bonds  5 120,998 126,276 127,739 + 18,855 + 5,278 + 725 + 1,371 + 143 + 3,041 + 1,464
Federal savings bonds 41,621 35,991 34,560 −5,775 −5,630 − 696 −1,725 −1,069 −2,140 −1,431
Debt securities  5 416,051 438,887 443,726 + 46,181 + 22,837 + 8,103 + 2,517 + 3,463 + 8,754 + 4,838
Direct lending by
credit institutions  6 450,111 433,443 443,378 −6,613 −12,082 + 6,947 −5,152 + 5,472 −19,349 + 10,382
Loans from social security funds 281 211 203 − 0− 70 + 1 − 1− 1− 70 − 8
Other loans  6 10,160 10,484 9,841 −3,130 + 324 − 467 + 76 − 90 + 805 − 643
Old debt  7 581 393 348 − 161 − 188 − 42 − 13 + 22 − 155 − 45
Equalisation claims 45,175 44,146 10,103 − 55 −1,024 + 102 − 1−1,135 + 10 −34,044
Investment assistance levy 40 40 40 − 0− 0− 0− 0− 0− 0− 0
Total 1,199,975 1,211,439 1,200,555 + 34,816 + 16,055 + 14,006 −1,330 + 9,074 −5,695 −10,438
Creditors
Banking system
Bundesbank 4,440 4,440 4,440 −−−−−− − 0
Credit institutions 595,962 565,438 561,756 −6,604 −25,933 + 4,546 −10,632 −3,401 −16,446 −3,235
Domestic non-banks
Social security funds  8 281 205 205 − 0− 7 7 +0 +0 − 0− 77 − 0
Other  9 187,141 210,287 214,894 + 25,673 + 23,147 + 9,153 −3,787 + 4,754 + 13,026 + 4,608
Foreign creditors  pe 412,152 431,070 419,259 + 15,747 + 18,918 + 307 + 13,089 + 7,721 −2,199 −11,811
Total 1,199,975 1,211,439 1,200,555 + 34,816 + 16,055 + 14,006 −1,330 + 9,074 −5,695 −10,438
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical 6Including loans raised abroad. —7Old liabilities arising from residential
Office. —*Excluding public authorities ’mutual indebtedness. —1Net construction and liabilities arising from the residential construction of the
borrowing differs from the change in indebtedness, which includes the former GDR ’s armed forces and from residential construction in connection
assumption and reduction of debts. —2See Table VIII. 7, footnote 6. — with the return of the troops of the former USSR based in eastern Germany
3Data other than end-of-year figures have been estimated. Including to their home country, and old debt in accordance with the London Debts
indebtedness of municipal special-purpose associations and municipal Agreement. —8Excluding public bonds acquired by supplementary pension
hospitals. —4Excluding mobilisation and liquidity paper. Predominantly funds for government employees. — 9 Ascertained as a difference. 
Treasury discount paper. —5Excluding paper in the issuers ’portfolios. —
9. Loans raised by public authorities against borrowers ’ notes
    
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999, euro million
End of year Federal "German ERP L änder Local Federal Inherited "Use of Hard
or month Govern- Unity" Special Govern- authorities Railways Liabilites Coal" Equal-
Total  1 ment  2,  3 Fund Fund ments 4,  5 Fund  3 Fund  3 isation Fund  3 
1997 883,260 25,914 35,370 22,840 471,224 186,087 49,694 88,902 3,229
1998 898,030 23,094 31,415 22,215 504,148 184,942 45,098 83,447 3,6711999 444,031 64,704 10,481 9,778 264,158 94,909 −− −
2000 Mar. 442,190 62,289 10,481 9,605 264,958 94,857 −− −
June 443,410 62,018 10,466 9,772 266,855 94,299 −− −
Sep. 436,742 57,651 9,277 10,725 264,691 94,398 −− −
Dec. 
p 431,364 54,731 7,178 10,801 268,362 90,292 −− −
2001 Mar.  p 423,714 49,333 5,184 10,927 268,760 89,510 −− −
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical 3See Table VIII. 7, footnote 6. —4Data other than end-of-year figures have
Office. —1Excluding Debt Register claims and cash advances. Including been estimated. Including municipal special-purpose associations and
small amounts of: mortgage loans, land charges in annuity and other forms, municipal hospitals. — 5 Including contractually agreed loans. 
and debts outstanding. —2Including Equalisation of Burdens Fund. —
57*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
10. Indebtedness of the Federal Government
    
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999, euro million
Treasury Indebtedness
discount paper  1 to non-banks Old debt
Federal Direct
of which Treasury 5 −year Debt lending owing to
Bundes- Treasury paper/ special Federal secur- by credit Social German Equal-
End of year bank financing Treasury Federal savings ities institu- security Other unifica- isationor month Total advances Total paper notes  
2 bonds  2 bonds 2 tions  3,  4 funds 3,  5,  6  tion 7 claims Other  8 
1996 839,883 − 26,789 7,166 55,289 176,164 96,391 434,295 32,988 5 7,766 1,330 8,684 183
1997 905,691 − 25,286 5,221 78,848 177,721 99,317 481,619 31,845 5 870 1,300 8,684 197
1998 957,983 − 24,666 4,558 84,760 199,274 92,698 519,718 24,125 − 2,603 1,270 8,684 186
1999  9 714,069 − 11,553 1,584 44,335 120,498 41,621 379,808 67,872 60 2,568 476 45,175 104
2000 715,819 − 11,516 1,804 44,678 123,642 35,991 400,490 52,836 29 2,099 285 44,146 107
2000         June 723,195 − 11,654 1,690 43,929 122,593 39,200 389,761 67,927 58 2,268 418 45,281 107
         July 729,799 − 11,698 1,701 44,308 122,604 39,233 393,645 71,272 58 2,294 432 44,146 109
         Aug. 731,075 − 11,748 1,751 44,496 120,794 38,781 392,264 75,948 58 2,294 435 44,147 111
         Sep. 730,423 − 11,775 1,778 44,416 121,601 38,131 392,785 74,820 57 2,145 434 44,146 113
         Oct. 725,875 − 11,469 1,757 44,121 122,118 38,130 396,905 66,235 57 2,145 434 44,147 114
         Nov. 724,073 − 11,489 1,777 43,940 122,672 35,991 399,752 63,337 57 2,153 434 44,136 111
         Dec. 715,819 − 11,516 1,804 44,678 123,642 35,991 400,490 52,836 29 2,099 285 44,146 107
2001         Jan. 696,637 − 11,669 1,780 45,391 123,881 35,959 402,794 64,383 29 2,030 288 10,105 107
         Feb. 696,201 − 11,722 1,833 45,557 120,949 34,929 408,471 61,995 29 2,054 283 10,105 107
         Mar. 699,682 − 11,798 1,909 45,431 121,605 34,560 409,855 64,045 29 1,908 238 10,103 110
         Apr. 694,836 − 13,697 1,936 46,075 121,646 33,637 409,536 58,003 29 1,743 237 10,125 110
         May 695,854 − 13,667 1,906 46,884 122,904 32,585 410,081 57,476 29 1,752 236 10,127 113
         June 691,437 − 13,656 1,896 48,966 123,758 30,245 411,401 51,182 29 1,725 238 10,125 113
         July p 699,490 − 17,876 1,842 49,421 124,059 30,305 415,815 50,919 29 1,725 238 8,992 113
1Excluding mobilisation and liquidity paper. In November 1999, including with the return of the troops of the former USSR based in eastern Germany
cash bills. —2Excluding paper in the issuers ’portfolios. —3Including loans to their home country. —8Commutation and compensation debt and old
raised abroad. —4Including money market debt. —5Including loans debt mainly expressed in foreign currency. —9Since July 1, 1999 the
granted by supplementary pension funds for government employees. — Federal Government has assumed joint responsibility for the debts of the
6Including liabilities arising from the investment assistance levy. — Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, the Federal Railway Fund and the
7Assumption of liabilities arising from residential construction of the Equalisation Fund for Safeguarding the Use of Coal. The special funds
former GDR ’s armed forces and from residential construction in connection mentioned are ascribed to the Federal Government from July 1999. 
11. Federal Government borrowing in the market
    
Up to the end of 1998, DM billion / from 1999, euro billion
of which
5−year special Loans against Change in
Total new borrowing Debt Securities Federal bonds Other securities  2 borrowers ’ notes Money money
market market
Period gross  1 net gross  1 net gross  1 net gross  1 net gross net debt deposits
1996 + 185,696 + 83,049 + 54,038 + 31,988 + 45,445 + 5,445 + 67,015 + 39,586 + 15,050 + 1,906 + 4,148 + 6,548
1997 + 250,074 + 65,808 + 79,323 + 47,323 + 59,557 + 1,557 + 98,275 + 24,983 + 12,950 − 8,009 − 30 − 3,304
1998 + 228,050 + 52,292 + 78,304 + 38,099 + 55,078 + 21,553 + 85,706 − 1,327 + 12,023 − 2,927 − 3,065 − 5,440
1999 + 139,865 + 31,631 + 53,931 + 114,080 + 22,229 + 18,610 + 44,904 − 5,836 + 14,861 + 52,897 + 3,937 + 1,832
2000 + 122,725 + 1,750 + 49,395 + 20,682 + 26,342 + 3,144 + 45,278 − 5,323 + 7,273 − 9,973 − 5,563 − 940
2000         Jan.-July + 77,261 + 15,730 + 25,344 + 13,838 + 13,037 + 2,106 + 27,651 − 2,269 + 5,176 − 2,929 + 6,054 − 1,755
2001         Jan.-July  p + 82,110 − 16,329 + 27,066 + 15,325 + 9,243 + 417 + 38,696 + 5,417 + 3,176 − 6,220 + 3,928 + 894
2000         June + 3,845 − 3,877 − 1,371 − 1,371 + 59 + 59 + 4,820 − 1,791 + 835 − 255 − 498 − 343
         July + 13,552 + 6,603 + 3,884 + 3,884 + 11 + 10 + 5,377 + 457 + 666 − 243 + 3,614 + 169
         Aug. + 13,745 + 1,276 + 2,545 − 1,381 + 4,696 − 1,810 + 449 − 214 + 198 − 1,182 + 5,858 − 230
         Sep. + 8,794 − 652 + 522 + 522 + 807 + 807 + 5,169 − 703 + 631 − 2,942 + 1,665 + 255
         Oct. + 11,985 − 4,548 + 12,596 + 4,120 + 517 + 517 + 4,898 − 601 + 379 − 2,179 − 6,406 − 72
         Nov. + 7,820 − 1,801 + 2,847 + 2,847 + 6,515 + 554 + 302 − 2,299 + 679 − 367 − 2,522 − 218
         Dec. + 3,120 − 8,254 + 5,541 + 738 + 770 + 970 + 6,809 + 764 + 211 − 373 −10,211 + 1,080
2001         Jan. + 25,914 − 19,182 + 7,235 + 2,305 + 239 + 239 + 5,852 + 834 + 672 − 437 + 11,915 − 36
         Feb. + 9,423 − 436 + 5,677 + 5,677 + 2,017 − 2,933 + 599 − 811 + 240 − 3,255 + 890 − 859
         Mar. + 11,354 + 3,481 + 1,383 + 1,383 + 657 + 657 + 4,871 − 419 + 832 − 1,707 + 3,611 + 892
         Apr. + 1,271 − 4,845 − 319 − 319 + 41 + 41 + 7,394 + 1,619 + 114 − 249 − 5,958 − 293
         May + 11,835 + 1,018 + 5,447 + 545 + 5,134 + 1,258 + 1,000 − 272 + 562 − 210 − 308 − 273
         June + 5,202 − 4,417 + 1,320 + 1,320 + 854 + 854 + 9,181 − 268 + 113 − 56 − 6,266 + 1,238
         July p + 17,111 + 8,053 + 6,323 + 4,414 + 301 + 301 + 9,800 + 4,734 + 643 − 307 + 44 + 225
1After deduction of repurchases. —2Federal Treasury notes, Federal   
savings bonds, Treasury discount paper, Treasury financing paper.    
58*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
12. Receipts, expenditure and assets of the wage and
salary earners ’ pension insurance funds
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999, euro million
Receipts  1 Expenditure  1 Assets  5 
of which of which Memor-
Balance Mort- andum
Pen- of receipts gage item
Pension sioners ’ and and Adminis-
Contri- Federal pay- health expend- other Real trative
Period Total butions  2 payments Total ments  3 insurance  4 iture Total Deposits  6 Securities loans  7 estate assets
Western Germany
1994 267,265 215,758 48,108 266,443 220,744 14,375 + 822 33,578 24,194 8,170 909 305 6,890
1995 276,302 225,324 47,979 279,226 230,222 15,923 −2,924 21,756 16,801 3,948 746 262 7,800
1996  8 288,761 236,036 50,478 288,716 237,464 16,809 + 45 14,456 9,608 2,119 2,500 229 8,863
1997 305,606 248,463 54,896 295,635 246,011 17,892 + 9,971 14,659 10,179 1,878 2,372 230 9,2611998 317,340 250,063 65,191 304,155 254,783 18,636 + 13,185 18,194 14,201 1,493 2,274 226 9,573
1999  
p 169,124 128,191 39,884 159,819 134,408 9,910 + 9,305 13,623 11,559 824 1,127 114 4,904
2000  p 172,903 128,046 43,563 165,797 139,205 10,237 + 7,106 14,350 11,459 1,676 1,105 110 4,889
2000         2nd qtr 42,199 30,986 10,910 40,428 34,516 2,532 + 1,772 11,636 8,980 1,409 1,119 128 4,936
         3rd qtr 42,891 31,757 10,802 42,262 35,068 2,580 + 628 10,653 7,936 1,483 1,114 121 4,909         4th qtr 46,523 35,287 10,864 41,994 35,047 2,594 + 4,529 14,350 11,459 1,676 1,105 110 4,889
2001         1st qtr 42,472 30,565 11,548 42,251 35,557 2,608 + 221 13,807 10,385 1,601 1,711 109 4,917
         2nd qtr 43,823 31,800 11,657 42,420 35,495 2,610 + 1,403 13,315 10,098 1,406 1,709 102 4,956
Eastern Germany
1994 63,001 40,904 13,783 65,811 53,136 3,376 −2,810 . . . . . .
1995 70,774 44,970 16,408 77,780 63,812 4,362 −7,006 . . . . . .
1996 74,790 46,580 17,910 83,830 68,316 4,851 −9,040 . . . . . .
1997 79,351 48,939 20,065 87,424 70,500 5,388 −8,073 . . . . . .
1998 81,072 47,764 23,564 90,863 73,040 5,757 −9,791 . . . . . .
1999  p 43,214 24,015 14,744 47,641 38,339 3,040 −4,426 . . . . . .
2000  p 42,995 22,654 15,408 49,209 39,505 3,109 −6,214 . . . . . .
2000         2nd qtr 10,054 5,564 3,865 12,241 9,839 774 −2,187 . . . . . .
         3rd qtr 11,100 5,581 3,894 12,394 9,928 780 −1,294 . . . . . .
         4th qtr 11,364 6,074 3,810 12,399 9,892 780 −1,035 . . . . . .
2001         1st qtr 10,748 5,284 4,084 12,489 9,975 782 −1,741 . . . . . .
         2nd qtr 10,954 5,465 4,117 12,512 9,964 777 −1,557 . . . . . .
Source: Federal Minister of Labour and Social Affairs and Association of including nursing insurance scheme for pensioners . —5Largely
German Pension Insurance Funds. —1The annual figures differ from the corresponds to fluctuation reserves. Level at the end of the year or quarter.
sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. From 1993 From 1992 figures for the whole of Germany. —6Including cash
including financial compensation payments. —2Including contributions for resources. —7Excluding loans to other social security funds; including
recipients of public financial benefits. —3Payments by pension insurance participating interests. —8Excluding receipts arising from the higher
funds to health insurance institutions under section 50 of the Social Security valuation of participating interests. Code V have been deducted from pension payments. —4From 1995
13. Receipts and expenditure of the Federal Labour Office
    
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999, euro million
Receipts Expenditure
Subsidies
of which of which or work-
ing fund
Promotion of vocational Promo- Balance credits
Unemployment relief  3,  4 training  4,  5 tion of of receipts of the
winter and Federal
Contri- Western Eastern Western Eastern con- expend- Govern-
Period Total  1 butions Levies  2 Total Total Germany Germany Total Germany Germany struction iture ment
Germany
1994 89,658 81,536 3,822 99,863 48,342 35,163 13,179 31,273 14,382 16,891 1,822 −10,205 10,142
1995 90,211 84,354 2,957 97,103 49,254 36,161 13,094 34,441 16,745 17,696 1,586 −6,892 6,887
1996 91,825 85,073 3,346 105,588 57,123 40,186 16,938 36,478 18,368 18,111 903 −13,763 13,756
1997 93,149 85,793 2,959 102,723 60,273 40,309 19,964 31,418 16,117 15,301 443 −9,574 9,574
1998 91,088 86,165 2,868 98,852 53,483 35,128 18,355 34,279 16,784 17,496 471 −7,764 7,719
1999 47,954 45,141 1,467 51,694 25,177 16,604 8,573 20,558 10,480 10,078 279 −3,740 3,739
2000 49,605 46,359 1,403 50,473 23,946 15,614 8,331 20,324 10,535 9,790 294 − 867 867
2000         2nd qtr 12,113 11,086 334 12,445 6,052 3,894 2,158 4,923 2,560 2,362 106 − 332 491
         3rd qtr 12,335 11,610 403 12,220 5,750 3,747 2,002 4,990 2,542 2,448 10 + 115 − 256
         4th qtr 13,854 12,875 582 13,746 6,050 3,975 2,075 5,997 3,168 2,830 1 + 108 −2,452
2001         1st qtr 11,470 11,092 57 12,842 6,303 4,139 2,165 4,860 2,633 2,226 150 −1,372 3,508
         2nd qtr 12,201 11,452 375 13,356 6,513 4,265 2,248 5,192 2,824 2,368 106 −1,155 1,194
Source: Federal Labour Office. —1Excluding Federal Government liquidity replacement for the unemployment benefits. —4Including contributions to
assistance. —2Levies to promote winter construction and to pay bank- the statutory health insurance, and to the pension insurance funds. —
ruptcy compensation to employees. —3Unemployment benefits, 5Vocational training, measures to foster the commencement of work,
short-time-working benefits. Including the integration allowance paid to rehabilitation and job creation measures. resettlers from eastern Europe and emigrants from the GDR as a
59*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
IX. Economic conditions
  
1. Origin and expenditure of domestic product, distribution of national income    Germany
    
  1995   1996   1997   1998   1999   2000   1999   2000   1997   1998   1999   2000   2000
Change from % of
Item DM billion Euro billion previous year in % total
at  1995  prices
I.Origin of domestic product
Producing sector(excluding construction) 837.8 819.3 837.8 849.9 851.5 893.8 435.4 457.0 2.3 1.4 0.2 5.0 23.3Construction 223.0 214.1 210.9 206.4 201.8 194.1 103.2 99.3 −1.5 −2.1 −2.2 −3.8 5.1
Distribution, catering trade,and transportation  
1 585.8 591.8 598.6 615.2 626.8 652.9 320.5 333.8 1.1 2.8 1.9 4.2 17.0
Financing, rents and corporateservices  
2 893.1 935.3 971.0 1,023.8 1,075.8 1,131.9 550.1 578.7 3.8 5.4 5.1 5.2 29.5
Public and private services  3 713.6 726.5 731.6 737.6 736.5 744.8 376.6 380.8 0.7 0.8 −0.2 1.1 19.4
All economic sectors 3,295.4 3,332.1 3,394.7 3,478.5 3,539.2 3,665.2 1,809.5 1,874.0 1.9 2.5 1.7 3.6 95.4
Memo item: Enterprise sector 2,845.3 2,879.9 2,945.1 3,030.1 3,092.0 3,216.1 1,580.9 1,644.3 2.3 2.9 2.0 4.0 83.7
Economic sectors, adjusted  4 3,176.6 3,202.9 3,254.0 3,325.0 3,372.9 3,486.6 1,724.5 1,782.7 1.6 2.2 1.4 3.4 90.8
Gross domestic product 3,523.0 3,550.0 3,599.6 3,673.5 3,730.7 3,840.8 1,907.5 1,963.8 1.4 2.1 1.6 3.0 100
II.Expenditure of domestic product
Private consumption  5 2,003.9 2,023.6 2,037.2 2,078.5 2,132.1 2,165.3 1,090.1 1,107.1 0.7 2.0 2.6 1.6 56.4
Government consumption 697.8 710.2 704.1 707.7 706.7 716.7 361.3 366.4 −0.9 0.5 −0.1 1.4 18.7
Machinery and equipment 253.9 258.3 268.0 292.5 312.1 340.0 159.5 173.8 3.7 9.2 6.7 9.0 8.9Construction 506.0 491.6 484.4 479.6 481.7 469.7 246.3 240.1 −1.5 −1.0 0.5 −2.5 12.2
Other investment  
6 30.6 34.1 36.1 40.0 45.0 49.3 23.0 25.2 5.9 10.9 12.4 9.7 1.3
Changes in stocks  7 8.1 −8.3 −0.3 15.0 21.0 30.3 10.7 15.5 . . . . 0.8
Domestic demand 3,500.3 3,509.4 3,529.4 3,613.2 3,698.5 3,771.3 1,891.0 1,928.2 0.6 2.4 2.4 2.0 98.2
Net exports 22.7 40.6 70.2 60.3 32.2 69.6 16.4 35.6 . . . . 1.8
Exports 862.6 906.4 1,008.6 1,079.0 1,133.5 1,283.7 579.5 656.3 11.3 7.0 5.1 13.2 33.4Imports 839.9 865.9 938.4 1,018.7 1,101.3 1,214.1 563.1 620.8 8.4 8.6 8.1 10.2 31.6
Gross domestic product 3,523.0 3,550.0 3,599.6 3,673.5 3,730.7 3,840.8 1,907.5 1,963.8 1.4 2.1 1.6 3.0 100
at  current  prices
III.Expenditure of domestic product
Private consumption  5 2,003.9 2,057.5 2,112.3 2,177.9 2,241.1 2,309.1 1,145.9 1,180.6 2.7 3.1 2.9 3.0 58.1
Government consumption 697.8 715.3 713.3 722.4 738.0 750.3 377.3 383.6 −0.3 1.3 2.2 1.7 18.9
Machinery and equipment 253.9 257.9 268.4 293.5 310.4 340.1 158.7 173.9 4.1 9.4 5.8 9.5 8.6Construction 506.0 489.5 481.1 475.3 475.1 466.3 242.9 238.4 −1.7 −1.2 −0.0 −1.8 11.7
Other investment  
6 30.6 33.1 35.1 38.1 41.5 44.3 21.2 22.7 6.1 8.7 8.9 6.7 1.1
Changes in stocks  7 8.1 −4.0 6.2 19.6 33.4 50.7 17.1 25.9 . . . . 1.3
Domestic demand 3,500.3 3,549.2 3,616.4 3,726.9 3,839.6 3,960.8 1,963.1 2,025.1 1.9 3.1 3.0 3.2 99.6
Net exports 22.7 37.3 50.1 57.5 37.6 15.3 19.2 7.8 . . . . 0.4
Exports 862.6 907.5 1,021.1 1,092.4 1,141.6 1,326.2 583.7 678.1 12.5 7.0 4.5 16.2 33.4Imports 839.9 870.2 971.0 1,034.9 1,104.0 1,310.9 564.5 670.3 11.6 6.6 6.7 18.7 33.0
Gross domestic product 3,523.0 3,586.5 3,666.5 3,784.4 3,877.2 3,976.1 1,982.4 2,032.9 2.2 3.2 2.5 2.6 100
IV.Prices (1995=100)
Private consumption 100.0 101.7 103.7 104.8 105.1 106.6 . . 2.0 1.1 0.3 1.4 .Gross domestic product 100.0 101.0 101.9 103.0 103.9 103.5 . . 0.8 1.1 0.9 −0.4 .
Terms of trade 100.0 99.6 97.8 99.7 100.5 95.7 . . −1.8 1.9 0.8 −4.8 .
V.Distribution of national income
Wages and salaries 1,948.5 1,966.1 1,973.2 2,011.7 2,060.3 2,121.5 1,053.4 1,084.7 0.4 2.0 2.4 3.0 72.0Entrepreneurial and propertyincome 708.8 736.4 779.9 820.7 810.9 824.1 414.6 421.4 5.9 5.2 −1.2 1.6 28.0
National income 2,657.3 2,702.5 2,753.1 2,832.4 2,871.2 2,945.6 1,468.0 1,506.1 1.9 2.9 1.4 2.6 100
Memo item: Gross national
income 3,504.4 3,570.9 3,648.6 3,758.6 3,845.9 3,946.9 1,966.4 2,018.0 2.2 3.0 2.3 2.6 .(Gross nat. product)
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in May 2001. —1Includ- on products (offset against subsidies on products). —5Including private
ing telecommunications. —2Financial intermediation, real estate activities, non-commercial organisations. —6Intangible fixed capital formation (inter
rents and corporate services. —3Including care-at-home services. —4Gross alia, EDP software, copyrights) and economically useful animals and
value added after deduction of assumed bank charges, but excluding taxes plants. — 7 Including net increase in valuables. 
60*IX. Economic conditions

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
 IX. Economic conditions 
2. Output in the producing sector Note: With the final figures for June,
 which will be published in the September
 Monthly Report, the main industrial groupings
Adjusted for working-day variations  are newly defined following an EU regulation.
of which:Manufacturing sector
Producing sector, Intermediate Capital goods Durable consumer Other consumer
total Total goods industries  
1 industries goods industries goods industries Construction
Change Change Change Change Change Change Change
from from from from from from fromprevious previous previous previous previous previous previousyear year year year year year year
Period in % in % in % in % in % in % in %
1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 
Germany  
  
1997 102.5 + 2.7 104.4 + 4.0 105.8 + 6.0 105.2 + 4.2 101.9 + 0.8 100.9 + 0.3 89.6 −4.2
1998 106.0 + 3.4 109.5 + 4.9 110.6 + 4.5 113.2 + 7.6 108.3 + 6.3 100.6 −0.3 86.8 −3.1
1999 107.6 + 1.5 111.3 + 1.6 113.5 + 2.6 113.2 + 0.0 112.3 + 3.7 101.9 + 1.3 87.5 + 0.8
2000 113.8 4 + 5.8 119.7 4 + 7.5 121.1 4 + 6.7 125.9 4 + 11.2 121.6 4 + 8.3 104.0 4 + 2.1 85.3 4 −2.5
  
2000         June  3 115.5 + 2.9 122.0 + 5.0 122.9 + 4.6 130.7 + 7.7 121.8 + 2.9 104.5 + 2.6 93.0 −7.6
         July 114.5 + 5.8 119.7 + 7.7 123.2 + 7.2 123.9 + 9.8 117.8 + 14.9 104.2 + 2.1 94.3 −5.9
         Aug. 106.0 + 6.2 110.3 + 8.1 114.9 + 7.4 112.8 + 12.1 95.8 + 6.9 100.9 + 3.2 88.9 −2.8
         Sep. 122.4 + 5.2 129.2 + 7.0 127.6 + 4.2 142.5 + 13.8 132.4 + 6.8 108.7 + 1.9 96.8 −7.0
         Oct. 121.3 + 4.5 127.4 + 6.2 128.7 + 6.0 131.6 + 8.9 135.6 + 6.8 112.7 + 1.9 93.7 −7.0
         Nov. 122.7 + 5.1 129.2 + 6.6 128.4 + 5.2 137.5 + 10.9 138.5 + 7.8 112.0 + 1.4 90.1 −2.6
         Dec. 114.5 4 + 9.4 122.2 4 + 11.4 114.3 4 + 8.1 148.8 4 + 18.4 114.8 4 + 15.8 101.6 4 + 3.7 68.5 4 + 1.3
2001         Jan. 104.9 + 6.5 112.7 + 9.5 116.7 + 7.7 112.7 + 14.2 120.4 + 16.6 98.2 + 3.5 51.8 −12.4
         Feb. 108.3 + 3.0 117.1 + 5.4 118.7 + 3.8 121.7 + 9.4 130.6 + 8.0 97.9 + 1.3 58.3 −14.4
         Mar. 2 121.6 + 1.6 131.4 + 4.1 130.9 + 2.1 142.1 + 7.7 145.8 + 9.2 107.0 + 0.0 2 71.2 −16.4
         Apr.  p + 2 111.5 + 0.2 118.2 + 1.8 119.3 + 0.8 123.8 + 3.4 126.2 + 4.8 101.3 −0.5 2 76.2 −15.1
         May  p + 2 111.7 −2.4 118.2 −1.1 120.9 −2.0 122.1 + 0.6 124.1 −0.4 101.0 −1.8 2 82.5 −13.9
         June  p + 2 116.6 + 1.0 124.7 + 2.2 124.4 + 1.2 134.7 + 3.1 131.6 + 8.0 104.8 + 0.3 2 84.4 −9.2
Western Germany  
  
1997 102.2 + 2.7 103.8 + 3.8 105.2 + 5.7 104.9 + 4.1 101.3 + 0.5 99.4 −0.3 88.9 −3.9
1998 105.8 + 3.5 108.5 + 4.5 109.4 + 4.0 112.9 + 7.6 107.2 + 5.8 99.0 −0.4 87.4 −1.7
1999 106.9 + 1.0 109.8 + 1.2 111.6 + 2.0 112.3 −0.5 110.8 + 3.4 99.9 + 0.9 88.4 + 1.1
2000 113.1 4 + 5.8 117.6 4 + 7.1 118.1 4 + 5.8 125.1 4 + 11.4 120.1 4 + 8.4 101.4 4 + 1.5 87.9 4 −0.6
  
2000         June  3 114.7 + 3.1 119.9 + 4.7 119.9 + 4.0 130.1 + 7.7 120.0 + 2.7 101.6 + 1.9 95.6 −5.7
         July 113.6 + 5.9 117.6 + 7.3 120.1 + 6.5 123.3 + 9.4 115.8 + 14.8 101.8 + 1.7 96.6 −4.4
         Aug. 104.7 + 6.1 108.0 + 7.6 111.8 + 6.2 111.5 + 12.5 94.8 + 7.0 98.2 + 2.0 89.9 −1.3
         Sep. 121.6 + 5.2 127.0 + 6.7 124.2 + 3.2 142.0 + 14.2 130.8 + 6.9 106.3 + 1.6 99.5 −5.8
         Oct. 120.5 + 4.5 125.2 + 6.0 125.3 + 5.2 131.0 + 9.2 134.3 + 7.0 109.9 + 1.5 97.2 −5.2
         Nov. 121.5 + 4.9 126.4 + 6.0 124.8 + 4.3 136.0 + 10.8 136.5 + 7.6 108.8 + 0.7 92.5 −0.9
         Dec. 114.1 4 + 9.5 120.1 4 + 11.3 111.5 4 + 7.4 147.8 4 + 18.8 112.9 4 + 15.6 98.6 4 + 3.1 70.9 4 + 4.0
2001         Jan. 104.6 + 6.5 110.7 + 9.3 113.7 + 7.1 112.1 + 14.4 118.1 + 15.6 95.7 + 2.8 53.6 −11.7
         Feb. 108.2 + 3.1 115.1 + 5.2 115.9 + 3.5 121.0 + 9.6 128.4 + 7.3 95.6 + 0.8 61.6 −13.4
         Mar. 2 121.4 + 1.6 129.2 + 3.9 127.9 + 1.9 141.3 + 7.4 143.2 + 8.6 104.1 −0.5 2 75.6 −14.3
         Apr.  p + 2 111.0 + 0.4 116.1 + 1.8 116.3 + 0.6 123.3 + 4.0 124.2 + 4.5 98.4 −0.9 2 80.4 −13.7
         May  p + 2 111.0 −2.2 115.8 −1.4 117.8 −2.2 121.2 + 0.5 122.0 −0.8 97.8 −2.3 2 86.8 −12.4
         June  p + 2 115.8 + 1.0 122.3 + 2.0 121.0 + 0.9 133.8 + 2.8 129.6 + 8.0 101.6 + 0.0 2 88.0 −7.9
Eastern Germany  
  
1997 105.6 + 3.5 115.8 + 9.3 116.5 + 11.6 110.9 + 6.7 121.4 + 11.7 118.9 + 7.6 92.2 −4.8
1998 109.0 + 3.2 127.1 + 9.8 133.4 + 14.5 119.9 + 8.1 142.3 + 17.2 120.5 + 1.3 84.9 −7.9
1999 114.4 + 5.0 137.2 + 7.9 146.4 + 9.7 128.5 + 7.2 157.9 + 11.0 125.3 + 4.0 84.1 −0.9
2000 121.9 + 6.6 155.5 + 13.3 173.4 + 18.4 140.9 + 9.6 172.0 + 8.9 134.8 + 7.6 75.9 −9.8
  
2000         June  3 124.8 + 2.9 158.4 + 10.4 175.4 + 12.3 143.2 + 9.2 182.4 + 10.1 138.6 + 7.5 83.7 −14.1
         July 125.0 + 5.9 155.8 + 13.6 177.0 + 15.8 135.4 + 15.5 182.0 + 17.7 133.7 + 4.9 86.4 −11.3
         Aug. 121.3 + 8.1 150.2 + 15.9 169.8 + 24.2 136.4 + 4.6 129.1 + 5.8 133.2 + 14.4 85.5 −8.2
         Sep. 131.3 + 4.5 166.6 + 10.9 188.5 + 17.6 152.5 + 6.4 182.8 + 3.5 137.8 + 3.3 87.2 −11.7
         Oct. 130.1 + 4.0 166.1 + 11.3 189.2 + 16.6 142.8 + 7.1 177.3 + 1.1 147.0 + 7.1 81.2 −14.3
         Nov. 135.9 + 7.0 176.0 + 13.5 192.4 + 16.7 165.9 + 12.8 202.1 + 9.5 151.1 + 8.5 81.2 −9.5
         Dec. 119.4 + 8.3 158.8 + 13.9 163.2 + 16.7 165.7 + 11.7 176.7 + 22.1 138.6 + 8.6 59.9 −8.4
2001         Jan. 109.1 + 7.3 148.6 + 14.1 169.3 + 13.8 124.4 + 12.8 196.0 + 41.6 127.9 + 10.3 45.5 −14.5
         Feb. 109.2 + 1.7 150.6 + 7.9 168.7 + 7.7 133.9 + 6.0 200.9 + 24.3 125.4 + 6.0 46.3 −19.5
         Mar. 2 123.3 + 0.7 169.5 + 8.5 184.3 + 5.3 157.8 + 14.2 231.0 + 24.1 142.7 + 5.5 2 55.5 −25.2
         Apr.  p + 2 116.4 −2.8 154.1 + 1.6 172.4 + 2.9 132.8 −4.0 191.6 + 11.2 136.4 + 3.1 2 61.2 −20.5
         May  p + 2 120.5 −2.9 158.8 + 1.7 177.6 + 0.1 138.1 + 1.7 191.7 + 10.9 140.4 + 3.1 2 66.9 −20.1
         June  p + 2 125.5 + 0.6 166.6 + 5.2 184.5 + 5.2 151.8 + 6.0 197.5 + 8.3 143.6 + 3.6 2 71.4 −14.7
Source: Federal Statistical Office. —1Excluding electricity and gas supply mated. —+Adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical Office by way of
and excluding mining and quarrying. —2Provisional until the adjustment estimates to the results of the Quarterly Production Survey for the second
to the figures of the annual overall survey in construction. —3Figures in- quarter (manufacturing sector in Germany: + 1/2% on average). 
fluenced by the exceptional working-day situation. —4Presumably overesti-
61* IX. Economic conditions

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
 IX. Economic conditions
 
3. Orders received by the manufacturing sector *)Note: With the final figures for June,
 which will be published in the September
 Monthly Report, the main industrial groupings
Adjusted for working-day variations  o  are newly defined following an EU regulation.
Manufacturing
 Durable and non-durable
Intermediate goods consumer goods
Total Domestic orders Foreign orders industries industries Capital goods industries
Change Change Change Change Change Change
from from from from from fromprevious previous previous previous previous previousyear year year year year year
Period 1995=100 in % 1995=100 in % 1995=100 in % 1995=100 in % 1995=100 in % 1995=100 in %
Germany  
  
1997 107.1 + 7.2 99.0 + 2.2 121.6 + 15.3 107.1 + 9.2 108.8 + 7.1 103.4 + 2.0
1998 110.9 + 3.5 102.9 + 3.9 125.4 + 3.1 108.6 + 1.4 116.0 + 6.6 107.0 + 3.51999 113.3 + 2.2 102.7 − 0.2 132.3 + 5.5 110.8 + 2.0 117.6 + 1.4 111.3 + 4.0
2000 129.1 + 13.9 111.3 + 8.4 161.2 + 21.8 126.1 + 13.8 137.9 + 17.3 119.6 + 7.5
 
2000         June 133.3 + 16.1 114.6 + 9.9 167.2 + 25.2 129.8 + 16.6 148.6 + 20.0 112.5 + 5.5
         July 130.2 + 15.2 113.2 + 9.4 160.9 + 23.8 127.8 + 13.4 139.7 + 20.7 118.1 + 9.0
         Aug. 121.8 + 11.4 107.0 + 7.4 148.2 + 17.0 120.9 + 15.1 126.1 + 9.9 115.6 + 4.8         Sep. 136.3 + 10.9 116.6 + 6.6 171.8 + 16.3 134.2 + 13.5 141.3 + 8.6 132.0 + 8.5
         Oct. 134.8 + 12.2 114.0 + 4.5 172.1 + 23.2 132.8 + 11.6 142.6 + 15.2 124.6 + 7.9
         Nov. 134.7 + 11.0 115.3 + 5.6 169.4 + 18.4 130.4 + 8.0 146.2 + 16.5 122.9 + 7.3         Dec. 129.5 + 15.6 105.4 + 8.1 172.9 + 25.4 119.4 + 9.5 152.3 + 24.7 111.0 + 11.1
2001         Jan. 127.9 + 12.1 108.8 + 8.3 162.0 + 17.0 126.3 + 11.2 132.4 + 12.4 123.2 + 13.9
         Feb. 130.7 + 6.1 111.2 + 2.9 165.7 + 10.4 125.2 + 4.8 136.0 + 7.1 134.6 + 7.4         Mar. 141.9 + 2.1 123.1 + 3.5 175.7 + 0.2 134.3 + 0.6 151.3 + 2.2 143.3 + 5.8
         Apr. 125.0 − 0.9 108.7 − 1.5 154.3 +
 0.0 123.5 − 0.4 127.7 − 4.7 123.4 + 6.7
         May 127.5 + 1.0 107.9 − 2.9 162.7 + 5.9 125.7 − 1.2 134.0 + 2.0 119.0 + 5.0
         June  p 131.7 − 1.2 108.2 − 5.6 173.9 + 4.0 127.7 − 1.6 142.4 − 4.2 121.6 + 8.1
Western Germany  
  
1997 107.1 + 6.9 98.8 + 1.9 121.2 + 14.7 106.4 + 8.7 110.0 + 7.0 103.1 + 1.8
1998 110.2 + 2.9 102.4 + 3.6 123.5 + 1.9 107.2 + 0.8 116.3 + 5.7 106.0 + 2.81999 112.2 + 1.8 101.8 − 0.6 130.1 + 5.3 108.9 + 1.6 117.9 + 1.4 110.1 + 3.9
2000 127.6 + 13.7 109.8 + 7.9 158.2 + 21.6 123.4 + 13.3 138.3 + 17.3 118.1 + 7.3
 
2000         June 131.5 + 16.0 113.2 + 9.7 163.0 + 24.4 127.0 + 16.4 148.3 + 19.8 110.9 + 5.4
         July 128.4 + 14.6 111.4 + 8.9 157.7 + 22.6 124.8 + 12.7 139.7 + 20.1 116.3 + 8.5
         Aug. 120.8 + 11.6 105.8 + 6.9 146.3 + 18.1 118.1 + 15.4 127.1 + 10.0 115.5 + 5.1         Sep. 135.2 + 10.6 115.4 + 6.6 169.4 + 16.0 131.2 + 13.0 143.1 + 8.9 131.0 + 8.9
         Oct. 133.4 + 12.1 112.4 + 4.0 169.4 + 23.0 129.8 + 10.9 143.7 + 15.6 122.9 + 7.8
         Nov. 132.7 + 11.3 113.4 + 5.3 165.4 + 19.1 127.2 + 7.1 146.4 + 18.7 120.5 + 7.1         Dec. 126.9 + 14.4 102.9 + 6.4 168.1 + 24.1 117.0 + 9.0 149.6 + 22.2 109.1 + 10.6
2001         Jan. 126.4 + 11.5 107.4 + 7.8 158.6 + 15.8 123.3 + 10.5 133.2 + 12.0 121.1 + 12.7
         Feb. 128.7 + 5.1 109.9 + 2.3 160.9 + 8.6 121.3 + 3.3 136.8 + 6.7 132.7 + 6.8         Mar. 139.8 + 1.6 121.2 + 2.8 171.7 + 0.2 130.8 − 0.2 151.2 + 1.7 141.3 + 5.5
         Apr. 122.7 − 1.3 106.4 − 1.8 150.6 − 0.7 120.4 − 0.9 126.4 − 5.2 121.4 + 6.8
         May 125.2 + 0.2 105.9 − 3.6 158.4 + 5.1 122.5 − 1.6 133.3 + 0.8 116.8 + 4.7
         June  
p 129.8 − 1.3 106.5 − 5.9 169.3 + 3.9 123.9 − 2.4 142.8 − 3.7 119.8 + 8.0
Eastern Germany  
  
1997 107.6 + 12.3 101.6 + 6.6 137.4 + 39.6 120.4 + 16.6 91.9 + 8.5 112.8 + 6.9
1998 124.1 + 15.3 109.7 + 8.0 196.4 + 42.9 133.0 + 10.5 112.0 + 21.9 132.4 + 17.41999 130.1 + 4.8 114.1 + 4.0 210.1 + 7.0 142.9 + 7.4 112.9 + 0.8 140.3 + 6.0
2000 153.9 + 18.3 130.0 + 13.9 273.2 + 30.0 171.9 + 20.3 133.0 + 17.8 156.9 + 11.8
 
2000         June 163.4 + 20.1 131.4 + 11.3 323.7 + 43.2 174.5 + 19.4 153.2 + 24.5 155.6 + 9.1
         July 160.7 + 24.4 136.8 + 15.9 280.4 + 51.9 178.3 + 19.7 140.3 + 32.1 164.4 + 23.4
         Aug. 138.9 + 9.0 123.3 + 14.7 216.4 − 4.5 168.4 + 11.7 112.2 + 8.0 117.6 − 0.8
         Sep. 155.0 + 14.1 133.8 + 9.6 261.6 + 28.6 186.3 + 22.3 119.0 + 6.4 160.2 + 2.9
         Oct. 158.2 + 14.0 134.8 + 8.7 274.9 + 29.5 184.2 + 19.7 127.3 + 8.9 165.5 + 6.0
         Nov. 167.9 + 7.5 137.9 + 7.5 317.5 + 7.4 186.1 + 21.4 143.6 − 8.6 182.0 + 11.3
         Dec. 172.9 + 35.4 138.1 + 28.6 348.1 + 51.3 162.7 + 18.5 188.5 + 61.5 158.7 + 22.1
2001         Jan. 152.7 + 21.3 125.6 + 12.3 288.8 + 47.0 175.4 + 17.7 121.5 + 20.8 174.3 + 39.4
         Feb. 163.5 + 20.4 128.5 + 9.5 339.4 + 48.9 194.2 + 25.8 124.1 + 13.1 182.1 + 17.9         Mar. 176.9 + 8.9 146.3 + 11.8 330.5 + 3.0 194.5 + 9.9 151.7 + 6.5 197.0 + 11.6
         Apr. 164.1 + 5.3 137.7 + 0.5 295.7 + 18.3 179.6 + 7.8 143.9 + 1.8 174.0 + 5.6
         May 164.0 + 9.8 132.1 + 3.9 323.8 + 24.3 180.7 + 2.8 141.6 + 20.6 177.0 + 11.6         June  
p 165.5 + 1.3 130.5 − 0.7 341.4 + 5.5 191.7 + 9.9 136.0 −11.2 167.2 + 7.5
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. —*Excluding manu- units; figures excluding value-added tax. — o Bundesbank calculation. 
facture of food products, beverages and tobacco; results for kinds of activity
62* IX. Economic conditions

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
 IX. Economic conditions
 
4. Orders received by construction *   
  
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Germany Western Germany Eastern Germany
Housing Public Housing Public Housing Public Industrial Industrial Industrial
con- construc- construc- con- construc- construc- con- construc- construc-
Total struction tion  1 tion Total struction tion  1 tion Total struction tion  1 tion
 Change Change Change
 from from from
 previous previous previous
 year year year
Period 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 in % 1995 = 100 in % 1995 = 100 in %
1997 84.4 −8.3 87.4 81.1 86.2 86.1 −5.3 87.7 85.5 85.7 80.4 −15.2 86.8 71.0 87.7
1998 84.0 −0.5 82.4 80.0 90.1 86.6 + 0.6 83.3 86.7 88.8 77.7 −3.4 80.4 64.6 93.8
1999 82.2 −2.1 78.2 80.2 87.6 87.3 + 0.8 84.1 88.7 88.1 70.0 −9.9 66.3 61.2 86.2
2000 75.1 −8.6 65.4 75.6 82.1 81.2 −7.0 73.3 84.9 82.7 60.5 −13.6 49.2 54.4 80.3
   
2000         May 82.7 −7.7 70.8 82.1 92.8 90.1 −4.8 78.1 93.6 94.6 65.4 −16.0 55.9 56.2 87.8
         June 87.4 −11.2 77.2 82.1 101.9 91.3 −10.2 81.9 87.8 102.0 78.3 −13.6 67.7 69.1 101.7
         July 80.2 −12.2 68.3 79.5 90.5 87.2 −11.2 78.2 91.2 89.0 63.7 −14.8 47.9 52.9 94.7
         Aug. 73.3 −14.0 63.9 68.9 86.1 76.7 −15.1 71.3 75.1 82.3 65.3 −10.7 48.7 54.7 96.7
         Sep. 84.4 −9.5 66.6 88.5 93.4 92.7 −5.7 76.9 102.4 92.9 64.8 −20.4 45.4 57.0 94.9
         Oct. 73.3 −10.8 60.3 71.7 85.6 81.0 −10.0 73.1 80.6 87.1 55.2 −13.1 34.0 51.5 81.3
         Nov. 63.2 −4.2 51.0 68.1 66.6 68.5 −1.7 60.3 76.3 65.3 50.6 −11.4 32.1 49.4 70.5
         Dec. 69.4 −3.2 50.9 75.2 76.7 77.2 −0.1 58.3 87.7 78.7 50.8 −13.3 35.7 46.9 71.2
2001         Jan. 51.2 −8.6 47.2 60.5 43.0 58.4 −3.5 58.0 70.1 45.1 34.3 −24.4 25.0 38.8 37.0
         Feb. 57.2 −7.9 49.0 58.2 62.4 65.0 −3.8 57.6 67.1 67.9 38.6 −21.1 31.3 38.0 46.7
         Mar. 79.6 −11.1 67.3 82.5 85.7 89.1 −7.6 81.7 93.4 89.3 57.2 −22.2 37.7 58.0 75.4
         Apr. 75.2 −5.2 59.1 77.3 85.3 86.0 + 0.4 70.9 91.7 90.1 49.7 −22.7 34.9 44.6 71.6
         May 80.6 −2.5 62.1 79.6 96.2 89.4 −0.8 71.5 93.0 98.1 59.5 −9.0 42.8 49.1 90.9
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. —*Values exclusive gineering". —oBundesbank calculation. —1Including the railways and
of value-added tax. The figures refer to the economic classifications "Site pre- post office. paration" and "Building of complete constructions or parts thereof; civil en-
 
 
5. Retail turnover *   
    Germany
  
Retail trade, total of which: By enterprises ’ main product range:
Pharmaceutical
including excluding and medical
goods, cosmetic Clothing, Furniture retail sales of motor vehicles retail sales of motor vehicles
and motorcycles and of and motorcycles and Food, beverages, and toilet footwear and and lightingautomotive fuel of automotive fuel tobacco  
2 articles  2 leather goods  2 equipment  2 Motor vehicles  3 
 Change from  Change from  Change  Change  Change  Change  Change
from from from from from previous year in % previous year in %
previous previous previous previous previous
Period not not year year year year year price- price-
in % in % in % in % in % 1995 = 100 adjusted adjusted  1 1995 = 100 adjusted adjusted  1 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100
1997 100.9 −0.4 −0.9 99.0 −1.3 −1.8 98.6 −1.4 105.8 + 1.8 97.2 −2.0 95.8 −2.6 109.1 + 3.5
1998 102.7 + 1.8 + 1.6 100.1 + 1.1 + 1.1 99.9 + 1.3 111.9 + 5.8 96.1 −1.1 99.6 + 4.0 115.1 + 5.5
1999 103.8 + 1.1 + 0.7 100.8 + 0.7 + 0.4 100.8 + 0.9 120.0 + 7.2 96.1 + 0.0 97.4 −2.2 119.3 + 3.6
2000 104.9 + 1.1 −0.1 102.9 + 2.1 + 1.0 102.6 + 1.8 126.7 + 5.6 96.0 −0.1 95.6 −1.8 115.4 −3.3
 
1999         Dec. 125.9 + 1.4 + 0.5 129.0 + 1.9 + 1.0 122.4 + 1.1 140.6 + 1.7 123.3 + 0.8 124.6 −1.7 117.0 −0.9
2000         Jan. 91.0 −0.5 −1.6 90.8 −0.5 −1.2 91.0 −0.4 121.2 + 5.7 78.5 −10.4 82.3 −4.7 94.3 −1.5
         Feb. 96.4 + 8.2 + 6.8 94.1 + 7.5 + 6.1 94.4 + 3.9 119.6 + 7.4 79.2 + 19.3 95.6 + 7.9 108.8 + 9.9         Mar. 110.7 −3.0 −4.1 104.6 −2.7 −3.7 107.3 −0.4 126.0 −0.9 91.0 −11.7 103.8 −4.0 138.7 −4.9
         Apr. 105.0 + 1.0 + 0.4 101.8 + 3.6 + 3.0 103.5 + 2.2 118.4 + 2.3 104.2 + 7.6 91.9 −3.7 119.9 −7.6
         May 112.6 + 11.2 + 10.2 107.3 + 11.5 + 10.8 108.1 + 9.6 133.2 + 16.7 103.9 + 6.2 96.6 + 8.9 136.5 + 9.8         June 99.5 −3.1 −4.2 95.3 −0.6 −1.6 100.4 + 2.4 122.0 + 2.3 82.6 −6.9 83.3 −8.8 118.6 −11.6
         July 101.3 −3.9 −4.9 98.1 −2.5 −3.3 98.3 −4.7 124.4 + 1.5 89.7 −8.3 89.2 −3.0 116.6 −8.9
         Aug. 101.2 + 5.1 + 3.7 99.4 + 6.1 + 4.8 99.8 + 5.2 124.8 + 9.8 89.1 + 5.2 84.5 −0.1 110.0 + 1.2
         Sep. 101.8 + 2.7 + 0.7 100.9 + 5.0 + 2.9 98.7 + 3.1 123.4 + 4.6 99.9 + 13.3 91.9 −2.3 107.3 −5.8
         Oct. 105.1 −0.9 −2.6 104.3 −0.4 −1.9 100.9 + 0.4 128.5 + 7.4 106.1 −6.6 100.3 −3.8 111.1 −3.6
         Nov. 110.9 + 0.8 −0.7 110.7 + 1.8 + 0.3 107.0 + 2.5 132.7 + 7.6 103.7 −2.0 110.8 −0.1 115.3 −3.4
         Dec. 123.2 −2.1 −3.3 127.6 −1.1 −2.2 121.7 −0.6 146.1 + 3.9 123.7 + 0.3 117.3 −5.9 108.1 −7.6
2001         Jan. 96.7 + 6.3 + 5.1 96.8 + 6.6 + 5.3 96.0 + 5.5 134.4 + 10.9 83.7 + 6.6 88.8 + 7.9 99.2 + 5.2
         Feb. 92.2 −4.4 −5.4 90.2 −4.1 −5.1 92.9 −1.6 121.7 + 1.8 73.2 −7.6 88.3 −7.6 102.6 −5.7
         Mar. 112.8 + 1.9 + 0.7 107.5 + 2.8 + 1.5 110.8 + 3.3 135.2 + 7.3 95.5 + 4.9 104.0 + 0.2 137.6 −0.8
         Apr. 107.2 + 2.1 + 0.2 103.9 + 2.1 + 0.2 107.9 + 4.3 129.7 + 9.5 98.8 −5.2 92.4 + 0.5 122.8 + 2.4
         May 111.4 −1.1 −3.2 107.2 −0.1 −2.4 111.1 + 2.8 137.9 + 3.5 104.1 + 0.2 91.5 −5.3 130.2 −4.6
         June 102.4 + 2.9 + 0.6 98.3 + 3.1 + 0.9 104.0 + 3.6 130.9 + 7.3 83.7 + 1.3 85.5 + 2.6 121.1 + 2.1
Source: Federal Statistical Office. —*Excluding value-added tax; figures 3 Including motor vehicle parts and accessories. 
from 2000 provisional. —1At 1995 prices. —2Retail sales in stores. —
63* IX. Economic conditions

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
 IX. Economic conditions
 
6. Labour market * 
  
 
Persons in
Employed  1,2,r Employees  1 employment  3 Unemployed
Persons
Mining employed Personsand under under-manu- employ- goingfactur- Short- ment pro- Change vocational
Change from Change ing Con- time motion further from Unem-previous year from sector workers training previous ploy- schemes  
5 struction  4 
previous year, ment Vacancies,
Thou- Thou- Thou- year Thou- thou- rate  6 thou-
Period sands in % sands sands in % Thousands sands sands in % sands
Germany  
  
1998 37,609 + 1.1 + 398 33,560 + 0.8 7 6,400 1,159 115 385 8 343 4,279 −105 11.1 422
1999 38,083 + 1.3 + 475 34,003 + 1.3 6,370 1,111 119 430 358 4,099 −180 10.5 456
2000 38,704 + 1.6 + 621 34,589 + 1.7 6,373 1,053 86 316 352 3,889 −211 9.6 514
2000         July 38,765 + 1.6 + 598 6,398 1,065 66 320 332 3,804 −224 9.3 553
         Aug. 38,858 + 1.4 + 545 34,823 + 1.6 6,428 1,068 62 321 335 3,781 −243 9.3 544
         Sep. 39,117 + 1.4 + 533 6,432 1,064 66 320 368 3,685 −258 9.0 525
         Oct. 39,240 + 1.3 + 518 6,420 1,054 66 319 389 3,611 −272 8.9 491
         Nov. 39,151 + 1.2 + 464 35,108 + 1.6 6,419 1,041 70 307 388 3,645 −255 8.9 468
         Dec. 38,988 + 1.0 + 392 6,393 1,012 70 287 359 3,809 −238 9.3 454
2001         Jan. 38,315 + 0.8 + 287 6,378 949 92 258 356 4,093 −200 10.0 484
         Feb. 38,290 + 0.6 + 215 34,329 + 1.1 6,382 918 122 252 359 4,113 −164 10.1 544
         Mar. 38,458 + 0.4 + 135 6,390 p 928 130 245 363 4,000 −141 9.8 578
         Apr. 38,599 + 0.2 + 72 6,384 p 942 119 246 365 3,868 −118 9.5 580
         May o 38,655 o + 0.0 o + 18 ... ... 6,385 p 950 111 248 368 3,721 − 689 9.0 559
         June ... ... ... ... ... 109 245 354 3,694 − 30 8.9 542
         July ... ... ... ... ... 102 242 324 3,799 − 5 9.2 522
Western Germany  
  
1998 . . . . . 7 5,813 804 81 71 8 193 2,904 −117 9.4 342
1999 . . . . . 5,775 775 92 82 215 2,756 −149 8.8 386
2000 . . . . . 5,761 749 62 70 212 2,529 −226 7.8 452
2000         July . . . . . 5,785 755 45 72 198 2,466 −226 7.5 488
         Aug. . . . . . 5,808 759 42 72 202 2,444 −234 7.4 478
         Sep. . . . . . 5,810 757 47 71 221 2,383 −240 7.2 461
         Oct. . . . . . 5,797 752 48 71 235 2,343 −248 7.1 433
         Nov. . . . . . 5,797 744 52 70 236 2,360 −244 7.2 413
         Dec. . . . . . 5,774 727 53 66 219 2,454 −236 7.4 405
2001         Jan. . . . . . 5,761 687 69 64 215 2,622 −205 8.0 431
         Feb. . . . . . 5,764 670 91 64 218 2,623 −174 8.0 481
         Mar. . . . . . 5,769 p 679 97 63 222 2,539 −152 7.7 506
         Apr. . . . . . 5,761 p 689 x 88x 64x 225 x 2,474 x −112 x 7.5 x 505
         May . . . . . 5,760 p 693 84 65 226 2,385 − 749 7.1 485
         June . . . . . ... ... 83 63 215 2,380 − 46 7.1 469
         July . . . . . ... ... 80 62 196 2,445 − 21 7.3 453
Eastern Germany  
  
1998 . . . . . 7 586 355 34 314 8 149 1,375 + 11 18.2 79
1999 . . . . . 595 336 27 348 143 1,344 − 31 17.6 70
2000 . . . . . 612 305 24 246 140 1,359 + 16 17.4 62
2000         July . . . . . 613 310 22 248 134 1,337 + 2 17.0 65
         Aug. . . . . . 620 309 20 249 133 1,337 − 9 17.0 65
         Sep. . . . . . 622 307 19 249 146 1,302 − 19 16.6 64
         Oct. . . . . . 623 302 18 248 154 1,268 − 24 16.1 59
         Nov. . . . . . 623 298 18 237 152 1,285 − 12 16.3 54
         Dec. . . . . . 619 286 17 221 140 1,355 − 2 17.2 50
2001         Jan. . . . . . 617 262 23 195 140 1,471 + 4 18.7 54
         Feb. . . . . . 619 249 30 188 140 1,490 + 10 18.9 63         Mar. . . . . . 620
p 249 33 182 140 1,461 + 10 18.6 72
         Apr. . . . . . 623 p 253 x 30x 181 x 140 x 1,394 x − 6x 17.7 x 75
         May . . . . . 625 p 256 28 183 142 1,336 + 6 9 17.0 74
         June . . . . . ... ... 25 182 139 1,314 + 16 16.8 73
         July . . . . . ... ... 22 180 128 1,354 + 16 17.3 69
Source: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Labour Office. —*Monthly fig- total civilian labour force. —7From January 1998, figures favourably affec-
ures: levels at end of month; employed persons and employees: averages; ted by including, for the first time, enterprises which were identified in theshort-time workers: levels at mid-month; annual and quarterly figures: aver- 1995 survey of craft enterprises and which are now required to report. —
ages. —1Work-place concept. —2Annual figures, calculated by the Bundes- 8Comparison with previous periods not possible because of the deletion of
bank; deviations from the official figures are due to rounding. —3In- payments towards on-the-job training, vocational assistance measures and
cluding active proprietors. —4The figures refer to the economic classifica- methodological changes in the collection of statistics. —9From May 2001
tions ”Site preparation ”and ”Building of complete constructions or parts calculated on the basis of new labour force figures. —xFrom 2001, change
thereof; civil engineering ”.—5Employees involved in job creation schemes against previous periods overstated for western Germany and understated
and receiving productive grants towards labour costs (up to December 1997 for eastern Germany owing to restructuring of labour exchange districts inapproved cases) and (from January 1998 approved, but from April 1998 statis- Berlin. — o First preliminary estimate. 
tically recorded) structural adjustment measures (SAM). —6Relative to the
64* IX. Economic conditions

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
 IX. Economic conditions
 
7. Prices
 Germany
  
Consumer price index for all households Indices of
foreign trade prices
By region By product group Index of
producer
Other prices of Index ofdurable Overall industrial Index of worldand non- Services con- products producer marketdurable excluding struction prices prices sold on the
Western Eastern consumer house House price domestic of farm of raw
Total Germany Germany Food goods  
r rents  1 rents level  1 market  2 Exports Imports products  2 materials  3 
Period 1995 = 100
Index level  
  
1997 103.3 103.2 104.2 102.1 101.8 104.1 106.3 99.0 99.9 100.5 101.5 104.0 122.8
1998 104.3 104.1 105.3 103.0 101.9 106.1 108.0 98.8 99.5 95.6 101.4 100.7 97.01999 104.9 104.8 105.7 101.9 102.8 106.4 109.2 98.5 98.5 89.9 100.9 100.2 113.5
2000 106.9 106.9 107.5 101.5 106.1 108.0 110.6 99.2 101.8 95.1 104.4 111.4 172.2
 
1999         Sep. 105.1 105.0 105.8 100.2 103.5 106.7 109.4 98.9 91.1 101.3 101.7 131.4
         Oct. 105.0 104.9 105.7 99.9 103.6 106.2 109.5 99.1 90.2 101.5 102.1 126.4
         Nov. 105.2 105.1 105.8 100.1 103.7 106.4 109.7 98.7 99.2 91.4 101.7 103.5 138.1         Dec. 105.5 105.5 106.0 100.4 104.1 107.0 109.7 99.4 91.9 102.1 105.2 145.2
2000         Jan. 105.8 105.7 106.4 101.3 104.5 106.9 110.0 99.8 90.7 102.4 106.0 146.5
         Feb. 106.2 106.1 106.9 102.0 104.7 107.6 110.2 98.9 100.0 92.9 102.8 107.8 157.1         Mar. 106.4 106.3 107.0 101.3 105.3 107.4 110.3 100.0 94.1 103.1 108.7 161.5
         Apr. 106.4 106.3 107.0 101.9 104.9 107.7 110.4 100.4 94.1 103.6 108.4 149.9
         May 106.3 106.2 107.0 102.2 105.1 107.0 110.5 99.2 101.0 94.7 104.3 110.6 172.1         June 106.9 106.8 107.5 102.2 105.9 107.9 110.6 101.3 96.1 104.3 110.7 170.2
         July 107.4 107.3 107.9 101.8 106.1 109.4 110.7 102.0 96.8 104.6 111.1 167.7
         Aug. 107.2 107.2 107.8 101.0 106.1 109.2 110.8 99.3 102.3 97.2 105.0 112.7 179.2         Sep. 107.7 107.6 108.0 100.7 107.6 108.3 110.9 103.2 97.3 105.6 115.3 197.6
         Oct. 107.5 107.4 107.8 100.6 107.4 107.7 111.0 103.7 98.8 105.9 115.8 198.2
         Nov. 107.7 107.7 108.3 101.1 107.8 108.1 111.0 99.5 103.9 99.9 105.9 116.4 201.1         Dec. 107.8 107.7 108.3 101.8 107.5 108.4 111.1 103.6 98.5 105.5 113.8 165.3
2001         Jan. 108.3 108.2 109.1 103.5 107.3 109.8 111.4 104.4 95.6 105.3 112.9 158.8
         Feb. 109.0 108.9 109.8 103.9 108.1 111.0 111.5 99.5 104.7 97.9 105.4 113.6 167.3         Mar. 109.1 109.0 110.0 105.1 108.2 110.7 111.6 104.9 102.1 105.6 113.3 161.2
         Apr. 109.5 109.3 110.4 107.0 108.5 110.4 111.7 105.4
p 102.3 105.7 113.9 166.4
         May 110.0 109.8 111.1 109.0 109.2 110.3 111.8 99.5 105.6 p 102.5 106.0 115.0 175.4
         June 110.2 110.0 111.2 109.3 109.0 111.2 111.9 105.7 ... 106.0 114.7 176.1
         July 110.2 110.0 111.3 108.7 108.4 112.7 112.0 ... ... ... ... 166.0
Change from previous year in %  
  
1997 + 1.9 + 1.9 + 2.3 + 1.2 + 1.3 + 2.5 + 2.8 − 0.8 + 1.1 + 1.0 + 1.5 + 3.6 + 13.2
1998 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 1.1 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 1.9 + 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 4.9 − 0.1 − 3.2 −21.0
1999 + 0.6 + 0.7 + 0.4 − 1.1 + 0.9 + 0.3 + 1.1 − 0.3 − 1.0 − 6.0 − 0.5 − 0.5 + 17.0
2000 + 1.9 + 2.0 + 1.7 − 0.4 + 3.2 + 1.5 + 1.3 + 0.7 + 3.4 + 5.8 + 3.5 + 11.2 + 51.7
 
1999         Sep. + 0.7 + 0.8 + 0.4 − 1.7 + 1.5 + 0.2 + 1.0 − 0.5 − 4.5 + 0.2 + 2.7 + 40.7
         Oct. + 0.8 + 0.9 + 0.5 − 1.5 + 1.7 + 0.1 + 1.1 + 0.2 − 3.1 + 0.8 + 4.2 + 44.5
         Nov. + 1.0 + 1.0 + 0.5 − 1.6 + 1.8 + 0.5 + 1.3 + 0.0 + 0.7 − 1.2 + 1.1 + 5.9 + 60.2
         Dec. + 1.2 + 1.3 + 0.7 − 1.7 + 2.4 + 0.8 + 1.2 + 1.1 − 4.0 + 1.7 + 8.2 + 81.3
2000         Jan. + 1.6 + 1.7 + 1.3 − 1.7 + 3.0 + 1.6 + 1.2 + 2.0 − 2.1 + 2.3 + 9.2 + 76.1
         Feb. + 1.8 + 1.9 + 1.5 − 1.1 + 3.4 + 1.3 + 1.3 + 0.4 + 2.4 − 0.1 + 2.6 + 10.9 + 87.7
         Mar. + 1.9 + 1.9 + 1.6 − 1.7 + 3.6 + 1.1 + 1.3 + 2.4 + 0.9 + 2.8 + 10.9 + 72.0
         Apr. + 1.5 + 1.6 + 1.3 − 1.5 + 2.0 + 2.2 + 1.3 + 2.1 + 2.3 + 3.2 + 9.8 + 43.9
         May + 1.4 + 1.4 + 1.2 − 1.3 + 2.5 + 1.1 + 1.3 + 0.8 + 2.7 + 2.5 + 3.8 + 11.7 + 61.9
         June + 1.9 + 1.9 + 1.7 − 0.7 + 3.1 + 1.6 + 1.4 + 2.9 + 2.9 + 3.6 + 11.5 + 55.0
         July + 1.9 + 1.9 + 1.7 − 0.1 + 3.0 + 1.5 + 1.3 + 3.3 + 5.8 + 3.7 + 10.9 + 42.0
         Aug. + 1.8 + 1.8 + 1.8 + 0.2 + 2.7 + 1.3 + 1.4 + 0.8 + 3.5 + 6.1 + 4.0 + 11.9 + 47.6         Sep. + 2.5 + 2.5 + 2.1 + 0.5 + 4.0 + 1.5 + 1.4 + 4.3 + 6.8 + 4.2 + 13.4 + 50.4
         Oct. + 2.4 + 2.4 + 2.0 + 0.7 + 3.7 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 4.6 + 9.5 + 4.3 + 13.4 + 56.8
         Nov. + 2.4 + 2.5 + 2.4 + 1.0 + 4.0 + 1.6 + 1.2 + 0.8 + 4.7 + 9.3 + 4.1 + 12.5 + 45.6         Dec. + 2.2 + 2.1 + 2.2 + 1.4 + 3.3 + 1.3 + 1.3 + 4.2 + 7.2 + 3.3 + 8.2 + 13.8
2001         Jan. + 2.4 + 2.4 + 2.5 + 2.2 + 2.7 + 2.7 + 1.3 + 4.6 + 5.4 + 2.8 + 6.5 + 8.4
         Feb. + 2.6 + 2.6 + 2.7 + 1.9 + 3.2 + 3.2 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 4.7 + 5.4 + 2.5 + 5.4 + 6.5         Mar. + 2.5 + 2.5 + 2.8 + 3.8 + 2.8 + 3.1 + 1.2 + 4.9 + 8.5 + 2.4 + 4.2 − 0.2
         Apr. + 2.9 + 2.8 + 3.2 + 5.0 + 3.4 + 2.5 + 1.2 + 5.0
p + 8.7 + 2.0 + 5.1 + 11.0
         May + 3.5 + 3.4 + 3.8 + 6.7 + 3.9 + 3.1 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 4.6 p + 8.2 + 1.6 + 4.0 + 1.9
         June + 3.1 + 3.0 + 3.4 + 6.9 + 2.9 + 3.1 + 1.2 + 4.3 ... + 1.6 + 3.6 + 3.5
         July + 2.6 + 2.5 + 3.2 + 6.8 + 2.2 + 3.0 + 1.2 ... ... ... ... − 1.0
Source: Federal Statistical Office; for index of world market prices: HWWA In- by the Federal Statistical Office. —2Excluding value-added tax. —3HWWA
stitute. —1Calculated by the Bundesbank on the basis of figures provided index of raw material prices, on a Deutsche Mark basis. 
65* IX. Economic conditions

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
IX. Economic conditions
  
8. Households ’ income *
Germany
    
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries  1 salaries  2 Saving  6 ratio  7 benefits received  3 "Mass income"  4 Disposable income  5 
Change Change Change Change Change Change
from from from from from fromprevious previous previous previous previous previous
Period year in % year in % year in % year in % year in % year in % % DM billion DM billion DM billion DM billion DM billion DM billion
1995 1,577.1 3.2 1,038.0 0.8 555.6 4.6 1,593.6 2.1 2,256.0 3.5 252.1 −0.5 11.2
1996 1,594.0 1.1 1,032.7 −0.5 597.7 7.6 1,630.4 2.3 2,307.2 2.3 249.7 −1.0 10.8
1997 1,590.5 −0.2 1,015.1 −1.7 611.6 2.3 1,626.7 −0.2 2,357.6 2.2 245.3 −1.7 10.4
1998 1,620.4 1.9 1,034.9 2.0 623.4 1.9 1,658.4 1.9 2,424.3 2.8 246.4 0.4 10.21999 1,661.3 2.5 1,062.0 2.6 643.9 3.3 1,705.9 2.9 2,488.4 2.6 247.3 0.3 9.9
2000 1,715.6 3.3 1,101.2 3.7 660.6 2.6 1,761.7 3.3 2,559.4 2.9 250.3 1.2 9.8
2000         1st qtr 392.1 3.8 254.0 4.6 166.2 3.0 420.2 4.0 636.6 3.4 84.7 6.1 13.3
         2nd qtr 410.3 2.9 259.1 3.3 163.6 3.1 422.7 3.2 635.4 3.4 58.0 −0.3 9.1
         3rd qtr 430.2 3.5 284.2 3.8 163.6 2.0 447.8 3.1 627.7 2.7 51.2 −1.7 8.2
         4th qtr 483.1 2.9 304.0 3.1 167.0 2.3 471.1 2.8 659.6 1.9 56.4 −1.4 8.6
2001         1st qtr 405.0 3.3 265.5 4.6 168.8 1.6 434.4 3.4 659.2 3.6 90.8 7.2 13.8
Euro billion
1999 849.4 . 543.0 . 329.2 . 872.2 . 1,272.3 . 126.4 . .
2000 877.2 . 563.0 . 337.7 . 900.8 . 1,308.6 . 128.0 . .
2000         1st qtr 200.5 . 129.8 . 85.0 . 214.8 . 325.5 . 43.3 . .
         2nd qtr 209.8 . 132.5 . 83.7 . 216.1 . 324.9 . 29.6 . .         3rd qtr 219.9 . 145.3 . 83.7 . 229.0 . 321.0 . 26.2 . .         4th qtr 247.0 . 155.4 . 85.4 . 240.8 . 337.3 . 28.9 . .
2001         1st qtr 207.1 . 135.8 . 86.3 . 222.1 . 337.1 . 46.4 . .
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in May 2001. —*House- wages and salaries plus monetary social benefits received. —5"Mass
holds including non-profit institutions which serve households. —1Resi- income" plus operating surplus, self-employed persons ’income, property in-
dence concept. —2After deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages come (net), other current transfers received, income of non-profit
and salaries and employees ’contributions to the social security funds. — organisations which serve households, less taxes (excluding wage tax and
3Cash benefits from the social security funds, central, regional and local consumption-related taxes) and other current transfers paid. Including t he
authorities and foreign countries, pension payments (net), social security increase in claims on company pension funds. —6Including the increase in
benefits from private insurance schemes, less social security contributions on claims on company pension funds. —7Saving as a percentage of disposable
social benefits, consumption-related taxes and public charges. —4Net income. 
  
  
9. Pay rates and actual earnings
Germany
    
Overall economy Producing sector (including construction)
Negotiated wage and salary level  1 Wages and salaries Negotiated wage and salary level  1 Wages and salaries
per employee per employee
on an hourly basis on a monthly basis on an hourly basis on a monthly basis (work-place concept)  2 (work-place concept)  3 
% from % from % from % from % from % from
previous previous previous previous previous previous
Period 1995=100 year 1995=100 year 1995=100 year 1995=100 year 1995=100 year 1995=100 year
1991 76.7 . 78.6 . 82.4 . 73.4 . 76.9 . 77.6 .
1992 85.8 11.9 87.3 11.0 91.0 10.4 82.9 12.9 85.9 11.7 88.4 13.91993 92.2 7.5 92.9 6.5 95.0 4.4 90.6 9.3 92.0 7.1 92.3 4.41994 95.3 3.4 95.6 2.9 96.9 2.0 94.3 4.1 94.8 3.0 96.1 4.1
1995 100.0 4.9 100.0 4.6 100.0 3.2 100.0 6.1 100.0 5.5 100.0 4.1
1996 102.6 2.6 102.4 2.4 101.4 1.4 103.8 3.8 102.9 2.9 102.9 2.91997 104.2 1.5 103.9 1.5 101.7 0.3 105.8 1.9 104.6 1.7 104.7 1.71998 106.2 2.0 105.8 1.8 102.7 1.0 107.7 1.8 106.4 1.7 106.4 1.61999 109.2 2.9 108.7 2.7 104.0 1.2 111.0 3.0 109.5 2.9 108.3 1.8
2000 111.4 2.0 110.8 2.0 105.5 1.5 113.1 2.0 111.6 1.9 111.2 2.7
2000         1st qtr 101.6 1.7 101.1 1.7 98.2 2.2 102.5 1.4 101.0 1.3 104.0 3.1
         2nd qtr 103.0 2.2 102.4 2.1 101.4 0.8 103.8 2.0 102.4 2.0 112.9 2.8         3rd qtr 115.1 2.0 114.5 2.0 105.3 1.9 121.1 2.1 119.4 2.1 107.1 2.5         4th qtr 125.9 2.1 125.2 2.0 117.2 1.3 125.2 2.2 123.5 2.3 120.6 2.5
2001         1st qtr 103.8 2.1 103.2 2.1 100.4 2.2 104.0 1.5 102.6 1.5 107.3 3.2
         2nd qtr 104.8 1.7 104.2 1.7 . . 105.2 1.4 103.8 1.4 . .
2000         Dec. 103.5 2.2 103.0 2.2 . . 104.3 2.3 102.8 2.3 111.7 0.9
2001         Jan. 103.8 2.4 103.2 2.4 . . 104.1 2.1 102.7 2.1 109.8 6.5
         Feb. 103.7 2.3 103.1 2.3 . . 104.0 2.0 102.6 2.0 103.9 0.5         Mar. 103.8 1.6 103.2 1.6 . . 104.0 0.5 102.6 0.5 108.3 2.6
         Apr. 104.3 1.4 103.7 1.4 . . 104.3 0.3 102.9 0.4 110.6 3.7
         May 105.0 2.0 104.4 2.0 . . 105.9 2.0 104.4 2.0 . .         June 104.9 1.8 104.3 1.8 . . 105.5 1.7 104.1 1.8 . .
1Current data are normally revised upwards on account of additional supply, and excluding installation and building completion work. Calculated
reports. —2Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in May by the Bundesbank on the basis of data from the Federal Statistical Office,
2001. —3Producing sector, excluding electricity, gas, steam and hot water using the old and new classifications of the economic sectors. 
66*IX. Economic conditions

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the European monetary union *
  
Until the end of 1998 ECU million, from 1999 euro million
2000 2001 1 
Position 1998 1999 2000 3rd qtr 4th qtr 1st qtr Mar. Apr. May
Current account + 31,076 −5,785 −34,738 −6,114 −14,155 −6,253 + 863 −3,267 − 828 A.
1. Foreign trade
Exports (f.o.b.) incl. supplementary items 779,244 814,487 979,121 244,600 274,360 253,184 92,102 84,025 88,911
Imports (f.o.b.) incl. supplementary items 669,950 731,052 926,897 226,747 263,925 245,803 85,143 78,725 83,630
Balance + 109,295 + 83,429 + 52,227 + 17,853 + 10,438 + 7,381 + 6,959 + 5,300 + 5,281
2. Services
Receipts 229,832 241,472 270,154 70,721 74,083 68,529 23,708 24,326 26,701
Expenditure 231,854 253,257 285,476 73,175 80,189 73,503 25,297 24,020 24,858
Balance −2,023 −11,782 −15,322 −2,454 −6,106 −4,974 −1,589 + 306 + 1,843
3. Factor income (balance) −28,832 −32,390 −20,214 −7,085 − 543 −6,784 − 496 −4,709 −2,631
4. Current transfers
Transfer payments from non-residents 62,678 66,448 66,853 11,942 14,795 29,635 6,149 5,591 4,816
Transfer payments to non-residents 110,039 111,487 118,282 26,370 32,739 31,508 10,159 9,755 10,137
Balance −47,360 −45,042 −51,429 −14,431 −17,944 −1,873 −4,010 −4,164 −5,321
Balance of capital transfers + 12,391 + 13,520 + 10,417 + 1,617 + 3,606 + 2,954 + 151 + 2,187 + 488B.
C. 2 −61,237 + 19,078 + 6,811 −14,006 −24,015 + 12,825 + 18,904 + 11,774 −4,570 Financial account (net capital exports: −)
1. Direct investment −83,210 −120,562 −22,785 −94,269 −58,359 −42,916 −33,081 + 109 −40,357
Investment outside the euro area −174,969 −286,808 −339,727 −117,931 −86,633 −59,898 −26,000 −6,557 −48,357
Foreign investment in the euro area + 91,761 + 166,243 + 316,942 + 23,662 + 28,274 + 16,982 −7,081 + 6,666 + 8,000
2. Investment in securities −99,695 −41,746 −128,863 + 3,484 + 8,412 −38,190 + 6,153 −20,947 + 24,923
Investment outside the euro area −327,579 −309,565 −409,636 −91,785 −78,820 −83,311 −17,739 −8,140 −21,812
Equities −105,492 −155,444 −286,770 −56,053 −59,523 −28,458 + 4,294 −11,343 −9,727
Bonds and notes −203,843 −153,605 −114,911 −30,821 −20,887 −38,131 −14,997 −3,355 −13,513
Money market paper −18,246 − 516 −7,958 −4,911 + 1,587 −16,719 −7,035 + 6,558 + 1,428
Foreign investment in the euro area + 227,884 + 267,819 + 280,773 + 95,269 + 87,232 + 45,121 + 23,892 −12,807 + 46,735
Equities + 105,862 + 106,002 + 13,507 + 29,676 + 37,123 + 20,869 + 8,305 + 8,534 + 58,407
Bonds and notes + 108,290 + 108,997 + 231,046 + 73,646 + 59,887 + 15,901 + 15,069 −11,279 −6,664
Money market paper + 13,732 + 52,823 + 36,217 −8,053 −9,781 + 8,351 + 518 −10,062 −5,008
3. Financial derivatives −7,474 + 8,072 −1,128 + 438 −8,847 −2,798 + 2,970 + 1,110 + 3,387
4. Credit transactions and other
investment (balance) + 120,900 + 163,086 + 142,046 + 71,863 + 24,107 + 87,151 + 40,157 + 24,550 + 11,074
Eurosystem + 2,717 + 4,596 −1,751 −1,741 + 2,040 −3,111 −1,804 −1,813 + 1,374
Public authorities −8,601 −9,696 −1,471 −2,534 + 9,086 −6,006 + 673 −1,466 + 2,859
Credit institutions + 169,878 + 177,852 + 145,695 + 58,078 −3,744 + 116,205 + 56,838 + 31,699 + 4,775
long-term + 2,919 + 7,996 + 741 − 682 −10,133 −7,422 −2,976 + 3,450 −3,244
short-term + 166,958 + 169,850 + 144,947 + 58,763 + 6,387 + 123,625 + 59,813 + 28,249 + 8,019
Enterprises and individuals −43,094 −9,669 − 433 + 18,054 + 16,722 −19,934 −15,549 −3,870 + 2,066
5. Change in the monetary reserves of
    the eurosystem (Increase: −) + 8,241 + 10,231 + 17,541 + 4,475 + 10,675 + 9,575 + 2,704 + 6,952 −3,597
Balance of unclassifiable transactions  2 + 17,769 −26,816 + 17,510 + 18,503 + 34,561 −9,526 −19,918 −10,694 + 4,910 D.
*Source: European Central Bank. —1From January 2001, including   
Greece. —2Series for which data from January 1999 are not closely  
comparable with earlier observations. 
67*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(Balances)
 
 
Current account Memo item:
Change in Capital trans-
the Bundes- fers and pur-
Change in bank ’s net chases / sales
Supple- external of intangible the monetary
Balance of mentary non- reserves at Balance of assets aton current Foreign trade Factor Current produced Financial transaction transaction unclassifiable
Period account trade  
1  2 items  3  4 Services  5 income transfers assets  6 account  6 values  7 values  7 transactions
DM million
1988 + 92,585 + 128,045 −2,791 −16,365 + 16,630 −32,933 −2,029 −122,721 + 27,662 + 4,503 + 34,676
1989 + 107,346 + 134,576 −4,107 −15,210 + 26,872 −34,784 −2,064 −110,286 −5,405 + 10,409 + 18,997
1990  o + 79,475 + 105,382 −3,833 −19,664 + 32,859 −35,269 −4,975 −89,497 −11,611 + 26,608 −10,976
1991 −30,416 + 21,899 −2,804 −24,842 + 33,144 −57,812 −4,565 + 12,614 + 9,605 + 12,762 − 319
1992 −22,924 + 33,656 −1,426 −37,894 + 33,962 −51,222 −1,963 + 69,792 −52,888 + 7,983 −68,745
1993  8 −16,155 + 60,304 −3,038 −45,080 + 27,373 −55,714 −1,915 + 21,442 + 22,795 −26,167 + 35,766
1994  8 −38,805 + 71,762 −1,104 −54,374 + 4,852 −59,940 −2,637 + 57,871 + 2,846 −19,276 −12,242
1995  8 −29,671 + 85,303 −4,722 −54,720 + 178 −55,710 −3,845 + 63,647 −10,355 −19,776 −17,754
1996  8 −11,959 + 98,538 −5,264 −55,330 + 1,391 −51,294 −3,283 + 23,613 + 1,882 −10,253 + 1,610
1997  8 − 4,727 + 116,467 −7,360 −58,715 − 2,376 −52,742 + 52 − 76 + 6,640 − 1,889 + 8,468
1998  8 −11,834 + 126,970 −5,967 −66,748 −12,741 −53,348 + 1,289 + 32,086 −7,128 −14,414 −8,231
1999  8 −32,894 + 127,542 −13,601 −80,366 −16,044 −50,425 − 301 −69,114 + 24,517 + 77,792 −72,364
2000  8 −41,064 + 114,306 −12,487 −87,414 − 2,421 −53,048 + 29,916 + 19,175 + 11,429 −19,455 + 94,329
2000         3rd qtr 8 −20,050 + 25,076 −3,146 −24,585 − 3,482 −13,913 + 31,046 −49,155 + 4,214 + 33,945 + 44,051
         4th qtr 8 −17,872 + 25,607 −4,369 −20,585 − 2,791 −15,735 − 798 −45,428 + 4,013 + 60,085 + 33,518
2001         1st qtr 8 − 1,630 + 38,740 −3,223 −24,798 − 1,965 −10,383 + 1,105 −16,497 + 7,965 + 9,057 −22,980
         2nd qtr 8p − 4,438 + 38,780 −2,683 −22,055 − 3,613 −14,867 −1,163 −13,812 + 3,988 + 15,425 + 41,266
2000         Oct.  8 − 744 + 13,431 −1,709 − 8,547 + 1,894 − 5,813 − 245 −14,601 + 1,053 + 14,537 + 38,316
         Nov.  8 − 4,130 + 9,341 − 679 − 6,109 − 1,049 − 5,632 − 279 −11,059 + 912 + 14,556 + 9,808
         Dec.  8 −12,998 + 2,835 −1,980 − 5,928 − 3,635 − 4,289 − 274 −19,769 + 2,049 + 30,993 −14,606
2001         Jan.  8 −10,384 + 8,711 −1,371 − 8,471 − 8,457 − 796 + 1,030 −17,977 + 2,739 + 24,592 −11,712
         Feb.  8 + 2,613 + 12,642 −1,248 − 5,807 + 1,373 − 4,346 + 233 − 7,276 + 2,307 + 2,123 −7,576
         Mar.  8 + 6,142 + 17,387 − 604 −10,519 + 5,119 − 5,242 − 158 + 8,755 + 2,919 −17,658 −3,692
         Apr.  8 + 3,890 + 10,571 −1,065 − 4,572 + 3,236 − 4,281 − 289 − 1,607 + 2,357 − 4,351 + 18,392
         May  8 + 333 + 14,510 −1,024 − 7,415 − 880 − 4,859 −1,444 + 32,413 + 994 −32,295 − 104
         June  8p − 8,661 + 13,698 − 594 −10,068 − 5,970 − 5,727 + 570 −44,618 + 638 + 52,071 + 22,978
 Euro million
1999  8 −16,819 + 65,211 −6,954 −41,091 − 8,203 −25,782 − 154 −35,338 + 12,535 + 39,775 −36,999
2000  8 −20,996 + 58,444 −6,384 −44,694 − 1,238 −27,123 + 15,296 + 9,804 + 5,844 − 9,947 + 48,230
1999         3rd qtr 8 − 9,121 + 15,673 −1,799 −12,411 − 2,900 − 7,684 − 847 + 1,751 − 415 + 8,631 −14,722
         4th qtr 8 − 4,199 + 18,524 −1,584 − 9,614 − 3,906 − 7,619 + 532 + 1,129 − 90 + 2,628 −13,354
2000         1st qtr 8 + 44 + 16,350 −1,357 − 9,938 + 441 − 5,452 + 160 + 34,102 − 751 −33,555 + 32,016
         2nd qtr 8 − 1,650 + 16,181 −1,185 −11,661 + 1,528 − 6,513 − 330 + 24,061 + 2,388 −24,470 −23,447
         3rd qtr 8 −10,252 + 12,821 −1,608 −12,570 − 1,780 − 7,114 + 15,874 −25,133 + 2,155 + 17,356 + 22,523
         4th qtr 8 − 9,138 + 13,093 −2,234 −10,525 − 1,427 − 8,045 − 408 −23,227 + 2,052 + 30,721 + 17,137
2001         1st qtr 8 − 833 + 19,807 −1,648 −12,679 − 1,005 − 5,309 + 565 −8,435 + 4,072 + 4,631 −11,749
         2nd qtr 8p − 2,269 + 19,828 −1,372 −11,276 − 1,847 − 7,602 − 594 −7,062 + 2,039 + 7,887 + 21,099
1999         Sep.  8 − 2,432 + 5,545 − 250 − 4,212 − 985 − 2,530 − 116 −4,196 − 133 + 6,877 −18,494
         Oct.  8 − 1,666 + 5,637 − 396 − 3,070 − 1,358 − 2,480 + 152 + 2,747 + 115 − 1,348 + 15,008
         Nov.  8 + 506 + 7,805 − 522 − 3,380 − 795 − 2,603 + 160 −12,666 − 354 + 12,354 −19,909
         Dec.  8 − 3,039 + 5,082 − 666 − 3,165 − 1,754 − 2,536 + 220 + 11,048 + 149 − 8,377 −8,452
2000         Jan.  8 − 6,607 + 3,133 − 568 − 4,147 − 3,336 − 1,689 + 172 + 13,544 − 42 − 7,067 + 26,184
         Feb.  8 + 1,526 + 7,123 − 411 − 3,150 + 12 − 2,048 − 146 − 508 − 438 − 433 −1,934
         Mar.  8 + 5,124 + 6,094 − 378 − 2,641 + 3,765 − 1,716 + 134 + 21,067 − 271 −26,054 + 7,766
         Apr.  8 − 270 + 5,285 − 353 − 3,370 + 715 − 2,548 + 194 + 1,331 + 1,354 − 2,608 −9,302
         May  8 − 2,074 + 4,359 − 530 − 3,884 − 291 − 1,728 − 22 + 20,880 + 171 −18,955 + 2,657
         June  8 + 694 + 6,537 − 302 − 4,408 + 1,104 − 2,237 − 502 + 1,851 + 863 − 2,907 −16,802
         July  8 − 2,687 + 5,817 − 425 − 3,560 − 1,514 − 3,006 + 105 + 1,954 + 1,180 − 551 + 23,600
         Aug.  8 − 5,727 + 2,837 − 716 − 5,174 − 53 − 2,620 + 7,766 −12,628 + 345 + 10,244 + 11,758
         Sep.  8 − 1,837 + 4,167 − 468 − 3,835 − 213 − 1,487 + 8,003 −14,459 + 630 + 7,663 −12,834
         Oct.  8 − 380 + 6,867 − 874 − 4,370 + 968 − 2,972 − 125 −7,465 + 538 + 7,433 + 19,591
         Nov.  8 − 2,112 + 4,776 − 347 − 3,124 − 537 − 2,880 − 143 −5,654 + 466 + 7,442 + 5,015
         Dec.  8 − 6,646 + 1,450 −1,012 − 3,031 − 1,859 − 2,193 − 140 −10,108 + 1,047 + 15,846 −7,468
2001         Jan.  8 − 5,309 + 4,454 − 701 − 4,331 − 4,324 − 407 + 527 −9,191 + 1,400 + 12,574 −5,988
         Feb.  8 + 1,336 + 6,464 − 638 − 2,969 + 702 − 2,222 + 119 −3,720 + 1,180 + 1,085 −3,873
         Mar.  8 + 3,140 + 8,890 − 309 − 5,378 + 2,617 − 2,680 − 81 + 4,477 + 1,492 − 9,028 −1,888
         Apr.  8 + 1,989 + 5,405 − 544 − 2,337 + 1,655 − 2,189 − 148 − 821 + 1,205 − 2,225 + 9,404
         May  8 + 170 + 7,419 − 524 − 3,791 − 450 − 2,485 − 738 + 16,572 + 508 −16,512 − 53
         June  8p − 4,428 + 7,004 − 304 − 5,148 − 3,052 − 2,928 + 292 −22,813 + 326 + 26,624 + 11,749
oFrom July 1990 including the external transactions of the former GDR. — warehouse transactions for account of residents and deduction of goods
1Special trade according to the official foreign trade statistics: imports c.i.f., returned. —4See footnote 2. —5Excluding the expenditure on freight and
exports f.o.b. —2From January 1993 including additional estimates for insurance included in the c.i.f. import value. —6Capital exports: −.—
external transactions which do not have to be reported and which are 7Increase: -. —8Figures subject to significant uncertainty owing to changes
included up to December 1992 in Supplementary trade items. —3Mainly in the method of data collection in foreign trade. 
68*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
by group of countries and country *
 
 Until the end of 1998 DM million, from 1999 euro million
2001
Group of countries / Country 1998 1999 2000 1 January February March April May June  p 
All countries  2 Exports 955,170 510,008 596,853 51,706 51,965 55,912 52,730 54,511 53,559
Imports 828,200 444,797 538,409 47,252 45,501 47,022 47,325 47,092 46,555Balance + 126,970 + 65,211 + 58,444 + 4,454 + 6,464 + 8,890 + 5,405 + 7,419 + 7,004
I. Exports 728,539 395,748 459,561 40,246 40,547 42,321 40,526 40,537 ...Industrialised
Imports 628,089 332,891 389,474 34,079 33,168 34,374 35,030 35,137 ... countries
Balance + 100,450 + 62,857 + 70,087 + 6,167 + 7,379 + 7,947 + 5,496 + 5,400 ...
Exports 539,793 293,377 337,394 29,474 30,172 30,795 30,392 29,321 ... 1. EU member countries
Imports 452,037 239,652 274,710 24,090 23,796 24,097 25,333 25,281 ...Balance + 87,757 + 53,725 + 62,684 + 5,384 + 6,376 + 6,698 + 5,058 + 4,040 ...
of  which
Exports 420,000 229,837 264,894 23,412 23,682 24,351 23,905 22,749 ... EMU member
Imports 365,132 193,146 218,870 19,102 19,369 19,321 20,323 20,386 ... countries
Balance + 54,867 + 36,691 + 46,024 + 4,310 + 4,313 + 5,031 + 3,582 + 2,363 ...
of which
Austria Exports 51,760 28,295 31,722 2,728 2,630 2,915 2,771 2,623 ...
Imports 33,078 18,288 20,443 1,599 1,699 1,792 1,844 1,766 ...Balance + 18,683 + 10,007 + 11,279 + 1,129 + 931 + 1,124 + 927 + 857 ...
Belgium and Exports 54,288 28,821 32,770 2,954 3,037 3,104 3,057 2,914 ...
Luxemburg Imports 46,437 22,880 26,707 2,565 2,605 2,754 2,583 2,508 ...
Balance + 7,851 + 5,942 + 6,062 + 388 + 432 + 350 + 474 + 406 ...
France Exports 105,901 58,578 68,163 6,192 6,156 6,147 6,374 5,683 ...
Imports 88,914 45,559 50,608 4,429 4,395 4,400 4,455 4,530 ...Balance + 16,987 + 13,019 + 17,555 + 1,763 + 1,761 + 1,746 + 1,919 + 1,153 ...
Italy Exports 70,533 38,335 45,200 4,087 4,152 4,326 3,902 4,006 ...
Imports 64,513 33,107 35,862 2,977 2,993 2,886 3,071 3,200 ...Balance + 6,020 + 5,229 + 9,338 + 1,110 + 1,158 + 1,440 + 830 + 806 ...
Netherlands Exports 66,910 34,355 38,468 3,323 3,310 3,455 3,528 3,290 ...
Imports 69,425 36,089 45,945 4,131 3,925 4,118 4,020 3,845 ...Balance − 2,515 − 1,734 − 7,477 − 807 − 614 − 663 − 492 − 555 ...
Spain Exports 38,454 22,684 27,076 2,329 2,388 2,496 2,401 2,432 ...
Imports 27,801 14,666 15,952 1,443 1,376 1,473 1,347 1,514 ...Balance + 10,653 + 8,018 + 11,124 + 886 + 1,012 + 1,023 + 1,054 + 919 ...
Sweden Exports 21,874 11,657 13,593 1,163 1,089 1,140 1,104 1,034 ...
Imports 16,331 8,305 10,121 854 878 783 820 810 ...Balance + 5,543 + 3,352 + 3,472 + 309 + 211 + 357 + 284 + 224 ...
United Exports 81,356 43,124 49,634 4,072 4,572 4,415 4,527 4,691 ...
Kingdom Imports 56,694 30,757 36,929 3,286 2,892 3,235 3,461 3,412 ...
Balance + 24,662 + 12,367 + 12,705 + 786 + 1,679 + 1,180 + 1,066 + 1,279 ...
Exports 66,640 33,504 39,598 3,069 3,373 3,631 3,041 3,460 ... 2. Other European
Imports 58,057 30,588 36,511 3,178 3,125 3,371 3,281 3,216 ... industrial countries
Balance + 8,582 + 2,916 + 3,087 − 109 + 248 + 260 − 240 + 243 ...
of which
Switzerland Exports 42,686 22,808 25,607 2,091 2,246 2,620 2,210 2,480 ...
Imports 32,550 17,070 18,767 1,480 1,600 1,764 1,613 1,673 ...Balance + 10,136 + 5,738 + 6,840 + 611 + 647 + 856 + 597 + 807 ...
Exports 122,107 68,867 82,569 7,703 7,002 7,895 7,093 7,757 ... 3. Non-European
Imports 117,995 62,651 78,254 6,812 6,246 6,905 6,416 6,640 ... industrial countries
Balance + 4,111 + 6,216 + 4,316 + 892 + 755 + 989 + 677 + 1,117 ...
of which
Japan Exports 18,310 10,367 13,194 1,102 1,094 1,170 983 1,111 ...
Imports 41,047 21,779 26,602 2,162 1,866 2,192 2,163 2,049 ...Balance −22,737 −11,412 −13,408 −1,060 − 772 −1,021 −1,180 − 938 ...
Exports 89,751 51,425 61,228 5,971 5,280 5,950 5,443 5,775 ... United States
Imports 68,307 36,790 46,496 4,194 4,006 4,251 3,799 4,130 ...Balance + 21,444 + 14,635 + 14,733 + 1,777 + 1,274 + 1,699 + 1,644 + 1,646 ...
II. Exports 115,463 56,717 70,269 5,770 5,964 7,152 6,332 7,391 ...Countries in transition
Imports 108,819 62,533 82,444 7,399 7,229 7,427 7,092 7,108 ...Balance + 6,645 − 5,816 −12,175 −1,629 −1,265 − 275 − 760 + 283 ...
of which
Central and east Exports 101,499 49,020 59,904 4,876 5,086 6,035 5,263 6,227 ...European countries Imports 84,280 47,723 62,501 5,525 5,535 5,831 5,508 5,434 ...in transition Balance + 17,220 + 1,297 − 2,598 − 649 − 449 + 203 − 246 + 793 ...
People ‘s Republic Exports 11,900 6,949 9,403 822 770 1,031 986 1,048 ...
of China  
3 Imports 23,181 13,795 18,386 1,724 1,590 1,429 1,422 1,519 ...
Balance −11,280 − 6,846 − 8,984 − 901 − 820 − 398 − 436 − 472 ...
III. Exports 108,860 56,377 65,346 5,602 5,326 6,320 5,769 6,433 ...Developing countries
Imports 90,249 48,835 64,325 5,713 5,046 5,149 5,149 4,791 ...Balance + 18,610 + 7,543 + 1,021 − 111 + 280 + 1,172 + 620 + 1,642 ...
of which
Newly industrial- Exports 36,657 18,775 24,033 2,082 1,831 2,282 2,006 2,349 ...ising countries in Imports 42,310 22,586 30,221 2,814 2,297 2,456 2,338 2,130 ...south-east Asia  
4 Balance − 5,653 − 3,811 − 6,188 − 732 − 467 − 174 − 332 + 219 ...
OPEC-countries Exports 19,213 9,135 10,759 960 916 1,157 1,002 1,144 ...
Imports 11,215 6,425 10,211 771 733 597 783 541 ...Balance + 7,998 + 2,710 + 548 + 189 + 182 + 560 + 220 + 603 ...
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (f.o.b.) by country of destination, and other supplies for ships and aircraft and other data not classif iable by
imports (c.i.f.) by country of origin. Inclusion of individual countries in region. —3Excluding Hong Kong. —4Brunei Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indo-
groups of countries according to the current position. —1The import nesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore, Republic of Korea, Taiwan and Thai-
figures on "All countries" include revisions for the year 2000 which have not land. yet been broken down by region for Non-EU countries. —2Including fuel
69*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
4. Services and factor income of the Federal Republic of Germany
(Balances)
 
Until the end of 1998 DM million, from 1999 euro million
Services
other services
of which
 
Patents Compen- Services  of Construction
Trans- Financial and sation of Investment Government selfemployed and  assembly
Period Total Travel services licences Total income portation  1 transactions  2 persons  3 work,  repairs employees  4 
1996 −55,330 −53,025 + 4,873 + 2,653 −3,772 + 6,699 −12,757 −2,180 −1,216 −1,779 + 3,171
1997 −58,715 −52,718 + 5,723 + 2,315 −4,341 + 6,616 −16,310 −2,403 −1,669 −1,698 − 678
1998 −66,748 −54,742 + 5,457 + 3,011 −4,052 + 5,462 −21,885 −2,564 −2,473 −1,584 −11,157
1999 −41,091 −29,947 + 2,882 + 1,073 −1,868 + 1,973 −15,204 −2,112 − 552 − 836 −7,367
2000 −44,694 −32,000 + 3,584 + 856 −2,871 + 2,149 −16,413 −2,594 −1,244 − 936 − 301
1999         4th qtr − 9,614 − 6,124 + 913 + 30 − 458 + 463 −4,438 − 621 + 18 − 259 −3,647
2000         1st qtr − 9,938 − 6,318 + 564 + 88 − 757 + 577 −4,091 − 696 − 380 + 45 + 397
         2nd qtr −11,661 − 8,463 + 946 + 475 − 450 + 407 −4,576 − 533 − 333 − 271 + 1,799
         3rd qtr −12,570 −11,111 + 1,073 + 42 − 572 + 576 −2,578 − 660 − 20 − 511 −1,269
         4th qtr −10,525 − 6,107 + 1,001 + 251 −1,092 + 589 −5,167 − 705 − 511 − 199 −1,228
2001         1st qtr −12,679 − 6,571 + 915 − 100 − 540 + 711 −7,093 − 620 − 655 + 99 −1,104
         2nd qtr −11,276 − 8,693 + 1,255 + 147 − 311 + 690 −4,364 − 591 − 409 − 173 −1,674
2000         Aug. − 5,174 − 4,303 + 382 − 23 − 333 + 243 −1,140 − 260 − 12 − 165 + 111
         Sep. − 3,835 − 3,496 + 316 − 42 − 121 + 211 − 702 − 207 + 59 − 169 − 44
         Oct. − 4,370 − 2,791 + 310 + 75 − 378 + 134 −1,719 − 190 − 437 − 81 + 1,050
         Nov. − 3,124 − 1,702 + 214 + 172 − 399 + 202 −1,610 − 212 − 164 − 69 − 467
         Dec. − 3,031 − 1,614 + 478 + 5 − 314 + 254 −1,839 − 303 + 90 − 49 −1,810
2001         Jan. − 4,331 − 2,317 + 171 + 4 − 143 + 221 −2,267 − 246 − 445 + 27 −4,351
         Feb. − 2,969 − 1,880 + 363 − 77 − 392 + 253 −1,236 − 194 − 92 + 26 + 676
         Mar. − 5,378 − 2,374 + 381 − 26 − 5 + 236 −3,591 − 180 − 118 + 47 + 2,570
         Apr. − 2,337 − 2,735 + 348 + 9 − 49 + 167 − 78 − 215 − 56 − 81 + 1,736
         May − 3,791 − 2,822 + 580 + 151 − 166 + 265 −1,801 − 188 − 71 − 43 − 406
         June − 5,148 − 3,137 + 327 − 13 − 97 + 258 −2,486 − 187 − 282 − 49 −3,004
1Excluding the expenditure on freight included in the c.i.f. import value. — vices supplied. —3Engineering and other technical services, research and
2Including the receipts from foreign military agencies for goods and ser- development, commercial services etc. — 4 Wages and salaries. 
5. Current transfers of the Federal Republic of Germany 6. Capital transfers
(Balances) (Balances)
Until the end of 1998 DM million, from 1999 euro million DM million / euro million
Public  1 Private  1 
International
Organisations  2 
 
of which other Remittances other
European current by foreign current
Period Total Total Total Communities Total workers transfers Total  4 Public  1 Private  1 transfers  3 
1996 −51,294 −35,281 −30,674 −27,553 −4,607 −16,013 −7,401 −8,612 −3,283 −2,617 − 666
1997 −52,742 −36,812 −31,509 −28,502 −5,302 −15,930 −7,519 −8,411 + 52 −2,821 + 2,873
1998 −53,348 −37,317 −33,077 −30,382 −4,240 −16,031 −6,936 −9,095 + 1,289 −2,441 + 3,730
1999 −25,782 −17,409 −15,428 −13,846 −1,981 −8,373 −3,429 −4,944 − 154 −1,351 + 1,197
2000 −27,123 −19,057 −16,958 −15,406 −2,099 −8,066 −3,458 −4,609 −1,588 −1,186 − 402
1999         4th qtr −7,619 −5,097 −4,481 −4,087 − 616 −2,521 − 857 −1,664 + 532 − 572 + 1,104
2000         1st qtr −5,452 −3,473 −2,578 −2,064 − 896 −1,979 − 864 −1,114 + 160 − 237 + 397
         2nd qtr −6,513 −4,488 −4,707 −4,435 + 219 −2,024 − 864 −1,160 − 330 − 290 − 40
         3rd qtr −7,114 −5,102 −4,664 −4,213 − 437 −2,012 − 864 −1,148 −1,010 − 285 − 725
         4th qtr −8,045 −5,994 −5,009 −4,695 − 985 −2,051 − 864 −1,187 − 408 − 374 − 34
2001         1st qtr −5,309 −2,926 −2,117 −1,604 − 808 −2,383 − 880 −1,503 + 565 − 312 + 877
         2nd qtr −7,602 −5,132 −5,338 −4,919 + 206 −2,470 − 880 −1,590 − 594 − 251 − 343
2000         Aug. −2,620 −1,973 −1,813 −1,788 − 160 − 647 − 288 − 359 − 656 − 107 − 548
         Sep. −1,487 − 870 − 699 − 634 − 171 − 618 − 288 − 330 − 458 − 87 − 372
         Oct. −2,972 −2,338 −1,789 −1,725 − 549 − 634 − 288 − 346 − 125 − 141 + 16
         Nov. −2,880 −2,116 −1,780 −1,617 − 337 − 764 − 288 − 475 − 143 − 117 − 25
         Dec. −2,193 −1,539 −1,440 −1,353 − 99 − 654 − 288 − 366 − 140 − 115 − 25
2001         Jan. − 407 + 310 + 676 + 847 − 366 − 717 − 293 − 423 + 527 − 137 + 663
         Feb. −2,222 −1,333 −1,093 − 779 − 240 − 889 − 293 − 595 + 119 − 82 + 201
         Mar. −2,680 −1,902 −1,700 −1,673 − 202 − 778 − 293 − 484 − 81 − 93 + 12
         Apr. −2,189 −1,368 −1,442 −1,388 + 74 − 821 − 293 − 527 − 148 − 72 − 76
         May −2,485 −1,608 −1,877 −1,663 + 269 − 877 − 293 − 583 − 738 − 84 − 654
         June −2,928 −2,156 −2,020 −1,867 − 136 − 773 − 293 − 479 + 292 − 95 + 387
1The classification of "public" and "private" transfers depends on which (excluding capital transfers). —3Payments to developing countries, pension
sector the participating domestic body belongs to. —2Current contri- payments, tax revenue and refunds, etc. —4Where identifiable; in
butions to the budgets of international organisations and to the EU budget particular, debt forgiveness. 
70*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
7. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
  
Until the end of 1998 DM million, from 1999 euro million
2000 2001
Item 1998 1999 2000 3rd qtr 4th qtr 1st qtr 2nd qtr Apr. May June
I. Net German investment abroad
(Increase/capital exports: −) −574,900 −355,558 −347,732 −72,414 −33,783 −135,453 −62,492 −21,885 −30,723 − 9,884
1. Direct investment  1 −155,873 −103,057 −52,705 + 7,619 + 12,366 −11,609 −33,522 − 601 −35,357 + 2,437
Equity capital −104,000 −83,922 −45,063 −21,531 + 10,762 − 23−35,616 − 2,710 −35,007 + 2,101
Reinvested earnings  2 −10,100 − 5,500 − 5,500 − 1,375 − 1,375 − 1,375 − 1,375 − 458 − 458 − 458
Credit transactions ofGerman direct investors −34,238 − 6,778 + 3,640 + 31,587 + 4,669 − 9,257 + 4,578 + 2,798 + 521 + 1,259
Other capital − 7,534 − 6,856 − 5,782 − 1,062 − 1,690 − 954 − 1,109 − 231 − 413 − 465
2. Portfolio investment −256,232 −178,153 −210,323 −56,393 −30,314 −42,489 −44,663 −21,892 −14,997 − 7,773
Equities  
3 −121,050 −67,934 −107,684 −29,752 −13,053 − 5,127 −11,119 − 9,548 − 1,054 − 517
Investment fund certificates  4 −17,892 −14,055 −31,861 − 5,936 − 3,992 − 5,832 − 4,716 − 2,062 − 1,388 − 1,266
Bonds and notes  5 −110,676 −94,688 −72,431 −22,352 −10,210 −31,174 −28,028 − 9,296 −11,418 − 7,314
Money market instruments − 6,613 − 1,477 + 1,652 + 1,647 − 3,060 − 356 − 800 − 986 − 1,136 + 1,323
3. Financial derivatives  6 −13,458 − 1,112 − 3,839 − 848 − 2,357 + 1,122 + 2,625 + 3,884 + 3,187 − 4,446
4. Credit transactions −141,250 −71,146 −78,673 −21,926 −13,465 −82,207 + 13,334 − 3,129 + 16,469 − 5
Credit institutions  7 −135,477 −43,076 −100,854 −30,112 −39,404 −70,058 −10,041 −10,913 + 14,215 −13,343
Long-term −61,395 −42,717 −39,476 −11,296 −14,767 − 7,576 −11,596 − 2,389 − 1,777 − 7,430
Short-term −74,082 − 359 −61,378 −18,815 −24,637 −62,483 + 1,555 − 8,524 + 15,992 − 5,913
Enterprises and individuals − 4,121 + 11,816 + 299 + 3,956 + 12,097 −17,290 + 2,391 + 224 + 2,611 − 444
Long-term − 593 − 1,967 + 1,030 − 419 + 1,199 − 298 − 158 − 90− 35− 33
Short-term  7 − 3,529 + 13,783 − 731 + 4,375 + 10,899 −16,992 + 2,548 + 313 + 2,646 − 411
General government − 1,501 + 7,658 −20,091 −15,811 − 1,198 + 21,140 + 1,995 − 723 + 335 + 2,383
Long-term − 1,722 − 376 − 1,250 − 658 − 183 + 159 + 179 + 40 + 160 − 22
Short-term  7 + 220 + 8,034 −18,841 −15,153 − 1,015 + 20,981 + 1,816 − 764 + 176 + 2,405
Bundesbank − 151 −47,544 + 41,972 + 20,041 + 15,040 −15,999 + 18,990 + 8,283 − 692 + 11,398
5. Other investment  8 − 8,088 − 2,090 − 2,191 − 866 − 13− 269 − 267 − 146 − 25− 96
II. Net foreign investment in Germany
(Increase/capital imports: +) + 606,986 + 320,220 + 357,535 + 47,282 + 10,556 + 127,018 + 55,430 + 21,064 + 47,295 −12,929
1. Direct investment  1 + 42,720 + 52,507 + 191,090 + 18,168 −36,613 + 389 + 5,525 + 1,278 − 1,540 + 5,787
Equity capital + 11,570 + 25,002 + 105,462 + 7,548 −72,158 + 21,197 + 4,134 + 2,806 + 1,261 + 67
Reinvested earnings  2 − 1,000 − 4,500 − 4,500 − 1,125 − 1,125 − 1,125 − 1,125 − 375 − 375 − 375
Credit transactions offoreign direct investors + 33,007 + 32,253 + 90,463 + 11,785 + 36,744 −19,657 + 2,566 − 1,111 − 2,423 + 6,101
Other capital − 857 − 249 − 336 − 40− 74− 27− 50− 42− 3− 6
2. Portfolio investment + 264,985 + 164,581 + 46,085 + 26,608 + 19,253 − 4,668 + 67,584 − 5,482 + 43,379 + 29,687
Equities  
3 + 101,294 + 22,694 −37,261 + 6,922 + 9,325 + 4,634 + 70,849 − 213 + 44,300 + 26,762
Investment fund certificates − 2,776 + 5,761 + 10,821 + 1,547 + 2,069 − 1,863 − 610 − 155 − 674 + 218
Bonds and notes  5 + 154,028 + 97,897 + 69,032 + 18,951 + 14,364 + 8,357 + 11,136 − 1,606 + 3,490 + 9,252
Money market instruments + 12,438 + 38,229 + 3,492 − 813 − 6,506 −15,797 −13,790 − 3,508 − 3,738 − 6,545
3. Credit transactions + 299,320 + 103,177 + 120,166 + 2,404 + 27,855 + 131,247 −17,662 + 25,269 + 5,473 −48,405
Credit institutions  7 + 279,437 + 95,379 + 117,943 + 3,344 + 26,961 + 131,163 −24,979 + 20,728 + 1,706 −47,413
Long-term + 61,270 + 35,226 + 18,314 + 144 + 3,214 − 2,605 + 11,385 + 605 + 6,339 + 4,441
Short-term + 218,167 + 60,153 + 99,629 + 3,200 + 23,747 + 133,768 −36,364 + 20,123 − 4,633 −51,854
Enterprises and individuals + 16,246 + 21,044 + 1,053 − 2,118 − 360 + 3,029 + 5,737 + 5,237 + 2,176 − 1,676
Long-term + 13,306 + 3,953 − 272 − 128 + 606 + 4,412 + 1,583 + 2,320 − 120 − 617
Short-term  7 + 2,941 + 17,091 + 1,325 − 1,990 − 966 − 1,384 + 4,154 + 2,917 + 2,297 − 1,060
General Government + 49 −11,255 + 757 + 850 + 1,208 − 3,122 + 1,509 − 612 + 1,460 + 661
Long-term − 8,280 − 8,306 − 141 − 428 + 391 − 520 − 67− 52− 23 + 8
Short-term  7 + 8,329 − 2,949 + 898 + 1,279 + 817 − 2,602 + 1,576 − 560 + 1,483 + 652
Bundesbank + 3,588 − 1,991 + 414 + 327 + 46 + 177 + 70 − 85 + 131 + 24
4. Other investment − 39− 45 + 195 + 103 + 62 + 50 − 16− 1− 17 + 2
III. Balance of all statistically
recorded financial movements(Net capital exports: −) + 32,086 −35,338 + 9,804 −25,133 −23,227 − 8,435 − 7,062 − 821 + 16,572 −22,813
1From 1996, new definition for direct investment. —2Estimated. — action values shown here are mostly derived from changes in stocks. As far
3Including participation rights. —4From 1991 including accumulated as possible, purely statistical changes have been eliminated. —8In
earnings. —5From 1975 excluding accrued interest. —6Options, whether particular, subscriptions of the Federal Government to International
or not evidenced by securities, and financial futures contracts. —7The trans- Organisations. 
71*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
8. External position of the Bundesbank *
 
 
DM million
Monetary reserves and other claims on non-residents Liabilities to non-residents
Monetary reserves
Reserve
positionin theInter- Liabilitiesnational arising Net Liabilities
Monetary arising from externalFund and Claims Loans and from liquidity position
Foreign special on the external Treasury (col. 1 other claims
End of year currency drawing ECB  
2 on non- trans- discount less
or month Total Total Gold rights (net) Total paper col. 8) balances  1 residents  3 actions  4 
1234567891 0 1 1
1989 99,959 97,527 13,688 58,308 8,229 17,303 2,432 51,642 51,642 − 48,317
1990 106,446 104,023 13,688 64,517 7,373 18,445 2,423 52,259 52,259 − 54,188
1991 97,345 94,754 13,688 55,424 8,314 17,329 2,592 42,335 42,335 − 55,010
1992 143,959 141,351 13,688 85,845 8,199 33,619 2,608 26,506 26,506 − 117,453
1993 122,763 120,143 13,688 61,784 8,496 36,176 2,620 39,541 23,179 16,362 83,2221994 115,965 113,605 13,688 60,209 7,967 31,742 2,360 24,192 19,581 4,611 91,774
1995 123,261 121,307 13,688 68,484 10,337 28,798 1,954 16,390 16,390 − 106,871
1996 120,985 119,544 13,688 72,364 11,445 22,048 1,441 15,604 15,604 − 105,381
1997 127,849 126,884 13,688 76,673 13,874 22,649 966 16,931 16,931 − 110,918
1998 135,085 134,005 17,109 100,363 16,533 − 1,079 15,978 15,978 − 119,107
*Valuation of the gold holdings and the claims on non-residents according Monetary Cooperation Fund −EMCF). —3Including loans to the World
to section 26 (2) of the Bundesbank Act and the provisions of the Bank. —4Including liquidity paper sold to non-residents by the
Commercial Code, especially section 253. In the course of the year, valuation Bundesbank; excluding the liquidity Treasury discount paper sold toat the balance sheet rates of the preceding year. —1Mainly US dollar non-residents between March 1993 and March 1995, as shown in column 10. 
assets. —2European Central Bank (until 1993 claims on the European
 
 
 
9. External position of the Bundesbank in the European monetary union *
Euro million
Monetary reserves and other claims on non-residents
Monetary reserves
Reserve
position
in the Inter-
national OtherMonetary Other claims on Net externalFund and claims on Claims residents position of the
Gold special Foreign non-euro- within the in other Bundesbank Liabilities
End of year and gold drawing currency area Eurosystem EMU member to non- (col.1 lessor month Total Total rights reserves (net)  
2 countries col.9) receivables residents  1  3 residents  3 
1234567891 0
1999         Jan.  4 95,316 93,940 29,312 8,461 56,167 140 1,225 11 8,169 87,146
1999         Mar. 115,913 85,979 29,048 7,518 49,414 20,588 9,337 8 7,197 108,715
         June 108,811 86,925 28,106 8,551 50,269 25,786 − 3,910 9 6,714 102,096
         Sep. 125,037 89,368 31,762 8,046 49,560 21,924 13,735 10 6,191 118,846         Dec. 141,958 93,039 32,287 8,332 52,420 9,162 39,746 11 6,179 135,779
2000         Mar. 120,291 96,835 32,208 8,681 55,946 10,537 12,909 10 13,482 106,808
         Apr. 126,571 95,481 32,208 7,688 55,585 8,346 22,735 8 10,461 116,110
         May 121,282 95,310 32,208 7,700 55,402 17,563 8,396 12 7,828 113,453         June 139,873 96,018 33,744 7,581 54,693 4,551 39,296 9 8,047 131,826
         July 114,851 94,838 33,744 7,374 53,720 14,114 5,890 10 6,624 108,227
         Aug. 104,396 94,493 33,744 7,428 53,321 11,466 − 1,577 15 7,927 96,469
         Sep. 126,332 100,750 34,874 7,815 58,061 5,616 19,958 8 10,141 116,191
         Oct. 114,646 100,212 34,874 7,684 57,654 1,765 12,662 7 18,046 96,600
         Nov. 98,238 99,746 34,874 7,620 57,252 313 − 1,828 7 6,652 91,585
         Dec. 100,762 93,815 32,676 7,762 53,377 313 6,620 14 6,592 94,170
2001         Jan. 106,446 92,019 31,945 7,856 52,218 313 14,106 8 6,683 99,763
         Feb. 110,799 91,297 31,956 7,628 51,713 313 19,181 8 6,705 104,094         Mar. 116,133 93,187 32,710 7,752 52,726 313 22,626 8 6,770 109,364
         Apr. 106,431 91,768 33,100 7,617 51,051 313 14,337 13 6,685 99,746
         May 111,163 95,808 34,994 7,956 52,858 313 15,035 8 6,816 104,347         June 99,774 95,817 35,494 8,158 52,165 313 3,637 7 6,840 92,934
         July 107,438 92,879 33,708 7,980 51,191 313 14,240 6 7,005 100,433
*Claims and liabilities vis- à-vis all countries within and outside EMU. Until Deutsche Bundesbank ’s cross-border payments within the Eurosystem. From
December 2000, the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, by virtue November 2000 including the TARGET positions which were previouslyof revaluations, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the levels shown (in columns 6 and 9) as bilateral assets and liabilities vis- à-vis national
are computed on the basis of cumulative transaction values. From January central banks outside the Eurosystem. —3See footnote 2. —4Euro
2001 onwards, all end-of-month levels will be valued at market prices. — opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at January 1, 1999. 
1Including loans to the World Bank. —2Including the balances in the
72*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
10. Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
Until the end of 1998 DM million, from 1999 euro million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities to non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  to foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms paymentsor month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received
operations operations
All countries
 
1997 461,760 141,722 320,038 132,372 187,666 172,843 14,823 392,071 80,743 311,328 181,987 129,341 85,746 43,5951998 502,610 140,729 361,881 169,889 191,992 176,485 15,507 429,240 81,092 348,148 220,628 127,520 87,576 39,9441999 277,331 52,774 224,557 115,564 108,993 100,777 8,216 293,849 56,632 237,217 166,026 71,191 52,047 19,1442000 320,874 43,462 277,412 152,752 124,660 116,971 7,689 439,560 52,663 386,897 302,524 84,373 63,093 21,280
2001         Mar. 384,512 60,615 323,897 196,450 127,447 119,371 8,076 457,305 54,100 403,205 318,240 84,965 62,428 22,537
         Apr.  
r 383,295 59,773 323,522 197,628 125,894 117,685 8,209 462,998 59,615 403,383 320,297 83,086 59,694 23,392
         May  r 384,527 59,059 325,468 199,395 126,073 117,926 8,147 467,926 63,530 404,396 320,901 83,495 59,943 23,552
         June 384,473 57,593 326,880 197,748 129,132 121,006 8,126 473,932 60,230 413,702 326,868 86,834 62,320 24,514
EU countries
 
1997 287,024 130,611 156,413 68,161 88,252 80,199 8,053 236,747 68,777 167,970 110,157 57,813 46,097 11,7161998 307,523 130,398 177,125 84,422 92,703 83,927 8,776 265,214 68,873 196,341 137,494 58,847 46,896 11,9511999 157,617 47,992 109,625 56,450 53,175 48,500 4,675 194,809 49,243 145,566 111,605 33,961 27,532 6,4292000 177,782 39,563 138,219 78,298 59,921 55,718 4,203 316,549 45,473 271,076 231,083 39,993 32,457 7,536
2001         Mar. 216,051 56,057 159,994 96,579 63,415 59,014 4,401 325,873 46,302 279,571 238,840 40,731 32,747 7,984
         Apr.  
r 216,701 54,943 161,758 100,094 61,664 57,196 4,468 329,449 51,726 277,723 238,404 39,319 30,987 8,332
         May  r 206,826 53,552 153,274 90,562 62,712 58,116 4,596 328,324 55,874 272,450 232,538 39,912 31,552 8,360
         June 209,105 53,147 155,958 92,946 63,012 58,498 4,514 333,130 52,633 280,497 238,967 41,530 32,778 8,752
of which: EMU member countries 1
 
1997 174,416 66,022 108,394 42,064 66,330 60,694 5,636 177,629 51,339 126,290 82,879 43,411 35,206 8,2051998 190,953 68,418 122,535 54,167 68,368 62,491 5,877 197,566 50,579 146,987 103,899 43,088 35,021 8,0671999 104,071 25,946 78,125 38,747 39,378 36,074 3,304 151,179 38,117 113,062 88,763 24,299 20,173 4,1262000 120,976 22,737 98,239 52,976 45,263 42,389 2,874 241,330 33,698 207,632 179,095 28,537 23,569 4,968
2001         Mar. 138,807 33,620 105,187 55,488 49,699 46,547 3,152 249,255 34,538 214,717 184,172 30,545 24,466 6,079
         Apr.  
r 135,175 29,358 105,817 57,354 48,463 45,208 3,255 250,602 37,594 213,008 183,500 29,508 23,096 6,412
         May  r 136,517 29,965 106,552 57,320 49,232 45,861 3,371 254,580 37,790 216,790 186,981 29,809 23,408 6,401
         June 137,804 30,383 107,421 58,072 49,349 46,119 3,230 262,935 38,115 224,820 193,844 30,976 24,228 6,748
Other industrial countries
 
1997 89,482 6,436 83,046 45,814 37,232 34,050 3,182 95,662 7,884 87,778 55,306 32,472 26,280 6,1921998 109,682 8,246 101,436 61,999 39,437 36,162 3,275 102,058 7,655 94,403 61,741 32,662 26,292 6,3701999 71,958 3,595 68,363 45,540 22,823 21,220 1,603 68,024 4,870 63,154 44,518 18,636 15,387 3,2492000 84,502 2,925 81,577 54,272 27,305 25,673 1,632 84,464 4,711 79,753 56,986 22,767 18,621 4,146
2001         Mar. 106,865 3,153 103,712 77,128 26,584 24,937 1,647 92,990 5,527 87,463 64,968 22,495 17,922 4,573
         Apr. 102,986 3,244 99,742 73,434 26,308 24,697 1,611 95,268 5,613 89,655 67,556 22,099 17,447 4,652
         May 114,356 4,104 110,252 84,328 25,924 24,346 1,578 100,822 5,382 95,440 73,711 21,729 16,943 4,786         June 110,386 2,908 107,478 80,783 26,695 25,104 1,591 99,053 5,264 93,789 70,982 22,807 17,928 4,879
Countries in transition
 
1997 27,427 296 27,131 5,916 21,215 19,487 1,728 10,690 90 10,600 595 10,005 4,007 5,9981998 30,107 360 29,747 7,914 21,833 20,218 1,615 11,383 135 11,248 657 10,591 4,941 5,6501999 16,402 231 16,171 4,603 11,568 10,934 634 6,256 78 6,178 481 5,697 3,119 2,5782000 19,082 240 18,842 5,028 13,814 13,104 710 8,202 113 8,089 928 7,161 4,384 2,777
2001         Mar. 19,625 224 19,401 5,324 14,077 13,309 768 8,479 111 8,368 1,149 7,219 4,479 2,740
         Apr. 20,287 234 20,053 5,680 14,373 13,597 776 8,262 137 8,125 1,184 6,941 4,062 2,879
         May 20,127 231 19,896 5,821 14,075 13,373 702 8,318 144 8,174 1,189 6,985 4,099 2,886         June 21,151 224 20,927 5,892 15,035 14,355 680 8,642 133 8,509 1,307 7,202 4,178 3,024
Developing countries
 
1997 57,827 4,379 53,448 12,481 40,967 39,107 1,860 48,972 3,992 44,980 15,929 29,051 9,362 19,6891998 55,298 1,725 53,573 15,554 38,019 36,178 1,841 50,585 4,429 46,156 20,736 25,420 9,447 15,9731999 31,354 956 30,398 8,971 21,427 20,123 1,304 24,760 2,441 22,319 9,422 12,897 6,009 6,8882000 39,508 734 38,774 15,154 23,620 22,476 1,144 30,345 2,366 27,979 13,527 14,452 7,631 6,821
2001         Mar. 41,971 1,181 40,790 17,419 23,371 22,111 1,260 29,963 2,160 27,803 13,283 14,520 7,280 7,240
         Apr. 43,321 1,352 41,969 18,420 23,549 22,195 1,354 30,019 2,139 27,880 13,153 14,727 7,198 7,529
         May 43,218 1,172 42,046 18,684 23,362 22,091 1,271 30,462 2,130 28,332 13,463 14,869 7,349 7,520         June 43,831 1,314 42,517 18,127 24,390 23,049 1,341 33,107 2,200 30,907 15,612 15,295 7,436 7,859
* Including the assets and liabilities vis- à-vis non-residents of individuals in and decreases have not been eliminated; to this extent the changes in totals
Germany. The assets and liabilities vis- à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in are not comparable with the figures shown in Table X, 7. —1Including
Germany are shown in Table 4 of Section IV, "Banks". Statistical increases Greece from January 2001. 
73*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
X. Foreign trade and payments
11. Exchange rates for the national currencies of the EMU countries, the Deutsche Mark value of the ECU *
and euro conversion rates
France Italy Netherlands Belgium/ Austria Spain Finland Ireland Portugal Greece ECU values  1 
Yearly Luxembourg GRD  100  2 ECU  1
average FRF  100 ITL  1,000 NLG  100 BEF/LUF  100 ATS  100 ESP  100 FIM  100 IEP  1 PTE  100 EUR  1  2 = DEM ...
Spot middle rates on the Frankfurt exchange in DEM
   
1991 29.409 1.3377 88.742 4.857  14.211 1.597  41.087 2.671  1.149  0.9103 2.050761992 29.500 1.2720 88.814 4.857  14.211 1.529  34.963 2.656  1.157  0.8178 2.020311993 29.189 1.0526 89.017 4.785  14.214 1.303  28.915 2.423  1.031  0.7213 1.936391994 29.238 1.0056 89.171 4.8530 14.214 1.2112 31.108 2.4254 0.9774 0.6683 1.92452
1995 28.718 0.8814 89.272 4.8604 14.214 1.1499 32.832 2.2980 0.9555 0.6182 1.87375
1996 29.406 0.9751 89.243 4.8592 14.214 1.1880 32.766 2.4070 0.9754 0.6248 1.909541997 29.705 1.0184 88.857 4.8464 14.210 1.1843 33.414 2.6297 0.9894 0.6349 1.964381998 29.829 1.0132 88.714 4.8476 14.213 1.1779 32.920 2.5049 0.9763 0.5952 1.969131999 . . . . . . . . . 325.76 .
2000 . . . . . . . . . 336.63 .
      
Irrevocable euro conversion rates (EUR 1 = currency units ...) 3
   
6.55957 1936.27 2.20371 40.3399 13.7603 166.386 5.94573 0.787564 200.482 4 340.750 5 1.95583
*Calculated from daily quotations. —1According to data from the Euro- ence exchange rates of the ECB (EU R 1 = GRD ...). —3Applicable from
pean Commission. —2Until 1998 reciprocal values of the exchange rates for January 1, 1999. —4Applicable from January 1, 2001. —5Deutsche Mark
the Deutsche Mark, published by the Bank of Greece; from 1999 euro refer- conversion rate. 
12. Exchange rates of the Deutsche Mark and the euro against other currencies *
Yearly Japan Denmark Sweden Norway Switzerland Canada Australia New Zealand United States United Kingdom
or monthly
average USD JPY DKK SEK GBP NOK CHF CAD AUD  1 NZD 1 
Spot middle rates on the Frankfurt exchange (1 or 100 currency units = DEM ...)
      
1991 1.6612 1.2346 25.932 27.421 2.926  25.580 115.740 1.4501 1.2942 0.95891992 1.5595 1.2313 25.869 26.912 2.753  25.143 111.198 1.2917 1.1476 0.84061993 1.6544 1.4945 25.508 21.248 2.483  23.303 111.949 1.2823 1.1235 0.89401994 1.6218 1.5870 25.513 21.013 2.4816 22.982 118.712 1.1884 1.1848 0.9605
1995 1.4338 1.5293 25.570 20.116 2.2620 22.614 121.240 1.0443 1.0622 0.9399
1996 1.5037 1.3838 25.945 22.434 2.3478 23.292 121.891 1.1027 1.1782 1.03571997 1.7348 1.4378 26.249 22.718 2.8410 24.508 119.508 1.2533 1.2889 1.14531998 1.7592 1.3484 26.258 22.128 2.9142 23.297 121.414 1.1884 1.1070 0.9445
      
Euro reference exchange rates published by the European Central Bank (EUR 1 = currency units ...) 2
      
1999 1.0658 121.32 7.4355 8.8075 0.65875 8.3104 1.6003 1.5840 1.6523 2.01452000 0.9236 99.47 7.4538 8.4452 0.60948 8.1129 1.5579 1.3706 1.5889 2.0288
1999         July 1.0353 123.71 7.4388 8.7446 0.65779 8.1811 1.6040 1.5403 1.5757 1.9664
         Aug. 1.0604 120.10 7.4376 8.7519 0.66014 8.2602 1.6004 1.5833 1.6451 2.0154         Sep. 1.0501 112.39 7.4337 8.6337 0.64683 8.2270 1.6015 1.5518 1.6186 2.0097
         Oct. 1.0706 113.52 7.4334 8.7272 0.64587 8.2885 1.5943 1.5808 1.6414 2.0798
         Nov. 1.0338 108.25 7.4366 8.6330 0.63702 8.1907 1.6051 1.5160 1.6179 2.0178         Dec. 1.0110 103.72 7.4403 8.5865 0.62651 8.0977 1.6012 1.4906 1.5798 1.9891
2000         Jan. 1.0137 106.53 7.4439 8.5968 0.61834 8.1215 1.6103 1.4687 1.5421 1.9716
         Feb. 0.9834 107.64 7.4453 8.5114 0.61466 8.0991 1.6069 1.4270 1.5642 2.0057         Mar. 0.9643 102.59 7.4473 8.3884 0.61063 8.1110 1.6042 1.4082 1.5827 1.9674
         Apr. 0.9470 99.92 7.4505 8.2671 0.59802 8.1545 1.5740 1.3890 1.5878 1.9097
         May 0.9060 98.09 7.4570 8.2410 0.60151 8.1994 1.5562 1.3549 1.5703 1.9355         June 0.9492 100.71 7.4607 8.3177 0.62927 8.2490 1.5608 1.4018 1.5968 2.0174
         July 0.9397 101.39 7.4589 8.4070 0.62304 8.1763 1.5505 1.3886 1.5978 2.0394
         Aug. 0.9041 97.76 7.4578 8.3917 0.60710 8.0959 1.5506 1.3406 1.5575 2.0305         Sep. 0.8721 93.11 7.4627 8.4145 0.60773 8.0266 1.5307 1.2945 1.5749 2.0882
         Oct. 0.8552 92.75 7.4472 8.5245 0.58933 8.0032 1.5130 1.2924 1.6176 2.1346
         Nov. 0.8564 93.26 7.4564 8.6289 0.60039 7.9950 1.5216 1.3204 1.6387 2.1438         Dec. 0.8973 100.61 7.4580 8.6622 0.61342 8.1334 1.5137 1.3679 1.6422 2.0905
2001         Jan. 0.9383 109.57 7.4642 8.9055 0.63480 8.2355 1.5291 1.4098 1.6891 2.1103
         Feb. 0.9217 107.08 7.4630 8.9770 0.63400 8.2125 1.5358 1.4027 1.7236 2.1184         Mar. 0.9095 110.33 7.4643 9.1264 0.62915 8.1600 1.5355 1.4167 1.8072 2.1753
         Apr. 0.8920 110.36 7.4633 9.1120 0.62168 8.1146 1.5287 1.3903 1.7847 2.1975
         May 0.8742 106.50 7.4612 9.0576 0.61328 7.9927 1.5334 1.3473 1.6813 2.0723         June 0.8532 104.30 7.4539 9.2106 0.60890 7.9360 1.5225 1.3016 1.6469 2.0589
         July 0.8607 107.21 7.4447 9.2637 0.60857 7.9714 1.5135 1.3153 1.6890 2.1074
*Calculated from daily quotations. —1Exchange rates from Australia and rates, which are calculated on the basis of the concertation between the
New Zealand; those for New Zealand calculated from rates as at the middle central banks at 2.15 p.m. and end of the month. —2The ECB publishes daily reference exchange
74*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportAugust 2001
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
13. Effective exchange rates * of the euro and selected foreign currencies
  
1st qtr 1999 = 100
Memo item:
Effective exchange rate of the euro against the Indicators of the German economy ’s Effective nominal exchange rates of selected foreign
currencies of a ... price competitiveness  3  against... currencies against 18 industrial countries  3  4 
broad group  1 narrow group  2 38 countries  4 18 industrial countries  4 
Real Real on the basis
of the on the basis on the basis
on the basis of Pound Canadian Swiss Japanese of consumer of consumer deflators of
Nominal prices Nominal prices consumer prices US dollar sterling dollar franc yen total sales  5 
1995 93.2 107.8 107.8 108.8 109.0 109.6 108.8 86.1 84.0 106.2 105.4 115.5
1996 95.4 105.9 107.9 108.8 104.4 106.7 105.8 90.9 85.9 108.6 104.2 100.51997 90.4 96.6 99.1 99.5 98.5 101.4 100.1 98.8 99.8 109.5 97.9 95.81998 96.6 99.1 101.5 101.3 100.1 101.4 100.7 103.4 103.3 103.3 99.9 89.61999 96.6 95.8 95.7 95.7 97.4 97.7 97.4 100.8 102.3 102.1 98.2 105.2
2000 88.2 86.3 85.7 86.5 91.1 92.1 91.0 105.1 104.9 103.4 96.6 118.6
1996         1st qtr 95.5 107.6 108.9 110.2 106.6 108.7 107.6 89.8 83.1 107.7 106.8 102.7
         2nd qtr 94.5 105.3 107.1 108.1 103.8 106.0 105.2 91.1 84.4 108.6 104.2 102.3         3rd qtr 96.3 106.3 108.6 109.5 104.5 106.9 105.6 90.9 85.2 108.0 104.8 100.0         4th qtr 95.5 104.4 106.9 107.4 102.7 105.2 104.6 91.8 91.0 110.0 100.7 97.0
1997         1st qtr 91.8 99.6 102.4 103.2 100.2 103.5 102.2 96.9 96.4 111.1 96.0 93.7
         2nd qtr 90.0 96.4 99.5 99.7 98.2 101.6 100.6 98.1 98.9 109.1 97.5 96.5         3rd qtr 87.7 93.2 95.5 95.7 96.8 99.6 98.0 99.5 101.4 109.7 97.9 100.0         4th qtr 92.1 97.0 99.1 99.2 98.9 100.8 99.7 100.5 102.4 108.1 100.2 92.8
1998         Jan. 93.4 97.6 99.7 99.6 99.4 100.4 . 103.6 103.9 106.5 100.2 91.3
         Feb. 92.5 96.4 98.8 98.8 98.8 100.0 99.0 102.6 103.8 106.6 100.6 94.0         Mar. 91.8 95.4 97.9 97.8 97.8 99.7 . 103.3 105.9 108.3 99.6 91.8
         Apr. 92.3 95.6 98.4 98.2 98.0 100.0 . 104.0 106.4 107.4 98.1 89.4
         May 94.9 98.1 101.2 101.0 99.7 101.5 100.5 104.2 102.9 106.3 98.7 86.8         June 95.5 98.5 101.1 101.0 99.9 101.7 . 106.2 105.1 105.3 98.7 83.9
         July 95.4 98.4 100.8 101.0 100.0 102.0 . 106.8 104.9 104.0 97.8 83.8
         Aug. 96.8 99.6 102.2 102.3 100.6 102.6 101.5 108.4 104.4 101.0 99.1 81.5         Sep. 101.3 102.8 104.6 104.3 102.4 102.8 . 103.7 103.0 100.4 101.2 85.5
         Oct. 102.8 103.8 105.7 105.2 102.4 102.6 . 99.0 100.0 97.7 102.3 94.1
         Nov. 100.6 101.3 103.6 103.2 101.0 101.8 101.7 100.1 99.7 98.1 100.7 95.3         Dec. 101.6 102.1 103.4 103.2 101.5 101.9 . 99.0 99.6 97.7 101.9 97.3
1999         Jan. 101.4 101.4 102.0 101.8 100.7 101.0 . 97.9 98.5 98.7 100.3 101.4
         Feb. 100.0 100.0 99.9 99.9 100.1 100.0 100.0 99.9 99.7 101.0 100.1 99.9         Mar. 98.7 98.6 98.3 98.3 99.0 99.1 . 102.2 101.7 100.3 99.7 98.8
         Apr. 97.5 97.2 97.1 96.9 98.3 98.5 . 102.4 102.1 102.3 98.8 99.4
         May 96.9 96.4 96.6 96.5 97.9 98.4 98.1 102.8 103.1 104.6 98.6 97.8         June 95.1 94.5 94.7 94.7 96.7 97.6 . 103.6 103.4 104.2 98.4 100.0
         July 95.1 94.5 94.8 95.2 97.1 98.1 . 103.8 102.1 102.9 97.8 101.3
         Aug. 96.3 95.5 95.4 95.6 97.3 97.6 96.7 101.0 101.8 101.7 98.1 105.7         Sep. 95.2 93.8 93.6 93.4 96.0 96.0 . 99.3 102.9 102.2 97.0 112.1
         Oct. 96.4 94.7 94.4 94.3 96.3 96.1 . 98.2 103.6 102.0 97.9 112.0
         Nov. 94.0 92.4 92.0 92.0 95.0 95.1 94.8 99.1 103.7 103.0 96.2 115.4         Dec. 92.2 90.7 90.1 90.4 94.0 94.3 . 99.4 104.5 102.5 95.7 118.9
2000         Jan. 92.4 90.8 90.2 90.8 94.2 95.0 . 99.6 106.2 104.5 95.3 115.8
         Feb. 91.2 89.5 89.2 89.8 93.6 94.5 93.2 102.2 106.3 105.1 95.2 112.9         Mar. 89.7 88.1 87.7 88.3 92.4 93.4 . 102.2 106.0 104.5 94.6 117.3
         Apr. 88.4 86.7 86.1 86.6 91.4 92.3 . 102.8 107.4 104.0 95.8 119.2
         May 86.9 85.1 84.5 85.0 90.4 91.2 91.2 106.1 105.7 103.0 96.2 118.9         June 89.9 88.1 87.4 88.1 92.1 92.8 . 103.4 102.3 103.5 97.0 118.8
         July 89.4 87.5 86.9 87.9 92.1 92.9 . 104.3 103.1 103.7 97.6 117.3
         Aug. 87.0 85.2 84.6 85.5 90.3 91.6 90.4 106.1 104.6 103.8 96.5 119.3         Sep. 85.3 83.3 82.8 83.6 89.1 90.5 . 107.4 103.2 104.1 96.9 123.1
         Oct. 84.4 82.2 81.6 82.4 88.2 89.6 . 109.1 106.0 102.5 97.6 122.3
         Nov. 85.1 82.8 82.3 83.2 88.6 89.9 89.3 109.9 104.2 100.6 97.3 121.9         Dec. 88.1 85.8 85.4 86.4 90.6 91.7 . 108.4 103.8 101.5 99.3 115.8
2001         Jan. 91.7 89.1 89.2 90.3 92.8 94.0 . 107.7 102.3 102.9 99.9 108.8
         Feb. 91.0 88.6 88.3 89.7 92.7 94.0
p 92.4 108.7 101.8 101.7 99.1 110.5
         Mar. 91.4 89.0 88.4 90.0 p 92.5 93.9 . 111.5 102.8 100.0 99.2 106.6
         Apr. 91.0 88.4 87.6 89.2 p 92.3 93.5 . 112.9 103.6 100.3 99.3 105.5
         May 89.3 86.6 85.9 87.5 p 91.2 92.6 p 90.9 113.0 104.1 101.6 98.2 108.2
         June 88.1 85.3 84.7 86.3 p 90.5 p 92.1 . 114.0 104.1 103.0 98.4 109.1
         July 89.1 86.1 85.4 87.2 p 91.0 p 92.5 . 114.3 104.7 102.9 99.4 106.5
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of manufactured goods trade between 1995 and 1997 and capture
the currency concerned. —1ECB calculations; in addition to the countries third-market effects. From January 2001, Greece ceased to be a partner
belonging to the narrow group (see footnote 2), this group also includes the country in the effective exchange rate of the euro; the weighting schemefollowing countries: Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, China, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech was adjusted accordingly. Due to change in the weighting scheme, ef fective
Republic, Estonia, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, exchange rate data as from January 2001 are not fully comparable withMorocco, New Zealand, Philippines, Poland, Romania, Russia, Slovakia, earlier observations. For the prices are not yet available, estimates haveSlovenia, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand and Turkey. 2ECB calculations been used. For the definition of the method see ECB, Monthly Bulletin, April
based on the weighted averages of the effective exchange rates of the euro 2000, page 39 ff. —3The method of calculation is largely consistent with
or, prior to 1999, of the exchange rates of the currencies preceding the euro the procedure used by the ECB to compute the effective exchange rates ofagainst the following countries: USA, Japan, Switzerland, United Kingdom, the euro. Up to 1998, the figures for Germany are identical to the previous ly
Sweden, Denmark, Greece, Norway, Canada, Australia, Hong Kong, South published data on the real external value of the Deutsche Mark. —
Korea and Singapore. The weights used in these calculations are based on 4 Including EMU countries. — 5 Annual and quarterly averages. 
75*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
76*

Overview of
publicationsby the DeutscheBundesbankThis overview is designed to inform
readers about selected recent eco-nomic and statistical publications bythe Deutsche Bundesbank. Exceptwhere stated, these publications arepublished both in German and English,and on the Internet.
The publications are available to inter-
ested parties free of charge from thePress and Public Relations Division.Against reimbursement of the costs, amonthly updated file with approxi-mately 40,000 time series published bythe Bundesbank can also be obtainedon magnetic tape or on ZIP diskettefrom the Statistical Data ProcessingDivision. Please submit orders in writ-ing, using the addresses specified onthe back of the title page. Selectedtime series can also be downloadedfrom the Internet.
Annual Report
Monthly Report
For information on the articles published between
1990 and 2000 see the index attached to the Jan-
uary 2001 Monthly Report.
September 2000
– The role of the International Monetary Fund in
a changing global economic environment
– The Deutsche Bundesbank’s involvement in
banking supervision
– The performance of German credit institutions
in 1999Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
77*

October 2000
– The market for venture capital in Germany
– The profitability and investment behaviour of
non-financial corporations
– Setting up an Economic Research Centre at the
Deutsche Bundesbank
November 2000
– The economic scene in Germany in autumn
2000
December 2000
– Subsidy trends in Germany since the start of
the nineties
– The price effects of deregulation and privatisa-
tion in the product markets
– Electronic banking from a prudential super-
visory perspective
January 2001
– Recent institutional developments in economic
and monetary cooperation
– The information content of survey data on ex-
pected price developments for monetary policy
– Structural current account balances: longer-
term trends and determinants
February 2001
– The economic scene in Germany around the
turn of 2000–01
March 2001
– The outlook for the enlargement of the EU
following the Nice European Council
– West German enterprises’ profitability and
financing in 1999
– Company pension schemes in Germany– German balance of payments in 2000April 2001
– The new Basel Capital Accord (Basel II)– The role and behaviour of German
fund managers on the equity market
– Structure of German firms’ inter-
national capital links at end-1999
May 2001
– The economic scene in Germany in spring
2001
June 2001
– Overall financial flows in 2000
– Monetary developments in the euro area since
the beginning of monetary union
– Trends in Länder Government finance since the
mid-nineties
– Ageing, financial markets and monetary policy –
the Bundesbank’s spring conference 2001
July 2001
– Cross-border capital movements and the role
of the IMF
– Real interest rates: movements and determi-
nants
– Factor prices, employment and capital stock in
Germany: results of a simulation study
August 2001
– The economic scene in Germany in summer
2001
Statistical Supplements to the
Monthly Report1
1 Banking statistics (monthly)
2 Capital market statistics (monthly)
3 Balance of payments statistics (monthly)
4 Seasonally adjusted business statistics (monthly)5 Exchange rate statistics (quarterly)Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
78*1Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data
contained in the German originals are available in English.

Discussion papers
of the Economic Research Centre
January 2001 1/01
Unemployment, Factor Substitution, and Capital
Formation
January 2001 2/01
Should the Individual Voting Records of CentralBankers be Published?
January 2001 3/01
Voting Transparency and Conflicting Interests inCentral Bank Councils
January 2001 4/01
Optimal Degrees of Transparency in Monetary
Policymaking
January 2001 5/01
Are Contemporary Central Banks Transparentabout Economic Models and Objectives and What
Difference Does it Make?
February 2001 6/01
What can we learn about monetary policy trans-parency from financial market data?
March 2001 7/01
Budgetary Policy and Unemployment Dynamics
March 2001 8/01
Investment Behaviour of German Equity Fund
Managers
April 2001 9/01
Der Informationsgehalt von Umfragedaten zur er-warteten Preisentwicklung für die Geldpolitik
Mai 2001 10/01
Exchange-rate pass-through and real exchangerate in EU candidate countries
Prior discussion papers are – in some cases as ab-
stracts – available on the Internet.
Special Publications
The monetary policy of the Bundesbank,October 1995
2Makro-ökonometrisches Mehr-Länder-Modell,November 1996
3
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im Bereichvon Währung und Wirtschaft, April 1997
3
Europäische Organisationen und Gremien im Be-reich von Währung und Wirtschaft, Mai 1997
3
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 bis1989, August 1993
3
The market for German Federal securities,May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model:
MEMMOD, June 2000
Special Statistical Publications
1 Banking statistics guidelines and customer clas-
sification, June 20004
2 Bankenstatistik Kundensystematik Firmenver-
zeichnisse, Juni 20003,5
3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen,
Januar 20003
4 Financial accounts for Germany 1991 to 1999,
January 20016
5 Annual accounts of west German enterprises
1971 to 1996, March 19991
(The data of this Special Statistical Publicationcan also be obtained on diskette for a fee ofcurrently 50 DM)Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
79*1Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data
contained in the German originals are available in English.
2Also available (in different editions) in French, Spanish,
Russian and Chinese.
3Available in German only.
4Only the sections “Monthly Balance Sheet Statistics”,
“External position” and “Customer classification” (“Over-
all survey on sectoral classification”, “Survey on break-
down by industry or activity” and “Explanatory notes on
the system of customer classification by industry or activ-
ity”) are available in English translation.
5Updated version available on the Internet.
6Available on the Internet only.oNot on the Internet.

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2001
80*6 Ratios from the annual accounts of west and
east German enterprises for 1996, September1999
1
(The data of this Special Statistical Publication
can also be obtained on diskette for a fee of
currently 50 DM)
7 Erläuterungen zum Leistungsverzeichnis der
Außenwirtschaftsverordnung,
März 1994o,3
8 Balance of payments statistics of the Federal
Republic of Germany, 2nd edition, February1991
o
9 Securities deposits,
August 2001
10 International capital links,
May 20011,6
11 Balance of payments by region,
August 2001
12 Technological services in the balance of pay-
ments, May 20001,6
Banking regulations
1 Bundesbank Act and Statute of the European
System of Central Banks and of the EuropeanCentral Bank, June 19982 Gesetz über das Kreditwesen, Februar 2001
3
2a Grundsatz I über die Eigenmittel der Institute,
Januar 20013
2b Grundsatz II über die Liquidität der Institute,
August 19993
7 Instruction sheet for the reporting of large ex-
posures and loans of 3 million Deutsche Markor more pursuant to sections 13 to 14 of the
Banking Act, September 1998
Publications on EMU
Informationsbriefe zur Europäischen Wirtschafts-
und Währungsunion3
euro 2002 – information on the introduction ofeuro banknotes and coins
No. 1, July 2000No. 2, October 2000
No. 3, February 2001
Der Euro ist da. Wir sagen Ihnen, worauf es an-
kommt. (Leaflet)
3
For footnotes, see p. 79*.

