Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
Vol. 53
No. 5

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
Deutsche Bundesbank
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 1460431 Frankfurt am Main
P .O.B. 10 06 02
60006 Frankfurt am MainFederal Republic of Germany
Telephone (0 69) 95 66-1
or (0 69) 95 66 . . . plus extension number
Telex 41 227 within Germany
4 14 431 from abroad
Fax (0 69) 5 60 10 71
Internet http://www.bundesbank.deReproduction permitted only if source is stated.ISSN 0418-8292The German original of this Report went to
press on May 18, 2001Annual and weekly publishing schedules for
selected statistics of the Deutsche Bundes-bank are available and can be downloadedfrom our Internet address. The relevant dataare also published on the Internet.
The Monthly Report is published autono-
mously by the Deutsche Bundesbank, Frank-furt am Main, by virtue of section 18 of theBundesbank Act of July 26, 1957. It is avail-able to interested parties free of charge.

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
ContentsThe economic scene in Germany
in spring 2001 5
The international and European
setting 6Financial markets in Germany 21Economic conditions in Germany 28Appendix: Problems of internationalcomparisons of growth – a supplementaryanalysis 39Foreign trade and payments 44Public finance 52
Statistical Section 1*
Key economic data for EMU 6*
Overall monetary survey in the EMU 8*Consolidated financial statementof the Eurosystem 16*Banks 20*Minimum reserves 42*Interest rates 43*Capital market 48*Public finance in Germany 52*Economic conditions 60*Foreign trade and payments 67*
Overview of publications by the
Deutsche Bundesbank 77*

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
4

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
5The economic scene
in Germany in spring2001

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
6The international
and EuropeansettingDevelopments in the world economy
So far this year, the world economic climate
has continued to cool off. The United Statesis still the central force slowing the pace ofgrowth. Real gross domestic product (GDP) inthe United States rose at an annualised rateof 1
12% in the winter half of 2000-01,
its slowest growth since 1991. As a result,the preceding considerable overextension ofmacroeconomic production capacities has de-clined perceptibly. There are additionallymany signs that the US economy has not yetreached its cyclical trough. The sharp reduc-tion in central bank lending rates since thebeginning of 2001 might be having a positiveimpact on consumer confidence and the busi-ness climate. However, it demonstrates yetagain just how difficult it is to take an econ-omy which has built up a need for adjustmentfollowing a period of conjunctural tensionand considerable excesses in its equity mar-kets and to redirect it towards a soft landing.
The braking effects emanating from the
United States, which are being transmittedprimarily via foreign trade and internationalfinancial markets, have in the meantime alsoimpaired the current situation and future out-look of other economic regions, albeit tovarying degrees. The slowdown in growth ofthe IT sector, in particular, has meant that theeast Asian economies which specialise inthese export products have had to clampdown perceptibly on growth. It is true thatmost of that region’s emerging economiesare still on a path of growth. However, theJapanese economy has taken yet another hit;domestic demand, particularly private con-Persistent
slowdown in
the world
economy

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
7sumption, has been too weak to offset the
dampening of export activity. The LatinAmerican countries present a rather mixedpicture. Countries having close trade relationswith the United States, such as Mexico, werehit particularly hard by the slumping US econ-omy, whereas other countries with a less-dense network of trade relations but withlarge US-dollar-denominated foreign debt,such as Brazil, seemed to benefit, on balance,from the US Federal Reserve slashing its inter-est rates. Argentina is a special case becauseit is undergoing a difficult economic andfinancial crisis. The main causes of this crisisare the overvaluation of the peso and thegovernment’s serious budget problems. Theworldwide economic slowdown left its markin the central and east European countries,too. In the Russian case, the fall in crude oilprices and the real appreciation of the roubleare additional dampening elements.
The euro area is in a more favourable position
relative to the US and Japanese economies.All the same, the euro area’s business cyclehas slowed down. Besides the negative influ-ence from the United States, the worseningof the terms of trade – in connection with thesharp rise in oil prices and the euro’s weak-ness – contributed to this slowdown. The de-pletion of purchasing power from householdsand enterprises in the euro area picked upagain this year following a short respite. Theinability of the euro to recover against theUS dollar in a sustained manner and thesharp rise in international quotations for min-eral oil products were the two main reasons.Against that background, the International
Monetary Fund (IMF) recently made a signifi-cant downward revision in its forecast; how-ever, there are no expectations of a world-wide recession. Global output, at 3
14% for
2001, is expected to continue its perceptiblegrowth, even if at a slower pace than in2000, when it increased by just under 5%.According to the IMF staff prediction, thegeneral phase of weakness will only last arelatively short time. The upward forces in theUnited States may gain the upper hand asearly as in the second half of 2001. The fore-cast also states that next year the economicsituation in Japan will brighten up. In Europe’scase, the IMF forecasts that the pace ofgrowth, in the light of generally robust do-mestic demand boosted by tax relief in themajor euro area countries, will likewise pickIMF forecasts for 2001 and 2002
Item 1999 2000 2001 2002
Real gross domestic
product Change from previous year in %
Advanced
economies 1 + 3.4 + 4.1 + 1.9 + 2.7
of which
United States + 4.2 + 5.0 + 1.5 + 2.5
Japan + 0.8 + 1.7 + 0.6 + 1.5EMU + 2.6 + 3.4 + 2.4 + 2.8
Consumer prices
2
Advanced
economies 1 + 1.4 + 2.3 + 2.1 + 1.8
of which
United States + 2.2 + 3.4 + 2.6 + 2.2
Japan – 0.3 – 0.6 – 0.7 0.0EMU + 1.2 + 2.4 + 2.3 + 1.7
UnemploymentNumber of unemployed as % of the
labour force
Advanced
economies
1 6.4 5.9 5.9 5.9
of which
United States 4.2 4.0 4.4 5.0
Japan 4.7 4.7 5.3 5.2EMU 9.9 9.0 8.4 8.1
Source: IMF, World Economic Outlook, May 2001. — 1Indus-
trialised countries plus Israel, China (Taiwan), Hong Kong (SpecialAdministrative Region), Republic of Korea and Singapore. —2Consumer price index.
Deutsche Bundesbank
IMF spring
forecast
remains
relatively
favourable, ...

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
8up. On the whole, the prospects that the
world economy may return to its path of po-tential growth in 2002 are considered to bequite favourable. According to the IMF fore-cast, though, the increase in world trade willslow down to 6
12% this year and next, after
having been as high as 1212% in 2000.
However, this scenario is fraught with consid-
erable risks. There is still quite a danger thatthe bottom may fall out of the US economyand that structural weakness in Japan maypersist. In addition, one cannot rule out therisk that the large external imbalance of theUnited States may be given more attention bythe markets than in the past, which couldlead to increased volatility in the foreign ex-change markets. Moreover, given weakergrowth, the structural problems existing insome emerging economies may becomemore prominent once again. That could cre-ate uncertainty in financial markets; if theworst came to the worst, it could even triggerdestabilising capital transactions.
In April 2001 consumer prices in the industri-
alised countries were up an average of 2
14%
on the year, representing a slight increase inthe rate of inflation, which had been 2% inMarch. Excluding Japan (which, given itsslightly declining price levels, pushes the aver-age value down significantly), price pressureswere considerably stronger (3%). The majorreason for the most recent clouding-over ofthe price climate was the sharp increase inprices for mineral oil products in April. In add-ition, other sources of energy, especially gas,whose prices trail heating oil quotations witha certain time lag owing to contractual pegs,became more expensive as of late. Quo-
tations in the crude oil markets themselvesheld steady in the first four months of thisyear, mostly within a relatively close range ofUS$ 24 to US$ 27 per barrel of North SeaBrent, remaining distinctly below the peak ofUS$ 34 reached in November 2000. Since theend of April, though, prices have been inch-ing upwards. According to the IMF forecast,consumer price inflation (starting from theaverage of 2.3% for all of 2000) will slowdown this year and next to 2.1% and 1.8%,respectively. However, this presupposes thatquotations in oil markets and the price ofmineral oil products go back down in thenear future and that the home-made pricepressures remain within tight boundaries.
According to initial estimates, real GDP (ad-
justed for seasonal and working-day vari-ations) in the United States rose in the wintermonths of 2001 by
12% from its level of au-
tumn 2000, considerably exceeding expect-ations. Its previous year’s level was surpassedby 2
34%. Seasonally adjusted private con-
sumption once again showed strong growth,at
34%, a surprise considering the distinct
worsening of consumer sentiment in the win-ter half of the year. It is also remarkable thatcommercial investment and housing con-struction went back up following a sluggishtrend in the autumn. Final demand, i.e. totaldemand less stockbuilding, was even justover 1% higher than in the previous period.However, this contrasted with a destocking,which put a considerable damper on growth.The change in stockkeeping, though, is apositive sign insofar as this constitutes an im-portant precondition for the economy re-... yet consider-
able downside
risks
Price develop-
ments in
industrialised
countriesUnited States

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
9covering in the near future. Foreign trade
exerted an expansionary influence for thefirst time in a long while. At a seasonally ad-justed 2
34%, imports weakened considerably
more than exports (12%). As a consequence,
the deficit in the real foreign balance dimin-ished perceptibly. However, this also demon-strates just what an impact the US economyhas on the other economies via foreign trade.
However, it would be premature to interpret
favourable GDP growth as indicating thateconomic recovery is just around the corner.Apart from statistical uncertainty in the na-tional accounts when performing the firstestimate of a quarterly result, the situation inthe labour market seems to have cloudedover significantly. The number of employedpersons plummeted in the past few months,with the unemployment rate rising from itsOctober nadir by well over one-half percent-age point to 4.5% as of late. In April, season-ally adjusted industrial output went down forthe seventh month running. In the first quar-ter, new orders for durables were 4
12%
lower than in the last quarter of 2000 anddown by just over 7% on the year. Moreover,the positive development in foreign trade atthe beginning of the year cannot be expectedto continue apace. Year-on-year consumerprice inflation, after having eased distinctly inMarch, went back up to 3.3% in April. Therise in prices for mineral oil products men-tioned at the beginning of the article was akey factor. In contrast, core inflation wentdown slightly, to 2.6%.
In the second half of 2000, the Japanese
economy stagnated, after seasonal adjust-ment. However, real GDP was still 1
12%
higher than a year earlier. The main factor be-hind the renewed weakness of the economywas that private domestic demand remainedanaemic, even falling below its level of thefirst half of the year, whereas export activitysuffered a considerable loss of steam, withimport activity remaining brisk. Following theturn of 2000-01, the downturn continued.Nominal exports fell by a seasonally adjusted
12% from their level in the fourth quarter.
Deliveries of IT goods and cars abroad plum-meted, contributing in large part to the de-cline in industrial output in the first quarter ofthe year, which amounted to a seasonally ad-justed 3
14% compared with the previous
quarter. The year-on-year decline was 1%.Households’ demand likewise tended to besluggish in the past few months. In addition,private investment is having less and less of astabilising impact. Given a considerable vol-ume of involuntary stockbuilding in the elec-tronics sector, the negative pattern of outputis likely to continue in the near future.
Japanese hopes rest all the more on the
United States recovering quickly and thor-oughly and on a new economic policy whichwill promote the process of reform. Macropolicy instruments have done all that theycan. The central bank has practically used upits room for manoeuvre by returning to azero-interest-rate policy, and fiscal policy willnot be able to continue the expansionarycourse it has been taking for much longerowing to the high government debt it has al-ready run up. After a short interruption at thebeginning of the year, consumer prices havebeen inching downward since February. How-
Japan

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
10ever, this is only partly a reflex of the weak
economy. The streamlining of distributionnetworks and deregulation in the telecom-munications sector have also contributed tothat development.
In the United Kingdom, in the first quarter of
2001 seasonally and working-day adjustedreal GDP only rose by
14% from the previous
period, according to initial estimates. Thismeant that its year-on-year growth was2
12%. The services sector remained on a
path of growth, whereas industry had to con-tinue to gradually reduce its output. In add-ition, macroeconomic development was se-verely strained by the drastic reduction inagricultural production. Animal production,having already taken a hit due to the BSE cri-sis, saw the bottom fall out owing to thespread of foot and mouth disease. However,the weakening in growth does not seem tohave had a tangible influence on UK house-holds’ propensity to consume. At any rate, re-tail turnover continued its strong rise in thewinter months, and consumer confidence inthe first quarter of 2001 was at a level it hadnot attained for quite a long time. Privateconsumption received an important boostfrom positive developments in employmentand by the rather high wage rises. So far,they have not had a sustained negative im-pact on the consumer price climate. In termsof the retail price index, excluding mortgagelending rates, consumer price inflation inApril was 2.0%, well below the Bank of Eng-land’s inflation target of 2.5%.Macroeconomic trends in the euro area
In the winter half of 2000-01, the overall
conjunctural situation in the euro areaworsened distinctly. At first glance, this wouldseem to contrast with the relatively strong realGDP growth from last autumn; at a seasonallyadjusted
34% from the previous period, this
growth was even somewhat stronger than inthe summer quarter. However, it was particu-larly those demand components such as gov-ernment consumption and investment instockbuilding (which are difficult to interpretas business indicators or which give mixed sig-nals) which grew more strongly. In addition,the seasonally adjusted result for the last quar-ter could also have been distorted upwards bythe fact that the fourth quarter saw a relativelypositive working-day influence and that not alleuro area countries adjust GDP for working-day variations.
The stagnation of industrial production in the
first quarter of 2001 (seasonally adjusted)relative to the last quarter of 2000 is anothersign that the business cycle is calming down.In this important sector, year-on-year growthslowed down from 5
12% in autumn 2000 to
414%. Fittingly enough, seasonally adjusted
capacity utilisation in the euro area manufac-turing sector was once again on the declinein January-April 2001 in all euro area coun-tries save Ireland and Greece. However, it wasstill above the average of the nineties. Indus-try sentiment, measured in the EU survey, hasclouded over almost continuously since it lastpeaked in June 2000. The ratio of negative topositive responses was more glum in Aprilthan at any time since September 1999. Con-United
KingdomSlower growth
in the euro area

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
11sumer confidence, however, has held firm at
a very high level throughout. This may havebeen helped along considerably by the tax re-ductions that came into effect in some euroarea countries at the beginning of the year.As of late, the situation in the euro area coun-tries’ labour markets has improved onlyslightly owing to the economic downturn.The seasonally adjusted standardised un-employment rate went down since Octoberof last year by only 0.2 percentage point to8.4% in March 2001.
Under the influence of the renewed rise in
prices of mineral oil products in the inter-national markets, increases in administeredprices, bad weather and the agricultural crises,consumer prices rose at a seasonally adjustedand annualised rate of 3
12% betweenDecember 2000 and April 2001; the latest
year-on-year rate was 2.9%. Food, drink andtobacco prices were up 4.4% on the year. Un-processed foods, which were hit by the badweather and the impacts of the animal epi-demics, saw a year-on-year price rise of 7.3%.Energy prices were up 7.8% on the year, hav-ing started from an already high price level.Services saw a 2.4% price rise on the year,with the sharp rise in administered prices andtaxes in some countries playing a major role.By contrast, industrial goods inflation, at1.4%, remained within tight limits, eventhough an upward trend can be noticed. Theinflation differential in the euro area has in-creased once again. France, as it has for sometime, once again had the lowest rate of infla-tion, at 2.0% on the year. In the Netherlands,the price trend, at + 5.3%, was particularlyStandardised unemployment rates, seasonally adjusted
%
Euro-area average in March 2001Euro-area average in March 2000
SpainMarch 2000
March 2001
(January)
Italy Finland France Germany Belgium Portugal Ireland Austria(February)
Nether-
landsLuxem-
bourgUnemployment
Sources: OECD, Eurostat.
Deutsche Bundesbank16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
Prices

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
12unfavourable; an increase in the value-added
tax contributed to that development.
Current account and exchange-rate
trends in the euro area
Despite the decline in world economic
growth, euro area suppliers’ exports con-tinued to witness persistently strong turnovergrowth in non-euro-area export markets evenat the beginning of this year. In the last threemonths for which such figures are available(December 2000-February 2001), euro-areacountries’
1exports surpassed their previous
year’s value by 1712%. A significant increase
in earnings per unit (caused by the depreci-ation of the euro) and large growth in vol-umes both played a part in this development.
At the same time, though, the figures for im-
ports from non-euro-area countries rosesharply. In the months of December-February,the value of imports was up 19% on theyear. However, higher import prices were themain reason for this increase. It was particu-larly the relatively high energy prices whichmade euro area imports from non-euro-areacountries expensive. On balance, the (nomin-al) foreign trade surplus of the euro area dur-ing the period under review continued toshrivel (to 32
12billion, following 3512billion
in the same period of the previous year).
“Invisible” current account transactions in
the euro area closed with a deficit of 318 bil-
lion. This represents an improvement over thesame period in the preceding year of 32
12
billion and is attributable to a lower shortfallin current transfers and in factor income. On
the whole, during the months under reportthe euro area current account ran a deficit ofaround 315
12billion, i.e. around the previ-
ous year’s level.
After recovering distinctly at the turn of
2000-01, the euro’s position in the foreign ex-change markets weakened a bit once againin the first few months of the new year. Theeuro had to relinquish some of its previouslyachieved gains against the US dollar, in par-ticular, whereas it was relatively able to holdits own against the other currencies. Afterbeing quoted at up to US$ 0.95 in January ofthis year, the rate, given sometimes extremefluctuations, fell to US$ 0.88 by mid-May.
The renewed drop in the exchange rate was a
bit of a surprise. For one thing, the growth ad-vantage of the United States, which was attimes one of the driving forces behind move-ments in the euro-US dollar exchange rate, hasshifted since the end of last year in the euroarea’s favour, and for another, the interest dif-ferential has changed to the euro’s advantagefollowing the Federal Reserve Board’s interest-rate moves. The exchange-rate movements ofthe past few months have therefore apparentlybeen fuelled less by current yield spreads andgrowth differentials and more by a series offactors, often of varying importance, whichhave influenced market players’ expectationsregarding further trends. The first three inter-est-rate cuts made this year by the US Federal
1From January 2001, euro area including Greece. Year-
on-year data from 2000 were supplemented with Greece’s
trade with non-euro-area countries and adjusted for
Greece’s trade with the euro area.Exports to
non-euro-area
countries
Imports from
non-euro-area
countries
Current
accountExchange-rate
movements
US dollar

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
13Reserve Board have apparently shed a more fa-
vourable light on the US economy’s outlookfor growth, whereas recent figures for theeuro area seemed to be more of an indicationof the existing conjunctural risks. The fact thatinternational organisations and economic re-search institutes downgraded the outlook forgrowth is a fitting example. By contrast, theFed’s surprise interest-rate cut in mid-Apriltended to be considered by various observersas a sigh that the Federal Reserve does, in fact,expect a relatively lengthy and powerful reces-sion in the United States. The concern that theexpansionary thrust of monetary policy maygenerate new dangers of inflation may alsohave played a role. At any rate, longer-termcapital market interest rates rose in the periodimmediately thereafter, and the euro re-covered somewhat. Following the unexpect-edly favourable figures for US economicgrowth in the first quarter (which, however,should be interpreted with caution), though,the euro once again came under some pres-sure. On the whole, since mid-March the eurohas been hovering within a tight corridor be-tween US$ 0.88 and US$ 0.90. That trend alsocontinued following the latest interest-ratemoves taken by the European Central Bankand the US Federal Reserve.
The euro suffered distinct losses against the
yen, too, but was able to make them up inthe following period. After averaging ¥ 110in January, the euro fell to as low as ¥ 105 inFebruary. Major repatriations of JapaneseEuro-deposits towards the end of the Japan-ese fiscal year may have played a role. Yetsoon afterwards, the yen lost ground againstpractically all other currencies upon increasedfears among market players that the Japan-
ese economy, following a temporary recovery,could once again slide into a recession and bestrained by a rising number of bad loans.When the Bank of Japan took on a very ex-pansionary monetary policy stance at the endof March, the pessimistic mood on the mar-kets became entrenched, causing the yen tocontinue its slide at first. In mid-May, theeuro, at ¥ 108, had almost returned to its
Daily values, log. scale
US $
¥
£¥
Effective exchange rate 1
1st qtr 1999 = 100... pound sterling... yenagainst the ...
... US dollarExchange rate of the euro
1According to ECB calculations made using
the weighted averages of the euro ex-change rates against the currencies of 13
countries (12 countries from 2001).
Deutsche Bundesbank92
89
86
83
800.64
0.62
0.60
0.5897115
94112
91109
88106
103
100
970.97
0.94
0.91
0.88
0.85
0.82
Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May
2000 2001
Yen

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
14January average, putting it just under 2112%
above its nadir of October.
By contrast, the euro’s movement against the
pound sterling was much more stable in thefirst few months of this year, with the eurohaving stabilised distinctly up until then. How-ever, in the past few weeks it lost someground against the pound sterling, too, whenmarket players gave the UK economy’s growthoutlook a somewhat more positive assessmentfollowing the interest-rate cut by the Bank ofEngland. At £ 0.61, the euro was still just over5
12% above its end-October level.
As a weighted average against the currencies
of the euro area’s twelve most important trad-ing partners, the euro went down by slightlyless than 3% between the beginning of Janu-ary and mid-May, though it was still 8
12%
above its end-October nadir.2However, the re-
newed fall of the euro against the US dollar –in spite of the shift in growth in favour of theeuro area – has shown that the markets stillconsider the US economy to be the more ro-bust and efficient of the two, whereas thegrowth potential of the euro area is still beingviewed with scepticism owing to the persistentstructural weaknesses. Therefore, it is all-important that the member states do notwaver in their efforts to pass reforms, but thatthey instead continue along the path ofgrowth-enhancing structural reform full speedahead, thereby strengthening investor confi-dence in the economic future of the euro area.Monetary policy and the financial
markets in the euro area
In the spring months, the ECB Governing
Council initially adhered to the “steady-as-she-goes” interest-rate policy it had intro-duced in autumn 2000. At its meeting onMay 10, 2001, it then cut all key interestrates by one-quarter percentage point. Theinterest rates for the marginal lending facilityand the deposit facility have stood at 5.50%and 3.50%, respectively, since May 11; themain refinancing operations have been con-ducted since May 15 as variable-rate tenderswith a minimum bid rate of 4.50%. The as-sessment of medium-term risks to price sta-bility in the euro area based on the two-pillarmonetary policy strategy of the ECB arguedin favour of cutting interest rates. The trendtowards slower monetary growth continued.Given the statistical distortions of the moneystock, monetary growth is currently lowerthan the reference value of 4
12% (see
page 18), which means that there are nomore dangers to price stability emanatingfrom the monetary side. The slowdown ineconomic growth was accompanied by a re-duction in the risks to price stability in termsof the second pillar of the ECB strategy, too.The current, and relatively high, rate of priceincrease is largely a result of special influences
2Up to the turn of the year, this nominal effective ex-
change rate of the euro was calculated against the cur-
rencies of 13 trading partners of the euro area, including
the Greek drachma (see European Central Bank, Effective
exchange rates for the euro, Monthly Bulletin,
October 1999, page 29 ff., and European Central Bank,
The nominal and real effective exchange rates for the
euro, Monthly Bulletin, April 2000, page 39 ff.). Since the
drachma has given way to the euro at the beginning of
the year, only the 12 remaining currencies have been
taken into account since then when calculating this
index.Pound sterling
Effective
exchange rate
of the euroInterest-rate cut
in May

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
15and one-off effects. It is due to subside grad-
ually and without any negative effects on in-flation expectations.
Quotations in the money market were very
volatile in the past few months. Against thebackground of persistent expectations in themarket that interest rates would be reduced,particularly longer-term notations fell initiallystarting in end-February. In the run-up to theGoverning Council meeting at the end ofMarch, rates in all maturity segments con-tinued to decline distinctly, and the yieldcurve in the money market was extremely in-verse. Yet when the Eurosystem left key inter-est rates unchanged, market players’ expect-ations of lower central bank rates in the nearfuture sagged, and money market rates gen-erally rose sharply. Following the cut in keyinterest rates in May, quotations for fixed-term deposits went back down.
Over the course of March, the overnight
interest rate (EONIA) and the marginal allot-ment rate of the weekly tender operationswent down to the level of the minimum bidrate. Owing to that interest-rate constellationand the prevailing expectations of interest-rate cuts, the number of credit institutionsparticipating in main tenders decreased. Inthe April 11 main refinancing operation, thebid volume – much like in February – fell wellshort of the credit institutions’ short-termliquidity needs. Yet unlike in February, thistime the banks did not expect any fine-tuningoperations by the Eurosystem; they immedi-ately took major recourse to the marginallending facility over the Easter holidays. Forthe first time, EONIA rose as high as the mar-Daily values
% p.a.
 5 
billion
 5 
billion
 5 
billion
0
Feb.Main and longer-term
refinancing operations4Impact of market factors
on liquidity (cumulative)3
TotalOf which
− General government
− Banknotes in circulation0Central bank balances
of credit institutions
Required
reserves2Overnight interest
rate (EONIA)Marginal lending rate
Deposit rateTender rate 1Interest-rate movements and
liquidity management in theEurosystem
1Interest rate for main refinancing oper-
ations. — 2 Maintenance periods: February
24 to March 23, March 24 to April 23, and
April 24 to May 23, 2001. — 3 Banknotes in
circulation, government deposits with the
Eurosystem, net foreign currency reservesof the Eurosystem and other factors; pro-
vision (+) or absorption (−) of central bank
balances. — 4 Including a one-week oper-
ation from April 30 to May 6, 2001.
Deutsche Bundesbank280
260
240
22020018060+
40+
20+
0
20−160
140
120100
80606.00
5.50
5.00
4.50
4.003.50
                      
  
March April May
2001Money market
rates were
volatile
Bidders were
“on strike”
in April ...

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
16ginal refinancing rate; the allotment rates of
the main tenders that followed were onceagain above the minimum bid rate.
During the period under review, ongoing
money market management in the Eurosystemcontinued to be geared towards offsetting theliquidity effects of autonomous market factorson credit institutions’ central bank balances inthe timeliest manner possible. It was also con-ducted with a view to gradually bringing theallotment amounts of the two main tenders,which had been diverging sharply since Febru-ary, into alignment. Following the insufficientvolume of the bids submitted by banks in theApril 11 tender operation, it was not possibleto guarantee that those objectives could beachieved merely by means of the usual mainrefinancing operations. Therefore, on April 30,t h eE u r o s y s t e m ,a tt h es a m et i m ea si t st w o -week main tender operations, conductedan “other” one-week refinancing operation(which was likewise a standard tender accord-ing to the fixed-rate tender procedure). Thismeasure proved successful in closing the gapbetween the individual tender volumes, andthe Eurosystem regained the ability to provideliquidity in a flexible and needs-based mannervia main refinancing operations.
On the whole, the autonomous factors deter-
mining bank liquidity caused 39.1 billion to
flow to credit institutions between Februaryand April (see the adjacent table). The trans-fer on April 4 of the Bundesbank’s profit forthe year 2000, which amounted to just over38 billion, is reflected in those inflows. By
contrast, the minimum reserve requirementswent up by 30.7 billion. In accordance with aFactors determining bank liquidity*
5billion; calculated on the basis of
daily averages of the maintenance periods
2001
ItemFeb. 24
to
Mar. 23Mar 24
to
Apr. 23Feb. 24
to
Apr. 23
I. Provision (+) or absorption (–)
of central bank balances by
1. Change in banknotes in
circulation (increase: –) + 1.8 – 1.6 + 0.2
2. Change in general govern-
ment deposits with the
Eurosystem (increase: –) + 4.0 + 3.5 + 7.5
3. Change in net foreign
exchange reserves 1 – 2.3 + 6.5 + 4.2
4. Other factors 2 –1 . 4 –1 . 4 –2 . 8
Total + 2.1 + 7.0 + 9.1
II. Monetary policy operations
of the Eurosystem
1. Open market operations
a) Main refinancing
operations – 3.7 – 12.8 – 16.5
b) Longer-term refinan-
cing operations + 4.3 + 4.3 + 8.6
c) Other operations – – –
2. Standing facilities
a) Marginal lending
facility – 2.2 + 1.8 – 0.4
b) Deposit facility
(increase: –) – 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.1
Total – 1.7 – 6.7 – 8.4
III. Change in credit institutions’
current accounts (I. + II.) + 0.3 + 0.4 + 0.7
IV. Change in the minimum
reserve requirement
(increase: –) – 0.2 – 0.4 – 0.7
Memo items 3
Main refinancing operations 185.2 172.4 172.4
Longer-term refinancing
operations 54.1 58.4 58.4
Other operations – – –
Marginal lending facility 0.4 2.2 2.2
Deposit facility 0.5 0.5 0.5
*For longer-term trends and the contribution of the Deutsche
Bundesbank, see pages 14* and 15* of the Statistical Section of
this Report. — 1Including end-of-quarter valuation adjustments
with no impact on liquidity. — 2Including monetary policy
operations concluded in Stage Two and still outstanding at the
beginning of Stage Three (outright transactions and the issuance
of debt certificates). — 3Levels as an average of the maintenance
period under review or the last maintenance period.
Deutsche Bundesbank... which made
money market
management
via main
tenders difficult
Decline in
liquidity needs

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
17decision taken in December 2000 by the ECB
Governing Council, the outstanding volumeof longer-term refinancing operations was in-creased to just under 360 billion. The main
tenders were reduced by 316.5 billion. In-
creased recourse to the deposit facility wastaken by banks as the end of the reservemaintenance period in March approached;their recourse to the marginal lending facilitywas focused on the Easter holidays.
In seasonally adjusted terms, the euro area
money stock M3 again grew somewhat morestrongly in the first quarter of this year than inthe last quarter of 2000. In both February andMarch, money holdings grew strongly. Fallingstock prices in the equity markets contributedto that growth. In the light of the inverse shapeof the yield curve at the short end and the fur-ther decline in interest rates, apparently manyinvestors preferred to hold their assets in moreliquid forms. At the end of March, M3 in theeuro area as a whole surpassed its previousyear’s level by 5.0%, compared with 5.1% atend-December 2000. The three-month movingaverage of year-on-year rates was 4.8% be-tween January and March 2001, as opposed to5.1% between October and December 2000.Thus, monetary growth has continued toapproach the reference value of 4
12%. When
interpreting monetary growth in the euro area,in addition to the aforementioned portfolioshifts, it must likewise be borne in mind thatthe recorded rates, owing to purchases ofmoney market fund certificates and moneymarket paper by non-euro-area residents whichhave so far not been recorded in the statistics,overstate liquidity expansion in the euro area.
3
In March working-day effects, which distort thetwelve-month rate upwards, entered into the
mix. If the purchases of negotiable paper bynon-euro-area residents are eliminated, growthof the money stock M3 is currently below thereference value. Foreign purchases of moneymarket fund certificates are alone enough to in-crease the twelve-month growth rate for M3 atpresent by around one-half percentage point.Purchases of money market paper by non-euro-area residents, which are statistically moredifficult to estimate, have likewise reached asignificant magnitude.
4Change from previous year in %, monthly
%
%Memo item
German contribution to M3
Scale reducedEuro area
Three-month
moving average
Reference value: 4 ½ %Growth of the money stock
M3 in the euro area
Deutsche Bundesbank12
10
8
6
4
2
007
6
54
1998 1999 2000 2001
3Since the outstanding amount of marketable instru-
ments is reported exclusive of the holdings of euro area
MFIs and – owing to statistical difficulties – up to now no
distinction has been made between purchasers from the
euro area and those from non-euro-area countries, such
liabilities of MFIs to investors residing outside the euro
area go into the monetary aggregate M3.
4See European Central Bank, Monthly Bulletin,
May 2001, page 5 ff.Monetary
growth charac-
terised by
portfolio shifts

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
18In the first quarter of this year, among the in-
dividual components of the money stock M3,it was particularly those components carryingrates of interest which are comparativelyclosely in line with market conditions whichbenefited from investors’ propensity to“park” their funds in short-term deposits.This applies both to fixed-term deposits withan agreed maturity of up to two years and tomarketable financial instruments – particular-ly money market fund certificates and moneymarket paper, as well as repo transactions.Currency and sight deposits stagnated, sea-sonally adjusted, after having already wit-nessed anaemic growth in the fourth quarterof 2000. At end-March the money stock M1was only 2.1% up on its previous year’s level.Deposits with an agreed maturity of up tothree months continued to be reduced.
As regards the balance-sheet counterparts,
monetary growth in the euro area continuedto be fostered, above all, by lending to theprivate sector. Credit to the private sector atend-March was 9.2% up on the year, as op-posed to 10.2% at end-December 2000.MFIs’ loans to enterprises and individualswent up at a seasonally adjusted annualisedrate of 8% between January and March; thisgrowth was even a bit stronger than in thepreceding quarter (where it was just over7%). At end-March they were 8.6% higherthan their previous year’s level. By contrast,the public sector reduced its borrowing fromdomestic MFIs. On the whole, monetary cap-ital formation, which had come to a virtualstandstill in the final quarter of 2000, in-creased in the first quarter of this year, but ithas recently distinctly lost steam. Paymenttransactions of resident non-MFIs with non-
euro-area residents saw considerable out-flows of funds in the first quarter of this year.
The German contribution to euro area M3,
which had been growing more sluggishlythan the euro area aggregate since the endof 1999, grew more sharply in the first quar-ter of 2001 than the euro area aggregate,after seasonal adjustment. Its year-on-yearrise at the end of March was 1.2%, following0.2% at the end of December 2000. How-ever, that rate probably overstates to somedegree the actual supply of liquidity in Ger-many owing to purchases of money marketpaper and shorter-term bank debt certificatesby non-euro-area investors. Unlike at theeuro area level, the development of the Ger-man contribution to M3 was characterised bydomestic depositors sharply increasing theirovernight deposits (see page 25f.).
Capital market rates in the euro area rose
slightly in spring 2001, on balance. From mid-February to mid-March, the yield on ten-yeargovernment bonds in the euro area countriesinitially went down by 20 bp to just over4
34%. Thereafter, it went back up. As this
Report went to press in mid-May, the yieldwas at 5
14%. Owing to pronounced expect-
ations of interest-rate cuts on the part of mar-ket participants, the rate of three-monthfunds temporarily fell much more stronglythan capital market rates, causing the yieldspread between the capital market and themoney market to widen again following itslow of eight basis points on March 21, 2001.The Eurosystem’s interest-rate move onMay 10 additionally widened the gap be-Components of
the money
stock
Balance-sheet
counterpartsGerman
contribution
Capital market
rates up slightly

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
19tween long-term and short-term interest
rates. In mid-May the gap was around23per-
centage point. The implied volatility of theBund future, which indicates the price fluctu-ations expected by market participants in thefutures market in the near future, held steady,initially without any major fluctuations, at alow level between mid-February and mid-April. At the end of April the Fed’s surpriseinterest-rate move, as well as unexpectedlyhigh money stock and inflation figures in theeuro area, caused a resurgence of relativelystrong interest-rate uncertainty in the capitalmarkets.
The pattern of long-term interest rates in Eur-
ope since the beginning of the year has large-ly reflected, albeit to a lesser degree, interest-rate movements in the United States. Afterthe yield on ten-year US Treasury bonds out-standing fell by one-half percentage point be-tween mid-February and mid-March, it wentback up just days after the Federal Funds Tar-get Rate was reduced for the third time onMarch 20. A further surprise interest-rate cuton April 18 was accompanied by rising long-term interest rates as well. A comparison ofthe yields of nominal and inflation-indexedUS Treasury bonds shows that this rise ininterest rates was fuelled primarily by height-ened inflationary expectations. Portfolio shiftstowards stocks likewise played a role. The realyield on ten-year indexed bonds, by contrast,has gone down since March. Seen in isol-ation, this does not indicate that market par-ticipants are giving the long-term outlook forgrowth a more positive assessment. Owing tothe relatively strong fluctuations in capitalmarket interest rates in the United States, itsinterest-rate advantage over the euro area at
the long end initially vanished completely be-fore reappearing and growing. All the same,though, the spread between yields on US andEuropean government bonds was, at current-ly just over one-quarter percentage point, stillvery small.
Stock prices in the euro area continued their
slide in the first quarter of the year. In termsDaily values
Per-
cent-
age
points
%%
Per-
cent
age
points
2000 2001Volatility 2Yield spread
between the US bond market
and the euro-area averageYields on ten-year government
bonds outstanding
Euro-area average1
GermanyBond market yields
in the euro area
1Weighted average yield on ten-year gov-
ernment bonds of all euro-area countries;
weighted by GDP. — 2Implied volatility of
the Bund future.
Deutsche Bundesbank8
76
5
431.25+
0.50+1.00+
0.25+0.75+
00.50+6.00
5.75
5.50
5.255.00
4.75
4.50
JF M A M JJA S O N DJF M A MVolatile
interest-rate
movements in
the United
States exerting
an influence

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
20of the Dow Jones Euro STOXX, the prices of
European shares at the end of March werearound 30% below their peak level of spring2000. Since that time, the situation in thestock markets has brightened up consider-ably, and by mid-May prices had risen byaround 12%. In addition, share price uncer-tainty, measured in terms of the implied vola-tility of options in the Dow Jones EuroSTOXX, has been on the decline since mid-March, which indicates that stability is return-ing to European equity markets. Since theend of March, share prices from the high-tech segment have been rising particularlysharply. This is likely to have improved thefinancing situation of that innovative sector
somewhat. However, the highly volatile na-ture of those stocks’ prices indicates the diffi-culty of correctly valuing high-tech stocks,which react more violently to changes in sen-timent than stocks from “old economy” sec-tors. Developments in European equity mar-kets have largely mirrored those in US equitymarkets. The US Standard & Poor’s 500 indextook a tumble once again in April but hasbeen on the rise since that time. In particular,stocks listed on the tech-heavy NASDAQ haverisen strongly since the beginning of thesecond quarter, gaining in value by over 18%in the month of April alone.
Stabilisation in
the equity
markets

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
21Financial markets in
GermanyCapital market and bank interest rates
In March the yield on ten-year Federal bonds
outstanding, which had edged sideways at thestart of the year, fell by
14percentage point to
just over 412%. It subsequently picked up
again and in mid-May, at the time of going topress, it was around 5%. On balance, long-term capital market rates in Germany roseby just over
14percentage point from mid-
February to mid-May. By contrast, interestrates on Federal securities with a shorter re-sidual maturity went down. The spread ofinterest rates on Federal securities with differ-ent maturities has therefore broadened andthe estimated yield curve is again somewhatsteeper. In mid-May the yield spread of ten-year Federal bonds, as observed on the mar-ket, over one-year paper was
23percentage
point, compared with less than14percentage
point in mid-February. The convergence ofGerman capital market rates with the yields inthe other euro-area countries diminishedslightly in spring. At the time of going to press,the yield of ten-year Federal bonds was justunder
13percentage point below the euro-
area average (excluding Germany).
The interest rate spread between ten-year
debt securities issued by domestic banks andcomparable Federal bonds has been narrow-ing somewhat since mid-February. At around
12percentage point, it is at roughly the same
level as one year ago. Having reached a re-cord level of over 120 basis points in March,the yield spread of domestic corporate bondsover public debt instruments has also fallenback to prior-year levels of around 80 basispoints at the current juncture.Slight interest
rate increase on
the capital
market
Risk spreads on
the bond
market slightly
reduced

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
22Although the overall yield curve became
steeper as interest rates rose from mid-Marchonwards, it was still inverse for one-yearbonds. This continues to indicate that interestrates are expected to go down at the shortend, even though the anticipation of thishappening has subsided somewhat. With re-gard to longer-term securities, surveys reveala slight increase in long-term inflation expect-ations. This explains why the expected realcapital market rate for ten-year bonds (calcu-lated on the basis of nominal yields less theinflation expectations determined in surveys)did not go up despite an increase in nominalyields. It was just over 3% in April, comparedwith around 4% on average in the 1990s.
Long-term bank interest rates have so far not
kept in line with the interest rate increase onthe capital markets. On balance the rates for
long-term loans by credit institutions in Ger-many fell in recent months by roughly
18per-
centage point. In April this year, the interestrate charged on mortgage loans with interestlocked in for ten years was, on average,around 6
18%, following 614% in Janu-
ary 2001. In April the average effective ratesfor long-term fixed-rate loans to enterpriseswere 6
34% (for a credit volume of between
DM 200,000 and less than DM 1 million) and6
12% (for a credit volume of between DM 1
million and less than DM 10 million). In short-term banking business, interest rates for cur-rent account credit (for a credit volume of be-tween DM 1 million and less than DM 5 mil-lion) fell by
14percentage point to just over
834% and the interest rate on three-month
time deposits (for an investment volume ofDM 100,000 to less than DM 1 million) was,at just under 4%, somewhat lower in Aprilthan in January. However, the rates for per-sonal credit lines and for higher-yielding retailsight deposits were raised slightly.
Share prices
In the first quarter of this year, the prices of
German shares initially continued to fall, withwide fluctuations, following the patternbegun in spring 2000. Compared with theirpeak in March 2000, German share prices, asmeasured on the broad CDAX share priceindex, fell year on year by around 37%. How-ever, from early April prices generally beganto go up again. The situation on the Germanequity market relaxed again somewhat, inline with the situation on the equity marketsDaily values
%
Percent-
age
points
JF M A M JJA S O N DJF M A M
2000 2001Yield spread of ten-year over
one year Federal bondsYield on Federal securities
outstanding...
...with a residual maturity of ten years
...with a residual maturity of one yearYields in the
German bond market
Deutsche Bundesbank1.5+
1.0+
0.5+
06.0
5.5
5.0
4.5
4.0
Steeper yield
curveNo turnaround
in long-term
bank interest
rates
Recovery on
the equity
markets

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
23in other European countries and the United
States. This is also indicated by the decline inimplied volatility since the start of the year, asmeasured on the VDAX.
Share prices of firms in the technology, media
and telecommunications (TMT) sector, in par-ticular, have been going up since the start ofApril. After sliding by almost 70% from theirpeak in March 2000 to the end of March thisyear, these prices went up by more than 23%in April alone.
1
Borrowing in the securities markets
Issuing activity on the German bond market
gained momentum again at the start of theyear. In the first three months of 2001, grosssales of bonds and notes issued by domesticborrowers amounted to 3216.1 billion, com-
pared with 3193.7 billion in the previous
quarter. However, extensive redemptions, es-pecially by public authorities, led to net salesof domestic fixed-interest securities (takingaccount of the changes in issuers’ holdings oftheir own bonds) being, at 320.7 billion, no
higher from January to March than in the pre-vious quarter. By contrast, purchasing of for-eign bonds and notes by residents wasstronger. On balance, between January andMarch 332.0 billion worth were sold in Ger-
many, compared with 313.3 billion in the
fourth quarter of 2000. All of these bondsand notes were denominated in euro. Salesof debt securities on the German bond mar-ket as a whole consequently amounted to352.7 billion net in the first three months of2001. This was considerably up on the previ-
ous quarter ( 333.9 billion).
Increased borrowing can be traced back in
part to the increase in issuing activity bybanks. They issued 336.3 billion net worth of
their own debt securities, compared with nomore than 37.4 billion worth in the preceding
three months. The bulk of these were otherbank debt securities, which amounted to320.4 billion. Communal bonds (Öffentliche
Pfandbriefe) were sold for 36.7 billion net; in
the previous quarter their outstanding amounthad gone down by 311.9 billion. However,
larger volumes of debt securities issued byspecialised credit institutions ( 35.7 billion)
and mortgage bonds (Hypothekenpfand-Monthly averages
%
Current account credit 1
Mortgage
loans2
Time deposits4Yields on
bank debtsecurities
3Bank interest rates
in Germany
1DM 1 million and more, but less than
DM 5 million. — 2 On residential property;
effective interest rate, fixed rate over ten
years. — 3 With a mean residual maturity
of over nine to ten years. — 4 Time de-
posits with an agreed maturity of onemonth for amounts of DM 100,000 and
more, but less than DM 1 million.
Deutsche Bundesbank9
8
7
65
4
32
1997 1998 1999 2000 2001
1Measured on Primark-Datastream’s TMTsector index.TMT share
prices rising
again
Increased sales
of bonds and
notes at the
start of the year
Lively issuing
activity by
banks

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
24briefe) (33.4 billion) were issued. Public
authorities redeemed debt securities in theamount of 320.8 billion net, after borrowing
311.7 billion in the three previous months.
Net redemptions can essentially be tracedback to the redemption in January of debtsecurities issued by the Currency ConversionEqualisation Fund. By contrast, the FederalGovernment issued 315.0 billion net worth
of new securities and the Länder issued 33.5
billion worth of debt securities. Industrialbonds were sold for 35.1 billion net, which
represents a significant increase comparedwith the previous quarter and the compar-able period of the previous year.
In the first quarter of 2001 domestic enter-
prises placed new shares to a market value of34.1 billion, virtually the same amount as inthe previous quarter. However, the number of
initial public offerings by domestic enterprisescontinued to fall – to nine new IPOs from 24in autumn 2000. The sale of foreign equitiesamounted to 37.3 billion net, with portfolio
investment accounting for one-half and directinvestment for the other.
Investment activity in the securities
markets
Domestic non-banks were the principal
buyers on the bond market in the first quarterof 2001, increasing their bond holdings by337.2 billion. Roughly two-thirds of this
amount was invested in domestic debt secur-ities and one-third in foreign bonds. Domesticcredit institutions purchased, on balance,322.8 billion worth of bonds and notes,
mainly bank debt securities ( 319.0 billion)
and foreign bonds and notes ( 317.5 billion).
Stocks of public bonds decreased on balanceby312.9 billion. At the start of the year non-
residents sold 37.3 billion net worth of Ger-
man debt securities, after adding 37.9 billion
worth of German securities to their portfoliosin the previous quarter. This disinvestment isdue solely to a decline in public sector secur-ities (– 311.6 billion).
At the start of the year domestic credit insti-
tutions took a lively interest in Germanshares. In the first quarter they increased theirdomestic equity holdings by 323.3, com-
pared with 35.2 billion in the previous quar-
ter. All in all they acquired 329.8 billion net
worth of equities. By contrast, domestic non-banks reduced their equity holdings by 326.7Daily values, log. scale
TMT equities 1
non-TMT equities2Share price index
Start of June 1999 = 100Price movements in the
equity market
Source: Primark-Datastream. — 1Shares
of firms in the technology, media andtelecommunications (TMT) industries. —2Total market excluding TMT shares.
Deutsche Bundesbank300
260
220
200
180
160
140
120
100
80
JF M A M JJASO N DJF M A M
2000 2001
Borrowing on
the equity
marketPurchases of
bonds
Shares

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
25billion, selling on balance domestic shares
only. In the first quarter of 2001, non-residentinvestors purchased German equities in theamount of 38.3 billion (net).
From January to March domestic investment
funds raised, at 324.3 billion, approximately
as large an amount as in the previous quarter(325.6 billion). In contrast to the previous
three months, funds open to the generalpublic increased their sales again, issuing312.1 billion net worth of certificates (previ-
ous quarter: 37.7 billion). Specialised invest-
ment funds raised 312.2 billion net, com-
pared with 317.9 billion at the end of 2000.
The increase in inflows to funds open to thegeneral public is accounted for by open-endreal estate funds and money market funds;these raised 33.2 billion and 32.9 billion re-
spectively. In contrast to the previous quarter,share-based funds raised a smaller amount(32.8 billion). In the case of specialised in-
vestment funds, mixed funds attracted thelargest inflow of resources, with net sales inthe amount of 38.7 billion.
Deposit and lending business of
monetary financial institutions (MFIs)with domestic customers
In seasonally adjusted terms, the overnight
deposits of domestic customers with GermanMFIs increased strongly in the first quarter of2001. As in the previous year, the clearscaling-down of sight deposits, which tendsto occur at this time of year, failed to takeplace in the review period. In particular, do-mestic households, as well as other financialinstitutions, increased their holdings of sight
deposits – probably as a reaction to the fallingprices on the equity markets. In addition, thedrop in interest rates which occurred duringthe quarter is also likely to have contributedto the accumulation of these liquid moneycomponents that bear little or no interest.
Short-term time deposits also benefited from
the preference shown by domestic investorsfor liquid forms of investment. They went upin the first quarter of 2001 by 37.3 billion,
having been reduced by 37.7 billion over the
same period one year previously. Primarily in-dividuals – and to a lesser extent insurancecompanies, too – increased their holdings ofthis type of deposits. Longer-term time de-posits, however, were subject to a far smallerexpansion. Compared with an increase ofInvestment activity in the German
securities markets
5billion
2000 2001 2000
ItemOct. to
Dec.Jan. to
Mar.Jan. to
Mar.
Bonds and notes
Residents 26.0 60.0 70.3
Credit institutions 1 11.8 22.8 37.9
of which
Foreign bonds andnotes
2 11.2 17.5 12.8
Non-banks 14.2 37.2 32.4of which
Domestic bonds andnotes 12.1 22.7 18.3
Non-residents
2 7.9 – 7.3 5.8
Shares
Residents 136.8 3.0 – 6.5
Credit institutions 1 8.2 29.8 45.8
of which
Domestic shares 5.2 23.3 43.0
Non-banks 3 128.6 – 26.7 – 52.3
of which
Domestic shares 135.8 – 27.5 – 100.2
Non-residents 2 – 136.8 8.3 62.3
Investment fund certificates
Investment in specialised
funds 17.9 12.2 9.5Investment in funds open tothe general public 7.7 12.1 16.3of which: Share-based funds 7.6 2.8 12.9
1Book values, statistically adjusted. — 2Transaction
values. — 3Residual.
Deutsche BundesbankInvestment
fund certifi-
cates
Clear increase
in overnight
depositsPerceptible
increase in
short-term time
deposits ...
... and
moderate
increase in
longer-term
time deposits

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
2635.2 billion a year before, they rose by only
31.8 billion in the first quarter of this year. In
particular, insurance companies, which trad-itionally represent the largest group of invest-ors, accumulated only relatively few newlonger-term time deposits in the period underreview.
The decrease of deposits with an agreed
period of notice of up to three months con-tinued during the period under review. How-ever, the decline was more moderate thanone year previously. From January toMarch 2001 domestic non-banks reducedtheir short-term savings deposits by 37.4 bil-
lion. In the same period one year earlier theyhad reduced their holdings by 315.5 billion.
Although, in particular, traditional savings de-posits with an agreed period of notice of upto three months declined again in the period
under review, households also reduced theirholdings of special savings facilities attractinga higher rate of interest. In contrast to theprevious quarters, savings deposits with long-er agreed periods of notice were unable toderive any noticeable benefit from the de-crease in short-term savings deposits. Thefunds released are therefore likely to haveflowed mainly into time deposits.
After weak growth in the previous quarter,
lending by German MFIs to domestic enter-prises and individuals picked up perceptibly inthe first quarter of 2001. Loans and lendingagainst securities were equally affected. Hav-ing plummeted to
12% in the last quarter of
2000, the seasonally adjusted annual increasein loans was just under 6% in the first quar-ter of 2001. Loans were boosted mainly by amarked increase in short-term debts of do-mestic enterprises and households. By con-trast, there was only a moderate expansion ofmedium and long-term loans.
With regard to the most important categories
of borrowers, borrowing by enterprises, inparticular, increased strongly in the first quar-ter of 2001, after these had reduced theirdebt to domestic MFIs in seasonally adjustedterms in the final quarter of 2001. There wasalso some recovery in housing loans in thequarter under review, whereas employees re-duced their loans from domestic MFIs. Withinthe enterprise sector there was a distinctlystronger demand for credit in the services sec-tor and the wholesale and retail trade andfrom financial institutions – although, in thecase of financial institutions, a particular im-Movement of the lending and deposits
of monetary financial institutions(MFIs) in Germany
*
5billion
2001 2000
ItemJan. to
Mar.Jan. to
Mar.
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight – 2.2 + 6.1
With agreed maturities
up to 2 years + 7.3 – 7.7over 2 years + 1.8 + 5.2
At agreed notice
2
up to 3 months – 7.4 – 15.5over 3 months – 0.5 + 0.9
Lending
Lending to domestic enterprisesand individuals
Loans + 16.7 + 21.4Lending against securities + 24.4 + 37.7
Lending to domestic publicauthorities
Loans + 4.0 – 1.3Lending against securities – 12.9 + 3.9
*As well as banks (including building and loan associ-
ations, but excluding the Bundesbank), monetary finan-cial institutions (MFIs) here also include money marketfunds; see also Table IV.1 in the Statistical Section of thisReport. — 1Enterprises, individuals and public
authorities. — 2Savings deposits.
Deutsche Bundesbank
Further fall in
savings deposits
with an agreed
period of noticeClear expansion
of lending to
the private
sector ...
... and
especially to
enterprises

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
27pact was made by larger single transactions.
By contrast, the moderate pace of expansionmaintained by manufacturing in the previousquarters continued.
The level of indebtedness of German public
authorities to domestic MFIs fell by 38.9 bil-
lion in the first quarter of 2001. Loans byGerman MFIs to the domestic public sectorwent up by 34.0 billion, while the liabilities
evidenced by certificates of domestic publicauthorities to German banks were reduced by312.9 billion. This decrease was due to the
redemption of equalisation claims by the Fed-eral Government totalling 333 billion at the
start of the year. Of this redemption volume,328.4 billion went to German MFIs, at least
some of which, however, increased theirholdings of government debt again by ac-quiring domestic government bonds in thesecondary market. In order to finance theredemption, the government drew on theproceeds of the sale of UMTS mobile phonelicences, which it was holding mainly asdeposits in the German banking sector. These
were reduced strongly in the period underreview.Seasonally adjusted
DM
billion 5 
billion
%lin. scale
Change from the previous
year in %18001900200021002200
log. scale
Loans 1
oLoans to domestic
enterprises and individuals
1End-of-month level; excluding statistical
changes. — oFigures in euro from 1999.
Deutsche Bundesbank8
6
4
2
04300
4100
3900
3700
3500
1998 1999 2000 2001Decline in
public sector
debt

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
28Economic conditions
in GermanyUnderlying trends
In terms of the underlying trend, in the first
few months of this year the German econ-omy remained on the flat expansionarycourse on which it had embarked in thesecond half of 2000. Although the economicclimate has become markedly cooler, overalleconomic output has held up comparativelywell, not least owing to work being per-formed to fill the large volume of orders onhand. According to an initial Bundesbank es-timate, real gross domestic product (GDP) inthe first quarter as a whole, may have beenaround
12% up on autumn last year after
eliminating seasonal and working-day vari-ations. Compared with the first three monthsof 2000, this signifies a growth rate of 2%,compared with slightly more than 2
12% be-
fore. On calendar-month terms the increasewas 1
12%. Overall capacity utilisation is thus
likely to have remained largely unchanged.
In the first few months of the year, manufac-
turing was, once again, a mainstay of output.Whereas industrial activity – despite buoyantdemand – had remained essentially un-changed towards the end of last year, in theensuing period more work was started on theexisting increased level of orders on hand. Ac-cording to ifo institute data, the manufactur-ing sector reported that capacity utilisation,despite a slight decline, remained higher thanthe average in March. Commercial serviceproviders probably benefited only in partfrom this. Although they are likely to havefurther expanded their business, growth (asalso reported by the Centre for EuropeanEconomic Research) remained limited. TheSubdued
economic
growth
Sharp increase
in manufactur-
ing output

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
29situation with regard to financial service pro-
viders, which had previously experienced verydynamic growth, has now become much lessbuoyant. In the construction sector, pressureto adjust remained quite heavy at the start of2001 as well.
Despite the fact that overall economic output
was still quite considerable, general businesssentiment in the commercial sector was pre-dominantly subdued in the winter months,too. Apart from a brief improvement at thestart of the year, the business climate indica-tor surveyed by the ifo institute showed a fur-ther downward movement, continuing thetrend which had been prevailing since sum-mer 2000. In March (more recent data are un-available at present), the balance of positiveand negative business assessment attained alevel that roughly matched the longer-termaverage, thus reflecting a more or less “neu-tral” position between optimisim and pessim-ism. The gloomier outlook for earnings is like-ly to have been the main reason why the sur-veyed firms were no longer so optimistic.Firstly, price expectations have been very de-pressed for some time. Secondly, there arealso probably fewer prospects – at least in theshort term – of achieving adequate profits bystepping up sales. In particular, foreign busi-ness – which had been much more buoyantthan domestic demand – has lost momentumwith the calming of the international environ-ment. On the cost side, expenditure on per-sonnel has remained moderate, however, andthere have at least been initial signs of an eas-ing in terms of imported intermediate goods.The terms of financing, especially in thelonger-term range, may still be described aslargely favourable, although the capital mar-
kets are yielding fewer resources in the wakeof dramatic share price adjustments.
Domestic demand in the first few months of
the year did not adequately offset the declinein foreign business. According to the surveysof the consumer research institution,Gesellschaft für Konsumforschung , house-
holds’ assessment of the general economic
%Balance
Balance
DM
billionDM
billion
elin. scale  
Change from previous
year in %e log. scale  
GPD 2lin. scale
  
Business climate in industry 1
moving five-monthaveragemonthlyBusiness sentiment
and development of the
economy as a whole
1 Ifo institute data for western Germany. —
2 At 1995 prices.
Deutsche Bundesbank4
32
1
0950970
940960
930950
920
910
900
890
880
87030−20+
20−10+
10−0
10−
1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001Depressed
business
sentiment
Weak
consumer
demand from
households

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
30situation has definitely stabilised, however.
Not least, the outlook for incomes was ratedas being somewhat more favourable – some-thing which is undoubtedly due in part to thelowering of tax. Households continued to beaffected by considerable strains induced byoil prices, however: in many cases, there arelikely to have been additional payments forheating and hot water on annual bills.Monthly instalment payments, moreover,have been adjusted upwards. Besides this,
petrol prices (which had to sustain a furtherrise in ecological tax at the start of the year)remained at a high level. The real scope ofincome available for retail purchases wassignificantly reduced as a result. Seasonallyadjusted, turnover in this sector in the periodof January to March was noticeably down onthe level in autumn 2000 and was barely upon the same period last year. After eliminat-ing price movements, there was, in fact, aclear fall.
Output and labour market
As mentioned above, manufacturing output
became perceptibly more buoyant in the firstfew months of 2001. According to the avail-able Federal Statistical Office data (which are,however, still provisional and likely to be ad-justed later in the year), seasonally adjustedoutput in the first quarter was 2
12% higher
than the level in autumn last year. However,this rise overstates the pace of economicgrowth in manufacturing insofar as there hadbeen a temporary slowdown towards the endof 2000. Given a flow of orders that initiallyremained buoyant, the comparatively smallnumber of working days in December andthe increased number of short holidays takenduring that period may have been a factor. InMarch, the effects of catching up on fillingthose orders petered out and seasonally ad-justed output declined significantly. Eventhough, at around 7%, the year-on-year in-crease in output in the first quarter of 2001was no longer as sharp as in the second halfBalance
%
lin. scale
Change from previous
year in %log. scale
Retail turnover2
nominal, 1995 = 100monthly
moving
five-month averagelin. scale
Assessment of the economic
situation1Consumer sentiment
and retail turnover
1Bundesbank calculations based on Gesell-
schaft für Konsumforschung data. — 2Ex-
cluding motor vehicle and filling station
retail.
Deutsche Bundesbank4.5+
3.0+
1.5+
0
1.5−
3.0−104.5
103.0
101.5
100.0
98.560+
45+
30+
15+
0
15−
30−
1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001Sharp
expansion in
manufacturing
output

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
31of 2000, the level of manufacturing produc-
tion remains very high.
In terms of turnover, there was again an
above-average expansion in output for exportpurposes in the first few months of the cur-rent year. Taking the lead in this developmentwere the capital goods sector, in particular,along with producers of durable and non-durable consumer goods. Now that theboom in telecommunications equipment andIT hardware appears to have abated some-what, car production and the manufacture ofother transport equipment (which includesships and boats, aircraft and rolling stock)have recently come to the fore. There haslikewise been a significant rise in productionfor the domestic market. In addition to capitalgoods, a sharp surge in turnover was alsoidentifiable in the basic goods sector.
Construction activity in the first few months
of the year was affected by changing weatherconditions. While the cold snap in January ledto marked hold-ups, the comparatively mildtemperatures in February meant that it waspossible to make up for some of the delays.Nevertheless, including March, seasonally ad-justed construction output was significantlydown on its level in autumn 2000. Theyear-on-year fall, which, at 3
12%, had been
comparatively slight in the fourth quarter of2000, became larger again, reaching almostone-seventh. This clearly reveals that the situ-ation in the construction industry remainsunfavourable and that the process of adjust-ment affecting eastern Germany, in particu-lar, has not yet been brought to an end.Residential construction was hit particularly
hard by the further deterioration in the situ-ation. New construction had already been cutback dramatically last year, as it had beenmany times before. No more than just under425,000 dwellings were completed – aroundone-tenth, or 50,000 fewer, than in 1999.Compared with the peak of more than600,000 in the mid-nineties, the declineamounts to 30%. There was a well above-Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
%%
Capacity utilisation 1
0Mean 1993-2000lin. scale
Change from previous year in %Output
1995 = 100, log. scaleOutput and utilisation
in the manufacturing sector
1Results of the ifo business survey.
Deutsche Bundesbank88
8582
799+
6+
3+
0
3−124
121
118
115
112
109
106
103
100
1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001Above-average
rise in exports
Weak construc-
tion activity
Fewer
dwellings
completed

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
32average fall in the number of completed units
in rented housing construction (buildingswith three or more apartments). This wasespecially the case in eastern Germany: atsomewhat more than 20,000 apartments in2000, the number was no more than one-fifth of the figure for 1997. The growingnumber of vacant properties, which are esti-mated to amount to more than 10% of thetotal stock of dwellings and to account for al-most one-third of older apartments in inner-
city areas, means there is very little incentiveto build additional dwellings in eastern Ger-many at present. Similarly, less work wasstarted on buildings with one or two dwell-ings, which are likely to be mainly owner-occupied single-family houses. Following sev-eral years of sharp growth, there was a slightfall in 2000 in the number of single-familyhouses that were completed in western Ger-many as well. At over 180,000 dwelling units,the number nevertheless remained very high.
There has been no further improvement since
the start of 2001 in the situation on the la-bour market. In addition to the, at times, un-favourable effects of the weather, the eco-nomic slowdown is also likely to have had anincreasing impact. According to the estimatesof the Federal Statistical Office, the increasein employment (which had been very sharpthroughout 2000) came to a standstill inJanuary. In February, the seasonally adjustednumber of persons in work amounted to38.73 million, which was still 365,000 per-sons, or 1%, more than 12 months previous-ly. In the fourth quarter of 2000, however,the increase had amounted to almost 1
12%.
The services sector is increasingly unlikely tohave offset the continuing shedding of labourin the construction sector, particularly asstudies by the Centre for European EconomicResearch reveal that the dynamic growth inthe commercial service providers sector haswaned. Hiring and employment of personnelmay also have become more cautious inthe retail trade as well as in the hotel, restaur-ant and catering industries. At the turn of2000-01 the number of vacancies notified toSeasonally adjusted, quarterly
%%
Capacity utilisation1
0lin. scale
Change from previous year in %Output
1995 =100, log. scaleOutput and utilisation
in the construction sector
1Results of the ifo business survey; western
Germany.
Deutsche Bundesbank65
6055
5010+
5+
0
5−
10−
15−
20−105
100
95
90
85
80
75
1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001No further
employment
growth

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
33the labour exchanges appears to have passed
its peak.
There was a continuous slight increase in un-
employment during the winter months. Ac-cording to the figures of the Federal LabourOffice, the seasonally adjusted number ofpersons registered as unemployed was 3.81million at the end of April. Compared withthe low in December 2000, to which the mildweather made a positive contribution, thiswas an increase of around 40,000 persons.Even though this still signifies a year-on-yearfall of roughly 120,000 in the number of job-less, the corresponding figure for the fourthquarter of 2000, for example, was more thantwice as large, at 260,000. At 7.7% in April,the seasonally adjusted EU-standardised un-employment rate was at a level which hadremained virtually unchanged since late sum-mer 2000.
According to data on movement and struc-
tural analysis on the labour market which wasrecently published by the Institute for Employ-ment Research, older members of the work-force were affected by unemployment farmore than average in 2000 as well. For in-stance, the unemployment rate among per-sons aged over 55 was almost twice as highas on the average of all jobless persons. Atover 20 months, the period of unemploymentfor persons of that age was almost two-and-a-half times longer than on average. Theythus form a significant hard core of un-employment, which may largely be regardedas structural.The economic slowdown had an impact on
the labour market which was all the moresevere as a result of a more reserved deploy-ment of labour market policy measures con-tinuing at the start of 2001. In the first quar-ter, the number of persons taking part in vo-cational training courses was still somewhathigher than 12 months before. There wasalso an increase in the number of grants forassisting people into jobs and in assistanceQuarterly
Mio
%Thou-
sands
0Unemployment rate
(seasonally adjusted)
AprilAprilChange from previous yearUnemployed
(seasonally adjusted)
AprilJan./
Feb.Change from
previous yearJan./
Feb.Employed
(seasonally adjusted)Labour market
Deutsche Bundesbank12
1110
9400+
0
400−4.6
4.2
3.8
3.4800+
400+
0
400−38.8
38.4
38.0
37.637.236.8
- - 
1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001Slight rise in
unemployment
High level of
unemployment
among older
members of the
workforce
Reduced
deployment of
labour market
policy measures

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
34measures provided by the Federal Labour Of-
fice in addition to the regulated programmes.However, this only partly offset the markedcutback in job creation schemes and struc-tural adjustment programmes. On balance,there was a further decline in the number ofpersons receiving assistance, even though thefall was not as sharp as it had been in 2000.Orders
The demand for industrial products subsided
noticeably at the start of 2001. Seasonally ad-justed orders received by the manufacturingsector in the first quarter were 2
34% down
on the autumn months of 2000, when – notleast owing to a number of large-scaleorders – they had been at a very high level.The year-on-year increase was also smallerthan before. Whereas the rise had been justunder 10% in the third quarter and slightlymore than 10% in the fourth quarter, the fig-ure was now 4
12%. Taken in isolation, this
indicates that there continues to be a consid-erable flow of orders. The pace of growth,however, has changed perceptibly.
Foreign orders, in particular, were no longer
on the same scale as before. On an averageof the first quarter, they were 5
34% down on
the high level at the end of last year. The in-crease over 12 months fell from almost one-fifth in the fourth quarter of 2000 to 6%.The downturn in world trade accompanyingthe cooling of the US economy is likely tohave played a part in this, added to whichwas the slower pace of growth in Europe.Goods especially associated with the “NewEconomy”, such as office equipment, IT hard-ware and telecommunications systems werefar less in demand internationally. By con-trast, ordering of German cars was buoyantup to the end of the period under review.Enterprises’ price competitiveness remainedhigh given the predominantly weak quota-tions of the euro on the foreign exchangemarkets. In some cases, in fact, enterpriseswere able to push through foreign-currencySeasonally adjusted, quarterly, log. scale
DomesticForeignNew orders
Volume, 1995 = 100
TotalDemand in the
manufacturing sector
Deutsche Bundesbank95115
100110
105
100120160
115155
105150
110145
100140
135
130
125
120165130
125
120
115
110
105
100
95
1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001Falling demand
for industrial
products ...
... especially
from abroad

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
35price increases for their own range of prod-
ucts.
Incoming domestic orders did not offset the
decline the export demand although, in sea-sonally adjusted terms, they did manage toalmost maintain the autumn level in the firstquarter. The year-on-year increase was 3%,compared with 4% in the final quarter of2000. While orders for both intermediate andconsumer goods declined only slightly, thecapital goods sector suffered sharp losses –not least in the ITsector.
Demand for construction work did not point
to a turn for the better in the first fewmonths of 2001 either. On the contrary,orders received by the construction sector inJanuary and February showed a further sharpdecline in seasonally adjusted terms. Not onlywere they below the somewhat increasedlevel of the fourth quarter, they were alsodown on the low level of summer 2000. At8%, they declined more sharply on the yearthan in autumn (– 6
34%).
While the reduction in orders placed by public
sector contractors may be regarded as a re-turn to normal following a surge in orders atthe end of last year, the renewed decline indemand for industrial and commercial con-struction interrupted the hopes of a steadycyclical upturn in this sector which hademerged along with the positive develop-ments at the end of last year. In residentialconstruction, the order books in January andFebruary showed a slight improvement onautumn, which had been very unfavourable.Seasonally adjusted, new orders went upsomewhat and the year-on-year shortfall had
been reduced from – 19
12% in the fourth
quarter of 2000 to – 1612% at the end of
the period under review. This should not beoverrated as a positive sign, however. The fallin the number of construction permits fordwellings last year, at one-fifth, was sharperthan at any time since German reunification.Moreover, in regional terms, the situation inwestern Germany was scarcely any differentSeasonally adjusted, quarterly, log. scale
...in housing
   construction
Jan./
Feb....of the
   public sector...of industrial
   enterprisesVolume, 1995 = 100
Construction orders...
...totalDemand for
construction work
Deutsche Bundesbank110
100
90
80
70
60
55100
90
80100
90
80
70100
90
80
70
1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001- - - - Development
not offset by
domestic orders
Further decline
in demand for
construction
work

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
36from that in eastern Germany. There were
only minor differences in demand betweenowner-occupied housing and rented housingconstruction as well.
Prices
The price climate in Germany, which had
shown a temporary improvement towardsthe end of 2000, worsened again perceptiblyduring the first few months of this year.Measured by the year-on-year rate of in-crease in the consumer price index, inflationwent up to 2.9% by April, having been2.2% in December. Among the contributoryfactors, developments in energy prices arethe most prominent. Prices for crude oil onthe international markets went up again inApril, for example. At US$ 27
12for a barrel
of Brent North Sea Oil at the end of themonth, the price reached a level that had lastbeen recorded in the second half of February.The upward movement in prices was muchsharper on the spot markets for petrol, wherethe quoted prices were hardly lower thantheir peak of mid-2000. Prices were drivenup, in particular, by heavy demand from theUnited States, where supply shortages werefeared owing to scarce refinery capacities. Bycontrast, there was no more than a compara-tively slight increase in heating oil prices, asthe heating period had ended. Following theinternational product markets, petrol priceswent up to a new record high at German fill-ing stations. In line with the past rise in min-eral oil prices, there was also a further in-crease in gas prices and tenants’ paymentsfor heating and hot water. According to theofficial statistics, consumer prices for energyin April were more than 10% higher than inthe same month last year. Food was anotherfactor contributing to higher prices. Firstly,the lengthy spell of wet and cold weatherhad an adverse impact on prices for seasonalfood products. Secondly, BSE and foot andmouth disease had the effect of driving upprices for both meat products from non-affected sources and for the substitutionproducts of fish and cheese. In total, house-holds paid 5% more for food in April thanone year before.
Excluding energy and food, the year-on-year
rate of consumer price inflation amounted to1.5% in April. At the end of last year, therate had been just under 1%. A similar pic-ture is presented by the core rates, whichConsumer price index
Changes from previous year in %
2000 2001
Item 3rd qtr 4th qtr 1rd qtrMarch/
April
Energy sources 14.2 15.8 11.2 11.4
of which
Mineral oil prod-ucts 24.2 19.3 5.2 6.4
Food 0.2 1.1 2.7 4.4of which
Seasonal products 1.3 2.5 2.9 6.1
Meat and fish
products 0.6 1.5 4.6 6.9
Manufactured
goods 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.7
Services 1.5 1.5 3.0 2.8of which
Radio and TVlicence fee, motorvehicle tax 0.6 0.1 20.0 20.0
Rents 1.4 1.3 1.2 1.2
Total 2.0 2.4 2.5 2.7
Deutsche Bundesbank
Deterioration
in the price
climate
Underlying
price trend
remains
moderate

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
37show the underlying trend of price move-
ments omitting shorter-term fluctuations. InMarch and April together, the figure was1.7%, compared with around 1% in thesecond half of 2000. Price developments inmanufactured goods, in particular, remainmoderate. In the last two months under re-view, they were no more than 0.7% more ex-pensive than 12 months previously. Althoughthe rise in house rents, at 1.2%, was obvious-ly sharper, it has been on this scale for somewhile. The year-on-year rate of price increasefor services, which amounted to 2.8% on theaverage of March and April, continued to beaffected by the sharp rise in administeredprices at the start of 2001. Excluding theradio and television licence fee and excludingmotor vehicle tax, the price rise was 1.5%.
In March, domestic industrial selling prices
were 4.9% up on the year, compared with arise over 12 months of 4.5% in the fourthquarter of 2000. The faster pace of inflationwas due solely to energy, where the easing ofmineral oil prices at that time was more thanoffset by the lagged price adjustments for gasand district heating and by higher electricityprices. The rate of price increase for manufac-tured products on their own (excluding min-eral oil products) has not gone up. At 2.2%in March, the rate of increase was scarcelydifferent from the fourth quarter, when it hadmeasured 2.1%. Whereas prices of foodproducts were raised more sharply in thewake of BSE and foot and mouth disease,some price movements in basic goods weremore moderate than in 2000.log. scale
DM,US$
per
barrel
DM,US$
per
tonneDM,US$
pertonne
01Petrol
oHeating oilBrent
in Deutsche Mark
in US$Prices on the
international oil markets
o Up to the end of 1999: monthly; from
2000: daily.
Deutsche Bundesbank400 400
300500
200600
100700
150800150800
100700
600
500
400
300
200
15080
70
60
50
40
30
20
1015
1997 1998 1999 2000Industrial prices
put under strain
by energy

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
38The basic pattern was similar in the case of
import prices. Moreover, since price increasesfor imported capital goods slowed downagain after some acceleration, the overallyear-on-year rate of increase in import pricesfell from double digits last year to 4.2% inMarch 2001. There were also reductions inexport prices at the turn of the year. As thesewere not as marked as they were for imports,
however, the terms of trade were not quite asunfavourable as they had been previously.
Agricultural producer prices were clearly af-
fected by BSE and the outbreak of foot andmouth disease. Whereas prices for cattle andfor calves were around one-fifth cheaperyear-on-year, pigs, lambs and poultry becamesignificantly more expensive. In March 2001,animals for slaughter as a whole cost around15% more than in the same period of 2000.Since agricultural selling prices for vegetableproducts fell slightly over 12 months, price in-creases for all agricultural products amountedto 8.4% year-on-year at the end of theperiod under review.
The rise in construction prices still remained
within narrow bounds at the beginning of2001. Overall, construction work cost only0.6% more than in the same period last year.Whereas road construction in February, des-pite a declining rate, was still 2% more ex-pensive than in the same month last year,prices for construction work for residentialbuildings were almost unchanged. Shell con-struction work was, in fact, 1% cheaper.Indicators of consumer prices
Change from previous year in %
2000 2001
Item 3rd qtr 4th qtr 1st qtrMarch/
April
Headline rate of
inflation
Consumer prices 2.0 2.4 2.5 2.7
Statistical core
rates 1
Consumer pricesexcluding seasonalfood and energy 0.9 1.0 1.6 1.8
Consumer prices
with modifiedweights
2 0.8 1.1 1.4 1.6
5% trimmed
mean 3 1.2 1.3 1.8 2.2
Weighted
median 4 1.1 1.1 1.2 1.3
Mean of the core
rates 1.0 1.1 1.5 1.7
1Bundesbank calculations. — 2Reduction of the
weights of volatile components. — 35% exclusion of
components showing a high/low degree of volatility. —4Price change for the component at which the cumula-
tive individual weights reach 50%.
Rise in import
prices
somewhat
weakerAgricultural
prices affected
by BSE and foot
and mouth
disease
Construction
prices stable

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
39Appendix:
Problems ofinternationalcomparisonsof growth –a supplementaryanalysisThis article aims to draw attention to the stat-
istical problems of international comparisonsof growth. It is not primarily concerned withthe question of whether the methods used inthe United States or in Europe are to be pre-ferred. Despite many efforts to improve thecomparability of statistics, much remains tobe done in this area. There is a need for ac-tion, in particular, by international organisa-tions, such as the United Nations, the OECDand the Statistical Office of the EuropeanCommunities (Eurostat). For the time being,however, a knowledge of the methodologicaland conceptual features of the national statis-tics is of major importance for the user of thedata.
In the August 2000 Monthly Report, refer-
ence was made to the fact that the discrep-ancy between the United States and Ger-many in developments in real IT equipment iscaused, to quite a considerable extent, by thediffering methods used in statistical pricemeasurement for evaluating and/or capturingchanges in quality.
1Adjusting the price of ex-
penditure on IT equipment in Germany usingthe corresponding time series for the US pricedeflator produces, for the nineties, a muchmore dynamic growth of the real variablesthan is shown in the official statistical data.There are similar methodological differencesbetween the United States and other mem-ber states of the EU.
1See Deutsche Bundesbank, Problems of international
comparisons of growth caused by dissimilar methods of
deflation – with IT equipment in Germany and the United
States as a case in point, Monthly Report, August 2000,
page 8.Aim
Price
adjustment of
expenditure on
IT goods

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
40Taken in isolation, this finding – as was point-
ed out in the August 2000 Monthly Report –also has an impact, in purely mathematicalterms, on the growth of real gross domesticproduct (GDP). However, the IT goods con-tained in other demand components, espe-cially in private consumption as well as in im-ports and exports, likewise have to be takeninto consideration. Furthermore, it should benoted that, in terms of the national accounts,the US price deflator differs from the ap-proach used in Germany (and other coun-tries) not merely with regard to the quality as-pect of price measurement. Since 1995, forexample, the US Bureau of Economic Analysishas been using a chained Fisher quantityindex
2for determining real GDP . The rate of
growth of the economy as a whole is aver-aged from the rate of expansion of real GDP ,calculated on the basis of the preceding year’s
prices, and the rate produced when evaluat-ing GDP at the prices of the respective report-ing period. By contrast, the real aggregates ofthe national accounts in Germany – and inmost of the other countries in Europe – areexpressed at constant prices of a given baseyear (currently 1995), i.e. as a Laspeyresquantity index. The US method, which workswith current price structures and thereforetakes account of substitution effects immedi-ately, tends to generate rates of growth inthe years following the base period which arelower than those generated when using thetraditional approach.
According to estimations at the Bundesbank,
real GDP growth in Germany on an averageof the years 1996 to 1999 would have beenshown as being just under 0.2 percentagepoint higher if the hedonic price measure-ment of IT goods and a methodological ap-proach which is similar to the US deflatorconcept (chained Laspeyres quantity index)had been applied in Germany.
3Since, given
the complex situation with regard to thedata, simplifying assumptions had to bemade, however, this outcome is to be inter-preted with due caution.1991 = 100, log. scale
1991 1999Germany
United
StatesPrices of IT equipment
in Germany and
the United States
Deutsche Bundesbank110
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
15
92 93 94 95 96 97 98
2For details, see Scheuer, M./ H.-A. Leifer, Zur Umstel-
lung der Berechnung des realen Bruttoinlandsprodukts in
den USA auf einen Kettenindex, WiSt, 25. Jg., 1996,
pages 473–478, and Nierhaus, W., Wirtschaftswachstum
in den Volkswirtschaftlichen Gesamtrechnungen: Ein Ver-
gleich Deutschland – USA, ifo-Schnelldienst, 2001,
Heft 3, pages 41–51.
3With regard to these calculations, it should be specific-
ally noted that the US import and export deflators were
not applied to Germany since the trends, even in an isol-
ated analysis of circumstances in the United States, do
not appear very plausible. Instead, a uniform deflator, i.e.
the US price index for IT goods, was used for all expend-
iture aggregates.Inclusion of
other demand
components
and ...
... differences in
price deflator
methodologies“Growth
effects” of
differing price
measurement

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
41Since we are concerned here – as indicated
above – with the comparability of the Ger-man and US GDP growth rates and not withthe more far-reaching question of the relativeadvantages and/or shortcomings of certainstatistical methodologies, the reverse ap-proach is also of interest, i.e. calculating thenational accounts aggregates of the UnitedStates using the methods which are custom-ary in Germany. As may be demonstrated,the contribution to GDP growth in the UnitedStates made by the US ITsector on an averageof the years 1994 to 1998 is halved to
12per-
centage point.4Overall economic output dur-
ing this period would therefore have grown“only” by 3
14% annually rather than by
334%. US Bureau of Economic Analysis staff
put the “growth effect” of hedonic pricemeasurement at “only” around
14percentage
point, however.5The fact that the negative
adjustment to US growth is much higher thanthe upward adjustment when using the USapproach in the German national accounts,appears entirely plausible, since the IT sector –measured in terms of value added – has amuch greater weight in the United Statesthan in Germany. The transfer of the deflatormethodology there has a correspondinglygreater impact.
The problems of comparing national accounts
data internationally are not due solely to ITequipment but derive from a large numberof classes of goods and national accountscategories.
6These problems are especially
marked in the case of components with acomparatively dynamic growth, pronouncedshifts in market shares or changes in relativeprices. In the IT sector, this is the case not onlyfor hardware but also for software. In Ger-
many, nominal software investment duringthe period from 1992 to 1999 rose by around70% in total, or just under 7% annually.
7By
contrast, in the United States it went up by215%, or 15
12% annually, during the same
period. If software investment is expressed as%
1991 1999Germany
United StatesSoftware-hardware
ratios in Germany
and the United States*
*Software investment as a percentage of
hardware investment at current prices.
Deutsche Bundesbank240
200
160
120
80
40
00
92 93 94 95 96 97 98
4See Callow, J., The European Digital Economy, Euro-11
Special, Credit Suisse First Bosten, July 2000, page 11.
5See Landefeld, St.J and B.T. Grimm, A Note on the Im-
pact of Hedonics and Computers on Real GDP , Survey of
Current Business, December 2000, page 20.
6In the United States, hedonic price measurements are
now made for one-fifth of GDP . See Landefeld, St.J and
B.T. Grimm, A Note on the Impact of Hedonics and Com-
puters on Real GDP , Survey of Current Business,
December 2000, page 18.
7According to the figures of the Federal Statistical
Office, software investment in 1995 accounted for nearly
three-quarters of the intangible assets formed. For the
preceding and following years, the Federal Statistical
Office did not show software investment separately in
the relevant publications, but subsumed them instead
under “intangible gross fixed capital formation”. The
data for those years were therefore estimated.Software-
hardware ratios
in Germany and
the United
States

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
42a ratio of enterprises’ expenditure on hard-
ware, US software investment in 1995 stoodat US$ 144 for every US$ 100 spent on hard-ware. This compared with a ratio of 108:100in Germany. By 1999, the ratio in the UnitedStates had risen to 220:100, whereas ex-penditure on hardware and software in Ger-many was in equilbrium at a ratio of roughly100:100. Such differences are difficult to ex-plain given the technological complementar-ities that exist between IT equipment andsoftware.
Since this comparison is based on nominal
data, the differences between Germany andthe United States in terms of price measure-ment (which also do not have as great an im-pact on software investment as they do on ITequipment) are not a factor. The markeddifferences in the figures for the software-hardware ratios cannot simply be explainedin terms of differing statistical recordingmethods insofar as these may be traced usingthe published accounts of the methodologies.Rather, there are some indications that theapproaches – which are indeed quite similarin conception – are “managed” differently inpractice. In the United States, expenditureon software and software development, forexample, is obviously regarded to a greaterextent as investment and thus as contributingto growth. In the official statistics in Germanyand in some other EU countries, on the otherhand, it tends to be treated more as an input.At all events, the much steadier software-hardware ratio in Germany fits much betteroverall with the existing technological com-plementarities between hardware and soft-ware, which are likely to change only grad-ually over a fairly long period. However, the
statistical basis for determining software ex-penditure, in general, and software invest-ment, in particular, is very narrow – not onlyin Germany but also in the majority of otherindustrial countries. Nevertheless, there areno indications that the level of software in-vestment in Germany is being systematicallyunderestimated. Measured as a share of GDPor GNP , it is clearly above the EU average.
8
This finding suggests that the highlighted dif-ferences are not a “bilateral phenomenon”between the United States and Germany.
In order to make a rough estimate of the ex-
tent to which the bilateral comparison ofgrowth may have been affected by differ-ences in capturing software investment, theUS software-hardware ratios were applied (inline with the procedure in the case of ITgoods) to German IT equipment. As a result,there is an acceleration in the pace of growthin software investment in Germany. Relativeto real GDP , there is, in purely mathematicalterms, an increase in growth of just under
14percentage point on an average of the
years 1996 to 1999. By contrast, US econom-ic growth is reduced if US software invest-ment is derived from the German software-hardware ratios. Owing to the higher macro-economic weight of software investment inthe United States, the “growth loss”, ataround 0.3 percentage point on an averageof the years 1996 to 1999, is somewhat
8According to the official statistics, the ranking of soft-
ware investment is especially low in the United Kingdom.
The same conclusion is reached by the Bank of England,
which has calculated a software-hardware ratio of
40:100. For details, see also Wadhwani, S., Monetary
Challenges in a New Economy, speech held on
October 12, 2000, page 18.Impact on GDP
growth

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
43greater than the matching “growth gain” in
Germany.
Taking together the factors under discussion
here, i.e. the impact of the differing methodsof price measurement and the diverging ap-proaches to the software-hardware ratio,there is a perceptible reduction in the differ-ences in growth between the United Statesand Germany shown hitherto. If the USmethods and computation approaches areapplied to Germany, the difference in growthbetween the two countries in the second halfof the nineties is around 0.4 percentage pointlower annually. If the relevant US aggregatesare adapted in a similar manner on the basisof the methods and computing approachesused in Germany, the disparity in growth be-comes even flatter.
The result in relation to Germany is consistent
with comparable estimations for the UnitedKingdom. According to calculations at theBank of England, the statistical “growth bias”vis-à-vis the United States in the period from1994 to 1998 likewise averaged 0.4 percent-age point.
9In France, the “bias” vis-à-vis the
United States was somewhat smaller, at atotal of 0.3 percentage point.
10This is unsur-
prising, however, as the French statistics havebeen undertaking a hedonic price measure-
ment for IT goods for some years now and –like the United States – used a chain indexmethodology. By contrast, the differences interms of the approaches to software invest-ment are – as in the case of Germany and theUnited Kingdom – considerable. Another fac-tor to be taken into consideration in this con-text is that the respective systems of calcula-tion differ in detail.
The “growth effect” estimated here is not
small in scale. Nevertheless, this can “ex-plain” only a small part of the overall differ-ence in statistically recorded growth betweenthe United States and Germany, amountingto 2
34percentage points on an average of
the years 1996 to 1999. This was also thecase with regard to the differences in growthbetween the United Kingdom and France, onthe one hand, and the United States, on theother, even though these differences weremarkedly smaller in the second half of thenineties at 1
12and 2 percentage points annu-
ally, respectively.
9See Wadhwani, S., Monetary Challenges in a New
Economy, speech held on October 12, 2000, page 21.
10See Lequiller, F., The new economy and the measure-
ment of GDP growth, Working Paper, February 2001,
page 35.“Growth
effect” overall
Comparable
findings for
the United
Kingdom and
FranceUS growth
lead remains
considerable

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
44Foreign trade and
paymentsForeign trade and current account
As a result of the deterioration in the world
economic outlook and the consequent slow-down in market growth, Germany’s exportbusiness lost momentum in the first quarterof 2001. Although German exports remainedat a relatively high level at the beginning ofthe year, the pace of exports became discern-ibly more sluggish later in the first quarter.This applied, in particular, to the flow of newbusiness. Indeed, export orders received byGerman industry in the first quarter of theyear showed a continual decline for the firsttime since 1998. According to the ifo busi-ness survey, the export expectations of themanufacturing sector also became less opti-mistic during this period even if reports on fu-ture prospects for exports were still predom-inantly positive.
In the first quarter of 2001 German exports
rose in seasonally adjusted terms by no morethan just under
12% over their level in the
final quarter of last year; however, this meansthat they were still as much as 13
12%u po n
a year-on-year comparison. A similar pictureemerges in real terms, too, as the change inexport prices was only slight.
The euro-area countries were again Ger-
many’s most important trading partners inthe first quarter of 2001. In the period ofDecember-February (a regional breakdown ofthe foreign trade figures for March is still notavailable) this group of countries accountedfor just over 44% of total German exportsales. However, the rise in exports to othereuro-area countries was only slight (1%)External trends
Exports
Regional
breakdown of
exports

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
45compared with the previous three months
(September-November). By contrast, Germanexports to the United States increased atan above-average rate (+ 8
12%). Although
this is understandable in the light of theexchange-rate-related competitive advan-tages enjoyed by German and other exportersin the euro area, it is still surprising in view ofthe pronounced cyclical downturn in theUnited States. Another possible factor maybe the completion and dispatch of orders pre-viously placed. These, after all, may not re-flect the actual business situation. Exports tothe OPEC countries also increased (+ 7%).This is probably an after-effect of the sharpincrease in income that these countries ob-tained from oil sales. Owing to the minor rolethat these countries play in Germany’s exportbusiness, however, these exports had little im-pact on the overall result. It seems remarkablethat the OPEC countries were very slow inconverting their improved balance of pay-ments situation into an increase in imports –in contrast to what they had done at the timeof previous oil price shocks. Exports to thecentral and east European countries in transi-tion rose slightly (+ 1%) compared with theprevious period. German exports to Asia,which has been affected to a much greaterdegree by the slowdown in the US economythan the euro area has been, declined sharply.The problems of the Japanese economy havealso had a detrimental effect. Sales of Ger-man goods to Japan fell by 9
12% compared
with the final quarter of last year.
Imports declined even more strongly than ex-
ports during the first quarter of the currentyear, their seasonally adjusted value beingjust under 6% below the corresponding level
in the fourth quarter of the year 2000. Theywere substantially lower at constant prices,too (just under 4%). However, the decline inimports was also due to oil prices, whichwere lower in the first quarter of the yearthan in the autumn of last year. For example,the value of imports from the OPEC countriesin the last three months for which figuresare available (December-February) fell sharply,DM
billion 5 
billion
%Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
monthlylin. scale
Export expectations 2Orders received
from abroad
values, 1995 = 100monthly140
135
130
125
120145
135
130
125
120150
135
130
125
120155
135
130
125
120160
135
130
125
120
omonthly  1
log. scale
ExportsExport trend
1Monthly figures converted into quarterly
values. — 2Results of the ifo business
survey; balances of positive and negative
company reports. — oFrom 1999 all data in
euro.
Deutsche Bundesbank20+
15+
10+
5+
0
5−150
145
140
135
130
125
120155160165170175310
300
290
280
270
260
250
240
230230230
1998 1999 2000 2001
ImportsRegional
breakdown of
imports

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
46as expected, i.e. 11%, compared with the
previous period, in response to the loweroil prices. By contrast, imports from theeuro-area countries declined only slightly(
14%). Similarly, German imports from non-
euro-area countries also went down onlyslightly (by
12%). Imports from the United
States and from the central and east Euro-pean countries in transition actually grewsharply (by 5
12% and 7%, respectively).
Owing to the substantially smaller import bill,
the export surplus rose significantly in thefirst quarter of 2001 after falling continuallyin the year 2000. In seasonally adjusted termsthe export surplus in the first three months ofthe current year was 39 billion greater, at
320
12billion, than in the previous quarter.The other current transactions with non-
residents had a slightly negative influence, onbalance, on the external position in the firstquarter of 2001. After seasonal adjustmentthe combined outcome of services, factorincome and current transfers was a further32 billion down on the previous quarter and
therefore amounted to minus 322 billion.
Only the current transfers abroad were morefavourable. The seasonally adjusted deficithere was 36 billion in the period under re-
view compared with one of 37 billion in the
final quarter of last year. By contrast, the def-icit on the service account was greater ( 314
12
billion compared with 313 billion in the previ-
ous quarter). There was net expenditure (of31
12billion) in the case of factor income
whereas in the previous quarter the accounthad been almost in balance. Consequently,the current account ran a deficit of 33 billion
compared with one of 310
12billion in the
final quarter of last year.
Financial transactions
The slowdown in the world economy and the
interest rate reductions in the United Stateshad an impact on the international financialmarkets at the beginning of 2001. Owing touncertainty about the future economic trend,especially in the United States, internationalinvestors shifted from shares into bonds andnotes, whose yields declined discernibly as aresult. At first the euro continued on the up-ward course it had set in the autumn of lastyear but later in the first quarter of 2001 itlost some of the ground it had regained.These general trends are largely reflected inCurrent account
3billion; seasonally adjusted
2000 2001
Item 3rd qtr 4th qtr 1st qtr
1. Foreign trade
Exports (f.o.b.) 151.5 159.4 159.8Imports (c.i.f.) 138.0 148.1 139.4
Balance 13.5 11.3 20.4
2. Services (balance) – 9.3 – 12.8 – 14.3
of which
Foreign travel (balance) – 7.9 – 8.2 – 8.2
3. Factor income (balance) – 1.3 – 0.1 – 1.5
of which
Investment income(balance) – 1.0 0.1 – 1.3
4. Current transfers (balance) – 6.4 – 7.0 – 6.0
Balance on current account
1– 5.1 – 10.7 – 3.0
1Includes supplementary trade items.
Deutsche Bundesbank
Trade balanceCurrent
account
Trends in
financial trans-
actions

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
47Germany’s financial transaction with non-
residents. However, specifically national fac-tors came into play at the beginning of theyear with the result that Germany ultimatelyrecorded net capital exports through portfoliotransactions and direct investment betweenJanuary and March 2001 whereas funds wereimported in the field of statistically recordedcredit transactions.
The net capital exports arising from portfolio
investment amounted to 347 billion in the
period under review, which meant that theyexceeded the figure in the final quarter of2000 ( 311 billion) fairly substantially. The
main reason for the increased outflow of cap-ital was the reduced investment of non-residents, who withdrew 34
12billion net
from the German capital market. Particularlyin the case of German money market paper,which had been in strong demand from for-eign investors right into the summer of lastyear, redemptions predominated in the firstthree months of 2001 ( 315
12billion), as in
the previous quarter. Evidently short-datedpaper did not appear to be sufficiently at-tractive in the light of the changed interestrate situation to induce foreign holders of thepaper to reinvest in it.
Part of the funds that became available could
have flowed into longer-dated debt securitiesowing to the expected holding gains. At allevents, non-resident investors purchasedprivate-sector bonds worth 319
12billion be-
tween January and March; that was 35 bil-
lion more than in the previous three-monthperiod. The positive sentiment in the bankdebt securities market also brought a slightMajor items of the balance
of payments
5billion
2000 2001
Item 1st qtr 4th qtr 1st qtr
I. Current account
1. Foreign trade
Exports (f.o.b.) 140.6 163.5 159.7Imports (c.i.f.) 124.9 151.1 140.0
Balance + 15.8 + 12.4 + 19.7
2. Services (balance) – 9.8 – 10.4 – 13.43. Factor income (balance) + 0.4 – 1.4 – 1.94. Current transfers (balance) – 5.4 – 8.0 – 5.3
Balance on current account
1 –0 . 4–9 . 6–2 . 4
II. Balance of capital transfers 2 + 0.2 – 0.4 + 0.6
III. Financial account 3
Direct investment + 134.3 – 24.2 – 13.8
Portfolio investment – 175.5 – 11.1 – 47.0
German investmentabroad – 90.2 – 30.3 – 42.3Foreign investment inGermany – 85.4 + 19.3 – 4.7
Financial derivatives – 2.3 – 2.4 + 1.5Credit transactions
4 + 77.6 + 14.6 + 49.2
Overall balance on financial
account + 34.1 – 23.0 – 10.1
IV. Change in the foreign reserves
at transaction values(increase: –)
5 – 0.8 + 2.1 + 4.1
V. Balance of unclassifiable
transactions – 33.1 + 31.0 + 7,9
1Includes supplementary trade items. — 2Including the acquisi-
tion/disposal of non-produced non-financial assets. — 3Net capital
exports: –. — 4Including Bundesbank investment and other public
and private investment. — 5Excluding allocation of SDRs and
changes due to value adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankPortfolio
investment
Foreign
investment in ...
... German
money market
paper
... German
bonds and
notes

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
48reduction in the interest rate premium which
these securities traditionally carry over Ger-man public bonds for the first time since thestart of monetary union. On a quarterly aver-age, the premium fell from 61 to 51 basispoints in the case of nine-year to ten-yearpaper.
In the case of public bonds, by contrast, non-
residents’ redemptions and sales predomin-ated, as in the previous quarter. All in all,these amounted to 311 billion between
January and March compared with 3
12billion
in the previous period. During the periodunder review it was not only the relativelyweak interest of foreign investors in Federalbonds, which has been observed for sometime, but also the early settlement of liabilitiesof the Currency Conversion Equalisation Fundthat played an important role; debt securitiesheld by non-residents and worth just under35 billion were affected by this. The Federal
Government used part of the proceeds fromthe auction of UMTS licences for the redemp-tion which it had announced in advance. Ifpublic and private bonds are taken together,capital imports in the period under reviewamounted to 38
12billion compared with
31412billion in the final quarter of last year.
Foreign funds amounting to no more than
3412billion flowed into the German share
markets between January and March. Thatwas less than one-half of the amount in theprevious period ( 39
12billion). Evidently the
less favourable economic outlook, especiallyin the United States, had a detrimental effecton the business expectations of many of theenterprises operating there. In view of theFinancial transactions
5billion, net capital exports: –
2000 2001
Item 1st qtr 4th qtr 1st qtr
1. Direct investment +134.3 – 24.2 – 13.8
German investment
abroad – 34.5 + 12.4 – 10.3Foreign investmentin Germany +168.8 – 36.6 – 3.5
2. Portfolio investment – 175.5 – 11.1 – 47.0
German investment
abroad – 90.2 – 30.3 – 42.3
Shares – 46.1 – 13.1 – 4.1
Investment fundcertificates – 14.8 – 4.0 – 6.2Bonds and notes – 31.0 – 10.2 – 31.7Money market paper + 1.7 – 3.1 – 0.4
Foreign investment
in Germany – 85.4 + 19.3 – 4.7
Shares – 96.3 + 9.3 + 4.5
Investment fundcertificates + 5.1 + 2.1 – 1.8Bonds and notes + 8.9 + 14.4 + 8.3Money market paper – 3.1 – 6.5 – 15.7
3. Financial derivatives
1 – 2.3 – 2.4 + 1.5
4. Credit transactions + 78.3 + 14.6 + 49.4
Credit institutions + 56.9 – 12.4 + 61.1
Long-term + 6.6 – 11.6 – 10.2
Short-term + 50.3 – 0.9 + 71.3
Enterprises and indivi-
duals – 11.4 + 11.9 – 13.9
Long-term + 0.8 + 1.8 + 4.1
Short-term – 12.2 + 10.1 – 18.0
General government – 0.0 + 0.0 + 18.0
Long-term – 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.4
Short-term + 0.1 – 0.2 + 18.4
Bundesbank + 32.8 + 15.1 – 15.8
5. Other investment – 0.7 + 0.0 – 0.26. Balance of all statisti-
cally recorded capitalflows + 34.1 – 23.0 – 10.1
Memo item
Change in the foreignreserves at transactionvalues (increase: –)
2 – 0.8 + 2.1 + 4.1
1Securitised and non-securitised options and financial
futures contracts. — 2Excluding allocation of SDRs and
changes due to value adjustments.
Deutsche Bundesbank... German
shares

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
49close integration of the financial markets
world-wide and the presence of German andother European firms in the United States,German shares could not escape this trendeither even though the economic prospectsfor the euro area are by no means poor.
The general reluctance to invest in shares in
the first three months of 2001 can also beclearly seen in the foreign investment of Ger-man residents. While the latter bought secur-ities issued by non-resident borrowers wortha total of 342
12billion, shares accounted for
only 34 billion of this amount. Last year Ger-
man residents invested about 327 billion on
a quarterly average in foreign equities. It wasnot only the general desire to limit risk thatplayed an important role in this sluggishdevelopment; the fact that individual invest-ors who are known to carry out complex spottransactions, futures contracts and lendingagreements with foreign shares sold fairlyextensive amounts of such paper in theperiod under review was also important.
The weak demand for foreign shares could
ultimately have benefited the bonds andnotes issued by foreign borrowers. Germaninvestors acquired foreign bonds worth atotal of 331
12billion between January and
March compared with 310 billion in the
quarter earlier. As usual since the start ofmonetary union, they preferred euro-denominated paper and sold foreign currencybonds for a net total of 32
12billion. German
banks were the most important group of in-vestors here. They stocked up their holdingsof foreign debt securities by 318
12billion.
German investment companies also acquiredforeign bonds. Evidently institutional invest-
ors, in particular, are taking advantage of the(small) interest rate differences within theeuro area to improve their earnings withouthaving to run additional exchange rate risks.
However, German savers do not use only Ger-
man financial intermediaries when investing.They take advantage of foreign services, too,and in the period under review purchasedcertificates of foreign investment funds worth36 billion. Although that was about 32 bil-
lion more than in the final quarter of 2000, itwas just under one-half of the sum they hadinvested in the first quarter of last year. Atthat time, of course, foreign investmentfunds had been recording an unusually largeinflow of capital from Germany owing to theeuphoria on the international share markets. 5 
billion
 5 
billionIncrease in credit
institutions’ holdings 2Acquisition of foreign
debt securities, total 1Participation of credit
institutions in the acquisition
of foreign debt securities
1Bonds and notes. — 2 Adjusted for statis-
tics-related changes.
Deutsche Bundesbank24
16
8
040
3224
16
80
1999 2000 2001German
investment in ...
... foreign
shares
... foreign
bonds and
notes... foreign
investment
fund certifi-
cates

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
50There were outflows of funds from Germany
outside the field of portfolio investment, too,in the first quarter of 2001. Direct investmentresulted in net capital exports of just under314 billion compared with 324 billion in the
previous three-month period. German enter-prises invested a total of 310
12billion in their
foreign subsidiaries between January andMarch 2001 whereas in the last two quartersof 2000 they had withdrawn funds fromthem on account of various special develop-ments. It was mainly credits that Germanfirms were now making available to their sub-sidiaries abroad; by contrast, the volume ofinvestment was checked owing inter alia to
the selling of affiliated enterprises as part ofgroup restructuring.
In the case of inward direct investment intra-
group funding flowed in the opposite direc-tion, resulting in net capital exports of 33
12
billion. It is true that, owing to corporate ac-
quisitions (for example, in the telecommuni-cations sector, which was already at thecentre of cross-border mergers), about 317
billion in equity capital flowed into Germanyin the period under review. Of greater import-ance, however, was the fact that the foreignsubsidiaries domiciled in Germany providedtheir proprietors with substantial amounts ofshort-term credit, which were statistically re-corded as reverse flows.
Statistically recorded non-securitised credit
transactions resulted in the influx of funds atthe beginning of this year. However, some ofthe transactions of non-banks cancelled eachother out. As usual at the beginning of theyear, German enterprises and individuals ex-ported capital in net terms ( 314 billion) be-
cause they were now rapidly replenishing thebalances which they hold with banks abroadand which they had reduced for balancesheet purposes at the end of last year. By con-trast, there were net imports of funds ( 318
billion) in the case of general government.The main reason for this was that, in connec-tion with the aforementioned repayment ofdebt certificates of the Currency ConversionEqualisation Fund, the Federal Governmenttemporarily took recourse to bank deposits“parked” abroad.
Consequently, the net capital imports in non-
securitised credit transactions are ultimatelyreflected in the change in the external pos-ition of the entire banking system, which usu-ally represents the counterpart of the othertransactions recorded in the balance of pay-ments. However, it was solely the Germancredit institutions which recorded imports offunds ( 361 billion) whereas the external
transactions booked through the accountsheld by the Bundesbank (and excluding thechange in foreign reserves) resulted in exportsof funds amounting to 316 billion. As usual,
these were largely due to changes in TARGETbalances.
During the first three months of this year the
foreign reserves of the Bundesbank declined– at transaction values – by 34 billion, which
was a somewhat sharper fall than in the finalquarter of last year. The previously an-nounced channelling of currency reserves onto the market was the decisive factor here. Bycontrast, the revaluation of the foreign re-serves at current market prices and exchangeDirect
investment
Credit
transactions ...
... of non-banks... of banks
Foreign
reserves of the
Bundesbank

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
51rates resulted in a substantial rise in value
with the result that the market value of theforeign reserves at the end of March 2001 –393 billion – was only slightly more than 3
12
billion below the level at the end of
December 2000.

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
52Public financeCentral, regional and local authorities
Current developmentsIn the first quarter of 2001, the central and
regional authorities (the figures for the localauthorities are not yet known) recorded adeficit of 317
12billion compared with 31612
billion in the corresponding period of last
year. While receipts rose by just under 2%altogether, expenditure increased by 2
12%.
In the further course of the year these ratesof increase are likely to slow markedly onboth the revenue and the expenditure side.
This year the deficits of the government sec-
tor, which increased already last year (to 334
billion) are set to expand further. This is duemainly to the revenue shortfalls connectedwith the tax reform which will lead to a sub-stantial worsening of the financial balancesof the Länder Governments and local author-ities. The Federal Government will offset itslost receipts to a greater extent by selling offassets, which will enable it to again reduce itsdeficit slightly. The off-budget special fundswill close the year with a much better fiscalbalance than in 2000 as the portion of theBundesbank profit allocated to the Redemp-tion Fund for Inherited Liabilities for debt re-payment is 34
12billion higher than last year.
The tax receipts1of the central, regional and
local authorities in the first three months ofthis year were a little above (+
14%) the cor-
responding figure in the first quarter of 2000.
1Including the EU shares in German tax revenue but ex-
cluding receipts from local authority taxes, which are not
yet known.Underlying
trends
Tax receipts in
the first quarter
of 2001...

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
53The effects of the comprehensive tax relief
measures which came into force at the startof this year with the first stage of the “Tax Re-form 2000” were partly masked by specialfactors. Moreover, the tax reform – whichcomprises a lowering of income tax rates anda reform of business taxation which, on bal-ance, will likewise cut tax payments to someextent
2– did not yet have a full impact on the
revenue trend during the first quarter.
Of the income taxes, wage tax yielded 134%
more than in the same period of last year. Thisis presumably attributable to the fact that asubstantial amount of special payments wereshifted from the end of 2000 to the start of2001 in order to benefit from the lower taxrates applying from January 1. In addition, thetax rate reductions introduced by the reformpackage began to depress the volume of re-ceipts only from February onwards. Althoughthe outturn of assessed taxes deterioratedconsiderably compared with the first threemonths of 2000, this was caused only partlyby the receipts lost in the wake of the tax re-form. In the case of assessed income tax theoutpayments outweighed the correspondinginpayments – to an even greater extent thanat the same time last year. However, this wasmainly due to the increase in the governmentsupplement to home buyers, which is mostlypaid in March. This category of receipts wasalso depressed, in particular, by lower pay-ments in respect of past years. By contrast,smaller prepayments by virtue of the tax re-form had hardly any impact because part ofthe adjustment of these payments to the newtax legislation in the wake of the past year’s as-sessment will not occur until later in the year.With respect to corporation tax revenue, too,
only a small part of the sharp decline in re-ceipts by almost three-quarters (to just over31
12billion) was due to adjustments of pre-
payments in connection with the tax reform.In this case the fall resulted principally from anexceptionally large rise in profit distributions,although this, too, was connected with thetax reform.
3Consequently, receipts from non-
assessed taxes on earnings amounted to 3612
billion, which was two-and-a-half times as
much as a year earlier.4Change from previous year in %
%
Tax receipts, total1
1st hf 2nd hf 1st hf 2nd hf1st
qtr2nd
qtrTrends in tax revenue*
*Out-turn in Germany as a whole. —
1Including EU shares in German tax rev-
enue, but excluding receipts from local
authority taxes, which are not yet known
for the last quarter recorded.
Deutsche Bundesbank7.5+
6.0+
4.5+
3.0+
1.5+
0
1999 2000 2001
2For a detailed account of the tax reform see Deutsche
Bundesbank, Monthly Report, August 2000, pages 54 ff.
3For the distribution effects triggered by the reform of
business taxation see Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly
Report, November 2000, page 52.
4Receipts from the tax on interest income in the first
quarter also rose sharply by almost two-fifths because
the halving of savers’ tax allowance which came into
force in 2000 affected the year-on-year comparison for
the last time at the beginning of this year.

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
54As regards indirect taxes, revenue from turn-
over tax was just over 1% lower than in thesame period of last year. It was also dampen-ed by the further decline in taxable invest-ment in the house-building sector. By con-trast, receipts from mineral oil tax were al-most 23% higher than in the first quarter of2000. Only a small part of this was attribut-able to the further increases in the tax ratesapplying to petrol which came into force withthe third stage of the “ecological tax reform”at the beginning of the year. Around two-thirds of the total increase in receipts fromthis tax in the first quarter was due to pay-ment held back from the fourth quarter of2000.
As the revenue losses caused by the tax re-
form will have a growing impact during theremainder of the year, tax revenue for 2001
as a whole is likely to fall well short of theout-turn in 2000. According to the recentforecast of the “Tax Estimates” workinggroup, tax revenue in 2001 will probably be2
12% smaller than last year. Given an expect-
ed growth of nominal GDP by approximately3
12%, the overall tax ratio (as shown in the
government financial statistics) is set to fall by1
14percentage points compared with 2000
to 21.7%.
Lower receipts must also be reckoned with in
comparison with last autumn’s forecast afteractual tax revenue for last year alreadydropped below the expectations at that timeand the assumptions for real economicgrowth for the year 2001 have been reviseddownwards vis-à-vis the autumn projection.
5
The “Tax Estimates” working group expectsthat actual receipts this year will be 33
12bil-
lion lower than forecast in the autumn. Onthe one hand, these shortfalls relate to turn-over tax. On the other hand, a marked fall incorporation tax revenue is becoming appar-ent, although that will probably be offset by asubstantial increase in receipts from higherdividend payments in the case of non-assessed taxes on earnings. The earlier ex-pectations for tax receipts from mineral oilhave likewise been revised downwards owingto consumer restraint following the increasein oil prices.Trends in the revenue from major taxes
Revenue
in5billion
1stquarter
Type of tax 2001 2000Change
frompre-viousyearin %
Wage tax 31.2 30.7 + 1.7
Assessed income tax – 2.3 – 0.2 .Corporation tax 1.7 6.2 – 73.1Turnover tax 35.1 35.5 – 1.2
Deutsche Bundesbank
5Whereas in autumn 2000 real economic growth of
234% was expected for 2001, the Federal Government
now estimates that GDP will grow by only 2% this year
in real terms. Owing to a larger increase in the overall
price level, the expected growth of nominal GDP , at ap-
proximately 312%, is almost as large as assumed earlier.... and in 2001
as a whole

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
55The deficit run up by the Federal Government
in the first quarter increased by 312billion
compared with the same period last year to315
12billion. Overall revenue rose by just
over12%; this was due above all to the sub-
stantial increase of a little more than 3% intax receipts caused by exceptional factors andthe raising of energy taxes. By contrast, non-tax revenue dropped by 19%, mainly be-cause (in contrast to last year) there were noreceipts in the first quarter of 2001 from thesale of equity interests. The Federal Govern-ment’s spending increased by just over 1%,with grants to the statutory pension insur-ance fund (5%) and interest expenditure(5
12%) both rising sharply. The latter is sub-
ject to quite strong fluctuations during theyear, however. Moreover, the repayment inJanuary of equalisation claims amounting to333 billion will not be reflected in lower
interest expenditure until the second quarter.Owing to a change in the system of budget-ary classification at the start of the year, somemajor shifts have occurred between variousexpenditure categories (especially other oper-ating expenditure and current transfers to en-terprises), with the result that the comparabil-ity of individual figures with those last year isvery limited.
For 2001 as a whole, the Federal Government
budget envisages a slight fall in the deficit to322
12billion – following 324 billion last
year. On the revenue side, the latest tax esti-mate suggests that there will be shortfalls ofjust over 32 billion, although they will be
counterbalanced by lower transfers to theEU. The Federal budget projects a slight de-cline in spending in 2001 compared with lastyear. Relief will be afforded not least by the
non-recurrence of the payment made lastyear to the compensation fund for wartimeforced labourers amounting to just under32
12billion. In addition, the Federal Railways
Fund will require smaller Federal grants thisyear as it will sell off some assets. At the mo-ment, it would appear that the budgeted tar-get for the volume of Federal Governmentspending will more or less be met, providedthat budget management is frugal.
Despite the fact that the deficit may decline
further in the current year, the structural con-solidation requirement within the Federalbudget has increased in 2001. Although theextensive revenue losses caused by the tax re-form will largely be absorbed in the short runby extraordinary asset disposals by the Fed- 5 
billion
I II III IV I II1The Federal Government’s
fiscal balance
1 Excluding the UMTS proceeds.
Deutsche Bundesbank2+
0
2−
4−
6−
8−
10−
12−
14−
16−
2000 2001Federal Govern-
ment in the first
quarter...
... and in 2001
as a whole
Rising consoli-
dation needs
despite the
falling deficit

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
56eral Government and the Federal Railways
Fund, those disposals will not improve the fis-cal position as the receipts booked in thebudget are offset by a corresponding fall inassets. It should also be borne in mind thatthe receipts from the ownership and sale ofthe successor enterprises to the German PostOffice are to be used to finance the large def-icits of the Post Office benefit funds
6(which
last year already amounted to almost 3412
billion and in the coming years will probably
expand further).
The off-budget special funds ended the first
quarter with a deficit of almost 3112billion,
which was more or less the same as at thecorresponding stage in 2000. In the course ofthis year their financial position will improveconsiderably, however, as the portion of theBundesbank profit earmarked for redeeming
the debt of the Redemption Fund for Inherit-ed Liabilities (i.e. the portion in excess of 33.6
billion) is 34
12billion higher this year than
last year. Following a deficit of more than31
12billion in 2000, substantial surpluses are
thus expected again this year.
The Länder Governments’ budgetary deficit
in the first quarter amounted to just over 34
billion, which exceeded the comparable fig-ure last year by nearly 31 billion. Total re-
ceipts grew by 1
12%, although tax revenue
contracted by 1%. Expenditure increasedfaster than revenue, rising by over 2
12%.
This was due in part to the increase in person-nel spending by the Länder Governmentsfrom the beginning of 2001 owing to the2% pay increase for employees, one-off pay-ments to civil servants, and the further adjust-ment of public sector pay rates in easternGermany to 88.5% of the west Germanlevel. As some Länder Governments had out-sourced staff at universities and in construc-tion administration by setting up new off-budget organisations, the overall increase inthe personnel expenditure of the Länder Gov-ernments was confined to little more than
12%, however (albeit at the cost of higher
grants to public institutions). For the year2001 as a whole the deficits are expected torise to more than 315 billion on account of
the large revenue shortfalls resulting from theNet borrowing in the market by the
central, regional and local authorities
5billion
of which
Period Total SecuritiesLoans
againstborrowers’notes
1MemoitemAcquisitionof publicdebt in-strumentsby non-residents
1999 + 34.8 + 44.8 – 9.7 + 16.2
2000
pe + 16.3 + 29.1 – 11.6 + 18.9
of which1st qtr + 14.0 + 7.5 + 6.5 + 0.32nd qtr – 1.3 + 3.8 – 5.1 + 13.13 r d q t r +9 . 1 +4 . 8 +5 . 4 +7 . 74th qtr
pe – 5.4 + 13.1 – 18.4 – 2.2
2001
1st qtr pe – 11.7 + 13.9 + 8.6 ...
1Including cash advances and money market borrowing.
Deutsche Bundesbank
6The Post Office benefit funds pay the non-contributory
pensions of retired civil servants who were employed by
the former Post Office when it was still in the public sec-
tor. The inpayments into the benefit funds made by the
successor enterprises to the Post Office, which are orient-
ed to the pay of present-day employees of those enter-
prises, by no means cover the outpayments. The Federal
Government is committed to making up the difference.Special fundsLänder
Governments

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
57tax reform, compared with around 310 bil-
lion in each of the past two years.
In the past year the local authorities again
generated a surplus of almost 32 billion. Al-
though their receipts grew by a mere12%,
expenditure growth was limited to less than1%, not least because of a sharp decline inexpenditure on tangible fixed assets in east-ern Germany. In the course of this year themunicipalities will probably slide into deficitagain because of the combined effect ofreform-related direct tax losses and lowergrants from the Länder Governments underthe federal revenue-sharing scheme.
The indebtedness of the central, regional and
local authorities decreased by 311
12billion in
the first quarter. This was primarily due to theredemption in early January of claims on theCurrency Conversion Equalisation Fundamounting to 333 billion, which was fi-
nanced by the proceeds from the UMTS li-cence auctions. If this exceptional effect isdisregarded, net government borrowing inthe capital market totalled 35 billion. Net
money market debt rose far more steeply to316
12billion, after having been virtually
eliminated at the end of last year. Whereasthe Federal Government reduced its debt by316 billion thanks to the UMTS proceeds,
the Länder Governments increased their netliabilities by 33
12billion and the special
funds increased theirs by just under 3112bil-
lion. Local authorities appear to have tappedthe credit markets hardly at all on balance.Social security funds
In the first quarter of 2001 the wage and
salary earners’ pension insurance scheme re-corded a deficit of 31
12billion. This was vir-
tually the same as at the corresponding stagein 2000.
7Total contribution receipts were
1% above the corresponding figure in 2000.They were dampened by the lowering of thecontribution rate on January 1, 2001 from19.3% to 19.1%. Whereas receipts fromcompulsorily ensured persons rose by almost2%, the pension contributions paid on wagesubstitutes declined owing to the sharp re-duction in payments on behalf of recipientsof unemployment assistance. By contrast, asignificant increase was recorded in thegrants from the Federal budget, which wereconnected to the higher taxation of energyconsumption. Overall revenue exceeded thatin the first quarter of 2000 by 2
12%. Expend-
iture rose altogether by 3%. The main costdriver was spending on pensions, which wentup by 2
12%. This was mainly attributable to
an increase in the number of pensioners,whereas the uniform pension adjustment of0.6% made in mid-2000 merely corres-ponded to the rate of inflation in 1999.
In the course of this year, the financial pos-
ition of the statutory pension insurancescheme is likely to deteriorate compared with2000 since the fairly stable increase in rev-enue will be accompanied by a sharper rise in
7The capital gain of 30.6 billion resulting from the up-
ward revaluation in February of the shares held by the
Federal Insurance Office for Salaried Employees (BfA) in
the non-profit public limited company for employee
housing “Gemeinnützige Aktiengesellschaft für Ange-
stelltenheimstätten” (GAGFAH) is not included in the re-
ceipts.Local
authorities
IndebtednessStatutory
pension
insurance
scheme: first
quarter ...
... and 2001 as
a whole

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
58pension expenditure in the middle of the
year. On July 1, 2001 pensions in westernGermany will be raised by 1.9% and those ineastern Germany by 2.1% – i.e. far moresteeply than last year’s adjustment in line withinflation. Under the new pension adjustmentformula which will be used for the first time,the adjustment will be based on the averagegrowth rate of gross wages and salaries lessthe pension insurance contributions paid.
8
These adjustment rates are based on an in-crease in gross employee compensation of1.4% and 1.6%, respectively. In addition,the annual average contribution rate in 2000(19.3%) was distinctly lower than the equiva-lent rate in 1999 (19.7%), which will push upthe size of the adjustment. In eastern Ger-many the defined standard pension will reach87.2% of the west German level in the mid-
dle of the year (currently 87.0%).
In the first quarter of 2001 the Federal Labour
Office recorded a deficit of just under 31
12bil-
lion, which was almost twice as high as oneyear earlier. This deterioration was attributableto shifts from the Federal budget to the Officeon both the revenue and expenditure side tothe detriment of the Federal Labour Office
9
and to legislative changes which prevented thecontinuing decline in the number of un-employed from passing through to the Office’sfiscal balance. On balance, receipts rose by1
12%, whereas expenditure grew by 612%.
Expenditure on unemployment benefits grew
by almost 312% in the first three months of
this year, even though the number of un-employed fell by 4% over twelve months.This was chiefly due to higher per capita
spending necessitated by last summer’s rulingby the Federal Constitutional Court that con-tributions made on one-off bonus paymentsare to be taken into account in future whencalculating wage substitutes. Moreover, ex-penditure in connection with the Act on pre-retirement short-time working, which is notQuarterly
 5 
billion
 5 
billion
Surplus (+) or deficit (−)Revenue
ExpenditureWage and salary earners’
pension insurance scheme
Deutsche Bundesbank6+
4+
2+
0
2−58
56
54
52
50
48
1999 2000 2001
8From 2003 notional supplementary contributions to pri-
vate pension plans in the previous year will also be de-
ducted from the calculation base. These are to increase in
steps of 0.5 percentage point from 2002 to a maximum
of 4% of average pay in 2009.
9These relate to the structural adjustment measures con-
cerning recipients of unemployment assistance and the
special programme to reintegrate the long-term un-
employed.Federal Labour
Office: first
quarter ...

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
59yet significant, more than doubled.10Some
10% more was spent overall on active labourmarket policy measures compared with thefirst quarter of 2000. However, this aggregatefigure masks disparate trends, namely afurther shift away from job creation schemes(– 22%) and towards vocational training andretraining (+ 21%).
The budget for the year 2001 includes an
additional appropriation requirement of 30.6
billion for the Federal Labour Office. How-ever, that appropriation is based on an as-sumed decrease of 270,000 in the annualaverage number of unemployed, which ap-pears rather optimistic in view of the latestlabour market trends. It cannot be ruled outthat a larger appropriation may be necessaryat the end of the year than that earmarked inthe Federal budget.
Outlook for the general government
sector as a whole
The trend in public finance for 2001 as a
whole appears in a much more unfavourablelight in the national accounts than in thebudgetary accounts. In the latter, for ex-ample, tax losses will be partly compensatedby privatisation proceeds, whereas in the na-tional accounts these shifts within financialassets do not lead to a decrease in the gov-ernment deficits.
11
Judging from the present perspective, thegeneral government deficit ratio as defined inthe national accounts – which last yearamounted to 1% (excluding the proceeds ofthe UMTS auction) – will this year exceed the
target of 1
12% specified in the German sta-Quarterly
 5 
billion
 5 
billion
Surplus (+) or deficit (−)Expenditure, total
Revenue 1
Expenditure on...
...unemployment benefits and
   short-time working benefits
...vocational
   training 2Federal Labour Office
1Excluding Federal Government liquidity
assistance. — 2Including job creation meas-
sures.
Deutsche Bundesbank1+
0
1−
2−14
13
12
11
10
98
7
65
4
3
1999 2000 2001
10Under this Act the Federal Labour Office reimburses
employers, for a maximum period of six years, for the
cost of topping-up the net salary of participants in the
scheme to 70% and their contributions to the statutory
pension insurance scheme to 90% of the level of an em-
ployee working full-time if the employer replaces the par-
ticipant by a jobless person or a trainee.
11Another important factor in the year-on-year compari-
son is the differently phased booking of tax receipts in
the national accounts. Thus the sharp increase in receipts
from mineral oil tax and tax on investment income appar-
ent in January of this year were booked already in 2000.... and in 2001
as a whole
Trend in 2001

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
60bility programme published in October 2000.
The deficit range of 365 billion to 375 billion
mentioned in the programme could likewisebe exceeded unless further retrenchmentmeasures are taken. The principal reason forthe widening of the deficit compared with2000 is the substantial revenue shortfalls inconnection with the tax reform, which willprobably amount to over 1% of GDP . More-over, the economic trend is currently less fa-vourable than was anticipated in autumn2000.
12Compared with these burdens, the
alleviation on the receipts side stemmingfrom the fact that the Bundesbank profit dis-bursed this year was appreciably higher thanlast year has a smaller weight.
The rise in the deficit ratio caused by the un-
favourable trends on the revenue side isbeing held down to some extent by the factthat the budgeted expenditure of the central,regional and local authorities is geared toeconomical rigour. This is being buttressed bya further decrease in staffing levels in con-junction with the moderate pay settlement inthe public sector. In addition, interest expend-iture is being dampened by the persistentlylow level of interest rates and the debt re-demption made possible by the UMTS auc-tion proceeds. Moreover, the financial burdenensuing from the payments made last year tothe compensation fund for wartime forced la-bourers will not recur in 2001. However,spending will be increased in a number ofareas. Thus there will be increases in year-on-year expenditure on training promotion,housing allowances, child-rearing benefitsand (in connection with the Federal Constitu-tional Court ruling) in unemployment benefitsand sickness benefits. Furthermore, the gov-
ernment heating cost allowance granted inthe wake of the surge in oil prices still has tobe paid out by the Länder Governments inthe course of this year. In addition, publicbudgets will be additionally burdened by thecrises in the agricultural sector. Finally, con-struction investment and investment grantsto the railways are to be expanded substan-tially – in connection with the interest savingsaccruing from the debt redemption out ofthe UMTS mobile phone licence proceeds.
The European Stability and Growth Pact
adopted in 1997 committed the membercountries to achieving budgets that are closeto balance or in surplus in the medium term.Many EU member states have either alreadyachieved this position or look set to do so in2001. Following the renewed increase in thegovernment deficits this year (arising aboveall from the extensive reductions in taxes andsocial security contributions), the task facingGerman fiscal policy makers is to eliminatethe deficits in the coming years, a task whichhas been made more difficult by the lessfavourable outlook for tax revenue.
Considerable tax shortfalls are likely in the
coming years compared with the currentmedium-term fiscal plans. This is because thenew official forecast has markedly reducedrevenue expectations vis-à-vis the precedingmedium-term estimate of May 2000 and alsobecause a growing volume of tax losses is be-
12It should also be noted, however, that the sagging of
cyclical momentum is due mainly to the less favourable
external economic developments, which initially have
only a limited bearing on tax revenue and on receipts
from social security contributions.Medium-term
requirements

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
61coming apparent from additional tax legisla-
tion changes. Based on a rate of economicgrowth for the coming years of 2
14% in real
terms and 4% in nominal terms (the samerates as those estimated in May 2000), the“Tax Estimates” working group expects risinglosses in the coming years compared with theprevious medium-term forecast (assuming nochange in tax legislation). The expected add-itional shortfalls in receipts will increase fromalmost 38 billion in 2002 to just over 313 bil-
lion in 2004. This is compounded by the factthat the structure of economic growth is less“tax-yielding” than assumed a year ago. Fur-ther considerable revenue losses will be in-curred in 2003 and 2005 from the secondand third stages of the tax reform amountingto35 billion and over 319 billion, respective-
ly. Additional burdens will ensue from the rul-ing of the Federal Constitutional Court requir-
ing a further improvement in the family al-lowance system and from the growing gov-ernment promotion of private pension plans.
Given these gloomier prospects compared
with last year’s medium-term financial plans,the general government sector now has thetask of tightly curbing future spending. Asmeasures such as asset disposals or the re-lease of reserves reduce net borrowing onlytemporarily, they have to be replaced bystructural consolidation measures if the strainon public budgets is to be lastingly eased. In afederally structured country such as Germany,however, such stringent and sustained ex-penditure discipline can only be successful ifit covers all levels of government.

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
62

Statistical
SectionDeutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
1*

ContentsI. Key economic data for European
monetary union
1. Monetary developments and interest
rates 6*
2. Foreign trade and payments 6*
3. General economic indicators 7*
II. Overall monetary survey in the
European monetary union
1. The money stock and its counterparts 8*2. Consolidated balance sheet of mon-
etary financial institutions (MFIs) 10*
3. Banking system’s liquidity position 14*
III. Consolidated financial statement
of the Eurosystem
1. Assets 16*2. Liabilities 18*
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary
financial institutions (excluding theBundesbank) in Germany 20*
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks
(MFIs) in Germany, by category ofbanks 24*
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-à-vis residents 26*
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents 28*Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
2*

5. Lending of banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) 30*
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic enterprises and individuals,
housing loans, sectors of economicactivity 32*
7. Deposits of domestic
non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs)in Germany 34*
8. Deposits of domestic individuals and
non-commercial organisations atbanks (MFIs) in Germany 36*
9. Deposits of domestic public author-
ities at banks (MFIs) in Germany, bycreditor group 36*
10. Savings deposits and bank savings
bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germanysold to non-banks (non-MFIs) 38*
11. Debt securities and money market
paper outstanding of banks (MFIs)in Germany 38*
12. Building and loan associations (MFIs)
in Germany 39*
13. Assets and liabilities of the foreign
branches and foreign subsidiaries ofGerman banks (MFIs) 40*
V. Minimum reserves
1. Reserve ratios 42*2. Reserve maintenance in Germany up
to the end of 1998 42*
3. Reserve maintenance in the Euro-
pean monetary union 42*VI. Interest rates
1. ECB interest rates 43*2. Discount and lombard rates of the
Bundesbank 43*
3. Base rate per Discount Rate Transi-
tion Act 43*
4. Eurosystem monetary policy opera-
tions allotted through tenders 43*
5. Money market rates, by month 44*6. Euro area retail bank interest rates 44*7. Lending and deposit rates of banks
(MFIs) in Germany 45*
8. Selected central bank rates abroad 47*9. Money market rates abroad 47*
VII. Capital market
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities
and shares in Germany 48*
2. Sales of debt securities issued by
borrowers domiciled in Germany 49*
3. Outstanding amount of debt secur-
ities issued by borrowers domiciledin Germany 50*
4. Circulation of shares issued by resi-
dents of Germany 50*
5. Yields and indices on German
securities 51*
6. Sales and purchases of investment
fund certificates in Germany 51*Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
3*

VIII. Public finance in Germany
1. Finances of the public sector 52*
2. Finances of the Federal
Government, Länder Governmentsand local authorities 52*
3. Finances of the Government
in the national accounts 53*
4. Tax revenue of the central,
regional and local authorities 53*
5. Tax revenue, by type 54*6. Individual taxes of the Federal
Government, Länder Governmentsand local authorities 54*
7. Indebtedness of the public sector 55*8. Changes in public sector
indebtedness 57*
9. Loans raised by public authorities
against borrowers’ notes 57*
10. Indebtedness of the Federal
Government 58*
11. Federal Government borrowing
in the market 58*
12. Receipts, expenditure and assets of
the wage and salary earners’pension insurance funds 59*
13. Receipts and expenditure of the
Federal Labour Office 59*
IX. Economic conditions
1. Origin and expenditure of
domestic product, distribution ofnational income 60*
2. Output in the producing sector 61*3. Orders received by the
manufacturing sector 62*
4. Orders received by construction 63*5. Retail turnover 63*6. Labour market 64*7. Prices 65*8. Households’ income 66*9. Pay rates and actual earnings 66*
X. Foreign trade and payments
1. Major items of the balance of pay-
ments of the European monetaryunion 67*
2. Major items of the balance of pay-
ments of the Federal Republic ofGermany 68*
3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the
Federal Republic of Germany, bygroup of countries and country 69*
4. Services and factor income of the
Federal Republic of Germany 70*
5. Current transfers of the Federal
Republic of Germany 70*
6. Capital transfers 70*7. Financial account of the Federal
Republic of Germany 71*
8. External position of the Bundesbank 72*9. External position of the Bundesbank
in the European monetary union 72*
10. Assets and liabilities of enterprises
in Germany (other than banks)vis-à-vis non-residents 73*
11. Deutsche Mark exchange rates for
the national currencies of the EMUcountries, the Deutsche Mark valueof the ECU and euro conversionrates 74*
12. Exchange rates of the Deutsche
Mark and the euro against othercurrencies 74*
13. Effective exchange rates of the euro
and selected foreign currencies 75*Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
4*

Abbreviations and symbols
eEstimated
pProvisional
pePartly estimated
rRevised
...Figure available at a later date
.Figure unknown or not to be published
or not meaningful
0Less than 0.5 but more than nil
–Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to round-ing.Note
From January 2001 the Bundesbank is mak-
ing available on the Internet, for download-ing, a selection of the time series that arepublished in the Monthly Reports and theStatistical Supplements.Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
5*

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
 I. Key economic data for European monetary union
 
1. Monetary developments and interest rates
 
 
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions  1 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
 MFI lending to Yield on Euro-enterprises Monetary pean govern-
 MFI lending, and capital 3−month ment bonds
M1 M2 M3 total individuals formation  
2 EONIA  3, 5 EURIBOR  4, 5 outstanding  6 
Period Change from previous year,in % % p. a. as a monthly average
1999          Sep. 12.8 7.0 6.1 8.5 10.5 5.7 2.43 2.73 5.2
         Oct. 13.0 7.1 5.8 8.9 10.6 6.9 2.50 3.38 5.5
         Nov. 11.8 6.5 6.2 9.2 10.9 7.3 2.94 3.47 5.2         Dec. 10.0 5.3 6.1 8.7 10.3 7.6 3.04 3.45 5.3
2000          Jan. 9.3 4.2 5.3 8.0 9.5 6.7 3.04 3.34 5.7
         Feb. 10.7 5.3 6.2 8.4 10.5 6.8 3.28 3.54 5.7         Mar. 10.1 5.1 6.6 8.4 11.0 6.5 3.51 3.75 5.5
         Apr. 11.4 5.5 6.7 8.6 11.4 6.4 3.69 3.93 5.4
         May 8.7 4.7 6.0 8.1 11.2 6.6 3.92 4.36 5.6         June 7.1 4.3 5.4 7.2 10.0 6.7 4.29 4.50 5.4
         July 6.9 3.7 5.2 7.1 9.9 7.0 4.31 4.58 5.4
         Aug. 7.1 4.2 5.7 7.0 10.2 7.2 4.42 4.78 5.4         Sep. 6.2 4.1 5.3 7.1 10.9 7.0 4.59 4.85 5.5
         Oct. 5.8 3.7 5.1 6.5 10.9 6.7 4.76 5.04 5.4
         Nov. 5.1 3.7 5.0 5.9 10.1 5.7 4.83 5.09 5.3         Dec. 5.7 3.7 5.1 6.3 10.2 4.6 4.83 4.94 5.1
2001          Jan. 1.5 2.6 4.7 6.2 10.1 4.5 4.76 4.77 5.0
         Feb. 2.0 2.8 4.7 5.8 9.6 4.3 4.99 4.76 5.0         Mar. 2.1 3.2 5.0 5.7 9.2 4.4 4.78 4.71 4.9
         Apr. ... ... ... ... ... ... 5.06 4.68 5.1
1 Source: ECB. — 2 Longer-term liabilities to euro area non-MFIs. — also footnotes to table VI.5., p. 44*. — 6 GDP-weighted yield on ten-year
3Euro OverNight Index Average. — 4 Euro InterBank Offered Rate. — 5 See government bonds; excluding Luxembourg. 
 
 
2. Foreign trade and payments  * 
  
 
Selected items of the EMU balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1 
Current account Capital account  2 Effective exchange rate  4 
of which: Direct Securities Credit Monetary
Balance Trade balance Balance investment transactions reserves Dollar rate nominal real  5 transactions  3 
Period until the end of 1998 ECU million, from 1999 euro million Euro/US-$ 1st q 1999=100
1999          Sep. − 3,267 + 4,970 − 18,806 + 95 + 13,535 − 33,095 + 660 1.0501 93.6 93.4
         Oct. − 482 + 9,109 + 8,449 − 9,330 − 16,711 + 34,175 + 315 1.0706 94.4 94.2
         Nov. − 2,103 + 6,260 + 1,458 − 17,018 + 13,102 + 5,382 − 8 1.0338 92.0 92.0         Dec. − 3,871 + 5,540 − 7,316 − 20,286 + 560 + 13,255 − 845 1.0110 90.1 90.4
2000          Jan. − 9,026 − 507 + 19,185 + 833 − 6,106 + 26,673 − 2,215 1.0137 90.2 90.8
         Feb. − 26 + 4,217 − 1,885 + 146,030 − 151,027 + 2,836 + 276 0.9834 89.2 89.8         Mar. + 1,188 + 5,566 + 30,460 + 1,132 − 33,003 + 61,838 + 493 0.9643 87.7 88.3
         Apr. − 5,873 + 4,338 + 2,733 + 1,098 − 3,758 + 5,146 + 247 0.9470 86.1 86.6
         May − 105 + 4,407 + 10,505 − 8,667 + 2,235 + 15,686 + 1,251 0.9060 84.5 85.0         June − 627 + 5,915 − 16,166 − 10,583 + 58,181 − 66,103 + 2,339 0.9492 87.4 88.2
         July − 2,240 + 8,076 − 12,042 − 24,562 − 13,340 + 26,286 − 427 0.9397 86.9 87.9
         Aug. − 3,946 + 4,056 + 579 − 41,066 + 12,687 + 27,799 + 1,158 0.9041 84.6 85.5         Sep. + 72 + 5,721 − 2,543 − 28,641 + 4,575 + 17,778 + 3,744 0.8721 82.8 83.6
         Oct. − 2,160 + 5,975 − 9,861 − 16,371 − 6,626 + 12,413 + 724 0.8552 81.6 82.4
         Nov. − 2,910 + 3,914 − 11,593 − 9,988 − 7,127 − 2,139 + 7,662 0.8564 82.3 83.3         Dec. − 8,777 + 1,351 − 8,092 − 30,684 + 4,969 + 15,335 + 2,289 0.8973 85.4 86.4
2001          Jan. − 8,539 − 1,859 − 4,749 − 4,482 − 50,563 + 47,926 + 2,370 0.9383 89.2 90.3
         Feb. + 2,057 + 3,250 + 2,120 − 766 − 20 − 3,192 + 6,098 0.9217 88.3 89.6         Mar. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0.9095 88.4 89.9
         Apr. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0.8920 87.6 89.1
 
*  Source: ECB. — 1  See also tables X.12 and 13, p. 74−75. — 2  Series to observations. — 3  Including financial derivatives. — 4  Vis-a-vis a narrow
which data from January 1999 are not closely comparable with earlier group of countries. — 5  Based on consumer prices. 
6* I. Key economic data for European monetary union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
I.  Key economic data for European monetary union 
 
3. General economic indicators
 
 
                   
Period Belgium Germany Finland France Greece Ireland Italy Luxembourg Austria Portugal Spain EMU 8 Netherlands
Real gross domestic product 1
1998 2.4 2.1 5.3 3.4 3.7 8.6 1.8 5.0 4.1 3.3 3.8 4.3 2.9
1999 2.7 1.6 4.2 2.9 3.3 9.8 1.6 7.5 3.9 2.8 3.3 4.0 2.5
2000 4.0 3.0 5.7 3.1 ... ... 2.9 ... 3.9 3.2 3.3 4.1 3.41999          3rd qtr 3.6 1.6 3.7 3.1 10.5 1.4 3.9 3.8 3.0 3.7 2.6
         4th qtr 5.1 2.4 4.1 3.6 12.1 2.6 4.9 4.0 2.6 4.1 3.4
2000          1st qtr 5.4 3.7 5.9 4.2 11.9 3.4 4.9 4.1 3.3 4.7 3.5
         2nd qtr 4.5 3.5 5.2 3.3 12.6 3.0 4.3 4.1 2.9 4.7 3.8         3rd qtr 3.2 2.8 6.3 2.7 11.0 2.9 3.5 2.3 3.6 3.7 3.3         4th qtr 3.1 1.9 5.5 2.7 ... 2.4 2.8 2.6 3.4 3.2 3.0
Industrial production 1, 2
1998 3.4 4.2 8.1 5.2 7.1 19.8 1.2 −0.1 2.4 8.2 5.7 5.4 4.4
1999 0.9 1.6 5.5 2.1 3.9 14.8 −0.1 11.5 2.2 6.0 3.0 2.6 2.0
2000 5.3 7 r 6.8 11.1 3.3 ... 15.4 4.8 4.3 2.9 9.2 0.3 4.0 7 5.6
1999          4th qtr 5.0 3.7 6.9 3.8 2.2 18.1 3.4 23.6 3.3 10.6 3.9 3.4 4.4
2000          1st qtr 5.7 r 5.9 7.5 5.8 5.4 5.3 2.5 10.3 1.8 11.3 −1.0 8.4 4.9
         2nd qtr 6.3 r 6.8 9.6 2.3 2.8 20.9 6.5 7.2 3.7 11.6 −2.1 5.0 6.1
         3rd qtr 4.5 r 7.0 13.0 2.6 −3.6 14.7 5.2 0.2 2.9 8.4 3.0 1.8 5.7
         4th qtr 4.7 7 r 7.2 14.3 2.4 ... 20.1 5.0 −0.4 3.1 5.9 1.8 0.7 7 5.5
2001          1st qtr ... 6 p 5.4 6.9 ... ... ... ... ... 1.7 ... ... −1.0 ...
Capacity utilisation 3
1998 82.7 85.5 88.9 83.8 75.8 76.6 78.5 88.0 85.3 83.7 81.4 80.3 82.9
1999 80.9 84.0 86.1 85.3 75.7 75.9 76.0 84.9 84.0 81.9 80.8 79.7 81.8
2000 84.0 85.9 86.8 87.5 78.1 78.6 78.8 87.8 84.7 84.5 81.2 80.6 83.82000          1st qtr 82.9 85.0 87.0 86.5 78.2 76.5 77.4 86.8 84.7 83.4 81.7 80.8 82.9
         2nd qtr 84.5 86.1 86.5 86.3 78.0 77.7 79.1 87.9 84.6 84.6 80.3 80.5 83.6         3rd qtr 84.2 86.0 87.0 87.9 77.8 78.5 78.9 88.0 85.0 85.0 82.0 80.3 83.9         4th qtr 84.5 86.3 86.7 89.1 78.4 81.5 79.8 88.3 84.6 85.0 80.9 80.8 84.6
2001          1st qtr 84.8 86.9 87.3 88.8 78.2 79.8 79.5 89.2 85.2 84.2 82.5 80.1 84.4
         2nd qtr 82.7 85.7 86.0 87.5 79.3 80.4 79.4 88.9 84.8 84.0 82.0 79.7 83.7
Unemployment rate 4
1998 9.5 9.3 11.4 11.8 10.9 7.5 11.8 2.7 4.0 4.5 5.2 18.8 10.91999 8.8 8.6 10.2 11.2 11.6 5.6 11.3 2.4 3.4 4.0 4.5 15.9 10.0
2000 7.0 7.9 9.8 9.5 11.1 4.2 10.5 2.4 2.7 3.7 4.2 14.1 8.92000          Sep. 7.0 7.8 9.6 9.3 4.0 10.2 2.4 2.7 3.6 4.2 13.8 8.7         Oct. 6.9 7.7 9.5 9.1 3.9 10.0 2.4 2.7 3.5 4.2 13.5 8.6
         Nov. 6.9 7.7 9.5 8.9 3.9 10.0 2.4 2.8 3.6 4.2 13.5 8.6         Dec. 6.8 7.7 9.4 8.8 3.8 10.0 2.4 2.8 3.6 4.3 13.6 8.6
2001          Jan. 6.8 7.7 9.3 8.7 3.8 9.9 2.4 2.6 3.7 4.4 13.7 8.5
         Feb. 6.8 7.7 9.2 8.6 3.8 ... 2.3 2.5 3.7 4.5 13.7 8.5         Mar. 6.8 7.7 9.0 8.6 3.8 ... 2.3 ... 3.7 4.6 13.5 8.4
Harmonised index of consumer prices 1
1998 0.9 0.6 1.4 0.7 4.5 2.1 2.0 1.0 1.8 0.8 2.2 1.8 1.21999 1.1 0.6 1.3 0.6 2.1 2.5 1.7 1.0 2.0 0.5 2.2 2.2 1.1
2000 2.7 2.1 3.0 1.8 2.9 5.3 2.6 3.8 2.3 2.0 2.8 3.5 2.42000          Sep. 3.9 2.6 3.4 2.3 3.0 5.5 2.6 4.2 2.9 2.3 3.6 3.7 2.8         Oct. 3.7 2.4 3.4 2.1 3.8 6.0 2.7 4.3 3.2 2.2 3.7 4.0 2.7
         Nov. 3.7 2.6 3.3 2.2 4.0 6.0 2.9 4.5 2.9 2.3 3.6 4.1 2.9         Dec. 3.0 2.3 2.9 1.7 3.7 4.6 2.8 4.3 2.9 1.8 3.8 4.0 2.6
2001          Jan. 2.7 2.2 2.9 1.4 3.2 3.9 2.7 2.9 4.5 2.2 4.4 3.8 2.5
         Feb. 2.5 2.5 2.7 1.4 3.5 3.9 2.7 2.9 4.9 1.8 4.9 4.0 2.6         Mar. 2.2 2.5 2.5 1.4 3.2 4.1 2.6 3.0 4.9 1.9 5.1 4.0 2.6
         Apr. 2.9 2.9 2.8 2.0 3.7 4.3 3.0 2.7 5.3 2.5 4.6 4.0 3.0
General government financial balance 5
1998 −0.9 −2.1 1.3 −2.7 −3.2 2.1 −2.8 3.2 −0.7 −2.3 −2.2 −2.6 −2.1
1999 −0.7 −1.4 1.8 −1.6 −1.8 2.1 −1.8 4.7 1.0 −2.1 −2.0 −1.2 −1.2
2000 0.0 1.5 6.7 −1.3 −0.9 4.5 −0.3 5.3 2.0 −1.1 −1.4 −0.3 0.4
General government debt 5
1998 119.8 60.7 48.8 59.7 105.5 55.0 116.2 6.4 66.8 63.9 55.3 64.7 73.7
1999 116.4 61.1 46.9 58.7 104.6 50.1 114.5 6.0 63.2 64.7 55.0 63.4 72.6
2000 110.9 60.2 44.0 58.0 103.9 39.1 110.2 5.3 56.3 62.8 53.8 60.6 70.3
Sources: National data, European Commission, Eurostat, European persons in civilian employment; seasonally adjusted. —5  As a percen-
Central Bank. Latest data are partly based on press reports and are tage of GDP; Maastricht Treaty definition, ESA95. —6  Adjusted in advance
provisional. —1  Annual percentage changes; GDP of Portugal and EMU are by the Federal Statistical Office by way of estimates to the results of the
calculated from seasonally adjusted data. —2  Manufacturing, mining, gas Quarterly Production Survey for the first quarter (manufacturing sector in
and electricity; adjusted for working-day variations (except France and Germany :+1%o n average). —7  Data for Germany presumably over-
Spain). —3  Manufacturing, in %; seasonally adjusted; data are collected estimated. — 8  Recalculation including Greece. 
in January, April, July and October. —4  Standardised, as a percentage of
7*I.  Key economic data for European monetary union 

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
 
1. The money stock and its counterparts*)
  
  
 
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II. Net claims on III. Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area  3 non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises Publicand individuals authorities Debt
Deposits Deposits securities
Liabil- with an at agreed with
Claims ities to agreed notice of maturitieson non- non-euro- maturity over of over 2 Capital
of which: of which: euro-area area of over 3 months years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total  
4 6 (net)  7 reserves 2 years  4,5 Securities Securities
 European monetary union (euro billion) 1 X
 
1999          Oct. 77.1 45.6 0.2 31.5 22.5 −33.9 21.2 55.1 25.0 6.2 −0.8 12.8 6.7
         Nov. 95.9 79.1 17.9 16.7 3.9 − 9.0 24.5 33.4 16.2 8.1 0.0 5.2 2.8
         Dec. 14.7 52.2 16.4 −37.5 −31.7 9.0 −80.8 −89.8 22.5 11.7 2.1 −2.6 11.3
2000          Jan. 51.5 45.2 5.1 6.3 13.8 −44.1 22.3 66.4 18.0 1.6 −0.9 −0.6 17.9
         Feb. 61.3 56.4 19.9 4.9 9.3 6.0 31.7 25.7 18.4 1.0 1.0 11.9 4.5
         Mar. 97.3 99.7 32.3 −2.4 −6.9 −74.7 32.9 107.6 13.5 −2.0 0.8 2.2 12.6
         Apr. 51.2 70.3 16.7 −19.0 −21.3 −20.2 14.8 35.0 23.0 −0.8 −0.4 14.9 9.4
         May 34.8 48.7 19.9 −13.8 −7.5 −15.9 11.2 27.1 13.3 1.3 1.3 8.0 2.7
         June 11.5 30.1 −30.9 −18.6 −18.1 86.0 7.4 −78.6 33.4 −1.0 1.5 14.0 18.9
         July 6.8 34.9 11.3 −28.0 −26.8 −10.8 − 3.4 7.3 19.8 −0.8 1.4 3.6 15.6
         Aug. 2.9 21.2 5.5 −18.3 −9.7 − 1.7 3.9 5.5 16.8 1.5 1.7 8.5 5.1
         Sep. 70.8 77.9 6.4 −7.1 −3.0 −23.5 18.3 41.9 22.2 −2.7 2.2 2.7 20.0
         Oct. 34.0 47.5 8.7 −13.5 −15.5 −10.2 9.3 19.6 17.6 −0.0 0.8 11.4 5.4
         Nov. 48.6 42.8 0.7 5.8 −1.4 1.2 8.8 7.6 −19.9 −5.9 2.7 −5.4 −11.3
         Dec. 52.9 58.9 7.5 −6.0 −18.6 17.7 5.2 −12.6 −14.7 8.9 2.5 −4.2 −21.8
2001          Jan. 40.4 43.4 14.9 −2.9 −5.8 −49.7 60.5 110.2 16.3 −1.8 0.2 21.1 −3.1
         Feb. 33.9 36.1 15.9 −2.2 5.8 8.9 13.6 4.7 11.5 −0.4 0.1 10.1 1.7
         Mar. 96.1 83.1 25.0 13.0 12.3 −31.4 106.4 137.7 18.5 1.2 −0.4 5.9 11.9
 German contribution (euro billion) 2
1999          Oct. 27.3 10.5 0.5 16.8 6.3 −10.3 2.5 12.8 5.0 2.0 −0.6 1.3 2.2
         Nov. 23.1 18.7 5.7 4.4 0.9 −23.8 1.4 25.2 10.2 3.3 0.1 5.6 1.1
         Dec. 18.3 31.3 11.2 −13.0 −5.2 − 5.7 −1.8 3.9 4.4 3.4 2.1 −5.1 4.1
2000          Jan. 17.7 5.3 1.7 12.4 10.7 −15.3 2.0 17.3 −3.4 2.4 −0.9 −7.2 2.2
         Feb. 15.0 14.0 5.7 1.1 5.8 4.7 18.5 13.9 6.1 1.9 1.0 2.4 0.8         Mar. 38.7 43.0 31.3 −4.3 −5.7 −25.3 7.9 33.2 5.8 −0.1 0.8 0.5 4.6
         Apr. 15.2 15.2 5.6 −0.0 −1.7 − 7.3 10.5 17.8 11.3 0.6 −0.4 10.1 1.1
         May 12.9 16.2 8.2 −3.3 −3.7 2.0 12.7 10.7 9.6 0.2 1.3 6.9 1.2
         June −32.2 −25.3 −32.2 −7.0 −2.8 12.5 −21.5 −34.0 4.6 0.9 1.5 0.6 1.6
         July 1.4 2.6 3.6 −1.3 −3.5 15.8 14.5 −1.3 10.7 0.5 1.3 8.4 0.5
         Aug. 8.8 10.9 1.6 −2.1 −0.2 − 5.8 5.1 10.9 6.2 1.4 1.7 2.6 0.6
         Sep. 6.5 19.2 0.9 −12.7 −3.4 − 4.9 −0.2 4.7 5.9 −1.3 2.2 −0.3 5.4
         Oct. 12.0 4.3 0.9 7.7 3.4 − 2.2 14.6 16.8 3.9 0.4 0.7 1.9 1.0
         Nov. 15.2 13.6 4.2 1.6 1.0 5.1 17.3 12.2 −8.3 −1.9 1.6 −8.7 0.7
         Dec. 12.0 14.4 5.5 −2.5 −3.3 10.3 5.6 −4.6 3.6 1.9 2.6 −4.6 3.7
2001          Jan. 2.1 7.9 6.1 −5.8 −13.5 −19.9 8.3 28.2 8.4 −0.8 −0.0 9.2 −0.0
         Feb. 15.6 18.0 7.2 −2.4 1.5 10.0 23.7 13.7 7.7 −0.7 −0.0 6.4 2.1
         Mar. 26.1 23.4 16.3 2.7 2.4 −50.5 17.2 67.7 3.4 1.2 −0.4 −1.7 4.3
 German contribution (DM billion) 2
1999          Oct. 53.3 20.5 1.0 32.8 12.3 −20.2 4.8 25.0 9.7 4.0 −1.2 2.6 4.4
         Nov. 45.2 36.6 11.2 8.6 1.7 −46.6 2.7 49.3 19.9 6.5 0.3 11.0 2.2
         Dec. 35.7 61.2 21.8 −25.5 −10.2 −11.1 −3.5 7.6 8.6 6.6 4.1 −10.1 8.0
2000          Jan. 34.7 10.4 3.2 24.3 21.0 −29.9 3.9 33.8 −6.7 4.7 −1.7 −14.1 4.4
         Feb. 29.4 27.3 11.2 2.1 11.3 9.2 36.3 27.1 11.8 3.7 2.0 4.7 1.5         Mar. 75.8 84.2 61.1 −8.4 −11.1 −49.4 15.4 64.8 11.4 −0.3 1.6 1.0 9.1
         Apr. 29.7 29.7 11.0 −0.0 −3.3 −14.3 20.6 34.8 22.2 1.1 −0.9 19.7 2.1
         May 25.3 31.7 15.9 −6.5 −7.3 3.9 24.9 21.0 18.8 0.4 2.5 13.5 2.4
         June −63.1 −49.4 −63.0 −13.6 −5.4 24.4 −42.1 −66.5 9.1 1.7 2.9 1.2 3.2
         July 2.7 5.1 7.0 −2.5 −6.9 30.8 28.3 −2.5 20.9 1.0 2.5 16.4 0.9
         Aug. 17.2 21.4 3.2 −4.2 −0.4 −11.4 10.0 21.4 12.2 2.6 3.2 5.2 1.1
         Sep. 12.7 37.6 1.8 −24.9 −6.7 − 9.6 −0.4 9.2 11.6 −2.6 4.2 −0.6 10.6
         Oct. 23.4 8.4 1.8 15.0 6.7 − 4.2 28.5 32.8 7.7 0.7 1.4 3.7 1.9
         Nov. 29.8 26.6 8.1 3.2 2.0 10.1 33.9 23.9 −16.3 −3.7 3.2 −17.1 1.3
         Dec. 23.4 28.2 10.7 −4.9 −6.4 20.1 11.0 −9.1 7.1 3.8 5.1 −9.1 7.2
2001          Jan. 4.1 15.5 11.9 −11.4 −26.4 −39.0 16.1 55.1 16.4 −1.6 −0.0 18.1 −0.1
         Feb. 30.5 35.2 14.1 −4.7 2.9 19.6 46.3 26.7 15.0 −1.4 −0.0 12.4 4.0
         Mar. 51.0 45.7 31.8 5.2 4.7 −98.8 33.7 132.5 6.6 2.3 −0.8 −3.3 8.4
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of 1998, including liabilities arising from loans on a trust basis. —5For the
monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (table II.2); statistical breaks have been German contribution: from 1999 including deposits under saving s and loan
eliminated from the flow figures. —1Source: ECB. —2Owing to changes in contracts (see table IV.12). —6For the German contribution: up to the end
the definitions of the items and differences in the range of reporting of 1998 including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also
institutions, the figures are not comparable with those published for footnote 5). —7Excluding MFIs portfolios; for the German contribution:
Germany up to end of 1998. —3For the German contribution: up to excluding German MFIs portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro
December 1998, including loans on a trust basis and bill-based lending area. —8For the European monetary union: including the counterparts of
instead of bill holdings. —4For the German contribution: up to December
8*II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
 
   
 
VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  9 
Money stock M2
Money
Money stock M1 market Debt
Deposits fund securities
with an Deposits with certificates
IV. De- agreed at agreed and money maturities
posits of Currency maturity notice of Repo- market of up to    
V. Other in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac- paper 2 years    central gov-ernments factors  
8 Total Total Total lation  10 tions  14 (net)  7 (net)  7    Period deposits  11 2 years  11,12  months  11,13  
European monetary union (euro billion) 1 X
 
1.8 − 1.2 17.6 16.3 5.8 2.3 3.6 12.5 − 2.1 − 3.2 6.4 − 1.9 1999         Oct.
11.0 15.0 44.7 25.0 32.7 0.5 32.2 − 2.5 − 5.2 1.1 17.8 0.7          Nov.
− 4.1 −74.7 80.0 96.0 52.9 19.5 33.4 20.6 22.5 −14.4 −14.7 13.1          Dec.
− 8.3 − 5.9 3.6 − 6.1 10.4 −16.9 27.4 −17.7 1.1 10.7 0.9 − 1.9 2000         Jan.
10.9 15.2 22.8 − 4.4 −10.1 − 1.8 − 8.2 16.5 −10.9 4.5 19.0 3.7          Feb.
−14.5 −12.5 36.0 7.1 10.6 3.5 7.2 7.1 −10.6 17.8 12.1 − 1.0          Mar.
1.6 −35.4 41.9 37.3 39.2 3.3 36.0 5.7 − 7.6 2.4 2.3 − 0.2          Apr.
−17.9 19.0 4.6 − 5.1 −14.9 − 0.2 −14.7 19.0 − 9.2 1.4 9.9 − 1.7          May
32.1 38.9 − 6.9 9.2 16.2 3.6 12.6 0.3 − 7.3 −13.9 − 3.9 1.7          June
−11.3 −18.0 5.6 − 0.5 − 1.3 1.9 − 3.2 8.3 − 7.5 4.7 12.1 −10.7          July
5.9 −19.4 − 2.0 −15.0 −36.3 − 5.1 −31.1 27.8 − 6.5 − 2.7 12.6 3.2          Aug.
18.7 9.4 − 3.0 3.0 11.3 1.0 10.3 1.8 −10.1 2.0 − 8.7 0.6          Sep.
13.1 −19.3 12.4 2.7 − 1.8 − 2.2 0.4 13.8 − 9.3 − 0.9 5.0 5.6          Oct.
− 3.6 32.0 41.2 26.4 20.4 0.1 20.3 14.6 − 8.6 3.0 1.8 10.1          Nov.
− 4.2 1.1 88.5 98.5 68.3 10.7 57.5 10.9 19.3 1.5 −21.3 9.8          Dec.
−18.8 5.8 −12.5 −54.7 −73.2 −20.1 −53.1 15.0 3.5 19.1 21.4 1.7 2001          Jan.
7.5 − 0.9 24.8 5.1 − 0.5 − 1.0 0.5 11.0 − 5.4 1.8 12.5 5.4          Feb.
− 4.2 − 1.8 52.4 25.2 12.9 1.1 11.8 12.9 − 0.6 8.6 15.2 3.3          Mar.
 German contribution (euro billion) 2
0.7 2.2 9.1 5.4 0.8 0.2 0.6 6.1 − 1.5 0.7 2.1 0.9 1999          Oct.
− 0.4 −47.3 36.8 25.4 27.8 1.2 26.6 0.8 − 3.2 − 0.1 13.0 − 1.4          Nov.
0.1 −13.3 21.3 16.9 − 6.7 4.8 −11.6 14.0 9.7 0.3 1.9 2.2          Dec.
− 1.2 23.1 −16.0 −12.6 2.0 − 5.0 6.9 −10.3 − 4.3 − 0.1 − 4.8 1.5 2000          Jan.
0.8 5.3 7.5 1.7 4.7 − 0.7 5.4 2.0 − 5.0 − 0.8 5.0 1.7          Feb.
− 0.6 16.0 − 7.8 − 9.6 − 4.4 0.9 − 5.3 1.2 − 6.4 − 0.2 − 1.0 3.1          Mar.
0.4 − 4.8 1.0 0.9 10.8 0.4 10.4 − 3.7 − 6.1 1.8 − 3.1 1.4          Apr.
− 0.5 10.4 − 4.6 − 6.5 − 8.5 − 0.1 − 8.4 9.2 − 7.2 0.2 2.4 − 0.7          May
6.3 −24.3 − 6.4 − 9.9 − 0.5 0.1 − 0.6 − 2.5 − 6.9 − 1.0 6.9 − 2.4          June
0.3 14.2 − 8.1 − 9.7 − 4.7 − 0.2 − 4.5 1.3 − 6.3 − 0.1 1.4 0.3          July
− 0.6 2.3 − 5.0 − 7.5 − 9.0 − 1.0 − 8.0 7.0 − 5.5 − 0.1 − 0.4 3.0          Aug.
19.8 −16.3 − 7.8 − 3.1 − 2.2 0.3 − 2.5 4.1 − 5.0 − 0.7 − 2.6 − 1.4          Sep.
2.4 0.7 2.8 − 1.2 2.9 − 1.1 4.0 0.4 − 4.4 0.3 3.4 0.2          Oct.
−10.7 19.3 20.1 22.6 22.2 − 0.0 22.2 5.5 − 5.1 − 0.0 − 3.8 1.3          Nov.
6.7 −14.7 26.6 25.0 4.3 1.1 3.2 12.4 8.3 − 0.9 1.8 0.8          Dec.
−12.2 5.1 −19.1 −18.5 −15.8 − 5.3 −10.5 1.4 − 4.1 1.4 − 4.5 2.4 2001          Jan.
0.5 2.8 14.6 10.1 9.8 − 0.4 10.2 2.5 − 2.1 − 0.2 0.1 4.6          Feb.
− 0.3 −30.6 3.1 1.6 − 1.3 0.0 − 1.4 4.1 − 1.2 − 0.6 1.8 0.3          Mar.
 German contribution (DM billion) 2
1.3 4.3 17.8 10.5 1.5 0.4 1.1 11.9 − 2.9 1.3 4.2 1.8 1999          Oct.
− 0.8 −92.5 72.0 49.7 54.4 2.4 52.0 1.6 − 6.3 − 0.3 25.3 − 2.7          Nov.
0.3 −25.9 41.7 33.1 −13.2 9.4 −22.6 27.4 18.9 0.6 3.7 4.3          Dec.
− 2.4 45.2 −31.3 −24.7 3.8 − 9.7 13.5 −20.2 − 8.3 − 0.2 − 9.3 3.0 2000          Jan.
1.6 10.4 14.7 3.3 9.2 − 1.4 10.6 3.9 − 9.8 − 1.6 9.7 3.2          Feb.
− 1.1 31.3 −15.2 −18.8 − 8.6 1.8 −10.4 2.4 −12.5 − 0.4 − 2.0 6.0          Mar.
0.7 − 9.3 1.9 1.7 21.0 0.8 20.2 − 7.3 −12.0 3.6 − 6.2 2.7          Apr.
− 1.0 20.4 − 9.1 −12.6 −16.5 − 0.1 −16.4 18.0 −14.1 0.3 4.6 − 1.4          May
12.4 −47.5 −12.6 −19.3 − 0.9 0.2 − 1.1 − 4.9 −13.5 − 2.0 13.5 − 4.7          June
0.7 27.8 −15.8 −19.0 − 9.2 − 0.3 − 8.9 2.5 −12.3 − 0.1 2.7 0.6          July
− 1.1 4.5 − 9.8 −14.6 −17.6 − 2.0 −15.6 13.8 −10.8 − 0.1 − 0.8 5.8          Aug.
38.7 −31.8 −15.3 − 6.0 − 4.3 0.6 − 4.9 8.0 − 9.8 − 1.4 − 5.1 − 2.8          Sep.
4.7 1.4 5.4 − 2.3 5.6 − 2.2 7.8 0.7 − 8.7 0.7 6.6 0.5          Oct.
−21.0 37.8 39.3 44.2 43.3 − 0.0 43.3 10.8 − 9.9 − 0.1 − 7.4 2.6          Nov.
13.1 −28.8 52.1 48.9 8.5 2.2 6.3 24.2 16.2 − 1.8 3.5 1.5          Dec.
−23.8 10.0 −37.4 −36.2 −30.9 −10.3 −20.6 2.8 − 8.1 2.8 − 8.8 4.8 2001          Jan.
1.1 5.6 28.5 19.8 19.1 − 0.8 19.9 4.8 − 4.1 − 0.5 0.2 9.0          Feb.
− 0.6 −59.9 6.1 3.1 − 2.6 0.1 − 2.6 8.1 − 2.4 − 1.3 3.6 0.6          Mar.
monetary liabilities of central governments. —9The German contributions hand denominated in all currencies of euro-area member states. —11For
to the Eurosystem ’s monetary aggregates should on no account be the European monetary union: including the monetary liabilities of central
interpreted as national monetary aggregates, and are therefore not governments (Post Office, Treasury). —12For the German contribution: up
comparable to the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2 or M3. — to December 1998, with maturities of less than 4 years. —13In Germany,
10Excluding euro-area MFIs cash in hand denominated in euros or in only savings deposits. —14For the German contribution: data collected
currencies of the euro area; for the German contribution: currency in separately only from 1999. —XFrom January 2001: Enlargement of the
circulation denominated in Deutsche Mark, excluding German MFIs cash in euro area. 
9*II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
 
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
 
 
 
Assets  3 
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area  4 
Enterprises and individuals Public authorities
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
assets  3  or Debt other Debt euro-area Other
Period Total Total Advances  4 securities  5 equities Total Advances  4 securities  6 residents assets liabilities  7 
 European monetary union (euro billion) 1 X
 
1999          Oct. 11,321.5 8,150.6 6,070.6 5,439.5 216.4 414.8 2,080.0 840.3 1,239.6 2,133.9 1,037.1
         Nov. 11,528.9 8,249.8 6,159.0 5,504.0 224.3 430.7 2,090.8 853.5 1,237.3 2,191.9 1,087.2         Dec. 11,489.2 8,272.9 6,214.3 5,537.2 227.8 449.2 2,058.6 847.9 1,210.7 2,121.2 1,095.1
2000          Jan. 11,609.8 8,325.8 6,263.5 5,581.5 228.7 453.4 2,062.3 840.6 1,221.7 2,166.3 1,117.7
         Feb. 11,725.7 8,387.8 6,320.9 5,617.3 234.8 468.7 2,066.9 836.1 1,230.7 2,203.4 1,134.5         Mar. 11,905.5 8,487.4 6,427.0 5,688.6 228.9 509.5 2,060.4 839.7 1,220.7 2,262.0 1,156.0
         Apr. 12,109.1 8,549.3 6,508.3 5,749.0 237.0 522.2 2,041.0 842.4 1,198.6 2,362.9 1,197.0
         May 12,132.7 8,582.8 6,559.1 5,779.1 244.2 535.9 2,023.7 835.8 1,187.9 2,351.4 1,198.5         June 12,143.8 8,597.2 6,594.9 5,846.3 244.2 504.3 2,002.3 835.6 1,166.8 2,343.3 1,203.3
         July 12,232.4 8,610.6 6,636.0 5,874.6 252.4 509.0 1,974.5 833.8 1,140.7 2,370.5 1,251.3
         Aug. 12,317.0 8,611.0 6,660.4 5,893.1 256.6 510.7 1,950.6 822.0 1,128.6 2,415.8 1,290.3         Sep. 12,371.6 8,697.0 6,750.6 5,978.5 258.3 513.8 1,946.4 818.0 1,128.4 2,458.7 1,215.9
         Oct. 12,533.3 8,735.2 6,799.8 6,021.5 264.3 514.0 1,935.4 819.9 1,115.5 2,511.3 1,286.7
         Nov. 12,495.3 8,775.5 6,836.3 6,056.8 263.7 515.8 1,939.2 827.0 1,112.2 2,484.3 1,235.5         Dec. 12,410.9 8,803.2 6,877.9 6,091.3 265.2 521.5 1,925.3 835.9 1,089.5 2,402.9 1,204.8
2001          Jan. 12,712.0 8,998.6 6,993.4 6,182.4 271.3 539.7 2,005.2 858.0 1,147.2 2,459.7 1,253.7
         Feb. 12,767.7 9,032.9 7,028.0 6,202.0 279.3 546.7 2,004.8 850.0 1,154.8 2,477.3 1,257.5         Mar. 13,065.9 9,136.4 7,117.5 6,266.4 288.2 562.9 2,018.9 851.1 1,167.8 2,633.8 1,295.7
 German contribution (euro billion) 2
1999          Oct. 3,877.3 3,089.9 2,341.2 2,095.7 47.6 197.9 748.6 517.7 230.9 603.6 183.8         Nov. 3,923.9 3,114.4 2,361.0 2,109.6 47.5 203.9 753.4 521.4 232.0 612.7 196.7         Dec. 3,941.9 3,131.8 2,391.7 2,129.3 46.4 216.0 740.1 513.6 226.5 612.2 197.9
2000          Jan. 3,967.7 3,152.3 2,400.0 2,136.2 45.6 218.1 752.3 515.4 237.0 618.7 196.7
         Feb. 4,003.5 3,167.2 2,414.0 2,144.5 47.2 222.3 753.2 510.7 242.5 638.3 198.0         Mar. 4,057.5 3,206.7 2,457.7 2,156.5 46.1 255.1 749.0 512.1 236.8 652.0 198.8
         Apr. 4,102.0 3,223.7 2,474.5 2,167.6 46.3 260.6 749.2 514.0 235.2 674.2 204.1
         May 4,126.1 3,235.6 2,489.9 2,174.9 46.9 268.1 745.7 514.3 231.4 680.7 209.7         June 4,063.4 3,201.6 2,463.0 2,180.9 48.6 233.4 738.6 510.4 228.2 655.6 206.2
         July 4,096.3 3,204.2 2,467.3 2,181.7 49.4 236.3 736.8 512.1 224.7 677.6 214.5
         Aug. 4,124.4 3,211.3 2,479.8 2,192.5 49.7 237.7 731.5 506.7 224.8 692.3 220.8         Sep. 4,150.0 3,218.6 2,499.8 2,211.5 50.3 238.0 718.8 497.5 221.3 696.5 235.0
         Oct. 4,196.0 3,232.6 2,505.8 2,216.4 50.7 238.6 726.8 501.9 225.0 722.0 241.4
         Nov. 4,217.3 3,247.1 2,519.0 2,225.5 50.7 242.8 728.1 502.4 225.8 730.4 239.8         Dec. 4,200.2 3,254.3 2,529.4 2,230.8 51.0 247.7 724.9 502.9 222.0 715.2 230.6
2001          Jan. 4,206.7 3,270.3 2,539.8 2,233.8 52.1 254.0 730.5 514.4 216.1 708.0 228.3
         Feb. 4,249.1 3,285.8 2,557.7 2,244.5 54.7 258.5 728.1 510.5 217.6 732.5 230.7         Mar. 4,317.9 3,313.6 2,582.7 2,253.1 57.4 272.2 730.9 510.9 220.0 763.1 241.2
 German contribution (DM billion) 2
1999          Oct. 7,583.3 6,043.3 4,579.0 4,098.8 93.1 387.1 1,464.2 1,012.6 451.6 1,180.5 359.5         Nov. 7,674.4 6,091.3 4,617.7 4,126.1 92.8 398.8 1,473.6 1,019.8 453.8 1,198.4 384.7         Dec. 7,709.6 6,125.3 4,677.8 4,164.6 90.8 422.4 1,447.5 1,004.5 443.0 1,197.3 387.0
2000          Jan. 7,760.1 6,165.4 4,693.9 4,178.0 89.3 426.7 1,471.4 1,008.0 463.5 1,210.0 384.8
         Feb. 7,830.2 6,194.6 4,721.4 4,194.3 92.2 434.9 1,473.2 998.8 474.4 1,248.3 387.3         Mar. 7,935.9 6,271.8 4,806.9 4,217.8 90.1 498.9 1,464.8 1,001.7 463.2 1,275.2 388.9
         Apr. 8,022.9 6,305.0 4,839.7 4,239.5 90.5 509.7 1,465.4 1,005.3 460.1 1,318.6 399.3
         May 8,069.9 6,328.3 4,869.8 4,253.7 91.7 524.3 1,458.5 1,006.0 452.6 1,331.3 410.2         June 7,947.4 6,261.8 4,817.2 4,265.5 95.1 456.5 1,444.7 998.3 446.3 1,282.3 403.3
         July 8,011.6 6,266.8 4,825.7 4,267.0 96.6 462.1 1,441.1 1,001.6 439.5 1,325.3 419.4
         Aug. 8,066.7 6,280.8 4,850.1 4,288.1 97.2 464.8 1,430.7 991.1 439.6 1,354.0 431.8         Sep. 8,116.7 6,295.0 4,889.1 4,325.2 98.4 465.4 1,405.9 973.0 432.9 1,362.2 459.6
         Oct. 8,206.7 6,322.4 4,900.8 4,334.9 99.2 466.8 1,421.6 981.6 440.0 1,412.0 472.2
         Nov. 8,248.4 6,350.8 4,926.7 4,352.8 99.1 474.8 1,424.1 982.6 441.5 1,428.5 469.1         Dec. 8,214.8 6,364.9 4,947.1 4,363.0 99.8 484.4 1,417.7 983.6 434.1 1,398.9 451.0
2001          Jan. 8,227.5 6,396.2 4,967.5 4,369.0 101.8 496.7 1,428.7 1,006.1 422.6 1,384.8 446.5
         Feb. 8,310.5 6,426.5 5,002.5 4,389.9 106.9 505.7 1,424.0 998.5 425.5 1,432.7 451.3         Mar. 8,445.1 6,480.9 5,051.3 4,406.7 112.3 532.4 1,429.6 999.3 430.3 1,492.4 471.8
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building holdings. —4For the German contribution: up to December 1998, including
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank loans on a trust basis and bill-based lending instead of bill holdings. —
and central banks (the Eurosystem). —1Source: ECB. —2Owing to changes 5Including money market paper of enterprises. —6Including Treasury bills
in the definitions of the items and differences in the range of reporting and other money market paper of public authorities. —7For the German
institutions, the figures are not comparable with those published for contribution: up to December 1998, including liabilities incurred in the
Germany up to the end of 1998. —3For the German contribution: up to banks own name but on behalf of third parties and including endorsement
December 1998, including trust funds and bill-based lending instead of bill liabilities on rediscounted bills. —8Excluding the cash in hand (in euros) of
10*II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
 
   
 
Liabilities  7 
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area  9 
Enterprises and individuals
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  14 
over
Currency 1 year
in of which: up to up to over up to over
Total in euros  10 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years  11 3 months 3 months  15   Period circulation  8 2 years  9, 12, 13  
European monetary union (euro billion) 1 X
 
329.6 4,936.8 4,640.0 4,674.8 1,430.2 742.8 72.9 1,114.8 1,204.8 109.4 1999          Oct.
330.1 4,985.5 4,671.8 4,705.0 1,460.9 738.8 72.9 1,123.6 1,199.5 109.4          Nov.
349.9 5,062.0 4,757.2 4,783.7 1,492.9 750.8 77.8 1,135.0 1,215.8 111.4          Dec.
333.0 5,068.3 4,765.5 4,798.8 1,519.5 736.5 78.5 1,136.8 1,217.0 110.5 2000          Jan.
331.1 5,080.6 4,767.5 4,798.2 1,513.3 749.5 78.6 1,138.9 1,206.3 111.6          Feb.
334.6 5,072.0 4,769.7 4,805.6 1,524.9 756.0 79.1 1,137.7 1,195.5 112.3          Mar.
337.7 5,109.8 4,798.4 4,836.3 1,553.9 764.9 79.1 1,137.9 1,188.5 111.9          Apr.
337.5 5,089.1 4,798.2 4,831.3 1,541.9 778.9 78.1 1,139.6 1,179.5 113.2          May341.2 5,124.1 4,800.0 4,829.9 1,547.0 778.6 78.1 1,138.6 1,172.8 114.7          June
343.0 5,112.8 4,802.2 4,835.5 1,546.9 790.4 78.4 1,138.9 1,165.1 115.8          July
337.9 5,117.9 4,795.1 4,833.8 1,518.7 819.9 78.3 1,141.1 1,158.4 117.4          Aug.338.9 5,145.2 4,799.6 4,840.0 1,531.3 820.5 77.9 1,141.6 1,149.1 119.6          Sep.
336.7 5,167.8 4,799.2 4,850.1 1,531.2 837.1 79.3 1,142.6 1,139.5 120.5          Oct.
336.8 5,182.7 4,820.4 4,865.6 1,547.2 847.1 81.4 1,135.9 1,130.9 123.2          Nov.347.5 5,260.0 4,919.3 4,945.8 1,599.0 853.9 76.6 1,141.5 1,149.1 125.7          Dec.
335.2 5,310.0 4,958.3 5,009.6 1,557.6 905.1 77.5 1,142.0 1,200.2 127.1 2001          Jan.
334.2 5,324.1 4,965.1 5,015.5 1,557.6 916.7 78.3 1,141.9 1,193.7 127.3          Feb.
335.2 5,348.1 4,990.1 5,049.8 1,574.8 930.9 79.6 1,144.5 1,193.1 126.9          Mar.
 German contribution (euro billion) 2
124.2 1,966.9 1,880.9 1,849.7 397.9 201.0 9.1 634.1 499.2 108.4 1999          Oct.
125.5 1,995.1 1,908.8 1,875.2 424.7 198.7 9.4 637.8 496.0 108.5          Nov.130.3 2,012.9 1,927.8 1,887.5 412.6 208.3 9.6 640.7 505.6 110.6          Dec.
125.3 2,006.0 1,921.9 1,886.4 421.5 200.6 9.9 643.2 501.4 109.7 2000          Jan.
124.6 2,012.3 1,928.4 1,892.0 427.0 201.5 9.3 646.9 496.4 110.8          Feb.
125.5 2,002.5 1,917.4 1,884.3 422.5 203.1 9.7 647.4 490.1 111.6          Mar.
125.9 2,004.8 1,916.8 1,884.7 430.8 199.6 10.3 648.8 484.0 111.1          Apr.
125.9 1,998.8 1,912.1 1,877.3 423.0 204.8 10.6 649.6 476.9 112.4          May126.0 1,996.9 1,905.2 1,866.5 419.3 202.4 10.5 650.3 470.1 113.9          June
125.8 1,990.3 1,898.1 1,863.9 417.5 205.5 10.9 651.7 463.5 114.9          July
124.8 1,987.3 1,895.3 1,860.6 410.0 211.3 11.2 653.7 458.0 116.5          Aug.125.1 2,005.0 1,891.2 1,858.6 407.7 214.9 11.7 652.7 453.0 118.7          Sep.
124.0 2,009.5 1,891.1 1,862.3 411.4 216.2 12.8 653.8 448.6 119.5          Oct.
124.0 2,020.2 1,913.2 1,882.4 433.9 217.8 14.8 651.3 443.6 121.1          Nov.125.1 2,051.8 1,944.1 1,900.3 434.1 224.7 15.5 650.6 451.8 123.7          Dec.
119.8 2,026.4 1,929.2 1,890.8 426.4 225.8 16.9 650.0 447.9 123.8 2001          Jan.
119.4 2,036.8 1,940.0 1,899.4 434.3 229.0 17.1 649.3 445.8 123.8          Feb.
119.5 2,039.9 1,940.6 1,905.3 435.0 233.9 17.4 651.0 444.7 123.4          Mar.
 German contribution (DM billion) 2
243.0 3,847.0 3,678.7 3,617.7 778.2 393.2 17.9 1,240.1 976.3 212.0 1999          Oct.
245.4 3,902.1 3,733.3 3,667.6 830.7 388.6 18.4 1,247.5 970.1 212.2          Nov.254.8 3,936.9 3,770.5 3,691.5 807.0 407.3 18.8 1,253.1 988.9 216.3          Dec.
245.1 3,923.5 3,758.9 3,689.5 824.5 392.4 19.4 1,258.0 980.7 214.6 2000          Jan.
243.7 3,935.7 3,771.5 3,700.3 835.1 394.0 18.3 1,265.3 971.0 216.6          Feb.
245.5 3,916.6 3,750.2 3,685.4 826.4 397.1 18.9 1,266.2 958.5 218.2          Mar.
246.3 3,921.0 3,748.9 3,686.1 842.6 390.3 20.2 1,268.9 946.7 217.3          Apr.
246.2 3,909.2 3,739.7 3,671.7 827.2 400.5 20.7 1,270.6 932.8 219.9          May246.4 3,905.6 3,726.2 3,650.5 820.0 395.8 20.6 1,271.8 919.5 222.8          June
246.0 3,892.7 3,712.4 3,645.5 816.6 401.9 21.2 1,274.6 906.5 224.7          July
244.1 3,886.9 3,706.9 3,639.1 801.9 413.3 21.8 1,278.4 895.7 227.9          Aug.244.7 3,921.4 3,698.9 3,635.2 797.3 420.3 22.8 1,276.5 886.0 232.2          Sep.
242.5 3,930.3 3,698.7 3,642.3 804.6 422.9 25.1 1,278.6 877.4 233.6          Oct.
242.5 3,951.2 3,741.8 3,681.7 848.6 426.1 28.9 1,273.9 867.5 236.8          Nov.244.7 4,013.0 3,802.3 3,716.7 849.0 439.4 30.3 1,272.4 883.6 241.9          Dec.
234.4 3,963.3 3,773.2 3,698.1 833.9 441.7 33.0 1,271.3 876.0 242.1 2001          Jan.
233.6 3,983.6 3,794.4 3,714.8 849.5 447.9 33.5 1,269.9 872.0 242.1          Feb.
233.7 3,989.7 3,795.4 3,726.5 850.7 457.4 34.0 1,273.3 869.7 241.4          Mar.
MFIs; for the German contribution: currency in circulation denominated in maturities of 4 years and more. —13For the German contribution: from
Deutsche Mark, excluding German MFIs cash in hand denominated in all 1999 including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see table
currencies of euro-area member states. —9For the German contribution: IV.12). —14In Germany, only saving deposits. —15For the German
up to December 1998, including liabilities arising from loans on a trust contribution: up to the end of 1998 including deposits under savings andbasis. —10Excluding central governments deposits. —11For the German loan contracts (see also footnote 13). —XFrom January 2001: Enlargement
contribution: up to December 1998, with maturities of 1 year to less than of the euro area. 4 years. —12For the German contribution: up to December 1998, with
11*II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
 
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (cont ’d)*
 
 
 
Liabilities (cont ’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont ’d) 3 
Public authorities Repo transactions
with counterparties
Other public authorities in the euro area  9 
With agreed At agreed Moneymaturities of notice of  
7 marketfund
over of which: certificates1 year Enterprises and money
Central up to up to over up to over and market paper
Period governments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years  
4 3 months 3 months  8 Total individuals (net)  10, 11  2 years  3, 5, 6  
 European monetary union (euro billion) 1 X
 
1999          Oct. 135.1 126.9 51.4 44.1 1.1 26.0 3.5 0.8 157.5 153.9 409.7
         Nov. 146.1 134.4 55.4 47.3 1.3 26.2 3.4 0.8 158.6 155.8 428.1         Dec. 142.0 136.3 52.9 51.4 1.2 26.6 3.4 0.9 144.2 142.0 425.2
2000          Jan. 133.7 135.8 55.4 47.7 1.7 26.8 3.3 0.8 155.0 150.0 430.1
         Feb. 144.6 137.8 54.9 49.5 1.9 27.5 3.3 0.8 159.5 155.2 449.1         Mar. 130.2 136.1 52.2 50.8 1.8 27.3 3.3 0.8 177.3 174.0 461.7
         Apr. 131.8 141.8 58.7 49.9 2.0 27.2 3.2 0.8 179.8 176.3 510.4
         May 113.9 144.0 56.1 54.7 2.0 27.4 3.1 0.8 181.2 175.6 517.2         June 146.0 148.2 61.6 53.8 1.8 27.3 2.9 0.8 167.3 161.9 517.8
         July 134.7 142.7 58.2 51.7 1.9 27.2 2.9 0.8 172.0 166.0 530.4
         Aug. 140.6 143.5 58.9 51.7 1.9 27.3 2.9 0.8 169.4 163.0 544.1         Sep. 159.3 146.0 58.2 54.5 1.8 27.8 2.7 0.8 171.4 166.1 535.7
         Oct. 172.3 145.4 59.6 52.7 1.9 27.8 2.7 0.8 170.6 166.6 541.9
         Nov. 168.8 148.3 61.7 53.3 1.9 27.8 2.8 0.8 173.5 169.2 542.4         Dec. 164.6 149.7 59.9 56.4 2.0 27.8 2.8 0.8 175.0 172.6 510.1
2001          Jan. 147.4 153.0 64.1 56.0 2.0 27.4 2.8 0.7 214.3 209.6 527.7
         Feb. 154.7 154.0 66.3 54.9 2.0 27.2 2.8 0.7 216.1 210.5 540.4         Mar. 150.4 147.8 61.0 54.8 1.9 26.7 2.7 0.7 224.7 220.1 557.0
 German contribution (euro billion) 2
1999          Oct. 46.9 70.3 13.3 30.4 0.4 23.0 2.5 0.7 1.8 1.8 59.1         Nov. 46.5 73.4 13.3 33.4 0.4 23.1 2.4 0.8 1.7 1.7 72.2         Dec. 46.7 78.8 13.9 37.6 0.4 23.7 2.4 0.8 2.0 2.0 74.1
2000          Jan. 45.4 74.2 12.1 34.3 0.9 23.9 2.4 0.8 1.9 1.9 69.3
         Feb. 46.2 74.1 12.0 34.2 1.0 23.8 2.4 0.8 1.1 1.1 74.3         Mar. 45.8 72.4 11.3 33.5 0.9 23.6 2.3 0.8 0.9 0.9 73.6
         Apr. 46.1 74.0 13.8 32.6 1.0 23.5 2.3 0.8 2.7 2.7 70.7
         May 45.6 75.8 12.0 36.3 1.0 23.6 2.2 0.8 2.9 2.9 72.8         June 52.0 78.4 14.9 36.2 1.0 23.5 2.1 0.8 1.8 1.8 79.6
         July 52.3 74.1 12.4 34.2 1.1 23.5 2.0 0.8 1.8 1.8 81.2
         Aug. 51.7 74.9 12.2 35.2 1.1 23.5 2.0 0.8 1.7 1.7 81.4         Sep. 71.5 74.8 12.1 35.3 1.1 23.5 2.0 0.8 1.0 1.0 79.0
         Oct. 73.9 73.3 12.7 33.4 1.1 23.4 1.9 0.8 1.3 1.3 83.0
         Nov. 63.2 74.6 12.2 35.1 1.2 23.4 1.9 0.8 1.3 1.3 78.6         Dec. 69.9 81.6 14.6 39.6 1.3 23.4 2.0 0.8 0.4 0.4 78.9
2001          Jan. 57.7 77.9 12.1 38.7 1.3 23.2 1.9 0.7 1.8 1.8 74.4
         Feb. 58.0 79.4 14.5 37.7 1.4 23.2 1.9 0.7 1.6 1.6 74.5         Mar. 57.7 76.9 12.9 36.9 1.4 23.2 1.8 0.6 0.9 0.9 76.9
 German contribution (DM billion) 2
1999          Oct. 91.7 137.5 26.0 59.5 0.8 45.0 4.8 1.4 3.6 3.6 115.6         Nov. 91.0 143.5 26.0 65.3 0.7 45.2 4.7 1.5 3.3 3.3 141.2         Dec. 91.2 154.1 27.1 73.5 0.9 46.3 4.8 1.6 3.9 3.9 144.9
2000          Jan. 88.8 145.1 23.6 67.0 1.7 46.7 4.6 1.6 3.6 3.6 135.6
         Feb. 90.4 144.9 23.5 66.8 1.9 46.5 4.6 1.5 2.1 2.1 145.3         Mar. 89.5 141.7 22.2 65.4 1.8 46.1 4.6 1.5 1.7 1.7 143.9
         Apr. 90.2 144.7 27.0 63.8 2.0 46.0 4.4 1.5 5.3 5.3 138.2
         May 89.3 148.3 23.4 71.0 2.0 46.1 4.3 1.5 5.6 5.6 142.4         June 101.6 153.4 29.2 70.7 2.0 45.9 4.1 1.5 3.6 3.6 155.7
         July 102.3 144.9 24.3 66.9 2.2 46.0 4.0 1.5 3.5 3.5 158.9
         Aug. 101.2 146.6 23.9 68.9 2.2 46.0 4.0 1.6 3.4 3.4 159.2         Sep. 139.9 146.3 23.7 69.1 2.2 45.9 3.9 1.5 1.9 1.9 154.5
         Oct. 144.6 143.4 24.9 65.2 2.2 45.7 3.8 1.5 2.6 2.6 162.4
         Nov. 123.6 145.9 23.8 68.7 2.3 45.8 3.7 1.5 2.5 2.5 153.7         Dec. 136.6 159.7 28.5 77.4 2.5 45.9 3.8 1.5 0.7 0.7 154.3
2001          Jan. 112.8 152.4 23.6 75.7 2.6 45.3 3.7 1.4 3.5 3.5 145.4
         Feb. 113.5 155.4 28.4 73.8 2.6 45.4 3.7 1.4 3.1 3.1 145.7         Mar. 112.8 150.3 25.2 72.2 2.6 45.4 3.5 1.3 1.8 1.8 150.3
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building December 1998, with maturities of 4 years and more. —6For the German
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank contribution: from 1999 including deposits under savings and loan contrac ts
and central banks (the Eurosystem). —1Source: ECB. —2Owing to changes (see table IV.12). —7In Germany: only savings deposits. —8For the
in the definitions of the items and differences in the range of reporting German contribution: up to the end of 1998 including deposits under
institutions, the figures are not comparable with those published for savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 6). —9For the German
Germany up to the end of 1998. —3For the German contribution: up to contribution: data collected separately from 1999 only; up to December
December 1998, including liabilities arising from loans on a trust basis. — 1998, included in the deposits with agreed maturities of up to 1 year. —
4For the German contribution: up to December 1998, with maturities of 10Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the German contribution: excluding
1 year to less than 4 years. —5For the German contribution: up to German MFIs portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro area. —
12*II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
 
   
 
 Memo item
Monetary aggregates  13 
Debt securities issued (net)  10 
With maturities of
Monetary
liabilitiesof central
Liabilities govern-
of which: over to non- Excess Monetary mentsdenom- 1 year euro-area Capital of capital (Postinated up to up to over and inter-MFI Other formation Office,
residents
Total in euros 1 year  11 2 years 2 years 12 reserves liabilities liabilities M1  14 M2 15 M3 16 17   Period Treasury)  18 
European monetary union (euro billion) 1 X
 
1,514.3 1,284.3 20.3 54.3 1,439.7 1,855.5 776.0 35.1 1,307.0 1,876.2 4,008.0 4,649.8 3,466.7 127.6 1999          Oct.
1,525.4 1,298.1 24.6 51.6 1,449.1 1,917.5 779.9 32.1 1,371.6 1,910.6 4,036.6 4,699.6 3,489.0 127.0          Nov.
1,535.5 1,305.4 34.0 54.8 1,446.8 1,832.3 809.2 30.9 1,299.9 1,964.0 4,133.3 4,791.5 3,529.8 137.3          Dec.
1,534.8 1,295.2 32.0 55.2 1,447.7 1,917.3 825.6 6.7 1,339.1 1,975.4 4,129.1 4,801.4 3,548.3 136.6 2000          Jan.
1,550.6 1,306.3 33.2 57.7 1,459.7 1,948.1 828.8 20.6 1,357.4 1,965.4 4,123.4 4,822.8 3,567.3 135.1          Feb.
1,553.7 1,305.0 29.8 60.9 1,463.0 2,075.9 843.0 − 2.7 1,390.0 1,977.4 4,133.1 4,862.9 3,584.1 134.8          Mar.
1,573.6 1,312.9 26.2 63.6 1,483.9 2,154.0 852.9 − 20.4 1,411.3 2,018.6 4,174.9 4,954.8 3,614.7 137.1          Apr.
1,575.9 1,323.7 24.3 63.2 1,488.5 2,159.8 853.9 − 6.5 1,424.5 2,000.3 4,166.3 4,952.2 3,623.4 134.6          May
1,585.1 1,327.3 27.6 59.2 1,498.3 2,059.1 878.0 30.8 1,440.5 2,015.3 4,172.5 4,944.4 3,657.7 134.7          June
1,584.0 1,318.5 19.1 57.6 1,507.2 2,093.9 894.5 26.4 1,475.3 2,015.3 4,174.9 4,954.0 3,684.5 136.5          July
1,604.1 1,326.5 19.3 61.8 1,523.1 2,136.2 898.9 9.1 1,499.6 1,981.0 4,163.5 4,958.0 3,708.6 134.9          Aug.1,611.4 1,327.9 19.3 62.2 1,529.9 2,192.8 927.1 10.4 1,438.6 1,993.4 4,168.8 4,957.5 3,746.9 133.8          Sep.
1,636.9 1,339.5 26.3 61.9 1,548.6 2,252.9 933.8 12.0 1,480.7 1,993.6 4,175.8 4,976.5 3,774.1 135.3          Oct.
1,634.4 1,341.4 33.1 64.2 1,537.2 2,227.7 921.8 − 0.1 1,476.0 2,012.1 4,198.4 5,011.6 3,746.7 135.3          Nov.
1,631.7 1,351.0 40.1 66.3 1,525.2 2,145.8 895.6 11.8 1,433.2 2,076.2 4,287.0 5,078.5 3,716.6 139.7          Dec.
1,661.2 1,378.8 38.5 70.3 1,552.4 2,257.1 911.0 25.0 1,470.5 2,025.4 4,341.4 5,192.3 3,760.7 140.9 2001          Jan.
1,677.3 1,386.8 42.9 71.3 1,563.0 2,265.3 911.9 2.3 1,496.0 2,025.2 4,347.0 5,217.8 3,772.0 140.5          Feb.
1,690.8 1,393.5 50.3 67.9 1,572.6 2,447.8 922.3 3.6 1,536.5 2,040.0 4,376.5 5,276.4 3,793.8 142.5          Mar.
 Germany contribution (euro billion) 2
744.3 657.4 − 22.5 721.9 457.7 271.5 − 45.6 297.3 535.4 1,278.0 1,361.4 1,759.6 −1999          Oct.
749.3 666.1 − 21.2 728.2 489.3 272.6 − 77.1 295.3 563.5 1,303.8 1,398.8 1,771.0 −         Nov.
747.2 665.2 − 23.4 723.9 494.1 277.0 − 88.5 292.8 556.8 1,320.8 1,420.2 1,776.7 −         Dec.
744.0 656.1 − 24.9 719.1 515.5 279.4 − 62.5 288.7 558.9 1,308.4 1,404.5 1,776.0 −2000          Jan.
748.5 661.1 − 26.6 722.0 530.5 280.1 − 53.0 285.2 563.6 1,308.4 1,410.3 1,784.3 −         Feb.
754.3 665.0 − 29.7 724.6 568.7 284.9 − 43.1 290.2 559.4 1,299.0 1,403.1 1,792.8 −         Mar.
768.2 673.4 − 31.2 737.0 597.2 286.0 − 47.7 294.2 570.5 1,300.4 1,404.9 1,807.2 −         Apr.
772.3 681.4 − 30.4 741.9 602.3 287.3 − 34.3 298.1 560.8 1,292.6 1,398.7 1,815.6 −         May
769.4 676.6 − 28.0 741.4 562.9 290.6 − 67.0 303.3 560.2 1,282.4 1,391.8 1,820.5 −         June
779.6 681.3 − 28.3 751.3 568.6 291.1 − 49.8 307.7 555.7 1,272.9 1,384.3 1,833.2 −         July
788.2 684.3 − 31.4 756.8 588.9 291.6 − 46.7 307.2 547.0 1,265.9 1,380.4 1,842.9 −         Aug.
787.4 681.8 − 30.0 757.4 597.5 298.6 − 70.6 327.1 544.9 1,262.9 1,372.9 1,851.6 −         Sep.
792.3 682.9 − 30.4 761.9 624.3 299.6 − 67.5 329.4 548.1 1,262.2 1,376.9 1,858.9 −         Oct.
782.4 676.4 − 31.6 750.8 628.2 300.4 − 54.7 336.9 570.0 1,284.4 1,395.9 1,847.8 −         Nov.
773.4 673.7 − 32.2 741.2 606.4 302.8 − 73.1 334.5 573.8 1,308.6 1,420.1 1,842.4 −         Dec.
785.0 683.8 − 34.6 750.4 632.9 302.7 − 65.2 328.8 558.3 1,290.8 1,401.6 1,850.9 −2001          Jan.
796.1 693.3 − 39.2 756.9 647.4 304.8 − 63.2 331.6 568.3 1,301.2 1,416.5 1,858.7 −         Feb.
797.0 692.2 − 38.9 758.1 727.2 309.4 − 91.5 338.6 567.3 1,303.3 1,419.9 1,865.9 −         Mar.
 Germany contribution (DM billion) 2
1,455.8 1,285.8 − 43.9 1,411.9 895.2 530.9 − 89.3 581.5 1,047.2 2,499.6 2,662.7 3,441.4 −1999          Oct.
1,465.5 1,302.7 − 41.4 1,424.2 957.0 533.1 −150.7 577.6 1,102.1 2,550.0 2,735.8 3,463.7 −         Nov.
1,461.5 1,300.9 − 45.7 1,415.8 966.3 541.8 −173.2 572.7 1,089.0 2,583.2 2,777.6 3,474.9 −         Dec.
1,455.1 1,283.2 − 48.7 1,406.4 1,008.3 546.4 −122.2 564.7 1,093.1 2,558.9 2,746.9 3,473.6 −2000          Jan.
1,464.0 1,292.9 − 52.0 1,412.0 1,037.6 547.9 −103.7 557.7 1,102.4 2,559.0 2,758.4 3,489.9 −         Feb.
1,475.2 1,300.7 − 58.1 1,417.1 1,112.4 557.3 − 84.2 567.6 1,094.1 2,540.6 2,744.2 3,506.4 −         Mar.
1,502.5 1,317.1 − 61.0 1,441.5 1,168.1 559.4 − 93.3 575.5 1,115.9 2,543.4 2,747.8 3,534.6 −         Apr.
1,510.5 1,332.6 − 59.5 1,451.0 1,178.1 561.8 − 67.1 583.1 1,096.8 2,528.1 2,735.6 3,550.9 −         May
1,504.8 1,323.4 − 54.7 1,450.1 1,100.9 568.4 −131.1 593.3 1,095.6 2,508.2 2,722.2 3,560.5 −         June
1,524.8 1,332.6 − 55.4 1,469.3 1,112.0 569.2 − 97.3 601.8 1,086.9 2,489.7 2,707.4 3,585.4 −         July
1,541.5 1,338.3 − 61.4 1,480.1 1,151.8 570.4 − 91.3 600.8 1,069.9 2,475.8 2,699.8 3,604.4 −         Aug.
1,540.0 1,333.5 − 58.7 1,481.3 1,168.6 584.1 −138.1 639.7 1,065.8 2,470.1 2,685.2 3,621.5 −         Sep.
1,549.6 1,335.7 − 59.4 1,490.2 1,221.1 586.0 −132.0 644.3 1,072.1 2,468.7 2,693.0 3,635.7 −         Oct.
1,530.3 1,323.0 − 61.8 1,468.4 1,228.7 587.6 −107.0 659.0 1,114.8 2,512.1 2,730.1 3,614.0 −         Nov.
1,512.5 1,317.7 − 62.9 1,449.6 1,186.1 592.2 −142.9 654.2 1,122.3 2,559.4 2,777.4 3,603.4 −         Dec.
1,535.4 1,337.4 − 67.7 1,467.7 1,237.9 592.1 −127.5 643.0 1,091.9 2,524.7 2,741.3 3,620.0 −2001          Jan.
1,557.1 1,355.9 − 76.7 1,480.4 1,266.3 596.1 −123.5 648.6 1,111.5 2,545.0 2,770.4 3,635.3 −         Feb.
1,558.7 1,353.7 − 76.0 1,482.7 1,422.4 605.2 −178.9 662.3 1,109.6 2,549.0 2,777.2 3,649.4 −         Mar.
11In Germany, bank debt securities with maturities of up to one year count of up to 2 years and at agreed notice of up to 3 months (excluding central
as money market paper. —12Excluding liabilities arising from securities governments ’deposits)and (for EMU) central governments ’monetary
issued. —13The German contributions to the Eurosystem ’s monetary liabilities which such maturities. —16M2 plus repo transactions, money
aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national monetary market fund certificates, money market paper and debt securities up to 2
aggregates, and are therefore not comparable to the erstwhile German years. —17Deposits with agreed maturities of over 2 years and at agreed
money stocks M1, M2 or M3. —14Currency in circulation, overnight notice of over 3 months, debt securities with maturities of over 2 years,
deposits (excluding central governments ’deposits), and (for EMU) central capital and reserves. —18Non-existent in Germany. —XFrom January
governments ’monetary liabilities, which are not included in the 2001: Enlargement of the euro area. 
consolidated balance sheet. —15M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities
13*II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
II. Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  European  monetary  union
  
 3. Banking system ’s liquidity position  *)
Stocks
  
Euro billions; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions ‘
current
Net assets Longer- Other Other accounts
Maintenance in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including
period and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Baseending in  
1) currency operations operations facility facility circulation deposits (net)  4) reserves)  5) money  6) operations  3) operations  3)
Eurosystem  2)
  
1999          Feb. 328.2 104.6 34.2 3.8 30.2 1.3 0.2 329.3 41.0 28.9 100.3 430.9
         Mar. 323.6 136.4 45.0 0.4 − 1.4 − 326.9 49.8 25.0 102.2 430.5
         Apr. 338.4 130.1 45.0 0.7 − 0.3 − 331.0 42.9 39.0 101.1 432.3
         May 342.5 121.6 45.0 0.8 − 0.4 − 333.9 36.3 38.0 101.2 435.5
         June 339.8 132.0 45.0 0.4 − 0.6 − 337.0 40.4 37.2 101.9 439.6
         July 342.4 143.1 45.0 0.4 − 0.5 − 342.1 45.7 39.5 102.9 445.6
         Aug. 343.2 150.1 45.0 0.5 − 1.0 − 344.8 47.3 42.1 103.6 449.4
         Sep. 343.5 150.4 45.0 0.2 − 0.7 − 342.1 51.4 41.6 103.2 446.0
         Oct. 349.7 143.0 45.0 0.3 − 0.6 − 342.5 45.4 45.9 103.5 446.7
         Nov. 351.8 140.5 53.7 0.3 − 0.4 − 343.1 51.5 47.3 104.2 447.6
         Dec. 351.7 150.4 65.0 0.3 − 1.0 − 354.3 59.0 47.5 105.6 460.8
2000          Jan. 362.3 138.5 75.0 1.9 − 0.5 3.3 363.0 41.0 61.2 108.7 472.3
         Feb. 367.8 130.9 70.5 0.1 − 0.2 − 347.6 49.2 64.2 108.1 455.9
         Mar. 369.2 136.1 66.2 0.2 − 0.3 − 347.6 51.7 63.5 108.6 456.4
         Apr. 377.1 136.7 61.0 0.2 − 0.9 − 349.7 45.6 69.1 109.7 460.3
         May 378.8 142.6 60.0 0.4 − 2.3 − 353.8 41.9 71.8 112.0 468.2
         June 378.1 140.9 59.9 0.3 0.2 0.8 − 354.1 38.3 72.1 114.2 469.1
         July 380.8 157.9 59.9 0.4 − 0.5 − 357.0 50.4 76.8 114.2 471.7
         Aug. 382.0 163.1 55.4 0.1 − 0.3 − 359.2 48.8 80.0 112.4 471.9
         Sep. 381.6 173.1 51.1 0.3 − 0.2 − 354.8 56.6 81.2 113.3 468.3
         Oct. 396.3 176.5 45.7 0.5 − 0.2 − 354.5 47.4 102.5 114.4 469.1
         Nov. 398.6 183.7 45.0 0.2 − 0.2 − 352.7 49.8 109.2 115.7 468.6
         Dec. 394.4 210.4 45.0 0.4 − 0.2 − 360.4 61.1 111.1 117.4 478.0
2001          Jan.  7) 383.7 205.3 45.0 0.5 − 0.6 − 368.3 52.2 94.2 119.1 488.0
         Feb. 377.9 188.9 49.8 2.6 − 0.4 − 354.8 57.0 86.3 120.7 476.0
         Mar. 375.6 185.2 54.1 0.4 − 0.5 − 353.0 53.0 87.7 121.0 474.5
         Apr. 382.1 172.4 58.4 2.2 − 0.5 − 354.6 49.5 89.1 121.4 476.4
Deutsche Bundesbank
1999          Feb. 80.5 55.0 18.2 2.0 19.4 0.9 − 127.2 0.2 16.4 30.5 158.5
         Mar. 79.1 64.2 26.1 0.3 − 0.6 − 126.7 0.1 11.4 30.9 158.2
         Apr. 83.0 67.7 27.7 0.5 − 0.2 − 128.1 0.1 19.9 30.6 158.9
         May 84.6 60.0 25.5 0.6 − 0.2 − 128.9 0.1 10.9 30.5 159.7
         June 84.7 67.5 25.0 0.3 − 0.4 − 129.4 0.1 16.9 30.8 160.6
         July 85.1 70.3 26.5 0.3 − 0.2 − 129.9 0.1 20.6 31.3 161.4
         Aug. 85.3 71.7 29.2 0.3 − 0.2 − 130.4 0.1 24.4 31.4 162.0
         Sep. 85.6 68.5 28.3 0.1 − 0.3 − 130.3 0.1 20.5 31.2 161.8
         Oct. 87.3 66.6 25.6 0.2 − 0.2 − 130.2 0.1 17.8 31.4 161.8
         Nov. 87.8 68.7 28.6 0.2 − 0.2 − 130.5 0.1 22.8 31.7 162.3
         Dec. 88.0 57.5 34.7 0.2 − 0.6 − 134.4 0.1 13.1 32.1 167.1
2000          Jan. 90.6 49.0 32.7 1.4 − 0.3 0.5 136.6 0.1 3.0 33.3 170.2
         Feb. 91.5 65.4 33.5 0.1 − 0.2 − 132.0 0.1 24.5 33.7 165.8
         Mar. 91.9 61.8 34.4 0.1 − 0.2 − 131.6 0.1 22.7 33.6 165.4
         Apr. 93.7 62.0 43.2 0.2 − 0.6 − 131.8 0.1 32.7 34.0 166.4
         May 93.7 60.1 39.5 0.3 − 1.8 − 132.3 0.1 24.8 34.5 168.6
         June 93.3 59.6 35.4 0.2 0.1 0.3 − 132.0 0.1 21.2 35.1 167.3
         July 93.4 67.9 33.3 0.2 − 0.4 − 131.8 0.1 27.6 35.1 167.2
         Aug. 93.0 71.6 34.9 0.1 − 0.1 − 131.9 0.1 33.1 34.5 166.5
         Sep. 92.6 81.9 33.8 0.3 − 0.1 − 131.4 0.1 42.6 34.4 165.9
         Oct. 97.0 87.2 30.7 0.3 − 0.1 − 131.1 0.1 49.5 34.5 165.7
         Nov. 98.2 99.1 30.7 0.2 − 0.1 − 130.1 0.1 63.0 34.9 165.1
         Dec. 97.6 103.5 31.1 0.2 − 0.1 − 132.0 0.1 65.0 35.2 167.4
2001          Jan. 93.0 103.1 28.4 0.3 − 0.3 − 131.2 0.1 57.7 35.6 167.1
         Feb. 90.3 93.2 28.3 1.3 − 0.2 − 126.7 0.1 50.0 36.2 163.1
         Mar. 89.1 87.6 33.2 0.2 − 0.4 − 126.2 0.1 47.6 35.9 162.4
         Apr. 90.1 84.5 37.4 1.5 − 0.2 − 126.2 0.1 50.7 36.4 162.8
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. —*The banking system ’s liquidity minimum reserve system starts on the 24th of each month and ends on the
position is defined as the current account holdings in euro of credit in- 23rd of the following month (the first reserve maintenance period lasted
stitutions in the euro area with the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from from January 1, 1999 to February 23, 1999). —2Source: ECB. —3Includes
the consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the statement monetary policy operations initiated by national central banks in Stage Tw o
of the Bundesbank. —1The reserve maintenance period of the ESCB and outstanding at the start of Stage Three (excluding outright operations
14*II. Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  European  monetary  union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
II. Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  European  monetary  union
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions ‘
current
Net assets Longer- Other Other accounts
in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Maintenanceand foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base periodcurrency operations operations facility facility circulation deposits (net)  
4) reserves)  5) money  6) ending in  1) operations  3) operations  3)
Eurosystem  2)
  
. . . . . . . . . . . . 1999          Feb.
− 4.6 + 31.8 + 10.8 −3.4 − 30.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 2.4 + 8.8 −3.9 + 1.9 − 0.4          Mar.
+ 14.8 − 6.3 − 0.0 + 0.3 −− 1.1 − + 4.1 − 6.9 + 14.0 − 1.1 + 1.8          Apr.
+ 4.1 − 8.5 − 0.0 + 0.1 − + 0.1 − + 2.9 − 6.6 −1.0 + 0.1 + 3.2          May
− 2.7 + 10.4 + 0.0 −0.4 − + 0.2 − + 3.1 + 4.1 −0.8 + 0.7 + 4.1          June
+ 2.6 + 11.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 −− 0.1 − + 5.1 + 5.3 + 2.3 + 1.0 + 6.0          July
+ 0.8 + 7.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 − + 0.5 − + 2.7 + 1.6 + 2.6 + 0.7 + 3.8          Aug.
+ 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.0 −0.3 −− 0.3 −− 2.7 + 4.1 −0.5 − 0.4 − 3.4          Sep.
+ 6.2 − 7.4
+ 0.0 + 0.1 −− 0.1 − + 0.4 − 6.0 + 4.3 + 0.3 + 0.7          Oct.
+ 2.1 − 2.5 + 8.7 + 0.0 −− 0.2 − + 0.6 + 6.1 + 1.4 + 0.7 + 0.9          Nov.
− 0.1 + 9.9 + 11.3 −0.0 − + 0.6 − + 11.2 + 7.5 + 0.2 + 1.4 + 13.2          Dec.
+ 10.6 −11.9 + 10.0 + 1.6 −− 0.5 + 3.3 + 8.7 −18.0 + 13.7 + 3.1 + 11.5 2000          Jan.
+ 5.5 − 7.6 − 4.5 −1.8 −− 0.3 − 3.3 −15.4 + 8.2 + 3.0 − 0.6 − 16.4          Feb.
+ 1.4 + 5.2 − 4.3 + 0.1 − + 0.1 − + 0.0 + 2.5 −0.7 + 0.5 + 0.5          Mar.
+ 7.9 + 0.6 − 5.2 + 0.0 − + 0.6 − + 2.1 − 6.1 + 5.6 + 1.1 + 3.9          Apr.
+ 1.7 + 5.9 − 1.0 + 0.2 − + 1.4 − + 4.1 − 3.7 + 2.7 + 2.3 + 7.9          May
− 0.7 − 1.7 − 0.1 −0.1 + 0.2 −1.5 − + 0.3 − 3.6 + 0.3 + 2.2 + 0.9          June
+ 2.7 + 17.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.2 −0.3 − + 2.9 + 12.1 + 4.7 − 0.0 + 2.6          July
+ 1.2 + 5.2 − 4.5 −0.3 −− 0.2 − + 2.2 − 1.6 + 3.2 − 1.8 + 0.2          Aug.
− 0.4 + 10.0 − 4.3 + 0.2 −− 0.1 −− 4.4 + 7.8 + 1.2 + 0.9 − 3.6          Sep.
+ 14.7 + 3.4 − 5.4 + 0.2 − + 0.0 −− 0.3 − 9.2 + 21.3 + 1.1 + 0.8          Oct.
+ 2.3 + 7.2 − 0.7 −0.3 − + 0.0 −− 1.8 + 2.4 + 6.7 + 1.3 − 0.5          Nov.
− 4.2 + 26.7 − 0.0 + 0.2 − + 0.0 − + 7.7 + 11.3 + 1.9 + 1.7 + 9.4          Dec.
−10.7 − 5.1
+ 0.0 + 0.1 − + 0.4 − + 7.9 − 8.9 −16.9 + 1.7 + 10.0 2001          Jan.  7)
− 5.8 −16.4 + 4.8 + 2.1 −− 0.2 −− 13.5 + 4.8 −7.9 + 1.6 − 12.0          Feb.
− 2.3 − 3.7 + 4.3 −2.2 − + 0.1 −− 1.8 − 4.0 + 1.4 + 0.3 − 1.5          Mar.
+ 6.5 −12.8 + 4.3 + 1.8 −− 0.0 − + 1.6 − 3.5 + 1.4 + 0.4 + 1.9          Apr.
Deutsche Bundesbank
... . . . − . . . . . 1999          Feb.
− 1.4 + 9.2 + 7.9 −1.7 − 19.4 −0.3 −− 0.5 − 0.0 −5.0 + 0.4 − 0.4          Mar.
+ 3.9 + 3.4 + 1.6 + 0.2 −− 0.4 − + 1.4 + 0.0 + 8.5 − 0.3 + 0.7          Apr.
+ 1.5 − 7.7 − 2.2 + 0.1 −− 0.0 − + 0.8 − 0.0 −9.0 − 0.0 + 0.8          May
+ 0.2 + 7.5 − 0.5 −0.4 − + 0.2 − + 0.5 − 0.0 + 6.0 + 0.3 + 0.9          June
+ 0.4 + 2.7 + 1.5 −0.0 −− 0.1 − + 0.5 + 0.0 + 3.7 + 0.5 + 0.9          July
+ 0.2 + 1.4 + 2.7 + 0.1 − + 0.0 − + 0.5 − 0.0 + 3.8 + 0.2 + 0.6          Aug.
+ 0.3 − 3.2 − 0.9 −0.2 − + 0.1 −− 0.1 + 0.0 −3.8 − 0.3 − 0.3          Sep.
+ 1.7 − 1.8 − 2.7 + 0.1 −− 0.1 −− 0.1 − 0.0 −2.8 + 0.2 + 0.0          Oct.
+ 0.6 + 2.1 + 3.0 −0.1 −− 0.0 − + 0.3 + 0.0 + 5.0 + 0.3 + 0.5          Nov.
+ 0.2 −11.2 + 6.1 + 0.0 − + 0.4 − + 3.9
+ 0.0 −9.7 + 0.5 + 4.8          Dec.
+ 2.6 − 8.5 − 2.0 + 1.2 −− 0.3 + 0.5 + 2.2 − 0.0 −10.1 + 1.2 + 3.1 2000          Jan.
+ 0.9 + 16.4 + 0.8 −1.4 −− 0.1 − 0.5 − 4.6 − 0.0 + 21.5 + 0.3 − 4.4          Feb.
+ 0.4 − 3.6 + 0.9 + 0.1 −− 0.0 −− 0.3 + 0.0 −1.8 − 0.1 − 0.4          Mar.
+ 1.8 + 0.3 + 8.8 + 0.0 − + 0.4 − + 0.2 − 0.0 + 9.9 + 0.4 + 1.0          Apr.
− 0.0 − 1.9 − 3.7 + 0.1 − + 1.2 − + 0.5 + 0.0 −7.8 + 0.5 + 2.2          May
− 0.4 − 0.5 − 4.1 −0.0 + 0.1 −1.5 −− 0.3 + 0.0 −3.6 + 0.5 − 1.3          June
+ 0.2 + 8.3 − 2.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 −− 0.1 − 0.0 + 6.4 − 0.0 − 0.1          July
− 0.4 + 3.7 + 1.6 −0.2 −− 0.3 − + 0.1 − 0.0 + 5.6 − 0.6 − 0.8          Aug.
− 0.5 + 10.3 − 1.1 + 0.2 −− 0.0 −− 0.5 + 0.0 + 9.5 − 0.1 − 0.6          Sep.
+ 4.5 + 5.3 − 3.1 + 0.0 − + 0.0 −− 0.3 + 0.0 + 6.9 + 0.1 − 0.2          Oct.
+ 1.2 + 11.8 − 0.0 −0.2 −
+ 0.0 −− 1.0 + 0.0 + 13.4 + 0.4 − 0.6          Nov.
− 0.6 + 4.5 + 0.5 + 0.1 − + 0.0 − + 1.9 + 0.0 + 2.1 + 0.4 + 2.3          Dec.
− 4.6 − 0.5 − 2.7 + 0.1 − + 0.2 −− 0.8 − 0.0 −7.4 + 0.3 − 0.2 2001          Jan.
− 2.7 − 9.8 − 0.1 + 1.0 −− 0.1 −− 4.6 − 0.0 −7.7 + 0.6 − 4.0          Feb.
− 1.2 − 5.6 + 4.8 −1.2 − + 0.1 −− 0.5 − 0.0 −2.4 − 0.4 − 0.7          Mar.
+ 1.0 − 3.1 + 4.3 + 1.3 −− 0.2 −− 0.0 + 0.0 + 3.1 + 0.5 + 0.4          Apr.
and the issuance of debt certificates); for the Bundesbank: including banks ’ as the sum of the "deposit facility", "banknotes in circulation" and "credit
recourse to rediscount quotas. —4Remaining items in the consolidated institutions ’current account holdings" or, alternatively, as the difference
financial statement of the Eurosystem and the statement of the between the sum of liquidity-providing factors and the sum of governmentBundesbank. —5Equal to the difference between the sum of liquidity- deposits and other factors (net). —7Entry of Greece into the euro area on
providing factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors. —6Calculated January 1, 2001. 
15*II. Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  European  monetary  union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1. Assets *
 
 
Euro billion
Claims on non-euro area Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, securityinvestments, euro area Balances Claimsexternal loans residents with banks, arising from
On Gold and other denominated security the creditreporting Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility underdate assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans  
2 ERM II
 Eurosystem 1
 
1999          Oct. 742.6 115.0 240.2 28.0 212.1 13.7 5.7 5.7 −
         Nov. 743.1 115.0 239.6 27.8 211.7 12.8 5.3 5.3 −
         Dec. 3 803.2 3 116.5 3 254.9 3 29.8 3 225.0 3 14.4 4.8 4.8 −
2000          Jan. 772.7 116.3 256.3 29.5 226.8 14.8 4.8 4.8 −
         Feb. 752.2 115.9 255.6 29.2 226.4 15.5 4.7 4.7 −
         Mar. 3 774.4 115.7 3 267.1 3 30.3 3 236.9 3 16.9 4.1 4.1 −
         Apr. 783.0 115.7 267.4 27.4 240.0 17.3 4.8 4.8 −
         May 779.2 115.7 267.5 26.9 240.6 17.6 5.0 5.0 −
         June 3 812.5 3 121.2 263.9 26.5 237.4 18.3 4.1 4.1 −
         July 800.7 120.9 264.1 26.2 237.9 16.7 3.8 3.8 −
         Aug. 797.0 120.9 263.7 26.3 237.4 15.3 4.2 4.2 −
         Sep. 3 826.3 3 124.9 3 281.7 3 27.5 3 254.2 3 16.6 4.0 4.0 −
         Oct. 822.1 124.9 282.4 27.2 255.2 14.2 3.7 3.7 −
         Nov. 833.1 124.9 272.0 26.9 245.1 16.3 4.0 4.0 −
         Dec. 3 835.1 3 117.1 3 258.7 26.7 3 232.0 15.8 3.7 3.7 −
2001          Jan. 5 853.5 118.6 266.5 27.9 238.6 19.6 4.5 4.5 −
2001 Feb.                 2 835.2 118.6 264.1 27.9 236.2 20.8 4.9 4.9 −
                                9 829.7 118.6 263.9 27.3 236.7 19.5 5.1 5.1 −
                              16 811.6 118.6 263.8 27.4 236.4 19.8 5.4 5.4 −
                              23 871.6 118.6 263.7 27.2 236.5 20.3 5.5 5.5 −
         Mar.                 2 831.5 118.6 261.0 27.2 233.8 21.5 5.6 5.6 −
                                9 818.2 118.6 260.4 27.1 233.3 21.2 5.8 5.8 −
                              16 840.1 118.6 257.4 27.1 230.3 21.2 5.8 5.8 −
                              23 832.8 118.6 256.1 26.9 229.2 23.2 5.8 5.8 −
                              30 3 848.0 118.5 3 271.6 3 27.5 3 244.1 3 20.1 5.4 5.4 −
         Apr.                 6 829.1 118.5 269.1 27.5 241.6 22.0 5.3 5.3 −
                              13 814.7 118.5 269.1 27.3 241.8 21.8 4.9 4.9 −
                              20 858.8 118.5 268.2 27.3 240.8 21.8 5.1 5.1 −
                              27 839.3 118.5 266.5 27.3 239.2 23.1 5.1 5.1 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
1999          Oct. 235.2 31.8 57.5 8.0 49.5 − 15.3 15.3 −
         Nov. 229.1 31.8 57.8 7.9 49.8 − 3.1 3.1 −
         Dec. 3 242.2 3 32.3 3 60.8 3 8.3 3 52.4 − 9.1 9.1 −
2000          Jan. 235.2 32.3 60.7 8.3 52.4 − 0.8 0.8 −
         Feb. 243.2 32.3 61.1 8.2 52.9 − 6.2 6.2 −
         Mar. 3 242.7 32.2 3 64.6 8.7 3 55.9 − 10.5 10.5 −
         Apr. 239.8 32.2 63.3 7.7 55.6 − 8.3 8.3 −
         May 228.9 32.2 63.1 7.7 55.4 − 11.4 11.4 −
         June 3 242.3 3 33.7 62.3 7.6 54.7 − 4.5 4.5 −
         July 242.2 33.7 61.1 7.4 53.7 − 14.6 14.6 −
         Aug. 269.3 33.7 60.9 7.4 53.4 − 32.6 32.6 −
         Sep. 3 244.8 3 34.9 3 65.9 7.8 3 58.1 − 5.6 5.6 −
         Oct. 263.3 34.9 65.3 7.7 57.6 − 16.5 16.5 −
         Nov. 287.7 34.9 65.0 7.6 57.4 − 29.8 29.8 −
         Dec. 3 256.9 3 32.7 3 61.1 7.8 3 53.4 − 0.3 0.3 −
2001          Jan. 243.5 32.7 59.9 7.9 52.0 − 0.3 0.3 −
2001 Feb.                 2 235.0 32.7 59.6 7.9 51.7 − 0.3 0.3 −
                                9 233.6 32.7 58.9 7.6 51.3 − 0.3 0.3 −
                              16 231.5 32.7 59.2 7.7 51.5 − 0.3 0.3 −
                              23 255.2 32.7 58.7 7.6 51.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Mar.                 2 236.5 32.7 58.4 7.6 50.8 − 0.3 0.3 −
                                9 229.3 32.7 58.2 7.6 50.5 − 0.3 0.3 −
                              16 241.6 32.7 57.9 7.6 50.2 − 0.3 0.3 −
                              23 241.8 32.7 57.5 7.6 49.9 − 0.3 0.3 −
                              30 3 245.3 3 32.7 3 60.5 3 7.8 3 52.7 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Apr.                 6 236.0 32.7 60.2 7.8 52.4 − 0.3 0.3 −
                              13 237.2 32.7 59.8 7.7 52.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
                              20 252.2 32.7 59.6 7.7 51.9 − 0.3 0.3 −
                              27 239.1 32.7 59.4 7.7 51.7 − 0.3 0.3 −
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quarter. —
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the statements of the 1Source: ECB. —2Since November 30, 2000, the Bundesbank ’s claims on
national central banks of the EU member countries (NCBs) of the euro and liabilities to non-Eurosystem NCBs arising from TARGET have beenarea. —The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold and shown as a balance under "Other assets" and "Other liabilities". —
16*III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations
denominated in euro
 Other claims on euro area credit Securities General
Credits institutions of euro area government
Main Longer-term Fine-tuning Structural Marginal related denomi- residents debt    Onrefinancing refinancing reverse reverse lending to margin nated in denominated denominated Other    reporting
Total  
4 operations operations operations operations facility calls euro  4 in euro in euro assets    date
Eurosystem 1
 
205.3 149.0 55.0 −− 0.7 0.1 0.6 23.4 60.2 79.2 1999          Oct.
209.0 143.0 65.0 −− 0.0 0.2 0.7 23.9 60.1 77.3          Nov.
250.1 162.0 75.0 −− 11.4 0.4 1.3 23.5 59.2 3 79.8          Dec.
216.7 146.0 70.0 −− 0.0 0.1 0.6 24.0 59.3 80.6 2000          Jan.
193.3 122.0 70.0 −− 0.0 0.1 1.3 24.6 59.3 83.3          Feb.
201.7 140.9 60.0 −− 0.1 0.1 0.7 25.3 59.0 3 84.5          Mar.
209.9 147.2 60.0 −− 1.6 0.0 1.2 24.9 59.0 83.8          Apr.
205.4 144.1 60.0 −− 0.2 0.0 1.1 25.2 59.0 83.9          May
234.5 173.0 59.9 −− 0.1 0.1 1.4 25.1 59.0 3 86.3          June
226.3 171.0 54.9 −− 0.0 0.0 0.3 25.4 59.0 84.6          July
222.7 167.0 54.9 −− 0.6 0.0 0.1 25.5 59.0 85.7          Aug.
230.3 185.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.1 0.1 25.6 58.9 3 84.3          Sep.
228.5 183.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.5 25.8 58.9 83.7          Oct.
243.3 198.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.3 26.0 58.8 87.8          Nov.
268.6 223.0 45.0 −− 0.6 0.1 0.6 26.0 57.7 87.0          Dec.
255.2 205.0 50.0 −− 0.2 0.0 1.0 28.2 70.3 89.6 2001          Jan. 5 
238.2 188.0 50.0 −− 0.2 0.0 1.1 27.5 70.2 89.8 2001 Feb.                  2
234.2 184.0 50.0 −− 0.2 0.0 0.6 27.5 70.2 90.0                                 9
215.5 165.3 50.0 −− 0.1 0.0 0.5 27.4 70.2 90.5                               16
274.0 220.3 50.0 −− 3.6 0.0 0.9 27.5 70.2 90.9                               23
237.0 182.0 55.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.8 27.6 70.2 89.1          Mar.                  2
225.1 170.0 55.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.8 27.4 70.2 88.7                                 9
249.6 194.0 55.0 −− 0.5 0.0 0.5 27.4 70.2 89.4                               16
241.4 186.0 55.0 −− 0.3 0.1 0.3 27.4 70.2 89.7                               23
244.3 185.0 59.1 −− 0.1 0.1 0.6 27.9 70.2 3 89.5                               30
227.1 168.0 59.1 −− 0.0 0.0 0.4 27.9 70.2 88.6          Apr.                  6
211.3 142.9 59.1 −− 9.2 0.1 0.5 28.3 70.2 90.1                               13
256.3 197.0 59.1 −− 0.1 0.1 0.7 27.7 70.2 90.4                               20
236.2 177.0 59.1 −− 0.1 0.1 0.5 27.8 70.2 91.5                               27
 Deutsche Bundesbank
108.9 79.6 29.1 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 17.4 1999          Oct.
84.1 49.1 35.0 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 47.8          Nov.
90.6 48.4 32.7 −− 9.4 − 0.0 − 4.4 3 45.0          Dec.
102.8 69.2 33.6 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 34.1 2000          Jan.
93.0 59.4 33.6 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 46.1          Feb.
112.5 67.2 45.3 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 3 18.4          Mar.
103.9 64.2 38.9 −− 0.9 − 0.0 − 4.4 27.6          Apr.
99.5 60.4 38.9 −− 0.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.3          May
93.1 59.8 33.2 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 44.2          June
109.9 74.8 35.1 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.5          July
118.7 83.0 35.1 −− 0.6 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.9          Aug.
108.3 78.0 30.3 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 25.7          Sep.
123.1 92.4 30.7 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.2          Oct.
134.3 103.5 30.7 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.3          Nov.
139.2 110.7 27.9 −− 0.6 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.1          Dec.
126.8 98.3 28.3 −− 0.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.4 2001          Jan.
118.8 90.4 28.3 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.2 2001 Feb.                  2
118.1 89.8 28.3 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.2                                 9
115.9 87.4 28.3 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.1                               16
140.0 109.9 28.3 −− 1.8 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.1                               23
121.4 87.2 34.2 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.3          Mar.                  2
108.4 74.2 34.2 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 25.3                                 9
127.1 92.9 34.2 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.2                               16
127.9 93.4 34.2 −− 0.3 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.0                               23
119.3 81.2 38.0 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 28.0                               30
120.2 82.1 38.0 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.2          Apr.                  6
121.7 76.3 38.0 −− 7.3 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.3                               13
136.8 98.7 38.0 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.3                               20
124.0 86.3 37.7 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.2                               27
 
3Changes are due mainly to revaluations at the end of the quarter. — credit institutions denominated in euro" have been shown as a separate
4Until December 22, 2000, "Other claims" were included in "Lending to item. —5Enlargement of the euro area on January 1, 2001 through the
euro area counterparties related to monetary policy operations accession of Greece. denominated in euro". Since December 29, 2000 "Other claims on euro area
17*III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2. Liabilities *
 
 
Euro billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilitiesaccounts to euro(covering Fine- area creditthe tuning Deposits institutions Debt
On Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
reporting Total in cir- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Otherdate liabilities culation Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment liabilities
 Eurosystem 1
 
1999          Oct. 742.6 343.6 109.9 109.4 0.4 −− 0.1 . 8.6 59.5 55.3 4.1
         Nov. 743.1 343.3 106.3 106.1 0.1 −− 0.2 . 7.9 65.7 61.7 4.0
         Dec. 3 803.2 375.0 117.1 114.5 2.6 −− 0.0 . 7.9 60.6 56.5 4.1
2000          Jan. 772.7 348.0 115.7 115.5 0.1 −− 0.0 . 7.9 56.8 52.3 4.5
         Feb. 752.2 345.0 95.5 95.4 0.1 −− 0.0 . 7.9 60.8 57.3 3.5
         Mar. 3 774.4 347.9 111.2 110.1 1.1 −−− . 6.3 52.3 48.7 3.6
         Apr. 783.0 354.3 111.9 101.5 10.4 −− 0.0 . 6.3 53.8 50.3 3.6
         May 779.2 350.9 115.9 115.9 0.0 −− 0.0 . 6.3 47.7 44.0 3.7
         June 3 812.5 355.7 120.4 120.3 0.1 −− 0.0 . 6.3 65.2 61.5 3.7
         July 800.7 358.5 113.5 113.4 0.0 −− 0.0 . 6.3 60.1 56.7 3.4
         Aug. 797.0 353.8 106.5 106.5 0.0 −− 0.0 . 6.3 65.5 61.9 3.5
         Sep. 3 826.3 354.8 115.3 114.9 0.4 −−− . 4.6 58.1 54.3 3.8
         Oct. 822.1 352.1 121.7 121.7 0.1 −−− . 4.6 49.4 45.7 3.7
         Nov. 833.1 350.1 113.7 113.6 0.1 −−− . 3.8 67.4 63.4 4.0
         Dec. 3 835.1 371.4 124.6 124.4 0.2 −−− 0.3 3.8 57.0 53.4 3.7
2001          Jan. 4 853.5 355.6 123.5 123.4 0.0 −− 0.0 8.0 3.8 73.8 68.0 5.7
2001 Feb.                 2 835.2 357.1 119.2 117.4 1.7 −−− 7.9 3.8 60.5 54.7 5.8
                                9 829.7 356.4 120.9 120.8 0.1 −−− 7.4 3.8 53.7 47.9 5.7
                              16 811.6 353.9 93.3 91.6 1.7 −−− 7.4 3.8 64.9 59.2 5.6
                              23 871.6 352.0 144.5 143.7 0.8 −−− 7.5 3.8 74.0 68.0 6.0
         Mar.                 2 831.5 355.1 118.9 118.9 0.0 −−− 7.6 3.8 57.9 51.9 6.0
                                9 818.2 355.0 110.3 110.3 0.0 −−− 7.6 3.8 53.2 47.4 5.7
                              16 840.1 352.9 127.3 126.7 0.6 −− 0.0 7.6 3.8 61.0 55.2 5.8
                              23 832.8 350.4 113.4 108.5 4.9 −− 0.0 7.4 3.8 69.5 63.7 5.7
                              30 3 848.0 351.7 126.9 126.7 0.1 −−− 6.1 3.8 60.5 54.6 5.9
         Apr.                 6 829.1 356.1 119.1 119.0 0.1 −−− 6.1 3.8 53.7 48.1 5.6
                              13 814.7 360.9 99.1 99.1 0.0 −−− 6.1 3.8 54.4 48.3 6.1
                              20 858.8 353.7 160.3 159.4 0.1 −− 0.8 6.1 3.8 43.9 38.1 5.8
                              27 839.3 352.7 133.2 133.1 0.0 −− 0.0 6.1 3.8 53.9 48.1 5.8
 Deutsche Bundesbank
1999          Oct. 235.2 130.2 42.1 41.7 0.4 −−− . − 0.7 0.2 0.4
         Nov. 229.1 131.0 31.1 31.1 0.1 −−− . − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Dec. 3 242.2 140.2 41.9 39.8 2.1 −−− . − 0.5 0.1 0.4
2000          Jan. 235.2 131.8 30.1 30.0 0.1 −−− . − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Feb. 243.2 130.9 29.1 29.0 0.1 −−− . − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Mar. 3 242.7 131.2 39.0 38.0 1.0 −−− . − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Apr. 239.8 132.5 42.2 31.8 10.4 −−− . − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         May 228.9 130.9 34.1 34.1 0.0 −−− . − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         June 3 242.3 131.5 45.2 45.2 0.0 −−− . − 0.6 0.1 0.6
         July 242.2 131.4 35.8 35.8 0.0 −−− . − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Aug. 269.3 130.9 34.3 34.3 0.0 −−− . − 0.4 0.1 0.4
         Sep. 3 244.8 131.3 37.2 37.1 0.1 −−− . − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Oct. 263.3 130.1 32.2 32.2 0.0 −−− . − 0.4 0.1 0.4
         Nov. 287.7 129.3 31.0 30.9 0.1 −−− . − 0.4 0.1 0.3
         Dec. 3 256.9 133.9 47.0 46.9 0.1 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
2001          Jan. 243.5 126.8 33.1 33.1 0.0 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
2001 Feb.                 2 235.0 127.4 37.3 35.6 1.6 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
                                9 233.6 127.3 34.5 34.3 0.1 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
                              16 231.5 126.5 30.6 30.3 0.3 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
                              23 255.2 126.2 46.1 45.8 0.3 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Mar.                 2 236.5 126.8 32.5 32.5 0.0 −−− − − 0.8 0.1 0.7
                                9 229.3 127.0 31.3 31.2 0.0 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
                              16 241.6 126.1 35.3 34.7 0.6 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
                              23 241.8 125.2 33.2 31.8 1.5 −−− − − 0.4 0.1 0.4
                              30 3 245.3 125.3 45.1 45.0 0.1 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Apr.                 6 236.0 126.8 33.2 33.2 0.1 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
                              13 237.2 128.1 26.8 26.7 0.0 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.5
                              20 252.2 125.7 52.7 52.6 0.1 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
                              27 239.1 125.0 40.8 40.8 0.0 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the area. —The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold and
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the statements of the financial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quarter. —
national central banks of the EU member countries (NCBs) of the euro 1Source: ECB. —2Whereas the consolidated financial statement of the
18*III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated inforeign currency
 
Liabilities  
Liabilities to euro area Liabilities Counterpart  to non-euro residents Deposits, arising of special  area residents denominated balances from the drawing  Capital    Ondenominated in foreign and other credit facility rights allocated Other Revaluation and    reportingin euro  
2 currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF liabilities accounts reserves    date
Eurosystem 1
 
7.1 1.3 9.8 9.8 − 6.2 53.5 89.8 53.2 1999          Oct.
7.3 1.0 8.7 8.7 − 6.2 53.6 89.8 53.2          Nov.
7.8 0.9 3 11.9 3 11.9 − 6.5 3 54.7 3 107.3 53.4          Dec.
7.0 1.2 13.3 13.3 − 6.5 55.6 107.5 53.4 2000          Jan.
7.8 0.8 10.5 10.5 − 6.5 55.7 107.4 54.2          Feb.
7.0 0.9 9.9 9.9 − 6.8 3 59.9 3 118.0 54.3          Mar.
7.7 0.8 13.5 13.5 − 6.8 55.3 118.0 54.6          Apr.
7.3 0.8 14.7 14.7 − 6.8 55.9 118.0 55.0          May
7.3 0.8 13.3 13.3 − 6.7 3 60.7 3 120.9 55.1          June
7.3 0.8 11.8 11.8 − 6.7 59.7 120.9 55.1          July
8.1 0.8 10.7 10.7 − 6.7 62.5 120.9 55.1          Aug.
9.2 0.9 3 11.7 3 11.7 − 7.1 3 65.4 3 144.2 55.1          Sep.
9.3 0.9 11.8 11.8 − 7.1 65.9 144.2 55.1          Oct.
11.4 0.9 10.3 10.3 − 7.1 69.1 144.2 55.2          Nov.
10.8 0.8 12.4 12.4 − 6.7 73.5 3 117.7 56.1          Dec.
11.1 5.1 13.0 13.0 − 7.2 78.9 119.3 54.4 2001          Jan. 4 
11.5 5.1 11.9 11.9 − 7.2 77.4 119.3 54.4 2001 Feb.                  2
10.7 5.0 13.4 13.4 − 7.2 77.6 119.3 54.4                                 9
10.0 5.0 13.4 13.4 − 7.2 78.2 119.3 55.4                               16
10.2 5.0 14.5 14.5 − 7.2 78.4 119.3 55.4                               23
9.8 5.0 13.1 13.1 − 7.2 78.4 119.3 55.4          Mar.                  2
9.8 4.9 12.5 12.5 − 7.2 79.1 119.3 55.4                                 9
10.7 4.9 9.9 9.9 − 7.2 79.3 119.3 56.4                               16
10.0 4.8 11.1 11.1 − 7.2 79.7 119.3 56.4                               23
8.5 3.8 13.0 13.0 − 7.0 3 82.5 3 126.3 3 58.0                               30
8.3 3.8 12.8 12.8 − 7.0 73.3 126.3 58.9          Apr.                  6
8.4 3.8 13.3 13.3 − 7.0 72.7 126.3 58.9                               13
8.5 3.8 12.9 12.9 − 7.0 73.7 126.3 58.9                               20
8.4 3.8 12.4 12.4 − 7.0 72.6 126.3 59.2                               27
 Deutsche Bundesbank
6.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.6 18.0 31.4 5.1 1999          Oct.
18.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.6 10.4 31.4 5.1          Nov.
6.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 3 11.7 3 35.0 5.1          Dec.
18.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 12.3 35.0 5.1 2000          Jan.
28.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 12.8 35.0 5.1          Feb.
13.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 13.6 3 38.0 5.1          Mar.
10.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 9.3 38.0 5.1          Apr.
6.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 11.7 38.0 5.1          May
8.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 3 11.1 3 39.0 5.1          June
6.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 22.0 39.0 5.1          July
7.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 50.9 39.0 5.1          Aug.
10.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.8 3 13.5 3 45.2 5.1          Sep.
7.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.8 40.7 45.2 5.1          Oct.
8.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.8 66.1 45.2 5.1          Nov.
6.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 22.9 3 39.2 5.1          Dec.
6.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 30.4 39.2 5.1 2001          Jan.
6.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 17.1 39.2 5.1 2001 Feb.                  2
6.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 18.6 39.2 5.1                                 9
6.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 21.2 39.2 5.1                               16
6.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 29.5 39.2 5.1                               23
6.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 23.8 39.2 5.1          Mar.                  2
6.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 17.9 39.2 5.1                                 9
6.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 26.8 39.2 5.1                               16
6.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 30.1 39.2 5.1                               23
6.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 19.2 3 41.4 5.1                               30
6.7 0.0 −−− 1.7 20.5 41.4 5.1          Apr.                  6
6.7 0.0 −−− 1.7 26.8 41.4 5.1                               13
6.7 0.0 −−− 1.7 18.2 41.4 5.1                               20
6.8 0.0 −−− 1.7 17.8 41.4 5.1                               27
 
Eurosystem shows the bilateral TARGET balances of the individual non-Eurosystem NCBs. —3Changes are due mainly to revaluations at the
non-Eurosystem NCBs as an aggregated (net) figure, the Bundesbank state- end of the quarter. —4Enlargement of the euro area on January 1, 2001
ment reports gross figures for the claims on and liabilities to the individual through the accession of Greece. 
19*III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
IV. Banks
 
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
   Assets
 
 Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 euro billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area  3 Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other member countries to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and indi-
viduals
Secur- Secur-
Balance- ities itiessheet Cash Ad- issued Ad- issued Ad-
Period total  
2 in hand Total Total vances  3 by banks Total vances  3 by banks Total Total Total vances  3 
 End of year or month
 
1991 5,751.6 23.9 1,713.9 1,576.9 1,122.9 454.0 137.0 117.2 19.8 3,437.9 3,380.2 2,665.2 2,573.7
1992 6,143.1 27.8 1,779.6 1,638.4 1,168.0 470.4 141.2 116.8 24.3 3,727.7 3,665.2 2,898.1 2,775.01993 6,799.5 27.8 1,940.4 1,757.5 1,212.6 544.9 182.9 151.9 31.0 4,085.0 4,005.8 3,156.8 2,980.31994 7,205.7 26.2 2,030.1 1,854.1 1,285.1 569.1 175.9 145.0 30.9 4,411.4 4,333.2 3,391.3 3,143.2
1995 7,778.7 27.3 2,210.2 2,019.0 1,399.8 619.3 191.2 158.0 33.2 4,723.3 4,635.0 3,548.8 3,298.7
1996 8,540.5 30.3 2,523.0 2,301.1 1,585.7 715.4 221.9 181.2 40.7 5,084.7 4,981.9 3,812.8 3,543.01997 9,368.2 30.7 2,836.0 2,580.7 1,758.6 822.1 255.3 208.8 46.5 5,408.8 5,269.5 4,041.3 3,740.81998 10,355.5 29.9 3,267.4 2,939.4 1,977.4 962.0 328.1 264.9 63.1 5,833.9 5,615.9 4,361.0 3,966.51999 5,678.5 17.2 1,836.9 1,635.0 1,081.4 553.6 201.9 161.8 40.1 3,127.4 2,958.6 2,326.4 2,093.4
2000 6,083.9 16.1 1,977.4 1,724.2 1,108.9 615.3 253.2 184.5 68.6 3,249.9 3,062.6 2,445.7 2,186.61999          June 5,412.9 13.5 1,735.4 1,536.2 1,001.2 534.9 199.2 167.1 32.1 3,019.9 2,871.9 2,243.1 2,027.3         July 5,437.2 13.1 1,749.2 1,546.1 1,010.1 536.1 203.1 168.9 34.1 3,028.3 2,877.2 2,248.1 2,032.2
         Aug. 5,486.7 13.2 1,782.1 1,576.3 1,035.3 541.0 205.8 170.9 34.9 3,033.5 2,879.8 2,255.0 2,038.3         Sep. 5,541.7 13.3 1,818.2 1,605.2 1,056.8 548.4 213.0 175.9 37.1 3,057.5 2,900.4 2,271.4 2,052.1
         Oct. 5,612.0 13.5 1,840.1 1,624.7 1,070.0 554.7 215.3 176.7 38.6 3,085.4 2,922.3 2,280.6 2,060.3
         Nov. 5,697.7 13.2 1,868.8 1,645.3 1,086.2 559.1 223.5 184.2 39.3 3,110.0 2,944.7 2,298.3 2,073.7         Dec. 5,678.5 17.2 1,836.9 1,635.0 1,081.4 553.6 201.9 161.8 40.1 3,127.4 2,958.6 2,326.4 2,093.4
2000          Jan. 5,706.5 13.5 1,836.5 1,624.2 1,065.9 558.3 212.2 171.2 41.0 3,147.9 2,975.0 2,333.3 2,098.5
         Feb. 5,725.8 13.5 1,823.6 1,611.1 1,047.1 564.0 212.5 169.2 43.3 3,162.8 2,986.2 2,345.6 2,106.7         Mar. 5,804.8 13.1 1,856.6 1,639.4 1,060.6 578.8 217.2 171.9 45.3 3,202.3 3,022.9 2,388.6 2,118.1
         Apr. 5,860.7 14.2 1,863.5 1,647.9 1,059.0 588.9 215.6 169.8 45.8 3,219.3 3,038.4 2,403.5 2,128.7
         May 5,910.4 13.9 1,899.3 1,677.6 1,076.0 601.7 221.6 172.4 49.3 3,231.2 3,050.7 2,418.7 2,136.7         June 5,848.3 13.3 1,887.5 1,665.5 1,066.9 598.6 222.0 171.5 50.6 3,197.2 3,016.9 2,391.1 2,143.6
         July 5,861.8 13.4 1,876.6 1,656.9 1,047.5 609.4 219.6 168.1 51.5 3,199.7 3,019.0 2,392.2 2,142.6
         Aug. 5,917.1 13.5 1,900.5 1,667.9 1,055.9 612.0 232.7 178.8 53.9 3,206.9 3,024.2 2,401.9 2,151.7         Sep. 5,945.4 13.6 1,903.9 1,658.9 1,044.9 614.0 244.9 189.2 55.8 3,214.2 3,029.3 2,421.7 2,169.2
         Oct. 6,019.6 14.0 1,927.4 1,684.1 1,068.1 616.0 243.3 185.6 57.7 3,228.2 3,040.6 2,425.9 2,173.9
         Nov. 6,076.1 13.4 1,961.1 1,714.5 1,100.0 614.5 246.5 185.3 61.3 3,242.7 3,055.6 2,436.8 2,181.2         Dec. 6,083.9 16.1 1,977.4 1,724.2 1,108.9 615.3 253.2 184.5 68.6 3,249.9 3,062.6 2,445.7 2,186.6
2001          Jan. 6,064.0 13.4 1,952.1 1,695.0 1,069.7 625.3 257.1 186.6 70.5 3,265.9 3,058.4 2,452.1 2,187.6
         Feb. 6,141.3 13.6 1,985.8 1,728.3 1,097.6 630.8 257.4 187.1 70.3 3,281.4 3,072.2 2,468.1 2,198.0         Mar. 6,259.3 13.1 2,037.0 1,749.6 1,111.2 638.4 287.4 215.0 72.3 3,309.2 3,095.3 2,487.6 2,204.2
 Changes 1
1992 7.5 3.3 −31.5 −29.1 −29.2 0.1 −2.3 − 2.6 0.2 49.9 50.9 46.3 39.5
1993 135.5 2.1 16.2 0.4 −12.9 13.3 15.8 14.7 1.1 71.8 67.1 67.9 54.6
1994 115.6 2.1 31.5 19.3 22.1 −2.8 12.2 12.5 −0.3 45.6 46.8 39.9 15.0
1995 107.8 3.7 41.8 36.5 26.8 9.7 5.3 5.5 −0.2 47.7 46.2 43.0 41.0
1996 111.6 6.7 18.1 7.7 5.6 2.1 10.4 9.8 0.7 58.0 53.1 74.2 73.71997 41.8 6.2 2.0 −3.3 −0.4 −2.9 5.3 6.6 −1.3 20.4 16.9 52.7 50.7
1998 52.7 4.7 −7.4 −18.8 −18.5 −0.2 11.3 11.0 0.3 80.5 65.5 99.1 77.2
1999 −18.3 4.0 −31.2 −9.6 −4.8 −4.8 −21.6 − 22.4 0.8 18.3 14.7 28.3 19.7
2000 29.7 2.7 16.9 10.0 8.9 1.1 6.9 − 0.7 7.6 12.0 10.4 12.2 8.7
1999          July 28.4 −0.4 13.8 10.0 8.8 1.1 3.9 1.8 2.0 7.8 4.3 4.1 4.0
         Aug. 45.8 0.1 32.7 30.1 25.3 4.8 2.6 1.9 0.7 4.4 2.3 6.6 5.8         Sep. 55.6 0.1 36.0 28.8 21.4 7.4 7.2 5.0 2.2 23.9 20.5 16.4 13.7
         Oct. 66.3 0.1 21.8 19.5 13.3 6.3 2.3 0.9 1.4 27.3 21.6 8.9 8.0
         Nov. 77.8 −0.3 28.6 20.6 16.2 4.4 8.0 7.4 0.6 23.1 21.6 16.9 12.7
         Dec. −18.3 4.0 −31.2 −9.6 −4.8 −4.8 −21.6 − 22.4 0.8 18.3 14.7 28.3 19.7
2000          Jan. 23.6 −3.7 1.1 −9.2 −15.5 6.3 10.3 9.4 0.9 17.7 13.9 4.0 2.0
         Feb. 19.2 −0.0 −12.3 −12.6 −18.8 6.2 0.3 − 2.0 2.3 15.0 11.3 12.3 8.2
         Mar. 73.4 −0.4 33.0 28.4 13.5 14.8 4.6 2.8 1.9 38.7 36.6 42.9 11.2
         Apr. 44.9 1.0 6.8 8.5 −1.6 10.1 −1.7 − 2.1 0.4 15.2 14.2 13.7 9.4
         May 55.7 −0.2 35.8 29.7 17.6 12.2 6.1 2.6 3.5 12.9 12.9 15.8 8.6
         June −55.8 −0.6 −11.6 −12.0 −9.1 −2.9 0.5 − 0.9 1.4 −32.2 −32.4 −26.0 7.6
         July 6.6 0.0 −11.0 −8.6 −19.3 10.7 −2.5 − 3.4 0.9 1.4 1.3 0.4 −1.8
         Aug. 49.4 0.1 23.8 10.9 8.3 2.6 12.9 10.7 2.2 8.8 7.6 8.5 7.9         Sep. 26.2 0.1 3.3 −9.0 −11.0 2.0 12.2 10.4 1.8 6.5 4.5 19.2 16.9
         Oct. 63.5 0.3 23.5 25.1 23.2 1.9 −1.6 − 3.6 1.9 12.0 10.0 2.9 3.4
         Nov. 64.5 −0.6 33.8 30.5 31.9 −1.4 3.3 − 0.4 3.7 15.2 15.0 11.0 7.4
         Dec. 29.7 2.7 16.9 10.0 8.9 1.1 6.9 − 0.7 7.6 12.0 10.4 12.2 8.7
2001          Jan. −18.9 −2.6 −26.0 −29.1 −39.2 10.1 3.1 1.3 1.8 2.1 −3.7 6.6 1.1
         Feb. 76.9 0.1 33.8 33.5 27.9 5.6 0.3 0.4 −0.1 15.6 13.9 16.1 10.5
         Mar. 107.0 −0.5 51.3 21.4 13.6 7.7 30.0 28.0 2.0 26.1 22.0 18.3 5.0
*This table serves to supplement the Overall monetary survey of section II; includes −in addition to the figures reported by banks (including building
it is planned to compare the figures for MFIs in the euro area with the data and loan associations) −the data of money market funds. —1Statistical
for Germany. Notwithstanding the other tables in section IV, this table breaks have been eliminated from the flow figures. —2Up to December
20*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
IV. Banks
 
   
 
euro area  3 Claims on
non-euro-area
to non-banks in other member countries residents
 Public Enterprises and Public authorities individuals authorities
of which: of which:
Secur- Ad- Secur- Ad- Ad- Secur- Ad- Otherities Total vances  
3 ities 4 Total Total vances  3 Total vances  3 ities Total vances  3 assets   Period
End of year or month
 
91.5 715.0 582.9 132.1 57.7 35.2 35.2 22.5 6.7 15.8 437.1 399.8 138.7 1991
123.1 767.1 556.3 210.8 62.5 35.1 35.1 27.5 6.7 20.8 446.1 398.5 162.0 1992
176.5 849.0 599.6 249.4 79.1 44.5 44.5 34.6 8.4 26.3 565.2 504.8 181.1 1993248.1 941.9 650.1 291.8 78.2 39.6 39.6 38.6 8.3 30.3 548.8 479.6 189.2 1994
250.0 1,086.3 792.2 294.1 88.2 39.4 39.2 48.8 11.3 37.6 608.5 526.0 209.4 1995
269.7 1,169.1 857.8 311.4 102.8 36.8 36.8 66.0 17.2 48.8 678.1 575.3 224.4 1996300.6 1,228.2 911.0 317.2 139.2 41.9 41.2 97.3 23.4 73.9 839.6 710.2 253.1 1997394.5 1,254.9 939.1 315.8 218.0 62.5 56.0 155.5 35.6 119.9 922.0 758.0 302.2 1998233.0 632.1 488.4 143.7 168.8 65.3 35.9 103.6 20.7 82.8 511.2 404.2 185.8 1999
259.1 616.9 478.5 138.4 187.3 83.8 44.2 103.5 20.0 83.5 622.4 481.7 218.1 2000215.8 628.9 483.8 145.1 148.0 58.4 32.9 89.6 20.2 69.3 474.2 374.3 169.9 1999          June
215.8 629.2 483.0 146.2 151.1 60.0 34.0 91.1 20.0 71.1 484.0 383.4 162.6          July
216.6 624.9 482.3 142.6 153.7 59.8 33.2 93.9 20.0 73.8 490.0 387.4 167.9          Aug.219.3 629.0 482.7 146.3 157.1 58.9 33.2 98.3 20.0 78.3 486.6 382.2 166.1          Sep.
220.3 641.7 493.2 148.5 163.1 60.6 35.3 102.5 20.1 82.4 500.0 396.9 173.0          Oct.
224.5 646.5 496.2 150.3 165.2 62.7 35.9 102.5 20.8 81.7 519.8 415.1 185.8          Nov.233.0 632.1 488.4 143.7 168.8 65.3 35.9 103.6 20.7 82.8 511.2 404.2 185.8          Dec.
234.8 641.7 490.2 151.5 172.9 66.7 37.7 106.2 20.7 85.5 524.0 414.3 184.7 2000          Jan.
238.8 640.6 485.5 155.2 176.6 68.4 37.8 108.2 20.8 87.4 539.9 425.0 186.0          Feb.
270.5 634.3 487.1 147.2 179.4 69.2 38.5 110.2 20.6 89.6 545.8 425.7 187.0          Mar.
274.8 634.9 488.9 146.0 180.9 71.0 38.9 109.9 20.7 89.2 571.5 449.1 192.2          Apr.
281.9 632.0 489.1 142.9 180.5 71.2 38.1 109.3 20.8 88.5 568.9 446.4 197.2          May247.5 625.8 485.4 140.4 180.3 71.9 37.4 108.4 20.6 87.8 556.1 432.0 194.2          June
249.6 626.7 487.9 138.8 180.8 75.1 39.1 105.6 19.7 85.9 569.7 439.2 202.4          July
250.2 622.3 482.4 139.9 182.7 78.0 40.8 104.8 19.9 84.9 587.5 456.6 208.7          Aug.252.5 607.6 473.0 134.6 184.9 78.1 42.3 106.8 20.0 86.7 591.3 456.4 222.4          Sep.
252.0 614.8 477.4 137.4 187.6 79.9 42.5 107.7 20.1 87.6 621.2 482.7 228.9          Oct.
255.6 618.8 477.8 141.0 187.1 82.2 44.4 104.9 20.2 84.7 631.6 490.4 227.4          Nov.259.1 616.9 478.5 138.4 187.3 83.8 44.2 103.5 20.0 83.5 622.4 481.7 218.1          Dec.
264.5 606.3 483.7 122.6 207.5 87.7 46.2 119.8 26.3 93.5 616.5 479.8 216.1 2001          Jan.
270.1 604.1 482.3 121.7 209.2 89.6 46.5 119.6 23.7 95.8 642.0 500.1 218.6          Feb.
283.4 607.7 482.5 125.2 213.9 95.1 49.0 118.8 24.0 94.7 670.8 522.7 229.2          Mar.
Changes 1
6.8 4.5 −9.9 14.5 −1.0 −0.8 −0.8 −0.2 −0.1 −0.1 −9.3 −9.4 −4.8 1992
13.3 −0.8 4.9 −5.7 4.8 3.3 3.3 1.4 0.5 0.9 39.1 36.9 6.3 1993
24.9 6.9 4.1 2.8 −1.3 −1.3 −1.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 29.2 26.5 7.2 1994
1.9 3.2 10.0 −6.7 1.5 0.8 0.8 0.8 1.5 −0.7 4.3 −0.6 10.3 1995
0.6 −21.2 −10.1 −11.1 5.0 1.8 1.9 3.2 1.5 1.7 22.7 20.9 6.0 1996
2.1 −35.8 −19.4 −16.4 3.5 0.9 0.8 2.6 4.3 −1.7 11.2 13.7 1.9 1997
21.8 −33.6 1.9 −35.5 15.1 2.2 1.8 12.8 7.8 5.0 −22.2 −23.7 −2.8 1998
8.6 −13.5 −7.2 −6.3 3.5 2.5 −0.0 1.0 −0.1 1.1 −9.3 −11.7 −0.0 1999
3.6 −1.8 0.8 −2.5 1.5 2.2 0.3 −0.7 0.0 −0.8 7.4 5.2 −9.3 2000
0.1 0.3 −0.8 1.1 3.4 1.8 1.3 1.7 −0.2 1.8 14.5 13.1 −7.3 1999          July
0.8 −4.3 −0.8 −3.5 2.1 −0.4 −1.0 2.5 0.0 2.5 3.3 1.7 5.3          Aug.
2.7 4.1 0.5 3.6 3.4 −0.9 0.1 4.3 −0.0 4.3 −2.7 −4.6 −1.8          Sep.
0.9 12.7 10.5 2.2 5.6 1.6 2.0 4.0 −0.0 4.0 10.2 11.9 6.9          Oct.
4.2 4.7 2.9 1.8 1.5 1.8 0.3 −0.3 0.6 −0.9 13.6 13.1 12.8          Nov.
8.6 −13.5 −7.2 −6.3 3.5 2.5 −0.0 1.0 −0.1 1.1 −9.3 −11.7 −0.0          Dec.
2.0 9.8 1.8 8.1 3.9 1.3 1.7 2.6 −0.1 2.7 9.6 6.9 −1.1 2000          Jan.
4.1 −1.0 −4.8 3.8 3.7 1.7 0.1 2.0 0.1 2.0 15.2 9.9 1.3          Feb.
31.6 −6.3 1.7 −7.9 2.2 0.2 0.6 2.0 −0.3 2.3 1.1 −3.4 1.0          Mar.
4.3 0.5 1.7 −1.2 0.9 1.5 0.1 −0.5 −0.0 −0.5 16.8 15.8 5.2          Apr.
7.2 −2.9 0.2 −3.1 −0.0 0.4 −0.6 −0.4 0.2 −0.6 2.1 1.3 5.2          May
−33.5 −6.4 −4.0 −2.4 0.1 0.7 −0.6 −0.6 −0.2 −0.4 −8.4 −9.6 −3.0          June
2.1 0.9 2.5 −1.6 0.1 2.3 0.8 −2.2 −0.2 −2.0 7.9 2.4 8.3          July
0.6 −0.9 −2.0 1.1 1.2 2.5 1.4 −1.3 0.0 −1.3 10.4 11.3 6.2          Aug.
2.3 −14.7 −9.4 −5.3 1.9 0.0 1.4 1.9 0.1 1.8 2.6 −1.0 13.8          Sep.
−0.5 7.1 4.3 2.8 1.9 1.4 −0.1 0.6 −0.1 0.7 21.3 18.9 6.4          Oct.
3.6 4.0 0.4 3.6 0.2 2.6 2.1 −2.4 0.2 −2.6 17.5 13.8 −1.5          Nov.
3.6 −1.8 0.8 −2.5 1.5 2.2 0.3 −0.7 0.0 −0.8 7.4 5.2 −9.3          Dec.
5.5 −10.4 5.2 −15.6 5.8 1.3 0.7 4.5 2.4 2.1 9.6 4.1 −2.0 2001          Jan.
5.6 −2.2 −1.4 −0.8 1.7 1.9 0.3 −0.2 −2.5 2.3 25.0 19.8 2.4          Feb.
13.3 3.6 0.1 3.5 4.1 5.1 2.1 −1.0 0.2 −1.1 19.4 14.2 10.7          Mar.
1998, volume of business (balance-sheet total plus endorsement liabilities bill-based lending instead of bill holdings. —4Including debt securities
and bills sent for collection from the banks ’portfolios prior to maturity) and arising from the exchange of equalisations claims. 
trust funds. —3Up to December 1998, including loans an a trust basis and
21*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
IV. Banks
 
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
   Liabilities
 
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 euro billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area  4 
in the euro area  3 
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities  5 notice  6 
 
Balance- in the in other of which: of which:
sheet home member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total  2 Total country countries Total Total night Total  4 Total 3 months Total night 2 years  7 
 End of year or month
 
1991 5,751.6 1,365.7 1,282.7 83.0 2,617.5 2,482.5 410.5 1,182.8 511.7 889.3 513.4 49.7 2.4
1992 6,143.1 1,405.6 1,304.2 101.4 2,743.6 2,585.3 444.5 1,228.2 563.5 912.6 522.4 60.6 3.01993 6,799.5 1,556.3 1,438.2 118.1 2,981.8 2,810.6 489.6 1,312.6 628.5 1,008.4 587.7 70.4 3.51994 7,205.7 1,650.9 1,483.5 167.4 3,082.2 2,894.4 510.4 1,288.3 549.2 1,095.8 654.6 79.6 4.1
1995 7,778.7 1,761.5 1,582.0 179.6 3,260.0 3,038.9 549.8 1,289.0 472.0 1,200.1 749.5 110.1 4.5
1996 8,540.5 1,975.3 1,780.2 195.1 3,515.9 3,264.0 638.1 1,318.5 430.6 1,307.4 865.7 137.3 7.51997 9,368.2 2,195.6 1,959.1 236.5 3,647.1 3,376.2 654.5 1,364.9 426.8 1,356.9 929.2 162.5 7.31998 10,355.5 2,480.3 2,148.9 331.4 3,850.8 3,552.1 751.6 1,411.0 461.5 1,389.6 971.9 187.4 9.41999 5,678.5 1,288.1 1,121.8 166.3 2,012.4 1,854.7 419.5 820.6 247.0 614.7 504.4 111.1 6.5
2000 6,083.9 1,379.4 1,188.9 190.5 2,051.4 1,873.6 441.4 858.8 274.3 573.5 450.5 107.9 6.91999          June 5,412.9 1,242.4 1,062.7 179.7 1,956.9 1,796.6 400.8 781.6 226.2 614.2 503.4 113.6 9.5         July 5,437.2 1,265.1 1,087.9 177.3 1,951.7 1,795.6 397.9 786.1 227.7 611.6 502.8 110.0 6.3
         Aug. 5,486.7 1,279.9 1,100.4 179.5 1,955.0 1,798.9 398.6 791.1 229.8 609.1 501.2 109.6 5.7         Sep. 5,541.7 1,293.4 1,102.8 190.5 1,958.6 1,802.5 404.2 790.0 227.1 608.3 499.6 109.9 5.6
         Oct. 5,612.0 1,317.8 1,130.9 186.9 1,966.3 1,808.1 405.2 796.7 232.2 606.2 498.1 111.3 5.3
         Nov. 5,697.7 1,326.1 1,132.2 193.8 1,994.4 1,834.0 428.8 802.1 234.1 603.1 494.9 114.0 8.6         Dec. 5,678.5 1,288.1 1,121.8 166.3 2,012.4 1,854.7 419.5 820.6 247.0 614.7 504.4 111.1 6.5
2000          Jan. 5,706.5 1,311.9 1,124.7 187.2 2,005.4 1,848.8 424.4 814.9 239.0 609.5 500.2 111.2 8.5
         Feb. 5,725.8 1,297.9 1,105.2 192.6 2,011.7 1,855.1 431.2 818.3 240.3 605.6 495.2 110.3 7.2         Mar. 5,804.8 1,327.9 1,135.5 192.4 2,001.9 1,844.2 426.0 818.2 239.4 600.0 488.9 112.0 7.4
         Apr. 5,860.7 1,317.4 1,122.3 195.1 2,004.3 1,844.7 435.2 816.0 236.5 593.5 482.8 113.4 9.0
         May 5,910.4 1,341.9 1,134.2 207.6 1,998.2 1,842.8 428.3 826.9 245.8 587.6 475.7 109.8 6.1         June 5,848.3 1,308.5 1,112.6 196.0 1,996.3 1,833.8 425.5 826.1 243.7 582.3 468.8 110.5 8.1
         July 5,861.8 1,292.0 1,110.3 181.7 1,989.8 1,827.9 422.3 829.0 245.1 576.6 462.2 109.7 7.2
         Aug. 5,917.1 1,318.3 1,130.5 187.7 1,986.8 1,824.5 415.0 836.7 251.8 572.7 456.7 110.7 6.8         Sep. 5,945.4 1,303.6 1,110.2 193.4 2,004.4 1,822.6 412.4 840.2 256.4 570.0 451.8 110.4 6.9
         Oct. 6,019.6 1,339.3 1,151.0 188.4 2,009.0 1,824.0 416.7 841.1 257.3 566.2 447.3 111.1 6.9
         Nov. 6,076.1 1,373.3 1,189.5 183.8 2,019.7 1,846.0 438.1 845.2 262.4 562.7 442.3 110.6 7.5         Dec. 6,083.9 1,379.4 1,188.9 190.5 2,051.4 1,873.6 441.4 858.8 274.3 573.5 450.5 107.9 6.9
2001          Jan. 6,064.0 1,345.5 1,145.1 200.4 2,025.9 1,860.9 429.9 861.6 276.3 569.3 446.3 107.4 8.0
         Feb. 6,141.3 1,377.4 1,159.8 217.5 2,036.3 1,872.7 442.1 863.3 278.2 567.2 444.2 105.6 6.2         Mar. 6,259.3 1,396.1 1,179.9 216.2 2,039.3 1,873.4 439.7 868.1 281.8 565.6 443.0 108.3 7.6
 Changes 1
1992 7.5 −14.7 −15.6 0.9 38.8 35.7 −1.1 −1.0 −2.1 37.8 20.2 0.6 0.0
1993 135.5 23.2 20.2 3.0 102.1 98.2 7.7 37.9 35.2 52.6 33.2 1.8 0.11994 115.6 30.0 11.9 18.1 37.2 44.2 3.8 1.8 −7.4 38.6 22.4 −8.9 −0.9
1995 107.8 23.6 27.7 −4.1 86.8 74.0 19.7 8.4 1.2 45.9 32.8 9.8 0.4
1996 111.6 17.4 15.5 1.8 118.0 109.3 46.7 20.7 14.0 41.9 32.0 4.7 2.01997 41.8 −7.0 5.9 −12.9 74.9 72.8 12.9 21.8 16.5 38.0 27.1 0.8 −0.1
1998 52.7 −30.3 −6.3 −24.0 103.9 101.9 25.2 36.5 43.6 40.2 29.6 −1.1 −3.3
1999 −18.3 −38.0 −10.5 −27.5 17.8 20.6 −9.4 18.4 13.0 11.6 9.5 −3.0 −2.1
2000 29.7 6.1 −0.6 6.6 35.1 30.1 3.8 15.5 12.1 10.8 8.2 −1.6 −0.5
1999          July 28.4 22.1 24.6 −2.5 −4.5 −0.7 −2.8 4.7 1.6 −2.6 −0.6 −3.2 −3.2
         Aug. 45.8 14.8 12.5 2.3 3.0 3.1 0.6 4.9 2.1 −2.5 −1.6 −0.6 −0.6
         Sep. 55.6 13.5 2.5 11.0 3.6 3.7 5.7 −1.2 −2.7 −0.8 −1.5 0.3 −0.1
         Oct. 66.3 24.4 28.0 −3.6 7.2 5.4 0.9 6.6 5.0 −2.1 −1.5 1.2 −0.3
         Nov. 77.8 8.3 1.3 7.0 27.2 25.5 23.3 5.3 1.8 −3.1 −3.3 2.2 3.3
         Dec. −18.3 −38.0 −10.5 −27.5 17.8 20.6 −9.4 18.4 13.0 11.6 9.5 −3.0 −2.1
2000          Jan. 23.6 21.4 2.7 18.7 −7.5 −6.1 4.8 −5.8 −8.0 −5.1 −4.2 −0.1 2.0
         Feb. 19.2 −14.1 −19.5 5.4 6.2 6.3 6.8 3.5 1.3 −4.0 −5.0 −0.9 −1.3
         Mar. 73.4 30.0 30.2 −0.2 −10.4 −11.1 −5.5 −0.1 −0.9 −5.5 −6.3 1.3 0.1
         Apr. 44.9 −10.5 −13.2 2.7 1.1 −0.1 8.8 −2.4 −3.0 −6.5 −6.1 0.8 1.6
         May 55.7 24.5 11.9 12.6 −5.4 −1.6 −5.6 9.9 9.3 −5.9 −7.1 −3.3 −2.8
         June −55.8 −33.3 −21.7 −11.7 −1.3 −8.7 −2.6 −0.7 −2.1 −5.4 −6.9 1.0 2.0
         July 6.6 −16.6 −2.3 −14.3 −7.2 −6.3 −3.4 2.1 1.1 −5.0 −6.3 −1.2 −1.0
         Aug. 49.4 26.3 20.3 6.1 −4.0 −3.9 −7.5 7.5 6.7 −3.9 −5.5 0.5 −0.4
         Sep. 26.2 −14.7 −20.4 5.7 17.2 −2.1 −2.7 3.3 4.5 −2.7 −4.9 −0.6 0.1
         Oct. 63.5 35.7 40.8 −5.1 3.4 0.9 4.0 0.7 0.8 −3.8 −4.5 0.1 0.0
         Nov. 64.5 32.6 37.7 −5.0 11.6 22.4 21.6 4.3 5.2 −3.5 −5.0 −0.1 0.6
         Dec. 29.7 6.1 −0.6 6.6 35.1 30.1 3.8 15.5 12.1 10.8 8.2 −1.6 −0.5
2001          Jan. −18.9 −34.9 −43.8 8.9 −26.3 −12.8 −11.4 2.8 1.9 −4.1 −4.1 −1.3 0.9
         Feb. 76.9 31.9 14.7 17.2 10.3 11.5 11.9 1.7 1.9 −2.1 −2.1 −1.8 −1.8
         Mar. 107.0 15.2 16.6 −1.3 2.0 0.2 −2.7 4.6 3.5 −1.6 −1.2 2.1 1.4
*This table serves to supplement the Overall monetary survey of section II; breaks have been eliminated from the flow figures. —2Up to December
it is planned to compare the figures for MFIs in the euro area with the data 1998, volume of business (balance-sheet total plus endorsement liabilities
for Germany. Notwithstanding the other tables in section IV, this table and bills sent for collection from the banks ’portfolios prior to maturity) and
includes −in addition to the figures reported by banks (including building liabilities incurred in the banks ’own name but on behalf of third parties. —
and loan associations) −the data of money market funds. —1Statistical 3Up to December 1998, including liabilities arising from loans on a trust
22*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
IV. Banks
 
   
 
 Debt securities
issued
in other member countries  8 Deposits of Money
market central governments  4 
With agreed At agreed papermaturities notice and
of which: money of which: Liabilitiesdomestic market with to non- Liabilities
of which: of which: central arising fund euro- Capital maturities
up to up to govern- from of up to area and Other certificates
Total  
4 Total 3 months Total ments repos  9 issued Total 2 years reserves   Period 2 years  7 residents  10 Liabilities
End of year or month
 
42.6 4.8 4.6 4.6 85.3 85.3 − 4.4 1,054.8 36.0 213.7 229.2 266.3 1991
52.0 5.9 5.6 5.6 97.6 97.6 − 9.4 1,165.7 44.6 260.9 256.6 301.4 1992
60.3 6.8 6.5 6.5 100.8 100.8 − 18.7 1,309.0 66.8 302.5 278.3 353.0 1993
68.5 11.8 7.0 7.0 108.2 108.2 − 53.8 1,418.7 59.4 337.3 305.2 357.8 1994
97.3 11.4 8.3 8.3 111.0 111.0 − 60.5 1,586.7 48.9 393.9 325.0 391.0 1995
120.6 9.0 9.2 9.2 114.6 114.6 − 53.2 1,785.1 35.2 422.1 350.0 438.8 1996
145.8 9.2 9.4 9.4 108.3 108.3 − 54.6 1,973.3 37.5 599.2 387.2 511.3 1997
168.3 13.8 9.7 9.7 111.2 111.2 − 84.1 2,209.9 41.9 739.8 415.9 574.8 1998
99.7 8.9 4.8 3.7 46.6 45.9 2.0 96.1 1,274.0 47.8 487.9 237.0 281.1 1999
96.3 6.7 4.7 3.3 69.9 67.6 0.4 108.6 1,367.6 63.7 599.8 258.5 318.4 200099.4 5.8 4.6 3.5 46.7 45.6 1.6 55.6 1,232.9 32.6 428.0 227.9 267.7 1999          June
99.2 6.3 4.5 3.5 46.0 45.1 1.0 55.1 1,238.0 34.7 426.0 229.3 271.0          July
99.3 6.0 4.6 3.5 46.5 45.4 1.6 61.6 1,248.1 34.5 436.4 229.7 274.4          Aug.99.6 6.1 4.6 3.5 46.2 44.9 1.2 69.2 1,270.3 37.5 435.4 232.7 281.1          Sep.
101.4 8.8 4.6 3.5 46.9 45.1 1.8 73.9 1,278.4 43.3 451.5 235.0 287.4          Oct.100.7 7.8 4.6 3.5 46.5 45.1 1.7 91.4 1,285.5 46.0 477.7 236.1 284.8          Nov.
99.7 8.9 4.8 3.7 46.6 45.9 2.0 96.1 1,274.0 47.8 487.9 237.0 281.1          Dec.
97.9 6.6 4.8 3.6 45.4 44.3 1.9 90.2 1,277.4 50.6 504.1 239.3 276.4 2000          Jan.
98.3 5.6 4.8 3.6 46.2 44.7 1.1 96.4 1,288.2 55.1 518.3 240.1 272.2          Feb.
99.9 7.7 4.7 3.5 45.7 44.8 0.9 99.5 1,300.4 58.4 555.3 241.8 277.2          Mar.
99.8 7.0 4.7 3.5 46.1 44.4 2.7 99.9 1,321.9 60.5 586.8 242.9 284.9          Apr.
99.0 6.9 4.7 3.4 45.6 44.2 2.9 101.7 1,339.6 61.7 594.5 244.1 287.5          May97.7 6.4 4.7 3.4 51.9 50.0 1.8 109.2 1,339.0 62.7 554.9 246.5 292.2          June
97.9 6.6 4.6 3.3 52.3 49.9 1.8 112.4 1,360.7 64.5 561.9 247.0 296.3          July
99.3 7.0 4.6 3.3 51.7 50.3 1.7 112.8 1,373.9 66.7 581.0 247.5 295.1          Aug.99.0 6.6 4.5 3.2 71.5 69.2 1.0 109.6 1,377.6 64.9 587.4 248.4 313.6          Sep.
99.6 6.3 4.6 3.2 73.9 71.6 1.3 113.3 1,385.8 62.7 606.3 249.3 315.2          Oct.
98.5 6.5 4.6 3.2 63.2 62.2 1.3 108.6 1,379.3 63.0 621.6 250.1 322.2          Nov.96.3 6.7 4.7 3.3 69.9 67.6 0.4 108.6 1,367.6 63.7 599.8 258.5 318.4          Dec.
94.4 6.5 5.0 3.5 57.7 55.7 1.8 104.1 1,390.2 67.2 626.3 258.4 311.9 2001          Jan.
94.4 7.0 5.0 3.5 58.0 55.5 1.6 101.3 1,409.4 71.7 640.7 260.5 314.1          Feb.
95.7 7.7 5.0 3.5 57.6 56.1 0.9 102.4 1,417.7 73.7 720.5 262.9 319.5          Mar.
Changes 1
0.5 0.1 0.1 0.1 2.5 2.5 −− 1.4 −8.4 −1.7 2.0 4.1 −12.8 1992
1.3 0.1 0.4 0.4 2.1 2.1 − 0.6 −4.8 9.8 6.2 2.4 5.8 1993
−8.1 1.3 0.2 0.2 1.8 1.8 − 21.9 12.5 −16.7 15.7 1.4 −3.2 1994
9.0 −2.3 0.4 0.4 3.0 3.0 − 7.6 9.6 −0.7 −3.8 2.8 −18.8 1995
2.4 0.4 0.3 0.3 4.0 4.0 −− 2.0 −0.2 0.7 4.5 1.7 −27.9 1996
0.6 0.6 0.3 0.3 1.4 1.4 − 0.0 −12.5 −0.5 1.3 3.4 −18.4 1997
2.0 1.3 0.2 0.2 3.1 3.1 − 3.2 −6.1 0.4 −0.4 4.6 −22.0 1998
−1.0 1.0 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.8 0.3 4.7 −11.7 1.8 9.3 0.9 −1.6 1999
−1.2 0.3 0.1 0.1 6.7 5.4 −0.9 1.4 −6.0 0.9 −4.6 8.3 −9.8 2000
0.2 0.6 −0.1 −0.0 −0.6 −0.4 −0.6 −0.4 6.4 2.1 2.7 1.2 1.5 1999          July
−0.1 −0.3 0.0 0.0 0.5 0.3 0.5 6.4 8.6 −0.3 8.2 0.4 3.9          Aug.
0.4 0.1 0.0 0.0 −0.4 −0.5 −0.4 7.6 22.2 3.0 −0.0 3.0 6.1          Sep.
1.5 1.0 0.0 0.0 0.7 0.2 0.7 4.7 6.8 5.7 12.8 2.2 7.5          Oct.
−1.2 −1.0 0.0 0.0 −0.4 −0.1 −0.1 17.3 4.7 2.6 19.8 1.1 −0.4          Nov.
−1.0 1.0 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.8 0.3 4.7 −11.7 1.8 9.3 0.9 −1.6          Dec.
−2.1 −2.3 −0.0 −0.0 −1.3 −1.5 −0.1 −5.9 2.6 2.8 12.1 2.2 −1.2 2000          Jan.
0.4 0.7 −0.0 −0.0 0.9 0.4 −0.8 6.3 10.8 4.5 13.0 0.8 −3.0          Feb.
1.2 2.1 −0.0 −0.0 −0.6 0.0 −0.2 2.7 10.0 3.2 31.9 1.7 7.7          Mar.
−0.8 −0.8 −0.0 −0.0 0.4 −0.5 1.8 0.2 18.8 2.0 20.8 1.1 11.6          Apr.
−0.5 −0.1 −0.0 −0.1 −0.5 −0.2 0.2 2.0 19.2 1.2 13.4 1.2 0.7          May
−1.0 −0.5 −0.0 −0.1 6.4 5.7 −1.0 7.6 0.6 1.0 −34.2 2.4 3.5          June
−0.2 0.2 −0.0 −0.0 0.3 −0.1 −0.1 2.9 20.1 1.8 0.1 0.5 6.8          July
0.9 0.4 −0.0 −0.0 −0.6 0.4 −0.1 −0.2 10.1 2.1 9.6 0.6 7.1          Aug.
−0.6 −0.4 −0.1 −0.1 19.8 19.0 −0.7 −3.4 2.7 −1.9 2.5 0.8 21.9          Sep.
0.0 −0.4 0.1 0.1 2.4 2.3 0.3 3.0 5.4 −2.3 8.8 1.0 5.7          Oct.
−0.6 0.3 0.0 −0.0 −10.7 −9.4 −0.0 −4.0 −4.0 0.4 23.6 0.7 4.0          Nov.
−1.2 0.3 0.1 0.1 6.7 5.4 −0.9 1.4 −6.0 0.9 −4.6 8.3 −9.8          Dec.
−2.2 −0.5 −0.0 −0.0 −12.2 −11.9 1.4 −4.4 22.8 3.5 28.1 −0.0 −5.6 2001          Jan.
0.0 0.6 0.0 0.0 0.5 0.0 −0.2 −2.8 19.2 4.5 13.6 2.1 2.9          Feb.
0.8 0.7 0.0 0.0 −0.4 0.6 −0.6 0.5 6.2 2.7 67.7 2.4 13.6          Mar.
basis and liabilities arising from rediscounted bills (endorsement savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 5). —7Up to December 1998,
liabilities). —4Up to December 1998, including liabilities arising from loans with maturities of less than 4 years. —8Excluding central governments ’
on a trust basis. —5For the German contribution: from 1999 including deposits. —9Data collected separately only from 1999; up to December
deposits under savings and loan contracts (see table IV.12). —6For the 1998, included in the deposits with agreed maturities of up to 2 years. —
German contribution: up to the end of 1998 including deposits under 10 Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued. 
23*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
IV. Banks
 
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks *
 
 
euro billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
  of which: of which: 
Loans and advances
 not evidenced
 Cash in by certificates for hand and
Number of balancesreporting Balance with Balances Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by up to over issued by pating Othermonth tions total  
1 banks Total advances banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets
All categories of banks
 
2000          Oct. 2,758 6,084.4 49.5 2,123.2 1,476.7 617.9 3,454.8 427.5 2,497.2 7.6 481.5 120.5 336.4
         Nov. 2,743 6,140.4 52.6 2,160.6 1,511.7 620.2 3,471.7 431.2 2,503.8 7.6 488.2 121.4 334.2         Dec. 2,740 6,148.3 67.1 2,147.2 1,497.3 621.6 3,479.5 432.4 2,510.5 7.6 487.2 130.1 324.4
2001          Jan. 2,717 6,126.8 54.0 2,126.9 1,465.5 633.2 3,492.1 451.2 2,510.8 7.2 508.6 131.7 322.1
         Feb. 2,717 6,203.4 57.2 2,170.6 1,504.1 641.2 3,517.6 462.0 2,513.8 6.9 520.9 133.2 324.8         Mar. 2,713 6,320.5 59.7 2,221.0 1,544.7 652.6 3,569.5 484.1 2,521.2 7.1 543.6 134.3 335.9
Commercial banks 7
2001          Feb. 289 1,780.1 23.2 571.8 424.5 142.8 964.2 238.2 529.0 3.4 186.1 84.9 136.1         Mar. 286 1,847.8 26.6 597.7 443.0 149.9 996.2 250.6 530.8 3.5 204.5 85.8 141.6
   Big banks 8
2001          Feb. 4 1,026.3 14.3 303.3 231.3 70.4 546.3 131.0 299.4 2.0 109.9 75.6 86.8         Mar. 4 1,083.4 17.6 316.5 238.0 76.8 581.6 143.3 300.1 2.1 132.6 76.6 91.2
   Regional banks and other commercial banks 9, 10
2001          Feb. 199 618.0 7.8 208.3 141.2 64.2 355.7 79.1 215.6 1.0 56.7 9.2 37.0         Mar. 197 623.7 8.2 213.6 146.3 64.7 353.5 78.9 216.3 1.0 54.0 9.2 39.3
   Branches of foreign banks
2001          Feb. 86 135.8 1.1 60.2 52.0 8.2 62.2 28.1 14.0 0.3 19.5 0.0 12.2         Mar. 85 140.7 0.8 67.5 58.6 8.4 61.1 28.4 14.3 0.3 17.9 0.0 11.1
Land banks 11
2001          Feb. 13 1,219.1 4.7 600.7 480.4 105.3 530.9 62.4 387.8 0.5 76.3 21.7 61.1         Mar. 13 1,243.6 2.5 618.2 496.4 108.2 539.7 68.4 389.4 0.5 77.4 21.7 61.6
Savings banks
2001          Feb. 547 935.2 16.8 215.9 57.8 157.3 665.4 76.7 498.5 1.8 87.8 11.1 25.9         Mar. 546 937.3 17.6 214.5 57.4 156.4 668.5 78.7 498.7 1.8 88.7 11.1 25.6
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives (including Deutsche Genossenschaftsbank)  
 
2001          Feb. 3 222.8 1.1 139.0 89.8 48.3 66.5 17.0 29.5 0.2 19.1 8.1 8.0         Mar. 3 220.6 0.8 139.0 89.3 48.7 64.9 15.9 29.5 0.2 18.5 8.2 7.7
Credit cooperatives
2001          Feb. 1,792 526.4 10.7 128.7 55.3 73.0 365.4 51.4 278.5 1.0 34.3 3.2 18.4         Mar. 1,792 527.0 10.6 128.7 55.5 72.8 365.8 51.8 278.3 1.0 34.5 3.2 18.6
Mortgage banks
2001          Feb. 30 903.8 0.4 239.4 169.0 69.6 633.6 8.2 540.5 − 84.5 2.5 27.9
         Mar. 30 907.8 0.7 238.5 167.5 70.6 637.6 8.3 542.1 − 86.8 2.5 28.6
Building and loan associations 12
2001          Feb. 30 153.5 0.0 34.6 22.9 11.6 110.7 1.6 99.8 − 9.4 0.5 7.6
         Mar. 30 154.4 0.0 35.3 23.6 11.7 110.9 1.6 100.2 − 9.1 0.5 7.6
Banks with special functions 13
2001          Feb. 13 462.6 0.3 240.4 204.3 33.3 180.8 6.5 150.3 0.0 23.4 1.2 39.8         Mar. 13 482.1 0.9 249.2 212.0 34.3 186.0 8.8 152.2 0.0 24.0 1.3 44.7
Memo item: Foreign banks 13
2001          Feb. 142 298.7 3.4 123.9 99.1 24.0 144.3 48.9 60.4 0.5 31.7 1.1 26.0         Mar. 139 303.9 2.3 131.6 106.6 23.7 143.8 50.6 60.6 0.5 29.6 1.1 25.2
  of which: Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 15
2001          Feb. 56 162.9 2.3 63.7 47.1 15.8 82.1 20.8 46.5 0.2 12.2 1.0 13.8         Mar. 54 163.3 1.5 64.0 47.9 15.4 82.6 22.2 46.4 0.2 11.7 1.0 14.1
*For the period up to December 1998, section IV (except for table IV.1) from rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks ’
shows the assets and liabilities of banks (excluding building and loan portfolios prior to maturity). —2Since the inclusion of building and loan
associations) in Germany; from January 1999, the assets and liabilities of associations in January 1999, including deposits under savings and loan
monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets and liabilities contracts (see table IV. 12). —3Included in time deposits. —4Up to
of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are likewise classified as December 1998, including loans on a trust basis. —5Excluding deposits
MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). —6Including
respective items, see the footnotes to table IV.3. —1Up to December 1998, subordinated negotiable bearer debt securities; excluding non-negotiable
volume of business (balance sheet total plus endorsement liabilities arising bearer debt securities. —7Commercial banks comprise the sub-groups
24*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
IV. Banks
 
   
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs)  4 Capital
  (including
of which: of which: published
reserves,
Savings deposits  5 partici- Time deposits for  2 
pation
Memo rightsitem: Bearer capital,
of which: debt Liabilities
funds for
arising At three Bank general securities
Sight Time Sight up to over from savings out- banking Other   End of months ’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year  2 repos  3 Total notice bonds risks   month standing  6 liabilities
All categories of banks
 
1,730.9 238.4 1,492.2 2,230.2 452.3 328.5 757.2 15.8 577.7 455.4 114.6 1,472.9 249.3 401.1 2000          Oct.
1,778.8 263.9 1,514.7 2,242.4 474.8 323.4 754.6 18.0 574.2 450.3 115.4 1,461.6 250.1 407.5          Nov.
1,775.2 227.2 1,547.6 2,260.7 478.9 328.8 752.0 9.8 585.2 458.7 115.9 1,450.7 258.5 403.2          Dec.
1,754.6 257.9 1,496.1 2,249.9 469.8 328.7 754.2 23.2 581.0 454.6 116.1 1,467.7 258.4 396.2 2001          Jan.
1,791.9 274.2 1,517.1 2,269.1 481.2 333.4 759.4 25.7 578.9 452.5 116.3 1,483.1 260.5 398.8          Feb.
1,880.7 288.4 1,591.9 2,282.3 483.3 339.8 765.3 26.8 577.3 451.2 116.5 1,491.2 262.9 403.5          Mar.
Commercial banks 7
689.7 178.6 510.6 597.3 211.2 143.4 140.5 22.2 90.7 70.7 11.5 226.6 97.7 168.9 2001          Feb.
748.2 192.9 554.9 603.1 211.9 147.9 141.4 23.3 90.5 70.6 11.4 227.3 99.2 169.9          Mar.
Big banks 8
405.7 125.8 279.9 313.3 108.4 86.4 88.6 21.1 28.4 25.9 1.5 158.1 64.2 85.1 2001          Feb.
457.7 131.9 325.8 317.2 107.8 90.5 89.3 22.2 28.2 25.7 1.5 158.1 65.1 85.3          Mar.
Regional banks and other commercial banks 9, 10
193.8 33.3 159.9 271.3 97.2 52.2 49.6 0.3 62.4 44.8 9.9 68.3 31.5 53.1 2001          Feb.
195.7 40.1 155.3 273.9 98.7 53.1 49.9 0.3 62.3 44.8 9.9 69.1 32.1 52.9          Mar.
Branches of foreign banks
90.2 19.4 70.8 12.7 5.6 4.7 2.3 0.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 2.1 30.7 2001          Feb.
94.7 21.0 73.7 12.0 5.4 4.3 2.3 0.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 2.1 31.8          Mar.
Land banks 11
433.5 50.8 382.8 295.8 34.1 47.1 199.5 2.1 14.2 12.8 0.9 383.9 48.3 57.6 2001          Feb.
454.6 53.2 401.4 298.9 34.7 47.3 201.8 2.0 14.2 12.8 0.9 384.9 48.5 56.8          Mar.
Savings banks
220.5 4.5 215.9 587.7 139.8 67.0 8.1 − 300.0 229.4 72.8 47.5 40.4 39.1 2001          Feb.
220.0 3.8 216.1 588.5 141.3 66.7 8.3 − 299.2 228.4 73.0 47.5 40.6 40.8          Mar.
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives  (including Deutsche Genossenschaftsbank)
 
121.6 28.4 93.2 36.4 7.4 7.9 21.1 1.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 46.8 9.4 8.5 2001          Feb.
120.6 24.0 96.5 35.1 5.3 8.5 21.3 1.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 46.7 9.4 8.8          Mar.
Credit cooperatives
77.7 2.3 75.4 372.8 85.5 60.0 22.7 − 173.7 139.3 30.9 30.9 27.2 17.9 2001          Feb.
76.8 1.8 75.0 373.4 86.2 60.3 22.9 − 173.0 139.1 31.0 31.1 27.2 18.4          Mar.
Mortgage banks
104.6 3.9 100.7 141.3 1.3 2.8 137.0 − 0.1 0.0 0.2 615.4 17.3 25.2 2001          Feb.
108.8 6.0 102.8 142.1 1.8 3.1 137.0 − 0.1 0.0 0.2 613.4 17.3 26.1          Mar.
Building and loan associations 12
27.7 1.9 25.9 97.8 0.3 0.4 96.8 − 0.3 0.3 0.1 6.4 6.6 15.0 2001          Feb.
28.2 2.2 26.0 97.8 0.3 0.4 96.8 − 0.3 0.3 0.1 6.3 6.8 15.3          Mar.
Banks with special functions 13
116.6 4.0 112.6 140.1 1.7 4.8 133.6 0.1 −−− 125.6 13.6 66.7 2001          Feb.
123.6 4.5 119.2 143.3 1.9 5.6 135.8 0.0 −−− 133.9 13.9 67.3          Mar.
Memo item: Foreign banks 14
142.2 32.4 109.7 68.5 28.9 17.7 16.0 0.8 4.4 3.9 1.6 29.4 9.3 49.3 2001          Feb.
143.8 36.6 107.1 70.6 31.0 17.1 16.5 0.8 4.4 4.0 1.6 29.4 9.3 50.8          Mar.
of which: Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 15
52.0 12.9 38.9 55.9 23.3 13.0 13.6 − 4.3 3.8 1.6 29.2 7.3 18.6 2001          Feb.
49.1 15.6 33.4 58.6 25.6 12.8 14.2 − 4.4 3.9 1.6 29.2 7.3 19.1          Mar.
”Big banks ”,”Regional banks and other commercial banks ”and ”Branches 13Up to December 1998, including Deutsche Postbank AG; see footnote
of foreign banks ”.—8Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner Bank AG, Commerz- 9. —14Sum of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks and included in
bank AG and, from 1999, Bayerische Hypo- und Vereinsbank AG. —9From other categories of banks and of the category ”Branches (of dependent
January 1999 including institutions of the discontinued category "Private legal status) of foreign banks ”— 15Separate presentation of the banks
bankers" and including Deutsche Postbank AG. —10Up to December 1998, majority-owned by foreign banks included in the categories ”Regional
including Bayerische Hypo- und Vereinsbank AG; see footnote 8. — banks and other commercial banks ”and, up to December 1998, in the
11Previously known as: ”Regional giro institutions ”.—12Assets and categories ”Private bankers ” and ”Mortgage banks ”. 
liabilities of building and loan associations included from 1999 only. —
25*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
IV. Banks
 
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis- à-vis residents *
 
 
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 euro billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs)  2, 3 Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3, 8 
Balances Treasury
Cash in and loans Negotiable Loans and bills and
hand and ad- money advances negotiable
Balances market Memo not money mar- (euro-area vances not Securities
notes with the evidenced paper item: evidenced ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- by certi- issued by issued by Trust by certi- issued by by non-
Period coins)  1 bank Total ficates Bills  4 banks  5 banks  6 loans  7 Total ficates Bills  4 non-banks banks  9 
End of year or month *
 
1991 22.8 90.0 1,424.9 976.5 22.5 − 419.5 6.3 3,147.0 2,813.8 62.5 11.7 181.5
1992 26.8 88.2 1,483.5 1,020.8 19.0 − 435.1 8.6 3,478.2 3,034.9 52.1 9.6 237.8
1993 26.7 75.3 1,596.8 1,076.2 14.7 3.3 493.2 9.3 3,826.4 3,291.6 44.7 5.6 327.7
1994 25.0 61.5 1,695.6 1,150.6 17.4 4.6 513.6 9.5 4,137.2 3,502.8 45.9 2.2 433.7
1995 26.0 61.0 1,859.9 1,264.9 17.5 4.3 561.9 11.4 4,436.9 3,802.0 46.8 1.4 427.3
1996 28.9 59.7 2,134.0 1,443.3 17.9 3.4 657.2 12.2 4,773.1 4,097.9 44.8 5.9 437.21997 29.3 60.2 2,397.9 1,606.3 18.1 3.6 758.9 11.1 5,058.4 4,353.9 44.7 2.9 473.31998 28.5 63.6 2,738.2 1,814.7 14.6 12.2 887.7 9.1 5,379.8 4,639.7 32.8 5.0 527.81999 16.8 45.6 1,556.9 1,033.4 0.0 19.2 504.2 3.9 2,904.5 2,569.6 7.0 3.0 287.5
2000 15.6 50.8 1,639.6 1,056.1 0.0 26.8 556.6 3.6 3,003.7 2,657.3 6.5 2.3 304.7
1999          Oct. 13.0 48.7 1,543.9 1,019.0 0.0 11.8 513.0 4.0 2,868.4 2,540.8 7.3 4.5 278.5
         Nov. 12.7 40.4 1,572.7 1,043.5 0.0 16.3 512.9 4.0 2,890.9 2,557.2 7.3 3.8 285.2         Dec. 16.8 45.6 1,556.9 1,033.4 0.0 19.2 504.2 3.9 2,904.5 2,569.6 7.0 3.0 287.5
2000          Jan. 13.0 43.1 1,547.4 1,019.8 0.0 17.9 509.7 4.1 2,922.0 2,576.5 6.8 4.2 297.0
         Feb. 13.0 34.0 1,542.8 1,010.2 0.0 18.7 513.9 3.8 2,933.2 2,580.1 6.7 3.6 305.3         Mar. 12.6 41.7 1,563.5 1,016.5 0.0 22.2 524.8 3.8 2,969.8 2,593.2 6.8 2.7 329.6
         Apr. 13.7 38.9 1,575.1 1,018.0 0.0 25.8 531.3 3.8 2,984.8 2,605.5 6.8 2.7 332.1
         May 13.2 36.7 1,607.0 1,037.2 0.0 25.4 544.5 3.8 2,996.7 2,613.8 6.8 2.4 336.1         June 12.7 48.9 1,583.0 1,016.0 0.0 26.3 540.8 3.7 2,961.4 2,617.2 6.6 2.2 297.8
         July 12.7 41.9 1,581.7 1,003.8 0.0 28.0 549.9 3.8 2,963.4 2,618.9 6.6 3.1 298.7
         Aug. 12.9 42.9 1,591.7 1,011.2 0.0 28.4 552.1 3.7 2,968.0 2,626.2 6.5 2.9 300.0         Sep. 13.1 41.1 1,585.0 1,002.3 0.0 27.8 554.9 3.7 2,972.0 2,634.3 6.4 2.3 296.5
         Oct. 13.4 35.3 1,616.2 1,031.3 0.0 27.9 557.0 3.7 2,982.9 2,643.4 6.4 2.4 298.2
         Nov. 12.9 39.1 1,642.5 1,059.0 0.0 27.1 556.4 3.6 2,997.2 2,651.1 6.5 2.3 305.0         Dec. 15.6 50.8 1,639.6 1,056.1 0.0 26.8 556.6 3.6 3,003.7 2,657.3 6.5 2.3 304.7
2001          Jan. 12.9 40.5 1,620.7 1,027.2 0.0 26.7 566.8 3.5 2,998.4 2,664.7 6.1 2.4 320.5
         Feb. 12.9 43.4 1,649.8 1,051.7 0.0 24.2 573.8 3.5 3,010.9 2,674.0 5.9 3.3 323.3         Mar. 12.6 46.3 1,668.2 1,062.3 0.0 22.4 583.5 3.4 3,033.2 2,680.2 6.0 2.8 339.2
Changes *
1992 + 2.8 + 6.3 + 77.6 + 61.0 −3.5 − + 17.8 + 2.3 + 294.3 + 249.2 −10.4 −2.2 + 57.1
1993 −0.1 −12.9 + 133.3 + 75.2 −4.3 + 0.1 + 61.5 + 0.7 + 339.8 + 259.1 −7.4 −4.5 + 102.0
1994 −1.7 −13.8 + 99.1 + 73.6 + 2.7 + 1.3 + 21.3 + 0.1 + 320.5 + 240.2 + 1.2 −3.3 + 86.7
1995 + 1.0 −0.5 + 193.5 + 139.4 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 54.3 + 0.2 + 312.8 + 303.6 + 1.0 −0.8 + 2.9
1996 + 2.9 −1.3 + 257.8 + 161.8 + 0.4 − 1.1 + 95.8 + 0.8 + 336.3 + 311.7 −2.0 + 4.7 + 10.6
1997 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 262.5 + 160.7 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 102.6 −1.1 + 285.2 + 255.5 −0.1 −3.0 + 36.5
1998 −0.8 + 3.4 + 343.3 + 210.3 −3.6 + 8.6 + 130.0 −2.0 + 335.3 + 302.1 −11.9 + 2.1 + 52.1
1999 + 2.2 + 13.2 + 122.1 + 66.3 + 0.0 + 12.9 + 42.8 −0.7 + 156.1 + 136.9 + 2.6 + 0.4 + 16.7
2000 −1.1 + 5.1 + 83.6 + 21.7 −0.0 + 7.6 + 54.3 −0.3 + 100.7 + 83.7 −0.5 −0.8 + 19.0
1999          Oct. + 0.2 + 4.6 + 14.5 + 8.6 + 0.0 + 2.3 + 3.5 −0.0 + 21.2 + 18.5 −0.0 + 0.8 + 2.0
         Nov. −0.2 −8.3 + 28.1 + 23.7 − + 4.5 − 0.1 −0.1 + 21.6 + 15.6 −0.0 −0.7 + 6.8
         Dec. + 4.1 + 5.2 −15.3 −10.2 −0.0 + 2.9 − 7.9 −0.1 + 15.2 + 13.2 −0.3 −0.8 + 3.0
2000          Jan. −3.7 −2.5 − 8.4 −14.2 −0.0 − 1.3 + 7.1 + 0.1 + 14.9 + 3.8 −0.1 + 1.2 + 10.0
         Feb. −0.0 −9.1 − 4.2 − 9.6 + 0.0 + 0.8 + 4.6 −0.2 + 11.3 + 3.6 −0.1 −0.6 + 8.4
         Mar. −0.4 + 7.7 + 20.2 + 5.6 −0.0 + 3.5 + 11.1 −0.0 + 36.4 + 12.9 + 0.1 −0.9 + 24.4
         Apr. + 1.1 −2.7 + 10.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 3.6 + 6.5 −0.0 + 13.5 + 10.9 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 2.5
         May −0.5 −2.2 + 32.6 + 20.5 −0.0 − 0.4 + 12.5 −0.1 + 13.1 + 9.5 −0.0 −0.3 + 3.9
         June −0.5 + 12.2 −23.4 −20.7 −0.0 + 0.9 − 3.6 −0.0 −33.7 + 3.9 −0.2 −0.2 −37.2
         July −0.0 −7.0 − 2.2 −13.0 + 0.0 + 1.7 + 9.1 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.8 + 0.9
         Aug. + 0.2 + 1.0 + 8.9 + 6.4 −0.0 + 0.4 + 2.2 −0.0 + 6.8 + 5.9 −0.1 −0.2 + 1.3
         Sep. + 0.1 −1.8 − 7.3 − 9.6 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 2.8 −0.0 + 3.3 + 7.4 −0.0 −0.5 − 3.5
         Oct. + 0.4 −5.7 + 30.0 + 27.8 −0.0 + 0.0 + 2.1 −0.0 + 9.5 + 7.7 −0.0 + 0.1 + 1.7
         Nov. −0.6 + 3.8 + 27.5 + 28.8 −0.0 − 0.7 − 0.6 −0.1 + 14.5 + 8.0 + 0.0 −0.1 + 6.7
         Dec. + 2.8 + 11.6 − 0.4 − 0.6 −0.0 − 0.3 + 0.5 −0.1 + 10.1 + 9.5 −− 0.1 − 0.2
2001          Jan. −2.7 −10.3 −18.5 −28.7 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 10.4 −0.1 − 4.5 + 7.6 −0.3 + 0.1 + 16.4
         Feb. −0.0 + 2.9 + 29.2 + 24.5 −0.0 − 2.5 + 7.1 −0.0 + 12.6 + 9.5 −0.3 + 0.9 + 2.8
         Mar. −0.3 + 3.0 + 17.2 + 9.3 −− 1.9 + 9.7 −0.1 + 21.1 + 4.9 + 0.1 −0.5 + 16.0
*See table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the from rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks ’
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as portfolios prior to maturity). —5Up to November 1993, included in
provisional. Subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following securities (see also footnote 6). —6Up to November 1993, including
Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Up to December 1998: negotiable money market paper; excluding registered debt securities. —
domestic notes and coins. —2Up to December 1998, excluding loans to 7From 1999, no longer included in loans or deposits (see also footnote
domestic building and loan associations. —3Up to December 1998, 3). —8Up to December 1998, including loans to domestic building and loan
including loans on a trust basis; see also footnote 7. —4Up to December associations. —9Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of
1998, bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising equalisation claims; see also footnote 10. —10Including debt securities
26*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
IV. Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3, 11, 12  Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3, 17 
Partici-
patinginterestsin
Memo domestic Bills Memo Memo
Equalisa- item: banks Sight Time redis- item: Sight Time Savings Bank item:tion Trust and deposits deposits counted Trust deposits deposits deposits savings Trust
loans  
7 Total 13, 14  14, 15  16 loans  7 Total 13 15, 18  19 bonds  20 loans  7   Period claims  10 enterprises
End of year or month *
 
2.4 75.1 41.3 1,249.6 226.9 913.1 87.8 21.7 2,462.7 431.3 976.6 754.1 236.7 64.0 1991
64.3 79.5 49.4 1,266.2 301.2 864.7 78.0 22.4 2,570.4 468.3 1,020.9 770.7 240.0 70.4 1992
75.3 81.6 59.5 1,395.2 380.2 917.9 69.2 27.9 2,788.1 513.6 1,123.6 859.4 219.1 72.4 199368.1 84.4 70.7 1,427.9 342.8 976.9 75.2 33.1 2,875.7 540.2 1,109.3 940.5 206.9 78.8 1994
71.3 88.1 83.2 1,539.4 363.9 1,065.1 75.5 35.0 3,021.1 579.9 1,086.1 1,046.1 227.4 81.6 1995
81.3 106.0 89.7 1,731.0 401.1 1,202.4 75.4 52.2 3,241.5 675.1 1,109.8 1,143.0 227.8 85.8 199676.0 107.6 95.1 1,902.3 427.6 1,349.1 75.6 50.0 3,341.9 689.8 1,146.9 1,182.1 236.9 86.1 199771.6 102.8 129.2 2,086.9 472.5 1,505.2 59.4 49.7 3,520.3 799.5 1,194.1 1,211.0 234.9 80.9 199837.5 58.0 75.6 1,122.0 114.4 1,007.3 0.3 29.8 1,905.3 420.4 759.6 614.7 110.7 42.1 1999
33.1 58.5 82.7 1,189.2 113.4 1,075.3 0.4 30.1 1,945.8 443.4 819.9 573.5 109.0 42.1 2000
37.4 57.8 74.0 1,130.9 115.1 1,015.4 0.3 29.7 1,858.1 406.1 734.9 606.2 110.9 41.7 1999          Oct.
37.4 57.8 74.3 1,132.6 126.6 1,005.7 0.3 29.7 1,884.1 429.7 740.5 603.1 110.9 42.0          Nov.
37.5 58.0 75.6 1,122.0 114.4 1,007.3 0.3 29.8 1,905.3 420.4 759.6 614.7 110.7 42.1          Dec.
37.5 57.8 74.1 1,125.2 125.7 999.2 0.3 29.8 1,897.5 424.9 754.1 609.6 109.0 42.1 2000          Jan.
37.5 58.1 74.5 1,105.8 119.7 985.9 0.2 29.7 1,904.2 432.1 758.1 605.6 108.4 42.4          Feb.
37.5 57.9 74.8 1,135.8 126.9 1,008.7 0.2 29.6 1,893.4 426.6 759.0 600.0 107.8 42.3          Mar.
37.6 57.9 75.6 1,122.7 126.9 995.6 0.2 29.6 1,893.5 435.7 756.7 593.5 107.6 42.4          Apr.
37.6 57.9 76.0 1,134.6 119.0 1,015.3 0.2 29.5 1,891.5 429.0 767.1 587.7 107.7 42.3          May37.6 57.9 77.9 1,112.9 116.8 996.0 0.2 29.5 1,888.2 426.2 772.2 582.3 107.6 42.3          June
36.1 58.5 78.1 1,110.6 100.1 1,010.3 0.2 30.2 1,882.2 422.9 775.0 576.6 107.7 42.4          July
32.5 58.6 78.8 1,130.9 105.6 1,025.0 0.2 29.9 1,879.2 415.6 783.2 572.7 107.7 42.6          Aug.32.5 58.7 79.6 1,110.3 110.3 999.7 0.2 30.0 1,896.5 413.0 805.7 570.0 107.8 42.8          Sep.
32.5 58.5 80.1 1,151.3 111.1 1,039.9 0.2 30.1 1,900.3 417.5 808.8 566.2 107.9 42.7          Oct.
32.3 58.7 80.9 1,189.6 133.0 1,056.4 0.2 30.1 1,912.9 438.7 802.8 562.7 108.7 42.3          Nov.33.1 58.5 82.7 1,189.2 113.4 1,075.3 0.4 30.1 1,945.8 443.4 819.9 573.5 109.0 42.1          Dec.
4.7 58.3 83.2 1,145.5 117.8 1,027.3 0.4 30.0 1,921.8 431.1 812.0 569.3 109.3 42.0 2001          Jan.
4.4 58.4 85.4 1,160.2 123.9 1,035.9 0.4 29.9 1,933.8 443.3 813.8 567.2 109.5 42.5          Feb.4.9 58.5 85.8 1,180.2 124.5 1,055.5 0.2 29.8 1,935.3 442.1 817.8 565.6 109.8 42.6          Mar.
Changes *
−1.0 + 1.5 + 7.9 + 39.7 + 74.0 −25.5 −9.8 + 1.0 + 126.0 + 33.6 + 69.6 + 16.3 + 3.3 + 3.2 1992
−11.4 + 2.1 + 9.8 + 145.3 + 75.1 + 77.1 −8.8 + 1.9 + 216.7 + 43.8 + 96.9 + 88.7 −14.6 + 2.0 1993
−6.9 + 2.6 + 11.3 + 32.4 −31.4 + 53.0 + 6.0 + 4.9 + 85.0 + 28.3 −14.1 + 81.2 −12.2 + 1.8 1994
−1.2 + 7.3 + 12.5 + 134.2 + 20.4 + 111.5 + 0.4 + 2.0 + 158.3 + 48.9 −14.2 + 105.6 + 11.7 + 6.3 1995
+ 8.0 + 3.3 + 6.5 + 175.9 + 36.6 + 137.7 −0.2 + 1.7 + 218.4 + 94.3 + 23.2 + 96.9 + 0.7 + 3.3 1996
−5.3 + 1.6 + 5.4 + 175.9 + 31.6 + 146.7 + 0.2 −2.6 + 100.5 + 13.0 + 37.1 + 39.1 + 9.2 + 2.1 1997
−4.4 −4.8 + 34.1 + 179.0 + 39.7 + 156.4 −16.2 −0.9 + 179.3 + 110.6 + 47.2 + 28.9 −2.1 −5.3 1998
−0.6 + 0.1 + 9.3 + 69.0 − 1.8 + 81.8 −11.1 −0.4 + 67.3 + 32.7 + 48.4 − 4.5 −9.3 + 0.7 1999
−0.8 + 0.5 + 7.1 + 64.7 − 2.3 + 66.9 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 41.3 + 22.3 + 61.1 −40.5 −1.7 −0.0 2000
+ 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.8 + 27.3 − 4.5 + 31.8 + 0.0 −0.2 + 5.4 + 0.6 + 6.8 − 2.1 + 0.1 + 0.4 1999          Oct.
−0.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 1.0 + 10.7 − 9.7 −0.0 −0.0 + 25.5 + 23.1 + 5.6 − 3.1 −0.0 + 0.3          Nov.
+ 0.1 + 0.2 + 1.3 −10.7 −12.3 + 1.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 21.2 − 9.4 + 19.1 + 11.6 −0.2 + 0.1          Dec.
+ 0.0 −0.1 −1.5 + 2.4 + 10.8 − 8.4 −0.0 + 0.0 − 8.1 + 4.2 − 5.4 − 5.1 −1.7 + 0.0 2000          Jan.
+ 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.4 −19.5 − 6.2 −13.3 −0.0 −0.1 + 6.6 + 7.2 + 4.0 − 4.0 −0.6 + 0.2          Feb.
−0.0 −0.2 + 0.3 + 29.5 + 6.7 + 22.8 −0.0 −0.1 −11.1 − 5.9 + 0.8 − 5.5 −0.5 −0.1          Mar.
+ 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.7 −14.4 − 1.3 −13.1 −0.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 8.5 − 2.3 − 6.5 −0.2 + 0.1          Apr.
−0.0 −0.0 + 0.4 + 12.5 − 7.2 + 19.8 −0.0 −0.1 − 1.6 − 6.3 + 10.4 − 5.9 + 0.1 −0.1          May
−0.0 −0.0 + 1.9 −21.2 − 1.8 −19.4 −0.0 −0.1 − 2.9 − 2.5 + 5.1 − 5.4 −0.1 + 0.0          June
−1.4 + 0.6 + 0.3 − 3.0 −17.4 + 14.4 + 0.0 + 0.7 − 6.5 − 3.7 + 2.0 − 5.0 + 0.1 + 0.2          July
−0.0 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 19.3 + 4.6 + 14.7 + 0.0 −0.3 − 3.5 − 7.9 + 8.2 − 3.9 + 0.0 + 0.2          Aug.
−0.0 + 0.0 + 0.8 −20.9 + 4.5 −25.3 −0.0 + 0.0 + 17.0 − 2.8 + 22.5 − 2.7 + 0.0 + 0.2          Sep.
−0.0 −0.2 + 0.5 + 40.0 − 0.2 + 40.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 3.3 + 3.9 + 3.0 − 3.8 + 0.1 −0.1          Oct.
−0.1 + 0.2 + 0.8 + 38.4 + 22.9 + 15.6 −0.0 + 0.0 + 13.1 + 21.8 − 6.0 − 3.5 + 0.8 −0.4          Nov.
+ 0.8 −0.2 + 1.8 + 1.6 −17.6 + 19.0 + 0.2 −0.1 + 35.5 + 5.7 + 18.6 + 10.8 + 0.4 −0.2          Dec.
−28.4 −0.2 + 0.5 −43.6 + 4.5 −48.1 + 0.0 −0.0 −24.0 − 12.3 − 7.9 − 4.1 + 0.3 −0.1 2001          Jan.
−0.3 −0.0 + 2.2 + 14.7 + 6.1 + 8.6 −0.0 −0.2 + 13.1 + 12.1 + 2.9 − 2.1 + 0.2 + 0.4          Feb.
+ 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 15.3 − 0.6 + 16.1 −0.2 −0.1 + 0.9 − 1.7 + 4.0 − 1.6 + 0.3 + 0.1          Mar.
arising from the exchange of equalisation claims. —11Including liabilities acceptances and promissory notes outstanding and, up to December 1998,
arising from registered debt securities, registered money market paper and including endorsement liabilities arising from rediscounted bills. —17Up to
non-negotiable bearer debt securities; including subordinated liabilities. — December 1998, including liabilities to domestic building and loans
12Up to December 1998, excluding liabilities to domestic building and loan associations and money market funds. —18Since the inclusion of building
associations and money market funds. —13Up to December 1998, and loan associations in January 1999, including deposits under savings and
including time deposits for less than 1 month. —14Including liabilities loan contracts (see table IV. 12). —19Excluding deposits under savings and
arising from monetary policy operations with the Bundesbank. —15Up to loan contracts (see also footnote 18). —20Including liabilities arising from
December 1998, excluding time deposits for less than 1 month. —16Own non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
27*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
IV. Banks
 
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis- à-vis non-residents *
 
 
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 euro billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
Balances and loans and Loans and advances not Treasury
advances not evidenced by evidenced by certificates, bills and
Cash in certificates, bills  3 bills 3 negotiable Negotiable
hand money money
(non- Medium market Memo Medium marketeuro-area and paper Securities item: and paper Securitiesnotes and Short- long- issued by issued by Trust Short- long- issued by of
Period coins)  
1 Total Total term term banks  4 banks  5 loans  6 Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
1991 1.1 419.6 395.8 266.5 129.3 − 17.5 6.4 188.7 142.6 27.7 114.8 1.4 31.3
1992 1.0 405.6 377.4 250.0 127.4 − 21.3 6.8 217.8 157.3 30.2 127.1 0.4 45.2
1993 1.2 533.8 498.3 360.5 137.7 0.1 24.3 11.2 262.5 184.0 48.3 135.7 0.0 63.0
1994 1.2 492.3 455.0 309.0 146.0 0.1 23.7 13.5 257.4 173.0 35.0 138.0 0.6 66.5
1995 1.2 538.4 500.8 349.7 151.1 0.1 25.6 11.8 289.2 191.1 42.1 148.9 1.7 79.7
1996 1.4 588.9 544.2 386.6 157.6 0.3 31.5 13.0 352.0 230.4 60.2 170.2 4.9 103.91997 1.5 689.1 635.3 456.1 179.2 0.2 43.1 10.5 474.8 312.7 96.2 216.5 6.0 140.31998 1.5 774.9 706.9 533.6 173.3 0.4 58.7 9.0 610.3 364.9 93.9 270.9 11.6 211.01999 0.4 427.1 383.5 279.5 104.1 0.4 43.2 4.2 396.1 235.8 52.7 183.1 7.5 152.7
2000 0.4 507.7 441.4 325.4 116.0 1.3 65.0 3.6 475.8 286.8 71.1 215.7 6.5 182.5
1999          Oct. 0.5 437.0 394.7 293.1 101.6 0.3 42.1 4.2 384.3 230.1 56.4 173.7 6.9 147.3
         Nov. 0.5 458.7 415.6 314.7 100.9 0.4 42.7 4.2 393.1 236.4 57.6 178.8 6.7 150.0         Dec. 0.4 427.1 383.5 279.5 104.1 0.4 43.2 4.2 396.1 235.8 52.7 183.1 7.5 152.7
2000          Jan. 0.5 440.8 396.4 292.2 104.2 0.4 44.0 4.2 407.1 243.6 56.7 186.9 6.7 156.8
         Feb. 0.5 448.8 401.8 294.2 107.6 0.5 46.5 4.3 414.4 247.1 59.5 187.7 6.8 160.5         Mar. 0.5 447.4 398.0 288.6 109.5 0.7 48.7 4.2 427.5 254.3 62.9 191.4 6.6 166.7
         Apr. 0.5 457.1 407.5 295.6 111.9 0.5 49.1 4.3 443.1 266.7 68.8 198.0 6.8 169.6
         May 0.7 465.0 412.6 303.1 109.5 0.5 51.9 4.8 438.0 261.4 64.6 196.8 5.4 171.2         June 0.6 463.6 410.1 301.1 109.0 0.5 53.0 5.2 426.9 247.8 52.2 195.6 6.2 172.9
         July 0.7 465.1 409.5 297.5 112.0 0.5 55.1 5.3 434.0 253.4 52.6 200.8 6.3 174.3
         Aug. 0.6 483.8 426.3 313.2 113.1 0.5 57.1 4.4 447.6 266.7 60.0 206.7 6.6 174.2         Sep. 0.6 491.4 432.3 316.7 115.6 0.5 58.6 4.5 458.3 272.7 62.0 210.7 5.4 180.3
         Oct. 0.6 507.0 445.5 327.3 118.2 0.6 60.9 4.5 471.9 282.5 64.6 217.8 6.1 183.3
         Nov. 0.5 518.1 452.9 335.5 117.4 1.3 63.9 3.9 474.5 285.1 68.2 216.9 6.2 183.3         Dec. 0.4 507.7 441.4 325.4 116.0 1.3 65.0 3.6 475.8 286.8 71.1 215.7 6.5 182.5
2001          Jan. 0.5 506.2 438.5 324.0 114.4 1.3 66.5 3.4 493.7 298.4 80.9 217.5 7.1 188.1
         Feb. 0.7 520.8 452.5 337.0 115.5 0.9 67.3 3.5 506.7 302.9 81.9 221.0 6.2 197.6         Mar. 0.5 552.8 482.5 365.5 117.0 1.2 69.1 3.6 536.3 326.1 97.5 228.6 5.9 204.3
Changes *
1992 −0.1 −18.4 −22.6 −20.4 −2.2 − + 3.8 + 0.4 + 28.6 + 13.6 + 2.5 + 11.0 −1.0 + 14.1
1993 + 0.1 + 117.3 + 117.2 + 103.9 + 13.3 −0.0 + 0.5 −0.4 + 31.9 + 12.6 + 6.2 + 6.3 −0.4 + 19.5
1994 + 0.0 −24.0 −27.5 −41.4 + 13.9 −0.0 + 0.1 + 3.4 − 1.6 −5.5 −12.3 + 6.7 + 0.6 + 5.1
1995 + 0.1 + 59.1 + 57.6 + 49.2 + 8.4 + 0.0 + 2.9 −1.4 + 38.3 + 21.3 + 7.8 + 13.6 + 1.1 + 16.1
1996 + 0.2 + 34.2 + 29.9 + 27.2 + 2.7 + 0.2 + 5.2 −1.1 + 58.4 + 36.2 + 17.0 + 19.2 + 3.1 + 21.4
1997 + 0.1 + 80.6 + 71.5 + 53.3 + 18.2 −0.1 + 10.4 −1.2 + 109.3 + 73.0 + 33.7 + 39.3 + 0.7 + 32.9
1998 −0.0 + 100.8 + 89.5 + 79.3 + 10.2 + 0.0 + 13.1 −1.8 + 122.0 + 42.7 −6.4 + 49.1 + 5.5 + 66.0
1999 −0.3 + 17.7 + 5.7 − 5.3 + 11.0 + 0.2 + 11.7 −0.0 + 85.8 + 42.8 + 8.4 + 34.4 + 1.3 + 41.8
2000 −0.0 + 78.9 + 56.5 + 44.6 + 11.8 + 0.9 + 21.6 −0.7 + 72.0 + 45.0 + 17.4 + 27.7 −1.2 + 28.2
1999          Oct. −0.0 + 10.3 + 8.8 + 8.8 −0.0 −0.0 + 1.5 + 0.0 + 9.2 + 5.1 + 3.2 + 1.9 −0.1 + 4.3
         Nov. −0.0 + 18.2 + 17.9 + 19.4 −1.5 + 0.1 + 0.2 −0.0 + 4.4 + 3.0 + 0.6 + 2.4 −0.3 + 1.7
         Dec. −0.0 −32.2 −32.7 −35.7 + 3.0 + 0.1 + 0.4 −0.0 + 2.8 −1.2 −4.9 + 3.8 + 0.8 + 3.2
2000          Jan. + 0.0 + 11.6 + 10.9 + 11.3 −0.4 + 0.0 + 0.7 −0.0 + 8.6 + 5.2 + 3.6 + 1.7 −0.9 + 4.3
         Feb. + 0.0 + 7.8 + 5.1 + 1.8 + 3.4 + 0.1 + 2.6 + 0.0 + 7.1 + 3.0 + 2.7 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 4.0         Mar. + 0.0 − 4.4 − 6.4 − 7.4 + 1.0 + 0.2 + 1.8 −0.1 + 9.4 + 4.7 + 2.8 + 1.8 −0.3 + 5.0
         Apr. −0.0 + 5.0 + 5.2 + 4.3 + 0.9 −0.2 −0.1 + 0.0 + 8.7 + 6.7 + 4.6 + 2.0 + 0.1 + 1.9
         May + 0.2 + 11.4 + 8.3 + 9.6 −1.3 −0.0 + 3.1 + 0.6 − 0.7 −1.6 −3.5 + 1.8 −1.3 + 2.3
         June −0.1 + 1.1 − 0.3 − 0.8 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 1.4 + 0.4 − 8.3 −10.1 −11.8 + 1.7 + 0.9 + 1.0
         July + 0.1 − 1.4 − 3.3 − 5.3 + 2.0 + 0.0 + 1.8 + 0.1 + 2.9 + 1.9 −0.2 + 2.1 + 0.0 + 0.9
         Aug. −0.1 + 15.0 + 13.6 + 13.0 + 0.6 −0.1 + 1.5 −0.9 + 7.7 + 8.9 + 6.6 + 2.4 + 0.2 −1.4
         Sep. −0.0 + 7.3 + 6.0 + 3.6 + 2.3 + 0.0 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 8.1 + 3.7 + 1.6 + 2.1 −1.3 + 5.7
         Oct. −0.0 + 10.9 + 8.8 + 7.6 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 2.0 −0.1 + 6.8 + 4.5 + 1.6 + 2.8 + 0.6 + 1.7
         Nov. −0.0 + 15.9 + 11.7 + 11.1 + 0.6 + 0.8 + 3.4 −0.5 + 8.6 + 7.4 + 4.5 + 3.0 + 0.1 + 1.1
         Dec. −0.1 − 1.2 − 3.2 − 4.1 + 0.9 + 0.0 + 2.0 −0.2 + 12.9 + 10.8 + 4.8 + 5.9 + 0.5 + 1.6
2001          Jan. + 0.1 − 1.0 − 2.5 − 1.1 −1.4 −0.0 + 1.5 −0.2 + 18.6 + 11.9 + 9.9 + 1.9 + 0.6 + 6.1
         Feb. + 0.2 + 14.5 + 13.9 + 12.8 + 1.1 −0.4 + 0.9 + 0.0 + 12.7 + 4.1 + 0.9 + 3.2 −0.9 + 9.5
         Mar. −0.2 + 27.4 + 25.6 + 25.4 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 1.5 + 0.1 + 22.1 + 17.0 + 14.3 + 2.6 −0.4 + 5.6
*See table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the domestic notes and coins. —2Up to December 1998, including loans on a
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as trust basis; see also footnote 6. —3Up to December 1998, bill-based
provisional. Subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from redisco unted
Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Up to December 1998: bills and bills sent for collection from the banks ’portfolios prior to
28*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
IV. Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
 Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bank
interests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memoitem: and and item: and item:Trust enter- Sight Short- long- Trust Sight Short- long- Trustloans  
6 prises  7 Total Total  9 term  9 term loans  6 Total Total  9 term  9 term loans  6   Period deposits  8 deposits  8 
End of year or month *
 
13.5 22.8 253.3 58.8 184.2 88.3 95.9 10.3 93.0 11.5 76.1 24.2 51.8 5.3 1991
14.8 25.8 297.0 66.7 219.7 119.2 100.5 10.5 125.8 15.8 103.6 34.4 69.2 6.4 199215.5 30.1 328.1 82.9 236.0 122.5 113.5 9.2 162.8 16.9 139.2 39.1 100.1 6.7 199317.3 34.0 402.3 111.6 283.7 150.8 132.9 7.1 181.5 20.6 155.3 41.7 113.6 5.6 1994
16.7 38.8 463.7 116.9 339.7 191.6 148.2 7.0 224.4 22.1 198.0 45.3 152.6 4.4 1995
12.7 45.8 486.5 147.1 335.7 172.0 163.7 3.8 273.5 34.3 237.2 50.0 187.2 2.1 199615.7 54.7 670.3 226.0 440.2 254.3 185.9 4.0 333.9 43.5 285.7 63.0 222.7 4.8 199722.9 62.9 875.7 309.5 562.5 359.1 203.4 3.7 390.3 51.3 329.6 71.8 257.8 9.5 199813.6 33.9 483.6 65.6 418.0 332.3 85.6 2.0 284.4 23.8 260.6 64.9 195.7 5.8 1999
13.9 47.4 586.0 113.7 472.2 382.9 89.3 1.7 314.9 35.4 279.5 62.5 217.0 5.6 2000
12.9 31.1 489.1 78.7 410.4 311.7 98.7 2.0 263.8 23.4 240.4 60.8 179.5 5.5 1999          Oct.
13.3 31.1 500.8 95.1 405.7 319.0 86.7 2.0 287.1 27.1 260.0 63.9 196.1 5.7          Nov.
13.6 33.9 483.6 65.6 418.0 332.3 85.6 2.0 284.4 23.8 260.6 64.9 195.7 5.8          Dec.
13.7 36.0 514.2 108.4 405.8 314.9 90.8 2.0 291.4 31.5 259.9 61.6 198.4 5.9 2000          Jan.
13.8 36.1 532.6 103.5 429.1 335.3 93.8 2.0 291.3 32.8 258.5 58.3 200.1 5.9          Feb.
13.9 36.3 553.0 110.2 442.9 347.5 95.3 2.0 308.6 41.2 267.4 62.0 205.4 5.9          Mar.
14.2 36.7 584.4 116.6 467.8 369.7 98.1 2.1 315.6 44.3 271.3 61.4 209.9 6.2          Apr.
14.2 37.5 595.9 113.4 482.5 386.0 96.5 2.0 320.3 43.1 277.3 69.9 207.4 6.8          May13.9 37.6 562.0 122.3 439.7 345.5 94.3 2.1 303.1 35.9 267.2 61.5 205.7 6.8          June
14.2 37.7 549.3 110.7 438.6 345.9 92.7 2.1 308.1 33.3 274.8 65.0 209.9 7.1          July
14.3 38.2 568.7 124.0 444.7 352.8 91.9 2.1 313.9 34.0 280.0 66.8 213.1 6.4          Aug.14.3 38.6 578.3 132.0 446.2 353.3 92.9 2.1 316.2 36.4 279.8 63.1 216.7 6.4          Sep.
14.5 40.4 579.5 127.3 452.3 358.8 93.5 1.9 329.9 34.8 295.1 69.6 225.5 6.5          Oct.
14.4 40.5 589.2 130.8 458.3 365.1 93.2 1.9 329.5 36.1 293.5 71.5 222.0 6.3          Nov.13.9 47.4 586.0 113.7 472.2 382.9 89.3 1.7 314.9 35.4 279.5 62.5 217.0 5.6          Dec.
14.2 48.5 608.9 140.2 468.8 381.4 87.4 1.7 328.2 38.7 289.5 73.4 216.1 5.6 2001          Jan.
14.5 47.8 631.6 150.3 481.3 396.0 85.3 1.7 335.3 37.9 297.4 76.3 221.1 5.6          Feb.
14.5 48.6 700.4 163.9 536.5 453.4 83.1 1.8 347.0 41.3 305.7 80.0 225.7 5.9          Mar.
Changes *
+ 1.9 + 3.8 + 41.3 + 7.3 + 33.2 + 28.8 + 4.4 + 0.7 + 32.5 + 4.2 + 27.0 + 10.1 + 16.9 + 1.2 1992+ 0.2 + 4.1 + 23.8 + 14.1 + 11.1 − 0.4 + 11.5 −1.4 + 34.3 + 1.0 + 33.2 + 4.0 + 29.1 + 0.2 1993
−1.7 + 4.2 + 85.6 + 31.3 + 56.0 + 33.9 + 22.1 −1.7 + 23.1 + 3.9 + 19.8 + 3.4 + 16.4 −0.7 1994
−0.2 + 5.2 + 71.0 + 7.9 + 64.6 + 45.9 + 18.7 −1.5 + 47.8 + 2.2 + 46.5 + 4.1 + 42.4 −0.9 1995
−2.3 + 5.9 + 11.3 + 27.1 − 13.9 − 26.6 + 12.7 −1.9 + 44.7 + 11.7 + 35.0 + 3.7 + 31.3 −2.0 1996
+ 2.7 + 7.9 + 157.3 + 67.7 + 89.5 + 71.8 + 17.7 + 0.1 + 51.0 + 5.4 + 43.3 + 11.4 + 31.9 + 2.3 1997+ 7.7 + 8.8 + 215.6 + 87.7 + 128.1 + 108.1 + 20.0 −0.3 + 64.7 + 10.4 + 48.9 + 10.3 + 38.6 + 5.5 1998
+ 1.1 + 10.9 + 37.4 −9.2 + 46.6 + 47.6 −1.0 −0.0 + 61.0 + 7.2 + 53.8 + 15.9 + 37.9 + 0.1 1999
−0.2 + 12.8 + 90.0 + 47.0 + 43.0 + 42.9 + 0.1 −0.4 + 24.4 + 11.1 + 13.3 −2.9 + 16.2 −0.8 2000
+ 0.0 + 0.1 + 8.3 −18.5 + 26.8 + 25.8 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 2.6 −2.9 + 5.5 + 3.8 + 1.7 + 0.1 1999          Oct.
+ 0.2 − 0.3 + 18.9 + 15.9 + 3.0 + 3.7 −0.7 −0.0 + 8.3 + 3.5 + 4.7 + 2.5 + 2.3 −0.0          Nov.
+ 0.3 + 2.7 −18.2 −29.7 + 11.4 + 12.7 −1.3 + 0.0 −3.4 −3.3 −0.1 + 0.8 −0.9 + 0.1          Dec.
−0.0 + 1.9 + 24.6 + 42.5 − 17.8 − 20.7 + 2.9 −0.0 + 4.9 + 7.6 −2.7 −3.8 + 1.1 −0.1 2000          Jan.
+ 0.0 − 0.0 + 17.7 −5.0 + 22.7 + 19.8 + 2.9 + 0.0 −0.3 + 1.3 −1.6 −2.7 + 1.1 −0.1          Feb.
−0.0 − 0.0 + 16.2 + 6.0 + 10.1 + 9.3 + 0.8 −0.0 + 14.6 + 8.2 + 6.4 + 3.3 + 3.1 −0.1          Mar.
+ 0.0 − 0.2 + 21.9 + 5.0 + 16.9 + 15.6 + 1.3 + 0.0 + 2.3 + 2.7 −0.4 −1.5 + 1.1 −0.1          Apr.
+ 0.1 + 1.2 + 18.1 −2.2 + 20.3 + 20.9 −0.6 −0.0 + 8.4 −1.0 + 9.5 + 9.1 + 0.4 + 0.8          May
−0.1 + 0.4 −29.0 + 9.6 − 38.7 − 37.1 −1.5 + 0.1 −15.0 −7.0 −8.0 −8.0 + 0.0 + 0.2          June
+ 0.1 − 0.3 −19.1 −12.5 − 6.6 − 4.2 −2.4 −0.0 + 2.0 −2.8 + 4.9 + 2.9 + 2.0 −0.0          July
−0.1 − 0.0 + 11.8 + 12.5 − 0.7 + 1.3 −2.0 + 0.0 + 1.7 + 0.3 + 1.4 + 1.0 + 0.3 −0.9          Aug.
−0.1 + 0.1 + 6.9 + 7.5 − 0.6 − 1.2 + 0.5 −0.1 + 0.2 + 2.3 −2.1 −4.1 + 2.0 −0.1          Sep.
−0.0 + 1.3 − 7.5 −6.1 − 1.4 − 0.8 −0.6 −0.2 + 9.0 −2.0 + 11.0 + 5.6 + 5.3 −0.2          Oct.
+ 0.1 + 0.7 + 16.7 + 4.7 + 12.0 + 11.4 + 0.7 −0.0 + 4.6 + 1.5 + 3.1 + 2.6 + 0.5 + 0.1          Nov.
−0.1 + 7.8 + 11.9 −15.0 + 26.9 + 28.8 −1.9 −0.1 −8.1 + 0.1 −8.1 −7.3 −0.8 −0.3          Dec.
+ 0.3 + 1.2 + 23.4 + 26.5 − 3.1 − 1.3 −1.9 −0.1 + 13.9 + 3.3 + 10.6 + 11.0 −0.4 + 0.0 2001          Jan.
+ 0.2 − 0.7 + 22.5 + 10.1 + 12.4 + 14.6 −2.2 −0.0 + 5.6 −0.8 + 6.4 + 2.5 + 3.9 + 0.0          Feb.
−0.2 + 0.1 + 58.9 + 11.9 + 47.0 + 50.2 −3.2 + 0.0 + 6.8 + 3.0 + 3.8 + 2.7 + 1.1 −0.1          Mar.
maturity). —4Up to November 1993, included in securities; see also 1998, including working capital supplied to branches abroad. —8Up to
footnote 5. —5Up to November 1993, including negotiable money market December 1998, including time deposits for less than 1 month. —9Up to
paper; excluding registered debt securities. —6From 1999, no longer December 1998, excluding time deposits for less than 1 month. 
included in loans and deposits (see also footnote 2). —7Up to December
29*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
IV. Banks
 
5. Lending of banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 euro billion
Short-term lending Medium and long-term
to public authorities to enter- to enterprises and individuals  1 
Lending to domestic
Loans and non-banks, total  1, 2 
   advances Loans and
including excluding not evi- Negoti- advances
negotiable money denced by able not evi-market paper, certifi- money denced bysecurities, cates and market certifi- Treasury
Period equalisation claims Total Total paper Total cates bills  
5 Total Total bills 3, 4 
End of year or month *
 
1991 3,147.0 2,951.4 602.0 575.8 575.5 0.4 26.1 14.7 11.4 2,545.0 1,941.8
1992 3,478.2 3,166.6 597.2 571.2 571.0 0.2 26.0 16.7 9.3 2,881.0 2,167.51993 3,826.4 3,417.8 563.2 544.2 540.8 3.4 19.0 16.8 2.2 3,263.2 2,441.81994 4,137.2 3,633.1 583.5 549.1 548.6 0.4 34.4 32.7 1.8 3,553.7 2,661.9
1995 4,436.9 3,936.9 615.2 584.0 583.3 0.7 31.3 30.5 0.8 3,821.7 2,785.5
1996 4,773.1 4,248.7 662.2 617.2 616.2 1.0 45.1 40.2 4.9 4,110.8 3,007.21997 5,058.4 4,506.2 667.8 625.8 624.8 1.0 41.9 40.1 1.9 4,390.6 3,223.41998 5,379.8 4,775.4 704.3 661.3 660.8 0.5 43.0 38.5 4.5 4,675.5 3,482.41999 2,904.5 2,576.5 355.3 328.9 328.7 0.2 26.4 23.6 2.8 2,549.2 1,943.6
2000 3,003.7 2,663.7 371.2 348.2 347.7 0.5 22.9 21.2 1.7 2,632.5 2,038.6
1999          Oct. 2,868.4 2,548.1 355.5 320.4 319.9 0.5 35.1 31.1 3.9 2,512.9 1,906.4
         Nov. 2,890.9 2,564.5 357.7 324.4 323.9 0.5 33.2 29.9 3.3 2,533.2 1,920.1         Dec. 2,904.5 2,576.5 355.3 328.9 328.7 0.2 26.4 23.6 2.8 2,549.2 1,943.6
2000          Jan. 2,922.0 2,583.3 358.9 328.8 328.3 0.5 30.1 26.5 3.6 2,563.1 1,951.6
         Feb. 2,933.2 2,586.8 357.9 332.4 331.8 0.6 25.6 22.6 3.0 2,575.2 1,960.4         Mar. 2,969.8 2,600.0 367.7 341.3 340.9 0.4 26.4 24.2 2.3 2,602.1 1,994.3
         Apr. 2,984.8 2,612.3 373.0 347.4 347.1 0.2 25.7 23.2 2.5 2,611.8 2,002.7
         May 2,996.7 2,620.6 372.3 347.2 346.9 0.4 25.1 23.0 2.1 2,624.4 2,017.6         June 2,961.4 2,623.8 370.4 349.3 348.8 0.4 21.1 19.3 1.8 2,590.9 1,986.4
         July 2,963.4 2,625.5 362.2 337.7 337.3 0.4 24.5 21.8 2.6 2,601.2 1,999.1
         Aug. 2,968.0 2,632.6 360.7 337.3 336.9 0.3 23.4 20.9 2.5 2,607.3 2,008.6         Sep. 2,972.0 2,640.8 367.2 350.6 349.9 0.6 16.6 14.9 1.7 2,604.8 2,013.9
         Oct. 2,982.9 2,649.9 372.9 349.0 348.5 0.5 23.9 22.0 1.9 2,610.0 2,019.2
         Nov. 2,997.2 2,657.6 373.0 349.5 348.8 0.7 23.5 21.9 1.6 2,624.1 2,028.9         Dec. 3,003.7 2,663.7 371.2 348.2 347.7 0.5 22.9 21.2 1.7 2,632.5 2,038.6
2001          Jan. 2,998.4 2,670.8 379.9 350.6 349.8 0.8 29.3 27.7 1.6 2,618.6 2,041.7
         Feb. 3,010.9 2,679.9 390.4 358.1 357.2 0.9 32.3 29.9 2.4 2,620.5 2,048.8         Mar. 3,033.2 2,686.2 396.4 362.7 361.6 1.2 33.7 32.1 1.7 2,636.7 2,062.9
Changes *
1992 + 294.3 + 240.3 + 16.9 + 18.1 + 18.3 −0.1 − 1.2 + 0.8 −2.0 + 277.4 + 229.7
1993 + 339.8 + 253.7 −15.1 − 9.2 −11.9 + 2.7 − 5.9 + 1.2 −7.2 + 354.9 + 251.7
1994 + 320.5 + 244.0 + 13.2 + 7.0 + 9.9 −2.9 + 6.2 + 6.6 −0.4 + 307.2 + 249.1
1995 + 312.8 + 311.9 + 35.9 + 37.9 + 37.7 + 0.2 − 1.9 − 1.0 −1.0 + 276.9 + 185.1
1996 + 336.3 + 312.9 + 44.3 + 32.6 + 32.2 + 0.4 + 11.7 + 7.4 + 4.3 + 292.0 + 221.51997 + 285.2 + 256.9 + 2.7 + 5.9 + 5.9 + 0.0 − 3.2 − 0.1 −3.0 + 282.5 + 219.9
1998 + 335.3 + 285.5 + 51.7 + 50.6 + 51.2 −0.6 + 1.1 − 1.6 + 2.7 + 283.6 + 258.3
1999 + 156.1 + 139.5 + 9.6 + 6.3 + 6.4 −0.0 + 3.3 + 2.9 + 0.4 + 146.4 + 146.4
2000 + 100.7 + 83.2 + 14.5 + 18.1 + 17.8 + 0.3 − 3.6 − 2.5 −1.1 + 86.1 + 93.8
1999          Oct. + 21.2 + 18.4 + 6.4 − 1.8 − 1.6 −0.2 + 8.2 + 7.2 + 1.0 + 14.8 + 10.3
         Nov. + 21.6 + 15.5 + 1.3 + 3.1 + 3.1 + 0.0 − 1.9 − 1.2 −0.7 + 20.3 + 13.7
         Dec. + 15.2 + 12.8 − 2.1 + 4.8 + 5.1 −0.3 − 6.8 − 6.4 −0.5 + 17.3 + 24.5
2000          Jan. + 14.9 + 3.7 + 2.7 − 1.0 − 1.3 + 0.3 + 3.7 + 2.9 + 0.8 + 12.1 + 6.0
         Feb. + 11.3 + 3.5 − 1.0 + 3.5 + 3.5 + 0.0 − 4.5 − 3.9 −0.6 + 12.3 + 8.8
         Mar. + 36.4 + 13.0 + 9.6 + 8.7 + 8.9 −0.1 + 0.9 + 1.6 −0.7 + 26.9 + 33.9
         Apr. + 13.5 + 10.9 + 3.9 + 4.6 + 4.8 −0.2 − 0.8 − 1.0 + 0.2 + 9.7 + 8.3
         May + 13.1 + 9.5 + 0.5 + 1.1 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.2 −0.4 + 12.6 + 14.9
         June − 33.7 + 3.7 − 2.8 + 1.3 + 1.2 + 0.1 − 4.1 − 3.8 −0.3 − 31.0 − 28.6
         July + 1.0 + 0.7 − 9.2 −12.5 −12.5 −0.0 + 3.3 + 2.5 + 0.8 + 10.2 + 12.6
         Aug. + 6.8 + 5.8 − 2.8 − 1.8 − 1.7 −0.1 − 1.1 − 0.9 −0.1 + 9.7 + 9.5
         Sep. + 3.3 + 7.4 + 5.8 + 12.5 + 12.2 + 0.3 − 6.8 − 6.0 −0.8 − 2.5 + 5.4
         Oct. + 9.5 + 7.7 + 4.8 − 2.5 − 2.3 −0.1 + 7.3 + 7.0 + 0.2 + 4.7 + 4.8
         Nov. + 14.5 + 8.0 + 1.8 + 2.2 + 1.9 + 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.0 −0.3 + 12.7 + 8.3
         Dec. + 10.1 + 9.5 + 1.4 + 1.9 + 2.1 −0.2 − 0.6 − 0.7 + 0.2 + 8.7 + 9.9
2001          Jan.  
r − 4.5 + 7.3 + 8.9 + 2.6 + 2.3 + 0.2 + 6.4 + 6.5 −0.1 − 13.4 + 3.3
         Feb. + 12.6 + 9.2 + 10.7 + 7.7 + 7.5 + 0.1 + 3.0 + 2.2 + 0.8 + 1.9 + 7.1         Mar. + 21.1 + 5.0 + 4.7 + 3.3 + 3.0 + 0.3 + 1.4 + 2.2 −0.8 + 16.4 + 14.2
*See table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the to December 1998, bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as liabilities arising from rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from
provisional. Subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following the banks ’portfolios prior to maturity). —4From 1999, including small
Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Up to December 1998, amounts of medium-term series of bills. —5From December 1993, including
including loans to domestic building and loan associations. —2Up to other negotiable money market paper; excluding mobilisation and liquidity
December 1998, including loans on a trust basis; see also footnote 9. —3Up paper. —6From 1999, breakdown of lending against securities by medium
30*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
IV. Banks
 
   
 
lending  2, 6 
prises and individuals  1, 2 to public authorities  2 
Loans and advances not Loans and advances not
evidenced by certificates evidenced by certificates
Memo Memo
item: Equal- item:
Medium- Long- Trust Medium- Long- Secur- isation Trust
Total term  7 term  8 loans  9 Total Total term  7 term  8 loans  9   Period Securities  6 ities 6, 10 claims  11 
End of year or month *
 
1,814.1 213.7 1,600.3 65.8 62.0 682.9 472.0 51.3 420.8 115.5 2.4 13.1 1991
2,011.5 263.5 1,748.0 90.3 65.7 734.1 487.8 47.6 440.2 147.2 64.3 13.9 19922,241.5 253.9 1,987.5 134.2 66.1 821.4 537.1 36.8 500.3 193.5 75.3 15.5 19932,390.4 228.3 2,162.0 203.2 68.3 891.8 577.0 34.5 542.5 230.5 68.1 16.1 1994
2,522.0 214.1 2,307.9 192.9 70.6 1,036.2 713.0 74.5 638.4 234.4 71.3 17.5 1995
2,713.3 215.8 2,497.5 205.9 88.0 1,103.6 773.0 69.5 703.6 231.3 81.3 18.0 19962,900.0 216.2 2,683.8 234.1 89.3 1,167.2 833.8 53.0 780.8 239.2 76.0 18.3 19973,104.5 206.8 2,897.8 292.4 85.4 1,193.2 868.8 33.1 835.7 235.4 71.6 17.3 19981,764.8 182.5 1,582.3 178.9 49.2 605.6 459.5 30.9 428.6 108.6 37.5 8.7 1999
1,838.9 192.8 1,646.0 199.7 50.1 593.9 455.9 30.4 425.5 104.9 33.1 8.4 2000
1,740.4 185.9 1,554.5 166.0 49.0 606.5 456.6 32.4 424.3 112.5 37.4 8.7 1999          Oct.
1,749.8 182.7 1,567.1 170.3 49.1 613.1 460.8 33.5 427.2 114.9 37.4 8.8          Nov.
1,764.8 182.5 1,582.3 178.9 49.2 605.6 459.5 30.9 428.6 108.6 37.5 8.7          Dec.
1,770.2 183.1 1,587.0 181.4 49.1 611.4 458.4 31.0 427.4 115.6 37.5 8.7 2000          Jan.
1,774.9 183.0 1,591.9 185.5 49.4 614.9 457.5 30.2 427.4 119.8 37.5 8.7          Feb.
1,777.2 183.3 1,593.9 217.1 49.3 607.8 457.7 31.1 426.7 112.5 37.5 8.6          Mar.
1,781.6 184.3 1,597.3 221.1 49.3 609.1 460.4 31.5 429.0 111.1 37.6 8.6          Apr.
1,789.9 185.7 1,604.2 227.7 49.3 606.8 460.8 32.5 428.3 108.4 37.6 8.6          May1,794.7 186.5 1,608.3 191.7 49.3 604.6 460.9 32.5 428.4 106.1 37.6 8.6          June
1,805.3 189.9 1,615.4 193.7 50.0 602.2 461.1 31.9 429.2 105.0 36.1 8.6          July
1,814.7 192.0 1,622.7 193.8 50.1 598.8 460.1 31.6 428.5 106.2 32.5 8.6          Aug.1,819.2 192.1 1,627.1 194.7 50.1 590.9 456.7 30.6 426.0 101.8 32.5 8.5          Sep.
1,825.3 192.1 1,633.2 193.9 50.0 590.8 454.0 29.7 424.3 104.3 32.5 8.5          Oct.
1,832.4 193.0 1,639.4 196.5 50.2 595.2 454.5 30.7 423.8 108.4 32.3 8.5          Nov.1,838.9 192.8 1,646.0 199.7 50.1 593.9 455.9 30.4 425.5 104.9 33.1 8.4          Dec.
1,837.8 191.7 1,646.1 203.9 49.8 576.9 455.6 30.6 425.0 116.6 4.7 8.5 2001          Jan.
1,840.8 191.2 1,649.6 208.0 49.9 571.7 452.0 28.8 423.3 115.2 4.4 8.5          Feb.
1,842.6 190.5 1,652.1 220.3 50.0 573.9 450.0 27.4 422.5 119.0 4.9 8.4          Mar.
Changes *
+ 204.1 + 29.6 + 174.5 + 24.8 + 0.8 + 41.2 + 15.7 − 3.6 + 19.3 + 32.2 − 1.0 + 0.7 1992
+ 214.1 −28.9 + 243.0 + 37.1 + 0.5 + 104.1 + 48.2 −10.8 + 59.0 + 65.1 −11.4 + 1.6 1993
+ 198.7 −29.2 + 227.9 + 48.5 + 1.9 + 58.2 + 26.2 − 2.4 + 28.5 + 38.3 − 6.9 + 0.7 1994
+ 176.0 − 1.9 + 177.9 + 3.3 + 5.9 + 91.8 + 91.8 + 15.3 + 76.6 − 0.4 − 1.2 + 1.5 1995
+ 204.4 + 1.6 + 202.8 + 14.0 + 3.1 + 70.4 + 65.7 − 5.5 + 71.2 − 3.3 + 8.0 + 0.1 1996
+ 189.0 + 0.3 + 188.7 + 29.5 + 1.4 + 62.6 + 60.6 −18.0 + 78.6 + 7.0 − 5.3 + 0.2 1997
+ 205.7 − 8.9 + 214.6 + 56.5 −3.9 + 25.3 + 35.0 −20.0 + 55.0 − 4.4 − 4.4 −0.9 1998
+ 121.8 + 25.1 + 96.8 + 24.6 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 8.5 + 6.2 + 2.3 − 7.8 − 0.6 −0.1 1999
+ 71.8 + 6.9 + 64.9 + 22.1 + 0.8 − 7.7 − 3.8 − 0.4 − 3.5 − 3.1 − 0.8 −0.3 2000
+ 9.5 − 0.3 + 9.8 + 0.8 + 0.2 + 4.5 + 3.3 + 0.4 + 2.9 + 1.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 1999          Oct.
+ 9.4 − 2.2 + 11.7 + 4.3 + 0.0 + 6.6 + 4.2 + 1.2 + 3.0 + 2.5 − 0.0 + 0.0          Nov.
+ 15.4 + 1.5 + 13.9 + 9.1 + 0.2 − 7.2 − 1.3 − 2.7 + 1.4 − 6.0 + 0.1 −0.0          Dec.
+ 3.2 − 1.0 + 4.2 + 2.8 −0.1 + 6.1 − 1.1 + 0.1 − 1.2 + 7.2 + 0.0 −0.0 2000          Jan.
+ 4.7 − 0.1 + 4.8 + 4.0 + 0.3 + 3.6 − 0.9 − 0.8 − 0.0 + 4.4 + 0.0 −0.0          Feb.
+ 2.3 + 0.3 + 2.0 + 31.6 −0.1 − 7.1 + 0.2 + 0.9 − 0.7 − 7.3 − 0.0 −0.0          Mar.
+ 4.4 + 1.0 + 3.4 + 4.0 + 0.0 + 1.3 + 2.7 + 0.4 + 2.3 − 1.5 + 0.1 −0.0          Apr.
+ 8.3 + 1.2 + 7.1 + 6.7 + 0.0 − 2.3 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 2.7 − 0.0 −0.0          May
+ 6.5 − 0.8 + 7.3 −35.1 −0.1 − 2.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 2.1 − 0.0 + 0.0          June
+ 10.5 + 3.6 + 7.0 + 2.1 + 0.7 − 2.4 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 1.1 − 1.4 −0.1          July
+ 9.4 + 2.1 + 7.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.7 + 1.2 − 0.0 −0.0          Aug.
+ 4.5 + 0.1 + 4.4 + 0.9 + 0.1 − 7.9 − 3.4 − 1.0 − 2.5 − 4.4 − 0.0 −0.0          Sep.
+ 5.6 + 0.0 + 5.6 − 0.8 −0.1 − 0.1 − 2.7 − 0.6 − 2.1 + 2.6 − 0.0 −0.1          Oct.
+ 5.6 − 0.1 + 5.8 + 2.6 + 0.2 + 4.4 + 0.4 + 1.0 − 0.5 + 4.1 − 0.1 −0.0          Nov.
+ 6.7 + 0.6 + 6.0 + 3.3 −0.1 − 1.2 + 1.5 − 0.3 + 1.8 − 3.4 + 0.8 −0.0          Dec.
− 1.1 − 2.5 + 1.3 + 4.4 −0.3 − 16.8 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.6 + 11.9 −28.4 + 0.0 2001          Jan.  r 
+ 3.0 − 0.5 + 3.5 + 4.1 −0.0 − 5.2 − 3.6 − 1.8 − 1.7 − 1.3 − 0.3 −0.0          Feb.
+ 1.9 − 0.6 + 2.5 + 12.3 + 0.1 + 2.2 − 2.1 − 1.3 − 0.8 + 3.7 + 0.6 −0.0          Mar.
and long-term lending no longer possible. —7Up to December 1998, (see also footnote 2). —10Excluding debt securities arising from the
maturity or period of notice of more than one year to less than 4 years; exchange of equalisation claims, see also footnote 11. —11Including debt
from 1999, more than 1 year up to and including 5 years. —8Up to securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims. —rAdjustments
December 1998, maturity or period of notice of 4 years and more; from of some items. 
1999, of more than 5 years. —9From 1999, no longer included in lending
31*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
IV. Banks
 
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and individuals, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
 
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 euro billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and individuals (excluding portfolios of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities  portfolios) 1 
of which  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
 
Financial
institu-
Mortgage tions  4 
loans Trans- (excluding
secured Energy Whole- Agri- port MFIs) andby and sale culture and insur-
Mortgage residen- Other of which water and and tele- anceloans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- supply, Construc- retail forestry, commu- enter-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing mining  
2 tion trade  3 fisheries nications prises
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
1998 3,850.8 1,430.2 1,654.9 1,040.9 614.0 2,367.1 614.9 331.5 70.7 124.2 343.1 63.7 80.9 132.8
1999 2,094.2 899.3 991.3 691.5 299.9 1,209.0 332.0 166.2 33.7 67.1 173.0 31.1 47.2 27.5
2000          Mar. 2,118.8 917.4 997.2 706.8 290.4 1,228.1 335.0 166.8 33.1 67.4 173.8 31.0 54.9 33.7
         June 2,144.2 931.3 1,009.7 719.2 290.5 1,243.4 338.6 170.5 33.0 68.5 172.8 31.6 52.7 37.0         Sep. 2,169.9 944.2 1,018.7 727.5 291.2 1,259.9 340.7 173.4 34.3 69.4 173.6 32.0 50.6 39.4         Dec. 2,187.3 955.2 1,030.8 737.6 293.2 1,267.8 344.1 174.9 35.9 68.2 173.2 31.4 49.1 34.2
2001          Mar. 2,204.8 961.9 1,031.8 742.4 289.4 1,286.5 343.5 177.7 36.0 69.2 174.0 31.3 50.6 42.9
 Short-term lending
1998 660.8 − 36.7 − 36.7 561.3 27.9 120.6 8.8 36.1 133.9 8.8 12.1 28.5
1999 329.4 − 17.6 − 17.6 276.9 11.8 57.3 4.3 17.9 61.4 4.5 10.6 8.8
2000          Mar. 341.5 − 16.3 − 16.3 289.4 11.2 57.9 3.6 18.1 62.0 4.3 16.2 15.8
         June 349.5 − 16.5 − 16.5 295.8 11.0 60.5 3.9 19.2 61.2 4.6 13.7 18.1
         Sep. 350.7 − 15.7 − 15.7 296.6 10.3 62.4 4.4 19.0 62.5 4.7 10.8 17.9
         Dec. 348.4 − 15.9 − 15.9 294.6 10.7 61.5 6.2 17.9 62.2 4.2 10.1 10.5
2001          Mar. 362.2 − 15.6 − 15.6 310.8 10.6 64.0 5.8 18.7 64.0 4.4 11.0 19.9
 Medium-term lending  
8 
1998 206.8 − 39.3 − 39.3 132.2 17.4 16.1 1.5 9.3 16.1 4.5 6.8 17.3
1999 182.5 − 42.6 − 42.6 109.1 13.4 16.7 1.7 6.9 13.0 3.4 6.3 4.0
2000          Mar. 183.3 − 40.9 − 40.9 110.1 13.1 16.8 1.8 6.8 13.2 3.4 7.2 3.5
         June 186.5 − 40.7 − 40.7 112.9 13.0 16.9 1.5 6.8 13.2 3.4 7.4 5.1
         Sep. 192.1 − 40.5 − 40.5 118.1 13.1 17.2 1.7 6.9 13.2 3.5 7.7 7.5
         Dec. 192.8 − 39.3 − 39.3 120.1 12.8 17.6 1.5 7.0 13.3 3.4 6.9 9.1
2001          Mar. 190.5 − 38.5 − 38.5 118.1 12.6 18.3 1.5 6.8 13.2 3.2 7.0 7.9
 Long-term lending  1, 9 
1998 2,983.2 1,430.2 1,578.9 1,040.9 538.0 1,673.5 569.6 194.8 60.4 78.8 193.1 50.4 62.0 87.0
1999 1,582.3 899.3 931.1 691.5 239.7 823.0 306.8 92.3 27.7 42.2 98.7 23.3 30.3 14.7
2000          Mar. 1,593.9 917.4 939.9 706.8 233.1 828.6 310.7 92.1 27.6 42.4 98.6 23.4 31.5 14.4
         June 1,608.3 931.3 952.4 719.2 233.3 834.7 314.6 93.2 27.5 42.6 98.4 23.5 31.7 13.9         Sep. 1,627.1 944.2 962.5 727.5 235.0 845.2 317.3 93.8 28.1 43.4 98.0 23.7 32.1 14.0         Dec. 1,646.0 955.2 975.5 737.6 238.0 853.1 320.6 95.9 28.2 43.4 97.7 23.9 32.1 14.6
2001          Mar. 1,652.1 961.9 977.7 742.4 235.3 857.7 320.4 95.4 28.6 43.7 96.7 23.7 32.7 15.1
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2000          2nd qtr + 26.1 + 10.4 + 10.7 + 8.9 + 1.8 + 15.5 + 3.0 + 3.8 − 0.1 + 1.2 − 1.0 + 0.5 − 2.1 + 2.8
         3rd qtr + 22.6 + 11.7 + 10.1 + 9.1 + 0.9 + 12.3 + 2.2 + 2.8 + 1.3 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 0.4 − 2.1 + 2.5
         4th qtr + 19.6 + 9.7 + 10.8 + 8.7 + 2.1 + 10.5 + 2.6 + 1.7 + 1.7 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.6 − 1.8 − 5.3
2001          1st qtr + 16.6 + 5.3 + 2.5 + 4.3 − 1.8 + 17.5 + 0.6 + 2.9 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.8 − 0.2 + 1.4 + 8.9
 Short-term lending
2000          2nd qtr + 7.0 − + 0.2 − + 0.2 + 5.4 − 0.2 + 2.6 + 0.2 + 1.0 − 0.8 + 0.3 − 2.5 + 2.3
         3rd qtr − 1.9 −− 0.9 −− 0.9 − 2.2 − 0.7 + 1.9 + 0.5 − 0.2 + 1.3 + 0.1 − 2.9 − 0.2
         4th qtr + 1.7 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 + 1.9 + 0.4 − 0.5 + 1.8 − 1.1 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.7 − 7.4
2001          1st qtr + 12.8 −− 0.4 −− 0.4 + 15.3 − 0.1 + 2.6 − 0.4 + 0.8 + 1.8 + 0.2 + 0.7 + 9.5
 Medium-term lending  8 
2000          2nd qtr + 1.3 −− 0.4 −− 0.4 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1
         3rd qtr + 5.8 −− 0.2 −− 0.2 + 5.2 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 2.5
         4th qtr + 0.5 −− 0.9 −− 0.9 + 1.5 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.8 + 1.5
2001          1st qtr − 3.5 −− 1.1 −− 1.1 − 2.4 − 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 1.1
 Long-term lending  1, 9 
2000          2nd qtr + 17.8 + 10.4 + 10.9 + 8.9 + 2.0 + 8.9 + 3.2 + 1.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.5
         3rd qtr + 18.7 + 11.7 + 11.1 + 9.1 + 2.0 + 9.4 + 2.8 + 0.6 + 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.2
         4th qtr + 17.4 + 9.7 + 11.4 + 8.7 + 2.7 + 7.1 + 2.3 + 1.8 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.6
2001          1st qtr + 7.4 + 5.3 + 3.9 + 4.3 − 0.4 + 4.6 + 1.1 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.1 + 0.6 + 0.5
*Excluding lending by foreign branches. Up to December 1998: lending by always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent alterations, which will
banks (excluding building and loan associations) in Germany; including appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Up
lending to building and loan associations. From 1999: lending by monetary to December 1998, including loans on a trust basis; from 1999, loans on a
financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany; breakdown of lending by building trust basis are no longer included in lending. —2Including the extraction of
and loan associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical alterations stones and earths. —3Including the maintenance and repair of motor
have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest date are vehicles and durable consumer goods. —4Up to December 1998, excluding
32*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
IV. Banks
 
   
 
 
 Lending to
 non-commercial
 Lending to employed and other individuals organisations
Memorandum items Other lending Services sector (including the professions)  5 
of which of which
Debit
balanceson wage
and salary
Other Lending accounts
real to self- Lending and of which
Housing estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Investment Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total credit  
7 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises enterprises persons  6 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
1,220.2 305.9 70.1 285.8 821.2 143.6 1,455.0 1,031.2 423.7 207.7 44.6 28.8 8.8 1998
663.1 154.1 42.8 168.3 449.4 73.9 871.4 655.7 215.7 105.7 23.6 13.7 3.6 1999
667.4 154.8 46.7 168.1 449.5 74.8 876.7 658.6 218.1 107.3 23.9 13.9 3.6 2000          Mar.
677.3 157.7 43.8 174.9 452.6 75.6 887.1 667.4 219.6 108.0 24.8 13.7 3.6          June
687.1 159.8 44.9 179.1 456.2 75.4 896.3 674.4 221.9 109.2 25.1 13.7 3.6          Sep.700.8 162.3 46.8 183.1 459.0 75.0 905.5 683.0 222.6 108.6 24.3 14.0 3.7          Dec.
704.9 163.9 49.4 184.0 457.5 75.6 904.5 684.6 219.8 108.6 23.3 13.8 3.6 2001          Mar.
Short-term lending
212.6 41.5 26.6 54.2 106.6 32.3 97.0 8.8 88.2 4.4 44.6 2.5 0.0 1998
112.2 18.6 17.1 27.5 55.9 15.6 51.1 5.7 45.4 2.5 23.6 1.3 0.0 1999
111.5 18.0 19.7 26.0 55.7 16.4 50.7 5.1 45.6 2.4 23.9 1.4 0.0 2000          Mar.
114.6 19.0 17.6 27.4 56.2 16.8 52.4 5.5 47.0 2.4 24.8 1.3 0.0          June
114.8 18.7 17.5 28.4 56.1 16.7 52.9 5.4 47.5 2.5 25.1 1.2 0.0          Sep.122.1 19.6 18.1 30.0 57.1 16.2 52.6 5.2 47.4 2.3 24.3 1.2 0.0          Dec.
123.0 19.6 20.1 29.8 56.0 17.1 50.3 5.0 45.3 2.5 23.3 1.1 0.0 2001          Mar.
Medium-term lending  
8
60.5 10.0 5.3 12.5 36.8 6.4 74.0 21.8 52.2 37.6 − 0.6 0.1 1998
57.0 7.1 4.0 12.3 33.3 5.6 72.7 29.2 43.5 31.0 − 0.7 0.1 1999
57.4 7.0 4.3 12.0 33.0 5.6 72.5 27.8 44.7 32.4 − 0.6 0.1 2000          Mar.
58.7 6.7 4.9 12.5 33.0 5.6 72.9 27.6 45.3 33.1 − 0.6 0.1          June
60.3 6.9 5.5 12.7 33.3 5.6 73.4 27.4 46.0 33.6 − 0.6 0.1          Sep.
61.4 6.8 6.3 13.6 33.1 5.5 72.2 26.4 45.8 33.0 − 0.6 0.1          Dec.
60.2 6.9 6.1 13.7 32.6 5.5 71.9 25.8 46.1 33.4 − 0.6 0.1 2001          Mar.
Long-term lending  1, 9
947.1 254.4 38.1 219.1 677.9 104.9 1,283.9 1,000.6 283.3 165.8 − 25.7 8.7 1998
493.9 128.5 21.8 128.5 360.1 52.7 747.5 620.8 126.7 72.2 − 11.7 3.5 1999
498.5 129.7 22.7 130.2 360.8 52.9 753.5 625.7 127.8 72.5 − 11.9 3.5 2000          Mar.
503.9 132.0 21.2 135.1 363.5 53.1 761.7 634.3 127.4 72.5 − 11.8 3.5          June
512.0 134.2 21.9 138.0 366.8 53.1 770.1 641.7 128.4 73.2 − 11.9 3.5          Sep.
517.3 135.9 22.5 139.5 368.7 53.2 780.8 651.4 129.4 73.3 − 12.2 3.6          Dec.
521.6 137.4 23.2 140.5 369.0 53.1 782.3 653.8 128.5 72.7 − 12.1 3.5 2001          Mar.
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
+ 10.4 + 2.6 − 2.4 + 6.5 + 2.7 + 0.7 + 10.8 + 7.7 + 3.1 + 1.4 + 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.0 2000          2nd qtr
+ 6.7 + 2.0 + 1.1 + 4.2 + 2.6 − 0.1 + 10.2 + 7.9 + 2.3 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.0          3rd qtr
+ 16.2 + 2.5 + 1.8 + 4.0 + 2.4 − 0.4 + 8.9 + 8.2 + 0.7 − 0.5 − 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.0          4th qtr
+ 3.4 + 1.6 + 2.5 + 0.9 − 1.8 + 0.6 − 0.7 + 1.9 − 2.5 − 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 2001          1st qtr
Short-term lending
+ 2.3 + 0.9 − 2.7 + 1.4 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 1.7 + 0.3 + 1.3 + 0.0 + 0.9 − 0.1 + 0.0 2000          2nd qtr
− 2.8 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0          3rd qtr
+ 10.2 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 1.6 + 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0          4th qtr
+ 0.0 − 0.0 + 2.0 − 0.3 − 1.1 + 0.8 − 2.4 − 0.3 − 2.1 + 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 2001          1st qtr
Medium-term lending  8
+ 1.1 − 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.6 + 0.6 −− 0.0 − 0.0 2000          2nd qtr
+ 1.6 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.3 + 0.8 + 0.5 − + 0.0 + 0.0          3rd qtr
+ 1.0 − 0.1 + 0.8 + 0.9 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 1.0 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.6 −− 0.0 − 0.0          4th qtr
− 1.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 1.1 − 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.1 − + 0.0 − 0.0 2001          1st qtr
Long-term lending  1, 9
+ 7.0 + 2.2 − 0.1 + 4.7 + 2.3 + 0.2 + 8.9 + 7.7 + 1.1 + 0.8 −− 0.0 − 0.0 2000          2nd qtr
+ 7.9 + 2.2 + 0.6 + 2.9 + 2.4 + 0.1 + 9.2 + 8.3 + 0.9 + 0.6 − + 0.1 + 0.0          3rd qtr
+ 5.1 + 1.7 + 0.4 + 1.5 + 1.7 + 0.1 + 10.0 + 9.0 + 1.0 + 0.1 − + 0.3 + 0.1          4th qtr
+ 4.6 + 1.5 + 0.7 + 1.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 2.8 + 2.9 − 0.1 − 0.0 −− 0.1 − 0.0 2001          1st qtr
credit institutions (other than building and loan associations); from 1999, loans, even in the form of instalment credit. —8Up to December 1998,
excluding banks (MFIs) and excluding finance leasing institutions; see also maturity or period of notice of more than 1 year to less than 4 years; from
footnote 5. —5From 1999, including finance leasing institutions. —6From 1999, more than 1 year up to and including 5 years. —9Up to December
1999, including sole proprietors; up to December 1998, sole proprietors 1998, maturity or period of notice of 4 years and more; from 1999, of morewere assigned to enterprises. —7Excluding mortgage loans and housing than 5 years. 
33*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
IV. Banks
 
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
 
 
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 euro billion
Sight deposits  2 Time deposits  3, 4, 5    Memo item:
  
for more than 1 year
of which: Subordin- Included
ated in timeliabilities deposits:
for up for (excluding liabilities
for less to and for for less 4 years Savings Bank Loans on negoti- arising
Deposits, on than up to than and deposits savings a trust able debt from
including
Period total  1 Total demand 1 month Total 1 year  4 Total 4 years more  6 bonds  7 basis  8 securities) repos  9 2 years  5 
Domestic non-banks, total 10 End of year or month *
 
1998 3,520.3 799.5 760.2 39.3 1,194.1 398.8 795.3 . 13.4 781.9 1,211.0 234.9 80.9 45.6 .
1999 1,905.3 420.4 420.4 . 759.6 239.7 519.9 4.5 . . 614.7 110.7 42.1 25.6 0.42000 1,945.8 443.4 443.4 . 819.9 274.7 545.2 9.0 . . 573.5 109.0 42.1 25.9 −
2000          May 1,891.5 429.0 429.0 . 767.1 232.6 534.4 6.0 . . 587.7 107.7 42.3 26.1 0.0         June 1,888.2 426.2 426.2 . 772.2 236.2 536.1 5.8 . . 582.3 107.6 42.3 26.1 0.0
         July 1,882.2 422.9 422.9 . 775.0 236.5 538.5 6.1 . . 576.6 107.7 42.4 26.1 −
         Aug. 1,879.2 415.6 415.6 . 783.2 242.7 540.5 6.3 . . 572.7 107.7 42.6 26.1 −
         Sep. 1,896.5 413.0 413.0 . 805.7 266.1 539.7 6.4 . . 570.0 107.8 42.8 26.0 0.0         Oct. 1,900.3 417.5 417.5 . 808.8 267.2 541.6 7.0 . . 566.2 107.9 42.7 26.2 −
         Nov. 1,912.9 438.7 438.7 . 802.8 260.1 542.7 8.5 . . 562.7 108.7 42.3 26.0 −
         Dec. 1,945.8 443.4 443.4 . 819.9 274.7 545.2 9.0 . . 573.5 109.0 42.1 25.9 −
2001          Jan. 1,921.8 431.1 431.1 . 812.0 263.6 548.4 10.2 . . 569.3 109.3 42.0 25.8 0.6
         Feb. 1,933.8 443.3 443.3 . 813.8 265.4 548.4 10.3 . . 567.2 109.5 42.5 25.7 1.0         Mar. 1,935.3 442.1 442.1 . 817.8 268.2 549.6 10.3 . . 565.6 109.8 42.6 25.8 0.1
Changes *
1999 + 67.3 + 32.7 + 32.7 . + 48.4 + 18.6 + 29.8 . . . −4.5 −9.3 + 0.7 + 2.3 .
2000 + 41.3 + 22.3 + 22.3 . + 61.1 + 34.8 + 26.2 + 4.5 . . −40.5 −1.7 −0.0 + 0.3 −0.4
2000          May − 1.6 − 6.3 − 6.3 . + 10.4 + 8.1 + 2.3 + 0.0 . . −5.9 + 0.1 −0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0
         June − 2.9 − 2.5 − 2.5 . + 5.1 + 3.5 + 1.6 −0.2 . . −5.4 −0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 −0.0
         July − 6.5 − 3.7 − 3.7 . + 2.0 + 0.1 + 1.9 + 0.2 . . −5.0 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 −0.0
         Aug. − 3.5 − 7.9 − 7.9 . + 8.2 + 6.3 + 1.9 + 0.1 . . −3.9 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 −
         Sep. + 17.0 − 2.8 − 2.8 . + 22.5 + 23.3 −0.8 + 0.1 . . −2.7 + 0.0 + 0.2 −0.1 + 0.0
         Oct. + 3.3 + 3.9 + 3.9 . + 3.0 + 1.1 + 1.9 + 0.6 . . −3.8 + 0.1 −0.1 + 0.1 −0.0
         Nov. + 13.1 + 21.8 + 21.8 . −6.0 −7.0 + 1.1 + 1.5 . . −3.5 + 0.8 −0.4 −0.1 −
         Dec. + 35.5 + 5.7 + 5.7 . + 18.6 + 14.6 + 4.0 + 0.5 . . + 10.8 + 0.4 −0.2 −0.1 −
2001          Jan. −24.0 −12.3 −12.3 . −7.9 −11.1 + 3.2 + 1.2 . . −4.1 + 0.3 −0.1 −0.1 + 0.6
         Feb. + 13.1 + 12.1 + 12.1 . + 2.9 + 1.8 + 1.1 + 0.1 . . −2.1 + 0.2 + 0.4 −0.0 + 0.4
         Mar. + 0.9 − 1.7 − 1.7 . + 4.0 + 2.8 + 1.3 + 0.0 . . −1.6 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 −0.9
Domestic public authorities End of year or month *
1998 288.3 36.7 29.1 7.6 170.3 44.8 125.5 . 1.0 124.5 6.4 6.3 68.7 2.6 .1999 124.4 14.7 14.7 . 104.4 42.0 62.4 0.4 . . 3.2 2.0 35.9 1.2 −
2000 149.1 16.6 16.6 . 127.7 62.1 65.5 1.2 . . 2.7 2.1 36.0 1.4 −
2000          May 119.9 12.7 12.7 . 102.2 38.2 64.1 0.9 . . 3.0 2.0 36.3 1.3 −
         June 128.3 15.6 15.6 . 107.7 43.7 64.0 0.9 . . 2.9 2.1 36.4 1.3 −
         July 123.9 13.1 13.1 . 105.9 41.3 64.6 1.1 . . 2.8 2.1 36.4 1.3 −
         Aug. 125.1 12.8 12.8 . 107.4 42.5 65.0 1.1 . . 2.8 2.1 36.6 1.4 −
         Sep. 144.0 12.7 12.7 . 126.4 61.9 64.5 1.0 . . 2.8 2.1 36.7 1.4 −
         Oct. 144.4 13.3 13.3 . 126.3 61.4 64.9 1.0 . . 2.7 2.1 36.5 1.4 −
         Nov. 136.7 12.7 12.7 . 119.1 53.8 65.3 1.1 . . 2.7 2.1 36.1 1.4 −
         Dec. 149.1 16.6 16.6 . 127.7 62.1 65.5 1.2 . . 2.7 2.1 36.0 1.4 −
2001          Jan. 133.5 13.3 13.3 . 115.5 49.7 65.8 1.4 . . 2.6 2.1 36.0 1.4 −
         Feb. 134.8 15.6 15.6 . 114.5 49.0 65.5 1.4 . . 2.6 2.2 36.3 1.4 −
         Mar. 132.9 14.2 14.2 . 114.1 49.1 65.0 1.4 . . 2.5 2.2 36.3 1.4 −
Changes *
1999 + 12.4 − 0.2 − 0.2 . + 13.7 + 15.3 −1.5 . . . −0.0 −1.2 + 0.7 −0.2 .
2000 + 24.8 + 1.9 + 1.9 . + 23.3 + 20.1 + 3.2 + 0.8 . . −0.5 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.3 −
2000          May + 1.6 − 1.6 − 1.6 . + 3.3 + 2.9 + 0.4 −0.0 . . −0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 −
         June + 8.4 + 2.9 + 2.9 . + 5.5 + 5.6 −0.0 −0.0 . . −0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −
         July − 4.4 − 2.5 − 2.5 . −1.8 −2.4 + 0.6 + 0.1 . . −0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 −
         Aug. + 1.2 − 0.3 − 0.3 . + 1.5 + 1.1 + 0.4 + 0.0 . . + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 −
         Sep. + 18.8 − 0.1 − 0.1 . + 19.0 + 19.4 −0.4 −0.0 . . −0.0 −0.0 + 0.2 −0.0 −
         Oct. + 0.4 + 0.7 + 0.7 . −0.2 −0.5 + 0.3 + 0.0 . . −0.1 + 0.0 −0.2 + 0.0 −
         Nov. − 7.7 − 0.6 − 0.6 . −7.2 −7.6 + 0.4 + 0.0 . . −0.0 + 0.0 −0.4 + 0.0 −
         Dec. + 12.5 + 3.9 + 3.9 . + 8.6 + 8.3 + 0.3 + 0.1 . . + 0.0 + 0.0 −0.1 −0.0 −
2001          Jan. −15.6 − 3.4 − 3.4 . −12.2 −12.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 . . −0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 −0.1 −
         Feb. + 1.3 + 2.3 + 2.3 . −1.0 −0.7 −0.3 + 0.0 . . −0.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 −−
         Mar. − 1.9 − 1.4 − 1.4 . −0.4 + 0.1 −0.5 − .. −0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −
*See table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from to December 1998, including time deposits for less than 1 month. —
the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as 3Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from registered
provisional. Subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following debt securities. —4Up to December 1998, excluding time deposits for less
Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Up to December 1998, than 1 month; see also footnote 2. —5Since the inclusion of building and
including deposits from loans on a trust basis; see also footnote 8. —2Up
34*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
IV. Banks
 
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont ’d)
 
 
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 euro billion
Sight deposits  2 Time deposits  3, 4, 5    Memo item:
  
for more than 1 year
of which: Subordin- Included
ated in timeliabilities deposits:
for up for (excluding liabilities
for less to and for for less 4 years Savings Bank Loans on negoti- arising
Deposits, on than up to than and deposits savings a trust able debt from
including
Period total  1 Total demand 1 month Total 1 year  4 Total 4 years more  6 bonds  7 basis  8 securities) repos  9 2 years  5 
Domestic enterprises and individuals 10 End of year or month *
 
1998 3,231.9 762.8 731.2 31.7 1,023.8 354.0 669.8 . 12.4 657.4 1,204.6 228.6 12.1 43.0 .
1999 1,781.0 405.7 405.7 . 655.2 197.6 457.6 4.1 . . 611.4 108.7 6.2 24.5 0.42000 1,796.7 426.8 426.8 . 692.2 212.6 479.6 7.8 . . 570.8 106.9 6.1 24.5 −
2000          May 1,771.6 416.3 416.3 . 664.9 194.5 470.4 5.1 . . 584.7 105.7 6.0 24.7 0.0         June 1,760.0 410.6 410.6 . 664.5 192.4 472.1 4.9 . . 579.4 105.5 5.9 24.7 0.0
         July 1,758.3 409.9 409.9 . 669.0 195.1 473.9 5.1 . . 573.8 105.6 6.0 24.8 −
         Aug. 1,754.1 402.8 402.8 . 675.8 200.3 475.5 5.2 . . 569.9 105.7 6.1 24.7 −
         Sep. 1,752.5 400.3 400.3 . 679.3 204.2 475.1 5.4 . . 567.2 105.7 6.1 24.6 0.0         Oct. 1,755.9 404.2 404.2 . 682.5 205.8 476.7 6.0 . . 563.5 105.8 6.2 24.7 −
         Nov. 1,776.2 426.0 426.0 . 683.7 206.3 477.4 7.4 . . 560.0 106.5 6.2 24.6 −
         Dec. 1,796.7 426.8 426.8 . 692.2 212.6 479.6 7.8 . . 570.8 106.9 6.1 24.5 −
2001          Jan. 1,788.3 417.9 417.9 . 696.5 213.9 482.6 8.9 . . 566.7 107.2 6.0 24.4 0.6
         Feb. 1,799.0 427.7 427.7 . 699.3 216.4 482.9 8.9 . . 564.6 107.4 6.2 24.4 1.0         Mar. 1,802.3 427.8 427.8 . 703.7 219.1 484.7 8.9 . . 563.1 107.6 6.3 24.5 0.1
Changes *
1999 + 54.9 + 32.8 + 32.8 . + 34.7 + 3.4 + 31.3 . . . −4.5 −8.1 + 0.0 + 2.4 .
2000 + 16.5 + 20.4 + 20.4 . + 37.8 + 14.8 + 23.1 + 3.7 . . −40.0 −1.8 −0.1 + 0.0 −0.4
2000          May −3.3 −4.7 −4.7 . + 7.1 + 5.2 + 1.9 + 0.1 . . −5.8 + 0.1 −0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0
         June −11.3 −5.4 −5.4 . −0.4 −2.0 + 1.7 −0.2 . . −5.3 −0.2 −0.0 −0.0 −0.0
         July −2.1 −1.1 −1.1 . + 3.8 + 2.5 + 1.4 + 0.1 . . −4.9 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 −0.0
         Aug. −4.7 −7.6 −7.6 . + 6.7 + 5.2 + 1.6 + 0.1 . . −3.9 + 0.0 + 0.0 −0.1 −
         Sep. −1.8 −2.7 −2.7 . + 3.5 + 3.9 −0.4 + 0.1 . . −2.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 −0.1 + 0.0
         Oct. + 2.8 + 3.3 + 3.3 . + 3.2 + 1.6 + 1.6 + 0.6 . . −3.7 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 −0.0
         Nov. + 20.8 + 22.3 + 22.3 . + 1.2 + 0.5 + 0.7 + 1.5 . . −3.4 + 0.8 −0.0 −0.1 −
         Dec. + 23.0 + 1.8 + 1.8 . + 10.0 + 6.3 + 3.7 + 0.4 . . + 10.7 + 0.4 −0.1 −0.1 −
2001          Jan. −8.4 −8.9 −8.9 . + 4.3 + 1.3 + 3.0 + 1.0 . . −4.0 + 0.3 −0.1 −0.1 + 0.6
         Feb. + 11.8 + 9.7 + 9.7 . + 4.0 + 2.5 + 1.4 + 0.0 . . −2.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 −0.0 + 0.4
         Mar. + 2.8 −0.4 −0.4 . + 4.4 + 2.7 + 1.7 + 0.0 . . −1.5 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 −0.9
of which: Domestic enterprises 10, 11 End of year or month *
1998 1,108.1 292.1 267.8 24.3 748.9 128.9 620.0 . 5.9 614.0 11.1 44.3 11.8 24.1 .1999 593.2 142.1 142.1 . 421.8 82.3 339.5 1.5 . . 5.5 23.7 6.1 13.7 0.42000 635.1 158.1 158.1 . 447.6 89.0 358.5 2.7 . . 5.2 24.2 5.9 14.1 −
2000          May 609.9 146.7 146.7 . 433.9 81.5 352.4 1.7 . . 5.5 23.8 5.8 14.1 0.0         June 606.3 142.7 142.7 . 434.4 79.5 354.9 1.8 . . 5.4 23.8 5.8 14.1 0.0
         July 608.5 142.6 142.6 . 436.7 80.1 356.6 1.8 . . 5.3 23.8 5.8 14.1 −
         Aug. 609.0 138.0 138.0 . 441.9 83.7 358.2 1.8 . . 5.3 23.8 5.9 14.1 −
         Sep. 611.2 138.0 138.0 . 444.0 85.9 358.1 1.8 . . 5.3 23.9 5.9 14.0 0.0         Oct. 616.6 142.5 142.5 . 444.8 85.3 359.5 1.8 . . 5.3 24.1 6.1 14.1 −
         Nov. 623.8 149.0 149.0 . 445.4 85.8 359.5 2.7 . . 5.2 24.3 6.0 14.0 −
         Dec. 635.1 158.1 158.1 . 447.6 89.0 358.5 2.7 . . 5.2 24.2 5.9 14.1 −
2001          Jan. 628.1 151.3 151.3 . 447.4 86.1 361.3 3.4 . . 5.2 24.2 5.8 14.0 0.6
         Feb. 632.2 154.5 154.5 . 448.4 87.0 361.4 3.4 . . 5.1 24.2 6.0 14.0 1.0         Mar. 629.9 150.2 150.2 . 450.6 87.5 363.1 3.3 . . 5.1 24.0 6.1 14.1 0.1
Changes *
1999 + 43.7 + 6.6 + 6.6 . + 36.0 + 7.5 + 28.5 . . . −0.2 + 1.2 + 0.0 + 1.3 .
2000 + 42.8 + 15.3 + 15.3 . + 27.3 + 6.7 + 20.5 + 1.2 . . −0.3 + 0.5 −0.1 + 0.4 −0.4
2000          May + 5.8 −0.1 −0.1 . + 5.8 + 3.3 + 2.5 −0.0 . . + 0.0 + 0.0 −0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0
         June −3.3 −3.7 −3.7 . + 0.5 −1.9 + 2.4 + 0.1 . . −0.1 −0.1 −0.0 + 0.0 −0.0
         July + 1.7 −0.5 −0.5 . + 2.3 + 0.6 + 1.7 −0.0 . . −0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 −0.0
         Aug. + 0.0 −5.1 −5.1 . + 5.2 + 3.6 + 1.6 + 0.0 . . −0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −0.0 −
         Sep. + 2.0 −0.2 −0.2 . + 2.1 + 2.2 −0.1 −0.0 . . −0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 −0.1 + 0.0
         Oct. + 4.8 + 3.8 + 3.8 . + 0.8 −0.6 + 1.4 + 0.1 . . −0.0 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 −0.0
         Nov. + 7.8 + 7.1 + 7.1 . + 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.9 . . −0.1 + 0.2 −0.0 −0.1 −
         Dec. + 13.8 + 10.1 + 10.1 . + 3.7 + 3.2 + 0.5 + 0.0 . . + 0.1 −0.0 −0.1 + 0.1 −
2001          Jan. −7.1 −6.8 −6.8 . −0.1 −2.9 + 2.8 + 0.7 . . −0.1 −0.1 −0.1 −0.1 + 0.6
         Feb. + 5.2 + 3.2 + 3.2 . + 2.1 + 0.8 + 1.2 −0.1 . . −0.1 − + 0.1 −0.0 + 0.4
         Mar. −2.9 −4.8 −4.8 . + 2.2 + 0.5 + 1.6 −0.1 . . −0.0 −0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 −0.9
loan associations in January 1999, including deposits under savings and in time deposits (see also footnote 1). —9Collected separately from 1999
loan contracts (see table IV. 12). —6Excluding deposits under savings and only. —10Up to December 1998, including liabilities to domestic building
loan contracts (see also footnote 5). —7Including liabilities arising from and loan associations and money market funds. —11Up to the End 1998,
non-negotiable bearer debt securities. —8From 1999, no longer included including sole proprietors. 
35*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
IV. Banks
 
8. Deposits of domestic individuals and non-commercial organisations at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
 
  
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 euro billion
Sight deposits  2 Time deposits  4, 5, 6  
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits Domestic individuals Domestic individuals
of domesticindividuals Domestic Domesticand non- non-com- non-com-commercial mercial mercialorganisa- Selfem- Other organisa- Selfem- Other organisa-
Period Total Total ployed  
3 Employees tions Total Total ployed  3 Employees tions tions, total  1 individuals individuals
End of year or month *
 
1998 2,123.9 470.8 452.1 93.4 298.0 60.7 18.6 275.0 243.5 72.3 132.6 38.7 31.4
1999 1,187.8 263.5 254.6 50.2 170.3 34.1 9.0 233.4 216.6 35.2 161.6 19.9 16.82000 1,161.5 268.7 259.3 47.7 176.0 35.6 9.4 244.6 225.5 34.9 168.9 21.7 19.2
2000          Oct. 1,139.3 261.7 252.0 48.3 169.4 34.3 9.7 237.7 218.5 34.7 162.8 21.0 19.2
         Nov. 1,152.4 276.9 266.7 50.4 180.3 35.9 10.3 238.3 220.3 34.7 164.4 21.3 18.1         Dec. 1,161.5 268.7 259.3 47.7 176.0 35.6 9.4 244.6 225.5 34.9 168.9 21.7 19.2
2001          Jan. 1,160.2 266.6 256.2 47.9 173.6 34.6 10.4 249.0 229.8 35.8 171.7 22.3 19.2
         Feb. 1,166.8 273.2 262.2 48.3 178.6 35.3 10.9 250.9 231.5 35.9 173.1 22.6 19.4         Mar. 1,172.5 277.6 266.8 47.5 183.1 36.3 10.9 253.2 233.4 35.9 174.6 23.0 19.7
Changes *
1999 + 11.2 + 26.2 + 25.9 + 3.7 + 18.8 + 3.4 + 0.3 −1.3 −1.0 −2.6 + 2.1 −0.5 −0.3
2000 −26.3 + 5.2 + 4.7 −2.5 + 5.7 + 1.5 + 0.4 + 10.6 + 8.2 −0.2 + 6.8 + 1.7 + 2.4
2000          Oct. −2.0 −0.6 −1.1 + 0.8 −1.8 −0.1 + 0.5 + 2.4 + 1.9 + 0.5 + 1.0 + 0.4 + 0.5
         Nov. + 13.1 + 15.2 + 14.7 + 2.2 + 10.9 + 1.6 + 0.6 + 0.6 + 1.8 −0.1 + 1.5 + 0.3 −1.2
         Dec. + 9.1 −8.2 −7.4 −2.7 −4.3 −0.3 −0.9 + 6.3 + 5.2 + 0.3 + 4.5 + 0.4 + 1.1
2001          Jan. −1.3 −2.1 −3.1 + 0.2 −2.4 −1.0 + 1.0 + 4.4 + 4.4 + 0.9 + 2.8 + 0.6 + 0.0
         Feb. + 6.6 + 6.6 + 6.0 + 0.3 + 5.0 + 0.7 + 0.5 + 1.9 + 1.7 + 0.1 + 1.4 + 0.2 + 0.2         Mar. + 5.7 + 4.5 + 4.6 −0.8 + 4.5 + 0.9 −0.1 + 2.3 + 1.9 −0.0 + 1.5 + 0.4 + 0.3
*See table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the including deposits arising from loans on a trust basis; see also footnote 9.—
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as 2Up to December 1998, including time deposits for less than 1 month. —
provisional. Subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following 3Up to the End 1998, including sole proprietors. —4Including subordi-
Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Up to December 1998, nated liabilities and liabilities arising from registered debt securities. —5UpDeutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
 
  
9. Deposits of domestic public authorities at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group 
*
 
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 euro billion
Deposits  1 
   
Federal Government and its special funds  2 Länder Governments
Time deposits  4 Time deposits  4 
Savings Memo Savings Memo
Domestic for up deposits item: for up deposits item:
public to and for more and bank Loans on to and for more and bank Loans on
Sight including than savings a trust Sight including than savings a trust authorities,
Period total Total 1 year 1 year bonds  5 basis  6 Total 1 year 1 year bonds  5 basis  6 deposits  3 deposits  3 
End of year or month *
 
1998 288.3 111.2 4.0 1.9 80.9 0.0 24.3 80.1 6.8 1.9 27.1 0.2 44.2
1999 124.4 45.9 1.0 4.6 40.3 0.0 12.7 21.0 2.8 4.2 14.0 0.1 23.12000 149.1 67.6 2.1 22.6 42.8 0.0 12.5 20.3 3.1 2.1 15.0 0.1 23.3
2000          Oct. 144.4 71.6 0.8 28.4 42.3 0.0 13.1 19.5 2.3 2.3 14.8 0.1 23.2
         Nov. 136.7 62.2 0.7 18.8 42.7 0.0 12.7 18.9 1.7 2.1 14.9 0.1 23.3         Dec. 149.1 67.6 2.1 22.6 42.8 0.0 12.5 20.3 3.1 2.1 15.0 0.1 23.3
2001          Jan. 133.5 55.7 1.3 11.1 43.3 0.0 12.2 21.7 2.9 3.7 14.9 0.1 23.6
         Feb. 134.8 55.5 1.2 11.4 42.9 0.0 12.7 22.0 3.5 3.4 15.0 0.1 23.4         Mar. 132.9 56.1 1.4 12.3 42.4 0.0 12.8 21.7 3.4 3.1 15.0 0.1 23.4
Changes *
1999 + 12.4 + 1.6 −0.9 + 3.5 −1.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 2.6 −0.4 + 3.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.5
2000 + 24.8 + 21.6 + 1.2 + 18.0 + 2.5 −0.0 −0.2 + 0.5 + 0.3 −0.9 + 1.1 + 0.0 + 0.2
2000          Oct. + 0.4 + 2.3 + 0.2 + 1.7 + 0.4 −− 0.3 −0.8 −0.0 −0.8 −0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1
         Nov. −7.7 −9.4 −0.1 −9.6 + 0.3 −− 0.5 −0.6 −0.5 −0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0
         Dec. + 12.5 + 5.4 + 1.4 + 3.8 + 0.2 −0.0 −0.2 + 1.6 + 1.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0
2001          Jan. −15.6 −11.9 −0.9 −11.5 + 0.5 −0.0 −0.3 + 1.4 −0.2 + 1.7 −0.1 + 0.0 + 0.3
         Feb. + 1.3 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.3 −0.4 − + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.3 −0.3 + 0.1 −− 0.0
         Mar. −1.9 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.9 −0.5 − + 0.1 −0.3 −0.1 −0.3 + 0.0 −0.0 −0.1
*See table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to
its successor organisations and of the Federal Railways, east German be regarded as provisional. Subsequent alterations, which will appear in the
Railways and Federal Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Up to December
Deutsche Post AG and Deutsche Telekom AG, and of publicly-owned 1998, including deposits arising from loans on a trust basis; see alsoenterprises, which are included in ”Enterprises ”. Statistical breaks have been footnote 6. —2Federal Railways Fund, Indemnification Fund, Redemption
36*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
IV. Banks
 
    
 
 Savings deposits  7  Memo item:
 
by maturity
 more than 1 year  6 
Included Subordinated
 of which: Domestic liabilities in time
non-com- (excluding deposits:
up to and up to and mercial Bank Loans on negotiable liabilitiesincluding including less than 4 years Domestic organisa- savings a trust debt arising1 year  
5 Total 2 years 4 years and more Total tions bonds  8 basis  9   Period individuals securities)  10 from repos  11 
End of year or month *
 
225.1 49.9 . 6.5 43.4 1,193.5 1,174.1 19.4 184.2 0.4 18.9 . 1998
115.4 118.0 2.5 . . 605.9 595.5 10.4 85.0 0.2 10.8 −1999
123.6 121.1 5.1 . . 565.5 555.8 9.7 82.7 0.2 10.4 −2000
120.5 117.2 4.2 . . 558.2 548.4 9.8 81.7 0.2 10.6 −2000          Oct.
120.5 117.9 4.7 . . 554.8 545.3 9.6 82.3 0.2 10.6 −         Nov.
123.6 121.1 5.1 . . 565.5 555.8 9.7 82.7 0.2 10.4 −         Dec.
127.8 121.3 5.5 . . 561.6 552.0 9.6 83.0 0.2 10.4 0.0 2001          Jan.
129.4 121.5 5.5 . . 559.5 550.0 9.6 83.2 0.2 10.4 0.0          Feb.131.6 121.6 5.6 . . 558.0 548.5 9.6 83.6 0.2 10.4 0.0          Mar.
Changes *
− 4.1 + 2.8 . . . − 4.3 − 4.8 + 0.5 −9.3 −0.0 + 1.1 . 1999
+ 8.0 + 2.5 + 2.5 . . −39.7 −39.0 −0.7 −2.3 + 0.0 −0.4 −2000
+ 2.2 + 0.2 + 0.6 . . − 3.7 − 3.6 −0.1 −0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −2000          Oct.
− 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.6 . . − 3.3 − 3.1 −0.2 + 0.6 + 0.0 −0.0 −         Nov.
+ 3.1 + 3.2 + 0.4 . . + 10.7 + 10.6 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.0 −0.2 −         Dec.
+ 4.2 + 0.2 + 0.3 . . − 4.0 − 3.9 −0.1 + 0.3 −0.0 −0.0 + 0.0 2001          Jan.
+ 1.7 + 0.2 + 0.1 . . − 2.0 − 2.0 −0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 −         Feb.
+ 2.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 . . − 1.5 − 1.5 −0.0 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 −0.0          Mar.
to December 1998, excluding time deposits for less than 1 month; see also footnote 6). —8Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
footnote 2. —6Since the inclusion of building and loan associations in securities. —9From 1999, no longer included in time deposits (see also
January 1999, including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see table footnote 1) —10Included in time deposits. —11Collected separately from
IV. 12). —7Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also 1999 only. Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
 
   
 
 
 
Local authorities and local authority associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  4, 7 Time deposits  4 
Savings Memo Savings Memo
for up deposits item: for up deposits item:to and for more and bank Loans on to and for more and bank Loans on
Sight including than savings a trust Sight including than savings a trust
Total 1 year 1 year bonds  
5, 8 basis  6 Total 1 year 1 year bonds  5 basis  6   Period deposits  3 deposits  3 
End of year or month *
 
45.3 16.5 19.8 2.4 6.6 0.1 51.7 9.3 21.2 15.2 5.8 0.2 1998
28.5 8.2 14.4 2.2 3.7 0.1 28.9 2.8 18.9 5.8 1.4 0.1 199930.2 8.9 15.7 2.0 3.6 0.1 31.1 2.5 21.7 5.7 1.2 0.1 2000
27.2 7.5 14.1 2.0 3.5 0.1 26.2 2.7 16.6 5.7 1.2 0.1 2000          Oct.
28.6 8.0 15.0 2.0 3.5 0.1 27.0 2.3 17.9 5.7 1.2 0.1          Nov.
30.2 8.9 15.7 2.0 3.6 0.1 31.1 2.5 21.7 5.7 1.2 0.1          Dec.
26.8 6.8 14.6 2.0 3.4 0.1 29.3 2.2 20.3 5.6 1.2 0.1 2001          Jan.
28.4 8.1 14.9 2.0 3.4 0.1 28.9 2.9 19.3 5.6 1.2 0.1          Feb.
27.4 7.5 14.6 1.9 3.3 0.1 27.7 1.9 19.0 5.6 1.1 0.1          Mar.
Changes *
+ 4.6 + 0.7 + 3.1 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 3.5 + 0.5 + 5.6 −1.0 −1.6 −0.0 1999
+ 1.7 + 0.8 + 1.3 −0.2 −0.2 + 0.0 + 1.0 −0.3 + 1.7 −0.1 −0.2 −0.0 2000
−0.5 + 0.1 −0.6 + 0.0 −0.0 + 0.0 −0.5 + 0.4 −0.8 −0.1 −0.0 −2000          Oct.
+ 1.5 + 0.5 + 1.0 + 0.0 −0.0 + 0.0 + 0.8 −0.4 + 1.2 −0.1 + 0.0 −         Nov.
+ 1.6 + 0.9 + 0.7 − + 0.0 + 0.0 + 3.8 + 0.2 + 3.6 + 0.0 −0.0 −         Dec.
−3.4 −2.1 −1.1 −0.1 −0.1 −− 1.8 −0.2 −1.5 −0.0 + 0.0 −0.0 2001          Jan.
+ 1.6 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 0.0 −0.0 + 0.0 −0.4 + 0.6 −1.0 −0.0 −0.0 −         Feb.
−1.0 −0.6 −0.3 −0.0 −0.1 −0.0 −1.2 −1.0 −0.2 + 0.0 −0.0 −         Mar.
Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special Fund, ”German Unity ”Fund, longer included in time deposits (see also footnote 1) —7Since the inclusion
Equalisation of Burdens Fund. —3Up to December 1998, including time of building and loan associations in January 1999, including deposits under
deposits for less than 1 month. —4Up to December 1998, excluding time savings and loan contracts. —8Excluding deposits under savings and loan
deposits for less than 1 month; see also footnote 3. —5Including liabilities contracts (see also footnote 7). 
arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. —6From 1999, no
37*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
IV. Banks
 
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 euro billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at three months ’ Memo at over three months ’
notice notice item: of which:
Interest With
of which: of which: of which: credited maturities
Special Special At three on of moresavings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months ’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years  
4 facilities  2 facilities  2 non-banks
End of year or month *
 
1998 1,234.2 1,211.0 971.4 582.8 239.6 189.6 23.2 17.3 39.5 243.9 234.9 211.1 9.1
1999 626.6 614.7 504.4 338.8 110.2 88.3 11.9 9.1 20.0 116.4 110.7 101.8 5.72000 585.2 573.5 450.5 309.0 123.0 104.4 11.7 8.3 19.3 115.9 109.0 94.4 6.8
2000          Nov. 574.2 562.7 442.3 303.4 120.5 102.1 11.5 8.1 0.6 115.4 108.7 94.7 6.7
         Dec. 585.2 573.5 450.5 309.0 123.0 104.4 11.7 8.3 13.8 115.9 109.0 94.4 6.8
2001          Jan. 581.0 569.3 446.3 308.9 123.0 107.3 11.7 8.2 0.8 116.1 109.3 93.6 6.8
         Feb. 578.9 567.2 444.2 307.5 123.0 107.4 11.7 8.2 0.5 116.3 109.5 93.0 6.8         Mar. 577.3 565.6 443.0 307.6 122.6 107.1 11.7 8.2 0.6 116.5 109.8 92.5 6.7
Changes *
1999 −4.4 −4.5 + 7.3 + 14.6 −11.8 −8.4 + 0.1 + 0.3 . −8.2 −9.3 −8.9 + 1.1
2000 −40.7 −40.5 −53.6 −31.1 + 13.1 + 15.8 −0.2 −0.8 . −0.5 −1.7 −7.4 + 1.1
2000          Nov. −3.5 −3.5 −5.0 −2.6 + 1.6 + 1.7 −0.0 −0.1 . + 0.8 + 0.8 −0.4 + 0.0
         Dec. + 11.0 + 10.8 + 8.2 + 5.6 + 2.6 + 2.3 + 0.3 + 0.2 . + 0.5 + 0.4 −0.3 + 0.1
2001          Jan. −4.2 −4.1 −4.1 −0.4 −0.0 + 2.9 −0.0 −0.0 . + 0.3 + 0.3 −0.8 −0.0
         Feb. −2.1 −2.1 −2.1 −0.8 −0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 −0.0 . + 0.2 + 0.2 −0.5 −0.1
         Mar. −1.7 −1.6 −1.2 + 0.1 −0.4 −0.4 −0.0 −0.0 . + 0.2 + 0.3 −0.5 −0.0
*See table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the building and loan associations, which are classified as time deposits. —
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as 2Savings deposits bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the minimum or
provisional. Subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following basic rate of interest. —3Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable
Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Other than deposits with bearer debt securities. — 4 Up to December 1998, of 4 years and more. 
 
   
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany 
*
 
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 eurobillion
Non-negotiable bearer debt securities
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper and money market paper  7 
of which: of which
with maturities of Subordinated
with maturities of
Certifi- non-
Floating- Zero- Foreign cates up to and up to and negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of including over over including over over debt debt
Period Total notes  1 deposit 1 year Total 1 year bonds  1, 2 bonds  3, 4 2 years  5 2 years  5 4 years  6 4 years  6 securities securities
End of year or month *)
 
1998 2,200.4 289.2 10.6 204.3 14.3 47.2 2,147.0 1,787.7 4.7 1.0 3.6 1.5 46.6 2.9
1999 1,310.3 208.2 14.7 98.7 13.1 73.6 1,189.8 . 2.6 0.5 1.3 . 32.7 2.52000 1,412.5 283.1 22.1 128.2 19.7 87.9 1,261.9 . 2.7 0.4 1.3 . 38.3 2.4
2000          Nov. 1,422.6 277.4 21.8 135.4 18.1 87.2 1,273.3 . 2.8 0.5 1.3 . 39.0 2.6
         Dec. 1,412.5 283.1 22.1 128.2 19.7 87.9 1,261.9 . 2.7 0.4 1.3 . 38.3 2.4
2001          Jan. 1,429.2 284.7 18.9 127.2 18.8 82.2 1,280.9 . 2.7 0.4 1.3 . 38.4 2.4
         Feb. 1,444.2 295.3 17.9 127.8 18.7 78.4 1,295.2 . 2.7 0.4 1.3 . 38.8 2.4         Mar. 1,451.6 302.6 18.7 130.2 20.2 78.3 1,300.7 . 2.7 0.4 1.3 . 39.6 2.4
Changes *
1999 + 183.5 + 56.2 + 9.3 + 20.0 + 5.8 + 49.5 + 96.4 . + 0.3 + 0.0 −0.5 . + 8.8 + 1.0
2000 + 102.0 + 65.5 + 7.0 + 26.6 + 6.4 + 14.1 + 72.1 . + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 . + 5.6 −0.1
2000          Nov. −10.9 −4.3 −0.4 −3.0 + 2.0 −4.7 − 6.5 . + 0.2 + 0.2 −0.0 . −0.3 −0.0
         Dec. −10.3 + 5.8 + 0.3 −7.2 + 1.4 + 0.5 −11.5 . + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 . −0.8 −0.2
2001          Jan. + 13.6 + 1.6 −3.2 −1.0 −0.8 −5.7 + 15.9 . + 0.0 + 0.0 −0.0 . + 0.2 −0.0
         Feb. + 15.0 + 6.7 −1.0 + 0.7 −0.1 −3.8 + 13.6 . + 0.0 + 0.0 −0.0 . + 0.4 −
         Mar. + 7.3 + 4.3 + 0.8 + 2.4 + 1.4 −0.1 + 5.5 . + 0.0 + 0.0 −0.0 . + 0.8 + 0.0
*See table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the 3Including floating-rate notes and zero-coupon bonds denominated in
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as foreign currencies. —4From 1999, bonds denominated in non-euro-area
provisional. Subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following currencies. —5Up to December 1998, 2 years and more. —6From 1999, no
Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Including debt securities longer collected. —7Non-negotiable bearer debt securities are classified
denominated in foreign currencies. —2Issue value when floated. — among bank savings bonds; see also table IV. 10, footnote 2. 
38*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
IV.  Banks
  
12.  Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *
  Interim statements
  
Euro billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs)  6 banks (non-MFIs)
Building loans Secur- Memo
item: ities (in-
Bal- cluding Bearer New
ances Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- and under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber loans Bank savings Interim and savings savings Sight ities ing pub- enteredof Balance (except debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan and time out- lished into in
End of year sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- deposits stand- year or associ- reserves)
or month ations total loans  
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans  4 tracts deposits tracts 7 ing 8 month  9 loans)  1 paper)  5 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2000 31 153.6 23.0 0.2 11.3 43.5 51.2 6.5 9.2 0.8 27.6 95.6 2.5 5.7 6.9 73.0
2001          Jan. 30 153.4 22.5 0.2 11.4 43.7 51.2 6.6 9.5 0.7 27.1 95.3 2.6 6.4 6.6 6.2
         Feb. 30 153.5 22.7 0.2 11.6 43.4 51.3 6.7 9.4 0.7 27.0 95.3 2.6 6.4 6.6 5.9         Mar. 30 154.4 23.4 0.2 11.7 43.4 51.6 6.7 9.1 0.7 27.5 95.2 2.6 6.3 6.8 6.8
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2001          Jan. 19 110.6 18.7 0.1 6.4 28.7 35.7 6.1 7.7 0.5 20.0 65.4 2.5 6.4 3.9 3.9         Feb. 19 110.6 18.8 0.1 6.4 28.4 35.8 6.2 7.5 0.5 19.8 65.4 2.5 6.4 3.9 3.8         Mar. 19 111.2 19.0 0.1 6.6 28.5 36.0 6.2 7.2 0.5 20.2 65.2 2.5 6.3 4.0 4.4
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2001          Jan. 11 42.7 3.8 0.1 5.1 15.1 15.5 0.5 1.9 0.2 7.1 29.8 0.0 − 2.6 2.2
         Feb. 11 42.9 3.9 0.1 5.2 15.0 15.5 0.5 1.9 0.2 7.2 29.8 0.0 − 2.6 2.1
         Mar. 11 43.1 4.3 0.1 5.1 14.9 15.6 0.5 2.0 0.2 7.3 30.0 0.0 − 2.7 2.3
Trends in building and loan association business
  
Euro billion
Changes in deposits Capital promised Capital paid out Outpayment Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts  10 Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans  11 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings andments loan contracts Newly loan contracts  
10 
Amounts Interest of granted
credited deposits interim paid into of which: of which:
savings on under Applied Applied and ofaccounts deposits bridging which: of Memo
cancelled to settle- to settle-
under under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which: item:savings savings and which: interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housingand loan and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonusescon- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during received
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter
13 tions  12 tracts  10 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2000 22.0 2.8 4.9 47.7 33.6 45.8 20.0 4.6 10.8 3.4 14.9 10.5 7.6 14.3 11.8 0.5
2001          Jan. 1.8 0.0 0.4 3.9 3.0 3.8 1.8 0.4 1.0 0.3 1.1 10.2 7.5 1.1 0.0
         Feb. 1.8 0.0 0.4 3.2 2.3 3.4 1.7 0.4 0.8 0.3 0.9 10.3 7.6 1.3 0.0         Mar. 2.2 0.0 0.4 4.7 3.4 4.1 1.9 0.4 1.0 0.3 1.2 10.7 8.0 1.3 . 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2001          Jan. 1.2 0.0 0.2 2.9 2.2 2.8 1.3 0.3 0.7 0.2 0.8 5.8 3.7 0.7 0.0         Feb. 1.3 0.0 0.3 2.2 1.5 2.5 1.3 0.3 0.6 0.2 0.7 5.9 3.7 0.9 0.0         Mar. 1.4 0.0 0.3 3.6 2.6 3.0 1.4 0.3 0.7 0.3 0.9 6.4 4.1 0.9 . 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2001          Jan. 0.6 − 0.1 1.0 0.8 1.1 0.5 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.3 4.3 3.8 0.3 0.0
         Feb. 0.6 0.0 0.1 1.0 0.8 0.9 0.4 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.2 4.4 3.9 0.4 0.0         Mar. 0.7 0.0 0.2 1.1 0.8 1.0 0.5 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.3 4.4 3.9 0.4 . 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of the foreign branches. deposits. —8Including participation rights capital; from December 1993
From August 1990 including assets and liabilities and/or transactions with including fund for general banking risks. —9Total amount covered by the
building and loan association savers in the former GDR. The figures for the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for which the contract fee ha s
latest date are always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent alterations, been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted count as new contracts .—
which will appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially 10For outpayments of deposits under savings and loan contracts arising
marked. —1Including postal giro account balances, claims on building and from the allocation of contracts see "Capital paid out". —11Including
loan associations, claims arising from registered debt securities and central housing bonuses credited. —12Only allocations accepted by the
bank balances. —2Loans under savings and loan contracts and interim and beneficiaries; including allocations applied to settlement of interim and
bridging loans. —3Including money market paper and small amounts of bridging loans. —13The amounts already credited to the accounts of savers
other securities issued by banks. —4Up to December 1998 including loans or borrowers are also included in "Amounts paid into savings accounts
on a trust basis. —5Including equalisation claims. —6Including liabilities under savings and loan contracts" and "Interest and repayments received
to building and loan associations. —7Including small amounts of savings on building loans". 
39*IV.  Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
IV.  Banks
  
13. Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
  
  
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 euro billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
Loans and advances Balances  and loans  and advances
German   not evidenced by certificates  3 not evidenced  by certificates    3 
banks
(MFIs)   to German
with non-banks
foreign foreignbranches Money of which Money
branches  1 
and/or and/or market enter- to marketforeign foreign balance paper, prises foreign paper,subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- and indi- non- secur- Other
Period diaries diaries total  
2 Total Total banks  4 banks Total Total Total viduals banks ities  5 assets  7 ities 5,  6 
Foreign  branches End of year or month *
  
1998 68 183 2,195.3 1,230.0 1,069.2 279.2 789.9 160.8 875.7 624.7 66.1 37.0 558.6 251.0 89.6
1999 66 187 1,311.9 714.6 614.2 177.0 437.2 100.4 533.9 386.2 26.6 20.8 359.6 147.7 63.42000 71 212 1,558.2 829.4 722.1 211.0 511.1 107.3 656.7 501.5 21.7 17.1 479.9 155.2 72.0
2000          June 74 210 1,433.8 784.3 680.6 209.1 471.5 103.7 588.7 437.6 24.5 18.7 413.1 151.1 60.8
         July 74 210 1,476.3 790.9 684.7 200.8 483.9 106.3 624.6 465.0 23.9 18.1 441.1 159.6 60.8
         Aug. 74 210 1,508.2 803.8 691.8 205.4 486.4 112.0 639.0 476.4 23.7 18.3 452.7 162.6 65.4         Sep. 73 210 1,542.9 816.8 706.1 209.4 496.7 110.7 656.5 494.5 24.8 19.5 469.8 161.9 69.7
         Oct. 72 212 1,635.7 851.3 738.2 205.8 532.3 113.1 717.1 537.5 23.5 18.3 514.0 179.6 67.3
         Nov. 72 212 1,629.8 863.0 753.1 213.5 539.6 109.9 700.4 526.2 23.2 18.1 503.0 174.3 66.4         Dec. 71 212 1,558.2 829.4 722.1 211.0 511.1 107.3 656.7 501.5 21.7 17.1 479.9 155.2 72.0
2001          Jan. 70 213 1,581.6 841.7 726.9 215.4 511.5 114.8 678.2 514.4 21.3 17.0 493.1 163.8 61.6
         Feb. 70 213 1,625.5 867.5 750.8 226.9 523.8 116.8 690.5 521.3 21.2 17.3 500.1 169.2 67.5
Changes *
1999 −2 + 4 + 73.2 + 5.3 + 7.7 + 18.1 −10.3 −2.5 + 52.2 + 33.5 −8.1 + 1.0 + 41.6 + 18.8 + 15.6
2000 + 5 + 25 +214.0 + 97.0 + 92.3 + 33.7 + 58.6 + 4.7 +108.3 +104.0 −5.3 −4.1 +109.4 + 4.3 + 8.7
2000          June + 2 + 4 −15.2 −22.3 −15.6 −11.9 −3.8 −6.6 + 1.0 −1.3 −1.9 −1.4 + 0.5 + 2.4 + 6.1
         July −− + 20.4 −4.2 −5.3 −8.6 + 3.2 + 1.2 + 24.8 + 18.9 −0.7 −0.8 + 19.6 + 6.0 −0.3
         Aug. −− + 0.0 −1.9 −6.1 + 4.1 −10.3 + 4.2 −2.6 −1.4 −0.4 + 0.0 −1.0 −1.2 + 4.5
         Sep. −1 − + 20.6 + 6.4 + 8.6 + 3.8 + 4.8 −2.3 + 10.4 + 12.4 + 0.9 + 1.0 + 11.5 −2.0 + 3.9
         Oct. −1 + 2 + 58.1 + 18.3 + 17.8 −4.0 + 21.8 + 0.5 + 42.6 + 28.8 −1.5 −1.4 + 30.3 + 13.8 −2.8
         Nov. −− + 30.4 + 27.7 + 28.9 + 8.2 + 20.8 −1.2 + 2.8 + 4.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 4.1 −1.3 −0.2
         Dec. −1 −− 9.3 −4.3 −4.6 −1.7 −2.8 + 0.3 −11.0 + 0.2 −1.1 −0.7 + 1.4 −11.2 + 6.0
2001          Jan. −1 + 1 + 26.5 + 13.4 + 5.7 + 4.5 + 1.3 + 7.7 + 23.4 + 14.5 −0.3 −0.0 + 14.8 + 8.9 −10.2
         Feb. −− + 42.3 + 24.9 + 23.0 + 11.5 + 11.5 + 1.8 + 11.6 + 6.4 −0.1 + 0.3 + 6.5 + 5.1 + 5.9
  
  
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month *
  
1998 37 137 830.8 469.0 373.1 160.1 213.0 95.9 311.0 237.5 71.4 62.3 166.1 73.5 50.8
1999 39 161 530.6 242.0 178.6 71.1 107.5 63.4 234.6 174.2 41.5 37.5 132.7 60.4 53.92000 40 170 580.5 248.1 183.8 82.2 101.6 64.3 263.5 203.4 45.4 42.3 158.0 60.1 69.0
2000          June 41 166 538.4 236.6 177.6 75.4 102.2 59.0 247.6 186.5 42.7 39.2 143.9 61.0 54.3
         July 41 167 540.4 238.3 176.5 70.2 106.3 61.8 245.8 185.3 40.9 37.5 144.4 60.6 56.3
         Aug. 41 167 553.8 245.5 183.1 74.6 108.5 62.4 248.7 187.1 41.8 38.5 145.3 61.6 59.6         Sep. 41 168 562.1 244.7 181.2 73.6 107.5 63.5 255.2 194.1 43.2 39.6 150.8 61.1 62.2
         Oct. 41 170 585.0 253.4 189.0 74.6 114.3 64.4 264.1 199.9 44.8 41.0 155.1 64.2 67.6
         Nov. 41 170 590.6 261.2 196.4 74.1 122.3 64.7 258.7 195.6 44.1 41.0 151.4 63.1 70.7         Dec. 40 170 580.5 248.1 183.8 82.2 101.6 64.3 263.5 203.4 45.4 42.3 158.0 60.1 69.0
2001          Jan. 41 170 580.6 259.0 194.1 82.1 112.1 64.8 259.2 195.1 44.4 40.7 150.7 64.1 62.5
         Feb. 41 171 579.0 252.9 186.0 80.2 105.8 66.9 262.3 197.1 44.1 40.8 153.1 65.1 63.8
Changes *
1999 + 2 + 24 + 86.6 + 5.2 −5.0 −0.6 −4.4 + 10.3 + 69.9 + 56.0 + 5.1 + 5.8 + 50.9 + 13.8 + 11.5
2000 + 1 + 9 + 38.4 + 2.1 + 2.4 + 11.1 −8.7 −0.3 + 21.8 + 21.8 + 3.9 + 4.8 + 17.9 + 0.0 + 14.5
2000          June − +2 −3.0 −7.1 −5.9 −2.9 −3.1 −1.2 + 0.6 + 2.1 + 0.0 + 0.5 + 2.1 −1.5 + 3.5
         July − +1 −3.2 −0.6 −2.7 −5.1 + 2.4 + 2.1 −4.1 −3.6 −1.8 −1.7 −1.8 −0.4 + 1.5
         Aug. −− + 6.5 + 4.2 + 4.8 + 4.4 + 0.4 −0.6 −0.5 −0.9 + 0.9 + 1.0 −1.9 + 0.4 + 2.8
         Sep. − + 1 + 5.1 −2.4 −3.1 −1.0 −2.1 + 0.6 + 5.2 + 5.6 + 1.5 + 1.1 + 4.2 −0.4 + 2.3
         Oct. − + 2 + 15.1 + 5.3 + 5.7 + 1.0 + 4.6 −0.4 + 5.2 + 2.5 + 1.6 + 1.4 + 0.9 + 2.7 + 4.6
         Nov. −− + 13.2 + 11.4 + 9.7 −0.5 + 10.2 + 1.7 −2.0 −1.5 −0.7 + 0.1 −0.8 −0.5 + 3.8
         Dec. −1 − + 3.4 −7.2 −8.9 + 8.1 −17.0 + 1.7 + 10.9 + 12.9 + 1.2 + 1.3 + 11.7 −2.0 −0.3
2001          Jan. + 1 − + 0.8 + 11.3 + 10.6 −0.2 + 10.8 + 0.7 −4.1 −8.2 −1.0 −1.7 −7.2 + 4.1 −6.4
         Feb. − +1 −2.0 −6.2 −8.2 −1.9 −6.3 + 2.0 + 2.9 + 1.9 −0.3 + 0.1 + 2.2 + 1.1 + 1.3
*From March 2000, including the foreign branches of building and loan plus endorsement liabilities arising from rediscounted bills and bills sent for
associations. In this table “foreign “also includes the country of domicile of collection from the banks ’portfolios prior to maturity); for foreign
the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical alterations have subsidiaries, volume of business even after 1998. —3For foreign branches:
been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest date are up to December 1998, including bill-based lending (bill holdings plus
always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent alterations, which will endorsement liabilities and bills sent for collection from the banks ’
appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. — portfolios prior to maturity); from 1999, including bill holdings; up to
1Several branches in a given country of domicile are regarded as a single December 1998, including loans on a trust basis. For foreign subsidiaris,
branch. —2Up to December 1998, volume of business (balance sheet total bill-based lending included even after 1998; up to December 1998,
40*IV.  Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
IV.  Banks
  
      
  
Deposits  8 
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  9 
Money
Short-term market Medium  and long-term
paper
of which of which and debt
enter- enter- Working securities
out- capital Other prises  and prises  and
German foreign indi- indi- Foreign standing and own liabilities
Total Total banks Total Total Total viduals Total viduals 10 funds 11   Period banks  4 non-banks
End of year or month * Foreign  branches
  
1,756.4 1,181.3 259.6 921.7 575.1 173.6 171.1 145.9 2.5 2.2 401.5 270.0 20.0 148.8 1998
988.6 671.8 148.3 523.6 316.7 60.7 57.9 52.8 2.8 2.7 256.0 234.4 14.0 75.0 1999
1,186.1 799.5 158.2 641.4 386.5 60.9 58.4 51.6 2.5 2.4 325.7 272.3 22.0 77.9 2000
1,113.9 734.6 147.7 586.9 379.3 67.0 63.5 58.4 3.5 3.3 312.3 239.9 19.1 60.9 2000          June
1,140.7 741.1 148.8 592.3 399.6 70.3 66.8 62.7 3.5 3.3 329.3 254.1 21.8 59.6          July
1,154.9 751.1 156.4 594.7 403.7 71.4 68.2 64.2 3.3 3.1 332.3 268.2 21.9 63.2          Aug.1,193.6 791.9 154.2 637.8 401.7 70.1 66.8 58.8 3.3 3.1 331.6 267.6 21.9 59.8          Sep.
1,258.2 829.4 159.2 670.1 428.8 65.3 61.9 58.8 3.4 3.2 363.6 287.4 22.0 68.1          Oct.
1,265.8 832.9 161.0 671.9 432.9 60.0 56.6 53.1 3.4 3.2 372.9 281.8 21.9 60.3          Nov.1,186.1 799.5 158.2 641.4 386.5 60.9 58.4 51.6 2.5 2.4 325.7 272.3 22.0 77.9          Dec.
1,209.0 805.3 149.5 655.8 403.7 58.7 56.3 53.2 2.5 2.4 345.0 282.6 21.9 68.1 2001          Jan.
1,270.1 822.4 160.4 662.1 447.7 61.1 58.6 55.8 2.5 2.4 386.6 267.2 22.0 66.3          Feb.
Changes *
− 2.8 + 5.6 + 13.4 −7.8 −8.4 −28.6 −30.2 −22.4 + 1.6 + 1.6 + 20.2 + 96.3 + 3.7 −24.1 1999
+ 170.8 +108.8 + 9.1 + 99.6 + 62.0 −0.0 + 0.4 −1.3 −0.4 −0.4 + 62.0 + 37.9 + 8.0 −2.7 2000
−16.2 + 1.8 + 5.9 −4.2 −18.0 −1.2 −1.1 −1.4 −0.1 −0.0 −16.9 −4.6 + 0.2 + 5.5 2000          June
+ 8.5 −5.2 + 0.8 −6.0 + 13.7 + 3.2 + 3.2 + 4.2 −0.0 −0.0 + 10.6 + 14.2 + 2.8 −5.0          July
−12.3 −7.2 + 7.0 −14.2 −5.1 + 1.0 + 1.2 + 1.3 −0.2 −0.2 −6.2 + 14.1 + 0.1 −1.8          Aug.
+ 27.4 + 33.9 −2.5 + 36.4 −6.5 −1.4 −1.4 −5.5 −0.0 −0.0 −5.1 −0.6 + 0.0 −6.2          Sep.
+ 35.9 + 18.8 + 4.5 + 14.3 + 17.1 −5.0 −5.1 −0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 22.0 + 19.8 + 0.1 + 2.3          Oct.
+ 37.1 + 21.7 + 2.5 + 19.2 + 15.4 −5.2 −5.2 −5.6 −0.0 −0.0 + 20.5 −5.6 −0.1 −1.0          Nov.
−27.5 + 0.1 −2.0 + 2.2 −27.6 + 1.1 + 2.0 −1.3 −0.9 −0.8 −28.8 −9.5 + 0.0 + 27.6          Dec.
+ 25.5 + 7.1 −8.6 + 15.6 + 18.4 −2.1 −2.1 + 1.7 −0.0 −0.0 + 20.5 + 10.3 −0.1 −9.2 2001          Jan.
+ 59.5 + 16.0 + 10.8 + 5.2 + 43.5 + 2.3 + 2.3 + 2.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 41.2 −15.4 + 0.1 −1.9          Feb.
  
  
End of year or month * Foreign  subsidiaries
  
638.7 450.5 85.5 365.0 188.2 50.2 44.2 41.6 6.0 5.9 138.1 87.7 33.8 70.6 1998
383.4 250.7 56.9 193.8 132.7 21.6 19.8 18.3 1.7 1.7 111.1 51.5 29.0 66.7 1999414.6 267.9 61.0 207.0 146.7 32.5 29.2 21.9 3.2 3.2 114.2 56.3 34.7 74.9 2000
394.8 256.2 51.6 204.6 138.6 24.9 22.2 20.7 2.7 2.7 113.8 51.5 31.5 60.5 2000          June
396.9 257.8 51.7 206.1 139.1 25.8 23.0 21.7 2.7 2.7 113.3 50.5 32.9 60.1          July
406.7 260.3 51.6 208.7 146.4 30.9 28.3 26.5 2.7 2.6 115.5 49.9 32.8 64.4          Aug.409.6 261.9 54.6 207.3 147.7 30.5 27.7 21.1 2.7 2.7 117.2 51.3 33.9 67.3          Sep.
421.5 264.7 55.2 209.5 156.8 37.0 34.2 23.1 2.8 2.8 119.8 54.6 34.8 74.0          Oct.
423.1 265.5 50.6 214.9 157.7 39.1 36.4 22.7 2.7 2.7 118.5 57.0 35.2 75.2          Nov.414.6 267.9 61.0 207.0 146.7 32.5 29.2 21.9 3.2 3.2 114.2 56.3 34.7 74.9          Dec.
415.6 278.0 59.3 218.7 137.6 27.3 23.5 21.7 3.8 3.8 110.3 58.7 36.1 70.2 2001          Jan.
415.2 273.2 55.0 218.2 142.0 26.3 22.5 19.8 3.8 3.8 115.7 58.0 35.5 70.3          Feb.
Changes *
+ 54.7 + 11.6 + 13.9 −2.3 + 43.1 −2.3 −2.8 −3.0 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 45.3 + 6.7 + 11.7 + 13.5 1999
+ 20.6 + 9.9 + 2.9 + 7.0 + 10.7 + 10.9 + 9.4 + 3.6 + 1.5 + 1.5 −0.3 + 4.8 + 5.4 + 7.6 2000
− 3.9 −5.2 + 0.6 −5.8 + 1.3 + 2.2 + 2.3 + 1.1 −0.0 −0.0 −0.9 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.4 2000          June
− 2.6 −1.3 + 0.1 −1.4 −1.3 + 0.9 + 0.9 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −2.2 −1.0 + 1.4 −1.0          July
+ 4.2 −1.4 −0.1 −1.3 + 5.6 + 5.1 + 5.2 + 4.8 −0.1 −0.1 + 0.5 −0.7 −0.1 + 3.0          Aug.
− 0.2 −0.3 + 3.0 −3.3 + 0.2 −0.4 −0.5 −5.4 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 2.7          Sep.
+ 5.6 −1.3 + 0.7 −1.9 + 6.9 + 6.5 + 6.5 + 2.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 3.4 + 0.9 + 5.3          Oct.
+ 7.7 + 4.7 −4.6 + 9.3 + 3.1 + 2.1 + 2.2 −0.4 −0.1 −0.1 + 0.9 + 2.4 + 0.3 + 2.7          Nov.
+ 2.2 + 10.0 + 10.3 −0.3 −7.8 −6.6 −7.2 −0.9 + 0.6 + 0.6 −1.2 −0.7 −0.5 + 2.5          Dec.
+ 1.7 + 10.5 −1.7 + 12.2 −8.8 −5.2 −5.7 −0.2 + 0.5 + 0.5 −3.6 + 2.4 + 1.4 −4.8 2001          Jan.
− 0.7 −4.9 −4.3 −0.6 + 4.3 −1.0 −1.0 −2.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 5.2 −0.5 −0.6 −0.2          Feb.
including loans on a trust basis (see also footnote 7). —4In the case of liabilities arising from loans on a trust basis (see also footnote 11). —
foreign branches, from December 1993 including transactions with the 9Excluding subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt securities
head office and with other branches in Germany; in the case of foreign and money market paper. —10Issues of negotiable and non-negotiable
subsidiaries, including transactions with the parent institution. — debt securities and money market paper. —11Including subordinated
5Treasury bills, Treasury discount paper and other money market paper, liabilities. From 1999, including liabilities arising from loans on a trust
debt securities. —6Including own debt securities. —7From 1999, basis. 
including loans on a trust basis. —8Up to Dezember 1998, including
41*IV.  Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
V. Minimum reserves
 
1. Reserve ratios
Germany European monetary union
 
% of liabilities subject to reserve requirements % of reserve base  1 
Sight Time
Applicable from liabilities liabilities Applicable from Ratio Savings deposits
1995  August 1 2    2    1.5    1999  January 1 2    
 
   
1Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank of 1 December
1998 on the application of minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which
a reserve ratio of 0 % applies, pursuant to article 4 (1)). 
 
  
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany up to the end of 1998
− pursuant to the Minimum Reserves Order of the Bundesbank −
 
DM million
Liabilities subject to reserve requirements Excess reserves  4 
Monthly Required as % of the
average  1 Total reserves  2 Level Sight liabilities Time liabilities Savings deposits Actual reserves  3 required  reserves Shortfall, total
1995          Dec. 2,066,565 579,337 519,456 967,772 36,492 37,337 845 2.3 3
1996          Dec. 2,201,464 655,483 474,342 1,071,639 38,671 39,522 851 2.2 41997          Dec. 2,327,879 734,986 476,417 1,116,477 40,975 41,721 745 1.8 31998          Dec. 2,576,889 865,444 564,878 1,146,567 45,805 46,432 627 1.4 4
1Pursuant to sections 5 to 7 of the Minimum Reserves Order. —2Amount balances of the credit institutions subject to reserve requirements on their
after applying the reserve ratios to the liabilities subject to reserve require- giro accounts at the Bundesbank. — 4 Actual reserves less required reserves. 
ments (section 5 (1) of the Minimum Reserves Order). —3Average credit
 
 
3. Reserve maintenance in the European monetary union
− from 1999, pursuant to the ECB Regulation governing minimum reserves according to article 19.1 of the
ECB/ESCB Statute −
 
Maintenance Required reserves
period before deduction Required reserves
of lump-sum Lump-sum beginning in  1 after deduction of
Reserve base  2 allowance  3 allowance  4 lump-sum allowance Actual reserves  5 Excess reserves  6 Shortfall, total  7 
European monetary union (euro billion)
 
2000          June 5,697.1 113.9 0.6 113.3 114.0 0.6 0.0
         July 5,622.0 112.4 0.6 111.8 112.3 0.4 0.0
         Aug. 5,660.1 113.2 0.6 112.6 113.1 0.5 0.0         Sep. 5,713.8 114.3 0.6 113.7 114.2 0.5 0.0
         Oct. 5,782.9 115.7 0.6 115.1 115.5 0.4 0.0
         Nov. 5,860.6 117.2 0.6 116.6 117.2 0.6 0.0         Dec.  
8 5,983.3 119.7 1.2 118.5 119.0 0.5 0.0
2001          Jan.  8 6,035.2 120.7 0.6 120.1 120.6 0.5 0.0
         Feb.  8 6,048.5 121.0 0.6 120.4 120.9 0.5 0.0
         Mar.  8 p 6,071.3 121.4 0.6 120.8 121.3 0.5 0.0
Of which: Germany (euro million)
2000          June 1,753,043 35,061 289 34,772 35,015 243 2
         July 1,728,735 34,575 285 34,290 34,451 161 2
         Aug. 1,722,726 34,455 279 34,175 34,392 217 3         Sep. 1,724,269 34,485 274 34,211 34,432 221 3
         Oct. 1,744,956 34,899 270 34,629 34,815 187 2
         Nov. 1,760,122 35,202 269 34,933 35,194 260 4         Dec. 1,780,022 35,600 269 35,332 35,532 200 6
2001          Jan. 1,813,577 36,272 267 36,005 36,177 172 1
         Feb. 1,795,119 35,902 266 35,636 35,831 195 1         Mar.  
p 1,820,155 36,403 266 36,137 36,329 193 6
1The reserve maintenance period of the ESCB minimum reserve system 1 December 1998 on the application of minimum reserves. —5Average
starts on the 24th of each month and ends on the 23rd of the following credit balances of the credit institutions subject to minimum reserve require-
month (the first reserve maintenance period lasted from January 1, 1999 to ments on their reserve accounts at the respective national central bank. —
February 23, 1999). —2Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central 6Actual reserves less required reserves after the deduction of the lump-sum
Bank of 1 December 1998 on the application of minimum reserves allowance. —7Required reserves after the deduction of the lump-sum
(excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio o f 0 % applies, pursuant to allowance. —8Owing to the adoption of the euro by Greece on January 1,
article 4 (1)). —3Amount after applying the reserve ratios to the reserve 2001, including credit institutions in Greece. 
base. —4Article 5 (2) of the Regulation of the European Central Bank of
42*V. Minimum reserves

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
VI. Interest rates
  
1. ECB interest rates 2. Discount and lombard rates 3. Base rate per Discount
    of the Bundesbank     Rate Transition Act
  
% p.a. % p.a. % p.a.
Main Marginal
Deposit refinancing lending Lombard
Applicable from facility operations  1 facility Applicable from Discount rate rate  3, 4 Applicable from Base rate  5 
1999 Jan.                 1 2.00 3.00 4.50 1994 Feb.                18 5 1/4 6 3/4 1999 Jan.                 1 2.50
         Jan.                 4  2 2.75 3.00 3.25          Apr.                15 5 6 1/2          May                 1 1.95
         Jan.               22 2.00 3.00 4.50          May                13 4 1/2 6 
         Apr.                 9 1.50 2.50 3.50 2000 Jan.                  1 2.68
         Nov.                 5 2.00 3.00 4.00 1995 Mar.                31 4 6          May                  1 3.42
         Aug.               25 3 1/2 5 1/2          Sep.                 1 4.26
2000 Feb.                 4 2.25 3.25 4.25          Dec.                15 3 5 
         Mar.               17 2.50 3.50 4.50   
         Apr.               28 2.75 3.75 4.75 1996 Apr.                19 2 1/2 4 1/2
         June                 9 3.25 4.25 5.25          to
         Sep.                 1 3.50 4.50 5.50 1998 Dec.                31
         Oct.                 6 3.75 4.75 5.75
  
2001 May               11 3.50 4.50 5.50
1Up to June 21, 2000 fixed rate tenders, from June 28, 2000 variable rate Rate Transition Regulation, the lombard rate is replaced from January 1,
tenders at minimum bid rate. —2On December 22, 1998 the European 1999 by the rate applied by the ECB for its marginal lending facility
Central Bank (ECB) announced that, as an exceptional measure between wherever the lombard rate is used as a reference variable for interest and
January 4 and 21, 1999, a narrow corridor of 50 basis points would be other payments. —5Pursuant to the Discount Rate Transition Act, read in
applied between the interest rates for the marginal lending facility and the conjunction with the Regulation Governing the Use of the Base Rate as adeposit facility, aimed at facilitating the transition to the new regime by Reference Variable, this rate replaces the discount rate from January 1, 1 999
market participants. —3From August 1, 1990 to December 31, 1993 this wherever the latter is used in contracts and regulations as a reference
was also the rate for cash advances; since January 1, 1994 cash advances variable for interest and other payments. This base rate is the discount ratehave no longer been granted. Wherever reference is made in an Act to the of the Bundesbank which applied on December 31, 1998. It changes frominterest rate applicable for cash advances of the Federal Government, the January 1, May 1 and September 1 of each year, and will change for the firstrate will be replaced by the base rate increased by 1.5 percentage points time on May 1, 1999 if the interest rate applied by the ECB to itspursuant to the Discount Rate Transition Act (see footnote 5).—4Pursuant longer-term refinancing operations (marginal rate) has changed by at least
to the Discount Rate Transition Act, read in conjunction with the Lombard 0.5 percentage points. 
  
    
4. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders 
*
    
  
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bids Allotment Weighted
Amount Amount Fixed rate Minimum bid rate Marginal rate  1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement EUR millions % p.a. ... days
Main refinancing operations
2001 Feb.                 7 104,384 100,000 − 4.75 4.75 4.75 14
       Feb.               14 65,307 65,307 − 4.75 4.75 4.75 12
       Feb.               21 200,526 155,000 − 4.75 4.78 4.83 14
       Feb.               26 109,632 27,000 − 4.75 4.78 4.79 16
       Mar.                 7 189,927 143,000 − 4.75 4.76 4.77 14
       Mar.               14 130,260 51,000 − 4.75 4.77 4.78 14
       Mar.               21 182,057 135,000 − 4.75 4.77 4.78 14
       Mar.               28 57,526 50,000 − 4.75 4.75 4.75 14
       Apr.                 4 129,101 118,000 − 4.75 4.75 4.75 15
       Apr.               11 24,949 24,949 − 4.75 4.75 4.75 14
       Apr.               19 257,706 172,000 − 4.75 4.86 4.91 11
       Apr.               25 83,303 5,000 − 4.75 4.78 4.80 12
       Apr.               30 147,324 80,000 − 4.75 4.77 4.78 15
       May                 7 164,985 79,000 − 4.75 4.78 4.78 16
       May               15 160,715 72,000 − 4.50 4.54 4.56 15
Longer-term refinancing operations
2000 June               29 41,833 20,000 −− 4.49 4.52 91
       July               27 40,799 15,000 −− 4.59 4.60 91
       Aug.               31 35,417 15,000 −− 4.84 4.87 91
       Sep.               28 34,043 15,000 −− 4.84 4.86 92
       Oct.               26 43,085 15,000 −− 5.06 5.07 91
       Nov.               30 31,999 15,000 −− 5.03 5.05 91
       Dec.               29 15,869 15,000 −− 4.75 4.81 90
2001 Jan.               25 31,905 20,000 −− 4.66 4.69 90
       Mar.                 1 45,755 20,000 −− 4.69 4.72 91
       Mar.               29 38,169 19,101 −− 4.47 4.50 91
       Apr.               25 43,416 20,000 −− 4.67 4.70 92
Other tender operations
2001 Apr.               30 105,377 73,000 − 4.75 4.77 4.79 7
Source: ECB. —*Enlargement of the euro area on January 1, 2001 to allotted or collected. 
include Greece. —1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were
43*VI. Interest rates

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
VI. Interest rates
 
5.  Money market rates, by month
 
 
% p.a.
Money market rates reported by Frankfurt banks  1 EURIBOR  3 
One- One- Three- Six- Nine- Twelve-
week month month month month month
Day-to-day money Three-month funds EONIA  2 funds funds funds funds funds funds
Monthly Lowest and Monthly Lowest and
Period averages highest rates averages highest rates Monthly averages
1999          Apr. 2.68 2.45 −3.15 2.65 2.54 −2.94 2.71 2.71 2.69 2.70 2.70 2.75 2.76
         May 2.55 2.49 −3.20 2.55 2.52 −2.58 2.55 2.56 2.57 2.58 2.60 2.66 2.68
         June 2.57 2.20 −2.75 2.60 2.53 −2.68 2.56 2.59 2.61 2.63 2.68 2.78 2.84
         July 2.51 1.65 −2.65 2.65 2.62 −2.70 2.52 2.61 2.63 2.68 2.90 2.95 3.03
         Aug. 2.43 1.70 −2.59 2.67 2.64 −2.70 2.44 2.57 2.61 2.70 3.05 3.13 3.24
         Sep. 2.42 1.65 −2.60 2.71 2.65 −3.09 2.43 2.55 2.58 2.73 3.11 3.19 3.30
         Oct. 2.49 1.70 −2.80 3.36 3.08 −3.50 2.50 2.63 2.76 3.38 3.46 3.55 3.68
         Nov. 2.92 2.50 −3.20 3.44 3.39 −3.52 2.94 2.99 3.06 3.47 3.48 3.58 3.69
         Dec. 3.03 4 2.75 −3.70 3.43 3.28 −3.47 3.04 3.27 3.51 3.45 3.51 3.66 3.83
2000          Jan. 3.03 2.79 −3.35 3.32 3.26 −3.49 3.04 3.08 3.15 3.34 3.56 3.76 3.95
         Feb. 3.27 3.12 −3.52 3.52 3.45 −3.63 3.28 3.31 3.36 3.54 3.73 3.93 4.11
         Mar. 3.50 3.26 −4.00 3.73 3.59 −3.83 3.51 3.52 3.59 3.75 3.94 4.11 4.27
         Apr. 3.67 3.00 −4.00 3.90 3.79 −4.09 3.69 3.73 3.79 3.93 4.08 4.25 4.36
         May 3.92 2.85 −4.23 4.34 4.06 −4.48 3.92 4.05 4.16 4.36 4.54 4.72 4.85
         June 4.28 4.02 −4.85 4.48 4.37 −4.55 4.29 4.31 4.37 4.50 4.68 4.85 4.96
         July 4.30 3.80 −4.51 4.56 4.50 −4.64 4.31 4.36 4.41 4.58 4.84 4.98 5.11
         Aug. 4.40 3.85 −4.80 4.76 4.60 −4.92 4.42 4.48 4.57 4.78 5.01 5.14 5.25
         Sep. 4.58 4.00 −4.99 4.83 4.77 −5.00 4.59 4.64 4.70 4.85 5.04 5.14 5.22
         Oct. 4.75 4.50 −5.02 5.02 4.95 −5.14 4.76 4.80 4.85 5.04 5.10 5.16 5.22
         Nov. 4.82 4.70 −4.98 5.07 5.00 −5.14 4.83 4.86 4.92 5.09 5.13 5.16 5.19
         Dec. 4.82 5 4.69 −5.40 4.92 4.81 −5.02 4.83 4.86 4.95 4.94 4.92 4.90 4.88
2001          Jan. 4.75 4.15 −4.88 4.75 4.65 −4.84 4.76 4.81 4.80 4.77 4.68 4.60 4.57
         Feb. 4.98 4.73 −5.75 4.74 4.67 −4.81 4.99 4.83 4.80 4.76 4.67 4.61 4.59
         Mar. 4.77 4.20 −4.93 4.69 4.52 −4.78 4.78 4.82 4.78 4.71 4.58 4.49 4.47
         Apr. 5.04 4.71 −5.80 4.66 4.52 −4.80 5.06 4.88 4.78 4.68 4.57 4.50 4.48
1Money market rates are not fixed or quoted officially; the monthly aver- Telerate. —3Euro Interbank Offered Rate: unweighted average rate
ages computed from daily quotations are unweighted. —2Euro OverNight calculated by Bridge Telerate since December 30, 1998 according to the
Index Average: weighted average overnight rate for interbank operations act/360 method. —4At the end of December 3.35% to 3.70%. —5At the
calculated by the European Central Bank since January 4, 1999 on the basis end of December 5.00% to 5.40%. 
of real turnover according to the act/360 method and published via Bridge
 
 
6. Euro area retail bank interest rates *, o
  
% p.a.; period averages
Deposit interest rates Lending interest rates
With agreed maturity Redeemable at notice To enterprises To householdsUp to Up to Over Up to Over Up to Over Consumer For house
Period Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months 1 year 1 year lending purchase
1998 1.10 3.20 3.22 4.06 2.61 3.25 6.73 5.80 10.06 5.87
1999 0.65 2.44 2.45 3.57 2.15 2.76 5.65 5.10 9.40 5.292000 0.85 3.45 3.44 4.52 2.25 3.79 6.60 6.23 9.86 6.34
2000          Mar. 0.73 2.96 2.96 4.28 2.07 3.33 6.07 5.85 9.56 6.10         Apr. 0.76 3.04 3.05 4.28 2.09 3.44 6.24 6.00 9.64 6.12
         May 0.78 3.26 3.26 4.45 2.13 3.65 6.40 6.17 9.72 6.30         June 0.83 3.49 3.49 4.48 2.16 3.87 6.56 6.23 9.84 6.34
         July 0.87 3.58 3.58 4.71 2.33 3.94 6.77 6.37 9.95 6.46
         Aug. 0.90 3.67 3.67 4.75 2.36 4.06 6.81 6.44 10.00 6.51         Sep. 0.94 3.85 3.83 4.77 2.38 4.20 6.92 6.44 10.03 6.56
         Oct. 0.97 3.96 3.96 4.76 2.40 4.14 7.14 6.60 10.15 6.57
         Nov. 0.99 4.04 4.03 4.77 2.47 4.25 7.17 6.63 10.20 6.56         Dec. 1.01 3.96 3.95 4.58 2.49 4.21 7.18 6.45 10.19 6.43
2001          Jan.
1 1.01 3.88 3.87 4.39 2.52 4.01 7.18 6.40 10.32 6.29
         Feb. 1.01 3.84 3.83 4.35 2.50 3.99 7.10 6.45 10.26 6.24
         Mar. 1.02 3.81 3.81 4.32 2.50 3.99 7.04 6.31 10.22 6.17
*These euro area retail bank interest rates should be used with caution and Member States. Furthermore, the national interest rates are not harmonised
for statistical purposes only, primarily to analyse their development over in terms of their coverage (new business and/or outstanding amounts), th e
time rather than their level. They are calculated as the weighted average of nature of the data (nominal or effective) or the compilation method. The
national interest rates provided by the national central banks. The national country weights for the euro area retail bank interest rates are derived from
rates represent those rates that are currently available from national MFI balance sheet statistics or close proxies. The weights reflect thesources and which are judged to fit the standard categories. These national country-specific proportions of the relevant instruments within the eur o
rates have been aggregated to derive information for the euro area, in area, measured as outstanding amounts. The weights are adjusted monthly,some cases relying on proxies and working assumptions due to the so that interest rates and weights always refer to the same month. —1En-
heterogeneity observed in the national financial instruments across MU largement of the euro area on January 1, 2001 to include Greece. 
      
o Tables and notes taken from the ECB. 
44*VI. Interest rates

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
VI. Interest rates
 
7. Lending and deposit rates of banks (MFIs) in Germany *
    Lending rates
 
% p.a.
Current account credit Bills discountedBills of less than DM 100,000
DM 200,000 and more DM 1 million and more refinancable
less than DM 200,000 but less than DM 1 million but less than DM 5 million at the Bundesbank
Reporting Average Average Average Average
period  
1 interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread
2000          June 10.57 8.00 −12.50 9.59 7.25 −12.00 8.39 6.50 −11.00 6.42 4.80 −9.75
         July 10.84 8.50 −12.75 9.81 7.50 −12.50 8.58 6.75 −11.50 6.49 4.84 −9.50
         Aug. 10.88 8.50 −12.75 9.85 7.50 −12.50 8.67 6.75 −11.50 6.63 5.00 −9.75
         Sep. 11.02 8.75 −13.00 9.94 7.50 −12.50 8.83 7.00 −11.75 6.76 5.00 −10.00
         Oct. 11.22 8.75 −13.25 10.18 7.75 −12.75 9.03 7.00 −12.00 6.95 5.00 −10.00
         Nov. 11.29 8.75 −13.25 10.19 7.50 −12.95 9.10 7.00 −12.00 7.01 5.00 −10.00
         Dec. 11.39 8.90 −13.25 10.27 8.00 −12.75 9.12 7.00 −12.00 6.98 5.05 −10.00
2001          Jan. 11.35 8.75 −13.50 10.30 8.00 −12.95 9.12 7.00 −12.25 6.99 5.50 −10.00
         Feb. 11.13 8.00 −13.25 10.15 7.50 −12.95 8.95 7.00 −12.00 6.98 5.40 −9.81
         Mar. 11.17 7.00 −13.25 10.03 6.50 −13.00 8.86 6.00 −12.00 7.00 5.50 −10.00
         Apr. 11.14 6.80 −13.25 10.07 6.50 −13.00 8.85 6.00 −12.25 6.96 5.39 −10.00
 
 
Long-term fixed-rate loans
to enterprises and self-employed persons
Instalment credits (excluding lending to the housing sector)  6 
DM 10,000 and more but not more than DM 30,000  2 DM 200,000 and more DM 1 million and more
Personal credit lines but less than DM 1 million but less than DM 10 million
(overdraft facilities Effectivegranted to individuals) Monthly rate  
3 annual interest rate  4, 5 Effective interest rate  5 
Reporting Average Average Average Average Averageperiod  
1 interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread
2000          June 11.81 10.75 −13.00 0.40 0.32 −0.48 10.44 8.44 −12.58 7.11 6.10 −8.75 6.93 5.97 −8.49
         July 12.01 10.75 −13.00 0.40 0.32 −0.48 10.50 8.57 −12.58 7.17 6.20 −8.85 6.99 6.07 −8.35
         Aug. 12.10 10.75 −13.00 0.41 0.33 −0.48 10.60 8.80 −12.61 7.21 6.26 −8.67 7.01 6.03 −8.35
         Sep. 12.28 11.00 −13.25 0.41 0.33 −0.49 10.64 8.76 −12.72 7.24 6.36 −8.83 7.04 6.16 −8.49
         Oct. 12.44 11.00 −13.50 0.41 0.34 −0.50 10.69 8.99 −12.73 7.25 6.24 −8.90 7.05 6.19 −8.52
         Nov. 12.57 11.25 −13.50 0.41 0.33 −0.51 10.73 8.95 −12.81 7.26 6.25 −8.89 7.05 6.17 −8.55
         Dec. 12.61 11.25 −13.50 0.41 0.35 −0.50 10.80 8.95 −12.83 7.04 6.05 −8.70 6.84 5.85 −8.30
2001          Jan. 12.63 11.00 −13.50 0.41 0.34 −0.50 10.82 8.95 −12.95 6.89 5.82 −8.57 6.66 5.68 −8.25
         Feb. 12.61 10.75 −13.50 0.41 0.34 −0.50 10.82 8.88 −12.91 6.89 5.79 −8.64 6.65 5.63 −8.25
         Mar. 12.67 11.25 −13.75 0.41 0.34 −0.50 10.76 8.77 −12.77 6.78 5.75 −8.50 6.56 5.64 −8.05
         Apr. 12.70 11.25 −13.75 0.41 0.33 −0.49 10.71 8.76 −12.77 6.77 5.75 −8.57 6.53 5.57 −8.05
 
 
Mortgage loans secured by residential real estate
with interest rates fixed (effective interest rate)  5, 7 
with variable interest rates
for 2 years for 5 years for 10 years (effective interest rate)  5, 7 
Reporting Average Average Average Average
period  1 interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread
2000          June 6.35 5.80 −6.97 6.41 6.10 −6.86 6.64 6.34 −7.07 6.56 5.64 −7.77
         July 6.45 5.91 −7.10 6.48 6.15 −6.91 6.70 6.43 −7.13 6.67 5.89 −7.77
         Aug. 6.51 5.96 −7.08 6.51 6.17 −6.91 6.69 6.43 −7.02 6.70 5.91 −8.04
         Sep. 6.53 5.96 −7.17 6.53 6.22 −6.91 6.72 6.49 −7.07 6.79 6.00 −7.87
         Oct. 6.51 6.00 −7.05 6.49 6.17 −6.95 6.68 6.47 −7.07 6.84 6.01 −8.03
         Nov. 6.48 5.96 −7.06 6.45 6.13 −6.91 6.64 6.43 −6.96 6.86 5.96 −8.03
         Dec. 6.20 5.64 −6.98 6.19 5.81 −6.75 6.44 6.17 −6.86 6.81 5.90 −8.03
2001          Jan. 5.95 5.41 −6.60 5.93 5.59 −6.54 6.22 5.96 −6.70 6.72 5.64 −8.11
         Feb. 5.94 5.43 −6.59 5.90 5.59 −6.51 6.17 5.96 −6.54 6.71 5.61 −8.03
         Mar. 5.85 5.27 −6.49 5.80 5.47 −6.35 6.12 5.85 −6.54 6.67 5.56 −8.03
         Apr. 5.80 5.27 −6.54 5.78 5.43 −6.33 6.11 5.85 −6.54 6.64 5.48 −8.03
*The average rates are calculated as unweighted arithmetic means from processing fees, taking due account of reported maturities. —5From the
the interest rates reported to be within the spread. The spread is as- reporting month September 2000, effective interest rates are calculatedcertained by eliminating the reports in the top 5% and the bottom 5% of according to the ISMA method (International Securities Market Association).the interest rate range. The figures for the latest date are always to be re- The use of the ISMA method (non-linear remuneration of less than onegarded as provisional; subsequent alterations, which will appear in the year) in this context tends to result in slightly lower effective annual inte rest
following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Second and third rates. —6Lending to enterprises (with agreed maturities of more than five
weeks of the months indicated. —2With maturities between 36 months years) with agreed interest rates locked in for more than five years. —7The
and 60 months. —3Interest rates as % per month of original amount of figures refer to the time when the contract was concluded and not to the
credit taken up. Besides interest, most banks charge a one-off processing entire duration of the contract. The calculation of the effective interest rate
fee (generally 2%, in some cases 3%, of the credit amount). —4Calculated is based on an annual redemption rate of 1% plus interest saved; the repay-
on the basis of reported monthly rates (see footnote 3) and reported annual ment conditions agreed upon in each case by the credit institutions involve d
rates on the respective amount of debt and on the basis of the respective are taken into account (at present mostly monthly payment and inclu sion). 
45*VI. Interest rates

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
VI. Interest rates
 
7. Lending and deposit rates of banks (MFIs) in Germany *  (cont ’d)
    Deposit rates
 
% p.a.
Time deposits with agreed maturities
of 1 month of 3 months
Higher-yielding
sight deposits DM 100,000 and more but DM 1 million and more but DM 100,000 and more butof individuals  
8 less than DM 100,000 less than DM 1 million less than DM 5 million less than DM 1 million
Reporting Average Average Average Average Averageperiod  
1 interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread
2000          June 2.11 0.50 −3.50 3.10 2.25 −3.80 3.49 2.70 −4.00 3.82 3.00 −4.25 3.66 2.90 −4.25
         July 2.17 0.50 −3.50 3.19 2.30 −3.90 3.59 2.75 −4.10 3.92 3.15 −4.35 3.76 3.00 −4.29
         Aug. 2.16 0.50 −3.53 3.25 2.30 −4.00 3.64 2.95 −4.25 4.00 3.25 −4.50 3.84 3.15 −4.40
         Sep. 2.29 0.50 −3.76 3.39 2.50 −4.05 3.79 3.00 −4.30 4.15 3.40 −4.55 4.00 3.25 −4.60
         Oct. 2.32 0.50 −3.88 3.48 2.50 −4.20 3.89 3.00 −4.50 4.27 3.45 −4.80 4.13 3.25 −4.75
         Nov. 2.38 0.50 −3.94 3.56 2.54 −4.30 3.97 3.00 −4.50 4.35 3.50 −4.83 4.22 3.30 −4.85
         Dec. 2.41 0.50 −4.00 3.62 2.65 −4.35 4.05 3.10 −4.60 4.42 3.50 −4.92 4.19 3.35 −4.80
2001          Jan. 2.43 0.50 −4.00 3.56 2.60 −4.25 3.96 3.20 −4.50 4.33 3.60 −4.75 4.06 3.39 −4.60
         Feb. 2.50 0.50 −4.00 3.46 2.55 −4.15 3.87 3.20 −4.45 4.21 3.50 −4.70 4.01 3.30 −4.50
         Mar. 2.48 0.50 −4.00 3.53 2.75 −4.25 3.95 3.25 −4.50 4.31 3.50 −4.75 4.05 3.40 −4.50
         Apr. 2.49 0.50 −4.00 3.48 2.59 −4.20 3.91 3.20 −4.50 4.27 3.50 −4.70 3.99 3.25 −4.50
 
 
Savings deposits
Bank savings bonds
with regular with minimum rates of with higher rates of return  10 
interest payments return  9 (without a duration of contract being agreed)
with agreed notice of 3 months
with agreed notice DM 10,000 and more DM 20,000 and more
maturity of 4 years of 3 months less than DM 10,000 but less than DM 20,000 but less than DM 50,000
Reporting Average Average Average Average Average
period  1 interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread
2000          June 4.82 4.00 −5.25 1.24 1.00 −2.00 2.20 1.50 −3.45 2.66 1.75 −3.65 2.87 2.00 −3.80
         July 4.90 4.00 −5.25 1.25 1.00 −2.00 2.23 1.50 −3.50 2.73 1.75 −3.70 2.94 2.00 −3.90
         Aug. 4.93 4.10 −5.30 1.25 1.00 −2.00 2.25 1.30 −3.70 2.79 1.75 −3.90 3.01 2.00 −4.00
         Sep. 4.99 4.50 −5.37 1.26 1.00 −2.00 2.31 1.50 −3.72 2.89 1.75 −3.95 3.10 2.00 −4.07
         Oct. 4.98 4.40 −5.40 1.25 1.00 −2.00 2.32 1.50 −3.75 2.89 1.75 −4.01 3.12 2.00 −4.22
         Nov. 4.98 4.50 −5.30 1.26 1.00 −2.00 2.38 1.50 −4.00 2.96 1.75 −4.20 3.19 2.00 −4.32
         Dec. 4.76 4.30 −5.25 1.25 1.00 −2.00 2.39 1.50 −4.00 2.99 1.75 −4.20 3.22 2.00 −4.34
2001          Jan. 4.47 4.10 −5.00 1.26 1.00 −2.00 2.37 1.50 −3.80 2.95 1.80 −4.10 3.21 2.00 −4.33
         Feb. 4.42 4.00 −4.75 1.25 1.00 −2.00 2.35 1.50 −3.75 2.94 1.80 −4.00 3.17 2.00 −4.25
         Mar. 4.37 4.00 −4.75 1.24 1.00 −2.00 2.36 1.50 −3.75 2.97 1.80 −4.00 3.20 2.00 −4.32
         Apr. 4.27 3.95 −4.60 1.23 1.00 −2.00 2.36 1.50 −3.75 2.95 1.95 −4.00 3.18 2.00 −4.30
 
 
Savings deposits with higher rates of return  10  and with duration of contract being agreed for
DM 20,000 and more but less than DM 50,000 (total rate of return) 11
with agreed notice of 3 months with agreed notice of more than 3 months
and a duration of contract of and a duration of contract of
more than 1 year and up to
up to and including 1 year and including 4 years more than 4 years up to and including 1 year more than 4 years
Reporting Average Average Average Average Averageperiod  
1 interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread
2000          June 3.82 2.50 −4.50 4.36 2.80 −5.00 4.71 3.58 −5.75 3.87 2.25 −4.50 4.78 3.60 −5.13
         July 3.93 2.50 −4.60 4.46 3.25 −5.07 4.76 3.58 −5.83 3.94 2.25 −4.75 4.83 4.35 −5.21
         Aug. 3.99 2.50 −4.70 4.56 3.25 −5.25 4.76 3.58 −5.83 4.06 2.25 −4.80 4.85 4.20 −5.30
         Sep. 4.15 2.50 −4.80 4.64 3.25 −5.35 4.81 3.58 −5.83 4.20 2.25 −5.00 4.93 4.36 −5.40
         Oct. 4.18 2.50 −4.85 4.68 3.25 −5.35 4.82 3.58 −5.83 4.14 2.25 −4.80 4.97 4.36 −5.50
         Nov. 4.23 2.50 −4.80 4.65 3.25 −5.16 4.84 3.58 −5.83 4.25 2.25 −5.00 4.96 4.36 −5.50
         Dec. 4.15 2.50 −4.75 4.51 3.25 −5.15 4.74 3.64 −5.62 4.21 2.30 −4.75 4.82 4.28 −5.40
2001          Jan. 3.98 3.00 −4.50 4.18 3.25 −4.75 4.59 3.60 −5.30 4.01 2.30 −4.50 4.51 4.04 −5.05
         Feb. 3.86 2.90 −4.40 4.11 3.25 −4.75 4.54 3.60 −5.30 3.99 2.50 −4.50 4.49 4.08 −4.83
         Mar. 3.84 2.99 −4.35 4.06 3.30 −4.62 4.52 3.60 −5.30 3.99 2.50 −4.50 4.42 3.95 −4.78
         Apr. 3.71 2.90 −4.25 3.96 3.25 −4.50 4.47 3.60 −5.25 3.91 2.50 −4.50 4.33 3.95 −4.75
For footnotes *, 1to7see page 45*. —8Only such interest rates are taken and/or a premium or a bonus is granted. —11Rate of return which is paid
into account as are above the relevant standard terms of the banks included when savings plans are held until maturity or when savings objectives havein the survey. —9Only a minimum rate of return is granted, but no pre- been achieved. 
mium or bonus. —10An interest rate above the minimum rate of return
46*VI. Interest rates

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
VI.  Interest rates
 
8. Selected central bank rates abroad
 
 
 
New rate Previous rate New rate Previous rate
Applicable Applicable Applicable Applicable
Country/Interest rate % p.a. from % p.a. from Country/Interest rate % p.a. from % p.a. from
1. EU-countries  1 3. Non European countries
Denmark Canada  3 
Discount rate       4 1/2  May 11,              ’01       4 3/4  Oct.   6,              ’00 Discount rate       5   Apr. 17,               ’01       5 1/4  Mar.   6,              ’01 
Repurchase/CD selling rate       5   May 11,               ’01           5.30   Feb.   9,               ’01 
Japan
Sweden Discount rate       0.25   Mar.   1,               ’01          0.35   Feb.   9,               ’01 
Deposit rate       3 1/4  Dec.   7,              ’00          2 3/4  Feb. 17,              ’99 
Repurchase rate       4   Dec.   7,               ’00          3 3/4  Feb.   4,              ’00 United States
Lombard rate       4 3/4  Dec.   7,              ’00          4 1/4  Feb. 17,              ’99 Federal funds rate  4       4   May 16,               ’01          4 1/2  Apr. 18,              ’01 
United Kingdom
Repurchase rate  2       5 1/4  May 11,              ’01          5 1/2  Apr.   5,              ’01 
2. Switzerland
Three-month Libor target   2 3/4
  −         3 3/4  Mar. 22,              ’01          3 −  4   June 15,               ’00 
1Only those member countries which are not participating in the euro area ceiling rate for call money. —4Rate targeted for interbank trade in central
for the time being. —2Bank of England key rate. —3Bank of Canada ’s bank money. 
9. Money market rates abroad
Monthly or weekly averages of daily figures  1 
%  p.a.
London New York Tokyo Zurich Hong Kong Euro-Dollar market
Memorandum
Treasury Treasury item
bills bills Swap rates in the
(three (three Gensaki open market  10 
Month Day-to- months) months) Day-to- rate Three- Day-to- Exchange Day-to- One- Three-
or day Tender Federal Tender day (three month day fund day month month US$/DM £/DMweek money  
2 rate 3 funds  4 rate 3 money months) funds  5 money  6 bills 7 money  8 funds  9 funds  9 Euro/US-$ Euro/£
1998          Oct. 7.44 6.54 5.07 4.08 0.24 0.11 0.50 4.52 6.33 5.30 5.27 5.22 −1.69 −3.52
         Nov. 6.55 6.31 4.83 4.44 0.20 0.11 0.94 4.61 5.60 5.13 5.20 5.28 −1.67 −3.21
         Dec. 6.21 5.71 4.68 4.42 0.25 0.11 0.69 4.23 5.22 4.95 5.54 5.20 −1.89 −3.04
1999          Jan. 5.87 5.28 4.63 4.34 0.23 0.14 0.56 3.96 5.64 4.79 4.98 5.00 + 1.85 + 2.61
         Feb. 5.63 5.08 4.76 4.45 0.18 0.13 0.56 4.96 5.63 4.74 4.94 5.00 + 1.87 + 2.27         Mar. 5.43 5.07 4.81 4.48 0.04 0.08 0.56 4.50 5.28 4.83 4.94 5.01 + 1.95 + 2.24
         Apr. 5.38 4.90 4.74 4.28 0.03 0.06 0.38 4.44 4.92 4.75 4.92 5.00 + 2.29 + 2.52
         May 5.29 4.93 4.74 4.51 0.03 0.05 0.44 4.47 4.82 4.78 4.91 5.02 + 2.47 + 2.69         June 5.05 4.76 4.76 4.59 0.03 0.04 0.50 5.21 5.13 4.88 5.04 5.18 + 2.60 + 2.50
         July 4.92 4.76 4.99 4.60 0.03 0.03 0.51 5.51 5.47 5.05 5.18 5.31 + 2.67 + 2.39
         Aug. 4.84 4.85 5.07 4.76 0.03 0.03 0.51 5.55 5.80 5.12 5.29 5.45 + 2.82 + 2.47         Sep. 4.89 5.08 5.22 4.73 0.03 0.02 1.14 5.12 5.68 5.29 5.38 5.57 + 2.85 + 2.60
         Oct. 5.01 5.24 5.20 4.88 0.02 0.02 1.38 5.37 5.49 5.25 5.41 6.18 + 2.86 + 2.55
         Nov. 5.18 5.24 5.42 5.07 0.03 0.02 1.34 5.01 5.11 5.40 5.56 6.10 + 2.68 + 2.34         Dec. 5.01 5.46 5.30 5.23 0.02 0.04 1.24 3.58 4.65 5.45 6.40 6.13 + 2.75 + 2.48
2000          Jan. 5.28 5.78 5.45 5.34 0.02 0.03 1.38 3.33 5.18 5.55 5.81 6.04 + 2.70 + 2.66
         Feb. 5.77 5.92 5.73 5.57 0.03 0.03 1.78 5.37 5.64 5.73 5.89 6.10 + 2.54 + 2.54         Mar. 5.69 5.93 5.85 5.72 0.02 0.03 2.26 5.41 5.65 5.87 6.05 6.20 + 2.47 + 2.36
         Apr. 5.82 6.01 6.02 5.67 0.02 0.03 2.76 6.32 6.06 6.03 6.15 6.31 + 2.42 + 2.22
         May 5.87 6.00 6.27 5.92 0.02 0.02 2.55 6.04 6.63 6.30 6.55 6.76 + 2.44 + 1.83         June 5.88 5.95 6.53 5.74 0.02 0.03 3.05 5.95 6.36 6.55 6.65 6.79 + 2.31 + 1.60
         July 5.85 5.92 6.55 5.92 0.02 0.04 3.04 5.86 6.12 6.55 6.63 6.73 + 2.17 + 1.48
         Aug. 5.81 5.90 6.50 6.11 0.16 0.14 3.12 5.49 5.76 6.47 6.62 6.69 + 1.92 + 1.33         Sep. 6.10 5.88 6.52 5.99 0.25 0.24 3.00 6.88 6.04 6.50 6.62 6.67 + 1.79 + 1.20
         Oct. 5.79 5.83 6.51 6.10 0.25 0.27 3.00 5.32 5.82 6.48 6.62 6.78 + 1.71 + 1.01
         Nov. 5.94 5.78 6.51 6.19 0.25 0.27 3.00 5.16 5.66 6.51 6.64 6.75 + 1.65 + 0.89         Dec. 5.70 5.71 6.40 5.90 0.24 0.29 2.88 6.44 5.73 6.52 6.69 6.55 + 1.57 + 0.92
2001          Jan. 5.95 5.62 5.98 5.27 0.25 0.28 3.09 5.57 5.14 6.03 5.87 5.70 + 0.90 + 0.95
         Feb. 5.86 5.51 5.49 4.93 0.25 0.27 2.86 5.22 4.92 5.52 5.52 5.35 + 0.56 + 0.86         Mar. 5.41 5.32 5.31 4.50 0.11 0.09 2.96 5.05 4.71 5.36 5.13 4.96 + 0.26 + 0.74
         Apr.  
p 5.31 5.15 4.80 3.92 0.02 0.03 2.60 4.49 4.46 4.82 4.80 4.61 −0.07 + 0.64
week ending  p 
2001 Mar.               30 6.21 5.29 5.00 4.20 0.03 0.04 2.96 5.00 4.63 5.17 5.07 4.88 + 0.30 + 0.80
         Apr.                 6 6.25 5.20 5.21 4.13 0.04 0.03 . 4.89 4.69 5.14 5.05 4.82 + 0.25 + 0.82
                              12 5.22 5.13 4.96 3.82 0.01 0.03 . 4.63 4.66 5.03 5.03 4.76 + 0.15 + 0.71
                              20 4.66 5.17 4.98 4.05 0.01 0.03 . 4.38 4.49 4.74 4.79 4.62 −0.11 + 0.57
                              27 4.98 5.11 4.42 3.66 0.01 0.02 2.60 4.14 4.08 4.45 4.47 4.35 −0.43 + 0.50
1Unless stated otherwise. —2Overnight money rate in the interbank deposits. —9From January 1999 US dollar-denominated London Interbank
market. —3Months: average of the tender rates in the weekly Treasury bill Offered Rate (LIBOR). Previously the rates were based on quotations
auctions; weeks: average of the tender rates on the day of issue. — reported by Frankfurt and Luxemburg banks. —10Rates for three-month
4Weekly average (Thursday to Wednesday) —5Three month deposits with contracts. Owing to the indirect quotation, the forward points between the
big banks in Zurich; months: average of end-of-month figures. Figure for euro and the foreign currency for the repurchase date of the swap are
the fourth week is that for the last day of the month. —6Hong Kong calculated in the foreign currency as from January 1999; previously the
dollar-denominated Hong Kong Interbank Offered Rates (HIBOR). — calculation was expressed in DM. As a result the previous discount ( −)
7Money market paper issued regularly by the Hong Kong Monetary changes into a premium (+). 
Authority; maturity of 91 days. —8From January 1999 rates for overnight  
47*VI.  Interest rates

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
VII. Capital market
 
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  *)
 
 
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities  1 Residents
Credit in- Bundes-
Sales stitutions bank
= Public Foreign including open
total Bank Indus- debt debt building marketpur- debt trial secur- secur- and loan Non- oper- Non-
Period chases Total securities bonds ities  
2 ities 3 Total  4 assc. 5 banks  6 ations  5 residents  7 
DM million
1986 103,497 87,485 29,509 200 57,774 16,012 45,927 31,192 13,667 1,068 57,570
1987 112,285 88,190 28,448 − 27 59,768 24,095 78,193 45,305 33,599 − 711 34,093
1988 88,425 35,100 −11,029 − 100 46,228 53,325 86,657 36,838 49,417 402 1,769
1989 118,285 78,409 52,418 344 25,649 39,876 96,073 20,311 76,448 − 686 22,212
1990 244,827 220,340 136,799 − 67 83,609 24,487 225,066 91,833 133,266 − 33 19,763
1991 231,965 219,346 131,670 667 87,011 12,619 173,099 45,095 127,310 694 58,8661992 291,762 284,054 106,857 − 175 177,376 7,708 170,873 132,236 37,368 1,269 120,887
1993 395,110 382,571 151,812 200 230,560 12,539 183,195 164,436 20,095 − 1,336 211,915
1994 303,339 276,058 117,185 − 65 158,939 27,281 279,989 126,808 154,738 − 1,557 23,349
1995 227,099 203,029 162,538 − 350 40,839 24,070 141,282 49,193 94,409 − 2,320 85,815
1996 254,359 233,519 191,341 649 41,529 20,840 148,250 117,352 31,751 − 853 106,109
1997 332,655 250,688 184,911 1,563 64,214 81,967 204,378 144,177 60,201 − 128,276
1998 418,877 308,201 254,367 3,143 50,691 110,676 245,983 203,342 42,641 − 172,894
Euro million
1999 292,758 198,068 156,399 2,184 39,485 94,690 157,420 74,728 82,692 − 135,338
2000 228,773 157,994 120,154 12,605 25,234 70,779 156,249 91,447 64,802 − 72,524
2000          Nov. 2,356 − 5,754 − 5,670 332 − 415 8,110 6,296 8,359 − 2,063 −− 3,940
         Dec. 6,400 6,738 1,598 112 5,028 − 338 2,275 − 3,694 5,969 − 4,125
2001          Jan. 6,892 − 4,978 17,318 1,670 −23,966 11,870 9,641 − 1,229 10,870 −− 2,749
         Feb. 24,075 13,581 15,077 859 − 2,354 10,494 21,981 13,024 8,957 − 2,094
         Mar. 21,699 12,056 3,892 2,602 5,562 9,643 28,387 11,007 17,380 −− 6,688
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-purchases shares  
8 shares  9 Total  10 tutions  5 , 11  Non-banks  6 residents  12 
Period
DM million
1986 32,371 16,394 15,976 17,195 5,022 12,173 15,174
1987 15,845 11,889 3,955 16,439 2,153 14,286 − 594
1988 21,390 7,528 13,862 18,436 1,177 17,259 2,9531989 35,511 19,365 16,147 10,231 4,913 5,318 25,277
1990 50,070 28,021 22,048 52,631 7,215 45,416 − 2,561
1991 33,478 13,317 20,161 32,247 2,466 29,781 1,230
1992 32,595 17,226 15,370 40,651 2,984 37,667 − 8,055
1993 39,355 19,512 19,843 30,871 4,133 26,738 8,4851994 55,125 29,160 25,966 54,466 1,622 52,844 659
1995 46,422 23,600 22,822 49,354 11,945 37,409 − 2,931
1996 72,491 34,212 38,280 55,962 12,627 43,335 16,529
1997 119,522 22,239 97,280 96,844 8,547 88,297 22,6771998 249,460 48,796 200,665 149,751 20,252 129,499 99,709
Euro million
1999 150,156 36,010 114,146 102,313 18,637 83,676 47,845
2000 143,567 22,733 120,834 164,355 23,293 141,062 − 20,787
2000          Nov. 8,938 1,629 7,309 2,997 1,109 1,888 5,941
         Dec. − 22,979 937 − 23,916 120,130 6,962 113,168 − 143,109
2001          Jan. 14,936 1,211 13,725 15,661 6,971 8,690 − 725
         Feb. 2,870 1,841 1,029 781 3,108 − 2,327 2,089
         Mar. − 6,424 1,077 − 7,501 − 13,398 19,705 − 33,103 6,974
*Until the end of 1999, debt securities comprise the bonds and money ment funds. —7Net purchases or net sales ( −) of domestic debt securities by
market paper of domestic banks, from January 2000 all fixed-interest non-residents; transaction values. —8At issue prices. —9Net purchases or
securities. Investment fund certificates see Table VII.6. —1Net sales at net sales ( −) of foreign shares (including direct investment) by residents;
market values plus/less changes in issuers ’portfolios of their own debt transaction values. —10Domestic and foreign shares. —11Up to the end
securities. —2Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and of 1998, excluding shares under syndicate agreement. —12Net purchases
Treuhand agency. —3Net purchases or net sales ( −) of foreign debt or net sales ( −) of domestic shares (including direct investment) −before
securities by residents; transaction values. —4Domestic and foreign debt 1989 also including domestic investment fund certificates −by
securities. —5Book values; statistically adjusted. —6Residual; also non-residents; transaction values. —In 1997 and 1998, revised figures owing
including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic invest- to changes in the balance of payments statistics. 
48*VII. Capital market

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
VII. Capital market
 
2. Sales of debt securities issued by borrowers domiciled in Germany  * 
 
 
Until the end of 1998 DM million nominal value, from 1999 euro million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item:
 Foreign  DM/euro
Mortgage Communal bonds issued Debt securities
bonds bonds issued by spe- by German-
All bank debt (Hypotheken- ( Öffentliche Other bank Industrial Public managed cialised credit
Period Total securities pfandbriefe) Pfandbriefe) institutions bonds  2 syndicates debt securities debt securities  3 
Gross sales  4 
1990 428,698 286,709 14,923 70,701 89,755 111,326 − 141,990 35,168
1991 442,089 292,092 19,478 91,489 80,738 100,386 707 149,288 32,832
1992 572,767 318,522 33,633 134,363 49,195 101,333 − 254,244 57,282
1993 733,126 434,829 49,691 218,496 34,028 132,616 457 297,841 87,3091994 627,331 412,585 44,913 150,115 39,807 177,750 486 214,261 61,465
1995 620,120 470,583 43,287 208,844 41,571 176,877 200 149,338 102,719
1996 731,992 563,076 41,439 246,546 53,508 221,582 1,742 167,173 112,3701997 846,567 621,683 53,168 276,755 54,829 236,933 1,915 222,972 114,8131998 1,030,827 789,035 71,371 344,609 72,140 300,920 3,392 238,400 149,542
Euro million
1999 571,269 448,216 27,597 187,661 59,760 173,200 2,570 120,483 57,202
2000 659,148 500,895 34,528 143,107 94,556 228,703 8,114 150,137 31,5972000          Oct. 68,502 45,717 1,538 10,832 7,784 25,563 50 22,734 270
         Nov. 48,324 34,282 2,005 6,644 5,432 20,201 1,678 12,364 2,175         Dec. 53,865 40,348 3,128 6,849 7,962 22,409 267 13,250 500
2001          Jan. 74,918 52,896 4,018 15,825 8,273 24,780 256 21,765 1,170
         Feb. 59,473 49,366 4,233 11,973 6,620 26,540 337 9,770 3,035         Mar. 54,977 41,572 2,418 7,618 12,371 19,164 1,215 12,189 260
of which: Debt securities with a maturity of over 4 years  5 
1990 272,642 133,347 10,904 43,250 26,767 52,425 − 139,295 29,791
1991 303,326 172,171 11,911 65,642 54,878 39,741 707 130,448 22,7721992 430,479 211,775 28,594 99,627 40,267 43,286 − 218,703 51,939
1993 571,533 296,779 43,365 160,055 26,431 66,923 230 274,524 82,0491994 429,369 244,806 36,397 109,732 29,168 69,508 306 184,255 53,351
1995 409,469 271,763 30,454 141,629 28,711 70,972 200 137,503 85,221
1996 473,560 322,720 27,901 167,811 35,522 91,487 1,702 149,139 92,5821997 563,333 380,470 41,189 211,007 41,053 87,220 1,820 181,047 98,4131998 694,414 496,444 59,893 288,619 54,385 93,551 2,847 195,122 139,645
Euro million
1999 324,888 226,993 16,715 124,067 37,778 48,435 2,565 95,331 44,013
2000 319,330 209,187 20,724 102,664 25,753 60,049 6,727 103,418 27,0082000          Oct. 38,236 20,481 1,000 7,853 2,290 9,339 − 17,754 270
         Nov. 22,372 9,536 623 5,446 391 3,076 851 11,986 1,675
         Dec. 22,039 15,517 2,468 4,804 2,760 5,484 163 6,360 −
2001          Jan. 45,552 29,993 2,955 13,246 3,522 10,270 35 15,524 770         Feb. 33,119 24,212 3,482 11,058 890 8,782 − 8,907 1,620
         Mar. 23,113 18,885 691 5,982 6,342 5,871 410 3,818 260
Net sales  6 
1990 226,707 140,327 − 3,922 − 72 73,287 71,036 − 67 86,449 21,717
1991 227,822 139,396 4,729 22,290 65,985 46,390 558 87,868 18,5831992 304,751 115,786 13,104 58,235 19,585 24,864 − 175 189,142 34,114
1993 403,212 159,982 22,496 122,917 −13,156 27,721 180 243,049 43,701
1994 270,088 116,519 18,184 54,316 − 6,897 50,914 − 62 153,630 21,634
1995 205,482 173,797 18,260 96,125 3,072 56,342 − 354 32,039 61,020
1996 238,427 195,058 11,909 121,929 6,020 55,199 585 42,788 69,9511997 257,521 188,525 16,471 115,970 12,476 43,607 1,560 67,437 63,1811998 327,991 264,627 22,538 162,519 18,461 61,111 3,118 60,243 84,308
Euro million
1999 209,096 170,069 2,845 80,230 31,754 55,238 2,185 36,840 22,728
2000 155,615 122,774 5,937 29,999 30,089 56,751 7,320 25,522 −16,705
2000          Oct. 18,785 10,674 − 659 − 983 486 11,830 − 34 8,146 − 2,432
         Nov. − 3,087 − 6,672 813 − 5,043 − 3,065 623 1,571 2,014 − 1,827
         Dec. 1,249 300 − 244 −10,548 2,707 8,385 267 683 − 3,058
2001          Jan. − 9,256 14,565 185 6,781 327 7,272 256 −24,077 − 3,263
         Feb. 14,168 16,448 2,817 4,545 − 1,674 10,760 213 − 2,493 − 2,575
         Mar. 10,808 4,373 651 − 5,088 6,802 2,008 1,215 5,220 − 2,934
*For definitions see the notes in the Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. —4Gross sales means only
Report 2, Capital market statistics. —1Excluding registered bank debt initial sales of newly issued securities. —5Maximum maturity according to
securities. —2Debt securities of enterprises. —3Including Federal Railways the terms of issue. — 6 Gross sales less redemptions. 
49*VII. Capital market

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
VII. Capital market
 
3. Outstanding amount of debt securities issued by borrowers domiciled in Germany  * 
 
 
Until the end of 1998 DM million nominal value, from 1999 euro million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item:
 Foreign  DM/euro
Mortgage Communal bonds issued
bonds bonds by German- Debt securities of
End of year All bank specialised Other bank Industrial Public managed (Öffentliche (Hypotheken-
or month Total bonds syndicates credit institutions debt securities debt securities debt securities Pfandbriefe) pfandbriefe)
DM million
1990 1,458,943 900,977 138,025 369,901 155,045 238,005 2,604 555,362 223,176
1991 1,686,765 1,040,374 142,757 392,190 221,031 284,396 3,161 643,230 241,7601992 1,991,515 1,156,162 155,862 450,424 240,616 309,259 2,983 832,370 275,8731993 2,394,728 1,316,142 178,357 573,341 227,463 336,981 3,163 1,075,422 319,5751994 2,664,814 1,432,661 196,541 627,657 219,214 389,249 3,101 1,229,053 341,210
1995 2,870,295 1,606,459 214,803 723,781 222,286 445,589 2,746 1,261,090 402,229
1996 3,108,724 1,801,517 226,711 845,710 228,306 500,790 3,331 1,303,877 472,1801997 3,366,245 1,990,041 243,183 961,679 240,782 544,397 4,891 1,371,313 535,3591998 3,694,234 2,254,668 265,721 1,124,198 259,243 605,507 8,009 1,431,558 619,668
Euro million
1999 2,097,926 1,322,863 134,814 655,024 163,284 369,741 6,280 768,783 339,560
2000 2,265,121 1,445,736 140,751 685,122 157,374 462,488 13,599 805,786 322,8562000          Nov. 2,263,872 1,445,436 140,996 695,670 154,668 454,103 13,333 805,103 325,913
         Dec. 2,265,121 1,445,736 140,751 685,122 157,374 462,488 13,599 805,786 322,856
2001          Jan. 2,255,865 1,460,301 140,936 691,903 157,701 469,759 13,856 781,709 319,593
         Feb. 2,270,033 1,476,749 143,754 696,448 156,027 480,519 14,068 779,216 317,018         Mar. 2,280,840 1,481,121 144,404 691,360 162,830 482,527 15,283 784,435 314,085
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  2                 Position at end-March 2001 
Maturity in years
794,407 563,628 47,223 226,554 61,880 227,972 2,985 227,793 86,660  less than 2
550,868 374,033 38,410 182,774 36,635 116,214 2,577 174,257 80,834   2 to less than 4
353,950 234,976 22,549 122,426 22,833 67,168 6,933 112,040 43,915   4 to less than  6
227,761 147,728 22,022 80,374 17,104 28,229 557 79,476 54,850   6 to less than  8
223,783 117,066 13,604 62,470 14,712 26,280 1,321 105,395 31,881   8 to less than 10
33,680 27,817 587 13,488 7,695 6,046 462 5,401 7,286 10 to less than 15
18,699 6,848 9 1,429 1,656 3,754 422 11,430 4,521 15 to less than 20
77,694 9,026 − 1,845 314 6,866 25 68,642 4,140 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers ’portfolios. — debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of the residual
1Excluding debt securities handed to the trustee for temporary safe amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc. 
custody. —2Calculated from month under review until final maturity for
50* 
 
4. Circulation of shares issued by residents of Germany
  
Until the end of 1998 DM million nominal value, from 1999 euro million nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies ’ capital due to
Share contribution
capital= of shares, Net increase or cash payment
merger reduction circulation at net decrease(-) and exchange contribution mining shares,
issue of change of of capital end of period during period of convertible of claims and GmbH shares, and transfer
Period bonds  1 etc. of assets legal form under review under review bonus shares other real assets and liquidation
DM million
1990 144,686 12,650 7,362 751 3,715 1,049 − 43 1,284 − 1,466
1991 151,618 6,932 3,656 610 2,416 407 − 182 411 − 386
1992 160,813 9,198 4,295 728 1,743 1,073 − 732 3,030 − 942
1993 168,005 7,190 5,224 772 387 876 10 707 − 783
1994 o 190,012 14,237 6,114 1,446 1,521 1,883 − 447 5,086 − 1,367
1995 211,231 21,217 5,894 1,498 1,421 1,421 − 623 13,739 − 2,133
1996 2 216,461 7,131 8,353 1,355 396 1,684 − 3,056 833 − 2,432
1997 221,575 5,115 4,164 2,722 370 1,767 − 2,423 197 − 1,678
1998 238,156 16,578 6,086 2,566 658 8,607 − 4,055 3,905 − 1,188
Euro million
1999 133,513 11,747 5,519 2,008 190 1,075 2,099 1,560 − 708
2000 147,629 14,115 3,620 3,694 618 8,089 − 1,986 1,827 − 1,745
2000          Nov. 147,483 677 315 402 38 122 − 1,366 1,185 − 18
         Dec. 147,629 145 209 104 19 546 − 359 118 − 492
2001          Jan. 149,152 1,524 591 157 38 326 447 − 5 − 31
         Feb. 149,736 584 330 126 58 177 225 100 − 432
         Mar. 150,653 918 445 28 153 586 497 55 − 846
oFrom January 1994 including the shares of east German companies share issues out of company profits. —2Figure reduced by DM 1,902 million
(resultant increase in share circulation: DM 7,771 million). —1Including owing to revisions. 
50*VII. Capital market

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
VII. Capital market
 
5. Yields and indices on German securities
 
 
Yields on bonds outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices  2 , 3 
Public bonds Bank debt securities Bonds Shares
Memo item:
Listed Foreign
Federal securities DM/euro
bonds
With re- With re- issued by German Germansidual matur- sidual matur- German- bond CDAX share
Industrial managed index share price index ities of over 9 ities of over 9
Total Total Total Total to 10 years bonds (REX) index (DAX) to 10 years  
4 syndicates  1, 5 
Period Average End- End-
% p.a. daily rate 1987=100 1987=1000
1990 8.9 8.8 8.8 8.7 9.0 8.9 9.0 9.2 93.50 145.00 1,398.23
1991 8.7 8.6 8.6 8.5 8.9 8.6 8.9 9.2 96.35 148.16 1,577.981992 8.1 8.0 8.0 7.8 8.3 8.1 8.7 8.8 101.54 134.92 1,545.051993 6.4 6.3 6.3 6.5 6.5 6.8 6.9 6.8 109.36 191.13 2,266.681994 6.7 6.7 6.7 6.9 6.8 7.2 7.0 6.9 99.90 176.87 2,106.58
1995 6.5 6.5 6.5 6.9 6.5 7.2 6.9 6.8 109.18 181.47 2,253.88
1996 5.6 5.6 5.6 6.2 5.5 6.4 5.8 5.8 110.37 217.47 2,888.691997 5.1 5.1 5.1 5.6 5.0 5.9 5.2 5.5 111.01 301.47 4,249.691998 4.5 4.4 4.4 4.6 4.5 4.9 5.0 5.3 118.18 343.64 5,002.391999 4.3 4.3 4.3 4.5 4.3 4.9 5.0 5.4 110.60 445.95 6,958.14
2000 5.4 5.3 5.2 5.3 5.6 5.8 6.2 6.3 112.48 396.59 6,433.612000          Nov. 5.4 5.2 5.2 5.2 5.6 5.8 6.2 6.5 111.31 396.27 6,372.33
         Dec. 5.1 5.0 4.9 4.9 5.3 5.6 6.0 6.3 112.48 396.59 6,433.61
2001          Jan. 4.9 4.8 4.8 4.8 5.1 5.4 5.8 6.0 112.74 414.59 6,795.14
         Feb. 4.9 4.8 4.8 4.8 5.0 5.3 5.8 6.0 112.81 384.17 6,208.24         Mar. 4.8 4.7 4.7 4.7 4.9 5.3 5.8 5.8 113.31 360.41 5,829.95
         Apr. 4.9 4.8 4.8 4.8 5.0 5.4 5.8 6.0 111.46 381.73 6,264.51
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of included in the calculation. Monthly figures are calculated on the basis of
issue of over 4 years, if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Conver- the yields on all the business days of a month. The annual figures are the un-
tible debt securities, etc., debt securities with unscheduled redemption, weighted means of the monthly figures. —2End of year or month. —
zero-coupon bonds, floating-rate notes and bonds not denominated in DM 3Source: German Stock Exchange plc. —4Only bonds eligible as underlying
or euros are not included. Group yields for the various categories of secu- instruments for futures contracts are included; calculated as unweighted
rities are weighted with the amounts outstanding of the debt securities averages. — 5 As far as quoted on German stock exchanges. 
51* 
  
6. Sales and purchases of investment fund certificates in Germany
 
Sales of investment fund certificates Purchases
Domestic funds (sales receipts) Residents
Investment funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Non-banks  2 and loan associations  1 
of which
of which of which
Sales Open- Special- Foreign Foreign= Secur- end ised invest- invest-total Money ities- real invest- ment mentpur- market based estate ment Foreign fund cer- fund cer- Non-resi-chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  
3 Total Total tificates Total tificates dents  4 
Period
DM million
1990 25,788 26,857 7,904 − 8,032 −128 18,952 −1,069 25,766 4,296 − 362 21,470 −707 22
1991 50,064 37,492 13,738 − 11,599 2,144 23,754 12,572 49,890 8,594 − 5 41,296 12,577 174
1992 81,514 20,474 −3,102 −− 9,189 6,087 23,575 61,040 81,518 10,495 2,152 71,023 58,888 − 4
1993 80,259 61,672 20,791 − 6,075 14,716 40,881 18,587 76,258 16,982 2,476 59,276 16,111 4,001
1994 130,995 108,914 63,263 31,180 24,385 7,698 45,650 22,081 125,943 9,849 − 689 116,094 22,770 5,052
1995 55,246 54,071 16,777 6,147 3,709 6,921 37,294 1,175 56,295 12,172 188 44,123 987 −1,049
1996 83,386 79,110 16,517 −4,706 7,273 13,950 62,592 4,276 85,704 19,924 1,685 65,780 2,591 −2,318
1997 145,805 138,945 31,501 −5,001 30,066 6,436 107,445 6,860 149,977 35,924 340 114,053 6,520 −4,172
1998 187,216 169,748 38,998 5,772 27,814 4,690 130,750 17,468 190,309 43,937 961 146,372 16,507 −3,093
Euro million
1999 111,079 97,197 37,684 3,347 23,269 7,395 59,513 13,882 105,370 19,862 − 637 85,508 14,519 5,709
2000 117,020 85,160 39,712 −2,188 36,818 −2,824 45,448 31,860 106,197 14,454 92 91,743 31,768 10,823
2000          Nov. 6,487 4,114 3,302 − 178 2,847 − 96 812 2,373 6,066 1,105 82 4,961 2,291 421
         Dec. 15,421 15,597 1,413 − 609 1,582 − 61 14,184 − 176 14,499 1,637 − 296 12,862 120 922
2001          Jan. 17,642 14,283 5,860 798 3,250 594 8,423 3,359 16,810 1,719 227 15,091 3,132 832
         Feb. 10,661 8,537 5,236 931 933 2,437 3,301 2,124 12,591 1,039 − 12 11,552 2,136 −1,930
         Mar. 2,166 1,467 974 1,162 − 623 153 492 699 2,911 172 17 2,739 682 −745
1Book values. —2Residual. —3Net purchases or net sales ( −) of foreign non-residents; transaction values (before 1989 classified as shares). —The
investment fund certificates by residents; transaction values. —4Net figures for the latest data are to be regarded as provisional; corrections are
purchases or net sales ( −) of domestic investment fund certificates by not specially marked. 
51*VII. Capital market

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
1. Finances of the public sector *
  
  
Central, regional and local authorities  1 Social security funds  2 Public sector, total
Receipts Expenditure
of which
Balance Balance Balance
Other of of of
Person- operat- receipts receipts receipts
of nel ex- ing ex- Capital Finan- and Ex- and Ex- and
which pend- pend- Current Interest forma- cial expend- Re- pend- expend- Re- pend- expend-
Period Total Taxes  3 Total  4 iture iture grants paid tion aid  5 iture ceipts  6 iture iture ceipts iture iture
DM billion
1996 1,000.3 800.0 1,121.8 326.2 137.0 362.2 130.7 83.9 80.1 −121.5 769.4 784.0 − 14.6 1,665.6 1,801.6 −136.1
1997 1,014.3 797.2 1,108.9 325.0 135.7 356.3 132.1 80.1 79.2 − 94.5 796.8 794.3 + 2.5 1,704.8 1,796.8 − 92.01998  
p 1,072.1 833.0 1,128.8 325.5 137.4 373.7 133.7 79.7 79.8 − 56.7 811.8 808.4 + 3.4 1,765.6 1,818.9 − 53.3
1999  pe 1,104.0 886.1 1,162.0 330.0 143.0 395.5 136.5 81.0 74.5 − 58.0 840.0 831.5 + 8.5 1,807.5 1,857.0 − 49.5
2000  pe 1,197.0 913.9 1,164.5 330.5 145.0 401.0 132.5 80.5 74.5 + 32.5 849.5 849.0 + 0.5 1,906.5 1,873.5 + 33.0
1999          4th qtr 325.7 255.1 329.8 96.9 43.9 98.8 31.0 29.3 28.8 − 4.1 221.0 212.9 + 8.1 517.2 513.2 + 4.0
2000          1st qtr 245.9 205.2 281.9 76.6 33.7 103.5 41.0 12.9 14.4 − 36.0 208.1 208.3 − 0.2 413.3 449.6 − 36.2
         2nd qtr 277.6 231.6 265.3 77.4 32.4 98.3 25.5 16.3 14.3 + 12.3 208.9 210.6 − 1.7 451.0 440.5 + 10.6         3rd qtr 362.8 222.9 282.2 77.0 33.7 98.1 36.1 19.7 17.9 + 80.5 210.4 211.5 − 1.1 539.4 459.9 + 79.5         4th qtr
p 304.8 254.5 329.0 96.8 43.2 103.4 29.1 28.3 27.6 − 24.2 222.0 218.5 + 3.5 497.6 518.3 − 20.7
Euro billion
1999  pe 564.5 453.1 594.1 168.7 73.1 202.2 69.8 41.4 38.1 − 29.7 429.5 425.1 + 4.3 924.2 949.5 − 25.3
2000  pe 612.0 467.3 595.4 169.0 74.1 205.0 67.7 41.2 38.1 + 16.6 434.3 434.1 + 0.3 974.8 957.9 + 16.9
1999          4th qtr 166.5 130.4 168.6 49.5 22.4 50.5 15.8 15.0 14.7 − 2.1 113.0 108.9 + 4.2 264.4 262.4 + 2.0
2000          1st qtr 125.7 104.9 144.1 39.2 17.2 52.9 21.0 6.6 7.4 − 18.4 106.4 106.5 − 0.1 211.3 229.9 − 18.5
         2nd qtr 141.9 118.4 135.7 39.6 16.6 50.3 13.0 8.3 7.3 + 6.3 106.8 107.7 − 0.9 230.6 225.2 + 5.4         3rd qtr 185.5 113.9 144.3 39.4 17.2 50.1 18.5 10.1 9.1 + 41.2 107.6 108.1 − 0.5 275.8 235.1 + 40.6         4th qtr
p 155.8 130.1 168.2 49.5 22.1 52.9 14.9 14.5 14.1 − 12.4 113.5 111.7 + 1.8 254.4 265.0 − 10.6
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical the latter are all provisional. The quarterly figures for some fields of
Office. — *The budgetary definition used here differs from the methods insurance are estimated. — 3The tax revenue shown here is taken from the
employed for the government account of the national accounts and, in case budget statistics and may differ from the data given in Table VIII. 4, whichof the quarterly figures, in some respects also from the financial statistics. — are based on the tax statistics. 4Including discrepancies in clearing
1Incl. subsidiary budgets. The quarterly figures, unlike the annual figures transactions between the central, regional and local authorities. —
based on the annual accounts statistics of the Federal Statistical Office, do 5Expenditure on investment grants, loans and acquisition of participating
not include municipal special-purpose associations and various special interests. — 6Including Federal Government liquidity assistance to the
accounts. For the receipts of Bundesbank profit see footnote 1 to Table VIII. Federal Labour Office. 2. — 2The annual figures differ from the sum of the quarterly figures, as
2. Finances of the Federal Government, Länder Governments and local authorities *
  
  
Federal Government Länder Governments Local authorities
Western  2,  3 Eastern  3 Western  3 Eastern  3 
Period Receipts  1 Expenditure Receipts Expenditure Receipts Expenditure Receipts Expenditure Receipts Expenditure
DM billion
1996 411.9 490.4 344.8 379.7 93.7 105.5 227.7 232.9 55.0 57.7
1997 416.8 480.3 349.2 376.5 94.3 105.2 222.9 226.9 52.6 54.21998 439.0 495.6 360.5 380.3 96.4 104.7 231.4 226.3 51.5 52.41999  
pe 470.0 521.5 371.5 385.0 97.5 105.0 236.0 232.0 51.0 51.5
2000  pe 570.0 517.5 381.0 393.0 98.0 106.0 238.0 235.5 50.0 50.0
1999          4th qtr 151.1 142.4 106.5 111.7 27.9 33.5 71.3 67.4 15.7 15.8
2000          1st qtr 98.8 128.3 87.3 94.6 23.0 22.3 50.1 54.0 10.4 10.8
         2nd qtr 119.8 117.4 96.5 91.5 22.8 22.7 57.0 55.1 12.1 11.5         3rd qtr
4 214.1 130.8 88.9 91.1 25.0 25.0 59.0 57.5 12.2 12.3
         4th qtr p 137.4 140.8 103.8 113.9 27.3 33.9 71.6 67.6 15.1 15.0
Euro billion
1999  pe 240.3 266.6 189.9 196.8 49.9 53.7 120.7 118.6 26.1 26.3
2000  pe 291.4 264.6 194.8 200.9 50.1 54.2 121.7 120.4 25.6 25.6
1999          4th qtr 77.2 72.8 54.4 57.1 14.3 17.1 36.5 34.4 8.0 8.1
2000          1st qtr 50.5 65.6 44.6 48.4 11.7 11.4 25.6 27.6 5.3 5.5
         2nd qtr 61.3 60.0 49.3 46.8 11.7 11.6 29.1 28.2 6.2 5.9         3rd qtr
4 109.4 66.9 45.5 46.6 12.8 12.8 30.2 29.4 6.2 6.3
         4th qtr p 70.2 72.0 53.1 58.2 14.0 17.3 36.6 34.6 7.7 7.7
52*Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Fund for Inherited Liabilities. — 2Including Berlin, Bremen, Hamburg.
Office. — *See corresponding footnote to Table VIII. 1. — 1The Including Berlin (East). — 3The quarterly figures, unlike the annual figures
Bundesbank profit transfer is shown in full until 1994; from 1995 only the based on the annual accounts statistics of the Federal Statistical Office, d o
DM 7 billion scheduled in the budget is shown. Since that time, receipts not include various special accounts. — 4Including receipts from the UMTS
over and above the scheduled amount accrue directly to the Redemption licence auctions. 
52*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
3. Finances of the Government in the national accounts *
  
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM billion / from 1999, euro billion
Item 1993 1994 1995  1 1996 1997  p 1998  p 1999  p 2000  2,  e 
Receipts 1,517.6 1,607.7 1,647.4 1,703.5 1,726.5 1,779.7 943.7 966.1
of which
Taxes 771.0 807.6 825.7 849.7 856.9 897.2 490.3 512.0Social security contributions 588.2 632.2 662.4 696.6 719.9 727.7 375.1 379.3
Expenditure 1,618.5 1,689.7 1,764.3 1,826.0 1,825.8 1,857.5 971.9 987.1
Intermediate input 140.3 140.6 143.1 142.5 140.1 143.8 76.5 78.3Employee compensation 301.7 306.8 315.9 319.6 319.0 319.7 165.1 164.7Interest 108.5 113.5 129.0 131.9 133.3 136.1 70.2 67.3Social security benefits  
3 792.4 848.8 902.4 970.3 984.4 997.9 522.4 532.3
Gross capital formation 90.9 90.3 80.6 76.4 69.2 68.6 36.7 36.9
Financial balance − 100.9 − 82.0 − 116.8 − 122.5 − 99.3 − 77.8 − 28.1 − 21.0
as a percentage of the grossdomestic product − 3.1 − 2.4 − 3.3 − 3.4 − 2.7 − 2.1 − 1.4 − 1.0
Memo itemDeficit of the Treuhand agency − 38.1 − 37.1 . .....
Debt as defined inMaastricht Treatyas a percentage of the grossdomestic product 47.1 49.4 57.1 59.8 60.9 60.7 61.1 60.3
Source: Federal Statistical Office. —*Figures according to ESA 95. In unadjusted terms, the deficit amounted to 10.0% of GDP. —2Adjusted
Notwithstanding the figures shown by the Federal Statistical Office, for receipts from UMTS licence auctions. In the accounts of the Federal
calculated including −with no impact on the balance −customs duties, the Statistical Office, such receipts (50.85 euro billion) are recorded under "net
EU share in VAT revenue and EU subsidies. —1Adjusted for the balance of increase in non-produced assets", with the result that government spending
notional capital transfers between the public sector and the corporate is lower and a surplus (29.8 euro billion or 1.5% of GDP) is shown. —
sector, mainly in connection with the winding-up of the Treuhand agency. 3 Monetary social security benefits and social benefits in kind. 
4. Tax revenue of the central, regional and local authorities
  
  
Federal and L änder Governments and European Union Local authorities  4 
Länder Governments
of which Balance of
Federal of which European in the untransferred
Period Total Total  1 Government  2 Total New L änder Union  3 Total New L änder tax shares  5 
DM million
1999 886,124 775,945 414,101 322,172 . 39,672 110,178 9,408 + 2
2000 913,867 802,118 428,394 331,022 . 42,702 111,953 9,574 − 204
2000          4th qtr 253,371 225,564 124,611 90,026 . 10,926 36,299 2,946 −8,492
2001          1st qtr p . 179,775 92,768 75,915 . 11,092 . . .
2000          Dec. . 115,376 65,934 45,592 . 3,850 . . .
2001          Jan. . 62,774 28,469 29,086 . 5,220 . . .
         Feb. . 54,237 30,270 21,784 . 2,183 . . .         Mar.
p . 62,764 34,029 25,045 . 3,689 . . .
Euro million
1999 453,068 396,734 211,726 164,724 . 20,284 56,333 4,810 + 12000 467,253 410,116 219,034 169,249 . 21,833 57,241 4,895 − 104
2000          4th qtr 129,547 115,329 63,713 46,030 . 5,587 18,560 1,506 −4,342
2001          1st qtr
p . 91,917 47,432 38,815 . 5,671 . . .
2000          Dec. . 58,991 33,711 23,311 . 1,968 . . .
2001          Jan. . 32,096 14,556 14,871 . 2,669 . . .
         Feb. . 27,731 15,477 11,138 . 1,116 . . .         Mar.
p . 32,091 17,399 12,805 . 1,886 . . .
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. —1Including receipts from the revenue. —4Including local authority taxes of Berlin, Bremen and
Equalisation of Burdens levies.  —2Before deduction of supplementary Hamburg. —5Difference between the local authorities ’share in the
Federal grants and shares in the revenue of mineral oil tax remitted to the income taxes received by the L änder cash offices in the period in question
Länder Governments. —3Including the (GNP-related) receipts accruing to (see Table VIII. 5) and the amounts passed on to the local authorities during
the EU from 1988 to the detriment of the Federal Government ’s tax the same period. 
53*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
5. Tax revenue, by type
  
  
Joint taxes Memo
item
Income taxes  2 Turnover taxes  5,  6 Localauthor-
As- Invest- ities’
sessed ment Value- Turnover Share EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income added tax on in trade Federal L änder customs income
Period Total  
1 Total tax  3 tax tion tax taxes  4 Total tax imports tax  6,  7 taxes  8 taxes  8 duties taxes  9 
DM million
1999 825,383 360,671 261,708 21,293 43,731 33,940 268,253 218,271 49,982 10,685 141,280 38,263 6,231 49,438
2000 852,966 376,266 265,471 23,909 46,109 40,777 275,520 209,547 65,974 10,797 147,672 36,072 6,638 50,849
2000          4th qtr 240,885 106,345 79,791 9,645 9,696 7,214 71,086 51,897 19,189 5,337 47,928 8,408 1,781 15,321
2001          1st qtr p 190,571 80,001 60,998 −4,569 3,284 20,288 68,634 51,862 16,772 87 30,027 10,282 1,541 10,796
2000          Dec. 124,142 69,244 40,604 13,488 11,762 3,391 23,397 16,414 6,983 2,634 25,418 2,805 644 8,766
2001          Jan. 67,260 34,491 23,521 −956 −495 12,422 23,060 17,698 5,362 − 61 5,569 3,718 484 4,486
         Feb. 57,417 17,089 18,854 −2,387 −2,213 2,835 26,029 20,546 5,483 126 10,689 2,939 546 3,180
         Mar. p 65,894 28,421 18,623 −1,227 5,993 5,032 19,545 13,618 5,928 22 13,770 3,625 511 3,130
Euro million
1999 422,012 184,408 133,809 10,887 22,359 17,353 137,155 111,600 25,555 5,463 72,235 19,564 3,186 25,277
2000 436,115 192,382 135,733 12,225 23,575 20,849 140,871 107,139 33,732 5,521 75,503 18,444 3,394 25,998
2000          4th qtr 123,162 54,373 40,796 4,931 4,958 3,688 36,346 26,534 9,811 2,729 24,505 4,299 910 7,834
2001          1st qtr p 97,437 40,904 31,188 −2,336 1,679 10,373 35,092 26,516 8,575 44 15,353 5,257 788 5,520
2000          Dec. 63,473 35,404 20,760 6,896 6,014 1,734 11,963 8,392 3,570 1,347 12,996 1,434 329 4,482
2001          Jan. 34,389 17,635 12,026 −489 −253 6,351 11,790 9,049 2,742 − 31 2,847 1,901 247 2,294
         Feb. 29,357 8,737 9,640 −1,220 −1,132 1,449 13,308 10,505 2,803 64 5,465 1,503 279 1,626
         Mar. p 33,691 14,531 9,522 −627 3,064 2,573 9,993 6,963 3,031 11 7,041 1,853 261 1,600
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. —1This total, unlike that in Table VIII. 1999 5.63% went to the Federal Government in advance to finance the
4, includes neither the revenue from Equalisation of Burdens levies, trade supplementary Federal grant to the pension insurance funds; 2.2% of the
tax on returns and capital (less Federal and L änder shares in trade tax), the balance went to the local authorities, of the new balance: 50.5% to the
taxes on land and buildings and other local authority taxes, nor the balance Federal Government, 49.5% to the L änder Governments, from 2000 50.25%
of untransferred tax shares. —2The yield of wage tax and assessed income to the Federal Government, 49.75% to the L änder Governments. The EU
tax was distributed among the Federal Government, the L änder share must likewise be deducted from the Federal Government ’s share
Governments and the local authorities in the ratio of 42.5 : 42.5 : 15 from stated. —6Since 1991 the distribution of turnover tax and the level and
1980, and the yield of corporation tax and investment income tax between distribution of the share in trade tax have been affected by the financing ofthe Federal Government and the L änder Governments in the ratio of 50 : 50 the debt service of the "German Unity" Fund. —7Federal Government and
from 1970. —3From 1996, after deduction of child benefit. —4From L änder Governments 50% each. From 1998 Federal Government 42.2%,
February 1993 including revenue from the tax on interest income, in which L änder Governments 57.8%. —8For breakdown see Table VIII. 6. —9From
the local authorities have a share of 12%. —5From 1998 3.64% and from 1998 including the share in turnover taxes. 
6. Individual taxes of the Federal Government, L änder Governments and local authorities
  
  
Federal taxes L änder taxes Local authority taxes
Insur- Electri- Other Motor Inherit- Other Taxes on Other
Mineral Tobacco Spirits ance city Federal vehicle Property ance Beer L änder Trade land and local
Period oil tax tax tax tax tax taxes  1 tax tax tax tax taxes tax  2 buildings taxes  3 
DM million
1999 71,278 22,795 4,367 13,917 3,551 25,373 13,767 1,050 5,977 1,655 15,815 52,924 16,890 1,612
2000 73,982 22,381 4,207 14,166 6,563 26,374 13,720 847 5,832 1,650 14,024 52,857 17,307 1,534
2000          4th qtr 27,836 6,917 1,628 2,160 2,020 7,367 2,980 197 1,524 381 3,326 13,806 3,682 335
2001          1st qtr p 10,681 4,062 682 6,816 1,514 6,273 4,441 183 1,491 364 3,804 . . .
2000          Dec. 15,227 3,228 982 574 953 4,455 946 72 605 122 1,060 . . .
2001          Jan. 1,951 402 91 647 326 2,152 1,613 93 603 134 1,275 . . .
         Feb. 2,767 1,044 45 5,061 370 1,401 1,209 37 341 116 1,237 . . .         Mar.
p 5,963 2,617 546 1,107 818 2,720 1,619 53 546 114 1,293 . . .
Euro million
1999 36,444 11,655 2,233 7,116 1,816 12,973 7,039 537 3,056 846 8,086 27,060 8,636 8242000 37,826 11,443 2,151 7,243 3,356 13,485 7,015 433 2,982 844 7,170 27,025 8,849 784
2000          4th qtr 14,232 3,537 833 1,104 1,033 3,767 1,524 101 779 195 1,701 7,059 1,882 171
2001          1st qtr
p 5,461 2,077 349 3,485 774 3,207 2,271 93 762 186 1,945 . . .
2000          Dec. 7,785 1,650 502 293 487 2,278 484 37 309 62 542 . . .
2001          Jan. 997 205 46 331 167 1,100 825 47 308 68 652 . . .
         Feb. 1,415 534 23 2,588 189 716 618 19 175 59 632 . . .         Mar.
p 3,049 1,338 279 566 418 1,391 828 27 279 58 661 . . .
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. —1Other excise taxes and the income until mid-1992, and again since the beginning of 1995. —2On returns and
and corporation tax surcharge ("solidarity surcharge") levied from mid-1991 capital. — 3 Including tax-like receipts.   
54*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
7. Indebtedness of the public sector *
  
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999, euro million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
5−year lending owing to
Bundes- Treasury special Federal Debt by credit Social German Equalisa-
End of year bank discount Treasury Federal savings secur- institu- security unifica- tion
or month Total advances paper  1 notes  2 bonds  2 bonds ities  2 tions  3 funds Other  3 tion 4 claims Other  5 
Public authorities
1994 1,659,632 − 20,506 169,181 181,737 59,334 465,408 644,459 1,337 28,997 1,391 87,098 184
1995 1,993,476 − 8,072 219,864 170,719 78,456 607,224 764,875 1,263 40,621 15,106 87,079 198
1996 2,126,320 − 27,609 217,668 176,164 96,391 631,696 836,582 770 39,450 9,960 89,826 203
1997 2,215,893 − 26,336 241,268 177,721 99,317 670,755 879,021 663 29,907 1,315 89,376 216
1998 2,280,154 − 25,631 221,524 199,774 92,698 729,416 894,456 550 26,073 1,249 88,582 202
1999 1,199,975 − 12,594 99,544 120,998 41,621 418,871 450,111 281 10,200 476 45,175 105
2000          Mar. 1,213,985 − 11,790 99,731 121,722 40,925 426,923 457,058 282 9,733 431 45,281 108
         June 1,212,346 − 11,729 101,390 123,093 39,200 429,441 451,597 281 9,809 418 45,281 108
         Sep. 1,221,702 − 11,850 103,538 123,235 38,131 432,904 457,350 280 9,720 434 44,146 114
         Dec. pe 1,216,123 − 11,616 107,207 126,276 35,991 441,658 438,398 244 10,195 285 44,146 108
Federal Government 6,  7
1994 712,488 − 15,870 66,987 181,737 59,334 359,833 16,654 50 875 1,391 9,576 183
1995 756,834 − 8,072 52,354 170,719 78,456 402,307 26,572 15 8,119 1,360 8,684 176
1996 839,883 − 26,789 55,289 176,164 96,391 434,295 32,988 5 7,766 1,330 8,684 183
1997 905,691 − 25,286 78,848 177,721 99,317 481,619 31,845 5 870 1,300 8,684 197
1998 957,983 − 24,666 84,760 199,274 92,698 519,718 24,125 − 2,603 1,270 8,684 186
1999 714,069 − 11,553 44,335 120,498 41,621 379,808 67,872 60 2,568 476 45,175 104
2000          Mar. 726,998 − 11,412 43,587 121,222 40,925 387,394 74,248 59 2,331 431 45,281 108
         June 723,195 − 11,654 43,929 122,593 39,200 389,761 67,927 58 2,268 418 45,281 107
         Sep. 730,423 − 11,775 44,416 121,601 38,131 392,785 74,820 57 2,145 434 44,146 113
         Dec. 715,819 − 11,516 44,678 123,642 35,991 400,490 52,836 29 2,099 285 44,146 107
West German L änder Governments
1994 415,052 −− 68,643 . . 20,451 311,622 623 11,453 . 2,259 2
1995 442,536 −− 72,001 . . 19,151 339,084 358 11,940 . − 2
1996 477,361 − 320 80,036 . . 11,934 372,449 54 12,567 . − 2
1997 505,297 − 350 79,901 . . 6,739 406,499 47 11,760 . − 2
1998 525,380 − 520 78,878 . . 4,512 430,709 43 10,716 . − 2
1999 274,208 − 150 40,979 . . 2,054 226,022 23 4,979 . − 1
2000          Mar. 275,718 − 50 42,080 . . 2,002 226,700 23 4,861 . . 1
         June 275,854 −− 43,166 . . 2,003 225,681 23 4,980 . . 1
         Sep. 275,454 −− 44,193 . . 2,003 224,238 23 4,997 . . 1
         Dec. p 282,702 −− 46,699 . . 2,003 228,498 23 5,478 . . 1
East German L änder Governments
1994 55,650 −− 19,350 . . 1,000 35,065 5 230 . . .
1995 69,151 −− 23,845 . . 1,500 43,328 17 461 . . .
1996 80,985 − 500 25,320 . . 1,500 53,483 − 182 . . .
1997 90,174 − 700 26,040 . . 1,500 61,697 15 222 . . .
1998 98,192 − 445 25,728 . . 1,500 70,289 − 230 . . .
1999 53,199 − 891 13,750 . . 767 37,602 − 189 . . .
2000          Mar. 52,201 − 328 13,584 . . 767 37,415 − 107 . . .
         June 52,956 − 75 13,816 . . 767 38,141 − 158 . . .
         Sep. 53,773 − 75 14,450 . . 767 38,377 − 103 . . .
         Dec. p 55,715 − 100 15,350 . . 767 39,384 − 114 . . .
West German local authorities 8
1994 153,375 . . − . . 100 147,558 288 5,429 . . .
1995 157,271 . . − . . 1,000 151,127 283 4,861 . . .
1996 158,613 . . 200 . . 1,280 152,311 174 4,648 . . .
1997 160,162 . . 300 . . 1,330 154,145 149 4,238 . . .1998 158,960 . . 300 . . 1,330 153,208 119 4,003 . . .1999 81,511 . . 153 . . 680 78,726 53 1,898 . . .
2000          Mar. 81,704 . . 153 . . 680 78,903 51 1,917 . . .
         June 82,165 . . 153 . . 680 79,363 51 1,917 . . .         Sep. 82,420 . . 153 . . 680 79,618 51 1,917 . . .         Dec.
pe 82,062 . . 153 . . 680 79,260 51 1,917 . . .
East German local authorities  8
1994 32,235 . . 125 . . 400 30,837 364 509 . . .
1995 36,830 . . 225 . . 400 35,427 347 431 . . .1996 38,976 . . 225 . . 400 37,922 308 121 . . .1997 38,688 . . 225 . . 400 37,623 273 167 . . .1998 39,873 . . 225 . . 460 38,777 255 156 . . .1999 20,726 . . 51 . . 335 20,138 124 78 . . .
2000          Mar. 20,758 . . 51 . . 335 20,167 128 77 . . .
         June 20,758 . . 51 . . 335 20,167 128 77 . . .         Sep. 20,682 . . 51 . . 335 20,091 128 77 . . .         Dec.
pe 20,810 . . 51 . . 335 20,219 128 77 . . .
For footnotes see end of the table. 
55*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
7. Indebtedness of the public sector * (cont ’d)
  
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999, euro million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
5−year lending owing to
Bundes- Treasury special Federal Debt by credit Social German Equalisa-
End of year bank discount Treasury Federal savings secur- institu- security unifica- tion
or month Total advances paper  1 notes  2 bonds  2 bonds ities  2 tions  3 funds Other  3 tion 4 claims Other  5 
“German Unity “Fund / Indemnification Fund 6
1994 89,187 . 897 8,867 − . 43,859 33,744 5 1,816 . . .
1995 87,146 . − 8,891 − . 44,398 31,925 5 1,927 . . .
1996 83,556 . −−− . 44,321 38,020 5 1,210 . . .
1997 79,717 . −−− . 44,347 34,720 5 645 . . .
1998 79,413 . −−− . 47,998 30,975 − 440 . . .
1999 40,234 . − 275 500 . 28,978 10,292 − 189 . . .
2000          Mar. 40,572 . − 275 500 . 29,315 10,292 − 189 . . .
         June 41,041 . − 275 500 . 29,290 10,797 − 179 . . .
         Sep. 41,189 . − 275 1,634 . 29,298 9,814 − 169 . . .
         Dec. p 40,629 . − 275 2,634 . 29,797 7,790 − 133 . . .
ERP Special Fund 6
1994 28,043 . .... 10,298 17,745 −− ...
1995 34,200 . .... 10,745 23,455 −− ...
1996 34,135 . .... 10,750 23,385 −− ...
1997 33,650 . .... 10,810 22,840 −− ...
1998 34,159 . .... 11,944 20,988 − 1,227 . . .
1999 16,028 . .... 6,250 9,458 21 299 . . .
2000          Mar. 16,034 . .... 6,429 9,333 21 251 . . .
         June 16,376 . .... 6,604 9,520 21 231 . . .
         Sep. 17,761 . .... 7,036 10,392 21 312 . . .
         Dec. p 18,386 . .... 7,585 10,411 13 377 . . .
Federal Railways Fund 6,  7
1994 71,173 . . 5,208 − . 29,467 29,232 − 7,265 . . .
1995 78,400 . . 3,848 − . 28,992 39,005 140 6,415 . . .
1996 77,785 . . 1,882 − . 28,749 41,537 130 5,489 . . .
1997 77,254 . . 1,927 − . 25,634 44,807 115 4,772 . . .
1998 77,246 . . − 500 . 31,648 42,488 79 2,531 . . .
1999          June 39,231 . . − 1,023 . 16,805 20,401 34 968 . . .
Debt-Processing Fund / Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities 6,  7
1994 102,428 . 3,740 . . . . 22,003 2 1,420 . 75,263 .
1995 328,888 . − 58,699 − . 98,731 72,732 98 6,468 13,745 78,395 21
1996 331,918 . − 54,718 − . 98,468 81,380 95 7,468 8,630 81,142 19
1997 322,032 . − 54,028 − . 98,377 81,616 54 7,233 15 80,692 17
1998 304,978 . − 31,633 − . 110,006 79,226 54 4,167 −20 79,899 15
1999          June 151,097 . − 11,127 2,000 . 58,897 36,133 27 2,015 −9 40,902 4
“Use of Hard Coal “Equalisation Fund 6,  7
1995 2,220 . .... − 2,220 −− ...
1996 3,108 . .... − 3,108 −− ...
1997 3,229 . .... − 3,229 −− ...
1998 3,971 . .... 3 0 0 3,671 −− ...
1999          June 2,302 . .... 1 5 3 2,148 −− ...
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical accordance with the London Debts agreement; excluding debt securities i n
Office. —*Excluding public authorities ’mutual indebtedness. — own portfolios. —6The debt incurred through the joint issue of Federal
1Predominantly Treasury discount paper. —2Excluding paper in the securities is recorded here −in contrast to the capital market statistics −
issuers ’portfolios. —3Mainly loans against borrowers ’notes. Including under the Federal Government and its special funds in accordance with the
loans raised abroad. Other loans from non-banks, including loans from agreed distribution ratios. —7Since July 1, 1999 the Federal Government
supplementary public pension funds and liabilities arising from the has assumed joint responsibility for the debts of the Redemption Fund for
investment assistance levy. —4Old liabilities arising from residential Inherited Liabilities, the Federal Railway Fund and the Equalisation Fund for
construction and liabilities arising from residential construction by the Safeguarding the Use of Coal. The special funds mentioned are onlyformer GDR ’s armed forces and from residential construction in connection recorded under the Federal Government from July. —8Data other than
with the return of the troops of the former USSR in eastern Germany to end-of-year figures have been estimated. Including indebtedness of munici-their home country. —5Old debt mainly expressed in foreign currency, in pal special-purpose associations. 
56*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
8. Changes in public sector indebtedness *
  
  
Net borrowing  1 
Level at end of 1999 2000
1999 2000  pe Total 1st half 3rd qtr 4th qtr total  pe 1st half 3rd qtr 4th qtr  pe 
Item Euro million
Borrowers
Federal Government  2 714,069 715,819 + 31,738 + 19,705 + 10,536 + 1,497 + 1,755 + 9,123 + 7,227 −14,594
"German Unity" Fund 40,102 40,425 − 428 + 87 − 386 − 129 + 323 + 775 + 128 − 580
ERP Special Fund 16,028 18,386 −1,437 − 470 − 627 − 340 + 2,358 + 348 + 1,385 + 625
Federal Railways Fund  2 −− − 265 − 265 −−−−−−
Inherited Liabilities Fund  2 −− − 4,882 −4,882 −−−−−−
"Use of Hard Coal" Equal-
isation Fund  2 −− + 271 + 271 −−−−−−
Indemnification Fund 132 204 + 59 + 24 + 17 + 18 + 72 + 32 + 20 + 20
West  German  Länder 274,208 282,702 + 5,585 + 2,173 − 803 + 4,215 + 8,494 + 1,647 − 400 + 7,247 Governments
East German  Länder 53,199 55,715 + 2,995 − 853 + 1,051 + 2,797 + 2,515 − 243 + 817 + 1,942 Governments
West German local authorities  3 81,511 82,062 + 751 − 273 + 332 + 692 + 667 + 897 − 26 − 205
East German local authorities  3 20,726 20,810 + 428 + 77 + 26 + 325 + 150 + 99 − 77 + 128
Total 1,199,975 1,216,123 + 34,816 + 15,594 + 10,146 + 9,075 + 16,334 + 12,676 + 9,074 −5,416
Types of debt
Treasury discount paper  4 12,594 11,616 − 511 −1,153 − 159 + 801 − 978 − 865 + 121 − 233
Treasury notes  5 99,544 107,207 −13,720 −8,674 −2,822 −2,224 + 7,663 + 1,846 + 2,149 + 3,668
Five-year special Federal bonds  5 120,998 126,276 + 18,855 + 9,116 + 3,646 + 6,093 + 5,278 + 2,095 + 143 + 3,041
Federal savings bonds 41,621 35,991 −5,775 −2,750 −1,434 −1,591 −5,630 −2,421 −1,069 −2,140
Debt securities  5 418,871 441,658 + 45,927 + 21,076 + 16,005 + 8,846 + 22,787 + 10,570 + 3,463 + 8,754
Direct lending bycredit institutions  
6 450,111 438,398 −6,613 − 243 −5,658 − 712 −11,531 + 1,795 + 5,472 −18,799
Loans from social security funds 281 244 − 0− 19 − 1+ 1 9 − 37 + 0 − 1− 37
Other loans  6 10,160 10,155 −3,130 −1,764 + 625 −1,992 − 6− 391 − 90 + 475
Old debt  7 581 393 − 161 + 1 − 1− 160 − 188 − 55 + 22 − 155
Equalisation claims 45,175 44,146 − 55 + 4 − 57 − 3−1,024 + 101 −1,135 + 10
Investment assistance levy 40 40 − 0− 0− 0− 0− 0− 0− 0− 0
Total 1,199,975 1,216,123 + 34,816 + 15,594 + 10,146 + 9,075 + 16,334 + 12,676 + 9,074 −5,416
Creditors
Banking system
Bundesbank 4,440 4,440 −−−−−−−−
Credit institutions 595,553 569,988 −7,014 −8,339 −3,267 + 4,591 −25,378 −6,085 −3,400 −15,892
Domestic non-banks
Social security funds  8 281 256 − 0− 26 − 0+ 2 6 − 26 − 0− 0− 26
Other  9 187,141 209,959 + 25,673 + 22,067 + 2,112 + 1,493 + 22,819 + 5,366 + 4,754 + 12,699
Foreign creditors  pe 412,561 431,479 + 16,157 + 1,892 + 11,300 + 2,965 + 18,918 + 13,396 + 7,721 −2,199
Total 1,199,975 1,216,123 + 34,816 + 15,594 + 10,146 + 9,075 + 16,334 + 12,676 + 9,074 −5,416
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical 6Including loans raised abroad. —7Old liabilities arising from residential
Office. —*Excluding public authorities ’mutual indebtedness. —1Net construction and liabilities arising from the residential construction of the
borrowing differs from the change in indebtedness, which includes the former GDR ’s armed forces and from residential construction in connection
assumption and reduction of debts. —2See Table VIII. 7, footnote 6. — with the return of the troops of the former USSR based in eastern Germany
3Data other than end-of-year figures have been estimated. Including to their home country, and old debt in accordance with the London Debts
indebtedness of municipal special-purpose associations and municipal Agreement. —8Excluding public bonds acquired by supplementary pension
hospitals. —4Excluding mobilisation and liquidity paper. Predominantly funds for government employees. — 9 Ascertained as a difference. 
Treasury discount paper. —5Excluding paper in the issuers ’portfolios. —
9. Loans raised by public authorities against borrowers ’ notes
  
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999, euro million
End of year Federal "German ERP L änder Local Federal Inherited "Use of Hard
or month Govern- Unity" Special Govern- authorities Railways Liabilites Coal" Equal-
Total  1 ment  2,  3 Fund Fund ments 4,  5 Fund  3 Fund  3 isation Fund  3 
1996 851,245 33,817 39,235 23,385 428,292 187,311 47,155 88,942 3,108
1997 883,260 25,914 35,370 22,840 471,224 186,087 49,694 88,902 3,2291998 898,030 23,094 31,415 22,215 504,148 184,942 45,098 83,447 3,6711999 444,031 64,704 10,481 9,778 264,158 94,909 −− −
2000 Mar. 442,190 62,289 10,481 9,605 264,958 94,857 −− −
June 443,410 62,018 10,466 9,772 266,855 94,299 −− −
Sep. 436,742 57,651 9,277 10,725 264,691 94,398 −− −
Dec. 
pe 435,987 54,731 7,178 10,801 268,912 94,365 −− −
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical 3See Table VIII. 7, footnote 6. —4Data other than end-of-year figures have
Office. —1Excluding Debt Register claims and cash advances. Including been estimated. Including municipal special-purpose associations and
small amounts of: mortgage loans, land charges in annuity and other forms, municipal hospitals. — 5 Including contractually agreed loans. 
and debts outstanding. —2Including Equalisation of Burdens Fund. —
57*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
10. Indebtedness of the Federal Government
  
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999, euro million
Treasury Indebtedness
discount paper  1 to non-banks Old debt
Federal Direct
of which Treasury 5 −year Debt lending owing to
Bundes- Treasury paper/ special Federal secur- by credit Social German Equal-
End of year bank financing Treasury Federal savings ities institu- security Other unifica- isation
or month Total advances Total paper notes  2 bonds  2 bonds 2 tions  3,  4 funds 3,  5,  6  tion 7 claims Other  8 
1996 839,883 − 26,789 7,166 55,289 176,164 96,391 434,295 32,988 5 7,766 1,330 8,684 183
1997 905,691 − 25,286 5,221 78,848 177,721 99,317 481,619 31,845 5 870 1,300 8,684 197
1998 957,983 − 24,666 4,558 84,760 199,274 92,698 519,718 24,125 − 2,603 1,270 8,684 186
1999  9 714,069 − 11,553 1,584 44,335 120,498 41,621 379,808 67,872 60 2,568 476 45,175 104
2000 715,819 − 11,516 1,804 44,678 123,642 35,991 400,490 52,836 29 2,099 285 44,146 107
2000          Mar. 726,998 − 11,412 1,586 43,587 121,222 40,925 387,394 74,248 59 2,331 431 45,281 108
         Apr. 725,260 − 11,534 1,570 44,175 122,229 41,045 386,828 71,229 59 2,332 435 45,283 111
         May 727,073 − 11,617 1,652 44,512 122,534 40,445 391,132 68,614 59 2,334 437 45,281 109
         June 723,195 − 11,654 1,690 43,929 122,593 39,200 389,761 67,927 58 2,268 418 45,281 107
         July 729,799 − 11,698 1,701 44,308 122,604 39,233 393,645 71,272 58 2,294 432 44,146 109
         Aug. 731,075 − 11,748 1,751 44,496 120,794 38,781 392,264 75,948 58 2,294 435 44,147 111
         Sep. 730,423 − 11,775 1,778 44,416 121,601 38,131 392,785 74,820 57 2,145 434 44,146 113
         Oct. 725,875 − 11,469 1,757 44,121 122,118 38,130 396,905 66,235 57 2,145 434 44,147 114
         Nov. 724,073 − 11,489 1,777 43,940 122,672 35,991 399,752 63,337 57 2,153 434 44,136 111
         Dec. 715,819 − 11,516 1,804 44,678 123,642 35,991 400,490 52,836 29 2,099 285 44,146 107
2001          Jan. 696,637 − 11,669 1,780 45,391 123,881 35,959 402,794 64,383 29 2,030 288 10,105 107
         Feb. 696,201 − 11,722 1,833 45,557 120,949 34,929 408,471 61,995 29 2,054 283 10,105 107
         Mar. 699,682 − 11,798 1,909 45,431 121,605 34,560 409,855 64,045 29 1,908 238 10,103 110
         Apr. p 694,812 − 13,691 1,931 46,075 121,646 33,639 409,536 57,838 29 1,908 238 10,103 110
1Excluding mobilisation and liquidity paper. In November 1999, including with the return of the troops of the former USSR based in eastern Germany
cash bills. —2Excluding paper in the issuers ’portfolios. —3Including loans to their home country. —8Commutation and compensation debt and old
raised abroad. —4Including money market debt. —5Including loans debt mainly expressed in foreign currency. —9Since July 1, 1999 the
granted by supplementary pension funds for government employees. — Federal Government has assumed joint responsibility for the debts of the
6Including liabilities arising from the investment assistance levy. — Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, the Federal Railway Fund and the
7Assumption of liabilities arising from residential construction of the Equalisation Fund for Safeguarding the Use of Coal. The special funds
former GDR ’s armed forces and from residential construction in connection mentioned are ascribed to the Federal Government from July 1999. 
11. Federal Government borrowing in the market
  
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM billion / from 1999, euro billion
of which
5−year special Loans against Change in
Total new borrowing Debt Securities Federal bonds Other securities  2 borrowers ’ notes Money money
market market
Period gross  1 net gross  1 net gross  1 net gross  1 net gross net debt deposits
1996 + 185,696 + 83,049 + 54,038 + 31,988 + 45,445 + 5,445 + 67,015 + 39,586 + 15,050 + 1,906 + 4,148 + 6,548
1997 + 250,076 + 65,808 + 79,323 + 47,323 + 59,557 + 1,557 + 98,276 + 24,983 + 12,950 − 8,009 − 30 − 3,304
1998 + 228,050 + 52,292 + 78,304 + 38,099 + 55,078 + 21,553 + 85,706 − 1,327 + 12,023 − 2,927 − 3,065 − 5,440
1999 + 139,865 + 31,631 + 53,931 + 114,080 + 22,229 + 18,610 + 44,904 − 5,836 + 14,861 + 52,897 + 3,937 + 1,832
2000 + 122,725 + 1,750 + 49,395 + 20,682 + 26,342 + 3,144 + 45,278 − 5,323 + 7,273 − 9,973 − 5,563 − 940
2000          Jan.-Apr. + 48,722 + 11,192 + 15,661 + 7,020 + 7,705 + 1,732 + 16,750 − 754 + 3,058 − 2,429 + 5,549 − 1,461
2001          Jan.-Apr.  p + 47,925 − 21,006 + 13,977 + 9,047 + 2,953 − 1,996 + 18,680 + 1,220 + 1,858 − 5,647 + 10,458 − 296
2000          Mar. + 14,580 + 1,932 + 1,871 − 109 + 916 − 2,501 + 5,066 − 1,064 + 735 − 350 + 5,992 − 220
         Apr. + 6,439 − 1,738 + 1,851 − 567 + 1,007 + 1,007 + 5,838 + 829 + 747 − 14 − 3,004 − 219
         May + 11,142 + 1,813 + 7,171 + 4,304 + 5,263 + 305 + 704 − 181 + 616 − 2− 2,612 − 120
         June + 3,845 − 3,877 − 1,371 − 1,371 + 59 + 59 + 4,820 − 1,791 + 835 − 255 − 498 − 343
         July + 13,552 + 6,603 + 3,884 + 3,884 + 11 + 10 + 5,377 + 457 + 666 − 243 + 3,614 + 169
         Aug. + 13,745 + 1,276 + 2,545 − 1,381 + 4,696 − 1,810 + 449 − 214 + 198 − 1,182 + 5,858 − 230
         Sep. + 8,794 − 652 + 522 + 522 + 807 + 807 + 5,169 − 703 + 631 − 2,942 + 1,665 + 255
         Oct. + 11,985 − 4,548 + 12,596 + 4,120 + 517 + 517 + 4,898 − 601 + 379 − 2,179 − 6,406 − 72
         Nov. + 7,820 − 1,801 + 2,847 + 2,847 + 6,515 + 554 + 302 − 2,299 + 679 − 367 − 2,522 − 218
         Dec. + 3,120 − 8,254 + 5,541 + 738 + 770 + 970 + 6,809 + 764 + 211 − 373 −10,211 + 1,080
2001          Jan. + 25,914 − 19,182 + 7,235 + 2,305 + 239 + 239 + 5,852 + 834 + 672 − 437 + 11,915 − 36
         Feb. + 9,415 − 436 + 5,677 + 5,677 + 2,017 − 2,933 + 592 − 811 + 240 − 3,255 + 890 − 859
         Mar. + 11,331 + 3,481 + 1,383 + 1,383 + 657 + 657 + 4,848 − 419 + 832 − 1,707 + 3,611 + 892
         Apr. p + 1,265 − 4,869 − 319 − 319 + 41 + 41 + 7,388 + 1,616 + 114 − 249 − 5,958 − 293
1After deduction of repurchases. —2Federal Treasury notes, Federal   
savings bonds, Treasury discount paper, Treasury financing paper.  
  
58*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
12. Receipts, expenditure and assets of the wage and
salary earners ’ pension insurance funds
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999, euro million
Receipts  1 Expenditure  1 Assets  5 
of which of which Memor-
Balance Mort- andum
Pen- of receipts gage item
Pension sioners ’ and and Adminis-
Contri- Federal pay- health expend- other Real trative
Period Total butions  2 payments Total ments  3 insurance  4 iture Total Deposits  6 Securities loans  7 estate assets
Western Germany
1994 267,265 215,758 48,108 266,443 220,744 14,375 + 822 33,578 24,194 8,170 909 305 6,890
1995 276,302 225,324 47,979 279,226 230,222 15,923 −2,924 21,756 16,801 3,948 746 262 7,800
1996  8 288,761 236,036 50,478 288,716 237,464 16,809 + 45 14,456 9,608 2,119 2,500 229 8,863
1997 305,606 248,463 54,896 295,635 246,011 17,892 + 9,971 14,659 10,179 1,878 2,372 230 9,2611998 317,340 250,063 65,191 304,155 254,783 18,636 + 13,185 18,194 14,201 1,493 2,274 226 9,573
1999  
p 169,124 128,191 39,884 159,819 134,408 9,910 + 9,305 13,623 11,559 824 1,127 114 4,904
2000  p 172,903 128,046 43,563 165,797 139,205 10,237 + 7,106 14,361 11,458 1,677 1,106 120 5,006
2000          1st qtr 41,290 30,016 10,987 40,856 34,574 2,531 + 434 12,612 9,817 1,538 1,126 130 4,899
         2nd qtr 42,199 30,986 10,910 40,428 34,516 2,532 + 1,772 11,636 8,980 1,409 1,119 128 4,936         3rd qtr 42,891 31,757 10,802 42,262 35,068 2,580 + 628 10,653 7,936 1,483 1,114 121 4,909         4th qtr 46,523 35,287 10,864 41,994 35,047 2,594 + 4,529 14,361 11,458 1,677 1,106 120 5,006
2001          1st qtr 42,472 30,565 11,548 42,251 35,557 2,608 + 221 13,807 10,385 1,601 1,711 109 4,917
Eastern Germany
1994 63,001 40,904 13,783 65,811 53,136 3,376 −2,810 . . . . . .
1995 70,774 44,970 16,408 77,780 63,812 4,362 −7,006 . . . . . .
1996 74,790 46,580 17,910 83,830 68,316 4,851 −9,040 . . . . . .
1997 79,351 48,939 20,065 87,424 70,500 5,388 −8,073 . . . . . .
1998 81,072 47,764 23,564 90,863 73,040 5,757 −9,791 . . . . . .
1999  p 43,214 24,015 14,744 47,641 38,339 3,040 −4,426 . . . . . .
2000  p 42,995 22,654 15,408 49,209 39,505 3,109 −6,214 . . . . . .
2000          1st qtr 10,477 5,434 3,838 12,174 9,846 776 −1,697 . . . . . .
         2nd qtr 10,054 5,564 3,865 12,241 9,839 774 −2,187 . . . . . .
         3rd qtr 11,100 5,581 3,894 12,394 9,928 780 −1,294 . . . . . .
         4th qtr 11,364 6,074 3,810 12,399 9,892 780 −1,035 . . . . . .
2001          1st qtr 10,748 5,284 4,084 12,489 9,975 782 −1,741 . . . . . .
Source: Federal Minister of Labour and Social Affairs and Association of including nursing insurance scheme for pensioners . —5Largely
German Pension Insurance Funds. —1The annual figures differ from the corresponds to fluctuation reserves. Level at the end of the year or quarter.
sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. From 1993 From 1992 figures for the whole of Germany. —6Including cash
including financial compensation payments. —2Including contributions for resources. —7Excluding loans to other social security funds; including
recipients of public financial benefits. —3Payments by pension insurance participating interests. —8Excluding receipts arising from the higher
funds to health insurance institutions under section 50 of the Social Security valuation of participating interests. 
Code V have been deducted from pension payments. —4From 1995
13. Receipts and expenditure of the Federal Labour Office
  
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999, euro million
Receipts Expenditure
Subsidies
of which of which or work-
ing fund
Promotion of vocational Promo- Balance credits
Unemployment relief  3,  4 training  4,  5 tion of of receipts of thewinter and Federal
Contri- Western Eastern Western Eastern con- expend- Govern-
Period Total  
1 butions Levies  2 Total Total Germany Germany Total Germany Germany struction iture ment
Germany
1994 89,658 81,536 3,822 99,863 48,342 35,163 13,179 31,273 14,382 16,891 1,822 −10,205 10,142
1995 90,211 84,354 2,957 97,103 49,254 36,161 13,094 34,441 16,745 17,696 1,586 −6,892 6,887
1996 91,825 85,073 3,346 105,588 57,123 40,186 16,938 36,478 18,368 18,111 903 −13,763 13,756
1997 93,149 85,793 2,959 102,723 60,273 40,309 19,964 31,418 16,117 15,301 443 −9,574 9,574
1998 91,088 86,165 2,868 98,852 53,483 35,128 18,355 34,279 16,784 17,496 471 −7,764 7,719
1999 47,954 45,141 1,467 51,694 25,177 16,604 8,573 20,558 10,480 10,078 279 −3,740 3,739
2000 49,605 46,359 1,403 50,473 23,946 15,614 8,331 20,324 10,535 9,790 294 − 867 867
2000          1st qtr 11,304 10,788 85 12,062 6,094 3,998 2,096 4,414 2,265 2,149 177 − 758 3,083
         2nd qtr 12,113 11,086 334 12,445 6,052 3,894 2,158 4,923 2,560 2,362 106 − 332 491
         3rd qtr 12,335 11,610 403 12,220 5,750 3,747 2,002 4,990 2,542 2,448 10 + 115 − 256
         4th qtr 13,854 12,875 582 13,746 6,050 3,975 2,075 5,997 3,168 2,830 1 + 108 −2,452
2001          1st qtr 11,470 11,092 57 12,842 6,303 4,139 2,165 4,860 2,633 2,226 150 −1,372 3,508
Source: Federal Labour Office. —1Excluding Federal Government liquidity replacement for the unemployment benefits. —4Including contributions to
assistance. —2Levies to promote winter construction and to pay bank- the statutory health insurance, and to the pension insurance funds. —
ruptcy compensation to employees. —3Unemployment benefits, 5Vocational training, measures to foster the commencement of work,
short-time-working benefits. Including the integration allowance paid to rehabilitation and job creation measures. resettlers from eastern Europe and emigrants from the GDR as a
59*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
IX. Economic conditions
  
1. Origin and expenditure of domestic product, distribution of national income
    Germany
    
  1995   1996   1997   1998   1999   2000   1999   2000   1997   1998   1999   2000   2000
Change from % of
Item DM billion Euro billion previous year in % total
at  1995  prices
I.Origin of domestic product
Producing sector
(excluding construction) 837.8 819.3 837.8 849.9 851.5 893.8 435.4 457.0 2.3 1.4 0.2 5.0 23.3Construction 223.0 214.1 210.9 206.4 201.8 194.1 103.2 99.3 −1.5 −2.1 −2.2 −3.8 5.1
Distribution, catering trade,and transportation  
1 585.8 591.8 598.6 615.2 626.8 652.9 320.5 333.8 1.1 2.8 1.9 4.2 17.0
Financing, rents and corporateservices  
2 893.1 935.3 971.0 1,023.8 1,075.8 1,131.9 550.1 578.7 3.8 5.4 5.1 5.2 29.5
Public and private services  3 713.6 726.5 731.6 737.6 736.5 744.8 376.6 380.8 0.7 0.8 −0.2 1.1 19.4
All economic sectors 3,295.4 3,332.1 3,394.7 3,478.5 3,539.2 3,665.2 1,809.5 1,874.0 1.9 2.5 1.7 3.6 95.4Memo item: Enterprise sector 2,845.3 2,879.9 2,945.1 3,030.1 3,092.0 3,216.1 1,580.9 1,644.3 2.3 2.9 2.0 4.0 83.7
Economic sectors, adjusted  
4 3,176.6 3,202.9 3,254.0 3,325.0 3,372.9 3,486.6 1,724.5 1,782.7 1.6 2.2 1.4 3.4 90.8
Gross domestic product 3,523.0 3,550.0 3,599.6 3,673.5 3,730.7 3,840.8 1,907.5 1,963.8 1.4 2.1 1.6 3.0 100
II.Expenditure of domestic product
Private consumption  5 2,003.9 2,023.6 2,037.2 2,078.5 2,132.1 2,165.3 1,090.1 1,107.1 0.7 2.0 2.6 1.6 56.4
Government consumption 697.8 710.2 704.1 707.7 706.7 716.7 361.3 366.4 −0.9 0.5 −0.1 1.4 18.7
Machinery and equipment 253.9 258.3 268.0 292.5 312.1 340.0 159.5 173.8 3.7 9.2 6.7 9.0 8.9
Construction 506.0 491.6 484.4 479.6 481.7 469.7 246.3 240.1 −1.5 −1.0 0.5 −2.5 12.2
Other investment  6 30.6 34.1 36.1 40.0 45.0 49.3 23.0 25.2 5.9 10.9 12.4 9.7 1.3
Changes in stocks  7 8.1 −8.3 −0.3 15.0 21.0 30.3 10.7 15.5 . . . . 0.8
Domestic demand 3,500.3 3,509.4 3,529.4 3,613.2 3,698.5 3,771.3 1,891.0 1,928.2 0.6 2.4 2.4 2.0 98.2Net exports 22.7 40.6 70.2 60.3 32.2 69.6 16.4 35.6 . . . . 1.8
Exports 862.6 906.4 1,008.6 1,079.0 1,133.5 1,283.7 579.5 656.3 11.3 7.0 5.1 13.2 33.4Imports 839.9 865.9 938.4 1,018.7 1,101.3 1,214.1 563.1 620.8 8.4 8.6 8.1 10.2 31.6
Gross domestic product 3,523.0 3,550.0 3,599.6 3,673.5 3,730.7 3,840.8 1,907.5 1,963.8 1.4 2.1 1.6 3.0 100
at  current  prices
III.Expenditure of domestic product
Private consumption  5 2,003.9 2,057.5 2,112.3 2,177.9 2,241.1 2,309.1 1,145.9 1,180.6 2.7 3.1 2.9 3.0 58.1
Government consumption 697.8 715.3 713.3 722.4 738.0 750.3 377.3 383.6 −0.3 1.3 2.2 1.7 18.9
Machinery and equipment 253.9 257.9 268.4 293.5 310.4 340.1 158.7 173.9 4.1 9.4 5.8 9.5 8.6Construction 506.0 489.5 481.1 475.3 475.1 466.3 242.9 238.4 −1.7 −1.2 −0.0 −1.8 11.7
Other investment  
6 30.6 33.1 35.1 38.1 41.5 44.3 21.2 22.7 6.1 8.7 8.9 6.7 1.1
Changes in stocks  7 8.1 −4.0 6.2 19.6 33.4 50.7 17.1 25.9 . . . . 1.3
Domestic demand 3,500.3 3,549.2 3,616.4 3,726.9 3,839.6 3,960.8 1,963.1 2,025.1 1.9 3.1 3.0 3.2 99.6Net exports 22.7 37.3 50.1 57.5 37.6 15.3 19.2 7.8 . . . . 0.4
Exports 862.6 907.5 1,021.1 1,092.4 1,141.6 1,326.2 583.7 678.1 12.5 7.0 4.5 16.2 33.4Imports 839.9 870.2 971.0 1,034.9 1,104.0 1,310.9 564.5 670.3 11.6 6.6 6.7 18.7 33.0
Gross domestic product 3,523.0 3,586.5 3,666.5 3,784.4 3,877.2 3,976.1 1,982.4 2,032.9 2.2 3.2 2.5 2.6 100
IV.Prices (1995=100)
Private consumption 100.0 101.7 103.7 104.8 105.1 106.6 . . 2.0 1.1 0.3 1.4 .Gross domestic product 100.0 101.0 101.9 103.0 103.9 103.5 . . 0.8 1.1 0.9 −0.4 .
Terms of trade 100.0 99.6 97.8 99.7 100.5 95.7 . . −1.8 1.9 0.8 −4.8 .
V.Distribution of national income
Wages and salaries 1,948.5 1,966.1 1,973.2 2,011.7 2,060.3 2,121.5 1,053.4 1,084.7 0.4 2.0 2.4 3.0 72.0Entrepreneurial and propertyincome 708.8 736.4 779.9 820.7 810.9 824.1 414.6 421.4 5.9 5.2 −1.2 1.6 28.0
National income 2,657.3 2,702.5 2,753.1 2,832.4 2,871.2 2,945.6 1,468.0 1,506.1 1.9 2.9 1.4 2.6 100
Memo item: Gross national
income 3,504.4 3,570.9 3,648.6 3,758.6 3,845.9 3,946.9 1,966.4 2,018.0 2.2 3.0 2.3 2.6 .
(Gross nat. product)
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in March 2001. —1In- ing taxes on products (offset against subsidies on products). —5Including
cluding telecommunications. —2Financial intermediation, real estate activi- private non-commercial organisations. —6Intangible fixed capital forma-
ties, rents and corporate services. —3Including care-at-home services. — tion (inter alia, EDP software, copyrights) and economically useful animals
4Gross value added after deduction of assumed bank charges, but exclud- and plants. — 7 Including net increase in valuables. 
60*IX. Economic conditions

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
 IX. Economic conditions
 
2. Output in the producing sector     
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations
of which:
Manufacturing sector
Producing sector, Intermediate Capital goods Durable consumer Other consumer
total Total goods industries  1 industries goods industries goods industries Construction
Change Change Change Change Change Change Changefrom from from from from from fromprevious previous previous previous previous previous previousyear year year year year year year
Period in % in % in % in % in % in % in %
1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 
Germany  
  
1997 102.5 + 2.7 104.4 + 4.0 105.8 + 6.0 105.2 + 4.2 101.9 + 0.8 100.9 + 0.3 89.6 −4.2
1998 106.0 + 3.4 109.5 + 4.9 110.6 + 4.5 113.2 + 7.6 108.3 + 6.3 100.6 −0.3 86.8 −3.1
1999 107.6 + 1.5 111.3 + 1.6 113.5 + 2.6 113.2
+ 0.0 112.3 + 3.7 101.9 + 1.3 87.5 + 0.8
2000  r 113.8 4 + 5.8 119.7 4 + 7.5 121.1 4 + 6.7 125.9 4 + 11.2 121.6 4 + 8.3 104.0 4 + 2.1 85.3 4 −2.5
  
2000          Mar.  r 119.7 + 5.5 126.2 + 7.0 128.2 + 7.0 131.9 + 10.6 133.5 + 7.5 107.0 −0.2 85.2 −2.9
         Apr.  r 111.3 + 4.6 116.1 + 6.4 118.4 + 5.3 119.7 + 9.6 120.4 + 6.8 101.8 + 3.8 89.7 −4.2
         May  3 r 114.4 + 10.0 119.5 + 11.8 123.4 + 12.1 121.4 + 14.4 124.6 + 14.0 102.8 + 4.9 95.8 + 4.0
         June  3 r 115.5 + 2.9 122.0 + 5.0 122.9 + 4.6 130.7 + 7.7 121.8 + 2.9 104.5 + 2.6 93.0 −7.6
         July  r 114.5 + 5.8 119.7 + 7.7 123.2 + 7.2 123.9 + 9.8 117.8 + 14.9 104.2 + 2.1 94.3 −5.9
         Aug.  r 106.0 + 6.2 110.3 + 8.1 114.9 + 7.4 112.8 + 12.1 95.8 + 6.9 100.9 + 3.2 88.9 −2.8
         Sep.  r 122.4 + 5.2 129.2 + 7.0 127.6 + 4.2 142.5 + 13.8 132.4 + 6.8 108.7 + 1.9 96.8 −7.0
         Oct.  r 121.3 + 4.5 127.4 + 6.2 128.7 + 6.0 131.6 + 8.9 135.6 + 6.8 112.7 + 1.9 93.7 −7.0
         Nov.  r 122.7 + 5.1 129.2 + 6.6 128.4 + 5.2 137.5 + 10.9 138.5 + 7.8 112.0 + 1.4 90.1 −2.6
         Dec.  r 114.5 4 + 9.4 122.2 4 + 11.4 114.3 4 + 8.1 148.8 4 + 18.4 114.8 4 + 15.8 101.6 4 + 3.7 68.5 4 + 1.3
2001          Jan.  p x 105.6 + 7.2 113.5 + 10.3 117.1 + 8.0 113.8 + 15.3 120.2 + 16.4 99.5 + 4.8 52.1 −11.8
         Feb.  p x 109.0 + 3.7 117.9 + 6.1 119.3 + 4.3 122.9 + 10.5 130.3 + 7.8 99.2 + 2.7 58.5 −14.1
         Mar.  p x 2 121.3 + 1.3 130.6 + 3.5 129.8 + 1.2 141.3 + 7.1 145.7 + 9.1 106.5 −0.5 2 72.0 −15.5
Western Germany  
  
1997 102.2 + 2.7 103.8 + 3.8 105.2 + 5.7 104.9 + 4.1 101.3 + 0.5 99.4 −0.3 88.9 −3.9
1998 105.8 + 3.5 108.5 + 4.5 109.4 + 4.0 112.9 + 7.6 107.2 + 5.8 99.0 −0.4 87.4 −1.7
1999 106.9 + 1.0 109.8 + 1.2 111.6 + 2.0 112.3 −0.5 110.8 + 3.4 99.9 + 0.9 88.4 + 1.1
2000  r 113.1 4 + 5.8 117.6 4 + 7.1 118.1 4 + 5.8 125.1 4 + 11.4 120.1 4 + 8.4 101.4 4 + 1.5 87.9 4 −0.6
  
2000          Mar.  r 119.5 + 5.6 124.4 + 6.6 125.5 + 6.0 131.6 + 11.2 131.9 + 7.4 104.6 −0.8 88.2 −1.1
         Apr.  r 110.6 + 4.5 114.1 + 5.9 115.6 + 4.4 118.6 + 9.2 118.8 + 6.6 99.3 + 3.3 93.2 −2.2
         May  3 r 113.5 + 9.9 117.4 + 11.4 120.4 + 11.1 120.6 + 14.5 123.0 + 13.7 100.1 + 4.4 99.1 + 5.7
         June  3 r 114.7 + 3.1 119.9 + 4.7 119.9 + 4.0 130.1 + 7.7 120.0 + 2.7 101.6 + 1.9 95.6 −5.7
         July  r 113.6 + 5.9 117.6 + 7.3 120.1 + 6.5 123.3 + 9.4 115.8 + 14.8 101.8 + 1.7 96.6 −4.4
         Aug.  r 104.7 + 6.1 108.0 + 7.6 111.8 + 6.2 111.5 + 12.5 94.8 + 7.0 98.2 + 2.0 89.9 −1.3
         Sep.  r 121.6 + 5.2 127.0 + 6.7 124.2 + 3.2 142.0 + 14.2 130.8 + 6.9 106.3 + 1.6 99.5 −5.8
         Oct.  r 120.5 + 4.5 125.2 + 6.0 125.3 + 5.2 131.0 + 9.2 134.3 + 7.0 109.9 + 1.5 97.2 −5.2
         Nov.  r 121.5 + 4.9 126.4 + 6.0 124.8 + 4.3 136.0 + 10.8 136.5 + 7.6 108.8 + 0.7 92.5 −0.9
         Dec.  r 114.1 4 + 9.5 120.1 4 + 11.3 111.5 4 + 7.4 147.8 4 + 18.8 112.9 4 + 15.6 98.6 4 + 3.1 70.9 4 + 4.0
2001          Jan.  p x 105.1 + 7.0 111.2 + 9.8 114.2 + 7.5 113.0 + 15.3 117.8 + 15.3 96.4 + 3.5 53.9 −11.2
         Feb.  p x 108.8 + 3.7 115.8 + 5.9 116.5 + 4.0 122.0 + 10.5 128.1 + 7.0 96.2 + 1.5 61.9 −12.9
         Mar.  p x 2 121.0 + 1.3 128.2 + 3.1 126.8 + 1.0 140.3 + 6.6 143.3 + 8.6 102.9 −1.6 2 76.4 −13.4
Eastern Germany  
  
1997 105.6 + 3.5 115.8 + 9.3 116.5 + 11.6 110.9 + 6.7 121.4 + 11.7 118.9 + 7.6 92.2 −4.8
1998 109.0 + 3.2 127.1 + 9.8 133.4 + 14.5 119.9 + 8.1 142.3 + 17.2 120.5 + 1.3 84.9 −7.9
1999 114.4 + 5.0 137.2 + 7.9 146.4 + 9.7 128.5 + 7.2 157.9 + 11.0 125.3 + 4.0 84.1 −0.9
2000  r 121.9 + 6.6 155.5 + 13.3 173.4 + 18.4 140.9 + 9.6 172.0 + 8.9 134.8 + 7.6 75.9 −9.8
  
2000          Mar.  r 122.4 + 4.7 156.2 + 10.6 175.0 + 19.5 138.2 −0.3 186.2 + 11.4 135.3 + 4.8 74.2 −10.1
         Apr.  r 119.8 + 6.9 151.6 + 15.5 167.6 + 17.9 138.4 + 17.2 172.3 + 13.5 132.3 + 8.4 77.0 −11.4
         May  3 r 124.1 + 12.0 156.2 + 19.3 177.5 + 26.5 135.8 + 13.0 172.9 + 20.6 136.2 + 10.9 83.7 −2.4
         June  3 r 124.8 + 2.9 158.4 + 10.4 175.4 + 12.3 143.2 + 9.2 182.4 + 10.1 138.6 + 7.5 83.7 −14.1
         July  r 125.0 + 5.9 155.8 + 13.6 177.0 + 15.8 135.4 + 15.5 182.0 + 17.7 133.7 + 4.9 86.4 −11.3
         Aug.  r 121.3 + 8.1 150.2 + 15.9 169.8 + 24.2 136.4 + 4.6 129.1 + 5.8 133.2 + 14.4 85.5 −8.2
         Sep.  r 131.3 + 4.5 166.6 + 10.9 188.5 + 17.6 152.5 + 6.4 182.8 + 3.5 137.8 + 3.3 87.2 −11.7
         Oct.  r 130.1 + 4.0 166.1 + 11.3 189.2 + 16.6 142.8 + 7.1 177.3 + 1.1 147.0 + 7.1 81.2 −14.3
         Nov.  r 135.9 + 7.0 176.0 + 13.5 192.4 + 16.7 165.9 + 12.8 202.1 + 9.5 151.1 + 8.5 81.2 −9.5
         Dec.  r 119.4 + 8.3 158.8 + 13.9 163.2 + 16.7 165.7 + 11.7 176.7 + 22.1 138.6 + 8.6 59.9 −8.4
2001          Jan.  p x 111.2 + 9.3 152.3 + 17.0 169.7 + 14.0 128.3 + 16.3 196.2 + 41.8 138.1 + 19.1 45.6 −14.3
         Feb.  p x 111.3 + 3.6 154.3 + 10.5 169.2 + 8.0 138.7 + 9.8 200.7 + 24.2 134.8 + 13.9 46.4 −19.3
         Mar.  p x 2 124.6 + 1.8 171.3 + 9.7 183.8 + 5.0 159.6 + 15.5 223.6 + 20.1 150.4 + 11.2 2 55.9 −24.7
Source: Federal Statistical Office. —1Excluding electricity and gas supply mated. —xAdjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical Office by way of es-
and excluding mining and quarrying. —2Provisional until the adjustment timates to the results of the Quarterly Production Survey for the first quar-
to the figures of the annual overall survey in construction. —3Figures in- ter (manufacturing sector in Germany: + 1% on average). 
fluenced by the exceptional working-day situation. —4Presumably overesti-
61* IX. Economic conditions

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
 IX. Economic conditions
 
3. Orders received by the manufacturing sector *)  
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Manufacturing
 Durable and non-durable
Intermediate goods consumer goods
Total Domestic orders Foreign orders industries industries Capital goods industries
Change Change Change Change Change Change
from from from from from fromprevious previous previous previous previous previousyear year year year year year
Period 1995=100 in % 1995=100 in % 1995=100 in % 1995=100 in % 1995=100 in % 1995=100 in %
Germany  
  
1997 107.1 + 7.2 99.0 + 2.2 121.6 + 15.3 107.2 + 9.2 108.8 + 7.1 103.4 + 2.0
1998 110.9 + 3.5 102.9 + 3.9 125.4 + 3.1 108.6 + 1.3 116.0 + 6.6 107.0 + 3.51999 113.3 + 2.2 102.7 − 0.2 132.3 + 5.5 110.8 + 2.0 117.6 + 1.4 111.3 + 4.0
2000 129.1 + 13.9 111.3 + 8.4 161.2 + 21.8 126.1 + 13.8 137.9 + 17.3 119.6 + 7.5
 
2000          Mar. 138.9 + 16.4 118.9 + 8.4 175.0 + 28.4 133.3 + 15.2 148.1 + 23.4 135.5 + 6.3
         Apr. 126.2 + 16.3 110.4 + 12.5 154.8 + 22.0 124.4 + 16.9 134.0 + 20.3 115.6 + 6.9
         May 126.0 + 19.0 111.1 + 14.1 153.0 + 26.0 126.7 + 20.3 131.4 + 21.2 113.3 + 10.1         June 133.4 + 16.2 114.6 + 9.9 167.5 + 25.4 130.0 + 16.7 148.6 + 20.0 112.5 + 5.5
         July 130.3 + 15.2 113.2 + 9.4 161.3 + 23.8 128.0 + 13.4 139.7 + 20.7 118.1 + 9.0
         Aug. 121.7 + 11.4 107.0 + 7.4 147.9 + 16.9 120.7 + 15.1 126.1 + 9.9 115.6 + 4.8         Sep. 136.4 + 10.9 116.6 + 6.6 172.0 + 16.5 134.4 + 13.6 141.3 + 8.6 132.0 + 8.5
         Oct. 134.9 + 12.3 114.0 + 4.5 172.2 + 23.2 132.9 + 11.6 142.6 + 15.2 124.6 + 7.9
         Nov. 134.6 + 11.0 115.3 + 5.6 169.2 + 18.4 130.3 + 8.0 146.2 + 16.5 122.9 + 7.3         Dec. 129.6 + 15.7 105.4 + 8.1 173.1 + 25.5 119.5 + 9.6 152.3 + 24.7 111.0 + 11.1
2001          Jan. 127.9 + 12.1 108.8 + 8.3 162.0 + 16.9 126.3 + 11.2 132.4 + 12.4 123.2 + 13.9
         Feb. 130.6 + 6.2 111.2 + 2.9 165.5 + 10.5 125.0 + 4.9 136.0 + 7.1 134.6 + 7.4         Mar.  
p 139.8 + 0.6 121.6 + 2.3 172.6 − 1.4 132.7 − 0.5 148.1 + 0.0 142.7 + 5.3
Western Germany  
  
1997 107.1 + 6.9 98.8 + 1.9 121.2 + 14.7 106.4 + 8.7 110.0 + 7.0 103.1 + 1.81998 110.2 + 2.9 102.4 + 3.6 123.4 + 1.8 107.2 + 0.8 116.3 + 5.7 106.0 + 2.81999 112.2 + 1.8 101.8 − 0.6 130.1 + 5.4 108.8 + 1.5 117.9 + 1.4 110.1 + 3.9
2000 127.6 + 13.7 109.8 + 7.9 158.2 + 21.6 123.4 + 13.4 138.3 + 17.3 118.1 + 7.3
 
2000          Mar. 137.5 + 16.0 117.9 + 7.8 171.2 + 27.6 130.8 + 14.7 148.6 + 23.4 133.9 + 5.5
         Apr. 124.5 + 15.7 108.4 + 11.5 152.3 + 21.4 122.0 + 16.5 133.4 + 19.2 113.7 + 6.2
         May 124.7 + 18.5 109.8 + 13.7 150.0 + 25.1 124.0 + 19.8 132.3 + 21.0 111.6 + 9.6         June 131.7 + 16.0 113.2 + 9.7 163.3 + 24.5 127.3 + 16.6 148.3 + 19.8 110.9 + 5.4
         July 128.5 + 14.6 111.4 + 8.9 158.1 + 22.7 125.1 + 12.8 139.7 + 20.1 116.3 + 8.5
         Aug. 120.7 + 11.7 105.8 + 6.9 146.1 + 18.0 117.9 + 15.5 127.1 + 10.0 115.5 + 5.1         Sep. 135.3 + 10.7 115.4 + 6.6 169.6 + 16.1 131.3 + 13.1 143.1 + 8.9 131.0 + 8.9
         Oct. 133.5 + 12.2 112.4 + 4.0 169.5 + 23.0 129.9 + 11.0 143.7 + 15.6 122.9 + 7.8
         Nov. 132.6 + 11.3 113.4 + 5.3 165.2 + 19.1 127.0 + 7.1 146.4 + 18.7 120.5 + 7.1         Dec. 126.9 + 14.4 102.9 + 6.4 168.3 + 24.2 117.1 + 9.1 149.6 + 22.2 109.1 + 10.6
2001          Jan. 126.4 + 11.4 107.4 + 7.8 158.6 + 15.7 123.3 + 10.4 133.2 + 12.0 121.1 + 12.7
         Feb. 128.6 + 5.2 109.9 + 2.3 160.7 + 8.7 121.2 + 3.4 136.8 + 6.7 132.7 + 6.8         Mar.  
p 137.5 + 0.0 119.7 + 1.5 168.3 − 1.7 129.0 − 1.4 147.9 − 0.5 140.4 + 4.9
Eastern Germany  
  
1997 107.6 + 12.3 101.6 + 6.6 137.4 + 39.6 120.4 + 16.6 91.9 + 8.5 112.8 + 6.91998 124.1 + 15.3 109.7 + 8.0 196.4 + 42.9 133.0 + 10.5 112.0 + 21.9 132.4 + 17.41999 130.1 + 4.8 114.1 + 4.0 210.1 + 7.0 142.9 + 7.4 112.9 + 0.8 140.3 + 6.0
2000 153.9 + 18.3 130.0 + 13.9 273.2 + 30.0 171.9 + 20.3 133.0 + 17.8 156.9 + 11.8
 
2000          Mar. 162.4 + 24.2 130.9 + 14.6 320.9 + 49.9 176.9 + 24.1 142.4 + 24.4 176.5 + 23.9         Apr. 155.8 + 29.0 137.0 + 24.9 250.0 + 41.9 166.6 + 24.2 141.4 + 38.9 164.7 + 21.3
         May 149.3 + 25.5 127.2 + 18.5 260.5 + 47.0 175.7 + 29.4 117.4 + 21.0 158.6 + 21.4         June 163.4 + 20.1 131.4 + 11.3 323.7 + 43.2 174.5 + 19.4 153.2 + 24.5 155.6 + 9.1
         July 160.7 + 24.4 136.8 + 15.9 280.4 + 51.9 178.3 + 19.7 140.3 + 32.1 164.4 + 23.4
         Aug. 138.9 + 9.0 123.3 + 14.7 216.4 − 4.5 168.4 + 11.7 112.2 + 8.0 117.6 − 0.8
         Sep. 155.0 + 14.1 133.8 + 9.6 261.6 + 28.6 186.3 + 22.3 119.0 + 6.4 160.2 + 2.9
         Oct. 158.2 + 14.0 134.8 + 8.7 274.9 + 29.5 184.2 + 19.7 127.3 + 8.9 165.5 + 6.0
         Nov. 167.9 + 7.5 137.9 + 7.5 317.5 + 7.4 186.1 + 21.4 143.6 − 8.6 182.0 + 11.3
         Dec. 172.9 + 35.4 138.1 + 28.6 348.1 + 51.3 162.7 + 18.5 188.5 + 61.5 158.7 + 22.1
2001          Jan. 152.7 + 21.3 125.6 + 12.3 288.8 + 47.0 175.4 + 17.7 121.5 + 20.8 174.3 + 39.4
         Feb. 163.5 + 20.4 128.5 + 9.5 339.4 + 48.9 194.2 + 25.8 124.1 + 13.1 182.1 + 17.9         Mar.  
p 176.6 + 8.7 145.6 + 11.2 331.2 + 3.2 194.3 + 9.8 150.2 + 5.5 200.1 + 13.4
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. —*Excluding manu- units; figures excluding value-added tax. — o Bundesbank calculation. 
facture of food products, beverages and tobacco; results for kinds of activity
62* IX. Economic conditions

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
 IX. Economic conditions
 
4. Orders received by construction *   
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Germany Western Germany Eastern Germany
Housing Public Housing Public Housing Public Industrial Industrial Industrial
con- construc- construc- con- construc- construc- con- construc- construc-
Total struction tion  1 tion Total struction tion  1 tion Total struction tion  1 tion
 Change Change Change
 from from from
 previous previous previous
 year year year
Period 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 in % 1995 = 100 in % 1995 = 100 in %
1997 84.4 −8.3 87.4 81.1 86.2 86.1 −5.3 87.7 85.5 85.7 80.4 −15.2 86.8 70.9 87.7
1998 84.0 −0.5 82.4 80.0 90.1 86.6 + 0.6 83.3 86.7 88.8 77.7 −3.4 80.4 64.6 93.8
1999 82.1 −2.3 78.2 80.2 87.6 87.3 + 0.8 84.1 88.7 88.1 69.9 −10.0 66.2 61.2 86.2
2000 75.1 −8.5 65.4 75.6 82.1 81.2 −7.0 73.3 84.9 82.7 60.5 −13.4 49.2 54.4 80.3
   
2000          Feb. 62.0 −11.2 58.7 68.1 57.2 67.6 −9.6 65.3 76.2 59.3 48.9 −15.8 45.2 49.6 51.3
         Mar. 89.5 −2.2 86.1 87.7 94.3 96.3 −3.1 92.6 96.7 98.5 73.4 + 0.8 72.9 67.3 82.5
         Apr. 79.4 −7.2 73.7 74.7 89.5 85.7 −2.2 79.4 84.4 91.6 64.4 −20.3 61.9 52.7 83.6
         May 82.7 −7.7 70.7 82.1 92.7 90.1 −4.8 78.1 93.6 94.5 65.2 −16.2 55.6 56.2 87.7
         June 87.4 −11.2 77.3 82.1 101.9 91.3 −10.2 81.9 87.8 102.0 78.3 −13.6 67.8 69.1 101.7
         July 80.2 −12.2 68.3 79.5 90.5 87.2 −11.2 78.2 91.2 89.1 63.8 −14.8 48.0 52.9 94.8
         Aug. 73.3 −14.0 63.9 68.9 86.1 76.7 −15.1 71.3 75.1 82.3 65.2 −10.8 48.6 54.7 96.6
         Sep. 84.4 −9.4 66.6 88.5 93.5 92.7 −5.7 76.9 102.4 93.0 64.8 −20.3 45.5 57.0 94.8
         Oct. 73.3 −10.8 60.3 71.7 85.6 81.0 −10.1 73.1 80.6 87.1 55.2 −13.1 34.1 51.5 81.3
         Nov. 63.2 −4.1 51.0 68.1 66.6 68.5 −1.7 60.3 76.3 65.3 50.5 −11.6 32.0 49.4 70.4
         Dec. 69.4 −3.2 50.9 75.2 76.7 77.2 −0.1 58.3 87.7 78.7 50.8 −13.3 35.7 46.9 71.2
2001          Jan. 51.3 −8.4 47.2 60.6 43.0 58.4 −3.5 58.0 70.2 45.1 34.3 −24.4 25.0 38.8 37.0
         Feb. 57.2 −7.7 49.0 58.2 62.4 65.0 −3.8 57.6 67.1 67.9 38.6 −21.1 31.3 38.0 46.7
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. —*Values exclusive gineering". —oBundesbank calculation. —1Including the railways and
of value-added tax. The figures refer to the economic classifications "Site pre- post office. 
paration" and "Building of complete constructions or parts thereof; civil en-
 
 
5. Retail turnover *   
    Germany
  
Retail trade, total of which: By enterprises ’ main product range:
Pharmaceutical
including excluding and medical
goods, cosmetic Clothing, Furniture retail sales of motor vehicles retail sales of motor vehicles
and motorcycles and of and motorcycles and Food, beverages, and toilet footwear and and lightingautomotive fuel of automotive fuel tobacco  
2 articles  2 leather goods  2 equipment  2 Motor vehicles  3 
 Change from  Change from  Change  Change  Change  Change  Change
from from from from from previous year in % previous year in %
previous previous previous previous previous
Period not not year year year year year price- price-
in % in % in % in % in % 1995 = 100 adjusted adjusted  1 1995 = 100 adjusted adjusted  1 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100
1997 100.9 −0.4 −0.9 99.0 −1.3 −1.8 98.6 −1.4 105.8 + 1.8 97.2 −2.0 95.8 −2.6 109.1 + 3.5
1998 102.7 + 1.8 + 1.6 100.1 + 1.1 + 1.1 99.9 + 1.3 111.9 + 5.8 96.1 −1.1 99.6 + 4.0 115.1 + 5.5
1999 103.8 + 1.1 + 0.7 100.8 + 0.7 + 0.4 100.8 + 0.9 120.0 + 7.2 96.1
+ 0.0 97.4 −2.2 119.3 + 3.6
2000 105.1 + 1.3 + 0.1 103.2 + 2.4 + 1.2 102.8 + 2.0 126.6 + 5.5 95.7 −0.4 95.6 −1.8 115.4 −3.3
 
1999          Sep. 99.1 −0.4 −1.1 96.1 −1.6 −2.2 95.7 + 0.7 118.0 + 7.4 88.2 −13.7 94.1 −1.9 113.9 + 4.5
         Oct. 106.1 + 0.5 −0.2 104.7 + 0.6 −0.1 100.5 −1.6 119.6 + 2.7 113.6 + 4.0 104.3 −3.9 115.3 + 0.9
         Nov. 110.0 + 1.6 + 0.9 108.7 + 2.0 + 1.2 104.4 + 1.7 123.3 + 6.4 105.8 + 0.8 110.9 −1.1 119.4 + 0.8
         Dec. 125.9 + 1.4 + 0.5 129.0 + 1.9 + 1.0 122.4 + 1.1 140.6 + 1.7 123.3 + 0.8 124.6 −1.7 117.0 −0.9
2000          Jan. 91.2 −0.3 −1.3 91.1 −0.2 −1.0 91.2 −0.2 121.2 + 5.7 78.3 −10.6 82.3 −4.7 94.2 −1.6
         Feb. 96.6 + 8.4 + 6.9 94.3 + 7.8 + 6.4 94.6 + 4.1 119.6 + 7.4 79.0 + 19.0 95.6 + 7.9 108.7 + 9.8
         Mar. 110.8 −2.9 −3.9 104.8 −2.5 −3.5 107.5 −0.2 126.0 −0.9 90.8 −11.8 103.8 −4.0 138.5 −5.0
         Apr. 105.2 + 1.2 + 0.6 102.1 + 3.9 + 3.3 103.8 + 2.5 118.3 + 2.2 103.8 + 7.2 91.9 −3.7 119.7 −7.8
         May 112.8 + 11.4 + 10.4 107.6 + 11.9 + 11.0 108.3 + 9.8 133.1 + 16.7 103.6 + 5.9 96.5 + 8.8 136.5 + 9.8         June 99.7 −2.9 −4.0 95.6 −0.3 −1.4 100.7 + 2.8 122.0 + 2.3 82.5 −7.0 83.3 −8.8 118.5 −11.6
         July 101.5 −3.7 −4.8 98.3 −2.3 −3.1 98.6 −4.5 124.4 + 1.5 89.4 −8.6 89.1 −3.2 116.4 −9.1
         Aug. 101.4 + 5.3 + 3.9 99.7 + 6.4 + 5.0 100.0 + 5.4 124.8 + 9.8 88.7 + 4.7 84.5 −0.1 110.0 + 1.2
         Sep. 102.1 + 3.0 + 0.9 101.2 + 5.3 + 3.2 98.9 + 3.3 123.3 + 4.5 99.7 + 13.0 91.9 −2.3 107.3 −5.8
         Oct. 105.4 −0.7 −2.3 104.6 −0.1 −1.8 101.1 + 0.6 128.4 + 7.4 105.8 −6.9 100.3 −3.8 111.0 −3.7
         Nov. 111.2 + 1.1 −0.6 111.0 + 2.1 + 0.5 107.3 + 2.8 132.7 + 7.6 103.7 −2.0 110.4 −0.5 115.2 −3.5
         Dec. 123.6 −1.8 −3.0 128.0 −0.8 −2.0 122.0 −0.3 145.7 + 3.6 123.3
+ 0.0 117.8 −5.5 108.5 −7.3
2001          Jan. 96.8 + 6.1 + 4.9 96.9 + 6.4 + 5.0 96.4 + 5.7 134.1 + 10.6 83.5 + 6.6 88.4 + 7.4 99.3 + 5.4         Feb. 91.3 −5.5 −6.5 89.3 −5.3 −6.4 90.8 −4.0 119.5 −0.1 73.7 −6.7 87.9 −8.1 102.0 −6.2
         Mar. 111.1 + 0.3 −1.0 105.5 + 0.7 −0.6 107.5
+ 0.0 131.3 + 4.2 94.9 + 4.5 102.7 −1.1 134.2 −3.1
Source: Federal Statistical Office. —*Excluding value-added tax; figures 3 Including motor vehicle parts and accessories. 
from 2000 provisional. —1At 1995 prices. —2Retail sales in stores. —
63* IX. Economic conditions

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
 IX. Economic conditions
 
6. Labour market * 
 
 
 
Persons in
Employed  1,2 Employees  1 employment  3 Unemployed
Persons
Mining employed Persons
and under under-manu- employ- goingfactur- Short- ment pro- Change vocational
Change from Change ing Con- time motion further from Unem-previous year from sector workers training previous ploy- schemes  
5 struction  4 
previous year, ment Vacancies,
Thou- Thou- Thou- year Thou- thou- rate  6 thou-
Period sands in % sands sands in % Thousands sands sands in % sands
Germany  
  
1998 37,539 + 0.9 + 344 33,560 + 0.8 7 6,400 1,159 115 385 8 343 4,279 −105 11.1 422
1999 37,942 + 1.1 + 403 34,003 + 1.3 6,370 1,111 119 430 358 4,099 −180 10.5 456
2000 38,534 + 1.6 + 592 34,589 + 1.7 6,373 1,053 86 316 352 3,889 −211 9.6 514
2000          Apr. 38,281 + 1.9 + 726 6,332 1,063 107 306 350 3,986 −159 9 9.8 560
         May 38,431 + 2.1 + 806 34,471 + 2.1 6,344 1,072 97 310 363 3,788 −210 9.3 567
         June 38,550 + 1.8 + 668 6,362 1,070 81 314 356 3,724 −214 9.1 560
         July 38,593 + 1.4 + 533 6,398 1,065 66 320 332 3,804 −224 9.3 553
         Aug. 38,717 + 1.4 + 551 34,823 + 1.6 6,428 1,068 62 321 335 3,781 −243 9.3 544
         Sep. 39,002 + 1.5 + 581 6,432 1,064 66 320 368 3,685 −258 9.0 525
         Oct. 39,137 + 1.5 + 579 6,420 1,054 66 319 389 3,611 −272 8.9 491
         Nov. 39,083 + 1.4 + 554 35,108 + 1.6 6,419 1,041 70 307 388 3,645 −255 8.9 468
         Dec. 38,934 + 1.3 + 511 6,393 1,012 70 287 359 3,809 −238 9.3 454
2001          Jan. 38,212 + 1.1 + 430 6,378 949 92 258 356 4,093 −200 10.0 484
         Feb. o 38,199 o + 1.0 o + 366 ... ... 6,382 918 122 252 359 4,113 −164 10.1 544
         Mar. ... ... ... 6,390 ... 130 245 363 4,000 −141 9.8 578
         Apr. ... ... ... ... ... 119 246 365 3,868 −118 9.5 580
Western Germany  
  
1998 . . . . . 7 5,813 804 81 71 8 193 2,904 −117 9.4 342
1999 . . . . . 5,775 775 92 82 215 2,756 −149 8.8 386
2000 . . . . . 5,761 749 62 70 212 2,529 −226 7.8 452
2000          Apr. . . . . . 5,726 756 74 69 211 2,586 −214 9 7.9 489
         May . . . . . 5,737 762 68 70 219 2,459 −236 7.5 497
         June . . . . . 5,753 760 56 71 212 2,427 −227 7.4 491
         July . . . . . 5,785 755 45 72 198 2,466 −226 7.5 488
         Aug. . . . . . 5,808 759 42 72 202 2,444 −234 7.4 478
         Sep. . . . . . 5,810 757 47 71 221 2,383 −240 7.2 461
         Oct. . . . . . 5,797 752 48 71 235 2,343 −248 7.1 433
         Nov. . . . . . 5,797 744 52 70 236 2,360 −244 7.2 413
         Dec. . . . . . 5,774 727 53 66 219 2,454 −236 7.4 405
2001          Jan. . . . . . 5,761 687 69 64 215 2,622 −205 8.0 431
         Feb. . . . . . 5,764 670 91 64 218 2,623 −174 8.0 481
         Mar. . . . . . 5,769 ... 97 63 222 2,539 −152 7.7 506
         Apr. . . . . . ... ... x 88x 64x 225 x 2,474 x −112 x 7.5 x 505
Eastern Germany  
  
1998 . . . . . 7 586 355 34 314 8 149 1,375 + 11 18.2 79
1999 . . . . . 595 336 27 348 143 1,344 − 31 17.6 70
2000 . . . . . 612 305 24 246 140 1,359 + 16 17.4 62
2000          Apr. . . . . . 606 307 33 237 138 1,401 + 55 9 17.8 71
         May . . . . . 607 311 29 239 144 1,329 + 26 16.9 70
         June . . . . . 609 310 26 243 144 1,298 + 13 16.5 69
         July . . . . . 613 310 22 248 134 1,337 + 2 17.0 65
         Aug. . . . . . 620 309 20 249 133 1,337 − 9 17.0 65
         Sep. . . . . . 622 307 19 249 146 1,302 − 19 16.6 64
         Oct. . . . . . 623 302 18 248 154 1,268 − 24 16.1 59
         Nov. . . . . . 623 298 18 237 152 1,285 − 12 16.3 54
         Dec. . . . . . 619 286 17 221 140 1,355 − 2 17.2 50
2001          Jan. . . . . . 617 262 23 195 140 1,471 + 4 18.7 54         Feb. . . . . . 619 249 30 188 140 1,490 + 10 18.9 63         Mar. . . . . . 620 ... 33 182 140 1,461 + 10 18.6 72
         Apr. . . . . . ... ...
x 30x 181 x 140 x 1,394 x − 6x 17.7 x 75
Source: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Labour Office. —*Monthly fig- total civilian labour force. —7From January 1998, figures favourably affec-
ures: levels at end of month; employed persons and employees: averages; ted by including, for the first time, enterprises which were identified in the
short-time workers: levels at mid-month; annual and quarterly figures: aver- 1995 survey of craft enterprises and which are now required to report. —
ages. —1Work-place concept. —2Annual figures, calculated by the Bundes- 8Comparison with previous periods not possible because of the deletion of
bank; deviations from the official figures are due to rounding. —3In- payments towards on-the-job training, vocational assistance measures and
cluding active proprietors. —4The figures refer to the economic classifica- methodological changes in the collection of statistics. —9From April 2000
tions ”Site preparation ”and ”Building of complete constructions or parts calculated on the basis of new labour force figures. —xChange against
thereof; civil engineering ”.—5Employees involved in job creation schemes previous periods overstated for western Germany and understated for
and receiving productive grants towards labour costs (up to December 1997 eastern Germany owing to restructuring of labour exchange districts inapproved cases) and (from January 1998 approved, but from April 1998 statis- Berlin. — o First preliminary estimate. 
tically recorded) structural adjustment measures (SAM). —6Relative to the
64* IX. Economic conditions

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
 IX. Economic conditions
 
7. Prices
 Germany
 
 
Consumer price index for all households Indices of
foreign trade prices
By region By product group Index of
producer
Other prices of Index ofdurable Overall industrial Index of worldand non- Services con- products producer marketdurable excluding struction prices prices sold on the
Western Eastern consumer house House price domestic of farm of raw
Total Germany Germany Food goods  
1 rents  1 rents level  1 market  2 products Exports Imports materials  3 
Period 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1991 = 100
Index level  
  
1997 103.3 103.2 104.2 102.1 101.8 104.1 106.3 99.0 99.9 92.5 101.5 104.0 122.8
1998 104.3 104.1 105.3 103.0 101.9 106.1 108.0 98.8 99.5 87.1 101.4 100.7 97.01999 104.9 104.8 105.7 101.9 102.8 106.4 109.2 98.5 98.5 82.7 100.9 100.2 113.5
2000 106.9 106.9 107.5 101.5 106.0 108.0 110.6 99.2 101.8
p 88.5 104.4 111.4 172.2
 
1999          June 104.9 104.8 105.7 102.9 102.7 106.2 109.1 98.4 85.4 100.7 99.3 109.8
         July 105.4 105.3 106.1 101.9 103.1 107.8 109.3 98.7 84.4 100.9 100.2 118.1
         Aug. 105.3 105.3 105.9 100.8 103.2 107.8 109.3 98.5 98.8 83.9 101.0 100.7 121.4         Sep. 105.1 105.0 105.8 100.2 103.4 106.7 109.4 98.9 83.8 101.3 101.7 131.4
         Oct. 105.0 104.9 105.7 99.9 103.5 106.2 109.5 99.1 82.9 101.5 102.1 126.4
         Nov. 105.2 105.1 105.8 100.1 103.7 106.4 109.7 98.7 99.2 84.0 101.7 103.5 138.1         Dec. 105.5 105.5 106.0 100.4 104.0 107.0 109.7 99.4 84.8 102.1 105.2 145.2
2000          Jan. 105.8 105.7 106.4 101.3 104.4 106.9 110.0 99.8 83.7 102.4 106.0 146.5
         Feb. 106.2 106.1 106.9 102.0 104.6 107.6 110.2 98.9 100.0 86.4 102.8 107.8 157.1         Mar. 106.4 106.3 107.0 101.3 105.3 107.4 110.3 100.0 88.5 103.1 108.7 161.5
         Apr. 106.4 106.3 107.0 101.9 104.9 107.7 110.4 100.4 88.3 103.6 108.4 149.9
         May 106.3 106.2 107.0 102.2 105.0 107.0 110.5 99.2 101.0 89.0 104.3 110.6 172.1         June 106.9 106.8 107.5 102.2 105.8 107.9 110.6 101.3 90.4 104.3 110.7 170.2
         July 107.4 107.3 107.9 101.8 106.2 109.4 110.7 102.0 90.0 104.6 111.1 167.7
         Aug. 107.2 107.2 107.8 101.0 106.0 109.2 110.8 99.3 102.3 90.1 105.0 112.7 179.2         Sep. 107.7 107.6 108.0 100.7 107.7 108.3 110.9 103.2 89.5 105.6 115.3 197.6
         Oct. 107.5 107.4 107.8 100.6 107.5 107.7 111.0 103.7 91.2 105.9 115.8 198.2
         Nov. 107.7 107.7 108.3 101.1 107.6 108.1 111.0 99.5 103.9
p 92.1 105.9 116.4 201.1
         Dec. 107.8 107.7 108.3 101.8 107.5 108.4 111.1 103.6 p 90.7 105.5 113.8 165.3
2001          Jan. 108.3 108.2 109.1 103.5 107.2 109.8 111.4 104.4 ... 105.3 112.9 158.8         Feb. 109.0 108.9 109.8 103.9 108.0 111.0 111.5 99.5 104.7 ... 105.4 113.6 167.3         Mar. 109.1 109.0 110.0 105.1 108.1 110.7 111.6 104.9 ... 105.6 113.3 161.2
         Apr. 109.5 109.3 110.4 107.0 108.6 110.4 111.7 ... ... ... ... 166.4
Change from previous year in %  
  
1997 + 1.9 + 1.9 + 2.3 + 1.2 + 1.3 + 2.5 + 2.8 − 0.8 + 1.1 + 1.5 + 1.5 + 3.6 + 13.2
1998 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 1.1 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 1.9 + 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 5.8 − 0.1 − 3.2 −21.0
1999 + 0.6 + 0.7 + 0.4 − 1.1 + 0.9 + 0.3 + 1.1 − 0.3 − 1.0 − 5.1 − 0.5 − 0.5 + 17.0
2000 + 1.9 + 2.0 + 1.7 − 0.4 + 3.1 + 1.5 + 1.3 + 0.7 + 3.4 p + 7.0 + 3.5 + 11.2 + 51.7
 
1999          June + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.2 − 1.5 + 0.8 + 0.0 + 1.0 − 1.5 − 4.4 − 1.0 − 1.8 + 11.8
         July + 0.6 + 0.7 + 0.4 − 1.6 + 0.9 + 0.6 + 1.1 − 1.0 − 4.3 − 0.7 − 0.4 + 21.6
         Aug. + 0.7 + 0.8 + 0.3 − 1.7 + 1.4 + 0.2 + 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.7 − 3.2 − 0.4 + 0.8 + 28.3
         Sep. + 0.7 + 0.8 + 0.4 − 1.7 + 1.4 + 0.2 + 1.0 − 0.5 − 2.3 + 0.2 + 2.7 + 40.7
         Oct. + 0.8 + 0.9 + 0.5 − 1.5 + 1.6 + 0.1 + 1.1 + 0.2 − 1.5 + 0.8 + 4.2 + 44.5
         Nov. + 1.0 + 1.0 + 0.5 − 1.6 + 1.7 + 0.5 + 1.3
+ 0.0 + 0.7 + 1.6 + 1.1 + 5.9 + 60.2
         Dec. + 1.2 + 1.3 + 0.7 − 1.7 + 2.1 + 0.8 + 1.2 + 1.1 − 1.6 + 1.7 + 8.2 + 81.3
2000          Jan. + 1.6 + 1.7 + 1.3 − 1.7 + 2.8 + 1.6 + 1.2 + 2.0 + 0.2 + 2.3 + 9.2 + 76.1
         Feb. + 1.8 + 1.9 + 1.5 − 1.1 + 3.2 + 1.3 + 1.3 + 0.4 + 2.4 + 2.6 + 2.6 + 10.9 + 87.7
         Mar. + 1.9 + 1.9 + 1.6 − 1.7 + 3.6 + 1.1 + 1.3 + 2.4 + 4.5 + 2.8 + 10.9 + 72.0
         Apr. + 1.5 + 1.6 + 1.3 − 1.5 + 2.0 + 2.2 + 1.3 + 2.1 + 5.7 + 3.2 + 9.8 + 43.9
         May + 1.4 + 1.4 + 1.2 − 1.3 + 2.4 + 1.1 + 1.3 + 0.8 + 2.7 + 6.0 + 3.8 + 11.7 + 61.9
         June + 1.9 + 1.9 + 1.7 − 0.7 + 3.0 + 1.6 + 1.4 + 2.9 + 5.9 + 3.6 + 11.5 + 55.0
         July + 1.9 + 1.9 + 1.7 − 0.1 + 3.0 + 1.5 + 1.3 + 3.3 + 6.6 + 3.7 + 10.9 + 42.0
         Aug. + 1.8 + 1.8 + 1.8 + 0.2 + 2.7 + 1.3 + 1.4 + 0.8 + 3.5 + 7.4 + 4.0 + 11.9 + 47.6
         Sep. + 2.5 + 2.5 + 2.1 + 0.5 + 4.2 + 1.5 + 1.4 + 4.3 + 6.8 + 4.2 + 13.4 + 50.4
         Oct. + 2.4 + 2.4 + 2.0 + 0.7 + 3.9 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 4.6 + 10.0 + 4.3 + 13.4 + 56.8
         Nov. + 2.4 + 2.5 + 2.4 + 1.0 + 3.8 + 1.6 + 1.2 + 0.8 + 4.7 p + 9.6 + 4.1 + 12.5 + 45.6
         Dec. + 2.2 + 2.1 + 2.2 + 1.4 + 3.4 + 1.3 + 1.3 + 4.2 p + 7.0 + 3.3 + 8.2 + 13.8
2001          Jan. + 2.4 + 2.4 + 2.5 + 2.2 + 2.7 + 2.7 + 1.3 + 4.6 ... + 2.8 + 6.5 + 8.4         Feb. + 2.6 + 2.6 + 2.7 + 1.9 + 3.3 + 3.2 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 4.7 ... + 2.5 + 5.4 + 6.5         Mar. + 2.5 + 2.5 + 2.8 + 3.8 + 2.7 + 3.1 + 1.2 + 4.9 ... + 2.4 + 4.2 − 0.2
         Apr. + 2.9 + 2.8 + 3.2 + 5.0 + 3.5 + 2.5 + 1.2 ... ... ... ... + 11.0
Source: Federal Statistical Office; for index of world market prices: HWWA In- by the Federal Statistical Office. —2Excluding value-added tax. —3HWWA
stitute. —1Calculated by the Bundesbank on the basis of figures provided index of raw material prices, on a Deutsche Mark basis. 
65* IX. Economic conditions

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
IX. Economic conditions
  
8. Households ’ income *
Germany
  
  
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries  1 salaries  2 Saving  6 ratio  7 benefits received  3 "Mass income"  4 Disposable income  5 
Change Change Change Change Change Change
from from from from from fromprevious previous previous previous previous previous
Period year in % year in % year in % year in % year in % year in % % DM billion DM billion DM billion DM billion DM billion DM billion
1995 1,577.1 3.2 1,038.0 0.8 555.6 4.6 1,593.6 2.1 2,256.0 3.5 252.1 −0.5 11.2
1996 1,594.0 1.1 1,032.7 −0.5 597.7 7.6 1,630.4 2.3 2,307.2 2.3 249.7 −1.0 10.8
1997 1,590.5 −0.2 1,015.1 −1.7 611.6 2.3 1,626.7 −0.2 2,357.6 2.2 245.3 −1.7 10.4
1998 1,620.4 1.9 1,034.9 2.0 623.4 1.9 1,658.4 1.9 2,424.3 2.8 246.4 0.4 10.2
1999 1,661.3 2.5 1,062.0 2.6 643.9 3.3 1,705.9 2.9 2,488.4 2.6 247.3 0.3 9.9
2000 1,715.6 3.3 1,101.2 3.7 660.6 2.6 1,761.7 3.3 2,559.4 2.9 250.3 1.2 9.8
1999          3rd qtr 415.6 2.6 273.8 2.7 160.4 3.0 434.2 2.8 611.3 2.5 52.1 1.0 8.5
         4th qtr 469.3 2.3 294.8 3.0 163.3 4.6 458.1 3.6 647.1 3.9 57.3 13.3 8.9
2000          1st qtr 392.1 3.8 254.0 4.6 166.2 3.0 420.2 4.0 636.6 3.4 84.7 6.1 13.3
         2nd qtr 410.3 2.9 259.1 3.3 163.6 3.1 422.7 3.2 635.4 3.4 58.0 −0.3 9.1
         3rd qtr 430.2 3.5 284.2 3.8 163.6 2.0 447.8 3.1 627.7 2.7 51.2 −1.7 8.2
         4th qtr 483.1 2.9 304.0 3.1 167.0 2.3 471.1 2.8 659.6 1.9 56.4 −1.4 8.6
Euro billion
1999 849.4 . 543.0 . 329.2 . 872.2 . 1,272.3 . 126.4 . .
2000 877.2 . 563.0 . 337.7 . 900.8 . 1,308.6 . 128.0 . .
1999          3rd qtr 212.5 . 140.0 . 82.0 . 222.0 . 312.5 . 26.6 . .
         4th qtr 239.9 . 150.7 . 83.5 . 234.2 . 330.8 . 29.3 . .
2000          1st qtr 200.5 . 129.8 . 85.0 . 214.8 . 325.5 . 43.3 . .
         2nd qtr 209.8 . 132.5 . 83.7 . 216.1 . 324.9 . 29.6 . .         3rd qtr 219.9 . 145.3 . 83.7 . 229.0 . 321.0 . 26.2 . .         4th qtr 247.0 . 155.4 . 85.4 . 240.8 . 337.3 . 28.9 . .
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in March 2001. — charges. —4Net wages and salaries plus monetary social benefits
*Households including non-profit institutions which serve households. — received. —5"Mass income" plus operating surplus, self-employed persons ’
1Residence concept. —2After deducting the wage tax payable on gross income, property income (net), other current transfers received, income of
wages and salaries and employees ’contributions to the social security non-profit organisations which serve households, less taxes (excluding wage
funds. —3Cash benefits from the social security funds, central, regional tax and consumption-related taxes) and other current transfers paid. Includ-
and local authorities and foreign countries, pension payments (net), social ing the increase in claims on company pension funds. —6Including the
security benefits from private insurance schemes, less social security increase in claims on company pension funds. —7Saving as a percentage of
contributions on social benefits, consumption-related taxes and public disposable income. 
  
  
9. Pay rates and actual earnings
Germany
    
Overall economy Producing sector (including construction)
Negotiated wage and salary level  1 Wages and salaries Negotiated wage and salary level  1 Wages and salaries
per employee per employee
on an hourly basis on a monthly basis on an hourly basis on a monthly basis (work-place concept)  2 (work-place concept)  3 
% from % from % from % from % from % from
previous previous previous previous previous previous
Period 1995=100 year 1995=100 year 1995=100 year 1995=100 year 1995=100 year 1995=100 year
1991 76.7 . 78.6 . 82.4 . 73.4 . 76.9 . 77.6 .
1992 85.8 11.9 87.3 11.0 91.0 10.4 82.9 12.9 85.9 11.7 88.4 13.91993 92.2 7.5 92.9 6.5 95.0 4.4 90.6 9.3 92.0 7.1 92.3 4.41994 95.3 3.4 95.6 2.9 96.9 2.0 94.3 4.1 94.8 3.0 96.1 4.1
1995 100.0 4.9 100.0 4.6 100.0 3.2 100.0 6.1 100.0 5.5 100.0 4.1
1996 102.6 2.6 102.4 2.4 101.4 1.4 103.8 3.8 102.9 2.9 102.9 2.91997 104.2 1.5 103.9 1.5 101.7 0.3 105.8 1.9 104.6 1.7 104.7 1.71998 106.2 2.0 105.8 1.8 102.7 1.0 107.7 1.8 106.4 1.7 106.4 1.61999 109.2 2.9 108.7 2.7 104.0 1.2 111.0 3.0 109.5 2.9 108.3 1.8
2000 111.4 2.0 110.8 2.0 105.5 1.5 113.1 2.0 111.6 1.9 111.2 2.7
2000          1st qtr 101.6 1.7 101.1 1.7 98.2 2.2 102.5 1.5 101.0 1.3 104.0 3.1
         2nd qtr 103.0 2.2 102.4 2.1 101.4 0.8 103.8 2.0 102.4 2.0 112.9 2.8         3rd qtr 115.1 2.0 114.5 2.0 105.3 1.9 121.1 2.1 119.4 2.1 107.1 2.5         4th qtr 125.9 2.1 125.3 2.0 117.2 1.3 125.2 2.2 123.5 2.3 120.6 2.5
2001          1st qtr 103.8 2.1 103.2 2.1 . . 104.0 1.5 102.6 1.5 . .
2000          Sep. 103.3 2.1 102.8 2.1 . . 103.9 2.0 102.5 2.0 105.6 1.8
         Oct. 103.4 2.1 102.8 2.1 . . 103.9 2.0 102.5 2.1 108.9 3.4
         Nov. 170.9 1.9 170.0 1.9 . . 167.4 2.3 165.1 2.3 141.1 2.9         Dec. 103.5 2.2 103.0 2.2 . . 104.3 2.3 102.8 2.3 111.7 0.9
2001          Jan. 103.8 2.4 103.2 2.3 . . 104.1 2.1 102.6 2.1 109.8 6.5
         Feb. 103.7 2.3 103.2 2.3 . . 104.0 2.0 102.6 2.0 103.9 0.5         Mar. 103.8 1.6 103.2 1.6 . . 104.0 0.5 102.6 0.5 . .
1Current data are normally revised upwards on account of additional supply, and excluding installation and building completion work. Calculated
reports. —2Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in March by the Bundesbank on the basis of data from the Federal Statistical Office,
2001. —3Producing sector, excluding electricity, gas, steam and hot water using the old and new classifications of the economic sectors. 
66*IX. Economic conditions

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the European monetary union *
 
 
Until the end of 1998 ECU million, from 1999 euro million
2000 2001 1 
Position 1998 1999 2000 2nd qtr 3rd qtr 4th qtr Dec. Jan. Feb.
Current account + 31,076 −5,785 −34,430 −6,605 −6,114 −13,847 −8,777 −8,539 + 2,057 A.
1. Foreign trade
Exports (f.o.b.) incl. supplementary items 779,244 814,487 978,129 238,998 244,600 273,368 86,915 79,433 81,527
Imports (f.o.b.) incl. supplementary items 669,950 731,052 925,100 224,338 226,747 262,128 85,564 81,292 78,277
Balance + 109,295 + 83,429 + 53,029 + 14,660 + 17,853 + 11,240 + 1,351 −1,859 + 3,250
2. Services
Receipts 229,832 241,472 269,439 66,831 70,721 73,368 24,914 21,228 20,908
Expenditure 231,854 253,257 285,371 68,270 73,175 80,084 28,817 23,712 21,974
Balance −2,023 −11,782 −15,932 −1,439 −2,454 −6,716 −3,903 −2,484 −1,066
3. Factor income (balance) −28,832 −32,390 −19,730 −6,311 −7,085 − 59− 84−6,659 + 500
4. Current transfers
Transfer payments from non-residents 62,678 66,448 66,512 14,928 11,942 14,454 6,080 15,033 7,497Transfer payments to non-residents 110,039 111,487 118,309 28,443 26,370 32,766 12,221 12,570 8,124
Balance −47,360 −45,042 −51,797 −13,515 −14,431 −18,312 −6,141 + 2,463 − 627
Balance of capital transfers + 12,391 + 13,520 + 10,232 + 2,354 + 1,617 + 3,421 + 1,699 + 1,407 + 1,572B.
C.
2 −61,237 + 19,078 + 1,280 −2,928 −14,006 −29,546 −8,092 −4,749 + 2,120 Financial account (net capital exports: −)
1. Direct investment −83,210 −120,562 −21,469 −18,152 −94,269 −57,043 −30,684 −4,482 − 766
Investment outside the euro area −174,969 −286,808 −335,765 −71,862 −117,931 −82,671 −19,295 −12,981 −17,145
Foreign investment in the euro area + 91,761 + 166,243 + 314,296 + 53,710 + 23,662 + 25,628 −11,389 + 8,499 + 16,379
2. Investment in securities −99,695 −41,746 −136,377 + 51,858 + 3,484 + 898 + 9,175 −45,485 + 938
Investment outside the euro area −327,579 −309,565 −403,900 −85,172 −91,785 −73,084 −26,484 −34,309 −29,311
Equities −105,492 −155,444 −285,059 −54,302 −56,053 −57,812 −32,680 −17,794 −10,966
Bonds and notes −203,843 −153,605 −111,628 −24,607 −30,821 −17,604 + 5,001 −6,552 −16,745
Money market paper −18,246 − 516 −7,213 −6,263 −4,911 + 2,332 + 1,195 −9,963 −1,600
Foreign investment in the euro area + 227,884 + 267,819 + 267,523 + 137,030 + 95,269 + 73,982 + 35,659 −11,176 + 30,249
Equities + 105,862 + 106,002 + 4,868 + 52,432 + 29,676 + 28,484 + 24,891 −2,075 + 13,469
Bonds and notes + 108,290 + 108,997 + 227,790 + 50,701 + 73,646 + 56,631 + 9,613 −9,628 + 17,276
Money market paper + 13,732 + 52,823 + 34,868 + 33,897 −8,053 −11,130 + 1,156 + 527 − 496
3. Financial derivatives −7,474 + 8,072 −1,963 + 4,800 + 438 −9,682 −4,206 −5,078 − 958
4. Credit transactions and other
investment (balance) + 120,900 + 163,086 + 143,548 −45,271 + 71,863 + 25,609 + 15,335 + 47,926 −3,192
Eurosystem + 2,717 + 4,596 −1,751 + 3,063 −1,741 + 2,040 + 1,031 + 2,001 −1,768
Public authorities −8,601 −9,696 −1,461 + 720 −2,534 + 9,096 + 1,601 −2,456 −3,853
Credit institutions + 169,878 + 177,852 + 147,715 −41,800 + 58,078 −1,724 −4,242 + 49,444 + 8,927
long-term + 2,919 + 7,996 − 776 + 2,693 − 682 −11,650 −15,901 −5,284 + 1,145
short-term + 166,958 + 169,850 + 148,486 −44,496 + 58,763 + 9,926 + 11,659 + 54,728 + 7,782
Enterprises and individuals −43,094 −9,669 − 961 −7,251 + 18,054 + 16,194 + 16,944 −1,063 −6,498
5. Change in the monetary reserves of
    the eurosystem (Increase: −) + 8,241 + 10,231 + 17,541 + 3,837 + 4,475 + 10,675 + 2,289 + 2,370 + 6,098
Balance of unclassifiable transactions  2 + 17,769 −26,816 + 22,921 + 7,182 + 18,503 + 39,972 + 15,170 + 11,881 −5,749 D.
*Source: European Central Bank. —1From January 2001, including   
Greece. —2Series for which data from January 1999 are not closely  
comparable with earlier observations. 
67*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(Balances)
 
 
Current account Memo item:
Change in Capital trans-
the Bundes- fers and pur-
Change in bank ’s net chases / sales
Supple- external of intangible the monetary
Balance of mentary non- reserves at Balance of assets aton current Foreign trade Factor Current produced Financial transaction transaction unclassifiable
Period account trade  
1  2 items  3  4 Services  5 income transfers assets  6 account  6 values  7 values  7 transactions
DM million
1988 + 92,585 + 128,045 −2,791 −16,365 + 16,630 −32,933 −2,029 −122,721 + 27,662 + 4,503 + 34,676
1989 + 107,346 + 134,576 −4,107 −15,210 + 26,872 −34,784 −2,064 −110,286 −5,405 + 10,409 + 18,997
1990  o + 79,475 + 105,382 −3,833 −19,664 + 32,859 −35,269 −4,975 −89,497 −11,611 + 26,608 −10,976
1991 −30,416 + 21,899 −2,804 −24,842 + 33,144 −57,812 −4,565 + 12,614 + 9,605 + 12,762 − 319
1992 −22,924 + 33,656 −1,426 −37,894 + 33,962 −51,222 −1,963 + 69,792 −52,888 + 7,983 −68,745
1993  8 −16,155 + 60,304 −3,038 −45,080 + 27,373 −55,714 −1,915 + 21,442 + 22,795 −26,167 + 35,766
1994  8 −38,805 + 71,762 −1,104 −54,374 + 4,852 −59,940 −2,637 + 57,871 + 2,846 −19,276 −12,242
1995  8 −29,671 + 85,303 −4,722 −54,720 + 178 −55,710 −3,845 + 63,647 −10,355 −19,776 −17,754
1996  8 −11,959 + 98,538 −5,264 −55,330 + 1,391 −51,294 −3,283 + 23,613 + 1,882 −10,253 + 1,610
1997  8 − 4,727 + 116,467 −7,360 −58,715 − 2,376 −52,742 + 52 − 76 + 6,640 − 1,889 + 8,468
1998  8 −11,834 + 126,970 −5,967 −66,748 −12,741 −53,348 + 1,289 + 32,086 −7,128 −14,414 −8,231
1999  8 −32,894 + 127,542 −13,601 −80,366 −16,044 −50,425 − 301 −69,114 + 24,517 + 77,792 −72,364
2000  8 −45,000 + 109,295 −12,370 −86,683 − 2,423 −52,819 + 29,916 + 19,536 + 11,429 −15,880 + 94,329
2000          2nd qtr 8 − 4,131 + 30,427 −2,386 −22,491 + 2,988 −12,670 − 646 + 47,060 + 4,671 −46,954 −45,858
         3rd qtr 8 −21,240 + 23,863 −3,180 −24,561 − 3,483 −13,879 + 31,046 −49,155 + 4,214 + 35,134 + 44,051
         4th qtr 8 −18,751 + 24,198 −4,106 −20,401 − 2,791 −15,651 − 798 −45,069 + 4,013 + 60,605 + 33,518
2001          1st qtr 8p − 4,748 + 38,587 −3,126 −26,141 − 3,675 −10,393 + 1,105 −19,850 + 7,965 + 15,528 −22,980
2000          July  8 − 5,649 + 10,971 − 837 − 6,949 − 2,961 − 5,872 + 204 + 3,822 + 2,308 − 685 + 46,157
         Aug.  8 −11,611 + 5,146 −1,413 −10,127 − 104 − 5,112 + 15,189 −24,698 + 675 + 20,445 + 22,996
         Sep.  8 − 3,980 + 7,746 − 929 − 7,485 − 417 − 2,895 + 15,652 −28,279 + 1,232 + 15,375 −25,102
         Oct.  8 − 1,156 + 12,965 −1,740 − 8,493 + 1,894 − 5,782 − 245 −14,600 + 1,053 + 14,949 + 38,316
         Nov.  8 − 4,524 + 8,854 − 713 − 6,016 − 1,050 − 5,599 − 279 −11,058 + 912 + 14,950 + 9,808
         Dec.  8 −13,071 + 2,380 −1,653 − 5,892 − 3,635 − 4,270 − 274 −19,410 + 2,049 + 30,706 −14,606
2001          Jan.  8 −10,384 + 8,711 −1,371 − 8,472 − 8,456 − 796 + 1,030 −16,908 + 2,739 + 23,524 −11,712
         Feb.  8 + 2,613 + 12,642 −1,248 − 5,807 + 1,373 − 4,346 + 233 − 7,276 + 2,307 + 2,123 −7,576
         Mar.  8p + 3,024 + 17,234 − 507 −11,861 + 3,409 − 5,251 − 158 + 4,334 + 2,919 −10,119 −3,692
 Euro million
1999  8 −16,819 + 65,211 −6,954 −41,091 − 8,203 −25,782 − 154 −35,338 + 12,535 + 39,775 −36,999
2000  8 −23,008 + 55,881 −6,325 −44,321 − 1,239 −27,006 + 15,296 + 9,989 + 5,844 − 8,119 + 48,230
1999          2nd qtr 8 + 1,498 + 15,694 −1,312 − 9,434 + 1,693 − 5,143 − 56 + 9,054 − 295 −10,202 + 7,270
         3rd qtr 8 − 9,121 + 15,673 −1,799 −12,411 − 2,900 − 7,684 − 847 + 1,751 − 415 + 8,631 −14,722
         4th qtr 8 − 4,199 + 18,524 −1,584 − 9,614 − 3,906 − 7,619 + 532 + 1,129 − 90 + 2,628 −13,354
2000          1st qtr 8 − 449 + 15,751 −1,380 − 9,832 + 441 − 5,430 + 160 + 34,102 − 751 −33,063 + 32,016
         2nd qtr 8 − 2,112 + 15,557 −1,220 −11,499 + 1,528 − 6,478 − 330 + 24,062 + 2,388 −24,007 −23,447
         3rd qtr 8 −10,860 + 12,201 −1,626 −12,558 − 1,781 − 7,096 + 15,874 −25,132 + 2,155 + 17,964 + 22,523
         4th qtr 8 − 9,587 + 12,372 −2,099 −10,431 − 1,427 − 8,002 − 408 −23,043 + 2,052 + 30,987 + 17,137
2001          1st qtr 8p − 2,427 + 19,729 −1,598 −13,366 − 1,879 − 5,314 + 565 −10,149 + 4,072 + 7,939 −11,749
1999          June  8 + 2,894 + 6,813 − 303 − 2,988 + 1,145 − 1,774 − 30 + 1,884 − 54 − 4,694 − 923
         July  8 − 1,934 + 7,103 − 481 − 3,972 − 2,184 − 2,400 − 550 −2,882 + 146 + 5,219 + 13,576
         Aug.  8 − 4,755 + 3,025 −1,068 − 4,227 + 268 − 2,753 − 180 + 8,828 − 429 − 3,465 −9,805
         Sep.  8 − 2,432 + 5,545 − 250 − 4,212 − 985 − 2,530 − 116 −4,196 − 133 + 6,877 −18,494
         Oct.  8 − 1,666 + 5,637 − 396 − 3,070 − 1,358 − 2,480 + 152 + 2,747 + 115 − 1,348 + 15,008
         Nov.  8 + 506 + 7,805 − 522 − 3,380 − 795 − 2,603 + 160 −12,666 − 354 + 12,354 −19,909
         Dec.  8 − 3,039 + 5,082 − 666 − 3,165 − 1,754 − 2,536 + 220 + 11,048 + 149 − 8,377 −8,452
2000          Jan.  8 − 6,775 + 2,945 − 572 − 4,127 − 3,336 − 1,685 + 172 + 13,544 − 42 − 6,900 + 26,184
         Feb.  8 + 1,375 + 6,935 − 415 − 3,112 + 12 − 2,044 − 146 − 508 − 438 − 283 −1,934
         Mar.  8 + 4,951 + 5,872 − 393 − 2,593 + 3,765 − 1,701 + 134 + 21,067 − 271 −25,880 + 7,766
         Apr.  8 − 430 + 5,094 − 359 − 3,338 + 715 − 2,542 + 194 + 1,331 + 1,354 − 2,448 −9,302
         May  8 − 2,226 + 4,130 − 548 − 3,807 − 291 − 1,710 − 22 + 20,880 + 171 −18,803 + 2,657
         June  8 + 544 + 6,334 − 313 − 4,355 + 1,104 − 2,226 − 502 + 1,851 + 863 − 2,757 −16,802
         July  8 − 2,888 + 5,609 − 428 − 3,553 − 1,514 − 3,002 + 105 + 1,954 + 1,180 − 350 + 23,600
         Aug.  8 − 5,936 + 2,631 − 722 − 5,178 − 53 − 2,614 + 7,766 −12,628 + 345 + 10,453 + 11,758
         Sep.  8 − 2,035 + 3,960 − 475 − 3,827 − 213 − 1,480 + 8,003 −14,459 + 630 + 7,861 −12,834
         Oct.  8 − 591 + 6,629 − 890 − 4,342 + 968 − 2,956 − 125 −7,465 + 538 + 7,643 + 19,591
         Nov.  8 − 2,313 + 4,527 − 364 − 3,076 − 537 − 2,863 − 143 −5,654 + 466 + 7,644 + 5,015
         Dec.  8 − 6,683 + 1,217 − 845 − 3,012 − 1,859 − 2,183 − 140 −9,924 + 1,047 + 15,700 −7,468
2001          Jan.  8 − 5,309 + 4,454 − 701 − 4,332 − 4,324 − 407 + 527 −8,645 + 1,400 + 12,027 −5,988
         Feb.  8 + 1,336 + 6,464 − 638 − 2,969 + 702 − 2,222 + 119 −3,720 + 1,180 + 1,085 −3,873
         Mar.  8p + 1,546 + 8,812 − 259 − 6,065 + 1,743 − 2,685 − 81 + 2,216 + 1,492 − 5,174 −1,888
oFrom July 1990 including the external transactions of the former GDR. — warehouse transactions for account of residents and deduction of goods
1Special trade according to the official foreign trade statistics: imports c.i.f., returned. —4See footnote 2. —5Excluding the expenditure on freight and
exports f.o.b. —2From January 1993 including additional estimates for insurance included in the c.i.f. import value. —6Capital exports: −.—
external transactions which do not have to be reported and which are 7Increase: -. —8Figures subject to significant uncertainty owing to changes
included up to December 1992 in Supplementary trade items. —3Mainly in the method of data collection in foreign trade. 
68*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
by group of countries and country *
 
 Until the end of 1998 DM million, from 1999 euro million
2000 1 2001
Group of countries / Country 1998 1999 2000 1 October November December January February March  p 
All countries  2 Exports 955,170 510,008 596,853 56,897 56,782 49,823 51,706 51,965 56,042
Imports 828,200 444,797 540,972 50,268 52,256 48,607 47,252 45,501 47,231Balance + 126,970 + 65,211 + 55,881 + 6,629 + 4,527 + 1,217 + 4,454 + 6,464 + 8,812
I. Exports 728,539 395,748 459,561 43,593 43,516 37,205 40,246 40,547 ...Industrialised
Imports 628,089 332,891 396,663 36,491 38,187 35,614 34,079 33,168 ... countries
Balance + 100,450 + 62,857 + 62,898 + 7,102 + 5,329 + 1,591 + 6,167 + 7,379 ...
Exports 539,793 293,377 337,394 31,861 32,043 27,241 29,474 30,172 ... 1. EU member countries
Imports 452,037 239,652 281,899 26,164 27,162 25,144 24,090 23,796 ...
Balance + 87,757 + 53,725 + 55,495 + 5,697 + 4,880 + 2,096 + 5,384 + 6,376 ...
of  which
Exports 420,000 229,837 264,894 25,099 25,099 21,543 23,412 23,682 ... EMU member
Imports 365,132 193,146 225,034 20,880 21,384 20,447 19,102 19,369 ... countries
Balance + 54,867 + 36,691 + 39,860 + 4,219 + 3,715 + 1,097 + 4,310 + 4,313 ...
of which
Austria Exports 51,760 28,295 31,722 3,123 2,982 2,628 2,728 2,630 ...
Imports 33,078 18,288 20,757 1,950 1,945 1,750 1,599 1,699 ...
Balance + 18,683 + 10,007 + 10,966 + 1,174 + 1,038 + 878 + 1,129 + 931 ...
Belgium and Exports 54,288 28,821 32,770 2,883 3,019 2,849 2,954 3,037 ...Luxemburg Imports 46,437 22,880 27,739 2,536 2,685 2,437 2,565 2,605 ...
Balance + 7,851 + 5,942 + 5,031 + 347 + 333 + 413 + 388 + 432 ...
France Exports 105,901 58,578 68,163 6,647 6,762 5,357 6,192 6,156 ...
Imports 88,914 45,559 52,013 4,893 5,204 4,364 4,429 4,395 ...Balance + 16,987 + 13,019 + 16,150 + 1,754 + 1,558 + 993 + 1,763 + 1,761 ...
Italy Exports 70,533 38,335 45,200 4,380 4,252 3,633 4,087 4,152 ...
Imports 64,513 33,107 36,240 3,350 3,065 3,246 2,977 2,993 ...
Balance + 6,020 + 5,229 + 8,960 + 1,030 + 1,187 + 386 + 1,110 + 1,158 ...
Netherlands Exports 66,910 34,355 38,468 3,475 3,526 3,245 3,323 3,310 ...
Imports 69,425 36,089 47,920 4,471 4,613 4,335 4,131 3,925 ...Balance − 2,515 − 1,734 − 9,452 − 996 −1,087 −1,090 − 807 − 614 ...
Spain Exports 38,454 22,684 27,076 2,606 2,627 2,159 2,329 2,388 ...
Imports 27,801 14,666 16,428 1,401 1,508 1,427 1,443 1,376 ...
Balance + 10,653 + 8,018 + 10,648 + 1,206 + 1,119 + 732 + 886 + 1,012 ...
Sweden Exports 21,874 11,657 13,593 1,340 1,241 1,090 1,163 1,089 ...
Imports 16,331 8,305 10,303 1,050 943 938 854 878 ...
Balance + 5,543 + 3,352 + 3,290 + 290 + 299 + 151 + 309 + 211 ...
United Exports 81,356 43,124 49,634 4,523 4,807 3,820 4,072 4,572 ...Kingdom Imports 56,694 30,757 37,930 3,337 3,948 2,991 3,286 2,892 ...
Balance + 24,662 + 12,367 + 11,704 + 1,186 + 859 + 829 + 786 + 1,679 ...
Exports 66,640 33,504 39,598 3,860 3,741 3,272 3,069 3,373 ... 2. Other European
Imports 58,057 30,588 36,511 3,130 3,802 3,365 3,178 3,125 ... industrial countries
Balance + 8,582 + 2,916 + 3,087 + 730 − 62 − 93 − 109 + 248 ...
of which
Switzerland Exports 42,686 22,808 25,607 2,520 2,291 2,155 2,091 2,246 ...
Imports 32,550 17,070 18,767 1,704 1,751 1,565 1,480 1,600 ...
Balance + 10,136 + 5,738 + 6,840 + 817 + 540 + 590 + 611 + 647 ...
Exports 122,107 68,867 82,569 7,873 7,732 6,692 7,703 7,002 ... 3. Non-European
Imports 117,995 62,651 78,254 7,197 7,222 7,105 6,812 6,246 ... industrial countries
Balance + 4,111 + 6,216 + 4,316 + 675 + 510 − 413 + 892 + 755 ...
of which
Japan Exports 18,310 10,367 13,194 1,318 1,244 1,028 1,102 1,094 ...
Imports 41,047 21,779 26,602 2,427 2,280 2,247 2,162 1,866 ...
Balance −22,737 −11,412 −13,408 −1,108 −1,035 −1,219 −1,060 − 772 ...
Exports 89,751 51,425 61,228 5,862 5,789 5,040 5,971 5,280 ... United States
Imports 68,307 36,790 46,496 4,296 4,486 4,400 4,194 4,006 ...Balance + 21,444 + 14,635 + 14,733 + 1,566 + 1,303 + 640 + 1,777 + 1,274 ...
II. Exports 115,463 56,717 70,269 7,019 6,958 6,477 5,770 5,964 ...Countries in transition
Imports 108,819 62,533 82,444 7,786 7,835 7,459 7,399 7,229 ...Balance + 6,645 − 5,816 −12,175 − 767 − 876 − 982 −1,629 −1,265 ...
of which
Central and east Exports 101,499 49,020 59,904 5,958 5,897 5,347 4,876 5,086 ...European countries Imports 84,280 47,723 62,501 5,664 5,856 5,723 5,525 5,535 ...in transition Balance + 17,220 + 1,297 − 2,598 + 294 + 42 − 377 − 649 − 449 ...
People ‘s Republic Exports 11,900 6,949 9,403 961 973 1,041 822 770 ...
of China  
3 Imports 23,181 13,795 18,386 1,984 1,811 1,605 1,724 1,590 ...Balance −11,280 − 6,846 − 8,984 −1,023 − 838 − 564 − 901 − 820 ...
III. Exports 108,860 56,377 65,346 6,100 6,178 5,952 5,602 5,326 ...Developing countries
Imports 90,249 48,835 64,325 6,253 6,161 5,459 5,713 5,046 ...Balance + 18,610 + 7,543 + 1,021 − 154 + 17 + 493 − 111 + 280 ...
of which
Newly industrial- Exports 36,657 18,775 24,033 2,307 2,289 2,070 2,082 1,831 ...ising countries in Imports 42,310 22,586 30,221 3,120 3,148 2,619 2,814 2,297 ...south-east Asia  
4 Balance − 5,653 − 3,811 − 6,188 − 813 − 860 − 549 − 732 − 467 ...
OPEC-countries Exports 19,213 9,135 10,759 1,051 1,023 1,132 960 916 ...
Imports 11,215 6,425 10,211 978 944 928 771 733 ...Balance + 7,998 + 2,710 + 548 + 73 + 79 + 204 + 189 + 182 ...
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (f.o.b.) by country of destination, been broken down by region. —2Including fuel and other supplies for
imports (c.i.f.) by country of origin. Inclusion of individual countries in ships and aircraft and other data not classifiable by region. —3Excluding
groups of countries according to the current position (EMU member Hong Kong. —4Brunei Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia,
countries including Greece). —1The import figures on "All countries" Philippines, Singapore, Republic of Korea, Taiwan and Thailand. 
include revisions from January until November 2000 which have not yet
69*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
4. Services and factor income of the Federal Republic of Germany
(Balances)
 
Until the end of 1998 DM million, from 1999 euro million
Services
other services
of which
 
Patents Compen- Services  of Construction
Trans- Financial and sation of Investment Government selfemployed and  assembly
Period Total Travel services licences Total income portation  1 transactions  2 persons  3 work,  repairs employees  4 
1996 −55,330 −53,025 + 4,873 + 2,653 −3,772 + 6,699 −12,757 −2,180 −1,216 −1,779 + 3,171
1997 −58,715 −52,718 + 5,723 + 2,315 −4,341 + 6,616 −16,310 −2,403 −1,669 −1,698 − 678
1998 −66,748 −54,742 + 5,457 + 3,011 −4,052 + 5,462 −21,885 −2,564 −2,473 −1,584 −11,157
1999 −41,091 −29,947 + 2,882 + 1,073 −1,868 + 1,973 −15,204 −2,112 − 552 − 836 −7,367
2000 −44,321 −32,000 + 3,958 + 856 −2,871 + 2,149 −16,413 −2,594 −1,244 − 936 − 302
1999          3rd qtr −12,411 −10,426 + 768 + 536 − 493 + 484 −3,280 − 527 − 183 − 448 −2,452
         4th qtr − 9,614 − 6,124 + 913 + 30 − 458 + 463 −4,438 − 621 + 18 − 259 −3,647
2000          1st qtr − 9,832 − 6,318 + 670 + 88 − 757 + 577 −4,091 − 696 − 380 + 45 + 396
         2nd qtr −11,499 − 8,463 + 1,108 + 475 − 450 + 407 −4,576 − 533 − 333 − 271 + 1,799
         3rd qtr −12,558 −11,111 + 1,085 + 42 − 572 + 576 −2,578 − 660 − 20 − 511 −1,270
         4th qtr −10,431 − 6,107 + 1,095 + 251 −1,092 + 589 −5,167 − 705 − 511 − 199 −1,228
2001          1st qtr −13,366 − 6,571 + 915 − 108 − 762 + 710 −7,550 − 620 − 662 + 99 −1,978
2000          May − 3,807 − 2,678 + 509 − 66 − 167 + 162 −1,567 − 165 − 80 − 74 − 217
         June − 4,355 − 3,348 + 339 + 162 − 76 + 148 −1,579 − 189 − 234 − 98 + 1,202
         July − 3,553 − 3,312 + 383 + 107 − 117 + 122 − 736 − 194 − 67 − 177 −1,337
         Aug. − 5,178 − 4,303 + 379 − 23 − 333 + 243 −1,140 − 260 − 12 − 165 + 111
         Sep. − 3,827 − 3,496 + 324 − 42 − 121 + 211 − 702 − 207 + 59 − 169 − 44
         Oct. − 4,342 − 2,791 + 337 + 75 − 378 + 134 −1,719 − 190 − 437 − 81 + 1,050
         Nov. − 3,076 − 1,702 + 261 + 172 − 399 + 202 −1,610 − 212 − 164 − 69 − 467
         Dec. − 3,012 − 1,614 + 496 + 5 − 314 + 254 −1,839 − 303 + 90 − 49 −1,810
2001          Jan. − 4,332 − 2,317 + 171 + 4 − 143 + 221 −2,267 − 246 − 445 + 27 −4,350
         Feb. − 2,969 − 1,880 + 363 − 77 − 392 + 253 −1,236 − 194 − 92 + 26 + 676
         Mar. − 6,065 − 2,374 + 381 − 35 − 226 + 236 −4,047 − 180 − 125 + 47 + 1,696
1Excluding the expenditure on freight included in the c.i.f. import value. — vices supplied. —3Engineering and other technical services, research and
2Including the receipts from foreign military agencies for goods and ser- development, commercial services etc. — 4 Wages and salaries. 
5. Current transfers of the Federal Republic of Germany 6. Capital transfers
(Balances) (Balances)
Until the end of 1998 DM million, from 1999 euro million DM million / euro million
Public  1 Private  1 
International
Organisations  2 
 
of which other Remittances otherEuropean current by foreign current
Period Total Total Total Communities Total workers transfers Total  
4 Public  1 Private  1 transfers  3 
1996 −51,294 −35,281 −30,674 −27,553 −4,607 −16,013 −7,401 −8,612 −3,283 −2,617 − 666
1997 −52,742 −36,812 −31,509 −28,502 −5,302 −15,930 −7,519 −8,411 + 52 −2,821 + 2,873
1998 −53,348 −37,317 −33,077 −30,382 −4,240 −16,031 −6,936 −9,095 + 1,289 −2,441 + 3,730
1999 −25,782 −17,409 −15,428 −13,846 −1,981 −8,373 −3,429 −4,944 − 154 −1,351 + 1,197
2000 −27,006 −19,057 −16,958 −15,406 −2,099 −7,949 −3,458 −4,491 −1,588 −1,186 − 402
1999          3rd qtr −7,684 −5,662 −5,027 −4,581 − 635 −2,022 − 857 −1,164 − 847 − 296 − 550
         4th qtr −7,619 −5,097 −4,481 −4,087 − 616 −2,521 − 857 −1,664 + 532 − 572 + 1,104
2000          1st qtr −5,430 −3,473 −2,578 −2,064 − 896 −1,956 − 864 −1,092 + 160 − 237 + 397
         2nd qtr −6,478 −4,488 −4,707 −4,435 + 219 −1,989 − 864 −1,125 − 330 − 290 − 40
         3rd qtr −7,096 −5,102 −4,664 −4,213 − 437 −1,994 − 864 −1,130 −1,010 − 285 − 725
         4th qtr −8,002 −5,994 −5,009 −4,695 − 985 −2,009 − 864 −1,144 − 408 − 374 − 34
2001          1st qtr −5,314 −2,924 −2,118 −1,604 − 807 −2,390 − 880 −1,510 + 565 − 312 + 877
2000          May −1,710 − 978 −1,224 −1,154 + 246 − 732 − 288 − 444 − 22 − 96 + 73
         June −2,226 −1,616 −1,552 −1,479 − 65 − 609 − 288 − 321 − 502 − 121 − 381
         July −3,002 −2,259 −2,152 −1,791 − 107 − 743 − 288 − 455 + 105 − 91 + 195
         Aug. −2,614 −1,973 −1,813 −1,788 − 160 − 641 − 288 − 352 − 656 − 107 − 548
         Sep. −1,480 − 870 − 699 − 634 − 171 − 610 − 288 − 322 − 458 − 87 − 372
         Oct. −2,956 −2,338 −1,789 −1,725 − 549 − 618 − 288 − 330 − 125 − 141 + 16
         Nov. −2,863 −2,116 −1,780 −1,617 − 337 − 746 − 288 − 458 − 143 − 117 − 25
         Dec. −2,183 −1,539 −1,440 −1,353 − 99 − 644 − 288 − 356 − 140 − 115 − 25
2001          Jan. − 407 + 310 + 675 + 847 − 366 − 717 − 293 − 423 + 527 − 137 + 663
         Feb. −2,222 −1,333 −1,093 − 779 − 240 − 889 − 293 − 595 + 119 − 82 + 201
         Mar. −2,685 −1,900 −1,700 −1,673 − 200 − 784 − 293 − 491 − 81 − 93 + 12
1The classification of "public" and "private" transfers depends on which (excluding capital transfers). —3Payments to developing countries, pension
sector the participating domestic body belongs to. —2Current contri- payments, tax revenue and refunds, etc. —4Where identifiable; in
butions to the budgets of international organisations and to the EU budget particular, debt forgiveness. 
70*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
7. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
 
 
Until the end of 1998 DM million, from 1999 euro million
2000 2001
Item 1998 1999 2000 2nd qtr 3rd qtr 4th qtr 1st qtr Jan. Feb. Mar.
I. Net German investment abroad
(Increase/capital exports: −) −574,900 −355,558 −347,736 −98,020 −72,414 −33,788 −133,535 −42,091 −48,758 −42,686
1. Direct investment  1 −155,873 −103,057 −52,704 −38,236 + 7,619 + 12,366 −10,290 − 3,872 − 7,080 + 663
Equity capital −104,000 −83,922 −45,063 −17,694 −21,531 + 10,762 + 814 − 3,092 − 2,236 + 6,142
Reinvested earnings  2 −10,100 − 5,500 − 5,499 − 1,375 − 1,375 − 1,375 − 1,375 − 458 − 458 − 458
Credit transactions of
German direct investors −34,238 − 6,778 + 3,640 −17,518 + 31,587 + 4,669 − 8,912 − 197 − 3,964 − 4,751
Other capital − 7,534 − 6,856 − 5,782 − 1,649 − 1,062 − 1,690 − 816 − 125 − 422 − 270
2. Portfolio investment −256,232 −178,153 −210,323 −33,430 −56,393 −30,314 −42,280 −27,063 −12,431 − 2,786
Equities  3 −121,050 −67,934 −107,684 −18,821 −29,752 −13,053 − 4,091 −11,833 + 187 + 7,556
Investment fund certificates  4 −17,892 −14,055 −31,861 − 7,137 − 5,936 − 3,992 − 6,182 − 3,359 − 2,124 − 699
Bonds and notes  5 −110,676 −94,688 −72,431 − 8,834 −22,352 −10,210 −31,652 −11,679 −10,272 − 9,701
Money market instruments − 6,613 − 1,477 + 1,652 + 1,363 + 1,647 − 3,060 − 356 − 192 − 223 + 58
3. Financial derivatives  6 −13,458 − 1,112 − 3,839 + 1,625 − 848 − 2,357 + 1,511 − 3,324 + 220 + 4,616
4. Credit transactions −141,250 −71,146 −78,678 −27,402 −21,926 −13,470 −82,207 − 7,669 −29,389 −45,150
Credit institutions  7 −135,477 −43,076 −100,854 − 7,510 −30,112 −39,404 −70,058 − 9,479 −18,310 −42,269
Long-term −61,395 −42,717 −39,476 − 5,566 −11,296 −14,767 − 7,576 − 600 − 4,259 − 2,716
Short-term −74,082 − 359 −61,378 − 1,944 −18,815 −24,637 −62,483 − 8,879 −14,051 −39,553
Enterprises and individuals − 4,121 + 11,816 + 294 + 10,727 + 3,956 + 12,092 −17,290 −10,807 − 6,954 + 471
Long-term − 593 − 1,967 + 1,030 − 527 − 419 + 1,199 − 298 − 21− 100 − 177
Short-term  7 − 3,529 + 13,783 − 736 + 11,254 + 4,375 + 10,894 −16,992 −10,786 − 6,854 + 648
General government − 1,501 + 7,658 −20,091 − 4,709 −15,811 − 1,198 + 21,140 + 20,097 + 950 + 93
Long-term − 1,722 − 376 − 1,250 − 319 − 658 − 183 + 159 − 6 + 163 + 2
Short-term  7 + 220 + 8,034 −18,841 − 4,390 −15,153 − 1,015 + 20,981 + 20,103 + 787 + 91
Bundesbank − 151 −47,544 + 41,972 −25,910 + 20,041 + 15,040 −15,999 − 7,480 − 5,075 − 3,444
5. Other investment  8 − 8,088 − 2,090 − 2,191 − 578 − 866 − 13− 269 − 163 − 78− 28
II. Net foreign investment in Germany
(Increase/capital imports: +) + 606,986 + 320,220 + 357,724 + 122,082 + 47,282 + 10,745 + 123,386 + 33,447 + 45,038 + 44,902
1. Direct investment  1 + 42,720 + 52,507 + 191,090 + 40,740 + 18,168 −36,613 − 3,548 − 521 + 14,696 −17,723
Equity capital + 11,570 + 25,002 + 105,462 + 12,005 + 7,548 −72,158 + 17,223 − 1,250 + 14,148 + 4,325
Reinvested earnings  2 − 1,000 − 4,500 − 4,500 − 1,125 − 1,125 − 1,125 − 1,125 − 375 − 375 − 375
Credit transactions offoreign direct investors + 33,007 + 32,253 + 90,463 + 29,956 + 11,785 + 36,744 −19,619 + 1,105 + 947 −21,671
Other capital − 857 − 249 − 336 − 96− 40− 74− 27− 1− 24− 2
2. Portfolio investment + 264,985 + 164,581 + 46,085 + 85,582 + 26,608 + 19,253 − 4,703 − 3,850 + 3,479 − 4,332
Equities  
3 + 101,294 + 22,694 −37,261 + 42,832 + 6,922 + 9,325 + 4,483 − 1,933 + 3,314 + 3,102
Investment fund certificates − 2,776 + 5,761 + 10,821 + 2,068 + 1,547 + 2,069 − 1,844 + 832 − 1,930 − 745
Bonds and notes  5 + 154,028 + 97,897 + 69,032 + 26,789 + 18,951 + 14,364 + 8,337 − 856 + 10,413 − 1,220
Money market instruments + 12,438 + 38,229 + 3,492 + 13,893 − 813 − 6,506 −15,679 − 1,893 − 8,318 − 5,468
3. Credit transactions + 299,320 + 103,177 + 120,355 − 4,228 + 2,404 + 28,043 + 131,586 + 37,821 + 26,848 + 66,917
Credit institutions  7 + 279,437 + 95,379 + 117,943 + 6,876 + 3,344 + 26,961 + 131,163 + 37,523 + 27,704 + 65,936
Long-term + 61,270 + 35,226 + 18,314 + 506 + 144 + 3,214 − 2,605 − 2,127 + 1,766 − 2,244
Short-term + 218,167 + 60,153 + 99,629 + 6,370 + 3,200 + 23,747 + 133,768 + 39,650 + 25,938 + 68,180
Enterprises and individuals + 16,246 + 21,044 + 1,241 −11,520 − 2,118 − 172 + 3,368 + 2,663 + 535 + 170
Long-term + 13,306 + 3,953 − 272 − 749 − 128 + 606 + 4,361 − 2 + 4,522 − 159
Short-term  7 + 2,941 + 17,091 + 1,513 −10,771 − 1,990 − 778 − 993 + 2,666 − 3,987 + 328
General Government + 49 −11,255 + 757 + 342 + 850 + 1,208 − 3,122 − 2,457 − 1,413 + 747
Long-term − 8,280 − 8,306 − 141 − 82− 428 + 391 − 520 − 101 − 332 − 87
Short-term  7 + 8,329 − 2,949 + 898 + 424 + 1,279 + 817 − 2,602 − 2,355 − 1,081 + 834
Bundesbank + 3,588 − 1,991 + 414 + 75 + 327 + 46 + 177 + 91 + 22 + 64
4. Other investment − 39− 45 + 195 − 13 + 103 + 62 + 50 − 4 + 15 + 40
III. Balance of all statistically
recorded financial movements(Net capital exports: −) + 32,086 −35,338 + 9,989 + 24,062 −25,132 −23,043 −10,149 − 8,645 − 3,720 + 2,216
1From 1996, new definition for direct investment. —2Estimated. — action values shown here are mostly derived from changes in stocks. As far
3Including participation rights. —4From 1991 including accumulated as possible, purely statistical changes have been eliminated. —8In
earnings. —5From 1975 excluding accrued interest. —6Options, whether particular, subscriptions of the Federal Government to International
or not evidenced by securities, and financial futures contracts. —7The trans- Organisations. 
71*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
8. External position of the Bundesbank *
 
 
DM million
Monetary reserves and other claims on non-residents Liabilities to non-residents
Monetary reserves
Reserve
positionin theInter- Liabilitiesnational arising Net Liabilities
Monetary arising from externalFund and Claims Loans and from liquidity position
Foreign special on the external Treasury (col. 1 other claims
End of year currency drawing ECB  
2 on non- trans- discount less
or month Total Total Gold rights (net) Total paper col. 8) balances  1 residents  3 actions  4 
1234567891 0 1 1
1989 99,959 97,527 13,688 58,308 8,229 17,303 2,432 51,642 51,642 − 48,317
1990 106,446 104,023 13,688 64,517 7,373 18,445 2,423 52,259 52,259 − 54,188
1991 97,345 94,754 13,688 55,424 8,314 17,329 2,592 42,335 42,335 − 55,010
1992 143,959 141,351 13,688 85,845 8,199 33,619 2,608 26,506 26,506 − 117,453
1993 122,763 120,143 13,688 61,784 8,496 36,176 2,620 39,541 23,179 16,362 83,222
1994 115,965 113,605 13,688 60,209 7,967 31,742 2,360 24,192 19,581 4,611 91,774
1995 123,261 121,307 13,688 68,484 10,337 28,798 1,954 16,390 16,390 − 106,871
1996 120,985 119,544 13,688 72,364 11,445 22,048 1,441 15,604 15,604 − 105,381
1997 127,849 126,884 13,688 76,673 13,874 22,649 966 16,931 16,931 − 110,918
1998 135,085 134,005 17,109 100,363 16,533 − 1,079 15,978 15,978 − 119,107
*Valuation of the gold holdings and the claims on non-residents according Monetary Cooperation Fund −EMCF). —3Including loans to the World
to section 26 (2) of the Bundesbank Act and the provisions of the Bank. —4Including liquidity paper sold to non-residents by the
Commercial Code, especially section 253. In the course of the year, valuation Bundesbank; excluding the liquidity Treasury discount paper sold to
at the balance sheet rates of the preceding year. —1Mainly US dollar non-residents between March 1993 and March 1995, as shown in column 10. 
assets. —2European Central Bank (until 1993 claims on the European
  
 
9. External position of the Bundesbank in the European monetary union *
Euro million
Monetary reserves and other claims on non-residents
Monetary reserves
Reserve
position
in the Inter-
national OtherMonetary Other claims on Net externalFund and claims on Claims residents position of the
Gold special Foreign non-euro- within the in other Bundesbank Liabilities
End of year and gold drawing currency area Eurosystem EMU member to non- (col.1 lessor month Total Total rights reserves (net)  
2 countries col.9) receivables residents  1  3 residents  3 
1234567891 0
1999          Jan.  4 95,316 93,940 29,312 8,461 56,167 140 1,225 11 8,169 87,146
1999          Mar. 115,913 85,979 29,048 7,518 49,414 20,588 9,337 8 7,197 108,715
         June 108,811 86,925 28,106 8,551 50,269 25,786 − 3,910 9 6,714 102,096
         Sep. 125,037 89,368 31,762 8,046 49,560 21,924 13,735 10 6,191 118,846         Dec. 141,958 93,039 32,287 8,332 52,420 9,162 39,746 11 6,179 135,779
2000          Mar. 120,291 96,835 32,208 8,681 55,946 10,537 12,909 10 13,482 106,808
         Apr. 126,571 95,481 32,208 7,688 55,585 8,346 22,735 8 10,461 116,110
         May 121,282 95,310 32,208 7,700 55,402 17,563 8,396 12 7,828 113,453         June 139,873 96,018 33,744 7,581 54,693 4,551 39,296 9 8,047 131,826
         July 114,851 94,838 33,744 7,374 53,720 14,114 5,890 10 6,624 108,227
         Aug. 104,396 94,493 33,744 7,428 53,321 11,466 − 1,577 15 7,927 96,469
         Sep. 126,332 100,750 34,874 7,815 58,061 5,616 19,958 8 10,141 116,191
         Oct. 114,646 100,212 34,874 7,684 57,654 1,765 12,662 7 18,046 96,600
         Nov. 98,238 99,746 34,874 7,620 57,252 313 − 1,828 7 6,652 91,585
         Dec. 100,762 93,815 32,676 7,762 53,377 313 6,620 14 6,592 94,170
2001          Jan. 106,446 92,019 31,945 7,856 52,218 313 14,106 8 6,683 99,763
         Feb. 110,799 91,297 31,956 7,628 51,713 313 19,181 8 6,705 104,094         Mar. 116,133 93,187 32,710 7,752 52,726 313 22,626 8 6,770 109,364
         Apr. 106,431 91,768 33,100 7,617 51,051 313 14,337 13 6,685 99,746
*Claims and liabilities vis- à-vis all countries within and outside EMU. Until Deutsche Bundesbank ’s cross-border payments within the Eurosystem. From
December 2000, the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, by virtue November 2000 including the TARGET positions which were previously
of revaluations, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the levels shown (in columns 6 and 9) as bilateral assets and liabilities vis- à-vis national
are computed on the basis of cumulative transaction values. From January central banks outside the Eurosystem. —3See footnote 2. —4Euro
2001 onwards, all end-of-month levels will be valued at market prices. — opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at January 1, 1999. 
1Including loans to the World Bank. —2Including the balances in the
72*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
10. Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
Until the end of 1998 DM million, from 1999 euro million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities to non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  to foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms payments
or month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received operations operations
All countries
 
1997 461,760 141,722 320,038 132,372 187,666 172,843 14,823 392,071 80,743 311,328 181,987 129,341 85,746 43,595
1998 502,610 140,729 361,881 169,889 191,992 176,485 15,507 429,240 81,092 348,148 220,628 127,520 87,576 39,9441999 277,331 52,774 224,557 115,564 108,993 100,777 8,216 293,849 56,632 237,217 166,026 71,191 52,047 19,1442000 320,874 43,462 277,412 152,752 124,660 116,971 7,689 436,760 52,663 384,097 299,724 84,373 63,093 21,280
2000          Dec. 320,874 43,462 277,412 152,752 124,660 116,971 7,689 436,760 52,663 384,097 299,724 84,373 63,093 21,280
2001          Jan. 341,928 55,654 286,274 162,583 123,691 115,851 7,840 447,028 55,864 391,164 308,870 82,294 60,841 21,453
         Feb. 359,233 62,434 296,799 172,759 124,040 116,042 7,998 453,181 53,668 399,513 316,974 82,539 60,374 22,165         Mar. 384,512 60,615 323,897 196,450 127,447 119,371 8,076 454,505 54,100 400,405 315,440 84,965 62,428 22,537
EU countries
 
1997 287,024 130,611 156,413 68,161 88,252 80,199 8,053 236,747 68,777 167,970 110,157 57,813 46,097 11,7161998 307,523 130,398 177,125 84,422 92,703 83,927 8,776 265,214 68,873 196,341 137,494 58,847 46,896 11,9511999 157,617 47,992 109,625 56,450 53,175 48,500 4,675 194,809 49,243 145,566 111,605 33,961 27,532 6,4292000 177,782 39,563 138,219 78,298 59,921 55,718 4,203 316,549 45,473 271,076 231,083 39,993 32,457 7,536
2000          Dec. 177,782 39,563 138,219 78,298 59,921 55,718 4,203 316,549 45,473 271,076 231,083 39,993 32,457 7,536
2001          Jan. 199,987 51,427 148,560 87,857 60,703 56,382 4,321 326,833 48,849 277,984 238,387 39,597 31,728 7,869
         Feb. 211,587 57,836 153,751 92,312 61,439 56,992 4,447 331,266 46,700 284,566 244,843 39,723 31,821 7,902         Mar. 216,051 56,057 159,994 96,579 63,415 59,014 4,401 325,873 46,302 279,571 238,840 40,731 32,747 7,984
of which: EMU member countries 1
 
1997 174,416 66,022 108,394 42,064 66,330 60,694 5,636 177,629 51,339 126,290 82,879 43,411 35,206 8,2051998 190,953 68,418 122,535 54,167 68,368 62,491 5,877 197,566 50,579 146,987 103,899 43,088 35,021 8,0671999 104,071 25,946 78,125 38,747 39,378 36,074 3,304 151,179 38,117 113,062 88,763 24,299 20,173 4,1262000 120,976 22,737 98,239 52,976 45,263 42,389 2,874 241,330 33,698 207,632 179,095 28,537 23,569 4,968
2000          Dec. 120,976 22,737 98,239 52,976 45,263 42,389 2,874 241,330 33,698 207,632 179,095 28,537 23,569 4,968
2001          Jan. 132,399 30,226 102,173 54,656 47,517 44,352 3,165 244,645 36,057 208,588 179,076 29,512 23,609 5,903
         Feb. 136,288 32,587 103,701 55,770 47,931 44,769 3,162 245,492 34,730 210,762 181,157 29,605 23,583 6,022         Mar. 138,807 33,620 105,187 55,488 49,699 46,547 3,152 249,255 34,538 214,717 184,172 30,545 24,466 6,079
Other industrial countries
 
1997 89,482 6,436 83,046 45,814 37,232 34,050 3,182 95,662 7,884 87,778 55,306 32,472 26,280 6,1921998 109,682 8,246 101,436 61,999 39,437 36,162 3,275 102,058 7,655 94,403 61,741 32,662 26,292 6,3701999 71,958 3,595 68,363 45,540 22,823 21,220 1,603 68,024 4,870 63,154 44,518 18,636 15,387 3,2492000 84,502 2,925 81,577 54,272 27,305 25,673 1,632 81,664 4,711 76,953 54,186 22,767 18,621 4,146
2000          Dec. 84,502 2,925 81,577 54,272 27,305 25,673 1,632 81,664 4,711 76,953 54,186 22,767 18,621 4,146
2001          Jan. 83,522 3,140 80,382 54,041 26,341 24,679 1,662 83,301 4,666 78,635 56,873 21,762 17,511 4,251
         Feb. 87,659 3,191 84,468 58,900 25,568 23,939 1,629 84,100 4,619 79,481 58,056 21,425 16,898 4,527         Mar. 106,865 3,153 103,712 77,128 26,584 24,937 1,647 90,190 5,527 84,663 62,168 22,495 17,922 4,573
Countries in transition
 
1997 27,427 296 27,131 5,916 21,215 19,487 1,728 10,690 90 10,600 595 10,005 4,007 5,9981998 30,107 360 29,747 7,914 21,833 20,218 1,615 11,383 135 11,248 657 10,591 4,941 5,6501999 16,402 231 16,171 4,603 11,568 10,934 634 6,256 78 6,178 481 5,697 3,119 2,5782000 19,082 240 18,842 5,028 13,814 13,104 710 8,202 113 8,089 928 7,161 4,384 2,777
2000          Dec. 19,082 240 18,842 5,028 13,814 13,104 710 8,202 113 8,089 928 7,161 4,384 2,777
2001          Jan. 19,004 233 18,771 5,082 13,689 12,953 736 8,050 102 7,948 979 6,969 4,316 2,653
         Feb. 19,435 239 19,196 5,167 14,029 13,250 779 8,201 103 8,098 1,027 7,071 4,390 2,681         Mar. 19,625 224 19,401 5,324 14,077 13,309 768 8,479 111 8,368 1,149 7,219 4,479 2,740
Developing countries
 
1997 57,827 4,379 53,448 12,481 40,967 39,107 1,860 48,972 3,992 44,980 15,929 29,051 9,362 19,6891998 55,298 1,725 53,573 15,554 38,019 36,178 1,841 50,585 4,429 46,156 20,736 25,420 9,447 15,9731999 31,354 956 30,398 8,971 21,427 20,123 1,304 24,760 2,441 22,319 9,422 12,897 6,009 6,8882000 39,508 734 38,774 15,154 23,620 22,476 1,144 30,345 2,366 27,979 13,527 14,452 7,631 6,821
2000          Dec. 39,508 734 38,774 15,154 23,620 22,476 1,144 30,345 2,366 27,979 13,527 14,452 7,631 6,821
2001          Jan. 39,415 854 38,561 15,603 22,958 21,837 1,121 28,844 2,247 26,597 12,631 13,966 7,286 6,680
         Feb. 40,552 1,168 39,384 16,380 23,004 21,861 1,143 29,614 2,246 27,368 13,048 14,320 7,265 7,055         Mar. 41,971 1,181 40,790 17,419 23,371 22,111 1,260 29,963 2,160 27,803 13,283 14,520 7,280 7,240
* Including the assets and liabilities vis- à-vis non-residents of individuals in and decreases have not been eliminated; to this extent the changes in totals
Germany. The assets and liabilities vis- à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in are not comparable with the figures shown in Table X, 7. —1Including
Germany are shown in Table 4 of Section IV, "Banks". Statistical increases Greece from January 2001. 
73*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
X. Foreign trade and payments
11. Exchange rates for the national currencies of the EMU countries, the Deutsche Mark value of the ECU *
and euro conversion rates
France Italy Netherlands Belgium/ Austria Spain Finland Ireland Portugal Greece ECU values  1 
Yearly Luxembourg GRD  100  2 ECU  1
average FRF  100 ITL  1,000 NLG  100 BEF/LUF  100 ATS  100 ESP  100 FIM  100 IEP  1 PTE  100 EUR  1  2 = DEM ...
Spot middle rates on the Frankfurt exchange in DEM
   
1991 29.409 1.3377 88.742 4.857  14.211 1.597  41.087 2.671  1.149  0.9103 2.05076
1992 29.500 1.2720 88.814 4.857  14.211 1.529  34.963 2.656  1.157  0.8178 2.020311993 29.189 1.0526 89.017 4.785  14.214 1.303  28.915 2.423  1.031  0.7213 1.936391994 29.238 1.0056 89.171 4.8530 14.214 1.2112 31.108 2.4254 0.9774 0.6683 1.92452
1995 28.718 0.8814 89.272 4.8604 14.214 1.1499 32.832 2.2980 0.9555 0.6182 1.87375
1996 29.406 0.9751 89.243 4.8592 14.214 1.1880 32.766 2.4070 0.9754 0.6248 1.909541997 29.705 1.0184 88.857 4.8464 14.210 1.1843 33.414 2.6297 0.9894 0.6349 1.964381998 29.829 1.0132 88.714 4.8476 14.213 1.1779 32.920 2.5049 0.9763 0.5952 1.969131999 . . . . . . . . . 325.76 .
2000 . . . . . . . . . 336.63 .
      
Irrevocable euro conversion rates (EUR 1 = currency units ...) 3
   
6.55957 1936.27 2.20371 40.3399 13.7603 166.386 5.94573 0.787564 200.482 4 340.750 5 1.95583
*Calculated from daily quotations. —1According to data from the Euro- ence exchange rates of the ECB (EU R 1 = GRD ...). —3Applicable from
pean Commission. —2Until 1998 reciprocal values of the exchange rates for January 1, 1999. —4Applicable from January 1, 2001. —5Deutsche Mark
the Deutsche Mark, published by the Bank of Greece; from 1999 euro refer- conversion rate. 
12. Exchange rates of the Deutsche Mark and the euro against other currencies *
Yearly Japan Denmark Sweden Norway Switzerland Canada Australia New Zealand United States United Kingdom
or monthly
average USD JPY DKK SEK GBP NOK CHF CAD AUD  1 NZD 1 
Spot middle rates on the Frankfurt exchange (1 or 100 currency units = DEM ...)
      
1991 1.6612 1.2346 25.932 27.421 2.926  25.580 115.740 1.4501 1.2942 0.95891992 1.5595 1.2313 25.869 26.912 2.753  25.143 111.198 1.2917 1.1476 0.84061993 1.6544 1.4945 25.508 21.248 2.483  23.303 111.949 1.2823 1.1235 0.89401994 1.6218 1.5870 25.513 21.013 2.4816 22.982 118.712 1.1884 1.1848 0.9605
1995 1.4338 1.5293 25.570 20.116 2.2620 22.614 121.240 1.0443 1.0622 0.9399
1996 1.5037 1.3838 25.945 22.434 2.3478 23.292 121.891 1.1027 1.1782 1.03571997 1.7348 1.4378 26.249 22.718 2.8410 24.508 119.508 1.2533 1.2889 1.14531998 1.7592 1.3484 26.258 22.128 2.9142 23.297 121.414 1.1884 1.1070 0.9445
      
Euro reference exchange rates published by the European Central Bank (EUR 1 = currency units ...) 2
      
1999 1.0658 121.32 7.4355 8.8075 0.65875 8.3104 1.6003 1.5840 1.6523 2.01452000 0.9236 99.47 7.4538 8.4452 0.60948 8.1129 1.5579 1.3706 1.5889 2.0288
1999          Apr. 1.0704 128.16 7.4327 8.9140 0.66502 8.3186 1.6015 1.5944 1.6684 1.9723
         May 1.0628 129.71 7.4333 8.9722 0.65825 8.2348 1.6025 1.5527 1.6046 1.9249         June 1.0378 125.32 7.4314 8.8284 0.65025 8.1676 1.5951 1.5244 1.5805 1.9479
         July 1.0353 123.71 7.4388 8.7446 0.65779 8.1811 1.6040 1.5403 1.5757 1.9664
         Aug. 1.0604 120.10 7.4376 8.7519 0.66014 8.2602 1.6004 1.5833 1.6451 2.0154         Sep. 1.0501 112.39 7.4337 8.6337 0.64683 8.2270 1.6015 1.5518 1.6186 2.0097
         Oct. 1.0706 113.52 7.4334 8.7272 0.64587 8.2885 1.5943 1.5808 1.6414 2.0798
         Nov. 1.0338 108.25 7.4366 8.6330 0.63702 8.1907 1.6051 1.5160 1.6179 2.0178         Dec. 1.0110 103.72 7.4403 8.5865 0.62651 8.0977 1.6012 1.4906 1.5798 1.9891
2000          Jan. 1.0137 106.53 7.4439 8.5968 0.61834 8.1215 1.6103 1.4687 1.5421 1.9716
         Feb. 0.9834 107.64 7.4453 8.5114 0.61466 8.0991 1.6069 1.4270 1.5642 2.0057         Mar. 0.9643 102.59 7.4473 8.3884 0.61063 8.1110 1.6042 1.4082 1.5827 1.9674
         Apr. 0.9470 99.92 7.4505 8.2671 0.59802 8.1545 1.5740 1.3890 1.5878 1.9097
         May 0.9060 98.09 7.4570 8.2410 0.60151 8.1994 1.5562 1.3549 1.5703 1.9355         June 0.9492 100.71 7.4607 8.3177 0.62927 8.2490 1.5608 1.4018 1.5968 2.0174
         July 0.9397 101.39 7.4589 8.4070 0.62304 8.1763 1.5505 1.3886 1.5978 2.0394
         Aug. 0.9041 97.76 7.4578 8.3917 0.60710 8.0959 1.5506 1.3406 1.5575 2.0305         Sep. 0.8721 93.11 7.4627 8.4145 0.60773 8.0266 1.5307 1.2945 1.5749 2.0882
         Oct. 0.8552 92.75 7.4472 8.5245 0.58933 8.0032 1.5130 1.2924 1.6176 2.1346
         Nov. 0.8564 93.26 7.4564 8.6289 0.60039 7.9950 1.5216 1.3204 1.6387 2.1438         Dec. 0.8973 100.61 7.4580 8.6622 0.61342 8.1334 1.5137 1.3679 1.6422 2.0905
2001          Jan. 0.9383 109.57 7.4642 8.9055 0.63480 8.2355 1.5291 1.4098 1.6891 2.1103
         Feb. 0.9217 107.08 7.4630 8.9770 0.63400 8.2125 1.5358 1.4027 1.7236 2.1184         Mar. 0.9095 110.33 7.4643 9.1264 0.62915 8.1600 1.5355 1.4167 1.8072 2.1753
         Apr. 0.8920 110.36 7.4633 9.1120 0.62168 8.1146 1.5287 1.3903 1.7847 2.1975
*Calculated from daily quotations. —1Exchange rates from Australia and rates, which are calculated on the basis of the concertation between the
New Zealand; those for New Zealand calculated from rates as at the middle central banks at 2.15 p.m. 
and end of the month. —2The ECB publishes daily reference exchange
74*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2001
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
13. Effective exchange rates * of the euro and selected foreign currencies
 
 
1st qtr 1999 = 100
Memo item:
Effective exchange rate of the euro against the Indicators of the German economy ’s Effective nominal exchange rates of selected foreign
currencies of a ... price competitiveness  3  against... currencies against 18 industrial countries  3  4 
broad group  1 narrow group  2 38 countries  4 18 industrial countries  4 
Real Real on the basis
of the on the basis on the basis
on the basis of Pound Canadian Swiss Japanese of consumer of consumer deflators of
Nominal prices Nominal prices consumer prices US dollar sterling dollar franc yen total sales  5 
1994 84.0 104.6 102.7 103.8 . 104.8 103.6 91.9 88.2 108.8 98.7 110.9
1995 93.2 107.8 107.8 108.7 109.0 109.6 108.8 86.1 84.0 106.2 105.4 115.5
1996 95.4 105.9 107.9 108.8 104.4 106.7 105.8 90.9 85.9 108.6 104.2 100.51997 90.4 96.6 99.1 99.4 98.5 101.4 100.2 98.8 99.8 109.5 97.9 95.81998 96.6 99.1 101.5 101.3 100.1 101.4 100.7 103.4 103.3 103.3 99.9 89.61999 96.6 95.8 95.7 95.7 97.4 97.7 97.5 100.8 102.3 102.1 98.2 105.2
2000 88.2 86.3 85.7 86.5 91.1 92.1
p 91.1 105.1 104.9 103.4 96.6 118.6
1996          1st qtr 95.5 107.6 108.9 110.2 106.6 108.7 107.6 89.8 83.1 107.7 106.8 102.7
         2nd qtr 94.5 105.3 107.1 108.1 103.8 106.0 105.2 91.1 84.4 108.6 104.2 102.3         3rd qtr 96.3 106.3 108.6 109.5 104.5 106.9 105.6 90.9 85.2 108.0 104.8 100.0         4th qtr 95.5 104.4 106.9 107.4 102.7 105.2 104.7 91.8 91.0 110.0 100.7 97.0
1997          1st qtr 91.8 99.6 102.4 103.2 100.2 103.5 102.2 96.9 96.4 111.1 96.0 93.7
         2nd qtr 90.0 96.4 99.5 99.7 98.2 101.6 100.7 98.1 98.9 109.1 97.5 96.5         3rd qtr 87.7 93.2 95.5 95.7 96.8 99.6 98.1 99.5 101.4 109.7 97.9 100.0         4th qtr 92.1 97.0 99.1 99.2 98.9 100.8 99.7 100.5 102.4 108.1 100.2 92.8
1998          Jan. 93.4 97.6 99.7 99.6 99.4 100.4 . 103.6 103.9 106.5 100.2 91.3
         Feb. 92.5 96.4 98.8 98.8 98.8 100.0 99.2 102.6 103.8 106.6 100.6 94.0         Mar. 91.8 95.4 97.9 97.8 97.8 99.7 . 103.3 105.9 108.3 99.6 91.8
         Apr. 92.3 95.6 98.4 98.2 98.0 100.0 . 104.0 106.4 107.4 98.1 89.4
         May 94.9 98.1 101.2 101.0 99.7 101.5 100.5 104.2 102.9 106.3 98.7 86.8         June 95.5 98.5 101.1 101.0 99.9 101.7 . 106.2 105.1 105.3 98.7 83.9
         July 95.4 98.4 100.8 101.0 100.0 102.0 . 106.8 104.9 104.0 97.8 83.8
         Aug. 96.8 99.6 102.2 102.3 100.6 102.6 101.5 108.4 104.4 101.0 99.1 81.5         Sep. 101.3 102.8 104.6 104.3 102.4 102.8 . 103.7 103.0 100.4 101.2 85.5
         Oct. 102.8 103.8 105.7 105.2 102.4 102.6 . 99.0 100.0 97.7 102.3 94.1
         Nov. 100.6 101.3 103.6 103.2 101.0 101.8 101.7 100.1 99.7 98.1 100.7 95.3         Dec. 101.6 102.1 103.4 103.2 101.5 101.9 . 99.0 99.6 97.7 101.9 97.3
1999          Jan. 101.4 101.4 102.0 101.8 100.7 101.0 . 97.9 98.5 98.7 100.3 101.4
         Feb. 100.0 100.0 99.9 99.9 100.1 100.0 100.0 99.9 99.7 101.0 100.1 99.9         Mar. 98.7 98.6 98.3 98.3 99.0 99.1 . 102.2 101.7 100.3 99.7 98.8
         Apr. 97.5 97.2 97.1 96.9 98.3 98.5 . 102.4 102.1 102.3 98.8 99.4
         May 96.9 96.4 96.6 96.5 97.9 98.4 98.1 102.8 103.1 104.6 98.6 97.8         June 95.1 94.5 94.7 94.7 96.7 97.6 . 103.6 103.4 104.2 98.4 100.0
         July 95.1 94.5 94.8 95.2 97.1 98.1 . 103.8 102.1 102.9 97.8 101.3
         Aug. 96.3 95.5 95.4 95.6 97.3 97.6 96.8 101.0 101.8 101.7 98.1 105.7         Sep. 95.2 93.8 93.6 93.4 96.0 96.0 . 99.3 102.9 102.2 97.0 112.1
         Oct. 96.4 94.7 94.4 94.2 96.3 96.1 . 98.2 103.6 102.0 97.9 112.0
         Nov. 94.0 92.4 92.0 92.0 95.0 95.1 94.9 99.1 103.7 103.0 96.2 115.4         Dec. 92.2 90.7 90.1 90.4 94.0 94.3 . 99.4 104.5 102.5 95.7 118.9
2000          Jan. 92.4 90.8 90.2 90.8 94.2 95.0 . 99.6 106.2 104.5 95.3 115.8
         Feb. 91.2 89.5 89.2 89.8 93.6 94.5 93.2 102.2 106.3 105.1 95.2 112.9         Mar. 89.7 88.1 87.7 88.3 92.4 93.4 . 102.2 106.0 104.5 94.6 117.3
         Apr. 88.4 86.7 86.1 86.6 91.4 92.3 . 102.8 107.4 104.0 95.8 119.2
         May 86.9 85.1 84.5 85.0 90.4 91.2 91.3 106.1 105.7 103.0 96.2 118.9         June 89.9 88.1 87.4 88.2 92.1 92.8 . 103.4 102.3 103.5 97.0 118.8
         July 89.4 87.5 86.9 87.9 92.1 92.9 . 104.3 103.1 103.7 97.6 117.3
         Aug. 87.0 85.2 84.6 85.5 90.3 91.6 90.4 106.1 104.6 103.8 96.5 119.3         Sep. 85.3 83.3 82.8 83.6 89.1 90.5 . 107.4 103.2 104.1 96.9 123.1
         Oct. 84.4 82.2 81.6 82.4 88.2 89.6 . 109.1 106.0 102.5 97.6 122.3
         Nov. 85.1 82.9 82.3 83.3 88.6 89.9
p 89.3 109.9 104.2 100.6 97.3 121.9
         Dec. 88.1 85.8 85.4 86.4 90.6 91.7 . 108.4 103.8 101.5 99.3 115.8
2001          Jan. 91.7 89.1 89.2 90.3 p 92.8 p 94.0 . 107.7 102.3 102.9 99.9 108.8
         Feb. 91.0 88.6 88.3 89.6 p 92.7 p 94.0 p 91.9 108.7 101.8 101.7 99.1 110.5
         Mar. 91.4 89.0 88.4 89.9 p 92.6 p 93.9 . 111.5 102.8 100.0 99.2 106.6
         Apr. 91.0 88.6 87.6 89.1 p 92.6 p 93.5 . 112.9 103.6 100.3 99.3 105.5
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of manufactured goods trade between 1995 and 1997 and capture
the currency concerned. —1ECB calculations; in addition to the countries third-market effects. From January 2001, Greece ceased to be a partner
belonging to the narrow group (see footnote 2), this group also includes the country in the effective exchange rate of the euro; the weighting scheme
following countries: Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, China, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech was adjusted accordingly. Due to change in the weighting scheme, ef fective
Republic, Estonia, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, exchange rate data as from January 2001 are not fully comparable withMorocco, New Zealand, Philippines, Poland, Romania, Russia, Slovakia, earlier observations. For the prices are not yet available, estimates haveSlovenia, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand and Turkey. 2ECB calculations been used. For the definition of the method see ECB, Monthly Bulletin, April
based on the weighted averages of the effective exchange rates of the euro 2000, page 39 ff. —3The method of calculation is largely consistent with
or, prior to 1999, of the exchange rates of the currencies preceding the euro the procedure used by the ECB to compute the effective exchange rates ofagainst the following countries: USA, Japan, Switzerland, United Kingdom, the euro. Up to 1998, the figures for Germany are identical to the previous ly
Sweden, Denmark, Greece, Norway, Canada, Australia, Hong Kong, South published data on the real external value of the Deutsche Mark. —
Korea and Singapore. The weights used in these calculations are based on 4 Including EMU countries. — 5 Annual and quarterly averages. 
75*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
76*

Overview of
publicationsby the DeutscheBundesbankThis overview is designed to inform
readers about selected recent eco-nomic and statistical publications bythe Deutsche Bundesbank. Exceptwhere stated, these publications arepublished both in German and English,and on the Internet.
The publications are available to inter-
ested parties free of charge from thePress and Public Relations Division.Against reimbursement of the costs, amonthly updated file with approxi-mately 40,000 time series published bythe Bundesbank can also be obtainedon magnetic tape or on ZIP diskettefrom the Statistical Data ProcessingDivision. Please submit orders in writ-ing, using the addresses specified onthe back of the title page. Selectedtime series can also be downloadedfrom the Internet.
Annual Report
Monthly Report
For information on the articles published between
1990 and 2000 see the index attached to the Jan-
uary 2001 Monthly Report.
June 2000
– Overall financial flows in 1999– Trends in local authority finance since the mid-
nineties
– RTGS
plus– The Bundesbank’s new system for
individual paymentsDeutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
77*

July 2000
– Determinants and macroeconomic significance
of product wage and consumption wage
– Deposit protection and investor compensation
in Germany
– Germany’s role in international service trans-
actions
August 2000
– The economic scene in Germany in summer
2000
September 2000
– The role of the International Monetary Fund in
a changing global economic environment
– The Deutsche Bundesbank’s involvement in
banking supervision
– The performance of German credit institutions
in 1999
October 2000
– The market for venture capital in Germany– The profitability and investment behaviour of
non-financial corporations
– Setting up an Economic Research Centre at the
Deutsche Bundesbank
November 2000
– The economic scene in Germany in autumn
2000
December 2000
– Subsidy trends in Germany since the start of
the nineties
– The price effects of deregulation and privatisa-
tion in the product markets
– Electronic banking from a prudential super-
visory perspective
January 2001
– Recent institutional developments in economic
and monetary cooperation– The information content of survey data on ex-
pected price developments for monetary policy
– Structural current account balances: longer-
term trends and determinants
February 2001
– The economic scene in Germany around the
turn of 2000–01
March 2001
– The outlook for the enlargement of the EU
following the Nice European Council
– West German enterprises’ profitability and
financing in 1999
– Company pension schemes in Germany– German balance of payments in 2000
April 2001
– The new Basel Capital Accord (Basel II)– The role and behaviour of German
fund managers on the equity market
– Structure of German firms’ inter-
national capital links at end-1999
May 2001
– The economic scene in Germany in spring
2001
Statistical Supplements to the
Monthly Report1
1 Banking statistics (monthly)
2 Capital market statistics (monthly)
3 Balance of payments statistics (monthly)
4 Seasonally adjusted business statistics (monthly)5 Exchange rate statistics (quarterly)Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
78*1Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data
contained in the German originals are available in English.

Discussion papers
November 2000 9/00
The Relationship between the Federal Funds Rate
and the Fed’s Funds Rate Target: Is it Open Market
or Open Mouth Operations?
November 2000 10/00
Expectations and the Stability Problem for Optimal
Monetary Policies
January 2001 1/01
Unemployment, Factor Substitution, and CapitalFormation
January 2001 2/01
Should the Individual Voting Records of CentralBankers be Published?
January 2001 3/01
Voting Transparency and Conflicting Interests in
Central Bank Councils
January 2001 4/01
Optimal Degrees of Transparency in MonetaryPolicymaking
January 2001 5/01
Are Contemporary Central Banks Transparentabout Economic Models and Objectives and WhatDifference Does it Make?
February 2001 6/01
What can we learn about monetary policy trans-parency from financial market data?
March 2001 7/01
Budgetary Policy and Unemployment Dynamics
March 2001 8/01
Investment Behaviour of German Equity FundManagers
Summaries of former discussion papers can be
found on the Internet
Special Publications
The monetary policy of the Bundesbank,
October 19952Makro-ökonometrisches Mehr-Länder-Modell, November 1996
3
Macroeconometric model of the German eco-nomy, April 1994
4
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im Bereichvon Währung und Wirtschaft, April 1997
3
Europäische Organisationen und Gremien im Be-reich von Währung und Wirtschaft, Mai 1997
3
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 bis1989, August 1993
3
The market for German Federal securities,May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model:
MEMMOD, June 2000
Special Statistical Publications
1 Banking statistics guidelines and customer clas-
sification, June 20005
2 Bankenstatistik Kundensystematik Firmenver-
zeichnisse, Juni 20003
3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen,
Januar 20003,6
4 Financial accounts for Germany 1991 to 1999,
January 2001
5 Annual accounts of west German enterprises
1971 to 1996, March 19991
(The data of this Special Statistical Publication
can also be obtained on diskette for a fee ofcurrently 50 DM)Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
79*1Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data
contained in the German originals are available in English.2Also available (in different editions) in French, Spanish,
Russian and Chinese.
3Available in German only.
4Available in English only.
5Only the sections “Monthly Balance Sheet Statistics”,
“External position” and “Customer classification” (“Over-
all survey on sectoral classification”, “Survey on break-
down by industry or activity” and “Explanatory notes on
the system of customer classification by industry or activ-
ity”) are available in English translation.
6Updated version available on the Internet.oNot on the Internet.

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2001
80*6 Ratios from the annual accounts of west and
east German enterprises for 1996, September1999
1
(The data of this Special Statistical Publication
can also be obtained on diskette for a fee of
currently 50 DM)
7 Erläuterungen zum Leistungsverzeichnis der
Außenwirtschaftsverordnung,
März 1994o,3
8 Balance of payments statistics of the Federal
Republic of Germany, 2nd edition, February1991
o
9 Securities deposits, August 2000
10 International capital links, May 20011
11 Balance of payments by region,
August 2000
12 Technological services in the balance of pay-
ments, May 20001
Banking regulations
1 Bundesbank Act and Statute of the European
System of Central Banks and of the EuropeanCentral Bank, June 19982 Banking Act, March 2000
2a Grundsatz I über die Eigenmittel der Institute,
Januar 2001
3
2b Grundsatz II über die Liquidität der Institute,
August 19993
7 Instruction sheet for the reporting of large ex-
posures and loans of 3 million Deutsche Markor more pursuant to sections 13 to 14 of the
Banking Act, September 1998
Publications on EMU
Informationsbriefe zur Europäischen Wirtschafts-
und Währungsunion3
euro 2002 – Informationen zur Euro-Bargeldein-führung
3
Nr. 1, Juli 2000
Nr. 2, Oktober 2000
Nr. 3, Februar 2001
Der Euro ist da. Wir sagen Ihnen, worauf es an-
kommt. (Faltblatt)3
For footnotes, see p. 79*.

