Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
Vol. 53
No. 2

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
Deutsche Bundesbank
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 1460431 Frankfurt am Main
P .O.B. 10 06 02
60006 Frankfurt am MainFederal Republic of Germany
Telephone (0 69) 95 66-1
or (0 69) 95 66 . . . plus extension number
Telex 41 227 within Germany
4 14 431 from abroad
Fax (0 69) 5 60 10 71
Internet http://www.bundesbank.deReproduction permitted only if source is stated.ISSN 0418-8292The German original of this Report went to
press on February 16, 2001Annual and weekly publishing schedules for
selected statistics of the Deutsche Bundes-bank are available and can be downloadedfrom our Internet address. The relevant dataare also published on the Internet.
The Monthly Report is published autono-
mously by the Deutsche Bundesbank, Frank-furt am Main, by virtue of section 18 of theBundesbank Act of July 26, 1957. It is avail-able to interested parties free of charge.

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
ContentsThe economic scene in Germany
around the turn of 2000-01 5
The international and European
setting 6Financial markets in Germany 22Economic conditions in Germany 29Foreign trade and payments 39Public finance 48
Statistical Section 1*
Key economic data for EMU 6*
Overall monetary survey in the EMU 8*Consolidated financial statementof the Eurosystem 16*Banks 20*Minimum reserves 42*Interest rates 43*Capital market 48*Public finance in Germany 52*Economic conditions 60*Foreign trade and payments 67*
Overview of publications by the
Deutsche Bundesbank 77*

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
4

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
5The economic scene
in Germany aroundthe turn of 2000-01

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
6The international
and EuropeansettingDevelopments in the world economy
The world economy cooled off distinctly last
autumn. The main reason was the sharpslowdown in growth in the United States.The hitherto fast pace of expansion began toslacken after mid-year, and this slide acceler-ated in the fourth quarter. In addition, theJapanese economy tended to weaken after ashort period of recovery; hopes entertainedat the beginning of 2000 of a lasting upswinghave not materialised so far. In western Eur-ope, growth has remained strong; however,the economy has latterly lost some of its mo-mentum. Since the growth stimuli from theindustrial countries, particularly the UnitedStates, are no longer so strong as they usedto be, the east Asian emerging economieslikewise seem to be returning to normal ex-pansion after the very high growth rates re-corded at times in the past two years. Thishas been highlighting the persistent structuralproblems that continue to beset some econ-omies. The picture surrounding Latin Americatends to be mixed. In countries with intensivetrade links with the United States, such asMexico, the retarding foreign trade effectspredominate. By contrast, other countries, es-pecially those whose currencies are peggedto the US dollar, but which have less strongtrade links with the US economy, seem to bebenefiting from the cut in US central bankrates and the ensuing depreciation of the USdollar against the euro.
The central and eastern European countries
have latterly remained on an expansionarypath. Russia is a prime example; its growthrate, estimated at 7
12% in 2000, has been atDownturn in
the world
economy

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
7its highest level since the beginning of the
nineties. This has owed a great deal to thesharp rise in income from oil and gas exports.
The downturn in global growth can be traced
back to several causes, whose importancevaries from one region to another. The after-effects of the crude-oil-price surge are aparticularly significant reason. In the oil-consuming countries, it led to considerablelosses in real income, which put a strain onprivate consumption and corporate profitabil-ity. German economic research institutes esti-mate the drain caused by higher oil prices at
13percentage point of GDP in the United
States and Japan, and at over23percentage
point in the euro area. The brunt had to beborne in the second half of the year, especial-ly since many households, owing to the risesin the prices of energy sources (which lastedinto the autumn), were increasingly less ableor willing to respond by reducing saving. Inaddition, in the enterprise sector, the “recyc-ling of petrodollars” through heavier importsby oil-producing countries from the OECDarea did little to offset the drain.
Moreover, financing terms, especially in the
United States, were no longer as favourableas they had once been. Facing increasingsigns that the economy was overheating, theUS Federal Reserve raised its interest ratesseveral times up to mid-2000. In addition,owing to a reassessment of the credit risk byinvestors, the yield spread between US cor-porate bonds and US government bonds, inparticular, widened sharply in the second halfof last year, and banks’ lending rates rose per-ceptibly from a relatively low level. Especiallythe nosedive in equity prices in the major
stock markets, triggered by a reassessment ofprofit expectations and risk premiums, exert-ed a dampening effect. That made it moredifficult to borrow additional funds. In theUnited States, consumer demand, whichreacts relatively strongly to changes in assetholdings, was also adversely affected.
One particular reason why sentiment clouded
over so much within a short time is the strongleverage exerted by the international financialmarkets. The higher energy costs, changedterms of finance, and especially the revisedsales and earnings expectations, were all veryquick to have an impact on the markets. How-ever, one should not lose sight of the fact thatthe corrections expected by many market play-ers have positive aspects, too. For instance,In terms of US dollars, 1995 = 100, log. scale
Industrial raw materialsof which:
Energy raw
materialsCommodity prices,
total
monthlyInternational
commodity prices
Source: Hamburg Institute of International
Economics.
Deutsche Bundesbank180
160
140
120
100
80
607090120
100
80
7090
1997 1998 1999 2000 2001Main reasons
for the
worldwide
moderation of
growth
Positive
corrections

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
8the euro has been able to regain some ground
in the foreign exchange markets, and condi-tions on the international oil markets havegenerally eased. The corrections of excessiveprofit expectations or the changes in theassessment of corporate risks – particularly inthe “new economy” – are, in principle, like-wise to be seen quite positively for allocativereasons. Besides, examples from the past goto show that the financial markets tend tofluctuate rather strongly when new technolo-gies are subject to an economic evaluation.
To that extent, the developments of recent
months may certainly be construed as a re-turn to normal, which will ultimately manifestitself in the growth process, too. However, ifabrupt market corrections accumulate, thismay give rise to a considerable risk to realeconomic performance. Up to now, though,there have been no signs of such “overshoot-ing”, which might culminate in a relativelylengthy downturn. It should also be notedhere that growth began its deceleration fromwhat was, on the whole, a relatively high de-gree of capacity utilisation.
The extent to which world economic growth
will slow down this year probably dependschiefly on further developments in the USeconomy. The fact that the US economyaccounts for over one-fifth of global outputand – according to data up to 1999 – absorbsover one-sixth of global imports is more thanample evidence of that. Moreover, US stockexchanges exert a strong influence on inter-national financial markets.Views on the US economy are being domin-
ated right now by the strong downwardtrend being displayed by major indicators ofsentiment. The Conference Board consumerconfidence index, for instance, went down inJanuary for the fourth time in a row. Latterly,it has been lower than at any time since theend of 1996. In addition, the decline in thepurchasing manager index, which attractsgreat attention in the United States, acceler-ated after the turn of 2000-01. Accordingto initial estimates, real GDP grew in thefourth quarter by
14% over the third, after
adjustment for seasonal and working-dayvariations. This made it 3
12% higher than at
the end of 1999. In this connection, the earlyand violent onset of winter in large parts ofthe country, leading at times to major produc-tion losses, must also be taken into account.Real GDP went up by an average of 5% in2000, making this the strongest GDP growthsince 1984. In the last quarter, households’demand boosted aggregate output; however,viewed over time, its increase (at
34%) was
distinctly more moderate than in the preced-ing period. By contrast, gross capital forma-tion and exports were unable to sustain theirlevels of the summer quarter. Since importsstagnated at the previously reached highlevel, the deficit on foreign trade and pay-ments continued to climb.
The manufacturing sector has been hit par-
ticularly hard by the economic downturn,though it accounts for only one-sixth of ag-gregate output. Industrial output decreasedconsistently from October to January, its aver-age being a seasonally adjusted
12% below
the level of the summer quarter. This was ac-The United
States’
importance
in the world
economyThe economic
situation in the
United States ...

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
9companied by a decline in capacity utilisation,
which, in January, after factoring out seasonalvariations, was lower than at any time since1992. However, the services sector has lat-terly been growing rapidly, and has alsocreated new jobs. This has thus more thanmade up for job losses in manufacturing. Theseasonally adjusted unemployment rate roseperceptibly in January, for the first time ina long while, but, at a seasonally adjusted4.2%, it is still running at a very low level.Price trends changed but little in the autumn.The rate of price increases at the consumerlevel has been running at 3.4% since Octo-ber, and core inflation (excluding food andenergy prices) has been holding steady at2
12% since mid-2000.
The IMF has recently revised downwards its
forecast for the growth of the US economythis year by
34percentage point to 212%,
which is still considered to be a “soft land-ing”. However, the possibility of a “hard land-ing” – i.e., according to prevailing opinion,a slowdown in the growth rate to less than2% – cannot be ruled out. The turnaround insentiment in the United States probably alsoowes something to the fact that US con-sumers and investors are apparently havingdifficulty in adjusting to a more sluggish paceof growth after a long succession of years inwhich the economy performed exceptionallywell. However, there are hardly any signs sofar that the economy might slide into abroadly-based, self-sustaining process of con-traction or a prolonged period of markedunderutilisation of overall production capaci-ties. The strong growth in output which is stillto be expected over the longer term, the gen-eral decrease in oil prices since the beginning
of December and the two reductions in cen-tral bank interest rates in January will prob-ably buttress the economy over the mediumterm.
After strong growth in real GDP in the first
half of 2000, economic activity in Japan hasbeen showing renewed signs of slackening.In the third quarter, real GDP went down by aseasonally adjusted
12% against the second,
meaning the year-on-year rise was only12%.
Industrial output, after having displayed aperceptible upward trend in the summer, roseonly marginally in the fourth quarter. Theslowdown in export growth, following on theheels of weaker economic expansion, particu-larly in the United States and the easternAsian emerging economies, was presumablythe main factor in that development. The lastquarter of 2000 saw no expansionary stimulifrom private consumption, either. However,private investment seems to have continuedto boost the economy. In October-Decemberthe domestic orders received by the mechan-ical engineering industry were up 2
12%, sea-
sonally adjusted, on their level of the summer,exceeding their 2000 level by around one-fifth. All in all, the outlook for growth in2001 must be assessed cautiously. Bearingthat in mind, it is unlikely that the currentyear will witness any significant home-grownupward pressure on prices. However, in themeantime the period of falling consumerprices has come to an end, owing to thehigher import prices caused by the latest de-preciation of the yen.... and the
outlook for
2001Japan

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
10In the United Kingdom, too, the economy
lost momentum in the second half of 2000.According to initial estimates, in the fourthquarter real GDP was up
14% on its third-
quarter level, after adjustment for seasonaland working-day variations; in the third quar-ter the corresponding rise had been
34%. The
year-on-year growth rate was 212%. Manu-
facturing once again took centre stage in thiseconomic slowdown, but the services sectorsaw a slackening of the expansionary forces,too. Even so, the labour market appear-ed to remain in pretty good shape, the sea-sonally adjusted (standardised) unemploy-ment rate standing at 5
14% at the end of
2000. The rate of consumer price increases(excluding mortgage rates), at 1.8% in Janu-ary, despite the sharp rise in oil prices in thespace of one year, was actually a little moremoderate than twelve months before, andwas thus distinctly below the Bank of Eng-land’s inflation target of 2.5%.
Macroeconomic trends in the euro area
The growth rate of the euro-area economies
likewise slackened after mid-year. In the sum-mer, real GDP was just over
12%u po nt h e
spring level, seasonally adjusted. This increasewas no longer as strong as in the four preced-ing quarters, when the growth rate wasaround 1% per quarter. The diminishing paceof consumption owing to the oil-price-relateddepletion of purchasing power was the mainfactor in this development. In the last quarterof the year, for which data are not yet avail-able, the pace of economic activity in theeuro area seems to have decelerated onceagain. Industrial output continued to rise in
October-November, generally speaking, yetthe year-on-year increase slowed from 6% inthe summer months to 4
14%. Seasonally ad-
justed capacity utilisation in the manufactur-ing sector fell slightly during the period be-tween October 2000 and January 2001, butlatterly it has still distinctly exceeded its long-term average. The industry confidence indexdropped relatively sharply in January. Bycontrast, consumer confidence, after havingplummeted in the preceding months owingto the oil-price increases, improved some-what in December-January. With economicconditions clouding over in the euro area,the reduction in unemployment also sloweddown in the second half of 2000. The stand-ardised seasonally adjusted unemploymentrate in December was 8.7%, compared with9.0% in mid-year and 9.6% a year before.
From today’s vantage point, the calmer pace
of growth of the euro-area economy sincemid-2000 is not to be seen as the harbingerof a pronounced, lasting economic down-swing. Rather, there is some evidence thateuro-area output will continue to grow. Inparticular, the tax-relief measures that cameinto force in some member states at the be-ginning of 2001 will contribute materially toboosting domestic demand. The terms of fi-nancing do not constitute an impediment tosuch a development. Moreover, the room formanoeuvre in households’ and enterprises’spending has increased owing to the down-ward trend in oil prices. In addition, thefavourable course of employment, whichseems to be continuing at a moderate pace,will probably continue to buttress private con-United
Kingdom
Declining
economic
momentum, ...... yet euro area
still on a path
of growth

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
11sumption. However, it must be conceded that
cyclical risks are on the rise in Europe, too.In particular, a “hardish landing” by the USeconomy could have massive repercussionson euro-area economies at times.
HICP (Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices)
inflation in the euro area, after having pickedup during the summer half of last year, wasparticularly high in November, hitting a year-on-year rate of 2.9%. In December, inflationdiminished perceptibly again, under the im-pact of falling quotations on the internationalcrude-oil markets and the appreciation of theeuro; however, at 2.6%, it was still above thelevel recorded in mid-year (2.4%). Excludingenergy sources and seasonal foods, whoseprices are especially volatile, the rate of infla-tion has latterly been 1.6%. The further out-look for price movements is largely depend-
ent on the extent to which the second-roundeffects of the oil-price increase which oc-curred in 2000 can be kept in check. Moder-ate wage settlements, like those agreed lastyear in Germany, are an essential prerequisitefor that.
Current-account and exchange-rate
trends in the euro area
Under the impact of the strong growth in the
world economy, which lasted well into thelate summer, euro-area suppliers’ exportsregistered strong and continued turnovergrowth. In the last three months for whichsuch figures are available (September-Novem-ber 2000), exports surpassed their previousCapacity utilisation in the euro area’s manufacturing sector*
Seasonally adjusted data, %
2000 2001
CountryAnnual
averages(AA) from1990 to 2000 Total April July October JanuaryJanuary
2001comparedwith AAfrom 1990to 2000in percent-age points
Euro area
1 81.7 83.8 83.6 83.9 84.6 84.4 + 2.7
of which
Belgium 79.9 84.0 84.5 84.2 84.5 84.8 + 4.9
France 84.4 87.4 86.3 87.9 89.1 88.8 + 4.4Germany 84.2 85.8 86.1 86.0 86.3 86.9 + 2.7Italy 77.0 78.8 79.1 78.9 79.8 79.5 + 2.5Netherlands 84.0 84.7 84.6 85.0 84.6 85.2 + 1.2Spain 77.8 80.6 80.5 80.3 80.8 80.1 + 2.3
Memo item
EU
1 81.8 83.4 83.2 83.6 84.0 84.0 + 2.2
*Source: EU business survey. — 1Weighted overall results
from data for each country.
Deutsche Bundesbank
Prices
Exports to
non-euro-area
countries

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
12year’s value by just over 21%. Euro-area ex-
porters had already recorded similar successin their sales in the preceding months. Theheavier foreign sales partly reflect rising ex-port prices, to be sure, but in real terms ex-ports likewise showed exceptionally dynamicgrowth, going up on the year by an estimated12%.
The figures for imports from non-euro-area
countries, by contrast, were inflated muchmore strongly by higher prices. This is particu-larly true in the field of sources of energy. Inthe three-month period from September toNovember, imports rose by just over 24%,and thus even faster than the value of ex-ports. In real terms, however, import growth,at an estimated 4%, is likely to have beendistinctly lower than that of exports. Evenso, the (nominal) foreign trade surplus ofthe euro area continued to decline duringthe months under review (to 318
12billion,
against 32012billion in the previous year).
The impact of this trend, though, did not
affect the balance on the euro area’s currentaccount, since the deficit on “invisible” cur-rent account transactions between euro-areacountries and non-euro-area countries de-clined more sharply than the surpluses fromtrade in goods. In the last three months (Sep-tember-November), that deficit was 321
12
billion, compared with 326 billion a year be-
fore. In particular, net payments of factor in-come to recipients outside the euro area, atjust under 34
12billion in the months under
review, were much lower than a year before(38
12billion). The shortfall in the balance of
services, at just under 3312billion, was like-wise somewhat lower than a year earlier
(nearly 34 billion), whereas the deficit on cur-
rent transfers remained unchanged, at 314
billion. Altogether, the euro-area current ac-count showed a deficit of 33 billion, com-
pared with 36 billion over the same period of
the previous year.
Since the end of last October, when it
reached its all-time low, the euro has appreci-ated distinctly. At times, euro exchange ratesrose so sharply in the dying weeks of last yearthat the quotations at the beginning of 2001,despite the long preceding bout of weakness,once again surpassed their value of twelvemonths before. This trend continued in thefirst two weeks of the new year, thoughin attenuated form; in the period thereafter,however, the euro forfeited those gains.
The development outlined above was chiefly
marked by the changes in the euro’s rateagainst the US dollar. The turnaround in theeuro’s rate against the dollar began at theend of October, when it became known thatthird-quarter growth in the United States wasunexpectedly low, reaching less than halfof its second-quarter rate. Along with thebunching of unfavourable reports from theUS corporate sector, which had alreadyushered in a reversal of price movements inthe equity market, that gave market partici-pants reason to fear that the US economymight be in for a “hard landing”. The rapidlyworsening sentiment in the markets was fur-ther exacerbated at the end of November andin December by the news that the figures forthird-quarter growth were to be reviseddownwards once again. Other impediments,Imports from
non-euro-area
countries
Current
accountEuro exchange
rate
US dollar

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
13such as the mounting current account deficits
and the high level of debt of US households,have attracted closer attention under thechanged market conditions. By contrast, theeuro-area countries’ growth outlook is nowbeing rated more favourable than that of theUnited States, for the first time in quite a longwhile. At the beginning of 2001, the eurowas again quoted at US$ 0.94, an appreci-ation of over 13% from its all-time low ofUS$ 0.83 near the end of October 2000.
The adjustment of the exchange rate was
buttressed after the turn of the year by theFed’s surprise decision early in January to cutinterest rates by one-half percentage point.Since then, though, the euro has fallen a bitbecause market participants have beendownscaling their forecasts for euro-areacountries from their preliminary estimates lastautumn, though without fundamentally call-ing in question the shift in the thrust of eco-nomic growth momentum in favour of theeuro-area countries. Moreover, following thepronounced price corrections, profit-takingin the foreign exchange markets may alsohave played a role. Following the renewed
12-percentage-point reduction in interest
rates by the Federal Reserve, the euro didfirm against the US dollar briefly, but it haslatterly fallen back below its level of the be-ginning of the year.
In the past few months, the euro has re-
covered more strongly against the yen than ithas against the US dollar. At the beginning of2001 the euro was trading at ¥ 108; thus, therate was just over 21% higher than at itsnadir at the end of October (¥ 89). As early aslast autumn, the continuation of the Japan-
ese economic recovery seemed doubtful,once corporate failures pushed the unre-solved structural problems besetting the Jap-anese economy more strongly to the fore. AsJanuary progressed, the yen firmed some-what in parallel with the US dollar; however,at ¥ 105, the euro was still 18% above itsnadir of October.Effective exchange rate 1
1st qtr 1999 =100
Monthly values Daily values
1999 2000 2001Exchange rate of the euro
103
100
97
94918885
82
79
%Bilateral change2
in the euro’s rate against the ...
... US dollar ... Japanese
    yen... pound
    sterling
Since
Oct. 26,
2000
Since the
beginning
of 1999
1According to ECB calculations made using
the weighted averages of the euro ex-
change rates against the currencies of
13 countries (12 countries from 2001). —
2 Appreciation of the euro: +. Latest posi-
tion: February 14, 2001.
Deutsche Bundesbank24+
16+
8+
0
8−
16−
24−
Yen

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
14Against the pound sterling, the euro has like-
wise regained ground in the last few months.The close interrelationships between the UKand US economies, and the largely parallelmovement of the two currencies in the pastfew years as a result, have made such a trendnot unlikely. At times, moreover, speculationthat the Bank of England might cut interestrates has weakened the pound sterling –though that move did not take place until earlyin February this year. On balance, the euro roseby about 9% from its October nadir of £ 0.58to £ 0.63 at the beginning of 2001. Since thattime, it has largely held steady, fluctuating alittle around that level.
At the turn of the year, Greece became the
twelfth country to join the Eurosystem, aftera convergence assessment by the EuropeanCouncil last May and a recommendation tothat effect. The conversion rate is 340.750Greek drachmas to the euro, corresponding,as announced, to the central rate agreed forthe drachma in January 2000 in the contextof the European exchange-rate mechanism(ERM II). Now that the euro has been intro-duced in Greece, only the Danish krone is leftin the European exchange-rate mechanism;since the transition to stage three of monet-ary union, the krone’s rate against the eurohas remained virtually unchanged.
As a weighted average against the currencies
of the euro-area countries’ major tradingpartners,
1the exchange rate of the euro rose
last autumn from its nadir towards the end ofOctober up to the beginning of 2001 by justunder 12%. The further slight gains in valueat the beginning of January had been can-celled out by the end of that month, with the
result that in mid-February the euro wasbeing quoted about 10% above its level atthe end of October. Measured in terms of theconsiderable undervaluation of the euro lastautumn, its appreciation represents a desir-able correction. It makes it easier for theEuropean Central Bank to pursue its stability-oriented policy stance, and simultaneously re-duces the exchange-rate-related competitivedistortions.
Monetary policy and the financial
markets in the euro area
In the past few months, the Governing Coun-
cil of the ECB has pursued a “steady-as-she-goes” interest-rate policy, and has left theEurosystem’s key interest rates unchanged.Since the last interest-rate increase onOctober 5, 2000, the interest rates for themarginal lending facility and the deposit facil-ity have stood at 5.75% and 3.75%, respect-ively; since that time, the Eurosystem’s mainrefinancing operations have all been conduct-ed as variable-rate tenders with a minimumbidding rate of 4.75%. Both monetary andmacroeconomic conditions have argued in fa-vour of a continuation of the monetary-policystance. Growth of the money stock and of
1Up to the turn of the year, this nominal effective ex-
change rate of the euro was calculated against the cur-
rencies of 13 trading partners of the euro area, including
the Greek drachma (see European Central Bank, Effective
exchange rates for the euro, Monthly Bulletin, October
1999, page 29 ff., and European Central Bank, The nom-
inal and real effective exchange rates for the euro,
Monthly Bulletin, April 2000, page 39 ff.). Since the
drachma has given way to the euro at the beginning of
this year, only the 12 remaining currencies have been
taken into account since then when calculating this
index.Pound sterling
Greece’s
participation in
the Eurosystem
Effective
exchange rate
of the euroNo changes
in the
Eurosystem’s
interest rates

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
15lending has slackened in the past few
months, which means that the dangers toprice stability emanating from the monetaryside have meanwhile abated. Oil prices havedeclined a bit, and the euro’s external valuehas risen since the late autumn. The trend hasbeen for economic growth to moderatesomewhat. Altogether, the inflation rate hasslowed, although the uncertainty surround-ing further price movements has remainedhigh.
In the money market, the overnight interest
rate (EONIA) changed little against the back-ground of the stable minimum bidding ratefor main tender operations; by contrast, theinterest rates on fixed-term deposits havedeclined significantly since the beginningof November, particularly in the longer-termsegments. The yield curve in the moneymarket has been inverse since the beginningof December. Following the Fed’s decisionto cut key interest rates at the beginning ofthis year, the decline in the euro money-market rates temporarily accelerated. In mid-February, fixed-term deposits were quoted ataround 15 to 65 bp below their level of earlyNovember. That no doubt primarily reflectsthe fact that, in the medium term, marketparticipants are expecting lower central bankinterest rates in the euro area, too.
Against this background, in weekly variable-
rate tender operations, the difference be-tween the marginal allotment rate and theminimum bidding rate decreased as last yeardrew to a close, and since the turn of theyear it has all but vanished. The credit institu-tions’ bids focus on a very few interest-rateDaily values
% p.a.
 5 
billion
 5 
billion
 5 
billion
0Main and longer-term
refinancing operations
Nov.Impact of market factors
on liquidity (cumulative)3
Total
of which
− Government
− Banknotes in circulation0Central bank balances
of credit institutions
Required reserves2Overnight interest rate (EONIA)Marginal lending rate
Deposit rateTender rate 1Interest-rate movements and
liquidity management in theEurosystem
1Interest rate for main refinancing oper-
ations. — 2 Maintenance periods: Novem-
ber 24 to  December 23, 2000, December
24, 2000 to January 23, 2001, and January
24 to February 23, 2001. — 3 Banknotes in
circulation, government deposits with theEurosystem, net foreign currency reserves
of the Eurosystem and other factors; provi-
sion (+) or absorption (−) of central bank
balances.
Deutsche Bundesbank300
280260240
220
20060+
40+
20+
0
20−
40−140
120
100
80606.00
5.50
5.00
4.504.00
3.50
3.00                        
December January February
2000 2001Inverse yield
curve in
the money
market ...
... affects credit
institutions’
bidding
behaviour

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
16stages near the minimum bidding rate. At the
same time, the bidding volumes and thenumber of bidders have been declining. Inthe case of longer-term refinancing oper-ations, too, credit institutions’ bidding hastended to be muted.
Over the turn of the year, too, ongoing
money-market management in the Eurosys-tem was conducted exclusively through theuse of main refinancing operations. The ECBsought to limit the fluctuations in the creditinstitutions’ daily central bank balances toaround the level of the required minimum re-serves, and to make it possible for the banksto meet their reserve requirements evenly.The provision of funds by the Eurosystem wasprimarily geared to typical calendar variationsin the circulation of banknotes, and to thepronounced fluctuations in the public sector’sdeposits with the Eurosystem. Moreover, theincrease from 315 billion to 320 billion in
the outstanding volume of longer-term refi-nancing operations approved in December bythe Governing Council of the ECB for 2001had to be taken into account. IntegratingGreece into the Eurosystem on January 1,2001 posed no problems. Altogether, the vol-ume of the Eurosystem’s regular open-marketoperations increased by 321.6 billion be-
tween November and January. This served tooffset market-related liquidity withdrawalstotalling, on balance, 317.9 billion, as well as
to finance the rise in the level of requiredminimum reserves, amounting to 33.5 bil-
lion.
On balance, the overnight money market has
presented a very even picture. Only at theFactors determining bank liquidity*
5billion; calculated on the basis of
daily averages of the maintenance periods
2000/2001
ItemNov. 24
to
Dec. 23Dec. 24
to
Jan. 23Nov. 24
to
Jan. 23
I. Provision (+) or absorption (–)
of central bank balances by
1. Change in banknotes in
circulation (increase: –) – 7.7 – 7.9 – 15.6
2. Change in general govern-
ment deposits with the
Eurosystem (increase: –) – 11.3 + 8.9 – 2.4
3. Change in net foreign
exchange reserves 1 – 4.2 – 10.7 – 14.9
4. Other factors 2 – 1.9 + 16.9 + 15.0
Total – 25.1 + 7.2 – 17.9
II. Monetary policy operations
of the Eurosystem
1. Open market operations
a) Main refinancing
operations + 26.7 – 5.1 + 21.6
b) Longer-term refinan-
cing operations – 0.0 € 0.0 – 0.0
c) Other operations – – –
2. Standing facilities
a) Marginal lending
facility + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.3
b) Deposit facility
(increase: –) – 0.0 – 0.4 – 0.4
Total + 26.9 – 5.4 + 21.5
III. Change in credit institutions’
current accounts (I. + II.) + 1.7 + 1.7 + 3.4
IV. Change in the minimum
reserve requirement
(increase: –) – 1.6 – 1.9 – 3.5
Memo items 3
Main refinancing operations 210.4 205.3 205.3
Longer-term refinancing
operations 45.0 45.0 45.0
Other operations – – –
Marginal lending facility 0.4 0.5 0.5
Deposit facility 0.2 0.6 0.6
*For longer-term trends and the contribution of the Deutsche
Bundesbank, see pages 14* and 15* of the Statistical Section of
this Report. — 1Including end-of-quarter valuation adjustments
with no impact on liquidity. — 2Including monetary policy
operations concluded in stage two and still outstanding at the
beginning of stage three (outright transactions and the issuance
of debt certificates). — 3Levels on an average of the mainten-
ance period under review or the last maintenance period.
Deutsche BundesbankMoney-market
management
via main
tenders

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
17end of the year did EONIA go up quite sharp-
ly, as usual. Towards the end of the Januaryreserve maintenance period, however, EONIAdropped distinctly for a short time on accountof a sizeable liquidity surplus. Average bankrecourse to the standing facilities did increasea bit during the period under review; how-ever, such recourse continued to focus on theend of the maintenance periods.
Monetary growth in the euro area slowed
down again in the fourth quarter of 2000,after having picked up somewhat in the pre-ceding quarter in connection with the auctionof UMTS licences in Germany. Especially inDecember, seasonally adjusted money hold-ings rose very moderately. Over the wholefourth quarter, they rose at a seasonally ad-justed annual rate of 4%. At the end of De-cember, the money stock M3 surpassed its1999 level by 4.9%, compared with 5.3% atthe end of September. The moving three-month average of the year-on-year rates was5.0% during the October-December period,in contrast to 5.4% from July to Septemberand 6.5% from February to April. Thus, ithas manifestly approached the referencevalue of 4
12%, which was reaffirmed for
2001 by the Governing Council of the ECB atits December 14, 2000 meeting. That appliesall the more if one considers that those ratesslightly overstate the liquidity expansion inthe euro area, owing to the purchases ofmoney-market paper and money-market-fund certificates by non-euro-area residents(which are not statistically recorded).
Among the individual components of the
money stock M3, cash and overnight depositsgrew only sluggishly, seasonally adjusted, in
the fourth quarter after having been aug-mented somewhat more strongly in the third.At the end of December the year-on-year risein the money stock M1 was 5.5%, comparedwith 6.2% at the end of September. Thediminished propensity of investors to holdliquidity probably owes something to the risein short-term interest rates, which fosteredportfolio shifts into higher-yielding assets.The marketable financial instruments in-cluded in the money stock M3 benefited inparticular measure from that development.Other shorter-term bank deposits rose mod-erately between October and December, sea-sonally adjusted. Whereas fixed-term depositswith an agreed maturity of up to two yearsmade substantial gains, the reduction in de-posits with an agreed notice of up to threeChange from previous year in %, monthly
%
%
Memo item
German contribution
to M3
Scale reducedEuro area
Three-month
moving average
Reference
value: 4 ½ %Growth of the money stock
M3 in the euro area
Deutsche Bundesbank12
10
8
6
4
2
007
6
54
3
1997 1998 1999 2000Credit
institutions’
assistance
operations
Abated
monetary
growth
Components of
the money
stock M3

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
18months persisted – apart from the rise in De-
cember, owing to interest payments.
In the fourth quarter of 2000, monetary
growth was fostered in particular by lendingto the private sector, although that, too,weakened a bit. At the end of December, theyear-on-year rise in overall lending to theprivate sector was 10.3%, compared with10.9% at the end of September. Loans to en-terprises and individuals went up at a season-ally adjusted annual rate of just over 7%between October and December, comparedwith just over 10% between July and Sep-tember, when a fairly large volume of fundshad been raised to finance the purchase ofUMTS licences. Lending to the public sectorwas also reduced in the fourth quarter, albeitto a lesser extent than in the two precedingquarters. On balance, this was entirely due toa decline in lending against securities; loansby MFIs to the public sector, by contrast,picked up again during the period under re-view. Monetary capital formation, relativelystrong during the preceding quarter, came toa virtual halt between October and Decem-ber, statistically speaking. Payments by resi-dent non-MFIs to non-euro-area residentshad little impact on monetary growth in thefourth quarter. Overall, outflows totalled 32.7
billion, and were thus much lower than in thesame period of the previous year ( 336.2 bil-
lion).
The German contribution to M3, which has
been growing more sluggishly than the euro-area aggregate since the end of 1999, againdeclined slightly in the fourth quarter of2000, after seasonal adjustment.
2Its year-on-year rise at the end of December was 0.2%.
During the period under review, monetarygrowth in Germany was curbed, in particular,by weak lending to the private sector byMFIs. In December, some individual transac-tions also played a role; as a result, the cur-rent movement of lending tends to under-state the trend (see page 28).
Capital-market rates in the euro area showed
a downward trend around the turn of theyear. Between mid-November and the end of2000, the yield on ten-year governmentbonds in the euro-area countries
3initially
went down by12percentage point to under
5%, hitting a low at the beginning of Janu-ary, at the same time as the Federal OpenMarket Committee (FOMC) of the US FederalReserve, in a surprise move, cut the federalfunds rate. Afterwards, the yield inched backup, though fluctuations did occur. When thisReport went to press in mid-February, theyield was just under 5%. The low capital-market rates in Europe suggest that marketparticipants are assessing long-term inflationexpectations as moderate. Accordingly, theinterest-rate differential between the capitalmarket and the money market declined inthe fourth quarter from just over 40 bp tounder 20 bp. Mounting expectations of aneconomic downturn and increasing specula-tion that interest rates may be cut engen-
2On the longer-term development of the German contri-
bution to M3, see page 19 of this Report.
3Since the beginning of 2001 the euro-area capital-
market rate has been calculated including Greece and
using 1999 GDP weights. Though the yield on Greek gov-
ernment bonds is still distinctly higher than that of the
other euro-area countries, no significant break in the ser-
ies can be discerned, owing to their low weight in the
calculation of the overall rate of interest.Balance-sheet
counterparts
German
contributionCapital-market
rates tending
to fall

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
19The development of the German contribution to M3
For some time now, the pace of monetary growth
in Germany has been perceptibly weaker than inthe euro area as a whole. Euro-area M3 grew by4.9% last year, whereas the German contributionrose by only 0.2%, i.e. practically stagnated. Thesedisparate growth rates do not have a single expla-nation, but may rather be attributed to several fac-tors. First of all, there has been a trend towards nor-malisation in monetary expansion in Germany. Onereaction following the launch of monetary union in1999 was major and, in part, temporary portfolioshifts in components of the German contribution toM3. Immediately upon the transition to monetaryunion, uncertainty was heightened, and with itcame a general increase in the propensity to hold li-quid funds. Furthermore, owing to changes in theminimum reserve regulations, large amounts offunds previously lodged in Luxembourg and theUnited Kingdom were repatriated to the Germanbanking system. That resulted, in particular, in theballooning of the volume of overnight deposits inGermany. Sales of money-market paper likewiserose sharply, fostered by a certain “need to catchup” compared with the other euro-area countries,and by heavy demand from non-euro-area coun-tries. Towards the end of the year, these factorswere joined by a Y2K-related search for safe invest-ment vehicles. Against that background, Germany’scontribution to M3 rose in 1999 by 8.7%, i.e. dis-tinctly faster than the euro-area aggregate (6.2%).
Last year, that trend reversed. Euro-deposits were
replenished, whereas overnight deposits were rundown from the spring onwards owing to interest-rate considerations, among other things. Sales ofmoney-market paper also returned to some sem-blance of normal. If both years are taken together,Germany’s contribution to M3, which grew at anannual rate of 4.3%, expanded less than euro-areaM3 (5.5%). This implies that the tendency of liquidholdings to return to normal is not in itself enoughto account for the perceptible weakening of mone-tary expansion in Germany in 2000. Recent develop-ments serve to corroborate this impression. In thepast six months, the German contribution to M3 hasdecreased at a seasonally adjusted annual rate of1
12%, whereas euro-area M3 has grown at a rate of
just over 412%. The disparity between these trends
probably owes something to the rise in short-terminterest rates since the end of 1999, which has trig-gered a variety of adjustment measures in the indi-
vidual euro-area countries (depending on the pat-tern of cash holdings and their specific rates of in-terest). A relatively large percentage of the Germancontribution to M3 consists of deposits bearing lit-tle interest; the interest-rate increase has thereforebeen accompanied by a relatively sharp rise in theopportunity cost of holding cash, and a correspond-ingly greater dampening of monetary expansionthan in other countries.
The individual components of the German contri-
bution to M3 most affected by this developmentare overnight deposits and deposits with an agreedmaturity of up to three months. The latter, afterhaving been greatly enlarged in the past few yearsbecause banks paid a rate of interest on them thatexceeded the minimum interest rate, are now beingtransformed to a great extent into longer-term sav-ings deposits, and also into other higher-yieldinginvestment vehicles issued by domestic and foreignborrowers. Apparently, foreign investment-fundcertificates are meeting with exceptionally keen in-terest.
Besides portfolio adjustments by investors, rela-
tively sluggish bank lending to the private sectorhas likewise been a factor contributing to the weakgrowth of the German contribution to M3. Whereasloans by MFIs to households and enterprises in EMUrose by 9.5% in 2000, their growth rate in Germanywas only 4.5%, and barely 3
12% in the second half
of the year (expressed as an annual rate). There aretwo probable reasons for this. One is the dampen-ing impact of higher interest rates and the slow-down in the economic upswing. The other is that,in 2000, German enterprises increasingly procuredfunds through affiliated foreign enterprises. More-over, the ongoing downturn in housing construc-tion, traditionally the largest category of borrowersfrom banks, is making itself felt.
Finally, monetary growth in Germany in 2000 was
also curbed by funds flowing out of the country.Not only outflows to non-euro-area countries (asituation affecting the rest of the euro area, too)played a role, but also outflows to other euro-areacountries, from which substantial sums had pouredinto Germany in 1999. There, they tended to pro-mote monetary growth.
Deutsche Bundesbank

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
20dered greater uncertainty in the capital mar-
ket towards the end of the year. Thus, the im-plied volatility of the Bund future, which indi-cates the price fluctuations expected by mar-ket participants in the futures market in thenear future, rose until early January 2001;since that time, though, it has been back onthe decline.The yield spread between ten-year US Treas-
ury bonds and comparable bonds from euro-area countries narrowed during the fourthquarter from
12percentage point to less than
10 bp at times, and thus hit a low notreached since the beginning of monetaryunion. When this Report went to press, thisdifferential, at
14percentage point, was still
very low. The reason for this minusculeinterest-rate differential is that long-termrates in the United States dropped somewhatfaster than in Europe. In mid-February 2001,the yield on ten-year US government bondsoutstanding was almost
34percentage point
lower than it was as late as November lastyear. This decline in interest rates was driven,in particular, by mounting signs of a loomingeconomic downturn in the United States andconcomitant expectations of a cut in centralbank rates. Stimuli towards interest-rate cutswere also imparted by price adjustments inthe US equity market, which gathered pace inthe fourth quarter, and which unleashed in-creased demand by investors for fixed-rateinstruments.
Since the autumn of last year, share prices in
the euro area have continued to fall. Meas-ured in terms of the Dow Jones Euro STOXXbroad index, in mid-February European equi-ties were quoted at 8% below their levelin mid-November 2000. They have droppedsome 18% below their all-time high at thebeginning of March 2000. The prime factorbehind this development is a sharp decline inprices up to the end of 2000, followed by aslight rise starting early in January. Brokendown by sectors, distinct differences may beobserved between the movement of shareDaily values
%
%Per-
cent-
age
points
2000 2001Volatility2Yield spread
between the US bond market
and the euro-area averageYields on ten-year government
bonds outstanding
Euro-area average1Bond market yields
in the euro area
1Weighted average yield on ten-year gov-
ernment bonds of all euro-area countries;
weighted by GDP. — 2Implied volatility of
the Bund future.
Deutsche Bundesbank7
6
5
4
31.25+
1.00+
0.75+
0.50+
0.25+
06.00
5.75
5.50
5.25
5.00
4.75
M A M JJASO N DJFUS interest-rate
advantage
marked by
cyclical factors
Equity prices
down at first,
followed by a
slight rally;
price
movements
volatile on the
whole

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
21prices from more traditional sectors and
prices from the high-tech segment. Both theprice fall up to the end of 2000 and the risein prices starting at the beginning of this yearwere more pronounced in the high-tech sec-tor. European stock markets largely followthe lead of Wall Street, as reflected in the factthat US price movements are running slightlyahead of the Euro STOXX. On the whole, be-tween mid-November and mid-February, the
Standard & Poor’s 500 index fell by 5%,whereas investors in the tech-heavy NASDAQsaw their stock prices drop by 19%. Uncer-tainty surrounding prices, measured in termsof the implied volatility of the next futurescontract due in each broad index, was higherin Europe than in the United States duringthe period under review.

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
22Financial markets
in GermanyCapital market and bank interest rates
From mid-November to early January long-
term capital market interest rates fell to4
23%. The yield on ten-year Federal bonds
outstanding subsequently rose somewhatand at the time of going to press it was, at4
34percentage points, around12percentage
point up on the level in autumn last year. Dur-ing the same period, interest rates on Federalsecurities with a shorter residual maturity,which are influenced more strongly by chan-ging conditions in the money market, fell by
23percentage point. The yield curve on the
German bond market has therefore againbecome somewhat steeper. In mid-Februarythe spread of interest rates between ten-yearand one-year Federal bonds (observed values)was just over
14percentage point, having fall-
en considerably during the fourth quarter of2000 and having even become negative for ashort period in early December. In winter,yields in the other euro-area countries onceagain evolved far more closely in line withGerman capital market rates than had previ-ously been the case. In the period under re-view the yield differential compared with theGerman benchmark bonds remained relative-ly constant at just over
14percentage point.
Although the interest rate spread between
ten-year debt securities issued by domesticbanks and comparable Federal bonds recentlynarrowed slightly, it was still fairly large. Inmid-February it was 54 basis points – 10 basispoints more than one year ago. Overall, theyields on private bonds moved in line withthe “more secure” government securities.Steeper ascent
of the yield
curve caused by
a more marked
decrease at the
short end
Risk spreads
on the bond
market still high

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
23There is thus no indication of an increase in
risk premiums.
The marked decrease in yields at the short
end of the bond market mainly reflects mar-ket players’ expectations of a cut in centralbank interest rates. This is accompanied by aninverse interest rate structure for one to two-year bonds. By contrast, for medium andlong-term bonds the yield curve shows an up-ward slope. This pattern is an indication thatexpectations of a slowdown in economic ac-tivity related to speculations about a fall ininterest rates are significant in the short termonly and not in the long term. However, theupward movement for longer-term yieldsdoes not point to higher long-term inflationexpectations. In fact, according to the infor-mation derived from surveys and financialmarket prices (such as the prices of index-linked as opposed to non-index-linked bonds),these expectations are currently (at approxi-mately 1
12%) rather low. Based on inflation
expectations as indicated in the surveys, theexpected real capital market rate for ten-yearbonds was 3
12% in January, as compared
with around 4% on average in the 1990s.The financing terms of German business thuscontinue to be favourable over the long term.
In line with interest rate movements on the
bond market, long-term bank interest rateshave decreased in recent months. In Januarythis year mortgage loans with interest lockedin for ten years cost on average around6
14%, following 634% in September 2000.
The effective rates for long-term fixed-rateloans to enterprises dipped a little less – byjust over
13percentage point. In January theywere on average just under 7% (for a credit
volume of DM 200,000 to less than DM 1million) or 6
23% (for a credit volume of DM 1
million to less than DM 10 million). In short-term banking business, however, interest rateswere higher than in autumn last year, withrates for short-term lending increasing slightlymore markedly than deposit rates. The inter-est rates for both current account credit (for acredit volume of DM 1 million to less thanDM 5 million) and personal credit lines wereraised by around
13percentage point. How-
ever, at over 4%, the interest rate on three-month time deposits (for an investment vol-ume of DM 100,000 to less than DM 1 mil-lion) was only a few basis points higher inJanuary than in September.Daily values
%
Percent-
age
points
MAM J J A SOND J F
2000 2001Yield spread of ten-year over
one-year Federal bondsYield on Federal securities
outstanding...
...with a residual maturity of ten years
...with a residual maturity of one yearYields
in the German bond market
Deutsche Bundesbank1.5+
1.0+
0.5+
06.0
5.5
5.0
4.5
4.0Marked fall in
short-term
interest rates
reflects expect-
ations of a cut
in central bank
rates
Decline in
long-term bank
interest rates

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
24Share prices
On the German equity market prices fell
markedly up to the end of December; sinceearly January they have been rising again.Nonetheless, measured on the broad CDAXshare price index, they were 7% lower inmid-February than in mid-November and25% lower than at the peak in March 2000.The German market has tended to followprice movements in the USA more closelythan the other European markets; in the USAthe S&P 500 index rose slightly against abackdrop of an easing of US monetary policy,gaining 3% from early January. Since thestart of the new year share price volatilityin Germany has also decreased again. TheVDAX index, which indicates the implicit vola-tility of the futures contract due to maturenext on the DAX, fell back by 23% overall in
the period under review after a temporary in-crease in December.
In recent months the individual segments of
the German equity market developed differ-ently. The share prices of firms in the technol-ogy, media and telecommunications (TMT) in-dustries, which are mostly listed on the Neuer
Markt, experienced a loss in value of 27%
between mid-November and early 2001.
1
Marked fluctuations in share prices were alsoobserved on the Neuer Markt as a whole. The
NEMAX-All-Share price index, which com-prises all equities traded on the Neuer Markt,
was recently trading 70% below its peak ofMarch 10, 2000.
Borrowing in the securities markets
Issuing activity on the German bond market
slackened towards the end of the year. Over-all, gross sales of bonds and notes issued bydomestic borrowers in the final quarter of2000 amounted to 3193.7 billion, compared
with 3183.9 billion from July to September
2000. After subtracting redemptions and tak-ing account of the changes in issuers’ hold-ings of their own bonds, net bond sales were,at320.6 billion, distinctly lower than in the
previous quarter ( 338.3 billion). Net sales of
foreign debt securities – at 314.6 billion –
were also down on the third quarter ( 321.6
billion). As was previously the case, purchasesby German investors were almost exclusivelyMonthly averages
%
Current account credit 1
Mortgage
loans2
Time deposits4Yields on
bank debtsecurities
3Bank interest rates
in Germany
1DM 1 million and more, but less than DM
5 million. — 2 On residential property;
effective interest rate, fixed rate over ten
years. — 3 With a mean residual maturity
of over nine to ten years. — 4 Time de-
posits with an agreed maturity of onemonth for amounts of DM 100,000 and
more, but less than DM 1 million.
Deutsche Bundesbank9
8
7
65
4
32
1997 1998 1999 2000 2001
1Measured by Primark-Datastream’s TMTsector index.Share prices
follow the
development
in the USAHigh volatility in
TMT equities
Weaker sales
of bonds and
notes at the
end of the year

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
25of foreign debt securities denominated in
euro ( 312.6 billion).
The fall in resources raised on the bond mar-
ket can be primarily attributed to the com-paratively slack net sales of bank debt secur-ities, which at 37.4 billion in the fourth quar-
ter were considerably lower than in the thirdquarter ( 330.7 billion). The issues consisted
almost exclusively of other bank debt secur-ities ( 318.7 billion net), while public Pfand-
briefe were redeemed in the amount of
311.9 billion. In the fourth quarter the public
authorities raised 311.7 billion net through
the bond market, compared with a mere31.6 billion in the third quarter. The Federal
Government increased its bonded debt by310.9 billion, primarily by selling long-term
bonds. Thirty-year and ten-year bonds wereissued for 35.2 billion and 33.5 billion re-
spectively. Net sales of Federal securities com-pared with redemptions of bonds of the for-mer German Federal Post Office and of theFederal Railways Fund (in total 32.0 billion).
Industrial bonds were sold for 31.5 billion net.
In the fourth quarter of 2000 domestic enter-
prises placed new shares to a market value of34.2 billion, compared with 35.5 billion in
the previous quarter. As a result of the on-going downward trend in share prices andthe marked reticence of investors, issuing ac-tivity on the Neuer Markt came almost com-
pletely to a standstill. In December and Janu-ary alike, there was only one new issue. FromOctober to December, a total of 18 enter-prises were newly listed on the Neuer Markt,
roughly half as many as in the third quarter.In comparison with the previous quarter,
 5 
millionlin. scale
Issue
volume on 
theNeuer
Markt4
(right-hand scale)lin. scale
Number of
new issues on
theNeuer Markt4
(left-hand scale)NEMAX-
All-Share
price index4
End-1997 = 1000
(monthly averages)TMT equities2
non-
TMT equities3log. scale
Index of
share prices 1
Start of  June 1999 = 100
(daily values)Price movements
and issuing activityon the equity market
1Source: Primark-Datastream. — 2Shares
of firms in the technology, media andtelecommunications (TMT) industries. —3Total market excluding TMT shares. —
4Source: Deutsche Börse AG.
Deutsche Bundesbank4000
30002000
1000
020
1510
5
08000
7000
6000
5000
4000
3000
2500280
260
240
220
200
180
160
140
120
100
90
1999 2000 2001Decline in
issuing activities
of banks
Borrowing on
the equity
market

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
26placed volumes were therefore down again –
by 60% to below 30.8 billion (see chart on
page 25). While the total number of newissues in 2000 (133) exceeded that in the pre-vious year (131), the expectations of a recordissue volume still being expressed, in particu-lar, in the spring did not materialise. BetweenOctober and December only 30.3 billion
worth of foreign equities were bought byresidents on balance, after purchases in theamount of 338.1 billion had been made in
the previous quarter.
Investment activity in the securities
markets
Domestic investors were the principal buyers
on the bond market in the fourth quarter,investing 332.8 billion in debt securities,
compared with 339.5 billion in the previous
three months. Domestic non-banks pur-chased 321.0 billion worth of bonds (from
July to September: 319.9 billion). 317.5 bil-
lion of this amount was spent on domesticbonds, mostly government issues ( 39.7 bil-
lion). Domestic non-banks acquired 33.5 bil-
lion worth of foreign debt securities. Banksincreased their bond holdings by 311.8 bil-
lion, their main interest being in foreignbonds and notes ( 311.2 billion). Foreign in-
vestors reduced their purchases on the Ger-man bond market appreciably and bought onbalance only 32.4 billion of domestic debt
securities, compared with 320.4 billion in the
previous quarter.
Foreign investors sold 3134.2 billion worth
of domestic equities in the fourth quarter,compared with purchases of 310.5 billion in
the previous three-month period. The transferto a domestic company of a large blockof shares which had previously been heldabroad as a direct investment played a de-cisive role (see page 45 of this MonthlyReport). Credit institutions topped up theirequity portfolios by 38.2 billion (net), two-
thirds of which was accounted for by domes-tic securities and one-third by foreign secur-ities. Domestic non-banks invested a total of3130.5 billion in equities, most of which can
be attributed to the aforementioned singletransaction.
From October to December sales of domestic
investment fund certificates, at 325.6 billion,
were clearly up on the previous quarter(317.2 billion). The increase was relatedInvestment activity in the German
securities markets
5billion; in 1999 excluding money market paper
2000 1999
ItemJuly to
Sep.Oct. to
Dec.Oct. to
Dec.
Bonds and notes 1
Residents 39.5 32.8 11.9
Credit institutions 2 19.6 11.8 0.2
of which
Foreign bonds and notes 3 9.6 11.2 6.7
Non-banks 4 19.9 21.0 11.7
of which
Domestic bonds and notes 7.9 17.5 9.5
Non-residents 3 20.4 2.4 24.9
Shares
Residents 33.1 138.7 26.1
Credit institutions 2 – 2.6 8.2 11.1
of which
Domestic shares – 1.0 5.2 6.5
Non-banks 4 35.7 130.5 15.0
of which
Domestic shares – 3.9 133.1 – 36.7
Non-residents 3 10.5 – 134.2 36.7
Investment fund certificates
Investment in specialised funds 9.5 17.9 22.7Investment in funds opento the general public 7.7 7.7 4.7of which: Share-based funds 8.9 7.6 5.6
1Since the beginning of 2000 including debt securities is-
sued by non-banks with an original maturity of up to and in-cluding one year plus commercial paper. — 2Book values,
statistically adjusted. — 3Transaction values. — 4Residual.
Deutsche Bundesbank
Purchases of
bondsShares
Investment
fund certificates

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
27exclusively to specialised investment funds
launched by institutional investors, to which317.9 billion were channelled (July to Sep-
tember: 39.5 billion). Funds open to the
general public registered an unchanged in-flow of resources of 37.7 billion. On balance,
it went almost exclusively to share-basedfunds, which raised 37.6 billion through the
sale of their certificates.
Deposit and lending business of
monetary financial institutions (MFIs)with domestic customers
In the deposit business of German MFIs, the
overnight deposits of domestic customers de-clined in the fourth quarter of 2000, meas-ured on a seasonally adjusted basis. To someextent this is due to the fact that as short-term interest rates rose further, so did the op-portunity costs of this liquid form of depositswhich bear little or no interest. Furthermore,in December last year – similarly to the end of1999 – the repatriation of euro deposits byGerman enterprises was far lower than hadpreviously been usual at the end of the year.
The interest-rate-related portfolio shifts gen-
erated an increase, in particular, in depositswith an agreed maturity of up to two yearswhich carry a market rate of interest. Theyrose by 318.2 billion in the fourth quarter,
compared with 319.8 billion one year previ-
ously. Predominantly employees, but non-financial corporations, too, expanded theirholdings of short-term time deposits signifi-cantly. By contrast, deposits with agreed ma-turities of more than two years increased by32.4 billion from October to December, i.e.
by far less than in the fourth quarter of 1999(310.5 billion). In particular, insurance com-
panies, which traditionally hold most of thelonger-term time deposits, made compara-tively small increases in their portfolios in thefourth quarter of 2000.
The weak development of deposits with an
agreed period of notice of three months con-tinued during the period under review. Des-pite the interest credited at the end of theyear, they fell further by DM 1.3 billion. Thedecline was restricted to traditional savingsdeposits with an agreed period of notice ofthree months, while the special savings facil-ities attracting a higher rate of interest pickedup slightly; these, at just under 70%, makeup the bulk of savings deposits. In addition toMovement of the lending and deposits
of monetary financial institutions(MFIs) in Germany
*
5billion
2000 1999
ItemOct. to
Dec.Oct. to
Dec.
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight + 29.4 + 14.8
With agreed maturities
up to 2 years + 18.2 + 19.8over 2 years + 2.4 + 10.5
At agreed notice
2
up to 3 months – 1.3 + 4.8over 3 months + 4.9 + 1.6
Lending
Lending to domestic enterprisesand individuals
Loans + 19.1 + 40.3Lending against securities + 6.6 + 13.8
Lending to domestic publicauthorities
Loans + 5.5 + 6.2Lending against securities + 3.9 – 2.3
*As well as banks (including building and loan associ-
ations, but excluding the Bundesbank), monetary finan-cial institutions (MFIs) here also include money marketfunds; see also Table IV.1 in the Statistical Section of thisReport. — 1Enterprises, individuals and public author-
ities. — 2Savings deposits.
Deutsche BundesbankContinuing
decline in
overnight
deposits
Marked
increase in
short-term time
deposits ...
... and
moderate
increase in
longer-term
time depositsFurther fall in
savings deposits
with an agreed
period of notice

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
28the time deposits, deposits with an agreed
period of notice of more than three monthsare likely to have benefited from the interest-rate-related shifts from short-term savingsdeposits which have now been going on forroughly one year. However, despite the year-end interest payments, the recent increase of34.9 billion was below that in the previous
quarter ( 35.1 billion).
Lending by German MFIs to domestic enter-
prises and individuals declined perceptibly inthe fourth quarter. Both lending against se-curities and loans were affected. After havingamounted to just over 5% in the third quar-ter, the seasonally adjusted annual increase inloans slumped to just
12% in the fourth quar-
ter. This significant slump is, however, likelyto understate the basic trend of credit expan-sion. For one thing, it was partly due to single
transactions in December. For another, at theend of 2000 – in contrast to previous years –there were no marked tax incentives for bor-rowers. Finally, in the third quarter lendingwas also boosted by the “one-off” effect ofthe borrowing requirement related to the saleof the UMTS mobile phone licences.
Looking at the sectoral breakdown of bor-
rowers, lending has declined across theboard. In the case of employees, the moder-ate pace of expansion in the past few quar-ters slowed further during the period underreview. The demand for housing loans virtual-ly came to a standstill. Lending to enterprisesalso remained largely unchanged, althoughthis was mainly due to a larger single trans-action in the financing institutions sector. Insome larger sectors other than manufactur-ing and energy and water supply, however,loans also declined on a seasonally adjustedbasis.
The level of indebtedness of German public
authorities to domestic MFIs rose by 39.3 bil-
lion in the fourth quarter, compared with anexpansion of 33.9 billion in the same period
in the previous year. Domestic MFIs increasedtheir stocks of domestic government bondsby33.9 billion and of loans to the public sec-
tor by 35.5 billion. The Federal Government
reduced its bank debts, however, by 34.1 bil-
lion – probably by having recourse to its pro-ceeds from the sale of UMTS mobile phonelicences. It ran down its deposits with Ger-man MFIs by 31.7 billion in the period under
review.Seasonally adjusted
DM
billion 5 
billion
%lin. scale
Change from the previous
year in %18001900200021002200
log. scale
Loans1
oLoans to domestic
enterprises and individuals
1End-of-month level; excluding statistical
changes. — oFigures in euro from 1999.
Deutsche Bundesbank8
6
4
2
04300
4100
3900
3700
3500
1997 1998 1999 2000
Decline in
lending to the
private sector ...... across the
board
Increase in
public sector
debt

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
29Economic conditions
in GermanyUnderlying trends
The German economy raised its output fur-
ther in the last few months of 2000, and theimprovement on the labour market con-tinued. Following a period of sharp growth,the underlying pace of economic activity wasmuch slower, however. On an annualisedbasis, the rate of expansion in the first sixmonths of 2000 had amounted to 3
34%,
compared with 212% in the second half of
the year. According to the Bundesbank’s owncalculations, the increase in real gross domes-tic product (GDP) in the fourth quarter of2000, which had been influenced by com-paratively strong calendar effects as well asby favourable weather conditions, may havegone down to
14%. At the end of the period
under review, the expansion of overall eco-nomic output was therefore probably laggingbehind the concurrent increase in productioncapacity. Adjusted for variations in the num-ber of working days, growth was nearly2
34% up on the corresponding period in
1999; in calendar-month terms the figurewas roughly 2%.
A major role in the slackening of economic
activity was played by the fact that oil-price-induced strains were having a stronger im-pact. This affected households’ real incomesas much as it did enterprises’ profitability. Fur-thermore, uncertainties – especially about theUS economy, which had long been playingthe role of an engine of global growth – arelikely to have depressed sentiment. Accordingto the surveys of the ifo institute, for ex-ample, positive assessments in the businesscommunity have subsided noticeably of late,GDP in Q4
2000
Oil-price-
induced strains
and higher risks

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
30with negative ratings gaining the upper
hand. In the case of commercial service pro-viders, which had previously been performingwell, the slowdown in industry and the still in-complete process of structural adjustment inthe construction sector were having an ad-verse impact.
Nevertheless, business sentiment could be
more pessimistic at the moment than is dir-ectly warranted by the economic data. Oil
prices have generally been on the decline,and the strains which had arisen earlier arebecoming less severe. At the same time, agradual calming of inflationary pressures isapparent. The improvement in the terms oftrade and the relief afforded by tax reformare likely to impart major stimuli to house-holds’ propensity to consume. The terms of fi-nancing in the longer-term maturity categor-ies, which are more important than interestrates at the short end of the market, also re-mained favourable. They continue to providea sound basis for an economic upswing.Moreover, enterprises’ price competitiveness –which had been improving well into the finalquarter of 2000 – was still high, even with ahigher exchange rate for the euro. There arethus good prospects that the current slow-down in growth will not become entrenchedand that the underlying tendency of econom-ic activity will be maintained.
Output and labour market
Industrial output in the autumn of last year
did not quite match that of the third quarter,which had shown a further significant in-crease on what, for some time, had alreadybeen a sharp upward trend in growth. Sea-sonally adjusted output in the period fromOctober to December was
14% down on the
preceding three-month period. The fact thatthe level of output remained high despite thisslight fall is revealed not least by a year-on-year comparison; as in the third quarter, thelevel in the fourth quarter was up nearly 8%on the year. According to ifo institute data,Balance
Balance
Households’ assessment
of the economic situation2Business climate in the
industrial sector 1
Monthly
Five-month
moving averageSentiment in the
industrial sector and
among households
1Seasonally adjusted ifo data; western Ger-
many. — 2Bundesbank calculations on the
basis of data from the “Gesellschaft für
Konsumforschung”.
Deutsche Bundesbank50+
40+
30+
20+
10+
0
10−
20−
30−20+
10+
0
10−
20−
30−
1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001The outlook
remains
positive
Declining
industrial
output

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
31the level of capacity utilisation remained well
above average in autumn.
Output in consumer-related industries was re-
duced comparatively sharply. This mainly af-fected the durable goods sector, where auto-mobile production, in particular, was downon the high level of the summer months. Pro-ducers of non-durable goods also had causeto make cutbacks, however. Especially in theclothing and shoe industry, developmentshave for some time now been much less fa-vourable than in 1999. Even so, the year-on-year rate of expansion in output in the capitalgoods sector, which likewise recorded losses,remained in double figures up to the end ofthe period under review. In particular, produc-tion of telecommunications equipment re-mained unchanged at a very high level.
Construction sector output benefited consid-
erably from the mild weather conditions inthe last few months of 2000. According tothe data of the ifo institute, only a small num-ber of firms complained of restrictions due tothe weather. After adjustment for seasonalvariations, construction activity in the autumnmonths was comparatively buoyant. The pre-ceding year-on-year decline in output waslargely made good, although the improve-ment in the situation which this shows is like-ly to be only temporary. The unfavourablesituation as a whole will re-emerge quitesoon, particularly since it may be assumedthat site work was largely suspended due tothe cold snap in January 2001.
Developments on the labour market re-
mained positive in autumn 2000. Employ-ment rose again sharply, and there was a
steady reduction in unemployment. Accord-ing to Federal Statistical Office data, the sea-sonally adjusted number of persons in workincreased to 38.69 million in November. Thiswas roughly 140,000 more than around themiddle of last year and 550,000, or 1.4%,more than 12 months previously. The mildweather probably played a part in fewer per-sons in outdoor occupations being laid offSeasonally adjusted, quarterly
%%
Capacity utilisation 1
0lin. scale
Change from previous
year in %Output
1995 = 100, log. scaleOutput and utilisation
in the manufacturing sector
1Results of the ifo business survey.
Deutsche Bundesbank86
84
82
80789+
6+
3+
0
3−121
118
115
112
109
106
103
100
97
1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000Weather condi-
tions favourable
to construction
Sustained
improvement
on the labour
market

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
32than is usual at this time of the year. Yet
again, commercial and private service pro-viders achieved the sharpest increases in staff-ing levels. However, wholesale and retailtrade, hotel and restaurant services and in-dustry likewise probably hired more workers.By contrast, in the construction sector thebalance of recruitment vis-à-vis lay-offs re-mained negative.The number of persons registered as un-
employed with the Federal Labour Officeshowed a marked decline by the end of2000. In December, the seasonally adjustednumber of registered persons amounted to3.77 million, i.e. roughly 130,000 fewer thanin mid-2000 and 240,000 fewer than inDecember 1999. The unemployment rate,which had been as high as 9.6% in seasonal-ly adjusted terms at the end of June, fell to9.2% at the end of the year. In January 2001,there was a slight seasonally adjusted rise inunemployment, since work in the weather-dependent outdoor occupations had beenhampered more than before by the onset ofwinter weather.
As has been the case for some while, the
trend improvement in the labour market situ-ation applies only to western Germany,where the unemployment rate fell from7.7% in the middle of 2000 to 7.3% at theend of the period under review. In easternGermany, however, the rate in December andJanuary, at 17.2%, was not only much higherbut was also nearly unchanged from mid-year.
The easing effect of labour market policy
measures at the turn of 2000–2001 did notquite match the high level achieved previous-ly. The number of persons attending voca-tional training courses in December and Janu-ary, at an average of 365,000, was somewhathigher than in the summer and represented ayear-on-year increase of slightly more than35,000. At the same time, however, the num-ber of persons working on job creationschemes fell to just under 285,000, whichSeasonally adjusted, quarterly
%%
Capacity utilisation1
0lin. scale
Change from previous year in %Output
1995 =100, log. scale
xOutput and utilisation
in the construction sector
1Results of the ifo business survey; western
Germany. — xProvisional pending adjust-
ment to the annual overall survey.
Deutsche Bundesbank70
65605510+
5+
0
5−
10−
15−
20−105
100
95
90
85
80
75
1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000Falling
unemployment

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
33was a fall of nearly 70,000 compared with
1999. By far the largest part of that figure isaccounted for by the new Länder, whichbenefited only to a below-average extentfrom the expansion of vocational training.
Orders
There was a further improvement in manufac-
turing order books in autumn 2000. Seasonal-ly adjusted, orders received by the manufac-turing sector in the fourth quarter were 2
12%
higher than in the preceding three-monthperiod. The year-on-year increase, which hadamounted to around 9% in the third quarter,went up to just over 10%.
Yet again, foreign customers placed a large
volume of new orders. After adjustment forseasonal variations, orders in the final quarterof the year were almost 4
12% higher than
in the summer. At around 18%, the year-on-year rise was, in fact, larger than in thethird quarter. By contrast, incoming domesticorders towards the end of the year were, inseasonally adjusted terms, only slightly up ontheir level in the preceding months. The year-on-year rate of increase fell back from 5
12%
to 412%.
For producers of capital goods, in particular,
the year-on-year increase in demand wassharper than average, with double-digit ratesof growth being achieved in the fourth quar-ter as well. The top position was occupied byproducers of telecommunications equipmentand makers of precision instruments. Therewas also perceptible growth in the manufac-ture of other transport equipment, which in-
cludes shipbuilding and aircraft manufactur-ing. Against that, there was a slackening ofthe pace of growth in ordering for intermedi-ate consumption, which had been very briskas recently as the summer. Even so, orderingwas still more buoyant than in the case ofproducers of durable and non-durable goods,among which the furniture industry andQuarterly
Millions
%Thou-
sands
0Unemployment rate
(seasonally adjusted)
Jan.Jan.Change from previous yearUnemployed
(seasonally adjusted)
Jan.Oct./Nov.
Change from
previous yearOct./Nov. Employed
(seasonally adjusted)Labour market
Deutsche Bundesbank12
1110
9400+
0
400−4.6
4.2
3.8
3.4800+
400+
0
400−38.8
38.4
38.0
37.637.236.8
- - 
1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001Improvement in
manufacturing
order books

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
34clothing manufacturers performed compara-
tively poorly.
Many of the orders received over the past
few months were large-scale contracts. Judg-ing by past experience, only some of theseorders are reflected in production during thereporting period, however. A considerablenumber of them will have been put on theorder books and will be processed only grad-ually. At present, the capital goods sector, in
particular, has a large stock of orders onhand. This will benefit output over the nextfew months and will ensure a steadier utilisa-tion of capacity.
Orders received by the construction sector in
October and November 2000 were – season-ally adjusted – around 1% higher than in thepreceding summer months. Whether thismeans that demand for construction workhas stabilised has to remain an open questionat present, however. Even at the end of theperiod under review, the level of orders wasroughly 8
14% down on the year.
The public sector, in particular, placed more
orders for construction work towards the endof last year. In the first two months of au-tumn, the seasonally adjusted volume of neworders was roughly 3
34% higher than in the
preceding three-month period. The year-on-year fall, which had been in double figures inthe summer, was reduced to 3
12%. Addition-
ally, the industrial sector also stepped up itsconstruction activity somewhat. Seasonallyadjusted, orders in October and Novemberwere just over 1% up on the preceding quar-ter. This was still clearly (i.e. 7
14%) down on
the figure for the same period in 1999, how-ever.
In contrast to the above-mentioned construc-
tion subsectors, the situation in housing con-struction at the end of last year continued todeteriorate. In seasonally adjusted terms, the(already low) level of business activity fell byanother 3
34% in October and November,
and was 17% down over 12 months. The de-Seasonally adjusted, quarterly, log. scale
DomesticForeignNew orders
Volume, 1995 = 100
TotalDemand in the
manufacturing sector
Deutsche Bundesbank95115
100110
105
10095160
105155
110150
100145
140
135
130
125
120
115
110165130
125
120
115
110
105
100
95
1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000Stabilisation of
construction
orders

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
35cline was even sharper in eastern Germany,
where orders were now only at two-fifths oftheir level in 1995. This is partly due to thefact that there are still numerous vacant prop-erties in eastern Germany that cannot be let.In western Germany the situation is some-what more favourable to the extent that thelevel of new orders agreed with the construc-tion firms in the final quarter of the year wasno lower than it had been in the summermonths. This was still a significant (around13%) year-on-year fall, however, eventhough it was no longer as large as it hadbeen in the third quarter (– 18%). Takingconstruction permits as a yardstick, there isstill no sign of a change for the better. Rather,the seasonally adjusted number of construc-tion permits for both single and two-familyhousing and for rented accommodation, inparticular, showed a further fall comparedwith the already low figures in the summer. Inall cases, the figures continued to be roughlyone-quarter down on the year.
Prices
The year-on-year rate of increase in consumer
prices, which had declined to 2.2% at theend of 2000, went back up again in January.At 2.4%, it was again approaching its levelof September, which had witnessed thesharpest rise in 2000. This renewed acceler-ation was mainly due to a number of adminis-trative measures which came into effect atthe start of 2001. For example, a perceptibleincrease in motor vehicle tax came into forcefor older vehicles which do not fully meet thestringent requirements relating to exhaustemissions. According to the calculations of
the Federal Statistical Office, this resulted inan average increase of just under 30%.Added to this was a significant increase inradio and television licence fees (fromDM 28.25 to DM 31.45 a month). Finally,there was the impact of the third stage of theecological tax reform, which raised the priceof petrol by 6 pfennigs per litre and madeelectricity 0.5 pfennig more expensive perSeasonally adjusted, quarterly, log. scale
...in housing
   construction
Oct./
Nov....of the
   public sector...of industrial
   enterprisesVolume, 1995 = 100
Construction orders...
...totalDemand for
construction work
Deutsche Bundesbank110
100
90
80
70
60110
100
90
80110
100
90
80
70110
100
90
80
70
1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000- - - - 
Strong
influence of
administered
prices

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
36kilowatt hour. In purely mathematical terms,
these three factors increased the cost of livingby roughly
12percentage point compared
with the previous month.
In terms of food products, prices for seasonal
goods such as fruit and vegetables, in particu-lar, have risen quite sharply as a result of thecold weather in January. In the case of meatand fish, the BSE crisis led to price move-ments in the opposite direction. Whereasfresh beef and processed beef products be-came cheaper, rising demand meant that, onbalance, fresh and processed pork and fishproducts became more expensive. Overall,food cost 2.2% more in January 2001 thantwelve months before, compared with 1.4%in December 2000.The fact that the price increase for energy at
the start of 2001 was comparatively limited isdue solely to mineral oil products. The pricereductions on the international oil marketshave been a factor clearly offsetting tax in-creases and persistent price adjustments inthe case of gas and contributions to the costof central and district heating. Both wereraised again in January owing to the time lagvis-à-vis heating oil prices in working theirway through to the consumer.
At 0.5%, the year-on-year rate of price in-
crease for industrial goods, in particular, re-mained far below average. Housing rentsrose by 1.3% in January and services (exclud-ing radio and television licence fees andmotor vehicle tax) were 1.5% more expen-sive than at the start of 2000.
The Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
(HICP) used by the ECB gives a year-on-yearrate of price increase of 2.2% in January,compared with 2.3% in December. The dis-crepancy between this index and the con-sumer price index produced by the FederalStatistical Office is due to the fact that motorvehicle taxes are not included in the HICP .
Measured in terms of US dollar prices for
Brent Oil, international oil prices during Janu-ary were going back up again compared withtheir low level at the turn of 2000–2001.Even so, on a monthly average they remainedslightly down on the corresponding figure forDecember. This meant that, for the first timein more than 20 months, oil was hardly anymore expensive than it had been 12 monthspreviously. Even though there was a slight1995 = 100
%
lin. scale
Change from previous
year in %Jan.Administered prices1
totallog. scaleConsumer prices*
*Consumer price index. — 1CEA definition
(1st and 2nd category).
Deutsche Bundesbank4+
2+
0114
112
110
108
106
104
102
100
98
1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001
Fall in
international oil
prices

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
37year-on-year rise when calculated in Deutsche
Mark, the appreciation of the euro has easedthe situation over the past few weeks. The risein prices on the international oil markets accel-erated again in the first two weeks of February,however.
In December 2000 (more recent data are un-
available at present), German import pricesfell sharply in seasonally adjusted terms. Theyear-on-year rate of increase, which hadbeen as much as + 12.5% in November,went down to + 8.2%. The main reason forthis was a marked fall in prices for crude oiland mineral oil products, more than offset-ting the further rise in the price of gas. Addedto this were exchange-rate-induced price re-ductions in the case of imports of non-energyraw materials.
On the other hand, the appreciation of the
euro meant that exporters lowered their sell-ing prices. As this reduction was significantlyless than the easing with regard to importedgoods, however, there was a marked im-provement in the terms of trade for the firsttime in two years. The year-on-year declinetherefore went down to 4.5%, comparedwith 7.4% in the previous month.
The inflationary pressures of industry on do-
mestic sales in December have eased up aswell, in seasonally adjusted terms. The year-on-year price increase went down to 4.2%,compared with 4.7% in November – duesolely to the fall in oil prices. Excluding en-ergy, the year-on-year rate of increase con-tinued to rise slightly – from 2.2% to 2.4%in December. The pace of inflation over 12months has accelerated in the case of both
capital and non-durable goods.
After adjustment for seasonal variations,
there was a sharp fall in agricultural prices inDecember, following a long period in whichthere had been a trend rise. The rate of year-on-year increase, having peaked at 10% inOctober, was 7.0% at the end of the periodunder review. Firstly, prices for fruit and vege-tables did not go up as much as one year be-fore. Secondly, in the case of livestock prod-ucts, the decline in prices for cattle due toBSE were much sharper than the price in-creases for poultry and pigs, which benefitedfrom a substitution-induced rise in demandaccompanied by a cyclical recovery of priceson the pig markets.
1995 = 100, log. scale
Scale enlarged,
seasonally adjusted
Import prices
in D-MarkRaw material prices 1
in D-Mark
in US dollarWorld market and
import prices
1HWWA index of raw material prices.
Deutsche Bundesbank115
110
105
100
95120200
180
160
140
120
100
80
7090
1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001Imports have
become less
expensive
Diverging
industrial
producer pricesSlower rise in
agricultural
producer prices

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
38There were still only minor price movements
in the construction sector during the last fewmonths of 2000. Seasonally adjusted con-struction prices went up by no more than0.3% compared with the third quarter. Asbefore, this was 0.8% more than in the sameperiod in 1999. The rise in prices for roadbuilding continued to be far higher than aver-age owing to the fact that increases in thecost of oil-dependent intermediate consump-tion have a stronger impact. By contrast,there was a comparatively slight increase inthe residential construction sector. At the endof the period under review, shell constructionwork was also 0.7% cheaper than 12 monthspreviously.1995 = 100, log. scale
Livestock products
CowsPigs
PoultryAgricultural producer prices
Deutsche Bundesbank160
150
140
130
120
110
100
90
80
70
60
55
1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000Construction
prices largely
stable

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
39Foreign trade and
paymentsForeign trade and current account
Germany again achieved record exports in the
autumn of 2000 with the result that thesecontinued to be one of the main driving forcesbehind economic growth. At all events, thecurrent dynamism in export business has sofar shown little sign of flagging. Orders re-ceived by German industry from abroad roseby just under 5% in the fourth quarter com-pared with the third and were therefore morethan 21% up on the same period a year earl-ier. The export expectations of entrepreneursinterviewed by the ifo institute as part of itsbusiness survey were favourable up to thetime this Report went to press even thoughthey were no longer quite so optimistic as inthe late summer but, instead, signalled a cer-tain normalisation in the prospects for exports.
German exports rose by a seasonally adjusted
5% in the fourth quarter of 2000 comparedwith the previous quarter and by just over18% compared with the fourth period of1999; this means that they were running al-most neck and neck with the simultaneousinflows of new orders. However, a not insig-nificant proportion of the growth in exportturnover is due to price increases (of 3.9%on a year-on-year comparison). In the light ofthe unusually brisk demand for exports, Ger-man exporters evidently used the weaknessin the euro that had persisted right into theautumn to pass on to foreign customers thehigher costs they had to bear as a result ofthe increased prices for energy and importedinputs and to improve profitability in the lightof a growing shortage of capacity. However,scope for further price rises is probably limit-External trends
Exports

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
40ed now that the euro has firmed on the for-
eign exchange markets and the world econ-omy is facing a downturn. Furthermore, costpressure from the import side will decline, es-pecially as world market prices for crude oilhave fallen from last autumn’s record levels.The fact that seasonally adjusted exportprices fell (by 0.4%) in December 2000 com-pared with the previous month for the firsttime in a while is consistent with this picture.Data on the regional breakdown of German
exports in the final quarter of last year are stillnot complete. However, the data currentlyavailable up to the end of November suggestthat German export growth was again largelydetermined in the fourth quarter by demandfrom euro-area partner countries. On an aver-age of October and November, taken to-gether, deliveries by German firms to theother euro-area countries accounted for justover 45% of total export growth. This meansthat the significance of “internal trade” with-in the euro area for Germany increased com-pared with the previous quarter. German sup-pliers also had relatively high rates of growthin sales to the other EU countries outside theeuro area. In October and November thesecountries accounted for about 20% of thegrowth in German exports. Despite the sub-stantial downturn in the US economy, Ger-man firms also achieved sharp rates ofgrowth in exports again in the US market,which has offered favourable sales conditionsduring the past two years. In the monthsunder review the United States accounted for10% of the rise in Germany’s total exportturnover. However, the growth in importanceof exports to the central and east Europeancountries in transition have taken on aparticular significance. Demand from thesecountries for German products rose excep-tionally steeply in the course of last year withthe result that they accounted for almost12
12% of German export growth. There is
no doubt that the improved balance of pay-ments situation in countries such as Russiawhich benefited from the sharp increase incrude oil prices encouraged this develop-ment. It is therefore somewhat surprising thatDM
billion 5 
billion
%Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
lin. scale
Export expectations 1 )Orders received
from abroad
values, 1995 = 100130160
155
125
120135160
155
125
120140160
155
125
120145160
155
125
120150160
155
125
120155160
155
125
120
olog. scale
ExportsExport trend
1Results of the ifo business survey; bal-
ances of positive and negative company re-
ports. — oFrom 1999 all data in euro.
Deutsche Bundesbank20+
15+
10+
5+
0
5−150
145
140
135
130
125
120155160165170300
290
280
270
260
250
240
230
1997 1998 1999 2000Regional
breakdown of
exports

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
41German exports to the OPEC countries in-
creased by no more than an average rategiven the sales successes in the previous twoquarters. Yet, at less than 2%, the OPECcountries’ share in German exports is so smallthat the changes are hardly discernible whenmeasured against the overall result.
Below-average growth in German exporters’
sales was recorded in Japan and the emergingeconomies of South-East Asia in particular.Taken together, these countries accountedfor no more than 3% of German exportgrowth during the months under review. Ac-cording to the available data, demand fromthe developing countries (excluding OPEC)played a similarly minor role in the final quar-ter of last year.
German imports also rose steeply in the
fourth quarter of 2000, their seasonally ad-justed value increasing by 7
12% over the pre-
vious quarter and by just over 26% com-pared with the final quarter of 1999. Al-though much of this unusually rapid rate ofgrowth in turnover is due to the year-on-yearrise of 11.3% in import prices, largely as a re-sult of the higher crude oil prices and the sub-stantial depreciation of the euro, the impactof these factors declined towards the end ofthe year because oil prices had reached theirpeak in the autumn and the euro had tendedto firm again on the foreign exchange mar-kets. Even so, import prices were 2.1% high-er on an average of the last three months ofthe year than they had been in the third quar-ter with the result that the rise in real importswas somewhat greater than the simultaneousgrowth in exports.As in the case of exports, the euro-area coun-
tries are the most important for Germanywhen it comes to imports. However, theirshare of import growth in the period underreview fell sharply compared with the previ-ous quarter. According to the data availableup to the end of November, suppliers in the“internal market” of the euro area accountedfor only 31% of the growth in German im-ports; however, their share of almost two-thirds in the previous quarter had been un-usually large. By contrast, US suppliers record-ed substantial gains, increasing their third-quarter average share of 4% to an averageshare of 15
12% in October and November,
taken together. US firms benefited from thedemand from Germany for modern data pro-cessing and office equipment as well as thecorresponding electronic components whichseasonally adjusted
%
Share in export growth 1
Other EU
countries
United
StatesCentral and
east European
countries
in transition
Emerging
economies in
South-East
Asia and Japan
OPEC
count-
riesExports by region
1Monthly average of October - November
2000 compared with the monthly average
of July - September 2000.
Deutsche Bundesbank50
45
4035
30
25
20
15
10
5
0EMU countries
Imports
Breakdown of
imports

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
42had been rising disproportionately fast for
some time. The above-average growth inGerman imports from the emerging econ-omies in South-East Asia, which accountedfor 11% of the rise in German imports duringthe months under review, can probably alsobe explained in this context. By contrast,imports from the OPEC countries declinedslightly while those from the central and eastEuropean countries in transition increased ata below-average rate in the period under re-view. The share of this latter group of coun-tries in Germany’s import growth was only3% in the final quarter of 2000 comparedwith more than 10% in the previous period.
Owing to the sharp rise in German imports
and, despite the fall in oil prices and the firm-ing of the euro on an average of the lastthree months of 2000, the further deterior-
ation in the terms of trade, Germany’s tradesurplus declined further in the fourth quarterof the year. Despite German exporters’ recordsales, the export surplus declined to 310
12
billion (seasonally adjusted) compared with
just over 313 billion in the previous period.
The combined balance of transactions in the
field of international trade in services, cross-border factor payments and current transfersdeteriorated in the fourth quarter. The sea-sonally adjusted deficit on current invisibletransactions rose by 33 billion in the period
under review to 322
12billion with the result
that the overall seasonally adjusted deficit oncurrent account in the final quarter of lastyear was almost 313
12billion (compared
with a deficit of just under 3712billion in the
third quarter). Larger net payments to non-residents were recorded above all in servicesand current transfers while factor income ona seasonally adjusted basis was somewhatmore favourable in the last quarter.
Financial transactions
Uncertainty over the trend in the world econ-
omy and financial restructuring in the Ger-man corporate sector were the factors deter-mining Germany’s financial transactions inthe final quarter of last year. The increasinglyapparent weakness in the US economy result-ed in sharp fluctuations in the internationalfinancial markets. With the exchange rate ofthe euro reaching a new low in October be-fore making a strong recovery, yields on gov-ernment bonds on both sides of the AtlanticCurrent account
3billion; seasonally adjusted
2000
Item 2nd qtr 3rd qtr 4th qtr
1. Foreign trade
Exports (f.o.b.) 145.7 151.1 158.8Imports (c.i.f.)
r130.9 r138.0 148.3
Balance r14.8 r13.1 10.5
2. Services (balance) – 12.2 – 9.6 – 13.0
of which
Foreign travel (balance) – 8.2 – 7.2 – 8.7
3. Factor income (balance) – 2.0 – 3.3 – 2.0
of which
Investment income(balance) – 1.8 – 3.1 – 1.7
4. Current transfers (balance) – 7.4 – 6.5 – 7.4
Balance on current account
1r–7 . 7 r– 7.3 – 13.3
1Includes supplementary trade items.
Deutsche Bundesbank
Trade balanceCurrent
account
Trends in
financial
transactions

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
43declined discernibly up to the end of the year.
The outcome was that the rise in volatility ledto a downturn in the flow of securities to andfrom Germany. However, a different pictureemerged in the case of direct investmentwhere there was a change of direction in netcapital flows and gross amounts rose appre-ciably. This was essentially due to the re-organisation of participatory relationships offirms domiciled in Germany. In the quarterunder review this reorganisation led to capitalflows of unusual proportions. All in all, therewere net capital exports of 320 billion
through portfolio investment and of 322 bil-
lion through direct investment between Octo-ber and December 2000. By contrast, therewere net inflows of foreign funds as a resultof credit transactions.
The balance in portfolio investment (minus
320 billion) has to be seen against the back-
ground of the spreading reluctance to investin cross-border securities during the periodunder review. For example, German investorsacquired foreign securities worth 337 billion
between October and December 2000, butthat was about 320 billion less than in the
previous three-month period. Interest in for-eign paper, whether equities or interest-bearing securities, has declined. Swayed bythe emerging downturn in the world econ-omy and the less optimistic corporate earn-ings prospects, especially in the United States,German residents invested no more than 316
billion in foreign shares in the final quarter of2000 compared with 328
12billion in the
quarter before. The 3612billion that flowed
out of Germany and into investment fundsdomiciled abroad in the last three months ofMajor items of the balance
of payments
5billion
1999 2000
Item 4th qtr 3rd qtr 4th qtr
I. Current account
1. Foreign trade
Exports (f.o.b.) 138.4 145.8 163.6Imports (c.i.f.) 119.9
r133.6 151.3
Balance + 18.5 + 12.2 + 12.2
2. Services (balance) – 9.7 – 12.4 – 10.33. Factor income (balance) – 5.3 – 3.4 – 3.64. Current transfers (balance) – 7.6 – 7.1 – 8.2
Balance on current account
1 – 5.0 – 11.9 – 11.3
II. Balance of capital transfers 2 + 0.6 + 16.0 – 0.3
III. Financial account 3
Direct investment – 8.3 + 27.0 – 21.9
Portfolio investment + 2.4 – 29.5 – 20.0
German investmentabroad – 38.5 – 58.2 – 37.1Foreign investment inGermany + 40.8 + 28.7 + 17.1
Financial derivatives – 4.2 – 0.6 – 2.0Credit transactions
4 + 16.0 – 29.3 + 12.5
Overall balance on financial
account + 5.8 – 32.4 – 31.4
IV. Change in the foreign reserves
at transaction values(increase: –)
5 – 0.1 + 2.2 + 2.1
V. Balance of unclassifiable
transactions – 1.3 + 26.2 + 41.0
1Includes supplementary trade items. — 2Including the acquisi-
tion/disposal of non-produced non-financial assets. — 3Net capital
exports: –. — 4Including Bundesbank investment and other public
and private investment. — 5Excluding allocation of SDRs and
changes due to value adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankPortfolio
investment
German
investment in ...
... foreign
shares and
investment
fund
certificates

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
44the year was also less than before. A large
proportion of this money is likewise investedin the international share markets.
This reluctance vis-à-vis foreign shares did not
result in increased investment in foreign debtcertificates. Instead, German investors pur-chased discernibly fewer foreign bonds in thelast three months of 2000 than they haddone during the summer ( 310 billion com-
pared with 322 billion), and this was despite
the predominantly favourable sentiment inthe international bond markets.
1For ex-
ample, the yields on ten-year governmentbonds both in the euro area and the UnitedStates declined markedly in the final quarterof 2000. The yield advantage of US paperover corresponding German paper diminishedsubstantially – at the end of the year itamounted (for a time) to no more than 31basis points. In view of the improved outlookfor the exchange rate of the euro, this wasobviously not enough to entice German resi-dents to put their savings into dollar assets.At all events, German investors sold foreigncurrency bonds worth 32
12billion net in the
final quarter of the year. However, purchasesof euro-denominated paper also declined,falling from 322
12billion in the third quarter
to31212billion in the following three-month
period. The waning interest in bonds andnotes might also be partly attributable to ashortening of maturities. In contrast to whathad happened in previous quarters, foreignFinancial transactions
5billion, net capital exports: –
1999 2000
Item 4th qtr 3rd qtr 4th qtr
1. Direct investment – 8.3 + 27.0 – 21.9
German investment
abroad – 39.6 + 8.5 + 12.7Foreign investmentin Germany + 31.3 + 18.5 – 34.6
2. Portfolio investment + 2.4 – 29.5 – 20.0
German investment
abroad – 38.5 – 58.2 – 37.1
Shares – 23.0 – 28.4 – 16.1
Investment fundcertificates – 5.6 – 8.2 – 6.5Bonds and notes – 9.5 – 21.9 – 10.2Money market paper – 0.3 + 0.3 – 4.4
Foreign investment
in Germany + 40.8 + 28.7 + 17.1
Shares + 11.8 + 6.8 + 12.6
Investment fundcertificates + 3.7 + 1.5 + 2.1Bonds and notes + 8.3 + 16.5 + 11.3Money market paper + 17.0 + 4.0 – 8.9
3. Financial derivatives
1 – 4.2 – 0.6 – 2.0
4. Credit transactions + 16.2 – 28.5 + 12.4
Credit institutions + 14.2 – 27.9 – 13.4
Long-term – 8.9 – 11.4 – 11.8
Short-term + 23.1 – 16.5 – 1.7
Enterprises and indivi-
duals + 18.1 – 6.0 + 11.3
Long-term – 0.6 – 0.8 + 1.5
Short-term + 18.7 – 5.3 + 9.8
General government – 2.9 – 15.0 – 0.5
Long-term – 3.2 – 1.1 + 0.2
Short-term + 0.3 – 13.9 – 0.7
Bundesbank – 13.3 + 20.4 + 15.1
5. Other investment – 0.2 – 0.8 + 0.16. Balance of all statistically
recorded capital flows + 5.8 – 32.4 – 31.4
Memo item
Change in the foreignreserves at transactionvalues (increase: –)
2 – 0.1 + 2.2 + 2.1
1Securitised and non-securitised options and financial
futures contracts. — 2Excluding allocation of SDRs and
changes due to value adjustments.
Deutsche Bundesbank1The situation varied to some extent from one country
or market segment to the next. In the United States, for
example, the spreads between private and public paper
widened in the final quarter of 2000 and for a time did
so discernibly. However, German residents’ purchases of
privately issued paper played a secondary role in German
financial transactions.... foreign
bonds and
notes

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
45money market paper, in other words paper
with a maturity of up to a year, was in some-what greater demand towards the end of2000 ( 34
12billion).
Like the German residents, non-residents
were reluctant investors in Germany in theautumn of last year. At 317 billion, approxi-
mately 310 billion less in foreign funds
flowed into the German capital markets thanin the previous quarter. However, the financialtransactions of non-residents differed fromthose of residents in that it was sales andredemptions ( 39 billion) that predominated
in the case of non-residents money marketoperations during the period under reviewwhereas, since the start of EMU, foreigninvestors had been purchasing substantialamounts of short-dated paper. Foreign inter-est in bonds and notes issued in Germanywas also fairly low recently; this appliesin particular to Federal bonds, which offerliquidity advantages over government bondsissued in other euro-area countries but, con-sequently, also carry an “interest-rate disad-vantage”. Non-residents’ net sales of publicbonds amounted to 31
12billion; at the same
time, foreign investors spent 313 billion in
purchasing German bank debt certificates,whose yield advantage over Federal bonds in-creased slightly again in the final quarter oflast year.
A certain countermovement to the aforemen-
tioned trends was discernible in the Germanshare market where foreign investment rosefrom 37 billion in the third quarter to 312
12
billion in the fourth quarter of 2000. How-
ever, this increase was due solely to specialfactors such as the initial public offering of
post office shares, which also aroused interestabroad, and a stock swap operation in con-nection with a merger in the financial sector.In the latter case a German credit institutiontook over a foreign bank and “compensated”that bank’s former shareholders by issuingthem with shares of its own.
It was not the aforementioned merger that
determined direct investment flows in theperiod under review, however. It was a re-structuring operation within a group. In viewof the sharp increase in the international in-tegration of German business, restructuringprogrammes of this kind can have profoundeffects on the financial account and make itmore difficult to interpret capital flow statis-tics even when in the aggregate the relevanttransactions ultimately cancel out.
In one incident recorded during the period
under review a foreign proprietor establisheda new firm in Germany (new direct invest-ment in Germany) and amalgamated a directinvestment enterprise already domiciled inGermany with this new company (liquidationof inward investment in Germany). At thesame time, German group-affiliated com-panies sold participating interests abroad (li-quidation of German outward investment)and paid back loans that they had previouslyraised within the group (some of which wereshown in FDI statistics as “reverse flows”).
Both sides of the direct investment balance
sheet were thereby affected by the restructur-ing although in each case it was the amountinvolved in the liquidation of the direct invest-Foreign
investment in ...
... German
money market
paper
... German
bonds and
notes
... German
sharesDirect
investment
influenced by
corporate
restructuring

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
46ment relationship that ultimately counted. As
the total financial volumes involved far ex-ceeded the balance of all other intra-grouptransactions recorded in the financial ac-count, the direct investment flows had the“wrong” sign in each case. This means thatbetween October and December 2000 for-eign enterprises reduced their participatinginterests in Germany by approximately 334
12
billion; at the same time, the German busi-
ness sector reduced its (financial) presenceabroad by 312
12billion. However, the net
figure on direct investment provides a moreaccurate reflection of the underlying trend indirect investment flows in the period underreview. With net capital exports of 322 bil-
lion it indicates that German enterprises havemaintained a comparatively high level of in-vestment abroad.Capital flows resulting from the non-
securitised credit transactions of the non-banks were fairly limited in the fourth quarterof 2000. Whereas the external transactionsof the public sector were more or less in bal-ance, those of enterprises and individualsresulted in a net influx of 311
12billion. As
usual, the end-of-year operations of enter-prises led to a return of bank balances heldabroad to the German banking system. Inview of the fall in the total amount of de-posits held abroad, however, balance sheetoperations of this nature are by no means asextensive as they had been before the intro-duction of the euro.
The external payments of the banking sys-
tem, which usually represent the counterpartto the other transactions recorded in thebalance of payments, had a somewhat great-er impact. Between October and DecemberGerman credit institutions recorded outflowsof funds amounting to 313
12billion net.
These, however, were offset by credits of 315
billion to the accounts held by the Bundes-bank in connection with balances arisingfrom the payment system TARGET.
The foreign reserves which are shown separ-
ately from the other items forming the ex-ternal balance of the Bundesbank in the bal-ance of payments declined – at transactionvalues – by 32 billion in the final quarter of
2000. Moreover, the regular end-of-year re-valuation resulted in a further decline of justunder 34 billion in the balance sheet value
compared with the level at the end of Sep-tember. The appreciation of the euro on theinternational foreign exchange markets wasNet capital exports: −
 5 
billion
 5 
billionGerman direct investment
abroad
1st qtr 2nd qtr 3rd qtr 4th qtrForeign direct
investment in GermanyTrend in direct
investment
Deutsche Bundesbank30+
0
30−180+
150+
120+
90+
60+
30+
0
30−
2000Credit
transactions of
non-banks
Credit transac-
tions of the
banking system
Foreign
reserves of the
Bundesbank

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
47the main reason for this. At the end of
December 2000 the foreign reserves of theBundesbank therefore amounted to approxi-mately 394 billion compared with 393 billion
at the end of 1999.
An unusually large discrepancy arose be-
tween the statistically recorded inpaymentsand the corresponding outpayments duringthe quarter under review. The balancing item,which reflects the unrecorded transactions,amounted to 341 billion. Possible causes ofgaps of this kind in the balance of payments
are problems in allocating transactions to theperiods in which they actually occurred, re-porting errors or inadequate recording ofcross-border business. However, it has not yetbeen possible to establish the main reasonsapplying in the period under review. It re-mains to be seen whether a reduction in thebalancing item will subsequently arise as a re-sult of the booking of late reports during theusual annual revision of the balance of pay-ments figures in March.
Balancing item

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
48Public financeCentral, regional and local authorities
Current trendsAccording to the figures currently available,
the fiscal position of the central, regional andlocal authorities deteriorated in the fourthquarter of 2000 compared with the sameperiod in 1999. The budgetary result for2000 as a whole likewise showed higheryear-on-year deficits if the proceeds from theauction of UMTS licences are disregarded. In-cluding those proceeds, which accrued to theFederal Government in the amount of 350.8
billion, public authorities recorded a signifi-cant surplus. While the Federal Government(even net of the UMTS proceeds) and theLänder Governments posted somewhat morepositive results, the fiscal balances of the spe-cial funds, in particular, and of the local au-thorities are likely to have deteriorated. Onthe whole, a strong rise in tax revenue wasaccompanied by a marked decline in non-taxreceipts (such as the Bundesbank profit, loanrepayments, and privatisation proceeds). Ex-penditure seems to have risen only slightly,not least due to the impact of the Retrench-ment Package 2000, moderate pay settle-ments in the public sector, the continued sub-dued trend in interest payments, and positivelabour market developments.
In the last quarter of 2000, the public author-
ities’ tax receipts
1fell by almost 1% com-
pared with the fourth quarter of 1999, dueinter alia to a sharp decline in revenue from
1Including EU shares in German tax revenue, but exclud-
ing receipts from local authority taxes, which are not yet
known.Underlying
trends
Tax receipts
in the fourth
quarter ...

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
49assessed taxes. Assessed income tax yielded
1212% less than in the same period in 1999,
while the year-on-year drop in corporationtax receipts amounted to as much as 15%.The main reason for this appeared to be thatmany enterprises had their advance tax pay-ments adjusted downwards at the end of lastyear. One of the chief reasons for this waspresumably that they brought forward invest-ment activities in order to take advantage ofthe more generous pre-tax reform depreci-ation facilities. At the same time this enabledthem to post lower pre-tax profits for theyear 2000, which were still subject to thehigher tax rates prevailing before the reformcame into effect. Wage tax revenue increasedby barely 1%. Its growth continued to be de-pressed by the impact of the measures thattook effect at the beginning of 2000. Thetrend in indirect taxes, too, was partly respon-sible for the fall in revenue at the end of lastyear. Despite the increase in mineral oil taxrates at the beginning of 2000, receipts fell3% short of the corresponding 1999 level.This was due not only to consumers’ reac-tions to the surge in oil prices, but also topayments being deferred until 2001. Turn-over tax yielded a moderate rise in receipts(+ 1%). Its growth was dampened inter alia
by declining (taxable) housing constructioninvestment.
According to the provisional figures (which
include an estimate for local authority taxes),the amount of taxes raised in 2000 as awhole was just over 3% higher than in theprevious year. Owing to the disappointingtrend at the end of last year, tax revenue for2000 fell more than 33
12billion below thelatest official forecast of November. Even so,
tax receipts (adjusted for the impact ofchanges in tax law) exceeded the autumn1999 estimate, on which budget plans hadbeen largely based, by almost 34 billion, and
they also grew slightly faster than nominalGDP . As a result, the overall tax ratio (as de-fined in the financial statistics) went up by0.1 percentage point to around 23%.
This rise in receipts relative to the budget
figure was mainly due to direct taxes. Non-assessed taxes on earnings (mainly the invest-ment income tax on dividends), in particular,exceeded expectations, yielding almost one-fifth more than in 1999. This was mainly at-tributable to enterprises’ large profit distribu-tions, which may have been partly influencedby the announced tax reform as from the be-Change from previous year in %
%
Tax receipts, total 1
1st hf 2nd hf 1st hf 2nd hf1st
qtr2nd
qtr3rd
qtr4th
qtrTrends in tax revenue *
*Out-turn in Germany as a whole. —
1Including EU shares in German tax rev-
enue, but excluding receipts from local
authority taxes, which are not yet known
for the last quarter recorded.
Deutsche Bundesbank9.0+
7.5+
6.0+
4.5+
3.0+
1.5+
0
1.5−
1998 1999 2000
... and in 2000
as a whole

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
50ginning of this year.2Although corporation
tax receipts were diminished by these largerprofit distributions and the increase in enter-prises’ profits fell far short of the original ex-pectations, growth in revenue from corpor-ation tax, at 5
12%, was somewhat greater
than anticipated. The main reason for thiswas that tax receipts relating to previousyears rose further. This was the case also forassessed income tax; buoyed in addition bylarger advance payments, this tax yieldedover 12% more than in 1999. By contrast,wage tax revenue increased by a mere 1
12%
in the wake of the further cut in the incometax rate at the beginning of 2000 and the re-newed rise in child benefit, although it like-wise exceeded expectations thanks to thepositive trend in employment. Conversely,receipts from turnover tax were well belowthe projected level, rising by less than 3%
compared with 1999 as nominal economicgrowth turned out to be weaker than origin-ally anticipated. Revenue from mineral oil taxfell short of the expected level by an evenlarger margin, growing by not quite 4% inconsequence of the above-mentioned con-sumer restraint in response to the rise incrude oil prices and the raising of tax rates.This points to a conflict of aims of the “ecol-ogy tax”: on the one hand it is intended tosteer the use of resources, on the other handit is relied on as a means of finance.
The Federal budget showed a deficit of just
under 32 billion in the fourth quarter, com-
pared with a surplus of 34
12billion in the
same period in 1999. This was due mainly topoorer receipts. Tax revenue decreased on theyear. However, the drop was caused principal-ly by non-tax receipts, which considerablyundershot their corresponding 1999 level,above all because privatisation proceeds hadbeen particularly abundant in the last fewmonths of 1999.
In 2000 as a whole, the Federal Government
recorded a budget deficit of almost 324 bil-
lion, which was 31
12billion less than antici-
pated and 3212billion smaller than in 1999.3
Receipts exceeded the budget target by just
over 31 billion. Actual expenditure was al-
most 312billion less than the appropriated
figure, thus declining by 1% against 1999.On the one hand, the Federal GovernmentTrends in the revenue from major taxes
Revenue
in5billion
Full year
Type of tax 1999 2000Change
frompre-viousyearin %
Wage tax 133.8 135.7 + 1.4
Assessed income tax 10.9 12.2 + 12.3Corporation tax 22.4 23.6 + 5.4Turnover tax 137.2 140.9 + 2.7
of which: 4th quarter
Wage tax 40.5 40.8 + 0.8
Assessed income tax 5.6 4.9 – 12.6Corporation tax 5.8 5.0 – 15.2Turnover tax 36.0 36.3 + 1.1
Deutsche Bundesbank
2See also the explanations given in Deutsche Bundes-
bank, Monthly Report, November 2000, page 52.
3The proceeds from the auction of the UMTS licences
were not recorded in the budgetary accounts as receipts
but instead were directly allocated to debt redemption.Federal
Government in
the fourth
quarter ...
... and in the
year as a whole

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
51had to cope with some extraordinary and
higher-than-expected expenditure items, inparticular indemnification payments to war-time forced and slave labourers, housing al-lowance, subsidies for heating costs grantedin connection with the oil price surge, and ahigher grant to the Post Office benefit funds.On the other hand, some items of spending(mainly labour-market related measures,interest payments, and other operating ex-penditure) turned out to be lower than antici-pated. On the whole, the Federal Govern-ment made considerable consolidation head-way in 2000, not least owing to the effectsof its retrenchment programme. The deficitreduction understates the real improvementin the budgetary position if it is borne inmind that, besides incurring some one-off ex-penditure items, the Federal Governmentsold off assets to a far smaller extent than in1999.
The budgetary result of the off-budget special
funds last year deteriorated sharply comparedwith 1999. This was due, firstly, to the 34
12
billion fall in the Bundesbank profit (to not
quite 34 billion), of which any balance in ex-
cess of DM 7 billion ( 33.6 billion) is allocated
to the Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabil-ities. Secondly, the ERP Special Fund gener-ated a deficit amounting to slightly over 32
12
billion, after it had recorded surpluses during
the four preceding years or had at least moreor less broken even in 1998. The key factorwas that loan repayments dropped consider-ably.
Full data are not yet available on the fiscal
out-turn of the Länder Governments in thefourth quarter. Contrary to the result project-
ed in the budget, the deficits for 2000 as awhole appear to have been smaller than in1999 (in that year, the deficit amounted to al-most 310 billion). This was due not least to a
sharp rise in tax receipts, despite the disap-pointing performance towards the year-end.Expenditure grew only marginally. This waschiefly attributable to the trend in personnelcosts, which account for a large part of theLänder Governments’ budgets, thanks mainlyto a postponement of most of the rise in civilservants’ remuneration.
Data on local authorities’ budgetary perform-
ance are available for the first three quartersonly. These figures point towards a slight de-terioration in budgetary results for the year asa whole, although it may be assumed that 5 
billion
 5 
billion
Aggregated
2000
1999
1st qtr 2nd qtr 3rd qtr 4th qtrQuarterly results
1999
2000The Federal Government’s
financial balances in
1999 and 2000
Deutsche Bundesbank10−
15−
20−
25−
30−5+
0
5−
10−
15−
Special funds
Länder
GovernmentsLocal
authorities

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
52the local authorities again recorded a surplus.
Receipts look likely to have increased onlymarginally, mainly owing to a sharp fall insales of fixed assets. Expenditure was drivenby the first sharp rise since 1996 in local au-thority spending on social welfare benefits.On balance, the municipalities stepped uptheir capital formation only marginally, with afairly steep rise in western Germany beinglargely offset by a sharp drop in the easternpart of the country.
According to the information available, the
central, regional and local authorities’ aggre-gate debt fell by 34
12billion in the fourth
quarter, primarily owing to the fact that partof the proceeds from the auction of UMTS li-cences went directly towards debt redemp-tion.
4The public authorities cut their moneymarket debt by 319 billion, while obtaining
funds in the capital market to the tune of notquite 315 billion, mainly in the form of
bonds. In 2000 as a whole, their aggregatedebt rose by 317
12billion, the focus being
on the sale of bonds ( 323 billion). Particularly
loans and Federal savings bonds were re-deemed on balance. On the whole, the shareof long-term debt has increased somewhat.
Budget plans for 2001
In 2001, the large revenue losses resulting
from the tax reform (amounting to an esti-mated 323 billion, or just over 1% of GDP)
5
look likely to lead to a marked decrease in tax
receipts. Forecasts based on the official taxestimate of November had pointed towards adecline in total tax receipts in 2001 by slightlymore than 2%. As tax revenue in the baseyear 2000 turned out to be lower than esti-mated at the time, actual tax receipts in 2001might likewise be lower than the forecast fig-ures. Although it may be expected that thecentral, regional and local authorities willseek to offset the likely decrease in tax rev-enue through expenditure restraint and sub-stantial asset sales, their deficits will probablyincrease significantly vis-à-vis last year. 5 
billion
 5 
billion
20001999Aggregated
pe
1st qtr 2nd qtr 3rd qtr 4th qtr1999
2000Quarterly results
peThe special funds’
financial balances in
1999 and 2000
Deutsche Bundesbank6+
4+
2+
0
2−
4−6+
4+
2+
0
2−
4These transactions were not recorded in the budgetary
accounts. Therefore, the borrowing requirement deviates
sharply from the recorded deficits in the fourth quarter. It
was not until January that the bulk of the UMTS proceeds
was used for redeeming debt of the Currency Conversion
Equalisation Fund.
5For details see Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report,
August 2000 (page 54 ff.) and November 2000 (page
54).IndebtednessIncreasing
deficits in the
wake of the
tax reform

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
53The Federal budget for 2001 approved by
Parliament envisages a deficit amounting to322
12billion, whereas the original budget
plan drawn up by the Federal Government6
had anticipated a deficit of 32312billion.
This lower sum is mainly attributable to cut-backs in Federal grants to other levels of gov-ernment. In addition, the Federal Govern-ment will take advantage of the savings ininterest payments following debt redemptionmade possible by the UMTS proceeds in orderto step up investment spending. The FederalGovernment’s intention to reduce the Federalbudget deficit further this year despite sub-stantial tax shortfalls is a welcome signal.However, this can only be achieved by resort-ing to substantial asset sales, which meansthat there will be considerably greater needfor structural consolidation in the Federalbudget than last year.
The Länder Governments’ budgets will be
squeezed hard in 2001 by tax reform-inducedfalls in receipts amounting to almost 310 bil-
lion. Many regional authorities will have tostruggle to stay within their statutory limitsfor new borrowing. They will be helped bythe fact that the grants from west GermanLänder Governments (like those from theFederal Government and western local au-thorities) to the “German Unity” Fund will besmaller than envisaged in the original draftbudget, which will lead to a correspondinglyslower debt reduction of that special fund.Furthermore, many Länder Governments hadtaken the precaution of building up reservesfrom the unexpectedly large tax receipts inthe past few years, which they will now re-lease in order to limit new borrowing. Yet thiswill enable them to counteract the pressure
to cut expenditure, which will increase in themedium term, inter alia in connection with
further tax cuts, only in the short run. The fis-cal deficits, which remain unaffected by thetransfers of reserves, will rise sharply this year,thus highlighting the need for action.
The local authorities will be affected by the
tax reform indirectly as well as directly, asthey share tax receipts with the Länder Gov-ernments under mutual tax-sharing arrange-ments. On balance, their expenditure is likelyto increase only slightly this year, even thoughthey anticipate a renewed acceleration in therise of spending on social welfare benefits. Allin all, however, the shortfalls in receipts willNet borrowing in the market by the
central, regional and local authorities
5billion
of which
Period Total SecuritiesLoans
againstborrowers’notes
1MemoitemAcquisitionof publicdebt in-strumentsby non-residents
1999 + 34.8 + 44.8 – 9.7 + 16.2
of which1st qtr + 12.7 + 14.7 – 2.0 + 0.72 n d q t r +2 . 9 +2 . 9 +0 . 0 +1 . 23rd qtr + 10.1 + 15.2 – 5.0 + 11.34th qtr + 9.1 + 11.9 – 2.7 + 3.0
2000
pe + 17.4 + 29.1 – 10.5 ...
of which1st qtr + 14.0 + 7.5 + 6.5 + 0.32nd qtr – 1.3 + 3.8 – 5.1 + 12.43 r d q t r +9 . 1 +4 . 8 +5 . 4 +7 . 54th qtr
pe – 4.3 + 13.1 – 17.3 ...
1Including cash advances and money market borrowing.
Deutsche Bundesbank
6For details see Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report,
August 2000, page 61.Federal
Government
Länder
Governments
Local
authorities

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
54probably push the local authorities into deficit
this year.
Social security funds
In the fourth quarter of 2000 the statutory
pension insurance scheme recorded a sur-plus – which is usual for the final quarter – of33
12billion; this was distinctly smaller than
the surplus of 35 billion generated in the
same period in 1999. Contribution receiptswere pushed down by the lowering of thecontribution rate on January 1, 2000 from19.5% to 19.3% and the reduction of pen-sion contributions paid out of the Federalbudget on behalf of recipients of unemploy-ment assistance in the wake of the Retrench-ment Package 2000. As a result, fourth-quarter receipts did not quite match the cor-
responding prior-year figure. Expenditure onpensions rose by just over 2
12%; this was
caused mainly by an increase in the numberof pension recipients and only to a lesser ex-tent by the 0.6% increase in pensions fromJuly 1, 2000.
In the year 2000 as a whole the wage and
salary earners’ pension insurance scheme re-corded a surplus of 31 billion. This fell 34 bil-
lion short of the 1999 result. However, as thefluctuation reserves had reached their statu-tory minimum level of one month’s expend-iture already at the end of 1999, this relativelysmall positive balance sufficed to adjust thereserves of the statutory pension insuranceinstitutions to the growing expenditure.
On January 1, 2001 the contribution rate was
cut by a further 0.2 percentage point to19.1%. This was made possible partly by thepositive prospects on the employment frontbut more especially by a further increase inthe Federal grants out of revenue from the“ecology tax”.
7On the expenditure side, by
contrast, significant additional costs will beincurred from the middle of the year from theannual adjustment of pension rates. As thingsstand at the moment, that will probablyamount to 2.1% based on the assumption ofQuarterly
DM
billion 5 
billion
+ 6
+ 4
+ 2
0
−2Surplus (+) or
deficit (−)
o56
5452504846
ExpenditureRevenueWage and salary earners’
pension insurance scheme
oFrom 1999 in euro.
Deutsche Bundesbank12+
8+
4+
0
4−110
106
102
9894
90
1998 1999 2000
7A capital gain also accrues from the fact that the up-
ward revaluation of the shares held by the Federal Insur-
ance Office for Salaried Employees (BfA) in the non-profit
public limited company for employee housing “Gemein-
nützige Aktiengesellschaft für Angestelltenheimstätten”
(GAGFAH) amounting to around 312billion is to be
booked as regular income.Statutory
pension
insurance
scheme in
the fourth
quarter ...... and in 2000
as a whole
Outlook for
2001

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
55a rise of 1.6% in average gross wages and
salaries.8
The Federal Government’s pension reformconcept has passed its third reading in theBundestag (lower house of parliament) and,
following the rejection of parts of the bill bytheBundesrat (upper house of parliament),
will now be dealt with by the MediationCommittee. Amendments were made onsome important points compared with theversion of the bill presented in November2000. In particular, the “compensation fac-tor”, which initially was to have applied onlyto new pensions from 2011, has been re-placed by a pension formula under which thepension increases of all pensioners will be alittle smaller.
9In the long term this modifica-
tion implies an increase in the pension level of3 percentage points and higher contributionrates under the pay-as-you-go system; thiswould increase the burden to be shoulderedby future generations somewhat comparedwith the original reform concept (see boxon page 56). Nevertheless, the reform as awhole represents an important step towardsa more strongly mixed system of old age pro-vision.
In the fourth quarter of 2000 the Federal La-
bour Office recorded a slight surplus com-pared with a break-even position in the samequarter in 1999. Whereas receipts grew byjust under 3%, expenditure rose by almost2%. Spending on unemployment benefitswas merely 1
12% less than during the same
period in 1999, which substantially lessenedthe year-on-year decrease. This was chieflydue to the implementation of a ruling by theFederal Constitutional Court, which stipulates
that contributions made on one-off bonuspayments are to be taken into account whencalculating wage substitutes. Almost 5%more was spent on active labour market pol-icy measures, within which there was a fur-ther shift away from job creation schemes(– 7%) and towards vocational training andretraining (+ 9%).
In the year 2000 as a whole the Federal La-
bour Office budget recorded a deficit of al-most 31 billion, which was a considerable
improvement on 1999 (deficit of 33
12bil-
lion). The size of the Federal grant required toplug the gap was likewise – as expected – farsmaller than the almost 34 billion earmarked
in the budget. A rise in receipts by 3
12%
was accompanied by a 212% fall in expend-
iture. Spending on unemployment benefitsdropped by 5%, while expenditure on activelabour market policy measures contractedby 1%.
The Federal Labour Office budget for 2001
puts the topping-up grant required from theFederal Government at just over 3
12billion.
Besides a further sharp rise in revenue (+ 3%compared with the actual out-turn for 2000),an increase in expenditure is also expected(+ 2
12%). That appears realistic as the effects
of the aforementioned Federal Constitutional
8According to the new pension adjustment formula, the
adjustment in 2001 will be based solely on the change in
average gross wages and salaries (less the contributions
paid into the statutory pension insurance scheme) in
2000 compared with the previous year.
9This will be achieved by stipulating that an increase in
the contribution rate to the statutory pension insurance
scheme from 2011 reduces the adjustment more sharply
than before.Pension reform
concept
Federal Labour
Office in
the fourth
quarter ...... and in 2000
as a whole
Outlook for
2001

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
56Changes in the pension reform concept and their impact on the pension “yield”
1See Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report, November
2000, page 59.
Deutsche BundesbankThe pension reform concept approved by the Bundestag
(lower house of parliament) at the end of January
contains several major changes vis-à-vis the original “Bill
promoting private pension plans”;1these include the
abandonment of the “compensation factor”, which
would have placed an increasing burden on new retirees
from 2011. Instead, the Federal Government now plans
to introduce a modified wages-based pension adjust-
ment formula, according to which increases in the
contribution rate to the statutory pension insurance
scheme will lead to smaller pension adjustments thanenvisaged in the original reform concept. In technical
terms this will be achieved by basing pension adjust-
ments not, as before, on the rate of change in the full
amount of average gross wages and salaries but only
90 % of that amount − in each case less the contribution
paid into the statutory pension insurance scheme and a
notional percentage paid into a supplementary private
pension plan. This approach will spread the burden over
old pensions as well as new pensions, thus lessening the
planned reductions in benefits paid to new retirees
while simultaneously maintaining in full the envisaged
downward effect on contribution rates. However, this
amendment of the original concept is expected to push
up the net standard pension level by roughly 3 percent-
age points in the long term, i. e. beyond the year 2030.
As under the original reform scenario, the contribution
rate to the statutory pension scheme should not exceed22 % up to 2030. Thereafter, however, the contribution
rate may now be expected to rise further. By contrast,
the projections under the original concept (with its
“compensation factor”) envisaged keeping contribution
rates stable after 2030, too, as its stronger dampening
effect on expenditure would have been sustained until
all pensions would have been subject to the full impactof the limitation of statutory benefits effective for new
retirees in 2030.
The intergenerational effects of the amendment of the
pension reform concept were again computed using
simplified model calculations of real yields to be expect-
ed by a “model” insured person (an average earner who
pays contributions over 45 years and receives a pension
for 15 years; surviving dependants’ pensions have been
disregarded). This calculation shows that the new reform
concept, too, will result in lower yields for older
generations, whereas future generations will receive a
higher yield than under the no-reform scenario (and
excluding the “demographic factor”). However, a com-
parison between the “compensation factor” and the mo-
dified pension adjustment formula shows that future
generations will benefit less under the new reform con-cept, while the burden to be borne by the older gener-
ations will be reduced. Moreover, there are some shifts
between individual age cohorts.
The “compensation factor” would have posed a burden
especially on individuals retiring from 2011 onwards, i. e.
those borne around 1945 and after. That specific burdenhas now been eliminated and replaced by a gradual
reduction in the general pension level, which will leave
the total yield to be expected by older generations virtu-
ally unaffected. Middle age groups will benefit from
smaller  benefit  cuts  than  under  the “compensation  fac-tor”. Their yield will not decline quite so rapidly, or, in
the case of those born around 1970 and after, will even
increase compared with the previous reform scenario. In
the long term, however, future generations of pension-ers will be burdened by the fact that the benefit level to
be financed under the pay-as-you-go statutory pension
scheme will be roughly 3 percentage points higher than
originally planned. Hence these generations will have
less leeway for additional old-age provision under a
private pension plan (which is assumed to be higher-
yielding), so that their overall yield will be lower in thelong run.
Other key amendments to the original bill relate to: a
uniform special deduction facility for all tax payers of up
to 4 % of the general income ceiling for social security
contributions (instead of 4 % of the actual income on
which each individual pays contributions) for payments
made into a private pension plan; surviving dependants’
pensions (child-related allowances will continue to be
raised in line with pensions); in the case of married
couples, the option to split pension entitlements (to be
granted only if each spouse has accumulated pension en-
titlements over 25 years at least); and technical measures
to facilitate legislation, in particular, to regulate min-
imum pensions and the promotion and certification of
private pension plans in seperate laws.
In the field of company pension schemes, “defined con-
tribution plans” have been introduced as an additional
option. Furthermore, “pension funds” are explicitly men-
tioned as a new external medium of accumulation. The
precise provisions governing investments under private
pension plans and the calculation of the required pre-
mium reserve will be regulated directly by the FederalGovernment or the Federal Ministry of Finance. Also, the
exemption from social security contributions of em-
ployee contributions to company pension schemes will
cease at the end of 2008. That does not apply to em-
ployee entitlements arising from employer contributions.in yield basis points
1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010
Year of birthwith a “compensation factor”
with a modified
adjustment formulaAdvantages (+) and disadvantages (−)
of the pension reform
50+ 50+
40+ 40+
30+ 30+
20+ 20+
10+ 10+
00
10− 10−
20− 20−

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
57Court ruling will continue to make them-
selves felt in a further growth in spending inthe first half of 2001. In addition, the FederalGovernment has transferred to the FederalLabour Office the burden of financing thestructural adjustment measures and the pro-gramme for reintegrating the long-term un-employed, which were previously funded bythe Federal Government. For the rest, thebudget is based on the assumption thatlabour market conditions will ease further.
10
Last year the statutory health insurance fundsprobably just managed to avoid running up adeficit, even though the average contributionrate was largely held steady. For the currentyear, however, various financial risks are ap-parent which will again increase the pressureto raise contribution rates. For example, theFederal Constitutional Court’s ruling on con-tributions made on one-off payments is likelyto lead to higher sickness benefits, too. More-over, the contributions from the Federalbudget to the health insurance funds on be-half of recipients of unemployment assistancehave now likewise been reduced.
11
Outlook for the general governmentsector as a whole
In January the Federal Statistical Office sub-
mitted initial national accounts results for theyear 2000, although a large portion of thefigures for the fourth quarter are estimated.For the general government sector those pro-visional results indicate a deficit amountingto 1.2% of GDP ,
12compared with 1.4% in
1999. In contrast to the position as defined inthe budgetary accounts, the deficit has fallen
because privatisation proceeds and loan re-Quarterly
DM
billion 5 
billion
   0
−1
−2
oSurplus (+) or deficit (−)234567891011121314Expenditure,
total
Revenue 1
Expenditure on...
...unemployment benefits and
   short-time working benefits
...vocational
   training 2Federal Labour Office
1Excluding Federal Government liquidity
assistance. — 2Including job creation meas-
ures. — oFrom 1999 in euro.
Deutsche Bundesbank0
2−
4−28
26
24
22
20
1816
14
1210
8
6
4
1998 1999 2000
10Last year the number of unemployed fell by 210,000
on an annual average and this year the figure is expected
to decrease by a further 270,000.
11Previously contributions to the health insurance funds on
behalf of recipients of unemployment assistance were cal-
c u l a t e do nt h eb a s i so f8 0 %o ft h e i rl a s tg r o s sp a y .A sf r o m
the start of 2001, this percentage was lowered to 58%.
12The proceeds of the UMTS auction are not included.
Inclusion of this income, which in the official national ac-
counts is recorded negatively on the expenditure side (ac-
quisitions less disposals of non-financial non-produced
assets), yields a surplus of 1.3% of GDP .Statutory
health
insurance funds
Provisional
national
accounts result
for 2000

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
58payments are not counted as receipts in the
national accounts, with the result that theirdecrease in 2000 did not have a deficit-widening effect. Expenditure rose by 2%.Whereas personnel costs and interest chargeswere more or less unchanged and labour mar-ket-related spending went down, expenditureon old age pensions, in particular, increasedat a faster-than-average pace, mainly due toa sharp increase in new pensions. The indem-nification payments to forced and slave la-bourers dating back to the pre-1945 era alsohad an impact. The general governmentspending ratio fell by 0.3 percentage point onbalance to 48.7%. Revenue rose by justunder 2
12%. While tax receipts grew at a dis-
tinctly faster rate, the income from social se-curity contributions expanded only moderate-ly, mainly on account of the lowering of thecontribution rate to the statutory pension in-surance scheme. The substantial decline inthe Bundesbank profit likewise depressedoverall revenue.
All in all, the underlying position of German
public finance seems to have improved some-what in 2000 compared with 1999. Althoughthe decline in the deficit ratio was principallyattributable to the favourable macroeconom-ic setting last year, it should also be remem-bered that the indemnification payments towartime forced and slave labourers incurredin 2000 were a one-off expense. Moreover,the 1999 result had been boosted by tempor-arily high surpluses accruing to the statutorypension insurance scheme (necessitated bythe legal requirement to replenish the fluctu-ation reserves).In 2001 the government deficit ratio will
widen considerably because the substantialrevenue losses ensuing from the tax reformwill not be offset by expenditure savings.From the present perspective the deficitmight exceed 1
12% of GDP; a key role will
be played not least by the trend in tax re-ceipts, which was rather unfavourable at theend of last year.
Following the increase this year caused by the
tax reform, the deficit ratio is to be reducedprogressively in the coming years. After theFederal Government had set out its medium-term fiscal policy objectives in October lastyear with its updated stability programme,
13
the Federal Ministry of Finance presented itslong-term fiscal policy strategy in November inthe form of some “Guiding Principles of FiscalPolicy”
14(for details see box on page 59). In
particular, the Guiding Principles emphasisethe need to maintain the consolidation efforts.The first objective is to reduce the governmentdebt, which is imperative given the crushingburden of interest payments but also the bur-den arising from demographic changes. Thesecond objective is to create scope subse-quently to cut the taxes and social securityratio, which is still too high, with a view toimproving the overall prospects for growth.
The basic orientation of German fiscal policy
outlined in the programme is in keeping withthe financial and macroeconomic require-
13For details see Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Re-
port, November 2000, page 61f.
14Federal Ministry of Finance, Guiding Principles of Fiscal
Policy – Seven pointers for future-oriented, equitable fis-
cal policy in a European context, Economic and Financial
Reports, 2000.Outlook for
2001
Medium and
long-term
fiscal policy
objectives
A dependable
fiscal policy
framework is
an important
national
competitve
advantage

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
59The “Guiding Principles of Fiscal Policy” of the Federal Ministry of Finance
The “Guiding Principles” published by the
Federal Ministry of Finance in November 2000are intended to set a dependable orientationframework for future fiscal policy decisions,extending beyond the medium-term horizonof the stability programme. They have twomain objectives:
– “Reduce debt for sustainable public fi-
nances and greater equity between thegenerations”;
– “Promote growth and employment by a
sustainable and equitable system of taxesand fiscal charges”.
Action guidelines have been drawn up for the
main fiscal policy areas, some of which arebased on existing binding provisions (such asthe European Stability and Growth Pact andArticle 115 of the German Constitution). Theyinclude the following:
– Government activity is to be regularly re-
viewed and where necessary restructured;the potential for privatisation is to be sys-tematically exploited and the linear staff-cuts of 1.5% a year in central governmentare to be implemented.
– A balanced Federal budget is to be sub-
mitted in 2006. Subsequently surpluses areto be generated in order to reduce govern-ment debt. Surpluses (amounting to 1% ofGDP) are likewise to be generated by gen-eral government in times of normal cyclicalactivity and used for debt redemption.
– More stringent criteria than in the past are
to be applied to any borrowing to financepublic investment. Loans are to be re-deemed within the lifetime of the assetsfinanced.
– In the Financial Planning Council the Fed-
eral Government will call for the locking-inof an expenditure growth ceiling of 2%until general government surpluses havebeen attained.
– Spending on physical and human capital is
to play a greater role within the overallexpenditure framework.– The reduction of subsidies is to be acceler-
ated and any new assistance is to begranted for a limited period only and atdiminishing rates.
– The social benefits system is to be reviewed
in the light of the employment target, anddecisive action is to be taken to counterfraudulent claims.
– Once the tax reform has been implement-
ed and general government surpluses havebeen attained, the resulting greater scopefor fiscal policy action is to be used in partto further cut taxes and social levies. In ad-dition, tax law is to be streamlined.
– The system of vertical and horizontal finan-
cial transfers between the different levelsof government, while maintaining theprinciple of solidarity between richer andpoorer regions, is to foster adequate finan-cial self-responsibility on the part of eachindividual authority.
– Coordination between the various levels of
government is to be improved, particularlywith a view to complying with obligationsat the EU level.
These Guiding Principles are fundamentally
suited to giving fiscal policy a clear basic or-ientation and to stabilising expectations in re-spect of a dependable and sustainable fiscalpolicy. However, the details of the budgetaryand tax policy measures will have to bespelled out by fiscal policy makers in the fu-ture. The credibility of the long-term objec-tives also depends on meeting the short andmedium-term targets. Since medium-term fi-nancial plans were first inaugurated in the1960s, the set targets have been frequentlymissed at all budgetary levels, especially inthe last few planning years, as fiscal policymakers failed to implement the consolidationaims announced in the plans. In the light ofthese past problems, it is desirable to anchorthe proposed rules in an institutional form.
Deutsche Bundesbank

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
60ments and therefore deserves support. The
medium and longer-term fiscal policy frame-work and the public confidence that it canengender in the government’s scope for ac-tion are a key criterion determining the pri-vate sector’s future investment and consump-tion decisions. The long-term sustainability ofpublic finance should be gauged especially bythe future outlook for government debt andthe burden of taxes and social security contri-butions. In view of the present level of gov-ernment debt and the burden of taxes andsocial security contributions as well as thedemographic problems in this country, it iscrucial for fiscal policy makers to give a clearand timely signal that they are taking meas-ures to deal with the problems.The key requirement now is to underpin the
fiscal policy objectives through concretemeasures. An important start has been madetowards this end with the retrenchment pack-age and the tax reform. Nevertheless, the as-pired goals continue to require a rigorous re-view of government activity and a persistentcheck on government spending. Public confi-dence in the long-term fiscal policy strategywill be fostered only if the government’s shortand medium-term financial plans are upheld.In this process care must be taken to defendthe basic orientation of fiscal policy againstthe vested interests of individual groups orsections of the population.
Implementation
is key fiscal
policy task

Statistical
SectionDeutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
1*

ContentsI. Key economic data for European
monetary union
1. Monetary developments and interest
rates 6*
2. Foreign trade and payments 6*3. General economic indicators 7*
II. Overall monetary survey in the
European monetary union
1. The money stock and its counterparts 8*
2. Consolidated balance sheet of mon-
etary financial institutions (MFIs) 10*
3. Banking system’s liquidity position 14*
III. Consolidated financial statement
of the Eurosystem
1. Assets 16*
2. Liabilities 18*
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary
financial institutions (excluding theBundesbank) in Germany 20*
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks
(MFIs) in Germany, by category ofbanks 24*
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-à-vis residents 26*
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents 28*Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
2*

5. Lending of banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) 30*
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic enterprises and individuals,housing loans, sectors of economicactivity 32*
7. Deposits of domestic
non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs)in Germany 34*
8. Deposits of domestic individuals and
non-commercial organisations atbanks (MFIs) in Germany 36*
9. Deposits of domestic public author-
ities at banks (MFIs) in Germany, bycreditor group 36*
10. Savings deposits and bank savings
bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germanysold to non-banks (non-MFIs) 38*
11. Debt securities and money market
paper outstanding of banks (MFIs)in Germany 38*
12. Building and loan associations (MFIs)
in Germany 39*
13. Assets and liabilities of the foreign
branches and foreign subsidiaries ofGerman banks (MFIs) 40*
V. Minimum reserves
1. Reserve ratios 42*
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany up
to the end of 1998 42*
3. Reserve maintenance in the Euro-
pean monetary union 42*VI. Interest rates
1. ECB interest rates 43*
2. Discount and lombard rates of the
Bundesbank 43*
3. Base rate per Discount Rate Transi-
tion Act 43*
4. Eurosystem monetary policy opera-
tions allotted through tenders 43*
5. Money market rates, by month 44*6. Euro area retail bank interest rates 44*7. Lending and deposit rates of banks
(MFIs) in Germany 45*
8. Selected central bank rates abroad 47*9. Money market rates abroad 47*
VII. Capital market
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities
and shares in Germany 48*
2. Sales of debt securities issued by
borrowers domiciled in Germany 49*
3. Outstanding amount of debt secur-
ities issued by borrowers domiciledin Germany 50*
4. Circulation of shares issued by resi-
dents of Germany 50*
5. Yields and indices on German
securities 51*
6. Sales and purchases of investment
fund certificates in Germany 51*Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
3*

VIII. Public finance in Germany
1. Finances of the public sector 52*
2. Finances of the Federal
Government, Länder Governmentsand local authorities 52*
3. Finances of the Government
in the national accounts 53*
4. Tax revenue of the central,
regional and local authorities 53*
5. Tax revenue, by type 54*6. Individual taxes of the Federal
Government, Länder Governmentsand local authorities 54*
7. Indebtedness of the public sector 55*8. Changes in public sector
indebtedness 57*
9. Loans raised by public authorities
against borrowers’ notes 57*
10. Indebtedness of the Federal
Government 58*
11. Federal finance on a cash basis 58*12. Receipts, expenditure and assets of
the wage and salary earners’pension insurance funds 59*
13. Receipts and expenditure of the
Federal Labour Office 59*
IX. Economic conditions
1. Origin and expenditure of
domestic product, distribution ofnational income 60*
2. Output in the producing sector 61*3. Orders received by the
manufacturing sector 62*
4. Orders received by construction 63*5. Retail turnover 63*6. Labour market 64*7. Prices 65*8. Households’ income 66*
9. Pay rates and actual earnings 66*
X. Foreign trade and payments
1. Major items of the balance of pay-
ments of the European monetaryunion 67*
2. Major items of the balance of pay-
ments of the Federal Republic ofGermany 68*
3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the
Federal Republic of Germany, bygroup of countries and country 69*
4. Services and factor income of the
Federal Republic of Germany 70*
5. Current transfers of the Federal
Republic of Germany 70*
6. Capital transfers 70*7. Financial account of the Federal
Republic of Germany 71*
8. External position of the Bundesbank 72*9. External position of the Bundesbank
in the European monetary union 72*
10. Assets and liabilities of enterprises
in Germany (other than banks)vis-à-vis non-residents 73*
11. Deutsche Mark exchange rates for
the national currencies of the EMUcountries, the Deutsche Mark valueof the ECU and euro conversionrates 74*
12. Exchange rates of the Deutsche
Mark and the euro against othercurrencies 74*
13. Effective exchange rates of the euro
and selected foreign currencies 75*Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
4*

Abbreviations and symbols
eEstimated
pProvisional
pePartly estimated
rRevised
...Figure available at a later date
.Figure unknown or not to be published
or not meaningful
0Less than 0.5 but more than nil
–Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to round-
ing.Note
From January 2001 the Bundesbank is mak-
ing available on the Internet, for download-ing, a selection of the time series that arepublished in the Monthly Reports and theStatistical Supplements.Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
5*

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
 I. Key economic data for European monetary union
 
1. Monetary developments and interest rates
  
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions  1 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
 MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
enterprises Monetary pean govern-
 MFI lending, and capital 3−month ment bonds
M1 M2 M3 total individuals formation  2 EONIA  3, 5 EURIBOR  4, 5 outstanding  6 
Period Change from previous year,in % % p. a. as a monthly average
1999         June 11.6 6.4 5.6 8.5 11.2 5.6 2.56 2.63 4.5
         July 14.1 7.8 6.0 8.4 11.1 5.8 2.52 2.68 4.8
         Aug. 12.9 7.1 5.8 8.4 11.1 5.7 2.44 2.70 5.0         Sep. 12.8 7.0 6.1 8.5 10.6 5.9 2.43 2.73 5.2
         Oct. 13.0 7.1 5.8 8.9 10.6 7.2 2.50 3.38 5.5
         Nov. 11.8 6.5 6.2 9.2 10.9 7.5 2.94 3.47 5.2         Dec. 10.1 5.3 6.2 8.8 10.4 8.1 3.04 3.45 5.3
2000         Jan. 9.3 4.2 5.3 8.0 9.5 7.5 3.04 3.34 5.7
         Feb. 10.7 5.3 6.2 8.4 10.5 7.6 3.28 3.54 5.7         Mar. 10.1 5.1 6.6 8.3 10.9 7.3 3.51 3.75 5.5
         Apr. 11.4 5.5 6.7 8.6 11.4 7.2 3.69 3.93 5.4
         May 8.7 4.7 6.0 8.1 11.2 7.4 3.92 4.36 5.6         June 7.1 4.3 5.4 7.1 9.9 6.8 4.29 4.50 5.4
         July 6.9 3.7 5.2 7.0 9.8 6.9 4.31 4.58 5.4
         Aug. 7.1 4.2 5.7 7.0 10.1 7.2 4.42 4.78 5.4         Sep. 6.2 4.1 5.3 7.1 10.9 6.9 4.59 4.85 5.5
         Oct. 5.8 3.7 5.2 6.5 10.9 6.6 4.76 5.04 5.4
         Nov. 5.0 3.7 5.0 5.9 10.3 6.2 4.83 5.09 5.3         Dec. 5.5 3.6 4.9 6.3 10.3 4.5 4.83 4.94 5.1
2001         Jan. ... ... ... ... ... ... 4.76 4.77 5.0
1 Source: ECB. — 2 Longer-term liabilities to euro area non-MFIs. — also footnotes to table VI.5., p. 44*. — 6 GDP-weighted yield on ten-year
3Euro OverNight Index Average. — 4 Euro InterBank Offered Rate. — 5 See government bonds; excluding Luxembourg. 
 
 
2. Foreign trade and payments  * 
  
 
Selected items of the EMU balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1 
Current account Capital account  2 Effective exchange rate  4 
of which: Direct Securities Credit Monetary
Balance Trade balance Balance investment transactions reserves Dollar rate nominal real  5 transactions  3 
Period until the end of 1998 ECU million, from 1999 euro million Euro/US-$ 1st q 1999=100
1999         June + 4,720 + 10,643 + 12,367 − 15,488 + 13,638 + 13,171 + 1,046 1.0378 94.7 94.7
         July + 2,307 + 13,610 + 1,553 − 3,081 + 8,589 − 2,905 − 1,049 1.0353 94.8 95.2
         Aug. − 1,828 + 4,632 + 15,834 − 9,233 + 6,148 + 18,555 + 365 1.0604 95.4 95.6         Sep. − 3,267 + 4,970 − 18,806 + 95 + 13,535 − 33,095 + 660 1.0501 93.6 93.4
         Oct. − 482 + 9,109 + 8,449 − 9,330 − 16,711 + 34,175 + 315 1.0706 94.4 94.2
         Nov. − 2,103 + 6,260 + 1,458 − 17,018 + 13,102 + 5,382 − 8 1.0338 92.0 92.0         Dec. − 3,871 + 5,540 − 7,316 − 20,286 + 560 + 13,255 − 845 1.0110 90.1 90.4
2000         Jan. − 9,026 − 507 + 19,185 + 833 − 6,106 + 26,673 − 2,215 1.0137 90.2 90.8
         Feb. − 26 + 4,217 − 1,885 + 146,030 − 151,027 + 2,836 + 276 0.9834 89.2 89.8         Mar. + 1,188 + 5,566 + 30,460 + 1,132 − 33,003 + 61,838 + 493 0.9643 87.7 88.3
         Apr. − 5,873 + 4,338 + 2,733 + 1,098 − 3,758 + 5,146 + 247 0.9470 86.1 86.6
         May − 105 + 4,407 + 10,505 − 8,667 + 2,235 + 15,686 + 1,251 0.9060 84.5 85.0         June − 627 + 5,915 − 16,166 − 10,583 + 58,181 − 66,103 + 2,339 0.9492 87.4 88.1
         July − 2,240 + 8,076 − 12,042 − 24,562 − 13,340 + 26,286 − 427 0.9397 86.9 88.0
         Aug. − 3,946 + 4,056 + 579 − 41,066 + 12,687 + 27,799 + 1,158 0.9041 84.6 85.5         Sep. + 72 + 5,721 − 2,543 − 28,641 + 4,575 + 17,778 + 3,744 0.8721 82.8 83.6
         Oct. − 128 + 8,194 − 6,796 − 15,676 − 3,898 + 11,789 + 989 0.8552 81.6 82.4
         Nov. − 2,876 + 4,632 − 8,977 − 9,543 − 8,163 + 929 + 7,800 0.8564 82.3 83.3         Dec. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0.8973 85.4 86.4
2001         Jan. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0.9383 89.2 90.5
 
*  Source: ECB. — 1  See also tables X.12 and 13, p. 74−75. — 2  Series to observations. — 3  Including financial derivatives. — 4  Against
which data from January 1999 are not closely comparable with earlier 13 countries. — 5  Based on consumer prices. 
6* I. Key economic data for European monetary union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
I.  Key economic data for European monetary union 
 
3. General economic indicators
  
                   
Period Belgium Germany Finland France Greece Ireland Italy Luxembourg Austria Portugal Spain EMU 7) Netherlands
Real gross domestic product 1
1997 3.4 1.4 6.3 1.9 3.4 10.7 1.8 7.3 3.8 1.3 3.8 3.9 2.3
1998 2.4 2.1 5.5 3.1 3.7 8.6 1.5 5.0 4.1 3.3 3.8 4.3 2.71999 2.7 1.6 4.0 2.9 3.3 9.8 1.4 7.5 3.9 2.8 3.0 4.0 2.5
1999         2nd qtr 1.2 1.4 4.4 2.8 8.0 1.0 3.4 1.4 3.3 4.5 2.1
         3rd qtr 3.6 1.6 3.5 3.1 10.5 1.6 3.9 3.8 2.5 3.5 2.6         4th qtr 5.1 2.4 3.9 3.4 12.1 2.1 4.9 4.0 2.6 4.0 3.3
2000         1st qtr 5.4 3.6 5.5 4.0 11.4 3.1 4.9 4.1 3.2 4.6 3.5
         2nd qtr 4.6 3.3 4.8 3.1 12.2 2.6 4.1 4.0 2.7 4.5 3.7         3rd qtr 3.1 2.8 5.6 2.5 ... 2.5 3.3 1.9 3.4 3.7 3.3
Industrial production 1, 2
1998 3.4 4.2 8.1 5.1 7.1 15.3 1.2 −0.1 2.4 8.2 5.7 5.4 4.2
1999 0.9 1.6 5.5 2.0 3.9 10.5 −0.1 11.5 2.2 6.0 3.0 2.6 1.9
2000 5.4 6 6.7 11.0 ... ... ... ... ... 2.9 ... 0.5 4.1 ...
1999         3rd qtr 1.4 2.0 3.8 2.3 5.2 12.4 1.4 22.1 2.6 4.6 2.8 3.5 2.5
         4th qtr 5.0 3.7 6.9 3.8 2.2 12.1 3.4 23.6 3.3 10.6 3.9 3.4 4.2
2000         1st qtr 5.7 5.6 7.5 6.3 5.4 4.3 2.5 10.3 1.8 11.3 −1.0 8.4 4.8
         2nd qtr 6.3 6.8 9.5 2.8 2.8 15.5 6.5 7.2 3.7 11.6 −2.1 5.0 6.0
         3rd qtr 5.2 7.1 13.0 3.2 ... ... 5.2 0.2 2.9 8.4 3.0 1.8 5.8         4th qtr 4.76 7.2 14.0 ... ... ... ... ... 3.2 ... 2.3 0.9 ...
Capacity utilisation 3
1998 82.7 85.5 88.9 83.8 75.8 76.6 78.5 88.0 85.3 83.7 81.4 80.3 82.9
1999 80.9 84.0 86.1 85.3 75.7 75.9 76.0 84.9 84.0 81.9 80.8 79.7 81.8
2000 84.0 85.9 86.8 87.5 78.1 78.6 78.8 87.8 84.7 84.5 81.2 80.6 83.81999         4th qtr 81.5 84.2 86.4 84.9 77.2 78.8 75.8 86.3 83.9 83.1 81.1 78.5 81.9
2000         1st qtr 82.9 85.0 87.0 86.5 78.2 76.5 77.4 86.8 84.7 83.4 81.7 80.8 82.9
         2nd qtr 84.5 86.1 86.5 86.3 78.0 77.7 79.1 87.9 84.6 84.6 80.3 80.5 83.6         3rd qtr 84.2 86.0 87.0 87.9 77.8 78.5 78.9 88.0 85.0 85.0 82.0 80.3 83.9         4th qtr 84.5 86.3 86.7 89.1 78.4 81.5 79.8 88.3 84.6 85.0 80.9 80.8 84.6
2001         1st qtr 84.8 86.9 87.3 88.8 78.2 79.8 79.5 89.2 85.2 84.2 82.5 80.1 84.4
Unemployment rate 4
1998 9.5 9.4 11.4 11.8 10.9 7.6 11.8 2.7 4.0 4.5 5.2 18.8 10.9
1999 9.1 8.8 10.2 11.2 11.7 5.7 11.3 2.4 3.3 3.8 4.5 15.9 10.0
2000 8.5 8.3 9.8 9.5 ... 4.5 10.5 ... ... 3.4 4.2 14.2 9.12000         June 8.5 8.4 9.7 9.5 4.5 10.6 2.2 2.6 3.3 4.1 14.0 9.0
         July 8.5 8.3 9.6 9.4 4.5 10.5 2.2 2.5 3.2 4.2 13.8 9.0
         Aug. 8.6 8.3 9.6 9.4 4.4 10.3 2.2 2.6 3.2 4.2 14.0 9.0         Sep. 8.6 8.3 9.6 9.3 4.3 10.2 2.2 2.7 3.2 4.2 13.8 8.9
         Oct. 8.5 8.2 9.5 9.1 4.2 10.1 2.1 2.8 3.2 4.2 13.7 8.8
         Nov. 8.4 8.2 9.4 8.9 4.1 ... 2.1 2.8 3.2 4.2 13.6 8.7         Dec. 8.3 8.1 9.4 8.8 4.1 ... ... ... 3.3 4.3 13.7 8.7
Harmonised index of consumer prices 1
1998 0.9 0.6 1.4 0.7 4.5 2.1 2.0 1.0 1.8 0.8 2.2 1.8 1.11999 1.1 0.6 1.3 0.6 2.1 2.5 1.7 1.0 2.0 0.5 2.2 2.2 1.1
2000 2.9 2.1 3.0 1.8 2.9 5.3 2.6 3.8 2.3 2.0 2.8 3.5 2.32000         June 3.0 2.0 3.1 1.9 2.2 5.4 2.7 4.4 2.5 2.4 2.8 3.5 2.4
         July 3.2 2.0 2.9 2.0 2.6 5.9 2.6 4.7 2.8 2.0 3.3 3.7 2.4
         Aug. 3.5 1.8 2.9 2.0 2.9 5.7 2.6 3.7 2.5 1.9 3.6 3.6 2.3         Sep. 3.9 2.6 3.4 2.3 3.0 5.5 2.6 4.2 2.9 2.3 3.6 3.7 2.8
         Oct. 3.7 2.4 3.4 2.1 3.8 6.0 2.7 4.3 3.2 2.2 3.7 4.0 2.7
         Nov. 3.7 2.6 3.3 2.2 4.0 6.0 2.9 4.5 2.9 2.3 3.6 4.1 2.9         Dec. 3.0 2.3 2.9 1.7 3.7 4.6 2.8 4.3 2.9 1.8 3.8 4.0 2.6
2001         Jan. ... 2.2 2.9 ... ... 3.9 2.7 ... 4.5 ... ... 3.8 ...
General government financial balance 5
1997 −1.9 −2.7 −1.5 −3.0 −4.0 0.7 −2.7 3.4 −1.1 −1.7 −2.6 −3.2 −2.6
1998 −0.9 −2.1 1.3 −2.7 −2.5 2.1 −2.8 3.7 −0.7 −2.3 −2.3 −2.6 −2.1
1999 −0.7 −1.4 1.9 −1.8 −1.8 1.9 −1.9 4.4 1.0 −2.1 −2.0 −1.1 −1.3
General government debt 5
1997 125.4 60.9 54.1 59.3 108.3 65.1 119.8 6.0 70.0 64.5 59.4 66.9 74.7
1998 119.6 60.7 48.7 59.7 105.5 55.0 116.2 6.4 66.6 64.0 55.7 65.1 73.01999 116.1 61.1 46.6 58.9 104.6 50.1 115.1 6.0 62.9 65.2 55.8 63.7 72.1
Sources: National data, European Commission, Eurostat, European persons in civilian employment; seasonally adjusted. —5  As a percen-
Central Bank. Latest data are partly based on press reports and are tage of GDP; Maastricht Treaty definition, ESA95. —6  Adjusted in advance
provisional. —1  Annual percentage changes; GDP of Portugal and EMU are by the Federal Statistical Office by way of estimates to the results of the
calculated from seasonally adjusted data. —2  Manufacturing, mining, gas Quarterly Production Survey for the fourth quarter (manufacturing sector in
and electricity; adjusted for working-day variations (except France and Germany: + 1.2 %). —7  Excluding Greece, Capacitiy utilisation: re-
Spain). —3  Manufacturing, in %; seasonally adjusted; data are collected calculation including Greece. 
in January, April, July and October. —4  Standardised, as a percentage of
7*I.  Key economic data for European monetary union 

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
 
1. The money stock and its counterparts*)
  
  
 
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II. Net claims on III. Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area  3 non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises Public
and individuals authorities Debt
Deposits Deposits securities
Liabil- with an at agreed with
Claims ities to agreed notice of maturitieson non- non-euro- maturity over of over 2 Capital
of which: of which: euro-area area of over 3 months years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total  
4 6 (net)  7 reserves 2 years  4,5 Securities Securities
 European monetary union (euro billion) 1
 
1999         July 13.1 37.7 −0.2 −24.6 −16.7 9.7 −35.8 −45.5 12.4 5.3 −2.3 4.4 5.0
         Aug. 7.3 1.7 7.8 5.6 9.8 −39.4 −44.3 − 4.9 9.1 5.7 −0.9 3.5 0.7
         Sep. 57.6 28.5 −12.7 29.1 24.0 15.7 20.0 4.3 29.5 2.2 0.2 21.3 5.8
         Oct. 75.3 43.8 −1.6 31.6 22.5 −33.8 21.1 55.0 26.2 6.2 −0.6 13.0 7.6
         Nov. 94.4 77.7 16.6 16.8 3.9 −11.0 21.9 32.9 16.8 8.1 0.1 5.4 3.3
         Dec. 17.2 54.6 18.9 −37.5 −31.7 8.6 −80.9 −89.6 41.1 11.7 2.1 −2.6 29.8
2000         Jan. 51.0 44.7 4.6 6.3 13.8 −46.7 20.9 67.6 18.4 1.6 −0.9 −0.8 18.4
         Feb. 60.5 55.6 19.1 4.9 9.3 7.6 33.9 26.3 19.0 1.0 1.0 11.7 5.4         Mar. 94.6 97.0 29.5 −2.4 −6.9 −75.8 31.2 107.1 15.5 −2.0 0.8 2.3 14.5
         Apr. 51.8 70.8 17.1 −19.0 −21.3 −22.1 13.7 35.8 22.9 −0.8 −0.4 14.8 9.3
         May 35.4 49.3 20.5 −13.9 −7.5 −15.4 11.5 26.9 13.3 1.3 1.2 7.8 3.0
         June 7.4 26.0 −34.9 −18.6 −18.1 86.1 7.1 −79.0 9.8 −1.0 1.5 13.9 −4.6
         July 7.9 35.9 12.3 −28.0 −26.7 −14.1 − 6.1 8.0 19.1 −0.8 1.4 3.5 15.1
         Aug. 1.5 19.7 4.0 −18.2 −9.6 − 1.1 3.9 5.0 18.6 1.5 1.7 8.5 6.9
         Sep. 69.5 76.6 5.1 −7.1 −3.0 −23.9 17.5 41.4 23.0 −2.7 2.2 2.7 20.8
         Oct. 35.6 49.0 10.4 −13.5 −15.4 −10.7 9.5 20.2 17.6 −0.1 0.8 11.0 5.9
         Nov. 54.9 49.1 6.9 5.8 −1.4 0.4 8.0 7.6 3.1 −5.8 2.7 −5.7 11.9
         Dec. 45.3 60.8 9.4 −15.5 −23.6 7.6 − 2.3 − 9.9 −18.1 8.1 2.2 −1.8 −26.7
 German contribution (euro billion) 2
1999         July 7.8 5.8 0.5 1.9 3.0 22.6 24.7 2.0 5.3 2.7 −2.1 3.5 1.2
         Aug. 4.4 6.2 1.4 −1.8 −1.0 −27.0 −13.3 13.8 8.2 3.1 −0.9 5.5 0.4
         Sep. 23.9 15.5 1.7 8.4 8.0 5.5 0.1 −5.5 19.8 1.9 0.7 15.8 1.4
         Oct. 27.3 10.5 0.5 16.8 6.3 −10.3 2.5 12.8 5.0 2.0 −0.6 1.3 2.2
         Nov. 23.1 18.7 5.7 4.4 0.9 −23.8 1.4 25.2 10.2 3.3 0.1 5.6 1.1
         Dec. 18.3 31.3 11.2 −13.0 −5.2 − 5.7 −1.8 3.9 4.4 3.4 2.1 −5.1 4.1
2000         Jan. 17.7 5.3 1.7 12.4 10.7 −15.3 2.0 17.3 −3.4 2.4 −0.9 −7.2 2.2
         Feb. 15.0 14.0 5.7 1.1 5.8 4.7 18.5 13.9 6.1 1.9 1.0 2.4 0.8         Mar. 38.7 43.0 31.3 −4.3 −5.7 −25.3 7.9 33.2 5.8 −0.1 0.8 0.5 4.6
         Apr. 15.2 15.2 5.6 −0.0 −1.7 − 7.3 10.5 17.8 11.3 0.6 −0.4 10.1 1.1
         May 12.9 16.2 8.2 −3.3 −3.7 2.0 12.7 10.7 9.6 0.2 1.3 6.9 1.2
         June −32.2 −25.3 −32.2 −7.0 −2.8 12.5 −21.5 −34.0 4.6 0.9 1.5 0.6 1.6
         July 1.4 2.6 3.6 −1.3 −3.5 15.8 14.5 −1.3 10.7 0.5 1.3 8.4 0.5
         Aug. 8.8 10.9 1.6 −2.1 −0.2 − 5.8 5.1 10.9 6.2 1.4 1.7 2.6 0.6
         Sep. 6.5 19.2 0.9 −12.7 −3.4 − 4.9 −0.2 4.7 5.9 −1.3 2.2 −0.3 5.4
         Oct. 12.0 4.3 0.9 7.7 3.4 − 2.2 14.6 16.8 3.9 0.4 0.7 1.9 1.0
         Nov. 15.2 13.6 4.2 1.6 1.0 5.1 17.3 12.2 −8.3 −1.9 1.6 −8.7 0.7
         Dec. 11.6 14.1 5.4 −2.5 −3.2 10.6 6.1 −4.6 4.0 1.9 2.6 −4.2 3.7
 German contribution (DM billion) 2
1999         July 15.2 11.4 1.0 3.8 5.8 44.3 48.2 4.0 10.3 5.3 −4.1 6.9 2.3
         Aug. 8.6 12.1 2.6 −3.5 −2.0 −52.9 −25.9 26.9 16.0 6.0 −1.7 10.8 0.9
         Sep. 46.8 30.3 3.3 16.5 15.6 10.8 0.2 −10.7 38.6 3.6 1.4 30.9 2.7
         Oct. 53.3 20.5 1.0 32.8 12.3 −20.2 4.8 25.0 9.7 4.0 −1.2 2.6 4.4
         Nov. 45.2 36.6 11.2 8.6 1.7 −46.6 2.7 49.3 19.9 6.5 0.3 11.0 2.2
         Dec. 35.7 61.2 21.8 −25.5 −10.2 −11.1 −3.5 7.6 8.6 6.6 4.1 −10.1 8.0
2000         Jan. 34.7 10.4 3.2 24.3 21.0 −29.9 3.9 33.8 −6.7 4.7 −1.7 −14.1 4.4
         Feb. 29.4 27.3 11.2 2.1 11.3 9.2 36.3 27.1 11.8 3.7 2.0 4.7 1.5         Mar. 75.8 84.2 61.1 −8.4 −11.1 −49.4 15.4 64.8 11.4 −0.3 1.6 1.0 9.1
         Apr. 29.7 29.7 11.0 −0.0 −3.3 −14.3 20.6 34.8 22.2 1.1 −0.9 19.7 2.1
         May 25.3 31.7 15.9 −6.5 −7.3 3.9 24.9 21.0 18.8 0.4 2.5 13.5 2.4
         June −63.1 −49.4 −63.0 −13.6 −5.4 24.4 −42.1 −66.5 9.1 1.7 2.9 1.2 3.2
         July 2.7 5.1 7.0 −2.5 −6.9 30.8 28.3 −2.5 20.9 1.0 2.5 16.4 0.9
         Aug. 17.2 21.4 3.2 −4.2 −0.4 −11.4 10.0 21.4 12.2 2.6 3.2 5.2 1.1
         Sep. 12.7 37.6 1.8 −24.9 −6.7 − 9.6 −0.4 9.2 11.6 −2.6 4.2 −0.6 10.6
         Oct. 23.4 8.4 1.8 15.0 6.7 − 4.2 28.5 32.8 7.7 0.7 1.4 3.7 1.9
         Nov. 29.8 26.6 8.1 3.2 2.0 10.1 33.9 23.9 −16.3 −3.7 3.2 −17.1 1.3
         Dec. 22.7 27.5 10.6 −4.8 −6.3 20.8 11.9 −8.9 7.8 3.8 5.1 −8.3 7.3
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of instead of bill holdings. —4For the German contribution: up to December
monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (table II.2); statistical breaks have been 1998, including liabilities arising from loans on a trust basis. —5For the
eliminated from the flow figures. —1Source: ECB. —2Owing to changes in German contribution: from 1999 including deposits under savings and loan
the definitions of the items and differences in the range of reporting contracts (see table IV.12). —6For the German contribution: up to the end
institutions, the figures are not comparable with those published for of 1998 including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see alsoGermany up to end of 1998. —3For the German contribution: up to footnote 5). —7Excluding MFIs portfolios; for the German contribution:
December 1998, including loans on a trust basis and bill-based lending excluding German MFIs portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro
8*II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
    
 
VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  9 
Money stock M2
Money
Money stock M1 market Debt
Deposits fund securitieswith an Deposits with certificates
IV. De- agreed at agreed and money maturities
posits of Currency maturity notice of Repo- market of up to    
V. Other in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac- paper 2 years    central gov-
ernments factors  
8 Total Total Total lation  10 tions  14 (net)  7 (net)  7    Period deposits  11 2 years  11,12  months  11,13  
European monetary union (euro billion) 1
 
10.0 −12.7 13.1 20.6 1.6 8.0 − 6.5 14.3 4.8 − 2.7 − 7.8 2.9 1999          July
2.9 −22.7 −21.4 −34.4 −36.3 − 5.5 −30.8 2.0 − 0.1 − 1.2 13.1 1.1          Aug.
− 4.7 34.1 14.4 9.0 25.4 0.9 24.5 −13.4 − 3.0 − 2.0 6.5 0.9          Sep.
1.8 − 3.8 17.4 16.1 5.8 2.3 3.6 12.2 − 1.9 − 3.2 6.4 − 1.9          Oct.
11.0 11.0 44.6 25.0 32.7 0.5 32.2 − 2.5 − 5.2 1.1 17.8 0.7          Nov.
− 4.1 −91.3 79.9 96.0 52.9 19.5 33.4 20.5 22.5 −14.4 −14.7 13.1          Dec.
− 8.3 − 9.3 3.6 − 6.1 10.4 −16.9 27.3 −17.6 1.1 10.7 0.8 − 1.9 2000         Jan.
10.9 15.4 22.8 − 4.4 −10.1 − 1.8 − 8.2 16.6 −10.9 4.5 19.0 3.7          Feb.
−14.5 −18.3 36.1 7.1 10.6 3.5 7.2 7.1 −10.6 17.8 12.0 − 1.0          Mar.
1.6 −36.6 41.9 37.4 39.2 3.3 36.0 5.8 − 7.6 2.4 2.3 − 0.2          Apr.
−17.9 20.0 4.6 − 5.1 −14.9 − 0.2 −14.7 19.0 − 9.2 1.4 9.9 − 1.7          May
32.1 58.5 − 6.9 9.2 16.2 3.6 12.6 0.2 − 7.3 −13.9 − 3.9 1.7          June
−11.3 −19.6 5.6 − 0.5 − 1.3 1.9 − 3.2 8.3 − 7.4 4.7 12.0 −10.7          July
5.9 −22.1 − 2.0 −15.0 −36.3 − 5.1 −31.1 27.8 − 6.5 − 2.7 12.6 3.2          Aug.
18.7 7.3 − 3.4 2.7 10.3 1.0 9.3 2.5 −10.1 2.0 − 8.7 0.6          Sep.
13.1 −19.3 13.5 2.1 − 1.8 − 2.2 0.4 13.2 − 9.4 − 0.8 5.0 7.3          Oct.
− 3.6 15.5 40.3 26.3 20.3 0.1 20.2 14.6 − 8.6 3.0 0.8 10.1          Nov.
− 4.4 − 5.0 80.4 97.4 66.2 10.6 55.5 12.5 18.8 1.8 −28.9 10.1          Dec.
 German contribution (euro billion) 2
− 0.6 29.4 − 3.6 − 3.1 − 4.6 1.6 − 6.2 2.1 − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.8 0.9 1999          July
0.5 −34.3 3.0 − 0.8 − 1.0 − 1.0 0.0 1.8 − 1.6 0.5 4.7 − 1.4          Aug.
− 0.4 2.0 8.1 1.8 6.0 0.3 5.7 − 2.6 − 1.5 − 0.4 4.9 1.9          Sep.
0.7 2.2 9.1 5.4 0.8 0.2 0.6 6.1 − 1.5 0.7 2.1 0.9          Oct.
− 0.4 −47.3 36.8 25.4 27.8 1.2 26.6 0.8 − 3.2 − 0.1 13.0 − 1.4          Nov.
0.1 −13.3 21.3 16.9 − 6.7 4.8 −11.6 14.0 9.7 0.3 1.9 2.2          Dec.
− 1.2 23.1 −16.0 −12.6 2.0 − 5.0 6.9 −10.3 − 4.3 − 0.1 − 4.8 1.5 2000          Jan.
0.8 5.3 7.5 1.7 4.7 − 0.7 5.4 2.0 − 5.0 − 0.8 5.0 1.7          Feb.
− 0.6 16.0 − 7.8 − 9.6 − 4.4 0.9 − 5.3 1.2 − 6.4 − 0.2 − 1.0 3.1          Mar.
0.4 − 4.8 1.0 0.9 10.8 0.4 10.4 − 3.7 − 6.1 1.8 − 3.1 1.4          Apr.
− 0.5 10.4 − 4.6 − 6.5 − 8.5 − 0.1 − 8.4 9.2 − 7.2 0.2 2.4 − 0.7          May
6.3 −24.3 − 6.4 − 9.9 − 0.5 0.1 − 0.6 − 2.5 − 6.9 − 1.0 6.9 − 2.4          June
0.3 14.2 − 8.1 − 9.7 − 4.7 − 0.2 − 4.5 1.3 − 6.3 − 0.1 1.4 0.3          July
− 0.6 2.3 − 5.0 − 7.5 − 9.0 − 1.0 − 8.0 7.0 − 5.5 − 0.1 − 0.4 3.0          Aug.
19.8 −16.3 − 7.8 − 3.1 − 2.2 0.3 − 2.5 4.1 − 5.0 − 0.7 − 2.6 − 1.4          Sep.
2.4 0.7 2.8 − 1.2 2.9 − 1.1 4.0 0.4 − 4.4 0.3 3.4 0.2          Oct.
−10.7 19.3 20.1 22.6 22.2 − 0.0 22.2 5.5 − 5.1 − 0.0 − 3.8 1.3          Nov.
6.7 −15.0 26.6 25.1 4.3 1.1 3.2 12.4 8.3 − 0.9 1.7 0.8          Dec.
 German contribution (DM billion) 2
− 1.2 57.4 − 7.1 − 6.1 − 9.0 3.1 −12.1 4.2 − 1.2 − 1.1 − 1.7 1.7 1999          July
1.0 −67.2 5.9 − 1.6 − 2.0 − 2.0 0.0 3.4 − 3.1 1.1 9.1 − 2.7          Aug.
− 0.7 3.9 15.8 3.5 11.7 0.5 11.2 − 5.2 − 3.0 − 0.9 9.5 3.6          Sep.
1.3 4.3 17.8 10.5 1.5 0.4 1.1 11.9 − 2.9 1.3 4.2 1.8          Oct.
− 0.8 −92.5 72.0 49.7 54.4 2.4 52.0 1.6 − 6.3 − 0.3 25.3 − 2.7          Nov.
0.3 −25.9 41.7 33.1 −13.2 9.4 −22.6 27.4 18.9 0.6 3.7 4.3          Dec.
− 2.4 45.2 −31.3 −24.7 3.8 − 9.7 13.5 −20.2 − 8.3 − 0.2 − 9.3 3.0 2000          Jan.
1.6 10.4 14.7 3.3 9.2 − 1.4 10.6 3.9 − 9.8 − 1.6 9.7 3.2          Feb.
− 1.1 31.3 −15.2 −18.8 − 8.6 1.8 −10.4 2.4 −12.5 − 0.4 − 2.0 6.0          Mar.
0.7 − 9.3 1.9 1.7 21.0 0.8 20.2 − 7.3 −12.0 3.6 − 6.2 2.7          Apr.
− 1.0 20.4 − 9.1 −12.6 −16.5 − 0.1 −16.4 18.0 −14.1 0.3 4.6 − 1.4          May
12.4 −47.5 −12.6 −19.3 − 0.9 0.2 − 1.1 − 4.9 −13.5 − 2.0 13.5 − 4.7          June
0.7 27.8 −15.8 −19.0 − 9.2 − 0.3 − 8.9 2.5 −12.3 − 0.1 2.7 0.6          July
− 1.1 4.5 − 9.8 −14.6 −17.6 − 2.0 −15.6 13.8 −10.8 − 0.1 − 0.8 5.8          Aug.
38.7 −31.8 −15.3 − 6.0 − 4.3 0.6 − 4.9 8.0 − 9.8 − 1.4 − 5.1 − 2.8          Sep.
4.7 1.4 5.4 − 2.3 5.6 − 2.2 7.8 0.7 − 8.7 0.7 6.6 0.5          Oct.
−21.0 37.8 39.3 44.2 43.3 − 0.0 43.3 10.8 − 9.9 − 0.1 − 7.4 2.6          Nov.
13.1 −29.4 52.0 49.0 8.5 2.2 6.3 24.3 16.2 − 1.8 3.3 1.5          Dec.
area. —8For the European monetary union: including the counterparts of circulation denominated in Deutsche Mark, excluding German MFIs cash in
monetary liabilities of central governments. —9The German contributions hand denominated in all currencies of euro-area member states. —11For
to the Eurosystem ’s monetary aggregates should on no account be the European monetary union: including the monetary liabilities of central
interpreted as national monetary aggregates, and are therefore not governments (Post Office, Treasury). —12For the German contribution: up
comparable to the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2 or M3. — to December 1998, with maturities of less than 4 years. —13In Germany,
10Excluding euro-area MFIs cash in hand denominated in euros or in only savings deposits. —14For the German contribution: data collected
currencies of the euro area; for the German contribution: currency in separately only from 1999. 
9*II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
 
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
  
 
Assets  3 
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area  4 
Enterprises and individuals Public authorities
Claims
Total Shares and on non-assets  
3  or Debt other Debt euro-area Other
Period Total Total Advances  4 securities  5 equities Total Advances  4 securities  6 residents assets liabilities  7 
 European monetary union (euro billion) 1
 
1999         July 11,192.1 7,974.8 5,937.4 5,358.3 216.7 362.4 2,037.3 830.1 1,207.2 2,088.3 1,129.0
         Aug. 11,149.6 7,976.9 5,939.3 5,353.2 224.9 361.2 2,037.6 826.1 1,211.5 2,061.7 1,111.0         Sep. 11,212.8 8,027.1 5,968.5 5,392.8 218.6 357.1 2,058.6 831.1 1,227.4 2,087.2 1,098.5
         Oct. 11,364.1 8,094.2 6,014.2 5,439.5 216.4 358.4 2,080.0 840.3 1,239.6 2,124.9 1,144.9
         Nov. 11,571.9 8,192.0 6,101.2 5,504.0 224.3 372.9 2,090.8 853.5 1,237.3 2,181.8 1,198.1         Dec. 11,551.0 8,217.7 6,159.1 5,537.2 227.8 394.0 2,058.6 847.9 1,210.7 2,110.8 1,222.5
2000         Jan. 11,672.1 8,270.1 6,207.8 5,581.5 228.7 397.7 2,062.3 840.6 1,221.7 2,153.9 1,248.1
         Feb. 11,788.9 8,331.3 6,264.4 5,617.3 234.8 412.2 2,066.9 836.1 1,230.7 2,192.8 1,264.8         Mar. 11,970.5 8,428.1 6,367.7 5,688.6 228.9 450.2 2,060.4 839.7 1,220.7 2,250.6 1,291.8
         Apr. 12,174.1 8,490.4 6,449.4 5,749.0 237.0 463.3 2,041.0 842.4 1,198.6 2,350.3 1,333.5
         May 12,197.9 8,524.5 6,500.8 5,779.1 244.2 477.6 2,023.7 835.8 1,187.9 2,338.9 1,334.4         June 12,186.8 8,535.0 6,532.6 5,846.3 244.2 442.1 2,002.3 835.6 1,166.8 2,331.6 1,320.2
         July 12,274.6 8,549.2 6,574.7 5,874.6 252.4 447.7 1,974.5 833.8 1,140.7 2,355.9 1,369.4
         Aug. 12,360.8 8,548.1 6,597.5 5,893.1 256.6 447.8 1,950.6 822.0 1,128.6 2,402.1 1,410.6         Sep. 12,414.2 8,632.6 6,686.2 5,978.5 258.3 449.4 1,946.4 818.0 1,128.4 2,442.9 1,338.7
         Oct. 12,578.0 8,672.6 6,737.1 6,021.5 266.0 449.6 1,935.4 819.9 1,115.5 2,495.5 1,409.9
         Nov. 12,563.7 8,719.0 6,779.8 6,056.8 265.4 457.6 1,939.2 827.0 1,112.2 2,469.0 1,375.8         Dec. 12,494.7 8,743.2 6,821.9 6,091.4 266.4 464.1 1,921.3 834.7 1,086.6 2,387.9 1,363.6
 German contribution (euro billion) 2
1999         July 3,810.3 3,032.8 2,308.1 2,066.2 48.1 193.7 724.7 507.4 217.3 604.1 173.4
         Aug. 3,810.9 3,038.0 2,314.8 2,071.5 49.6 193.6 723.2 506.7 216.5 594.2 178.7         Sep. 3,835.7 3,062.0 2,330.3 2,085.2 48.4 196.6 731.7 507.2 224.5 596.9 176.9
         Oct. 3,877.3 3,089.9 2,341.2 2,095.7 47.6 197.9 748.6 517.7 230.9 603.6 183.8
         Nov. 3,923.9 3,114.4 2,361.0 2,109.6 47.5 203.9 753.4 521.4 232.0 612.7 196.7         Dec. 3,941.9 3,131.8 2,391.7 2,129.3 46.4 216.0 740.1 513.6 226.5 612.2 197.9
2000         Jan. 3,967.7 3,152.3 2,400.0 2,136.2 45.6 218.1 752.3 515.4 237.0 618.7 196.7
         Feb. 4,003.5 3,167.2 2,414.0 2,144.5 47.2 222.3 753.2 510.7 242.5 638.3 198.0         Mar. 4,057.5 3,206.7 2,457.7 2,156.5 46.1 255.1 749.0 512.1 236.8 652.0 198.8
         Apr. 4,102.0 3,223.7 2,474.5 2,167.6 46.3 260.6 749.2 514.0 235.2 674.2 204.1
         May 4,126.1 3,235.6 2,489.9 2,174.9 46.9 268.1 745.7 514.3 231.4 680.7 209.7         June 4,063.4 3,201.6 2,463.0 2,180.9 48.6 233.4 738.6 510.4 228.2 655.6 206.2
         July 4,096.3 3,204.2 2,467.3 2,181.7 49.4 236.3 736.8 512.1 224.7 677.6 214.5
         Aug. 4,124.4 3,211.3 2,479.8 2,192.5 49.7 237.7 731.5 506.7 224.8 692.3 220.8         Sep. 4,150.0 3,218.6 2,499.8 2,211.5 50.3 238.0 718.8 497.5 221.3 696.5 235.0
         Oct. 4,196.0 3,232.6 2,505.8 2,216.4 50.7 238.6 726.8 501.9 225.0 722.0 241.4
         Nov. 4,217.3 3,247.1 2,519.0 2,225.5 50.7 242.8 728.1 502.4 225.8 730.4 239.8         Dec. 4,200.4 3,254.3 2,529.4 2,230.8 51.0 247.6 724.9 502.9 222.0 715.5 230.6
 German contribution (DM billion) 2
1999         July 7,452.3 5,931.6 4,514.2 4,041.2 94.1 378.9 1,417.4 992.4 425.0 1,181.5 339.2
         Aug. 7,453.5 5,941.7 4,527.3 4,051.5 97.1 378.7 1,414.5 991.0 423.4 1,162.2 349.6         Sep. 7,502.1 5,988.7 4,557.6 4,078.4 94.7 384.5 1,431.1 991.9 439.1 1,167.4 346.0
         Oct. 7,583.3 6,043.3 4,579.0 4,098.8 93.1 387.1 1,464.2 1,012.6 451.6 1,180.5 359.5
         Nov. 7,674.4 6,091.3 4,617.7 4,126.1 92.8 398.8 1,473.6 1,019.8 453.8 1,198.4 384.7         Dec. 7,709.6 6,125.3 4,677.8 4,164.6 90.8 422.4 1,447.5 1,004.5 443.0 1,197.3 387.0
2000         Jan. 7,760.1 6,165.4 4,693.9 4,178.0 89.3 426.7 1,471.4 1,008.0 463.5 1,210.0 384.8
         Feb. 7,830.2 6,194.6 4,721.4 4,194.3 92.2 434.9 1,473.2 998.8 474.4 1,248.3 387.3         Mar. 7,935.9 6,271.8 4,806.9 4,217.8 90.1 498.9 1,464.8 1,001.7 463.2 1,275.2 388.9
         Apr. 8,022.9 6,305.0 4,839.7 4,239.5 90.5 509.7 1,465.4 1,005.3 460.1 1,318.6 399.3
         May 8,069.9 6,328.3 4,869.8 4,253.7 91.7 524.3 1,458.5 1,006.0 452.6 1,331.3 410.2         June 7,947.4 6,261.8 4,817.2 4,265.5 95.1 456.5 1,444.7 998.3 446.3 1,282.3 403.3
         July 8,011.6 6,266.8 4,825.7 4,267.0 96.6 462.1 1,441.1 1,001.6 439.5 1,325.3 419.4
         Aug. 8,066.7 6,280.8 4,850.1 4,288.1 97.2 464.8 1,430.7 991.1 439.6 1,354.0 431.8         Sep. 8,116.7 6,295.0 4,889.1 4,325.2 98.4 465.4 1,405.9 973.0 432.9 1,362.2 459.6
         Oct. 8,206.7 6,322.4 4,900.8 4,334.9 99.2 466.8 1,421.6 981.6 440.0 1,412.0 472.2
         Nov. 8,248.4 6,350.8 4,926.7 4,352.8 99.1 474.8 1,424.1 982.6 441.5 1,428.5 469.1         Dec. 8,215.3 6,364.9 4,947.1 4,363.1 99.8 484.2 1,417.8 983.5 434.2 1,399.4 451.0
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building holdings. —4For the German contribution: up to December 1998, including
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank loans on a trust basis and bill-based lending instead of bill holdings. —
and central banks (the Eurosystem). —1Source: ECB. —2Owing to changes 5Including money market paper of enterprises. —6Including Treasury bills
in the definitions of the items and differences in the range of reporting and other money market paper of public authorities. —7For the German
institutions, the figures are not comparable with those published for contribution: up to December 1998, including liabilities incurred in theGermany up to the end of 1998. —3For the German contribution: up to banks own name but on behalf of third parties and including endorsement
December 1998, including trust funds and bill-based lending instead of bill liabilities on rediscounted bills. —8Excluding the cash in hand (in euros) of
10*II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
    
 
Liabilities  7 
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area  9 
Enterprises and individuals
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  14 
over
Currency 1 year
in of which: up to up to over up to over
Total in euros  10 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years  11 3 months 3 months  15   Period circulation  8 2 years  9, 12, 13  
European monetary union (euro billion) 1
 
331.9 4,924.3 4,631.6 4,664.7 1,429.5 736.7 75.3 1,101.6 1,210.5 111.1 1999          July
326.4 4,906.2 4,605.4 4,641.7 1,400.4 738.0 74.9 1,107.7 1,210.5 110.2          Aug.327.3 4,915.6 4,623.2 4,656.5 1,429.2 728.4 71.7 1,109.4 1,207.3 110.5          Sep.
329.6 4,936.8 4,640.0 4,674.8 1,430.2 742.5 72.6 1,114.8 1,204.9 109.8          Oct.
330.1 4,985.5 4,671.9 4,705.0 1,460.9 738.5 72.7 1,123.6 1,199.6 109.8          Nov.349.9 5,062.0 4,757.2 4,783.7 1,492.9 750.5 77.5 1,135.0 1,215.9 111.8          Dec.
333.0 5,068.3 4,765.5 4,798.8 1,519.5 736.2 78.3 1,136.8 1,217.2 110.9 2000          Jan.
331.1 5,080.6 4,767.5 4,798.2 1,513.3 749.1 78.5 1,138.9 1,206.4 111.9          Feb.334.6 5,072.0 4,769.6 4,805.6 1,524.9 755.7 79.0 1,137.7 1,195.7 112.7          Mar.
337.7 5,109.8 4,798.4 4,836.3 1,553.9 764.6 78.9 1,137.9 1,188.6 112.3          Apr.
337.5 5,089.1 4,798.2 4,831.3 1,541.9 778.6 77.9 1,139.6 1,179.7 113.6          May341.2 5,124.1 4,800.0 4,829.9 1,547.0 778.3 78.0 1,138.6 1,173.0 115.1          June
343.0 5,112.8 4,802.2 4,835.5 1,546.9 790.1 78.2 1,138.9 1,165.3 116.1          July
337.9 5,117.9 4,795.1 4,833.8 1,518.7 819.6 78.1 1,141.1 1,158.6 117.7          Aug.338.9 5,145.8 4,799.5 4,840.6 1,531.2 820.8 77.8 1,141.6 1,149.2 120.0          Sep.
336.7 5,167.8 4,799.2 4,850.0 1,531.1 836.7 79.2 1,142.5 1,139.6 120.8          Oct.
336.8 5,182.7 4,820.4 4,865.6 1,547.2 846.8 81.3 1,135.9 1,131.0 123.4          Nov.347.5 5,262.3 4,920.5 4,948.5 1,600.2 856.7 76.5 1,140.8 1,148.7 125.7          Dec.
 German contribution (euro billion) 2
124.8 1,952.2 1,868.5 1,837.5 393.1 195.3 8.5 628.0 503.4 109.2 1999          July
123.8 1,955.5 1,870.2 1,838.5 392.0 196.3 8.4 631.6 501.9 108.3          Aug.124.1 1,959.2 1,874.7 1,843.4 398.5 194.2 8.2 633.0 500.5 109.1          Sep.
124.2 1,966.9 1,880.9 1,849.7 397.9 201.0 9.1 634.1 499.2 108.4          Oct.
125.5 1,995.1 1,908.8 1,875.2 424.7 198.7 9.4 637.8 496.0 108.5          Nov.130.3 2,012.9 1,927.8 1,887.5 412.6 208.3 9.6 640.7 505.6 110.6          Dec.
125.3 2,006.0 1,921.9 1,886.4 421.5 200.6 9.9 643.2 501.4 109.7 2000          Jan.
124.6 2,012.3 1,928.4 1,892.0 427.0 201.5 9.3 646.9 496.4 110.8          Feb.125.5 2,002.5 1,917.4 1,884.3 422.5 203.1 9.7 647.4 490.1 111.6          Mar.
125.9 2,004.8 1,916.8 1,884.7 430.8 199.6 10.3 648.8 484.0 111.1          Apr.
125.9 1,998.8 1,912.1 1,877.3 423.0 204.8 10.6 649.6 476.9 112.4          May126.0 1,996.9 1,905.2 1,866.5 419.3 202.4 10.5 650.3 470.1 113.9          June
125.8 1,990.3 1,898.1 1,863.9 417.5 205.5 10.9 651.7 463.5 114.9          July
124.8 1,987.3 1,895.3 1,860.6 410.0 211.3 11.2 653.7 458.0 116.5          Aug.125.1 2,005.0 1,891.2 1,858.6 407.7 214.9 11.7 652.7 453.0 118.7          Sep.
124.0 2,009.5 1,891.1 1,862.3 411.4 216.2 12.8 653.8 448.6 119.5          Oct.
124.0 2,020.2 1,913.2 1,882.4 433.9 217.8 14.8 651.3 443.6 121.1          Nov.125.1 2,051.8 1,944.1 1,900.3 434.1 224.5 15.7 650.6 451.8 123.7          Dec.
 German contribution (DM billion) 2
244.1 3,818.1 3,654.4 3,593.9 768.8 382.0 16.5 1,228.4 984.6 213.6 1999          July
242.1 3,824.6 3,657.7 3,595.9 766.7 384.0 16.4 1,235.2 981.7 211.9          Aug.242.6 3,831.8 3,666.7 3,605.4 779.3 379.8 16.0 1,238.0 978.9 213.3          Sep.
243.0 3,847.0 3,678.7 3,617.7 778.2 393.2 17.9 1,240.1 976.3 212.0          Oct.
245.4 3,902.1 3,733.3 3,667.6 830.7 388.6 18.4 1,247.5 970.1 212.2          Nov.254.8 3,936.9 3,770.5 3,691.5 807.0 407.3 18.8 1,253.1 988.9 216.3          Dec.
245.1 3,923.5 3,758.9 3,689.5 824.5 392.4 19.4 1,258.0 980.7 214.6 2000          Jan.
243.7 3,935.7 3,771.5 3,700.3 835.1 394.0 18.3 1,265.3 971.0 216.6          Feb.245.5 3,916.6 3,750.2 3,685.4 826.4 397.1 18.9 1,266.2 958.5 218.2          Mar.
246.3 3,921.0 3,748.9 3,686.1 842.6 390.3 20.2 1,268.9 946.7 217.3          Apr.
246.2 3,909.2 3,739.7 3,671.7 827.2 400.5 20.7 1,270.6 932.8 219.9          May246.4 3,905.6 3,726.2 3,650.5 820.0 395.8 20.6 1,271.8 919.5 222.8          June
246.0 3,892.7 3,712.4 3,645.5 816.6 401.9 21.2 1,274.6 906.5 224.7          July
244.1 3,886.9 3,706.9 3,639.1 801.9 413.3 21.8 1,278.4 895.7 227.9          Aug.244.7 3,921.4 3,698.9 3,635.2 797.3 420.3 22.8 1,276.5 886.0 232.2          Sep.
242.5 3,930.3 3,698.7 3,642.3 804.6 422.9 25.1 1,278.6 877.4 233.6          Oct.
242.5 3,951.2 3,741.8 3,681.7 848.6 426.1 28.9 1,273.9 867.5 236.8          Nov.244.7 4,013.1 3,802.3 3,716.7 849.0 439.1 30.7 1,272.4 883.6 241.9          Dec.
MFIs; for the German contribution: currency in circulation denominated in 4 years. —12For the German contribution: up to December 1998, with
Deutsche Mark, excluding German MFIs cash in hand denominated in all maturities of 4 years and more. —13For the German contribution: from
currencies of euro-area member states. —9For the German contribution: 1999 including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see table
up to December 1998, including liabilities arising from loans on a trust IV.12). —14In Germany, only saving deposits. —15For the German
basis. —10Excluding central governments deposits. —11For the German contribution: up to the end of 1998 including deposits under savings and
contribution: up to December 1998, with maturities of 1 year to less than loan contracts (see also footnote 13). 
11*II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
 
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (cont ’d)*
 
 
 
Liabilities (cont ’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont ’d) 3 
Public authorities Repo transactions
with counterparties
Other public authorities in the euro area  9 
With agreed At agreed Money
maturities of notice of  7 market
fund
over of which: certificates1 year Enterprises and money
Central up to up to over up to over and market paper
Period governments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years  
4 3 months 3 months  8 Total individuals (net)  10, 11  2 years  3, 5, 6  
 European monetary union (euro billion) 1
 
1999         July 135.0 124.6 49.9 42.9 1.0 26.1 3.9 0.8 163.7 160.9 382.7
         Aug. 138.0 126.5 50.0 44.9 1.1 26.0 3.7 0.8 162.6 160.0 396.0         Sep. 133.3 125.8 49.9 44.0 1.2 26.4 3.6 0.8 160.6 157.9 402.9
         Oct. 135.1 126.9 51.4 44.1 1.1 26.0 3.5 0.8 157.5 153.9 409.7
         Nov. 146.1 134.4 55.4 47.3 1.3 26.2 3.4 0.9 158.6 155.8 428.1         Dec. 142.0 136.3 52.9 51.3 1.2 26.6 3.4 0.9 144.2 142.0 425.2
2000         Jan. 133.7 135.8 55.4 47.6 1.7 26.8 3.3 0.9 155.0 150.0 430.1
         Feb. 144.6 137.8 54.9 49.4 1.9 27.5 3.3 0.8 159.5 155.2 449.1         Mar. 130.2 136.1 52.2 50.8 1.8 27.3 3.3 0.9 177.3 174.0 461.7
         Apr. 131.8 141.8 58.7 49.8 2.0 27.2 3.2 0.9 179.8 176.3 510.4
         May 113.9 144.0 56.1 54.7 2.0 27.4 3.1 0.8 181.2 175.6 517.2         June 146.0 148.2 61.6 53.8 1.8 27.3 2.9 0.8 167.3 161.9 517.8
         July 134.7 142.7 58.2 51.7 1.9 27.2 2.9 0.8 172.0 166.0 530.4
         Aug. 140.6 143.5 58.9 51.7 1.9 27.3 2.9 0.8 169.4 163.0 544.1         Sep. 159.3 146.0 58.2 54.5 1.8 27.8 2.7 0.8 171.4 166.1 535.7
         Oct. 172.3 145.4 59.6 52.7 1.9 27.8 2.7 0.8 170.6 166.6 541.9
         Nov. 168.8 148.3 61.7 53.3 1.9 27.8 2.8 0.8 173.5 169.2 542.4         Dec. 164.4 149.4 59.7 56.4 1.9 27.8 2.8 0.8 175.2 172.9 510.9
 German contribution (euro billion) 2
1999         July 46.1 68.6 11.5 30.0 0.3 23.2 2.8 0.7 1.0 1.0 47.4
         Aug. 46.6 70.4 12.8 30.8 0.4 23.0 2.7 0.7 1.6 1.6 52.2         Sep. 46.2 69.5 12.0 30.5 0.4 23.4 2.6 0.7 1.2 1.2 56.9
         Oct. 46.9 70.3 13.3 30.4 0.4 23.0 2.5 0.7 1.8 1.8 59.1
         Nov. 46.5 73.4 13.3 33.4 0.4 23.1 2.4 0.8 1.7 1.7 72.2         Dec. 46.7 78.8 13.9 37.6 0.4 23.7 2.4 0.8 2.0 2.0 74.1
2000         Jan. 45.4 74.2 12.1 34.3 0.9 23.9 2.4 0.8 1.9 1.9 69.3
         Feb. 46.2 74.1 12.0 34.2 1.0 23.8 2.4 0.8 1.1 1.1 74.3         Mar. 45.8 72.4 11.3 33.5 0.9 23.6 2.3 0.8 0.9 0.9 73.6
         Apr. 46.1 74.0 13.8 32.6 1.0 23.5 2.3 0.8 2.7 2.7 70.7
         May 45.6 75.8 12.0 36.3 1.0 23.6 2.2 0.8 2.9 2.9 72.8         June 52.0 78.4 14.9 36.2 1.0 23.5 2.1 0.8 1.8 1.8 79.6
         July 52.3 74.1 12.4 34.2 1.1 23.5 2.0 0.8 1.8 1.8 81.2
         Aug. 51.7 74.9 12.2 35.2 1.1 23.5 2.0 0.8 1.7 1.7 81.4         Sep. 71.5 74.8 12.1 35.3 1.1 23.5 2.0 0.8 1.0 1.0 79.0
         Oct. 73.9 73.3 12.7 33.4 1.1 23.4 1.9 0.8 1.3 1.3 83.0
         Nov. 63.2 74.6 12.2 35.1 1.2 23.4 1.9 0.8 1.3 1.3 78.6         Dec. 69.9 81.6 14.6 39.6 1.3 23.4 2.0 0.8 0.4 0.4 78.8
 German contribution (DM billion) 2
1999         July 90.1 134.1 22.6 58.6 0.6 45.4 5.5 1.4 2.0 2.0 92.8
         Aug. 91.1 137.6 25.0 60.2 0.8 45.1 5.3 1.4 3.1 3.1 102.0         Sep. 90.4 136.0 23.4 59.6 0.7 45.8 5.1 1.4 2.2 2.2 111.3
         Oct. 91.7 137.5 26.0 59.5 0.8 45.0 4.8 1.4 3.6 3.6 115.6
         Nov. 91.0 143.5 26.0 65.3 0.7 45.2 4.7 1.5 3.3 3.3 141.2         Dec. 91.2 154.1 27.1 73.5 0.9 46.3 4.8 1.6 3.9 3.9 144.9
2000         Jan. 88.8 145.1 23.6 67.0 1.7 46.7 4.6 1.6 3.6 3.6 135.6
         Feb. 90.4 144.9 23.5 66.8 1.9 46.5 4.6 1.5 2.1 2.1 145.3         Mar. 89.5 141.7 22.2 65.4 1.8 46.1 4.6 1.5 1.7 1.7 143.9
         Apr. 90.2 144.7 27.0 63.8 2.0 46.0 4.4 1.5 5.3 5.3 138.2
         May 89.3 148.3 23.4 71.0 2.0 46.1 4.3 1.5 5.6 5.6 142.4         June 101.6 153.4 29.2 70.7 2.0 45.9 4.1 1.5 3.6 3.6 155.7
         July 102.3 144.9 24.3 66.9 2.2 46.0 4.0 1.5 3.5 3.5 158.9
         Aug. 101.2 146.6 23.9 68.9 2.2 46.0 4.0 1.6 3.4 3.4 159.2         Sep. 139.9 146.3 23.7 69.1 2.2 45.9 3.9 1.5 1.9 1.9 154.5
         Oct. 144.6 143.4 24.9 65.2 2.2 45.7 3.8 1.5 2.6 2.6 162.4
         Nov. 123.6 145.9 23.8 68.7 2.3 45.8 3.7 1.5 2.5 2.5 153.7         Dec. 136.6 159.7 28.5 77.4 2.5 45.9 3.8 1.5 0.7 0.7 154.2
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building December 1998, with maturities of 4 years and more. —6For the German
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank contribution: from 1999 including deposits under savings and loan contrac ts
and central banks (the Eurosystem). —1Source: ECB. —2Owing to changes (see table IV.12). —7In Germany: only savings deposits. —8For the
in the definitions of the items and differences in the range of reporting German contribution: up to the end of 1998 including deposits underinstitutions, the figures are not comparable with those published for savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 6). —9For the German
Germany up to the end of 1998. —3For the German contribution: up to contribution: data collected separately from 1999 only; up to December
December 1998, including liabilities arising from loans on a trust basis. — 1998, included in the deposits with agreed maturities of up to 1 year. —
4For the German contribution: up to December 1998, with maturities of 10Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the German contribution: excluding
1 year to less than 4 years. —5For the German contribution: up to
12*II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
    
 
 Memo item
Monetary aggregates  13 
Debt securities issued (net)  10 
With maturities of
Monetaryliabilitiesof central
Liabilities govern-
of which: over to non- Excess Monetary mentsdenom- 1 year euro-area Capital of capital (Postinated up to up to over and inter-MFI Other formation Office,
residents
Total in euros 1 year  11 2 years 2 years 12 reserves liabilities liabilities M1  14 M2 15 M3 16 17   Period Treasury)  18 
European monetary union (euro billion) 1
 
1,481.6 1,266.6 22.0 40.1 1,419.4 1,778.0 800.3 13.7 1,316.0 1,880.1 4,012.2 4,620.8 3,459.2 130.5 1999          July
1,489.5 1,270.1 23.8 39.7 1,425.9 1,784.5 799.0 0.7 1,284.6 1,844.6 3,979.5 4,601.7 3,469.7 129.6          Aug.1,510.2 1,287.5 21.3 54.8 1,434.1 1,784.9 809.5 16.0 1,285.7 1,869.5 3,987.9 4,627.5 3,490.7 125.3          Sep.
1,523.7 1,296.1 20.3 54.3 1,449.1 1,855.5 818.7 21.2 1,311.3 1,876.2 4,007.5 4,649.3 3,519.2 127.6          Oct.
1,534.6 1,309.8 24.6 51.6 1,458.4 1,917.5 823.0 18.3 1,376.0 1,910.6 4,036.2 4,699.1 3,541.8 127.0          Nov.1,544.9 1,317.1 34.0 54.8 1,456.1 1,832.3 871.0 17.1 1,304.3 1,964.0 4,132.8 4,791.0 3,601.4 137.3          Dec.
1,544.1 1,306.9 32.0 55.2 1,456.9 1,917.3 888.0 − 7.2 1,343.5 1,975.4 4,128.7 4,800.9 3,620.4 136.6 2000          Jan.
1,559.7 1,317.9 33.2 57.7 1,468.8 1,948.1 892.1 6.8 1,362.0 1,965.4 4,122.9 4,822.4 3,640.1 135.1          Feb.1,562.7 1,316.5 29.8 60.9 1,472.0 2,075.9 908.1 − 16.6 1,394.7 1,977.4 4,132.7 4,862.5 3,658.7 134.8          Mar.
1,582.6 1,324.4 26.2 63.6 1,492.8 2,154.0 918.0 − 34.2 1,416.1 2,018.6 4,174.5 4,954.4 3,689.1 137.1          Apr.
1,584.7 1,335.0 24.3 63.2 1,497.2 2,159.8 919.2 − 20.3 1,429.5 2,000.3 4,165.9 4,951.8 3,697.8 134.6          May
1,593.7 1,338.4 27.6 59.2 1,506.9 2,059.1 921.0 17.0 1,445.6 2,015.3 4,172.2 4,944.1 3,709.7 134.7          June
1,592.4 1,329.5 19.1 57.6 1,515.7 2,093.9 936.8 12.6 1,480.6 2,015.3 4,174.6 4,953.7 3,735.6 136.5          July
1,612.5 1,337.6 19.3 61.8 1,531.5 2,136.2 942.8 − 4.8 1,504.8 1,981.0 4,163.2 4,957.6 3,761.3 134.9          Aug.
1,619.8 1,339.0 19.3 62.2 1,538.3 2,192.1 970.2 − 3.6 1,443.8 1,993.3 4,169.1 4,957.8 3,798.7 133.8          Sep.
1,646.4 1,351.9 28.0 61.9 1,556.5 2,252.9 977.2 − 1.8 1,486.2 1,993.5 4,175.5 4,977.9 3,825.7 135.3          Oct.
1,643.9 1,353.6 34.8 64.2 1,544.9 2,227.7 988.6 − 13.9 1,482.0 2,012.0 4,198.0 5,013.0 3,821.5 135.3          Nov.
1,639.4 1,360.8 40.1 66.5 1,532.7 2,148.3 957.0 2.3 1,451.8 2,074.3 4,287.2 5,080.0 3,784.8 136.9          Dec.
 Germany contribution (euro billion) 2
717.7 634.0 − 20.9 696.8 432.0 263.8 − 8.4 279.9 529.4 1,269.7 1,339.0 1,721.8 −1999         July
723.1 636.9 − 19.5 703.6 448.0 264.2 − 41.4 284.0 528.6 1,269.1 1,342.3 1,731.5 −         Aug.
740.9 656.0 − 21.5 719.4 441.5 269.2 − 48.2 291.0 534.5 1,270.8 1,350.4 1,754.8 −         Sep.
744.3 657.4 − 22.5 721.9 457.7 271.5 − 45.6 297.3 535.4 1,278.0 1,361.4 1,759.6 −         Oct.
749.3 666.1 − 21.2 728.2 489.3 272.6 − 77.1 295.3 563.5 1,303.8 1,398.8 1,771.0 −         Nov.
747.2 665.2 − 23.4 723.9 494.1 277.0 − 88.5 292.8 556.8 1,320.8 1,420.2 1,776.7 −         Dec.
744.0 656.1 − 24.9 719.1 515.5 279.4 − 62.5 288.7 558.9 1,308.4 1,404.5 1,776.0 −2000         Jan.
748.5 661.1 − 26.6 722.0 530.5 280.1 − 53.0 285.2 563.6 1,308.4 1,410.3 1,784.3 −         Feb.
754.3 665.0 − 29.7 724.6 568.7 284.9 − 43.1 290.2 559.4 1,299.0 1,403.1 1,792.8 −         Mar.
768.2 673.4 − 31.2 737.0 597.2 286.0 − 47.7 294.2 570.5 1,300.4 1,404.9 1,807.2 −         Apr.
772.3 681.4 − 30.4 741.9 602.3 287.3 − 34.3 298.1 560.8 1,292.6 1,398.7 1,815.6 −         May
769.4 676.6 − 28.0 741.4 562.9 290.6 − 67.0 303.3 560.2 1,282.4 1,391.8 1,820.5 −         June
779.6 681.3 − 28.3 751.3 568.6 291.1 − 49.8 307.7 555.7 1,272.9 1,384.3 1,833.2 −         July
788.2 684.3 − 31.4 756.8 588.9 291.6 − 46.7 307.2 547.0 1,265.9 1,380.4 1,842.9 −         Aug.
787.4 681.8 − 30.0 757.4 597.5 298.6 − 70.6 327.1 544.9 1,262.9 1,372.9 1,851.6 −         Sep.
792.3 682.9 − 30.4 761.9 624.3 299.6 − 67.5 329.4 548.1 1,262.2 1,376.9 1,858.9 −         Oct.
782.4 676.4 − 31.6 750.8 628.2 300.4 − 54.7 336.9 570.0 1,284.4 1,395.9 1,847.8 −         Nov.
773.7 674.1 − 32.2 741.5 606.2 302.8 − 72.9 334.5 573.8 1,308.6 1,420.0 1,842.7 −         Dec.
 Germany contribution (DM billion) 2
1,403.7 1,239.9 − 40.8 1,362.9 844.8 515.9 − 16.5 547.5 1,035.5 2,483.3 2,618.9 3,367.5 −1999         July
1,414.3 1,245.7 − 38.2 1,376.2 876.2 516.7 − 81.0 555.4 1,033.8 2,482.1 2,625.3 3,386.5 −         Aug.
1,449.2 1,283.1 − 42.0 1,407.1 863.5 526.5 − 94.2 569.1 1,045.4 2,485.5 2,641.1 3,432.2 −         Sep.
1,455.8 1,285.8 − 43.9 1,411.9 895.2 530.9 − 89.3 581.5 1,047.2 2,499.6 2,662.7 3,441.4 −         Oct.
1,465.5 1,302.7 − 41.4 1,424.2 957.0 533.1 −150.7 577.6 1,102.1 2,550.0 2,735.8 3,463.7 −         Nov.
1,461.5 1,300.9 − 45.7 1,415.8 966.3 541.8 −173.2 572.7 1,089.0 2,583.2 2,777.6 3,474.9 −         Dec.
1,455.1 1,283.2 − 48.7 1,406.4 1,008.3 546.4 −122.2 564.7 1,093.1 2,558.9 2,746.9 3,473.6 −2000         Jan.
1,464.0 1,292.9 − 52.0 1,412.0 1,037.6 547.9 −103.7 557.7 1,102.4 2,559.0 2,758.4 3,489.9 −         Feb.
1,475.2 1,300.7 − 58.1 1,417.1 1,112.4 557.3 − 84.2 567.6 1,094.1 2,540.6 2,744.2 3,506.4 −         Mar.
1,502.5 1,317.1 − 61.0 1,441.5 1,168.1 559.4 − 93.3 575.5 1,115.9 2,543.4 2,747.8 3,534.6 −         Apr.
1,510.5 1,332.6 − 59.5 1,451.0 1,178.1 561.8 − 67.1 583.1 1,096.8 2,528.1 2,735.6 3,550.9 −         May
1,504.8 1,323.4 − 54.7 1,450.1 1,100.9 568.4 −131.1 593.3 1,095.6 2,508.2 2,722.2 3,560.5 −         June
1,524.8 1,332.6 − 55.4 1,469.3 1,112.0 569.2 − 97.3 601.8 1,086.9 2,489.7 2,707.4 3,585.4 −         July
1,541.5 1,338.3 − 61.4 1,480.1 1,151.8 570.4 − 91.3 600.8 1,069.9 2,475.8 2,699.8 3,604.4 −         Aug.
1,540.0 1,333.5 − 58.7 1,481.3 1,168.6 584.1 −138.1 639.7 1,065.8 2,470.1 2,685.2 3,621.5 −         Sep.
1,549.6 1,335.7 − 59.4 1,490.2 1,221.1 586.0 −132.0 644.3 1,072.1 2,468.7 2,693.0 3,635.7 −         Oct.
1,530.3 1,323.0 − 61.8 1,468.4 1,228.7 587.6 −107.0 659.0 1,114.8 2,512.1 2,730.1 3,614.0 −         Nov.
1,513.2 1,318.4 − 62.9 1,450.3 1,185.6 592.2 −142.6 654.2 1,122.2 2,559.5 2,777.3 3,604.1 −         Dec.
German MFIs portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro area. — governments ’monetary liabilities, which are not included in the
11In Germany, bank debt securities with maturities of up to one year count consolidated balance sheet. —15M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities
as money market paper. —12Excluding liabilities arising from securities of up to 2 years and at agreed notice of up to 3 months (excluding central
issued. —13The German contributions to the Eurosystem ’s monetary governments ’deposits). —16M2 plus repo transactions, money market
aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national monetary fund certificates, money market paper and debt securities up to 2 years. —
aggregates, and are therefore not comparable to the erstwhile German 17Deposits with agreed maturities of over 2 years and at agreed notice of
money stocks M1, M2 or M3. —14Currency in circulation, overnight over 3 months, debt securities with maturities of over 2 years, capital and
deposits (excluding central governments ’deposits), and (for EMU) central reserves. — 18 Non-existent in Germany. 
13*II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
II. Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  European  monetary  union
  
 3. Banking system ’s liquidity position  *)
Stocks
  
Euro billions; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions ‘
current
Net assets Longer- Other Other accounts
Maintenance in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (includingperiod and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Baseending in  
1) currency operations operations facility facility circulation deposits (net)  4) reserves)  5) money  6) operations  3) operations  3)
Eurosystem  2)
  
1999         Feb. 328.2 104.6 34.2 3.8 30.2 1.3 0.2 329.3 41.0 28.9 100.3 430.9
         Mar. 323.6 136.4 45.0 0.4 − 1.4 − 326.9 49.8 25.0 102.2 430.5
         Apr. 338.4 130.1 45.0 0.7 − 0.3 − 331.0 42.9 39.0 101.1 432.3
         May 342.5 121.6 45.0 0.8 − 0.4 − 333.9 36.3 38.0 101.2 435.5
         June 339.8 132.0 45.0 0.4 − 0.6 − 337.0 40.4 37.2 101.9 439.6
         July 342.4 143.1 45.0 0.4 − 0.5 − 342.1 45.7 39.5 102.9 445.6
         Aug. 343.2 150.1 45.0 0.5 − 1.0 − 344.8 47.3 42.1 103.6 449.4
         Sep. 343.5 150.4 45.0 0.2 − 0.7 − 342.1 51.4 41.6 103.2 446.0
         Oct. 349.7 143.0 45.0 0.3 − 0.6 − 342.5 45.4 45.9 103.5 446.7
         Nov. 351.8 140.5 53.7 0.3 − 0.4 − 343.1 51.5 47.3 104.2 447.6
         Dec. 351.7 150.4 65.0 0.3 − 1.0 − 354.3 59.0 47.5 105.6 460.8
2000         Jan. 362.3 138.5 75.0 1.9 − 0.5 3.3 363.0 41.0 61.2 108.7 472.3
         Feb. 367.8 130.9 70.5 0.1 − 0.2 − 347.6 49.2 64.2 108.1 455.9
         Mar. 369.2 136.1 66.2 0.2 − 0.3 − 347.6 51.7 63.5 108.6 456.4
         Apr. 377.1 136.7 61.0 0.2 − 0.9 − 349.7 45.6 69.1 109.7 460.3
         May 378.8 142.6 60.0 0.4 − 2.3 − 353.8 41.9 71.8 112.0 468.2
         June 378.1 140.9 59.9 0.3 0.2 0.8 − 354.1 38.3 72.1 114.2 469.1
         July 380.8 157.9 59.9 0.4 − 0.5 − 357.0 50.4 76.8 114.2 471.7
         Aug. 382.0 163.1 55.4 0.1 − 0.3 − 359.2 48.8 80.0 112.4 471.9
         Sep. 381.6 173.1 51.1 0.3 − 0.2 − 354.8 56.6 81.2 113.3 468.3
         Oct. 396.3 176.5 45.7 0.5 − 0.2 − 354.5 47.4 102.5 114.4 469.1
         Nov. 398.6 183.7 45.0 0.2 − 0.2 − 352.7 49.8 109.2 115.7 468.6
         Dec. 394.4 210.4 45.0 0.4 − 0.2 − 360.4 61.1 111.1 117.4 478.0
2001         Jan.  7) 383.7 205.3 45.0 0.5 − 0.6 − 368.3 52.2 94.2 119.1 488.0
         Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Deutsche Bundesbank
1999         Feb. 80.5 55.0 18.2 2.0 19.4 0.9 − 127.2 0.2 16.4 30.5 158.5
         Mar. 79.1 64.2 26.1 0.3 − 0.6 − 126.7 0.1 11.4 30.9 158.2
         Apr. 83.0 67.7 27.7 0.5 − 0.2 − 128.1 0.1 19.9 30.6 158.9
         May 84.6 60.0 25.5 0.6 − 0.2 − 128.9 0.1 10.9 30.5 159.7
         June 84.7 67.5 25.0 0.3 − 0.4 − 129.4 0.1 16.9 30.8 160.6
         July 85.1 70.3 26.5 0.3 − 0.2 − 129.9 0.1 20.6 31.3 161.4
         Aug. 85.3 71.7 29.2 0.3 − 0.2 − 130.4 0.1 24.4 31.4 162.0
         Sep. 85.6 68.5 28.3 0.1 − 0.3 − 130.3 0.1 20.5 31.2 161.8
         Oct. 87.3 66.6 25.6 0.2 − 0.2 − 130.2 0.1 17.8 31.4 161.8
         Nov. 87.8 68.7 28.6 0.2 − 0.2 − 130.5 0.1 22.8 31.7 162.3
         Dec. 88.0 57.5 34.7 0.2 − 0.6 − 134.4 0.1 13.1 32.1 167.1
2000         Jan. 90.6 49.0 32.7 1.4 − 0.3 0.5 136.6 0.1 3.0 33.3 170.2
         Feb. 91.5 65.4 33.5 0.1 − 0.2 − 132.0 0.1 24.5 33.7 165.8
         Mar. 91.9 61.8 34.4 0.1 − 0.2 − 131.6 0.1 22.7 33.6 165.4
         Apr. 93.7 62.0 43.2 0.2 − 0.6 − 131.8 0.1 32.7 34.0 166.4
         May 93.7 60.1 39.5 0.3 − 1.8 − 132.3 0.1 24.8 34.5 168.6
         June 93.3 59.6 35.4 0.2 0.1 0.3 − 132.0 0.1 21.2 35.1 167.3
         July 93.4 67.9 33.3 0.2 − 0.4 − 131.8 0.1 27.6 35.1 167.2
         Aug. 93.0 71.6 34.9 0.1 − 0.1 − 131.9 0.1 33.1 34.5 166.5
         Sep. 92.6 81.9 33.8 0.3 − 0.1 − 131.4 0.1 42.6 34.4 165.9
         Oct. 97.0 87.2 30.7 0.3 − 0.1 − 131.1 0.1 49.5 34.5 165.7
         Nov. 98.2 99.1 30.7 0.2 − 0.1 − 130.1 0.1 63.0 34.9 165.1
         Dec. 97.6 103.5 31.1 0.2 − 0.1 − 132.0 0.1 65.0 35.2 167.4
2001         Jan. 93.0 103.1 28.4 0.3 − 0.3 − 131.2 0.1 57.7 35.6 167.1
         Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. —*The banking system ’s liquidity minimum reserve system starts on the 24th of each month and ends on the
position is defined as the current account holdings in euro of credit in- 23rd of the following month (the first reserve maintenance period lastedstitutions in the euro area with the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from from January 1, 1999 to February 23, 1999). —2Source: ECB. —3Includes
the consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the statement monetary policy operations initiated by national central banks in Stage Tw o
of the Bundesbank. —1The reserve maintenance period of the ESCB and outstanding at the start of Stage Three (excluding outright operations
14*II. Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  European  monetary  union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
II. Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  European  monetary  union
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions ‘
current
Net assets Longer- Other Other accountsin gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Maintenanceand foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base periodcurrency operations operations facility facility circulation deposits (net)  
4) reserves)  5) money  6) ending in  1) operations  3) operations  3)
Eurosystem  2)
  
. . . . . . . . . . . . 1999          Feb.
− 4.6 + 31.8 + 10.8 −3.4 − 30.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 2.4 + 8.8 −3.9 + 1.9 − 0.4          Mar.
+ 14.8 − 6.3 − 0.0 + 0.3 −− 1.1 − + 4.1 − 6.9 + 14.0 − 1.1 + 1.8          Apr.
+ 4.1 − 8.5 − 0.0 + 0.1 − + 0.1 − + 2.9 − 6.6 −1.0 + 0.1 + 3.2          May
− 2.7 + 10.4 + 0.0 −0.4 − + 0.2 − + 3.1 + 4.1 −0.8 + 0.7 + 4.1          June
+ 2.6 + 11.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 −− 0.1 − + 5.1 + 5.3 + 2.3 + 1.0 + 6.0          July
+ 0.8 + 7.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 − + 0.5 − + 2.7 + 1.6 + 2.6 + 0.7 + 3.8          Aug.
+ 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.0 −0.3 −− 0.3 −− 2.7 + 4.1 −0.5 − 0.4 − 3.4          Sep.
+ 6.2 − 7.4 + 0.0 + 0.1 −− 0.1 − + 0.4 − 6.0 + 4.3 + 0.3 + 0.7          Oct.
+ 2.1 − 2.5 + 8.7 + 0.0 −− 0.2 − + 0.6 + 6.1 + 1.4 + 0.7 + 0.9          Nov.
− 0.1 + 9.9 + 11.3 −0.0 − + 0.6 − + 11.2 + 7.5 + 0.2 + 1.4 + 13.2          Dec.
+ 10.6 −11.9 + 10.0 + 1.6 −− 0.5 + 3.3 + 8.7 −18.0 + 13.7 + 3.1 + 11.5 2000          Jan.
+ 5.5 − 7.6 − 4.5 −1.8 −− 0.3 − 3.3 −15.4 + 8.2 + 3.0 − 0.6 − 16.4          Feb.
+ 1.4 + 5.2 − 4.3 + 0.1 − + 0.1 − + 0.0 + 2.5 −0.7 + 0.5 + 0.5          Mar.
+ 7.9 + 0.6 − 5.2 + 0.0 − + 0.6 − + 2.1 − 6.1 + 5.6 + 1.1 + 3.9          Apr.
+ 1.7 + 5.9 − 1.0 + 0.2 − + 1.4 − + 4.1 − 3.7 + 2.7 + 2.3 + 7.9          May
− 0.7 − 1.7 − 0.1 −0.1 + 0.2 −1.5 − + 0.3 − 3.6 + 0.3 + 2.2 + 0.9          June
+ 2.7 + 17.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.2 −0.3 − + 2.9 + 12.1 + 4.7 − 0.0 + 2.6          July
+ 1.2 + 5.2 − 4.5 −0.3 −− 0.2 − + 2.2 − 1.6 + 3.2 − 1.8 + 0.2          Aug.
− 0.4 + 10.0 − 4.3 + 0.2 −− 0.1 −− 4.4 + 7.8 + 1.2 + 0.9 − 3.6          Sep.
+ 14.7 + 3.4 − 5.4 + 0.2 − + 0.0 −− 0.3 − 9.2 + 21.3 + 1.1 + 0.8          Oct.
+ 2.3 + 7.2 − 0.7 −0.3 − + 0.0 −− 1.8 + 2.4 + 6.7 + 1.3 − 0.5          Nov.
− 4.2 + 26.7 − 0.0 + 0.2 − + 0.0 − + 7.7 + 11.3 + 1.9 + 1.7 + 9.4          Dec.
−10.7 − 5.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − + 0.4 − + 7.9 − 8.9 −16.9 + 1.7 + 10.0 2001          Jan.  7)
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Mar.
Deutsche Bundesbank
... . . . − . . . . . 1999          Feb.
− 1.4 + 9.2 + 7.9 −1.7 − 19.4 −0.3 −− 0.5 − 0.0 −5.0 + 0.4 − 0.4          Mar.
+ 3.9 + 3.4 + 1.6 + 0.2 −− 0.4 − + 1.4 + 0.0 + 8.5 − 0.3 + 0.7          Apr.
+ 1.5 − 7.7 − 2.2 + 0.1 −− 0.0 − + 0.8 − 0.0 −9.0 − 0.0 + 0.8          May
+ 0.2 + 7.5 − 0.5 −0.4 − + 0.2 − + 0.5 − 0.0 + 6.0 + 0.3 + 0.9          June
+ 0.4 + 2.7 + 1.5 −0.0 −− 0.1 − + 0.5 + 0.0 + 3.7 + 0.5 + 0.9          July
+ 0.2 + 1.4 + 2.7 + 0.1 − + 0.0 − + 0.5 − 0.0 + 3.8 + 0.2 + 0.6          Aug.
+ 0.3 − 3.2 − 0.9 −0.2 − + 0.1 −− 0.1 + 0.0 −3.8 − 0.3 − 0.3          Sep.
+ 1.7 − 1.8 − 2.7 + 0.1 −− 0.1 −− 0.1 − 0.0 −2.8 + 0.2 + 0.0          Oct.
+ 0.6 + 2.1 + 3.0 −0.1 −− 0.0 − + 0.3 + 0.0 + 5.0 + 0.3 + 0.5          Nov.
+ 0.2 −11.2 + 6.1 + 0.0 − + 0.4 − + 3.9 + 0.0 −9.7 + 0.5 + 4.8          Dec.
+ 2.6 − 8.5 − 2.0 + 1.2 −− 0.3 + 0.5 + 2.2 − 0.0 −10.1 + 1.2 + 3.1 2000          Jan.
+ 0.9 + 16.4 + 0.8 −1.4 −− 0.1 − 0.5 − 4.6 − 0.0 + 21.5 + 0.3 − 4.4          Feb.
+ 0.4 − 3.6 + 0.9 + 0.1 −− 0.0 −− 0.3 + 0.0 −1.8 − 0.1 − 0.4          Mar.
+ 1.8 + 0.3 + 8.8 + 0.0 − + 0.4 − + 0.2 − 0.0 + 9.9 + 0.4 + 1.0          Apr.
− 0.0 − 1.9 − 3.7 + 0.1 − + 1.2 − + 0.5 + 0.0 −7.8 + 0.5 + 2.2          May
− 0.4 − 0.5 − 4.1 −0.0 + 0.1 −1.5 −− 0.3 + 0.0 −3.6 + 0.5 − 1.3          June
+ 0.2 + 8.3 − 2.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 −− 0.1 − 0.0 + 6.4 − 0.0 − 0.1          July
− 0.4 + 3.7 + 1.6 −0.2 −− 0.3 − + 0.1 − 0.0 + 5.6 − 0.6 − 0.8          Aug.
− 0.5 + 10.3 − 1.1 + 0.2 −− 0.0 −− 0.5 + 0.0 + 9.5 − 0.1 − 0.6          Sep.
+ 4.5 + 5.3 − 3.1 + 0.0 − + 0.0 −− 0.3 + 0.0 + 6.9 + 0.1 − 0.2          Oct.
+ 1.2 + 11.8 − 0.0 −0.2 − + 0.0 −− 1.0 + 0.0 + 13.4 + 0.4 − 0.6          Nov.
− 0.6 + 4.5 + 0.5 + 0.1 − + 0.0 − + 1.9 + 0.0 + 2.1 + 0.4 + 2.3          Dec.
− 4.6 − 0.5 − 2.7 + 0.1 − + 0.2 −− 0.8 − 0.0 −7.4 + 0.3 − 0.2 2001          Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Mar.
and the issuance of debt certificates); for the Bundesbank: including banks ’ as the sum of the "deposit facility", "banknotes in circulation" and "credit
recourse to rediscount quotas. —4Remaining items in the consolidated institutions ’current account holdings" or, alternatively, as the difference
financial statement of the Eurosystem and the statement of the between the sum of liquidity-providing factors and the sum of governmentBundesbank. —5Equal to the difference between the sum of liquidity- deposits and other factors (net). —7Entry of Greece into the euro area on
providing factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors. —6Calculated January 1, 2001. 
15*II. Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  European  monetary  union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1. Assets *
  
Euro billion
Claims on non-euro area Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
investments, euro area Balances Claimsexternal loans residents with banks, arising from
On Gold and other denominated security the creditreporting Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility underdate assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans  
2 ERM II
 Eurosystem 1
 
1999         Apr. 698.3 105.3 240.7 30.0 210.8 11.7 4.0 4.0 −
         May 705.1 105.3 237.6 29.6 208.1 12.4 4.4 4.4 −
         June 695.6 105.3 238.4 29.2 209.1 11.9 3.9 3.9 −
         July 739.7 101.8 245.4 29.0 216.4 12.8 4.2 4.2 −
         Aug. 734.0 101.8 245.4 28.8 216.7 12.6 4.1 4.1 −
         Sep. 728.6 101.8 246.1 27.7 218.3 13.1 4.9 4.9 −
         Oct. 742.6 115.0 240.2 28.0 212.1 13.7 5.7 5.7 −
         Nov. 743.1 115.0 239.6 27.8 211.7 12.8 5.3 5.3 −
         Dec. 3 803.2 3 116.5 3 254.9 3 29.8 3 225.0 3 14.4 4.8 4.8 −
2000         Jan. 772.7 116.3 256.3 29.5 226.8 14.8 4.8 4.8 −
         Feb. 752.2 115.9 255.6 29.2 226.4 15.5 4.7 4.7 −
         Mar. 3 774.4 115.7 3 267.1 3 30.3 3 236.9 3 16.9 4.1 4.1 −
         Apr. 783.0 115.7 267.4 27.4 240.0 17.3 4.8 4.8 −
         May 779.2 115.7 267.5 26.9 240.6 17.6 5.0 5.0 −
         June 3 812.5 3 121.2 263.9 26.5 237.4 18.3 4.1 4.1 −
         July 800.7 120.9 264.1 26.2 237.9 16.7 3.8 3.8 −
         Aug. 797.0 120.9 263.7 26.3 237.4 15.3 4.2 4.2 −
         Sep. 3 826.3 3 124.9 3 281.7 3 27.5 3 254.2 3 16.6 4.0 4.0 −
         Oct. 822.1 124.9 282.4 27.2 255.2 14.2 3.7 3.7 −
2000 Nov.                 3 821.3 124.9 281.1 27.0 254.1 15.5 3.6 3.6 −
                              10 821.9 124.9 276.4 26.9 249.5 15.4 3.5 3.5 −
                              17 819.0 124.9 272.6 26.9 245.7 16.0 3.5 3.5 −
                              24 833.1 124.9 272.0 26.9 245.1 16.3 4.0 4.0 −
         Dec.                 1 834.6 124.9 271.9 26.8 245.1 16.7 3.5 3.5 −
                                8 856.0 124.9 273.6 26.9 246.7 16.4 3.6 3.6 −
                              15 854.4 124.9 272.8 26.8 246.0 16.3 3.8 3.8 −
                              22 848.6 124.9 273.5 27.1 246.4 15.4 3.4 3.4 −
                              29 3 835.1 3 117.1 3 258.7 26.7 3 232.0 15.8 3.7 3.7 −
2001 Jan.                 5 843.8 118.6 267.6 27.0 240.6 17.6 5.2 5.2 −
                              12 836.8 118.6 265.7 26.8 239.0 18.8 4.4 4.4 −
                              19 840.2 118.6 267.6 28.2 239.5 19.3 4.8 4.8 −
                              26 853.5 118.6 266.5 27.9 238.6 19.6 4.5 4.5 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
1999         Apr. 214.9 29.0 57.1 9.1 48.0 − 18.7 18.7 −
         May 218.9 29.0 57.2 8.8 48.4 − 12.8 12.8 −
         June 228.6 29.0 57.1 8.4 48.8 − 33.1 33.1 −
         July 255.4 28.1 58.7 8.4 50.2 − 34.2 34.2 −
         Aug. 230.3 28.1 59.0 8.2 50.8 − 18.0 18.0 −
         Sep. 231.8 28.1 59.0 7.9 51.1 − 25.5 25.5 −
         Oct. 235.2 31.8 57.5 8.0 49.5 − 15.3 15.3 −
         Nov. 229.1 31.8 57.8 7.9 49.8 − 3.1 3.1 −
         Dec. 3 242.2 3 32.3 3 60.8 3 8.3 3 52.4 − 9.1 9.1 −
2000         Jan. 235.2 32.3 60.7 8.3 52.4 − 0.8 0.8 −
         Feb. 243.2 32.3 61.1 8.2 52.9 − 6.2 6.2 −
         Mar. 3 242.7 32.2 3 64.6 8.7 3 55.9 − 10.5 10.5 −
         Apr. 239.8 32.2 63.3 7.7 55.6 − 8.3 8.3 −
         May 228.9 32.2 63.1 7.7 55.4 − 11.4 11.4 −
         June 3 242.3 3 33.7 62.3 7.6 54.7 − 4.5 4.5 −
         July 242.2 33.7 61.1 7.4 53.7 − 14.6 14.6 −
         Aug. 269.3 33.7 60.9 7.4 53.4 − 32.6 32.6 −
         Sep. 3 244.8 3 34.9 3 65.9 7.8 3 58.1 − 5.6 5.6 −
         Oct. 263.3 34.9 65.3 7.7 57.6 − 16.5 16.5 −
2000 Nov.                 3 254.8 34.9 65.2 7.7 57.5 − 5.5 5.5 −
                              10 265.7 34.9 65.0 7.7 57.3 − 5.2 5.2 −
                              17 274.7 34.9 65.2 7.7 57.6 − 17.4 17.4 −
                              24 287.7 34.9 65.0 7.6 57.4 − 29.8 29.8 −
         Dec.                 1 255.6 34.9 64.8 7.6 57.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
                                8 261.4 34.9 64.7 7.6 57.0 − 0.3 0.3 −
                              15 259.4 34.9 64.2 7.6 56.6 − 0.3 0.3 −
                              22 256.6 34.9 64.0 7.7 56.2 − 0.3 0.3 −
                              29 256.9 3 32.7 3 61.1 7.8 3 53.4 − 0.3 0.3 −
2001 Jan.                 5 249.4 32.7 61.0 7.7 53.2 − 0.3 0.3 −
                              12 246.3 32.7 60.6 7.6 53.0 − 0.3 0.3 −
                              19 242.2 32.7 60.3 7.9 52.4 − 0.3 0.3 −
                              26 243.5 32.7 59.9 7.9 52.0 − 0.3 0.3 −
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quarter. —
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the statements of the 1Source: ECB. —2Since November 30, 2000, the Bundesbank ’s claims on
national central banks of the EU member countries (NCBs) of the euro and liabilities to non-Eurosystem NCBs arising from TARGET have beenarea. —The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold and shown as a balance under "Other assets" and "Other liabilities". —
16*III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
    
 
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations denominated in euro
 
 Other claims on euro area Securities General
Credits credit government of euro area
Main Longer-term Fine-tuning Structural Marginal related residents debt    On institutions
refinancing refinancing reverse reverse lending to margin denominated denominated denominated Other    reporting
Total  
4 operations operations operations operations facility calls in euro  4 in euro in euro assets    date
Eurosystem 1
 
174.3 128.0 45.0 −− 0.5 0.0 0.8 26.1 60.2 75.9 1999          Apr.
184.9 139.0 45.0 −− 0.4 0.1 0.5 25.8 60.2 74.4          May
170.6 125.0 45.0 −− 0.2 0.0 0.4 26.1 60.2 79.2          June
214.0 167.0 45.0 −− 1.5 0.1 0.5 25.8 60.2 75.7          July
205.2 159.1 45.0 −− 0.3 0.1 0.7 26.0 60.2 78.8          Aug.
198.5 153.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.1 0.4 25.4 60.2 78.8          Sep.
205.3 149.0 55.0 −− 0.7 0.1 0.6 23.4 60.2 79.2          Oct.
209.0 143.0 65.0 −− 0.0 0.2 0.7 23.9 60.1 77.3          Nov.
250.1 162.0 75.0 −− 11.4 0.4 1.3 23.5 59.2 3 79.8          Dec.
216.7 146.0 70.0 −− 0.0 0.1 0.6 24.0 59.3 80.6 2000          Jan.
193.3 122.0 70.0 −− 0.0 0.1 1.3 24.6 59.3 83.3          Feb.
201.7 140.9 60.0 −− 0.1 0.1 0.7 25.3 59.0 3 84.5          Mar.
209.9 147.2 60.0 −− 1.6 0.0 1.2 24.9 59.0 83.8          Apr.
205.4 144.1 60.0 −− 0.2 0.0 1.1 25.2 59.0 83.9          May
234.5 173.0 59.9 −− 0.1 0.1 1.4 25.1 59.0 3 86.3          June
226.3 171.0 54.9 −− 0.0 0.0 0.3 25.4 59.0 84.6          July
222.7 167.0 54.9 −− 0.6 0.0 0.1 25.5 59.0 85.7          Aug.
230.3 185.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.1 0.1 25.6 58.9 3 84.3          Sep.
228.5 183.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.5 25.8 58.9 83.7          Oct.
225.4 180.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.4 25.9 58.8 86.1 2000 Nov.                  3
230.4 185.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.4 26.1 58.8 86.4                               10
230.5 185.0 45.0 −− 0.2 0.0 0.3 25.9 58.8 86.7                               17
243.3 198.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.3 26.0 58.8 87.8                               24
245.2 200.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.1 0.1 26.1 58.8 87.5          Dec.                  1
265.3 220.0 45.0 −− 0.1 0.1 0.2 25.9 58.8 87.5                                 8
264.5 219.0 45.0 −− 0.3 0.1 0.2 25.7 58.7 87.7                               15
259.3 212.0 45.0 −− 2.0 0.1 0.3 25.8 58.3 87.9                               22
268.6 223.0 45.0 −− 0.6 0.1 0.6 26.0 57.7 87.0                               29
248.1 203.0 45.0 −− 0.1 0.1 0.8 28.9 69.4 87.6 2001 Jan.                  5
241.1 196.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.1 1.3 29.2 69.4 88.3                               12
241.1 196.0 45.0 −− 0.1 0.0 1.1 29.0 69.4 89.2                               19
255.2 205.0 50.0 −− 0.2 0.0 1.0 28.2 70.3 89.6                               26
 Deutsche Bundesbank
88.5 63.0 25.0 −− 0.4 − 0.0 − 4.4 17.2 1999          Apr.
98.3 72.9 25.0 −− 0.3 − 0.0 − 4.4 17.2          May
87.5 62.3 25.0 −− 0.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 17.4          June
112.6 81.6 29.6 −− 1.5 − 0.0 − 4.4 17.3          July
103.2 74.8 28.2 −− 0.3 − 0.0 − 4.4 17.6          Aug.
97.2 68.9 28.2 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 17.5          Sep.
108.9 79.6 29.1 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 17.4          Oct.
84.1 49.1 35.0 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 47.8          Nov.
90.6 48.4 32.7 −− 9.4 − 0.0 − 4.4 3 45.0          Dec.
102.8 69.2 33.6 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 34.1 2000          Jan.
93.0 59.4 33.6 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 46.1          Feb.
112.5 67.2 45.3 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 3 18.4          Mar.
103.9 64.2 38.9 −− 0.9 − 0.0 − 4.4 27.6          Apr.
99.5 60.4 38.9 −− 0.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.3          May
93.1 59.8 33.2 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 44.2          June
109.9 74.8 35.1 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.5          July
118.7 83.0 35.1 −− 0.6 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.9          Aug.
108.3 78.0 30.3 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 25.7          Sep.
123.1 92.4 30.7 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.2          Oct.
125.6 94.8 30.7 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.2 2000 Nov.                  3
137.0 106.3 30.7 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.2                               10
133.4 102.5 30.7 −− 0.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.3                               17
134.3 103.5 30.7 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.3                               24
131.8 100.5 31.3 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.4          Dec.                  1
137.8 106.5 31.3 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.4                                 8
136.1 104.7 31.3 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.5                               15
133.9 101.6 31.3 −− 1.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.2                               22
139.2 110.7 27.9 −− 0.6 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.1                               29
131.9 103.9 27.9 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.1 2001 Jan.                  5
129.0 101.1 27.9 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.3                               12
125.2 97.1 27.9 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.3                               19
126.8 98.3 28.3 −− 0.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.4                               26
 
3Changes are due mainly to revaluations at the end of the quarter. — denominated in euro". Since December 29, 2000 "Other claims on euro area
4Until December 22, 2000, "Other claims" were included in "Lending to credit institutions denominated in euro" have been shown as a separate
euro area counterparties related to monetary policy operations item. 
17*III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2. Liabilities *
  
Euro billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilitiesaccounts to euro(covering area creditthe Fine- Deposits Debt institutions
On Banknotes minimum tuning deno- certifi- related to
reporting Total in cir- reserve Deposit reverse margin minated cates General Other Fixed-term
date culation Total system) facility deposits calls in euro issued Total government liabilities operations liabilities
 Eurosystem 1
 
1999         Apr. 698.3 332.3 104.4 104.2 0.1 −− 0.0 . 10.2 45.0 41.6 3.4
         May 705.1 335.1 109.5 109.3 0.1 −− 0.0 . 10.2 43.9 40.4 3.5
         June 695.6 337.9 97.5 97.4 0.1 −− 0.0 . 10.2 40.9 37.6 3.4
         July 739.7 345.8 109.8 109.8 0.0 −− 0.0 . 10.2 62.1 58.7 3.4
         Aug. 734.0 340.6 110.5 110.4 0.0 −− 0.0 . 10.2 57.8 54.3 3.5
         Sep. 728.6 340.3 104.0 103.9 0.1 −− 0.0 . 10.2 59.0 55.0 4.0
         Oct. 742.6 343.6 109.9 109.4 0.4 −− 0.1 . 8.6 59.5 55.3 4.1
         Nov. 743.1 343.3 106.3 106.1 0.1 −− 0.2 . 7.9 65.7 61.7 4.0
         Dec. 3 803.2 375.0 117.1 114.5 2.6 −− 0.0 . 7.9 60.6 56.5 4.1
2000         Jan. 772.7 348.0 115.7 115.5 0.1 −− 0.0 . 7.9 56.8 52.3 4.5
         Feb. 752.2 345.0 95.5 95.4 0.1 −− 0.0 . 7.9 60.8 57.3 3.5
         Mar. 3 774.4 347.9 111.2 110.1 1.1 −−− . 6.3 52.3 48.7 3.6
         Apr. 783.0 354.3 111.9 101.5 10.4 −− 0.0 . 6.3 53.8 50.3 3.6
         May 779.2 350.9 115.9 115.9 0.0 −− 0.0 . 6.3 47.7 44.0 3.7
         June 3 812.5 355.7 120.4 120.3 0.1 −− 0.0 . 6.3 65.2 61.5 3.7
         July 800.7 358.5 113.5 113.4 0.0 −− 0.0 . 6.3 60.1 56.7 3.4
         Aug. 797.0 353.8 106.5 106.5 0.0 −− 0.0 . 6.3 65.5 61.9 3.5
         Sep. 3 826.3 354.8 115.3 114.9 0.4 −−− . 4.6 58.1 54.3 3.8
         Oct. 822.1 352.1 121.7 121.7 0.1 −−− . 4.6 49.4 45.7 3.7
2000 Nov.                 3 821.3 355.7 116.3 116.2 0.1 −−− . 3.8 51.1 47.4 3.7
                              10 821.9 354.1 114.8 114.7 0.1 −−− . 3.8 54.3 50.1 4.1
                              17 819.0 351.9 111.5 111.4 0.1 −−− . 3.8 56.5 52.2 4.3
                              24 833.1 350.1 113.7 113.6 0.1 −−− . 3.8 67.4 63.4 4.0
         Dec.                 1 834.6 356.4 125.6 125.5 0.1 −−− . 3.8 51.7 48.2 3.4
                                8 856.0 363.8 116.4 116.3 0.1 −−− . 3.8 73.4 69.6 3.8
                              15 854.4 364.3 117.9 117.8 0.1 −−− . 3.8 68.1 64.2 3.9
                              22 848.6 373.1 115.7 114.4 1.3 −−− . 3.8 54.0 50.1 3.9
                              29 3 835.1 371.4 124.6 124.4 0.2 −−− 0.3 3.8 57.0 53.4 3.7
2001 Jan.                 5 843.8 372.8 117.3 117.2 0.1 −− 0.0 7.7 3.8 57.3 51.2 6.1
                              12 836.8 365.7 117.1 117.0 0.1 −− 0.1 8.2 3.8 56.8 50.9 5.8
                              19 840.2 359.9 124.2 124.0 0.1 −− 0.1 8.1 3.8 55.5 49.7 5.9
                              26 853.5 355.6 123.5 123.4 0.0 −− 0.0 8.0 3.8 73.8 68.0 5.7
 Deutsche Bundesbank
1999         Apr. 214.9 128.3 33.4 33.3 0.1 −−− . − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         May 218.9 128.8 27.7 27.6 0.1 −−− . − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         June 228.6 128.9 25.9 25.8 0.1 −−− . − 0.5 0.1 0.3
         July 255.4 130.2 33.8 33.7 0.0 −−− . − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Aug. 230.3 129.7 29.6 29.6 0.0 −−− . − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Sep. 231.8 129.7 25.7 25.6 0.1 −−− . − 0.4 0.1 0.3
         Oct. 235.2 130.2 42.1 41.7 0.4 −−− . − 0.7 0.2 0.4
         Nov. 229.1 131.0 31.1 31.1 0.1 −−− . − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Dec. 3 242.2 140.2 41.9 39.8 2.1 −−− . − 0.5 0.1 0.4
2000         Jan. 235.2 131.8 30.1 30.0 0.1 −−− . − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Feb. 243.2 130.9 29.1 29.0 0.1 −−− . − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Mar. 3 242.7 131.2 39.0 38.0 1.0 −−− . − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Apr. 239.8 132.5 42.2 31.8 10.4 −−− . − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         May 228.9 130.9 34.1 34.1 0.0 −−− . − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         June 3 242.3 131.5 45.2 45.2 0.0 −−− . − 0.6 0.1 0.6
         July 242.2 131.4 35.8 35.8 0.0 −−− . − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Aug. 269.3 130.9 34.3 34.3 0.0 −−− . − 0.4 0.1 0.4
         Sep. 3 244.8 131.3 37.2 37.1 0.1 −−− . − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Oct. 263.3 130.1 32.2 32.2 0.0 −−− . − 0.4 0.1 0.4
2000 Nov.                 3 254.8 131.0 35.5 35.5 0.0 −−− . − 0.4 0.1 0.4
                              10 265.7 130.5 33.5 33.4 0.1 −−− . − 0.5 0.1 0.4
                              17 274.7 130.0 35.9 35.8 0.1 −−− . − 0.4 0.1 0.4
                              24 287.7 129.3 31.0 30.9 0.1 −−− . − 0.4 0.1 0.3
         Dec.                 1 255.6 131.0 35.1 35.0 0.1 −−− . − 0.5 0.1 0.4
                                8 261.4 133.1 37.4 37.3 0.1 −−− . − 0.5 0.1 0.4
                              15 259.4 133.3 37.0 36.9 0.1 −−− . − 0.5 0.1 0.4
                              22 256.6 135.4 32.1 31.7 0.4 −−− . − 0.5 0.1 0.4
                              29 3 256.9 133.9 47.0 46.9 0.1 −−−− − 0.5 0.1 0.4
2001 Jan.                 5 249.4 131.6 28.0 28.0 0.0 −−−− − 0.5 0.1 0.5
                              12 246.3 129.8 32.5 32.4 0.1 −−−− − 0.5 0.1 0.4
                              19 242.2 128.3 37.4 37.4 0.1 −−−− − 0.4 0.1 0.4
                              26 243.5 126.8 33.1 33.1 0.0 −−−− − 0.5 0.1 0.4
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the area. —The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold and
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the statements of the financial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quarter. —
national central banks of the EU member countries (NCBs) of the euro 1Source: ECB. —2Whereas the consolidated financial statement of the
18*III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
    
 
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated inforeign currency
 
Liabilities  
Liabilities to euro area Liabilities Counterpart  to non-euro residents Deposits, arising of special  area residents denominated balances from the drawing  Capital    Ondenominated in foreign and other Other Revaluation and    reporting credit facility rights allocated
in euro  
2 currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF liabilities accounts reserves    date
Eurosystem 1
 
7.2 1.0 7.9 7.9 − 6.0 51.2 78.5 54.6 1999          Apr.
7.8 0.9 8.8 8.8 − 6.0 49.5 78.5 54.8          May
7.1 0.7 9.3 9.3 − 6.0 54.3 78.5 53.2          June
6.7 0.9 10.6 10.6 − 6.2 51.8 82.5 53.2          July
7.5 1.0 9.3 9.3 − 6.2 55.2 82.5 53.2          Aug.
7.3 0.9 10.5 10.5 − 6.2 54.7 82.5 53.2          Sep.
7.1 1.3 9.8 9.8 − 6.2 53.5 89.8 53.2          Oct.
7.3 1.0 8.7 8.7 − 6.2 53.6 89.8 53.2          Nov.
7.8 0.9 3 11.9 3 11.9 − 6.5 3 54.7 3 107.3 53.4          Dec.
7.0 1.2 13.3 13.3 − 6.5 55.6 107.5 53.4 2000          Jan.
7.8 0.8 10.5 10.5 − 6.5 55.7 107.4 54.2          Feb.
7.0 0.9 9.9 9.9 − 6.8 3 59.9 3 118.0 54.3          Mar.
7.7 0.8 13.5 13.5 − 6.8 55.3 118.0 54.6          Apr.
7.3 0.8 14.7 14.7 − 6.8 55.9 118.0 55.0          May
7.3 0.8 13.3 13.3 − 6.7 3 60.7 3 120.9 55.1          June
7.3 0.8 11.8 11.8 − 6.7 59.7 120.9 55.1          July
8.1 0.8 10.7 10.7 − 6.7 62.5 120.9 55.1          Aug.
9.2 0.9 11.7 11.7 − 7.1 65.4 144.2 55.1          Sep.
9.3 0.9 11.8 11.8 − 7.1 65.9 144.2 55.1          Oct.
9.5 0.9 12.2 12.2 − 7.1 65.5 144.2 55.1 2000 Nov.                  3
9.9 0.9 12.0 12.0 − 7.1 65.8 144.2 55.1                               10
10.9 0.9 10.0 10.0 − 7.1 67.1 144.2 55.1                               17
11.4 0.9 10.3 10.3 − 7.1 69.1 144.2 55.2                               24
10.7 0.9 10.7 10.7 − 7.1 68.4 144.2 55.2          Dec.                  1
10.7 0.9 12.2 12.2 − 7.1 68.5 144.2 55.2                                 8
10.8 0.9 12.4 12.4 − 7.1 69.8 144.2 55.2                               15
11.1 0.9 12.7 12.7 − 7.1 70.9 144.2 55.2                               22
10.8 0.8 12.4 12.4 − 6.7 73.5 3 117.7 56.1                               29
11.7 5.8 10.8 10.8 − 7.2 76.2 118.8 54.4 2001 Jan.                  5
10.9 5.7 11.5 11.5 − 7.2 76.4 119.1 54.4                               12
10.9 5.4 13.5 13.5 − 7.2 78.2 119.1 54.4                               19
11.1 5.1 13.0 13.0 − 7.2 78.9 119.3 54.4                               26
 Deutsche Bundesbank
7.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.5 10.0 28.7 5.1 1999          Apr.
8.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.5 17.6 28.7 5.1          May
7.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.5 31.0 28.7 5.1          June
6.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.6 48.9 29.4 5.1          July
13.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.6 21.1 29.4 5.1          Aug.
16.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.6 23.3 29.4 5.1          Sep.
6.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.6 18.0 31.4 5.1          Oct.
18.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.6 10.4 31.4 5.1          Nov.
6.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 3 11.7 3 35.0 5.1          Dec.
18.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 12.3 35.0 5.1 2000          Jan.
28.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 12.8 35.0 5.1          Feb.
13.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 13.6 3 38.0 5.1          Mar.
10.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 9.3 38.0 5.1          Apr.
6.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 11.7 38.0 5.1          May
8.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 3 11.1 3 39.0 5.1          June
6.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 22.0 39.0 5.1          July
7.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 50.9 39.0 5.1          Aug.
10.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.8 3 13.5 3 45.2 5.1          Sep.
7.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.8 40.7 45.2 5.1          Oct.
7.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.8 27.9 45.2 5.1 2000 Nov.                  3
8.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.8 41.3 45.2 5.1                               10
8.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.8 48.2 45.2 5.1                               17
8.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.8 66.1 45.2 5.1                               24
6.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.8 30.4 45.2 5.1          Dec.                  1
6.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.8 31.8 45.2 5.1                                 8
6.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.8 30.0 45.2 5.1                               15
6.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.8 29.9 45.2 5.1                               22
6.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 22.9 3 39.2 5.1                               29
6.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 36.7 39.2 5.1 2001 Jan.                  5
6.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 31.0 39.2 5.1                               12
6.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 23.4 39.2 5.1                               19
6.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 30.4 39.2 5.1                               26
 
Eurosystem shows the bilateral TARGET balances of the individual non-Eurosystem NCBs. —3Changes are due mainly to revaluations at the
non-Eurosystem NCBs as an aggregated (net) figure, the Bundesbank state- end of the quarter. ment reports gross figures for the claims on and liabilities to the individual
19*III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
IV. Banks
 
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
   Assets
 
 Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 euro billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area  3 Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other member countries to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and indi-
viduals
Secur- Secur-
Balance- ities itiessheet Cash Ad- issued Ad- issued Ad-
Period total  
2 in hand Total Total vances  3 by banks Total vances  3 by banks Total Total Total vances  3 
 End of year or month
 
1991 5,751.6 23.9 1,713.9 1,576.9 1,122.9 454.0 137.0 117.2 19.8 3,437.9 3,380.2 2,665.2 2,573.71992 6,143.1 27.8 1,779.6 1,638.4 1,168.0 470.4 141.2 116.8 24.3 3,727.7 3,665.2 2,898.1 2,775.01993 6,799.5 27.8 1,940.4 1,757.5 1,212.6 544.9 182.9 151.9 31.0 4,085.0 4,005.8 3,156.8 2,980.31994 7,205.7 26.2 2,030.1 1,854.1 1,285.1 569.1 175.9 145.0 30.9 4,411.4 4,333.2 3,391.3 3,143.2
1995 7,778.7 27.3 2,210.2 2,019.0 1,399.8 619.3 191.2 158.0 33.2 4,723.3 4,635.0 3,548.8 3,298.7
1996 8,540.5 30.3 2,523.0 2,301.1 1,585.7 715.4 221.9 181.2 40.7 5,084.7 4,981.9 3,812.8 3,543.01997 9,368.2 30.7 2,836.0 2,580.7 1,758.6 822.1 255.3 208.8 46.5 5,408.8 5,269.5 4,041.3 3,740.81998 10,355.5 29.9 3,267.4 2,939.4 1,977.4 962.0 328.1 264.9 63.1 5,833.9 5,615.9 4,361.0 3,966.51999 5,678.5 17.2 1,836.9 1,635.0 1,081.4 553.6 201.9 161.8 40.1 3,127.4 2,958.6 2,326.4 2,093.4
2000 6,083.9 16.1 1,977.2 1,724.3 1,108.9 615.4 252.8 184.5 68.3 3,249.9 3,062.5 2,445.6 2,186.61999         Mar. 5,297.8 12.8 1,681.5 1,493.9 977.8 516.1 187.6 160.0 27.5 2,979.1 2,846.1 2,213.6 1,992.6
         Apr. 5,351.8 12.7 1,711.3 1,518.3 993.2 525.2 193.0 163.1 29.8 2,994.9 2,857.3 2,227.8 1,999.1
         May 5,394.1 13.4 1,723.0 1,528.3 998.2 530.1 194.7 163.9 30.8 3,023.0 2,877.5 2,239.2 2,006.4         June 5,412.9 13.5 1,735.4 1,536.2 1,001.2 534.9 199.2 167.1 32.1 3,019.9 2,871.9 2,243.1 2,027.3
         July 5,437.2 13.1 1,749.2 1,546.1 1,010.1 536.1 203.1 168.9 34.1 3,028.3 2,877.2 2,248.1 2,032.2
         Aug. 5,486.7 13.2 1,782.1 1,576.3 1,035.3 541.0 205.8 170.9 34.9 3,033.5 2,879.8 2,255.0 2,038.3         Sep. 5,541.7 13.3 1,818.2 1,605.2 1,056.8 548.4 213.0 175.9 37.1 3,057.5 2,900.4 2,271.4 2,052.1
         Oct. 5,612.0 13.5 1,840.1 1,624.7 1,070.0 554.7 215.3 176.7 38.6 3,085.4 2,922.3 2,280.6 2,060.3
         Nov. 5,697.7 13.2 1,868.8 1,645.3 1,086.2 559.1 223.5 184.2 39.3 3,110.0 2,944.7 2,298.3 2,073.7         Dec. 5,678.5 17.2 1,836.9 1,635.0 1,081.4 553.6 201.9 161.8 40.1 3,127.4 2,958.6 2,326.4 2,093.4
2000         Jan. 5,706.5 13.5 1,836.5 1,624.2 1,065.9 558.3 212.2 171.2 41.0 3,147.9 2,975.0 2,333.3 2,098.5
         Feb. 5,725.8 13.5 1,823.6 1,611.1 1,047.1 564.0 212.5 169.2 43.3 3,162.8 2,986.2 2,345.6 2,106.7         Mar. 5,804.8 13.1 1,856.6 1,639.4 1,060.6 578.8 217.2 171.9 45.3 3,202.3 3,022.9 2,388.6 2,118.1
         Apr. 5,860.7 14.2 1,863.5 1,647.9 1,059.0 588.9 215.6 169.8 45.8 3,219.3 3,038.4 2,403.5 2,128.7
         May 5,910.4 13.9 1,899.3 1,677.6 1,076.0 601.7 221.6 172.4 49.3 3,231.2 3,050.7 2,418.7 2,136.7         June 5,848.3 13.3 1,887.5 1,665.5 1,066.9 598.6 222.0 171.5 50.6 3,197.2 3,016.9 2,391.1 2,143.6
         July 5,861.8 13.4 1,876.6 1,656.9 1,047.5 609.4 219.6 168.1 51.5 3,199.7 3,019.0 2,392.2 2,142.6
         Aug. 5,917.1 13.5 1,900.5 1,667.9 1,055.9 612.0 232.7 178.8 53.9 3,206.9 3,024.2 2,401.9 2,151.7         Sep. 5,945.4 13.6 1,903.9 1,658.9 1,044.9 614.0 244.9 189.2 55.8 3,214.2 3,029.3 2,421.7 2,169.2
         Oct. 6,019.6 14.0 1,927.4 1,684.1 1,068.1 616.0 243.3 185.6 57.7 3,228.2 3,040.6 2,425.9 2,173.9
         Nov. 6,076.1 13.4 1,961.1 1,714.5 1,100.0 614.5 246.5 185.3 61.3 3,242.7 3,055.6 2,436.8 2,181.2         Dec. 6,083.9 16.1 1,977.2 1,724.3 1,108.9 615.4 252.8 184.5 68.3 3,249.9 3,062.5 2,445.6 2,186.6
 Changes 1
1992 7.5 3.3 −31.5 −29.1 −29.2 0.1 −2.3 − 2.6 0.2 49.9 50.9 46.3 39.5
1993 135.5 2.1 16.2 0.4 −12.9 13.3 15.8 14.7 1.1 71.8 67.1 67.9 54.6
1994 115.6 2.1 31.5 19.3 22.1 −2.8 12.2 12.5 −0.3 45.6 46.8 39.9 15.0
1995 107.8 3.7 41.8 36.5 26.8 9.7 5.3 5.5 −0.2 47.7 46.2 43.0 41.0
1996 111.6 6.7 18.1 7.7 5.6 2.1 10.4 9.8 0.7 58.0 53.1 74.2 73.71997 41.8 6.2 2.0 −3.3 −0.4 −2.9 5.3 6.6 −1.3 20.4 16.9 52.7 50.7
1998 52.7 4.7 −7.4 −18.8 −18.5 −0.2 11.3 11.0 0.3 80.5 65.5 99.1 77.2
1999 −18.3 4.0 −31.2 −9.6 −4.8 −4.8 −21.6 − 22.4 0.8 18.3 14.7 28.3 19.7
2000 29.7 2.7 16.7 10.1 8.9 1.3 6.6 − 0.7 7.3 11.6 10.0 11.8 8.3
1999         Apr. 52.0 −0.1 29.8 24.4 15.4 9.0 5.3 3.1 2.3 15.6 11.2 14.2 6.4
         May 40.1 0.8 11.7 10.0 5.1 4.9 1.7 0.7 1.0 27.6 19.8 11.1 7.0         June 16.2 0.0 12.3 7.8 3.0 4.8 4.5 3.2 1.3 −3.4 −5.7 3.7 20.8
         July 28.4 −0.4 13.8 10.0 8.8 1.1 3.9 1.8 2.0 7.8 4.3 4.1 4.0
         Aug. 45.8 0.1 32.7 30.1 25.3 4.8 2.6 1.9 0.7 4.4 2.3 6.6 5.8         Sep. 55.6 0.1 36.0 28.8 21.4 7.4 7.2 5.0 2.2 23.9 20.5 16.4 13.7
         Oct. 66.3 0.1 21.8 19.5 13.3 6.3 2.3 0.9 1.4 27.3 21.6 8.9 8.0
         Nov. 77.8 −0.3 28.6 20.6 16.2 4.4 8.0 7.4 0.6 23.1 21.6 16.9 12.7
         Dec. −18.3 4.0 −31.2 −9.6 −4.8 −4.8 −21.6 − 22.4 0.8 18.3 14.7 28.3 19.7
2000         Jan. 23.6 −3.7 1.1 −9.2 −15.5 6.3 10.3 9.4 0.9 17.7 13.9 4.0 2.0
         Feb. 19.2 −0.0 −12.3 −12.6 −18.8 6.2 0.3 − 2.0 2.3 15.0 11.3 12.3 8.2
         Mar. 73.4 −0.4 33.0 28.4 13.5 14.8 4.6 2.8 1.9 38.7 36.6 42.9 11.2
         Apr. 44.9 1.0 6.8 8.5 −1.6 10.1 −1.7 − 2.1 0.4 15.2 14.2 13.7 9.4
         May 55.7 −0.2 35.8 29.7 17.6 12.2 6.1 2.6 3.5 12.9 12.9 15.8 8.6
         June −55.8 −0.6 −11.6 −12.0 −9.1 −2.9 0.5 − 0.9 1.4 −32.2 −32.4 −26.0 7.6
         July 6.6 0.0 −11.0 −8.6 −19.3 10.7 −2.5 − 3.4 0.9 1.4 1.3 0.4 −1.8
         Aug. 49.4 0.1 23.8 10.9 8.3 2.6 12.9 10.7 2.2 8.8 7.6 8.5 7.9         Sep. 26.2 0.1 3.3 −9.0 −11.0 2.0 12.2 10.4 1.8 6.5 4.5 19.2 16.9
         Oct. 63.5 0.3 23.5 25.1 23.2 1.9 −1.6 − 3.6 1.9 12.0 10.0 2.9 3.4
         Nov. 64.5 −0.6 33.8 30.5 31.9 −1.4 3.3 − 0.4 3.7 15.2 15.0 11.0 7.4
         Dec. 29.7 2.7 16.7 10.1 8.9 1.3 6.6 − 0.7 7.3 11.6 10.0 11.8 8.3
*This table serves to supplement the Overall monetary survey of section II; includes −in addition to the figures reported by banks (including building
it is planned to compare the figures for MFIs in the euro area with the data and loan associations) −the data of money market funds. —1Statistical
for Germany. Notwithstanding the other tables in section IV, this table breaks have been eliminated from the flow figures. —2Up to December
20*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
IV. Banks
    
 
euro area  3 Claims on
non-euro-area
to non-banks in other member countries residents
 Public Enterprises and Public
 authorities individuals authorities
of which: of which:
Secur- Ad- Secur- Ad- Ad- Secur- Ad- Otherities Total vances  
3 ities 4 Total Total vances  3 Total vances  3 ities Total vances  3 assets   Period
End of year or month
 
91.5 715.0 582.9 132.1 57.7 35.2 35.2 22.5 6.7 15.8 437.1 399.8 138.7 1991
123.1 767.1 556.3 210.8 62.5 35.1 35.1 27.5 6.7 20.8 446.1 398.5 162.0 1992176.5 849.0 599.6 249.4 79.1 44.5 44.5 34.6 8.4 26.3 565.2 504.8 181.1 1993248.1 941.9 650.1 291.8 78.2 39.6 39.6 38.6 8.3 30.3 548.8 479.6 189.2 1994
250.0 1,086.3 792.2 294.1 88.2 39.4 39.2 48.8 11.3 37.6 608.5 526.0 209.4 1995
269.7 1,169.1 857.8 311.4 102.8 36.8 36.8 66.0 17.2 48.8 678.1 575.3 224.4 1996300.6 1,228.2 911.0 317.2 139.2 41.9 41.2 97.3 23.4 73.9 839.6 710.2 253.1 1997394.5 1,254.9 939.1 315.8 218.0 62.5 56.0 155.5 35.6 119.9 922.0 758.0 302.2 1998233.0 632.1 488.4 143.7 168.8 65.3 35.9 103.6 20.7 82.8 511.2 404.2 185.8 1999
259.0 616.9 478.4 138.4 187.4 83.8 44.2 103.6 20.0 83.6 622.7 481.7 218.1 2000220.9 632.5 485.6 147.0 133.0 56.8 32.3 76.2 18.4 57.8 459.8 378.0 164.7 1999          Mar.
228.7 629.5 483.5 146.1 137.6 55.1 30.7 82.5 18.6 63.8 470.9 387.8 162.1          Apr.
232.8 638.3 482.7 155.6 145.5 57.2 31.8 88.3 18.8 69.5 468.1 377.5 166.6          May215.8 628.9 483.8 145.1 148.0 58.4 32.9 89.6 20.2 69.3 474.2 374.3 169.9          June
215.8 629.2 483.0 146.2 151.1 60.0 34.0 91.1 20.0 71.1 484.0 383.4 162.6          July
216.6 624.9 482.3 142.6 153.7 59.8 33.2 93.9 20.0 73.8 490.0 387.4 167.9          Aug.219.3 629.0 482.7 146.3 157.1 58.9 33.2 98.3 20.0 78.3 486.6 382.2 166.1          Sep.
220.3 641.7 493.2 148.5 163.1 60.6 35.3 102.5 20.1 82.4 500.0 396.9 173.0          Oct.
224.5 646.5 496.2 150.3 165.2 62.7 35.9 102.5 20.8 81.7 519.8 415.1 185.8          Nov.233.0 632.1 488.4 143.7 168.8 65.3 35.9 103.6 20.7 82.8 511.2 404.2 185.8          Dec.
234.8 641.7 490.2 151.5 172.9 66.7 37.7 106.2 20.7 85.5 524.0 414.3 184.7 2000          Jan.
238.8 640.6 485.5 155.2 176.6 68.4 37.8 108.2 20.8 87.4 539.9 425.0 186.0          Feb.270.5 634.3 487.1 147.2 179.4 69.2 38.5 110.2 20.6 89.6 545.8 425.7 187.0          Mar.
274.8 634.9 488.9 146.0 180.9 71.0 38.9 109.9 20.7 89.2 571.5 449.1 192.2          Apr.
281.9 632.0 489.1 142.9 180.5 71.2 38.1 109.3 20.8 88.5 568.9 446.4 197.2          May247.5 625.8 485.4 140.4 180.3 71.9 37.4 108.4 20.6 87.8 556.1 432.0 194.2          June
249.6 626.7 487.9 138.8 180.8 75.1 39.1 105.6 19.7 85.9 569.7 439.2 202.4          July
250.2 622.3 482.4 139.9 182.7 78.0 40.8 104.8 19.9 84.9 587.5 456.6 208.7          Aug.252.5 607.6 473.0 134.6 184.9 78.1 42.3 106.8 20.0 86.7 591.3 456.4 222.4          Sep.
252.0 614.8 477.4 137.4 187.6 79.9 42.5 107.7 20.1 87.6 621.2 482.7 228.9          Oct.
255.6 618.8 477.8 141.0 187.1 82.2 44.4 104.9 20.2 84.7 631.6 490.4 227.4          Nov.259.0 616.9 478.4 138.4 187.4 83.8 44.2 103.6 20.0 83.6 622.7 481.7 218.1          Dec.
Changes 1
6.8 4.5 −9.9 14.5 −1.0 −0.8 −0.8 −0.2 −0.1 −0.1 −9.3 −9.4 −4.8 1992
13.3 −0.8 4.9 −5.7 4.8 3.3 3.3 1.4 0.5 0.9 39.1 36.9 6.3 1993
24.9 6.9 4.1 2.8 −1.3 −1.3 −1.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 29.2 26.5 7.2 1994
1.9 3.2 10.0 −6.7 1.5 0.8 0.8 0.8 1.5 −0.7 4.3 −0.6 10.3 1995
0.6 −21.2 −10.1 −11.1 5.0 1.8 1.9 3.2 1.5 1.7 22.7 20.9 6.0 1996
2.1 −35.8 −19.4 −16.4 3.5 0.9 0.8 2.6 4.3 −1.7 11.2 13.7 1.9 1997
21.8 −33.6 1.9 −35.5 15.1 2.2 1.8 12.8 7.8 5.0 −22.2 −23.7 −2.8 1998
8.6 −13.5 −7.2 −6.3 3.5 2.5 −0.0 1.0 −0.1 1.1 −9.3 −11.7 −0.0 1999
3.5 −1.8 0.7 −2.5 1.6 2.3 0.4 −0.6 0.0 −0.7 7.9 5.3 −9.3 2000
7.8 −3.0 −3.6 0.6 4.4 −1.8 −1.7 6.2 0.2 6.0 9.2 8.3 −2.5 1999          Apr.
4.1 8.7 −0.8 9.5 7.8 2.0 1.1 5.8 0.1 5.6 −4.4 −11.8 4.5          May
−17.1 −9.4 1.1 −10.5 2.3 1.1 1.0 1.2 1.4 −0.2 4.0 −4.9 3.3          June
0.1 0.3 −0.8 1.1 3.4 1.8 1.3 1.7 −0.2 1.8 14.5 13.1 −7.3          July
0.8 −4.3 −0.8 −3.5 2.1 −0.4 −1.0 2.5 0.0 2.5 3.3 1.7 5.3          Aug.
2.7 4.1 0.5 3.6 3.4 −0.9 0.1 4.3 −0.0 4.3 −2.7 −4.6 −1.8          Sep.
0.9 12.7 10.5 2.2 5.6 1.6 2.0 4.0 −0.0 4.0 10.2 11.9 6.9          Oct.
4.2 4.7 2.9 1.8 1.5 1.8 0.3 −0.3 0.6 −0.9 13.6 13.1 12.8          Nov.
8.6 −13.5 −7.2 −6.3 3.5 2.5 −0.0 1.0 −0.1 1.1 −9.3 −11.7 −0.0          Dec.
2.0 9.8 1.8 8.1 3.9 1.3 1.7 2.6 −0.1 2.7 9.6 6.9 −1.1 2000          Jan.
4.1 −1.0 −4.8 3.8 3.7 1.7 0.1 2.0 0.1 2.0 15.2 9.9 1.3          Feb.
31.6 −6.3 1.7 −7.9 2.2 0.2 0.6 2.0 −0.3 2.3 1.1 −3.4 1.0          Mar.
4.3 0.5 1.7 −1.2 0.9 1.5 0.1 −0.5 −0.0 −0.5 16.8 15.8 5.2          Apr.
7.2 −2.9 0.2 −3.1 −0.0 0.4 −0.6 −0.4 0.2 −0.6 2.1 1.3 5.2          May
−33.5 −6.4 −4.0 −2.4 0.1 0.7 −0.6 −0.6 −0.2 −0.4 −8.4 −9.6 −3.0          June
2.1 0.9 2.5 −1.6 0.1 2.3 0.8 −2.2 −0.2 −2.0 7.9 2.4 8.3          July
0.6 −0.9 −2.0 1.1 1.2 2.5 1.4 −1.3 0.0 −1.3 10.4 11.3 6.2          Aug.
2.3 −14.7 −9.4 −5.3 1.9 0.0 1.4 1.9 0.1 1.8 2.6 −1.0 13.8          Sep.
−0.5 7.1 4.3 2.8 1.9 1.4 −0.1 0.6 −0.1 0.7 21.3 18.9 6.4          Oct.
3.6 4.0 0.4 3.6 0.2 2.6 2.1 −2.4 0.2 −2.6 17.5 13.8 −1.5          Nov.
3.5 −1.8 0.7 −2.5 1.6 2.3 0.4 −0.6 0.0 −0.7 7.9 5.3 −9.3          Dec.
1998, volume of business (balance-sheet total plus endorsement liabilities bill-based lending instead of bill holdings. —4Including debt securities
and bills sent for collection from the banks ’portfolios prior to maturity) and arising from the exchange of equalisations claims. 
trust funds. —3Up to December 1998, including loans an a trust basis and
21*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
IV. Banks
 
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
   Liabilities
 
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 euro billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area  4 
in the euro area  3 
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities  5 notice  6 
 
Balance- in the in other of which: of which:sheet home member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total  
2 Total country countries Total Total night Total  4 Total 3 months Total night 2 years  7 
 End of year or month
 
1991 5,751.6 1,365.7 1,282.7 83.0 2,617.5 2,482.5 410.5 1,182.8 511.7 889.3 513.4 49.7 2.41992 6,143.1 1,405.6 1,304.2 101.4 2,743.6 2,585.3 444.5 1,228.2 563.5 912.6 522.4 60.6 3.01993 6,799.5 1,556.3 1,438.2 118.1 2,981.8 2,810.6 489.6 1,312.6 628.5 1,008.4 587.7 70.4 3.51994 7,205.7 1,650.9 1,483.5 167.4 3,082.2 2,894.4 510.4 1,288.3 549.2 1,095.8 654.6 79.6 4.1
1995 7,778.7 1,761.5 1,582.0 179.6 3,260.0 3,038.9 549.8 1,289.0 472.0 1,200.1 749.5 110.1 4.5
1996 8,540.5 1,975.3 1,780.2 195.1 3,515.9 3,264.0 638.1 1,318.5 430.6 1,307.4 865.7 137.3 7.51997 9,368.2 2,195.6 1,959.1 236.5 3,647.1 3,376.2 654.5 1,364.9 426.8 1,356.9 929.2 162.5 7.31998 10,355.5 2,480.3 2,148.9 331.4 3,850.8 3,552.1 751.6 1,411.0 461.5 1,389.6 971.9 187.4 9.41999 5,678.5 1,288.1 1,121.8 166.3 2,012.4 1,854.7 419.5 820.6 247.0 614.7 504.4 111.1 6.5
2000 6,083.9 1,379.5 1,188.9 190.7 2,051.4 1,873.7 441.3 858.8 274.4 573.5 450.5 107.9 6.91999         Mar. 5,297.8 1,210.7 1,031.8 179.0 1,941.3 1,786.1 374.4 792.5 238.1 619.2 501.2 109.8 6.5
         Apr. 5,351.8 1,228.7 1,045.0 183.7 1,942.4 1,786.5 382.2 786.1 232.7 618.2 502.2 110.3 6.1
         May 5,394.1 1,244.6 1,064.2 180.5 1,951.8 1,796.5 393.5 786.0 232.8 616.9 504.4 109.8 6.8         June 5,412.9 1,242.4 1,062.7 179.7 1,956.9 1,796.6 400.8 781.6 226.2 614.2 503.4 113.6 9.5
         July 5,437.2 1,265.1 1,087.9 177.3 1,951.7 1,795.6 397.9 786.1 227.7 611.6 502.8 110.0 6.3
         Aug. 5,486.7 1,279.9 1,100.4 179.5 1,955.0 1,798.9 398.6 791.1 229.8 609.1 501.2 109.6 5.7         Sep. 5,541.7 1,293.4 1,102.8 190.5 1,958.6 1,802.5 404.2 790.0 227.1 608.3 499.6 109.9 5.6
         Oct. 5,612.0 1,317.8 1,130.9 186.9 1,966.3 1,808.1 405.2 796.7 232.2 606.2 498.1 111.3 5.3
         Nov. 5,697.7 1,326.1 1,132.2 193.8 1,994.4 1,834.0 428.8 802.1 234.1 603.1 494.9 114.0 8.6         Dec. 5,678.5 1,288.1 1,121.8 166.3 2,012.4 1,854.7 419.5 820.6 247.0 614.7 504.4 111.1 6.5
2000         Jan. 5,706.5 1,311.9 1,124.7 187.2 2,005.4 1,848.8 424.4 814.9 239.0 609.5 500.2 111.2 8.5
         Feb. 5,725.8 1,297.9 1,105.2 192.6 2,011.7 1,855.1 431.2 818.3 240.3 605.6 495.2 110.3 7.2         Mar. 5,804.8 1,327.9 1,135.5 192.4 2,001.9 1,844.2 426.0 818.2 239.4 600.0 488.9 112.0 7.4
         Apr. 5,860.7 1,317.4 1,122.3 195.1 2,004.3 1,844.7 435.2 816.0 236.5 593.5 482.8 113.4 9.0
         May 5,910.4 1,341.9 1,134.2 207.6 1,998.2 1,842.8 428.3 826.9 245.8 587.6 475.7 109.8 6.1         June 5,848.3 1,308.5 1,112.6 196.0 1,996.3 1,833.8 425.5 826.1 243.7 582.3 468.8 110.5 8.1
         July 5,861.8 1,292.0 1,110.3 181.7 1,989.8 1,827.9 422.3 829.0 245.1 576.6 462.2 109.7 7.2
         Aug. 5,917.1 1,318.3 1,130.5 187.7 1,986.8 1,824.5 415.0 836.7 251.8 572.7 456.7 110.7 6.8         Sep. 5,945.4 1,303.6 1,110.2 193.4 2,004.4 1,822.6 412.4 840.2 256.4 570.0 451.8 110.4 6.9
         Oct. 6,019.6 1,339.3 1,151.0 188.4 2,009.0 1,824.0 416.7 841.1 257.3 566.2 447.3 111.1 6.9
         Nov. 6,076.1 1,373.3 1,189.5 183.8 2,019.7 1,846.0 438.1 845.2 262.4 562.7 442.3 110.6 7.5         Dec. 6,083.9 1,379.5 1,188.9 190.7 2,051.4 1,873.7 441.3 858.8 274.4 573.5 450.5 107.9 6.9
 Changes 1
1992 7.5 −14.7 −15.6 0.9 38.8 35.7 −1.1 −1.0 −2.1 37.8 20.2 0.6 0.0
1993 135.5 23.2 20.2 3.0 102.1 98.2 7.7 37.9 35.2 52.6 33.2 1.8 0.11994 115.6 30.0 11.9 18.1 37.2 44.2 3.8 1.8 −7.4 38.6 22.4 −8.9 −0.9
1995 107.8 23.6 27.7 −4.1 86.8 74.0 19.7 8.4 1.2 45.9 32.8 9.8 0.4
1996 111.6 17.4 15.5 1.8 118.0 109.3 46.7 20.7 14.0 41.9 32.0 4.7 2.01997 41.8 −7.0 5.9 −12.9 74.9 72.8 12.9 21.8 16.5 38.0 27.1 0.8 −0.1
1998 52.7 −30.3 −6.3 −24.0 103.9 101.9 25.2 36.5 43.6 40.2 29.6 −1.1 −3.3
1999 −18.3 −38.0 −10.5 −27.5 17.8 20.6 −9.4 18.4 13.0 11.6 9.5 −3.0 −2.1
2000 29.7 6.3 −0.6 6.9 35.2 30.1 3.8 15.6 12.2 10.8 8.2 −1.6 −0.5
1999         Apr. 52.0 18.0 13.3 4.7 0.9 0.4 7.7 −6.3 −5.5 −1.0 1.1 0.4 −0.3
         May 40.1 15.9 19.1 −3.2 9.1 9.8 11.2 −0.2 0.0 −1.3 2.2 −0.7 0.7
         June 16.2 −2.2 −1.5 −0.7 4.8 0.0 7.2 −4.5 −6.6 −2.7 −1.0 3.6 2.8
         July 28.4 22.1 24.6 −2.5 −4.5 −0.7 −2.8 4.7 1.6 −2.6 −0.6 −3.2 −3.2
         Aug. 45.8 14.8 12.5 2.3 3.0 3.1 0.6 4.9 2.1 −2.5 −1.6 −0.6 −0.6
         Sep. 55.6 13.5 2.5 11.0 3.6 3.7 5.7 −1.2 −2.7 −0.8 −1.5 0.3 −0.1
         Oct. 66.3 24.4 28.0 −3.6 7.2 5.4 0.9 6.6 5.0 −2.1 −1.5 1.2 −0.3
         Nov. 77.8 8.3 1.3 7.0 27.2 25.5 23.3 5.3 1.8 −3.1 −3.3 2.2 3.3
         Dec. −18.3 −38.0 −10.5 −27.5 17.8 20.6 −9.4 18.4 13.0 11.6 9.5 −3.0 −2.1
2000         Jan. 23.6 21.4 2.7 18.7 −7.5 −6.1 4.8 −5.8 −8.0 −5.1 −4.2 −0.1 2.0
         Feb. 19.2 −14.1 −19.5 5.4 6.2 6.3 6.8 3.5 1.3 −4.0 −5.0 −0.9 −1.3
         Mar. 73.4 30.0 30.2 −0.2 −10.4 −11.1 −5.5 −0.1 −0.9 −5.5 −6.3 1.3 0.1
         Apr. 44.9 −10.5 −13.2 2.7 1.1 −0.1 8.8 −2.4 −3.0 −6.5 −6.1 0.8 1.6
         May 55.7 24.5 11.9 12.6 −5.4 −1.6 −5.6 9.9 9.3 −5.9 −7.1 −3.3 −2.8
         June −55.8 −33.3 −21.7 −11.7 −1.3 −8.7 −2.6 −0.7 −2.1 −5.4 −6.9 1.0 2.0
         July 6.6 −16.6 −2.3 −14.3 −7.2 −6.3 −3.4 2.1 1.1 −5.0 −6.3 −1.2 −1.0
         Aug. 49.4 26.3 20.3 6.1 −4.0 −3.9 −7.5 7.5 6.7 −3.9 −5.5 0.5 −0.4
         Sep. 26.2 −14.7 −20.4 5.7 17.2 −2.1 −2.7 3.3 4.5 −2.7 −4.9 −0.6 0.1
         Oct. 63.5 35.7 40.8 −5.1 3.4 0.9 4.0 0.7 0.8 −3.8 −4.5 0.1 0.0
         Nov. 64.5 32.6 37.7 −5.0 11.6 22.4 21.6 4.3 5.2 −3.5 −5.0 −0.1 0.6
         Dec. 29.7 6.3 −0.6 6.9 35.2 30.1 3.8 15.6 12.2 10.8 8.2 −1.6 −0.5
*This table serves to supplement the Overall monetary survey of section II; breaks have been eliminated from the flow figures. —2Up to December
it is planned to compare the figures for MFIs in the euro area with the data 1998, volume of business (balance-sheet total plus endorsement liabilitiesfor Germany. Notwithstanding the other tables in section IV, this table and bills sent for collection from the banks ’portfolios prior to maturity) and
includes −in addition to the figures reported by banks (including building liabilities incurred in the banks ’own name but on behalf of third parties. —
and loan associations) −the data of money market funds. —1Statistical 3Up to December 1998, including liabilities arising from loans on a trust
22IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
IV. Banks
    
 
 Debt securities
issued
in other member countries  8 Deposits of Money
market central governments  4 
With agreed At agreed papermaturities notice and
of which: money of which: Liabilitiesdomestic market with to non- Liabilities
of which: of which: central arising fund euro- Capital maturities
up to up to govern- from of up to area and Other certificates
Total  
4 Total 3 months Total ments repos  9 issued Total 2 years reserves   Period 2 years  7 residents  10 Liabilities
End of year or month
 
42.6 4.8 4.6 4.6 85.3 85.3 − 4.4 1,054.8 36.0 213.7 229.2 266.3 1991
52.0 5.9 5.6 5.6 97.6 97.6 − 9.4 1,165.7 44.6 260.9 256.6 301.4 1992
60.3 6.8 6.5 6.5 100.8 100.8 − 18.7 1,309.0 66.8 302.5 278.3 353.0 1993
68.5 11.8 7.0 7.0 108.2 108.2 − 53.8 1,418.7 59.4 337.3 305.2 357.8 1994
97.3 11.4 8.3 8.3 111.0 111.0 − 60.5 1,586.7 48.9 393.9 325.0 391.0 1995
120.6 9.0 9.2 9.2 114.6 114.6 − 53.2 1,785.1 35.2 422.1 350.0 438.8 1996
145.8 9.2 9.4 9.4 108.3 108.3 − 54.6 1,973.3 37.5 599.2 387.2 511.3 1997
168.3 13.8 9.7 9.7 111.2 111.2 − 84.1 2,209.9 41.9 739.8 415.9 574.8 1998
99.7 8.9 4.8 3.7 46.6 45.9 2.0 96.1 1,274.0 47.8 487.9 237.0 281.1 1999
96.3 6.7 4.7 3.3 69.8 67.6 0.4 108.6 1,367.6 63.7 599.6 258.5 318.4 200098.5 5.6 4.9 3.5 45.4 44.8 1.9 45.5 1,188.5 22.5 411.4 218.4 280.1 1999          Mar.
99.5 5.5 4.7 3.5 45.5 44.8 1.3 50.4 1,211.3 28.3 421.8 222.9 272.9          Apr.
98.4 5.4 4.6 3.5 45.5 44.8 1.5 53.5 1,225.4 33.9 429.9 226.7 260.6          May99.4 5.8 4.6 3.5 46.7 45.6 1.6 55.6 1,232.9 32.6 428.0 227.9 267.7          June
99.2 6.3 4.5 3.5 46.0 45.1 1.0 55.1 1,238.0 34.7 426.0 229.3 271.0          July
99.3 6.0 4.6 3.5 46.5 45.4 1.6 61.6 1,248.1 34.5 436.4 229.7 274.4          Aug.99.6 6.1 4.6 3.5 46.2 44.9 1.2 69.2 1,270.3 37.5 435.4 232.7 281.1          Sep.
101.4 8.8 4.6 3.5 46.9 45.1 1.8 73.9 1,278.4 43.3 451.5 235.0 287.4          Oct.
100.7 7.8 4.6 3.5 46.5 45.1 1.7 91.4 1,285.5 46.0 477.7 236.1 284.8          Nov.
99.7 8.9 4.8 3.7 46.6 45.9 2.0 96.1 1,274.0 47.8 487.9 237.0 281.1          Dec.
97.9 6.6 4.8 3.6 45.4 44.3 1.9 90.2 1,277.4 50.6 504.1 239.3 276.4 2000          Jan.
98.3 5.6 4.8 3.6 46.2 44.7 1.1 96.4 1,288.2 55.1 518.3 240.1 272.2          Feb.99.9 7.7 4.7 3.5 45.7 44.8 0.9 99.5 1,300.4 58.4 555.3 241.8 277.2          Mar.
99.8 7.0 4.7 3.5 46.1 44.4 2.7 99.9 1,321.9 60.5 586.8 242.9 284.9          Apr.
99.0 6.9 4.7 3.4 45.6 44.2 2.9 101.7 1,339.6 61.7 594.5 244.1 287.5          May97.7 6.4 4.7 3.4 51.9 50.0 1.8 109.2 1,339.0 62.7 554.9 246.5 292.2          June
97.9 6.6 4.6 3.3 52.3 49.9 1.8 112.4 1,360.7 64.5 561.9 247.0 296.3          July
99.3 7.0 4.6 3.3 51.7 50.3 1.7 112.8 1,373.9 66.7 581.0 247.5 295.1          Aug.99.0 6.6 4.5 3.2 71.5 69.2 1.0 109.6 1,377.6 64.9 587.4 248.4 313.6          Sep.
99.6 6.3 4.6 3.2 73.9 71.6 1.3 113.3 1,385.8 62.7 606.3 249.3 315.2          Oct.
98.5 6.5 4.6 3.2 63.2 62.2 1.3 108.6 1,379.3 63.0 621.6 250.1 322.2          Nov.96.3 6.7 4.7 3.3 69.8 67.6 0.4 108.6 1,367.6 63.7 599.6 258.5 318.4          Dec.
Changes 1
0.5 0.1 0.1 0.1 2.5 2.5 −− 1.4 −8.4 −1.7 2.0 4.1 −12.8 1992
1.3 0.1 0.4 0.4 2.1 2.1 − 0.6 −4.8 9.8 6.2 2.4 5.8 1993
−8.1 1.3 0.2 0.2 1.8 1.8 − 21.9 12.5 −16.7 15.7 1.4 −3.2 1994
9.0 −2.3 0.4 0.4 3.0 3.0 − 7.6 9.6 −0.7 −3.8 2.8 −18.8 1995
2.4 0.4 0.3 0.3 4.0 4.0 −− 2.0 −0.2 0.7 4.5 1.7 −27.9 1996
0.6 0.6 0.3 0.3 1.4 1.4 − 0.0 −12.5 −0.5 1.3 3.4 −18.4 1997
2.0 1.3 0.2 0.2 3.1 3.1 − 3.2 −6.1 0.4 −0.4 4.6 −22.0 1998
−1.0 1.0 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.8 0.3 4.7 −11.7 1.8 9.3 0.9 −1.6 1999
−1.2 0.3 0.1 0.1 6.7 5.4 −0.9 1.5 −5.9 0.9 −4.5 8.3 −10.2 2000
0.9 −0.1 −0.2 0.0 0.1 −0.1 −0.5 4.8 22.3 3.1 8.8 4.5 −6.8 1999          Apr.
−1.3 −0.1 −0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.2 3.0 13.5 5.6 6.5 3.7 −11.8          May
0.9 0.4 0.0 −0.0 1.2 0.8 0.1 2.1 6.7 −1.3 −4.0 1.2 7.6          June
0.2 0.6 −0.1 −0.0 −0.6 −0.4 −0.6 −0.4 6.4 2.1 2.7 1.2 1.5          July
−0.1 −0.3 0.0 0.0 0.5 0.3 0.5 6.4 8.6 −0.3 8.2 0.4 3.9          Aug.
0.4 0.1 0.0 0.0 −0.4 −0.5 −0.4 7.6 22.2 3.0 −0.0 3.0 6.1          Sep.
1.5 1.0 0.0 0.0 0.7 0.2 0.7 4.7 6.8 5.7 12.8 2.2 7.5          Oct.
−1.2 −1.0 0.0 0.0 −0.4 −0.1 −0.1 17.3 4.7 2.6 19.8 1.1 −0.4          Nov.
−1.0 1.0 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.8 0.3 4.7 −11.7 1.8 9.3 0.9 −1.6          Dec.
−2.1 −2.3 −0.0 −0.0 −1.3 −1.5 −0.1 −5.9 2.6 2.8 12.1 2.2 −1.2 2000          Jan.
0.4 0.7 −0.0 −0.0 0.9 0.4 −0.8 6.3 10.8 4.5 13.0 0.8 −3.0          Feb.
1.2 2.1 −0.0 −0.0 −0.6 0.0 −0.2 2.7 10.0 3.2 31.9 1.7 7.7          Mar.
−0.8 −0.8 −0.0 −0.0 0.4 −0.5 1.8 0.2 18.8 2.0 20.8 1.1 11.6          Apr.
−0.5 −0.1 −0.0 −0.1 −0.5 −0.2 0.2 2.0 19.2 1.2 13.4 1.2 0.7          May
−1.0 −0.5 −0.0 −0.1 6.4 5.7 −1.0 7.6 0.6 1.0 −34.2 2.4 3.5          June
−0.2 0.2 −0.0 −0.0 0.3 −0.1 −0.1 2.9 20.1 1.8 0.1 0.5 6.8          July
0.9 0.4 −0.0 −0.0 −0.6 0.4 −0.1 −0.2 10.1 2.1 9.6 0.6 7.1          Aug.
−0.6 −0.4 −0.1 −0.1 19.8 19.0 −0.7 −3.4 2.7 −1.9 2.5 0.8 21.9          Sep.
0.0 −0.4 0.1 0.1 2.4 2.3 0.3 3.0 5.4 −2.3 8.8 1.0 5.7          Oct.
−0.6 0.3 0.0 −0.0 −10.7 −9.4 −0.0 −4.0 −4.0 0.4 23.6 0.7 4.0          Nov.
−1.2 0.3 0.1 0.1 6.7 5.4 −0.9 1.5 −5.9 0.9 −4.5 8.3 −10.2          Dec.
basis and liabilities arising from rediscounted bills (endorsement savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 5). —7Up to December 1998,
liabilities). —4Up to December 1998, including liabilities arising from loans with maturities of less than 4 years. —8Excluding central governments ’
on a trust basis. —5For the German contribution: from 1999 including deposits. —9Data collected separately only from 1999; up to December
deposits under savings and loan contracts (see table IV.12). —6For the 1998, included in the deposits with agreed maturities of up to 2 years. —
German contribution: up to the end of 1998 including deposits under 10 Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued. 
23*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
IV. Banks
 
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks *
  
euro billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
  of which: of which: 
Loans and advances
 not evidenced
 Cash in by certificates for hand and
Number of balancesreporting Balance with Balances Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by up to over issued by pating Othermonth tions total  
1 banks Total advances banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets
All categories of banks
 
2000         July 2,864 5,926.1 55.3 2,046.8 1,413.1 605.0 3,397.4 403.8 2,467.2 7.9 473.0 115.9 310.7
         Aug. 2,834 5,980.3 56.4 2,075.5 1,437.2 609.2 3,415.5 410.1 2,481.5 7.7 474.2 117.0 315.9         Sep. 2,792 6,009.5 54.8 2,076.4 1,434.4 613.5 3,430.4 419.2 2,486.6 7.6 476.8 118.1 329.8
         Oct. 2,758 6,084.4 49.5 2,123.2 1,476.7 617.9 3,454.8 427.5 2,497.2 7.6 481.5 120.5 336.4
         Nov. 2,743 6,140.4 52.6 2,160.6 1,511.7 620.2 3,471.7 431.2 2,503.8 7.6 488.2 121.4 334.2         Dec. 2,740 6,148.3 67.1 2,147.2 1,497.3 621.6 3,479.5 432.4 2,510.5 7.6 487.2 130.1 324.4
Commercial banks
2000         Nov. 292 1,706.9 17.3 561.1 425.1 131.3 920.1 215.0 525.4 3.7 164.1 75.8 132.6
         Dec. 294 1,704.4 29.3 549.5 410.0 134.5 919.7 211.4 528.8 3.8 167.0 82.5 123.4
   Big banks 7
2000         Nov. 4 961.7 8.9 290.7 227.2 61.8 513.3 117.9 298.6 2.2 92.0 65.6 83.1
         Dec. 4 969.8 20.8 281.4 212.5 67.1 516.7 115.6 300.4 2.2 95.7 73.6 77.3
   Regional banks and other commercial banks 8, 9
2000         Nov. 201 620.6 7.4 211.2 146.3 62.1 355.8 77.2 212.9 1.1 56.0 8.6 37.6
         Dec. 200 613.2 7.9 207.3 143.5 60.6 353.2 77.6 214.5 1.1 54.2 8.9 36.0
   Branches of foreign banks
2000         Nov. 87 124.7 1.0 59.2 51.6 7.4 51.0 19.9 14.0 0.4 16.2 1.5 11.9
         Dec. 90 121.4 0.7 60.8 54.0 6.7 49.8 18.2 13.8 0.4 17.1 0.0 10.2
Land banks 10
2000         Nov. 13 1,216.2 4.5 585.4 466.3 102.0 539.6 58.6 387.5 0.6 76.7 19.6 67.1
         Dec. 13 1,222.7 4.7 588.7 470.2 101.5 541.5 60.7 387.1 0.5 74.0 20.9 67.0
Savings banks
2000         Nov. 563 939.9 17.4 223.8 64.3 158.5 662.2 73.9 496.1 1.9 86.8 10.8 25.7
         Dec. 562 953.9 18.7 231.7 72.9 157.8 665.6 76.2 497.2 1.9 86.7 11.0 27.0
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives (including Deutsche Genossenschaftsbank)  
 
2000         Nov. 4 231.2 1.3 143.3 96.1 46.3 68.9 18.0 30.1 0.3 17.2 7.8 9.8
         Dec. 4 227.4 0.9 141.7 94.1 46.8 67.7 16.3 29.9 0.3 16.9 8.1 8.9
Credit cooperatives
2000         Nov. 1,795 528.9 10.8 132.9 58.4 74.0 363.9 50.8 277.7 1.1 33.5 3.2 18.2
         Dec. 1,792 533.6 11.8 134.0 60.7 72.9 365.9 51.9 278.8 1.1 33.4 3.3 18.8
Mortgage banks
2000         Nov. 31 891.9 0.6 234.2 168.8 64.5 624.2 7.2 537.2 − 77.4 2.4 30.5
         Dec. 31 891.8 1.3 230.7 164.7 65.0 626.5 7.8 539.8 − 76.4 2.4 31.0
Building and loan associations 11
2000         Nov. 32 151.7 0.0 33.3 21.9 11.4 110.0 1.6 99.3 − 9.1 0.6 7.8
         Dec. 31 153.6 0.1 34.5 23.1 11.3 110.4 1.6 99.6 − 9.2 0.5 8.2
Banks with special functions 12
2000         Nov. 13 473.8 0.7 246.6 210.8 32.3 182.8 6.1 150.6 0.0 23.3 1.3 42.5
         Dec. 13 460.8 0.4 236.6 201.6 31.9 182.3 6.5 149.2 0.0 23.5 1.4 40.2
Memo item: Foreign banks 13
2000         Nov. 144 254.7 1.7 111.7 95.6 15.6 111.7 36.9 47.7 0.7 23.2 2.7 26.9
         Dec. 146 251.4 1.5 112.3 97.7 14.2 113.1 35.7 48.6 0.6 25.3 1.1 23.5
  of which: Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 14
2000         Nov. 57 130.0 0.7 52.5 44.0 8.2 60.8 17.1 33.7 0.3 7.0 1.1 14.9
         Dec. 56 130.0 0.8 51.5 43.7 7.5 63.3 17.5 34.7 0.2 8.3 1.1 13.3
*For the period up to December 1998, section IV (except for table IV.1) from rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks ’
shows the assets and liabilities of banks (excluding building and loan portfolios prior to maturity). —2Since the inclusion of building and loan
associations) in Germany; from January 1999, the assets and liabilities of associations in January 1999, including deposits under savings and loanmonetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets and liabilities contracts (see table IV. 12). —3Included in time deposits. —4Up to
of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are likewise classified as December 1998, including loans on a trust basis. —5Excluding deposits
MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). —6Including
respective items, see the footnotes to table IV.3. —1Up to December 1998, subordinated negotiable bearer debt securities; excluding non-negotiable
volume of business (balance sheet total plus endorsement liabilities arising bearer debt securities. —7Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner Bank AG,
24*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
IV. Banks
    
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs)  4 Capital
  (including
of which: of which: published
reserves,
Savings deposits  5 partici- Time deposits for  2 
pation
Memo rightsitem: Bearer capital,
of which: debt Liabilities
funds for
arising At three Bank general securities
Sight Time Sight up to over from savings out- banking Other   End of months ’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year  2 repos  3 Total notice bonds risks   month standing  6 liabilities
All categories of banks
 
1,660.0 210.8 1,448.9 2,190.3 456.2 292.9 738.9 11.8 588.1 470.6 114.1 1,445.9 247.0 382.9 2000          July
1,699.6 229.6 1,469.7 2,193.1 449.5 301.2 743.9 15.1 584.3 465.0 114.3 1,459.4 247.5 380.6          Aug.1,688.6 242.4 1,445.9 2,212.7 449.4 320.8 746.6 12.2 581.5 460.0 114.4 1,460.6 248.4 399.3          Sep.
1,730.9 238.4 1,492.2 2,230.2 452.3 328.5 757.2 15.8 577.7 455.4 114.6 1,472.9 249.3 401.1          Oct.
1,778.8 263.9 1,514.7 2,242.4 474.8 323.4 754.6 18.0 574.2 450.3 115.4 1,461.6 250.1 407.5          Nov.1,775.2 227.2 1,547.6 2,260.7 478.9 328.8 752.0 9.8 585.2 458.7 115.9 1,450.7 258.5 403.2          Dec.
Commercial banks
650.9 160.9 489.8 582.9 202.3 136.0 141.4 14.4 91.3 70.6 11.9 220.0 90.5 162.7 2000          Nov.
641.6 140.5 500.6 592.0 209.6 137.6 140.7 7.6 92.4 71.7 11.7 214.6 98.0 158.2          Dec.
Big banks 7
370.3 103.8 266.5 304.7 103.0 82.7 88.9 13.9 28.5 25.9 1.7 151.1 56.4 79.1 2000          Nov.
369.7 85.8 283.9 307.8 109.4 79.2 88.5 6.1 28.9 26.3 1.7 147.3 63.0 82.0          Dec.
Regional banks and other commercial banks 8, 9
196.8 35.6 161.0 267.4 94.1 50.3 50.1 0.4 62.8 44.8 10.2 68.7 30.3 57.3 2000          Nov.
188.8 34.3 154.0 273.4 95.7 54.5 49.8 0.7 63.4 45.3 10.0 67.1 31.3 52.6          Dec.
Branches of foreign banks
83.8 21.4 62.4 10.7 5.2 3.0 2.4 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 3.7 26.3 2000          Nov.
83.1 20.4 62.7 10.7 4.5 3.8 2.3 0.8 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 3.8 23.6          Dec.
Land banks 10
444.1 53.3 390.7 285.9 31.4 43.3 196.3 1.9 13.9 12.4 1.0 382.3 46.5 57.4 2000          Nov.
439.1 44.4 394.7 291.9 31.9 50.2 194.6 0.7 14.2 12.7 1.0 380.7 46.8 64.2          Dec.
Savings banks
220.8 4.8 216.0 583.5 143.7 64.0 7.9 − 296.3 228.2 71.6 47.4 40.2 48.0 2000          Nov.
234.3 9.0 225.3 590.6 141.8 66.1 7.9 − 302.6 232.3 72.2 47.5 40.3 41.2          Dec.
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives  (including Deutsche Genossenschaftsbank)
 
130.4 29.8 100.7 33.8 5.7 7.4 20.7 1.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 47.8 9.0 10.1 2000          Nov.
129.2 23.3 106.0 33.6 5.5 7.4 20.7 1.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 47.3 9.0 8.3          Dec.
Credit cooperatives
77.1 2.5 74.6 372.1 89.7 57.6 21.8 − 172.3 138.8 30.6 30.7 27.0 22.0 2000          Nov.
81.0 2.9 78.1 375.0 86.6 59.7 22.4 − 175.7 141.7 30.7 30.7 27.2 19.7          Dec.
Mortgage banks
107.4 7.0 100.4 140.9 0.8 2.3 137.5 0.2 0.1 0.0 0.2 600.2 17.0 26.4 2000          Nov.
105.5 3.9 101.6 141.9 1.4 2.7 137.5 0.2 0.1 0.0 0.2 596.5 17.3 30.6          Dec.
Building and loan associations 11
27.8 2.2 25.6 95.3 0.2 0.3 94.4 − 0.3 0.2 0.1 5.4 6.9 16.3 2000          Nov.
28.5 1.6 26.9 98.1 0.2 0.4 97.2 − 0.3 0.3 0.1 5.7 6.9 14.5          Dec.
Banks with special functions 12
120.3 3.5 116.8 148.1 0.9 12.5 134.7 −−−− 127.7 13.1 64.6 2000          Nov.
116.0 1.6 114.4 137.6 1.8 4.8 131.1 −−−− 127.8 13.0 66.3          Dec.
Memo item: Foreign banks 13
128.0 36.1 91.8 55.0 22.7 14.4 12.4 0.1 4.3 3.5 1.2 13.5 10.3 47.9 2000          Nov.
129.6 35.4 94.1 57.0 23.1 16.1 12.4 0.8 4.3 3.6 1.2 13.1 10.6 41.2          Dec.
of which: Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 14
44.2 14.6 29.5 44.3 17.5 11.4 9.9 0.0 4.2 3.5 1.2 13.4 6.6 21.6 2000          Nov.
46.5 15.0 31.4 46.3 18.6 12.2 10.0 0.0 4.2 3.6 1.1 13.0 6.7 17.6          Dec.
Commerzbank AG and, from 1999, Bayerische Hypo- und Vereins- footnote 8. —13Sum of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks and
bank AG. —8From January 1999 including institutions of the discontinued included in other categories of banks and of the category ”Branches (of
category "Private bankers" and including Deutsche Postbank AG. —9Up to dependent legal status) of foreign banks ”— 14Separate presentation of
December 1998, including Bayerische Hypo- und Vereinsbank AG; see the banks majority-owned by foreign banks included in the categoriesfootnote 7. —10Previously known as: ”Regional giro institutions ”.—” Regional banks and other commercial banks ”and, up to December 1998,
11Assets and liabilities of building and loan associations included from 1999 in the categories ”Private bankers ” and ”Mortgage banks ”. 
only. —12Up to December 1998, including Deutsche Postbank AG; see
25*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
IV. Banks
 
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis- à-vis residents *
 
 
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 euro billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs)  2, 3 Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3, 8 
Balances Treasury
Cash in and loans Negotiable Loans and bills andhand and ad- money advances negotiable
Balances market Memo not money mar- (euro-area vances not Securities
notes with the evidenced paper item: evidenced ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- by certi- issued by issued by Trust by certi- issued by by non-
Period coins)  
1 bank Total ficates Bills  4 banks  5 banks  6 loans  7 Total ficates Bills  4 non-banks banks  9 
End of year or month *
 
1991 22.8 90.0 1,424.9 976.5 22.5 − 419.5 6.3 3,147.0 2,813.8 62.5 11.7 181.5
1992 26.8 88.2 1,483.5 1,020.8 19.0 − 435.1 8.6 3,478.2 3,034.9 52.1 9.6 237.8
1993 26.7 75.3 1,596.8 1,076.2 14.7 3.3 493.2 9.3 3,826.4 3,291.6 44.7 5.6 327.71994 25.0 61.5 1,695.6 1,150.6 17.4 4.6 513.6 9.5 4,137.2 3,502.8 45.9 2.2 433.7
1995 26.0 61.0 1,859.9 1,264.9 17.5 4.3 561.9 11.4 4,436.9 3,802.0 46.8 1.4 427.3
1996 28.9 59.7 2,134.0 1,443.3 17.9 3.4 657.2 12.2 4,773.1 4,097.9 44.8 5.9 437.21997 29.3 60.2 2,397.9 1,606.3 18.1 3.6 758.9 11.1 5,058.4 4,353.9 44.7 2.9 473.31998 28.5 63.6 2,738.2 1,814.7 14.6 12.2 887.7 9.1 5,379.8 4,639.7 32.8 5.0 527.81999 16.8 45.6 1,556.9 1,033.4 0.0 19.2 504.2 3.9 2,904.5 2,569.6 7.0 3.0 287.5
2000 15.6 50.8 1,639.6 1,056.1 0.0 26.8 556.6 3.6 3,003.7 2,657.3 6.5 2.3 304.7
1999         July 12.4 39.4 1,477.3 968.6 0.0 5.1 503.6 3.9 2,826.6 2,502.0 7.7 4.4 275.4
         Aug. 12.6 40.0 1,506.0 992.4 0.0 6.9 506.6 4.1 2,829.6 2,507.6 7.5 4.1 273.1         Sep. 12.8 44.1 1,529.0 1,010.0 0.0 9.5 509.5 4.1 2,846.8 2,521.9 7.4 3.7 276.5
         Oct. 13.0 48.7 1,543.9 1,019.0 0.0 11.8 513.0 4.0 2,868.4 2,540.8 7.3 4.5 278.5
         Nov. 12.7 40.4 1,572.7 1,043.5 0.0 16.3 512.9 4.0 2,890.9 2,557.2 7.3 3.8 285.2         Dec. 16.8 45.6 1,556.9 1,033.4 0.0 19.2 504.2 3.9 2,904.5 2,569.6 7.0 3.0 287.5
2000         Jan. 13.0 43.1 1,547.4 1,019.8 0.0 17.9 509.7 4.1 2,922.0 2,576.5 6.8 4.2 297.0
         Feb. 13.0 34.0 1,542.8 1,010.2 0.0 18.7 513.9 3.8 2,933.2 2,580.1 6.7 3.6 305.3         Mar. 12.6 41.7 1,563.5 1,016.5 0.0 22.2 524.8 3.8 2,969.8 2,593.2 6.8 2.7 329.6
         Apr. 13.7 38.9 1,575.1 1,018.0 0.0 25.8 531.3 3.8 2,984.8 2,605.5 6.8 2.7 332.1
         May 13.2 36.7 1,607.0 1,037.2 0.0 25.4 544.5 3.8 2,996.7 2,613.8 6.8 2.4 336.1         June 12.7 48.9 1,583.0 1,016.0 0.0 26.3 540.8 3.7 2,961.4 2,617.2 6.6 2.2 297.8
         July 12.7 41.9 1,581.7 1,003.8 0.0 28.0 549.9 3.8 2,963.4 2,618.9 6.6 3.1 298.7
         Aug. 12.9 42.9 1,591.7 1,011.2 0.0 28.4 552.1 3.7 2,968.0 2,626.2 6.5 2.9 300.0         Sep. 13.1 41.1 1,585.0 1,002.3 0.0 27.8 554.9 3.7 2,972.0 2,634.3 6.4 2.3 296.5
         Oct. 13.4 35.3 1,616.2 1,031.3 0.0 27.9 557.0 3.7 2,982.9 2,643.4 6.4 2.4 298.2
         Nov. 12.9 39.1 1,642.5 1,059.0 0.0 27.1 556.4 3.6 2,997.2 2,651.1 6.5 2.3 305.0         Dec. 15.6 50.8 1,639.6 1,056.1 0.0 26.8 556.6 3.6 3,003.7 2,657.3 6.5 2.3 304.7
Changes *
1992 + 2.8 + 6.3 + 77.6 + 61.0 −3.5 − + 17.8 + 2.3 + 294.3 + 249.2 −10.4 −2.2 + 57.1
1993 −0.1 −12.9 + 133.3 + 75.2 −4.3 + 0.1 + 61.5 + 0.7 + 339.8 + 259.1 −7.4 −4.5 + 102.0
1994 −1.7 −13.8 + 99.1 + 73.6 + 2.7 + 1.3 + 21.3 + 0.1 + 320.5 + 240.2 + 1.2 −3.3 + 86.7
1995 + 1.0 −0.5 + 193.5 + 139.4 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 54.3 + 0.2 + 312.8 + 303.6 + 1.0 −0.8 + 2.9
1996 + 2.9 −1.3 + 257.8 + 161.8 + 0.4 − 1.1 + 95.8 + 0.8 + 336.3 + 311.7 −2.0 + 4.7 + 10.6
1997 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 262.5 + 160.7 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 102.6 −1.1 + 285.2 + 255.5 −0.1 −3.0 + 36.5
1998 −0.8 + 3.4 + 343.3 + 210.3 −3.6 + 8.6 + 130.0 −2.0 + 335.3 + 302.1 −11.9 + 2.1 + 52.1
1999 + 2.2 + 13.2 + 122.1 + 66.3 + 0.0 + 12.9 + 42.8 −0.7 + 156.1 + 136.9 + 2.6 + 0.4 + 16.7
2000 −1.1 + 5.1 + 83.6 + 21.7 −0.0 + 7.6 + 54.3 −0.3 + 100.7 + 83.7 −0.5 −0.8 + 19.0
1999         July −0.3 + 5.1 + 5.2 + 4.4 −0.0 + 0.2 + 0.5 −0.2 + 3.7 + 3.4 −0.2 + 0.2 + 1.4
         Aug. + 0.2 + 0.7 + 28.4 + 23.6 −0.0 + 1.8 + 3.0 + 0.2 + 2.7 + 5.3 −0.2 −0.3 − 2.3
         Sep. + 0.1 + 4.0 + 23.0 + 17.6 −0.0 + 2.4 + 3.0 −0.0 + 17.1 + 14.2 −0.1 −0.4 + 3.4
         Oct. + 0.2 + 4.6 + 14.5 + 8.6 + 0.0 + 2.3 + 3.5 −0.0 + 21.2 + 18.5 −0.0 + 0.8 + 2.0
         Nov. −0.2 −8.3 + 28.1 + 23.7 − + 4.5 − 0.1 −0.1 + 21.6 + 15.6 −0.0 −0.7 + 6.8
         Dec. + 4.1 + 5.2 −15.3 −10.2 −0.0 + 2.9 − 7.9 −0.1 + 15.2 + 13.2 −0.3 −0.8 + 3.0
2000         Jan. −3.7 −2.5 − 8.4 −14.2 −0.0 − 1.3 + 7.1 + 0.1 + 14.9 + 3.8 −0.1 + 1.2 + 10.0
         Feb. −0.0 −9.1 − 4.2 − 9.6 + 0.0 + 0.8 + 4.6 −0.2 + 11.3 + 3.6 −0.1 −0.6 + 8.4
         Mar. −0.4 + 7.7 + 20.2 + 5.6 −0.0 + 3.5 + 11.1 −0.0 + 36.4 + 12.9 + 0.1 −0.9 + 24.4
         Apr. + 1.1 −2.7 + 10.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 3.6 + 6.5 −0.0 + 13.5 + 10.9 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 2.5
         May −0.5 −2.2 + 32.6 + 20.5 −0.0 − 0.4 + 12.5 −0.1 + 13.1 + 9.5 −0.0 −0.3 + 3.9
         June −0.5 + 12.2 −23.4 −20.7 −0.0 + 0.9 − 3.6 −0.0 −33.7 + 3.9 −0.2 −0.2 −37.2
         July −0.0 −7.0 − 2.2 −13.0 + 0.0 + 1.7 + 9.1 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.8 + 0.9
         Aug. + 0.2 + 1.0 + 8.9 + 6.4 −0.0 + 0.4 + 2.2 −0.0 + 6.8 + 5.9 −0.1 −0.2 + 1.3
         Sep. + 0.1 −1.8 − 7.3 − 9.6 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 2.8 −0.0 + 3.3 + 7.4 −0.0 −0.5 − 3.5
         Oct. + 0.4 −5.7 + 30.0 + 27.8 −0.0 + 0.0 + 2.1 −0.0 + 9.5 + 7.7 −0.0 + 0.1 + 1.7
         Nov. −0.6 + 3.8 + 27.5 + 28.8 −0.0 − 0.7 − 0.6 −0.1 + 14.5 + 8.0 + 0.0 −0.1 + 6.7
         Dec. + 2.8 + 11.6 − 0.4 − 0.6 −0.0 − 0.3 + 0.5 −0.1 + 10.1 + 9.5 −− 0.1 − 0.2
*See table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the from rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks ’
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as portfolios prior to maturity). —5Up to November 1993, included in
provisional. Subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following securities (see also footnote 6). —6Up to November 1993, including
Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Up to December 1998: negotiable money market paper; excluding registered debt securities. —
domestic notes and coins. —2Up to December 1998, excluding loans to 7From 1999, no longer included in loans or deposits (see also footnote
domestic building and loan associations. —3Up to December 1998, 3). —8Up to December 1998, including loans to domestic building and loan
including loans on a trust basis; see also footnote 7. —4Up to December associations. —9Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of
1998, bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising equalisation claims; see also footnote 10. —10Including debt securities
26*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
IV. Banks
    
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3, 11, 12  Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3, 17 
Partici-patinginterestsin
Memo domestic Bills Memo Memo
Equalisa- item: banks Sight Time redis- item: Sight Time Savings Bank item:tion Trust and deposits deposits counted Trust deposits deposits deposits savings Trust
loans  
7 Total 13, 14  14, 15  16 loans  7 Total 13 15, 18  19 bonds  20 loans  7   Period claims  10 enterprises
End of year or month *
 
2.4 75.1 41.3 1,249.6 226.9 913.1 87.8 21.7 2,462.7 431.3 976.6 754.1 236.7 64.0 1991
64.3 79.5 49.4 1,266.2 301.2 864.7 78.0 22.4 2,570.4 468.3 1,020.9 770.7 240.0 70.4 199275.3 81.6 59.5 1,395.2 380.2 917.9 69.2 27.9 2,788.1 513.6 1,123.6 859.4 219.1 72.4 199368.1 84.4 70.7 1,427.9 342.8 976.9 75.2 33.1 2,875.7 540.2 1,109.3 940.5 206.9 78.8 1994
71.3 88.1 83.2 1,539.4 363.9 1,065.1 75.5 35.0 3,021.1 579.9 1,086.1 1,046.1 227.4 81.6 1995
81.3 106.0 89.7 1,731.0 401.1 1,202.4 75.4 52.2 3,241.5 675.1 1,109.8 1,143.0 227.8 85.8 199676.0 107.6 95.1 1,902.3 427.6 1,349.1 75.6 50.0 3,341.9 689.8 1,146.9 1,182.1 236.9 86.1 199771.6 102.8 129.2 2,086.9 472.5 1,505.2 59.4 49.7 3,520.3 799.5 1,194.1 1,211.0 234.9 80.9 199837.5 58.0 75.6 1,122.0 114.4 1,007.3 0.3 29.8 1,905.3 420.4 759.6 614.7 110.7 42.1 1999
33.1 58.5 82.7 1,189.2 113.4 1,075.3 0.4 30.1 1,945.8 443.4 819.9 573.5 109.0 42.1 2000
37.2 58.2 68.8 1,087.2 113.0 973.8 0.3 29.9 1,845.4 398.6 723.5 611.6 111.8 41.5 1999          July
37.4 57.9 68.1 1,099.3 115.1 983.9 0.3 29.9 1,849.4 399.5 729.4 609.1 111.4 41.6          Aug.37.4 57.6 73.3 1,102.3 119.2 982.9 0.2 29.9 1,852.5 405.2 728.1 608.3 110.8 41.4          Sep.
37.4 57.8 74.0 1,130.9 115.1 1,015.4 0.3 29.7 1,858.1 406.1 734.9 606.2 110.9 41.7          Oct.
37.4 57.8 74.3 1,132.6 126.6 1,005.7 0.3 29.7 1,884.1 429.7 740.5 603.1 110.9 42.0          Nov.37.5 58.0 75.6 1,122.0 114.4 1,007.3 0.3 29.8 1,905.3 420.4 759.6 614.7 110.7 42.1          Dec.
37.5 57.8 74.1 1,125.2 125.7 999.2 0.3 29.8 1,897.5 424.9 754.1 609.6 109.0 42.1 2000          Jan.
37.5 58.1 74.5 1,105.8 119.7 985.9 0.2 29.7 1,904.2 432.1 758.1 605.6 108.4 42.4          Feb.37.5 57.9 74.8 1,135.8 126.9 1,008.7 0.2 29.6 1,893.4 426.6 759.0 600.0 107.8 42.3          Mar.
37.6 57.9 75.6 1,122.7 126.9 995.6 0.2 29.6 1,893.5 435.7 756.7 593.5 107.6 42.4          Apr.
37.6 57.9 76.0 1,134.6 119.0 1,015.3 0.2 29.5 1,891.5 429.0 767.1 587.7 107.7 42.3          May37.6 57.9 77.9 1,112.9 116.8 996.0 0.2 29.5 1,888.2 426.2 772.2 582.3 107.6 42.3          June
36.1 58.5 78.1 1,110.6 100.1 1,010.3 0.2 30.2 1,882.2 422.9 775.0 576.6 107.7 42.4          July
32.5 58.6 78.8 1,130.9 105.6 1,025.0 0.2 29.9 1,879.2 415.6 783.2 572.7 107.7 42.6          Aug.32.5 58.7 79.6 1,110.3 110.3 999.7 0.2 30.0 1,896.5 413.0 805.7 570.0 107.8 42.8          Sep.
32.5 58.5 80.1 1,151.3 111.1 1,039.9 0.2 30.1 1,900.3 417.5 808.8 566.2 107.9 42.7          Oct.
32.3 58.7 80.9 1,189.6 133.0 1,056.4 0.2 30.1 1,912.9 438.7 802.8 562.7 108.7 42.3          Nov.33.1 58.5 82.7 1,189.2 113.4 1,075.3 0.4 30.1 1,945.8 443.4 819.9 573.5 109.0 42.1          Dec.
Changes *
−1.0 + 1.5 + 7.9 + 39.7 + 74.0 −25.5 −9.8 + 1.0 + 126.0 + 33.6 + 69.6 + 16.3 + 3.3 + 3.2 1992
−11.4 + 2.1 + 9.8 + 145.3 + 75.1 + 77.1 −8.8 + 1.9 + 216.7 + 43.8 + 96.9 + 88.7 −14.6 + 2.0 1993
−6.9 + 2.6 + 11.3 + 32.4 −31.4 + 53.0 + 6.0 + 4.9 + 85.0 + 28.3 −14.1 + 81.2 −12.2 + 1.8 1994
−1.2 + 7.3 + 12.5 + 134.2 + 20.4 + 111.5 + 0.4 + 2.0 + 158.3 + 48.9 −14.2 + 105.6 + 11.7 + 6.3 1995
+ 8.0 + 3.3 + 6.5 + 175.9 + 36.6 + 137.7 −0.2 + 1.7 + 218.4 + 94.3 + 23.2 + 96.9 + 0.7 + 3.3 1996
−5.3 + 1.6 + 5.4 + 175.9 + 31.6 + 146.7 + 0.2 −2.6 + 100.5 + 13.0 + 37.1 + 39.1 + 9.2 + 2.1 1997
−4.4 −4.8 + 34.1 + 179.0 + 39.7 + 156.4 −16.2 −0.9 + 179.3 + 110.6 + 47.2 + 28.9 −2.1 −5.3 1998
−0.6 + 0.1 + 9.3 + 69.0 − 1.8 + 81.8 −11.1 −0.4 + 67.3 + 32.7 + 48.4 − 4.5 −9.3 + 0.7 1999
−0.8 + 0.5 + 7.1 + 64.7 − 2.3 + 66.9 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 41.3 + 22.3 + 61.1 −40.5 −1.7 −0.0 2000
−1.1 + 0.1 + 0.9 + 24.7 −12.8 + 37.6 −0.0 −0.1 − 1.1 − 3.0 + 5.4 − 2.6 −0.9 −0.1 1999          July
+ 0.2 −0.2 −0.7 + 11.9 + 1.9 + 10.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 3.9 + 0.7 + 5.9 − 2.5 −0.4 + 0.0          Aug.
−0.0 −0.4 + 5.1 + 2.9 + 4.0 − 1.0 −0.0 −0.0 + 3.1 + 5.8 − 1.3 − 0.8 −0.6 −0.2          Sep.
+ 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.8 + 27.3 − 4.5 + 31.8 + 0.0 −0.2 + 5.4 + 0.6 + 6.8 − 2.1 + 0.1 + 0.4          Oct.
−0.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 1.0 + 10.7 − 9.7 −0.0 −0.0 + 25.5 + 23.1 + 5.6 − 3.1 −0.0 + 0.3          Nov.
+ 0.1 + 0.2 + 1.3 −10.7 −12.3 + 1.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 21.2 − 9.4 + 19.1 + 11.6 −0.2 + 0.1          Dec.
+ 0.0 −0.1 −1.5 + 2.4 + 10.8 − 8.4 −0.0 + 0.0 − 8.1 + 4.2 − 5.4 − 5.1 −1.7 + 0.0 2000          Jan.
+ 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.4 −19.5 − 6.2 −13.3 −0.0 −0.1 + 6.6 + 7.2 + 4.0 − 4.0 −0.6 + 0.2          Feb.
−0.0 −0.2 + 0.3 + 29.5 + 6.7 + 22.8 −0.0 −0.1 −11.1 − 5.9 + 0.8 − 5.5 −0.5 −0.1          Mar.
+ 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.7 −14.4 − 1.3 −13.1 −0.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 8.5 − 2.3 − 6.5 −0.2 + 0.1          Apr.
−0.0 −0.0 + 0.4 + 12.5 − 7.2 + 19.8 −0.0 −0.1 − 1.6 − 6.3 + 10.4 − 5.9 + 0.1 −0.1          May
−0.0 −0.0 + 1.9 −21.2 − 1.8 −19.4 −0.0 −0.1 − 2.9 − 2.5 + 5.1 − 5.4 −0.1 + 0.0          June
−1.4 + 0.6 + 0.3 − 3.0 −17.4 + 14.4 + 0.0 + 0.7 − 6.5 − 3.7 + 2.0 − 5.0 + 0.1 + 0.2          July
−0.0 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 19.3 + 4.6 + 14.7 + 0.0 −0.3 − 3.5 − 7.9 + 8.2 − 3.9 + 0.0 + 0.2          Aug.
−0.0 + 0.0 + 0.8 −20.9 + 4.5 −25.3 −0.0 + 0.0 + 17.0 − 2.8 + 22.5 − 2.7 + 0.0 + 0.2          Sep.
−0.0 −0.2 + 0.5 + 40.0 − 0.2 + 40.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 3.3 + 3.9 + 3.0 − 3.8 + 0.1 −0.1          Oct.
−0.1 + 0.2 + 0.8 + 38.4 + 22.9 + 15.6 −0.0 + 0.0 + 13.1 + 21.8 − 6.0 − 3.5 + 0.8 −0.4          Nov.
+ 0.8 −0.2 + 1.8 + 1.6 −17.6 + 19.0 + 0.2 −0.1 + 35.5 + 5.7 + 18.6 + 10.8 + 0.4 −0.2          Dec.
arising from the exchange of equalisation claims. —11Including liabilities acceptances and promissory notes outstanding and, up to December 1998,
arising from registered debt securities, registered money market paper and including endorsement liabilities arising from rediscounted bills. —17Up to
non-negotiable bearer debt securities; including subordinated liabilities. — December 1998, including liabilities to domestic building and loans
12Up to December 1998, excluding liabilities to domestic building and loan associations and money market funds. —18Since the inclusion of building
associations and money market funds. —13Up to December 1998, and loan associations in January 1999, including deposits under savings and
including time deposits for less than 1 month. —14Including liabilities loan contracts (see table IV. 12). —19Excluding deposits under savings and
arising from monetary policy operations with the Bundesbank. —15Up to loan contracts (see also footnote 18). —20Including liabilities arising from
December 1998, excluding time deposits for less than 1 month. —16Own non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
27*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
IV. Banks
 
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis- à-vis non-residents *
 
 
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 euro billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
Balances and loans and Loans and advances not Treasury
advances not evidenced by evidenced by certificates, bills and
Cash in certificates, bills  3 bills 3 negotiable Negotiable
hand money money
(non- Medium market Memo Medium marketeuro-area and paper Securities item: and paper Securitiesnotes and Short- long- issued by issued by Trust Short- long- issued by of
Period coins)  
1 Total Total term term banks  4 banks  5 loans  6 Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
1991 1.1 419.6 395.8 266.5 129.3 − 17.5 6.4 188.7 142.6 27.7 114.8 1.4 31.3
1992 1.0 405.6 377.4 250.0 127.4 − 21.3 6.8 217.8 157.3 30.2 127.1 0.4 45.2
1993 1.2 533.8 498.3 360.5 137.7 0.1 24.3 11.2 262.5 184.0 48.3 135.7 0.0 63.01994 1.2 492.3 455.0 309.0 146.0 0.1 23.7 13.5 257.4 173.0 35.0 138.0 0.6 66.5
1995 1.2 538.4 500.8 349.7 151.1 0.1 25.6 11.8 289.2 191.1 42.1 148.9 1.7 79.7
1996 1.4 588.9 544.2 386.6 157.6 0.3 31.5 13.0 352.0 230.4 60.2 170.2 4.9 103.91997 1.5 689.1 635.3 456.1 179.2 0.2 43.1 10.5 474.8 312.7 96.2 216.5 6.0 140.31998 1.5 774.9 706.9 533.6 173.3 0.4 58.7 9.0 610.3 364.9 93.9 270.9 11.6 211.01999 0.4 427.1 383.5 279.5 104.1 0.4 43.2 4.2 396.1 235.8 52.7 183.1 7.5 152.7
2000 0.4 507.7 441.4 325.4 116.0 1.3 65.0 3.6 475.8 286.8 71.1 215.7 6.5 182.5
1999         July 0.7 423.5 385.5 285.9 99.5 0.2 37.8 4.0 357.6 217.3 53.5 163.9 4.5 135.7
         Aug. 0.6 428.5 389.8 289.3 100.5 0.2 38.5 4.1 362.3 217.9 50.5 167.4 6.4 138.0         Sep. 0.6 424.8 384.2 283.1 101.1 0.3 40.3 4.1 372.7 223.1 52.9 170.3 7.0 142.6
         Oct. 0.5 437.0 394.7 293.1 101.6 0.3 42.1 4.2 384.3 230.1 56.4 173.7 6.9 147.3
         Nov. 0.5 458.7 415.6 314.7 100.9 0.4 42.7 4.2 393.1 236.4 57.6 178.8 6.7 150.0         Dec. 0.4 427.1 383.5 279.5 104.1 0.4 43.2 4.2 396.1 235.8 52.7 183.1 7.5 152.7
2000         Jan. 0.5 440.8 396.4 292.2 104.2 0.4 44.0 4.2 407.1 243.6 56.7 186.9 6.7 156.8
         Feb. 0.5 448.8 401.8 294.2 107.6 0.5 46.5 4.3 414.4 247.1 59.5 187.7 6.8 160.5         Mar. 0.5 447.4 398.0 288.6 109.5 0.7 48.7 4.2 427.5 254.3 62.9 191.4 6.6 166.7
         Apr. 0.5 457.1 407.5 295.6 111.9 0.5 49.1 4.3 443.1 266.7 68.8 198.0 6.8 169.6
         May 0.7 465.0 412.6 303.1 109.5 0.5 51.9 4.8 438.0 261.4 64.6 196.8 5.4 171.2         June 0.6 463.6 410.1 301.1 109.0 0.5 53.0 5.2 426.9 247.8 52.2 195.6 6.2 172.9
         July 0.7 465.1 409.5 297.5 112.0 0.5 55.1 5.3 434.0 253.4 52.6 200.8 6.3 174.3
         Aug. 0.6 483.8 426.3 313.2 113.1 0.5 57.1 4.4 447.6 266.7 60.0 206.7 6.6 174.2         Sep. 0.6 491.4 432.3 316.7 115.6 0.5 58.6 4.5 458.3 272.7 62.0 210.7 5.4 180.3
         Oct. 0.6 507.0 445.5 327.3 118.2 0.6 60.9 4.5 471.9 282.5 64.6 217.8 6.1 183.3
         Nov. 0.5 518.1 452.9 335.5 117.4 1.3 63.9 3.9 474.5 285.1 68.2 216.9 6.2 183.3         Dec. 0.4 507.7 441.4 325.4 116.0 1.3 65.0 3.6 475.8 286.8 71.1 215.7 6.5 182.5
Changes *
1992 −0.1 −18.4 −22.6 −20.4 −2.2 − + 3.8 + 0.4 + 28.6 + 13.6 + 2.5 + 11.0 −1.0 + 14.1
1993 + 0.1 + 117.3 + 117.2 + 103.9 + 13.3 −0.0 + 0.5 −0.4 + 31.9 + 12.6 + 6.2 + 6.3 −0.4 + 19.5
1994 + 0.0 −24.0 −27.5 −41.4 + 13.9 −0.0 + 0.1 + 3.4 − 1.6 −5.5 −12.3 + 6.7 + 0.6 + 5.1
1995 + 0.1 + 59.1 + 57.6 + 49.2 + 8.4 + 0.0 + 2.9 −1.4 + 38.3 + 21.3 + 7.8 + 13.6 + 1.1 + 16.1
1996 + 0.2 + 34.2 + 29.9 + 27.2 + 2.7 + 0.2 + 5.2 −1.1 + 58.4 + 36.2 + 17.0 + 19.2 + 3.1 + 21.4
1997 + 0.1 + 80.6 + 71.5 + 53.3 + 18.2 −0.1 + 10.4 −1.2 + 109.3 + 73.0 + 33.7 + 39.3 + 0.7 + 32.9
1998 −0.0 + 100.8 + 89.5 + 79.3 + 10.2 + 0.0 + 13.1 −1.8 + 122.0 + 42.7 −6.4 + 49.1 + 5.5 + 66.0
1999 −0.3 + 17.7 + 5.7 − 5.3 + 11.0 + 0.2 + 11.7 −0.0 + 85.8 + 42.8 + 8.4 + 34.4 + 1.3 + 41.8
2000 −0.0 + 78.9 + 56.5 + 44.6 + 11.8 + 0.9 + 21.6 −0.7 + 72.0 + 45.0 + 17.4 + 27.7 −1.2 + 28.2
1999         July −0.0 + 10.5 + 8.6 + 6.7 + 1.9 −0.1 + 2.0 −0.1 + 9.3 + 6.9 + 5.8 + 1.1 −0.6 + 3.0
         Aug. −0.1 + 3.3 + 2.9 + 2.3 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 2.9 −0.6 −3.2 + 2.6 + 1.9 + 1.6
         Sep. −0.0 − 3.8 − 5.8 − 6.4 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 1.8 −0.0 + 10.5 + 5.4 + 2.3 + 3.0 + 0.7 + 4.5
         Oct. −0.0 + 10.3 + 8.8 + 8.8 −0.0 −0.0 + 1.5 + 0.0 + 9.2 + 5.1 + 3.2 + 1.9 −0.1 + 4.3
         Nov. −0.0 + 18.2 + 17.9 + 19.4 −1.5 + 0.1 + 0.2 −0.0 + 4.4 + 3.0 + 0.6 + 2.4 −0.3 + 1.7
         Dec. −0.0 −32.2 −32.7 −35.7 + 3.0 + 0.1 + 0.4 −0.0 + 2.8 −1.2 −4.9 + 3.8 + 0.8 + 3.2
2000         Jan. + 0.0 + 11.6 + 10.9 + 11.3 −0.4 + 0.0 + 0.7 −0.0 + 8.6 + 5.2 + 3.6 + 1.7 −0.9 + 4.3
         Feb. + 0.0 + 7.8 + 5.1 + 1.8 + 3.4 + 0.1 + 2.6 + 0.0 + 7.1 + 3.0 + 2.7 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 4.0         Mar. + 0.0 − 4.4 − 6.4 − 7.4 + 1.0 + 0.2 + 1.8 −0.1 + 9.4 + 4.7 + 2.8 + 1.8 −0.3 + 5.0
         Apr. −0.0 + 5.0 + 5.2 + 4.3 + 0.9 −0.2 −0.1 + 0.0 + 8.7 + 6.7 + 4.6 + 2.0 + 0.1 + 1.9
         May + 0.2 + 11.4 + 8.3 + 9.6 −1.3 −0.0 + 3.1 + 0.6 − 0.7 −1.6 −3.5 + 1.8 −1.3 + 2.3
         June −0.1 + 1.1 − 0.3 − 0.8 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 1.4 + 0.4 − 8.3 −10.1 −11.8 + 1.7 + 0.9 + 1.0
         July + 0.1 − 1.4 − 3.3 − 5.3 + 2.0 + 0.0 + 1.8 + 0.1 + 2.9 + 1.9 −0.2 + 2.1 + 0.0 + 0.9
         Aug. −0.1 + 15.0 + 13.6 + 13.0 + 0.6 −0.1 + 1.5 −0.9 + 7.7 + 8.9 + 6.6 + 2.4 + 0.2 −1.4
         Sep. −0.0 + 7.3 + 6.0 + 3.6 + 2.3 + 0.0 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 8.1 + 3.7 + 1.6 + 2.1 −1.3 + 5.7
         Oct. −0.0 + 10.9 + 8.8 + 7.6 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 2.0 −0.1 + 6.8 + 4.5 + 1.6 + 2.8 + 0.6 + 1.7
         Nov. −0.0 + 15.9 + 11.7 + 11.1 + 0.6 + 0.8 + 3.4 −0.5 + 8.6 + 7.4 + 4.5 + 3.0 + 0.1 + 1.1
         Dec. −0.1 − 1.2 − 3.2 − 4.1 + 0.9 + 0.0 + 2.0 −0.2 + 12.9 + 10.8 + 4.8 + 5.9 + 0.5 + 1.6
*See table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the domestic notes and coins. —2Up to December 1998, including loans on a
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as trust basis; see also footnote 6. —3Up to December 1998, bill-based
provisional. Subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from redisco unted
Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Up to December 1998: bills and bills sent for collection from the banks ’portfolios prior to
28*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
IV. Banks
    
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
 Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bankinterests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memoitem: and and item: and item:Trust enter- Sight Short- long- Trust Sight Short- long- Trustloans  
6 prises  7 Total Total  9 term  9 term loans  6 Total Total  9 term  9 term loans  6   Period deposits  8 deposits  8 
End of year or month *
 
13.5 22.8 253.3 58.8 184.2 88.3 95.9 10.3 93.0 11.5 76.1 24.2 51.8 5.3 199114.8 25.8 297.0 66.7 219.7 119.2 100.5 10.5 125.8 15.8 103.6 34.4 69.2 6.4 199215.5 30.1 328.1 82.9 236.0 122.5 113.5 9.2 162.8 16.9 139.2 39.1 100.1 6.7 199317.3 34.0 402.3 111.6 283.7 150.8 132.9 7.1 181.5 20.6 155.3 41.7 113.6 5.6 1994
16.7 38.8 463.7 116.9 339.7 191.6 148.2 7.0 224.4 22.1 198.0 45.3 152.6 4.4 1995
12.7 45.8 486.5 147.1 335.7 172.0 163.7 3.8 273.5 34.3 237.2 50.0 187.2 2.1 199615.7 54.7 670.3 226.0 440.2 254.3 185.9 4.0 333.9 43.5 285.7 63.0 222.7 4.8 199722.9 62.9 875.7 309.5 562.5 359.1 203.4 3.7 390.3 51.3 329.6 71.8 257.8 9.5 199813.6 33.9 483.6 65.6 418.0 332.3 85.6 2.0 284.4 23.8 260.6 64.9 195.7 5.8 1999
13.9 47.4 586.0 113.7 472.2 382.9 89.3 1.7 314.9 35.4 279.5 62.5 217.0 5.6 2000
13.5 30.5 464.8 80.4 384.4 288.2 96.2 2.0 250.7 23.0 227.8 56.1 171.7 6.2 1999          July
12.6 30.8 476.4 90.4 385.9 288.2 97.8 1.9 252.2 24.9 227.3 53.4 173.9 5.3          Aug.12.7 30.8 478.7 96.8 381.9 284.7 97.2 1.9 259.6 26.2 233.4 56.0 177.4 5.2          Sep.
12.9 31.1 489.1 78.7 410.4 311.7 98.7 2.0 263.8 23.4 240.4 60.8 179.5 5.5          Oct.
13.3 31.1 500.8 95.1 405.7 319.0 86.7 2.0 287.1 27.1 260.0 63.9 196.1 5.7          Nov.13.6 33.9 483.6 65.6 418.0 332.3 85.6 2.0 284.4 23.8 260.6 64.9 195.7 5.8          Dec.
13.7 36.0 514.2 108.4 405.8 314.9 90.8 2.0 291.4 31.5 259.9 61.6 198.4 5.9 2000          Jan.
13.8 36.1 532.6 103.5 429.1 335.3 93.8 2.0 291.3 32.8 258.5 58.3 200.1 5.9          Feb.13.9 36.3 553.0 110.2 442.9 347.5 95.3 2.0 308.6 41.2 267.4 62.0 205.4 5.9          Mar.
14.2 36.7 584.4 116.6 467.8 369.7 98.1 2.1 315.6 44.3 271.3 61.4 209.9 6.2          Apr.
14.2 37.5 595.9 113.4 482.5 386.0 96.5 2.0 320.3 43.1 277.3 69.9 207.4 6.8          May13.9 37.6 562.0 122.3 439.7 345.5 94.3 2.1 303.1 35.9 267.2 61.5 205.7 6.8          June
14.2 37.7 549.3 110.7 438.6 345.9 92.7 2.1 308.1 33.3 274.8 65.0 209.9 7.1          July
14.3 38.2 568.7 124.0 444.7 352.8 91.9 2.1 313.9 34.0 280.0 66.8 213.1 6.4          Aug.14.3 38.6 578.3 132.0 446.2 353.3 92.9 2.1 316.2 36.4 279.8 63.1 216.7 6.4          Sep.
14.5 40.4 579.5 127.3 452.3 358.8 93.5 1.9 329.9 34.8 295.1 69.6 225.5 6.5          Oct.
14.4 40.5 589.2 130.8 458.3 365.1 93.2 1.9 329.5 36.1 293.5 71.5 222.0 6.3          Nov.13.9 47.4 586.0 113.7 472.2 382.9 89.3 1.7 314.9 35.4 279.5 62.5 217.0 5.6          Dec.
Changes *
+ 1.9 + 3.8 + 41.3 + 7.3 + 33.2 + 28.8 + 4.4 + 0.7 + 32.5 + 4.2 + 27.0 + 10.1 + 16.9 + 1.2 1992+ 0.2 + 4.1 + 23.8 + 14.1 + 11.1 − 0.4 + 11.5 −1.4 + 34.3 + 1.0 + 33.2 + 4.0 + 29.1 + 0.2 1993
−1.7 + 4.2 + 85.6 + 31.3 + 56.0 + 33.9 + 22.1 −1.7 + 23.1 + 3.9 + 19.8 + 3.4 + 16.4 −0.7 1994
−0.2 + 5.2 + 71.0 + 7.9 + 64.6 + 45.9 + 18.7 −1.5 + 47.8 + 2.2 + 46.5 + 4.1 + 42.4 −0.9 1995
−2.3 + 5.9 + 11.3 + 27.1 − 13.9 − 26.6 + 12.7 −1.9 + 44.7 + 11.7 + 35.0 + 3.7 + 31.3 −2.0 1996
+ 2.7 + 7.9 + 157.3 + 67.7 + 89.5 + 71.8 + 17.7 + 0.1 + 51.0 + 5.4 + 43.3 + 11.4 + 31.9 + 2.3 1997+ 7.7 + 8.8 + 215.6 + 87.7 + 128.1 + 108.1 + 20.0 −0.3 + 64.7 + 10.4 + 48.9 + 10.3 + 38.6 + 5.5 1998
+ 1.1 + 10.9 + 37.4 −9.2 + 46.6 + 47.6 −1.0 −0.0 + 61.0 + 7.2 + 53.8 + 15.9 + 37.9 + 0.1 1999
−0.2 + 12.8 + 90.0 + 47.0 + 43.0 + 42.9 + 0.1 −0.4 + 24.4 + 11.1 + 13.3 −2.9 + 16.2 −0.8 2000
−0.0 + 0.9 − 2.3 −31.7 + 29.4 + 24.4 + 5.0 + 0.0 −0.8 −3.7 + 2.9 + 2.1 + 0.8 −0.1 1999          July
−1.0 + 0.2 + 9.7 + 9.8 − 0.1 − 1.3 + 1.2 −0.1 + 0.3 + 1.8 −1.6 −2.9 + 1.4 −0.9          Aug.
+ 0.2 + 0.0 + 2.6 + 6.3 − 3.7 − 3.2 −0.5 + 0.0 + 7.5 + 1.4 + 6.1 + 2.6 + 3.4 −0.0          Sep.
+ 0.0 + 0.1 + 8.3 −18.5 + 26.8 + 25.8 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 2.6 −2.9 + 5.5 + 3.8 + 1.7 + 0.1          Oct.
+ 0.2 − 0.3 + 18.9 + 15.9 + 3.0 + 3.7 −0.7 −0.0 + 8.3 + 3.5 + 4.7 + 2.5 + 2.3 −0.0          Nov.
+ 0.3 + 2.7 −18.2 −29.7 + 11.4 + 12.7 −1.3 + 0.0 −3.4 −3.3 −0.1 + 0.8 −0.9 + 0.1          Dec.
−0.0 + 1.9 + 24.6 + 42.5 − 17.8 − 20.7 + 2.9 −0.0 + 4.9 + 7.6 −2.7 −3.8 + 1.1 −0.1 2000          Jan.
+ 0.0 − 0.0 + 17.7 −5.0 + 22.7 + 19.8 + 2.9 + 0.0 −0.3 + 1.3 −1.6 −2.7 + 1.1 −0.1          Feb.
−0.0 − 0.0 + 16.2 + 6.0 + 10.1 + 9.3 + 0.8 −0.0 + 14.6 + 8.2 + 6.4 + 3.3 + 3.1 −0.1          Mar.
+ 0.0 − 0.2 + 21.9 + 5.0 + 16.9 + 15.6 + 1.3 + 0.0 + 2.3 + 2.7 −0.4 −1.5 + 1.1 −0.1          Apr.
+ 0.1 + 1.2 + 18.1 −2.2 + 20.3 + 20.9 −0.6 −0.0 + 8.4 −1.0 + 9.5 + 9.1 + 0.4 + 0.8          May
−0.1 + 0.4 −29.0 + 9.6 − 38.7 − 37.1 −1.5 + 0.1 −15.0 −7.0 −8.0 −8.0 + 0.0 + 0.2          June
+ 0.1 − 0.3 −19.1 −12.5 − 6.6 − 4.2 −2.4 −0.0 + 2.0 −2.8 + 4.9 + 2.9 + 2.0 −0.0          July
−0.1 − 0.0 + 11.8 + 12.5 − 0.7 + 1.3 −2.0 + 0.0 + 1.7 + 0.3 + 1.4 + 1.0 + 0.3 −0.9          Aug.
−0.1 + 0.1 + 6.9 + 7.5 − 0.6 − 1.2 + 0.5 −0.1 + 0.2 + 2.3 −2.1 −4.1 + 2.0 −0.1          Sep.
−0.0 + 1.3 − 7.5 −6.1 − 1.4 − 0.8 −0.6 −0.2 + 9.0 −2.0 + 11.0 + 5.6 + 5.3 −0.2          Oct.
+ 0.1 + 0.7 + 16.7 + 4.7 + 12.0 + 11.4 + 0.7 −0.0 + 4.6 + 1.5 + 3.1 + 2.6 + 0.5 + 0.1          Nov.
−0.1 + 7.8 + 11.9 −15.0 + 26.9 + 28.8 −1.9 −0.1 −8.1 + 0.1 −8.1 −7.3 −0.8 −0.3          Dec.
maturity). —4Up to November 1993, included in securities; see also 1998, including working capital supplied to branches abroad. —8Up to
footnote 5. —5Up to November 1993, including negotiable money market December 1998, including time deposits for less than 1 month. —9Up to
paper; excluding registered debt securities. —6From 1999, no longer December 1998, excluding time deposits for less than 1 month. 
included in loans and deposits (see also footnote 2). —7Up to December
29*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
IV. Banks
 
5. Lending of banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
  
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 euro billion
Short-term lending Medium and long-term
to public authorities to enter- to enterprises and individuals  1 
Lending to domestic
Loans and non-banks, total  1, 2 
   advances Loans and
including excluding not evi- Negoti- advancesnegotiable money denced by able not evi-market paper, certifi- money denced bysecurities, cates and market certifi- Treasury
Period equalisation claims Total Total paper Total cates bills  
5 Total Total bills 3, 4 
End of year or month *
 
1991 3,147.0 2,951.4 602.0 575.8 575.5 0.4 26.1 14.7 11.4 2,545.0 1,941.81992 3,478.2 3,166.6 597.2 571.2 571.0 0.2 26.0 16.7 9.3 2,881.0 2,167.51993 3,826.4 3,417.8 563.2 544.2 540.8 3.4 19.0 16.8 2.2 3,263.2 2,441.81994 4,137.2 3,633.1 583.5 549.1 548.6 0.4 34.4 32.7 1.8 3,553.7 2,661.9
1995 4,436.9 3,936.9 615.2 584.0 583.3 0.7 31.3 30.5 0.8 3,821.7 2,785.5
1996 4,773.1 4,248.7 662.2 617.2 616.2 1.0 45.1 40.2 4.9 4,110.8 3,007.21997 5,058.4 4,506.2 667.8 625.8 624.8 1.0 41.9 40.1 1.9 4,390.6 3,223.41998 5,379.8 4,775.4 704.3 661.3 660.8 0.5 43.0 38.5 4.5 4,675.5 3,482.41999 2,904.5 2,576.5 355.3 328.9 328.7 0.2 26.4 23.6 2.8 2,549.2 1,943.6
2000 3,003.7 2,663.7 371.2 348.2 347.7 0.5 22.9 21.2 1.7 2,632.5 2,038.6
1999         July 2,826.6 2,509.7 349.9 321.4 320.9 0.5 28.5 24.6 3.9 2,476.7 1,876.2
         Aug. 2,829.6 2,515.1 343.5 316.5 315.9 0.7 27.0 23.6 3.4 2,486.1 1,888.4         Sep. 2,846.8 2,529.3 348.8 321.9 321.1 0.7 26.9 23.9 3.0 2,498.0 1,896.1
         Oct. 2,868.4 2,548.1 355.5 320.4 319.9 0.5 35.1 31.1 3.9 2,512.9 1,906.4
         Nov. 2,890.9 2,564.5 357.7 324.4 323.9 0.5 33.2 29.9 3.3 2,533.2 1,920.1         Dec. 2,904.5 2,576.5 355.3 328.9 328.7 0.2 26.4 23.6 2.8 2,549.2 1,943.6
2000         Jan. 2,922.0 2,583.3 358.9 328.8 328.3 0.5 30.1 26.5 3.6 2,563.1 1,951.6
         Feb. 2,933.2 2,586.8 357.9 332.4 331.8 0.6 25.6 22.6 3.0 2,575.2 1,960.4         Mar. 2,969.8 2,600.0 367.7 341.3 340.9 0.4 26.4 24.2 2.3 2,602.1 1,994.3
         Apr. 2,984.8 2,612.3 373.0 347.4 347.1 0.2 25.7 23.2 2.5 2,611.8 2,002.7
         May 2,996.7 2,620.6 372.3 347.2 346.9 0.4 25.1 23.0 2.1 2,624.4 2,017.6         June 2,961.4 2,623.8 370.4 349.3 348.8 0.4 21.1 19.3 1.8 2,590.9 1,986.4
         July 2,963.4 2,625.5 362.2 337.7 337.3 0.4 24.5 21.8 2.6 2,601.2 1,999.1
         Aug. 2,968.0 2,632.6 360.7 337.3 336.9 0.3 23.4 20.9 2.5 2,607.3 2,008.6         Sep. 2,972.0 2,640.8 367.2 350.6 349.9 0.6 16.6 14.9 1.7 2,604.8 2,013.9
         Oct. 2,982.9 2,649.9 372.9 349.0 348.5 0.5 23.9 22.0 1.9 2,610.0 2,019.2
         Nov. 2,997.2 2,657.6 373.0 349.5 348.8 0.7 23.5 21.9 1.6 2,624.1 2,028.9         Dec. 3,003.7 2,663.7 371.2 348.2 347.7 0.5 22.9 21.2 1.7 2,632.5 2,038.6
Changes *
1992 + 294.3 + 240.3 + 16.9 + 18.1 + 18.3 −0.1 − 1.2 + 0.8 −2.0 + 277.4 + 229.7
1993 + 339.8 + 253.7 −15.1 − 9.2 −11.9 + 2.7 − 5.9 + 1.2 −7.2 + 354.9 + 251.7
1994 + 320.5 + 244.0 + 13.2 + 7.0 + 9.9 −2.9 + 6.2 + 6.6 −0.4 + 307.2 + 249.1
1995 + 312.8 + 311.9 + 35.9 + 37.9 + 37.7 + 0.2 − 1.9 − 1.0 −1.0 + 276.9 + 185.1
1996 + 336.3 + 312.9 + 44.3 + 32.6 + 32.2 + 0.4 + 11.7 + 7.4 + 4.3 + 292.0 + 221.51997 + 285.2 + 256.9 + 2.7 + 5.9 + 5.9 + 0.0 − 3.2 − 0.1 −3.0 + 282.5 + 219.9
1998 + 335.3 + 285.5 + 51.7 + 50.6 + 51.2 −0.6 + 1.1 − 1.6 + 2.7 + 283.6 + 258.3
1999 + 156.1 + 139.5 + 9.6 + 6.3 + 6.4 −0.0 + 3.3 + 2.9 + 0.4 + 146.4 + 146.4
2000 + 100.7 + 83.2 + 14.5 + 18.1 + 17.8 + 0.3 − 3.6 − 2.5 −1.1 + 86.1 + 93.8
1999         July + 3.7 + 3.2 −10.2 − 9.2 − 8.9 −0.3 − 1.0 − 1.5 + 0.5 + 13.9 + 12.6
         Aug. + 2.7 + 5.1 − 6.7 − 5.2 − 5.4 + 0.2 − 1.5 − 1.1 −0.5 + 9.4 + 12.1
         Sep. + 17.1 + 14.1 + 5.2 + 5.3 + 5.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.4 −0.5 + 11.9 + 7.7
         Oct. + 21.2 + 18.4 + 6.4 − 1.8 − 1.6 −0.2 + 8.2 + 7.2 + 1.0 + 14.8 + 10.3
         Nov. + 21.6 + 15.5 + 1.3 + 3.1 + 3.1 + 0.0 − 1.9 − 1.2 −0.7 + 20.3 + 13.7
         Dec. + 15.2 + 12.8 − 2.1 + 4.8 + 5.1 −0.3 − 6.8 − 6.4 −0.5 + 17.3 + 24.5
2000         Jan. + 14.9 + 3.7 + 2.7 − 1.0 − 1.3 + 0.3 + 3.7 + 2.9 + 0.8 + 12.1 + 6.0
         Feb. + 11.3 + 3.5 − 1.0 + 3.5 + 3.5 + 0.0 − 4.5 − 3.9 −0.6 + 12.3 + 8.8
         Mar. + 36.4 + 13.0 + 9.6 + 8.7 + 8.9 −0.1 + 0.9 + 1.6 −0.7 + 26.9 + 33.9
         Apr. + 13.5 + 10.9 + 3.9 + 4.6 + 4.8 −0.2 − 0.8 − 1.0 + 0.2 + 9.7 + 8.3
         May + 13.1 + 9.5 + 0.5 + 1.1 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.2 −0.4 + 12.6 + 14.9
         June − 33.7 + 3.7 − 2.8 + 1.3 + 1.2 + 0.1 − 4.1 − 3.8 −0.3 − 31.0 − 28.6
         July + 1.0 + 0.7 − 9.2 −12.5 −12.5 −0.0 + 3.3 + 2.5 + 0.8 + 10.2 + 12.6
         Aug. + 6.8 + 5.8 − 2.8 − 1.8 − 1.7 −0.1 − 1.1 − 0.9 −0.1 + 9.7 + 9.5
         Sep. + 3.3 + 7.4 + 5.8 + 12.5 + 12.2 + 0.3 − 6.8 − 6.0 −0.8 − 2.5 + 5.4
         Oct. + 9.5 + 7.7 + 4.8 − 2.5 − 2.3 −0.1 + 7.3 + 7.0 + 0.2 + 4.7 + 4.8
         Nov. + 14.5 + 8.0 + 1.8 + 2.2 + 1.9 + 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.0 −0.3 + 12.7 + 8.3
         Dec. + 10.1 + 9.5 + 1.4 + 1.9 + 2.1 −0.2 − 0.6 − 0.7 + 0.2 + 8.7 + 9.9
*See table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the December 1998, including loans on a trust basis; see also footnote 9. —3Up
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as to December 1998, bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsementprovisional. Subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following liabilities arising from rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from
Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Up to December 1998, the banks ’portfolios prior to maturity). —4From 1999, including small
including loans to domestic building and loan associations. —2Up to amounts of medium-term series of bills. —5From December 1993, including
30*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
IV. Banks
    
 
lending  2, 6 
prises and individuals  1, 2 to public authorities  2 
Loans and advances not Loans and advances not
evidenced by certificates evidenced by certificates
Memo Memo
item: Equal- item:
Medium- Long- Trust Medium- Long- Secur- isation Trust
Total term  7 term  8 loans  9 Total Total term  7 term  8 loans  9   Period Securities  6 ities 6, 10 claims  11 
End of year or month *
 
1,814.1 213.7 1,600.3 65.8 62.0 682.9 472.0 51.3 420.8 115.5 2.4 13.1 19912,011.5 263.5 1,748.0 90.3 65.7 734.1 487.8 47.6 440.2 147.2 64.3 13.9 19922,241.5 253.9 1,987.5 134.2 66.1 821.4 537.1 36.8 500.3 193.5 75.3 15.5 19932,390.4 228.3 2,162.0 203.2 68.3 891.8 577.0 34.5 542.5 230.5 68.1 16.1 1994
2,522.0 214.1 2,307.9 192.9 70.6 1,036.2 713.0 74.5 638.4 234.4 71.3 17.5 1995
2,713.3 215.8 2,497.5 205.9 88.0 1,103.6 773.0 69.5 703.6 231.3 81.3 18.0 19962,900.0 216.2 2,683.8 234.1 89.3 1,167.2 833.8 53.0 780.8 239.2 76.0 18.3 19973,104.5 206.8 2,897.8 292.4 85.4 1,193.2 868.8 33.1 835.7 235.4 71.6 17.3 19981,764.8 182.5 1,582.3 178.9 49.2 605.6 459.5 30.9 428.6 108.6 37.5 8.7 1999
1,838.9 192.8 1,646.0 199.7 50.1 593.9 455.9 30.4 425.5 104.9 33.1 8.4 2000
1,711.3 188.2 1,523.1 164.9 49.4 600.5 452.8 31.9 420.9 110.5 37.2 8.8 1999          July
1,722.5 189.4 1,533.1 165.9 49.1 597.8 453.2 31.6 421.6 107.2 37.4 8.8          Aug.1,730.9 186.3 1,544.6 165.2 48.8 601.9 453.3 31.8 421.5 111.3 37.4 8.7          Sep.
1,740.4 185.9 1,554.5 166.0 49.0 606.5 456.6 32.4 424.3 112.5 37.4 8.7          Oct.
1,749.8 182.7 1,567.1 170.3 49.1 613.1 460.8 33.5 427.2 114.9 37.4 8.8          Nov.1,764.8 182.5 1,582.3 178.9 49.2 605.6 459.5 30.9 428.6 108.6 37.5 8.7          Dec.
1,770.2 183.1 1,587.0 181.4 49.1 611.4 458.4 31.0 427.4 115.6 37.5 8.7 2000          Jan.
1,774.9 183.0 1,591.9 185.5 49.4 614.9 457.5 30.2 427.4 119.8 37.5 8.7          Feb.1,777.2 183.3 1,593.9 217.1 49.3 607.8 457.7 31.1 426.7 112.5 37.5 8.6          Mar.
1,781.6 184.3 1,597.3 221.1 49.3 609.1 460.4 31.5 429.0 111.1 37.6 8.6          Apr.
1,789.9 185.7 1,604.2 227.7 49.3 606.8 460.8 32.5 428.3 108.4 37.6 8.6          May1,794.7 186.5 1,608.3 191.7 49.3 604.6 460.9 32.5 428.4 106.1 37.6 8.6          June
1,805.3 189.9 1,615.4 193.7 50.0 602.2 461.1 31.9 429.2 105.0 36.1 8.6          July
1,814.7 192.0 1,622.7 193.8 50.1 598.8 460.1 31.6 428.5 106.2 32.5 8.6          Aug.1,819.2 192.1 1,627.1 194.7 50.1 590.9 456.7 30.6 426.0 101.8 32.5 8.5          Sep.
1,825.3 192.1 1,633.2 193.9 50.0 590.8 454.0 29.7 424.3 104.3 32.5 8.5          Oct.
1,832.4 193.0 1,639.4 196.5 50.2 595.2 454.5 30.7 423.8 108.4 32.3 8.5          Nov.1,838.9 192.8 1,646.0 199.7 50.1 593.9 455.9 30.4 425.5 104.9 33.1 8.4          Dec.
Changes *
+ 204.1 + 29.6 + 174.5 + 24.8 + 0.8 + 41.2 + 15.7 − 3.6 + 19.3 + 32.2 − 1.0 + 0.7 1992
+ 214.1 −28.9 + 243.0 + 37.1 + 0.5 + 104.1 + 48.2 −10.8 + 59.0 + 65.1 −11.4 + 1.6 1993
+ 198.7 −29.2 + 227.9 + 48.5 + 1.9 + 58.2 + 26.2 − 2.4 + 28.5 + 38.3 − 6.9 + 0.7 1994
+ 176.0 − 1.9 + 177.9 + 3.3 + 5.9 + 91.8 + 91.8 + 15.3 + 76.6 − 0.4 − 1.2 + 1.5 1995
+ 204.4 + 1.6 + 202.8 + 14.0 + 3.1 + 70.4 + 65.7 − 5.5 + 71.2 − 3.3 + 8.0 + 0.1 1996
+ 189.0 + 0.3 + 188.7 + 29.5 + 1.4 + 62.6 + 60.6 −18.0 + 78.6 + 7.0 − 5.3 + 0.2 1997
+ 205.7 − 8.9 + 214.6 + 56.5 −3.9 + 25.3 + 35.0 −20.0 + 55.0 − 4.4 − 4.4 −0.9 1998
+ 121.8 + 25.1 + 96.8 + 24.6 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 8.5 + 6.2 + 2.3 − 7.8 − 0.6 −0.1 1999
+ 71.8 + 6.9 + 64.9 + 22.1 + 0.8 − 7.7 − 3.8 − 0.4 − 3.5 − 3.1 − 0.8 −0.3 2000
+ 12.9 + 1.0 + 11.9 − 0.3 + 0.3 + 1.3 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 1.7 − 1.1 −0.2 1999          July
+ 11.2 + 1.3 + 9.9 + 1.0 −0.2 − 2.7 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.7 − 3.3 + 0.2 −0.0          Aug.
+ 8.5 − 0.0 + 8.5 − 0.7 −0.3 + 4.2 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 4.1 − 0.0 −0.1          Sep.
+ 9.5 − 0.3 + 9.8 + 0.8 + 0.2 + 4.5 + 3.3 + 0.4 + 2.9 + 1.2 + 0.0 + 0.0          Oct.
+ 9.4 − 2.2 + 11.7 + 4.3 + 0.0 + 6.6 + 4.2 + 1.2 + 3.0 + 2.5 − 0.0 + 0.0          Nov.
+ 15.4 + 1.5 + 13.9 + 9.1 + 0.2 − 7.2 − 1.3 − 2.7 + 1.4 − 6.0 + 0.1 −0.0          Dec.
+ 3.2 − 1.0 + 4.2 + 2.8 −0.1 + 6.1 − 1.1 + 0.1 − 1.2 + 7.2 + 0.0 −0.0 2000          Jan.
+ 4.7 − 0.1 + 4.8 + 4.0 + 0.3 + 3.6 − 0.9 − 0.8 − 0.0 + 4.4 + 0.0 −0.0          Feb.
+ 2.3 + 0.3 + 2.0 + 31.6 −0.1 − 7.1 + 0.2 + 0.9 − 0.7 − 7.3 − 0.0 −0.0          Mar.
+ 4.4 + 1.0 + 3.4 + 4.0 + 0.0 + 1.3 + 2.7 + 0.4 + 2.3 − 1.5 + 0.1 −0.0          Apr.
+ 8.3 + 1.2 + 7.1 + 6.7 + 0.0 − 2.3 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 2.7 − 0.0 −0.0          May
+ 6.5 − 0.8 + 7.3 −35.1 −0.1 − 2.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 2.1 − 0.0 + 0.0          June
+ 10.5 + 3.6 + 7.0 + 2.1 + 0.7 − 2.4 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 1.1 − 1.4 −0.1          July
+ 9.4 + 2.1 + 7.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.7 + 1.2 − 0.0 −0.0          Aug.
+ 4.5 + 0.1 + 4.4 + 0.9 + 0.1 − 7.9 − 3.4 − 1.0 − 2.5 − 4.4 − 0.0 −0.0          Sep.
+ 5.6 + 0.0 + 5.6 − 0.8 −0.1 − 0.1 − 2.7 − 0.6 − 2.1 + 2.6 − 0.0 −0.1          Oct.
+ 5.6 − 0.1 + 5.8 + 2.6 + 0.2 + 4.4 + 0.4 + 1.0 − 0.5 + 4.1 − 0.1 −0.0          Nov.
+ 6.7 + 0.6 + 6.0 + 3.3 −0.1 − 1.2 + 1.5 − 0.3 + 1.8 − 3.4 + 0.8 −0.0          Dec.
other negotiable money market paper; excluding mobilisation and liquidity December 1998, maturity or period of notice of 4 years and more; from
paper. —6From 1999, breakdown of lending against securities by medium 1999, of more than 5 years. —9From 1999, no longer included in lending
and long-term lending no longer possible. —7Up to December 1998, (see also footnote 2). —10Excluding debt securities arising from the
maturity or period of notice of more than one year to less than 4 years; exchange of equalisation claims, see also footnote 11. —11Including debt
from 1999, more than 1 year up to and including 5 years. —8Up to securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims. 
31*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
IV. Banks
 
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and individuals, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
 
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 euro billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and individuals (excluding portfolios of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities  portfolios) 1 
of which  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
 
Financialinstitu-
Mortgage tions  
4 
loans Trans- (excluding
secured Energy Whole- Agri- port MFIs) andby and sale culture and insur-
Mortgage residen- Other of which water and and tele- anceloans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- supply, Construc- retail forestry, commu- enter-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing mining  
2 tion trade  3 fisheries nications prises
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
1997 3,614.1 1,335.7 1,543.9 968.2 575.7 2,225.2 574.4 318.5 66.6 122.7 334.9 60.5 77.2 116.01998 3,850.8 1,430.2 1,654.9 1,040.9 614.0 2,367.1 614.9 331.5 70.7 124.2 343.1 63.7 80.9 132.8
1999         Dec. 2,094.2 899.3 991.3 691.5 299.9 1,209.0 332.0 166.2 33.7 67.1 173.0 31.1 47.2 27.5
2000         Mar. 2,118.8 917.4 997.2 706.8 290.4 1,228.1 335.0 166.8 33.1 67.4 173.8 31.0 54.9 33.7
         June 2,144.2 931.3 1,009.7 719.2 290.5 1,243.4 338.6 170.5 33.0 68.5 172.8 31.6 52.7 37.0         Sep. 2,169.9 944.2 1,018.7 727.5 291.2 1,259.9 340.7 173.4 34.3 69.4 173.6 32.0 50.6 39.4         Dec. 2,187.3 955.2 1,030.8 737.6 293.2 1,267.8 344.1 174.9 35.9 68.2 173.2 31.4 49.1 34.2
 Short-term lending
1997 624.8 − 34.6 − 34.6 534.4 26.3 114.5 6.1 37.5 132.0 8.7 11.8 27.9
1998 660.8 − 36.7 − 36.7 561.3 27.9 120.6 8.8 36.1 133.9 8.8 12.1 28.5
1999         Dec. 329.4 − 17.6 − 17.6 276.9 11.8 57.3 4.3 17.9 61.4 4.5 10.6 8.8
2000         Mar. 341.5 − 16.3 − 16.3 289.4 11.2 57.9 3.6 18.1 62.0 4.3 16.2 15.8
         June 349.5 − 16.5 − 16.5 295.8 11.0 60.5 3.9 19.2 61.2 4.6 13.7 18.1
         Sep. 350.7 − 15.7 − 15.7 296.6 10.3 62.4 4.4 19.0 62.5 4.7 10.8 17.9
         Dec. 348.4 − 15.9 − 15.9 294.6 10.7 61.5 6.2 17.9 62.2 4.2 10.1 10.5
 Medium-term lending  
8 
1997 216.2 − 42.3 − 42.3 137.8 17.8 17.6 1.6 10.0 16.7 4.7 7.7 17.0
1998 206.8 − 39.3 − 39.3 132.2 17.4 16.1 1.5 9.3 16.1 4.5 6.8 17.3
1999         Dec. 182.5 − 42.6 − 42.6 109.1 13.4 16.7 1.7 6.9 13.0 3.4 6.3 4.0
2000         Mar. 183.3 − 40.9 − 40.9 110.1 13.1 16.8 1.8 6.8 13.2 3.4 7.2 3.5
         June 186.5 − 40.7 − 40.7 112.9 13.0 16.9 1.5 6.8 13.2 3.4 7.4 5.1
         Sep. 192.1 − 40.5 − 40.5 118.1 13.1 17.2 1.7 6.9 13.2 3.5 7.7 7.5
         Dec. 192.8 − 39.3 − 39.3 120.1 12.8 17.6 1.5 7.0 13.3 3.4 6.9 9.1
 Long-term lending  1, 9 
1997 2,773.1 1,335.7 1,467.0 968.2 498.8 1,553.0 530.3 186.5 58.9 75.2 186.1 47.2 57.7 71.1
1998 2,983.2 1,430.2 1,578.9 1,040.9 538.0 1,673.5 569.6 194.8 60.4 78.8 193.1 50.4 62.0 87.0
1999         Dec. 1,582.3 899.3 931.1 691.5 239.7 823.0 306.8 92.3 27.7 42.2 98.7 23.3 30.3 14.7
2000         Mar. 1,593.9 917.4 939.9 706.8 233.1 828.6 310.7 92.1 27.6 42.4 98.6 23.4 31.5 14.4
         June 1,608.3 931.3 952.4 719.2 233.3 834.7 314.6 93.2 27.5 42.6 98.4 23.5 31.7 13.9         Sep. 1,627.1 944.2 962.5 727.5 235.0 845.2 317.3 93.8 28.1 43.4 98.0 23.7 32.1 14.0         Dec. 1,646.0 955.2 975.5 737.6 238.0 853.1 320.6 95.9 28.2 43.4 97.7 23.9 32.1 14.6
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2000         1st qtr + 21.2 + 9.4 + 4.6 + 8.4 − 3.8 + 17.5 + 1.8 + 0.6 − 0.6 + 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 7.6 + 6.5
         2nd qtr + 26.1 + 10.4 + 10.7 + 8.9 + 1.8 + 15.5 + 3.0 + 3.8 − 0.1 + 1.2 − 1.0 + 0.5 − 2.1 + 2.8
         3rd qtr + 22.6 + 11.7 + 10.1 + 9.1 + 0.9 + 12.3 + 2.2 + 2.8 + 1.3 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 0.4 − 2.1 + 2.5
         4th qtr + 19.6 + 9.7 + 10.8 + 8.7 + 2.1 + 10.5 + 2.6 + 1.7 + 1.7 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.6 − 1.8 − 5.3
 Short-term lending
2000         1st qtr + 11.0 −− 1.3 −− 1.3 + 11.2 − 0.8 + 0.6 − 0.7 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 5.5 + 7.0
         2nd qtr + 7.0 − + 0.2 − + 0.2 + 5.4 − 0.2 + 2.6 + 0.2 + 1.0 − 0.8 + 0.3 − 2.5 + 2.3
         3rd qtr − 1.9 −− 0.9 −− 0.9 − 2.2 − 0.7 + 1.9 + 0.5 − 0.2 + 1.3 + 0.1 − 2.9 − 0.2
         4th qtr + 1.7 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 + 1.9 + 0.4 − 0.5 + 1.8 − 1.1 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.7 − 7.4
 Medium-term lending  8 
2000         1st qtr − 0.7 −− 1.2 −− 1.2 + 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.9 − 0.5
         2nd qtr + 1.3 −− 0.4 −− 0.4 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1
         3rd qtr + 5.8 −− 0.2 −− 0.2 + 5.2 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 2.5
         4th qtr + 0.5 −− 0.9 −− 0.9 + 1.5 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.8 + 1.5
 Long-term lending  1, 9 
2000         1st qtr + 11.0 + 9.4 + 7.1 + 8.4 − 1.3 + 5.8 + 2.8 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.2 + 0.0
         2nd qtr + 17.8 + 10.4 + 10.9 + 8.9 + 2.0 + 8.9 + 3.2 + 1.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.5
         3rd qtr + 18.7 + 11.7 + 11.1 + 9.1 + 2.0 + 9.4 + 2.8 + 0.6 + 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.2
         4th qtr + 17.4 + 9.7 + 11.4 + 8.7 + 2.7 + 7.1 + 2.3 + 1.8 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.6
*Excluding lending by foreign branches. Up to December 1998: lending by always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent alterations, which will
banks (excluding building and loan associations) in Germany; including appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Up
lending to building and loan associations. From 1999: lending by monetary to December 1998, including loans on a trust basis; from 1999, loans on afinancial institutions (MFIs) in Germany; breakdown of lending by building trust basis are no longer included in lending. —2Including the extraction of
and loan associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical alterations stones and earths. —3Including the maintenance and repair of motor
have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest date are vehicles and durable consumer goods. —4Up to December 1998, excluding
32*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
IV. Banks
    
 
  Lending to
 non-commercial
 Lending to employed and other individuals organisations
Memorandum items Other lending Services sector (including the professions)  
5 
of which of which
Debit
balanceson wage
and salary
Other Lending accountsreal to self- Lending and of which
Housing estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Investment Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total credit  
7 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises enterprises persons  6 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
1,128.8 277.6 56.3 270.9 781.1 139.8 1,360.4 960.8 399.6 201.7 42.6 28.5 8.6 19971,220.2 305.9 70.1 285.8 821.2 143.6 1,455.0 1,031.2 423.7 207.7 44.6 28.8 8.8 1998
663.1 154.1 42.8 168.3 449.4 73.9 871.4 655.7 215.7 105.7 23.6 13.7 3.6 1999          Dec.
667.4 154.8 46.7 168.1 449.5 74.8 876.7 658.6 218.1 107.3 23.9 13.9 3.6 2000          Mar.
677.3 157.7 43.8 174.9 452.6 75.6 887.1 667.4 219.6 108.0 24.8 13.7 3.6          June687.1 159.8 44.9 179.1 456.2 75.4 896.3 674.4 221.9 109.2 25.1 13.7 3.6          Sep.700.8 162.3 46.8 183.1 459.0 75.0 905.5 683.0 222.6 108.6 24.3 14.0 3.7          Dec.
Short-term lending
195.9 34.9 21.5 54.2 103.4 33.0 87.3 8.2 79.1 4.2 42.6 3.1 0.1 1997
212.6 41.5 26.6 54.2 106.6 32.3 97.0 8.8 88.2 4.4 44.6 2.5 0.0 1998
112.2 18.6 17.1 27.5 55.9 15.6 51.1 5.7 45.4 2.5 23.6 1.3 0.0 1999          Dec.
111.5 18.0 19.7 26.0 55.7 16.4 50.7 5.1 45.6 2.4 23.9 1.4 0.0 2000          Mar.
114.6 19.0 17.6 27.4 56.2 16.8 52.4 5.5 47.0 2.4 24.8 1.3 0.0          June114.8 18.7 17.5 28.4 56.1 16.7 52.9 5.4 47.5 2.5 25.1 1.2 0.0          Sep.122.1 19.6 18.1 30.0 57.1 16.2 52.6 5.2 47.4 2.3 24.3 1.2 0.0          Dec.
Medium-term lending  
8
62.6 10.8 5.1 13.5 40.2 6.6 77.8 24.3 53.4 39.3 − 0.7 0.1 1997
60.5 10.0 5.3 12.5 36.8 6.4 74.0 21.8 52.2 37.6 − 0.6 0.1 1998
57.0 7.1 4.0 12.3 33.3 5.6 72.7 29.2 43.5 31.0 − 0.7 0.1 1999          Dec.
57.4 7.0 4.3 12.0 33.0 5.6 72.5 27.8 44.7 32.4 − 0.6 0.1 2000          Mar.
58.7 6.7 4.9 12.5 33.0 5.6 72.9 27.6 45.3 33.1 − 0.6 0.1          June
60.3 6.9 5.5 12.7 33.3 5.6 73.4 27.4 46.0 33.6 − 0.6 0.1          Sep.
61.4 6.8 6.3 13.6 33.1 5.5 72.2 26.4 45.8 33.0 − 0.6 0.1          Dec.
Long-term lending  1, 9
870.4 231.8 29.8 203.2 637.5 100.2 1,195.4 928.3 267.1 158.3 − 24.7 8.5 1997
947.1 254.4 38.1 219.1 677.9 104.9 1,283.9 1,000.6 283.3 165.8 − 25.7 8.7 1998
493.9 128.5 21.8 128.5 360.1 52.7 747.5 620.8 126.7 72.2 − 11.7 3.5 1999          Dec.
498.5 129.7 22.7 130.2 360.8 52.9 753.5 625.7 127.8 72.5 − 11.9 3.5 2000          Mar.
503.9 132.0 21.2 135.1 363.5 53.1 761.7 634.3 127.4 72.5 − 11.8 3.5          June
512.0 134.2 21.9 138.0 366.8 53.1 770.1 641.7 128.4 73.2 − 11.9 3.5          Sep.
517.3 135.9 22.5 139.5 368.7 53.2 780.8 651.4 129.4 73.3 − 12.2 3.6          Dec.
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
+ 3.2 + 1.0 + 3.9 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 3.6 + 2.8 + 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.2 −2000         1st qtr
+ 10.4 + 2.6 − 2.4 + 6.5 + 2.7 + 0.7 + 10.8 + 7.7 + 3.1 + 1.4 + 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.0          2nd qtr
+ 6.7 + 2.0 + 1.1 + 4.2 + 2.6 − 0.1 + 10.2 + 7.9 + 2.3 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.0          3rd qtr
+ 16.2 + 2.5 + 1.8 + 4.0 + 2.4 − 0.4 + 8.9 + 8.2 + 0.7 − 0.5 − 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.0          4th qtr
Short-term lending
− 1.2 − 0.1 + 2.6 − 1.2 − 0.2 + 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.0 2000          1st qtr
+ 2.3 + 0.9 − 2.7 + 1.4 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 1.7 + 0.3 + 1.3 + 0.0 + 0.9 − 0.1 + 0.0          2nd qtr
− 2.8 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0          3rd qtr
+ 10.2 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 1.6 + 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0          4th qtr
Medium-term lending  8
+ 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 1.2 − 0.9 − 0.2 + 0.1 −− 0.0 + 0.0 2000          1st qtr
+ 1.1 − 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.6 + 0.6 −− 0.0 − 0.0          2nd qtr
+ 1.6 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.3 + 0.8 + 0.5 − + 0.0 + 0.0          3rd qtr
+ 1.0 − 0.1 + 0.8 + 0.9 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 1.0 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.6 −− 0.0 − 0.0          4th qtr
Long-term lending  1, 9
+ 4.4 + 1.2 + 0.9 + 1.8 + 0.7 + 0.2 + 5.0 + 4.3 + 0.8 + 0.5 − + 0.1 + 0.0 2000          1st qtr
+ 7.0 + 2.2 − 0.1 + 4.7 + 2.3 + 0.2 + 8.9 + 7.7 + 1.1 + 0.8 −− 0.0 − 0.0          2nd qtr
+ 7.9 + 2.2 + 0.6 + 2.9 + 2.4 + 0.1 + 9.2 + 8.3 + 0.9 + 0.6 − + 0.1 + 0.0          3rd qtr
+ 5.1 + 1.7 + 0.4 + 1.5 + 1.7 + 0.1 + 10.0 + 9.0 + 1.0 + 0.1 − + 0.3 + 0.1          4th qtr
credit institutions (other than building and loan associations); from 1999, loans, even in the form of instalment credit. —8Up to December 1998,
excluding banks (MFIs) and excluding finance leasing institutions; see also maturity or period of notice of more than 1 year to less than 4 years; fromfootnote 5. —5From 1999, including finance leasing institutions. —6From 1999, more than 1 year up to and including 5 years. —9Up to December
1999, including sole proprietors; up to December 1998, sole proprietors 1998, maturity or period of notice of 4 years and more; from 1999, of morewere assigned to enterprises. —7Excluding mortgage loans and housing than 5 years. 
33*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
IV. Banks
 
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
  
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 euro billion
Sight deposits  2 Time deposits  3, 4, 5    Memo item:
  
for more than 1 year
of which: Subordin- Included
ated in timeliabilities deposits:
for up for (excluding liabilities
for less to and for for less 4 years Savings Bank Loans on negoti- arising
Deposits, on than up to than and deposits savings a trust able debt from
including
Period total  1 Total demand 1 month Total 1 year  4 Total 4 years more  6 bonds  7 basis  8 securities) repos  9 2 years  5 
Domestic non-banks, total 10 End of year or month *
 
1998 3,520.3 799.5 760.2 39.3 1,194.1 398.8 795.3 . 13.4 781.9 1,211.0 234.9 80.9 45.6 .1999 1,905.3 420.4 420.4 . 759.6 239.7 519.9 4.5 . . 614.7 110.7 42.1 25.6 0.42000 1,945.8 443.4 443.4 . 819.9 274.7 545.2 9.0 . . 573.5 109.0 42.1 25.9 −
2000         Feb. 1,904.2 432.1 432.1 . 758.1 229.5 528.6 5.3 . . 605.6 108.4 42.4 25.8 0.0
         Mar. 1,893.4 426.6 426.6 . 759.0 229.0 530.0 5.4 . . 600.0 107.8 42.3 25.9 −
         Apr. 1,893.5 435.7 435.7 . 756.7 224.5 532.1 6.0 . . 593.5 107.6 42.4 26.1 −
         May 1,891.5 429.0 429.0 . 767.1 232.6 534.4 6.0 . . 587.7 107.7 42.3 26.1 0.0         June 1,888.2 426.2 426.2 . 772.2 236.2 536.1 5.8 . . 582.3 107.6 42.3 26.1 0.0
         July 1,882.2 422.9 422.9 . 775.0 236.5 538.5 6.1 . . 576.6 107.7 42.4 26.1 −
         Aug. 1,879.2 415.6 415.6 . 783.2 242.7 540.5 6.3 . . 572.7 107.7 42.6 26.1 −
         Sep. 1,896.5 413.0 413.0 . 805.7 266.1 539.7 6.4 . . 570.0 107.8 42.8 26.0 0.0
         Oct. 1,900.3 417.5 417.5 . 808.8 267.2 541.6 7.0 . . 566.2 107.9 42.7 26.2 −
         Nov. 1,912.9 438.7 438.7 . 802.8 260.1 542.7 8.5 . . 562.7 108.7 42.3 26.0 −
         Dec. 1,945.8 443.4 443.4 . 819.9 274.7 545.2 9.0 . . 573.5 109.0 42.1 25.9 −
Changes *
1999 + 67.3 + 32.7 + 32.7 . + 48.4 + 18.6 + 29.8 . . . −4.5 −9.3 + 0.7 + 2.3 .
2000 + 41.3 + 22.3 + 22.3 . + 61.1 + 34.8 + 26.2 + 4.5 . . −40.5 −1.7 −0.0 + 0.3 −0.4
2000         Feb. + 6.6 + 7.2 + 7.2 . + 4.0 + 0.4 + 3.6 + 0.3 . . −4.0 −0.6 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0
         Mar. −11.1 − 5.9 − 5.9 . + 0.8 −0.5 + 1.3 + 0.2 . . −5.5 −0.5 −0.1 + 0.2 −0.0
         Apr. − 0.5 + 8.5 + 8.5 . −2.3 −4.5 + 2.2 + 0.5 . . −6.5 −0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 −
         May − 1.6 − 6.3 − 6.3 . + 10.4 + 8.1 + 2.3 + 0.0 . . −5.9 + 0.1 −0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0
         June − 2.9 − 2.5 − 2.5 . + 5.1 + 3.5 + 1.6 −0.2 . . −5.4 −0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 −0.0
         July − 6.5 − 3.7 − 3.7 . + 2.0 + 0.1 + 1.9 + 0.2 . . −5.0 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 −0.0
         Aug. − 3.5 − 7.9 − 7.9 . + 8.2 + 6.3 + 1.9 + 0.1 . . −3.9 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 −
         Sep. + 17.0 − 2.8 − 2.8 . + 22.5 + 23.3 −0.8 + 0.1 . . −2.7 + 0.0 + 0.2 −0.1 + 0.0
         Oct. + 3.3 + 3.9 + 3.9 . + 3.0 + 1.1 + 1.9 + 0.6 . . −3.8 + 0.1 −0.1 + 0.1 −0.0
         Nov. + 13.1 + 21.8 + 21.8 . −6.0 −7.0 + 1.1 + 1.5 . . −3.5 + 0.8 −0.4 −0.1 −
         Dec. + 35.5 + 5.7 + 5.7 . + 18.6 + 14.6 + 4.0 + 0.5 . . + 10.8 + 0.4 −0.2 −0.1 −
Domestic public authorities End of year or month *
1998 288.3 36.7 29.1 7.6 170.3 44.8 125.5 . 1.0 124.5 6.4 6.3 68.7 2.6 .
1999 124.4 14.7 14.7 . 104.4 42.0 62.4 0.4 . . 3.2 2.0 35.9 1.2 −
2000 149.1 16.6 16.6 . 127.7 62.1 65.5 1.2 . . 2.7 2.1 36.0 1.4 −
2000         Feb. 118.6 12.9 12.9 . 100.6 36.8 63.8 0.9 . . 3.1 2.0 36.2 1.3 −
         Mar. 117.2 11.9 11.9 . 100.1 36.9 63.1 0.9 . . 3.1 2.0 36.2 1.3 −
         Apr. 118.3 14.3 14.3 . 98.9 35.2 63.6 1.0 . . 3.1 2.0 36.2 1.3 −
         May 119.9 12.7 12.7 . 102.2 38.2 64.1 0.9 . . 3.0 2.0 36.3 1.3 −
         June 128.3 15.6 15.6 . 107.7 43.7 64.0 0.9 . . 2.9 2.1 36.4 1.3 −
         July 123.9 13.1 13.1 . 105.9 41.3 64.6 1.1 . . 2.8 2.1 36.4 1.3 −
         Aug. 125.1 12.8 12.8 . 107.4 42.5 65.0 1.1 . . 2.8 2.1 36.6 1.4 −
         Sep. 144.0 12.7 12.7 . 126.4 61.9 64.5 1.0 . . 2.8 2.1 36.7 1.4 −
         Oct. 144.4 13.3 13.3 . 126.3 61.4 64.9 1.0 . . 2.7 2.1 36.5 1.4 −
         Nov. 136.7 12.7 12.7 . 119.1 53.8 65.3 1.1 . . 2.7 2.1 36.1 1.4 −
         Dec. 149.1 16.6 16.6 . 127.7 62.1 65.5 1.2 . . 2.7 2.1 36.0 1.4 −
Changes *
1999 + 12.4 − 0.2 − 0.2 . + 13.7 + 15.3 −1.5 . . . −0.0 −1.2 + 0.7 −0.2 .
2000 + 24.8 + 1.9 + 1.9 . + 23.3 + 20.1 + 3.2 + 0.8 . . −0.5 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.3 −
2000         Feb. + 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.4 . −0.2 −0.5 + 0.3 + 0.1 . . −0.0 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 −
         Mar. − 1.4 − 0.9 − 0.9 . −0.5 + 0.1 −0.6 −0.0 . . −0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −
         Apr. + 1.1 + 2.4 + 2.4 . −1.2 −1.7 + 0.5 + 0.1 . . −0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 −0.0 −
         May + 1.6 − 1.6 − 1.6 . + 3.3 + 2.9 + 0.4 −0.0 . . −0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 −
         June + 8.4 + 2.9 + 2.9 . + 5.5 + 5.6 −0.0 −0.0 . . −0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −
         July − 4.4 − 2.5 − 2.5 . −1.8 −2.4 + 0.6 + 0.1 . . −0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 −
         Aug. + 1.2 − 0.3 − 0.3 . + 1.5 + 1.1 + 0.4 + 0.0 . . + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 −
         Sep. + 18.8 − 0.1 − 0.1 . + 19.0 + 19.4 −0.4 −0.0 . . −0.0 −0.0 + 0.2 −0.0 −
         Oct. + 0.4 + 0.7 + 0.7 . −0.2 −0.5 + 0.3 + 0.0 . . −0.1 + 0.0 −0.2 + 0.0 −
         Nov. − 7.7 − 0.6 − 0.6 . −7.2 −7.6 + 0.4 + 0.0 . . −0.0 + 0.0 −0.4 + 0.0 −
         Dec. + 12.5 + 3.9 + 3.9 . + 8.6 + 8.3 + 0.3 + 0.1 . . + 0.0 + 0.0 −0.1 −0.0 −
*See table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from to December 1998, including time deposits for less than 1 month. —
the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as 3Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from registered
provisional. Subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following debt securities. —4Up to December 1998, excluding time deposits for less
Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Up to December 1998, than 1 month; see also footnote 2. —5Since the inclusion of building and
including deposits from loans on a trust basis; see also footnote 8. —2Up
34*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
IV. Banks
 
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont ’d)
  
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 euro billion
Sight deposits  2 Time deposits  3, 4, 5    Memo item:
  
for more than 1 year
of which: Subordin- Included
ated in timeliabilities deposits:
for up for (excluding liabilities
for less to and for for less 4 years Savings Bank Loans on negoti- arising
Deposits, on than up to than and deposits savings a trust able debt from
including
Period total  1 Total demand 1 month Total 1 year  4 Total 4 years more  6 bonds  7 basis  8 securities) repos  9 2 years  5 
Domestic enterprises and individuals 10 End of year or month *
 
1998 3,231.9 762.8 731.2 31.7 1,023.8 354.0 669.8 . 12.4 657.4 1,204.6 228.6 12.1 43.0 .1999 1,781.0 405.7 405.7 . 655.2 197.6 457.6 4.1 . . 611.4 108.7 6.2 24.5 0.42000 1,796.7 426.8 426.8 . 692.2 212.6 479.6 7.8 . . 570.8 106.9 6.1 24.5 −
2000         Feb. 1,785.6 419.3 419.3 . 657.6 192.7 464.9 4.4 . . 602.4 106.4 6.2 24.4 0.0
         Mar. 1,776.3 414.6 414.6 . 658.9 192.1 466.8 4.6 . . 596.9 105.8 6.1 24.6 −
         Apr. 1,775.3 421.4 421.4 . 657.8 189.3 468.5 5.0 . . 590.5 105.6 6.1 24.7 −
         May 1,771.6 416.3 416.3 . 664.9 194.5 470.4 5.1 . . 584.7 105.7 6.0 24.7 0.0         June 1,760.0 410.6 410.6 . 664.5 192.4 472.1 4.9 . . 579.4 105.5 5.9 24.7 0.0
         July 1,758.3 409.9 409.9 . 669.0 195.1 473.9 5.1 . . 573.8 105.6 6.0 24.8 −
         Aug. 1,754.1 402.8 402.8 . 675.8 200.3 475.5 5.2 . . 569.9 105.7 6.1 24.7 −
         Sep. 1,752.5 400.3 400.3 . 679.3 204.2 475.1 5.4 . . 567.2 105.7 6.1 24.6 0.0
         Oct. 1,755.9 404.2 404.2 . 682.5 205.8 476.7 6.0 . . 563.5 105.8 6.2 24.7 −
         Nov. 1,776.2 426.0 426.0 . 683.7 206.3 477.4 7.4 . . 560.0 106.5 6.2 24.6 −
         Dec. 1,796.7 426.8 426.8 . 692.2 212.6 479.6 7.8 . . 570.8 106.9 6.1 24.5 −
Changes *
1999 + 54.9 + 32.8 + 32.8 . + 34.7 + 3.4 + 31.3 . . . −4.5 −8.1 + 0.0 + 2.4 .
2000 + 16.5 + 20.4 + 20.4 . + 37.8 + 14.8 + 23.1 + 3.7 . . −40.0 −1.8 −0.1 + 0.0 −0.4
2000         Feb. + 6.4 + 6.8 + 6.8 . + 4.2 + 0.9 + 3.3 + 0.2 . . −3.9 −0.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0
         Mar. −9.7 −5.0 −5.0 . + 1.3 −0.6 + 1.9 + 0.2 . . −5.5 −0.5 −0.1 + 0.2 −0.0
         Apr. −1.6 + 6.1 + 6.1 . −1.1 −2.8 + 1.7 + 0.4 . . −6.4 −0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 −
         May −3.3 −4.7 −4.7 . + 7.1 + 5.2 + 1.9 + 0.1 . . −5.8 + 0.1 −0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0
         June −11.3 −5.4 −5.4 . −0.4 −2.0 + 1.7 −0.2 . . −5.3 −0.2 −0.0 −0.0 −0.0
         July −2.1 −1.1 −1.1 . + 3.8 + 2.5 + 1.4 + 0.1 . . −4.9 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 −0.0
         Aug. −4.7 −7.6 −7.6 . + 6.7 + 5.2 + 1.6 + 0.1 . . −3.9 + 0.0 + 0.0 −0.1 −
         Sep. −1.8 −2.7 −2.7 . + 3.5 + 3.9 −0.4 + 0.1 . . −2.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 −0.1 + 0.0
         Oct. + 2.8 + 3.3 + 3.3 . + 3.2 + 1.6 + 1.6 + 0.6 . . −3.7 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 −0.0
         Nov. + 20.8 + 22.3 + 22.3 . + 1.2 + 0.5 + 0.7 + 1.5 . . −3.4 + 0.8 −0.0 −0.1 −
         Dec. + 23.0 + 1.8 + 1.8 . + 10.0 + 6.3 + 3.7 + 0.4 . . + 10.7 + 0.4 −0.1 −0.1 −
of which: Domestic enterprises 10, 11 End of year or month *
1998 1,108.1 292.1 267.8 24.3 748.9 128.9 620.0 . 5.9 614.0 11.1 44.3 11.8 24.1 .
1999 593.2 142.1 142.1 . 421.8 82.3 339.5 1.5 . . 5.5 23.7 6.1 13.7 0.42000 635.1 158.1 158.1 . 447.6 89.0 358.5 2.7 . . 5.2 24.2 5.9 14.1 −
2000         Feb. 600.4 145.0 145.0 . 426.1 79.2 346.9 1.7 . . 5.5 23.7 6.0 13.9 0.0
         Mar. 598.7 141.4 141.4 . 428.0 79.5 348.5 1.8 . . 5.5 23.8 5.9 14.0 −
         Apr. 604.6 147.2 147.2 . 428.1 78.2 349.9 1.7 . . 5.5 23.8 6.0 14.1 −
         May 609.9 146.7 146.7 . 433.9 81.5 352.4 1.7 . . 5.5 23.8 5.8 14.1 0.0         June 606.3 142.7 142.7 . 434.4 79.5 354.9 1.8 . . 5.4 23.8 5.8 14.1 0.0
         July 608.5 142.6 142.6 . 436.7 80.1 356.6 1.8 . . 5.3 23.8 5.8 14.1 −
         Aug. 609.0 138.0 138.0 . 441.9 83.7 358.2 1.8 . . 5.3 23.8 5.9 14.1 −
         Sep. 611.2 138.0 138.0 . 444.0 85.9 358.1 1.8 . . 5.3 23.9 5.9 14.0 0.0
         Oct. 616.6 142.5 142.5 . 444.8 85.3 359.5 1.8 . . 5.3 24.1 6.1 14.1 −
         Nov. 623.8 149.0 149.0 . 445.4 85.8 359.5 2.7 . . 5.2 24.3 6.0 14.0 −
         Dec. 635.1 158.1 158.1 . 447.6 89.0 358.5 2.7 . . 5.2 24.2 5.9 14.1 −
Changes *
1999 + 43.7 + 6.6 + 6.6 . + 36.0 + 7.5 + 28.5 . . . −0.2 + 1.2 + 0.0 + 1.3 .
2000 + 42.8 + 15.3 + 15.3 . + 27.3 + 6.7 + 20.5 + 1.2 . . −0.3 + 0.5 −0.1 + 0.4 −0.4
2000         Feb. + 3.6 −0.2 −0.2 . + 3.8 + 1.0 + 2.8 + 0.1 . . + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0
         Mar. −2.0 −3.9 −3.9 . + 1.9 + 0.2 + 1.7 + 0.1 . . + 0.0 + 0.0 −0.1 + 0.1 −0.0
         Apr. + 5.2 + 5.2 + 5.2 . + 0.1 −1.3 + 1.4 −0.0 . . −0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 −
         May + 5.8 −0.1 −0.1 . + 5.8 + 3.3 + 2.5 −0.0 . . + 0.0 + 0.0 −0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0
         June −3.3 −3.7 −3.7 . + 0.5 −1.9 + 2.4 + 0.1 . . −0.1 −0.1 −0.0 + 0.0 −0.0
         July + 1.7 −0.5 −0.5 . + 2.3 + 0.6 + 1.7 −0.0 . . −0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 −0.0
         Aug. + 0.0 −5.1 −5.1 . + 5.2 + 3.6 + 1.6 + 0.0 . . −0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −0.0 −
         Sep. + 2.0 −0.2 −0.2 . + 2.1 + 2.2 −0.1 −0.0 . . −0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 −0.1 + 0.0
         Oct. + 4.8 + 3.8 + 3.8 . + 0.8 −0.6 + 1.4 + 0.1 . . −0.0 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 −0.0
         Nov. + 7.8 + 7.1 + 7.1 . + 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.9 . . −0.1 + 0.2 −0.0 −0.1 −
         Dec. + 13.8 + 10.1 + 10.1 . + 3.7 + 3.2 + 0.5 + 0.0 . . + 0.1 −0.0 −0.1 + 0.1 −
loan associations in January 1999, including deposits under savings and in time deposits (see also footnote 1). —9Collected separately from 1999
loan contracts (see table IV. 12). —6Excluding deposits under savings and only. —10Up to December 1998, including liabilities to domestic building
loan contracts (see also footnote 5). —7Including liabilities arising from and loan associations and money market funds. —11Up to the End 1998,
non-negotiable bearer debt securities. —8From 1999, no longer included including sole proprietors. 
35*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
IV. Banks
 
8. Deposits of domestic individuals and non-commercial organisations at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
   
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 euro billion
Sight deposits  2 Time deposits  4, 5, 6  
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits Domestic individuals Domestic individuals
of domesticindividuals Domestic Domesticand non- non-com- non-com-commercial mercial mercialorganisa- Selfem- Other organisa- Selfem- Other organisa-
Period Total Total ployed  
3 Employees tions Total Total ployed  3 Employees tions tions, total  1 individuals individuals
End of year or month *
 
1998 2,123.9 470.8 452.1 93.4 298.0 60.7 18.6 275.0 243.5 72.3 132.6 38.7 31.41999 1,187.8 263.5 254.6 50.2 170.3 34.1 9.0 233.4 216.6 35.2 161.6 19.9 16.82000 1,161.5 268.7 259.3 47.7 176.0 35.6 9.4 244.6 225.5 34.9 168.9 21.7 19.2
2000         July 1,149.9 267.2 256.7 48.9 172.8 35.0 10.5 232.4 214.7 34.1 160.6 20.0 17.6
         Aug. 1,145.1 264.8 254.5 49.3 170.8 34.4 10.3 233.9 216.2 34.4 161.4 20.4 17.7         Sep. 1,141.3 262.3 253.1 47.5 171.2 34.4 9.2 235.3 216.6 34.2 161.8 20.6 18.7
         Oct. 1,139.3 261.7 252.0 48.3 169.4 34.3 9.7 237.7 218.5 34.7 162.8 21.0 19.2
         Nov. 1,152.4 276.9 266.7 50.4 180.3 35.9 10.3 238.3 220.3 34.7 164.4 21.3 18.1         Dec. 1,161.5 268.7 259.3 47.7 176.0 35.6 9.4 244.6 225.5 34.9 168.9 21.7 19.2
Changes *
1999 + 11.2 + 26.2 + 25.9 + 3.7 + 18.8 + 3.4 + 0.3 −1.3 −1.0 −2.6 + 2.1 −0.5 −0.3
2000 −26.3 + 5.2 + 4.7 −2.5 + 5.7 + 1.5 + 0.4 + 10.6 + 8.2 −0.2 + 6.8 + 1.7 + 2.4
2000         July −3.8 −0.6 −0.3 + 0.9 −1.0 −0.2 −0.3 + 1.5 + 1.5 + 0.4 + 0.7 + 0.4 −0.0
         Aug. −4.8 −2.4 −2.2 + 0.4 −2.0 −0.6 −0.3 + 1.5 + 1.5 + 0.3 + 0.8 + 0.4 + 0.1
         Sep. −3.8 −2.5 −1.4 −1.8 + 0.4 + 0.0 −1.1 + 1.4 + 0.4 −0.2 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 1.0
         Oct. −2.0 −0.6 −1.1 + 0.8 −1.8 −0.1 + 0.5 + 2.4 + 1.9 + 0.5 + 1.0 + 0.4 + 0.5
         Nov. + 13.1 + 15.2 + 14.7 + 2.2 + 10.9 + 1.6 + 0.6 + 0.6 + 1.8 −0.1 + 1.5 + 0.3 −1.2
         Dec. + 9.1 −8.2 −7.4 −2.7 −4.3 −0.3 −0.9 + 6.3 + 5.2 + 0.3 + 4.5 + 0.4 + 1.1
*See table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the including deposits arising from loans on a trust basis; see also footnote 9.—
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as 2Up to December 1998, including time deposits for less than 1 month. —
provisional. Subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following 3Up to the End 1998, including sole proprietors. —4Including subordi-
Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Up to December 1998, nated liabilities and liabilities arising from registered debt securities. —5UpDeutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
 
  
9. Deposits of domestic public authorities at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group 
*
 
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 euro billion
Deposits  1 
   
Federal Government and its special funds  2 Länder Governments
Time deposits  4 Time deposits  4 
Savings Memo Savings Memo
Domestic for up deposits item: for up deposits item:public to and for more and bank Loans on to and for more and bank Loans on
Sight including than savings a trust Sight including than savings a trust authorities,
Period total Total 1 year 1 year bonds  
5 basis  6 Total 1 year 1 year bonds  5 basis  6 deposits  3 deposits  3 
End of year or month *
 
1998 288.3 111.2 4.0 1.9 80.9 0.0 24.3 80.1 6.8 1.9 27.1 0.2 44.21999 124.4 45.9 1.0 4.6 40.3 0.0 12.7 21.0 2.8 4.2 14.0 0.1 23.12000 149.1 67.6 2.1 22.6 42.8 0.0 12.5 20.3 3.1 2.1 15.0 0.1 23.3
2000         July 123.9 49.9 0.7 7.2 41.9 0.0 13.1 19.4 2.5 2.1 14.8 0.1 23.2
         Aug. 125.1 50.3 0.6 7.3 42.3 0.0 13.3 18.5 1.9 1.7 14.9 0.1 23.2         Sep. 144.0 69.2 0.6 26.7 41.9 0.0 13.5 20.4 2.3 3.1 14.9 0.1 23.1
         Oct. 144.4 71.6 0.8 28.4 42.3 0.0 13.1 19.5 2.3 2.3 14.8 0.1 23.2
         Nov. 136.7 62.2 0.7 18.8 42.7 0.0 12.7 18.9 1.7 2.1 14.9 0.1 23.3         Dec. 149.1 67.6 2.1 22.6 42.8 0.0 12.5 20.3 3.1 2.1 15.0 0.1 23.3
Changes *
1999 + 12.4 + 1.6 −0.9 + 3.5 −1.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 2.6 −0.4 + 3.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.5
2000 + 24.8 + 21.6 + 1.2 + 18.0 + 2.5 −0.0 −0.2 + 0.5 + 0.3 −0.9 + 1.1 + 0.0 + 0.2
2000         July −4.4 −0.1 −0.0 −0.4 + 0.4 −0.0 + 0.1 −3.4 −1.7 −1.7 + 0.0 −0.0 −0.0
         Aug. + 1.2 + 0.4 −0.1 + 0.1 + 0.4 − + 0.2 −0.9 −0.6 −0.4 + 0.1 −− 0.1
         Sep. + 18.8 + 19.0 −0.0 + 19.3 −0.3 − + 0.2 + 1.8 + 0.4 + 1.4 −0.0 −− 0.0
         Oct. + 0.4 + 2.3 + 0.2 + 1.7 + 0.4 −− 0.3 −0.8 −0.0 −0.8 −0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1
         Nov. −7.7 −9.4 −0.1 −9.6 + 0.3 −− 0.5 −0.6 −0.5 −0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0
         Dec. + 12.5 + 5.4 + 1.4 + 3.8 + 0.2 −0.0 −0.2 + 1.6 + 1.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0
*See table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to
its successor organisations and of the Federal Railways, east German be regarded as provisional. Subsequent alterations, which will appear in theRailways and Federal Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Up to December
Deutsche Post AG and Deutsche Telekom AG, and of publicly-owned 1998, including deposits arising from loans on a trust basis; see alsoenterprises, which are included in ”Enterprises ”. Statistical breaks have been footnote 6. —2Federal Railways Fund, Indemnification Fund, Redemption
36*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
IV. Banks
     
 
 Savings deposits  7  Memo item:
 
by maturity
 more than 1 year  6 
Included Subordinated
 of which: Domestic liabilities in time
non-com- (excluding deposits:
up to and up to and mercial Bank Loans on negotiable liabilitiesincluding including less than 4 years Domestic organisa- savings a trust debt arising1 year  
5 Total 2 years 4 years and more Total tions bonds  8 basis  9   Period individuals securities)  10 from repos  11 
End of year or month *
 
225.1 49.9 . 6.5 43.4 1,193.5 1,174.1 19.4 184.2 0.4 18.9 . 1998115.4 118.0 2.5 . . 605.9 595.5 10.4 85.0 0.2 10.8 −1999
123.6 121.1 5.1 . . 565.5 555.8 9.7 82.7 0.2 10.4 −2000
115.0 117.3 3.3 . . 568.4 558.4 10.0 81.8 0.2 10.6 −2000         July
116.6 117.3 3.4 . . 564.6 554.6 9.9 81.8 0.2 10.6 −         Aug.
118.3 117.1 3.6 . . 561.9 552.0 9.9 81.8 0.2 10.6 −         Sep.
120.5 117.2 4.2 . . 558.2 548.4 9.8 81.7 0.2 10.6 −         Oct.
120.5 117.9 4.7 . . 554.8 545.3 9.6 82.3 0.2 10.6 −         Nov.
123.6 121.1 5.1 . . 565.5 555.8 9.7 82.7 0.2 10.4 −         Dec.
Changes *
− 4.1 + 2.8 . . . − 4.3 − 4.8 + 0.5 −9.3 −0.0 + 1.1 . 1999
+ 8.0 + 2.5 + 2.5 . . −39.7 −39.0 −0.7 −2.3 + 0.0 −0.4 −2000
+ 1.9 −0.4 + 0.1 . . − 4.9 − 4.7 −0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 −− 2000         July
+ 1.6 −0.0 + 0.1 . . − 3.9 − 3.8 −0.0 −0.0 + 0.0 −0.0 −         Aug.
+ 1.7 −0.3 + 0.2 . . − 2.6 − 2.6 −0.1 −0.1 −0.0 −0.0 −         Sep.
+ 2.2 + 0.2 + 0.6 . . − 3.7 − 3.6 −0.1 −0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −         Oct.
− 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.6 . . − 3.3 − 3.1 −0.2 + 0.6 + 0.0 −0.0 −         Nov.
+ 3.1 + 3.2 + 0.4 . . + 10.7 + 10.6 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.0 −0.2 −         Dec.
to December 1998, excluding time deposits for less than 1 month; see also footnote 6). —8Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
footnote 2. —6Since the inclusion of building and loan associations in securities. —9From 1999, no longer included in time deposits (see also
January 1999, including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see table footnote 1) —10Included in time deposits. —11Collected separately from
IV. 12). —7Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also 1999 only. Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
 
   
 
 
 
Local authorities and local authority associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  4, 7 Time deposits  4 
Savings Memo Savings Memo
for up deposits item: for up deposits item:to and for more and bank Loans on to and for more and bank Loans on
Sight including than savings a trust Sight including than savings a trust
Total 1 year 1 year bonds  
5, 8 basis  6 Total 1 year 1 year bonds  5 basis  6   Period deposits  3 deposits  3 
End of year or month *
 
45.3 16.5 19.8 2.4 6.6 0.1 51.7 9.3 21.2 15.2 5.8 0.2 199828.5 8.2 14.4 2.2 3.7 0.1 28.9 2.8 18.9 5.8 1.4 0.1 199930.2 8.9 15.7 2.0 3.6 0.1 31.1 2.5 21.7 5.7 1.2 0.1 2000
26.6 7.5 13.5 2.0 3.6 0.1 28.0 2.4 18.5 5.9 1.2 0.1 2000          July
29.1 7.8 15.7 2.0 3.6 0.1 27.3 2.5 17.8 5.8 1.2 0.1          Aug.27.7 7.5 14.7 2.0 3.6 0.1 26.7 2.3 17.5 5.8 1.2 0.1          Sep.
27.2 7.5 14.1 2.0 3.5 0.1 26.2 2.7 16.6 5.7 1.2 0.1          Oct.
28.6 8.0 15.0 2.0 3.5 0.1 27.0 2.3 17.9 5.7 1.2 0.1          Nov.30.2 8.9 15.7 2.0 3.6 0.1 31.1 2.5 21.7 5.7 1.2 0.1          Dec.
Changes *
+ 4.6 + 0.7 + 3.1 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 3.5 + 0.5 + 5.6 −1.0 −1.6 −0.0 1999
+ 1.7 + 0.8 + 1.3 −0.2 −0.2 + 0.0 + 1.0 −0.3 + 1.7 −0.1 −0.2 −0.0 2000
−0.5 −0.2 −0.3 + 0.0 −0.0 + 0.0 −0.4 −0.6 −0.0 + 0.1 −0.0 −2000         July
+ 2.4 + 0.3 + 2.2 −0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −0.7 + 0.1 −0.8 −0.0 + 0.0 −         Aug.
−1.4 −0.3 −1.0 −0.0 −0.1 + 0.0 −0.6 −0.3 −0.3 −0.0 −0.0 −0.0          Sep.
−0.5 + 0.1 −0.6 + 0.0 −0.0 + 0.0 −0.5 + 0.4 −0.8 −0.1 −0.0 −         Oct.
+ 1.5 + 0.5 + 1.0 + 0.0 −0.0 + 0.0 + 0.8 −0.4 + 1.2 −0.1 + 0.0 −         Nov.
+ 1.6 + 0.9 + 0.7 − + 0.0 + 0.0 + 3.8 + 0.2 + 3.6 + 0.0 −0.0 −         Dec.
Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special Fund, ”German Unity ”Fund, longer included in time deposits (see also footnote 1) —7Since the inclusion
Equalisation of Burdens Fund. —3Up to December 1998, including time of building and loan associations in January 1999, including deposits under
deposits for less than 1 month. —4Up to December 1998, excluding time savings and loan contracts. —8Excluding deposits under savings and loan
deposits for less than 1 month; see also footnote 3. —5Including liabilities contracts (see also footnote 7). 
arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. —6From 1999, no
37*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
IV. Banks
 
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs) *
  
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 euro billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at three months ’ Memo at over three months ’
notice notice item: of which:
Interest With
of which: of which: of which: credited maturitiesSpecial Special At three on of moresavings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months ’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years  
4 facilities  2 facilities  2 non-banks
End of year or month *
 
1998 1,234.2 1,211.0 971.4 582.8 239.6 189.6 23.2 17.3 39.5 243.9 234.9 211.1 9.11999 626.6 614.7 504.4 338.8 110.2 88.3 11.9 9.1 20.0 116.4 110.7 101.8 5.72000 585.2 573.5 450.5 309.0 123.0 104.4 11.7 8.3 19.3 115.9 109.0 94.4 6.8
2000         Aug. 584.3 572.7 456.7 311.1 116.0 97.0 11.5 8.3 0.4 114.3 107.7 96.5 6.6
         Sep. 581.5 570.0 451.8 308.8 118.2 99.5 11.5 8.2 0.5 114.4 107.8 95.9 6.6
         Oct. 577.7 566.2 447.3 306.0 118.9 100.4 11.5 8.1 0.6 114.6 107.9 95.1 6.7
         Nov. 574.2 562.7 442.3 303.4 120.5 102.1 11.5 8.1 0.6 115.4 108.7 94.7 6.7         Dec. 585.2 573.5 450.5 309.0 123.0 104.4 11.7 8.3 13.8 115.9 109.0 94.4 6.8
Changes *
1999 −4.4 −4.5 + 7.3 + 14.6 −11.8 −8.4 + 0.1 + 0.3 . −8.2 −9.3 −8.9 + 1.1
2000 −40.7 −40.5 −53.6 −31.1 + 13.1 + 15.8 −0.2 −0.8 . −0.5 −1.7 −7.4 + 1.1
2000         Aug. −3.9 −3.9 −5.5 −2.6 + 1.6 + 1.8 −0.0 −0.1 . + 0.2 + 0.0 −0.4 + 0.2
         Sep. −2.7 −2.7 −4.9 −3.1 + 2.1 + 2.2 −0.0 −0.1 . + 0.1 + 0.0 −0.6 + 0.0
         Oct. −3.9 −3.8 −4.5 −2.7 + 0.7 + 0.9 −0.0 −0.1 . + 0.2 + 0.1 −0.8 + 0.1
         Nov. −3.5 −3.5 −5.0 −2.6 + 1.6 + 1.7 −0.0 −0.1 . + 0.8 + 0.8 −0.4 + 0.0
         Dec. + 11.0 + 10.8 + 8.2 + 5.6 + 2.6 + 2.3 + 0.3 + 0.2 . + 0.5 + 0.4 −0.3 + 0.1
*See table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the building and loan associations, which are classified as time deposits. —
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as 2Savings deposits bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the minimum or
provisional. Subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following basic rate of interest. —3Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable
Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Other than deposits with bearer debt securities. — 4 Up to December 1998, of 4 years and more. 
 
   
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany 
*
 
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 eurobillion
Non-negotiable bearer debt securities
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper and money market paper  7 
of which: of which
with maturities of Subordinated
with maturities of
Certifi- non-
Floating- Zero- Foreign cates up to and up to and negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of including over over including over over debt debt
Period Total notes  1 deposit 1 year Total 1 year bonds  1, 2 bonds  3, 4 2 years  5 2 years  5 4 years  6 4 years  6 securities securities
End of year or month *)
 
1998 2,200.4 289.2 10.6 204.3 14.3 47.2 2,147.0 1,787.7 4.7 1.0 3.6 1.5 46.6 2.91999 1,310.3 208.2 14.7 98.7 13.1 73.6 1,189.8 . 2.6 0.5 1.3 . 32.7 2.52000 1,412.5 283.1 22.1 128.2 19.7 87.9 1,261.9 . 2.7 0.4 1.3 . 38.3 2.4
2000         Aug. 1,422.3 272.2 21.1 127.7 15.0 90.3 1,266.1 . 2.4 0.3 1.3 . 37.2 2.6
         Sep. 1,422.9 273.1 20.5 131.1 14.1 87.9 1,271.0 . 2.5 0.3 1.3 . 37.8 2.6
         Oct. 1,433.5 281.7 22.2 138.4 16.0 91.9 1,279.9 . 2.6 0.3 1.3 . 39.3 2.6
         Nov. 1,422.6 277.4 21.8 135.4 18.1 87.2 1,273.3 . 2.8 0.5 1.3 . 39.0 2.6         Dec. 1,412.5 283.1 22.1 128.2 19.7 87.9 1,261.9 . 2.7 0.4 1.3 . 38.3 2.4
Changes *
1999 + 183.5 + 56.2 + 9.3 + 20.0 + 5.8 + 49.5 + 96.4 . + 0.3 + 0.0 −0.5 . + 8.8 + 1.0
2000 + 102.0 + 65.5 + 7.0 + 26.6 + 6.4 + 14.1 + 72.1 . + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 . + 5.6 −0.1
2000         Aug. + 12.7 + 2.0 + 0.4 + 8.7 + 4.1 + 0.4 + 10.1 . + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 . + 0.9 + 0.0
         Sep. + 0.6 + 0.9 −0.6 + 3.4 −0.9 −2.4 + 5.0 . + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 . + 0.6 + 0.0
         Oct. + 10.7 + 8.6 + 1.7 + 7.3 + 1.9 + 4.1 + 8.8 . + 0.1 + 0.0 −0.0 . + 1.6 + 0.0
         Nov. −10.9 −4.3 −0.4 −3.0 + 2.0 −4.7 − 6.5 . + 0.2 + 0.2 −0.0 . −0.3 −0.0
         Dec. −10.3 + 5.8 + 0.3 −7.2 + 1.4 + 0.5 −11.5 . + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 . −0.8 −0.2
*See table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the 3Including floating-rate notes and zero-coupon bonds denominated in
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as foreign currencies. —4From 1999, bonds denominated in non-euro-area
provisional. Subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following currencies. —5Up to December 1998, 2 years and more. —6From 1999, no
Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Including debt securities longer collected. —7Non-negotiable bearer debt securities are classified
denominated in foreign currencies. —2Issue value when floated. — among bank savings bonds; see also table IV. 10, footnote 2. 
38*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
IV.  Banks
  
12.  Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *
  Interim statements
  
Euro billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs)  6 banks (non-MFIs)
Building loans Secur- Memo
item: ities (in-
Bal- cluding Bearer Newances Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- and under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber loans Bank savings Interim and savings savings Sight ities ing pub- enteredof Balance (except debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan and time out- lished into in
End of year sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- deposits stand- year or associ- reserves)
or month ations total loans  
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans  4 tracts deposits tracts 7 ing 8 month  9 loans)  1 paper)  5 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2000 31 153.6 23.0 0.2 11.3 43.5 51.2 6.5 9.2 0.8 27.6 95.6 2.5 5.7 6.9 73.0
2000         Oct. 32 151.5 21.8 0.2 11.4 43.8 50.3 6.4 9.3 0.8 27.4 92.9 2.5 5.0 6.9 6.0
         Nov. 32 151.7 21.8 0.2 11.4 43.6 50.8 6.5 9.1 0.8 27.0 92.8 2.5 5.4 6.9 6.2         Dec. 31 153.6 23.0 0.2 11.3 43.5 51.2 6.5 9.2 0.8 27.6 95.6 2.5 5.7 6.9 8.9
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2000         Oct. 20 109.5 18.5 0.1 6.2 28.7 35.0 5.9 7.5 0.6 20.6 64.0 2.5 5.0 4.3 4.0
         Nov. 20 109.6 18.4 0.1 6.2 28.6 35.4 6.0 7.3 0.5 20.4 63.8 2.4 5.4 4.3 4.0         Dec. 19 110.8 19.0 0.1 6.2 28.6 35.7 6.0 7.3 0.6 20.4 65.8 2.5 5.7 4.2 5.6
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2000         Oct. 12 42.0 3.4 0.1 5.2 15.0 15.3 0.5 1.8 0.2 6.7 28.9 0.0 − 2.6 2.0
         Nov. 12 42.1 3.3 0.1 5.1 15.0 15.4 0.5 1.8 0.2 6.7 29.0 0.0 − 2.6 2.2
         Dec. 12 42.8 3.9 0.1 5.1 15.0 15.4 0.5 1.9 0.2 7.3 29.9 0.0 − 2.6 3.3
Trends in building and loan association business
  
Euro billion
Changes in deposits Capital promised Capital paid out Outpayment Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts  10 Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans  11 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings andments loan contracts Newly loan contracts  
10 
Amounts Interest of granted
credited deposits interim paid into of which: of which:
savings on under Applied Applied and ofaccounts deposits bridging which: of Memo
cancelled to settle- to settle-
under under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which: item:savings savings and which: interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housingand loan and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonusescon- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during received
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter
13 tions  12 tracts  10 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2000 22.0 2.8 4.9 47.7 33.6 45.8 20.0 4.6 10.8 3.4 14.9 10.5 7.6 14.3 . 0.5
2000         Oct. 1.7 0.1 0.4 4.3 3.1 4.1 1.8 0.4 1.0 0.3 1.3 10.7 7.8 1.2 0.0
         Nov. 1.7 0.1 0.4 3.4 2.3 3.5 1.5 0.3 0.8 0.2 1.2 10.6 7.7 1.2 0.0         Dec. 2.4 2.4 0.4 3.7 2.6 3.7 1.5 0.3 0.9 0.3 1.3 10.5 7.6 1.3 . 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2000         Oct. 1.2 0.0 0.2 3.1 2.3 3.0 1.3 0.3 0.7 0.3 1.0 6.3 3.9 0.8 0.0
         Nov. 1.1 0.0 0.3 2.3 1.5 2.6 1.1 0.2 0.6 0.1 1.0 6.2 3.7 0.8 0.0         Dec. 1.6 1.6 0.2 2.6 1.8 2.6 1.0 0.2 0.6 0.2 1.0 6.1 3.8 0.9 . 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2000         Oct. 0.5 0.0 0.1 1.1 0.8 1.1 0.5 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.3 4.5 3.9 0.4 0.0
         Nov. 0.6 0.0 0.1 1.0 0.8 1.0 0.4 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.3 4.5 3.9 0.4 0.0         Dec. 0.8 0.8 0.1 1.2 0.9 1.1 0.5 0.1 0.4 0.1 0.3 4.4 3.9 0.4 . 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of the foreign branches. deposits. —8Including participation rights capital; from December 1993
From August 1990 including assets and liabilities and/or transactions with including fund for general banking risks. —9Total amount covered by the
building and loan association savers in the former GDR. The figures for the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for which the contract fee ha s
latest date are always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent alterations, been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted count as new contracts .—
which will appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially 10For outpayments of deposits under savings and loan contracts arising
marked. —1Including postal giro account balances, claims on building and from the allocation of contracts see "Capital paid out". —11Including
loan associations, claims arising from registered debt securities and central housing bonuses credited. —12Only allocations accepted by the
bank balances. —2Loans under savings and loan contracts and interim and beneficiaries; including allocations applied to settlement of interim and
bridging loans. —3Including money market paper and small amounts of bridging loans. —13The amounts already credited to the accounts of savers
other securities issued by banks. —4Up to December 1998 including loans or borrowers are also included in "Amounts paid into savings accounts
on a trust basis. —5Including equalisation claims. —6Including liabilities under savings and loan contracts" and "Interest and repayments received
to building and loan associations. —7Including small amounts of savings on building loans". 
39*IV.  Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
IV.  Banks
  
13. Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
    
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999 euro billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
Loans and advances Balances  and loans  and advances
German   not evidenced by certificates  3 not evidenced  by certificates    3 
banks(MFIs)   to German
with non-banks
foreign foreignbranches Money of which Money
branches  1 
and/or and/or market enter- to marketforeign foreign balance paper, prises foreign paper,subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- and indi- non- secur- Other
Period diaries diaries total  
2 Total Total banks  4 banks Total Total Total viduals banks ities  5 assets  7 ities 5,  6 
Foreign  branches End of year or month *
  
1997 62 165 1,837.4 1,068.1 927.0 207.5 719.4 141.1 728.4 505.8 68.1 35.2 437.7 222.6 40.91998 68 183 2,195.3 1,230.0 1,069.2 279.2 789.9 160.8 875.7 624.7 66.1 37.0 558.6 251.0 89.61999 66 187 1,311.9 714.6 614.2 177.0 437.2 100.4 533.9 386.2 26.6 20.8 359.6 147.7 63.4
2000         Mar. 73 203 1,444.5 805.4 695.3 202.3 493.0 110.0 581.0 432.0 27.9 21.3 404.1 149.1 58.1
         Apr. 73 204 1,486.0 845.9 734.4 217.9 516.5 111.5 596.1 442.0 27.6 21.3 414.5 154.1 44.0
         May 72 206 1,466.9 815.2 703.7 221.2 482.5 111.5 596.7 445.9 26.4 20.2 419.5 150.8 54.9         June 74 210 1,433.8 784.3 680.6 209.1 471.5 103.7 588.7 437.6 24.5 18.7 413.1 151.1 60.8
         July 74 210 1,476.3 790.9 684.7 200.8 483.9 106.3 624.6 465.0 23.9 18.1 441.1 159.6 60.8
         Aug. 74 210 1,508.2 803.8 691.8 205.4 486.4 112.0 639.0 476.4 23.7 18.3 452.7 162.6 65.4         Sep. 73 210 1,542.9 816.8 706.1 209.4 496.7 110.7 656.5 494.5 24.8 19.5 469.8 161.9 69.7
         Oct. 72 212 1,635.7 851.3 738.2 205.8 532.3 113.1 717.1 537.5 23.5 18.3 514.0 179.6 67.3
         Nov. 72 212 1,629.8 863.0 753.1 213.5 539.6 109.9 700.4 526.2 23.2 18.1 503.0 174.3 66.4
Changes *
1998 + 6 + 18 +406.2 +187.9 +163.5 + 71.9 + 91.5 + 24.5 +168.5 +136.2 −1.6 + 2.1 +137.8 + 32.3 + 49.8
1999 −2 + 4 + 73.2 + 5.3 + 7.7 + 18.1 −10.3 −2.5 + 52.2 + 33.5 −8.1 + 1.0 + 41.6 + 18.8 + 15.6
2000         Mar. + 5 + 10 + 10.0 + 7.8 + 7.6 + 13.5 −5.9 + 0.3 + 3.8 + 5.0 −0.3 + 0.0 + 5.3 −1.2 −1.6
         Apr. − + 1 + 5.3 + 21.5 + 22.3 + 15.2 + 7.1 −0.9 −2.1 −3.2 −0.6 −0.3 −2.6 + 1.1 −14.0
         May −1 + 2 + 8.4 −16.6 −18.8 + 3.6 −22.4 + 2.1 + 13.9 + 14.7 −0.8 −0.8 + 15.6 −0.8 + 11.1
         June + 2 + 4 −15.2 −22.3 −15.6 −11.9 −3.8 −6.6 + 1.0 −1.3 −1.9 −1.4 + 0.5 + 2.4 + 6.1
         July −− + 20.4 −4.2 −5.3 −8.6 + 3.2 + 1.2 + 24.8 + 18.9 −0.7 −0.8 + 19.6 + 6.0 −0.3
         Aug. −− + 0.0 −1.9 −6.1 + 4.1 −10.3 + 4.2 −2.6 −1.4 −0.4 + 0.0 −1.0 −1.2 + 4.5
         Sep. −1 − + 20.6 + 6.4 + 8.6 + 3.8 + 4.8 −2.3 + 10.4 + 12.4 + 0.9 + 1.0 + 11.5 −2.0 + 3.9
         Oct. −1 + 2 + 58.1 + 18.3 + 17.8 −4.0 + 21.8 + 0.5 + 42.6 + 28.8 −1.5 −1.4 + 30.3 + 13.8 −2.8
         Nov. −− + 30.4 + 27.7 + 28.9 + 8.2 + 20.8 −1.2 + 2.8 + 4.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 4.1 −1.3 −0.2
  
  
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month *
  
1997 37 131 764.9 429.5 366.8 122.1 244.6 62.7 292.0 214.4 67.5 54.9 147.0 77.6 43.41998 37 137 830.8 469.0 373.1 160.1 213.0 95.9 311.0 237.5 71.4 62.3 166.1 73.5 50.81999 39 161 530.6 242.0 178.6 71.1 107.5 63.4 234.6 174.2 41.5 37.5 132.7 60.4 53.9
2000         Mar. 41 164 539.3 239.5 179.6 75.6 104.0 59.9 249.0 184.4 42.7 38.6 141.7 64.5 50.8
         Apr. 41 164 546.6 243.3 183.3 74.9 108.5 60.0 249.7 185.1 42.0 38.4 143.1 64.7 53.5
         May 41 164 542.9 245.5 184.7 78.2 106.5 60.8 246.4 183.8 42.6 38.6 141.2 62.6 51.0         June 41 166 538.4 236.6 177.6 75.4 102.2 59.0 247.6 186.5 42.7 39.2 143.9 61.0 54.3
         July 41 167 540.4 238.3 176.5 70.2 106.3 61.8 245.8 185.3 40.9 37.5 144.4 60.6 56.3
         Aug. 41 167 553.8 245.5 183.1 74.6 108.5 62.4 248.7 187.1 41.8 38.5 145.3 61.6 59.6         Sep. 41 168 562.1 244.7 181.2 73.6 107.5 63.5 255.2 194.1 43.2 39.6 150.8 61.1 62.2
         Oct. 41 170 585.0 253.4 189.0 74.6 114.3 64.4 264.1 199.9 44.8 41.0 155.1 64.2 67.6
         Nov. 41 170 590.6 261.2 196.4 74.1 122.3 64.7 258.7 195.6 44.1 41.0 151.4 63.1 70.7
Changes *
1998 + 0 + 6 + 79.5 + 47.8 + 13.7 + 39.7 −26.1 + 34.1 + 24.2 + 27.0 + 4.1 + 7.5 + 22.9 −2.8 + 7.5
1999 + 2 + 24 + 86.6 + 5.2 −5.0 −0.6 −4.4 + 10.3 + 69.9 + 56.0 + 5.1 + 5.8 + 50.9 + 13.8 + 11.5
2000         Mar. + 1 + 2 −1.6 −7.4 −8.3 −0.4 −7.8 + 0.9 + 7.7 + 5.5 −0.2 + 0.4 + 5.7 + 2.2 −1.9
         Apr. −− − 1.2 −0.1 + 1.2 −0.7 + 1.9 −1.3 −3.1 −3.2 −0.7 −0.2 −2.4 + 0.0 + 2.0
         May −− + 2.5 + 5.2 + 3.4 + 3.4 + 0.0 + 1.8 −0.7 + 1.1 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.5 −1.8 −2.0
         June − +2 −3.0 −7.1 −5.9 −2.9 −3.1 −1.2 + 0.6 + 2.1 + 0.0 + 0.5 + 2.1 −1.5 + 3.5
         July − +1 −3.2 −0.6 −2.7 −5.1 + 2.4 + 2.1 −4.1 −3.6 −1.8 −1.7 −1.8 −0.4 + 1.5
         Aug. −− + 6.5 + 4.2 + 4.8 + 4.4 + 0.4 −0.6 −0.5 −0.9 + 0.9 + 1.0 −1.9 + 0.4 + 2.8
         Sep. − + 1 + 5.1 −2.4 −3.1 −1.0 −2.1 + 0.6 + 5.2 + 5.6 + 1.5 + 1.1 + 4.2 −0.4 + 2.3
         Oct. − + 2 + 15.1 + 5.3 + 5.7 + 1.0 + 4.6 −0.4 + 5.2 + 2.5 + 1.6 + 1.4 + 0.9 + 2.7 + 4.6
         Nov. −− + 13.2 + 11.4 + 9.7 −0.5 + 10.2 + 1.7 −2.0 −1.5 −0.7 + 0.1 −0.8 −0.5 + 3.8
*From March 2000, including the foreign branches of building and loan plus endorsement liabilities arising from rediscounted bills and bills sent for
associations. In this table “foreign “also includes the country of domicile of collection from the banks ’portfolios prior to maturity); for foreign
the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical alterations have subsidiaries, volume of business even after 1998. —3For foreign branches:
been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest date are up to December 1998, including bill-based lending (bill holdings plusalways to be regarded as provisional; subsequent alterations, which will endorsement liabilities and bills sent for collection from the banks ’
appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. — portfolios prior to maturity); from 1999, including bill holdings; up to
1Several branches in a given country of domicile are regarded as a single December 1998, including loans on a trust basis. For foreign subsidiaris,
branch. —2Up to December 1998, volume of business (balance sheet total bill-based lending included even after 1998; up to December 1998,
40*IV.  Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
IV.  Banks
        
  
Deposits  8 
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  9 
Money
Short-term market Medium  and long-term
paper
of which of which and debtenter- enter- Working
securities
out- capital Other prises  and prises  and
German foreign indi- indi- Foreign standing and own liabilities
Total Total banks Total Total Total viduals Total viduals 10 funds 11   Period banks  4 non-banks
End of year or month * Foreign  branches
  
1,518.6 1,002.8 221.3 781.5 515.7 164.9 161.2 136.1 3.7 3.6 350.9 198.0 17.3 103.5 19971,756.4 1,181.3 259.6 921.7 575.1 173.6 171.1 145.9 2.5 2.2 401.5 270.0 20.0 148.8 1998
988.6 671.8 148.3 523.6 316.7 60.7 57.9 52.8 2.8 2.7 256.0 234.4 14.0 75.0 1999
1,111.3 723.5 133.7 589.8 387.7 71.5 68.0 63.9 3.5 3.3 316.2 251.1 18.7 63.4 2000          Mar.
1,151.3 756.9 139.2 617.7 394.4 73.0 69.5 65.9 3.5 3.3 321.4 257.4 18.7 58.5          Apr.
1,145.3 742.4 142.1 600.3 402.9 68.2 64.7 59.9 3.6 3.3 334.7 244.5 18.9 58.2          May1,113.9 734.6 147.7 586.9 379.3 67.0 63.5 58.4 3.5 3.3 312.3 239.9 19.1 60.9          June
1,140.7 741.1 148.8 592.3 399.6 70.3 66.8 62.7 3.5 3.3 329.3 254.1 21.8 59.6          July
1,154.9 751.1 156.4 594.7 403.7 71.4 68.2 64.2 3.3 3.1 332.3 268.2 21.9 63.2          Aug.1,193.6 791.9 154.2 637.8 401.7 70.1 66.8 58.8 3.3 3.1 331.6 267.6 21.9 59.8          Sep.
1,258.2 829.4 159.2 670.1 428.8 65.3 61.9 58.8 3.4 3.2 363.6 287.4 22.0 68.1          Oct.
1,265.8 832.9 161.0 671.9 432.9 60.0 56.6 53.1 3.4 3.2 372.9 281.8 21.9 60.3          Nov.
Changes *
+ 278.4 +202.7 + 39.3 +163.5 + 75.6 + 9.2 + 10.4 + 10.3 −1.2 −1.4 + 66.5 + 72.0 + 2.7 + 53.2 1998
− 2.8 + 5.6 + 13.4 −7.8 −8.4 −28.6 −30.2 −22.4 + 1.6 + 1.6 + 20.2 + 96.3 + 3.7 −24.1 1999
− 5.7 −5.8 −10.1 + 4.3 + 0.1 + 1.8 + 1.7 + 2.7 + 0.2 + 0.1 −1.7 + 20.6 + 0.7 −5.6 2000          Mar.
+ 10.0 + 13.2 + 4.9 + 8.3 −3.2 + 1.3 + 1.3 + 1.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 −4.5 + 6.3 + 0.1 −11.1          Apr.
+ 15.9 −0.7 + 3.4 −4.1 + 16.6 −4.6 −4.6 −5.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 21.2 −12.9 + 0.2 + 5.2          May
−16.2 + 1.8 + 5.9 −4.2 −18.0 −1.2 −1.1 −1.4 −0.1 −0.0 −16.9 −4.6 + 0.2 + 5.5          June
+ 8.5 −5.2 + 0.8 −6.0 + 13.7 + 3.2 + 3.2 + 4.2 −0.0 −0.0 + 10.6 + 14.2 + 2.8 −5.0          July
−12.3 −7.2 + 7.0 −14.2 −5.1 + 1.0 + 1.2 + 1.3 −0.2 −0.2 −6.2 + 14.1 + 0.1 −1.8          Aug.
+ 27.4 + 33.9 −2.5 + 36.4 −6.5 −1.4 −1.4 −5.5 −0.0 −0.0 −5.1 −0.6 + 0.0 −6.2          Sep.
+ 35.9 + 18.8 + 4.5 + 14.3 + 17.1 −5.0 −5.1 −0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 22.0 + 19.8 + 0.1 + 2.3          Oct.
+ 37.1 + 21.7 + 2.5 + 19.2 + 15.4 −5.2 −5.2 −5.6 −0.0 −0.0 + 20.5 −5.6 −0.1 −1.0          Nov.
  
  
End of year or month * Foreign  subsidiaries
  
600.8 412.3 58.2 354.1 188.5 52.1 45.0 42.0 7.1 7.0 136.4 84.4 27.0 52.7 1997638.7 450.5 85.5 365.0 188.2 50.2 44.2 41.6 6.0 5.9 138.1 87.7 33.8 70.6 1998383.4 250.7 56.9 193.8 132.7 21.6 19.8 18.3 1.7 1.7 111.1 51.5 29.0 66.7 1999
397.9 256.6 51.3 205.3 141.4 23.8 21.3 20.7 2.6 2.6 117.5 49.0 30.6 61.8 2000          Mar.
403.8 259.5 48.2 211.2 144.3 24.7 21.9 21.1 2.8 2.7 119.7 49.2 31.6 62.0          Apr.
399.9 261.5 49.9 211.5 138.5 22.6 19.9 19.6 2.7 2.7 115.8 51.1 31.2 60.6          May394.8 256.2 51.6 204.6 138.6 24.9 22.2 20.7 2.7 2.7 113.8 51.5 31.5 60.5          June
396.9 257.8 51.7 206.1 139.1 25.8 23.0 21.7 2.7 2.7 113.3 50.5 32.9 60.1          July
406.7 260.3 51.6 208.7 146.4 30.9 28.3 26.5 2.7 2.6 115.5 49.9 32.8 64.4          Aug.409.6 261.9 54.6 207.3 147.7 30.5 27.7 21.1 2.7 2.7 117.2 51.3 33.9 67.3          Sep.
421.5 264.7 55.2 209.5 156.8 37.0 34.2 23.1 2.8 2.8 119.8 54.6 34.8 74.0          Oct.
423.1 265.5 50.6 214.9 157.7 39.1 36.4 22.7 2.7 2.7 118.5 57.0 35.2 75.2          Nov.
Changes *
+ 51.6 + 48.4 + 28.1 + 20.3 + 3.2 −1.4 −0.4 −0.0 −1.0 −1.1 + 4.6 + 3.2 + 6.8 + 17.9 1998
+ 54.7 + 11.6 + 13.9 −2.3 + 43.1 −2.3 −2.8 −3.0 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 45.3 + 6.7 + 11.7 + 13.5 1999
− 0.8 + 0.7 + 1.0 −0.3 −1.5 + 1.4 + 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.8 + 0.8 −2.9 −0.9 + 0.6 −0.5 2000          Mar.
− 1.6 −1.9 −3.1 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 0.8 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 −0.5 + 0.2 + 1.0 −0.8          Apr.
+ 2.1 + 5.7 + 1.7 + 4.0 −3.5 −2.0 −2.0 −1.5 −0.0 −0.0 −1.5 + 1.9 −0.4 −1.2          May
− 3.9 −5.2 + 0.6 −5.8 + 1.3 + 2.2 + 2.3 + 1.1 −0.0 −0.0 −0.9 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.4          June
− 2.6 −1.3 + 0.1 −1.4 −1.3 + 0.9 + 0.9 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −2.2 −1.0 + 1.4 −1.0          July
+ 4.2 −1.4 −0.1 −1.3 + 5.6 + 5.1 + 5.2 + 4.8 −0.1 −0.1 + 0.5 −0.7 −0.1 + 3.0          Aug.
− 0.2 −0.3 + 3.0 −3.3 + 0.2 −0.4 −0.5 −5.4 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 2.7          Sep.
+ 5.6 −1.3 + 0.7 −1.9 + 6.9 + 6.5 + 6.5 + 2.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 3.4 + 0.9 + 5.3          Oct.
+ 7.7 + 4.7 −4.6 + 9.3 + 3.1 + 2.1 + 2.2 −0.4 −0.1 −0.1 + 0.9 + 2.4 + 0.3 + 2.7          Nov.
including loans on a trust basis (see also footnote 7). —4In the case of liabilities arising from loans on a trust basis (see also footnote 11). —
foreign branches, from December 1993 including transactions with the 9Excluding subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt securities
head office and with other branches in Germany; in the case of foreign and money market paper. —10Issues of negotiable and non-negotiable
subsidiaries, including transactions with the parent institution. — debt securities and money market paper. —11Including subordinated
5Treasury bills, Treasury discount paper and other money market paper, liabilities. From 1999, including liabilities arising from loans on a trust
debt securities. —6Including own debt securities. —7From 1999, basis. 
including loans on a trust basis. —8Up to Dezember 1998, including
41*IV.  Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
V. Minimum reserves
 
1. Reserve ratios
Germany European monetary union
 
% of liabilities subject to reserve requirements % of reserve base  1 
Sight Time
Applicable from liabilities liabilities Applicable from Ratio Savings deposits
1995  August 1 2    2    1.5    1999  January 1 2    
    
1Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank of 1 December
1998 on the application of minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to whicha reserve ratio of 0 % applies, pursuant to article 4 (1)). 
 
  
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany up to the end of 1998
− pursuant to the Minimum Reserves Order of the Bundesbank −
 
DM million
Liabilities subject to reserve requirements Excess reserves  4 
Monthly Required as % of the
average  1 Total reserves  2 Level Sight liabilities Time liabilities Savings deposits Actual reserves  3 required  reserves Shortfall, total
1995         Dec. 2,066,565 579,337 519,456 967,772 36,492 37,337 845 2.3 3
1996         Dec. 2,201,464 655,483 474,342 1,071,639 38,671 39,522 851 2.2 4
1997         Dec. 2,327,879 734,986 476,417 1,116,477 40,975 41,721 745 1.8 3
1998         Dec. 2,576,889 865,444 564,878 1,146,567 45,805 46,432 627 1.4 4
1Pursuant to sections 5 to 7 of the Minimum Reserves Order. —2Amount balances of the credit institutions subject to reserve requirements on their
after applying the reserve ratios to the liabilities subject to reserve require- giro accounts at the Bundesbank. — 4 Actual reserves less required reserves. 
ments (section 5 (1) of the Minimum Reserves Order). —3Average credit
 
 
3. Reserve maintenance in the European monetary union
− from 1999, pursuant to the ECB Regulation governing minimum reserves according to article 19.1 of the
ECB/ESCB Statute −
 
Maintenance Required reserves
period before deduction Required reserves
of lump-sum Lump-sum beginning in  1 after deduction of
Reserve base  2 allowance  3 allowance  4 lump-sum allowance Actual reserves  5 Excess reserves  6 Shortfall, total  7 
European monetary union (euro billion)
 
2000         Apr. 5,598.7 112.0 0.6 111.3 111.8 0.5 0.0
         May 5,702.9 114.1 0.6 113.4 113.9 0.5 0.0         June 5,697.1 113.9 0.6 113.3 114.0 0.6 0.0
         July 5,622.0 112.4 0.6 111.8 112.3 0.4 0.0
         Aug. 5,660.1 113.2 0.6 112.6 113.1 0.5 0.0         Sep. 5,713.8 114.3 0.6 113.7 114.2 0.5 0.0
         Oct. 5,782.9 115.7 0.6 115.1 115.5 0.4 0.0
         Nov.  
r 5,860.6 117.2 0.6 116.6 117.2 0.6 0.0
         Dec.  8 p 5,983.3 119.7 1.2 118.5 119.0 0.5 0.0
2001         Jan. . . . . . . .
Of which: Germany (euro million)
2000         Apr. 1,730,410 34,608 293 34,316 34,493 178 5
         May 1,758,285 35,166 292 34,874 35,053 179 20         June 1,753,043 35,061 289 34,772 35,015 243 2
         July 1,728,735 34,575 285 34,290 34,451 161 2
         Aug. 1,722,726 34,455 279 34,175 34,392 217 3         Sep. 1,724,269 34,485 274 34,211 34,432 221 3
         Oct. 1,744,956 34,899 270 34,629 34,815 187 2
         Nov. 1,760,122 35,202 269 34,933 35,194 260 4         Dec.  
p 1,780,022 35,600 269 35,332 35,532 200 6
2001         Jan. . . . . . . .
1The reserve maintenance period of the ESCB minimum reserve system 1 December 1998 on the application of minimum reserves. —5Average
starts on the 24th of each month and ends on the 23rd of the following credit balances of the credit institutions subject to minimum reserve require-month (the first reserve maintenance period lasted from January 1, 1999 to ments on their reserve accounts at the respective national central bank. —
February 23, 1999). —2Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central 6Actual reserves less required reserves after the deduction of the lump-sum
Bank of 1 December 1998 on the application of minimum reserves allowance. —7Required reserves after the deduction of the lump-sum
(excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio o f 0 % applies, pursuant to allowance. —8Owing to the adoption of the euro by Greece on January 1,
article 4 (1)). —3Amount after applying the reserve ratios to the reserve 2001, including credit institutions in Greece. 
base. —4Article 5 (2) of the Regulation of the European Central Bank of
42*V. Minimum reserves

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
VI. Interest rates
  
1. ECB interest rates 2. Discount and lombard rates 3. Base rate per Discount
    of the Bundesbank     Rate Transition Act
  
% p.a. % p.a. % p.a.
Main Marginal
Deposit refinancing lending Lombard
Applicable from facility operations  1 facility Applicable from Discount rate rate  3, 4 Applicable from Base rate  5 
1999 Jan.                 1 2.00 3.00 4.50 1994 Feb.                18 5 1/4 6 3/4 1999 Jan.                 1 2.50
         Jan.                 4  2 2.75 3.00 3.25          Apr.                15 5 6 1/2          May                 1 1.95
         Jan.               22 2.00 3.00 4.50          May                13 4 1/2 6 
         Apr.                 9 1.50 2.50 3.50 2000 Jan.                  1 2.68
         Nov.                 5 2.00 3.00 4.00 1995 Mar.                31 4 6          May                  1 3.42
         Aug.               25 3 1/2 5 1/2          Sep.                 1 4.26
2000 Feb.                 4 2.25 3.25 4.25          Dec.                15 3 5 
         Mar.               17 2.50 3.50 4.50   
         Apr.               28 2.75 3.75 4.75 1996 Apr.                19 2 1/2 4 1/2
         June                 9 3.25 4.25 5.25          to
         Sep.                 1 3.50 4.50 5.50 1998 Dec.                31
         Oct.                 6 3.75 4.75 5.75
1Up to June 21, 2000 fixed rate tenders, from June 28, 2000 variable rate Rate Transition Regulation, the lombard rate is replaced from January 1,
tenders at minimum bid rate. —2On December 22, 1998 the European 1999 by the rate applied by the ECB for its marginal lending facility
Central Bank (ECB) announced that, as an exceptional measure between wherever the lombard rate is used as a reference variable for interest andJanuary 4 and 21, 1999, a narrow corridor of 50 basis points would be other payments. —5Pursuant to the Discount Rate Transition Act, read in
applied between the interest rates for the marginal lending facility and the conjunction with the Regulation Governing the Use of the Base Rate as adeposit facility, aimed at facilitating the transition to the new regime by Reference Variable, this rate replaces the discount rate from January 1, 1 999
market participants. —3From August 1, 1990 to December 31, 1993 this wherever the latter is used in contracts and regulations as a reference
was also the rate for cash advances; since January 1, 1994 cash advances variable for interest and other payments. This base rate is the discount ratehave no longer been granted. Wherever reference is made in an Act to the of the Bundesbank which applied on December 31, 1998. It changes frominterest rate applicable for cash advances of the Federal Government, the January 1, May 1 and September 1 of each year, and will change for the firstrate will be replaced by the base rate increased by 1.5 percentage points time on May 1, 1999 if the interest rate applied by the ECB to itspursuant to the Discount Rate Transition Act (see footnote 5).—4Pursuant longer-term refinancing operations (marginal rate) has changed by at least
to the Discount Rate Transition Act, read in conjunction with the Lombard 0.5 percentage points. 
  
    
4. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders 
*
    
  
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bids Allotment Weighted
Amount Amount Fixed rate Minimum bid rate Marginal rate  1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement EUR millions % p.a. ... days
Main refinancing operations
2000 Nov.                 8 147,173 95,000 − 4.75 4.83 4.84 14
       Nov.               15 130,251 90,000 − 4.75 4.78 4.80 14
       Nov.               22 148,887 108,000 − 4.75 4.80 4.82 14
       Nov.               29 147,060 92,000 − 4.75 4.82 4.83 14
       Dec.                 6 129,916 128,000 − 4.75 4.75 4.79 14
       Dec.               13 116,112 91,000 − 4.75 4.76 4.78 14
       Dec.               20 152,151 121,000 − 4.75 4.80 4.86 14
       Dec.               27 118,217 102,000 − 4.75 4.79 4.84 14
2001 Jan.                 3 136,434 101,000 − 4.75 4.76 4.78 14
       Jan.               10 95,841 95,000 − 4.75 4.75 4.75 14
       Jan.               17 137,641 101,000 − 4.75 4.75 4.77 14
       Jan.               24 118,546 104,000 − 4.75 4.75 4.76 14
       Jan.               31 137,610 84,000 − 4.75 4.76 4.77 14
       Feb.                 7 104,384 100,000 − 4.75 4.75 4.75 14
       Feb.               14 65,307 65,307 − 4.75 4.75 4.75 12
Longer-term refinancing operations
2000 Mar.                 2 72,960 20,000 −− 3.60 3.61 91
       Mar.               30 74,929 20,000 −− 3.78 3.80 91
       Apr.               27 64,094 20,000 −− 4.00 4.01 91
       June                 1 64,317 20,000 −− 4.40 4.42 91
       June               29 41,833 20,000 −− 4.49 4.52 91
       July               27 40,799 15,000 −− 4.59 4.60 91
       Aug.               31 35,417 15,000 −− 4.84 4.87 91
       Sep.               28 34,043 15,000 −− 4.84 4.86 92
       Oct.               26 43,085 15,000 −− 5.06 5.07 91
       Nov.               30 31,999 15,000 −− 5.03 5.05 91
       Dec.               29 15,869 15,000 −− 4.75 4.81 90
2001 Jan.               25 31,905 20,000 −− 4.66 4.69 90
Other tender operations
2000 Jan.                 5  2 14,420 14,420 −− 3.00 3.00 7
       June               21 18,845 7,000 −− 4.26 4.28 1
Source: ECB. —*Enlargement of the euro area on January 1, 2001 to allotted or collected. — 2 Collection of fixed-term deposits. 
include Greece. —1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were  
43*VI. Interest rates

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
VI. Interest rates
 
5.  Money market rates, by month
  
% p.a.
Money market rates reported by Frankfurt banks  1 EURIBOR  3 
One- One- Three- Six- Nine- Twelve-
week month month month month month
Day-to-day money Three-month funds EONIA  2 funds funds funds funds funds funds
Monthly Lowest and Monthly Lowest and
Period averages highest rates averages highest rates Monthly averages
1999         Jan. 3.14 2.96 −3.28 3.11 3.02 −3.21 3.14 3.17 3.16 3.13 3.09 3.07 3.06
         Feb. 3.11 3.00 −3.20 3.07 3.03 −3.11 3.12 3.13 3.13 3.09 3.04 3.03 3.03
         Mar. 2.93 2.05 −3.13 3.03 2.94 −3.11 2.93 3.05 3.05 3.05 3.02 3.02 3.05
         Apr. 2.68 2.45 −3.15 2.65 2.54 −2.94 2.71 2.71 2.69 2.70 2.70 2.75 2.76
         May 2.55 2.49 −3.20 2.55 2.52 −2.58 2.55 2.56 2.57 2.58 2.60 2.66 2.68
         June 2.57 2.20 −2.75 2.60 2.53 −2.68 2.56 2.59 2.61 2.63 2.68 2.78 2.84
         July 2.51 1.65 −2.65 2.65 2.62 −2.70 2.52 2.61 2.63 2.68 2.90 2.95 3.03
         Aug. 2.43 1.70 −2.59 2.67 2.64 −2.70 2.44 2.57 2.61 2.70 3.05 3.13 3.24
         Sep. 2.42 1.65 −2.60 2.71 2.65 −3.09 2.43 2.55 2.58 2.73 3.11 3.19 3.30
         Oct. 2.49 1.70 −2.80 3.36 3.08 −3.50 2.50 2.63 2.76 3.38 3.46 3.55 3.68
         Nov. 2.92 2.50 −3.20 3.44 3.39 −3.52 2.94 2.99 3.06 3.47 3.48 3.58 3.69
         Dec. 3.03 4 2.75 −3.70 3.43 3.28 −3.47 3.04 3.27 3.51 3.45 3.51 3.66 3.83
2000         Jan. 3.03 2.79 −3.35 3.32 3.26 −3.49 3.04 3.08 3.15 3.34 3.56 3.76 3.95
         Feb. 3.27 3.12 −3.52 3.52 3.45 −3.63 3.28 3.31 3.36 3.54 3.73 3.93 4.11
         Mar. 3.50 3.26 −4.00 3.73 3.59 −3.83 3.51 3.52 3.59 3.75 3.94 4.11 4.27
         Apr. 3.67 3.00 −4.00 3.90 3.79 −4.09 3.69 3.73 3.79 3.93 4.08 4.25 4.36
         May 3.92 2.85 −4.23 4.34 4.06 −4.48 3.92 4.05 4.16 4.36 4.54 4.72 4.85
         June 4.28 4.02 −4.85 4.48 4.37 −4.55 4.29 4.31 4.37 4.50 4.68 4.85 4.96
         July 4.30 3.80 −4.51 4.56 4.50 −4.64 4.31 4.36 4.41 4.58 4.84 4.98 5.11
         Aug. 4.40 3.85 −4.80 4.76 4.60 −4.92 4.42 4.48 4.57 4.78 5.01 5.14 5.25
         Sep. 4.58 4.00 −4.99 4.83 4.77 −5.00 4.59 4.64 4.70 4.85 5.04 5.14 5.22
         Oct. 4.75 4.50 −5.02 5.02 4.95 −5.14 4.76 4.80 4.85 5.04 5.10 5.16 5.22
         Nov. 4.82 4.70 −4.98 5.07 5.00 −5.14 4.83 4.86 4.92 5.09 5.13 5.16 5.19
         Dec. 4.82 5 4.69 −5.40 4.92 4.81 −5.02 4.83 4.86 4.95 4.94 4.92 4.90 4.88
2001         Jan. 4.75 4.15 −4.88 4.75 4.65 −4.84 4.76 4.81 4.80 4.77 4.68 4.60 4.57
1Money market rates are not fixed or quoted officially; the monthly aver- Telerate. —3Euro Interbank Offered Rate: unweighted average rate
ages computed from daily quotations are unweighted. —2Euro OverNight calculated by Bridge Telerate since December 30, 1998 according to the
Index Average: weighted average overnight rate for interbank operations act/360 method. —4At the end of December 3.35% to 3.70%. —5At the
calculated by the European Central Bank since January 4, 1999 on the basis end of December 5.00% to 5.40%. of real turnover according to the act/360 method and published via Bridge
 
 
6. Euro area retail bank interest rates *, o
  
% p.a.; period averages
Deposit interest rates Lending interest rates
With agreed maturity Redeemable at notice To enterprises To householdsUp to Up to Over Up to Over Up to Over Consumer For house
Period Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months 1 year 1 year lending purchase
1998 1.10 3.20 3.22 4.06 2.61 3.25 6.73 5.80 10.05 5.87
1999 0.65 2.44 2.45 3.57 2.15 2.76 5.65 5.10 9.38 5.292000 0.85 3.45 3.44 4.52 2.25 3.79 6.60 6.23 9.83 6.34
1999         Dec. 0.67 2.70 2.71 4.02 2.04 3.05 5.81 5.51 9.38 5.80
2000         Jan. 0.69 2.74 2.74 4.19 2.05 3.18 5.91 5.74 9.51 6.03
         Feb. 0.69 2.80 2.81 4.25 2.06 3.18 6.01 5.85 9.52 6.13         Mar. 0.73 2.96 2.96 4.28 2.07 3.33 6.07 5.85 9.55 6.10
         Apr. 0.76 3.04 3.05 4.28 2.09 3.44 6.24 5.99 9.62 6.12
         May 0.78 3.26 3.26 4.45 2.13 3.65 6.40 6.16 9.70 6.30         June 0.83 3.49 3.49 4.48 2.16 3.87 6.56 6.23 9.81 6.34
         July 0.87 3.58 3.58 4.71 2.33 3.94 6.77 6.37 9.92 6.46
         Aug. 0.90 3.67 3.67 4.75 2.36 4.06 6.81 6.44 9.97 6.51         Sep. 0.94 3.85 3.83 4.77 2.38 4.20 6.94 6.44 10.00 6.56
         Oct. 0.97 3.96 3.96 4.76 2.40 4.14 7.15 6.60 10.11 6.57
         Nov. 0.99 4.04 4.03 4.77 2.46 4.25 7.18 6.63 10.16 6.56         Dec. 1.01 3.96 3.95 4.58 2.49 4.21 7.16 6.45 10.14 6.43
*These euro area retail bank interest rates should be used with caution and Member States. Furthermore, the national interest rates are not harmonised
for statistical purposes only, primarily to analyse their development over in terms of their coverage (new business and/or outstanding amounts), th e
time rather than their level. They are calculated as the weighted average of nature of the data (nominal or effective) or the compilation method. Thenational interest rates provided by the national central banks. The national country weights for the euro area retail bank interest rates are derived from
rates represent those rates that are currently available from national MFI balance sheet statistics or close proxies. The weights reflect thesources and which are judged to fit the standard categories. These national country-specific proportions of the relevant instruments within the eur o
rates have been aggregated to derive information for the euro area, in area, measured as outstanding amounts. The weights are adjusted monthly,some cases relying on proxies and working assumptions due to the so that interest rates and weights always refer to the same month. heterogeneity observed in the national financial instruments across MU
      
o Tables and notes taken from the ECB. 
44*VI. Interest rates

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
VI. Interest rates
 
7. Lending and deposit rates of banks (MFIs) in Germany *
    Lending rates
 
% p.a.
Current account credit Bills discounted
Bills of less than DM 100,000
DM 200,000 and more DM 1 million and more refinancable
less than DM 200,000 but less than DM 1 million but less than DM 5 million at the Bundesbank
Reporting Average Average Average Average
period  1 interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread
2000         Mar. 10.14 7.75 −11.75 9.14 7.00 −11.50 7.88 6.00 −10.75 5.86 4.27 −8.75
         Apr. 10.28 7.75 −12.00 9.26 7.00 −11.75 8.06 6.25 −11.00 5.95 4.40 −9.00
         May 10.41 8.00 −12.25 9.34 7.05 −11.75 8.20 6.50 −11.00 6.21 4.60 −9.50
         June 10.57 8.00 −12.50 9.59 7.25 −12.00 8.39 6.50 −11.00 6.42 4.80 −9.75
         July 10.84 8.50 −12.75 9.81 7.50 −12.50 8.58 6.75 −11.50 6.49 4.84 −9.50
         Aug. 10.88 8.50 −12.75 9.85 7.50 −12.50 8.67 6.75 −11.50 6.63 5.00 −9.75
         Sep. 11.02 8.75 −13.00 9.94 7.50 −12.50 8.83 7.00 −11.75 6.76 5.00 −10.00
         Oct. 11.22 8.75 −13.25 10.18 7.75 −12.75 9.03 7.00 −12.00 6.95 5.00 −10.00
         Nov. 11.29 8.75 −13.25 10.19 7.50 −12.95 9.10 7.00 −12.00 7.01 5.00 −10.00
         Dec. 11.39 8.90 −13.25 10.27 8.00 −12.75 9.12 7.00 −12.00 6.98 5.05 −10.00
2001         Jan. 11.35 8.75 −13.50 10.30 8.00 −12.95 9.12 7.00 −12.25 6.99 5.50 −10.00
 
 
Long-term fixed-rate loans
to enterprises and self-employed persons
Instalment credits (excluding lending to the housing sector)  6 
DM 10,000 and more but not more than DM 30,000  2 DM 200,000 and more DM 1 million and more
Personal credit lines but less than DM 1 million but less than DM 10 million
(overdraft facilities Effectivegranted to individuals) Monthly rate  
3 annual interest rate  4, 5 Effective interest rate  5 
Reporting Average Average Average Average Average
period  1 interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread
2000         Mar. 11.38 10.25 −12.50 0.39 0.31 −0.48 10.18 8.33 −12.11 6.91 6.09 −8.50 6.74 5.91 −8.10
         Apr. 11.48 10.50 −12.50 0.39 0.31 −0.48 10.17 8.32 −12.11 6.89 5.96 −8.48 6.72 5.80 −8.10
         May 11.60 10.50 −12.75 0.40 0.31 −0.48 10.28 8.29 −12.27 7.09 6.07 −8.59 6.91 5.95 −8.30
         June 11.81 10.75 −13.00 0.40 0.32 −0.48 10.44 8.44 −12.58 7.11 6.10 −8.75 6.93 5.97 −8.49
         July 12.01 10.75 −13.00 0.40 0.32 −0.48 10.50 8.57 −12.58 7.17 6.20 −8.85 6.99 6.07 −8.35
         Aug. 12.10 10.75 −13.00 0.41 0.33 −0.48 10.60 8.80 −12.61 7.21 6.26 −8.67 7.01 6.03 −8.35
         Sep. 12.28 11.00 −13.25 0.41 0.33 −0.49 10.64 8.76 −12.72 7.24 6.36 −8.83 7.04 6.16 −8.49
         Oct. 12.44 11.00 −13.50 0.41 0.34 −0.50 10.69 8.99 −12.73 7.25 6.24 −8.90 7.05 6.19 −8.52
         Nov. 12.57 11.25 −13.50 0.41 0.33 −0.51 10.73 8.95 −12.81 7.26 6.25 −8.89 7.05 6.17 −8.55
         Dec. 12.61 11.25 −13.50 0.41 0.35 −0.50 10.80 8.95 −12.83 7.04 6.05 −8.70 6.84 5.85 −8.30
2001         Jan. 12.63 11.00 −13.50 0.41 0.34 −0.50 10.82 8.95 −12.95 6.89 5.82 −8.57 6.66 5.68 −8.25
 
 
Mortgage loans secured by residential real estate
with interest rates fixed (effective interest rate)  5, 7 
with variable interest rates
for 2 years for 5 years for 10 years (effective interest rate)  5, 7 
Reporting Average Average Average Average
period  1 interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread
2000         Mar. 5.90 5.43 −6.39 6.19 5.96 −6.59 6.64 6.38 −7.02 6.22 5.22 −7.45
         Apr. 5.90 5.43 −6.43 6.15 5.85 −6.63 6.54 6.27 −6.97 6.26 5.38 −7.50
         May 6.27 5.70 −6.86 6.42 5.90 −6.82 6.73 6.34 −7.08 6.49 5.64 −7.67
         June 6.35 5.80 −6.97 6.41 6.10 −6.86 6.64 6.34 −7.07 6.56 5.64 −7.77
         July 6.45 5.91 −7.10 6.48 6.15 −6.91 6.70 6.43 −7.13 6.67 5.89 −7.77
         Aug. 6.51 5.96 −7.08 6.51 6.17 −6.91 6.69 6.43 −7.02 6.70 5.91 −8.04
         Sep. 6.53 5.96 −7.17 6.53 6.22 −6.91 6.72 6.49 −7.07 6.79 6.00 −7.87
         Oct. 6.51 6.00 −7.05 6.49 6.17 −6.95 6.68 6.47 −7.07 6.84 6.01 −8.03
         Nov. 6.48 5.96 −7.06 6.45 6.13 −6.91 6.64 6.43 −6.96 6.86 5.96 −8.03
         Dec. 6.20 5.64 −6.98 6.19 5.81 −6.75 6.44 6.17 −6.86 6.81 5.90 −8.03
2001         Jan. 5.95 5.41 −6.60 5.93 5.59 −6.54 6.22 5.96 −6.70 6.72 5.64 −8.11
*The average rates are calculated as unweighted arithmetic means from processing fees, taking due account of reported maturities. —5From the
the interest rates reported to be within the spread. The spread is as- reporting month September 2000, effective interest rates are calculatedcertained by eliminating the reports in the top 5% and the bottom 5% of according to the ISMA method (International Securities Market Association).the interest rate range. The figures for the latest date are always to be re- The use of the ISMA method (non-linear remuneration of less than onegarded as provisional; subsequent alterations, which will appear in the year) in this context tends to result in slightly lower effective annual inte rest
following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Second and third rates. —6Lending to enterprises (with agreed maturities of more than five
weeks of the months indicated. —2With maturities between 36 months years) with agreed interest rates locked in for more than five years. —7The
and 60 months. —3Interest rates as % per month of original amount of figures refer to the time when the contract was concluded and not to the
credit taken up. Besides interest, most banks charge a one-off processing entire duration of the contract. The calculation of the effective interest rate
fee (generally 2%, in some cases 3%, of the credit amount). —4Calculated is based on an annual redemption rate of 1% plus interest saved; the repay-
on the basis of reported monthly rates (see footnote 3) and reported annual ment conditions agreed upon in each case by the credit institutions involve d
rates on the respective amount of debt and on the basis of the respective are taken into account (at present mostly monthly payment and inclu sion). 
45*VI. Interest rates

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
VI. Interest rates
 
7. Lending and deposit rates of banks (MFIs) in Germany *  (cont ’d)
    Deposit rates
 
% p.a.
Time deposits with agreed maturitiesof 1 month of 3 months
Higher-yieldingsight deposits DM 100,000 and more but DM 1 million and more but DM 100,000 and more butof individuals  
8 less than DM 100,000 less than DM 1 million less than DM 5 million less than DM 1 million
Reporting Average Average Average Average Average
period  1 interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread
2000         Mar. 1.89 0.50 −2.96 2.53 1.95 −3.15 2.85 2.20 −3.35 3.12 2.50 −3.60 3.04 2.50 −3.50
         Apr. 1.93 0.50 −3.00 2.62 2.00 −3.20 2.96 2.25 −3.40 3.27 2.55 −3.65 3.14 2.50 −3.60
         May 2.00 0.50 −3.22 2.88 2.00 −3.55 3.23 2.45 −3.83 3.59 2.75 −4.10 3.43 2.75 −4.10
         June 2.11 0.50 −3.50 3.10 2.25 −3.80 3.49 2.70 −4.00 3.82 3.00 −4.25 3.66 2.90 −4.25
         July 2.17 0.50 −3.50 3.19 2.30 −3.90 3.59 2.75 −4.10 3.92 3.15 −4.35 3.76 3.00 −4.29
         Aug. 2.16 0.50 −3.53 3.25 2.30 −4.00 3.64 2.95 −4.25 4.00 3.25 −4.50 3.84 3.15 −4.40
         Sep. 2.29 0.50 −3.76 3.39 2.50 −4.05 3.79 3.00 −4.30 4.15 3.40 −4.55 4.00 3.25 −4.60
         Oct. 2.32 0.50 −3.88 3.48 2.50 −4.20 3.89 3.00 −4.50 4.27 3.45 −4.80 4.13 3.25 −4.75
         Nov. 2.38 0.50 −3.94 3.56 2.54 −4.30 3.97 3.00 −4.50 4.35 3.50 −4.83 4.22 3.30 −4.85
         Dec. 2.41 0.50 −4.00 3.62 2.65 −4.35 4.05 3.10 −4.60 4.42 3.50 −4.92 4.19 3.35 −4.80
2001         Jan. 2.43 0.50 −4.00 3.56 2.60 −4.25 3.96 3.20 −4.50 4.33 3.60 −4.75 4.06 3.39 −4.60
 
 
Savings deposits
Bank savings bondswith regular with minimum rates of with higher rates of return  
10 
interest payments return  9 (without a duration of contract being agreed)
with agreed notice of 3 months
with agreed notice DM 10,000 and more DM 20,000 and more
maturity of 4 years of 3 months less than DM 10,000 but less than DM 20,000 but less than DM 50,000
Reporting Average Average Average Average Average
period  1 interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread
2000         Mar. 4.54 3.50 −5.00 1.24 1.00 −2.00 2.06 1.50 −3.00 2.36 1.75 −3.05 2.53 2.00 −3.20
         Apr. 4.54 3.50 −5.00 1.24 1.00 −1.75 2.10 1.50 −3.00 2.40 1.75 −3.20 2.57 2.00 −3.25
         May 4.74 3.90 −5.20 1.24 1.00 −2.00 2.12 1.25 −3.45 2.53 1.75 −3.50 2.72 2.00 −3.59
         June 4.82 4.00 −5.25 1.24 1.00 −2.00 2.20 1.50 −3.45 2.66 1.75 −3.65 2.87 2.00 −3.80
         July 4.90 4.00 −5.25 1.25 1.00 −2.00 2.23 1.50 −3.50 2.73 1.75 −3.70 2.94 2.00 −3.90
         Aug. 4.93 4.10 −5.30 1.25 1.00 −2.00 2.25 1.30 −3.70 2.79 1.75 −3.90 3.01 2.00 −4.00
         Sep. 4.99 4.50 −5.37 1.26 1.00 −2.00 2.31 1.50 −3.72 2.89 1.75 −3.95 3.10 2.00 −4.07
         Oct. 4.98 4.40 −5.40 1.25 1.00 −2.00 2.32 1.50 −3.75 2.89 1.75 −4.01 3.12 2.00 −4.22
         Nov. 4.98 4.50 −5.30 1.26 1.00 −2.00 2.38 1.50 −4.00 2.96 1.75 −4.20 3.19 2.00 −4.32
         Dec. 4.76 4.30 −5.25 1.25 1.00 −2.00 2.39 1.50 −4.00 2.99 1.75 −4.20 3.22 2.00 −4.34
2001         Jan. 4.47 4.10 −5.00 1.26 1.00 −2.00 2.37 1.50 −3.80 2.95 1.80 −4.10 3.21 2.00 −4.33
 
 
Savings deposits with higher rates of return  10  and with duration of contract being agreed for
DM 20,000 and more but less than DM 50,000 (total rate of return) 11
with agreed notice of 3 months with agreed notice of more than 3 months
and a duration of contract of and a duration of contract of
more than 1 year and up to
up to and including 1 year and including 4 years more than 4 years up to and including 1 year more than 4 years
Reporting Average Average Average Average Average
period  1 interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread
2000         Mar. 3.20 2.25 −3.85 4.04 3.00 −4.68 4.53 3.25 −5.50 3.33 2.25 −4.00 4.56 3.46 −5.12
         Apr. 3.26 2.40 −4.00 4.15 3.30 −4.75 4.55 3.25 −5.50 3.44 2.25 −4.20 4.59 3.60 −5.17
         May 3.55 2.50 −4.35 4.19 2.35 −5.00 4.65 3.25 −5.49 3.65 2.25 −4.50 4.67 3.60 −5.25
         June 3.82 2.50 −4.50 4.36 2.80 −5.00 4.71 3.58 −5.75 3.87 2.25 −4.50 4.78 3.60 −5.13
         July 3.93 2.50 −4.60 4.46 3.25 −5.07 4.76 3.58 −5.83 3.94 2.25 −4.75 4.83 4.35 −5.21
         Aug. 3.99 2.50 −4.70 4.56 3.25 −5.25 4.76 3.58 −5.83 4.06 2.25 −4.80 4.85 4.20 −5.30
         Sep. 4.15 2.50 −4.80 4.64 3.25 −5.35 4.81 3.58 −5.83 4.20 2.25 −5.00 4.93 4.36 −5.40
         Oct. 4.18 2.50 −4.85 4.68 3.25 −5.35 4.82 3.58 −5.83 4.14 2.25 −4.80 4.97 4.36 −5.50
         Nov. 4.23 2.50 −4.80 4.65 3.25 −5.16 4.84 3.58 −5.83 4.25 2.25 −5.00 4.96 4.36 −5.50
         Dec. 4.15 2.50 −4.75 4.51 3.25 −5.15 4.74 3.64 −5.62 4.21 2.30 −4.75 4.82 4.28 −5.40
2001         Jan. 3.98 3.00 −4.50 4.18 3.25 −4.75 4.59 3.60 −5.30 4.01 2.30 −4.50 4.51 4.04 −5.05
For footnotes *, 1to7see page 45*. —8Only such interest rates are taken and/or a premium or a bonus is granted. —11Rate of return which is paid
into account as are above the relevant standard terms of the banks included when savings plans are held until maturity or when savings objectives havein the survey. —9Only a minimum rate of return is granted, but no pre- been achieved. 
mium or bonus. —10An interest rate above the minimum rate of return
46*VI. Interest rates

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
VI.  Interest rates
 
8. Selected central bank rates abroad
  
 
New rate Previous rate New rate Previous rate
Applicable Applicable Applicable Applicable
Country/Interest rate % p.a. from % p.a. from Country/Interest rate % p.a. from % p.a. from
1. EU-countries  1 3. Non European countries
Denmark Canada  3 
Discount rate       4 3/4  Oct.   6,              ’00       4 1/2  Aug. 31,              ’00 Discount rate       5 3/4  Jan. 23,              ’01       6   May 17,               ’00 
Repurchase/CD selling rate           5.30   Feb.   9,               ’01           5.40   Okt          27,              ’00 
Japan
Sweden Discount rate       0.35   Feb.   9,               ’01           1/2  Sep.   8,              ’95 
Deposit rate       3 1/4  Dec.   7,              ’00          2 3/4  Feb. 17,              ’99 
Repurchase rate       4   Dec.   7,               ’00          3 3/4  Feb.   4,              ’00 United States
Lombard rate       4 3/4  Dec.   7,              ’00          4 1/4  Feb. 17,              ’99 Federal funds rate  4       5 1/2  Jan. 31,              ’01          6   Jan.   3,               ’01 
United Kingdom
Repurchase rate  2       5 3/4  Feb.   8,              ’01          6             Feb. 10,              ’00 
2. Switzerland
Three-month Libor target   2 1/2
         3 −  4   June 15,               ’00   −         3 1/2  Mar. 23,              ’00 
1Only those member countries which are not participating in the euro area ceiling rate for call money. —4Rate targeted for interbank trade in central
for the time being. —2Bank of England key rate. —3Bank of Canada ’s bank money. 
9. Money market rates abroad
Monthly or weekly averages of daily figures  1 
%  p.a.
London New York Tokyo Zurich Hong Kong Euro-Dollar market
Memorandum
Treasury Treasury item
bills bills Swap rates in the
(three (three Gensaki open market  10 
Month Day-to- months) months) Day-to- rate Three- Day-to- Exchange Day-to- One- Three-or day Tender Federal Tender day (three month day fund day month month US$/DM £/DMweek money  
2 rate 3 funds  4 rate 3 money months) funds  5 money  6 bills 7 money  8 funds  9 funds  9 Euro/US-$ Euro/£
1998         July 7.29 7.22 5.54 4.96 0.41 0.29 1.31 5.78 7.86 5.58 5.59 5.63 −2.14 −4.13
         Aug. 7.37 7.19 5.55 4.94 0.43 0.29 1.00 9.84 9.78 5.56 5.59 5.63 −2.14 −4.11
         Sep. 7.44 6.95 5.51 4.74 0.32 0.18 0.84 5.83 8.37 5.58 5.52 5.45 −2.00 −3.89
         Oct. 7.44 6.54 5.07 4.08 0.24 0.11 0.50 4.52 6.33 5.30 5.27 5.22 −1.69 −3.52
         Nov. 6.55 6.31 4.83 4.44 0.20 0.11 0.94 4.61 5.60 5.13 5.20 5.28 −1.67 −3.21
         Dec. 6.21 5.71 4.68 4.42 0.25 0.11 0.69 4.23 5.22 4.95 5.54 5.20 −1.89 −3.04
1999         Jan. 5.87 5.28 4.63 4.34 0.23 0.14 0.56 3.96 5.64 4.79 4.98 5.00 + 1.85 + 2.61
         Feb. 5.63 5.08 4.76 4.45 0.18 0.13 0.56 4.96 5.63 4.74 4.94 5.00 + 1.87 + 2.27         Mar. 5.43 5.07 4.81 4.48 0.04 0.08 0.56 4.50 5.28 4.83 4.94 5.01 + 1.95 + 2.24
         Apr. 5.38 4.90 4.74 4.28 0.03 0.06 0.38 4.44 4.92 4.75 4.92 5.00 + 2.29 + 2.52
         May 5.29 4.93 4.74 4.51 0.03 0.05 0.44 4.47 4.82 4.78 4.91 5.02 + 2.47 + 2.69         June 5.05 4.76 4.76 4.59 0.03 0.04 0.50 5.21 5.13 4.88 5.04 5.18 + 2.60 + 2.50
         July 4.92 4.76 4.99 4.60 0.03 0.03 0.51 5.51 5.47 5.05 5.18 5.31 + 2.67 + 2.39
         Aug. 4.84 4.85 5.07 4.76 0.03 0.03 0.51 5.55 5.80 5.12 5.29 5.45 + 2.82 + 2.47         Sep. 4.89 5.08 5.22 4.73 0.03 0.02 1.14 5.12 5.68 5.29 5.38 5.57 + 2.85 + 2.60
         Oct. 5.01 5.24 5.20 4.88 0.02 0.02 1.38 5.37 5.49 5.25 5.41 6.18 + 2.86 + 2.55
         Nov. 5.18 5.24 5.42 5.07 0.03 0.02 1.34 5.01 5.11 5.40 5.56 6.10 + 2.68 + 2.34         Dec. 5.01 5.46 5.30 5.23 0.02 0.04 1.24 3.58 4.65 5.45 6.40 6.13 + 2.75 + 2.48
2000         Jan. 5.28 5.78 5.45 5.34 0.02 0.03 1.38 3.33 5.18 5.55 5.81 6.04 + 2.70 + 2.66
         Feb. 5.77 5.92 5.73 5.57 0.03 0.03 1.78 5.37 5.64 5.73 5.89 6.10 + 2.54 + 2.54         Mar. 5.69 5.93 5.85 5.72 0.02 0.03 2.26 5.41 5.65 5.87 6.05 6.20 + 2.47 + 2.36
         Apr. 5.82 6.01 6.02 5.67 0.02 0.03 2.76 6.32 6.06 6.03 6.15 6.31 + 2.42 + 2.22
         May 5.87 6.00 6.27 5.92 0.02 0.02 2.55 6.04 6.63 6.30 6.55 6.76 + 2.44 + 1.83         June 5.88 5.95 6.53 5.74 0.02 0.03 3.05 5.95 6.36 6.55 6.65 6.79 + 2.31 + 1.60
         July 5.85 5.92 6.55 5.92 0.02 0.04 3.04 5.86 6.12 6.55 6.63 6.73 + 2.17 + 1.48
         Aug. 5.81 5.90 6.50 6.11 0.16 0.14 3.12 5.49 5.76 6.47 6.62 6.69 + 1.92 + 1.33         Sep. 6.10 5.88 6.52 5.99 0.25 0.24 3.00 6.88 6.04 6.50 6.62 6.67 + 1.79 + 1.20
         Oct. 5.79 5.83 6.51 6.10 0.25 0.27 3.00 5.32 5.82 6.48 6.62 6.78 + 1.71 + 1.01
         Nov. 5.94 5.78 6.51 6.19 0.25 0.27 3.00 5.16 5.66 6.51 6.64 6.75 + 1.65 + 0.89         Dec. 5.70 5.71 6.40 5.90 0.24 0.29 2.88 6.44 5.73 6.52 6.69 6.55 + 1.57 + 0.92
2001         Jan.  
p 5.95 5.62 5.98 5.27 0.25 0.28 3.09 5.57 5.14 6.03 5.87 5.70 + 0.90 + 0.95
week ending  p 
2001 Jan.                 5 5.65 5.54 5.88 5.70 0.23 0.30 2.88 5.56 5.39 6.30 6.26 6.05 + 1.25 + 0.98
                              12 5.85 5.80 5.91 5.05 0.24 0.28 . 5.30 5.15 5.97 5.88 5.65 + 0.88 + 1.00
                              19 6.22 5.58 6.02 5.22 0.24 0.28 . 5.64 5.17 5.96 5.87 5.70 + 0.88 + 0.93
                              26 6.06 5.57 5.96 5.09 0.24 0.28 3.09 5.83 4.95 5.98 5.72 5.59 + 0.80 + 0.94
1Unless stated otherwise. —2Overnight money rate in the interbank deposits. —9From January 1999 US dollar-denominated London Interbank
market. —3Months: average of the tender rates in the weekly Treasury bill Offered Rate (LIBOR). Previously the rates were based on quotations
auctions; weeks: average of the tender rates on the day of issue. — reported by Frankfurt and Luxemburg banks. —10Rates for three-month
4Weekly average (Thursday to Wednesday) —5Three month deposits with contracts. Owing to the indirect quotation, the forward points between the
big banks in Zurich; months: average of end-of-month figures. Figure for euro and the foreign currency for the repurchase date of the swap arethe fourth week is that for the last day of the month. —6Hong Kong calculated in the foreign currency as from January 1999; previously the
dollar-denominated Hong Kong Interbank Offered Rates (HIBOR). — calculation was expressed in DM. As a result the previous discount ( −)
7Money market paper issued regularly by the Hong Kong Monetary changes into a premium (+). 
Authority; maturity of 91 days. —8From January 1999 rates for overnight  
47*VI.  Interest rates

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
VII. Capital market
 
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  *)
  
Debt securities
Sales PurchasesDomestic debt securities  
1 Residents
Credit in- Bundes-
Sales stitutions bank
= Public Foreign including opentotal Bank Indus- debt debt building marketpur- debt trial secur- secur- and loan Non- oper- Non-
Period chases Total securities bonds ities  
2 ities 3 Total  4 assc. 5 banks  6 ations  5 residents  7 
DM million
1986 103,497 87,485 29,509 200 57,774 16,012 45,927 31,192 13,667 1,068 57,570
1987 112,285 88,190 28,448 − 27 59,768 24,095 78,193 45,305 33,599 − 711 34,093
1988 88,425 35,100 −11,029 − 100 46,228 53,325 86,657 36,838 49,417 402 1,769
1989 118,285 78,409 52,418 344 25,649 39,876 96,073 20,311 76,448 − 686 22,212
1990 244,827 220,340 136,799 − 67 83,609 24,487 225,066 91,833 133,266 − 33 19,763
1991 231,965 219,346 131,670 667 87,011 12,619 173,099 45,095 127,310 694 58,8661992 291,762 284,054 106,857 − 175 177,376 7,708 170,873 132,236 37,368 1,269 120,887
1993 395,110 382,571 151,812 200 230,560 12,539 183,195 164,436 20,095 − 1,336 211,915
1994 303,339 276,058 117,185 − 65 158,939 27,281 279,989 126,808 154,738 − 1,557 23,349
1995 227,099 203,029 162,538 − 350 40,839 24,070 141,282 49,193 94,409 − 2,320 85,815
1996 254,359 233,519 191,341 649 41,529 20,840 148,250 117,352 31,751 − 853 106,109
1997 332,655 250,688 184,911 1,563 64,214 81,967 204,353 144,177 60,176 − 128,301
1998 417,693 308,201 254,367 3,143 50,691 109,492 254,293 203,342 50,951 − 163,397
Euro million
1999 290,874 198,068 156,399 2,184 39,485 92,806 168,561 74,728 93,833 − 122,314
2000 238,126 157,994 120,154 12,605 25,234 80,132 174,791 91,447 83,344 − 63,335
2000         Sep. 13,753 2,894 3,542 1,084 − 1,733 10,859 4,851 3,945 906 − 8,902
         Oct. 25,601 19,606 11,480 1,011 7,116 5,995 19,132 7,137 11,995 − 6,469
         Nov. 2,831 − 5,754 − 5,670 332 − 415 8,585 8,177 8,359 − 182 −− 5,346
         Dec. 6,763 6,738 1,598 112 5,028 25 5,451 − 3,694 9,145 − 1,312
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-purchases shares  
8 shares  9 Total  10 tutions  5 , 11  Non-banks  6 residents  12 
Period
DM million
1986 32,371 16,394 15,976 17,195 5,022 12,173 15,174
1987 15,845 11,889 3,955 16,439 2,153 14,286 − 594
1988 21,390 7,528 13,862 18,436 1,177 17,259 2,9531989 35,511 19,365 16,147 10,231 4,913 5,318 25,277
1990 50,070 28,021 22,048 52,631 7,215 45,416 − 2,561
1991 33,478 13,317 20,161 32,247 2,466 29,781 1,2301992 32,595 17,226 15,370 40,651 2,984 37,667 − 8,055
1993 39,355 19,512 19,843 30,871 4,133 26,738 8,4851994 55,125 29,160 25,966 54,466 1,622 52,844 659
1995 46,422 23,600 22,822 49,354 11,945 37,409 − 2,931
1996 72,491 34,212 38,280 55,962 12,627 43,335 16,5291997 118,786 22,239 96,546 96,133 8,547 87,586 22,6521998 239,757 48,796 190,962 138,390 20,252 118,138 101,366
Euro million
1999 148,986 36,010 112,976 97,048 18,637 78,411 51,939
2000 143,293 22,733 120,560 164,795 23,293 141,502 − 21,502
2000         Sep. 9,614 1,388 8,226 8,599 − 860 9,459 1,015
         Oct. 12,906 1,645 11,261 12,526 83 12,443 380
         Nov. 11,827 1,629 10,198 6,065 1,109 4,956 5,762         Dec. − 20,224 937 − 21,161 120,070 6,962 113,108 − 140,294
*Until the end of 1999, debt securities comprise the bonds and money ment funds. —7Net purchases or net sales ( −) of domestic debt securities by
market paper of domestic banks, from January 2000 all fixed-interest non-residents; transaction values. —8At issue prices. —9Net purchases or
securities. Investment fund certificates see Table VII.6. —1Net sales at net sales ( −) of foreign shares (including direct investment) by residents;
market values plus/less changes in issuers ’portfolios of their own debt transaction values. —10Domestic and foreign shares. —11Up to the end
securities. —2Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and of 1998, excluding shares under syndicate agreement. —12Net purchases
Treuhand agency. —3Net purchases or net sales ( −) of foreign debt or net sales ( −) of domestic shares (including direct investment) −before
securities by residents; transaction values. —4Domestic and foreign debt 1989 also including domestic investment fund certificates −by
securities. —5Book values; statistically adjusted. —6Residual; also non-residents; transaction values. —The figures for the latest data are to be
including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic invest- regarded as provisional; corrections are not specially marked.  
48*VII. Capital market

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
VII. Capital market
 
2. Sales of debt securities issued by borrowers domiciled in Germany  * 
  
Until the end of 1998 DM million nominal value, from 1999 euro million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item:
 Foreign  DM/euro
Mortgage Communal bonds issued Debt securities
bonds bonds issued by spe- by German-
All bank debt (Hypotheken- ( Öffentliche Other bank Industrial Public managed cialised credit
Period Total securities pfandbriefe) Pfandbriefe) institutions bonds  2 syndicates debt securities debt securities  3 
Gross sales  4 
1990 428,698 286,709 14,923 70,701 89,755 111,326 − 141,990 35,168
1991 442,089 292,092 19,478 91,489 80,738 100,386 707 149,288 32,8321992 572,767 318,522 33,633 134,363 49,195 101,333 − 254,244 57,282
1993 733,126 434,829 49,691 218,496 34,028 132,616 457 297,841 87,3091994 627,331 412,585 44,913 150,115 39,807 177,750 486 214,261 61,465
1995 620,120 470,583 43,287 208,844 41,571 176,877 200 149,338 102,719
1996 731,992 563,076 41,439 246,546 53,508 221,582 1,742 167,173 112,3701997 846,567 621,683 53,168 276,755 54,829 236,933 1,915 222,972 114,8131998 1,030,827 789,035 71,371 344,609 72,140 300,920 3,392 238,400 149,542
Euro million
1999 571,269 448,216 27,597 187,661 59,760 173,200 2,570 120,483 57,202
2000 659,148 500,895 34,528 143,107 94,556 228,703 8,114 150,137 31,5972000         July 63,795 44,661 6,207 13,747 8,297 16,410 2,743 16,391 1,634
         Aug. 49,212 37,752 2,362 11,152 5,788 18,450 1,110 10,350 650         Sep. 48,823 40,979 2,690 7,849 10,780 19,659 597 7,247 1,110
         Oct. 68,502 45,717 1,538 10,832 7,784 25,563 50 22,734 270
         Nov. 48,324 34,282 2,005 6,644 5,432 20,201 1,678 12,364 2,175         Dec. 53,865 40,348 3,128 6,849 7,962 22,409 267 13,250 500
of which: Debt securities with a maturity of over 4 years  5 
1990 272,642 133,347 10,904 43,250 26,767 52,425 − 139,295 29,791
1991 303,326 172,171 11,911 65,642 54,878 39,741 707 130,448 22,7721992 430,479 211,775 28,594 99,627 40,267 43,286 − 218,703 51,939
1993 571,533 296,779 43,365 160,055 26,431 66,923 230 274,524 82,0491994 429,369 244,806 36,397 109,732 29,168 69,508 306 184,255 53,351
1995 409,469 271,763 30,454 141,629 28,711 70,972 200 137,503 85,221
1996 473,560 322,720 27,901 167,811 35,522 91,487 1,702 149,139 92,5821997 563,333 380,470 41,189 211,007 41,053 87,220 1,820 181,047 98,4131998 694,414 496,444 59,893 288,619 54,385 93,551 2,847 195,122 139,645
Euro million
1999 324,888 226,993 16,715 124,067 37,778 48,435 2,565 95,331 44,013
2000 319,330 209,187 20,724 102,664 25,753 60,049 6,727 103,418 27,0082000         July 34,400 20,525 4,568 8,194 1,047 6,715 2,743 11,132 725
         Aug. 26,035 15,088 1,507 8,288 497 4,796 980 9,967 650         Sep. 20,140 17,560 2,199 5,227 3,555 6,580 390 2,191 310
         Oct. 38,236 20,481 1,000 7,853 2,290 9,339 − 17,754 270
         Nov. 22,372 9,536 623 5,446 391 3,076 851 11,986 1,675         Dec. 22,039 15,517 2,468 4,804 2,760 5,484 163 6,360 −
Net sales  6 
1990 226,707 140,327 − 3,922 − 72 73,287 71,036 − 67 86,449 21,717
1991 227,822 139,396 4,729 22,290 65,985 46,390 558 87,868 18,5831992 304,751 115,786 13,104 58,235 19,585 24,864 − 175 189,142 34,114
1993 403,212 159,982 22,496 122,917 −13,156 27,721 180 243,049 43,701
1994 270,088 116,519 18,184 54,316 − 6,897 50,914 − 62 153,630 21,634
1995 205,482 173,797 18,260 96,125 3,072 56,342 − 354 32,039 61,020
1996 238,427 195,058 11,909 121,929 6,020 55,199 585 42,788 69,9511997 257,521 188,525 16,471 115,970 12,476 43,607 1,560 67,437 63,1811998 327,991 264,627 22,538 162,519 18,461 61,111 3,118 60,243 84,308
Euro million
1999 209,096 170,069 2,845 80,230 31,754 55,238 2,185 36,840 22,728
2000 155,615 122,774 5,937 29,999 30,089 56,751 7,320 25,522 −16,705
2000         July 30,452 22,906 5,223 7,233 5,543 4,907 2,743 4,803 − 2,066
         Aug. 5,814 6,254 − 473 4,414 2,107 207 1,061 − 1,501 − 3,719
         Sep. 2,987 4,437 454 − 3,889 3,441 4,431 597 − 2,047 − 2,416
         Oct. 18,785 10,674 − 659 − 983 486 11,830 − 34 8,146 − 2,432
         Nov. − 3,087 − 6,672 813 − 5,043 − 3,065 623 1,571 2,014 − 1,827
         Dec. 1,249 300 − 244 −10,548 2,707 8,385 267 683 − 3,058
*For definitions see the notes in the Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. —4Gross sales means only
Report 2, Capital market statistics. —1Excluding registered bank debt initial sales of newly issued securities. —5Maximum maturity according to
securities. —2Debt securities of enterprises. —3Including Federal Railways the terms of issue. — 6 Gross sales less redemptions. 
49*VII. Capital market

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
VII. Capital market
 
3. Outstanding amount of debt securities issued by borrowers domiciled in Germany  * 
  
Until the end of 1998 DM million nominal value, from 1999 euro million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item:
 Foreign  DM/euro
Mortgage Communal bonds issued
bonds bonds by German- Debt securities of
End of year All bank specialised Other bank Industrial Public managed (Öffentliche (Hypotheken-
or month Total bonds syndicates credit institutions debt securities debt securities debt securities Pfandbriefe) pfandbriefe)
DM million
1990 1,458,943 900,977 138,025 369,901 155,045 238,005 2,604 555,362 223,176
1991 1,686,765 1,040,374 142,757 392,190 221,031 284,396 3,161 643,230 241,7601992 1,991,515 1,156,162 155,862 450,424 240,616 309,259 2,983 832,370 275,8731993 2,394,728 1,316,142 178,357 573,341 227,463 336,981 3,163 1,075,422 319,5751994 2,664,814 1,432,661 196,541 627,657 219,214 389,249 3,101 1,229,053 341,210
1995 2,870,295 1,606,459 214,803 723,781 222,286 445,589 2,746 1,261,090 402,229
1996 3,108,724 1,801,517 226,711 845,710 228,306 500,790 3,331 1,303,877 472,1801997 3,366,245 1,990,041 243,183 961,679 240,782 544,397 4,891 1,371,313 535,3591998 3,694,234 2,254,668 265,721 1,124,198 259,243 605,507 8,009 1,431,558 619,668
Euro million
1999 2,097,926 1,322,863 134,814 655,024 163,284 369,741 6,280 768,783 339,560
2000 2,265,121 1,445,736 140,751 685,122 157,374 462,488 13,599 805,786 322,8562000         Sep. 2,248,174 1,441,435 140,842 701,696 157,247 441,650 11,796 794,942 330,172
         Oct. 2,266,959 1,452,108 140,183 700,713 157,733 453,480 11,762 803,089 327,740
         Nov. 2,263,872 1,445,436 140,996 695,670 154,668 454,103 13,333 805,103 325,913         Dec. 2,265,121 1,445,736 140,751 685,122 157,374 462,488 13,599 805,786 322,856
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  2                 Position at end-December 2000 
Maturity in years
744,266 531,385 45,103 211,737 60,783 213,761 1,824 211,056 79,899  less than 2
581,549 390,970 41,252 191,009 37,644 121,063 2,026 188,555 91,042   2 to less than 4
345,832 234,228 18,290 126,804 24,349 64,789 6,988 104,616 43,574   4 to less than  6
215,144 133,058 21,187 78,668 11,105 22,099 557 81,528 53,460   6 to less than  8
214,113 119,428 12,881 61,343 18,707 26,498 1,289 93,395 34,810   8 to less than 10
42,130 21,881 2,029 12,203 2,817 4,831 469 19,780 11,259 10 to less than 15
51,681 6,729 9 1,447 1,656 3,617 422 44,531 4,673 15 to less than 20
70,406 8,056 − 1,911 314 5,830 25 62,325 4,140 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers ’portfolios. — debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of the residual
1Excluding debt securities handed to the trustee for temporary safe amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc. 
custody. —2Calculated from month under review until final maturity for
50* 
 
4. Circulation of shares issued by residents of Germany
  
Until the end of 1998 DM million nominal value, from 1999 euro million nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies ’ capital due to
Share contribution
capital= of shares, Net increase or cash payment
merger reduction circulation at net decrease(-) and exchange contribution mining shares,
issue of change of of capital end of period during period of convertible of claims and GmbH shares, and transfer
Period bonds  1 etc. of assets legal form under review under review bonus shares other real assets and liquidation
DM million
1990 144,686 12,650 7,362 751 3,715 1,049 − 43 1,284 − 1,466
1991 151,618 6,932 3,656 610 2,416 407 − 182 411 − 386
1992 160,813 9,198 4,295 728 1,743 1,073 − 732 3,030 − 942
1993 168,005 7,190 5,224 772 387 876 10 707 − 783
1994 o 190,012 14,237 6,114 1,446 1,521 1,883 − 447 5,086 − 1,367
1995 211,231 21,217 5,894 1,498 1,421 1,421 − 623 13,739 − 2,133
1996 2 216,461 7,131 8,353 1,355 396 1,684 − 3,056 833 − 2,432
1997 221,575 5,115 4,164 2,722 370 1,767 − 2,423 197 − 1,678
1998 238,156 16,578 6,086 2,566 658 8,607 − 4,055 3,905 − 1,188
Euro million
1999 133,513 11,747 5,519 2,008 190 1,075 2,099 1,560 − 708
2000 147,629 14,115 3,620 3,694 618 8,089 − 1,986 1,827 − 1,745
2000         Sep. 145,959 1,691 489 452 215 640 1 318 − 424
         Oct. 146,806 847 347 277 68 206 42 67 − 161
         Nov. 147,483 677 315 402 38 122 − 1,366 1,185 − 18
         Dec. 147,629 145 209 104 19 546 − 359 118 − 492
oFrom January 1994 including the shares of east German companies share issues out of company profits. —2Figure reduced by DM 1,902 million
(resultant increase in share circulation: DM 7,771 million). —1Including owing to revisions. 
50*VII. Capital market

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
VII. Capital market
 
5. Yields and indices on German securities
  
Yields on bonds outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices  2 , 3 
Public bonds Bank debt securities Bonds Shares
Memo item:
Listed ForeignFederal securities DM/euro
bonds
With re- With re- issued by German Germansidual matur- sidual matur- German- bond CDAX share
Industrial managed index share price index ities of over 9 ities of over 9
Total Total Total Total to 10 years bonds (REX) index (DAX) to 10 years  
4 syndicates  1, 5 
Period Average End- End-
% p.a. daily rate 1987=100 1987=1000
1990 8.9 8.8 8.8 8.7 9.0 8.9 9.0 9.2 93.50 145.00 1,398.23
1991 8.7 8.6 8.6 8.5 8.9 8.6 8.9 9.2 96.35 148.16 1,577.981992 8.1 8.0 8.0 7.8 8.3 8.1 8.7 8.8 101.54 134.92 1,545.051993 6.4 6.3 6.3 6.5 6.5 6.8 6.9 6.8 109.36 191.13 2,266.681994 6.7 6.7 6.7 6.9 6.8 7.2 7.0 6.9 99.90 176.87 2,106.58
1995 6.5 6.5 6.5 6.9 6.5 7.2 6.9 6.8 109.18 181.47 2,253.88
1996 5.6 5.6 5.6 6.2 5.5 6.4 5.8 5.8 110.37 217.47 2,888.691997 5.1 5.1 5.1 5.6 5.0 5.9 5.2 5.5 111.01 301.47 4,249.691998 4.5 4.4 4.4 4.6 4.5 4.9 5.0 5.3 118.18 343.64 5,002.391999 4.3 4.3 4.3 4.5 4.3 4.9 5.0 5.4 110.60 445.95 6,958.14
2000 5.4 5.3 5.2 5.3 5.6 5.8 6.2 6.3 112.48 396.59 6,433.612000         Aug. 5.5 5.3 5.3 5.2 5.7 5.8 6.4 6.4 109.50 463.12 7,216.45
         Sep. 5.6 5.4 5.3 5.3 5.7 5.9 6.4 6.4 110.09 437.41 6,798.12
         Oct. 5.5 5.3 5.2 5.2 5.7 5.8 6.3 6.4 110.20 443.97 7,077.44
         Nov. 5.4 5.2 5.2 5.2 5.6 5.8 6.2 6.5 111.31 396.27 6,372.33         Dec. 5.1 5.0 4.9 4.9 5.3 5.6 6.0 6.3 112.48 396.59 6,433.61
2001         Jan. 4.9 4.8 4.8 4.8 5.1 5.4 5.8 6.0 112.74 414.59 6,795.14
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of included in the calculation. Monthly figures are calculated on the basis of
issue of over 4 years, if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Conver- the yields on all the business days of a month. The annual figures are the un-
tible debt securities, etc., debt securities with unscheduled redemption, weighted means of the monthly figures. —2End of year or month. —
zero-coupon bonds, floating-rate notes and bonds not denominated in DM 3Source: German Stock Exchange plc. —4Only bonds eligible as underlying
or euros are not included. Group yields for the various categories of secu- instruments for futures contracts are included; calculated as unweightedrities are weighted with the amounts outstanding of the debt securities averages. — 5 As far as quoted on German stock exchanges. 
51* 
  
6. Sales and purchases of investment fund certificates in Germany
 
Sales of investment fund certificates Purchases
Domestic funds (sales receipts) Residents
Investment funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Non-banks  2 and loan associations  1 
of which
of which of which
Sales Open- Special- Foreign Foreign= Secur- end ised invest- invest-total Money ities- real invest- ment mentpur- market based estate ment Foreign fund cer- fund cer- Non-resi-chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  
3 Total Total tificates Total tificates dents  4 
Period
DM million
1990 25,788 26,857 7,904 − 8,032 −128 18,952 −1,069 25,766 4,296 − 362 21,470 −707 22
1991 50,064 37,492 13,738 − 11,599 2,144 23,754 12,572 49,890 8,594 − 5 41,296 12,577 174
1992 81,514 20,474 −3,102 −− 9,189 6,087 23,575 61,040 81,518 10,495 2,152 71,023 58,888 − 4
1993 80,259 61,672 20,791 − 6,075 14,716 40,881 18,587 76,258 16,982 2,476 59,276 16,111 4,001
1994 130,995 108,914 63,263 31,180 24,385 7,698 45,650 22,081 125,943 9,849 − 689 116,094 22,770 5,052
1995 55,246 54,071 16,777 6,147 3,709 6,921 37,294 1,175 56,295 12,172 188 44,123 987 −1,049
1996 83,386 79,110 16,517 −4,706 7,273 13,950 62,592 4,276 85,704 19,924 1,685 65,780 2,591 −2,318
1997 145,805 138,945 31,501 −5,001 30,066 6,436 107,445 6,860 149,977 35,924 340 114,053 6,520 −4,172
1998 187,216 169,748 38,998 5,772 27,814 4,690 130,750 17,468 190,309 43,937 961 146,372 16,507 −3,093
Euro million
1999 111,079 97,197 37,684 3,347 23,269 7,395 59,513 13,882 105,370 19,862 − 637 85,508 14,519 5,709
2000 126,830 85,160 39,712 −2,188 36,818 −2,824 45,448 41,670 116,208 14,454 92 101,754 41,578 10,622
2000         Aug. 9,694 5,913 3,201 − 102 2,858 −223 2,712 3,781 9,129 1,926 342 7,203 3,439 565
         Sep. 7,063 4,662 1,267 − 943 1,781 −250 3,395 2,401 6,773 792 143 5,981 2,258 290
         Oct. 8,472 5,855 2,958 − 427 2,891 −153 2,897 2,617 7,746 1,161 86 6,585 2,531 726
         Nov. 7,310 4,114 3,302 − 178 2,847 − 96 812 3,196 6,889 1,105 82 5,784 3,114 421
         Dec. 16,244 15,597 1,413 − 609 1,582 − 61 14,184 647 15,322 1,637 − 296 13,685 943 922
1Book values. —2Residual. —3Net purchases or net sales ( −) of foreign non-residents; transaction values (before 1989 classified as shares). —The
investment fund certificates by residents; transaction values. —4Net figures for the latest data are to be regarded as provisional; corrections are
purchases or net sales ( −) of domestic investment fund certificates by not specially marked. 
51*VII. Capital market

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
1. Finances of the public sector *
    
Central, regional and local authorities  1 Social security funds  2 Public sector, total
Receipts Expenditure
of which
Balance Balance Balance
Other of of of
Person- operat- receipts receipts receipts
of nel ex- ing ex- Capital Finan- and Ex- and Ex- andwhich pend- pend- Current Interest forma- cial expend- Re- pend- expend- Re- pend- expend-
Period Total Taxes  
3 Total  4 iture iture grants paid tion aid  5 iture ceipts  6 iture iture ceipts iture iture
DM billion
1995 1,026.4 814.2 1,136.4 324.8 135.5 367.2 129.0 90.1 86.3 −110.1 731.2 743.8 −12.5 1,664.9 1,787.5 −122.6
1996 1,000.3 800.0 1,121.8 326.2 137.0 362.2 130.7 83.9 80.1 −121.5 769.4 784.0 −14.6 1,665.6 1,801.6 −136.1
1997  p 1,014.3 797.2 1,108.9 325.0 135.7 356.3 132.1 80.1 79.2 −94.5 797.0 794.5 + 2.5 1,705.0 1,797.0 −92.0
1998  pe 1,074.0 833.0 1,128.5 326.0 136.5 371.5 133.5 80.0 78.5 −54.5 813.0 809.0 + 4.0 1,768.5 1,819.0 −50.5
1999  pe 1,106.5 886.1 1,161.5 330.5 142.0 394.5 137.0 81.5 73.5 −55.0 838.5 831.0 + 7.5 1,809.5 1,857.0 −47.5
1999         3rd qtr 262.6 219.6 291.3 78.6 33.9 105.1 36.2 20.2 17.7 −28.7 208.8 206.3 + 2.5 436.6 462.9 −26.3
         4th qtr 325.7 255.1 329.8 96.9 43.9 98.8 31.0 29.3 28.8 −4.1 221.0 212.9 + 8.1 517.2 513.2 + 4.0
2000         1st qtr 246.0 205.2 281.9 76.6 33.7 103.5 41.0 12.9 14.4 −35.8 208.1 208.3 −0.2 413.5 449.6 −36.1
         2nd qtr 277.5 231.6 265.3 77.4 32.4 98.3 25.5 16.3 14.3 + 12.2 208.9 210.6 −1.7 451.0 440.5 + 10.5
         3rd qtr p 362.8 222.9 282.2 77.0 33.7 98.3 36.1 19.7 17.8 + 80.5 210.4 211.5 −1.1 539.4 459.9 + 79.5
Euro billion
1999  pe 565.7 453.1 593.9 169.0 72.6 201.7 70.0 41.7 37.6 −28.1 428.7 424.9 + 3.8 925.2 949.5 −24.3
1999         3rd qtr 134.2 112.3 148.9 40.2 17.3 53.7 18.5 10.3 9.0 −14.7 106.7 105.5 + 1.3 223.2 236.7 −13.4
         4th qtr 166.5 130.4 168.6 49.5 22.4 50.5 15.8 15.0 14.7 −2.1 113.0 108.9 + 4.2 264.4 262.4 + 2.0
2000         1st qtr 125.8 104.9 144.1 39.2 17.2 52.9 21.0 6.6 7.4 −18.3 106.4 106.5 −0.1 211.4 229.9 −18.4
         2nd qtr 141.9 118.4 135.7 39.6 16.6 50.3 13.0 8.3 7.3 + 6.3 106.8 107.7 −0.9 230.6 225.2 + 5.4
         3rd qtr p 185.5 113.9 144.3 39.4 17.2 50.3 18.5 10.1 9.1 + 41.2 107.6 108.1 −0.5 275.8 235.1 + 40.6
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical the latter are all provisional. The quarterly figures for some fields of
Office. —*The budgetary definition used here differs from the methods insurance are estimated. —3The tax revenue shown here is taken from the
employed for the government account of the national accounts and, in case budget statistics and may differ from the data given in Table VIII. 4, whichof the quarterly figures, in some respects also from the financial statistics. — are based on the tax statistics. 4Including discrepancies in clearing
1Incl. subsidiary budgets. The quarterly figures, unlike the annual figures transactions between the central, regional and local authorities. —
based on the annual accounts statistics of the Federal Statistical Office, do 5Expenditure on investment grants, loans and acquisition of participating
not include municipal special-purpose associations and various special interests. —6Including Federal Government liquidity assistance to the
accounts. For the receipts of Bundesbank profit see footnote 1 to Table VIII. Federal Labour Office. 2.—2The annual figures differ from the sum of the quarterly figures, as
2. Finances of the Federal Government, L änder Governments and local authorities *
  
  
Federal Government L änder Governments Local authorities
Western  2,  3 Eastern  3 Western  3 Eastern  3 
Period Receipts  1 Expenditure Receipts Expenditure Receipts Expenditure Receipts Expenditure Receipts Expenditure
DM billion
1995 439.3 489.9 338.6 370.2 88.4 101.5 225.6 237.9 58.7 60.8
1996 411.9 490.4 344.8 379.7 93.7 105.5 227.7 232.9 55.0 57.71997 416.8 480.3 349.2 376.5 94.3 105.2 222.9 226.9 52.6 54.21998  
pe 439.5 496.0 360.5 381.0 96.0 103.5 232.5 226.5 52.0 52.5
1999  pe 470.0 521.5 371.5 385.0 97.5 103.5 237.5 232.0 51.0 51.5
1999         3rd qtr 111.1 137.3 89.6 92.5 24.7 24.9 58.9 57.3 12.6 12.5
         4th qtr 151.1 142.4 106.5 111.7 27.9 33.5 71.3 67.4 15.7 15.8
2000         1st qtr 98.8 128.3 87.3 94.6 23.0 22.3 50.1 54.0 10.4 10.8
         2nd qtr 119.8 117.4 96.5 91.5 22.8 22.7 57.0 55.1 12.1 11.5         3rd qtr
p 4 214.1 130.8 88.9 91.1 25.0 25.0 59.0 57.5 12.2 12.3
Euro billion
1999  pe 240.3 266.6 189.9 196.8 49.9 52.9 121.4 118.6 26.1 26.3
1999         3rd qtr 56.8 70.2 45.8 47.3 12.6 12.7 30.1 29.3 6.5 6.4
         4th qtr 77.2 72.8 54.4 57.1 14.3 17.1 36.5 34.4 8.0 8.1
2000         1st qtr 50.5 65.6 44.6 48.4 11.7 11.4 25.6 27.6 5.3 5.5
         2nd qtr 61.3 60.0 49.3 46.8 11.7 11.6 29.1 28.2 6.2 5.9         3rd qtr
p 4 109.4 66.9 45.5 46.6 12.8 12.8 30.2 29.4 6.2 6.3
52*Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Fund for Inherited Liabilities. —2Including Berlin, Bremen, Hamburg.
Office. —*See corresponding footnote to Table VIII. 1. —1The Including Berlin (East). —3The quarterly figures, unlike the annual figures
Bundesbank profit transfer is shown in full until 1994; from 1995 only the based on the annual accounts statistics of the Federal Statistical Office, d o
DM 7 billion scheduled in the budget is shown. Since that time, receipts not include various special accounts. —4Including receipts from the UMTS
over and above the scheduled amount accrue directly to the Redemption licence auctions. 
52*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
3. Finances of the Government in the national accounts *
    
Up to the end of 1998, DM billion / from 1999, euro billion
Item 1993 1994 1995  1,  p 1996  p 1997  p 1998  p 1999  p 2000  2,  e 
Receipts 1,516.8 1,606.9 1,646.6 1,702.7 1,725.8 1,779.0 943.4 966.3
of which
Taxes 771.0 807.6 825.7 849.7 856.9 897.2 490.3 513.1Social security contributions 588.2 632.2 662.4 696.6 719.9 727.7 375.1 378.3
Expenditure 1,617.7 1,688.9 1,763.5 1,825.2 1,825.1 1,856.8 971.6 991.1
Intermediate input 140.3 140.6 143.1 142.5 140.1 143.8 76.5 78.2
Employee compensation 301.7 306.8 315.9 319.6 319.0 319.7 165.1 165.0Interest 108.5 113.5 129.0 131.9 133.3 136.1 70.2 69.9Social security benefits  
3 792.4 848.8 902.4 970.3 984.4 997.9 522.4 533.2
Gross capital formation 90.9 90.3 80.6 76.4 69.2 68.6 36.7 36.2
Financial balance − 100.9 − 82.0 − 116.8 − 122.5 − 99.3 − 77.8 − 28.1 − 24.8
as a percentage of the grossdomestic product − 3.1 − 2.4 − 3.3 − 3.4 − 2.7 − 2.1 − 1.4 − 1.2
Memo item
Deficit of the Treuhand agency − 38.1 − 37.1 . .....
Debt as defined in
Maastricht Treatyas a percentage of the grossdomestic product 47.1 49.4 57.1 59.8 60.9 60.7 61.1 .
Source: Federal Statistical Office. —*Figures according to ESA 95. In unadjusted terms, the deficit amounted to 10.0% of GDP. —2Adjusted
Notwithstanding the figures shown by the Federal Statistical Office, for receipts from UMTS licence auctions. In the accounts of the Federalcalculated including −with no impact on the balance −customs duties, the Statistical Office, such receipts (50.85 euro billion) are recorded under "net
EU share in VAT revenue and EU subsidies. —1Adjusted for the balance of increase in non-produced assets", with the result that government spending
notional capital transfers between the public sector and the corporate is lower and a surplus (26.0 euro billion or 1.3% of GDP) is shown. —
sector, mainly in connection with the winding-up of the Treuhand agency. 3 Monetary social security benefits and social benefits in kind. 
4. Tax revenue of the central, regional and local authorities
    
Federal and L änder Governments and European Union Local authorities  4 
Länder Governments
of which Balance of
Federal of which European in the untransferred
Period Total Total  1 Government  2 Total New L änder Union  3 Total New L änder tax shares  5 
DM million
1999 886,124 775,945 414,101 322,172 . 39,672 110,178 9,408 + 2
2000  p . 802,118 428,394 331,022 . 42,702 . . .
2000         3rd qtr p 223,400 194,962 106,132 79,825 . 9,005 28,042 ... + 396
         4th qtr p . 225,564 124,611 90,026 . 10,927 . . .
2000         Sep. . 79,320 44,390 33,294 . 1,636 . . .
         Oct. . 55,562 29,494 22,517 . 3,551 . . .
         Nov. p . 54,626 29,184 21,917 . 3,525 . . .
         Dec. p . 115,376 65,934 45,592 . 3,850 . . .
Euro million
1999 453,068 396,734 211,726 164,724 . 20,284 56,333 4,810 + 1
2000  p . 410,116 219,034 169,249 . 21,833 . . .
2000         3rd qtr p 114,222 99,682 54,264 40,814 . 4,604 14,337 ... + 203
         4th qtr p . 115,329 63,712 46,030 . 5,587 . . .
2000         Sep. . 40,556 22,696 17,023 . 836 . . .
         Oct. . 28,408 15,080 11,513 . 1,816 . . .
         Nov. p . 27,930 14,921 11,206 . 1,802 . . .
         Dec. p . 58,991 33,711 23,311 . 1,968 . . .
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. —1Including receipts from the revenue. —4Including local authority taxes of Berlin, Bremen and
Equalisation of Burdens levies.  —2Before deduction of supplementary Hamburg. —5Difference between the local authorities ’share in the
Federal grants and shares in the revenue of mineral oil tax remitted to the income taxes received by the L änder cash offices in the period in question
Länder Governments. —3Including the (GNP-related) receipts accruing to (see Table VIII. 5) and the amounts passed on to the local authorities during
the EU from 1988 to the detriment of the Federal Government ’s tax the same period. 
53*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
5. Tax revenue, by type
    
Joint taxes Memo
item
Income taxes  2 Turnover taxes  5,  6 Local
author-
As- Invest- ities’
sessed ment Value- Turnover Share EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income added tax on in trade Federal L änder customs income
Period Total  1 Total tax  3 tax tion tax taxes  4 Total tax imports tax  6,  7 taxes  8 taxes  8 duties taxes  9 
DM million
1999 825,383 360,671 261,708 21,293 43,731 33,940 268,253 218,271 49,982 10,685 141,280 38,263 6,231 49,438
2000  p 852,966 376,266 265,471 23,909 46,108 40,777 275,520 209,547 65,974 10,797 147,672 36,073 6,638 50,849
2000         3rd qtr 207,345 90,787 64,568 6,586 9,491 10,141 66,875 50,557 16,318 2,702 36,796 8,508 1,678 12,384
         4th qtr p 240,885 106,345 79,790 9,645 9,696 7,213 71,086 51,897 19,189 5,337 47,928 8,409 1,781 15,321
2000         Sep. 84,632 46,926 19,830 11,912 12,683 2,501 21,722 16,145 5,576 2 12,652 2,730 600 5,312
         Oct. 58,849 19,040 19,539 −1,612 −865 1,978 22,998 17,176 5,822 1,995 11,477 2,758 582 3,288
         Nov. p 57,893 18,060 19,648 −2,232 −1,200 1,844 24,691 18,307 6,384 707 11,034 2,846 556 3,267
         Dec. p 124,142 69,244 40,604 13,488 11,761 3,391 23,397 16,414 6,983 2,634 25,418 2,805 644 8,766
Euro million
1999 422,012 184,408 133,809 10,887 22,359 17,353 137,155 111,600 25,555 5,463 72,235 19,564 3,186 25,277
2000  p 436,115 192,382 135,733 12,225 23,575 20,849 140,871 107,140 33,732 5,521 75,503 18,444 3,394 25,998
2000         3rd qtr 106,014 46,418 33,013 3,367 4,853 5,185 34,192 25,849 8,343 1,382 18,813 4,350 858 6,332
         4th qtr p 123,162 54,373 40,796 4,931 4,958 3,688 36,346 26,534 9,811 2,729 24,505 4,299 910 7,834
2000         Sep. 43,271 23,993 10,139 6,091 6,485 1,279 11,106 8,255 2,851 1 6,469 1,396 307 2,716
         Oct. 30,089 9,735 9,990 −824 −442 1,012 11,759 8,782 2,977 1,020 5,868 1,410 297 1,681
         Nov. p 29,600 9,234 10,046 −1,141 −614 943 12,624 9,360 3,264 362 5,641 1,455 284 1,670
         Dec. p 63,473 35,404 20,760 6,896 6,014 1,734 11,963 8,393 3,570 1,347 12,996 1,434 329 4,482
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. —1This total, unlike that in Table VIII. 1999 5.63% went to the Federal Government in advance to finance the
4, includes neither the revenue from Equalisation of Burdens levies, trade supplementary Federal grant to the pension insurance funds; 2.2% of thetax on returns and capital (less Federal and L änder shares in trade tax), the balance went to the local authorities, of the new balance: 50.5% to the
taxes on land and buildings and other local authority taxes, nor the balance Federal Government, 49.5% to the L änder Governments, from 2000 50.25%
of untransferred tax shares. —2The yield of wage tax and assessed income to the Federal Government, 49.75% to the L änder Governments. The EU
tax was distributed among the Federal Government, the L änder share must likewise be deducted from the Federal Government ’s share
Governments and the local authorities in the ratio of 42.5 : 42.5 : 15 from stated. —6Since 1991 the distribution of turnover tax and the level and
1980, and the yield of corporation tax and investment income tax between distribution of the share in trade tax have been affected by the financing ofthe Federal Government and the L änder Governments in the ratio of 50 : 50 the debt service of the "German Unity" Fund. —7Federal Government and
from 1970. —3From 1996, after deduction of child benefit. —4From L änder Governments 50% each. From 1998 Federal Government 42.2%,
February 1993 including revenue from the tax on interest income, in which L änder Governments 57.8%. —8For breakdown see Table VIII. 6. —9From
the local authorities have a share of 12%. —5From 1998 3.64% and from 1998 including the share in turnover taxes. 
6. Individual taxes of the Federal Government, L änder Governments and local authorities
    
Federal taxes L änder taxes Local authority taxes
Insur- Electri- Other Motor Inherit- Other Taxes on Other
Mineral Tobacco Spirits ance city Federal vehicle Property ance Beer L änder Trade land and local
Period oil tax tax tax tax tax taxes  1 tax tax tax tax taxes tax  2 buildings taxes  3 
DM million
1999 71,278 22,795 4,367 13,917 3,551 25,373 13,767 1,050 5,977 1,655 15,815 52,924 16,890 1,612
2000 73,982 22,381 4,207 14,166 6,563 26,374 13,720 847 5,832 1,650 14,024 . . .
2000         3rd qtr p 18,595 5,990 966 3,025 1,836 6,384 3,311 185 1,206 453 3,352 13,362 5,013 382
         4th qtr 27,836 6,917 1,628 2,160 2,020 7,367 2,980 197 1,524 381 3,326 . . .
2000         Sep. 6,148 2,008 317 668 526 2,985 1,013 47 411 156 1,103 . . .
         Oct. 6,596 1,845 335 628 589 1,483 1,037 71 442 127 1,080 . . .         Nov.
p 6,014 1,844 311 959 478 1,429 997 55 477 132 1,186 . . .
         Dec. 15,227 3,228 982 574 953 4,455 946 72 605 122 1,060 . . .
Euro million
1999 36,444 11,655 2,233 7,116 1,816 12,973 7,039 537 3,056 846 8,086 27,060 8,636 824
2000 37,826 11,443 2,151 7,243 3,356 13,485 7,015 433 2,982 844 7,170 . . .
2000         3rd qtr p 9,507 3,063 494 1,547 939 3,264 1,693 94 617 232 1,714 6,832 2,563 195
         4th qtr 14,232 3,537 833 1,104 1,033 3,767 1,524 101 779 195 1,701 . . .
2000         Sep. 3,144 1,027 162 341 269 1,526 518 24 210 80 564 . . .
         Oct. 3,372 944 171 321 301 758 530 36 226 65 552 . . .         Nov.
p 3,075 943 159 490 244 730 510 28 244 67 606 . . .
         Dec. 7,785 1,650 502 293 487 2,278 484 37 309 62 542 . . .
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. —1Other excise taxes and the income until mid-1992, and again since the beginning of 1995. —2On returns and
and corporation tax surcharge ("solidarity surcharge") levied from mid-1991 capital. — 3 Including tax-like receipts.   
54*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
7. Indebtedness of the public sector *
    
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999, euro million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
5−year lending owing to
Bundes- Treasury special Federal Debt by credit Social German Equalisa-
End of year bank discount Treasury Federal savings secur- institu- security unifica- tionor month Total advances paper  
1 notes  2 bonds  2 bonds ities  2 tions  3 funds Other  3 tion 4 claims Other  5 
Public authorities
1994 1,659,632 − 20,506 169,181 181,737 59,334 465,408 644,459 1,337 28,997 1,391 87,098 184
1995 1,993,476 − 8,072 219,864 170,719 78,456 607,224 764,875 1,263 40,621 15,106 87,079 198
1996 2,126,320 − 27,609 217,668 176,164 96,391 631,696 836,582 770 39,450 9,960 89,826 203
1997 2,215,893 − 26,336 241,268 177,721 99,317 670,755 879,021 663 29,907 1,315 89,376 216
1998 2,280,154 − 25,631 221,524 199,774 92,698 729,416 894,456 550 26,073 1,249 88,582 202
1999         Sep. 1,190,614 − 11,793 101,767 114,905 43,212 410,025 450,457 262 12,192 637 45,260 104
         Dec. 1,199,975 − 12,594 99,544 120,998 41,621 418,871 450,111 281 10,200 476 45,175 105
2000         Mar. 1,213,985 − 11,790 99,731 121,722 40,925 426,923 457,058 282 9,733 431 45,281 108
         June 1,212,346 − 11,729 101,390 123,093 39,200 429,441 451,597 281 9,809 418 45,281 108
         Sep. 1,221,702 − 11,850 103,538 123,235 38,131 432,904 457,350 280 9,720 434 44,146 114
Federal Government 6,  7
1994 712,488 − 15,870 66,987 181,737 59,334 359,833 16,654 50 875 1,391 9,576 183
1995 756,834 − 8,072 52,354 170,719 78,456 402,307 26,572 15 8,119 1,360 8,684 176
1996 839,883 − 26,789 55,289 176,164 96,391 434,295 32,988 5 7,766 1,330 8,684 183
1997 905,691 − 25,286 78,848 177,721 99,317 481,619 31,845 5 870 1,300 8,684 197
1998 957,983 − 24,666 84,760 199,274 92,698 519,718 24,125 − 2,603 1,270 8,684 186
1999         Sep. 712,654 − 11,685 46,956 114,405 43,212 372,129 73,386 61 4,820 637 45,260 104
         Dec. 714,069 − 11,553 44,335 120,498 41,621 379,808 67,872 60 2,568 476 45,175 104
2000         Mar. 726,998 − 11,412 43,587 121,222 40,925 387,394 74,248 59 2,331 431 45,281 108
         June 723,195 − 11,654 43,929 122,593 39,200 389,761 67,927 58 2,268 418 45,281 107
         Sep. 730,423 − 11,775 44,416 121,601 38,131 392,785 74,820 57 2,145 434 44,146 113
         Dec. p 715,819 − 11,516 44,678 123,642 35,991 400,490 52,836 29 2,099 285 44,146 107
West German L änder Governments
1994 415,052 −− 68,643 . . 20,451 311,622 623 11,453 . 2,259 2
1995 442,536 −− 72,001 . . 19,151 339,084 358 11,940 . − 2
1996 477,361 − 320 80,036 . . 11,934 372,449 54 12,567 . − 2
1997 505,297 − 350 79,901 . . 6,739 406,499 47 11,760 . − 2
1998 525,380 − 520 78,878 . . 4,512 430,709 43 10,716 . − 2
1999         Sep. 269,993 − 26 40,525 . . 1,962 222,878 21 4,581 . − 1
         Dec. 274,208 − 150 40,979 . . 2,054 226,022 23 4,979 . − 1
2000         Mar. 275,718 − 50 42,080 . . 2,002 226,700 23 4,861 . − 1
         June 275,854 −− 43,166 . . 2,003 225,681 23 4,980 . − 1
         Sep. 275,454 −− 44,193 . . 2,003 224,238 23 4,997 . − 1
East German L änder Governments
1994 55,650 −− 19,350 . . 1,000 35,065 5 230 . . .
1995 69,151 −− 23,845 . . 1,500 43,328 17 461 . . .
1996 80,985 − 500 25,320 . . 1,500 53,483 − 182 . . .
1997 90,174 − 700 26,040 . . 1,500 61,697 15 222 . . .
1998 98,192 − 445 25,728 . . 1,500 70,289 − 230 . . .
1999         Sep. 50,402 − 83 14,030 . . 767 35,445 − 7 8...
         Dec. 53,199 − 891 13,750 . . 767 37,602 − 189 . . .
2000         Mar. 52,201 − 328 13,584 . . 767 37,415 − 107 . . .
         June 52,956 − 75 13,816 . . 767 38,141 − 158 . . .
         Sep. 53,773 − 75 14,450 . . 767 38,377 − 103 . . .
West German local authorities 8
1994 153,375 . . − . . 100 147,558 288 5,429 . . .
1995 157,271 . . − . . 1,000 151,127 283 4,861 . . .
1996 158,613 . . 200 . . 1,280 152,311 174 4,648 . . .1997 160,162 . . 300 . . 1,330 154,145 149 4,238 . . .1998 158,960 . . 300 . . 1,330 153,208 119 4,003 . . .
1999         Sep. 80,401 . . 153 . . 680 77,471 51 2,045 . . .
         Dec. 81,511 . . 153 . . 680 78,726 53 1,898 . . .
2000         Mar. 81,704 . . 153 . . 680 78,903 51 1,917 . . .
         June 82,165 . . 153 . . 680 79,363 51 1,917 . . .         Sep. 82,420 . . 153 . . 680 79,618 51 1,917 . . .
East German local authorities  8
1994 32,235 . . 125 . . 400 30,837 364 509 . . .1995 36,830 . . 225 . . 400 35,427 347 431 . . .1996 38,976 . . 225 . . 400 37,922 308 121 . . .1997 38,688 . . 225 . . 400 37,623 273 167 . . .1998 39,873 . . 225 . . 460 38,777 255 156 . . .
1999         Sep. 20,452 . . 102 . . 335 19,804 128 82 . . .
         Dec. 20,726 . . 51 . . 335 20,138 124 78 . . .
2000         Mar. 20,758 . . 51 . . 335 20,167 128 77 . . .
         June 20,758 . . 51 . . 335 20,167 128 77 . . .         Sep. 20,682 . . 51 . . 335 20,091 128 77 . . .
For footnotes see end of the table. 
55*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
7. Indebtedness of the public sector * (cont ’d)
    
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999, euro million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
5−year lending owing to
Bundes- Treasury special Federal Debt by credit Social German Equalisa-
End of year bank discount Treasury Federal savings secur- institu- security unifica- tionor month Total advances paper  
1 notes  2 bonds  2 bonds ities  2 tions  3 funds Other  3 tion 4 claims Other  5 
“German Unity “Fund / Indemnification Fund 6
1994 89,187 . 897 8,867 − . 43,859 33,744 5 1,816 . . .
1995 87,146 . − 8,891 − . 44,398 31,925 5 1,927 . . .
1996 83,556 . −−− . 44,321 38,020 5 1,210 . . .
1997 79,717 . −−− . 44,347 34,720 5 645 . . .
1998 79,413 . −−− . 47,998 30,975 − 440 . . .
1999         Sep. 40,345 . −− 500 . 27,822 11,834 − 189 . . .
         Dec. 40,234 . − 275 500 . 28,978 10,292 − 189 . . .
2000         Mar. 40,572 . − 275 500 . 29,315 10,292 − 189 . . .
         June 41,041 . − 275 500 . 29,290 10,797 − 179 . . .
         Sep. 41,189 . − 275 1,634 . 29,298 9,814 − 169 . . .
         Dec. p 40,629 . − 275 2,634 . 29,797 7,790 − 133 . . .
ERP Special Fund 6
1994 28,043 . .... 10,298 17,745 −− ...
1995 34,200 . .... 10,745 23,455 −− ...
1996 34,135 . .... 10,750 23,385 −− ...
1997 33,650 . .... 10,810 22,840 −− ...
1998 34,159 . .... 11,944 20,988 − 1,227 . . .
1999         Sep. 16,368 . .... 6,331 9,639 − 398 . . .
         Dec. 16,028 . .... 6,250 9,458 21 299 . . .
2000         Mar. 16,034 . .... 6,429 9,333 21 251 . . .
         June 16,376 . .... 6,604 9,520 21 231 . . .
         Sep. 17,761 . .... 7,036 10,392 21 312 . . .
         Dec. p 18,386 . .... 7,585 10,411 13 377 . . .
Federal Railways Fund 6,  7
1994 71,173 . . 5,208 − . 29,467 29,232 − 7,265 . . .
1995 78,400 . . 3,848 − . 28,992 39,005 140 6,415 . . .
1996 77,785 . . 1,882 − . 28,749 41,537 130 5,489 . . .
1997 77,254 . . 1,927 − . 25,634 44,807 115 4,772 . . .
1998 77,246 . . − 500 . 31,648 42,488 79 2,531 . . .
1999         June 39,231 . . − 1,023 . 16,805 20,401 34 968 . . .
Debt-Processing Fund / Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities 6,  7
1994 102,428 . 3,740 . . . . 22,003 2 1,420 . 75,263 .
1995 328,888 . − 58,699 − . 98,731 72,732 98 6,468 13,745 78,395 21
1996 331,918 . − 54,718 − . 98,468 81,380 95 7,468 8,630 81,142 19
1997 322,032 . − 54,028 − . 98,377 81,616 54 7,233 15 80,692 17
1998 304,978 . − 31,633 − . 110,006 79,226 54 4,167 −20 79,899 15
1999         June 151,097 . − 11,127 2,000 . 58,897 36,133 27 2,015 −9 40,902 4
“Use of Hard Coal “Equalisation Fund 6,  7
1995 2,220 . .... − 2,220 −− ...
1996 3,108 . .... − 3,108 −− ...
1997 3,229 . .... − 3,229 −− ...
1998 3,971 . .... 3 0 0 3,671 −− ...
1999         June 2,302 . .... 1 5 3 2,148 −− ...
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical accordance with the London Debts agreement; excluding debt securities i n
Office. —*Excluding public authorities ’mutual indebtedness. — own portfolios. —6The debt incurred through the joint issue of Federal
1Predominantly Treasury discount paper. —2Excluding paper in the securities is recorded here −in contrast to the capital market statistics −
issuers ’portfolios. —3Mainly loans against borrowers ’notes. Including under the Federal Government and its special funds in accordance with the
loans raised abroad. Other loans from non-banks, including loans from agreed distribution ratios. —7Since July 1, 1999 the Federal Government
supplementary public pension funds and liabilities arising from the has assumed joint responsibility for the debts of the Redemption Fund forinvestment assistance levy. —4Old liabilities arising from residential Inherited Liabilities, the Federal Railway Fund and the Equalisation Fund for
construction and liabilities arising from residential construction by the Safeguarding the Use of Coal. The special funds mentioned are onlyformer GDR ’s armed forces and from residential construction in connection recorded under the Federal Government from July. —8Data other than
with the return of the troops of the former USSR in eastern Germany to end-of-year figures have been estimated. Including indebtedness of munici-their home country. —5Old debt mainly expressed in foreign currency, in pal special-purpose associations. 
56*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
8. Changes in public sector indebtedness *
    
Net borrowing  1 
Level at end of 1999 20001999 Sep. 2000 Total 1st qtr 2nd qtr 3rd qtr 4th qtr 1st qtr 2nd qtr 3rd qtr
Item Euro million
Borrowers
Federal Government  2 714,069 730,423 + 31,738 + 16,503 + 3,202 + 10,536 + 1,497 + 12,926 −3,803 + 7,227
"German Unity" Fund 40,102 41,005 − 428 − 2+ 8 9 − 386 − 129 + 320 + 455 + 128
ERP Special Fund 16,028 17,761 −1,437 − 37 − 432 − 627 − 340 + 6 + 343 + 1,385
Federal Railways Fund  2 −− − 265 − 318 + 53 −−−−−
Inherited Liabilities Fund  2 −− − 4,882 −2,852 −2,030 −−−−−
"Use of Hard Coal" Equal-isation Fund  
2 −− + 271 + 217 + 55 −−−−−
Indemnification Fund 132 184 + 59 + 12 + 12 + 17 + 18 + 18 + 14 + 20
West  German  Länder 274,208 275,454 + 5,585 + 1 + 2,172 − 803 + 4,215 + 1,510 + 136 − 400 Governments
East German  Länder 53,199 53,773 + 2,995 − 703 − 151 + 1,051 + 2,797 − 999 + 755 + 817 Governments
West German local authorities  3 81,511 82,420 + 751 − 207 − 66 + 332 + 692 + 194 + 703 − 26
East German local authorities  3 20,726 20,682 + 428 + 68 + 10 + 26 + 325 + 32 + 66 − 77
Total 1,199,975 1,221,702 + 34,816 + 12,680 + 2,914 + 10,146 + 9,075 + 14,006 −1,330 + 9,074
Types of debt
Treasury discount paper  4 12,594 11,850 − 511 − 535 − 617 − 159 + 801 − 804 − 62 + 121
Treasury notes  5 99,544 103,538 −13,720 −5,482 −3,192 −2,822 −2,224 + 187 + 1,658 + 2,149
Five-year special Federal bonds  5 120,998 123,235 + 18,855 + 4,408 + 4,708 + 3,646 + 6,093 + 725 + 1,371 + 143
Federal savings bonds 41,621 38,131 −5,775 −1,981 − 769 −1,434 −1,591 − 696 −1,725 −1,069
Debt securities  5 418,871 432,904 + 45,927 + 18,306 + 2,770 + 16,005 + 8,846 + 8,052 + 2,518 + 3,463
Direct lending by
credit institutions  6 450,111 457,350 −6,613 − 552 + 309 −5,658 − 712 + 6,947 −5,152 + 5,472
Loans from social security funds 281 280 − 0− 10 − 9− 1+ 1 9+ 1 − 1− 1
Other loans  6 10,160 9,679 −3,130 −1,475 − 289 + 625 −1,992 − 467 + 76 − 90
Old debt  7 581 548 − 161 − 0+ 1 − 1− 160 − 42 − 13 + 22
Equalisation claims 45,175 44,146 − 55 − 0+ 4 − 57 − 3 + 102 − 1−1,135
Investment assistance levy 40 40 − 0− 0− 0− 0− 0− 0− 0− 0
Total 1,199,975 1,221,702 + 34,816 + 12,680 + 2,914 + 10,146 + 9,075 + 14,006 −1,330 + 9,074
Creditors
Banking system
Bundesbank 4,440 4,440 −−−−−−−−
Credit institutions 595,553 586,043 −7,014 −7,536 − 803 −3,267 + 4,591 + 4,547 −10,632 −3,400
Domestic non-banks
Social security funds  8 281 281 − 0− 26 − 0− 0+ 2 6+ 0 − 0− 0
Other  9 187,141 198,130 + 25,673 + 19,577 + 2,490 + 2,112 + 1,493 + 9,152 −3,122 + 4,958
Foreign creditors  pe 412,561 432,809 + 16,157 + 665 + 1,227 + 11,300 + 2,965 + 307 + 12,424 + 7,516
Total 1,199,975 1,221,702 + 34,816 + 12,680 + 2,914 + 10,146 + 9,075 + 14,006 −1,330 + 9,074
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical 6Including loans raised abroad. —7Old liabilities arising from residential
Office. —*Excluding public authorities ’mutual indebtedness. —1Net construction and liabilities arising from the residential construction of the
borrowing differs from the change in indebtedness, which includes the former GDR ’s armed forces and from residential construction in connection
assumption and reduction of debts. —2See Table VIII. 7, footnote 6. — with the return of the troops of the former USSR based in eastern Germany
3Data other than end-of-year figures have been estimated. Including to their home country, and old debt in accordance with the London Debts
indebtedness of municipal special-purpose associations and municipal Agreement. —8Excluding public bonds acquired by supplementary pension
hospitals. —4Excluding mobilisation and liquidity paper. Predominantly funds for government employees. — 9 Ascertained as a difference. 
Treasury discount paper. —5Excluding paper in the issuers ’portfolios. —
9. Loans raised by public authorities against borrowers ’ notes
    
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999, euro million
End of year Federal "German ERP L änder Local Federal Inherited "Use of Hard
or month Govern- Unity" Special Govern- authorities Railways Liabilites Coal" Equal-
Total  1 ment  2,  3 Fund Fund ments 4,  5 Fund  3 Fund  3 isation Fund  3 
1996 851,245 33,817 39,235 23,385 428,292 187,311 47,155 88,942 3,108
1997 883,260 25,914 35,370 22,840 471,224 186,087 49,694 88,902 3,2291998 898,030 23,094 31,415 22,215 504,148 184,942 45,098 83,447 3,671
1999 Sep. 441,961 66,954 12,023 10,037 259,427 93,519 −− −
Dec. 444,031 64,704 10,481 9,778 264,158 94,909 −− −
2000 Mar. 442,190 62,289 10,481 9,605 264,958 94,857 −− −
June 443,410 62,018 10,466 9,772 266,855 94,299 −− −
Sep. 436,742 57,651 9,277 10,725 264,691 94,398 −− −
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical 3See Table VIII. 7, footnote 6. —4Data other than end-of-year figures have
Office. —1Excluding Debt Register claims and cash advances. Including been estimated. Including municipal special-purpose associations and
small amounts of: mortgage loans, land charges in annuity and other forms, municipal hospitals. — 5 Including contractually agreed loans. 
and debts outstanding. —2Including Equalisation of Burdens Fund. —
57*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
10. Indebtedness of the Federal Government
    
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999, euro million
Treasury Indebtedness
discount paper  1 to non-banks Old debt
Federal Direct
of which Treasury 5 −year Debt lending owing to
Bundes- Treasury paper/ special Federal secur- by credit Social German Equal-
End of year bank financing Treasury Federal savings ities institu- security Other unifica- isationor month Total advances Total paper notes  
2 bonds  2 bonds 2 tions  3,  4 funds 3,  5,  6  tion 7 claims Other  8 
1993 685,283 − 23,276 22,904 60,565 188,767 46,093 325,201 26,129 546 3,395 1,421 9,698 194
1994 712,488 − 15,870 14,578 66,987 181,737 59,334 359,833 16,654 50 875 1,391 9,576 183
1995 756,834 − 8,072 7,681 52,354 170,719 78,456 402,307 26,572 15 8,119 1,360 8,684 176
1996 839,883 − 26,789 7,166 55,289 176,164 96,391 434,295 32,988 5 7,766 1,330 8,684 183
1997 905,691 − 25,286 5,221 78,848 177,721 99,317 481,619 31,845 5 870 1,300 8,684 197
1998 957,983 − 24,666 4,558 84,760 199,274 92,698 519,718 24,125 − 2,603 1,270 8,684 186
1999  9 714,069 − 11,553 1,584 44,335 120,498 41,621 379,808 67,872 60 2,568 476 45,175 104
2000  p 715,819 − 11,516 1,804 44,678 123,642 35,991 400,490 52,836 29 2,099 285 44,146 107
2000         Jan. 722,754 − 11,400 1,573 44,478 118,311 40,857 387,735 71,486 60 2,568 475 45,279 106
         Feb. 725,066 − 11,412 1,586 44,692 123,723 40,884 387,504 68,365 60 2,570 470 45,279 106
         Mar. 726,998 − 11,412 1,586 43,587 121,222 40,925 387,394 74,248 59 2,331 431 45,281 108
         Apr. 725,260 − 11,534 1,570 44,175 122,229 41,045 386,828 71,229 59 2,332 435 45,283 111
         May 727,073 − 11,617 1,652 44,512 122,534 40,445 391,132 68,614 59 2,334 437 45,281 109
         June 723,195 − 11,654 1,690 43,929 122,593 39,200 389,761 67,927 58 2,268 418 45,281 107
         July 729,799 − 11,698 1,701 44,308 122,604 39,233 393,645 71,272 58 2,294 432 44,146 109
         Aug. 731,075 − 11,748 1,751 44,496 120,794 38,781 392,264 75,948 58 2,294 435 44,147 111
         Sep. 730,423 − 11,775 1,778 44,416 121,601 38,131 392,785 74,820 57 2,145 434 44,146 113
         Oct. 725,875 − 11,469 1,757 44,121 122,118 38,130 396,905 66,235 57 2,145 434 44,147 114
         Nov. 724,073 − 11,489 1,777 43,940 122,672 35,991 399,752 63,337 57 2,153 434 44,136 111
         Dec. p 715,819 − 11,516 1,804 44,678 123,642 35,991 400,490 52,836 29 2,099 285 44,146 107
2001         Jan. p 696,621 − 11,646 1,757 45,391 123,881 35,970 402,794 64,314 29 2,099 285 10,104 107
1Excluding mobilisation and liquidity paper. In November 1999, including with the return of the troops of the former USSR based in eastern Germany
cash bills. —2Excluding paper in the issuers ’portfolios. —3Including loans to their home country. —8Commutation and compensation debt and old
raised abroad. —4Including money market debt. —5Including loans debt mainly expressed in foreign currency. —9Since July 1, 1999 the
granted by supplementary pension funds for government employees. — Federal Government has assumed joint responsibility for the debts of the
6Including liabilities arising from the investment assistance levy. — Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, the Federal Railway Fund and the
7Assumption of liabilities arising from residential construction of the Equalisation Fund for Safeguarding the Use of Coal. The special funds
former GDR ’s armed forces and from residential construction in connection mentioned are ascribed to the Federal Government from July 1999. 
11. Federal finance on a cash basis
    
Up to the end of 1998, DM billion / from 1999, euro billion
Financing  3 
Change
Cash
surplus (+)
in Bundes- Items or deficit (-),
in cash bank ad- in market in course of cumulative
Cash Cash resources  4 vances debt settlement Seigniorage from
Cash expenditure surplus (+) beginning
Period receipts  1 1,  2 or deficit (-) (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) of year
1993 450.28 512.30 − 62.01 + 12.95 − 4.35 + 78.54 − 0.78 −62.01
1994 463.72 497.55 − 33.83 − 6.12 − + 27.21 − 0.50 −33.83
1995 501.56 549.77 − 48.20 − 3.49 − + 44.35 − 0.37 −48.20
1996 532.67 609.26 − 76.60 + 6.62 − + 83.05 − 0.17 −76.60
1997 568.83 638.04 − 69.21 − 3.33 − + 65.81 − 0.07 −69.21
1998 597.48 655.33 − 57.84 − 5.43 − + 52.29 − 0.12 −57.84
1999 315.59 345.39 − 29.80 + 1.81 − + 31.63 −− 0.02 −29.80
2000  p 323.20 325.92 − 2.72 − 0.95 − + 1.75 − 0.01 − 2.72
1999         Dec. 50.47 36.00 + 14.47 + 2.44 −− 12.03 −− 0.01 −29.80
2000         Jan. 22.39 32.23 − 9.83 − 1.12 − + 8.69 − 0.03 − 9.83
         Feb. 22.35 24.57 − 2.22 + 0.09 − + 2.31 −− 0.00 −12.05
         Mar. 23.95 26.09 − 2.14 − 0.22 − + 1.93 −− 0.01 −14.19
         Apr. 25.05 23.53 + 1.52 − 0.22 −− 1.74 −− 0.00 −12.67
         May 23.60 25.50 − 1.90 − 0.10 − + 1.81 −− 0.01 −14.57
         June 28.61 25.10 + 3.51 − 0.37 −− 3.88 −− 0.00 −11.07
         July 24.09 30.52 − 6.44 + 0.18 − + 6.60 − 0.01 −17.50
         Aug. 22.16 23.63 − 1.47 − 0.20 − + 1.28 −− 0.00 −18.98
         Sep. 27.25 26.39 + 0.87 + 0.23 −− 0.65 − 0.01 −18.11
         Oct. 32.44 27.97 + 4.47 − 0.08 −− 4.55 −− 0.00 −13.64
         Nov. 29.32 27.73 + 1.58 − 0.22 −− 1.80 −− 0.01 −12.06
         Dec. p 42.00 32.66 + 9.34 + 1.08 −− 8.25 −− 0.01 − 2.72
1The cash transactions recorded as cash receipts and cash expenditure actions on behalf of the European Communities (which are not entered in
comprise payments into and out of the accounts carried by the Bundesbank the Federal budget) are conducted through the accounts of the Federalfor the Federal Government. The cash receipts and cash expenditure differ Government. —2Including small amounts of special transactions. —3Cash
from those shown in the official financial statistics primarily because these balance = column (a) less (b) less (c) less (d) less (e). —4Deposits at the
transactions are recorded not at the time they are entered in the budgetary Bundesbank and in the money market. accounts but at the time of the actual inflow or outflow, and because trans-
58*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
12. Receipts, expenditure and assets of the wage and
salary earners ’ pension insurance funds
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999, euro million
Receipts  1 Expenditure  1 Assets  5 
of which of which Memor-
Balance Mort- andum
Pen- of receipts gage item
Pension sioners ’ and and Adminis-
Contri- Federal pay- health expend- other Real trative
Period Total butions  2 payments Total ments  3 insurance  4 iture Total Deposits  6 Securities loans  7 estate assets
Western Germany
1994 267,265 215,758 48,108 266,443 220,744 14,375 + 822 33,578 24,194 8,170 909 305 6,890
1995 276,302 225,324 47,979 279,226 230,222 15,923 −2,924 21,756 16,801 3,948 746 262 7,800
1996  8 288,761 236,036 50,478 288,716 237,464 16,809 + 45 14,456 9,608 2,119 2,500 229 8,863
1997 305,606 248,463 54,896 295,635 246,011 17,892 + 9,971 14,659 10,179 1,878 2,372 230 9,2611998 317,340 250,063 65,191 304,155 254,783 18,636 + 13,185 18,194 14,201 1,493 2,274 226 9,573
1999  
p 169,124 128,191 39,884 159,819 134,408 9,910 + 9,305 13,623 11,559 824 1,127 114 4,904
2000  p 172,903 128,046 43,563 165,797 139,205 10,237 + 7,106 14,361 11,458 1,677 1,106 120 5,006
1999         4th qtr 46,089 35,130 10,666 40,578 33,972 2,527 + 5,512 13,623 11,559 824 1,127 114 4,904
2000         1st qtr 41,290 30,016 10,987 40,856 34,574 2,531 + 434 12,612 9,817 1,538 1,126 130 4,899
         2nd qtr 42,199 30,986 10,910 40,428 34,516 2,532 + 1,772 11,636 8,980 1,409 1,119 128 4,936         3rd qtr 42,891 31,757 10,802 42,262 35,068 2,580 + 628 10,653 7,936 1,483 1,114 121 4,909         4th qtr 46,523 35,287 10,864 41,994 35,047 2,594 + 4,529 14,361 11,458 1,677 1,106 120 5,006
Eastern Germany
1994 63,001 40,904 13,783 65,811 53,136 3,376 −2,810 . . . . . .
1995 70,774 44,970 16,408 77,780 63,812 4,362 −7,006 . . . . . .
1996 74,790 46,580 17,910 83,830 68,316 4,851 −9,040 . . . . . .
1997 79,351 48,939 20,065 87,424 70,500 5,388 −8,073 . . . . . .
1998 81,072 47,764 23,564 90,863 73,040 5,757 −9,791 . . . . . .
1999  p 43,214 24,015 14,744 47,641 38,339 3,040 −4,426 . . . . . .
2000  p 42,995 22,654 15,408 49,209 39,505 3,109 −6,214 . . . . . .
1999         4th qtr 11,523 6,398 3,927 12,057 9,713 772 − 534 . . . . . .
2000         1st qtr 10,477 5,434 3,838 12,174 9,846 776 −1,697 . . . . . .
         2nd qtr 10,054 5,564 3,865 12,241 9,839 774 −2,187 . . . . . .
         3rd qtr 11,100 5,581 3,894 12,394 9,928 780 −1,294 . . . . . .
         4th qtr 11,364 6,074 3,810 12,399 9,892 780 −1,035 . . . . . .
Source: Federal Minister of Labour and Social Affairs and Association of including nursing insurance scheme for pensioners . —5Largely
German Pension Insurance Funds. —1The annual figures differ from the corresponds to fluctuation reserves. Level at the end of the year or quarter.
sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. From 1993 From 1992 figures for the whole of Germany. —6Including cash
including financial compensation payments. —2Including contributions for resources. —7Excluding loans to other social security funds; including
recipients of public financial benefits. —3Payments by pension insurance participating interests. —8Excluding receipts arising from the higher
funds to health insurance institutions under section 50 of the Social Security valuation of participating interests. Code V have been deducted from pension payments. —4From 1995
13. Receipts and expenditure of the Federal Labour Office
    
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999, euro million
Receipts Expenditure
Subsidies
of which of which or work-
ing fund
Promotion of vocational Promo- Balance credits
Unemployment relief  3,  4 training  4,  5 tion of of receipts of the
winter and Federal
Contri- Western Eastern Western Eastern con- expend- Govern-
Period Total  1 butions Levies  2 Total Total Germany Germany Total Germany Germany struction iture ment
Germany
1994 89,658 81,536 3,822 99,863 48,342 35,163 13,179 31,273 14,382 16,891 1,822 −10,205 10,142
1995 90,211 84,354 2,957 97,103 49,254 36,161 13,094 34,441 16,745 17,696 1,586 −6,892 6,887
1996 91,825 85,073 3,346 105,588 57,123 40,186 16,938 36,478 18,368 18,111 903 −13,763 13,756
1997 93,149 85,793 2,959 102,723 60,273 40,309 19,964 31,418 16,117 15,301 443 −9,574 9,574
1998 91,088 86,165 2,868 98,852 53,483 35,128 18,355 34,279 16,784 17,496 471 −7,764 7,719
1999 47,954 45,141 1,467 51,694 25,177 16,604 8,573 20,558 10,480 10,078 279 −3,740 3,739
2000 49,605 46,359 1,403 50,473 23,946 15,614 8,331 20,324 10,535 9,790 294 − 867 867
1999         4th qtr 13,466 12,578 577 13,509 6,132 4,014 2,118 5,721 2,987 2,734 3 − 43 −2,098
2000         1st qtr 11,304 10,788 85 12,062 6,094 3,998 2,096 4,414 2,265 2,149 177 − 758 3,083
         2nd qtr 12,113 11,086 334 12,445 6,052 3,894 2,158 4,923 2,560 2,362 106 − 332 491
         3rd qtr 12,335 11,610 403 12,220 5,750 3,747 2,002 4,990 2,542 2,448 10 + 115 − 256
         4th qtr 13,854 12,875 582 13,746 6,050 3,975 2,075 5,997 3,168 2,830 1 + 108 −2,452
Source: Federal Labour Office. —1Excluding Federal Government liquidity replacement for the unemployment benefits. —4Including contributions to
assistance. —2Levies to promote winter construction and to pay bank- the statutory health insurance, and to the pension insurance funds. —
ruptcy compensation to employees. —3Unemployment benefits, 5Vocational training, measures to foster the commencement of work,
short-time-working benefits. Including the integration allowance paid to rehabilitation and job creation measures. resettlers from eastern Europe and emigrants from the GDR as a
59*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
IX. Economic conditions
  
1. Origin and expenditure of domestic product, distribution of national income    Germany
    
  1995   1996   1997   1998   1999   2000   1999   2000   1997   1998   1999   2000   2000
Change from % of
Item DM billion Euro billion previous year in % total
at  1995  prices
I.Origin of domestic product
Producing sector(excluding construction) 837.8 819.3 837.8 849.9 851.5 894.4 435.4 457.3 2.3 1.4 0.2 5.0 23.3Construction 223.0 214.1 210.9 206.4 201.8 194.1 103.2 99.3 −1.5 −2.1 −2.2 −3.8 5.0
Distribution, catering trade,and transportation  
1 585.8 591.8 598.6 615.2 626.8 652.6 320.5 333.7 1.1 2.8 1.9 4.1 17.0
Financing, rents and corporateservices  
2 893.1 935.3 971.0 1,023.8 1,075.8 1,132.2 550.1 578.9 3.8 5.4 5.1 5.2 29.4
Public and private services  3 713.6 726.5 731.6 737.6 736.5 745.6 376.6 381.2 0.7 0.8 −0.2 1.2 19.4
All economic sectors 3,295.4 3,332.1 3,394.7 3,478.5 3,539.2 3,666.6 1,809.5 1,874.7 1.9 2.5 1.7 3.6 95.3
Memo item: Enterprise sector 2,845.3 2,879.9 2,945.1 3,030.1 3,092.0 3,216.9 1,580.9 1,644.8 2.3 2.9 2.0 4.0 83.6
Economic sectors, adjusted  4 3,176.6 3,202.9 3,254.0 3,325.0 3,372.9 3,488.1 1,724.5 1,783.4 1.6 2.2 1.4 3.4 90.7
Gross domestic product 3,523.0 3,550.0 3,599.6 3,673.5 3,730.7 3,846.0 1,907.5 1,966.4 1.4 2.1 1.6 3.1 100
II.Expenditure of domestic product
Private consumption  5 2,003.9 2,023.6 2,037.2 2,078.5 2,132.1 2,172.0 1,090.1 1,110.5 0.7 2.0 2.6 1.9 56.5
Government consumption 697.8 710.2 704.1 707.7 706.7 716.2 361.3 366.2 −0.9 0.5 −0.1 1.3 18.6
Machinery and equipment 253.9 258.3 268.0 292.5 312.1 340.0 159.5 173.8 3.7 9.2 6.7 9.0 8.8Construction 506.0 491.6 484.4 479.6 481.7 469.8 246.3 240.2 −1.5 −1.0 0.5 −2.5 12.2
Other investment  
6 30.6 34.1 36.1 40.0 45.0 49.3 23.0 25.2 5.9 10.9 12.4 9.7 1.3
Changes in stocks  7 8.1 −8.3 −0.3 15.0 21.0 29.9 10.7 15.3 . . . . 0.8
Domestic demand 3,500.3 3,509.4 3,529.4 3,613.2 3,698.5 3,777.2 1,891.0 1,931.2 0.6 2.4 2.4 2.1 98.2
Net exports 22.7 40.6 70.2 60.3 32.2 68.8 16.4 35.2 . . . . 1.8
Exports 862.6 906.4 1,008.6 1,079.0 1,133.5 1,279.8 579.5 654.3 11.3 7.0 5.1 12.9 33.3Imports 839.9 865.9 938.4 1,018.7 1,101.3 1,211.0 563.1 619.1 8.4 8.6 8.1 10.0 31.5
Gross domestic product 3,523.0 3,550.0 3,599.6 3,673.5 3,730.7 3,846.0 1,907.5 1,966.4 1.4 2.1 1.6 3.1 100
at  current  prices
III.Expenditure of domestic product
Private consumption  5 2,003.9 2,057.5 2,112.3 2,177.9 2,241.1 2,315.6 1,145.9 1,183.9 2.7 3.1 2.9 3.3 58.2
Government consumption 697.8 715.3 713.3 722.4 738.0 749.8 377.3 383.4 −0.3 1.3 2.2 1.6 18.8
Machinery and equipment 253.9 257.9 268.4 293.5 310.4 340.1 158.7 173.9 4.1 9.4 5.8 9.5 8.5Construction 506.0 489.5 481.1 475.3 475.1 466.2 242.9 238.4 −1.7 −1.2 −0.0 −1.9 11.7
Other investment  
6 30.6 33.1 35.1 38.1 41.5 44.3 21.2 22.7 6.1 8.7 8.9 6.7 1.1
Changes in stocks  7 8.1 −4.0 6.2 19.6 33.4 46.7 17.1 23.9 . . . . 1.2
Domestic demand 3,500.3 3,549.2 3,616.4 3,726.9 3,839.6 3,962.6 1,963.1 2,026.1 1.9 3.1 3.0 3.2 99.5
Net exports 22.7 37.3 50.1 57.5 37.6 19.4 19.2 9.9 . . . . 0.5
Exports 862.6 907.5 1,021.1 1,092.4 1,141.6 1,325.1 583.7 677.5 12.5 7.0 4.5 16.1 33.3Imports 839.9 870.2 971.0 1,034.9 1,104.0 1,305.7 564.5 667.6 11.6 6.6 6.7 18.3 32.8
Gross domestic product 3,523.0 3,586.5 3,666.5 3,784.4 3,877.2 3,982.0 1,982.4 2,036.0 2.2 3.2 2.5 2.7 100
IV.Prices (1995=100)
Private consumption 100.0 101.7 103.7 104.8 105.1 106.6 . . 2.0 1.1 0.3 1.4 .Gross domestic product 100.0 101.0 101.9 103.0 103.9 103.5 . . 0.8 1.1 0.9 −0.4 .
Terms of trade 100.0 99.6 97.8 99.7 100.5 96.0 . . −1.8 1.9 0.8 −4.4 .
V.Distribution of national income
Wages and salaries 1,948.5 1,966.1 1,973.2 2,011.7 2,060.3 2,120.2 1,053.4 1,084.0 0.4 2.0 2.4 2.9 72.1Entrepreneurial and propertyincome 708.8 736.4 779.9 820.7 810.9 821.8 414.6 420.2 5.9 5.2 −1.2 1.3 27.9
National income 2,657.3 2,702.5 2,753.1 2,832.4 2,871.2 2,942.0 1,468.0 1,504.2 1.9 2.9 1.4 2.5 100
Memo item: Gross national
income 3,504.4 3,570.9 3,648.6 3,758.6 3,845.9 3,948.9 1,966.4 2,019.0 2.2 3.0 2.3 2.7 .(Gross nat. product)
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in January 2001. Prelimi- bank charges, but excluding taxes on products (offset against subsi dies on
nary figure. —1Including telecommunications. —2Financial interme- products). —5Including private non-commercial organisations. —6Intangi-
diation, real estate activities, rents and corporate services. —3Including ble fixed capital formation (inter alia, EDP software, copyrights) and eco-
care-at-home services. —4Gross value added after deduction of assumed nomically useful animals and plants. — 7 Including net increase in valuables. 
60*IX. Economic conditions

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
 IX. Economic conditions
 
2. Output in the producing sector     
  
Adjusted for working-day variations
of which:Manufacturing sector
Producing sector, Intermediate Capital goods Durable consumer Other consumer
total Total goods industries  
1 industries goods industries goods industries Construction
Change Change Change Change Change Change Change
from from from from from from fromprevious previous previous previous previous previous previousyear year year year year year year
Period in % in % in % in % in % in % in %
1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 
Germany  
  
1997 102.5 + 2.7 104.4 + 4.0 105.8 + 6.0 105.2 + 4.2 101.9 + 0.8 100.9 + 0.3 89.6 −4.2
1998 106.0 + 3.4 109.5 + 4.9 110.6 + 4.5 113.2 + 7.6 108.3 + 6.3 100.6 −0.3 86.8 −3.1
1999 107.6 + 1.5 111.3 + 1.6 113.5 + 2.6 113.2 + 0.0 112.3 + 3.7 101.9 + 1.3 87.5 + 0.8
2000  p o 113.5 + 5.5 119.6 + 7.5 121.0 + 6.6 126.2 + 11.5 121.4 + 8.1 103.7 + 1.8 83.1 −5.0
  
1999         Dec. 104.7 + 4.4 109.7 + 4.5 105.7 + 9.9 125.7 −0.6 99.1 + 4.3 98.0 + 1.9 67.6 + 7.3
2000         Jan. 98.0 + 2.3 102.6 + 3.8 108.3 + 3.9 98.1 + 7.0 103.7 + 3.4 95.1 −1.8 59.3 −6.6
         Feb. 105.0 + 8.4 111.1 + 8.5 114.3 + 9.8 111.4 + 9.9 121.1 + 8.7 96.9 + 2.3 68.5 + 22.8         Mar.
2 118.8 + 4.7 125.9 + 6.8 127.7 + 6.6 132.2 + 10.8 133.7 + 7.6 106.6 −0.6 2 80.5 −8.2
         Apr. 2 110.8 + 4.1 116.4 + 6.7 118.3 + 5.2 120.3 + 10.2 121.2 + 7.5 101.6 + 3.6 2 84.9 −9.3
         May  3 2 113.9 + 9.5 119.3 + 11.6 123.1 + 11.8 121.7 + 14.7 124.3 + 13.7 102.5 + 4.6 2 90.9 −1.3
         June  3 2 114.9 + 2.4 121.9 + 4.9 122.7 + 4.4 130.9 + 7.8 121.9 + 3.0 104.4 + 2.5 2 88.4 −12.1
         July 2 114.2 + 5.5 119.9 + 7.9 122.9 + 7.0 124.9 + 10.7 118.2 + 15.3 104.3 + 2.2 2 90.0 −10.2
         Aug. 2 105.4 + 5.6 110.4 + 8.2 115.0 + 7.5 113.4 + 12.7 96.3 + 7.5 100.3 + 2.6 2 84.9 −7.2
         Sep. 2 122.1 + 4.9 129.4 + 7.2 127.7 + 4.3 143.1 + 14.3 132.3 + 6.7 108.6 + 1.8 2 92.7 −11.0
         Oct.  p o 121.3 + 4.5 127.3 + 6.1 128.4 + 5.8 132.6 + 9.8 132.9 + 4.6 111.8 + 1.1 95.4 −5.4
         Nov.  p o 122.8 + 5.2 128.8 + 6.3 127.8 + 4.7 138.1 + 11.4 137.2 + 6.8 111.0 + 0.5 91.7 −0.9
         Dec.  p o 114.9 + 9.7 122.4 + 11.6 115.8 + 9.6 147.2 + 17.1 114.0 + 15.0 101.1 + 3.2 69.4 + 2.7
Western Germany  
  
1997 102.2 + 2.7 103.8 + 3.8 105.2 + 5.7 104.9 + 4.1 101.3 + 0.5 99.4 −0.3 88.9 −3.9
1998 105.8 + 3.5 108.5 + 4.5 109.4 + 4.0 112.9 + 7.6 107.2 + 5.8 99.0 −0.4 87.4 −1.7
1999 106.9 + 1.0 109.8 + 1.2 111.6 + 2.0 112.3 −0.5 110.8 + 3.4 99.9 + 0.9 88.4 + 1.1
2000  p o 112.9 + 5.6 117.6 + 7.1 118.1 + 5.8 125.3 + 11.6 119.8 + 8.1 101.2 + 1.3 86.1 −2.6
  
1999         Dec. 104.2 + 3.8 107.9 + 3.8 103.8 + 9.1 124.4 −1.7 97.7 + 4.5 95.6 + 1.6 68.2 + 7.7
2000         Jan. 97.9 + 2.6 101.1 + 3.5 106.2 + 3.2 97.3 + 7.3 102.6 + 4.2 93.4 −2.2 60.9 −3.8
         Feb. 104.9 + 8.0 109.4 + 7.7 112.0 + 8.8 110.5 + 9.3 119.7 + 8.6 95.2 + 1.8 71.4 + 26.6         Mar.
2 118.8 + 4.9 124.3 + 6.5 125.1 + 5.7 132.0 + 11.6 132.1 + 7.6 104.3 −1.0 2 84.0 −5.8
         Apr. 2 110.2 + 4.2 114.4 + 6.2 115.6 + 4.4 119.1 + 9.7 119.5 + 7.3 99.1 + 3.1 2 89.0 −6.6
         May  3 2 113.2 + 9.6 117.3 + 11.3 120.1 + 10.8 121.0 + 14.9 122.8 + 13.5 99.7 + 4.0 2 94.8 + 1.1
         June  3 2 114.3 + 2.8 119.9 + 4.7 119.8 + 3.9 130.3 + 7.9 120.0 + 2.7 101.6 + 1.9 2 91.6 −9.7
         July 2 113.5 + 5.8 117.9 + 7.6 119.9 + 6.3 124.3 + 10.3 116.2 + 15.2 101.9 + 1.8 2 93.0 −7.9
         Aug. 2 104.4 + 5.8 108.1 + 7.7 111.9 + 6.3 112.2 + 13.2 95.3 + 7.6 97.7 + 1.5 2 86.6 −4.9
         Sep. 2 121.4 + 5.0 127.3 + 7.0 124.2 + 3.2 142.6 + 14.7 130.7 + 6.8 106.2 + 1.5 2 96.1 −9.0
         Oct.  p o 120.4 + 4.4 125.0 + 5.8 125.1 + 5.0 132.0 + 10.0 131.5 + 4.8 109.0 + 0.6 99.1 −3.3
         Nov.  p o 121.6 + 5.0 126.1 + 5.8 124.2 + 3.8 136.6 + 11.3 135.2 + 6.6 107.8 −0.2 94.3 + 1.1
         Dec.  p o 114.4 + 9.8 120.2 + 11.4 113.0 + 8.9 146.0 + 17.4 111.9 + 14.5 98.3 + 2.8 71.9 + 5.4
Eastern Germany  
  
1997 105.6 + 3.5 115.8 + 9.3 116.5 + 11.6 110.9 + 6.7 121.4 + 11.7 118.9 + 7.6 92.2 −4.8
1998 109.0 + 3.2 127.1 + 9.8 133.4 + 14.5 119.9 + 8.1 142.3 + 17.2 120.5 + 1.3 84.9 −7.9
1999 114.4 + 5.0 137.2 + 7.9 146.4 + 9.7 128.5 + 7.2 157.9 + 11.0 125.3 + 4.0 84.1 −0.9
2000  p o 120.6 + 5.4 155.3 + 13.2 172.8 + 18.0 141.3 + 10.0 173.9 + 10.1 134.7 + 7.5 72.2 −14.1
  
1999         Dec. 110.3 + 11.8 139.4 + 15.0 139.8 + 20.7 148.4 + 19.0 144.7 + 2.8 127.6 + 3.7 65.4 + 5.7
2000         Jan. 100.9 + 1.6 129.4 + 7.7 145.1 + 13.6 113.2 + 4.5 142.7 −10.0 116.1 + 3.8 53.2 −16.9
         Feb. 107.2 + 14.3 139.4 + 18.0 154.5 + 21.6 127.7 + 20.0 167.4 + 11.3 118.6 + 9.9 57.7 + 7.6         Mar.
2 118.8 + 1.6 154.0 + 9.1 172.4 + 17.7 134.1 −3.2 188.7 + 12.9 135.0 + 4.6 2 67.8 −17.8
         Apr. 2 118.0 + 5.3 152.4 + 16.1 166.8 + 17.4 142.8 + 20.9 175.1 + 15.3 132.1 + 8.2 2 70.4 −19.0
         May  3 2 121.8 + 9.9 155.8 + 19.0 177.3 + 26.4 134.2 + 11.6 172.6 + 20.4 136.4 + 11.1 2 76.8 −10.5
         June  3 2 122.2 + 0.7 157.7 + 9.9 175.0 + 12.0 141.8 + 8.2 182.1 + 9.9 138.1 + 7.1 2 77.0 −20.9
         July 2 122.8 + 4.1 155.6 + 13.4 176.4 + 15.4 135.4 + 15.5 182.7 + 18.2 133.5 + 4.7 2 79.4 −18.5
         Aug. 2 118.8 + 5.9 149.9 + 15.7 169.8 + 24.2 136.7 + 4.8 128.1 + 5.0 132.3 + 13.7 2 78.8 −15.4
         Sep. 2 129.3 + 2.9 166.7 + 11.0 188.9 + 17.8 151.9 + 6.0 182.9 + 3.5 138.3 + 3.7 2 80.5 −18.4
         Oct.  p o 130.4 + 4.2 166.2 + 11.4 188.6 + 16.3 143.1 + 7.4 177.9 + 1.5 147.9 + 7.7 82.2 −13.3
         Nov.  p o 136.2 + 7.2 175.7 + 13.4 191.6 + 16.2 166.4 + 13.1 202.3 + 9.6 151.5 + 8.8 82.4 −8.1
         Dec.  p o 120.5 + 9.2 160.7 + 15.3 167.1 + 19.5 167.9 + 13.1 184.7 + 27.6 136.1 + 6.7 60.7 −7.2
Source: Federal Statistical Office. —1Excluding electricity and gas supply by the Federal Statistical Office by way of estimates to the results of the
and excluding mining and quarrying. —2Provisional until the adjustment Quarterly Production Survey for the fourth quarter (manufacturing sector in
to the figures of the annual overall survey in construction. —3Figures in- Germany: + 1.2%). 
fluenced by the exceptional working-day situation. —oAdjusted in advance
61* IX. Economic conditions

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
 IX. Economic conditions
 
3. Orders received by the manufacturing sector *)  
  
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Manufacturing
 Durable and non-durable
Intermediate goods consumer goods
Total Domestic orders Foreign orders industries industries Capital goods industries
Change Change Change Change Change Change
from from from from from fromprevious previous previous previous previous previousyear year year year year year
Period 1995=100 in % 1995=100 in % 1995=100 in % 1995=100 in % 1995=100 in % 1995=100 in %
Germany  
  
1997 107.1 + 7.2 99.0 + 2.2 121.6 + 15.3 107.2 + 9.2 108.8 + 7.1 103.4 + 2.0
1998 110.9 + 3.5 102.9 + 3.9 125.4 + 3.1 108.6 + 1.3 116.0 + 6.6 107.0 + 3.51999 113.2 + 2.1 102.6 − 0.3 132.3 + 5.5 110.8 + 2.0 117.6 + 1.4 111.3 + 4.0
2000  
p 128.5 + 13.5 111.2 + 8.4 159.7 + 20.7 126.1 + 13.8 136.9 + 16.4 118.3 + 6.3
 
1999         Dec. 112.1 + 9.8 97.5 + 6.6 138.0 + 13.7 109.0 + 13.1 122.1 + 7.4 100.1 + 5.7
2000         Jan. 113.2 + 7.7 99.5 + 2.2 137.9 + 16.0 113.7 + 8.8 116.7 + 10.7 104.7 − 1.2
         Feb. 121.4 + 13.9 107.3 + 11.4 146.7 + 17.7 118.2 + 17.0 124.3 + 12.9 124.0 + 9.0         Mar. 137.5 + 15.6 118.2 + 8.0 172.5 + 26.8 132.4 + 14.7 145.6 + 21.8 135.1 + 6.1
         Apr. 126.6 + 16.1 111.0 + 12.5 154.9 + 21.6 125.4 + 17.4 134.0 + 19.6 115.6 + 6.3
         May 124.2 + 17.9 109.6 + 13.3 150.6 + 24.7 125.6 + 19.8 128.7 + 19.4 111.7 + 9.4         June 134.0 + 16.4 115.6 + 10.5 166.9 + 24.6 130.7 + 17.1 149.3 + 20.3 112.1 + 4.8
         July 130.3 + 14.8 113.5 + 9.2 160.6 + 23.0 128.6 + 13.5 139.2 + 19.8 117.1 + 7.8
         Aug. 120.8 + 10.9 106.5 + 7.3 146.6 + 16.1 120.4 + 15.0 124.7 + 9.1 114.0 + 3.6         Sep. 135.7 + 10.2 116.6 + 6.4 170.0 + 14.9 134.2 + 13.3 140.4 + 7.8 130.2 + 6.8
         Oct. 134.4 + 11.7 114.2 + 4.5 170.7 + 21.9 132.9 + 11.4 141.5 + 14.1 124.0 + 7.3
         Nov. 133.3 + 10.2 115.0 + 5.6 166.3 + 16.6 129.8 + 7.8 145.1 + 16.1 122.0 + 6.7         Dec.  
p 130.7 + 16.6 107.0 + 9.7 172.9 + 25.3 121.8 + 11.7 153.1 + 25.4 109.3 + 9.2
Western Germany  
  
1997 107.1 + 6.9 98.8 + 1.9 121.2 + 14.7 106.4 + 8.7 110.1 + 7.1 103.1 + 1.8
1998 110.2 + 2.9 102.4 + 3.6 123.5 + 1.9 107.2 + 0.8 116.4 + 5.7 106.0 + 2.81999 112.2 + 1.8 101.8 − 0.6 130.1 + 5.3 108.8 + 1.5 117.9 + 1.3 110.2 + 4.0
2000  
p 127.0 + 13.2 109.6 + 7.7 156.8 + 20.5 123.5 + 13.5 137.2 + 16.4 116.7 + 5.9
 
1999         Dec. 111.0 + 9.9 96.8 + 7.0 135.6 + 14.1 107.4 + 12.8 122.4 + 8.5 98.9 + 5.9
2000         Jan. 112.4 + 8.1 98.5 + 2.0 136.4 + 16.8 111.6 + 8.3 117.9 + 12.3 104.1 − 0.7
         Feb. 120.4 + 13.6 106.3 + 10.8 144.6 + 17.4 115.9 + 16.5 125.3 + 12.8 122.8 + 8.7         Mar. 136.1 + 15.1 117.0 + 7.3 168.7 + 26.0 129.9 + 14.2 145.8 + 21.7 133.5 + 5.4
         Apr. 125.0 + 15.5 108.8 + 11.2 152.4 + 21.0 123.0 + 17.0 133.4 + 18.4 113.7 + 5.7
         May 122.8 + 17.4 108.2 + 12.8 147.7 + 23.8 122.8 + 19.2 129.5 + 19.4 109.7 + 8.6         June 132.1 + 16.1 114.1 + 10.2 162.9 + 23.9 128.1 + 17.1 148.8 + 19.9 110.3 + 4.4
         July 128.6 + 14.3 111.6 + 8.6 157.7 + 22.1 125.7 + 13.0 139.6 + 19.4 115.1 + 7.0
         Aug. 120.0 + 11.3 105.3 + 6.7 145.0 + 17.4 117.6 + 15.4 126.1 + 9.6 113.8 + 3.7         Sep. 134.5 + 9.9 115.2 + 6.2 167.9 + 14.8 131.3 + 12.9 142.0 + 7.9 128.9 + 6.9
         Oct. 132.8 + 11.4 112.4 + 3.8 167.9 + 21.7 129.9 + 10.8 142.3 + 14.2 122.2 + 7.1
         Nov. 131.2 + 10.4 113.1 + 5.3 162.6 + 17.5 126.5 + 6.9 145.2 + 18.2 119.6 + 6.4         Dec.  
p 127.9 + 15.2 104.3 + 7.7 168.3 + 24.1 119.2 + 11.0 150.5 + 23.0 107.1 + 8.3
Eastern Germany  
  
1997 107.6 + 12.2 101.6 + 6.6 137.3 + 39.2 120.3 + 16.2 91.9 + 8.5 112.8 + 6.9
1998 124.1 + 15.3 109.7 + 8.0 196.3 + 43.0 132.9 + 10.5 112.0 + 21.9 132.4 + 17.41999 130.0 + 4.8 114.0 + 3.9 210.0 + 7.0 142.8 + 7.4 112.9 + 0.8 140.4 + 6.0
2000  
p 154.0 + 18.5 131.3 + 15.2 267.6 + 27.4 172.3 + 20.7 132.6 + 17.4 157.8 + 12.4
 
1999         Dec. 127.2 + 3.7 106.9 + 4.4 229.3 + 2.3 136.0 + 16.0 116.7 − 7.9 130.7 + 0.5
2000         Jan. 125.5 + 1.0 111.5 + 2.3 194.6 − 2.4 148.4 + 12.9 100.6 − 9.7 123.3 −12.2
         Feb. 137.2 + 20.1 118.8 + 16.4 229.6 + 31.5 157.2 + 24.2 110.0 + 15.9 154.7 + 15.9         Mar. 162.3 + 24.1 132.3 + 16.0 313.2 + 46.3 176.3 + 23.7 143.3 + 25.2 175.0 + 22.9
         Apr. 157.1 + 29.5 138.8 + 26.0 247.9 + 40.1 167.0 + 23.7 143.6 + 41.1 165.5 + 21.2
         May 149.1 + 26.0 127.8 + 19.9 255.9 + 45.3 175.4 + 30.4 117.3 + 20.9 158.9 + 22.8         June 164.1 + 20.1 134.9 + 13.7 311.4 + 37.3 173.8 + 18.2 155.8 + 26.6 156.3 + 9.0
         July 158.1 + 22.1 136.8 + 15.6 264.1 + 42.8 177.6 + 18.7 134.2 + 26.4 166.1 + 24.3
         Aug. 136.2 + 7.2 122.3 + 14.0 205.9 − 8.9 167.2 + 11.2 106.7 + 2.7 119.2 + 0.8
         Sep. 154.6 + 13.6 135.5 + 10.8 250.3 + 22.8 186.3 + 22.0 117.4 + 5.0 162.1 + 3.8
         Oct. 159.4 + 14.7 136.2 + 9.7 275.5 + 29.6 184.1 + 19.3 130.0 + 11.2 166.4 + 6.3
         Nov. 167.7 + 7.4 139.1 + 8.5 312.0 + 5.5 186.3 + 21.6 143.2 − 8.8 182.0 + 11.4
         Dec.  
p 176.2 + 38.5 141.5 + 32.4 350.4 + 52.8 167.7 + 23.3 188.7 + 61.7 164.6 + 25.9
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. —*Excluding manu- units; figures excluding value-added tax. — o Bundesbank calculation. 
facture of food products, beverages and tobacco; results for kinds of activity
62* IX. Economic conditions

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
 IX. Economic conditions
 
4. Orders received by construction *   
  
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Germany Western Germany Eastern Germany
Housing Public Housing Public Housing Public Industrial Industrial Industrial
con- construc- construc- con- construc- construc- con- construc- construc-
Total struction tion  1 tion Total struction tion  1 tion Total struction tion  1 tion
 Change Change Change
 from from from
 previous previous previous
 year year year
Period 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 in % 1995 = 100 in % 1995 = 100 in %
1996 92.1 −7.8 101.3 89.1 88.5 90.9 −9.0 97.6 90.9 86.2 94.8 −5.2 108.8 85.0 95.0
1997 84.4 −8.4 87.4 81.0 86.2 86.1 −5.3 87.7 85.5 85.7 80.4 −15.2 86.8 70.8 87.7
1998 84.0 −0.5 82.4 79.9 90.1 86.6 + 0.6 83.4 86.7 88.8 77.7 −3.4 80.4 64.6 93.8
1999 82.2 −2.1 78.2 80.2 87.6 87.3 + 0.8 84.1 88.7 88.1 70.0 −9.9 66.2 61.2 86.2
   
1999         Nov. 65.9 −11.3 63.9 67.6 65.5 69.7 −6.1 72.4 73.8 63.0 57.1 −23.4 46.6 53.5 72.5
         Dec. 71.7 −5.4 68.0 69.9 77.0 77.3 −1.7 77.9 76.5 77.7 58.6 −15.4 47.8 54.6 74.8
2000         Jan. 56.0 −8.5 56.9 60.1 50.3 60.5 −7.9 63.8 66.5 51.2 45.5 −10.1 42.7 45.9 47.6
         Feb. 62.1 −11.0 58.7 68.1 57.3 67.6 −9.6 65.3 76.2 59.3 48.9 −15.7 45.2 49.8 51.4
         Mar. 89.5 −2.3 86.1 87.7 94.3 96.3 −3.1 92.6 96.7 98.5 73.4 + 0.7 72.9 67.3 82.6
         Apr. 79.3 −7.4 73.7 74.6 89.4 85.7 −2.2 79.4 84.4 91.6 64.2 −20.6 61.9 52.4 83.4
         May 82.8 −7.5 70.7 82.3 92.8 90.1 −4.7 78.1 93.6 94.5 65.5 −15.6 55.6 56.6 88.0
         June 87.4 −11.3 77.3 82.0 101.9 91.3 −10.3 81.9 87.8 102.0 78.1 −14.0 67.8 68.8 101.6
         July 80.2 −12.2 68.3 79.4 90.5 87.2 −11.2 78.2 91.2 89.1 63.7 −15.1 48.0 52.8 94.6
         Aug. 73.3 −14.0 63.9 68.9 86.1 76.7 −15.1 71.3 75.1 82.3 65.3 −10.5 48.6 54.8 96.8
         Sep. 84.4 −9.5 66.6 88.4 93.4 92.7 −5.7 76.9 102.4 93.0 64.7 −20.5 45.5 56.9 94.8
         Oct. 73.3 −10.8 60.3 71.6 85.6 81.0 −10.1 73.1 80.6 87.1 55.1 −13.2 34.1 51.4 81.2
         Nov. 63.2 −4.1 51.0 68.1 66.6 68.5 −1.7 60.3 76.3 65.3 50.6 −11.4 32.0 49.4 70.5
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. —*Values exclusive gineering". —oBundesbank calculation. —1Including the railways and
of value-added tax. The figures refer to the economic classifications "Site pre- post office. paration" and "Building of complete constructions or parts thereof; civil en-
 
 
5. Retail turnover *   
    Germany
  
Retail trade, total of which: By enterprises ’ main product range:
Pharmaceutical
including excluding and medical
goods, cosmetic Clothing, Furniture retail sales of motor vehicles retail sales of motor vehicles
and motorcycles and of and motorcycles and Food, beverages, and toilet footwear and and lightingautomotive fuel of automotive fuel tobacco  
2 articles  2 leather goods  2 equipment  2 Motor vehicles  3 
 Change from  Change from  Change  Change  Change  Change  Change
from from from from from previous year in % previous year in %
previous previous previous previous previous
Period not not year year year year year price- price-
in % in % in % in % in % 1995 = 100 adjusted adjusted  1 1995 = 100 adjusted adjusted  1 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100
1997 100.9 −0.4 −0.9 99.0 −1.3 −1.8 98.6 −1.4 105.8 + 1.8 97.2 −2.0 95.8 −2.6 109.1 + 3.5
1998 102.7 + 1.8 + 1.6 100.1 + 1.1 + 1.1 99.9 + 1.3 111.9 + 5.8 96.1 −1.1 99.6 + 4.0 115.1 + 5.5
1999 103.9 + 1.2 + 0.8 100.9 + 0.8 + 0.5 100.8 + 0.9 120.0 + 7.2 96.2 + 0.1 97.4 −2.2 119.2 + 3.6
2000 105.1 + 1.2 −0.1 103.4 + 2.5 + 1.2 102.9 + 2.1 126.1 + 5.1 95.6 −0.6 96.7 −0.7 114.6 −3.9
 
1999         June 102.8 + 5.1 + 5.1 96.0 + 3.6 + 3.9 98.1 + 2.8 119.3 + 10.9 88.7 + 8.7 91.3 + 1.9 134.0 + 11.7
         July 105.5 + 0.2 + 0.0 100.7 −0.1 −0.3 103.3 + 1.4 122.6 + 5.1 97.8 + 2.8 92.0 −4.4 127.9 + 1.6
         Aug. 96.4 + 3.0 + 2.6 93.8 + 2.1 + 1.8 95.1 −0.2 113.7 + 10.0 84.7 + 0.8 84.6 + 1.3 108.7 + 7.9
         Sep. 99.2 −0.3 −1.0 96.2 −1.5 −2.1 95.8 + 0.8 118.0 + 7.4 88.2 −13.7 94.1 −1.9 113.9 + 4.5
         Oct. 106.3 + 0.7 −0.1 104.8 + 0.7 + 0.1 100.7 −1.4 119.5 + 2.7 113.6 + 4.0 104.3 −3.9 115.3 + 0.9
         Nov. 110.1 + 1.7 + 0.9 108.8 + 2.1 + 1.2 104.4 + 1.7 123.3 + 6.4 105.8 + 0.8 110.9 −1.1 119.3 + 0.8
         Dec. 126.0 + 1.4 + 0.5 129.1 + 2.0 + 1.1 122.4 + 1.1 140.5 + 1.6 123.3 + 0.8 124.5 −1.8 116.9 −1.0
2000         Jan. 91.3 −0.3 −1.2 91.3 −0.1 −0.9 91.3 −0.1 121.2 + 5.7 78.3 −10.7 83.6 −3.4 94.1 −1.7
         Feb. 96.8 + 8.6 + 7.1 94.7 + 8.2 + 6.7 94.7 + 4.2 119.6 + 7.4 79.0 + 19.0 97.3 + 9.8 108.5 + 9.7         Mar. 111.1 −2.7 −3.8 105.2 −2.2 −3.3 107.6 −0.1 126.0 −0.8 90.8 −11.8 105.3 −2.7 138.3 −5.1
         Apr. 105.4 + 1.3 + 0.8 102.4 + 4.1 + 3.5 103.8 + 2.5 118.3 + 2.2 103.8 + 7.2 93.2 −2.4 119.5 −7.9
         May 112.9 + 11.3 + 10.5 107.9 + 12.0 + 11.2 108.4 + 9.8 133.0 + 16.6 103.6 + 5.9 97.9 + 10.4 135.9 + 9.3         June 99.9 −2.8 −4.0 95.9 −0.1 −1.2 100.8 + 2.8 122.0 + 2.3 82.6 −6.9 84.4 −7.6 118.1 −11.9
         July 101.5 −3.8 −4.9 98.5 −2.2 −3.0 98.5 −4.6 124.3 + 1.4 89.5 −8.5 90.4 −1.7 115.9 −9.4
         Aug. 101.4 + 5.2 + 3.7 99.9 + 6.5 + 5.0 99.9 + 5.0 124.8 + 9.8 88.6 + 4.6 85.5 + 1.1 109.4 + 0.6         Sep. 102.1 + 2.9 + 0.8 101.5 + 5.5 + 3.3 98.9 + 3.2 123.4 + 4.6 99.6 + 12.9 93.1 −1.1 106.8 −6.2
         Oct. 105.5 −0.8 −2.4 105.0 + 0.2 −1.7 101.2 + 0.5 128.7 + 7.7 105.7 −7.0 101.3 −2.9 110.0 −4.6
         Nov. 111.0 + 0.8 −0.7 111.2 + 2.2 + 0.7 107.9 + 3.4 131.5 + 6.7 102.5 −3.1 110.8 −0.1 113.3 −5.0
         Dec. 122.1 −3.1 −4.3 126.8 −1.8 −2.9 121.3 −0.9 140.8 + 0.2 123.5 + 0.2 117.0 −6.0 105.1 −10.1
Source: Federal Statistical Office. —*Excluding value-added tax; figures 3 Including motor vehicle parts and accessories. 
from 1999 provisional. —1At 1995 prices. —2Retail sales in stores. —
63* IX. Economic conditions

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
 IX. Economic conditions
 
6. Labour market * 
  
 
Persons in
Employed  1,2 Employees  1 employment  3 Unemployed
Persons
Mining employed Personsand under under-manu- employ- goingfactur- Short- ment pro- Change vocational
Change from Change ing Con- time motion further from Unem-previous year from sector workers training previous ploy- schemes  
5 struction  4 
previous year, ment Vacancies,
Thou- Thou- Thou- year Thou- thou- rate  6 thou-
Period sands in % sands sands in % Thousands sands sands in % sands
Germany  
  
1998 37,539 + 0.9 + 344 33,560 + 0.8 7 6,400 1,159 115 385 8 343 4,279 −105 11.1 422
1999 37,942 + 1.1 + 403 34,003 + 1.3 6,370 1,111 119 430 358 4,099 −180 10.5 456
2000 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 86 316 352 3,889 −211 9.6 514
2000         Jan. 37,782 + 1.3 + 482 6,321 1,028 101 326 323 4,293 −162 11.0 438
         Feb. 37,833 + 1.4 + 520 33,953 + 1.6 6,322 1,006 121 319 332 4,277 −188 10.9 498
         Mar. 38,069 + 1.6 + 592 6,331 1,053 126 312 345 4,141 −148 10.6 536
         Apr. 38,281 + 1.9 + 726 6,333 1,063 107 306 350 3,986 −159 9 9.8 560
         May 38,431 + 2.1 + 806 34,471 + 2.1 6,343 1,072 97 310 363 3,788 −210 9.3 567
         June 38,550 + 1.8 + 668 6,361 1,070 81 314 356 3,724 −214 9.1 560
         July 38,593 + 1.4 + 533 6,400 1,065 66 320 332 3,804 −224 9.3 553
         Aug. 38,717 + 1.4 + 551 34,821 + 1.6 6,429 1,068 62 321 335 3,781 −243 9.3 544
         Sep. 39,002 + 1.5 + 581 6,432 1,064 66 320 368 3,685 −258 9.0 525
         Oct. 39,132 + 1.5 + 574 6,425 1,054 66 319 389 3,611 −272 8.9 491
         Nov. o 39,078 o + 1.4 o + 549 ... ... 6,423 1,041 70 307 388 3,645 −255 8.9 468
         Dec. ... ... ... ... ... 70 287 359 3,809 −238 9.3 454
2001         Jan. ... ... ... ... ... 92 258 356 4,093 −200 10.0 484
Western Germany  
  
1998 . . . . . 7 5,813 804 81 71 8 193 2,904 −117 9.4 342
1999 . . . . . 5,775 775 92 82 215 2,756 −149 8.8 386
2000 . . . . . ... ... 62 70 212 2,529 −226 7.8 452
2000         Jan. . . . . . 5,720 727 77 68 194 2,827 −198 9.0 388
         Feb. . . . . . 5,720 717 89 69 201 2,797 −226 8.9 439
         Mar. . . . . . 5,727 748 90 68 209 2,691 −206 8.6 467
         Apr. . . . . . 5,727 756 74 69 211 2,586 −214 9 7.9 489
         May . . . . . 5,735 762 68 70 219 2,459 −236 7.5 497
         June . . . . . 5,752 760 56 71 212 2,427 −227 7.4 491
         July . . . . . 5,787 755 45 72 198 2,466 −226 7.5 488
         Aug. . . . . . 5,809 759 42 72 202 2,444 −234 7.4 478
         Sep. . . . . . 5,811 757 47 71 221 2,383 −240 7.2 461
         Oct. . . . . . 5,802 752 48 71 235 2,343 −248 7.1 433
         Nov. . . . . . 5,798 744 52 70 236 2,360 −244 7.2 413
         Dec. . . . . . ... ... 53 66 219 2,454 −236 7.4 405
2001         Jan. . . . . . ... ... 69 64 215 2,622 −205 8.0 431
Eastern Germany  
  
1998 . . . . . 7 586 355 34 314 8 149 1,375 + 11 18.2 79
1999 . . . . . 595 336 27 348 143 1,344 − 31 17.6 70
2000 . . . . . ... ... 24 246 140 1,359 + 16 17.4 62
2000         Jan. . . . . . 602 301 24 258 129 1,467 + 37 19.1 51
         Feb. . . . . . 602 289 32 250 131 1,480 + 38 19.3 59         Mar. . . . . . 604 305 36 243 136 1,450 + 59 18.9 69
         Apr. . . . . . 606 307 33 237 138 1,401 + 55
9 17.8 71
         May . . . . . 607 311 29 239 144 1,329 + 26 16.9 70         June . . . . . 609 310 26 243 144 1,298 + 13 16.5 69
         July . . . . . 613 310 22 248 134 1,337 + 2 17.0 65
         Aug. . . . . . 620 309 20 249 133 1,337 − 9 17.0 65
         Sep. . . . . . 622 307 19 249 146 1,302 − 19 16.6 64
         Oct. . . . . . 622 302 18 248 154 1,268 − 24 16.1 59
         Nov. . . . . . 624 298 18 237 152 1,285 − 12 16.3 54
         Dec. . . . . . ... ... 17 221 140 1,355 − 2 17.2 50
2001         Jan. . . . . . ... ... 23 195 140 1,471 + 4 18.7 54
Source: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Labour Office. —*Monthly fig- tically recorded) structural adjustment measures (SAM). —6Relative to the
ures: levels at end of month; employed persons and employees: averages; total civilian labour force. —7From January 1998, figures favourably affec-
short-time workers: levels at mid-month; annual and quarterly figures: aver- ted by including, for the first time, enterprises which were identifie di nt h e
ages. —1Work-place concept. —2Annual figures, calculated by the Bundes- 1995 survey of craft enterprises and which are now required to report. —
bank; deviations from the official figures are due to rounding. —3In- 8Comparison with previous periods not possible because of the deletion of
cluding active proprietors. —4The figures refer to the economic classifica- payments towards on-the-job training, vocational assistance measures and
tions ”Site preparation ”and ”Building of complete constructions or parts methodological changes in the collection of statistics. —9From April 2000
thereof; civil engineering ”.—5Employees involved in job creation schemes calculated on the basis of new labour force figures. —oFirst preliminary esti-
and receiving productive grants towards labour costs (up to December 1997 mate. approved cases) and (from January 1998 approved, but from April 1998 statis-
64* IX. Economic conditions

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
 IX. Economic conditions
 
7. Prices
 Germany
  
Consumer price index for all households Indices of
foreign trade prices
By region By product group Index of
producer
Other prices of Index ofdurable Overall industrial Index of worldand non- Services con- products producer marketdurable excluding struction prices prices sold on the
Western Eastern consumer house House price domestic of farm of raw
Total Germany Germany Food goods  
1 rents  1 rents level  1 market  2 products Exports Imports materials  3 
Period 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1991 = 100
Index level  
  
1997 103.3 103.2 104.2 102.1 101.8 104.1 106.3 99.0 99.9 92.5 101.5 104.0 122.8
1998 104.3 104.1 105.3 103.0 101.9 106.1 108.0 98.8 99.5 87.1 101.4 100.7 97.01999 104.9 104.8 105.7 101.9 102.8 106.4 109.2 98.5 98.5 82.7 100.9 100.2 113.5
2000 106.9 106.9 107.5 101.5 106.0 108.0 110.6 99.2 101.8
p 88.5 104.4 111.4 172.2
 
1999         Mar. 104.4 104.3 105.3 103.0 101.6 106.2 108.9 97.7 84.7 100.3 98.0 93.9
         Apr. 104.8 104.6 105.6 103.4 102.8 105.4 109.0 98.3 83.5 100.4 98.7 104.2
         May 104.8 104.7 105.7 103.5 102.5 105.8 109.1 98.4 98.3 84.0 100.5 99.0 106.3         June 104.9 104.8 105.7 102.9 102.7 106.2 109.1 98.4 85.4 100.7 99.3 109.8
         July 105.4 105.3 106.1 101.9 103.1 107.8 109.3 98.7 84.4 100.9 100.2 118.1
         Aug. 105.3 105.3 105.9 100.8 103.2 107.8 109.3 98.5 98.8 83.9 101.0 100.7 121.4         Sep. 105.1 105.0 105.8 100.2 103.4 106.7 109.4 98.9 83.8 101.3 101.7 131.4
         Oct. 105.0 104.9 105.7 99.9 103.5 106.2 109.5 99.1 82.9 101.5 102.1 126.4
         Nov. 105.2 105.1 105.8 100.1 103.7 106.4 109.7 98.7 99.2 84.0 101.7 103.5 138.1         Dec. 105.5 105.5 106.0 100.4 104.0 107.0 109.7 99.4 84.8 102.1 105.2 145.2
2000         Jan. 105.8 105.7 106.4 101.3 104.4 106.9 110.0 99.8 83.7 102.4 106.0 146.5
         Feb. 106.2 106.1 106.9 102.0 104.6 107.6 110.2 98.9 100.0 86.4 102.8 107.8 157.1         Mar. 106.4 106.3 107.0 101.3 105.3 107.4 110.3 100.0 88.5 103.1 108.7 161.5
         Apr. 106.4 106.3 107.0 101.9 104.9 107.7 110.4 100.4 88.3 103.6 108.4 149.9
         May 106.3 106.2 107.0 102.2 105.0 107.0 110.5 99.2 101.0 89.0 104.3 110.6 172.1         June 106.9 106.8 107.5 102.2 105.8 107.9 110.6 101.3 90.4 104.3 110.7 170.2
         July 107.4 107.3 107.9 101.8 106.2 109.4 110.7 102.0 90.0 104.6 111.1 167.7
         Aug. 107.2 107.2 107.8 101.0 106.0 109.2 110.8 99.3 102.3 90.1 105.0 112.7 179.2         Sep. 107.7 107.6 108.0 100.7 107.7 108.3 110.9 103.2 89.5 105.6 115.3 197.6
         Oct. 107.5 107.4 107.8 100.6 107.5 107.7 111.0 103.7 91.2 105.9 115.8 198.2
         Nov. 107.7 107.7 108.3 101.1 107.6 108.1 111.0 99.5 103.9
p 92.1 105.9 116.4 201.1
         Dec. 107.8 107.7 108.3 101.8 107.5 108.4 111.1 103.6 p 90.7 105.5 113.8 165.3
2001         Jan. 108.3 108.2 109.1 103.5 107.2 109.8 111.4 ... ... ... ... 158.8
Change from previous year in %  
  
1997 + 1.9 + 1.9 + 2.3 + 1.2 + 1.3 + 2.5 + 2.8 − 0.8 + 1.1 + 1.5 + 1.5 + 3.6 + 13.2
1998 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 1.1 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 1.9 + 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 5.8 − 0.1 − 3.2 −21.0
1999 + 0.6 + 0.7 + 0.4 − 1.1 + 0.9 + 0.3 + 1.1 − 0.3 − 1.0 − 5.1 − 0.5 − 0.5 + 17.0
2000 + 1.9 + 2.0 + 1.7 − 0.4 + 3.1 + 1.5 + 1.3 + 0.7 + 3.4 p + 7.0 + 3.5 + 11.2 + 51.7
 
1999         Mar. + 0.4 + 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.0 −0.1 + 0.6 + 1.2 − 2.3 − 8.6 − 1.7 − 4.9 − 9.5
         Apr. + 0.7 + 0.7 + 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.9 + 0.3 + 1.1 − 1.7 − 8.1 − 1.6 − 3.9 − 1.0
         May + 0.4 + 0.5 + 0.3 − 0.8 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 1.1 − 0.7 − 1.7 − 5.4 − 1.3 − 3.0 + 4.4
         June + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.2 − 1.5 + 0.8 + 0.0 + 1.0 − 1.5 − 4.4 − 1.0 − 1.8 + 11.8
         July + 0.6 + 0.7 + 0.4 − 1.6 + 0.9 + 0.6 + 1.1 − 1.0 − 4.3 − 0.7 − 0.4 + 21.6
         Aug. + 0.7 + 0.8 + 0.3 − 1.7 + 1.4 + 0.2 + 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.7 − 3.2 − 0.4 + 0.8 + 28.3
         Sep. + 0.7 + 0.8 + 0.4 − 1.7 + 1.4 + 0.2 + 1.0 − 0.5 − 2.3 + 0.2 + 2.7 + 40.7
         Oct. + 0.8 + 0.9 + 0.5 − 1.5 + 1.6 + 0.1 + 1.1 + 0.2 − 1.5 + 0.8 + 4.2 + 44.5
         Nov. + 1.0 + 1.0 + 0.5 − 1.6 + 1.7 + 0.5 + 1.3 + 0.0 + 0.7 + 1.6 + 1.1 + 5.9 + 60.2
         Dec. + 1.2 + 1.3 + 0.7 − 1.7 + 2.1 + 0.8 + 1.2 + 1.1 − 1.6 + 1.7 + 8.2 + 81.3
2000         Jan. + 1.6 + 1.7 + 1.3 − 1.7 + 2.8 + 1.6 + 1.2 + 2.0 + 0.2 + 2.3 + 9.2 + 76.1
         Feb. + 1.8 + 1.9 + 1.5 − 1.1 + 3.2 + 1.3 + 1.3 + 0.4 + 2.4 + 2.6 + 2.6 + 10.9 + 87.7
         Mar. + 1.9 + 1.9 + 1.6 − 1.7 + 3.6 + 1.1 + 1.3 + 2.4 + 4.5 + 2.8 + 10.9 + 72.0
         Apr. + 1.5 + 1.6 + 1.3 − 1.5 + 2.0 + 2.2 + 1.3 + 2.1 + 5.7 + 3.2 + 9.8 + 43.9
         May + 1.4 + 1.4 + 1.2 − 1.3 + 2.4 + 1.1 + 1.3 + 0.8 + 2.7 + 6.0 + 3.8 + 11.7 + 61.9
         June + 1.9 + 1.9 + 1.7 − 0.7 + 3.0 + 1.6 + 1.4 + 2.9 + 5.9 + 3.6 + 11.5 + 55.0
         July + 1.9 + 1.9 + 1.7 − 0.1 + 3.0 + 1.5 + 1.3 + 3.3 + 6.6 + 3.7 + 10.9 + 42.0
         Aug. + 1.8 + 1.8 + 1.8 + 0.2 + 2.7 + 1.3 + 1.4 + 0.8 + 3.5 + 7.4 + 4.0 + 11.9 + 47.6         Sep. + 2.5 + 2.5 + 2.1 + 0.5 + 4.2 + 1.5 + 1.4 + 4.3 + 6.8 + 4.2 + 13.4 + 50.4
         Oct. + 2.4 + 2.4 + 2.0 + 0.7 + 3.9 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 4.6 + 10.0 + 4.3 + 13.4 + 56.8
         Nov. + 2.4 + 2.5 + 2.4 + 1.0 + 3.8 + 1.6 + 1.2 + 0.8 + 4.7
p + 9.6 + 4.1 + 12.5 + 45.6
         Dec. + 2.2 + 2.1 + 2.2 + 1.4 + 3.4 + 1.3 + 1.3 + 4.2 p + 7.0 + 3.3 + 8.2 + 13.8
2001         Jan. + 2.4 + 2.4 + 2.5 + 2.2 + 2.7 + 2.7 + 1.3 ... ... ... ... + 8.4
Source: Federal Statistical Office; for index of world market prices: HWWA In- by the Federal Statistical Office. —2Excluding value-added tax. —3HWWA
stitute. —1Calculated by the Bundesbank on the basis of figures provided index of raw material prices, on a Deutsche Mark basis. 
65* IX. Economic conditions

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
IX. Economic conditions
  
8. Households ’ income *
Germany
    
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries  1 salaries  2 Saving  6 ratio  7 benefits received  3 "Mass income"  4 Disposable income  5 
Change Change Change Change Change Change
from from from from from fromprevious previous previous previous previous previous
Period year in % year in % year in % year in % year in % year in % % DM billion DM billion DM billion DM billion DM billion DM billion
1991 1,355.5 . 941.6 . 427.6 . 1,369.2 . 1,917.4 . 250.1 . 13.0
1992 1,467.3 8.2 1,003.1 6.5 475.4 11.2 1,478.5 8.0 2,053.3 7.1 265.4 6.1 12.91993 1,505.9 2.6 1,032.9 3.0 512.8 7.9 1,545.7 4.5 2,122.1 3.4 263.3 −0.8 12.4
1994 1,528.1 1.5 1,029.5 −0.3 531.3 3.6 1,560.7 1.0 2,180.7 2.8 253.4 −3.7 11.6
1995 1,577.1 3.2 1,038.0 0.8 555.6 4.6 1,593.6 2.1 2,256.0 3.5 252.1 −0.5 11.2
1996 1,594.0 1.1 1,032.7 −0.5 597.7 7.6 1,630.4 2.3 2,307.2 2.3 249.7 −1.0 10.8
1997 1,590.5 −0.2 1,015.1 −1.7 611.6 2.3 1,626.7 −0.2 2,357.6 2.2 245.3 −1.7 10.4
1998 1,620.4 1.9 1,034.9 2.0 623.4 1.9 1,658.4 1.9 2,424.3 2.8 246.4 0.4 10.21999 1,661.3 2.5 1,062.0 2.6 643.9 3.3 1,705.9 2.9 2,488.4 2.6 247.3 0.3 9.9
1999         3rd qtr 415.6 2.6 273.8 2.7 160.4 3.0 434.2 2.8 611.3 2.5 52.1 1.0 8.5
         4th qtr 469.3 2.3 294.8 3.0 163.3 4.6 458.1 3.6 647.1 3.9 57.3 13.3 8.9
2000         1st qtr 392.1 3.8 253.9 4.6 166.4 3.1 420.4 4.0 637.1 3.5 84.9 6.4 13.3
         2nd qtr 410.5 3.0 259.5 3.5 163.8 3.2 423.3 3.4 634.9 3.3 57.8 −0.5 9.1
         3rd qtr 430.2 3.5 285.4 4.2 164.4 2.5 449.8 3.6 629.5 3.0 51.7 −0.6 8.2
Euro billion
1999 849.4 . 543.0 . 329.2 . 872.2 . 1,272.3 . 126.4 . .
1999         3rd qtr 212.5 . 140.0 . 82.0 . 222.0 . 312.5 . 26.6 . .
         4th qtr 239.9 . 150.7 . 83.5 . 234.2 . 330.8 . 29.3 . .
2000         1st qtr 200.5 . 129.8 . 85.1 . 214.9 . 325.7 . 43.4 . .
         2nd qtr 209.9 . 132.7 . 83.8 . 216.4 . 324.6 . 29.6 . .         3rd qtr 219.9 . 145.9 . 84.1 . 230.0 . 321.9 . 26.4 . .
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in November 2000. — charges. —4Net wages and salaries plus monetary social benefits
*Households including non-profit institutions which serve households. — received. —5"Mass income" plus operating surplus, self-employed persons ’
1Residence concept. —2After deducting the wage tax payable on gross income, property income (net), other current transfers received, income of
wages and salaries and employees ’contributions to the social security non-profit organisations which serve households, less taxes (excluding wage
funds. —3Cash benefits from the social security funds, central, regional tax and consumption-related taxes) and other current transfers paid. Includ-
and local authorities and foreign countries, pension payments (net), social ing the increase in claims on company pension funds. —6Including the
security benefits from private insurance schemes, less social security increase in claims on company pension funds. —7Saving as a percentage of
contributions on social benefits, consumption-related taxes and public disposable income. 
  
  
9. Pay rates and actual earnings
Germany
    
Overall economy Producing sector (including construction)
Negotiated wage and salary level  1 Wages and salaries Negotiated wage and salary level  1 Wages and salaries
per employee per employee
on an hourly basis on a monthly basis on an hourly basis on a monthly basis (work-place concept)  2 (work-place concept)  3 
% from % from % from % from % from % from
previous previous previous previous previous previous
Period 1995=100 year 1995=100 year 1995=100 year 1995=100 year 1995=100 year 1995=100 year
1991 76.7 . 78.6 . 82.4 . 73.4 . 76.9 . 77.6 .
1992 85.8 11.9 87.3 11.0 91.0 10.4 82.9 12.9 85.9 11.7 88.4 13.91993 92.2 7.5 92.9 6.5 95.0 4.4 90.6 9.3 92.0 7.1 92.3 4.41994 95.3 3.4 95.6 2.9 96.9 2.0 94.3 4.1 94.8 3.0 96.1 4.1
1995 100.0 4.9 100.0 4.6 100.0 3.2 100.0 6.1 100.0 5.5 100.0 4.1
1996 102.6 2.6 102.4 2.4 101.4 1.4 103.8 3.8 102.9 2.9 102.9 2.91997 104.1 1.5 103.9 1.5 101.7 0.3 105.8 1.9 104.6 1.7 104.7 1.71998 106.2 1.9 105.8 1.8 102.7 1.0 107.7 1.8 106.4 1.7 106.4 1.61999 109.2 2.9 108.7 2.7 104.0 1.2 111.0 3.0 109.5 2.9 108.3 1.8
2000 111.3 2.0 110.8 1.9 . . 113.1 2.0 111.6 1.9 . .
1999         3rd qtr 112.8 3.1 112.2 3.0 103.3 1.2 118.6 3.2 117.0 3.1 104.5 1.9
         4th qtr 123.4 2.4 122.7 2.3 115.6 1.0 122.5 2.1 120.8 1.9 117.7 1.1
2000         1st qtr 101.6 1.7 101.0 1.6 98.2 2.2 102.5 1.5 101.0 1.3 104.3 3.4
         2nd qtr 102.9 2.1 102.4 2.1 101.4 0.8 103.8 2.0 102.4 2.0 112.9 2.8         3rd qtr 115.1 2.0 114.5 2.0 105.3 1.9 121.1 2.1 119.4 2.1 107.4 2.8         4th qtr 125.8 2.0 125.2 2.0 . . 125.2 2.2 123.4 2.2 . .
2000         June 103.0 2.1 102.4 2.1 . . 103.7 2.0 102.3 2.0 116.5 2.4
         July 138.8 1.9 138.1 1.9 . . 155.6 2.3 153.5 2.3 108.5 2.3
         Aug. 103.1 2.0 102.6 2.0 . . 103.8 2.0 102.4 2.0 107.8 4.0         Sep. 103.3 2.1 102.7 2.1 . . 103.9 2.0 102.5 2.0 105.8 2.0
         Oct. 103.3 2.1 102.8 2.1 . . 103.9 2.0 102.5 2.0 108.8 3.3
         Nov. 170.7 1.9 169.8 1.9 . . 167.3 2.3 165.0 2.3 140.0 2.1         Dec. 103.5 2.2 102.9 2.2 . . 104.2 2.3 102.8 2.3 . .
1Current data are normally revised upwards on account of additional Calculated by the Bundesbank on the basis of data from the Federal
reports. —2Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in Novem- Statistical Office, using the old and new classifications of the economic
ber 2000. —3Producing sector, excluding electricity, gas, steam and hot sectors. 
water supply, and excluding installation and building completion work.
66*IX. Economic conditions

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the European monetary union *
  
Until the end of 1998 ECU million, from 1999 euro million
2000
Position 1998 1999 1st qtr 2nd qtr 3rd qtr Sep. Oct. Nov.
Current account + 31,076 −5,785 −7,864 −6,605 −6,114 + 72 − 128 −2,876 A.
1. Foreign trade
Exports (f.o.b.) incl. supplementary items 779,244 814,487 221,163 238,998 244,600 85,160 92,883 91,213Imports (f.o.b.) incl. supplementary items 669,950 731,052 211,887 224,338 226,747 79,439 84,689 86,581
Balance + 109,295 + 83,429 + 9,276 + 14,660 + 17,853 + 5,721 + 8,194 + 4,632
2. Services
Receipts 229,832 241,472 58,519 66,831 70,721 22,584 22,993 22,518Expenditure 231,854 253,257 63,842 68,270 73,175 24,470 24,162 22,756
Balance −2,023 −11,782 −5,323 −1,439 −2,454 −1,886 −1,169 − 238
3. Factor income (balance) −28,832 −32,390 −6,275 −6,311 −7,085 − 873 −1,177 −2,242
4. Current transfers
Transfer payments from non-residents 62,678 66,448 25,188 14,928 11,942 4,424 3,537 4,260Transfer payments to non-residents 110,039 111,487 30,730 28,443 26,370 7,314 9,513 9,288
Balance −47,360 −45,042 −5,539 −13,515 −14,431 −2,891 −5,976 −5,028
Balance of capital transfers + 12,391 + 13,520 + 2,840 + 2,354 + 1,617 + 900 + 94 + 875B.
Financial account (net capital exports: −) 
1 −61,237 + 19,078 + 47,760 −2,928 −14,006 −2,543 −6,796 −8,977 C.
1. Direct investment −83,210 −120,562 + 147,995 −18,152 −94,269 −28,641 −15,676 −9,543
Investment outside the euro area −174,969 −286,808 −63,301 −71,862 −117,931 −44,075 −24,835 −25,876
Foreign investment in the euro area + 91,761 + 166,243 + 211,296 + 53,710 + 23,662 + 15,434 + 9,159 + 16,333
2. Investment in securities −99,695 −41,746 −192,617 + 51,858 + 3,484 + 2,798 −1,663 −3,921
Investment outside the euro area −327,579 −309,565 −153,859 −85,172 −91,785 −30,950 −26,474 −31,776
Equities −105,492 −155,444 −116,892 −54,302 −56,053 −9,486 −15,553 −19,841
Bonds and notes −203,843 −153,605 −38,596 −24,607 −30,821 −21,025 −10,231 −8,948
Money market paper −18,246 − 516 + 1,629 −6,263 −4,911 − 439 − 690 −2,987
Foreign investment in the euro area + 227,884 + 267,819 −38,758 + 137,030 + 95,269 + 33,748 + 24,811 + 27,855
Equities + 105,862 + 106,002 −105,724 + 52,432 + 29,676 + 5,821 + 8,900 + 6,411
Bonds and notes + 108,290 + 108,997 + 46,812 + 50,701 + 73,646 + 30,393 + 19,457 + 30,548Money market paper + 13,732 + 52,823 + 20,154 + 33,897 −8,053 −2,466 −3,546 −9,104
3. Financial derivatives −7,474 + 8,072 + 2,481 + 4,800 + 438 + 1,777 −2,235 −4,242
4. Credit transactions and other
investment (balance) + 120,900 + 163,086 + 91,347 −45,271 + 71,863 + 17,778 + 11,789 + 929
Eurosystem + 2,717 + 4,596 −5,113 + 3,063 −1,738 + 1,653 − 248 + 711
Public authorities −8,601 −9,696 −8,743 + 720 −2,534 −6,723 + 10,109 −2,250
Credit institutions + 169,878 + 177,852 + 133,161 −41,800 + 58,078 + 26,787 + 4,234 + 1,970
long-term + 2,919 + 7,996 + 8,863 + 2,693 − 682 + 475 + 3,169 + 380
short-term + 166,958 + 169,850 + 124,293 −44,496 + 58,763 + 26,313 + 1,065 + 1,590
Enterprises and individuals −43,094 −9,669 −27,958 −7,251 + 18,054 −3,940 −2,306 + 498
5. Change in the monetary reserves of
    the eurosystem (Increase: −) + 8,241 + 10,231 −1,446 + 3,837 + 4,475 + 3,744 + 989 + 7,800
Balance of unclassifiable transactions  
1 + 17,769 −26,816 −42,736 + 7,182 + 18,503 + 1,571 + 6,830 + 10,978 D.
*Source: European Central Bank. —1Series for which data from January   
1999 are not closely comparable with earlier observations.  
67*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(Balances)
 
 
Current account Memo item:
Change in Capital trans-
the Bundes- fers and pur-
Change in bank ’s net chases / sales
Supple- external of intangible the monetary
Balance of mentary non- reserves at Balance of assets aton current Foreign trade Factor Current produced Financial transaction transaction unclassifiable
Period account trade  
1  2 items  3  4 Services  5 income transfers assets  6 account  6 values  7 values  7 transactions
DM million
1988 + 92,585 + 128,045 −2,791 −16,365 + 16,630 −32,933 −2,029 −122,721 + 27,662 + 4,503 + 34,676
1989 + 107,346 + 134,576 −4,107 −15,210 + 26,872 −34,784 −2,064 −110,286 −5,405 + 10,409 + 18,997
1990  o + 79,475 + 105,382 −3,833 −19,664 + 32,859 −35,269 −4,975 −89,497 −11,611 + 26,608 −10,976
1991 −30,416 + 21,899 −2,804 −24,842 + 33,144 −57,812 −4,565 + 12,614 + 9,605 + 12,762 − 319
1992 −22,924 + 33,656 −1,426 −37,894 + 33,962 −51,222 −1,963 + 69,792 −52,888 + 7,983 −68,745
1993  8 −16,155 + 60,304 −3,038 −45,080 + 27,373 −55,714 −1,915 + 21,442 + 22,795 −26,167 + 35,766
1994  8 −38,805 + 71,762 −1,104 −54,374 + 4,852 −59,940 −2,637 + 57,871 + 2,846 −19,276 −12,242
1995  8 −29,671 + 85,303 −4,722 −54,720 + 178 −55,710 −3,845 + 63,647 −10,355 −19,776 −17,754
1996  8 −11,959 + 98,538 −5,264 −55,330 + 1,391 −51,294 −3,283 + 23,613 + 1,882 −10,253 + 1,610
1997  8 − 4,846 + 116,467 −6,160 −59,942 − 2,488 −52,722 + 52 − 1,164 + 6,640 − 681 + 8,468
1998  8 − 8,019 + 126,970 −2,554 −67,568 −11,569 −53,298 + 1,289 + 17,254 −7,128 − 3,397 −8,231
1999  8 −35,908 + 127,542 −10,015 −79,767 −23,353 −50,314 − 252 −57,091 + 24,517 + 68,734 −72,364
2000  8 −57,278 + 109,020 −8,969 −87,216 −16,851 −53,262 + 30,862 −33,583 + 11,429 + 48,570 + 94,329
2000         1st qtr 8r − 4,588 + 30,807 −2,109 −19,137 − 3,603 −10,545 + 313 + 56,295 −1,469 −50,551 + 62,618
         2nd qtr 8r − 7,430 + 30,427 −1,853 −23,641 + 417 −12,779 + 19 + 34,971 + 4,671 −32,231 −45,858
         3rd qtr 8r −23,207 + 23,863 −2,144 −24,328 − 6,651 −13,946 + 31,210 −63,362 + 4,214 + 51,145 + 44,051
         4th qtr 8 −22,053 + 23,924 −2,863 −20,109 − 7,014 −15,992 − 680 −61,487 + 4,013 + 80,207 + 33,518
2000         Apr.  8r − 2,767 + 9,962 − 641 − 7,222 + 104 − 4,970 + 379 − 4,206 + 2,648 + 3,947 −18,192
         May  8r − 5,648 + 8,077 − 775 − 8,064 − 1,576 − 3,310 − 44 + 38,649 + 335 −33,293 + 5,196
         June  8r + 985 + 12,387 − 437 − 8,355 + 1,888 − 4,498 − 316 + 528 + 1,688 − 2,886 −32,862
         July  8r − 5,920 + 10,971 − 685 − 6,328 − 4,131 − 5,747 + 205 − 4,464 + 2,308 + 7,872 + 46,157
         Aug.  8r −11,315 + 5,146 −1,131 − 8,503 − 1,559 − 5,268 + 15,187 −25,787 + 675 + 21,240 + 22,996
         Sep.  8r − 5,972 + 7,746 − 328 − 9,497 − 961 − 2,932 + 15,818 −33,111 + 1,232 + 22,033 −25,102
         Oct.  8r − 1,876 + 12,965 −1,472 − 8,415 + 913 − 5,869 − 245 −15,509 + 1,053 + 16,577 + 38,316
         Nov.  8 − 4,871 + 8,854 − 383 − 6,099 − 1,841 − 5,401 − 279 −21,364 + 912 + 25,603 + 9,808
         Dec.  8p −15,306 + 2,105 −1,008 − 5,595 − 6,086 − 4,723 − 156 −24,614 + 2,049 + 38,027 −14,606
 Euro million
1999  8 −18,359 + 65,211 −5,121 −40,784 −11,940 −25,725 − 129 −29,190 + 12,535 + 35,143 −36,999
2000  8 −29,286 + 55,741 −4,586 −44,593 − 8,616 −27,233 + 15,780 −17,171 + 5,844 + 24,833 + 48,230
1999         1st qtr 8 − 4,914 + 15,319 −1,884 − 9,561 − 3,412 − 5,376 + 217 −45,038 + 13,336 + 36,399 −16,194
         2nd qtr 8 + 724 + 15,694 −1,059 − 9,405 + 630 − 5,137 − 56 + 12,395 − 295 −12,768 + 7,270
         3rd qtr 8 − 9,180 + 15,673 −1,237 −12,089 − 3,899 − 7,626 − 847 −2,380 − 415 + 12,822 −14,722
         4th qtr 8 − 4,990 + 18,524 − 940 − 9,729 − 5,259 − 7,586 + 557 + 5,833 − 90 − 1,309 −13,354
2000         1st qtr 8r − 2,346 + 15,751 −1,078 − 9,785 − 1,842 − 5,392 + 160 + 28,783 − 751 −25,846 + 32,016
         2nd qtr 8r − 3,799 + 15,557 − 947 −12,088 + 213 − 6,534 + 10 + 17,880 + 2,388 −16,480 −23,447
         3rd qtr 8r −11,865 + 12,201 −1,096 −12,439 − 3,401 − 7,130 + 15,957 −32,397 + 2,155 + 26,150 + 22,523
         4th qtr 8 −11,276 + 12,232 −1,464 −10,281 − 3,586 − 8,177 − 347 −31,438 + 2,052 + 41,009 + 17,137
1999         Jan.  8 − 6,161 + 4,170 −1,620 − 3,776 − 3,541 − 1,394 + 490 −31,183 + 12,445 + 24,410 −13,841
         Feb.  8 − 222 + 5,521 − 240 − 2,276 − 650 − 2,578 − 183 + 9,188 + 996 − 9,778 + 1,858
         Mar.  8 + 1,469 + 5,628 − 24 − 3,510 + 779 − 1,404 − 90 −23,042 − 105 + 21,768 −4,211
         Apr.  8 + 2,405 + 5,632 − 386 − 3,207 + 2,155 − 1,789 − 75 + 6,434 − 125 − 8,638 − 139
         May  8 − 4,515 + 3,249 − 465 − 3,284 − 2,439 − 1,576 + 50 + 3,399 − 116 + 1,182 + 8,332
         June  8 + 2,834 + 6,813 − 207 − 2,914 + 915 − 1,773 − 30 + 2,562 − 54 − 5,312 − 923
         July  8 − 2,043 + 7,103 − 293 − 3,778 − 2,722 − 2,352 − 550 −3,334 + 146 + 5,781 + 13,576
         Aug.  8 − 4,570 + 3,025 − 867 − 4,112 + 134 − 2,749 − 180 + 9,674 − 429 − 4,496 −9,805
         Sep.  8 − 2,567 + 5,545 − 77 − 4,200 − 1,311 − 2,525 − 116 −8,720 − 133 + 11,537 −18,494
         Oct.  8 − 1,811 + 5,637 − 198 − 2,910 − 1,878 − 2,462 + 152 + 3,784 + 115 − 2,241 + 15,008
         Nov.  8 − 150 + 7,805 − 322 − 3,744 − 1,227 − 2,663 + 160 −9,241 − 354 + 9,585 −19,909
         Dec.  8 − 3,029 + 5,082 − 420 − 3,075 − 2,154 − 2,462 + 245 + 11,289 + 149 − 8,653 −8,452
2000         Jan.  8r − 7,654 + 2,945 − 610 − 4,011 − 4,327 − 1,651 + 172 + 14,546 − 42 − 7,023 + 26,184
         Feb.  8r + 1,054 + 6,935 − 192 − 3,067 − 625 − 1,996 − 146 −6,545 − 438 + 6,075 −1,934
         Mar.  8r + 4,254 + 5,872 − 277 − 2,706 + 3,110 − 1,744 + 134 + 20,781 − 271 −24,898 + 7,766
         Apr.  8r − 1,415 + 5,094 − 328 − 3,692 + 53 − 2,541 + 194 −2,150 + 1,354 + 2,018 −9,302
         May  8r − 2,888 + 4,130 − 396 − 4,123 − 806 − 1,692 − 22 + 19,761 + 171 −17,022 + 2,657
         June  8r + 504 + 6,334 − 223 − 4,272 + 965 − 2,300 − 161 + 270 + 863 − 1,475 −16,802
         July  8r − 3,027 + 5,609 − 350 − 3,235 − 2,112 − 2,938 + 105 −2,283 + 1,180 + 4,025 + 23,600
         Aug.  8r − 5,785 + 2,631 − 578 − 4,348 − 797 − 2,693 + 7,765 −13,185 + 345 + 10,860 + 11,758
         Sep.  8r − 3,053 + 3,960 − 167 − 4,856 − 491 − 1,499 + 8,088 −16,930 + 630 + 11,265 −12,834
         Oct.  8r − 959 + 6,629 − 752 − 4,302 + 467 − 3,001 − 125 −7,929 + 538 + 8,476 + 19,591
         Nov.  8 − 2,490 + 4,527 − 196 − 3,118 − 942 − 2,761 − 143 −10,923 + 466 + 13,090 + 5,015
         Dec.  8p − 7,826 + 1,076 − 515 − 2,861 − 3,112 − 2,415 − 80 −12,585 + 1,047 + 19,443 −7,468
oFrom July 1990 including the external transactions of the former GDR. — warehouse transactions for account of residents and deduction of goods
1Special trade according to the official foreign trade statistics: imports c.i.f., returned. —4See footnote 2. —5Excluding the expenditure on freight and
exports f.o.b. —2From January 1993 including additional estimates for insurance included in the c.i.f. import value. —6Capital exports: −.—
external transactions which do not have to be reported and which are 7Increase: -. —8Figures subject to significant uncertainty owing to changes
included up to December 1992 in Supplementary trade items. —3Mainly in the method of data collection in foreign trade. 
68*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
by group of countries and country *
 
 Until the end of 1998 DM million, from 1999 euro million
2000 1  r 
Group of countries / Country 1997 1998 1999 Jan. / Nov. August September October November December  p 
All countries  2 Exports 888,616 955,170 510,008 547,030 47,149 48,914 56,897 56,782 49,889
Imports 772,149 828,200 444,797 492,365 44,518 44,954 50,268 52,256 48,813Balance + 116,467 + 126,970 + 65,211 + 54,665 + 2,631 + 3,960 + 6,629 + 4,527 + 1,076
I. Exports 667,038 728,539 395,748 422,356 34,993 37,215 43,593 43,516 ...Industrialised
Imports 585,621 628,089 332,891 361,049 31,915 31,994 36,491 38,187 ... countries
Balance + 81,417 + 100,450 + 62,857 + 61,307 + 3,078 + 5,220 + 7,102 + 5,329 ...
Exports 493,554 539,793 293,377 310,153 24,933 27,236 31,861 32,043 ... 1. EU member countries
Imports 424,430 452,037 239,652 256,755 22,723 22,634 26,164 27,162 ...Balance + 69,124 + 87,757 + 53,725 + 53,399 + 2,210 + 4,601 + 5,697 + 4,880 ...
of  which
Exports 375,758 413,055 225,679 239,093 18,834 21,011 24,673 24,689 ... EMU member
Imports 337,439 361,921 191,390 203,064 18,027 17,658 20,748 21,236 ... countries
Balance + 38,319 + 51,134 + 34,289 + 36,029 + 807 + 3,353 + 3,925 + 3,453 ...
of which
Austria Exports 46,680 51,760 28,295 29,095 2,443 2,643 3,123 2,982 ...
Imports 29,082 33,078 18,288 19,006 1,583 1,708 1,950 1,945 ...Balance + 17,598 + 18,683 + 10,007 + 10,088 + 861 + 934 + 1,174 + 1,038 ...
Belgium and Exports 51,666 54,288 28,821 29,920 2,497 2,595 2,883 3,019 ...
Luxemburg Imports 47,421 46,437 22,880 25,302 2,169 2,183 2,536 2,685 ...
Balance + 4,245 + 7,851 + 5,942 + 4,619 + 328 + 412 + 347 + 333 ...
France Exports 94,420 105,901 58,578 62,806 4,867 5,514 6,647 6,762 ...
Imports 81,090 88,914 45,559 47,649 3,805 3,809 4,893 5,204 ...Balance + 13,330 + 16,987 + 13,019 + 15,157 + 1,062 + 1,705 + 1,754 + 1,558 ...
Italy Exports 65,053 70,533 38,335 41,567 2,979 3,697 4,380 4,252 ...
Imports 61,074 64,513 33,107 32,994 2,696 2,767 3,350 3,065 ...Balance + 3,978 + 6,020 + 5,229 + 8,574 + 283 + 930 + 1,030 + 1,187 ...
Netherlands Exports 63,054 66,910 34,355 35,223 3,040 3,014 3,475 3,526 ...
Imports 67,537 69,425 36,089 43,585 3,691 4,185 4,471 4,613 ...Balance − 4,483 − 2,515 − 1,734 − 8,362 − 651 −1,171 − 996 −1,087 ...
Spain Exports 33,071 38,454 22,684 24,917 1,708 2,121 2,606 2,627 ...
Imports 25,941 27,801 14,666 15,001 968 1,306 1,401 1,508 ...Balance + 7,130 + 10,653 + 8,018 + 9,916 + 741 + 815 + 1,206 + 1,119 ...
Sweden Exports 20,630 21,874 11,657 12,503 1,093 1,130 1,340 1,241 ...
Imports 14,819 16,331 8,305 9,365 698 891 1,050 943 ...Balance + 5,812 + 5,543 + 3,352 + 3,139 + 395 + 240 + 290 + 299 ...
United Exports 74,962 81,356 43,124 45,813 3,937 3,946 4,523 4,807 ...
Kingdom Imports 54,342 56,694 30,757 34,938 3,170 3,289 3,337 3,948 ...
Balance + 20,620 + 24,662 + 12,367 + 10,875 + 768 + 657 + 1,186 + 859 ...
Exports 62,869 66,640 33,504 36,326 3,334 3,417 3,860 3,741 ... 2. Other European
Imports 56,705 58,057 30,588 33,146 2,800 3,272 3,130 3,802 ... industrial countries
Balance + 6,164 + 8,582 + 2,916 + 3,180 + 534 + 146 + 730 − 62 ...
of which
Switzerland Exports 39,847 42,686 22,808 23,451 2,130 2,212 2,520 2,291 ...
Imports 29,858 32,550 17,070 17,202 1,443 1,710 1,704 1,751 ...Balance + 9,989 + 10,136 + 5,738 + 6,250 + 687 + 501 + 817 + 540 ...
Exports 110,615 122,107 68,867 75,877 6,726 6,562 7,873 7,732 ... 3. Non-European
Imports 104,487 117,995 62,651 71,149 6,392 6,089 7,197 7,222 ... industrial countries
Balance + 6,128 + 4,111 + 6,216 + 4,729 + 334 + 473 + 675 + 510 ...
of which
Japan Exports 20,476 18,310 10,367 12,166 1,087 1,217 1,318 1,244 ...
Imports 37,478 41,047 21,779 24,355 2,120 2,122 2,427 2,280 ...Balance −17,002 −22,737 −11,412 −12,189 −1,034 − 905 −1,108 −1,035 ...
Exports 76,617 89,751 51,425 56,188 4,972 4,697 5,862 5,789 ... United States
Imports 59,039 68,307 36,790 42,095 3,861 3,542 4,296 4,486 ...Balance + 17,578 + 21,444 + 14,635 + 14,093 + 1,111 + 1,155 + 1,566 + 1,303 ...
II. Exports 102,960 115,463 56,717 63,792 5,944 6,009 7,019 6,958 ...Countries in transition
Imports 96,792 108,819 62,533 74,985 7,021 7,370 7,786 7,835 ...Balance + 6,168 + 6,645 − 5,816 −11,193 −1,076 −1,361 − 767 − 876 ...
of which
Central and east Exports 90,282 101,499 49,020 54,557 4,990 5,101 5,958 5,897 ...European countries Imports 74,304 84,280 47,723 56,778 5,216 5,522 5,664 5,856 ...in transition Balance + 15,978 + 17,220 + 1,297 − 2,221 − 226 − 421 + 294 + 42 ...
China  
3 Exports 10,629 11,900 6,949 8,362 851 840 961 973 ...
Imports 21,534 23,181 13,795 16,782 1,635 1,693 1,984 1,811 ...Balance −10,906 −11,280 − 6,846 − 8,420 − 784 − 854 −1,023 − 838 ...
III. Exports 116,124 108,860 56,377 59,394 6,043 5,554 6,100 6,178 ...Developing countries
Imports 88,792 90,249 48,835 58,867 5,841 5,849 6,253 6,161 ...Balance + 27,332 + 18,610 + 7,543 + 528 + 202 − 295 − 154 + 17 ...
of which
Newly industrial- Exports 48,444 36,657 18,775 21,963 2,195 2,099 2,307 2,289 ...ising countries in Imports 40,094 42,310 22,586 27,602 2,595 2,676 3,120 3,148 ...south-east Asia  
4 Balance + 8,350 − 5,653 − 3,811 − 5,639 − 401 − 577 − 813 − 860 ...
OPEC-countries Exports 20,024 19,213 9,135 9,627 921 932 1,051 1,023 ...
Imports 13,932 11,215 6,425 9,283 930 1,061 978 944 ...Balance + 6,092 + 7,998 + 2,710 + 344 − 9 − 129 + 73 + 79 ...
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (f.o.b.) by country of destination, 2000 which have not yet been broken down by region. —2Including fuel
imports (c.i.f.) by country of origin. Inclusion of individual countries in and other supplies for ships and aircraft and other data not classifiable by
groups of countries according to the current position. —1The import region. —3Excluding Hong Kong. —4Brunei, Hong Kong, Indonesia,
figures on "All countries" include revisions from January until November Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, Taiwan and Thaila nd. 
69*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
4. Services and factor income of the Federal Republic of Germany
(Balances)
 
Until the end of 1998 DM million, from 1999 euro million
Services
other services
of which
 
Patents Compen- Services  of Construction
Trans- Financial and sation of Investment Government selfemployed and  assembly
Period Total Travel services licences Total income portation  1 transactions  2 persons  3 work,  repairs employees  4 
1996 −55,330 −53,025 + 4,873 + 2,653 −3,772 + 6,699 −12,757 −2,180 −1,216 −1,779 + 3,171
1997 −59,942 −54,142 + 5,702 + 2,315 −4,148 + 6,649 −16,318 −2,402 −1,649 −1,698 − 790
1998 −67,568 −56,542 + 5,461 + 3,011 −2,933 + 5,468 −22,033 −2,582 −2,505 −1,634 −9,935
1999 −40,784 −29,796 + 3,126 + 1,065 −1,299 + 2,010 −15,891 −2,104 − 642 − 888 −11,052
2000 −44,593 −31,596 + 4,139 + 822 −2,686 + 2,148 −17,419 −2,630 −1,200 − 930 −7,686
1999         2nd qtr − 9,405 − 7,787 + 836 + 262 − 200 + 486 −3,002 − 505 − 45 − 246 + 876
         3rd qtr −12,089 −10,070 + 812 + 535 − 370 + 484 −3,480 − 529 − 224 − 461 −3,438
         4th qtr − 9,729 − 6,064 + 966 + 25 − 359 + 502 −4,799 − 610 − 12 − 272 −4,987
2000         1st qtr − 9,785 − 6,493 + 775 + 76 − 632 + 536 −4,047 − 732 − 391 + 93 −1,935
         2nd qtr −12,088 − 8,518 + 1,158 + 470 − 540 + 423 −5,079 − 543 − 344 − 285 + 498
         3rd qtr −12,439 −10,038 + 1,109 + 27 − 640 + 548 −3,445 − 644 − 27 − 461 −2,939
         4th qtr −10,281 − 6,547 + 1,097 + 250 − 873 + 641 −4,848 − 711 − 437 − 277 −3,309
2000         Feb. − 3,067 − 1,732 + 284 + 45 − 203 + 159 −1,621 − 258 − 319 + 28 − 653
         Mar. − 2,706 − 2,588 + 405 + 12 − 199 + 235 − 572 − 270 − 65 + 40 + 3,069
         Apr. − 3,692 − 2,478 + 252 + 387 − 197 + 101 −1,758 − 182 − 24 − 103 + 156
         May − 4,123 − 2,769 + 530 − 94 − 191 + 169 −1,767 − 172 − 84 − 80 − 726
         June − 4,272 − 3,271 + 376 + 177 − 153 + 153 −1,554 − 189 − 235 − 102 + 1,067
         July − 3,235 − 3,009 + 396 + 97 − 165 + 114 − 668 − 194 − 66 − 161 −1,951
         Aug. − 4,348 − 3,536 + 388 − 23 − 333 + 233 −1,076 − 243 − 7 − 147 − 650
         Sep. − 4,856 − 3,492 + 324 − 47 − 142 + 201 −1,701 − 207 + 45 − 152 − 339
         Oct. − 4,302 − 2,876 + 338 + 83 − 393 + 131 −1,586 − 190 − 432 − 105 + 572
         Nov. − 3,118 − 1,947 + 262 + 132 − 267 + 198 −1,496 − 201 − 115 − 93 − 849
         Dec. − 2,861 − 1,724 + 496 + 35 − 213 + 312 −1,766 − 319 + 110 − 79 −3,033
1Excluding the expenditure on freight included in the c.i.f. import value. — vices supplied. —3Engineering and other technical services, research and
2Including the receipts from foreign military agencies for goods and ser- development, commercial services etc. — 4 Wages and salaries. 
5. Current transfers of the Federal Republic of Germany 6. Capital transfers
(Balances) (Balances)
Until the end of 1998 DM million, from 1999 euro million DM million / euro million
Public  1 Private  1 
International
Organisations  2 
 
of which other Remittances other
European current by foreign current
Period Total Total Total Communities Total workers transfers Total  4 Public  1 Private  1 transfers  3 
1996 −51,294 −35,281 −30,674 −27,553 −4,607 −16,013 −7,401 −8,612 −3,283 −2,617 − 666
1997 −52,722 −36,823 −31,509 −28,502 −5,313 −15,900 −7,519 −8,381 + 52 −2,821 + 2,873
1998 −53,298 −37,263 −33,077 −30,382 −4,186 −16,035 −6,936 −9,099 + 1,289 −2,443 + 3,732
1999 −25,725 −17,162 −15,253 −13,837 −1,909 −8,563 −3,429 −5,134 − 129 −1,342 + 1,213
2000 −27,233 −19,448 −17,210 −15,674 −2,238 −7,785 −3,338 −4,447 −1,104 −1,186 + 82
1999         2nd qtr −5,137 −3,209 −3,186 −2,972 − 23 −1,928 − 857 −1,071 − 56 − 278 + 222
         3rd qtr −7,626 −5,603 −5,027 −4,581 − 576 −2,024 − 857 −1,166 − 847 − 297 − 550
         4th qtr −7,586 −4,892 −4,306 −4,078 − 586 −2,694 − 857 −1,837 + 557 − 561 + 1,118
2000         1st qtr −5,392 −3,515 −2,576 −2,063 − 939 −1,877 − 834 −1,042 + 160 − 237 + 397
         2nd qtr −6,534 −4,506 −4,691 −4,435 + 186 −2,028 − 834 −1,194 + 10 − 290 + 300
         3rd qtr −7,130 −5,161 −4,664 −4,212 − 497 −1,969 − 834 −1,135 − 926 − 285 − 641
         4th qtr −8,177 −6,266 −5,278 −4,964 − 988 −1,911 − 834 −1,076 − 347 − 374 + 26
2000         Feb. −1,996 −1,393 −1,145 − 869 − 248 − 604 − 278 − 326 − 146 − 76 − 70
         Mar. −1,744 −1,111 − 856 − 762 − 254 − 634 − 278 − 356 + 134 − 80 + 214
         Apr. −2,541 −1,908 −1,931 −1,802 + 23 − 634 − 278 − 355 + 194 − 74 + 267
         May −1,692 − 960 −1,209 −1,154 + 249 − 733 − 278 − 455 − 22 − 95 + 73
         June −2,300 −1,638 −1,552 −1,479 − 87 − 662 − 278 − 384 − 161 − 121 − 41
         July −2,938 −2,277 −2,152 −1,791 − 125 − 661 − 278 − 383 + 105 − 91 + 195
         Aug. −2,693 −1,994 −1,813 −1,788 − 181 − 700 − 278 − 421 − 657 − 107 − 549
         Sep. −1,499 − 890 − 699 − 633 − 191 − 609 − 278 − 331 − 374 − 87 − 287
         Oct. −3,001 −2,341 −1,790 −1,725 − 551 − 660 − 278 − 381 − 125 − 141 + 16
         Nov. −2,761 −2,116 −1,780 −1,617 − 336 − 646 − 278 − 368 − 143 − 117 − 25
         Dec. −2,415 −1,809 −1,709 −1,622 − 101 − 605 − 278 − 327 − 80 − 115 + 36
1The classification of "public" and "private" transfers depends on which (excluding capital transfers). —3Payments to developing countries, pension
sector the participating domestic body belongs to. —2Current contri- payments, tax revenue and refunds, etc. —4Where identifiable; in
butions to the budgets of international organisations and to the EU budget particular, debt forgiveness. 
70*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
7. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
  
Until the end of 1998 DM million, from 1999 euro million
2000
Item 1998 1999 2000 1st qtr 2nd qtr 3rd qtr 4th qtr Oct. Nov. Dec.
I. Net German investment abroad
(Increase/capital exports: −) −569,874 −332,427 −371,111 −150,242 −98,782 −81,299 −40,788 −15,499 −37,024 + 11,735
1. Direct investment  1 −160,409 −92,882 −45,784 −33,344 −33,701 + 8,518 + 12,743 − 5,134 − 7,022 + 24,898
Equity capital −106,380 −74,830 −39,324 −15,485 −13,946 −20,782 + 10,890 − 6,868 − 6,688 + 24,446
Reinvested earnings  2 −12,500 − 5,113 − 5,112 − 1,278 − 1,278 − 1,278 − 1,278 − 426 − 426 − 426
Credit transactions ofGerman direct investors −34,073 − 6,098 + 4,228 −15,185 −16,907 + 31,641 + 4,680 + 2,426 + 518 + 1,736
Other capital − 7,455 − 6,842 − 5,577 − 1,396 − 1,570 − 1,062 − 1,549 − 266 − 426 − 857
2. Portfolio investment −248,176 −176,340 −233,320 −100,377 −37,598 −58,202 −37,142 −13,623 −16,388 − 7,131
Equities  
3 −113,543 −66,652 −111,518 −49,092 −17,966 −28,383 −16,077 − 5,010 − 4,608 − 6,459
Investment fund certificates  4 −17,468 −13,882 −41,670 −17,313 − 9,707 − 8,190 − 6,460 − 2,617 − 3,196 − 647
Bonds and notes  5 −109,492 −92,806 −74,222 −32,892 − 9,229 −21,916 −10,185 − 4,192 − 7,662 + 1,668
Money market instruments − 7,673 − 3,000 − 5,910 − 1,081 − 696 + 287 − 4,420 − 1,804 − 923 − 1,693
3. Financial derivatives  6 −11,812 + 1,924 − 24− 1,164 + 3,757 − 625 − 1,993 − 1,075 − 1,361 + 443
4. Credit transactions −141,235 −63,925 −89,913 −14,672 −30,720 −30,121 −14,400 + 4,231 −12,202 − 6,428
Credit institutions  7 −135,479 −44,270 −101,963 −22,778 − 8,132 −30,923 −40,129 −13,069 −18,853 − 8,208
Long-term −61,397 −42,728 −39,477 − 7,848 − 5,566 −11,296 −14,767 − 3,995 − 3,751 − 7,022
Short-term −74,082 − 1,542 −62,485 −14,931 − 2,566 −19,626 −25,363 − 9,075 −15,102 − 1,186
Enterprises and individuals − 4,103 + 20,124 − 9,330 −24,727 + 7,459 − 4,484 + 12,422 − 3,467 + 2,986 + 12,903
Long-term − 575 − 1,975 + 988 + 841 − 601 − 437 + 1,184 − 168 − 114 + 1,466
Short-term  7 − 3,529 + 22,099 −10,317 −25,568 + 8,060 − 4,047 + 11,238 − 3,298 + 3,100 + 11,436
General government − 1,501 + 7,764 −20,593 + 32 − 4,137 −14,755 − 1,732 + 1,767 − 832 − 2,668
Long-term − 1,722 − 376 − 1,250 − 90− 319 − 658 − 183 − 15− 10− 158
Short-term  7 + 220 + 8,140 −19,343 + 122 − 3,818 −14,097 − 1,549 + 1,782 − 822 − 2,509
Bundesbank − 151 −47,544 + 41,972 + 32,801 −25,910 + 20,041 + 15,040 + 18,999 + 4,496 − 8,455
5. Other investment  8 − 8,243 − 1,203 − 2,071 − 685 − 521 − 869 + 4 + 102 − 51− 47
II. Net foreign investment in Germany
(Increase/capital imports: +) + 587,128 + 303,237 + 353,941 + 179,025 + 116,662 + 48,903 + 9,351 + 7,569 + 26,101 −24,320
1. Direct investment  1 + 37,420 + 49,238 + 197,844 + 170,965 + 43,010 + 18,514 −34,646 + 504 + 2,672 −37,821
Equity capital + 9,443 + 21,166 + 108,009 + 159,607 + 11,966 + 7,995 −71,560 + 711 + 1,335 −73,606
Reinvested earnings  2 − 1,000 −−−−−−−−−
Credit transactions offoreign direct investors + 29,833 + 28,268 + 90,170 + 11,484 + 31,139 + 10,559 + 36,988 − 178 + 1,355 + 35,811
Other capital − 857 − 197 − 336 − 126 − 96− 40− 74− 30− 18− 26
2. Portfolio investment + 254,783 + 155,792 + 36,901 −86,476 + 77,590 + 28,691 + 17,097 + 7,537 + 673 + 8,886
Equities  
3 + 100,938 + 27,385 −37,056 −96,627 + 40,215 + 6,762 + 12,593 + 342 + 5,599 + 6,652
Investment fund certificates − 3,094 + 5,709 + 10,623 + 5,133 + 1,934 + 1,487 + 2,069 + 726 + 421 + 922
Bonds and notes  5 + 144,658 + 83,847 + 54,998 + 6,861 + 20,336 + 16,476 + 11,325 + 6,409 + 2,400 + 2,516
Money market instruments + 12,281 + 38,852 + 8,337 − 1,843 + 15,105 + 3,966 − 8,891 + 60 − 7,746 − 1,205
3. Credit transactions + 294,983 + 98,252 + 119,002 + 94,493 − 3,925 + 1,597 + 26,838 − 515 + 22,737 + 4,615
Credit institutions  7 + 279,437 + 94,526 + 118,032 + 81,259 + 7,025 + 3,033 + 26,716 + 1,153 + 21,017 + 4,545
Long-term + 61,270 + 34,255 + 17,914 + 14,376 + 584 − 54 + 3,007 + 4,431 + 1,242 − 2,666
Short-term + 218,167 + 60,271 + 100,118 + 66,883 + 6,440 + 3,087 + 23,708 − 3,278 + 19,775 + 7,211
Enterprises and individuals + 14,643 + 16,965 − 322 + 13,284 −10,905 − 1,558 − 1,142 − 2,312 + 459 + 710
Long-term + 12,875 + 1,527 − 1,022 − 829 − 166 − 348 + 321 − 811 + 1,037 + 95
Short-term  7 + 1,768 + 15,438 + 700 + 14,112 −10,739 − 1,210 − 1,463 − 1,501 − 577 + 616
General Government − 2,685 −11,249 + 878 − 16− 119 − 206 + 1,219 + 591 + 1,207 − 580
Long-term − 8,580 − 8,300 − 20− 22 + 29 − 428 + 402 − 67 + 444 + 24
Short-term  7 + 5,895 − 2,949 + 898 + 6 − 148 + 223 + 817 + 658 + 763 − 604
Bundesbank + 3,588 − 1,991 + 414 − 34 + 75 + 327 + 46 + 53 + 53 − 60
4. Other investment − 57− 46 + 193 + 43 − 13 + 101 + 62 + 43 + 19 − 1
III. Balance of all statistically
recorded financial movements(Net capital exports: −) + 17,254 −29,190 −17,171 + 28,783 + 17,880 −32,397 −31,438 − 7,929 −10,923 −12,585
1From 1996, new definition for direct investment. —2Estimated. — action values shown here are mostly derived from changes in stocks. As far
3Including participation rights. —4From 1991 including accumulated as possible, purely statistical changes have been eliminated. —8In
earnings. —5From 1975 excluding accrued interest. —6Options, whether particular, subscriptions of the Federal Government to International
or not evidenced by securities, and financial futures contracts. —7The trans- Organisations. 
71*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
8. External position of the Bundesbank *
 
 
DM million
Monetary reserves and other claims on non-residents Liabilities to non-residents
Monetary reserves
Reserve
positionin theInter- Liabilitiesnational arising Net Liabilities
Monetary arising from externalFund and Claims Loans and from liquidity position
Foreign special on the external Treasury (col. 1 other claims
End of year currency drawing ECB  
2 on non- trans- discount less
or month Total Total Gold rights (net) Total paper col. 8) balances  1 residents  3 actions  4 
1234567891 0 1 1
1989 99,959 97,527 13,688 58,308 8,229 17,303 2,432 51,642 51,642 − 48,317
1990 106,446 104,023 13,688 64,517 7,373 18,445 2,423 52,259 52,259 − 54,188
1991 97,345 94,754 13,688 55,424 8,314 17,329 2,592 42,335 42,335 − 55,010
1992 143,959 141,351 13,688 85,845 8,199 33,619 2,608 26,506 26,506 − 117,453
1993 122,763 120,143 13,688 61,784 8,496 36,176 2,620 39,541 23,179 16,362 83,2221994 115,965 113,605 13,688 60,209 7,967 31,742 2,360 24,192 19,581 4,611 91,774
1995 123,261 121,307 13,688 68,484 10,337 28,798 1,954 16,390 16,390 − 106,871
1996 120,985 119,544 13,688 72,364 11,445 22,048 1,441 15,604 15,604 − 105,381
1997 127,849 126,884 13,688 76,673 13,874 22,649 966 16,931 16,931 − 110,918
1998 135,085 134,005 17,109 100,363 16,533 − 1,079 15,978 15,978 − 119,107
*Valuation of the gold holdings and the claims on non-residents according Monetary Cooperation Fund −EMCF). —3Including loans to the World
to section 26 (2) of the Bundesbank Act and the provisions of the Bank. —4Including liquidity paper sold to non-residents by the
Commercial Code, especially section 253. In the course of the year, valuation Bundesbank; excluding the liquidity Treasury discount paper sold toat the balance sheet rates of the preceding year. —1Mainly US dollar non-residents between March 1993 and March 1995, as shown in column 10. 
assets. —2European Central Bank (until 1993 claims on the European
 
 
 
9. External position of the Bundesbank in the European monetary union *
Euro million
Monetary reserves and other claims on non-residents
Monetary reserves
Reserve
position
in the Inter-
national OtherMonetary Other claims on Net externalFund and claims on Claims residents position of the
Gold special Foreign non-euro- within the in other Bundesbank Liabilities
End of year and gold drawing currency area Eurosystem EMU member to non- (col.1 lessor month Total Total rights reserves (net)  
2 countries col.9) receivables residents  1  3 residents  3 
1234567891 0
1999         Jan.  4 95,316 93,940 29,312 8,461 56,167 140 1,225 11 8,169 87,146
1999         Mar. 115,913 85,979 29,048 7,518 49,414 20,588 9,337 8 7,197 108,715
         June 108,811 86,925 28,106 8,551 50,269 25,786 − 3,910 9 6,714 102,096
         Sep. 125,037 89,368 31,762 8,046 49,560 21,924 13,735 10 6,191 118,846         Dec. 141,958 93,039 32,287 8,332 52,420 9,162 39,746 11 6,179 135,7792000         Jan. 120,993 93,080 32,287 8,202 52,592 2,743 25,162 8 11,398 109,595
         Feb. 123,747 93,519 32,287 8,238 52,994 5,989 24,230 9 12,218 111,529         Mar. 120,291 96,835 32,208 8,681 55,946 10,537 12,909 10 13,482 106,808
         Apr. 126,571 95,481 32,208 7,688 55,585 8,346 22,735 8 10,461 116,110
         May 121,282 95,310 32,208 7,700 55,402 17,563 8,396 12 7,828 113,453         June 139,873 96,018 33,744 7,581 54,693 4,551 39,296 9 8,047 131,826
         July 114,851 94,838 33,744 7,374 53,720 14,114 5,890 10 6,624 108,227
         Aug. 104,396 94,493 33,744 7,428 53,321 11,466 − 1,577 15 7,927 96,469
         Sep. 126,332 100,750 34,874 7,815 58,061 5,616 19,958 8 10,141 116,191
         Oct. 114,646 100,212 34,874 7,684 57,654 1,765 12,662 7 18,046 96,600
         Nov. 98,238 99,746 34,874 7,620 57,252 313 − 1,828 7 6,652 91,585
         Dec. 100,762 93,815 32,676 7,762 53,377 313 6,620 14 6,592 94,170
2001         Jan. 106,446 92,019 31,945 7,856 52,218 313 14,106 8 6,683 99,763
*Claims and liabilities vis- à-vis all countries within and outside EMU. Until Deutsche Bundesbank ’s cross-border payments within the Eurosystem. From
December 2000, the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, by virtue November 2000 including the TARGET positions which were previouslyof revaluations, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the levels shown (in columns 6 and 9) as bilateral assets and liabilities vis- à-vis national
are computed on the basis of cumulative transaction values. From January central banks outside the Eurosystem. —3See footnote 2. —4Euro
2001 onwards, the monthly levels will all be valued at market prices. — opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at January 1, 1999. 
1Including loans to the World Bank. —2Including the balances in the
72*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
10. Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
Until the end of 1998 DM million, from 1999 euro million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities to non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  to foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms paymentsor month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received
operations operations
All countries
 
1997 461,760 141,722 320,038 132,372 187,666 172,843 14,823 392,071 80,743 311,328 181,987 129,341 85,746 43,5951998 502,610 140,729 361,881 169,889 191,992 176,485 15,507 429,240 81,092 348,148 220,628 127,520 87,576 39,9441999 277,331 52,774 224,557 115,564 108,993 100,777 8,216 293,849 56,632 237,217 166,026 71,191 52,047 19,1442000 321,374 43,462 277,912 153,252 124,660 116,971 7,689 436,760 52,663 384,097 299,724 84,373 63,093 21,280
2000         Sep. 333,029 56,412 276,617 153,714 122,903 114,715 8,188 396,061 55,168 340,893 260,612 80,281 59,202 21,079
         Oct. 338,993 58,281 280,712 155,422 125,290 117,015 8,275 399,429 53,455 345,974 264,154 81,820 60,387 21,433
         Nov. 335,263 54,409 280,854 153,201 127,653 119,480 8,173 400,460 52,783 347,677 263,199 84,478 62,802 21,676         Dec. 321,374 43,462 277,912 153,252 124,660 116,971 7,689 436,760 52,663 384,097 299,724 84,373 63,093 21,280
EU countries
 
1997 287,024 130,611 156,413 68,161 88,252 80,199 8,053 236,747 68,777 167,970 110,157 57,813 46,097 11,7161998 307,523 130,398 177,125 84,422 92,703 83,927 8,776 265,214 68,873 196,341 137,494 58,847 46,896 11,9511999 157,617 47,992 109,625 56,450 53,175 48,500 4,675 194,809 49,243 145,566 111,605 33,961 27,532 6,4292000 178,282 39,563 138,719 78,798 59,921 55,718 4,203 316,549 45,473 271,076 231,083 39,993 32,457 7,536
2000         Sep. 188,810 51,538 137,272 77,257 60,015 55,576 4,439 278,414 48,430 229,984 191,515 38,469 30,710 7,759
         Oct. 197,194 52,177 145,017 83,546 61,471 57,033 4,438 286,777 46,784 239,993 201,096 38,897 31,206 7,691
         Nov. 190,185 49,941 140,244 77,131 63,113 58,615 4,498 280,270 45,950 234,320 194,198 40,122 32,414 7,708         Dec. 178,282 39,563 138,719 78,798 59,921 55,718 4,203 316,549 45,473 271,076 231,083 39,993 32,457 7,536
of which: EMU member countries
 
1997 174,416 66,022 108,394 42,064 66,330 60,694 5,636 177,629 51,339 126,290 82,879 43,411 35,206 8,2051998 190,953 68,418 122,535 54,167 68,368 62,491 5,877 197,566 50,579 146,987 103,899 43,088 35,021 8,0671999 104,071 25,946 78,125 38,747 39,378 36,074 3,304 151,179 38,117 113,062 88,763 24,299 20,173 4,1262000 121,476 22,737 98,739 53,476 45,263 42,389 2,874 241,330 33,698 207,632 179,095 28,537 23,569 4,968
2000         Sep. 122,751 28,072 94,679 49,742 44,937 41,841 3,096 199,777 35,215 164,562 137,084 27,478 22,413 5,065
         Oct. 125,515 28,082 97,433 51,277 46,156 42,985 3,171 203,333 35,185 168,148 140,045 28,103 22,892 5,211
         Nov. 126,385 27,540 98,845 51,232 47,613 44,456 3,157 200,335 34,243 166,092 136,913 29,179 24,003 5,176         Dec. 121,476 22,737 98,739 53,476 45,263 42,389 2,874 241,330 33,698 207,632 179,095 28,537 23,569 4,968
Other industrial countries
 
1997 89,482 6,436 83,046 45,814 37,232 34,050 3,182 95,662 7,884 87,778 55,306 32,472 26,280 6,1921998 109,682 8,246 101,436 61,999 39,437 36,162 3,275 102,058 7,655 94,403 61,741 32,662 26,292 6,3701999 71,958 3,595 68,363 45,540 22,823 21,220 1,603 68,024 4,870 63,154 44,518 18,636 15,387 3,2492000 84,502 2,925 81,577 54,272 27,305 25,673 1,632 81,664 4,711 76,953 54,186 22,767 18,621 4,146
2000         Sep. 85,261 3,173 82,088 56,297 25,791 24,046 1,745 80,538 4,384 76,154 54,957 21,197 17,031 4,166
         Oct. 81,536 4,342 77,194 50,989 26,205 24,449 1,756 74,639 4,311 70,328 48,630 21,698 17,487 4,211
         Nov. 84,880 3,084 81,796 55,316 26,480 24,712 1,768 80,883 4,530 76,353 54,530 21,823 17,546 4,277         Dec. 84,502 2,925 81,577 54,272 27,305 25,673 1,632 81,664 4,711 76,953 54,186 22,767 18,621 4,146
Countries in transition
 
1997 27,427 296 27,131 5,916 21,215 19,487 1,728 10,690 90 10,600 595 10,005 4,007 5,9981998 30,107 360 29,747 7,914 21,833 20,218 1,615 11,383 135 11,248 657 10,591 4,941 5,6501999 16,402 231 16,171 4,603 11,568 10,934 634 6,256 78 6,178 481 5,697 3,119 2,5782000 19,082 240 18,842 5,028 13,814 13,104 710 8,202 113 8,089 928 7,161 4,384 2,777
2000         Sep. 18,409 269 18,140 4,873 13,267 12,538 729 7,575 121 7,454 827 6,627 3,955 2,672
         Oct. 18,896 267 18,629 4,918 13,711 12,981 730 7,738 91 7,647 850 6,797 4,023 2,774
         Nov. 19,322 223 19,099 5,083 14,016 13,311 705 7,993 66 7,927 855 7,072 4,318 2,754         Dec. 19,082 240 18,842 5,028 13,814 13,104 710 8,202 113 8,089 928 7,161 4,384 2,777
Developing countries
 
1997 57,827 4,379 53,448 12,481 40,967 39,107 1,860 48,972 3,992 44,980 15,929 29,051 9,362 19,6891998 55,298 1,725 53,573 15,554 38,019 36,178 1,841 50,585 4,429 46,156 20,736 25,420 9,447 15,9731999 31,354 956 30,398 8,971 21,427 20,123 1,304 24,760 2,441 22,319 9,422 12,897 6,009 6,8882000 39,508 734 38,774 15,154 23,620 22,476 1,144 30,345 2,366 27,979 13,527 14,452 7,631 6,821
2000         Sep. 40,549 1,432 39,117 15,287 23,830 22,555 1,275 29,534 2,233 27,301 13,313 13,988 7,506 6,482
         Oct. 41,367 1,495 39,872 15,969 23,903 22,552 1,351 30,275 2,269 28,006 13,578 14,428 7,671 6,757
         Nov. 40,876 1,161 39,715 15,671 24,044 22,842 1,202 31,314 2,237 29,077 13,616 15,461 8,524 6,937         Dec. 39,508 734 38,774 15,154 23,620 22,476 1,144 30,345 2,366 27,979 13,527 14,452 7,631 6,821
* Including the assets and liabilities vis- à-vis non-residents of individuals in and decreases have not been eliminated; to this extent the changes in totals
Germany. The assets and liabilities vis- à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in are not comparable with the figures shown in Table X, 7. 
Germany are shown in Table 4 of Section IV, "Banks". Statistical increases
73*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
X. Foreign trade and payments
11. Exchange rates for the national currencies of the EMU countries, the Deutsche Mark value of the ECU *
and euro conversion rates
France Italy Netherlands Belgium/ Austria Spain Finland Ireland Portugal Greece ECU values  1 
Yearly Luxembourg GRD  100  2 ECU  1
average FRF  100 ITL  1,000 NLG  100 BEF/LUF  100 ATS  100 ESP  100 FIM  100 IEP  1 PTE  100 EUR  1  2 = DEM ...
Spot middle rates on the Frankfurt exchange in DEM
   
1991 29.409 1.3377 88.742 4.857  14.211 1.597  41.087 2.671  1.149  0.9103 2.050761992 29.500 1.2720 88.814 4.857  14.211 1.529  34.963 2.656  1.157  0.8178 2.020311993 29.189 1.0526 89.017 4.785  14.214 1.303  28.915 2.423  1.031  0.7213 1.936391994 29.238 1.0056 89.171 4.8530 14.214 1.2112 31.108 2.4254 0.9774 0.6683 1.92452
1995 28.718 0.8814 89.272 4.8604 14.214 1.1499 32.832 2.2980 0.9555 0.6182 1.87375
1996 29.406 0.9751 89.243 4.8592 14.214 1.1880 32.766 2.4070 0.9754 0.6248 1.909541997 29.705 1.0184 88.857 4.8464 14.210 1.1843 33.414 2.6297 0.9894 0.6349 1.964381998 29.829 1.0132 88.714 4.8476 14.213 1.1779 32.920 2.5049 0.9763 0.5952 1.969131999 . . . . . . . . . 325.76 .
2000 . . . . . . . . . 336.63 .
      
Irrevocable euro conversion rates (EUR 1 = currency units ...) 3
   
6.55957 1936.27 2.20371 40.3399 13.7603 166.386 5.94573 0.787564 200.482 4 340.750 5 1.95583
*Calculated from daily quotations. —1According to data from the Euro- ence exchange rates of the ECB (EU R 1 = GRD ...). —3Applicable from
pean Commission. —2Until 1998 reciprocal values of the exchange rates for January 1, 1999. —4Applicable from January 1, 2001. —5Deutsche Mark
the Deutsche Mark, published by the Bank of Greece; from 1999 euro refer- conversion rate. 
12. Exchange rates of the Deutsche Mark and the euro against other currencies *
Yearly Japan Denmark Sweden Norway Switzerland Canada Australia New Zealand United States United Kingdom
or monthly
average USD JPY DKK SEK GBP NOK CHF CAD AUD  1 NZD 1 
Spot middle rates on the Frankfurt exchange (1 or 100 currency units = DEM ...)
      
1991 1.6612 1.2346 25.932 27.421 2.926  25.580 115.740 1.4501 1.2942 0.95891992 1.5595 1.2313 25.869 26.912 2.753  25.143 111.198 1.2917 1.1476 0.84061993 1.6544 1.4945 25.508 21.248 2.483  23.303 111.949 1.2823 1.1235 0.89401994 1.6218 1.5870 25.513 21.013 2.4816 22.982 118.712 1.1884 1.1848 0.9605
1995 1.4338 1.5293 25.570 20.116 2.2620 22.614 121.240 1.0443 1.0622 0.9399
1996 1.5037 1.3838 25.945 22.434 2.3478 23.292 121.891 1.1027 1.1782 1.03571997 1.7348 1.4378 26.249 22.718 2.8410 24.508 119.508 1.2533 1.2889 1.14531998 1.7592 1.3484 26.258 22.128 2.9142 23.297 121.414 1.1884 1.1070 0.9445
      
Euro reference exchange rates published by the European Central Bank (EUR 1 = currency units ...) 2
      
1999 1.0658 121.32 7.4355 8.8075 0.65875 8.3104 1.6003 1.5840 1.6523 2.01452000 0.9236 99.47 7.4538 8.4452 0.60948 8.1129 1.5579 1.3706 1.5889 2.0288
1999         Jan. 1.1608 131.35 7.4412 9.0826 0.70312 8.6512 1.6055 1.7646 1.8387 2.1588
         Feb. 1.1208 130.78 7.4352 8.9077 0.68851 8.6497 1.5979 1.6786 1.7515 2.0623         Mar. 1.0883 130.20 7.4325 8.9403 0.67127 8.5065 1.5954 1.6510 1.7260 2.0451
         Apr. 1.0704 128.16 7.4327 8.9140 0.66502 8.3186 1.6015 1.5944 1.6684 1.9723
         May 1.0628 129.71 7.4333 8.9722 0.65825 8.2348 1.6025 1.5527 1.6046 1.9249         June 1.0378 125.32 7.4314 8.8284 0.65025 8.1676 1.5951 1.5244 1.5805 1.9479
         July 1.0353 123.71 7.4388 8.7446 0.65779 8.1811 1.6040 1.5403 1.5757 1.9664
         Aug. 1.0604 120.10 7.4376 8.7519 0.66014 8.2602 1.6004 1.5833 1.6451 2.0154         Sep. 1.0501 112.39 7.4337 8.6337 0.64683 8.2270 1.6015 1.5518 1.6186 2.0097
         Oct. 1.0706 113.52 7.4334 8.7272 0.64587 8.2885 1.5943 1.5808 1.6414 2.0798
         Nov. 1.0338 108.25 7.4366 8.6330 0.63702 8.1907 1.6051 1.5160 1.6179 2.0178         Dec. 1.0110 103.72 7.4403 8.5865 0.62651 8.0977 1.6012 1.4906 1.5798 1.9891
2000         Jan. 1.0137 106.53 7.4439 8.5968 0.61834 8.1215 1.6103 1.4687 1.5421 1.9716
         Feb. 0.9834 107.64 7.4453 8.5114 0.61466 8.0991 1.6069 1.4270 1.5642 2.0057         Mar. 0.9643 102.59 7.4473 8.3884 0.61063 8.1110 1.6042 1.4082 1.5827 1.9674
         Apr. 0.9470 99.92 7.4505 8.2671 0.59802 8.1545 1.5740 1.3890 1.5878 1.9097
         May 0.9060 98.09 7.4570 8.2410 0.60151 8.1994 1.5562 1.3549 1.5703 1.9355         June 0.9492 100.71 7.4607 8.3177 0.62927 8.2490 1.5608 1.4018 1.5968 2.0174
         July 0.9397 101.39 7.4589 8.4070 0.62304 8.1763 1.5505 1.3886 1.5978 2.0394
         Aug. 0.9041 97.76 7.4578 8.3917 0.60710 8.0959 1.5506 1.3406 1.5575 2.0305         Sep. 0.8721 93.11 7.4627 8.4145 0.60773 8.0266 1.5307 1.2945 1.5749 2.0882
         Oct. 0.8552 92.75 7.4472 8.5245 0.58933 8.0032 1.5130 1.2924 1.6176 2.1346
         Nov. 0.8564 93.26 7.4564 8.6289 0.60039 7.9950 1.5216 1.3204 1.6387 2.1438         Dec. 0.8973 100.61 7.4580 8.6622 0.61342 8.1334 1.5137 1.3679 1.6422 2.0905
2001         Jan. 0.9383 109.57 7.4642 8.9055 0.63480 8.2355 1.5291 1.4098 1.6891 2.1103
*Calculated from daily quotations. —1Exchange rates from Australia and rates, which are calculated on the basis of the concertation between the
New Zealand; those for New Zealand calculated from rates as at the middle central banks at 2.15 p.m. and end of the month. —2The ECB publishes daily reference exchange
74*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2001
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
13. Effective exchange rates * of the euro and selected foreign currencies
  
1st qtr 1999 = 100
Memo item:
Effective exchange rate of the euro against the Indicators of the German economy ’s Effective nominal exchange rates of selected foreign
currencies of a ... price competitiveness  3  against... currencies against 18 industrial countries  3  4 
broad group  1 narrow group  2 38 countries  4 18 industrial countries  4 
Real Real on the basis
of the on the basis on the basis
on the basis of Pound Canadian Swiss Japanese of consumer of consumer deflators of
Nominal prices Nominal prices consumer prices US dollar sterling dollar franc yen total sales  5 
1993 74.7 106.0 103.9 104.8 . 104.6 103.8 93.7 88.1 116.3 92.8 102.8
1994 84.0 104.6 102.7 103.8 . 104.8 103.6 91.9 88.2 108.8 98.7 110.9
1995 93.2 107.8 107.8 108.7 109.0 109.6 109.0 86.1 84.0 106.2 105.4 115.5
1996 95.4 105.9 107.9 108.8 104.4 106.7 106.0 90.9 85.9 108.6 104.2 100.51997 90.4 96.6 99.1 99.4 98.5 101.4 100.4 98.8 99.8 109.5 97.9 95.81998 96.6 99.1 101.5 101.3 100.1 101.4 100.8 103.4 103.3 103.3 99.9 89.61999 96.6 95.8 95.7 95.7 97.4 97.7 97.4 100.8 102.3 102.1 98.2 105.2
2000 88.2 86.3 85.7 86.5
p 91.1 p 92.1 p 91.2 105.1 104.9 103.4 96.6 118.6
1996         1st qtr 95.5 107.6 108.9 110.2 106.6 108.7 107.8 89.8 83.1 107.7 106.8 102.7
         2nd qtr 94.5 105.3 107.1 108.1 103.8 106.0 105.4 91.1 84.4 108.6 104.2 102.3         3rd qtr 96.3 106.3 108.6 109.5 104.5 106.9 106.0 90.9 85.2 108.0 104.8 100.0         4th qtr 95.5 104.4 106.9 107.4 102.7 105.2 104.9 91.8 91.0 110.0 100.7 97.0
1997         1st qtr 91.8 99.6 102.4 103.2 100.2 103.5 102.4 96.9 96.4 111.1 96.0 93.7
         2nd qtr 90.0 96.4 99.5 99.7 98.2 101.6 100.9 98.1 98.9 109.1 97.5 96.5         3rd qtr 87.7 93.2 95.5 95.7 96.7 99.6 98.2 99.5 101.4 109.7 97.9 100.0         4th qtr 92.1 97.0 99.1 99.2 98.9 100.8 99.9 100.5 102.4 108.1 100.2 92.8
1998         Jan. 93.4 97.6 99.7 99.6 99.4 100.4 . 103.6 103.9 106.5 100.2 91.3
         Feb. 92.5 96.4 98.8 98.8 98.8 100.0 99.1 102.6 103.8 106.6 100.6 94.0         Mar. 91.8 95.4 97.9 97.8 97.8 99.7 . 103.3 105.9 108.3 99.6 91.8
         Apr. 92.3 95.6 98.4 98.2 98.0 100.0 . 104.0 106.4 107.4 98.1 89.4
         May 94.9 98.1 101.2 101.0 99.7 101.5 100.6 104.2 102.9 106.3 98.7 86.8         June 95.5 98.5 101.1 101.0 99.9 101.7 . 106.2 105.1 105.3 98.7 83.9
         July 95.4 98.4 100.8 101.0 100.0 102.0 . 106.8 104.9 104.0 97.8 83.8
         Aug. 96.8 99.6 102.2 102.3 100.6 102.6 101.6 108.4 104.4 101.0 99.1 81.5         Sep. 101.3 102.8 104.6 104.3 102.4 102.8 . 103.7 103.0 100.4 101.2 85.5
         Oct. 102.8 103.8 105.7 105.2 102.4 102.6 . 99.0 100.0 97.7 102.3 94.1
         Nov. 100.6 101.3 103.6 103.2 101.0 101.8 101.8 100.1 99.7 98.1 100.7 95.3         Dec. 101.6 102.1 103.4 103.2 101.5 101.9 . 99.0 99.6 97.7 101.9 97.3
1999         Jan. 101.4 101.4 102.0 101.8 100.7 101.0 . 97.9 98.5 98.7 100.3 101.4
         Feb. 100.0 100.0 99.9 99.9 100.1 100.0 100.0 99.9 99.7 101.0 100.1 99.9         Mar. 98.7 98.6 98.3 98.3 99.0 99.1 . 102.2 101.7 100.3 99.7 98.8
         Apr. 97.5 97.2 97.1 96.9 98.3 98.5 . 102.4 102.1 102.3 98.8 99.4
         May 96.9 96.4 96.6 96.5 97.9 98.4 98.1 102.8 103.1 104.6 98.6 97.8         June 95.1 94.5 94.7 94.7 96.7 97.6 . 103.6 103.4 104.2 98.4 100.0
         July 95.1 94.5 94.8 95.2 97.1 98.1 . 103.8 102.1 102.9 97.8 101.3
         Aug. 96.3 95.5 95.4 95.6 97.3 97.7 96.6 101.0 101.8 101.7 98.1 105.7         Sep. 95.2 93.8 93.6 93.4 96.0 96.0 . 99.3 102.9 102.2 97.0 112.1
         Oct. 96.4 94.7 94.4 94.2 96.3 96.1 . 98.2 103.6 102.0 97.9 112.0
         Nov. 94.0 92.4 92.0 92.0 95.0 95.1 94.8 99.1 103.7 103.0 96.2 115.4         Dec. 92.2 90.7 90.1 90.4 94.0 94.3 . 99.4 104.5 102.5 95.7 118.9
2000         Jan. 92.4 90.8 90.2 90.8 94.2 95.0 . 99.6 106.2 104.5 95.3 115.8
         Feb. 91.2 89.5 89.2 89.8 93.6 94.5 93.3 102.2 106.3 105.1 95.2 112.9         Mar. 89.7 88.1 87.7 88.3 92.4 93.4 . 102.2 106.0 104.5 94.6 117.3
         Apr. 88.4 86.7 86.1 86.6 91.4 92.3 . 102.8 107.4 104.0 95.8 119.2
         May 86.9 85.1 84.5 85.0 90.4 91.2 91.5 106.1 105.7 103.0 96.2 118.9         June 89.9 88.1 87.4 88.1 92.1 92.8 . 103.4 102.3 103.5 97.0 118.8
         July 89.4 87.6 86.9 88.0 92.1 92.9 . 104.3 103.1 103.7 97.6 117.3
         Aug. 87.0 85.1 84.6 85.5 90.3 91.6
p 90.4 106.1 104.6 103.8 96.5 119.3
         Sep. 85.3 83.3 82.8 83.6 89.1 90.5 . 107.4 103.2 104.1 96.9 123.1
         Oct. 84.4 82.2 81.6 82.4 88.2 89.6 . 109.1 106.0 102.5 97.6 122.3
         Nov. 85.1 82.8 82.3 83.3 p 88.6 p 89.9 p 89.4 109.9 104.2 100.6 97.3 121.9
         Dec. 88.1 85.6 85.4 86.4 p 90.6 p 91.7 . 108.4 103.8 101.5 99.3 115.8
2001         Jan. 91.7 89.0 89.2 90.5 p 92.8 p 94.0 . 107.7 102.3 102.9 99.9 108.8
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of manufactured goods trade between 1995 and 1997 and capture
the currency concerned. —1ECB calculations; in addition to the countries third-market effects. From January 2001, Greece ceased to be a partner
belonging to the narrow group (see footnote 2), this group also includes the country in the effective exchange rate of the euro; the weighting schemefollowing countries: Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, China, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech was adjusted accordingly. Due to the change in the weighting scheme ,
Republic, Estonia, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, effective exchange rate data as from January 2001 are not fully comparableMorocco, New Zealand, Philippines, Poland, Romania, Russia, Slovakia, with earlier observations. For the prices are not yet available, estimates h ave
Slovenia, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand and Turkey. 2ECB calculations been used. For the definition of the method see ECB, Monthly Bulletin, April
based on the weighted averages of the effective exchange rates of the euro 2000, page 39 ff. —3The method of calculation is largely consistent with
or, prior to 1999, of the exchange rates of the currencies preceding the euro the procedure used by the ECB to compute the effective exchange rates ofagainst the following countries: USA, Japan, Switzerland, United Kingdom, the euro. Up to 1998, the figures for Germany are identical to the previous ly
Sweden, Denmark, Greece, Norway, Canada, Australia, Hong Kong, South published data on the real external value of the Deutsche Mark. —
Korea and Singapore. The weights used in these calculations are based on 4 Including EMU countries. — 5 Annual and quarterly averages. 
75*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
76*

Overview of
publicationsby the DeutscheBundesbankThis overview is designed to inform
readers about selected recent eco-nomic and statistical publications bythe Deutsche Bundesbank. Exceptwhere stated, these publications arepublished both in German and English,and on the Internet.
The publications are available to inter-
ested parties free of charge from thePress and Public Relations Division.Against reimbursement of the costs, amonthly updated file with approxi-mately 40,000 time series published bythe Bundesbank can also be obtainedon magnetic tape or on ZIP diskettefrom the Statistical Data ProcessingDivision. Please submit orders in writ-ing, using the addresses specified onthe back of the title page. Selectedtime series can also be downloadedfrom the Internet.
Annual Report
Monthly Report
For information on the articles published between
1990 and 2000 see the index attached to the Jan-uary 2001 Monthly Report.
March 2000
– Monetary policy transparency
– West German enterprises’ profitability and
financing in 1998
– German balance of payments in 1999Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
77*

April 2000
– The impact of financial market crises on the
German securities markets
– Cyclical adjustment of the public sector
financial balance in Germany – a disaggregatedapproach
– Core inflation rates as a tool of price analysis
May 2000
– The economic scene in Germany in spring
2000
June 2000
– Overall financial flows in 1999– Trends in local authority finance since the mid-
nineties
– RTGS
plus– The Bundesbank’s new system for
individual payments
July 2000
– Determinants and macroeconomic significance
of product wage and consumption wage
– Deposit protection and investor compensation
in Germany
– Germany’s role in international service trans-
actions
August 2000
– The economic scene in Germany in summer
2000
September 2000
– The role of the International Monetary Fund in
a changing global economic environment
– The Deutsche Bundesbank’s involvement in
banking supervision
– The performance of German credit institutions
in 1999
October 2000
– The market for venture capital in Germany– The profitability and investment behaviour of
non-financial corporations– Setting up an Economic Research Centre at the
Deutsche Bundesbank
November 2000
– The economic scene in Germany in autumn
2000
December 2000
– Subsidy trends in Germany since the start of
the nineties
– The price effects of deregulation and privatisa-
tion in the product markets
– Electronic banking from a prudential super-
visory perspective
January 2001
– Recent institutional developments in economic
and monetary cooperation
– The information content of survey data on ex-
pected price developments for monetary policy
– Structural current account balances: longer-
term trends and determinants
February 2001
– The economic scene in Germany around the
turn of 2000–01
Statistical Supplements to the
Monthly Report1
1 Banking statistics (monthly)
2 Capital market statistics (monthly)
3 Balance of payments statistics (monthly)
4 Seasonally adjusted business statistics (monthly)5 Exchange rate statistics (quarterly)Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
78*1Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data
contained in the German originals are available in English.

Discussion papers
May 2000 2/00
The determinants of the euro-dollar exchange rate.
Synthetic fundamentals and a non-existing currency
July 2000 3/00
Concepts to Calculate Equilibrium Exchange Rates:An Overview
August 2000 4/00
Kerninflationsraten: Ein Methodenvergleich aufder Basis westdeutscher Daten
3
September 2000 5/00
Exploring the Role of Uncertainty for Corporate In-
vestment Decisions in Germany
November 2000 6/00
Central Bank Accountability and Transparency:Theory and Some Evidence
November 2000 7/00
Welfare Effects of Public Information
November 2000 8/00
Monetary Policy Transparency, Public Commentary,
and Market Perceptions about Monetary Policy in
Canada
November 2000 9/00
The Relationship between the Federal Funds Rate
and the Fed’s Funds Rate Target: Is it Open Market
or Open Mouth Operations?
November 2000 10/00
Expectations and the Stability Problem for Optimal
Monetary Policies
January 2001 1/01
Unemployment, Factor Substitution, and CapitalFormation
Summaries of former discussion papers can be
found on the Internet
Special Publications
The monetary policy of the Bundesbank,
October 19952Makro-ökonometrisches Mehr-Länder-Modell, November 1996
3
Macroeconometric model of the German eco-nomy, April 1994
4
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im Bereichvon Währung und Wirtschaft, April 1997
3
Europäische Organisationen und Gremien im Be-reich von Währung und Wirtschaft, Mai 1997
3
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 bis1989, August 1993
3
The market for German Federal securities,May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model:
MEMMOD, June 2000
Special Statistical Publications
1 Banking statistics guidelines and customer clas-
sification, June 20005
2 Bankenstatistik Kundensystematik Firmenver-
zeichnisse, Juni 20003
3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen,
Januar 20003
4 Financial accounts for Germany 1991 to 1999,
January 2001
5 Annual accounts of west German enterprises
1971 to 1996, March 19991
(The data of this Special Statistical Publication
can also be obtained on diskette for a fee of
currently 50 DM)Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
79*1Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data
contained in the German originals are available in English.
2Also available (in different editions) in French, Spanish,
Russian and Chinese.
3Available in German only.
4Available in English only.
5Only the sections “Monthly Balance Sheet Statistics”,
“External position” and “Customer classification” (“Over-
all survey on sectoral classification”, “Survey on break-
down by industry or activity” and “Explanatory notes on
the system of customer classification by industry or activ-
ity”) are available in English translation.oNot on the Internet.

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2001
80*6 Ratios from the annual accounts of west and
east German enterprises for 1996, September1999
1
(The data of this Special Statistical Publication
can also be obtained on diskette for a fee of
currently 50 DM)
7 Erläuterungen zum Leistungsverzeichnis der
Außenwirtschaftsverordnung,
März 1994o,3
8 Balance of payments statistics of the Federal
Republic of Germany, 2nd edition, February1991
o
9 Securities deposits, August 2000
10 International capital links, May 20001
11 Balance of payments by region,
August 2000
12 Technological services in the balance of pay-
ments, May 20001
Banking regulations
1 Bundesbank Act and Statute of the European
System of Central Banks and of the EuropeanCentral Bank, June 19982 Banking Act, March 2000
2a Grundsatz I über die Eigenmittel der Institute,
Januar 2001
3
2b Grundsatz II über die Liquidität der Institute,
August 19993
7 Instruction sheet for the reporting of large ex-
posures and loans of 3 million Deutsche Markor more pursuant to sections 13 to 14 of the
Banking Act, September 1998
Publications on EMU
Informationsbriefe zur Europäischen Wirtschafts-
und Währungsunion3
euro 2002 – Informationen zur Euro-Bargeldein-führung
3
Nr. 1, Juli 2000
Nr. 2, Oktober 2000
Nr. 3, Februar 2001
Der Euro ist da. Wir sagen Ihnen, worauf es an-
kommt. (Faltblatt)3
For footnotes, see p. 79*.

