Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
Vol. 54
No. 11

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
Deutsche Bundesbank
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 1460431 Frankfurt am Main
Postfach 10 06 02
60006 Frankfurt am MainFederal Republic of Germany
Tel +49 69 9566-1
or +49 69 9566 . . . plus extension
number
Telex 41227 within Germany
414431 from abroad
Fax +49 69 56010 71
Internet http://www.bundesbank.deReproduction permitted only if source is stated.ISSN 0418-8292The German original of this Monthly Report
went to press on 15 November 2002.Annual and weekly publishing schedules for
selected statistics of the Deutsche Bundes-bank can be downloaded from our internetsite. The statistical data are also published onthe internet.
TheMonthly Report is published by the Deut-
sche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main, by vir-tue of section 18 of the Bundesbank Act. It isavailable to interested parties free of charge.

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
ContentsThe economic scene in Germany
in autumn 2002 5
The international and European setting 6
Financial markets in Germany 20Economic conditions in Germany 29Foreign trade and payments 38Public finance 46
Statistical Section 1*
Key economic data for EMU 6*
Overall monetary survey in the EMU 8*Consolidated financial statementof the Eurosystem 16*Banks 20*Minimum reserves 42*Interest rates 43*Capital market 48*Public finance in Germany 52*Economic conditions 60*Foreign trade and payments 67*
Overview of publications by the
Deutsche Bundesbank 77*

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
4

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
5The economic
scene in Germanyin autumn 2002

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
6The international
and EuropeansettingDevelopments in the global economy
Whereas industrial production in the G-7
countries and the smaller countries in west-ern Europe picked up noticeably in the thirdquarter and, at 1%, surpassed the previousyear’s level for the first time since the begin-ning of 2001, the global economic outlookhas clouded over again during the past fewmonths. A sure sign of this is that business ex-pectations and consumer confidence, whichhad recovered visibly up to and into thespring period and had indicated a brisk eco-nomic recovery, have been inching down-wards in most industrial countries since mid-year. Important contributing factors have in-cluded high risk premia, sliding share priceson very volatile stock markets up to early Oc-tober and the speculation-induced rise in oilprices.
However, barring an escalation of the conflict
in the Middle East, the dampening influencesare likely to gradually peter out. Oil priceshave already declined noticeably in the pastfew weeks and listed share prices have re-covered somewhat from their lows, whichmeans that expansionary forces will probablyregain the upper hand in the course of nextyear. However, the winter of 2002-2003 islikely to see only relatively weak global eco-nomic growth, the adverse impact of which islikely to affect the result for 2003 as well. Toprop up the US economy, the Federal Reserveonce again cut interest rates in early Novem-ber; at 1.25%, they are now at their lowestlevel since the 1960s. Euro-area interest rateshave remained unchanged at a relatively lowlevel.Global recovery
without
momentum

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
7In view of the heightened uncertainty and the
drag on the real economy that this is creating,various international organisations and na-tional agencies in industrial countries haverecently scaled back their macroeconomicforecasts, especially those for 2003, and insome cases quite considerably. In its latestedition of the World Economic Outlook pub-lished in September, the International Monet-ary Fund (IMF) predicts that global economicgrowth in 2002 will be 2.8% and, therefore,unchanged from the spring forecast. How-ever, the global outlook for 2003, withgrowth of +3.7%, is no longer as favourableas six months earlier (+4.0%). Now anotherrevision is on the horizon after the IMF scaledback its forecast for the euro area once againat the end of October. According to the IMF’sforecast, global trade will rise by 2.1% and6.1% in 2002 and 2003 respectively, growingin each case half a percentage point moreslowly than had been expected in spring.
The downward revision of the forecast for
the USA for 2003, by 0.8 percentage pointto 2.6%, was particularly pronounced (al-though, from the current perspective, eventhis rate of growth will be difficult toachieve). According to the IMF’s end of Octo-ber forecast, real euro-area GDP is expectedto rise by a paltry 2% (compared with 2.3%in September and 2.9% in April). Followingtwo years of negative productivity growth,the Japanese economy is expected to growby 1.1% in 2003.
The IMF scaled back its forecast for Latin
America considerably in view of the sustainedfinancial turbulence in the region. In the cur-1995=100, seasonally adjusted, log scale
1995 96 97 98 99 00 01 2002JapanUnited KingdomEuro areaof which
United StatesSelected
countries 1three-month moving average
monthlyIndustrial production *
in selected countries
Source: national statistics, Eurostat and the
Bundesbank’s own calculations. — *Includ-
ing mining and energy, excluding construc-
tion. — 1In addition to euro-area countries
and countries shown, the list includes
Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland
and Canada; weighted with the respectiveshare in gross value added of industry in
those countries in 1995.
Deutsche Bundesbank108
104
100
96
92108
104
100
96104120
100116
96112
96108
104116132
112128
108124
104120
100116
98120
116
112
108
104
100
98IMF forecast

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
8rent year, therefore, Latin America’s total eco-
nomic production will shrink by 0.6% in starkcontrast to April predictions which held thatgrowth of 0.7% was probable. Predictedgrowth in 2003 is now 3.0% as against 3.7%as predicted previously. By contrast, the IMFdoes not see any need for a tangible correc-tion of the forecasts for the east Asian emer-ging market economies (including China),which could witness economic growth inexcess of 6% in the coming two forecastyears. The same applies to the central andeast European transition countries (includingthe Commonwealth of Independent States),whose production will probably rise by 3.9%in 2002 and by 4.5% in 2003. What is par-ticularly noteworthy is that, besides Russia,most of the other members of the Common-wealth of Independent States have enteredinto a relatively steep growth track.
Year-on-year consumer price inflation in in-
dustrial countries averaged 1.1% over theJuly-September period compared with 1.0%in the first half of 2002. The fact that the rateof price increase has remained very low is at-tributable to the continuing decline in pricesin Japan. Excluding Japan, consumer priceswere 1.7% higher in the third quarter thana year before. According to the IMF fore-cast, next year inflation pressures in industrialcountries will increase slightly on the whole,particularly because the deflationary tenden-cies in Japan will taper off and prices in theUnited States will rise more sharply for cyclicalreasons.
According to initial estimates, real GDP in the
United States went up in the third quarterby
34% after adjustment for seasonal and
working-day variations compared with a14%
rise in the spring period. Total economic pro-duction increased by 3% on the year. Thestrongest stimulus by far came from privateconsumption, which increased by a seasonallyadjusted 1% and, in nominal terms, was thesole base of support for GDP growth. House-holds’ rather high demand was based for themost part on special factors and thereforecannot be seen as a sign of a sustained up-swing in consumption. One example is thefinancing campaign by car manufacturers,which at times did much to increase car sales;however, sales figures have since begun to re-cede. For the next few months, the anticipa-tory effects triggered by these incentives arelikely to lead to a sales dip on car markets.The other factor is that, because of the rela-tively low level of interest rates, privatehouseholds have, to a considerable extent,refinanced their existing mortgages withinterest rates locked in, which is possible inthe United States with only relatively low pre-payment penalties. The financial room formanoeuvre thereby gained has, in manycases, been used to increase consumerspending. However, this effect will probablyalso expire since the volume of mortgagesnot yet refinanced has already shrunk consid-erably.
Disposable income did not grow as fast as pri-
vate consumption, causing the Q3 householdsaving ratio to fall by one-quarter percentagepoint to 3
34%. Households’ debt service,
which at last report amounted to just over14% of disposable income, had returned toits high levels of the mid-1980s. This is likelyPrice
developments
in industrial
countries
United States

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
9to strain further developments in private con-
sumption. In addition, the ability of risingproperty prices to compensate for the nega-tive wealth effects still being emitted by thestock markets will probably diminish. Con-sumer confidence, which has already been indecline since June, plummeted in October,reaching its lowest level since 1993. In add-ition, the outlook on the labour market hasnot improved. In October, the seasonally ad-justed unemployment rate went back upslightly to 5.7%.
In the summer months, industrial investment
did not decline further for the first time intwo years. It is still unclear, however, whetherinvestment has bottomed out, as the volumeof orders for machinery and equipment re-cently shrank once again by a considerablemargin. In the third quarter, spending on newhousing virtually stagnated at the high levelreached in the spring months. The number ofconstruction permits picked up sharply aftermid-year, however, which means that hous-ing construction is likely to once again makea positive contribution to growth in the com-ing months. Inventories remained largely un-changed in the summer months. The deficitin the real foreign balance rose slightly.
The price climate in the United States re-
mained relatively favourable throughout theperiod under review. Consumer price inflationwas 1.6% in the July-September period,slightly higher than in the first half of the year(1.3%). This mainly reflects abating price pres-sure owing to declining energy prices in thesummer of 2001, however. Core inflation, ieconsumer prices excluding energy and food,continued to decline slightly, going down
to 2.3%. The private consumption deflator,which is highly regarded in the United States,was only 1.1% higher in the third quarterthan its previous year’s level, however.
The agency in Japan responsible for the na-
tional accounts announced this summer thatit had improved its methods of calculatingGDP and its components. These changes arejust one reason why GDP figures for the firsttwo quarters of the current year have nowbeen revised upwards. The first estimate forthe third quarter signalled growth of
34%
after seasonal adjustment. That means that,after bottoming out in the autumn of 2001,total economic production has risen by notless than 2%. Growth exceeded the previousyear’s level in the summer period for the firsttime since early 2001 (by 1
12%). Unlike the
first half of 2002, in which a key expansionarystimulus was generated by foreign trade andpayments, growth was supported exclusivelyby domestic demand. Private and govern-ment consumption rose particularly sharply.Inventory investment contributed one-halfpercentage point to GDP growth. By contrast,gross fixed capital formation continued toinch downwards. The increase in exports, at aseasonally adjusted
12%, was distinctly weak-
er than in the past. However, it was offset bya rather large increase in imports, causing aslight decline in the net foreign balance.
Given that the global economic climate has
once again clouded over, the outlook for theJapanese economy has likewise taken a turnfor the worse. This is indicated by the factthat, in the third quarter, orders for mechan-Japan

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
10ical engineering products declined for the
second quarter running. The continuing de-flation is also a reflection of the delicate situ-ation in which domestic economic activityfinds itself. Over the July-October period,consumer prices were, on average, 0.8%lower than a year before. On the whole, thesevere problems besetting the financial sec-tor, in particular, are preventing the Japan-ese economy from undergoing a lastingand broadly-based revival. It is questionablewhether the recently adopted measures toalleviate the strain being placed on banksby non-performing loans will be enough torevive the ailing Japanese financial sector.
According to initial calculations, economic
growth in the United Kingdom, after adjust-ment for seasonal and working-day vari-ations, was
34% in the summer quarter and
thus even stronger than in the spring months;the year-on-year growth rate was 1
34%. This
expansion, which was much stronger than inother industrial countries, was supported bythe service sector, which generated
34%
more value added after adjustment for priceand seasonal variations than in the secondquarter of the year. Retail trade and accom-modation services fared particularly well. Atthe least, industry no longer held back totaleconomic growth. The decisive demandstimulus driving the expansion of real GDPcame from the increase in private householdexpenditure. This was supported by a goodlabour market environment and a moderaterate of price increase of 1.7% in the July-October period (excluding mortgage rates,the rate of consumer price increase was2.1%). Furthermore, property values, whichrose sharply throughout the period under re-
view, fuelled households’ propensity to con-sume. It is questionable, however, whetherthe boom in the real-estate market, withproperty prices rising over 20% in a twelve-month period, is not already a bubble waitingto burst and turn into negative growth,which could put a strain on economic growthin the United Kingdom.
Macroeconomic trends in the euro area
Real euro-area GDP rose by
12% in the spring
months after seasonal adjustment, the samerate as in the winter months. Total economicproduction increased by
34% on the year.
However, growth was supported morestrongly by domestic demand than in thepast. The main factor was that private con-sumption, having fallen in real terms in thefirst quarter of the year, rose by
14% after
seasonal adjustment. By contrast, fixed cap-ital formation sagged once again, falling 4%below its last high recorded at the end of2000. Inventories were depleted further, al-though the decline was only slightly lowerthan earlier. Seasonally adjusted exports andimports went back up for the first time sincethe end of 2000 by 1
12% and 114% respect-
ively. That resulted in a contribution togrowth of one-quarter percentage point.
However, the economic recovery in the euro
area also lacked force after the middle of theyear. In the July-August period, seasonally ad-justed industrial production was barely higherthan in the second quarter and was still
12%
lower than its muted level at the same time inUnited
KingdomModerate GDP
growth in the
spring period
No stable
upswing in the
summer either

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
11the previous year. Initial country results for
September indicate a decline in the euro areaafter seasonal adjustment; therefore, indus-trial production probably increased onlyslightly in the summer quarter. According tothe survey commissioned by the EuropeanCommission, capacity utilisation in the manu-facturing sector nevertheless rose by one-halfpercentage point between July and October.However, a closer look reveals that this rise isattributable, inter alia , to quite volatile move-
ments in mostly smaller member states.These movements should not be taken atface value.
In October, seasonally adjusted business con-
fidence in the euro area improved a little afterdeteriorating in the four preceding months.This result should not be overinterpreted,however, since other key indicators tend tosuggest that the economy will run more slow-ly in the winter. In the quarterly survey, the as-sessment of incoming orders was distinctlyweaker in October than in July. In addition,consumer sentiment in October was at itslowest level since November 2001.
Although economic growth tended to be
sluggish, the labour market situation re-mained quite stable. From July to September,the standardised unemployment rate heldfirm at 8.3% after 8.1% at the beginning ofthe year and 8.0% in the summer of 2001.Unemployment among women, which was9.7% in September, hardly rose at all on theyear, while the standardised unemploymentrate for men, who tend to work in industrieswhich are more sensitive to the businesscycle, rose by 0.4% to 7.2%.General price developments continued to set-
tle down in the summer months. In the thirdquarter, seasonally adjusted and annualisedconsumer prices, measured in terms of theHarmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP),were up by only 1.7% from the second quar-ter. Their year-on-year rise decelerated slightlyto 2.0%. Lower prices for unprocessed foodand energy, in particular, contributed to themore favourable development over thecourse of the year. Excluding these volatilecomponents, the annual rate of increase wasprojected at 2.2% in the summer, following2.5% in the second quarter and 2.6% in thefirst. Year-on-year core inflation in the thirdquarter declined to 2.5%, representing only aminute change from 2.6% in the first half ofthe year. Prices for manufactured goods (ex-cluding sources of energy) rose by only 1.4%on the year, a relatively low rate of increase;this contrasted with a much higher rate ofprice increase for processed food (+2.9%)and services (+3.3%). According to Eurostatestimates, inflation was 2.2% in October.
Consumer surveys by the European Commis-
sion revealed that, despite lower headlineinflation rates in the summer months, “per-ceived” inflation initially continued to risesomewhat, while net inflation expectationsdeclined. “Perceived” inflation has remainedat a high level since August.
The regional spread of inflation rates changed
only relatively little on the whole during thesummer months. The spread between thehighest inflation rate (in Ireland) and the low-est rate (in Germany) narrowed from 3.7 to3.4 percentage points. Measured in terms of
Results of EU
survey mixed
Little change
in the labour
marketMore
favourable
price
developments
in the summer
“Perceived”
inflation
remains high
Diverging
inflation rates

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
12the weighted standard deviation of core infla-
tion rates, which takes account of the coun-tries’ varying sizes and, at the same time, can-cels out random fluctuations caused by vola-tile prices, the gap between lower-inflationand higher-inflation countries has widenedsomewhat again, however, after expandingin the spring months already.
Euro-area current account and
exchange rates
During the summer months, euro-area for-
eign trade exerted hardly any positive influ-ence on economic growth. In the last threemonths for which such data are available(June-August 2002), exports remained virtu-ally unchanged from the preceding three-month period (March-May 2002) after adjust-
ment for seasonal and working-day vari-ations. During the same period, imports in-creased by about
12%. The euro-area trade
surplus therefore declined slightly, reaching aseasonally adjusted 334 billion in the June-
August period following 335
12billion in the
preceding three-month period.
By contrast, the euro area’s seasonally adjust-
ed foreign trade balance in “invisible” currenttransactions with non-euro-area partners im-proved. Current transfers by the euro area tonon-euro-area countries went down sharplyon balance. Net expenditure on factor in-come was also considerably lower during theJune-August period than before, whereas inthe case of services the seasonally adjustednet income gain declined. Despite the slightlylower trade surplus, the euro-area current ac-count therefore closed, on balance, with aseasonally adjusted surplus of 315
12billion
for the period of June-August 2002 asagainst 310
12billion for the preceding three-
month period.
In the autumn months, the euro held its own
remarkably well in an environment plaguedby great uncertainty and even continued tostabilise as of late. It held steady against theUS dollar, in particular, for several monthsafter having appreciated distinctly up to mid-July. From then until early November, therates fluctuated within a tight band of aroundUS$0.03 just below parity between the euroand the US dollar. Such a long phase of rela-tive stability in the US dollar/euro exchangerate is unprecedented. As before, varying re-ports on the future outlook on each sideQ3 2002
- 1 0123 % pointsGermany
Belgium
Finland
France
Austria
Luxembourg
Italy
Spain
Greece
NetherlandsPortugal
IrelandInflation differentials in the
euro area *
* Change in Harmonised Index of Consumer
Prices from Q3 2001; difference between na-
tional inflation rate and euro-area average.
Deutsche Bundesbank
Foreign trade
and current
accountThe euro’s
exchange
rate...
...against the
US dollar,...

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
13of the Atlantic played a key role in daily
exchange rate fluctuations. However, suchchanges unleashed dampening balancingforces earlier than usual and these held theexchange rate in a narrow band. Parity withthe US dollar represented a line of resistancewhich was difficult to overcome. The eurohad initially reached this line in mid-July butcould only stay there for a few days. Un-favourable business indicators for the euroarea and heightened general uncertainty inthe weeks prior to 11 September 2002 con-tinued to put pressure on the euro in theperiod that followed; however, the euro didnot fall below around US$0.97.
In mid-September, the euro was given an-
other boost after it became known that inAugust US industrial production, contrary tothe expectations of most market participants,had fallen for the first time this year. How-ever, when it became clear that the budget-ary situation in the large euro-area countries,particularly Germany, had deteriorated sharp-ly, the pendulum swung back in the otherdirection. This countermovement was add-itionally fuelled by strains caused by thesubsequent debate about the Stability andGrowth Pact and the imminent increase inthe tax burden arising from the coalitionagreements. Given that forecasts for theUnited States were being corrected down-wards as well, however, the euro fell by arelatively small margin during this period.
However, new disappointing business indica-
tors for the United States and particularly asharp cut in interest rates by the US FederalReserve, which was seen by market partici-pants as confirmation that the US economy
was growing sluggishly, caused the euro tomake significant gains against the US dollarin early November, which did not stop at par-ity. At US$1.01 as of late, the euro had re-turned to its previous high for the year asreached in mid-July.
Up until mid-October, the euro made distinct
gains against the Japanese yen. It went upfrom a mid-August level of ¥115 to a recentlevel of ¥121, a 5% appreciation. The yenwas burdened by the fact that prospects forfurther economic recovery in Japan, whichhad rested on temporary success in exportbusiness, clouded over again in the autumnmonths. In addition, suggestions that the yenshould be actively weakened by having theBank of Japan sell yen to fight deflation in-creased depreciation pressure on the yen inmid-September. The decision somewhat laterby the Bank of Japan to acquire securitiesheld by credit institutions in order to improvethe balance-sheet structure of the ailingbanking system had a similar effect, as thisstrengthened the impression that the Japan-ese financial system’s unresolved structuralproblems are more stubborn than many hadhitherto assumed.
In the autumn months, the pound sterling
changed relatively little against the euro.Since late summer, the rate has been moving,much like that of the euro to the US dollar,within a relatively tight band of around £0.63to the euro. The comparatively robust UKeconomy has maintained the value of thepound sterling at a relatively high levelagainst the euro.
...the Japanese
yen...
...and the
pound sterling

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
14In the autumn months up to early November,
the euro’s external value against the weight-ed average of the currencies of the euroarea’s most important trading partners re-mained practically unchanged just below itspeak for the year reached in July. Only follow-ing the most recent substantial exchange rategains achieved by the euro against the USdollar did the effective exchange rate go backup distinctly. As this report went to press, theeuro – in terms of a weighted average – was
again quoted at this year’s peak as reached inmid-July. However, at its introduction the ex-ternal value of the euro was 11% higher.Even if differences in the inflation rates of theeuro-area countries and the non-euro-areapartner countries are taken into account, theoutcome is still a real depreciation of 6%compared with early 1999 levels. This meansthat the competitiveness of euro-area manu-facturers on global markets is still being sup-ported by the exchange rate.
Monetary policy and financial markets
in the euro area
The Governing Council of the European Cen-
tral Bank did not change the Eurosystem’s keyinterest rates in the past few months. Theweekly main refinancing operations were allconducted as variable rate tenders with aminimum bid rate of 3.25%, while the inter-est rates on the marginal refinancing facilityand the deposit facility remained at 4.25%and 2.25% respectively. This “steady-as-she-goes” interest policy was consistent with theassessment that risks to monetary stabilitywere balanced. Although monetary growthremained strong, this was mainly a reflectionof the considerable uncertainty gripping thefinancial markets, which meant that theeconomy’s abundance of liquidity did not cre-ate any direct threat of inflation. This is alsoevinced by the fact that the early indicators ofbusiness activity and business confidencecontinued to point to muted economicactivity. By applying a steady-handed policygeared towards ensuring monetary stability,Monthly, log scale
1999Q1=100
Real effective exchange rate 1... US dollar... pound sterling
... Japanese yenJanuary 1999 =100
Exchange rate of the euro
against the ...
Weekly
averagesExchange rate of the euro
1Against the currencies of a narrow group
of countries based on consumer prices.
Deutsche Bundesbank105
100
95
90
85
80105
100
95
90
85
80
75
70
1999 2000 2001 2002
Effective
exchange rate
of the euroEurosystem’s
interest rates
unchanged

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
15Money market management and liquidity needs
In the past few months, main refinancing oper-
ations remained the sole method of ongoingmoney market management; recourse to fine-tuning operations was not sought. Whengauging the main refinancing operations, theEurosystem made particularly sure that liquidityeffects caused by the strong fluctuations in gen-eral government deposits with the Eurosystem –most notably towards the end of the reservemaintenance periods because of tax payments inItaly but also at the end of each month – wereoffset in the timeliest manner possible. In add-ition, account had to be taken of the severewithdrawal of funds owing to the continuedsharp rise in the volume of banknotes in circula-tion, which exceeded the previous year’s levelfor the first time in October. Lastly, the reductionin the outstanding volume of longer-term refi-nancing operations decided by the ECB Govern-ing Council in July had to be taken into account.At the end of July, August and September (forthe last time), longer-term refinancing oper-ations of 520 billion each reached maturity and
were not completely offset by new transactionsworth 515 billion each. On the whole, the Euro-
system’s liquidity management has enabledcredit institutions to meet their reserve require-ments relatively steadily. It was only at the endof the reserve maintenance periods in Septem-ber and October and, as usual, at the end of themonth and quarter that the overnight moneyrate (Eonia) varied relatively sharply from themain refinancing rate.
Between July and October, the autonomous fac-
tors determining bank liquidity withdrew 54 bil-
lion net from credit institutions (see adjacenttable). The sharp rise in the volume of banknotesin circulation contrasted with an evident declinein general government deposits with the Euro-system. The minimum reserve requirement fellby53 billion during the period under review.
The Eurosystem met the remaining additionalliquidity requirements by increasing the volumeof its open market operations by 51 billion net
to an average of 5191.4 billion. On the whole,
recourse to the standing facilities remainedslight and was concentrated at the ends of thereserve maintenance periods.
1For longer-term trends and the contribution of the
Deutsche Bundesbank, see pages 14* and 15* of the Statis-tical Section of the Monthly Report .— 2Including end
of quarter valuation adjustments with no impact on li-quidity. — 3Including monetary policy operations con-
cluded in stage two and still outstanding in stage three(outright transactions and the issuance of debt certifi-cates).
Deutsche BundesbankFactors determining bank liquidity1
5billion; calculated on the basis of
daily averages of the maintenance periods
2002
Item24 July
to23 Aug24 Aug
to23 Sep24 Sep
to23 Oct
I Provision (+) or absorption
(–) of central bankbalances by
1 Change in banknotes in
circulation (increase: –) – 9.3 – 0.9 – 5.6
2 Change in general
government depositswith the Eurosystem(increase: –) + 3.5 + 1.8 + 3.5
3 Change in net foreign
reserves
2– 9.1 + 2.3 + 7.7
4 Other factors3+ 9.5 – 0.9 – 6.5
Total – 5.4 + 2.3 – 0.9
II Monetary policy oper-
ations of the Eurosystem
1 Open market
operations
(a) Main refinancing
operations + 8.8 + 1.7 + 5.2
(b) Longer-term
refinancingoperations – 4.8 – 4.4 – 5.5
(c) Other operations – – –
2 Standing facilities
(a) Marginal lending
facility – 0.1 + 0.0 – 0.0
(b) Deposit facility
(increase: –) + 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.1
Total + 4.0 – 2.8 – 0.2
III Change in credit institu-
tions’ current accounts( I+I I ) –1 . 5 –0 . 3 –1 . 3
IV Change in the minimum
reserve requirement(increase: –) + 1.4 + 0.3 + 1.3

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
16the Governing Council sought to calm the
volatile financial markets and provide reliablegeneral guidance for investors and con-sumers.
Given that the minimum bid rate on main re-
financing operations was stable, the over-night money rates (Eonia) hardly changedapart from fluctuations at the end of the re-serve maintenance periods and at the end ofthe month. However, time deposit rates fell,with rates in the longer-term areas fallingmuch faster than in the short-term areas. Thiscaused the yield curve on the money marketto change from a rather flat shape to an in-verted shape. Market participants obviouslyassume that central bank interest rates willfall in the future.Euro-area M3 growth picked up steam in the
summer months. Seasonally adjusted and an-nualised M3 growth in the third quarter was10% compared to just under 7
12% in the
second quarter. This increase was even higherin September. Owing to base effects, how-ever, this acceleration is not at all or onlybarely visible in the year-on-year rates. Bythat token, in September 2002, M3 was up7.4% on the year compared with 7.1% inJune. The three-month moving average ofannual rates of change even went downslightly from 7.3% for the April-June periodto 7.1% in July-September. Portfolio shiftswere the main cause of the rise in the moneystock. Investors’ unease regarding develop-ments in interest rates and stock marketscontinued to make temporary investment inliquid and secure M3 components appear tobe an attractive option.
Among the individual components of M3,
overnight deposits were once again increasedsharply in the third quarter. Two-thirds of thisseasonally adjusted increase took place inSeptember when share prices plummeted byaround 18%. Euro currency in circulation like-wise grew significantly. At the end of Septem-ber, it was just slightly below its level at thesame time in the previous year, which meansthat the sharp decrease in cash in the lastquarter of 2001 has now been almost com-pletely offset. All in all, M1 grew by a season-ally adjusted annual rate of 13% in the July-September period as against 11% in thesecond quarter. The other short-term bankdeposits grew only sluggishly by contrast.Deposits with an agreed maturity of up totwo years, in particular, were weak; theirChange from previous year, seasonally adjusted
%
%
Memo item
German contribution
to M3
Scale reducedEuro area
Three-month moving
average
Reference value: 4½%Growth of the money stock
M3 in the euro area
Deutsche Bundesbank12+
10+
8+
6+
4+
2+
0
2−8
7654
3
1999 2000 2001 2002
Inverted yield
curve on the
money marketSharp increase
in the money
stock
Components of
the money
stock

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
17year-on-year growth rate at the end of Sep-
tember was only just under 1%. Deposits re-deemable with a period of notice of up tothree months, however, remained in demand.Between July and September, marketable in-struments picked up sharply. Money marketfund shares/units contributed in large part tothis development, as they are especially suit-ed to the short-term investment of funds atmarket rates. There was also a perceptible in-crease in repo transactions.
In the summer months, euro-area MFIs in-
creased their loans to the domestic privatesector by a seasonally adjusted and annual-ised rate of just under 5% compared withjust under 6% between April and June.Against the background of muted economicactivity in the euro area, which tends to curbthe propensity to borrow in spite of the factthat the terms of finance are generally good,the pace of private credit expansion is cur-rently much slower than that of monetarygrowth. Since MFIs also reduced their securi-tised lending to euro-area companies by 38
billion during the period under review, theyear-on-year increase in total lending to thedomestic private sector dropped from 5.4%at the end of June to 5.1% by the end ofSeptember. The reduction in lending to euro-area general governments continued in thethird quarter. Within this category, only loanswere reduced whilst MFIs’ holdings of secur-ities issued by domestic public authorities in-creased. The propensity to deposit funds witheuro-area MFIs over the longer term re-mained muted during the summer months.Excluding capital and reserves, monetary cap-ital was up by 4.5% on the year at the endof September as against 4.6% at the end of
June. The third quarter saw renewed net in-flows of funds in payments with non-euro-area countries, although these were smallerthan in the preceding quarter. Securitiestransactions with non-euro-area countries areonce again likely to have made a key contri-bution to this development.
The expectations of market participants re-
garding economic activity, which have beenmuted since the summer, also left their markon the capital market. Long-term capital mar-ket rates in the euro area fell by just over one-half percentage point after mid-year. As aconsequence of the even steeper fall in inter-est rates in the United States, the euro area’syield spread initially widened from aroundone-third of a percentage point in July tothree-quarters of a percentage point in thefirst half of October. Then, within the spaceof a few days, the yield on ten-year govern-ment bonds shot up by one-quarter percent-age point in the euro area and even by one-half percentage point in the United States.The reason for this temporary increase is tobe found not so much in improved expect-ations regarding economic activity but ratherin portfolio shifts from bonds to shares,which is consistent with the capital gains onthe stock markets which took place at thesame time. When this report went to press,the average yield on ten-year euro-area gov-ernment bonds had returned to 4
12%. This
meant that long-term capital market rates inEurope were just under two-thirds of a per-centage point higher than in the UnitedStates.Balance-sheet
counterpartsCapital market
rates down

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
18Market participants’ long-term inflation ex-
pectations derived from inflation-indexedbonds and from surveys remained largely un-changed during the period under review atbetween 1
12% and 134%. The decline in
nominal interest rates is, therefore, primarilya reflection of a fall in real interest rates. Bymid-September, the expected real interestrate for ten-year bonds had dropped to2
23%. The rate had risen again by the timethis report went to press in November, al-
though it remained well below its level ofmid-2002.
The decline in interest rates since the summer
months was more pronounced in the shorter-term maturities than in the longer-term ma-turities. As this report went to press, the yieldcurve of German Federal securities was steep-er than in the summer months. This suggeststhat investors are expecting the economy toimprove and interest rates to rise over themedium term, while in the short term theystill expect interest rates to decline – asshown by the inverted shape of the yieldcurve on the money market.
Initially, risk premia on corporate bonds con-
tinued to rise in the summer months. After abrief period of calm, the upward trend inyield spreads continued, peaking for 2002 at280 basis points at the beginning of October.Then, in step with the more favourable stockmarket developments, they receded some-what yet remained at a relatively high level.Whereas the increase in risk premia in thespring months was mostly as a result of di-minished confidence owing to various ac-counting scandals, the latest increase is prob-ably a reflection of the deterioration in mar-ket participants’ expectations regarding eco-nomic activity.
Against the background of the entrenched
crisis of confidence among investors, in thethird quarter stock market prices in the euroarea continued to nosedive as they had donesince April. Between the beginning of Julyand the beginning of October, the Dow JonesDaily data
%
Per-
cent-
age
points%
Per
cent-
age
points
Yield spread of European
corporate bonds2
2001 2002Yield spread
between the US bond market
and the euro-area averageYield on ten-year government
bonds outstanding
Euro-area
average 1USABond market yields
in the euro area
1Weighted average yield on ten-year gov-
ernment bonds issued by all euro-area
countries; weighted by GDP. — 2Seven to
ten-year BBB-rated European corporate
bonds over government bonds with com-parable maturities; three-day moving aver-
age; source: Merrill Lynch indexes.
Deutsche Bundesbank3.5
3.0
2.52.0
1.50.5+
0
0.5−
1.0−5.5
4.55.0
4.04.5
3.5
JASO N DJF M A M J JASO N D
Hardly any
change in
inflation
expectationsYield curve
somewhat
steeper
Risk premia on
non-top-rated
corporate
bonds still high
Visible losses on
stock markets

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
19EuroStoxx index fell by over 30% to its lowest
level since the spring of 1997. Since then,European companies’ share prices have re-covered somewhat. When this report went topress, they were around one-third lower thantheir level at the beginning of the year andmore than one-half lower than their all-timehighs of March 2000.
As share prices plummeted, uncertainty re-
garding further stock price developments,which is expressed in the implied volatility ofindex options, rose to record heights up tothe beginning of October. Since that time,stock price uncertainty has abated slightly buthas still been at levels last recorded after theterror attacks of September 2001. Gloomierbusiness prospects and the general collapseof share prices hit financial assets especiallyhard. The fact that banks’ and insurers’profits were put under pressure by reductionsin the value of their financial holdings playedan important role. This is especially true of in-stitutions which had increased their holdingsin listed companies during the bull marketphase.
Owing to structural weakness on the stock
markets
1and uncertainty regarding further
developments in corporate profitability, in-vestors’ confidence could not be regained inthe third quarter of the year. Most analystsonce again downgraded their medium-termgrowth forecasts for corporate earnings.However, these downward revisions of esti-mates continue to be based on the expect-ation that profits will recover perceptibly.Owing to the fact that share prices fell oncemore during the period under review, theprice-earnings ratios have now fallen well
below their average of the past ten years. Thedispersion of analysts’ estimates was on thedecline in the third quarter yet remained at arelatively high level. According to market ex-perts, therefore, uncertainty remains over fur-ther developments in the profitability of listedcompanies.Monthly data
 5 
%
... as a percentage of the respective
    share price2Expected average annual
corporate profits ...
... per share2Dow Jones EuroStoxx index 1Share price developments
and profit estimates
for Europeanpublic limited companies
1End of 1991 = 100; source:  Deutsche Börse
AG. — 2Based on I / B / E / S analyst estimates
for the Dow Jones EuroStoxx index; source:
Thomson Financial.
Deutsche Bundesbank8
7
6
5
4
321
20
19
18
17
16
15500
450400
350
300
250200
2000 2001 2002
1See: Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report,
August 2002, p 21.Continuing
anxiety on
stock
exchanges
Crisis of
confidence not
yet overcome
Profit estimates
downgraded
once again

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
20The financial
markets in GermanyCapital market and bank interest rates
In line with European yields, German capital
market rates have fallen sharply on balancesince the mid-year point. In mid-Novemberthe yield on ten-year Federal bonds outstand-ing was 4.4%, which was a good
12percent-
age point down on early July. Compared withthe average rate of other European govern-ment bonds, the interest rate discount onthese bonds moved within a narrow band ofbetween 15 and 20 basis points in the periodunder review. The interest-rate advantage often-year bonds issued by domestic banksover similar government bonds has hardlychanged since the summer months. Whenthis article went to press in mid-November,the spread was just under 30 basis points,well down on the average of previous years.The poor performance of German bankshares (see page 21) has therefore not re-sulted in higher risk premia for bank bonds.
Whereas short-term bank interest rates,
which are more strongly influenced by moneymarket conditions, showed little change be-tween July and October, the longer-termdebit interest rates fell sharply, albeit some-what less than capital market rates. The costof mortgage loans at a rate of interest lockedin for ten years decreased on average by justunder
12percentage point to 5.7%. The de-
cline in effective interest rates on long-termfixed-rate corporate loans was somewhatsmaller. In October the rates were 6.3% (for acredit volume of 3100,000 to less than
3500,000) and 6.1% (for a credit volume of
3500,000 to less than 35 million). By con-
trast, the rates charged for current accountDecline in
capital market
rates
Little change
in short-term
bank rates but
lower long-
term rates

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
21credit (for a credit volume of 3500,000 to less
than 32.5 million) and for personal credit
lines hardly changed at all; they were, onaverage, 8.6% and 12.5% respectively in Oc-tober. On the liabilities side of the balancesheet, the interest rate paid in October onfixed-term deposits with a maturity of onemonth was 2.6% and on those with a matur-ity of three months 2.7% (for an investmentamount of 350,000 to less than 3500,000), ie
a few basis points lower than in July.
Share prices
Against the background of falling prices in
the international financial markets, quota-tions in the German share markets have alsodeclined considerably in recent months. Inthe first half of October, the broad index forGerman equities (CDAX) was at times nearly40% down on its mid-year position, thus fall-ing to its lowest level since 1995. Prices havesince recovered slightly but at the end of theperiod under review they were still 26%down on their mid-year level. Prices werethus still almost two-thirds down on the his-torical peak reached in May 2000.
In particular, the prices of financial assets
have fallen dramatically. For example, com-pared with early July, insurance companies re-corded, on balance, a loss of 46% of theirstock market capitalisation, with banks losing37%. Given the economic imponderables,the expectation that banks would expandtheir loan risk provisions became stronger. Inaddition, concern grew about further write-downs on bank loans granted to “New Econ-omy” enterprises in the late 1990s. Further-
more, the slide in prices of financial assets isalso likely to have been affected by the de-cline in valuation reserves. This applies, in par-ticular, to financial institutions which hadtopped up their equity portfolios during theboom period.
As a result of falling prices and virtually un-
changed profit expectations, the valuationDaily data
%
Percent-
age
points
July Aug Sep Oct NovLog scale
Equity market
CDAX index2for ...
... total market
... banks... insurance
    companiesYield spread of bank bonds
over Federal bonds 1Bond market
Yield on ...
... bank bonds outstanding 1
... Federal bonds
    outstanding 1Valuations of German
financial institutions on the
bond and equity markets
1With a mean residual maturity of more
than nine and up to ten years. — 21 July
2002 = 100, source: Deutsche Börse AG.
Deutsche Bundesbank110
100
90
80
70
60
50
400.50
0.25
05.50
5.255.00
4.75
4.50
4.25
2002Major price
slump on the
equity market

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
22level of German blue chips (ratio of price to
year-on-year expected profits) moved intoline with the level of European enterprises inOctober. The price/earnings ratio of DAX en-terprises is now well below its long-term aver-age. The estimated profits which it includesare, however, based on the assumption thatthe performance of German blue chips willmake a noticeable recovery.
Borrowing in the securities markets
Issuing activity in the German bond market
overcame the slight weakness of spring 2002and picked up again in the summer. Calcu-lated at market prices, gross sales of debtsecurities issued by domestic borrowersamounted to 3232 billion in the third quarter,compared with 3212 billion in the previous
three-month period. With only a minor in-crease in redemptions and in issuers’ holdingsof their own bonds and notes, net sales ofdomestic fixed-interest securities raised 353
billion, compared with 336
12billion in the
preceding period. Thus, far more bonds is-sued by German enterprises ( 3137
12billion)
were sold in the first three quarters of 2002than in the whole of 2001 ( 386
12billion).
However, there was a slight decline in foreignbonds and notes; at 314 billion in the third
quarter of 2002, net sales were somewhatdown on the second quarter ( 318
12billion).
Between July and September 367 billion (net)
of domestic and foreign debt securities weresold, as opposed to 355 billion in the preced-
ing three months.
Just under half of the borrowing on the Ger-
man bond market in the summer was by thepublic sector, which expanded its bondeddebt by 324 billion (previous quarter: 321
12
billion). Of this amount, the Federal Govern-
ment accounted for 322 billion and the Land
governments for 310 billion. By contrast, 38
billion worth of bonds issued by special fundssuch as the Federal Railways Fund, the Cur-rency Conversion Equalisation Fund and theTreuhand agency were redeemed. These spe-cial funds are no longer involved in the bondmarket as issuers. They refinance their liabil-ities by issuing Federal securities.
The German Finance Agency continued to
pursue its strategy of shortening the residualmaturity of government debt in order to re-duce the Federal Government’s current inter-est burden. In the third quarter the FederalMonthly averages
%
Current account credit 1
Lending to
enterprises3Mortgage
loans2
Yield on
bank bonds4Bank interest rates
in Germany
1 5  500,000 and more, but less than  5  2.5 
million. — 2 On residential property; ef-
fective interest rate, locked in for ten
years. — 3 Long-term fixed-rate loans to
enterprises and self-employed persons of
 5 100,000 and more, but less than
 5  500,000. — 4 With a mean residual matur-
ity of more than nine and up to ten years.
Deutsche Bundesbank9
8
7
6
5
4
1998 1999 2000 2001 2002
Bond salesSlight increase
in the public
sector
Major issue of
short-term
Federal
securities

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
23Government issued 3912billion (net) of Treas-
ury discount paper (“Bubills”) with a six-month maturity and 37 billion of two-year
Federal Treasury notes (“Schätze”). Issues offive-year Federal notes (“Bobls”) were up by33
12billion, those of ten-year Federal bonds
by3212billion and those of thirty-year Fed-
eral bonds by 31 billion. Federal savings notes
worth 31 billion net were repurchased.
After a poor spring, there was a sharp in-
crease in the issue of bank bonds in the thirdquarter. Net sales of this kind of paper wentup from only 39 billion in April to 321 billion
in June. This increase was accounted for pri-marily by sales of other bank bonds, whichraised 324
12billion, followed by those of
debt securities issued by other specialisedcredit institutions, which raised 35 billion. By
contrast, the volume of public Pfandbriefeoutstanding shrank by 38
12billion. Sales of
corporate bonds also increased in the thirdquarter ( 38 billion, following 35
12billion in
the second quarter).
Against a backdrop of plummeting prices on
the stock exchanges, issuing activity in theGerman equity market was again weaker inthe third quarter than in previous quarters.Between July and September domestic enter-prises placed only 31
12billion worth of new
shares, compared with just under 3212billion
in the previous three months. Sales had lastbeen at a similarly low level in the third quar-ter of 1996. On balance, the outstanding vol-ume of equities issued by foreign enterpriseswas slightly down, by 3
12billion, after in-
creasing by 31512billion between April and
June. Total borrowing in the equity marketdeclined from 318 billion in the second quar-
ter to only 31 billion in the third.
Investment activity
in the securities markets
In the third quarter foreign investors and do-
mestic non-banks were the main buyers inthe bond market. Foreign investors purchased336 billion worth of domestic bonds, far
more than in the second quarter ( 320
12bil-
lion). Domestic non-banks added 33512bil-
lion to their bond portfolios, most of which(328 billion) was domestic paper. By contrast,
German credit institutions reduced their bondholdings by 35 billion. This includes portfolio
shifts from domestic paper (- 311
12billion) to
foreign paper ( 3612billion).Investment activity in the German
securities markets
5bn
2002 2001
ItemApr to
JuneJuly to
SepJuly to
Sep
Bonds and notes
Residents 34.6 30.7 23.5
Credit institutions 15.9 – 5.0 – 8.2of which
Foreign bonds andnotes 8.1 6.5 2.9
Non-banks 18.7 35.7 31.6of which
Domestic bonds andnotes 8.2 28.0 27.3
Non-residents 20.5 36.1 20.3
Shares
Residents 6.3 2.3 – 9.6
Credit institutions – 9.1 – 5.6 – 16.3of which
Domestic shares – 3.4 – 4.2 – 14.3
Non-banks 15.4 7.9 6.6of which
Domestic shares – 5.6 7.1 8.3
Non-residents 11.6 – 1.2 10.5
Investment fund certificates
Investment in specialised
funds 11.1 7.4 5.9Investment in funds open tothe general public 4.6 4.6 4.5of which: Share-based funds 1.0 – 0.5 – 2.1
Deutsche BundesbankMore funds
raised by the
banks
Few funds
raised on the
equity market
Bond purchases

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
24Deutsche BundesbankThe impact of the decline in share prices on economic activity
Since spring 2002 global share prices have again
been tumbling from what was still a very high level;in Germany alone they have fallen by nearly 40%.Along with accounting scandals in the United States,this was mainly due to the worsening of the globaleconomic outlook. The experience of various coun-tries reveals that what occurs in the financial systemcan have a profound impact on the real economy.Especially in economic regions such as the USA,where shares are of relatively major importance asinvestment and financing instruments, share pricesmay affect the development of the economy and re-inforce current trends.
Although credit institutions continue to play a dom-
inant role in Germany in terms of financial flows,elements based on the financial markets have alsobecome increasingly important in this respect in re-cent years. Events in the financial markets are there-fore likely to have a greater effect on cyclical devel-opments than in the past. However, it is difficult tofind empirically significant links between the twobecause the time-frame for measuring share priceeffects in Germany is still very short and shares con-tinue to play a relatively minor role. Moreover,equity investment is concentrated on certain cat-egories of households and the funds raised focus oncertain types of enterprises or financing purposes.Even so, owing to households stepping up their dir-
ect investment and their indirect investment via mu-tual funds, consumer demand is likely to have be-come more dependent on share price movements.Estimations over lengthy periods show that a 30%to 40% decline in the value of households’ equityholdings since April 2002 is likely to lead to a private-consumption-induced slowing of GDP growth inGermany by
110to210percentage point, assuming
that asset losses due to price developments are per-sistent. In the vast majority of cases, this wealth ef-fect sets in within one year. At the same time, how-ever, it should also be noted that major portfolioshifts in the international capital markets haveboosted the prices of fixed-interest securities bynearly 4% on average since early April. Householdswith mixed securities portfolios have thus alsoachieved gains in some areas.
For enterprises, the price slump has meant that the
equity market has practically dried up as a source offinancing. Any directly related adverse impacts oninvestment activity are likely, if anything, to be limit-ed as, even in the boom years of 1996 to 2000, nomore than around 7% of corporate financing wasraised through share issuance and only a fairly smallpart of this was linked to fixed capital formation.However, in certain sectors, such as technology, the
1This corresponds, by and large, to James Tobin’s q theory, which
postulates a connection between the equity market and the demandfor investment goods. Investment occurs if the resultant additionalcapitalisation value of a listed company is higher than the costs of the
required capital outlay. If the cost of capital remains constant, fallingshare prices lead to enterprises curtailing their investment activity. In

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
25percentage was considerably larger. If the bear mar-
ket continues, it is likely to discourage investmentprojects in these sectors, which might otherwise pro-vide a valuable stimulus to long-term growth.
In the corporate balance sheets, a marked fall in the
prices of listed shares leads, pursuant to the provi-sions of the German Commercial Code, to the needfor value adjustments to be made if book values areundershot. Those firms which are facing growingbalance sheet risks are precisely those which hadsharply increased their equity holdings in listed com-panies during the boom period. Lower profits or apoorer outlook for profitability are, in turn, puttingthe brake on corporate willingness to invest or re-stricting the range of financing options. Moreover,perhaps as a result of their significantly lower mar-ket capitalisation, public limited companies are com-ing under pressure from their shareholders or facingthe threat of hostile takeovers. In order to effect arapid increase in the value of a firm on the stockmarket, the next step is often to take radical busi-ness policy measures to improve performance, suchas a restructuring of business units and cutbacks ininvestment plans.
1
The recent dramatic falls in prices have alsoworsened the balance sheet and performance situ-ation of banks and insurance companies and have
thus led to the introduction of a more cautious busi-ness policy. This also makes it more difficult to raisebusiness loan financing. Moreover, in the bond mar-kets, higher risk premia are being required of cer-tain categories of borrowers. Overall, financial mar-ket developments have therefore contributed to adeterioration in the environment for the financingof investment plans.
Feedback effects of share prices on enterprises and
households are the result of “soft” factors such asconsumer confidence and enterprises’ business ex-pectations, which are directly connected to marketdevelopments. However, it is not entirely clear howthis operates. The accelerated slump in prices oc-curred concurrently with the marked decline in theIfo business expectations index. Consumer sentiment,however, remained subdued until September anddid not worsen to any major extent until October.
Finally, it is important not to overlook the risks asso-
ciated with the international integration of enter-prises’ capital and trade. The fact that the equitymarket tends to play a more important role in themain non-euro-area economies and that share priceshave fallen worldwide is placing an additional strainon economic recovery in Germany.
some cases it may even be wise for an enterprise to buy back its own
capital on the stock market. Share repurchasing has since become le-gally permissible to an extent in Germany, too, but most adjustmentsare still made by reducing loan capital, which may mean by selling
equity holdings.

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
26On balance, domestic non-banks were the
only purchasers of equities in the third quar-ter. They invested 37 billion in the German
equity market and just under 31 billion in for-
eign shares (previous quarter: - 35
12billion
and 321 billion respectively). Foreign invest-
ors, however, reduced their portfolios of Ger-man shares by 31 billion net. In the period
under review, domestic credit institutionsraised 34 billion from the sale of domesticshares and just under 31
12billion from sales
of foreign shares. Credit institutions thus re-duced their equity portfolios by slightly lessthan in the previous three months (- 39 bil-
lion).
Sales of shares in domestic and non-resident
mutual funds went down to 315 billion in the
third quarter, compared with a figure of318
12billion for the period from April to
June. The bulk of funds raised once againflowed to domestic mutual funds, which is-sued shares worth 312 billion net (previous
quarter: 315
12billion); as in the previous
quarter, foreign mutual fund shares account-ed for 33 billion.
Between July and September the inflow of re-
sources to domestic special funds, whichmanage monies invested by institutional cus-tomers, was, at 37
12billion, well down on
the preceding three months. Mixed securitiesfunds were still in the forefront, with inflowsof33
12billion net, but fewer resources ac-
crued to them than in the previous quarter(37
12billion). By contrast, bond-based funds
and open-end real estate funds attractedslightly more investment. At 34
12billion net,
domestic investment funds open to the gen-eral public sold as many certificates in thethird quarter as in the preceding threemonths. Savers with mutual funds continuedto favour open-end real estate funds, towhich they channelled 33 billion. With fund
assets of 372
12billion, these kinds of special
funds open to the general public becameeven more popular. Between July and Sep-tember new resources amounting to 31
12bil-
lion were channelled to money market funds 5 bn 5 bn
Money market and open-end
real estate fundsNew investment in selected
funds open to the general public
Share-
basedfundsDAX performance index 1Equity prices and
selected investment in funds
1 End-of-month levels; end-1987 = 1000.
Source: Deutsche Börse AG.
Deutsche Bundesbank10+
8+
6+
4+
2+
0
2−14+
12+
10+
8+
6+
4+
2+
0
2−8000
7000
6000
5000
4000
3000
2500
1999 2000 2001 2002
Share
purchasesMutual fund
shares
Cautious
investment
behaviour by
savers with
mutual funds

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
27and 31 billion to bond-based funds, after
they had had to repurchase their own bondsin the previous quarter. The recent appeal ofthese kinds of funds is likely to have beenboosted by the dramatic collapse of prices onthe equity markets. By contrast, investorsshowed less interest in share-based funds.Following inflows in the second quarter, 3
12
billion was withdrawn in the second quarter.
Mixed funds and pension mutual funds alsoexperienced a small volume of repurchases.
Deposit and lending business
of monetary financial institutions (MFIs)with domestic customers
As part of the deposit business of German
MFIs with domestic customers, overnight de-posits again increased sharply in the thirdquarter of 2002, at a seasonally adjusted an-nual rate of 11
12%. Domestic enterprises
were almost alone in building up sight de-posits; around half of these deposits werebuilt up by non-financial enterprises. Other fi-nancing institutions and insurance companiesalso increased their overnight deposits sharplyin the third quarter, especially in September.The marked uncertainty on the financial mar-kets about future interest rate and equitymarket developments is likely to have beenthe main determining factor.
By contrast, domestic investors made a per-
ceptible seasonally adjusted reduction in theirdeposits with agreed periods of notice of upto two years, after having expanded them inthe previous quarter. Deposits with an agreedmaturity of more than two years were onlyslightly reduced in the period under review.
On balance, only domestic non-financial en-terprises reduced their longer-term time de-posits at German MFIs.
In the third quarter, there was a seasonally
adjusted increase in deposits with an agreedperiod of notice of three months, after a spe-cial effect had caused them to decline notice-ably in the second quarter. This is probablydue to both the present marked preferencefor liquidity and the fact that remuneration ofshort-term savings deposits has shrunk lessthan returns on the capital market. The con-traction of deposits with an agreed period ofnotice of over three months continued duringthe period under review, albeit at a slowerpace.Lending and deposits of monetary
financial institutions (MFIs)in Germany
*
5bn
2002 2001
ItemJuly to
SepJuly to
Sep
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight + 4.8 + 17.7
With agreed maturities
up to 2 years – 6.2 + 5.5over 2 years – 0.6 – 0.1
At agreed notice
2
up to 3 months – 0.4 – 0.1over 3 months – 0.2 – 3.2
Lending
To domestic enterprises andresident individuals
Unsecuritised + 9.4 + 7.7Securitised + 3.9 – 7.9
To domestic public authorities
Unsecuritised – 4.7 – 2.4Securitised + 7.5 – 8.2
*As well as banks (including building and loan associ-
ations, but excluding the Bundesbank), monetary finan-cial institutions (MFIs) here also include money marketfunds; see also Table IV.1 in the Statistical Section of theMonthly Report .—1Enterprises, individuals and public
authorities. — 2Savings deposits.
Deutsche Bundesbank
Perceptible
increase in
overnight
deposits
Perceptible
decline in short-
term time
deposits......and a
moderate
decrease in
long-term time
deposits
Overall increase
in savings
deposits

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
28Between July and September loans by Ger-
man MFIs to the domestic private sector con-tinued to expand very moderately in season-ally adjusted terms. While there was a sharpincrease in short-term loans after a decline inthe preceding quarters, medium to long-termloans to German enterprises and householdsincreased only slightly. In the third quarter of2002 the MFIs again made a marked expan-sion of their holdings of securities issued byGerman enterprises.
The development of lending to the domestic
corporate sector, as one of the most import-ant categories of borrower, continued to be
very subdued in the third quarter. The in-crease in lending to other financing institu-tions and insurance companies and the slight-ly positive impulses in lending to the servicessector were offset primarily by a further re-duction in loans to manufacturing com-panies. In seasonally adjusted terms, lendingto this economic sector has now been con-tracting for one and a half years. Much thesame applies to lending to enterprises in thetrade and construction sectors. Housing loansshowed no more than a slight increase in thethird quarter, their year-on-year rate thus fall-ing further to just over 1
12%. By contrast,
consumer lending was, for the first time for awhile, stepped up again very distinctly. Inaddition to a perceptibly sharper increase inmedium and long-term lending, short-termlending has now also picked up again some-what, having previously been reduced over aperiod of almost two years.
Lending by German MFIs to domestic public
authorities went up by 32.7 billion in the
third quarter of 2002. The increase can betraced back solely to the purchase of govern-ment securities ( 37.5 billion). By contrast,
loans were reduced by 34.7 billion in the
period under review as both Federal and Land
governments cut their debt to Germanbanks.Seasonally adjusted
 5 bn
%Lin scale
Change from previous yearLog scale
Loans 1Loans to domestic enterprises
and resident individuals
1End-of-month level; adjusted for statis-
tical changes.
Deutsche Bundesbank8
6
4
2
02250
2200
2150
2100
2050
2000
1950
1999 2000 2001 2002
Lending to the
private sector
restrained
Lending, by
borrowerIncrease in
lending to the
public sector

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
29Economic conditions
in GermanyUnderlying trends
In the summer months, the German economy
was moving on the path of moderate growthon which it had embarked at the start of thecurrent year after having overcome the phaseof contraction in the second half of 2001. Weestimate that the increase in overall output inthe third quarter may have been more or lessas high (despite adverse accompanying cir-cumstances) as in the two preceding quarterswhich – after seasonal and working-day ad-justment – had each recorded an expansionof 0.3%. This gives a working-day-adjustedyear-on-year
12% increase in real gross do-
mestic product (GDP). The correspondingcalendar-month figure is likely to have been1%. This means that overall capacity utilisa-tion was probably down again in the thirdquarter and noticeably below its normallonger-term level.
At present, economic activity is still too weak
to relieve the labour market. What is mainlylacking at present is some kind of positiveoutlook – which, as experience shows, is es-sential if investment and job recruitment is topick up. It is therefore especially importantthat negative underlying sentiment does notbecome entrenched. As before, responsibilityfor finding the key to solving the structuralweakness of growth and the persistent labourmarket problems lies at the national level.
Third-quarter growth was largely sustained
by an increase in exports of industrial goods.After the end of the summer holiday period,more work is likely to have been undertakenin processing the fairly large number of ordersContinued
increase
in GDP...
...but still
lacking in
momentum
Export stimuli,
investment
remains weak

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
30received from abroad in the spring. The third
quarter is likely to have seen a further declinein spending on machinery and equipment,however. An end to the existing restraint ininvestment is not in sight. According to theIfo test, there was still extensive unutilisedcapacity in manufacturing up to the end ofthe period under review. Although utilisationof available machinery and equipment has re-covered somewhat from its low at the start ofthis year, it was still well down on its normallevel. In surveys, too – such as that of the As-sociation of German Chambers of Industryand Commerce (DIHK) – available unutilisedcapacity is cited as a major reason for the lowpropensity to invest. Added to this is the factthat, on the whole, bank lending conditionshave been tightened. The slump in stock mar-ket prices and higher risk premia for corpor-ate bonds are reinforcing that effect. The
comparatively high wage increases agreed inthis year’s pay round are placing a strain, notleast, on small and medium-sized enterprises.
In the third quarter, too, construction invest-
ment was characterised by the persistentweakness of demand for residential construc-tion. Both industrial investors’ and house-holds’ interest in construction activity con-tinued to be very subdued, whereas con-sumers’ propensity to consume had increasedat the end of the period under review. Whileretail turnover in autumn failed to match itsspring-quarter level, car sales were up. Never-theless, according to the surveys of the con-sumer research institution Gesellschaft für
Konsumforschung (GfK), households’ assess-
ment of the economic situation has deterior-ated of late. This suggests that private con-sumption will tend to remain weak in the im-mediate future.
Output and labour market
There was a distinct increase in industrial out-
put in the third quarter. Seasonally adjusted,it went up by nearly 1% compared with thepreceding three-month period. Although thefigure was still down over 12 months, theyear-on-year fall, at
12%, was perceptibly
smaller than it had been in the second quar-ter (-2%). A particular contribution to the risein output was made by the capital goodssector, which showed a quarter-on-quarterincrease in production of around 1
14%.
According to the data on turnover, exportsplayed a significant part in achieving that fig-Real GDP
Percentage change
year on year
Periodseasonally
adjustedquarteronquarterworking-
dayadjustedin
calendar-monthterms
2000 Q3 0.0 3.1 2.4
Q4 0.1 1.8 0.9
2001 Q1 0.6 1.9 1.4
Q2 0.0 0.7 0.6Q3 – 0.2 0.4 0.4Q4 – 0.3 0.0 – 0.1
2002 Q1 0.3 – 0.2 – 1.2
Q2 0.3 0.1 0.5Q3 (Bundes-
bank estimate)
1412 1
Deutsche BundesbankHousehold
demand
Rise in industrial
output

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
31ure. Both motor vehicle manufacturers and
producers of intermediate goods expandedtheir output. Manufacture of machinery andequipment did, at least, hold up. As before,however, developments in the consumergoods sector remained quite unfavourable.
According to the Ifo surveys, capacity utilisa-
tion in manufacturing – measured against thestandard level of utilisation – was a seasonallyadjusted 82
12% in September. Compared
with the low at the end of the first quarter,this represented an increase of 1 percentagepoint. At the end of the period under review,the longer-term average utilisation ratio wasstill being undershot by
34percentage point.
Construction output in the summer months
remained at the low level of the precedingquarter. The last time a similarly low levelwas recorded – apart from weather-inducedslumps – was in the early 1990s. Even theoutput of the finishing trades – which ac-counts for roughly half of activity in the con-struction sector as a whole – was showing anoticeable year-on-year fall. Capacity utilisa-tion in the firms surveyed by the Ifo Institutehas continued to decline.
Construction sector turnover indicates that
public sector construction, in particular, hassuffered losses in the past few months. Thenegative tendency in residential construction,which has been recognisable for quite sometime now, continued up to the end of theperiod under review. By contrast, industrialconstruction was still holding up compara-tively well.On the labour market, the decline in employ-
ment accelerated perceptibly in summer. Upto August, the number of persons in work,according to the figures of the Federal Statis-tical Office, had fallen to a seasonally adjust-ed 38.62 million. This figure was 160,000below the average level of the second quarterand 310,000, or 8%, lower than in the sameperiod of 2001. In spring, the year-on-yearfall had been 175,000, or 0.4%.Balance
Balance
Households’ assessment
of the economic situation2Business climate in theindustrial sector
 1
monthly
five-month
moving averageSentiment in the
industrial sector and
among households
1Seasonally adjusted data of the Ifo Insti-
tute; western Germany. — 2Bundesbank
calculations on the basis of data from the
“Gesellschaft für Konsumforschung”.
Deutsche Bundesbank50+
40+
30+
20+
10+
0
10−
20−
30−20+
10+
0
10−
20−
30−
1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002Somewhat
higher capacity
utilisation
Persistent
weakness in
construction
output
Continued
reduction in
employment

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
32In the period under review, as had been the
case for some time, the continuing reductionsin staffing levels in industry and constructionwere being offset less and less by a positivedevelopment in the services sector. The em-ployment situation deteriorated especially infinancing, renting and leasing, and services toenterprises, but there were also negativedevelopments in trade and transport as wellas for public and private service providers.The accelerated decline in employment dur-
ing the past few months is undoubtedly con-nected with an increasing use of the leewayprovided by working hours accounts. This issuggested, for example, by the fact that theaverage number of hours worked increasedin the third quarter. For quite a long periodbefore that, total hours worked were beingreduced far more sharply than the number ofemployees. Short-time working was also cutback. While the number of persons on short-time work in the second quarter of 2002 wasmore than 100,000 higher than 12 monthspreviously, the year-on-year increase in Julyand August narrowed to somewhat over60,000. In September and October, the num-ber of persons on short-time work did show aclear rise again, but this was connected, notleast, with special measures in the wake ofthe flood disaster in eastern Germany.
Over the past few months, there has been
scarcely any change in the seasonally adjust-ed number of persons registered as un-employed at the Federal Labour Office. Sincethe end of June, the figure has persisted ataround 4.1 million. The year-on-year increase,which had been more than 250,000 in mid-year, dropped to little more than 200,000 inOctober. At 9.9% in early autumn, the sea-sonally adjusted unemployment rate, as cal-culated by the labour exchanges, was mar-ginally higher than in June. According to thestandardised EU method, the figure remainedunchanged at 8.3%.
The fact that unemployment is tending to
stagnate does not signal a cyclical stabilisa-tion of the labour market situation, however.Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
%%
Capacity utilisation 1
0Mean 1993-2001Lin scale
Change from previous yearOutput
1995 = 100, log scaleOutput and utilisation
in industry
1Results of the Ifo business survey.
Deutsche Bundesbank88
85
82
799+
6+
3+
0
3−
6−124
121
118
115
112
109
106
103
100
1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002Stagnation
of unemploy-
ment...
...owing to
special factors
and Job-AQTIV
act

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
33Rather, this stagnation is due to a number of
special factors. In July, for example, there wasa sharp fall in the number of persons out ofwork in eastern Germany, since the switchfrom a training school to unemployment thatusually occurs in that month had alreadytaken place owing to the early end of theschool year this time. This led to a seasonallyuntypical increase in unemployment in June.By contrast, August benefited from the com-paratively early end to the holidays in someeast German Länder insofar as a large num-ber of persons left unemployment mainly totake part in job creation schemes and attendtraining courses. In September and October,the labour exchanges responded to the flooddisaster with special programmes. There wasa further fall in the seasonally adjusted num-ber of persons out of work, with the level inOctober being 40,000 lower than in June. Inwestern Germany, where such special factorsdid not have any major importance, seasonal-ly adjusted unemployment showed a steadyslight rise, leading to the number of jobless,at the end of the period under review, beingaround 60,000 higher than in mid-year. Inthis case, however, the cyclical trend is dis-torted by the fact that a large number of per-sons are deregistering as unemployed as a re-sult of intensified contacts between the la-bour exchanges and jobless persons undertheJob-AQTIV Gesetz (an act which is de-
signed to get people back into work). Thishas led to a clear-out of the unemploymentregister, which has an accompanying level ef-fect on the stock figures. Between Januaryand October of this year, more than two-thirds of the increased numbers of those leav-ing unemployment in western Germany (anincrease of 270,000 compared with 2001)
was due to non-renewal of registration or toderegistration for other or non-specified rea-sons.
Orders received
Demand for industrial goods was somewhat
lower in the third quarter than it had been inQuarterly
Millions
%Thou-
sands
0Unemployment rate
(seasonally adjusted)
OctOct Change from previous yearUnemployed
(seasonally adjusted)
OctJuly /
AugChange from previous
yearJuly /
AugEmployed
(seasonally adjusted)Labour market
Deutsche Bundesbank12
1110
9400+
0
400−4.6
4.2
3.8
3.4800+
400+
0
400−38.8
38.4
38.0
37.637.236.8
- - 
1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
34the spring months. At constant prices, there
was a seasonally adjusted fall of around1
12% in the order intake compared with the
second quarter, when there had been an ac-cumulation of very sizeable new orders. Evenso, the year-on-year figure, which had beennegative in the preceding quarters, shows aslight increase of just over
12%.Export business was the main factor in the re-
duced flow of orders. In autumn, orders fromabroad were a seasonally adjusted 3% downon the three-month period from April toJune. However, the figure was still a good5
12% up on the year because the situation
12 months previously had been even moreunfavourable. Losses were suffered by all themajor subsectors of industry. Manufacturersof consumer goods sustained the heaviest de-cline. The fall in the case of capital goods pro-ducers was less severe – the fact that Germanroad vehicles were once again highly fa-voured by buyers had a positive impact. Bycontrast, new orders for machinery andequipment went back down again followingan interim peak in spring.
Domestic demand for industrial goods just
about held up in the summer months. In sea-sonally adjusted terms, demand was some-what lower in the third quarter (-
12%) than
in the preceding period, which had beenmarked by a broad degree of stagnation. Al-though the figure was again down on theyear, the decline, at 3
14%, was not quite as
large as before. Here, too, the capital goodsindustry is a positive exception among theother sectors. This was due mainly – as in thecase of exports – to a rise in car sales. Theother subsectors including, in particular,manufacture of machinery and equipment aswell as production of office machinery andcomputers, remained quite weak, however.
Construction orders fell to a new low in July
and August. Seasonally adjusted, they under-shot the already low level of the second quar-ter by 4% and were nearly 8% down on theSeasonally adjusted, quarterly, log scale
DomesticForeignNew orders
Volume, 1995 = 100
TotalDemand in industry
Deutsche Bundesbank95115
100110
105
100120160
115155
105150
110145
100140
135
130
125
120165130
125
120
115
110
105
100
95
1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002
Slowdown in
industrial
demand
Low
in construction
orders

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
35year, even though there had been a percep-
tible decline in the corresponding period of2001.
The recent decline in incoming orders hit all
the major subsectors of construction. By com-parison, industrial construction was not muchaffected by this. Nevertheless, the quite sharp9
12% year-on-year decline makes clear that,
in the somewhat longer term, a marked fallin level has been recorded in this subsector aswell. Public sector construction orders havelikewise continued to decline in the past fewmonths. There were especially sharp fallsagain in residential construction. This meantthat the impression of a gradual stabilisation,which emerged in the first half of this year,had to be revised again. In July and August,there was a seasonally adjusted decline innew orders of 8
12% on the preceding three-
month period. Judging by the number ofhousing construction permits granted, no im-provement is likely in the near future either.The number of planned dwellings continuedto decline, in fact, in July and August. Inwestern Germany, it was down to a levelwhich was lower than at any time since theend of the 1980s.
Prices
Price rises remained within narrow bounds.
The year-on-year rate of consumer price in-crease went up to 1.3% in October, havingbeen at around 1% for several monthsbeforehand. The main reasons for this were,first, that refined petroleum products havebecome more expensive as a result of thehigh prices on the international markets. This
contrasts with a marked fall in the corres-ponding period of 2001. Second, upwardprice pressure in the case of services intensi-fied somewhat at the end of the periodunder review. Price movements in the case ofindustrial goods remained quite small, how-ever. In seasonally adjusted terms, the generalprice level in October was still slightly lowerthan at the end of winter. The year-on-yearSeasonally adjusted, quarterly, log scale
...in housing
   construction...of the
   public sector...of industrial
   enterprisesVolume, 1995 = 100
Construction orders...
...total
July /
AugDemand for
construction work
Deutsche Bundesbank110
100
90
80
70
60
4550100
90
80100
90
80
70100
90
80
70
65
1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002- - - - 
Rise in
consumer
prices remains
moderate

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
36rate of inflation was below 1%. Although
food prices have gone down recently, the fallis less than is seasonally usual. Weather-induced hold-ups in many parts of Germanywere a factor in this. At -0.9%, food pricesstill showed a clear year-on-year fall, how-ever.
At the end of the period under review, prices
of agricultural and forestry imports becamesomewhat more expensive again after fallingin mid-year. In September, prices showed ayear-on-year rise for the first time in fivemonths. In addition, energy imports were be-coming more expensive well into September.They thus followed the rise in internationaloil prices, which, at the end of September,peaked at somewhat over US$29 per barrelof North Sea Brent. These factors were themain reason for the overall decline in importprices coming to an end and giving way toan increase. While it is true that importsin September were still 1.4% cheaper over12 months, in June they had been as much as5.2% down on the year. During recentweeks, oil prices were showing an appre-ciable fall, going down to below US$25 atthe end of the period under review.
In September, seasonally adjusted domestic
industrial selling prices rose slightly for thefirst time since spring. The year-on-year fallnarrowed marginally to 0.9%. Excluding en-ergy, the rise over 12 months went up to+0.5%, having been +0.2% in the secondquarter. In the intermediate goods sector, theprices of chemical products have shown aparticular increase. Among capital goods,however, office machinery and computer1995 = 100, seasonally adjusted
%
OctLin scale
Change from previous
yearConsumer prices 1Construction pricesAgricultural
producer pricesIndustrial
producer pricesLog scale
Import pricesPrices at various stages
of the economic process
1Consumer price index (CPI).
Deutsche Bundesbank3+
2+
1+
0112
109
106
103
100103
100
97106
103
100
97
94
91106
103
100
97115
112
109
106
103
100
97
1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002Imports
somewhat
more expensive
Hardly any
change in
producer prices

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
37equipment continue to show sharp year-on-
year reductions in prices, whereas both motorvehicles and machinery have become signifi-cantly more expensive. Construction pricesremained largely unchanged in summer andwere no more expensive than one year previ-ously. Price reductions in road construction
were offset by slight price increases for officeand commercial buildings. In residential con-struction, quoted prices remained largely con-stant.

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
38Foreign trade and
paymentsForeign trade and current account
Foreign trade provided a remarkably strong
stimulus for German economic growth duringthe third quarter of the year. If working-dayand seasonal factors are eliminated, Germanexports of goods during that period were 4%greater than in the previous quarter. How-ever, this development, which is surprisinglyfavourable at first sight, is not so much thereflection of any correspondingly favourablebusiness situation for German exporters. In-stead, it has to be seen primarily in connec-tion with the large backlog of orders fromprevious months which is now being reflectedwith the usual time lags in the increased ex-ports of goods. The number of new orders re-ceived during this period declined significant-ly, and surveys undertaken by the Ifo Instituteindicate that the export expectations of Ger-man industry were clearly deteriorating upto September; a somewhat more optimisticmood did not re-emerge until October.
The sluggish flow of incoming orders was
largely due to the general downturn in de-mand from Germany’s export markets. More-over, the appreciation of the euro during theearly summer may have had a somewhat det-rimental effect on German competitiveness insome cases. However, the firming of the euroagainst the currencies of Germany’s partnercountries was hardly the reason for the sharpdownturn in foreign demand. From Germa-ny’s point of view the real exchange rate hasrisen by no more than about 1
12%o na
trade-weighted average since the end of lastyear. This compares with a previous increasein competitiveness of almost 10% since theExports of
goods

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
39introduction of the euro. German exporters
had been using this development in previousyears to achieve an appreciable expansion intheir position on the world market again. Asa result, Germany’s share of global exportsrose from 9% in the mid-1990s to 10% in2001 and thereby regained the position heldin the early 1990s. If measured in terms ofthe exports of industrial countries alone, theincrease in German exporters’ market sharewas actually even greater. These findings ap-pear to contradict the results of other calcula-tions by international organisations and aca-demic institutions, some of which indicateappreciable reductions in German industry’smarket shares. However, most of these analy-ses are based on world market shares whichare calculated from the values of export salesexpressed in dollars and which thereforeshow only exchange-rate-related “losses” inmarket shares in the past few years. At allevents, the changes in real world marketshares, on which the assertions made in thisarticle are based, paint a different picture.
Trade with partner countries within the euro
area as well as with the other EU states wasevidently the main driving force behind Ger-man export growth during the third quarterof this year. On an average of July and Augusttaken together (the complete data for thethird quarter are not yet available) Germanexports to these countries, which account formore than half of Germany’s total exports ofgoods, rose substantially compared with themonthly average in the previous quarter. Ex-ports to the United States, which have longbeen a major driving force behind Germany’sexport business, continued to run at a highlevel but in the end they increased less sharp-
ly. Much the same can be said about the mar-kets in the central and east European coun-tries in transition, which, following the rapidgrowth in their imports from Germany, havebecome important consumers of Germanproducts in the past few years. Yet sales tothese countries actually declined slightly inthe two months concerned (July and August).According to the data so far available, exports
DM bn  5 bn
%Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
OctLin scale
Export expectations2Orders received
from abroad
values, 1995 = 100monthly120130340
320
300
280
260
240
230
omonthly 1Log scale
ExportsExport trend
1Monthly values adjusted to match quar-
terly level. — 2Results of the Ifo business
survey; balances of positive and negative
company reports. — oFrom 1999 all data in
euro.
Deutsche Bundesbank20+
15+
10+
5+
0
5−150
140
130
120160170180170
160
150
140
1998 1999 2000 2001 2002
Breakdown
of exports of
goods

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
40Germany’s world market shares
World market shares play an important role in pub-
lic debate when locations for investment are beingevaluated and economic competitiveness assessed.Recently, for example, there have been repeatedreferences to a sharp decline in German world mar-ket shares, and this has been regarded as proof ofthe inadequate level of German competitiveness.However, the calculation of world market shares inUS dollars on which this assertion is based (worldmarket shares = national exports in US dollars /world exports in US dollars) gives a false impressionwhenever there are significant exchange ratemovements against the dollar. Thus, a depreciationof the euro against the US dollar, if considered inisolation, will result in a fall in Germany’s worldmarket shares when calculated in this way even ifits real market shares actually remain intact.
To avoid the distortions caused by exchange-rate
movements it seems reasonable to calculate real worldmarket shares adjusted for exchange-rate movements.To do this the nominal national export sales calculatedin US dollars were divided by the national dollar-basedexport prices.
1This results in real exports at prices in
t h eb a s ey e a ra n da tt h eU Sd o l l a re x c h a n g er a t ei nthe base year.
2In the case of many groups of develop-
ing countries, however, the export prices are not avail-able for each of these countries but only for the re-spective country groups. Consequently, only total realexports were established for each of these regions.
The real exchange-rate-adjusted world market
shares of Germany are calculated as follows:
ExD$
Pe xD$,99
RWMA =
EXj$
Pe xj$,99EXk$
Pe xk$,99 Σ
j +Σ
k ( )m
where RWMA = Germany’s real world market
share
EX$= nominal exports in US dollars
PEX$,99= export prices in US dollars
(1999=100)
j=1...n = industrial countries and selected
development countries
k=1...m = development country regionsD = GermanyThe results, together with the nominal world mar-
ket shares on a dollar basis that are normally used,are shown in the chart on page 41. It is striking thatthe marked fall in Germany’s nominal world marketshares from 1980 to 1985 and the decline since 1995are not reflected in the real market shares. Quitethe opposite, the real world market shares actuallyincrease from 1980 to 1982 and again from 1995.The difference between the two series is largely ex-plained by exchange-rate movements.
The pronounced decline in Germany’s real world
market shares in the first half of the 1990s is to beseen primarily in connection with reunification. Itmust also be said that the cyclical movements inGermany’s world market share in real terms are inline with changes in Germany’s price competitive-ness – a circumstance which is not apparent in thechanges in nominal world market shares. This is par-ticular obvious in 1986 when price competitivenessdeclined considerably as a result of the appreciationof the Deutsche Mark. Real world market shares fellfrom 1986 in line with this whereas there was initi-ally a dramatic rise in nominal shares (as a result ofexchange-rate movements). A similar developmentcan be observed from 1995 but with a plus sign be-cause in this case competitiveness improved. Duringthis latter period the rise in real world marketshares has been particularly pronounced.
Germany’s retrieval of its former position on the
world market since the mid-1990s becomes evenclearer if the country’s exports are considered onlyas a percentage of the exports of the other indus-trial countries and therefore account is taken of thefact that the industrial countries as a whole havebeen losing market shares as a result of the pene-tration of emerging market economies in South-East Asia and the advancing integration of centraland eastern Europe into the world economy. Ifviewed in this narrower context, the German shareof the real exports of the industrial countries hasincreased by 2
12percentage points since 1995. At
just under 16%, Germany’s share was recently at itsold record levels again.
1Unit values were used for this purpose. Substitute indices
were used for some countries for which no unit valueswere available. — 2It must be remembered when inter-preting real world market shares that their levels but not
their movements depend on the choice of the base year.
Deutsche Bundesbank

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
41to South-East Asia were very weak in the
third quarter. German industry also recordeddeclining export turnover in the oil exportingcountries (OPEC).
It is a reflection of German industry’s product
range that demand for investment goodscontributed most to turnover growth in thethird quarter. Products related to vehiclemanufacture were mainly concerned here.On an average of the last two months forwhich the relevant data are available, for ex-ample, the German motor industry alone re-corded a 13
12% increase in sales to foreign
markets compared with the monthly averagein the previous quarter. Exports of inputs alsoincreased in the third quarter whereas theGerman consumer goods sector recordeddeclining turnover abroad.
In contrast to exports, German imports in-
creased by no more than 1% after seasonaladjustment in the third quarter. At the sametime, however, import prices declined by ap-proximately
12%, with the result that real im-
port growth was somewhat greater thannominal growth.
The other euro-area countries were the main
beneficiaries of the increased demand fromGermany. On an average of July and August(regional and sectoral breakdowns of the im-port data for September are not yet availableeither) imports from the other euro-areacountries rose sharply in seasonally adjustedterms compared with the second-quarteraverage. Imports of goods from the other re-gions were more sluggish for the most part,by contrast. Imports from the United Statesactually fell significantly. Much the same is
true of deliveries emanating from South-EastAsia and of imports from OPEC, which like-wise declined sharply in July and August com-pared with the second quarter. Fewer goodswere also imported from the transition coun-tries in central and eastern Europe, but in thiscase the drop was not quite so pronounced.
In line with the breakdown in exports, im-
ports of motor vehicles and vehicle partsgrew particularly strongly during the periodunder review. Imports of machinery andequipment also increased. By contrast, im-ports of goods in the information and com-munications technology sector and the chem-ical industry moderated compared with theprevious period. While imports of inputs andraw materials fell substantially during the%
90
95
100
105
1101999Q1 =100, log scale2
Price competitiveness3
1975 80 85 90 95 2001Share of world exports
nominalreal 1Germany’s share of
world exports and its
price competitiveness
1 At 1999 prices. — 2 Scale inverted: rise in
the curve (fall in values) denotes increase in
competitiveness. — 3 In relation to 19 in-
dustrial countries on the basis of the defla-
tors of total sales.
Deutsche Bundesbank12
11
10
9
8
Imports of
goods
Breakdown
of imports
of goods

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
42period under review, an increase was record-
ed in the case of capital goods.
The outcome of the strong growth in exports
and the rather moderate demand for importsin the third quarter of 2002 was a seasonallyadjusted increase of more than 35 billion in
Germany’s trade balance, which stood at justover 334
12billion. At the same time, Ger-
many’s traditional deficit on invisible currenttransactions with non-residents decreased by33
12billion to 31512billion. Current transfers
to non-residents fell particularly sharply onbalance (by 34 billion to just under 35 billion).
The cross-border factor income which Ger-many has to pay to non-residents alsoshowed a decline whereas the net paymentsin service transactions with non-residents roseslightly (by about 31 billion to 38
12billion).
The overall seasonally adjusted surplus onGermany’s current account thereby increasedby38
12billion to 318 billion.
Financial transactions
Uncertainty about future developments in the
world economy grew on the internationalfinancial markets during the third quarter. Asinternationally operating investors had littledesire to run risks in any case, this resulted,on the one hand, in further shifts from equi-ties into bonds with corresponding pricemovements and, on the other hand, in a pro-nounced preference for liquidity and, conse-quently, in considerable reluctance to engagein cross-border investment. To some extent,this also had an effect on the foreign ex-change markets where the upward move-Major items of the balance
of payments
5bn
2001 2002
Item Q3 Q2 r Q3
I Current account
1 Foreign trade 1
Exports (fob) 156.6 162.3 161.8
Imports (cif) 131.3 132.4 128.6
Balance + 25.2 + 29.9 + 33.2
2 Services (balance) – 13.4 – 7.8 – 10.83 Factor income (balance) – 3.5 – 1.1 – 3.94 Current transfers (balance) – 6.0 – 8.2 – 5.8
Balance on current account
2 + 0.9 + 11.9 + 11.3
Memo item
Balances, seasonally adjusted
1 Foreign trade + 26.8 + 29.4 + 34.72 Services – 11.1 – 7.7 – 8.63 Factor income – 2.1 – 2.6 – 2.04 Current transfers – 5.2 – 8.9 – 4.9
Current account
2 + 7.3 + 9.5 + 18.0
II Balance of capital transfers 3 – 0.4 – 0.1 + 0.1
III Balance of financial account 4 – 5.8 – 30.1 – 25.6
IV Change in the foreign reserves
at transaction values(increase: –)
5 – 2.2 + 2.4 + 0.1
V Balance of unclassifiable
transactions + 7.5 + 15.9 + 14.2
1Special trade according to the official foreign trade statistics
(source: Federal Statistical Office). — 2Includes supplementary
trade items. — 3Including the acquisition/disposal of non-
produced non-financial assets. — 4For details see the table
“Financial transactions” on page 44. — 5Excluding allocation of
SDRs and changes due to value adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankCurrent
account
Trends in
financial
transactions

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
43ment of the euro which had emerged in the
early summer came to a halt later in the quar-ter. These trends on the international financialmarkets can also be seen in the Germanfinancial transactions with non-residents. Inthe process net capital imports arising fromportfolio transactions rose in the third quarterof 2002 while in the case of direct investment– where special developments also played apart – and in credit transactions outflows offunds were recorded.
324
12billion net was imported between July
and September 2002 as a result of portfolioinvestment, which, as usual, directly reflectedthe international developments described.This figure is more than twice as high as inthe previous three-month period ( 39
12bil-
lion). While foreign investors continued to fa-vour Germany as a safe haven, German in-vestors were discernibly restrained in purchas-ing foreign securities. All in all, these amount-ed to just 311 billion in the period under re-
view (compared with 320 billion in the
second quarter of 2002). They had not beenas low as this since the start of monetaryunion except in the third quarter of 2001 asa result of the September terrorist attacks.As at that time, German investors now alsoliquidated part of their foreign equity invest-ments ( 36
12billion) although it is likely that
the majority of sellers were institutional in-vestors. They were responding to the lessfavourable global economic outlook, whichwas being reflected in pessimistic expect-ations about the profitability of many enter-prises and in falling share prices.Foreign bond markets benefited only to a
very limited extent from the aforementionedliquidation of equity investments abroad. Ger-man residents invested 311 billion in longer-
term foreign debt securities in the third quar-ter, which was less than in the previous three-month period ( 317
12billion). In view of the
frequently higher transaction costs and pre-sumably also the greater risks involved incross-border investment, they evidently found 5 bn
 5 bn
657075Purchase of German securities
by non-residentsPurchase of foreign securities
by German residents 1
Bonds and notes
SharesStructural shifts in
portfolio investment
1Purchases / capital exports: +.
Deutsche Bundesbank25
20
1510
5
040+
35+
30+
25+
20+
15+
10+
5+
0
5−
10−
2001 2002Portfolio
investment
German invest-
ment in foreign
securities

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
44the yields, which in some cases had fallen
dramatically, not very attractive and preferredfinancial assets in Germany. As they have al-ways done since the start of monetary union,German investors again avoided exchangerate risks to a large extent in their portfolio in-vestment. They mostly acquired euro paper(38
12billion). They also invested to a some-
what lesser extent in foreign money marketpaper ( 33
12billion) and investment fund cer-
tificates ( 33 billion).
Non-residents invested 33512billion on the
German securities markets between July andSeptember and therefore, in terms of value,somewhat more than in the previous quarter.They also undertook significant changes inthe structure of their portfolio investments.For example, they, too, retreated from theshare market and sold German equities worth31
12billion net, which sustained fairly sub-
stantial losses in value during the periodunder review. By contrast, non-residents pur-chased German money market paper worth317
12billion and German bonds and notes
worth 31812billion. Evidently the security
and liquidity which German paper offersplayed an important role in foreign investors’decision-making. Another factor was thatthroughout the period under review euro-denominated debt securities issued by Ger-man borrowers offered a higher yield than,say, comparable dollar paper.
For the first time in more than a year there
were again net capital exports through directinvestment in the third quarter. These out-flows amounted to 311
12billion compared
with net inflows of 315 billion in this segmentFinancial transactions
5bn, net capital exports: –
2001 2002
Item Q3 Q2 r Q3
1 Direct investment + 18.2 + 14.8 – 11.6
German investment
abroad + 3.1 – 1.2 – 13.4Foreign investmentin Germany + 15.1 + 16.0 + 1.8
2 Portfolio investment + 30.9 + 9.6 + 24.7
German investment
abroad – 4.5 – 20.2 – 10.9
Shares + 6.7 + 1.3 + 6.5
Investment fundcertificates – 3.9 – 3.0 – 3.1Bonds and notes – 6.6 – 17.6 – 10.9Money market paper – 0.7 – 1.0 – 3.3
Foreign investment
in Germany + 35.4 + 29.8 + 35.7
Shares + 15.6 + 10.3 – 1.5
Investment fundcertificates – 0.5 – 1.0 + 1.0Bonds and notes + 18.0 + 18.6 + 18.6Money market paper + 2.3 + 2.0 + 17.5
3 Financial derivatives
1 – 4.1 + 1.3 – 3.7
4 Credit transactions – 50.3 – 55.4 – 34.7
Credit institutions – 43.6 – 48.6 – 17.4
Long-term – 4.9 – 3.2 + 1.3
Short-term – 38.6 – 45.4 – 18.7
Enterprises and
individuals + 3.8 – 8.4 – 3.4
Long-term + 1.9 – 0.9 + 0.5
Short-term + 2.0 – 7.5 – 3.9
General government + 0.6 + 2.3 + 3.8
Long-term – 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.5
Short-term + 0.8 + 2.3 + 3.3
Bundesbank – 11.2 – 0.7 – 17.7
5 Other investment – 0.6 – 0.4 – 0.36 Balance of all
statistically recordedcapital flows – 5.8 – 30.1 – 25.6
Memo item
Change in the foreignreserves at transactionvalues (increase: –)
2 – 2.2 + 2.4 + 0.1
1Securitised and non-securitised options and financial
futures contracts. — 2Excluding allocation of SDRs and
changes due to value adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankForeign
investment
in German
securities
Direct
investment

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
45during the previous three-month period. The
deficit was due primarily to the vigorous pur-chase of foreign participating interests byGerman enterprises. Corporate acquisitionsin the United Kingdom, Luxembourg and theSlovak Republic were among the factors play-ing a determining role here. If intra-groupcredit flows are included, German enterprisesinvested 313
12billion abroad between July
and September. By contrast, foreign enter-prises, which have recently been gradually ex-panding their presence in Germany, largelyrefrained from further investment during theperiod under review. They provided theirbranches domiciled in Germany with no morethan 32 billion in investable funds compared
with 316 billion in the quarter earlier.
As in the case of direct investment, capital ex-
ports predominated through non-securitisedcredit transactions between July and Septem-ber. However, this was not the result of thetransactions of the non-banks, which virtuallycancelled out. It is true that the financial op-erations of enterprises and individuals led tonet outflows of 33
12billion, primarily through
the building-up of deposits with foreigncredit institutions; however, this was almostentirely offset by capital inflows (of almost 34
billion) in the public sector as the FederalGovernment drew on its bank balancesabroad.The main reason for the export of capital
through credit transactions was once againthe non-securitised foreign operations of thebanking system, which, for the most part,may be seen as the counterpart to the othercross-border payments. A total of 334
12bil-
lion net flowed abroad in this way. The netexternal position of the Bundesbank – exclud-ing the foreign reserves – improved by 317
12
billion, largely as a result of positive balances
arising through the payment system TARGET.The non-securitised credit flows of the banks,which in the period under review sharply ex-panded their lending to foreign customers, inparticular, accounted for further net outflowsof funds in almost the same proportions.
The transaction-related changes to the Bun-
desbank’s foreign reserves shown in the bal-ance of payments largely cancelled out in theperiod between July and September whereasin the second quarter there had been a sub-stantial decline in the foreign reserves (of32
12billion). When valued at market prices,
the reserves amounted to 389 billion at the
end of September compared with 38612bil-
lion at the end of June. This increase is there-fore a reflection of holding gains in the caseof the gold reserves and the portfolio pos-ition, in particular.Credit
transactions...
...of the
non-banks...and the
banking system
Foreign
reserves of the
Bundesbank

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
46Public financeCentral, state and local government
budgets
The central, state and local government
budgets continued to deteriorate in the thirdquarter. The deficit (excluding that of localgovernment, the results of which are not yetknown) was 311 billion – 32 billion higher
than in the same period last year. While rev-enue continued to be weak, mainly owing tosluggish tax receipts, expenditure rose consid-erably due, in particular, to labour market-related spending.
After having already climbed to 348 billion
last year, the general government deficit for2002 as a whole is likely to exceed 360 bil-
lion. According to the budget plans, however,the deficit should have declined. This deteri-oration was primarily caused by the dramaticshortfall in revenue. Tax receipts are likely todecline by 1
12% and therefore end up more
than 325 billion lower than in the original
plans. However, expenditure – particularly la-bour market-related spending – is also grow-ing faster than expected . Next year a fall inthe deficits may be recorded if tax receiptsdevelop more favourably again, the budget-ary position improves due to statutory meas-ures and a very stringent expenditure policy isimplemented.
Tax receipts
1in the third quarter declined by
14% vis-à-vis the same period last year, after
falling by just over 5% in the first half of2002. Although this slide has now probably
1Including EU tax shares in German tax revenue but ex-
cluding receipts from local government taxes, which are
not yet known.Underlying
trends
Tax receipts
in the third
quarter ...

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
47bottomed out, the recovery in the revenue
trend, which was expected in spring, failed tomaterialise, above all because of the persist-ent economic slowdown.
Among income taxes, wage tax receipts grew
by 1
14% in the third quarter after stagnating
in the second quarter. Before deducting childbenefit, which was increased at the begin-ning of the year, the rise amounted to 3%.The impact of the higher pay settlements thisyear – which included back payments for pre-vious months – made itself felt for the firsttime in the third quarter. By contrast, the em-ployment trend continued to dampen rev-enue growth. Receipts from assessed incometax also went up (by 2%), with prepaymentsapparently being somewhat higher. The out-turn for corporation tax improved for the firsttime since mid-2000, yielding almost 31 bil-
lion, whereas in the third quarter of 2001 re-funds had exceeded receipts by just over 3
12
billion. This more favourable result was, how-
ever, mainly attributable to the fact thatcorporation tax receipts were not dented assharply as last year by the distribution ofprofits retained in earlier years. Revenue fromnon-assessed taxes on earnings declined by41% as a result of the fall in profit distribu-tions and the lowering of the investment in-come tax rate on dividends from 25% to20% at the beginning of the year. In addition,receipts from the withholding tax on interestpayments went down by just under 12%owing to a fall in the average rate of interest.
In the case of indirect taxes, the decline in
turnover tax receipts continued (-
34%). This
was caused partly by lower retail trade turn-over and also by the fact that taxable invest-
ment in the housing and government sectorsdeclined further. Among excise duties, re-ceipts from tobacco tax and insurance taxrose steeply (by 15% in each case) in thewake of the tax increases at the beginning ofthe year, whereas receipts from mineral oiltax in the third quarter only reached the samelevel as last year despite the increased taxrates.
Tax receipts in 2002 as a whole will be much
lower than forecast in May, mainly as a resultof the pronounced economic slowdown –which to some extent is being reflected in thedevelopment of revenue only with a delay.The new official tax estimate projects a de-crease of 1
12% vis-à-vis 2001, with a revenue
total 315 billion down on the figure esti-Change from previous year
%
Tax receipts, total 1
1st hf 2nd hf 1st hf 2nd hf Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4Tax revenue
1Including EU shares in German tax rev-
enue, but excluding receipts from local au-
thority taxes, which are not yet known for
the last quarter recorded.
Deutsche Bundesbank8+
6+
4+
2+
0
2−
4−
6−
2000 2001 2002
... and in 2002
as a whole

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
48mated in May. Despite the tax increases
which came into effect at the beginning of2002, the overall tax ratio will again declinesignificantly; based on the Federal Govern-ment’s assumption of nominal economicgrowth of 2% (and real growth of
12%), the
tax ratio (as defined in the government finan-cial statistics) will contract by 0.8 percentagepoint this year to 20.8%.
The shortfalls vis-à-vis the spring estimate re-
late chiefly to corporation tax and trade tax.In addition, receipts from turnover tax andwage tax are considerably lower than project-ed in earlier forecasts because both taxabledomestic demand and gross wages and salar-ies are growing far more slowly than previ-ously anticipated. Moreover, the measuresaimed at combating turnover tax fraud,which were adopted at the end of 2001, will
apparently not yield much additional revenuethis year.
The tax shortfalls vis-à-vis the estimate in May
will widen even more next year because theassumed rate of economic growth in 2003,too, will be significantly below the earlier ex-pectations (nominal growth of 3
12% and real
growth of 112%) as a result of the delayed
economic upturn.2It is now estimated that
tax revenue – adjusted to account for recentamendments in tax legislation – will be 322
billion lower. But unlike this year, tax receiptswill increase again markedly in 2003 by nearly4
12%. This figure includes additional revenue,
compared with the May estimate, of around36 billion raised to finance the assistance to
the flood disaster victims (ie in particular bypostponing the next stage of the tax reformby a year to 2004). However, this estimate ex-cludes the plans to reduce current tax breaksand increase taxes, which have not yet beenpassed by parliament. The tax ratio in 2003 istherefore likely to notably surpass the in-crease by 0.2 percentage point (to 21.0%)– as defined in the Government’s financialstatistics – which is expected in the new offi-cial tax estimate.
In the third quarter the Federal Government
recorded a deficit of 38 billion, which was 34
billion more than in the same period lastyear. Revenue stagnated. While tax receiptsgrew by 1
12%, non-tax revenue contracted
by 312%. Expenditure grew by a steep 612%.Trends in the revenue from major taxes
Revenue
in5billion
Q1 to Q3
Type of tax 2001 2002Change
frompre-viousyearin %
Wage tax 93.7 93.3 – 0.4
Assessed income tax 4.1 3.0 – 26.5Corporation tax 1.5 – 0.3 .Turnover tax 103.3 102.2 – 1.0
of which: Q3
Wage tax 31.5 31.9 + 1.2
Assessed income tax 3.2 3.3 + 2.1Corporation tax – 0.6 1.0 .Turnover tax 34.5 34.2 – 0.8
Deutsche Bundesbank
2In spring, by contrast, the Federal Government had ex-
pected that GDP would grow in 2003 by 4% in nominal
terms and 212% in real terms.Tax receipts
in 2003
Federal
Government

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
49This was primarily due to the 3112billion rise
in labour market-related expenditure. Fur-thermore, transfers to the statutory pensioninsurance scheme and to the Federal RailwaysFund, as well as other operating expenditure,also went up substantially.
For 2002 as a whole, the deficit is likely to be
much higher than expected ( 324 billion). This
is due to the fact that, firstly, tax receipts – ac-cording to the latest estimate – will be almost312 billion lower than anticipated and that,
secondly, expenditure of the Federal LabourOffice and unemployment assistance to-gether will exceed the budgeted total bysome 35 billion. Compensatory movements
in other areas – including transfers to the EU,guarantees and non-tax receipts – will in noway suffice to offset this higher spending andlower revenue. Savings in the course of im-plementing the budget will be partly offset bythe additional financial requirements associ-ated with overcoming the flood damage. Netgovernment borrowing must also compen-sate for coin seigniorage, the trend in whichis significantly below that estimated in thebudget plans. Since the borrowing authorisa-tions still available from earlier years will notbe sufficient to cover the additional require-ments, a supplementary budget will have tobe adopted for this year. The required level ofnet borrowing will exceed the budgetedamount of investment spending. Accordingto Article 115 of the Constitution, this ispermitted in exceptional circumstances if itserves to avert a disruption of the overall eco-nomic equilibrium.The Federal budget draft for 2003 envisaged
a decline in the deficit to 316 billion. In view
of the looming additional shortfalls reachingsums in the tens of billions, the governmentcoalition parties agreed on an extensive pack-age of measures.
3Firstly, this should yield sav-
ings on the expenditure side – in labour mar-ket-related spending in particular – of around36 billion next year. Secondly, numerous tax
measures, which in the first year notably in-clude additional revenue from turnover taxand from energy taxation, should boost theFederal Government’s tax receipts by just over34 billion. Thirdly, central government is in-
tending to raise its net borrowing by 32
12bil- 5 bn
 5 bn
2001
2002cumulative
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4Quarterly results
2001
2002The Federal Government’s
financial balance in
2001 and 2002
Deutsche Bundesbank15−
20−
25−
30−
35−5+
0
5−
10−
15−
20−
3It had already been decided that general government’s
additional shortfalls associated with the flood damage
are to be offset by postponing the next stage of the tax
reform to 2004 and by temporarily raising the corpor-
ation tax rate from 25% to 26.5%.

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
50lion to 318 billion; it would, however, be well
below the level of investment spending (fordetails of the overall consolidation package,see page 57 f). All in all, if these targets arereached, the Federal Government wouldmake considerable consolidation progress incomparison to this year. Although there arefiscal deviations vis-à-vis the deficit goal set inthe medium-term financial plan for 2003,most of the financial gap will be closed.
The surplus generated by the off-budget spe-
cial funds in the third quarter, at nearly 31 bil-
lion, was a little higher than in the sameperiod last year. The surplus expected for thewhole of 2002 will increase markedly com-pared with 2001, when it reached 35 billion.
The main reason for this is the Bundesbankprofit paid in April, which rose by 33 billionover twelve months to 311 billion. Any part
of this profit which exceeds 33
12billion is al-
located to the Redemption Fund for InheritedLiabilities.
In the third quarter the Land Government
budgets recorded a deficit of 34 billion after
35
12billion in the third quarter of 2001. Tax
receipts declined further, even though this fallwas only marginal compared with the first sixmonths. By contrast, non-tax receipts rosesteeply. Although expenditure grew by only1%, when adjusted for the bloating of lastyear’s base figure caused by the one-off injec-tion of capital into Bankgesellschaft Berlinthe growth in spending amounted to 4%.The cumulative deficit in the first nine monthsreached 319
12billion, compared with 312 bil-
lion in the same period last year. This wasmainly attributable to the fall in revenue ofjust under 3% but also to the fact thatexpenditure rose by another 1
12% despite
the exceptional burden in 2001. In 2002 as awhole, last year’s record deficit of 327
12bil-
lion is likely to be exceeded (in contrast to theplanned decline to less than 320 billion), with
the full-year shortfall topping 330 billion.
The announced tax measures would result in
additional revenue next year for state govern-ment, too, although this rise (by just over 32
billion) will be only half as large as that ofcentral government. The extra spending ne-cessitated by the flood damage is to be fi-nanced by the additional tax revenue meas-ures adopted for this purpose. However, itcannot be ruled out that the majority of Land
Governments’ budgets – taking into accountthe downward revisions in the latest tax esti-Net borrowing in the market by
central, state and local government
5billion
of which
Period TotalSecuri-
ties 1Loansagainstborrow-ers’notes
2MemoitemAcquisi-tion bynon-resi-dents
2001 + 14.2 + 56.3 – 6.6 + 1.1
of which
Q1 – 10.4 + 13.9 + 9.7 – 11.8Q2 – 6.1 + 7.5 – 13.7 – 0.5Q3 + 15.6 + 18.5 – 1.8 + 14.9Q4 + 15.2 + 16.4 – 0.9 – 1.6
2002
Q1 + 25.6 + 15.2 + 10.5 + 7.2Q2 + 1.5 + 22.9 – 21.4 + 11.7Q3
pe + 18.3 + 25.6 – 6.1 ...
1Excluding equalisation claims. — 2Including cash ad-
vances and money market borrowing.
Deutsche Bundesbank
Special fundsLand
Governments

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
51mate – will overshoot the constitutional ceil-
ings for new borrowing.4Even based on earl-
ier more favourable tax estimates, severalLand Governments had resorted to problem-
atic appropriations in order to keep thebudgeted amounts for net borrowing belowthe level of self-financed investment.
5Given
the extreme financial constraints on the Land
Governments, they need to take comprehen-sive consolidation measures.
For local government, only the results for the
second quarter are available so far, accordingto which overall revenue rose marginallythanks solely to a large sale of participatinginterests in Baden-Württemberg. Expendituregrew sharply by almost 3%, which was main-ly attributable to the development of socialbenefits, expenditure on staff and other oper-ating expenses. By contrast, fixed capital for-mation fell further. The financial balance de-teriorated by nearly 31 billion vis-à-vis the
second quarter of 2001. In the first half of2002 the deficit had thus already widened by32 billion to almost 35 billion, and no im-
provement in the budgetary position is ex-pected in the second half of the year either.
In the third quarter the indebtedness of cen-
tral, state and local government rose by318
12billion. The Federal Government alone
drew on the credit markets to the net amountof310 billion. Although it redeemed money
market loans to the value of 33 billion, it
raised 313
12billion in the capital market. The
indebtedness of the special funds barelychanged in the third quarter. On the otherhand, the Land Governments expanded their
indebtedness sharply by 37
12billion. Localgovernment debt probably increased by al-
most 31 billion.
Social security funds
In the third quarter the wage and salary
earners’ pension insurance scheme recordeda deficit of 32 billion, which was 3
12billion
higher than in the same period last year.While expenditure grew by just over 3
12%,
revenue exceeded the figure for last yearby just under 3%. Despite the relatively highpay settlements concluded in the spring,compulsory contributions rose by only
12%.
By contrast, grants from the Federal budgetincreased by a little under 6% in total. Al-though the pension increases from 1 July 2002were higher than in 2001, the growth of ex-penditure on pensions did not accelerate (notquite 3
12%).6The main reason for this is that
the number of pension recipients has risenmore slowly, which is due in part to the intro-duction of deductions from the pensionamount for pensioners taking early retire-ment. By contrast, considerably more (almost6
12%) was spent on pensioners’ health and
nursing insurance because from mid-year theapplicable rate is the contribution rate to thestatutory health insurance institutions valid atthe beginning of the year, and this increased
4This could be avoided by most state governments in
2002 through recourse to unused borrowing authorisa-
tions and reserves.
5Examples of this are the investment grants of state gov-
ernment which are explicitly financed from current trans-
fers from central government, the EU and the municipal
tax-sharing arrangements as well as unspecified addition-
al revenue and lower expenditure.
6On 1 July 2002 pensions were raised by 2.16% in west-
ern Germany and 2.89% in eastern Germany. The com-
parable figures for 2001 were 1.91% in western Ger-
many and 2.11% in eastern Germany.Local
government
IndebtednessStatutory
pension
insurance
scheme

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
52at the start of 2002 from 13.65% to 14.0%
on average.
The required minimum fluctuation reserve of
0.8 month’s expenditure is likely to be consid-erably undershot at the end of this year. Inthe light of the less favourable outlook foremployment in 2003, too, the contributionrate is expected to rise from 19.1% to19.5%. In order to avoid an even higherlevel, the fluctuation reserve is to be reducedfurther and the income ceiling for contribu-tions significantly raised.
7It should be noted
in this connection that the smaller the re-quired fluctuation reserve, the greater theprobability is of having to rely on liquidity as-sistance from the Federal Government duringthe year. A second consequence is that theadditional contribution payments that willnow be deducted from persons whose in-
come exceeds the current contribution ceilingwill result in correspondingly higher pensionclaims in the future. This means that the bur-den on future contribution payers will beeven heavier in a period when the strainscaused by demographic developments will al-ready be greatest.
In the third quarter of 2002 the Federal La-
bour Office recorded a deficit of just over 31
billion, whereas it had ended up close to bal-ance in the corresponding quarter of lastyear. A rise in expenditure of nearly 11% wasaccompanied by virtually stagnating revenue.The main cause of the worsened financialsituation, besides the disappointing develop-ment of the trend in revenue from contribu-tions (+
12%), was increasing unemployment.
This resulted in 13% more being spent on un-employment benefit. By contrast, the numberof registered unemployed persons on averageover the quarter exceeded last year’s corres-ponding figure by just 6%. This discrepancycan be explained by higher per capita pay-
ments and a rising share of benefit recipientsamong the total unemployed. This constella-tion, which is typical during a labour mar-ket downturn, indicates a big influx of un-employed persons with “fresh” claims. Fur-thermore, long-term unemployed personswithout entitlement to unemployment bene-fit have probably deregistered. This pattern isdetermined by the development in westernGermany. In eastern Germany, conversely, anincrease in the number of unemployed wasQuarterly
 5 bn
 5 bn
Surplus (+) or deficit (−)Revenue
ExpenditureWage and salary earners’
pension insurance scheme
Deutsche Bundesbank6+
4+
2+
0
2−58
56
54
5250
2000 2001 2002
7From 34,500 per month in western Germany and
33,750 in eastern Germany to 35,100 and 34,250, re-
spectively.OutlookFederal Labour
Office

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
53again accompanied by a decline in expend-
iture on unemployment benefit. This suggestsan entrenchment of long-term unemploy-ment there.
Between January and September the deficit
of the Federal Labour Office doubled vis-à-vislast year, reaching just over 34
12billion. The
envisaged required grant of 32 billion from
the Federal budget for 2002 will therefore beconsiderably overshot. However, the deficit isnot expected to increase further in the lastquarter because the revenue from contribu-tions is likely to be relatively high thanks toChristmas bonuses and the substantial wageincreases concluded in the spring. If, asplanned, the need for a Federal budget grantis to be obviated next year, considerable re-trenchment efforts will have to be made thatgo beyond a restructuring of active labourmarket policy.
In the first six months the statutory health in-
surance fund recorded a deficit of 32
12bil-
lion, which was only marginally lower than inthe same period last year. Despite the averagerise in contributions at the beginning of theyear from 13.65% to 14.0%, revenue fromcontributions did not suffice to cover currentexpenditure, which rose significantly in thecase of pharmaceuticals and hospitals, in par-ticular. Consequently, no financial resourceswere available to replenish the statutory re-serves. The growth in expenditure is not ex-pected to slow down noticeably before theend of the year. The impending rise in contri-bution rates as a result of the tense financialsituation is to be avoided by means of thedraft Act to Stabilise the Rate of Contribu-tions presented by the Government. This Act
envisages savings in expenditure. A rise incontribution rates should only be possible inexceptional circumstances. Many health in-surance institutions are, however, likely toinvoke this clause.Quarterly
 5 bn
 5 bn 5 bn
Surplus (+) or deficit (−)Expenditure on...
...unemployment benefits and
   short-time working benefits
...vocational
   training 2Expenditure, total
Revenue 1Federal Labour Office
1Excluding Federal Government liquidity
assistance. — 2Including job creation meas-
ures.
Deutsche Bundesbank0.5+
0
0.5−
1.0−
1.5−
2.0−7.0
6.5
6.0
5.5
5.0
4.5
4.014.5
14.0
13.5
13.0
12.5
12.0
11.5
11.0
2000 2001 2002Deficit this year
significantly
higher than
anticipated
Statutory
health
insurance fund

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
54Deutsche BundesbankThe debate on amending the Stability and Growth Pact
The European Stability and Growth Pact was
adopted in Amsterdam in 1997 to ensure sound
public finance in European monetary union (and
also in those countries of the European Union
which have not yet introduced the single currency).
The rationale underlying the Pact is the realisation
that sustainable public finance promotes sustain-
able economic growth and a favourable employ-
ment trend and makes it easier for the European
Central Bank to perform its task of safeguarding
monetary stability in the euro area. The Pact, which
was initiated principally by Germany, is thus an in-
tegral part of the economic policy framework of
monetary union. It details and expands on corre-
sponding rules in the Maastricht Treaty, which was
adopted in 1992.
While the majority of EU member states had at
least achieved a balanced budget in 2001, Ger-
many, France, Italy and Portugal have still not ful-
filled the requirement of a budgetary position that
is close to balance or in surplus over the business
cycle – five years after the adoption of the Pact.
Some of these countries are even having difficulties
keeping below the 3% ceiling for the general gov-
ernment deficit ratio that was already set by the
Maastricht Treaty, or have actually exceeded it.
These fiscal problems have recently triggered an
extensive debate about the Pact’s meaningfulness
as well as various proposals to change it.
A number of commentators have suggested exclud-
ing public investment expenditure from the calcu-
lation of the government deficits. They argue that
public investment has positive growth effects and
that present-day generations are placed at a disad-
vantage if such expenditure cannot be financedthrough deficits. The counterargument to this is
that government activity redistributes burdens be-
tween the generations in other ways besides public
investment and indebtedness. For example, if the
ageing of the population develops as expected, fu-
ture generations will be heavily burdened by the
current pay-as-you-go statutory pension insurance
systems. It is therefore wrong to consider public in-
vestment in isolation in the context of the inter-
generational implications of government activity.
Although certain types of public investment may
indeed boost economic growth potential, it is very
difficult in practice to distinguish them from other
forms of government spending. For example, gov-
ernment investment expenditure intended for con-
sumption purposes (such as swimming baths or old
people’s homes) is hardly likely to generate longer-
term economic growth impulses, whereas spending
on education – which has more positive conse-
quences in this connection – is classified as govern-
ment consumption expenditure. It should also be
noted that a considerable proportion of public in-
vestment merely serves to maintain the existing ca-
pital stock and also that investment projects may
entail considerable follow-up costs. Hence defining
the concept of investment in this context is extre-
mely contentious and probably could not be imple-
mented in a transparent, internationally harmo-
nised and accepted fiscal policy rule. Furthermore,
the Stability and Growth Pact does not restrict pub-
lic investment that boosts productivity; it merely
stipulates that such investment may not be debt-
financed.
Another point that features prominently in the cur-
rent debate about amending the Stability and
Growth Pact is the claim that the Pact is not flexible

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
55enough to take sufficient account of cyclical fluc-
tuations. The proponents of this view say that in
the present phase of sluggish cyclical momentum
the Pact is forcing policy makers to pursue a restric-
tive fiscal policy and is thus acting as an additional
drag on economic growth. What such critics over-
look is that the Stability and Growth Pact is expli-
citly designed to allow cyclical fluctuations in the
government fiscal balance so that, to this extent,
fiscal policy can perform its stabilisation function.
Thus if the member states meet the requirement
of reaching a budgetary position that is at least
close to balance under normal economic circum-
stances, they will generally have a sufficient safety
margin below the 3% ceiling for the deficit ratio.
Consequently, they can cope with cyclical strains
on the budget without breaching the deficit limit.
During a severe recession the 3% ceiling may even
be temporarily exceeded. Contrary to many claims,
therefore, the Stability and Growth Pact shows
considerable flexibility with regard to cyclical fluc-
tuations.
However, budgetary problems arising from insuffi-
cient consolidation in the past are a different mat-
ter. Only those countries which have not yet
reached a structural budgetary position that is at
least close to balance cannot cope for long with cy-
clically induced increases in the deficit. This also ap-
plies to Germany which in 2000, following a phase
of relatively strong economic growth, was still far
from reaching a balanced budget and in the two
following years saw its deficit ratio rise by around
2 percentage points – not least for structural rea-
sons. The countries concerned are faced with a
dual task: they must lower their deficit ratios below
the 3% ceiling – or not exceed it in the first place –and achieve a structurally balanced budgetary posi-
tion as quickly as possible.
The Stability and Growth Pact’s provisions and sanc-
tions in the event that the deficit limit is breached
are appropriate. If the ceiling is overshot and none
of the precisely defined exceptional circumstances
obtain, effective consolidation measures are to be
taken swiftly to bring the deficit back under the
threshold. Otherwise sanctions are envisaged for
the member state concerned in the course of a
multi-stage procedure. Stringent implementation
of these rules by the European institutions is called
for so as to prevent any backsliding into the policy
of debt accumulation pursued during the previous
decades, with the associated negative repercussions
for medium and long-term growth and employ-
ment prospects. This will also make it easier for the
European Central Bank to carry out its task of safe-
guarding monetary stability.
Given that no deadline was specified in the Pact for
achieving a budgetary position which is at least
close to balance, the European Commission has
suggested relaxing the current rules in order to
take account of the considerably deteriorated over-
all economic outlook.
It no longer foresees 2004 as the deadline. Instead,
those countries with high deficit levels are to re-
duce them annually by at least 0.5% of GDP, mea-
sured on a structural basis, which will ultimately
mean that the target must be reached by 2006 at
the latest. The consolidation path required for the
individual countries must be reinforced by specific
measures to ensure that the Pact’s objectives are at-
tained – even if with a delay.

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
56Outlook for the general government
sector as a whole
This year Germany’s deficit ratio will markedly
exceed the 3% ceiling set by the MaastrichtTreaty, after it had already doubled last yearto 2.8%. Yet whereas last year fiscal policy– particularly as a result of the comprehensivetax cuts – largely contributed to the deficit in-crease, the further rise this year is mainly dueto cyclical developments and other (tempor-ary) influences.
The main reason for the unexpected deficit
increase is the marked drop in revenue. Thedampened trends in gross wages and salariesand in private consumption are leading tolosses in revenue from social security contri-butions, wage tax and turnover tax. In add-ition, taxes related to profits have developedvery unfavourably. This was probably due,inter alia, to temporary factors, such as write-
downs and the combination of lower prepay-ments and a speedier assessment of the 2001fiscal year when profits were low. The tax andsocial security ratio (as defined in the nationalaccounts) will decrease by around
12percent-
age point to 4112%, despite the noticeable
rises in excise duties and in the average con-tribution rate to the statutory health insur-ance fund. This pronounced – and unexpect-ed – decoupling of taxes and levies from thetrend in GDP and its sub-components is,however, likely to abate at least partly in thenext few years. Expenditure in 2002 will in-crease more sharply than last year (+1.7%),mainly as a result of the trend in labourmarket-related expenditure and the rise inchild benefit. Spending on measures to over-come the flood damage is unlikely to have its
main impact until 2003 and is therefore not adecisive factor in the deficit exceeding the3% ceiling in 2002.
Even with stringent budgetary implementa-
tion, if no additional consolidation measuresare introduced next year it is not certain thatthe general government deficit ratio can bebrought back below 3%. But this is absolute-ly essential if the excessive deficit procedureprescribed by the Stability and Growth Pact isto be terminated as quickly as possible. Thisprocedure is set in motion as a rule if the def-icit ratio exceeds 3% and may ultimately re-sult in severe financial penalties.
The objectives of the Stability and Growth
Pact and their implementation have recentlybeen called into question by various com-mentators. Any amendments or even theabolition of the Pact, however, would impairthe foundations of the single European cur-rency and future economic development (seebox on page 54 f). By contrast, a convincingconsolidation strategy, which results in a de-crease in the general government deficits andultimately demonstrates that fiscal policymakers have the capability to implementambitious objectives with a view to lastinglylimiting the burden of taxes and social secur-ity contributions and government activity,could also create a more positive consump-tion and investment climate in the shortterm – particularly if it is coupled with reformsaimed at fostering growth, not least on thelabour market. A stable fiscal policy frame-work and public confidence that policymakers will comply with transparent and
The 3% ceiling
will be
breached
in 2002
Marked drop
in revenueNeed for
consolidation
Stability and
Growth Pact
improves
macroeconomic
framework

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
57verifiable rules are important conditions for
macroeconomic stability in an enlarged Euro-pean Union, too.
Consolidation measures of the Federal
Government
Following the German parliamentary elec-
tions, the coalition government partiesagreed on a consolidation package which,based on the original scope of the package,would ensure that the deficit ceiling set bythe Maastricht Treaty is not overshot againand would support the goal of a medium-term balanced budget. In addition, however,very stringent budget management is also re-quired. The Federal Government estimatesthat the measures in the coalition agreementwill amount to around
34% of GDP in 2003
and will then rise in subsequent years.
The package includes cuts in labour market-
related expenditure, cuts in subsidies and nu-merous tax measures, although amendmentsto the original plans may be expected duringthe course of the legislative procedure. Whilethe expenditure cuts would help to reducethe government expenditure ratio – a desir-able macroeconomic aim – and to lessen dis-incentives, the tax and social security ratiowould be raised by the taxation measures,and some elements of tax legislation wouldbe made more complicated. These measuresrange from abolishing exemptions from taxrules to changing certain systemically justifiedprovisions – notably by limiting the ability offirms to offset losses against profits. From amacroeconomic viewpoint, the measures af-fecting the corporate sector – which, contrary
to the curbing of social benefits, are to have afar larger impact in the coming years – wouldworsen the investment climate and hence thelonger-term outlook for growth. The extend-ed taxation of capital gains would makefirms’ equity financing more expensive andhamper domestic capital formation. In thefurther course of the decision-making processpolicy makers therefore need to considerwhether perhaps more extensive measurescould be adopted that principally curtail gov-ernment consumption expenditure instead ofprivate-sector investment, which is crucial forlonger-term growth prospects. A major po-tential field of action in this respect is the de-velopment of personnel expenditure in thepublic sector.
Overall, it is necessary to create a clear con-
solidation perspective that boosts confidencein a sustainable fiscal policy. Not least giventhe fiscal rules which apply under Europeanmonetary union and in the light of a stability-oriented monetary policy, reducing the gov-ernment deficits is a high priority. It shouldtherefore be ensured that the envisaged vol-ume of relief measures in favour of the gov-ernment budgets are actually achieved.
The consolidation package will, for the most
part, ease the budgetary position of the Fed-eral Government. Reducing the overall def-icit, however, requires great efforts at alllevels of government. The deficit ratio is at-tributable – more or less in equal parts – tocentral government, on the one hand, and tostate and local government, on the other.With a view to achieving consolidation on the
Consolidation
package:
overall scope ...
... and structure
Efforts required
from all levels
of government

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
58part of all levels of government, the Financial
Planning Council decided in spring to tightlylimit spending in order to achieve the goal ofmedium-term balanced budgets as well as tofinance the adopted tax cuts which will comeinto force at the beginning of 2004 and2005. In addition, the goal of medium-termbalanced budgets has now been enshrined inGerman budgetary law by an amendment tothe Budget Principles Act. To be able to com-ply with the agreed expenditure limits, it is
very important – for the Land Government
budgets, in particular – that the pay settle-ments in the public sector remain moderate.Although the social security funds will be bal-anced in the medium term, they likewisehave a pressing need to limit their expend-iture so as to reduce the burden of social se-curity contributions.

Statistical
SectionDeutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
1*

ContentsI Key economic data for European
monetary union
1 Monetary developments and interest
rates 6*
2 Foreign trade and payments 6*3 General economic indicators 7*
II Overall monetary survey in the
European monetary union
1 The money stock and its counterparts 8*
2 Consolidated balance sheet of mon-
etary financial institutions (MFIs) 10*
3 Banking system’s liquidity position 14*
III Consolidated financial statement
of the Eurosystem
1 Assets 16*
2 Liabilities 18*
IV Banks
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary
financial institutions (excluding theBundesbank) in Germany 20*
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks
(MFIs) in Germany, by category ofbanks 24*
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-à-vis residents 26*
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents 28*Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
2*

5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) 30*
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic enterprises and residentindividuals, housing loans, sectors ofeconomic activity 32*
7 Deposits of domestic
non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs)in Germany 34*
8 Deposits of domestic individuals and
non-commercial organisations atbanks (MFIs) in Germany 36*
9 Deposits of domestic public author-
ities at banks (MFIs) in Germany, bycreditor group 36*
10 Savings deposits and bank savings
bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germanysold to non-banks (non-MFIs) 38*
11 Debt securities and money market
paper outstanding of banks (MFIs)in Germany 38*
12 Building and loan associations (MFIs)
in Germany 39*
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign
branches and foreign subsidiaries ofGerman banks (MFIs) 40*
V Minimum reserves
1 Reserve ratios 42*
2 Reserve maintenance in Germany up
to the end of 1998 42*
3 Reserve maintenance in the Euro-
pean monetary union 42*VI Interest rates
1 ECB interest rates 43*
2 Discount and lombard rates of the
Bundesbank 43*
3 Base rates 43*4 Eurosystem monetary policy opera-
tions allotted through tenders 43*
5 Money market rates, by month 44*6 Euro area retail bank interest rates 44*7 Lending and deposit rates of banks
(MFIs) in Germany 45*
8 Selected central bank rates abroad 47*9 Money market rates abroad 47*
VII Capital market
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities
and shares in Germany 48*
2 Sales of debt securities issued by
borrowers domiciled in Germany 49*
3 Outstanding amount of debt secur-
ities issued by borrowers domiciledin Germany 50*
4 Circulation of shares issued by resi-
dents of Germany 50*
5 Yields and indices on German
securities 51*
6 Sales and purchases of investment
fund certificates in Germany 51*Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
3*

VIII Public finance in Germany
1 Finances of the public sector 52*
2 Finances of the Federal
Government, Länder Governmentsand local authorities 52*
3 Finances of the Government
in the national accounts 53*
4 Tax revenue of the central,
regional and local authorities 53*
5 Tax revenue, by type 54*6 Individual taxes of the Federal
Government, Länder Governmentsand local authorities 54*
7 Indebtedness of the public sector 55*8 Changes in public sector
indebtedness 57*
9 Loans raised by public authorities
against borrowers’ notes 57*
10 Indebtedness of the Federal
Government 58*
11 Federal Government borrowing
in the market 58*
12 Receipts, expenditure and assets of
the wage and salary earners’pension insurance funds 59*
13 Receipts and expenditure of the
Federal Labour Office 59*
IX Economic conditions
1 Origin and expenditure of
domestic product, distribution ofnational income 60*
2 Output in the producing sector 61*3 Orders received by the
manufacturing sector 62*
4 Orders received by construction 63*5 Retail trade turnover 63*6 Labour market 64*
7 Prices 65*8 Households’ income 66*9 Pay rates and actual earnings 66*
X Foreign trade and payments
1 Major items of the balance of pay-
ments of the European monetaryunion 67*
2 Major items of the balance of pay-
ments of the Federal Republic ofGermany 68*
3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the
Federal Republic of Germany, bygroup of countries and country 69*
4 Services and factor income of the
Federal Republic of Germany 70*
5 Current transfers of the Federal
Republic of Germany 70*
6 Capital transfers 70*7 Financial account of the Federal
Republic of Germany 71*
8 External position of the Bundesbank 72*9 External position of the Bundesbank
in the European monetary union 72*
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises
in Germany (other than banks)vis-à-vis non-residents 73*
11 Deutsche Mark and euro exchange
rates of selected currencies 74*
12 Exchange rates for the national
currencies of the EMU countries,the Deutsche Mark value of theECU and euro conversion rates 74*
13 Effective exchange rates of the euro
and selected foreign currencies 75*Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
4*

Abbreviations and symbols
eestimated
pprovisional
pepartly estimated
rrevised
...Data available at a later date
.Data unknown, not to be published or
not meaningful
0Less than 0.5 but more than nil
–nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to round-
ing.Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
5*

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
 I. Key economic data for European monetary union
 
1. Monetary developments and interest rates
 
 
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions  1  2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
 M 3  3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3−month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
moving average MFI lending, and capital 3−month ment bonds
M1 M2 (centred) total individuals formation  4 EONIA  5, 7 EURIBOR  6, 7 outstanding  8 
Period Change from previous year,in % % p. a. as a monthly average
2001          Mar. 1.7 3.1 3.7 3.9 5.3 9.3 4.7 4.78 4.71 4.9
         Apr. 1.6 3.4 4.0 4.0 5.4 9.1 3.9 5.06 4.68 5.1
         May 2.9 3.6 4.3 4.6 5.3 8.5 3.5 4.65 4.64 5.3         June 4.0 4.3 5.5 5.1 5.7 8.4 3.4 4.54 4.45 5.2
         July 3.4 4.4 5.6 5.7 5.8 8.2 2.7 4.51 4.47 5.2
         Aug. 3.6 4.4 5.9 6.1 5.5 7.7 2.3 4.49 4.35 5.0         Sep. 5.0 5.1 6.8 6.7 5.2 7.1 2.5 3.99 3.98 5.0
         Oct. 5.2 5.5 7.3 7.3 5.1 6.9 2.6 3.97 3.60 4.8
         Nov. 5.9 6.0 7.8 7.7 5.4 7.0 3.6 3.51 3.39 4.6         Dec. 5.5 6.4 8.0 7.8 5.2 6.7 4.7 3.34 3.34 4.9
2002          Jan. 6.6 6.7 7.8 7.7 5.2 6.2 4.8 3.29 3.34 5.0
         Feb. 6.2 6.4 7.4 7.5 5.1 6.0 4.8 3.28 3.36 5.1         Mar. 6.0 6.3 7.2 7.3 4.9 5.4 4.7 3.26 3.39 5.3
         Apr. 6.6 6.4 7.3 7.4 4.4 5.1 4.6 3.32 3.41 5.3
         May 6.8 6.7 7.6 7.3 4.5 5.3 5.2 3.31 3.47 5.3         June 6.8 6.5 7.1 7.3 4.4 5.4 4.3 3.35 3.46 5.2
         July 7.6 6.5 7.1 7.1 4.1 4.9 4.9 3.30 3.41 5.0
         Aug. 7.6 6.4 7.0 7.1 4.2 5.2 5.2 3.29 3.35 4.7         Sep. 8.2 6.6 7.4 ... 4.3 5.1 4.7 3.32 3.31 4.5
         Oct. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3.30 3.26 4.6
1 Source: ECB. — 2 Saisonally adjusted. — 3 Excluding holdings of money Average. — 6 Euro InterBank Offered Rate. — 7 See also footnotes to table
market fund shares
/units by non-residents of the euro area. — 4 Longer- VI.5., p. 44*. — 8 GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds; from
term liabilities to euro area non-MFIs. — 5Euro OverNight Index 2001 Euro12. 
 
 
2. Foreign trade and payments  * 
  
 
Selected items of the EMU balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1 
Current account Capital account Effective exchange rate  3 
of which: Direct Securities Credit Monetary
Balance Trade balance Balance investment transactions reserves Dollar rate nominal real  4 transactions  2 
Period
 5 
 million Euro/US-$ 1st q 1999=100
2001          Mar. − 1,329 + 6,250 + 27,559 − 31,773 + 4,683 + 51,959 + 2,690 0.9095 88.4 89.8
         Apr. − 8,630 + 3,030 + 15,281 − 1,863 − 15,217 + 25,393 + 6,967 0.8920 87.6 89.1
         May − 4,581 + 4,160 − 3,060 − 46,522 + 31,473 + 15,569 − 3,581 0.8742 85.9 87.6         June − 3,008 + 7,994 − 6,072 − 6,037 + 26,021 − 25,208 − 849 0.8532 84.7 86.3
         July − 790 + 10,548 − 25,607 − 2,803 − 4,527 − 18,313 + 36 0.8607 85.4 87.1
         Aug. + 5,257 + 7,428 − 6,123 − 5,910 + 204 − 4,485 + 4,068 0.9005 87.7 89.3         Sep. + 743 + 6,019 − 21,326 − 15,612 + 46,607 − 50,706 − 1,615 0.9111 88.0 89.7
         Oct. + 4,122 + 11,397 − 22,033 + 4,005 − 1,535 − 21,843 − 2,661 0.9059 88.0 90.0
         Nov. + 2,668 + 8,846 − 6,834 + 11,690 + 17,096 − 35,681 + 60 0.8883 86.8 88.8         Dec. + 2,295 + 10,439 − 3,197 + 831 − 17,117 + 7,232 + 5,856 0.8924 87.7 89.9
2002          Jan. − 94 + 3,109 − 49,540 + 9 − 38,477 − 5,759 − 5,313 0.8833 87.6 90.3
         Feb. + 4,399 + 9,999 + 6,741 − 8,915 − 11,195 + 24,396 + 2,455 0.8700 86.8 89.4         Mar. + 7,444 + 13,222 + 16,327 − 6,091 − 569 + 23,192 − 205 0.8758 86.8 89.6
         Apr. − 4,550 + 8,355 + 16,794 + 8,027 + 19,279 − 18,882 + 8,369 0.8858 87.2 90.1
         May + 2,368 + 10,708 + 2,126 + 3,748 + 29,888 − 33,329 + 1,818 0.9170 88.6 91.5         June + 7,335 + 13,647 − 41,261 − 16,147 + 15,168 − 36,836 − 3,446 0.9554 90.6 93.6
         July + 2,587 + 14,178 − 11,188 − 3,617 + 7,230 − 12,273 − 2,528 0.9922 91.7 94.7
         Aug. + 9,720 + 11,691 − 11,763 + 1,694 + 2,546 − 17,784 + 1,780 0.9778 91.1 93.9         Sep. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0.9808 91.2 94.2
         Oct. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0.9811 91.7 94.8
 
*  Source: ECB. — 1  See also tables X.12 and 13, p. 74−75. — 2  Including on consumer prices. 
financial derivatives. — 3  Vis-a-vis a narrow group of countries. — 4  Based
6* I. Key economic data for European monetary union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
I.  Key economic data for European monetary union 
 
3. General economic indicators
 
 
                   
Period Belgium Germany Finland France Greece Ireland Italy Luxembourg Austria Portugal Spain EMU 7 Netherlands
Real gross domestic product 1
1999 3.2 2.0 4.1 3.2 3.6 11.1 1.6 6.0 4.0 2.7 3.5 4.2 2.8
2000 3.7 2.9 6.1 3.8 4.2 10.0 2.9 8.9 3.3 3.5 3.5 4.2 3.5
2001 0.8 0.6 0.7 1.8 4.1 5.7 1.8 1.0 1.3 0.7 1.7 2.7 1.4
2001          1st qtr 1.6 1.4 3.5 2.9 5.1 11.3 2.7 1.7 2.8 1.9 3.6 2.4
         2nd qtr 1.3 0.6 0.4 2.0 4.0 6.7 2.3 1.7 0.9 3.0 2.0 1.6         3rd qtr 0.8 0.4 0.1 2.0 3.5 4.3 1.8 1.1 0.3 1.0 2.5 1.3         4th qtr −0.5 −0.1 −1.1 0.5 3.7 1.1 0.3 0.6 0.1 0.7 2.6 0.5
2002          1st qtr −0.5 −1.2 −1.9 0.3 4.3 4.4 −0.6 −0.1 0.3 1.2 1.9 −0.3
         2nd qtr 0.5 0.5 2.5 0.9 4.0 6.5 0.2 0.0 0.4 0.9 2.2 0.7
Industrial production 1, 2
1999 0.9 1.5 5.5 2.0 3.9 14.8 −0.1 11.5 1.3 6.0 3.0 2.6 1.9
2000 5.3 6.2 11.2 3.5 0.5 15.4 4.8 4.3 4.0 8.9 0.5 4.0 5.52001 −1.0 0.5 −1.0 0.8 1.4 10.2 −1.2 1.8 1.4 0.8 2.4 −1.1 0.3
2001          2nd qtr −1.0 1.4 −2.2 1.6 0.5 12.4 −0.8 0.2 2.5 0.0 5.3 −1.3 1.0
         3rd qtr −0.9 −1.1 −3.3 2.3 2.5 3.6 −1.3 2.5 1.2 0.2 2.0 −0.4 −0.2
         4th qtr −5.2 −3.7 −4.7 −2.4 0.1 −2.6 −5.6 1.3 −1.5 −2.4 0.1 −2.0 −3.6
2002          1st qtr −0.8 −4.0 ... −2.1 −1.1 4.9 −3.4 −2.7 −2.9 −2.1 1.5 −3.9 −2.6
         2nd qtr 2.8 −1.8 ... −0.3 2.4 11.6 −2.3 5.9 −2.9 2.4 0.0 1.0 −0.6
         3rd qtr ... 6 p −0.6 ... ... ... ... −3.0 ... −1.7 ... ... 1.5 ...
Capacity utilisation 3
2000 84.0 85.9 86.8 87.5 78.1 78.6 78.8 87.8 84.7 84.5 81.2 80.6 84.22001 82.3 85.1 85.7 87.4 77.6 78.4 78.9 88.7 84.6 83.1 81.7 79.6 83.62002 79.6 82.0 82.7 85.3 77.0 75.9 77.3 85.1 82.9 80.6 79.4 77.2 81.2
2001          3rd qtr 81.4 84.3 85.1 87.7 76.1 78.0 78.7 88.9 84.6 82.7 82.4 80.1 83.4
         4th qtr 80.2 83.3 84.5 86.3 76.8 75.2 77.9 87.8 83.8 81.4 79.7 78.3 82.2
2002          1st qtr 79.2 82.4 82.0 85.5 75.4 77.5 76.9 86.9 83.5 80.9 77.9 76.3 81.1
         2nd qtr 79.6 81.5 82.7 85.8 76.7 76.3 77.3 84.3 82.9 80.6 79.4 77.0 81.2         3rd qtr 80.1 82.0 83.0 85.3 79.0 72.8 76.9 83.8 82.5 80.5 79.1 76.3 81.0         4th qtr 79.6 82.1 83.1 84.7 76.8 76.9 78.0 85.3 82.8 80.4 81.2 79.3 81.5
Unemployment rate 4
1999 8.6 8.4 10.2 10.7 11.9 5.6 11.3 2.4 3.2 3.9 4.5 12.8 9.4
2000 6.9 7.8 9.8 9.3 11.1 4.2 10.4 2.3 2.8 3.7 4.1 11.3 8.5
2001 6.6 7.7 9.1 8.5 10.5 3.8 9.4 2.0 2.4 3.6 4.1 10.6 8.0
2002          Apr. 6.8 8.0 9.2 8.7 4.4 9.0 2.2 2.6 4.0 4.4 11.1 8.1
         May 6.8 8.2 9.3 8.7 4.4 9.0 2.3 2.8 4.1 4.4 11.1 8.2         June 6.9 8.3 9.3 8.7 4.4 9.0 2.3 2.8 4.1 4.5 11.1 8.2
         July 6.9 8.3 9.2 8.8 4.5 9.0 2.4 2.9 4.1 4.5 11.2 8.3
         Aug. 6.9 8.3 9.1 8.8 4.5 ... 2.5 2.9 4.2 4.6 11.2 8.3         Sep. 6.8 8.3 8.9 8.8 4.5 ... 2.5 ... 4.2 4.7 11.3 8.3
         Oct. ... 8.3 ... ... 4.5 ... ... ... 4.1 ... 11.3 ...
Harmonised index of consumer prices 1
1999 1.1 0.6 1.3 0.6 2.1 2.5 1.7 1.0 2.0 0.5 2.2 2.2 1.12000 2.7 2.1 3.0 1.8 2.9 5.3 2.6 3.8 2.3 2.0 2.8 3.5 2.3
2001 2.4 2.4 2.7 1.8 3.7 4.0 2.3 2.4 5.1 2.3 4.4 2.8 2.5
2002          Apr. 1.7 1.6 2.6 2.1 4.1 5.0 2.5 1.9 4.2 1.7 3.5 3.7 2.4
         May 1.4 1.0 1.8 1.5 3.8 5.0 2.4 1.3 3.8 1.7 3.4 3.7 2.0         June 0.8 0.7 1.5 1.5 3.6 4.5 2.2 1.3 3.9 1.5 3.5 3.4 1.8
         July 1.1 1.0 2.0 1.6 3.6 4.2 2.4 1.9 3.8 1.5 3.6 3.5 1.9
         Aug. 1.3 1.0 1.8 1.8 3.8 4.5 2.6 2.0 3.8 2.1 3.9 3.7 2.1         Sep. 1.2 1.0 1.4 1.8 3.8 4.5 2.8 2.2 3.7 1.6 3.8 3.5 2.1
         Oct. 1.3 1.3 1.7 1.9 3.9 4.4 2.8 2.5 3.6 ... ... 4.0 ...
General government financial balance 5
1999 −0.5 −1.5 1.9 −1.6 −1.9 2.2 −1.8 3.6 0.7 −2.3 −2.4 −1.1 −1.3
2000 0.1 1.1 7.0 −1.3 −0.8 4.4 −0.5 5.6 2.2 −1.5 −2.9 −0.6 0.2
2001 0.4 −2.8 4.9 −1.4 ... 1.5 −2.2 6.1 0.1 0.2 −4.1 −0.1 −1.4
General government debt 5
1999 114.9 61.2 46.8 58.5 104.3 49.7 114.5 6.0 63.1 64.9 54.4 63.1 71.92000 109.2 60.2 44.0 57.3 104.7 39.1 110.5 5.6 55.8 63.6 53.3 60.5 69.4
2001 107.6 59.5 43.4 57.3 ... 36.4 109.8 5.6 52.8 63.2 55.5 57.1 69.2
Sources: National data, European Commission, Eurostat, European persons in civilian employment; seasonally adjusted. —5  As a percen-
Central Bank. Latest data are partly based on press reports and are tage of GDP; Maastricht Treaty definition, ESA95; including proceeds from
provisional. —1  Annual percentage changes; GDP of Greece and Portugal is sales of UMTS licenses in 2000 and 2001. —6  Adjusted in advance by the Fe-
calculated from seasonally adjusted data. —2  Manufacturing, mining, gas deral Statistical Office by way of estimates to the results of the Quarterly Pro-
and electricity; adjusted for working-day variations (except France and duction Survey for the third quarter (industry in Germany: + 1.8 %). —7  In-
Spain). —3  Manufacturing, in %; seasonally adjusted; data are collected cluding Greece (Harmonised index of consumer prices only from 2001). 
in January, April, July and October. —4  Standardised, as a percentage of
7*I.  Key economic data for European monetary union 

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
 
1. The money stock and its counterparts*)
  
  
 
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II. Net claims on III. Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises Publicand individuals authorities Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturitieson non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over 2 Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  
3 Securities Securities reserves  4 
 European monetary union (  5  billion) 1
 
2001          June 39.0 28.4 −31.7 10.7 13.3 32.7 27.5 − 5.3 30.0 0.5 −1.1 11.5 19.1
         July 14.1 19.8 4.6 −5.6 −3.2 16.7 −41.3 −58.0 −5.1 −4.7 −1.4 7.5 −6.5
         Aug. −20.0 −11.9 3.2 −8.0 −4.3 27.1 57.2 30.1 2.7 −2.1 −1.2 −1.2 7.3
         Sep. 42.2 45.5 −2.0 −3.3 −4.3 31.2 49.1 18.0 26.4 0.8 −0.9 17.5 9.0
         Oct. 24.5 36.8 8.4 −12.3 −9.6 25.2 43.6 18.4 18.6 −0.3 −1.7 12.7 7.9
         Nov. 72.5 48.6 −1.1 23.8 7.9 27.5 66.0 38.5 18.9 −1.6 −1.1 18.7 2.9
         Dec. 41.9 48.5 24.4 −6.6 −10.2 − 8.9 −26.6 −17.8 29.6 7.3 0.1 7.6 14.6
2002          Jan. 36.1 17.3 4.7 18.7 21.9 −13.6 0.2 13.8 24.3 3.6 −3.6 11.0 13.3
         Feb. 29.1 25.1 8.6 4.0 1.3 −10.3 0.4 10.7 9.2 1.6 −1.0 9.3 −0.6
         Mar. 70.9 48.8 −10.4 22.2 16.9 − 5.7 20.0 25.6 23.7 3.7 −1.3 18.7 2.6
         Apr. 25.8 44.5 2.7 −18.6 1.3 − 1.7 18.8 20.6 −6.2 −0.5 −1.9 1.2 −4.9
         May 39.2 32.5 4.1 6.7 9.5 39.1 74.1 35.0 25.5 3.0 −1.2 19.7 3.9
         June 33.1 33.2 −6.4 −0.1 −1.5 40.7 −26.7 −67.4 −5.0 3.6 −0.2 8.8 −17.2
         July −18.4 −13.1 −10.4 −5.3 −3.5 − 1.8 − 2.4 − 0.7 20.3 1.8 −0.0 8.8 9.8
         Aug. − 7.1 5.3 5.0 −12.4 −1.5 16.3 − 7.3 −23.6 12.8 2.2 0.2 1.6 8.8
         Sep. 56.6 41.3 −2.7 15.2 12.5 8.4 68.2 59.8 9.2 0.7 0.4 −1.6 9.7
 German contribution (  5  billion) 2 
2001          June −26.5 −22.6 −27.8 −3.9 2.2 22.4 −2.4 −24.9 12.6 −0.5 −0.9 3.4 10.6
         July 4.5 −7.0 −1.4 11.5 10.8 0.6 −20.2 −20.8 −4.0 −2.0 −1.3 −0.9 0.1
         Aug. − 5.2 −1.3 −3.1 −3.9 −3.4 7.7 33.1 25.4 5.8 −0.2 −1.3 2.7 4.6
         Sep. − 6.2 7.9 −4.6 −14.0 −10.9 25.4 23.8 −1.6 −0.0 0.6 −0.8 2.5 −2.3
         Oct. − 0.2 4.6 3.3 −4.8 −6.0 9.6 7.6 −2.0 2.4 −0.8 −1.8 1.6 3.4
         Nov. 15.7 6.2 −0.4 9.5 −0.9 30.5 15.3 −15.2 7.6 −1.6 −1.0 8.9 1.3
         Dec. 18.9 22.1 10.8 −3.1 4.2 19.1 −18.0 −37.1 −0.8 1.4 0.1 −4.7 2.5
2002          Jan. − 7.3 −8.7 1.5 1.3 1.0 −21.5 −5.2 16.3 2.8 1.9 −3.6 2.7 1.9
         Feb. 1.8 0.1 −3.2 1.7 4.2 1.8 −0.3 −2.1 5.0 1.2 −1.0 3.2 1.6
         Mar. − 1.0 −2.4 −9.5 1.4 3.0 7.6 10.6 3.0 13.3 3.5 −1.1 10.1 0.9
         Apr. 11.0 9.9 5.8 1.1 5.2 −20.2 −3.0 17.2 −7.7 −1.3 −1.9 −2.1 −2.4
         May 6.6 3.7 −0.2 2.9 8.4 10.7 24.6 13.9 0.4 −0.4 −1.1 2.2 −0.4
         June −19.8 −12.6 −11.1 −7.2 −2.2 25.7 0.1 −25.6 −0.5 −0.7 −0.2 2.3 −1.9
         July 7.2 −7.4 −2.8 14.6 6.1 −16.5 −5.7 10.8 11.2 0.5 0.1 8.2 2.4
         Aug. − 1.7 5.8 6.4 −7.5 2.2 14.5 9.9 −4.5 8.9 −0.2 0.1 5.2 3.7
         Sep. 13.1 12.0 −0.7 1.1 4.1 15.1 30.9 15.7 1.5 −0.5 −0.5 2.0 0.5
 German contribution (DM billion) 2 
2001          June −51.8 −44.2 −54.3 −7.6 4.2 43.9 −4.8 −48.6 24.7 −0.9 −1.8 6.6 20.8
         July 8.8 −13.7 −2.7 22.5 21.1 1.2 −39.5 −40.7 −7.8 −3.9 −2.4 −1.7 0.2
         Aug. −10.2 −2.5 −6.0 −7.7 −6.7 15.0 64.7 49.7 11.3 −0.4 −2.5 5.2 8.9
         Sep. −12.0 15.4 −8.9 −27.4 −21.4 49.6 46.5 −3.1 −0.1 1.1 −1.5 4.8 −4.5
         Oct. − 0.4 9.0 6.4 −9.4 −11.7 18.8 14.9 −3.8 4.7 −1.5 −3.6 3.1 6.7
         Nov. 30.7 12.2 −0.7 18.6 −1.7 59.7 29.9 −29.8 14.9 −3.1 −1.9 17.3 2.6
         Dec. 37.0 43.2 21.2 −6.1 8.2 37.3 −35.2 −72.5 −1.5 2.7 0.1 −9.2 4.8
2002          Jan. −14.4 −16.9 2.9 2.6 2.0 −42.0 −10.1 31.9 5.6 3.7 −7.1 5.3 3.7
         Feb. 3.5 0.2 −6.3 3.3 8.3 3.5 −0.6 −4.1 9.8 2.4 −2.0 6.3 3.1
         Mar. − 2.0 −4.7 −18.6 2.7 5.9 14.9 20.8 5.9 26.1 6.8 −2.2 19.8 1.7
         Apr. 21.4 19.3 11.4 2.2 10.3 −39.5 −5.8 33.7 −15.0 −2.5 −3.8 −4.1 −4.6
         May 13.0 7.2 −0.4 5.8 16.3 21.0 48.1 27.1 0.7 −0.7 −2.2 4.3 −0.7
         June −38.7 −24.7 −21.6 −14.0 −4.3 50.2 0.1 −50.1 −1.0 −1.4 −0.4 4.5 −3.7
         July 14.0 −14.5 −5.5 28.5 11.9 −32.3 −11.2 21.1 21.9 1.1 0.1 16.0 4.7
         Aug. − 3.4 11.3 12.5 −14.7 4.3 28.3 19.4 −8.9 17.4 −0.3 0.3 10.2 7.3
         Sep. 25.6 23.5 −1.4 2.1 7.9 29.6 60.3 30.7 3.0 −1.0 −0.9 4.0 0.9
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of liabilities of central governments. —6The German contributions to the
monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (table II.2); statistical breaks have been Eurosystem ’s monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as
eliminated from the flow figures. —1Source: ECB. —2Owing to changes in national monetary aggregates, and are therefore not comparable to the
the definitions of the items and differences in the range of reporting erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2 or M3. —7In Germany, bank debt
institutions, the figures are not comparable with those published for securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market
Germany up to end of 1998. —3Excluding MFIs portfolios; for the German paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were published in this
contribution: excluding German MFIs portfolios of securities issued by MFIs table together with money market fund certificates. —8From 2002 euro
in the euro area. —4After deduction of inter-MFI participations. —5For currency in circulation plus outstanding national banknotes and coins.
the European monetary union: including the counterparts of monetary Excluding euro-area MFIs ’cash in hand denominated in euro or in
8*II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
 
   
 
V. Other factors VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  6,7,11  
Money Stock M2 Money
of which market  paper
Intra- Money Stock M1 and debt
Eurosystem Deposits securitiesliability/ with an Deposits Money with
IV. De- claim agreed at agreed market maturities
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo- fund of up to    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac- 2 years    
central  gov- certificates
ernments Total  5 issue  12 Total Total Total lation  8 deposits  9 2 years  9 tions (net)  3,11 (net)  3,7,11   Period months  9,10 
European Monetary union (  5  billion) 1
 
18.3 −19.5 − 42.9 47.4 39.7 0.1 39.6 − 2.1 9.8 −12.3 − 1.5 9.2 2001          June
− 9.6 47.0 −− 1.5 − 7.9 − 21.4 −5.0 − 16.4 9.1 4.4 1.9 9.5 − 4.9          July
− 3.3 2.4 − 5.3 − 15.5 − 39.7 −8.8 − 30.9 18.4 5.9 7.5 10.5 2.8          Aug.
− 5.4 8.4 − 44.0 46.3 57.7 −9.6 67.4 −18.2 6.8 − 5.1 3.7 − 0.9          Sep.
5.2 1.7 − 24.2 2.6 − 12.6 −14.2 1.6 3.3 11.8 9.5 11.6 0.5          Oct.
− 2.9 29.6 − 54.4 48.8 32.0 −15.7 47.8 2.0 14.8 − 9.2 9.8 5.1          Nov.
− 11.5 −85.1 − 100.0 116.5 63.9 −40.0 103.9 11.1 41.5 − 7.4 − 1.1 − 8.0          Dec.
10.3 − 3.1 −− 9.1 − 26.1 − 40.5 6.8 − 47.3 − 6.7 21.1 − 2.3 19.8 − 0.4 2002         Jan.
6.3 2.1 − 1.2 − 10.6 − 10.8 −6.2 − 4.6 − 4.0 4.1 4.9 10.8 − 3.9          Feb.
1.1 1.3 − 39.1 27.2 11.5 14.0 − 2.5 12.3 3.4 8.4 3.2 0.3          Mar.
0.5 −13.6 − 43.4 40.1 40.2 7.4 32.9 5.7 − 5.8 − 1.5 8.0 − 3.3          Apr.
− 8.6 12.7 − 48.7 28.0 14.3 12.2 2.1 11.4 2.3 6.7 4.0 10.0          May
5.9 47.2 − 25.6 46.0 60.6 12.0 48.7 −20.9 6.3 − 6.1 − 7.4 − 6.9          June
− 2.9 −24.4 −− 13.2 − 16.3 − 22.8 11.0 − 33.8 3.7 2.8 − 0.7 12.7 − 8.9          July
− 10.8 − 5.6 − 12.8 − 8.3 − 27.8 4.4 − 32.1 13.5 6.0 7.7 12.4 1.0          Aug.
7.7 − 3.6 − 51.7 43.2 62.8 5.6 57.2 −22.5 2.9 5.8 − 2.0 4.6          Sep.
 German contribution (  5  billion) 2
− 0.1 −25.8 − 9.2 7.6 6.0 −1.7 7.7 1.9 − 0.3 − 0.7 0.9 1.5 2001          June
0.9 10.4 −− 2.2 − 5.7 − 6.2 −2.5 − 3.7 1.6 − 1.1 0.6 0.8 2.2          July
0.1 −11.2 − 7.8 2.8 − 1.0 −3.3 2.3 3.7 0.1 2.9 1.5 0.6          Aug.
− 2.9 6.9 − 15.3 14.4 14.5 −4.6 19.1 − 1.2 1.0 − 1.7 1.5 1.1          Sep.
− 1.6 4.1 − 4.5 0.4 − 3.3 −6.0 2.6 0.9 2.8 6.5 1.6 − 4.1          Oct.
1.1 18.8 − 18.7 19.3 20.3 −7.5 27.8 − 3.8 2.8 − 5.3 1.1 3.7          Nov.
− 7.4 27.1 − 19.2 13.2 − 9.5 −24.4 14.9 6.3 16.5 0.9 1.9 3.2          Dec.
1.0 − 6.3 11.6 − 26.4 − 25.7 − 18.0 13 −4.1 − 13.8 −10.2 2.4 − 2.4 2.0 − 0.2 2002         Jan.
− 0.7 − 4.9 − 3.4 4.2 − 0.1 3.9 4.5 − 0.6 − 3.5 − 0.5 1.0 0.8 2.4          Feb.
− 0.0 − 8.6 3.4 1.9 1.5 − 0.0 2.6 − 2.6 1.6 − 0.1 0.2 − 0.1 0.4          Mar.
− 1.9 − 1.4 1.3 1.8 0.2 12.4 3.1 9.3 − 4.8 − 7.3 − 0.3 0.2 1.7          Apr.
0.7 − 0.6 2.9 16.9 12.6 8.7 2.5 6.2 4.5 − 0.6 1.3 − 0.0 3.0          May
0.5 − 5.1 1.0 11.0 15.7 16.4 3.3 13.1 0.3 − 1.0 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 3.7          June
− 1.1 −13.7 2.0 − 5.8 − 3.2 − 1.5 3.7 − 5.1 − 0.2 − 1.5 − 1.0 0.6 − 2.2          July
1.3 − 0.8 3.2 3.3 − 0.4 − 4.3 0.9 − 5.2 3.7 0.1 1.2 1.2 1.4          Aug.
1.0 11.0 2.2 14.7 9.0 17.0 1.6 15.4 − 9.0 1.0 6.4 0.1 − 0.8          Sep.
 German contribution (DM billion) 2
− 0.2 −50.5 − 18.1 14.9 11.7 −3.3 15.0 3.7 − 0.5 − 1.4 1.7 2.9 2001          June
1.8 20.3 −− 4.2 − 11.2 − 12.1 −4.9 − 7.2 3.1 − 2.2 1.1 1.5 4.3          July
0.2 −21.9 − 15.3 5.4 − 1.9 −6.4 4.5 7.2 0.1 5.7 2.9 1.3          Aug.
− 5.7 13.5 − 29.9 28.1 28.4 −9.0 37.4 − 2.3 2.0 − 3.4 3.0 2.2          Sep.
− 3.1 8.1 − 8.7 0.8 − 6.5 −11.6 5.2 1.7 5.5 12.7 3.1 − 7.9          Oct.
2.2 36.8 − 36.6 37.7 39.8 −14.6 54.4 − 7.5 5.5 −10.4 2.2 7.2          Nov.
− 14.5 52.9 − 37.5 25.9 − 18.6 −47.8 29.2 12.3 32.2 1.8 3.7 6.2          Dec.
1.9 −12.3 22.7 − 51.6 − 50.3 − 35.1 13 −8.1 − 27.0 −19.9 4.7 − 4.7 3.9 − 0.4 2002          Jan.
− 1.3 − 9.7 − 6.6 8.1 − 0.2 7.5 8.8 − 1.2 − 6.8 − 0.9 1.9 1.6 4.8          Feb.
− 0.1 −16.8 6.6 3.8 2.9 − 0.1 5.0 − 5.1 3.1 − 0.1 0.3 − 0.3 0.9          Mar.
− 3.7 − 2.8 2.5 3.5 0.4 24.2 6.1 18.1 − 9.4 − 14.4 − 0.6 0.3 3.3          Apr.
1.4 − 1.2 5.6 33.1 24.6 16.9 4.8 12.1 8.8 − 1.2 2.6 − 0.0 5.9          May
0.9 −10.0 2.0 21.6 30.6 32.0 6.5 25.6 0.6 − 2.0 − 1.2 − 0.7 − 7.2          June
− 2.1 −26.8 4.0 − 11.3 − 6.3 − 2.9 7.2 − 10.1 − 0.4 − 2.9 − 2.0 1.2 − 4.3          July
2.6 − 1.6 6.2 6.5 − 0.8 − 8.4 1.8 − 10.1 7.3 0.2 2.3 2.4 2.6          Aug.
2.0 21.5 4.2 28.8 17.6 33.3 3.1 30.2 −17.5 1.9 12.5 0.2 − 1.5          Sep.
currencies of the euro area. From 2002 the German contribution contains deposits. —11Paper held by residents outside the euro area has been
the euro banknote volume put into circulation by the Bundesbank eliminated. —12For the German contribution: the difference between the
according to the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see footnote volume of euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the
4 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put amount disclosed according to the accounting regime chosen by theinto circulation by the Bundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total Eurosystem (see also footnote 4 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). —
the item "Intra-Eurosystem liability/claim related to banknote issue". — 13Includes statistically non-eliminated decrease of
 5 
11.6 billion (DM22.7
9For the European monetary union: including the monetary liabilities of billion) owing to the changed method of recording banknote circulation
central governments (Post Office, Treasury). —10In Germany, only savings (see also footnotes 8 and 12). 
9*II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
 
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
 
 
 
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and individuals Public authorities
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
assets or Debt other Debt euro-area Other
Period liabilities Total Total Advances securities  3 equities Total Advances securities  4 residents assets
 European monetary union (  5  billion) 1
 
2001          June 13,317.2 9,290.0 7,247.9 6,388.2 302.1 557.5 2,042.1 835.7 1,206.5 2,704.8 1,322.4
         July 13,183.9 9,296.0 7,261.6 6,394.4 315.0 552.3 2,034.4 832.9 1,201.5 2,619.1 1,268.8
         Aug. 13,144.3 9,260.1 7,238.5 6,369.6 323.7 545.1 2,021.6 828.8 1,192.9 2,624.7 1,259.5         Sep. 13,318.6 9,309.1 7,284.1 6,421.9 327.4 534.7 2,025.0 829.8 1,195.2 2,697.8 1,311.7
         Oct. 13,424.2 9,339.1 7,325.2 6,451.6 329.9 543.7 2,014.0 827.2 1,186.8 2,742.5 1,342.5
         Nov. 13,574.5 9,413.9 7,379.6 6,501.9 333.1 544.6 2,034.3 843.3 1,191.0 2,827.6 1,333.0         Dec. 13,576.7 9,451.7 7,424.8 6,519.3 337.2 568.3 2,026.9 847.7 1,179.2 2,807.4 1,317.5
2002          Jan. 13,671.8 9,495.7 7,444.6 6,534.4 341.9 568.2 2,051.1 844.8 1,206.3 2,829.5 1,346.7
         Feb. 13,661.9 9,520.8 7,465.6 6,548.8 349.9 566.8 2,055.2 847.5 1,207.7 2,833.1 1,308.0         Mar. 13,699.1 9,595.1 7,513.4 6,606.2 346.6 560.6 2,081.7 852.6 1,229.1 2,845.2 1,258.8
         Apr. 13,685.1 9,612.7 7,551.1 6,641.3 342.9 566.9 2,061.7 832.4 1,229.2 2,826.6 1,245.8
         May 13,716.2 9,645.2 7,573.8 6,659.8 345.0 569.0 2,071.4 829.2 1,242.3 2,845.9 1,225.1         June 13,648.2 9,667.6 7,598.4 6,691.3 342.9 564.3 2,069.1 830.1 1,239.0 2,731.2 1,249.5
         July 13,685.3 9,653.5 7,589.2 6,692.7 346.1 550.3 2,064.3 828.5 1,235.8 2,756.7 1,275.1
         Aug. 13,654.2 9,645.9 7,592.9 6,692.3 339.7 560.8 2,053.0 818.0 1,235.0 2,745.0 1,263.3         Sep. 13,819.7 9,703.9 7,630.5 6,734.8 342.3 553.3 2,073.4 820.7 1,252.7 2,815.3 1,300.5
 German contribution (  5  billion) 2 
2001          June 4,333.3 3,300.3 2,578.0 2,263.6 60.6 253.8 722.3 498.1 224.2 789.9 243.1
         July 4,289.1 3,302.8 2,569.5 2,256.5 62.0 250.9 733.4 498.7 234.6 759.8 226.5
         Aug. 4,298.5 3,293.6 2,566.3 2,256.4 62.8 247.0 727.3 498.1 229.3 780.0 224.9         Sep. 4,323.3 3,288.4 2,575.0 2,269.7 63.7 241.6 713.3 495.0 218.3 808.1 226.8
         Oct. 4,334.4 3,288.4 2,579.9 2,271.3 64.4 244.2 708.6 496.2 212.4 818.3 227.6
         Nov. 4,336.2 3,303.9 2,587.2 2,279.0 64.8 243.4 716.6 506.6 210.0 837.9 194.5         Dec. 4,328.2 3,321.6 2,608.3 2,289.4 66.0 252.9 713.3 499.3 213.9 821.2 185.4
2002          Jan. 4,321.4 3,315.2 2,600.6 2,280.2 66.9 253.4 714.6 499.7 215.0 820.0 186.2
         Feb. 4,322.9 3,316.3 2,600.1 2,283.4 65.1 251.6 716.2 497.1 219.1 822.1 184.4         Mar. 4,334.0 3,315.0 2,597.6 2,290.4 67.2 240.1 717.4 495.4 221.9 829.6 189.3
         Apr. 4,330.7 3,324.0 2,605.7 2,293.1 69.0 243.7 718.3 491.2 227.1 816.6 190.1
         May 4,341.9 3,327.7 2,606.9 2,294.6 69.2 243.2 720.8 485.6 235.2 827.5 186.7         June 4,291.6 3,309.3 2,596.0 2,294.8 69.7 231.6 713.3 480.4 232.8 800.0 182.3
         July 4,303.6 3,317.5 2,589.5 2,291.3 69.8 228.4 728.0 489.0 239.0 801.2 184.9
         Aug. 4,307.0 3,315.3 2,594.9 2,289.8 67.1 238.0 720.4 479.8 240.6 810.2 181.5         Sep. 4,356.5 3,328.6 2,606.6 2,302.8 66.4 237.3 722.1 476.8 245.2 841.8 186.1
 German contribution (DM billion) 2 
2001          June 8,475.2 6,454.9 5,042.1 4,427.3 118.5 496.4 1,412.7 974.3 438.5 1,544.9 475.4
         July 8,388.8 6,459.8 5,025.4 4,413.3 121.3 490.8 1,434.3 975.4 458.9 1,486.0 443.0
         Aug. 8,407.1 6,441.7 5,019.2 4,413.2 122.9 483.1 1,422.5 974.1 448.4 1,525.5 439.9         Sep. 8,455.7 6,431.5 5,036.3 4,439.2 124.5 472.6 1,395.2 968.1 427.0 1,580.6 443.6
         Oct. 8,477.3 6,431.6 5,045.8 4,442.3 126.0 477.5 1,385.8 970.5 415.3 1,600.5 445.1
         Nov. 8,481.0 6,461.8 5,060.2 4,457.3 126.7 476.1 1,401.6 990.9 410.7 1,638.7 380.5         Dec. 8,465.3 6,496.5 5,101.4 4,477.7 129.1 494.7 1,395.0 976.6 418.4 1,606.2 362.6
2002          Jan. 8,451.9 6,484.0 5,086.3 4,459.7 130.9 495.7 1,397.7 977.3 420.4 1,603.7 364.2
         Feb. 8,454.8 6,486.2 5,085.4 4,465.9 127.4 492.1 1,400.8 972.2 428.6 1,607.8 360.7         Mar. 8,476.5 6,483.6 5,080.5 4,479.6 131.4 469.5 1,403.1 969.0 434.1 1,622.6 370.3
         Apr. 8,470.2 6,501.2 5,096.3 4,484.9 134.9 476.6 1,404.8 960.6 444.2 1,597.2 371.8
         May 8,492.0 6,508.4 5,098.7 4,487.8 135.3 475.6 1,409.8 949.7 460.0 1,618.4 365.2         June 8,393.6 6,472.4 5,077.4 4,488.2 136.2 452.9 1,395.0 939.6 455.4 1,564.7 356.6
         July 8,417.2 6,488.5 5,064.7 4,481.5 136.6 446.6 1,423.8 956.4 467.4 1,567.0 361.7
         Aug. 8,423.8 6,484.3 5,075.2 4,478.5 131.2 465.5 1,409.0 938.4 470.6 1,584.5 355.0         Sep. 8,520.6 6,510.3 5,098.0 4,504.0 130.0 464.1 1,412.2 932.6 479.7 1,646.3 364.0
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building Germany up to the end of 1998. —3Including money market paper of
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank enterprises. —4Including Treasury bills and other money market paper of
and central banks (the Eurosystem). —1Source: ECB. —2Owing to changes public authorities. —5From 2002 euro currency in circulation plus
in the definitions of the items and differences in the range of reporting outstanding national banknotes and coins. Excluding MFIs ‘cash in hand (in
institutions, the figures are not comparable with those published for euro). From 2002 the German contribution contains the euro banknote
10*II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
 
   
 
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and individuals
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  7 
over
Currency 1 year
in of which up to up to over up to over
Total in euro  6 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months   Period circulation  5 
European monetary union (  5  billion) 1
 
333.0 5,467.2 5,091.3 5,145.4 1,667.5 924.7 81.9 1,143.6 1,206.2 121.5 2001          June
328.0 5,442.7 5,082.1 5,132.2 1,648.5 933.7 81.7 1,137.9 1,210.4 120.1          July
319.2 5,424.1 5,070.7 5,117.3 1,617.5 949.6 81.4 1,134.7 1,215.3 118.9          Aug.309.6 5,475.9 5,132.4 5,170.9 1,680.4 933.4 81.5 1,136.0 1,221.6 118.0          Sep.
295.5 5,494.4 5,144.7 5,183.4 1,678.9 938.6 81.1 1,136.1 1,232.4 116.4          Oct.
279.7 5,554.1 5,200.8 5,249.5 1,728.6 944.2 79.9 1,134.9 1,246.6 115.3          Nov.239.7 5,699.4 5,360.0 5,403.1 1,826.5 952.2 80.0 1,142.4 1,286.5 115.3          Dec.
246.5 5,670.8 5,319.0 5,363.5 1,773.7 948.3 79.5 1,146.2 1,304.0 111.8 2002          Jan.
240.3 5,672.0 5,311.4 5,359.9 1,768.2 946.9 78.7 1,148.1 1,307.2 110.8          Feb.
254.3 5,686.5 5,327.4 5,376.7 1,770.0 955.4 79.7 1,151.5 1,310.6 109.5          Mar.
261.7 5,711.9 5,355.6 5,401.3 1,798.0 960.8 80.2 1,150.5 1,304.2 107.5          Apr.
273.9 5,714.2 5,366.9 5,410.0 1,801.3 963.0 80.8 1,152.2 1,306.4 106.4          May285.8 5,749.9 5,408.2 5,438.7 1,844.7 939.9 80.8 1,154.5 1,312.7 106.2          June
296.8 5,726.5 5,385.2 5,423.0 1,816.4 948.4 82.6 1,154.1 1,315.4 106.2          July
301.2 5,688.8 5,358.6 5,396.4 1,783.7 959.9 83.3 1,142.5 1,320.6 106.4          Aug.306.7 5,734.4 5,399.7 5,435.8 1,837.8 941.4 82.6 1,143.3 1,323.9 106.8          Sep.
 German contribution (  5  billion) 2
116.3 2,062.1 1,960.8 1,921.9 456.0 233.6 17.9 653.0 441.9 119.5 2001          June
113.7 2,055.6 1,955.4 1,917.4 453.9 235.7 18.3 650.5 440.8 118.2          July
110.5 2,059.2 1,960.9 1,922.0 455.6 240.7 18.1 649.7 440.9 117.0          Aug.105.8 2,075.2 1,979.0 1,939.6 472.7 240.0 18.3 650.5 441.9 116.2          Sep.
99.9 2,077.6 1,982.9 1,945.0 475.5 241.8 18.6 650.0 444.8 114.4          Oct.92.4 2,103.2 2,006.3 1,973.0 504.0 240.7 18.7 648.7 447.5 113.5          Nov.68.0 2,135.1 2,048.0 2,010.0 519.0 244.7 18.6 650.2 463.9 113.6          Dec.
8 63.8 2,113.2 2,024.0 1,989.9 506.4 236.6 18.5 652.0 466.4 110.0 2002          Jan.
68.3 2,108.1 2,019.4 1,986.2 505.6 235.1 17.1 653.5 465.9 109.0          Feb.70.9 2,109.1 2,021.9 1,989.1 504.1 237.3 17.1 656.8 465.9 107.8          Mar.
74.0 2,100.4 2,015.8 1,984.7 513.9 234.0 17.1 655.2 458.6 105.9          Apr.
76.5 2,107.7 2,023.6 1,987.3 519.1 234.2 17.1 654.1 457.9 104.8          May79.8 2,119.3 2,035.6 1,997.1 530.9 234.4 17.3 653.0 457.0 104.6          June
83.4 2,112.5 2,030.5 1,993.2 525.8 235.8 17.6 653.9 455.5 104.6          July
84.3 2,098.8 2,018.1 1,979.2 521.5 239.6 17.6 640.1 455.6 104.8          Aug.85.9 2,106.2 2,024.2 1,988.1 537.1 233.0 17.5 639.6 456.5 104.3          Sep.
 German contribution (DM billion) 2
227.4 4,033.1 3,834.9 3,758.9 891.9 456.8 35.0 1,277.2 864.3 233.7 2001          June
222.5 4,020.4 3,824.5 3,750.2 887.7 461.1 35.7 1,272.2 862.2 231.2          July216.0 4,027.4 3,835.2 3,759.1 891.1 470.8 35.4 1,270.7 862.3 228.8          Aug.207.0 4,058.8 3,870.7 3,793.6 924.5 469.4 35.9 1,272.2 864.3 227.3          Sep.
195.4 4,063.4 3,878.2 3,804.2 929.9 472.9 36.3 1,271.3 869.9 223.8          Oct.
180.7 4,113.6 3,924.1 3,858.9 985.8 470.7 36.5 1,268.7 875.2 222.0          Nov.132.9 4,175.9 4,005.5 3,931.2 1,015.2 478.6 36.4 1,271.6 907.4 222.1          Dec.
8 124.8 4,133.1 3,958.6 3,891.8 990.5 462.7 36.2 1,275.2 912.2 215.1 2002          Jan.
133.6 4,123.1 3,949.5 3,884.6 988.8 459.9 33.5 1,278.1 911.3 213.1          Feb.138.7 4,125.0 3,954.6 3,890.3 986.0 464.2 33.5 1,284.6 911.3 210.9          Mar.
144.7 4,108.0 3,942.5 3,881.8 1,005.1 457.6 33.5 1,281.5 897.0 207.1          Apr.
149.6 4,122.4 3,957.8 3,886.7 1,015.2 458.1 33.5 1,279.4 895.7 204.9          May156.0 4,145.0 3,981.3 3,906.0 1,038.3 458.5 33.8 1,277.2 893.8 204.5          June
163.2 4,131.7 3,971.2 3,898.4 1,028.4 461.2 34.4 1,279.0 890.9 204.6          July
165.0 4,105.0 3,947.1 3,871.0 1,020.0 468.6 34.5 1,252.0 891.0 204.9          Aug.168.1 4,119.4 3,959.1 3,888.4 1,050.5 455.7 34.3 1,251.0 892.9 204.0          Sep.
volume put into circulation by the Bundesbank according to the accounting liability items"). —6Excluding central governments deposits. —7In
regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see footnote 4 on banknote circulation in Germany, only saving deposits. —8Includes decrease of
 5 
11.6 billion
Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into circulation by the (DM22.7 billion) owing to the changed method of recording banknote
Bundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the item circulation (see also footnote 5). "Intra-Eurosystem liability/claim related to banknote issue" (see "Other
11*II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
 
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (cont ’d)*
 
 
 
Liabilities (cont ’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont ’d)  
 
Public authorities Repo transactions Debt securitieswith counterparties
Other public authorities in the euro area
With agreed At agreedmaturities of notice of  
3 
Money
over of which market of which
Central 1 year Enterprises fund denom-govern- up to up to over up to over and inated certificates
Period ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total individuals (net)  
4,6 Total in euro
 European monetary union (  5  billion) 1
 
2001          June 167.7 154.1 64.3 57.5 2.0 27.2 2.5 0.6 221.5 216.6 360.5 1,738.3 1,383.3
         July 158.1 152.4 64.2 56.0 1.7 27.4 2.5 0.6 223.4 218.1 369.6 1,734.5 1,384.6
         Aug. 154.8 152.0 63.8 56.1 1.8 27.3 2.5 0.6 230.8 225.3 380.7 1,728.7 1,383.1         Sep. 149.4 155.5 69.5 54.4 1.6 27.0 2.5 0.6 225.7 220.2 384.7 1,752.3 1,396.0
         Oct. 154.7 156.3 71.4 53.4 1.6 26.8 2.5 0.5 235.1 227.2 395.9 1,766.5 1,399.2
         Nov. 151.8 152.8 69.5 51.9 1.6 26.7 2.6 0.5 225.9 218.3 404.5 1,758.8 1,372.7         Dec. 140.3 156.0 69.7 54.9 1.7 26.7 2.6 0.5 218.5 214.6 402.0 1,760.1 1,376.4
2002          Jan. 150.0 157.3 74.1 51.4 1.7 27.0 2.5 0.5 216.2 211.4 420.8 1,775.4 1,375.2
         Feb. 156.3 155.7 75.1 49.4 1.7 26.6 2.5 0.5 221.1 215.8 431.6 1,778.3 1,380.2         Mar. 157.5 152.3 69.3 51.8 1.6 26.7 2.5 0.5 229.6 224.9 435.9 1,793.8 1,389.4
         Apr. 158.0 152.6 71.9 49.9 1.4 26.6 2.5 0.4 228.1 223.8 442.2 1,785.7 1,382.9
         May 149.4 154.7 68.8 55.2 1.4 26.6 2.4 0.4 234.8 230.7 447.3 1,805.2 1,392.3         June 155.3 155.9 71.6 53.2 1.5 26.7 2.4 0.4 229.6 225.9 443.7 1,789.1 1,392.8
         July 152.4 151.1 69.3 51.3 1.5 26.3 2.4 0.4 228.8 224.9 455.5 1,796.6 1,398.8
         Aug. 141.7 150.7 67.8 52.3 1.5 26.3 2.4 0.4 236.5 231.9 468.7 1,814.4 1,415.8         Sep. 149.4 149.2 70.7 48.5 1.3 25.9 2.4 0.4 242.4 238.3 466.6 1,814.2 1,418.6
 German contribution (  5  billion) 2
2001          June 59.0 81.2 14.9 39.5 1.4 23.1 1.8 0.6 1.1 1.1 24.2 811.2 695.9
         July 59.9 78.3 13.1 38.8 1.1 23.1 1.7 0.6 1.7 1.7 25.0 810.1 701.2
         Aug. 60.0 77.2 13.3 37.6 1.0 23.1 1.7 0.6 4.6 4.6 26.5 811.4 705.5         Sep. 57.0 78.5 15.4 36.9 1.0 23.0 1.7 0.6 2.8 2.8 28.0 815.5 709.0
         Oct. 55.4 77.1 15.3 35.8 1.0 22.8 1.7 0.5 9.4 9.4 29.6 813.4 707.5
         Nov. 56.6 73.6 14.7 33.0 1.0 22.7 1.7 0.5 4.0 4.0 30.7 792.9 678.1         Dec. 49.1 75.9 14.6 35.2 1.2 22.7 1.7 0.5 4.9 4.9 32.6 791.9 676.0
2002          Jan. 50.1 73.3 13.6 33.3 1.2 23.0 1.7 0.5 2.5 2.5 34.5 795.7 672.2
         Feb. 49.4 72.5 13.8 32.6 1.2 22.7 1.7 0.5 3.5 3.5 35.4 801.2 678.8         Mar. 49.4 70.6 12.6 32.0 1.2 22.8 1.6 0.5 3.7 3.7 35.8 811.6 687.2
         Apr. 47.5 68.2 11.8 30.6 1.0 22.7 1.6 0.4 3.4 3.4 35.9 808.5 685.1
         May 48.2 72.3 12.4 34.2 1.0 22.7 1.6 0.4 4.7 4.7 35.4 810.5 683.8         June 48.7 73.5 13.8 34.1 1.1 22.6 1.6 0.4 4.1 4.1 35.0 805.1 684.0
         July 47.6 71.7 13.9 32.3 1.0 22.5 1.5 0.4 3.1 3.1 35.6 813.3 687.2
         Aug. 48.9 70.7 13.0 32.2 1.0 22.6 1.6 0.4 4.3 4.3 37.1 836.1 702.8         Sep. 49.9 68.2 13.1 30.0 0.9 22.2 1.6 0.4 10.7 10.7 37.7 837.7 702.4
 German contribution (DM billion) 2
2001          June 115.3 158.9 29.1 77.3 2.7 45.2 3.4 1.2 2.1 2.1 47.3 1,586.5 1,361.0
         July 117.1 153.2 25.6 75.9 2.1 45.2 3.3 1.1 3.2 3.2 48.8 1,584.4 1,371.4
         Aug. 117.3 151.0 26.0 73.5 2.0 45.1 3.3 1.1 8.9 8.9 51.8 1,586.9 1,379.9         Sep. 111.5 153.6 30.1 72.1 2.0 45.0 3.3 1.1 5.6 5.6 54.7 1,595.1 1,386.7
         Oct. 108.4 150.8 30.0 70.0 2.0 44.5 3.3 1.0 18.3 18.3 57.8 1,590.9 1,383.8
         Nov. 110.6 144.0 28.7 64.5 2.0 44.4 3.4 1.0 7.9 7.9 60.0 1,550.7 1,326.2         Dec. 96.1 148.5 28.6 68.9 2.3 44.4 3.4 1.0 9.7 9.6 63.7 1,548.9 1,322.2
2002          Jan. 98.0 143.3 26.6 65.1 2.4 45.0 3.3 0.9 5.0 5.0 67.6 1,556.3 1,314.8
         Feb. 96.7 141.8 27.0 63.8 2.4 44.4 3.3 0.9 6.9 6.9 69.2 1,567.0 1,327.7         Mar. 96.6 138.1 24.6 62.6 2.4 44.5 3.2 0.9 7.2 7.2 70.0 1,587.3 1,344.1
         Apr. 92.9 133.3 23.1 59.9 2.0 44.4 3.1 0.9 6.6 6.6 70.2 1,581.3 1,339.9
         May 94.3 141.4 24.2 66.8 2.0 44.4 3.1 0.9 9.2 9.2 69.3 1,585.2 1,337.4         June 95.2 143.8 26.9 66.7 2.1 44.2 3.0 0.9 8.1 8.1 68.5 1,574.7 1,337.8
         July 93.1 140.3 27.2 63.2 2.0 44.1 3.0 0.8 6.1 6.1 69.7 1,590.6 1,344.1
         Aug. 95.7 138.3 25.3 62.9 2.0 44.1 3.1 0.8 8.3 8.3 72.5 1,635.3 1,374.5         Sep. 97.7 133.3 25.5 58.7 1.8 43.4 3.1 0.8 20.8 20.8 73.7 1,638.5 1,373.7
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building published in this table together with money market fund certificates. —
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank 6Paper held by residents outside the euro area has been eliminated. —
and central banks (the Eurosystem). —1Source: ECB. —2Owing to changes 7Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued. —8After deduction of
in the definitions of the items and differences in the range of reporting Inter-MFI participations. —9The German contributions to the Eurosystem ’s
institutions, the figures are not comparable with those published for monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national
Germany up to the end of 1998. —3In Germany: only savings deposits. — monetary aggregates, and are therefore not comparable to the erstwhile
4Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the German contribution: excluding German money stocks M1, M2 or M3. —10Currency in circulation (from
German MFIs portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro area. —5In 2002 euro currency in circulation plus outstanding national banknotes and
Germany, bank debt securities with maturities of up to one year are classed coins), overnight deposits (excluding central governments ’deposits), and
as money market paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were (for EMU) central governments ’overnight monetary liabilities,
12*II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
 
   
 
 Memo item
 Other liability items Monetary aggregates  9 
 
issued (net)  4 
With maturities of
of which Monetary
Intra- liabilitiesEurosystem- of central
Liabilities liability/ govern-
over to non- Excess claim Monetary ments1 year euro-area Capital of related to capital (Post,   
up to up to over residents and inter-MFI banknote formation Office,1 year  
5,6 2 years  6 2 years 7 reseves  8 liabilities Total issue  15 M1 10 M2 11 M3 6,12 13   Period Treasury)  14 
European monetary union (  5  billion) 1
 
96.3 49.0 1,593.0 2,743.3 965.9 − 16.8 1,504.4 − 2,131.4 4,480.6 5,207.8 3,851.9 140.9 2001          June
91.3 49.1 1,594.1 2,643.0 955.2 − 7.4 1,494.8 − 2,108.3 4,468.7 5,202.1 3,835.2 141.9          July
91.2 51.3 1,586.2 2,620.1 959.9 − 8.6 1,489.4 − 2,066.7 4,448.4 5,202.4 3,827.5 141.3          Aug.
94.9 52.7 1,604.7 2,639.9 970.4 18.7 1,541.4 − 2,124.7 4,495.3 5,253.4 3,856.5 140.8          Sep.
98.3 51.1 1,617.0 2,661.6 981.1 5.5 1,588.7 − 2,111.6 4,497.9 5,278.4 3,877.9 142.5          Oct.
97.4 54.9 1,606.6 2,726.2 982.6 10.4 1,632.4 − 2,144.3 4,548.2 5,330.8 3,866.6 143.7          Nov.
88.9 57.6 1,613.6 2,719.1 996.2 − 8.5 1,550.7 − 2,207.9 4,664.6 5,430.9 3,894.7 150.7          Dec.
96.6 45.9 1,632.9 2,755.2 1,007.6 2.0 1,578.0 − 2,168.4 4,639.8 5,418.7 3,925.9 158.0 2002          Jan.
90.2 49.3 1,638.8 2,763.3 1,011.5 1.1 1,543.4 − 2,157.5 4,628.8 5,420.3 3,936.2 158.7          Feb.
89.4 48.6 1,655.8 2,786.6 1,010.6 2.4 1,500.1 − 2,168.6 4,655.0 5,457.8 3,954.5 159.8          Mar.
84.5 51.0 1,650.2 2,769.2 1,004.7 − 7.4 1,489.8 − 2,207.4 4,691.7 5,496.7 3,939.9 161.0          Apr.
93.8 50.8 1,660.5 2,750.3 1,008.9 − 5.8 1,488.1 − 2,219.5 4,713.9 5,540.0 3,955.0 160.8          May
84.8 48.9 1,655.4 2,615.2 985.7 13.5 1,536.4 − 2,278.2 4,753.6 5,559.9 3,929.0 161.0          June
77.5 48.7 1,670.3 2,642.8 993.3 − 0.3 1,545.8 − 2,256.5 4,743.1 5,553.1 3,950.6 159.2          July
80.1 47.0 1,687.3 2,610.9 1,004.2 3.6 1,526.5 − 2,228.4 4,734.2 5,566.0 3,967.1 161.6          Aug.
84.7 48.0 1,681.5 2,668.3 1,016.0 − 4.3 1,575.9 − 2,291.3 4,776.9 5,618.1 3,973.9 161.5          Sep.
 German contribution (  5  billion) 2
21.1 36.6 753.5 766.3 256.2 − 30.4 326.4 − 587.2 1,323.2 1,406.2 1,805.9 −2001          June
20.5 39.4 750.2 734.4 256.4 − 24.7 317.0 − 580.7 1,317.1 1,403.5 1,799.0 −         July
19.3 41.6 750.5 745.8 260.9 − 39.5 319.2 − 579.4 1,319.4 1,411.2 1,801.7 −         Aug.
19.4 42.6 753.5 746.5 259.6 − 39.5 329.2 − 593.9 1,333.8 1,426.6 1,803.4 −         Sep.
19.1 39.6 754.6 747.4 263.0 − 37.5 331.6 − 590.7 1,334.3 1,432.0 1,805.4 −         Oct.
16.9 42.4 733.6 736.7 264.4 − 21.8 333.7 − 611.1 1,353.7 1,447.7 1,783.4 −         Nov.
17.9 44.5 729.5 702.1 265.3 10.6 317.7 − 601.6 1,367.0 1,466.9 1,781.7 −         Dec.
22.4 35.1 738.2 724.3 267.2 − 0.1 320.2 11.6 583.8 1,341.5 1,436.1 1,790.8 −2002          Jan.
22.3 37.6 741.2 721.4 272.1 − 0.6 313.4 8.2 587.7 1,341.4 1,440.2 1,798.9 −         Feb.
22.7 37.7 751.2 721.6 272.4 − 2.7 311.6 11.6 587.6 1,342.8 1,442.6 1,811.4 −         Mar.
22.9 38.7 746.9 728.3 270.0 − 1.1 311.4 12.9 599.7 1,342.7 1,441.9 1,801.1 −         Apr.
25.2 39.4 745.9 730.3 269.8 − 8.2 315.1 15.7 607.9 1,354.0 1,458.7 1,797.8 −         May
23.1 38.1 743.9 687.4 265.5 − 24.8 320.1 16.7 624.4 1,369.8 1,470.1 1,790.1 −         June
21.9 38.7 752.7 705.4 267.7 − 39.0 321.5 18.8 623.1 1,366.9 1,466.2 1,801.9 −         July
24.5 37.5 774.2 698.5 272.4 − 50.5 326.0 22.0 618.8 1,366.4 1,469.6 1,814.5 −         Aug.
24.9 36.9 776.0 712.3 274.3 − 48.2 339.8 24.1 636.1 1,375.6 1,485.7 1,816.9 −         Sep.
 German contribution (DM billion) 2
41.3 71.5 1,473.7 1,498.8 501.1 − 59.5 638.3 − 1,148.4 2,587.9 2,750.2 3,532.1 −2001          June
40.0 77.1 1,467.3 1,436.5 501.4 − 48.3 620.0 − 1,135.7 2,576.0 2,745.1 3,518.5 −         July
37.7 81.3 1,467.9 1,458.6 510.3 − 77.2 624.4 − 1,133.2 2,580.5 2,760.2 3,523.9 −         Aug.
37.9 83.4 1,473.8 1,460.1 507.8 − 77.2 643.9 − 1,161.6 2,608.7 2,790.2 3,527.2 −         Sep.
37.4 77.5 1,475.9 1,461.8 514.5 − 73.4 648.6 − 1,155.3 2,609.6 2,800.7 3,531.1 −         Oct.
33.0 82.9 1,434.8 1,440.8 517.2 − 42.6 652.7 − 1,195.3 2,647.6 2,831.4 3,488.0 −         Nov.
35.1 87.0 1,426.8 1,373.1 518.9 20.8 621.4 − 1,176.7 2,673.6 2,869.1 3,484.7 −         Dec.
43.9 68.6 1,443.8 1,416.6 522.6 − 0.3 626.3 22.7 1,141.9 2,623.7 2,808.8 3,502.5 −2002          Jan.
43.7 73.6 1,449.7 1,411.0 532.1 − 1.1 613.0 16.1 1,149.4 2,623.5 2,816.9 3,518.3 −         Feb.
44.5 73.6 1,469.2 1,411.4 532.8 − 5.3 609.5 22.7 1,149.2 2,626.3 2,821.6 3,542.8 −         Mar.
44.8 75.7 1,460.8 1,424.5 528.0 − 2.1 609.0 25.2 1,172.9 2,626.0 2,820.1 3,522.7 −         Apr.
49.3 77.0 1,458.9 1,428.3 527.7 − 16.1 616.4 30.7 1,189.0 2,648.2 2,853.0 3,516.1 −         May
45.1 74.6 1,455.0 1,344.4 519.3 − 48.5 626.1 32.8 1,221.2 2,679.1 2,875.4 3,501.1 −         June
42.9 75.6 1,472.1 1,379.6 523.6 − 76.2 628.9 36.7 1,218.7 2,673.3 2,867.6 3,524.2 −         July
47.8 73.3 1,514.2 1,366.1 532.8 − 98.8 637.6 43.0 1,210.3 2,672.4 2,874.3 3,548.9 −         Aug.
48.6 72.2 1,517.7 1,393.2 536.6 − 94.2 664.6 47.2 1,244.1 2,690.5 2,905.9 3,553.5 −         Sep.
which are not included in the consolidated balance sheet. From 2002 the governments ’monetary liabilities with such maturities. —12M2 plus repo
German contribution contains the euro banknote volume put into transactions, money market fund certificates, money market paper and debt
circulation by the Bundesbank according to the accounting regime chosen securities up to 2 years. —13Deposits with agreed maturities of over 2
by the Eurosystem (see footnote 4 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). years and at agreed notice of over 3 months, debt securities with maturitiesThe volume of currency actually put into circulation by the Bundesbank can of over 2 years, capital and reserves. —14Non-existent in Germany. —
be calculated by adding to this total the item "Intra-Eurosystem 15For the German contibution: the difference between the volume of euro
liability/claim related to banknote issue". —11M1 plus deposits with banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed
agreed maturities of up to 2 years and at agreed notice of up to 3 months according to the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also(excluding central governments ’deposits) and (for EMU) central footnote 4 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 
13*II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
II. Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  European  monetary  union
  
 3. Banking system ’s liquidity position  * 
Stocks
  
 5  billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions ‘
current
Net assets Longer- Other Other accounts
Maintenance in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including
period and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Baseending in  
1 currency operations operations facility operations facility operations deposits (net)  4 reserves)  5 money  6 circulation  3 
Eurosystem   2  
  
2000          Apr. 377.1 136.7 61.0 0.2 − 0.9 − 349.7 45.6 69.1 109.7 460.3
         May 378.8 142.6 60.0 0.4 − 2.3 − 353.8 41.9 71.8 112.0 468.2
         June 378.1 140.9 59.9 0.3 0.2 0.8 − 354.1 38.3 72.1 114.2 469.1
         July 380.8 157.9 59.9 0.4 − 0.5 − 357.0 50.4 76.8 114.2 471.7
         Aug. 382.0 163.1 55.4 0.1 − 0.3 − 359.2 48.8 80.0 112.4 471.9
         Sep. 381.6 173.1 51.1 0.3 − 0.2 − 354.8 56.6 81.2 113.3 468.3
         Oct. 396.3 176.5 45.7 0.5 − 0.2 − 354.5 47.4 102.5 114.4 469.1
         Nov. 398.6 183.7 45.0 0.2 − 0.2 − 352.7 49.8 109.2 115.7 468.6
         Dec. 394.4 210.4 45.0 0.4 − 0.2 − 360.4 61.1 111.1 117.4 478.0
2001          Jan.  7 383.7 205.3 45.0 0.5 − 0.6 − 368.3 52.2 94.2 119.1 488.0
         Feb. 377.9 188.9 49.8 2.6 − 0.4 − 354.8 57.0 86.3 120.7 476.0
         Mar. 375.6 185.2 54.1 0.4 − 0.5 − 353.0 53.0 87.7 121.0 474.5
         Apr. 382.1 172.4 58.4 2.2 − 0.5 − 354.6 49.5 89.1 121.4 476.4
         May 384.4 144.0 59.1 0.4 17.0 0.6 − 352.7 39.4 87.5 124.8 478.1
         June 385.0 161.7 59.1 0.2 − 0.4 − 351.1 41.3 87.5 125.7 477.3
         July 397.6 161.9 59.9 0.2 − 0.4 − 350.8 42.5 98.8 127.1 478.3
         Aug. 402.1 164.0 60.0 0.1 − 0.2 − 347.6 48.8 101.8 127.8 475.6
         Sep. 401.3 147.1 60.0 0.5 3.5 0.4 − 335.4 45.2 105.4 126.1 461.9
         Oct. 389.9 136.7 60.0 1.1 − 0.1 − 325.2 43.6 93.6 125.1 450.4
         Nov. 385.0 132.3 60.0 0.2 − 0.3 − 311.3 46.1 93.1 126.7 438.3
         Dec. 383.7 122.5 60.0 0.5 12.4 0.8 − 298.0 43.5 109.3 127.4 426.2
2002          Jan. 385.2 118.5 60.0 0.4 3.7 0.6 − 344.3 38.3 54.2 130.4 475.2
         Feb. 386.0 127.3 60.0 0.2 − 0.1 − 306.2 49.6 85.2 132.6 438.8
         Mar. 386.7 114.6 60.0 0.2 − 0.1 − 283.3 54.2 91.8 132.1 415.6
         Apr. 395.4 112.7 60.0 0.4 − 0.2 − 285.9 55.9 95.3 131.2 417.3
         May 397.7 110.6 60.0 0.1 − 0.3 − 293.7 49.2 93.5 131.7 425.6
         June 396.2 112.6 60.0 0.5 − 0.4 − 300.8 45.1 91.2 131.8 433.0
         July 369.1 130.4 60.0 0.2 − 0.2 − 313.4 54.4 60.3 131.4 445.0
         Aug. 360.0 139.2 55.2 0.1 − 0.1 − 322.7 50.9 50.8 129.9 452.8
         Sep. 362.3 140.9 50.8 0.1 − 0.2 − 323.6 49.1 51.7 129.6 453.4
         Oct. 370.0 146.1 45.3 0.1 − 0.1 − 329.2 45.6 58.2 128.3 457.6
Deutsche Bundesbank
2000          Apr. 93.7 62.0 43.2 0.2 − 0.6 − 131.8 0.1 32.7 34.0 166.4
         May 93.7 60.1 39.5 0.3 − 1.8 − 132.3 0.1 24.8 34.5 168.6
         June 93.3 59.6 35.4 0.2 0.1 0.3 − 132.0 0.1 21.2 35.1 167.3
         July 93.4 67.9 33.3 0.2 − 0.4 − 131.8 0.1 27.6 35.1 167.2
         Aug. 93.0 71.6 34.9 0.1 − 0.1 − 131.9 0.1 33.1 34.5 166.5
         Sep. 92.6 81.9 33.8 0.3 − 0.1 − 131.4 0.1 42.6 34.4 165.9
         Oct. 97.0 87.2 30.7 0.3 − 0.1 − 131.1 0.1 49.5 34.5 165.7
         Nov. 98.2 99.1 30.7 0.2 − 0.1 − 130.1 0.1 63.0 34.9 165.1
         Dec. 97.6 103.5 31.1 0.2 − 0.1 − 132.0 0.1 65.0 35.2 167.4
2001          Jan. 93.0 103.1 28.4 0.3 − 0.3 − 131.2 0.1 57.7 35.6 167.1
         Feb. 90.3 93.2 28.3 1.3 − 0.2 − 126.7 0.1 50.0 36.2 163.1
         Mar. 89.1 87.6 33.2 0.2 − 0.4 − 126.2 0.1 47.6 35.9 162.4
         Apr. 90.1 84.5 37.4 1.5 − 0.2 − 126.2 0.1 50.7 36.4 162.8
         May 90.0 67.4 37.8 0.2 7.5 0.5 − 124.8 0.1 47.6 37.4 162.7
         June 89.7 79.9 37.5 0.1 − 0.3 − 123.6 0.1 45.7 37.5 161.4
         July 92.8 85.4 37.0 0.1 − 0.3 − 121.8 0.1 55.5 37.7 159.7
         Aug. 94.2 77.0 38.2 0.1 − 0.2 − 119.3 0.1 52.0 37.8 157.3
         Sep. 93.7 73.3 38.9 0.1 1.3 0.1 − 115.4 0.1 54.6 37.1 152.7
         Oct. 91.3 66.3 40.2 0.5 − 0.1 − 110.8 0.1 50.1 37.3 148.2
         Nov. 89.8 68.2 38.5 0.2 − 0.2 − 104.6 0.1 53.8 38.0 142.9
         Dec. 89.4 62.4 40.1 0.2 5.0 0.5 − 96.6 0.1 67.1 37.8 134.9
2002          Jan. 89.9 63.3 41.1 0.3 1.4 0.3 − 91.7 0.1 64.9 39.0 131.0
         Feb. 89.9 63.3 42.4 0.1 − 0.0 − 78.5 0.1 78.6 38.6 117.2
         Mar. 90.0 58.5 40.7 0.2 − 0.1 − 79.7 0.1 71.2 38.3 118.1
         Apr. 92.3 57.6 40.4 0.3 − 0.2 − 80.8 0.1 71.8 37.9 118.8
         May 92.3 53.1 39.7 0.1 − 0.3 − 83.8 0.1 63.1 38.0 122.0
         June 91.6 60.6 38.8 0.1 − 0.3 − 85.4 0.1 67.3 38.1 123.8
         July 84.7 67.6 37.1 0.2 − 0.2 − 89.2 0.1 62.0 38.1 127.5
         Aug. 82.5 63.1 36.4 0.0 − 0.1 − 92.2 0.1 51.8 37.9 130.2
         Sep. 82.4 64.4 32.7 0.1 − 0.1 − 92.4 0.0 49.1 37.9 130.4
         Oct. 84.0 69.0 31.7 0.1 − 0.1 − 94.0 0.1 53.0 37.6 131.6
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. —*The banking system ’s liquidity other banknotes which have been issued by the national central banks of
position is defined as the current account holdings in euro of credit institu- the Eurosystem and which are still in circulation. In accordance with th e ac-
tions in the euro area with the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the counting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for the issue of euro bank-
consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the statement of notes, 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation are alloca-the Bundesbank. —1The reserve maintenance period of the ESCB minimum ted on a monthly basis to the ECB. The counterpart of this adjustment is
reserve system starts on the 24th of each month and ends on the 23rd of shown under "Other factors". The remaining 92% of the value of the eurothe following month. —2Source: ECB. —3From 2002, euro banknotes and banknotes in circulation are allocated, likewise on a monthly basis, to the
14*II. Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  European  monetary  union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
II. Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  European  monetary  union
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions ‘
current
Net assets Longer- Other Other accounts
in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Maintenanceand foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base periodcurrency operations operations facility operations facility operations deposits (net)  
4 reserves)  5 money  6 ending in  1 circulation  3 
Eurosystem   2  
  
+ 7.9 + 0.6 − 5.2 + 0.0 − + 0.6 − + 2.1 − 6.1 + 5.6 + 1.1 + 3.9 2000          Apr.
+ 1.7 + 5.9 − 1.0 + 0.2 − + 1.4 − + 4.1 − 3.7 + 2.7 + 2.3 + 7.9          May
− 0.7 − 1.7 − 0.1 −0.1 + 0.2 −1.5 − + 0.3 − 3.6 + 0.3 + 2.2 + 0.9          June
+ 2.7 + 17.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.2 −0.3 − + 2.9 + 12.1 + 4.7 − 0.0 + 2.6          July
+ 1.2 + 5.2 − 4.5 −0.3 −− 0.2 − + 2.2 − 1.6 + 3.2 − 1.8 + 0.2          Aug.
− 0.4 + 10.0 − 4.3 + 0.2 −− 0.1 −− 4.4 + 7.8 + 1.2 + 0.9 − 3.6          Sep.
+ 14.7 + 3.4 − 5.4 + 0.2 − + 0.0 −− 0.3 − 9.2 + 21.3 + 1.1 + 0.8          Oct.
+ 2.3 + 7.2 − 0.7 −0.3 − + 0.0 −− 1.8 + 2.4 + 6.7 + 1.3 − 0.5          Nov.
− 4.2 + 26.7 − 0.0 + 0.2 − + 0.0 − + 7.7 + 11.3 + 1.9 + 1.7 + 9.4          Dec.
−10.7 − 5.1
+ 0.0 + 0.1 − + 0.4 − + 7.9 − 8.9 −16.9 + 1.7 + 10.0 2001          Jan.  7 
− 5.8 −16.4 + 4.8 + 2.1 −− 0.2 −− 13.5 + 4.8 −7.9 + 1.6 − 12.0          Feb.
− 2.3 − 3.7 + 4.3 −2.2 − + 0.1 −− 1.8 − 4.0 + 1.4 + 0.3 − 1.5          Mar.
+ 6.5 −12.8 + 4.3 + 1.8 −− 0.0 − + 1.6 − 3.5 + 1.4 + 0.4 + 1.9          Apr.
+ 2.3 −28.4 + 0.7 −1.8 + 17.0 + 0.1 −− 1.9 −10.1 −1.6 + 3.4 + 1.7          May
+ 0.6 + 17.7
+ 0.0 −0.2 − 17.0 −0.2 −− 1.6 + 1.9 + 0.0 + 0.9 − 0.8          June
+ 12.6 + 0.2 + 0.8 + 0.0 − + 0.0 −− 0.3 + 1.2 + 11.3 + 1.4 + 1.0          July
+ 4.5 + 2.1 + 0.1 −0.1 −− 0.2 −− 3.2 + 6.3 + 3.0 + 0.7 − 2.7          Aug.
− 0.8 −16.9
+ 0.0 + 0.4 + 3.5 + 0.2 −− 12.2 − 3.6 + 3.6 − 1.7 − 13.7          Sep.
−11.4 −10.4 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 3.5 −0.3 −− 10.2 − 1.6 −11.8 − 1.0 − 11.5          Oct.
− 4.9 − 4.4 − 0.0 −0.9 − + 0.2 −− 13.9 + 2.5 −0.5 + 1.6 − 12.1          Nov.
− 1.3 − 9.8
+ 0.0 + 0.3 + 12.4 + 0.5 −− 13.3 − 2.6 + 16.2 + 0.7 − 12.1          Dec.
+ 1.5 − 4.0 − 0.0 −0.1 − 8.7 −0.2 − + 46.3 − 5.2 −55.1 + 3.0 + 49.0 2002          Jan.
+ 0.8 + 8.8
+ 0.0 −0.2 − 3.7 −0.5 −− 38.1 + 11.3 + 31.0 + 2.2 − 36.4          Feb.
+ 0.7 −12.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 − + 0.0 −− 22.9 + 4.6 + 6.6 − 0.5 − 23.2          Mar.
+ 8.7 − 1.9 − 0.0 + 0.2 − + 0.1 − + 2.6 + 1.7 + 3.5 − 0.9 + 1.7          Apr.
+ 2.3 − 2.1 − 0.0 −0.3 − + 0.1 − + 7.8 − 6.7 −1.8 + 0.5 + 8.3          May
− 1.5 + 2.0 + 0.0 + 0.4 − + 0.1 − + 7.1 − 4.1 −2.3 + 0.1 + 7.4          June
−27.1 + 17.8 − 0.0 −0.3 −− 0.2 − + 12.6 + 9.3 −30.9 − 0.4 + 12.0          July
− 9.1 + 8.8 − 4.8 −0.1 −− 0.1 − + 9.3 − 3.5 −9.5 − 1.5 + 7.8          Aug.
+ 2.3 + 1.7 − 4.4 + 0.0 − + 0.1 − + 0.9 − 1.8 + 0.9 − 0.3 + 0.6          Sep.
+ 7.7 + 5.2 − 5.5 −0.0 −− 0.1 − + 5.6 − 3.5 + 6.5 − 1.3 + 4.2          Oct.
Deutsche Bundesbank
+ 1.8 + 0.3 + 8.8 + 0.0 − + 0.4 − + 0.2 − 0.0 + 9.9 + 0.4 + 1.0 2000          Apr.
− 0.0 − 1.9 − 3.7 + 0.1 − + 1.2 − + 0.5 + 0.0 −7.8 + 0.5 + 2.2          May
− 0.4 − 0.5 − 4.1 −0.0 + 0.1 −1.5 −− 0.3 + 0.0 −3.6 + 0.5 − 1.3          June
+ 0.2 + 8.3 − 2.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 −− 0.1 − 0.0 + 6.4 − 0.0 − 0.1          July
− 0.4 + 3.7 + 1.6 −0.2 −− 0.3 − + 0.1 − 0.0 + 5.6 − 0.6 − 0.8          Aug.
− 0.5 + 10.3 − 1.1 + 0.2 −− 0.0 −− 0.5 + 0.0 + 9.5 − 0.1 − 0.6          Sep.
+ 4.5 + 5.3 − 3.1 + 0.0 − + 0.0 −− 0.3 + 0.0 + 6.9 + 0.1 − 0.2          Oct.
+ 1.2 + 11.8 − 0.0 −0.2 −
+ 0.0 −− 1.0 + 0.0 + 13.4 + 0.4 − 0.6          Nov.
− 0.6 + 4.5 + 0.5 + 0.1 − + 0.0 − + 1.9 + 0.0 + 2.1 + 0.4 + 2.3          Dec.
− 4.6 − 0.5 − 2.7 + 0.1 − + 0.2 −− 0.8 − 0.0 −7.4 + 0.3 − 0.2 2001          Jan.
− 2.7 − 9.8 − 0.1 + 1.0 −− 0.1 −− 4.6 − 0.0 −7.7 + 0.6 − 4.0          Feb.
− 1.2 − 5.6 + 4.8 −1.2 − + 0.1 −− 0.5 − 0.0 −2.4 − 0.4 − 0.7          Mar.
+ 1.0 − 3.1 + 4.3 + 1.3 −− 0.2 −− 0.0 + 0.0 + 3.1 + 0.5 + 0.4          Apr.
− 0.1 −17.2 + 0.3 −1.2 + 7.5 + 0.3 −− 1.4 + 0.0 −3.1 + 1.1 − 0.1          May
− 0.3 + 12.5 − 0.3 −0.1 − 7.5 −0.2 −− 1.2 + 0.0 −1.9 + 0.1 − 1.3          June
+ 3.2 + 5.5 − 0.5 + 0.0 − + 0.0 −− 1.9 − 0.0 + 9.9 + 0.2 − 1.7          July
+ 1.3 − 8.4 + 1.2 −0.1 −− 0.2 −− 2.4 − 0.0 −3.5 + 0.2 − 2.4          Aug.
− 0.4 − 3.7 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 1.3 −0.0 −− 3.9 + 0.0 + 2.6 − 0.7 − 4.7          Sep.
− 2.4 − 7.0 + 1.3 + 0.4 − 1.3 −0.0 −− 4.7 − 0.0 −4.5 + 0.2 − 4.5          Oct.
− 1.5 + 2.0 − 1.7 −0.3 − + 0.2 −− 6.1 + 0.0 + 3.7 + 0.7 − 5.3          Nov.
− 0.4 − 5.8 + 1.7 + 0.0 + 5.0 + 0.3 −− 8.1 + 0.0 + 13.3 − 0.1 − 7.9          Dec.
+ 0.4 + 0.9 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 3.6 −0.2 −− 4.8 − 0.0 −2.2 + 1.1 − 3.9 2002          Jan.
+ 0.0 + 0.1 + 1.3 −0.2 − 1.4 −0.3 −− 13.2 − 0.0 + 13.6 − 0.4 − 13.8          Feb.
+ 0.1 − 4.9 − 1.7 + 0.1 − + 0.0 − + 1.2 − 0.0 −7.4 − 0.3 + 0.9          Mar.
+ 2.4 − 0.9 − 0.3 + 0.1 − + 0.1 − + 1.0 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.4 + 0.7          Apr.
− 0.0 − 4.5 − 0.7 −0.2 − + 0.1 − + 3.0 + 0.0 −8.7 + 0.1 + 3.3          May
− 0.7 + 7.5 − 0.9 + 0.1 −− 0.0 − + 1.6 − 0.0 + 4.2 + 0.2 + 1.8          June
− 6.9 + 7.0 − 1.7 + 0.0 −− 0.1 − + 3.8 + 0.0 −5.3 − 0.1 + 3.7          July
− 2.2 − 4.5 − 0.7 −0.1 −− 0.1 − + 3.0 − 0.0 −10.2 − 0.2 + 2.7          Aug.
− 0.1 + 1.3 − 3.7 + 0.0 − + 0.1 − + 0.2 − 0.0 −2.8 − 0.0 + 0.2          Sep.
+ 1.6 + 4.6 − 1.0 + 0.0 −− 0.0 − + 1.5 + 0.0 + 3.9 − 0.3 + 1.2          Oct.
NCBs, with each NCB showing in its balance sheet the percentage of the system and the statement of the Bundesbank. —5Equal to the difference
euro banknotes in circulation that corresponds to its paid-up share in the between the sum of liquidity-providing factors and the sum of li-ECB’s capital. The difference between the value of the euro banknotes quidity-absorbing factors. —6Calculated as the sum of the "deposit facili-
allocated to an NCB and the value of the euro banknotes which that NCB ty", "banknotes in circulation" and "credit institutions ’current account hold-
has put into circulation is likewise shown under "Other factors". — ings". — 7 Entry of Greece into the euro area on January 1, 2001. 
4Remaining items in the consolidated financial statement of the Euro-
15*II. Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  European  monetary  union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1. Assets *
 
 
 5  billion
Claims on non-euro area Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
On investments, euro area Balances Claims
reporting external loans residents with banks, arising from
date/ Gold and other denominated security the creditEnd of Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility undermonth  
2 assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
 Eurosystem 1
 
2002 Feb.               22 777.4 126.8 267.7 32.6 235.2 21.0 5.3 5.3 −
         Mar.                 1 790.2 126.8 266.0 32.6 233.5 22.0 5.4 5.4 −
                                8 786.3 126.8 267.9 32.5 235.4 21.2 5.1 5.1 −
                              15 779.0 126.9 269.6 32.5 237.1 22.2 5.2 5.2 −
                              22 781.8 126.8 269.4 32.5 237.0 22.4 5.1 5.1 −
                              28 4 814.9 4 139.8 4 267.7 32.6 4 235.1 21.8 5.2 5.2 −
         Apr.                 5 800.1 139.8 269.5 32.6 236.9 20.7 5.3 5.3 −
                              12 782.9 139.8 266.7 32.5 234.2 21.2 5.2 5.2 −
                              19 778.8 139.8 268.0 33.1 234.9 21.5 5.1 5.1 −
                              26 788.8 139.5 264.4 33.0 231.4 23.3 4.9 4.9 −
         May                 3 783.8 139.5 260.6 31.1 229.5 24.0 5.2 5.2 −
                              10 791.6 139.5 261.6 30.7 230.9 23.9 5.0 5.0 −
                              17 785.5 139.5 262.2 30.9 231.2 22.9 5.0 5.0 −
                              24 788.8 139.5 261.1 30.9 230.2 23.1 5.0 5.0 −
                              31 793.3 139.4 259.4 30.9 228.5 24.1 5.1 5.1 −
         June                 7 788.4 139.4 260.1 30.9 229.3 23.6 5.1 5.1 −
                              14 783.6 139.4 261.8 30.8 231.1 22.9 5.1 5.1 −
                              21 793.7 139.4 263.2 34.5 228.7 22.0 5.0 5.0 −
                              28 4 780.8 4 128.3 4 238.0 4 32.6 4 205.3 4 19.7 4.5 4.5 −
         July                 5 764.7 128.3 237.9 32.5 205.4 19.3 4.6 4.6 −
                              12 765.6 128.3 239.4 32.5 206.9 19.5 4.8 4.8 −
                              19 776.0 128.3 240.1 32.4 207.7 20.2 4.9 4.9 −
                              26 783.5 128.3 240.9 32.3 208.6 20.4 4.9 4.9 −
         Aug.                 2 771.6 128.3 240.1 32.3 207.8 20.0 4.9 4.9 −
                                9 768.6 128.3 239.4 32.1 207.3 19.3 4.8 4.8 −
                              16 763.5 128.3 237.4 32.4 205.0 19.4 4.9 4.9 −
                              23 764.1 128.3 240.0 32.4 207.6 17.9 4.8 4.8 −
                              30 770.8 128.3 238.5 32.4 206.0 17.0 5.3 5.3 −
         Sep.                 6 765.6 128.3 239.7 32.5 207.2 18.5 4.8 4.8 −
                              13 762.1 128.3 241.4 32.4 209.0 18.2 4.6 4.6 −
                              20 772.6 128.3 243.0 32.4 210.6 18.5 4.8 4.8 −
                              27 772.8 128.3 242.5 32.4 210.1 18.3 5.0 5.0 −
         Oct.                 4 4 778.3 4 131.2 4 248.3 32.6 4 215.7 18.5 4.5 4.5 −
                              11 778.7 131.2 247.2 32.6 214.6 19.4 4.2 4.2 −
                              18 774.3 131.2 246.4 32.5 213.9 19.6 4.2 4.2 −
                              25 798.0 131.2 246.6 32.4 214.2 21.0 4.6 4.6 −
         Nov.                 1 779.7 131.2 244.9 32.3 212.6 21.0 4.3 4.3 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2000          Dec. 4 256.9 4 32.7 4 61.1 7.8 4 53.4 − 0.3 0.3 −
2001          Jan. 243.5 32.7 59.9 7.9 52.0 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Feb. 255.2 32.7 58.7 7.6 51.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Mar. 4 245.3 4 32.7 4 60.5 4 7.8 4 52.7 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Apr. 239.1 32.7 59.4 7.7 51.7 − 0.3 0.3 −
         May 229.8 32.7 58.8 7.7 51.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
         June 4 247.3 4 35.5 4 60.3 4 8.2 4 52.2 − 0.3 0.3 −
         July 241.0 35.4 60.4 8.2 52.3 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Aug. 238.4 35.4 60.0 8.1 51.9 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Sep. 4 233.4 35.4 4 59.1 4 9.0 4 50.2 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Oct. 226.6 35.4 59.5 8.8 50.7 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Nov. 225.6 35.4 59.9 8.7 51.3 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Dec. 4 239.9 4 35.0 4 58.2 4 8.7 4 49.5 − 0.3 0.3 −
2002          Jan. 230.6 35.0 60.0 8.8 51.2 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Feb. 221.4 35.0 59.9 8.8 51.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Mar. 4 227.4 4 38.5 4 59.6 4 8.8 4 50.8 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Apr. 205.3 38.5 58.0 8.3 49.6 − 0.3 0.3 −
         May 218.3 38.5 56.6 8.4 48.2 − 0.3 0.3 −
         June 4 217.9 4 35.4 4 51.2 8.8 4 42.4 − 0.3 0.3 −
         July 211.3 35.4 51.8 8.8 43.0 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Aug. 218.3 35.4 50.9 8.7 42.2 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Sep. 4 221.9 4 36.2 4 52.7 8.8 4 44.0 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Oct. 226.4 36.2 52.1 8.6 43.5 − 0.3 0.3 −
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quarter. —
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the statements of the 1Source: ECB. —2For the Eurosystem: financial statement for specific
national central banks of the EU member countries (NCBs) of the euro weekly dates; for the Bundesbank: up to the end of 2001 financialarea. —The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold and statement for the last Friday of each month, from 2002 end-of-month
16*III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations
denominated in euro
 Other claims on euro area credit Securities General    On
Credits institutions of euro area government    reporting
Main Longer-term Fine-tuning Structural Marginal related denomi- residents debt    date/refinancing refinancing reverse reverse lending to margin nated in denominated denominated Other    End of
Total  
3 operations operations operations operations facility calls euro  3 in euro in euro assets    month  2 
Eurosystem 1
 
169.7 107.0 60.0 −− 2.7 0.0 0.2 29.0 68.6 88.9 2002 Feb.                22
183.0 123.0 60.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.4 29.2 68.6 88.7          Mar.                  1
178.0 118.0 60.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.4 29.5 68.6 88.8                                 8
168.1 108.1 60.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.4 29.4 68.6 88.7                               15
170.6 110.1 60.0 −− 0.5 0.0 0.3 29.3 68.6 89.3                               22
192.7 132.0 60.0 −− 0.7 0.0 0.3 29.2 68.6 89.6                               28
178.0 118.0 60.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.3 29.1 68.6 88.9          Apr.                  5
163.1 103.0 60.0 −− 0.1 0.0 0.2 30.1 67.7 88.9                               12
157.0 97.0 60.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.2 30.3 67.7 89.2                               19
169.0 109.0 60.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.2 30.5 67.7 89.3                               26
169.0 109.0 60.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.3 30.1 67.7 87.4          May                  3
174.9 114.9 60.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.3 30.3 67.7 88.4                               10
169.0 109.0 60.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.3 29.9 67.7 88.9                               17
173.0 113.0 60.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.2 30.2 67.7 89.0                               24
178.4 118.0 60.0 −− 0.4 0.0 0.2 29.9 67.7 89.1                               31
173.3 113.0 60.0 −− 0.3 0.0 0.2 29.9 67.7 89.1          June                  7
167.0 107.0 60.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.2 30.1 67.7 89.2                               14
175.9 112.0 60.0 −− 3.9 0.0 0.2 30.2 67.7 90.1                               21
201.0 140.0 60.0 −− 0.9 0.0 0.5 30.5 67.7 90.7                               28
187.0 127.0 60.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.4 30.6 67.7 88.8          July                  5
186.0 126.0 60.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.4 30.5 67.7 89.1                               12
194.4 134.0 60.0 −− 0.4 0.0 0.2 30.7 67.7 89.5                               19
204.7 149.0 55.0 −− 0.7 0.0 0.4 30.7 67.7 85.5                               26
194.0 139.0 55.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.4 30.5 67.7 85.6          Aug.                  2
192.1 137.0 55.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.4 30.6 67.6 86.0                                 9
189.1 134.0 55.0 −− 0.1 0.0 0.2 30.7 67.2 86.3                               16
189.0 134.0 55.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.1 30.9 67.2 85.7                               23
197.0 147.0 50.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.4 31.4 67.2 85.8                               30
191.0 141.0 50.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.2 31.5 67.2 84.2          Sep.                  6
186.1 136.0 50.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.2 31.5 67.2 84.7                               13
194.0 144.0 50.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.2 31.5 67.2 85.1                               20
194.1 149.0 45.0 −− 0.1 0.0 0.3 31.5 67.2 85.6                               27
190.4 145.0 45.0 −− 0.4 0.0 0.6 4 32.1 67.2 85.5          Oct.                  4
191.0 146.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.6 32.3 67.2 85.5                               11
187.1 142.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.1 0.4 32.3 67.2 85.8                               18
209.1 164.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.1 0.2 32.1 67.2 86.0                               25
190.1 145.0 45.0 −− 0.1 0.0 0.4 32.3 67.2 88.4          Nov.                  1
 Deutsche Bundesbank
139.2 110.7 27.9 −− 0.6 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.1 2000          Dec.
126.8 98.3 28.3 −− 0.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.4 2001          Jan.
140.0 109.9 28.3 −− 1.8 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.1          Feb.
119.3 81.2 38.0 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 28.0          Mar.
124.0 86.3 37.7 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.2          Apr.
115.1 77.3 37.7 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.4          May
128.2 91.2 36.9 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.6          June
121.8 83.5 38.3 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.7          July
114.0 74.5 39.1 −− 0.4 − 0.0 − 4.4 24.2          Aug.
111.7 70.2 40.3 −− 1.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 22.4          Sep.
108.2 69.8 38.4 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.7          Oct.
106.8 45.0 40.4 − 21.3 0.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.7          Nov.
123.0 80.5 41.1 −− 1.4 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.9          Dec.
112.3 69.5 42.8 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.6 2002          Jan.
103.7 61.7 40.4 −− 1.6 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.1          Feb.
106.8 65.7 40.4 −− 0.7 − 0.0 − 4.4 17.7          Mar.
86.6 46.7 39.6 −− 0.3 − 0.0 − 4.4 17.5          Apr.
101.0 62.3 38.6 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 17.4          May
109.1 71.2 36.9 −− 0.9 − 0.0 − 4.4 17.5          June
98.2 61.8 36.4 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 21.2          July
100.3 68.3 32.0 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 26.9          Aug.
104.2 72.4 31.7 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 24.0          Sep.
103.9 72.4 31.6 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 29.4          Oct.
 
financial statement. —3Until December 22, 2000, “Other claims “were on euro area credit institutions denominated in euro “have been shown as
included in “Lending to euro area counterparties related to monetary policy a separate item. —4Changes are due mainly to revalutions at the end of
operations denominated in euro. “Since December 29, 2000 “Other claims the quarter. 
17*III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2. Liabilities *
 
 
 5  billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilitiesaccounts to euro
On (covering Fine- area creditreporting the tuning Deposits institutions Debtdate/ Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
End of Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Othermonth  
2 liabilities Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment lation  3  4 liabilities
 Eurosystem 1
 
2002 Feb.               22 777.4 287.7 132.3 131.8 0.5 −−− 2.1 2.9 49.7 43.9 5.7
         Mar.                 1 790.2 285.8 134.9 134.9 0.1 −− 0.0 2.6 2.9 62.7 57.2 5.5
                                8 786.3 284.6 132.9 132.8 0.0 −− 0.0 2.6 2.9 61.8 56.3 5.5
                              15 779.0 281.7 134.3 134.2 0.1 −− 0.0 2.4 2.9 52.8 47.1 5.7
                              22 781.8 280.2 133.9 133.1 0.8 −− 0.0 2.2 2.9 57.1 51.4 5.7
                              28 5 814.9 287.5 131.4 131.3 0.1 −− 0.0 2.2 2.9 74.6 68.5 6.1
         Apr.                 5 800.1 287.7 132.4 132.4 0.0 −− 0.0 2.3 2.9 59.3 53.3 6.0
                              12 782.9 285.8 134.0 133.0 1.0 −− 0.0 2.3 2.9 56.0 50.2 5.8
                              19 778.8 284.9 134.3 134.3 0.0 −− 0.0 2.2 2.9 51.0 45.1 5.9
                              26 788.8 286.5 132.2 132.1 0.1 −−− 2.3 2.9 63.6 57.7 5.9
         May                 3 783.8 294.5 129.9 128.8 1.1 −− 0.0 2.2 2.9 53.3 47.3 5.9
                              10 791.6 297.3 134.3 134.1 0.2 −− 0.0 2.3 2.9 53.6 47.8 5.8
                              17 785.5 297.2 133.3 133.2 0.0 −− 0.0 2.2 2.9 47.3 41.2 6.0
                              24 788.8 295.2 128.6 128.5 0.0 −−− 2.2 2.9 60.7 54.8 5.9
                              31 793.3 299.0 130.2 130.1 0.1 −− 0.0 2.4 2.9 59.9 54.0 5.9
         June                 7 788.4 302.9 132.9 132.9 0.1 −− 0.0 2.5 2.9 48.0 42.1 5.8
                              14 783.6 303.6 128.2 128.2 0.0 −− 0.0 2.4 2.9 46.0 40.3 5.7
                              21 793.7 304.5 135.0 132.3 2.7 −− 0.0 2.2 2.9 48.3 42.5 5.9
                              28 5 780.8 308.8 134.9 134.8 0.1 −− 0.0 2.0 2.9 70.9 65.2 5.7
         July                 5 764.7 315.1 129.1 128.7 0.0 −− 0.4 0.2 2.9 57.5 52.7 4.8
                              12 765.6 316.7 129.4 129.4 0.0 −− 0.0 0.1 2.9 54.5 49.9 4.6
                              19 776.0 317.2 128.6 128.0 0.6 −− 0.0 0.0 2.9 62.7 58.0 4.7
                              26 783.5 317.6 132.4 132.3 0.0 −− 0.0 0.1 2.9 69.6 65.0 4.5
         Aug.                 2 771.6 324.0 129.3 129.2 0.0 −− 0.0 0.0 2.9 55.3 50.6 4.7
                                9 768.6 326.0 127.6 127.6 0.0 −− 0.0 0.3 2.9 52.3 47.6 4.7
                              16 763.5 325.8 129.4 129.4 0.0 −− 0.0 0.2 2.9 47.5 42.7 4.8
                              23 764.1 321.2 131.3 128.7 2.6 −− 0.0 0.1 2.9 49.8 45.1 4.7
                              30 770.8 321.8 126.1 125.9 0.1 −− 0.0 0.1 2.9 63.8 59.0 4.8
         Sep.                 6 765.6 325.8 129.9 129.8 0.0 −− 0.0 0.3 2.9 51.7 47.0 4.7
                              13 762.1 325.7 126.8 126.8 0.0 −− 0.0 0.1 2.9 50.1 45.4 4.7
                              20 772.6 324.5 130.0 129.9 0.1 −− 0.0 0.1 2.9 55.8 51.0 4.8
                              27 772.8 325.4 126.9 126.9 0.0 −−− 0.2 2.9 58.8 53.7 5.0
         Oct.                 4 5 778.3 331.7 127.3 127.3 0.1 −− 0.0 0.2 2.9 47.8 42.9 4.9
                              11 778.7 331.6 132.3 132.3 0.0 −−− 0.4 2.9 43.9 39.1 4.8
                              18 774.3 330.8 128.9 128.8 0.0 −− 0.0 0.2 2.9 43.8 39.1 4.7
                              25 798.0 329.6 136.8 136.8 0.0 −− 0.0 0.1 2.9 59.1 54.4 4.6
         Nov.                 1 779.7 334.8 122.7 122.6 0.0 −− 0.0 0.1 2.9 50.6 45.8 4.8
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2000          Dec. 5 256.9 133.9 47.0 46.9 0.1 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
2001          Jan. 243.5 126.8 33.1 33.1 0.0 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Feb. 255.2 126.2 46.1 45.8 0.3 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Mar. 5 245.3 125.3 45.1 45.0 0.1 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Apr. 239.1 125.0 40.8 40.8 0.0 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         May 229.8 124.1 32.6 32.5 0.1 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         June 5 247.3 121.9 42.7 42.5 0.2 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         July 241.0 119.9 33.6 33.6 0.0 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Aug. 238.4 116.5 48.0 48.0 0.0 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Sep. 5 233.4 112.0 48.3 48.2 0.0 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Oct. 226.6 106.7 34.0 34.0 0.0 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Nov. 225.6 99.0 49.9 49.8 0.1 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Dec. 5 239.9 76.5 57.5 57.4 0.1 −−− − − 1.0 0.1 1.0
2002          Jan. 230.6 82.5 46.1 46.1 0.0 −−− − − 1.0 0.1 0.9
         Feb. 221.4 79.8 41.6 41.5 0.0 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.6
         Mar. 5 227.4 80.5 42.0 42.0 0.1 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Apr. 205.3 81.7 40.1 38.9 1.2 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.5
         May 218.3 84.1 44.9 44.9 0.0 −−− − − 0.6 0.0 0.6
         June 5 217.9 86.9 41.4 41.3 0.1 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         July 211.3 90.0 40.7 40.6 0.0 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Aug. 218.3 90.7 44.3 44.2 0.1 −−− − − 0.5 0.0 0.5
         Sep. 5 221.9 92.0 41.0 41.0 0.0 −−− − − 0.6 0.0 0.5
         Oct. 226.4 94.2 41.3 41.3 0.0 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the specific weekly dates; for the Bundesbank: up to the end of 2001 financial
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the statements of the statement for the last Friday of each month, from 2002 end-of-monthnational central banks of the EU member countries (NCBs) of the euro financial statement. —3From 2002 euro banknotes and banknotes still in
area. —The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold and circulation issued by the national central banks of the Eurosystem. —
financial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quar- 4According to the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem on the
ter. —1Source: ECB. —2For the Eurosystem: financial statement for issue of euro banknotes, a share of 8% of the total value of the
18*III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated inforeign currency
 
Liabilities Intra-  
Liabilities to euro area Liabilities Counterpart Eurosystem     Onto non-euro residents Deposits, arising of special liability     reportingarea residents denominated balances from the drawing related to  Capital    date/denominated in foreign and other rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and    End of credit facility
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF liabilities issue  
4 accounts reserves    month  2 
Eurosystem 1
 
8.6 2.6 19.0 19.0 − 7.0 77.0 − 125.3 63.1 2002 Feb.                22
8.4 2.8 17.9 17.9 − 7.0 76.6 − 125.3 63.1          Mar.                  1
8.3 2.6 19.6 19.6 − 7.0 75.6 − 125.3 63.1                                 8
8.7 2.7 22.4 22.4 − 7.0 75.6 − 125.3 63.1                               15
8.5 2.6 22.9 22.9 − 7.0 75.9 − 125.3 63.3                               22
8.7 1.8 22.1 22.1 − 7.0 5 76.5 − 5 136.9 63.4                               28
8.5 1.5 22.2 22.2 − 7.0 75.8 − 136.9 63.7          Apr.                  5
8.5 1.5 20.0 20.0 − 7.0 64.2 − 136.9 63.7                               12
8.3 1.4 21.0 21.0 − 7.0 65.2 − 136.9 63.7                               19
8.4 1.4 19.1 19.1 − 7.0 64.8 − 136.9 63.7                               26
9.6 1.4 17.8 17.8 − 7.0 64.6 − 136.9 63.8          May                  3
8.5 1.4 18.9 18.9 − 7.0 64.6 − 136.9 63.8                               10
8.6 1.5 19.4 19.4 − 7.0 65.4 − 136.9 63.8                               17
8.4 1.4 18.8 18.8 − 7.0 62.6 − 136.9 64.1                               24
8.5 1.4 18.2 18.2 − 7.0 62.9 − 136.9 64.1                               31
8.6 1.4 18.6 18.6 − 7.0 62.5 − 136.9 64.3          June                  7
8.3 1.4 20.0 20.0 − 7.0 62.4 − 136.9 64.3                               14
8.9 1.4 19.1 19.1 − 7.0 62.9 − 136.9 64.3                               21
8.4 1.6 5 16.9 5 16.9 − 6.5 5 64.4 − 5 99.1 64.3                               28
8.5 1.2 16.9 16.9 − 6.5 63.3 − 99.1 64.3          July                  5
8.6 1.2 18.8 18.8 − 6.5 63.3 − 99.1 64.3                               12
8.6 1.5 20.0 20.0 − 6.5 64.5 − 99.1 64.3                               19
9.0 1.3 21.5 21.5 − 6.5 59.3 − 99.1 64.3                               26
9.4 1.4 20.4 20.4 − 6.5 59.1 − 99.1 64.3          Aug.                  2
8.6 1.3 19.7 19.7 − 6.5 59.9 − 99.1 64.3                                 9
8.6 1.3 17.3 17.3 − 6.5 60.5 − 99.1 64.3                               16
9.1 1.3 18.4 18.4 − 6.5 60.0 − 99.1 64.3                               23
9.0 1.3 16.1 16.1 − 6.5 59.8 − 99.1 64.3                               30
8.7 1.3 15.1 15.1 − 6.5 60.0 − 99.1 64.3          Sep.                  6
8.6 1.3 16.6 16.6 − 6.5 60.0 − 99.1 64.3                               13
9.0 1.5 18.1 18.1 − 6.5 60.7 − 99.1 64.3                               20
8.9 1.4 17.9 17.9 − 6.5 60.5 − 99.1 64.3                               27
9.2 1.3 18.1 18.1 − 6.6 5 62.5 − 5 106.3 64.3          Oct.                  4
8.5 1.3 18.0 18.0 − 6.6 62.6 − 106.3 64.3                               11
8.3 1.4 17.3 17.3 − 6.6 63.5 − 106.3 64.3                               18
8.4 1.6 18.8 18.8 − 6.6 63.6 − 106.3 64.3                               25
8.4 1.4 17.3 17.3 − 6.6 64.3 − 106.3 64.2          Nov.                  1
 Deutsche Bundesbank
6.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 22.9 . 5 39.2 5.1 2000          Dec.
6.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 30.4 . 39.2 5.1 2001          Jan.
6.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 29.5 . 39.2 5.1          Feb.
6.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 19.2 . 5 41.4 5.1          Mar.
6.8 0.0 −−− 1.7 17.8 . 41.4 5.1          Apr.
7.2 0.0 −−− 1.7 17.1 . 41.4 5.1          May
6.8 0.0 −−− 1.8 23.2 . 5 45.2 5.1          June
6.8 0.0 −−− 1.8 28.0 . 45.2 5.1          July
6.8 0.0 −−− 1.8 14.4 . 45.2 5.1          Aug.
6.8 0.0 1.8 1.8 − 1.7 15.3 . 5 41.8 5.1          Sep.
6.9 0.0 3.0 3.0 − 1.7 26.8 . 41.8 5.1          Oct.
6.9 0.0 4.1 4.1 − 1.7 16.4 . 41.8 5.1          Nov.
7.3 0.0 1.4 1.4 − 1.7 47.8 . 5 41.6 5.1          Dec.
7.1 0.0 3.3 3.3 − 1.7 30.6 11.6 41.6 5.1 2002          Jan.
7.0 0.0 3.2 3.2 − 1.7 32.6 8.2 41.6 5.1          Feb.
7.0 0.0 5 3.0 5 3.0 − 1.7 30.9 11.6 5 44.8 5.1          Mar.
7.0 0.0 2.4 2.4 − 1.7 9.1 12.9 44.8 5.1          Apr.
7.0 0.0 1.6 1.6 − 1.7 12.7 15.7 44.8 5.1          May
6.9 0.0 2.3 2.3 − 1.6 20.9 16.7 5 35.5 5.1          June
7.1 0.0 3.0 3.0 − 1.6 8.9 18.8 35.5 5.1          July
7.1 0.0 2.3 2.3 − 1.6 9.2 22.0 35.5 5.1          Aug.
7.2 0.0 2.8 2.8 − 1.6 10.2 24.1 5 37.3 5.1          Sep.
7.1 0.0 2.4 2.4 − 1.6 10.6 26.2 37.3 5.1          Oct.
 
euro banknotes in circulation is allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to the NCB according tocounterpart of this adjustment is disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem liability the aforementioned accounting regime, and the value of euro banknotes
related to banknote issue. “The remaining 92% of the value of the euro put into circulation, is also disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem claim/ liability
banknotes in circulation are allocated to the NCBs on a monthly basis too, related to banknote issue. “— 5Changes are due mainly to revaluations at
whereby each NCB shows in its balance sheet a share of the euro banknotes the end of the quarter. issued corresponding to its paid-up share in the ECB ’s capital. The difference
19*III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
IV. Banks
 
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
   Assets
 
 Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999  5  billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area  3 Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other member countries to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and indi-
viduals
Secur- Secur-
Balance- ities itiessheet Cash Ad- issued Ad- issued Ad-
Period total  
2 in hand Total Total vances  3 by banks Total vances  3 by banks Total Total Total vances  3 
 End of year or month
 
1993 6,799.5 27.8 1,940.4 1,757.5 1,212.6 544.9 182.9 151.9 31.0 4,085.0 4,005.8 3,156.8 2,980.3
1994 7,205.7 26.2 2,030.1 1,854.1 1,285.1 569.1 175.9 145.0 30.9 4,411.4 4,333.2 3,391.3 3,143.2
1995 7,778.7 27.3 2,210.2 2,019.0 1,399.8 619.3 191.2 158.0 33.2 4,723.3 4,635.0 3,548.8 3,298.7
1996 8,540.5 30.3 2,523.0 2,301.1 1,585.7 715.4 221.9 181.2 40.7 5,084.7 4,981.9 3,812.8 3,543.01997 9,368.2 30.7 2,836.0 2,580.7 1,758.6 822.1 255.3 208.8 46.5 5,408.8 5,269.5 4,041.3 3,740.81998 10,355.5 29.9 3,267.4 2,939.4 1,977.4 962.0 328.1 264.9 63.1 5,833.9 5,615.9 4,361.0 3,966.51999 5,678.5 17.2 1,836.9 1,635.0 1,081.4 553.6 201.9 161.8 40.1 3,127.4 2,958.6 2,326.4 2,093.4
2000 6,083.9 16.1 1,977.4 1,724.2 1,108.9 615.3 253.2 184.5 68.6 3,249.9 3,062.6 2,445.7 2,186.6
2001 6,303.1 14.6 2,069.7 1,775.5 1,140.6 634.9 294.2 219.8 74.4 3,317.1 3,084.9 2,497.1 2,235.7
2000          Dec. 6,083.9 16.1 1,977.4 1,724.2 1,108.9 615.3 253.2 184.5 68.6 3,249.9 3,062.6 2,445.7 2,186.6
2001          Jan. 6,064.0 13.4 1,952.1 1,695.0 1,069.7 625.3 257.1 186.6 70.5 3,265.9 3,058.4 2,452.1 2,187.6
         Feb. 6,141.3 13.6 1,985.8 1,728.3 1,097.6 630.8 257.4 187.1 70.3 3,281.4 3,072.2 2,468.1 2,198.0         Mar. 6,259.3 13.1 2,037.0 1,749.6 1,111.2 638.4 287.4 215.0 72.3 3,309.4 3,095.3 2,487.6 2,204.2
         Apr. 6,283.6 13.7 2,036.3 1,750.8 1,101.7 649.1 285.5 211.3 74.2 3,311.9 3,092.6 2,492.9 2,202.3
         May 6,312.3 13.9 2,038.9 1,756.7 1,106.2 650.5 282.2 206.5 75.7 3,323.1 3,095.6 2,497.6 2,210.5         June 6,283.8 13.8 2,050.4 1,753.5 1,112.4 641.1 296.9 221.0 75.9 3,295.9 3,070.6 2,473.6 2,212.8
         July 6,225.8 13.8 2,036.5 1,748.3 1,100.6 647.7 288.2 213.2 75.0 3,298.4 3,073.9 2,466.3 2,206.8
         Aug. 6,236.5 13.5 2,037.6 1,751.9 1,113.0 638.9 285.7 210.6 75.1 3,289.2 3,061.6 2,464.3 2,207.2         Sep. 6,295.9 13.7 2,070.9 1,778.2 1,142.2 635.9 292.7 216.8 75.9 3,283.9 3,056.0 2,471.5 2,218.7
         Oct. 6,300.0 14.2 2,064.4 1,769.4 1,130.7 638.7 295.0 218.2 76.8 3,284.0 3,058.5 2,474.7 2,219.6
         Nov. 6,320.2 13.7 2,082.6 1,779.3 1,144.1 635.3 303.2 227.1 76.1 3,299.4 3,073.7 2,479.4 2,226.6         Dec. 6,303.1 14.6 2,069.7 1,775.5 1,140.6 634.9 294.2 219.8 74.4 3,317.1 3,084.9 2,497.1 2,235.7
2002          Jan. 6,255.1 27.7 2,019.8 1,728.4 1,094.0 634.4 291.4 216.2 75.2 3,310.8 3,075.1 2,487.1 2,225.5
         Feb. 6,230.4 19.5 2,004.6 1,725.2 1,084.2 641.0 279.4 202.9 76.5 3,311.9 3,074.7 2,485.5 2,227.3         Mar. 6,269.8 16.9 2,033.3 1,744.1 1,096.1 647.9 289.3 213.2 76.1 3,310.6 3,065.5 2,478.9 2,230.3
         Apr. 6,267.7 14.9 2,032.8 1,736.5 1,085.8 650.7 296.3 220.2 76.1 3,319.5 3,072.8 2,485.6 2,231.6
         May 6,304.5 14.7 2,055.5 1,749.0 1,096.7 652.2 306.6 230.7 75.8 3,323.3 3,074.2 2,485.6 2,232.0         June 6,277.4 14.3 2,073.9 1,758.9 1,111.2 647.6 315.1 238.1 77.0 3,304.8 3,059.5 2,477.9 2,233.2
         July 6,265.6 13.8 2,051.7 1,731.9 1,094.9 637.1 319.7 242.3 77.4 3,313.1 3,063.8 2,471.5 2,231.6
         Aug. 6,290.6 13.6 2,073.4 1,746.9 1,113.0 634.0 326.5 249.2 77.3 3,310.9 3,064.3 2,480.6 2,231.5         Sep. 6,341.8 13.3 2,077.2 1,745.1 1,113.1 632.1 332.0 253.8 78.2 3,324.2 3,076.1 2,491.9 2,243.6
 Changes 1
1994 406.2 −1.6 89.7 96.6 72.4 24.2 −6.9 − 6.9 −0.1 326.5 327.4 257.5 185.9
1995 587.7 1.1 184.6 169.3 114.7 54.6 15.2 13.0 2.3 322.1 312.1 201.2 188.11996 761.8 3.0 312.8 282.1 186.0 96.1 30.7 23.2 7.5 361.5 346.9 264.0 244.31997 825.6 0.5 313.1 279.6 172.9 106.7 33.5 27.6 5.9 324.0 287.5 228.4 197.61998 1,001.0 −0.8 422.2 355.7 215.1 140.6 66.4 56.2 10.2 440.4 363.3 337.5 245.2
1999 452.6 1.8 179.8 140.1 81.4 58.6 39.8 26.3 13.5 206.6 158.1 156.8 126.4
2000 401.5 −1.2 143.0 91.7 28.1 63.6 51.4 22.8 28.6 123.2 105.4 116.8 89.5
2001 244.9 −1.4 91.0 50.7 30.3 20.5 40.3 34.5 5.8 55.1 23.9 50.4 48.1
2001          Jan. −18.1 −2.6 −25.9 −29.1 −39.2 10.1 3.1 1.3 1.8 2.2 −3.6 6.7 1.2
         Feb. 77.0 0.1 33.8 33.5 27.9 5.6 0.3 0.4 −0.1 15.6 13.9 16.1 10.5
         Mar. 105.7 −0.5 51.3 21.3 13.6 7.7 30.0 28.0 2.0 26.0 21.8 18.2 4.9
         Apr. 24.1 0.6 −2.0 −0.1 −10.9 10.7 −1.9 − 3.7 1.8 2.7 −2.5 5.5 −1.7
         May 12.3 0.1 2.4 5.9 4.6 1.3 −3.5 − 4.8 1.3 7.5 0.6 2.3 5.9
         June −26.6 −0.1 11.6 −3.2 6.2 −9.4 14.8 14.5 0.3 −26.5 −24.4 −23.6 2.7
         July −47.6 −0.0 −13.8 −5.2 −11.8 6.7 −8.7 − 7.8 −0.8 4.5 4.5 −6.1 −4.8
         Aug. 25.5 −0.3 1.3 3.6 12.4 −8.8 −2.3 − 2.6 0.2 −5.2 −8.9 −0.5 1.9
         Sep. 56.7 0.3 33.2 26.3 29.2 −3.0 6.9 6.2 0.8 −6.2 −6.5 6.4 10.6
         Oct. 1.6 0.4 −6.6 −8.9 −11.7 2.8 2.3 1.4 0.9 −0.2 2.3 3.0 0.8
         Nov. 51.1 −0.5 18.2 10.0 13.4 −3.3 8.2 8.9 −0.7 15.7 14.4 3.7 6.0
         Dec. −16.8 1.0 −12.3 −3.4 −3.5 0.1 −8.9 − 7.3 −1.7 18.9 12.4 18.7 10.1
2002          Jan. −51.6 13.0 −49.6 −46.7 −46.6 −0.1 −2.9 − 3.7 0.8 −7.3 −10.4 −10.7 −11.0
         Feb. −23.2 −8.2 −15.1 −3.1 −9.8 6.7 −12.0 − 13.3 1.2 1.8 0.1 −1.0 2.0
         Mar. 42.2 −2.5 28.9 19.0 11.9 7.1 9.9 10.3 −0.4 −1.0 −8.9 −6.5 3.0
         Apr. 7.7 −2.0 −0.9 −8.0 −10.3 2.3 7.1 7.0 0.1 11.0 8.7 8.1 2.3
         May 52.5 −0.2 23.2 12.8 11.1 1.8 10.4 10.5 −0.2 6.6 3.6 2.1 2.4
         June −5.7 −0.4 18.4 9.7 14.3 −4.5 8.6 7.4 1.3 −19.8 −17.1 −10.1 −1.1
         July −19.6 −0.5 −22.6 −27.2 −16.3 −10.9 4.6 4.2 0.3 7.2 3.6 −7.1 −2.6
         Aug. 23.8 −0.2 18.3 15.0 18.1 −3.1 3.3 3.3 −0.0 −1.7 0.9 8.8 0.3
         Sep. 52.0 −0.2 3.8 −1.8 0.1 −1.9 5.6 4.6 0.9 13.1 11.5 11.6 11.7
*This table serves to supplement the Overall monetary survey of section II; includes −in addition to the figures reported by banks (including building
it is planned to compare the figures for MFIs in the euro area with the data and loan associations) −the data of money market funds. —1Statistical
for Germany. Notwithstanding the other tables in section IV, this table breaks have been eliminated from the flow figures. —2Up to December
20*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
IV. Banks
 
   
 
euro area  3 Claims on
non-euro-area
to non-banks in other member countries residents
 Public Enterprises and Public authorities individuals authorities
of which: of which:
Secur- Ad- Secur- Ad- Ad- Secur- Ad- Otherities Total vances  
3 ities 4 Total Total vances  3 Total vances  3 ities Total vances  3 assets   Period
End of year or month
 
176.5 849.0 599.6 249.4 79.1 44.5 44.5 34.6 8.4 26.3 565.2 504.8 181.1 1993
248.1 941.9 650.1 291.8 78.2 39.6 39.6 38.6 8.3 30.3 548.8 479.6 189.2 1994
250.0 1,086.3 792.2 294.1 88.2 39.4 39.2 48.8 11.3 37.6 608.5 526.0 209.4 1995
269.7 1,169.1 857.8 311.4 102.8 36.8 36.8 66.0 17.2 48.8 678.1 575.3 224.4 1996300.6 1,228.2 911.0 317.2 139.2 41.9 41.2 97.3 23.4 73.9 839.6 710.2 253.1 1997394.5 1,254.9 939.1 315.8 218.0 62.5 56.0 155.5 35.6 119.9 922.0 758.0 302.2 1998233.0 632.1 488.4 143.7 168.8 65.3 35.9 103.6 20.7 82.8 511.2 404.2 185.8 1999
259.1 616.9 478.5 138.4 187.3 83.8 44.2 103.5 20.0 83.5 622.4 481.7 218.1 2000
261.3 587.8 468.7 119.1 232.3 111.3 53.7 121.0 26.2 94.8 727.3 572.0 174.3 2001
259.1 616.9 478.5 138.4 187.3 83.8 44.2 103.5 20.0 83.5 622.4 481.7 218.1 2000          Dec.
264.5 606.3 483.7 122.6 207.5 87.7 46.2 119.8 26.3 93.5 616.5 479.8 216.1 2001          Jan.
270.1 604.1 482.3 121.7 209.2 89.6 46.5 119.6 23.7 95.8 642.0 500.1 218.6          Feb.
283.4 607.7 482.5 125.2 214.1 95.1 49.0 119.0 24.1 94.9 670.6 522.6 229.3          Mar.
290.7 599.6 477.1 122.5 219.3 99.5 48.3 119.9 24.0 95.9 689.7 536.9 231.9          Apr.
287.1 598.0 475.5 122.5 227.5 103.5 48.4 123.9 24.3 99.7 698.1 541.1 238.4          May260.7 597.1 469.2 127.8 225.2 104.4 50.8 120.8 24.5 96.3 693.2 535.9 230.4          June
259.5 607.6 470.3 137.3 224.5 103.2 49.7 121.4 24.0 97.3 663.1 510.4 214.1          July
257.0 597.3 469.5 127.8 227.5 102.0 49.2 125.6 24.1 101.5 683.8 531.3 212.6          Aug.252.9 584.5 466.8 117.7 228.0 103.5 51.1 124.5 23.8 100.7 712.8 558.0 214.6          Sep.
255.1 583.8 467.7 116.1 225.5 105.2 51.7 120.3 24.1 96.2 722.0 563.7 215.5          Oct.
252.8 594.3 477.4 116.9 225.7 107.8 52.4 117.9 24.8 93.1 741.7 584.8 182.8          Nov.261.3 587.8 468.7 119.1 232.3 111.3 53.7 121.0 26.2 94.8 727.3 572.0 174.3          Dec.
261.6 588.1 469.5 118.5 235.6 113.5 54.7 122.1 25.7 96.4 723.8 569.9 173.1 2002          Jan.
258.2 589.2 466.9 122.3 237.2 114.6 56.1 122.6 25.8 96.8 721.8 566.7 172.6          Feb.
248.6 586.6 464.3 122.3 245.0 118.7 60.1 126.3 26.7 99.6 730.8 574.6 178.3          Mar.
254.0 587.2 460.4 126.9 246.7 120.1 61.5 126.6 26.4 100.2 721.2 568.3 179.3          Apr.
253.6 588.6 455.2 133.4 249.0 121.3 62.6 127.7 26.0 101.8 734.8 580.6 176.1          May244.6 581.6 450.0 131.6 245.4 118.1 61.5 127.2 26.0 101.2 712.6 559.4 171.7          June
239.9 592.3 458.1 134.2 249.3 118.1 59.8 131.2 26.5 104.7 712.9 557.9 174.2          July
249.1 583.7 448.5 135.2 246.6 114.3 58.3 132.3 26.9 105.4 722.0 566.9 170.7          Aug.248.3 584.2 445.3 138.9 248.1 114.7 59.3 133.4 27.1 106.3 752.2 597.3 174.9          Sep.
Changes 1
71.6 69.9 27.5 42.4 −0.9 −4.9 −4.9 4.0 −0.0 4.0 −16.4 −25.1 8.1 1994
13.1 110.9 113.1 −2.1 10.0 −0.2 −0.4 10.2 3.0 7.3 59.7 46.3 20.2 1995
19.7 82.9 65.5 17.3 14.6 −2.6 −2.5 17.2 6.0 11.2 69.5 49.3 15.1 1996
30.8 59.1 53.3 5.8 36.5 5.1 4.4 31.4 6.1 25.3 159.4 132.9 28.6 199792.3 25.8 28.1 −2.3 77.1 18.9 13.0 58.3 12.5 45.7 83.9 52.0 55.3 1998
30.4 1.3 7.7 −6.4 48.4 12.2 6.4 36.2 2.0 34.2 33.1 13.8 31.3 1999
27.3 −11.4 −6.7 −4.6 17.8 16.8 7.2 1.0 −0.3 1.2 103.9 71.9 32.5 2000
2.4 −26.5 −9.8 −16.7 31.3 24.3 7.7 7.0 2.2 4.8 110.1 86.6 −9.9 2001
5.5 −10.4 5.2 −15.6 5.8 1.3 0.7 4.5 2.4 2.1 10.3 4.7 −2.0 2001          Jan.
5.6 −2.2 −1.4 −0.8 1.7 1.9 0.3 −0.2 −2.5 2.3 25.1 19.9 2.4          Feb.
13.3 3.6 0.1 3.5 4.2 5.0 2.0 −0.8 0.2 −1.0 18.2 13.3 10.7          Mar.
7.2 −8.1 −5.4 −2.7 5.3 4.4 −0.6 0.9 −0.1 1.0 20.1 15.2 2.6          Apr.
−3.6 −1.7 −1.6 −0.1 6.9 3.5 −0.4 3.5 0.1 3.4 −4.1 −6.5 6.4          May
−26.3 −0.9 −6.2 5.4 −2.0 1.0 2.4 −3.0 0.2 −3.2 −3.7 −4.2 −8.0          June
−1.3 10.6 1.0 9.6 −0.0 −0.9 −0.8 0.9 −0.3 1.2 −21.9 −18.4 −16.4          July
−2.4 −8.4 −0.7 −7.7 3.7 −0.8 −0.1 4.5 0.2 4.3 31.3 30.2 −1.6          Aug.
−4.2 −12.9 −2.8 −10.1 0.3 1.5 1.9 −1.1 −0.3 −0.8 27.3 25.1 2.1          Sep.
2.2 −0.7 0.9 −1.5 −2.5 1.6 0.5 −4.1 0.3 −4.4 7.1 3.9 0.8          Oct.
−2.3 10.7 9.8 0.9 1.3 2.5 0.6 −1.2 0.6 −1.8 16.3 18.0 1.3          Nov.
8.6 −6.3 −8.8 2.4 6.6 3.4 1.2 3.2 1.4 1.8 −15.9 −14.6 −8.5          Dec.
0.3 0.3 0.8 −0.5 3.0 2.1 0.9 1.0 −0.6 1.5 −6.4 −6.4 −1.2 2002          Jan.
−3.0 1.2 −2.6 3.8 1.6 1.1 1.3 0.5 0.1 0.4 −1.2 −2.7 −0.4          Feb.
−9.6 −2.4 −2.6 0.2 7.9 4.1 4.1 3.8 1.0 2.8 11.3 11.5 5.6          Mar.
5.7 0.6 −3.9 4.5 2.2 1.8 1.7 0.5 −0.2 0.7 −1.2 1.1 0.8          Apr.
−0.3 1.6 −5.1 6.7 3.0 1.6 1.5 1.4 −0.3 1.6 25.8 23.0 −3.0          May
−9.0 −7.0 −5.1 −1.9 −2.7 −2.6 −0.5 −0.2 0.2 −0.4 0.6 −0.3 −4.5          June
−4.5 10.7 8.1 2.6 3.5 −0.3 −2.0 3.8 0.4 3.4 −6.1 −7.1 2.5          July
8.5 −7.9 −9.6 1.7 −2.6 −3.0 −0.9 0.4 −0.1 0.5 10.9 10.6 −3.5          Aug.
−0.1 −0.1 −3.2 3.1 1.6 0.4 1.0 1.2 0.2 0.9 31.1 31.2 4.3          Sep.
1998, volume of business (balance-sheet total plus endorsement liabilities bill-based lending instead of bill holdings. —4Including debt securities
and bills sent for collection from the banks ’portfolios prior to maturity) and arising from the exchange of equalisations claims. 
trust funds. —3Up to December 1998, including loans an a trust basis and
21*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
IV. Banks
 
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
   Liabilities
 
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999  5  billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area  4 
in the euro area  3 
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities  5 notice  6 
 
Balance- in the in other of which: of which:
sheet home member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total  2 Total country countries Total Total night Total  4 Total 3 months Total night 2 years  7 
 End of year or month
 
1993 6,799.5 1,556.3 1,438.2 118.1 2,982.1 2,810.6 489.6 1,312.6 628.5 1,008.4 587.7 70.6 3.5
1994 7,205.7 1,650.9 1,483.5 167.4 3,082.7 2,894.4 510.4 1,288.3 549.2 1,095.8 654.6 80.1 4.1
1995 7,778.7 1,761.5 1,582.0 179.6 3,260.0 3,038.9 549.8 1,289.0 472.0 1,200.1 749.5 110.1 4.5
1996 8,540.5 1,975.3 1,780.2 195.1 3,515.9 3,264.0 638.1 1,318.5 430.6 1,307.4 865.7 137.3 7.51997 9,368.2 2,195.6 1,959.1 236.5 3,647.1 3,376.2 654.5 1,364.9 426.8 1,356.9 929.2 162.5 7.31998 10,355.5 2,480.3 2,148.9 331.4 3,850.8 3,552.2 751.6 1,411.1 461.6 1,389.6 971.9 187.4 9.41999 5,678.5 1,288.1 1,121.8 166.3 2,012.4 1,854.7 419.5 820.6 247.0 614.7 504.4 111.1 6.5
2000 6,083.9 1,379.4 1,188.9 190.5 2,051.4 1,873.6 441.4 858.8 274.3 573.5 450.5 107.9 6.9
2001 6,303.1 1,418.0 1,202.1 215.9 2,134.0 1,979.7 525.0 880.2 290.6 574.5 461.9 105.2 7.6
2000          Dec. 6,083.9 1,379.4 1,188.9 190.5 2,051.4 1,873.6 441.4 858.8 274.3 573.5 450.5 107.9 6.9
2001          Jan. 6,064.0 1,345.5 1,145.1 200.4 2,025.9 1,860.9 429.9 861.6 276.3 569.3 446.3 107.4 8.0
         Feb. 6,141.3 1,377.4 1,159.8 217.5 2,036.3 1,872.7 442.1 863.3 278.2 567.2 444.2 105.6 6.2         Mar. 6,259.3 1,396.1 1,179.9 216.2 2,040.4 1,874.4 440.7 868.1 281.8 565.6 443.0 108.4 7.6
         Apr. 6,283.6 1,399.2 1,170.1 229.1 2,044.2 1,878.0 450.8 864.5 279.0 562.7 442.1 108.0 7.5
         May 6,312.3 1,397.2 1,169.6 227.7 2,053.8 1,883.9 453.9 870.1 282.1 559.9 440.4 110.9 8.8         June 6,283.8 1,390.9 1,183.6 207.3 2,061.5 1,893.3 462.1 872.4 283.7 558.7 440.1 109.2 8.2
         July 6,225.8 1,374.9 1,168.1 206.8 2,055.1 1,888.4 458.8 873.2 285.8 556.4 439.0 106.9 7.6
         Aug. 6,236.5 1,367.7 1,168.2 199.4 2,058.6 1,893.2 461.9 876.2 289.0 555.1 439.0 105.5 6.6         Sep. 6,295.9 1,398.9 1,196.0 203.0 2,074.6 1,912.0 479.2 877.4 289.0 555.4 440.0 105.6 8.3
         Oct. 6,300.0 1,386.9 1,176.9 210.0 2,077.0 1,914.5 482.5 875.6 287.3 556.4 442.8 107.1 7.7
         Nov. 6,320.2 1,418.2 1,198.8 219.4 2,102.7 1,938.6 509.6 870.9 284.1 558.2 445.6 107.5 8.6         Dec. 6,303.1 1,418.0 1,202.1 215.9 2,134.0 1,979.7 525.0 880.2 290.6 574.5 461.9 105.2 7.6
2002          Jan. 6,255.1 1,375.4 1,153.3 222.2 2,112.2 1,957.1 511.0 872.8 281.4 573.4 464.3 105.0 8.1
         Feb. 6,230.4 1,346.3 1,141.7 204.6 2,107.5 1,955.2 510.5 872.7 278.8 572.0 463.9 102.9 8.2         Mar. 6,269.8 1,371.2 1,157.9 213.3 2,108.5 1,954.0 508.0 875.2 278.4 570.8 463.8 105.1 8.1
         Apr. 6,267.7 1,362.1 1,129.9 232.1 2,099.9 1,948.3 515.1 871.3 274.5 561.8 456.7 104.1 10.1
         May 6,304.5 1,382.7 1,150.7 232.0 2,107.1 1,957.8 523.5 874.3 277.0 560.1 456.1 101.1 7.4         June 6,277.4 1,392.3 1,174.8 217.4 2,118.7 1,970.2 535.6 875.7 278.3 558.9 455.1 99.9 8.5
         July 6,265.6 1,371.7 1,149.6 222.1 2,111.9 1,964.9 531.2 876.2 278.0 557.5 453.6 99.5 8.0
         Aug. 6,290.6 1,389.2 1,165.7 223.5 2,098.3 1,962.0 526.7 877.6 280.7 557.8 453.8 87.4 7.3         Sep. 6,341.8 1,400.3 1,172.2 228.1 2,105.7 1,968.2 540.8 869.1 272.6 558.3 454.7 87.5 8.8
 Changes 1
1994 406.2 94.6 45.3 49.3 100.6 83.8 20.8 −24.3 −79.3 87.4 66.9 9.4 0.6
1995 587.7 110.7 98.5 12.2 189.3 156.5 47.2 4.9 −76.5 104.3 99.1 30.0 0.4
1996 761.8 213.7 198.2 15.5 256.0 225.2 88.3 29.5 −41.4 107.3 116.2 27.2 3.0
1997 825.6 223.7 185.5 38.3 130.8 112.1 16.3 46.4 −3.8 49.4 60.3 25.0 −0.3
1998 1,001.0 277.0 182.8 94.2 205.9 176.8 97.8 46.3 34.8 32.7 42.0 26.2 2.01999 452.6 70.2 66.4 3.7 75.0 65.6 34.2 36.7 13.5 −5.3 7.4 7.5 1.7
2000 401.5 87.5 66.0 21.5 38.7 19.8 22.5 37.8 27.0 −40.5 −53.6 −4.2 0.3
2001 244.9 32.4 8.4 24.0 80.6 105.2 83.0 21.2 16.2 1.1 11.4 −4.0 0.4
2001          Jan. −18.1 −34.9 −43.8 8.9 −26.1 −12.8 −11.4 2.8 1.9 −4.1 −4.1 −1.2 1.0
         Feb. 77.0 31.9 14.7 17.2 10.3 11.6 11.9 1.7 1.9 −2.1 −2.1 −1.8 −1.8
         Mar. 105.7 15.3 16.6 −1.3 2.9 1.2 −1.8 4.6 3.5 −1.6 −1.2 2.1 1.4
         Apr. 24.1 2.1 −10.7 12.8 3.6 3.6 10.0 −3.5 −2.8 −2.9 −0.9 −0.4 −0.3
         May 12.3 −2.2 −0.5 −1.7 8.4 5.2 2.7 5.3 3.0 −2.8 −1.7 2.2 1.3
         June −26.6 −6.3 14.0 −20.3 7.8 9.4 8.3 2.4 1.6 −1.2 −0.3 −1.5 −0.6
         July −47.6 −16.0 −15.5 −0.6 −5.4 −4.4 −3.1 1.0 2.2 −2.4 −1.1 −1.9 −0.5
         Aug. 25.5 −7.2 0.1 −7.4 4.7 5.3 3.4 3.2 3.3 −1.2 0.0 −0.7 −1.1
         Sep. 56.7 31.3 27.8 3.5 15.7 18.7 17.3 1.2 −0.0 0.2 1.0 −0.1 1.7
         Oct. 1.6 −12.0 −19.1 7.1 2.1 2.4 3.2 −1.8 −1.7 1.0 2.8 1.4 −0.6
         Nov. 51.1 30.8 21.4 9.4 25.4 24.0 26.9 −4.7 −3.3 1.8 2.8 0.2 1.0
         Dec. −16.8 −0.3 3.3 −3.6 31.2 41.0 15.4 9.2 6.5 16.4 16.3 −2.3 −1.0
2002          Jan. −51.6 −42.6 −48.9 6.3 −22.3 −22.8 −14.2 −7.5 −9.2 −1.2 2.4 −0.4 0.4
         Feb. −23.2 −29.1 −11.5 −17.6 −4.7 −1.9 −0.4 −0.0 −2.6 −1.4 −0.4 −2.2 0.1
         Mar. 42.2 24.9 16.2 8.7 1.2 −1.1 −2.5 2.5 −0.5 −1.2 −0.1 2.4 −0.1
         Apr. 7.7 −9.2 −28.0 18.8 −7.9 −5.4 7.4 −3.8 −3.8 −9.0 −7.1 −0.6 1.9
         May 52.5 20.9 21.1 −0.1 9.2 11.0 8.8 3.9 3.2 −1.7 −0.6 −2.5 −2.6
         June −5.7 6.9 22.2 −15.3 11.9 12.1 12.0 1.3 1.3 −1.2 −1.0 −0.6 1.2
         July −19.6 −20.5 −25.2 4.6 −7.4 −5.6 −4.6 0.4 −0.4 −1.4 −1.5 −0.7 −0.6
         Aug. 23.8 17.5 16.1 1.5 0.0 −2.8 −4.5 1.4 2.7 0.3 0.1 1.5 −0.7
         Sep. 52.0 11.1 6.6 4.6 7.4 5.8 13.9 −8.6 −8.5 0.5 1.0 0.6 1.5
*This table serves to supplement the Overall monetary survey of section II; 1998, volume of business (balance-sheet total plus endorsement liabiliti es
it is planned to compare the figures for MFIs in the euro area with the data and bills sent for collection from the banks ’portfolios prior to maturity) and
for Germany. Notwithstanding the other tables in section IV, this table liabilities incurred in the banks ’own name but on behalf of third parties. —
includes −in addition to the figures reported by banks (including building 3Up to December 1998, including liabilities arising from loans on a trust
and loan associations) −the data of money market funds. —1Statistical basis and liabilities arising from rediscounted bills (endorsement
breaks have been eliminated from the flow figures. —2Up to December liabilities). —4Up to December 1998, including liabilities arising from
22*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
IV. Banks
 
   
 
 Debt securities
issued  10 
in other member countries  8 Deposits of
central governments  4 
With agreed At agreed
maturities notice
of which: Money of which: Liabilitiesdomestic market with to non- Liabilities
of which: of which: central arising fund euro- Capital maturities
up to up to govern- from of up to area and Other certificates
Total  
4 Total 3 months Total ments repos  9 Total reserves   Period 2 years  7 issued  10 2 years  10 residents Liabilities
End of year or month
 
60.3 6.8 6.8 6.8 100.8 100.8 −− 1,327.6 85.5 302.2 278.3 353.0 1993
68.7 11.8 7.3 7.3 108.2 108.2 − 31.3 1,441.2 81.9 336.8 305.2 357.8 1994
97.3 11.4 8.3 8.3 111.0 111.0 − 39.1 1,608.1 70.3 393.9 325.0 391.0 1995
120.6 9.0 9.2 9.2 114.6 114.6 − 34.0 1,804.3 54.4 422.1 350.0 438.8 1996
145.8 9.2 9.4 9.4 108.3 108.3 − 28.6 1,998.3 62.5 599.2 388.1 511.3 1997
168.3 13.8 9.7 9.7 111.2 111.2 − 34.8 2,248.1 80.2 739.8 426.8 574.8 1998
99.7 8.9 4.8 3.7 46.6 45.9 2.0 20.8 1,323.6 97.4 487.9 262.6 281.1 1999
96.3 6.7 4.7 3.3 69.9 67.6 0.4 19.3 1,417.1 113.3 599.8 298.1 318.4 2000
92.4 9.0 5.2 3.8 49.1 46.9 4.9 33.2 1,445.4 129.3 647.6 319.2 300.8 2001
96.3 6.7 4.7 3.3 69.9 67.6 0.4 19.3 1,417.1 113.3 599.8 298.1 318.4 2000          Dec.
94.4 6.5 5.0 3.5 57.7 55.7 1.8 20.6 1,434.5 111.5 626.3 297.7 311.9 2001          Jan.
94.4 7.0 5.0 3.5 58.0 55.5 1.6 21.5 1,450.2 112.4 640.7 299.6 314.1          Feb.
95.8 7.7 5.0 3.5 57.6 56.1 0.9 22.7 1,457.8 113.8 720.4 302.5 318.5          Mar.
95.6 7.7 5.0 3.5 58.1 55.5 1.4 23.3 1,460.3 116.3 725.9 301.8 327.6          Apr.
97.1 8.4 5.0 3.5 59.0 55.1 1.8 23.4 1,466.2 117.4 744.6 304.7 320.5          May96.1 8.7 5.0 3.5 58.9 55.2 1.1 24.2 1,468.0 118.0 717.9 307.2 313.0          June
94.2 8.0 5.0 3.5 59.8 55.3 1.7 25.0 1,473.1 123.7 682.5 310.3 303.3          July
94.0 8.4 5.0 3.6 59.9 54.5 4.6 26.5 1,468.1 123.5 693.7 312.6 304.9          Aug.92.3 7.3 5.0 3.6 57.0 54.0 2.8 28.0 1,471.1 125.6 692.2 314.2 314.0          Sep.
94.4 9.8 5.0 3.6 55.4 53.4 9.4 29.6 1,473.1 126.7 690.0 318.2 315.8          Oct.
93.8 9.3 5.1 3.7 56.5 53.6 4.0 30.7 1,448.5 123.8 677.1 321.3 317.6          Nov.92.4 9.0 5.2 3.8 49.1 46.9 4.9 33.2 1,445.4 129.3 647.6 319.2 300.8          Dec.
91.8 8.1 5.1 3.8 50.1 47.4 2.5 35.0 1,450.5 122.2 668.3 320.1 291.1 2002          Jan.
89.6 7.3 5.1 3.8 49.4 47.3 3.5 35.9 1,462.8 125.4 664.8 322.2 287.3          Feb.
92.0 9.3 5.0 3.7 49.4 46.9 3.7 35.8 1,479.4 129.0 666.4 323.3 281.6          Mar.
89.4 8.3 4.7 3.5 47.5 45.8 3.4 35.9 1,478.2 133.1 673.4 325.3 289.7          Apr.
89.1 9.5 4.7 3.4 48.2 45.6 4.7 35.4 1,480.6 134.6 673.3 329.0 291.6          May86.7 8.5 4.6 3.4 48.7 45.9 4.1 35.0 1,472.6 133.1 628.9 331.1 294.7          June
87.0 8.7 4.6 3.4 47.6 45.8 3.1 35.6 1,471.6 133.7 640.9 336.8 293.9          July
75.5 9.7 4.6 3.4 48.9 45.8 4.3 37.1 1,489.4 135.9 636.3 341.2 294.8          Aug.74.2 8.8 4.5 3.4 49.9 46.7 10.7 37.7 1,490.8 137.6 647.7 343.5 305.5          Sep.
Changes 1
8.3 5.0 0.4 0.4 7.4 7.4 − 31.3 113.5 −3.6 34.5 26.9 4.8 1994
28.6 −0.4 1.0 1.0 2.8 2.8 − 7.8 166.9 −11.5 57.2 19.8 36.0 1995
23.3 −2.4 0.9 0.9 3.6 3.6 −− 5.1 196.3 −15.9 28.1 25.0 47.8 1996
25.1 0.2 0.2 0.2 −6.2 −6.2 −− 4.5 194.8 8.1 172.3 37.1 71.2 1997
24.0 4.6 0.3 0.3 2.9 2.9 − 6.2 263.3 28.1 151.4 28.8 68.3 1998
5.9 1.5 −0.2 −1.3 1.9 1.2 0.6 3.5 168.0 65.1 89.7 38.0 7.7 1999
−4.5 −0.5 −0.1 −0.3 23.1 21.6 −1.6 −1.5 90.6 15.9 97.8 35.3 54.6 2000
−4.6 1.6 0.2 0.4 −20.5 −20.4 4.6 13.3 59.5 18.6 34.8 20.9 −1.1 2001
−2.1 −0.5 −0.0 −0.0 −12.2 −11.9 1.4 1.2 17.9 −1.8 29.0 −0.4 −6.2 2001          Jan.
0.0 0.6 0.0 0.0 0.5 0.0 −0.2 1.0 15.6 0.9 13.8 1.9 2.8          Feb.
0.7 0.7 0.0 0.0 −0.4 0.6 −0.6 1.1 5.1 2.1 66.2 2.3 13.4          Mar.
−0.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.5 −0.7 0.5 0.7 2.6 2.5 6.7 −0.7 8.6          Apr.
1.0 0.1 −0.0 0.0 0.9 −0.4 0.4 0.0 1.3 1.0 2.2 2.1 0.2          May
−0.9 0.3 0.0 0.0 −0.1 0.1 −0.7 0.9 2.8 0.5 −25.2 2.6 −8.3          June
−1.4 −0.6 0.0 0.0 0.9 0.1 0.6 0.8 7.7 5.8 −25.0 3.6 −13.8          July
0.3 0.4 0.0 0.0 0.1 −0.8 2.9 1.5 −2.9 −0.5 24.7 2.9 −1.1          Aug.
−1.8 −1.1 0.0 0.0 −2.9 −0.5 −1.7 1.5 2.5 2.0 −3.7 1.5 9.6          Sep.
1.9 2.5 0.0 0.0 −1.6 −0.6 6.5 1.6 1.6 0.2 −4.9 4.0 2.7          Oct.
−0.8 −0.6 0.0 0.0 1.1 0.1 −5.3 1.1 8.5 0.3 −17.1 2.8 4.9          Nov.
−1.5 −0.2 0.1 0.2 −7.4 −6.6 0.9 1.9 −3.2 5.5 −32.0 −1.6 −13.8          Dec.
−0.8 −0.9 −0.1 −0.0 1.0 0.5 −2.4 2.0 4.0 −2.4 15.1 0.7 −6.0 2002          Jan.
−2.2 −0.9 −0.1 −0.0 −0.7 −0.2 1.0 0.8 12.7 3.2 −2.8 2.3 −3.3          Feb.
2.5 2.0 −0.0 −0.0 −0.0 −0.3 0.2 −0.1 16.9 3.6 3.7 1.2 −5.8          Mar.
−2.3 −1.0 −0.3 −0.3 −1.9 −1.2 −0.3 0.2 0.9 4.1 15.9 2.3 5.8          Apr.
0.2 1.3 −0.1 −0.0 0.7 −0.1 1.3 −0.0 6.2 1.7 12.6 4.1 −1.8          May
−1.8 −1.0 −0.0 0.0 0.5 0.3 −0.6 −0.3 −3.8 −1.8 −28.2 2.5 5.9          June
−0.1 0.2 −0.1 −0.0 −1.1 −0.1 −1.0 0.6 −3.4 −1.2 5.4 5.2 1.6          July
2.2 1.0 −0.0 −0.0 1.4 0.0 1.2 1.2 1.5 2.3 −2.6 4.7 0.2          Aug.
−0.9 −0.4 −0.0 −0.0 1.0 0.8 6.4 0.1 1.0 1.0 12.0 3.5 10.5          Sep.
loans on a trust basis. —5For the German contribution: from 1999 governments ’deposits. —9Data collected separately only from 1999; up to
including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see table IV.12). — December 1998, included in the deposits with agreed maturities of up to 2
6For the German contribution: up to the end of 1998 including deposits years. —10In Germany, debt securities with maturities of up to one year
under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 5). —7Up to December are classed as money market paper; up to January 2002 monthly report they
1998, with maturities of less than 4 years. —8Excluding central were published together with money market fund certificates. 
23*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
IV. Banks
 
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks *
 
 
 5  billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
  of which of which 
Loans and advances
 not evidenced
 Cash in by certificates for hand and
Number of balancesreporting Balance with Balances up to and Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Othermonth tions total banks Total advances banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets  
1 
All categories of banks
 
2002          Apr. 2,509 6,346.9 55.9 2,238.4 1,553.4 677.3 3,590.9 478.3 2,567.6 5.1 524.5 142.5 319.3
         May 2,498 6,384.1 60.2 2,269.0 1,582.5 679.1 3,594.9 475.2 2,566.5 4.9 533.0 143.2 316.8         June 2,466 6,319.7 58.5 2,278.0 1,595.8 674.7 3,565.9 465.7 2,560.6 4.9 520.4 142.5 274.7
         July 2,437 6,308.1 55.1 2,258.0 1,585.9 662.9 3,574.8 462.7 2,568.1 4.9 526.1 142.2 278.0
         Aug. 2,424 6,331.8 59.6 2,281.4 1,614.9 657.2 3,563.4 446.1 2,573.3 4.9 523.3 152.9 274.6         Sep. 2,394 6,381.8 55.6 2,312.2 1,646.9 654.8 3,580.4 468.0 2,568.3 4.8 522.9 154.8 278.7
Commercial banks 6
2002          Aug. 274 1,757.3 22.4 592.2 462.9 124.3 938.4 229.1 540.2 2.2 157.2 92.8 111.5         Sep. 275 1,801.3 20.3 616.5 485.4 126.1 955.9 243.0 539.2 2.2 161.0 93.3 115.4
   Big banks 7
2002          Aug. 4 1,012.5 14.3 326.0 269.6 52.8 521.7 133.5 288.6 1.4 92.3 82.6 67.8         Sep. 4 1,042.4 12.3 340.4 282.8 54.1 536.1 143.9 286.9 1.4 96.7 83.1 70.6
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2002          Aug. 189 636.5 7.3 211.9 146.0 65.2 375.6 76.8 235.4 0.8 59.3 9.4 32.4         Sep. 189 650.2 7.4 220.2 154.4 65.1 379.6 80.8 235.8 0.8 59.2 9.4 33.6
   Branches of foreign banks
2002          Aug. 81 108.2 0.8 54.3 47.3 6.3 41.0 18.8 16.3 0.1 5.7 0.8 11.3         Sep. 82 108.6 0.6 55.9 48.2 6.9 40.2 18.4 16.5 0.1 5.2 0.8 11.2
Land banks
2002          Aug. 14 1,292.7 4.4 647.1 515.0 129.9 561.9 64.5 405.6 0.4 86.8 31.7 47.6         Sep. 14 1,305.9 4.5 658.6 527.2 128.9 562.5 67.6 406.0 0.4 84.4 32.7 47.7
Savings banks
2002          Aug. 524 974.6 18.3 228.4 70.8 157.3 691.4 77.4 520.3 1.4 91.9 12.1 24.4         Sep. 523 974.4 17.1 228.9 73.5 154.7 691.7 79.6 520.0 1.4 90.3 12.5 24.3
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives  
 
2002          Aug. 2 192.0 0.9 122.7 85.3 37.3 54.3 10.7 25.0 0.1 18.3 9.1 4.9         Sep. 2 189.7 1.2 120.1 82.7 37.1 54.0 10.9 24.6 0.1 18.0 9.2 5.3
Credit cooperatives
2002          Aug. 1,541 547.0 11.4 137.5 60.3 76.1 376.8 50.0 287.9 0.8 37.7 3.8 17.6         Sep. 1,512 547.9 11.4 137.1 59.5 76.2 377.9 51.4 287.9 0.7 37.3 3.8 17.6
Mortgage banks
2002          Aug. 27 894.2 1.8 227.7 148.4 78.5 640.5 7.7 534.2 − 98.4 1.1 23.2
         Sep. 26 893.6 0.8 231.0 151.8 78.5 638.4 8.2 531.0 − 99.0 1.1 22.3
Building and loan associations
2002          Aug. 28 160.7 0.0 36.6 24.9 11.8 115.6 1.6 104.2 . 9.8 0.4 8.1         Sep. 28 160.7 0.0 36.2 24.6 11.6 116.0 1.7 104.6 . 9.7 0.4 8.1
Banks with special functions
2002          Aug. 14 513.4 0.5 289.3 247.3 42.0 184.5 5.0 155.9 − 23.2 1.8 37.3
         Sep. 14 508.3 0.4 283.8 242.2 41.6 184.2 5.5 155.0 − 23.2 1.8 38.1
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
2002          Aug. 133 384.7 3.6 153.0 112.2 40.0 200.2 37.4 120.6 0.2 41.7 1.7 26.1         Sep. 134 393.4 2.4 162.7 120.7 41.1 199.7 38.0 118.7 0.1 42.6 1.7 26.9
  of which: Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
2002          Aug. 52 276.5 2.8 98.7 64.9 33.7 159.2 18.6 104.3 0.1 36.1 0.9 14.8         Sep. 52 284.8 1.8 106.8 72.4 34.2 159.5 19.6 102.2 0.1 37.4 0.9 15.7
*For the period up to December 1998, section IV (except for table IV.1) respective items, see the footnotes to table IV.3. —1Decreases in June 2002
shows the assets and liabilities of banks (excluding building and loan caused by elimination of previously recorded debt securities; see also
associations) in Germany; from January 1999, the assets and liabilities of footnote 5. —2For building and loan associations: Including deposits under
monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets and liabilities savings and loan contracts (see table IV. 12). —3Included in time
of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are likewise classified as deposits. —4Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also
MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the footnote 2). —5Including subordinated negotiable bearer debt
24*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
IV. Banks
 
   
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
  (including
of which of which published
reserves,
Savings deposits  4 partici- Time deposits for  2 
pation
Memo rightsitem: Bearer capital,
of which: debt Liabilities
funds for
up to and more arising At three Bank general securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking Other   End of months ’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year  2 repos  3 Total notice bonds risks   month standing  5 liabilities
All categories of banks
 
1,786.1 246.6 1,539.2 2,365.6 551.7 353.5 775.9 37.1 572.8 464.8 111.6 1,544.4 280.3 370.6 2002          Apr.
1,805.0 232.7 1,572.0 2,375.5 558.7 360.5 773.5 41.8 571.0 464.1 111.7 1,549.4 282.2 372.0          May
1,790.7 266.0 1,524.4 2,365.6 574.5 341.5 767.3 30.2 569.8 463.1 112.5 1,506.6 283.4 373.5          June
1,775.9 239.5 1,536.2 2,364.1 570.2 344.1 768.5 30.9 568.3 461.5 113.0 1,510.7 284.1 373.3          July
1,788.7 207.1 1,581.3 2,351.1 561.9 352.3 755.5 35.9 568.6 461.6 112.9 1,527.7 290.0 374.4          Aug.1,805.6 265.8 1,539.6 2,369.6 582.0 353.1 753.2 45.0 569.1 462.6 112.3 1,530.9 290.5 385.2          Sep.
Commercial banks 6
646.7 108.7 537.7 631.6 239.2 172.4 125.9 32.3 84.4 68.8 9.7 233.7 104.9 140.3 2002          Aug.
668.6 141.9 526.5 650.6 256.2 174.1 125.8 38.5 85.1 69.4 9.5 232.5 105.2 144.3          Sep.
Big banks 7
383.2 70.5 312.6 319.0 107.7 117.5 73.1 30.9 19.8 17.7 0.9 166.1 67.0 77.3 2002          Aug.
396.6 98.5 298.1 332.7 120.6 118.6 72.7 36.0 19.9 17.7 0.9 165.5 67.0 80.6          Sep.
Regional banks and other commercial banks
184.1 27.6 156.3 300.7 126.1 51.2 50.1 1.0 64.5 51.1 8.8 67.6 35.0 49.1 2002          Aug.
191.9 32.4 159.2 305.9 130.0 51.7 50.4 1.5 65.2 51.6 8.6 66.9 35.3 50.2          Sep.
Branches of foreign banks
79.4 10.5 68.9 11.9 5.4 3.7 2.7 0.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 2.9 14.0 2002          Aug.
80.1 11.0 69.1 12.1 5.5 3.8 2.7 1.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 2.9 13.5          Sep.
Land banks
470.1 55.3 414.8 300.2 38.6 41.1 205.5 2.4 14.3 13.0 0.6 402.8 62.3 57.3 2002          Aug.
470.4 69.0 401.4 303.5 42.3 40.7 205.6 4.5 14.3 13.0 0.6 409.3 62.3 60.4          Sep.
Savings banks
218.3 5.4 212.9 617.8 171.2 65.3 10.3 − 297.7 235.9 73.2 47.5 44.3 46.6 2002          Aug.
218.9 7.5 211.4 615.2 170.3 64.4 10.2 − 297.5 236.0 72.9 47.2 44.4 48.7          Sep.
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives
 
108.6 27.0 81.7 30.2 6.7 4.5 19.0 1.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 35.7 9.3 8.1 2002          Aug.
107.4 30.2 77.2 30.5 7.1 4.5 19.0 1.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 34.4 9.3 8.0          Sep.
Credit cooperatives
76.9 1.7 75.2 388.3 103.6 59.6 24.2 − 171.8 143.6 29.2 32.6 28.3 20.8 2002          Aug.
76.4 2.4 74.0 388.6 103.7 59.9 24.2 − 171.8 143.9 29.0 32.7 28.4 21.8          Sep.
Mortgage banks
112.4 3.6 108.8 142.7 1.4 3.6 137.6 − 0.0 0.0 0.2 591.6 18.6 28.9 2002          Aug.
114.6 6.2 108.4 142.1 1.4 3.6 136.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.2 590.9 18.6 27.3          Sep.
Building and loan associations
29.7 1.9 27.8 100.5 0.3 0.7 99.1 − 0.3 0.3 0.1 7.9 7.1 15.6 2002          Aug.
29.4 2.0 27.4 100.7 0.3 0.7 99.3 − 0.3 0.3 0.1 7.4 7.1 16.1          Sep.
Banks with special functions
125.9 3.6 122.3 139.8 0.9 5.0 133.9 0.1 −−− 175.9 15.1 56.8 2002          Aug.
119.9 6.5 113.3 138.3 1.0 5.2 132.2 0.2 −−− 176.4 15.1 58.6          Sep.
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
138.0 20.7 117.2 99.6 48.0 15.8 27.9 0.4 5.6 5.3 2.3 97.7 13.3 36.1 2002          Aug.
144.7 26.0 118.6 101.7 49.5 15.9 27.8 1.0 6.1 5.8 2.4 99.5 13.3 34.2          Sep.
of which: Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
58.6 10.1 48.4 87.7 42.6 12.1 25.1 − 5.6 5.3 2.3 97.6 10.4 22.1 2002          Aug.
64.5 15.0 49.4 89.6 43.9 12.1 25.1 0.0 6.1 5.7 2.3 99.5 10.4 20.8          Sep.
securities; excluding non-negotiable negotiable bearer debt securities. of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks and included in other
Decreases in June 2002 caused by transition to net recording of outstanding categories of banks and of the category ”Branches (of dependent legal
debt securities (ie less own debt securities). —6Commercial banks comprise status) of foreign banks ”— 9Separate presentation of the banks
the sub-groups ”Big banks ”,”Regional banks and other commercial banks ” majority-owned by foreign banks included in the categories ”Regional
and ”Branches of foreign banks ”.—7Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner Bank banks and other commercial banks ” and ”Mortgage banks ”. 
AG, Commerzbank AG and Bayerische Hypo- und Vereinsbank AG. —8Sum
25*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
IV. Banks
 
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis- à-vis residents *
 
 
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999  5  billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs)  2, 3 Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3, 8 
Balances Treasury
Cash in and loans Negotiable Loans and bills and
hand and ad- money advances negotiable
Balances market Memo not money mar- (euro-area vances not Securities
notes with the evidenced paper item evidenced ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- by certi- issued by issued by Trust by certi- issued by by non-
Period coins)  1 bank Total ficates Bills  4 banks  5 banks  6 loans  7 Total ficates Bills  4 non-banks banks  9 
End of year or month *
 
1992 26.8 88.2 1,483.5 1,020.8 19.0 − 435.1 8.6 3,478.2 3,034.9 52.1 9.6 237.8
1993 26.7 75.3 1,596.8 1,076.2 14.7 3.3 493.2 9.3 3,826.4 3,291.6 44.7 5.6 327.7
1994 25.0 61.5 1,695.6 1,150.6 17.4 4.6 513.6 9.5 4,137.2 3,502.8 45.9 2.2 433.7
1995 26.0 61.0 1,859.9 1,264.9 17.5 4.3 561.9 11.4 4,436.9 3,802.0 46.8 1.4 427.3
1996 28.9 59.7 2,134.0 1,443.3 17.9 3.4 657.2 12.2 4,773.1 4,097.9 44.8 5.9 437.21997 29.3 60.2 2,397.9 1,606.3 18.1 3.6 758.9 11.1 5,058.4 4,353.9 44.7 2.9 473.31998 28.5 63.6 2,738.2 1,814.7 14.6 12.2 887.7 9.1 5,379.8 4,639.7 32.8 5.0 527.81999 16.8 45.6 1,556.9 1,033.4 0.0 19.2 504.2 3.9 2,904.5 2,569.6 7.0 3.0 287.5
2000 15.6 50.8 1,639.6 1,056.1 0.0 26.8 556.6 3.6 3,003.7 2,657.3 6.5 2.3 304.7
2001 14.2 56.3 1,676.0 1,078.9 0.0 5.6 591.5 2.8 3,014.1 2,699.4 4.8 4.4 301.5
2001          Apr. 13.2 40.3 1,675.2 1,058.9 0.0 20.6 595.7 3.5 3,030.3 2,673.1 6.0 2.5 343.9
         May 13.4 43.9 1,677.9 1,060.1 0.0 18.5 599.2 3.4 3,032.7 2,679.8 5.9 2.9 339.3         June 13.2 46.1 1,671.6 1,063.4 0.0 16.8 591.5 3.4 3,007.7 2,676.1 5.8 2.3 318.7
         July 13.2 50.5 1,661.4 1,046.9 0.0 14.4 600.0 3.4 3,008.2 2,671.1 5.7 4.4 323.0
         Aug. 13.0 49.3 1,665.7 1,060.7 0.0 12.9 592.1 2.8 2,995.3 2,671.0 5.6 3.7 311.1         Sep. 13.2 51.2 1,689.6 1,087.9 0.0 11.2 590.6 2.8 2,989.9 2,679.6 5.6 4.9 295.7
         Oct. 13.6 54.4 1,676.9 1,072.8 0.0 11.1 593.0 2.9 2,992.5 2,681.6 5.5 4.4 297.1
         Nov. 13.2 55.9 1,684.1 1,084.2 0.0 7.5 592.3 2.8 3,009.4 2,698.5 5.3 3.7 297.9         Dec. 14.2 56.3 1,676.0 1,078.9 0.0 5.6 591.5 2.8 3,014.1 2,699.4 4.8 4.4 301.5
2002          Jan. 26.7 49.3 1,633.8 1,038.5 0.0 5.7 589.7 2.8 3,011.2 2,690.2 4.6 3.0 309.5
         Feb. 18.8 42.0 1,636.3 1,035.4 0.0 5.2 595.7 2.8 3,006.1 2,689.6 4.4 2.8 305.4         Mar. 16.5 44.4 1,653.0 1,045.6 0.0 5.8 601.5 2.7 2,996.9 2,689.9 4.5 2.7 295.9
         Apr. 14.5 40.9 1,648.3 1,038.4 0.0 6.3 603.6 2.7 3,004.3 2,687.4 4.4 3.7 304.9
         May 14.3 45.4 1,655.7 1,044.4 0.0 6.1 605.2 2.7 3,005.7 2,682.8 4.2 4.6 310.2         June 13.9 43.8 1,668.4 1,061.5 0.0 6.3 600.6 2.7 2,990.8 2,678.8 4.3 5.2 298.7
         July 13.4 41.2 1,643.8 1,047.7 0.0 7.6 588.4 2.6 2,995.7 2,685.3 4.3 4.2 299.1
         Aug. 13.2 46.0 1,650.2 1,060.1 0.0 7.7 582.4 2.7 2,987.3 2,675.6 4.2 3.9 300.6         Sep. 13.0 42.3 1,652.7 1,064.4 0.0 8.5 579.8 2.7 2,995.5 2,683.2 4.2 3.9 301.2
Changes *
1993 −0.1 −12.9 + 133.3 + 75.2 −4.3 + 0.1 + 61.5 + 0.7 + 339.8 + 259.1 −7.4 −4.5 + 102.0
1994 −1.7 −13.8 + 99.1 + 73.6 + 2.7 + 1.3 + 21.3 + 0.1 + 320.5 + 240.2 + 1.2 −3.3 + 86.7
1995 + 1.0 −0.5 + 193.5 + 139.4 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 54.3 + 0.2 + 312.8 + 303.6 + 1.0 −0.8 + 2.9
1996 + 2.9 −1.3 + 257.8 + 161.8 + 0.4 − 1.1 + 95.8 + 0.8 + 336.3 + 311.7 −2.0 + 4.7 + 10.6
1997 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 262.5 + 160.7 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 102.6 −1.1 + 285.2 + 255.5 −0.1 −3.0 + 36.5
1998 −0.8 + 3.4 + 343.3 + 210.3 −3.6 + 8.6 + 130.0 −2.0 + 335.3 + 302.1 −11.9 + 2.1 + 52.1
1999 + 2.2 + 13.2 + 122.1 + 66.3 + 0.0 + 12.9 + 42.8 −0.7 + 156.1 + 136.9 + 2.6 + 0.4 + 16.7
2000 −1.1 + 5.1 + 83.6 + 21.7 −0.0 + 7.6 + 54.3 −0.3 + 100.7 + 83.7 −0.5 −0.8 + 19.0
2001 −1.4 + 5.5 + 34.6 + 20.1 −0.0 −21.3 + 35.8 −0.9 + 11.9 + 40.8 −1.6 + 1.6 + 0.3
2001          Apr. + 0.6 −6.1 + 5.8 − 4.6 + 0.0 − 1.8 + 12.2 + 0.0 − 2.7 − 6.9 −0.0 −0.3 + 4.6
         May + 0.1 + 3.6 + 0.7 − 0.7 −0.0 − 2.1 + 3.5 −0.1 − 0.1 + 4.3 −0.1 + 0.4 − 4.6
         June −0.1 + 2.2 − 6.0 + 3.5 −0.0 − 1.7 − 7.8 −0.0 −24.5 − 3.3 −0.1 −0.6 −20.6
         July + 0.0 + 4.4 − 9.2 −15.4 −0.0 − 2.4 + 8.6 + 0.0 + 1.7 − 3.7 −0.0 + 2.1 + 4.3
         Aug. −0.3 −1.2 + 5.7 + 15.2 −− 1.5 − 8.0 −0.6 − 9.6 + 1.3 −0.1 −0.7 −10.1
         Sep. + 0.3 + 1.9 + 23.5 + 26.7 −0.0 − 1.7 − 1.5 −0.0 − 6.3 + 7.8 + 0.0 + 0.6 −14.7
         Oct. + 0.4 + 3.2 −13.0 −15.3 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 2.4 −0.0 + 2.4 + 1.7 −0.1 −0.5 + 1.3
         Nov. −0.5 + 1.6 + 6.9 + 11.1 −− 3.6 − 0.6 −0.1 + 16.1 + 15.9 −0.1 −0.7 + 1.0
         Dec. + 1.0 + 0.3 − 7.7 − 5.4 −0.0 − 1.9 − 0.3 −0.0 + 5.8 + 1.7 −0.5 + 0.7 + 3.8
2002          Jan. + 12.5 −6.9 −42.5 −41.0 −0.0 + 0.1 − 1.6 −0.0 − 3.4 − 9.9 −0.3 −1.5 + 8.3
         Feb. −8.0 −7.3 + 2.7 − 2.9 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 6.1 −0.0 − 4.9 − 0.5 −0.2 −0.2 − 4.1
         Mar. −2.3 + 2.4 + 16.9 + 10.3 −0.0 + 0.6 + 6.0 −0.0 − 8.6 + 0.7 + 0.1 −0.1 − 9.3
         Apr. −2.0 −3.5 − 5.0 − 7.2 − + 0.5 + 1.6 −0.0 + 8.1 − 2.3 −0.1 + 1.0 + 9.4
         May −0.2 + 4.5 + 7.7 + 6.2 −0.0 − 0.2 + 1.7 −0.1 + 2.2 − 3.9 −0.2 + 0.9 + 5.4
         June −0.4 −1.6 + 12.5 + 16.9 −0.0 + 0.1 − 4.6 + 0.0 −19.0 − 8.0 + 0.1 + 0.5 −11.5
         July −0.5 −2.5 −24.9 −13.8 − + 1.4 −12.4 −0.0 + 5.1 + 6.5 −0.0 −1.0 + 0.6
         Aug. −0.2 + 4.8 + 6.4 + 12.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 6.0 + 0.0 − 8.4 − 9.6 −0.0 −0.2 + 1.5
         Sep. −0.2 −3.8 + 2.5 + 4.3 − + 0.8 − 2.6 −0.0 + 7.7 + 7.2 −0.1 −0.0 + 0.7
*See table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the from rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks ’
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as portfolios prior to maturity). —5Up to November 1993, included in
provisional. Subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following securities (see also footnote 6). —6Up to November 1993, including
Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Up to December 1998: negotiable money market paper; excluding registered debt securities. —
domestic notes and coins. —2Up to December 1998, excluding loans to 7From 1999, no longer included in loans or deposits (see also footnote
domestic building and loan associations. —3Up to December 1998, 3). —8Up to December 1998, including loans to domestic building and loan
including loans on a trust basis; see also footnote 7. —4Up to December associations. —9Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of
1998, bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising equalisation claims; see also footnote 10. —10Including debt securities
26*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
IV. Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3, 11, 12  Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3, 17 
Partici-
patinginterestsin
Memo domestic Bills Memo Memo
Equalisa- item banks Sight Time redis- item Sight Time Savings Bank itemtion Trust and deposits deposits counted Trust deposits deposits deposits savings Trust
loans  
7 Total 13, 14  14, 15  16 loans  7 Total 13 15, 18  19 bonds  20 loans  7   Period claims  10 enterprises
End of year or month *
 
64.3 79.5 49.4 1,266.2 301.2 864.7 78.0 22.4 2,570.4 468.3 1,020.9 770.7 240.0 70.4 1992
75.3 81.6 59.5 1,395.2 380.2 917.9 69.2 27.9 2,788.1 513.6 1,123.6 859.4 219.1 72.4 199368.1 84.4 70.7 1,427.9 342.8 976.9 75.2 33.1 2,875.7 540.2 1,109.3 940.5 206.9 78.8 1994
71.3 88.1 83.2 1,539.4 363.9 1,065.1 75.5 35.0 3,021.1 579.9 1,086.1 1,046.1 227.4 81.6 1995
81.3 106.0 89.7 1,731.0 401.1 1,202.4 75.4 52.2 3,241.5 675.1 1,109.8 1,143.0 227.8 85.8 199676.0 107.6 95.1 1,902.3 427.6 1,349.1 75.6 50.0 3,341.9 689.8 1,146.9 1,182.1 236.9 86.1 199771.6 102.8 129.2 2,086.9 472.5 1,505.2 59.4 49.7 3,520.3 799.5 1,194.1 1,211.0 234.9 80.9 199837.5 58.0 75.6 1,122.0 114.4 1,007.3 0.3 29.8 1,905.3 420.4 759.6 614.7 110.7 42.1 1999
33.1 58.5 82.7 1,189.2 113.4 1,075.3 0.4 30.1 1,945.8 443.4 819.9 573.5 109.0 42.1 2000
4.0 57.0 95.9 1,204.9 123.1 1,081.6 0.3 27.2 2,034.0 526.4 827.0 574.5 106.0 43.3 2001
4.9 58.4 86.1 1,169.9 127.7 1,041.9 0.2 29.8 1,938.3 451.9 813.8 562.7 109.8 42.7 2001          Apr.
4.8 57.2 86.5 1,169.5 119.5 1,049.8 0.2 28.3 1,944.0 454.9 819.2 559.9 110.0 42.9          May
4.9 56.8 86.5 1,183.9 127.1 1,056.5 0.2 28.3 1,953.3 465.0 819.8 558.8 109.8 42.7          June
4.0 56.7 89.4 1,168.2 116.2 1,051.8 0.2 28.1 1,948.4 461.4 821.0 556.4 109.7 42.7          July
4.0 57.6 89.6 1,167.9 119.2 1,048.4 0.2 28.1 1,953.2 463.5 825.0 555.1 109.6 42.8          Aug.4.0 57.4 89.0 1,196.4 137.1 1,059.1 0.2 28.1 1,971.0 480.2 826.1 555.4 109.3 42.7          Sep.
4.0 57.2 88.7 1,177.5 124.2 1,053.1 0.2 28.1 1,977.5 483.7 829.0 556.4 108.4 42.4          Oct.
4.0 57.0 87.2 1,198.9 146.7 1,052.0 0.2 27.9 1,999.2 511.0 822.5 558.2 107.6 42.5          Nov.4.0 57.0 95.9 1,204.9 123.1 1,081.6 0.3 27.2 2,034.0 526.4 827.0 574.5 106.0 43.3          Dec.
3.9 56.7 89.6 1,159.4 115.6 1,043.6 0.2 27.3 2,009.8 511.5 819.9 573.4 105.1 42.4 2002          Jan.
3.9 56.4 95.1 1,148.5 119.8 1,028.5 0.2 27.3 2,007.8 511.3 819.7 572.0 104.8 42.2          Feb.
3.9 56.2 95.4 1,164.8 126.0 1,038.6 0.2 27.1 2,006.6 509.2 821.7 570.8 104.9 42.1          Mar.
3.9 56.1 95.7 1,138.3 123.2 1,014.9 0.2 27.0 1,999.3 515.7 816.8 561.8 104.9 42.0          Apr.
3.9 56.0 95.8 1,158.7 113.4 1,045.1 0.1 26.8 2,009.4 523.8 820.6 560.1 105.0 41.9          May3.9 55.4 95.5 1,182.3 132.1 1,050.1 0.1 26.0 2,021.4 536.2 820.6 558.9 105.7 41.5          June
3.0 55.2 95.0 1,157.4 118.2 1,039.1 0.1 25.9 2,016.2 531.6 821.1 557.5 106.0 41.6          July
3.0 55.2 105.9 1,173.0 115.3 1,057.6 0.1 25.9 2,013.9 527.2 823.0 557.8 105.9 41.6          Aug.3.0 55.0 107.9 1,179.3 133.0 1,046.1 0.1 25.7 2,025.0 540.8 820.6 558.3 105.3 41.6          Sep.
Changes *
−11.4 + 2.1 + 9.8 + 145.3 + 75.1 + 77.1 −8.8 + 1.9 + 216.7 + 43.8 + 96.9 + 88.7 −14.6 + 2.0 1993
−6.9 + 2.6 + 11.3 + 32.4 −31.4 + 53.0 + 6.0 + 4.9 + 85.0 + 28.3 −14.1 + 81.2 −12.2 + 1.8 1994
−1.2 + 7.3 + 12.5 + 134.2 + 20.4 + 111.5 + 0.4 + 2.0 + 158.3 + 48.9 −14.2 + 105.6 + 11.7 + 6.3 1995
+ 8.0 + 3.3 + 6.5 + 175.9 + 36.6 + 137.7 −0.2 + 1.7 + 218.4 + 94.3 + 23.2 + 96.9 + 0.7 + 3.3 1996
−5.3 + 1.6 + 5.4 + 175.9 + 31.6 + 146.7 + 0.2 −2.6 + 100.5 + 13.0 + 37.1 + 39.1 + 9.2 + 2.1 1997
−4.4 −4.8 + 34.1 + 179.0 + 39.7 + 156.4 −16.2 −0.9 + 179.3 + 110.6 + 47.2 + 28.9 −2.1 −5.3 1998
−0.6 + 0.1 + 9.3 + 69.0 − 1.8 + 81.8 −11.1 −0.4 + 67.3 + 32.7 + 48.4 − 4.5 −9.3 + 0.7 1999
−0.8 + 0.5 + 7.1 + 64.7 − 2.3 + 66.9 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 41.3 + 22.3 + 61.1 −40.5 −1.7 −0.0 2000
−29.1 −1.5 + 13.3 + 9.6 + 7.4 + 2.3 −0.2 −2.9 + 88.5 + 82.3 + 8.1 + 1.1 −2.9 + 1.0 2001
−0.1 −0.1 + 0.3 −11.0 + 2.5 −13.5 −0.0 −0.0 + 2.9 + 9.8 − 4.0 − 2.9 −0.0 + 0.1 2001          Apr.
−0.0 −1.2 + 0.5 − 2.3 −10.2 + 7.9 + 0.0 −1.5 + 5.0 + 2.2 + 5.4 − 2.8 + 0.2 + 0.2          May
+ 0.1 −0.3 + 0.0 + 14.6 + 7.9 + 6.7 + 0.0 −0.0 + 9.4 + 10.2 + 0.6 − 1.2 −0.1 −0.2          June
−0.9 −0.1 + 3.0 −14.5 − 9.8 − 4.7 −0.0 −0.2 − 4.4 − 3.1 + 1.2 − 2.4 −0.1 + 0.1          July
+ 0.0 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 1.1 + 4.5 − 3.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 5.3 + 2.7 + 4.0 − 1.2 −0.1 + 0.1          Aug.
+ 0.0 −0.1 −0.5 + 28.1 + 17.4 + 10.7 −0.0 −0.0 + 17.8 + 16.7 + 1.2 + 0.2 −0.3 −0.2          Sep.
−0.0 −0.1 −0.3 −19.1 −13.1 − 6.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 6.3 + 3.4 + 2.9 + 1.0 −0.9 −0.2          Oct.
+ 0.0 −0.2 −1.5 + 20.5 + 22.0 − 1.5 −0.0 −0.2 + 21.5 + 27.1 − 6.6 + 1.8 −0.8 + 0.0          Nov.
+ 0.0 + 0.0 + 8.7 + 5.9 −23.7 + 29.6 + 0.1 −0.7 + 34.7 + 15.4 + 4.5 + 16.4 −1.5 + 0.8          Dec.
−0.0 −0.3 −6.1 −46.1 −10.5 −35.6 −0.1 + 0.1 −24.4 − 15.2 − 7.1 − 1.2 −0.9 −0.9 2002          Jan.
−− 0.3 + 5.8 −10.8 + 4.3 −15.1 −0.0 −0.1 − 2.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 1.4 −0.3 −0.2          Feb.
−0.0 −0.3 + 0.3 + 16.4 + 6.3 + 10.1 −0.0 −0.2 − 1.2 − 2.0 + 2.0 − 1.2 + 0.1 −0.1          Mar.
+ 0.0 −0.1 + 0.3 −26.6 − 2.9 −23.7 + 0.0 −0.0 − 7.3 + 6.5 − 4.9 − 9.0 + 0.1 −0.1          Apr.
+ 0.0 −0.0 + 0.1 + 20.7 − 9.8 + 30.5 −0.0 −0.1 + 11.1 + 8.2 + 4.5 − 1.7 + 0.1 −0.1          May
−0.0 −0.6 −0.3 + 21.7 + 18.6 + 3.1 −0.0 −0.8 + 11.1 + 11.9 − 0.3 − 1.2 + 0.7 −0.3          June
−1.0 −0.2 −0.5 −24.9 −13.9 −11.0 −0.0 −0.1 − 5.3 − 4.7 + 0.5 − 1.4 + 0.3 + 0.0          July
+ 0.0 −0.0 + 11.5 + 16.4 − 2.9 + 19.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 2.3 − 4.4 + 1.9 + 0.3 −0.1 −0.0          Aug.
+ 0.0 −0.2 + 1.9 + 6.2 + 17.8 −11.5 + 0.0 −0.2 + 10.7 + 13.3 − 2.6 + 0.5 −0.5 −0.0          Sep.
arising from the exchange of equalisation claims. —11Including liabilities acceptances and promissory notes outstanding and, up to December 1998,
arising from registered debt securities, registered money market paper and including endorsement liabilities arising from rediscounted bills. —17Up to
non-negotiable bearer debt securities; including subordinated liabilities. — December 1998, including liabilities to domestic building and loans
12Up to December 1998, excluding liabilities to domestic building and loan associations and money market funds. —18Since the inclusion of building
associations and money market funds. —13Up to December 1998, and loan associations in January 1999, including deposits under savings and
including time deposits for less than 1 month. —14Including liabilities loan contracts (see table IV. 12). —19Excluding deposits under savings and
arising from monetary policy operations with the Bundesbank. —15Up to loan contracts (see also footnote 18). —20Including liabilities arising from
December 1998, excluding time deposits for less than 1 month. —16Own non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
27*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
IV. Banks
 
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis- à-vis non-residents *
 
 
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999  5  billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
Balances and loans and Loans and advances not Treasury
advances not evidenced by evidenced by certificates, bills and
Cash in certificates, bills  3 bills 3 negotiable Negotiable
hand money money
(non- Medium market Memo Medium marketeuro-area and paper Securities item and paper Securitiesnotes and Short- long- issued by issued by Trust Short- long- issued by of
Period coins)  
1 Total Total term term banks  4 banks  5 loans  6 Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
1992 1.0 405.6 377.4 250.0 127.4 − 21.3 6.8 217.8 157.3 30.2 127.1 0.4 45.2
1993 1.2 533.8 498.3 360.5 137.7 0.1 24.3 11.2 262.5 184.0 48.3 135.7 0.0 63.0
1994 1.2 492.3 455.0 309.0 146.0 0.1 23.7 13.5 257.4 173.0 35.0 138.0 0.6 66.5
1995 1.2 538.4 500.8 349.7 151.1 0.1 25.6 11.8 289.2 191.1 42.1 148.9 1.7 79.7
1996 1.4 588.9 544.2 386.6 157.6 0.3 31.5 13.0 352.0 230.4 60.2 170.2 4.9 103.91997 1.5 689.1 635.3 456.1 179.2 0.2 43.1 10.5 474.8 312.7 96.2 216.5 6.0 140.31998 1.5 774.9 706.9 533.6 173.3 0.4 58.7 9.0 610.3 364.9 93.9 270.9 11.6 211.01999 0.4 427.1 383.5 279.5 104.1 0.4 43.2 4.2 396.1 235.8 52.7 183.1 7.5 152.7
2000 0.4 507.7 441.4 325.4 116.0 1.3 65.0 3.6 475.8 286.8 71.1 215.7 6.5 182.5
2001 0.4 596.1 521.7 383.7 138.0 0.8 73.6 3.5 570.3 347.2 99.7 247.5 5.2 217.9
2001          Apr. 0.5 557.3 484.1 366.9 117.3 1.3 71.8 3.5 553.0 334.4 104.4 230.0 6.8 211.8
         May 0.5 552.5 477.5 358.4 119.1 1.5 73.5 3.6 569.7 340.9 103.6 237.3 7.3 221.5         June 0.6 568.1 492.6 369.3 123.3 1.5 74.0 3.6 562.2 337.5 97.6 239.9 6.0 218.7
         July 0.5 540.4 465.0 341.1 123.9 1.8 73.6 3.5 549.6 330.2 92.8 237.4 6.6 212.8
         Aug. 0.5 560.0 485.2 358.5 126.7 1.8 73.0 3.5 550.4 327.7 95.2 232.6 6.7 215.9         Sep. 0.5 589.0 513.6 384.2 129.4 1.8 73.6 3.5 557.1 333.4 98.4 235.1 6.5 217.2
         Oct. 0.5 591.9 516.9 384.5 132.4 1.5 73.4 3.5 561.4 338.0 100.4 237.6 6.1 217.3
         Nov. 0.5 608.4 534.2 399.9 134.3 1.1 73.1 3.6 573.0 352.3 110.1 242.3 5.2 215.5         Dec. 0.4 596.1 521.7 383.7 138.0 0.8 73.6 3.5 570.3 347.2 99.7 247.5 5.2 217.9
2002          Jan. 0.9 585.2 510.4 371.7 138.7 1.0 73.8 3.2 578.2 353.8 103.1 250.7 4.6 219.8
         Feb. 0.7 568.5 493.0 351.0 142.0 1.4 74.1 3.1 582.3 355.9 103.6 252.3 5.8 220.6         Mar. 0.4 581.2 505.6 362.4 143.2 1.3 74.3 2.9 596.4 366.7 113.3 253.4 7.2 222.5
         Apr. 0.4 590.1 515.1 370.6 144.6 1.3 73.7 2.9 586.5 359.2 108.0 251.2 7.8 219.6
         May 0.4 613.3 538.2 395.3 142.9 1.2 74.0 2.8 589.1 359.6 111.2 248.5 6.6 222.9         June 0.4 609.7 534.3 399.4 135.0 1.2 74.1 2.8 575.1 348.2 105.1 243.1 5.2 221.7
         July 0.4 614.2 538.2 400.0 138.3 1.5 74.5 2.8 579.1 346.2 101.4 244.9 5.8 227.0
         Aug. 0.3 631.2 554.9 413.3 141.6 1.5 74.8 2.8 576.0 344.3 98.9 245.4 8.9 222.8         Sep. 0.3 659.5 582.6 439.2 143.4 1.9 75.0 2.8 584.9 353.7 109.3 244.4 9.5 221.7
Changes *
1993 + 0.1 + 117.3 + 117.2 + 103.9 + 13.3 −0.0 + 0.5 −0.4 + 31.9 + 12.6 + 6.2 + 6.3 −0.4 + 19.5
1994 + 0.0 −24.0 −27.5 −41.4 + 13.9 −0.0 + 0.1 + 3.4 − 1.6 −5.5 −12.3 + 6.7 + 0.6 + 5.1
1995 + 0.1 + 59.1 + 57.6 + 49.2 + 8.4 + 0.0 + 2.9 −1.4 + 38.3 + 21.3 + 7.8 + 13.6 + 1.1 + 16.1
1996 + 0.2 + 34.2 + 29.9 + 27.2 + 2.7 + 0.2 + 5.2 −1.1 + 58.4 + 36.2 + 17.0 + 19.2 + 3.1 + 21.4
1997 + 0.1 + 80.6 + 71.5 + 53.3 + 18.2 −0.1 + 10.4 −1.2 + 109.3 + 73.0 + 33.7 + 39.3 + 0.7 + 32.9
1998 −0.0 + 100.8 + 89.5 + 79.3 + 10.2 + 0.0 + 13.1 −1.8 + 122.0 + 42.7 −6.4 + 49.1 + 5.5 + 66.0
1999 −0.3 + 17.7 + 5.7 − 5.3 + 11.0 + 0.2 + 11.7 −0.0 + 85.8 + 42.8 + 8.4 + 34.4 + 1.3 + 41.8
2000 −0.0 + 78.9 + 56.5 + 44.6 + 11.8 + 0.9 + 21.6 −0.7 + 72.0 + 45.0 + 17.4 + 27.7 −1.2 + 28.2
2001 + 0.0 + 83.7 + 75.6 + 54.4 + 21.2 −0.5 + 8.5 −0.2 + 88.3 + 53.4 + 27.0 + 26.4 −1.5 + 36.3
2001          Apr. + 0.0 + 4.8 + 1.9 + 1.4 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 2.7 −0.0 + 17.4 + 8.9 + 7.1 + 1.9 + 0.9 + 7.5
         May −0.0 −11.3 −12.5 −13.1 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 1.0 −0.0 + 6.9 −1.0 −2.7 + 1.7 + 0.3 + 7.5
         June + 0.1 + 16.7 + 16.1 + 11.6 + 4.5 −0.0 + 0.6 −0.0 − 6.6 −3.0 −5.8 + 2.8 −1.3 −2.3
         July −0.0 −23.7 −24.0 −25.6 + 1.6 + 0.3 −0.0 −0.0 − 6.3 −2.4 −3.6 + 1.2 + 0.7 −4.7
         Aug. −0.0 + 24.0 + 24.2 + 20.2 + 4.1 −0.0 −0.2 + 0.0 + 8.6 + 4.3 + 4.0 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 4.1
         Sep. + 0.0 + 28.1 + 27.5 + 25.2 + 2.3 + 0.1 + 0.5 −0.0 + 5.7 + 4.9 + 3.0 + 1.9 −0.2 + 1.0
         Oct. + 0.0 + 2.0 + 2.5 − 0.3 + 2.8 −0.3 −0.2 + 0.0 + 2.7 + 3.2 + 1.4 + 1.8 −0.4 −0.0
         Nov. −0.0 + 15.1 + 16.0 + 14.5 + 1.5 −0.5 −0.5 + 0.0 + 10.3 + 12.1 + 9.1 + 3.0 −1.0 −0.9
         Dec. −0.1 −12.8 −13.2 −16.6 + 3.4 −0.2 + 0.6 −0.0 − 3.7 −6.6 −10.6 + 4.0 −0.0 + 2.9
2002          Jan. + 0.5 −13.2 −13.5 −13.7 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.1 −0.4 + 4.8 + 3.5 + 2.6 + 0.9 −0.7 + 1.9
         Feb. −0.2 −16.4 −17.1 −20.5 + 3.4 + 0.4 + 0.3 −0.1 + 4.6 + 2.5 + 0.6 + 1.8 + 1.2 + 1.0
         Mar. −0.3 + 13.5 + 13.3 + 11.9 + 1.4 −0.1 + 0.2 −0.2 + 15.9 + 13.9 + 9.9 + 4.0 + 1.4 + 0.6
         Apr. −0.1 + 12.7 + 13.0 + 10.7 + 2.3 −0.1 −0.3 −0.0 − 3.6 −2.4 −3.8 + 1.4 + 0.7 −1.8
         May + 0.0 + 28.7 + 28.2 + 28.2 −0.1 −0.1 + 0.6 −0.1 + 10.7 + 7.1 + 4.9 + 2.2 −1.0 + 4.6
         June −0.0 + 10.8 + 10.3 + 9.0 + 1.2 + 0.0 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 3.3 −2.9 −3.9 + 1.0 −1.2 + 0.8
         July −0.0 + 1.2 + 0.8 − 1.4 + 2.3 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.2 −5.3 −4.5 −0.7 + 0.5 + 4.6
         Aug. −0.0 + 14.3 + 14.0 + 13.8 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.3 −0.0 − 2.0 −0.9 −2.3 + 1.3 + 3.1 −4.2
         Sep. + 0.0 + 28.8 + 28.2 + 26.3 + 1.9 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 9.6 + 9.7 + 10.5 −0.8 + 0.6 −0.8
*See table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the domestic notes and coins. —2Up to December 1998, including loans on a
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as trust basis; see also footnote 6. —3Up to December 1998, bill-based
provisional. Subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from redisco unted
Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Up to December 1998: bills and bills sent for collection from the banks ’portfolios prior to
28*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
IV. Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
 Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bank
interests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memoitem and and item and itemTrust enter- Sight Short- long- Trust Sight Short- long- Trustloans  
6 prises  7 Total Total  9 term  9 term loans  6 Total Total  9 term  9 term loans  6   Period deposits  8 deposits  8 
End of year or month *
 
14.8 25.8 297.0 66.7 219.7 119.2 100.5 10.5 125.8 15.8 103.6 34.4 69.2 6.4 1992
15.5 30.1 328.1 82.9 236.0 122.5 113.5 9.2 162.8 16.9 139.2 39.1 100.1 6.7 199317.3 34.0 402.3 111.6 283.7 150.8 132.9 7.1 181.5 20.6 155.3 41.7 113.6 5.6 1994
16.7 38.8 463.7 116.9 339.7 191.6 148.2 7.0 224.4 22.1 198.0 45.3 152.6 4.4 1995
12.7 45.8 486.5 147.1 335.7 172.0 163.7 3.8 273.5 34.3 237.2 50.0 187.2 2.1 199615.7 54.7 670.3 226.0 440.2 254.3 185.9 4.0 333.9 43.5 285.7 63.0 222.7 4.8 199722.9 62.9 875.7 309.5 562.5 359.1 203.4 3.7 390.3 51.3 329.6 71.8 257.8 9.5 199813.6 33.9 483.6 65.6 418.0 332.3 85.6 2.0 284.4 23.8 260.6 64.9 195.7 5.8 1999
13.9 47.4 586.0 113.7 472.2 382.9 89.3 1.7 314.9 35.4 279.5 62.5 217.0 5.6 2000
13.8 47.6 622.7 91.9 530.8 434.5 96.3 1.4 350.6 34.0 316.6 97.6 219.0 5.3 2001
14.6 48.6 702.1 154.5 547.6 464.7 82.9 1.7 365.3 47.1 318.2 92.0 226.1 5.8 2001          Apr.
14.9 49.1 704.1 155.0 549.1 462.0 87.1 1.7 385.0 53.9 331.1 96.3 234.8 6.1          May
14.8 48.6 675.1 151.3 523.8 435.2 88.6 1.6 364.1 45.8 318.3 81.5 236.8 6.1          June
14.7 49.3 635.4 132.5 502.8 414.1 88.7 1.5 367.1 42.0 325.2 91.5 233.6 6.0          July
14.3 49.2 640.1 106.9 533.3 445.0 88.3 1.5 368.3 37.7 330.6 100.6 230.0 5.7          Aug.14.2 49.1 645.2 144.7 500.5 409.0 91.6 1.5 360.8 36.7 324.2 92.2 231.9 5.7          Sep.
14.1 49.8 637.1 133.7 503.4 412.3 91.1 1.4 376.6 37.0 339.6 105.9 233.6 5.8          Oct.
14.2 50.0 643.3 120.4 522.9 429.6 93.3 1.4 365.7 38.8 327.0 107.5 219.5 5.9          Nov.13.8 47.6 622.7 91.9 530.8 434.5 96.3 1.4 350.6 34.0 316.6 97.6 219.0 5.3          Dec.
13.7 47.2 638.6 130.5 508.1 412.3 95.8 1.3 361.3 36.0 325.2 102.2 223.0 5.3 2002          Jan.
14.0 47.4 616.5 122.8 493.7 396.3 97.4 1.3 360.4 34.6 325.8 105.0 220.8 5.1          Feb.
14.1 47.0 627.0 122.0 505.0 406.5 98.4 1.3 363.2 35.0 328.2 106.4 221.8 5.1          Mar.
14.4 46.9 647.7 123.4 524.2 426.0 98.2 1.3 366.3 36.0 330.3 109.2 221.2 4.9          Apr.
14.1 47.4 646.2 119.3 526.9 428.8 98.1 1.2 366.0 34.9 331.1 112.7 218.4 4.7          May13.1 47.0 608.3 133.9 474.4 376.0 98.4 1.1 344.2 38.2 306.0 93.0 213.0 4.5          June
13.4 47.2 618.3 121.3 497.1 395.4 101.6 1.1 347.9 38.6 309.3 95.8 213.5 4.6          July
13.4 47.0 615.5 91.8 523.7 419.2 104.5 1.1 337.2 34.8 302.5 100.9 201.6 4.5          Aug.13.4 47.0 626.2 132.7 493.5 389.3 104.2 1.1 344.6 41.2 303.4 103.2 200.2 4.6          Sep.
Changes *
+ 0.2 + 4.1 + 23.8 + 14.1 + 11.1 − 0.4 + 11.5 −1.4 + 34.3 + 1.0 + 33.2 + 4.0 + 29.1 + 0.2 1993
−1.7 + 4.2 + 85.6 + 31.3 + 56.0 + 33.9 + 22.1 −1.7 + 23.1 + 3.9 + 19.8 + 3.4 + 16.4 −0.7 1994
−0.2 + 5.2 + 71.0 + 7.9 + 64.6 + 45.9 + 18.7 −1.5 + 47.8 + 2.2 + 46.5 + 4.1 + 42.4 −0.9 1995
−2.3 + 5.9 + 11.3 + 27.1 − 13.9 − 26.6 + 12.7 −1.9 + 44.7 + 11.7 + 35.0 + 3.7 + 31.3 −2.0 1996
+ 2.7 + 7.9 + 157.3 + 67.7 + 89.5 + 71.8 + 17.7 + 0.1 + 51.0 + 5.4 + 43.3 + 11.4 + 31.9 + 2.3 1997+ 7.7 + 8.8 + 215.6 + 87.7 + 128.1 + 108.1 + 20.0 −0.3 + 64.7 + 10.4 + 48.9 + 10.3 + 38.6 + 5.5 1998
+ 1.1 + 10.9 + 37.4 −9.2 + 46.6 + 47.6 −1.0 −0.0 + 61.0 + 7.2 + 53.8 + 15.9 + 37.9 + 0.1 1999
−0.2 + 12.8 + 90.0 + 47.0 + 43.0 + 42.9 + 0.1 −0.4 + 24.4 + 11.1 + 13.3 −2.9 + 16.2 −0.8 2000
−0.5 − 0.5 + 23.5 −23.6 + 47.0 + 42.4 + 4.6 −0.4 + 30.8 −1.8 + 32.6 + 33.3 −0.7 −0.6 2001
+ 0.0 + 0.1 + 2.7 −9.3 + 12.0 + 12.2 −0.1 −0.1 + 18.5 + 5.8 + 12.8 + 12.2 + 0.6 −0.0 2001          Apr.
−0.0 − 0.3 −11.9 −1.2 − 10.8 − 12.6 + 1.8 −0.1 + 14.0 + 6.2 + 7.8 + 2.9 + 4.9 −0.0          May
−0.0 − 0.4 −28.0 −3.4 − 24.5 − 26.2 + 1.7 −0.1 −20.0 −8.1 −11.9 −14.7 + 2.8 −0.0          June
+ 0.0 + 1.1 −32.2 −17.6 − 14.6 − 15.5 + 0.9 −0.0 + 7.6 −3.3 + 10.9 + 10.8 + 0.1 + 0.1          July
−0.0 + 0.5 + 14.3 −24.3 + 38.7 + 38.1 + 0.5 −0.0 + 6.7 −3.9 + 10.6 + 10.2 + 0.3 + 0.1          Aug.
−0.1 − 0.2 + 3.4 + 37.7 − 34.2 − 37.4 + 3.1 −0.0 −8.4 −1.1 −7.4 −8.7 + 1.3 −0.0          Sep.
−0.2 + 0.5 −10.3 −11.4 + 1.1 + 1.7 −0.6 −0.1 + 14.7 + 0.3 + 14.5 + 13.4 + 1.1 −0.0          Oct.
+ 0.0 + 0.0 + 3.1 −13.8 + 16.9 + 15.1 + 1.8 −0.0 −12.6 + 1.6 −14.2 + 1.0 −15.2 −0.0          Nov.
−0.4 − 2.6 −22.5 −28.8 + 6.3 + 3.5 + 2.8 + 0.0 −16.0 −4.8 −11.2 −10.1 −1.1 −0.6          Dec.
−0.2 + 0.4 + 11.6 + 38.3 − 26.8 − 25.7 −1.0 −0.1 + 8.2 + 1.9 + 6.4 + 3.9 + 2.5 −0.1 2002          Jan.
+ 0.3 + 0.2 −21.7 −7.7 − 14.0 − 15.7 + 1.7 −0.0 −0.5 −1.4 + 0.9 + 2.9 −2.0 −0.2          Feb.
+ 0.2 − 0.3 + 11.9 −0.5 + 12.4 + 11.3 + 1.2 + 0.0 + 3.6 + 0.4 + 3.2 + 1.6 + 1.7 −0.0          Mar.
+ 0.3 + 0.2 + 27.1 + 2.3 + 24.8 + 24.3 + 0.5 −0.1 + 7.1 + 1.3 + 5.8 + 3.9 + 1.9 −0.2          Apr.
−0.3 + 1.1 + 7.3 −2.8 + 10.1 + 9.1 + 1.0 −0.0 + 5.4 −0.8 + 6.2 + 5.2 + 1.0 −0.2          May
−1.0 + 0.3 −27.3 + 16.1 − 43.4 − 44.4 + 1.0 −0.1 −14.5 + 3.7 −18.2 −17.6 −0.6 −0.3          June
+ 0.2 − 0.1 + 5.5 −13.6 + 19.0 + 16.3 + 2.7 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 2.1 −1.6 + 0.1          July
−0.0 − 0.2 − 1.5 −29.2 + 27.7 + 24.8 + 3.0 −0.0 + 4.7 −3.8 + 8.5 + 5.3 + 3.2 −0.0          Aug.
+ 0.1 + 0.0 + 11.2 + 40.9 − 29.6 − 29.6 −0.1 + 0.0 + 8.1 + 6.5 + 1.6 + 2.9 −1.3 + 0.1          Sep.
maturity). —4Up to November 1993, included in securities; see also 1998, including working capital supplied to branches abroad. —8Up to
footnote 5. —5Up to November 1993, including negotiable money market December 1998, including time deposits for less than 1 month. —9Up to
paper; excluding registered debt securities. —6From 1999, no longer December 1998, excluding time deposits for less than 1 month. 
included in loans and deposits (see also footnote 2). —7Up to December
29*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
IV. Banks
 
5. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999  5  billion
Short-term lending Medium and long-term
to public authorities to enter- to enterprises and individuals  1 
Lending to domestic
Loans and non-banks, total  1, 2 
   advances Loans and
including excluding not evi- Negoti- advances
negotiable money denced by able not evi-market paper, certifi- money denced bysecurities, cates and market certifi- Treasury
Period equalisation claims Total Total paper Total cates bills  
5 Total Total bills 3, 4 
End of year or month *
 
1992 3,478.2 3,166.6 597.2 571.2 571.0 0.2 26.0 16.7 9.3 2,881.0 2,167.5
1993 3,826.4 3,417.8 563.2 544.2 540.8 3.4 19.0 16.8 2.2 3,263.2 2,441.81994 4,137.2 3,633.1 583.5 549.1 548.6 0.4 34.4 32.7 1.8 3,553.7 2,661.9
1995 4,436.9 3,936.9 615.2 584.0 583.3 0.7 31.3 30.5 0.8 3,821.7 2,785.5
1996 4,773.1 4,248.7 662.2 617.2 616.2 1.0 45.1 40.2 4.9 4,110.8 3,007.21997 5,058.4 4,506.2 667.8 625.8 624.8 1.0 41.9 40.1 1.9 4,390.6 3,223.41998 5,379.8 4,775.4 704.3 661.3 660.8 0.5 43.0 38.5 4.5 4,675.5 3,482.41999 2,904.5 2,576.5 355.3 328.9 328.7 0.2 26.4 23.6 2.8 2,549.2 1,943.6
2000 3,003.7 2,663.7 371.2 348.2 347.7 0.5 22.9 21.2 1.7 2,632.5 2,038.6
2001 3,014.1 2,704.2 387.9 356.7 355.2 1.5 31.2 28.2 2.9 2,626.2 2,070.2
2001          Apr. 3,030.3 2,679.0 391.1 361.8 360.8 1.0 29.3 27.8 1.5 2,639.2 2,069.0
         May 3,032.7 2,685.7 390.0 362.3 361.0 1.3 27.7 26.1 1.6 2,642.7 2,072.6         June 3,007.7 2,681.8 385.0 363.3 362.0 1.3 21.7 20.7 1.0 2,622.7 2,047.4
         July 3,008.2 2,676.9 380.0 353.5 352.2 1.2 26.6 23.4 3.2 2,628.2 2,047.3
         Aug. 2,995.3 2,676.6 371.3 345.9 344.6 1.4 25.4 23.1 2.3 2,624.0 2,052.4         Sep. 2,989.9 2,685.2 379.9 354.4 352.5 1.9 25.5 22.4 3.0 2,610.0 2,051.2
         Oct. 2,992.5 2,687.1 376.7 350.1 348.7 1.4 26.6 23.6 3.0 2,615.8 2,058.9
         Nov. 3,009.4 2,703.8 388.0 351.1 349.9 1.2 36.9 34.4 2.5 2,621.4 2,064.6         Dec. 3,014.1 2,704.2 387.9 356.7 355.2 1.5 31.2 28.2 2.9 2,626.2 2,070.2
2002          Jan. 3,011.2 2,694.8 377.4 345.5 344.6 0.9 31.8 29.8 2.1 2,633.8 2,078.2
         Feb. 3,006.1 2,694.0 377.7 345.7 344.8 0.9 32.0 30.1 1.9 2,628.4 2,071.7         Mar. 2,996.9 2,694.4 382.5 349.0 348.0 1.0 33.5 31.8 1.6 2,614.4 2,061.7
         Apr. 3,004.3 2,691.8 379.1 348.2 347.1 1.1 30.8 28.2 2.6 2,625.3 2,069.3
         May 3,005.7 2,687.0 373.6 344.9 344.0 0.9 28.6 24.9 3.7 2,632.2 2,072.7         June 2,990.8 2,683.1 370.7 343.1 342.2 0.9 27.6 23.4 4.2 2,620.1 2,066.7
         July 2,995.7 2,689.5 370.4 335.5 334.1 1.5 34.9 32.2 2.7 2,625.3 2,068.5
         Aug. 2,987.3 2,679.9 356.0 331.2 329.9 1.2 24.8 22.1 2.7 2,631.4 2,073.3         Sep. 2,995.5 2,687.4 367.4 343.2 341.6 1.5 24.2 21.8 2.4 2,628.2 2,068.8
Changes *
1993 + 339.8 + 253.7 −15.1 − 9.2 −11.9 + 2.7 − 5.9 + 1.2 −7.2 + 354.9 + 251.7
1994 + 320.5 + 244.0 + 13.2 + 7.0 + 9.9 −2.9 + 6.2 + 6.6 −0.4 + 307.2 + 249.1
1995 + 312.8 + 311.9 + 35.9 + 37.9 + 37.7 + 0.2 − 1.9 − 1.0 −1.0 + 276.9 + 185.1
1996 + 336.3 + 312.9 + 44.3 + 32.6 + 32.2 + 0.4 + 11.7 + 7.4 + 4.3 + 292.0 + 221.51997 + 285.2 + 256.9 + 2.7 + 5.9 + 5.9 + 0.0 − 3.2 − 0.1 −3.0 + 282.5 + 219.9
1998 + 335.3 + 285.5 + 51.7 + 50.6 + 51.2 −0.6 + 1.1 − 1.6 + 2.7 + 283.6 + 258.3
1999 + 156.1 + 139.5 + 9.6 + 6.3 + 6.4 −0.0 + 3.3 + 2.9 + 0.4 + 146.4 + 146.4
2000 + 100.7 + 83.2 + 14.5 + 18.1 + 17.8 + 0.3 − 3.6 − 2.5 −1.1 + 86.1 + 93.8
2001 + 11.9 + 39.2 + 15.3 + 7.0 + 5.9 + 1.0 + 8.4 + 7.8 + 0.6 − 3.4 + 32.0
2001          Apr. − 2.7 − 7.0 − 5.2 − 0.7 − 0.6 −0.2 − 4.4 − 4.3 −0.1 + 2.4 + 6.1
         May − 0.1 + 4.2 − 2.8 − 2.0 − 2.3 + 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.9 + 0.1 + 2.8 + 3.6
         June − 24.5 − 3.4 − 4.5 + 1.5 + 1.5 + 0.0 − 6.0 − 5.4 −0.6 − 20.0 − 25.1
         July + 1.7 − 3.8 − 3.8 − 8.7 − 8.6 −0.1 + 4.9 + 2.7 + 2.2 + 5.5 − 0.3
         Aug. − 9.6 + 1.2 − 7.2 − 6.1 − 6.2 + 0.1 − 1.2 − 0.3 −0.9 − 2.4 + 5.1
         Sep. − 6.3 + 7.8 + 7.1 + 7.7 + 7.1 + 0.5 − 0.6 − 0.7 + 0.1 − 13.4 − 1.2
         Oct. + 2.4 + 1.5 − 3.8 − 5.0 − 4.5 −0.5 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 0.0 + 6.2 + 8.1
         Nov. + 16.1 + 15.8 + 10.8 + 0.5 + 0.7 −0.2 + 10.3 + 10.8 −0.5 + 5.3 + 5.2
         Dec. + 5.8 + 1.3 + 0.5 + 6.2 + 5.9 + 0.3 − 5.7 − 6.2 + 0.4 + 5.4 + 5.9
2002          Jan. − 3.4 − 10.2 −11.3 −11.9 −11.4 −0.6 + 0.7 + 1.6 −0.9 + 7.9 + 8.1
         Feb. − 4.9 − 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.3 −0.2 − 5.4 − 6.5
         Mar. − 8.6 + 0.8 + 4.9 + 3.4 + 3.3 + 0.1 + 1.5 + 1.7 −0.2 − 13.5 − 9.7
         Apr. + 8.1 − 2.4 − 3.4 − 0.8 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 2.6 − 3.6 + 1.0 + 11.5 + 8.2
         May + 2.2 − 4.1 − 5.1 − 2.9 − 2.8 −0.2 − 2.2 − 3.3 + 1.1 + 7.4 + 3.7
         June − 19.0 − 8.0 − 3.3 − 2.3 − 2.3 + 0.0 − 1.0 − 1.5 + 0.5 − 15.6 − 9.6
         July + 5.1 + 6.5 − 0.3 − 7.6 − 8.1 + 0.5 + 7.3 + 8.8 −1.5 + 5.5 + 2.1
         Aug. − 8.4 − 9.6 −14.4 − 4.4 − 4.1 −0.2 −10.0 −10.1 + 0.0 + 6.1 + 4.0
         Sep. + 7.7 + 7.1 + 11.0 + 11.7 + 11.3 + 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.3 −0.3 − 3.3 − 3.9
*See table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the December 1998, including loans on a trust basis; see also footnote 9. —3Up
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as to December 1998, bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement
provisional. Subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following liabilities arising from rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from
Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Up to December 1998, the banks ’portfolios prior to maturity). —4From 1999, including small
including loans to domestic building and loan associations. —2Up to amounts of medium-term series of bills. —5From December 1993, including
30*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
IV. Banks
 
   
 
lending  2, 6 
prises and individuals  1, 2 to public authorities  2 
Loans and advances not Loans and advances not
evidenced by certificates evidenced by certificates
Memo Memo
item Equal- item
Medium- Long- Trust Medium- Long- Secur- isation Trust
Total term  7 term  8 loans  9 Total Total term  7 term  8 loans  9   Period Securities  6 ities 6, 10 claims  11 
End of year or month *
 
2,011.5 263.5 1,748.0 90.3 65.7 734.1 487.8 47.6 440.2 147.2 64.3 13.9 1992
2,241.5 253.9 1,987.5 134.2 66.1 821.4 537.1 36.8 500.3 193.5 75.3 15.5 19932,390.4 228.3 2,162.0 203.2 68.3 891.8 577.0 34.5 542.5 230.5 68.1 16.1 1994
2,522.0 214.1 2,307.9 192.9 70.6 1,036.2 713.0 74.5 638.4 234.4 71.3 17.5 1995
2,713.3 215.8 2,497.5 205.9 88.0 1,103.6 773.0 69.5 703.6 231.3 81.3 18.0 19962,900.0 216.2 2,683.8 234.1 89.3 1,167.2 833.8 53.0 780.8 239.2 76.0 18.3 19973,104.5 206.8 2,897.8 292.4 85.4 1,193.2 868.8 33.1 835.7 235.4 71.6 17.3 19981,764.8 182.5 1,582.3 178.9 49.2 605.6 459.5 30.9 428.6 108.6 37.5 8.7 1999
1,838.9 192.8 1,646.0 199.7 50.1 593.9 455.9 30.4 425.5 104.9 33.1 8.4 2000
1,880.5 191.1 1,689.4 189.7 48.9 556.0 440.3 25.6 414.6 111.8 4.0 8.0 2001
1,841.5 188.2 1,653.3 227.5 50.0 570.2 449.0 27.1 421.9 116.4 4.9 8.4 2001          Apr.
1,849.5 190.4 1,659.2 223.0 48.8 570.2 449.1 27.3 421.8 116.2 4.8 8.4          May
1,850.8 189.4 1,661.4 196.6 48.5 575.3 448.3 26.8 421.5 122.1 4.9 8.3          June
1,854.6 188.8 1,665.8 192.7 48.5 580.9 446.7 26.6 420.1 130.2 4.0 8.2          July
1,862.7 189.7 1,672.9 189.7 49.4 571.6 446.2 26.6 419.7 121.4 4.0 8.2          Aug.1,866.1 190.0 1,676.1 185.1 49.2 558.8 444.1 25.7 418.4 110.7 4.0 8.2          Sep.
1,870.9 189.8 1,681.1 188.0 49.1 556.9 443.9 25.5 418.4 109.0 4.0 8.1          Oct.
1,876.6 190.0 1,686.6 188.0 48.8 556.8 442.9 25.6 417.3 110.0 4.0 8.1          Nov.1,880.5 191.1 1,689.4 189.7 48.9 556.0 440.3 25.6 414.6 111.8 4.0 8.0          Dec.
1,880.9 189.1 1,691.8 197.3 48.7 555.7 439.6 26.7 412.9 112.2 3.9 8.0 2002          Jan.
1,882.5 189.3 1,693.3 189.1 48.5 556.8 436.6 26.1 410.5 116.2 3.9 8.0          Feb.
1,882.3 189.4 1,692.9 179.4 48.2 552.7 432.2 25.6 406.6 116.5 3.9 7.9          Mar.
1,884.5 189.8 1,694.7 184.8 48.2 556.0 431.9 26.2 405.7 120.1 3.9 7.9          Apr.
1,888.0 189.9 1,698.1 184.7 48.1 559.5 430.1 26.3 403.8 125.5 3.9 7.9          May1,891.0 191.2 1,699.9 175.6 47.6 553.4 426.4 24.4 402.0 123.0 3.9 7.8          June
1,897.5 191.7 1,705.8 171.0 47.5 556.8 425.8 24.5 401.3 128.0 3.0 7.7          July
1,901.6 192.3 1,709.3 171.6 47.5 558.1 426.2 24.7 401.5 128.9 3.0 7.7          Aug.1,900.6 192.1 1,708.6 168.2 47.3 559.3 423.3 24.6 398.7 133.1 3.0 7.7          Sep.
Changes *
+ 214.1 −28.9 + 243.0 + 37.1 + 0.5 + 104.1 + 48.2 −10.8 + 59.0 + 65.1 −11.4 + 1.6 1993
+ 198.7 −29.2 + 227.9 + 48.5 + 1.9 + 58.2 + 26.2 − 2.4 + 28.5 + 38.3 − 6.9 + 0.7 1994
+ 176.0 − 1.9 + 177.9 + 3.3 + 5.9 + 91.8 + 91.8 + 15.3 + 76.6 − 0.4 − 1.2 + 1.5 1995
+ 204.4 + 1.6 + 202.8 + 14.0 + 3.1 + 70.4 + 65.7 − 5.5 + 71.2 − 3.3 + 8.0 + 0.1 1996
+ 189.0 + 0.3 + 188.7 + 29.5 + 1.4 + 62.6 + 60.6 −18.0 + 78.6 + 7.0 − 5.3 + 0.2 1997
+ 205.7 − 8.9 + 214.6 + 56.5 −3.9 + 25.3 + 35.0 −20.0 + 55.0 − 4.4 − 4.4 −0.9 1998
+ 121.8 + 25.1 + 96.8 + 24.6 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 8.5 + 6.2 + 2.3 − 7.8 − 0.6 −0.1 1999
+ 71.8 + 6.9 + 64.9 + 22.1 + 0.8 − 7.7 − 3.8 − 0.4 − 3.5 − 3.1 − 0.8 −0.3 2000
+ 41.9 − 2.8 + 44.7 − 9.8 −1.2 − 35.4 −16.5 − 5.5 −10.9 + 10.1 −29.1 −0.4 2001
− 1.1 − 2.3 + 1.2 + 7.2 −0.1 − 3.6 − 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.6 − 2.6 − 0.1 −0.0 2001          Apr.
+ 8.0 + 2.2 + 5.9 − 4.5 −1.2 − 0.8 − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 −0.0          May
+ 1.3 − 1.0 + 2.2 −26.4 −0.2 + 5.1 − 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.3 + 5.8 + 0.1 −0.1          June
+ 3.8 − 0.6 + 4.4 − 4.0 −0.0 + 5.8 − 1.6 − 0.2 − 1.4 + 8.3 − 0.9 −0.1          July
+ 8.1 + 0.9 + 7.2 − 3.0 + 0.9 − 7.4 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 7.0 + 0.0 −0.0          Aug.
+ 3.4 + 0.3 + 3.1 − 4.6 −0.1 − 12.2 − 2.1 − 0.8 − 1.3 −10.1 + 0.0 −0.0          Sep.
+ 5.1 + 0.1 + 5.0 + 2.9 −0.1 − 1.9 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 1.6 − 0.0 −0.0          Oct.
+ 5.3 − 0.1 + 5.3 − 0.1 −0.2 + 0.1 − 1.0 + 0.1 − 1.1 + 1.1 + 0.0 + 0.0          Nov.
+ 4.1 + 1.2 + 3.0 + 1.8 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 2.6 + 0.1 − 2.7 + 2.0 + 0.0 −0.1          Dec.
+ 0.3 − 2.1 + 2.4 + 7.8 −0.3 − 0.3 − 0.7 + 1.0 − 1.7 + 0.5 − 0.0 −0.0 2002          Jan.
+ 1.7 + 0.2 + 1.5 − 8.1 −0.2 + 1.1 − 3.0 − 0.6 − 2.4 + 4.1 −− 0.0          Feb.
+ 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.3 − 9.8 −0.2 − 3.9 − 4.4 − 0.5 − 3.9 + 0.5 − 0.0 −0.0          Mar.
+ 2.4 + 0.4 + 2.0 + 5.8 −0.1 + 3.3 − 0.3 + 0.6 − 0.9 + 3.6 + 0.0 −0.0          Apr.
+ 3.8 + 0.2 + 3.6 − 0.0 −0.0 + 3.6 − 1.9 + 0.0 − 1.9 + 5.5 + 0.0 −0.0          May
− 0.5 − 1.9 + 1.4 − 9.0 −0.5 − 6.1 − 3.6 − 1.8 − 1.8 − 2.4 − 0.0 −0.1          June
+ 6.4 + 0.5 + 5.9 − 4.4 −0.1 + 3.4 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.7 + 5.0 − 1.0 −0.1          July
+ 4.1 + 0.6 + 3.5 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 2.1 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 1.6 + 0.0 −0.0          Aug.
− 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.7 − 2.8 −0.2 + 0.6 − 2.9 − 0.1 − 2.8 + 3.5 + 0.0 −0.0          Sep.
other negotiable money market paper; excluding mobilisation and liquidity December 1998, maturity or period of notice of 4 years and more; from
paper. —6From 1999, breakdown of lending against securities by medium 1999, of more than 5 years. —9From 1999, no longer included in lending
and long-term lending no longer possible. —7Up to December 1998, (see also footnote 2). —10Excluding debt securities arising from the
maturity or period of notice of more than one year to less than 4 years; exchange of equalisation claims, see also footnote 11. —11Including debt
from 1999, more than 1 year up to and including 5 years. —8Up to securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims. 
31*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
IV. Banks
 
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and resident individuals, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
 
 5  billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and resident individuals (excluding portfolios of negotiable money market paper and excluding s ecurities portfolios)  1 
of which  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
 
Financial
institu-
Mortgage tions  4 
loans Trans- (excluding
secured Energy Whole- Agri- port MFIs) andby and sale culture and insur-
Mortgage residen- Other of which water and and tele- anceloans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- supply, Construc- retail forestry, commu- enter-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing mining  
2 tion trade  3 fisheries nications prises
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
1999 2,094.2 899.3 991.3 691.5 299.9 1,209.0 332.0 166.2 33.7 67.1 173.0 31.1 47.2 27.5
2000 2,187.3 955.2 1,030.8 737.6 293.2 1,267.8 344.1 174.9 35.9 68.2 173.2 31.4 49.1 34.2
2001          Sep. 2,219.3 974.2 1,047.8 754.0 293.9 1,284.7 345.6 175.9 34.8 69.4 172.3 31.9 49.3 38.2
         Dec. 2,236.3 981.4 1,053.9 757.7 296.2 1,295.6 346.1 174.3 36.7 67.9 172.9 31.3 50.0 39.0
2002          Mar. 2,230.8 983.7 1,055.7 759.9 295.7 1,291.7 345.8 173.8 38.1 68.5 169.3 31.6 51.7 39.0
         June 2,233.7 994.1 1,060.2 768.0 292.2 1,287.1 345.9 171.5 39.4 68.2 167.0 32.0 51.5 36.5         Sep. 2,242.7 1,000.0 1,064.3 770.7 293.6 1,286.1 344.5 168.2 38.3 66.9 165.7 32.5 50.5 42.1
 Short-term lending
1999 329.4 − 17.6 − 17.6 276.9 11.8 57.3 4.3 17.9 61.4 4.5 10.6 8.8
2000 348.4 − 15.9 − 15.9 294.6 10.7 61.5 6.2 17.9 62.2 4.2 10.1 10.5
2001          Sep. 353.2 − 15.9 − 15.9 300.9 10.6 60.9 4.2 19.0 62.4 4.7 8.8 15.2
         Dec. 355.8 − 15.9 − 15.9 304.1 10.6 59.6 5.5 17.8 63.5 4.1 9.3 14.2
2002          Mar. 348.5 − 15.1 − 15.1 299.5 10.1 59.1 6.6 18.5 61.1 4.3 10.5 15.7
         June 342.6 − 14.4 − 14.4 293.2 9.4 58.6 7.3 18.4 60.0 4.6 9.6 12.1
         Sep. 342.1 − 14.1 − 14.1 291.2 9.1 56.6 6.1 17.5 59.3 4.8 8.8 17.0
 Medium-term lending  
8 
1999 182.5 − 42.6 − 42.6 109.1 13.4 16.7 1.7 6.9 13.0 3.4 6.3 4.0
2000 192.8 − 39.3 − 39.3 120.1 12.8 17.6 1.5 7.0 13.3 3.4 6.9 9.1
2001          Sep. 190.0 − 37.9 − 37.9 117.9 12.5 18.0 1.7 6.6 13.3 3.2 7.4 7.3
         Dec. 191.1 − 37.1 − 37.1 120.1 12.0 18.5 1.9 6.5 13.4 3.2 7.2 7.7
2002          Mar. 189.4 − 36.4 − 36.4 120.0 11.9 18.8 1.9 6.4 13.2 3.3 7.7 6.4
         June 191.2 − 35.9 − 35.9 120.9 11.7 17.8 2.2 6.6 13.2 3.3 8.1 6.5
         Sep. 192.1 − 35.7 − 35.7 121.0 11.6 18.0 2.4 6.6 13.3 3.3 8.1 6.7
 Long-term lending  1, 9 
1999 1,582.3 899.3 931.1 691.5 239.7 823.0 306.8 92.3 27.7 42.2 98.7 23.3 30.3 14.72000 1,646.0 955.2 975.5 737.6 238.0 853.1 320.6 95.9 28.2 43.4 97.7 23.9 32.1 14.6
2001          Sep. 1,676.1 974.2 994.0 754.0 240.0 865.9 322.6 96.9 28.9 43.8 96.6 24.0 33.1 15.8
         Dec. 1,689.4 981.4 1,000.9 757.7 243.2 871.4 323.5 96.2 29.4 43.7 96.1 24.0 33.5 17.1
2002          Mar. 1,692.9 983.7 1,004.1 759.9 244.2 872.3 323.8 95.9 29.5 43.5 94.9 24.1 33.5 17.0
         June 1,699.9 994.1 1,009.9 768.0 241.9 873.0 324.8 95.1 29.9 43.2 93.9 24.1 33.8 17.9         Sep. 1,708.6 1,000.0 1,014.5 770.7 243.8 873.9 323.8 93.6 29.9 42.8 93.0 24.4 33.5 18.4
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2001          4th qtr + 16.6 + 5.8 + 7.2 + 4.7 + 2.5 + 10.6 + 0.8 − 1.5 + 2.0 − 1.4 + 0.5 − 0.6 + 0.7 + 0.6
2002          1st qtr − 5.7 + 1.6 + 1.3 + 1.4 − 0.2 − 4.1 − 0.4 − 0.2 + 1.3 + 0.5 − 3.7 + 0.3 + 1.7 + 0.1
         2nd qtr − 0.3 + 3.7 + 3.8 + 3.4 + 0.3 − 7.0 − 0.4 − 2.4 + 1.2 − 0.5 − 2.7 + 0.3 − 1.3 − 2.7
         3rd qtr + 8.6 + 4.8 + 5.7 + 3.6 + 2.1 − 1.4 − 0.6 − 3.4 − 1.1 − 1.4 − 1.4 + 0.5 − 1.1 + 5.6
 Short-term lending
2001          4th qtr + 2.0 −− 0.2 −− 0.2 + 2.6 − 0.1 − 1.2 + 1.3 − 1.2 + 0.9 − 0.6 + 0.5 − 1.0
2002          1st qtr − 7.8 −− 0.8 −− 0.8 − 5.1 − 0.6 − 0.5 + 1.1 + 0.7 − 2.3 + 0.2 + 1.2 + 1.4
         2nd qtr − 6.0 −− 0.7 −− 0.7 − 6.5 − 0.6 − 0.5 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 1.4 + 0.3 − 0.9 − 3.5
         3rd qtr − 0.9 −− 0.2 −− 0.2 − 2.4 − 0.3 − 2.1 − 1.2 − 0.9 − 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.8 + 5.0
 Medium-term lending  8 
2001          4th qtr + 1.2 −− 0.9 −− 0.9 + 2.5 − 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.4
2002          1st qtr − 1.5 −− 0.6 −− 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 1.3
         2nd qtr − 1.3 −− 0.5 −− 0.5 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 1.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.1
         3rd qtr + 0.8 −− 0.3 −− 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2
 Long-term lending  1, 9 
2001          4th qtr + 13.3 + 5.8 + 8.2 + 4.7 + 3.5 + 5.5 + 1.4 − 0.7 + 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 1.2
2002          1st qtr + 3.6 + 1.6 + 2.7 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 0.9 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 1.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0
         2nd qtr + 6.9 + 3.7 + 5.0 + 3.4 + 1.5 + 0.5 + 0.4 − 0.8 + 0.4 − 0.4 − 1.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.7
         3rd qtr + 8.7 + 4.8 + 6.3 + 3.6 + 2.7 + 0.9 − 0.2 − 1.5 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.5
*Excluding lending by foreign branches. Up to December 1998: lending by always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent alterations, which will
banks (excluding building and loan associations) in Germany; including appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Up
lending to building and loan associations. From 1999: lending by monetary to December 1998, including loans on a trust basis; from 1999, loans on a
financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany; breakdown of lending by building trust basis are no longer included in lending. —2Including the extraction of
and loan associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical alterations stones and earths. —3Including the maintenance and repair of motor
have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest date are vehicles and durable consumer goods. —4Up to December 1998, excluding
32*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
IV. Banks
 
   
 
 
 Lending to
 non-commercial
 Lending to employed and other individuals organisations
Memorandum items Other lending Services sector (including the professions)  5 
of which of which
Debit
balanceson wage
and salary
Other Lending accounts
real to self- Lending and of which
Housing estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Investment Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total credit  
7 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises enterprises persons  6 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
663.1 154.1 42.8 168.3 449.4 73.9 871.4 655.7 215.7 105.7 23.6 13.7 3.6 1999
700.8 162.3 46.8 183.1 459.0 75.0 905.5 683.0 222.6 108.6 24.3 14.0 3.7 2000
712.9 168.7 49.0 190.3 458.5 75.5 920.6 698.6 222.0 110.3 23.9 13.9 3.6 2001          Sep.
723.3 169.4 50.3 194.3 458.6 74.7 926.7 704.3 222.4 110.7 22.9 14.1 3.5          Dec.
719.7 168.9 49.2 195.6 455.5 75.1 925.4 706.4 219.0 109.5 22.3 13.8 3.5 2002          Mar.
720.9 169.4 48.8 197.9 456.1 74.7 932.5 710.8 221.7 112.3 22.7 14.1 3.5          June
721.9 171.1 47.8 199.8 453.5 74.0 942.1 716.4 225.8 114.6 23.9 14.5 3.4          Sep.
Short-term lending
112.2 18.6 17.1 27.5 55.9 15.6 51.1 5.7 45.4 2.5 23.6 1.3 0.0 1999122.1 19.6 18.1 30.0 57.1 16.2 52.6 5.2 47.4 2.3 24.3 1.2 0.0 2000
125.6 20.7 19.7 32.2 56.3 16.8 51.0 5.3 45.6 2.9 23.9 1.3 0.0 2001          Sep.
130.1 21.6 20.4 34.1 56.0 15.8 50.3 5.3 45.0 2.8 22.9 1.4 0.0          Dec.
123.8 20.8 18.2 33.3 54.9 16.5 47.9 5.0 42.9 2.5 22.3 1.1 0.0 2002          Mar.
122.6 20.8 18.2 32.5 54.8 16.3 48.2 4.9 43.2 2.5 22.7 1.3 0.0          June
121.0 20.9 17.3 33.0 53.8 16.1 49.2 5.0 44.2 2.5 23.9 1.7 0.0          Sep.
Medium-term lending  
8
57.0 7.1 4.0 12.3 33.3 5.6 72.7 29.2 43.5 31.0 − 0.7 0.1 1999
61.4 6.8 6.3 13.6 33.1 5.5 72.2 26.4 45.8 33.0 − 0.6 0.1 2000
60.5 7.0 5.6 14.8 31.7 5.4 71.6 25.4 46.2 33.9 − 0.6 0.1 2001          Sep.
61.9 6.7 6.5 14.7 31.2 5.3 70.5 25.0 45.4 33.4 − 0.6 0.1          Dec.
62.2 6.7 7.2 14.9 30.7 5.1 68.9 24.5 44.4 32.7 − 0.6 0.1 2002          Mar.
63.2 6.7 6.9 15.4 31.6 5.0 69.7 24.2 45.5 34.1 − 0.6 0.1          June
62.6 6.6 6.6 15.9 31.3 4.9 70.5 24.1 46.4 35.0 − 0.6 0.1          Sep.
Long-term lending  1, 9
493.9 128.5 21.8 128.5 360.1 52.7 747.5 620.8 126.7 72.2 − 11.7 3.5 1999
517.3 135.9 22.5 139.5 368.7 53.2 780.8 651.4 129.4 73.3 − 12.2 3.6 2000
526.8 141.0 23.7 143.4 370.4 53.3 798.1 667.9 130.2 73.5 − 12.1 3.5 2001          Sep.
531.3 141.1 23.4 145.6 371.3 53.7 806.0 674.0 132.0 74.4 − 12.1 3.5          Dec.
533.7 141.4 23.8 147.4 369.8 53.4 808.6 676.9 131.7 74.4 − 12.1 3.4 2002          Mar.
535.1 142.0 23.6 150.0 369.6 53.4 814.7 681.7 132.9 75.7 − 12.2 3.4          June
538.3 143.5 24.0 150.9 368.3 53.0 822.4 687.3 135.1 77.0 − 12.2 3.4          Sep.
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
+ 10.1 + 0.8 + 1.7 + 4.0 + 0.3 − 0.9 + 5.8 + 6.4 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 2001          4th qtr
− 4.2 − 0.5 − 0.8 + 1.1 − 2.7 + 0.3 − 1.3 + 1.7 − 3.0 − 1.0 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.0 2002          1st qtr
+ 1.0 + 0.6 − 0.5 + 2.3 − 0.7 − 0.3 + 6.3 + 4.2 + 2.2 + 1.6 + 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.0          2nd qtr
+ 0.9 + 1.5 − 0.2 + 2.0 − 2.1 − 0.7 + 9.6 + 6.4 + 3.3 + 2.1 + 1.2 + 0.4 − 0.0          3rd qtr
Short-term lending
+ 3.9 + 0.8 + 0.7 + 1.8 − 0.3 − 1.1 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 2001          4th qtr
− 7.0 − 0.7 − 2.2 − 0.8 − 1.1 + 0.7 − 2.3 − 0.3 − 2.1 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.3 + 0.0 2002          1st qtr
− 1.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.0          2nd qtr
− 1.8 + 0.1 − 1.0 + 0.5 − 0.9 − 0.2 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 1.2 + 0.4 + 0.0          3rd qtr
Medium-term lending  8
+ 1.5 − 0.2 + 0.9 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 1.3 − 0.4 − 0.8 − 0.6 − + 0.0 − 0.0 2001          4th qtr
+ 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 1.6 − 0.5 − 1.0 − 0.8 −− 0.0 + 0.0 2002          1st qtr
+ 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.2 − + 0.0 − 0.0          2nd qtr
− 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 1.0 −− 0.0 − 0.0          3rd qtr
Long-term lending  1, 9
+ 4.7 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 2.2 + 1.0 + 0.3 + 7.8 + 6.9 + 0.9 + 0.5 −− 0.0 − 0.0 2001          4th qtr
+ 2.2 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 1.7 − 1.1 − 0.3 + 2.6 + 2.5 + 0.1 + 0.1 − + 0.0 − 0.1 2002          1st qtr
+ 1.6 + 0.6 − 0.2 + 2.5 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 6.3 + 4.6 + 1.7 + 1.3 − + 0.1 − 0.0          2nd qtr
+ 3.2 + 1.4 + 1.0 + 1.2 − 1.0 − 0.3 + 7.8 + 6.4 + 1.3 + 1.1 − + 0.0 − 0.0          3rd qtr
credit institutions (other than building and loan associations); from 1999, loans, even in the form of instalment credit. —8Up to December 1998,
excluding banks (MFIs) and excluding finance leasing institutions; see also maturity or period of notice of more than 1 year to less than 4 years; from
footnote 5. —5From 1999, including finance leasing institutions. —6From 1999, more than 1 year up to and including 5 years. —9Up to December
1999, including sole proprietors; up to December 1998, sole proprietors 1998, maturity or period of notice of 4 years and more; from 1999, of morewere assigned to enterprises. —7Excluding mortgage loans and housing than 5 years. 
33*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
IV. Banks
 
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
 
  
 5  billion
Time deposits  1, 2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Included Subordinated
 liabilities in time
for up for up (excluding deposits:to and to and for more Bank Loans on negotiable liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings a trust debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  
4 basis securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month *
 
1999 1,905.3 420.4 759.6 239.7 519.9 4.5 515.4 614.7 110.7 42.1 25.6 0.4
2000 1,945.8 443.4 819.9 274.7 545.2 9.0 536.2 573.5 109.0 42.1 25.9 −
2001 2,034.0 526.4 827.0 268.7 558.3 10.3 548.0 574.5 106.0 43.3 26.2 3.1
2001          Oct. 1,977.5 483.7 829.0 274.2 554.8 10.2 544.6 556.4 108.4 42.4 26.1 5.0
         Nov. 1,999.2 511.0 822.5 268.3 554.2 10.3 543.9 558.2 107.6 42.5 26.2 2.5         Dec. 2,034.0 526.4 827.0 268.7 558.3 10.3 548.0 574.5 106.0 43.3 26.2 3.1
2002          Jan. 2,009.8 511.5 819.9 257.8 562.1 10.2 551.9 573.4 105.1 42.4 26.1 1.1
         Feb. 2,007.8 511.3 819.7 256.3 563.5 8.6 554.8 572.0 104.8 42.2 26.2 1.2         Mar. 2,006.6 509.2 821.7 256.4 565.3 8.5 556.8 570.8 104.9 42.1 26.3 1.5
         Apr. 1,999.3 515.7 816.8 252.5 564.3 8.3 556.0 561.8 104.9 42.0 26.3 1.2
         May 2,009.4 523.8 820.6 255.9 564.7 8.3 556.4 560.1 105.0 41.9 26.3 2.0         June 2,021.4 536.2 820.6 256.6 564.0 8.4 555.6 558.9 105.7 41.5 26.6 1.4
         July 2,016.2 531.6 821.1 256.3 564.9 8.5 556.4 557.5 106.0 41.6 26.9 1.5
         Aug. 2,013.9 527.2 823.0 259.4 563.6 8.5 555.2 557.8 105.9 41.6 27.1 2.0         Sep. 2,025.0 540.8 820.6 257.8 562.8 8.4 554.3 558.3 105.3 41.6 27.5 6.7
Changes *
2000 + 41.3 + 22.3 + 61.1 + 34.8 + 26.2 + 4.5 + 21.8 −40.5 −1.7 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.4
2001 + 88.5 + 82.3 + 8.1 − 6.0 + 14.1 + 1.3 + 12.8 + 1.1 −2.9 + 1.0 + 0.3 + 3.1
2001          Oct. + 6.3 + 3.4 + 2.9 + 2.0 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.8 + 1.0 −0.9 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 4.5
         Nov. + 21.5 + 27.1 − 6.6 − 5.8 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 0.8 + 1.8 −0.8 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 2.5
         Dec. + 34.7 + 15.4 + 4.5 + 0.4 + 4.1 + 0.0 + 4.1 + 16.4 −1.5 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 0.5
2002          Jan. − 24.4 − 15.2 − 7.1 −10.9 + 3.9 − 0.1 + 4.0 − 1.2 −0.9 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 2.0
         Feb. − 2.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 1.5 + 1.4 − 1.5 + 2.9 − 1.4 −0.3 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.2
         Mar. − 1.2 − 2.0 + 2.0 + 0.1 + 1.8 − 0.2 + 2.0 − 1.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.3
         Apr. − 7.3 + 6.5 − 4.9 − 3.9 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.8 − 9.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.4
         May + 11.1 + 8.2 + 4.5 + 3.9 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.5 − 1.7 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.8
         June + 11.1 + 11.9 − 0.3 + 0.6 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.9 − 1.2 + 0.7 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.6
         July − 5.3 − 4.7 + 0.5 − 0.3 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.8 − 1.4 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.1
         Aug. − 2.3 − 4.4 + 1.9 + 3.1 − 1.2 + 0.0 − 1.2 + 0.3 −0.1 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.5
         Sep. + 10.7 + 13.3 − 2.6 − 1.7 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.8 + 0.5 −0.5 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 4.7
Domestic public authorities End of year or month *
1999 124.4 14.7 104.4 42.0 62.4 0.4 61.9 3.2 2.0 35.9 1.2 −
2000 149.1 16.6 127.7 62.1 65.5 1.2 64.4 2.7 2.1 36.0 1.4 −
2001 122.7 16.1 102.3 37.7 64.5 1.2 63.3 2.3 2.1 36.6 1.4 −
2001          Oct. 128.9 16.4 108.1 43.9 64.2 1.1 63.1 2.2 2.1 36.1 1.4 −
         Nov. 127.0 16.1 106.6 42.3 64.3 1.1 63.2 2.2 2.2 36.2 1.4 −
         Dec. 122.7 16.1 102.3 37.7 64.5 1.2 63.3 2.3 2.1 36.6 1.4 −
2002          Jan. 120.6 14.1 102.3 36.0 66.4 1.2 65.2 2.2 2.0 35.9 1.3 −
         Feb. 119.6 14.5 101.0 34.7 66.2 1.2 65.1 2.1 2.0 35.8 1.3 −
         Mar. 117.4 13.8 99.5 34.2 65.3 1.1 64.2 2.1 2.0 35.6 1.3 −
         Apr. 113.7 12.4 97.3 32.9 64.4 0.9 63.5 2.0 2.1 35.5 1.3 −
         May 116.9 12.7 100.1 35.5 64.6 1.0 63.6 2.0 2.1 35.5 1.3 −
         June 118.5 14.5 99.9 35.7 64.2 1.0 63.2 2.0 2.1 35.2 1.3 −
         July 116.6 14.3 98.2 34.0 64.2 1.0 63.3 2.0 2.1 35.6 1.3 −
         Aug. 115.4 13.4 97.8 33.5 64.4 1.0 63.4 2.0 2.1 35.6 1.3 −
         Sep. 114.3 13.6 96.6 33.7 62.9 0.8 62.1 2.0 2.1 35.5 1.3 −
Changes *
2000 + 24.8 + 1.9 + 23.3 + 20.1 + 3.2 + 0.8 + 2.4 − 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.3 −
2001 − 26.4 − 0.6 − 25.4 −24.4 − 1.0 + 0.0 − 1.1 − 0.5 −0.0 + 0.7 − 0.0 −
2001          Oct. − 3.5 + 0.1 − 3.6 − 3.4 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 −0.0 − 0.3 + 0.0 −
         Nov. − 1.9 − 0.4 − 1.6 − 1.7 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 −
         Dec. − 4.3 + 0.0 − 4.3 − 4.5 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 −0.0 + 0.5 + 0.0 −
2002          Jan. − 2.1 − 2.0 + 0.1 − 1.8 + 1.9 − 0.0 + 1.9 − 0.1 −0.1 − 0.7 − 0.1 −
         Feb. − 0.9 + 0.5 − 1.4 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 −0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 −
         Mar. − 2.3 − 0.8 − 1.5 − 0.6 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.9 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 −
         Apr. − 3.6 − 1.4 − 2.2 − 1.3 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 −
         May + 3.4 + 0.4 + 3.1 + 2.9 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 −
         June + 1.5 + 1.8 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 −
         July − 1.9 − 0.2 − 1.7 − 1.7 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.0 −
         Aug. − 1.2 − 0.9 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.2 − + 0.2 + 0.1 −0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 −
         Sep. − 1.1 + 0.2 − 1.2 + 0.2 − 1.4 − 0.1 − 1.3 − 0.0 −0.0 − 0.1 −−
*See table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Including subordinated
the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as liabilities and liabilities arising from registered debt securities. —
provisional. Subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following
34*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
IV. Banks
 
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont ’d)
 
  
 5  billion
Time deposits  1, 2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Included Subordinated
 liabilities in time
for up for up (excluding deposits:to and to and for more Bank Loans on negotiable liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings a trust debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  
4 basis securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic enterprises and individuals End of year or month *
 
1999 1,781.0 405.7 655.2 197.6 457.6 4.1 453.5 611.4 108.7 6.2 24.5 0.4
2000 1,796.7 426.8 692.2 212.6 479.6 7.8 471.8 570.8 106.9 6.1 24.5 −
2001 1,911.3 510.4 724.7 231.0 493.7 9.1 484.6 572.3 103.9 6.6 24.8 3.1
2001          Oct. 1,848.5 467.3 720.9 230.2 490.6 9.1 481.5 554.2 106.3 6.3 24.7 5.0
         Nov. 1,872.2 494.9 715.9 226.1 489.9 9.2 480.7 555.9 105.4 6.3 24.9 2.5         Dec. 1,911.3 510.4 724.7 231.0 493.7 9.1 484.6 572.3 103.9 6.6 24.8 3.1
2002          Jan. 1,889.3 497.4 717.5 221.8 495.7 9.0 486.7 571.2 103.1 6.4 24.8 1.1
         Feb. 1,888.2 496.7 718.8 221.6 497.2 7.5 489.7 569.8 102.8 6.4 24.9 1.2         Mar. 1,889.2 495.4 722.2 222.2 500.0 7.3 492.6 568.7 102.8 6.5 25.0 1.5
         Apr. 1,885.5 503.3 719.5 219.6 499.9 7.4 492.5 559.8 102.9 6.4 25.0 1.2
         May 1,892.5 511.1 720.5 220.4 500.1 7.4 492.8 558.0 102.9 6.4 25.0 2.0         June 1,903.0 521.8 720.8 220.9 499.8 7.4 492.4 556.9 103.6 6.3 25.3 1.4
         July 1,899.6 517.3 722.9 222.3 500.6 7.5 493.1 555.5 103.8 6.0 25.6 1.5
         Aug. 1,898.5 513.8 725.2 225.9 499.3 7.5 491.7 555.8 103.8 6.0 25.8 2.0         Sep. 1,910.7 527.3 724.0 224.1 499.8 7.6 492.2 556.3 103.2 6.1 26.2 6.7
Changes *
2000 + 16.5 + 20.4 + 37.8 + 14.8 + 23.1 + 3.7 + 19.3 −40.0 −1.8 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.4
2001 + 115.0 + 82.9 + 33.5 + 18.4 + 15.1 + 1.3 + 13.8 + 1.5 −2.9 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 3.1
2001          Oct. + 9.9 + 3.3 + 6.5 + 5.5 + 1.0 + 0.1 + 0.9 + 1.0 −0.9 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 4.5
         Nov. + 23.5 + 27.5 − 5.0 − 4.2 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 0.9 + 1.8 −0.8 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 2.5
         Dec. + 39.0 + 15.4 + 8.8 + 4.9 + 3.9 − 0.1 + 4.0 + 16.4 −1.5 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.5
2002          Jan. − 22.2 − 13.2 − 7.2 − 9.1 + 2.0 − 0.1 + 2.1 − 1.1 −0.8 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 2.0
         Feb. − 1.1 − 0.6 + 1.2 − 0.3 + 1.5 − 1.5 + 3.0 − 1.4 −0.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.2
         Mar. + 1.1 − 1.3 + 3.4 + 0.7 + 2.7 − 0.1 + 2.9 − 1.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.3
         Apr. − 3.7 + 7.9 − 2.7 − 2.6 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 8.9 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.4
         May + 7.6 + 7.9 + 1.4 + 1.0 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 1.7 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.8
         June + 9.5 + 10.1 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 1.2 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.6
         July − 3.4 − 4.5 + 2.2 + 1.4 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 1.3 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.1
         Aug. − 1.1 − 3.5 + 2.3 + 3.6 − 1.4 + 0.0 − 1.4 + 0.2 −0.1 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.5
         Sep. + 11.8 + 13.2 − 1.4 − 1.9 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.5 + 0.5 −0.5 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 4.7
of which: Domestic enterprises End of year or month *
1999 593.2 142.1 421.8 82.3 339.5 1.5 338.0 5.5 23.7 6.1 13.7 0.42000 635.1 158.1 447.6 89.0 358.5 2.7 355.8 5.2 24.2 5.9 14.1 −
2001 668.4 180.0 461.3 91.7 369.6 2.9 366.8 4.3 22.8 6.4 14.3 3.1
2001          Oct. 653.8 164.8 461.1 90.8 370.3 3.0 367.4 4.4 23.5 6.0 14.3 5.0
         Nov. 653.5 169.1 456.6 87.5 369.2 2.9 366.2 4.3 23.4 6.1 14.3 2.5         Dec. 668.4 180.0 461.3 91.7 369.6 2.9 366.8 4.3 22.8 6.4 14.3 3.1
2002          Jan. 654.1 171.4 455.7 84.1 371.7 2.9 368.8 4.3 22.7 6.2 14.3 1.1
         Feb. 649.7 164.4 458.4 85.1 373.3 1.4 371.9 4.3 22.6 6.2 14.4 1.2         Mar. 650.0 160.1 462.9 87.3 375.6 1.4 374.3 4.3 22.6 6.3 14.4 1.5
         Apr. 651.9 162.1 463.1 87.6 375.5 1.4 374.0 4.3 22.5 6.2 14.4 1.2
         May 659.0 167.8 464.5 88.9 375.6 1.4 374.2 4.2 22.5 6.2 14.4 2.0         June 665.5 172.7 466.1 90.8 375.2 1.4 373.8 4.3 22.6 6.1 14.7 1.4
         July 666.4 171.3 468.4 92.6 375.8 1.4 374.4 4.4 22.4 5.8 15.0 1.5
         Aug. 663.0 166.4 469.8 95.6 374.2 1.4 372.8 4.4 22.4 5.8 15.1 2.0         Sep. 676.4 180.1 469.7 95.3 374.4 1.4 373.0 4.4 22.2 5.8 15.5 6.7
Changes *
2000 + 42.8 + 15.3 + 27.3 + 6.7 + 20.5 + 1.2 + 19.3 − 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.4
2001 + 33.6 + 21.2 + 14.7 + 2.6 + 12.1 + 0.1 + 11.9 − 0.9 −1.3 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 3.1
2001          Oct. + 7.9 + 2.4 + 5.9 + 4.5 + 1.4 − 0.1 + 1.5 − 0.4 −0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 4.5
         Nov. − 0.5 + 4.2 − 4.6 − 3.3 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 1.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 2.5
         Dec. + 14.8 + 10.8 + 4.7 + 4.2 + 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.5 − 0.0 −0.6 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.5
2002          Jan. − 14.5 − 8.9 − 5.5 − 7.6 + 2.1 + 0.0 + 2.0 − 0.0 −0.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 2.0
         Feb. − 4.5 − 6.9 + 2.5 + 1.0 + 1.4 − 1.5 + 2.9 + 0.0 −0.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.2
         Mar. + 0.4 − 4.2 + 4.6 + 2.2 + 2.4 − 0.0 + 2.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.3
         Apr. + 1.9 + 1.9 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 −0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.4
         May + 7.4 + 5.7 + 1.7 + 1.5 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.8
         June + 5.7 + 4.4 + 1.2 + 1.7 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.6
         July + 1.2 − 1.4 + 2.7 + 1.7 + 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.9 + 0.1 −0.2 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1
         Aug. − 3.5 − 4.9 + 1.4 + 3.0 − 1.5 + 0.0 − 1.5 + 0.0 −0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.5
         Sep. + 12.6 + 13.0 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.0 −0.2 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 4.7
2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see table IV. 12). — note 2). —4Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot- securities. 
35*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
IV. Banks
 
8. Deposits of domestic individuals and non-commercial organisations at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
 
  
 5  billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1, 2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits Domestic individuals Domestic individuals
of domesticindividuals Domestic
and non- non-com-
commercial mercial
organisa- Self- Other organisa- Self- Other
Period Total Total employed Employees tions Total Total employed Employees tions, total individuals individuals
End of year or month *
 
1999 1,187.8 263.5 254.6 50.2 170.3 34.1 9.0 233.4 216.6 35.2 161.6 19.9
2000 1,161.5 268.7 259.3 47.7 176.0 35.6 9.4 244.6 225.5 34.9 168.9 21.72001 1,242.9 330.4 320.1 55.8 220.9 43.4 10.2 263.4 242.9 36.3 182.4 24.2
2002          Apr. 1,233.6 341.2 330.4 57.5 227.5 45.4 10.9 256.4 237.2 35.3 179.4 22.5
         May 1,233.5 343.3 332.3 57.9 228.5 45.9 11.0 256.0 236.0 35.1 178.6 22.3         June 1,237.4 349.1 338.0 57.0 234.3 46.7 11.1 254.7 234.9 34.7 178.0 22.2
         July 1,233.2 346.0 335.2 58.8 230.3 46.1 10.9 254.6 235.2 35.1 177.8 22.2
         Aug. 1,235.5 347.4 336.4 59.8 230.6 46.0 11.0 255.4 235.5 35.3 177.9 22.3         Sep. 1,234.3 347.1 335.6 58.7 229.3 47.6 11.5 254.2 235.2 35.0 177.5 22.8
Changes *
2000 −26.3 + 5.2 + 4.7 − 2.5 + 5.7 + 1.5 + 0.4 + 10.6 + 8.2 −0.2 + 6.8 + 1.7
2001 + 81.3 + 61.7 + 60.8 + 8.1 + 45.0 + 7.8 + 0.8 + 18.8 + 17.4 + 1.4 + 13.5 + 2.5
2002          Apr. −5.6 + 6.0 + 5.4 + 2.3 + 2.3 + 0.8 + 0.6 − 2.8 − 1.8 −0.4 −1.0 −0.4
         May + 0.2 + 2.1 + 2.0 + 0.5 + 1.1 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 1.0 −0.1 −0.6 −0.2
         June + 3.8 + 5.7 + 5.6 − 0.9 + 5.7 + 0.8 + 0.1 − 1.3 − 1.1 −0.4 −0.6 −0.1
         July −4.6 − 3.1 − 2.9 + 1.7 − 4.1 −0.6 −0.2 − 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.4 −0.2 + 0.0
         Aug. + 2.4 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 1.1 + 0.4 −0.1 + 0.1 + 0.8 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1
         Sep. −0.8 + 0.2 − 0.4 − 1.1 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.5 − 1.1 − 0.3 −0.3 + 0.1 −0.1
*See table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Including subordinated
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as liabilities and liabilities arising from registered debt securities. —2Including
provisional. Subsequent alterations, which will appear in the followingDeutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
 
  
9. Deposits of domestic public authorities at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group 
*
 
 5  billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 Länder Governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Memo Savings Memo
Domestic for up deposits item for up deposits item
public to and for more and bank Loans on to and for more and bank Loans on
Sight including than savings a trust Sight including than savings a trust authorities,
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 basis Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 basis
End of year or month *
 
1999 124.4 45.9 1.0 4.6 40.3 0.0 12.7 21.0 2.8 4.2 14.0 0.1 23.1
2000 149.1 67.6 2.1 22.6 42.8 0.0 12.5 20.3 3.1 2.1 15.0 0.1 23.32001 122.7 46.9 1.6 2.7 42.7 0.0 13.2 19.2 2.7 1.8 14.6 0.1 23.2
2002          Apr. 113.7 45.8 0.6 2.4 42.7 0.0 12.5 19.0 1.5 2.5 14.8 0.1 22.8
         May 116.9 45.6 0.4 2.3 42.8 0.0 12.5 18.6 1.5 2.2 14.8 0.1 22.8         June 118.5 45.9 0.8 2.6 42.5 0.0 12.3 21.0 2.8 3.4 14.7 0.1 22.7
         July 116.6 45.8 0.5 2.6 42.7 0.0 12.6 21.4 3.2 3.4 14.7 0.1 22.7
         Aug. 115.4 45.8 0.6 2.4 42.8 0.0 12.6 19.9 1.8 3.2 14.7 0.1 22.8         Sep. 114.3 46.7 0.6 4.2 41.9 0.0 12.6 21.3 2.8 3.7 14.7 0.1 22.7
Changes *
2000 + 24.8 + 21.6 + 1.2 + 18.0 + 2.5 −0.0 −0.2 + 0.5 + 0.3 −0.9 + 1.1 + 0.0 + 0.2
2001 −26.4 −20.4 −0.4 −19.9 −0.1 −0.0 + 0.5 −1.2 −0.6 −0.2 −0.4 + 0.0 + 0.1
2002          Apr. −3.6 −1.2 −0.7 + 0.1 −0.6 −− 0.1 −1.3 −0.6 −0.7 −0.0 −0.0 + 0.0
         May + 3.4 −0.1 −0.2 −0.0 + 0.1 −− 0.1 −0.3 −0.0 −0.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0
         June + 1.5 + 0.3 + 0.4 + 0.2 −0.3 + 0.0 −0.2 + 2.4 + 1.3 + 1.2 −0.1 + 0.0 −0.1
         July −1.9 −0.1 −0.3 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.4 + 0.0 −0.0 −0.0 + 0.0
         Aug. −1.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 −0.2 + 0.1 −− 0.0 −1.5 −1.4 −0.2 + 0.1 −0.0 + 0.0
         Sep. −1.1 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 1.8 −1.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.4 + 1.0 + 0.5 −0.0 + 0.0 −0.1
*See table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and enterprises, which are included in ”Enterprises ”. Statistical breaks have been
its successor organisations and of the Federal Railways, east German eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to
Railways and Federal Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, be regarded as provisional. Subsequent alterations, which will appear in theDeutsche Post AG and Deutsche Telekom AG, and of publicly-owned
36*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
IV. Banks
 
    
 
 Savings deposits  3  Memo item
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year  2 
Included Subordinated
Domestic of which Domestic liabilities in timenon-com- non-com- (excluding deposits:
mercial up to and up to and mercial Bank Loans on negotiable liabilitiesorganisa- including including more than Domestic organisa- savings a trust debt arisingtions 1 year Total 2 year 2 years Total tions bonds  
4 basis from repos   Period individuals securities)  5 
End of year or month *)
 
16.8 115.4 118.0 2.5 115.5 605.9 595.5 10.4 85.0 0.2 10.8 −1999
19.2 123.6 121.1 5.1 116.0 565.5 555.8 9.7 82.7 0.2 10.4 −2000
20.6 139.3 124.1 6.2 117.9 568.0 558.6 9.4 81.1 0.2 10.5 −2001
19.2 132.0 124.4 6.0 118.5 555.5 546.4 9.1 80.4 0.2 10.5 −2002          Apr.
20.0 131.4 124.5 6.0 118.6 553.8 544.7 9.1 80.4 0.2 10.6 −         May
19.8 130.1 124.6 6.0 118.6 552.6 543.5 9.1 81.0 0.2 10.6 −         June
19.4 129.7 124.9 6.1 118.8 551.2 542.1 9.1 81.4 0.2 10.7 −         July
19.9 130.3 125.1 6.2 118.9 551.4 542.3 9.1 81.4 0.2 10.7 −         Aug.
19.0 128.9 125.4 6.2 119.2 551.9 542.9 9.1 81.0 0.2 10.7 −         Sep.
Changes *)
+ 2.4 + 8.0 + 2.5 + 2.5 + 0.0 −39.7 −39.0 −0.7 −2.3 + 0.0 −0.4 −2000
+ 1.4 + 15.8 + 3.0 + 1.1 + 1.9 + 2.5 + 2.8 −0.3 −1.6 + 0.0 + 0.0
+ 0.0 2001
− 1.1 − 2.9 + 0.1 −0.0 + 0.1 − 8.9 − 8.8 −0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 −2002          Apr.
+ 0.8 − 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 1.7 − 1.7 −0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −         May
− 0.2 − 1.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 1.2 − 1.1 −0.0 + 0.6 −0.0 −0.0 −         June
− 0.8 − 0.4 −0.1 + 0.1 −0.2 − 1.5 − 1.5 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.1 −         July
+ 0.5 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 −0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −         Aug.
− 0.9 − 1.5 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.6 −0.0 −0.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 −         Sep.
deposits under savings and loan contracts (see table IV. 12). —3Excluding 4Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. —
deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). — 5 Included in time deposits. Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
 
   
 
 
 
Local authorities and local authority associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  3 Time deposits
Savings Memo Savings Memo
for up deposits item for up deposits itemto and for more and bank Loans on to and for more and bank Loans on
Sight including than savings a trust Sight including than savings a trust
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  
2, 4 basis Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 basis   Period
End of year or month *
 
28.5 8.2 14.4 2.2 3.7 0.1 28.9 2.8 18.9 5.8 1.4 0.1 1999
30.2 8.9 15.7 2.0 3.6 0.1 31.1 2.5 21.7 5.7 1.2 0.1 200027.8 9.2 13.8 1.8 3.1 0.2 28.7 2.7 19.5 5.4 1.1 0.1 2001
25.1 8.1 12.3 1.8 2.9 0.2 23.9 2.1 15.7 5.1 1.0 0.1 2002          Apr.
26.6 8.7 13.1 1.8 3.0 0.2 26.1 2.1 17.9 5.1 1.0 0.1          May
25.6 8.2 12.5 1.9 3.0 0.2 25.9 2.7 17.2 5.0 1.0 0.1          June
25.0 8.1 12.0 1.9 2.9 0.2 24.3 2.5 16.0 4.9 1.0 0.1          July
26.9 8.6 13.4 1.9 3.0 0.2 22.7 2.4 14.4 4.9 1.0 0.1          Aug.25.2 8.0 12.4 1.9 2.9 0.2 21.1 2.2 13.4 4.5 1.0 0.1          Sep.
Changes *
+ 1.7 + 0.8 + 1.3 −0.2 −0.2 + 0.0 + 1.0 −0.3 + 1.7 −0.1 −0.2 −0.0 2000
−2.4 + 0.2 −2.0 −0.2 −0.4 + 0.0 −2.4 + 0.2 −2.3 −0.3 −0.0 −0.0 2001
−0.4 −0.1 −0.3 −0.1 −0.0 + 0.0 −0.7 −0.1 −0.4 −0.2 −0.0 −2002          Apr.
+ 1.7 + 0.6 + 1.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 −0.0 + 2.2 −0.0 + 2.3 −0.0 −0.0 −         May
−1.0 −0.5 −0.6 + 0.1 −0.0 −0.0 −0.1 + 0.6 −0.7 −0.1 −0.0 −0.0          June
−0.5 −0.0 −0.5 + 0.0 −0.0 + 0.0 −1.6 −0.2 −1.2 −0.1 −0.0 −         July
+ 1.9 + 0.5 + 1.4 −0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −1.6 −0.1 −1.5 + 0.0 + 0.0 −         Aug.
−1.7 −0.7 −1.0 −0.0 −0.0 + 0.0 −1.6 −0.2 −1.0 −0.4 −0.0 −0.0          Sep.
following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Federal Railways 2Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. —
Fund, Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP 3Including deposits under savings and loan contracts. —4Excluding
Special Fund, ”German Unity ”Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. — deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
37*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
IV. Banks
 
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
 5  billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at three months ’ Memo at over three months ’
notice notice item of which
Interest With
of which of which of which credited maturities
Special Special At three on of moresavings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months ’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities  
2 facilities  2 non-banks
End of year or month *
 
1999 626.6 614.7 504.4 338.8 110.2 88.3 11.9 9.1 20.0 116.4 110.7 101.8 5.7
2000 585.2 573.5 450.5 309.0 123.0 104.4 11.7 8.3 19.3 115.9 109.0 94.4 6.82001 586.5 574.5 461.9 327.2 112.7 97.2 12.0 8.8 19.9 112.8 106.0 87.2 6.8
2002          May 571.0 560.1 456.1 326.9 104.0 90.5 10.9 8.0 0.4 111.7 105.0 86.8 6.7
         June 569.8 558.9 455.1 326.5 103.8 90.4 10.9 8.0 0.4 112.5 105.7 87.4 6.8
         July 568.3 557.5 453.6 326.5 103.9 90.4 10.8 7.9 0.5 113.0 106.0 87.6 7.0
         Aug. 568.6 557.8 453.8 327.5 104.0 90.3 10.8 7.9 0.4 112.9 105.9 87.6 7.0         Sep. 569.1 558.3 454.7 328.4 103.6 90.0 10.8 7.8 0.5 112.3 105.3 87.2 7.0
Changes *
2000 −40.7 −40.5 −53.6 −31.1 + 13.1 + 15.8 −0.2 −0.8 . −0.5 −1.7 −7.4 + 1.1
2001 + 1.3 + 1.1 + 11.4 + 15.5 −10.4 −7.2 + 0.3 + 0.5 . −2.9 −2.9 −7.1 −0.0
2002          May −1.8 −1.7 −0.6 + 0.5 −1.1 −1.1 −0.1 −0.0 . + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0
         June −1.2 −1.2 −1.0 −0.4 −0.2 −0.1 −0.0 −0.0 . + 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 0.1
         July −1.5 −1.4 −1.5 −0.0 + 0.1 −0.0 −0.1 −0.1 . + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.2
         Aug. + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 1.0 + 0.2 −0.1 −0.0 −0.0 . −0.1 −0.1 + 0.0 −0.0
         Sep. + 0.5 + 0.5 + 1.0 + 0.9 −0.5 −0.3 −0.0 −0.0 . −0.6 −0.5 −0.4 −0.0
*See table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the savings and loan contracts, which are classified as time deposits. —2Savings
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as deposits bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the minimum or basic rate
provisional. Subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following of interest. —3Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Excluding deposits under securities. 
 
   
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany 
*
 
 5  billion
Non-negotiable bearer debt securities
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper and money market paper  6 
of which of which
with maturities of Subordinated
with maturities of
Certifi- more more non-
Floating- Zero- Foreign cates up to and more up to and more than 1 year than 1 year negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of including including than including including than debt debt
Period Total  1 notes  2 deposit 1 year  1 Total 1 year 2 years 2 years bonds  2, 3 bonds  4, 5 2 years  1 2 years  1 securities securities
 
1999 1,310.3 208.2 14.7 98.7 13.1 73.6 47.0 1,189.8 2.6 0.5 0.8 1.3 32.7 2.5
2000 1,412.5 283.1 22.1 128.2 19.7 87.9 62.7 1,261.9 2.7 0.4 1.0 1.3 38.3 2.42001 1,472.3 324.0 16.3 144.1 17.6 46.5 124.9 1,300.9 5.8 3.7 1.0 1.2 43.3 2.4
2002          May 1,505.0 340.8 16.7 148.6 23.4 53.5 121.7 1,329.8 10.3 8.2 0.9 1.2 44.4 2.4
         June 1,462.5 328.4 14.5 141.6 23.8 51.3 119.3 1,291.9 10.0 8.0 0.9 1.2 44.0 2.4
         July 1,466.2 332.0 14.9 152.1 27.0 56.5 120.0 1,289.7 10.0 7.9 0.9 1.3 44.6 2.4
         Aug. 1,483.1 345.9 16.9 156.4 27.9 59.0 119.0 1,305.2 9.3 7.2 0.8 1.3 44.6 2.4         Sep. 1,486.9 346.5 19.3 160.1 31.8 62.3 118.9 1,305.6 9.4 7.3 0.8 1.3 44.0 2.4
Changes *
2000 + 102.0 + 65.5 + 7.0 + 26.6 + 6.4 + 14.1 + 15.8 + 72.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 5.6 −0.1
2001 + 56.2 + 33.3 −5.5 + 15.9 −2.1 −41.4 + 61.7 + 35.9 + 3.2 + 3.4 −0.1 −0.1 + 5.0
+ 0.0
2002          May + 4.8 + 3.7 + 0.1 + 0.9 + 4.1 + 2.7 + 0.8 + 1.3 −0.3 −0.3 −0.0 + 0.0 + 0.4 −0.0
         June − 6.4 −12.3 −2.2 −7.0 + 0.4 −1.1 + 0.4 − 5.7 −0.3 −0.3 −0.0 −0.0 −0.3 −0.0
         July + 3.6 + 3.6 + 0.4 + 10.2 + 3.2 + 5.2 + 0.7 − 2.2 −0.0 −0.1 −0.0 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.0
         Aug. − 0.8 + 4.9 + 0.9 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 1.7 − 1.0 − 1.5 + 0.0 + 0.1 −0.0 + 0.0 −1.0 −
         Sep. + 3.8 + 0.6 −0.8 + 3.7 + 4.0 + 3.4 − 0.0 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.1 −0.0 −0.0 −0.6 −0.0
*See table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. — 2Including debt securities denominated in foreign
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as currencies. —3Issue value when floated. —4Including floating-rate notes
provisional. Subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following and zero-coupon bonds denominated in foreign currencies. —5Bonds
Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Decreases in June 2002 denominated in non-euro-area currencies. —6Non-negotiable bearer debt
caused by transition to net recording of outstanding debt securities (ie less securities are classified among bank savings bonds; see also table IV. 1 0,
own debt securities). The statistical break has been eliminated from the footnote 3. 
38*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
IV.  Banks
  
12.  Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *
  Interim statements
  
 5  billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs)  5 banks (non-MFIs)
Building loans Secur- Memo
item: ities (in-
Bal- cluding Bearer New
ances Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- and under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber loans Bank savings Interim and savings savings Sight ities ing pub- enteredof Balance (except debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan and time out- lished into in
End of year sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- deposits stand- year or associ- reserves)
or month ations total loans  
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts 6 ing 7 month  8 loans)  1 paper)  4 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2001 29 158.4 23.8 0.2 11.8 42.7 54.3 7.2 9.7 0.5 29.3 96.6 3.1 6.9 7.5 75.7
2002          July 28 161.1 25.2 0.2 12.0 41.8 56.2 7.5 9.8 0.4 29.1 97.2 3.2 8.0 7.1 6.4
         Aug. 28 160.7 24.7 0.2 11.8 41.6 56.6 7.6 9.8 0.4 29.3 97.2 3.3 7.9 7.1 6.0         Sep. 28 160.7 24.4 0.2 11.6 41.5 57.1 7.7 9.7 0.4 29.0 97.4 3.3 7.4 7.1 6.3
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2002          July 17 116.1 20.7 0.1 6.6 27.1 39.8 6.9 7.3 0.3 20.9 66.0 3.1 8.0 4.6 4.1         Aug. 17 115.5 20.0 0.1 6.4 26.9 40.1 7.0 7.2 0.3 21.1 66.1 3.1 7.9 4.6 3.9         Sep. 17 115.5 19.7 0.1 6.3 26.9 40.5 7.1 7.1 0.2 21.0 66.2 3.2 7.4 4.6 4.1
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2002          July 11 45.0 4.5 0.1 5.4 14.7 16.5 0.6 2.6 0.1 8.2 31.1 0.1 − 2.5 2.2
         Aug. 11 45.2 4.7 0.1 5.3 14.7 16.5 0.6 2.6 0.1 8.2 31.1 0.1 − 2.5 2.1
         Sep. 11 45.2 4.7 0.1 5.3 14.6 16.6 0.6 2.5 0.1 8.1 31.1 0.1 − 2.5 2.2
Trends in building and loan association business
  
 5  billion
Changes in deposits Capital promised Capital paid out Outpayment Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans  10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings andments loan contracts loan contracts  
9 Newly
Amounts Interest of granted
credited deposits interim paid into of which: of which:
savings on under Applied Applied and ofaccounts deposits bridging which: of Memo
cancelled to settle- to settle-
under under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which: item:savings savings and which: interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housingand loan and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonusescon- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during received
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter
12 tions  11 tracts  9 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2001 22.0 2.7 4.5 46.5 32.7 44.2 19.7 4.3 10.7 3.4 13.8 10.4 7.7 14.7 11.8 0.5
2002          July 1.8 0.0 0.4 4.1 2.9 4.2 1.8 0.4 1.0 0.3 1.4 10.8 7.9 1.2 0.0
         Aug. 1.6 0.0 0.4 3.4 2.2 3.2 1.3 0.3 0.7 0.2 1.2 10.8 7.9 1.1 0.0         Sep. 1.8 0.0 0.3 3.2 2.1 3.2 1.3 0.3 0.7 0.2 1.2 10.6 7.8 1.2 . 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2002          July 1.2 0.0 0.3 2.9 2.0 3.0 1.3 0.3 0.7 0.3 1.1 6.5 4.1 0.9 0.0         Aug. 1.1 0.0 0.2 2.4 1.4 2.3 0.9 0.2 0.5 0.1 0.9 6.5 4.1 0.8 0.0         Sep. 1.2 0.0 0.2 2.2 1.3 2.3 0.9 0.2 0.5 0.2 0.9 6.3 4.0 0.8 . 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2002          July 0.6 0.0 0.1 1.2 0.9 1.2 0.5 0.1 0.4 0.1 0.3 4.3 3.8 0.4 0.0         Aug. 0.5 0.0 0.1 1.0 0.8 0.9 0.4 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.2 4.3 3.8 0.3 0.0         Sep. 0.6 0.0 0.1 1.0 0.8 0.9 0.4 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.2 4.3 3.8 0.4 . 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of the foreign branches. December 1993 including fund for general banking risks. —8Total amount
From August 1990 including assets and liabilities and/or transactions with covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for which th e
building and loan association savers in the former GDR. The figures for the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted count as
latest date are always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent alterations, new contracts. —9For outpayments of deposits under savings and loan
which will appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially contracts arising from the allocation of contracts see "Capital paid out". —
marked. —1Including postal giro account balances, claims on building and 10Including housing bonuses credited. —11Only allocations accepted by
loan associations, claims arising from registered debt securities and central the beneficiaries; including allocations applied to settlement of i nterim and
bank balances. —2Loans under savings and loan contracts and interim and bridging loans. —12The amounts already credited to the accounts of savers
bridging loans. —3Including money market paper and small amounts of or borrowers are also included in "Amounts paid into savings accounts
other securities issued by banks. —4Including equalisation claims. — under savings and loan contracts" and "Interest and repayments received
5Including liabilities to building and loan associations. —6Including small on building loans". 
amounts of savings deposits. —7Including participation rights capital; from
39*IV.  Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
IV.  Banks
  
13. Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
  
  
 5  billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
Loans and advances Balances  and loans  and advances
German   not evidenced by certificates not evidenced  by certificates
banks
(MFIs)   to German
with non-banks
foreign foreignbranches Money of which Money
branches  1 
and/or and/or market enter- to marketforeign foreign balance paper, prises foreign paper,subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- and indi- non- secur- Other
Period diaries diaries total Total Total banks banks Total Total Total viduals banks ities  
2 assets ities 2,  3 
Foreign  branches End of year or month *
  
1999 66 187 1,311.9 714.6 614.2 177.0 437.2 100.4 533.9 386.2 26.6 20.8 359.6 147.7 63.4
2000 71 212 1,558.2 829.4 722.1 211.0 511.1 107.3 656.7 501.5 21.7 17.1 479.9 155.2 72.02001 68 216 1,689.3 870.6 761.6 213.6 548.0 109.0 744.9 549.0 20.6 17.2 528.4 195.9 73.9
2001          Nov. 69 217 1,785.9 960.4 849.6 231.3 618.3 110.8 751.7 547.5 20.1 17.0 527.4 204.2 73.9
         Dec. 68 216 1,689.3 870.6 761.6 213.6 548.0 109.0 744.9 549.0 20.6 17.2 528.4 195.9 73.9
2002          Jan. 68 216 1,755.2 934.1 821.1 226.5 594.6 113.0 750.1 553.3 20.2 16.7 533.1 196.9 71.0
         Feb. 68 216 1,735.3 920.3 800.6 218.6 582.0 119.6 737.2 544.8 19.9 16.3 524.9 192.4 77.8         Mar. 65 214 1,718.9 905.4 788.3 216.0 572.3 117.1 732.8 540.8 19.1 15.4 521.7 192.0 80.7
         Apr. 64 213 1,720.0 907.4 764.5 230.2 534.3 143.0 745.1 576.7 19.4 15.3 557.3 168.4 67.4
         May 63 212 1,677.0 870.7 737.5 219.5 518.0 133.1 756.6 579.2 19.2 15.0 560.0 177.4 49.7         June 63 211 1,548.6 795.4 672.9 206.4 466.5 122.6 694.8 524.6 18.4 14.3 506.2 170.3 58.4
         July 62 210 1,561.1 776.9 655.0 201.1 453.9 122.0 723.7 544.2 18.7 15.0 525.5 179.5 60.4
         Aug. 62 210 1,577.0 764.1 642.8 203.2 439.5 121.3 756.6 569.7 18.4 14.8 551.3 186.9 56.3
Changes *
2000 + 5 + 25 +214.0 + 97.0 + 92.3 + 33.7 + 58.6 + 4.7 +108.3 +104.0 −5.3 −4.1 +109.4 + 4.3 + 8.7
2001 −3 + 4 + 99.1 + 24.8 + 26.1 + 2.3 + 23.8 −1.3 + 72.7 + 35.6 −1.1 −0.0 + 36.7 + 37.1 + 1.6
2001          Nov. −− 1 + 45.4 + 33.7 + 32.2 + 6.1 + 26.1 + 1.5 + 12.2 + 7.4 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 6.0 + 4.8 −0.5
         Dec. −1 −1 −102.2 −92.5 −90.2 −17.7 −72.4 −2.4 −9.4 −0.8 + 0.6 + 0.2 −1.4 −8.6 −0.2
2002          Jan. −− + 51.0 + 56.7 + 53.4 + 12.7 + 40.7 + 3.3 −2.5 −1.5 −0.5 −0.6 −1.0 −1.0 −3.2
         Feb. −− − 17.5 −12.8 −19.5 −7.8 −11.7 + 6.8 −11.6 −7.5 −0.2 −0.4 −7.3 −4.1 + 6.9
         Mar. −3 −2 −10.7 −12.1 −9.9 −2.5 −7.4 −2.2 −1.5 −1.9 −0.8 −0.8 −1.1 + 0.3 + 2.9
         Apr. −1 −1 + 25.5 + 13.4 −13.7 + 14.1 −27.8 + 27.1 + 25.0 + 45.4 + 0.2 −0.2 + 45.1 −20.4 −12.8
         May −1 −1 −4.3 −20.5 −13.0 −10.6 −2.4 −7.5 + 29.9 + 17.0 −0.1 −0.3 + 17.1 + 12.9 −13.7
         June −− 1 −80.1 −55.4 −47.5 −13.1 −34.4 −7.9 −37.7 −36.2 −0.8 −0.7 −35.3 −1.6 + 13.1
         July −1 −1 −8.2 −26.9 −25.1 −5.3 −19.7 −1.9 + 19.0 + 11.7 + 0.2 + 0.7 + 11.5 + 7.3 −0.2
         Aug. −− + 20.8 −10.9 −10.7 + 2.2 −12.9 −0.2 + 35.1 + 27.4 −0.3 −0.2 + 27.6 + 7.8 −3.5
  
  
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month *
  
1999 39 161 530.6 242.0 178.6 71.1 107.5 63.4 234.6 174.2 41.5 37.5 132.7 60.4 53.9
2000 40 170 580.5 248.1 183.8 82.2 101.6 64.3 263.5 203.4 45.4 42.3 158.0 60.1 69.02001 46 200 811.5 342.4 262.8 105.7 157.1 79.6 382.2 293.1 51.9 47.7 241.2 89.2 87.0
2001          Nov. 45 202 784.7 333.4 254.0 89.2 164.8 79.4 368.2 277.9 50.7 46.0 227.2 90.3 83.0
         Dec. 46 200 811.5 342.4 262.8 105.7 157.1 79.6 382.2 293.1 51.9 47.7 241.2 89.2 87.0
2002          Jan. 46 201 815.1 354.7 273.6 108.3 165.3 81.0 370.4 278.8 50.8 47.2 228.0 91.6 90.1
         Feb. 46 201 803.5 348.0 268.1 101.7 166.4 79.9 367.6 277.2 49.4 45.7 227.8 90.4 87.9         Mar. 47 201 813.9 349.4 268.3 105.3 163.0 81.1 368.7 277.4 49.7 46.3 227.7 91.4 95.8
         Apr. 47 200 760.9 346.8 272.6 108.6 164.0 74.2 325.8 258.1 49.4 46.1 208.7 67.7 88.3
         May 48 201 751.8 343.3 269.0 113.0 156.1 74.3 317.6 259.4 49.5 46.4 209.9 58.2 90.9         June 48 201 732.2 334.7 261.9 106.2 155.7 72.8 311.4 253.9 48.4 45.2 205.5 57.6 86.0
         July 48 200 712.7 328.4 255.8 116.8 139.0 72.6 306.6 248.2 48.1 45.0 200.1 58.4 77.7
         Aug. 49 199 693.7 314.7 242.0 111.9 130.0 72.7 302.7 243.9 47.8 44.8 196.1 58.8 76.3
Changes *
2000 + 1 + 9 + 38.4 + 2.1 + 2.4 + 11.1 −8.7 −0.3 + 21.8 + 21.8 + 3.9 + 4.8 + 17.9 + 0.0 + 14.5
2001 + 6 + 30 +229.9 + 92.5 + 78.0 + 23.5 + 54.6 + 14.5 +119.5 + 89.1 + 6.5 + 5.3 + 82.7 + 30.4 + 17.9
2001          Nov. − + 1 + 10.5 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 2.3 −2.2 + 0.8 + 12.1 + 8.6 + 3.3 + 2.2 + 5.3 + 3.5 −2.6
         Dec. + 1 −2 + 25.7 + 8.1 + 8.2 + 16.5 −8.3 −0.1 + 13.9 + 14.5 + 1.2 + 1.7 + 13.3 −0.6 + 3.7
2002          Jan. − +1 −0.5 + 10.5 + 9.7 + 2.6 + 7.0 + 0.8 −13.8 −16.1 −1.0 −0.4 −15.1 + 2.4 + 2.8
         Feb. −− − 11.0 −6.3 −5.3 −6.6 + 1.3 −1.0 −2.5 −1.4 −1.4 −1.5 −− 1.1 −2.2
         Mar. + 1 − + 11.6 + 2.0 + 0.6 + 3.6 −2.9 + 1.4 + 1.6 + 0.7 + 0.3 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.9 + 8.0
         Apr. −− 1 −47.2 + 0.3 + 6.1 + 3.3 + 2.9 −5.9 −40.3 −16.7 −0.3 −0.2 −16.4 −23.6 −7.2
         May + 1 + 1 −1.2 + 0.7 −0.6 + 4.4 −5.0 + 1.3 −5.1 + 4.4 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 4.3 −9.5 + 3.1
         June −− − 9.6 −3.5 −3.6 −6.8 + 3.2 + 0.1 −1.8 −1.2 −1.1 −1.2 −0.1 −0.6 −4.3
         July −− 1 −23.8 −8.6 −7.7 + 10.7 −18.3 −0.9 −6.6 −7.4 −0.3 −0.2 −7.1 + 0.8 −8.5
         Aug. + 1 −1 −17.9 −13.0 −13.4 −4.9 −8.5 + 0.3 −3.4 −3.8 −0.3 −0.3 −3.5 + 0.4 −1.4
*From March 2000, including the foreign branches of building and loan of reporting institutions have, in principle, not been eliminated from the
associations. In this table “foreign “also includes the country of domicile of flow figures in the case of the foreign subsidiaries). The figures for the lat-
the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical alterations have est date are always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent alterati ons,
been eliminated from the changes. (Breaks owing to changes in the range which will appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially
40*IV.  Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
IV.  Banks
  
      
  
Deposits
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  4 
Money
Short-term market Medium  and long-term
paper
of which of which and debt
enter- enter- Working securities
out- capital Other prises  and prises  and
German foreign indi- indi- Foreign standing and own liabilities
Total Total banks Total Total Total viduals Total viduals 5 funds 6   Period banks non-banks
End of year or month * Foreign  branches
  
988.6 671.8 148.3 523.6 316.7 60.7 57.9 52.8 2.8 2.7 256.0 234.4 14.0 75.0 1999
1,186.1 799.5 158.2 641.4 386.5 60.9 58.4 51.6 2.5 2.4 325.7 272.3 22.0 77.9 2000
1,271.3 855.3 194.0 661.2 416.0 57.4 54.2 51.2 3.2 3.0 358.6 316.8 24.0 77.2 2001
1,357.3 925.2 182.5 742.7 432.0 60.1 56.7 54.6 3.4 3.2 372.0 329.6 24.1 75.0 2001          Nov.
1,271.3 855.3 194.0 661.2 416.0 57.4 54.2 51.2 3.2 3.0 358.6 316.8 24.0 77.2          Dec.
1,314.8 896.7 192.4 704.3 418.1 65.8 62.7 60.4 3.2 3.0 352.3 334.3 24.3 81.8 2002          Jan.
1,323.0 883.6 190.0 693.6 439.4 65.8 62.6 60.2 3.2 3.0 373.6 303.9 24.3 84.1          Feb.
1,306.0 882.5 199.4 683.1 423.5 62.8 59.6 56.9 3.3 3.1 360.7 310.3 24.3 78.3          Mar.
1,334.9 883.5 209.5 674.0 451.4 77.8 74.5 71.1 3.3 3.2 373.6 303.7 24.5 56.9          Apr.
1,298.2 850.1 213.0 637.1 448.1 75.1 71.8 68.0 3.3 3.2 373.1 293.4 25.0 60.3          May1,200.4 791.3 209.8 581.5 409.1 63.6 60.3 56.6 3.3 3.2 345.5 264.5 24.9 58.8          June
1,212.9 788.3 212.5 575.8 424.5 67.2 63.9 60.0 3.4 3.3 357.3 263.1 25.0 60.1          July
1,236.0 791.6 219.1 572.4 444.4 66.1 62.7 58.9 3.4 3.3 378.3 257.0 25.1 58.9          Aug.
Changes *
+ 170.8 +108.8 + 9.1 + 99.6 + 62.0 −0.0 + 0.4 −1.3 −0.4 −0.4 + 62.0 + 37.9 + 8.0 −2.7 2000
+ 53.8 + 36.3 + 35.2 + 1.1 + 17.5 −3.7 −4.4 −0.6 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 21.2 + 44.6 + 2.1 −1.3 2001
+ 24.8 + 23.2 + 4.3 + 18.9 + 1.6 + 3.0 + 2.3 + 2.4 + 0.7 + 0.7 −1.4 + 21.1 + 0.1 −0.7 2001          Nov.
−92.0 −73.1 + 11.4 −84.5 −18.9 −2.8 −2.6 −3.5 −0.2 −0.2 −16.2 −12.8 −0.0 + 2.7          Dec.
+ 31.6 + 33.6 −1.8 + 35.4 −2.0 + 8.4 + 8.4 + 9.2 −0.0 −0.0 −10.4 + 17.4 + 0.2 + 1.7 2002          Jan.
+ 9.7 −11.9 −2.4 −9.5 + 21.7 −0.0 −0.0 −0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 21.7 −30.4 −0.0 + 3.1          Feb.
−12.4 + 1.8 + 9.5 −7.7 −14.2 −2.9 −3.0 −3.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 −11.2 + 6.4 −0.0 −4.8          Mar.
+ 48.2 + 13.5 + 10.1 + 3.4 + 34.7 + 15.0 + 14.9 + 14.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 19.7 −6.6 + 0.2 −16.2          Apr.
− 8.4 −15.6 + 3.5 −19.0 + 7.2 −2.7 −2.7 −3.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 9.9 −10.3 + 0.5 + 13.8          May
−63.1 −36.5 −3.2 −33.4 −26.6 −11.4 −11.5 −11.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 −15.1 −29.0 −0.1 + 12.1          June
− 2.1 −11.6 + 2.7 −14.3 + 9.5 + 3.6 + 3.5 + 3.4 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 5.9 −1.4 + 0.1 −4.8          July
+ 26.9 + 5.3 + 6.6 −1.4 + 21.6 −1.1 −1.1 −1.1 + 0.0 −0.0 + 22.7 −6.1 + 0.1 −0.1          Aug.
  
  
End of year or month * Foreign  subsidiaries
  
383.4 250.7 56.9 193.8 132.7 21.6 19.8 18.3 1.7 1.7 111.1 51.5 29.0 66.7 1999
414.6 267.9 61.0 207.0 146.7 32.5 29.2 21.9 3.2 3.2 114.2 56.3 34.7 74.9 2000576.5 362.5 79.2 283.3 214.0 36.4 32.5 23.9 3.9 3.8 177.6 99.8 47.3 87.9 2001
557.8 356.3 67.4 288.8 201.5 28.5 22.8 21.8 5.7 5.7 173.1 95.1 46.8 85.0 2001          Nov.
576.5 362.5 79.2 283.3 214.0 36.4 32.5 23.9 3.9 3.8 177.6 99.8 47.3 87.9          Dec.
580.0 369.6 70.1 299.5 210.4 35.0 31.2 25.7 3.8 3.8 175.4 98.4 48.0 88.6 2002          Jan.
568.8 361.3 61.9 299.4 207.5 33.0 29.2 24.1 3.8 3.8 174.5 98.9 48.3 87.5          Feb.
578.1 376.1 65.6 310.5 202.0 32.9 29.1 24.1 3.8 3.8 169.1 101.0 48.0 86.8          Mar.
547.7 344.3 66.6 277.7 203.4 33.7 29.9 25.4 3.8 3.7 169.7 81.9 47.1 84.1          Apr.
539.5 339.9 71.3 268.7 199.6 32.3 28.5 24.4 3.8 3.7 167.3 82.1 46.4 83.8          May521.7 326.3 72.5 253.8 195.4 31.8 28.1 24.0 3.7 3.7 163.6 81.4 45.4 83.7          June
500.8 307.6 71.5 236.1 193.3 31.7 24.8 20.6 6.9 6.8 161.6 82.9 45.6 83.4          July
490.1 304.0 75.7 228.3 186.1 27.6 23.3 22.8 4.3 4.2 158.5 81.4 44.0 78.2          Aug.
Changes *
+ 20.6 + 9.9 + 2.9 + 7.0 + 10.7 + 10.9 + 9.4 + 3.6 + 1.5 + 1.5 −0.3 + 4.8 + 5.4 + 7.6 2000
+ 160.9 + 94.6 + 18.2 + 76.3 + 66.4 + 3.9 + 3.3 + 2.0 + 0.6 + 0.6 + 62.5 + 43.6 + 13.7 + 11.7 2001
+ 6.1 + 6.2 + 2.1 + 4.1 −0.1 + 1.0 −0.7 −0.7 + 1.8 + 1.8 −1.1 + 3.6 + 0.4 + 0.5 2001          Nov.
+ 17.6 + 5.9 + 11.8 −5.9 + 11.7 + 7.9 + 9.8 + 2.2 −1.8 −1.8 + 3.8 + 4.8 + 0.5 + 2.9          Dec.
− 0.0 + 4.7 −9.1 + 13.8 −4.7 −1.4 −1.4 + 1.8 −0.0 −0.0 −3.4 −1.4 + 0.7 + 0.2 2002          Jan.
−10.7 −7.9 −8.2 + 0.3 −2.9 −2.0 −2.0 −1.6 −0.0 −0.0 −0.8 + 0.5 + 0.3 −1.0          Feb.
+ 10.5 + 15.5 + 3.7 + 11.7 −5.0 −0.1 −0.1 −0.0 −− − 4.9 + 2.1 −0.3 −0.6          Mar.
−25.1 −28.1 + 1.0 −29.1 + 3.0 + 0.7 + 0.8 + 1.3 −0.1 −0.1 + 2.2 −19.2 −0.9 −2.1          Apr.
− 0.9 + 0.4 + 4.6 −4.2 −1.4 −1.4 −1.4 −1.0 −0.0 −0.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 −0.7 + 0.2          May
− 8.7 −7.4 + 1.3 −8.7 −1.3 −0.4 −0.4 −0.4 −0.0 −0.0 −0.9 −0.7 −1.0 + 0.9          June
−25.0 −21.4 −1.0 −20.3 −3.6 −0.1 −3.3 −3.4 + 3.2 + 3.2 −3.5 + 1.5 + 0.2 −0.5          July
− 9.6 −2.8 + 4.3 −7.1 −6.7 −4.1 −1.5 + 2.2 −2.6 −2.6 −2.7 −1.5 −1.6 −5.2          Aug.
marked. —1Several branches in a given country of domicile are re- debt securities and money market paper. —5Issues of negotiable and
garded as a single branch. —2Treasury bills, Treasury discount paper non-negotiable debt securities and money market paper. —6Including
and other money market paper, debt securities. —3Including own debt subordinated liabilities. 
securities. —4Excluding subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable
41*IV.  Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
V. Minimum reserves
 
1. Reserve ratios
Germany European monetary union
 
% of liabilities subject to reserve requirements % of reserve base  1 
Sight Time
Applicable from liabilities liabilities Applicable from Ratio Savings deposits
1995  August 1 2    2    1.5    1999  January 1 2    
 
   
1Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank of 1 December
1998 on the application of minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which
a reserve ratio of 0 % applies, pursuant to article 4 (1)). 
 
  
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany up to the end of 1998
− pursuant to the Minimum Reserves Order of the Bundesbank −
 
DM million
Liabilities subject to reserve requirements Excess reserves  4 
Monthly Required as % of the
average  1 Total reserves  2 Level Sight liabilities Time liabilities Savings deposits Actual reserves  3 required  reserves Shortfall, total
1995          Dec. 2,066,565 579,337 519,456 967,772 36,492 37,337 845 2.3 3
1996          Dec. 2,201,464 655,483 474,342 1,071,639 38,671 39,522 851 2.2 41997          Dec. 2,327,879 734,986 476,417 1,116,477 40,975 41,721 745 1.8 31998          Dec. 2,576,889 865,444 564,878 1,146,567 45,805 46,432 627 1.4 4
1Pursuant to sections 5 to 7 of the Minimum Reserves Order. —2Amount balances of the credit institutions subject to reserve requirements on their
after applying the reserve ratios to the liabilities subject to reserve require- giro accounts at the Bundesbank. — 4 Actual reserves less required reserves. 
ments (section 5 (1) of the Minimum Reserves Order). —3Average credit
 
 
3. Reserve maintenance in the European monetary union
− from 1999, pursuant to the ECB Regulation governing minimum reserves according to article 19.1 of the
ECB/ESCB Statute −
 
Maintenance Required reserves
period before deduction Required reserves
of lump-sum Lump-sum beginning in  1 after deduction of
Reserve base  2 allowance  3 allowance  4 lump-sum allowance Actual reserves  5 Excess reserves  6 Shortfall, total  7 
European monetary union (  5  billion)
 
2002          Jan. 6,615.8 132.3 0.6 131.7 132.4 0.6 0.0
         Feb. 6,592.1 131.8 0.6 131.3 132.0 0.7 0.0         Mar. 6,557.5 131.2 0.6 130.6 131.1 0.5 0.0
         Apr. 6,578.6 131.6 0.6 131.0 131.5 0.5 0.0
         May 6,581.0 131.6 0.6 131.0 131.7 0.6 0.0         June 6,560.9 131.2 0.6 130.7 131.3 0.6 0.0
         July 6,490.8 129.8 0.6 129.3 129.7 0.5 0.0
         Aug.  
r 6,477.9 129.6 0.6 129.0 129.5 0.5 0.0
         Sep.  p 6,410.8 128.2 0.5 127.7 128.2 0.5 0.0
Of which: Germany (  5  million)
2002          Jan. 1,925,319 38,506 246 38,260 38,534 273 5
         Feb. 1,908,714 38,174 246 37,928 38,242 314 8         Mar. 1,891,284 37,826 246 37,580 37,812 232 6
         Apr. 1,899,520 37,990 246 37,745 37,931 187 1
         May 1,903,413 38,068 245 37,823 38,100 276 4         June 1,899,951 37,999 242 37,757 38,040 282 1
         July 1,896,682 37,934 238 37,696 37,867 171 4
         Aug. 1,892,420 37,848 234 37,614 37,823 209 2         Sep.  
p 1,879,343 37,587 232 37,354 37,545 190 1
1The reserve maintenance period of the ESCB minimum reserve system base. —4Article 5 (2) of the Regulation of the European Central Bank of
starts on the 24th of each month and ends on the 23rd of the following 1 December 1998 on the application of minimum reserves. —5Average
month (the first reserve maintenance period lasted from January 1, 1999 to credit balances of the credit institutions subject to minimum reserve requ ire-
February 23, 1999). —2Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central ments on their reserve accounts at the respective national central bank. —
Bank of 1 December 1998 on the application of minimum reserves 6Actual reserves less required reserves after the deduction of the lump-sum
(excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio o f 0 % applies, pursuant to allowance. —7Required reserves after the deduction of the lump-sum
article 4 (1)). —3Amount after applying the reserve ratios to the reserve allowance. 
42*V. Minimum reserves

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
VI. Interest rates
  
1. ECB interest rates 2. Discount and lombard rates 3. Base rates
    of the Bundesbank
  
% p.a. % p.a. % p.a.
Base rate as per
Main Marginal Discount Rate
Deposit refinancing lending Lombard Transition Act
Applicable from facility operations  1 facility Applicable from Discount rate rate  2, 4, 5  Applicable from 3, 4, 5  
1999 Jan.                 1 2.00 3.00 4.50 1994 Feb.                18 5 1/4 6 3/4 1999 Jan.                 1 2.50
         Jan.                 4 2.75 3.00 3.25          Apr.                15 5 6 1/2          May                 1 1.95
         Jan.               22 2.00 3.00 4.50          May                13 4 1/2 6 
         Apr.                 9 1.50 2.50 3.50 2000 Jan.                  1 2.68
         Nov.                 5 2.00 3.00 4.00 1995 Mar.                31 4 6          May                  1 3.42
         Aug.               25 3 1/2 5 1/2          Sep.                 1 4.26
2000 Feb.                 4 2.25 3.25 4.25          Dec.                15 3 5 
         Mar.               17 2.50 3.50 4.50   2001 Sep.                  1 3.62
         Apr.               28 2.75 3.75 4.75 1996 Apr.                19 2 1/2 4 1/2
         June                 9 3.25 4.25 5.25          to 2002 Jan.                  1 2.71
         Sep.                 1 3.50 4.50 5.50 1998 Dec.                31          to
         Oct.                 6 3.75 4.75 5.75          Apr.                  3
  
2001 May               11 3.50 4.50 5.50 Base rate as per
         Aug.               31 3.25 4.25 5.25 Civil Code  6 
         Sep.               18 2.75 3.75 4.75
         Nov.                 9 2.25 3.25 4.25 2002 Jan.                  1 2.57
         July                 1 2.47
1Up to 21 June 2000 fixed rate tenders, from 28 June 2000 variable rate the field of civil law and judicial procedural law), in state legislation (as stipu -
tenders at minimum bid rate. —2From 1 August 1990 to 31 December 1993 lated in the Act Introducing the Civil Code) or in executory instruments and
this was also the rate for cash advances; from 1 January 1994 cash advances contracts based on such regulations, the following changes apply as from
have no longer been granted. Wherever reference is made in an Act to the 1 January 2002: a) the rate for cash advances of the Federal Government isinterest rate applicable for cash advances of the Federal Government, the replaced by the base rate in the Civil Code increased by 1.5%, b) the lom-rate will be replaced by the base rate increased by 1.5 percentage points pur- bard rate is replaced by the ECB ’s marginal lending facility rate, c) the base
suant to the Discount Rate Transition Act (see also footnot e 4 a and 5). Pursu- rate pursuant to the Discount Rate Transition Act is replaced by the base
ant to the Discount Rate Transition Act, read in conjunction with the Lom- rate pursuant to section 247 of the Civil Code (see also footnote 5). —5Pur-
bard Rate Transition Regulation, the lombard rate is replaced from 1 Janu- suant to Article 4 section 1 of the Act on the Amendment of Provisions con-ary 1999 by the rate applied by the European Cental Bank (ECB) for its mar- cerning the Evaluation of Insurance Enterprises ’Capital Investment and the
ginal lending facility wherever the lombard rate is used as a reference vari- Repeal of the Discount Rate Transition Act, the Discount Rate Transition Act,
able for interest and other payments (see also footnot e 4 b and 5). —3Pur- the Regulation Governing the Use of the Base Rate as a Reference Variable
suant to the Discount Rate Transition Act, read in conjunction with the Regu- and the Lombard Rate Transition Regulation are repealed. Pursuant to Art -
lation Governing the Use of the Base Rate as a Reference Variable, this rate icle 4 section 2 of this act, from 4 April 2002 the discount rate and the basereplaces the discount rate from 1 January 1999 wherever the latter is used rate under the Discount Rate Transition Act are replaced by the base ratein contracts and regulations as a reference variable for interest and other pursuant to section 247 of the Civil Code, the lombard rate is replaced bypayments. This base rate is the discount rate of the Bundesbank which ap- the interest rate on the marginal lending facility of the ECB, and the inter-plied on 31 December 1998. It changes from January 1, May 1 and Septem- est rate for cash advances of the Federal Government by the base rate pursu-ber 1 of each year, and will change for the first time on 1 May 1999 if the ant to section 247 of the Civil Code increased by 1.5 percentage points. —
interest rate applied by the ECB to its longer-term refinancing operations 6Starting at 3.62%, it is adjusted on January 1 and July 1 of each year (for
(marginal rate) has changed by at least 0.5 percentage points (see also foot- the first time on 1 January 2002) by the percentage points by which the refe r-
note 4 c and 5). —4Wherever the rates listed in this column are used as a ence variable (most recent main refinancing operation of the ECB, marginal
reference variable for interest and other payments in Federal legislation (in rate) has increased or decreased since the last change in th e base rate. 
  
  
  
4. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders *
  
  
  
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bids Allotment Weighted
Amount Amount Fixed rate Minimum bid rate Marginal rate  1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement
 5 
 millions % p.a. ... days
Main refinancing operations
2002 Aug.               21 115,921 82,000 − 3.25 3.28 3.29 14
       Aug.               28 104,816 65,000 − 3.25 3.28 3.29 14
       Sep.                 4 124,579 76,000 − 3.25 3.28 3.29 14
       Sep.               11 105,528 60,000 − 3.25 3.27 3.28 14
       Sep.               18 116,252 84,000 − 3.25 3.28 3.29 14
       Sep.               25 105,130 65,000 − 3.25 3.28 3.29 14
       Oct.                 2 125,630 80,000 − 3.25 3.28 3.29 14
       Oct.                 9 111,824 66,000 − 3.25 3.27 3.28 14
       Oct.               16 106,563 76,000 − 3.25 3.28 3.29 14
       Oct.               23 115,642 88,000 − 3.25 3.29 3.30 14
       Oct.               30 101,910 57,000 − 3.25 3.29 3.29 14
       Nov.                 6 104,397 87,000 − 3.25 3.25 3.26 14
       Nov.               13 85,033 51,000 − 3.25 3.28 3.28 14
Longer-term refinancing operations
2002 June               27 27,670 20,000 −− 3.38 3.41 91
       July               25 28,791 15,000 −− 3.35 3.37 98
       Aug.               29 33,527 15,000 −− 3.33 3.34 91
       Sep.               26 25,728 15,000 −− 3.23 3.26 88
       Oct.               31 27,820 15,000 −− 3.22 3.24 91
Source: ECB. —*Enlargement of the euro area on 1 January 2001 to allotted or collected. 
include Greece. —1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were
43*VI. Interest rates

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
VI. Interest rates
 
5.  Money market rates, by month
 
 
% p.a.
Money market rates reported by Frankfurt banks  1 EURIBOR  3 
One- One- Three- Six- Nine- Twelve-
week month month month month month
Day-to-day money Three-month funds EONIA  2 funds funds funds funds funds funds
Monthly Lowest and Monthly Lowest and
Period averages highest rates averages highest rates Monthly averages
2000          Oct. 4.75 4.50 −5.02 5.02 4.95 −5.14 4.76 4.80 4.85 5.04 5.10 5.16 5.22
         Nov. 4.82 4.70 −4.98 5.07 5.00 −5.14 4.83 4.86 4.92 5.09 5.13 5.16 5.19
         Dec. 4.82 4 4.69 −5.40 4.92 4.81 −5.02 4.83 4.86 4.95 4.94 4.92 4.90 4.88
2001          Jan. 4.75 4.15 −4.88 4.75 4.65 −4.84 4.76 4.81 4.80 4.77 4.68 4.60 4.57
         Feb. 4.98 4.73 −5.75 4.74 4.67 −4.81 4.99 4.83 4.80 4.76 4.67 4.61 4.59
         Mar. 4.77 4.20 −4.93 4.69 4.52 −4.78 4.78 4.82 4.78 4.71 4.58 4.49 4.47
         Apr. 5.04 4.71 −5.80 4.66 4.52 −4.80 5.06 4.88 4.78 4.68 4.57 4.50 4.48
         May 4.64 4.41 −4.90 4.62 4.49 −4.81 4.65 4.66 4.66 4.64 4.56 4.53 4.52
         June 4.53 4.30 −4.85 4.43 4.37 −4.50 4.54 4.56 4.53 4.45 4.35 4.33 4.31
         July 4.51 4.25 −4.63 4.45 4.38 −4.50 4.51 4.54 4.52 4.47 4.39 4.33 4.31
         Aug. 4.49 4.35 −4.53 4.33 4.21 −4.43 4.49 4.51 4.46 4.35 4.22 4.14 4.11
         Sep. 3.97 2.95 −5.50 3.96 3.60 −4.27 3.99 4.08 4.05 3.98 3.88 3.80 3.77
         Oct. 3.96 3.65 −4.76 3.58 3.48 −3.65 3.97 3.83 3.72 3.60 3.46 3.39 3.37
         Nov. 3.51 3.15 −4.20 3.37 3.28 −3.50 3.51 3.48 3.43 3.39 3.26 3.20 3.20
         Dec. 3.32 5 2.90 −4.05 3.33 3.26 −3.36 3.34 3.38 3.42 3.34 3.26 3.24 3.30
2002          Jan. 3.29 2.45 −3.57 3.32 3.24 −3.38 3.29 3.35 3.35 3.34 3.34 3.39 3.48
         Feb. 3.27 2.90 −3.35 3.34 3.31 −3.38 3.28 3.32 3.34 3.36 3.40 3.48 3.59
         Mar. 3.25 2.90 −3.45 3.37 3.33 −3.45 3.26 3.33 3.35 3.39 3.50 3.65 3.82
         Apr. 3.30 3.11 −3.75 3.39 3.35 −3.45 3.32 3.32 3.34 3.41 3.54 3.70 3.86
         May 3.31 3.21 −3.50 3.44 3.35 −3.52 3.31 3.34 3.37 3.47 3.63 3.80 3.96
         June 3.35 3.28 −3.65 3.45 3.40 −3.48 3.35 3.36 3.38 3.46 3.59 3.73 3.87
         July 3.30 3.15 −3.40 3.39 3.34 −3.44 3.30 3.34 3.36 3.41 3.48 3.56 3.64
         Aug. 3.29 3.26 −3.36 3.33 3.29 −3.37 3.29 3.32 3.33 3.35 3.38 3.40 3.44
         Sep. 3.31 3.26 −3.60 3.29 3.25 −3.34 3.32 3.32 3.32 3.31 3.27 3.23 3.24
         Oct. 3.30 3.27 −3.50 3.24 3.18 −3.31 3.30 3.31 3.31 3.26 3.17 3.12 3.13
1Money market rates are not fixed or quoted officially; the monthly aver- Moneyline Telerate (formerly Bridge Telerate). —3Euro Interbank Offered
ages computed from daily quotations are unweighted. —2Euro OverNight Rate: unweighted average rate calculated by Moneyline Telerate (formerly
Index Average: weighted average overnight rate for interbank operations Bridge Telerate) since 30 December 1998 according to the act/360
calculated by the European Central Bank since 4 January 1999 on the basis method. —4At the end of December 5.00% to 5.40%. —5At the end of De-
of real turnover according to the act/360 method and published via cember 3.50% to 4.05%. 
 
 
6. Euro area retail bank interest rates *, o
  
% p.a.; period averages
Deposit interest rates Lending interest rates
With agreed maturity Redeemable at notice To enterprises To householdsUp to Up to Over Up to Over Up to Over Consumer For house
Period Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months 1 year 1 year lending purchase
1999 0.65 2.44 2.45 3.57 2.15 2.76 5.65 5.10 9.39 5.29
2000 0.85 3.45 3.45 4.52 2.25 3.79 6.60 6.23 9.87 6.342001  
1 0.94 3.49 3.49 4.12 2.40 3.59 6.83 6.15 10.12 5.97
2001          Sep. 0.91 3.28 3.28 3.98 2.36 3.33 6.71 6.07 10.08 5.86
         Oct. 0.84 3.06 3.06 3.84 2.29 3.01 6.46 5.82 9.99 5.65
         Nov. 0.78 2.84 2.83 3.65 2.19 2.75 6.31 5.71 9.87 5.48         Dec. 0.74 2.79 2.78 3.77 2.17 2.79 6.26 5.69 9.81 5.52
2002          Jan. 0.73 2.77 2.77 3.83 2.17 2.80 6.18 5.63 9.78 5.53
         Feb. 0.73 2.78 2.79 3.95 2.15 2.91 6.16 5.75 9.81 5.61         Mar. 0.73 2.84 2.84 4.07 2.15 3.00 6.09 5.85 9.76 5.74
         Apr. 0.74 2.89 2.90 4.13 2.14 3.07 6.17 5.95 9.82 5.81
         May 0.74 2.91 2.92 4.15 2.15 3.08 6.20 5.98 9.85 5.82         June 0.74 2.93 2.94 4.09 2.13 3.08 6.17 5.92 9.82 5.77
         July 0.74 2.88 2.89 4.02 2.13 3.02 6.15 5.79 9.76 5.68
         Aug. 0.73 2.83 2.84 3.81 2.12 2.94 6.13 5.71 9.77 5.53         Sep. 0.73 2.77 2.77 3.64 2.12 2.73 6.09 5.61 9.80 5.37
*These euro area retail bank interest rates should be used with caution and Member States. Furthermore, the national interest rates are not harmonised
for statistical purposes only, primarily to analyse their development over in terms of their coverage (new business and/or outstanding amounts), th e
time rather than their level. They are calculated as the weighted average of nature of the data (nominal or effective) or the compilation method. The
national interest rates provided by the national central banks. The national country weights for the euro area retail bank interest rates are derived from
rates represent those rates that are currently available from national MFI balance sheet statistics or close proxies. The weights reflect thesources and which are judged to fit the standard categories. These national country-specific proportions of the relevant instruments within the eur o
rates have been aggregated to derive information for the euro area, in area, measured as outstanding amounts. The weights are adjusted monthly,some cases relying on proxies and working assumptions due to the so that interest rates and weights always refer to the same month. —1En-
heterogeneity observed in the national financial instruments across MU largement of the euro area on 1 January 2001 to include Greece. 
      
o Tables and notes taken from the ECB. 
44*VI. Interest rates

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
VI. Interest rates
 
7. Lending and deposit rates of banks (MFIs) in Germany *, o
    Lending rates
 
% p.a.
Current account credit Bills discountedBills of less than 
 5 
 50,000
 5 
 100,000 and more
 5 
 500,000 and more refinancable
less than 
 5 
 100,000 but less than 
 5 
 500,000 but less than 
 5 
 2,5 million at the Bundesbank
Reporting Average Average Average Average
period  1 interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread
2000          Oct. 11.22 8.75 −13.25 10.18 7.75 −12.75 9.03 7.00 −12.00 6.95 5.00 −10.00
         Nov. 11.29 8.75 −13.25 10.19 7.50 −12.95 9.10 7.00 −12.00 7.01 5.00 −10.00
         Dec. 11.39 8.90 −13.25 10.27 8.00 −12.75 9.12 7.00 −12.00 6.98 5.05 −10.00
2001          Jan. 11.35 8.75 −13.50 10.30 8.00 −12.95 9.12 7.00 −12.25 6.99 5.50 −10.00
         Feb. 11.13 8.00 −13.25 10.15 7.50 −12.95 8.95 7.00 −12.00 6.98 5.40 −9.81
         Mar. 11.17 7.00 −13.25 10.03 6.50 −13.00 8.86 6.00 −12.00 7.00 5.50 −10.00
         Apr. 11.14 6.80 −13.25 10.07 6.50 −13.00 8.85 6.00 −12.25 6.96 5.39 −10.00
         May 11.12 6.50 −13.25 10.09 6.00 −12.75 8.84 5.60 −12.00 6.86 4.78 −10.00
         June 11.21 6.50 −13.25 10.13 6.50 −12.95 8.79 5.50 −12.00 6.91 5.42 −10.00
         July 11.12 6.50 −13.25 9.99 6.00 −12.95 8.73 5.50 −12.00 6.91 5.43 −10.00
         Aug. 11.11 6.20 −13.25 10.03 6.00 −12.95 8.79 5.50 −12.10 6.84 5.18 −10.00
         Sep. 11.06 6.00 −13.25 9.98 6.00 −12.75 8.75 5.50 −12.10 6.69 5.00 −10.00
         Oct. 10.97 5.50 −13.25 9.93 5.50 −12.75 8.57 5.00 −12.00 6.57 4.55 −10.25
         Nov. 10.87 5.50 −13.00 9.77 5.00 −12.75 8.49 4.90 −12.00 6.43 4.36 −10.25
         Dec. 10.66 6.00 −13.00 9.64 5.50 −12.75 8.44 4.90 −12.00 6.23 3.46 −10.00
2002          Jan. o 10.86 6.00 −13.00 9.62 5.50 −12.75 8.40 4.50 −12.00 6.34 4.30 −10.25
         Feb. 10.84 6.00 −13.00 9.58 6.00 −12.75 8.42 5.50 −12.00 6.36 4.35 −10.25
         Mar. 10.88 6.45 −13.00 9.64 6.00 −12.60 8.39 4.50 −12.00 6.28 4.25 −10.00
         Apr. 10.90 6.00 −13.00 9.69 6.00 −12.75 8.49 5.00 −12.00 6.34 4.30 −10.25
         May 10.93 6.00 −13.00 9.69 5.50 −12.75 8.55 4.50 −12.00 6.36 4.35 −10.25
         June 10.88 6.30 −13.00 9.76 6.00 −12.75 8.48 4.50 −12.00 6.42 4.45 −10.25
         July 10.99 6.00 −13.00 9.70 5.50 −12.75 8.57 4.50 −12.00 6.40 4.38 −10.00
         Aug. 11.00 6.00 −13.00 9.72 5.50 −12.75 8.57 4.50 −12.00 6.41 4.34 −10.25
         Sep. 10.86 5.50 −13.00 9.78 6.00 −12.75 8.54 4.50 −12.00 6.37 4.30 −10.25
         Oct. 10.92 5.50 −13.00 9.77 5.40 −12.75 8.58 4.50 −12.00 6.36 4.26 −10.25
 
 
Long-term fixed-rate loans
to enterprises and self-employed persons
Instalment credits (excluding lending to the housing sector)  5 
 5 
 5,000 and more but not more than 
 5 
 15,000  2  5  100,000 and more  5  500,000 and more
Personal credit lines but less than 
 5 
 500,000 but less than 
 5 
 5 million
(overdraft facilities Effective
granted to individuals) Monthly rate  3 annual interest rate  4 Effective interest rate
Reporting Average Average Average Average Averageperiod  
1 interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread
2000          Oct. 12.44 11.00 −13.50 0.41 0.34 −0.50 10.69 8.99 −12.73 7.25 6.24 −8.90 7.05 6.19 −8.52
         Nov. 12.57 11.25 −13.50 0.41 0.33 −0.51 10.73 8.95 −12.81 7.26 6.25 −8.89 7.05 6.17 −8.55
         Dec. 12.61 11.25 −13.50 0.41 0.35 −0.50 10.80 8.95 −12.83 7.04 6.05 −8.70 6.84 5.85 −8.30
2001          Jan. 12.63 11.00 −13.50 0.41 0.34 −0.50 10.82 8.95 −12.95 6.89 5.82 −8.57 6.66 5.68 −8.25
         Feb. 12.61 10.75 −13.50 0.41 0.34 −0.50 10.82 8.88 −12.91 6.89 5.79 −8.64 6.65 5.63 −8.25
         Mar. 12.67 11.25 −13.75 0.41 0.34 −0.50 10.76 8.77 −12.77 6.78 5.75 −8.50 6.56 5.64 −8.05
         Apr. 12.70 11.25 −13.75 0.41 0.33 −0.49 10.71 8.76 −12.77 6.77 5.75 −8.57 6.53 5.57 −8.05
         May 12.70 11.50 −13.50 0.41 0.33 −0.49 10.75 8.69 −12.89 6.81 5.83 −8.65 6.60 5.69 −8.01
         June 12.68 11.50 −13.50 0.41 0.34 −0.49 10.76 8.76 −12.89 6.82 5.81 −8.66 6.62 5.75 −8.20
         July 12.68 11.25 −13.50 0.41 0.35 −0.49 10.78 8.92 −12.91 6.82 5.85 −8.63 6.60 5.70 −8.30
         Aug. 12.66 11.25 −13.50 0.41 0.35 −0.49 10.80 8.89 −12.76 6.74 5.63 −8.60 6.52 5.50 −8.30
         Sep. 12.66 11.25 −13.50 0.41 0.35 −0.49 10.80 8.95 −12.89 6.64 5.49 −8.50 6.43 5.38 −8.25
         Oct. 12.61 11.25 −13.50 0.41 0.35 −0.49 10.76 8.80 −12.95 6.44 5.26 −8.50 6.21 5.17 −8.17
         Nov. 12.54 11.25 −13.50 0.41 0.34 −0.49 10.65 8.68 −12.86 6.28 5.15 −8.50 6.05 5.04 −8.12
         Dec. 12.48 11.00 −13.50 0.41 0.34 −0.49 10.64 8.78 −12.63 6.40 5.36 −8.50 6.16 5.25 −8.05
2002          Jan. o 12.47 11.25 −13.50 0.41 0.33 −0.49 10.65 8.62 −12.68 6.48 5.50 −8.55 6.23 5.28 −8.25
         Feb. 12.47 11.00 −13.50 0.41 0.34 −0.49 10.73 8.87 −12.77 6.57 5.55 −8.60 6.36 5.41 −8.50
         Mar. 12.44 11.00 −13.50 0.41 0.34 −0.49 10.71 8.87 −12.68 6.77 5.80 −8.80 6.55 5.41 −8.55
         Apr. 12.44 10.51 −13.50 0.41 0.34 −0.49 10.68 8.76 −12.80 6.82 5.80 −8.80 6.63 5.70 −8.45
         May 12.47 11.00 −13.50 0.41 0.34 −0.49 10.73 8.87 −12.96 6.86 5.90 −8.60 6.63 5.75 −8.45
         June 12.49 11.20 −13.50 0.41 0.33 −0.50 10.73 8.48 −13.00 6.75 5.77 −8.53 6.53 5.64 −8.25
         July 12.48 11.00 −13.50 0.41 0.33 −0.49 10.74 8.83 −13.00 6.68 5.71 −8.60 6.45 5.48 −8.25
         Aug. 12.47 10.50 −13.50 0.42 0.33 −0.50 10.71 8.82 −13.00 6.51 5.33 −8.52 6.26 5.21 −8.25
         Sep. 12.49 10.75 −13.50 0.41 0.34 −0.49 10.76 8.76 −13.00 6.37 5.12 −8.57 6.13 4.99 −8.25
         Oct. 12.52 11.00 −13.50 0.41 0.34 −0.50 10.74 8.56 −13.05 6.32 5.17 −8.57 6.13 4.93 −8.25
*The average rates are calculated as unweighted arithmetic means from 60 months. —3Interest rates as % per month of original amount of credit
the interest rates reported to be within the spread. The spread is as- taken up. Besides interest, most banks charge a one-off processing fee (gen-certained by eliminating the reports in the top 5% and the bottom 5% of erally 2%, in some cases 3%, of the credit amount). —4Calculated on the
the interest rate range. The figures for the latest date are always to be re- basis of reported monthly rates (see footnote 3) and reported annual ratesgarded as provisional; subsequent alterations, which will appear in the on the respective amount of debt and on the basis of the respective pro-following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —oFor simplicity, the cessing fees, taking due account of reported maturities. —5Lending to
amount categories were redenominated to euro as from January 2002 by enterprises (with agreed maturities of more than five years) with agreedhalving the previous Deutsche Mark amounts. —1Second and third weeks interest rates locked in for more than five years. 
of the months indicated. —2With maturities between 36 months and
45*VI. Interest rates

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
VI. Interest rates
 
7. Lending and deposit rates of banks (MFIs) in Germany *, o  (cont ’d)
    Lending rates
 
% p.a.
Mortgage loans secured by residential real estatewith interest rates fixed (effective interest rate)  
6 
with variable interest rates
for 2 years for 5 years for 10 years (effective interest rate)  6 
Reporting Average Average Average Average
period  1 interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread
2000          Oct. 6.51 6.00 −7.05 6.49 6.17 −6.95 6.68 6.47 −7.07 6.84 6.01 −8.03
         Nov. 6.48 5.96 −7.06 6.45 6.13 −6.91 6.64 6.43 −6.96 6.86 5.96 −8.03
         Dec. 6.20 5.64 −6.98 6.19 5.81 −6.75 6.44 6.17 −6.86 6.81 5.90 −8.03
2001          Jan. 5.95 5.41 −6.60 5.93 5.59 −6.54 6.22 5.96 −6.70 6.72 5.64 −8.11
         Feb. 5.94 5.43 −6.59 5.90 5.59 −6.51 6.17 5.96 −6.54 6.71 5.61 −8.03
         Mar. 5.85 5.27 −6.49 5.80 5.47 −6.35 6.12 5.85 −6.54 6.67 5.56 −8.03
         Apr. 5.80 5.27 −6.54 5.78 5.43 −6.33 6.11 5.85 −6.54 6.64 5.48 −8.03
         May 5.88 5.34 −6.59 5.87 5.54 −6.43 6.20 5.77 −6.64 6.66 5.59 −8.03
         June 5.80 5.27 −6.54 5.84 5.54 −6.33 6.22 5.85 −6.59 6.64 5.48 −8.03
         July 5.78 5.22 −6.45 5.85 5.54 −6.37 6.24 5.77 −6.59 6.64 5.43 −8.03
         Aug. 5.62 5.06 −6.35 5.69 5.43 −6.22 6.13 5.88 −6.54 6.57 5.43 −8.03
         Sep. 5.41 4.75 −6.22 5.57 5.22 −6.22 6.08 5.85 −6.43 6.45 5.38 −7.82
         Oct. 5.12 4.49 −5.96 5.36 5.01 −6.03 5.91 5.64 −6.43 6.30 4.96 −7.73
         Nov. 4.95 4.33 −5.79 5.20 4.75 −5.75 5.70 5.38 −6.14 6.12 4.80 −7.71
         Dec. 5.13 4.59 −5.90 5.42 4.90 −5.90 5.87 5.20 −6.22 6.15 4.85 −7.60
2002          Jan. 5.19 4.65 −5.91 5.52 5.10 −6.06 5.95 5.36 −6.27 6.13 4.85 −7.50
         Feb. 5.38 4.85 −6.11 5.66 5.32 −6.17 6.05 5.62 −6.42 6.14 4.80 −7.50
         Mar. 5.61 5.12 −6.27 5.89 5.54 −6.33 6.26 5.84 −6.61 6.16 4.70 −7.50
         Apr. 5.70 5.22 −6.38 5.96 5.56 −6.43 6.30 6.00 −6.69 6.26 5.10 −7.60
         May 5.73 5.22 −6.38 5.96 5.69 −6.43 6.30 6.01 −6.70 6.22 4.95 −7.50
         June 5.63 5.08 −6.27 5.86 5.54 −6.38 6.21 5.91 −6.59 6.21 5.02 −7.50
         July 5.47 4.85 −6.17 5.71 5.41 −6.27 6.10 5.85 −6.54 6.13 4.96 −7.49
         Aug. 5.17 4.54 −5.90 5.42 5.08 −6.06 5.84 5.57 −6.38 6.04 4.87 −7.23
         Sep. 4.95 4.28 −5.75 5.22 4.85 −5.96 5.69 5.38 −6.26 6.02 4.79 −7.49
         Oct. 4.86 4.28 −5.75 5.14 4.75 −5.80 5.67 5.33 −6.22 5.93 4.59 −7.34
 
 
    Deposit rates
 
% p.a.
Time deposits with agreed maturities
of 1 month of 3 months
Higher-yielding
sight deposits
 5 
 50,000 and more but
 5 
 500,000 and more but
 5 
 50,000 and more but
of individuals  7 less than  5  50,000 less than  5  500,000 less than  5  2,5 million less than  5  500,000
Reporting Average Average Average Average Average
period  1 interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread
2000          Oct. 2.32 0.50 −3.88 3.48 2.50 −4.20 3.89 3.00 −4.50 4.27 3.45 −4.80 4.13 3.25 −4.75
         Nov. 2.38 0.50 −3.94 3.56 2.54 −4.30 3.97 3.00 −4.50 4.35 3.50 −4.83 4.22 3.30 −4.85
         Dec. 2.41 0.50 −4.00 3.62 2.65 −4.35 4.05 3.10 −4.60 4.42 3.50 −4.92 4.19 3.35 −4.80
2001          Jan. 2.43 0.50 −4.00 3.56 2.60 −4.25 3.96 3.20 −4.50 4.33 3.60 −4.75 4.06 3.39 −4.60
         Feb. 2.50 0.50 −4.00 3.46 2.55 −4.15 3.87 3.20 −4.45 4.21 3.50 −4.70 4.01 3.30 −4.50
         Mar. 2.48 0.50 −4.00 3.53 2.75 −4.25 3.95 3.25 −4.50 4.31 3.50 −4.75 4.05 3.40 −4.50
         Apr. 2.49 0.50 −4.00 3.48 2.59 −4.20 3.91 3.20 −4.50 4.27 3.50 −4.70 3.99 3.25 −4.50
         May 2.44 0.50 −4.00 3.46 2.50 −4.20 3.85 3.10 −4.40 4.20 3.50 −4.65 3.95 3.20 −4.50
         June 2.42 0.50 −3.90 3.34 2.50 −4.00 3.73 3.10 −4.25 4.07 3.50 −4.44 3.84 3.15 −4.35
         July 2.41 0.50 −3.88 3.34 2.50 −4.00 3.73 3.10 −4.20 4.08 3.50 −4.50 3.83 3.20 −4.41
         Aug. 2.39 0.50 −3.75 3.31 2.50 −4.00 3.70 3.00 −4.20 4.05 3.40 −4.45 3.76 3.10 −4.30
         Sep. 2.26 0.50 −3.50 3.00 2.20 −3.85 3.38 2.70 −4.00 3.66 2.95 −4.15 3.47 2.60 −4.00
         Oct. 2.10 0.50 −3.24 2.69 2.00 −3.40 3.07 2.40 −3.50 3.36 2.75 −3.75 3.12 2.40 −3.65
         Nov. 1.96 0.50 −2.96 2.42 1.75 −3.00 2.77 2.20 −3.15 3.00 2.50 −3.30 2.83 2.17 −3.45
         Dec. 1.92 0.50 −2.95 2.41 1.75 −3.00 2.76 2.23 −3.15 3.03 2.50 −3.40 2.78 2.20 −3.15
2002          Jan. o 1.90 0.50 −2.85 2.37 1.70 −3.00 2.73 2.20 −3.10 3.00 2.50 −3.30 2.76 2.20 −3.11
         Feb. 1.86 0.50 −2.85 2.30 1.65 −3.00 2.66 2.09 −3.05 2.89 2.45 −3.23 2.75 2.20 −3.13
         Mar. 1.88 0.50 −2.80 2.34 1.70 −3.00 2.70 2.20 −3.10 2.94 2.40 −3.25 2.77 2.25 −3.17
         Apr. 1.87 0.50 −3.00 2.34 1.70 −3.00 2.69 2.25 −3.05 2.94 2.50 −3.25 2.78 2.22 −3.20
         May 1.85 0.50 −2.75 2.33 1.67 −3.00 2.70 2.25 −3.05 2.94 2.40 −3.25 2.79 2.23 −3.20
         June 1.85 0.50 −2.75 2.35 1.70 −3.00 2.70 2.25 −3.10 2.94 2.50 −3.30 2.83 2.25 −3.25
         July 1.85 0.50 −2.80 2.35 1.75 −3.00 2.71 2.20 −3.10 2.95 2.50 −3.30 2.81 2.25 −3.25
         Aug. 1.82 0.50 −2.75 2.33 1.66 −3.00 2.69 2.17 −3.10 2.92 2.40 −3.25 2.77 2.20 −3.10
         Sep. 1.80 0.50 −2.75 2.29 1.65 −3.00 2.65 2.10 −3.07 2.89 2.35 −3.22 2.74 2.20 −3.10
         Oct. 1.76 0.50 −2.75 2.29 1.65 −3.00 2.64 2.10 −3.02 2.88 2.40 −3.22 2.72 2.20 −3.10
For footnotes *, o, 1to5see page 45*. —6The figures refer to the time upon in each case by the credit institutions involved are taken into account
when the contract was concluded and not to the entire duration of the con- (at present mostly monthly payment and inclusion). —7Only such interest
tract. The calculation of the effective interest rate is based on an annual re- rates are taken into account as are above the relevant standard terms of t he
demption rate of 1% plus interest saved; the repayment conditions agreed banks included in the survey. 
46*VI. Interest rates

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
VI. Interest rates
 
7. Lending and deposit rates of banks (MFIs) in Germany *, o  (cont ’d)
    Deposit rates
 
% p.a.
Savings deposits
Bank savings bonds
with regular with minimum rates of with higher rates of return  9 
interest payments return  8 (without a duration of contract being agreed)
with agreed notice of 3 months
with agreed notice
 5 
 5,000 and more
 5 
 10,000 and more
maturity of 4 years of 3 months less than 
 5 
 5,000 but less than 
 5 
 10,000 but less than 
 5 
 25,000
Reporting Average Average Average Average Average
period  1 interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread
2000          Oct. 4.98 4.40 −5.40 1.25 1.00 −2.00 2.32 1.50 −3.75 2.89 1.75 −4.01 3.12 2.00 −4.22
         Nov. 4.98 4.50 −5.30 1.26 1.00 −2.00 2.38 1.50 −4.00 2.96 1.75 −4.20 3.19 2.00 −4.32
         Dec. 4.76 4.30 −5.25 1.25 1.00 −2.00 2.39 1.50 −4.00 2.99 1.75 −4.20 3.22 2.00 −4.34
2001          Jan. 4.47 4.10 −5.00 1.26 1.00 −2.00 2.37 1.50 −3.80 2.95 1.80 −4.10 3.21 2.00 −4.33
         Feb. 4.42 4.00 −4.75 1.25 1.00 −2.00 2.35 1.50 −3.75 2.94 1.80 −4.00 3.17 2.00 −4.25
         Mar. 4.37 4.00 −4.75 1.24 1.00 −2.00 2.36 1.50 −3.75 2.97 1.80 −4.00 3.20 2.00 −4.32
         Apr. 4.27 3.95 −4.60 1.23 1.00 −2.00 2.36 1.50 −3.75 2.95 1.95 −4.00 3.18 2.00 −4.30
         May 4.31 4.00 −4.65 1.24 1.00 −2.00 2.33 1.50 −3.75 2.92 1.80 −4.00 3.14 2.00 −4.26
         June 4.31 3.95 −4.60 1.21 1.00 −2.00 2.29 1.50 −3.66 2.87 1.75 −4.00 3.09 2.00 −4.00
         July 4.26 3.90 −4.60 1.20 1.00 −2.00 2.26 1.50 −3.50 2.85 1.75 −4.00 3.07 2.00 −4.00
         Aug. 4.16 3.75 −4.50 1.18 1.00 −1.75 2.20 1.50 −3.35 2.77 1.75 −3.75 3.02 2.00 −4.00
         Sep. 3.99 3.60 −4.35 1.16 1.00 −1.75 2.11 1.35 −3.25 2.63 1.60 −3.50 2.88 1.85 −3.90
         Oct. 3.77 3.40 −4.20 1.14 1.00 −1.75 2.01 1.25 −3.05 2.47 1.50 −3.50 2.69 1.85 −3.50
         Nov. 3.48 3.00 −4.00 1.11 0.75 −1.50 1.86 1.25 −2.75 2.25 1.50 −3.00 2.49 1.75 −3.20
         Dec. 3.65 3.10 −4.00 1.08 0.75 −1.50 1.81 1.25 −2.75 2.18 1.50 −3.00 2.42 1.75 −3.00
2002          Jan. o 3.73 3.25 −4.10 1.07 0.75 −1.50 1.78 1.25 −2.75 2.15 1.50 −2.75 2.40 1.70 −3.00
         Feb. 3.90 3.25 −4.25 1.06 0.75 −1.50 1.78 1.25 −2.70 2.14 1.50 −2.75 2.37 1.60 −3.00
         Mar. 4.07 3.30 −4.50 1.05 0.75 −1.50 1.79 1.25 −2.75 2.14 1.50 −2.80 2.38 1.60 −3.00
         Apr. 4.15 3.30 −4.50 1.04 0.75 −1.50 1.78 1.25 −2.60 2.15 1.50 −2.80 2.38 1.60 −3.00
         May 4.15 3.30 −4.50 1.04 0.75 −1.50 1.79 1.25 −2.60 2.16 1.50 −2.80 2.40 1.75 −3.00
         June 4.12 3.30 −4.50 1.04 0.75 −1.50 1.78 1.25 −2.50 2.15 1.50 −2.80 2.40 1.75 −3.00
         July 4.01 3.30 −4.40 1.03 0.75 −1.50 1.78 1.15 −2.60 2.16 1.50 −2.81 2.40 1.75 −3.00
         Aug. 3.70 3.12 −4.05 1.01 0.75 −1.50 1.76 1.00 −2.50 2.14 1.50 −2.80 2.36 1.60 −3.00
         Sep. 3.50 3.05 −4.00 1.00 0.75 −1.50 1.75 1.25 −2.50 2.12 1.50 −2.75 2.34 1.50 −3.00
         Oct. 3.38 2.85 −4.00 0.99 0.75 −1.50 1.71 1.01 −2.50 2.10 1.40 −2.75 2.32 1.50 −3.00
 
 
Savings deposits with higher rates of return  9  and with duration of contract being agreed for
 5 
 10,000 and more but less than 
 5 
 25,000   (total rate of return) 10
with agreed notice of 3 months with agreed notice of more than 3 months
and a duration of contract of and a duration of contract of
more than 1 year and up to
up to and including 1 year and including 4 years more than 4 years up to and including 1 year more than 4 years
Reporting Average Average Average Average Averageperiod  
1 interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread
2000          Oct. 4.18 2.50 −4.85 4.68 3.25 −5.35 4.82 3.58 −5.83 4.14 2.25 −4.80 4.97 4.36 −5.50
         Nov. 4.23 2.50 −4.80 4.65 3.25 −5.16 4.84 3.58 −5.83 4.25 2.25 −5.00 4.96 4.36 −5.50
         Dec. 4.15 2.50 −4.75 4.51 3.25 −5.15 4.74 3.64 −5.62 4.21 2.30 −4.75 4.82 4.28 −5.40
2001          Jan. 3.98 3.00 −4.50 4.18 3.25 −4.75 4.59 3.60 −5.30 4.01 2.30 −4.50 4.51 4.04 −5.05
         Feb. 3.86 2.90 −4.40 4.11 3.25 −4.75 4.54 3.60 −5.30 3.99 2.50 −4.50 4.49 4.08 −4.83
         Mar. 3.84 2.99 −4.35 4.06 3.30 −4.62 4.52 3.60 −5.30 3.99 2.50 −4.50 4.42 3.95 −4.78
         Apr. 3.71 2.90 −4.25 3.96 3.25 −4.50 4.47 3.60 −5.25 3.91 2.50 −4.50 4.33 3.95 −4.75
         May 3.74 3.00 −4.25 3.99 3.25 −4.35 4.50 3.64 −5.22 3.91 2.60 −4.35 4.36 3.95 −4.75
         June 3.67 2.80 −4.20 3.93 3.25 −4.30 4.48 3.64 −5.22 3.85 2.50 −4.25 4.35 3.90 −4.78
         July 3.64 2.80 −4.15 3.91 3.25 −4.45 4.48 3.64 −5.25 3.80 2.50 −4.05 4.33 3.90 −4.75
         Aug. 3.52 2.60 −4.00 3.83 3.20 −4.30 4.42 3.60 −5.40 3.68 2.50 −4.00 4.22 3.84 −4.73
         Sep. 3.32 2.40 −3.90 3.62 2.61 −4.25 4.32 3.36 −5.42 3.33 2.50 −3.65 4.06 3.72 −4.73
         Oct. 2.94 2.25 −3.45 3.36 2.60 −3.88 4.17 3.00 −5.40 3.01 2.50 −3.50 3.85 3.50 −4.50
         Nov. 2.64 2.00 −3.25 3.09 2.48 −3.50 4.01 2.66 −5.40 2.75 2.00 −3.50 3.53 2.93 −4.30
         Dec. 2.63 1.75 −3.10 3.14 2.48 −4.00 3.98 2.88 −5.40 2.79 2.20 −3.20 3.63 3.00 −4.30
2002          Jan. o 2.67 2.00 −3.10 3.23 2.50 −4.25 3.98 2.91 −5.08 2.80 2.00 −3.20 3.74 3.25 −4.25
         Feb. 2.76 2.00 −3.25 3.32 2.60 −4.00 4.07 2.91 −5.13 2.91 2.20 −3.50 3.84 3.25 −4.20
         Mar. 2.84 2.10 −3.30 3.45 2.50 −4.25 4.15 3.13 −5.13 3.00 2.40 −3.50 3.96 3.25 −4.40
         Apr. 2.89 2.10 −3.40 3.50 2.25 −4.25 4.17 2.91 −5.13 3.07 2.50 −3.70 3.97 3.25 −4.44
         May 2.91 2.10 −3.40 3.48 2.50 −4.25 4.20 2.91 −5.13 3.08 2.20 −4.00 3.98 3.25 −4.50
         June 2.93 2.10 −3.40 3.52 2.25 −4.25 4.21 2.91 −5.15 3.08 2.20 −4.00 3.97 3.10 −4.50
         July 2.89 2.10 −3.30 3.48 2.25 −4.10 4.14 2.91 −5.08 3.02 2.50 −3.50 3.90 3.15 −4.29
         Aug. 2.73 2.00 −3.25 3.19 2.25 −4.00 4.02 2.91 −5.02 2.94 2.45 −3.50 3.68 2.85 −4.21
         Sep. 2.61 1.90 −3.20 3.08 2.42 −3.80 3.90 2.90 −5.02 2.73 2.25 −3.25 3.54 3.00 −4.04
         Oct. 2.53 1.95 −3.25 2.88 2.12 −3.50 3.84 2.75 −5.08 2.63 2.25 −3.00 3.43 2.70 −4.04
For footnotes *, o, 1to5see page 45*; for footnotes 6and 7see page mium or a bonus is granted. —10Rate of return which is paid when savings
46*. —8Only a minimum rate of return is granted, but no premium or plans are held until maturity or when savings objectives have been
bonus. —9An interest rate above the minimum rate of return and/or a pre- achieved. 
47*VI. Interest rates

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
VII. Capital market
 
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  *)
 
 
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities  1 Residents
Credit in- Bundes-
Sales stitutions bank
= Public Foreign including open
total Bank Indus- debt debt building marketpur- debt trial secur- secur- and loan Non- oper- Non-
Period chases Total securities bonds ities  
2 ities 3 Total  4 assc. 5 banks  6 ations  5 residents  7 
DM million
1990 244,827 220,340 136,799 − 67 83,609 24,487 225,066 91,833 133,266 − 33 19,763
1991 231,965 219,346 131,670 667 87,011 12,619 173,099 45,095 127,310 694 58,866
1992 291,762 284,054 106,857 − 175 177,376 7,708 170,873 132,236 37,368 1,269 120,887
1993 395,110 382,571 151,812 200 230,560 12,539 183,195 164,436 20,095 − 1,336 211,915
1994 303,339 276,058 117,185 − 65 158,939 27,281 279,989 126,808 154,738 − 1,557 23,349
1995 227,099 203,029 162,538 − 350 40,839 24,070 141,282 49,193 94,409 − 2,320 85,815
1996 254,359 233,519 191,341 649 41,529 20,840 148,250 117,352 31,751 − 853 106,109
1997 332,655 250,688 184,911 1,563 64,214 81,967 204,378 144,177 60,201 − 128,276
1998 418,841 308,201 254,367 3,143 50,691 110,640 245,802 203,342 42,460 − 173,038
 5 
 million
1999 292,727 198,068 156,399 2,184 39,485 94,659 155,808 74,728 81,080 − 136,920
2000 229,167 157,994 120,154 12,605 25,234 71,173 156,532 91,447 65,085 − 72,635
2001 180,377 86,656 55,918 14,473 16,262 93,721 140,648 35,848 104,800 − 39,729
2002          June 7,440 4,116 − 3,044 188 6,972 3,324 − 5,286 − 3,765 − 1,521 − 12,726
         July 28,039 17,634 1,237 4,404 11,993 10,405 7,328 − 3,364 10,692 − 20,711
         Aug. 2,376 3,273 − 2,661 806 5,128 − 897 − 2,280 − 5,920 3,640 − 4,656
         Sep. 36,516 31,748 22,228 2,569 6,951 4,768 25,748 4,303 21,445 − 10,768
 
  
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-purchases shares  
8 shares  9 Total  10 tutions  5  11 Non-banks  6 residents  12 
Period
DM million
1990 50,070 28,021 22,048 52,631 7,215 45,416 − 2,561
1991 33,478 13,317 20,161 32,247 2,466 29,781 1,230
1992 32,595 17,226 15,370 40,651 2,984 37,667 − 8,055
1993 39,355 19,512 19,843 30,871 4,133 26,738 8,4851994 55,125 29,160 25,966 54,466 1,622 52,844 659
1995 46,422 23,600 22,822 49,354 11,945 37,409 − 2,931
1996 72,491 34,212 38,280 55,962 12,627 43,335 16,529
1997 119,522 22,239 97,280 96,844 8,547 88,297 22,6771998 249,504 48,796 200,708 149,151 20,252 128,899 100,352
 5 
 million
1999 149,980 36,010 113,969 103,487 18,637 84,850 46,493
2000 138,535 22,733 115,802 156,274 23,293 132,981 − 17,738
2001 80,107 17,575 62,532 − 6,663 − 14,714 8,051 86,769
2002          June 8,495 622 7,873 1,862 − 11,651 13,513 6,633
         July 7,362 692 6,670 6,820 − 2,383 9,203 542
         Aug. − 1,828 255 − 2,083 − 1,194 439 − 1,633 − 634
         Sep. − 4,379 706 − 5,085 − 3,279 − 3,644 365 − 1,100
*Until the end of 1999, debt securities comprise the bonds and money ment funds. —7Net purchases or net sales ( −) of domestic debt securities by
market paper of domestic banks, from January 2000 all fixed-interest non-residents; transaction values. —8At issue prices. —9Net purchases or
securities. Investment fund certificates see Table VII.6. —1Net sales at net sales ( −) of foreign shares (including direct investment) by residents;
market values plus/less changes in issuers ’portfolios of their own debt transaction values. —10Domestic and foreign shares. —11Up to the end
securities. —2Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and of 1998, excluding shares under syndicate agreement. —12Net purchases
Treuhand agency. —3Net purchases or net sales ( −) of foreign debt or net sales ( −) of domestic shares (including direct investment) −before
securities by residents; transaction values. —4Domestic and foreign debt 1989 also including domestic investment fund certificates −by
securities. —5Book values; statistically adjusted. —6Residual; also non-residents; transaction values. —The figures for the latest data are to be
including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic invest- regarded as provisional; corrections are not specially marked.  
48*VII. Capital market

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
VII. Capital market
 
2. Sales of debt securities issued by borrowers domiciled in Germany  *)
 
 
Until the end of 1998 DM nominal million value, from 1999  5  million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item:
Foreign  DM/euro
Mortgage Communal bonds issued Debt securities
bonds bonds issued by spe- by German-
All bank debt (Hypotheken- ( Öffentliche Other bank Industrial Public managed cialised credit
Period Total securities pfandbriefe) Pfandbriefe) institutions bonds  2 syndicates debt securities debt securities  3 
Gross sales  4 
1990 428,698 286,709 14,923 70,701 89,755 111,326 − 141,990 35,168
1991 442,089 292,092 19,478 91,489 80,738 100,386 707 149,288 32,832
1992 572,767 318,522 33,633 134,363 49,195 101,333 − 254,244 57,282
1993 733,126 434,829 49,691 218,496 34,028 132,616 457 297,841 87,3091994 627,331 412,585 44,913 150,115 39,807 177,750 486 214,261 61,465
1995 620,120 470,583 43,287 208,844 41,571 176,877 200 149,338 102,719
1996 731,992 563,076 41,439 246,546 53,508 221,582 1,742 167,173 112,3701997 846,567 621,683 53,168 276,755 54,829 236,933 1,915 222,972 114,8131998 1,030,827 789,035 71,371 344,609 72,140 300,920 3,392 238,400 149,542
 5 
 million
1999 571,269 448,216 27,597 187,661 59,760 173,200 2,570 120,483 57,202
2000 659,148 500,895 34,528 143,107 94,556 228,703 8,114 150,137 31,597
2001 687,988 505,646 34,782 112,594 106,166 252,103 11,328 171,012 10,605
2002          May 65,354 45,802 2,580 10,267 9,348 23,607 1,420 18,133 4,000
         June 57,284 42,324 3,085 5,790 12,318 21,130 656 14,304 170
         July 74,794 44,289 2,111 8,271 12,101 21,806 1,861 28,645 −
         Aug. 54,522 36,213 1,776 6,771 8,161 19,506 608 17,701 −
         Sep. 74,271 57,798 4,810 12,010 10,889 30,090 1,617 14,856 −
of which: Debt securities with a maturity of over 4 years  5 
1990 272,642 133,347 10,904 43,250 26,767 52,425 − 139,295 29,791
1991 303,326 172,171 11,911 65,642 54,878 39,741 707 130,448 22,772
1992 430,479 211,775 28,594 99,627 40,267 43,286 − 218,703 51,939
1993 571,533 296,779 43,365 160,055 26,431 66,923 230 274,524 82,0491994 429,369 244,806 36,397 109,732 29,168 69,508 306 184,255 53,351
1995 409,469 271,763 30,454 141,629 28,711 70,972 200 137,503 85,221
1996 473,560 322,720 27,901 167,811 35,522 91,487 1,702 149,139 92,5821997 563,333 380,470 41,189 211,007 41,053 87,220 1,820 181,047 98,4131998 694,414 496,444 59,893 288,619 54,385 93,551 2,847 195,122 139,645
 5 
 million
1999 324,888 226,993 16,715 124,067 37,778 48,435 2,565 95,331 44,013
2000 319,330 209,187 20,724 102,664 25,753 60,049 6,727 103,418 27,008
2001 299,751 202,337 16,619 76,341 42,277 67,099 7,479 89,933 6,480
2002          May 21,742 12,070 1,228 3,862 752 6,228 160 9,513 3,000
         June 16,790 14,291 1,703 2,900 5,551 4,136 121 2,379 80
         July 27,850 10,367 235 2,738 3,490 3,903 1,490 15,994 −
         Aug. 21,973 10,660 667 3,468 1,468 5,057 153 11,159 −
         Sep. 30,255 25,604 1,978 6,395 2,610 14,622 1,555 3,096 −
Net sales  6 
1990 226,707 140,327 − 3,922 − 72 73,287 71,036 − 67 86,449 21,717
1991 227,822 139,396 4,729 22,290 65,985 46,390 558 87,868 18,583
1992 304,751 115,786 13,104 58,235 19,585 24,864 − 175 189,142 34,114
1993 403,212 159,982 22,496 122,917 − 13,156 27,721 180 243,049 43,701
1994 270,088 116,519 18,184 54,316 − 6,897 50,914 − 62 153,630 21,634
1995 205,482 173,797 18,260 96,125 3,072 56,342 − 354 32,039 61,020
1996 238,427 195,058 11,909 121,929 6,020 55,199 585 42,788 69,9511997 257,521 188,525 16,471 115,970 12,476 43,607 1,560 67,437 63,1811998 327,991 264,627 22,538 162,519 18,461 61,111 3,118 60,243 84,308
 5 
 million
1999 209,096 170,069 2,845 80,230 31,754 55,238 2,185 36,840 22,728
2000 155,615 122,774 5,937 29,999 30,089 56,751 7,320 25,522 − 16,705
2001 84,122 60,905 6,932 − 9,254 28,808 34,416 8,739 14,479 − 30,657
2002          May 18,216 9,470 − 98 2,448 1,919 5,200 1,323 7,423 523
         June 9,157 1,600 1,546 − 6,782 3,939 2,896 281 7,276 − 5,790
         July 16,041 2,735 − 66 − 4,844 5,502 2,144 1,733 11,572 − 2,457
         Aug. 5,853 − 423 − 813 − 1,785 362 1,813 557 5,719 − 3,436
         Sep. 33,336 23,775 2,762 2,906 − 2,654 20,762 1,562 7,999 − 13,041
*For definitions see the notes in the Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. —4Gross sales means only
Report 2, Capital market statistics. —1Excluding registered bank debt initial sales of newly issued securities. —5Maximum maturity according to
securities. —2Debt securities of enterprises. —3Including Federal Railways the terms of issue. — 6 Gross sales less redemptions. 
49*VII. Capital market

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
VII. Capital market
 
3. Outstanding amount of debt securities issued by borrowers domiciled in Germany  * 
 
 
Until the end of 1998 DM million nominal value, from 1999  5  million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item:
 Foreign  DM/euro
Mortgage Communal bonds issued
bonds bonds by German- Debt securities of
End of year All bank specialised Other bank Industrial Public managed (Öffentliche (Hypotheken-
or month Total bonds syndicates credit institutions debt securities debt securities debt securities Pfandbriefe) pfandbriefe)
DM million
1990 1,458,943 900,977 138,025 369,901 155,045 238,005 2,604 555,362 223,176
1991 1,686,765 1,040,374 142,757 392,190 221,031 284,396 3,161 643,230 241,7601992 1,991,515 1,156,162 155,862 450,424 240,616 309,259 2,983 832,370 275,8731993 2,394,728 1,316,142 178,357 573,341 227,463 336,981 3,163 1,075,422 319,5751994 2,664,814 1,432,661 196,541 627,657 219,214 389,249 3,101 1,229,053 341,210
1995 2,870,295 1,606,459 214,803 723,781 222,286 445,589 2,746 1,261,090 402,229
1996 3,108,724 1,801,517 226,711 845,710 228,306 500,790 3,331 1,303,877 472,1801997 3,366,245 1,990,041 243,183 961,679 240,782 544,397 4,891 1,371,313 535,3591998 3,694,234 2,254,668 265,721 1,124,198 259,243 605,507 8,009 1,431,558 619,668
 5 
 million
1999 2,097,926 1,322,863 134,814 655,024 163,284 369,741 6,280 768,783 339,560
2000 2,265,121 1,445,736 140,751 685,122 157,374 462,488 13,599 805,786 322,856
2001 2,349,243 1,506,640 147,684 675,868 201,721 481,366 22,339 820,264 292,199
2002          July 2,462,455 1,559,051 155,975 663,837 220,017 519,221 34,054 869,350 275,674
         Aug. 2,468,308 1,558,628 155,162 662,052 220,380 521,033 34,611 875,069 272,238         Sep. 2,501,644 1,582,403 157,925 664,958 217,726 541,795 36,173 883,068 259,197
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  2 Position at end- September 2002 
Maturity in years
938,816 637,566 65,074 236,564 66,007 269,920 5,331 295,919 87,768    less than 2
596,489 416,537 35,163 194,521 61,377 125,476 11,625 168,326 56,008 2 to less than 4
375,624 234,937 30,150 119,741 31,615 53,430 8,764 131,924 54,460 4 to less than 6
258,756 153,151 18,138 75,198 22,251 37,564 2,664 102,941 37,360 6 to less than 8
178,412 76,242 8,754 25,536 15,152 26,800 6,719 95,451 7,144 8 to less than 10
39,314 30,482 636 9,580 6,793 13,471 365 8,468 10,379 10 to less than 15
18,311 12,735 9 2,092 6,284 4,349 422 5,154 2,585 15 to less than 20
95,923 20,754 − 1,725 8,244 10,784 284 74,885 3,493 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers ’portfolios. — debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of the residual
1Excluding debt securities handed to the trustee for temporary safe amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc. 
custody. —2Calculated from month under review until final maturity for
50* 
  
4. Circulation of shares issued by residents of Germany
  
Until the end of 1998 DM million nominal value, from 1999  5  million nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies ’ capital due to
Share contribution
capital= of shares, Net increase or cash payment
merger reduction circulation at net decrease(-) and exchange contribution mining shares,
issue of change of of capital end of period during period of convertible of claims and GmbH shares, and transfer
Period bonds  1 etc. of assets legal form under review under review bonus shares other real assets and liquidation
DM million
1990 144,686 12,650 7,362 751 3,715 1,049 − 43 1,284 − 1,466
1991 151,618 6,932 3,656 610 2,416 407 − 182 411 − 386
1992 160,813 9,198 4,295 728 1,743 1,073 − 732 3,030 − 942
1993 168,005 7,190 5,224 772 387 876 10 707 − 783
1994 o 190,012 14,237 6,114 1,446 1,521 1,883 − 447 5,086 − 1,367
1995 211,231 21,217 5,894 1,498 1,421 1,421 − 623 13,739 − 2,133
1996 2 216,461 7,131 8,353 1,355 396 1,684 − 3,056 833 − 2,432
1997 221,575 5,115 4,164 2,722 370 1,767 − 2,423 197 − 1,678
1998 238,156 16,578 6,086 2,566 658 8,607 − 4,055 3,905 − 1,188
 5 
 million
1999 133,513 11,747 5,519 2,008 190 1,075 2,099 1,560 − 708
2000 147,629 14,115 3,620 3,694 618 8,089 − 1,986 1,827 − 1,745
2001 166,187 18,561 7,987 4,057 1,106 8,448 1,018 − 905 − 3,152
2002          July 168,868 510 167 74 6 9 386 − 55 − 75
         Aug. 168,516 − 351 168 199 64 69 305 − 1,096 − 59
         Sep. 168,246 − 270 316 170 24 451 − 941 19 − 310
oFrom January 1994 including the shares of east German companies share issues out of company profits. —2Figure reduced by DM 1,902 million
(resultant increase in share circulation: DM 7,771 million). —1Including owing to revisions. 
50*VII. Capital market

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
VII. Capital market
 
5. Yields and indices on German securities
 
 
               
Yields on bonds outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices  2 , 3 
Public bonds Bank debt securities Bonds Shares
Memo item:
Listed Foreign
Federal securities DM/euro
bonds
With re- With re- issued by German Germansidual matur- sidual matur- German- bond iBoxx- CDAX share
managed index index ities of over 9 ities of over 9 Industrial
 5 -Germany- share price
Total Total Total Total to 10 years bonds (REX) price index index (DAX) to 10 years  4 syndicates  1,5 
Average End- End- End-
Period % p.a. daily rate 1998=100 1987=100 1987=1000
1990 8.9 8.8 8.9 8.7 9.0 9.0 9.0 9.2 93.50 . 145.00 1,398.23
1991 8.7 8.6 8.5 8.5 8.9 8.4 8.9 9.2 96.35 . 148.16 1,577.981992 8.1 8.0 7.3 7.8 8.3 7.6 8.7 8.8 101.54 . 134.92 1,545.051993 6.4 6.3 5.5 6.5 6.5 6.3 6.9 6.8 109.36 . 191.13 2,266.681994 6.7 6.7 7.4 6.9 6.8 7.8 7.0 6.9 99.90 . 176.87 2,106.58
1995 6.5 6.5 5.6 6.9 6.5 6.5 6.9 6.8 109.18 . 181.47 2,253.88
1996 5.6 5.6 5.2 6.2 5.5 6.1 5.8 5.8 110.37 . 217.47 2,888.691997 5.1 5.1 5.1 5.6 5.0 5.6 5.2 5.5 111.01 . 301.47 4,249.691998 4.5 4.4 3.7 4.6 4.5 4.3 5.0 5.3 118.18 100.00 343.64 5,002.391999 4.3 4.3 5.0 4.5 4.3 5.5 5.0 5.4 110.60 92.52 445.95 6,958.14
2000 5.4 5.3 4.9 5.3 5.6 5.6 6.2 6.3 112.48 94.11 396.59 6,433.61
2001 4.8 4.7 4.6 4.8 4.9 5.1 5.9 6.2 113.12 94.16 319.38 5,160.10
2002          June 4.9 4.9 4.9 5.0 5.0 5.3 5.9 6.0 112.81 94.08 279.29 4,382.56         July 4.8 4.7 4.7 4.9 4.8 5.2 5.8 5.8 113.75 94.93 237.79 3,700.14
         Aug. 4.5 4.4 4.4 4.6 4.5 4.9 5.8 5.6 115.02 95.79 238.16 3,712.94         Sep. 4.2 4.2 4.2 4.4 4.3 4.7 5.9 5.3 116.61 97.31 181.34 2,769.03
         Oct. 4.3 4.2 4.2 4.5 4.3 4.8 6.0 5.3 115.60 96.27 204.83 3,152.85
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of included in the calculation. Monthly figures are calculated on the basis of
issue of over 4 years, if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Conver- the yields on all the business days of a month. The annual figures are the un-
tible debt securities, etc., debt securities with unscheduled redemption, weighted means of the monthly figures. —2End of year or month. —
zero-coupon bonds, floating-rate notes and bonds not denominated in DM 3Source: German Stock Exchange plc. —4Only bonds eligible as underlying
or euros are not included. Group yields for the various categories of secu- instruments for futures contracts are included; calculated as unweighted
rities are weighted with the amounts outstanding of the debt securities averages. — 5 As far as quoted on German stock exchanges. 
 
 
6. Sales and purchases of investment fund certificates in Germany
  
Sales of investment fund certificates Purchases
Domestic funds (sales receipts) Residents
Investment funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Non-banks  2 and loanassociations  1 
of which
of which of which
Sales Open- Special- Foreign Foreign= Secur- end ised invest- invest-total Money ities- real invest- ment mentpur- market based estate ment Foreign fund cer- fund cer- Non-resi-chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  
3 Total Total tificates Total tificates dents  4 
Period
DM million
1990 25,788 26,857 7,904 − 8,032 − 128 18,952 −1,069 25,766 4,296 − 362 21,470 − 707 22
1991 50,064 37,492 13,738 − 11,599 2,144 23,754 12,572 49,890 8,594 − 5 41,296 12,577 174
1992 81,514 20,474 −3,102 −− 9,189 6,087 23,575 61,040 81,518 10,495 2,152 71,023 58,888 − 4
1993 80,259 61,672 20,791 − 6,075 14,716 40,881 18,587 76,258 16,982 2,476 59,276 16,111 4,001
1994 130,995 108,914 63,263 31,180 24,385 7,698 45,650 22,081 125,943 9,849 − 689 116,094 22,770 5,052
1995 55,246 54,071 16,777 6,147 3,709 6,921 37,294 1,175 56,295 12,172 188 44,123 987 −1,049
1996 83,386 79,110 16,517 −4,706 7,273 13,950 62,592 4,276 85,704 19,924 1,685 65,780 2,591 −2,318
1997 145,805 138,945 31,501 −5,001 30,066 6,436 107,445 6,860 149,977 35,924 340 114,053 6,520 −4,172
1998 187,641 169,748 38,998 5,772 27,814 4,690 130,750 17,893 190,416 43,937 961 146,479 16,507 −2,775
 5 
 million
1999 111,253 97,197 37,684 3,347 23,269 7,395 59,513 14,056 105,492 19,862 − 637 85,630 14,693 5,761
2000 117,688 85,160 39,712 −2,188 36,818 −2,824 45,448 32,528 106,749 14,454 92 92,295 32,436 10,939
2001 95,937 76,811 35,522 12,410 9,195 10,159 41,289 19,126 94,815 10,251 2,703 84,564 16,423 1,122
2002          June 2,671 2,958 502 − 496 − 384 1,366 2,456 − 287 3,761 114 − 22 3,647 − 265 −1,090
         July 5,112 3,593 1,782 404 20 1,370 1,811 1,519 4,856 − 1,030 115 5,886 1,404 256
         Aug. 6,977 5,804 2,507 1,049 661 869 3,298 1,173 5,712 100 236 5,612 937 1,265
         Sep. 3,120 2,690 360 140 − 468 819 2,330 430 3,645 − 1,263 − 160 4,908 590 − 525
1Book values. —2Residual. —3Net purchases or net sales ( −) of foreign non-residents; transaction values (before 1989 classified as shares). —The
investment fund certificates by residents; transaction values. —4Net figures for the latest data are to be regarded as provisional; corrections are
purchases or net sales ( −) of domestic investment fund certificates by not specially marked. 
51*VII. Capital market

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
1. Finances of the public sector *
  
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM billion / from 1999,  5  billion
Central, regional and local authorities  1 Social security funds  2 Public sector, total
Receipts Expenditure
of which
Balance Balance Balance
Other of of of
Person- operat- receipts receipts receipts
of nel ex- ing ex- Capital Finan- and Ex- and Ex- and
which pend- pend- Current Interest forma- cial expend- Re- pend- expend- Re- pend- expend-
Period Total Taxes  3 Total  4 iture iture grants paid tion aid  5 iture ceipts  6 iture iture ceipts iture iture
1992 904.1 731.7 1,013.9 285.7 134.0 304.8 100.6 101.1 86.1 −109.8 609.1 617.4 −8.3 1,436.0 1,554.2 −118.1
1993 928.7 749.1 1,060.2 296.8 136.0 340.5 102.1 97.0 87.3 −131.5 660.8 658.7 + 2.1 1,492.1 1,621.5 −129.4
1994 995.2 786.2 1,102.2 315.5 137.3 353.4 114.0 93.2 86.5 −106.9 694.1 693.7 + 0.4 1,596.4 1,702.9 −106.5
1995 1,026.4 814.2 1,136.4 324.8 135.5 367.2 129.0 90.1 86.3 −110.1 731.2 743.8 −12.5 1,664.9 1,787.5 −122.6
1996 1,000.3 800.0 1,121.8 326.2 137.0 362.2 130.7 83.9 80.1 −121.5 769.4 784.0 −14.6 1,665.6 1,801.6 −136.1
1997 1,014.3 797.2 1,108.9 325.0 135.7 356.3 132.1 80.1 79.2 −94.5 797.3 794.5 + 2.9 1,705.3 1,797.0 −91.7
1998  p 1,072.1 833.0 1,128.8 325.4 137.4 373.7 133.7 79.7 79.8 −56.7 812.2 808.9 + 3.3 1,766.0 1,819.3 −53.4
1999  p 566.0 453.1 592.9 168.7 72.4 202.7 69.8 40.8 38.0 −27.0 429.1 425.7 + 3.5 925.3 948.8 −23.5
2000  pe 613.3 467.3 594.9 169.0 73.6 205.5 67.5 40.8 38.0 + 18.4 434.0 434.0 + 0.0 975.9 957.6 + 18.3
2001  pe 553.5 446.2 601.3 169.8 70.0 213.7 66.7 40.4 39.5 −47.8 443.1 447.2 −4.1 919.8 971.7 −51.9
2001          1st qtr 7 126.7 105.1 147.8 39.5 16.4 55.5 22.0 6.5 7.8 −21.1 108.8 109.7 −0.9 213.5 235.5 −22.0
         2nd qtr 139.4 110.9 136.7 39.3 15.8 54.0 12.6 8.0 6.4 + 2.6 110.1 111.8 −1.7 229.6 228.7 + 0.9
         3rd qtr 136.3 109.5 146.2 40.1 15.6 52.2 19.0 10.0 9.3 −9.9 109.6 111.9 −2.3 227.4 239.5 −12.2
         4th qtr p 149.3 121.3 167.7 49.5 21.8 52.4 12.7 14.5 16.0 −18.4 115.1 114.5 + 0.6 248.3 266.1 −17.8
2002          1st qtr 118.3 98.6 150.2 39.9 15.3 57.9 24.0 6.5 6.0 −31.8 111.3 112.8 −1.5 206.4 239.8 −33.4
         2nd qtr p 137.8 105.1 141.8 40.4 15.6 58.3 11.9 7.8 6.7 −4.0 113.0 115.6 −2.6 228.9 235.6 −6.6
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical insurance are estimated. —3The tax revenue shown here is taken from the
Office. —*The budgetary definition used here differs from the methods budget statistics and may differ from the data given in Table VIII. 4, which
employed for the government account of the national accounts and, in case are based on the tax statistics. —4Including discrepancies in clearing
of the quarterly figures, in some respects also from the financial statistics. — transactions between the central, regional and local authorities. —
1Incl. subsidiary budgets. The quarterly figures, unlike the annual figures 5Expenditure on investment grants, loans and acquisition of participating
based on the annual accounts statistics of the Federal Statistical Office, do interests. —6Including Federal Government liquidity assistance to the
not include municipal special-purpose associations and various special Federal Labour Office. —7Owing to modifications of the system of
accounts. For the receipts of Bundesbank profit see footnote 1 to Table VIII. classification, especially shifts between Other operating expenditur e and
2.—2The annual figures differ from the sum of the quarterly figures, as Current grants. 
the latter are all provisional. The quarterly figures for some fields of
2. Finances of the Federal Government, L änder Governments and local authorities *
  
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM billion / from 1999,  5  billion
Federal Government L änder Governments Local authorities
Western  2,  3 Eastern  3 Western  3 Eastern  3 
Period Receipts  1 Expenditure Receipts Expenditure Receipts Expenditure Receipts Expenditure Receipts Expenditure
1992 398.4 431.7 318.2 336.3 73.0 86.0 212.6 221.6 50.3 57.5
1993 401.6 462.5 326.5 352.8 76.4 92.5 222.5 230.9 54.4 59.01994 439.6 478.9 328.8 357.0 79.3 95.9 228.9 235.1 53.9 59.2
1995 439.3 489.9 338.6 370.2 88.4 101.5 225.6 237.9 58.7 60.8
1996 411.9 490.4 344.8 379.7 93.7 105.5 227.7 232.9 55.0 57.71997 416.8 480.3 349.2 376.5 94.3 105.2 222.9 226.9 52.6 54.21998 439.0 495.6 360.5 380.3 96.4 104.7 231.4 226.3 51.5 52.41999  
p 240.3 266.5 191.6 196.6 50.0 53.3 119.8 117.5 26.1 26.3
2000  4,  pe  291.4 264.6 195.6 200.4 50.5 53.9 121.4 119.9 25.6 25.6
2001  pe 240.0 261.0 184.1 208.1 49.6 52.9 118.9 123.0 25.1 25.6
2001          1st qtr 50.8 66.4 44.8 49.8 12.0 11.6 25.5 28.8 5.2 5.5         2nd qtr 57.6 59.9 46.3 47.5 11.5 11.8 28.8 28.1 5.8 5.8         3rd qtr 62.3 66.3 44.6 49.4 11.7 12.5 29.6 29.9 6.1 6.2         4th qtr
p 69.1 68.3 47.5 60.3 14.1 16.3 35.4 36.0 7.5 7.7
2002          1st qtr 47.4 68.9 42.4 49.4 10.2 12.0 24.7 29.1 5.2 5.4         2nd qtr
p 56.3 62.6 43.3 48.8 11.1 11.9 28.8 29.1 5.9 5.8
52*Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Fund for Inherited Liabilities. —2Including Berlin, Bremen, Hamburg.
Office. —*See corresponding footnote to Table VIII. 1. —1The Including Berlin (East). —3The quarterly figures, unlike the annual figures
Bundesbank profit transfer is shown in full until 1994; from 1995 only the based on the annual accounts statistics of the Federal Statistical Office, d o
DM 7 billion scheduled in the budget is shown. Since that time, receipts not include various special accounts. —4Including receipts from the UMTS
over and above the scheduled amount accrue directly to the Redemption licence auctions. 
52*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
3. Finances of the Government in the national accounts *
  
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM billion / from 1999,  5  billion
Item 1994 1995  1 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000  2 2001  ts 
Receipts 1,608.6 1,647.8 1,704.0 1,726.8 1,775.9 943.4 963.7 951.5
of which
Taxes 807.9 825.8 850.0 856.9 897.4 490.4 511.7 488.3Social security contributions 632.4 662.5 696.7 720.1 727.7 375.7 378.5 383.6
Expenditure 1,690.2 1,764.9 1,826.6 1,826.5 1,859.6 973.2 991.8 1,009.0of which
Intermediate input 140.7 143.2 142.7 140.2 144.1 76.9 78.5 81.6Employee compensation 306.9 315.9 319.6 319.0 319.3 165.4 165.6 164.9Interest 113.4 128.9 131.7 133.2 136.4 68.8 68.2 67.8Social security benefits  
3 849.1 902.8 970.7 984.7 998.4 523.1 534.7 548.1
Gross capital formation 90.0 80.5 76.4 69.4 69.9 37.8 37.0 35.8
Financial balance − 81.6 − 117.1 − 122.7 − 99.7 − 83.7 − 29.7 − 28.0 − 57.5
as a percentage of the grossdomestic product − 2.4 − 3.3 − 3.4 − 2.7 − 2.2 − 1.5 − 1.4 − 2.8
Memo itemDeficit of the Treuhand agency − 37.1 . . .....
Debt as defined inMaastricht Treatyas a percentage of the grossdomestic product 49.4 57.1 59.8 61.0 60.9 61.2 60.2 59.5
Source: Federal Statistical Office. —*Figures according to ESA 95. In unadjusted terms, the deficit amounted to 9.8% of GDP. —2Adjusted
Notwithstanding the figures shown by the Federal Statistical Office, for receipts from UMTS licence auctions. In the accounts of the Federal
calculated including −with no impact on the balance −customs duties, the Statistical Office, such receipts (50.85
 5 
billion) are recorded under "net
EU share in VAT revenue and EU subsidies. —1Adjusted for the balance of increase in non-produced assets", with the result that government spending
notional capital transfers between the public sector and the corporate is lower and a surplus (22.8
 5 
billion or 1.1% of GDP) is shown. —
sector, mainly in connection with the winding-up of the Treuhand agency. 3 Monetary social security benefits and social benefits in kind. 
4. Tax revenue of the central, regional and local authorities
  
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999,  5  million
Federal and L änder Governments and European Union Local authorities  4 
Länder Governments
of which Balance of
Federal of which European in the untransferred
Period Total Total  1 Government  2 Total New L änder Union  3 Total New L änder tax shares  5 
1991 661,920 577,150 321,334 224,321 19,139 31,495 84,633 2,540 + 137
1992 731,738 638,423 356,849 247,372 23,807 34,203 93,374 4,034 − 58
1993 749,119 653,015 360,250 256,131 27,542 36,634 95,809 5,863 + 2951994 786,162 688,785 386,145 261,947 32,052 40,692 97,116 7,677 + 260
1995 814,190 719,332 390,807 288,520 . 40,005 94,498 8,460 + 359
1996 799,998 706,071 372,390 294,232 . 39,449 94,641 7,175 − 714
1997 797,154 700,739 368,244 290,771 . 41,724 96,531 7,703 − 117
1998 833,013 727,888 379,491 306,127 . 42,271 104,960 8,841 + 1641999 453,068 396,734 211,727 164,724 . 20,284 56,333 4,810 + 1
2000 467,253 410,117 219,034 169,249 . 21,833 57,241 4,895 − 104
2001 446,248 392,189 213,342 159,115 . 19,732 54,047 4,590 + 12
2002          2nd qtr 104,433 91,656 48,960 37,171 . 5,525 12,255 1,131 + 522
         3rd qtr
p . 96,067 54,032 38,776 . 3,259 . . .
2002          May . 29,829 16,301 11,672 . 1,856 . . .         June . 35,732 19,039 14,875 . 1,819 . . .
         July . 31,119 17,755 12,676 . 688 . . .
         Aug.
p . 29,448 17,159 11,314 . 976 . . .
         Sep. p . 35,500 19,118 14,787 . 1,595 . . .
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. —1Including receipts from the revenue. —4Including local authority taxes of Berlin, Bremen and
Equalisation of Burdens levies.  —2Before deduction of supplementary Hamburg. —5Difference between the local authorities ’share in the
Federal grants and shares in the revenue of mineral oil tax remitted to the income taxes received by the L änder cash offices in the period in question
Länder Governments. —3Including the (GNP-related) receipts accruing to (see Table VIII. 5) and the amounts passed on to the local authorities during
the EU from 1988 to the detriment of the Federal Government ’s tax the same period. 
53*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
5. Tax revenue, by type
  
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999,  5  million
Joint taxes Memo
item
Income taxes  2 Turnover taxes  5,  6 Localauthor-
As- Invest- ities’
sessed ment Value- Turnover Share EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income added tax on in trade Federal L änder customs income
Period Total  
1 Total tax  3 tax tion tax taxes  4 Total tax imports tax  6,  7 taxes  8 taxes  8 duties taxes  9 
1991 615,506 298,804 214,175 41,532 31,716 11,381 179,672 98,797 80,875 5,986 92,583 29,113 8,307 38,356
1992 681,751 331,310 247,322 41,531 31,184 11,273 197,712 117,274 80,438 6,923 104,802 32,963 7,742 43,3281993 697,988 341,785 257,987 33,234 27,830 22,734 216,306 174,492 41,814 4,181 93,678 34,720 7,240 44,9731994 734,234 343,055 266,522 25,510 19,569 31,455 235,698 195,265 40,433 6,271 105,410 36,551 7,173 45,450
1995 765,374 344,554 282,701 13,997 18,136 29,721 234,622 198,496 36,126 8,412 134,013 36,602 7,117 46,042
1996 746,958 317,807 251,278 11,616 29,458 25,456 237,208 200,381 36,827 8,945 137,865 38,540 6,592 40,8871997 740,272 313,794 248,672 5,764 33,267 26,092 240,900 199,934 40,966 8,732 135,264 34,682 6,900 39,5331998 775,028 340,231 258,276 11,116 36,200 34,640 250,214 203,684 46,530 10,284 130,513 37,300 6,486 47,1401999 422,012 184,408 133,809 10,887 22,359 17,353 137,155 111,600 25,555 5,463 72,235 19,564 3,186 25,277
2000 436,115 192,381 135,733 12,225 23,575 20,849 140,871 107,140 33,732 5,521 75,504 18,444 3,394 25,998
2001 417,358 170,817 132,626 8,771 −426 29,845 138,935 104,463 34,472 5,510 79,277 19,628 3,191 25,170
2002          2nd qtr 97,670 38,032 31,000 3,331 −1,961 5,662 33,468 25,417 8,050 1,402 19,241 4,820 708 6,014
         3rd qtr
p 102,228 40,903 31,896 3,317 965 4,726 34,226 25,937 8,290 1,410 20,297 4,638 753 6,160
2002          May 31,563 9,583 10,334 −900 −1,640 1,789 12,468 9,580 2,887 467 7,110 1,685 251 1,734
         June 38,381 19,595 10,697 5,127 929 2,841 10,747 8,393 2,354 9 6,350 1,467 213 2,648
         July 32,976 12,401 11,753 −1,307 −563 2,517 10,998 8,124 2,874 963 6,711 1,656 249 1,857
         Aug. p 31,154 9,577 10,593 −1,278 −1,122 1,384 11,947 9,130 2,817 442 7,368 1,564 255 1,706
         Sep. p 38,098 18,925 9,550 5,901 2,650 825 11,282 8,683 2,599 5 6,219 1,418 249 2,598
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. —1This total, unlike that in Table VIII. supplementary Federal grant to the pension insurance funds; 2.2% of the
4, includes neither the revenue from Equalisation of Burdens levies, trade balance went to the local authorities, of the new balance: 50.5% to the
tax on returns and capital (less Federal and L änder shares in trade tax), the Federal Government, 49.5% to the L änder Governments, from 2000 50.25%
taxes on land and buildings and other local authority taxes, nor the balance to the Federal Government, 49.75% to the L änder Governments, from 2002
of untransferred tax shares. —2The yield of wage tax and assessed income 49.6% to the Federal Government, 50.4% to the L änder Governments. The
tax was distributed among the Federal Government, the L änder EU share must likewise be deducted from the Federal Government ’s share
Governments and the local authorities in the ratio of 42.5 : 42.5 : 15 from stated. —6Since 1991 the distribution of turnover tax and the level and
1980, and the yield of corporation tax and investment income tax between distribution of the share in trade tax have been affected by the financing ofthe Federal Government and the L änder Governments in the ratio of 50 : 50 the debt service of the "German Unity" Fund. —7Federal Government and
from 1970. —3From 1996, after deduction of child benefit. —4From L änder Governments 50% each. From 1998 Federal Government 42.2%,
February 1993 including revenue from the tax on interest income, in which L änder Governments 57.8%. —8For breakdown see Table VIII. 6. —9From
the local authorities have a share of 12%. —5From 1998 3.64% and from 1998 including the share in turnover taxes. 
1999 5.63% went to the Federal Government in advance to finance the
6. Individual taxes of the Federal Government, L änder Governments and local authorities
  
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999,  5  million
Federal taxes L änder taxes Local authority taxes
Insur- Electri- Other Motor Inherit- Other Taxes on Other
Mineral Tobacco Spirits ance city Federal vehicle Property ance Beer L änder Trade land and local
Period oil tax tax tax tax tax taxes  1 tax tax tax tax taxes tax  2 buildings taxes  3 
1991 47,266 19,592 5,648 5,862 . 14,215 11,012 6,729 2,636 1,647 7,090 41,297 9,921 1,181
1992 55,166 19,253 5,545 8,094 . 16,744 13,317 6,750 3,030 1,625 8,241 44,848 10,783 1,2811993 56,300 19,459 5,134 9,290 . 3,495 14,059 6,784 3,044 1,769 9,065 42,266 11,663 1,3831994 63,847 20,264 4,889 11,400 . 5,011 14,169 6,627 3,479 1,795 10,482 44,086 12,664 1,445
1995 64,888 20,595 4,837 14,104 . 29,590 13,806 7,855 3,548 1,779 9,613 42,058 13,744 1,426
1996 68,251 20,698 5,085 14,348 . 29,484 13,743 9,035 4,054 1,718 9,990 45,880 14,642 1,4631997 66,008 21,155 4,662 14,127 . 29,312 14,418 1,757 4,061 1,698 12,749 48,601 15,503 1,5091998 66,677 21,652 4,426 13,951 . 23,807 15,171 1,063 4,810 1,662 14,594 50,508 16,228 1,5321999 36,444 11,655 2,233 7,116 1,816 12,973 7,039 537 3,056 846 8,086 27,060 8,636 824
2000 37,826 11,443 2,151 7,243 3,356 13,485 7,015 433 2,982 844 7,171 27,025 8,849 784
2001 40,690 12,072 2,143 7,427 4,322 12,622 8,376 290 3,069 829 7,064 24,534 9,076 790
2002          2nd qtr 10,107 3,291 461 1,497 1,167 2,717 2,078 43 791 213 1,697 5,423 2,560 182
         3rd qtr
p 10,154 3,577 511 1,804 1,407 2,845 1,816 72 798 226 1,726 . . .
2002          May 3,468 1,567 157 724 455 740 694 16 309 68 598 . . .         June 3,505 600 158 428 360 1,300 641 17 219 79 511 . . .
         July 3,397 1,191 184 410 614 915 693 25 251 74 614 . . .
         Aug.
p 3,166 1,705 220 1,029 516 733 578 42 274 78 593 . . .
         Sep. p 3,591 681 107 365 277 1,198 545 5 274 74 520 . . .
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. —1Other excise taxes and the income until mid-1992, and again since the beginning of 1995. —2On returns and
and corporation tax surcharge ("solidarity surcharge") levied from mid-1991 capital. — 3 Including tax-like receipts.   
54*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
7. Indebtedness of the public sector *
  
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999,  5  million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
5−year lending owing to
Bundes- Treasury special Federal Debt by credit Social German Equalisa-
End of year bank discount Treasury Federal savings secur- institu- security unifica- tion
or month Total advances paper  1 notes  2,  3 bonds  2 bonds ities  2 tions  4 funds Other  4 tion 5 claims Other  6 
Public authorities
1995 1,993,476 − 8,072 240,514 170,719 78,456 586,573 764,875 1,263 40,621 15,106 87,079 198
1996 2,126,320 − 27,609 231,102 176,164 96,391 618,262 836,582 770 39,450 9,960 89,826 203
1997 2,215,893 − 26,336 249,507 177,721 99,317 662,516 879,021 663 29,907 1,315 89,376 216
1998 2,280,154 − 25,631 227,536 199,774 92,698 723,403 894,456 550 26,073 1,249 88,582 202
1999 1,199,975 − 12,594 102,364 120,998 41,621 416,051 450,111 281 10,200 476 45,175 105
2000 1,211,439 − 11,616 109,951 126,276 35,991 438,888 433,443 211 10,524 285 44,146 108
2001          Sep. 1,210,399 − 19,549 137,217 130,959 28,823 446,120 427,313 182 10,911 226 8,992 107
         Dec. 1,223,929 − 23,036 151,401 130,045 26,395 448,148 422,440 174 13,110 85 8,986 108
2002          Mar. 1,249,857 − 17,817 158,695 133,421 22,648 461,617 431,066 218 15,234 49 8,986 109
         June 1,251,125 − 22,252 176,996 133,289 20,636 463,906 408,991 239 15,681 51 8,986 101
Federal Government 7,  8
1995 756,834 − 8,072 52,354 170,719 78,456 402,307 26,572 15 8,119 1,360 8,684 176
1996 839,883 − 26,789 55,289 176,164 96,391 434,295 32,988 5 7,766 1,330 8,684 183
1997 905,691 − 25,286 78,848 177,721 99,317 481,619 31,845 5 870 1,300 8,684 197
1998 957,983 − 24,666 84,760 199,274 92,698 519,718 24,125 − 2,603 1,270 8,684 186
1999 714,069 − 11,553 44,335 120,498 41,621 379,808 67,872 60 2,568 476 45,175 104
2000 715,819 − 11,516 44,678 123,642 35,991 400,490 52,836 29 2,099 285 44,146 107
2001          Sep. 698,268 − 17,799 53,517 120,825 28,823 414,102 52,312 26 1,541 226 8,992 107
         Dec. 701,077 − 21,136 59,643 119,911 26,395 416,195 47,111 26 1,481 85 8,986 107
2002          Mar. 721,619 − 16,917 59,622 123,287 22,648 429,270 59,356 12 1,365 49 8,986 108
         June 716,787 − 21,389 66,445 123,155 20,636 431,039 43,600 12 1,374 51 8,986 100
         Sep. 726,896 − 30,982 72,762 125,316 19,752 429,452 39,392 0 1,242 50 7,848 101
West German L änder Governments
1995 442,536 −− 91,152 . . − 339,084 358 11,940 . − 2
1996 477,361 − 320 91,969 . . − 372,449 54 12,567 . − 2
1997 505,297 − 350 86,639 . . − 406,499 47 11,760 . − 2
1998 525,380 − 520 83,390 . . − 430,709 43 10,716 . − 2
1999 274,208 − 150 43,033 . . − 226,022 23 4,979 . − 1
2000 282,431 −− 48,702 . . − 227,914 22 5,792 . . 1
2001          Sep. 295,470 − 1,750 59,991 . . − 227,609 10 6,108 . . 1
         Dec. 305,788 − 1,800 67,721 . . − 228,270 5 7,991 . . 1
2002          Mar. 310,210 − 800 73,844 . . − 225,475 58 10,032 . . 1
         June 314,447 − 750 83,192 . . − 219,729 79 10,697 . . 1
         Sep. p 320,617 −− 92,470 . . − 216,121 79 11,946 . . 1
East German L änder Governments
1995 69,151 −− 25,345 . . − 43,328 17 461 . . .
1996 80,985 − 500 26,820 . . − 53,483 − 182 . . .
1997 90,174 − 700 27,540 . . − 61,697 15 222 . . .
1998 98,192 − 445 27,228 . . − 70,289 − 230 . . .
1999 53,200 − 891 14,517 . . − 37,602 − 189 . . .
2000 55,712 − 100 16,092 . . − 39,339 − 182 . . .
2001          Sep. 57,550 −− 19,780 . . − 36,889 − 880 . . .
         Dec. 58,771 − 100 20,135 . . − 37,382 − 1,154 . . .
2002          Mar. 59,143 − 100 21,328 . . − 36,256 − 1,460 . . .
         June 60,156 − 112 23,387 . . − 35,399 − 1,258 . . .
         Sep. p 61,533 − 112 24,193 . . − 35,840 − 1,368 . . .
West German local authorities 9
1995 157,271 . . − . . 1,000 151,127 283 4,861 . . .
1996 158,613 . . 200 . . 1,280 152,311 174 4,648 . . .
1997 160,162 . . 300 . . 1,330 154,145 149 4,238 . . .1998 158,960 . . 300 . . 1,330 153,208 119 4,003 . . .1999 81,511 . . 153 . . 680 78,726 53 1,898 . . .2000 81,414 . . 153 . . 680 78,656 33 1,891 . . .
2001          Sep. 82,216 . . 153 . . 680 79,465 26 1,892 . . .
         Dec. 82,203 . . 153 . . 629 79,470 29 1,922 . . .
2002          Mar. 82,900 . . 153 . . 629 80,168 30 1,920 . . .
         June 83,700 . . 153 . . 629 80,968 30 1,920 . . .
East German local authorities  9
1995 36,830 . . 225 . . 400 35,427 347 431 . . .1996 38,976 . . 225 . . 400 37,922 308 121 . . .1997 38,688 . . 225 . . 400 37,623 273 167 . . .1998 39,873 . . 225 . . 460 38,777 255 156 . . .1999 20,726 . . 51 . . 335 20,138 124 78 . . .2000 17,048 . . 51 . . 335 16,497 114 50 . . .
2001          Sep. 16,796 . . − . . 335 16,297 113 51 . . .
         Dec. 17,005 . . − . . 284 16,581 107 33 . . .
2002          Mar. 16,880 . . − . . 284 16,456 110 30 . . .
         June 16,700 . . − . . 284 16,276 110 30 . . .
For footnotes see end of the table. 
55*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
7. Indebtedness of the public sector * (cont ’d)
  
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999,  5  million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
5−year lending owing to
Bundes- Treasury special Federal Debt by credit Social German Equalisa-
End of year bank discount Treasury Federal savings secur- institu- security unifica- tion
or month Total advances paper  1 notes  2,  3 bonds  2 bonds ities  2 tions  4 funds Other  4 tion 5 claims Other  6 
“German Unity “Fund / Indemnification Fund 7
1995 87,146 . − 8,891 − . 44,398 31,925 5 1,927 . . .
1996 83,556 . −−− . 44,321 38,020 5 1,210 . . .
1997 79,717 . −−− . 44,347 34,720 5 645 . . .
1998 79,413 . −−− . 47,998 30,975 − 440 . . .
1999 40,234 . − 275 500 . 28,978 10,292 − 189 . . .
2000 40,629 . − 275 2,634 . 29,797 7,790 − 133 . . .
2001          Sep. 40,660 . − 3,775 10,134 . 21,562 5,113 − 7 7...
         Dec. 39,923 . − 3,748 10,134 . 21,577 4,315 − 149 . . .
2002          Mar. 40,006 . − 3,748 10,134 . 21,732 4,315 − 7 7...
         June 40,028 . − 3,820 10,134 . 21,902 4,147 − 2 6...
         Sep. 40,047 . − 3,820 10,134 . 22,049 4,019 − 2 6...
ERP Special Fund 7
1995 34,200 . .... 10,745 23,455 −− ...
1996 34,135 . .... 10,750 23,385 −− ...
1997 33,650 . .... 10,810 22,840 −− ...
1998 34,159 . .... 11,944 20,988 − 1,227 . . .
1999 16,028 . .... 6,250 9,458 21 299 . . .
2000 18,386 . .... 7,585 10,411 13 377 . . .
2001          Sep. 19,440 . .... 9,442 9,627 8 363 . . .
         Dec. 19,161 . .... 9,462 9,310 8 381 . . .
2002          Mar. 19,098 . .... 9,701 9,039 8 350 . . .
         June 19,308 . .... 10,052 8,873 8 376 . . .
         Sep. 19,327 . .... 10,045 8,863 8 361 . . .
Federal Railways Fund 7,  8
1995 78,400 . . 3,848 − . 28,992 39,005 140 6,415 . . .
1996 77,785 . . 1,882 − . 28,749 41,537 130 5,489 . . .
1997 77,254 . . 1,927 − . 25,634 44,807 115 4,772 . . .
1998 77,246 . . − 500 . 31,648 42,488 79 2,531 . . .
1999          June 39,231 . . − 1,023 . 16,805 20,401 34 968 . . .
Debt-Processing Fund / Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities 7,  8
1995 328,888 . − 58,699 − . 98,731 72,732 98 6,468 13,745 78,395 21
1996 331,918 . − 54,718 − . 98,468 81,380 95 7,468 8,630 81,142 19
1997 322,032 . − 54,028 − . 98,377 81,616 54 7,233 15 80,692 17
1998 304,978 . − 31,633 − . 110,006 79,226 54 4,167 −20 79,899 15
1999          June 151,097 . − 11,127 2,000 . 58,897 36,133 27 2,015 −9 40,902 4
“Use of Hard Coal “Equalisation Fund 7,  8
1995 2,220 . .... − 2,220 −− ...
1996 3,108 . .... − 3,108 −− ...
1997 3,229 . .... − 3,229 −− ...
1998 3,971 . .... 3 0 0 3,671 −− ...
1999          June 2,302 . .... 1 5 3 2,148 −− ...
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical accordance with the London Debts agreement; excluding debt securities i n
Office. —*Excluding public authorities ’mutual indebtedness. — own portfolios. —7The debt incurred through the joint issue of Federal
1Predominantly Treasury discount paper. —2Excluding paper in the securities is recorded here −in contrast to the capital market statistics −
issuers ’portfolios. —3Länder Treasury paper also covers the long-term under the Federal Government and its special funds in accordance with the
maturity category. —4Mainly loans against borrowers ’notes. Including agreed distribution ratios. —8Since July 1, 1999 the Federal Government
loans raised abroad. Other loans from non-banks, including loans from has assumed joint responsibility for the debts of the Redemption Fund forsupplementary public pension funds and liabilities arising from the Inherited Liabilities, the Federal Railway Fund and the Equalisation Fund forinvestment assistance levy. —5Old liabilities arising from residential Safeguarding the Use of Coal. The special funds mentioned are only
construction and liabilities arising from residential construction by the recorded under the Federal Government from July. —9Data other than
former GDR ’s armed forces and from residential construction in connection end-of-year figures have been estimated. Including indebtedness of munici-
with the return of the troops of the former USSR in eastern Germany to pal special-purpose associations. their home country. —6Old debt mainly expressed in foreign currency, in
56*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
8. Changes in public sector indebtedness *
  
  
Net borrowing  1 
Level at end of 2001 2002
2001 Total 1st qtr 2nd qtr 3rd qtr 4th qtr 1st half 1st qtr 2nd qtr June 2002
Item  5  million
Borrowers
Federal Government  2 701,077 716,787 −14,908 −16,138 −8,256 + 6,820 + 2,665 + 15,709 + 20,542 −4,833
"German Unity" Fund 39,638 39,702 − 787 + 748 − 739 − 41 − 754 + 64 + 64 −
ERP Special Fund 19,161 19,308 + 775 + 513 + 91 + 449 − 278 + 147 − 63 + 210
Indemnification Fund 285 325 + 81 + 21 + 22 + 21 + 17 + 40 + 19 + 21
West  German  Länder 305,788 314,447 + 23,357 + 3,307 + 2,310 + 7,422 + 10,318 + 8,660 + 4,422 + 4,237 Governments
East German  Länder 58,771 60,156 + 3,059 + 318 + 154 + 1,365 + 1,222 + 1,385 + 372 + 1,013 Governments
West German local authorities  3 82,203 83,700 + 2,487 + 815 + 435 − 460 + 1,697 + 1,275 + 275 + 1,000
East German local authorities  3 17,005 16,700 + 162 − 22 − 102 −+ 286 − 212 − 31 − 180
Total 1,223,929 1,251,125 + 14,224 −10,438 −6,086 + 15,576 + 15,173 + 27,068 + 25,601 + 1,468
Types of debt
Treasury discount paper  4 23,036 22,252 + 11,420 + 182 + 1,948 + 5,803 + 3,488 − 785 −5,219 + 4,434
Treasury notes  5 151,401 176,996 + 41,449 + 8,866 + 5,676 + 12,724 + 14,183 + 25,595 + 7,294 + 18,301
Five-year special Federal bonds  5 130,045 133,289 + 3,770 + 1,464 + 2,153 + 1,067 − 913 + 3,244 + 3,375 − 132
Federal savings bonds 26,395 20,636 −9,596 −1,431 −4,315 −1,422 −2,428 −5,759 −3,748 −2,012
Debt securities  5 448,148 463,906 + 9,260 + 4,838 + 2,059 + 336 + 2,027 + 15,758 + 13,469 + 2,289
Direct lending by
credit institutions  6 422,440 408,991 −9,100 + 10,382 −14,596 −1,802 −3,086 −13,578 + 8,297 −21,875
Loans from social security funds 174 239 − 37 − 8− 18 − 3− 8 + 64 + 44 + 21
Other loans  6 13,070 15,640 + 2,586 − 643 + 994 + 36 + 2,199 + 2,571 + 2,124 + 447
Old debt  7 193 152 − 200 − 45 + 2 − 17 − 140 − 42 − 36 − 6
Equalisation claims 8,986 8,986 −35,328 −34,044 + 11 −1,144 − 150 −−−
Investment assistance levy 40 40 − 0− 0− 0− 0− 0+ 0+ 0 −
Total 1,223,929 1,251,125 + 14,224 −10,438 −6,086 + 15,576 + 15,173 + 27,068 + 25,601 + 1,468
Creditors
Banking system
Bundesbank 4,440 4,440 −−−−−−−−
Credit institutions 534,400 533,000 −29,304 −3,235 −11,848 −11,361 −2,859 −1,529 + 11,671 −13,200
Domestic non-banks
Social security funds 174 239 − 31 − 0− 5− 20 − 5 + 65 + 44 + 21
Other  8 243,710 253,346 + 42,436 + 4,566 + 6,222 + 12,028 + 19,620 + 9,636 + 6,689 + 2,947
Foreign creditors  pe 441,205 460,100 + 1,123 −11,769 − 456 + 14,930 −1,583 + 18,895 + 7,195 + 11,700
Total 1,223,929 1,251,125 + 14,224 −10,438 −6,086 + 15,576 + 15,173 + 27,068 + 25,601 + 1,468
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Treasury discount paper. —5Excluding paper in the issuers ’portfolios. —
Office. —*Excluding public authorities ’mutual indebtedness. —1Net 6Including loans raised abroad. —7Old liabilities arising from residential
borrowing differs from the change in indebtedness, which includes the construction and liabilities arising from the residential construction of th e
assumption and reduction of debts. —2See Table VIII. 7, footnote 8. — former GDR ’s armed forces and from residential construction in connection
3Data other than end-of-year figures have been estimated. Including with the return of the troops of the former USSR based in eastern Germany
indebtedness of municipal special-purpose associations and municipal to their home country, and old debt in accordance with the London Debts
hospitals. —4Excluding mobilisation and liquidity paper. Predominantly Agreement. — 8 Ascertained as a difference. 
9. Loans raised by public authorities against borrowers ’ notes
  
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999,  5  million
End of year Federal "German ERP L änder Local Federal Inherited "Use of Hard
or month Govern- Unity" Special Govern- authorities Railways Liabilites Coal" Equal-
Total  1 ment  2,  3 Fund Fund ments 4,  5 Fund  3 Fund  3 isation Fund  3 
1998 898,030 23,094 31,415 22,215 504,148 184,942 45,098 83,447 3,671
1999 444,031 64,704 10,481 9,778 264,158 94,909 −− −
2000 431,364 54,731 7,178 10,801 268,362 90,292 −− −
2001 June 422,367 48,818 5,159 10,570 268,552 89,267 −− −
Sep. 418,633 47,487 4,418 9,998 267,602 89,129 −− −
Dec. 416,068 44,791 4,464 9,699 267,988 89,126 −− −
2002 Mar. 409,176 41,751 4,392 9,397 264,741 88,895 −− −
June 404,661 40,431 4,172 9,256 262,574 88,228 −− −
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical 3See Table VIII. 7, footnote 8. —4Data other than end-of-year figures have
Office. —1Excluding Debt Register claims and cash advances. Including been estimated. Including municipal special-purpose associations and
small amounts of: mortgage loans, land charges in annuity and other forms, municipal hospitals. — 5 Including contractually agreed loans. 
and debts outstanding. —2Including Equalisation of Burdens Fund. —
57*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
10. Indebtedness of the Federal Government
  
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999,  5  million
Treasury Indebtedness
discount paper  1 to non-banks Old debt
Federal Direct
of which Treasury 5 −year Debt lending owing to
Treasury paper/ special Federal secur- by credit Social German Equal-
End of year financing Treasury Federal savings ities institu- security Other unifica- isation
or month Total Total paper notes  2 bonds  2 bonds 2 tions  3,  4 funds 3,  5,  6  tion 7 claims Other  8 
1996 839,883 26,789 7,166 55,289 176,164 96,391 434,295 32,988 5 7,766 1,330 8,684 183
1997 905,691 25,286 5,221 78,848 177,721 99,317 481,619 31,845 5 870 1,300 8,684 1971998 957,983 24,666 4,558 84,760 199,274 92,698 519,718 24,125 − 2,603 1,270 8,684 186
1999  
9 714,069 11,553 1,584 44,335 120,498 41,621 379,808 67,872 60 2,568 476 45,175 104
2000 715,819 11,516 1,805 44,678 123,642 35,991 400,490 52,836 29 2,099 285 44,146 1072001 701,077 21,136 1,658 59,643 119,911 26,395 416,195 47,111 26 1,481 85 8,986 107
2001          Oct. 702,389 21,192 1,714 54,448 121,162 28,266 416,241 50,174 26 1,541 229 9,004 106
         Nov. 708,895 21,141 1,663 55,031 119,746 26,384 416,428 59,295 26 1,507 227 9,004 106         Dec. 701,077 21,136 1,658 59,643 119,911 26,395 416,195 47,111 26 1,481 85 8,986 107
2002          Jan. 713,928 16,852 1,658 58,910 119,373 24,779 427,130 56,198 26 1,481 85 8,986 109
         Feb. 716,611 16,886 1,693 59,226 122,524 24,752 428,296 54,242 26 1,481 85 8,986 108         Mar. 721,619 16,917 1,724 59,622 123,287 22,648 429,270 59,356 12 1,365 49 8,986 108
         Apr. 714,032 11,709 1,787 64,533 123,500 22,666 431,935 49,165 12 1,366 54 8,986 106
         May 715,840 16,623 1,788 64,891 123,015 21,967 430,935 47,891 12 1,366 50 8,986 103         June 716,787 21,389 1,776 66,445 123,155 20,636 431,039 43,600 12 1,374 51 8,986 100
         July 726,077 21,253 1,763 71,385 123,144 20,773 430,911 49,222 12 1,374 54 7,848 102
         Aug. 723,931 26,149 1,724 71,540 124,334 20,057 430,140 42,323 12 1,374 52 7,848 101         Sep. 726,896 30,982 1,700 72,762 125,316 19,752 429,452 39,392 0 1,242 50 7,848 101
         Oct.
p 728,652 30,980 1,667 78,405 125,954 17,982 425,628 40,487 0 1,242 28 7,848 99
1Excluding mobilisation and liquidity paper. In November 1999, including with the return of the troops of the former USSR based in eastern Germany
cash bills. —2Excluding paper in the issuers ’portfolios. —3Including loans to their home country. —8Commutation and compensation debt and old
raised abroad. —4Including money market debt. —5Including loans debt mainly expressed in foreign currency. —9Since July 1, 1999 the
granted by supplementary pension funds for government employees. — Federal Government has assumed joint responsibility for the debts of the
6Including liabilities arising from the investment assistance levy. — Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, the Federal Railway Fund and the
7Assumption of liabilities arising from residential construction of the Equalisation Fund for Safeguarding the Use of Coal. The special funds
former GDR ’s armed forces and from residential construction in connection mentioned are ascribed to the Federal Government from July 1999. 
11. Federal Government borrowing in the market
  
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM billion / from 1999,  5  billion
of which
5−year special Loans against Change in
Total new borrowing Debt Securities Federal bonds Other securities  2 borrowers ’ notes Money money
market market
Period gross  1 net gross  1 net gross  1 net gross  1 net gross net debt deposits
1996 + 185,696 + 83,049 + 54,038 + 31,988 + 45,445 + 5,445 + 67,015 + 39,586 + 15,050 + 1,906 + 4,148 + 6,548
1997 + 250,074 + 65,808 + 79,323 + 47,323 + 59,557 + 1,557 + 98,275 + 24,983 + 12,950 − 8,009 − 30 − 3,304
1998 + 228,050 + 52,292 + 78,304 + 38,099 + 55,078 + 21,553 + 85,706 − 1,327 + 12,023 − 2,927 − 3,065 − 5,440
1999 + 139,865 + 31,631 + 53,931 + 114,080 + 22,229 + 18,610 + 44,904 − 5,836 + 14,861 + 52,897 + 3,937 + 1,832
2000 + 122,725 + 1,750 + 49,395 + 20,682 + 26,342 + 3,144 + 45,278 − 5,323 + 7,273 − 9,973 − 5,563 − 940
2001 + 135,018 − 14,741 + 36,511 + 15,705 + 19,603 − 3,730 + 69,971 + 14,989 + 5,337 − 9,941 + 3,595 − 1,495
2001          Jan.-Oct. + 117,261 − 13,430 + 36,557 + 15,751 + 12,815 − 2,480 + 59,586 + 11,721 + 4,195 − 7,330 + 4,106 − 976
2002          Jan.-Oct.  p + 137,643 + 27,575 + 31,867 + 9,433 + 26,620 + 6,042 + 76,413 + 20,192 + 4,098 − 5,534 − 1,354 + 777
2001          Oct. + 11,937 + 4,120 + 2,139 + 2,139 + 338 + 338 + 11,294 + 3,768 + 219 − 85 − 2,053 − 263
         Nov. + 18,764 + 6,506 + 188 + 188 + 6,622 − 1,417 + 1,002 − 1,350 + 570 − 1,295 + 10,382 − 177
         Dec. − 1,007 − 7,817 − 233 − 233 + 166 + 166 + 9,383 + 4,618 + 571 − 1,317 −10,893 − 342
2002          Jan. + 25,679 + 12,851 + 10,935 + 10,935 − 539 − 539 + 4,961 − 6,634 + 686 − 549 + 9,635 + 630
         Feb. + 10,575 + 2,683 + 1,165 + 1,165 + 9,669 + 3,151 + 572 + 323 + 117 − 1,009 − 948 + 83
         Mar. + 15,492 + 5,009 + 975 + 975 + 763 + 763 + 6,740 − 1,677 + 548 − 1,482 + 6,467 + 9
         Apr. + 3,637 − 7,587 + 2,665 + 2,665 + 214 + 214 + 9,919 − 278 + 708 − 321 − 9,870 − 307
         May + 9,842 + 1,807 − 1,000 − 1,000 + 6,025 − 485 + 5,543 + 4,574 + 522 − 28 − 1,247 − 190
         June + 8,533 + 947 + 104 + 104 + 140 + 140 + 11,512 + 4,988 + 88 − 971 − 3,311 − 41
         July + 27,272 + 9,291 + 10,400 − 127 − 11 − 11 + 9,934 + 4,941 + 610 − 716 + 6,338 + 133
         Aug. + 6,663 − 2,147 − 772 − 772 + 8,739 + 1,189 + 5,360 + 4,337 + 135 − 100 − 6,799 + 228
         Sep. + 9,231 + 2,966 − 688 − 688 + 983 + 983 + 11,072 + 5,748 + 590 − 348 − 2,727 + 1,413
         Oct. p + 20,719 + 1,756 + 8,082 − 3,824 + 637 + 637 + 10,800 + 3,871 + 94 − 10 + 1,106 − 1,181
1After deduction of repurchases. —2Federal Treasury notes, Federal   
savings bonds, Treasury discount paper, Treasury financing paper.  
  
58*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
12. Receipts, expenditure and assets of the wage and
salary earners ’ pension insurance funds
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999,  5  million
Receipts  1 Expenditure  1 Assets  5 
of which of which Memor-
Balance Mort- andum
Pen- of receipts gage item
Pension sioners ’ and and Adminis-
Contri- Federal pay- health expend- other Real trative
Period Total butions  2 payments Total ments  3 insurance  4 iture Total Deposits  6 Securities loans  7 estate assets
Western Germany
1995 276,302 225,324 47,979 279,226 230,222 15,923 −2,924 21,756 16,801 3,948 746 262 7,800
1996  8 288,761 236,036 50,478 288,716 237,464 16,809 + 45 14,456 9,608 2,119 2,500 229 8,863
1997 305,606 248,463 54,896 295,635 246,011 17,892 + 9,971 14,659 10,179 1,878 2,372 230 9,261
1998 317,340 250,063 65,191 304,155 254,783 18,636 + 13,185 18,194 14,201 1,493 2,274 226 9,573
1999 169,124 128,191 39,884 159,819 134,536 9,910 + 9,305 13,623 11,559 824 1,127 114 4,904
2000  p 173,020 128,057 43,638 166,569 139,189 10,253 + 6,451 14,350 11,459 1,676 1,105 110 4,889
2001  8,  p 178,293 130,064 46,710 172,382 143,863 10,610 + 5,911 13,973 10,646 1,517 1,699 111 4,917
2001          2nd qtr 43,823 31,800 11,657 42,420 35,572 2,610 + 1,403 13,315 10,098 1,406 1,709 102 4,956         3rd qtr 44,023 32,123 11,530 43,229 36,469 2,688 + 794 11,543 8,201 1,532 1,704 106 4,973         4th qtr 47,452 35,514 11,588 43,530 36,400 2,701 + 3,922 13,973 10,646 1,517 1,699 111 4,917
2002          1st qtr 43,411 30,893 12,212 43,792 36,898 2,719 − 381 11,943 8,712 1,427 1,698 106 4,933
         2nd qtr 44,541 31,949 12,222 43,927 36,784 2,711 + 614 10,663 7,490 1,366 1,696 111 4,954
Eastern Germany
1995 70,774 44,970 16,408 77,780 63,812 4,362 −7,006 . . . . . .
1996 74,790 46,580 17,910 83,830 68,316 4,851 −9,040 . . . . . .
1997 79,351 48,939 20,065 87,424 70,500 5,388 −8,073 . . . . . .
1998 81,072 47,764 23,564 90,863 73,040 5,757 −9,791 . . . . . .
1999 43,214 24,015 14,744 47,641 38,383 3,040 −4,427 . . . . . .
2000  p 43,513 22,655 15,224 49,385 39,414 3,112 −5,872 . . . . . .
2001  p 44,462 21,984 16,383 50,943 40,254 3,152 −6,481 . . . . . .
2001          3rd qtr 10,540 5,372 4,070 12,881 10,240 796 −2,341 . . . . . .
         4th qtr 11,446 5,860 4,107 12,857 10,221 788 −1,411 . . . . . .
2002          1st qtr 11,070 5,157 4,410 13,106 10,373 793 −2,036 . . . . . .
         2nd qtr 11,493 5,455 4,558 13,046 10,228 797 −1,553 . . . . . .
         3rd qtr 10,757 5,275 4,334 13,391 10,530 832 −2,634 . . . . . .
Source: Federal Minister of Labour and Social Affairs and Association of including nursing insurance scheme for pensioners . —5Largely cor-
German Pension Insurance Funds. —1The annual figures differ from the responds to fluctuation reserves. Level at the end of the year or quarter.
sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. From 1993 From 1992 figures for the whole of Germany. —6Including cash
including financial compensation payments. —2Including contributions for resources. —7Excluding loans to other social security funds; including
recipients of public financial benefits. —3Payments by pension insurance participating interests. —8Excluding receipts arising from the higher
funds to health insurance institutions under section 50 of the Social Security valuation of participating interests. 
Code V have been deducted from pension payments. —4From 1995
13. Receipts and expenditure of the Federal Labour Office
  
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999,  5  million
Receipts Expenditure
Subsidies
of which of which or work-
ing fund
Promotion of vocational Promo- Balance credits
Unemployment relief  3,  4 training  4,  5 tion of of receipts of thewinter and Federal
Contri- Western Eastern Western Eastern con- expend- Govern-
Period Total  
1 butions Levies  2 Total Total Germany Germany Total Germany Germany struction iture ment
Germany
1995 90,211 84,354 2,957 97,103 49,254 36,161 13,094 34,441 16,745 17,696 1,586 −6,892 6,887
1996 91,825 85,073 3,346 105,588 57,123 40,186 16,938 36,478 18,368 18,111 903 −13,763 13,756
1997 93,149 85,793 2,959 102,723 60,273 40,309 19,964 31,418 16,117 15,301 443 −9,574 9,574
1998 91,088 86,165 2,868 98,852 53,483 35,128 18,355 34,279 16,784 17,496 471 −7,764 7,719
1999 47,954 45,141 1,467 51,694 25,177 16,604 8,573 20,558 10,480 10,078 279 −3,740 3,739
2000 49,606 46,359 1,403 50,473 23,946 15,615 8,331 20,324 10,534 9,790 294 − 868 867
2001 50,682 47,337 1,640 52,613 25,036 16,743 8,294 20,713 11,094 9,619 268 −1,931 1,931
2001          3rd qtr 12,692 11,748 437 12,549 5,899 3,974 1,926 5,024 2,664 2,361 8 + 143 0
         4th qtr 14,319 13,045 770 13,866 6,321 4,366 1,955 5,637 2,973 2,664 3 + 453 −2,771
2002          1st qtr 11,502 11,188 51 13,093 6,587 4,608 1,979 4,665 2,523 2,142 139 −1,591 3,720
         2nd qtr 12,200 11,459 433 14,141 7,098 5,005 2,093 5,230 2,903 2,327 97 −1,941 2,200
         3rd qtr 12,710 11,808 528 13,905 6,708 4,839 1,869 5,182 2,849 2,334 7 −1,195 854
Source: Federal Labour Office. —1Excluding Federal Government liquidity replacement for the unemployment benefits. —4Including contributions to
assistance. —2Levies to promote winter construction and to pay bank- the statutory health insurance, and to the pension insurance funds. —
ruptcy compensation to employees. —3Unemployment benefits, 5Vocational training, measures to foster the commencement of work,
short-time-working benefits. Including the integration allowance paid to rehabilitation and job creation measures. 
resettlers from eastern Europe and emigrants from the GDR as a
59*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
IX. Economic conditions
  
1. Origin and expenditure of domestic product, distribution of national income
    Germany
    
1st half 1st half
  1998   1999   2000   2001   2002   1999   2000   2001   2002   1998   1999   2000   2001
DM Change from % of
Item billion
 5 
 billion previous year in % total
at  1995  prices
I.Origin of domestic product
Producing sector
(excluding construction) 855.2 429.4 445.6 447.3 217.1 −1.8 3.8 0.4 −2.5 23.3 22.4 22.6 22.6
Construction 205.3 105.5 102.6 96.0 43.8 0.5 −2.7 −6.5 −5.1 5.6 5.5 5.2 4.8
Distribution, catering trade,and transportation  
1 614.6 335.3 352.9 361.8 178.8 6.7 5.3 2.5 1.0 16.7 17.5 17.9 18.3
Financing, rents and corporateservices  
2 1,028.6 548.3 572.6 585.2 293.7 4.3 4.4 2.2 1.9 28.0 28.6 29.1 29.5
Public and private services  3 737.6 380.6 387.3 391.6 197.6 0.9 1.8 1.1 1.2 20.1 19.9 19.7 19.8
All economic sectors 3,487.2 1,823.3 1,885.3 1,906.5 943.4 2.3 3.4 1.1 0.2 95.0 95.2 95.7 96.2Memo item: Enterprise sector 3,041.7 1,595.6 1,656.7 1,679.3 829.7 2.6 3.8 1.4 0.2 82.9 83.3 84.1 84.8
Economic sectors, adjusted  
4 3,320.2 1,730.3 1,785.5 1,801.4 888.9 1.9 3.2 0.9 −0.0 90.5 90.4 90.7 90.9
Gross domestic product 3,669.9 1,914.8 1,969.5 1,980.8 977.7 2.0 2.9 0.6 −0.4 100 100 100 100
II.Expenditure of domestic product
Private consumption  5 2,072.8 1,099.2 1,114.8 1,131.6 550.4 3.7 1.4 1.5 −1.1 56.5 57.4 56.6 57.1
Government consumption 726.3 375.0 379.6 382.6 191.4 1.0 1.2 0.8 1.0 19.8 19.6 19.3 19.3
Machinery and equipment 292.5 160.3 175.5 165.4 73.4 7.2 9.5 −5.8 −10.6 8.0 8.4 8.9 8.3
Construction 479.5 248.7 242.1 227.7 104.7 1.4 −2.6 −6.0 −5.2 13.1 13.0 12.3 11.5
Other investment  6 40.0 23.2 25.2 26.5 13.2 13.5 8.4 5.0 3.0 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.3
Changes in stocks  7 3.2 −6.6 −2.7 −15.2 −2.0 . . . . 0.1 −0.3 −0.1 −0.8
Domestic demand 3,614.3 1,899.8 1,934.5 1,918.6 931.1 2.8 1.8 −0.8 −2.2 98.5 99.2 98.2 96.9
Net exports 55.6 15.0 35.0 62.2 46.6 . . . . 1.5 0.8 1.8 3.1
Exports 1,078.6 582.5 662.1 695.4 348.2 5.6 13.7 5.0 0.4 29.4 30.4 33.6 35.1Imports 1,023.0 567.4 627.1 633.1 301.6 8.5 10.5 1.0 −5.1 27.9 29.6 31.8 32.0
Gross domestic product 3,669.9 1,914.8 1,969.5 1,980.8 977.7 2.0 2.9 0.6 −0.4 100 100 100 100
at  current  prices
III.Expenditure of domestic product
Private consumption  5 2,173.3 1,156.5 1,190.9 1,232.2 606.9 4.1 3.0 3.5 0.5 57.6 58.5 58.7 59.5
Government consumption 722.7 378.8 387.2 393.5 191.9 2.5 2.2 1.6 2.0 19.2 19.1 19.1 19.0Machinery and equipment 293.5 159.6 175.8 166.3 74.6 6.4 10.2 −5.4 −9.6 7.8 8.1 8.7 8.0
Construction 475.3 245.2 240.2 226.2 104.2 0.9 −2.1 −5.8 −5.2 12.6 12.4 11.8 10.9
Other investment  
6 38.3 21.4 22.8 23.7 11.8 9.1 6.7 4.1 3.0 1.0 1.1 1.1 1.1
Changes in stocks  7 14.1 0.9 5.2 −9.4 4.0 . . . . 0.4 0.0 0.3 −0.5
Domestic demand 3,717.2 1,962.3 2,022.2 2,032.6 993.3 3.3 3.0 0.5 −1.0 98.5 99.2 99.6 98.1
Net exports 56.4 16.3 7.8 38.6 41.2 . . . . 1.5 0.8 0.4 1.9
Exports 1,095.6 587.0 685.4 726.9 365.6 4.8 16.8 6.1 0.5 29.0 29.7 33.8 35.1Imports 1,039.2 570.7 677.6 688.3 324.4 7.4 18.7 1.6 −6.7 27.5 28.8 33.4 33.2
Gross domestic product 3,773.6 1,978.6 2,030.0 2,071.2 1,034.5 2.6 2.6 2.0 1.5 100 100 100 100
IV.Prices (1995=100)
Private consumption 104.8 105.2 106.8 108.9 110.3 0.4 1.5 1.9 1.6 . . . .Gross domestic product 102.8 103.3 103.1 104.6 105.8 0.5 −0.3 1.4 1.9 . . . .
Terms of trade 100.0 100.2 95.8 96.2 97.6 0.2 −4.4 0.4 1.7 . . . .
V.Distribution of national income
Wages and salaries 2,015.6 1,058.0 1,099.0 1,120.4 535.5 2.7 3.9 1.9 1.1 71.5 72.0 72.8 73.2Entrepreneurial and propertyincome 805.0 411.1 410.3 410.9 223.4 −0.1 −0.2 0.2 1.5 28.5 28.0 27.2 26.8
National income 2,820.6 1,469.0 1,509.2 1,531.2 758.9 1.9 2.7 1.5 1.2 100 100 100 100
Memo item: Gross national
income 3,746.2 1,965.9 2,020.9 2,055.8 1,024.7 2.6 2.8 1.7 1.3 . . . .
(Gross nat. product)
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August 2002. —1In- ing taxes on products (offset against subsidies on products). —5Including
cluding telecommunications. —2Financial intermediation, real estate activi- private non-commercial organisations. —6Intangible fixed capital forma-
ties, rents and corporate services. —3Including care-at-home services. — tion (inter alia, EDP software, copyrights) and economically useful animals
4Gross value added after deduction of assumed bank charges, but exclud- and plants. — 7 Including net increase in valuables. 
60*IX. Economic conditions

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
 IX. Economic conditions
 
2. Output in the producing sector     
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Industry  1 
Producing sector, Intermediate
total Total goods  2 Capital goods  3 Consumer goods  4 Energy  5 Construction
Change Change Change Change Change Change Changefrom from from from from from fromprevious previous previous previous previous previous previousyear year year year year year year
Period in % in % in % in % in % in % in %
1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 
Germany  
  
1998 106.2 + 3.4 109.6 + 4.7 108.7 + 3.0 116.2 + 8.8 101.6 + 1.1 100.4 −1.3 87.2 −3.2
1999 107.7 + 1.4 111.5 + 1.7 110.7 + 1.8 118.0 + 1.5 103.3 + 1.7 100.0 −0.4 87.9 + 0.8
2000 113.4 + 5.3 119.1 + 6.8 116.9 + 5.6 130.9 + 10.9 105.6 + 2.2 99.7 −0.3 84.9 −3.4
2001 113.2 −0.2 119.9 + 0.7 116.1 −0.7 134.3 + 2.6 105.2 −0.4 98.1 −1.6 79.0 −6.9
  
2001          Sep. 119.9 −1.7 126.9 −1.6 121.1 −2.2 145.0 −0.5 110.4 −2.2 92.1 −1.6 93.3 −3.3
         Oct. 118.6 −2.7 124.4 −3.0 121.0 −3.4 135.7 −2.4 113.3 −3.3 98.4 −3.7 94.3 + 0.2
         Nov. 117.3 −4.0 123.4 −4.2 117.6 −4.9 138.8 −3.6 110.6 −3.9 105.4 −1.1 84.7 −5.3
         Dec. 105.5 −4.4 111.5 −5.0 96.9 −8.3 137.0 −3.9 98.7 −1.6 111.8 + 4.7 61.2 −6.3
2002          Jan. 100.9 −4.2 107.6 −4.4 107.4 −4.6 114.4 −5.2 98.2 −2.3 111.1 −0.9 48.4 −5.3
         Feb. 104.2 −4.6 111.7 −4.9 110.6 −3.7 121.8 −7.2 98.9 −2.8 98.8 −1.6 57.7 −2.2
         Mar. 7 117.7 −2.7 125.5 −3.5 123.0 −1.7 139.5 −6.3 109.1 −1.3 103.4 −0.6 7 75.3 + 3.4
         Apr. 7 111.6 −1.4 117.8 −1.5 116.9 −0.2 130.1 −2.3 101.5 −2.4 97.4 −1.0 7 79.6 −1.4
         May  6 7 108.3 −3.6 114.3 −3.5 115.4 −1.7 122.9 −5.8 100.2 −2.4 94.3 + 2.2 7 78.3 −8.6
         June  6 7 116.1 −1.4 124.2 −1.0 121.1 −0.5 141.1 −1.3 104.5 −1.9 87.0 + 1.6 7 83.0 −7.2
         July  + 7 111.8 −1.1 118.5 −0.3 118.7 + 0.6 129.8 −0.8 101.3 −1.7 87.0 −2.2 7 84.6 −6.9
         Aug.  + 7 104.1 −1.2 109.8 −0.5 111.8 + 1.3 116.1 −0.9 97.2 −3.6 88.9 + 1.1 7 76.7 −9.0
         Sep.  + 7 118.4 −1.3 126.1 −0.6 124.1 + 2.5 140.5 −3.1 108.4 −1.8 89.7 −2.6 7 87.4 −6.3
Western Germany  
  
1998 105.9 + 3.4 108.7 + 4.4 107.6 + 2.5 115.7 + 8.6 99.9 + 1.0 101.2 −1.2 87.7 −1.9
1999 107.2 + 1.2 110.1 + 1.3 109.0 + 1.3 117.1 + 1.2 101.1 + 1.2 100.6 −0.6 88.9 + 1.4
2000 112.7 + 5.1 117.1 + 6.4 114.3 + 4.9 129.8 + 10.8 102.8 + 1.7 99.8 −0.8 87.5 −1.6
2001 112.4 −0.3 117.6 + 0.4 113.2 −1.0 132.9 + 2.4 101.9 −0.9 97.9 −1.9 82.2 −6.1
  
2001          Sep. 118.9 −1.9 124.4 −1.9 117.7 −2.5 143.6 −0.9 107.2 −2.6 91.9 −1.8 96.8 −2.4
         Oct. 117.4 −3.1 121.7 −3.4 117.6 −3.8 134.3 −2.8 109.6 −4.0 98.2 −3.9 98.7 + 1.1
         Nov. 116.0 −4.2 120.5 −4.5 114.3 −5.1 136.6 −4.0 106.9 −4.2 105.3 −1.4 87.9 −4.4
         Dec. 104.8 −4.6 109.2 −5.4 94.4 −8.6 135.2 −4.4 95.3 −2.0 111.5 + 4.4 63.8 −5.5
2002          Jan. 100.3 −4.4 105.3 −4.8 104.6 −5.0 113.0 −5.7 95.1 −2.5 110.9 −1.1 50.8 −3.2
         Feb. 103.6 −5.0 109.4 −5.4 107.7 −4.3 120.4 −7.7 95.7 −3.3 98.7 −1.8 60.9 −2.2
         Mar. 7 116.9 −3.2 122.7 −4.1 119.8 −2.4 137.7 −6.6 105.3 −1.8 103.2 −0.7 7 80.5 + 4.8
         Apr. 7 110.8 −1.6 115.3 −1.9 113.6 −0.6 128.7 −2.7 98.2 −2.5 97.2 −1.1 7 85.2 + 0.5
         May  6 7 107.2 −3.8 111.5 −3.9 111.8 −2.3 121.4 −6.0 96.3 −2.7 94.2 + 2.5 7 83.3 −7.1
         June  6 7 115.1 −1.5 121.3 −1.5 117.5 −0.8 139.3 −1.6 100.7 −2.3 86.6 + 1.5 7 88.0 −5.4
         July  + 7 111.1 −0.9 116.1 −0.4 115.5 + 0.5 128.8 −0.6 97.9 −2.0 86.7 −2.4 7 90.1 −4.8
         Aug.  + 7 102.4 −1.3 106.6 −0.8 108.0 + 1.0 113.9 −1.0 93.1 −4.0 88.6 + 1.3 7 80.0 −6.9
         Sep.  + 7 117.3 −1.3 123.2 −1.0 120.7 + 2.5 138.5 −3.6 104.4 −2.6 89.6 −2.5 7 92.6 −4.3
Eastern Germany  
  
1998 109.1 + 2.9 126.2 + 9.2 125.9 + 11.3 126.3 + 11.5 126.5 + 3.8 94.0 −2.3 85.1 −8.3
1999 114.4 + 4.9 135.7 + 7.5 137.1 + 8.9 135.5 + 7.3 134.0 + 5.9 95.1 + 1.2 84.2 −1.1
2000 121.5 + 6.2 152.7 + 12.5 157.0 + 14.5 153.2 + 13.1 145.7 + 8.7 98.3 + 3.4 75.6 −10.2
2001 123.0 + 1.2 160.1 + 4.8 162.6 + 3.6 163.7 + 6.9 152.6 + 4.7 99.5 + 1.2 67.1 −11.2
  
2001          Sep. 132.0 + 0.7 169.6 + 3.3 175.6 + 2.0 174.4 + 6.7 155.8 + 1.9 93.8 + 0.0 80.5 −7.4
         Oct. 131.9 + 1.0 169.2 + 2.8 174.4 + 1.4 165.0 + 4.1 165.4 + 3.8 100.4 −1.8 78.5 −3.7
         Nov. 132.8 −1.7 172.5 −0.1 170.2 −1.4 186.4 + 3.0 162.3 −1.3 106.6 + 1.4 73.2 −9.1
         Dec. 114.1 −1.0 149.7 −0.5 135.7 −5.5 174.5 + 3.7 146.5 + 2.2 114.3 + 7.4 51.9 −9.6
2002          Jan. 108.4 −1.3 146.7 + 0.5 151.6 + 0.1 143.7 + 2.0 142.1 −0.2 113.1 + 1.1 39.7 −13.7
         Feb. 111.2 + 1.3 151.0 + 2.0 155.9 + 3.3 151.0 −0.3 143.7 + 2.2 99.5 + 0.2 46.2 −1.7
         Mar. 7 126.9 + 2.6 171.9 + 4.0 174.3 + 6.6 177.1 + 0.6 163.2 + 3.8 105.4 + 0.9 7 56.5 −3.3
         Apr. 7 120.8 + 0.8 160.6 + 3.5 169.3 + 5.2 159.6 + 5.5 148.2 −1.5 98.6 −0.4 7 59.5 −9.7
         May  6 7 121.4 −1.9 161.9 + 1.4 171.9 + 4.2 154.0 −2.0 154.5 + 0.2 95.2 + 0.1 7 60.3 −15.4
         June  6 7 128.2 −0.2 172.4 + 3.4 177.2 + 3.1 179.4 + 4.8 158.3 + 2.5 90.2 + 2.3 7 65.1 −14.8
         July  + 7 120.2 −3.4 158.4 −0.1 169.7 + 1.9 151.0 −3.8 148.6 + 0.5 89.8 −0.8 7 64.7 −16.4
         Aug.  + 7 123.6 −1.7 164.1 + 2.4 171.0 + 3.5 163.3 + 2.8 154.3 + 0.2 90.9 + 0.1 7 65.0 −17.1
         Sep.  + 7 131.1 −0.7 175.5 + 3.5 177.7 + 1.2 183.3 + 5.1 164.6 + 5.6 90.9 −3.1 7 68.5 −14.9
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. —oBy means of ducing materials, and especially manufacture of refined petroleum pro-
the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. —1Manufacturing sector, ducts. —6Influenced by the exceptional working-day situation. —7Pro-
unless assigned to the main grouping energy, plus mining and quarrying. — visional up to adjustment to the figures of the annual overall survey in the
2Including mining and quarrying except energy-producing materials. —3In- construction sector. —+Provisional; adjusted in advance by the Federal Stat-
cluding manufacture of motor vehicles, trailers and semi-trailers. —4In- istical Office, by way of estimates, to the results of the Quarterly Production
cluding printing and service activities related to printing. —5Electricity, Survey for the third quarter (industry in Germany: + 1.8%). 
gas, steam and hot water supply, mining and quarrying of energy-pro-
61* IX. Economic conditions

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
 IX. Economic conditions
 
3. Orders received by industry *  
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Industry
 
Total Domestic orders Foreign orders Intermediate goods Capital goods  1 Consumer goods  2 
Change Change Change Change Change Change
from from from from from fromprevious previous previous previous previous previousyear year year year year year
Period 1995=100 in % 1995=100 in % 1995=100 in % 1995=100 in % 1995=100 in % 1995=100 in %
Germany  
  
1998 111.0 + 3.7 103.0 + 4.0 125.4 + 3.2 105.4 − 0.2 119.9 + 8.1 100.1 + 0.8
1999 113.3 + 2.1 102.7 − 0.3 132.3 + 5.5 106.3 + 0.9 123.9 + 3.3 101.0 + 0.9
2000 128.9 + 13.8 111.2 + 8.3 161.0 + 21.7 121.3 + 14.1 144.1 + 16.3 105.2 + 4.2
2001 126.8 − 1.6 108.6 − 2.3 159.7 − 0.8 116.4 − 4.0 143.3 − 0.6 106.8 + 1.5
 
2001          Sep. 127.3 − 6.5 110.8 − 5.0 157.2 − 8.3 115.9 −10.0 142.3 − 4.4 114.8 − 3.4
         Oct. 123.6 − 8.6 107.0 − 6.6 153.6 −11.2 115.5 − 9.7 135.7 − 9.7 110.2 − 0.8
         Nov. 123.3 − 8.6 105.8 − 8.4 155.0 − 8.8 111.8 −10.4 140.3 − 8.8 104.7 − 2.1
         Dec. 120.9 − 5.5 99.9 − 4.2 158.9 − 7.0 102.6 − 8.1 147.6 − 4.4 92.6 − 2.3
2002          Jan. 123.0 − 4.3 103.9 − 5.0 157.4 − 3.5 113.0 − 7.5 138.4 − 2.3 104.7 − 2.4
         Feb. 123.0 − 5.9 102.6 − 7.7 159.7 − 3.7 114.6 − 4.4 135.3 − 7.5 109.5 − 4.1
         Mar. 137.5 − 2.7 112.3 − 8.3 183.0 + 4.4 124.8 − 2.9 155.5 − 2.8 119.3 − 1.3
         Apr. 125.6 + 0.7 105.0 − 2.9 162.9 + 5.4 118.3 + 1.7 140.3 + 0.1 102.6 + 0.5
         May 127.3 + 0.7 101.4 − 5.1 174.0 + 7.6 116.5 − 1.0 147.9 + 2.9 96.3 − 2.5
         June 130.4 − 1.6 107.0 − 2.1 172.7 − 0.9 121.5 − 0.7 148.6 − 2.0 101.1 − 2.2
         July 126.1 + 0.3 106.5 − 2.0 161.5 + 3.3 118.4 + 1.5 142.3 + 0.6 99.4 − 4.6
         Aug. 118.3 + 1.2 100.7 − 3.3 150.1 + 7.1 108.7 + 0.7 133.1 + 3.7 101.1 − 6.6
         Sep.  p 129.5 + 1.7 107.3 − 3.2 169.6 + 7.9 118.7 + 2.4 145.2 + 2.0 112.9 − 1.7
Western Germany  
  
1998 110.2 + 3.0 102.4 + 3.6 123.5 + 2.0 104.0 − 0.9 119.8 + 7.1 99.0 + 0.5
1999 112.3 + 1.9 101.8 − 0.6 130.2 + 5.4 104.5 + 0.5 123.9 + 3.4 99.7 + 0.7
2000 127.5 + 13.5 109.7 + 7.8 158.0 + 21.4 118.7 + 13.6 144.0 + 16.2 103.1 + 3.42001 124.8 − 2.1 106.7 − 2.7 155.8 − 1.4 112.9 − 4.9 142.8 − 0.8 104.4 + 1.3
 
2001          Sep. 124.8 − 7.6 108.4 − 6.0 153.1 − 9.4 111.9 −11.1 141.2 − 5.7 112.4 − 3.8
         Oct. 121.5 − 9.3 104.9 − 7.1 150.1 −11.8 111.7 −10.6 135.5 −10.2 107.6 − 1.0
         Nov. 121.3 − 8.7 103.7 − 8.8 151.6 − 8.6 108.4 −10.9 140.1 − 8.7 102.0 − 1.9
         Dec. 118.6 − 5.4 97.5 − 4.1 154.8 − 6.8 99.3 − 9.0 146.4 − 3.6 90.3 − 2.3
2002          Jan. 121.0 − 4.8 101.9 − 5.7 153.8 − 3.7 108.9 − 8.6 138.8 − 2.2 102.2 − 2.8
         Feb. 120.9 − 6.1 100.7 − 8.4 155.7 − 3.4 111.0 − 4.1 134.9 − 8.0 107.3 − 4.3
         Mar. 133.1 − 4.4 110.0 − 8.8 172.8 + 1.0 120.0 − 4.1 151.0 − 5.3 116.9 − 1.4
         Apr. 123.4 + 0.8 103.1 − 2.6 158.4 + 5.0 114.3 + 1.2 140.0 + 0.7 99.9 + 0.4
         May 125.4 + 1.0 99.2 − 5.3 170.3 + 8.2 112.5 − 1.6 148.4 + 3.8 93.3 − 2.9
         June 127.9 − 2.0 104.4 − 3.0 168.2 − 1.0 117.6 − 1.0 147.7 − 2.6 98.2 − 2.7
         July 124.4 + 0.4 104.6 − 2.1 158.4 + 3.4 114.3 + 1.1 143.1 + 1.2 97.3 − 4.8
         Aug. 115.1 + 0.2 98.0 − 4.2 144.4 + 5.7 104.1
+ 0.0 131.0 + 2.3 98.4 − 7.3
         Sep.  p 127.0 + 1.8 104.6 − 3.5 165.5 + 8.1 114.3 + 2.1 144.7 + 2.5 110.1 − 2.0
Eastern Germany  
  
1998 124.0 + 15.6 109.6 + 8.1 196.3 + 43.0 126.6 + 7.7 121.3 + 27.3 124.3 + 6.01999 129.7 + 4.6 113.9 + 3.9 209.7 + 6.8 134.7 + 6.4 124.6 + 2.7 131.8 + 6.0
2000 153.4 + 18.3 129.8 + 14.0 272.8 + 30.1 162.6 + 20.7 145.3 + 16.6 151.5 + 14.9
2001 161.2 + 5.1 133.0 + 2.5 303.9 + 11.4 172.9 + 6.3 150.3 + 3.4 160.9 + 6.2
 
2001          Sep. 168.8 + 9.5 140.6 + 5.6 311.5 + 19.5 178.8 + 2.2 159.7 + 20.5 168.4 + 3.4
         Oct. 157.7 − 0.2 133.0 − 1.3 282.4 + 2.5 175.2 + 0.5 138.3 − 1.6 170.1 + 2.3
         Nov. 156.5 − 6.7 131.8 − 4.6 281.4 −11.3 167.2 − 4.3 144.2 −10.0 166.2 − 2.9
         Dec. 160.3 − 6.2 130.7 − 4.3 309.8 −10.1 156.0 + 3.6 168.0 −13.8 144.5 − 4.0
2002          Jan. 155.5 + 1.5 128.8 + 1.9 290.3 + 0.6 179.0 + 6.5 131.8 − 4.5 162.1 + 2.3
         Feb. 156.4 − 3.6 126.2 − 1.2 308.9 − 8.3 170.7 − 7.6 142.1 + 0.8 159.6 − 1.6
         Mar. 210.6 + 19.5 140.8 − 3.4 563.7 + 70.3 201.3 + 10.1 227.7 + 33.2 175.8 + 1.7
         Apr. 162.4 − 0.9 129.3 − 6.0 329.9 + 10.9 181.2 + 7.3 144.1 − 9.8 165.3 + 2.2
         May 159.8 − 2.4 129.5 − 2.3 312.8 − 2.7 180.2 + 5.3 139.3 −11.7 164.9 + 3.5
         June 172.8 + 4.9 140.0 + 7.4 338.6 − 0.1 183.9 + 2.5 163.5 + 7.4 168.2 + 5.0
         July 154.3 − 1.5 130.3 − 2.1 275.4
+ 0.0 183.4 + 5.4 128.6 − 9.2 147.5 − 2.3
         Aug. 172.8 + 14.9 135.1 + 7.0 363.3 + 33.6 182.1 + 7.7 166.7 + 26.7 161.5 + 3.9
         Sep.  p 170.9 + 1.2 141.2 + 0.4 321.0 + 3.0 189.2 + 5.8 152.4 − 4.6 176.5 + 4.8
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. —*Economic means of the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. —1Including manu-
activities of the manufacturing sector, in particular, excluding manufacture facture of motor vehicles, trailers and semitrailers. —2Including printing
of food products, beverages, tobacco and refined petroleum products; and service activities related to printing. 
results for kinds of activity units; figures excluding value-added tax. —oBy
62* IX. Economic conditions

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
 IX. Economic conditions
 
4. Orders received by construction *   
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Germany Western Germany Eastern Germany
Housing Public Housing Public Housing Public Industrial Industrial Industrial
con- construc- construc- con- construc- construc- con- construc- construc-
Total struction tion  1 tion Total struction tion  1 tion Total struction tion  1 tion
 Change Change Change
 from from from
 previous previous previous
 year year year
Period 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 in % 1995 = 100 in % 1995 = 100 in %
1998 84.0 −0.5 82.4 79.9 90.1 86.6 + 0.6 83.4 86.7 88.8 77.7 −3.4 80.4 64.7 93.8
1999 82.2 −2.1 78.2 80.2 87.6 87.3 + 0.8 84.0 88.7 88.1 69.9 −10.0 66.2 61.1 86.2
2000 75.1 −8.6 65.4 75.6 82.1 81.2 −7.0 73.3 84.9 82.7 60.5 −13.4 49.2 54.4 80.3
2001 71.0 −5.5 54.2 73.3 81.3 79.2 −2.5 64.2 84.9 83.3 51.6 −14.7 33.6 47.1 75.6
   
2001          Aug. 74.8 + 1.9 52.9 75.9 90.7 81.7 + 6.4 61.0 87.2 90.2 58.4 −10.7 36.3 50.2 91.7
         Sep. 78.4 −7.0 58.2 81.1 90.8 87.6 −5.4 69.5 95.1 91.8 56.5 −12.5 35.0 49.3 88.0
         Oct. 69.2 −5.6 50.5 67.5 85.7 77.0 −4.9 59.3 77.6 89.0 50.6 −8.5 32.4 44.7 76.8
         Nov. 61.2 −3.2 39.9 69.4 67.7 66.7 −2.6 47.1 79.7 65.6 48.2 −4.7 25.3 46.1 73.6
         Dec. 59.7 −14.0 39.4 67.0 66.7 69.1 −10.5 48.5 80.6 70.6 37.5 −26.2 20.9 36.1 55.7
2002          Jan. 47.1 −8.2 38.0 51.9 48.4 53.6 −8.2 47.3 59.7 51.0 31.7 −7.6 19.1 34.0 40.7
         Feb. 55.5 −3.0 40.9 62.7 58.1 60.1 −7.5 49.7 66.8 59.7 44.8 + 16.1 23.0 53.6 53.7
         Mar. 83.9 + 5.4 55.6 96.4 90.8 98.5 + 10.5 69.5 118.8 95.7 49.6 −13.4 27.2 45.8 77.1
         Apr. 71.4 −4.9 52.8 72.3 85.0 80.1 −6.8 64.8 82.1 88.7 51.0 + 2.6 28.3 50.1 74.5
         May 69.3 −14.1 51.3 67.3 85.8 75.9 −15.2 62.4 77.0 84.3 53.6 −10.1 28.6 45.3 90.1
         June 79.8 −11.4 55.2 77.6 101.9 88.2 −10.3 66.6 88.9 102.8 60.1 −15.2 31.9 52.0 99.2
         July 70.4 −5.5 45.3 72.4 87.7 78.4 −4.2 55.1 83.8 88.7 51.7 −9.6 25.2 46.8 84.9
         Aug. 66.4 −11.2 46.4 64.8 83.9 70.8 −13.3 54.5 72.2 80.8 55.9 −4.3 29.9 48.1 92.5
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. —*Values exclusive gineering". —oBundesbank calculation. —1Including the railways and
of value-added tax. The figures refer to the economic classifications "Site pre- post office. 
paration" and "Building of complete constructions or parts thereof; civil en-
 
 
5. Retail trade turnover *)
    Germany
  
Retail trade  1 Memo item
of which:  by enterprises ’ main product range of which
Pharmaceutical
and medical Retail trade plus retailgoods, cosmetic Clothing, Furniture and sales of motor vehicles
Food, beverages, and toilet footwear and lighting and motorcycles plus Retail sales of
Total tobacco  
2 articles  2 leather goods  2 equipment  2 sales of automotive fuel motor vehicles  3 
Change from Change Change Change Change Change from Change
from from from from from previous year in % previous year in %
previous previous previous previous previous
not year year year year not year price- price-
Period in % in % in % in % in % 2000 = 100 adjusted adjusted  4 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 adjusted adjusted  4 2000 = 100
1998 96.9 + 1.0 + 1.1 97.1 + 1.5 88.2 + 5.8 100.3 −1.1 104.4 + 3.9 97.5 + 1.8 + 1.5 99.2 + 5.5
1999 97.7 + 0.8 + 0.5 98.0 + 0.9 94.7 + 7.4 100.2 −0.1 102.3 −2.0 98.7 + 1.2 + 0.8 102.9 + 3.7
2000 100.0 + 2.4 + 1.2 100.0 + 2.0 100.0 + 5.6 100.0 −0.2 100.0 −2.2 100.0 + 1.3 + 0.1 100.0 −2.8
2001 102.1 + 2.1 + 0.4 104.9 + 4.9 107.6 + 7.6 99.5 −0.5 98.7 −1.3 102.2 + 2.2 + 0.6 102.8 + 2.8
 
2001          Apr. 101.2 + 2.3 + 0.3 105.4 + 4.4 103.2 + 10.3 103.0 −5.0 97.5 + 1.4 102.8 + 2.7 + 0.8 108.5 + 4.7
         May 104.7 + 0.6 −1.8 109.3 + 3.8 109.8 + 4.5 107.8 −0.2 95.8 −5.1 107.1 −0.2 −2.5 114.9 −3.3
         June 97.2 + 5.1 + 2.5 104.6 + 6.7 104.5 + 8.5 87.9 + 2.2 89.7 + 2.9 99.4 + 4.7 + 2.4 106.9 + 3.5
         July 98.5 + 3.4 + 0.8 102.3 + 6.8 108.3 + 10.3 93.0 −0.7 88.9 −4.7 100.4 + 3.9 + 1.8 106.7 + 5.3
         Aug. 99.0 + 2.6 + 0.6 105.0 + 7.9 106.6 + 8.3 88.8 −4.4 88.2 + 0.1 98.8 + 2.6 + 0.6 97.2 + 2.3
         Sep. 97.3 −1.0 −2.3 97.6 + 1.5 100.5 + 3.2 110.3 + 6.0 92.2 −4.1 96.6 −0.6 −1.8 94.4 + 2.1
         Oct. 104.6 + 3.0 + 1.5 106.1 + 7.8 110.4 + 8.7 104.6 −5.4 105.6 + 0.5 104.9 + 4.6 + 3.1 106.7 + 11.5
         Nov. 110.7 + 2.6 + 1.5 111.7 + 7.1 113.2 + 7.9 110.0 + 1.7 112.6 −2.8 109.8 + 3.6 + 2.5 108.5 + 8.8
         Dec. 123.8 + 0.3 −0.8 123.4 + 4.1 124.5 + 8.2 124.8 −3.1 116.4 −4.9 117.2 + 0.3 −0.9 94.2 + 0.3
2002          Jan. 92.6 −2.4 −4.0 96.1 + 2.0 108.3 + 1.8 83.7 −4.9 87.4 −7.1 91.4 −1.7 −3.3 87.8 + 1.2
         Feb. 86.8 −1.5 −2.9 93.4 + 2.9 100.5 + 4.0 72.9 −5.0 86.1 −7.8 87.8 −0.6 −2.2 92.3 + 3.1
         Mar. 102.5 −2.1 −3.4 110.7 + 2.4 109.3 + 2.2 97.3 −2.3 93.3 −14.9 104.4 −3.1 −4.5 111.5 −6.2
         Apr. 101.0 −0.2 −1.2 105.7 + 0.3 113.6 + 10.1 97.9 −5.0 92.4 −5.2 104.7 + 1.8 + 0.6 118.5 + 9.2
         May 100.0 −4.5 −4.8 108.3 −0.9 109.6 −0.2 96.4 −10.6 83.1 −13.3 102.0 −4.8 −5.3 108.8 −5.3
         June 93.3 −4.0 −3.8 101.2 −3.3 106.3 + 1.7 85.4 −2.8 78.1 −12.9 96.8 −2.6 −2.9 109.3 + 2.2
         July 99.1 + 0.6 + 1.0 104.7 + 2.3 114.4 + 5.6 92.5 −0.5 87.7 −1.3 102.1 + 1.7 + 1.5 112.8 + 5.7
         Aug. 96.5 −2.5 −2.2 105.2 + 0.2 109.6 + 2.8 85.6 −3.6 79.9 −9.4 96.3 −2.5 −2.4 95.1 −2.2
         Sep.  s 95.8 −1.5 −1.3 98.9 + 1.3 107.2 + 6.7 99.0 −10.2 84.5 −8.4 96.5 −0.1 −0.2 99.0 + 4.9
Source: Federal Statistical Office. —*Excluding value-added tax; figures sales of motor vehicles and motorcycles and excluding the sale of automo-
from 2001 provisional, partly revised and, judging by past experience, sub- tive fuel. —2Retail sales in stores. —3Including motor vehicle parts and
ject to considerable uncertainty in the most recent months. —1Excluding accessories. — 4 At 1995 prices. 
63* IX. Economic conditions

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
 IX. Economic conditions
 
6. Labour market * 
 
 
 
Persons in
Employed  1,2 Employees  1 employment  3 Unemployed
Persons
Mining employed Persons
and under under-manu- employ- goingfactur- Short- ment pro- Change vocational
Change from Change ing Con- time motion further from Unem-previous year from sector workers training previous ploy- schemes  
5 struction  4 
previous year, ment Vacancies,
Thou- Thou- Thou- year Thou- thou- rate  6 thou-
Period sands in % sands sands in % Thousands sands sands in % sands
Germany  
  
1999 38,078 + 1.2 + 465 34,136 + 1.5 6,370 1,111 119 430 358 4,099 −180 10.5 456
2000 38,753 + 1.8 + 675 34,748 + 1.8 6,373 1,053 86 316 352 3,889 −211 9.6 514
2001 38,919 + 0.4 + 166 34,835 + 0.3 6,395 958 123 243 345 3,852 − 37 9.4 506
2001          Oct. 39,288 −0.0 − 14 6,397 959 140 230 329 3,725 + 114 9.0 443
         Nov. 39,295 −0.1 − 42 35,145 −0.3 6,377 948 169 227 329 3,789 + 144 9.2 408
         Dec. 39,139 −0.2 − 67 6,336 921 176 215 319 3,964 + 155 9.6 389
2002          Jan. 38,354 −0.2 − 69 6,272 864 212 198 317 4,290 + 197 10.4 422
         Feb. 38,343 −0.2 − 81 34,262 −0.4 6,247 840 246 192 326 4,296 + 184 10.4 487
         Mar. 38,494 −0.3 −105 6,237 p 846 258 187 335 4,156 + 156 10.0 527
         Apr. 38,698 −0.3 −120 6,219 p 863 245 185 345 4,024 + 156 9.7 537
         May 38,768 −0.4 −174 34,599 −0.7 6,207 p 864 201 184 348 3,946 + 226 7 9.5 517
         June 38,741 −0.6 −228 6,198 p 862 202 185 336 3,954 + 260 9.5 497
         July 38,668 −0.6 −247 6,214 p 860 173 187 315 4,047 + 248 9.7 471
         Aug. o 38,692 o −0.8 o −310 ... ... 6,220 p 861 145 191 320 4,018 + 229 9.6 458
         Sep. ... ... ... ... ... 216 199 337 3,942 + 199 9.5 420
         Oct. ... ... ... ... ... 214 202 342 3,930 + 204 9.4 378
Western Germany  
  
1999 . . . . . 5,775 775 92 82 215 2,756 −149 8.8 386
2000 . . . . . 5,761 749 62 70 212 2,529 −226 7.8 452
2001 . . . . . 5,769 696 96 61 209 2,478 − 51 7.4 440
2001          Oct. . . . . . 5,764 698 114 57 197 2,413 + 70 7.2 380
         Nov. . . . . . 5,745 691 142 56 195 2,468 + 108 7.4 348         Dec. . . . . . 5,708 674 147 54 189 2,584 + 130 7.7 334
2002          Jan. . . . . . 5,649 640 179 52 190 2,791 + 169 8.3 367
         Feb. . . . . . 5,626 624 207 51 197 2,789 + 166 8.3 419         Mar. . . . . . 5,616
p 630 217 50 204 2,683 + 144 8.0 449
         Apr. . . . . . 5,597 p 644 206 50 212 2,603 + 129 7.8 457
         May . . . . . 5,585 p 643 166 50 215 2,561 + 176 7 7.6 439
         June . . . . . 5,575 p 641 168 50 209 2,560 + 180 7.6 421
         July . . . . . 5,590 p 640 145 50 193 2,636 + 191 7.8 398
         Aug. . . . . . 5,592 p 641 106 50 195 2,631 + 185 7.8 379
         Sep. . . . . . ... ... 143 49 207 2,594 + 173 7.7 350
         Oct. . . . . . ... ... 156 49 211 2,605 + 193 7.7 317
Eastern Germany  
  
1999 . . . . . 595 336 27 348 143 1,344 − 31 17.6 70
2000 . . . . . 612 305 24 246 140 1,359 + 16 17.4 62
2001 . . . . . 626 262 27 182 136 1,374 + 14 17.5 66
2001          Oct. . . . . . 633 261 26 173 132 1,313 + 44 16.8 63
         Nov. . . . . . 632 257 28 171 134 1,321 + 36 16.9 59         Dec. . . . . . 628 247 29 161 130 1,380 + 24 17.6 55
2002          Jan. . . . . . 623 224 33 147 128 1,499 + 28 19.1 56
         Feb. . . . . . 622 215 39 141 129 1,507 + 17 19.2 68         Mar. . . . . . 621
p 216 41 137 131 1,473 + 13 18.8 78
         Apr. . . . . . 622 p 219 40 136 133 1,421 + 27 18.1 80
         May . . . . . 622 p 220 35 135 133 1,385 + 49 7 17.7 78
         June . . . . . 623 p 220 35 135 128 1,394 + 80 17.8 76
         July . . . . . 624 p 220 28 137 122 1,411 + 57 18.0 73
         Aug. . . . . . 628 p 220 38 141 125 1,387 + 45 17.7 79
         Sep. . . . . . ... ... 74 150 130 1,347 + 26 17.2 70
         Oct. . . . . . ... ... 57 153 131 1,325 + 12 16.9 61
Source: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Labour Office. —*Monthly fig- tions ”Site preparation ”and ”Building of complete constructions or parts
ures: levels at end of month; employed persons and employees: averages; thereof; civil engineering ”.—5Employees involved in job creation schemes
short-time workers: levels at mid-month; annual and quarterly figures: aver- and structural adjustment measures (SAM). —6Relative to the total civilian
ages. —1Work-place concept. —2Annual figures, calculated by the Bundes- labour force. —7From May 2002 calculated on the basis of new labour
bank; deviations from the official figures are due to rounding. —3In- force figures. — o First preliminary estimate. 
cluding active proprietors. —4The figures refer to the economic classifica-
64* IX. Economic conditions

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
 IX. Economic conditions
 
7. Prices
 Germany
 
 
Consumer price index for all households Indices of
foreign trade prices
By region By product group Index of
producer
Other prices of Index ofdurable Overall industrial Index of worldand non- Services con- products producer marketdurable excluding struction prices prices sold on the
Western Eastern consumer house House price domestic of farm of raw
Total Germany Germany Food goods rents  
1 rents level  1 market  2 Exports Imports products  2 materials  3 
Period 1995 = 100
Index level  
  
1998 104.3 104.1 105.3 103.0 101.9 106.1 108.0 98.8 99.5 95.6 101.4 100.7 97.0
1999 104.9 104.8 105.7 101.9 102.8 106.4 109.2 98.5 98.5 89.9 100.9 100.2 113.4
2000 106.9 106.9 107.5 101.5 106.1 108.0 110.6 99.2 101.8 95.4 104.4 111.4 172.2
2001 109.6 109.4 110.6 106.8 108.3 111.2 112.0 99.4 104.9 100.8 105.4 112.1 157.5
 
2000          Nov. 107.7 107.7 108.3 101.1 107.8 108.1 111.0 99.5 103.9 100.2 105.9 116.4 201.1
         Dec. 107.8 107.7 108.3 101.8 107.5 108.4 111.1 103.6 98.8 105.5 113.8 165.2
2001          Jan. 108.3 108.2 109.1 103.5 107.3 109.8 111.4 104.4 96.2 105.3 112.9 158.9
         Feb. 109.0 108.9 109.8 103.9 108.1 111.0 111.5 99.5 104.7 98.5 105.4 113.6 167.4         Mar. 109.1 109.0 110.0 105.1 108.2 110.7 111.6 104.9 102.7 105.6 113.3 161.3
         Apr. 109.5 109.3 110.4 107.0 108.5 110.4 111.7 105.4 103.0 105.7 113.9 166.4
         May 110.0 109.8 111.1 109.0 109.2 110.3 111.8 99.5 105.6 103.7 106.0 115.0 175.4         June 110.2 110.0 111.2 109.3 109.0 111.2 111.9 105.7 100.3 106.0 114.7 176.0
         July 110.2 110.0 111.3 108.7 108.4 112.7 112.0 105.2 100.5 105.8 113.0 166.0
         Aug. 110.0 109.8 111.0 107.3 108.4 112.5 112.1 99.4 105.1 101.9 105.4 111.7 160.7         Sep. 110.0 109.8 111.0 107.1 108.9 111.7 112.2 105.2 102.6 105.3 111.1 157.2
         Oct. 109.7 109.5 110.7 107.2 108.2 111.2 112.3 104.3 100.9 105.0 109.3 138.9
         Nov. 109.5 109.3 110.5 106.6 107.9 111.1 112.4 99.3 104.0 100.5 104.9 108.7 131.9         Dec. 109.6 109.4 110.7 107.2 107.8 111.4 112.5 103.7 99.8 104.8 108.5 130.2
2002          Jan. 110.6 110.4 111.7 110.4 108.7 112.2 112.9 104.3 98.2 104.9 109.1 135.1
         Feb. 110.9 110.7 111.9 109.8 108.9 113.0 113.0 99.4 104.4 99.4 104.9 109.6 141.1         Mar. 111.1 110.9 112.0 109.6 109.4 113.0 113.2 104.7 99.7 105.2 110.5 157.5
         Apr. 111.2 111.0 112.1 109.5 109.8 112.6 113.3 104.6 96.0 105.4 110.7 162.9
         May 111.2 111.0 112.0 109.4 109.4 113.2 113.4 99.5 104.6 94.5 105.4 110.1 157.5         June 111.1 110.9 111.7 108.4 109.1 113.9 113.5 104.5 93.8 105.4 108.7 147.9
         July 111.3 111.2 111.9 107.7 108.9 115.2 113.6 104.2 93.6 105.3 108.2 147.0
         Aug. 111.2 111.1 111.7 106.8 108.9 115.0 113.7 99.5 104.1
p 93.5 105.4 108.8 152.0
         Sep. 111.1 111.0 111.8 106.6 109.3 114.2 113.7 104.3 p 94.6 105.5 109.5 158.8
         Oct. 111.1 111.0 111.6 106.2 109.4 114.0 113.8 ... ... ... ... 156.5
Change from previous year in %  
  
1998 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 1.1 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 1.9 + 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 4.9 − 0.1 − 3.2 −21.0
1999 + 0.6 + 0.7 + 0.4 − 1.1 + 0.9 + 0.3 + 1.1 − 0.3 − 1.0 − 6.0 − 0.5 − 0.5 + 16.9
2000 + 1.9 + 2.0 + 1.7 − 0.4 + 3.2 + 1.5 + 1.3 + 0.7 + 3.4 + 6.1 + 3.5 + 11.2 + 51.9
2001 + 2.5 + 2.3 + 2.9 + 5.2 + 2.1 + 3.0 + 1.3 + 0.2 + 3.0 + 5.7 + 1.0 + 0.6 − 8.5
 
2000          Nov. + 2.4 + 2.5 + 2.4 + 1.0 + 4.0 + 1.6 + 1.2 + 0.8 + 4.7 + 9.6 + 4.1 + 12.5 + 45.6
         Dec. + 2.2 + 2.1 + 2.2 + 1.4 + 3.3 + 1.3 + 1.3 + 4.2 + 7.5 + 3.3 + 8.2 + 13.8
2001          Jan. + 2.4 + 2.4 + 2.5 + 2.2 + 2.7 + 2.7 + 1.3 + 4.6 + 5.7 + 2.8 + 6.5 + 8.2
         Feb. + 2.6 + 2.6 + 2.7 + 1.9 + 3.2 + 3.2 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 4.7 + 5.7 + 2.5 + 5.4 + 6.5         Mar. + 2.5 + 2.5 + 2.8 + 3.8 + 2.8 + 3.1 + 1.2 + 4.9 + 8.7 + 2.4 + 4.2 − 0.1
         Apr. + 2.9 + 2.8 + 3.2 + 5.0 + 3.4 + 2.5 + 1.2 + 5.0 + 9.1 + 2.0 + 5.1 + 11.0         May + 3.5 + 3.4 + 3.8 + 6.7 + 3.9 + 3.1 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 4.6 + 9.0 + 1.6 + 4.0 + 1.9         June + 3.1 + 3.0 + 3.4 + 6.9 + 2.9 + 3.1 + 1.2 + 4.3 + 3.9 + 1.6 + 3.6 + 3.4
         July + 2.6 + 2.5 + 3.2 + 6.8 + 2.2 + 3.0 + 1.2 + 3.1 + 3.4 + 1.1 + 1.7 − 1.0
         Aug. + 2.6 + 2.4 + 3.0 + 6.2 + 2.2 + 3.0 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 2.7 + 4.5 + 0.4 − 0.9 −10.3
         Sep. + 2.1 + 2.0 + 2.8 + 6.4 + 1.2 + 3.1 + 1.2 + 1.9 + 5.0 − 0.3 − 3.6 −20.4
         Oct. + 2.0 + 2.0 + 2.7 + 6.6 + 0.7 + 3.2 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 1.8 − 0.8 − 5.6 −29.9
         Nov. + 1.7 + 1.5 + 2.0 + 5.4 + 0.1 + 2.8 + 1.3 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.9 − 6.6 −34.4
         Dec. + 1.7 + 1.6 + 2.2 + 5.3 + 0.3 + 2.8 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 1.0 − 0.7 − 4.7 −21.2
2002          Jan. + 2.1 + 2.0 + 2.4 + 6.7 + 1.3 + 2.2 + 1.3 − 0.1 + 2.1 − 0.4 − 3.4 −15.0
         Feb. + 1.7 + 1.7 + 1.9 + 5.7 + 0.7 + 1.8 + 1.3 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.9 − 0.5 − 3.5 −15.7
         Mar. + 1.8 + 1.7 + 1.8 + 4.3 + 1.1 + 2.1 + 1.4 − 0.2 − 2.9 − 0.4 − 2.5 − 2.4
         Apr. + 1.6 + 1.6 + 1.5 + 2.3 + 1.2 + 2.0 + 1.4 − 0.8 − 6.8 − 0.3 − 2.8 − 2.1
         May + 1.1 + 1.1 + 0.8 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 2.6 + 1.4
+ 0.0 − 0.9 − 8.9 − 0.6 − 4.3 −10.2
         June + 0.8 + 0.8 + 0.4 − 0.8 + 0.1 + 2.4 + 1.4 − 1.1 − 6.5 − 0.6 − 5.2 −16.0
         July + 1.0 + 1.1 + 0.5 − 0.9 + 0.5 + 2.2 + 1.4 − 1.0 − 6.9 − 0.5 − 4.2 −11.4
         Aug. + 1.1 + 1.2 + 0.6 − 0.5 + 0.5 + 2.2 + 1.4 + 0.1 − 1.0 p − 8.2 + 0.0 − 2.6 − 5.4
         Sep. + 1.0 + 1.1 + 0.7 − 0.5 + 0.4 + 2.2 + 1.3 − 0.9 p − 7.8 + 0.2 − 1.4 + 1.0
         Oct. + 1.3 + 1.4 + 0.8 − 0.9 + 1.1 + 2.5 + 1.3 ... ... ... ... + 12.7
Source: Federal Statistical Office; for index of world market prices: HWWA In- index of raw material prices, on a euro basis (until 1998, on a Deutsche
stitute. —1Calculated by the Bundesbank on the basis of figures provided Mark basis). 
by the Federal Statistical Office. —2Excluding value-added tax. —3HWWA
65* IX. Economic conditions

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
IX. Economic conditions
  
8. Households ’ income *
Germany
  
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999  5  billion
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries  1 salaries  2 Saving  6 ratio  7 benefits received  3 "Mass income"  4 Disposable income  5 
Change Change Change Change Change Change
from from from from from fromprevious previous previous previous previous previous
Period DM / 
 5 
year in % DM / 
 5 
year in % DM / 
 5 
year in % DM / 
 5 
year in % DM / 
 5 
year in % DM / 
 5 
year in % %
1991 1,355.4 . 941.4 . 426.2 . 1,367.6 . 1,917.5 . 250.1 . 13.0
1992 1,467.3 8.3 1,003.0 6.5 473.9 11.2 1,476.9 8.0 2,054.3 7.1 266.1 6.4 13.01993 1,505.9 2.6 1,032.7 3.0 511.2 7.9 1,543.9 4.5 2,120.6 3.2 261.3 −1.8 12.3
1994 1,528.1 1.5 1,029.3 −0.3 529.4 3.6 1,558.6 1.0 2,181.9 2.9 254.0 −2.8 11.6
1995 1,577.1 3.2 1,037.9 0.8 553.7 4.6 1,591.7 2.1 2,256.4 3.4 252.1 −0.7 11.2
1996 1,594.0 1.1 1,032.7 −0.5 595.7 7.6 1,628.3 2.3 2,307.5 2.3 249.5 −1.0 10.8
1997 1,591.3 −0.2 1,015.9 −1.6 609.6 2.3 1,625.5 −0.2 2,356.5 2.1 244.7 −1.9 10.4
1998 1,624.3 2.1 1,038.9 2.3 621.5 1.9 1,660.3 2.1 2,422.8 2.8 249.6 2.0 10.3
1999 855.4 3.0 549.3 3.4 328.6 3.4 877.8 3.4 1,281.6 3.5 125.1 −2.0 9.8
2000 885.5 3.5 572.8 4.3 339.5 3.3 912.3 3.9 1,320.4 3.0 129.5 3.5 9.8
2001 904.6 2.2 593.1 3.5 347.1 2.3 940.2 3.1 1,370.2 3.8 138.1 6.7 10.1
2000          3rd qtr 221.8 3.6 147.5 4.1 84.1 2.8 231.6 3.6 325.2 3.3 26.6 2.7 8.2
         4th qtr 249.6 3.2 158.8 4.2 86.1 3.3 244.9 3.9 339.1 1.1 29.0 −2.8 8.6
2001          1st qtr 208.6 3.2 137.0 3.9 87.1 2.0 224.0 3.1 340.0 3.8 45.8 4.6 13.5
         2nd qtr 217.2 2.5 140.2 4.1 86.0 2.4 226.1 3.5 342.3 4.2 32.6 8.6 9.5         3rd qtr 225.4 1.7 152.0 3.1 86.5 2.9 238.5 3.0 335.6 3.2 28.0 5.0 8.3         4th qtr 253.4 1.5 163.9 3.2 87.6 1.7 251.5 2.7 352.3 3.9 31.7 9.3 9.0
2002          1st qtr 211.0 1.2 138.2 0.9 89.5 2.8 227.7 1.6 344.2 1.2 47.8 4.4 13.9
         2nd qtr 218.9 0.8 140.5 0.3 88.3 2.7 228.8 1.2 343.3 0.3 32.9 0.8 9.6
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August 2002. — charges. —4Net wages and salaries plus monetary social benefits
*Households including non-profit institutions which serve households. — received. —5"Mass income" plus operating surplus, self-employed persons ’
1Residence concept. —2After deducting the wage tax payable on gross income, property income (net), other current transfers received, income of
wages and salaries and employees ’contributions to the social security non-profit organisations which serve households, less taxes (excluding wage
funds. —3Cash benefits from the social security funds, central, regional tax and consumption-related taxes) and other current transfers paid. Includ-
and local authorities and foreign countries, pension payments (net), social ing the increase in claims on company pension funds. —6Including the
security benefits from private insurance schemes, less social security increase in claims on company pension funds. —7Saving as a percentage of
contributions on social benefits, consumption-related taxes and public disposable income. 
  
  
9. Pay rates and actual earnings
Germany
    
Overall economy Producing sector (including construction)
Negotiated wage and salary level  1 Wages and salaries Negotiated wage and salary level  1 Wages and salaries
per employee per employee
on an hourly basis on a monthly basis on an hourly basis on a monthly basis (work-place concept)  2 (work-place concept)  3 
% from % from % from % from % from % from
previous previous previous previous previous previous
Period 1995=100 year 1995=100 year 1995=100 year 1995=100 year 1995=100 year 1995=100 year
1991 76.7 . 78.6 . 82.4 . 73.4 . 76.9 . 77.6 .
1992 85.8 12.0 87.3 11.0 91.0 10.4 82.9 12.9 85.9 11.7 88.4 13.91993 92.2 7.5 92.9 6.5 95.0 4.4 90.6 9.3 92.0 7.1 92.3 4.41994 95.3 3.4 95.6 2.9 96.9 2.0 94.3 4.1 94.8 3.0 96.1 4.1
1995 100.0 4.9 100.0 4.6 100.0 3.2 100.0 6.1 100.0 5.5 100.0 4.1
1996 102.6 2.6 102.4 2.4 101.4 1.4 103.8 3.8 102.9 2.9 102.9 2.91997 104.1 1.5 103.9 1.5 101.7 0.3 105.8 1.9 104.6 1.7 104.7 1.71998 106.2 2.0 105.8 1.8 102.7 1.0 107.7 1.8 106.4 1.7 106.4 1.61999 109.2 2.8 108.6 2.7 104.3 1.5 110.9 3.0 109.4 2.9 108.3 1.8
2000 111.4 2.0 110.8 2.0 106.0 1.7 113.2 2.0 111.6 2.0 111.2 2.7
2001 113.6 2.0 113.0 2.0 108.0 1.9 115.2 1.8 113.6 1.8 113.7 2.2
2000          4th qtr 125.9 2.1 125.2 2.1 117.9 1.7 125.2 2.3 123.5 2.3 120.6 2.5
2001          1st qtr 103.8 2.1 103.2 2.1 100.8 2.3 104.1 1.6 102.6 1.6 107.2 3.1
         2nd qtr 104.8 1.8 104.3 1.8 103.9 2.0 105.4 1.5 104.0 1.5 115.6 2.4         3rd qtr 117.3 2.0 116.7 1.9 107.5 1.6 123.5 2.0 121.9 2.0 109.2 2.0         4th qtr 128.6 2.1 127.9 2.1 120.0 1.8 127.7 2.0 125.9 2.0 122.6 1.7
2002          1st qtr 106.3 2.4 105.7 2.4 102.4 1.6 106.3 2.1 104.8 2.2 108.1 0.8
         2nd qtr 107.7 2.7 107.1 2.7 105.3 1.4 109.1 3.5 107.6 3.5 118.0 2.1         3rd qtr 120.2 2.4 119.5 2.4 . . 127.3 3.0 125.6 3.1 . .
2002          Mar. 106.4 2.5 105.8 2.5 . . 106.6 2.5 105.2 2.5 108.9 0.5
         Apr. 106.8 2.3 106.2 2.3 . . 106.8 2.4 105.4 2.4 113.1 2.3
         May 108.4 3.0 107.8 3.0 . . 111.0 4.4 109.6 4.5 118.7 0.8         June 108.0 2.9 107.4 2.9 . . 109.4 3.6 107.9 3.6 122.2 3.0
         July 144.2 2.3 143.4 2.3 . . 163.2 2.8 161.0 2.8 116.5 4.5
         Aug. 108.1 2.7 107.5 2.7 . . 109.3 3.2 107.8 3.2 112.0 2.2         Sep. 108.2 2.4 107.6 2.3 . . 109.5 3.3 108.0 3.4 . .
1Current data are normally revised upwards on account of additional supply, and excluding installation and building completion work. Calculated
reports. —2Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August by the Bundesbank on the basis of data from the Federal Statistical Office,
2002. —3Producing sector, excluding electricity, gas, steam and hot water using the old and new classifications of the economic sectors. 
66*IX. Economic conditions

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the European monetary union *
 
 
 5  million
2001 1 2002
Position 1999 2000 2001 1 4th qtr 1st qtr 2nd qtr June July Aug.
Current account −19,025 −60,364 −13,778 + 9,085 + 11,749 + 5,153 + 7,335 + 2,587 + 9,720 A.
1. Foreign trade
Exports (f.o.b.) incl. supplementary items 818,251 989,822 1,032,971 264,619 254,309 267,605 90,058 93,012 80,814
Imports (f.o.b.) incl. supplementary items 742,552 958,233 957,141 233,937 227,976 234,896 76,411 78,834 69,123
Balance + 75,702 + 31,592 + 75,830 + 30,682 + 26,330 + 32,710 + 13,647 + 14,178 + 11,691
2. Services
Receipts 247,385 287,014 321,572 81,422 71,586 83,839 28,468 29,657 28,437Expenditure 258,096 298,546 320,648 81,914 76,068 77,524 25,600 28,794 27,132
Balance −10,711 −11,535 + 921 − 495 −4,483 + 6,315 + 2,868 + 863 + 1,306
3. Factor income (balance) −37,296 −27,023 −39,746 −4,381 −7,387 −15,404 −1,682 −9,290 − 52
4. Current transfers
Transfer payments from non-residents 64,821 67,634 75,686 16,304 31,047 15,350 4,548 5,795 5,459Transfer payments to non-residents 111,544 121,035 126,469 33,025 33,760 33,819 12,046 8,960 8,684
Balance −46,720 −53,398 −50,783 −16,721 −2,712 −18,468 −7,497 −3,165 −3,225
Balance of capital transfers + 12,797 + 9,836 + 8,924 + 1,352 + 3,105 + 3,462 + 1,108 + 534 + 653B.
C. + 11,651 + 69,955 −40,508 −32,064 −26,472 −22,341 −41,261 −11,188 −11,763 Financial account (net capital exports: −)
1. Direct investment −120,118 −12,289 −101,495 + 16,526 −14,997 −4,372 −16,147 −3,617 + 1,694
Investment outside the euro area −320,505 −436,259 −255,835 −28,210 −56,017 −41,186 −16,259 −9,310 − 170
Foreign investment in the euro area + 200,384 + 423,970 + 154,343 + 44,736 + 41,020 + 36,814 + 112 + 5,693 + 1,864
2. Investment in securities −42,955 −115,170 + 38,137 + 5,306 −51,808 + 67,090 + 17,099 + 14,199 + 4,469
Investment outside the euro area −311,299 −411,316 −287,957 −86,994 −72,983 −49,473 −9,155 −15,923 −3,448
Equities −156,464 −287,914 −108,569 −24,827 −33,606 −12,946 −5,370 −7,189 + 4,050
Bonds and notes −154,953 −114,573 −158,723 −51,269 −20,817 −22,917 + 568 −3,000 −9,188
Money market paper + 118 −8,829 −20,668 −10,901 −18,561 −13,611 −4,353 −5,734 + 1,690
Foreign investment in the euro area + 268,347 + 296,146 + 326,091 + 92,300 + 21,175 + 116,564 + 26,254 + 30,121 + 7,917
Equities + 92,300 + 50,749 + 231,137 + 60,536 + 30,372 + 34,167 −1,223 + 2,976 − 728
Bonds and notes + 117,005 + 232,191 + 90,440 + 28,648 + 994 + 55,168 + 24,872 + 17,829 + 1,052Money market paper + 59,042 + 13,206 + 4,514 + 3,116 −10,190 + 27,228 + 2,605 + 9,317 + 7,593
3. Financial derivatives + 3,767 −2,163 −3,736 −6,862 + 1,567 −2,755 −1,931 −6,969 −1,923
4. Credit transactions and other
investment (balance) + 160,829 + 182,012 + 8,765 −50,292 + 41,829 −89,047 −36,836 −12,273 −17,784
Eurosystem + 4,587 − 221 + 5,004 + 3,363 + 775 −4,072 + 1,192 + 3,108 −4,887
Public authorities −9,707 −1,247 + 1,870 + 6,152 −9,042 + 3,601 −2,362 −1,610 −1,789
Credit institutions + 177,500 + 159,021 + 6,815 −41,198 + 44,219 −73,607 −45,484 + 7,257 −3,956
long-term + 6,611 + 3,052 −24,299 −26,257 + 8,163 + 14,219 + 6,855 + 10,012 − 400
short-term + 170,896 + 155,970 + 31,123 −14,938 + 36,055 −87,828 −52,340 −2,755 −3,556
Enterprises and individuals −11,554 + 24,465 −4,924 −18,609 + 5,877 −14,966 + 9,820 −21,028 −7,152
5. Change in the monetary reserves of
    the eurosystem (Increase: −) + 10,128 + 17,568 + 17,815 + 3,255 −3,063 + 6,741 −3,446 −2,528 + 1,780
Balance of unclassifiable transactions −5,420 −19,427 + 45,356 + 21,624 + 11,617 + 13,726 + 32,818 + 8,068 + 1,390 D.
*Source: European Central Bank. —1From January 2001, including   
Greece.  
67*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(Balances)
 
 
Current account Memo item:
Change in Capital trans-
the Bundes- fers and pur-
Change in bank ’s net chases / sales
Supple- external of intangible the monetary
Balance of mentary non- reserves at Balance of assets aton current Foreign trade Factor Current produced Financial transaction transaction unclassifiable
Period account  
1 items  4  5 Services  6 income transfers assets  7 account  7 values  8 values  8 trade  1  2  3 transactions
DM million
1989 + 107,346 + 134,576 −4,107 −15,210 + 26,872 −34,784 −2,064 −110,286 −5,405 + 10,409 + 18,997
1990  o + 79,475 + 105,382 −3,833 −19,664 + 32,859 −35,269 −4,975 −89,497 −11,611 + 26,608 −10,976
1991 −30,416 + 21,899 −2,804 −24,842 + 33,144 −57,812 −4,565 + 12,614 + 9,605 + 12,762 − 319
1992 −22,924 + 33,656 −1,426 −37,894 + 33,962 −51,222 −1,963 + 69,792 −52,888 + 7,983 −68,745
1993 −16,155 + 60,304 −3,038 −45,080 + 27,373 −55,714 −1,915 + 21,442 + 22,795 −26,167 + 35,766
1994 −38,805 + 71,762 −1,104 −54,374 + 4,852 −59,940 −2,637 + 57,871 + 2,846 −19,276 −12,242
1995 −29,671 + 85,303 −4,722 −54,720 + 178 −55,710 −3,845 + 63,647 −10,355 −19,776 −17,754
1996 −11,959 + 98,538 −5,264 −55,330 + 1,391 −51,294 −3,283 + 23,613 + 1,882 −10,253 + 1,610
1997 − 4,727 + 116,467 −7,360 −58,715 − 2,376 −52,742 + 52 − 76 + 6,640 − 1,889 + 8,468
1998 −10,905 + 126,970 −5,934 −65,301 −13,337 −53,304 + 1,289 + 17,042 −7,128 − 298 −8,231
1999 −34,991 + 127,542 −13,643 −81,088 −17,535 −50,266 − 301 −51,015 + 24,517 + 61,790 −72,364
2000 −44,225 + 115,645 −13,390 −86,887 − 6,503 −53,089 + 13,351 + 67,177 + 11,429 −47,731 + 94,329
2001 + 5,185 + 184,229 −9,559 −92,650 −24,660 −52,174 −1,892 −57,230 + 11,797 + 42,140 + 63,911
2001          4th qtr + 13,884 + 49,490 −1,085 −17,990 − 2,481 −14,049 − 932 −56,304 + 4,078 + 39,273 + 71,755
2001          Dec. + 2,707 + 16,297 − 337 − 4,961 − 5,092 − 3,201 − 305 −22,446 + 5,636 + 14,409 + 60,895
 5 
 million
1999 −17,891 + 65,211 −6,976 −41,460 − 8,966 −25,701 − 154 −26,084 + 12,535 + 31,593 −36,999
2000 −22,612 + 59,128 −6,846 −44,425 − 3,325 −27,144 + 6,826 + 34,347 + 5,844 −24,405 + 48,230
2001 + 2,651 + 94,195 −4,887 −47,371 −12,609 −26,676 − 967 −29,261 + 6,032 + 21,546 + 32,677
2000          1st qtr − 1,231 + 16,372 −1,368 −10,011 − 788 − 5,436 + 160 + 38,650 − 751 −36,828 + 32,016
         2nd qtr − 2,845 + 16,406 −1,272 −11,559 + 121 − 6,542 − 330 + 28,540 + 2,388 −27,753 −23,447
         3rd qtr −11,690 + 13,116 −1,745 −12,778 − 3,122 − 7,161 + 7,412 −14,904 + 2,155 + 17,026 + 22,523
         4th qtr − 6,846 + 13,234 −2,462 −10,077 + 464 − 8,005 − 416 −17,939 + 2,052 + 23,150 + 17,137
2001          1st qtr − 984 + 22,052 −1,413 −12,613 − 3,523 − 5,487 + 552 + 10 + 4,072 − 3,650 −11,749
         2nd qtr − 4,376 + 21,592 −1,517 −12,154 − 4,307 − 7,988 − 597 + 5,355 + 2,039 − 2,421 + 21,099
         3rd qtr + 912 + 25,247 −1,402 −13,406 − 3,510 − 6,017 − 446 −5,838 −2,165 + 7,536 −13,360
         4th qtr + 7,099 + 25,304 − 555 − 9,198 − 1,269 − 7,183 − 476 −28,788 + 2,085 + 20,080 + 36,688
2002          1st qtr + 10,533 + 31,822 −1,265 −10,589 − 4,410 − 5,025 + 160 −24,494 −1,352 + 15,153 −18,496
         2nd qtr + 11,872 + 29,897 − 970 − 7,750 − 1,138 − 8,166 − 67 −30,125 + 2,432 + 15,887 + 1,694
         3rd qtr p + 11,318 + 33,189 −1,422 −10,827 − 3,857 − 5,765 + 64 −25,639 + 87 + 14,170 −17,588
2000          May − 2,394 + 4,503 − 558 − 3,952 − 691 − 1,696 − 22 + 21,552 + 171 −19,307 + 2,657
         June + 294 + 6,607 − 308 − 4,273 + 573 − 2,306 − 502 + 3,454 + 863 − 4,109 −16,802
         July − 2,795 + 5,943 − 422 − 3,251 − 2,018 − 3,046 + 105 + 2,542 + 1,180 − 1,031 + 23,600
         Aug. − 5,727 + 2,920 − 808 − 4,870 − 349 − 2,620 + 7,766 −11,981 + 345 + 9,597 + 11,758
         Sep. − 3,167 + 4,254 − 515 − 4,657 − 755 − 1,494 − 458 −5,465 + 630 + 8,461 −12,834
         Oct. − 1,121 + 6,794 − 955 − 4,531 + 556 − 2,985 − 125 −4,453 + 538 + 5,162 + 19,591
         Nov. − 2,589 + 4,765 − 395 − 3,112 − 990 − 2,857 − 143 −4,991 + 466 + 7,256 + 5,015
         Dec. − 3,136 + 1,675 −1,111 − 2,435 + 898 − 2,164 − 149 −8,495 + 1,047 + 10,733 −7,468
2001          Jan. − 5,671 + 5,497 − 565 − 4,749 − 5,357 − 497 + 515 −6,239 + 1,400 + 9,995 −5,988
         Feb. + 1,203 + 7,059 − 522 − 2,793 − 295 − 2,246 + 119 −2,756 + 1,180 + 254 −3,873
         Mar. + 3,484 + 9,496 − 326 − 5,071 + 2,129 − 2,744 − 83 + 9,006 + 1,492 −13,899 −1,888
         Apr. + 1,090 + 6,041 − 647 − 2,938 + 868 − 2,235 − 149 + 773 + 1,205 − 2,919 + 9,404
         May − 448 + 8,054 − 465 − 4,060 − 1,320 − 2,657 − 732 + 19,583 + 508 −18,911 − 53
         June − 5,018 + 7,496 − 405 − 5,156 − 3,856 − 3,097 + 284 −15,001 + 326 + 19,408 + 11,749
         July − 2,689 + 9,369 − 394 − 4,950 − 4,115 − 2,599 − 226 + 1,826 − 151 + 1,240 −10,589
         Aug. + 3,060 + 8,826 − 584 − 4,803 + 1,085 − 1,465 − 172 + 3,583 + 460 − 6,931 −4,247
         Sep. + 541 + 7,051 − 424 − 3,653 − 480 − 1,953 − 47 −11,248 −2,474 + 13,227 + 1,476
         Oct. + 4,175 + 9,634 − 98 − 3,850 + 1,282 − 2,793 − 140 − 886 −1,001 − 2,148 −1,307
         Nov. + 1,540 + 7,337 − 284 − 2,811 + 53 − 2,754 − 180 −16,425 + 204 + 14,861 + 6,860
         Dec. + 1,384 + 8,333 − 172 − 2,536 − 2,603 − 1,637 − 156 −11,477 + 2,882 + 7,367 + 31,135
2002          Jan. + 510 + 10,076 − 448 − 4,081 − 5,761 + 724 + 477 − 198 −1,747 + 958 −17,916
         Feb. + 3,009 + 10,008 − 387 − 3,237 − 360 − 3,015 − 155 −15,109 + 67 + 12,187 + 1,535
         Mar. + 7,013 + 11,738 − 431 − 3,271 + 1,711 − 2,734 − 162 −9,188 + 328 + 2,008 −2,116
         Apr. + 3,964 + 9,390 − 360 − 2,654 + 380 − 2,792 − 147 −2,389 + 1,657 − 3,086 −9,839
         May + 3,894 + 9,742 − 405 − 2,267 − 815 − 2,360 + 50 −3,068 + 1,379 − 2,254 + 3,826
         June + 4,015 + 10,765 − 204 − 2,829 − 703 − 3,014 + 30 −24,668 − 603 + 21,227 + 7,707
         July + 163 + 11,872 − 564 − 4,642 − 4,753 − 1,749 − 203 −12,392 − 548 + 12,980 −15,567
         Aug. + 4,152 + 10,387 − 478 − 3,876 − 387 − 1,493 + 87 −7,351 + 886 + 2,226 −5,579
         Sep.  p + 7,003 + 10,930 − 380 − 2,308 + 1,283 − 2,522 + 181 −5,896 − 252 − 1,035 + 3,559
oFrom July 1990 including the external transactions of the former GDR. — included up to December 1992 in Supplementary trade items. —4Mainly
1From the beginning of 1993 figures subject to significant uncertainty warehouse transactions for account of residents and deduction of goods
owing to changes in the method of data collection in foreign trade. — returned. —5See footnote 3. —6Excluding the expenditure on freight and
2Special trade according to the official foreign trade statistics: imports c.i.f., insurance included in the c.i.f. import value. —7Capital exports: −.—
exports f.o.b. —3From January 1993 including additional estimates for 8 Increase: −. 
external transactions which do not have to be reported and which are
68*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
by group of countries and country *
 
  5  million
2002
Group of countries / Country 1999 2000 2001 1 Jan. / Aug. May June July August September  p 
All countries  2 Exports 510,008 597,440 637,333 425,097 50,245 56,440 54,839 51,920 55,035
Imports 444,797 538,311 543,138 341,118 40,503 45,675 42,967 41,532 44,105Balance + 65,211 + 59,128 + 94,195 + 83,978 + 9,742 + 10,765 + 11,872 + 10,387 + 10,930
I. Exports 396,139 460,422 481,342 317,654 37,216 42,157 40,710 37,956 ...Industrialised
Imports 332,947 389,927 390,555 243,187 28,952 33,359 30,500 29,006 ... countries
Balance + 63,192 + 70,495 + 90,786 + 74,467 + 8,264 + 8,798 + 10,210 + 8,951 ...
Exports 293,377 337,375 351,495 232,770 27,110 31,385 29,518 27,374 ... 1. EU member countries
Imports 239,652 273,951 278,261 175,205 20,578 24,252 22,196 20,938 ...
Balance + 53,725 + 63,424 + 73,234 + 57,564 + 6,532 + 7,133 + 7,321 + 6,436 ...
of  which
Exports 229,837 264,870 274,975 181,399 21,287 24,711 23,230 20,590 ... EMU member
Imports 193,146 217,946 223,339 141,739 16,428 19,576 18,331 16,719 ... countries
Balance + 36,691 + 46,924 + 51,636 + 39,660 + 4,859 + 5,135 + 4,900 + 3,871 ...
of which
Austria Exports 28,295 32,436 33,225 21,611 2,563 2,823 2,730 2,625 ...
Imports 18,288 20,497 20,366 13,719 1,682 1,903 1,863 1,569 ...Balance + 10,007 + 11,939 + 12,859 + 7,892 + 880 + 919 + 866 + 1,056 ...
Belgium and Exports 28,821 32,728 34,316 22,625 2,654 2,972 2,772 2,682 ...Luxemburg Imports 22,880 26,230 28,793 19,066 2,109 2,804 2,555 2,255 ...
Balance + 5,942 + 6,499 + 5,523 + 3,558 + 545 + 168 + 218 + 427 ...
France Exports 58,578 67,418 69,918 46,219 5,218 6,116 5,797 5,215 ...
Imports 45,559 50,862 49,944 32,509 3,743 4,286 4,032 3,812 ...Balance + 13,019 + 16,556 + 19,974 + 13,709 + 1,475 + 1,830 + 1,765 + 1,403 ...
Italy Exports 38,335 45,011 47,300 31,198 3,639 4,527 4,182 3,195 ...
Imports 33,107 35,776 35,238 22,101 2,608 3,121 3,076 2,390 ...Balance + 5,229 + 9,235 + 12,062 + 9,097 + 1,031 + 1,406 + 1,105 + 805 ...
Netherlands Exports 34,355 38,993 39,933 25,732 3,020 3,493 3,228 3,089 ...
Imports 36,089 44,739 44,300 27,733 3,277 3,716 3,390 3,455 ...Balance − 1,734 − 5,745 − 4,367 − 2,000 − 258 − 223 − 162 − 366 ...
Spain Exports 22,684 26,732 28,065 19,229 2,404 2,826 2,676 1,992 ...
Imports 14,666 16,087 15,069 10,291 1,208 1,435 1,414 978 ...Balance + 8,018 + 10,645 + 12,996 + 8,938 + 1,195 + 1,391 + 1,262 + 1,013 ...
Sweden Exports 11,657 13,524 12,925 8,553 1,025 1,136 935 1,061 ...
Imports 8,305 10,202 8,847 5,799 624 865 739 695 ...Balance + 3,352 + 3,322 + 4,078 + 2,754 + 401 + 271 + 196 + 365 ...
United Exports 43,124 49,377 53,065 35,834 3,976 4,538 4,504 4,892 ...Kingdom Imports 30,757 36,923 37,005 22,100 2,871 3,099 2,503 2,777 ...
Balance + 12,367 + 12,453 + 16,060 + 13,734 + 1,105 + 1,438 + 2,002 + 2,115 ...
Exports 33,895 39,944 40,162 26,402 3,158 3,485 3,389 3,267 ... 2. Other European
Imports 30,644 36,800 39,104 25,166 3,189 3,330 3,228 2,852 ... industrial countries  
3 
Balance + 3,251 + 3,144 + 1,058 + 1,236 − 31 + 154 + 161 + 415 ...
of which
Switzerland Exports 22,808 25,596 27,611 17,483 2,055 2,289 2,173 2,173 ...
Imports 17,070 18,797 19,793 12,912 1,590 1,684 1,651 1,624 ...
Balance + 5,738 + 6,799 + 7,818 + 4,571 + 465 + 605 + 522 + 549 ...
Exports 68,867 83,103 89,684 58,482 6,948 7,288 7,804 7,315 ... 3. Non-European
Imports 62,651 79,176 73,191 42,816 5,184 5,776 5,075 5,216 ... industrial countries
Balance + 6,216 + 3,926 + 16,494 + 15,666 + 1,763 + 1,511 + 2,728 + 2,099 ...
of which
Japan Exports 10,367 13,195 13,073 7,871 945 1,067 1,064 948 ...
Imports 21,779 26,847 22,599 12,669 1,528 1,641 1,605 1,629 ...
Balance −11,412 −13,651 − 9,527 − 4,798 − 583 − 574 − 540 − 680 ...
Exports 51,425 61,764 67,307 44,010 5,142 5,419 5,736 5,532 ... United States
Imports 36,790 47,121 45,454 26,835 3,288 3,667 3,045 3,201 ...Balance + 14,635 + 14,643 + 21,853 + 17,174 + 1,854 + 1,752 + 2,691 + 2,331 ...
II. Exports 56,717 70,318 83,210 58,675 7,216 7,935 7,752 7,570 ...Countries in transition
Imports 62,533 82,900 89,844 60,272 7,171 7,580 7,825 7,708 ...Balance − 5,816 −12,582 − 6,634 − 1,596 + 44 + 355 − 73 − 138 ...
of which
Central and east Exports 49,020 59,900 69,934 48,502 6,109 6,609 6,375 6,036 ...European countries Imports 47,723 62,781 68,420 46,171 5,600 5,956 6,061 5,685 ...in transition Balance + 1,297 − 2,882 + 1,513 + 2,331 + 509 + 653 + 314 + 351 ...
People ‘s Republic Exports 6,949 9,459 12,064 9,288 998 1,195 1,264 1,442 ...
of China  
4 Imports 13,795 18,553 19,740 13,056 1,489 1,517 1,605 1,820 ...Balance − 6,846 − 9,094 − 7,676 − 3,768 − 491 − 323 − 341 − 378 ...
III. Exports 55,987 65,023 71,225 47,708 5,669 6,230 6,241 6,257 ...Developing countries
Imports 48,779 64,742 60,605 37,237 4,328 4,682 4,591 4,758 ...Balance + 7,208 + 282 + 10,620 + 10,470 + 1,341 + 1,548 + 1,650 + 1,500 ...
of which
Newly industrial- Exports 18,775 24,029 24,527 16,545 2,063 2,220 2,164 2,136 ...ising countries in Imports 22,586 30,498 27,784 17,056 2,102 2,036 2,064 2,131 ...south-east Asia  
5 Balance − 3,811 − 6,469 − 3,257 − 511 − 39 + 184 + 100 + 5 ...
OPEC-countries Exports 9,135 10,756 13,687 9,606 1,125 1,238 1,222 1,181 ...
Imports 6,425 10,244 8,219 4,320 429 613 616 497 ...Balance + 2,710 + 512 + 5,468 + 5,286 + 695 + 625 + 605 + 684 ...
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (f.o.b.) by country of destination, countries. —2Including fuel and other supplies for ships and aircraft and
imports (c.i.f.) by country of origin. Inclusion of individual countries in other data not classifiable by region. —3Including Cyprus. —4Excluding
groups of countries according to the current position. —1The import Hong Kong. —5Brunei Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia,
figures on "All countries" include revisions from January until November Philippines, Singapore, Republic of Korea, Taiwan and Thailand. 
2001 which have not yet been broken down by region for Non-EU
69*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
4. Services and factor income of the Federal Republic of Germany
(Balances)
 
Until the end of 1998 DM million, from 1999  5  million
Services
other services
of which
 
Patents Compen- Services  of Construction
Trans- Financial and sation of Investment Government selfemployed and  assembly
Period Total Travel  1 services licences Total income portation  2 transactions  3 persons  4 work,  repairs employees  5 
1997 −58,715 −52,718 + 5,723 + 2,315 −4,341 + 6,616 −16,310 −2,403 −1,669 −1,698 − 678
1998 −65,301 −53,704 + 5,449 + 3,011 −4,044 + 5,462 −21,474 −2,586 −2,484 −1,584 −11,753
1999 −41,460 −30,645 + 2,881 + 1,018 −1,896 + 1,973 −14,792 −2,245 − 409 − 836 −8,130
2000 −44,425 −31,574 + 3,379 + 959 −2,924 + 2,177 −16,443 −2,725 − 912 − 885 −2,440
2001 −47,371 −32,377 + 4,139 + 439 −2,335 + 3,301 −20,539 −2,576 −1,293 −1,471 −11,138
2001          1st qtr −12,613 − 6,738 + 828 − 106 − 654 + 761 −6,704 − 646 − 593 − 39 −3,484
         2nd qtr −12,154 − 8,656 + 1,153 + 208 − 532 + 804 −5,132 − 625 − 213 − 408 −3,900
         3rd qtr −13,406 −10,723 + 1,182 + 175 − 579 + 803 −4,265 − 640 − 142 − 685 −2,825
         4th qtr − 9,198 − 6,261 + 976 + 161 − 571 + 933 −4,437 − 665 − 346 − 340 − 929
2002          1st qtr −10,589 − 5,974 + 764 − 60 − 300 + 992 −6,011 − 536 − 468 − 22 −4,388
         2nd qtr − 7,750 − 7,664 + 1,192 + 70 − 578 + 1,131 −1,901 − 515 − 253 − 347 − 791
         3rd qtr −10,827 −10,291 + 804 + 188 − 445 + 1,603 −2,686 − 536 + 61 − 632 −3,226
2001          Nov. − 2,811 − 1,687 + 157 + 26 − 278 + 297 −1,326 − 219 + 31 − 117 + 170
         Dec. − 2,536 − 1,596 + 521 + 142 − 28 + 321 −1,896 − 233 − 266 − 101 −2,502
2002          Jan. − 4,081 − 2,206 + 181 + 24 − 102 + 368 −2,345 − 210 − 185 + 9 −5,770
         Feb. − 3,237 − 1,704 + 252 − 78 − 91 + 309 −1,925 − 174 − 174 − 11 − 350
         Mar. − 3,271 − 2,064 + 331 − 6 − 107 + 315 −1,741 − 152 − 109 − 20 + 1,731
         Apr. − 2,654 − 2,523 + 425 + 64 − 197 + 441 − 865 − 193 − 95 − 103 + 483
         May − 2,267 − 2,584 + 186 + 26 − 28 + 362 − 230 − 164 − 44 − 118 − 697
         June − 2,829 − 2,558 + 580 − 20 − 354 + 328 − 805 − 158 − 114 − 126 − 577
         July − 4,642 − 3,323 + 295 + 76 − 429 + 380 −1,642 − 205 − 15 − 209 −4,544
         Aug. − 3,876 − 3,719 + 201 − 14 + 89 + 851 −1,284 − 184 + 115 − 204 − 184
         Sep. − 2,308 − 3,248 + 309 + 125 − 105 + 371 + 240 − 147 − 39 − 219 + 1,502
1From January 2002 figures subject to significant uncertainty. —2Ex- vices supplied. —4Engineering and other technical services, research and
cluding the expenditure on freight included in the c.i.f. import value. — development, commercial services etc. — 5 Wages and salaries. 
3Including the receipts from foreign military agencies for goods and ser-
5. Current transfers of the Federal Republic of Germany 6. Capital transfers
(Balances) (Balances)
Until the end of 1998 DM million, from 1999  5  million DM million /  5  million
Public  1 Private  1 
International
Organisations  2 
 
of which other Remittances otherEuropean current by foreign current
Period Total Total Total Communities Total workers transfers Total  
4 Public  1 Private  1 transfers  3 
1997 −52,742 −36,812 −31,509 −28,502 −5,302 −15,930 −7,519 −8,411 + 52 −2,821 + 2,873
1998 −53,304 −37,317 −33,077 −30,382 −4,240 −15,987 −6,936 −9,051 + 1,289 −2,441 + 3,730
1999 −25,701 −17,404 −15,428 −13,846 −1,976 −8,296 −3,429 −4,867 − 154 −1,351 + 1,197
2000 −27,144 −19,045 −17,100 −15,398 −1,944 −8,100 −3,458 −4,642 −1,596 −1,186 − 410
2001 −26,676 −17,024 −14,482 −12,812 −2,542 −9,653 −3,520 −6,132 − 967 −1,355 + 387
2001          1st qtr −5,487 −2,898 −2,112 −1,598 − 786 −2,589 − 880 −1,709 + 552 − 323 + 875
         2nd qtr −7,988 −5,144 −5,346 −4,927 + 202 −2,845 − 880 −1,964 − 597 − 252 − 345
         3rd qtr −6,017 −3,956 −3,027 −2,467 − 929 −2,062 − 880 −1,182 − 446 − 327 − 118
         4th qtr −7,183 −5,026 −3,997 −3,820 −1,029 −2,157 − 880 −1,277 − 476 − 452 − 24
2002          1st qtr −5,025 −2,357 −1,256 − 832 −1,101 −2,668 − 868 −1,801 + 160 − 229 + 389
         2nd qtr −8,166 −5,239 −5,254 −4,997 + 15 −2,928 − 868 −2,060 − 67 − 277 + 210
         3rd qtr −5,765 −3,523 −2,747 −2,388 − 776 −2,242 − 868 −1,374 + 64 − 348 + 413
2001          Nov. −2,754 −2,078 −1,674 −1,628 − 404 − 675 − 293 − 382 − 180 − 156 − 25
         Dec. −1,637 − 871 − 660 − 616 − 211 − 766 − 293 − 473 − 156 − 198 + 42
2002          Jan. + 724 + 1,530 + 1,921 + 2,129 − 391 − 806 − 289 − 517 + 477 − 74 + 551
         Feb. −3,015 −2,005 −1,575 −1,391 − 430 −1,010 − 289 − 721 − 155 − 75 − 80
         Mar. −2,734 −1,882 −1,602 −1,570 − 279 − 852 − 289 − 563 − 162 − 80 − 82
         Apr. −2,792 −2,055 −1,889 −1,788 − 165 − 737 − 289 − 448 − 147 − 89 − 58
         May −2,360 −1,489 −1,697 −1,633 + 208 − 872 − 289 − 582 + 50 − 98 + 148
         June −3,014 −1,695 −1,667 −1,576 − 28 −1,319 − 289 −1,030 + 30 − 91 + 121
         July −1,749 −1,079 − 842 − 637 − 237 − 670 − 289 − 381 − 203 − 168 − 35
         Aug. −1,493 − 760 − 397 − 272 − 363 − 733 − 289 − 444 + 87 − 95 + 181
         Sep. −2,522 −1,684 −1,507 −1,478 − 177 − 838 − 289 − 549 + 181 − 86 + 267
1The classification of "public" and "private" transfers depends on which (excluding capital transfers). —3Payments to developing countries, pension
sector the participating domestic body belongs to. —2Current contri- payments, tax revenue and refunds, etc. —4Where identifiable; in
butions to the budgets of international organisations and to the EU budget particular, debt forgiveness. 
70*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
7. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
 
 
 5  million
2001 2002
Item 1999 2000 2001 3rd qtr 4th qtr 1st qtr 2nd qtr July Aug. Sep.
I. Net German investment abroad
(Increase/capital exports: −) −347,069 −353,152 −265,061 −19,776 −66,243 −79,598 −92,807 −40,656 −13,118 −39,033
1. Direct investment  1 −102,729 −54,045 −48,340 − 6,162 − 2,660 − 1,161 −13,442 −10,165 + 2,035 − 5,313
Equity capital −85,021 −49,616 −59,377 − 7,229 − 9,186 −20,489 −10,039 − 4,669 − 2,145 − 3,225
Reinvested earnings  2 − 4,400 − 2,300 −−−−−−−−
Credit transactions of
German direct investors − 6,524 + 3,627 + 15,986 + 2,336 + 7,711 + 20,937 − 1,513 − 4,637 + 4,642 − 1,518
Other capital − 6,784 − 5,756 − 4,949 − 1,269 − 1,185 − 1,609 − 1,890 − 858 − 462 − 570
2. Portfolio investment −177,440 −208,511 −128,670 −31,829 −34,788 −20,224 −10,929 −13,697 + 2,107 + 660
Equities  3 −68,048 −104,809 −15,824 − 2,797 − 7,309 + 1,329 + 6,468 − 1,773 + 2,383 + 5,857
Investment fund certificates  4 −14,057 −32,529 −19,126 − 4,474 − 7,409 − 2,963 − 3,121 − 1,519 − 1,173 − 430
Bonds and notes  5 −94,658 −72,758 −94,691 −27,512 −15,793 −17,555 −10,944 − 8,624 + 1,664 − 3,984
Money market instruments − 677 + 1,585 + 970 + 2,954 − 4,277 − 1,035 − 3,331 − 1,781 − 767 − 784
3. Financial derivatives  6 − 1,749 − 4,211 + 6,703 − 807 + 1,504 + 1,263 − 3,731 − 4,527 − 1,862 + 2,658
4. Credit transactions −62,826 −84,203 −93,368 + 19,353 −29,871 −59,052 −64,363 −12,113 −15,236 −37,014
Credit institutions  7 −42,443 −101,513 −130,654 −14,149 − 305 −54,111 −45,819 + 4,805 −13,120 −37,504
Long-term −42,717 −40,136 −47,642 −16,201 − 9,717 − 8,329 − 4,224 − 1,561 − 1,593 − 1,070
Short-term + 274 −61,378 −83,012 + 2,051 + 9,413 −45,782 −41,595 + 6,367 −11,527 −36,435
Enterprises and individuals + 19,503 − 4,742 − 2,705 + 6,465 −14,305 − 4,873 − 4,391 − 660 − 716 − 3,014
Long-term − 2,057 + 465 − 1,698 − 1,161 − 124 − 351 + 27 − 29− 18 + 74
Short-term  7 + 21,560 − 5,207 − 1,007 + 7,626 −14,180 − 4,522 − 4,418 − 631 − 698 − 3,088
General government + 7,658 −19,920 + 15,977 − 7,537 + 3,164 + 123 + 4,249 − 339 + 4,347 + 241
Long-term − 376 − 1,079 + 254 + 5 + 114 + 151 − 61 + 71 + 90 − 221
Short-term  7 + 8,034 −18,841 + 15,723 − 7,542 + 3,050 − 27 + 4,310 − 410 + 4,257 + 462
Bundesbank −47,544 + 41,972 + 24,015 + 34,575 −18,425 − 191 −18,402 −15,919 − 5,747 + 3,264
5. Other investment  8 − 2,324 − 2,183 − 1,385 − 330 − 428 − 424 − 341 − 155 − 162 − 24
II. Net foreign investment in Germany
(Increase/capital imports: +) + 320,985 + 387,499 + 235,799 − 9,012 + 41,749 + 49,473 + 67,167 + 28,264 + 5,766 + 33,137
1. Direct investment  1 + 51,392 + 211,786 + 35,574 + 10,392 + 12,810 + 15,980 + 1,845 − 146 − 585 + 2,575
Equity capital + 24,754 + 114,495 + 31,916 + 5,586 + 13,033 + 12,007 + 1,800 + 24 + 967 + 810Reinvested earnings  
2 − 5,400 − 3,600 − 3,600 − 900 − 900 − 900 − 900 − 300 − 300 − 300
Credit transactions offoreign direct investors + 32,286 + 101,226 + 7,403 + 5,757 + 704 + 4,904 + 1,042 + 144 − 1,247 + 2,144
Other capital − 249 − 335 − 145 − 51− 28− 31− 97− 14− 5− 78
2. Portfolio investment + 166,624 + 49,104 + 129,732 + 20,389 + 13,464 + 29,810 + 35,665 + 21,490 + 5,044 + 9,131
Equities  
3 + 21,942 −34,469 + 88,882 + 434 + 6,014 + 10,275 − 1,465 + 524 − 877 − 1,111
Investment fund certificates + 5,761 + 10,938 + 1,121 + 4,171 + 1,074 − 1,002 + 995 + 256 + 1,265 − 525
Bonds and notes  5 + 97,615 + 69,159 + 54,878 + 17,729 + 22,509 + 18,565 + 18,622 + 14,757 − 763 + 4,628
Money market instruments + 41,306 + 3,475 −15,149 − 1,945 −16,133 + 1,971 + 17,513 + 5,954 + 5,420 + 6,140
3. Credit transactions + 103,075 + 126,564 + 70,462 −39,792 + 15,452 + 3,637 + 29,616 + 6,878 + 1,302 + 21,435
Credit institutions  7 + 95,394 + 115,294 + 54,316 −44,403 + 13,852 + 5,533 + 28,405 + 6,343 + 3,459 + 18,603
Long-term + 35,241 + 15,665 + 4,394 −11,433 + 4,285 + 5,127 + 5,516 + 767 + 6,079 − 1,329
Short-term + 60,153 + 99,629 + 49,922 −32,970 + 9,567 + 406 + 22,888 + 5,576 − 2,619 + 19,932
Enterprises and individuals + 20,926 + 10,101 + 13,063 + 2,700 + 3,710 − 3,551 + 959 − 533 − 414 + 1,906
Long-term + 3,836 + 4,400 + 9,027 + 469 + 1,151 − 551 + 433 + 122 + 232 + 78
Short-term  7 + 17,090 + 5,701 + 4,036 + 2,231 + 2,559 − 3,000 + 526 − 656 − 646 + 1,828
General Government −11,255 + 756 + 452 + 1,883 − 3,391 + 2,203 − 476 + 169 − 1,025 + 380
Long-term − 8,306 − 142 − 602 + 152 − 318 − 150 + 531 − 55 + 808 − 222
Short-term  7 − 2,949 + 898 + 1,054 + 1,731 − 3,072 + 2,353 − 1,007 + 224 − 1,834 + 603
Bundesbank − 1,991 + 414 + 2,631 + 28 + 1,281 − 548 + 728 + 900 − 719 + 547
4. Other investment − 106 + 45 + 32 − 2 + 23 + 46 + 41 + 41 + 5 − 5
III. Balance of all statistically
recorded financial movements(Net capital exports: −) −26,084 + 34,347 −29,261 −28,788 −24,494 −30,125 −25,639 −12,392 − 7,351 − 5,896
1From 1996, new definition for direct investment. —2Estimated. — action values shown here are mostly derived from changes in stocks. As far
3Including participation rights. —4From 1991 including accumulated as possible, purely statistical changes have been eliminated. —8In
earnings. —5From 1975 excluding accrued interest. —6Options, whether particular, subscriptions of the Federal Government to International
or not evidenced by securities, and financial futures contracts. —7The trans- Organisations. 
71*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
8. External position of the Bundesbank *
 
 
DM million
Monetary reserves and other claims on non-residents Liabilities to non-residents
Monetary reserves
Reserve
positionin theInter- Liabilitiesnational arising Net Liabilities
Monetary arising from externalFund and Claims Loans and from liquidity position
Foreign special on the external Treasury (col. 1 other claims
End of year currency drawing ECB  
2 on non- trans- discount less
or month Total Total Gold rights (net) Total paper col. 8) balances  1 residents  3 actions  4 
1234567891 0 1 1
1989 99,959 97,527 13,688 58,308 8,229 17,303 2,432 51,642 51,642 − 48,317
1990 106,446 104,023 13,688 64,517 7,373 18,445 2,423 52,259 52,259 − 54,188
1991 97,345 94,754 13,688 55,424 8,314 17,329 2,592 42,335 42,335 − 55,010
1992 143,959 141,351 13,688 85,845 8,199 33,619 2,608 26,506 26,506 − 117,453
1993 122,763 120,143 13,688 61,784 8,496 36,176 2,620 39,541 23,179 16,362 83,222
1994 115,965 113,605 13,688 60,209 7,967 31,742 2,360 24,192 19,581 4,611 91,774
1995 123,261 121,307 13,688 68,484 10,337 28,798 1,954 16,390 16,390 − 106,871
1996 120,985 119,544 13,688 72,364 11,445 22,048 1,441 15,604 15,604 − 105,381
1997 127,849 126,884 13,688 76,673 13,874 22,649 966 16,931 16,931 − 110,918
1998 135,085 134,005 17,109 100,363 16,533 − 1,079 15,978 15,978 − 119,107
*Valuation of the gold holdings and the claims on non-residents according Monetary Cooperation Fund −EMCF). —3Including loans to the World
to section 26 (2) of the Bundesbank Act and the provisions of the Bank. —4Including liquidity paper sold to non-residents by the
Commercial Code, especially section 253. In the course of the year, valuation Bundesbank; excluding the liquidity Treasury discount paper sold to
at the balance sheet rates of the preceding year. —1Mainly US dollar non-residents between March 1993 and March 1995, as shown in column 10. 
assets. —2European Central Bank (until 1993 claims on the European
  
 
9. External position of the Bundesbank in the European monetary union o
 5  million
Monetary reserves and other claims on non-residents
Monetary reserves
Reserve
position
in the Inter-
national OtherMonetary Other claims on Net externalFund and claims on Claims residents position of the
Gold special Foreign non-euro- within the in other Bundesbank Liabilities
End of year and gold drawing currency area Eurosystem EMU member to non- (col.1 lessor month Total Total rights reserves (net)  
2 countries col.9) receivables residents  1  3 residents  3 
1234567891 0
1999          Jan.  4 95,316 93,940 29,312 8,461 56,167 140 1,225 11 8,169 87,146
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 8,332 52,420 9,162 39,746 11 6,179 135,779
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 7,762 53,377 313 6,620 14 6,592 94,1702001 76,147 93,215 35,005 8,721 49,489 312 − 17,385 5 8,752 67,396
2001          May 111,162 95,808 34,994 7,956 52,858 312 15,035 8 6,816 104,347         June 99,773 95,817 35,494 8,158 52,165 312 3,637 7 6,840 92,933
         July 107,437 92,879 33,708 7,980 51,191 312 14,240 6 7,005 100,432
         Aug. 109,011 89,890 33,414 7,765 48,711 312 18,803 6 6,860 102,151         Sep. 112,045 94,538 35,399 8,989 50,151 312 17,189 6 8,658 103,387
         Oct. 115,487 95,552 34,531 8,643 52,378 312 19,616 7 10,783 104,704
         Nov. 108,934 95,395 34,309 8,745 52,341 312 13,217 9 11,093 97,841         Dec. 76,147 93,215 35,005 8,721 49,489 312 − 17,385 5 8,752 67,396
2002          Jan. 98,116 97,392 36,220 8,855 52,316 312 409 3 10,455 87,661         Feb. 98,392 99,230 38,095 8,874 52,260 312 − 1,152 2 10,354 88,038
         Mar. 99,489 98,130 38,505 8,840 50,786 312 1,045 1 10,077 89,412
         Apr. 106,936 94,779 38,072 8,205 48,502 312 11,842 2 9,298 97,638
         May 100,886 91,942 38,649 8,040 45,253 312 8,630 2 8,448 92,438         June 88,199 86,649 35,435 8,848 42,366 312 1,236 1 9,219 78,980
         July 105,187 87,718 34,596 8,897 44,225 312 17,156 1 10,163 95,025
         Aug. 110,682 87,466 35,197 8,797 43,471 312 22,902 1 9,432 101,250         Sep. 108,889 88,937 36,225 8,751 43,961 312 19,639 1 9,966 98,923
         Oct. 112,748 87,441 35,530 8,594 43,317 312 24,993 2 9,473 103,276
oClaims and liabilities vis- à-vis all countries within and outside EMU. Until Deutsche Bundesbank ’s cross-border payments within the Eurosystem. From
December 2000, the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, by virtue November 2000 including the TARGET positions which were previously
of revaluations, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the levels shown (in columns 6 and 9) as bilateral assets and liabilities vis- à-vis national
are computed on the basis of cumulative transaction values. From January central banks outside the Eurosystem. —3See footnote 2. —4Euro
2001 onwards, all end-of-month levels will be valued at market prices. — opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at January 1, 1999. 
1Including loans to the World Bank. —2Including the balances in the
72*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
10. Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
Until the end of 1998 DM million, from 1999  5  million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities to non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  to foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms payments
or month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received operations operations
All countries
 
1998 502,610 140,729 361,881 169,889 191,992 176,485 15,507 429,240 81,092 348,148 220,628 127,520 87,576 39,944
1999 277,331 52,774 224,557 115,564 108,993 100,777 8,216 293,849 56,632 237,217 166,026 71,191 52,047 19,1442000 320,874 43,462 277,412 152,752 124,660 116,971 7,689 446,060 52,663 393,397 309,024 84,373 63,093 21,2802001 358,120 62,434 295,686 171,939 123,747 114,857 8,890 505,266 60,132 445,134 354,561 90,573 65,988 24,585
2002          June  
r 347,460 76,418 271,042 147,824 123,218 114,626 8,592 524,082 62,043 462,039 377,405 84,634 58,568 26,066
         July  r 344,903 79,106 265,797 144,686 121,111 112,163 8,948 518,224 63,130 455,094 371,400 83,694 57,388 26,306
         Aug.  r 341,476 80,947 260,529 143,574 116,955 108,148 8,807 517,057 63,509 453,548 372,148 81,400 55,162 26,238
         Sep. 350,948 81,997 268,951 148,669 120,282 111,998 8,284 528,330 61,613 466,717 381,222 85,495 59,295 26,200
EU countries
 
1998 307,523 130,398 177,125 84,422 92,703 83,927 8,776 265,214 68,873 196,341 137,494 58,847 46,896 11,951
1999 157,617 47,992 109,625 56,450 53,175 48,500 4,675 194,809 49,243 145,566 111,605 33,961 27,532 6,4292000 177,782 39,563 138,219 78,298 59,921 55,718 4,203 323,049 45,473 277,576 237,583 39,993 32,457 7,5362001 198,118 58,039 140,079 79,205 60,874 55,371 5,503 372,937 53,683 319,254 275,749 43,505 34,716 8,789
2002          June  
r 214,798 72,309 142,489 81,657 60,832 55,532 5,300 400,500 56,773 343,727 302,860 40,867 31,174 9,693
         July  r 214,048 74,035 140,013 81,423 58,590 52,976 5,614 397,149 57,930 339,219 299,266 39,953 30,359 9,594
         Aug.  r 212,441 76,218 136,223 80,442 55,781 50,277 5,504 395,942 58,377 337,565 299,307 38,258 28,369 9,889
         Sep. 217,989 77,105 140,884 83,219 57,665 52,363 5,302 403,861 56,593 347,268 306,777 40,491 30,755 9,736
of which: EMU member countries 1
 
1998 190,953 68,418 122,535 54,167 68,368 62,491 5,877 197,566 50,579 146,987 103,899 43,088 35,021 8,067
1999 104,071 25,946 78,125 38,747 39,378 36,074 3,304 151,179 38,117 113,062 88,763 24,299 20,173 4,1262000 120,976 22,737 98,239 52,976 45,263 42,389 2,874 247,830 33,698 214,132 185,595 28,537 23,569 4,9682001 126,519 33,787 92,732 46,599 46,133 42,771 3,362 295,943 38,361 257,582 225,711 31,871 24,878 6,993
2002          June  
r 142,731 46,626 96,105 50,273 45,832 42,370 3,462 327,423 40,887 286,536 256,006 30,530 22,694 7,836
         July  r 137,056 43,868 93,188 48,765 44,423 40,858 3,565 328,394 42,318 286,076 256,008 30,068 22,293 7,775
         Aug.  r 136,159 45,524 90,635 48,671 41,964 38,397 3,567 326,723 42,437 284,286 255,996 28,290 20,303 7,987
         Sep. 139,717 46,889 92,828 49,732 43,096 39,707 3,389 332,227 41,325 290,902 260,984 29,918 22,233 7,685
Other industrial countries 3
 
1998 109,682 8,246 101,436 61,999 39,437 36,162 3,275 102,058 7,655 94,403 61,741 32,662 26,292 6,370
1999 71,958 3,595 68,363 45,540 22,823 21,220 1,603 68,024 4,870 63,154 44,518 18,636 15,387 3,2492000 84,502 2,925 81,577 54,272 27,305 25,673 1,632 84,464 4,711 79,753 56,986 22,767 18,621 4,1462001 100,786 3,364 97,422 71,842 25,580 24,082 1,498 93,269 4,178 89,091 64,595 24,496 19,648 4,848
2002          June  
r 76,636 2,622 74,014 48,938 25,076 23,759 1,317 84,318 3,150 81,168 59,504 21,664 16,750 4,914
         July  r 74,921 2,890 72,031 46,598 25,433 24,111 1,322 81,281 3,109 78,172 57,082 21,090 16,116 4,974
         Aug.  r 74,999 3,190 71,809 46,918 24,891 23,558 1,333 81,524 3,074 78,450 57,874 20,576 15,624 4,952
         Sep. 77,671 3,065 74,606 49,004 25,602 24,468 1,134 83,851 3,008 80,843 59,103 21,740 16,688 5,052
Countries in transition
 
1998 30,107 360 29,747 7,914 21,833 20,218 1,615 11,383 135 11,248 657 10,591 4,941 5,650
1999 16,402 231 16,171 4,603 11,568 10,934 634 6,256 78 6,178 481 5,697 3,119 2,5782000 19,082 240 18,842 5,028 13,814 13,104 710 8,202 113 8,089 928 7,161 4,384 2,7772001 20,444 204 20,240 6,103 14,137 13,449 688 9,095 151 8,944 1,699 7,245 4,341 2,904
2002          June 20,670 292 20,378 5,933 14,445 13,719 726 9,438 192 9,246 2,048 7,198 4,027 3,171
         July 20,471 305 20,166 5,781 14,385 13,645 740 9,549 196 9,353 1,992 7,361 4,063 3,298
         Aug. 20,175 255 19,920 5,844 14,076 13,330 746 9,719 190 9,529 1,911 7,618 4,305 3,313         Sep. 20,384 265 20,119 5,807 14,312 13,590 722 10,152 185 9,967 2,081 7,886 4,734 3,152
Developing countries 2
 
1998 55,298 1,725 53,573 15,554 38,019 36,178 1,841 50,585 4,429 46,156 20,736 25,420 9,447 15,9731999 31,354 956 30,398 8,971 21,427 20,123 1,304 24,760 2,441 22,319 9,422 12,897 6,009 6,8882000 39,508 734 38,774 15,154 23,620 22,476 1,144 30,345 2,366 27,979 13,527 14,452 7,631 6,8212001 38,772 827 37,945 14,789 23,156 21,955 1,201 29,965 2,120 27,845 12,518 15,327 7,283 8,044
2002          June 35,356 1,195 34,161 11,296 22,865 21,616 1,249 29,826 1,928 27,898 12,993 14,905 6,617 8,288
         July 35,463 1,876 33,587 10,884 22,703 21,431 1,272 30,245 1,895 28,350 13,060 15,290 6,850 8,440
         Aug. 33,861 1,284 32,577 10,370 22,207 20,983 1,224 29,872 1,868 28,004 13,056 14,948 6,864 8,084         Sep. 34,904 1,562 33,342 10,639 22,703 21,577 1,126 30,466 1,827 28,639 13,261 15,378 7,118 8,260
* Including the assets and liabilities vis- à-vis non-residents of individuals in are not comparable with the figures shown in Table X, 7. —1Including
Germany. The assets and liabilities vis- à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in Greece from January 2001. —2Including Cyprus until April 2002. —
Germany are shown in Table 4 of Section IV, "Banks". Statistical increases 3 Including Cyprus from May 2002. 
and decreases have not been eliminated; to this extent the changes in totals
73*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
X. Foreign trade and payments
11. Deutsche Mark and euro exchange rates of selected currencies *
Yearly Japan Denmark Sweden Norway Switzerland Canada Australia New Zealand United States United Kingdom
or monthly
average USD JPY DKK SEK GBP NOK CHF CAD AUD  1 NZD 1 
Historic spot middle rates on the Frankfurt exchange (1 or 100 currency units = DEM ...)
      
1991 1.6612 1.2346 25.932 27.421 2.926  25.580 115.740 1.4501 1.2942 0.95891992 1.5595 1.2313 25.869 26.912 2.753  25.143 111.198 1.2917 1.1476 0.84061993 1.6544 1.4945 25.508 21.248 2.483  23.303 111.949 1.2823 1.1235 0.89401994 1.6218 1.5870 25.513 21.013 2.4816 22.982 118.712 1.1884 1.1848 0.9605
1995 1.4338 1.5293 25.570 20.116 2.2620 22.614 121.240 1.0443 1.0622 0.9399
1996 1.5037 1.3838 25.945 22.434 2.3478 23.292 121.891 1.1027 1.1782 1.03571997 1.7348 1.4378 26.249 22.718 2.8410 24.508 119.508 1.2533 1.2889 1.14531998 1.7592 1.3484 26.258 22.128 2.9142 23.297 121.414 1.1884 1.1070 0.9445
      
Euro reference exchange rates published by the European Central Bank (EUR 1 = currency units ...) 2
      
1999 1.0658 121.32 7.4355 8.8075 0.65874 8.3104 1.6003 1.5840 1.6523 2.01452000 0.9236 99.47 7.4538 8.4452 0.60948 8.1129 1.5579 1.3706 1.5889 2.02882001 0.8956 108.68 7.4521 9.2551 0.62187 8.0484 1.5105 1.3864 1.7319 2.1300
2000          Dec. 0.8973 100.61 7.4580 8.6622 0.61342 8.1334 1.5137 1.3679 1.6422 2.09052001          Jan. 0.9383 109.57 7.4642 8.9055 0.63480 8.2355 1.5291 1.4098 1.6891 2.1103
         Feb. 0.9217 107.08 7.4630 8.9770 0.63400 8.2125 1.5358 1.4027 1.7236 2.1184         Mar. 0.9095 110.33 7.4643 9.1264 0.62915 8.1600 1.5355 1.4167 1.8072 2.1753
         Apr. 0.8920 110.36 7.4633 9.1120 0.62168 8.1146 1.5287 1.3903 1.7847 2.1975
         May 0.8742 106.50 7.4612 9.0576 0.61328 7.9927 1.5334 1.3473 1.6813 2.0723         June 0.8532 104.30 7.4539 9.2106 0.60890 7.9360 1.5225 1.3016 1.6469 2.0589
         July 0.8607 107.21 7.4447 9.2637 0.60857 7.9714 1.5135 1.3153 1.6890 2.1074
         Aug. 0.9005 109.34 7.4450 9.3107 0.62672 8.0552 1.5144 1.3857 1.7169 2.0895         Sep. 0.9111 108.20 7.4413 9.6744 0.62291 7.9985 1.4913 1.4260 1.8036 2.1781
         Oct. 0.9059 109.86 7.4367 9.5780 0.62393 7.9970 1.4793 1.4224 1.7955 2.1863
         Nov. 0.8883 108.68 7.4452 9.4166 0.61838 7.9224 1.4663 1.4153 1.7172 2.1322         Dec. 0.8924 113.38 7.4431 9.4359 0.62012 7.9911 1.4749 1.4075 1.7348 2.1456
2002          Jan. 0.8833 117.12 7.4329 9.2275 0.61659 7.9208 1.4745 1.4135 1.7094 2.0826
         Feb. 0.8700 116.23 7.4299 9.1828 0.61160 7.7853 1.4775 1.3880 1.6963 2.0771         Mar. 0.8758 114.75 7.4324 9.0594 0.61574 7.7183 1.4678 1.3903 1.6695 2.0261
         Apr. 0.8858 115.81 7.4341 9.1358 0.61407 7.6221 1.4658 1.4008 1.6537 1.9995
         May 0.9170 115.86 7.4356 9.2208 0.62823 7.5207 1.4572 1.4210 1.6662 1.9859         June 0.9554 117.80 7.4330 9.1137 0.64405 7.4043 1.4721 1.4627 1.6793 1.9517
         July 0.9922 117.11 7.4301 9.2689 0.63870 7.4050 1.4624 1.5321 1.7922 2.0646
         Aug. 0.9778 116.31 7.4270 9.2489 0.63633 7.4284 1.4636 1.5333 1.8045 2.1076         Sep. 0.9808 118.38 7.4271 9.1679 0.63059 7.3619 1.4649 1.5434 1.7927 2.0847
         Oct. 0.9811 121.57 7.4297 9.1051 0.62994 7.3405 1.4650 1.5481 1.7831 2.0381
*Calculated from daily quotations. —1Exchange rates from Australia and central banks at 2.15 p.m. For additional euro reference exchange rates of
New Zealand; those for New Zealand calculated from rates as at the middle the ECB, see Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Report 5, Exchange rate
and end of the month. —2The ECB publishes daily euro reference ex- statistics. 
change rates, which are calculated on the basis of the concertation between
12. Exchange rates for the national currencies of the EMU countries, the Deutsche Mark value of the ECU *
and euro conversion rates
France Italy Netherlands Belgium/ Austria Spain Finland Ireland Portugal Greece ECU values  1 
Yearly Luxembourg GRD  100 /
average FRF  100 ITL  1,000 NLG  100 BEF/LUF  100 ATS  100 ESP  100 FIM  100 IEP  1 PTE  100 EUR  1  2 ECU  1 .
Historic spot middle rates on the Frankfurt exchange in DEM
   
1991 29.409 1.3377 88.742 4.857  14.211 1.597  41.087 2.671  1.149  0.9103 2.050761992 29.500 1.2720 88.814 4.857  14.211 1.529  34.963 2.656  1.157  0.8178 2.020311993 29.189 1.0526 89.017 4.785  14.214 1.303  28.915 2.423  1.031  0.7213 1.936391994 29.238 1.0056 89.171 4.8530 14.214 1.2112 31.108 2.4254 0.9774 0.6683 1.92452
1995 28.718 0.8814 89.272 4.8604 14.214 1.1499 32.832 2.2980 0.9555 0.6182 1.87375
1996 29.406 0.9751 89.243 4.8592 14.214 1.1880 32.766 2.4070 0.9754 0.6248 1.909541997 29.705 1.0184 88.857 4.8464 14.210 1.1843 33.414 2.6297 0.9894 0.6349 1.964381998 29.829 1.0132 88.714 4.8476 14.213 1.1779 32.920 2.5049 0.9763 0.5952 1.969131999 . . . . . . . . . 325.76 .
2000 . . . . . . . . . 336.63 .
      
Irrevocable euro conversion rates (EUR 1 = currency units ...) 3
   
6.55957 1936.27 2.20371 40.3399 13.7603 166.386 5.94573 0.787564 200.482 4 340.750 5 1.95583
*Calculated from daily quotations. —1According to data from the Euro- ence exchange rates of the ECB (EU R 1 = GRD ...). —3Applicable from
pean Commission. —2Until 1998 reciprocal values of the exchange rates for 1 January 1999. —4Applicable from 1 January 2001. —5Deutsche Mark
the Deutsche Mark, published by the Bank of Greece; from 1999 euro refer- conversion rate. 
74*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportNovember 2002
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
13. Effective exchange rates * of the euro and selected foreign currencies
 
 
1st qtr 1999 = 100
Memo item: Effective nominal exchange rates of selected foreign
Indicators of the German economy ’s currencies against the currencies of 19 industrial
Effective exchange rate of the euro price competitiveness  3  4 countries  3  5  6 
Narrow group  1 Broad group  2 19 industrial countries  5 49 countries  7 
Real Real on the basis
of the on the basis on the basis
on the basis of Pound Canadian Swiss Japanese of consumer of consumer deflators of
Period Nominal prices Nominal prices consumer prices US dollar sterling dollar franc yen total sales  8 
1995 107.8 108.8 93.2 107.8 109.5 110.4 110.2 86.1 84.0 106.4 105.4 115.6
1996 107.9 108.8 95.4 105.9 106.1 106.8 105.2 90.9 85.9 108.8 104.2 100.61997 99.1 99.5 90.4 96.6 100.7 101.4 99.0 98.8 99.8 109.7 97.9 95.91998 101.5 101.3 96.6 99.1 100.9 101.1 100.1 103.4 103.3 103.5 99.9 89.71999 95.7 95.7 96.6 95.8 97.8 98.0 97.7 100.8 102.3 102.2 98.3 105.1
2000 85.7 86.5 88.2 86.3 91.9 93.2 91.7 105.4 105.2 103.6 96.8 117.9
2001 87.3 88.9 91.0 88.1
p 92.1 94.2 92.4 112.0 103.6 100.5 100.5 106.7
1996          1st qtr 108.9 110.2 95.5 107.6 108.0 108.9 107.6 89.8 83.1 108.0 106.8 102.9         2nd qtr 107.1 108.1 94.5 105.3 105.6 106.3 104.6 91.1 84.4 108.8 104.2 102.4         3rd qtr 108.6 109.5 96.3 106.3 105.9 107.1 105.4 90.9 85.2 108.2 104.8 100.1         4th qtr 106.9 107.4 95.5 104.5 104.9 104.9 103.3 91.8 91.0 110.2 100.7 97.1
1997          1st qtr 102.4 103.2 91.8 99.6 102.7 103.5 100.9 96.9 96.4 111.3 96.0 93.8
         2nd qtr 99.5 99.7 90.0 96.4 101.0 101.7 98.9 98.1 98.9 109.3 97.5 96.6         3rd qtr 95.5 95.7 87.7 93.2 98.8 99.8 97.1 99.5 101.4 109.9 97.9 100.0         4th qtr 99.1 99.2 92.1 97.0 100.2 100.4 99.0 100.5 102.4 108.2 100.2 92.9
1998          1st qtr 98.8 98.8 92.6 96.4 99.4 99.8 98.8 103.2 104.5 107.3 100.1 92.5
         2nd qtr 100.2 100.1 94.2 97.4 100.7 100.7 99.1 104.8 104.8 106.5 98.5 86.8         3rd qtr 102.5 102.5 97.8 100.2 101.6 102.1 101.0 106.3 104.1 102.0 99.4 83.7         4th qtr 104.2 103.8 101.7 102.4 101.9 101.8 101.5 99.4 99.8 98.0 101.6 95.7
1999          1st qtr 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 99.9 99.9 100.0 100.0 100.1
         2nd qtr 96.1 96.0 96.5 96.0 98.5 98.3 97.8 102.8 102.9 103.5 98.6 99.0         3rd qtr 94.6 94.7 95.5 94.6 97.1 97.8 97.2 101.4 102.4 102.3 97.7 106.2         4th qtr 92.2 92.2 94.2 92.6 95.5 95.9 95.5 99.1 104.1 102.8 96.7 115.2
2000          Jan. 90.2 90.8 92.4 90.7 . 95.9 94.8 99.7 106.5 104.8 95.4 115.5
         Feb. 89.2 89.8 91.2 89.6 93.8 95.5 94.1 102.3 106.5 105.2 95.2 112.5         Mar. 87.7 88.3 89.7 88.1 . 94.3 92.9 102.4 106.3 104.6 94.7 116.8
         Apr. 86.1 86.6 88.4 86.7 . 93.2 91.9 103.0 107.7 104.3 95.9 118.6
         May 84.5 85.0 86.9 85.1 92.0 92.1 91.0 106.4 106.0 103.0 96.3 118.3         June 87.4 88.1 89.9 88.1 . 93.8 92.7 103.6 102.5 103.7 97.2 118.3
         July 86.9 87.9 89.4 87.5 . 94.3 92.7 104.5 103.4 103.9 97.7 116.8
         Aug. 84.6 85.5 87.0 85.1 91.5 92.8 90.9 106.3 104.9 104.0 96.7 118.6         Sep. 82.8 83.6 85.3 83.3 . 91.8 89.8 107.7 103.5 104.3 97.2 122.3
         Oct. 81.6 82.4 84.4 82.2 . 90.9 88.9 109.4 106.4 102.7 97.8 121.4
         Nov. 82.3 83.3 85.1 82.9 90.2 91.3 89.3 110.2 104.6 100.7 97.5 121.1         Dec. 85.4 86.4 88.1 85.8 . 92.8 91.3 108.7 104.1 101.5 99.4 115.1
2001          Jan. 89.2 90.2 91.7 89.0 . 95.2 93.3 107.7 102.4 102.7 100.0 108.3
         Feb. 88.3 89.4 91.0 88.3 92.7 95.2 93.2 108.8 102.0 101.6 99.2 109.9         Mar. 88.4 89.8 91.4 88.9 . 95.0 93.2 111.5 102.9 99.7 99.3 106.0
         Apr. 87.6 89.1 91.0 88.4 . 94.2 92.7 113.0 103.7 100.0 99.4 104.9
         May 85.9 87.6 89.3 86.7 91.6 93.6 91.7 113.1 104.3 101.3 98.3 107.5         June 84.7 86.3 88.1 85.4 . 93.1 90.9 114.1 104.4 102.7 98.5 108.3
         July 85.4 87.1 89.1 86.2 . 93.8 91.8 114.3 104.9 102.5 99.5 105.8
         Aug. 87.7 89.3 91.8 88.6
p 91.8 94.7 92.9 111.6 103.0 101.1 100.4 106.4
         Sep. 88.0 89.7 92.6 89.4 . 94.3 93.1 110.7 103.9 99.1 102.2 108.2
         Oct. 88.0 90.0 92.8 89.5 . 93.9 92.7 111.8 103.7 99.0 103.0 106.2
         Nov. 86.8 88.8 91.3 88.0 p 92.3 93.2 91.7 113.3 104.0 97.8 103.4 106.3
         Dec. 87.7 89.9 91.9 88.6 . 93.8 92.1 114.1 104.3 99.0 103.3 102.1
2002          Jan. 87.6 90.3 91.6 88.4 . 95.1 92.6 116.4 104.9 97.9 103.3 98.3
         Feb. 86.8 89.4 91.1 87.8 p 92.3 94.6 92.2 117.3 105.4 98.5 102.7 98.2
         Mar. 86.8 89.6 91.3 88.2 . 94.3 92.0 116.1 104.6 98.7 103.4 99.8
         Apr. 87.2 90.1 91.7 88.5 . 93.9 91.6 115.3 105.2 99.0 103.8 99.4
         May 88.6 91.5 93.7 90.4 p 92.9 94.3 92.6 112.0 103.5 100.4 105.1 101.2
         June 90.6 93.6 96.4 92.8 . 95.4 94.0 109.0 101.9 101.0 104.9 101.7
         July 91.7 94.7 98.2 94.4 . 96.3 95.3 106.0 103.5 99.4 106.0 104.3
         Aug. 91.1 93.9 97.7 93.7 p 93.6 95.5 94.7 107.3 103.5 98.0 105.7 104.3
         Sep. 91.2 94.2 98.0 93.8 . 95.4 94.5 107.6 104.7 97.7 105.6 102.5
         Oct. 91.7 94.8 98.5 94.3 . 95.3 94.4 108.5 105.0 97.6 105.8 99.8
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of April 2000, page 39 ff. —2ECB calculations; in addition to the countries
the currency concerned. —1ECB calculations based on the weighted belonging to the narrow group (see footnote 1), this group also includes the
averages of the effective exchange rates of the euro or, prior to 1999, of the following countries: Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, China, Croatia, Cypru s, Czech
exchange rates of the currencies preceding the euro against the currencies Republic, Estonia, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico ,
of the following countries: Australia, Canada, Denmark, Greece, Hong Kong, Morocco, New Zealand, Philippines, Poland, Romania, Russia, Slovakia,
Japan, Norway, Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, United Slovenia, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand and Turkey. —3The method of
Kingdom and United States. The weights used in these calculations are calculation is consistent with the procedure used by the ECB to compute thebased on manufactured goods trade between 1995 and 1997 and capture effective exchange rates of the euro (see Monthly Bulletin, November 2001,third-market effects. From January 2001, Greece ceased to be a partner page 50 ff.). —4Decline in the values implies an increase in
country in the effective exchange rate of the euro; the weighting scheme competitiveness. —5EMU countries and narrow group of the ECB except
was adjusted accordingly. Due to change in the weighting scheme, effective Australia, Hong Kong, Singapore and South Korea. —6Figures up to
exchange rate data as from January 2001 are not fully comparable with end-1998, computed by linking with the figures published up to Octoberearlier observations. For the prices are not yet available, estimates have 2001. —7EMU countries and broad group of the ECB. —8Annual and
been used. For the definition of the method see: ECB, Monthly Bulletin, quarterly averages. 
75*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
76*

Overview of
publicationsby the DeutscheBundesbankThis overview provides information
about selected recent economic andstatistical publications by the DeutscheBundesbank. Unless otherwise indi-cated, these publications are availablein both English and German, in printedform and on the internet.
The publications are available free of
charge from the Press and Public Rela-tions Division. For a small fee to covercosts, a file which is updated monthlyand contains approximately 40,000time series published by the Bundes-bank can be obtained on magnetictape cassette or ZIP disk from the Divi-sion Statistical data processing, math-ematical methods. Orders should besent, in writing, to one of the ad-dresses listed on the reverse of the titlepage. Selected time series can also bedownloaded from the internet.
Annual Report
Monthly Report
For information on the articles published between
1990 and 2001 see the index attached to the Jan-uary 2002 Monthly Report.
December 2001
– International integration of German securities
markets
– The long-term sustainability of public finance –
an analysis based on generational accountingDeutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
77*

– German enterprises’ earning and financing
patterns, by form of business organisation
– Reports from the Economic Research Centre
January 2002
– Capital flows and the exchange rate– The housing market during the nineties– Credit institutions’ capital viewed from a busi-
ness and a regulatory perspective
– Reports from the Economic Research Centre
February 2002
– The economic scene in Germany around the
turn of 2001–02
March 2002
– Circulation of the Deutsche Mark – from cur-
rency reform to European monetary union
– German balance of payments in 2001– The pass-through from market interest rates to
bank lending rates in Germany
April 2002
– Government benefits for families– German enterprises’ profitability and financing
in 2000
– RTGS
plus– successfully established
May 2002
– The economic scene in Germany in spring
2002
June 2002
– Overall financial flows in 2001– The evolution of accounting standards for
credit institutions
– Consequences of increasing capital flows for
exchange rate policy – observations and pro-
spects worldwide
– Direct investment in the real and financial sec-
tor – the Bundesbank Spring Conference 2002
July 2002
– Consumer prices and the changeover from
Deutsche Mark to euro– Funded old-age provision and the financial
markets
– Monetary policy and investment behaviour – an
empirical study
– Reports from the Economic Research Centre
August 2002
– The economic scene in Germany in summer
2002
September 2002
– The performance of German credit institutions
in 2001
– Productivity developments
in Germany
– Quotas and voting shares in the IMF
October 2002
– Amendments to the Banking Act caused by
the Fourth Financial Market Promotion Act
– The development of bank lending to the pri-
vate sector
– Fundamental determinants of real exchange
rate movements in the central and east Euro-
pean accession countries
November 2002
– The economic scene in Germany in autumn
2002
Statistical Supplements to the
Monthly Report1
1 Banking statistics (monthly)
2 Capital market statistics (monthly)
3 Balance of payments statistics (monthly)
4 Seasonally adjusted business statistics (monthly)5 Exchange rate statistics (quarterly)Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
78*1Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data
contained in the German originals are available in English.

Discussion papers
by the Economic Research Centre
June 2002 16/02
Monetary Transmission in the New Economy: Ac-
celerated Depreciation, Transmission Channels and
the Speed of Adjustment
June 2002 17/02
Central Bank Intervention and Exchange Rate Ex-
pectations – Evidence from the Daily DM/US-Dollar
Exchange Rate
June 2002 18/02
Monetäre Indikatoren und geldpolitische Regeln
im P-Stern-Modell
July 2002 19/02
Real currency appreciation in accession countries:Balassa-Samuelson and investment demand
August 2002 20/02
The Eurosystem’s Standing Facilities in a General
Equilibrium Model of the European InterbankMarket
August 2002 21/02
Imperfect Competition, Monetary Policy and Wel-
fare in a Currency Area
August 2002 22/02
Monetary and fiscal policy rules in a model with cap-
ital accumulation and potentially non-superneutral
money
September 2002 23/02
Dynamic Q-investment functions for Germany
using panel balance sheet data and a new algo-
rithm for the capital stock at replacement values
Earlier discussion papers are available on the inter-
net, in some cases as abstracts.Special Publications
The monetary policy of the Bundesbank,October 1995
1
Makro-ökonometrisches Mehr-Länder-Modell,November 1996
2
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im Bereichvon Währung und Wirtschaft, April 1997
2
Europäische Organisationen und Gremien im Be-reich von Währung und Wirtschaft, May 1997
2
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 bis1989, August 1993
2
The market for German Federal securities, May2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model: MEMMOD,
June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Special Statistical Publications
1 Banking statistics guidelines and customer clas-
sification, June 20003
2 Bankenstatistik Kundensystematik Firmenver-
zeichnisse2,4
3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen,
January 20002
4 Financial accounts for Germany 1991 to 2000,
September 200156Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
79*1Also available in French, Spanish, Russian and Chinese.
2Available in German only.
3Only the sections “Monthly Balance Sheet Statistics”,
“External position” and “Customer classification”
(“Overall survey on sectoral classification”, “Survey on
breakdown by industry or activity” and “Explanatory
notes on the system of customer classification by industry
or activity”) are available in English.
4Current version available on the internet at quarterly in-
tervals.
5Only available on the internet.
6Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data
contained in the German originals are available in English.oNot available on the internet.

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2002
80*5 Annual accounts of west German enterprises
1971 to 1996, March 19996
6 Ratios from the annual accounts of west and
east German enterprises for 1998, September
20015,6
7 Erläuterungen zu den Leistungspositionen der
Zahlungsbilanz, September 20012
8 Balance of payments statistics of the Federal
Republic of Germany, 2nd edition, February
1991o
9 Securities deposits,
August 2002
10 International capital links,
May 20026
11 Balance of payments by region,
August 2001
12 Technologische Dienstleistungen in der Zah-
lungsbilanz, May 20022
Banking legislation
1 Bundesbank Act and Statute of the European
System of Central Banks and of the European
Central Bank, June 1998
2 Gesetz über das Kreditwesen, February 200122a Grundsatz I über die Eigenmittel der Institute,
January 20012
2b Grundsatz II über die Liquidität der Institute,
August 19992
7 Instruction sheet for the reporting of large ex-
posures and loans of 3 million Deutsche Markor more pursuant to sections 13 to 14 of theBanking Act, September 1998
Publications on EMU
Informationsbriefe zur Europäischen Wirtschafts-und Währungsunion
2
euro 2002 – information on the introduction of eurobanknotes and coins
No 1, July 2000
No 2, October 2000No 3, February 2001No 4, May 2001
No 5, September 2001
Der Euro ist da. Wir sagen Ihnen, worauf es an-
kommt. (Leaflet)
2
For footnotes, see p 79*.

