Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
Vol. 54
No. 10

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
Deutsche Bundesbank
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 1460431 Frankfurt am Main
Postfach 10 06 02
60006 Frankfurt am MainFederal Republic of Germany
Tel +49 69 9566-1
or +49 69 9566 . . . plus extension
number
Telex 41227 within Germany
414431 from abroad
Fax +49 69 56010 71
Internet http://www.bundesbank.deReproduction permitted only if source is stated.ISSN 0418-8292The German original of this Monthly Report
went to press on 18 October 2002.Annual and weekly publishing schedules for
selected statistics of the Deutsche Bundes-bank can be downloaded from our internetsite. The statistical data are also published onthe internet.
TheMonthly Report is published by the Deut-
sche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main, by vir-tue of section 18 of the Bundesbank Act. It isavailable to interested parties free of charge.

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
ContentsCommentaries 5
Economic conditions 5
Public finance 7Securities markets 9Balance of payments 11
Amendments to the Banking Act
caused by the Fourth FinancialMarket Promotion Act 15
The development of bank lending
to the private sector 31
Fundamental determinants of real
exchange rate movements in thecentral and east European accessioncountries 47
Statistical Section 1*
Key economic data for EMU 6*
Overall monetary survey in the EMU 8*Consolidated financial statementof the Eurosystem 16*Banks 20*Minimum reserves 42*Interest rates 43*Capital market 48*Public finance in Germany 52*Economic conditions 60*Foreign trade and payments 67*
Overview of publications by the
Deutsche Bundesbank 77*

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
4

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
5CommentariesEconomic conditions
IndustrySeasonally adjusted orders received by indus-
try in August showed a significant rise com-pared with their low level in the previousmonth. There was also a year-on-year in-crease of just over
12%. Combining the two
summer months of July and August to char-acterise the general development, however,reveals that there was still a decline of around1% on the spring quarter, which had benefit-ed from a whole series of large-scale orders.
The slight weakening in the flow of orders
was due to foreign demand, with the ordervolume in July and August being almost2
12% down on the second quarter in season-
ally adjusted terms. By contrast, domesticorders were somewhat higher than in spring.
Seasonally adjusted industrial output in Au-
gust was noticeably up on July, which hadbeen crucially influenced by holiday effects ineastern Germany. Even though a significantdownward adjustment of the August figuresis still to be expected, July and August to-gether witnessed a marked expansion of out-put compared with the second quarter. Theyear-on-year fall, having been as much as2
12% in the spring, decreased to34%. The in-
crease in production in August was undoubt-edly not merely a reaction to the holiday ef-fects of the preceding month. Another con-tributory factor is likely to have been workcarried out in processing the increased orderbacklog resulting from the major contractsplaced in spring.Orders received
Output

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
6Construction
Demand for construction work showed a fur-
ther seasonally adjusted fall in July, beingdown both on the month and the averagelevel of the second quarter. The year-on-yeardecline now amounts to 5%. Incoming ordersdeclined again perceptibly in seasonally ad-justed terms, especially in residential con-struction. The comparable figure for 2001continued to be undershot at a double-digitrate. Public contractors, too, remained veryrestrained in July. It was only in industrial con-struction that no further fall in new orderswas recorded in early summer.
Seasonally adjusted construction output in
August was somewhat lower than in July.Taken together, July and August also showeda slight fall compared with the spring. Theyear-on-year figure continued to show a sig-nificant fall.
Labour marketThe seasonally adjusted number of persons
in work in July was scarcely lower than inJune. The year-on-year fall became some-what smaller, at 230,000, compared with theprevious figure of 250,000. The slowdown inthe hitherto negative employment trend doesnot signal a cyclical improvement, however,but is mainly due to a shift in the call-updates for military service.
The seasonally adjusted number of persons
registered as unemployed in September – asin July and August – persisted largely at thelevel of just under 4.10 million. The year-on-Economic conditions in Germany*
Seasonally adjusted
New orders (volume); 1995 = 100
Industry 1
of which
Period Total Domestic ForeignCon-
struction
2001 Q4 119.6 103.6 148.4 71.4
2002 Q1 121.0 102.7 154.0 73.9
Q2 123.6 102.7 161.3 70.1
June 122.1 102.4 157.8 70.2July 121.6 102.8 155.5 68.2
August 123.1 103.1 159.3 ...
Output; 1995 = 100Industry
2
of which
TotalInter-
mediategoodsCapital
goods
3Con-struction
2001 Q4 116.7 113.0 130.1 79.8
2002 Q1 117.7 115.3 130.0 78.4
Q2 117.3 115.2 129.6 72.8
June 118.5 115.9 131.8 72.4July 117.8 115.4 130.9 72.8
August 120.3 117.1 135.6 72.2
Labour market
Em-
ployed
4VacanciesUn-
employed
Number in thousandsUn-
employ-mentratein %
5
2002 Q1 38,816 474 3,971 9.6
Q2 38,750 471 4,027 9.7Q3 ... 446 4,098 9.8
July 38,704 449 4,099 9.8
Aug ... 444 4,099 9.8Sep ... 427 4,098 9.8
Prices; 1995 =100
Import
pricesProducer
prices ofindustrialprod-ucts
6Overallconstruc-tion pricelevel
7Con-sumerpriceindex
2002 Q1 109.8 104.6 99.4 110.8
Q2 109.7 104.5 99.5 111.0Q3 ... ... 99.5 111.0
July 108.3 104.1 . 110.9
Aug 109.0 104.0 . 111.0Sep ... ... . 111.1
*Data in many cases provisional. — 1Manufacturing sectors
excluding, in particular, food products, beverages and to-bacco, and refined petroleum products. — 2Manufacturing
industries not classified under energy plus mining andquarrying. — 3Including manufacture of motor vehicles,
trailers and semi-trailers. — 4Workplace concept. — 5Meas-
ured on the basis of all civilian members of the labourforce. — 6Domestic sales. — 7Calculated by the Bundes-
bank. Mid-quarter level.
Deutsche BundesbankOrders received
Output
Employment
Unemployment

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
7year rise went down from 230,000 in August
to below 200,000. Much as in the precedingperiod, special influences in eastern Germanyretarded the growth of unemployment re-cently. The large-scale clearing-up and recon-struction work after the flood disaster meantthat increased use was made of many labourmarket policy measures. In western Germany,however, unemployment showed a steadyslight seasonally adjusted rise up to the endof the period under review.
At the end of September, the unemployment
rate as defined by the Federal Labour Officeamounted to a seasonally adjusted 9.8%.The corresponding figure using the standard-ised method was 8.3%.
PricesThe rate of consumer price increase remained
within narrow bounds in September. Season-ally adjusted, there was no more than a mar-ginal increase in the general price level. Theyear-on-year rate of increase fell back to1.0%, having been 1.1% in August. Therewas again a marked rise in energy prices. Asthere had been even stronger upward pres-sure on prices in September 2001, however,the year-on-year rate of increase eased. Thefall in food prices – especially for seasonalproduce – was also significantly smaller thanis usual at this time of year. Weather-inducedcrop failures are likely to have played a partin this. By contrast, there were only minorchanges in the prices of industrial goods. Theyear-on-year rate of price increase remainedvery moderate at 0.8%. The year-on-year risein housing rents (including additional ex-
penses) eased slightly to 1.3%.
The external price-moderating influences
ceased to have an impact at the end of theperiod under review. Seasonally adjusted im-port prices went up 0.6% in August and theyear-on-year rate narrowed from -4.2% inJuly to -2.6% at the end of the period underreview. There was a sharp increase in theprices of crude oil and petroleum products.Prices quoted internationally for Brent NorthSea Oil went up from US$25.75 per barrel inJuly to US$26.40 in August. At the end of theperiod under review, prices were at aroundUS$28
12. Furthermore, there were sharp price
increases for other imported goods, not leastfood products.
Domestic industrial producer prices showed a
further slight fall in August in seasonally ad-justed terms. They continued to be 1% downon the year. At the end of the period underreview, agricultural producer prices were alsodistinctly lower than 12 months previously.Construction prices remained unchanged insummer, which meant that they were not sig-nificantly higher than during the same periodof 2001.
Public finance
Indebtedness of central, state and local
government
In August the indebtedness of central, state
and local government decreased marginallyby31.0 billion. This was due solely to the de-Consumer
pricesImport prices
Producer prices
August

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
8velopment of Federal Government debt,
which went down by 32.1 billion. Whereas
the funds which the Federal Governmentraised in the capital market exceeded its asso-ciated borrowing requirement for redemp-tions and repurchases by 34.7 billion, the vol-
ume of outstanding money market loans con-currently declined by 36.8 billion. Monthly
tenders of Treasury discount paper (Bubills)dominated the net borrowing of central gov-ernment in the capital market ( 34.9 billion).
In addition, the Federal Government recordeda net inflow of 31.2 billion from the sale of
five-year Federal notes (Bobls), whereas otherFederal securities recorded a decline in out-standing liabilities of 31.4 billion. The Federal
Government repaid bank loans to the netvalue of 30.1 billion. In the case of those spe-
cial funds not integrated into central govern-ment debt, the ERP Special Fund had a 30.1
billion share in the issue of Bobls.
Expenditure of the Land Governments rose
again in August, although the increase ( 30.8
billion) was noticeably lower than the averagefor the preceding months. The Land Govern-
ments raised loans against borrowers’ noteson a small scale only (+ 30.2 billion) and re-
paid short-term bank loans to the net valueof30.7 billion. By contrast, the issue of Treas-
ury notes raised the net amount of 31.3 bil-
lion. It is worth noting that the state ofBaden-Württemberg launched a bond de-nominated in foreign currency: a five-yearfixed-interest bond amounting to CHF 0.5 bil-lion was issued on the Zurich stock exchange.Local government is likely to have drawnmarginally on the capital market in August.
Federal Government borrowingIn September the Federal Government ex-
panded its indebtedness by 32.9 billion.
While it reduced its outstanding volume ofloans in the money market by a further 32.7
billion to 31.3 billion, its gross borrowing in
the capital market ( 311.9 billion) significantly
exceeded the refinancing requirement of36.3 billion which resulted from the com-
paratively low volume of scheduled redemp-tions in September. Gross borrowing mainlycomprised two-year Federal Treasury notes(Schätze) and six-month Bubills. Schätzemade up 36.0 billion. The regular quarterly
new issue at an interest rate of 3.25%allowed a Schätze issue from 2000 with acoupon of 5% to be refinanced on very fa-vourable conditions. The outstanding amountNet borrowing in the market
5billion
2001 2002
Borrower Totalof
whichJan-AugJan-
Aug
pAug pe
Central govern-ment
1 – 14,83 – 17.43 + 22.9 – 2.1
State government + 26.4 + 13.7 + 18.5 + 0.8Local govern-
ment
2, pe + 2.6 + 0.8 + 1.7 + 0.3
ERP Special Fund + 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.1“German Unity”
Fund – 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.1 –
Central, state and
local government,total + 14.2 – 1.9 + 43.3 – 1.0
1Including the off-budget special funds not shown
separately here. — 2Including special-purpose asso-
ciations. — 3Including exceptional redemptions of
equalisation claims out of UMTS sales proceeds in theamount of 533 billion.
Deutsche Bundesbank
In September ...

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
9of these securities increased by 31.2 billion
net. The monthly issue of Bubills, which forthe last time was not offset by any redemp-tions, again came to 34.9 billion. The average
yield (3.17%) was once more lower than inthe previous month. Few changes were re-corded for other Federal securities on bal-ance. The outstanding amount of Federalbonds (Bunds) and Federal savings notesdeclined by 30.7 billion and 30.3 billion, re-
spectively, whereas the outstanding amountof Bobls went up by 31.0 billion. Loans
against borrowers’ notes were redeemed tothe net value of 30.3 billion.
Between January and September 2002 as a
whole, the Federal Government’s net marketborrowing amounted to 325.8 billion. The
budgetary plan for 2002 envisages new bor-rowing of 321 billion for the whole year. Pri-
marily as a result of large tax shortfalls, it willbe barely possible to comply with this budgetestimate. Bunds, the outstanding amount ofwhich went up by 313.3 billion, made up the
bulk of this new borrowing. Their share inoverall Federal Government debt hardlychanged (59%). Five to seven-year maturitycategories became somewhat less significant,since a rise of 35.4 billion in the outstanding
amount of Bobls was offset by a reduction of36.7 billion in the circulation of Federal sav-
ings notes (one-quarter of the outstandingvolume). By contrast, short-term categories inthe form of Schätze, Federal Treasury finan-cing paper and Bubills expanded noticeablyby322.9 billion. Their share in overall Federal
Government borrowing rose by just under3 percentage points to 14
12%.Securities markets
Bond marketThe volume of issues in the German bond
market was moderate in August. Domesticborrowers issued bonds to a market value of362.9 billion, compared with 385.9 billion in
July 2002. Net sales came to only 33.3 billion
(previous month: 317.6 billion). The out-
standing amount of foreign bonds in Ger-many declined overall by 30.4 billion. The
amount raised from sales of domestic andforeign bonds was thus only 32.9 billion in
August.
In August the public sector increased its in-
debtedness in the bond market by 35.1 bil-
lion. The Federal Government sold ownFederal Government borrowing in the
market
5billion; 2002
SeptemberJanuary–
September
Item Gross Net Gross Net
Change in money
market debt – 2.7 – 2.7 – 2.5 – 2.5
Change in capital
market debt, total 1 11.9 5.7 119.4 28.2
Treasury discount
paper (Bubills) 4.9 4.9 34.0 9.8
Federal Treasury
financing paper 0.1 – 0.0 1.1 0.0
Treasury notes (Schätze) 6.0 1.2 29.2 2 13.1
Five-year Federal notes
(Bobls) 1.0 1.0 26.0 3 5.4
Federal savings notes 0.1 – 0.3 1.3 – 6.7
Federal bonds (Bunds) – 0.7 – 0.7 23.8 4 13.3
Bank loans 0.6 – 0.3 4.0 – 5.4
Loans from non-banks – – – – 0.1
Other debt – – – – 1.2
Total borrowing 9.2 2.9 116.9 25.8
1Memo item: borrowing for 2002 as a whole according to the
Federal budget: 5174 billion gross, 521 billion net. — 2Including
borrowing for the “German Unity” Fund: 523.2 billion. — 3In-
cluding borrowing for the ERP Special Fund: 526.0 billion. — 4In-
cluding borrowing for the “German Unity” Fund and the ERPSpecial Fund: 536.8 billion.
Deutsche Bundesbank... and in
the first three
quarters
Moderate sales
of bonds
Public sector
bonds

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
10bonds amounting to 37.0 billion net. The
monthly issue of Treasury discount paper(Bubills), which was not accompanied by re-demptions, was 35.0 billion. 32.3 billion was
allocated to five-year Federal notes (Bobls).Two-year Federal Treasury notes (Schätze)were sold in the amount of 30.4 billion net.
The outstanding amount of Federal savingsnotes, however, fell by 30.7 billion.
1In Au-
gust the Land governments raised 31.3 billion
on balance in the bond market. The liabilitiesof the former Federal Post Office and the Fed-eral special funds declined by 33.2 billion.
In August corporate bonds were sold to a net
value of 30.8 billion, compared with 34.4 bil-
lion in the previous month. The outstandingamount of bank debt securities, which hadrisen by 31.2 billion at that time, declinedby32.7 billion. This decline affected public
Pfandbriefe (- 33.6 billion) as well as mort-
gage Pfandbriefe (- 30.7 billion) and debt se-
curities issued by specialised credit institutions(-30.4 billion). Sales of other bank debt secur-
ities raised 32.1 billion net.
In August domestic non-banks predominated
on the buyers’ side of the bond market. Theyadded 36.9 billion to their bond portfolios, al-
most entirely from purchases of domesticpaper. Non-residents increased their invest-ment in domestic bonds by 31.9 billion. They
purchased debt securities issued by privateand public borrowers in equal shares. Creditinstitutions reduced their holdings of bondsand notes by 35.9 billion, on balance selling
mainly debt securities issued by banks ( 35.6
billion). They sold 30.8 billion net worth of
foreign bonds and notes.
Equity marketAgain hardly any funds were raised in the
German equity market. In August domesticenterprises placed new shares to a marketvalue of just 30.3 billion, consisting entirely of
shares of unlisted enterprises. In August Ger-man credit institutions were the only buyers.Overall, they purchased shares worth 30.4 bil-
lion net and sold foreign equities worth 30.2
billion. Non-banks reduced their portfolios by31.7 billion, entirely at the expense of foreignSales and purchases of bonds
5billion
2002 2001
Item July August August
Sales of domestic bonds
and notes 1 17.6 3.3 – 1.5
of which
Bank debt securities 1.2 – 2.7 – 3.6Public sector bonds 12.0 5.1 0.1
Foreign bonds
2 10.4 – 0.4 1.4
Purchases
Residents 7.3 0.9 – 7.8
Credit institutions 3 –3 . 4 –5 . 9 –1 0 . 2
Non-banks 4 10.7 6.9 2.4
of which
Domestic bonds 4.9 6.5 5.5
Non-residents 2 20.7 1.9 7.7
Total sales/purchases 28.0 2.9 – 0.1
1Net sales at market values plus/minus changes in issuers’
holdings of their own bonds. — 2Transaction values. —
3Book values, statistically adjusted. — 4Residual.
Deutsche Bundesbank
1The individual items for the Federal Government are
shown at nominal values rather than at market values,
and no account is taken of the changes in its holdings of
Federal bonds. The sum total of these individual items
therefore normally fails to tally with the aforementioned
net sales of Federal Government bonds.Bank debt
securities and
corporate
bondsPurchases of
bonds
Sales and
purchases of
shares

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
11equities (- 31.9 billion). Foreign investors sold
German equities totalling 30.6 billion.
Investment fund certificatesIn August domestic investment funds sold
35.8 billion worth of certificates, compared
with 33.6 billion in July. Specialised funds
were the main beneficiaries of the increase,receiving 33.3 billion net of investment
money. On balance, the funds open to thegeneral public also sold more certificates(32.5 billion). Investors continued to show a
preference for money market funds ( 31.0 bil-
lion), bond-based funds and open-end realestate funds ( 30.9 billion each). Certificates
of share-based funds were resold for 30.3 bil-
lion. 31.2 billion (net) worth of foreign fund
certificates were sold. Investment fund certifi-cates were purchased mainly by residents(35.7 billion), almost all of these being non-
banks. Non-residents added certificates ofGerman investment companies worth 31.3
billion to their portfolios.
Balance of payments
In August Germany’s current account closed
with a surplus of 34.5 billion, which was 34.3
billion higher than in the preceding month.The increase was due to a lower deficit in in-visible current transactions which compriseservices, factor income and current transfers.By contrast, the trade surplus weakenedslightly.
According to calculations by the Federal Stat-
istical Office, foreign trade generated a sur-plus of 310.5 billion in August following one
of311.9 billion in July. Seasonally adjusted,
however, the surplus in August, at 312
12bil-
lion, was 32 billion higher than in the preced-
ing month ( 31012billion). That was because
exports rose especially sharply, whereas theincrease in imports, though also very strong,was not nearly as pronounced. Seasonally ad-justed exports of goods in August were10
12% higher than in July after falling sharply
the previous month. That meant exports inthe July-August period were up 2
12%f r o m
the May-June period. Imports of goods,which had also declined in July in similar fash-ion to exports, likewise clearly surpassed theirprevious month’s figures in August, going upby 8%. In the combined July-August period,however, they stagnated compared with theprevious period.
The other current transactions with non-
residents closed with a deficit in Augustwhich, at 35.6 billion, was only about half its
July level. The main reason was that the def-icit in factor income went down by 34.3 bil-
lion in August to 30.4 billion. The main factor
was interest payments on government bondswhich in July are regularly relatively high. Butthe deficit on services was also reduced: at33.7 billion in August, this means a reduction
in net payments of 31.0 billion from the pre-
vious month. Moreover, on balance 31.5 bil-
lion worth of current transfers were made tonon-residents, a decline of 30.3 billion from
the July figure.
In capital transactions with non-residents,
cross-border portfolio transactions recordednet capital imports in August ( 33.8 billion)Sales and
purchases of
investment
fund
certificates
Current
account
Foreign tradeInvisible current
transactions
Securities
transactions

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
12which, however, were low compared with
inflows for June and July ( 318.5 billion and
37.8 billion, respectively). The main reason
for this decline was a pronounced turnaroundin investment in domestic bonds and notes bynon-residents, from a surplus of 314.8 billion
in July to a deficit of 30.6 billion in August. In
addition, non-residents reduced their totalnet holdings of domestic equities ( 30.9 bil-
lion). German money market paper ( 32.5 bil-
lion) and investment fund certificates ( 31.3
billion) were favoured by non-residents. Do-mestic investors purchased 31.2 billion worth
of foreign investment fund certificates and30.8 billion worth of money market paper,
whereas in the case of equities and bondsand notes, sales by residents even out-weighed purchases.
Direct investment, too, resulted in slight net
capital imports ( 31.7 billion) following heavy
outflows of funds in the two precedingmonths. The fact that domestic enterprisesreduced their financial investment in theirforeign subsidiaries by 32.3 billion contrib-
uted to this development. Although foreignowners likewise withdrew funds from theirbranches and subsidiaries based in Germany,these outflows, at 30.6 billion, were some-
what less pronounced.
The non-securitised credit transactions of
non-banks ( 32.9 billion net) generated slight
inflows of funds. General government in par-ticular was a major importer of foreign funds,whereas the financial transactions of businessenterprises and individuals led to slight out-flows of funds.Major items of the balance
of payments
5billion
2001 2002
Item August July r August
I Current account
1 Foreign trade 1
Exports (fob) 51.6 54.8 52.2Imports (cif) 42.8 43.0 41.6
Balance + 8.8 + 11.9 + 10.5
Memo itemSeasonally adjustedfigures
Exports (fob) 55.2 51.9 57.5Imports (cif) 44.9 41.5 44.9
2 Supplementary trade
items
2 –0 . 6–0 . 6–0 . 4
3 Services
Receipts 8.4 9.8 9.1Expenditure 13.2 14.4 12.7
Balance – 4.8 – 4.6 – 3.7
4 Factor income (net) + 1.1 – 4.8 – 0.45 Current transfers
from non-residents 0.9 1.1 1.3to non-residents 2.4 2.8 2.8
Balance – 1.5 – 1.7 – 1.5
Balance on current account + 3.1 + 0.2 + 4.5
II Capital transfers (net)
3 – 0.2 – 0.2 + 0.1
III Financial account
(net capital exports: –)
Direct investment + 1.7 – 10.3 + 1.7
German investmentabroad – 1.2 – 10.2 + 2.3Foreign investmentin Germany + 2.9 – 0.1 – 0.6
Portfolio investment + 11.1 + 7.8 + 3.8
German investmentabroad – 2.2 – 13.7 + 1.5of which
Shares + 0.4 – 1.8 + 2.3Bonds and notes – 2.3 – 8.6 + 1.2
Foreign investmentin Germany + 13.3 + 21.5 + 2.3of which
Shares + 5.8 + 0.5 – 0.9Bonds and notes + 8.6 + 14.8 – 0.6
Financial derivatives – 1.6 – 4.5 – 1.7Credit transactions – 7.4 – 5.2 – 13.2
Credit institutions – 7.6 + 11.1 – 9.7
of whichShort-term – 4.3 + 11.9 – 10.6
Enterprises and individuals + 5.6 – 1.2 – 1.4General government – 0.7 – 0.2 + 4.3Bundesbank – 4.7 – 15.0 – 6.5
Other investment – 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.2
Overall balance on financial
account + 3.6 – 12.4 – 9.6
IV Change in the foreign
reserves at transaction values(increase: –)
4 + 0.5 – 0.5 + 0.9
V Balance of unclassifiable
transactions – 6.9 + 13.0 + 4.1
1Special trade according to the official foreign trade statistics
(source: Federal Statistical Office). — 2Mainly warehouse trans-
actions for account of residents and deduction of goods re-turned. — 3Including the acquisition/disposal of non-produced
non-financial assets. — 4Excluding allocation of SDRs and ex-
cluding changes due to value adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankDirect
investment
Credit
transactions by
non-banks

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
13The (unsecuritised) net external assets of the
entire banking system increased by 316.2 bil-
lion, a reflection, as it were, of all remainingcross-border payments. The credit institu-tions’ corresponding external position thusrose by 39.7 billion and the Bundesbank’s net
foreign assets (excluding foreign reserves)rose – largely in connection with the TARGET
payment system – by 36.5 billion.
The foreign reserves of the Bundesbank de-
clined – at transaction values – by 30.9 billion
in August.Credit
transactions by
the banking
system
The foreign
reserves of the
Bundesbank

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
14

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
15Amendments
to the Banking Actcaused by theFourth FinancialMarket PromotionActThe Fourth Financial Market Promo-
tion Act, which entered into force on1 July 2002, pursues multiple object-ives. Its initial aim is to enhance invest-or protection by increasing market in-tegrity and market transparency. Thereform of legislation governing stockexchanges and securities trading is in-tended to give stock exchanges andtheir market participants greater roomfor manoeuvre and thus improve theircompetitive position in Europe andinternationally. Other measures are de-signed to combat money launderingand the financing of terrorism moreeffectively. Lastly, the Fourth FinancialMarket Promotion Act has changednumerous rules governing prudentialsupervisory legislation. The primaryreason for amending the Banking Actwas to implement the 1997 Basel CorePrinciples for Effective Banking Super-vision and the Electronic Money Dir-ective. Other regulatory measureswere taken at the same time, such asharmonising the respective rules formonitoring holders of qualified partici-pating interests in the Banking Act andthe Insurance Supervision Act as wellas modernising the legislation govern-ing loans of DM 3 million ( 51.5 million)
or more. The ongoing refinement ofprudential supervisory legislation is in-tended to strengthen the operationalframework of the financial sector andthus the international competitivenessof Germany as a financial centre.

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
16The Fourth Financial Market Promotion Act,
like its predecessors, amended the BankingAct with a view to implementing various pru-dential supervisory projects. The primary aimof this new act is to implement the Core Prin-ciples for Effective Banking Supervision pub-lished in 1997 by the Basel Committee onBanking Supervision. The International Mon-etary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank monitoreach member country’s compliance withthese principles in their Financial Sector As-sessment Programs (see box on page 17). Inaddition, Council Directive 2000/46/EC onthe taking up, pursuit and prudential supervi-sion of the business of electronic money insti-tutions (E-Money Directive) needed to betranslated into German law. Furthermore, therespective provisions in the Banking Act andthe Insurance Supervision Act (Versicherungs-
aufsichtsgesetz) governing the monitoring of
shareholders were harmonised following aproposal from the Forum for Financial MarketSupervision. At the initiative of the DeutscheBundesbank, the regulations governing thereporting of loans of 31.5 million or more
were modernised. Lastly, provisions for com-bating money laundering and the financingof terrorism were included in the Banking Actin the wake of the terrorist attacks in NewYork City and Washington D.C. on 11 Sep-tember 2001.
Implementation of the Core Principles
The standards set by the Core Principles for
Effective Banking Supervision had alreadybeen met for the most part by the provisionsof earlier versions of the Banking Act or Euro-pean prudential supervisory legislation. A
case in point is the requirement contained inthe first principle, which calls for operationalindependence for agencies involved in bank-ing supervision. However, the task of com-pleting implementation, covering the marginsof banking supervision as well, remained tobe tackled, especially as a Financial Sector As-sessment Program (FSAP) is scheduled to beconducted in Germany next year. The amend-ments to the Banking Act (BA) necessitatedby the Core Principles relate to the provisionsconcerning loans to managers (section 15BA),
1particular organisational duties of insti-
tutions (section 25a (1) BA), grounds for re-fusing to grant a licence (section 33 BA) andthe supervisory authorities’ right to conductaudits (section 44 BA).
There are special risks which arise from lend-
ing to persons who or enterprises which areparticularly closely linked to the lending insti-tution or financial services institution (egmanagers, members of the supervisory boardand their closest relatives as well as enter-prises linked to these persons and the institu-tion). The main danger is that decisions onloans to managers might be motivated bypersonal influence or subjective consider-ations, thereby causing conflicts of interestwhich would be damaging to the institution.Section 15 of the old version of the BankingAct countered this risk in its provisions onloans to managers and the like by requiring aunanimous decision by the managers and theconsent of the supervisory board before such
1Unless otherwise indicated, all references to the Bank-
ing Act are to the new version as amended by the Fourth
Financial Market Promotion Act.Implementation
of prudential
supervisory
projects
Principles for
effective
banking
supervisionLoans to
managers

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
17Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision
Weaknesses in the banking system of one
country can threaten financial stability bothwithin that country and internationally. Forthat reason, the communiquØ issued at theclose of the Lyon G7 summit in June 1996called for prudential supervisory measures tostrengthen banking systems. In September1997 the Basel Committee on Banking Super-vision published its “Core Principles for Effec-tive Banking Supervision”, which were en-dorsed by the G10 central bank governors.The Basel Committee developed these princi-ples in close cooperation with the supervisoryauthorities of non-G10 countries (Chile,China, the Czech Republic, Hong Kong, Mex-ico, Russia, Thailand, etc).
The Core Principles comprise 25 principles
which have to be in place for a supervisorysystem to be effective. The principles relate tothe legal and institutional preconditions foreffective banking supervision (Principle 1),the licensing and structure of banks (Princi-ples 2 to 5), the prudential regulations and re-quirements (Principles 6 to 15), methods ofongoing banking supervision (Principles 16to 20), information requirements (Principle21), the formal powers of supervisors (Prin-ciple 22) and cross-border banking (Principles23 to 25). The Core Principles were supple-mented by a methodology of assessing com-pliance with the Principles (Core PrinciplesMethodology) published in October 1999.
The Core Principles are minimum require-
ments and, in many cases, may need to besupplemented by further measures designedto address certain circumstances and risks inthe financial systems of individual countries.They are intended to serve as a basic refer-ence for supervisory and other public authori-ties in all countries and internationally in or-der to find and eradicate any deficienciesquickly so as to improve financial stability at
home and internationally. It is worth notingthat, even if the Core Principles have beenwidely accepted, they have also been wordedvery vaguely in some places – not least be-cause of the wide group of interested par-ties – and have left out some problems whicheven then were apparent, such as the issuanceof electronic money or the formation of cross-sector financial conglomerates.
Upon a proposal by the Basel Committee, the
International Monetary Fund (IMF), in a jointeffort with the World Bank, introduced a Fi-nancial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) inMay 1999. This programme monitors compli-ance with not only the Core Principles butalso the minimum requirements establishedby the International Organisation of Securi-ties Commissions (IOSCO) and the Interna-tional Association of Insurance Supervisors(IAIS) for the supervision of securities tradingand insurance business as well as other inter-national standards such as those on combat-ing money laundering. Since another purposeof the FSAP is to identify weaknesses in thetwo-way interaction between the macroeco-nomic environment, on the one hand, andthe structure and development of the finan-cial sector, on the other, macroprudential in-dicators of economic and financial stabilityare analysed and subjected to a stress test or ascenario analysis. With the consent of thecountries being monitored, a Report on Ob-servance of Standards and Codes (ROSC) forthose countries is published. By the end of2001 the IMF, in cooperation with the WorldBank, had already completed an FSAP for32 countries (five advanced economies, tentransition countries and 17 developing coun-tries), and another 22 programmes are sched-uled to be completed this year.
Deutsche Bundesbank

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
18loans could be granted. This approach has
stood the test of time in supervisory practice.According to the amendment to section 15,which was designed to implement the CorePrinciples, loans to managers should begranted solely at prevailing market rates.
The provisions on loans to managers accord-
ingly needed further refinement. Now loansto managers, with the exception of staff pro-grammes, may be granted only at prevailingmarket rates (section 15 (1) sentence 1 BA); ifsuch loans are not granted at prevailing mar-ket rates, they must, by order of the FederalFinancial Supervisory Authority (FFSA), bebacked by liable capital. Moreover, thepowers of the FFSA to intervene were extend-ed to enable it to stipulate upper limits forloans to managers in individual cases, evenretroactively. Loans to managers which ex-ceed the upper limits must, by further orderof the FFSA, be reduced to the upper limit; inthe meantime they must be backed by liablecapital (section 15 (2) BA). To ensure full com-pliance with the relevant Core Principle 10without reintroducing the reporting require-ment for loans to managers, which was abol-ished only in 1998, it will be necessary for theexternal auditors to outline the aggregatetrend in loans to managers in their report onthe annual financial statements.
The special organisational requirements for
institutions introduced with the Sixth ActAmending the Banking Act (section 25a (1)BA) have been extended in two respects inthe light of the Core Principles. Previously aninstitution only had to ensure its own enter-prise’s compliance with the rules set forth insection 25a (1) BA. Now, a parent or superor-
dinated institution must ensure that theserules are being complied with by the group asa whole so that it can manage risk within thatgroup. A clarifying addition to section 25a (1)number 1 BA requires institutions to have ap-propriate rules in place regarding the man-agement, monitoring and inspection of com-pliance with legal regulations. Moreover, thespecial organisational requirements havebeen supplemented by the requirement toestablish adequate internal safeguardsagainst money laundering and fraudulent ac-tivities (section 25a (1) number 4 BA). TheOECD’s Financial Action Task Force on MoneyLaundering has drawn up a list of require-ments which have since been fleshed out bythe Basel Committee’s supervisory principlesentitled “Customer due diligence for banks”(BS/01/82). In reference thereto, the CorePrinciples call for banks to install securitymeasures including strict “know your cus-tomer” rules, in order to prevent misuse withcriminal intent, and for banking supervisorsto monitor the adequacy of these measures.Institutions should have state-of-the-art tech-nology at their disposal enabling them tomonitor payment flows and financial transac-tions which have a criminal origination or aredesigned to launder money in the retailpayment sector, too; in this way institutionscan monitor suspicious business relationshipsusing additional sources of information (oftendescribed as monitoring or screening). Thisapplies even if dirty money has already beensmuggled into the economy as book moneyand its trail is to be obscured through nationalor cross-border payment transactions. The ex-tended organisational requirements are
Non-market
rates
Special organ-
isational duties
for banks and
financial
services
institutions

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
19rounded off by a provision giving the FFSA
the power to issue orders to institutions in in-dividual cases to take the measures requiredby section 25a (1) BA.
According to Core Principle 3 the owner or
parent institution of a bank that is to benewly established, if it is a supervised foreignbank, must obtain prior consent from thehome country supervisor before the newbank can be licensed. This requirement hasbeen implemented by section 33 (1) number8 BA and, via section 53 (2a) BA, also governsthe establishment of branches of enterprisesdomiciled in a country outside the EuropeanEconomic Area (EEA). Within the frameworkof shareholder monitoring pursuant to sec-tion 2b BA, the aforementioned consent ofthe home country supervisor is not men-tioned so as to ensure consistency with insur-ance supervision regulations (see page 25). Asimilar regulation for German institutionsseeking to found or acquire a subsidiary out-side the EEA or to establish a branch there,which is required by the Core Principles, hasbeen implemented by extending the FFSA’spowers to intervene in section 6 (3) BA. Aslong as the principle of due proportion ismaintained, the FFSA is entitled to take meas-ures necessary to prevent danger to an insti-tution caused by the collapse of a subsidiaryor branch or by the acquisition of a participat-ing interest.
Last on the list of rules amended in the light
of the Core Principles is section 44 (1) BA,which now gives the FFSA and the Bundes-bank the right to obtain information from aninstitution’s employees as well as its man-agers. Consistency with section 44c (1) BA
has thereby been established. To achieve fullcompliance with the Core Principles, it will becrucial to ensure that the “Minimum require-ments for the credit business of credit institu-tions”, the announcement of which is cur-rently still under discussion with the bankingindustry, are implemented quickly.
Implementation of the E-Money Directive
A second focal point of the legislative
amendments was the need to implementthe E-Money Directive. The Sixth Act amend-i n gt h eB a n k i n gA c t ,i nl i n ew i t har e c o m -mendation made by the European MonetaryInstitute, had already subjected prepaid cardbusiness and network money business toprudential supervision in Germany (sec-tion 1(1) sentence 2 numbers 11 and 12 ofthe old Banking Act). Whereas prepaid cardbusiness means the issuance of prepaidcards, network money business means theissuance of prepaid electronic payment unitswhich may be used as payment media in lieuof cash or book money. In the past, an ex-ception had been made only for those enter-prises operating prepaid card business wherethe limited use and dissemination of suchprepaid cards precluded any danger to pay-ment systems.
The E-Money Directive has now led to the
creation of a new category of credit institu-tion under European law which is subject toless stringent supervisory rules as long as thatenterprise confines itself to issuing electronicpayment units (for various definitions of the
Licensing
procedure for
banks set up by
foreign banks
Employess
required to give
informationE-money
institutions as a
new category
of credit
institution

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
20term “credit institution” see the table on
page 21). In implementing the E-Money Dir-ective, what were previously known as pre-paid card business and network money busi-ness have been combined and are now calledelectronic money business (e-money busi-ness – section 1 (1) sentence 2 number 11 BA)since payment practice has shown that it isno longer possible to draw a clear line be-tween the two formerly separate types ofbusiness. The new definition of e-moneybusiness is based on the definition containedin the E-Money Directive; however, by includ-ing the term “administration”, it takes dueaccount of the ancillary business in whiche-money institutions are permitted to en-gage. The concept of electronic money nowembraces all prepaid value units stored onelectronic data media in the form of a claimon the issuing agency and which are accept-ed by third parties as a medium of paymentwithout being legal tender. A definition ofthe term e-money institution (section 1 (3d)sentence 4 BA) was necessary for formal legalreasons.
The provisions of the “European Passport”
apply to e-money institutions as well; iee-money institutions based in the EuropeanEconomic Area invoking their right to set upbranches or subsidiaries in other EEA states orthe freedom to provide services throughoutthe EEA are solely supervised by the pruden-tial authorities in their home country (see therelevant amendments in sections 24a and53b BA). Since that means German e-moneyinstitutions are in competition with similar in-stitutions based in other EEA states, it was nolonger possible to maintain the principle offull supervision of institutions even if they
were to confine themselves to prepaid cardbusiness and network money business. In-stead, prudential supervisory exemptionsgranted by the E-Money Directive to institu-tions issuing only electronic money had to beincorporated into the Banking Act.
The minimum initial capital for e-money insti-
tutions was set at 31 million by section 33 (1)
sentence 1 number 1(e) BA. The own fundsrequirements which e-money institutions arerequired to meet on an ongoing basis derivefrom section 10 (10) BA, pursuant to whichown funds must make up at least 2% of thecurrent amount or the average of the sum ofthe liabilities over the preceding six monthson the basis of still-unused electronic money,whichever figure is higher.
The investment limitations set out in Article 5
of the E-Money Directive in order to safe-guard the liquidity of e-money institutionshave to be included either in the regulationsuperseding Principle I on own funds pursu-ant to section 10 (1) sentence 2 BA or theregulation superseding Principle II on theliquidity of institutions pursuant to sec-tion 11 (1) sentence 2 BA. Pursuant to Art-icle 5 of the E-Money Directive, such institu-tions may only invest in assets with a lowcredit risk and high liquidity, such as claims onzone A central governments and centralbanks or sight deposits held with zone Acredit institutions. To hedge market risks aris-ing from the issuance of electronic moneyand the permissible investment, e-money in-stitutions may apply sufficiently liquid inter-est-rate and foreign-exchange-rate-related
European
Passport for
e-money
institutionsOwn funds
requirements
Limitation of
investment
options

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
21off-balance-sheet instruments in the form of
exchange-trade derivatives as long as theyare subject to daily margin requirements andthe complete elimination of market risksis intended and, as far as possible, alsoachieved. Since under Article 1 (5) sentence 2of the E-Money Directive e-money institutionsshall not have any holdings in other enter-prises except where these enterprises performoperational or other ancillary functions re-lated to electronic money issued or distrib-uted by the institution concerned, such arestriction needed to be inserted into sec-tion 12 (3) BA.
Article 3 was included in the E-Money Direct-
ive not least at the urging of the Europeannational central banks, which feared thatotherwise money would circulate completelybeyond the control of central banks. It stipu-
lates that holders of electronic money can de-mand its redemption at par value in coins andnotes or by a transfer to an account if theminimum threshold of 310 is exceeded. This
requirement, implemented as section 22a BA,made it the first civil-law consumer protectionrule to be incorporated into the Banking Act,though compliance is to be monitored by theFFSA.
Modernising the procedure for loans
of51.5 million or more
A third focus is on modernising the procedure
for loans of 31.5 million or more, which is a
tried and tested prudential supervisory instru-ment. The so-called credit register for loans ofClassification of institutions pursuant to section 1 of the Banking Act
Institutions
Credit institutions within the meaning of the Banking ActFinancial services institutions within the
meaning of the Banking Act
Deposit business
andlending businessElectronic money
businessDiscount business
Safe-custody busi-nessInvestment fundbusinessAcquisition ofclaimsGuarantee busi-nessGiro businessPrincipal broking
services and/orunderwriting busi-nessInvestment brok-
ingContract brokingPortfolio manage-mentOwn-account trad-ingNon-EEA deposit
brokingMoney trans-mission servicesForeign currencydealingCredit card busi-ness
Deposit-taking
credit institu-tionsElectronic money
institutionsSecurities trading
banks
Credit institutions within the meaning
of EC lawInvestment firms within the meaning of
the Investment Services Directive
Deutsche Bundesbank
Redeemability
of electronic
moneyPreventive
prudential
supervisory
instrument

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
2231.5 million or more is located at the
Deutsche Bundesbank’s Central Office inFrankfurt. This credit register is one of themost important prudential supervisory instru-ments for identifying concentrations of riskwithin individual institutions and assessing theoverall negative impact on the banking indus-try – and not only in cases of insolvency ofmajor enterprises. It is also gaining increasedimportance for preventive supervision, too. Inaddition, the information stored in the creditregister is valuable for institutions required tosubmit reports and for insurers because thefeedback notification enables them to obtainan overview of the total indebtedness of theirlargest borrowers. The aim of amending theBanking Act in this connection is to open theway for the credit register to cooperate withsimilar foreign institutions and to simplify thetechnical procedure for submitting preliminary
enquiries and reporting loans of 31.5 million
or more. To add flexibility to the reporting pro-cedure for loans of 31.5 million or more, the
content, deadlines and routing of the reportsare now to be determined by regulations ra-ther than acts.
With regard to cooperation with other EU
credit registers, the legal preconditions need-ed to be created so that Germany could par-ticipate in the envisaged expanded exchangeof information between EU credit registers,including forwarding information to commer-cial banks. Some years ago the credit registerscurrently existing in the EU (Austria, Belgium,France, Germany, Italy, Portugal and Spain),in a first step towards closer cooperation,reached an agreement on the cross-border
Deutsche BundesbankProcedu re for loans of /g0/g0/g0/g0/g0/g0/g0/g0E1.5 million or more and
the planned c ross-border exchan ge of information
BorrowerCredit register of the
Deutsche Bundesbank
Credit institution 1 
AForeign credit register
Credit institution1
BCredit institution1
CForeign institution
Schedu led
reportSchedu led
report
Lending
relationshipStart of lending
relationshipLending
relationshipInformation
on total 
indebtednessPrelim.
enquiryEnquiry or 
schedu led reportInformation on 
total indebtednessEnquiry or 
schedu led report#
Information
on total
indebtednessInformation 
on total 
indebtednessInformation on total 
indebtedness
# Schematic presentat ion: once the legal basis has been c reated , concrete a greements on procedu re still remain 
to be reached with foreign partner credit registers. — 1 Institutions sub ject t o reporting requirements include 
not only credit institutions but a lso financ ial services institutions within the meaning of sect ion 1 (1a) sentence 
2 number 4 BA, financ ial ente rprises within the meaning of sect ion 1 (3) sentence 1 number 2 BA and the 
ente rprises and a gencies listed in sect ion 2 (2) BA. 
Cooperation
with foreign
credit registers

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
23Key amendments to section 14 of the Banking Act caused by the
Fourth Financial Market Promotion Act
Area of regulation Old rule New rule
Cross-border exchange of data International agreements or the entry
into force of a European Community dir-ective were required in the past beforedata could be passed on to companiesparticipating in the reporting procedureand domiciled abroad.
The exchange of information between EU
credit registers was solely for prudentialsupervisory purposes.In consultation with the Federal Financial
Supervisory Authority and in accordancewith section 4b of the Federal Data Pro-tection Act (Bundesdatenschutzgesetz)
the Bundesbank may provide foreigncredit registers with data on borrowersstored with the Bundesbank even for thepurposes of passing on such data to lend-ers located in the country in question.
The Bundesbank can participate in the en-
visaged extended exchange of informa-tion between EU credit registers, includ-ing passing on data to commercial banks.
Pre-loan enquiries For pre-loan enquiries to be legal, the po-
tential loan (new loan or increase in anexisting loan) had to be worth 51.5 mil-
lion or more and the customer’s consentwas required.
The single borrower unit’s total indebted-
ness was notified only if all members ofthe single borrower unit had given theirprior consent.The term “customer” has been replaced
by the term “borrower”, which also en-compasses the single borrower unit.
Regardless of the amount of the potential
loan, the (potential) borrower’s or singleborrower unit’s indebtedness is notifiedto the reporting lender upon request (inthe case of both existing and new bor-rowers). In the case of a potential borrow-er the lender must, if required by the Bun-desbank, indicate the amount of the in-tended loan and the potential borrower’sconsent to such notification. This is de-signed to simplify the existing possibilitiesfor making pre-loan enquiries, also inview of the envisaged extension of theinternational exchange of informationbetween EU credit registers.
Contents and deadlines of reports;
breakdown of notificationThese areas were all explicitly governed
by section 14 of the Banking Act.Because the objective is to add flexibility
to the reporting system, these areas areto be stipulated by a regulation pursuantto section 22 of the Banking Act.
Electronic data transmission Section 14 of the Banking Act contained
no rules on this area. Section 15 (3) of theRegulation governing large exposuresand loans of DM3 million or more (Gross-
kredit- und Millionenkreditverordnung)stipulated that the institutions shouldprovide reports using a paperless submis-sion procedure.Companies participating in the reporting
procedure for loans of 51.5 million or
more and the Bundesbank are permittedto submit the report, the routine notifica-tion and the ad hoc notification given be-cause of a pre-loan enquiry by electronicdata telecommunication. By opening upthis legal requirement to the use of elec-tronic data transmission, lenders requiredto submit reports are able to use modernmethods of communication to generateand process reports quickly and cost-effectively.
Transitional arrangements The contents and deadlines of the reports
and the review period will remain un-changed until the legal regulation pursu-ant to section 22 of the Banking Actenters into force. The other changesentered into force on 1 July 2002.
Deutsche Bundesbank

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
24exchange of information on the indebtedness
of borrowers in specific cases, although up tonow the exchanged information may only beused for prudential supervisory purposes andmay not be forwarded to the lenders. To en-able the enterprises subject to reporting re-quirements also to acquire information ontheir borrowers’ liabilities abroad, there areplans to expand the existing cooperation and,in the future, to give commercial banks ac-cess to information on the indebtedness oftheir borrowers stored in foreign credit regis-ters.
According to the strategy paper presented by
the Working Group on Credit Registers, asubcommittee of the Banking SupervisionCommittee of the European System of Cen-tral Banks, information on borrowers’ indebt-edness exchanged between credit registersshould in future be included in the feedbacknotification given to lenders if a borrower re-ported by the lender has taken out reportableloans in the other aforementioned countriesas well.
In connection with creating the legal basis for
the envisaged expansion of the exchange ofinformation, the possibility of making an en-quiry to the credit register prior to granting aloan introduced by the Sixth Act amendingthe Banking Act in section 14 (2) sentence 4BA needed to be simplified and adapted toEuropean practice. In the wake of this simplifi-cation, the minimum lending amount of 31.5
million is no longer a precondition for submit-ting pre-loan enquiries to the credit register.Furthermore, the lender is no longer routinelyrequired to confirm that the potential borrow-er has consented to the enquiry addressed to
the credit register, and enquiries relating tosingle borrower units are also permitted. Pre-viously, pre-loan enquiries to the credit regis-ter had been permitted only from an envis-aged minimum lending amount of 31.5 mil-
lion, and the lender needed to confirm thecustomer’s consent to the enquiry in all cases.Consequently, institutions made very little useof the pre-loan enquiry. The abolition of theminimum lending amount for pre-loan enquir-ies addressed to the credit register in Germanyis also designed to facilitate the envisaged ex-tended exchange of information between EUcredit registers, given that the reportingthresholds in other countries are considerablylower. The whole reporting procedure forloans of 31.5 million or more is presented
schematically on page 22.
To enable the reporting procedure for loans
of31.5 million or more to be carried out
more efficiently, the new Banking Act permitsthe use of electronic data transmission. An-other means of streamlining the process isthat now a regulation pursuant to section 22BA can be used to determine the content anddeadlines of the reports and the reviewperiod rather than the Act itself. A number ofthe envisaged improvements, however, canonly be tackled over the next few years sincethey require comprehensive, time-consumingtechnical innovations. Details of the changesare contained in the box on page 23.
Working Group
on Credit
Registers
Simplifying
pre-loan
enquiriesContent of
reports defined
by regulation

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
25Harmonising shareholder monitoring
practices among credit institutions,financial services institutions andinsurance companies
At the first meeting of the Forum for Financial
Market Supervision (Forum für Finanzmarkt-
aufsicht) in December 2000 – attended by
representatives of the former federal super-visory offices for banking, securities tradingand insurance (which in the meantime haveall merged to form the FFSA), the FederalMinistry of Finance and the Bundesbank – theFederal Insurance Supervisory Office pro-posed harmonising the respective rules formonitoring the shareholders of institutions inthe Banking Act and the Insurance Supervi-sion Act. The shareholder monitoring proced-ure is primarily intended to ensure that super-visory authorities are notified of any relevantchanges in institutions’ ownership. At thesame time, however, the supervisory author-ities are also to be given the possibility ofblocking the acquisition of significant partici-pating interests in institutions or companiesby persons or enterprises who, by assertingtheir interests in the institution, jeopardise itssolvency and thus may be classified as nottrustworthy. The stiffer provisions in the Bank-ing Act concerning shareholder monitoringintroduced by the Third Financial Market Pro-motion Act of 27 March 1998 had not beenmatched in the Insurance Supervision Act.Since the insurance industry has shareholdermonitoring problems similar to those in thebanking industry – often involving the samepeople – it makes sense for the legal instru-ments to be the same. Although the amend-ments to the Banking Act caused by the ThirdFinancial Market Promotion Act had largely
been taken on board by the amendment ofthe Insurance Supervision Act of December2000, the two acts had still not been com-pletely harmonised. Only with Article 16 ofthe Fourth Financial Market Promotion Acthas the process of making the necessary ad-justments to the Insurance Supervision Actnow been completed.
To ensure that the trustworthiness of share-
holders can be monitored on an ongoingbasis, the new provisions now require allholders of qualified participating interestswho are either legal persons or partnershipsto report immediately each newly appointedlegal representative or new general partnerto the FFSA and the Bundesbank, togetherwith the facts germane to assessing his trust-worthiness, even without being asked to pro-vide such information. Moreover, the Actspells out the fact that, in the case of legalpersons and partnerships, not only the legalrepresentative or general partner but also thelegal person or the partnership itself may beconsidered untrustworthy. Moreover, thegrounds for prohibiting the intended acquisi-tion of a participating interest have beentightened in two areas. Firstly, a prospectivepurchaser is deemed not trustworthy if thereare facts justifying the assumption that the re-sources he has raised to purchase the quali-fied participating interest have been acquiredby an action constituting a criminal offence(section 2b (1a) sentence 1 number 1 BA). Itdoes not matter whether the act was com-mitted by the person himself or a third party.To that extent, if the trustworthiness of theacquirer of the participating interest cannot
Harmonising
the rules in the
Banking Act
and the
Insurance
Supervision Act
Tightening
shareholder
monitoring

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
26be established beyond reasonable doubt, the
acquirer will not receive the benefit of thedoubt. Secondly, the grounds for prohibitingthe integration of the institution into a cor-porate association if this would hamper ef-fective supervision of the institution (section2b (1a) sentence 1 number 2 BA) have beenworded more precisely to specify that thehampering of supervision must be caused bythe structure of cross-shareholdings or the in-adequate economic transparency of the asso-ciation. Commercial performance and sound-ness also have to be taken into considerationwhen assessing the economic transparency ofa corporate association. Matching rules gov-erning the licensing procedure were added tosection 33 BA. In order to make it easier forthe FFSA to monitor shareholders, it maynow, as part of its right to perform auditspursuant to section 44b BA, have the docu-ments submitted to it pursuant to sec-tion 2b(1) sentence 2 BA audited by an audit-or of the FFSA’s choice at the expense of theparty required to submit said documentation.Lastly, the FFSA may now also receive infor-mation regarding the institution of tax eva-sion proceedings against holders of qualifiedparticipating interests (section 8 (2) BA).
In order to harmonise the provisions govern-
ing shareholder monitoring, the definition ofa qualified participating interest initially need-ed to be adjusted. For shareholder monitoringto be effective, participating interests held intrust must be ascribed to both the trustee andthe trustor and a qualified participating inter-est in any enterprise on whose management akey influence may be exercised is consideredto exist even if no formal equity is held.Other amendments to the Banking Act
In addition to these focal points, the Fourth
Financial Market Promotion Act envisagesmany amendments to individual items in theBanking Act. A significant change is that, infuture, Principles I and II concerning the cap-ital and liquidity of institutions will be adoptedwith the legal status of regulations. For onething, it is doubtful whether the implementa-tion of EC Directives by means of administra-tive orders is consistent with EC law. For an-other, the adoption of a regulation makes itpossible to combat violations of principlesadopted as regulations by means of adminis-trative acts which can be founded directly onthese principles. For the first time, investmentcompanies which sell private pension plansthat need to be certified by a public officialare also subject to capital adequacy rules.
The distinction between the trading book
and the banking book will likewise be estab-lished in future by means of a regulation. Thisis intended to make it possible to adapt theregulations more speedily to amendments ofEC Directives. The regulation which nowneeds to be issued will also require commod-ity spot and futures transactions pursuant toDirective 98/31/EC (CAD II), which had notyet been implemented in Germany, to be in-cluded in the trading book if all other condi-tions apply. Previously, section 1 (12) sen-tence 3 of the old Banking Act forbade theinclusion of such transactions.
Last but not least, the FFSA’s powers to issue
orders have been extended so that it is nowable to issue orders to put a stop to violations
Definition
of a qualified
participating
interestPrinciples I and
II adopted as
regulations
Distinction
between
trading book
and banking
book defined
by regulation
FFSA’s powers
to issue orders
extended

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
27of supervisory rules. Since majority opinion
had already held that section 6 (1) BA entitledthe FFSA to issue instructions to stop viola-tions of the Banking Act, these supervisoryrules had to be contained in other acts. Theseother supervisory standards are referred to inthe list of acts in the revised section 36 (2)BA. This extended power to issue orders alsoencompasses financial holding companiesand their managers. Other amendments tothe Banking Act are contained in the list onthis page.
It was not possible to issue the legal regula-
tions on the content, deadlines and reviewperiod of reports pursuant to section 14 (1)BA, on the rewriting of the Regulation gov-erning large exposures and loans of three mil-lion Deutsche Mark or more, and on the dis-tinction between the banking book and thetrading book – all of which have been neces-sitated by the amendments to the BankingAct – concurrently with the Fourth FinancialMarket Promotion Act. For that reason, sec-tion 64f (3) to (5) BA envisages the continuedapplication of the previous rules, such asthose on reporting loans of 31.5 million or
more, until the aforementioned new regula-tions enter into effect.
Tightening of money laundering rules
One major consequence of analysing the ter-
ror attacks in New York and Washington D.C.on 11 September 2001 was the realisationthat combating international terrorism effect-ively needs to go hand in hand with combat-ing the financing of terrorist groups and theirOther amendments to the Banking Act
(BA) as a result of the Fourth FinancialMarket Promotion Act
– German Finance Agency (Finanzagentur GmbH)
not considered a credit institution pursuant tosection 2 (1) number 3a BA unless it accepts de-posits or grants loans
– “Dependent agents” must take out liability in-
surance, section 2 (10) BA
– Information may be passed on to central
banks, section 9 (1) number 7 BA
– The deduction requirement for subordinated
liabilities pursuant to section 10 (6) number5 (b) BA is now restricted to those comprisingadditional capital
– The provision of collateral has been extended
to include short-term subordinated liabilitiesincurred by a subsidiary, section 10 (7) sen-tence 8 BA
– Exposures secured by collateral in the form of
cash deposits or certificates of deposit are notconsidered loans within the meaning of sec-tion 18 BA and section 21 (4) number 2 BA
– “Two managers” principle has been intro-
duced for financial services institutions which,in accordance with a certificate from the Fed-eral Financial Supervisory Authority, pursuantto section 4 (1) number 2 of the Act governingthe certification of contracts for pension plans(Gesetz über die Zertifizierung von Altersvor-sorgeverträgen), are authorised to offer con-
tracts for pension plans, section 33 (1) sen-tence 1 number 5 BA
– A special commissioner may be appointed to
exercise powers incumbent upon the institu-tion’s governing bodies, section 36 (1a) BA
– The Federal Financial Supervisory Authority’s
powers to take action to stop unlawful busi-ness have been extended to companies in-volved in the preparation, conclusion and set-tlement of such transactions, section 37 (1)sentence 4 BA
– Supervisors’ rights to gather information and
conduct audits extended to cover outsourcing,section 44 (1) sentence 2 second clause BA
– German institutions are now required to toler-
ate audits by foreign supervisory authorities,section 44a (2) sentence 3 BA
– A branch may be liquidated only with the con-
sent of the Federal Financial SupervisoryAuthority, section 53 (6) BA
Deutsche BundesbankTransitional
arrangements
Combating
money
laundering

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
28members. Since terrorist groups rely on
banks’ payment systems to finance their ac-tivities, the money laundering rules weretightened to support efforts to combat terror-ism. Besides the safeguards pursuant to sec-tion 25a (1) number 4 BA introduced becauseof the Core Principles, as well as the reversalof the burden of proof regarding the origin offunds for acquiring participating interestspursuant to section 2b (1a) sentence 1 num-ber 1 BA and section 33 (1) sentence 1 num-ber 3 BA, institutions have been instructed toenable the FFSA to automatically access ac-count information (section 24c BA) in thecontext of combating money laundering. Thepackage of measures adopted by the FederalMinistry of Finance on 5 October 2001 en-titled Finanzierungsströme des Terrorismus
austrocknen – Stabilität der Finanzmärktesichern originally envisaged installing a cen-
tral database at the FFSA to which credit insti-tutions would have to supply information onall accounts and safe-custody accounts heldin Germany. During the legislative processthis plan was modified by the proposal to setup a system of automated access to accountinformation. This automated access to infor-mation supplements the FFSA’s unlimitedright to obtain information pursuant to sec-tion 44 (1) BA, which also governs businessrelations with individual customers. Credit in-stitutions are required to keep the followinginformation about all accounts or safe cus-tody accounts on file: the account or safe-custody account number, the date the ac-count was opened or closed, the name of theholder and all parties entitled to access theaccount, those of any other authorised eco-nomic agents, and (in the case of natural per-sons) the date of birth. The FFSA must be
given access to these data at all times. By vir-tue of Article 3 of the Money Laundering Act(Federal Law Gazette I No 57 of 14 August2002), section 25b BA imposes special organ-isational duties on credit institutions involvedin cross-border cashless payments. For in-stance, from 1 July 2003 a credit institutionexecuting a bank transfer to a non-EU coun-try must first record the name, account num-ber and address of the transferor and trans-mit these data in toto to the beneficiary’s
credit institution or an intermediate credit in-stitution.
To assist in the combating of money launder-
ing, credit card business was likewise sub-jected to licensing requirements. Up to nowenterprises not engaged in credit card busi-ness as guarantee business (section 1 (1)number 8 BA) were not classified as institu-tions but as financial enterprises within themeaning of section 1 (3) sentence 1 num-ber 4BA. In Germany, unlike most other EEAcountries, such institutions did not need a li-cence. That meant they were subject to nei-ther solvency supervision nor to supervisionunder the Money Laundering Act. The Finan-cial Action Task Force on Money Launderingand the FFSA have found that credit cardbusiness can increasingly be abused formoney laundering purposes through the useof credit card accounts, since certain types ofcredit cards provide for accounts and partici-pation in payment systems similar to girobusiness. This means that thus far moneycould be deposited in credit card accountsand transferred across borders from onecredit card account to another within the
Credit card
business
classified
as a financial
services
transaction

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
29same credit card association without the pay-
ment flows from the card business beingsupervised under the Money Laundering Act.Now credit card business has been classifiedas a financial service (section 1 (1a) num-ber 8BA) and hence is subject to prudentialsupervision. Other modern methods of set-tling payments, such as mobile banking orWAP technology, are likewise now classifiedas credit card business since these paymentsystems can also be misused for money laun-dering owing to their lack of transparency.However, only tripartite systems – ie wherethe card issuer, the card holder and the ser-vice provider (acceptor) are three differentparties – are subject to supervision. Creditcard business, however, does not require all-embracing solvency supervision; accordingly,the provisions on own funds and liquidity aswell as on lending business are not applic-able to dedicated credit card companies. Inindividual cases credit card companies maybe completely exempted from supervisionpursuant to the Banking Act, as long as thenature and type of their business do notneed to be supervised.Further amendments to the Banking Act
in the near future
Despite the extensive amendments to the
Banking Act caused by the Fourth FinancialMarket Promotion Act, further changes willbe necessary prior to the translation of Basel IIinto German law. Before then it will be neces-sary to implement Council Directive 2001/24/EC on the reorganisation and winding-up ofcredit institutions, which envisages a singleEurope-wide reorganisation and winding-upprocedure for credit institutions withoutthe opportunity of a special procedure forbranches, as well as the pending Council Dir-ective on the supplementary supervision ofcredit institutions, insurance undertakingsand investment firms in a financial conglom-erate (COM/2001/0213 final – COD 2001/0095). Adapting prudential supervisory legis-lation to developments in the financial sectoris an ongoing task which also places high de-mands on the supervised enterprises. More-over, it will not be possible to slow down thepace of amending the Banking Act if Ger-many is to remain internationally competitiveas a financial centre that meets internationalprudential supervisory standards.
Implementation
of additional EC
Directives

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
30

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
31The development
of bank lendingto the private sectorThe growth in lending by German
banks to domestic enterprises and resi-dent individuals has been very weakfor some time. Both lending to thevarious categories of borrowers andlending by the various categories ofbanks have been very similarly affect-ed. In public debate, this is occasionallybeing interpreted as a “credit crunch”.However, an in-depth analysis showsthat the weaker credit growth is main-ly due to the underlying economic situ-ation, ie primarily to low credit de-mand. Moreover, the importance ofspecial effects has waned, these havingboosted credit growth in Germanyover fairly long periods in the 1990s. Inview of the poorer credit quality oftheir borrowers, the high number ofinsolvencies and the narrow margins inlending business, the banks are alsobeing rather cautious about grantingloans. The new Basel capital require-ments have probably done little morethan raise the banks’ income and riskawareness. The planned new rules,which are scheduled to enter intoforce at the end of 2006, are not gen-erally expected to produce an overallincrease in borrowing costs; instead,they are likely to increase the differen-tiation of credit terms in line with bor-rowers’ creditworthiness.

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
32The development of lending by German
banks to domestic enterprises andresident individuals – an overview
When viewed over the longer term, lending
by German banks to the domestic private sec-tor can be divided into three periods. The1980s were characterised by very strong fluc-tuations in loans granted to German enter-prises and households. Credit growth in-creased sharply in the 1990s in connectionwith the reunification boom and remainedrelatively high even after the boom had cometo an end. By contrast, it has weakened con-tinuously since 2000. The current growth rateof lending to enterprises and individuals isonly around 1% (see chart on page 33).
In the 1980s credit growth was linked rela-
tively closely to economic developments. Itmirrored both the weakening of the economyat the start of the decade and its subsequentrecovery. The same pattern was evident in thesecond half of the decade, although it waseclipsed by an extensive influx of funds fromabroad. In 1986 and 1987, in particular, thisled to a sharp appreciation of the DeutscheMark and to an attenuation of the domesticcredit demand.
1
Lending by German banks regained momen-tum even before reunification. During the re-unification boom, bank lending to the privatesector expanded by 11% at times. When theboom came to an end, credit growth declinedagain but persisted until the end of 1999,with fluctuations, at a quite high averagegrowth rate of 7%. This was furthered by nu-merous government promotional measuresassociated with the reconstruction of eastern
Germany. Their expiry often had a particularlynoticeable impact on borrowing as therewere extensive anticipatory effects, such as in1993-94 and 1998-99. Towards the end ofthe 1990s, the increase in foreign direct in-vestment by German enterprises – in 1999roughly seven times more money flowedabroad in this connection than ten years pre-viously – is likely to have given a perceptibleboost to credit demand. However, greater in-vestment activity abroad does not allow im-mediate conclusions to be drawn about thesources of financing that are being used. Thespate of mergers and acquisitions in Germanymay also have led to an increase in borrowingby German enterprises.
Since 2000 bank lending to domestic enter-
prises and resident individuals has marked avirtually steady decline against a backgroundof an economic downturn. However, theslowdown in credit growth was somewhatstronger than in earlier periods in which theeconomic climate had cooled.
When viewed by borrower, the development
of loans granted by German banks to the do-mestic private sector in the 1980s was mainlycharacterised by the changing dynamics oflending to enterprises and self-employed per-sons (see chart on page 34). Well into thesecond half of that decade, consumer creditand housing loans certainly showed no ap-
1An analysis of the development of the money stock
and lending in Germany in 1986 and 1987 is presented
in J Reischle, The role of the analysis of the consolidated
balance sheet of the banking sector, in: H-J Klöckers and
C Willeke (eds), Monetary analysis: tools and applica-
tions, European Central Bank, August 2001.Credit growth –
a longer-term
view
Stronger
fluctuations in
the 1980s
Effect of
government
promotional
measures in
the 1990sContinuous
decline since
2000
Development,
by borrower

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
33preciable departure from this pattern. How-
ever, after the upswing in lending in 1987,lending developed differently in the varioussectors. Loans to enterprises and consumercredit increased strongly as the economic up-turn got under way, while the rise in housingloans initially remained somewhat subdued.The growth rate for that type of loan did notpick up again markedly until reunification. Itreached its peak value of 13
12% in autumn
1994 – at a time when the growth of lendingto enterprises and consumer credit had al-ready declined distinctly again. Up to the endof the 1990s housing loans grew far morestrongly than other categories of loans.
The slowdown in lending by German banks
to the domestic private sector was initiallystrongest in consumer credit. The growth ofhousing loans, which had already been slow-
ing down successively during the adjustmentcrisis in the construction industry in thesecond half of the 1990s, declined morestrongly from mid-2000 onwards. At first,lending to domestic enterprises and self-employed persons remained strong for cyclic-al reasons but then decreased sharply fromthe winter of 2000-01. At the end of theperiod, outstanding loans to enterprises andconsumer credit were both slightly down onthe year.
In the past the development of total loans
to domestic enterprises and resident self-employed persons (including housing loans)was determined primarily by that of lendingto the services sector (including the profes-sions), which is statistically rather broadly de-Change from previous year
%
1980 2002Loans made by German banks
to domestic enterprises and resident individuals
Deutsche Bundesbank12
10
8
6
42
0
81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01
Lending to
domestic
enterprises

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
34fined.2This was particularly apparent in the
reunification period. However, loans by Ger-man banks to enterprises were subsequentlystill taken up primarily by enterprises in thiseconomic sector, which includes housing en-terprises and other real estate firms. Aroundthe turn of the year 1999/2000 the indebted-ness of enterprises in the transport and tele-communications sector rose sharply for atime; somewhat later, there was a strong ex-pansion of lending to manufacturing. As theeconomy began to slow in the second half of2000, however, the demand for credit de-clined perceptibly again in these sectors, too(see chart on page 35).
The marked acceleration in lending at the
end of the 1980s came mainly from commer-cial banks. Loans granted by Land banks andsavings banks did not begin to gain momen-
tum until 1991. While lending business atcommercial banks began to lose much of itsdynamism from the end of 1992, it did notweaken perceptibly at savings banks andLand banks until the second half of the
1990s.
Recently, lending to domestic enterprises and
resident individuals has slowed most at thecommercial banks, followed by the coopera-tive banks. Year on year, lending by commer-cial banks to the domestic private sector isChange from previous year
%
Loans to ...
... domestic enterprises
    and resident individuals
... domestic enterprises and
    resident self-employed persons... resident employed persons
Housing loans
1980 2002Lending, by borrower
Deutsche Bundesbank18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
2−
81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01
2In addition to lending to enterprises in the IT sector, re-
search and development (15%), health and social ser-
vices (10%) and leasing and holding companies (10%),
approximately 50% of loans to service enterprises go to
housing enterprises and other real estate firms. These in-
clude property management and real estate holding en-
terprises (including closed real estate funds) and housing
development companies.Lending, by
category of
bank

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
35currently even lower, and lending by the co-
operatives banks is only marginally higher.This is mainly due to the decline in short-termlending, which plays a more important role atcommercial banks. Lending by Land banks
and savings banks has risen by 2% year onyear (see table on page 36).
Empirical analysis of credit development
in Germany
In attempting to use the main macroeconom-
ic determinants, such as GDP and interestrates, to explain lending in Germany, owingto their differing development, one needs toobserve not only total lending, but also thepartial aggregates “long-term lending to en-terprises” (29
12% of total loans), “short-termlending to enterprises (13%), “housing
loans” (4712%) and “lending to employed
persons” (consumer credit, 10%).
When interpreting estimated credit equa-
tions, one must note, however, that they donot allow a precise breakdown by factors re-lating to credit supply and credit demand asthe concomitant problems of identificationcannot be resolved at the macro-level. None-theless, one can safely assume that the esti-mated relationships are mainly credit demandeffects. The results also show whether theremight also be other explanations in additionto the average dependence of lending on in-come and interest rates.Contributions to growth 1
%
points
Lending to manufacturingLending to transport
and telecommunicationsLending to service
enterprises (including
the professions)Annual growth rate of lending to
domestic enterprises and resident
self-employed persons
(change from previous year in %)
1980 2002Lending to selected economic sectors
1Contributions to growth are the growth rates of lending to the various economic sectors, weighted by the
share in total lending to domestic enterprises and resident self-employed persons.
Deutsche Bundesbank12+
10+
8+
6+
4+
2+
0
2−
81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01
Econometric
analysis
of credit
developmentFundamental
problems of
identification

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
36Long-term analysis
As the description of credit development
given above has shown, growth in loans byGerman banks to the private sector was attimes clearly influenced strongly by Germanreunification. In order to take due account ofthis influence, estimations were carried outfor two sub-periods as well as for the wholeperiod. In that exercise, the years from 1990to 1992 were excluded as taking them intoaccount would have had a marked impact onthe estimates for the sub-periods or led to in-stability.
Owing to the effects of reunification, for
most aggregates no stable and significant re-lationship could be found between credit vol-ume, gross domestic product and interestrates over the whole period (from 1980 to
2002). The only exception was consumerlending, which is comparatively unimportantin terms of volume. By contrast, with the ex-ception of short-term lending to enterprises,which frequently fluctuate more widely, theseparate analysis of the sub-periods revealeda stable credit relationship in the first period.If the aforementioned special effects of the1990s (an increase in investment linked tothe restructuring of eastern Germany alongwith more direct investment and mergers andacquisitions in Germany) were captured byadditional linear or quadratic time trends, thesecond time period also showed a plausibleconnection between the credit aggregatesand the gross domestic product (see Box onpage 38).Lending, by category of bank
Change from previous year in %, end of period
Lending to enterprises and households in Germany, by ...
... all banks ... commercial banks... savings banks and
Land banks... credit cooperatives
and regionalinstitutions of creditcooperatives
Period Totalof which
Mediumto long-term Totalof which
Mediumto long-term Totalof which
Mediumto long-term Totalof which
Mediumto long-term
1989 7.6 6.9 12.4 12.4 5.9 5.2 7.8 7.2
1991 11.7 10.7 12.4 12.4 12.6 10.7 10.7 9.91993 8.2 10.6 7.2 13.5 11.2 13.0 8.0 10.11995 7.4 7.5 7.4 8.6 7.7 7.5 9.1 9.01997 5.9 7.0 4.8 6.7 6.1 7.0 5.8 6.71998 7.7 7.1 8.4 6.6 7.2 7.0 6.3 6.51999 6.4 7.5 5.5 5.9 8.9 10.7 4.6 6.52000 4.3 4.1 4.1 3.8 4.9 4.0 3.2 3.4
2001 Q1 4.1 3.7 3.9 3.7 4.6 3.6 2.3 2.5
Q2 3.1 3.0 1.8 2.1 4.3 3.5 1.7 2.1Q3 2.4 2.5 0.4 1.1 4.0 3.2 0.4 1.4Q4 2.3 2.3 0.8 0.5 3.8 3.6 0.4 1.1
2002 Q1 1.2 2.2 – 1.6 0.4 3.1 3.4 0.4 1.6
Q2 0.9 2.0 – 1.1 1.2 2.5 2.9 – 0.2 1.5
July 1.0 2.2 – 0.7 1.2 2.3 3.1 0.3 1.7
August 1.0 1.9 – 0.7 1.3 2.1 2.7 0.4 1.5
Deutsche Bundesbank
German reunifi-
cation suggests
that splitting
the estimation
period...
...is the only
way to
identify stable
relationships

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
37In sum, over the long term it can be seen that
credit development in Germany can be ad-equately explained by the situation with re-gard to interest rates and income. It is, how-ever, characterised by a structural break atthe time of reunification. Unlike the 1980s,there was an apparent additional demand forcredit in the 1990s which was not solelybased on the development of interest ratesand income (see adjacent chart). This influ-ence seems, however, to have weakened inthe meantime.
3
Analysis of more recent creditdevelopment
In estimating the weak current credit devel-
opment, it is important to determine whetherthis weakness is the consequence of fairlyshort-term disruptions or of a deviation fromthe long-term growth path. This can beexamined on the basis of the econometricmodels which we used.
4
In the short term, credit growth is affected byunsystematic shocks, which have no impacton long-run tendencies. If the credit growthrates are adjusted for these shocks, the rateobtained can be explained by the estimatedmodel at a given development of interestrates and income. The chart on page 39shows that, in the case of total lending andlong-term lending to enterprises, actual creditgrowth since the turn of the year 2000/2001is well below the explainable growth rate andthat the gap is tending to become smaller.This means that actual lending has becomefar weaker than might be assumed from thedevelopment of the macroeconomic factors,ie interest rates and income. By contrast, in
the case of housing loans, there is hardly anydeviation of the actual from the short-termexplainable growth rate. In both cases thetrend is perceptibly downward.
In the long run, credit development is deter-
mined by a stable structural relationship be-tween income and interest rates (see Box onpage 38). If deviations from this relationshipoccur, it means that credit development isdeviating from its long-term path to a degreewhich cannot be traced back to non-Seasonally adjusted, quarterly, log scale
DM bn  5 bn
4000
3600
3200
2800
2400
2000
1600
1200
oActual
lending
Projected
borrowing
requirements1
1980 85 90 95 00 2002Increase in borrowing
requirements in the 1990s
1 Estimated on the basis of long-term lend-
ing in the 1980s. Adjusted for statistical
breaks. — o From 1999, in euro.
Deutsche Bundesbank2200
2000
1800
1600
1400
1200
1000
800
600
3Unlike credit development, the money stock does not
reflect the particular importance of reunification. This is
consistent with numerous studies which provide evidence
of the stability of money demand in Germany (see also
Deutsche Bundesbank, Review of the monetary target,
Monthly Report, August 1997, p 17-32).
4More information about the method employed is given
in the Annex, p 45-46.Short and
long-term
deviations of
credit growth
From the
short-term
perspective,
credit growth
too small at
timesNo major slump
in the long
term

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
38Estimating long-term lending equations
Estimations of long-term credit relationships (see
equation 2 in the Annex) for the whole of theperiod (1980:1 to 2002:2) and the two sub-periods(1980:1 to 1989:4 and 1993:1 to 2002:2) producedthe coefficients shown in the table below.
When the two sub-periods are compared, it is im-
mediately apparent that the income elasticities fortotal lending and long-term lending to enterprises,and especially for housing loans, are far higher inthe second sub-period than in the first. As they ap-pear unusually high, they may well reflect morethan merely the greater responsiveness of lendingto a change in the gross domestic product (GDP),probably pointing to other credit-boosting devel-opments which show a trend over time similar tothat of GDP growth. In that case, the GDP coeffi-cients would be distorted upwards. Possible addi-tional expansive factors are the increased borrow-ing needs resulting from the reconstruction of east-ern Germany and the enhanced foreign direct in-vestment activities of German enterprises towardsthe end of the 1990s. The chart on page 37 showsthe increase in borrowing requirements comparedwith the 1980s. The actual development of lendingby German banks to domestic enterprises and resi-dent individuals is set against the volume derivedfrom the estimate of the long-term credit relation-ship in the 1980s. The period after German reunifi-cation was evidently characterised by a stronger up-ward trend than the first sub-period.
As it is difficult to measure the aforementioned spe-
cial effects on credit growth empirically, linear andquadratic time trends were added to the long-termlending equations. The first specification allows atrend in lending which rises proportionately overtime to be modelled; the second also permits the
modelling of a trend which increases or decreasesdisproportionately fast over time.
The results in the table below show that GDP elastici-
ties re-assume plausible values when the special ef-fects are taken into account by means of time trends;
those values do not deviate particularly strongly
from the elasticities of the values determined onthe basis of the 1980s. The linear trends are highlypositively significant. The partially significant nega-tive quadratic trends indicate that the importanceof the special factors tended to decline towards theend of the 1990s as well as at the end of the period.
*Significant at 5%. — **Significant at 1%. — 1„–“
means no, or an unstable, cointegration relationship.
Deutsche BundesbankLong-term lending equations
(Semi-)elasticity
Period
1980:1 to 2002:2Sub-period
1980:1 to 1989:4Sub-period
1993:1 to 2002:2
Type of credit GDPInterest
rate GDPInterest
rate GDPInterest
rate
Total lending 1 – 1 – 1.16** – 0.01* 2.65** – 0.03**
Long-term lending to enterprises 1 – 1 – 1.58** 0.0 2.4** – 0.02**
Short-term lending to enterprises 1 – 1 – 1 – 1 – 3.41** – 0.04**
Housing loans 1 – 1 – 1.16** – 0.03** 3.4** – 0.04**
Consumer credit 1.79** – 0.01** 1.63** – 0.01** 1.87** – 0.01**
Long-term lending equations taking
account of time trends
Sub-period 1993:1 to 2002:2; (semi-)elasticity;
Kt=b0+b1BIPt+b2rt+b3t+b 4t2
TrendsType of
credit GDPInterest
rate Linear Quadratic
Total
lending 1.67** – 0.013* 0.025* – 0.0001*
Long-term
lending toenter-prises 1.56** – 0.013** 0.004** –
Housing
loans 1.14** – 0.006 0.077** – 0.0003**

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
39recurrent unsystematic shocks alone. The
question is therefore whether the currentweakness in credit growth is due, from along-term perspective, to insufficient lending.In order to tackle this question, the creditgrowth which would be obtained on thebasis of the structural long-term relationshipat a given development of interest rates andincome must be determined.
5The chart on
page 40 shows that in the case of total lend-ing, long-term lending to enterprises andhousing loans, the currently prevailing realcredit volume is 1 or 2 percentage pointsbelow its long-term equilibrium value. How-ever, if the whole period from 1993 is exam-ined, there were definitely earlier periods dur-ing which the deviations were even greater. Itshould also be borne in mind that, in eachcase, the current credit development is deter-mined only to a relatively small extent by thelong-term relationship. All in all, the presentweak credit growth cannot therefore be seenas a dramatic structural slump in lending.Rather, the deviations seem to be caused byshort-term disruptions.
Factors explaining the present low level
of lending in Germany
As the result of the empirical analysis of loans
granted by German banks to domestic privatenon-banks, it must be noted that the current-ly weak credit expansion is primarily cyclicallyinduced and thus probably mainly due tocredit demand adjustments. A decline instimulating special effects may also come intoplay. Nonetheless, additional factors relatingto credit demand and credit supply may also
be playing a role.Change from previous year
%
%
1993 2002Housing loansof which
Long-term lending
to enterprisesActual credit growthExplained credit growthTotal lendingCredit growth as explained
in the estimation equation
and actual credit growth
Deutsche Bundesbank18
1512
9
63012
9
63012
9630
94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01
5The structural long-term relationship can be obtained
by using an error correction model (see equation 2 in the
Annex). It should be noted that the speed of adjustment c
of the long-term relationship in the error correction
models (equation 1) is between approximately –0.1 and
–0.2 only. In the short term, the relative importance of
disruptions and dynamic adjustment processes is there-
fore considerably higher.Weak credit
growth mainly
cyclically
induced

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
40For instance, borrowing in Germany may
have tended to be dampened of late becauselarge amounts of funds have flowed to pri-vate non-banks from abroad. The net exter-nal assets of the German banking industry, inwhich these incoming funds are recorded,have risen by 395 billion since mid-2001,
after a clear overall decline. In the past aslight negative correlation between net exter-nal assets and borrowing by domestic enter-prises was generally apparent.
The inflows of funds from abroad come from
both current and financial transactions.Lower levels of direct investment abroad haveplayed just as great a role in financial transac-tions as net purchases of German securitiesby non-residents. There was also a slight ex-pansion of the indebtedness of German en-terprises and individuals abroad. However,
private non-banks increased their claims onnon-resident debtors to a slightly greater ex-tent over the same period, with the resultthat no overall tendency to increase net bor-rowing abroad can be perceived on the partof domestic enterprises and resident individ-uals. Nor does lending business conducted byforeign subsidiaries and branches of Germanbanks with the domestic private sector pro-vide any indication that lending is being shift-ed abroad from Germany.
The weak growth in loans might be partly
due to the fact that, as a result of the increas-ing securitisation of corporate liabilities, Ger-man banks have substituted securitised forunsecuritised loans to a greater extent. A ten-dency for securitised lending to gain in im-portance has been observable for some timenow. The ratio of securitised lending to Ger-man enterprises to unsecuritised loans to thedomestic private sector went up from around2% in the mid-1980s to roughly 8% in 1995,peaking at just over 13% in April 2001. How-ever, this is mainly due to a clear increase inthe volume of equities held by the banks;from a statistical point of view, these are in-cluded in securitised lending by Germanbanks to domestic enterprises. Its share inlending to the domestic private sector rosefrom 2% in the early 1990s to as much as10
12% in April 2001 and subsequently de-
creased. However, this increase probably alsoreflects, in particular, the strong gains previ-ously made in the equity markets; the CDAXindex more than doubled between the end of1990 and April 2001. By contrast, the shareof debt instruments issued by residents, suchSeasonally adjusted
%
points
%
points
1993 2002Housing loansof which
Long-term lending
to enterprisesTotal lendingDeviations from the
long-run equibrium *
*Real; deflated with the GDP deflator.
Deutsche Bundesbank1.5+
0
1.5−3.0+
1.5+
0
1.5−
3.0−1.5+
0
1.5−
3.0−
94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01
Increase in
banks’ net
external assets
Sources of the
inflowsRole of
securitised
lending...

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
41as corporate bonds, in lending by German
banks to domestic enterprises and resident in-dividuals was still around 1% in August 2002,a figure that had not changed since the early1990s. This does not indicate that banks aresubstituting securitised corporate liabilities forunsecuritised lending.
The securitisation of lending by banks in the
context of asset backed securities (ABS) pro-grammes may also conceivably have contrib-uted to the weak development of unsecuri-tised loans. However, if one looks at the dataon ABS managed by German credit institu-tions that are reported to the Bundesbank,the possible importance of that kind of pro-gramme is put into perspective. After a sud-den increase in ABS in mid-1998 and at thestart of 1999, their volume – 315 billion in
August 2002 – was only
34percentage point
of total loans by domestic banks to Germanenterprises and households.
The comparatively small volume of securities
on the banks’ balance sheets does not, how-ever, rule out the fact that, for external finan-cing purposes, domestic enterprises have re-sorted increasingly to the financial markets asa means of exploiting direct financing oppor-tunities. The sharp increase in corporatebonds outstanding issued by residents mightbe indicative: since early 2000 the outstand-ing volume of this paper issued in Germanyand abroad has more than doubled. Despitethe huge increase in recent years, the volumeof corporate bonds outstanding corresponds,however, to only around 2
12% of the loans
made by German banks to the domestic pri-vate sector.By contrast, financing by means of equity
holdings in German non-financial corpor-ations has become more important, particu-larly from 1998 onwards. For instance, theshare of equity financing in the financing ofnon-financial corporations rose from an aver-age of just under 3% between 1991 and1995 to more than 7% between 1996 and2001. However, as most of these capital in-creases were related to corporate mergersand acquisitions, it cannot necessarily be con-cluded that new share issues have been usedas a financing alternative to bank loans to anoticeably greater extent, especially as issuingshares is not an option open to most smallerfirms.
Lending restraint at credit institutions
In addition to the factors referred to above,
supply-side effects are also increasingly as-sumed to be a further cause of weak creditgrowth. This assumption is partly based onsurveys of different associations and institu-tions
6whose results give at least certain indi-
cations of changes in lending by banks, butpartly also on comments on this subject bythe banking industry itself. With regard to theoverall development, however, a distinctionneeds to be made between corporate and re-tail banking. A further distinction needs to bemade between a fundamental shift in supplybehaviour by the banks and their reaction to
6See, for example, KfW, Unternehmensfinanzierung im
Umbruch, April 2002, Creditreform, Wirtschaftslage und
Finanzierung im Mittelstand, spring 2002, and DSGV,
Diagnose Mittelstand, January 2002....and
securitisation
tendenciesBanks’ credit
supply

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
42a mainly cyclically induced worsening of bor-
rowers’ creditworthiness.
Those enterprises affected by the banks’
lending policy are mainly firms which, interms of their external financing, are particu-larly or solely reliant on bank loans, ie, in par-ticular, small and medium-sized enterprises(SMEs). The dependence of German enter-prises on bank financing increases as com-pany size decreases and is particularly highfor non-corporations, of which sole propri-etorships are especially affected (see chart onpage 43). However, against the backdrop ofthe economic situation and rising uncertaintyon the international financial markets, largerenterprises have probably also become moredependent on banks again. This is especiallytrue of firms whose rating has fallen belowthe investment grade and which are therefore
hardly in a position any longer to consider fi-nancing on the capital markets.
In particular, SMEs – and especially partner-
ships – in Germany have a comparativelysmall capitalisation. These low capital ratiosendow the problems of asymmetrical infor-mation (such as moral hazard and adverse se-lection) and thus the necessity of an extensiveflow of information between borrower andlender with additional importance, this beingreflected in the high degree of dependenceby smaller enterprises on banks. However, thebalance sheets of partnerships, in particular,frequently provide little information abouttheir capital.
7It also needs to be borne in
mind that, owing to the low balance sheetvaluation for real estate, for instance, and theconcomitant opportunity to build up hiddenreserves, the capital shown in the balancesheets leads in some cases to major underes-timations of the actually liable capital.
Against the background of the weak eco-
nomic situation and the uncertainties on thefinancial markets, a further factor is the in-creasingly tense business situation of manyenterprises. There was already a sharp in-crease in the number of company insolvenciesin Germany in 2001. At over 32,000, thesewere 14.4% above the previous year’s fig-ures, which were already quite high. They willprobably increase markedly again in the cur-rent year. Purely in terms of figures, most in-%As a percentage of the balance sheet total
All economic sectors 1
Incorporated enterprises
Partnerships
Sole proprietorships
Turnover in  5 millionLess
than 55 to
less than1010 to
less than2525 to
less than5050 to
less than100100 and
overBank lending to German
enterprises in 2000, by size
of turnover and legal form
1 Electricity, gas and water supply, mining
(including quarrying), manufacturing, con-
struction, trade and transport (excluding
railways and telecommunications).
Deutsche Bundesbank70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
7For further details, see Deutsche Bundesbank, German
enterprises’ earning and financing patterns, by form of
business organisation, Monthly Report, December 2001,
p 45-77.Bank lending
predominates
in SME
financingLow capital
ratios of
German
enterprises
Sharp increase
in company
insolvencies

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
43solvencies are occurring among smaller and
newer enterprises.8However, the number of
insolvencies among larger and older enter-prises, which involve the majority of employ-ees affected by insolvencies, went up sharplylast year (see adjacent table).
When assessing the quality of borrowers, the
capital ratios, some of which are small, lead,in times of high and increasing insolvency risk,to the enterprises in question being given alower credit rating. Against this background,average lending terms would also have to be-come more restrictive, even if the banks’ sup-ply policy were to remain unchanged. Thisshould not be interpreted as a change in lend-ing behaviour on the part of the banks.
In connection with borrowers’ credit rating and
the loans granted on that basis, it has frequent-ly been suggested of late that the new rulingintroduced by the Basel Capital Accord (BaselII) is another restrictive factor. The new capitalrequirements, scheduled to enter into force atthe end of 2006, stipulate, in the context oftheir first pillar (minimum capital requirements),that the capital required to back loans bybanks must take greater account of risk thanwas previously the case. The latest QuantitativeImpact Study (QIS 2.5) in Germany at the endof 2001 showed, on average, no change in thecapital requirements when the standard ap-proach based on the banks’ internal rating wastaken. In accordance with that approach, therewere clear reductions in capital requirements,especially in the area of retail portfolios for pri-vate customers and smaller enterprises, where-as, in the case of lending to governments,banks and major enterprises, a higher or loweramount of regulatory capital is required, de-
pending on their credit quality. In the mean-time, the Basel Committee has also approvedreductions in capital requirements for medium-sized enterprises with an annual turnover ofless than 350 million.
9Those types of expos-Company insolvencies in Germany
Item 2000 2001Change
frompre-viousyearin %
Total 28,235 32,278 + 14.4
of which
> 100 employees 197 264 + 34.0>525 m claims 93 126 + 35.5
> 8 years old
1 7,309 9,132 + 24.9
of which
Small businesses 2,981 3,795 + 27.3Sole proprietorships 6,667 7,231 + 8.5Partnerships 2,211 2,624 + 18.7Private limitedcompanies 15,832 17,857 + 12.8Public limited companies 176 442 + 151.1Other 368 329 – 10.6
Source: Federal Statistical Office. — 1Excluding small
businesses.
Deutsche Bundesbank
8According to data from Creditreform, in 2001 just
under 60% of the enterprises concerned had an annual
turnover of less than 32.5 million, more than 50% are
“microfirms” employing no more than five people, and
almost every fifth enterprise concerned is no more than
two years old.
9On the one hand, lending to most of the German SMEs
(approximately 90%) will probably come within the
scope of the “retail portfolio” and thus be subject to a
lower risk weighting. For loans to individuals and smaller
enterprises, the retail portfolio assumes that granularity
and diversification will be higher than for the portfolio of
loans to other enterprises. The ceiling for loans in that
category is 31 million. On the other hand, the intention is
for account to be taken of a special size-dependent com-
ponent for small and medium-sized enterprises in the risk
weighting function for SMEs not included in the retail
portfolio. (See also the press release issued by the Basel
Committee on Banking Supervision at the Bank for Inter-
national Settlements (BIS) on 10 July 2002.)Decline in
borrowers’
credit quality
Lending and
Basel II

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
44ures are generally to be backed by 10% less
capital than exposures to large enterprises; themaximum reduction will be 20%. Overall, amore marked differentiation of lending mar-gins can therefore be expected, although this isunlikely to lead to a general tightening of creditterms – at least not because of the capital re-quirements – but should, in part, create greaterleeway for concessions, particularly for smallerenterprises.
Nonetheless, both surveys of enterprises and
comments by the credit institutions indicatethat there has been a change in banks’ lend-ing policy. This is likely to be reflected in theaforementioned heterogeneous credit devel-opment across the different categories ofbanks. Owing to the unsatisfactory incomeand expenditure situation and the extensivevalue adjustments required in the field of cor-porate loans,
10the banks are coming under
greater pressure, on the one hand, to concen-trate on particularly lucrative business sectorsand to give lower priority to possible invest-ment in longer-term credit relationshipswhich represent less profitable lending. Onthe other hand, poor performance has alsomeant that banks are attempting to achievehigher, perhaps risk differentiated, lendingmargins. As outlined above, Basel II has pre-sumably contributed to an increase in incomeand risk awareness on the part of the creditinstitutions. Lending behaviour and lendingrates are now more obviously dependent ontheir internal rating and therefore on the en-terprises’ risk position. Nor can it be ruled outthat, if, on the basis of Basel II, banks aligntheir credit policy more closely to borrowers’current credit rating, this will have a greaterprocyclical impact on lending than was previ-
ously the case. In order to counter this, thebanks would have to conduct stress tests tosimulate, for example, a decline in the qualityof assets in a recession.
Just as in the case of corporate lending, lend-
ing to retail customers has also been affectedby the economic climate and the associatedincrease in the need for value adjustments.The number of consumer insolvencies alsorose sharply from 10,479 in 2000 to 13,277in 2001, which represents an increase of26.7%. As in corporate lending business,here, too, terms and lending policy are likelyto be aligned more closely with customers’creditworthiness. The credit institutions arealready using scoring methods to assess thecreditworthiness of retail customers. Thebanking industry is currently working on ex-tended procedures which should make it eas-ier to achieve a risk-weighted categorisationof customers based on socio-economic data.In the future, in this area, too, the spread ofmargins based on the individual customers’credit rating can be expected to widen andlending policy to be more strongly geared tothese risk categories. However, given thecomparatively high margins in this area ofbusiness and the savings in administrativecosts resulting from a greater standardisationof procedures, a somewhat higher degree ofinvolvement by banks can nonetheless be ex-pected in the future.
10See Deutsche Bundesbank, The performance of Ger-
man credit institutions in 2001, Monthly Report,
September 2002, p 15-45.Basel II as a
catalystLoans to retail
customers

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
45Annex
Estimating the credit equations: data and
methodology
Modelling and estimating econometric models on
German credit growth has encountered somemethodological difficulties. Lending behaviour hasbeen shaped by numerous special effects, such asthose linked to German reunification, for example;these are difficult to measure empirically. Robustprocedures such as Engle-Granger or FMOLS weretherefore used for the econometric estimationmethods as the conditions necessary for the use ofthe Johansen procedure were not in place.
11The basis for the estimations presented here arequarterly data, adjusted for breaks and seasonaland calendar effects, on actual lending (deflatedwith the GDP deflator), real GDP and nominal cap-ital market rates (the yield on domestic bearerbonds outstanding). The estimation period extendsfrom the first quarter of 1980 to the secondSummary
Overall, it can be seen that weak credit
growth in Germany can be explained primar-ily by the development of interest rates andincome, ie it is probably to be viewed aslinked, in particular, to the cyclically inducedrestraint in credit demand. The expiry of spe-cial developments, such as the governmentpromotion of investment in eastern Germanyor the decline in the large volume of foreigndirect investment by German enterprises,which stimulated lending in the 1990s, is alsocontributing to the slowdown in creditgrowth.
Nonetheless, the econometric results for the
various credit aggregates also show thatother factors may well also be causing weakcredit growth. Indications that particular useis being made of other sources of financingare currently fairly weak. By contrast, there
are signs of a certain lending restraint amongbanks. Set against a background of poor per-formance by the German banking industry,not only the narrow lending margins but also,in particular, the high number of company in-solvencies and the low capitalisation of manyenterprises have probably put additionalnegative pressure on firms’ credit quality.
By contrast, the proposed new Basel capital
requirements, which are being debated inpublic, have probably done little more thanheighten the banks’ income and risk aware-ness. They are therefore likely to increase theexisting tendency to differentiate more clearlywhen defining lending terms; overall, how-ever, owing to the fact that the regulatorycapital has, on average, remained more orless as it was, the banks’ capital costs of lend-ing have not gone up as a result of Basel II.
11In particular, the normality of the error terms.Credit growth
can be largely
explained by
fundamentals
However, a
certain restraint
also evident at
the banks......but not
attributable to
Basel II

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
46quarter of 2002. Account has been taken of lend-
ing volume and GDP as logarithmic variables.12
The following error correction model was used todescribe credit growth.
(1)
∆Kt = a0 + a1∆Kt–1 + a1∆BIPt + a2∆BIPt–1 + a2∆rt–1
Sho rt-term dyn amism

– c (Kt–1 – b0 – b1BIPt–1 – b2rt–1) + εt
Error correction term



Sho ck
This specification proved to be eminently suitable
and produced a satisfactory empirical descriptionof credit behaviour for most estimations. In accord-ance with the usual interpretation of error correc-tion models, the current change in the real volumeof lending is determined by two explainable fac-tors, the short-term adjustment dynamism and theerror correction term, as well as by an inexplicablecurrent shock. The long-term relationship, asshown in equation 2, is of particular interest forthe interpretation of credit growth.(2) K
t=b0+b1BIPt+b2rt
This equation describes a long-term equilibrium
structural relationship of the volume of lending de-pendent on GDP and interest rates. If, for example,the credit volume is larger than postulated by thisrelationship, this produces a corrective negative ef-fect on current credit growth ( DK
t< 0) of the order
of the speed of adjustment (– c).
12As an alternative, analyses using other variables were
carried out but they produced either no different results
or economically unsatisfactory descriptions of credit
growth. For example, in the case of housing loans, invest-
ment in housing construction was used as a sector-
specific activity variable. In the case of short-term lending
to enterprises, the inclusion of short-term or current ac-
count interest rates failed to produce any stable results.
This is due to the fact that such lending is less determined
by cost factors than by short-term liquidity requirements,
which change in the course of the economic cycle, for in-
stance. The capital market rate seems, in this case, better
suited to modelling factors of that kind. Short-term inter-
est rates, by contrast, tend to measure monetary policy
effects, which make only a slight impact on short-term
borrowing.

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
47Fundamental
determinants ofreal exchangerate movementsin the central andeast Europeanaccession countriesIn the years of reform and reconstruc-
tion, the currencies of all the EU acces-sion countries in central and easternEurope have appreciated in real terms.The relatively large increases in prod-uctivity during the economic catching-up process are the most common ex-planation given for this. In principle,however, other factors may also play arole in influencing shifts in the inter-national price relationships betweenthe advanced economies and countriesthat are catching up. This article firstprovides a brief overview of the real ex-change rate movements in the centraland east European accession countriesand then, on the strength of this, re-ports on the results of an analysis of theunderlying determinants. This revealsthat the relatively large productivity in-creases which characterise the catching-up and development processes are theprime, but by no means the sole, causeof the real currency appreciation inthose countries. The transmission mech-anisms which lie behind this are, never-theless, more complex than is some-times assumed.
Real exchange rate movements in the
accession countries
The currencies of all the central and east
European accession countries have shown asignificant real appreciation over the past tenyears. That has been the case both bilaterallyin relation to the euro and on a weighted
Real currency
appreciation in
all central and
east European
accession
countries...

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
48average against the currencies of the major
trading partners of the central and east Euro-pean transition countries. (Among those trad-ing partners, the west European industrialeconomies have become increasingly import-ant during the transformation process). Evenso, the extent of the real currency appreci-ation has varied considerably from one candi-date country to another. Slovenia, the SlovakRepublic and Hungary, for example, have re-corded a real currency appreciation againstthe euro-area countries in the order of 30%to 50% in the past decade. During the sameperiod, however, the real external value ofthe currencies of the Czech Republic, Ro-mania and Poland have risen by around 80%and the real external value of Bulgaria’s cur-rency has gone up by nearly 180%. The ratesof appreciation of the currencies of the Balticstates have been much higher still (500% tomore than 600%).
In the majority of countries mentioned, the
real currency appreciation was especiallysharp in the early phase of transformation. Asthe catching-up process and macroeconomicstabilisation advanced, however, real upwardpressure eased over time. The average realrates of appreciation since early 1996, for ex-ample, have been no more than around one-quarter of the mean figure for the three pre-ceding years.
The outlined development in the accession
countries’ real exchange rates, however, isnot due to a matching (nominal) higher valu-ation of their national currencies. On an aver-age of the past ten years, most of the curren-cies under consideration in this article haveJanuary 1993 =100, monthly, log scale
BulgariaRomania
1991 2002EstoniaLatviaLithuaniaSlovak RepublicCzech RepublicPoland
SloveniaHungaryReal effective exchange rates *
of the central and east
European accession countries
against the euro area
Source: IMF and Bundesbank calcula-
tions. — *Real effective exchange rates
based on consumer price indices; before
1999: ”theoretical” euro, see ECB, Monthly
Bulletin , October 1999, April 2000 and
March 2001.
Deutsche Bundesbank250
200
150
100
305075800
600
400
200
3050100200
150
100200
150
100
75
92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01...despite
nominal
depreciation
in many
countries...

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
49actually depreciated in nominal terms against
the euro or its west European legacy curren-cies. Real currency appreciation has essential-ly been due to high rates of inflation, whichalso applies in the case of countries whosecurrencies have appreciated in nominal termsagainst the euro.
Especially in the early period of changeover
from a centrally planned economy to a mar-ket system and the associated liberalisation ofthe price formation process, the transitioneconomies had to contend with an intermit-tent acceleration in inflation. This was causedby pent-up demand for western industrialcountries’ goods combined with large “mon-etary overhangs” from the period of theplanned economy and by the inevitable ad-justments in price structures to conditions onthe world markets. Especially in the first fewyears of transition, two or even three-figureinflation rates were recorded in all of thesecountries. In some cases, these were one-offsurges in inflation due mainly to unavoidableadjustments in the price structure, whichpushed up the cost of living, in particular. Asthe reform process was not supported bystrict stability policy measures, however, noneof the countries affected managed to bringinflation sufficiently under control in subse-quent years when the structural price adjust-ments had largely been completed. In severalcases, the rates of price increase remained farhigher than in the economies of western Eur-ope. Seen in that light, the resultant real cur-rency appreciation is also a reflection of theexceptional stabilisation task facing the coun-tries under consideration.Real exchange rate: definition andsignificance
The real exchange rate (R) of a country’s currency
against the euro is defined here as
R=E( P eu/Pi)
where P eudenotes the general price level in the
euro area, P ithe general price level in the coun-
try concerned and E the bilateral nominal euroexchange rate of the currency of the countryconcerned expressed in units of the national cur-rency per euro. The inverse of this bilateral realexchange rate is described as the real externalvalue (Q) of the country’s currency against theeuro area
Q = 1 / R = (1 / E) (P
i/Peu)
An increase in Q is tantamount to a real appre-
ciation against the euro area. This can happen ifthe currency concerned appreciates in nominalterms against the euro (ie E falls and 1/E rises)and/or if inflation in that country exceeds infla-tion in the euro area.
While the nominal exchange rate and a corres-
ponding nominal external value reflect the rela-tive price of two currencies, the real effective ex-change rate and the real external value representthe relative price between the baskets of goodsin the two currency areas. A real currency appre-ciation in country i against the euro area maytherefore also be regarded as a relative increasein prices in that country over prices in the euroarea when expressed in the same currency. Sucha change in the relative prices therefore worsensthe price competitiveness of country i and thusalso the sales prospects for its import substitutionand export goods industries.
1
1See also Deutsche Bundesbank, Real exchange rates as
an indicator of international competitiveness, Monthly
Report, May 1994, p 45-57.
Deutsche Bundesbank...as a result of
high inflation

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
50After achieving initial success in combating
inflation, several countries suffered acute set-backs. This was the case, albeit to quite avarying extent, in Bulgaria, the Czech Repub-lic, Hungary, Romania and the Slovak Repub-lic, for example. A lack of resolve in imple-menting stability policy measures played apart in this as did delays in privatising largestate-owned industries and long-deferredprice liberalisation, especially in the consumerservices sectors. In some cases, inflation ranalmost entirely out of control, with the resultthat soaring inflation rates led to a sharp de-preciation in the exchange rates of the cur-rencies concerned. This, in turn, strengtheneddomestic inflation – a vicious circle that, inBulgaria, for example, could only by brokenby monetary reforms and the strict monetarydiscipline of a currency board.
Currency boards have been used successfully
to stabilise prices in other, smaller central andeast European economies, too. The best-known example of this is Estonia, which in1992 was the first of this group of countriesto embark on the reform process with a peg-ging of its currency to the Deutsche Mark. In1994, Lithuania, following a period of indeci-sive and, ultimately, unsuccessful experimen-tation, also switched to a similarly strict ex-change rate pegging to the US dollar. Lithu-ania likewise made striking stability progressin the ensuing period.
However, these examples should not be
taken to imply that the introduction of cur-rency boards is in itself a guarantee of anti-inflation policy success. Ultimately, the formin which a small country pegs its currency toYear-on-year change, monthly
%
%
Bulgaria2,019.48
(March 1997)
Romania
1991 2002EstoniaLatviaLithuaniaScale reducedSlovak Republic
Czech RepublicPoland
Slovenia
HungaryInflation in the central and
east European accessioncountries
Source: IMF and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank700
600500400300200100
0800
700600500400300200100
025
0100
755025
0
92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01Difficult
stabilisation
process
Exchange-rate
pegging as an
instrument for
stabilising
prices

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
51a stable anchor currency is less important
than its determination to reinforce the exter-nal stabilisation constraints imposed by thepeg with fiscal and wage policies supportingthe same objective. Without that willingness,even a currency board is doomed to failure,as was vividly illustrated by the example ofArgentina early this year.
Conversely, this also means that smaller coun-
tries which peg their exchange rates less ri-gidly than in a formal currency board maylikewise make use, in their anti-inflation pol-icy, of the disciplining effects of fixed ex-change rates against stable anchor curren-cies. One instance of this is the third Balticstate, Latvia. Although it has not introduced acurrency board, since launching the lats Latviahas strictly geared its monetary policy to thegoal of stable exchange rates against a basketof major currencies.
What is crucial is not only the strategic frame-
work within which a country pursues it stabil-isation policy objectives but also its willing-ness to take just as much account of what isrequired in other policy areas. That fact isdemonstrated, finally, by recent experience ina number of transition countries, such as theCzech Republic, which, following severe set-backs, have achieved gratifying success interms of stability policy on the basis of flexibleexchange rates.
Hungary is pursuing its own course. With the
introduction last year of a target zone systemagainst the euro with fluctuation bands of€15%, it de facto unilaterally adopted the ex-
change rate arrangements of the EuropeanJanuary 1993 =100, monthly, log scale
BulgariaScale reduced
Romania
1991 2002EstoniaLatvia
LithuaniaSlovak RepublicCzech
RepublicPolandSlovenia
HungaryNominal external values *
of the central and east
European accession countries’
currencies against the euro
Source: IMF and Bundesbank calcula-
tions. — * Falling curve denotes a nominal
currency depreciation against the euro.
Deutsche Bundesbank1500
1000
500
250
100
5025
10
5
1200
175
150
125
100
75125
100
75175
150
125
100
75
50
35
92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
52Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM II), albeit
without formally joining the system, whichwould require membership of the EuropeanUnion.
Possible causes of real currency
appreciation
The real trend currency appreciation observed
in all central and east European transitioneconomies appears, at first glance, to contra-dict the widespread notion that the develop-ment of the nominal exchange rates should, inthe long run, at least approximately offsetinternational inflation differentials. Given thevalidity of the purchasing power parity theory,the real exchange rate would, strictly speak-ing, have to be constant or at least stationary,ie the temporary deviations of the exchangerate from its purchasing power parity wouldeventually trigger corrective movements, re-sulting in the real exchange rate being ap-proximately constant on a long-term averageand showing no trend. It therefore seems obvi-ous to ask why it was possible for the ob-served real currency appreciation to occur. Inthis connection, a whole series of argumentsare cited.
1
The real trend currency appreciation of thepast few years may have been a correction ofan undervaluation with which the countriesconcerned entered the transition process –partly on grounds of competitiveness or as aresult of market overreactions. With theabandonment of the centrally planned econ-omy in the early 1990s, several of the curren-cies came under considerable downwardpressure. In many cases, this led to nominal
depreciations which, following the initial suc-cesses in stabilisation, had to be seen as exag-gerated. An often, at first, comparatively ex-pansionary monetary policy, the pent-up ex-cess demand for foreign goods and assets aswell as the flight out of the domestic currencyafter years of economic mismanagement andthe loss of savings undoubtedly played amajor part in the – in some cases, dramatic –slump in the external value of the central andeast European currencies. The economic lit-erature, however, is unanimous in assumingthat the real currency appreciation in the en-suing period cannot be explained solely as acorrection of earlier instances of exaggerateddepreciation. Such counter-movements wereindeed a factor initially, but the underlyingimbalances are likely to have been largelyovercome in the second half of the 1990s.
2
Alternatively, the real currency appreciationmay be explained inter alia by the Balassa-
Samuelson effect. This second explanatoryapproach is cited fairly often in this connec-tion.
3According to this approach, the rela-
tively sharp increase in productivity in the in-dustrial sector of the transition economies
1Most of these arguments already appear in L Halpern,
and C Wyplosz (1997), Equilibrium exchange rates in
transition economies , IMF Staff Papers 44, p 430-461.
2See D Begg, L Halpern und C Wyplosz (1999), Monet-
ary and exchange rate policies, EMU and Central and
Eastern Europe, CEPR Forum Report of the Economic Pol-
icy Initiative, No 5, p 32.
3See, for example, UN, Economic Commission for Eur-
ope (2001), Economic transformation and real exchange
rates in the 2000s: the Balassa-Samuelson connection,
Economic Survey of Europe 2001, p 227-239; M De
Broeck, and T Sløk (2001), Interpreting real exchange
rate movements in transition countries, IMF Working
Paper, No 01/56; A J Richards, und G H R Tersman
(1996), Growth, nontradables, and price convergence
in the Baltics, Journal of Comparative Economics 23,
p 121-145.Correction
of an
undervaluationBalassa-
Samuelson
effect

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
53The standard model for the Balassa-Samuelson effect
The hypothesis of Balassa and Samuelson is usually
derived in the context of the following standardmodel.
1A model economy produces two goods,
tradeables, T, and non-tradeables, N. Each sectoruses a linear homogeneous Cobb-Douglas functionwith capital, K, and labour, L, as inputs
(1) Y
iiKi
iL1ÿi
i
where Y idenotes output and itotal factor produc-
tivity in sector i with i = T, N. Profit maximisationand the formation of growth rates, denoted by a ^,result in
(2)
^r=^pi+^i+(i–1 )(^Ki–^Li) and
(3)^w=^pi+^i+i(^Ki–^Li)
Both factors are intersectorally mobile, which im-
plies that the factor returns, ie nominal wages, w,and interest, r, equalise across sectors. Goods andfactor prices thus have the following relationship toeach other
(4a)
^pT=–^T+T^r + (1 –T)^w and
(4b)^pN=–^N+N^r + (1 –N)^w
where p idenotes the price of good i. In line with
the circumstances of the central and east Europeanaccession candidates, the model economy is as-sumed to be small on the world goods and capitalmarkets. This means that the price of tradeables, p
T,
and – since capital is assumed to be internationallymobile – also interest, r, are set for the model econ-omy exogenously by the world market. Since la-bour, by contrast, is assumed to be internationallyimmobile, wages are determined endogenously in
the model. Equation
(5)
^pN=1ÿN
1ÿT^T–^N
which results from combining (4a) and (4b) for
^pT=^r = 0, illustrates the Balassa-Samuelson effect.
If total factor productivity in the tradeables sectorincreases, the price of non-tradeables rises, whichcorresponds to a real currency appreciation.
2Equa-
tions (4a) and (4b) show that this result is due tothe fact that, with a given price of tradeables and agiven rate of interest, wages have to rise, and thiseffect is transferred, owing to the assumed intersec-toral mobility of labour, to the non-tradeables sec-tor.
Furthermore, equation (5) illustrates one of the
standard model’s main implications, ie an increasein total factor productivity in the non-tradeablessector results in a reduction in the price of non-tradeables, ie a real currency depreciation. This isdue to the fact that wages – as shown in equation(4a) – are already set by the tradeables sector andthus remain unaffected by the disturbance referredto here. Given unchanged factor costs, prices haveto fall if productivity increases.
Since the price of non-tradeables is unambiguously
defined by equation (5), it also illustrates a secondimplication of the standard model: output, Y
N, has
no impact on the price of non-tradeables in thismodel. As a consequence, demand-side disturb-ances do not affect the real exchange rate either,which is due to the implied completely price-elasticsupply of non-tradeables.
1See B Balassa (1964), The purchasing-power parity doc-
trine: a reappraisal, The Journal of Political Economy 72,
p 584-596, and P A Samuelson (1964), Theoretical notes on
trade problems, The Review of Economics and Statistics 46,
p 145-154. The standard model may be found, for example,in K A Froot and K Rogoff (1995), Perspectives on PPP and
long-run real exchange rates, in G M Grossman and K
Rogoff (eds), Handbook of International Economics Vol III,Amsterdam, p 1647-1688. — 2This, of course, assumes that
the external parameters do not change. The ability simplyto equate an increase in the price of non-tradeables with a
real currency appreciation is due to the fact that, given thevalidity of the law of one price for tradeables, this pricecomponent is the only one within the domestic price indexthat can change in relation to the external price index. Fora detailed account of the relationship between the price ofnon-traded goods and the real external value, seeDeutsche Bundesbank, Overall determinants of the trendsin the real external value of the Deutsche Mark, Monthly
Report, August 1995, p 21.
Deutsche Bundesbank

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
54pushed up the general wage level and thus
also the prices of the other goods and ser-vices in which these economies were unableto make comparable productivity gains. Theresulting surge in inflation in the case ofgoods mostly not traded internationally wasreflected, according to this theory, in a realcurrency appreciation.
It is also conceivable that the rising demand
of households and general government,which accompanied the rapid growth of theeconomy as a whole, drove up the prices ofgoods not traded internationally. Both an in-crease in the level of consumption demandand a shift in its structure in favour of non-tradeables are conceivable as the cause, par-ticularly as it is generally assumed that theproductivity gains in this sector lag signifi-cantly behind the growth in the industrialoutput of goods that are traded in fairly largevolumes internationally.
4
There is another hypothesis which arguesthat rising general government deficits,which had to be financed via the capital mar-ket, put up real interest rates in the candidatecountries, thereby causing real currency ap-preciation. Conversely, the low rates of realinterest on the world financial markets haveat times also been identified as the reason forthe net capital inflows into this region and forthe associated trend real currency appreci-ation in those countries. At all events, thecomparatively small original capital stockwould seem to suggest a relatively high mar-ginal productivity of capital and attractiveyield opportunities. Moreover, given the de-mand for investment, opportunities for in-vestment are increased by privatisation, and
this, in turn, favours capital inflows.
In principle, the price liberalisation imple-
mented in the transition process may havehad an impact on real exchange rates in ei-ther direction. While price increases may beexpected over the medium term in the caseof goods which used to be priced below thecomparable market level, the emergence ofprice competition should have the long-termeffect of dampening the general price level inthe economy as a whole. If mainly services, ienon-tradeables, used to be sold below mar-ket prices in the centrally planned economies,price liberalisation may also lead in the longrun to a real currency appreciation.
5
Finally, it is also argued that the opening ofmarkets to the West improved the qualityand marketing of the transition countries’ ex-port products, thus improving their terms oftrade.
A panel-econometric analysis
The impact of the various potential determin-
ants on the real exchange rates of the acces-sion countries’ currencies may, in general, beanalysed by using econometric estimationmethods. However, such calculations are
4The impact of such demand-side developments on the
real exchange rate in transition countries is stressed, for
example, by F Coricelli, and B Jazbec (2001), Real ex-
change rate dynamics in transition economies, CEPR Dis-
cussion Paper, No 2869.
5F Coricelli and B Jazbec (2001), op cit, model this by as-
suming that a disproportionately large share of labour
input was allocated to the tradeables sector in the era of
the centrally planned economy.Rise in private
and public
consumption
General
government
deficits, real
interest rates
and
privatisationPrice
liberalisation
Quality and
marketing of
export products
Estimation
procedure
and data

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
55made more difficult by the fact that the time
series available for this purpose are stillrelatively short. This means that traditionalmethods of analysing time series may be ap-plied only subject to considerable qualifica-tions. That is all the more true if the dataused are available only as annual figures, as inthe case of sectoral productivities, for ex-ample. Under these conditions, an outlet isprovided by panel-econometric estimations.These represent a combination of time-seriesand cross-sectional analytical methods, thusreducing the problem of short data series.The findings presented below are thereforebased on this type of econometric analysis.
6
Even so, the resulting panel with annual dataon all central and east European accessioncandidates was comparatively small. For thisreason, a simple fixed effects estimation ap-proach was used.
Specifically, in the relevant econometric esti-
mations an attempt is made to explain thereal effective external value of the candidatecountries’ currencies by the following deter-minants:
– labour productivity in the industrial, ser-
vices and agricultural sectors;
– general government consumption or, al-
ternatively, aggregate (private and public)consumption, expressed as a share ofgross domestic product (GDP) in eachcase.
As is done when calculating the effective
real exchange rate, each of the above-mentioned variables for each candidatecountry is expressed as a share of the
trade-weighted average of the correspond-ing variables from more than 20 OECDcountries.
– In addition to the explanatory variables
mentioned, the estimations use a measurerepresenting real interest rates in the globalcapital market and approximated by theunweighted average of real interest ratesin the United States and Germany as a de-terminant of the real exchange rates and
– the terms of trade of each candidate
country or, as an alternative, a commod-ities prices index deflated by the US pro-ducer price index.
The estimations are summarised in the
table on page 56. It should first be noted thatthere is generally a perceptible increase in thequality of the estimated parameters and, byextension, the quality of the related results ifBulgaria and Romania – two countries com-monly held to be less far advanced in thetransition process than the other accessioncandidates – are left out of the estimation.Evidently, the differing stages reached in thetransition process do indeed have an influ-ence on the type of reaction to changes inthe respective determinants of real trendcurrency appreciation. However, the mainpoint confirmed by the calculations is that anincrease in (relative) labour productivity inone of the candidate countries leads to a sig-
6See C Fischer, (2002), Real currency appreciation in
accession countries: Balassa-Samuelson and investment
demand, Deutsche Bundesbank, Economic Research
Centre, Discussion paper, No 19/02.Determinants
of real
exchange ratesResults

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
56nificant real currency appreciation. This ap-
plies, in particular, to the development oflabour productivity in industry and also inagriculture. This by itself, is consistent withthe Balassa-Samuelson hypothesis if it can beassumed that domestic prices of industrialand agricultural products are set by worldmarket prices. For the agricultural sector,however, the validity of such an assumption isby no means self-evident since the pricesof agricultural products are often state-regulated.
In contrast to the broad expectations of the
standard Balassa-Samuelson model, however,there is also a positive relationship betweenthe (relative) labour productivity in the ser-vices sector and the real external value of thenational currency concerned. The positive ef-fects of consumption and/or general govern-
ment demand, relative to GDP , on the real ex-ternal value of the national currency analysedare not consistent with the standard Balassa-Samuelson hypothesis either. The cited de-mand aggregates, in particular, evidentlyhave significant effects on the internationalprice relationships.
In the standard Balassa-Samuelson model, an
increase in productivity in the services sector –which, for the sake of simplicity, is generallyequated in the literature with the non-trade-ables sector – should reduce the prices ofthese goods and thus also lower the consumerprice index, which would correspond to a realcurrency depreciation. The standard Balassa-Samuelson model also maintains that a vari-ation in consumer demand should not pro-duce any price effects at all but, instead, onlyquantity effects. That is because the model im-plies a completely price-elastic supply functionfor non-tradeables and the prices of trade-ables are set through the world market.
It is therefore necessary to expand and gener-
alise the standard Balassa-Samuelson ap-proach to make it more consistent with theempirical findings.
7One possible explanationDeterminants of the real effective
exchange rates in central andeast European accession countries
*
Fixed effects estimation
Annual data panel 1994-99
Explanatory variable Estimation A Estimation BLabour productivity in
agriculture 0.46 (2.87) 0.44 (3.64)
Labour productivity in
industry 0.76 (3.34) 0.60 (2.65)
Consumption/GDP 0.89 (4.13) –Government
consumption/GDP – 0.45 (3.51)
Real rate of interest
(USA, Germany) – 0.21 (4.18) – 0.23 (4.20)
*Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania,
Poland, Slovak Republic and Slovenia. A positive coeffi-cient implies a real currency appreciation; t values inbrackets, computed using heteroskedasticity and auto-correlation-robust standard errors in accordance withM Arellano (1987), Computing robust standard errors
for within-group estimators, Oxford Bulletin of Eco-
nomics and Statistics 49, p 431-434.
Deutsche Bundesbank
7In particular, there are two assumptions of the standard
Balassa-Samuelson model to be changed. First, if the
prices of non-tradeables rise, the quantity supplied must
be expanded only by a finite amount. This can be
achieved by assuming that, instead of the homogeneous
type of labour assumed in the standard Balassa-
Samuelson approaches, a distinction is made between
two types of labour, ie skilled and unskilled labour.
Second, it has to be assumed that capital goods do not
consist exclusively of tradeables but also, at least for the
lesser part, of non-tradeables. Following the literature,
this might include, for example, infrastructure and ser-
vices used in the installation of capital. For further details
and a description of the expanded model, see C Fischer,
op cit.Contradictions
of the standard
Balassa-
Samuelson
modelExpanded
explanatory
approach

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
57for the, in some cases, significantly positive
effect which labour productivity in the ser-vices sector has on the real external valuemight be that every exogenously induced risein productivity – in whatever sector, be it in-dustry, agriculture or services – results in add-itional investment. This pushes up the pricesof capital goods, which in many cases aretraded under what tend to be oligopolisticmarket conditions, and leads to a real cur-rency appreciation. At the same time, the im-proved profitability and sales conditions resultin increased capital flows from abroad,through which at least some of this invest-ment is financed. This applies to all sectors, iethe services sector as well. Therefore, the ten-dency to real depreciation – which, in theBalassa-Samuelson approach, necessarily fol-lows from an increase in productivity in theservices sector – is accompanied by an oppos-ing tendency to real currency appreciation.
Of course, an investment demand effect of
this kind can likewise occur if there is an in-crease in productivity in the tradeables sector.In such a case, the overall impact on the realexchange rate would, in fact, be especiallypronounced as both effects (investmentdemand effect and classical Balassa-Samuel-son effect) would reinforce each other. Theunderlying mechanisms, however, are morecomplex than is assumed in standard Balassa-Samuelson models. The relationships be-tween productivity gains in the industrial sec-tor and the real appreciation of the currenciesof developing and transition countries, whichhave been noted in many studies, can there-fore be equated only to a limited extent withthe Balassa-Samuelson effect. Instead, theyare also due in some cases to other transmis-
sion mechanisms, such as the described in-vestment demand effect: growth, no matterin what sector, requires investment. This by it-self results in upward trends in prices if thesupply of capital goods for the country inquestion is not perfectly elastic, which is quitepossible.
The obvious thing to do, therefore, is to test
these relationships using total labour product-ivities as well rather than the sectoral prod-uctivity developments used in the above-mentioned estimations. This additionally hasthe advantage that, unlike the sectoral labourproductivities and like the other variables,these data are also available on a quarterlybasis. As a result, it is possible to switch fromthe annual figures used so far to a quarterlydata panel, which is then comparatively size-able. This makes it possible to apply more so-phisticated estimation methods which, giventhe properties of the data, are more expedi-ent. Specifically, these include SUR estima-tors, panel cointegration methods and the“pooled mean group” estimation method.
8
In qualitative terms, the results calculatedusing these more sophisticated methods con-firm those produced with the aid of the sim-ple estimations based on the annual datapanel. This is also the case for the previouslyunmentioned connection between the realexchange rates of the accession countriesand the real rate of interest in the “world”
8See M H Pesaran, Y Shin and R P Smith (1999), Pooled
mean group estimation of dynamic heterogeneous
panels, Journal of the American Statistical Association
94, p 621-634.Quarterly data
panel
Results
qualitatively
robust but
quantitatively
widely
dispersed

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
58market. As expected, a rise in the real global
interest rate level, according to the performedestimations, results in a real currency depreci-ation in the candidate countries. In quantita-tive terms, the estimation results differ con-siderably, however, both with regard to therate of real interest and the other explanatoryvariables used, depending on the specifica-tion and the estimation procedure. For ex-ample, the estimate for the effect of a 1% in-crease in total labour productivity is a real cur-rency appreciation in the order of between0.9% and 1.7%. The estimated elasticities ofchanges in the general government share ofconsumption of GDP are also relatively widelydispersed: according to the present estima-tions, they fluctuate between 0.24 and 0.56.If the real rate of interest in the “world” mar-ket goes up 1 percentage point, a real depre-ciation of between 0.03% and 0.23% is ob-
tained, depending on the estimate. In otherwords, although each of these coefficients issignificantly different from zero and althoughthe trend impact of the variables appears tobe unambiguous according to the performedcalculations, this shows that quantitativestatements are fraught with major uncer-tainty. Strictly speaking, it is possible, at most,to state orders of magnitude which may dif-fer widely from each other depending on thespecific circumstances and the country ana-lysed.
The influence of the terms of trade on the
real exchange rate generally proves to be in-significant. Much the same can be said forthe commodities price index.
9At first glance,
this may seem to be at variance with the gen-eral assumption that world market commod-ity prices have quite a large influence on thedomestic inflation of the candidate countries.Even theoretically, however, a surge in infla-tion does not have an impact on the real ex-change rate if the inflation rate of the majortrading partners is similarly affected bychanges in commodities prices.
Further estimations were performed to inves-
tigate the extent to which the transition pro-cess itself caused the real currency appreci-ation. To do this, proxy variables for those as-Determinants of the real effective
exchange rates in central andeast European accession countries
*
SUR fixed effects estimation
Quarterly data panel 1994 Q1 – 2000 Q4
Explanatory variable Estimation A Estimation BTotal labour
productivity 1.68 (17.49) 1.58 (15.81)
Consumption/GDP 0.55 (3.98) –Government
consumption/GDP – 0.24 (3.39)
Real rate of interest
(USA, Germany) – 0.03 (2.77) – 0.04 (3.52)
*Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania,
Poland and Slovak Republic. A positive coefficient im-plies a real currency appreciation; t values in brackets.
Deutsche Bundesbank
9When using the “pooled mean group” estimation pro-
cedure, however, a rise in the deflated commodities price
index leads to a small, but significant real appreciation in
the case of the candidate countries. This initially perhaps
surprising result may be explained by the fact that rising
commodity prices cause considerable upward price pres-
sure precisely in countries where the basket of goods, dir-
ectly or indirectly, consists of a relatively high percentage
of commodities.Terms-of-trade
effects...
...and other
influences

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
59pects of institutional transformation which
may be assumed to have an effect on the realexchange rate were included in the equationas additional explanatory variables. However,no significant influence could be ascertainedfor proxy variables of price and trade liberal-isation. By contrast, the impact of a proxyvariable for progress in privatisation proved tobe significant in some cases. Since privatisa-tion creates opportunities for investment, areal currency appreciation may result. Evi-dence of such a connection can be foundonly for the first few years of the transitionprocess, however.
Summary and conclusions
The results of the analysis thus essentially
confirm the widely held view, delineated atthe beginning of this article, that the ob-served real currency appreciation in the cen-tral and east European accession countries islargely due to those countries having higherproductivity gains than their trading part-ners. However, in addition to the Balassa-Samuelson effect, which is often cited as anexplanation in this context, other transmis-sion channels, such as investment demand,also appear to be a factor. At all events, some
of the findings cannot be reconciled with thesimple explanatory paradigm of the standardBalassa-Samuelson model.
It goes without saying that the empirical find-
ings cannot simply be extrapolated into thefuture. Nevertheless, given the continuingdisparities in development between the ac-cession countries and the more advancedeconomies of western Europe, it may be ex-pected that the catching-up process will con-tinue to be accompanied by a real appreci-ation of the accession countries’ currencies.These young, up-and-coming market econ-omies not having the possibility of making ex-change rate adjustments and of determiningtheir monetary policy stance autonomouslywould entail significant risks for their inter-national competitiveness and the continu-ation of the real catching-up process
10In the
efforts to gain early Eurosystem membership,it is imperative not to lose sight of these fac-tors and the associated risks.
10A detailed discussion of the conditions for accession
to the EU and EMU and the associated monetary policy
challenges may be found in Deutsche Bundesbank, Mon-
etary aspects of the enlargement of the EU, Monthly
Report, October 2001, p 15-30.Supply and
demand-side
impact of
productivity
effectsReal and
nominal
convergence

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
60

Statistical
SectionDeutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
1*

ContentsI Key economic data for European
monetary union
1 Monetary developments and interest
rates 6*
2 Foreign trade and payments 6*3 General economic indicators 7*
II Overall monetary survey in the
European monetary union
1 The money stock and its counterparts 8*
2 Consolidated balance sheet of mon-
etary financial institutions (MFIs) 10*
3 Banking system’s liquidity position 14*
III Consolidated financial statement
of the Eurosystem
1 Assets 16*
2 Liabilities 18*
IV Banks
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary
financial institutions (excluding theBundesbank) in Germany 20*
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks
(MFIs) in Germany, by category ofbanks 24*
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-à-vis residents 26*
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents 28*Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
2*

5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) 30*
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic enterprises and residentindividuals, housing loans, sectors ofeconomic activity 32*
7 Deposits of domestic
non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs)in Germany 34*
8 Deposits of domestic individuals and
non-commercial organisations atbanks (MFIs) in Germany 36*
9 Deposits of domestic public author-
ities at banks (MFIs) in Germany, bycreditor group 36*
10 Savings deposits and bank savings
bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germanysold to non-banks (non-MFIs) 38*
11 Debt securities and money market
paper outstanding of banks (MFIs)in Germany 38*
12 Building and loan associations (MFIs)
in Germany 39*
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign
branches and foreign subsidiaries ofGerman banks (MFIs) 40*
V Minimum reserves
1 Reserve ratios 42*
2 Reserve maintenance in Germany up
to the end of 1998 42*
3 Reserve maintenance in the Euro-
pean monetary union 42*VI Interest rates
1 ECB interest rates 43*
2 Discount and lombard rates of the
Bundesbank 43*
3 Base rates 43*4 Eurosystem monetary policy opera-
tions allotted through tenders 43*
5 Money market rates, by month 44*6 Euro area retail bank interest rates 44*7 Lending and deposit rates of banks
(MFIs) in Germany 45*
8 Selected central bank rates abroad 47*9 Money market rates abroad 47*
VII Capital market
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities
and shares in Germany 48*
2 Sales of debt securities issued by
borrowers domiciled in Germany 49*
3 Outstanding amount of debt secur-
ities issued by borrowers domiciledin Germany 50*
4 Circulation of shares issued by resi-
dents of Germany 50*
5 Yields and indices on German
securities 51*
6 Sales and purchases of investment
fund certificates in Germany 51*Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
3*

VIII Public finance in Germany
1 Finances of the public sector 52*
2 Finances of the Federal
Government, Länder Governmentsand local authorities 52*
3 Finances of the Government
in the national accounts 53*
4 Tax revenue of the central,
regional and local authorities 53*
5 Tax revenue, by type 54*6 Individual taxes of the Federal
Government, Länder Governmentsand local authorities 54*
7 Indebtedness of the public sector 55*8 Changes in public sector
indebtedness 57*
9 Loans raised by public authorities
against borrowers’ notes 57*
10 Indebtedness of the Federal
Government 58*
11 Federal Government borrowing
in the market 58*
12 Receipts, expenditure and assets of
the wage and salary earners’pension insurance funds 59*
13 Receipts and expenditure of the
Federal Labour Office 59*
IX Economic conditions
1 Origin and expenditure of
domestic product, distribution ofnational income 60*
2 Output in the producing sector 61*3 Orders received by the
manufacturing sector 62*
4 Orders received by construction 63*5 Retail trade turnover 63*6 Labour market 64*
7 Prices 65*8 Households’ income 66*9 Pay rates and actual earnings 66*
X Foreign trade and payments
1 Major items of the balance of pay-
ments of the European monetaryunion 67*
2 Major items of the balance of pay-
ments of the Federal Republic ofGermany 68*
3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the
Federal Republic of Germany, bygroup of countries and country 69*
4 Services and factor income of the
Federal Republic of Germany 70*
5 Current transfers of the Federal
Republic of Germany 70*
6 Capital transfers 70*7 Financial account of the Federal
Republic of Germany 71*
8 External position of the Bundesbank 72*9 External position of the Bundesbank
in the European monetary union 72*
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises
in Germany (other than banks)vis-à-vis non-residents 73*
11 Deutsche Mark and euro exchange
rates of selected currencies 74*
12 Exchange rates for the national
currencies of the EMU countries,the Deutsche Mark value of theECU and euro conversion rates 74*
13 Effective exchange rates of the euro
and selected foreign currencies 75*Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
4*

Abbreviations and symbols
eestimated
pprovisional
pepartly estimated
rrevised
...Data available at a later date
.Data unknown, not to be published or
not meaningful
0Less than 0.5 but more than nil
–nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to round-
ing.Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
5*

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
 I. Key economic data for European monetary union
 
1. Monetary developments and interest rates
 
 
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions  1  2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
 M 3  3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3−month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
moving average MFI lending, and capital 3−month ment bonds
M1 M2 (centred) total individuals formation  4 EONIA  5, 7 EURIBOR  6, 7 outstanding  8 
Period Change from previous year,in % % p. a. as a monthly average
2001          Feb. 2.3 3.0 3.8 3.8 5.4 9.7 4.4 4.99 4.76 5.0
         Mar. 1.7 3.1 3.7 3.9 5.3 9.3 4.7 4.78 4.71 4.9
         Apr. 1.7 3.4 4.0 4.0 5.4 9.1 3.9 5.06 4.68 5.1
         May 3.0 3.6 4.4 4.6 5.3 8.5 3.5 4.65 4.64 5.3         June 4.0 4.3 5.5 5.2 5.7 8.4 3.4 4.54 4.45 5.2
         July 3.3 4.4 5.6 5.6 5.8 8.2 2.7 4.51 4.47 5.2
         Aug. 3.6 4.3 5.9 6.1 5.5 7.7 2.3 4.49 4.35 5.0         Sep. 5.0 5.1 6.7 6.7 5.2 7.1 2.5 3.99 3.98 5.0
         Oct. 5.2 5.5 7.4 7.3 5.1 6.9 2.6 3.97 3.60 4.8
         Nov. 5.9 5.9 7.8 7.7 5.4 7.0 3.6 3.51 3.39 4.6         Dec. 5.6 6.5 8.1 7.9 5.2 6.7 4.7 3.34 3.34 4.9
2002          Jan. 6.7 6.8 7.8 7.7 5.2 6.2 4.8 3.29 3.34 5.0
         Feb. 6.2 6.3 7.4 7.4 5.1 6.0 4.8 3.28 3.36 5.1         Mar. 5.8 6.2 7.2 7.3 4.9 5.5 4.7 3.26 3.39 5.3
         Apr. 6.6 6.3 7.2 7.3 4.5 5.1 4.7 3.32 3.41 5.3
         May 6.8 6.8 7.6 7.3 4.5 5.4 5.3 3.31 3.47 5.3         June 6.9 6.5 7.1 7.3 4.5 5.4 4.5 3.35 3.46 5.2
         July 7.6 6.5 7.1 7.1 4.1 5.0 5.1 3.30 3.41 5.0
         Aug. 7.8 6.5 7.0 ... 4.2 5.2 5.4 3.29 3.35 4.7         Sep. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3.32 3.31 4.5
1 Source: ECB. — 2 Saisonally adjusted. — 3 Excluding holdings of money Average. — 6 Euro InterBank Offered Rate. — 7 See also footnotes to table
market fund shares
/units by non-residents of the euro area. — 4 Longer- VI.5., p. 44*. — 8 GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds; from
term liabilities to euro area non-MFIs. — 5Euro OverNight Index 2001 Euro12. 
 
 
2. Foreign trade and payments  * 
  
 
Selected items of the EMU balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1 
Current account Capital account Effective exchange rate  3 
of which: Direct Securities Credit Monetary
Balance Trade balance Balance investment transactions reserves Dollar rate nominal real  4 transactions  2 
Period
 5 
 million Euro/US-$ 1st q 1999=100
2001          Feb. + 1,153 + 3,348 + 7,718 + 2,447 − 3,010 + 3,794 + 4,486 0.9217 88.3 89.4
         Mar. − 611 + 5,970 + 20,592 − 33,202 + 9,912 + 41,191 + 2,690 0.9095 88.4 89.8
         Apr. − 6,693 + 3,123 + 11,657 + 797 − 17,491 + 21,384 + 6,967 0.8920 87.6 89.1
         May − 2,170 + 4,364 − 9,602 − 41,491 + 18,668 + 16,802 − 3,581 0.8742 85.9 87.6         June − 1,006 + 8,408 − 14,047 − 11,005 + 25,218 − 27,411 − 849 0.8532 84.7 86.3
         July − 153 + 10,909 − 20,253 − 1,544 − 4,207 − 14,542 + 39 0.8607 85.4 87.1
         Aug. + 6,002 + 7,804 − 11,297 − 6,994 − 1,177 − 7,195 + 4,068 0.9005 87.7 89.3         Sep. + 1,564 + 6,119 − 23,611 − 13,909 + 42,976 − 51,064 − 1,615 0.9111 88.0 89.7
         Oct. + 4,582 + 11,895 − 23,043 + 3,759 − 3,414 − 20,747 − 2,642 0.9059 88.0 90.0
         Nov. + 3,315 + 9,886 − 8,422 + 10,788 + 13,576 − 32,834 + 47 0.8883 86.8 88.8         Dec. + 2,807 + 11,195 − 4,289 − 3,032 − 17,840 + 10,726 + 5,856 0.8924 87.7 89.9
2002          Jan. + 378 + 3,834 − 49,997 − 1,557 − 39,377 − 3,747 − 5,317 0.8833 87.6 90.3
         Feb. + 3,664 + 9,973 + 6,383 − 8,432 − 12,868 + 25,232 + 2,451 0.8700 86.8 89.3         Mar. + 7,075 + 13,582 + 15,316 − 6,831 − 2,269 + 24,625 − 209 0.8758 86.8 89.6
         Apr. − 5,797 + 8,162 − 1,146 + 7,743 + 13,575 − 30,791 + 8,327 0.8858 87.2 90.1
         May + 95 + 9,186 + 4,887 + 5,103 + 30,060 − 32,383 + 2,107 0.9170 88.6 91.5         June + 3,891 + 12,059 − 36,887 − 15,541 + 13,196 − 31,038 − 3,504 0.9554 90.6 93.5
         July + 2,587 + 14,178 − 11,188 − 3,617 + 7,230 − 12,273 − 2,528 0.9922 91.7 94.6
         Aug. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0.9778 91.1 93.9         Sep. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0.9808 91.2 .
 
*  Source: ECB. — 1  See also tables X.12 and 13, p. 74−75. — 2  Including on consumer prices. 
financial derivatives. — 3  Vis-a-vis a narrow group of countries. — 4  Based
6* I. Key economic data for European monetary union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
I.  Key economic data for European monetary union 
 
3. General economic indicators
 
 
                   
Period Belgium Germany Finland France Greece Ireland Italy Luxembourg Austria Portugal Spain EMU 7 Netherlands
Real gross domestic product 1
1999 3.0 2.0 4.1 3.2 3.6 10.8 1.6 6.0 4.0 2.7 3.5 4.1 2.8
2000 4.0 2.9 6.1 3.8 4.2 11.5 2.9 8.9 3.3 3.5 3.5 4.1 3.5
2001 1.0 0.6 0.7 1.8 4.1 5.9 1.8 1.0 1.3 0.7 1.7 2.8 1.4
2001          1st qtr 1.9 1.4 3.5 2.9 5.1 12.3 2.7 1.7 2.8 2.0 3.6 2.4
         2nd qtr 1.4 0.6 0.4 2.0 4.0 9.0 2.3 1.7 0.9 2.8 2.0 1.6         3rd qtr 0.7 0.4 0.1 2.0 3.5 2.8 1.8 1.1 0.3 1.0 2.5 1.3         4th qtr 0.0 −0.1 −1.1 0.5 3.7 0.1 0.3 0.6 0.1 1.0 2.6 0.5
2002          1st qtr −0.8 −1.2 −1.9 0.3 4.3 2.9 −0.6 −0.1 0.3 1.4 1.9 −0.3
         2nd qtr ... 0.5 2.5 0.9 4.0 ... 0.2 0.0 0.4 ... 2.2 0.6
Industrial production 1, 2
1999 0.9 1.5 5.5 2.0 3.9 14.8 −0.1 11.5 1.3 6.0 3.0 2.6 1.9
2000 5.3 6.2 11.2 3.5 0.5 15.4 4.8 4.3 4.0 8.9 0.5 4.0 5.52001 −1.0 0.5 −1.0 0.8 1.4 10.2 −1.2 1.8 1.4 0.1 2.4 −1.1 0.3
2001          1st qtr 3.5 5.9 7.1 2.0 2.6 31.7 2.9 3.3 3.5 5.8 2.3 −0.9 4.4
         2nd qtr −1.0 1.4 −2.2 1.6 0.5 12.4 −0.8 0.2 2.5 −0.9 5.3 −1.3 1.0
         3rd qtr −0.9 −1.1 −3.3 2.3 2.5 3.6 −1.3 2.5 1.2 −0.1 2.0 −0.4 −0.2
         4th qtr −5.2 −3.7 −4.7 −2.4 0.1 −2.6 −5.6 1.3 −1.5 −3.6 0.1 −2.0 −3.7
2002          1st qtr −0.8 −4.0 ... −2.1 −1.1 4.9 −3.4 −2.7 −3.0 −1.7 1.5 −3.9 −2.5
         2nd qtr 1.9 6 p −2.3 ... −0.3 2.4 11.6 −2.3 ... −2.9 3.3 0.0 1.0 −0.8
Capacity utilisation 3
1999 80.9 84.0 86.1 85.3 75.7 75.9 76.0 84.9 84.0 81.9 80.8 79.7 82.2
2000 84.0 85.9 86.8 87.5 78.1 78.6 78.8 87.8 84.7 84.5 81.2 80.6 84.2
2001 82.3 85.1 85.7 87.4 77.6 78.4 78.9 88.7 84.6 83.1 81.7 79.6 83.6
2001          2nd qtr 82.7 85.7 86.0 86.9 79.3 80.4 79.4 88.9 84.8 84.0 82.0 79.7 84.0
         3rd qtr 81.4 84.3 85.1 87.7 76.1 78.0 78.7 88.9 84.6 82.7 82.4 80.1 83.4         4th qtr 80.2 83.3 84.5 86.3 76.8 75.2 77.9 87.8 83.8 81.4 79.7 78.3 82.2
2002          1st qtr 79.2 82.4 82.0 85.5 75.4 77.5 76.9 86.9 83.5 80.9 77.9 76.3 81.1
         2nd qtr 79.6 81.5 82.7 85.8 76.7 76.3 77.3 84.3 82.9 80.6 79.4 77.0 81.2         3rd qtr 80.1 82.0 83.0 85.3 79.0 72.8 76.9 83.8 82.5 80.5 79.1 76.3 81.0
Unemployment rate 4
1999 8.6 8.4 10.2 10.7 11.9 5.6 11.3 2.4 3.2 3.9 4.5 12.8 9.4
2000 6.9 7.8 9.8 9.3 11.1 4.2 10.4 2.3 2.8 3.7 4.1 11.3 8.5
2001 6.6 7.7 9.1 8.6 10.5 3.8 9.4 2.0 2.4 3.6 4.1 10.6 8.0
2002          Mar. 6.8 8.0 9.2 8.8 4.4 9.0 2.2 2.6 4.0 4.3 11.2 8.2
         Apr. 6.8 8.0 9.2 8.8 4.4 9.0 2.2 2.6 4.0 4.4 11.2 8.2
         May 6.8 8.2 9.2 8.8 4.4 9.0 2.3 2.8 4.1 4.4 11.2 8.2         June 6.9 8.3 9.3 8.9 4.4 9.0 2.3 2.8 4.1 4.4 11.2 8.3
         July 6.9 8.2 9.3 8.9 4.5 9.0 2.4 2.9 4.1 4.5 11.3 8.3
         Aug. 6.9 8.3 9.4 8.9 4.5 ... 2.5 2.9 4.2 4.6 11.3 8.3         Sep. 6.8 8.3 ... ... 4.5 ... ... ... 4.2 ... 11.4 ...
Harmonised index of consumer prices 1
1999 1.1 0.6 1.3 0.6 2.1 2.5 1.7 1.0 2.0 0.5 2.2 2.2 1.1
2000 2.7 2.1 3.0 1.8 2.9 5.3 2.6 3.8 2.3 2.0 2.8 3.5 2.3
2001 2.4 2.4 2.7 1.8 3.7 4.0 2.3 2.4 5.1 2.3 4.4 2.8 2.5
2002          Mar. 2.5 1.9 2.6 2.2 4.4 5.1 2.5 1.7 4.3 1.7 3.3 3.2 2.5
         Apr. 1.7 1.6 2.6 2.1 4.1 5.0 2.5 1.9 4.2 1.7 3.5 3.7 2.4
         May 1.4 1.0 1.8 1.5 3.8 5.0 2.4 1.3 3.8 1.7 3.4 3.7 2.0         June 0.8 0.7 1.5 1.5 3.6 4.5 2.2 1.3 3.9 1.5 3.5 3.4 1.8
         July 1.1 1.0 2.0 1.6 3.6 4.2 2.4 1.9 3.8 1.5 3.6 3.5 1.9
         Aug. 1.3 1.0 1.8 1.8 3.8 4.5 2.6 2.0 3.8 2.1 3.9 3.7 2.1         Sep. 1.2 1.0 1.4 1.8 3.8 4.5 2.8 2.2 3.7 1.6 3.8 3.5 2.1
General government financial balance 5
1999 −0.5 −1.5 1.9 −1.6 −1.9 2.2 −1.8 3.6 0.7 −2.3 −2.4 −1.1 −1.3
2000 0.1 1.1 7.0 −1.3 −0.8 4.4 −0.5 5.6 2.2 −1.5 −2.9 −0.6 0.2
2001 0.4 −2.8 4.9 −1.4 ... 1.5 −2.2 6.1 0.1 0.2 −4.1 −0.1 −1.4
General government debt 5
1999 114.9 61.2 46.8 58.5 104.3 49.7 114.5 6.0 63.1 64.9 54.4 63.1 71.9
2000 109.2 60.2 44.0 57.3 104.7 39.1 110.5 5.6 55.8 63.6 53.3 60.5 69.4
2001 107.6 59.5 43.4 57.3 ... 36.4 109.8 5.6 52.8 63.2 55.5 57.1 69.2
Sources: National data, European Commission, Eurostat, European persons in civilian employment; seasonally adjusted. —5  As a percen-
Central Bank. Latest data are partly based on press reports and are tage of GDP; Maastricht Treaty definition, ESA95; including proceeds from
provisional. —1  Annual percentage changes; GDP of Greece and Portugal is sales of UMTS licenses in 2000 and 2001. —6  Adjusted in advance by the
calculated from seasonally adjusted data. —2  Manufacturing, mining, gas Federal Statistical Office by way of estimates to the results of the Quarterly
and electricity; adjusted for working-day variations (except France and Production Survey for the second quarter (industry in Germany: + 1.0 %).Spain). —3  Manufacturing, in %; seasonally adjusted; data are collected Output possibly understated. —7  Including Greece (Harmonised in-
in January, April, July and October. —4  Standardised, as a percentage of dex of consumer prices only from 2001). 
7*I.  Key economic data for European monetary union 

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
 
1. The money stock and its counterparts*)
  
  
 
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II. Net claims on III. Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises Publicand individuals authorities Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturitieson non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over 2 Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  
3 Securities Securities reserves  4 
 European monetary union (  5  billion) 1 X
 
2001          May 31.0 15.8 6.1 15.2 20.8 −13.0 − 1.2 11.8 2.0 0.1 −1.4 −5.1 8.4
         June 39.0 28.4 −31.7 10.7 13.3 32.7 27.5 − 5.3 30.0 0.5 −1.1 11.5 19.1
         July 14.1 19.8 4.6 −5.6 −3.2 16.7 −41.3 −58.0 −5.1 −4.7 −1.4 7.5 −6.5
         Aug. −20.0 −11.9 3.2 −8.0 −4.3 27.1 57.2 30.1 2.7 −2.1 −1.2 −1.2 7.3
         Sep. 42.2 45.5 −2.0 −3.3 −4.3 31.2 49.1 18.0 26.4 0.8 −0.9 17.5 9.0
         Oct. 24.2 36.4 8.4 −12.3 −9.6 25.6 44.0 18.4 18.6 −0.3 −1.7 12.7 7.9
         Nov. 72.8 49.0 −1.1 23.8 7.9 27.1 65.7 38.5 18.9 −1.6 −1.1 18.7 2.9
         Dec. 42.0 48.5 24.4 −6.6 −10.2 − 8.9 −26.6 −17.8 29.7 7.3 0.1 7.6 14.7
2002          Jan. 36.1 17.4 4.7 18.7 21.9 −13.6 0.2 13.8 24.4 3.6 −3.6 11.0 13.4
         Feb. 29.1 25.1 8.6 4.0 1.3 −10.4 0.4 10.7 9.3 1.6 −1.0 9.3 −0.5
         Mar. 73.4 50.9 −8.1 22.5 16.9 − 5.7 19.9 25.6 26.2 3.7 −1.3 18.7 5.1
         Apr. 25.8 44.5 2.7 −18.6 1.3 − 1.7 18.9 20.6 −6.2 −0.5 −1.9 1.2 −4.9
         May 39.5 32.6 4.2 6.9 9.7 39.1 74.1 35.0 26.8 3.0 −1.2 21.1 4.0
         June 33.3 33.8 −5.5 −0.5 −0.8 36.9 −29.6 −66.4 0.3 3.3 −0.2 8.5 −11.3
         July −20.1 −12.5 −9.8 −7.5 −5.5 − 1.9 − 2.8 − 0.9 18.0 1.9 −0.0 6.2 9.8
         Aug. − 7.9 4.4 4.4 −12.3 −1.9 16.1 − 7.5 −23.7 13.6 3.2 0.2 1.5 8.7
 German contribution (  5  billion) 2 X 
2001          May 7.5 5.7 0.2 1.8 3.3 − 9.6 −7.0 2.7 0.5 3.1 −1.1 −4.4 2.8
         June −26.5 −22.6 −27.8 −3.9 2.2 22.4 −2.4 −24.9 12.6 −0.5 −0.9 3.4 10.6
         July 4.5 −7.0 −1.4 11.5 10.8 0.6 −20.2 −20.8 −4.0 −2.0 −1.3 −0.9 0.1
         Aug. − 5.2 −1.3 −3.1 −3.9 −3.4 7.7 33.1 25.4 5.8 −0.2 −1.3 2.7 4.6
         Sep. − 6.2 7.9 −4.6 −14.0 −10.9 25.4 23.8 −1.6 −0.0 0.6 −0.8 2.5 −2.3
         Oct. − 0.2 4.6 3.3 −4.8 −6.0 9.6 7.6 −2.0 2.4 −0.8 −1.8 1.6 3.4
         Nov. 15.7 6.2 −0.4 9.5 −0.9 30.5 15.3 −15.2 7.6 −1.6 −1.0 8.9 1.3
         Dec. 18.9 22.1 10.8 −3.1 4.2 19.1 −18.0 −37.1 −0.8 1.4 0.1 −4.7 2.5
2002          Jan. − 7.3 −8.7 1.5 1.3 1.0 −21.5 −5.2 16.3 2.8 1.9 −3.6 2.7 1.9
         Feb. 1.8 0.1 −3.2 1.7 4.2 1.8 −0.3 −2.1 5.0 1.2 −1.0 3.2 1.6
         Mar. − 1.0 −2.4 −9.5 1.4 3.0 7.6 10.6 3.0 13.3 3.5 −1.1 10.1 0.9
         Apr. 11.0 9.9 5.8 1.1 5.2 −20.2 −3.0 17.2 −7.7 −1.3 −1.9 −2.1 −2.4
         May 6.6 3.7 −0.2 2.9 8.4 10.7 24.6 13.9 0.4 −0.4 −1.1 2.2 −0.4
         June −19.8 −12.6 −11.1 −7.2 −2.2 25.7 0.1 −25.6 −0.5 −0.7 −0.2 2.3 −1.9
         July 7.2 −7.4 −2.8 14.6 6.1 −16.5 −5.7 10.8 11.2 0.5 0.1 8.2 2.4
         Aug. − 1.7 5.3 6.4 −7.0 2.2 14.6 9.9 −4.7 9.9 0.8 0.1 5.2 3.7
 German contribution (DM billion) 2 X 
2001          May 14.6 11.2 0.4 3.5 6.4 −18.8 −13.6 5.2 0.9 6.1 −2.2 −8.6 5.6
         June −51.8 −44.2 −54.3 −7.6 4.2 43.9 −4.8 −48.6 24.7 −0.9 −1.8 6.6 20.8
         July 8.8 −13.7 −2.7 22.5 21.1 1.2 −39.5 −40.7 −7.8 −3.9 −2.4 −1.7 0.2
         Aug. −10.2 −2.5 −6.0 −7.7 −6.7 15.0 64.7 49.7 11.3 −0.4 −2.5 5.2 8.9
         Sep. −12.0 15.4 −8.9 −27.4 −21.4 49.6 46.5 −3.1 −0.1 1.1 −1.5 4.8 −4.5
         Oct. − 0.4 9.0 6.4 −9.4 −11.7 18.8 14.9 −3.8 4.7 −1.5 −3.6 3.1 6.7
         Nov. 30.7 12.2 −0.7 18.6 −1.7 59.7 29.9 −29.8 14.9 −3.1 −1.9 17.3 2.6
         Dec. 37.0 43.2 21.2 −6.1 8.2 37.3 −35.2 −72.5 −1.5 2.7 0.1 −9.2 4.8
2002          Jan. −14.4 −16.9 2.9 2.6 2.0 −42.0 −10.1 31.9 5.6 3.7 −7.1 5.3 3.7
         Feb. 3.5 0.2 −6.3 3.3 8.3 3.5 −0.6 −4.1 9.8 2.4 −2.0 6.3 3.1
         Mar. − 2.0 −4.7 −18.6 2.7 5.9 14.9 20.8 5.9 26.1 6.8 −2.2 19.8 1.7
         Apr. 21.4 19.3 11.4 2.2 10.3 −39.5 −5.8 33.7 −15.0 −2.5 −3.8 −4.1 −4.6
         May 13.0 7.2 −0.4 5.8 16.3 21.0 48.1 27.1 0.7 −0.7 −2.2 4.3 −0.7
         June −38.7 −24.7 −21.6 −14.0 −4.3 50.2 0.1 −50.1 −1.0 −1.4 −0.4 4.5 −3.7
         July 14.0 −14.5 −5.5 28.5 11.9 −32.3 −11.2 21.1 21.9 1.1 0.1 16.0 4.7
         Aug. − 3.4 10.3 12.5 −13.7 4.3 28.6 19.4 −9.2 19.3 1.6 0.3 10.2 7.3
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of liabilities of central governments. —6The German contributions to the
monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (table II.2); statistical breaks have been Eurosystem ’s monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as
eliminated from the flow figures. —1Source: ECB. —2Owing to changes in national monetary aggregates, and are therefore not comparable to the
the definitions of the items and differences in the range of reporting erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2 or M3. —7In Germany, bank debt
institutions, the figures are not comparable with those published for securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market
Germany up to end of 1998. —3Excluding MFIs portfolios; for the German paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were published in this
contribution: excluding German MFIs portfolios of securities issued by MFIs table together with money market fund certificates. —8From 2002 euro
in the euro area. —4After deduction of inter-MFI participations. —5For currency in circulation plus outstanding national banknotes and coins.
the European monetary union: including the counterparts of monetary Excluding euro-area MFIs ’cash in hand denominated in euro or in
8*II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
 
   
 
V. Other factors VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  6,7,11  
Money Stock M2 Money
of which market  paper
Intra- Money Stock M1 and debt
Eurosystem Deposits securitiesliability/ with an Deposits Money with
IV. De- claim agreed at agreed market maturities
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo- fund of up to    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac- 2 years    
central  gov- certificates
ernments Total  5 issue  12 Total Total Total lation  8 deposits  9 2 years  9 tions (net)  3,11 (net)  3,7,11   Period months  9,10 
European Monetary union (  5  billion) 1 X
 
− 5.6 − 7.2 − 28.9 13.2 16.9 −3.3 20.1 − 3.2 − 0.5 12.4 9.8 − 6.5 2001         May
18.3 −19.5 − 42.9 47.4 39.7 0.1 39.6 − 2.1 9.8 −12.3 − 1.5 9.2          June
− 9.6 47.0 −− 1.5 − 7.9 − 21.4 −5.0 − 16.4 9.1 4.4 1.9 9.5 − 4.9          July
− 3.3 2.4 − 5.3 − 15.5 − 39.7 −8.8 − 30.9 18.4 5.9 7.5 10.5 2.8          Aug.
− 5.4 8.4 − 44.0 46.3 57.7 −9.6 67.4 −18.2 6.8 − 5.1 3.7 − 0.9          Sep.
5.2 1.7 − 24.2 2.6 − 12.6 −14.2 1.6 3.3 11.8 9.5 11.6 0.5          Oct.
− 2.9 29.6 − 54.4 48.8 32.0 −15.7 47.8 2.0 14.8 − 9.2 9.8 5.1          Nov.
− 11.5 −85.1 − 100.0 116.5 63.9 −40.0 103.9 11.1 41.5 − 7.4 − 1.1 − 8.0          Dec.
10.3 − 3.1 −− 9.1 − 26.1 − 40.5 6.8 − 47.3 − 6.7 21.1 − 2.3 19.8 − 0.4 2002         Jan.
6.3 2.0 − 1.1 − 10.6 − 10.8 −6.2 − 4.6 − 4.0 4.1 4.9 10.8 − 4.0          Feb.
1.1 1.2 − 39.1 27.2 11.5 14.0 − 2.5 12.3 3.4 8.4 3.2 0.3          Mar.
0.5 −13.6 − 43.4 40.1 40.2 7.4 32.9 5.7 − 5.8 − 1.5 8.0 − 3.2          Apr.
− 8.6 11.1 − 49.3 28.6 14.9 12.2 2.7 11.4 2.3 6.7 4.0 10.1          May
4.1 41.8 − 24.0 47.9 61.9 11.8 50.1 −20.6 6.6 − 6.9 − 8.3 − 8.7          June
− 3.2 −25.3 −− 11.3 − 17.0 − 23.6 11.0 − 34.5 3.7 2.8 − 0.7 12.9 − 6.4          July
− 10.8 − 7.1 − 12.5 − 8.6 − 27.9 4.4 − 32.3 13.4 6.0 7.6 12.6 0.8          Aug.
 German contribution (  5  billion) 2 X
0.9 − 9.5 − 5.9 3.6 2.1 −1.9 4.0 3.1 − 1.7 0.4 0.0 1.9 2001          May
− 0.1 −25.8 − 9.2 7.6 6.0 −1.7 7.7 1.9 − 0.3 − 0.7 0.9 1.5          June
0.9 10.4 −− 2.2 − 5.7 − 6.2 −2.5 − 3.7 1.6 − 1.1 0.6 0.8 2.2          July
0.1 −11.2 − 7.8 2.8 − 1.0 −3.3 2.3 3.7 0.1 2.9 1.5 0.6          Aug.
− 2.9 6.9 − 15.3 14.4 14.5 −4.6 19.1 − 1.2 1.0 − 1.7 1.5 1.1          Sep.
− 1.6 4.1 − 4.5 0.4 − 3.3 −6.0 2.6 0.9 2.8 6.5 1.6 − 4.1          Oct.
1.1 18.8 − 18.7 19.3 20.3 −7.5 27.8 − 3.8 2.8 − 5.3 1.1 3.7          Nov.
− 7.4 27.1 − 19.2 13.2 − 9.5 −24.4 14.9 6.3 16.5 0.9 1.9 3.2          Dec.
1.0 − 6.3 11.6 − 26.4 − 25.7 − 18.0 13 −4.1 − 13.8 −10.2 2.4 − 2.4 2.0 − 0.2 2002         Jan.
− 0.7 − 4.9 − 3.4 4.2 − 0.1 3.9 4.5 − 0.6 − 3.5 − 0.5 1.0 0.8 2.4          Feb.
− 0.0 − 8.6 3.4 1.9 1.5 − 0.0 2.6 − 2.6 1.6 − 0.1 0.2 − 0.1 0.4          Mar.
− 1.9 − 1.4 1.3 1.8 0.2 12.4 3.1 9.3 − 4.8 − 7.3 − 0.3 0.2 1.7          Apr.
0.7 − 0.6 2.9 16.9 12.6 8.7 2.5 6.2 4.5 − 0.6 1.3 − 0.0 3.0          May
0.5 − 5.1 1.0 11.0 15.7 16.4 3.3 13.1 0.3 − 1.0 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 3.7          June
− 1.1 −13.7 2.0 − 5.8 − 3.2 − 1.5 3.7 − 5.1 − 0.2 − 1.5 − 1.0 0.6 − 2.2          July
1.3 − 1.8 3.2 3.5 − 0.4 − 4.3 0.9 − 5.2 3.7 0.1 1.2 1.4 1.4          Aug.
 German contribution (DM billion) 2 X
1.8 −18.5 − 11.6 7.0 4.1 −3.7 7.9 6.1 − 3.3 0.8 0.0 3.7 2001          May
− 0.2 −50.5 − 18.1 14.9 11.7 −3.3 15.0 3.7 − 0.5 − 1.4 1.7 2.9          June
1.8 20.3 −− 4.2 − 11.2 − 12.1 −4.9 − 7.2 3.1 − 2.2 1.1 1.5 4.3          July
0.2 −21.9 − 15.3 5.4 − 1.9 −6.4 4.5 7.2 0.1 5.7 2.9 1.3          Aug.
− 5.7 13.5 − 29.9 28.1 28.4 −9.0 37.4 − 2.3 2.0 − 3.4 3.0 2.2          Sep.
− 3.1 8.1 − 8.7 0.8 − 6.5 −11.6 5.2 1.7 5.5 12.7 3.1 − 7.9          Oct.
2.2 36.8 − 36.6 37.7 39.8 −14.6 54.4 − 7.5 5.5 −10.4 2.2 7.2          Nov.
− 14.5 52.9 − 37.5 25.9 − 18.6 −47.8 29.2 12.3 32.2 1.8 3.7 6.2          Dec.
1.9 −12.3 22.7 − 51.6 − 50.3 − 35.1 13 −8.1 − 27.0 −19.9 4.7 − 4.7 3.9 − 0.4 2002          Jan.
− 1.3 − 9.7 − 6.6 8.1 − 0.2 7.5 8.8 − 1.2 − 6.8 − 0.9 1.9 1.6 4.8          Feb.
− 0.1 −16.8 6.6 3.8 2.9 − 0.1 5.0 − 5.1 3.1 − 0.1 0.3 − 0.3 0.9          Mar.
− 3.7 − 2.8 2.5 3.5 0.4 24.2 6.1 18.1 − 9.4 − 14.4 − 0.6 0.3 3.3          Apr.
1.4 − 1.2 5.6 33.1 24.6 16.9 4.8 12.1 8.8 − 1.2 2.6 − 0.0 5.9          May
0.9 −10.0 2.0 21.6 30.6 32.0 6.5 25.6 0.6 − 2.0 − 1.2 − 0.7 − 7.2          June
− 2.1 −26.8 4.0 − 11.3 − 6.3 − 2.9 7.2 − 10.1 − 0.4 − 2.9 − 2.0 1.2 − 4.3          July
2.6 − 3.6 6.2 6.9 − 0.8 − 8.4 1.8 − 10.1 7.3 0.2 2.3 2.8 2.6          Aug.
currencies of the euro area. From 2002 the German contribution contains deposits. —11Paper held by residents outside the euro area has been
the euro banknote volume put into circulation by the Bundesbank eliminated. —12For the German contribution: the difference between the
according to the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see footnote volume of euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the
4 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put amount disclosed according to the accounting regime chosen by theinto circulation by the Bundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total Eurosystem (see also footnote 4 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). —
the item "Intra-Eurosystem liability/claim related to banknote issue". — 13Includes statistically non-eliminated decrease of
 5 
11.6 billion (DM22.7
9For the European monetary union: including the monetary liabilities of billion) owing to the changed method of recording banknote circulation
central governments (Post Office, Treasury). —10In Germany, only savings (see also footnotes 8 and 12). — X From January 2001 enlarged euro area. 
9*II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
 
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
 
 
 
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and individuals Public authorities
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
assets or Debt other Debt euro-area Other
Period liabilities Total Total Advances securities  3 equities Total Advances securities  4 residents assets
 European monetary union (  5  billion) 1 X
 
2001          May 13,254.6 9,254.2 7,222.8 6,334.4 301.1 587.3 2,031.3 838.4 1,193.0 2,677.5 1,323.0
         June 13,317.2 9,290.0 7,247.9 6,388.2 302.1 557.5 2,042.1 835.7 1,206.5 2,704.8 1,322.4
         July 13,183.9 9,296.0 7,261.6 6,394.4 315.0 552.3 2,034.4 832.9 1,201.5 2,619.1 1,268.8
         Aug. 13,144.3 9,260.1 7,238.5 6,369.6 323.7 545.1 2,021.6 828.8 1,192.9 2,624.7 1,259.5         Sep. 13,318.6 9,309.1 7,284.1 6,421.9 327.4 534.7 2,025.0 829.8 1,195.2 2,697.8 1,311.7
         Oct. 13,424.2 9,338.8 7,324.8 6,451.2 329.9 543.7 2,014.0 827.2 1,186.8 2,742.9 1,342.5
         Nov. 13,574.5 9,413.9 7,379.6 6,501.9 333.1 544.6 2,034.3 843.3 1,191.0 2,827.6 1,333.0         Dec. 13,576.7 9,451.7 7,424.8 6,519.3 337.2 568.3 2,026.9 847.7 1,179.2 2,807.4 1,317.5
2002          Jan. 13,671.8 9,495.7 7,444.6 6,534.4 341.9 568.2 2,051.1 844.8 1,206.3 2,829.5 1,346.7
         Feb. 13,661.8 9,520.8 7,465.6 6,548.8 349.9 566.8 2,055.2 847.5 1,207.7 2,833.0 1,308.0         Mar. 13,701.3 9,597.5 7,515.5 6,605.9 346.6 563.0 2,082.0 853.0 1,229.1 2,845.1 1,258.8
         Apr. 13,687.5 9,615.1 7,553.1 6,640.9 342.9 569.3 2,062.0 832.7 1,229.2 2,826.6 1,245.8
         May 13,719.0 9,647.9 7,576.0 6,659.5 345.0 571.5 2,072.0 829.5 1,242.5 2,845.9 1,225.1         June 13,645.8 9,670.5 7,601.2 6,690.7 342.8 567.7 2,069.2 829.3 1,239.9 2,728.3 1,246.9
         July 13,680.9 9,654.8 7,592.6 6,692.2 346.4 554.0 2,062.2 827.5 1,234.7 2,753.4 1,272.6
         Aug. 13,651.0 9,646.7 7,596.2 6,692.1 340.3 563.8 2,050.5 817.0 1,233.4 2,741.5 1,262.8
 German contribution (  5  billion) 2 X 
2001          May 4,368.8 3,327.5 2,601.1 2,259.0 61.0 281.2 726.4 504.2 222.2 790.4 250.9
         June 4,333.3 3,300.3 2,578.0 2,263.6 60.6 253.8 722.3 498.1 224.2 789.9 243.1
         July 4,289.1 3,302.8 2,569.5 2,256.5 62.0 250.9 733.4 498.7 234.6 759.8 226.5
         Aug. 4,298.5 3,293.6 2,566.3 2,256.4 62.8 247.0 727.3 498.1 229.3 780.0 224.9         Sep. 4,323.3 3,288.4 2,575.0 2,269.7 63.7 241.6 713.3 495.0 218.3 808.1 226.8
         Oct. 4,334.4 3,288.4 2,579.9 2,271.3 64.4 244.2 708.6 496.2 212.4 818.3 227.6
         Nov. 4,336.2 3,303.9 2,587.2 2,279.0 64.8 243.4 716.6 506.6 210.0 837.9 194.5         Dec. 4,328.2 3,321.6 2,608.3 2,289.4 66.0 252.9 713.3 499.3 213.9 821.2 185.4
2002          Jan. 4,321.4 3,315.2 2,600.6 2,280.2 66.9 253.4 714.6 499.7 215.0 820.0 186.2
         Feb. 4,322.9 3,316.3 2,600.1 2,283.4 65.1 251.6 716.2 497.1 219.1 822.1 184.4         Mar. 4,334.0 3,315.0 2,597.6 2,290.4 67.2 240.1 717.4 495.4 221.9 829.6 189.3
         Apr. 4,330.7 3,324.0 2,605.7 2,293.1 69.0 243.7 718.3 491.2 227.1 816.6 190.1
         May 4,341.9 3,327.7 2,606.9 2,294.6 69.2 243.2 720.8 485.6 235.2 827.5 186.7         June 4,291.6 3,309.3 2,596.0 2,294.8 69.7 231.6 713.3 480.4 232.8 800.0 182.3
         July 4,303.6 3,317.5 2,589.5 2,291.3 69.8 228.4 728.0 489.0 239.0 801.2 184.9
         Aug. 4,307.0 3,315.3 2,594.9 2,289.8 67.1 238.0 720.4 479.8 240.6 810.1 181.5
 German contribution (DM billion) 2 X 
2001          May 8,544.6 6,508.0 5,087.4 4,418.1 119.2 550.0 1,420.6 986.1 434.5 1,545.9 490.6         June 8,475.2 6,454.9 5,042.1 4,427.3 118.5 496.4 1,412.7 974.3 438.5 1,544.9 475.4
         July 8,388.8 6,459.8 5,025.4 4,413.3 121.3 490.8 1,434.3 975.4 458.9 1,486.0 443.0
         Aug. 8,407.1 6,441.7 5,019.2 4,413.2 122.9 483.1 1,422.5 974.1 448.4 1,525.5 439.9         Sep. 8,455.7 6,431.5 5,036.3 4,439.2 124.5 472.6 1,395.2 968.1 427.0 1,580.6 443.6
         Oct. 8,477.3 6,431.6 5,045.8 4,442.3 126.0 477.5 1,385.8 970.5 415.3 1,600.5 445.1
         Nov. 8,481.0 6,461.8 5,060.2 4,457.3 126.7 476.1 1,401.6 990.9 410.7 1,638.7 380.5         Dec. 8,465.3 6,496.5 5,101.4 4,477.7 129.1 494.7 1,395.0 976.6 418.4 1,606.2 362.6
2002          Jan. 8,451.9 6,484.0 5,086.3 4,459.7 130.9 495.7 1,397.7 977.3 420.4 1,603.7 364.2
         Feb. 8,454.8 6,486.2 5,085.4 4,465.9 127.4 492.1 1,400.8 972.2 428.6 1,607.8 360.7         Mar. 8,476.5 6,483.6 5,080.5 4,479.6 131.4 469.5 1,403.1 969.0 434.1 1,622.6 370.3
         Apr. 8,470.2 6,501.2 5,096.3 4,484.9 134.9 476.6 1,404.8 960.6 444.2 1,597.2 371.8
         May 8,492.0 6,508.4 5,098.7 4,487.8 135.3 475.6 1,409.8 949.7 460.0 1,618.4 365.2         June 8,393.6 6,472.4 5,077.4 4,488.2 136.2 452.9 1,395.0 939.6 455.4 1,564.7 356.6
         July 8,417.2 6,488.5 5,064.7 4,481.5 136.6 446.6 1,423.8 956.4 467.4 1,567.0 361.7
         Aug. 8,423.7 6,484.2 5,075.2 4,478.5 131.2 465.5 1,409.0 938.4 470.6 1,584.4 355.0
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building Germany up to the end of 1998. —3Including money market paper of
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank enterprises. —4Including Treasury bills and other money market paper of
and central banks (the Eurosystem). —1Source: ECB. —2Owing to changes public authorities. —5From 2002 euro currency in circulation plus
in the definitions of the items and differences in the range of reporting outstanding national banknotes and coins. Excluding MFIs ‘cash in hand (in
institutions, the figures are not comparable with those published for euro). From 2002 the German contribution contains the euro banknote
10*II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
 
   
 
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and individuals
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  7 
over
Currency 1 year
in of which up to up to over up to over
Total in euro  6 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months   Period circulation  5 
European monetary union (  5  billion) 1 X
 
332.9 5,403.1 5,039.3 5,097.9 1,626.1 928.0 81.5 1,143.1 1,196.7 122.5 2001          May
333.0 5,467.2 5,091.3 5,145.4 1,667.5 924.7 81.9 1,143.6 1,206.2 121.5          June
328.0 5,442.7 5,082.1 5,132.2 1,648.5 933.7 81.7 1,137.9 1,210.4 120.1          July
319.2 5,424.1 5,070.7 5,117.3 1,617.5 949.6 81.4 1,134.7 1,215.3 118.9          Aug.309.6 5,475.9 5,132.4 5,170.9 1,680.4 933.4 81.5 1,136.0 1,221.6 118.0          Sep.
295.5 5,494.4 5,144.7 5,183.4 1,678.9 938.6 81.1 1,136.1 1,232.4 116.4          Oct.
279.7 5,554.1 5,200.8 5,249.5 1,728.6 944.2 79.9 1,134.9 1,246.6 115.3          Nov.239.7 5,699.4 5,360.0 5,403.1 1,826.5 952.2 80.0 1,142.4 1,286.5 115.3          Dec.
246.5 5,670.8 5,319.0 5,363.5 1,773.7 948.3 79.5 1,146.2 1,304.0 111.8 2002          Jan.
240.3 5,672.0 5,311.4 5,359.9 1,768.2 946.9 78.7 1,148.1 1,307.2 110.8          Feb.
254.3 5,686.5 5,327.4 5,376.7 1,770.0 955.4 79.7 1,151.5 1,310.6 109.5          Mar.
261.7 5,711.9 5,355.6 5,401.3 1,798.0 960.8 80.2 1,150.5 1,304.2 107.5          Apr.
273.9 5,714.2 5,366.9 5,410.0 1,801.3 963.0 80.8 1,152.2 1,306.4 106.4          May285.7 5,750.8 5,409.8 5,441.4 1,847.0 939.7 81.3 1,154.2 1,313.0 106.2          June
296.6 5,726.1 5,386.4 5,424.7 1,817.5 948.2 83.2 1,154.0 1,315.7 106.2          July
301.0 5,688.4 5,360.0 5,398.2 1,785.0 959.6 83.8 1,142.5 1,320.9 106.4          Aug.
 German contribution (  5  billion) 2 X
117.9 2,054.5 1,953.0 1,915.9 449.9 231.8 18.2 653.5 442.2 120.4 2001          May
116.3 2,062.1 1,960.8 1,921.9 456.0 233.6 17.9 653.0 441.9 119.5          June
113.7 2,055.6 1,955.4 1,917.4 453.9 235.7 18.3 650.5 440.8 118.2          July
110.5 2,059.2 1,960.9 1,922.0 455.6 240.7 18.1 649.7 440.9 117.0          Aug.105.8 2,075.2 1,979.0 1,939.6 472.7 240.0 18.3 650.5 441.9 116.2          Sep.
99.9 2,077.6 1,982.9 1,945.0 475.5 241.8 18.6 650.0 444.8 114.4          Oct.92.4 2,103.2 2,006.3 1,973.0 504.0 240.7 18.7 648.7 447.5 113.5          Nov.68.0 2,135.1 2,048.0 2,010.0 519.0 244.7 18.6 650.2 463.9 113.6          Dec.
8 63.8 2,113.2 2,024.0 1,989.9 506.4 236.6 18.5 652.0 466.4 110.0 2002          Jan.
68.3 2,108.1 2,019.4 1,986.2 505.6 235.1 17.1 653.5 465.9 109.0          Feb.70.9 2,109.1 2,021.9 1,989.1 504.1 237.3 17.1 656.8 465.9 107.8          Mar.
74.0 2,100.4 2,015.8 1,984.7 513.9 234.0 17.1 655.2 458.6 105.9          Apr.
76.5 2,107.7 2,023.6 1,987.3 519.1 234.2 17.1 654.1 457.9 104.8          May79.8 2,119.3 2,035.6 1,997.1 530.9 234.4 17.3 653.0 457.0 104.6          June
83.4 2,112.5 2,030.5 1,993.2 525.8 235.8 17.6 653.9 455.5 104.6          July
84.3 2,098.8 2,018.1 1,979.2 521.5 239.6 17.6 640.1 455.6 104.8          Aug.
 German contribution (DM billion) 2 X
230.7 4,018.2 3,819.8 3,747.2 879.9 453.3 35.6 1,278.2 864.8 235.4 2001          May
227.4 4,033.1 3,834.9 3,758.9 891.9 456.8 35.0 1,277.2 864.3 233.7          June
222.5 4,020.4 3,824.5 3,750.2 887.7 461.1 35.7 1,272.2 862.2 231.2          July
216.0 4,027.4 3,835.2 3,759.1 891.1 470.8 35.4 1,270.7 862.3 228.8          Aug.207.0 4,058.8 3,870.7 3,793.6 924.5 469.4 35.9 1,272.2 864.3 227.3          Sep.
195.4 4,063.4 3,878.2 3,804.2 929.9 472.9 36.3 1,271.3 869.9 223.8          Oct.
180.7 4,113.6 3,924.1 3,858.9 985.8 470.7 36.5 1,268.7 875.2 222.0          Nov.132.9 4,175.9 4,005.5 3,931.2 1,015.2 478.6 36.4 1,271.6 907.4 222.1          Dec.
8 124.8 4,133.1 3,958.6 3,891.8 990.5 462.7 36.2 1,275.2 912.2 215.1 2002          Jan.
133.6 4,123.1 3,949.5 3,884.6 988.8 459.9 33.5 1,278.1 911.3 213.1          Feb.138.7 4,125.0 3,954.6 3,890.3 986.0 464.2 33.5 1,284.6 911.3 210.9          Mar.
144.7 4,108.0 3,942.5 3,881.8 1,005.1 457.6 33.5 1,281.5 897.0 207.1          Apr.
149.6 4,122.4 3,957.8 3,886.7 1,015.2 458.1 33.5 1,279.4 895.7 204.9          May156.0 4,145.0 3,981.3 3,906.0 1,038.3 458.5 33.8 1,277.2 893.8 204.5          June
163.2 4,131.7 3,971.2 3,898.4 1,028.4 461.2 34.4 1,279.0 890.9 204.6          July
165.0 4,105.0 3,947.1 3,871.0 1,020.0 468.6 34.5 1,252.0 891.0 204.9          Aug.
volume put into circulation by the Bundesbank according to the accounting liability items"). —6Excluding central governments deposits. —7In
regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see footnote 4 on banknote circulation in Germany, only saving deposits. —8Includes decrease of
 5 
11.6 billion
Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into circulation by the (DM22.7 billion) owing to the changed method of recording banknote
Bundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the item circulation (see also footnote 5). —XFrom January 2001 enlarged euro
"Intra-Eurosystem liability/claim related to banknote issue" (see "Other area. 
11*II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
 
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (cont ’d)*
 
 
 
Liabilities (cont ’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont ’d)  
 
Public authorities Repo transactions Debt securitieswith counterparties
Other public authorities in the euro area
With agreed At agreedmaturities of notice of  
3 
Money
over of which market of which
Central 1 year Enterprises fund denom-govern- up to up to over up to over and inated certificates
Period ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total individuals (net)  
4,6 Total in euro
 European monetary union (  5  billion) 1 X
 
2001          May 149.4 155.8 65.7 57.2 2.1 27.5 2.7 0.6 233.8 228.1 363.0 1,719.5 1,372.8
         June 167.7 154.1 64.3 57.5 2.0 27.2 2.5 0.6 221.5 216.6 360.5 1,738.3 1,383.3
         July 158.1 152.4 64.2 56.0 1.7 27.4 2.5 0.6 223.4 218.1 369.6 1,734.5 1,384.6
         Aug. 154.8 152.0 63.8 56.1 1.8 27.3 2.5 0.6 230.8 225.3 380.7 1,728.7 1,383.1         Sep. 149.4 155.5 69.5 54.4 1.6 27.0 2.5 0.6 225.7 220.2 384.7 1,752.3 1,396.0
         Oct. 154.7 156.3 71.4 53.4 1.6 26.8 2.5 0.5 235.1 227.2 395.9 1,766.5 1,399.2
         Nov. 151.8 152.8 69.5 51.9 1.6 26.7 2.6 0.5 225.9 218.3 404.5 1,758.8 1,372.7         Dec. 140.3 156.0 69.7 54.9 1.7 26.7 2.6 0.5 218.5 214.6 402.0 1,760.1 1,376.4
2002          Jan. 150.0 157.3 74.1 51.4 1.7 27.0 2.5 0.5 216.2 211.4 420.8 1,775.4 1,375.2
         Feb. 156.3 155.7 75.1 49.4 1.7 26.6 2.5 0.5 221.1 215.8 431.6 1,778.2 1,380.2         Mar. 157.5 152.3 69.3 51.8 1.6 26.7 2.5 0.5 229.6 224.9 435.9 1,793.7 1,389.4
         Apr. 158.0 152.6 71.9 49.9 1.4 26.6 2.5 0.4 228.1 223.8 442.2 1,785.7 1,382.9
         May 149.4 154.7 68.8 55.2 1.4 26.6 2.4 0.4 234.8 230.7 447.3 1,806.5 1,393.4         June 153.5 155.8 71.6 53.2 1.5 26.7 2.4 0.4 228.7 225.0 443.6 1,787.6 1,392.2
         July 150.3 151.1 69.3 51.3 1.5 26.3 2.3 0.4 228.0 224.1 455.3 1,795.3 1,396.5
         Aug. 139.5 150.7 67.8 52.2 1.5 26.3 2.4 0.4 235.6 231.0 468.5 1,813.0 1,413.5
 German contribution (  5  billion) 2 X
2001          May 59.1 79.5 13.4 39.0 1.5 23.2 1.8 0.6 1.8 1.7 23.4 807.2 687.0
         June 59.0 81.2 14.9 39.5 1.4 23.1 1.8 0.6 1.1 1.1 24.2 811.2 695.9
         July 59.9 78.3 13.1 38.8 1.1 23.1 1.7 0.6 1.7 1.7 25.0 810.1 701.2
         Aug. 60.0 77.2 13.3 37.6 1.0 23.1 1.7 0.6 4.6 4.6 26.5 811.4 705.5         Sep. 57.0 78.5 15.4 36.9 1.0 23.0 1.7 0.6 2.8 2.8 28.0 815.5 709.0
         Oct. 55.4 77.1 15.3 35.8 1.0 22.8 1.7 0.5 9.4 9.4 29.6 813.4 707.5
         Nov. 56.6 73.6 14.7 33.0 1.0 22.7 1.7 0.5 4.0 4.0 30.7 792.9 678.1         Dec. 49.1 75.9 14.6 35.2 1.2 22.7 1.7 0.5 4.9 4.9 32.6 791.9 676.0
2002          Jan. 50.1 73.3 13.6 33.3 1.2 23.0 1.7 0.5 2.5 2.5 34.5 795.7 672.2
         Feb. 49.4 72.5 13.8 32.6 1.2 22.7 1.7 0.5 3.5 3.5 35.4 801.2 678.8         Mar. 49.4 70.6 12.6 32.0 1.2 22.8 1.6 0.5 3.7 3.7 35.8 811.6 687.2
         Apr. 47.5 68.2 11.8 30.6 1.0 22.7 1.6 0.4 3.4 3.4 35.9 808.5 685.1
         May 48.2 72.3 12.4 34.2 1.0 22.7 1.6 0.4 4.7 4.7 35.4 810.5 683.8         June 48.7 73.5 13.8 34.1 1.1 22.6 1.6 0.4 4.1 4.1 35.0 805.1 684.0
         July 47.6 71.7 13.9 32.3 1.0 22.5 1.5 0.4 3.1 3.1 35.6 813.3 687.2
         Aug. 48.9 70.7 13.0 32.2 1.0 22.6 1.6 0.4 4.3 4.3 37.0 834.6 702.8
 German contribution (DM billion) 2 X
2001          May 115.5 155.4 26.2 76.2 3.0 45.3 3.4 1.2 3.6 3.4 45.7 1,578.8 1,343.6         June 115.3 158.9 29.1 77.3 2.7 45.2 3.4 1.2 2.1 2.1 47.3 1,586.5 1,361.0
         July 117.1 153.2 25.6 75.9 2.1 45.2 3.3 1.1 3.2 3.2 48.8 1,584.4 1,371.4
         Aug. 117.3 151.0 26.0 73.5 2.0 45.1 3.3 1.1 8.9 8.9 51.8 1,586.9 1,379.9         Sep. 111.5 153.6 30.1 72.1 2.0 45.0 3.3 1.1 5.6 5.6 54.7 1,595.1 1,386.7
         Oct. 108.4 150.8 30.0 70.0 2.0 44.5 3.3 1.0 18.3 18.3 57.8 1,590.9 1,383.8
         Nov. 110.6 144.0 28.7 64.5 2.0 44.4 3.4 1.0 7.9 7.9 60.0 1,550.7 1,326.2         Dec. 96.1 148.5 28.6 68.9 2.3 44.4 3.4 1.0 9.7 9.6 63.7 1,548.9 1,322.2
2002          Jan. 98.0 143.3 26.6 65.1 2.4 45.0 3.3 0.9 5.0 5.0 67.6 1,556.3 1,314.8
         Feb. 96.7 141.8 27.0 63.8 2.4 44.4 3.3 0.9 6.9 6.9 69.2 1,567.0 1,327.7         Mar. 96.6 138.1 24.6 62.6 2.4 44.5 3.2 0.9 7.2 7.2 70.0 1,587.3 1,344.1
         Apr. 92.9 133.3 23.1 59.9 2.0 44.4 3.1 0.9 6.6 6.6 70.2 1,581.3 1,339.9
         May 94.3 141.4 24.2 66.8 2.0 44.4 3.1 0.9 9.2 9.2 69.3 1,585.2 1,337.4         June 95.2 143.8 26.9 66.7 2.1 44.2 3.0 0.9 8.1 8.1 68.5 1,574.7 1,337.8
         July 93.1 140.3 27.2 63.2 2.0 44.1 3.0 0.8 6.1 6.1 69.7 1,590.6 1,344.1
         Aug. 95.7 138.3 25.3 62.9 2.0 44.1 3.1 0.8 8.3 8.3 72.4 1,632.3 1,374.5
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building published in this table together with money market fund certificates. —
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank 6Paper held by residents outside the euro area has been eliminated. —
and central banks (the Eurosystem). —1Source: ECB. —2Owing to changes 7Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued. —8After deduction of
in the definitions of the items and differences in the range of reporting Inter-MFI participations. —9The German contributions to the Eurosystem ’s
institutions, the figures are not comparable with those published for monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national
Germany up to the end of 1998. —3In Germany: only savings deposits. — monetary aggregates, and are therefore not comparable to the erstwhile
4Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the German contribution: excluding German money stocks M1, M2 or M3. —10Currency in circulation (from
German MFIs portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro area. —5In 2002 euro currency in circulation plus outstanding national banknotes and
Germany, bank debt securities with maturities of up to one year are classed coins), overnight deposits (excluding central governments ’deposits), and
as money market paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were (for EMU) central governments ’overnight monetary liabilities,
12*II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
 
   
 
 Memo item
 Other liability items Monetary aggregates  9 
 
issued (net)  4 
With maturities of
of which Monetary
Intra- liabilitiesEurosystem- of central
Liabilities liability/ govern-
over to non- Excess claim Monetary ments1 year euro-area Capital of related to capital (Post,   
up to up to over residents and inter-MFI banknote formation Office,1 year  
5,6 2 years  6 2 years 7 reseves  8 liabilities Total issue  15 M1 10 M2 11 M3 6,12 13   Period Treasury)  14 
European monetary union (  5  billion) 1 X
 
90.3 44.7 1,584.5 2,755.0 940.0 − 13.2 1,520.6 − 2,092.1 4,434.3 5,166.1 3,818.2 141.4 2001          May
96.3 49.0 1,593.0 2,743.3 965.9 − 16.8 1,504.4 − 2,131.4 4,480.6 5,207.8 3,851.9 140.9          June
91.3 49.1 1,594.1 2,643.0 955.2 − 7.4 1,494.8 − 2,108.3 4,468.7 5,202.1 3,835.2 141.9          July
91.2 51.3 1,586.2 2,620.1 959.9 − 8.6 1,489.4 − 2,066.7 4,448.4 5,202.4 3,827.5 141.3          Aug.
94.9 52.7 1,604.7 2,639.9 970.4 18.7 1,541.4 − 2,124.7 4,495.3 5,253.4 3,856.5 140.8          Sep.
98.3 51.1 1,617.0 2,661.6 981.1 5.5 1,588.7 − 2,111.6 4,497.9 5,278.4 3,877.9 142.5          Oct.
97.4 54.9 1,606.6 2,726.2 982.6 10.4 1,632.4 − 2,144.3 4,548.2 5,330.8 3,866.6 143.7          Nov.
88.9 57.6 1,613.6 2,719.1 996.2 − 8.5 1,550.7 − 2,207.9 4,664.6 5,430.9 3,894.7 150.7          Dec.
96.6 45.9 1,632.9 2,755.2 1,007.6 2.4 1,577.6 − 2,168.4 4,639.8 5,418.7 3,925.9 158.0 2002          Jan.
90.1 49.3 1,638.8 2,763.3 1,011.5 1.5 1,543.0 − 2,157.5 4,628.8 5,420.2 3,936.2 158.7          Feb.
89.3 48.6 1,655.8 2,786.6 1,013.0 2.4 1,500.1 − 2,168.6 4,655.0 5,457.7 3,956.9 159.8          Mar.
84.5 51.0 1,650.2 2,769.2 1,007.1 − 7.4 1,489.8 − 2,207.4 4,691.7 5,496.7 3,942.2 161.0          Apr.
93.8 50.9 1,661.9 2,750.3 1,011.3 − 7.2 1,488.5 − 2,220.0 4,714.4 5,540.5 3,958.7 161.3          May
84.5 46.7 1,656.5 2,616.1 994.0 18.3 1,521.6 − 2,279.9 4,755.9 5,558.8 3,938.1 160.6          June
78.3 48.1 1,668.8 2,643.5 1,001.6 2.9 1,532.2 − 2,257.5 4,744.8 5,554.0 3,957.3 159.3          July
80.9 46.5 1,685.7 2,611.5 1,012.2 7.0 1,514.2 − 2,229.3 4,735.6 5,566.6 3,973.5 161.4          Aug.
 German contribution (  5  billion) 2 X
24.6 31.5 751.1 792.8 243.3 − 4.5 332.4 − 581.2 1,315.7 1,397.0 1,792.0 −2001          May
21.1 36.6 753.5 766.3 256.2 − 30.4 326.4 − 587.2 1,323.2 1,406.2 1,805.9 −         June
20.5 39.4 750.2 734.4 256.4 − 24.7 317.0 − 580.7 1,317.1 1,403.5 1,799.0 −         July
19.3 41.6 750.5 745.8 260.9 − 39.5 319.2 − 579.4 1,319.4 1,411.2 1,801.7 −         Aug.
19.4 42.6 753.5 746.5 259.6 − 39.5 329.2 − 593.9 1,333.8 1,426.6 1,803.4 −         Sep.
19.1 39.6 754.6 747.4 263.0 − 37.5 331.6 − 590.7 1,334.3 1,432.0 1,805.4 −         Oct.
16.9 42.4 733.6 736.7 264.4 − 21.8 333.7 − 611.1 1,353.7 1,447.7 1,783.4 −         Nov.
17.9 44.5 729.5 702.1 265.3 10.6 317.7 − 601.6 1,367.0 1,466.9 1,781.7 −         Dec.
22.4 35.1 738.2 724.3 267.2 − 0.1 320.2 11.6 583.8 1,341.5 1,436.1 1,790.8 −2002          Jan.
22.3 37.6 741.2 721.4 272.1 − 0.6 313.4 8.2 587.7 1,341.4 1,440.2 1,798.9 −         Feb.
22.7 37.7 751.2 721.6 272.4 − 2.7 311.6 11.6 587.6 1,342.8 1,442.6 1,811.4 −         Mar.
22.9 38.7 746.9 728.3 270.0 − 1.1 311.4 12.9 599.7 1,342.7 1,441.9 1,801.1 −         Apr.
25.2 39.4 745.9 730.3 269.8 − 8.2 315.1 15.7 607.9 1,354.0 1,458.7 1,797.8 −         May
23.1 38.1 743.9 687.4 265.5 − 24.8 320.1 16.7 624.4 1,369.8 1,470.1 1,790.1 −         June
21.9 38.7 752.7 705.4 267.7 − 39.0 321.5 18.8 623.1 1,366.9 1,466.2 1,801.9 −         July
23.6 36.8 774.2 700.1 272.4 − 50.6 326.0 22.0 618.8 1,366.4 1,468.0 1,814.5 −         Aug.
 German contribution (DM billion) 2 X
48.2 61.7 1,468.9 1,550.5 475.8 − 8.8 650.2 − 1,136.8 2,573.2 2,732.3 3,504.9 −2001          May
41.3 71.5 1,473.7 1,498.8 501.1 − 59.5 638.3 − 1,148.4 2,587.9 2,750.2 3,532.1 −         June
40.0 77.1 1,467.3 1,436.5 501.4 − 48.3 620.0 − 1,135.7 2,576.0 2,745.1 3,518.5 −         July
37.7 81.3 1,467.9 1,458.6 510.3 − 77.2 624.4 − 1,133.2 2,580.5 2,760.2 3,523.9 −         Aug.
37.9 83.4 1,473.8 1,460.1 507.8 − 77.2 643.9 − 1,161.6 2,608.7 2,790.2 3,527.2 −         Sep.
37.4 77.5 1,475.9 1,461.8 514.5 − 73.4 648.6 − 1,155.3 2,609.6 2,800.7 3,531.1 −         Oct.
33.0 82.9 1,434.8 1,440.8 517.2 − 42.6 652.7 − 1,195.3 2,647.6 2,831.4 3,488.0 −         Nov.
35.1 87.0 1,426.8 1,373.1 518.9 20.8 621.4 − 1,176.7 2,673.6 2,869.1 3,484.7 −         Dec.
43.9 68.6 1,443.8 1,416.6 522.6 − 0.3 626.3 22.7 1,141.9 2,623.7 2,808.8 3,502.5 −2002          Jan.
43.7 73.6 1,449.7 1,411.0 532.1 − 1.1 613.0 16.1 1,149.4 2,623.5 2,816.9 3,518.3 −         Feb.
44.5 73.6 1,469.2 1,411.4 532.8 − 5.3 609.5 22.7 1,149.2 2,626.3 2,821.6 3,542.8 −         Mar.
44.8 75.7 1,460.8 1,424.5 528.0 − 2.1 609.0 25.2 1,172.9 2,626.0 2,820.1 3,522.7 −         Apr.
49.3 77.0 1,458.9 1,428.3 527.7 − 16.1 616.4 30.7 1,189.0 2,648.2 2,853.0 3,516.1 −         May
45.1 74.6 1,455.0 1,344.4 519.3 − 48.5 626.1 32.8 1,221.2 2,679.1 2,875.4 3,501.1 −         June
42.9 75.6 1,472.1 1,379.6 523.6 − 76.2 628.9 36.7 1,218.7 2,673.3 2,867.6 3,524.2 −         July
46.1 72.0 1,514.2 1,369.3 532.8 − 98.9 637.6 43.0 1,210.3 2,672.4 2,871.2 3,548.9 −         Aug.
which are not included in the consolidated balance sheet. From 2002 the transactions, money market fund certificates, money market paper and debt
German contribution contains the euro banknote volume put into securities up to 2 years. —13Deposits with agreed maturities of over 2
circulation by the Bundesbank according to the accounting regime chosen years and at agreed notice of over 3 months, debt securities with maturitiesby the Eurosystem (see footnote 4 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). of over 2 years, capital and reserves. —14Non-existent in Germany. —
The volume of currency actually put into circulation by the Bundesbank can 15For the German contibution: the difference between the volume of euro
be calculated by adding to this total the item "Intra-Eurosystem banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosedliability/claim related to banknote issue". —11M1 plus deposits with according to the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also
agreed maturities of up to 2 years and at agreed notice of up to 3 months footnote 4 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). —XFrom January 2001
(excluding central governments ’deposits) and (for EMU) central enlarged euro area. 
governments ’monetary liabilities with such maturities. —12M2 plus repo
13*II. Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
II. Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  European  monetary  union
  
 3. Banking system ’s liquidity position  * 
Stocks
  
 5  billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions ‘
current
Net assets Longer- Other Other accounts
Maintenance in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including
period and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Baseending in  
1 currency operations operations facility operations facility operations deposits (net)  4 reserves)  5 money  6 circulation  3 
Eurosystem   2  
  
2000          Apr. 377.1 136.7 61.0 0.2 − 0.9 − 349.7 45.6 69.1 109.7 460.3
         May 378.8 142.6 60.0 0.4 − 2.3 − 353.8 41.9 71.8 112.0 468.2
         June 378.1 140.9 59.9 0.3 0.2 0.8 − 354.1 38.3 72.1 114.2 469.1
         July 380.8 157.9 59.9 0.4 − 0.5 − 357.0 50.4 76.8 114.2 471.7
         Aug. 382.0 163.1 55.4 0.1 − 0.3 − 359.2 48.8 80.0 112.4 471.9
         Sep. 381.6 173.1 51.1 0.3 − 0.2 − 354.8 56.6 81.2 113.3 468.3
         Oct. 396.3 176.5 45.7 0.5 − 0.2 − 354.5 47.4 102.5 114.4 469.1
         Nov. 398.6 183.7 45.0 0.2 − 0.2 − 352.7 49.8 109.2 115.7 468.6
         Dec. 394.4 210.4 45.0 0.4 − 0.2 − 360.4 61.1 111.1 117.4 478.0
2001          Jan.  7 383.7 205.3 45.0 0.5 − 0.6 − 368.3 52.2 94.2 119.1 488.0
         Feb. 377.9 188.9 49.8 2.6 − 0.4 − 354.8 57.0 86.3 120.7 476.0
         Mar. 375.6 185.2 54.1 0.4 − 0.5 − 353.0 53.0 87.7 121.0 474.5
         Apr. 382.1 172.4 58.4 2.2 − 0.5 − 354.6 49.5 89.1 121.4 476.4
         May 384.4 144.0 59.1 0.4 17.0 0.6 − 352.7 39.4 87.5 124.8 478.1
         June 385.0 161.7 59.1 0.2 − 0.4 − 351.1 41.3 87.5 125.7 477.3
         July 397.6 161.9 59.9 0.2 − 0.4 − 350.8 42.5 98.8 127.1 478.3
         Aug. 402.1 164.0 60.0 0.1 − 0.2 − 347.6 48.8 101.8 127.8 475.6
         Sep. 401.3 147.1 60.0 0.5 3.5 0.4 − 335.4 45.2 105.4 126.1 461.9
         Oct. 389.9 136.7 60.0 1.1 − 0.1 − 325.2 43.6 93.6 125.1 450.4
         Nov. 385.0 132.3 60.0 0.2 − 0.3 − 311.3 46.1 93.1 126.7 438.3
         Dec. 383.7 122.5 60.0 0.5 12.4 0.8 − 298.0 43.5 109.3 127.4 426.2
2002          Jan. 385.2 118.5 60.0 0.4 3.7 0.6 − 344.3 38.3 54.2 130.4 475.2
         Feb. 386.0 127.3 60.0 0.2 − 0.1 − 306.2 49.6 85.2 132.6 438.8
         Mar. 386.7 114.6 60.0 0.2 − 0.1 − 283.3 54.2 91.8 132.1 415.6
         Apr. 395.4 112.7 60.0 0.4 − 0.2 − 285.9 55.9 95.3 131.2 417.3
         May 397.7 110.6 60.0 0.1 − 0.3 − 293.7 49.2 93.5 131.7 425.6
         June 396.2 112.6 60.0 0.5 − 0.4 − 300.8 45.1 91.2 131.8 433.0
         July 369.1 130.4 60.0 0.2 − 0.2 − 313.4 54.4 60.3 131.4 445.0
         Aug. 360.0 139.2 55.2 0.1 − 0.1 − 322.7 50.9 50.8 129.9 452.8
         Sep. 362.3 140.9 50.8 0.1 − 0.2 − 323.6 49.1 51.7 129.6 453.4
Deutsche Bundesbank
2000          Apr. 93.7 62.0 43.2 0.2 − 0.6 − 131.8 0.1 32.7 34.0 166.4
         May 93.7 60.1 39.5 0.3 − 1.8 − 132.3 0.1 24.8 34.5 168.6
         June 93.3 59.6 35.4 0.2 0.1 0.3 − 132.0 0.1 21.2 35.1 167.3
         July 93.4 67.9 33.3 0.2 − 0.4 − 131.8 0.1 27.6 35.1 167.2
         Aug. 93.0 71.6 34.9 0.1 − 0.1 − 131.9 0.1 33.1 34.5 166.5
         Sep. 92.6 81.9 33.8 0.3 − 0.1 − 131.4 0.1 42.6 34.4 165.9
         Oct. 97.0 87.2 30.7 0.3 − 0.1 − 131.1 0.1 49.5 34.5 165.7
         Nov. 98.2 99.1 30.7 0.2 − 0.1 − 130.1 0.1 63.0 34.9 165.1
         Dec. 97.6 103.5 31.1 0.2 − 0.1 − 132.0 0.1 65.0 35.2 167.4
2001          Jan. 93.0 103.1 28.4 0.3 − 0.3 − 131.2 0.1 57.7 35.6 167.1
         Feb. 90.3 93.2 28.3 1.3 − 0.2 − 126.7 0.1 50.0 36.2 163.1
         Mar. 89.1 87.6 33.2 0.2 − 0.4 − 126.2 0.1 47.6 35.9 162.4
         Apr. 90.1 84.5 37.4 1.5 − 0.2 − 126.2 0.1 50.7 36.4 162.8
         May 90.0 67.4 37.8 0.2 7.5 0.5 − 124.8 0.1 47.6 37.4 162.7
         June 89.7 79.9 37.5 0.1 − 0.3 − 123.6 0.1 45.7 37.5 161.4
         July 92.8 85.4 37.0 0.1 − 0.3 − 121.8 0.1 55.5 37.7 159.7
         Aug. 94.2 77.0 38.2 0.1 − 0.2 − 119.3 0.1 52.0 37.8 157.3
         Sep. 93.7 73.3 38.9 0.1 1.3 0.1 − 115.4 0.1 54.6 37.1 152.7
         Oct. 91.3 66.3 40.2 0.5 − 0.1 − 110.8 0.1 50.1 37.3 148.2
         Nov. 89.8 68.2 38.5 0.2 − 0.2 − 104.6 0.1 53.8 38.0 142.9
         Dec. 89.4 62.4 40.1 0.2 5.0 0.5 − 96.6 0.1 67.1 37.8 134.9
2002          Jan. 89.9 63.3 41.1 0.3 1.4 0.3 − 91.7 0.1 64.9 39.0 131.0
         Feb. 89.9 63.3 42.4 0.1 − 0.0 − 78.5 0.1 78.6 38.6 117.2
         Mar. 90.0 58.5 40.7 0.2 − 0.1 − 79.7 0.1 71.2 38.3 118.1
         Apr. 92.3 57.6 40.4 0.3 − 0.2 − 80.8 0.1 71.8 37.9 118.8
         May 92.3 53.1 39.7 0.1 − 0.3 − 83.8 0.1 63.1 38.0 122.0
         June 91.6 60.6 38.8 0.1 − 0.3 − 85.4 0.1 67.3 38.1 123.8
         July 84.7 67.6 37.1 0.2 − 0.2 − 89.2 0.1 62.0 38.1 127.5
         Aug. 82.5 63.1 36.4 0.0 − 0.1 − 92.2 0.1 51.8 37.9 130.2
         Sep. 82.4 64.4 32.7 0.1 − 0.1 − 92.4 0.0 49.1 37.9 130.4
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. —*The banking system ’s liquidity other banknotes which have been issued by the national central banks of
position is defined as the current account holdings in euro of credit institu- the Eurosystem and which are still in circulation. In accordance with th e ac-
tions in the euro area with the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the counting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for the issue of euro bank-consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the statement of notes, 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation are alloca-the Bundesbank. —1The reserve maintenance period of the ESCB minimum ted on a monthly basis to the ECB. The counterpart of this adjustment is
reserve system starts on the 24th of each month and ends on the 23rd of shown under "Other factors". The remaining 92% of the value of the eurothe following month. —2Source: ECB. —3From 2002, euro banknotes and banknotes in circulation are allocated, likewise on a monthly basis, to the
14*II. Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  European  monetary  union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
II. Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  European  monetary  union
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions ‘
current
Net assets Longer- Other Other accounts
in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Maintenanceand foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base periodcurrency operations operations facility operations facility operations deposits (net)  
4 reserves)  5 money  6 ending in  1 circulation  3 
Eurosystem   2  
  
+ 7.9 + 0.6 − 5.2 + 0.0 − + 0.6 − + 2.1 − 6.1 + 5.6 + 1.1 + 3.9 2000          Apr.
+ 1.7 + 5.9 − 1.0 + 0.2 − + 1.4 − + 4.1 − 3.7 + 2.7 + 2.3 + 7.9          May
− 0.7 − 1.7 − 0.1 −0.1 + 0.2 −1.5 − + 0.3 − 3.6 + 0.3 + 2.2 + 0.9          June
+ 2.7 + 17.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.2 −0.3 − + 2.9 + 12.1 + 4.7 − 0.0 + 2.6          July
+ 1.2 + 5.2 − 4.5 −0.3 −− 0.2 − + 2.2 − 1.6 + 3.2 − 1.8 + 0.2          Aug.
− 0.4 + 10.0 − 4.3 + 0.2 −− 0.1 −− 4.4 + 7.8 + 1.2 + 0.9 − 3.6          Sep.
+ 14.7 + 3.4 − 5.4 + 0.2 − + 0.0 −− 0.3 − 9.2 + 21.3 + 1.1 + 0.8          Oct.
+ 2.3 + 7.2 − 0.7 −0.3 − + 0.0 −− 1.8 + 2.4 + 6.7 + 1.3 − 0.5          Nov.
− 4.2 + 26.7 − 0.0 + 0.2 − + 0.0 − + 7.7 + 11.3 + 1.9 + 1.7 + 9.4          Dec.
−10.7 − 5.1
+ 0.0 + 0.1 − + 0.4 − + 7.9 − 8.9 −16.9 + 1.7 + 10.0 2001          Jan.  7 
− 5.8 −16.4 + 4.8 + 2.1 −− 0.2 −− 13.5 + 4.8 −7.9 + 1.6 − 12.0          Feb.
− 2.3 − 3.7 + 4.3 −2.2 − + 0.1 −− 1.8 − 4.0 + 1.4 + 0.3 − 1.5          Mar.
+ 6.5 −12.8 + 4.3 + 1.8 −− 0.0 − + 1.6 − 3.5 + 1.4 + 0.4 + 1.9          Apr.
+ 2.3 −28.4 + 0.7 −1.8 + 17.0 + 0.1 −− 1.9 −10.1 −1.6 + 3.4 + 1.7          May
+ 0.6 + 17.7
+ 0.0 −0.2 − 17.0 −0.2 −− 1.6 + 1.9 + 0.0 + 0.9 − 0.8          June
+ 12.6 + 0.2 + 0.8 + 0.0 − + 0.0 −− 0.3 + 1.2 + 11.3 + 1.4 + 1.0          July
+ 4.5 + 2.1 + 0.1 −0.1 −− 0.2 −− 3.2 + 6.3 + 3.0 + 0.7 − 2.7          Aug.
− 0.8 −16.9
+ 0.0 + 0.4 + 3.5 + 0.2 −− 12.2 − 3.6 + 3.6 − 1.7 − 13.7          Sep.
−11.4 −10.4 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 3.5 −0.3 −− 10.2 − 1.6 −11.8 − 1.0 − 11.5          Oct.
− 4.9 − 4.4 − 0.0 −0.9 − + 0.2 −− 13.9 + 2.5 −0.5 + 1.6 − 12.1          Nov.
− 1.3 − 9.8
+ 0.0 + 0.3 + 12.4 + 0.5 −− 13.3 − 2.6 + 16.2 + 0.7 − 12.1          Dec.
+ 1.5 − 4.0 − 0.0 −0.1 − 8.7 −0.2 − + 46.3 − 5.2 −55.1 + 3.0 + 49.0 2002          Jan.
+ 0.8 + 8.8
+ 0.0 −0.2 − 3.7 −0.5 −− 38.1 + 11.3 + 31.0 + 2.2 − 36.4          Feb.
+ 0.7 −12.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 − + 0.0 −− 22.9 + 4.6 + 6.6 − 0.5 − 23.2          Mar.
+ 8.7 − 1.9 − 0.0 + 0.2 − + 0.1 − + 2.6 + 1.7 + 3.5 − 0.9 + 1.7          Apr.
+ 2.3 − 2.1 − 0.0 −0.3 − + 0.1 − + 7.8 − 6.7 −1.8 + 0.5 + 8.3          May
− 1.5 + 2.0 + 0.0 + 0.4 − + 0.1 − + 7.1 − 4.1 −2.3 + 0.1 + 7.4          June
−27.1 + 17.8 − 0.0 −0.3 −− 0.2 − + 12.6 + 9.3 −30.9 − 0.4 + 12.0          July
− 9.1 + 8.8 − 4.8 −0.1 −− 0.1 − + 9.3 − 3.5 −9.5 − 1.5 + 7.8          Aug.
+ 2.3 + 1.7 − 4.4 + 0.0 − + 0.1 − + 0.9 − 1.8 + 0.9 − 0.3 + 0.6          Sep.
Deutsche Bundesbank
+ 1.8 + 0.3 + 8.8 + 0.0 − + 0.4 − + 0.2 − 0.0 + 9.9 + 0.4 + 1.0 2000          Apr.
− 0.0 − 1.9 − 3.7 + 0.1 − + 1.2 − + 0.5 + 0.0 −7.8 + 0.5 + 2.2          May
− 0.4 − 0.5 − 4.1 −0.0 + 0.1 −1.5 −− 0.3 + 0.0 −3.6 + 0.5 − 1.3          June
+ 0.2 + 8.3 − 2.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 −− 0.1 − 0.0 + 6.4 − 0.0 − 0.1          July
− 0.4 + 3.7 + 1.6 −0.2 −− 0.3 − + 0.1 − 0.0 + 5.6 − 0.6 − 0.8          Aug.
− 0.5 + 10.3 − 1.1 + 0.2 −− 0.0 −− 0.5 + 0.0 + 9.5 − 0.1 − 0.6          Sep.
+ 4.5 + 5.3 − 3.1 + 0.0 − + 0.0 −− 0.3 + 0.0 + 6.9 + 0.1 − 0.2          Oct.
+ 1.2 + 11.8 − 0.0 −0.2 −
+ 0.0 −− 1.0 + 0.0 + 13.4 + 0.4 − 0.6          Nov.
− 0.6 + 4.5 + 0.5 + 0.1 − + 0.0 − + 1.9 + 0.0 + 2.1 + 0.4 + 2.3          Dec.
− 4.6 − 0.5 − 2.7 + 0.1 − + 0.2 −− 0.8 − 0.0 −7.4 + 0.3 − 0.2 2001          Jan.
− 2.7 − 9.8 − 0.1 + 1.0 −− 0.1 −− 4.6 − 0.0 −7.7 + 0.6 − 4.0          Feb.
− 1.2 − 5.6 + 4.8 −1.2 − + 0.1 −− 0.5 − 0.0 −2.4 − 0.4 − 0.7          Mar.
+ 1.0 − 3.1 + 4.3 + 1.3 −− 0.2 −− 0.0 + 0.0 + 3.1 + 0.5 + 0.4          Apr.
− 0.1 −17.2 + 0.3 −1.2 + 7.5 + 0.3 −− 1.4 + 0.0 −3.1 + 1.1 − 0.1          May
− 0.3 + 12.5 − 0.3 −0.1 − 7.5 −0.2 −− 1.2 + 0.0 −1.9 + 0.1 − 1.3          June
+ 3.2 + 5.5 − 0.5 + 0.0 − + 0.0 −− 1.9 − 0.0 + 9.9 + 0.2 − 1.7          July
+ 1.3 − 8.4 + 1.2 −0.1 −− 0.2 −− 2.4 − 0.0 −3.5 + 0.2 − 2.4          Aug.
− 0.4 − 3.7 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 1.3 −0.0 −− 3.9 + 0.0 + 2.6 − 0.7 − 4.7          Sep.
− 2.4 − 7.0 + 1.3 + 0.4 − 1.3 −0.0 −− 4.7 − 0.0 −4.5 + 0.2 − 4.5          Oct.
− 1.5 + 2.0 − 1.7 −0.3 − + 0.2 −− 6.1 + 0.0 + 3.7 + 0.7 − 5.3          Nov.
− 0.4 − 5.8 + 1.7 + 0.0 + 5.0 + 0.3 −− 8.1 + 0.0 + 13.3 − 0.1 − 7.9          Dec.
+ 0.4 + 0.9 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 3.6 −0.2 −− 4.8 − 0.0 −2.2 + 1.1 − 3.9 2002          Jan.
+ 0.0 + 0.1 + 1.3 −0.2 − 1.4 −0.3 −− 13.2 − 0.0 + 13.6 − 0.4 − 13.8          Feb.
+ 0.1 − 4.9 − 1.7 + 0.1 − + 0.0 − + 1.2 − 0.0 −7.4 − 0.3 + 0.9          Mar.
+ 2.4 − 0.9 − 0.3 + 0.1 − + 0.1 − + 1.0 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.4 + 0.7          Apr.
− 0.0 − 4.5 − 0.7 −0.2 − + 0.1 − + 3.0 + 0.0 −8.7 + 0.1 + 3.3          May
− 0.7 + 7.5 − 0.9 + 0.1 −− 0.0 − + 1.6 − 0.0 + 4.2 + 0.2 + 1.8          June
− 6.9 + 7.0 − 1.7 + 0.0 −− 0.1 − + 3.8 + 0.0 −5.3 − 0.1 + 3.7          July
− 2.2 − 4.5 − 0.7 −0.1 −− 0.1 − + 3.0 − 0.0 −10.2 − 0.2 + 2.7          Aug.
− 0.1 + 1.3 − 3.7 + 0.0 − + 0.1 − + 0.2 − 0.0 −2.8 − 0.0 + 0.2          Sep.
NCBs, with each NCB showing in its balance sheet the percentage of the system and the statement of the Bundesbank. —5Equal to the difference
euro banknotes in circulation that corresponds to its paid-up share in the between the sum of liquidity-providing factors and the sum of li-ECB’s capital. The difference between the value of the euro banknotes quidity-absorbing factors. —6Calculated as the sum of the "deposit facili-
allocated to an NCB and the value of the euro banknotes which that NCB ty", "banknotes in circulation" and "credit institutions ’current account hold-
has put into circulation is likewise shown under "Other factors". — ings". — 7 Entry of Greece into the euro area on January 1, 2001. 
4Remaining items in the consolidated financial statement of the Euro-
15*II. Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  European  monetary  union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem M o d i f i e d t a b l e
 
1. Assets *
 
 
 5  billion
Claims on non-euro area Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
On investments, euro area Balances Claims
reporting external loans residents with banks, arising from
date/ Gold and other denominated security the creditEnd of Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility undermonth  
2 assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
 Eurosystem 1 X
 
2002 Jan.               25 839.7 126.8 269.5 32.0 237.5 22.2 6.3 6.3 −
         Feb.                 1 810.1 126.8 267.8 32.0 235.8 21.9 6.5 6.5 −
                                8 796.9 126.8 267.9 32.5 235.4 20.9 6.2 6.2 −
                              15 796.8 126.8 269.6 32.6 237.0 21.6 5.9 5.9 −
                              22 777.4 126.8 267.7 32.6 235.2 21.0 5.3 5.3 −
         Mar.                 1 790.2 126.8 266.0 32.6 233.5 22.0 5.4 5.4 −
                                8 786.3 126.8 267.9 32.5 235.4 21.2 5.1 5.1 −
                              15 779.0 126.9 269.6 32.5 237.1 22.2 5.2 5.2 −
                              22 781.8 126.8 269.4 32.5 237.0 22.4 5.1 5.1 −
                              28 4 814.9 4 139.8 4 267.7 32.6 4 235.1 21.8 5.2 5.2 −
         Apr.                 5 800.1 139.8 269.5 32.6 236.9 20.7 5.3 5.3 −
                              12 782.9 139.8 266.7 32.5 234.2 21.2 5.2 5.2 −
                              19 778.8 139.8 268.0 33.1 234.9 21.5 5.1 5.1 −
                              26 788.8 139.5 264.4 33.0 231.4 23.3 4.9 4.9 −
         May                 3 783.8 139.5 260.6 31.1 229.5 24.0 5.2 5.2 −
                              10 791.6 139.5 261.6 30.7 230.9 23.9 5.0 5.0 −
                              17 785.5 139.5 262.2 30.9 231.2 22.9 5.0 5.0 −
                              24 788.8 139.5 261.1 30.9 230.2 23.1 5.0 5.0 −
                              31 793.3 139.4 259.4 30.9 228.5 24.1 5.1 5.1 −
         June                 7 788.4 139.4 260.1 30.9 229.3 23.6 5.1 5.1 −
                              14 783.6 139.4 261.8 30.8 231.1 22.9 5.1 5.1 −
                              21 793.7 139.4 263.2 34.5 228.7 22.0 5.0 5.0 −
                              28 4 780.8 4 128.3 4 238.0 4 32.6 4 205.3 4 19.7 4.5 4.5 −
         July                 5 764.7 128.3 237.9 32.5 205.4 19.3 4.6 4.6 −
                              12 765.6 128.3 239.4 32.5 206.9 19.5 4.8 4.8 −
                              19 776.0 128.3 240.1 32.4 207.7 20.2 4.9 4.9 −
                              26 783.5 128.3 240.9 32.3 208.6 20.4 4.9 4.9 −
         Aug.                 2 771.6 128.3 240.1 32.3 207.8 20.0 4.9 4.9 −
                                9 768.6 128.3 239.4 32.1 207.3 19.3 4.8 4.8 −
                              16 763.5 128.3 237.4 32.4 205.0 19.4 4.9 4.9 −
                              23 764.1 128.3 240.0 32.4 207.6 17.9 4.8 4.8 −
                              30 770.8 128.3 238.5 32.4 206.0 17.0 5.3 5.3 −
         Sep.                 6 765.6 128.3 239.7 32.5 207.2 18.5 4.8 4.8 −
                              13 762.1 128.3 241.4 32.4 209.0 18.2 4.6 4.6 −
                              20 772.6 128.3 243.0 32.4 210.6 18.5 4.8 4.8 −
                              27 772.8 128.3 242.5 32.4 210.1 18.3 5.0 5.0 −
         Oct.                 4 4 778.3 4 131.2 4 248.3 32.6 4 215.7 18.5 4.5 4.5 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2000          Nov. 287.7 34.9 65.0 7.6 57.4 − 29.8 29.8 −
         Dec. 4 256.9 4 32.7 4 61.1 7.8 4 53.4 − 0.3 0.3 −
2001          Jan. 243.5 32.7 59.9 7.9 52.0 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Feb. 255.2 32.7 58.7 7.6 51.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Mar. 4 245.3 4 32.7 4 60.5 4 7.8 4 52.7 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Apr. 239.1 32.7 59.4 7.7 51.7 − 0.3 0.3 −
         May 229.8 32.7 58.8 7.7 51.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
         June 4 247.3 4 35.5 4 60.3 4 8.2 4 52.2 − 0.3 0.3 −
         July 241.0 35.4 60.4 8.2 52.3 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Aug. 238.4 35.4 60.0 8.1 51.9 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Sep. 4 233.4 35.4 4 59.1 4 9.0 4 50.2 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Oct. 226.6 35.4 59.5 8.8 50.7 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Nov. 225.6 35.4 59.9 8.7 51.3 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Dec. 4 239.9 4 35.0 4 58.2 4 8.7 4 49.5 − 0.3 0.3 −
2002          Jan. 230.6 35.0 60.0 8.8 51.2 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Feb. 221.4 35.0 59.9 8.8 51.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Mar. 4 227.4 4 38.5 4 59.6 4 8.8 4 50.8 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Apr. 205.3 38.5 58.0 8.3 49.6 − 0.3 0.3 −
         May 218.3 38.5 56.6 8.4 48.2 − 0.3 0.3 −
         June 4 217.9 4 35.4 4 51.2 8.8 4 42.4 − 0.3 0.3 −
         July 211.3 35.4 51.8 8.8 43.0 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Aug. 218.3 35.4 50.9 8.7 42.2 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Sep. 4 221.9 4 36.2 4 52.7 8.8 4 44.0 − 0.3 0.3 −
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the 1Source: ECB. —2For the Eurosystem: financial statement for specific
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the statements of the weekly dates; for the Bundesbank: up to the end of 2001 financialnational central banks of the EU member countries (NCBs) of the euro statement for the last Friday of each month, from 2002 end-of-montharea. —The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial statement. —3Until December 22, 2000, “Other claims “were
financial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quarter. — included in “Lending to euro area counterparties related to monetary
16*III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations
denominated in euro
 Other claims on euro area credit Securities General    On
Credits institutions of euro area government    reporting
Main Longer-term Fine-tuning Structural Marginal related denomi- residents debt    date/refinancing refinancing reverse reverse lending to margin nated in denominated denominated Other    End of
Total  
3 operations operations operations operations facility calls euro  3 in euro in euro assets    month  2 
Eurosystem 1 X
 
185.1 125.0 60.0 −− 0.0 0.0 44.4 27.9 68.6 88.9 2002 Jan.                25
201.1 141.0 60.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.5 27.6 68.6 89.4          Feb.                  1
189.0 129.0 60.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.5 27.9 68.6 89.1                                 8
186.0 126.0 60.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.3 28.2 68.6 89.8                               15
169.7 107.0 60.0 −− 2.7 0.0 0.2 29.0 68.6 88.9                               22
183.0 123.0 60.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.4 29.2 68.6 88.7          Mar.                  1
178.0 118.0 60.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.4 29.5 68.6 88.8                                 8
168.1 108.1 60.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.4 29.4 68.6 88.7                               15
170.6 110.1 60.0 −− 0.5 0.0 0.3 29.3 68.6 89.3                               22
192.7 132.0 60.0 −− 0.7 0.0 0.3 29.2 68.6 89.6                               28
178.0 118.0 60.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.3 29.1 68.6 88.9          Apr.                  5
163.1 103.0 60.0 −− 0.1 0.0 0.2 30.1 67.7 88.9                               12
157.0 97.0 60.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.2 30.3 67.7 89.2                               19
169.0 109.0 60.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.2 30.5 67.7 89.3                               26
169.0 109.0 60.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.3 30.1 67.7 87.4          May                  3
174.9 114.9 60.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.3 30.3 67.7 88.4                               10
169.0 109.0 60.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.3 29.9 67.7 88.9                               17
173.0 113.0 60.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.2 30.2 67.7 89.0                               24
178.4 118.0 60.0 −− 0.4 0.0 0.2 29.9 67.7 89.1                               31
173.3 113.0 60.0 −− 0.3 0.0 0.2 29.9 67.7 89.1          June                  7
167.0 107.0 60.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.2 30.1 67.7 89.2                               14
175.9 112.0 60.0 −− 3.9 0.0 0.2 30.2 67.7 90.1                               21
201.0 140.0 60.0 −− 0.9 0.0 0.5 30.5 67.7 90.7                               28
187.0 127.0 60.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.4 30.6 67.7 88.8          July                  5
186.0 126.0 60.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.4 30.5 67.7 89.1                               12
194.4 134.0 60.0 −− 0.4 0.0 0.2 30.7 67.7 89.5                               19
204.7 149.0 55.0 −− 0.7 0.0 0.4 30.7 67.7 85.5                               26
194.0 139.0 55.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.4 30.5 67.7 85.6          Aug.                  2
192.1 137.0 55.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.4 30.6 67.6 86.0                                 9
189.1 134.0 55.0 −− 0.1 0.0 0.2 30.7 67.2 86.3                               16
189.0 134.0 55.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.1 30.9 67.2 85.7                               23
197.0 147.0 50.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.4 31.4 67.2 85.8                               30
191.0 141.0 50.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.2 31.5 67.2 84.2          Sep.                  6
186.1 136.0 50.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.2 31.5 67.2 84.7                               13
194.0 144.0 50.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.2 31.5 67.2 85.1                               20
194.1 149.0 45.0 −− 0.1 0.0 0.3 31.5 67.2 85.6                               27
190.4 145.0 45.0 −− 0.4 0.0 0.6 4 32.1 67.2 85.5          Oct.                  4
 Deutsche Bundesbank
134.3 103.5 30.7 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.3 2000          Nov.
139.2 110.7 27.9 −− 0.6 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.1          Dec.
126.8 98.3 28.3 −− 0.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.4 2001          Jan.
140.0 109.9 28.3 −− 1.8 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.1          Feb.
119.3 81.2 38.0 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 28.0          Mar.
124.0 86.3 37.7 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.2          Apr.
115.1 77.3 37.7 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.4          May
128.2 91.2 36.9 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.6          June
121.8 83.5 38.3 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.7          July
114.0 74.5 39.1 −− 0.4 − 0.0 − 4.4 24.2          Aug.
111.7 70.2 40.3 −− 1.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 22.4          Sep.
108.2 69.8 38.4 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.7          Oct.
106.8 45.0 40.4 − 21.3 0.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.7          Nov.
123.0 80.5 41.1 −− 1.4 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.9          Dec.
112.3 69.5 42.8 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.6 2002          Jan.
103.7 61.7 40.4 −− 1.6 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.1          Feb.
106.8 65.7 40.4 −− 0.7 − 0.0 − 4.4 17.7          Mar.
86.6 46.7 39.6 −− 0.3 − 0.0 − 4.4 17.5          Apr.
101.0 62.3 38.6 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 17.4          May
109.1 71.2 36.9 −− 0.9 − 0.0 − 4.4 17.5          June
98.2 61.8 36.4 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 21.2          July
100.3 68.3 32.0 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 26.9          Aug.
104.2 72.4 31.7 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 24.0          Sep.
 
policy operations denominated in euro. “Since December 29, 2000 “Other end of the quarter. —XEnlargement of the euro area on January 1, 2001
claims on euro area credit institutions denominated in euro “have been through the accession of Greece. 
shown as a separate item. —4Changes are due mainly to revalutions at the
17*III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem M o d i f i e d t a b l e
 
2. Liabilities *
 
 
 5  billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilitiesaccounts to euro
On (covering Fine- area creditreporting the tuning Deposits institutions Debtdate/ Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
End of Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Othermonth  
2 liabilities Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment lation  3  4 liabilities
 Eurosystem 1 X
 
2002 Jan.               25 839.7 325.8 130.8 130.8 0.0 −− 0.0 12.4 2.9 61.3 55.6 5.8
         Feb.                 1 810.1 312.9 134.0 134.0 0.1 −−− 2.1 2.9 54.5 48.6 5.9
                                8 796.9 305.4 128.4 128.4 0.0 −−− 2.2 2.9 55.6 49.6 6.0
                              15 796.8 296.4 138.3 138.2 0.1 −−− 2.3 2.9 52.8 46.9 6.0
                              22 777.4 287.7 132.3 131.8 0.5 −−− 2.1 2.9 49.7 43.9 5.7
         Mar.                 1 790.2 285.8 134.9 134.9 0.1 −− 0.0 2.6 2.9 62.7 57.2 5.5
                                8 786.3 284.6 132.9 132.8 0.0 −− 0.0 2.6 2.9 61.8 56.3 5.5
                              15 779.0 281.7 134.3 134.2 0.1 −− 0.0 2.4 2.9 52.8 47.1 5.7
                              22 781.8 280.2 133.9 133.1 0.8 −− 0.0 2.2 2.9 57.1 51.4 5.7
                              28 5 814.9 287.5 131.4 131.3 0.1 −− 0.0 2.2 2.9 74.6 68.5 6.1
         Apr.                 5 800.1 287.7 132.4 132.4 0.0 −− 0.0 2.3 2.9 59.3 53.3 6.0
                              12 782.9 285.8 134.0 133.0 1.0 −− 0.0 2.3 2.9 56.0 50.2 5.8
                              19 778.8 284.9 134.3 134.3 0.0 −− 0.0 2.2 2.9 51.0 45.1 5.9
                              26 788.8 286.5 132.2 132.1 0.1 −−− 2.3 2.9 63.6 57.7 5.9
         May                 3 783.8 294.5 129.9 128.8 1.1 −− 0.0 2.2 2.9 53.3 47.3 5.9
                              10 791.6 297.3 134.3 134.1 0.2 −− 0.0 2.3 2.9 53.6 47.8 5.8
                              17 785.5 297.2 133.3 133.2 0.0 −− 0.0 2.2 2.9 47.3 41.2 6.0
                              24 788.8 295.2 128.6 128.5 0.0 −−− 2.2 2.9 60.7 54.8 5.9
                              31 793.3 299.0 130.2 130.1 0.1 −− 0.0 2.4 2.9 59.9 54.0 5.9
         June                 7 788.4 302.9 132.9 132.9 0.1 −− 0.0 2.5 2.9 48.0 42.1 5.8
                              14 783.6 303.6 128.2 128.2 0.0 −− 0.0 2.4 2.9 46.0 40.3 5.7
                              21 793.7 304.5 135.0 132.3 2.7 −− 0.0 2.2 2.9 48.3 42.5 5.9
                              28 5 780.8 308.8 134.9 134.8 0.1 −− 0.0 2.0 2.9 70.9 65.2 5.7
         July                 5 764.7 315.1 129.1 128.7 0.0 −− 0.4 0.2 2.9 57.5 52.7 4.8
                              12 765.6 316.7 129.4 129.4 0.0 −− 0.0 0.1 2.9 54.5 49.9 4.6
                              19 776.0 317.2 128.6 128.0 0.6 −− 0.0 0.0 2.9 62.7 58.0 4.7
                              26 783.5 317.6 132.4 132.3 0.0 −− 0.0 0.1 2.9 69.6 65.0 4.5
         Aug.                 2 771.6 324.0 129.3 129.2 0.0 −− 0.0 0.0 2.9 55.3 50.6 4.7
                                9 768.6 326.0 127.6 127.6 0.0 −− 0.0 0.3 2.9 52.3 47.6 4.7
                              16 763.5 325.8 129.4 129.4 0.0 −− 0.0 0.2 2.9 47.5 42.7 4.8
                              23 764.1 321.2 131.3 128.7 2.6 −− 0.0 0.1 2.9 49.8 45.1 4.7
                              30 770.8 321.8 126.1 125.9 0.1 −− 0.0 0.1 2.9 63.8 59.0 4.8
         Sep.                 6 765.6 325.8 129.9 129.8 0.0 −− 0.0 0.3 2.9 51.7 47.0 4.7
                              13 762.1 325.7 126.8 126.8 0.0 −− 0.0 0.1 2.9 50.1 45.4 4.7
                              20 772.6 324.5 130.0 129.9 0.1 −− 0.0 0.1 2.9 55.8 51.0 4.8
                              27 772.8 325.4 126.9 126.9 0.0 −−− 0.2 2.9 58.8 53.7 5.0
         Oct.                 4 5 778.3 331.7 127.3 127.3 0.1 −− 0.0 0.2 2.9 47.8 42.9 4.9
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2000          Nov. 287.7 129.3 31.0 30.9 0.1 −−− . − 0.4 0.1 0.3
         Dec. 5 256.9 133.9 47.0 46.9 0.1 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
2001          Jan. 243.5 126.8 33.1 33.1 0.0 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Feb. 255.2 126.2 46.1 45.8 0.3 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Mar. 5 245.3 125.3 45.1 45.0 0.1 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Apr. 239.1 125.0 40.8 40.8 0.0 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         May 229.8 124.1 32.6 32.5 0.1 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         June 5 247.3 121.9 42.7 42.5 0.2 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         July 241.0 119.9 33.6 33.6 0.0 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Aug. 238.4 116.5 48.0 48.0 0.0 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Sep. 5 233.4 112.0 48.3 48.2 0.0 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Oct. 226.6 106.7 34.0 34.0 0.0 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Nov. 225.6 99.0 49.9 49.8 0.1 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Dec. 5 239.9 76.5 57.5 57.4 0.1 −−− − − 1.0 0.1 1.0
2002          Jan. 230.6 82.5 46.1 46.1 0.0 −−− − − 1.0 0.1 0.9
         Feb. 221.4 79.8 41.6 41.5 0.0 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.6
         Mar. 5 227.4 80.5 42.0 42.0 0.1 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Apr. 205.3 81.7 40.1 38.9 1.2 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.5
         May 218.3 84.1 44.9 44.9 0.0 −−− − − 0.6 0.0 0.6
         June 5 217.9 86.9 41.4 41.3 0.1 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         July 211.3 90.0 40.7 40.6 0.0 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Aug. 218.3 90.7 44.3 44.2 0.1 −−− − − 0.5 0.0 0.5
         Sep. 5 221.9 92.0 41.0 41.0 0.0 −−− − − 0.6 0.0 0.5
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the specific weekly dates; for the Bundesbank: up to the end of 2001 financial
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the statements of the statement for the last Friday of each month, from 2002 end-of-monthnational central banks of the EU member countries (NCBs) of the euro financial statement. —3From 2002 euro banknotes and banknotes still in
area. —The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold and circulation issued by the national central banks of the Eurosystem. —
financial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quar- 4According to the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem on the
ter. —1Source: ECB. —2For the Eurosystem: financial statement for issue of euro banknotes, a share of 8% of the total value of the
18*III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated inforeign currency
 
Liabilities Intra-  
Liabilities to euro area Liabilities Counterpart Eurosystem     Onto non-euro residents Deposits, arising of special liability     reportingarea residents denominated balances from the drawing related to  Capital    date/denominated in foreign and other rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and    End of credit facility
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF liabilities issue  
4 accounts reserves    month  2 
Eurosystem 1 X
 
8.5 2.6 23.4 23.4 − 7.0 76.5 − 125.3 63.1 2002 Jan.                25
8.7 2.7 21.3 21.3 − 7.0 75.5 − 125.3 63.1          Feb.                  1
8.5 2.6 20.5 20.5 − 7.0 75.3 − 125.3 63.1                                 8
8.5 2.6 21.5 21.5 − 7.0 76.2 − 125.3 63.1                               15
8.6 2.6 19.0 19.0 − 7.0 77.0 − 125.3 63.1                               22
8.4 2.8 17.9 17.9 − 7.0 76.6 − 125.3 63.1          Mar.                  1
8.3 2.6 19.6 19.6 − 7.0 75.6 − 125.3 63.1                                 8
8.7 2.7 22.4 22.4 − 7.0 75.6 − 125.3 63.1                               15
8.5 2.6 22.9 22.9 − 7.0 75.9 − 125.3 63.3                               22
8.7 1.8 22.1 22.1 − 7.0 5 76.5 − 5 136.9 63.4                               28
8.5 1.5 22.2 22.2 − 7.0 75.8 − 136.9 63.7          Apr.                  5
8.5 1.5 20.0 20.0 − 7.0 64.2 − 136.9 63.7                               12
8.3 1.4 21.0 21.0 − 7.0 65.2 − 136.9 63.7                               19
8.4 1.4 19.1 19.1 − 7.0 64.8 − 136.9 63.7                               26
9.6 1.4 17.8 17.8 − 7.0 64.6 − 136.9 63.8          May                  3
8.5 1.4 18.9 18.9 − 7.0 64.6 − 136.9 63.8                               10
8.6 1.5 19.4 19.4 − 7.0 65.4 − 136.9 63.8                               17
8.4 1.4 18.8 18.8 − 7.0 62.6 − 136.9 64.1                               24
8.5 1.4 18.2 18.2 − 7.0 62.9 − 136.9 64.1                               31
8.6 1.4 18.6 18.6 − 7.0 62.5 − 136.9 64.3          June                  7
8.3 1.4 20.0 20.0 − 7.0 62.4 − 136.9 64.3                               14
8.9 1.4 19.1 19.1 − 7.0 62.9 − 136.9 64.3                               21
8.4 1.6 5 16.9 5 16.9 − 6.5 5 64.4 − 5 99.1 64.3                               28
8.5 1.2 16.9 16.9 − 6.5 63.3 − 99.1 64.3          July                  5
8.6 1.2 18.8 18.8 − 6.5 63.3 − 99.1 64.3                               12
8.6 1.5 20.0 20.0 − 6.5 64.5 − 99.1 64.3                               19
9.0 1.3 21.5 21.5 − 6.5 59.3 − 99.1 64.3                               26
9.4 1.4 20.4 20.4 − 6.5 59.1 − 99.1 64.3          Aug.                  2
8.6 1.3 19.7 19.7 − 6.5 59.9 − 99.1 64.3                                 9
8.6 1.3 17.3 17.3 − 6.5 60.5 − 99.1 64.3                               16
9.1 1.3 18.4 18.4 − 6.5 60.0 − 99.1 64.3                               23
9.0 1.3 16.1 16.1 − 6.5 59.8 − 99.1 64.3                               30
8.7 1.3 15.1 15.1 − 6.5 60.0 − 99.1 64.3          Sep.                  6
8.6 1.3 16.6 16.6 − 6.5 60.0 − 99.1 64.3                               13
9.0 1.5 18.1 18.1 − 6.5 60.7 − 99.1 64.3                               20
8.9 1.4 17.9 17.9 − 6.5 60.5 − 99.1 64.3                               27
9.2 1.3 18.1 18.1 − 6.6 5 62.5 − 5 106.3 64.3          Oct.                  4
 Deutsche Bundesbank
8.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.8 66.1 . 45.2 5.1 2000          Nov.
6.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 22.9 . 5 39.2 5.1          Dec.
6.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 30.4 . 39.2 5.1 2001          Jan.
6.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 29.5 . 39.2 5.1          Feb.
6.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 19.2 . 5 41.4 5.1          Mar.
6.8 0.0 −−− 1.7 17.8 . 41.4 5.1          Apr.
7.2 0.0 −−− 1.7 17.1 . 41.4 5.1          May
6.8 0.0 −−− 1.8 23.2 . 5 45.2 5.1          June
6.8 0.0 −−− 1.8 28.0 . 45.2 5.1          July
6.8 0.0 −−− 1.8 14.4 . 45.2 5.1          Aug.
6.8 0.0 1.8 1.8 − 1.7 15.3 . 5 41.8 5.1          Sep.
6.9 0.0 3.0 3.0 − 1.7 26.8 . 41.8 5.1          Oct.
6.9 0.0 4.1 4.1 − 1.7 16.4 . 41.8 5.1          Nov.
7.3 0.0 1.4 1.4 − 1.7 47.8 . 5 41.6 5.1          Dec.
7.1 0.0 3.3 3.3 − 1.7 30.6 11.6 41.6 5.1 2002          Jan.
7.0 0.0 3.2 3.2 − 1.7 32.6 8.2 41.6 5.1          Feb.
7.0 0.0 5 3.0 5 3.0 − 1.7 30.9 11.6 5 44.8 5.1          Mar.
7.0 0.0 2.4 2.4 − 1.7 9.1 12.9 44.8 5.1          Apr.
7.0 0.0 1.6 1.6 − 1.7 12.7 15.7 44.8 5.1          May
6.9 0.0 2.3 2.3 − 1.6 20.9 16.7 5 35.5 5.1          June
7.1 0.0 3.0 3.0 − 1.6 8.9 18.8 35.5 5.1          July
7.1 0.0 2.3 2.3 − 1.6 9.2 22.0 35.5 5.1          Aug.
7.2 0.0 2.8 2.8 − 1.6 10.2 24.1 5 37.3 5.1          Sep.
 
euro banknotes in circulation is allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to the NCB according tocounterpart of this adjustment is disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem liability the aforementioned accounting regime, and the value of euro banknotes
related to banknote issue. “The remaining 92% of the value of the euro put into circulation, is also disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem claim/ liability
banknotes in circulation are allocated to the NCBs on a monthly basis too, related to banknote issue. “— 5Changes are due mainly to revaluations at
whereby each NCB shows in its balance sheet a share of the euro banknotes the end of the quarter. —XEnlargement of the euro area on January 1,
issued corresponding to its paid-up share in the ECB ’s capital. The difference 2001 through the accession of Greece. 
19*III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
IV. Banks
 
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
   Assets
 
 Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999  5  billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area  3 Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other member countries to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and indi-
viduals
Secur- Secur-
Balance- ities itiessheet Cash Ad- issued Ad- issued Ad-
Period total  
2 in hand Total Total vances  3 by banks Total vances  3 by banks Total Total Total vances  3 
 End of year or month
 
1993 6,799.5 27.8 1,940.4 1,757.5 1,212.6 544.9 182.9 151.9 31.0 4,085.0 4,005.8 3,156.8 2,980.3
1994 7,205.7 26.2 2,030.1 1,854.1 1,285.1 569.1 175.9 145.0 30.9 4,411.4 4,333.2 3,391.3 3,143.2
1995 7,778.7 27.3 2,210.2 2,019.0 1,399.8 619.3 191.2 158.0 33.2 4,723.3 4,635.0 3,548.8 3,298.7
1996 8,540.5 30.3 2,523.0 2,301.1 1,585.7 715.4 221.9 181.2 40.7 5,084.7 4,981.9 3,812.8 3,543.01997 9,368.2 30.7 2,836.0 2,580.7 1,758.6 822.1 255.3 208.8 46.5 5,408.8 5,269.5 4,041.3 3,740.81998 10,355.5 29.9 3,267.4 2,939.4 1,977.4 962.0 328.1 264.9 63.1 5,833.9 5,615.9 4,361.0 3,966.51999 5,678.5 17.2 1,836.9 1,635.0 1,081.4 553.6 201.9 161.8 40.1 3,127.4 2,958.6 2,326.4 2,093.4
2000 6,083.9 16.1 1,977.4 1,724.2 1,108.9 615.3 253.2 184.5 68.6 3,249.9 3,062.6 2,445.7 2,186.6
2001 6,303.1 14.6 2,069.7 1,775.5 1,140.6 634.9 294.2 219.8 74.4 3,317.1 3,084.9 2,497.1 2,235.7
2000          Nov. 6,076.1 13.4 1,961.1 1,714.5 1,100.0 614.5 246.5 185.3 61.3 3,242.7 3,055.6 2,436.8 2,181.2
         Dec. 6,083.9 16.1 1,977.4 1,724.2 1,108.9 615.3 253.2 184.5 68.6 3,249.9 3,062.6 2,445.7 2,186.6
2001          Jan. 6,064.0 13.4 1,952.1 1,695.0 1,069.7 625.3 257.1 186.6 70.5 3,265.9 3,058.4 2,452.1 2,187.6
         Feb. 6,141.3 13.6 1,985.8 1,728.3 1,097.6 630.8 257.4 187.1 70.3 3,281.4 3,072.2 2,468.1 2,198.0         Mar. 6,259.3 13.1 2,037.0 1,749.6 1,111.2 638.4 287.4 215.0 72.3 3,309.4 3,095.3 2,487.6 2,204.2
         Apr. 6,283.6 13.7 2,036.3 1,750.8 1,101.7 649.1 285.5 211.3 74.2 3,311.9 3,092.6 2,492.9 2,202.3
         May 6,312.3 13.9 2,038.9 1,756.7 1,106.2 650.5 282.2 206.5 75.7 3,323.1 3,095.6 2,497.6 2,210.5         June 6,283.8 13.8 2,050.4 1,753.5 1,112.4 641.1 296.9 221.0 75.9 3,295.9 3,070.6 2,473.6 2,212.8
         July 6,225.8 13.8 2,036.5 1,748.3 1,100.6 647.7 288.2 213.2 75.0 3,298.4 3,073.9 2,466.3 2,206.8
         Aug. 6,236.5 13.5 2,037.6 1,751.9 1,113.0 638.9 285.7 210.6 75.1 3,289.2 3,061.6 2,464.3 2,207.2         Sep. 6,295.9 13.7 2,070.9 1,778.2 1,142.2 635.9 292.7 216.8 75.9 3,283.9 3,056.0 2,471.5 2,218.7
         Oct. 6,300.0 14.2 2,064.4 1,769.4 1,130.7 638.7 295.0 218.2 76.8 3,284.0 3,058.5 2,474.7 2,219.6
         Nov. 6,320.2 13.7 2,082.6 1,779.3 1,144.1 635.3 303.2 227.1 76.1 3,299.4 3,073.7 2,479.4 2,226.6         Dec. 6,303.1 14.6 2,069.7 1,775.5 1,140.6 634.9 294.2 219.8 74.4 3,317.1 3,084.9 2,497.1 2,235.7
2002          Jan. 6,255.1 27.7 2,019.8 1,728.4 1,094.0 634.4 291.4 216.2 75.2 3,310.8 3,075.1 2,487.1 2,225.5
         Feb. 6,230.4 19.5 2,004.6 1,725.2 1,084.2 641.0 279.4 202.9 76.5 3,311.9 3,074.7 2,485.5 2,227.3         Mar. 6,269.8 16.9 2,033.3 1,744.1 1,096.1 647.9 289.3 213.2 76.1 3,310.6 3,065.5 2,478.9 2,230.3
         Apr. 6,267.7 14.9 2,032.8 1,736.5 1,085.8 650.7 296.3 220.2 76.1 3,319.5 3,072.8 2,485.6 2,231.6
         May 6,304.5 14.7 2,055.5 1,749.0 1,096.7 652.2 306.6 230.7 75.8 3,323.3 3,074.2 2,485.6 2,232.0         June 6,277.4 14.3 2,073.9 1,758.9 1,111.2 647.6 315.1 238.1 77.0 3,304.8 3,059.5 2,477.9 2,233.2
         July 6,265.6 13.8 2,051.7 1,731.9 1,094.9 637.1 319.7 242.3 77.4 3,313.1 3,063.8 2,471.5 2,231.6
         Aug. 6,290.6 13.6 2,073.5 1,747.0 1,113.0 634.0 326.5 249.2 77.4 3,310.9 3,064.3 2,480.6 2,231.6
 Changes 1
1994 406.2 −1.6 89.7 96.6 72.4 24.2 −6.9 − 6.9 −0.1 326.5 327.4 257.5 185.9
1995 587.7 1.1 184.6 169.3 114.7 54.6 15.2 13.0 2.3 322.1 312.1 201.2 188.11996 761.8 3.0 312.8 282.1 186.0 96.1 30.7 23.2 7.5 361.5 346.9 264.0 244.31997 825.6 0.5 313.1 279.6 172.9 106.7 33.5 27.6 5.9 324.0 287.5 228.4 197.61998 1,001.0 −0.8 422.2 355.7 215.1 140.6 66.4 56.2 10.2 440.4 363.3 337.5 245.2
1999 452.6 1.8 179.8 140.1 81.4 58.6 39.8 26.3 13.5 206.6 158.1 156.8 126.4
2000 401.5 −1.2 143.0 91.7 28.1 63.6 51.4 22.8 28.6 123.2 105.4 116.8 89.5
2001 244.9 −1.4 91.0 50.7 30.3 20.5 40.3 34.5 5.8 55.1 23.9 50.4 48.1
2000          Dec. 30.4 2.7 16.9 10.0 8.9 1.1 6.9 − 0.7 7.7 12.1 10.5 12.3 8.7
2001          Jan. −18.1 −2.6 −25.9 −29.1 −39.2 10.1 3.1 1.3 1.8 2.2 −3.6 6.7 1.2
         Feb. 77.0 0.1 33.8 33.5 27.9 5.6 0.3 0.4 −0.1 15.6 13.9 16.1 10.5
         Mar. 105.7 −0.5 51.3 21.3 13.6 7.7 30.0 28.0 2.0 26.0 21.8 18.2 4.9
         Apr. 24.1 0.6 −2.0 −0.1 −10.9 10.7 −1.9 − 3.7 1.8 2.7 −2.5 5.5 −1.7
         May 12.3 0.1 2.4 5.9 4.6 1.3 −3.5 − 4.8 1.3 7.5 0.6 2.3 5.9
         June −26.6 −0.1 11.6 −3.2 6.2 −9.4 14.8 14.5 0.3 −26.5 −24.4 −23.6 2.7
         July −47.6 −0.0 −13.8 −5.2 −11.8 6.7 −8.7 − 7.8 −0.8 4.5 4.5 −6.1 −4.8
         Aug. 25.5 −0.3 1.3 3.6 12.4 −8.8 −2.3 − 2.6 0.2 −5.2 −8.9 −0.5 1.9
         Sep. 56.7 0.3 33.2 26.3 29.2 −3.0 6.9 6.2 0.8 −6.2 −6.5 6.4 10.6
         Oct. 1.6 0.4 −6.6 −8.9 −11.7 2.8 2.3 1.4 0.9 −0.2 2.3 3.0 0.8
         Nov. 51.1 −0.5 18.2 10.0 13.4 −3.3 8.2 8.9 −0.7 15.7 14.4 3.7 6.0
         Dec. −16.8 1.0 −12.3 −3.4 −3.5 0.1 −8.9 − 7.3 −1.7 18.9 12.4 18.7 10.1
2002          Jan. −51.6 13.0 −49.6 −46.7 −46.6 −0.1 −2.9 − 3.7 0.8 −7.3 −10.4 −10.7 −11.0
         Feb. −23.2 −8.2 −15.1 −3.1 −9.8 6.7 −12.0 − 13.3 1.2 1.8 0.1 −1.0 2.0
         Mar. 42.2 −2.5 28.9 19.0 11.9 7.1 9.9 10.3 −0.4 −1.0 −8.9 −6.5 3.0
         Apr. 7.7 −2.0 −0.9 −8.0 −10.3 2.3 7.1 7.0 0.1 11.0 8.7 8.1 2.3
         May 52.5 −0.2 23.2 12.8 11.1 1.8 10.4 10.5 −0.2 6.6 3.6 2.1 2.4
         June −5.7 −0.4 18.4 9.7 14.3 −4.5 8.6 7.4 1.3 −19.8 −17.1 −10.1 −1.1
         July −19.6 −0.5 −22.6 −27.2 −16.3 −10.9 4.6 4.2 0.3 7.2 3.6 −7.1 −2.6
         Aug. 24.8 −0.2 19.3 15.0 18.1 −3.1 4.3 4.3 0.0 −1.7 0.9 8.8 0.3
*This table serves to supplement the Overall monetary survey of section II; includes −in addition to the figures reported by banks (including building
it is planned to compare the figures for MFIs in the euro area with the data and loan associations) −the data of money market funds. —1Statistical
for Germany. Notwithstanding the other tables in section IV, this table breaks have been eliminated from the flow figures. —2Up to December
20*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
IV. Banks
 
   
 
euro area  3 Claims on
non-euro-area
to non-banks in other member countries residents
 Public Enterprises and Public authorities individuals authorities
of which: of which:
Secur- Ad- Secur- Ad- Ad- Secur- Ad- Otherities Total vances  
3 ities 4 Total Total vances  3 Total vances  3 ities Total vances  3 assets   Period
End of year or month
 
176.5 849.0 599.6 249.4 79.1 44.5 44.5 34.6 8.4 26.3 565.2 504.8 181.1 1993
248.1 941.9 650.1 291.8 78.2 39.6 39.6 38.6 8.3 30.3 548.8 479.6 189.2 1994
250.0 1,086.3 792.2 294.1 88.2 39.4 39.2 48.8 11.3 37.6 608.5 526.0 209.4 1995
269.7 1,169.1 857.8 311.4 102.8 36.8 36.8 66.0 17.2 48.8 678.1 575.3 224.4 1996300.6 1,228.2 911.0 317.2 139.2 41.9 41.2 97.3 23.4 73.9 839.6 710.2 253.1 1997394.5 1,254.9 939.1 315.8 218.0 62.5 56.0 155.5 35.6 119.9 922.0 758.0 302.2 1998233.0 632.1 488.4 143.7 168.8 65.3 35.9 103.6 20.7 82.8 511.2 404.2 185.8 1999
259.1 616.9 478.5 138.4 187.3 83.8 44.2 103.5 20.0 83.5 622.4 481.7 218.1 2000
261.3 587.8 468.7 119.1 232.3 111.3 53.7 121.0 26.2 94.8 727.3 572.0 174.3 2001
255.6 618.8 477.8 141.0 187.1 82.2 44.4 104.9 20.2 84.7 631.6 490.4 227.4 2000          Nov.
259.1 616.9 478.5 138.4 187.3 83.8 44.2 103.5 20.0 83.5 622.4 481.7 218.1          Dec.
264.5 606.3 483.7 122.6 207.5 87.7 46.2 119.8 26.3 93.5 616.5 479.8 216.1 2001          Jan.
270.1 604.1 482.3 121.7 209.2 89.6 46.5 119.6 23.7 95.8 642.0 500.1 218.6          Feb.
283.4 607.7 482.5 125.2 214.1 95.1 49.0 119.0 24.1 94.9 670.6 522.6 229.3          Mar.
290.7 599.6 477.1 122.5 219.3 99.5 48.3 119.9 24.0 95.9 689.7 536.9 231.9          Apr.
287.1 598.0 475.5 122.5 227.5 103.5 48.4 123.9 24.3 99.7 698.1 541.1 238.4          May260.7 597.1 469.2 127.8 225.2 104.4 50.8 120.8 24.5 96.3 693.2 535.9 230.4          June
259.5 607.6 470.3 137.3 224.5 103.2 49.7 121.4 24.0 97.3 663.1 510.4 214.1          July
257.0 597.3 469.5 127.8 227.5 102.0 49.2 125.6 24.1 101.5 683.8 531.3 212.6          Aug.252.9 584.5 466.8 117.7 228.0 103.5 51.1 124.5 23.8 100.7 712.8 558.0 214.6          Sep.
255.1 583.8 467.7 116.1 225.5 105.2 51.7 120.3 24.1 96.2 722.0 563.7 215.5          Oct.
252.8 594.3 477.4 116.9 225.7 107.8 52.4 117.9 24.8 93.1 741.7 584.8 182.8          Nov.261.3 587.8 468.7 119.1 232.3 111.3 53.7 121.0 26.2 94.8 727.3 572.0 174.3          Dec.
261.6 588.1 469.5 118.5 235.6 113.5 54.7 122.1 25.7 96.4 723.8 569.9 173.1 2002          Jan.
258.2 589.2 466.9 122.3 237.2 114.6 56.1 122.6 25.8 96.8 721.8 566.7 172.6          Feb.
248.6 586.6 464.3 122.3 245.0 118.7 60.1 126.3 26.7 99.6 730.8 574.6 178.3          Mar.
254.0 587.2 460.4 126.9 246.7 120.1 61.5 126.6 26.4 100.2 721.2 568.3 179.3          Apr.
253.6 588.6 455.2 133.4 249.0 121.3 62.6 127.7 26.0 101.8 734.8 580.6 176.1          May244.6 581.6 450.0 131.6 245.4 118.1 61.5 127.2 26.0 101.2 712.6 559.4 171.7          June
239.9 592.3 458.1 134.2 249.3 118.1 59.8 131.2 26.5 104.7 712.9 557.9 174.2          July
249.1 583.7 448.5 135.2 246.6 114.3 58.3 132.3 26.9 105.4 722.0 566.9 170.7          Aug.
Changes 1
71.6 69.9 27.5 42.4 −0.9 −4.9 −4.9 4.0 −0.0 4.0 −16.4 −25.1 8.1 1994
13.1 110.9 113.1 −2.1 10.0 −0.2 −0.4 10.2 3.0 7.3 59.7 46.3 20.2 1995
19.7 82.9 65.5 17.3 14.6 −2.6 −2.5 17.2 6.0 11.2 69.5 49.3 15.1 1996
30.8 59.1 53.3 5.8 36.5 5.1 4.4 31.4 6.1 25.3 159.4 132.9 28.6 199792.3 25.8 28.1 −2.3 77.1 18.9 13.0 58.3 12.5 45.7 83.9 52.0 55.3 1998
30.4 1.3 7.7 −6.4 48.4 12.2 6.4 36.2 2.0 34.2 33.1 13.8 31.3 1999
27.3 −11.4 −6.7 −4.6 17.8 16.8 7.2 1.0 −0.3 1.2 103.9 71.9 32.5 2000
2.4 −26.5 −9.8 −16.7 31.3 24.3 7.7 7.0 2.2 4.8 110.1 86.6 −9.9 2001
3.6 −1.8 0.8 −2.5 1.6 2.3 0.4 −0.7 0.0 −0.8 8.0 5.8 −9.3 2000          Dec.
5.5 −10.4 5.2 −15.6 5.8 1.3 0.7 4.5 2.4 2.1 10.3 4.7 −2.0 2001          Jan.
5.6 −2.2 −1.4 −0.8 1.7 1.9 0.3 −0.2 −2.5 2.3 25.1 19.9 2.4          Feb.
13.3 3.6 0.1 3.5 4.2 5.0 2.0 −0.8 0.2 −1.0 18.2 13.3 10.7          Mar.
7.2 −8.1 −5.4 −2.7 5.3 4.4 −0.6 0.9 −0.1 1.0 20.1 15.2 2.6          Apr.
−3.6 −1.7 −1.6 −0.1 6.9 3.5 −0.4 3.5 0.1 3.4 −4.1 −6.5 6.4          May
−26.3 −0.9 −6.2 5.4 −2.0 1.0 2.4 −3.0 0.2 −3.2 −3.7 −4.2 −8.0          June
−1.3 10.6 1.0 9.6 −0.0 −0.9 −0.8 0.9 −0.3 1.2 −21.9 −18.4 −16.4          July
−2.4 −8.4 −0.7 −7.7 3.7 −0.8 −0.1 4.5 0.2 4.3 31.3 30.2 −1.6          Aug.
−4.2 −12.9 −2.8 −10.1 0.3 1.5 1.9 −1.1 −0.3 −0.8 27.3 25.1 2.1          Sep.
2.2 −0.7 0.9 −1.5 −2.5 1.6 0.5 −4.1 0.3 −4.4 7.1 3.9 0.8          Oct.
−2.3 10.7 9.8 0.9 1.3 2.5 0.6 −1.2 0.6 −1.8 16.3 18.0 1.3          Nov.
8.6 −6.3 −8.8 2.4 6.6 3.4 1.2 3.2 1.4 1.8 −15.9 −14.6 −8.5          Dec.
0.3 0.3 0.8 −0.5 3.0 2.1 0.9 1.0 −0.6 1.5 −6.4 −6.4 −1.2 2002          Jan.
−3.0 1.2 −2.6 3.8 1.6 1.1 1.3 0.5 0.1 0.4 −1.2 −2.7 −0.4          Feb.
−9.6 −2.4 −2.6 0.2 7.9 4.1 4.1 3.8 1.0 2.8 11.3 11.5 5.6          Mar.
5.7 0.6 −3.9 4.5 2.2 1.8 1.7 0.5 −0.2 0.7 −1.2 1.1 0.8          Apr.
−0.3 1.6 −5.1 6.7 3.0 1.6 1.5 1.4 −0.3 1.6 25.8 23.0 −3.0          May
−9.0 −7.0 −5.1 −1.9 −2.7 −2.6 −0.5 −0.2 0.2 −0.4 0.6 −0.3 −4.5          June
−4.5 10.7 8.1 2.6 3.5 −0.3 −2.0 3.8 0.4 3.4 −6.1 −7.1 2.5          July
8.5 −7.9 −9.6 1.7 −2.6 −3.5 −1.4 0.9 0.4 0.5 10.9 10.6 −3.5          Aug.
1998, volume of business (balance-sheet total plus endorsement liabilities bill-based lending instead of bill holdings. —4Including debt securities
and bills sent for collection from the banks ’portfolios prior to maturity) and arising from the exchange of equalisations claims. 
trust funds. —3Up to December 1998, including loans an a trust basis and
21*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
IV. Banks
 
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
   Liabilities
 
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999  5  billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area  4 
in the euro area  3 
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities  5 notice  6 
 
Balance- in the in other of which: of which:
sheet home member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total  2 Total country countries Total Total night Total  4 Total 3 months Total night 2 years  7 
 End of year or month
 
1993 6,799.5 1,556.3 1,438.2 118.1 2,982.1 2,810.6 489.6 1,312.6 628.5 1,008.4 587.7 70.6 3.5
1994 7,205.7 1,650.9 1,483.5 167.4 3,082.7 2,894.4 510.4 1,288.3 549.2 1,095.8 654.6 80.1 4.1
1995 7,778.7 1,761.5 1,582.0 179.6 3,260.0 3,038.9 549.8 1,289.0 472.0 1,200.1 749.5 110.1 4.5
1996 8,540.5 1,975.3 1,780.2 195.1 3,515.9 3,264.0 638.1 1,318.5 430.6 1,307.4 865.7 137.3 7.51997 9,368.2 2,195.6 1,959.1 236.5 3,647.1 3,376.2 654.5 1,364.9 426.8 1,356.9 929.2 162.5 7.31998 10,355.5 2,480.3 2,148.9 331.4 3,850.8 3,552.2 751.6 1,411.1 461.6 1,389.6 971.9 187.4 9.41999 5,678.5 1,288.1 1,121.8 166.3 2,012.4 1,854.7 419.5 820.6 247.0 614.7 504.4 111.1 6.5
2000 6,083.9 1,379.4 1,188.9 190.5 2,051.4 1,873.6 441.4 858.8 274.3 573.5 450.5 107.9 6.9
2001 6,303.1 1,418.0 1,202.1 215.9 2,134.0 1,979.7 525.0 880.2 290.6 574.5 461.9 105.2 7.6
2000          Nov. 6,076.1 1,373.3 1,189.5 183.8 2,019.7 1,846.0 438.1 845.2 262.4 562.7 442.3 110.6 7.5
         Dec. 6,083.9 1,379.4 1,188.9 190.5 2,051.4 1,873.6 441.4 858.8 274.3 573.5 450.5 107.9 6.9
2001          Jan. 6,064.0 1,345.5 1,145.1 200.4 2,025.9 1,860.9 429.9 861.6 276.3 569.3 446.3 107.4 8.0
         Feb. 6,141.3 1,377.4 1,159.8 217.5 2,036.3 1,872.7 442.1 863.3 278.2 567.2 444.2 105.6 6.2         Mar. 6,259.3 1,396.1 1,179.9 216.2 2,040.4 1,874.4 440.7 868.1 281.8 565.6 443.0 108.4 7.6
         Apr. 6,283.6 1,399.2 1,170.1 229.1 2,044.2 1,878.0 450.8 864.5 279.0 562.7 442.1 108.0 7.5
         May 6,312.3 1,397.2 1,169.6 227.7 2,053.8 1,883.9 453.9 870.1 282.1 559.9 440.4 110.9 8.8         June 6,283.8 1,390.9 1,183.6 207.3 2,061.5 1,893.3 462.1 872.4 283.7 558.7 440.1 109.2 8.2
         July 6,225.8 1,374.9 1,168.1 206.8 2,055.1 1,888.4 458.8 873.2 285.8 556.4 439.0 106.9 7.6
         Aug. 6,236.5 1,367.7 1,168.2 199.4 2,058.6 1,893.2 461.9 876.2 289.0 555.1 439.0 105.5 6.6         Sep. 6,295.9 1,398.9 1,196.0 203.0 2,074.6 1,912.0 479.2 877.4 289.0 555.4 440.0 105.6 8.3
         Oct. 6,300.0 1,386.9 1,176.9 210.0 2,077.0 1,914.5 482.5 875.6 287.3 556.4 442.8 107.1 7.7
         Nov. 6,320.2 1,418.2 1,198.8 219.4 2,102.7 1,938.6 509.6 870.9 284.1 558.2 445.6 107.5 8.6         Dec. 6,303.1 1,418.0 1,202.1 215.9 2,134.0 1,979.7 525.0 880.2 290.6 574.5 461.9 105.2 7.6
2002          Jan. 6,255.1 1,375.4 1,153.3 222.2 2,112.2 1,957.1 511.0 872.8 281.4 573.4 464.3 105.0 8.1
         Feb. 6,230.4 1,346.3 1,141.7 204.6 2,107.5 1,955.2 510.5 872.7 278.8 572.0 463.9 102.9 8.2         Mar. 6,269.8 1,371.2 1,157.9 213.3 2,108.5 1,954.0 508.0 875.2 278.4 570.8 463.8 105.1 8.1
         Apr. 6,267.7 1,362.1 1,129.9 232.1 2,099.9 1,948.3 515.1 871.3 274.5 561.8 456.7 104.1 10.1
         May 6,304.5 1,382.7 1,150.7 232.0 2,107.1 1,957.8 523.5 874.3 277.0 560.1 456.1 101.1 7.4         June 6,277.4 1,392.3 1,174.8 217.4 2,118.7 1,970.2 535.6 875.7 278.3 558.9 455.1 99.9 8.5
         July 6,265.6 1,371.7 1,149.6 222.1 2,111.9 1,964.9 531.2 876.2 278.0 557.5 453.6 99.5 8.0
         Aug. 6,290.6 1,389.2 1,165.7 223.5 2,098.3 1,962.0 526.7 877.6 280.7 557.8 453.8 87.4 7.3
 Changes 1
1994 406.2 94.6 45.3 49.3 100.6 83.8 20.8 −24.3 −79.3 87.4 66.9 9.4 0.6
1995 587.7 110.7 98.5 12.2 189.3 156.5 47.2 4.9 −76.5 104.3 99.1 30.0 0.4
1996 761.8 213.7 198.2 15.5 256.0 225.2 88.3 29.5 −41.4 107.3 116.2 27.2 3.0
1997 825.6 223.7 185.5 38.3 130.8 112.1 16.3 46.4 −3.8 49.4 60.3 25.0 −0.3
1998 1,001.0 277.0 182.8 94.2 205.9 176.8 97.8 46.3 34.8 32.7 42.0 26.2 2.01999 452.6 70.2 66.4 3.7 75.0 65.6 34.2 36.7 13.5 −5.3 7.4 7.5 1.7
2000 401.5 87.5 66.0 21.5 38.7 19.8 22.5 37.8 27.0 −40.5 −53.6 −4.2 0.3
2001 244.9 32.4 8.4 24.0 80.6 105.2 83.0 21.2 16.2 1.1 11.4 −4.0 0.4
2000          Dec. 30.4 6.1 −0.6 6.6 35.2 30.1 3.8 15.5 12.1 10.8 8.2 −1.6 −0.5
2001          Jan. −18.1 −34.9 −43.8 8.9 −26.1 −12.8 −11.4 2.8 1.9 −4.1 −4.1 −1.2 1.0
         Feb. 77.0 31.9 14.7 17.2 10.3 11.6 11.9 1.7 1.9 −2.1 −2.1 −1.8 −1.8
         Mar. 105.7 15.3 16.6 −1.3 2.9 1.2 −1.8 4.6 3.5 −1.6 −1.2 2.1 1.4
         Apr. 24.1 2.1 −10.7 12.8 3.6 3.6 10.0 −3.5 −2.8 −2.9 −0.9 −0.4 −0.3
         May 12.3 −2.2 −0.5 −1.7 8.4 5.2 2.7 5.3 3.0 −2.8 −1.7 2.2 1.3
         June −26.6 −6.3 14.0 −20.3 7.8 9.4 8.3 2.4 1.6 −1.2 −0.3 −1.5 −0.6
         July −47.6 −16.0 −15.5 −0.6 −5.4 −4.4 −3.1 1.0 2.2 −2.4 −1.1 −1.9 −0.5
         Aug. 25.5 −7.2 0.1 −7.4 4.7 5.3 3.4 3.2 3.3 −1.2 0.0 −0.7 −1.1
         Sep. 56.7 31.3 27.8 3.5 15.7 18.7 17.3 1.2 −0.0 0.2 1.0 −0.1 1.7
         Oct. 1.6 −12.0 −19.1 7.1 2.1 2.4 3.2 −1.8 −1.7 1.0 2.8 1.4 −0.6
         Nov. 51.1 30.8 21.4 9.4 25.4 24.0 26.9 −4.7 −3.3 1.8 2.8 0.2 1.0
         Dec. −16.8 −0.3 3.3 −3.6 31.2 41.0 15.4 9.2 6.5 16.4 16.3 −2.3 −1.0
2002          Jan. −51.6 −42.6 −48.9 6.3 −22.3 −22.8 −14.2 −7.5 −9.2 −1.2 2.4 −0.4 0.4
         Feb. −23.2 −29.1 −11.5 −17.6 −4.7 −1.9 −0.4 −0.0 −2.6 −1.4 −0.4 −2.2 0.1
         Mar. 42.2 24.9 16.2 8.7 1.2 −1.1 −2.5 2.5 −0.5 −1.2 −0.1 2.4 −0.1
         Apr. 7.7 −9.2 −28.0 18.8 −7.9 −5.4 7.4 −3.8 −3.8 −9.0 −7.1 −0.6 1.9
         May 52.5 20.9 21.1 −0.1 9.2 11.0 8.8 3.9 3.2 −1.7 −0.6 −2.5 −2.6
         June −5.7 6.9 22.2 −15.3 11.9 12.1 12.0 1.3 1.3 −1.2 −1.0 −0.6 1.2
         July −19.6 −20.5 −25.2 4.6 −7.4 −5.6 −4.6 0.4 −0.4 −1.4 −1.5 −0.7 −0.6
         Aug. 24.8 17.5 16.1 1.5 1.0 −2.8 −4.5 1.4 2.7 0.3 0.1 2.5 −0.7
*This table serves to supplement the Overall monetary survey of section II; 1998, volume of business (balance-sheet total plus endorsement liabiliti es
it is planned to compare the figures for MFIs in the euro area with the data and bills sent for collection from the banks ’portfolios prior to maturity) and
for Germany. Notwithstanding the other tables in section IV, this table liabilities incurred in the banks ’own name but on behalf of third parties. —
includes −in addition to the figures reported by banks (including building 3Up to December 1998, including liabilities arising from loans on a trust
and loan associations) −the data of money market funds. —1Statistical basis and liabilities arising from rediscounted bills (endorsement
breaks have been eliminated from the flow figures. —2Up to December liabilities). —4Up to December 1998, including liabilities arising from
22*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
IV. Banks
 
   
 
 Debt securities
issued  10 
in other member countries  8 Deposits of
central governments  4 
With agreed At agreed
maturities notice
of which: Money of which: Liabilitiesdomestic market with to non- Liabilities
of which: of which: central arising fund euro- Capital maturities
up to up to govern- from of up to area and Other certificates
Total  
4 Total 3 months Total ments repos  9 Total reserves   Period 2 years  7 issued  10 2 years  10 residents Liabilities
End of year or month
 
60.3 6.8 6.8 6.8 100.8 100.8 −− 1,327.6 85.5 302.2 278.3 353.0 1993
68.7 11.8 7.3 7.3 108.2 108.2 − 31.3 1,441.2 81.9 336.8 305.2 357.8 1994
97.3 11.4 8.3 8.3 111.0 111.0 − 39.1 1,608.1 70.3 393.9 325.0 391.0 1995
120.6 9.0 9.2 9.2 114.6 114.6 − 34.0 1,804.3 54.4 422.1 350.0 438.8 1996
145.8 9.2 9.4 9.4 108.3 108.3 − 28.6 1,998.3 62.5 599.2 388.1 511.3 1997
168.3 13.8 9.7 9.7 111.2 111.2 − 34.8 2,248.1 80.2 739.8 426.8 574.8 1998
99.7 8.9 4.8 3.7 46.6 45.9 2.0 20.8 1,323.6 97.4 487.9 262.6 281.1 1999
96.3 6.7 4.7 3.3 69.9 67.6 0.4 19.3 1,417.1 113.3 599.8 298.1 318.4 2000
92.4 9.0 5.2 3.8 49.1 46.9 4.9 33.2 1,445.4 129.3 647.6 319.2 300.8 2001
98.5 6.5 4.6 3.2 63.2 62.2 1.3 19.8 1,425.9 109.7 621.6 292.2 322.2 2000          Nov.
96.3 6.7 4.7 3.3 69.9 67.6 0.4 19.3 1,417.1 113.3 599.8 298.1 318.4          Dec.94.4 6.5 5.0 3.5 57.7 55.7 1.8 20.6 1,434.5 111.5 626.3 297.7 311.9 2001          Jan.
94.4 7.0 5.0 3.5 58.0 55.5 1.6 21.5 1,450.2 112.4 640.7 299.6 314.1          Feb.
95.8 7.7 5.0 3.5 57.6 56.1 0.9 22.7 1,457.8 113.8 720.4 302.5 318.5          Mar.
95.6 7.7 5.0 3.5 58.1 55.5 1.4 23.3 1,460.3 116.3 725.9 301.8 327.6          Apr.
97.1 8.4 5.0 3.5 59.0 55.1 1.8 23.4 1,466.2 117.4 744.6 304.7 320.5          May96.1 8.7 5.0 3.5 58.9 55.2 1.1 24.2 1,468.0 118.0 717.9 307.2 313.0          June
94.2 8.0 5.0 3.5 59.8 55.3 1.7 25.0 1,473.1 123.7 682.5 310.3 303.3          July
94.0 8.4 5.0 3.6 59.9 54.5 4.6 26.5 1,468.1 123.5 693.7 312.6 304.9          Aug.92.3 7.3 5.0 3.6 57.0 54.0 2.8 28.0 1,471.1 125.6 692.2 314.2 314.0          Sep.
94.4 9.8 5.0 3.6 55.4 53.4 9.4 29.6 1,473.1 126.7 690.0 318.2 315.8          Oct.
93.8 9.3 5.1 3.7 56.5 53.6 4.0 30.7 1,448.5 123.8 677.1 321.3 317.6          Nov.92.4 9.0 5.2 3.8 49.1 46.9 4.9 33.2 1,445.4 129.3 647.6 319.2 300.8          Dec.
91.8 8.1 5.1 3.8 50.1 47.4 2.5 35.0 1,450.5 122.2 668.3 320.1 291.1 2002          Jan.
89.6 7.3 5.1 3.8 49.4 47.3 3.5 35.9 1,462.8 125.4 664.8 322.2 287.3          Feb.
92.0 9.3 5.0 3.7 49.4 46.9 3.7 35.8 1,479.4 129.0 666.4 323.3 281.6          Mar.
89.4 8.3 4.7 3.5 47.5 45.8 3.4 35.9 1,478.2 133.1 673.4 325.3 289.7          Apr.
89.1 9.5 4.7 3.4 48.2 45.6 4.7 35.4 1,480.6 134.6 673.3 329.0 291.6          May86.7 8.5 4.6 3.4 48.7 45.9 4.1 35.0 1,472.6 133.1 628.9 331.1 294.7          June
87.0 8.7 4.6 3.4 47.6 45.8 3.1 35.6 1,471.6 133.7 640.9 336.8 293.9          July
75.5 9.7 4.6 3.4 48.9 45.8 4.3 37.0 1,487.8 134.4 636.3 342.7 294.8          Aug.
Changes 1
8.3 5.0 0.4 0.4 7.4 7.4 − 31.3 113.5 −3.6 34.5 26.9 4.8 1994
28.6 −0.4 1.0 1.0 2.8 2.8 − 7.8 166.9 −11.5 57.2 19.8 36.0 1995
23.3 −2.4 0.9 0.9 3.6 3.6 −− 5.1 196.3 −15.9 28.1 25.0 47.8 1996
25.1 0.2 0.2 0.2 −6.2 −6.2 −− 4.5 194.8 8.1 172.3 37.1 71.2 1997
24.0 4.6 0.3 0.3 2.9 2.9 − 6.2 263.3 28.1 151.4 28.8 68.3 1998
5.9 1.5 −0.2 −1.3 1.9 1.2 0.6 3.5 168.0 65.1 89.7 38.0 7.7 1999
−4.5 −0.5 −0.1 −0.3 23.1 21.6 −1.6 −1.5 90.6 15.9 97.8 35.3 54.6 2000
−4.6 1.6 0.2 0.4 −20.5 −20.4 4.6 13.3 59.5 18.6 34.8 20.9 −1.1 2001
−1.2 0.3 0.1 0.1 6.7 5.4 −0.9 −0.5 −2.7 3.9 −3.7 7.3 −10.3 2000          Dec.
−2.1 −0.5 −0.0 −0.0 −12.2 −11.9 1.4 1.2 17.9 −1.8 29.0 −0.4 −6.2 2001          Jan.
0.0 0.6 0.0 0.0 0.5 0.0 −0.2 1.0 15.6 0.9 13.8 1.9 2.8          Feb.
0.7 0.7 0.0 0.0 −0.4 0.6 −0.6 1.1 5.1 2.1 66.2 2.3 13.4          Mar.
−0.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.5 −0.7 0.5 0.7 2.6 2.5 6.7 −0.7 8.6          Apr.
1.0 0.1 −0.0 0.0 0.9 −0.4 0.4 0.0 1.3 1.0 2.2 2.1 0.2          May
−0.9 0.3 0.0 0.0 −0.1 0.1 −0.7 0.9 2.8 0.5 −25.2 2.6 −8.3          June
−1.4 −0.6 0.0 0.0 0.9 0.1 0.6 0.8 7.7 5.8 −25.0 3.6 −13.8          July
0.3 0.4 0.0 0.0 0.1 −0.8 2.9 1.5 −2.9 −0.5 24.7 2.9 −1.1          Aug.
−1.8 −1.1 0.0 0.0 −2.9 −0.5 −1.7 1.5 2.5 2.0 −3.7 1.5 9.6          Sep.
1.9 2.5 0.0 0.0 −1.6 −0.6 6.5 1.6 1.6 0.2 −4.9 4.0 2.7          Oct.
−0.8 −0.6 0.0 0.0 1.1 0.1 −5.3 1.1 8.5 0.3 −17.1 2.8 4.9          Nov.
−1.5 −0.2 0.1 0.2 −7.4 −6.6 0.9 1.9 −3.2 5.5 −32.0 −1.6 −13.8          Dec.
−0.8 −0.9 −0.1 −0.0 1.0 0.5 −2.4 2.0 4.0 −2.4 15.1 0.7 −6.0 2002          Jan.
−2.2 −0.9 −0.1 −0.0 −0.7 −0.2 1.0 0.8 12.7 3.2 −2.8 2.3 −3.3          Feb.
2.5 2.0 −0.0 −0.0 −0.0 −0.3 0.2 −0.1 16.9 3.6 3.7 1.2 −5.8          Mar.
−2.3 −1.0 −0.3 −0.3 −1.9 −1.2 −0.3 0.2 0.9 4.1 15.9 2.3 5.8          Apr.
0.2 1.3 −0.1 −0.0 0.7 −0.1 1.3 −0.0 6.2 1.7 12.6 4.1 −1.8          May
−1.8 −1.0 −0.0 0.0 0.5 0.3 −0.6 −0.3 −3.8 −1.8 −28.2 2.5 5.9          June
−0.1 0.2 −0.1 −0.0 −1.1 −0.1 −1.0 0.6 −3.4 −1.2 5.4 5.2 1.6          July
3.2 1.0 −0.0 −0.0 1.4 0.0 1.2 1.4 1.5 2.3 −2.6 4.5 0.2          Aug.
loans on a trust basis. —5For the German contribution: from 1999 governments ’deposits. —9Data collected separately only from 1999; up to
including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see table IV.12). — December 1998, included in the deposits with agreed maturities of up to 2
6For the German contribution: up to the end of 1998 including deposits years. —10In Germany, debt securities with maturities of up to one year
under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 5). —7Up to December are classed as money market paper; up to January 2002 monthly report they
1998, with maturities of less than 4 years. —8Excluding central were published together with money market fund certificates. 
23*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
IV. Banks
 
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks *
 
 
 5  billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
  of which of which 
Loans and advances
 not evidenced
 Cash in by certificates for hand and
Number of balancesreporting Balance with Balances up to and Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Othermonth tions total banks Total advances banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets  
1 
All categories of banks
 
2002          Mar. 2,510 6,349.0 61.4 2,234.1 1,551.1 675.8 3,593.2 487.9 2,568.0 5.2 518.4 142.3 317.9
         Apr. 2,509 6,346.9 55.9 2,238.4 1,553.4 677.3 3,590.9 478.3 2,567.6 5.1 524.5 142.5 319.3
         May 2,498 6,384.1 60.2 2,269.0 1,582.5 679.1 3,594.9 475.2 2,566.5 4.9 533.0 143.2 316.8         June 2,466 6,319.7 58.5 2,278.0 1,595.8 674.7 3,565.9 465.7 2,560.6 4.9 520.4 142.5 274.7
         July 2,437 6,308.1 55.1 2,258.0 1,585.9 662.9 3,574.8 462.7 2,568.1 4.9 526.1 142.2 278.0
         Aug. 2,424 6,331.8 59.6 2,281.4 1,614.9 657.2 3,563.4 446.1 2,573.3 4.9 523.3 152.9 274.6
Commercial banks 6
2002          July 274 1,753.9 20.5 588.0 456.8 125.9 942.6 239.8 538.1 2.2 155.5 86.9 115.8         Aug. 274 1,757.3 22.4 592.2 462.9 124.3 938.4 229.1 540.2 2.2 157.2 92.8 111.5
   Big banks 7
2002          July 4 1,005.8 12.7 320.1 262.5 54.0 524.4 139.9 288.0 1.3 91.8 76.9 71.7         Aug. 4 1,012.5 14.3 326.0 269.6 52.8 521.7 133.5 288.6 1.4 92.3 82.6 67.8
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2002          July 189 635.6 7.2 210.2 144.0 65.5 377.1 80.5 234.2 0.8 58.5 9.2 31.9         Aug. 189 636.5 7.3 211.9 146.0 65.2 375.6 76.8 235.4 0.8 59.3 9.4 32.4
   Branches of foreign banks
2002          July 81 112.5 0.6 57.7 50.4 6.4 41.2 19.4 15.9 0.1 5.2 0.8 12.2         Aug. 81 108.2 0.8 54.3 47.3 6.3 41.0 18.8 16.3 0.1 5.7 0.8 11.3
Land banks
2002          July 13 1,273.2 1.7 630.3 497.1 131.3 567.1 67.0 403.1 0.4 92.4 26.5 47.5         Aug. 14 1,292.7 4.4 647.1 515.0 129.9 561.9 64.5 405.6 0.4 86.8 31.7 47.6
Savings banks
2002          July 525 974.5 18.7 228.7 68.9 159.5 690.9 78.8 518.7 1.5 91.5 12.0 24.1         Aug. 524 974.6 18.3 228.4 70.8 157.3 691.4 77.4 520.3 1.4 91.9 12.1 24.4
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives  
 
2002          July 2 192.5 1.2 120.7 83.3 37.4 56.6 12.0 25.2 0.1 19.1 9.1 4.9         Aug. 2 192.0 0.9 122.7 85.3 37.3 54.3 10.7 25.0 0.1 18.3 9.1 4.9
Credit cooperatives
2002          July 1,554 545.0 11.4 135.6 58.7 76.0 376.4 50.5 287.3 0.8 37.4 3.8 17.7         Aug. 1,541 547.0 11.4 137.5 60.3 76.1 376.8 50.0 287.9 0.8 37.7 3.8 17.6
Mortgage banks
2002          July 27 900.0 1.2 233.3 153.2 79.3 642.0 8.1 536.3 − 97.5 1.1 22.5
         Aug. 27 894.2 1.8 227.7 148.4 78.5 640.5 7.7 534.2 − 98.4 1.1 23.2
Building and loan associations
2002          July 28 161.1 0.1 37.3 25.3 12.0 115.4 1.6 103.9 . 9.8 0.4 8.0         Aug. 28 160.7 0.0 36.6 24.9 11.8 115.6 1.6 104.2 . 9.8 0.4 8.1
Banks with special functions
2002          July 14 507.9 0.2 284.0 242.5 41.5 183.8 4.9 155.5 − 22.9 2.3 37.5
         Aug. 14 513.4 0.5 289.3 247.3 42.0 184.5 5.0 155.9 − 23.2 1.8 37.3
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
2002          July 132 387.2 2.2 156.7 116.1 39.5 199.9 38.6 120.7 0.2 39.8 1.5 26.9         Aug. 133 384.7 3.6 153.0 112.2 40.0 200.2 37.4 120.6 0.2 41.7 1.7 26.1
  of which: Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
2002          July 51 274.7 1.6 99.0 65.7 33.1 158.8 19.3 104.8 0.1 34.6 0.7 14.6         Aug. 52 276.5 2.8 98.7 64.9 33.7 159.2 18.6 104.3 0.1 36.1 0.9 14.8
*For the period up to December 1998, section IV (except for table IV.1) respective items, see the footnotes to table IV.3. —1Decreases in June 2002
shows the assets and liabilities of banks (excluding building and loan caused by elimination of previously recorded debt securities; see also
associations) in Germany; from January 1999, the assets and liabilities of footnote 5. —2For building and loan associations: Including deposits under
monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets and liabilities savings and loan contracts (see table IV. 12). —3Included in time
of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are likewise classified as deposits. —4Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also
MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the footnote 2). —5Including subordinated negotiable bearer debt
24*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
IV. Banks
 
   
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
  (including
of which of which published
reserves,
Savings deposits  4 partici- Time deposits for  2 
pation
Memo rightsitem: Bearer capital,
of which: debt Liabilities
funds for
up to and more arising At three Bank general securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking Other   End of months ’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year  2 repos  3 Total notice bonds risks   month standing  5 liabilities
All categories of banks
 
1,792.0 248.0 1,543.6 2,369.8 544.2 354.0 777.5 39.5 582.5 472.5 111.6 1,545.1 279.9 362.3 2002          Mar.
1,786.1 246.6 1,539.2 2,365.6 551.7 353.5 775.9 37.1 572.8 464.8 111.6 1,544.4 280.3 370.6          Apr.
1,805.0 232.7 1,572.0 2,375.5 558.7 360.5 773.5 41.8 571.0 464.1 111.7 1,549.4 282.2 372.0          May1,790.7 266.0 1,524.4 2,365.6 574.5 341.5 767.3 30.2 569.8 463.1 112.5 1,506.6 283.4 373.5          June
1,775.9 239.5 1,536.2 2,364.1 570.2 344.1 768.5 30.9 568.3 461.5 113.0 1,510.7 284.1 373.3          July
1,788.7 207.1 1,581.3 2,351.1 561.9 352.3 755.5 35.9 568.6 461.6 112.9 1,527.7 290.0 374.4          Aug.
Commercial banks 6
646.1 135.5 510.4 647.5 250.2 162.2 141.3 26.1 84.0 68.7 9.8 216.2 104.4 139.8 2002          July
646.7 108.7 537.7 631.6 239.2 172.4 125.9 32.3 84.4 68.8 9.7 233.7 104.9 140.3          Aug.
Big banks 7
376.4 89.8 286.6 336.2 117.7 109.4 88.3 24.9 19.8 17.7 1.0 148.7 67.0 77.5 2002          July
383.2 70.5 312.6 319.0 107.7 117.5 73.1 30.9 19.8 17.7 0.9 166.1 67.0 77.3          Aug.
Regional banks and other commercial banks
186.6 32.6 153.8 299.3 126.3 49.8 50.2 0.8 64.1 51.0 8.8 67.4 34.5 47.8 2002          July
184.1 27.6 156.3 300.7 126.1 51.2 50.1 1.0 64.5 51.1 8.8 67.6 35.0 49.1          Aug.
Branches of foreign banks
83.1 13.1 70.0 12.0 6.2 3.1 2.7 0.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 2.9 14.5 2002          July
79.4 10.5 68.9 11.9 5.4 3.7 2.7 0.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 2.9 14.0          Aug.
Land banks
458.2 57.4 400.7 301.9 37.7 44.4 205.0 3.3 14.3 13.0 0.6 397.9 57.1 58.0 2002          July
470.1 55.3 414.9 300.2 38.6 41.1 205.5 2.4 14.3 13.0 0.6 402.8 62.3 57.3          Aug.
Savings banks
220.8 4.6 216.2 616.3 170.2 64.6 10.3 − 298.0 236.0 73.2 47.5 44.3 45.6 2002          July
218.3 5.4 212.9 617.8 171.2 65.3 10.3 − 297.7 235.9 73.2 47.5 44.3 46.6          Aug.
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives
 
109.3 28.5 80.7 30.0 6.4 4.7 18.9 1.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 36.2 9.3 7.7 2002          July
108.6 27.0 81.7 30.2 6.7 4.5 19.0 1.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 35.7 9.3 8.1          Aug.
Credit cooperatives
76.5 1.8 74.7 386.7 103.1 58.7 24.0 − 171.7 143.6 29.2 32.8 28.3 20.8 2002          July
76.9 1.7 75.2 388.3 103.6 59.6 24.2 − 171.8 143.6 29.2 32.6 28.3 20.8          Aug.
Mortgage banks
113.6 4.9 108.6 143.5 1.5 3.2 138.6 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.2 596.1 18.6 28.2 2002          July
112.4 3.6 108.8 142.7 1.4 3.6 137.6 − 0.0 0.0 0.2 591.6 18.6 28.9          Aug.
Building and loan associations
29.5 2.3 27.1 100.4 0.3 0.7 99.1 − 0.3 0.3 0.1 8.0 7.1 16.2 2002          July
29.7 1.9 27.8 100.5 0.3 0.7 99.1 − 0.3 0.3 0.1 7.9 7.1 15.6          Aug.
Banks with special functions
121.9 4.4 117.5 137.8 0.9 5.6 131.3 0.2 −−− 176.0 15.1 57.1 2002          July
125.9 3.6 122.3 139.8 0.9 5.0 133.9 0.1 −−− 175.9 15.1 56.8          Aug.
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
143.2 27.7 115.3 97.5 47.2 14.6 27.9 0.6 5.4 5.1 2.3 97.5 12.7 36.3 2002          July
138.0 20.6 117.2 99.6 48.0 15.8 27.9 0.4 5.6 5.3 2.3 97.7 13.3 36.1          Aug.
of which: Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
60.1 14.7 45.3 85.5 41.0 11.5 25.2 0.2 5.4 5.1 2.3 97.4 9.7 21.9 2002          July
58.6 10.1 48.4 87.7 42.6 12.1 25.1 − 5.6 5.3 2.3 97.6 10.4 22.1          Aug.
securities; excluding non-negotiable negotiable bearer debt securities. of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks and included in other
Decreases in June 2002 caused by transition to net recording of outstanding categories of banks and of the category ”Branches (of dependent legal
debt securities (ie less own debt securities). —6Commercial banks comprise status) of foreign banks ”— 9Separate presentation of the banks
the sub-groups ”Big banks ”,”Regional banks and other commercial banks ” majority-owned by foreign banks included in the categories ”Regional
and ”Branches of foreign banks ”.—7Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner Bank banks and other commercial banks ” and ”Mortgage banks ”. 
AG, Commerzbank AG and Bayerische Hypo- und Vereinsbank AG. —8Sum
25*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
IV. Banks
 
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis- à-vis residents *
 
 
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999  5  billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs)  2, 3 Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3, 8 
Balances Treasury
Cash in and loans Negotiable Loans and bills and
hand and ad- money advances negotiable
Balances market Memo not money mar- (euro-area vances not Securities
notes with the evidenced paper item evidenced ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- by certi- issued by issued by Trust by certi- issued by by non-
Period coins)  1 bank Total ficates Bills  4 banks  5 banks  6 loans  7 Total ficates Bills  4 non-banks banks  9 
End of year or month *
 
1992 26.8 88.2 1,483.5 1,020.8 19.0 − 435.1 8.6 3,478.2 3,034.9 52.1 9.6 237.8
1993 26.7 75.3 1,596.8 1,076.2 14.7 3.3 493.2 9.3 3,826.4 3,291.6 44.7 5.6 327.7
1994 25.0 61.5 1,695.6 1,150.6 17.4 4.6 513.6 9.5 4,137.2 3,502.8 45.9 2.2 433.7
1995 26.0 61.0 1,859.9 1,264.9 17.5 4.3 561.9 11.4 4,436.9 3,802.0 46.8 1.4 427.3
1996 28.9 59.7 2,134.0 1,443.3 17.9 3.4 657.2 12.2 4,773.1 4,097.9 44.8 5.9 437.21997 29.3 60.2 2,397.9 1,606.3 18.1 3.6 758.9 11.1 5,058.4 4,353.9 44.7 2.9 473.31998 28.5 63.6 2,738.2 1,814.7 14.6 12.2 887.7 9.1 5,379.8 4,639.7 32.8 5.0 527.81999 16.8 45.6 1,556.9 1,033.4 0.0 19.2 504.2 3.9 2,904.5 2,569.6 7.0 3.0 287.5
2000 15.6 50.8 1,639.6 1,056.1 0.0 26.8 556.6 3.6 3,003.7 2,657.3 6.5 2.3 304.7
2001 14.2 56.3 1,676.0 1,078.9 0.0 5.6 591.5 2.8 3,014.1 2,699.4 4.8 4.4 301.5
2001          Mar. 12.6 46.3 1,668.2 1,062.3 0.0 22.4 583.5 3.4 3,033.2 2,680.2 6.0 2.8 339.2
         Apr. 13.2 40.3 1,675.2 1,058.9 0.0 20.6 595.7 3.5 3,030.3 2,673.1 6.0 2.5 343.9
         May 13.4 43.9 1,677.9 1,060.1 0.0 18.5 599.2 3.4 3,032.7 2,679.8 5.9 2.9 339.3         June 13.2 46.1 1,671.6 1,063.4 0.0 16.8 591.5 3.4 3,007.7 2,676.1 5.8 2.3 318.7
         July 13.2 50.5 1,661.4 1,046.9 0.0 14.4 600.0 3.4 3,008.2 2,671.1 5.7 4.4 323.0
         Aug. 13.0 49.3 1,665.7 1,060.7 0.0 12.9 592.1 2.8 2,995.3 2,671.0 5.6 3.7 311.1         Sep. 13.2 51.2 1,689.6 1,087.9 0.0 11.2 590.6 2.8 2,989.9 2,679.6 5.6 4.9 295.7
         Oct. 13.6 54.4 1,676.9 1,072.8 0.0 11.1 593.0 2.9 2,992.5 2,681.6 5.5 4.4 297.1
         Nov. 13.2 55.9 1,684.1 1,084.2 0.0 7.5 592.3 2.8 3,009.4 2,698.5 5.3 3.7 297.9         Dec. 14.2 56.3 1,676.0 1,078.9 0.0 5.6 591.5 2.8 3,014.1 2,699.4 4.8 4.4 301.5
2002          Jan. 26.7 49.3 1,633.8 1,038.5 0.0 5.7 589.7 2.8 3,011.2 2,690.2 4.6 3.0 309.5
         Feb. 18.8 42.0 1,636.3 1,035.4 0.0 5.2 595.7 2.8 3,006.1 2,689.6 4.4 2.8 305.4         Mar. 16.5 44.4 1,653.0 1,045.6 0.0 5.8 601.5 2.7 2,996.9 2,689.9 4.5 2.7 295.9
         Apr. 14.5 40.9 1,648.3 1,038.4 0.0 6.3 603.6 2.7 3,004.3 2,687.4 4.4 3.7 304.9
         May 14.3 45.4 1,655.7 1,044.4 0.0 6.1 605.2 2.7 3,005.7 2,682.8 4.2 4.6 310.2         June 13.9 43.8 1,668.4 1,061.5 0.0 6.3 600.6 2.7 2,990.8 2,678.8 4.3 5.2 298.7
         July 13.4 41.2 1,643.8 1,047.7 0.0 7.6 588.4 2.6 2,995.7 2,685.3 4.3 4.2 299.1
         Aug. 13.2 46.0 1,650.2 1,060.1 0.0 7.7 582.4 2.7 2,987.3 2,675.6 4.2 3.9 300.6
Changes *
1993 −0.1 −12.9 + 133.3 + 75.2 −4.3 + 0.1 + 61.5 + 0.7 + 339.8 + 259.1 −7.4 −4.5 + 102.0
1994 −1.7 −13.8 + 99.1 + 73.6 + 2.7 + 1.3 + 21.3 + 0.1 + 320.5 + 240.2 + 1.2 −3.3 + 86.7
1995 + 1.0 −0.5 + 193.5 + 139.4 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 54.3 + 0.2 + 312.8 + 303.6 + 1.0 −0.8 + 2.9
1996 + 2.9 −1.3 + 257.8 + 161.8 + 0.4 − 1.1 + 95.8 + 0.8 + 336.3 + 311.7 −2.0 + 4.7 + 10.6
1997 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 262.5 + 160.7 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 102.6 −1.1 + 285.2 + 255.5 −0.1 −3.0 + 36.5
1998 −0.8 + 3.4 + 343.3 + 210.3 −3.6 + 8.6 + 130.0 −2.0 + 335.3 + 302.1 −11.9 + 2.1 + 52.1
1999 + 2.2 + 13.2 + 122.1 + 66.3 + 0.0 + 12.9 + 42.8 −0.7 + 156.1 + 136.9 + 2.6 + 0.4 + 16.7
2000 −1.1 + 5.1 + 83.6 + 21.7 −0.0 + 7.6 + 54.3 −0.3 + 100.7 + 83.7 −0.5 −0.8 + 19.0
2001 −1.4 + 5.5 + 34.6 + 20.1 −0.0 −21.3 + 35.8 −0.9 + 11.9 + 40.8 −1.6 + 1.6 + 0.3
2001          Mar. −0.3 + 3.0 + 17.2 + 9.3 −− 1.9 + 9.7 −0.1 + 21.1 + 4.9 + 0.1 −0.5 + 16.0
         Apr. + 0.6 −6.1 + 5.8 − 4.6 + 0.0 − 1.8 + 12.2 + 0.0 − 2.7 − 6.9 −0.0 −0.3 + 4.6
         May + 0.1 + 3.6 + 0.7 − 0.7 −0.0 − 2.1 + 3.5 −0.1 − 0.1 + 4.3 −0.1 + 0.4 − 4.6
         June −0.1 + 2.2 − 6.0 + 3.5 −0.0 − 1.7 − 7.8 −0.0 −24.5 − 3.3 −0.1 −0.6 −20.6
         July + 0.0 + 4.4 − 9.2 −15.4 −0.0 − 2.4 + 8.6 + 0.0 + 1.7 − 3.7 −0.0 + 2.1 + 4.3
         Aug. −0.3 −1.2 + 5.7 + 15.2 −− 1.5 − 8.0 −0.6 − 9.6 + 1.3 −0.1 −0.7 −10.1
         Sep. + 0.3 + 1.9 + 23.5 + 26.7 −0.0 − 1.7 − 1.5 −0.0 − 6.3 + 7.8 + 0.0 + 0.6 −14.7
         Oct. + 0.4 + 3.2 −13.0 −15.3 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 2.4 −0.0 + 2.4 + 1.7 −0.1 −0.5 + 1.3
         Nov. −0.5 + 1.6 + 6.9 + 11.1 −− 3.6 − 0.6 −0.1 + 16.1 + 15.9 −0.1 −0.7 + 1.0
         Dec. + 1.0 + 0.3 − 7.7 − 5.4 −0.0 − 1.9 − 0.3 −0.0 + 5.8 + 1.7 −0.5 + 0.7 + 3.8
2002          Jan. + 12.5 −6.9 −42.5 −41.0 −0.0 + 0.1 − 1.6 −0.0 − 3.4 − 9.9 −0.3 −1.5 + 8.3
         Feb. −8.0 −7.3 + 2.7 − 2.9 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 6.1 −0.0 − 4.9 − 0.5 −0.2 −0.2 − 4.1
         Mar. −2.3 + 2.4 + 16.9 + 10.3 −0.0 + 0.6 + 6.0 −0.0 − 8.6 + 0.7 + 0.1 −0.1 − 9.3
         Apr. −2.0 −3.5 − 5.0 − 7.2 − + 0.5 + 1.6 −0.0 + 8.1 − 2.3 −0.1 + 1.0 + 9.4
         May −0.2 + 4.5 + 7.7 + 6.2 −0.0 − 0.2 + 1.7 −0.1 + 2.2 − 3.9 −0.2 + 0.9 + 5.4
         June −0.4 −1.6 + 12.5 + 16.9 −0.0 + 0.1 − 4.6 + 0.0 −19.0 − 8.0 + 0.1 + 0.5 −11.5
         July −0.5 −2.5 −24.9 −13.8 − + 1.4 −12.4 −0.0 + 5.1 + 6.5 −0.0 −1.0 + 0.6
         Aug. −0.2 + 4.8 + 6.4 + 12.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 6.0 + 0.0 − 8.4 − 9.6 −0.0 −0.2 + 1.5
*See table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the from rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks ’
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as portfolios prior to maturity). —5Up to November 1993, included in
provisional. Subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following securities (see also footnote 6). —6Up to November 1993, including
Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Up to December 1998: negotiable money market paper; excluding registered debt securities. —
domestic notes and coins. —2Up to December 1998, excluding loans to 7From 1999, no longer included in loans or deposits (see also footnote
domestic building and loan associations. —3Up to December 1998, 3). —8Up to December 1998, including loans to domestic building and loan
including loans on a trust basis; see also footnote 7. —4Up to December associations. —9Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of
1998, bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising equalisation claims; see also footnote 10. —10Including debt securities
26*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
IV. Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3, 11, 12  Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3, 17 
Partici-
patinginterestsin
Memo domestic Bills Memo Memo
Equalisa- item banks Sight Time redis- item Sight Time Savings Bank itemtion Trust and deposits deposits counted Trust deposits deposits deposits savings Trust
loans  
7 Total 13, 14  14, 15  16 loans  7 Total 13 15, 18  19 bonds  20 loans  7   Period claims  10 enterprises
End of year or month *
 
64.3 79.5 49.4 1,266.2 301.2 864.7 78.0 22.4 2,570.4 468.3 1,020.9 770.7 240.0 70.4 1992
75.3 81.6 59.5 1,395.2 380.2 917.9 69.2 27.9 2,788.1 513.6 1,123.6 859.4 219.1 72.4 199368.1 84.4 70.7 1,427.9 342.8 976.9 75.2 33.1 2,875.7 540.2 1,109.3 940.5 206.9 78.8 1994
71.3 88.1 83.2 1,539.4 363.9 1,065.1 75.5 35.0 3,021.1 579.9 1,086.1 1,046.1 227.4 81.6 1995
81.3 106.0 89.7 1,731.0 401.1 1,202.4 75.4 52.2 3,241.5 675.1 1,109.8 1,143.0 227.8 85.8 199676.0 107.6 95.1 1,902.3 427.6 1,349.1 75.6 50.0 3,341.9 689.8 1,146.9 1,182.1 236.9 86.1 199771.6 102.8 129.2 2,086.9 472.5 1,505.2 59.4 49.7 3,520.3 799.5 1,194.1 1,211.0 234.9 80.9 199837.5 58.0 75.6 1,122.0 114.4 1,007.3 0.3 29.8 1,905.3 420.4 759.6 614.7 110.7 42.1 1999
33.1 58.5 82.7 1,189.2 113.4 1,075.3 0.4 30.1 1,945.8 443.4 819.9 573.5 109.0 42.1 2000
4.0 57.0 95.9 1,204.9 123.1 1,081.6 0.3 27.2 2,034.0 526.4 827.0 574.5 106.0 43.3 2001
4.9 58.5 85.8 1,180.2 124.5 1,055.5 0.2 29.8 1,935.3 442.1 817.8 565.6 109.8 42.6 2001          Mar.
4.9 58.4 86.1 1,169.9 127.7 1,041.9 0.2 29.8 1,938.3 451.9 813.8 562.7 109.8 42.7          Apr.
4.8 57.2 86.5 1,169.5 119.5 1,049.8 0.2 28.3 1,944.0 454.9 819.2 559.9 110.0 42.9          May4.9 56.8 86.5 1,183.9 127.1 1,056.5 0.2 28.3 1,953.3 465.0 819.8 558.8 109.8 42.7          June
4.0 56.7 89.4 1,168.2 116.2 1,051.8 0.2 28.1 1,948.4 461.4 821.0 556.4 109.7 42.7          July
4.0 57.6 89.6 1,167.9 119.2 1,048.4 0.2 28.1 1,953.2 463.5 825.0 555.1 109.6 42.8          Aug.4.0 57.4 89.0 1,196.4 137.1 1,059.1 0.2 28.1 1,971.0 480.2 826.1 555.4 109.3 42.7          Sep.
4.0 57.2 88.7 1,177.5 124.2 1,053.1 0.2 28.1 1,977.5 483.7 829.0 556.4 108.4 42.4          Oct.
4.0 57.0 87.2 1,198.9 146.7 1,052.0 0.2 27.9 1,999.2 511.0 822.5 558.2 107.6 42.5          Nov.4.0 57.0 95.9 1,204.9 123.1 1,081.6 0.3 27.2 2,034.0 526.4 827.0 574.5 106.0 43.3          Dec.
3.9 56.7 89.6 1,159.4 115.6 1,043.6 0.2 27.3 2,009.8 511.5 819.9 573.4 105.1 42.4 2002          Jan.
3.9 56.4 95.1 1,148.5 119.8 1,028.5 0.2 27.3 2,007.8 511.3 819.7 572.0 104.8 42.2          Feb.
3.9 56.2 95.4 1,164.8 126.0 1,038.6 0.2 27.1 2,006.6 509.2 821.7 570.8 104.9 42.1          Mar.
3.9 56.1 95.7 1,138.3 123.2 1,014.9 0.2 27.0 1,999.3 515.7 816.8 561.8 104.9 42.0          Apr.
3.9 56.0 95.8 1,158.7 113.4 1,045.1 0.1 26.8 2,009.4 523.8 820.6 560.1 105.0 41.9          May3.9 55.4 95.5 1,182.3 132.1 1,050.1 0.1 26.0 2,021.4 536.2 820.6 558.9 105.7 41.5          June
3.0 55.2 95.0 1,157.4 118.2 1,039.1 0.1 25.9 2,016.2 531.6 821.1 557.5 106.0 41.6          July
3.0 55.2 105.9 1,173.0 115.3 1,057.6 0.1 25.9 2,013.9 527.2 823.0 557.8 105.9 41.6          Aug.
Changes *
−11.4 + 2.1 + 9.8 + 145.3 + 75.1 + 77.1 −8.8 + 1.9 + 216.7 + 43.8 + 96.9 + 88.7 −14.6 + 2.0 1993
−6.9 + 2.6 + 11.3 + 32.4 −31.4 + 53.0 + 6.0 + 4.9 + 85.0 + 28.3 −14.1 + 81.2 −12.2 + 1.8 1994
−1.2 + 7.3 + 12.5 + 134.2 + 20.4 + 111.5 + 0.4 + 2.0 + 158.3 + 48.9 −14.2 + 105.6 + 11.7 + 6.3 1995
+ 8.0 + 3.3 + 6.5 + 175.9 + 36.6 + 137.7 −0.2 + 1.7 + 218.4 + 94.3 + 23.2 + 96.9 + 0.7 + 3.3 1996
−5.3 + 1.6 + 5.4 + 175.9 + 31.6 + 146.7 + 0.2 −2.6 + 100.5 + 13.0 + 37.1 + 39.1 + 9.2 + 2.1 1997
−4.4 −4.8 + 34.1 + 179.0 + 39.7 + 156.4 −16.2 −0.9 + 179.3 + 110.6 + 47.2 + 28.9 −2.1 −5.3 1998
−0.6 + 0.1 + 9.3 + 69.0 − 1.8 + 81.8 −11.1 −0.4 + 67.3 + 32.7 + 48.4 − 4.5 −9.3 + 0.7 1999
−0.8 + 0.5 + 7.1 + 64.7 − 2.3 + 66.9 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 41.3 + 22.3 + 61.1 −40.5 −1.7 −0.0 2000
−29.1 −1.5 + 13.3 + 9.6 + 7.4 + 2.3 −0.2 −2.9 + 88.5 + 82.3 + 8.1 + 1.1 −2.9 + 1.0 2001
+ 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 15.3 − 0.6 + 16.1 −0.2 −0.1 + 0.9 − 1.7 + 4.0 − 1.6 + 0.3 + 0.1 2001          Mar.
−0.1 −0.1 + 0.3 −11.0 + 2.5 −13.5 −0.0 −0.0 + 2.9 + 9.8 − 4.0 − 2.9 −0.0 + 0.1          Apr.
−0.0 −1.2 + 0.5 − 2.3 −10.2 + 7.9 + 0.0 −1.5 + 5.0 + 2.2 + 5.4 − 2.8 + 0.2 + 0.2          May
+ 0.1 −0.3 + 0.0 + 14.6 + 7.9 + 6.7 + 0.0 −0.0 + 9.4 + 10.2 + 0.6 − 1.2 −0.1 −0.2          June
−0.9 −0.1 + 3.0 −14.5 − 9.8 − 4.7 −0.0 −0.2 − 4.4 − 3.1 + 1.2 − 2.4 −0.1 + 0.1          July
+ 0.0 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 1.1 + 4.5 − 3.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 5.3 + 2.7 + 4.0 − 1.2 −0.1 + 0.1          Aug.
+ 0.0 −0.1 −0.5 + 28.1 + 17.4 + 10.7 −0.0 −0.0 + 17.8 + 16.7 + 1.2 + 0.2 −0.3 −0.2          Sep.
−0.0 −0.1 −0.3 −19.1 −13.1 − 6.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 6.3 + 3.4 + 2.9 + 1.0 −0.9 −0.2          Oct.
+ 0.0 −0.2 −1.5 + 20.5 + 22.0 − 1.5 −0.0 −0.2 + 21.5 + 27.1 − 6.6 + 1.8 −0.8 + 0.0          Nov.
+ 0.0 + 0.0 + 8.7 + 5.9 −23.7 + 29.6 + 0.1 −0.7 + 34.7 + 15.4 + 4.5 + 16.4 −1.5 + 0.8          Dec.
−0.0 −0.3 −6.1 −46.1 −10.5 −35.6 −0.1 + 0.1 −24.4 − 15.2 − 7.1 − 1.2 −0.9 −0.9 2002          Jan.
−− 0.3 + 5.8 −10.8 + 4.3 −15.1 −0.0 −0.1 − 2.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 1.4 −0.3 −0.2          Feb.
−0.0 −0.3 + 0.3 + 16.4 + 6.3 + 10.1 −0.0 −0.2 − 1.2 − 2.0 + 2.0 − 1.2 + 0.1 −0.1          Mar.
+ 0.0 −0.1 + 0.3 −26.6 − 2.9 −23.7 + 0.0 −0.0 − 7.3 + 6.5 − 4.9 − 9.0 + 0.1 −0.1          Apr.
+ 0.0 −0.0 + 0.1 + 20.7 − 9.8 + 30.5 −0.0 −0.1 + 11.1 + 8.2 + 4.5 − 1.7 + 0.1 −0.1          May
−0.0 −0.6 −0.3 + 21.7 + 18.6 + 3.1 −0.0 −0.8 + 11.1 + 11.9 − 0.3 − 1.2 + 0.7 −0.3          June
−1.0 −0.2 −0.5 −24.9 −13.9 −11.0 −0.0 −0.1 − 5.3 − 4.7 + 0.5 − 1.4 + 0.3 + 0.0          July
+ 0.0 −0.0 + 11.5 + 16.4 − 2.9 + 19.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 2.3 − 4.4 + 1.9 + 0.3 −0.1 −0.0          Aug.
arising from the exchange of equalisation claims. —11Including liabilities acceptances and promissory notes outstanding and, up to December 1998,
arising from registered debt securities, registered money market paper and including endorsement liabilities arising from rediscounted bills. —17Up to
non-negotiable bearer debt securities; including subordinated liabilities. — December 1998, including liabilities to domestic building and loans
12Up to December 1998, excluding liabilities to domestic building and loan associations and money market funds. —18Since the inclusion of building
associations and money market funds. —13Up to December 1998, and loan associations in January 1999, including deposits under savings and
including time deposits for less than 1 month. —14Including liabilities loan contracts (see table IV. 12). —19Excluding deposits under savings and
arising from monetary policy operations with the Bundesbank. —15Up to loan contracts (see also footnote 18). —20Including liabilities arising from
December 1998, excluding time deposits for less than 1 month. —16Own non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
27*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
IV. Banks
 
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis- à-vis non-residents *
 
 
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999  5  billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
Balances and loans and Loans and advances not Treasury
advances not evidenced by evidenced by certificates, bills and
Cash in certificates, bills  3 bills 3 negotiable Negotiable
hand money money
(non- Medium market Memo Medium marketeuro-area and paper Securities item and paper Securitiesnotes and Short- long- issued by issued by Trust Short- long- issued by of
Period coins)  
1 Total Total term term banks  4 banks  5 loans  6 Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
1992 1.0 405.6 377.4 250.0 127.4 − 21.3 6.8 217.8 157.3 30.2 127.1 0.4 45.2
1993 1.2 533.8 498.3 360.5 137.7 0.1 24.3 11.2 262.5 184.0 48.3 135.7 0.0 63.0
1994 1.2 492.3 455.0 309.0 146.0 0.1 23.7 13.5 257.4 173.0 35.0 138.0 0.6 66.5
1995 1.2 538.4 500.8 349.7 151.1 0.1 25.6 11.8 289.2 191.1 42.1 148.9 1.7 79.7
1996 1.4 588.9 544.2 386.6 157.6 0.3 31.5 13.0 352.0 230.4 60.2 170.2 4.9 103.91997 1.5 689.1 635.3 456.1 179.2 0.2 43.1 10.5 474.8 312.7 96.2 216.5 6.0 140.31998 1.5 774.9 706.9 533.6 173.3 0.4 58.7 9.0 610.3 364.9 93.9 270.9 11.6 211.01999 0.4 427.1 383.5 279.5 104.1 0.4 43.2 4.2 396.1 235.8 52.7 183.1 7.5 152.7
2000 0.4 507.7 441.4 325.4 116.0 1.3 65.0 3.6 475.8 286.8 71.1 215.7 6.5 182.5
2001 0.4 596.1 521.7 383.7 138.0 0.8 73.6 3.5 570.3 347.2 99.7 247.5 5.2 217.9
2001          Mar. 0.5 552.8 482.5 365.5 117.0 1.2 69.1 3.6 536.3 326.1 97.5 228.6 5.9 204.3
         Apr. 0.5 557.3 484.1 366.9 117.3 1.3 71.8 3.5 553.0 334.4 104.4 230.0 6.8 211.8
         May 0.5 552.5 477.5 358.4 119.1 1.5 73.5 3.6 569.7 340.9 103.6 237.3 7.3 221.5         June 0.6 568.1 492.6 369.3 123.3 1.5 74.0 3.6 562.2 337.5 97.6 239.9 6.0 218.7
         July 0.5 540.4 465.0 341.1 123.9 1.8 73.6 3.5 549.6 330.2 92.8 237.4 6.6 212.8
         Aug. 0.5 560.0 485.2 358.5 126.7 1.8 73.0 3.5 550.4 327.7 95.2 232.6 6.7 215.9         Sep. 0.5 589.0 513.6 384.2 129.4 1.8 73.6 3.5 557.1 333.4 98.4 235.1 6.5 217.2
         Oct. 0.5 591.9 516.9 384.5 132.4 1.5 73.4 3.5 561.4 338.0 100.4 237.6 6.1 217.3
         Nov. 0.5 608.4 534.2 399.9 134.3 1.1 73.1 3.6 573.0 352.3 110.1 242.3 5.2 215.5         Dec. 0.4 596.1 521.7 383.7 138.0 0.8 73.6 3.5 570.3 347.2 99.7 247.5 5.2 217.9
2002          Jan. 0.9 585.2 510.4 371.7 138.7 1.0 73.8 3.2 578.2 353.8 103.1 250.7 4.6 219.8
         Feb. 0.7 568.5 493.0 351.0 142.0 1.4 74.1 3.1 582.3 355.9 103.6 252.3 5.8 220.6         Mar. 0.4 581.2 505.6 362.4 143.2 1.3 74.3 2.9 596.4 366.7 113.3 253.4 7.2 222.5
         Apr. 0.4 590.1 515.1 370.6 144.6 1.3 73.7 2.9 586.5 359.2 108.0 251.2 7.8 219.6
         May 0.4 613.3 538.2 395.3 142.9 1.2 74.0 2.8 589.1 359.6 111.2 248.5 6.6 222.9         June 0.4 609.7 534.3 399.4 135.0 1.2 74.1 2.8 575.1 348.2 105.1 243.1 5.2 221.7
         July 0.4 614.2 538.2 400.0 138.3 1.5 74.5 2.8 579.1 346.2 101.4 244.9 5.8 227.0
         Aug. 0.3 631.2 554.9 413.3 141.6 1.5 74.8 2.8 576.0 344.3 98.9 245.4 8.9 222.8
Changes *
1993 + 0.1 + 117.3 + 117.2 + 103.9 + 13.3 −0.0 + 0.5 −0.4 + 31.9 + 12.6 + 6.2 + 6.3 −0.4 + 19.5
1994 + 0.0 −24.0 −27.5 −41.4 + 13.9 −0.0 + 0.1 + 3.4 − 1.6 −5.5 −12.3 + 6.7 + 0.6 + 5.1
1995 + 0.1 + 59.1 + 57.6 + 49.2 + 8.4 + 0.0 + 2.9 −1.4 + 38.3 + 21.3 + 7.8 + 13.6 + 1.1 + 16.1
1996 + 0.2 + 34.2 + 29.9 + 27.2 + 2.7 + 0.2 + 5.2 −1.1 + 58.4 + 36.2 + 17.0 + 19.2 + 3.1 + 21.4
1997 + 0.1 + 80.6 + 71.5 + 53.3 + 18.2 −0.1 + 10.4 −1.2 + 109.3 + 73.0 + 33.7 + 39.3 + 0.7 + 32.9
1998 −0.0 + 100.8 + 89.5 + 79.3 + 10.2 + 0.0 + 13.1 −1.8 + 122.0 + 42.7 −6.4 + 49.1 + 5.5 + 66.0
1999 −0.3 + 17.7 + 5.7 − 5.3 + 11.0 + 0.2 + 11.7 −0.0 + 85.8 + 42.8 + 8.4 + 34.4 + 1.3 + 41.8
2000 −0.0 + 78.9 + 56.5 + 44.6 + 11.8 + 0.9 + 21.6 −0.7 + 72.0 + 45.0 + 17.4 + 27.7 −1.2 + 28.2
2001 + 0.0 + 83.7 + 75.6 + 54.4 + 21.2 −0.5 + 8.5 −0.2 + 88.3 + 53.4 + 27.0 + 26.4 −1.5 + 36.3
2001          Mar. −0.2 + 27.4 + 25.6 + 25.4 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 1.5 + 0.1 + 22.1 + 17.0 + 14.3 + 2.6 −0.4 + 5.6
         Apr. + 0.0 + 4.8 + 1.9 + 1.4 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 2.7 −0.0 + 17.4 + 8.9 + 7.1 + 1.9 + 0.9 + 7.5
         May −0.0 −11.3 −12.5 −13.1 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 1.0 −0.0 + 6.9 −1.0 −2.7 + 1.7 + 0.3 + 7.5
         June + 0.1 + 16.7 + 16.1 + 11.6 + 4.5 −0.0 + 0.6 −0.0 − 6.6 −3.0 −5.8 + 2.8 −1.3 −2.3
         July −0.0 −23.7 −24.0 −25.6 + 1.6 + 0.3 −0.0 −0.0 − 6.3 −2.4 −3.6 + 1.2 + 0.7 −4.7
         Aug. −0.0 + 24.0 + 24.2 + 20.2 + 4.1 −0.0 −0.2 + 0.0 + 8.6 + 4.3 + 4.0 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 4.1
         Sep. + 0.0 + 28.1 + 27.5 + 25.2 + 2.3 + 0.1 + 0.5 −0.0 + 5.7 + 4.9 + 3.0 + 1.9 −0.2 + 1.0
         Oct. + 0.0 + 2.0 + 2.5 − 0.3 + 2.8 −0.3 −0.2 + 0.0 + 2.7 + 3.2 + 1.4 + 1.8 −0.4 −0.0
         Nov. −0.0 + 15.1 + 16.0 + 14.5 + 1.5 −0.5 −0.5 + 0.0 + 10.3 + 12.1 + 9.1 + 3.0 −1.0 −0.9
         Dec. −0.1 −12.8 −13.2 −16.6 + 3.4 −0.2 + 0.6 −0.0 − 3.7 −6.6 −10.6 + 4.0 −0.0 + 2.9
2002          Jan. + 0.5 −13.2 −13.5 −13.7 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.1 −0.4 + 4.8 + 3.5 + 2.6 + 0.9 −0.7 + 1.9
         Feb. −0.2 −16.4 −17.1 −20.5 + 3.4 + 0.4 + 0.3 −0.1 + 4.6 + 2.5 + 0.6 + 1.8 + 1.2 + 1.0
         Mar. −0.3 + 13.5 + 13.3 + 11.9 + 1.4 −0.1 + 0.2 −0.2 + 15.9 + 13.9 + 9.9 + 4.0 + 1.4 + 0.6
         Apr. −0.1 + 12.7 + 13.0 + 10.7 + 2.3 −0.1 −0.3 −0.0 − 3.6 −2.4 −3.8 + 1.4 + 0.7 −1.8
         May + 0.0 + 28.7 + 28.2 + 28.2 −0.1 −0.1 + 0.6 −0.1 + 10.7 + 7.1 + 4.9 + 2.2 −1.0 + 4.6
         June −0.0 + 10.8 + 10.3 + 9.0 + 1.2 + 0.0 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 3.3 −2.9 −3.9 + 1.0 −1.2 + 0.8
         July −0.0 + 1.2 + 0.8 − 1.4 + 2.3 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.2 −5.3 −4.5 −0.7 + 0.5 + 4.6
         Aug. −0.0 + 14.3 + 14.0 + 10.3 + 3.7 + 0.0 + 0.3 −0.0 − 2.0 −0.9 −2.3 + 1.3 + 3.1 −4.2
*See table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the domestic notes and coins. —2Up to December 1998, including loans on a
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as trust basis; see also footnote 6. —3Up to December 1998, bill-based
provisional. Subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from redisco unted
Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Up to December 1998: bills and bills sent for collection from the banks ’portfolios prior to
28*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
IV. Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
 Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bank
interests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memoitem and and item and itemTrust enter- Sight Short- long- Trust Sight Short- long- Trustloans  
6 prises  7 Total Total  9 term  9 term loans  6 Total Total  9 term  9 term loans  6   Period deposits  8 deposits  8 
End of year or month *
 
14.8 25.8 297.0 66.7 219.7 119.2 100.5 10.5 125.8 15.8 103.6 34.4 69.2 6.4 1992
15.5 30.1 328.1 82.9 236.0 122.5 113.5 9.2 162.8 16.9 139.2 39.1 100.1 6.7 199317.3 34.0 402.3 111.6 283.7 150.8 132.9 7.1 181.5 20.6 155.3 41.7 113.6 5.6 1994
16.7 38.8 463.7 116.9 339.7 191.6 148.2 7.0 224.4 22.1 198.0 45.3 152.6 4.4 1995
12.7 45.8 486.5 147.1 335.7 172.0 163.7 3.8 273.5 34.3 237.2 50.0 187.2 2.1 199615.7 54.7 670.3 226.0 440.2 254.3 185.9 4.0 333.9 43.5 285.7 63.0 222.7 4.8 199722.9 62.9 875.7 309.5 562.5 359.1 203.4 3.7 390.3 51.3 329.6 71.8 257.8 9.5 199813.6 33.9 483.6 65.6 418.0 332.3 85.6 2.0 284.4 23.8 260.6 64.9 195.7 5.8 1999
13.9 47.4 586.0 113.7 472.2 382.9 89.3 1.7 314.9 35.4 279.5 62.5 217.0 5.6 2000
13.8 47.6 622.7 91.9 530.8 434.5 96.3 1.4 350.6 34.0 316.6 97.6 219.0 5.3 2001
14.5 48.6 700.4 163.9 536.5 453.4 83.1 1.8 347.0 41.3 305.7 80.0 225.7 5.9 2001          Mar.
14.6 48.6 702.1 154.5 547.6 464.7 82.9 1.7 365.3 47.1 318.2 92.0 226.1 5.8          Apr.
14.9 49.1 704.1 155.0 549.1 462.0 87.1 1.7 385.0 53.9 331.1 96.3 234.8 6.1          May14.8 48.6 675.1 151.3 523.8 435.2 88.6 1.6 364.1 45.8 318.3 81.5 236.8 6.1          June
14.7 49.3 635.4 132.5 502.8 414.1 88.7 1.5 367.1 42.0 325.2 91.5 233.6 6.0          July
14.3 49.2 640.1 106.9 533.3 445.0 88.3 1.5 368.3 37.7 330.6 100.6 230.0 5.7          Aug.14.2 49.1 645.2 144.7 500.5 409.0 91.6 1.5 360.8 36.7 324.2 92.2 231.9 5.7          Sep.
14.1 49.8 637.1 133.7 503.4 412.3 91.1 1.4 376.6 37.0 339.6 105.9 233.6 5.8          Oct.
14.2 50.0 643.3 120.4 522.9 429.6 93.3 1.4 365.7 38.8 327.0 107.5 219.5 5.9          Nov.13.8 47.6 622.7 91.9 530.8 434.5 96.3 1.4 350.6 34.0 316.6 97.6 219.0 5.3          Dec.
13.7 47.2 638.6 130.5 508.1 412.3 95.8 1.3 361.3 36.0 325.2 102.2 223.0 5.3 2002          Jan.
14.0 47.4 616.5 122.8 493.7 396.3 97.4 1.3 360.4 34.6 325.8 105.0 220.8 5.1          Feb.
14.1 47.0 627.0 122.0 505.0 406.5 98.4 1.3 363.2 35.0 328.2 106.4 221.8 5.1          Mar.
14.4 46.9 647.7 123.4 524.2 426.0 98.2 1.3 366.3 36.0 330.3 109.2 221.2 4.9          Apr.
14.1 47.4 646.2 119.3 526.9 428.8 98.1 1.2 366.0 34.9 331.1 112.7 218.4 4.7          May13.1 47.0 608.3 133.9 474.4 376.0 98.4 1.1 344.2 38.2 306.0 93.0 213.0 4.5          June
13.4 47.2 618.3 121.3 497.1 395.4 101.6 1.1 347.9 38.6 309.3 95.8 213.5 4.6          July
13.4 47.0 615.5 91.8 523.7 419.2 104.5 1.1 337.2 34.8 302.5 100.9 201.6 4.5          Aug.
Changes *
+ 0.2 + 4.1 + 23.8 + 14.1 + 11.1 − 0.4 + 11.5 −1.4 + 34.3 + 1.0 + 33.2 + 4.0 + 29.1 + 0.2 1993
−1.7 + 4.2 + 85.6 + 31.3 + 56.0 + 33.9 + 22.1 −1.7 + 23.1 + 3.9 + 19.8 + 3.4 + 16.4 −0.7 1994
−0.2 + 5.2 + 71.0 + 7.9 + 64.6 + 45.9 + 18.7 −1.5 + 47.8 + 2.2 + 46.5 + 4.1 + 42.4 −0.9 1995
−2.3 + 5.9 + 11.3 + 27.1 − 13.9 − 26.6 + 12.7 −1.9 + 44.7 + 11.7 + 35.0 + 3.7 + 31.3 −2.0 1996
+ 2.7 + 7.9 + 157.3 + 67.7 + 89.5 + 71.8 + 17.7 + 0.1 + 51.0 + 5.4 + 43.3 + 11.4 + 31.9 + 2.3 1997+ 7.7 + 8.8 + 215.6 + 87.7 + 128.1 + 108.1 + 20.0 −0.3 + 64.7 + 10.4 + 48.9 + 10.3 + 38.6 + 5.5 1998
+ 1.1 + 10.9 + 37.4 −9.2 + 46.6 + 47.6 −1.0 −0.0 + 61.0 + 7.2 + 53.8 + 15.9 + 37.9 + 0.1 1999
−0.2 + 12.8 + 90.0 + 47.0 + 43.0 + 42.9 + 0.1 −0.4 + 24.4 + 11.1 + 13.3 −2.9 + 16.2 −0.8 2000
−0.5 − 0.5 + 23.5 −23.6 + 47.0 + 42.4 + 4.6 −0.4 + 30.8 −1.8 + 32.6 + 33.3 −0.7 −0.6 2001
−0.2 + 0.1 + 58.9 + 11.9 + 47.0 + 50.2 −3.2 + 0.0 + 6.8 + 3.0 + 3.8 + 2.7 + 1.1 −0.1 2001          Mar.
+ 0.0 + 0.1 + 2.7 −9.3 + 12.0 + 12.2 −0.1 −0.1 + 18.5 + 5.8 + 12.8 + 12.2 + 0.6 −0.0          Apr.
−0.0 − 0.3 −11.9 −1.2 − 10.8 − 12.6 + 1.8 −0.1 + 14.0 + 6.2 + 7.8 + 2.9 + 4.9 −0.0          May
−0.0 − 0.4 −28.0 −3.4 − 24.5 − 26.2 + 1.7 −0.1 −20.0 −8.1 −11.9 −14.7 + 2.8 −0.0          June
+ 0.0 + 1.1 −32.2 −17.6 − 14.6 − 15.5 + 0.9 −0.0 + 7.6 −3.3 + 10.9 + 10.8 + 0.1 + 0.1          July
−0.0 + 0.5 + 14.3 −24.3 + 38.7 + 38.1 + 0.5 −0.0 + 6.7 −3.9 + 10.6 + 10.2 + 0.3 + 0.1          Aug.
−0.1 − 0.2 + 3.4 + 37.7 − 34.2 − 37.4 + 3.1 −0.0 −8.4 −1.1 −7.4 −8.7 + 1.3 −0.0          Sep.
−0.2 + 0.5 −10.3 −11.4 + 1.1 + 1.7 −0.6 −0.1 + 14.7 + 0.3 + 14.5 + 13.4 + 1.1 −0.0          Oct.
+ 0.0 + 0.0 + 3.1 −13.8 + 16.9 + 15.1 + 1.8 −0.0 −12.6 + 1.6 −14.2 + 1.0 −15.2 −0.0          Nov.
−0.4 − 2.6 −22.5 −28.8 + 6.3 + 3.5 + 2.8 + 0.0 −16.0 −4.8 −11.2 −10.1 −1.1 −0.6          Dec.
−0.2 + 0.4 + 11.6 + 38.3 − 26.8 − 25.7 −1.0 −0.1 + 8.2 + 1.9 + 6.4 + 3.9 + 2.5 −0.1 2002          Jan.
+ 0.3 + 0.2 −21.7 −7.7 − 14.0 − 15.7 + 1.7 −0.0 −0.5 −1.4 + 0.9 + 2.9 −2.0 −0.2          Feb.
+ 0.2 − 0.3 + 11.9 −0.5 + 12.4 + 11.3 + 1.2 + 0.0 + 3.6 + 0.4 + 3.2 + 1.6 + 1.7 −0.0          Mar.
+ 0.3 + 0.2 + 27.1 + 2.3 + 24.8 + 24.3 + 0.5 −0.1 + 7.1 + 1.3 + 5.8 + 3.9 + 1.9 −0.2          Apr.
−0.3 + 1.1 + 7.3 −2.8 + 10.1 + 9.1 + 1.0 −0.0 + 5.4 −0.8 + 6.2 + 5.2 + 1.0 −0.2          May
−1.0 + 0.3 −27.3 + 16.1 − 43.4 − 44.4 + 1.0 −0.1 −14.5 + 3.7 −18.2 −17.6 −0.6 −0.3          June
+ 0.2 − 0.1 + 5.5 −13.6 + 19.0 + 16.3 + 2.7 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 2.1 −1.6 + 0.1          July
−0.0 − 0.2 − 1.5 −29.2 + 27.8 + 24.8 + 3.0 −0.0 + 4.7 −3.8 + 8.5 + 5.3 + 3.2 −0.0          Aug.
maturity). —4Up to November 1993, included in securities; see also 1998, including working capital supplied to branches abroad. —8Up to
footnote 5. —5Up to November 1993, including negotiable money market December 1998, including time deposits for less than 1 month. —9Up to
paper; excluding registered debt securities. —6From 1999, no longer December 1998, excluding time deposits for less than 1 month. 
included in loans and deposits (see also footnote 2). —7Up to December
29*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
IV. Banks
 
5. Lending of banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999  5  billion
Short-term lending Medium and long-term
to public authorities to enter- to enterprises and individuals  1 
Lending to domestic
Loans and non-banks, total  1, 2 
   advances Loans and
including excluding not evi- Negoti- advances
negotiable money denced by able not evi-market paper, certifi- money denced bysecurities, cates and market certifi- Treasury
Period equalisation claims Total Total paper Total cates bills  
5 Total Total bills 3, 4 
End of year or month *
 
1992 3,478.2 3,166.6 597.2 571.2 571.0 0.2 26.0 16.7 9.3 2,881.0 2,167.5
1993 3,826.4 3,417.8 563.2 544.2 540.8 3.4 19.0 16.8 2.2 3,263.2 2,441.81994 4,137.2 3,633.1 583.5 549.1 548.6 0.4 34.4 32.7 1.8 3,553.7 2,661.9
1995 4,436.9 3,936.9 615.2 584.0 583.3 0.7 31.3 30.5 0.8 3,821.7 2,785.5
1996 4,773.1 4,248.7 662.2 617.2 616.2 1.0 45.1 40.2 4.9 4,110.8 3,007.21997 5,058.4 4,506.2 667.8 625.8 624.8 1.0 41.9 40.1 1.9 4,390.6 3,223.41998 5,379.8 4,775.4 704.3 661.3 660.8 0.5 43.0 38.5 4.5 4,675.5 3,482.41999 2,904.5 2,576.5 355.3 328.9 328.7 0.2 26.4 23.6 2.8 2,549.2 1,943.6
2000 3,003.7 2,663.7 371.2 348.2 347.7 0.5 22.9 21.2 1.7 2,632.5 2,038.6
2001 3,014.1 2,704.2 387.9 356.7 355.2 1.5 31.2 28.2 2.9 2,626.2 2,070.2
2001          Mar. 3,033.2 2,686.2 396.4 362.7 361.6 1.2 33.7 32.1 1.7 2,636.7 2,062.9
         Apr. 3,030.3 2,679.0 391.1 361.8 360.8 1.0 29.3 27.8 1.5 2,639.2 2,069.0
         May 3,032.7 2,685.7 390.0 362.3 361.0 1.3 27.7 26.1 1.6 2,642.7 2,072.6         June 3,007.7 2,681.8 385.0 363.3 362.0 1.3 21.7 20.7 1.0 2,622.7 2,047.4
         July 3,008.2 2,676.9 380.0 353.5 352.2 1.2 26.6 23.4 3.2 2,628.2 2,047.3
         Aug. 2,995.3 2,676.6 371.3 345.9 344.6 1.4 25.4 23.1 2.3 2,624.0 2,052.4         Sep. 2,989.9 2,685.2 379.9 354.4 352.5 1.9 25.5 22.4 3.0 2,610.0 2,051.2
         Oct. 2,992.5 2,687.1 376.7 350.1 348.7 1.4 26.6 23.6 3.0 2,615.8 2,058.9
         Nov. 3,009.4 2,703.8 388.0 351.1 349.9 1.2 36.9 34.4 2.5 2,621.4 2,064.6         Dec. 3,014.1 2,704.2 387.9 356.7 355.2 1.5 31.2 28.2 2.9 2,626.2 2,070.2
2002          Jan. 3,011.2 2,694.8 377.4 345.5 344.6 0.9 31.8 29.8 2.1 2,633.8 2,078.2
         Feb. 3,006.1 2,694.0 377.7 345.7 344.8 0.9 32.0 30.1 1.9 2,628.4 2,071.7         Mar. 2,996.9 2,694.4 382.5 349.0 348.0 1.0 33.5 31.8 1.6 2,614.4 2,061.7
         Apr. 3,004.3 2,691.8 379.1 348.2 347.1 1.1 30.8 28.2 2.6 2,625.3 2,069.3
         May 3,005.7 2,687.0 373.6 344.9 344.0 0.9 28.6 24.9 3.7 2,632.2 2,072.7         June 2,990.8 2,683.1 370.7 343.1 342.2 0.9 27.6 23.4 4.2 2,620.1 2,066.7
         July 2,995.7 2,689.5 370.4 335.5 334.1 1.5 34.9 32.2 2.7 2,625.3 2,068.5
         Aug. 2,987.3 2,679.9 356.0 331.2 329.9 1.2 24.8 22.1 2.7 2,631.4 2,073.3
Changes *
1993 + 339.8 + 253.7 −15.1 − 9.2 −11.9 + 2.7 − 5.9 + 1.2 −7.2 + 354.9 + 251.7
1994 + 320.5 + 244.0 + 13.2 + 7.0 + 9.9 −2.9 + 6.2 + 6.6 −0.4 + 307.2 + 249.1
1995 + 312.8 + 311.9 + 35.9 + 37.9 + 37.7 + 0.2 − 1.9 − 1.0 −1.0 + 276.9 + 185.1
1996 + 336.3 + 312.9 + 44.3 + 32.6 + 32.2 + 0.4 + 11.7 + 7.4 + 4.3 + 292.0 + 221.51997 + 285.2 + 256.9 + 2.7 + 5.9 + 5.9 + 0.0 − 3.2 − 0.1 −3.0 + 282.5 + 219.9
1998 + 335.3 + 285.5 + 51.7 + 50.6 + 51.2 −0.6 + 1.1 − 1.6 + 2.7 + 283.6 + 258.3
1999 + 156.1 + 139.5 + 9.6 + 6.3 + 6.4 −0.0 + 3.3 + 2.9 + 0.4 + 146.4 + 146.4
2000 + 100.7 + 83.2 + 14.5 + 18.1 + 17.8 + 0.3 − 3.6 − 2.5 −1.1 + 86.1 + 93.8
2001 + 11.9 + 39.2 + 15.3 + 7.0 + 5.9 + 1.0 + 8.4 + 7.8 + 0.6 − 3.4 + 32.0
2001          Mar. + 21.1 + 5.0 + 4.7 + 3.3 + 3.0 + 0.3 + 1.4 + 2.2 −0.8 + 16.4 + 14.2
         Apr. − 2.7 − 7.0 − 5.2 − 0.7 − 0.6 −0.2 − 4.4 − 4.3 −0.1 + 2.4 + 6.1
         May − 0.1 + 4.2 − 2.8 − 2.0 − 2.3 + 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.9 + 0.1 + 2.8 + 3.6
         June − 24.5 − 3.4 − 4.5 + 1.5 + 1.5 + 0.0 − 6.0 − 5.4 −0.6 − 20.0 − 25.1
         July + 1.7 − 3.8 − 3.8 − 8.7 − 8.6 −0.1 + 4.9 + 2.7 + 2.2 + 5.5 − 0.3
         Aug. − 9.6 + 1.2 − 7.2 − 6.1 − 6.2 + 0.1 − 1.2 − 0.3 −0.9 − 2.4 + 5.1
         Sep. − 6.3 + 7.8 + 7.1 + 7.7 + 7.1 + 0.5 − 0.6 − 0.7 + 0.1 − 13.4 − 1.2
         Oct. + 2.4 + 1.5 − 3.8 − 5.0 − 4.5 −0.5 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 0.0 + 6.2 + 8.1
         Nov. + 16.1 + 15.8 + 10.8 + 0.5 + 0.7 −0.2 + 10.3 + 10.8 −0.5 + 5.3 + 5.2
         Dec. + 5.8 + 1.3 + 0.5 + 6.2 + 5.9 + 0.3 − 5.7 − 6.2 + 0.4 + 5.4 + 5.9
2002          Jan. − 3.4 − 10.2 −11.3 −11.9 −11.4 −0.6 + 0.7 + 1.6 −0.9 + 7.9 + 8.1
         Feb. − 4.9 − 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.3 −0.2 − 5.4 − 6.5
         Mar. − 8.6 + 0.8 + 4.9 + 3.4 + 3.3 + 0.1 + 1.5 + 1.7 −0.2 − 13.5 − 9.7
         Apr. + 8.1 − 2.4 − 3.4 − 0.8 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 2.6 − 3.6 + 1.0 + 11.5 + 8.2
         May + 2.2 − 4.1 − 5.1 − 2.9 − 2.8 −0.2 − 2.2 − 3.3 + 1.1 + 7.4 + 3.7
         June − 19.0 − 8.0 − 3.3 − 2.3 − 2.3 + 0.0 − 1.0 − 1.5 + 0.5 − 15.6 − 9.6
         July + 5.1 + 6.5 − 0.3 − 7.6 − 8.1 + 0.5 + 7.3 + 8.8 −1.5 + 5.5 + 2.1
         Aug. − 8.4 − 9.6 −14.4 − 4.4 − 4.1 −0.2 −10.0 −10.1 + 0.0 + 6.1 + 4.0
*See table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the December 1998, including loans on a trust basis; see also footnote 9. —3Up
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as to December 1998, bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement
provisional. Subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following liabilities arising from rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from
Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Up to December 1998, the banks ’portfolios prior to maturity). —4From 1999, including small
including loans to domestic building and loan associations. —2Up to amounts of medium-term series of bills. —5From December 1993, including
30*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
IV. Banks
 
   
 
lending  2, 6 
prises and individuals  1, 2 to public authorities  2 
Loans and advances not Loans and advances not
evidenced by certificates evidenced by certificates
Memo Memo
item Equal- item
Medium- Long- Trust Medium- Long- Secur- isation Trust
Total term  7 term  8 loans  9 Total Total term  7 term  8 loans  9   Period Securities  6 ities 6, 10 claims  11 
End of year or month *
 
2,011.5 263.5 1,748.0 90.3 65.7 734.1 487.8 47.6 440.2 147.2 64.3 13.9 1992
2,241.5 253.9 1,987.5 134.2 66.1 821.4 537.1 36.8 500.3 193.5 75.3 15.5 19932,390.4 228.3 2,162.0 203.2 68.3 891.8 577.0 34.5 542.5 230.5 68.1 16.1 1994
2,522.0 214.1 2,307.9 192.9 70.6 1,036.2 713.0 74.5 638.4 234.4 71.3 17.5 1995
2,713.3 215.8 2,497.5 205.9 88.0 1,103.6 773.0 69.5 703.6 231.3 81.3 18.0 19962,900.0 216.2 2,683.8 234.1 89.3 1,167.2 833.8 53.0 780.8 239.2 76.0 18.3 19973,104.5 206.8 2,897.8 292.4 85.4 1,193.2 868.8 33.1 835.7 235.4 71.6 17.3 19981,764.8 182.5 1,582.3 178.9 49.2 605.6 459.5 30.9 428.6 108.6 37.5 8.7 1999
1,838.9 192.8 1,646.0 199.7 50.1 593.9 455.9 30.4 425.5 104.9 33.1 8.4 2000
1,880.5 191.1 1,689.4 189.7 48.9 556.0 440.3 25.6 414.6 111.8 4.0 8.0 2001
1,842.6 190.5 1,652.1 220.3 50.0 573.9 450.0 27.4 422.5 119.0 4.9 8.4 2001          Mar.
1,841.5 188.2 1,653.3 227.5 50.0 570.2 449.0 27.1 421.9 116.4 4.9 8.4          Apr.
1,849.5 190.4 1,659.2 223.0 48.8 570.2 449.1 27.3 421.8 116.2 4.8 8.4          May1,850.8 189.4 1,661.4 196.6 48.5 575.3 448.3 26.8 421.5 122.1 4.9 8.3          June
1,854.6 188.8 1,665.8 192.7 48.5 580.9 446.7 26.6 420.1 130.2 4.0 8.2          July
1,862.7 189.7 1,672.9 189.7 49.4 571.6 446.2 26.6 419.7 121.4 4.0 8.2          Aug.1,866.1 190.0 1,676.1 185.1 49.2 558.8 444.1 25.7 418.4 110.7 4.0 8.2          Sep.
1,870.9 189.8 1,681.1 188.0 49.1 556.9 443.9 25.5 418.4 109.0 4.0 8.1          Oct.
1,876.6 190.0 1,686.6 188.0 48.8 556.8 442.9 25.6 417.3 110.0 4.0 8.1          Nov.1,880.5 191.1 1,689.4 189.7 48.9 556.0 440.3 25.6 414.6 111.8 4.0 8.0          Dec.
1,880.9 189.1 1,691.8 197.3 48.7 555.7 439.6 26.7 412.9 112.2 3.9 8.0 2002          Jan.
1,882.5 189.3 1,693.3 189.1 48.5 556.8 436.6 26.1 410.5 116.2 3.9 8.0          Feb.
1,882.3 189.4 1,692.9 179.4 48.2 552.7 432.2 25.6 406.6 116.5 3.9 7.9          Mar.
1,884.5 189.8 1,694.7 184.8 48.2 556.0 431.9 26.2 405.7 120.1 3.9 7.9          Apr.
1,888.0 189.9 1,698.1 184.7 48.1 559.5 430.1 26.3 403.8 125.5 3.9 7.9          May1,891.0 191.2 1,699.9 175.6 47.6 553.4 426.4 24.4 402.0 123.0 3.9 7.8          June
1,897.5 191.7 1,705.8 171.0 47.5 556.8 425.8 24.5 401.3 128.0 3.0 7.7          July
1,901.6 192.3 1,709.3 171.6 47.5 558.1 426.2 24.7 401.5 128.9 3.0 7.7          Aug.
Changes *
+ 214.1 −28.9 + 243.0 + 37.1 + 0.5 + 104.1 + 48.2 −10.8 + 59.0 + 65.1 −11.4 + 1.6 1993
+ 198.7 −29.2 + 227.9 + 48.5 + 1.9 + 58.2 + 26.2 − 2.4 + 28.5 + 38.3 − 6.9 + 0.7 1994
+ 176.0 − 1.9 + 177.9 + 3.3 + 5.9 + 91.8 + 91.8 + 15.3 + 76.6 − 0.4 − 1.2 + 1.5 1995
+ 204.4 + 1.6 + 202.8 + 14.0 + 3.1 + 70.4 + 65.7 − 5.5 + 71.2 − 3.3 + 8.0 + 0.1 1996
+ 189.0 + 0.3 + 188.7 + 29.5 + 1.4 + 62.6 + 60.6 −18.0 + 78.6 + 7.0 − 5.3 + 0.2 1997
+ 205.7 − 8.9 + 214.6 + 56.5 −3.9 + 25.3 + 35.0 −20.0 + 55.0 − 4.4 − 4.4 −0.9 1998
+ 121.8 + 25.1 + 96.8 + 24.6 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 8.5 + 6.2 + 2.3 − 7.8 − 0.6 −0.1 1999
+ 71.8 + 6.9 + 64.9 + 22.1 + 0.8 − 7.7 − 3.8 − 0.4 − 3.5 − 3.1 − 0.8 −0.3 2000
+ 41.9 − 2.8 + 44.7 − 9.8 −1.2 − 35.4 −16.5 − 5.5 −10.9 + 10.1 −29.1 −0.4 2001
+ 1.9 − 0.6 + 2.5 + 12.3 + 0.1 + 2.2 − 2.1 − 1.3 − 0.8 + 3.7 + 0.6 −0.0 2001          Mar.
− 1.1 − 2.3 + 1.2 + 7.2 −0.1 − 3.6 − 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.6 − 2.6 − 0.1 −0.0          Apr.
+ 8.0 + 2.2 + 5.9 − 4.5 −1.2 − 0.8 − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 −0.0          May
+ 1.3 − 1.0 + 2.2 −26.4 −0.2 + 5.1 − 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.3 + 5.8 + 0.1 −0.1          June
+ 3.8 − 0.6 + 4.4 − 4.0 −0.0 + 5.8 − 1.6 − 0.2 − 1.4 + 8.3 − 0.9 −0.1          July
+ 8.1 + 0.9 + 7.2 − 3.0 + 0.9 − 7.4 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 7.0 + 0.0 −0.0          Aug.
+ 3.4 + 0.3 + 3.1 − 4.6 −0.1 − 12.2 − 2.1 − 0.8 − 1.3 −10.1 + 0.0 −0.0          Sep.
+ 5.1 + 0.1 + 5.0 + 2.9 −0.1 − 1.9 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 1.6 − 0.0 −0.0          Oct.
+ 5.3 − 0.1 + 5.3 − 0.1 −0.2 + 0.1 − 1.0 + 0.1 − 1.1 + 1.1 + 0.0 + 0.0          Nov.
+ 4.1 + 1.2 + 3.0 + 1.8 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 2.6 + 0.1 − 2.7 + 2.0 + 0.0 −0.1          Dec.
+ 0.3 − 2.1 + 2.4 + 7.8 −0.3 − 0.3 − 0.7 + 1.0 − 1.7 + 0.5 − 0.0 −0.0 2002          Jan.
+ 1.7 + 0.2 + 1.5 − 8.1 −0.2 + 1.1 − 3.0 − 0.6 − 2.4 + 4.1 −− 0.0          Feb.
+ 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.3 − 9.8 −0.2 − 3.9 − 4.4 − 0.5 − 3.9 + 0.5 − 0.0 −0.0          Mar.
+ 2.4 + 0.4 + 2.0 + 5.8 −0.1 + 3.3 − 0.3 + 0.6 − 0.9 + 3.6 + 0.0 −0.0          Apr.
+ 3.8 + 0.2 + 3.6 − 0.0 −0.0 + 3.6 − 1.9 + 0.0 − 1.9 + 5.5 + 0.0 −0.0          May
− 0.5 − 1.9 + 1.4 − 9.0 −0.5 − 6.1 − 3.6 − 1.8 − 1.8 − 2.4 − 0.0 −0.1          June
+ 6.4 + 0.5 + 5.9 − 4.4 −0.1 + 3.4 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.7 + 5.0 − 1.0 −0.1          July
+ 4.1 + 0.6 + 3.5 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 2.1 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 1.6 + 0.0 −0.0          Aug.
other negotiable money market paper; excluding mobilisation and liquidity December 1998, maturity or period of notice of 4 years and more; from
paper. —6From 1999, breakdown of lending against securities by medium 1999, of more than 5 years. —9From 1999, no longer included in lending
and long-term lending no longer possible. —7Up to December 1998, (see also footnote 2). —10Excluding debt securities arising from the
maturity or period of notice of more than one year to less than 4 years; exchange of equalisation claims, see also footnote 11. —11Including debt
from 1999, more than 1 year up to and including 5 years. —8Up to securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims. 
31*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
IV. Banks
 
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and individuals, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
 
 5  billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and individuals (excluding portfolios of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities  portfolios) 1 
of which  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
 
Financial
institu-
Mortgage tions  4 
loans Trans- (excluding
secured Energy Whole- Agri- port MFIs) andby and sale culture and insur-
Mortgage residen- Other of which water and and tele- anceloans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- supply, Construc- retail forestry, commu- enter-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing mining  
2 tion trade  3 fisheries nications prises
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
1999 2,094.2 899.3 991.3 691.5 299.9 1,209.0 332.0 166.2 33.7 67.1 173.0 31.1 47.2 27.5
2000 2,187.3 955.2 1,030.8 737.6 293.2 1,267.8 344.1 174.9 35.9 68.2 173.2 31.4 49.1 34.2
2001          June 2,213.5 966.0 1,038.2 746.6 291.6 1,288.2 344.8 177.8 34.1 69.6 172.5 31.5 54.3 37.9
         Sep. 2,219.3 974.2 1,047.8 754.0 293.9 1,284.7 345.6 175.9 34.8 69.4 172.3 31.9 49.3 38.2         Dec. 2,236.3 981.4 1,053.9 757.7 296.2 1,295.6 346.1 174.3 36.7 67.9 172.9 31.3 50.0 39.0
2002          Mar. 2,230.8 983.7 1,055.7 759.9 295.7 1,291.7 345.8 173.8 38.1 68.5 169.3 31.6 51.7 39.0
         June 2,233.7 994.1 1,060.2 768.0 292.2 1,287.1 345.9 171.5 39.4 68.2 167.0 32.0 51.5 36.5
 Short-term lending
1999 329.4 − 17.6 − 17.6 276.9 11.8 57.3 4.3 17.9 61.4 4.5 10.6 8.8
2000 348.4 − 15.9 − 15.9 294.6 10.7 61.5 6.2 17.9 62.2 4.2 10.1 10.5
2001          June 362.7 − 16.1 − 16.1 310.6 10.8 63.9 4.4 19.2 63.3 4.5 13.5 15.9
         Sep. 353.2 − 15.9 − 15.9 300.9 10.6 60.9 4.2 19.0 62.4 4.7 8.8 15.2
         Dec. 355.8 − 15.9 − 15.9 304.1 10.6 59.6 5.5 17.8 63.5 4.1 9.3 14.2
2002          Mar. 348.5 − 15.1 − 15.1 299.5 10.1 59.1 6.6 18.5 61.1 4.3 10.5 15.7
         June 342.6 − 14.4 − 14.4 293.2 9.4 58.6 7.3 18.4 60.0 4.6 9.6 12.1
 Medium-term lending  
8 
1999 182.5 − 42.6 − 42.6 109.1 13.4 16.7 1.7 6.9 13.0 3.4 6.3 4.0
2000 192.8 − 39.3 − 39.3 120.1 12.8 17.6 1.5 7.0 13.3 3.4 6.9 9.1
2001          June 189.4 − 38.0 − 38.0 116.8 12.4 18.2 1.3 6.7 13.0 3.2 8.1 6.5
         Sep. 190.0 − 37.9 − 37.9 117.9 12.5 18.0 1.7 6.6 13.3 3.2 7.4 7.3
         Dec. 191.1 − 37.1 − 37.1 120.1 12.0 18.5 1.9 6.5 13.4 3.2 7.2 7.7
2002          Mar. 189.4 − 36.4 − 36.4 120.0 11.9 18.8 1.9 6.4 13.2 3.3 7.7 6.4
         June 191.2 − 35.9 − 35.9 120.9 11.7 17.8 2.2 6.6 13.2 3.3 8.1 6.5
 Long-term lending  1, 9 
1999 1,582.3 899.3 931.1 691.5 239.7 823.0 306.8 92.3 27.7 42.2 98.7 23.3 30.3 14.72000 1,646.0 955.2 975.5 737.6 238.0 853.1 320.6 95.9 28.2 43.4 97.7 23.9 32.1 14.6
2001          June 1,661.4 966.0 984.1 746.6 237.5 860.9 321.7 95.7 28.4 43.7 96.1 23.8 32.7 15.4
         Sep. 1,676.1 974.2 994.0 754.0 240.0 865.9 322.6 96.9 28.9 43.8 96.6 24.0 33.1 15.8         Dec. 1,689.4 981.4 1,000.9 757.7 243.2 871.4 323.5 96.2 29.4 43.7 96.1 24.0 33.5 17.1
2002          Mar. 1,692.9 983.7 1,004.1 759.9 244.2 872.3 323.8 95.9 29.5 43.5 94.9 24.1 33.5 17.0
         June 1,699.9 994.1 1,009.9 768.0 241.9 873.0 324.8 95.1 29.9 43.2 93.9 24.1 33.8 17.9
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2001          3rd qtr + 7.6 + 7.1 + 9.2 + 6.8 + 2.4 − 1.3 + 0.9 − 1.9 + 0.4 − 0.3 − 1.2 + 0.5 − 5.3 + 0.4
         4th qtr + 16.6 + 5.8 + 7.2 + 4.7 + 2.5 + 10.6 + 0.8 − 1.5 + 2.0 − 1.4 + 0.5 − 0.6 + 0.7 + 0.6
2002          1st qtr − 5.7 + 1.6 + 1.3 + 1.4 − 0.2 − 4.1 − 0.4 − 0.2 + 1.3 + 0.5 − 3.7 + 0.3 + 1.7 + 0.1
         2nd qtr − 0.3 + 3.7 + 3.8 + 3.4 + 0.3 − 7.0 − 0.4 − 2.4 + 1.2 − 0.5 − 2.7 + 0.3 − 1.3 − 2.7
 Short-term lending
2001          3rd qtr − 7.7 −− 0.1 −− 0.1 − 7.9 − 0.2 − 3.0 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 1.1 + 0.2 − 4.8 − 0.9
         4th qtr + 2.0 −− 0.2 −− 0.2 + 2.6 − 0.1 − 1.2 + 1.3 − 1.2 + 0.9 − 0.6 + 0.5 − 1.0
2002          1st qtr − 7.8 −− 0.8 −− 0.8 − 5.1 − 0.6 − 0.5 + 1.1 + 0.7 − 2.3 + 0.2 + 1.2 + 1.4
         2nd qtr − 6.0 −− 0.7 −− 0.7 − 6.5 − 0.6 − 0.5 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 1.4 + 0.3 − 0.9 − 3.5
 Medium-term lending  8 
2001          3rd qtr + 0.6 −− 0.2 −− 0.2 + 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.7 + 0.9
         4th qtr + 1.2 −− 0.9 −− 0.9 + 2.5 − 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.4
2002          1st qtr − 1.5 −− 0.6 −− 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 1.3
         2nd qtr − 1.3 −− 0.5 −− 0.5 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 1.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.1
 Long-term lending  1, 9 
2001          3rd qtr + 14.7 + 7.1 + 9.6 + 6.8 + 2.7 + 5.4 + 1.1 + 1.3 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.4
         4th qtr + 13.3 + 5.8 + 8.2 + 4.7 + 3.5 + 5.5 + 1.4 − 0.7 + 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 1.2
2002          1st qtr + 3.6 + 1.6 + 2.7 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 0.9 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 1.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0
         2nd qtr + 6.9 + 3.7 + 5.0 + 3.4 + 1.5 + 0.5 + 0.4 − 0.8 + 0.4 − 0.4 − 1.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.7
*Excluding lending by foreign branches. Up to December 1998: lending by always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent alterations, which will
banks (excluding building and loan associations) in Germany; including appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Up
lending to building and loan associations. From 1999: lending by monetary to December 1998, including loans on a trust basis; from 1999, loans on a
financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany; breakdown of lending by building trust basis are no longer included in lending. —2Including the extraction of
and loan associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical alterations stones and earths. —3Including the maintenance and repair of motor
have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest date are vehicles and durable consumer goods. —4Up to December 1998, excluding
32*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
IV. Banks
 
   
 
 
 Lending to
 non-commercial
 Lending to employed and other individuals organisations
Memorandum items Other lending Services sector (including the professions)  5 
of which of which
Debit
balanceson wage
and salary
Other Lending accounts
real to self- Lending and of which
Housing estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Investment Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total credit  
7 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises enterprises persons  6 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
663.1 154.1 42.8 168.3 449.4 73.9 871.4 655.7 215.7 105.7 23.6 13.7 3.6 1999
700.8 162.3 46.8 183.1 459.0 75.0 905.5 683.0 222.6 108.6 24.3 14.0 3.7 2000
710.6 165.7 48.5 188.2 459.3 75.7 911.4 689.8 221.7 109.6 23.6 13.8 3.6 2001          June
712.9 168.7 49.0 190.3 458.5 75.5 920.6 698.6 222.0 110.3 23.9 13.9 3.6          Sep.
723.3 169.4 50.3 194.3 458.6 74.7 926.7 704.3 222.4 110.7 22.9 14.1 3.5          Dec.
719.7 168.9 49.2 195.6 455.5 75.1 925.4 706.4 219.0 109.5 22.3 13.8 3.5 2002          Mar.
720.9 169.4 48.8 197.9 456.1 74.7 932.5 710.8 221.7 112.3 22.7 14.1 3.5          June
Short-term lending
112.2 18.6 17.1 27.5 55.9 15.6 51.1 5.7 45.4 2.5 23.6 1.3 0.0 1999
122.1 19.6 18.1 30.0 57.1 16.2 52.6 5.2 47.4 2.3 24.3 1.2 0.0 2000
125.8 20.5 19.1 31.4 56.8 17.1 50.9 5.3 45.7 2.6 23.6 1.2 0.0 2001          June
125.6 20.7 19.7 32.2 56.3 16.8 51.0 5.3 45.6 2.9 23.9 1.3 0.0          Sep.
130.1 21.6 20.4 34.1 56.0 15.8 50.3 5.3 45.0 2.8 22.9 1.4 0.0          Dec.
123.8 20.8 18.2 33.3 54.9 16.5 47.9 5.0 42.9 2.5 22.3 1.1 0.0 2002          Mar.
122.6 20.8 18.2 32.5 54.8 16.3 48.2 4.9 43.2 2.5 22.7 1.3 0.0          June
Medium-term lending  8
57.0 7.1 4.0 12.3 33.3 5.6 72.7 29.2 43.5 31.0 − 0.7 0.1 1999
61.4 6.8 6.3 13.6 33.1 5.5 72.2 26.4 45.8 33.0 − 0.6 0.1 2000
59.7 6.8 6.3 13.9 32.4 5.5 72.0 25.6 46.4 33.9 − 0.6 0.1 2001          June
60.5 7.0 5.6 14.8 31.7 5.4 71.6 25.4 46.2 33.9 − 0.6 0.1          Sep.
61.9 6.7 6.5 14.7 31.2 5.3 70.5 25.0 45.4 33.4 − 0.6 0.1          Dec.
62.2 6.7 7.2 14.9 30.7 5.1 68.9 24.5 44.4 32.7 − 0.6 0.1 2002          Mar.
63.2 6.7 6.9 15.4 31.6 5.0 69.7 24.2 45.5 34.1 − 0.6 0.1          June
Long-term lending  1, 9
493.9 128.5 21.8 128.5 360.1 52.7 747.5 620.8 126.7 72.2 − 11.7 3.5 1999
517.3 135.9 22.5 139.5 368.7 53.2 780.8 651.4 129.4 73.3 − 12.2 3.6 2000
525.1 138.3 23.0 142.9 370.1 53.1 788.5 658.9 129.6 73.1 − 12.0 3.5 2001          June
526.8 141.0 23.7 143.4 370.4 53.3 798.1 667.9 130.2 73.5 − 12.1 3.5          Sep.
531.3 141.1 23.4 145.6 371.3 53.7 806.0 674.0 132.0 74.4 − 12.1 3.5          Dec.
533.7 141.4 23.8 147.4 369.8 53.4 808.6 676.9 131.7 74.4 − 12.1 3.4 2002          Mar.
535.1 142.0 23.6 150.0 369.6 53.4 814.7 681.7 132.9 75.7 − 12.2 3.4          June
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
+ 6.2 + 2.0 + 0.2 + 2.4 − 0.8 − 0.2 + 8.8 + 8.3 + 0.5 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 2001          3rd qtr
+ 10.1 + 0.8 + 1.7 + 4.0 + 0.3 − 0.9 + 5.8 + 6.4 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.0          4th qtr
− 4.2 − 0.5 − 0.8 + 1.1 − 2.7 + 0.3 − 1.3 + 1.7 − 3.0 − 1.0 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.0 2002          1st qtr
+ 1.0 + 0.6 − 0.5 + 2.3 − 0.7 − 0.3 + 6.3 + 4.2 + 2.2 + 1.6 + 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.0          2nd qtr
Short-term lending
+ 2.1 + 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.7 − 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 2001          3rd qtr
+ 3.9 + 0.8 + 0.7 + 1.8 − 0.3 − 1.1 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.0          4th qtr
− 7.0 − 0.7 − 2.2 − 0.8 − 1.1 + 0.7 − 2.3 − 0.3 − 2.1 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.3 + 0.0 2002          1st qtr
− 1.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.0          2nd qtr
Medium-term lending  8
+ 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.8 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 −− 0.1 − 0.0 2001          3rd qtr
+ 1.5 − 0.2 + 0.9 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 1.3 − 0.4 − 0.8 − 0.6 − + 0.0 − 0.0          4th qtr
+ 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 1.6 − 0.5 − 1.0 − 0.8 −− 0.0 + 0.0 2002          1st qtr
+ 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.2 − + 0.0 − 0.0          2nd qtr
Long-term lending  1, 9
+ 3.4 + 1.6 + 0.3 + 0.9 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 9.2 + 8.4 + 0.8 + 0.5 − + 0.1 + 0.0 2001          3rd qtr
+ 4.7 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 2.2 + 1.0 + 0.3 + 7.8 + 6.9 + 0.9 + 0.5 −− 0.0 − 0.0          4th qtr
+ 2.2 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 1.7 − 1.1 − 0.3 + 2.6 + 2.5 + 0.1 + 0.1 − + 0.0 − 0.1 2002          1st qtr
+ 1.6 + 0.6 − 0.2 + 2.5 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 6.3 + 4.6 + 1.7 + 1.3 − + 0.1 − 0.0          2nd qtr
credit institutions (other than building and loan associations); from 1999, loans, even in the form of instalment credit. —8Up to December 1998,
excluding banks (MFIs) and excluding finance leasing institutions; see also maturity or period of notice of more than 1 year to less than 4 years; from
footnote 5. —5From 1999, including finance leasing institutions. —6From 1999, more than 1 year up to and including 5 years. —9Up to December
1999, including sole proprietors; up to December 1998, sole proprietors 1998, maturity or period of notice of 4 years and more; from 1999, of morewere assigned to enterprises. —7Excluding mortgage loans and housing than 5 years. 
33*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
IV. Banks
 
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
 
  
 5  billion
Time deposits  1, 2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Included Subordinated
 liabilities in time
for up for up (excluding deposits:to and to and for more Bank Loans on negotiable liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings a trust debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  
4 basis securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month *
 
1999 1,905.3 420.4 759.6 239.7 519.9 4.5 515.4 614.7 110.7 42.1 25.6 0.4
2000 1,945.8 443.4 819.9 274.7 545.2 9.0 536.2 573.5 109.0 42.1 25.9 −
2001 2,034.0 526.4 827.0 268.7 558.3 10.3 548.0 574.5 106.0 43.3 26.2 3.1
2001          Sep. 1,971.0 480.2 826.1 272.1 554.0 10.2 543.9 555.4 109.3 42.7 26.2 0.5
         Oct. 1,977.5 483.7 829.0 274.2 554.8 10.2 544.6 556.4 108.4 42.4 26.1 5.0
         Nov. 1,999.2 511.0 822.5 268.3 554.2 10.3 543.9 558.2 107.6 42.5 26.2 2.5         Dec. 2,034.0 526.4 827.0 268.7 558.3 10.3 548.0 574.5 106.0 43.3 26.2 3.1
2002          Jan. 2,009.8 511.5 819.9 257.8 562.1 10.2 551.9 573.4 105.1 42.4 26.1 1.1
         Feb. 2,007.8 511.3 819.7 256.3 563.5 8.6 554.8 572.0 104.8 42.2 26.2 1.2         Mar. 2,006.6 509.2 821.7 256.4 565.3 8.5 556.8 570.8 104.9 42.1 26.3 1.5
         Apr. 1,999.3 515.7 816.8 252.5 564.3 8.3 556.0 561.8 104.9 42.0 26.3 1.2
         May 2,009.4 523.8 820.6 255.9 564.7 8.3 556.4 560.1 105.0 41.9 26.3 2.0         June 2,021.4 536.2 820.6 256.6 564.0 8.4 555.6 558.9 105.7 41.5 26.6 1.4
         July 2,016.2 531.6 821.1 256.3 564.9 8.5 556.4 557.5 106.0 41.6 26.9 1.5
         Aug. 2,013.9 527.2 823.0 259.4 563.6 8.5 555.2 557.8 105.9 41.6 27.1 2.0
Changes *
2000 + 41.3 + 22.3 + 61.1 + 34.8 + 26.2 + 4.5 + 21.8 −40.5 −1.7 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.4
2001 + 88.5 + 82.3 + 8.1 − 6.0 + 14.1 + 1.3 + 12.8 + 1.1 −2.9 + 1.0 + 0.3 + 3.1
2001          Sep. + 17.8 + 16.7 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.2 −0.3 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.4
         Oct. + 6.3 + 3.4 + 2.9 + 2.0 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.8 + 1.0 −0.9 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 4.5
         Nov. + 21.5 + 27.1 − 6.6 − 5.8 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 0.8 + 1.8 −0.8 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 2.5
         Dec. + 34.7 + 15.4 + 4.5 + 0.4 + 4.1 + 0.0 + 4.1 + 16.4 −1.5 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 0.5
2002          Jan. − 24.4 − 15.2 − 7.1 −10.9 + 3.9 − 0.1 + 4.0 − 1.2 −0.9 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 2.0
         Feb. − 2.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 1.5 + 1.4 − 1.5 + 2.9 − 1.4 −0.3 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.2
         Mar. − 1.2 − 2.0 + 2.0 + 0.1 + 1.8 − 0.2 + 2.0 − 1.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.3
         Apr. − 7.3 + 6.5 − 4.9 − 3.9 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.8 − 9.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.4
         May + 11.1 + 8.2 + 4.5 + 3.9 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.5 − 1.7 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.8
         June + 11.1 + 11.9 − 0.3 + 0.6 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.9 − 1.2 + 0.7 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.6
         July − 5.3 − 4.7 + 0.5 − 0.3 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.8 − 1.4 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.1
         Aug. − 2.3 − 4.4 + 1.9 + 3.1 − 1.2 + 0.0 − 1.2 + 0.3 −0.1 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.5
Domestic public authorities End of year or month *
1999 124.4 14.7 104.4 42.0 62.4 0.4 61.9 3.2 2.0 35.9 1.2 −
2000 149.1 16.6 127.7 62.1 65.5 1.2 64.4 2.7 2.1 36.0 1.4 −
2001 122.7 16.1 102.3 37.7 64.5 1.2 63.3 2.3 2.1 36.6 1.4 −
2001          Sep. 132.5 16.3 111.8 47.3 64.4 1.1 63.3 2.2 2.2 36.4 1.4 −
         Oct. 128.9 16.4 108.1 43.9 64.2 1.1 63.1 2.2 2.1 36.1 1.4 −
         Nov. 127.0 16.1 106.6 42.3 64.3 1.1 63.2 2.2 2.2 36.2 1.4 −
         Dec. 122.7 16.1 102.3 37.7 64.5 1.2 63.3 2.3 2.1 36.6 1.4 −
2002          Jan. 120.6 14.1 102.3 36.0 66.4 1.2 65.2 2.2 2.0 35.9 1.3 −
         Feb. 119.6 14.5 101.0 34.7 66.2 1.2 65.1 2.1 2.0 35.8 1.3 −
         Mar. 117.4 13.8 99.5 34.2 65.3 1.1 64.2 2.1 2.0 35.6 1.3 −
         Apr. 113.7 12.4 97.3 32.9 64.4 0.9 63.5 2.0 2.1 35.5 1.3 −
         May 116.9 12.7 100.1 35.5 64.6 1.0 63.6 2.0 2.1 35.5 1.3 −
         June 118.5 14.5 99.9 35.7 64.2 1.0 63.2 2.0 2.1 35.2 1.3 −
         July 116.6 14.3 98.2 34.0 64.2 1.0 63.3 2.0 2.1 35.6 1.3 −
         Aug. 115.4 13.4 97.8 33.5 64.4 1.0 63.4 2.0 2.1 35.6 1.3 −
Changes *
2000 + 24.8 + 1.9 + 23.3 + 20.1 + 3.2 + 0.8 + 2.4 − 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.3 −
2001 − 26.4 − 0.6 − 25.4 −24.4 − 1.0 + 0.0 − 1.1 − 0.5 −0.0 + 0.7 − 0.0 −
2001          Sep. + 0.9 + 1.4 − 0.6 + 0.4 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.9 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 −−
         Oct. − 3.5 + 0.1 − 3.6 − 3.4 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 −0.0 − 0.3 + 0.0 −
         Nov. − 1.9 − 0.4 − 1.6 − 1.7 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 −
         Dec. − 4.3 + 0.0 − 4.3 − 4.5 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 −0.0 + 0.5 + 0.0 −
2002          Jan. − 2.1 − 2.0 + 0.1 − 1.8 + 1.9 − 0.0 + 1.9 − 0.1 −0.1 − 0.7 − 0.1 −
         Feb. − 0.9 + 0.5 − 1.4 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 −0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 −
         Mar. − 2.3 − 0.8 − 1.5 − 0.6 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.9 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 −
         Apr. − 3.6 − 1.4 − 2.2 − 1.3 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 −
         May + 3.4 + 0.4 + 3.1 + 2.9 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 −
         June + 1.5 + 1.8 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 −
         July − 1.9 − 0.2 − 1.7 − 1.7 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.0 −
         Aug. − 1.2 − 0.9 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.2 − + 0.2 + 0.1 −0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 −
*See table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Including subordinated
the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as liabilities and liabilities arising from registered debt securities. —
provisional. Subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following
34*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
IV. Banks
 
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont ’d)
 
  
 5  billion
Time deposits  1, 2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Included Subordinated
 liabilities in time
for up for up (excluding deposits:to and to and for more Bank Loans on negotiable liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings a trust debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  
4 basis securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic enterprises and individuals End of year or month *
 
1999 1,781.0 405.7 655.2 197.6 457.6 4.1 453.5 611.4 108.7 6.2 24.5 0.4
2000 1,796.7 426.8 692.2 212.6 479.6 7.8 471.8 570.8 106.9 6.1 24.5 −
2001 1,911.3 510.4 724.7 231.0 493.7 9.1 484.6 572.3 103.9 6.6 24.8 3.1
2001          Sep. 1,838.6 463.9 714.4 224.8 489.6 9.1 480.5 553.1 107.2 6.2 24.9 0.5
         Oct. 1,848.5 467.3 720.9 230.2 490.6 9.1 481.5 554.2 106.3 6.3 24.7 5.0
         Nov. 1,872.2 494.9 715.9 226.1 489.9 9.2 480.7 555.9 105.4 6.3 24.9 2.5         Dec. 1,911.3 510.4 724.7 231.0 493.7 9.1 484.6 572.3 103.9 6.6 24.8 3.1
2002          Jan. 1,889.3 497.4 717.5 221.8 495.7 9.0 486.7 571.2 103.1 6.4 24.8 1.1
         Feb. 1,888.2 496.7 718.8 221.6 497.2 7.5 489.7 569.8 102.8 6.4 24.9 1.2         Mar. 1,889.2 495.4 722.2 222.2 500.0 7.3 492.6 568.7 102.8 6.5 25.0 1.5
         Apr. 1,885.5 503.3 719.5 219.6 499.9 7.4 492.5 559.8 102.9 6.4 25.0 1.2
         May 1,892.5 511.1 720.5 220.4 500.1 7.4 492.8 558.0 102.9 6.4 25.0 2.0         June 1,903.0 521.8 720.8 220.9 499.8 7.4 492.4 556.9 103.6 6.3 25.3 1.4
         July 1,899.6 517.3 722.9 222.3 500.6 7.5 493.1 555.5 103.8 6.0 25.6 1.5
         Aug. 1,898.5 513.8 725.2 225.9 499.3 7.5 491.7 555.8 103.8 6.0 25.8 2.0
Changes *
2000 + 16.5 + 20.4 + 37.8 + 14.8 + 23.1 + 3.7 + 19.3 −40.0 −1.8 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.4
2001 + 115.0 + 82.9 + 33.5 + 18.4 + 15.1 + 1.3 + 13.8 + 1.5 −2.9 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 3.1
2001          Sep. + 16.9 + 15.2 + 1.7 − 0.0 + 1.8 + 0.1 + 1.6 + 0.3 −0.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.4
         Oct. + 9.9 + 3.3 + 6.5 + 5.5 + 1.0 + 0.1 + 0.9 + 1.0 −0.9 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 4.5
         Nov. + 23.5 + 27.5 − 5.0 − 4.2 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 0.9 + 1.8 −0.8 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 2.5
         Dec. + 39.0 + 15.4 + 8.8 + 4.9 + 3.9 − 0.1 + 4.0 + 16.4 −1.5 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.5
2002          Jan. − 22.2 − 13.2 − 7.2 − 9.1 + 2.0 − 0.1 + 2.1 − 1.1 −0.8 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 2.0
         Feb. − 1.1 − 0.6 + 1.2 − 0.3 + 1.5 − 1.5 + 3.0 − 1.4 −0.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.2
         Mar. + 1.1 − 1.3 + 3.4 + 0.7 + 2.7 − 0.1 + 2.9 − 1.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.3
         Apr. − 3.7 + 7.9 − 2.7 − 2.6 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 8.9 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.4
         May + 7.6 + 7.9 + 1.4 + 1.0 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 1.7 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.8
         June + 9.5 + 10.1 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 1.2 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.6
         July − 3.4 − 4.5 + 2.2 + 1.4 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 1.3 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.1
         Aug. − 1.1 − 3.5 + 2.3 + 3.6 − 1.4 + 0.0 − 1.4 + 0.2 −0.1 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.5
of which: Domestic enterprises End of year or month *
1999 593.2 142.1 421.8 82.3 339.5 1.5 338.0 5.5 23.7 6.1 13.7 0.42000 635.1 158.1 447.6 89.0 358.5 2.7 355.8 5.2 24.2 5.9 14.1 −
2001 668.4 180.0 461.3 91.7 369.6 2.9 366.8 4.3 22.8 6.4 14.3 3.1
2001          Sep. 645.9 162.3 455.2 86.3 368.9 3.0 365.9 4.8 23.6 6.0 14.4 0.5
         Oct. 653.8 164.8 461.1 90.8 370.3 3.0 367.4 4.4 23.5 6.0 14.3 5.0
         Nov. 653.5 169.1 456.6 87.5 369.2 2.9 366.2 4.3 23.4 6.1 14.3 2.5         Dec. 668.4 180.0 461.3 91.7 369.6 2.9 366.8 4.3 22.8 6.4 14.3 3.1
2002          Jan. 654.1 171.4 455.7 84.1 371.7 2.9 368.8 4.3 22.7 6.2 14.3 1.1
         Feb. 649.7 164.4 458.4 85.1 373.3 1.4 371.9 4.3 22.6 6.2 14.4 1.2         Mar. 650.0 160.1 462.9 87.3 375.6 1.4 374.3 4.3 22.6 6.3 14.4 1.5
         Apr. 651.9 162.1 463.1 87.6 375.5 1.4 374.0 4.3 22.5 6.2 14.4 1.2
         May 659.0 167.8 464.5 88.9 375.6 1.4 374.2 4.2 22.5 6.2 14.4 2.0         June 665.5 172.7 466.1 90.8 375.2 1.4 373.8 4.3 22.6 6.1 14.7 1.4
         July 666.4 171.3 468.4 92.6 375.8 1.4 374.4 4.4 22.4 5.8 15.0 1.5
         Aug. 663.0 166.4 469.8 95.6 374.2 1.4 372.8 4.4 22.4 5.8 15.1 2.0
Changes *
2000 + 42.8 + 15.3 + 27.3 + 6.7 + 20.5 + 1.2 + 19.3 − 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.4
2001 + 33.6 + 21.2 + 14.7 + 2.6 + 12.1 + 0.1 + 11.9 − 0.9 −1.3 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 3.1
2001          Sep. + 8.6 + 7.6 + 1.4 − 0.2 + 1.6 + 0.1 + 1.5 − 0.2 −0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.4
         Oct. + 7.9 + 2.4 + 5.9 + 4.5 + 1.4 − 0.1 + 1.5 − 0.4 −0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 4.5
         Nov. − 0.5 + 4.2 − 4.6 − 3.3 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 1.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 2.5
         Dec. + 14.8 + 10.8 + 4.7 + 4.2 + 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.5 − 0.0 −0.6 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.5
2002          Jan. − 14.5 − 8.9 − 5.5 − 7.6 + 2.1 + 0.0 + 2.0 − 0.0 −0.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 2.0
         Feb. − 4.5 − 6.9 + 2.5 + 1.0 + 1.4 − 1.5 + 2.9 + 0.0 −0.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.2
         Mar. + 0.4 − 4.2 + 4.6 + 2.2 + 2.4 − 0.0 + 2.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.3
         Apr. + 1.9 + 1.9 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 −0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.4
         May + 7.4 + 5.7 + 1.7 + 1.5 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.8
         June + 5.7 + 4.4 + 1.2 + 1.7 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.6
         July + 1.2 − 1.4 + 2.7 + 1.7 + 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.9 + 0.1 −0.2 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1
         Aug. − 3.5 − 4.9 + 1.4 + 3.0 − 1.5 + 0.0 − 1.5 + 0.0 −0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.5
2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see table IV. 12). — note 2). —4Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot- securities. 
35*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
IV. Banks
 
8. Deposits of domestic individuals and non-commercial organisations at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
 
  
 5  billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1, 2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits Domestic individuals Domestic individuals
of domesticindividuals Domestic
and non- non-com-
commercial mercial
organisa- Self- Other organisa- Self- Other
Period Total Total employed Employees tions Total Total employed Employees tions, total individuals individuals
End of year or month *
 
1999 1,187.8 263.5 254.6 50.2 170.3 34.1 9.0 233.4 216.6 35.2 161.6 19.9
2000 1,161.5 268.7 259.3 47.7 176.0 35.6 9.4 244.6 225.5 34.9 168.9 21.72001 1,242.9 330.4 320.1 55.8 220.9 43.4 10.2 263.4 242.9 36.3 182.4 24.2
2002          Mar. 1,239.2 335.3 325.0 55.2 225.1 44.6 10.3 259.3 238.9 35.7 180.4 22.9
         Apr. 1,233.6 341.2 330.4 57.5 227.5 45.4 10.9 256.4 237.2 35.3 179.4 22.5
         May 1,233.5 343.3 332.3 57.9 228.5 45.9 11.0 256.0 236.0 35.1 178.6 22.3         June 1,237.4 349.1 338.0 57.0 234.3 46.7 11.1 254.7 234.9 34.7 178.0 22.2
         July 1,233.2 346.0 335.2 58.8 230.3 46.1 10.9 254.6 235.2 35.1 177.8 22.2
         Aug. 1,235.5 347.4 336.4 59.8 230.6 46.0 11.0 255.4 235.5 35.3 177.9 22.3
Changes *
2000 −26.3 + 5.2 + 4.7 − 2.5 + 5.7 + 1.5 + 0.4 + 10.6 + 8.2 −0.2 + 6.8 + 1.7
2001 + 81.3 + 61.7 + 60.8 + 8.1 + 45.0 + 7.8 + 0.8 + 18.8 + 17.4 + 1.4 + 13.5 + 2.5
2002          Mar. + 0.7 + 3.0 + 3.4 − 1.1 + 3.8 + 0.7 −0.4 − 1.2 − 1.2 −0.4 −0.5 −0.4
         Apr. −5.6 + 6.0 + 5.4 + 2.3 + 2.3 + 0.8 + 0.6 − 2.8 − 1.8 −0.4 −1.0 −0.4
         May + 0.2 + 2.1 + 2.0 + 0.5 + 1.1 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 1.0 −0.1 −0.6 −0.2
         June + 3.8 + 5.7 + 5.6 − 0.9 + 5.7 + 0.8 + 0.1 − 1.3 − 1.1 −0.4 −0.6 −0.1
         July −4.6 − 3.1 − 2.9 + 1.7 − 4.1 −0.6 −0.2 − 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.4 −0.2 + 0.0
         Aug. + 2.4 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 1.1 + 0.4 −0.1 + 0.1 + 0.8 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1
*See table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Including subordinated
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as liabilities and liabilities arising from registered debt securities. —2Including
provisional. Subsequent alterations, which will appear in the followingDeutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
 
  
9. Deposits of domestic public authorities at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group 
*
 
 5  billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 Länder Governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Memo Savings Memo
Domestic for up deposits item for up deposits item
public to and for more and bank Loans on to and for more and bank Loans on
Sight including than savings a trust Sight including than savings a trust authorities,
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 basis Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 basis
End of year or month *
 
1999 124.4 45.9 1.0 4.6 40.3 0.0 12.7 21.0 2.8 4.2 14.0 0.1 23.1
2000 149.1 67.6 2.1 22.6 42.8 0.0 12.5 20.3 3.1 2.1 15.0 0.1 23.32001 122.7 46.9 1.6 2.7 42.7 0.0 13.2 19.2 2.7 1.8 14.6 0.1 23.2
2002          Mar. 117.4 46.9 1.3 2.3 43.3 0.0 12.6 20.3 2.1 3.2 14.8 0.1 22.8
         Apr. 113.7 45.8 0.6 2.4 42.7 0.0 12.5 19.0 1.5 2.5 14.8 0.1 22.8
         May 116.9 45.6 0.4 2.3 42.8 0.0 12.5 18.6 1.5 2.2 14.8 0.1 22.8         June 118.5 45.9 0.8 2.6 42.5 0.0 12.3 21.0 2.8 3.4 14.7 0.1 22.7
         July 116.6 45.8 0.5 2.6 42.7 0.0 12.6 21.4 3.2 3.4 14.7 0.1 22.7
         Aug. 115.4 45.8 0.6 2.4 42.8 0.0 12.6 19.9 1.8 3.2 14.7 0.1 22.8
Changes *
2000 + 24.8 + 21.6 + 1.2 + 18.0 + 2.5 −0.0 −0.2 + 0.5 + 0.3 −0.9 + 1.1 + 0.0 + 0.2
2001 −26.4 −20.4 −0.4 −19.9 −0.1 −0.0 + 0.5 −1.2 −0.6 −0.2 −0.4 + 0.0 + 0.1
2002          Mar. −2.3 −0.3 + 0.5 + 0.1 −0.9 −− 0.0 + 0.1 −0.1 + 0.3 −0.1 −0.0 −0.2
         Apr. −3.6 −1.2 −0.7 + 0.1 −0.6 −− 0.1 −1.3 −0.6 −0.7 −0.0 −0.0 + 0.0
         May + 3.4 −0.1 −0.2 −0.0 + 0.1 −− 0.1 −0.3 −0.0 −0.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0
         June + 1.5 + 0.3 + 0.4 + 0.2 −0.3 + 0.0 −0.2 + 2.4 + 1.3 + 1.2 −0.1 + 0.0 −0.1
         July −1.9 −0.1 −0.3 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.4 + 0.0 −0.0 −0.0 + 0.0
         Aug. −1.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 −0.2 + 0.1 −− 0.0 −1.5 −1.4 −0.2 + 0.1 −0.0 + 0.0
*See table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and enterprises, which are included in ”Enterprises ”. Statistical breaks have been
its successor organisations and of the Federal Railways, east German eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to
Railways and Federal Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, be regarded as provisional. Subsequent alterations, which will appear in theDeutsche Post AG and Deutsche Telekom AG, and of publicly-owned
36*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
IV. Banks
 
    
 
 Savings deposits  3  Memo item
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year  2 
Included Subordinated
Domestic of which Domestic liabilities in timenon-com- non-com- (excluding deposits:
mercial up to and up to and mercial Bank Loans on negotiable liabilitiesorganisa- including including more than Domestic organisa- savings a trust debt arisingtions 1 year Total 2 year 2 years Total tions bonds  
4 basis from repos   Period individuals securities)  5 
End of year or month *)
 
16.8 115.4 118.0 2.5 115.5 605.9 595.5 10.4 85.0 0.2 10.8 −1999
19.2 123.6 121.1 5.1 116.0 565.5 555.8 9.7 82.7 0.2 10.4 −2000
20.6 139.3 124.1 6.2 117.9 568.0 558.6 9.4 81.1 0.2 10.5 −2001
20.3 134.9 124.3 6.0 118.4 564.4 555.2 9.2 80.3 0.2 10.5 −2002          Mar.
19.2 132.0 124.4 6.0 118.5 555.5 546.4 9.1 80.4 0.2 10.5 −         Apr.
20.0 131.4 124.5 6.0 118.6 553.8 544.7 9.1 80.4 0.2 10.6 −         May
19.8 130.1 124.6 6.0 118.6 552.6 543.5 9.1 81.0 0.2 10.6 −         June
19.4 129.7 124.9 6.1 118.8 551.2 542.1 9.1 81.4 0.2 10.7 −         July
19.9 130.3 125.1 6.2 118.9 551.4 542.3 9.1 81.4 0.2 10.7 −         Aug.
Changes *)
+ 2.4 + 8.0 + 2.5 + 2.5 + 0.0 −39.7 −39.0 −0.7 −2.3 + 0.0 −0.4 −2000
+ 1.4 + 15.8 + 3.0 + 1.1 + 1.9 + 2.5 + 2.8 −0.3 −1.6 + 0.0 + 0.0
+ 0.0 2001
+ 0.1 − 1.5 + 0.4 −0.1 + 0.5 − 1.1 − 1.1 −0.0 + 0.0 −0.0 + 0.0 −2002          Mar.
− 1.1 − 2.9 + 0.1 −0.0 + 0.1 − 8.9 − 8.8 −0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 −         Apr.
+ 0.8 − 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 1.7 − 1.7 −0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −         May
− 0.2 − 1.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 1.2 − 1.1 −0.0 + 0.6 −0.0 −0.0 −         June
− 0.8 − 0.4 −0.1 + 0.1 −0.2 − 1.5 − 1.5 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.1 −         July
+ 0.5 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 −0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −         Aug.
deposits under savings and loan contracts (see table IV. 12). —3Excluding 4Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. —
deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). — 5 Included in time deposits. Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
 
   
 
 
 
Local authorities and local authority associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  3 Time deposits
Savings Memo Savings Memo
for up deposits item for up deposits itemto and for more and bank Loans on to and for more and bank Loans on
Sight including than savings a trust Sight including than savings a trust
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  
2, 4 basis Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 basis   Period
End of year or month *
 
28.5 8.2 14.4 2.2 3.7 0.1 28.9 2.8 18.9 5.8 1.4 0.1 1999
30.2 8.9 15.7 2.0 3.6 0.1 31.1 2.5 21.7 5.7 1.2 0.1 200027.8 9.2 13.8 1.8 3.1 0.2 28.7 2.7 19.5 5.4 1.1 0.1 2001
25.5 8.2 12.5 1.9 2.9 0.2 24.7 2.2 16.1 5.3 1.1 0.1 2002          Mar.
25.1 8.1 12.3 1.8 2.9 0.2 23.9 2.1 15.7 5.1 1.0 0.1          Apr.
26.6 8.7 13.1 1.8 3.0 0.2 26.1 2.1 17.9 5.1 1.0 0.1          May25.6 8.2 12.5 1.9 3.0 0.2 25.9 2.7 17.2 5.0 1.0 0.1          June
25.0 8.1 12.0 1.9 2.9 0.2 24.3 2.5 16.0 4.9 1.0 0.1          July
26.9 8.6 13.4 1.9 3.0 0.2 22.7 2.4 14.4 4.9 1.0 0.1          Aug.
Changes *
+ 1.7 + 0.8 + 1.3 −0.2 −0.2 + 0.0 + 1.0 −0.3 + 1.7 −0.1 −0.2 −0.0 2000
−2.4 + 0.2 −2.0 −0.2 −0.4 + 0.0 −2.4 + 0.2 −2.3 −0.3 −0.0 −0.0 2001
−0.5 −0.5 −0.0 + 0.1 −0.0 −0.0 −1.6 −0.6 −0.9 −0.0 −0.0 −0.0 2002          Mar.
−0.4 −0.1 −0.3 −0.1 −0.0 + 0.0 −0.7 −0.1 −0.4 −0.2 −0.0 −         Apr.
+ 1.7 + 0.6 + 1.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 −0.0 + 2.2 −0.0 + 2.3 −0.0 −0.0 −         May
−1.0 −0.5 −0.6 + 0.1 −0.0 −0.0 −0.1 + 0.6 −0.7 −0.1 −0.0 −0.0          June
−0.5 −0.0 −0.5 + 0.0 −0.0 + 0.0 −1.6 −0.2 −1.2 −0.1 −0.0 −         July
+ 1.9 + 0.5 + 1.4 −0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −1.6 −0.1 −1.5 + 0.0 + 0.0 −         Aug.
following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Federal Railways 2Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. —
Fund, Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP 3Including deposits under savings and loan contracts. —4Excluding
Special Fund, ”German Unity ”Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. — deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
37*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
IV. Banks
 
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
 5  billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at three months ’ Memo at over three months ’
notice notice item of which
Interest With
of which of which of which credited maturities
Special Special At three on of moresavings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months ’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities  
2 facilities  2 non-banks
End of year or month *
 
1999 626.6 614.7 504.4 338.8 110.2 88.3 11.9 9.1 20.0 116.4 110.7 101.8 5.7
2000 585.2 573.5 450.5 309.0 123.0 104.4 11.7 8.3 19.3 115.9 109.0 94.4 6.82001 586.5 574.5 461.9 327.2 112.7 97.2 12.0 8.8 19.9 112.8 106.0 87.2 6.8
2002          Apr. 572.8 561.8 456.7 326.4 105.1 91.5 11.0 8.0 0.4 111.6 104.9 86.6 6.7
         May 571.0 560.1 456.1 326.9 104.0 90.5 10.9 8.0 0.4 111.7 105.0 86.8 6.7         June 569.8 558.9 455.1 326.5 103.8 90.4 10.9 8.0 0.4 112.5 105.7 87.4 6.8
         July 568.3 557.5 453.6 326.5 103.9 90.4 10.8 7.9 0.5 113.0 106.0 87.6 7.0
         Aug. 568.6 557.8 453.8 327.5 104.0 90.3 10.8 7.9 0.4 112.9 105.9 87.6 7.0
Changes *
2000 −40.7 −40.5 −53.6 −31.1 + 13.1 + 15.8 −0.2 −0.8 . −0.5 −1.7 −7.4 + 1.1
2001 + 1.3 + 1.1 + 11.4 + 15.5 −10.4 −7.2 + 0.3 + 0.5 . −2.9 −2.9 −7.1 −0.0
2002          Apr. −9.7 −9.0 −7.1 −3.7 −1.9 −1.8 −0.7 −0.7 . + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0
         May −1.8 −1.7 −0.6 + 0.5 −1.1 −1.1 −0.1 −0.0 . + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0
         June −1.2 −1.2 −1.0 −0.4 −0.2 −0.1 −0.0 −0.0 . + 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 0.1
         July −1.5 −1.4 −1.5 −0.0 + 0.1 −0.0 −0.1 −0.1 . + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.2
         Aug. + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 1.0 + 0.2 −0.1 −0.0 −0.0 . −0.1 −0.1 + 0.0 −0.0
*See table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the savings and loan contracts, which are classified as time deposits. —2Savings
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as deposits bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the minimum or basic rate
provisional. Subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following of interest. —3Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Excluding deposits under securities. 
 
   
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany 
*
 
 5  billion
Non-negotiable bearer debt securities
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper and money market paper  6 
of which of which
with maturities of Subordinated
with maturities of
Certifi- more more non-
Floating- Zero- Foreign cates up to and more up to and more than 1 year than 1 year negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of including including than including including than debt debt
Period Total  1 notes  2 deposit 1 year  1 Total 1 year 2 years 2 years bonds  2, 3 bonds  4, 5 2 years  1 2 years  1 securities securities
 
1999 1,310.3 208.2 14.7 98.7 13.1 73.6 47.0 1,189.8 2.6 0.5 0.8 1.3 32.7 2.5
2000 1,412.5 283.1 22.1 128.2 19.7 87.9 62.7 1,261.9 2.7 0.4 1.0 1.3 38.3 2.42001 1,472.3 324.0 16.3 144.1 17.6 46.5 124.9 1,300.9 5.8 3.7 1.0 1.2 43.3 2.4
2002          Apr. 1,500.4 337.1 16.6 147.7 19.3 50.8 120.9 1,328.7 10.6 8.6 0.9 1.2 44.0 2.4
         May 1,505.0 340.8 16.7 148.6 23.4 53.5 121.7 1,329.8 10.3 8.2 0.9 1.2 44.4 2.4         June 1,462.5 328.4 14.5 141.6 23.8 51.3 119.3 1,291.9 10.0 8.0 0.9 1.2 44.0 2.4
         July 1,466.2 332.0 14.9 152.1 27.0 56.5 120.0 1,289.7 10.0 7.9 0.9 1.3 44.6 2.4
         Aug. 1,483.1 345.9 16.9 156.4 27.9 59.0 119.0 1,305.2 9.3 7.2 0.8 1.3 44.6 2.4
Changes *
2000 + 102.0 + 65.5 + 7.0 + 26.6 + 6.4 + 14.1 + 15.8 + 72.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 5.6 −0.1
2001 + 56.2 + 33.3 −5.5 + 15.9 −2.1 −41.4 + 61.7 + 35.9 + 3.2 + 3.4 −0.1 −0.1 + 5.0
+ 0.0
2002          Apr. − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.4 −1.3 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 4.8 − 5.0 + 0.9 + 1.0 −0.0 −0.0 −0.5 −0.0
         May + 4.8 + 3.7 + 0.1 + 0.9 + 4.1 + 2.7 + 0.8 + 1.3 −0.3 −0.3 −0.0 + 0.0 + 0.4 −0.0
         June − 6.4 −12.3 −2.2 −7.0 + 0.4 −1.1 + 0.4 − 5.7 −0.3 −0.3 −0.0 −0.0 −0.3 −0.0
         July + 3.6 + 3.6 + 0.4 + 10.2 + 3.2 + 5.2 + 0.7 − 2.2 −0.0 −0.1 −0.0 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.0
         Aug. − 0.8 + 4.9 + 0.9 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 1.7 − 1.0 − 1.5 + 0.0 + 0.1 −0.0 + 0.0 −1.0 −
*See table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. — 2Including debt securities denominated in foreign
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as currencies. —3Issue value when floated. —4Including floating-rate notes
provisional. Subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following and zero-coupon bonds denominated in foreign currencies. —5Bonds
Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —1Decreases in June 2002 denominated in non-euro-area currencies. —6Non-negotiable bearer debt
caused by transition to net recording of outstanding debt securities (ie less securities are classified among bank savings bonds; see also table IV. 1 0,
own debt securities). The statistical break has been eliminated from the footnote 3. 
38*IV. Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
IV.  Banks
  
12.  Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *
  Interim statements
  
 5  billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs)  5 banks (non-MFIs)
Building loans Secur- Memo
item: ities (in-
Bal- cluding Bearer New
ances Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- and under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber loans Bank savings Interim and savings savings Sight ities ing pub- enteredof Balance (except debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan and time out- lished into in
End of year sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- deposits stand- year or associ- reserves)
or month ations total loans  
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts 6 ing 7 month  8 loans)  1 paper)  4 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2001 29 158.4 23.8 0.2 11.8 42.7 54.3 7.2 9.7 0.5 29.3 96.6 3.1 6.9 7.5 75.7
2002          June 28 160.6 24.9 0.2 12.3 41.8 55.9 7.4 9.5 0.4 29.0 97.4 3.2 8.0 7.1 6.3
         July 28 161.1 25.2 0.2 12.0 41.8 56.2 7.5 9.8 0.4 29.1 97.2 3.2 8.0 7.1 6.4         Aug. 28 160.7 24.7 0.2 11.8 41.6 56.6 7.6 9.8 0.4 29.3 97.2 3.3 7.9 7.1 6.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2002          June 17 115.5 20.4 0.1 6.8 27.1 39.5 6.9 7.0 0.3 20.8 66.3 3.1 8.0 4.6 4.1         July 17 116.1 20.7 0.1 6.6 27.1 39.8 6.9 7.3 0.3 20.9 66.0 3.1 8.0 4.6 4.1         Aug. 17 115.5 20.0 0.1 6.4 26.9 40.1 7.0 7.2 0.3 21.1 66.1 3.1 7.9 4.6 3.9
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2002          June 11 45.1 4.5 0.1 5.6 14.7 16.4 0.6 2.5 0.1 8.2 31.2 0.1 − 2.5 2.2
         July 11 45.0 4.5 0.1 5.4 14.7 16.5 0.6 2.6 0.1 8.2 31.1 0.1 − 2.5 2.2
         Aug. 11 45.2 4.7 0.1 5.3 14.7 16.5 0.6 2.6 0.1 8.2 31.1 0.1 − 2.5 2.1
Trends in building and loan association business
  
 5  billion
Changes in deposits Capital promised Capital paid out Outpayment Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans  10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings andments loan contracts loan contracts  
9 Newly
Amounts Interest of granted
credited deposits interim paid into of which: of which:
savings on under Applied Applied and ofaccounts deposits bridging which: of Memo
cancelled to settle- to settle-
under under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which: item:savings savings and which: interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housingand loan and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonusescon- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during received
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter
12 tions  11 tracts  9 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2001 22.0 2.7 4.5 46.5 32.7 44.2 19.7 4.3 10.7 3.4 13.8 10.4 7.7 14.7 11.8 0.5
2002          June 1.7 0.0 0.3 3.7 2.4 3.4 1.4 0.3 0.8 0.3 1.2 11.0 8.0 1.2 2.7 0.0
         July 1.8 0.0 0.4 4.1 2.9 4.2 1.8 0.4 1.0 0.3 1.4 10.8 7.9 1.2 0.0         Aug. 1.6 0.0 0.4 3.4 2.2 3.2 1.3 0.3 0.7 0.2 1.2 10.8 7.9 1.1 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2002          June 1.2 0.0 0.2 2.5 1.5 2.3 0.9 0.2 0.5 0.2 0.9 6.7 4.1 0.8 1.8 0.0         July 1.2 0.0 0.3 2.9 2.0 3.0 1.3 0.3 0.7 0.3 1.1 6.5 4.1 0.9 0.0         Aug. 1.1 0.0 0.2 2.4 1.4 2.3 0.9 0.2 0.5 0.1 0.9 6.5 4.1 0.8 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2002          June 0.6 0.0 0.1 1.2 0.9 1.0 0.5 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.3 4.4 3.8 0.4 0.9 0.0         July 0.6 0.0 0.1 1.2 0.9 1.2 0.5 0.1 0.4 0.1 0.3 4.3 3.8 0.4 0.0         Aug. 0.5 0.0 0.1 1.0 0.8 0.9 0.4 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.2 4.3 3.8 0.3 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of the foreign branches. December 1993 including fund for general banking risks. —8Total amount
From August 1990 including assets and liabilities and/or transactions with covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for which th e
building and loan association savers in the former GDR. The figures for the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted count as
latest date are always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent alterations, new contracts. —9For outpayments of deposits under savings and loan
which will appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially contracts arising from the allocation of contracts see "Capital paid out". —
marked. —1Including postal giro account balances, claims on building and 10Including housing bonuses credited. —11Only allocations accepted by
loan associations, claims arising from registered debt securities and central the beneficiaries; including allocations applied to settlement of i nterim and
bank balances. —2Loans under savings and loan contracts and interim and bridging loans. —12The amounts already credited to the accounts of savers
bridging loans. —3Including money market paper and small amounts of or borrowers are also included in "Amounts paid into savings accounts
other securities issued by banks. —4Including equalisation claims. — under savings and loan contracts" and "Interest and repayments received
5Including liabilities to building and loan associations. —6Including small on building loans". 
amounts of savings deposits. —7Including participation rights capital; from
39*IV.  Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
IV.  Banks
  
13. Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
  
  
 5  billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
Loans and advances Balances  and loans  and advances
German   not evidenced by certificates not evidenced  by certificates
banks
(MFIs)   to German
with non-banks
foreign foreignbranches Money of which Money
branches  1 
and/or and/or market enter- to marketforeign foreign balance paper, prises foreign paper,subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- and indi- non- secur- Other
Period diaries diaries total Total Total banks banks Total Total Total viduals banks ities  
2 assets ities 2,  3 
Foreign  branches End of year or month *
  
1999 66 187 1,311.9 714.6 614.2 177.0 437.2 100.4 533.9 386.2 26.6 20.8 359.6 147.7 63.4
2000 71 212 1,558.2 829.4 722.1 211.0 511.1 107.3 656.7 501.5 21.7 17.1 479.9 155.2 72.02001 68 216 1,689.3 870.6 761.6 213.6 548.0 109.0 744.9 549.0 20.6 17.2 528.4 195.9 73.9
2001          Oct. 69 218 1,729.5 921.5 812.7 225.1 587.6 108.8 733.9 536.0 18.6 15.6 517.4 197.9 74.2
         Nov. 69 217 1,785.9 960.4 849.6 231.3 618.3 110.8 751.7 547.5 20.1 17.0 527.4 204.2 73.9         Dec. 68 216 1,689.3 870.6 761.6 213.6 548.0 109.0 744.9 549.0 20.6 17.2 528.4 195.9 73.9
2002          Jan. 68 216 1,755.2 934.1 821.1 226.5 594.6 113.0 750.1 553.3 20.2 16.7 533.1 196.9 71.0
         Feb. 68 216 1,735.3 920.3 800.6 218.6 582.0 119.6 737.2 544.8 19.9 16.3 524.9 192.4 77.8         Mar. 65 214 1,718.9 905.4 788.3 216.0 572.3 117.1 732.8 540.8 19.1 15.4 521.7 192.0 80.7
         Apr. 64 213 1,720.0 907.4 764.5 230.2 534.3 143.0 745.1 576.7 19.4 15.3 557.3 168.4 67.4
         May 63 212 1,677.0 870.7 737.5 219.5 518.0 133.1 756.6 579.2 19.2 15.0 560.0 177.4 49.7         June 63 211 1,548.6 795.4 672.9 206.4 466.5 122.6 694.8 524.6 18.4 14.3 506.2 170.3 58.4
         July 62 210 1,561.1 776.9 655.0 201.1 453.9 122.0 723.7 544.2 18.7 15.0 525.5 179.5 60.4
Changes *
2000 + 5 + 25 +214.0 + 97.0 + 92.3 + 33.7 + 58.6 + 4.7 +108.3 +104.0 −5.3 −4.1 +109.4 + 4.3 + 8.7
2001 −3 + 4 + 99.1 + 24.8 + 26.1 + 2.3 + 23.8 −1.3 + 72.7 + 35.6 −1.1 −0.0 + 36.7 + 37.1 + 1.6
2001          Oct. −1 + 1 + 6.3 + 1.5 −1.1 −8.5 + 7.4 + 2.6 + 4.4 −14.2 −0.5 −0.6 −13.6 + 18.6 + 0.3
         Nov. −− 1 + 45.4 + 33.7 + 32.2 + 6.1 + 26.1 + 1.5 + 12.2 + 7.4 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 6.0 + 4.8 −0.5
         Dec. −1 −1 −102.2 −92.5 −90.2 −17.7 −72.4 −2.4 −9.4 −0.8 + 0.6 + 0.2 −1.4 −8.6 −0.2
2002          Jan. −− + 51.0 + 56.7 + 53.4 + 12.7 + 40.7 + 3.3 −2.5 −1.5 −0.5 −0.6 −1.0 −1.0 −3.2
         Feb. −− − 17.5 −12.8 −19.5 −7.8 −11.7 + 6.8 −11.6 −7.5 −0.2 −0.4 −7.3 −4.1 + 6.9
         Mar. −3 −2 −10.7 −12.1 −9.9 −2.5 −7.4 −2.2 −1.5 −1.9 −0.8 −0.8 −1.1 + 0.3 + 2.9
         Apr. −1 −1 + 25.5 + 13.4 −13.7 + 14.1 −27.8 + 27.1 + 25.0 + 45.4 + 0.2 −0.2 + 45.1 −20.4 −12.8
         May −1 −1 −4.3 −20.5 −13.0 −10.6 −2.4 −7.5 + 29.9 + 17.0 −0.1 −0.3 + 17.1 + 12.9 −13.7
         June −− 1 −80.1 −55.4 −47.5 −13.1 −34.4 −7.9 −37.7 −36.2 −0.8 −0.7 −35.3 −1.6 + 13.1
         July −1 −1 −8.2 −26.9 −25.1 −5.3 −19.7 −1.9 + 19.0 + 11.7 + 0.2 + 0.7 + 11.5 + 7.3 −0.2
  
  
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month *
  
1999 39 161 530.6 242.0 178.6 71.1 107.5 63.4 234.6 174.2 41.5 37.5 132.7 60.4 53.9
2000 40 170 580.5 248.1 183.8 82.2 101.6 64.3 263.5 203.4 45.4 42.3 158.0 60.1 69.02001 46 200 811.5 342.4 262.8 105.7 157.1 79.6 382.2 293.1 51.9 47.7 241.2 89.2 87.0
2001          Oct. 45 201 771.3 331.0 252.9 86.8 166.0 78.1 354.9 268.2 47.4 43.8 220.8 86.7 85.4
         Nov. 45 202 784.7 333.4 254.0 89.2 164.8 79.4 368.2 277.9 50.7 46.0 227.2 90.3 83.0         Dec. 46 200 811.5 342.4 262.8 105.7 157.1 79.6 382.2 293.1 51.9 47.7 241.2 89.2 87.0
2002          Jan. 46 201 815.1 354.7 273.6 108.3 165.3 81.0 370.4 278.8 50.8 47.2 228.0 91.6 90.1
         Feb. 46 201 803.5 348.0 268.1 101.7 166.4 79.9 367.6 277.2 49.4 45.7 227.8 90.4 87.9         Mar. 47 201 813.9 349.4 268.3 105.3 163.0 81.1 368.7 277.4 49.7 46.3 227.7 91.4 95.8
         Apr. 47 200 760.9 346.8 272.6 108.6 164.0 74.2 325.8 258.1 49.4 46.1 208.7 67.7 88.3
         May 48 201 751.8 343.3 269.0 113.0 156.1 74.3 317.6 259.4 49.5 46.4 209.9 58.2 90.9         June 48 201 732.2 334.7 261.9 106.2 155.7 72.8 311.4 253.9 48.4 45.2 205.5 57.6 86.0
         July 48 200 712.7 328.4 255.8 116.8 139.0 72.6 306.6 248.2 48.1 45.0 200.1 58.4 77.7
Changes *
2000 + 1 + 9 + 38.4 + 2.1 + 2.4 + 11.1 −8.7 −0.3 + 21.8 + 21.8 + 3.9 + 4.8 + 17.9 + 0.0 + 14.5
2001 + 6 + 30 +229.9 + 92.5 + 78.0 + 23.5 + 54.6 + 14.5 +119.5 + 89.1 + 6.5 + 5.3 + 82.7 + 30.4 + 17.9
2001          Oct. + 1 −3 + 2.3 + 11.9 + 11.3 + 2.0 + 9.2 + 0.7 −11.7 −12.6 −1.3 −0.7 −11.3 + 0.9 + 2.0
         Nov. − + 1 + 10.5 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 2.3 −2.2 + 0.8 + 12.1 + 8.6 + 3.3 + 2.2 + 5.3 + 3.5 −2.6
         Dec. + 1 −2 + 25.7 + 8.1 + 8.2 + 16.5 −8.3 −0.1 + 13.9 + 14.5 + 1.2 + 1.7 + 13.3 −0.6 + 3.7
2002          Jan. − +1 −0.5 + 10.5 + 9.7 + 2.6 + 7.0 + 0.8 −13.8 −16.1 −1.0 −0.4 −15.1 + 2.4 + 2.8
         Feb. −− − 11.0 −6.3 −5.3 −6.6 + 1.3 −1.0 −2.5 −1.4 −1.4 −1.5 −− 1.1 −2.2
         Mar. + 1 − + 11.6 + 2.0 + 0.6 + 3.6 −2.9 + 1.4 + 1.6 + 0.7 + 0.3 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.9 + 8.0
         Apr. −− 1 −47.2 + 0.3 + 6.1 + 3.3 + 2.9 −5.9 −40.3 −16.7 −0.3 −0.2 −16.4 −23.6 −7.2
         May + 1 + 1 −1.2 + 0.7 −0.6 + 4.4 −5.0 + 1.3 −5.1 + 4.4 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 4.3 −9.5 + 3.1
         June −− − 9.6 −3.5 −3.6 −6.8 + 3.2 + 0.1 −1.8 −1.2 −1.1 −1.2 −0.1 −0.6 −4.3
         July −− 1 −23.8 −8.6 −7.7 + 10.7 −18.3 −0.9 −6.6 −7.4 −0.3 −0.2 −7.1 + 0.8 −8.5
*From March 2000, including the foreign branches of building and loan of reporting institutions have, in principle, not been eliminated from the
associations. In this table “foreign “also includes the country of domicile of flow figures in the case of the foreign subsidiaries). The figures for the lat-
the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical alterations have est date are always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent alterati ons,
been eliminated from the changes. (Breaks owing to changes in the range which will appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially
40*IV.  Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
IV.  Banks
  
      
  
Deposits
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  4 
Money
Short-term market Medium  and long-term
paper
of which of which and debt
enter- enter- Working securities
out- capital Other prises  and prises  and
German foreign indi- indi- Foreign standing and own liabilities
Total Total banks Total Total Total viduals Total viduals 5 funds 6   Period banks non-banks
End of year or month * Foreign  branches
  
988.6 671.8 148.3 523.6 316.7 60.7 57.9 52.8 2.8 2.7 256.0 234.4 14.0 75.0 1999
1,186.1 799.5 158.2 641.4 386.5 60.9 58.4 51.6 2.5 2.4 325.7 272.3 22.0 77.9 2000
1,271.3 855.3 194.0 661.2 416.0 57.4 54.2 51.2 3.2 3.0 358.6 316.8 24.0 77.2 2001
1,323.4 895.9 178.1 717.8 427.4 57.1 54.4 52.2 2.7 2.5 370.4 308.5 23.9 73.7 2001          Oct.
1,357.3 925.2 182.5 742.7 432.0 60.1 56.7 54.6 3.4 3.2 372.0 329.6 24.1 75.0          Nov.
1,271.3 855.3 194.0 661.2 416.0 57.4 54.2 51.2 3.2 3.0 358.6 316.8 24.0 77.2          Dec.
1,314.8 896.7 192.4 704.3 418.1 65.8 62.7 60.4 3.2 3.0 352.3 334.3 24.3 81.8 2002          Jan.
1,323.0 883.6 190.0 693.6 439.4 65.8 62.6 60.2 3.2 3.0 373.6 303.9 24.3 84.1          Feb.
1,306.0 882.5 199.4 683.1 423.5 62.8 59.6 56.9 3.3 3.1 360.7 310.3 24.3 78.3          Mar.
1,334.9 883.5 209.5 674.0 451.4 77.8 74.5 71.1 3.3 3.2 373.6 303.7 24.5 56.9          Apr.
1,298.2 850.1 213.0 637.1 448.1 75.1 71.8 68.0 3.3 3.2 373.1 293.4 25.0 60.3          May1,200.4 791.3 209.8 581.5 409.1 63.6 60.3 56.6 3.3 3.2 345.5 264.5 24.9 58.8          June
1,212.9 788.3 212.5 575.8 424.5 67.2 63.9 60.0 3.4 3.3 357.3 263.1 25.0 60.1          July
Changes *
+ 170.8 +108.8 + 9.1 + 99.6 + 62.0 −0.0 + 0.4 −1.3 −0.4 −0.4 + 62.0 + 37.9 + 8.0 −2.7 2000
+ 53.8 + 36.3 + 35.2 + 1.1 + 17.5 −3.7 −4.4 −0.6 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 21.2 + 44.6 + 2.1 −1.3 2001
− 9.7 −6.6 + 3.8 −10.4 −3.1 + 1.6 + 1.6 + 2.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 −4.7 + 17.9 + 0.2 −2.1 2001          Oct.
+ 24.8 + 23.2 + 4.3 + 18.9 + 1.6 + 3.0 + 2.3 + 2.4 + 0.7 + 0.7 −1.4 + 21.1 + 0.1 −0.7          Nov.
−92.0 −73.1 + 11.4 −84.5 −18.9 −2.8 −2.6 −3.5 −0.2 −0.2 −16.2 −12.8 −0.0 + 2.7          Dec.
+ 31.6 + 33.6 −1.8 + 35.4 −2.0 + 8.4 + 8.4 + 9.2 −0.0 −0.0 −10.4 + 17.4 + 0.2 + 1.7 2002          Jan.
+ 9.7 −11.9 −2.4 −9.5 + 21.7 −0.0 −0.0 −0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 21.7 −30.4 −0.0 + 3.1          Feb.
−12.4 + 1.8 + 9.5 −7.7 −14.2 −2.9 −3.0 −3.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 −11.2 + 6.4 −0.0 −4.8          Mar.
+ 48.2 + 13.5 + 10.1 + 3.4 + 34.7 + 15.0 + 14.9 + 14.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 19.7 −6.6 + 0.2 −16.2          Apr.
− 8.4 −15.6 + 3.5 −19.0 + 7.2 −2.7 −2.7 −3.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 9.9 −10.3 + 0.5 + 13.8          May
−63.1 −36.5 −3.2 −33.4 −26.6 −11.4 −11.5 −11.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 −15.1 −29.0 −0.1 + 12.1          June
− 2.1 −11.6 + 2.7 −14.3 + 9.5 + 3.6 + 3.5 + 3.4 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 5.9 −1.4 + 0.1 −4.8          July
  
  
End of year or month * Foreign  subsidiaries
  
383.4 250.7 56.9 193.8 132.7 21.6 19.8 18.3 1.7 1.7 111.1 51.5 29.0 66.7 1999
414.6 267.9 61.0 207.0 146.7 32.5 29.2 21.9 3.2 3.2 114.2 56.3 34.7 74.9 2000576.5 362.5 79.2 283.3 214.0 36.4 32.5 23.9 3.9 3.8 177.6 99.8 47.3 87.9 2001
549.3 348.4 65.3 283.1 200.9 27.4 23.5 22.4 3.9 3.9 173.4 91.5 46.5 84.0 2001          Oct.
557.8 356.3 67.4 288.8 201.5 28.5 22.8 21.8 5.7 5.7 173.1 95.1 46.8 85.0          Nov.
576.5 362.5 79.2 283.3 214.0 36.4 32.5 23.9 3.9 3.8 177.6 99.8 47.3 87.9          Dec.
580.0 369.6 70.1 299.5 210.4 35.0 31.2 25.7 3.8 3.8 175.4 98.4 48.0 88.6 2002          Jan.
568.8 361.3 61.9 299.4 207.5 33.0 29.2 24.1 3.8 3.8 174.5 98.9 48.3 87.5          Feb.
578.1 376.1 65.6 310.5 202.0 32.9 29.1 24.1 3.8 3.8 169.1 101.0 48.0 86.8          Mar.
547.7 344.3 66.6 277.7 203.4 33.7 29.9 25.4 3.8 3.7 169.7 81.9 47.1 84.1          Apr.
539.5 339.9 71.3 268.7 199.6 32.3 28.5 24.4 3.8 3.7 167.3 82.1 46.4 83.8          May521.7 326.3 72.5 253.8 195.4 31.8 28.1 24.0 3.7 3.7 163.6 81.4 45.4 83.7          June
500.8 307.6 71.5 236.1 193.3 31.7 24.8 20.6 6.9 6.8 161.6 82.9 45.6 83.4          July
Changes *
+ 20.6 + 9.9 + 2.9 + 7.0 + 10.7 + 10.9 + 9.4 + 3.6 + 1.5 + 1.5 −0.3 + 4.8 + 5.4 + 7.6 2000
+ 160.9 + 94.6 + 18.2 + 76.3 + 66.4 + 3.9 + 3.3 + 2.0 + 0.6 + 0.6 + 62.5 + 43.6 + 13.7 + 11.7 2001
− 0.3 + 3.9 −1.2 + 5.1 −4.2 −0.4 −0.6 −0.5 + 0.2 + 0.2 −3.8 + 1.2 + 0.4 + 1.0 2001          Oct.
+ 6.1 + 6.2 + 2.1 + 4.1 −0.1 + 1.0 −0.7 −0.7 + 1.8 + 1.8 −1.1 + 3.6 + 0.4 + 0.5          Nov.
+ 17.6 + 5.9 + 11.8 −5.9 + 11.7 + 7.9 + 9.8 + 2.2 −1.8 −1.8 + 3.8 + 4.8 + 0.5 + 2.9          Dec.
− 0.0 + 4.7 −9.1 + 13.8 −4.7 −1.4 −1.4 + 1.8 −0.0 −0.0 −3.4 −1.4 + 0.7 + 0.2 2002          Jan.
−10.7 −7.9 −8.2 + 0.3 −2.9 −2.0 −2.0 −1.6 −0.0 −0.0 −0.8 + 0.5 + 0.3 −1.0          Feb.
+ 10.5 + 15.5 + 3.7 + 11.7 −5.0 −0.1 −0.1 −0.0 −− − 4.9 + 2.1 −0.3 −0.6          Mar.
−25.1 −28.1 + 1.0 −29.1 + 3.0 + 0.7 + 0.8 + 1.3 −0.1 −0.1 + 2.2 −19.2 −0.9 −2.1          Apr.
− 0.9 + 0.4 + 4.6 −4.2 −1.4 −1.4 −1.4 −1.0 −0.0 −0.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 −0.7 + 0.2          May
− 8.7 −7.4 + 1.3 −8.7 −1.3 −0.4 −0.4 −0.4 −0.0 −0.0 −0.9 −0.7 −1.0 + 0.9          June
−25.0 −21.4 −1.0 −20.3 −3.6 −0.1 −3.3 −3.4 + 3.2 + 3.2 −3.5 + 1.5 + 0.2 −0.5          July
marked. —1Several branches in a given country of domicile are re- debt securities and money market paper. —5Issues of negotiable and
garded as a single branch. —2Treasury bills, Treasury discount paper non-negotiable debt securities and money market paper. —6Including
and other money market paper, debt securities. —3Including own debt subordinated liabilities. 
securities. —4Excluding subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable
41*IV.  Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
V. Minimum reserves
 
1. Reserve ratios
Germany European monetary union
 
% of liabilities subject to reserve requirements % of reserve base  1 
Sight Time
Applicable from liabilities liabilities Applicable from Ratio Savings deposits
1995  August 1 2    2    1.5    1999  January 1 2    
 
   
1Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank of 1 December
1998 on the application of minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which
a reserve ratio of 0 % applies, pursuant to article 4 (1)). 
 
  
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany up to the end of 1998
− pursuant to the Minimum Reserves Order of the Bundesbank −
 
DM million
Liabilities subject to reserve requirements Excess reserves  4 
Monthly Required as % of the
average  1 Total reserves  2 Level Sight liabilities Time liabilities Savings deposits Actual reserves  3 required  reserves Shortfall, total
1995          Dec. 2,066,565 579,337 519,456 967,772 36,492 37,337 845 2.3 3
1996          Dec. 2,201,464 655,483 474,342 1,071,639 38,671 39,522 851 2.2 41997          Dec. 2,327,879 734,986 476,417 1,116,477 40,975 41,721 745 1.8 31998          Dec. 2,576,889 865,444 564,878 1,146,567 45,805 46,432 627 1.4 4
1Pursuant to sections 5 to 7 of the Minimum Reserves Order. —2Amount balances of the credit institutions subject to reserve requirements on their
after applying the reserve ratios to the liabilities subject to reserve require- giro accounts at the Bundesbank. — 4 Actual reserves less required reserves. 
ments (section 5 (1) of the Minimum Reserves Order). —3Average credit
 
 
3. Reserve maintenance in the European monetary union
− from 1999, pursuant to the ECB Regulation governing minimum reserves according to article 19.1 of the
ECB/ESCB Statute −
 
Maintenance Required reserves
period before deduction Required reserves
of lump-sum Lump-sum beginning in  1 after deduction of
Reserve base  2 allowance  3 allowance  4 lump-sum allowance Actual reserves  5 Excess reserves  6 Shortfall, total  7 
European monetary union (  5  billion)
 
2001          Dec.  8 6,463.7 129.3 0.6 128.7 130.1 1.4 0.0
2002          Jan.  8 6,615.8 132.3 0.6 131.7 132.4 0.6 0.0
         Feb.  8 6,592.1 131.8 0.6 131.3 132.0 0.7 0.0
         Mar.  8 6,557.5 131.2 0.6 130.6 131.1 0.5 0.0
         Apr.  8 6,578.6 131.6 0.6 131.0 131.5 0.5 0.0
         May  8 6,581.0 131.6 0.6 131.0 131.7 0.6 0.0
         June  8 6,560.9 131.2 0.6 130.7 131.3 0.6 0.0
         July  8 r 6,490.8 129.8 0.6 129.3 129.7 0.5 0.0
         Aug.  8 p 6,478.0 129.6 0.6 129.0 129.5 0.5 0.0
Of which: Germany (  5  million)
2001          Dec. 1,906,707 38,134 247 37,887 38,875 988 6
2002          Jan. 1,925,319 38,506 246 38,260 38,534 273 5
         Feb. 1,908,714 38,174 246 37,928 38,242 314 8         Mar. 1,891,284 37,826 246 37,580 37,812 232 6
         Apr. 1,899,520 37,990 246 37,745 37,931 187 1
         May 1,903,413 38,068 245 37,823 38,100 276 4         June 1,899,951 37,999 242 37,757 38,040 282 1
         July 1,896,682 37,934 238 37,696 37,867 171 4
         Aug.  
p 1,892,420 37,848 234 37,614 37,823 209 2
1The reserve maintenance period of the ESCB minimum reserve system 1 December 1998 on the application of minimum reserves. —5Average
starts on the 24th of each month and ends on the 23rd of the following credit balances of the credit institutions subject to minimum reserve require-
month (the first reserve maintenance period lasted from January 1, 1999 to ments on their reserve accounts at the respective national central bank. —
February 23, 1999). —2Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central 6Actual reserves less required reserves after the deduction of the lump-sum
Bank of 1 December 1998 on the application of minimum reserves allowance. —7Required reserves after the deduction of the lump-sum
(excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio o f 0 % applies, pursuant to allowance. —8Owing to the adoption of the euro by Greece on January 1,
article 4 (1)). —3Amount after applying the reserve ratios to the reserve 2001, including credit institutions in Greece. 
base. —4Article 5 (2) of the Regulation of the European Central Bank of
42*V. Minimum reserves

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
VI. Interest rates
  
1. ECB interest rates 2. Discount and lombard rates 3. Base rates
    of the Bundesbank
  
% p.a. % p.a. % p.a.
Base rate as per
Main Marginal Discount Rate
Deposit refinancing lending Lombard Transition Act
Applicable from facility operations  1 facility Applicable from Discount rate rate  2, 4, 5  Applicable from 3, 4, 5  
1999 Jan.                 1 2.00 3.00 4.50 1994 Feb.                18 5 1/4 6 3/4 1999 Jan.                 1 2.50
         Jan.                 4 2.75 3.00 3.25          Apr.                15 5 6 1/2          May                 1 1.95
         Jan.               22 2.00 3.00 4.50          May                13 4 1/2 6 
         Apr.                 9 1.50 2.50 3.50 2000 Jan.                  1 2.68
         Nov.                 5 2.00 3.00 4.00 1995 Mar.                31 4 6          May                  1 3.42
         Aug.               25 3 1/2 5 1/2          Sep.                 1 4.26
2000 Feb.                 4 2.25 3.25 4.25          Dec.                15 3 5 
         Mar.               17 2.50 3.50 4.50   2001 Sep.                  1 3.62
         Apr.               28 2.75 3.75 4.75 1996 Apr.                19 2 1/2 4 1/2
         June                 9 3.25 4.25 5.25          to 2002 Jan.                  1 2.71
         Sep.                 1 3.50 4.50 5.50 1998 Dec.                31          to
         Oct.                 6 3.75 4.75 5.75          Apr.                  3
  
2001 May               11 3.50 4.50 5.50 Base rate as per
         Aug.               31 3.25 4.25 5.25 Civil Code  6 
         Sep.               18 2.75 3.75 4.75
         Nov.                 9 2.25 3.25 4.25 2002 Jan.                  1 2.57
         July                 1 2.47
1Up to 21 June 2000 fixed rate tenders, from 28 June 2000 variable rate the field of civil law and judicial procedural law), in state legislation (as stipu -
tenders at minimum bid rate. —2From 1 August 1990 to 31 December 1993 lated in the Act Introducing the Civil Code) or in executory instruments and
this was also the rate for cash advances; from 1 January 1994 cash advances contracts based on such regulations, the following changes apply as from
have no longer been granted. Wherever reference is made in an Act to the 1 January 2002: a) the rate for cash advances of the Federal Government isinterest rate applicable for cash advances of the Federal Government, the replaced by the base rate in the Civil Code increased by 1.5%, b) the lom-rate will be replaced by the base rate increased by 1.5 percentage points pur- bard rate is replaced by the ECB ’s marginal lending facility rate, c) the base
suant to the Discount Rate Transition Act (see also footnot e 4 a and 5). Pursu- rate pursuant to the Discount Rate Transition Act is replaced by the base
ant to the Discount Rate Transition Act, read in conjunction with the Lom- rate pursuant to section 247 of the Civil Code (see also footnote 5). —5Pur-
bard Rate Transition Regulation, the lombard rate is replaced from 1 Janu- suant to Article 4 section 1 of the Act on the Amendment of Provisions con-ary 1999 by the rate applied by the European Cental Bank (ECB) for its mar- cerning the Evaluation of Insurance Enterprises ’Capital Investment and the
ginal lending facility wherever the lombard rate is used as a reference vari- Repeal of the Discount Rate Transition Act, the Discount Rate Transition Act,
able for interest and other payments (see also footnot e 4 b and 5). —3Pur- the Regulation Governing the Use of the Base Rate as a Reference Variable
suant to the Discount Rate Transition Act, read in conjunction with the Regu- and the Lombard Rate Transition Regulation are repealed. Pursuant to Art -
lation Governing the Use of the Base Rate as a Reference Variable, this rate icle 4 section 2 of this act, from 4 April 2002 the discount rate and the basereplaces the discount rate from 1 January 1999 wherever the latter is used rate under the Discount Rate Transition Act are replaced by the base ratein contracts and regulations as a reference variable for interest and other pursuant to section 247 of the Civil Code, the lombard rate is replaced bypayments. This base rate is the discount rate of the Bundesbank which ap- the interest rate on the marginal lending facility of the ECB, and the inter-plied on 31 December 1998. It changes from January 1, May 1 and Septem- est rate for cash advances of the Federal Government by the base rate pursu-ber 1 of each year, and will change for the first time on 1 May 1999 if the ant to section 247 of the Civil Code increased by 1.5 percentage points. —
interest rate applied by the ECB to its longer-term refinancing operations 6Starting at 3.62%, it is adjusted on January 1 and July 1 of each year (for
(marginal rate) has changed by at least 0.5 percentage points (see also foot- the first time on 1 January 2002) by the percentage points by which the refe r-
note 4 c and 5). —4Wherever the rates listed in this column are used as a ence variable (most recent main refinancing operation of the ECB, marginal
reference variable for interest and other payments in Federal legislation (in rate) has increased or decreased since the last change in th e base rate. 
  
  
  
4. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders *
  
  
  
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bids Allotment Weighted
Amount Amount Fixed rate Minimum bid rate Marginal rate  1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement
 5 
 millions % p.a. ... days
Main refinancing operations
2002 July               24 108,732 84,000 − 3.25 3.30 3.31 14
       July               31 86,879 55,000 − 3.25 3.30 3.31 14
       Aug.                 7 104,266 82,000 − 3.25 3.28 3.29 14
       Aug.               14 85,232 52,000 − 3.25 3.28 3.29 14
       Aug.               21 115,921 82,000 − 3.25 3.28 3.29 14
       Aug.               28 104,816 65,000 − 3.25 3.28 3.29 14
       Sep.                 4 124,579 76,000 − 3.25 3.28 3.29 14
       Sep.               11 105,528 60,000 − 3.25 3.27 3.28 14
       Sep.               18 116,252 84,000 − 3.25 3.28 3.29 14
       Sep.               25 105,130 65,000 − 3.25 3.28 3.29 14
       Oct.                 2 125,630 80,000 − 3.25 3.28 3.29 14
       Oct.                 9 111,824 66,000 − 3.25 3.27 3.28 14
       Oct.               16 106,563 76,000 − 3.25 3.28 3.29 14
Longer-term refinancing operations
2002 May               30 37,602 20,000 −− 3.45 3.47 91
       June               27 27,670 20,000 −− 3.38 3.41 91
       July               25 28,791 15,000 −− 3.35 3.37 98
       Aug.               29 33,527 15,000 −− 3.33 3.34 91
       Sep.               26 25,728 15,000 −− 3.23 3.26 88
Source: ECB. —*Enlargement of the euro area on 1 January 2001 to allotted or collected. 
include Greece. —1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were
43*VI. Interest rates

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
VI. Interest rates
 
5.  Money market rates, by month
 
 
% p.a.
Money market rates reported by Frankfurt banks  1 EURIBOR  3 
One- One- Three- Six- Nine- Twelve-
week month month month month month
Day-to-day money Three-month funds EONIA  2 funds funds funds funds funds funds
Monthly Lowest and Monthly Lowest and
Period averages highest rates averages highest rates Monthly averages
2000          Sep. 4.58 4.00 −4.99 4.83 4.77 −5.00 4.59 4.64 4.70 4.85 5.04 5.14 5.22
         Oct. 4.75 4.50 −5.02 5.02 4.95 −5.14 4.76 4.80 4.85 5.04 5.10 5.16 5.22
         Nov. 4.82 4.70 −4.98 5.07 5.00 −5.14 4.83 4.86 4.92 5.09 5.13 5.16 5.19
         Dec. 4.82 4 4.69 −5.40 4.92 4.81 −5.02 4.83 4.86 4.95 4.94 4.92 4.90 4.88
2001          Jan. 4.75 4.15 −4.88 4.75 4.65 −4.84 4.76 4.81 4.80 4.77 4.68 4.60 4.57
         Feb. 4.98 4.73 −5.75 4.74 4.67 −4.81 4.99 4.83 4.80 4.76 4.67 4.61 4.59
         Mar. 4.77 4.20 −4.93 4.69 4.52 −4.78 4.78 4.82 4.78 4.71 4.58 4.49 4.47
         Apr. 5.04 4.71 −5.80 4.66 4.52 −4.80 5.06 4.88 4.78 4.68 4.57 4.50 4.48
         May 4.64 4.41 −4.90 4.62 4.49 −4.81 4.65 4.66 4.66 4.64 4.56 4.53 4.52
         June 4.53 4.30 −4.85 4.43 4.37 −4.50 4.54 4.56 4.53 4.45 4.35 4.33 4.31
         July 4.51 4.25 −4.63 4.45 4.38 −4.50 4.51 4.54 4.52 4.47 4.39 4.33 4.31
         Aug. 4.49 4.35 −4.53 4.33 4.21 −4.43 4.49 4.51 4.46 4.35 4.22 4.14 4.11
         Sep. 3.97 2.95 −5.50 3.96 3.60 −4.27 3.99 4.08 4.05 3.98 3.88 3.80 3.77
         Oct. 3.96 3.65 −4.76 3.58 3.48 −3.65 3.97 3.83 3.72 3.60 3.46 3.39 3.37
         Nov. 3.51 3.15 −4.20 3.37 3.28 −3.50 3.51 3.48 3.43 3.39 3.26 3.20 3.20
         Dec. 3.32 5 2.90 −4.05 3.33 3.26 −3.36 3.34 3.38 3.42 3.34 3.26 3.24 3.30
2002          Jan. 3.29 2.45 −3.57 3.32 3.24 −3.38 3.29 3.35 3.35 3.34 3.34 3.39 3.48
         Feb. 3.27 2.90 −3.35 3.34 3.31 −3.38 3.28 3.32 3.34 3.36 3.40 3.48 3.59
         Mar. 3.25 2.90 −3.45 3.37 3.33 −3.45 3.26 3.33 3.35 3.39 3.50 3.65 3.82
         Apr. 3.30 3.11 −3.75 3.39 3.35 −3.45 3.32 3.32 3.34 3.41 3.54 3.70 3.86
         May 3.31 3.21 −3.50 3.44 3.35 −3.52 3.31 3.34 3.37 3.47 3.63 3.80 3.96
         June 3.35 3.28 −3.65 3.45 3.40 −3.48 3.35 3.36 3.38 3.46 3.59 3.73 3.87
         July 3.30 3.15 −3.40 3.39 3.34 −3.44 3.30 3.34 3.36 3.41 3.48 3.56 3.64
         Aug. 3.29 3.26 −3.36 3.33 3.29 −3.37 3.29 3.32 3.33 3.35 3.38 3.40 3.44
         Sep. 3.31 3.26 −3.60 3.29 3.25 −3.34 3.32 3.32 3.32 3.31 3.27 3.23 3.24
1Money market rates are not fixed or quoted officially; the monthly aver- Moneyline Telerate (formerly Bridge Telerate). —3Euro Interbank Offered
ages computed from daily quotations are unweighted. —2Euro OverNight Rate: unweighted average rate calculated by Moneyline Telerate (formerly
Index Average: weighted average overnight rate for interbank operations Bridge Telerate) since 30 December 1998 according to the act/360
calculated by the European Central Bank since 4 January 1999 on the basis method. —4At the end of December 5.00% to 5.40%. —5At the end of De-
of real turnover according to the act/360 method and published via cember 3.50% to 4.05%. 
 
 
6. Euro area retail bank interest rates *, o
  
% p.a.; period averages
Deposit interest rates Lending interest rates
With agreed maturity Redeemable at notice To enterprises To householdsUp to Up to Over Up to Over Up to Over Consumer For house
Period Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months 1 year 1 year lending purchase
1999 0.65 2.44 2.45 3.57 2.15 2.76 5.65 5.10 9.39 5.29
2000 0.85 3.45 3.45 4.52 2.25 3.79 6.60 6.23 9.87 6.342001  
1 0.94 3.49 3.49 4.12 2.40 3.59 6.83 6.15 10.12 5.97
2001          Aug. 0.96 3.59 3.59 4.14 2.40 3.68 6.89 6.19 10.16 5.96         Sep. 0.91 3.28 3.28 3.98 2.36 3.33 6.71 6.07 10.08 5.86
         Oct. 0.84 3.06 3.06 3.84 2.29 3.01 6.46 5.82 9.99 5.65
         Nov. 0.78 2.84 2.83 3.65 2.19 2.75 6.31 5.71 9.87 5.48         Dec. 0.74 2.79 2.78 3.77 2.17 2.79 6.26 5.69 9.81 5.52
2002          Jan. 0.73 2.77 2.77 3.83 2.17 2.80 6.18 5.63 9.78 5.53
         Feb. 0.73 2.78 2.79 3.95 2.15 2.91 6.16 5.75 9.81 5.61         Mar. 0.73 2.84 2.84 4.07 2.15 3.00 6.09 5.85 9.76 5.74
         Apr. 0.74 2.89 2.90 4.13 2.14 3.07 6.17 5.95 9.82 5.81
         May 0.74 2.91 2.92 4.15 2.15 3.08 6.20 5.98 9.85 5.82         June 0.74 2.93 2.94 4.09 2.13 3.08 6.17 5.92 9.81 5.77
         July 0.74 2.88 2.89 4.02 2.13 3.02 6.18 5.91 9.81 5.68
         Aug. 0.73 2.84 2.85 3.81 2.12 2.94 6.17 5.82 9.82 5.53
*These euro area retail bank interest rates should be used with caution and Member States. Furthermore, the national interest rates are not harmonised
for statistical purposes only, primarily to analyse their development over in terms of their coverage (new business and/or outstanding amounts), th e
time rather than their level. They are calculated as the weighted average of nature of the data (nominal or effective) or the compilation method. The
national interest rates provided by the national central banks. The national country weights for the euro area retail bank interest rates are derived from
rates represent those rates that are currently available from national MFI balance sheet statistics or close proxies. The weights reflect thesources and which are judged to fit the standard categories. These national country-specific proportions of the relevant instruments within the eur o
rates have been aggregated to derive information for the euro area, in area, measured as outstanding amounts. The weights are adjusted monthly,some cases relying on proxies and working assumptions due to the so that interest rates and weights always refer to the same month. —1En-
heterogeneity observed in the national financial instruments across MU largement of the euro area on 1 January 2001 to include Greece. 
      
o Tables and notes taken from the ECB. 
44*VI. Interest rates

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
VI. Interest rates
 
7. Lending and deposit rates of banks (MFIs) in Germany *, o
    Lending rates
 
% p.a.
Current account credit Bills discountedBills of less than 
 5 
 50,000
 5 
 100,000 and more
 5 
 500,000 and more refinancable
less than 
 5 
 100,000 but less than 
 5 
 500,000 but less than 
 5 
 2,5 million at the Bundesbank
Reporting Average Average Average Average
period  1 interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread
2000          Sep. 11.02 8.75 −13.00 9.94 7.50 −12.50 8.83 7.00 −11.75 6.76 5.00 −10.00
         Oct. 11.22 8.75 −13.25 10.18 7.75 −12.75 9.03 7.00 −12.00 6.95 5.00 −10.00
         Nov. 11.29 8.75 −13.25 10.19 7.50 −12.95 9.10 7.00 −12.00 7.01 5.00 −10.00
         Dec. 11.39 8.90 −13.25 10.27 8.00 −12.75 9.12 7.00 −12.00 6.98 5.05 −10.00
2001          Jan. 11.35 8.75 −13.50 10.30 8.00 −12.95 9.12 7.00 −12.25 6.99 5.50 −10.00
         Feb. 11.13 8.00 −13.25 10.15 7.50 −12.95 8.95 7.00 −12.00 6.98 5.40 −9.81
         Mar. 11.17 7.00 −13.25 10.03 6.50 −13.00 8.86 6.00 −12.00 7.00 5.50 −10.00
         Apr. 11.14 6.80 −13.25 10.07 6.50 −13.00 8.85 6.00 −12.25 6.96 5.39 −10.00
         May 11.12 6.50 −13.25 10.09 6.00 −12.75 8.84 5.60 −12.00 6.86 4.78 −10.00
         June 11.21 6.50 −13.25 10.13 6.50 −12.95 8.79 5.50 −12.00 6.91 5.42 −10.00
         July 11.12 6.50 −13.25 9.99 6.00 −12.95 8.73 5.50 −12.00 6.91 5.43 −10.00
         Aug. 11.11 6.20 −13.25 10.03 6.00 −12.95 8.79 5.50 −12.10 6.84 5.18 −10.00
         Sep. 11.06 6.00 −13.25 9.98 6.00 −12.75 8.75 5.50 −12.10 6.69 5.00 −10.00
         Oct. 10.97 5.50 −13.25 9.93 5.50 −12.75 8.57 5.00 −12.00 6.57 4.55 −10.25
         Nov. 10.87 5.50 −13.00 9.77 5.00 −12.75 8.49 4.90 −12.00 6.43 4.36 −10.25
         Dec. 10.66 6.00 −13.00 9.64 5.50 −12.75 8.44 4.90 −12.00 6.23 3.46 −10.00
2002          Jan. o 10.86 6.00 −13.00 9.62 5.50 −12.75 8.40 4.50 −12.00 6.34 4.30 −10.25
         Feb. 10.84 6.00 −13.00 9.58 6.00 −12.75 8.42 5.50 −12.00 6.36 4.35 −10.25
         Mar. 10.88 6.45 −13.00 9.64 6.00 −12.60 8.39 4.50 −12.00 6.28 4.25 −10.00
         Apr. 10.90 6.00 −13.00 9.69 6.00 −12.75 8.49 5.00 −12.00 6.34 4.30 −10.25
         May 10.93 6.00 −13.00 9.69 5.50 −12.75 8.55 4.50 −12.00 6.36 4.35 −10.25
         June 10.88 6.30 −13.00 9.76 6.00 −12.75 8.48 4.50 −12.00 6.42 4.45 −10.25
         July 10.99 6.00 −13.00 9.70 5.50 −12.75 8.57 4.50 −12.00 6.40 4.38 −10.00
         Aug. 11.00 6.00 −13.00 9.72 5.50 −12.75 8.57 4.50 −12.00 6.41 4.34 −10.25
         Sep. 10.86 5.50 −13.00 9.78 6.00 −12.75 8.54 4.50 −12.00 6.37 4.30 −10.25
 
 
Long-term fixed-rate loans
to enterprises and self-employed persons
Instalment credits (excluding lending to the housing sector)  5 
 5 
 5,000 and more but not more than 
 5 
 15,000  2  5  100,000 and more  5  500,000 and more
Personal credit lines but less than 
 5 
 500,000 but less than 
 5 
 5 million
(overdraft facilities Effective
granted to individuals) Monthly rate  3 annual interest rate  4 Effective interest rate
Reporting Average Average Average Average Averageperiod  
1 interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread
2000          Sep. 12.28 11.00 −13.25 0.41 0.33 −0.49 10.64 8.76 −12.72 7.24 6.36 −8.83 7.04 6.16 −8.49
         Oct. 12.44 11.00 −13.50 0.41 0.34 −0.50 10.69 8.99 −12.73 7.25 6.24 −8.90 7.05 6.19 −8.52
         Nov. 12.57 11.25 −13.50 0.41 0.33 −0.51 10.73 8.95 −12.81 7.26 6.25 −8.89 7.05 6.17 −8.55
         Dec. 12.61 11.25 −13.50 0.41 0.35 −0.50 10.80 8.95 −12.83 7.04 6.05 −8.70 6.84 5.85 −8.30
2001          Jan. 12.63 11.00 −13.50 0.41 0.34 −0.50 10.82 8.95 −12.95 6.89 5.82 −8.57 6.66 5.68 −8.25
         Feb. 12.61 10.75 −13.50 0.41 0.34 −0.50 10.82 8.88 −12.91 6.89 5.79 −8.64 6.65 5.63 −8.25
         Mar. 12.67 11.25 −13.75 0.41 0.34 −0.50 10.76 8.77 −12.77 6.78 5.75 −8.50 6.56 5.64 −8.05
         Apr. 12.70 11.25 −13.75 0.41 0.33 −0.49 10.71 8.76 −12.77 6.77 5.75 −8.57 6.53 5.57 −8.05
         May 12.70 11.50 −13.50 0.41 0.33 −0.49 10.75 8.69 −12.89 6.81 5.83 −8.65 6.60 5.69 −8.01
         June 12.68 11.50 −13.50 0.41 0.34 −0.49 10.76 8.76 −12.89 6.82 5.81 −8.66 6.62 5.75 −8.20
         July 12.68 11.25 −13.50 0.41 0.35 −0.49 10.78 8.92 −12.91 6.82 5.85 −8.63 6.60 5.70 −8.30
         Aug. 12.66 11.25 −13.50 0.41 0.35 −0.49 10.80 8.89 −12.76 6.74 5.63 −8.60 6.52 5.50 −8.30
         Sep. 12.66 11.25 −13.50 0.41 0.35 −0.49 10.80 8.95 −12.89 6.64 5.49 −8.50 6.43 5.38 −8.25
         Oct. 12.61 11.25 −13.50 0.41 0.35 −0.49 10.76 8.80 −12.95 6.44 5.26 −8.50 6.21 5.17 −8.17
         Nov. 12.54 11.25 −13.50 0.41 0.34 −0.49 10.65 8.68 −12.86 6.28 5.15 −8.50 6.05 5.04 −8.12
         Dec. 12.48 11.00 −13.50 0.41 0.34 −0.49 10.64 8.78 −12.63 6.40 5.36 −8.50 6.16 5.25 −8.05
2002          Jan. o 12.47 11.25 −13.50 0.41 0.33 −0.49 10.65 8.62 −12.68 6.48 5.50 −8.55 6.23 5.28 −8.25
         Feb. 12.47 11.00 −13.50 0.41 0.34 −0.49 10.73 8.87 −12.77 6.57 5.55 −8.60 6.36 5.41 −8.50
         Mar. 12.44 11.00 −13.50 0.41 0.34 −0.49 10.71 8.87 −12.68 6.77 5.80 −8.80 6.55 5.41 −8.55
         Apr. 12.44 10.51 −13.50 0.41 0.34 −0.49 10.68 8.76 −12.80 6.82 5.80 −8.80 6.63 5.70 −8.45
         May 12.47 11.00 −13.50 0.41 0.34 −0.49 10.73 8.87 −12.96 6.86 5.90 −8.60 6.63 5.75 −8.45
         June 12.49 11.20 −13.50 0.41 0.33 −0.50 10.73 8.48 −13.00 6.75 5.77 −8.53 6.53 5.64 −8.25
         July 12.48 11.00 −13.50 0.41 0.33 −0.49 10.74 8.83 −13.00 6.68 5.71 −8.60 6.45 5.48 −8.25
         Aug. 12.47 10.50 −13.50 0.42 0.33 −0.50 10.71 8.82 −13.00 6.51 5.33 −8.52 6.26 5.21 −8.25
         Sep. 12.49 10.75 −13.50 0.41 0.34 −0.49 10.76 8.76 −13.00 6.37 5.12 −8.57 6.13 4.99 −8.25
*The average rates are calculated as unweighted arithmetic means from 60 months. —3Interest rates as % per month of original amount of credit
the interest rates reported to be within the spread. The spread is as- taken up. Besides interest, most banks charge a one-off processing fee (gen-certained by eliminating the reports in the top 5% and the bottom 5% of erally 2%, in some cases 3%, of the credit amount). —4Calculated on the
the interest rate range. The figures for the latest date are always to be re- basis of reported monthly rates (see footnote 3) and reported annual ratesgarded as provisional; subsequent alterations, which will appear in the on the respective amount of debt and on the basis of the respective pro-following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —oFor simplicity, the cessing fees, taking due account of reported maturities. —5Lending to
amount categories were redenominated to euro as from January 2002 by enterprises (with agreed maturities of more than five years) with agreedhalving the previous Deutsche Mark amounts. —1Second and third weeks interest rates locked in for more than five years. 
of the months indicated. —2With maturities between 36 months and
45*VI. Interest rates

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
VI. Interest rates
 
7. Lending and deposit rates of banks (MFIs) in Germany *, o  (cont ’d)
    Lending rates
 
% p.a.
Mortgage loans secured by residential real estatewith interest rates fixed (effective interest rate)  
6 
with variable interest rates
for 2 years for 5 years for 10 years (effective interest rate)  6 
Reporting Average Average Average Average
period  1 interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread
2000          Sep. 6.53 5.96 −7.17 6.53 6.22 −6.91 6.72 6.49 −7.07 6.79 6.00 −7.87
         Oct. 6.51 6.00 −7.05 6.49 6.17 −6.95 6.68 6.47 −7.07 6.84 6.01 −8.03
         Nov. 6.48 5.96 −7.06 6.45 6.13 −6.91 6.64 6.43 −6.96 6.86 5.96 −8.03
         Dec. 6.20 5.64 −6.98 6.19 5.81 −6.75 6.44 6.17 −6.86 6.81 5.90 −8.03
2001          Jan. 5.95 5.41 −6.60 5.93 5.59 −6.54 6.22 5.96 −6.70 6.72 5.64 −8.11
         Feb. 5.94 5.43 −6.59 5.90 5.59 −6.51 6.17 5.96 −6.54 6.71 5.61 −8.03
         Mar. 5.85 5.27 −6.49 5.80 5.47 −6.35 6.12 5.85 −6.54 6.67 5.56 −8.03
         Apr. 5.80 5.27 −6.54 5.78 5.43 −6.33 6.11 5.85 −6.54 6.64 5.48 −8.03
         May 5.88 5.34 −6.59 5.87 5.54 −6.43 6.20 5.77 −6.64 6.66 5.59 −8.03
         June 5.80 5.27 −6.54 5.84 5.54 −6.33 6.22 5.85 −6.59 6.64 5.48 −8.03
         July 5.78 5.22 −6.45 5.85 5.54 −6.37 6.24 5.77 −6.59 6.64 5.43 −8.03
         Aug. 5.62 5.06 −6.35 5.69 5.43 −6.22 6.13 5.88 −6.54 6.57 5.43 −8.03
         Sep. 5.41 4.75 −6.22 5.57 5.22 −6.22 6.08 5.85 −6.43 6.45 5.38 −7.82
         Oct. 5.12 4.49 −5.96 5.36 5.01 −6.03 5.91 5.64 −6.43 6.30 4.96 −7.73
         Nov. 4.95 4.33 −5.79 5.20 4.75 −5.75 5.70 5.38 −6.14 6.12 4.80 −7.71
         Dec. 5.13 4.59 −5.90 5.42 4.90 −5.90 5.87 5.20 −6.22 6.15 4.85 −7.60
2002          Jan. 5.19 4.65 −5.91 5.52 5.10 −6.06 5.95 5.36 −6.27 6.13 4.85 −7.50
         Feb. 5.38 4.85 −6.11 5.66 5.32 −6.17 6.05 5.62 −6.42 6.14 4.80 −7.50
         Mar. 5.61 5.12 −6.27 5.89 5.54 −6.33 6.26 5.84 −6.61 6.16 4.70 −7.50
         Apr. 5.70 5.22 −6.38 5.96 5.56 −6.43 6.30 6.00 −6.69 6.26 5.10 −7.60
         May 5.73 5.22 −6.38 5.96 5.69 −6.43 6.30 6.01 −6.70 6.22 4.95 −7.50
         June 5.63 5.08 −6.27 5.86 5.54 −6.38 6.21 5.91 −6.59 6.21 5.02 −7.50
         July 5.47 4.85 −6.17 5.71 5.41 −6.27 6.10 5.85 −6.54 6.13 4.96 −7.49
         Aug. 5.17 4.54 −5.90 5.42 5.08 −6.06 5.84 5.57 −6.38 6.04 4.87 −7.23
         Sep. 4.95 4.28 −5.75 5.22 4.85 −5.96 5.69 5.38 −6.26 6.02 4.79 −7.49
 
 
    Deposit rates
 
% p.a.
Time deposits with agreed maturities
of 1 month of 3 months
Higher-yielding
sight deposits
 5 
 50,000 and more but
 5 
 500,000 and more but
 5 
 50,000 and more but
of individuals  7 less than  5  50,000 less than  5  500,000 less than  5  2,5 million less than  5  500,000
Reporting Average Average Average Average Average
period  1 interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread
2000          Sep. 2.29 0.50 −3.76 3.39 2.50 −4.05 3.79 3.00 −4.30 4.15 3.40 −4.55 4.00 3.25 −4.60
         Oct. 2.32 0.50 −3.88 3.48 2.50 −4.20 3.89 3.00 −4.50 4.27 3.45 −4.80 4.13 3.25 −4.75
         Nov. 2.38 0.50 −3.94 3.56 2.54 −4.30 3.97 3.00 −4.50 4.35 3.50 −4.83 4.22 3.30 −4.85
         Dec. 2.41 0.50 −4.00 3.62 2.65 −4.35 4.05 3.10 −4.60 4.42 3.50 −4.92 4.19 3.35 −4.80
2001          Jan. 2.43 0.50 −4.00 3.56 2.60 −4.25 3.96 3.20 −4.50 4.33 3.60 −4.75 4.06 3.39 −4.60
         Feb. 2.50 0.50 −4.00 3.46 2.55 −4.15 3.87 3.20 −4.45 4.21 3.50 −4.70 4.01 3.30 −4.50
         Mar. 2.48 0.50 −4.00 3.53 2.75 −4.25 3.95 3.25 −4.50 4.31 3.50 −4.75 4.05 3.40 −4.50
         Apr. 2.49 0.50 −4.00 3.48 2.59 −4.20 3.91 3.20 −4.50 4.27 3.50 −4.70 3.99 3.25 −4.50
         May 2.44 0.50 −4.00 3.46 2.50 −4.20 3.85 3.10 −4.40 4.20 3.50 −4.65 3.95 3.20 −4.50
         June 2.42 0.50 −3.90 3.34 2.50 −4.00 3.73 3.10 −4.25 4.07 3.50 −4.44 3.84 3.15 −4.35
         July 2.41 0.50 −3.88 3.34 2.50 −4.00 3.73 3.10 −4.20 4.08 3.50 −4.50 3.83 3.20 −4.41
         Aug. 2.39 0.50 −3.75 3.31 2.50 −4.00 3.70 3.00 −4.20 4.05 3.40 −4.45 3.76 3.10 −4.30
         Sep. 2.26 0.50 −3.50 3.00 2.20 −3.85 3.38 2.70 −4.00 3.66 2.95 −4.15 3.47 2.60 −4.00
         Oct. 2.10 0.50 −3.24 2.69 2.00 −3.40 3.07 2.40 −3.50 3.36 2.75 −3.75 3.12 2.40 −3.65
         Nov. 1.96 0.50 −2.96 2.42 1.75 −3.00 2.77 2.20 −3.15 3.00 2.50 −3.30 2.83 2.17 −3.45
         Dec. 1.92 0.50 −2.95 2.41 1.75 −3.00 2.76 2.23 −3.15 3.03 2.50 −3.40 2.78 2.20 −3.15
2002          Jan. o 1.90 0.50 −2.85 2.37 1.70 −3.00 2.73 2.20 −3.10 3.00 2.50 −3.30 2.76 2.20 −3.11
         Feb. 1.86 0.50 −2.85 2.30 1.65 −3.00 2.66 2.09 −3.05 2.89 2.45 −3.23 2.75 2.20 −3.13
         Mar. 1.88 0.50 −2.80 2.34 1.70 −3.00 2.70 2.20 −3.10 2.94 2.40 −3.25 2.77 2.25 −3.17
         Apr. 1.87 0.50 −3.00 2.34 1.70 −3.00 2.69 2.25 −3.05 2.94 2.50 −3.25 2.78 2.22 −3.20
         May 1.85 0.50 −2.75 2.33 1.67 −3.00 2.70 2.25 −3.05 2.94 2.40 −3.25 2.79 2.23 −3.20
         June 1.85 0.50 −2.75 2.35 1.70 −3.00 2.70 2.25 −3.10 2.94 2.50 −3.30 2.83 2.25 −3.25
         July 1.85 0.50 −2.80 2.35 1.75 −3.00 2.71 2.20 −3.10 2.95 2.50 −3.30 2.81 2.25 −3.25
         Aug. 1.82 0.50 −2.75 2.33 1.66 −3.00 2.69 2.17 −3.10 2.92 2.40 −3.25 2.77 2.20 −3.10
         Sep. 1.80 0.50 −2.75 2.29 1.65 −3.00 2.65 2.10 −3.07 2.89 2.35 −3.22 2.74 2.20 −3.10
For footnotes *, o, 1to5see page 45*. —6The figures refer to the time upon in each case by the credit institutions involved are taken into account
when the contract was concluded and not to the entire duration of the con- (at present mostly monthly payment and inclusion). —7Only such interest
tract. The calculation of the effective interest rate is based on an annual re- rates are taken into account as are above the relevant standard terms of t he
demption rate of 1% plus interest saved; the repayment conditions agreed banks included in the survey. 
46*VI. Interest rates

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
VI. Interest rates
 
7. Lending and deposit rates of banks (MFIs) in Germany *, o  (cont’d)
    Deposit rates
 
% p.a.
Savings deposits
Bank savings bonds
with regular with minimum rates of with higher rates of return  9 
interest payments return  8 (without a duration of contract being agreed)
with agreed notice of 3 months
with agreed notice
 5 
 5,000 and more
 5 
 10,000 and more
maturity of 4 years of 3 months less than 
 5 
 5,000 but less than 
 5 
 10,000 but less than 
 5 
 25,000
Reporting Average Average Average Average Average
period  1 interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread
2000          Sep. 4.99 4.50 − 5.37 1.26 1.00 − 2.00 2.31 1.50 − 3.72 2.89 1.75 − 3.95 3.10 2.00 − 4.07
         Oct. 4.98 4.40 − 5.40 1.25 1.00 − 2.00 2.32 1.50 − 3.75 2.89 1.75 − 4.01 3.12 2.00 − 4.22
         Nov. 4.98 4.50 − 5.30 1.26 1.00 − 2.00 2.38 1.50 − 4.00 2.96 1.75 − 4.20 3.19 2.00 − 4.32         Dec. 4.76 4.30 − 5.25 1.25 1.00 − 2.00 2.39 1.50 − 4.00 2.99 1.75 − 4.20 3.22 2.00 − 4.34
2001          Jan. 4.47 4.10 − 5.00 1.26 1.00 − 2.00 2.37 1.50 − 3.80 2.95 1.80 − 4.10 3.21 2.00 − 4.33
         Feb. 4.42 4.00 − 4.75 1.25 1.00 − 2.00 2.35 1.50 − 3.75 2.94 1.80 − 4.00 3.17 2.00 − 4.25         Mar. 4.37 4.00 − 4.75 1.24 1.00 − 2.00 2.36 1.50 − 3.75 2.97 1.80 − 4.00 3.20 2.00 − 4.32
         Apr. 4.27 3.95 − 4.60 1.23 1.00 − 2.00 2.36 1.50 − 3.75 2.95 1.95 − 4.00 3.18 2.00 − 4.30
         May 4.31 4.00 − 4.65 1.24 1.00 − 2.00 2.33 1.50 − 3.75 2.92 1.80 − 4.00 3.14 2.00 − 4.26         June 4.31 3.95 − 4.60 1.21 1.00 − 2.00 2.29 1.50 − 3.66 2.87 1.75 − 4.00 3.09 2.00 − 4.00
         July 4.26 3.90 − 4.60 1.20 1.00 − 2.00 2.26 1.50 − 3.50 2.85 1.75 − 4.00 3.07 2.00 − 4.00
         Aug. 4.16 3.75 − 4.50 1.18 1.00 − 1.75 2.20 1.50 − 3.35 2.77 1.75 − 3.75 3.02 2.00 − 4.00         Sep. 3.99 3.60 − 4.35 1.16 1.00 − 1.75 2.11 1.35 − 3.25 2.63 1.60 − 3.50 2.88 1.85 − 3.90
         Oct. 3.77 3.40 − 4.20 1.14 1.00 − 1.75 2.01 1.25 − 3.05 2.47 1.50 − 3.50 2.69 1.85 − 3.50
         Nov. 3.48 3.00 − 4.00 1.11 0.75 − 1.50 1.86 1.25 − 2.75 2.25 1.50 − 3.00 2.49 1.75 − 3.20         Dec. 3.65 3.10 − 4.00 1.08 0.75 − 1.50 1.81 1.25 − 2.75 2.18 1.50 − 3.00 2.42 1.75 − 3.00
2002          Jan.
o 3.73 3.25 − 4.10 1.07 0.75 − 1.50 1.78 1.25 − 2.75 2.15 1.50 − 2.75 2.40 1.70 − 3.00
         Feb. 3.90 3.25 − 4.25 1.06 0.75 − 1.50 1.78 1.25 − 2.70 2.14 1.50 − 2.75 2.37 1.60 − 3.00
         Mar. 4.07 3.30 − 4.50 1.05 0.75 − 1.50 1.79 1.25 − 2.75 2.14 1.50 − 2.80 2.38 1.60 − 3.00
         Apr. 4.15 3.30 − 4.50 1.04 0.75 − 1.50 1.78 1.25 − 2.60 2.15 1.50 − 2.80 2.38 1.60 − 3.00
         May 4.15 3.30 − 4.50 1.04 0.75 − 1.50 1.79 1.25 − 2.60 2.16 1.50 − 2.80 2.40 1.75 − 3.00         June 4.12 3.30 − 4.50 1.04 0.75 − 1.50 1.78 1.25 − 2.50 2.15 1.50 − 2.80 2.40 1.75 − 3.00
         July 4.01 3.30 − 4.40 1.03 0.75 − 1.50 1.78 1.15 − 2.60 2.16 1.50 − 2.81 2.40 1.75 − 3.00
         Aug. 3.70 3.12 − 4.05 1.01 0.75 − 1.50 1.76 1.00 − 2.50 2.14 1.50 − 2.80 2.36 1.60 − 3.00         Sep. 3.50 3.05 − 4.00 1.00 0.75 − 1.50 1.75 1.25 − 2.50 2.12 1.50 − 2.75 2.34 1.50 − 3.00
 
 
Savings deposits with higher rates of return  9  and with duration of contract being agreed for
 5 
 10,000 and more but less than 
 5 
 25,000   (total rate of return) 10
with agreed notice of 3 months with agreed notice of more than 3 months
and a duration of contract of and a duration of contract of
more than 1 year and up to
up to and including 1 year and including 4 years more than 4 years up to and including 1 year more than 4 years
Reporting Average Average Average Average Averageperiod  
1 interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread
2000          Sep. 4.15 2.50 − 4.80 4.64 3.25 − 5.35 4.81 3.58 − 5.83 4.20 2.25 − 5.00 4.93 4.36 − 5.40
         Oct. 4.18 2.50 − 4.85 4.68 3.25 − 5.35 4.82 3.58 − 5.83 4.14 2.25 − 4.80 4.97 4.36 − 5.50
         Nov. 4.23 2.50 − 4.80 4.65 3.25 − 5.16 4.84 3.58 − 5.83 4.25 2.25 − 5.00 4.96 4.36 − 5.50         Dec. 4.15 2.50 − 4.75 4.51 3.25 − 5.15 4.74 3.64 − 5.62 4.21 2.30 − 4.75 4.82 4.28 − 5.40
2001          Jan. 3.98 3.00 − 4.50 4.18 3.25 − 4.75 4.59 3.60 − 5.30 4.01 2.30 − 4.50 4.51 4.04 − 5.05
         Feb. 3.86 2.90 − 4.40 4.11 3.25 − 4.75 4.54 3.60 − 5.30 3.99 2.50 − 4.50 4.49 4.08 − 4.83         Mar. 3.84 2.99 − 4.35 4.06 3.30 − 4.62 4.52 3.60 − 5.30 3.99 2.50 − 4.50 4.42 3.95 − 4.78
         Apr. 3.71 2.90 − 4.25 3.96 3.25 − 4.50 4.47 3.60 − 5.25 3.91 2.50 − 4.50 4.33 3.95 − 4.75
         May 3.74 3.00 − 4.25 3.99 3.25 − 4.35 4.50 3.64 − 5.22 3.91 2.60 − 4.35 4.36 3.95 − 4.75         June 3.67 2.80 − 4.20 3.93 3.25 − 4.30 4.48 3.64 − 5.22 3.85 2.50 − 4.25 4.35 3.90 − 4.78
         July 3.64 2.80 − 4.15 3.91 3.25 − 4.45 4.48 3.64 − 5.25 3.80 2.50 − 4.05 4.33 3.90 − 4.75
         Aug. 3.52 2.60 − 4.00 3.83 3.20 − 4.30 4.42 3.60 − 5.40 3.68 2.50 − 4.00 4.22 3.84 − 4.73         Sep. 3.32 2.40 − 3.90 3.62 2.61 − 4.25 4.32 3.36 − 5.42 3.33 2.50 − 3.65 4.06 3.72 − 4.73
         Oct. 2.94 2.25 − 3.45 3.36 2.60 − 3.88 4.17 3.00 − 5.40 3.01 2.50 − 3.50 3.85 3.50 − 4.50
         Nov. 2.64 2.00 − 3.25 3.09 2.48 − 3.50 4.01 2.66 − 5.40 2.75 2.00 − 3.50 3.53 2.93 − 4.30         Dec. 2.63 1.75 − 3.10 3.14 2.48 − 4.00 3.98 2.88 − 5.40 2.79 2.20 − 3.20 3.63 3.00 − 4.30
2002          Jan.
o 2.67 2.00 − 3.10 3.23 2.50 − 4.25 3.98 2.91 − 5.08 2.80 2.00 − 3.20 3.74 3.25 − 4.25
         Feb. 2.76 2.00 − 3.25 3.32 2.60 − 4.00 4.07 2.91 − 5.13 2.91 2.20 − 3.50 3.84 3.25 − 4.20
         Mar. 2.84 2.10 − 3.30 3.45 2.50 − 4.25 4.15 3.13 − 5.13 3.00 2.40 − 3.50 3.96 3.25 − 4.40
         Apr. 2.89 2.10 − 3.40 3.50 2.25 − 4.25 4.17 2.91 − 5.13 3.07 2.50 − 3.70 3.97 3.25 − 4.44
         May 2.91 2.10 − 3.40 3.48 2.50 − 4.25 4.20 2.91 − 5.13 3.08 2.20 − 4.00 3.98 3.25 − 4.50         June 2.93 2.10 − 3.40 3.52 2.25 − 4.25 4.21 2.91 − 5.15 3.08 2.20 − 4.00 3.97 3.10 − 4.50
         July 2.89 2.10 − 3.30 3.48 2.25 − 4.10 4.14 2.91 − 5.08 3.02 2.50 − 3.50 3.90 3.15 − 4.29
         Aug. 2.73 2.00 − 3.25 3.19 2.25 − 4.00 4.02 2.91 − 5.02 2.94 2.45 − 3.50 3.68 2.85 − 4.21         Sep. 2.61 1.90 − 3.20 3.08 2.42 − 3.80 3.90 2.90 − 5.02 2.73 2.25 − 3.25 3.54 3.00 − 4.04
For footnotes *, o, 1to5see page 45*; for footnotes 6and 7see page mium or a bonus is granted. — 10Rate of return which is paid when savings
46*. — 8Only a minimum rate of return is granted, but no premium or plans are held until maturity or when savings objectives have been
bonus. — 9An interest rate above the minimum rate of return and/or a pre- achieved. 
47*VI. Interest rates

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
VII. Capital market
 
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  *)
 
 
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities  1 Residents
Credit in- Bundes-
Sales stitutions bank
= Public Foreign including open
total Bank Indus- debt debt building marketpur- debt trial secur- secur- and loan Non- oper- Non-
Period chases Total securities bonds ities  
2 ities 3 Total  4 assc. 5 banks  6 ations  5 residents  7 
DM million
1990 244,827 220,340 136,799 − 67 83,609 24,487 225,066 91,833 133,266 − 33 19,763
1991 231,965 219,346 131,670 667 87,011 12,619 173,099 45,095 127,310 694 58,866
1992 291,762 284,054 106,857 − 175 177,376 7,708 170,873 132,236 37,368 1,269 120,887
1993 395,110 382,571 151,812 200 230,560 12,539 183,195 164,436 20,095 − 1,336 211,915
1994 303,339 276,058 117,185 − 65 158,939 27,281 279,989 126,808 154,738 − 1,557 23,349
1995 227,099 203,029 162,538 − 350 40,839 24,070 141,282 49,193 94,409 − 2,320 85,815
1996 254,359 233,519 191,341 649 41,529 20,840 148,250 117,352 31,751 − 853 106,109
1997 332,655 250,688 184,911 1,563 64,214 81,967 204,378 144,177 60,201 − 128,276
1998 418,841 308,201 254,367 3,143 50,691 110,640 245,802 203,342 42,460 − 173,038
 5 
 million
1999 292,727 198,068 156,399 2,184 39,485 94,659 155,808 74,728 81,080 − 136,920
2000 229,167 157,994 120,154 12,605 25,234 71,173 156,532 91,447 65,085 − 72,635
2001 180,377 86,656 55,918 14,473 16,262 93,721 140,648 35,848 104,800 − 39,729
2002          May 27,868 16,878 8,393 2,496 5,989 10,990 22,631 12,427 10,204 − 5,237
         June 7,440 4,116 − 3,044 188 6,972 3,324 − 5,286 − 3,765 − 1,521 − 12,726
         July 28,039 17,634 1,237 4,404 11,993 10,405 7,328 − 3,364 10,692 − 20,711
         Aug. 2,855 3,273 − 2,661 806 5,128 − 418 949 − 5,920 6,869 − 1,906
 
  
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-purchases shares  
8 shares  9 Total  10 tutions  5  11 Non-banks  6 residents  12 
Period
DM million
1990 50,070 28,021 22,048 52,631 7,215 45,416 − 2,561
1991 33,478 13,317 20,161 32,247 2,466 29,781 1,230
1992 32,595 17,226 15,370 40,651 2,984 37,667 − 8,055
1993 39,355 19,512 19,843 30,871 4,133 26,738 8,4851994 55,125 29,160 25,966 54,466 1,622 52,844 659
1995 46,422 23,600 22,822 49,354 11,945 37,409 − 2,931
1996 72,491 34,212 38,280 55,962 12,627 43,335 16,529
1997 119,522 22,239 97,280 96,844 8,547 88,297 22,6771998 249,504 48,796 200,708 149,151 20,252 128,899 100,352
 5 
 million
1999 149,980 36,010 113,969 103,487 18,637 84,850 46,493
2000 138,535 22,733 115,802 156,274 23,293 132,981 − 17,738
2001 80,107 17,575 62,532 − 6,663 − 14,714 8,051 86,769
2002          May 6,551 936 5,615 − 4,329 80 − 4,409 10,880
         June 8,495 622 7,873 1,862 − 11,651 13,513 6,633
         July 7,362 692 6,670 6,820 − 2,383 9,203 542
         Aug. − 1,843 255 − 2,098 − 1,218 439 − 1,657 − 625
*Until the end of 1999, debt securities comprise the bonds and money ment funds. —7Net purchases or net sales ( −) of domestic debt securities by
market paper of domestic banks, from January 2000 all fixed-interest non-residents; transaction values. —8At issue prices. —9Net purchases or
securities. Investment fund certificates see Table VII.6. —1Net sales at net sales ( −) of foreign shares (including direct investment) by residents;
market values plus/less changes in issuers ’portfolios of their own debt transaction values. —10Domestic and foreign shares. —11Up to the end
securities. —2Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and of 1998, excluding shares under syndicate agreement. —12Net purchases
Treuhand agency. —3Net purchases or net sales ( −) of foreign debt or net sales ( −) of domestic shares (including direct investment) −before
securities by residents; transaction values. —4Domestic and foreign debt 1989 also including domestic investment fund certificates −by
securities. —5Book values; statistically adjusted. —6Residual; also non-residents; transaction values. —The figures for the latest data are to be
including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic invest- regarded as provisional; corrections are not specially marked.  
48*VII. Capital market

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
VII. Capital market
 
2. Sales of debt securities issued by borrowers domiciled in Germany  *)
 
 
Until the end of 1998 DM nominal million value, from 1999  5  million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item:
Foreign  DM/euro
Mortgage Communal bonds issued Debt securities
bonds bonds issued by spe- by German-
All bank debt (Hypotheken- ( Öffentliche Other bank Industrial Public managed cialised credit
Period Total securities pfandbriefe) Pfandbriefe) institutions bonds  2 syndicates debt securities debt securities  3 
Gross sales  4 
1990 428,698 286,709 14,923 70,701 89,755 111,326 − 141,990 35,168
1991 442,089 292,092 19,478 91,489 80,738 100,386 707 149,288 32,832
1992 572,767 318,522 33,633 134,363 49,195 101,333 − 254,244 57,282
1993 733,126 434,829 49,691 218,496 34,028 132,616 457 297,841 87,3091994 627,331 412,585 44,913 150,115 39,807 177,750 486 214,261 61,465
1995 620,120 470,583 43,287 208,844 41,571 176,877 200 149,338 102,719
1996 731,992 563,076 41,439 246,546 53,508 221,582 1,742 167,173 112,3701997 846,567 621,683 53,168 276,755 54,829 236,933 1,915 222,972 114,8131998 1,030,827 789,035 71,371 344,609 72,140 300,920 3,392 238,400 149,542
 5 
 million
1999 571,269 448,216 27,597 187,661 59,760 173,200 2,570 120,483 57,202
2000 659,148 500,895 34,528 143,107 94,556 228,703 8,114 150,137 31,597
2001 687,988 505,646 34,782 112,594 106,166 252,103 11,328 171,012 10,605
2002          Apr. 67,069 42,615 2,334 10,718 7,546 22,017 5,382 19,072 4,010
         May 65,354 45,802 2,580 10,267 9,348 23,607 1,420 18,133 4,000         June 57,284 42,324 3,085 5,790 12,318 21,130 656 14,304 170
         July 74,794 44,289 2,111 8,271 12,101 21,806 1,861 28,645 −
         Aug. 54,522 36,213 1,776 6,771 8,161 19,506 608 17,701 −
of which: Debt securities with a maturity of over 4 years  5 
1990 272,642 133,347 10,904 43,250 26,767 52,425 − 139,295 29,791
1991 303,326 172,171 11,911 65,642 54,878 39,741 707 130,448 22,772
1992 430,479 211,775 28,594 99,627 40,267 43,286 − 218,703 51,939
1993 571,533 296,779 43,365 160,055 26,431 66,923 230 274,524 82,0491994 429,369 244,806 36,397 109,732 29,168 69,508 306 184,255 53,351
1995 409,469 271,763 30,454 141,629 28,711 70,972 200 137,503 85,221
1996 473,560 322,720 27,901 167,811 35,522 91,487 1,702 149,139 92,5821997 563,333 380,470 41,189 211,007 41,053 87,220 1,820 181,047 98,4131998 694,414 496,444 59,893 288,619 54,385 93,551 2,847 195,122 139,645
 5 
 million
1999 324,888 226,993 16,715 124,067 37,778 48,435 2,565 95,331 44,013
2000 319,330 209,187 20,724 102,664 25,753 60,049 6,727 103,418 27,008
2001 299,751 202,337 16,619 76,341 42,277 67,099 7,479 89,933 6,480
2002          Apr. 22,630 9,760 427 4,054 1,520 3,759 5,051 7,820 4,000
         May 21,742 12,070 1,228 3,862 752 6,228 160 9,513 3,000         June 16,790 14,291 1,703 2,900 5,551 4,136 121 2,379 80
         July 27,850 10,367 235 2,738 3,490 3,903 1,490 15,994 −
         Aug. 21,973 10,660 667 3,468 1,468 5,057 153 11,159 −
Net sales  6 
1990 226,707 140,327 − 3,922 − 72 73,287 71,036 − 67 86,449 21,717
1991 227,822 139,396 4,729 22,290 65,985 46,390 558 87,868 18,583
1992 304,751 115,786 13,104 58,235 19,585 24,864 − 175 189,142 34,114
1993 403,212 159,982 22,496 122,917 − 13,156 27,721 180 243,049 43,701
1994 270,088 116,519 18,184 54,316 − 6,897 50,914 − 62 153,630 21,634
1995 205,482 173,797 18,260 96,125 3,072 56,342 − 354 32,039 61,020
1996 238,427 195,058 11,909 121,929 6,020 55,199 585 42,788 69,9511997 257,521 188,525 16,471 115,970 12,476 43,607 1,560 67,437 63,1811998 327,991 264,627 22,538 162,519 18,461 61,111 3,118 60,243 84,308
 5 
 million
1999 209,096 170,069 2,845 80,230 31,754 55,238 2,185 36,840 22,728
2000 155,615 122,774 5,937 29,999 30,089 56,751 7,320 25,522 − 16,705
2001 84,122 60,905 6,932 − 9,254 28,808 34,416 8,739 14,479 − 30,657
2002          Apr. 17,329 4,286 − 608 − 1,395 545 5,743 4,630 8,413 − 800
         May 18,216 9,470 − 98 2,448 1,919 5,200 1,323 7,423 523
         June 9,157 1,600 1,546 − 6,782 3,939 2,896 281 7,276 − 5,790
         July 16,041 2,735 − 66 − 4,844 5,502 2,144 1,733 11,572 − 2,457
         Aug. 5,853 − 423 − 813 − 1,785 362 1,813 557 5,719 − 3,436
*For definitions see the notes in the Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. —4Gross sales means only
Report 2, Capital market statistics. —1Excluding registered bank debt initial sales of newly issued securities. —5Maximum maturity according to
securities. —2Debt securities of enterprises. —3Including Federal Railways the terms of issue. — 6 Gross sales less redemptions. 
49*VII. Capital market

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
VII. Capital market
 
3. Outstanding amount of debt securities issued by borrowers domiciled in Germany  * 
 
 
Until the end of 1998 DM million nominal value, from 1999  5  million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item:
 Foreign  DM/euro
Mortgage Communal bonds issued
bonds bonds by German- Debt securities of
End of year All bank specialised Other bank Industrial Public managed (Öffentliche (Hypotheken-
or month Total bonds syndicates credit institutions debt securities debt securities debt securities Pfandbriefe) pfandbriefe)
DM million
1990 1,458,943 900,977 138,025 369,901 155,045 238,005 2,604 555,362 223,176
1991 1,686,765 1,040,374 142,757 392,190 221,031 284,396 3,161 643,230 241,7601992 1,991,515 1,156,162 155,862 450,424 240,616 309,259 2,983 832,370 275,8731993 2,394,728 1,316,142 178,357 573,341 227,463 336,981 3,163 1,075,422 319,5751994 2,664,814 1,432,661 196,541 627,657 219,214 389,249 3,101 1,229,053 341,210
1995 2,870,295 1,606,459 214,803 723,781 222,286 445,589 2,746 1,261,090 402,229
1996 3,108,724 1,801,517 226,711 845,710 228,306 500,790 3,331 1,303,877 472,1801997 3,366,245 1,990,041 243,183 961,679 240,782 544,397 4,891 1,371,313 535,3591998 3,694,234 2,254,668 265,721 1,124,198 259,243 605,507 8,009 1,431,558 619,668
 5 
 million
1999 2,097,926 1,322,863 134,814 655,024 163,284 369,741 6,280 768,783 339,560
2000 2,265,121 1,445,736 140,751 685,122 157,374 462,488 13,599 805,786 322,856
2001 2,349,243 1,506,640 147,684 675,868 201,721 481,366 22,339 820,264 292,199
2002          June 2,446,415 1,556,315 156,042 668,682 214,515 517,077 32,321 857,778 278,132         July 2,462,455 1,559,051 155,975 663,837 220,017 519,221 34,054 869,350 275,674
         Aug. 2,468,308 1,558,628 155,162 662,052 220,380 521,033 34,611 875,069 272,238
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  2 Position at end- August 2002 
Maturity in years
925,817 637,099 65,226 236,614 71,777 263,483 5,007 283,711 94,685    less than 2
573,825 403,023 33,447 193,812 53,431 122,333 11,777 159,025 58,228 2 to less than 4
388,059 234,447 28,932 115,913 37,369 52,231 7,374 146,240 53,701 4 to less than 6
255,809 150,234 18,253 77,413 21,240 33,327 2,639 102,936 40,497 6 to less than 8
175,180 72,814 8,512 24,309 15,772 24,222 6,714 95,651 7,787 8 to less than 10
38,037 30,175 781 10,960 5,722 12,710 395 7,468 10,387 10 to less than 15
17,332 11,755 9 1,274 6,920 3,552 422 5,154 2,985 15 to less than 20
94,249 19,080 − 1,756 8,148 9,176 284 74,885 3,970 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers ’portfolios. — debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of the residual
1Excluding debt securities handed to the trustee for temporary safe amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc. 
custody. —2Calculated from month under review until final maturity for
50* 
  
4. Circulation of shares issued by residents of Germany
  
Until the end of 1998 DM million nominal value, from 1999  5  million nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies ’ capital due to
Share contribution
capital= of shares, Net increase or cash payment
merger reduction circulation at net decrease(-) and exchange contribution mining shares,
issue of change of of capital end of period during period of convertible of claims and GmbH shares, and transfer
Period bonds  1 etc. of assets legal form under review under review bonus shares other real assets and liquidation
DM million
1990 144,686 12,650 7,362 751 3,715 1,049 − 43 1,284 − 1,466
1991 151,618 6,932 3,656 610 2,416 407 − 182 411 − 386
1992 160,813 9,198 4,295 728 1,743 1,073 − 732 3,030 − 942
1993 168,005 7,190 5,224 772 387 876 10 707 − 783
1994 o 190,012 14,237 6,114 1,446 1,521 1,883 − 447 5,086 − 1,367
1995 211,231 21,217 5,894 1,498 1,421 1,421 − 623 13,739 − 2,133
1996 2 216,461 7,131 8,353 1,355 396 1,684 − 3,056 833 − 2,432
1997 221,575 5,115 4,164 2,722 370 1,767 − 2,423 197 − 1,678
1998 238,156 16,578 6,086 2,566 658 8,607 − 4,055 3,905 − 1,188
 5 
 million
1999 133,513 11,747 5,519 2,008 190 1,075 2,099 1,560 − 708
2000 147,629 14,115 3,620 3,694 618 8,089 − 1,986 1,827 − 1,745
2001 166,187 18,561 7,987 4,057 1,106 8,448 1,018 − 905 − 3,152
2002          June 168,357 244 165 20 53 118 − 46 − 17 − 48
         July 168,868 510 167 74 6 9 386 − 55 − 75
         Aug. 168,516 − 351 168 199 64 69 305 − 1,096 − 59
oFrom January 1994 including the shares of east German companies share issues out of company profits. —2Figure reduced by DM 1,902 million
(resultant increase in share circulation: DM 7,771 million). —1Including owing to revisions. 
50*VII. Capital market

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
VII. Capital market
 
5. Yields and indices on German securities
 
 
               
Yields on bonds outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices  2 , 3 
Public bonds Bank debt securities Bonds Shares
Memo item:
Listed Foreign
Federal securities DM/euro
bonds
With re- With re- issued by German Germansidual matur- sidual matur- German- bond iBoxx- CDAX share
managed index index ities of over 9 ities of over 9 Industrial
 5 -Germany- share price
Total Total Total Total to 10 years bonds (REX) price index index (DAX) to 10 years  4 syndicates  1,5 
Average End- End- End-
Period % p.a. daily rate 1998=100 1987=100 1987=1000
1990 8.9 8.8 8.9 8.7 9.0 9.0 9.0 9.2 93.50 . 145.00 1,398.23
1991 8.7 8.6 8.5 8.5 8.9 8.4 8.9 9.2 96.35 . 148.16 1,577.981992 8.1 8.0 7.3 7.8 8.3 7.6 8.7 8.8 101.54 . 134.92 1,545.051993 6.4 6.3 5.5 6.5 6.5 6.3 6.9 6.8 109.36 . 191.13 2,266.681994 6.7 6.7 7.4 6.9 6.8 7.8 7.0 6.9 99.90 . 176.87 2,106.58
1995 6.5 6.5 5.6 6.9 6.5 6.5 6.9 6.8 109.18 . 181.47 2,253.88
1996 5.6 5.6 5.2 6.2 5.5 6.1 5.8 5.8 110.37 . 217.47 2,888.691997 5.1 5.1 5.1 5.6 5.0 5.6 5.2 5.5 111.01 . 301.47 4,249.691998 4.5 4.4 3.7 4.6 4.5 4.3 5.0 5.3 118.18 100.00 343.64 5,002.391999 4.3 4.3 5.0 4.5 4.3 5.5 5.0 5.4 110.60 92.52 445.95 6,958.14
2000 5.4 5.3 4.9 5.3 5.6 5.6 6.2 6.3 112.48 94.11 396.59 6,433.61
2001 4.8 4.7 4.6 4.8 4.9 5.1 5.9 6.2 113.12 94.16 319.38 5,160.10
2002          May 5.1 5.1 5.1 5.2 5.1 5.4 5.9 5.9 111.81 92.64 302.56 4,818.30
         June 4.9 4.9 4.9 5.0 5.0 5.3 5.9 6.0 112.81 94.08 279.29 4,382.56
         July 4.8 4.7 4.7 4.9 4.8 5.2 5.8 5.8 113.75 94.93 237.79 3,700.14
         Aug. 4.5 4.4 4.4 4.6 4.5 4.9 5.8 5.6 115.02 95.79 238.16 3,712.94         Sep. 4.2 4.2 4.2 4.4 4.3 4.7 5.9 5.3 116.61 97.31 181.34 2,769.03
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of included in the calculation. Monthly figures are calculated on the basis of
issue of over 4 years, if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Conver- the yields on all the business days of a month. The annual figures are the un-
tible debt securities, etc., debt securities with unscheduled redemption, weighted means of the monthly figures. —2End of year or month. —
zero-coupon bonds, floating-rate notes and bonds not denominated in DM 3Source: German Stock Exchange plc. —4Only bonds eligible as underlying
or euros are not included. Group yields for the various categories of secu- instruments for futures contracts are included; calculated as unweighted
rities are weighted with the amounts outstanding of the debt securities averages. — 5 As far as quoted on German stock exchanges. 
 
 
6. Sales and purchases of investment fund certificates in Germany
  
Sales of investment fund certificates Purchases
Domestic funds (sales receipts) Residents
Investment funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Non-banks  2 and loanassociations  1 
of which
of which of which
Sales Open- Special- Foreign Foreign= Secur- end ised invest- invest-total Money ities- real invest- ment mentpur- market based estate ment Foreign fund cer- fund cer- Non-resi-chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  
3 Total Total tificates Total tificates dents  4 
Period
DM million
1990 25,788 26,857 7,904 − 8,032 − 128 18,952 −1,069 25,766 4,296 − 362 21,470 − 707 22
1991 50,064 37,492 13,738 − 11,599 2,144 23,754 12,572 49,890 8,594 − 5 41,296 12,577 174
1992 81,514 20,474 −3,102 −− 9,189 6,087 23,575 61,040 81,518 10,495 2,152 71,023 58,888 − 4
1993 80,259 61,672 20,791 − 6,075 14,716 40,881 18,587 76,258 16,982 2,476 59,276 16,111 4,001
1994 130,995 108,914 63,263 31,180 24,385 7,698 45,650 22,081 125,943 9,849 − 689 116,094 22,770 5,052
1995 55,246 54,071 16,777 6,147 3,709 6,921 37,294 1,175 56,295 12,172 188 44,123 987 −1,049
1996 83,386 79,110 16,517 −4,706 7,273 13,950 62,592 4,276 85,704 19,924 1,685 65,780 2,591 −2,318
1997 145,805 138,945 31,501 −5,001 30,066 6,436 107,445 6,860 149,977 35,924 340 114,053 6,520 −4,172
1998 187,641 169,748 38,998 5,772 27,814 4,690 130,750 17,893 190,416 43,937 961 146,479 16,507 −2,775
 5 
 million
1999 111,253 97,197 37,684 3,347 23,269 7,395 59,513 14,056 105,492 19,862 − 637 85,630 14,693 5,761
2000 117,688 85,160 39,712 −2,188 36,818 −2,824 45,448 32,528 106,749 14,454 92 92,295 32,436 10,939
2001 95,937 76,811 35,522 12,410 9,195 10,159 41,289 19,126 94,815 10,251 2,703 84,564 16,423 1,122
2002          May 7,186 5,326 2,854 295 1,686 845 2,472 1,860 6,686 − 462 65 7,148 1,795 500
         June 2,671 2,958 502 − 496 − 384 1,366 2,456 − 287 3,761 114 − 22 3,647 − 265 −1,090
         July 5,112 3,593 1,782 404 20 1,370 1,811 1,519 4,856 − 1,030 115 5,886 1,404 256
         Aug. 6,977 5,804 2,507 1,049 661 869 3,298 1,173 5,712 100 236 5,612 937 1,265
1Book values. —2Residual. —3Net purchases or net sales ( −) of foreign non-residents; transaction values (before 1989 classified as shares). —The
investment fund certificates by residents; transaction values. —4Net figures for the latest data are to be regarded as provisional; corrections are
purchases or net sales ( −) of domestic investment fund certificates by not specially marked. 
51*VII. Capital market

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
1. Finances of the public sector *
  
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM billion / from 1999,  5  billion
Central, regional and local authorities  1 Social security funds  2 Public sector, total
Receipts Expenditure
of which
Balance Balance Balance
Other of of of
Person- operat- receipts receipts receipts
of nel ex- ing ex- Capital Finan- and Ex- and Ex- and
which pend- pend- Current Interest forma- cial expend- Re- pend- expend- Re- pend- expend-
Period Total Taxes  3 Total  4 iture iture grants paid tion aid  5 iture ceipts  6 iture iture ceipts iture iture
1992 904.1 731.7 1,013.9 285.7 134.0 304.8 100.6 101.1 86.1 −109.8 609.1 617.4 −8.3 1,436.0 1,554.2 −118.1
1993 928.7 749.1 1,060.2 296.8 136.0 340.5 102.1 97.0 87.3 −131.5 660.8 658.7 + 2.1 1,492.1 1,621.5 −129.4
1994 995.2 786.2 1,102.2 315.5 137.3 353.4 114.0 93.2 86.5 −106.9 694.1 693.7 + 0.4 1,596.4 1,702.9 −106.5
1995 1,026.4 814.2 1,136.4 324.8 135.5 367.2 129.0 90.1 86.3 −110.1 731.2 743.8 −12.5 1,664.9 1,787.5 −122.6
1996 1,000.3 800.0 1,121.8 326.2 137.0 362.2 130.7 83.9 80.1 −121.5 769.4 784.0 −14.6 1,665.6 1,801.6 −136.1
1997 1,014.3 797.2 1,108.9 325.0 135.7 356.3 132.1 80.1 79.2 −94.5 797.3 794.5 + 2.9 1,705.3 1,797.0 −91.7
1998  p 1,072.1 833.0 1,128.8 325.4 137.4 373.7 133.7 79.7 79.8 −56.7 812.2 808.9 + 3.3 1,766.0 1,819.3 −53.4
1999  p 566.0 453.1 592.9 168.7 72.4 202.7 69.8 40.8 38.0 −27.0 429.1 425.7 + 3.5 925.3 948.8 −23.5
2000  pe 613.3 467.3 594.9 169.0 73.6 205.5 67.5 40.8 38.0 + 18.4 434.0 434.0 + 0.0 975.9 957.6 + 18.3
2001  pe 553.5 446.2 601.3 169.8 70.0 213.7 66.7 40.4 39.5 −47.8 443.1 447.2 −4.1 919.8 971.7 −51.9
2001          1st qtr 7 126.7 105.1 147.8 39.5 16.4 55.5 22.0 6.5 7.8 −21.1 108.8 109.7 −0.9 213.5 235.5 −22.0
         2nd qtr 139.4 110.9 136.7 39.3 15.8 54.0 12.6 8.0 6.4 + 2.6 110.1 111.8 −1.7 229.6 228.7 + 0.9
         3rd qtr 136.3 109.5 146.2 40.1 15.6 52.2 19.0 10.0 9.3 −9.9 109.6 111.9 −2.3 227.4 239.5 −12.2
         4th qtr p 149.3 121.3 167.7 49.5 21.8 52.4 12.7 14.5 16.0 −18.4 115.1 114.5 + 0.6 248.3 266.1 −17.8
2002          1st qtr 118.3 98.6 150.2 39.9 15.3 57.9 24.0 6.5 6.0 −31.8 111.3 112.8 −1.5 206.4 239.8 −33.4
         2nd qtr p 137.8 105.1 141.8 40.4 15.6 58.3 11.9 7.8 6.7 −4.0 113.0 115.6 −2.6 228.9 235.6 −6.6
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical insurance are estimated. —3The tax revenue shown here is taken from the
Office. —*The budgetary definition used here differs from the methods budget statistics and may differ from the data given in Table VIII. 4, which
employed for the government account of the national accounts and, in case are based on the tax statistics. —4Including discrepancies in clearing
of the quarterly figures, in some respects also from the financial statistics. — transactions between the central, regional and local authorities. —
1Incl. subsidiary budgets. The quarterly figures, unlike the annual figures 5Expenditure on investment grants, loans and acquisition of participating
based on the annual accounts statistics of the Federal Statistical Office, do interests. —6Including Federal Government liquidity assistance to the
not include municipal special-purpose associations and various special Federal Labour Office. —7Owing to modifications of the system of
accounts. For the receipts of Bundesbank profit see footnote 1 to Table VIII. classification, especially shifts between Other operating expenditur e and
2.—2The annual figures differ from the sum of the quarterly figures, as Current grants. 
the latter are all provisional. The quarterly figures for some fields of
2. Finances of the Federal Government, L änder Governments and local authorities *
  
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM billion / from 1999,  5  billion
Federal Government L änder Governments Local authorities
Western  2,  3 Eastern  3 Western  3 Eastern  3 
Period Receipts  1 Expenditure Receipts Expenditure Receipts Expenditure Receipts Expenditure Receipts Expenditure
1992 398.4 431.7 318.2 336.3 73.0 86.0 212.6 221.6 50.3 57.5
1993 401.6 462.5 326.5 352.8 76.4 92.5 222.5 230.9 54.4 59.01994 439.6 478.9 328.8 357.0 79.3 95.9 228.9 235.1 53.9 59.2
1995 439.3 489.9 338.6 370.2 88.4 101.5 225.6 237.9 58.7 60.8
1996 411.9 490.4 344.8 379.7 93.7 105.5 227.7 232.9 55.0 57.71997 416.8 480.3 349.2 376.5 94.3 105.2 222.9 226.9 52.6 54.21998 439.0 495.6 360.5 380.3 96.4 104.7 231.4 226.3 51.5 52.41999  
p 240.3 266.5 191.6 196.6 50.0 53.3 119.8 117.5 26.1 26.3
2000  4,  pe  291.4 264.6 195.6 200.4 50.5 53.9 121.4 119.9 25.6 25.6
2001  pe 240.0 261.0 184.1 208.1 49.6 52.9 118.9 123.0 25.1 25.6
2001          1st qtr 50.8 66.4 44.8 49.8 12.0 11.6 25.5 28.8 5.2 5.5         2nd qtr 57.6 59.9 46.3 47.5 11.5 11.8 28.8 28.1 5.8 5.8         3rd qtr 62.3 66.3 44.6 49.4 11.7 12.5 29.6 29.9 6.1 6.2         4th qtr
p 69.1 68.3 47.5 60.3 14.1 16.3 35.4 36.0 7.5 7.7
2002          1st qtr 47.4 68.9 42.4 49.4 10.2 12.0 24.7 29.1 5.2 5.4         2nd qtr
p 56.3 62.6 43.3 48.8 11.1 11.9 28.8 29.1 5.9 5.8
52*Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Fund for Inherited Liabilities. —2Including Berlin, Bremen, Hamburg.
Office. —*See corresponding footnote to Table VIII. 1. —1The Including Berlin (East). —3The quarterly figures, unlike the annual figures
Bundesbank profit transfer is shown in full until 1994; from 1995 only the based on the annual accounts statistics of the Federal Statistical Office, d o
DM 7 billion scheduled in the budget is shown. Since that time, receipts not include various special accounts. —4Including receipts from the UMTS
over and above the scheduled amount accrue directly to the Redemption licence auctions. 
52*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
3. Finances of the Government in the national accounts *
  
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM billion / from 1999,  5  billion
Item 1994 1995  1 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000  2 2001  ts 
Receipts 1,608.6 1,647.8 1,704.0 1,726.8 1,775.9 943.4 963.7 951.5
of which
Taxes 807.9 825.8 850.0 856.9 897.4 490.4 511.7 488.3Social security contributions 632.4 662.5 696.7 720.1 727.7 375.7 378.5 383.6
Expenditure 1,690.2 1,764.9 1,826.6 1,826.5 1,859.6 973.2 991.8 1,009.0of which
Intermediate input 140.7 143.2 142.7 140.2 144.1 76.9 78.5 81.6Employee compensation 306.9 315.9 319.6 319.0 319.3 165.4 165.6 164.9Interest 113.4 128.9 131.7 133.2 136.4 68.8 68.2 67.8Social security benefits  
3 849.1 902.8 970.7 984.7 998.4 523.1 534.7 548.1
Gross capital formation 90.0 80.5 76.4 69.4 69.9 37.8 37.0 35.8
Financial balance − 81.6 − 117.1 − 122.7 − 99.7 − 83.7 − 29.7 − 28.0 − 57.5
as a percentage of the grossdomestic product − 2.4 − 3.3 − 3.4 − 2.7 − 2.2 − 1.5 − 1.4 − 2.8
Memo itemDeficit of the Treuhand agency − 37.1 . . .....
Debt as defined inMaastricht Treatyas a percentage of the grossdomestic product 49.4 57.1 59.8 61.0 60.9 61.2 60.2 59.5
Source: Federal Statistical Office. —*Figures according to ESA 95. In unadjusted terms, the deficit amounted to 9.8% of GDP. —2Adjusted
Notwithstanding the figures shown by the Federal Statistical Office, for receipts from UMTS licence auctions. In the accounts of the Federal
calculated including −with no impact on the balance −customs duties, the Statistical Office, such receipts (50.85
 5 
billion) are recorded under "net
EU share in VAT revenue and EU subsidies. —1Adjusted for the balance of increase in non-produced assets", with the result that government spending
notional capital transfers between the public sector and the corporate is lower and a surplus (22.8
 5 
billion or 1.1% of GDP) is shown. —
sector, mainly in connection with the winding-up of the Treuhand agency. 3 Monetary social security benefits and social benefits in kind. 
4. Tax revenue of the central, regional and local authorities
  
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999,  5  million
Federal and L änder Governments and European Union Local authorities  4 
Länder Governments
of which Balance of
Federal of which European in the untransferred
Period Total Total  1 Government  2 Total New L änder Union  3 Total New L änder tax shares  5 
1991 661,920 577,150 321,334 224,321 19,139 31,495 84,633 2,540 + 137
1992 731,738 638,423 356,849 247,372 23,807 34,203 93,374 4,034 − 58
1993 749,119 653,015 360,250 256,131 27,542 36,634 95,809 5,863 + 2951994 786,162 688,785 386,145 261,947 32,052 40,692 97,116 7,677 + 260
1995 814,190 719,332 390,807 288,520 . 40,005 94,498 8,460 + 359
1996 799,998 706,071 372,390 294,232 . 39,449 94,641 7,175 − 714
1997 797,154 700,739 368,244 290,771 . 41,724 96,531 7,703 − 117
1998 833,013 727,888 379,491 306,127 . 42,271 104,960 8,841 + 1641999 453,068 396,734 211,727 164,724 . 20,284 56,333 4,810 + 1
2000 467,253 410,117 219,034 169,249 . 21,833 57,241 4,895 − 104
2001 446,248 392,189 213,342 159,115 . 19,732 54,047 4,590 + 12
2002          1st qtr 99,494 86,571 44,768 36,252 . 5,551 9,240 953 + 3,682
         2nd qtr
p 104,433 91,656 48,960 37,171 . 5,525 12,253 990 + 525
2002          Apr. . 26,095 13,620 10,625 . 1,850 . . .         May . 29,829 16,301 11,672 . 1,856 . . .         June . 35,732 19,039 14,875 . 1,819 . . .
         July . 31,119 17,755 12,676 . 688 . . .
         Aug.
p . 29,448 17,159 11,314 . 976 . . .
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. —1Including receipts from the revenue. —4Including local authority taxes of Berlin, Bremen and
Equalisation of Burdens levies.  —2Before deduction of supplementary Hamburg. —5Difference between the local authorities ’share in the
Federal grants and shares in the revenue of mineral oil tax remitted to the income taxes received by the L änder cash offices in the period in question
Länder Governments. —3Including the (GNP-related) receipts accruing to (see Table VIII. 5) and the amounts passed on to the local authorities during
the EU from 1988 to the detriment of the Federal Government ’s tax the same period. 
53*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
5. Tax revenue, by type
  
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999,  5  million
Joint taxes Memo
item
Income taxes  2 Turnover taxes  5,  6 Localauthor-
As- Invest- ities’
sessed ment Value- Turnover Share EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income added tax on in trade Federal L änder customs income
Period Total  
1 Total tax  3 tax tion tax taxes  4 Total tax imports tax  6,  7 taxes  8 taxes  8 duties taxes  9 
1991 615,506 298,804 214,175 41,532 31,716 11,381 179,672 98,797 80,875 5,986 92,583 29,113 8,307 38,356
1992 681,751 331,310 247,322 41,531 31,184 11,273 197,712 117,274 80,438 6,923 104,802 32,963 7,742 43,3281993 697,988 341,785 257,987 33,234 27,830 22,734 216,306 174,492 41,814 4,181 93,678 34,720 7,240 44,9731994 734,234 343,055 266,522 25,510 19,569 31,455 235,698 195,265 40,433 6,271 105,410 36,551 7,173 45,450
1995 765,374 344,554 282,701 13,997 18,136 29,721 234,622 198,496 36,126 8,412 134,013 36,602 7,117 46,042
1996 746,958 317,807 251,278 11,616 29,458 25,456 237,208 200,381 36,827 8,945 137,865 38,540 6,592 40,8871997 740,272 313,794 248,672 5,764 33,267 26,092 240,900 199,934 40,966 8,732 135,264 34,682 6,900 39,5331998 775,028 340,231 258,276 11,116 36,200 34,640 250,214 203,684 46,530 10,284 130,513 37,300 6,486 47,1401999 422,012 184,408 133,809 10,887 22,359 17,353 137,155 111,600 25,555 5,463 72,235 19,564 3,186 25,277
2000 436,115 192,381 135,733 12,225 23,575 20,849 140,871 107,140 33,732 5,521 75,504 18,444 3,394 25,998
2001 417,358 170,817 132,626 8,771 −426 29,845 138,935 104,463 34,472 5,510 79,277 19,628 3,191 25,170
2002          1st qtr 91,769 35,955 30,382 −3,644 665 8,552 34,532 27,087 7,444 140 15,556 4,899 688 5,198
         2nd qtr 97,670 38,032 31,000 3,331 −1,961 5,662 33,468 25,417 8,050 1,402 19,241 4,820 708 6,014
2002          Apr. 27,726 8,854 9,968 −896 −1,250 1,032 10,253 7,444 2,809 927 5,780 1,668 244 1,632
         May 31,563 9,583 10,334 −900 −1,640 1,789 12,468 9,580 2,887 467 7,110 1,685 251 1,734
         June 38,381 19,595 10,697 5,127 929 2,841 10,747 8,393 2,354 9 6,350 1,467 213 2,648
         July 32,976 12,401 11,753 −1,307 −563 2,517 10,998 8,124 2,874 963 6,711 1,656 249 1,857
         Aug.
p 31,154 9,577 10,593 −1,278 −1,122 1,384 11,947 9,130 2,817 442 7,368 1,564 255 1,706
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. —1This total, unlike that in Table VIII. supplementary Federal grant to the pension insurance funds; 2.2% of the
4, includes neither the revenue from Equalisation of Burdens levies, trade balance went to the local authorities, of the new balance: 50.5% to the
tax on returns and capital (less Federal and L änder shares in trade tax), the Federal Government, 49.5% to the L änder Governments, from 2000 50.25%
taxes on land and buildings and other local authority taxes, nor the balance to the Federal Government, 49.75% to the L änder Governments, from 2002
of untransferred tax shares. —2The yield of wage tax and assessed income 49.6% to the Federal Government, 50.4% to the L änder Governments. The
tax was distributed among the Federal Government, the L änder EU share must likewise be deducted from the Federal Government ’s share
Governments and the local authorities in the ratio of 42.5 : 42.5 : 15 from stated. —6Since 1991 the distribution of turnover tax and the level and
1980, and the yield of corporation tax and investment income tax between distribution of the share in trade tax have been affected by the financing ofthe Federal Government and the L änder Governments in the ratio of 50 : 50 the debt service of the "German Unity" Fund. —7Federal Government and
from 1970. —3From 1996, after deduction of child benefit. —4From L änder Governments 50% each. From 1998 Federal Government 42.2%,
February 1993 including revenue from the tax on interest income, in which L änder Governments 57.8%. —8For breakdown see Table VIII. 6. —9From
the local authorities have a share of 12%. —5From 1998 3.64% and from 1998 including the share in turnover taxes. 
1999 5.63% went to the Federal Government in advance to finance the
6. Individual taxes of the Federal Government, L änder Governments and local authorities
  
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999,  5  million
Federal taxes L änder taxes Local authority taxes
Insur- Electri- Other Motor Inherit- Other Taxes on Other
Mineral Tobacco Spirits ance city Federal vehicle Property ance Beer L änder Trade land and local
Period oil tax tax tax tax tax taxes  1 tax tax tax tax taxes tax  2 buildings taxes  3 
1991 47,266 19,592 5,648 5,862 . 14,215 11,012 6,729 2,636 1,647 7,090 41,297 9,921 1,181
1992 55,166 19,253 5,545 8,094 . 16,744 13,317 6,750 3,030 1,625 8,241 44,848 10,783 1,2811993 56,300 19,459 5,134 9,290 . 3,495 14,059 6,784 3,044 1,769 9,065 42,266 11,663 1,3831994 63,847 20,264 4,889 11,400 . 5,011 14,169 6,627 3,479 1,795 10,482 44,086 12,664 1,445
1995 64,888 20,595 4,837 14,104 . 29,590 13,806 7,855 3,548 1,779 9,613 42,058 13,744 1,426
1996 68,251 20,698 5,085 14,348 . 29,484 13,743 9,035 4,054 1,718 9,990 45,880 14,642 1,4631997 66,008 21,155 4,662 14,127 . 29,312 14,418 1,757 4,061 1,698 12,749 48,601 15,503 1,5091998 66,677 21,652 4,426 13,951 . 23,807 15,171 1,063 4,810 1,662 14,594 50,508 16,228 1,5321999 36,444 11,655 2,233 7,116 1,816 12,973 7,039 537 3,056 846 8,086 27,060 8,636 824
2000 37,826 11,443 2,151 7,243 3,356 13,485 7,015 433 2,982 844 7,171 27,025 8,849 784
2001 40,690 12,072 2,143 7,427 4,322 12,622 8,376 290 3,069 829 7,064 24,534 9,076 790
2002          1st qtr 5,713 1,857 337 3,755 883 3,011 2,112 76 666 180 1,865 5,593 2,059 214
         2nd qtr
p 10,107 3,291 461 1,497 1,167 2,717 2,078 43 791 213 1,697 5,423 2,560 182
2002          Apr. 3,134 1,124 147 345 353 677 743 10 262 65 589 . . .         May 3,468 1,567 157 724 455 740 694 16 309 68 598 . . .         June 3,505 600 158 428 360 1,300 641 17 219 79 511 . . .
         July 3,397 1,191 184 410 614 915 693 25 251 74 614 . . .
         Aug.
p 3,166 1,705 220 1,029 516 733 578 42 274 78 593 . . .
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. —1Other excise taxes and the income until mid-1992, and again since the beginning of 1995. —2On returns and
and corporation tax surcharge ("solidarity surcharge") levied from mid-1991 capital. — 3 Including tax-like receipts.   
54*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
7. Indebtedness of the public sector *
  
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999,  5  million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
5−year lending owing to
Bundes- Treasury special Federal Debt by credit Social German Equalisa-
End of year bank discount Treasury Federal savings secur- institu- security unifica- tion
or month Total advances paper  1 notes  2,  3 bonds  2 bonds ities  2 tions  4 funds Other  4 tion 5 claims Other  6 
Public authorities
1995 1,993,476 − 8,072 240,514 170,719 78,456 586,573 764,875 1,263 40,621 15,106 87,079 198
1996 2,126,320 − 27,609 231,102 176,164 96,391 618,262 836,582 770 39,450 9,960 89,826 203
1997 2,215,893 − 26,336 249,507 177,721 99,317 662,516 879,021 663 29,907 1,315 89,376 216
1998 2,280,154 − 25,631 227,536 199,774 92,698 723,403 894,456 550 26,073 1,249 88,582 202
1999 1,199,975 − 12,594 102,364 120,998 41,621 416,051 450,111 281 10,200 476 45,175 105
2000 1,211,439 − 11,616 109,951 126,276 35,991 438,888 433,443 211 10,524 285 44,146 108
2001          Sep. 1,210,399 − 19,549 137,217 130,959 28,823 446,120 427,313 182 10,911 226 8,992 107
         Dec. 1,223,929 − 23,036 151,401 130,045 26,395 448,148 422,440 174 13,110 85 8,986 108
2002          Mar. 1,249,857 − 17,817 158,695 133,421 22,648 461,617 431,066 218 15,234 49 8,986 109
         June p 1,251,125 − 22,252 176,996 133,289 20,636 463,906 408,991 239 15,681 51 8,986 101
Federal Government 7,  8
1995 756,834 − 8,072 52,354 170,719 78,456 402,307 26,572 15 8,119 1,360 8,684 176
1996 839,883 − 26,789 55,289 176,164 96,391 434,295 32,988 5 7,766 1,330 8,684 183
1997 905,691 − 25,286 78,848 177,721 99,317 481,619 31,845 5 870 1,300 8,684 197
1998 957,983 − 24,666 84,760 199,274 92,698 519,718 24,125 − 2,603 1,270 8,684 186
1999 714,069 − 11,553 44,335 120,498 41,621 379,808 67,872 60 2,568 476 45,175 104
2000 715,819 − 11,516 44,678 123,642 35,991 400,490 52,836 29 2,099 285 44,146 107
2001          Sep. 698,268 − 17,799 53,517 120,825 28,823 414,102 52,312 26 1,541 226 8,992 107
         Dec. 701,077 − 21,136 59,643 119,911 26,395 416,195 47,111 26 1,481 85 8,986 107
2002          Mar. 721,619 − 16,917 59,622 123,287 22,648 429,270 59,356 12 1,365 49 8,986 108
         June 716,787 − 21,389 66,445 123,155 20,636 431,039 43,600 12 1,374 51 8,986 100
West German L änder Governments
1995 442,536 −− 91,152 . . − 339,084 358 11,940 . − 2
1996 477,361 − 320 91,969 . . − 372,449 54 12,567 . − 2
1997 505,297 − 350 86,639 . . − 406,499 47 11,760 . − 2
1998 525,380 − 520 83,390 . . − 430,709 43 10,716 . − 2
1999 274,208 − 150 43,033 . . − 226,022 23 4,979 . − 1
2000 282,431 −− 48,702 . . − 227,914 22 5,792 . . 1
2001          Sep. 295,470 − 1,750 59,991 . . − 227,609 10 6,108 . . 1
         Dec. 305,788 − 1,800 67,721 . . − 228,270 5 7,991 . . 1
2002          Mar. 310,210 − 800 73,844 . . − 225,475 58 10,032 . . 1
         June 314,447 − 750 83,192 . . − 219,729 79 10,697 . . 1
East German L änder Governments
1995 69,151 −− 25,345 . . − 43,328 17 461 . . .
1996 80,985 − 500 26,820 . . − 53,483 − 182 . . .
1997 90,174 − 700 27,540 . . − 61,697 15 222 . . .
1998 98,192 − 445 27,228 . . − 70,289 − 230 . . .
1999 53,200 − 891 14,517 . . − 37,602 − 189 . . .
2000 55,712 − 100 16,092 . . − 39,339 − 182 . . .
2001          Sep. 57,550 −− 19,780 . . − 36,889 − 880 . . .
         Dec. 58,771 − 100 20,135 . . − 37,382 − 1,154 . . .
2002          Mar. 59,143 − 100 21,328 . . − 36,256 − 1,460 . . .
         June 60,156 − 112 23,387 . . − 35,399 − 1,258 . . .
West German local authorities 9
1995 157,271 . . − . . 1,000 151,127 283 4,861 . . .
1996 158,613 . . 200 . . 1,280 152,311 174 4,648 . . .
1997 160,162 . . 300 . . 1,330 154,145 149 4,238 . . .1998 158,960 . . 300 . . 1,330 153,208 119 4,003 . . .1999 81,511 . . 153 . . 680 78,726 53 1,898 . . .2000 81,414 . . 153 . . 680 78,656 33 1,891 . . .
2001          Sep. 82,216 . . 153 . . 680 79,465 26 1,892 . . .
         Dec. 82,203 . . 153 . . 629 79,470 29 1,922 . . .
2002          Mar. 82,900 . . 153 . . 629 80,168 30 1,920 . . .
         June
p 83,700 . . 153 . . 629 80,968 30 1,920 . . .
East German local authorities  9
1995 36,830 . . 225 . . 400 35,427 347 431 . . .1996 38,976 . . 225 . . 400 37,922 308 121 . . .1997 38,688 . . 225 . . 400 37,623 273 167 . . .1998 39,873 . . 225 . . 460 38,777 255 156 . . .1999 20,726 . . 51 . . 335 20,138 124 78 . . .2000 17,048 . . 51 . . 335 16,497 114 50 . . .
2001          Sep. 16,796 . . − . . 335 16,297 113 51 . . .
         Dec. 17,005 . . − . . 284 16,581 107 33 . . .
2002          Mar. 16,880 . . − . . 284 16,456 110 30 . . .
         June
p 16,700 . . − . . 284 16,276 110 30 . . .
For footnotes see end of the table. 
55*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
7. Indebtedness of the public sector * (cont ’d)
  
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999,  5  million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
5−year lending owing to
Bundes- Treasury special Federal Debt by credit Social German Equalisa-
End of year bank discount Treasury Federal savings secur- institu- security unifica- tion
or month Total advances paper  1 notes  2,  3 bonds  2 bonds ities  2 tions  4 funds Other  4 tion 5 claims Other  6 
“German Unity “Fund / Indemnification Fund 7
1995 87,146 . − 8,891 − . 44,398 31,925 5 1,927 . . .
1996 83,556 . −−− . 44,321 38,020 5 1,210 . . .
1997 79,717 . −−− . 44,347 34,720 5 645 . . .
1998 79,413 . −−− . 47,998 30,975 − 440 . . .
1999 40,234 . − 275 500 . 28,978 10,292 − 189 . . .
2000 40,629 . − 275 2,634 . 29,797 7,790 − 133 . . .
2001          Sep. 40,660 . − 3,775 10,134 . 21,562 5,113 − 7 7...
         Dec. 39,923 . − 3,748 10,134 . 21,577 4,315 − 149 . . .
2002          Mar. 40,006 . − 3,748 10,134 . 21,732 4,315 − 7 7...
         June 40,028 . − 3,820 10,134 . 21,902 4,147 − 2 6...
ERP Special Fund 7
1995 34,200 . .... 10,745 23,455 −− ...
1996 34,135 . .... 10,750 23,385 −− ...
1997 33,650 . .... 10,810 22,840 −− ...
1998 34,159 . .... 11,944 20,988 − 1,227 . . .
1999 16,028 . .... 6,250 9,458 21 299 . . .
2000 18,386 . .... 7,585 10,411 13 377 . . .
2001          Sep. 19,440 . .... 9,442 9,627 8 363 . . .
         Dec. 19,161 . .... 9,462 9,310 8 381 . . .
2002          Mar. 19,098 . .... 9,701 9,039 8 350 . . .
         June 19,308 . .... 10,052 8,873 8 376 . . .
Federal Railways Fund 7,  8
1995 78,400 . . 3,848 − . 28,992 39,005 140 6,415 . . .
1996 77,785 . . 1,882 − . 28,749 41,537 130 5,489 . . .
1997 77,254 . . 1,927 − . 25,634 44,807 115 4,772 . . .
1998 77,246 . . − 500 . 31,648 42,488 79 2,531 . . .
1999          June 39,231 . . − 1,023 . 16,805 20,401 34 968 . . .
Debt-Processing Fund / Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities 7,  8
1995 328,888 . − 58,699 − . 98,731 72,732 98 6,468 13,745 78,395 21
1996 331,918 . − 54,718 − . 98,468 81,380 95 7,468 8,630 81,142 19
1997 322,032 . − 54,028 − . 98,377 81,616 54 7,233 15 80,692 17
1998 304,978 . − 31,633 − . 110,006 79,226 54 4,167 −20 79,899 15
1999          June 151,097 . − 11,127 2,000 . 58,897 36,133 27 2,015 −9 40,902 4
“Use of Hard Coal “Equalisation Fund 7,  8
1995 2,220 . .... − 2,220 −− ...
1996 3,108 . .... − 3,108 −− ...
1997 3,229 . .... − 3,229 −− ...
1998 3,971 . .... 3 0 0 3,671 −− ...
1999          June 2,302 . .... 1 5 3 2,148 −− ...
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical accordance with the London Debts agreement; excluding debt securities i n
Office. —*Excluding public authorities ’mutual indebtedness. — own portfolios. —7The debt incurred through the joint issue of Federal
1Predominantly Treasury discount paper. —2Excluding paper in the securities is recorded here −in contrast to the capital market statistics −
issuers ’portfolios. —3Länder Treasury paper also covers the long-term under the Federal Government and its special funds in accordance with the
maturity category. —4Mainly loans against borrowers ’notes. Including agreed distribution ratios. —8Since July 1, 1999 the Federal Government
loans raised abroad. Other loans from non-banks, including loans from has assumed joint responsibility for the debts of the Redemption Fund forsupplementary public pension funds and liabilities arising from the Inherited Liabilities, the Federal Railway Fund and the Equalisation Fund forinvestment assistance levy. —5Old liabilities arising from residential Safeguarding the Use of Coal. The special funds mentioned are only
construction and liabilities arising from residential construction by the recorded under the Federal Government from July. —9Data other than
former GDR ’s armed forces and from residential construction in connection end-of-year figures have been estimated. Including indebtedness of munici-
with the return of the troops of the former USSR in eastern Germany to pal special-purpose associations. their home country. —6Old debt mainly expressed in foreign currency, in
56*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
8. Changes in public sector indebtedness *
  
  
Net borrowing  1 
Level at end of 2000 2001 2002
2000 2001 Total Total 1st qtr 2nd qtr 3rd qtr 4th qtr 1st qtr Mar. 2002
Item  5  million
Borrowers
Federal Government  2 715,819 701,077 721,619 + 1,755 −14,908 −16,138 −8,256 + 6,820 + 2,665 + 20,542
"German Unity" Fund 40,425 39,638 39,702 + 323 − 787 + 748 − 739 − 41 − 754 + 64
ERP Special Fund 18,386 19,161 19,098 + 2,358 + 775 + 513 + 91 + 449 − 278 − 63
Indemnification Fund 204 285 304 + 72 + 81 + 21 + 22 + 21 + 17 + 19
West  German  Länder 282,431 305,788 310,210 + 8,223 + 23,357 + 3,307 + 2,310 + 7,422 + 10,318 + 4,422 Governments
East German  Länder 55,712 58,771 59,143 + 2,513 + 3,059 + 318 + 154 + 1,365 + 1,222 + 372 Governments
West German local authorities  3 81,414 82,203 82,900 + 701 + 2,487 + 815 + 435 − 460 + 1,697 + 275
East German local authorities  3 17,048 17,005 16,880 + 109 + 162 − 22 − 102 −+ 286 − 31
Total 1,211,439 1,223,929 1,249,857 + 16,055 + 14,224 −10,438 −6,086 + 15,576 + 15,173 + 25,601
Types of debt
Treasury discount paper  4 11,616 23,036 17,817 − 978 + 11,420 + 182 + 1,948 + 5,803 + 3,488 −5,219
Treasury notes  5 109,951 151,401 158,695 + 7,587 + 41,449 + 8,866 + 5,676 + 12,724 + 14,183 + 7,294
Five-year special Federal bonds  5 126,276 130,045 133,421 + 5,278 + 3,770 + 1,464 + 2,153 + 1,067 − 913 + 3,375
Federal savings bonds 35,991 26,395 22,648 −5,630 −9,596 −1,431 −4,315 −1,422 −2,428 −3,748
Debt securities  5 438,887 448,148 461,617 + 22,837 + 9,260 + 4,838 + 2,059 + 336 + 2,027 + 13,469
Direct lending by
credit institutions  6 433,443 422,440 431,066 −12,082 −9,100 + 10,382 −14,596 −1,802 −3,086 + 8,297
Loans from social security funds 211 174 218 − 70 − 37 − 8− 18 − 3− 8+ 4 4
Other loans  6 10,484 13,070 15,194 + 324 + 2,586 − 643 + 994 + 36 + 2,199 + 2,124
Old debt  7 393 193 158 − 188 − 200 − 45 + 2 − 17 − 140 − 36
Equalisation claims 44,146 8,986 8,986 −1,024 −35,328 −34,044 + 11 −1,144 − 150 −
Investment assistance levy 40 40 40 − 0− 0− 0− 0− 0− 0 −
Total 1,211,439 1,223,929 1,249,857 + 16,055 + 14,224 −10,438 −6,086 + 15,576 + 15,173 + 25,601
Creditors
Banking system
Bundesbank 4,440 4,440 4,440 −−−−−−−
Credit institutions 565,438 534,400 546,400 −25,933 −29,304 −3,235 −11,848 −11,361 −2,859 + 11,671
Domestic non-banks
Social security funds 205 174 218 − 77 − 31 − 0− 5− 20 − 5+ 4 4
Other  8 200,674 243,210 249,599 + 20,846 + 42,536 + 4,966 + 6,022 + 12,028 + 19,520 + 6,389
Foreign creditors  pe 440,682 441,705 449,200 + 21,219 + 1,023 −12,169 − 256 + 14,930 −1,483 + 7,495
Total 1,211,439 1,223,929 1,249,857 + 16,055 + 14,224 −10,438 −6,086 + 15,576 + 15,173 + 25,601
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Treasury discount paper. —5Excluding paper in the issuers ’portfolios. —
Office. —*Excluding public authorities ’mutual indebtedness. —1Net 6Including loans raised abroad. —7Old liabilities arising from residential
borrowing differs from the change in indebtedness, which includes the construction and liabilities arising from the residential construction of th e
assumption and reduction of debts. —2See Table VIII. 7, footnote 8. — former GDR ’s armed forces and from residential construction in connection
3Data other than end-of-year figures have been estimated. Including with the return of the troops of the former USSR based in eastern Germany
indebtedness of municipal special-purpose associations and municipal to their home country, and old debt in accordance with the London Debts
hospitals. —4Excluding mobilisation and liquidity paper. Predominantly Agreement. — 8 Ascertained as a difference. 
9. Loans raised by public authorities against borrowers ’ notes
  
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999,  5  million
End of year Federal "German ERP L änder Local Federal Inherited "Use of Hard
or month Govern- Unity" Special Govern- authorities Railways Liabilites Coal" Equal-
Total  1 ment  2,  3 Fund Fund ments 4,  5 Fund  3 Fund  3 isation Fund  3 
1998 898,030 23,094 31,415 22,215 504,148 184,942 45,098 83,447 3,671
1999 444,031 64,704 10,481 9,778 264,158 94,909 −− −
2000 431,364 54,731 7,178 10,801 268,362 90,292 −− −
2001 Mar. 423,714 49,333 5,184 10,927 268,760 89,510 −− −
June 422,367 48,818 5,159 10,570 268,552 89,267 −− −
Sep. 418,633 47,487 4,418 9,998 267,602 89,129 −− −
Dec. 416,068 44,791 4,464 9,699 267,988 89,126 −− −
2002 Mar. 409,176 41,751 4,392 9,397 264,741 88,895 −− −
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical 3See Table VIII. 7, footnote 8. —4Data other than end-of-year figures have
Office. —1Excluding Debt Register claims and cash advances. Including been estimated. Including municipal special-purpose associations and
small amounts of: mortgage loans, land charges in annuity and other forms, municipal hospitals. — 5 Including contractually agreed loans. 
and debts outstanding. —2Including Equalisation of Burdens Fund. —
57*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
10. Indebtedness of the Federal Government
  
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999,  5  million
Treasury Indebtedness
discount paper  1 to non-banks Old debt
Federal Direct
of which Treasury 5 −year Debt lending owing to
Treasury paper/ special Federal secur- by credit Social German Equal-
End of year financing Treasury Federal savings ities institu- security Other unifica- isation
or month Total Total paper notes  2 bonds  2 bonds 2 tions  3,  4 funds 3,  5,  6  tion 7 claims Other  8 
1996 839,883 26,789 7,166 55,289 176,164 96,391 434,295 32,988 5 7,766 1,330 8,684 183
1997 905,691 25,286 5,221 78,848 177,721 99,317 481,619 31,845 5 870 1,300 8,684 1971998 957,983 24,666 4,558 84,760 199,274 92,698 519,718 24,125 − 2,603 1,270 8,684 186
1999  
9 714,069 11,553 1,584 44,335 120,498 41,621 379,808 67,872 60 2,568 476 45,175 104
2000 715,819 11,516 1,805 44,678 123,642 35,991 400,490 52,836 29 2,099 285 44,146 1072001 701,077 21,136 1,658 59,643 119,911 26,395 416,195 47,111 26 1,481 85 8,986 107
2001          Sep. 698,268 17,799 1,760 53,517 120,825 28,823 414,102 52,312 26 1,541 226 8,992 107
         Oct. 702,389 21,192 1,714 54,448 121,162 28,266 416,241 50,174 26 1,541 229 9,004 106
         Nov. 708,895 21,141 1,663 55,031 119,746 26,384 416,428 59,295 26 1,507 227 9,004 106         Dec. 701,077 21,136 1,658 59,643 119,911 26,395 416,195 47,111 26 1,481 85 8,986 107
2002          Jan. 713,928 16,852 1,658 58,910 119,373 24,779 427,130 56,198 26 1,481 85 8,986 109
         Feb. 716,611 16,886 1,693 59,226 122,524 24,752 428,296 54,242 26 1,481 85 8,986 108         Mar. 721,619 16,917 1,724 59,622 123,287 22,648 429,270 59,356 12 1,365 49 8,986 108
         Apr. 714,032 11,709 1,787 64,533 123,500 22,666 431,935 49,165 12 1,366 54 8,986 106
         May 715,840 16,623 1,788 64,891 123,015 21,967 430,935 47,891 12 1,366 50 8,986 103         June 716,787 21,389 1,776 66,445 123,155 20,636 431,039 43,600 12 1,374 51 8,986 100
         July 726,077 21,253 1,763 71,385 123,144 20,773 430,911 49,222 12 1,374 54 7,848 102
         Aug. 723,931 26,149 1,724 71,540 124,334 20,057 430,140 42,323 12 1,374 52 7,848 101         Sep.
p 726,863 30,968 1,686 72,762 125,316 19,731 429,452 39,248 12 1,374 52 7,848 101
1Excluding mobilisation and liquidity paper. In November 1999, including with the return of the troops of the former USSR based in eastern Germany
cash bills. —2Excluding paper in the issuers ’portfolios. —3Including loans to their home country. —8Commutation and compensation debt and old
raised abroad. —4Including money market debt. —5Including loans debt mainly expressed in foreign currency. —9Since July 1, 1999 the
granted by supplementary pension funds for government employees. — Federal Government has assumed joint responsibility for the debts of the
6Including liabilities arising from the investment assistance levy. — Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, the Federal Railway Fund and the
7Assumption of liabilities arising from residential construction of the Equalisation Fund for Safeguarding the Use of Coal. The special funds
former GDR ’s armed forces and from residential construction in connection mentioned are ascribed to the Federal Government from July 1999. 
11. Federal Government borrowing in the market
  
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM billion / from 1999,  5  billion
of which
5−year special Loans against Change in
Total new borrowing Debt Securities Federal bonds Other securities  2 borrowers ’ notes Money money
market market
Period gross  1 net gross  1 net gross  1 net gross  1 net gross net debt deposits
1996 + 185,696 + 83,049 + 54,038 + 31,988 + 45,445 + 5,445 + 67,015 + 39,586 + 15,050 + 1,906 + 4,148 + 6,548
1997 + 250,074 + 65,808 + 79,323 + 47,323 + 59,557 + 1,557 + 98,275 + 24,983 + 12,950 − 8,009 − 30 − 3,304
1998 + 228,050 + 52,292 + 78,304 + 38,099 + 55,078 + 21,553 + 85,706 − 1,327 + 12,023 − 2,927 − 3,065 − 5,440
1999 + 139,865 + 31,631 + 53,931 + 114,080 + 22,229 + 18,610 + 44,904 − 5,836 + 14,861 + 52,897 + 3,937 + 1,832
2000 + 122,725 + 1,750 + 49,395 + 20,682 + 26,342 + 3,144 + 45,278 − 5,323 + 7,273 − 9,973 − 5,563 − 940
2001 + 135,018 − 14,741 + 36,511 + 15,705 + 19,603 − 3,730 + 69,971 + 14,989 + 5,337 − 9,941 + 3,595 − 1,495
2001          Jan.-Sep. + 105,324 − 17,551 + 34,418 + 13,612 + 12,478 − 2,817 + 48,292 + 7,954 + 3,976 − 7,245 + 6,159 − 712
2002          Jan.-Sep.  p + 116,910 + 25,786 + 23,785 + 13,257 + 25,983 + 5,405 + 65,598 + 16,286 + 4,004 − 5,524 − 2,461 + 1,957
2001          Sep. + 17,190 − 200 + 6,728 − 2,337 + 1,287 + 1,287 + 9,032 + 2,357 + 621 − 1,022 − 478 − 345
         Oct. + 11,937 + 4,120 + 2,139 + 2,139 + 338 + 338 + 11,294 + 3,768 + 219 − 85 − 2,053 − 263
         Nov. + 18,764 + 6,506 + 188 + 188 + 6,622 − 1,417 + 1,002 − 1,350 + 570 − 1,295 + 10,382 − 177
         Dec. − 1,007 − 7,817 − 233 − 233 + 166 + 166 + 9,383 + 4,618 + 571 − 1,317 −10,893 − 342
2002          Jan. + 25,679 + 12,851 + 10,935 + 10,935 − 539 − 539 + 4,961 − 6,634 + 686 − 549 + 9,635 + 630
         Feb. + 10,575 + 2,683 + 1,165 + 1,165 + 9,669 + 3,151 + 572 + 323 + 117 − 1,009 − 948 + 83
         Mar. + 15,492 + 5,009 + 975 + 975 + 763 + 763 + 6,740 − 1,677 + 548 − 1,482 + 6,467 + 9
         Apr. + 3,637 − 7,587 + 2,665 + 2,665 + 214 + 214 + 9,919 − 278 + 708 − 321 − 9,870 − 307
         May + 9,842 + 1,807 − 1,000 − 1,000 + 6,025 − 485 + 5,543 + 4,574 + 522 − 28 − 1,247 − 190
         June + 8,533 + 947 + 104 + 104 + 140 + 140 + 11,512 + 4,988 + 88 − 971 − 3,311 − 41
         July + 27,272 + 9,291 + 10,400 − 127 − 11 − 11 + 9,934 + 4,941 + 610 − 716 + 6,338 + 133
         Aug. + 6,663 − 2,147 − 772 − 772 + 8,739 + 1,189 + 5,360 + 4,337 + 135 − 100 − 6,799 + 228
         Sep. p + 9,217 + 2,933 − 688 − 688 + 983 + 983 + 11,058 + 5,713 + 590 − 348 − 2,727 + 1,413
1After deduction of repurchases. —2Federal Treasury notes, Federal   
savings bonds, Treasury discount paper, Treasury financing paper.  
  
58*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
12. Receipts, expenditure and assets of the wage and
salary earners ’ pension insurance funds
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999,  5  million
Receipts  1 Expenditure  1 Assets  5 
of which of which Memor-
Balance Mort- andum
Pen- of receipts gage item
Pension sioners ’ and and Adminis-
Contri- Federal pay- health expend- other Real trative
Period Total butions  2 payments Total ments  3 insurance  4 iture Total Deposits  6 Securities loans  7 estate assets
Western Germany
1995 276,302 225,324 47,979 279,226 230,222 15,923 −2,924 21,756 16,801 3,948 746 262 7,800
1996  8 288,761 236,036 50,478 288,716 237,464 16,809 + 45 14,456 9,608 2,119 2,500 229 8,863
1997 305,606 248,463 54,896 295,635 246,011 17,892 + 9,971 14,659 10,179 1,878 2,372 230 9,261
1998 317,340 250,063 65,191 304,155 254,783 18,636 + 13,185 18,194 14,201 1,493 2,274 226 9,573
1999 169,124 128,191 39,884 159,819 134,536 9,910 + 9,305 13,623 11,559 824 1,127 114 4,904
2000  p 173,020 128,057 43,638 166,569 139,189 10,253 + 6,451 14,350 11,459 1,676 1,105 110 4,889
2001  8,  p 178,293 130,064 46,710 172,382 143,863 10,610 + 5,911 13,973 10,646 1,517 1,699 111 4,917
2001          2nd qtr 43,823 31,800 11,657 42,420 35,572 2,610 + 1,403 13,315 10,098 1,406 1,709 102 4,956         3rd qtr 44,023 32,123 11,530 43,229 36,469 2,688 + 794 11,543 8,201 1,532 1,704 106 4,973         4th qtr 47,452 35,514 11,588 43,530 36,400 2,701 + 3,922 13,973 10,646 1,517 1,699 111 4,917
2002          1st qtr 43,411 30,893 12,212 43,792 36,898 2,719 − 381 11,943 8,712 1,427 1,698 106 4,933
         2nd qtr 44,541 31,949 12,222 43,927 36,784 2,711 + 614 10,663 7,490 1,366 1,696 111 4,954
Eastern Germany
1995 70,774 44,970 16,408 77,780 63,812 4,362 −7,006 . . . . . .
1996 74,790 46,580 17,910 83,830 68,316 4,851 −9,040 . . . . . .
1997 79,351 48,939 20,065 87,424 70,500 5,388 −8,073 . . . . . .
1998 81,072 47,764 23,564 90,863 73,040 5,757 −9,791 . . . . . .
1999 43,214 24,015 14,744 47,641 38,383 3,040 −4,427 . . . . . .
2000  p 43,513 22,655 15,224 49,385 39,414 3,112 −5,872 . . . . . .
2001  p 44,462 21,984 16,383 50,943 40,254 3,152 −6,481 . . . . . .
2001          2nd qtr 10,954 5,465 4,117 12,512 9,989 777 −1,558 . . . . . .
         3rd qtr 10,540 5,372 4,070 12,881 10,240 796 −2,341 . . . . . .
         4th qtr 11,446 5,860 4,107 12,857 10,221 788 −1,411 . . . . . .
2002          1st qtr 11,070 5,157 4,410 13,106 10,373 793 −2,036 . . . . . .
         2nd qtr 11,493 5,455 4,558 13,046 10,228 797 −1,553 . . . . . .
Source: Federal Minister of Labour and Social Affairs and Association of including nursing insurance scheme for pensioners . —5Largely cor-
German Pension Insurance Funds. —1The annual figures differ from the responds to fluctuation reserves. Level at the end of the year or quarter.
sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. From 1993 From 1992 figures for the whole of Germany. —6Including cash
including financial compensation payments. —2Including contributions for resources. —7Excluding loans to other social security funds; including
recipients of public financial benefits. —3Payments by pension insurance participating interests. —8Excluding receipts arising from the higher
funds to health insurance institutions under section 50 of the Social Security valuation of participating interests. 
Code V have been deducted from pension payments. —4From 1995
13. Receipts and expenditure of the Federal Labour Office
  
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999,  5  million
Receipts Expenditure
Subsidies
of which of which or work-
ing fund
Promotion of vocational Promo- Balance credits
Unemployment relief  3,  4 training  4,  5 tion of of receipts of thewinter and Federal
Contri- Western Eastern Western Eastern con- expend- Govern-
Period Total  
1 butions Levies  2 Total Total Germany Germany Total Germany Germany struction iture ment
Germany
1995 90,211 84,354 2,957 97,103 49,254 36,161 13,094 34,441 16,745 17,696 1,586 −6,892 6,887
1996 91,825 85,073 3,346 105,588 57,123 40,186 16,938 36,478 18,368 18,111 903 −13,763 13,756
1997 93,149 85,793 2,959 102,723 60,273 40,309 19,964 31,418 16,117 15,301 443 −9,574 9,574
1998 91,088 86,165 2,868 98,852 53,483 35,128 18,355 34,279 16,784 17,496 471 −7,764 7,719
1999 47,954 45,141 1,467 51,694 25,177 16,604 8,573 20,558 10,480 10,078 279 −3,740 3,739
2000 49,606 46,359 1,403 50,473 23,946 15,615 8,331 20,324 10,534 9,790 294 − 868 867
2001 50,682 47,337 1,640 52,613 25,036 16,743 8,294 20,713 11,094 9,619 268 −1,931 1,931
2001          3rd qtr 12,692 11,748 437 12,549 5,899 3,974 1,926 5,024 2,664 2,361 8 + 143 0
         4th qtr 14,319 13,045 770 13,866 6,321 4,366 1,955 5,637 2,973 2,664 3 + 453 −2,771
2002          1st qtr 11,502 11,188 51 13,093 6,587 4,608 1,979 4,665 2,523 2,142 139 −1,591 3,720
         2nd qtr 12,200 11,459 433 14,141 7,098 5,005 2,093 5,230 2,903 2,327 97 −1,941 2,200
         3rd qtr 12,710 11,808 528 13,905 6,708 4,839 1,869 5,182 2,849 2,334 7 −1,195 854
Source: Federal Labour Office. —1Excluding Federal Government liquidity replacement for the unemployment benefits. —4Including contributions to
assistance. —2Levies to promote winter construction and to pay bank- the statutory health insurance, and to the pension insurance funds. —
ruptcy compensation to employees. —3Unemployment benefits, 5Vocational training, measures to foster the commencement of work,
short-time-working benefits. Including the integration allowance paid to rehabilitation and job creation measures. 
resettlers from eastern Europe and emigrants from the GDR as a
59*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
IX. Economic conditions
  
1. Origin and expenditure of domestic product, distribution of national income
    Germany
    
1st half 1st half
  1998   1999   2000   2001   2002   1999   2000   2001   2002   1998   1999   2000   2001
DM Change from % of
Item billion
 5 
 billion previous year in % total
at  1995  prices
I.Origin of domestic product
Producing sector
(excluding construction) 855.2 429.4 445.6 447.3 217.1 −1.8 3.8 0.4 −2.5 23.3 22.4 22.6 22.6
Construction 205.3 105.5 102.6 96.0 43.8 0.5 −2.7 −6.5 −5.1 5.6 5.5 5.2 4.8
Distribution, catering trade,and transportation  
1 614.6 335.3 352.9 361.8 178.8 6.7 5.3 2.5 1.0 16.7 17.5 17.9 18.3
Financing, rents and corporateservices  
2 1,028.6 548.3 572.6 585.2 293.7 4.3 4.4 2.2 1.9 28.0 28.6 29.1 29.5
Public and private services  3 737.6 380.6 387.3 391.6 197.6 0.9 1.8 1.1 1.2 20.1 19.9 19.7 19.8
All economic sectors 3,487.2 1,823.3 1,885.3 1,906.5 943.4 2.3 3.4 1.1 0.2 95.0 95.2 95.7 96.2Memo item: Enterprise sector 3,041.7 1,595.6 1,656.7 1,679.3 829.7 2.6 3.8 1.4 0.2 82.9 83.3 84.1 84.8
Economic sectors, adjusted  
4 3,320.2 1,730.3 1,785.5 1,801.4 888.9 1.9 3.2 0.9 −0.0 90.5 90.4 90.7 90.9
Gross domestic product 3,669.9 1,914.8 1,969.5 1,980.8 977.7 2.0 2.9 0.6 −0.4 100 100 100 100
II.Expenditure of domestic product
Private consumption  5 2,072.8 1,099.2 1,114.8 1,131.6 550.4 3.7 1.4 1.5 −1.1 56.5 57.4 56.6 57.1
Government consumption 726.3 375.0 379.6 382.6 191.4 1.0 1.2 0.8 1.0 19.8 19.6 19.3 19.3
Machinery and equipment 292.5 160.3 175.5 165.4 73.4 7.2 9.5 −5.8 −10.6 8.0 8.4 8.9 8.3
Construction 479.5 248.7 242.1 227.7 104.7 1.4 −2.6 −6.0 −5.2 13.1 13.0 12.3 11.5
Other investment  6 40.0 23.2 25.2 26.5 13.2 13.5 8.4 5.0 3.0 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.3
Changes in stocks  7 3.2 −6.6 −2.7 −15.2 −2.0 . . . . 0.1 −0.3 −0.1 −0.8
Domestic demand 3,614.3 1,899.8 1,934.5 1,918.6 931.1 2.8 1.8 −0.8 −2.2 98.5 99.2 98.2 96.9
Net exports 55.6 15.0 35.0 62.2 46.6 . . . . 1.5 0.8 1.8 3.1
Exports 1,078.6 582.5 662.1 695.4 348.2 5.6 13.7 5.0 0.4 29.4 30.4 33.6 35.1Imports 1,023.0 567.4 627.1 633.1 301.6 8.5 10.5 1.0 −5.1 27.9 29.6 31.8 32.0
Gross domestic product 3,669.9 1,914.8 1,969.5 1,980.8 977.7 2.0 2.9 0.6 −0.4 100 100 100 100
at  current  prices
III.Expenditure of domestic product
Private consumption  5 2,173.3 1,156.5 1,190.9 1,232.2 606.9 4.1 3.0 3.5 0.5 57.6 58.5 58.7 59.5
Government consumption 722.7 378.8 387.2 393.5 191.9 2.5 2.2 1.6 2.0 19.2 19.1 19.1 19.0Machinery and equipment 293.5 159.6 175.8 166.3 74.6 6.4 10.2 −5.4 −9.6 7.8 8.1 8.7 8.0
Construction 475.3 245.2 240.2 226.2 104.2 0.9 −2.1 −5.8 −5.2 12.6 12.4 11.8 10.9
Other investment  
6 38.3 21.4 22.8 23.7 11.8 9.1 6.7 4.1 3.0 1.0 1.1 1.1 1.1
Changes in stocks  7 14.1 0.9 5.2 −9.4 4.0 . . . . 0.4 0.0 0.3 −0.5
Domestic demand 3,717.2 1,962.3 2,022.2 2,032.6 993.3 3.3 3.0 0.5 −1.0 98.5 99.2 99.6 98.1
Net exports 56.4 16.3 7.8 38.6 41.2 . . . . 1.5 0.8 0.4 1.9
Exports 1,095.6 587.0 685.4 726.9 365.6 4.8 16.8 6.1 0.5 29.0 29.7 33.8 35.1Imports 1,039.2 570.7 677.6 688.3 324.4 7.4 18.7 1.6 −6.7 27.5 28.8 33.4 33.2
Gross domestic product 3,773.6 1,978.6 2,030.0 2,071.2 1,034.5 2.6 2.6 2.0 1.5 100 100 100 100
IV.Prices (1995=100)
Private consumption 104.8 105.2 106.8 108.9 110.3 0.4 1.5 1.9 1.6 . . . .Gross domestic product 102.8 103.3 103.1 104.6 105.8 0.5 −0.3 1.4 1.9 . . . .
Terms of trade 100.0 100.2 95.8 96.2 97.6 0.2 −4.4 0.4 1.7 . . . .
V.Distribution of national income
Wages and salaries 2,015.6 1,058.0 1,099.0 1,120.4 535.5 2.7 3.9 1.9 1.1 71.5 72.0 72.8 73.2Entrepreneurial and propertyincome 805.0 411.1 410.3 410.9 223.4 −0.1 −0.2 0.2 1.5 28.5 28.0 27.2 26.8
National income 2,820.6 1,469.0 1,509.2 1,531.2 758.9 1.9 2.7 1.5 1.2 100 100 100 100
Memo item: Gross national
income 3,746.2 1,965.9 2,020.9 2,055.8 1,024.7 2.6 2.8 1.7 1.3 . . . .
(Gross nat. product)
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August 2002. —1In- ing taxes on products (offset against subsidies on products). —5Including
cluding telecommunications. —2Financial intermediation, real estate activi- private non-commercial organisations. —6Intangible fixed capital forma-
ties, rents and corporate services. —3Including care-at-home services. — tion (inter alia, EDP software, copyrights) and economically useful animals
4Gross value added after deduction of assumed bank charges, but exclud- and plants. — 7 Including net increase in valuables. 
60*IX. Economic conditions

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
 IX. Economic conditions
 
2. Output in the producing sector     
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Industry  1 
Producing sector, Intermediate
total Total goods  2 Capital goods  3 Consumer goods  4 Energy  5 Construction
Change Change Change Change Change Change Changefrom from from from from from fromprevious previous previous previous previous previous previousyear year year year year year year
Period in % in % in % in % in % in % in %
1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 
Germany  
  
1998 106.2 + 3.4 109.6 + 4.7 108.7 + 3.0 116.2 + 8.8 101.6 + 1.1 100.4 −1.3 87.2 −3.2
1999 107.7 + 1.4 111.5 + 1.7 110.7 + 1.8 118.0 + 1.5 103.3 + 1.7 100.0 −0.4 87.9 + 0.8
2000 113.4 + 5.3 119.1 + 6.8 116.9 + 5.6 130.9 + 10.9 105.6 + 2.2 99.7 −0.3 84.9 −3.4
2001 113.2 −0.2 119.9 + 0.7 116.1 −0.7 134.3 + 2.6 105.2 −0.4 98.1 −1.6 79.0 −6.9
  
2001          Sep. 119.9 −1.7 126.9 −1.6 121.1 −2.2 145.0 −0.5 110.4 −2.2 92.1 −1.6 93.3 −3.3
         Oct. 118.6 −2.7 124.4 −3.0 121.0 −3.4 135.7 −2.4 113.3 −3.3 98.4 −3.7 94.3 + 0.2
         Nov. 117.3 −4.0 123.4 −4.2 117.6 −4.9 138.8 −3.6 110.6 −3.9 105.4 −1.1 84.7 −5.3
         Dec. 105.5 −4.4 111.5 −5.0 96.9 −8.3 137.0 −3.9 98.7 −1.6 111.8 + 4.7 61.2 −6.3
2002          Jan. 100.9 −4.2 107.6 −4.4 107.4 −4.6 114.4 −5.2 98.2 −2.3 111.1 −0.9 48.4 −5.3
         Feb. 104.2 −4.6 111.7 −4.9 110.6 −3.7 121.8 −7.2 98.9 −2.8 98.8 −1.6 57.7 −2.2
         Mar. 7 117.7 −2.7 125.5 −3.5 123.0 −1.7 139.5 −6.3 109.1 −1.3 103.4 −0.6 7 75.3 + 3.4
         Apr.  x 7 111.1 −1.9 117.2 −2.0 116.3 −0.7 129.5 −2.7 100.7 −3.2 97.2 −1.2 7 79.5 −1.5
         May  x 6 7 107.8 −4.1 113.6 −4.1 114.7 −2.3 122.0 −6.4 99.3 −3.3 94.2 + 2.1 7 78.2 −8.8
         June  x 6 7 115.4 −2.0 123.3 −1.8 120.2 −1.2 140.3 −1.8 103.6 −2.7 86.8 + 1.4 7 83.0 −7.2
         July  + 7 111.1 −1.8 117.6 −1.1 117.9 −0.1 129.0 −1.4 100.4 −2.6 87.0 −2.2 7 84.4 −7.2
         Aug.  + 7 104.1 −1.2 110.1 −0.3 111.7 + 1.2 117.4 + 0.3 96.7 −4.1 86.5 −1.6 7 76.4 −9.4
Western Germany  
  
1998 105.9 + 3.4 108.7 + 4.4 107.6 + 2.5 115.7 + 8.6 99.9 + 1.0 101.2 −1.2 87.7 −1.9
1999 107.2 + 1.2 110.1 + 1.3 109.0 + 1.3 117.1 + 1.2 101.1 + 1.2 100.6 −0.6 88.9 + 1.4
2000 112.7 + 5.1 117.1 + 6.4 114.3 + 4.9 129.8 + 10.8 102.8 + 1.7 99.8 −0.8 87.5 −1.6
2001 112.4 −0.3 117.6 + 0.4 113.2 −1.0 132.9 + 2.4 101.9 −0.9 97.9 −1.9 82.2 −6.1
  
2001          Sep. 118.9 −1.9 124.4 −1.9 117.7 −2.5 143.6 −0.9 107.2 −2.6 91.9 −1.8 96.8 −2.4
         Oct. 117.4 −3.1 121.7 −3.4 117.6 −3.8 134.3 −2.8 109.6 −4.0 98.2 −3.9 98.7 + 1.1
         Nov. 116.0 −4.2 120.5 −4.5 114.3 −5.1 136.6 −4.0 106.9 −4.2 105.3 −1.4 87.9 −4.4
         Dec. 104.8 −4.6 109.2 −5.4 94.4 −8.6 135.2 −4.4 95.3 −2.0 111.5 + 4.4 63.8 −5.5
2002          Jan. 100.3 −4.4 105.3 −4.8 104.6 −5.0 113.0 −5.7 95.1 −2.5 110.9 −1.1 50.8 −3.2
         Feb. 103.6 −5.0 109.4 −5.4 107.7 −4.3 120.4 −7.7 95.7 −3.3 98.7 −1.8 60.9 −2.2
         Mar. 7 116.9 −3.2 122.7 −4.1 119.8 −2.4 137.7 −6.6 105.3 −1.8 103.2 −0.7 7 80.5 + 4.8
         Apr.  x 7 110.3 −2.0 114.7 −2.4 113.0 −1.1 128.2 −3.1 97.4 −3.3 97.0 −1.3 7 85.0 + 0.2
         May  x 6 7 106.7 −4.2 110.8 −4.5 111.2 −2.8 120.7 −6.6 95.4 −3.6 94.1 + 2.4 7 83.2 −7.2
         June  x 6 7 114.4 −2.1 120.5 −2.1 116.7 −1.5 138.6 −2.1 99.8 −3.2 86.4 + 1.3 7 87.9 −5.5
         July  + 7 110.4 −1.5 115.3 −1.1 114.7 −0.2 128.1 −1.2 97.0 −2.9 86.6 −2.5 7 89.9 −5.0
         Aug.  + 7 102.5 −1.2 107.0 −0.5 108.0 + 1.0 115.3 + 0.2 92.7 −4.4 86.1 −1.6 7 79.4 −7.6
Eastern Germany  
  
1998 109.1 + 2.9 126.2 + 9.2 125.9 + 11.3 126.3 + 11.5 126.5 + 3.8 94.0 −2.3 85.1 −8.3
1999 114.4 + 4.9 135.7 + 7.5 137.1 + 8.9 135.5 + 7.3 134.0 + 5.9 95.1 + 1.2 84.2 −1.1
2000 121.5 + 6.2 152.7 + 12.5 157.0 + 14.5 153.2 + 13.1 145.7 + 8.7 98.3 + 3.4 75.6 −10.2
2001 123.0 + 1.2 160.1 + 4.8 162.6 + 3.6 163.7 + 6.9 152.6 + 4.7 99.5 + 1.2 67.1 −11.2
  
2001          Sep. 132.0 + 0.7 169.6 + 3.3 175.6 + 2.0 174.4 + 6.7 155.8 + 1.9 93.8 + 0.0 80.5 −7.4
         Oct. 131.9 + 1.0 169.2 + 2.8 174.4 + 1.4 165.0 + 4.1 165.4 + 3.8 100.4 −1.8 78.5 −3.7
         Nov. 132.8 −1.7 172.5 −0.1 170.2 −1.4 186.4 + 3.0 162.3 −1.3 106.6 + 1.4 73.2 −9.1
         Dec. 114.1 −1.0 149.7 −0.5 135.7 −5.5 174.5 + 3.7 146.5 + 2.2 114.3 + 7.4 51.9 −9.6
2002          Jan. 108.4 −1.3 146.7 + 0.5 151.6 + 0.1 143.7 + 2.0 142.1 −0.2 113.1 + 1.1 39.7 −13.7
         Feb. 111.2 + 1.3 151.0 + 2.0 155.9 + 3.3 151.0 −0.3 143.7 + 2.2 99.5 + 0.2 46.2 −1.7
         Mar. 7 126.9 + 2.6 171.9 + 4.0 174.3 + 6.6 177.1 + 0.6 163.2 + 3.8 105.4 + 0.9 7 56.5 −3.3
         Apr.  x 7 119.8 + 0.0 158.9 + 2.4 167.9 + 4.4 156.7 + 3.6 147.2 −2.2 98.7 −0.3 7 59.5 −9.7
         May  x 6 7 120.4 −2.7 160.2 + 0.3 170.4 + 3.3 150.9 −3.9 153.7 −0.3 95.3 + 0.2 7 60.3 −15.4
         June  x 6 7 127.3 −0.9 170.7 + 2.4 175.7 + 2.3 176.0 + 2.8 157.9 + 2.3 90.3 + 2.4 7 65.1 −14.8
         July  + 7 119.3 −4.1 156.8 −1.1 168.1 + 1.0 148.4 −5.4 147.9 + 0.1 89.9 −0.7 7 64.7 −16.4
         Aug.  + 7 122.6 −2.5 162.3 + 1.3 169.4 + 2.5 161.4 + 1.6 152.5 −1.0 89.5 −1.4 7 65.5 −16.5
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. —oBy means of visional up to adjustment to the figures of the annual overall survey in the
the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. —1Manufacturing sector, construction sector. —xProvisional; adjusted in advance by the Federal Stat-
unless assigned to the main grouping energy, plus mining and quarrying. — istical Office, by way of estimates, to the results of the Quarterly Production
2Including mining and quarrying except energy-producing materials. —3In- Survey for the second quarter (industry in Germany: + 1.0%). Output pos-
cluding manufacture of motor vehicles, trailers and semi-trailers. —4In- sibly understated. —+Provisional; adjusted in advance by the Federal Statis-
cluding printing and service activities related to printing. —5Electricity, tical Office, by way of estimates, to the results of the Quarterly Production
gas, steam and hot water supply, mining and quarrying of energy-pro- Survey for the third quarter (industry in Germany: + 1.0%). Output possiblyducing materials, and especially manufacture of refined petroleum pro- understated. ducts. —6Influenced by the exceptional working-day situation. —7Pro-
61* IX. Economic conditions

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
 IX. Economic conditions
 
3. Orders received by industry *  
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Industry
 
Total Domestic orders Foreign orders Intermediate goods Capital goods  1 Consumer goods  2 
Change Change Change Change Change Change
from from from from from fromprevious previous previous previous previous previousyear year year year year year
Period 1995=100 in % 1995=100 in % 1995=100 in % 1995=100 in % 1995=100 in % 1995=100 in %
Germany  
  
1998 111.0 + 3.7 103.0 + 4.0 125.4 + 3.2 105.4 − 0.2 119.8 + 8.0 100.1 + 0.8
1999 113.3 + 2.1 102.7 − 0.3 132.3 + 5.5 106.3 + 0.9 123.9 + 3.4 101.0 + 0.9
2000 129.0 + 13.9 111.2 + 8.3 161.0 + 21.7 121.3 + 14.1 144.1 + 16.3 105.2 + 4.2
2001 126.8 − 1.7 108.6 − 2.3 159.7 − 0.8 116.5 − 4.0 143.3 − 0.6 106.8 + 1.5
 
2001          Aug. 116.9 − 3.7 104.1 − 2.5 140.1 − 5.2 107.9 − 7.7 128.4 − 1.9 108.2 + 2.1
         Sep. 127.3 − 6.5 110.7 − 5.0 157.2 − 8.3 115.9 −10.0 142.2 − 4.4 114.8 − 3.4
         Oct. 123.6 − 8.6 107.0 − 6.6 153.6 −11.1 115.5 − 9.7 135.7 − 9.7 110.3 − 0.7
         Nov. 123.4 − 8.6 105.9 − 8.4 155.0 − 8.8 111.8 −10.4 140.4 − 8.8 104.7 − 2.1
         Dec. 120.9 − 5.5 99.8 − 4.3 158.9 − 7.0 102.7 − 8.0 147.6 − 4.4 92.6 − 2.3
2002          Jan. 123.0 − 4.3 104.0 − 4.9 157.4 − 3.5 113.0 − 7.5 138.4 − 2.4 104.8 − 2.3
         Feb. 123.0 − 5.9 102.6 − 7.7 159.7 − 3.7 114.6 − 4.4 135.3 − 7.5 109.5 − 4.1
         Mar. 137.4 − 2.8 112.2 − 8.3 182.9 + 4.3 124.8 − 2.9 155.4 − 2.9 119.3 − 1.3
         Apr. 125.6 + 0.7 105.0 − 2.9 162.9 + 5.4 118.3 + 1.7 140.3 + 0.1 102.6 + 0.5
         May 127.3 + 0.7 101.4 − 5.1 174.0 + 7.6 116.5 − 1.0 147.8 + 2.8 96.3 − 2.5
         June 130.4 − 1.5 107.0 − 2.0 172.7 − 0.9 121.5 − 0.7 148.6 − 1.9 101.1 − 2.2
         July 126.2 + 0.5 106.6 − 1.8 161.5 + 3.3 118.4 + 1.5 142.4 + 0.8 99.4 − 4.6
         Aug.  p 118.8 + 1.6 101.4 − 2.6 150.2 + 7.2 109.6 + 1.6 133.3 + 3.8 101.2 − 6.5
Western Germany  
  
1998 110.2 + 3.0 102.4 + 3.6 123.5 + 2.0 104.0 − 0.9 119.8 + 7.1 99.1 + 0.6
1999 112.3 + 1.9 101.8 − 0.6 130.2 + 5.4 104.5 + 0.5 123.9 + 3.4 99.7 + 0.6
2000 127.5 + 13.5 109.7 + 7.8 158.0 + 21.4 118.7 + 13.6 144.0 + 16.2 103.1 + 3.42001 124.8 − 2.1 106.7 − 2.7 155.8 − 1.4 112.9 − 4.9 142.8 − 0.8 104.4 + 1.3
 
2001          Aug. 114.9 − 4.6 102.3 − 3.0 136.6 − 6.4 104.1 − 8.8 128.2 − 2.7 106.2 + 1.5
         Sep. 124.8 − 7.6 108.3 − 6.0 153.1 − 9.4 111.9 −11.1 141.1 − 5.7 112.4 − 3.8
         Oct. 121.5 − 9.3 104.9 − 7.1 150.1 −11.7 111.7 −10.6 135.5 −10.2 107.6 − 1.0
         Nov. 121.4 − 8.7 103.8 − 8.8 151.6 − 8.6 108.4 −10.9 140.2 − 8.7 102.0 − 2.0
         Dec. 118.5 − 5.5 97.4 − 4.2 154.8 − 6.8 99.3 − 9.0 146.3 − 3.7 90.3 − 2.2
2002          Jan. 121.1 − 4.7 102.0 − 5.6 153.8 − 3.7 108.9 − 8.6 138.8 − 2.3 102.2 − 2.8
         Feb. 120.9 − 6.1 100.7 − 8.4 155.7 − 3.4 111.0 − 4.1 134.9 − 8.0 107.3 − 4.3
         Mar. 133.0 − 4.5 109.9 − 8.9 172.7 + 0.9 120.0 − 4.1 150.9 − 5.3 116.8 − 1.5
         Apr. 123.4 + 0.8 103.1 − 2.6 158.4 + 5.0 114.3 + 1.2 140.1 + 0.9 99.9 + 0.5
         May 125.4 + 1.0 99.2 − 5.3 170.3 + 8.2 112.5 − 1.6 148.3 + 3.7 93.3 − 3.0
         June 127.9 − 2.0 104.4 − 2.9 168.2 − 1.0 117.6 − 1.0 147.6 − 2.6 98.2 − 2.7
         July 124.5 + 0.6 104.7 − 1.9 158.4 + 3.4 114.3 + 1.1 143.2 + 1.3 97.4 − 4.7
         Aug.  p 115.5 + 0.5 98.7 − 3.5 144.4 + 5.7 105.0 + 0.9 131.2 + 2.3 98.5 − 7.3
Eastern Germany  
  
1998 124.0 + 15.6 109.6 + 8.1 196.3 + 43.0 126.6 + 7.7 121.3 + 27.3 124.3 + 6.01999 129.7 + 4.6 113.9 + 3.9 209.7 + 6.8 134.7 + 6.4 124.6 + 2.7 131.8 + 6.0
2000 153.4 + 18.3 129.8 + 14.0 272.9 + 30.1 162.6 + 20.7 145.3 + 16.6 151.5 + 14.9
2001 161.2 + 5.1 133.0 + 2.5 303.9 + 11.4 172.9 + 6.3 150.3 + 3.4 160.9 + 6.2
 
2001          Aug. 150.4 + 8.6 126.3 + 2.6 272.0 + 25.8 169.1 + 4.7 131.6 + 12.6 155.4 + 11.9         Sep. 168.8 + 9.5 140.6 + 5.6 311.6 + 19.6 178.8 + 2.2 159.7 + 20.5 168.4 + 3.4
         Oct. 157.7 − 0.2 133.0 − 1.3 282.4 + 2.5 175.2 + 0.5 138.3 − 1.6 170.1 + 2.3
         Nov. 156.5 − 6.7 131.8 − 4.6 281.4 −11.3 167.2 − 4.3 144.2 −10.0 166.2 − 2.9
         Dec. 160.3 − 6.2 130.7 − 4.3 309.9 −10.1 156.0 + 3.6 168.0 −13.8 144.5 − 4.0
2002          Jan. 155.5 + 1.5 128.8 + 1.9 290.3 + 0.6 179.0 + 6.5 131.8 − 4.5 162.1 + 2.3
         Feb. 156.4 − 3.6 126.2 − 1.2 308.9 − 8.3 170.7 − 7.6 142.1 + 0.8 159.6 − 1.6
         Mar. 210.7 + 19.5 140.8 − 3.4 563.8 + 70.4 201.3 + 10.1 227.7 + 33.2 175.8 + 1.7
         Apr. 162.4 − 0.9 129.3 − 6.0 329.8 + 10.9 181.2 + 7.3 144.1 − 9.8 165.3 + 2.2
         May 159.8 − 2.4 129.5 − 2.3 312.8 − 2.7 180.1 + 5.3 139.3 −11.7 164.9 + 3.5
         June 172.8 + 4.9 140.0 + 7.4 338.6 − 0.1 183.9 + 2.5 163.5 + 7.4 168.2 + 5.0
         July 154.3 − 1.5 130.3 − 2.1 275.4
+ 0.0 183.4 + 5.4 128.6 − 9.2 147.5 − 2.3
         Aug.  p 173.6 + 15.4 135.2 + 7.0 367.9 + 35.3 183.8 + 8.7 167.1 + 27.0 161.0 + 3.6
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. —*Economic means of the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. —1Including manu-
activities of the manufacturing sector, in particular, excluding manufacture facture of motor vehicles, trailers and semitrailers. —2Including printing
of food products, beverages, tobacco and refined petroleum products; and service activities related to printing. 
results for kinds of activity units; figures excluding value-added tax. —oBy
62* IX. Economic conditions

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
 IX. Economic conditions
 
4. Orders received by construction *   
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Germany Western Germany Eastern Germany
Housing Public Housing Public Housing Public Industrial Industrial Industrial
con- construc- construc- con- construc- construc- con- construc- construc-
Total struction tion  1 tion Total struction tion  1 tion Total struction tion  1 tion
 Change Change Change
 from from from
 previous previous previous
 year year year
Period 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 in % 1995 = 100 in % 1995 = 100 in %
1998 84.0 −0.5 82.4 79.9 90.1 86.6 + 0.6 83.3 86.7 88.8 77.7 −3.5 80.3 64.7 93.8
1999 82.1 −2.3 78.2 80.2 87.6 87.3 + 0.8 84.1 88.7 88.1 69.9 −10.0 66.2 61.1 86.2
2000 75.1 −8.5 65.4 75.6 82.1 81.2 −7.0 73.3 84.9 82.7 60.5 −13.4 49.2 54.4 80.3
2001 71.0 −5.5 54.2 73.3 81.3 79.2 −2.5 64.2 84.9 83.3 51.6 −14.7 33.6 47.1 75.6
   
2001          July 74.5 −7.1 52.9 76.5 88.9 81.8 −6.2 62.3 87.3 89.3 57.2 −10.3 33.6 52.2 87.6
         Aug. 74.8 + 1.9 52.9 75.9 90.6 81.7 + 6.5 61.0 87.2 90.2 58.3 −10.7 36.2 50.2 91.7
         Sep. 78.4 −7.0 58.3 81.1 90.8 87.6 −5.4 69.6 95.1 91.8 56.6 −12.5 35.1 49.3 88.1
         Oct. 69.1 −5.7 50.4 67.5 85.7 77.0 −4.9 59.3 77.6 89.0 50.5 −8.7 32.3 44.7 76.8
         Nov. 61.2 −3.2 39.9 69.4 67.7 66.7 −2.6 47.1 79.7 65.6 48.1 −4.9 25.2 46.1 73.6
         Dec. 59.7 −14.0 39.4 67.0 66.7 69.1 −10.5 48.5 80.6 70.6 37.5 −26.2 20.9 36.1 55.7
2002          Jan. 47.1 −8.0 38.0 51.9 48.4 53.6 −8.2 47.2 59.7 51.0 31.7 −7.6 19.1 34.0 40.7
         Feb. 55.5 −3.0 40.9 62.7 58.1 60.1 −7.5 49.7 66.8 59.7 44.8 + 16.1 23.0 53.6 53.7
         Mar. 84.0 + 5.5 55.7 96.4 90.8 98.5 + 10.5 69.6 118.8 95.7 49.6 −13.4 27.3 45.8 77.1
         Apr. 71.4 −4.9 52.8 72.3 85.0 80.1 −6.8 64.8 82.1 88.7 50.9 + 2.4 28.2 50.1 74.5
         May 69.3 −14.0 51.3 67.3 85.8 75.9 −15.2 62.4 77.0 84.3 53.6 −10.1 28.6 45.3 90.1
         June 79.8 −11.5 55.2 77.6 101.9 88.2 −10.3 66.6 88.9 102.8 60.1 −15.2 31.9 52.0 99.2
         July 70.4 −5.5 45.3 72.4 87.7 78.4 −4.2 55.1 83.8 88.7 51.7 −9.6 25.1 46.8 84.9
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. —*Values exclusive gineering". —oBundesbank calculation. —1Including the railways and
of value-added tax. The figures refer to the economic classifications "Site pre- post office. 
paration" and "Building of complete constructions or parts thereof; civil en-
 
 
5. Retail trade turnover *)
    Germany
  
Retail trade  1 Memo item
of which:  by enterprises ’ main product range of which
Pharmaceutical
and medical Retail trade plus retailgoods, cosmetic Clothing, Furniture and sales of motor vehicles
Food, beverages, and toilet footwear and lighting and motorcycles plus Retail sales of
Total tobacco  
2 articles  2 leather goods  2 equipment  2 sales of automotive fuel motor vehicles  3 
Change from Change Change Change Change Change from Change
from from from from from previous year in % previous year in %
previous previous previous previous previous
not year year year year not year price- price-
Period in % in % in % in % in % 2000 = 100 adjusted adjusted  4 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 adjusted adjusted  4 2000 = 100
1998 96.9 + 1.0 + 1.1 97.1 + 1.5 88.2 + 5.8 100.3 −1.1 104.4 + 3.9 97.5 + 1.8 + 1.5 99.2 + 5.5
1999 97.7 + 0.8 + 0.5 98.0 + 0.9 94.7 + 7.4 100.2 −0.1 102.3 −2.0 98.7 + 1.2 + 0.8 102.9 + 3.7
2000 100.0 + 2.4 + 1.2 100.0 + 2.0 100.0 + 5.6 100.0 −0.2 100.0 −2.2 100.0 + 1.3 + 0.1 100.0 −2.8
2001 102.1 + 2.1 + 0.4 104.9 + 4.9 107.6 + 7.6 99.5 −0.5 98.7 −1.3 102.2 + 2.2 + 0.6 102.8 + 2.8
 
2001          Mar. 104.7 + 3.1 + 1.7 108.1 + 3.3 106.9 + 7.5 99.6 + 5.1 109.6 + 1.0 107.7 + 2.1 + 0.8 118.9 −0.8
         Apr. 101.2 + 2.3 + 0.3 105.4 + 4.4 103.2 + 10.3 103.0 −5.0 97.5 + 1.4 102.8 + 2.7 + 0.8 108.5 + 4.7
         May 104.7 + 0.6 −1.8 109.3 + 3.8 109.8 + 4.5 107.8 −0.2 95.8 −5.1 107.1 −0.2 −2.5 114.9 −3.3
         June 97.2 + 5.1 + 2.5 104.6 + 6.7 104.5 + 8.5 87.9 + 2.2 89.7 + 2.9 99.4 + 4.7 + 2.4 106.9 + 3.5
         July 98.5 + 3.4 + 0.8 102.3 + 6.8 108.3 + 10.3 93.0 −0.7 88.9 −4.7 100.4 + 3.9 + 1.8 106.7 + 5.3
         Aug. 99.0 + 2.6 + 0.6 105.0 + 7.9 106.6 + 8.3 88.8 −4.4 88.2 + 0.1 98.8 + 2.6 + 0.6 97.2 + 2.3
         Sep. 97.3 −1.0 −2.3 97.6 + 1.5 100.5 + 3.2 110.3 + 6.0 92.2 −4.1 96.6 −0.6 −1.8 94.4 + 2.1
         Oct. 104.6 + 3.0 + 1.5 106.1 + 7.8 110.4 + 8.7 104.6 −5.4 105.6 + 0.5 104.9 + 4.6 + 3.1 106.7 + 11.5
         Nov. 110.7 + 2.6 + 1.5 111.7 + 7.1 113.2 + 7.9 110.0 + 1.7 112.6 −2.8 109.8 + 3.6 + 2.5 108.5 + 8.8
         Dec. 123.8 + 0.3 −0.8 123.4 + 4.1 124.5 + 8.2 124.8 −3.1 116.4 −4.9 117.2 + 0.3 −0.9 94.2 + 0.3
2002          Jan. 92.6 −2.4 −4.0 96.1 + 2.0 108.3 + 1.8 83.7 −4.9 87.4 −7.1 91.4 −1.7 −3.3 87.8 + 1.2
         Feb. 86.8 −1.5 −2.9 93.4 + 2.9 100.5 + 4.0 72.9 −5.0 86.1 −7.8 87.8 −0.6 −2.2 92.3 + 3.1
         Mar. 102.5 −2.1 −3.4 110.7 + 2.4 109.3 + 2.2 97.3 −2.3 93.3 −14.9 104.4 −3.1 −4.5 111.5 −6.2
         Apr. 101.0 −0.2 −1.2 105.7 + 0.3 113.6 + 10.1 97.9 −5.0 92.4 −5.2 104.7 + 1.8 + 0.6 118.5 + 9.2
         May 100.0 −4.5 −4.8 108.3 −0.9 109.6 −0.2 96.4 −10.6 83.1 −13.3 102.0 −4.8 −5.3 108.8 −5.3
         June 93.3 −4.0 −3.8 101.2 −3.3 106.3 + 1.7 85.4 −2.8 78.1 −12.9 96.8 −2.6 −2.9 109.3 + 2.2
         July 99.1 + 0.6 + 1.0 104.7 + 2.3 114.4 + 5.6 92.5 −0.5 87.7 −1.3 102.1 + 1.7 + 1.5 112.8 + 5.7
         Aug. 96.5 −2.5 −2.2 105.2 + 0.2 109.6 + 2.8 85.6 −3.6 79.9 −9.4 96.3 −2.5 −2.4 95.1 −2.2
Source: Federal Statistical Office. —*Excluding value-added tax; figures sales of motor vehicles and motorcycles and excluding the sale of automo-
from 2001 provisional, partly revised and, judging by past experience, sub- tive fuel. —2Retail sales in stores. —3Including motor vehicle parts and
ject to considerable uncertainty in the most recent months. —1Excluding accessories. — 4 At 1995 prices. 
63* IX. Economic conditions

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
 IX. Economic conditions
 
6. Labour market * 
 
 
 
Persons in
Employed  1,2 Employees  1 employment  3 Unemployed
Persons
Mining employed Persons
and under under-manu- employ- goingfactur- Short- ment pro- Change vocational
Change from Change ing Con- time motion further from Unem-previous year from sector workers training previous ploy- schemes  
5 struction  4 
previous year, ment Vacancies,
Thou- Thou- Thou- year Thou- thou- rate  6 thou-
Period sands in % sands sands in % Thousands sands sands in % sands
Germany  
  
1999 38,078 + 1.2 + 465 34,136 + 1.5 6,370 1,111 119 430 358 4,099 −180 10.5 456
2000 38,753 + 1.8 + 675 34,748 + 1.8 6,373 1,053 86 316 352 3,889 −211 9.6 514
2001 38,919 + 0.4 + 166 34,835 + 0.3 6,395 958 123 243 345 3,852 − 37 9.4 506
2001          Sep. 39,213 + 0.1 + 30 6,425 968 114 233 329 3,743 + 58 9.0 485
         Oct. 39,288 −0.0 − 14 6,397 959 140 230 329 3,725 + 114 9.0 443
         Nov. 39,295 −0.1 − 42 35,145 −0.3 6,377 948 169 227 329 3,789 + 144 9.2 408
         Dec. 39,139 −0.2 − 67 6,336 921 176 215 319 3,964 + 155 9.6 389
2002          Jan. 38,326 −0.3 − 97 6,272 864 212 198 317 4,290 + 197 10.4 422
         Feb. 38,299 −0.3 −125 34,262 −0.4 6,247 840 246 192 326 4,296 + 184 10.4 487
         Mar. 38,445 −0.4 −154 6,237 p 846 258 187 335 4,156 + 156 10.0 527
         Apr. 38,652 −0.4 −166 6,219 p 863 245 185 345 4,024 + 156 9.7 537
         May 38,721 −0.6 −221 34,599 −0.7 6,207 p 864 201 184 348 3,946 + 226 7 9.5 517
         June 38,717 −0.6 −252 6,198 p 862 202 185 336 3,954 + 260 9.5 497
         July o 38,685 o −0.6 o −230 6,214 p 860 173 187 315 4,047 + 248 9.7 471
         Aug. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 145 191 320 4,018 + 229 9.6 458
         Sep. ... ... ... ... ... 216 199 337 3,942 + 199 9.5 420
Western Germany  
  
1999 . . . . . 5,775 775 92 82 215 2,756 −149 8.8 386
2000 . . . . . 5,761 749 62 70 212 2,529 −226 7.8 452
2001 . . . . . 5,769 696 96 61 209 2,478 − 51 7.4 440
2001          Sep. . . . . . 5,791 703 90 58 199 2,422 + 39 7.2 417
         Oct. . . . . . 5,764 698 8 114 8 578 197 8 2,413 8 +7 0 8 7.2 8 380
         Nov. . . . . . 5,745 691 142 56 195 2,468 + 108 7.4 348
         Dec. . . . . . 5,708 674 147 54 189 2,584 + 130 7.7 334
2002          Jan. . . . . . 5,649 640 179 52 190 2,791 + 169 8.3 367
         Feb. . . . . . 5,626 624 207 51 197 2,789 + 166 8.3 419         Mar. . . . . . 5,616
p 630 217 50 204 2,683 + 144 8.0 449
         Apr. . . . . . 5,597 p 644 206 50 212 2,603 + 129 7.8 457
         May . . . . . 5,585 p 643 166 50 215 2,561 + 176 7 7.6 439
         June . . . . . 5,575 p 641 168 50 209 2,560 + 180 7.6 421
         July . . . . . 5,590 p 640 145 50 193 2,636 + 191 7.8 398
         Aug. . . . . . ... ... 106 50 195 2,631 + 185 7.8 379         Sep. . . . . . ... ... 143 49 207 2,594 + 173 7.7 350
Eastern Germany  
  
1999 . . . . . 595 336 27 348 143 1,344 − 31 17.6 70
2000 . . . . . 612 305 24 246 140 1,359 + 16 17.4 622001 . . . . . 626 262 27 182 136 1,374 + 14 17.5 66
2001          Sep. . . . . . 635 265 24 175 130 1,321 + 19 16.9 68
         Oct. . . . . . 633 261
8 268 173 8 132 8 1,313 8 +4 4 8 16.8 8 63
         Nov. . . . . . 632 257 28 171 134 1,321 + 36 16.9 59
         Dec. . . . . . 628 247 29 161 130 1,380 + 24 17.6 55
2002          Jan. . . . . . 623 224 33 147 128 1,499 + 28 19.1 56
         Feb. . . . . . 622 215 39 141 129 1,507 + 17 19.2 68         Mar. . . . . . 621
p 216 41 137 131 1,473 + 13 18.8 78
         Apr. . . . . . 622 p 219 40 136 133 1,421 + 27 18.1 80
         May . . . . . 622 p 220 35 135 133 1,385 + 49 7 17.7 78
         June . . . . . 623 p 220 35 135 128 1,394 + 80 17.8 76
         July . . . . . 624 p 220 28 137 122 1,411 + 57 18.0 73
         Aug. . . . . . ... ... 38 141 125 1,387 + 45 17.7 79         Sep. . . . . . ... ... 74 150 130 1,347 + 26 17.2 70
Source: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Labour Office. —*Monthly fig- thereof; civil engineering ”.—5Employees involved in job creation schemes
ures: levels at end of month; employed persons and employees: averages; and structural adjustment measures (SAM). —6Relative to the total civilian
short-time workers: levels at mid-month; annual and quarterly figures: aver- labour force. —7From May 2002 calculated on the basis of new labour
ages. —1Work-place concept. —2Annual figures, calculated by the Bundes- force figures. —8From October 2001, change against previous periods
bank; deviations from the official figures are due to rounding. —3In- understated for western Germany and overstated for eastern Germany
cluding active proprietors. —4The figures refer to the economic classifica- owing to restructuring of labour exchange districts in Berlin. —oFirst pre-
tions ”Site preparation ”and ”Building of complete constructions or parts liminary estimate. 
64* IX. Economic conditions

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
 IX. Economic conditions
 
7. Prices
 Germany
 
 
Consumer price index for all households Indices of
foreign trade prices
By region By product group Index of
producer
Other prices of Index ofdurable Overall industrial Index of worldand non- Services con- products producer marketdurable excluding struction prices prices sold on the
Western Eastern consumer house House price domestic of farm of raw
Total Germany Germany Food goods rents  
1 rents level  1 market  2 Exports Imports products  2 materials  3 
Period 1995 = 100
Index level  
  
1998 104.3 104.1 105.3 103.0 101.9 106.1 108.0 98.8 99.5 95.6 101.4 100.7 97.0
1999 104.9 104.8 105.7 101.9 102.8 106.4 109.2 98.5 98.5 89.9 100.9 100.2 113.4
2000 106.9 106.9 107.5 101.5 106.1 108.0 110.6 99.2 101.8 95.4 104.4 111.4 172.2
2001 109.6 109.4 110.6 106.8 108.3 111.2 112.0 99.4 104.9 100.8 105.4 112.1 157.5
 
2000          Nov. 107.7 107.7 108.3 101.1 107.8 108.1 111.0 99.5 103.9 100.2 105.9 116.4 201.1         Dec. 107.8 107.7 108.3 101.8 107.5 108.4 111.1 103.6 98.8 105.5 113.8 165.2
2001          Jan. 108.3 108.2 109.1 103.5 107.3 109.8 111.4 104.4 96.2 105.3 112.9 158.9
         Feb. 109.0 108.9 109.8 103.9 108.1 111.0 111.5 99.5 104.7 98.5 105.4 113.6 167.4         Mar. 109.1 109.0 110.0 105.1 108.2 110.7 111.6 104.9 102.7 105.6 113.3 161.3
         Apr. 109.5 109.3 110.4 107.0 108.5 110.4 111.7 105.4 103.0 105.7 113.9 166.4
         May 110.0 109.8 111.1 109.0 109.2 110.3 111.8 99.5 105.6 103.7 106.0 115.0 175.4         June 110.2 110.0 111.2 109.3 109.0 111.2 111.9 105.7 100.3 106.0 114.7 176.0
         July 110.2 110.0 111.3 108.7 108.4 112.7 112.0 105.2 100.5 105.8 113.0 166.0
         Aug. 110.0 109.8 111.0 107.3 108.4 112.5 112.1 99.4 105.1 101.9 105.4 111.7 160.7         Sep. 110.0 109.8 111.0 107.1 108.9 111.7 112.2 105.2 102.6 105.3 111.1 157.2
         Oct. 109.7 109.5 110.7 107.2 108.2 111.2 112.3 104.3 100.9 105.0 109.3 138.9
         Nov. 109.5 109.3 110.5 106.6 107.9 111.1 112.4 99.3 104.0 100.5 104.9 108.7 131.9         Dec. 109.6 109.4 110.7 107.2 107.8 111.4 112.5 103.7 99.8 104.8 108.5 130.2
2002          Jan. 110.6 110.4 111.7 110.4 108.7 112.2 112.9 104.3 98.2 104.9 109.1 135.1
         Feb. 110.9 110.7 111.9 109.8 108.9 113.0 113.0 99.4 104.4 99.4 104.9 109.6 141.1         Mar. 111.1 110.9 112.0 109.6 109.4 113.0 113.2 104.7 99.7 105.2 110.5 157.5
         Apr. 111.2 111.0 112.1 109.5 109.8 112.6 113.3 104.6 96.0 105.4 110.7 162.9
         May 111.2 111.0 112.0 109.4 109.4 113.2 113.4 99.5 104.6 94.5 105.4 110.1 157.5         June 111.1 110.9 111.7 108.4 109.1 113.9 113.5 104.5
p 93.9 105.4 108.7 147.9
         July 111.3 111.2 111.9 107.7 108.9 115.2 113.6 104.2 p 93.8 105.3 108.2 147.0
         Aug. 111.2 111.1 111.7 106.8 108.9 115.0 113.7 99.5 104.1 ... 105.4 108.8 152.0         Sep. 111.1 111.0 111.8 106.6 109.3 114.2 113.7 ... ... ... ... 158.8
Change from previous year in %  
  
1998 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 1.1 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 1.9 + 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 4.9 − 0.1 − 3.2 −21.0
1999 + 0.6 + 0.7 + 0.4 − 1.1 + 0.9 + 0.3 + 1.1 − 0.3 − 1.0 − 6.0 − 0.5 − 0.5 + 16.9
2000 + 1.9 + 2.0 + 1.7 − 0.4 + 3.2 + 1.5 + 1.3 + 0.7 + 3.4 + 6.1 + 3.5 + 11.2 + 51.9
2001 + 2.5 + 2.3 + 2.9 + 5.2 + 2.1 + 3.0 + 1.3 + 0.2 + 3.0 + 5.7 + 1.0 + 0.6 − 8.5
 
2000          Nov. + 2.4 + 2.5 + 2.4 + 1.0 + 4.0 + 1.6 + 1.2 + 0.8 + 4.7 + 9.6 + 4.1 + 12.5 + 45.6         Dec. + 2.2 + 2.1 + 2.2 + 1.4 + 3.3 + 1.3 + 1.3 + 4.2 + 7.5 + 3.3 + 8.2 + 13.8
2001          Jan. + 2.4 + 2.4 + 2.5 + 2.2 + 2.7 + 2.7 + 1.3 + 4.6 + 5.7 + 2.8 + 6.5 + 8.2
         Feb. + 2.6 + 2.6 + 2.7 + 1.9 + 3.2 + 3.2 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 4.7 + 5.7 + 2.5 + 5.4 + 6.5         Mar. + 2.5 + 2.5 + 2.8 + 3.8 + 2.8 + 3.1 + 1.2 + 4.9 + 8.7 + 2.4 + 4.2 − 0.1
         Apr. + 2.9 + 2.8 + 3.2 + 5.0 + 3.4 + 2.5 + 1.2 + 5.0 + 9.1 + 2.0 + 5.1 + 11.0         May + 3.5 + 3.4 + 3.8 + 6.7 + 3.9 + 3.1 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 4.6 + 9.0 + 1.6 + 4.0 + 1.9         June + 3.1 + 3.0 + 3.4 + 6.9 + 2.9 + 3.1 + 1.2 + 4.3 + 3.9 + 1.6 + 3.6 + 3.4
         July + 2.6 + 2.5 + 3.2 + 6.8 + 2.2 + 3.0 + 1.2 + 3.1 + 3.4 + 1.1 + 1.7 − 1.0
         Aug. + 2.6 + 2.4 + 3.0 + 6.2 + 2.2 + 3.0 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 2.7 + 4.5 + 0.4 − 0.9 −10.3
         Sep. + 2.1 + 2.0 + 2.8 + 6.4 + 1.2 + 3.1 + 1.2 + 1.9 + 5.0 − 0.3 − 3.6 −20.4
         Oct. + 2.0 + 2.0 + 2.7 + 6.6 + 0.7 + 3.2 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 1.8 − 0.8 − 5.6 −29.9
         Nov. + 1.7 + 1.5 + 2.0 + 5.4 + 0.1 + 2.8 + 1.3 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.9 − 6.6 −34.4
         Dec. + 1.7 + 1.6 + 2.2 + 5.3 + 0.3 + 2.8 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 1.0 − 0.7 − 4.7 −21.2
2002          Jan. + 2.1 + 2.0 + 2.4 + 6.7 + 1.3 + 2.2 + 1.3 − 0.1 + 2.1 − 0.4 − 3.4 −15.0
         Feb. + 1.7 + 1.7 + 1.9 + 5.7 + 0.7 + 1.8 + 1.3 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.9 − 0.5 − 3.5 −15.7
         Mar. + 1.8 + 1.7 + 1.8 + 4.3 + 1.1 + 2.1 + 1.4 − 0.2 − 2.9 − 0.4 − 2.5 − 2.4
         Apr. + 1.6 + 1.6 + 1.5 + 2.3 + 1.2 + 2.0 + 1.4 − 0.8 − 6.8 − 0.3 − 2.8 − 2.1
         May + 1.1 + 1.1 + 0.8 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 2.6 + 1.4
+ 0.0 − 0.9 − 8.9 − 0.6 − 4.3 −10.2
         June + 0.8 + 0.8 + 0.4 − 0.8 + 0.1 + 2.4 + 1.4 − 1.1 p − 6.4 − 0.6 − 5.2 −16.0
         July + 1.0 + 1.1 + 0.5 − 0.9 + 0.5 + 2.2 + 1.4 − 1.0 p − 6.7 − 0.5 − 4.2 −11.4
         Aug. + 1.1 + 1.2 + 0.6 − 0.5 + 0.5 + 2.2 + 1.4 + 0.1 − 1.0 ...
+ 0.0 − 2.6 − 5.4
         Sep. + 1.0 + 1.1 + 0.7 − 0.5 + 0.4 + 2.2 + 1.3 ... ... ... ... + 1.0
Source: Federal Statistical Office; for index of world market prices: HWWA In- index of raw material prices, on a euro basis (until 1998, on a Deutsche
stitute. —1Calculated by the Bundesbank on the basis of figures provided Mark basis). 
by the Federal Statistical Office. —2Excluding value-added tax. —3HWWA
65* IX. Economic conditions

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
IX. Economic conditions
  
8. Households ’ income *
Germany
  
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999  5  billion
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries  1 salaries  2 Saving  6 ratio  7 benefits received  3 "Mass income"  4 Disposable income  5 
Change Change Change Change Change Change
from from from from from fromprevious previous previous previous previous previous
Period DM / 
 5 
year in % DM / 
 5 
year in % DM / 
 5 
year in % DM / 
 5 
year in % DM / 
 5 
year in % DM / 
 5 
year in % %
1991 1,355.4 . 941.4 . 426.2 . 1,367.6 . 1,917.5 . 250.1 . 13.0
1992 1,467.3 8.3 1,003.0 6.5 473.9 11.2 1,476.9 8.0 2,054.3 7.1 266.1 6.4 13.01993 1,505.9 2.6 1,032.7 3.0 511.2 7.9 1,543.9 4.5 2,120.6 3.2 261.3 −1.8 12.3
1994 1,528.1 1.5 1,029.3 −0.3 529.4 3.6 1,558.6 1.0 2,181.9 2.9 254.0 −2.8 11.6
1995 1,577.1 3.2 1,037.9 0.8 553.7 4.6 1,591.7 2.1 2,256.4 3.4 252.1 −0.7 11.2
1996 1,594.0 1.1 1,032.7 −0.5 595.7 7.6 1,628.3 2.3 2,307.5 2.3 249.5 −1.0 10.8
1997 1,591.3 −0.2 1,015.9 −1.6 609.6 2.3 1,625.5 −0.2 2,356.5 2.1 244.7 −1.9 10.4
1998 1,624.3 2.1 1,038.9 2.3 621.5 1.9 1,660.3 2.1 2,422.8 2.8 249.6 2.0 10.3
1999 855.4 3.0 549.3 3.4 328.6 3.4 877.8 3.4 1,281.6 3.5 125.1 −2.0 9.8
2000 885.5 3.5 572.8 4.3 339.5 3.3 912.3 3.9 1,320.4 3.0 129.5 3.5 9.8
2001 904.6 2.2 593.1 3.5 347.1 2.3 940.2 3.1 1,370.2 3.8 138.1 6.7 10.1
2000          3rd qtr 221.8 3.6 147.5 4.1 84.1 2.8 231.6 3.6 325.2 3.3 26.6 2.7 8.2
         4th qtr 249.6 3.2 158.8 4.2 86.1 3.3 244.9 3.9 339.1 1.1 29.0 −2.8 8.6
2001          1st qtr 208.6 3.2 137.0 3.9 87.1 2.0 224.0 3.1 340.0 3.8 45.8 4.6 13.5
         2nd qtr 217.2 2.5 140.2 4.1 86.0 2.4 226.1 3.5 342.3 4.2 32.6 8.6 9.5         3rd qtr 225.4 1.7 152.0 3.1 86.5 2.9 238.5 3.0 335.6 3.2 28.0 5.0 8.3         4th qtr 253.4 1.5 163.9 3.2 87.6 1.7 251.5 2.7 352.3 3.9 31.7 9.3 9.0
2002          1st qtr 211.0 1.2 138.2 0.9 89.5 2.8 227.7 1.6 344.2 1.2 47.8 4.4 13.9
         2nd qtr 218.9 0.8 140.5 0.3 88.3 2.7 228.8 1.2 343.3 0.3 32.9 0.8 9.6
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August 2002. — charges. —4Net wages and salaries plus monetary social benefits
*Households including non-profit institutions which serve households. — received. —5"Mass income" plus operating surplus, self-employed persons ’
1Residence concept. —2After deducting the wage tax payable on gross income, property income (net), other current transfers received, income of
wages and salaries and employees ’contributions to the social security non-profit organisations which serve households, less taxes (excluding wage
funds. —3Cash benefits from the social security funds, central, regional tax and consumption-related taxes) and other current transfers paid. Includ-
and local authorities and foreign countries, pension payments (net), social ing the increase in claims on company pension funds. —6Including the
security benefits from private insurance schemes, less social security increase in claims on company pension funds. —7Saving as a percentage of
contributions on social benefits, consumption-related taxes and public disposable income. 
  
  
9. Pay rates and actual earnings
Germany
    
Overall economy Producing sector (including construction)
Negotiated wage and salary level  1 Wages and salaries Negotiated wage and salary level  1 Wages and salaries
per employee per employee
on an hourly basis on a monthly basis on an hourly basis on a monthly basis (work-place concept)  2 (work-place concept)  3 
% from % from % from % from % from % from
previous previous previous previous previous previous
Period 1995=100 year 1995=100 year 1995=100 year 1995=100 year 1995=100 year 1995=100 year
1991 76.7 . 78.6 . 82.4 . 73.4 . 76.9 . 77.6 .
1992 85.8 12.0 87.3 11.0 91.0 10.4 82.9 12.9 85.9 11.7 88.4 13.91993 92.2 7.5 92.9 6.5 95.0 4.4 90.6 9.3 92.0 7.1 92.3 4.41994 95.3 3.4 95.6 2.9 96.9 2.0 94.3 4.1 94.8 3.0 96.1 4.1
1995 100.0 4.9 100.0 4.6 100.0 3.2 100.0 6.1 100.0 5.5 100.0 4.1
1996 102.6 2.6 102.4 2.4 101.4 1.4 103.8 3.8 102.9 2.9 102.9 2.91997 104.1 1.5 103.9 1.5 101.7 0.3 105.8 1.9 104.6 1.7 104.7 1.71998 106.2 2.0 105.8 1.8 102.7 1.0 107.7 1.8 106.4 1.7 106.4 1.61999 109.2 2.9 108.7 2.7 104.3 1.5 110.9 3.0 109.4 2.9 108.3 1.8
2000 111.4 2.0 110.8 2.0 106.0 1.7 113.1 2.0 111.6 2.0 111.2 2.7
2001 113.6 2.0 113.0 2.0 108.0 1.9 115.1 1.8 113.6 1.8 113.7 2.2
2000          3rd qtr 115.1 2.0 114.5 2.0 105.7 2.0 121.1 2.1 119.5 2.1 107.1 2.5
         4th qtr 125.9 2.1 125.3 2.1 117.9 1.7 125.2 2.3 123.5 2.3 120.6 2.5
2001          1st qtr 103.8 2.1 103.2 2.1 100.8 2.3 104.1 1.6 102.6 1.6 107.2 3.1
         2nd qtr 104.8 1.8 104.2 1.8 103.9 2.0 105.3 1.4 103.9 1.4 115.6 2.4         3rd qtr 117.3 2.0 116.7 1.9 107.5 1.6 123.5 2.0 121.9 2.0 109.2 2.0         4th qtr 128.6 2.1 127.9 2.1 120.0 1.8 127.7 2.0 125.9 2.0 122.6 1.7
2002          1st qtr 106.3 2.4 105.7 2.4 102.4 1.6 106.3 2.1 104.8 2.2 108.1 0.8
         2nd qtr 107.6 2.7 107.0 2.7 105.3 1.4 108.9 3.4 107.5 3.5 118.0 2.1
2002          Feb. 106.3 2.4 105.6 2.4 . . 106.2 2.0 104.7 2.0 105.3 1.6
         Mar. 106.4 2.5 105.9 2.5 . . 106.6 2.5 105.2 2.5 108.9 0.5
         Apr. 106.8 2.3 106.2 2.3 . . 106.8 2.4 105.4 2.4 113.1 2.3
         May 108.1 2.9 107.6 2.9 . . 110.5 4.4 109.1 4.4 118.7 0.8         June 107.9 2.8 107.3 2.8 . . 109.4 3.6 107.9 3.6 122.2 3.0
         July 144.1 2.2 143.3 2.1 . . 163.2 2.7 161.0 2.8 116.5 4.5
         Aug. 108.0 2.6 107.4 2.6 . . 109.3 3.2 107.8 3.2 . .
1Current data are normally revised upwards on account of additional supply, and excluding installation and building completion work. Calculated
reports. —2Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August by the Bundesbank on the basis of data from the Federal Statistical Office,
2002. —3Producing sector, excluding electricity, gas, steam and hot water using the old and new classifications of the economic sectors. 
66*IX. Economic conditions

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the European monetary union *
 
 
 5  million
2001 1 2002
Position 1999 2000 2001 1 4th qtr 1st qtr 2nd qtr May June July
Current account −18,261 −59,865 −2,282 + 10,704 + 11,117 −1,811 + 95 + 3,891 + 2,587 A.
1. Foreign trade
Exports (f.o.b.) incl. supplementary items 818,126 986,841 1,038,266 266,019 252,960 261,021 86,741 88,198 93,012
Imports (f.o.b.) incl. supplementary items 742,493 951,265 959,110 233,046 225,572 231,615 77,556 76,139 78,834
Balance + 75,633 + 35,576 + 79,162 + 32,976 + 27,389 + 29,407 + 9,186 + 12,059 + 14,178
2. Services
Receipts 244,523 279,546 318,666 81,041 71,674 80,769 28,002 26,982 29,657Expenditure 256,420 295,654 315,169 81,723 76,373 76,119 25,235 25,027 28,794
Balance −11,900 −16,108 + 3,494 − 682 −4,699 + 4,649 + 2,767 + 1,955 + 863
3. Factor income (balance) −35,682 −26,698 −36,781 −4,678 −8,936 −17,684 −6,405 −3,380 −9,290
4. Current transfers
Transfer payments from non-residents 64,819 67,249 74,749 15,468 30,750 14,337 5,064 4,568 5,795Transfer payments to non-residents 111,134 119,887 122,903 32,377 33,386 32,520 10,517 11,310 8,960
Balance −46,315 −52,635 −48,154 −16,909 −2,636 −18,182 −5,453 −6,742 −3,165
Balance of capital transfers + 12,861 + 9,679 + 8,532 + 1,063 + 3,073 + 3,462 + 1,079 + 1,081 + 534B.
C. + 10,933 + 93,427 −72,336 −35,754 −28,298 −33,146 + 4,887 −36,887 −11,188 Financial account (net capital exports: −)
1. Direct investment −118,132 + 17,619 −103,278 + 11,515 −16,820 −2,695 + 5,103 −15,541 −3,617
Investment outside the euro area −315,645 −382,370 −225,538 −33,025 −42,275 −36,737 −14,574 −15,599 −9,310
Foreign investment in the euro area + 197,510 + 399,992 + 122,266 + 44,543 + 25,454 + 34,042 + 19,677 + 58 + 5,693
2. Investment in securities −45,652 −111,538 + 36,439 − 443 −54,813 + 57,750 + 31,973 + 14,263 + 14,199
Investment outside the euro area −311,403 −412,782 −270,077 −87,654 −71,992 −41,958 −26,188 −7,234 −15,923
Equities −156,328 −288,479 −97,002 −24,383 −32,639 −14,417 −5,751 −5,698 −7,189
Bonds and notes −154,392 −102,742 −153,716 −51,632 −19,580 −19,566 −12,182 + 1,190 −3,000
Money market paper − 683 −21,564 −19,359 −11,639 −19,772 −7,975 −8,255 −2,726 −5,734
Foreign investment in the euro area + 265,748 + 301,247 + 306,513 + 87,211 + 17,179 + 99,708 + 58,161 + 21,497 + 30,121
Equities + 92,366 + 44,930 + 241,325 + 60,488 + 31,459 + 26,418 + 27,614 −3,494 + 2,976
Bonds and notes + 117,435 + 229,621 + 76,162 + 23,435 + 781 + 48,052 + 13,901 + 24,185 + 17,829Money market paper + 55,947 + 26,702 −10,971 + 3,288 −15,062 + 25,237 + 16,647 + 805 + 9,317
3. Financial derivatives + 4,469 −1,719 −20,646 −7,235 + 299 − 919 −1,913 −1,067 −6,969
4. Credit transactions and other
investment (balance) + 160,114 + 171,512 −2,684 −42,855 + 46,110 −94,212 −32,383 −31,038 −12,273
Eurosystem + 4,587 − 217 + 5,031 + 3,362 + 775 −4,069 − 562 + 1,193 + 3,108
Public authorities −9,707 −1,494 + 2,021 + 5,468 −8,133 − 902 −1,827 + 928 −1,610
Credit institutions + 179,187 + 158,298 + 8,679 −37,842 + 48,590 −75,287 −21,582 −45,222 + 7,257
long-term + 6,597 + 3,741 −21,630 −26,199 + 12,476 + 13,221 + 2,877 + 6,885 + 10,012
short-term + 172,598 + 154,556 + 30,315 −11,640 + 36,115 −88,508 −24,459 −52,107 −2,755
Enterprises and individuals −13,959 + 14,925 −18,418 −13,843 + 4,875 −13,954 −8,412 + 12,063 −21,028
5. Change in the monetary reserves of
    the eurosystem (Increase: −) + 10,128 + 17,559 + 17,824 + 3,261 −3,075 + 6,930 + 2,107 −3,504 −2,528
Balance of unclassifiable transactions −5,530 −43,244 + 66,086 + 23,987 + 14,106 + 31,495 −6,061 + 31,915 + 8,068 D.
*Source: European Central Bank. —1From January 2001, including   
Greece.  
67*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(Balances)
 
 
Current account Memo item:
Change in Capital trans-
the Bundes- fers and pur-
Change in bank ’s net chases / sales
Supple- external of intangible the monetary
Balance of mentary non- reserves at Balance of assets aton current Foreign trade Factor Current produced Financial transaction transaction unclassifiable
Period account  
1 items  4  5 Services  6 income transfers assets  7 account  7 values  8 values  8 trade  1  2  3 transactions
DM million
1989 + 107,346 + 134,576 −4,107 −15,210 + 26,872 −34,784 −2,064 −110,286 −5,405 + 10,409 + 18,997
1990  o + 79,475 + 105,382 −3,833 −19,664 + 32,859 −35,269 −4,975 −89,497 −11,611 + 26,608 −10,976
1991 −30,416 + 21,899 −2,804 −24,842 + 33,144 −57,812 −4,565 + 12,614 + 9,605 + 12,762 − 319
1992 −22,924 + 33,656 −1,426 −37,894 + 33,962 −51,222 −1,963 + 69,792 −52,888 + 7,983 −68,745
1993 −16,155 + 60,304 −3,038 −45,080 + 27,373 −55,714 −1,915 + 21,442 + 22,795 −26,167 + 35,766
1994 −38,805 + 71,762 −1,104 −54,374 + 4,852 −59,940 −2,637 + 57,871 + 2,846 −19,276 −12,242
1995 −29,671 + 85,303 −4,722 −54,720 + 178 −55,710 −3,845 + 63,647 −10,355 −19,776 −17,754
1996 −11,959 + 98,538 −5,264 −55,330 + 1,391 −51,294 −3,283 + 23,613 + 1,882 −10,253 + 1,610
1997 − 4,727 + 116,467 −7,360 −58,715 − 2,376 −52,742 + 52 − 76 + 6,640 − 1,889 + 8,468
1998 −10,905 + 126,970 −5,934 −65,301 −13,337 −53,304 + 1,289 + 17,042 −7,128 − 298 −8,231
1999 −34,991 + 127,542 −13,643 −81,088 −17,535 −50,266 − 301 −51,015 + 24,517 + 61,790 −72,364
2000 −44,225 + 115,645 −13,390 −86,887 − 6,503 −53,089 + 13,351 + 67,177 + 11,429 −47,731 + 94,329
2001 + 5,185 + 184,229 −9,559 −92,650 −24,660 −52,174 −1,892 −57,230 + 11,797 + 42,140 + 63,911
2001          3rd qtr + 1,784 + 49,379 −2,743 −26,219 − 6,864 −11,769 − 871 −11,419 −4,233 + 14,740 −26,131
         4th qtr + 13,884 + 49,490 −1,085 −17,990 − 2,481 −14,049 − 932 −56,304 + 4,078 + 39,273 + 71,755
2001          Nov. + 3,013 + 14,350 − 556 − 5,499 + 104 − 5,386 − 353 −32,124 + 399 + 29,065 + 13,417
         Dec. + 2,707 + 16,297 − 337 − 4,961 − 5,092 − 3,201 − 305 −22,446 + 5,636 + 14,409 + 60,895
 5 
 million
1999 −17,891 + 65,211 −6,976 −41,460 − 8,966 −25,701 − 154 −26,084 + 12,535 + 31,593 −36,999
2000 −22,612 + 59,128 −6,846 −44,425 − 3,325 −27,144 + 6,826 + 34,347 + 5,844 −24,405 + 48,230
2001 + 2,651 + 94,195 −4,887 −47,371 −12,609 −26,676 − 967 −29,261 + 6,032 + 21,546 + 32,677
2000          1st qtr − 1,231 + 16,372 −1,368 −10,011 − 788 − 5,436 + 160 + 38,650 − 751 −36,828 + 32,016
         2nd qtr − 2,845 + 16,406 −1,272 −11,559 + 121 − 6,542 − 330 + 28,540 + 2,388 −27,753 −23,447
         3rd qtr −11,690 + 13,116 −1,745 −12,778 − 3,122 − 7,161 + 7,412 −14,904 + 2,155 + 17,026 + 22,523
         4th qtr − 6,846 + 13,234 −2,462 −10,077 + 464 − 8,005 − 416 −17,939 + 2,052 + 23,150 + 17,137
2001          1st qtr − 984 + 22,052 −1,413 −12,613 − 3,523 − 5,487 + 552 + 10 + 4,072 − 3,650 −11,749
         2nd qtr − 4,376 + 21,592 −1,517 −12,154 − 4,307 − 7,988 − 597 + 5,355 + 2,039 − 2,421 + 21,099
         3rd qtr + 912 + 25,247 −1,402 −13,406 − 3,510 − 6,017 − 446 −5,838 −2,165 + 7,536 −13,360
         4th qtr + 7,099 + 25,304 − 555 − 9,198 − 1,269 − 7,183 − 476 −28,788 + 2,085 + 20,080 + 36,688
2002          1st qtr + 10,533 + 31,822 −1,265 −10,589 − 4,410 − 5,025 + 160 −24,494 −1,352 + 15,153 −18,496
         2nd qtr + 11,872 + 29,897 − 970 − 7,750 − 1,138 − 8,166 − 67 −31,582 + 2,432 + 17,345 + 1,694
2000          May − 2,394 + 4,503 − 558 − 3,952 − 691 − 1,696 − 22 + 21,552 + 171 −19,307 + 2,657
         June + 294 + 6,607 − 308 − 4,273 + 573 − 2,306 − 502 + 3,454 + 863 − 4,109 −16,802
         July − 2,795 + 5,943 − 422 − 3,251 − 2,018 − 3,046 + 105 + 2,542 + 1,180 − 1,031 + 23,600
         Aug. − 5,727 + 2,920 − 808 − 4,870 − 349 − 2,620 + 7,766 −11,981 + 345 + 9,597 + 11,758
         Sep. − 3,167 + 4,254 − 515 − 4,657 − 755 − 1,494 − 458 −5,465 + 630 + 8,461 −12,834
         Oct. − 1,121 + 6,794 − 955 − 4,531 + 556 − 2,985 − 125 −4,453 + 538 + 5,162 + 19,591
         Nov. − 2,589 + 4,765 − 395 − 3,112 − 990 − 2,857 − 143 −4,991 + 466 + 7,256 + 5,015
         Dec. − 3,136 + 1,675 −1,111 − 2,435 + 898 − 2,164 − 149 −8,495 + 1,047 + 10,733 −7,468
2001          Jan. − 5,671 + 5,497 − 565 − 4,749 − 5,357 − 497 + 515 −6,239 + 1,400 + 9,995 −5,988
         Feb. + 1,203 + 7,059 − 522 − 2,793 − 295 − 2,246 + 119 −2,756 + 1,180 + 254 −3,873
         Mar. + 3,484 + 9,496 − 326 − 5,071 + 2,129 − 2,744 − 83 + 9,006 + 1,492 −13,899 −1,888
         Apr. + 1,090 + 6,041 − 647 − 2,938 + 868 − 2,235 − 149 + 773 + 1,205 − 2,919 + 9,404
         May − 448 + 8,054 − 465 − 4,060 − 1,320 − 2,657 − 732 + 19,583 + 508 −18,911 − 53
         June − 5,018 + 7,496 − 405 − 5,156 − 3,856 − 3,097 + 284 −15,001 + 326 + 19,408 + 11,749
         July − 2,689 + 9,369 − 394 − 4,950 − 4,115 − 2,599 − 226 + 1,826 − 151 + 1,240 −10,589
         Aug. + 3,060 + 8,826 − 584 − 4,803 + 1,085 − 1,465 − 172 + 3,583 + 460 − 6,931 −4,247
         Sep. + 541 + 7,051 − 424 − 3,653 − 480 − 1,953 − 47 −11,248 −2,474 + 13,227 + 1,476
         Oct. + 4,175 + 9,634 − 98 − 3,850 + 1,282 − 2,793 − 140 − 886 −1,001 − 2,148 −1,307
         Nov. + 1,540 + 7,337 − 284 − 2,811 + 53 − 2,754 − 180 −16,425 + 204 + 14,861 + 6,860
         Dec. + 1,384 + 8,333 − 172 − 2,536 − 2,603 − 1,637 − 156 −11,477 + 2,882 + 7,367 + 31,135
2002          Jan. + 510 + 10,076 − 448 − 4,081 − 5,761 + 724 + 477 − 198 −1,747 + 958 −17,916
         Feb. + 3,009 + 10,008 − 387 − 3,237 − 360 − 3,015 − 155 −15,109 + 67 + 12,187 + 1,535
         Mar. + 7,013 + 11,738 − 431 − 3,271 + 1,711 − 2,734 − 162 −9,188 + 328 + 2,008 −2,116
         Apr. + 3,964 + 9,390 − 360 − 2,654 + 380 − 2,792 − 147 −2,389 + 1,657 − 3,086 −9,839
         May + 3,894 + 9,742 − 405 − 2,267 − 815 − 2,360 + 50 −4,526 + 1,379 − 796 + 3,826
         June + 4,015 + 10,765 − 204 − 2,829 − 703 − 3,014 + 30 −24,668 − 603 + 21,227 + 7,707
         July + 163 + 11,872 − 564 − 4,642 − 4,753 − 1,749 − 203 −12,392 − 548 + 12,980 −15,567
         Aug.  p + 4,503 + 10,509 − 390 − 3,674 − 447 − 1,494 + 89 −9,591 + 886 + 4,112 −5,579
oFrom July 1990 including the external transactions of the former GDR. — included up to December 1992 in Supplementary trade items. —4Mainly
1From the beginning of 1993 figures subject to significant uncertainty warehouse transactions for account of residents and deduction of goods
owing to changes in the method of data collection in foreign trade. — returned. —5See footnote 3. —6Excluding the expenditure on freight and
2Special trade according to the official foreign trade statistics: imports c.i.f., insurance included in the c.i.f. import value. —7Capital exports: −.—
exports f.o.b. —3From January 1993 including additional estimates for 8 Increase: −. 
external transactions which do not have to be reported and which are
68*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
by group of countries and country *
 
  5  million
2002
Group of countries / Country 1999 2000 2001 1 Jan. / July April May June July August  p 
All countries  2 Exports 510,008 597,440 637,333 373,177 55,652 50,245 56,440 54,839 52,151
Imports 444,797 538,311 543,138 299,586 46,261 40,503 45,675 42,967 41,642Balance + 65,211 + 59,128 + 94,195 + 73,591 + 9,390 + 9,742 + 10,765 + 11,872 + 10,509
I. Exports 396,139 460,422 481,342 279,697 41,794 37,216 42,157 40,710 ...Industrialised
Imports 332,947 389,927 390,555 214,181 32,962 28,952 33,359 30,500 ... countries
Balance + 63,192 + 70,495 + 90,786 + 65,516 + 8,832 + 8,264 + 8,798 + 10,210 ...
Exports 293,377 337,375 351,495 205,396 30,883 27,110 31,385 29,518 ... 1. EU member countries
Imports 239,652 273,951 278,261 154,268 23,215 20,578 24,252 22,196 ...
Balance + 53,725 + 63,424 + 73,234 + 51,128 + 7,668 + 6,532 + 7,133 + 7,321 ...
of  which
Exports 229,837 264,870 274,975 160,809 24,391 21,287 24,711 23,230 ... EMU member
Imports 193,146 217,946 223,339 125,020 18,830 16,428 19,576 18,331 ... countries
Balance + 36,691 + 46,924 + 51,636 + 35,789 + 5,561 + 4,859 + 5,135 + 4,900 ...
of which
Austria Exports 28,295 32,436 33,225 18,986 3,014 2,563 2,823 2,730 ...
Imports 18,288 20,497 20,366 12,150 1,817 1,682 1,903 1,863 ...Balance + 10,007 + 11,939 + 12,859 + 6,836 + 1,197 + 880 + 919 + 866 ...
Belgium and Exports 28,821 32,728 34,316 19,943 3,086 2,654 2,972 2,772 ...Luxemburg Imports 22,880 26,230 28,793 16,812 2,492 2,109 2,804 2,555 ...
Balance + 5,942 + 6,499 + 5,523 + 3,131 + 594 + 545 + 168 + 218 ...
France Exports 58,578 67,418 69,918 41,003 6,352 5,218 6,116 5,797 ...
Imports 45,559 50,862 49,944 28,697 4,318 3,743 4,286 4,032 ...Balance + 13,019 + 16,556 + 19,974 + 12,306 + 2,034 + 1,475 + 1,830 + 1,765 ...
Italy Exports 38,335 45,011 47,300 28,003 4,109 3,639 4,527 4,182 ...
Imports 33,107 35,776 35,238 19,712 2,904 2,608 3,121 3,076 ...Balance + 5,229 + 9,235 + 12,062 + 8,292 + 1,205 + 1,031 + 1,406 + 1,105 ...
Netherlands Exports 34,355 38,993 39,933 22,643 3,439 3,020 3,493 3,228 ...
Imports 36,089 44,739 44,300 24,278 3,677 3,277 3,716 3,390 ...Balance − 1,734 − 5,745 − 4,367 − 1,635 − 237 − 258 − 223 − 162 ...
Spain Exports 22,684 26,732 28,065 17,237 2,512 2,404 2,826 2,676 ...
Imports 14,666 16,087 15,069 9,312 1,339 1,208 1,435 1,414 ...Balance + 8,018 + 10,645 + 12,996 + 7,925 + 1,173 + 1,195 + 1,391 + 1,262 ...
Sweden Exports 11,657 13,524 12,925 7,493 1,152 1,025 1,136 935 ...
Imports 8,305 10,202 8,847 5,104 816 624 865 739 ...Balance + 3,352 + 3,322 + 4,078 + 2,389 + 336 + 401 + 271 + 196 ...
United Exports 43,124 49,377 53,065 30,941 4,480 3,976 4,538 4,504 ...Kingdom Imports 30,757 36,923 37,005 19,323 2,812 2,871 3,099 2,503 ...
Balance + 12,367 + 12,453 + 16,060 + 11,619 + 1,668 + 1,105 + 1,438 + 2,002 ...
Exports 33,895 39,944 40,162 23,135 3,332 3,158 3,485 3,389 ... 2. Other European
Imports 30,644 36,800 39,104 22,314 3,486 3,189 3,330 3,228 ... industrial countries  
3 
Balance + 3,251 + 3,144 + 1,058 + 821 − 155 − 31 + 154 + 161 ...
of which
Switzerland Exports 22,808 25,596 27,611 15,310 2,268 2,055 2,289 2,173 ...
Imports 17,070 18,797 19,793 11,287 1,682 1,590 1,684 1,651 ...
Balance + 5,738 + 6,799 + 7,818 + 4,023 + 586 + 465 + 605 + 522 ...
Exports 68,867 83,103 89,684 51,167 7,579 6,948 7,288 7,804 ... 3. Non-European
Imports 62,651 79,176 73,191 37,599 6,261 5,184 5,776 5,075 ... industrial countries
Balance + 6,216 + 3,926 + 16,494 + 13,567 + 1,318 + 1,763 + 1,511 + 2,728 ...
of which
Japan Exports 10,367 13,195 13,073 6,923 1,005 945 1,067 1,064 ...
Imports 21,779 26,847 22,599 11,040 1,720 1,528 1,641 1,605 ...
Balance −11,412 −13,651 − 9,527 − 4,117 − 715 − 583 − 574 − 540 ...
Exports 51,425 61,764 67,307 38,478 5,731 5,142 5,419 5,736 ... United States
Imports 36,790 47,121 45,454 23,635 3,922 3,288 3,667 3,045 ...Balance + 14,635 + 14,643 + 21,853 + 14,843 + 1,809 + 1,854 + 1,752 + 2,691 ...
II. Exports 56,717 70,318 83,210 51,105 7,526 7,216 7,935 7,752 ...Countries in transition
Imports 62,533 82,900 89,844 52,563 8,156 7,171 7,580 7,825 ...Balance − 5,816 −12,582 − 6,634 − 1,458 − 630 + 44 + 355 − 73 ...
of which
Central and east Exports 49,020 59,900 69,934 42,466 6,222 6,109 6,609 6,375 ...European countries Imports 47,723 62,781 68,420 40,486 6,352 5,600 5,956 6,061 ...in transition Balance + 1,297 − 2,882 + 1,513 + 1,980 − 130 + 509 + 653 + 314 ...
People ‘s Republic Exports 6,949 9,459 12,064 7,846 1,210 998 1,195 1,264 ...
of China  
4 Imports 13,795 18,553 19,740 11,236 1,700 1,489 1,517 1,605 ...Balance − 6,846 − 9,094 − 7,676 − 3,390 − 490 − 491 − 323 − 341 ...
III. Exports 55,987 65,023 71,225 41,450 6,186 5,669 6,230 6,241 ...Developing countries
Imports 48,779 64,742 60,605 32,479 5,086 4,328 4,682 4,591 ...Balance + 7,208 + 282 + 10,620 + 8,971 + 1,099 + 1,341 + 1,548 + 1,650 ...
of which
Newly industrial- Exports 18,775 24,029 24,527 14,408 2,202 2,063 2,220 2,164 ...ising countries in Imports 22,586 30,498 27,784 14,925 2,321 2,102 2,036 2,064 ...south-east Asia  
5 Balance − 3,811 − 6,469 − 3,257 − 517 − 119 − 39 + 184 + 100 ...
OPEC-countries Exports 9,135 10,756 13,687 8,425 1,371 1,125 1,238 1,222 ...
Imports 6,425 10,244 8,219 3,822 644 429 613 616 ...Balance + 2,710 + 512 + 5,468 + 4,602 + 727 + 695 + 625 + 605 ...
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (f.o.b.) by country of destination, countries. —2Including fuel and other supplies for ships and aircraft and
imports (c.i.f.) by country of origin. Inclusion of individual countries in other data not classifiable by region. —3Including Cyprus. —4Excluding
groups of countries according to the current position. —1The import Hong Kong. —5Brunei Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia,
figures on "All countries" include revisions from January until November Philippines, Singapore, Republic of Korea, Taiwan and Thailand. 
2001 which have not yet been broken down by region for Non-EU
69*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
4. Services and factor income of the Federal Republic of Germany
(Balances)
 
Until the end of 1998 DM million, from 1999  5  million
Services
other services
of which
 
Patents Compen- Services  of Construction
Trans- Financial and sation of Investment Government selfemployed and  assembly
Period Total Travel  1 services licences Total income portation  2 transactions  3 persons  4 work,  repairs employees  5 
1997 −58,715 −52,718 + 5,723 + 2,315 −4,341 + 6,616 −16,310 −2,403 −1,669 −1,698 − 678
1998 −65,301 −53,704 + 5,449 + 3,011 −4,044 + 5,462 −21,474 −2,586 −2,484 −1,584 −11,753
1999 −41,460 −30,645 + 2,881 + 1,018 −1,896 + 1,973 −14,792 −2,245 − 409 − 836 −8,130
2000 −44,425 −31,574 + 3,379 + 959 −2,924 + 2,177 −16,443 −2,725 − 912 − 885 −2,440
2001 −47,371 −32,377 + 4,139 + 439 −2,335 + 3,301 −20,539 −2,576 −1,293 −1,471 −11,138
2000          4th qtr −10,077 − 6,372 + 980 + 307 −1,089 + 596 −4,500 − 747 − 426 − 186 + 651
2001          1st qtr −12,613 − 6,738 + 828 − 106 − 654 + 761 −6,704 − 646 − 593 − 39 −3,484
         2nd qtr −12,154 − 8,656 + 1,153 + 208 − 532 + 804 −5,132 − 625 − 213 − 408 −3,900
         3rd qtr −13,406 −10,723 + 1,182 + 175 − 579 + 803 −4,265 − 640 − 142 − 685 −2,825
         4th qtr − 9,198 − 6,261 + 976 + 161 − 571 + 933 −4,437 − 665 − 346 − 340 − 929
2002          1st qtr −10,589 − 5,974 + 764 − 60 − 300 + 992 −6,011 − 536 − 468 − 22 −4,388
         2nd qtr − 7,750 − 7,664 + 1,192 + 70 − 578 + 1,131 −1,901 − 515 − 253 − 347 − 791
2001          Oct. − 3,850 − 2,978 + 299 − 6 − 264 + 315 −1,215 − 213 − 111 − 121 + 1,402
         Nov. − 2,811 − 1,687 + 157 + 26 − 278 + 297 −1,326 − 219 + 31 − 117 + 170
         Dec. − 2,536 − 1,596 + 521 + 142 − 28 + 321 −1,896 − 233 − 266 − 101 −2,502
2002          Jan. − 4,081 − 2,206 + 181 + 24 − 102 + 368 −2,345 − 210 − 185 + 9 −5,770
         Feb. − 3,237 − 1,704 + 252 − 78 − 91 + 309 −1,925 − 174 − 174 − 11 − 350
         Mar. − 3,271 − 2,064 + 331 − 6 − 107 + 315 −1,741 − 152 − 109 − 20 + 1,731
         Apr. − 2,654 − 2,523 + 425 + 64 − 197 + 441 − 865 − 193 − 95 − 103 + 483
         May − 2,267 − 2,584 + 186 + 26 − 28 + 362 − 230 − 164 − 44 − 118 − 697
         June − 2,829 − 2,558 + 580 − 20 − 354 + 328 − 805 − 158 − 114 − 126 − 577
         July − 4,642 − 3,323 + 295 + 76 − 429 + 380 −1,642 − 205 − 15 − 209 −4,544
         Aug. − 3,674 − 3,717 + 220 + 19 + 96 + 851 −1,145 − 173 + 114 − 204 − 243
1From January 2002 figures subject to significant uncertainty. —2Ex- vices supplied. —4Engineering and other technical services, research and
cluding the expenditure on freight included in the c.i.f. import value. — development, commercial services etc. — 5 Wages and salaries. 
3Including the receipts from foreign military agencies for goods and ser-
5. Current transfers of the Federal Republic of Germany 6. Capital transfers
(Balances) (Balances)
Until the end of 1998 DM million, from 1999  5  million DM million /  5  million
Public  1 Private  1 
International
Organisations  2 
 
of which other Remittances otherEuropean current by foreign current
Period Total Total Total Communities Total workers transfers Total  
4 Public  1 Private  1 transfers  3 
1997 −52,742 −36,812 −31,509 −28,502 −5,302 −15,930 −7,519 −8,411 + 52 −2,821 + 2,873
1998 −53,304 −37,317 −33,077 −30,382 −4,240 −15,987 −6,936 −9,051 + 1,289 −2,441 + 3,730
1999 −25,701 −17,404 −15,428 −13,846 −1,976 −8,296 −3,429 −4,867 − 154 −1,351 + 1,197
2000 −27,144 −19,045 −17,100 −15,398 −1,944 −8,100 −3,458 −4,642 −1,596 −1,186 − 410
2001 −26,676 −17,024 −14,482 −12,812 −2,542 −9,653 −3,520 −6,132 − 967 −1,355 + 387
2000          4th qtr −8,005 −5,990 −5,151 −4,687 − 838 −2,016 − 864 −1,151 − 416 − 374 − 43
2001          1st qtr −5,487 −2,898 −2,112 −1,598 − 786 −2,589 − 880 −1,709 + 552 − 323 + 875
         2nd qtr −7,988 −5,144 −5,346 −4,927 + 202 −2,845 − 880 −1,964 − 597 − 252 − 345
         3rd qtr −6,017 −3,956 −3,027 −2,467 − 929 −2,062 − 880 −1,182 − 446 − 327 − 118
         4th qtr −7,183 −5,026 −3,997 −3,820 −1,029 −2,157 − 880 −1,277 − 476 − 452 − 24
2002          1st qtr −5,025 −2,357 −1,256 − 832 −1,101 −2,668 − 868 −1,801 + 160 − 229 + 389
         2nd qtr −8,166 −5,239 −5,254 −4,997 + 15 −2,928 − 868 −2,060 − 67 − 277 + 210
2001          Oct. −2,793 −2,077 −1,663 −1,576 − 414 − 716 − 293 − 423 − 140 − 98 − 42
         Nov. −2,754 −2,078 −1,674 −1,628 − 404 − 675 − 293 − 382 − 180 − 156 − 25
         Dec. −1,637 − 871 − 660 − 616 − 211 − 766 − 293 − 473 − 156 − 198 + 42
2002          Jan. + 724 + 1,530 + 1,921 + 2,129 − 391 − 806 − 289 − 517 + 477 − 74 + 551
         Feb. −3,015 −2,005 −1,575 −1,391 − 430 −1,010 − 289 − 721 − 155 − 75 − 80
         Mar. −2,734 −1,882 −1,602 −1,570 − 279 − 852 − 289 − 563 − 162 − 80 − 82
         Apr. −2,792 −2,055 −1,889 −1,788 − 165 − 737 − 289 − 448 − 147 − 89 − 58
         May −2,360 −1,489 −1,697 −1,633 + 208 − 872 − 289 − 582 + 50 − 98 + 148
         June −3,014 −1,695 −1,667 −1,576 − 28 −1,319 − 289 −1,030 + 30 − 91 + 121
         July −1,749 −1,079 − 842 − 637 − 237 − 670 − 289 − 381 − 203 − 168 − 35
         Aug. −1,494 − 780 − 415 − 289 − 365 − 715 − 289 − 425 + 89 − 95 + 183
1The classification of "public" and "private" transfers depends on which (excluding capital transfers). —3Payments to developing countries, pension
sector the participating domestic body belongs to. —2Current contri- payments, tax revenue and refunds, etc. —4Where identifiable; in
butions to the budgets of international organisations and to the EU budget particular, debt forgiveness. 
70*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
7. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
 
 
 5  million
2001 2002
Item 1999 2000 2001 3rd qtr 4th qtr 1st qtr 2nd qtr June July Aug.
I. Net German investment abroad
(Increase/capital exports: −) −347,069 −353,152 −265,061 −51,022 −19,776 −66,243 −79,998 + 757 −40,656 −12,388
1. Direct investment  1 −102,729 −54,045 −48,340 + 3,124 − 6,162 − 2,660 − 1,561 − 9,437 −10,165 + 2,273
Equity capital −85,021 −49,616 −59,377 −13,946 − 7,229 − 9,186 −20,489 −10,328 − 4,669 − 2,085
Reinvested earnings  2 − 4,400 − 2,300 −−−−−−−−
Credit transactions of
German direct investors − 6,524 + 3,627 + 15,986 + 18,475 + 2,336 + 7,711 + 20,537 + 1,521 − 4,637 + 4,790
Other capital − 6,784 − 5,756 − 4,949 − 1,404 − 1,269 − 1,185 − 1,609 − 630 − 858 − 432
2. Portfolio investment −177,440 −208,511 −128,670 − 4,522 −31,829 −34,788 −20,224 − 1,226 −13,697 + 1,541
Equities  3 −68,048 −104,809 −15,824 + 6,736 − 2,797 − 7,309 + 1,329 + 1,811 − 1,773 + 2,296
Investment fund certificates  4 −14,057 −32,529 −19,126 − 3,900 − 4,474 − 7,409 − 2,963 + 287 − 1,519 − 1,173
Bonds and notes  5 −94,658 −72,758 −94,691 − 6,641 −27,512 −15,793 −17,555 − 2,777 − 8,624 + 1,185
Money market instruments − 677 + 1,585 + 970 − 716 + 2,954 − 4,277 − 1,035 − 547 − 1,781 − 767
3. Financial derivatives  6 − 1,749 − 4,211 + 6,703 − 4,102 − 807 + 1,504 + 1,263 + 721 − 4,527 − 1,741
4. Credit transactions −62,826 −84,203 −93,368 −44,956 + 19,353 −29,871 −59,052 + 10,741 −12,113 −14,298
Credit institutions  7 −42,443 −101,513 −130,654 −35,892 −14,149 − 305 −54,111 − 8,350 + 4,805 −13,120
Long-term −42,717 −40,136 −47,642 −11,755 −16,201 − 9,717 − 8,329 − 2,398 − 1,561 − 5,093
Short-term + 274 −61,378 −83,012 −24,136 + 2,051 + 9,413 −45,782 − 5,952 + 6,367 − 8,027
Enterprises and individuals + 19,503 − 4,742 − 2,705 + 4,108 + 6,465 −14,305 − 4,873 + 11,609 − 660 − 806
Long-term − 2,057 + 465 − 1,698 − 5− 1,161 − 124 − 351 + 21 − 29− 108
Short-term  7 + 21,560 − 5,207 − 1,007 + 4,113 + 7,626 −14,180 − 4,522 + 11,589 − 631 − 698
General government + 7,658 −19,920 + 15,977 + 379 − 7,537 + 3,164 + 123 + 88 − 339 + 5,374
Long-term − 376 − 1,079 + 254 − 88 + 5 + 114 + 151 − 10 + 71 + 90
Short-term  7 + 8,034 −18,841 + 15,723 + 467 − 7,542 + 3,050 − 27 + 98 − 410 + 5,284
Bundesbank −47,544 + 41,972 + 24,015 −13,551 + 34,575 −18,425 − 191 + 7,394 −15,919 − 5,747
5. Other investment  8 − 2,324 − 2,183 − 1,385 − 566 − 330 − 428 − 424 − 42− 155 − 162
II. Net foreign investment in Germany
(Increase/capital imports: +) + 320,985 + 387,499 + 235,799 + 45,183 − 9,012 + 41,749 + 48,415 −25,425 + 28,264 + 2,797
1. Direct investment  1 + 51,392 + 211,786 + 35,574 + 15,124 + 10,392 + 12,810 + 14,923 − 4,077 − 146 − 612
Equity capital + 24,754 + 114,495 + 31,916 − 1,839 + 5,586 + 13,033 + 10,950 + 5,760 + 24 + 1,137
Reinvested earnings  2 − 5,400 − 3,600 − 3,600 − 900 − 900 − 900 − 900 − 300 − 300 − 300
Credit transactions offoreign direct investors + 32,286 + 101,226 + 7,403 + 17,889 + 5,757 + 704 + 4,904 − 9,513 + 144 − 1,444
Other capital − 249 − 335 − 145 − 26− 51− 28− 31− 24− 14− 5
2. Portfolio investment + 166,624 + 49,104 + 129,732 + 35,441 + 20,389 + 13,464 + 29,810 + 19,728 + 21,490 + 2,303
Equities  
3 + 21,942 −34,469 + 88,882 + 15,600 + 434 + 6,014 + 10,275 + 8,092 + 524 − 868
Investment fund certificates + 5,761 + 10,938 + 1,121 − 486 + 4,171 + 1,074 − 1,002 − 1,090 + 256 + 1,265
Bonds and notes  5 + 97,615 + 69,159 + 54,878 + 18,018 + 17,729 + 22,509 + 18,565 + 11,154 + 14,757 − 600
Money market instruments + 41,306 + 3,475 −15,149 + 2,309 − 1,945 −16,133 + 1,971 + 1,573 + 5,954 + 2,506
3. Credit transactions + 103,075 + 126,564 + 70,462 − 5,381 −39,792 + 15,452 + 3,637 −41,076 + 6,878 + 1,101
Credit institutions  7 + 95,394 + 115,294 + 54,316 − 7,688 −44,403 + 13,852 + 5,533 −41,759 + 6,343 + 3,459
Long-term + 35,241 + 15,665 + 4,394 + 6,824 −11,433 + 4,285 + 5,127 + 563 + 767 + 6,079
Short-term + 60,153 + 99,629 + 49,922 −14,512 −32,970 + 9,567 + 406 −42,322 + 5,576 − 2,619
Enterprises and individuals + 20,926 + 10,101 + 13,063 − 297 + 2,700 + 3,710 − 3,551 − 1,206 − 533 − 615
Long-term + 3,836 + 4,400 + 9,027 + 1,865 + 469 + 1,151 − 551 − 448 + 122 + 63
Short-term  7 + 17,090 + 5,701 + 4,036 − 2,162 + 2,231 + 2,559 − 3,000 − 758 − 656 − 678
General Government −11,255 + 756 + 452 + 249 + 1,883 − 3,391 + 2,203 + 972 + 169 − 1,025
Long-term − 8,306 − 142 − 602 − 100 + 152 − 318 − 150 + 61 − 55 + 808
Short-term  7 − 2,949 + 898 + 1,054 + 349 + 1,731 − 3,072 + 2,353 + 911 + 224 − 1,834
Bundesbank − 1,991 + 414 + 2,631 + 2,355 + 28 + 1,281 − 548 + 917 + 900 − 719
4. Other investment − 106 + 45 + 32 − 0− 2 + 23 + 46 − 1+ 4 1+ 5
III. Balance of all statistically
recorded financial movements(Net capital exports: −) −26,084 + 34,347 −29,261 − 5,838 −28,788 −24,494 −31,582 −24,668 −12,392 − 9,591
1From 1996, new definition for direct investment. —2Estimated. — action values shown here are mostly derived from changes in stocks. As far
3Including participation rights. —4From 1991 including accumulated as possible, purely statistical changes have been eliminated. —8In
earnings. —5From 1975 excluding accrued interest. —6Options, whether particular, subscriptions of the Federal Government to International
or not evidenced by securities, and financial futures contracts. —7The trans- Organisations. 
71*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
8. External position of the Bundesbank *
 
 
DM million
Monetary reserves and other claims on non-residents Liabilities to non-residents
Monetary reserves
Reserve
positionin theInter- Liabilitiesnational arising Net Liabilities
Monetary arising from externalFund and Claims Loans and from liquidity position
Foreign special on the external Treasury (col. 1 other claims
End of year currency drawing ECB  
2 on non- trans- discount less
or month Total Total Gold rights (net) Total paper col. 8) balances  1 residents  3 actions  4 
1234567891 0 1 1
1989 99,959 97,527 13,688 58,308 8,229 17,303 2,432 51,642 51,642 − 48,317
1990 106,446 104,023 13,688 64,517 7,373 18,445 2,423 52,259 52,259 − 54,188
1991 97,345 94,754 13,688 55,424 8,314 17,329 2,592 42,335 42,335 − 55,010
1992 143,959 141,351 13,688 85,845 8,199 33,619 2,608 26,506 26,506 − 117,453
1993 122,763 120,143 13,688 61,784 8,496 36,176 2,620 39,541 23,179 16,362 83,222
1994 115,965 113,605 13,688 60,209 7,967 31,742 2,360 24,192 19,581 4,611 91,774
1995 123,261 121,307 13,688 68,484 10,337 28,798 1,954 16,390 16,390 − 106,871
1996 120,985 119,544 13,688 72,364 11,445 22,048 1,441 15,604 15,604 − 105,381
1997 127,849 126,884 13,688 76,673 13,874 22,649 966 16,931 16,931 − 110,918
1998 135,085 134,005 17,109 100,363 16,533 − 1,079 15,978 15,978 − 119,107
*Valuation of the gold holdings and the claims on non-residents according Monetary Cooperation Fund −EMCF). —3Including loans to the World
to section 26 (2) of the Bundesbank Act and the provisions of the Bank. —4Including liquidity paper sold to non-residents by the
Commercial Code, especially section 253. In the course of the year, valuation Bundesbank; excluding the liquidity Treasury discount paper sold to
at the balance sheet rates of the preceding year. —1Mainly US dollar non-residents between March 1993 and March 1995, as shown in column 10. 
assets. —2European Central Bank (until 1993 claims on the European
  
 
9. External position of the Bundesbank in the European monetary union o
 5  million
Monetary reserves and other claims on non-residents
Monetary reserves
Reserve
position
in the Inter-
national OtherMonetary Other claims on Net externalFund and claims on Claims residents position of the
Gold special Foreign non-euro- within the in other Bundesbank Liabilities
End of year and gold drawing currency area Eurosystem EMU member to non- (col.1 lessor month Total Total rights reserves (net)  
2 countries col.9) receivables residents  1  3 residents  3 
1234567891 0
1999          Jan.  4 95,316 93,940 29,312 8,461 56,167 140 1,225 11 8,169 87,146
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 8,332 52,420 9,162 39,746 11 6,179 135,779
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 7,762 53,377 313 6,620 14 6,592 94,1702001 76,147 93,215 35,005 8,721 49,489 312 − 17,385 5 8,752 67,396
2001          Apr. 106,430 91,768 33,100 7,617 51,051 312 14,337 13 6,685 99,745         May 111,162 95,808 34,994 7,956 52,858 312 15,035 8 6,816 104,347         June 99,773 95,817 35,494 8,158 52,165 312 3,637 7 6,840 92,933
         July 107,437 92,879 33,708 7,980 51,191 312 14,240 6 7,005 100,432
         Aug. 109,011 89,890 33,414 7,765 48,711 312 18,803 6 6,860 102,151         Sep. 112,045 94,538 35,399 8,989 50,151 312 17,189 6 8,658 103,387
         Oct. 115,487 95,552 34,531 8,643 52,378 312 19,616 7 10,783 104,704
         Nov. 108,934 95,395 34,309 8,745 52,341 312 13,217 9 11,093 97,841         Dec. 76,147 93,215 35,005 8,721 49,489 312 − 17,385 5 8,752 67,396
2002          Jan. 98,113 97,392 36,220 8,855 52,316 312 409 − 10,455 87,658
         Feb. 98,390 99,230 38,095 8,874 52,260 312 − 1,152 − 10,354 88,036
         Mar. 99,487 98,130 38,505 8,840 50,786 312 1,045 − 10,077 89,410
         Apr. 106,934 94,779 38,072 8,205 48,502 312 11,842 − 9,297 97,636
         May 100,884 91,942 38,649 8,040 45,253 312 8,630 − 8,448 92,436
         June 88,197 86,649 35,435 8,848 42,367 312 1,236 − 9,219 78,979
         July 105,186 87,718 34,596 8,897 44,225 312 17,156 − 10,163 95,023
         Aug. 110,680 87,466 35,197 8,797 43,471 312 22,902 − 9,432 101,249
         Sep. 108,888 88,937 36,225 8,751 43,961 312 19,639 − 9,966 98,922
oClaims and liabilities vis- à-vis all countries within and outside EMU. Until Deutsche Bundesbank ’s cross-border payments within the Eurosystem. From
December 2000, the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, by virtue November 2000 including the TARGET positions which were previously
of revaluations, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the levels shown (in columns 6 and 9) as bilateral assets and liabilities vis- à-vis national
are computed on the basis of cumulative transaction values. From January central banks outside the Eurosystem. —3See footnote 2. —4Euro
2001 onwards, all end-of-month levels will be valued at market prices. — opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at January 1, 1999. 
1Including loans to the World Bank. —2Including the balances in the
72*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
10. Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
Until the end of 1998 DM million, from 1999  5  million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities to non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  to foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms payments
or month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received operations operations
All countries
 
1998 502,610 140,729 361,881 169,889 191,992 176,485 15,507 429,240 81,092 348,148 220,628 127,520 87,576 39,944
1999 277,331 52,774 224,557 115,564 108,993 100,777 8,216 293,849 56,632 237,217 166,026 71,191 52,047 19,1442000 320,874 43,462 277,412 152,752 124,660 116,971 7,689 446,060 52,663 393,397 309,024 84,373 63,093 21,2802001 358,120 62,434 295,686 171,939 123,747 114,857 8,890 505,266 60,132 445,134 354,561 90,573 65,988 24,585
2002          May 357,591 89,933 267,658 147,634 120,024 111,396 8,628 526,587 64,818 461,769 379,270 82,499 56,528 25,971
         June 347,460 76,418 271,042 147,824 123,218 114,626 8,592 521,062 62,043 459,019 374,385 84,634 58,568 26,066
         July 344,903 79,106 265,797 144,686 121,111 112,163 8,948 515,204 63,130 452,074 368,380 83,694 57,388 26,306
         Aug. 341,476 80,947 260,529 143,574 116,955 108,148 8,807 514,037 63,509 450,528 369,128 81,400 55,162 26,238
EU countries
 
1998 307,523 130,398 177,125 84,422 92,703 83,927 8,776 265,214 68,873 196,341 137,494 58,847 46,896 11,9511999 157,617 47,992 109,625 56,450 53,175 48,500 4,675 194,809 49,243 145,566 111,605 33,961 27,532 6,4292000 177,782 39,563 138,219 78,298 59,921 55,718 4,203 323,049 45,473 277,576 237,583 39,993 32,457 7,5362001 198,118 58,039 140,079 79,205 60,874 55,371 5,503 372,937 53,683 319,254 275,749 43,505 34,716 8,789
2002          May 225,844 85,393 140,451 81,884 58,567 53,299 5,268 405,717 59,008 346,709 307,350 39,359 29,673 9,686
         June 214,798 72,309 142,489 81,657 60,832 55,532 5,300 400,380 56,773 343,607 302,740 40,867 31,174 9,693
         July 214,048 74,035 140,013 81,423 58,590 52,976 5,614 397,029 57,930 339,099 299,146 39,953 30,359 9,594
         Aug. 212,441 76,218 136,223 80,442 55,781 50,277 5,504 395,822 58,377 337,445 299,187 38,258 28,369 9,889
of which: EMU member countries 1
 
1998 190,953 68,418 122,535 54,167 68,368 62,491 5,877 197,566 50,579 146,987 103,899 43,088 35,021 8,0671999 104,071 25,946 78,125 38,747 39,378 36,074 3,304 151,179 38,117 113,062 88,763 24,299 20,173 4,1262000 120,976 22,737 98,239 52,976 45,263 42,389 2,874 247,830 33,698 214,132 185,595 28,537 23,569 4,9682001 126,519 33,787 92,732 46,599 46,133 42,771 3,362 295,943 38,361 257,582 225,711 31,871 24,878 6,993
2002          May 149,251 54,770 94,481 50,060 44,421 40,971 3,450 329,474 41,483 287,991 258,486 29,505 21,674 7,831
         June 142,731 46,626 96,105 50,273 45,832 42,370 3,462 327,303 40,887 286,416 255,886 30,530 22,694 7,836
         July 137,056 43,868 93,188 48,765 44,423 40,858 3,565 328,274 42,318 285,956 255,888 30,068 22,293 7,775
         Aug. 136,159 45,524 90,635 48,671 41,964 38,397 3,567 326,603 42,437 284,166 255,876 28,290 20,303 7,987
Other industrial countries 3
 
1998 109,682 8,246 101,436 61,999 39,437 36,162 3,275 102,058 7,655 94,403 61,741 32,662 26,292 6,3701999 71,958 3,595 68,363 45,540 22,823 21,220 1,603 68,024 4,870 63,154 44,518 18,636 15,387 3,2492000 84,502 2,925 81,577 54,272 27,305 25,673 1,632 84,464 4,711 79,753 56,986 22,767 18,621 4,1462001 100,786 3,364 97,422 71,842 25,580 24,082 1,498 93,269 4,178 89,091 64,595 24,496 19,648 4,848
2002          May 76,117 3,067 73,050 48,590 24,460 23,112 1,348 82,852 3,696 79,156 57,780 21,376 16,354 5,022
         June 76,636 2,622 74,014 48,938 25,076 23,759 1,317 81,418 3,150 78,268 56,604 21,664 16,750 4,914
         July 74,921 2,890 72,031 46,598 25,433 24,111 1,322 78,381 3,109 75,272 54,182 21,090 16,116 4,974
         Aug. 74,999 3,190 71,809 46,918 24,891 23,558 1,333 78,624 3,074 75,550 54,974 20,576 15,624 4,952
Countries in transition
 
1998 30,107 360 29,747 7,914 21,833 20,218 1,615 11,383 135 11,248 657 10,591 4,941 5,6501999 16,402 231 16,171 4,603 11,568 10,934 634 6,256 78 6,178 481 5,697 3,119 2,5782000 19,082 240 18,842 5,028 13,814 13,104 710 8,202 113 8,089 928 7,161 4,384 2,7772001 20,444 204 20,240 6,103 14,137 13,449 688 9,095 151 8,944 1,699 7,245 4,341 2,904
2002          May 20,282 222 20,060 5,912 14,148 13,420 728 9,413 178 9,235 1,894 7,341 3,961 3,380
         June 20,670 292 20,378 5,933 14,445 13,719 726 9,438 192 9,246 2,048 7,198 4,027 3,171
         July 20,471 305 20,166 5,781 14,385 13,645 740 9,549 196 9,353 1,992 7,361 4,063 3,298
         Aug. 20,175 255 19,920 5,844 14,076 13,330 746 9,719 190 9,529 1,911 7,618 4,305 3,313
Developing countries 2
 
1998 55,298 1,725 53,573 15,554 38,019 36,178 1,841 50,585 4,429 46,156 20,736 25,420 9,447 15,9731999 31,354 956 30,398 8,971 21,427 20,123 1,304 24,760 2,441 22,319 9,422 12,897 6,009 6,8882000 39,508 734 38,774 15,154 23,620 22,476 1,144 30,345 2,366 27,979 13,527 14,452 7,631 6,8212001 38,772 827 37,945 14,789 23,156 21,955 1,201 29,965 2,120 27,845 12,518 15,327 7,283 8,044
2002          May 35,348 1,251 34,097 11,248 22,849 21,565 1,284 28,605 1,936 26,669 12,246 14,423 6,540 7,883
         June 35,356 1,195 34,161 11,296 22,865 21,616 1,249 29,826 1,928 27,898 12,993 14,905 6,617 8,288
         July 35,463 1,876 33,587 10,884 22,703 21,431 1,272 30,245 1,895 28,350 13,060 15,290 6,850 8,440
         Aug. 33,861 1,284 32,577 10,370 22,207 20,983 1,224 29,872 1,868 28,004 13,056 14,948 6,864 8,084
* Including the assets and liabilities vis- à-vis non-residents of individuals in are not comparable with the figures shown in Table X, 7. —1Including
Germany. The assets and liabilities vis- à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in Greece from January 2001. —2Including Cyprus until April 2002. —
Germany are shown in Table 4 of Section IV, "Banks". Statistical increases 3 Including Cyprus from May 2002. 
and decreases have not been eliminated; to this extent the changes in totals
73*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
X. Foreign trade and payments
11. Deutsche Mark and euro exchange rates of selected currencies *
Yearly Japan Denmark Sweden Norway Switzerland Canada Australia New Zealand United States United Kingdom
or monthly
average USD JPY DKK SEK GBP NOK CHF CAD AUD  1 NZD 1 
Historic spot middle rates on the Frankfurt exchange (1 or 100 currency units = DEM ...)
      
1991 1.6612 1.2346 25.932 27.421 2.926  25.580 115.740 1.4501 1.2942 0.95891992 1.5595 1.2313 25.869 26.912 2.753  25.143 111.198 1.2917 1.1476 0.84061993 1.6544 1.4945 25.508 21.248 2.483  23.303 111.949 1.2823 1.1235 0.89401994 1.6218 1.5870 25.513 21.013 2.4816 22.982 118.712 1.1884 1.1848 0.9605
1995 1.4338 1.5293 25.570 20.116 2.2620 22.614 121.240 1.0443 1.0622 0.9399
1996 1.5037 1.3838 25.945 22.434 2.3478 23.292 121.891 1.1027 1.1782 1.03571997 1.7348 1.4378 26.249 22.718 2.8410 24.508 119.508 1.2533 1.2889 1.14531998 1.7592 1.3484 26.258 22.128 2.9142 23.297 121.414 1.1884 1.1070 0.9445
      
Euro reference exchange rates published by the European Central Bank (EUR 1 = currency units ...) 2
      
1999 1.0658 121.32 7.4355 8.8075 0.65874 8.3104 1.6003 1.5840 1.6523 2.01452000 0.9236 99.47 7.4538 8.4452 0.60948 8.1129 1.5579 1.3706 1.5889 2.02882001 0.8956 108.68 7.4521 9.2551 0.62187 8.0484 1.5105 1.3864 1.7319 2.1300
2000          Oct. 0.8552 92.75 7.4472 8.5245 0.58933 8.0032 1.5130 1.2924 1.6176 2.1346
         Nov. 0.8564 93.26 7.4564 8.6289 0.60039 7.9950 1.5216 1.3204 1.6387 2.1438         Dec. 0.8973 100.61 7.4580 8.6622 0.61342 8.1334 1.5137 1.3679 1.6422 2.0905
2001          Jan. 0.9383 109.57 7.4642 8.9055 0.63480 8.2355 1.5291 1.4098 1.6891 2.1103
         Feb. 0.9217 107.08 7.4630 8.9770 0.63400 8.2125 1.5358 1.4027 1.7236 2.1184         Mar. 0.9095 110.33 7.4643 9.1264 0.62915 8.1600 1.5355 1.4167 1.8072 2.1753
         Apr. 0.8920 110.36 7.4633 9.1120 0.62168 8.1146 1.5287 1.3903 1.7847 2.1975
         May 0.8742 106.50 7.4612 9.0576 0.61328 7.9927 1.5334 1.3473 1.6813 2.0723         June 0.8532 104.30 7.4539 9.2106 0.60890 7.9360 1.5225 1.3016 1.6469 2.0589
         July 0.8607 107.21 7.4447 9.2637 0.60857 7.9714 1.5135 1.3153 1.6890 2.1074
         Aug. 0.9005 109.34 7.4450 9.3107 0.62672 8.0552 1.5144 1.3857 1.7169 2.0895         Sep. 0.9111 108.20 7.4413 9.6744 0.62291 7.9985 1.4913 1.4260 1.8036 2.1781
         Oct. 0.9059 109.86 7.4367 9.5780 0.62393 7.9970 1.4793 1.4224 1.7955 2.1863
         Nov. 0.8883 108.68 7.4452 9.4166 0.61838 7.9224 1.4663 1.4153 1.7172 2.1322         Dec. 0.8924 113.38 7.4431 9.4359 0.62012 7.9911 1.4749 1.4075 1.7348 2.1456
2002          Jan. 0.8833 117.12 7.4329 9.2275 0.61659 7.9208 1.4745 1.4135 1.7094 2.0826
         Feb. 0.8700 116.23 7.4299 9.1828 0.61160 7.7853 1.4775 1.3880 1.6963 2.0771         Mar. 0.8758 114.75 7.4324 9.0594 0.61574 7.7183 1.4678 1.3903 1.6695 2.0261
         Apr. 0.8858 115.81 7.4341 9.1358 0.61407 7.6221 1.4658 1.4008 1.6537 1.9995
         May 0.9170 115.86 7.4356 9.2208 0.62823 7.5207 1.4572 1.4210 1.6662 1.9859         June 0.9554 117.80 7.4330 9.1137 0.64405 7.4043 1.4721 1.4627 1.6793 1.9517
         July 0.9922 117.11 7.4301 9.2689 0.63870 7.4050 1.4624 1.5321 1.7922 2.0646
         Aug. 0.9778 116.31 7.4270 9.2489 0.63633 7.4284 1.4636 1.5333 1.8045 2.1076         Sep. 0.9808 118.38 7.4271 9.1679 0.63059 7.3619 1.4649 1.5434 1.7927 2.0847
*Calculated from daily quotations. —1Exchange rates from Australia and central banks at 2.15 p.m. For additional euro reference exchange rates of
New Zealand; those for New Zealand calculated from rates as at the middle the ECB, see Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Report 5, Exchange rateand end of the month. —2The ECB publishes daily euro reference ex- statistics. 
change rates, which are calculated on the basis of the concertation between
12. Exchange rates for the national currencies of the EMU countries, the Deutsche Mark value of the ECU *
and euro conversion rates
France Italy Netherlands Belgium/ Austria Spain Finland Ireland Portugal Greece ECU values  1 
Yearly Luxembourg GRD  100 /
average FRF  100 ITL  1,000 NLG  100 BEF/LUF  100 ATS  100 ESP  100 FIM  100 IEP  1 PTE  100 EUR  1  2 ECU  1 .
Historic spot middle rates on the Frankfurt exchange in DEM
   
1991 29.409 1.3377 88.742 4.857  14.211 1.597  41.087 2.671  1.149  0.9103 2.050761992 29.500 1.2720 88.814 4.857  14.211 1.529  34.963 2.656  1.157  0.8178 2.020311993 29.189 1.0526 89.017 4.785  14.214 1.303  28.915 2.423  1.031  0.7213 1.936391994 29.238 1.0056 89.171 4.8530 14.214 1.2112 31.108 2.4254 0.9774 0.6683 1.92452
1995 28.718 0.8814 89.272 4.8604 14.214 1.1499 32.832 2.2980 0.9555 0.6182 1.87375
1996 29.406 0.9751 89.243 4.8592 14.214 1.1880 32.766 2.4070 0.9754 0.6248 1.909541997 29.705 1.0184 88.857 4.8464 14.210 1.1843 33.414 2.6297 0.9894 0.6349 1.964381998 29.829 1.0132 88.714 4.8476 14.213 1.1779 32.920 2.5049 0.9763 0.5952 1.969131999 . . . . . . . . . 325.76 .
2000 . . . . . . . . . 336.63 .
      
Irrevocable euro conversion rates (EUR 1 = currency units ...) 3
   
6.55957 1936.27 2.20371 40.3399 13.7603 166.386 5.94573 0.787564 200.482 4 340.750 5 1.95583
*Calculated from daily quotations. —1According to data from the Euro- ence exchange rates of the ECB (EU R 1 = GRD ...). —3Applicable from
pean Commission. —2Until 1998 reciprocal values of the exchange rates for 1 January 1999. —4Applicable from 1 January 2001. —5Deutsche Mark
the Deutsche Mark, published by the Bank of Greece; from 1999 euro refer- conversion rate. 
74*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportOctober 2002
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
13. Effective exchange rates * of the euro and selected foreign currencies
 
 
1st qtr 1999 = 100
Memo item: Effective nominal exchange rates of selected foreign
Indicators of the German economy ’s currencies against the currencies of 19 industrial
Effective exchange rate of the euro price competitiveness  3  4 countries  3  5  6 
Narrow group  1 Broad group  2 19 industrial countries  5 49 countries  7 
Real Real on the basis
of the on the basis on the basis
on the basis of Pound Canadian Swiss Japanese of consumer of consumer deflators of
Period Nominal prices Nominal prices consumer prices US dollar sterling dollar franc yen total sales  8 
1995 107.8 108.8 93.2 107.8 109.5 110.4 110.2 86.1 84.0 106.4 105.4 115.6
1996 107.9 108.8 95.4 105.9 106.1 106.8 105.2 90.9 85.9 108.8 104.2 100.61997 99.1 99.5 90.4 96.6 100.7 101.4 99.0 98.8 99.8 109.7 97.9 95.91998 101.5 101.3 96.6 99.1 100.9 101.1 100.1 103.4 103.3 103.5 99.9 89.71999 95.7 95.7 96.6 95.8 97.8 98.0 97.7 100.8 102.3 102.2 98.3 105.1
2000 85.7 86.5 88.2 86.3 91.9 93.2 91.7 105.4 105.2 103.6 96.8 117.9
2001 87.3 88.9 91.0 88.1
p 92.1 94.2 92.4 112.0 103.6 100.5 100.5 106.7
1996          1st qtr 108.9 110.2 95.5 107.6 108.0 108.9 107.6 89.8 83.1 108.0 106.8 102.9         2nd qtr 107.1 108.1 94.5 105.3 105.6 106.3 104.6 91.1 84.4 108.8 104.2 102.4         3rd qtr 108.6 109.5 96.3 106.3 106.0 107.1 105.4 90.9 85.2 108.2 104.8 100.1         4th qtr 106.9 107.4 95.5 104.5 104.9 104.9 103.3 91.8 91.0 110.2 100.7 97.1
1997          1st qtr 102.4 103.2 91.8 99.6 102.7 103.5 100.9 96.9 96.4 111.3 96.0 93.8
         2nd qtr 99.5 99.7 90.0 96.4 101.0 101.7 98.9 98.1 98.9 109.3 97.5 96.6         3rd qtr 95.5 95.7 87.7 93.2 98.8 99.8 97.1 99.5 101.4 109.9 97.9 100.0         4th qtr 99.1 99.2 92.1 97.0 100.2 100.4 99.0 100.5 102.4 108.2 100.2 92.9
1998          1st qtr 98.8 98.8 92.6 96.4 99.4 99.8 98.8 103.2 104.5 107.3 100.1 92.5
         2nd qtr 100.2 100.1 94.2 97.4 100.7 100.7 99.1 104.8 104.8 106.5 98.5 86.8         3rd qtr 102.5 102.5 97.8 100.2 101.6 102.1 101.0 106.3 104.1 102.0 99.4 83.7         4th qtr 104.2 103.8 101.7 102.4 101.9 101.8 101.5 99.4 99.8 98.0 101.6 95.7
1999          1st qtr 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 99.9 99.9 100.0 100.0 100.1
         2nd qtr 96.1 96.0 96.5 96.0 98.5 98.3 97.8 102.8 102.9 103.5 98.6 99.0         3rd qtr 94.6 94.7 95.5 94.6 97.2 97.8 97.2 101.4 102.4 102.3 97.7 106.2         4th qtr 92.2 92.2 94.2 92.6 95.5 95.9 95.5 99.1 104.1 102.8 96.7 115.2
2000          Jan. 90.2 90.8 92.4 90.7 . 95.9 94.8 99.7 106.5 104.8 95.4 115.5
         Feb. 89.2 89.8 91.2 89.6 93.8 95.5 94.1 102.3 106.5 105.2 95.2 112.5         Mar. 87.7 88.3 89.7 88.1 . 94.3 92.9 102.4 106.3 104.6 94.7 116.8
         Apr. 86.1 86.6 88.4 86.7 . 93.2 91.9 103.0 107.7 104.3 95.9 118.6
         May 84.5 85.0 86.9 85.1 92.0 92.1 91.0 106.4 106.0 103.0 96.3 118.3         June 87.4 88.1 89.9 88.1 . 93.8 92.7 103.6 102.5 103.7 97.2 118.3
         July 86.9 87.9 89.4 87.5 . 94.3 92.7 104.5 103.4 103.9 97.7 116.8
         Aug. 84.6 85.5 87.0 85.1 91.5 92.8 90.9 106.3 104.9 104.0 96.7 118.6         Sep. 82.8 83.6 85.3 83.3 . 91.8 89.8 107.7 103.5 104.3 97.2 122.3
         Oct. 81.6 82.4 84.4 82.2 . 90.9 88.9 109.4 106.4 102.7 97.8 121.4
         Nov. 82.3 83.3 85.1 82.9 90.3 91.3 89.3 110.2 104.6 100.7 97.5 121.1         Dec. 85.4 86.4 88.1 85.8 . 92.8 91.3 108.7 104.1 101.5 99.4 115.1
2001          Jan. 89.2 90.2 91.7 89.0 . 95.2 93.3 107.7 102.4 102.7 100.0 108.3
         Feb. 88.3 89.4 91.0 88.3 92.7 95.2 93.2 108.8 102.0 101.6 99.2 109.9         Mar. 88.4 89.8 91.4 88.9 . 95.0 93.2 111.5 102.9 99.7 99.3 106.0
         Apr. 87.6 89.1 91.0 88.4 . 94.2 92.7 113.0 103.7 100.0 99.4 104.9
         May 85.9 87.6 89.3 86.7 91.5 93.6 91.7 113.1 104.3 101.3 98.3 107.5         June 84.7 86.3 88.1 85.4 . 93.1 90.9 114.1 104.4 102.7 98.5 108.3
         July 85.4 87.1 89.1 86.2 . 93.8 91.8 114.3 104.9 102.5 99.5 105.8
         Aug. 87.7 89.3 91.8 88.6
p 91.7 94.7 92.9 111.6 103.0 101.1 100.4 106.4
         Sep. 88.0 89.7 92.6 89.4 . 94.3 93.1 110.7 103.9 99.1 102.2 108.2
         Oct. 88.0 90.0 92.8 89.5 . 93.9 92.7 111.8 103.7 99.0 103.0 106.2
         Nov. 86.8 88.8 91.3 88.0 p 92.3 93.2 91.7 113.3 104.0 97.8 103.4 106.3
         Dec. 87.7 89.9 91.9 88.6 . 93.8 92.1 114.1 104.3 99.0 103.3 102.1
2002          Jan. 87.6 90.3 91.6 88.4 . 95.1 92.6 116.4 104.9 97.9 103.3 98.3
         Feb. 86.8 89.4 91.1 87.8 p 92.3 94.6 92.2 117.3 105.4 98.5 102.7 98.2
         Mar. 86.8 89.6 91.3 88.2 . 94.3 92.0 116.1 104.6 98.7 103.4 99.8
         Apr. 87.2 90.1 91.7 88.5 . 93.9 91.6 115.3 105.2 99.0 103.8 99.4
         May 88.6 91.5 93.7 90.4 p 92.8 94.3 92.6 112.0 103.5 100.4 105.1 101.2
         June 90.6 93.5 96.4 92.7 . 95.4 94.0 109.0 101.9 101.0 104.9 101.7
         July 91.7 94.7 98.2 94.3 . 96.3 95.3 106.0 103.5 99.4 106.0 104.3
         Aug. 91.1 94.0 97.7 93.6 p 93.6 95.5 94.6 107.3 103.5 98.0 105.7 104.3
         Sep. 91.2 94.1 98.0 93.7 . 95.5 94.5 107.6 104.7 97.7 105.6 102.5
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of April 2000, page 39 ff. —2ECB calculations; in addition to the countries
the currency concerned. —1ECB calculations based on the weighted belonging to the narrow group (see footnote 1), this group also includes the
averages of the effective exchange rates of the euro or, prior to 1999, of the following countries: Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, China, Croatia, Cypru s, Czech
exchange rates of the currencies preceding the euro against the currencies Republic, Estonia, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico ,
of the following countries: Australia, Canada, Denmark, Greece, Hong Kong, Morocco, New Zealand, Philippines, Poland, Romania, Russia, Slovakia,
Japan, Norway, Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, United Slovenia, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand and Turkey. —3The method of
Kingdom and United States. The weights used in these calculations are calculation is consistent with the procedure used by the ECB to compute thebased on manufactured goods trade between 1995 and 1997 and capture effective exchange rates of the euro (see Monthly Bulletin, November 2001,third-market effects. From January 2001, Greece ceased to be a partner page 50 ff.). —4Decline in the values implies an increase in
country in the effective exchange rate of the euro; the weighting scheme competitiveness. —5EMU countries and narrow group of the ECB except
was adjusted accordingly. Due to change in the weighting scheme, effective Australia, Hong Kong, Singapore and South Korea. —6Figures up to
exchange rate data as from January 2001 are not fully comparable with end-1998, computed by linking with the figures published up to Octoberearlier observations. For the prices are not yet available, estimates have 2001. —7EMU countries and broad group of the ECB. —8Annual and
been used. For the definition of the method see: ECB, Monthly Bulletin, quarterly averages. 
75*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
76*

Overview of
publicationsby the DeutscheBundesbankThis overview provides information
about selected recent economic andstatistical publications by the DeutscheBundesbank. Unless otherwise indi-cated, these publications are availablein both English and German, in printedform and on the internet.
The publications are available free of
charge from the Press and Public Rela-tions Division. For a small fee to covercosts, a file which is updated monthlyand contains approximately 40,000time series published by the Bundes-bank can be obtained on magnetictape cassette or ZIP disk from the Divi-sion Statistical data processing, math-ematical methods. Orders should besent, in writing, to one of the ad-dresses listed on the reverse of the titlepage. Selected time series can also bedownloaded from the internet.
Annual Report
Monthly Report
For information on the articles published between
1990 and 2001 see the index attached to the Jan-uary 2002 Monthly Report.
November 2001
– The economic scene in Germany in autumn
2001
December 2001
– International integration of German securities
marketsDeutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
77*

– The long-term sustainability of public finance –
an analysis based on generational accounting
– German enterprises’ earning and financing
patterns, by form of business organisation
– Reports from the Economic Research Centre
January 2002
– Capital flows and the exchange rate
– The housing market during the nineties– Credit institutions’ capital viewed from a busi-
ness and a regulatory perspective
– Reports from the Economic Research Centre
February 2002
– The economic scene in Germany around the
turn of 2001–02
March 2002
– Circulation of the Deutsche Mark – from cur-
rency reform to European monetary union
– German balance of payments in 2001– The pass-through from market interest rates to
bank lending rates in Germany
April 2002
– Government benefits for families
– German enterprises’ profitability and financing
in 2000
– RTGSplus– successfully established
May 2002
– The economic scene in Germany in spring
2002
June 2002
– Overall financial flows in 2001
– The evolution of accounting standards for
credit institutions
– Consequences of increasing capital flows for
exchange rate policy – observations and pro-
spects worldwide
– Direct investment in the real and financial sec-
tor – the Bundesbank Spring Conference 2002July 2002
– Consumer prices and the changeover from
Deutsche Mark to euro
– Funded old-age provision and the financial
markets
– Monetary policy and investment behaviour – an
empirical study
– Reports from the Economic Research Centre
August 2002
– The economic scene in Germany in summer
2002
September 2002
– The performance of German credit institutions
in 2001
– Productivity developments
in Germany
– Quotas and voting shares in the IMF
October 2002
– Amendments to the Banking Act caused by
the Fourth Financial Market Promotion Act
– The development of bank lending to the pri-
vate sector
– Fundamental determinants of real exchange
rate movements in the central and east Euro-
pean accession countries
Statistical Supplements to the
Monthly Report1
1 Banking statistics (monthly)
2 Capital market statistics (monthly)
3 Balance of payments statistics (monthly)
4 Seasonally adjusted business statistics (monthly)5 Exchange rate statistics (quarterly)Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
78*1Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data
contained in the German originals are available in English.

Discussion papers
by the Economic Research Centre
June 2002 16/02
Monetary Transmission in the New Economy: Ac-
celerated Depreciation, Transmission Channels and
the Speed of Adjustment
June 2002 17/02
Central Bank Intervention and Exchange Rate Ex-
pectations – Evidence from the Daily DM/US-Dollar
Exchange Rate
June 2002 18/02
Monetäre Indikatoren und geldpolitische Regeln
im P-Stern-Modell
July 2002 19/02
Real currency appreciation in accession countries:Balassa-Samuelson and investment demand
August 2002 20/02
The Eurosystem’s Standing Facilities in a General
Equilibrium Model of the European InterbankMarket
August 2002 21/02
Imperfect Competition, Monetary Policy and Wel-
fare in a Currency Area
August 2002 22/02
Monetary and fiscal policy rules in a model with cap-
ital accumulation and potentially non-superneutral
money
September 2002 23/02
Dynamic Q-investment functions for Germany
using panel balance sheet data and a new algo-
rithm for the capital stock at replacement values
Earlier discussion papers are available on the inter-
net, in some cases as abstracts.Special Publications
The monetary policy of the Bundesbank,October 1995
1
Makro-ökonometrisches Mehr-Länder-Modell,November 1996
2
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im Bereichvon Währung und Wirtschaft, April 1997
2
Europäische Organisationen und Gremien im Be-reich von Währung und Wirtschaft, May 1997
2
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 bis1989, August 1993
2
The market for German Federal securities, May2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model: MEMMOD,
June 2000
Special Statistical Publications
1 Banking statistics guidelines and customer clas-
sification, June 20003
2 Bankenstatistik Kundensystematik Firmenver-
zeichnisse2,4
3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen,
January 20002
4 Financial accounts for Germany 1991 to 2000,
September 20015
5 Annual accounts of west German enterprises
1971 to 1996, March 19996Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
79*1Also available in French, Spanish, Russian and Chinese.
2Available in German only.
3Only the sections “Monthly Balance Sheet Statistics”,
“External position” and “Customer classification”
(“Overall survey on sectoral classification”, “Survey on
breakdown by industry or activity” and “Explanatory
notes on the system of customer classification by industry
or activity”) are available in English.
4Current version available on the internet at quarterly in-
tervals.
5Only available on the internet.
6Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data
contained in the German originals are available in English.oNot available on the internet.

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
October 2002
80*6 Ratios from the annual accounts of west and
east German enterprises for 1998, September2001
5,6
7 Erläuterungen zu den Leistungspositionen der
Zahlungsbilanz, September 20012
8 Balance of payments statistics of the Federal
Republic of Germany, 2nd edition, February1991
o
9 Securities deposits,
August 2002
10 International capital links,
May 20026
11 Balance of payments by region,
August 2001
12 Technologische Dienstleistungen in der Zah-
lungsbilanz, May 20022
Banking legislation
1 Bundesbank Act and Statute of the European
System of Central Banks and of the European
Central Bank, June 1998
2 Gesetz über das Kreditwesen, February 200122a Grundsatz I über die Eigenmittel der Institute,
January 20012
2b Grundsatz II über die Liquidität der Institute,
August 19992
7 Instruction sheet for the reporting of large ex-
posures and loans of 3 million Deutsche Markor more pursuant to sections 13 to 14 of theBanking Act, September 1998
Publications on EMU
Informationsbriefe zur Europäischen Wirtschafts-und Währungsunion
2
euro 2002 – information on the introduction of eurobanknotes and coins
No 1, July 2000
No 2, October 2000No 3, February 2001No 4, May 2001
No 5, September 2001
Der Euro ist da. Wir sagen Ihnen, worauf es an-
kommt. (Leaflet)
2
For footnotes, see p 79*.

