MONTHLY REPORT
AUGUST SEPTEMBER OCTOBER NOVEMBER DECEMBER
2003
Vol 55
No 8

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
Deutsche Bundesbank
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 1460431 Frankfurt am Main
Postfach 10 06 02
60006 Frankfurt am MainFederal Republic of Germany
Tel +49 69 9566-1
or +49 69 9566 plus extension
number
Telex 41227 within Germany
414431 from abroad
Fax +49 69 5601071
Internet http://www.bundesbank.deReproduction permitted only if source is stated.ISSN 0418-8292The German original of this Monthly Report
went to press on 15 August 2003.Annual and weekly publishing schedules for
selected statistics of the Deutsche Bundes-bank can be downloaded from our internetsite. The statistical data are also published onthe internet.
TheMonthly Report is published by the Deut-
sche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main, by vir-tue of section 18 of the Bundesbank Act. It isavailable to interested parties free of charge.
This is a translation of the original German-
language version, which is the sole authorita-tive text.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
ContentsThe economic scene in Germany
in summer 2003 5
The international and European setting 6
The financial markets in Germany 22Economic conditions in Germany 32Foreign trade and payments 41Public finance 50
Statistical Section 1*
Key economic data for EMU 6*
Overall monetary survey in the EMU 8*Consolidated financial statementof the Eurosystem 16*Banks 20*Minimum reserves 42*Interest rates 43*Capital market 48*Public finance in Germany 52*Economic conditions 60*Foreign trade and payments 67*
Overview of publications by the
Deutsche Bundesbank 77*

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
4

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
5The economic scene
in Germany
in summer 2003

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
6The international and
European settingDevelopments in the global economy
The forces holding back economic growth in
winter 2002-2003, especially in the industrialcountries, weakened in the spring months.According to country information available sofar, aggregate output in the advanced econ-omies probably rose somewhat more sharplythan in the two preceding periods. The condi-tions for world economic recovery have im-proved noticeably over the past few months.There are now increasing signs that globalgrowth will pick up in the second half of2003.
There was a high level of uncertainty leading
up to the Iraq war, which was reflected pri-marily in a sharp rise in oil prices and renewedfalls in share prices. This uncertainty began torecede soon after military action had startedwhen it became apparent that it would endquickly. As early as mid-March, internationaloil prices began to fall distinctly. They initiallyheld firm within the OPEC corridor of be-tween US$22 and US$28. Since early July,though, they have been at the upper marginof the corridor or even slightly above it. Sincetheir most recent low in early March, shareprices have been moving clearly upwards and– in terms of the S&P 500 – had returned totheir end-June 2002 level by the end of theperiod under review. The SARS epidemic,which, for a time, had sharply dented outputand demand in the most severely affectedEast Asian countries, has since abated. Thesituation in Latin America likewise appears tobecome somewhat less tense, even if the po-tential for a setback remains high, especiallysince the revival of capital flows is associatedImproved
situation and
brighter
outlook
Fewer strains
on world
economy

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
7in large part with the very low interest rates
in the industrial countries.
The widespread expectation of a marked re-
vival of the global economy in the comingmonths rests not least on expansionist eco-nomic policies in the industrial nations. Fur-ther cuts in interest rates were made in theeuro area in early June, in the USA in lateJune, and in the UK in mid-July. The tax reliefpackage adopted in the USA in late May islikely to provide additional stimuli. The envis-aged relief will amount to $350 billion over aten-year period, with a large part being front-loaded in 2004 and 2005. As early as thesummer quarter of 2003 the US Internal Rev-enue Service will commence sending tax re-funds to households. This, together with thereduction in the income tax rate which is al-ready in effect, will increase disposable in-come in the second quarter and will, in allprobability, give a perceptible boost to privateconsumption. Public finances in the euro areaare still supporting demand through the oper-ation of the automatic stabilisers.
In this connection, the calming of the global
price climate, to which falling energy pricesmade a major contribution, has had a positiveimpact. This has tended to strengthen con-sumers’ purchasing power. In the group of in-dustrial countries as a whole, consumer priceinflation was 1.6% in June, compared with2.2% in the first quarter of 2003. This time ayear ago, at 1.1%, it was even lower, how-ever. Nevertheless, deflation in Japan, whichwas accelerating again somewhat at the endof the period under review, has draggeddown the average inflation rate of the indus-trial countries perceptibly. Excluding Japan,
the rate of price increase in June was 2.1%.Given the continuing calm price trend andthe recent budding hopes for the economy,the at times strongly accentuated concernsabout deflation have largely receded.
Account should be taken not only of those
macroeconomic changes but also of the factthat profitability and financing in the banking1998 = 100, seasonally adjusted, log scale
Euro areaUnited KingdomJapanUSAReal GDP in selected
industrial countries
Deutsche Bundesbank109
106
103
100112
109
106
103
100
98100100
98106
103
100112
109
106
103
100
98
1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003Macro policy
with new
stimuli
Calm price
climate
Progress in the
financial and
corporate
sectors

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
8and insurance sectors of most industrial
countries have improved recently. In addition,many manufacturing enterprises have usedthese difficult times as an opportunity for re-structuring and consolidation in the real andfinancial sectors. The elimination from themarket of borderline firms, the reorganisationof business areas, the modernisation of prod-uct ranges and the review of value-addedchains are important elements of a new basisfor economic development. Those factorscontrast, however, with low capacity utilisa-tion, high unemployment and the fact thatinvestor confidence has not yet completelystabilised, all of which are inhibiting econom-ic growth.
The brightening of the economic outlook in
the industrial countries is not yet broadlybased across regions but rather focused onthe United States. In the USA, most prelimin-ary economic indicators are now pointing up-wards. The sharp rise in orders for machineryand equipment, in particular, is seen by manyas a harbinger of more buoyant investmentactivity. Admittedly, this is not consistent withthe disappointing outcome of the end-Julyconsumer survey commissioned by the Con-ference Board; nevertheless, since other con-sumer signals were quite positive, not toomuch importance should be placed on theseresults. Seasonally adjusted retail trade turn-over in July was up by 1
12% on the month;
this represented a year-on-year increase of5
14%. In its latest forecast, at any rate, the
US Federal Reserve Board assumes that realGDP in the fourth quarter of 2003 will be upby 2
12%t o234% on the year and that therelevant year-on-year figure will be 334%t o
434% at the end of 2004.
One difficulty in the development of the
international economy is that, once again,the USA will probably be the sole engine ofglobal economic growth, with some supportfrom East Asian emerging markets and fromthe central and east European transitioncountries, most of which are showing soundgrowth. Such a global economic situationwould appear to be quite prone to disruptionand hardly sustainable in the long run. If theUS economy’s sizeable lead in growth were tobe maintained over a relatively long period oftime, external imbalances in the global econ-omy would be increased further and the riskof abrupt exchange rate changes would tendto be heightened. The continuing threat ofterrorism and new geopolitical tensions, es-pecially in the Middle East, pose additionalrisks to a global upswing.
According to initial calculations, real gross do-
mestic product (GDP) in the USA rose inspring by just over
12% from the previous
period after adjustment for seasonal andworking-day variations, compared with justunder
12% in each of the two preceding
quarters; this translates to a year-on-year riseof 2
14%. This fairly moderate acceleration in
the growth rate, however, is being supportedby a distinctly faster pace of growth in US do-mestic economic activity. Private final demandrose by a seasonally adjusted 1%, more thantwice as fast as in the first quarter. Expansionwas driven once again by commercial invest-ment, which went up by a seasonally adjust-ed 1
34% (after having declined in winter),USA once again
the economic
engineExternal
imbalances
as a risk
US economy

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
9thus showing a year-on-year increase for the
first time since early 2001. In addition, realspending on new housing again picked upperceptibly. Considerably increased purchasesof personal and household goods caused pri-vate consumption to rise more quickly thanbefore. Besides private final demand, govern-ment expenditure on consumption and in-vestment was also increased considerably – inconnection with the Iraq war and the subse-quent stationing of troops – by a seasonallyadjusted 1
34%. Domestically, however, only
some of the additional private and govern-ment final demand in the second quarter hada direct impact on output. Inventories weredepleted, resulting in a nominal negativegrowth contribution of
14percentage point.
Also, imports grew by no less than 214%
after seasonal adjustment. Since, in addition,exports were on the decline, the gap in realnet exports widened again.
In Japan, seasonally adjusted aggregate
second-quarter output went up by just over
12% after having risen by only14% in the
winter months. Especially owing to a relative-ly sharp expansion in the second half of2002, overall output was up by over 2% onthe year. GDP growth was driven mainly bydomestic private demand. Private consump-tion, up by
14% at constant prices and after
adjustment for seasonal variations, did showa relatively small increase on the quarter.Nevertheless, it should be noted that Japan-ese travel expenditure abroad was curtaileddrastically in spring owing to uncertaintycaused by the Iraq war and the outbreak ofSARS in neighbouring countries. This was alsoreflected in lower imports of services andmade a major contribution to the overall de-
cline in real imports. Domestic households’consumption expenditure, by contrast, rosequite sharply – not least owing to special fac-tors which, to some extent, have obscuredthe underlying cyclical trend.
The size of the contribution to growth made
by commercial investment, which again rosesharply in spring by a seasonally adjusted1
14%, was similar to that made by private
consumption. Commercial investment thuswent up by no less than 7% on the year.Among other factors, Japanese enterprises’improved performance, higher sales expect-ations and possibly also the recovery of shareprices may have played a part in this. Accord-ing to the latest survey of companies by theBank of Japan, the “Tankan Report”,
1the re-
vival of investment will continue in themonths to come; business sentiment has im-proved perceptibly. Real exports likewisegrew quite sharply, at a seasonally adjusted1%. Aggregate economic growth was curbedby the continuing slide in housing investmentand further cut-backs in government expend-iture.
Even though the Japanese economy has
shown six consecutive quarters of growth, itwould be premature to speak of a self-sus-taining upswing. The problems that continueto plague the corporate and financial sectorsand the high level of government debt con-tinue to be acute weaknesses. In addition,the deflationary tendencies have not yet been
1The Bank of Japan’s “Tankan Report” is published quar-
terly and is based on a comprehensive survey of Japanese
enterprises.Japan

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
10surmounted. Consumer price deflation,
which – on a year-on-year basis – had cometo a virtual standstill in March-April, has sinceaccelerated again, reaching 0.5% in June-July. Excluding energy and food, prices fell byan average of 0.3% in spring.
According to initial estimates, UK economic
growth in spring remained subdued, amount-ing to
14% after adjustment for seasonal and
working-day variations. This works out to ayear-on-year rate of 1
34% as against 2% in
the first quarter. Viewed from the value-added side, on which the initial estimate isbased, the relatively weak second-quarterGDP growth is due in large part to the stag-nation of industrial output. In addition, theservices sector, having been the linchpin ofthe UK economy in 2002, remained on theflatter growth path on which it had em-barked at the start of 2003. However, retailtrade value added is likely to have risen dis-proportionately strongly, as second-quarterturnover went up by no less than 1
12%i n
seasonally adjusted terms. This translates to arise of 4
12% on the year. This shows quite
clearly that, if nothing else, consumption inthe United Kingdom is still intact.
The continuing favourable situation on the la-
bour market, which is reflected in a relativelylow standardised unemployment rate of 5%and persistent growth in employment, aremajor factors in this development. What hasto be taken into consideration, however, isthat a large percentage of the net jobs cre-ated in the past 12 months are in the publicsector, especially in health care. Consumerprice inflation has ebbed noticeably sinceearly spring. In terms of the Harmonised
Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) – which theUK government intends to use as a basis forsetting its inflation targets in future – inflationwas 1.3% in July, compared with 1.6% inMarch.
Macroeconomic trends in the euro area
The euro area’s economic slump continued in
the spring months. According to Eurostat’s“flash estimate”, real GDP was stagnating inseasonally adjusted terms, which means thatthere had been virtually no growth since sum-mer 2002: output was up by only just under
12% on the year.
In the April-May period seasonally adjusted
industrial output was12% below its first-
quarter level and down by12% on the year.
Initial country results show that industrial out-put may have grown again somewhat duringthe course of June, yet for the second quarteras a whole, euro-area industrial output ap-pears to be down. Production of capitalgoods fell particularly noticeably in April-May.One contributory factor is likely to have beenthe decline in orders from non-euro-areacountries, which is due not only to the still-hesitant revival of world trade but also, inlarge part, to the preceding sharp appreci-ation of the euro against the US dollar. An-other factor is that, in seasonally adjustedterms, just under 1
12% fewer cars were regis-
tered in the euro area in the April-June periodthan in the preceding three-month periodand a good 3% fewer than 12 months earl-ier.United
Kingdom
Overall output
in the second
quarter
Industrial
output

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
11The renewed decline in capacity utilisation in
manufacturing is consistent with the pictureof subdued industrial activity in the euro areaduring the spring months. Capacity utilisationin this sector in July was again almost as lowas in early 1997, when industry was caught inan interim cyclical trough. The outcome ofthe monthly survey of industry conducted onbehalf of the European Commission was alsodisappointing. The confidence indicator wentdown further in July after having held firm ata low level in June. Not too much importanceshould be placed on this finding, however, es-pecially as the data for the three large mem-ber states are difficult to interpret. Italy’s“production expectations” subsegment isshown to have deteriorated very strongly, butthis is not substantiated by other industry sur-vey data. According to the EU Survey, inFrance and Germany the confidence indicatorfell in July in seasonally adjusted terms,whereas the matching national results inthese two countries – admittedly using differ-ent statistical methods – signal a slight im-provement in sentiment.
According to the latest EU survey, consumer
confidence continued to recover slightly inJuly: the balance of ups and downs returnedto its January 2003 level. The easing of geo-political uncertainty and the attendant in-creasingly optimistic assessment of the eco-nomic outlook over the coming 12 monthswere probably the main factors in this devel-opment.
Seasonally adjusted unemployment in the
euro area continued to rise in spring, albeitmore slowly than in the preceding months.The number of unemployed persons rose by
200,000 from the first quarter of 2003, whenthe figure had gone up by 270,000. A totalof 12.42 million members of the labour forcewere without work in the second quarter,corresponding to a rate of 8.9% following anaverage rate of 8.7% in the January-Marchperiod. A year earlier, the standardised un-employment rate had been 8.3%.
Consumer prices, measured in terms of the
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP),calmed down noticeably by mid-year.Second-quarter inflation, at 2.0% on theyear, was only slightly above the Eurosystemprice norm. The rate of price increase hadbeen distinctly higher in the winter months,at 2.3%. Households’ cost of living went upby 0.2% in spring in seasonally adjustedterms (and 0.9% on the year). This was theweakest rise in approximately four years. Thenearly 3% decline in energy prices was themain reason for this. However, prices for un-processed food hardly rose after seasonal ad-justment, either. Excluding these two volatilecomponents, the extent of the increase inHICP inflation was similar to that in the pre-ceding quarters, ie 0.5%. The year-on-yearHICP rate excluding energy and unprocessedfood was virtually unchanged at around 2%in spring. Processed food, drinks and tobacco(+3.4%) rose more sharply than average –mainly because of higher taxes on tobacco insome member states – as did services(+2.6%), whereas the rate of price increasefor other household goods remained quitemoderate, at less than 1%. According to pro-visional Eurostat estimates, the overall calmprice climate persisted in July; despite a re-
EU survey
Labour marketConsumer
prices

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
12newed slight rise in crude oil prices, the an-
nual rate of inflation fell slightly to 1.9%.
Current account and exchange rates
In spring 2003 euro-area exports were affect-
ed by the subdued economic growth of im-portant trading partners and the appreciationof the euro. Between March and May (up towhich statistics are available), seasonally ad-justed exports of goods went down by nearly2
12% from the preceding three-month
period. Imports were also down in a three-month comparison, falling slightly behind theprevious period’s level (-1%). That caused theeuro area’s total trade surplus for the periodfrom March to May to drop to 325 billionfrom as much as 328
12billion in the preced-
ing three-month period.
At the same time, the seasonally adjusted
deficit on invisible current transactions in-creased. This was due to higher net expend-iture in current transfers to non-euro-areapartner countries and to a lower surplus onservices. By contrast, the deficit on factor in-come remained nearly unchanged. Thus, onbalance the euro area’s seasonally adjustedcurrent account surplus in the March-Mayperiod fell by over 36
12billion from the pre-
ceding three-month period to 33 billion.
The first few months of this year saw the
euro surge anew, culminating at the end ofMay in new all-time highs against other keycurrencies. However, during the period underEuro-area consumer prices
Annual percentage change
2002 2003
I t e m Q 1Q 2Q 3Q 4Q 1Q 2Food, drinks and tobacco 4.9 2.9 2.3 2.3 2.0 2.6
Unprocessed 7.0 2.5 1.4 1.7 0.2 1.6Processed 3.5 3.2 2.9 2.7 3.2 3.4
Energy – 2.1 – 2.3 – 0.7 2.9 7.0 1.5Industrial goods (excluding energy) 1.7 1.6 1.3 1.2 0.7 0.9Services 3.1 3.1 3.3 3.1 2.7 2.6
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
(HICP) 2.5 2.1 2.1 2.3 2.3 2.0
Memo item
Excluding unprocessed foods and energy 2.6 2.6 2.5 2.3 2.0 2.1
Deutsche Bundesbank
Foreign trade
and current
account
Exchange rate
movements

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
13review the euro was forced to surrender
some of its previous gains. As usual, the mar-kets’ attention was focused on the euro’s rateagainst the US dollar.
In May 2003 the euro was trading at over
US$1.19, its highest level since the launch ofmonetary union. Thereafter, it initially fluctu-ated within a rather tight band betweenUS$1.17 and US$1.19. These fluctuations pri-marily reflected shifting market views of theUS economic outlook. Positive reports onconsumer and business confidence in theUSA alongside new data indicating that theweakness of the US labour market would ini-tially persist presented a mixed picture of thestate of the US economy and failed to provideany guiding stimuli to the exchange rate.
The interest rate cut by the European Central
Bank in early June had generally been expect-ed on the foreign exchange markets andfailed to make a discernible impact on subse-quent exchange rate movements. After theUS Federal Reserve cut interest rates at theend of June, the euro lost ground perceptiblyagainst the US dollar, falling to US$1.11 bymid-July. This move, coupled with the Fed’soptimistic assessment of the economy, led toan upward revision in market expectations re-garding future developments in the US econ-omy. By contrast, the growth outlook for theeuro area was increasingly being reviseddownwards in the light of the exchange-rate-related reduction in competitiveness. Further-more, the euro area’s yield spread over theUSA in the long-term segment diminishedand even went into reverse at the end of theperiod under review. The euro, after its clearsurge of appreciation in the spring months,
may have been hurt by profit-taking on theforeign exchange markets. As this reportwent to press, the euro was being quoted atUS$1.13, or around 8% higher than at thebeginning of the year.
At the end of May this year the euro also hit a
new high against the yen, trading at ¥140and initially staying just below that level. Inearly July, however, the euro encounteredheavy selling pressure against the yen, fallingbelow the ¥132 mark by mid-month. Theeuro began to weaken against the yen oncethe Bank of Japan’s Tankan survey, which iswidely read around the world, reported a sur-prisingly clear improvement in the Japanesebusiness climate. The yen then continued tostabilise following the publication of positivedata on the Japanese economic situation. Asthis report went to press, the euro was trad-ing at just under ¥135, or around 8
12% high-
er than at the beginning of the year.
The euro hit a new high against the pound
sterling at the end of May, too, rising to£0.72. During June, however, the pound ster-ling regained just under 4
12% of its value
against the euro. The recent recovery of thepound sterling should also be seen againstthe background of the publication of new UKeconomic data which came out better thanexpected despite moderate growth. By con-trast, the outcome of the British Treasury’seconomic tests, which indicated that it wasnot advisable at the present time for the UKto join monetary union, had been anticipatedby market participants and therefore had nodiscernible impact on exchange rate move-US dollar
Yen
Pound sterling

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
14ments. After the Bank of England cut interest
rates in mid-July, citing the unfavourable busi-ness outlook for the UK economy, the eurowas able to regain some of the ground it hadlost earlier, albeit with some fluctuations. Asthis report went to press the euro was tradingat £0.70 and was thus around 7
12% above its
value at the beginning of the year.As a weighted average against the currencies
of the euro area’s 12 most important tradingpartners, at the end of May the euro hit itshighest level since the launch of monetaryunion. Even though the euro relinquishedsome of its gains in mid-year, its effective ex-change rate was, at the end of the periodunder review, still 6
12% higher than at the
beginning of the year. In terms of its long-term average and taking into account the di-verging inflation rates in the euro area andthe key partner countries, European industry’sprice competitiveness may still be classified asneutral.
Monetary policy and financial markets
in the euro area
During the second quarter, as in the two
quarters before it, there were mounting signsthat the risks to euro-area price stabilitywould be lower than initially expected. At itsmeeting in early June the Governing Councilof the ECB therefore decided to reduce thekey ECB interest rates by a further
12percent-
age point. Since 6 June 2003, the interestrates on the marginal lending facility and thedeposit facility have been 3% and 1% re-spectively; since 11 June 2003, all main refi-nancing operations have been conducted asvariable rate tenders with a minimum bid rateof 2%.
The weak economic growth in the euro area,
which showed no signs of picking up in thesecond quarter despite the rapid end to theIraq war, was one indication that price pres-sures were easing. In addition, the euro’s ap-Log scale
Effective exchange rate1
1999 Q1 =100
Monthly data Daily data
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003Exchange rate of the euro
103
100
97
94
91
88
85
82
79
%Lin scale
Change2in the rate of the
euro against the...
...US dollar ...Japanese
   yen...pound
   sterling
since the beginning of 2003since its high of May 2003
1According to ECB calculations, against the
currencies of 12 countries (before 2001, 13
countries). — 2 Appreciation of the euro: +.
Latest position: 14 August  2003.
Deutsche Bundesbank12+
9+
6+
3+
0
3−
6−
9−Effective
exchange rate
of the euro
Renewed
interest rate
cut in June...
...owing to
subsiding
inflationary
risks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
15preciation put a damper on euro-area infla-
tion. The Eurosystem staff’s macroeconomicprojections therefore indicate a perceptibledecline in the inflation rate this year and next.Even though the money stock increasedsharply again in the second quarter, the mon-etary side does not appear to signal any directthreat of inflation at present, either. Persist-ently moderate growth in lending in the euroarea and as well as the inflows of funds inportfolio transactions with non-residents sug-gest that the rapid growth in liquidity hold-ings is still primarily due to prudent invest-ment and is not an indication that the privatesector is about to step up its spending activity.The low interest rates, however, may havelikewise promoted the holding of money.
Even in the run-up to the interest rate cut in
early June, forward rates had, in some cases,been distinctly lower than the relevant spotrates. The interest rate move therefore cameas no surprise to many market players. Thesize of the interest rate cut had also beenwidely expected. Prudent bidding practices,especially towards the end of the half-year(when liquidity is always at a premium), ini-tially prevented a sharper fall in money mar-ket interest rates following the interest ratecut in early June. Well into July, the marginalrate on main refinancing operations (MROs)was ten or more basis points above the min-imum bid rate. Accordingly, the Eonia wasclearly above the rate of 2% desired by mon-etary policymakers. It was only the generousprovision of liquidity in the 23 July tender op-eration that perceptibly closed the gap be-tween the marginal allotment rate and theminimum bid rate, causing the overnight rateto come distinctly close to the 2% mark. At
the same time, the money market was char-acterised by major uncertainty, which was re-flected in violent swings in interest rates.
Euro-area M3 grew sharply between April
and June, its pace of expansion being evenfaster than in the preceding quarter. The sea-sonally adjusted, annualised growth rate in-creased from 7
12% at the end of March to
9% at the end of June. The three-monthmoving average of the annual rates ofgrowth in the April-June period, at 8.5%,was higher than the rate for the January-March period (7.8%). On the whole, the per-sistently high level of uncertainty on the fi-nancial markets is likely to have encouragedthe holding of cash balances. It is true that, asthe second quarter progressed, share pricesrose sharply, yet uncertainty about bond mar-ket price movements increased perceptibly aswell. Hopes of an economic recovery in theeuro area failed to materialise in the first halfof 2003, leading investors to continue to holdtheir money primarily in the form of secureand liquid bank deposits.
Of the components of the monetary aggre-
gate M3, overnight deposits again rosesharply in the second quarter, although thepace of expansion eased slightly. BetweenApril and June, sight deposits rose at a sea-sonally adjusted and annualised rate of 8
12%
compared with 912% in the first quarter of
2003. Currency in circulation likewise grewless sharply in the second quarter than in thefirst. Cash holdings, however, continued toincrease at a rapid rate. On the whole, themoney stock M1 grew somewhat faster thanInterest rates
in the money
marketMoney stock
grew sharply
Components
of the money
stock

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
16Money market management and liquidity needs
Main refinancing operations (MROs) were the
main method of ongoing money market man-
agement in the Eurosystem during the past three
reserve maintenance periods. One liquidity-
absorbing fine-tuning operation was conducted.
The 7 May and 9 July MROs were conducted as
split operations, each consisting of a one-week
tender and a two-week tender. In both cases the
size of the remaining MROs was rebalanced.
Following relatively large recourse to the mar-
ginal lending facility on two consecutive days at
the end of the April-May reserve maintenance
periods, on 23 May the Eurosystem launched a
fine-tuning mechanism by accepting fixed-term
deposits with a maturity of three days, which
served to withdraw 53.9 billion from the market.
This ensured that the reserve maintenance
period ended with credit institutions holding a
normal 5600 million in excess of reserve require-
ments.
Strong expectations of interest rate reductions
led to underbidding in the MRO settled on
4 June. The credit institutions’ resultant large re-
serve deficits were balanced out by a matching
increase in the allotment amount in the subse-
quent MRO.
The Governing Council cut the key ECB interest
rates on 5 June. In the following weeks, the Eo-
nia initially remained entrenched well above the
new minimum bid rate of 2.0%. By “flooding”
the market with 533 billion worth of net liquid-
ity in the 23 July MRO, it was possible to bring
the Eonia distinctly closer to the minimum bid
rate. Owing to this measure, however, the June-
July maintenance period ended with recourse of
55.3 billion to the deposit facility.
Between April and July, the autonomous factors
determining bank liquidity withdrew 523.9 bil-
lion net from credit institutions (see adjacent
table). As in the preceding reserve maintenance
periods, what drove this development was not
only the decline in net foreign assets but also
the strong demand for banknotes. The low op-
portunity costs of holding cash and non-euro-
area residents’ stronger demand for euro bank-
notes are key factors that explain this develop-
ment. As in the spring, the “Other factors” were
net suppliers of liquidity. The minimum reserve
requirement went up by 51.6 billion during the
period under review.To cover the increased need for liquidity, the
Eurosystem expanded its open market oper-
ations in the last three reserve maintenance
periods by a total of 525.3 billion to an average
of5249.7 billion.
1For longer-term trends and the contribution of the
Deutsche Bundesbank, see pages 14* and 15* of the Statis-tical Section of the Monthly Report .— 2Including end
of quarter valuation adjustments with no impact on li-quidity. — 3Including monetary policy operations concluded
in stage two and still outstanding in stage three (outright
transactions and the issuance of debt certificates).
Deutsche BundesbankFactors determining bank liquidity1
5billion; calculated on the basis of
daily averages of the maintenance periods
2003
Item24 Apr
to23 May24 May
to23 Jun24 Jun
to23 Jul
I Provision (+) or absorption
(–) of central bankbalances by
1 Change in banknotes in
circulation (increase: –) – 7.7 – 7.0 – 9.5
2 Change in general
government depositswith the Eurosystem(increase: –) + 9.5 – 10.0 + 0.2
3 Change in net foreign
reserves
2– 4.3 – 1.8 – 10.9
4 Other factors3+ 5.0 + 2.3 + 10.3
Total + 2.5 – 16.5 – 9.9
II Monetary policy oper-
ations of the Eurosystem
1 Open market
operations
(a) Main refinancing
operations – 2.3 + 17.6 + 10.0
(b) Longer-term
refinancingoperations – 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0
(c) Other operations – 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.2
2 Standing facilities
(a) Marginal lending
facility + 0.3 – 0.0 + 0.0
(b) Deposit facility
(increase: –) + 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.0
Total – 2.1 + 17.4 + 10.2
III Change in credit institu-
tions’ current accounts(I + II) + 0.3 + 1.0 + 0.3
IV Change in the minimum
reserve requirement(increase: –) – 0.4 – 0.8 – 0.4

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
17the M3 aggregate. During the period under
review, as in the preceding quarter, the othershort-term bank deposits (excluding over-night deposits) grew strongly. Falling interestrates and uncertain bond market price devel-opments have evidently enhanced the at-tractiveness of these instruments. It was par-ticularly deposits redeemable with a period ofnotice of up to three months which showedstrong growth. At the end of the periodunder review they were 10.5% up on theyear. However, deposits with an agreed ma-turity of up to two years were, in fact, re-duced over the past 12 months. BetweenApril and June, marketable instrumentspicked up noticeably. Before adjustment forseasonal effects, only money market fundshares/units were in demand, whereas repotransactions, money market paper and short-term bank debt securities were reduced.
As regards the balance sheet counterparts,
euro-area monetary growth in the secondquarter of 2003 was boosted particularly bystrong inflows of funds from non-euro-areacountries to domestic non-banks. The net ex-ternal position of the MFI sector, which re-flects non-banks’ payment transactions withnon-euro-area countries, went up by 393.4
billion during the period under review, a de-velopment to which securities transactionswith non-euro-area countries are again likelyto have contributed.
By contrast, loans to the domestic private sec-
tor again grew distinctly more slowly thanM3 in the second quarter in seasonally adjust-ed terms. In this context, it was primarily thesluggish economy which curbed the demandfor loans. At a seasonally adjusted and annu-
alised rate of 5%, the growth of unsecuri-tised lending during the period under reviewwas still somewhat higher than in the preced-ing quarter (just over 4
12%). This means that
euro-area lending has probably now stabil-ised, not least owing to falling interest rates.Moreover, MFIs have also perceptibly in-creased their holdings of securities issued bydomestic enterprises. There were net port-folio additions of shares and other equitiesalong with fixed-interest securities. This con-trasted with the previous quarter when bankshad been divesting themselves of these in-struments. Securitised lending to the publicsector in the euro area likewise rose distinctlyin the second quarter (by 336.7 billion). That
contrasted with an 38.7 billion reduction in
unsecuritised loans to the public sector. Over-Seasonally adjusted, year-on-year change
%
%
Memo item
German contribution
to M3
Reduced scaleEuro area
Three-month moving
average
Reference value: 4½%Growth of the money stock
M3 in the euro area
Deutsche Bundesbank12+
10+
8+
6+
4+
2+
0
2−9
8
7
65
4
3
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003
Balance sheet
counterparts

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
18all lending to the public sector in the euro
area thus rose by 328.0 billion, following an
311.5 billion reduction between April and
June 2002.
The propensity to deposit funds with euro-
area MFIs over the longer term likewisepicked up during the period under reviewand thus tended to dampen monetarygrowth. Excluding capital and reserves, mon-etary capital formation in the euro area grew
at a rate of 5.4% over the past 12 monthscompared with 5.0% at the end of March.With net sales of 340.3 billion, banks were
able to place a distinctly larger number oflonger-term bank debt securities with non-MFIs than in the same period of 2002(+329.3 billion). This contrasted, however,
with somewhat smaller growth in depositswith an agreed maturity of over two yearsand deposits with an agreed maturity of overthree months. Their growth between Apriland June 2003 was 32.7 billion as against
33.2 billion a year earlier.
During the period under review, the euro
area’s capital markets felt the effects ofsharply falling interest rates followed by theirrapid rise. Up to mid-June the average yieldon ten-year government bonds in the euroarea fell below 3
12%, an all-time low. Since
then, however, they have risen by nearly34
percentage point. They thus replicated, albeitin a less marked fashion, the movements ofinterest rates on US government bonds. At3.14% in mid-June, yields on ten-year USTreasury bonds hit their lowest level since thelate 1950s. The ensuing 1
13percentage point
rise in interest rates resulted in a13percent-
age point yield premium for US governmentbonds over corresponding euro-area bonds inmid-August. The decline in interest rates onUS and European government bonds up tomid-June may have been driven in part byworries of potential deflation risks, which hadbeen additionally fuelled by statements madeby Federal Reserve Board members followingtheir meeting on 6 May 2003. This concern,however, was evidently only partially reflectedDaily data
%
Per-
cent-
age
points%
Per-
cent-
age
pointsYield spreads of European
corporate bonds2
2002 2003Spread of the US bond market
over the euro-area averageYield on ten-year government
bonds outstanding
Euro-area
average 1
USABond market yields
in the euro area and the USA
1Weighted average of the yields on ten-
year government bonds of all euro-area
countries; GDP-weighted. — 2Spread of
seven to ten-year BBB-rated European cor-
porate bonds over euro-area governmentbonds with a comparable maturity. Source:
Merrill Lynch Indices.
Deutsche Bundesbank3.0
2.52.01.5
1.00.5+
0
0.5−
1.0−6.0
4.55.5
4.05.0
3.54.5
3.0
J FMAM J J A S OND J FMAM J J A SCapital market
rates affected
by uncertain
outlook for the
economy and
prices

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
19in the findings of the survey on inflation ex-
pectations. The surveyed year-on-year infla-tion forecasts went down by no more thanaround
14percentage point between May
and July (see adjacent chart). The temporarydisconnect between the bond market and ex-pectations regarding inflation and economicgrowth – the factors that have a major im-pact in determining nominal interest ratemovements – was at least partly corrected bythe upswing in interest rates which began inmid-June. The fact that growth and inflationexpectations for the euro area were lowerthan those for the USA indicates that, even atits all-time low in mid-June, the interest ratelevel in the euro area diverged less from thefundamentals than did interest rates in theUSA, where the debate on deflationary ten-dencies had originated (see adjacent chartand chart on page 18). The average expectedreal rate of interest on ten-year bonds for theeuro area went down somewhat from itsApril level to around 2% in July.
Persistent risks with regard to the scale of the
economic recovery have, in addition, causedprices to continue to fluctuate sharply. Mar-ket players’ uncertainty about the futuremovements of bond prices, expressed interms of the implied volatility of options onforward contracts for long-term Federalbonds, have held steady at a high level sinceinterest rates began to rise in June.
From early April the yield curve of German
Federal securities (the benchmark for theeuro area) was shifting downwards initiallyacross all maturities. The inverse slope at theshort end, which had already begun to takeshape prior to the ECB’s interest rate move on
5 June 2003, remained inverse in the ensuingperiod. Thus, in mid-June the yields on short-term Federal securities were nearly 30 basispoints below the three-month Euribor. How-ever, they then rose – in reaction to thebrighter economic outlook – and, as this re-port went to press, were more than
110per-
centage point above the three-month fundsrate. The increasingly steeper slope of the%%
Growth expectations
Euro areaUSAInflation expectations
Euro areaUSAInflation and
growth expectations
in a one-year horizon
Source: Consensus Forecast survey results
for the current year and the coming year;
Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.51.0
0.53.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003Price
uncertainty
remains high
Yield curve
reflects brighter
economic
outlook

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
20yield curve caused by the rise in the interest
rates on longer-term Federal securities sincemid-June is also a sign of improved expect-ations for the economy. On balance, thespread between money market rates andlong-term capital market rates in the euroarea had risen from 1
12percentage points in
early April to 2 percentage points at the endof the period under review.The financing conditions on the market for
corporate bonds have remained favourabledespite the general increase in interest rates.This is also revealed by the fact that the al-ready exceptionally low risk premia on Euro-pean corporate bonds continued their slideduring the period under review. In the euroarea, the yield on seven to ten-year BBB-ratedcorporate bonds – the lowest investment-grade rating – was, in mid-August, just under1
14percentage points higher than that on
government bonds with the same maturity;at the end of July this risk premium had evenfallen below the 1 percentage point mark.This contrasts with the persistent credit risk.The wave of insolvencies gripping Europeanenterprises has not ebbed this year, either.Bond prices were high probably on accountof investors’ great interest in adding a largervolume of riskier yet higher-yielding bonds totheir portfolios. On the supply side, the highlevel of net issuing of European corporatebonds indicates that companies seeking cap-ital made use of the favourable financingconditions on the capital markets.
Euro-area equity markets made considerable
gains during the period under review. Be-tween early April and mid-June the DowJones EuroStoxx index picked up by nearlyone-fifth and has remained steady since then.This means that share prices have reachedtheir highest level since early December2002. Even so, they are less than half as highas their all-time highs of March 2000. The risein share prices was accompanied by diminish-ing uncertainty among investors regarding fu-ture share price movements, since the impliedvolatility of index options receded perceptibly.Monthly data
% 5 
...relative to
   current market
   value2One-year average
expected corporate profit...
...per share2Dow Jones EuroStoxx
share price index 1Price movements and profit
estimates for European
public limited companies
1End-1991 = 100; source:  Deutsche Börse
AG. — 2Based on I /B /E / S  analyst estimates
of the Dow Jones EuroStoxx share price in-
dex; source: Thomson Financial.
Deutsche Bundesbank9
8
7
6
5421
20
1918
17
16
15500
450
400
350
300250
200
150
2000 2001 2002 2003Market risk
premia on non-
top-rated
corporate
bonds remain
low
European
share prices
recovered
vigorously

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
21Investors’ risk aversion seems to have less-
ened as well. This, along with the high levelof liquidity on the market, may have fosteredthe positive developments on the stock ex-changes.
The rise in European share prices is all the
more remarkable in the light of downgradedestimates of corporate profitability. BetweenApril and July, equity analysts reduced theirforecasts for average longer-term earnings
growth of the companies listed in the DowJones EuroStoxx index by more than 1 per-centage point to 9.2%. In addition, on aver-age they reviced down their 12-month earn-ings expectations for these shares by a smallmargin from April. Given the rise in shareprices, the price-earnings ratio of Europeanshares, based on expected annual profits, hasgone up from 13.3 to 14.6.
Rising prices
despite falling
profit estimates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
22The financial markets
in GermanyCapital market and bank interest rates
In line with euro-area yields, German capital
market rates first fell sharply during theperiod under review and then made a markedrecovery. As in the other euro-area memberstates, the decline and successive rise in inter-est rates were not as sharp as in the UnitedStates. In mid-August, at just under 4.2%,the yield on ten-year Federal bonds wasslightly up on early April, after having been
34percentage point below that level in mid-
June. Compared with the average rate ofother European government bonds, the inter-est rate discount on these bonds declined bya few basis points in early July and has sincelargely been below
110percentage point.
Given the tense budgetary situation in thepublic sector, the narrowing of the “yield ad-vantage” of Federal bonds may also be re-lated to the debate about how to counter-finance the early introduction of the thirdstage of the tax reform. The benchmark func-tion of Federal bonds in the euro-area bondmarket is, however, unlikely to be contested.Given the liquid secondary market and thestatus of the Bund future as the most import-ant instrument for hedging against long-terminterest rate risks in the euro area, Federalbonds still have a key role to play.
Probably first and foremost for the above-
mentioned reasons relating to the precariousgovernment budgetary situation, in the firsthalf of July Federal bonds also lost somethingof their preferred status compared with debtsecurities issued by domestic credit institu-tions. However, the yields on these bankbonds increased sharply in the second half ofCapital market
rates climb
sharply from
previous low
Low interest
rate premium
on bank bonds

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
23July, with the result that the interest rate pre-
mium on ten-year bank bonds over compar-able government paper again rose by a fewbasis points at the end of the period under re-view and, at just under
14percentage point,
reached roughly the level at the start of thesecond quarter. However, it was still movingwell below the values observed in the secondhalf of 2002.
Paralleling the decline in capital market rates
which continued until June, banks’ lendingand deposit rates also decreased in May andJune and in some cases fell sharply.
1In
particular, there was a marked decrease inthe terms for longer-term loans and depositsin this period: mortgage loans with interestrates locked in for ten years became cheaperbetween April and June, the rates charged onthem falling by
12percentage point to 4.8%.
The decline in long-term fixed interest loansto enterprises was somewhat less marked at0.4 percentage point. Depending on theamount of the loan, interest rates varied be-tween 5.3% and 5.5%. Among longer-termdeposits, it was mainly the rates of interestpaid on savings bonds and savings depositswith interest rates locked in for correspond-ingly long periods which fell. In June theywere between 0.3 and
12percentage point
down on April. However, against the back-drop of a
12percentage point reduction in
the key interest rate in early June, banks’short-term deposit rates also decreased con-siderably. Depending on the amount of thedeposit, the interest paid on one-month timedeposits, for instance, was between
13and
just under12percentage point down on April
to between 1.4% and 1.9%.Only specific interest rates on short-term or
floating rate loans, however, showed a dis-tinct decline. For instance, bills discountedand variable rate mortgage loans, both ofwhich are well-collateralised, fell by 26 and19 basis points respectively. Depending onthe sum concerned, current account creditrates fell by between 12 and 15 basis points.By contrast, after adjusting by a few basispoints, the terms on instalment credit andpersonal credit lines remained virtually un-changed. The delay in interest rate adjust-ments probably reflects the banks’ efforts toadjust lending margins to take account ofDaily data
%
Basis
points Interest rate discount
between Federal bonds and
other euro-area government bonds
(enlarged scale)
2002 2003Yield on ...
... ten-year government bonds outstanding    of the other euro-area countries
... ten-year Federal
    bonds outstandingInterest rate discount
of Federal bonds
in the euro-area bond market
Deutsche Bundesbank30
20
10
05.5
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
J FMAM J J A S OND J FMAM J J A S
1The Deutsche Bundesbank collected statistics on lend-
ing and deposit rates for the last time in reporting month
June 2003. These statistics are being replaced by euro-
area interest rate statistics, which have been collected on
a harmonised basis in the euro area since January 2003;
the results are scheduled to be published for the first
time in the September 2003 Monthly Report .Distinct decline
in bank rates
on deposits and
longer-term
loans
Slow
adjustment
of interest rates
on short-term
loans

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
24higher default risks. Endeavours to further
widen risk-differentiated margins were alsoapparent from the results of the quarterly sur-vey on bank lending (see box entitled BankLending Survey on pages 28-29).
Share prices
German equity market prices rose sharply
during the period under review. From April tomid-August German equity prices measuredon the broad index for German equities(CDAX) went up by more than one-third. Thisincrease far outstripped that of other Euro-pean equities. Prices rose in two stages. Theupward movement in April was followed by amoderate slide which lasted until the end ofMay, before a period of rising prices set inagain. Whereas the prices of other European
shares moved sideways from mid-June on-wards, German equity prices continued torise. When viewing this positive evolution ofGerman share prices, it should, first, be bornein mind that the previous declines had beensharper in Germany. Second, estimated year-on-year profit expectations evolved more fa-vourably for German blue chips in the periodunder review than for the other listed enter-prises in the euro area. The positive signalswhich probably came from the progressivebrightening of some sentiment indicators inGermany produced a similar directionalresponse.
Borrowing in the securities markets
The amount of funds raised in the German
bond market contracted in the second quar-ter of 2003. Calculated at market prices,gross sales of debt securities issued by domes-tic borrowers amounted to 3275
12billion,
compared with 3316 billion in the previous
quarter. After adjusting for redemptions andchanges in issuers’ holdings of their ownshares, net sales came to 327
12billion, slight-
ly less than half the figure for the previousquarter ( 362 billion). At 319
12billion, sales of
German bonds were more than three timesas high as in the first quarter ( 36 billion).
Almost two-thirds of the funds raised from
the sale of domestic fixed interest securitiesaccrued to the public sector, which raised317 billion in the bond market. The Federal
Government added 318 billion to its bonded
debt in the second quarter, issuing primarilyMonthly averages
%
Current account credit 1
Lending to enterprises2
Mortgage
loans3
Yield on
bank bonds4Bank interest rates
in Germany *
*Owing to the discontinuation of the pre-
vious interest rate statistics, the lending
rates shown in this chart end with the June
figures. — 1 5  500,000 and more, but less
than  5  2.5 million. — 2 Long-term fixed-rate
loans to enterprises and self-employed per-
sons of  5 100,000 and more, but less than
 5  500,000. — 3 On residential property; ef-
fective interest rate, locked in for ten
years. — 4 With a mean residual maturity of
more than nine and up to ten years.
Deutsche Bundesbank9
8
7
65
4
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003
Strong share
price gainsBond sales

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
25five-year Federal notes (Bobls) and ten-year
Federal bonds (Bunds). The Land govern-
ments raised 311 billion in the bond market,
slightly less than in the previous quarter ( 313
billion). Two bonds issued by the former Treu-hand agency were redeemed for 35 billion
each. The latter borrower no longer issuespaper on the bond market but acquires refi-nancing in conjunction with the Federal Gov-ernment.
German enterprises again raised larger
amounts of resources in the capital market inthe second quarter of 2003. Overall, domes-tic corporate bonds were sold for 37 billion
net and commercial paper issued by domesticnon-banks for 3
12billion net. The very low
level of interest rates and the narrow yieldspreads for corporate bonds are likely to havehad a favourable impact. In addition to issu-ing domestic debt securities – amounting, onbalance, to 322
12billion in the first half of
2003 – for refinancing purposes Germanindustrial enterprises continued to use bondsissued in the international capital market bytheir foreign financial subsidiaries. At the endof March 2003, the last date for which fig-ures are currently available, 3225 billion
worth of such bonds were outstanding, iemore than three times the amount of domes-tic corporate debt securities in circulation (seeadjacent chart). German enterprises raiselarge amounts of funds in the internationalcapital market via foreign subsidiaries primar-ily because of tax advantages.
Credit institutions raised considerably less
(32
12billion) than in the first quarter ( 313 bil-
lion). As in the previous quarter, this can beexplained by the German banks’ limited need
for refinancing as a result of weak lending.Despite the marked slump compared withthe first quarter ( 318
12billion), debt securities
issued by specialised credit institutions, withnet sales of 35 billion, again led the field, fol-
lowed by mortgage Pfandbriefe with 34 bil-
lion. By contrast, the volume of other bankbonds outstanding fell by 36
12billion.
As stock market prices rose, there was a
sharp increase in issuing activity in the Ger-man equity market in the second quarter. Be-tween April and June, domestic enterprisesplaced 35
12billion of new shares at market
values, nearly twice as much as in the preced-ing quarter. In contrast to the precedingperiod, listed equities accounted for most ofthe issue volume.Outstanding at year-end
DM bn  5 bn
100200300400500600
0oCorporate bonds and commercial paper
issued by foreign financial subsidiaries 1
Commercial paper issued by
domestic non-banks via domesticcredit institutons
Corporate bonds
issued by residents
2
MarchSecuritised liabilities
of German enterprises
1Source: BIS. — 2Excluding corporate
bonds which are placed directly and re-
served for the issuer’s employees. — oFrom
1999, data in euro.
Deutsche Bundesbank300
250
200
150100
50
0
1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003Issuance of
corporate
bonds
Sales of bank
bonds sluggishFunds raised
in the equity
market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
26Investment activity in the
securities markets
Foreign investors were the main purchasers in
the bond market, acquiring 325 billion worth
of domestic debt securities. They addedmainly government debt securities to theirportfolios ( 317 billion). Nonetheless, their
purchases were well down on the first quar-ter (334 billion). Investment by domestic non-
banks was also on the decline; following 311
billion in the first quarter, they invested 39 bil-
lion worth of funds in domestic debt secur-ities, most of which were issued by the publicsector. By contrast, the credit institutionstrimmed their domestic bond portfolio by 37
billion, having added 317
12billion in the pre-
vious quarter.In the second quarter the main purchasers of
German equities were domestic non-banks.They invested 33 billion in the German equity
market, following 39 billion between January
and March. On balance, foreign investorsacquired 32
12billion of domestic shares. Do-
mestic credit institutions barely featured inthe equity market in the period under review.
Sales of domestic and foreign mutual fund
shares went down to 314 billion in the
second quarter, compared with 322 billion in
the first three months of the year. Virtually allthe inflows accrued to domestic investmentcompanies. Domestic funds open to the gen-eral public and specialised funds, which man-age institutional customers’ investment, eachissued 37 billion net worth of fund shares in
the second quarter. With regard to fundsopen to the general public, investors con-tinued to focus on open-end real estatefunds. These sold 35
12billion worth of shares,
following 37 billion in the previous quarter. In
line with the positive developments on thestock market, share-based funds recordedinflows of 32 billion in the second quarter,
after 31 billion worth of shares had been re-
deemed in the previous three-month period.By contrast, the volume of money marketfunds outstanding shrank by 31
12billion (see
chart on page 27).
Deposit and lending business of
monetary financial institutions (MFIs)with domestic customers
As part of the deposit business of German
MFIs with domestic customers, overnightInvestment activity in the German
securities markets
5billion
2003 2002
ItemJan to
MarApr to
JuneApr to
June
Bonds and notes 1
Residents 34.1 21.5 23.7
Credit institutions 2 20.0 3.2 15.9
of which
Foreign bonds and notes 3 2.7 10.1 9.7
Non-banks 4 14.1 18.3 7.9
of which
Domestic bonds and notes 10.8 9.0 – 3.1
Non-residents 3 34.0 25.2 31.9
Shares
Residents – 3.7 6.0 10.1
Credit institutions 2 – 6.2 5.5 – 9.1
of which
Domestic shares – 3.5 0.2 – 3.4
Non-banks 4 2.5 0.6 19.3
of which
Domestic shares 8.9 2.9 – 4.2
Non-residents 3 – 2.5 2.5 10.1
Mutual fund shares
Investment in specialised funds 7.9 6.8 11.1
Investment in funds open to thegeneral public 10.9 7.0 4.6of which: Share-based funds – 0.8 2.0 1.0
1From the start of 2000, including debt securities with
maturities of up to one year issued by non-banks and commer-cial paper. — 2Book values, statistically adjusted. — 3Trans-
action values. — 4Residual.
Deutsche Bundesbank
Bond purchasesShare
purchases
Mutual fund
shares

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
27deposits again increased sharply in the se-
cond quarter of 2003, at a seasonally adjust-ed annualised rate of 15
12%. However, the
pace of the growth slowed somewhat com-pared with the first quarter, when annualisedsight deposits had increased by just under21%. In the period under review, non-financial enterprises and other financial insti-tutions, in particular, expanded their over-night deposits more strongly in the periodfrom April to June than is usual at that timeof year. Given the subdued economic outlookand the persistently high degree of uncer-tainty in the financial markets, especially withregard to bond market price movements,these enterprises appear to consider it moreappropriate to “park” their inflowing fundstemporarily in overnight deposits rather thanto invest them. The low interest rates certain-ly favoured that decision.
Deposits with an agreed period of notice of
three months again benefited from the inter-est rate situation. In seasonally adjustedterms, they were built up again distinctly inthe second quarter. As in the previous quar-ter, the increase not only affected high-interest special savings facilities, which havebeen increasingly favoured since mid-2001, ieshortly after the start of the interest-loweringperiod in this market segment, but also sav-ings deposits with a comparatively low min-imum or basic rate of interest. In the periodunder review the decrease in deposits with anagreed maturity of up to two years is alsolikely to have contributed to the increase inshort-term savings deposits. All in all, how-ever, there was only a slight reduction inshort-term time deposits between April and
 5 bn 5 bn
 5 bn
Money market fundsOpen-end real estate fundsNew investment in selected funds
Share-based fundsDAX performance index 1Share prices and
selected fund investment
1End of month; end-1987 = 1000. Source:
Deutsche Börse AG.
Deutsche Bundesbank6+
4+
2+
0
2−8+
6+
4+
2+
0
2−14+
12+
10+
8+
6+
4+
2+
0
2−8000
7000
6000
5000
4000
3000
2500
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003Further sharp
increase in
overnight
deposits
Sharp increase
in short-term
savings
deposits, too...
...while only
slight reduction
in short-term
time deposits

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
28Deutsche BundesbankBank Lending Survey
Less stringent tightening of the credit standards
The results of the third Eurosystem Bank Lending Sur-
vey2published in July 2003 indicate that in the second 
quarter of 2003 there was a further slight tightening 
of the surveyed institutions’ credit standards applied 
to loans or credit lines to enterprises in Germany. This tightening was again less stringent than in the previous quarter. This time small and medium-sized enterprises 
tended to be hit harder by the tightening, whereas the 
credit standards applied to lending to large enterprises had been the main target for tightening in the previous quarter. As the main overall reason for the tightening, the credit institutions pointed essentially to further esti-
mations of higher risk; these were particularly related 
to the general economic outlook and sector-speciﬁ  c or 
ﬁ rm-speciﬁ  c factors but also to the intrinsic value of 
collateral. Although market rates were declining, the 
data supplied by the survey respondents suggest that the tightening of the credit standards also reﬂ  ected the 
fact that the reﬁ  nancing terms in the money or bond 
markets were still slightly more restrictive. By contrast, credit standards applied to housing loans and household 
consumer credit remained virtually unchanged in the second quarter of 2003. The institutions do not expect 
any fundamental changes to their credit standards for 
enterprises or households in the third quarter of 2003 
(see adjacent chart).
Despite the virtually negligeable change in credit 
standards, the respondent banks indicated that there 
had been a further widening of margins, especially for 
riskier loans. As far as corporate lending is concerned, the tightening also continued to be reﬂ  ected, albeit to a 
lesser extent, in more restrictive loan covenants, volume 
reductions and stricter collateral requirements (see chart 
on page 29). 
1Difference between the sum of the percentages for “tightened 
considerably“ and “tightened somewhat“ and the sum of the percentages for “eased somewhat“ and “eased considerably“. —
2See Deutsche Bundesbank, German results of euro-area bank Percentage distribution of responses 1
%%%
Q4 Q1 Q2 Expectations
for Q3
2002 2003Consumer creditTo households
Housing loansTo enterprisesChanges in the credit standards applied
to the approval of loans or credit lines
40+
30+
20+
10+
040+
30+
20+
10+
0
10–60+
50+
40+
30+
20+
10+
0

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
29According to the survey, there was a further slight 
decrease in the demand for corporate credit, while for housing loans and household consumer credit the tendency was slightly upward. The banks’ responses 
indicated that the shrinking demand for corporate loans 
was mainly affecting long-term loans. The main factor here was that less ﬁ  nancing was needed for ﬁ  xed invest-
ment, inventories and working capital; by contrast, posi-
tive demand effects came from debt restructuring, for example. With regard to lending to households, lower interest rates were the main positive factor affecting 
housing loans while weak consumer conﬁ  dence con-
tinued to have a dampening effect. The institutions tak-
ing part in the survey expect little change in the overall demand for corporate credit in the third quarter; they 
anticipate a further slight decline in the demand from 
large enterprises only. Among households it is therefore 
assumed that demand for housing loans and consumer 
credit will remain more or less unchanged.
Taken together, these results show that German banks 
have continuously relaxed the tightening of credit stand-
ards over the past three quarters (see chart on page 28). 
This is true of both corporate lending and lending to households. By contrast, there is still a trend towards a 
persistent risk-differentiated widening of margins in the 
areas of credit business covered here. Even though the 
survey results can only provide data on the changes in 
the degree of restriction,  a further easing of the overall situation regarding credit supply and demand can be 
expected in the third quarter of 2003.
In the second quarter of 2003 Germany’s results were 
again below the aggregate ﬁ  gure for the euro area 
mainly in respect of tightening in the ﬁ  eld of corpor-ate lending. In Germany, however, there was a more 
frequent additional widening of margins in lending to households; in particular, the estimations of consumer 
credit risk were slightly up on the euro area. Overall, however, the German results broadly matched the aggregate results for the euro area.
3
lending survey, Monthly Report , June 2003, pp 67-76. — 3See
European Central Bank, The results of the July 2003 bank lending survey for the euro area, Monthly Bulletin , August 2003, pp 10-12.Net percentage of responses 1
%
%
Size of the loan
or credit line
Maturity
Non-interest-rate charges
Collateral requirementsLoan covenantsOther terms and conditions
Q4 Q1 Q2
2002 2003Prices
Margin on riskier loans
Margin on average loansChanges in the credit terms and
conditions applied to enterprises
over the past three months
100
80
60
40
20
0100
80
60
40

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
30June as, in addition to the other financial in-
stitutions, insurance companies added per-ceptibly to their short-term time deposits atGerman banks.
In seasonally adjusted terms, however,
longer-term bank deposits were reducedmarkedly in the period under review. In par-ticular, the trend decline in savings depositswith an agreed period of notice of more thanthree months continued and gained momen-tum. In contrast to the previous quarters, be-tween April and June deposits with an agreedmaturity of more than two years were also re-duced. It was primarily the insurance com-panies which allowed their longer-term timedeposits to dwindle; with a share of around60%, they represented the bulk of these de-posits.In seasonally adjusted terms, there was a
moderate increase in loans by German MFIsto the domestic private sector between Apriland June. The low overall dynamism is prob-ably still due primarily to the cyclically inducedweak demand for credit. The results of thethird Bank Lending Survey, however, also indi-cate that the banks tightened their terms oflending again slightly in the second quarter,albeit less than previously (see box entitledBank Lending Survey on pages 28-29). Thismay have affected short-term loans to do-mestic enterprises in particular, as these weretrimmed back in the period under review. Bycontrast, medium to long-term unsecuritisedlending to the German private sector was ex-panded fairly strongly. In seasonally adjustedterms, domestic MFIs also increased theirsecuritised lending to German enterprises. Onbalance, they added only shares and otherequities to their portfolios, having reducedsuch holdings in the previous quarter.
As the borrowers statistics show, on balance
German banks granted only additional hous-ing loans in the second quarter. As in the twoprevious quarters, this meant that mediumand long-term housing loans increased per-ceptibly. This is likely to have been primarilydue to the further clear reduction in mort-gage rates between April and June. Whileconsumer credit stagnated in the quarterunder review, loans granted by Germanbanks to domestic enterprises declined per-ceptibly. In particular, further net credit re-demptions were made by the trade sector,manufacturing and construction, this patternhaving been observed for nine quarters.However, on balance the services sector,
Lending and deposits of monetary
financial institutions (MFIs)in Germany
*
5billion
2003 2002
ItemApr to
JuneApr to
June
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight + 30.2 + 28.1
With agreed maturities
up to 2 years – 5.9 + 0.6over 2 years – 2.5 + 0.8
At agreed notice
2
up to 3 months + 2.8 – 8.7over 3 months – 5.4 – 3.2
Lending
To domestic enterprises andresident individuals
Unsecuritised + 4.6 + 3.6Securitised + 3.3 – 3.6
To domestic government
Unsecuritised – 9.4 – 14.2Securitised – 5.8 + 9.4
*As well as banks (including building and loan associ-
ations, but excluding the Bundesbank), monetary finan-cial institutions (MFIs) here also include money marketfunds; see also Table IV.1 in the Statistical Section of theMonthly Report .— 1Enterprises, individuals and
government. — 2Savings deposits.
Deutsche Bundesbank
Marked
reduction of
longer-term
bank depositsLending to the
private sector
Lending, by
borrower

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
31financial institutions and insurance com-
panies also decreased their lending at the endof the period under review, having expandedit between January and March, in some casesdistinctly. By contrast, lending to transportand communications enterprises was expand-ed somewhat. However, the perceptible over-all decline in lending by German banks to thedomestic enterprise sector needs to be seenas closely bound up with the weak domesticeconomy. Although the banks also tightenedtheir credit standards slightly in the secondquarter, they did so to a far lesser extent thanin the preceding quarters.
Lending by domestic MFIs to the German
public sector went down by 315.1 billion in
the first quarter, after having increased by asimilar amount in the previous quarter ( 316.1
billion). In addition to unsecuritised lendingby German banks to the domestic public sec-tor (down by 39.4 billion), the banks also re-
duced their investment in government secur-ities in the period under review (by 35.8 bil-
lion).Seasonally adjusted
 5 bn
%Lin scale
Year-on-year changeLog scale
Loans1Loans to domestic enterprises
and resident individuals
1End of month; adjusted for statistical
changes.
Deutsche Bundesbank8
6
4
2
02250
2200
2150
2100
2050
2000
1950
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003Lending to the
public sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
32Economic conditions
in GermanyUnderlying trends
There were still no stimuli to the German
economy in the spring months. Exports losttheir sustaining power and domestic demandshowed no more than subdued growth. Onceagain, retarding factors had the upper hand.Indicators for the international setting do givethe impression of a turn for the better andsurveys point to an improvement in sentimentin a number of major sectors in Germany aswell. At the same time, there is renewed opti-mism on the financial markets. So far, how-ever, these promising signs have not beenreflected in the hard data of the officialstatistics.
Such a situation is by no means untypical be-
fore a cyclical turning point. Nevertheless,this incipient cyclical optimism cannot yet beregarded as self-sustaining, especially as thebrighter mood in some sectors of the Germaneconomy is hardly matched by output expect-ations. The corporate sector continues totake a very sceptical view of the outlook forexports. Even so, there is still the chance thatthe economy will pick up again as the yeargoes on and break free of its present under-lying trend of stagnation.
The latest flash estimate of GDP by the Fed-
eral Statistical Office revealed that the under-lying condition of the German economy, atleast in the second quarter, remained weak.According to the estimate, there was afurther slight fall in overall output. After ad-justment for seasonal and working-day vari-ations, GDP was 0.1% lower than in the pre-vious quarter. The unadjusted and working-Further slight
decline in GDP

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
33day-adjusted figures were 0.6% and 0.2%
down on the year respectively. For the firsthalf of the year, this results in a fall of 0.1%in working-day-adjusted terms.
It was a deterioration in the external situ-
ation, in particular, which exerted an adverseimpact on production in the second quarter.The volume of imports declined from thehigh levels recorded in the first few monthsof the year, which had been sustained notleast by large volumes of imported energy. Atthe same time, however, exports of goodsand services have perceptibly lost momen-tum. Real net exports showed a further fall.
This was not offset by domestic demand.
Construction investment had been clearlynegative in the first few months of the year,not least owing to the inclement weather,and recovered only in technical terms. De-mand for construction work remained de-cidedly weak. The propensity to invest in newmachinery and equipment remained very sub-dued. The crucial factor in this is likely to havebeen that capacity utilisation was decliningup to the end of the period under review. TheIfo test shows that industrial utilisation inJune was approximately 1 percentage pointdown on March, and thus 2 percentagepoints lower than the average medium-termlevel.
According to surveys, households’ sentiment
has improved somewhat of late. At the endof the period under review, economic expect-ations and the outlook for incomes were lesspessimistic than they had been in the firstfew months of the year. Nevertheless, thepropensity to make major purchases
remained subdued. This was also reflected byretail turnover in the spring months. Accord-ing to preliminary figures, at constant pricesand seasonally adjusted, average turnover be-tween April and June was no higher than ithad been in the first quarter. In contrast tothe first three months of the year, the figurewas again significantly down on the year. Thiswas one crucial reason why households’ con-sumption spending probably remained largelyunchanged at the end of the period under re-view. Evidently, caution still appeared advis-able given the continuing unfavourable situ-ation on the labour market, the occasionallyvery animated debate on rising taxes andsocial contributions and the financing of thepromised tax relief.
Adjusted for seasonal and working-day
variations, quarterly
%DM bn  5 bn
Lin scale
Year-on-year change880900920940960980
oLog scale
Real GDP 1Economic growth in Germany
1At 1995 prices. — oFrom 1999, in euro.
Deutsche Bundesbank4+
2+
0
2−500
490
480
470
460
450
1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003Weaker
external stimuli
Persistently low
level of
investment
Households
cautious

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
34Output and labour market
Second-quarter industrial output was signifi-
cantly down on the first three months of theyear, showing a seasonally adjusted decline ofaround 2
14%. It should be noted, however,
that the start of 2003 had the stimulus ofbacklog effects from last year and that, incyclical terms, the decrease is thus probablysomewhat overstated. The year-on-year fallof 1% in the last three months (compared
with a figure of +1
12% in the first quarter)
does confirm a marked slowdown in businessactivity, however. This is also suggested bythe above-mentioned decline in capacity util-isation.
The sharpest falls in output were felt by pro-
ducers of durable goods as well as in the cap-ital goods sector. In seasonally adjustedterms, their production fell by just over 4%.Particularly affected were manufacturers ofmachinery and equipment, but car manufac-turers – partly as a result of strikes – producedsignificantly fewer vehicles as well. Reducedbusiness activity with export customers is like-ly to have had an impact on both sectors. Thedecline was much smaller in the case of inter-mediate goods producers. In the non-durablegoods sector, a high level of output by drinksproducers owing to the hot summer weatherhad a positive impact.
Construction output picked up again after
the end of the winter hold-ups. According tothe currently available data, second-quarterconstruction output was only slightly up onthe first three months of the year in seasonal-ly adjusted terms. It is quite sure, however,that the figures will be revised upwards in theannual overall survey. In each of the past twoyears, the upward adjustment factor hasbeen roughly 3%. Accordingly, the year-on-year decline will be less than the currentfigure of 5
12%. Nevertheless, the fact that
output will still be significantly down on theyear even after adjustment is an indication ofthe continuing unfavourable development inthe construction sector. At present, there isSeasonally adjusted, monthly
Balance
BalanceBalance
Households’ assessment of the
economic situation3
Monthly
Moving
five-month average
1997 98 99 00 01 02 2003Expectations in the
manufacturing sector 1
Export expectations
Output expectationsBusiness climate in the
industrial sector 1 , 2Sentiment in the industrial
sector and among households
1 Source: Ifo Institute. — 2  Western Ger-
many. — 3 Bundesbank calculations based
on data from the Gesellschaft für Konsum-
forschung .
Deutsche Bundesbank40+
20+
0
20−
40−20+
0
20−20+
0
20−
40−
Marked
reduction
in industrial
outputConstruction
picks up after
winter slump

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
35no sign of an end to the downward slide.
General construction and civil engineeringwere both almost equally affected. The situ-ation is now scarcely better in the finishingtrades.
Up to the end of the period under review, the
labour market was feeling the pressure offurther job cuts. This means that, up to thepresent, there has been a distinct fall in em-ployment. According to the present calcula-tions of the Federal Statistical Office, whichhave recently been revised downwards, thenet average monthly figure for job lossessince the summer of last year is around55,000. By May, the seasonally adjusted num-ber of persons in work had thus fallen to38.10 million, ie around 660,000 lower thanlast year, which had likewise witnessed sharpreductions in the level of employment. Thiscorresponds to a fall of around 1
34%.
The largest reduction in jobs continued to
take place in the construction industry. Morethan 6% of the workforce, ie around150,000 employees, will probably have losttheir jobs within the space of one year. How-ever, there was also a further reduction in thenumber of persons employed in the manufac-turing sector (excluding construction). Theservices sector, with only small increases inthe number of jobs, did not offset this devel-opment to any great extent.
The negative overall picture is not fundamen-
tally altered by recent talk of nearly one mil-lion “new” mini-jobs having been createdsince April of this year. It is true that simplifiedlegal regulations on low-paid jobs have beenin force since April, but such a large increase
within no more than a quarter of a year doesnot seem to be very probable in cyclicalterms. Instead, it is more likely that the newprovisions have made it significantly easier forsome persons already holding low-paid jobsto be captured in the statistics. It may also bethe case that more persons have taken up asecond job. An additional factor to be con-sidered in this context is that the averageSeasonally adjusted, quarterly
%%
Capacity utilisation 1
0 Mean 1993-2002 Lin scale
Year-on-year changeLog scale
Output
1995 = 100Output and utilisation
in industry
1Results of the Ifo business survey.
Deutsche Bundesbank88
85
82
799+
6+
3+
0
3−
6−124
121
118
115
112
109
106
103
1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003Further decline
in employment
Lots of new
mini-jobs?

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
36number of hours worked in mini-jobs is very
small. The change in the total number ofhours worked is much smaller. Owing to thestructural shifts in the forms of employment,it is becoming less and less possible to give anaccurate description of the input of labour inthe economy in terms of persons in work.
At the end of April, the seasonally adjusted
number of persons officially registered as un-employed was roughly 4.41 million, ie 40,000
fewer than in April, the most recent month inwhich the figure peaked. The year-on-year in-crease went down to 305,000, comparedwith 415,000 in the second quarter. Atthe end of the period under review, the sea-sonally adjusted unemployment rate, as cal-culated by the Federal Labour Office, was10.6%. Using the internationally standard-ised method, the figure was 9.4%.
Given a further decline in employment, the
statistically measured fall in the official un-employment figure points to powerful specialfactors being in operation. This can also beseen from the fact that, up to the present,the year-on-year inflow into unemploymentof persons previously in work was perceptiblyhigher than the number of those who foundwork and dropped out of the statistics duringthe same period. The fact that unemploy-ment has nevertheless fallen is likely to bedue mainly to the numerous legislative initia-tives for restructuring the labour market (re-organisation of the Federal Labour Office; the“job placement offensive”; the Job-AQTIV -
Gesetz, an act designed to get people backinto work; the first and second Acts Pro-moting Modern Labour Market Services).These measures included a tightening of job-acceptance criteria and a stricter examinationof eligibility for registering as unemployed. Thishas played a significant part in the sizeable in-crease in outflows of persons who have nottaken up work or who have not de-registeredfor other reasons, such as illness or retire-ment, or owing to special regulations underthe Social Security Code. Almost 880,000 de-registrations of this kind occurred in the firstQuarterly
Millions
Millions
%Thou-
sands
Thou-
sands
0Unemployment rate
(seasonally adjusted)
JulyJulyYear-on-year changeUnemployed
(seasonally adjusted)JulyApril /
MayYear-on-year
change38.8
38.4
38.0
37.6
37.2April /
MayEmployed
(seasonally
adjusted)Labour market
Deutsche Bundesbank12
1110
9400+
0
400−4.6
4.2
3.8800+
400+
0
400−
800−
- - 
1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003Fall in official
unemploy-
ment...
...due in part to
special factors

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
37seven months of 2003, 160,000 more than
12 months previously. Although the numberof renewed registrations (following failures tomeet the reporting deadline) during the sameperiod, at almost 175,000, was some 12,500higher than in 2002, there is still a positivebalance in terms of de-registration.
Furthermore, improved incentives have led to
more persons leaving the unemployment rollsto become self-employed. The number of for-merly unemployed persons who took up thisoption was around 67,000 higher than in thesame period of 2002. By contrast, the expect-ations linked with the establishment of Per-sonnel Service Agencies, which were intend-ed to step up the placement of the un-employed in temporary and part-time workon a private basis, have not been fulfilled. Upto and including July, only 3,500 unemployedpersons had been taken on by such agencies.
Orders
Demand for industrial products has declined
perceptibly over the past few months, withexport business now also being affected. Interms of volume, seasonally adjusted new ex-port orders on an average of the period fromApril to June were 2% down on the quarter.This meant that they were around 4% downon the year, compared with a year-on-year in-crease of 2
14% in the first quarter.
The decline was especially pronounced in the
case of intermediate goods producers, wherethe seasonally adjusted flow of export orderswent down by 4% on the quarter. The mainsector affected was base metals. The decline
was all the more apparent owing to the factthat demand up to the last few months of2002 had been very buoyant – orders in thefourth quarter of last year had been 8% upon the year. Manufacturers of chemicals andchemical products also performed consider-ably less well than before, however. Afterseasonal adjustment, their orders fell byaround 4
12% in the second quarter. The de-Seasonally adjusted, quarterly, log scale
DomesticForeignNew orders
Volume, 2000 = 100
TotalDemand in industry
Deutsche Bundesbank105
100
95
90105
100
95
90
85
80
75105
100
95
90
85
8080
1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003Deterioration
in demand
for industrial
exports

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
38cline was not so large in the case of capital
goods producers, where a very large order inthe “manufacture of other transport equip-ment” (aircraft, ships and boats, railways androlling stock) had a positive impact. By con-trast, manufacturers of machinery and equip-ment as well as manufacturers of computerand communications equipment reported amarked fall in orders. The non-durable goodssector held up comparatively well up to andincluding May, with clothing manufacturers
receiving sizeable export orders, although theflow of orders decreased in this sector too inJune.
The decrease in domestic business activity,
which had already been subdued for sometime, was only slightly less pronounced. In-coming domestic orders went down by 1
34%
in the period from April to June. In terms ofvolume, this was likewise some 1
34% lower
than in the same period of 2002, after theprevious year’s figure had been easilymatched in the first few months. In contrastto exports, it was the capital goods sectorthat was affected more than average on thedomestic markets. This was due not least to asignificant decline in orders for private cars. Inthe basic materials sector, the chemical indus-try was largely able to hold its own, whichmeant that it partly counterbalanced themarked downturn in the steel industry.
There was also less demand for construction
work during the past few months. Seasonallyadjusted new construction orders in April andMay (more recent data are unavailable) were2
34% down on the quarter. The figure for
those two months was no less than 1112%
lower than the already depressed level of 2002.
Given the critical financial situation, public
sector contractors, in particular, were verycautious in placing orders. After seasonal ad-justment, they reduced the volume of theirnew orders in April and May by nearly one-tenth compared with the winter quarter.Road construction and other public sectorcivil engineering work were especially af-Seasonally adjusted, quarterly, log scale
...in housing construction...from the
   public sectorConstruction orders...
...from industrial
   enterprisesVolume, 2000 = 100
Total
construction
orders
April /
MayDemand for
construction work
Deutsche Bundesbank140
130
120
110
100
90
80
70
60110
100
90
80110
100
90
80
75120
110
100
90
80
1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003- - - - Further losses
in domestic
business
Further fall in
construction
demand...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
39fected. In the commercial sector, on the other
hand, there was a slight increase in thevolume of new orders. Even so, there had al-ready been a dramatic decline in this sectorduring the first few months of the year. Thelevel of orders was therefore very low even atthe end of the period under review.
In housing construction, the debate on cuts
in government assistance had triggered asurge of accelerated orders towards the endof last year. At the start of 2003, the level ofbusiness activity in this area was significantlylower and has not recovered since then. Neworders continue to be a good one-tenthlower than in the same period of 2002. Tak-ing the number of construction permits fordwellings granted in April and May as a yard-stick for housing demand this year, a furtheroverall reduction in rental housing construc-tion is likely for 2003.
Prices
Price developments at the various levels of
the economy were very calm up to the end ofthe period under review. Nevertheless, thedampening external effects have becomeweaker and oil prices have held firm at a fairlyhigh level. The temporary upward pressureon prices due to unfavourable weather condi-tions has been limited so far. There are still nosigns of a slide into deflationary tendencies,which many had been fearing until recently.
In seasonally adjusted terms, consumer prices
have been largely stable for some months.The year-on-year rate of increase, which isgenerally used as a measure of inflation, was
0.9% in July according to the national priceindex and 0.8% according to the HarmonisedIndex of Consumer Prices (HICP) used by theECB. One factor in this was that the prices ofseasonal food products, which had previouslyrisen on account of the unfavourable weatherconditions, returned to normal. The crop fail-ures caused by the recent heat wave willprobably not push up prices permanently ei-ther. Additionally, consumer prices for refinedpetroleum products have remained largelystable, and the shift in the main holidayperiod to August was one factor in the sea-sonal price increases for package holidays inJuly being comparatively small. This was onereason why the slight steady price increasefor services did not continue towards the endof the period under review. In the case of in-Consumer prices
Annual percentage change
2002 2003
ItemPer-
cent-ageweight-i n gQ 4Q 1Q 2J u l y
Energy 8.1 3.4 7.7 2.0 3.1
of which
Refined petroleumproducts 4.2 8.4 14.4 0.7 2.2
Food 9.0 – 1.0 – 2.2 – 0.6 0.4
of which
Seasonal products 1.6 – 4.6 – 9.5 – 2.6 1.2
Industrial goods 31.3 0.2 0 0.2 0.2Services 27.1 2.1 1.4 1.4 0.8
of which
Package holidays 2.0 1.3 1.0 2.5 – 3.8
Rents 24.4 1.4 1.2 1.2 1.1
Total 100.0 1.2 1.2 0.9 0.9
Memo item
Harmonised Index ofConsumer Prices 100.0 1.1 1.1 0.9 0.8
Deutsche Bundesbank
Favourable
price
developments
Stable
consumer
prices

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
40dustrial goods, numerous special offers
caused the year-on-year rate of inflation toremain quite low.
Shortly before this report went to press, inter-
national oil prices were being quoted at justunder US$30 for a barrel of North Sea Brent.They were thus above the limit set by OPEC,which is based on a basket of prices for seven
types of oil. Prevailing concerns about furtherproduction losses in Nigeria and Venezuela,the slow pace at which production is beingincreased in Iraq and reports that stocksbeing built up for the coming winter are stillat a low level were preventing a decline inprices. Moreover, from a European perspec-tive, the price-dampening effects of a risingeuro exchange rate have become less pro-nounced. As a result, German import prices,which are invoiced in euro, did not go downany further in June; the year-on-year fall inprices decreased to 2.7% from as much as3.4% in April and May.
The phase of price reductions in industrial fac-
tory gate prices did not continue at the end ofthe period under review either. Seasonally ad-justed producer prices for industrial productswere unchanged in June, the year-on-year rateof increase remaining at 1.3%. Excludingenergy, the price level continued to fall slightly.The year-on-year rate of price increase wentdown further to 0.4%. In May 2003, quotedprices for construction work largely held steadyat their end-2000 level.1995 = 100, seasonally adjusted
Enlarged scale
Import pricesLog scale
Prices of
raw materials 1Prices of raw materials
and imports
1HWWA Index of World Market Prices of
Raw Materials, on a euro basis (up to and
including 1998 on a DM basis); not season-
ally adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank120
115
110
105
100
95200
180
160
140
120
100
80
1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003
High oil pricesProducer prices
unchanged

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
41Foreign trade and
paymentsForeign trade and current account
In the spring months of 2003, the external
environment of German export companiescontinued to be impacted by the subduedeconomic developments and uncertaintiessurrounding the economic outlook in theeconomies of major trading partners. Againstthis background, export expectations of Ger-man companies for the following months fellin the second quarter of 2003 to a neutraloutlook. In the second quarter seasonally ad-justed new foreign orders also weakenedover the previous period, which had recordeda slight increase in order activity. Overall,however, seasonally adjusted exports in thesecond quarter of 2003 were just under2
12% lower than the level of the previous
three months.
In the spring of 2003 – statistical information
on foreign trade by region and product groupis available up to and including May – Ger-man exporters reported declining sales pri-marily in the euro area, but saw these drop inthe markets outside of EMU as well. In thiscontext, regional export performance wasmainly supported by the cyclical position ofthe trading partners’ economies. Thus, sea-sonally adjusted goods delivered to the euroarea on an average of the months of Apriland May declined by 3% vis-à-vis the averageof the first quarter of 2003, owing to the on-going economic slowdown there. Moreover,exports of goods to the other EU countries,the demand from which had supported Ger-man export performance in the first quarterperceptibly, and to the United States, also fellshort of the average level witnessed in theExternal
environment
Breakdown
of exports

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
42first quarter. By contrast, an increase in export
demand from the central and eastern Euro-pean transition countries and the emergingeconomies in South-East Asia was a positivefactor. Sales by German exporters to thesecountries increased moderately.
In the meantime, exports to the United States
in particular are likely to have been dampen-ed by the decline in Germany’s price competi-tiveness which started in spring of last year
and usually has a delayed impact on exports.Whereas Germany’s price competitiveness,calculated on the basis of deflators of totalsales, fell in the last year and a half by nearly28% vis-à-vis the United States and justunder 11% vis-à-vis the other non-EMUcountries, it improved slightly (+1%) vis-à-visthe euro area countries. According to practic-ally all relevant economic observers, however,the euro was significantly undervalued at thebeginning of 2002. With a view to all of themajor trading partners, the longer-term out-look for Germany’s international competitive-ness can, at the moment, be assessed as ap-proximately neutral.
German exporters’ entire range of goods was
affected by the weaker export demand (seetable on page 43). The ongoing subdued in-vestment activity of major trading partnersdampened the export business mainly in thecapital goods sector (-4
12%), which in the
current year again accounted for nearly halfof all exports. Exports of goods from the in-formation and communication industry post-ed the sharpest decline (-8
12%), which in the
first quarter, had still recorded growth. Exportdemand for machinery and motor vehiclesalso declined. Exports of intermediate goods,which make up nearly a third of Germany’sexport business, fell by 2
12%. Furthermore,
after having posted marked growth in thetwo previous quarters, exports of consumergoods dropped by 3%, likely owing to theongoing tense situation in the labour marketsof many trading partners’ countries. 5 bn
%Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
monthlyLin scale
Export expectations2Orders received
from abroad
values, 2000 = 100monthlymonthly 1
Log scale
ExportsExport trend
1Monthly values adjusted to match quar-
terly level. — 2Results of the Ifo business
survey; balances of positive and negative
company reports.
Deutsche Bundesbank20+
15+
10+
5+
0
5−110
105
100
95
90
85
80
75180
170
160
150
140
130
120
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
43Seasonally adjusted imported goods to Ger-
many weakened in the second quarter by justunder 3
12%. The reduction in the total value
of imports is, however, attributed to anequally sharp drop in prices for importedgoods in the same period. In real terms, thelevel of imported goods thus remained nearlyconstant. One major reason for the observeddecline in import prices is likely to have beenthe steep fall in imported energy prices(-16%) in the second quarter. In the periodunder review, the prices for imported crudeoil alone dropped by more than a fifth com-pared to the first quarter. Since import priceshave broadly fallen, the stronger euro and theoverall muted domestic demand are also like-ly to have contributed to these price declines.Slight growth was observed only in the areasof motor vehicles and chemical products.
Compared to the first quarter, products of
the foreign chemicals industry were particu-larly in demand in the two-month period ofApril-May 2003 (+3% on a monthly average).By contrast, seasonally adjusted imports ofmachinery and equipment and motor vehiclesposted a slight decline (-
12% each) over the
previous period. Other major sectors experi-enced declines, in some cases a sharp fall inimports, including information and communi-cation technology which fell more than 8%.
This import trend can especially be seen
against the backdrop of weaker demand forimported capital goods observed since thewinter months. By contrast, despite the on-going subdued consumer sentiment importsof consumer goods increased by around 1%even with declining prices.The drop in imports not only affected individ-
ual trading partners. Compared with the firstquarter, imports from almost all regions fell(see table above). By comparison, importsfrom the EU countries which are not partici-pating in European monetary union, from theUnited States and from the emerging marketsin South-East Asia declined significantly. Bycontrast, imports from the central and eastEuropean transition countries increased(+1
12%), thus further extending their share
of German imports in the period under re-view, namely to nearly 15%. There was arelatively sharp increase in imports fromOPEC countries (+2
12%) which was remark-
able against the background of markedly de-clining crude oil prices. This may be due to in-ventories being replenished in the periodunder review.Trend in foreign trade by region and
by categories of goods
Seasonally adjusted average of April to May
period 2003 vis-à-vis average of January to Marchperiod 2003 in %
ItemEx-
portsIm-
ports
Total – 2.0 – 3.3Selected country/group of countries
Euro-area countries – 3.0 – 3.0
Other EU countries – 9.4 – 9.5United States – 5.2 – 7.0Japan – 0.3 – 3.9Central and east Europeancountries in transition + 2.6 + 1.5OPEC countries – 4.6 + 2.6Emerging markets in South-EastAsia + 1.1 – 7.8
Categories of goods
Selected main categories
Intermediate goods – 2.4 – 2.0Capital goods – 4.4 – 5.1Consumer goods – 3.0 + 0.9Energy sources . – 7.0
Selected categories
Chemicals – 2.6 + 3.2Machinery – 2.0 – 0.5Motor vehicles and motor vehicleparts – 3.0 – 0.7Information technology – 8.6 – 8.1
Deutsche BundesbankImports of
goods
Breakdown
of imports

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
44Was the German conversion rate too high at the start of monetary union?
The German economy’s persistently slug-
gish growth has been put down in partto Germany joining monetary union at aconversion rate which was too high. As aresult, this is said to have impaired theability of German companies to competeagainst the other euro area countries.
1
Measured by a competition indicatorbased on unit labour costs in the manu-facturing sector, which is often used ininternational comparisons, one does in-deed at a first glance draw the conclu-sion that Germany’s competitive situ-ation upon entry into European mone-tary union was clearly below the long-term average for the period since 1975.In this context, it should be consideredthat in the last two decades, the unit la-bour costs in the German manufacturingsector have risen more than in the othersectors, which are also of significance fordetermining the international competi-tiveness of Germany’s economy.
2In many
partner countries by contrast, the exactopposite trend has been observed, mean-ing that in the long term, using a compe-tition indicator based on unit labourcosts in the manufacturing sector, would,in the case of Germany, lead to consider-able interpretation errors. Moreover,wages represent only one cost factor, al-beit an important one, that companieshave to consider. The Bundesbank there-
fore uses for its analyses a more broadlydefined indicator based on the price andcost index of total sales, which in add-ition to the (unit) costs of the total do-mestic value-added created (includingservices produced in Germany) also takesaccount of imported goods and services.Measured by this more precise indicator,the competitive position of Germany’seconomy vis-à-vis the other euro areacountries at the start of monetary unionapproximately equalled the long-termaverage for the period from 1975. It hasimproved slightly on the whole sincethen (see chart on page 45). The theorythat Germany joined monetary union atan exchange rate that was overvalued,and, as a result, suffered a worseningof price competitiveness within theeuro area, must therefore be rejected.Another argument against the theory ofa too high conversion rate is the fact thatGerman exports to the euro area devel-oped very dynamically right up to the be-ginning of 2001, ie more than two yearsfollowing the start of monetary union.German exports to these countries didnot lose momentum until the major euroarea trading partners experienced adownturn in growth which started in2001.
1A comprehensive analysis of the competitive situation of
the German economy in the euro area is planned for theOctober 2003 issue of the Monthly Report. — 2In the
November 1998 issue of the Monthly Report, the advan-tages and disadvantages of the various indicators of
international competitiveness have been illustrated indetail.
Deutsche Bundesbank

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
45Owing to the somewhat steeper decline in
imports vis-à-vis exports during the secondquarter of 2003, Germany’s trade surplusrose in seasonally adjusted terms by just over3
12billion to 330 billion. In the second quar-
ter, the deficit in invisible current accounttransactions with non-residents rose by35 billion over the previous three-month
period. The deficit on Germany’s services ac-count was somewhat higher than in the pre-vious three-month period. Furthermore, netcurrent transfers and (net) payments of factorincome to non-residents rose slightly. As a re-sult, the German current account ran a sur-plus of 36
12billion, compared to approxi-
mately 311 billion in the previous quarter.Financial transactions
While the rapid end of armed conflict in Iraq
at the beginning of the second quarter had,for a short time, given rise to hopes of aneconomic recovery, renewed uncertainties asto the further development of the globaleconomy led to deflationary concerns, whichhave, however, recently abated. In parallel tothe changing mood on the global markets,significant decreases in the bond yields offirst-class borrowers were again recorded wellinto June. At the end of the quarter, however,they again rose considerably. At the sametime, central banks on both sides of the At-lantic used the leeway afforded by the abat-ing price pressure to further cut interest rates,while the euro made considerable groundagainst other currencies. The exchange rateAverage since 1975 = 100, quarterly average, log scale 1
75
80
85
90
95
100
105
110
115
120
125...price index of total sales...unit labour costs in manufacturingBased on...
1975 80 85 90 95 00 2003Germany’s price competitiveness vis-à-vis the other euro-area countries
1 Scale inverted: rise in curve (fall in values) denotes increase in German competitiveness.
Deutsche Bundesbank
Current
account
Trends in
financial
transactions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
46did not weaken until June. This uncertain
environment is also reflected in the trendof portfolio flows, which changed directionin the period under review. On thewhole, internationally-oriented investors againstepped up their cross-border investment ac-tivity which, according to the statistical data sofar available, showed that in contrast to theeuro area, financial transactions between Ger-many and non-residents in the second quarterof 2003 resulted in net capital imports throughcombined portfolio transactions and direct in-vestments, while in the area of credit transac-tions there were net exports of funds.
In the area of portfolio investment, which
reacts particularly sensitively to changes in in-vestor preferences and perceptions, net cap-ital imports totalled 37
12billion. However,
this figure is clearly lower than in the previousthree-month period ( 336 billion).
This development was mainly due to the fact
that following the end of the military conflictin Iraq, German savers apparently overcametheir strong reluctance to invest abroad onceagain and increased their securities holdingsby320 billion. In the previous three-month
period they sold 35
12billion in foreign secur-
ities against the backdrop of the weak globaleconomy and the imminent war in the MiddleEast. German investors’ renewed interest inglobal investment opportunities especiallybuoyed sales of foreign bonds, in particulareuro-denominated bonds issued by non-residents ( 313
12billion). Since these offer a
somewhat higher yield than comparableBunds, they have enjoyed widespread popu-larity since the beginning of European monet-Major items of the balance
of payments
5billion
2002 2003
I t e m Q 2Q 1Q 2
I Current account
1 Foreign trade 1
Exports (fob) 162.3 162.8 162.0
Imports (cif) 131.6 133.5 132.2
Balance + 30.8 + 29.3 + 29.8
2 Services (balance) – 8.9 – 8.6 – 8.93 Factor income (balance) + 0.5 – 4.3 – 2.54 Current transfers (balance) – 8.6 – 5.3 – 7.6
Balance on current account
2 + 12.4 + 9.7 + 8.8
Memo item
Balances, seasonally adjusted
1 Foreign trade + 30.5 + 29.3 + 30.02 Services – 9.4 – 8.4 – 9.33 Factor income – 1.4 – 1.2 – 4.64 Current transfers – 8.7 – 6.8 – 7.7
Current account
2 + 9.8 + 11.2 + 6.7
II Balance of capital transfers 3 – 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.2
III Balance of financial account 4 – 20.1 – 15.9 – 29.3
IV Change in the foreign reserves
at transaction values(increase: –)
5 + 2.4 – 1.5 + 1.5
V Balance of unclassifiable
transactions + 5.3 + 7.8 + 18.8
1Special trade according to the official foreign trade statistics
(source: Federal Statistical Office). — 2Includes supplementary
trade items. — 3Including the acquisition/disposal of non-
produced non-financial assets. — 4For details see the table
“Financial transactions” on page •. — 5Excluding allocation of
SDRs and changes due to value adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankPortfolio
investment
German invest-
ment in foreign
securities

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
47ary union. Over the course of the quarter,
German investors also geared their portfoliosmore towards shares of foreign companies.While April still saw net sales of equities, aswas the case in the first three months, thewaning uncertainty in the financial marketsled German investors to becoming net buyersin the second quarter. As a result, their equityholdings actually increased slightly on balance(3
12billion). By contrast, they sold 3112billion
in foreign money market paper.
In the second quarter, non-resident investors
again showed keen interest in German secur-ities and increased their holdings by 327
12bil-
lion on balance (compared to 33012billion in
the previous quarter). In the period under re-view they focused on bank debt securities(313 billion, following 38 billion in the previ-
ous period), whose spread over public bondsdwindled to 20 basis points by the end of thequarter. Foreign investors did, however, showrobust demand for public bonds and notes aswell ( 312 billion). Investments in longer-term
interest-bearing paper were presumably a re-flex reaction to the widespread deflation de-bate, which had led to a rise in the prices oflonger-term bonds. German dividend-bearingpaper also aroused interest in the secondquarter (2
12billion) after investors had sold
212billion worth of holdings in this paper in
the first three months. The rally on the Ger-man stock exchange has certainly contributedto this reversal in investor behaviour. With theDAX rising by more than 30% in the secondquarter, they managed to recoup a part oftheir earlier losses. By contrast, foreign saverspurchased only small amounts ( 3
12billion) of
money market paper, ie debt instrument withFinancial transactions
5billion, net capital exports: –
2002 2003
I t e m Q 2Q 1Q 2
1 Direct investment + 12.3 – 7.6 + 21.8
German investment
abroad – 2.7 – 16.0 + 12.7Foreign investmentin Germany + 15.0 + 8.5 + 9.1
2 Portfolio investment + 21.6 + 36.1 + 7.4
German investment
abroad – 18.9 + 5.6 – 20.1
Shares + 1.1 + 14.7 – 0.7
Investment fundcertificates – 1.0 – 3.1 – 0.1Bonds and notes – 17.8 – 9.6 – 21.0Money market paper – 1.3 + 3.6 + 1.7
Foreign investment
in Germany + 40.5 + 30.6 + 27.5
Shares + 9.7 – 2.6 + 2.3
Investment fundcertificates – 1.0 – 0.9 – 0.1Bonds and notes + 25.7 + 22.7 + 24.8Money market paper + 6.1 + 11.4 + 0.4
3 Financial derivatives
1 + 1.2 + 2.9 – 2.0
4 Credit transactions – 54.7 – 46.8 – 55.8
Credit institutions – 48.6 – 33.0 – 67.0
Long-term – 3.2 – 14.6 – 8.2
Short-term – 45.4 – 18.4 – 58.9
Enterprises and
individuals – 7.7 – 20.0 – 10.5
Long-term + 0.1 – 6.8 + 0.1
Short-term – 7.8 – 13.2 – 10.7
General government + 2.3 + 1.3 + 1.1
Long-term – 0.0 + 3.7 – 0.1
Short-term + 2.3 – 2.5 + 1.3
Bundesbank – 0.7 + 4.9 + 20.6
5 Other investment – 0.4 – 0.6 – 0.66 Balance of all
statistically recordedcapital flows – 20.1 – 15.9 – 29.3
Memo item
Change in the foreignreserves at transactionvalues (increase: –)
2 + 2.4 – 1.5 + 1.5
1Securitised and non-securitised options and financial
futures contracts. — 2Excluding allocation of SDRs and
changes due to value adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankForeign
investment
in German
securities

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
48a maturity of up to one year, which had
played a major role in the previous monthsdue to their safety and liquidity, while theamounts they invested in investment fundcertificates remained practically unchanged.
In line with last year’s trend, direct invest-
ments in the period from April to June onceagain resulted in net capital imports ( 322 bil-
lion), after having witnessed net capital ex-ports of 37
12billion in the previous quarter.
The continued dampened economic outlookoutside of Germany apparently impacted thedirect investment activity of some inter-nationally operating companies as well.
This clearly affected German companies’ for-
eign transactions: in the period under reviewthey repatriated 312
12billion from their sub-
sidiaries. In this context, short-term loans (re-verse flows), which subsidiaries granted totheir German parent companies, once againplayed the decisive role. In this context, vari-ous financing companies in the Netherlandswere of particular importance, which possiblytook advantage of the current favourablefinancing conditions in order to raise capitalby issuing bonds and, likely with a view to taxissues, provided these funds to their Germanparent companies. By contrast, movements incapital equity were relatively limited.
The negative global economic conditions
have had a less pronounced effect so far onforeign companies’ direct investment activityin Germany. Foreign proprietors thus in-creased their direct investments in Germanyby an additional 39 billion, after having pro-
vided their German branches with fresh fundstotalling 38
12billion in the previous quarter.
These capital inflows comprised mainly short-term loans to subsidiaries domiciled in Ger-many.
In contrast to direct investments and portfolio
investments, non-banks’ unsecuritised credittransactions in the second quarter led tonet capital exports ( 39
12billion). Enterprises
and individuals transferred funds totallingCapital exports: −
 5 bn
 5 bn
Foreign investment
in securities in GermanyGerman investment
in securities abroad
TotalBonds and notesPortfolio investment
Deutsche Bundesbank45+
40+
35+
30+
25+
20+
15+
10+
5+
0
5−5+
0
5−
10−
15−
20−
25−
30−
35−
2002 2003
Direct
investmentGerman
foreign direct
investment
Foreign direct
investment
in Germany
Credit
transactions
of non-banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
4931012billion net abroad in part by significant-
ly increasing their holdings at foreign bankswith proceeds from the sale of securities. Theoperations of public authorities by contrastresulted in a slight net inflow of capital(31 billion).
Overall transactions of the banking sector,
which can be considered a reflection of theother foreign payments recorded in the bal-ance of payments, recorded net capital ex-ports totalling 346
12billion in the April to
June period. The resulting net capital exportswere mainly due to an increase of short-termloans by German credit institutions to foreignborrowers ( 359 billion), while the net external
position of the Bundesbank – excluding theforeign reserves – fell by 320
12billion. This isprimarily due to a reduction in claims which
had arisen in connection with the grosssettlement payment system, TARGET.
The foreign reserves of the Bundesbank,
which are shown separately from credit trans-actions in the balance of payments, declinedby31
12billion at transaction values between
the end of March and the end of June. Val-ued at market prices, they fell by nearly34 billion from 382
12billion at the end of
March to 37812billion at the end of the first
half of the year. A slight decline in the marketvalue of gold in euro terms and, in particular,a significant depreciation of the US dollaragainst the euro, contributed to this develop-ment.Credit
transactions
of the banking
sectorForeign
reserves of the
Bundesbank

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
50Public financeCentral, state and local government
budgets
In the second quarter of 2003, the combined
deficit of central and state government (ex-cluding the results of local government,which are not yet known) was again consid-erably higher ( 37 billion) than the deficit in
the same period last year ( 34
12billion). How-
ever, this less favourable development wasdue not to declining tax receipts, as in thepreceding quarter, but rather predominantlyto the 36 billion fall in the Bundesbank’s profit
distribution. Therefore, despite a relativelylarge increase in tax receipts (+4%), revenuestagnated whilst expenditure rose by 2%.
Following the sharp increase in the deficits of
central, state and local government in thefirst half of 2003, these deficits are also likelyto considerably exceed last year’s already highamount of 360 billion in 2003 as a whole.
The Federal Government and the majority oftheLand governments will clearly miss their
budget targets, which had envisaged a sig-nificant reduction in the deficits. Net borrow-ing will, for the most part, exceed the funda-mentally applicable constitutional level of(self-financed) investment. The local author-ities’ fiscal position is likely to deteriorate dis-cernibly and, in many cases, will probably runinto even greater conflict with requirementsunder budgetary law. The surplus of the spe-cial funds will decrease owing to the fall inthe Bundesbank’s profit distribution. Thetense budget situation which central, stateand local government is facing, together withthe deficit to be expected in the social secur-ity funds, will – as last year – result in a breachUnderlying
trends

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
51of the 3% deficit ceiling laid down in the
Maastricht Treaty.
In the second quarter, the tax receipts1of
general government were almost 4% higherthan in the corresponding period of last yearafter having decreased significantly in the firstquarter. However, this relatively sharp in-crease was considerably inflated by last year’slow baseline figure, which had been dentedby exceptional factors. The strong growth inrevenue in the second quarter thus cannotyet be seen as signalling a positive reversal intrend.
Among direct taxes, there were favourable
developments in corporation tax receipts inparticular. They amounted to just over 31 bil-
lion, whereas in 2002 refunds had exceededtax payments by 32 billion. At that time, the
outcome had been strongly affected by majorrefunds to individual enterprises. Further-more, higher retrospective payments in re-spect of earlier years have been received in2003 and corporation tax has been reducedonly marginally by supplementary dividenddistributions.
2On the other hand, revenue
from non-assessed taxes on earnings – essen-tially investment income tax on dividends –has continued to decline substantially (byone-fifth or almost 31 billion). As in the case
of corporation tax, it is not yet possible to re-cord a positive reversal in trend with regard toprepayments for assessed income tax. Re-ceipts remained around 22% down on thecorresponding figure for last year, althoughthis was due primarily to lower payments inrespect of past years. Receipts from tax oninterest income have continued to fall (by7
12%), above all as a result of the declining
average rate of interest.3By contrast, the
wage tax yield increased by just over 2%.Revenue growth, which was considerablystronger than in the first three months, washowever also boosted by the one-off pay-ments agreed as part of the pay settlementsin the public sector and the metal-working in-dustry.Year-on-year change
%
Tax receipts, total 1
1st hf 2nd hf 1st hf 2nd hf Q1 Q2Tax revenue
1Including EU shares in German tax rev-
enue, but excluding receipts from local au-
thority taxes, which are not yet known for
the last quarter recorded.
Deutsche Bundesbank4+
3+
2+
1+
0
1−
2−
3−
4−
5−
2001 2002 2003
1Including EU shares in German tax revenue but exclud-
ing receipts from local government taxes, which are not
yet known.
2According to current information, however, the three-
year moratorium for the use of tax credits relating to
earnings retained before the tax reform, which was intro-
duced by way of the Act to Reduce Tax Subsidies ( Steuer-
vergünstigungsabbaugesetz ), has barely had an impact
up to now.
3Furthermore, there appear to have been portfolio shifts
towards open-end real estate funds, the receipts from
which are largely exempt from tax in Germany.Tax revenue
in the second
quarter...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
52In the case of indirect taxes, revenue from
turnover tax continued to fall somewhat(-
12%). This reflected the persistently muted
development in domestic demand. By con-trast, receipts from energy taxes rose by justover 9% owing to the tax increases whichentered into force at the beginning of theyear.
In the first half of the year, tax revenue was
only
12% higher than the corresponding fig-
ure last year, whereas the official tax estimatefrom May projected revenue growth of justover 2% for 2003 as a whole (excluding localgovernment taxes in both cases). Despite themore favourable result for the second quar-ter, the downside risks vis-à-vis the May fore-cast predominate. Thus, following the eco-nomic stagnation so far this year, it cannot beexpected that the rate of economic growth
on which the Federal Government based itsestimate at that time (
34% in real terms and
just over 2% in nominal terms) will beachieved this year. With regard to the majorindividual taxes, there is a risk of shortfalls vis-à-vis the spring forecast, above all, for wagetax and turnover tax. At 1
12%, wage tax re-
ceipts increased in the first half of the year atonly half the rate previously predicted for2003 as a whole. Revenue from turnover taxfell by 1
12%, whereas an overall slight in-
crease had been expected in the estimate for2003 published in May.
In the second quarter, the deficit recorded by
the Federal Government fell on the year byjust under 31 billion to 35
12billion. Revenue
increased relatively sharply by 5% owing tothe marked rise in tax receipts. However, thiswas partly offset by a significant increase inexpenditure (by just over 3%), which wasmainly due to the rise in government grantsto the statutory pension insurance schemeand the flood disaster fund as well as tolabour market-related spending. The FederalGovernment’s budget plan for 2003 as awhole envisages a sharp year-on-year declinein the deficit (to 319
12billion from 33212bil-
lion). However, this target will be considerablyundershot and so a supplementary budgethas been announced. Tax revenue will be farlower than expected. According to the Maytax estimate, this will result in shortfalls of34 billion for the Federal Government. In add-
ition, the fact that certain tax measures (Actto Reduce Tax Subsidies, Act on the Tax onInterest Income (Zinsabgeltungssteuergesetz)
were included in the plans but ultimately notTrends in the revenue from major taxes
Revenue
in5billion
1st half
Type of tax 2002 2003Annual
percent-agechange
Wage tax 61.4 62.3 + 1.5
Assessed income tax – 0.3 – 2.9 .Corporation tax – 1.3 3.7 .Turnover tax 68.0 67.0 – 1.5
of which Q2
Wage tax 31.031.7 + 2.2
Assessed income tax 3.3 2.6 – 22.1
Corporation tax – 2.0 1.2 .Turnover tax 33.5 33.3 – 0.5
Deutsche Bundesbank
...and in 2003
as a wholeFederal budget
in 2003

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
53implemented (in full) will result in revenue
shortfalls. On the expenditure side, labourmarket-related spending (unemployment as-sistance, grant to the Federal Labour Office)in particular will be considerably higher thanthe budget estimates. Overall, the deficit islikely to exceed last year’s figure significantly.
In July, the Federal Cabinet adopted the draft
Federal budget for 2004. In order to limitnew borrowing, a comprehensive consolida-tion package was approved at the same time.Moreover, a decision of principle was takento bring forward to 2004 that stage of the in-come tax reform planned for 2005. This willlead to revenue shortfalls of 37 billion for the
Federal Government. It was subsequently an-nounced that privatisation proceeds in theamount of 32 billion will be generated and
subsidies totalling almost 3
12billion will be re-
moved in order to finance these tax shortfallsin 2004. At its meeting on 13 August, theFederal Cabinet adopted a draft Act accom-panying the budget in which the previouslyadopted decisions of principle are consoli-dated insofar as they have to be regulated bylaw. Consequently, Federal Government netborrowing now amounts to just under329 billion and is thus once more consider-
ably higher than investment expenditure (al-most 325 billion). According to article 115 of
the Constitution, this is permitted only if theexcessive new borrowing is suitable for avert-ing a disruption of the overall economic equi-librium. The Federal Government has de-clared that it will invoke this exemption clausefor the third year in succession.Although the targeted level of net borrowing
would be markedly lower than the level ex-pected in 2003, it would nevertheless bearound 319 billion higher than the amount of
310 billion contained in the previous financial
plan. The Federal budget will be adversely af-fected on the one hand by large tax shortfallsresulting both from extensive revisions to thetax estimate (just under 313 billion
4)a n d
from bringing forward the tax reform ( 37 bil-
lion). Moreover, allowance has been made forconsiderable additional spending (around311 billion) on both unemployment assist-
ance and the grant to the Federal Labour Of-fice. This is, however, to be offset by exten- 5 bn
I II III IV I IIThe Federal Government’s
financial balance
Deutsche Bundesbank3+
0
3−
6−
9−
12−
15−
18−
21−
24−
27−
2002 2003
4Total deviation from the tax estimate of May 2002 tak-
ing into account changes in tax legislation, changes in
transfers to the EU and assessment discrepancies (in par-
ticular in relation to a less favourable macroeconomic as-
sessment).Federal budget
in 2004

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
54sive cost savings, above all from the consoli-
dation package which was presented to-gether with the draft Federal budget in July.The measures (see table above) are to totalaround 314 billion of which 38
12billion will
be on the expenditure side and 3512billion
will be on the revenue side.
The Federal Government’s new medium-term
financial plan (see table on page 55) also ap-pears to be considerably less favourable thanthe preceding forecast. As a result, theplanned reduction in net borrowing will benoticeably protracted. This is due above all tothe distinctly more negative estimate oftrends in tax revenue, but also to the upwardrevision of labour market-related expenditure.Given an annual average increase in expend-iture of
12% from 2005 to 2007, a balancedFederal budget will no longer be achieved
within the time-frame of the medium-termfinancial plan.
The relief measures accompanying the draft
Federal budget plan may make a significantcontribution to consolidating the Federalbudget. State and local government wouldalso benefit considerably from this. Theplanned measures are a step in the rightdirection, not least with regard to the intend-ed reduction of subsidies. Nonetheless, pol-icymakers need to ensure that the measures –especially the planned changes in businesstaxation – do not impair investment condi-tions in Germany.
5Although disposals of
state-owned participating interests reducenet borrowing and are to be welcomed inprinciple from a regulatory point of view, theymake little contribution towards fiscal con-solidation. Lower borrowing is achieved atthe cost of a corresponding loss of govern-ment assets. Such asset disposals are, ineffect, even more akin to borrowing if state-owned banks act as the “upstream” pur-chasers.
On balance, the Federal Government’s plans
still involve a very high degree of uncertainty.Whereas the burdens that will result from theincome tax cuts are relatively concrete, thelikely relief from the consolidation package isfar less certain. Some measures have not yetbeen specified in detail and – like the ad-vancement of the tax reform – largely requirethe Bundesrat’s consent. Furthermore, thefinancial implications of major items are veryThe consolidation package contained
in the draft Federal budget for 2004*
5billion
Item AmountExpenditure 8
12
of which
Savings owing to “Hartz reforms”(grant to the Federal Labour Officeand unemployment assistance) 4.0Reduction in Federal Government’s grantto the statutory pension insurancescheme
1 2.0
Continuation of across-the-boardministerial savings 1.0Reduction of subsidies 0.6Public sector pay 0.5Child-rearing benefits 0.2
Revenue 5
12
of which
Act on Tax Honesty (amnesty) 2.1Reduction in tax subsidies 1.2Measures combating illicit work/taxevasion 1.0Act to Reduce Tax Subsidies (basket II) 0.5Limitation of standard travel allowance 0.5Elimination of the grant to home buyers 0.1
Total 14
*Financial implications for the Federal budget in 2004. —
1In addition, the contribution rate to the statutory pen-
sion insurance scheme is to be stabilised at 19.5%.
Deutsche Bundesbank
5See also Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report , No-
vember 2002, p 57 ff.Federal
Government’s
medium-term
financial planProposed relief
measures
Budgetary
plans
associated
with high risks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
55difficult to assess (tax amnesty, measures
combating tax evasion and illicit work). More-over, the underlying macroeconomic assump-tions seem decidedly optimistic.
In the second quarter, the surplus of the spe-
cial funds amounted to 35 billion; this was
around 33
12billion lower than the compar-
able figure for last year. This was mainly dueto the drop in the Bundesbank’s profit distri-bution, which fell by 36 billion to 35
12billion;
any part of this distribution in excess of33
12billion is transferred to the Redemption
Fund for Inherited Liabilities. This contrastedwith budgetary improvements on the part ofthe ERP Special Fund (in connection withlarge loan repayments) and a surplus in theflood disaster fund of around 31 billion in
each case. In view of the decline in the Bun-desbank’s profit distribution, the surplus ofthe special funds in 2003 as a whole will fallwell short of last year’s figure ( 39 billion).
In the second quarter, the Land governments’
budgets recorded a 3
12% increase in revenue.
However, there was only a moderate rise of2% in tax receipts. In view of the paymentsto the flood disaster fund, expenditure grewat a relatively moderate rate of 1
12%. Person-
nel expenditure continued to rise by just over1%. It must be borne in mind, however, thatthe adjustment of civil servants’ pay andpension benefits, which is a major item intheLand governments’ budgets, was not
approved until July.
6On balance, the quarter-
ly deficit fell on the year by 31 billion to
3512billion. However, according to the results
of the tax estimate, the planned significantreduction of the record deficit of 331 billionrecorded in 2002 can no longer be achieved.
Although numerous Land governments have
reacted to this by economising, this will prob-ably not be enough to offset the shortfalls.Apart from a few exceptions, net borrowingwill probably far exceed self-financed invest-ment in the Land governments’ budgets and
will therefore breach the constitutional ceil-ing, thereby triggering special justification ob-ligations. The strain on the Land govern-
ments’ budgets is likely to intensify even fur-ther next year, above all if the advancementof the third stage of the tax reform resolvedby the Federal Cabinet is not counter-financed. The Land governments need the
relief measures proposed by the FederalThe Federal Government’s financial
planning over the medium term
5billion
ItemTarget
2003Minis-
try1
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
Expenditure 248.2 257.0 251.2 251.2 251.2 254.9
of which
Investment 26.7 26.7 24.8 24.7 24.7 24.7
Revenue 228.6 221.3 226.9 229.6 235.6 244.4
of which
Taxes 203.3 196.0 208.5 211.5 221.6 229.9Privatisationproceeds 5.5 5.5 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1
Deficit (–) – 19.6 – 35.7 – 24.3 – 21.6 – 15.6 – 10.5Seigniorage 0.7 0.7 0.5 0.6 0.6 0.5
Net borrowing 18.9 35.0 23.8
2 21.0 15.0 10.0
Memo item
Change in
expenditurein % – 0.4 + 3.1 . + 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.5
1Most recent assessment of the Federal Ministry of Finance. —
2Taking into account the decisions to bring forward the tax
reform, net borrowing amounts to just under 529 billion.
Deutsche Bundesbank
6The resulting additional burdens in 2003 are, however,
to be compensated for largely by cuts in Christmas bo-
nuses on the basis of the new flexibility arrangement.Special funds
Land
governments

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
56Government in order to limit their borrowing
requirements, which are already high.
For local government, only the results for the
first quarter are currently available. Accordingto these data, revenue rose by 2% and ex-penditure increased by 1
12%. Personnel ex-
penditure rose steeply by 312%, reflecting the
effects of the relatively high pay settlementsfor wage and salary earners in the public sec-tor. The increase in expenditure on socialbenefits was far steeper (9
12%). Overall, cost
growth was held down, however, by an ex-ceptionally sharp fall in fixed capital expend-iture. At 34
12billion, the deficit matched last
year’s corresponding figure. In the remainderof the year, however, a marked deteriorationin the deficit is likely, above all as a result of aless favourable revenue trend.The indebtedness of central, state and local
government rose by 312
12billion in the
second quarter. The Federal Government in-creased its liabilities by 34
12billion, borrowing
just over 32 billion on both the money market
and the capital market. Whereas the Land
governments recorded rather high borrowingrequirements totalling 37
12billion, the local
authorities are likely to have raised their in-debtedness only moderately. Borrowing wasfocused on balance on the capital market’smedium-term segment.
Social security funds
At31 billion, the deficit in the wage and sal-
ary earners’ pension insurance scheme wasjust as high in the second quarter as in 2002,even though the contribution rate had beenraised from 19.1% to 19.5% at the begin-ning of 2003. Revenue from contributionsrose by only 2
12%. Adjusted for the increase
in the contribution rate, the compulsory con-tributions for employed persons increased by
12% which – given the slight fall in gross
wages and salaries – was attributable to theraising of the maximum level of earnings sub-ject to contributions. The new arrangementsapplying to low-paid part-time work have ap-parently not led to a noticeable improvementin the fiscal position despite the large numberof new so-called “minijobs” which have beenregistered. Relief was afforded, however, bythe transfers from central government, whichwere 8% higher owing to the last stage ofthe ecological tax reform as well as the peg-ging of government transfers to the contribu-tion rate. Overall expenditure increased by al-Net borrowing in the market by
central, state and local government
5billion
of which
Period TotalSecuri-
ties 1Loansagainstborrow-ers’notes
2MemoitemAcquisi-tion bynon-resi-dents
2001 + 14.2 + 56.3 – 6.6 + 13.0
2002
p + 54.6 + 67.6 – 11.8 + 57.4
of which
Q1 + 25.6 + 15.2 + 10.5 + 12.2Q2 + 1.5 + 22.9 – 21.4 + 16.7Q3 + 18.6 + 25.1 – 5.4 + 19.1Q4
p +9 . 0 +4 . 4 +4 . 6 +9 . 4
2003
Q1p + 34.7 + 32.6 + 2.1 + 19.4
Q2pe + 12.6 + 11.8 + 0.8 ...
1Excluding equalisation claims. — 2Including cash ad-
vances and money market borrowing.
Deutsche Bundesbank
Local
authoritiesIndebtedness
Statutory
pension
insurance
scheme

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
57most 312%, as in the previous quarter. How-
ever, pension expenditure rose somewhatmore rapidly owing to higher per capita pay-ments. By contrast, the increase in the num-ber of pension recipients continued to decel-erate, amounting to little more than
12%.
The pension adjustment of 1 July, which was
lower than in 2002 (1.04% in western Ger-many and 1.19% in eastern Germany), is like-ly to slow down the growth of expenditure inthe second half of the year. However, an ac-celeration in the inflow of contributions is notyet apparent on the revenue side. Therefore,a noticeable deficit is likely to be recordedagain at the end of the year. Even based onthe Federal Government’s optimistic growthassumptions, it is now expected that the con-tribution rate will have to be raised to 19.9%in 2004. However, the Federal Governmentwants to retain the current rate and also cutthe transfers from the Federal Governmentby32 billion. Given these assumptions, sav-
ings of around 36 billion will have to be made
next year. A further lowering of the requiredvolume of fluctuation reserves, which have al-ready been reduced, would increase the riskof the statutory pension insurance schemebecoming dependent on liquidity injectionsfrom the Federal Government and wouldfoster uncertainty regarding the soundness ofthe scheme’s finances. Moreover, the needfor structural consolidation would merely bepostponed by one year and the general gov-ernment deficit would increase by up to0.3% of GDP in 2004.
In the second quarter, the Federal Labour
Office recorded a deficit of just under32
12billion. This was 312billion higher than
last year’s figure. Total revenue rose by only
12%. The main reason for this was that con-
tribution receipts grew only slightly despitethe increase in the maximum level of earningssubject to contributions. The increase in ex-penditure slowed down markedly to 3
12%.
Although spending on unemployment bene-fit continued to go up (by just over 12%)more sharply than the number of un-employed persons, the 8% reduction in ex-penditure on active labour market measureswas a significant counterweight.
In the first six months of the year, therefore,
the deficit already amounted to 35.2 billion
despite the cuts in assistance measures andthe Hartz reforms. The result is traditionallymuch better in the second half of the yearQuarterly
 5 bn
 5 bn
Surplus (+) or deficit (−)Revenue
ExpenditureWage and salary earners’
pension insurance scheme
Deutsche Bundesbank4+
2+
0
2−58
56
54
52
2001 2002 2003
Federal Labour
Office

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
58owing to seasonal factors. However, based
on the Federal Government’s macroeconomicforecast, the Federal Labour Office – whosebudget for 2003 does not envisage any needfor grants from central government – is nowlikewise expecting a deficit of around 37 bil-
lion. In view of the poor labour market situ-ation, there will also be a need for a grantnext year. 35.2 billion has been earmarked
for this in the draft Federal budget for 2004.Financial data on the statutory health insur-
ance fund are currently available only for thefirst quarter. According to these data, thehealth fund managed to reduce its year-on-year deficit by 3
14billion to just over 312bil-
lion. Revenue was 212% up on the year. How-
ever, adjusted for the 0.3 percentage point in-crease in the average contribution rate to14.3% at the beginning of the year, revenuefrom contributions actually fell somewhatand thus decoupled itself further from thebenchmark that serves as a proxy for the as-sessment base (gross wages and salaries pluswage substitutes and pensions). The budgetfreezes and price discounts ordained last au-tumn limited the overall increase in expend-iture to 2%. Although spending on pharma-ceuticals rose by 2
12%, the corresponding
figure in 2002 had been curtailed by a one-off “donation” from the pharmaceutical in-dustry in exchange for the Federal Govern-ment not introducing certain price-reducingmeasures for pharmaceuticals. Adjusted forthis effect, expenditure declined slightly.
In view of their depleted reserves and a level
of indebtedness which is now likely to havereached 33 billion, the health insurance insti-
tutions would normally be obliged under cur-rent law to raise their contribution rates with-out delay. However, the prospect of reliefthrough the health system reform which hasnow been agreed between the Federal Gov-ernment and the opposition parties (see boxon page 60) has evidently prompted most ofthe health insurance institutions to refrainfrom doing so. On balance, therefore, thestatutory health insurance fund is in dangerof running up another marked deficit inQuarterly
 5 bn
 5 bn 5 bn
Surplus (+) or deficit (−)Expenditure on...
  ...unemployment benefits
     and short-time work-
     ing benefits
  ...vocational training 2Expenditure, total
Revenue 1Federal Labour Office
1 Excluding Federal Government liquidity
assistance. — 2 Including job creation meas-
ures.
Deutsche Bundesbank0.5+
0
0.5−
1.0−
1.5−
2.0−
2.5−
3.0−8.0
7.5
7.06.5
6.0
5.55.0
4.515.5
15.0
14.5
14.0
13.5
13.012.5
12.0
11.511.0
2001 2002 2003Statutory
health
insurance fund

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
592003, too, which will restrict the scope for
lowering contributions in 2004.
General government budget trends
In 2002, the deficit ratio rose above the ceil-
ing laid down in the Maastricht Treaty (reach-ing 3.6%). The 3% criterion is expected to bedistinctly exceeded in 2003, too. The increasein the deficit is caused, in particular, by con-tinuing unfavourable cyclical developmentsand several other negative factors (above allthe lower Bundesbank profit, higher transfersto the EU and flood-related expenditure). Bycontrast, there have been a number of in-creases in taxes and social security contribu-tions (notably concerning the statutory healthand pension insurance schemes and excisetaxes). In addition, prudent budget manage-ment is to be expected, not least because theborrowing of central, state and local govern-ment is bordering on the limits laid downunder budgetary law. Finally, cost curbs af-fecting the health insurance fund and labourmarket-related benefits have been adopted.
Given the fact that, in January 2003, the Eco-
fin Council established that Germany had anexcessive deficit in 2002 and that this breachof European regulations will probably alsopersist in 2003, it is extremely important thatthe deficit ratio be lowered to less than the3% ceiling next year. Otherwise, there is adanger that further damage will be caused tothe European fiscal regulations, which guar-antee the sustainable development of fiscalbudgets, above all in the medium and longterm, and are therefore intended to support astability-oriented monetary policy in the mon-
etary union.
At present, there appears to be an increasing
tendency in some euro-area countries todefer the original consolidation targets andseek a way out of the growth crisis with thehelp of short-term credit-financed govern-ment stimulus packages. However, failure toachieve fiscal consolidation is likely not onlyto dampen economic growth in the mediumand longer term, but – owing to the existinggeneral uncertainty about the sustainabilityof fiscal policy – will also have a negativeimpact on the consumption and investmentclimate in the short term. In this respect,the potential short-term “growth dividend”owing to a more expansionary fiscal stanceshould not be overestimated. It will not solvethe far more important structural macroeco-nomic problems. These require growth-enhancing structural reforms.
A reduction in government deficits is called
for not only in the context of the Europeanregulations, however. The room for man-oeuvre available to central, state and localgovernment is being increasingly curtailed bythe growing indebtedness and the relatedinterest burden. The national upper borrow-ing limits set by budgetary law, which are notvery stringent anyway, are exceeded not onlyin individual cases, but almost as a rule. Size-able deficits are also being recorded by thesocial security funds; their reserves are nowlargely depleted and debts have already beenincurred in some cases.
Deficit ratio
above 3%
ceiling in 2003,
too
Deficit
reduction
necessary
in 2004Consolidation
also a national
requirement

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
60The reform of the statutory health insurance fund
The key points for a reform of the statutory health in-
surance fund agreed between the Federal Government
and the opposition parties provide for a reduction in
the expenses which are financed equally by employers
and employees. These key points are also to apply to
public sector employees with civil servant status and to
retired civil servants. The savings are to increase from
59.9 billion in 2004 to 523.1 billion (including refinan-
cing in the amount of 58.5 billion in favour of employ-
ers) in 2007. This will apparently lead to a fall in the
average contribution rate from 14.3% at present to
13% in 2007 (employers: 6.1%, employees: 6.9%). The
principal measures are:
– Abolition of one-off mortality and maternity pay-
ments, in principle also of payments for over-the-
counter pharmaceuticals, taxi journeys and spec-
tacles. Saving: 52.5 billion.
– Extension of prescription charges up to a ceiling of
2% of gross income (up to 1% for the chronically
ill, children remain exempt): in general, they are to
amount to 10% of the price (at least 55 and not
more than 510). The supplementary charge for
hospital in-patient treatment will be increased
from 59t o 510 per day and, in future, will be
levied for up to 28 days rather than 14 days. Fur-
thermore, a surgery charge of 510 per quarter is
planned for visits to the doctor. If a patient con-
sults several doctors without a referral, the charge
will be levied several times. Net benefit: 53.3 bil-
lion.
– Financing of non-insurance-related (above all
maternity-related) payments through raising to-
bacco tax. The statutory health insurance fund will
initially receive a Federal grant of 51 billion, which
will increase to 54.2 billion by 2006.
– Higher health insurance contributions from pen-
sioners out of pensions and any employment in-
come. Additional revenue: 51.6 billion.
– Structural measures: extension of price discount
scheme for patented pharmaceuticals, introduc-
tion of fixed prices for new patented pharmaceut-
icals with few additional benefits, more rigorous
assessment of pharmaceuticals’ utility as of 2005,
limitation of administrative expenditure. Net
benefit: rising from 51.5 billion to 53 billion in
2007.
– Transfer of financing costs from the employer to
the employee through separate insurance for den-
tures (expenditure by statutory health insurance
fund: 53.5 billion) as of 2005 as well as a special
contribution of 55 billion for sickness benefits as of
2007.
These measures are aimed predominantly at achieving
greater cost-sharing and thereby increasing the indi-
vidual responsibility of insured persons. However, only
the structural measures will bring about real cost sav-
ings. While the supplementary charges are also likelyto have a steering and containing effect on demand,
the cost-efficiency reserves in the system will be mobil-
ised only to a limited extent. The package contains
other measures for which the estimate of relief is not
quantified. For example, a foundation is to be set up
to help improve the quality of service. Its tasks will in-
clude not only assessing the utility of pharmaceuticals,
but also working out treatment guidelines. Although
mail-order pharmacies are to be legally permitted to
sell pharmaceutical products, price formation regu-
lations will not be dropped. With regard to doctors’
remuneration, payment for standard services at fixed
prices rather than an overall professional fee is
planned in future. Persons who are voluntarily insured
with the statutory health insurance fund even though
their salary level would entitle them to opt out are to
be given limited options with regard to the scope of
their insurance cover.
The relief volume totalling 514.6 billion (excluding
transfers from employers to employees) in 2007 is likely
to considerably lower the contribution rate. However,
it seems doubtful whether the target of 13% can be
reached as the current average rate of 14.3% – taken
as the point of reference – does not cover costs and the
assumed increase in contribution receipts is not certain.
A further obstacle to achieving the rate of 13.6% tar-
geted for 2004 is the fact that, according to the current
legal situation, around 56 billion (which corresponds
to 0.6 percentage point of the contribution rate) must
first of all be used for loan repayments and replenish-
ment of reserves. However, the intention in this respect
is to spread these obligations over a longer period,
which is ultimately tantamount to deferring burdens
until a future point in time.
There is already a consensus that the agreed measures
to reform the statutory health insurance fund will not
be able to solve the fund’s long-term problems. Both
demographic developments and advances in medical
technology will create considerable expenditure pres-
sure, even if the rationalisation reserves, which un-
doubtedly exist, are mobilised. If contributions remain
linked to wages and salaries, this will automatically
continue to lead to a rise in the cost of labour. The pro-
spect of sharply rising social contributions over the
longer term is certainly one of the reasons for the cur-
rent scepticism regarding the economic outlook. The
generally acknowledged need for more extensive re-
forms has led the government-appointed Commission
for Sustainability in the Financing of Social Security Sys-
tems (known as the “Rürup Commission”) to develop
two models: a “citizens’ insurance model (Bürgerver-
sicherung) ” and a “per capita flat-rate charging model
(Kopfpauschalen) ” with a supplementary tax-financed
adjustment based on the principle of solidarity. In both
models, the financing basis is to be decoupled from
labour income with the flat-rate charging model being
more systematic in this respect. Moreover, this concept
provides for a clear separation of insurance and
solidarity elements. It has further advantages owing to
its more competitive orientation. The Rürup Commis-
sion’s final report has not yet been published, how-
ever.
Deutsche Bundesbank

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
61The outlook for the development of public
finance in 2004 is marked by great uncer-tainty, above all because numerous fiscalmeasures which have already been an-nounced still have to pass the legislative pro-cess. Various projects planned as part of the“Agenda 2010” and the Federal budget for2004 are suitable for strengthening future ex-pansionary forces and improving the state ofpublic finance. However, in order to achievethis they must be forced through against vest-ed interests.
The advancement of the third stage of the in-
come tax reform to 2004, which is likely to re-sult in tax shortfalls of 315 billion, is to be
welcomed in principle as it involves a signifi-cant reduction in the income tax rates. How-ever, at the same time, it would be regret-table if, without any further counterfinan-cing, not only the individual national borrow-ing limits, but also the general governmentdeficit ceiling of 3% laid down in the Maas-tricht Treaty were to be exceeded. The tax cutshould be accompanied by additional meas-ures in order to ensure that these importantfiscal targets are met. However, privatisationproceeds or proceeds from the sale of othergovernment financial assets (eg claims in re-spect of loans) do not lead to a reduction inthe deficit as defined in the Maastricht Treaty,as these merely constitute shifts in the gov-ernment’s financial assets. If taxes are to belowered without breaching the European pro-visions, not only the Federal Government butalso the Land governments will be required to
reinforce their efforts with regard to review-ing government benefits and tax loopholes.At the same time, new deficits in the socialsecurity sector should be avoided and any
debts already incurred reduced without delay.
On 13 August 2003, the Federal Cabinet also
approved a bill concerning a reform of tradetax in the context of restructuring localauthority finance. Trade tax is to be retainedand tax liability is to be extended to self-em-ployed professionals, although they will beable to largely offset their trade tax liabilityagainst their income tax. Despite the envis-aged offsetting of tax liability against incometax, this will lead to additional – albeit limited– tax burdens, which will complicate tax law.Calls to include elements which are unrelatedto earnings (rents, leasing payments) in tradetax liability were not heeded. By contrast,interest on longer-term debt is no longer tobe counted towards trade earnings. The factthat this bill concentrates on the taxation ofelements which pertain to earnings is to bewelcomed. Given that, with the abolition ofpayroll tax and trade capital tax, policymakershave been increasingly sensitive to the prob-lems associated with taxing firms’ and entre-preneurs’ capital base, as this may jeopardisetheir very livelihood, any return to a policy oftaxing capital components in what is a par-ticularly difficult operating environment forenterprises would run counter to the effortsto revive economic growth and would darkenthe investment climate. The intended object-ive of freeing trade tax of its remaining non-earnings components and of bringing the as-sessment base largely into line with that ap-plied for income tax and corporation taxcould, at the same time, pave the way to inte-grating this special tax on earnings in thegeneral income tax regime. The need of local
Outlook
for 2004
particularly
uncertain
Advancement
of the tax
reform...
...must not
compromise
the Stability
PactTrade tax
reform

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
62authorities to have their own tax source
which, to a certain extent, they could struc-ture themselves can be accommodated byalso granting them a share of corporationtax, in addition to their share of wage tax andincome tax, and a multiplier or add-on facilityfor these taxes. Municipal revenue could beconsolidated even further if a substantially
larger share of turnover tax were to be allo-cated to local government.
7
7See also Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report,
December 2002, p 30 ff.

Statistical
Section
1*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003

ContentsI Key economic data for European
monetary union
1 Monetary developments and interest
rates 6*
2 Foreign trade and payments 6*
3 General economic indicators 7*
II Overall monetary survey in the
European monetary union
1 The money stock and its counterparts 8*2 Consolidated balance sheet of mon-
etary financial institutions (MFIs) 10*
3 Banking system’s liquidity position 14*
III Consolidated financial statement
of the Eurosystem
1 Assets 16*2 Liabilities 18*
IV Banks
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary
financial institutions (excluding theBundesbank) in Germany 20*
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks
(MFIs) in Germany, by category ofbanks 24*
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-à-vis residents 26*
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents 28*
2*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003

5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) 30*
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic enterprises and resident
individuals, housing loans, sectors ofeconomic activity 32*
7 Deposits of domestic
non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs)in Germany 34*
8 Deposits of resident individuals and
domestic non-profit institutions atbanks (MFIs) in Germany 36*
9 Deposits of domestic public author-
ities at banks (MFIs) in Germany, bycreditor group 36*
10 Savings deposits and bank savings
bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germanysold to non-banks (non-MFIs) 38*
11 Debt securities and money market
paper outstanding of banks (MFIs)in Germany 38*
12 Building and loan associations (MFIs)
in Germany 39*
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign
branches and foreign subsidiaries ofGerman banks (MFIs) 40*
V Minimum reserves
1 Reserve ratios 42*2 Reserve maintenance in Germany up
to the end of 1998 42*
3 Reserve maintenance in the Euro-
pean monetary union 42*VI Interest rates
1 ECB interest rates 43*2 Discount and lombard rates of the
Bundesbank 43*
3 Base rates 43*4 Eurosystem monetary policy opera-
tions allotted through tenders 43*
5 Money market rates, by month 44*6 Euro area retail bank interest rates 44*7 Lending and deposit rates of banks
(MFIs) in Germany 45*
VII Capital market
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities
and shares in Germany 48*
2 Sales of debt securities issued by
borrowers domiciled in Germany 49*
3 Outstanding amount of debt secur-
ities issued by borrowers domiciledin Germany 50*
4 Circulation of shares issued by resi-
dents of Germany 50*
5 Yields and indices on German
securities 51*
6 Sales and purchases of investment
fund certificates in Germany 51*
3*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003

VIII Public finance in Germany
1 Finances of the public sector 52*
2 Finances of the Federal
Government, Länder Governmentsand local authorities 52*
3 Finances of the Government
in the national accounts 53*
4 Tax revenue of the central,
regional and local authorities 53*
5 Tax revenue, by type 54*6 Individual taxes of the Federal
Government, Länder Governmentsand local authorities 54*
7 Indebtedness of the public sector 55*8 Changes in public sector
indebtedness 57*
9 Loans raised by public authorities
against borrowers’ notes 57*
10 Indebtedness of the Federal
Government 58*
11 Federal Government borrowing
in the market 58*
12 Receipts, expenditure and assets of
the wage and salary earners’pension insurance funds 59*
13 Receipts and expenditure of the
Federal Labour Office 59*
IX Economic conditions
1 Origin and expenditure of
domestic product, distribution ofnational income 60*
2 Output in the producing sector 61*3 Orders received by industry 62*4 Orders received by construction 63*5 Retail trade turnover 63*6 Labour market 64*7 Prices 65*8 Households’ income 66*9 Pay rates and actual earnings 66*
X Foreign trade and payments
1 Major items of the balance of pay-
ments of the European monetaryunion 67*
2 Major items of the balance of pay-
ments of the Federal Republic ofGermany 68*
3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the
Federal Republic of Germany, bygroup of countries and country 69*
4 Services and factor income of the
Federal Republic of Germany 70*
5 Current transfers of the Federal
Republic of Germany 70*
6 Capital transfers 70*7 Financial account of the Federal
Republic of Germany 71*
8 External position of the Bundesbank 72*9 External position of the Bundesbank
in the European monetary union 72*
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises
in Germany (other than banks)vis-à-vis non-residents 73*
11 Deutsche Mark and euro exchange
rates of selected currencies 74*
12 Exchange rates for the national
currencies of the EMU countries,the Deutsche Mark value of theECU and euro conversion rates 74*
13 Effective exchange rates of the euro
and selected foreign currencies 75*
4*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003

Abbreviations and symbols
eestimated
pprovisional
pepartly estimated
rrevised
...Data available at a later date
.Data unknown, not to be published or
not meaningful
0Less than 0.5 but more than nil
–nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to round-ing.
5*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
 I Key economic data for European monetary union
 
1 Monetary developments and interest rates
  
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions  1, 2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
 M 3  3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3-month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
MFI lending, and capital 3-month ment bonds moving  average
M1 M2 (centred) total individuals formation  4 EONIA  5, 7 EURIBOR  6, 7 outstanding  8 
Period Change from previous year, in % % p. a. as a monthly average
2001         Dec 5.4 6.4 7.9 7.8 5.2 6.7 4.7 3.34 3.34 4.9
2002         Jan 6.6 6.8 7.7 7.6 5.2 6.2 4.8 3.29 3.34 5.0
         Feb 6.1 6.3 7.3 7.4 5.1 6.0 4.8 3.28 3.36 5.1         Mar 6.0 6.3 7.2 7.2 4.8 5.4 4.7 3.26 3.39 5.3
         Apr 6.7 6.4 7.3 7.3 4.4 5.1 4.6 3.32 3.41 5.3
         May 6.8 6.7 7.5 7.3 4.5 5.3 5.2 3.31 3.47 5.3         Jun 6.9 6.4 7.1 7.2 4.4 5.3 4.3 3.35 3.46 5.2
         Jul 7.6 6.5 7.0 7.0 4.0 4.8 5.0 3.30 3.41 5.0
         Aug 7.7 6.5 7.0 7.0 4.2 5.1 5.3 3.29 3.35 4.7         Sep 8.1 6.5 7.1 7.0 4.3 5.0 5.2 3.32 3.31 4.5
         Oct 8.3 6.8 6.9 7.0 4.3 4.9 5.0 3.30 3.26 4.6
         Nov 9.0 6.8 7.0 7.0 3.9 4.6 5.0 3.30 3.12 4.6         Dec 9.9 6.6 6.9 7.1 4.1 4.7 4.9 3.09 2.94 4.4
2003         Jan 9.5 6.6 7.3 7.4 4.2 4.8 4.5 2.79 2.83 4.2
         Feb 10.5 7.4 8.0 7.8 4.4 4.9 4.6 2.76 2.69 4.0         Mar 11.8 8.0 8.0 8.2 4.1 4.8 4.3 2.75 2.53 4.1
         Apr 11.2 8.0 8.7 8.4 4.8 5.1 4.6 2.56 2.53 4.2
         May 11.5 8.5 8.5 8.5 5.1 5.2 4.4 2.56 2.40 3.9         Jun 11.5 8.3 8.3 ... 4.8 5.1 5.1 2.21 2.15 3.7
         Jul ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2.08 2.13 4.0
1 Source: ECB. — 2 Saisonally adjusted. — 3 Excluding holdings of money Average. — 6 Euro InterBank Offered Rate. — 7 See also footnotes to table
market fund shares
/units by non-residents of the euro area. — 4 Longer- VI.5., p. 44*. — 8 GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds; from
term liabilities to euro area non-MFIs. — 5Euro OverNight Index 2001 Euro12. 
 
 
2 Foreign trade and payments  * 
  
 
Selected items of the EMU balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1 
Current account Capital account Effective exchange rate  3 
of which Direct Securities Credit Monetary
Balance Trade balance Balance investment transactions reserves Dollar rate nominal real  4 transactions  2 
Period  5  million Euro/US-$ 1st q 1999=100
2001         Dec + 3,911 + 10,544 − 6,231 + 1,703 − 14,445 + 655 + 5,856 0.8924 87.7 89.8
2002         Jan − 144 + 3,058 − 39,383 + 1,191 − 30,295 − 4,967 − 5,313 0.8833 87.6 90.0
         Feb + 4,656 + 10,141 + 13,271 − 9,141 − 6,443 + 26,399 + 2,455 0.8700 86.8 89.0         Mar + 7,445 + 13,532 + 17,890 − 8,061 + 3,460 + 22,696 − 205 0.8758 86.8 89.3
         Apr − 5,803 + 7,258 + 14,785 + 8,104 + 17,392 − 19,073 + 8,361 0.8858 87.2 89.7
         May + 656 + 10,319 + 5,624 + 1,481 + 32,214 − 29,968 + 1,897 0.9170 88.6 91.1         Jun + 7,352 + 13,679 − 40,209 − 18,825 + 19,792 − 37,659 − 3,517 0.9554 90.6 93.2
         Jul + 4,817 + 15,278 − 17,417 − 6,663 + 2,509 − 10,712 − 2,552 0.9922 91.7 94.4
         Aug + 9,851 + 12,175 − 11,523 + 1,710 + 6,151 − 21,139 + 1,756 0.9778 91.1 93.6         Sep + 8,347 + 11,071 − 21,314 − 7,013 + 17,381 − 27,881 − 3,800 0.9808 91.2 93.8
         Oct + 4,704 + 12,439 − 17,405 − 6,163 + 25,884 − 39,262 + 2,136 0.9811 91.7 94.3
         Nov + 10,622 + 12,580 − 20,232 + 7,223 + 14,177 − 39,212 − 2,420 1.0014 92.5 95.1         Dec + 7,101 + 9,571 − 16,237 + 2,521 − 7,823 − 9,902 − 1,033 1.0183 93.6 96.7
2003         Jan − 4,764 + 2,065 − 12,655 − 3,144 − 3,678 − 7,382 + 1,549 1.0622 95.8 98.8
         Feb + 3,529 + 9,075 − 25,779 + 3,198 − 11,413 − 22,903 + 5,340 1.0773 97.1 100.2         Mar + 4,037 + 6,182 + 7,895 − 7,709 + 17,798 − 7,187 + 4,992 1.0807 97.9 101.2
         Apr − 8,608 + 7,381 + 7,845 − 20,175 + 4,638 + 22,855 + 527 1.0848 98.6 102.1
         May − 449 + 8,261 − 30,959 − 324 + 7,586 − 39,660 + 1,438 1.1582 102.5 106.0         Jun ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.1663 102.7 106.5
         Jul ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.1372 101.4 105.2
*  Source: ECB. — 1  See also tables X.12 and 13, p. 74−75. — 2  Including
financial derivatives. — 3  Vis-à-vis a narrow group of countries. — 4  Based
on consumer prices. 
6* I Key economic data for European monetary union

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
I.  Key economic data for European monetary union 
 
3. General economic indicators
  
                   
Period Belgium Germany Finland France Greece Ireland Italy Luxembourg Austria Portugal Spain EMU 7 Netherlands
Real gross domestic product 1
2000 3.7 2.9 5.1 3.8 4.2 10.1 3.1 8.9 3.3 3.5 3.7 4.2 3.5
2001 0.8 0.8 1.2 2.1 4.1 6.2 1.8 1.2 1.3 0.7 1.6 2.7 1.52002 0.7 0.2 2.2 1.2 4.0 6.9 0.4 1.1 0.2 1.0 0.4 2.0 0.8
2002         Q1 −0.7 −1.1 −0.9 0.6 4.5 5.4 −0.1 −0.1 0.6 1.4 1.9 −0.1
         Q2 0.4 0.5 3.6 1.3 4.2 7.5 0.4 0.2 1.1 2.0 2.1 1.0         Q3 1.3 0.9 2.8 1.8 3.7 7.2 0.6 0.7 1.4 −0.3 1.9 1.4
         Q4 1.7 0.3 3.3 1.1 3.4 7.5 0.6 0.1 1.1 −1.3 2.2 1.0
2003         Q1 1.4 0.4 1.2 1.1 4.3 0.5 0.6 0.0 0.5 −1.2 2.1 0.9
         Q2 ... −0.6 ... ... 4.4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Industrial production 1, 2
2000 5.2 6.2 11.8 3.5 7.2 15.6 4.0 5.0 4.0 8.9 −0.2 4.4 5.3
2001 −0.5 0.5 0.0 1.1 1.0 10.1 −1.2 3.2 1.4 0.8 3.1 −1.5 0.5
2002 1.5 −1.1 1.7 −1.0 1.7 7.8 −1.3 0.4 −2.1 0.1 −0.2 0.2 −0.6
2002         Q1 −3.3 −3.6 −6.3 −1.7 −0.5 3.0 −3.6 −3.8 −3.0 −2.1 −1.2 −1.1 −2.8
         Q2 2.3 −2.0 5.1 −0.4 4.0 11.3 −2.0 4.0 −2.9 2.4 1.8 −1.1 −0.7
         Q3 3.5 −0.3 2.9 −1.8 0.1 10.6 −0.1 −0.3 −1.4 0.3 0.4 0.4 0.1
         Q4 3.7 1.4 5.2 −0.1 3.1 6.6 0.6 1.7 −1.1 −0.1 −1.9 2.5 1.2
2003         Q1 −0.2 r 1.9 2.0 1.0 0.9 2.5 −0.4 4.1 0.6 ... 0.2 1.5 e 1.0
         Q2 ... 6 p −0.5 −1.6 −1.4 2.2 p 3.5 −1.5 −1.2 −3.2 ... −3.4 1.7 ...
Capacity utilisation 3
2000 84.0 86.4 86.8 87.5 78.1 78.6 78.8 87.8 84.7 84.5 81.2 80.6 84.3
2001 82.3 84.4 85.7 87.4 77.6 78.4 78.9 88.7 84.6 83.1 81.7 79.6 83.42002 79.6 82.3 82.7 85.3 77.0 75.9 77.3 85.1 82.9 80.2 79.4 77.2 81.4
2002         Q2 79.6 82.4 82.7 85.8 76.7 76.3 77.3 84.3 82.9 80.6 79.4 77.0 81.5
         Q3 80.1 82.4 83.0 85.3 79.0 72.8 76.9 83.8 82.5 80.2 79.1 76.3 81.2         Q4 79.6 82.7 83.1 84.7 76.8 76.9 78.0 85.3 82.8 79.1 81.2 79.3 81.7
2003         Q1 79.3 82.3 82.2 85.1 75.8 74.5 77.5 84.1 82.5 79.7 77.7 78.6 81.3
         Q2 78.6 81.8 82.8 84.9 77.1 75.1 75.6 85.9 81.9 80.4 78.5 78.2 80.8         Q3 77.9 81.0 80.7 84.5 76.8 77.1 76.1 84.8 81.0 79.4 75.8 79.5 80.6
Unemployment rate 4
2000 6.9 7.8 9.8 9.3 11.0 4.3 10.4 2.3 2.8 3.7 4.1 11.3 8.52001 6.7 7.8 9.1 8.5 10.4 3.9 9.4 2.1 2.4 3.6 4.1 10.6 8.02002 7.3 8.6 9.1 8.8 10.0 4.4 9.0 2.8 2.7 4.3 5.1 11.3 8.4
2003         Jan 7.7 9.1 9.0 9.1 4.5 8.9 3.3 3.4 4.4 6.1 11.4 8.7
         Feb 7.8 9.2 9.1 9.2 4.5 8.9 3.3 3.6 4.2 6.3 11.4 8.7         Mar 7.8 9.3 9.1 9.2 4.5 8.8 3.4 3.8 4.3 6.5 11.5 8.8
         Apr 7.9 9.4 9.2 9.3 4.6 8.7 3.5 4.0 4.3 6.8 11.4 8.8
         May 8.0 9.4 9.2 9.3 4.6 ... 3.6 4.1 4.4 7.0 11.4 8.9         June 8.0 9.4 9.3 9.4 4.7 ... 3.7 ... 4.4 7.3 11.4 8.9
         July ... 9.4 ... ... 4.7 ... ... ... 4.5 ... 11.4 ...
Harmonised index of consumer prices 1
2000 2.7 1.4 3.0 1.8 2.9 5.3 2.6 3.8 2.3 2.0 2.8 3.5 2.1
2001 2.4 1.9 2.7 1.8 3.7 4.0 2.3 2.4 5.1 2.3 4.4 2.8 2.32002 1.6 1.3 2.0 1.9 3.9 4.7 2.6 2.1 3.9 1.7 3.7 3.6 2.3
2003         Jan 1.2 0.9 1.4 1.9 3.3 4.7 2.9 3.3 2.9 1.7 4.0 3.8 2.1
         Feb 1.6 1.2 2.1 2.5 4.2 5.1 2.6 3.2 3.2 1.8 4.1 3.8 2.4         Mar 1.7 1.2 1.9 2.6 3.9 4.9 2.9 3.7 3.1 1.8 3.8 3.7 2.4
         Apr 1.4 1.0 1.3 1.9 3.3 4.6 3.0 3.0 2.5 1.3 3.7 3.2 2.1
         May 0.9 0.6 1.1 1.8 3.5 3.9 2.9 2.3 2.7 0.9 3.7 2.7 1.9         June 1.5 0.9 1.2 1.9 3.6 3.8 2.9 2.0
p 2.5 p 1.0 3.4 2.8 p 2.0
         July 1.4 0.8 1.0 2.0 3.5 3.9 p 2.9 1.9 ... ... p 2.9 p 2.9 e 1.9
General government financial balance 5
2000 0.1 1.1 6.9 −1.4 −1.9 4.3 −0.6 6.1 2.2 −1.5 −2.8 −0.8 0.1
2001 0.4 −2.8 5.1 −1.5 −1.4 1.1 −2.6 6.4 0.1 0.3 −4.2 −0.1 −1.6
2002 0.0 −3.6 4.7 −3.1 −1.2 −0.1 −2.3 2.6 −1.1 −0.6 −2.7 −0.1 −2.3
General government debt 5
2000 109.6 60.2 44.5 57.2 106.2 39.3 110.6 5.6 55.8 66.8 53.3 60.5 69.6
2001 108.5 59.5 43.8 56.8 107.0 36.8 109.5 5.6 52.8 67.3 55.6 56.9 69.22002 105.4 60.8 42.7 59.1 104.9 34.0 106.7 5.7 52.6 67.9 58.0 54.0 69.1
Sources: National data, European Commission, Eurostat, European ment; seasonally adjusted. —5  As a percentage of GDP; Maastricht Trea-
Central Bank. Latest data are partly based on press reports and are ty definition, ESA95; including proceeds from sales of UMTS licenses. —6  Ad-
provisional. —1  Annual percentage changes; GDP of Greece and Portugal is justed in advance by the Federal Statistical Office by way of estimates to the
calculated from seasonally adjusted data. —2  Manufacturing, mining, gas results of the Quarterly Production Survey for the second quarter (industry
and electricity; adjusted for working-day variations. —3  Manufacturing, in Germany: + 0.2 %). —7  Including Greece (Harmonised index of consumer
in %; seasonally adjusted; data are collected in January, April, July and Octo- prices, General government financial balance and General govern-ber. —4  Standardised, as a percentage of persons in civilian employ- ment debt only from 2001). 
7*I.  Key economic data for European monetary union 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
 
1 The money stock and its counterparts *
  
  
 
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises Public
and individuals authorities Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturitieson non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  
2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
 European monetary union (  5  billion) 1
 
2002         Mar 70.7 48.5 −10.4 22.1 16.9 − 5.6 19.9 25.5 23.8 3.7 −1.3 18.7 2.7
         Apr 26.1 44.6 3.0 −18.5 1.5 − 3.0 17.5 20.5 −6.3 −0.2 −1.9 1.0 −5.2
         May 39.0 32.1 3.9 6.9 9.7 39.0 73.8 34.8 25.8 3.5 −1.2 19.7 3.7
         Jun 32.6 32.5 −6.9 0.1 −1.3 41.0 −26.8 −67.8 −5.5 3.3 −0.2 8.6 −17.1
         Jul −18.9 −15.1 −12.3 −3.8 −2.0 1.5 − 3.5 − 5.0 24.7 1.3 −0.0 13.8 9.6
         Aug − 6.9 7.1 6.8 −14.0 −3.1 14.1 −10.7 −24.8 14.1 2.2 0.2 2.7 9.0
         Sep 54.6 40.3 4.9 14.3 11.5 18.1 65.5 47.4 22.8 1.0 0.4 12.1 9.3
         Oct 28.0 31.0 12.4 −3.0 −2.6 29.7 55.1 25.5 9.4 1.3 −1.0 9.1 0.0
         Nov 41.3 26.2 6.8 15.1 6.1 34.9 84.4 49.5 21.7 3.6 −0.5 16.6 2.0
         Dec 50.8 56.9 14.9 −6.1 −14.1 21.8 −33.2 −55.0 23.6 16.5 0.1 −1.9 8.9
2003         Jan 49.4 28.1 3.5 21.3 20.0 7.2 18.0 10.7 13.2 −2.3 −2.1 6.5 11.0
         Feb 50.7 35.2 4.4 15.5 17.8 10.6 67.1 56.4 11.5 6.9 −1.2 10.1 −4.3
         Mar 48.3 39.1 7.6 9.2 8.6 13.9 6.6 − 7.2 12.6 7.2 −1.6 12.4 −5.4
         Apr 87.5 71.7 27.7 15.8 21.0 − 4.4 39.7 44.1 4.5 −2.7 −2.6 9.9 −0.1
         May 69.0 42.4 14.2 26.7 30.7 41.3 41.9 0.6 18.2 7.4 −1.3 19.0 −6.9
         Jun 10.9 25.4 −8.6 −14.5 −15.1 56.5 40.5 −16.0 23.3 3.6 −1.5 11.3 9.9
 German contribution (  5  billion) 
2002         Mar − 1.0 −2.4 −9.5 1.4 3.0 7.6 10.6 3.0 13.3 3.5 −1.1 10.1 0.9
         Apr 11.0 9.9 5.8 1.1 5.2 −20.2 −3.0 17.2 −7.7 −1.3 −1.9 −2.1 −2.4
         May 6.6 3.7 −0.2 2.9 8.4 10.7 24.6 13.9 0.4 −0.4 −1.1 2.2 −0.4
         Jun −19.8 −12.6 −11.1 −7.2 −2.2 25.7 0.1 −25.6 −0.5 −0.7 −0.2 2.3 −1.9
         Jul 7.2 −7.4 −2.8 14.6 6.1 −16.5 −5.7 10.8 11.2 0.5 0.1 8.2 2.4
         Aug − 1.7 5.8 6.4 −7.5 2.2 11.0 6.4 −4.5 8.9 −0.2 0.1 5.2 3.7
         Sep 12.0 10.8 −0.7 1.2 4.1 14.9 31.0 15.6 1.5 −0.5 −0.5 2.0 0.5
         Oct 4.6 5.8 7.4 −1.2 −4.6 17.8 11.6 −6.1 0.1 1.9 −0.8 −0.3 −0.7
         Nov 9.4 4.6 4.3 4.8 3.5 19.2 32.0 12.8 5.8 4.1 −0.6 0.4 1.9
         Dec 5.7 17.8 6.8 −12.1 −8.5 2.2 −40.5 −42.7 −9.8 3.1 0.2 −17.0 2.4
2003         Jan 18.3 1.8 3.1 16.4 10.8 − 6.1 8.7 14.8 4.1 −1.6 −2.0 3.8 3.9
         Feb − 1.5 5.7 −1.3 −7.2 0.5 10.2 20.1 9.9 4.4 6.3 −1.2 0.9 −1.5
         Mar 4.6 2.7 −1.2 1.9 5.1 18.8 25.2 6.4 1.7 1.9 −1.6 −1.1 2.6
         Apr 4.9 6.6 5.9 −1.7 −2.6 4.3 14.4 10.1 −2.6 −2.0 −2.5 0.5 1.5
         May 1.9 4.0 3.0 −2.1 2.4 27.3 22.4 −5.0 −2.8 −1.6 −1.5 4.8 −4.4
         Jun −18.0 −0.9 −3.0 −17.1 −10.0 38.5 24.9 −13.6 4.8 0.1 −1.4 3.8 2.4
 German contribution (DM billion) 
2002         Mar − 2.0 −4.7 −18.6 2.7 5.9 14.9 20.8 5.9 26.1 6.8 −2.2 19.8 1.7
         Apr 21.4 19.3 11.4 2.2 10.3 −39.5 −5.8 33.7 −15.0 −2.5 −3.8 −4.1 −4.6
         May 13.0 7.2 −0.4 5.8 16.3 21.0 48.1 27.1 0.7 −0.7 −2.2 4.3 −0.7
         Jun −38.7 −24.7 −21.6 −14.0 −4.3 50.2 0.1 −50.1 −1.0 −1.4 −0.4 4.5 −3.7
         Jul 14.0 −14.5 −5.5 28.5 11.9 −32.3 −11.2 21.1 21.9 1.1 0.1 16.0 4.7
         Aug − 3.4 11.3 12.5 −14.7 4.3 21.5 12.6 −8.9 17.4 −0.3 0.3 10.2 7.3
         Sep 23.5 21.1 −1.4 2.4 8.0 29.1 60.6 30.5 3.0 −1.0 −0.9 3.9 1.0
         Oct 9.1 11.4 14.6 −2.3 −9.0 34.7 22.8 −12.0 0.2 3.8 −1.6 −0.7 −1.3
         Nov 18.4 8.9 8.5 9.5 6.9 37.5 62.5 25.1 11.4 8.1 −1.2 0.8 3.7
         Dec 11.2 34.9 13.3 −23.7 −16.7 4.2 −79.2 −83.5 −19.2 6.0 0.5 −33.3 4.7
2003         Jan 35.7 3.6 6.0 32.1 21.1 −11.9 17.1 28.9 8.0 −3.1 −3.9 7.4 7.5
         Feb − 3.0 11.1 −2.5 −14.1 1.1 19.9 39.3 19.3 8.7 12.3 −2.4 1.7 −2.9
         Mar 9.0 5.3 −2.4 3.7 10.1 36.7 49.3 12.6 3.3 3.6 −3.2 −2.2 5.1
         Apr 9.6 13.0 11.5 −3.4 −5.0 8.4 28.2 19.8 −5.0 −4.0 −5.0 1.0 2.9
         May 3.7 7.8 5.8 −4.1 4.7 53.5 43.7 −9.8 −5.5 −3.2 −3.0 9.4 −8.6
         Jun −35.2 −1.7 −5.9 −33.5 −19.5 75.3 48.7 −26.6 9.5 0.2 −2.7 7.4 4.6
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of DM banknotes still in circulation (see also footnote 7). —5The German
monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have been contributions to the Eurosystem ’s monetary aggregates should on no
eliminated from the flow figures (see also the “Notes on the figures “in the account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and are therefore
“Explanatory notes “in the Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Report 1, not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2 or M3. —
p 30). —1Source: ECB. —2Excluding MFIs ’portfolios; for the German 6In Germany, bank debt securities with maturities of up to one year are
contribution: excluding German MFIs ’portfolios of securities issued by MFIs classed as money market paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report
in the euro area. —3After deduction of inter-MFI participations. —4For they were published in this table together with money market fund
the European monetary union: including the counterparts of monetary shares. —7From 2002, euro currency in circulation; up to end-2002,
liabilities of central governments. For Germany: as of 2003, also including including national banknotes and coins still in circulation. Excluding
8*II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
    
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V )  5,6,10  
Money stock M2 Debt securi-
of which ties with
Intra- Money stock M1 maturitiesEurosystem Deposits of up toliability/ with an Deposits Money 2 years
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market (incl.money
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund market    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares paper)    central  gov-
ernments Total  4 issue  11 Total Total Total lation  7 deposits  8 2 years  8 tions (net)  2,10 (net)  2,6,10   Period months  8,9 
European Monetary union (  5  billion) 1
 
1.7 0.5 − 39.1 27.3 11.4 14.0 − 2.6 12.3 3.5 8.4 3.3 0.2 2002          Mar
0.0 −12.5 − 42.4 39.4 40.2 7.4 32.8 5.4 − 6.2 − 1.5 7.9 − 3.4          Apr
− 8.5 13.0 − 48.1 27.6 14.3 12.2 2.1 10.9 2.4 6.7 4.0 9.8          May
6.0 47.7 − 25.5 46.2 60.6 12.0 48.6 −20.6 6.3 − 6.1 − 7.3 − 7.4          Jun
− 3.1 −24.9 −− 13.2 − 15.8 − 22.9 11.0 − 33.8 4.2 3.0 − 0.7 12.0 − 8.7          Jul
− 11.0 − 9.3 − 13.6 − 7.5 − 27.3 4.4 − 31.7 13.5 6.2 7.7 12.3 1.1          Aug
1.6 3.2 − 45.1 41.8 62.5 5.6 56.9 −23.3 2.6 2.4 − 2.7 3.6          Sep
5.5 21.8 − 20.8 19.0 − 8.6 7.2 − 15.8 20.6 7.1 − 2.8 2.0 2.5          Oct
− 4.3 −12.8 − 72.1 64.4 61.2 7.5 53.0 − 7.3 11.6 − 4.4 14.7 − 2.7          Nov
− 11.0 −29.3 − 89.5 102.2 74.2 19.8 54.3 − 7.8 33.8 − 2.8 − 6.1 − 3.9          Dec
15.2 22.4 − 6.8 − 33.4 − 58.6 −7.4 − 51.2 3.4 21.8 14.7 19.4 6.2 2003          Jan
18.6 − 8.7 − 40.1 26.8 8.1 7.2 0.9 2.8 15.9 0.9 12.2 0.3          Feb
− 1.0 12.2 − 38.0 53.9 46.7 7.9 38.7 − 6.1 13.3 − 9.8 4.2 − 10.2          Mar
− 16.5 7.7 − 87.5 49.0 30.1 9.1 21.0 10.2 8.7 6.4 11.8 20.3          Apr
10.4 27.1 − 53.8 61.7 35.4 7.4 28.0 18.6 7.7 1.0 8.8 − 17.7          May
29.9 11.2 − 3.0 29.9 54.9 7.3 47.6 −39.7 14.7 −16.6 − 1.6 − 8.8          Jun
 German contribution (  5  billion) 
− 0.0 − 8.6 3.4 1.9 1.5 − 0.0 2.6 − 2.6 1.6 − 0.1 0.2 − 0.2 0.5 2002          Mar
− 1.9 − 1.4 1.3 1.7 0.2 12.4 3.1 9.3 − 4.8 − 7.3 − 0.3 − 0.3 2.1          Apr
0.7 − 0.6 2.9 16.8 12.6 8.7 2.5 6.2 4.5 − 0.6 1.3 0.4 2.5          May
0.5 − 5.1 1.0 10.9 15.7 16.4 3.3 13.1 0.3 − 1.0 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 3.7          Jun
− 1.1 −13.7 2.0 − 5.8 − 3.2 − 1.5 3.7 − 5.1 − 0.2 − 1.5 − 1.0 0.3 − 1.8          Jul
1.3 − 4.3 3.2 3.3 − 0.4 − 4.3 0.9 − 5.2 3.7 0.1 1.2 1.3 1.2          Aug
1.0 10.7 2.2 13.7 8.4 16.5 1.6 14.9 − 9.0 1.0 6.4 0.1 − 0.8          Sep
− 1.6 8.5 2.0 15.5 11.7 2.7 1.5 1.2 6.8 2.2 − 1.0 0.6 4.2          Oct
− 0.6 − 6.1 1.5 29.5 32.1 34.3 2.5 31.8 − 5.6 3.3 − 3.2 − 0.2 0.8          Nov
0.0 − 3.8 1.5 22.8 25.4 5.3 4.3 1.0 7.2 12.8 − 3.1 − 0.5 0.9          Dec
− 0.8 12.9 0.5 − 3.9 − 10.6 − 10.0 −0.7 − 9.3 − 4.7 4.1 5.3 2.5 − 1.1 2003         Jan
1.4 −18.3 2.2 21.1 9.5 7.3 1.7 5.6 − 0.7 3.0 2.3 1.3 8.1          Feb
− 1.7 20.3 1.5 2.9 6.0 9.6 2.5 7.1 − 5.2 1.7 0.4 0.6 − 4.0          Mar
− 1.1 1.4 0.9 11.5 10.1 11.0 2.8 8.2 − 2.0 1.1 0.0 − 0.0 1.4          Apr
2.2 13.2 2.4 16.6 16.2 8.1 1.3 6.8 7.4 0.7 1.0 0.4 − 1.0          May
0.4 10.7 0.6 4.6 8.4 19.4 2.8 16.6 −12.0 1.0 − 1.5 − 0.5 − 1.7          Jun
 German contribution (DM billion) 
− 0.1 −16.8 6.6 3.8 2.9 − 0.1 5.0 − 5.1 3.1 − 0.1 0.3 − 0.4 1.0 2002          Mar
− 3.7 − 2.8 2.5 3.3 0.4 24.2 6.1 18.1 − 9.4 − 14.4 − 0.6 − 0.6 4.1          Apr
1.4 − 1.2 5.6 32.9 24.6 16.9 4.8 12.1 8.8 − 1.2 2.6 0.8 4.9          May
0.9 −10.0 2.0 21.4 30.6 32.0 6.5 25.6 0.6 − 2.0 − 1.2 − 1.0 − 7.2          Jun
− 2.1 −26.8 4.0 − 11.3 − 6.3 − 2.9 7.2 − 10.1 − 0.4 − 2.9 − 2.0 0.6 − 3.6          Jul
2.6 − 8.4 6.2 6.5 − 0.8 − 8.4 1.8 − 10.1 7.3 0.2 2.3 2.6 2.4          Aug
2.0 21.0 4.2 26.8 16.5 32.2 3.1 29.1 −17.5 1.9 12.5 0.2 − 1.5          Sep
− 3.2 16.6 4.0 30.2 22.8 5.3 2.9 2.4 13.2 4.3 − 2.0 1.2 8.2          Oct
− 1.3 −12.0 2.8 57.6 62.7 67.1 4.9 62.2 −10.9 6.4 − 6.4 − 0.3 1.6          Nov
0.1 − 7.4 3.0 44.6 49.6 10.5 8.5 2.0 14.1 25.1 − 6.0 − 0.9 1.8          Dec
− 1.6 25.2 1.0 − 7.7 − 20.7 − 19.5 −1.4 − 18.1 − 9.2 8.1 10.3 4.9 − 2.2 2003          Jan
2.8 −35.8 4.4 41.3 18.6 14.2 3.3 10.9 − 1.4 5.8 4.4 2.5 15.8          Feb
− 3.3 39.8 2.9 5.7 11.8 18.7 4.8 13.9 −10.1 3.2 0.8 1.2 − 7.8          Mar
− 2.2 2.7 1.8 22.5 19.7 21.5 5.5 16.0 − 3.9 2.1 0.1 − 0.1 2.8          Apr
4.3 25.9 4.6 32.5 31.7 15.9 2.6 13.2 14.5 1.3 2.0 0.8 − 2.0          May
0.8 20.8 1.3 9.1 16.4 37.9 5.5 32.4 −23.5 1.9 − 3.0 − 1.0 − 3.3          Jun
euro-area MFIs ’cash in hand denominated in euro or in currencies of the deposits. —10Paper held by residents outside the euro area has been
euro area. From 2002 the German contribution contains the euro banknote eliminated. —11For the German contribution: the difference between the
volume put into circulation by the Bundesbank according to the accounting volume of euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and theregime chosen by the Eurosystem (see footnote 3 on banknote circulation in amount disclosed in accordance with the accounting regime chosen by theTable III.2). The volume of currency actually put into circulation by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 3 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). —
Bundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the item 12Includes statistically non-eliminated decrease of  5 11.6 billion (DM22.7
“Intra-Eurosystem liability/claim related to banknote issue “.—8For billion) owing to the change in the method of recording banknote
European monetary union: including the monetary liabilities of central circulation (see also footnotes 7 and 11). governments (Post Office, Treasury). —9In Germany, only savings
9*II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
  
 
AssetsLending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and individuals Public authorities
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
End of assets or Debt other Debt euro-area Otheryear/month liabilities Total Total Loans securities  
2 equities Total Loans securities  3 residents assets
 European monetary union (  5  billion) 1
 
2002         Mar 13,694.4 9,594.9 7,513.2 6,606.1 346.6 560.5 2,081.7 852.6 1,229.1 2,845.2 1,254.2
         Apr 13,680.2 9,612.5 7,550.9 6,641.2 342.9 566.8 2,061.7 832.4 1,229.3 2,826.5 1,241.2
         May 13,711.6 9,645.0 7,573.6 6,659.7 345.0 568.9 2,071.5 829.2 1,242.3 2,845.8 1,220.7         Jun 13,642.3 9,667.1 7,598.0 6,691.1 343.0 563.9 2,069.1 830.1 1,239.0 2,731.2 1,243.9
         Jul 13,679.1 9,652.9 7,587.0 6,692.6 345.3 549.1 2,065.9 828.5 1,237.4 2,756.7 1,269.5
         Aug 13,649.2 9,645.5 7,592.5 6,692.3 341.0 559.1 2,053.0 818.0 1,235.0 2,745.3 1,258.4         Sep 13,822.3 9,700.5 7,626.6 6,726.8 350.8 549.1 2,073.9 820.8 1,253.2 2,813.5 1,308.3
         Oct 13,863.8 9,726.2 7,657.3 6,742.7 353.1 561.5 2,068.8 820.4 1,248.5 2,863.5 1,274.1
         Nov 14,010.7 9,761.6 7,678.0 6,754.5 356.7 566.8 2,083.6 829.2 1,254.4 2,937.0 1,312.1         Dec 13,931.1 9,779.1 7,721.2 6,781.5 367.1 572.7 2,057.8 836.8 1,221.0 2,840.3 1,311.7
2003         Jan 13,972.1 9,851.5 7,747.0 6,804.7 374.8 567.5 2,104.4 828.9 1,275.5 2,851.9 1,268.7
         Feb 14,111.6 9,903.4 7,776.5 6,831.3 381.1 564.1 2,126.8 828.3 1,298.6 2,908.9 1,299.3         Mar 14,122.8 9,940.3 7,806.9 6,854.9 386.6 565.4 2,133.5 828.7 1,304.8 2,894.8 1,287.6
         Apr 14,226.4 10,026.3 7,879.7 6,891.4 404.1 584.2 2,146.6 823.3 1,323.3 2,905.8 1,294.3
         May 14,298.9 10,086.4 7,910.5 6,907.3 406.9 596.2 2,175.9 818.9 1,357.0 2,877.8 1,334.7         Jun 14,385.2 10,103.2 7,942.0 6,944.9 406.7 590.4 2,161.2 819.6 1,341.6 2,959.5 1,322.5
 German contribution (  5  billion) 
2002         Mar 4,334.0 3,315.0 2,597.6 2,290.4 67.2 240.1 717.4 495.4 221.9 829.6 189.3
         Apr 4,330.7 3,324.0 2,605.7 2,293.1 69.0 243.7 718.3 491.2 227.1 816.6 190.1
         May 4,341.9 3,327.7 2,606.9 2,294.6 69.2 243.2 720.8 485.6 235.2 827.5 186.7         Jun 4,291.6 3,309.3 2,596.0 2,294.8 69.7 231.6 713.3 480.4 232.8 800.0 182.3
         Jul 4,303.6 3,317.5 2,589.5 2,291.3 69.8 228.4 728.0 489.0 239.0 801.2 184.9
         Aug 4,307.0 3,315.3 2,594.9 2,289.8 67.1 238.0 720.4 479.8 240.6 810.2 181.5         Sep 4,355.6 3,327.5 2,605.3 2,301.6 66.5 237.3 722.2 477.0 245.2 841.9 186.1
         Oct 4,370.5 3,332.3 2,611.3 2,299.8 69.8 241.7 721.0 480.4 240.6 850.3 188.0
         Nov 4,413.9 3,341.1 2,615.3 2,299.5 69.6 246.2 725.8 481.7 244.1 879.3 193.5         Dec 4,359.5 3,344.6 2,630.8 2,304.4 66.6 259.8 713.8 478.4 235.4 823.8 191.1
2003         Jan 4,360.7 3,353.2 2,623.2 2,298.5 66.1 258.7 730.0 484.0 246.1 824.1 183.4
         Feb 4,383.3 3,351.8 2,627.3 2,303.8 66.5 257.0 724.6 477.9 246.6 841.9 189.5         Mar 4,395.2 3,351.2 2,624.8 2,302.6 67.2 255.0 726.4 474.6 251.7 861.8 182.2
         Apr 4,400.8 3,353.3 2,629.0 2,300.8 67.3 260.9 724.3 475.4 248.9 867.7 179.8
         May 4,401.1 3,351.6 2,629.9 2,298.8 67.9 263.2 721.7 470.7 251.1 871.9 177.5         Jun 4,412.0 3,334.6 2,629.8 2,301.7 67.0 261.1 704.8 463.7 241.2 906.8 170.6
 German contribution (DM billion) 
2002         Mar 8,476.5 6,483.6 5,080.5 4,479.6 131.4 469.5 1,403.1 969.0 434.1 1,622.6 370.3
         Apr 8,470.2 6,501.2 5,096.3 4,484.9 134.9 476.6 1,404.8 960.6 444.2 1,597.2 371.8
         May 8,492.0 6,508.4 5,098.7 4,487.8 135.3 475.6 1,409.8 949.7 460.0 1,618.4 365.2         Jun 8,393.6 6,472.4 5,077.4 4,488.2 136.2 452.9 1,395.0 939.6 455.4 1,564.7 356.6
         Jul 8,417.2 6,488.5 5,064.7 4,481.5 136.6 446.6 1,423.8 956.4 467.4 1,567.0 361.7
         Aug 8,423.8 6,484.3 5,075.2 4,478.5 131.2 465.5 1,409.0 938.4 470.6 1,584.5 355.0         Sep 8,518.8 6,508.1 5,095.6 4,501.5 130.0 464.1 1,412.5 932.9 479.7 1,646.6 364.0
         Oct 8,548.0 6,517.3 5,107.2 4,497.9 136.5 472.7 1,410.1 939.5 470.6 1,663.0 367.6
         Nov 8,632.8 6,534.6 5,115.1 4,497.3 136.2 481.6 1,419.5 942.1 477.4 1,719.7 378.5         Dec 8,526.4 6,541.5 5,145.4 4,507.0 130.3 508.1 1,396.1 935.7 460.4 1,611.2 373.7
2003         Jan 8,528.8 6,558.3 5,130.5 4,495.4 129.2 505.9 1,427.8 946.5 481.2 1,611.8 358.7
         Feb 8,572.9 6,555.6 5,138.5 4,505.9 130.0 502.6 1,417.1 934.7 482.4 1,646.7 370.6         Mar 8,596.3 6,554.3 5,133.7 4,503.6 131.4 498.7 1,420.6 928.3 492.3 1,685.5 356.4
         Apr 8,607.2 6,558.5 5,141.9 4,500.0 131.7 510.2 1,416.5 929.7 486.8 1,697.1 351.7
         May 8,607.7 6,555.2 5,143.6 4,496.0 132.7 514.9 1,411.6 920.6 491.0 1,705.3 347.2         Jun 8,629.1 6,521.9 5,143.4 4,501.6 131.0 510.7 1,378.5 906.9 471.7 1,773.5 333.7
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building circulation; up to end-2002, also including national banknotes and coi ns still
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p 12*). Excluding MFIs ‘cash in hand (in
and national central banks (the Eurosystem). —1Source: ECB. —2Including euro). From 2002 the German contribution includes the volume of euro
money market paper of enterprises. —3Including Treasury bills and other banknotes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with the
money market paper of public authorities. —4From 2002, euro currency in
10*II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
    
 
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and individuals
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  6 
over
Currency 1 year and
in of which up to up to over up to over
Total in euro  5 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months  End of circulation  4 
year/month
European monetary union (  5  billion) 1
 
254.3 5,686.3 5,327.3 5,376.5 1,769.8 954.6 80.4 1,151.5 1,310.6 109.5 2002          Mar
261.7 5,711.2 5,355.4 5,401.0 1,797.8 959.7 81.0 1,150.8 1,304.2 107.5          Apr
273.9 5,713.5 5,366.7 5,409.7 1,801.1 961.3 81.5 1,153.0 1,306.4 106.4          May285.8 5,749.3 5,407.9 5,438.3 1,844.4 938.5 81.5 1,155.0 1,312.7 106.2          Jun
296.8 5,725.7 5,384.9 5,422.5 1,816.1 948.2 82.6 1,154.1 1,315.4 106.2          Jul
301.2 5,688.0 5,358.6 5,396.2 1,783.7 959.7 83.3 1,142.5 1,320.6 106.4          Aug306.7 5,730.1 5,399.2 5,434.7 1,837.3 941.0 82.9 1,143.6 1,323.2 106.8          Sep
313.9 5,745.4 5,410.6 5,446.2 1,819.2 964.2 82.8 1,144.9 1,329.4 105.8          Oct
321.4 5,799.5 5,466.9 5,504.6 1,871.3 956.8 82.4 1,148.3 1,340.5 105.3          Nov341.2 5,880.6 5,567.9 5,593.3 1,924.2 947.6 81.2 1,163.9 1,371.1 105.3          Dec
312.1 5,869.2 5,535.9 5,568.6 1,877.1 950.7 79.8 1,166.7 1,391.0 103.3 2003          Jan
319.3 5,912.4 5,559.7 5,585.9 1,875.5 950.2 78.5 1,174.0 1,405.6 102.1          Feb327.2 5,962.4 5,608.9 5,638.7 1,914.5 946.6 77.8 1,180.9 1,418.4 100.6          Mar
336.3 5,977.8 5,638.2 5,669.6 1,931.3 959.1 76.2 1,178.0 1,427.2 97.9          Apr
343.8 6,040.1 5,694.4 5,714.1 1,955.6 969.8 75.1 1,184.3 1,432.7 96.6          May351.0 6,099.0 5,714.2 5,742.9 2,001.6 936.6 74.5 1,188.0 1,447.1 95.1          Jun
 German contribution (  5  billion) 
70.9 2,109.1 2,021.9 1,989.1 504.1 237.3 17.1 656.8 465.9 107.8 2002          Mar
74.0 2,100.4 2,015.8 1,984.7 513.9 234.0 17.1 655.2 458.6 105.9          Apr
76.5 2,107.7 2,023.6 1,987.3 519.1 234.2 17.1 654.1 457.9 104.8          May79.8 2,119.3 2,035.6 1,997.1 530.9 234.4 17.3 653.0 457.0 104.6          Jun
83.4 2,112.5 2,030.5 1,993.2 525.8 235.8 17.6 653.9 455.5 104.6          Jul
84.3 2,098.8 2,018.1 1,979.2 521.5 239.6 17.6 640.1 455.6 104.8          Aug85.9 2,105.7 2,023.7 1,987.6 536.6 233.0 17.5 639.6 456.5 104.3          Sep
87.4 2,115.1 2,035.2 2,003.0 538.0 243.7 17.5 641.5 458.8 103.5          Oct
89.9 2,147.3 2,066.9 2,035.6 569.5 237.6 17.9 645.7 462.0 102.9          Nov94.2 2,170.7 2,092.1 2,054.2 567.8 242.4 18.2 648.0 474.8 103.1          Dec
84.9 2,159.7 2,082.0 2,048.3 561.2 238.7 18.6 649.7 478.9 101.2 2003          Jan
86.6 2,173.9 2,094.9 2,058.5 564.8 237.3 18.5 656.1 481.8 100.0          Feb89.0 2,175.8 2,098.2 2,063.3 572.0 232.8 18.6 657.9 483.5 98.4          Mar
91.9 2,176.7 2,100.4 2,068.2 580.4 233.5 18.1 655.8 484.6 95.8          Apr
93.2 2,189.4 2,112.0 2,073.9 585.9 236.9 17.8 653.8 485.3 94.3          May96.0 2,194.7 2,115.7 2,076.1 600.0 225.8 17.6 653.4 486.3 92.9          Jun
 German contribution (DM billion) 
138.7 4,125.0 3,954.6 3,890.3 986.0 464.2 33.5 1,284.6 911.3 210.9 2002          Mar
144.7 4,108.0 3,942.5 3,881.8 1,005.1 457.6 33.5 1,281.5 897.0 207.1          Apr
149.6 4,122.4 3,957.8 3,886.7 1,015.2 458.1 33.5 1,279.4 895.7 204.9          May156.0 4,145.0 3,981.3 3,906.0 1,038.3 458.5 33.8 1,277.2 893.8 204.5          Jun
163.2 4,131.7 3,971.2 3,898.4 1,028.4 461.2 34.4 1,279.0 890.9 204.6          Jul
165.0 4,105.0 3,947.1 3,871.0 1,020.0 468.6 34.5 1,252.0 891.0 204.9          Aug168.1 4,118.3 3,958.0 3,887.3 1,049.4 455.7 34.3 1,251.0 892.9 204.0          Sep
170.9 4,136.7 3,980.5 3,917.6 1,052.2 476.7 34.3 1,254.7 897.2 202.4          Oct
175.8 4,199.8 4,042.5 3,981.3 1,113.8 464.7 35.1 1,262.9 903.6 201.3          Nov184.3 4,245.5 4,091.8 4,017.7 1,110.5 474.0 35.5 1,267.4 928.6 201.7          Dec
166.0 4,223.9 4,072.0 4,006.2 1,097.7 466.9 36.4 1,270.7 936.6 197.8 2003          Jan
169.3 4,251.9 4,097.3 4,026.0 1,104.6 464.1 36.2 1,283.2 942.4 195.5          Feb174.1 4,255.4 4,103.7 4,035.4 1,118.8 455.4 36.4 1,286.8 945.7 192.4          Mar
179.7 4,257.3 4,108.0 4,045.0 1,135.1 456.6 35.4 1,282.7 947.9 187.4          Apr
182.3 4,282.0 4,130.6 4,056.2 1,145.9 463.3 34.8 1,278.7 949.2 184.4          May187.7 4,292.4 4,137.9 4,060.4 1,173.6 441.7 34.4 1,278.0 951.1 181.7          Jun
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see footnote 3 on banknote liability items “).—5Excluding central governments deposits. —6In
circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into circulation Germany, only saving deposits. —7Includes decrease of  5 11.6 billion
by the Bundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the item (DM22.7 billion) owing to the change in the method of recording banknote“Intra-Eurosystem liability/claim related to banknote issue “(see “Other circulation (see also footnote 4). 
11*II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (cont ’d) *
 
 
 
Liabilities (cont ’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont ’d)  
 
Public authorities Repo transactions Debt securities
with non-banks
Other public authorities in the euro area
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  2 
Money
over of which market of which
Central 1 year and Enterprises fund denom-
End of govern- up to up to over up to over and shares inatedyear/month ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total individuals (net)  
3 Total in euro
 European monetary union (  5  billion) 1
 
2002         Mar 157.5 152.3 69.3 51.8 1.6 26.7 2.5 0.5 229.6 224.9 431.2 1,793.1 1,468.5
         Apr 157.5 152.7 71.9 50.0 1.4 26.6 2.5 0.4 228.1 223.8 437.5 1,785.5 1,460.7
         May 149.0 154.8 68.8 55.2 1.4 26.6 2.4 0.4 234.8 230.7 442.6 1,805.0 1,475.7         Jun 155.0 156.0 71.6 53.3 1.5 26.7 2.4 0.4 229.6 225.9 439.2 1,788.3 1,470.9
         Jul 151.9 151.3 69.3 51.4 1.5 26.3 2.4 0.4 228.8 224.9 450.3 1,796.1 1,473.8
         Aug 141.0 150.8 67.8 52.4 1.5 26.3 2.4 0.4 236.5 231.9 463.4 1,814.3 1,493.3         Sep 146.3 149.1 70.7 48.4 1.3 25.9 2.4 0.4 238.3 234.4 460.4 1,813.0 1,491.3
         Oct 151.8 147.4 72.2 45.3 1.3 25.6 2.5 0.4 235.6 232.1 462.7 1,823.0 1,490.3
         Nov 147.5 147.4 71.9 45.6 1.3 25.6 2.5 0.4 229.6 225.8 477.1 1,831.1 1,491.9         Dec 136.4 150.9 75.6 45.1 1.4 25.6 2.8 0.4 226.9 224.4 470.6 1,818.6 1,490.8
2003         Jan 154.7 145.9 70.8 45.9 1.2 24.8 2.8 0.4 233.0 229.7 535.0 1,792.8 1,481.4
         Feb 175.8 150.6 72.0 49.9 1.0 24.4 2.9 0.4 233.8 230.3 547.4 1,802.5 1,486.4         Mar 176.2 147.5 71.6 47.2 0.9 24.5 3.0 0.3 224.0 220.8 550.8 1,803.8 1,486.8
         Apr 159.7 148.4 74.8 45.2 1.0 24.2 3.0 0.3 230.5 227.0 563.0 1,833.9 1,517.3
         May 170.1 155.8 76.7 50.8 0.9 24.1 3.0 0.3 231.4 227.8 571.1 1,819.3 1,515.4         Jun 200.0 156.1 80.0 47.2 0.9 24.6 3.0 0.3 214.8 211.6 570.3 1,830.1 1,516.4
 German contribution (  5  billion) 
2002         Mar 49.4 70.6 12.6 32.0 1.2 22.8 1.6 0.5 3.7 3.7 31.6 815.2 715.0
         Apr 47.5 68.2 11.8 30.6 1.0 22.7 1.6 0.4 3.4 3.4 31.3 812.8 712.9
         May 48.2 72.3 12.4 34.2 1.0 22.7 1.6 0.4 4.7 4.7 31.7 814.1 712.6         Jun 48.7 73.5 13.8 34.1 1.1 22.6 1.6 0.4 4.1 4.1 31.3 808.9 712.2
         Jul 47.6 71.7 13.9 32.3 1.0 22.5 1.5 0.4 3.1 3.1 31.6 817.3 715.7
         Aug 48.9 70.7 13.0 32.2 1.0 22.6 1.6 0.4 4.3 4.3 32.9 840.1 733.6         Sep 49.9 68.2 13.1 30.0 0.9 22.2 1.6 0.4 10.7 10.7 33.0 841.1 733.7
         Oct 48.3 63.7 12.8 26.0 0.9 22.0 1.6 0.4 9.6 9.6 33.6 844.6 730.7
         Nov 47.7 64.1 13.1 26.2 0.9 21.9 1.6 0.4 6.4 6.4 33.4 844.9 728.7         Dec 47.7 68.7 15.7 27.7 1.0 22.2 1.6 0.4 3.3 3.3 33.0 826.4 716.6
2003         Jan 46.9 64.5 12.7 26.9 1.0 21.8 1.7 0.4 8.6 8.6 35.5 817.6 702.1
         Feb 48.3 67.2 14.8 28.0 0.7 21.7 1.7 0.4 10.9 10.9 36.8 825.8 710.3         Mar 46.6 65.9 14.5 27.1 0.7 21.6 1.6 0.3 11.2 11.2 37.4 819.4 701.0
         Apr 45.5 63.1 14.1 24.9 0.7 21.5 1.6 0.3 11.3 11.3 37.2 818.7 699.8
         May 47.7 67.8 14.8 28.9 0.7 21.5 1.6 0.3 12.3 12.3 37.7 814.0 698.7         Jun 48.1 70.5 17.6 28.3 0.7 22.1 1.6 0.3 10.8 10.8 37.1 819.6 699.7
 German contribution (DM billion) 
2002         Mar 96.6 138.1 24.6 62.6 2.4 44.5 3.2 0.9 7.2 7.2 61.9 1,594.3 1,398.5
         Apr 92.9 133.3 23.1 59.9 2.0 44.4 3.1 0.9 6.6 6.6 61.3 1,589.7 1,394.4
         May 94.3 141.4 24.2 66.8 2.0 44.4 3.1 0.9 9.2 9.2 62.1 1,592.3 1,393.7         Jun 95.2 143.8 26.9 66.7 2.1 44.2 3.0 0.9 8.1 8.1 61.2 1,582.0 1,393.0
         Jul 93.1 140.3 27.2 63.2 2.0 44.1 3.0 0.8 6.1 6.1 61.7 1,598.6 1,399.8
         Aug 95.7 138.3 25.3 62.9 2.0 44.1 3.1 0.8 8.3 8.3 64.3 1,643.1 1,434.7         Sep 97.7 133.3 25.5 58.7 1.8 43.4 3.1 0.8 20.8 20.8 64.5 1,645.0 1,435.0
         Oct 94.5 124.6 25.1 50.9 1.7 43.0 3.0 0.8 18.9 18.9 65.7 1,651.9 1,429.1
         Nov 93.2 125.3 25.7 51.2 1.7 42.8 3.1 0.8 12.5 12.5 65.4 1,652.5 1,425.3         Dec 93.3 134.4 30.8 54.2 1.9 43.5 3.2 0.8 6.5 6.5 64.5 1,616.3 1,401.6
2003         Jan 91.7 126.1 24.9 52.6 1.9 42.7 3.2 0.8 16.8 16.8 69.4 1,599.2 1,373.2
         Feb 94.4 131.4 28.9 54.7 1.3 42.4 3.2 0.7 21.2 21.2 71.9 1,615.1 1,389.3         Mar 91.2 128.8 28.3 53.0 1.3 42.3 3.2 0.7 22.0 22.0 73.1 1,602.5 1,371.0
         Apr 89.0 123.4 27.6 48.6 1.3 42.1 3.1 0.6 22.1 22.1 72.8 1,601.3 1,368.7
         May 93.3 132.5 28.9 56.5 1.3 42.0 3.1 0.6 24.0 24.0 73.7 1,592.0 1,366.5         Jun 94.1 137.9 34.4 55.3 1.3 43.2 3.2 0.6 21.1 21.1 72.6 1,603.0 1,368.6
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building securities issued. —6After deduction of inter-MFI participations. —7The
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank German contributions to the Eurosystem ’s monetary aggregates should on
and national central banks (the Eurosystem). —1Source: ECB. —2In no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and are
Germany: only savings deposits. —3Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the therefore not comparable to the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2 or
German contribution: excluding German MFIs ’portfolios of securities issued M3. —8From 2003, including DM banknotes still in circulation (see also foot-
by MFIs in the euro area. —4In Germany, bank debt securities with note 4 on p 10*). —9For the German contribution: the difference between
maturities of up to one year are classed as money market paper; up to the the volume of euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and theJanuary 2002 Monthly Report they were published in this table together amount disclosed in accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the
with money market fund shares. —5Excluding liabilities arising from Eurosystem (see also footnote 3 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). —
12*II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
    
 
 Memo item
 Other liability items Monetary aggregates  7 
 issued (net)  
3 
With maturities of
of which Monetary
Intra- liabilitiesEurosystem- of centralliability/ govern-
over Liabilities Excess claim Monetary ments1 year and to non- Capital of related to capital (Post,
up to up to over euro-area and inter-MFI banknote forma- Office, End of1 year  
4 2 years 2 years residents  5 reseves  6 liabilities Total  8 issue  9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12 tion 13 year/month Treasury)  14 
European monetary union (  5  billion) 1
 
... ... 1,655.8 2,791.3 1,010.7 1.3 1,496.6 − 2,168.5 4,654.7 5,452.8 3,954.6 159.7 2002          Mar
... ... 1,650.2 2,773.9 1,004.6 − 8.9 1,486.6 − 2,207.2 4,690.6 5,490.9 3,940.1 160.5          Apr
... ... 1,660.6 2,755.0 1,008.8 − 7.3 1,485.2 − 2,219.3 4,712.4 5,533.8 3,955.7 160.4          May
... ... 1,655.2 2,619.9 985.8 10.7 1,533.6 − 2,277.9 4,752.2 5,553.8 3,929.3 160.6          Jun
... ... 1,670.1 2,648.2 993.4 − 2.9 1,542.7 − 2,256.1 4,742.3 5,546.9 3,950.5 158.9          Jul
... ... 1,687.0 2,616.3 1,004.3 − 0.2 1,525.4 − 2,228.6 4,734.2 5,560.7 3,967.0 161.7          Aug
... ... 1,680.8 2,674.8 1,015.9 − 5.0 1,588.0 − 2,291.0 4,776.1 5,606.1 3,973.4 162.3          Sep
... ... 1,688.7 2,697.9 1,014.0 3.3 1,568.2 − 2,282.3 4,794.4 5,626.4 3,979.4 163.6          Oct
... ... 1,698.9 2,737.7 1,016.2 − 4.0 1,601.5 − 2,342.3 4,858.3 5,696.2 3,994.0 164.6          Nov
... ... 1,689.7 2,627.2 1,006.5 8.8 1,550.8 − 2,423.8 4,964.6 5,789.8 3,991.5 174.5          Dec
... ... 1,684.5 2,662.9 1,016.3 9.7 1,541.0 − 2,343.7 4,906.7 5,782.9 3,996.0 175.3 2003          Jan
... ... 1,693.7 2,714.5 1,009.4 12.5 1,559.8 − 2,351.8 4,933.4 5,823.4 4,004.0 178.5          Feb
... ... 1,704.4 2,694.6 999.5 14.3 1,545.8 − 2,397.8 4,985.6 5,859.8 4,010.1 178.5          Mar
... ... 1,709.9 2,715.6 995.6 − 20.1 1,593.6 − 2,426.6 5,031.6 5,948.9 4,005.9 177.6          Apr
... ... 1,714.3 2,653.4 991.4 − 3.4 1,650.6 − 2,458.9 5,086.1 5,993.6 4,011.1 177.6          May
... ... 1,734.4 2,674.4 1,000.7 21.9 1,621.7 − 2,515.5 5,120.0 6,000.9 4,043.2 178.1          Jun
 German contribution (  5  billion) 
26.3 37.7 751.2 722.2 272.4 − 2.7 311.6 11.6 587.6 1,342.8 1,442.1 1,811.4 −2002         Mar
27.0 38.7 747.1 730.0 270.0 − 1.1 310.0 12.9 599.7 1,342.7 1,443.1 1,801.3 −         Apr
28.9 39.4 745.9 730.3 269.8 − 8.2 315.1 15.7 607.9 1,354.0 1,458.7 1,797.8 −         May
26.8 38.1 743.9 687.4 265.5 − 24.8 320.1 16.7 624.4 1,369.8 1,470.1 1,790.1 −         Jun
26.0 38.7 752.7 705.4 267.7 − 39.0 321.5 18.8 623.1 1,366.9 1,466.2 1,801.9 −         Jul
28.4 37.5 774.2 698.7 272.4 − 50.5 326.0 22.0 618.8 1,366.4 1,469.4 1,814.5 −         Aug
28.4 36.8 775.9 713.6 274.4 − 48.6 339.8 24.1 635.6 1,375.1 1,483.9 1,816.9 −         Sep
32.2 37.1 775.2 706.9 272.8 − 42.1 342.7 26.2 638.2 1,386.7 1,499.3 1,815.4 −         Oct
32.1 38.1 774.7 717.3 274.2 − 47.5 347.9 27.6 672.5 1,418.7 1,528.7 1,819.8 −         Nov
32.1 39.0 755.3 661.0 277.7 − 56.9 350.0 29.1 677.8 1,443.4 1,550.8 1,806.8 −         Dec
26.9 37.4 753.4 670.0 283.0 − 50.3 351.7 29.6 658.9 1,424.6 1,532.9 1,809.5 −2003         Jan
34.6 37.7 753.4 679.1 279.5 − 63.2 353.9 31.9 666.1 1,434.1 1,554.0 1,811.1 −         Feb
31.9 36.5 751.0 682.5 280.3 − 48.9 348.6 33.3 675.5 1,439.9 1,556.9 1,809.6 −         Mar
33.5 36.3 748.9 686.4 281.1 − 55.5 353.0 34.2 686.3 1,449.6 1,567.9 1,803.5 −         Apr
32.2 34.1 747.7 666.8 277.5 − 43.6 353.8 36.6 693.9 1,465.0 1,581.2 1,795.1 −         May
33.0 31.6 754.9 661.1 279.0 − 42.6 356.3 37.3 713.6 1,473.8 1,586.4 1,802.6 −         Jun
 German contribution (DM billion) 
51.5 73.6 1,469.2 1,412.4 532.8 − 5.3 609.5 22.7 1,149.2 2,626.3 2,820.5 3,542.8 −2002         Mar
52.7 75.7 1,461.3 1,427.7 528.0 − 2.1 606.3 25.2 1,172.9 2,626.0 2,822.4 3,523.1 −         Apr
56.4 77.0 1,458.9 1,428.4 527.7 − 16.1 616.4 30.7 1,189.0 2,648.2 2,852.9 3,516.1 −         May
52.4 74.6 1,455.0 1,344.4 519.3 − 48.5 626.1 32.8 1,221.2 2,679.1 2,875.4 3,501.1 −         Jun
50.8 75.6 1,472.1 1,379.6 523.6 − 76.2 628.9 36.7 1,218.7 2,673.3 2,867.6 3,524.2 −         Jul
55.6 73.3 1,514.2 1,366.5 532.8 − 98.8 637.6 43.0 1,210.3 2,672.4 2,873.9 3,548.9 −         Aug
55.5 71.9 1,517.6 1,395.7 536.6 − 95.0 664.6 47.2 1,243.0 2,689.4 2,902.2 3,553.5 −         Sep
63.1 72.6 1,516.2 1,382.6 533.5 − 82.4 670.2 51.2 1,248.2 2,712.1 2,932.4 3,550.7 −         Oct
62.8 74.4 1,515.2 1,403.0 536.3 − 92.9 680.4 54.0 1,315.3 2,774.6 2,989.8 3,559.3 −         Nov
62.8 76.3 1,477.2 1,292.7 543.2 −111.2 684.6 57.0 1,325.6 2,823.1 3,033.1 3,533.8 −         Dec
52.5 73.1 1,473.5 1,310.5 553.5 − 98.4 687.9 57.9 1,288.6 2,786.2 2,998.1 3,539.0 −2003         Jan
67.7 73.8 1,473.6 1,328.2 546.6 −123.5 692.2 62.3 1,302.8 2,804.8 3,039.4 3,542.1 −         Feb
62.3 71.3 1,468.9 1,334.8 548.3 − 95.7 681.7 65.2 1,321.3 2,816.2 3,045.0 3,539.3 −         Mar
65.4 71.0 1,464.8 1,342.5 549.8 −108.6 690.5 67.0 1,342.3 2,835.2 3,066.6 3,527.3 −         Apr
62.9 66.7 1,462.3 1,304.1 542.8 − 85.2 692.0 71.6 1,357.1 2,865.3 3,092.6 3,510.9 −         May
64.6 61.9 1,476.5 1,293.0 545.6 − 83.3 696.9 72.9 1,395.7 2,882.6 3,102.7 3,525.7 −         Jun
10Currency in circulation (from 2002, euro currency in circulation; up to calculated by adding to this total the item “Intra-Eurosystem liability/claim
end-2002, including national banknotes and coins still in circulation), related to banknote issue “.—11M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities
overnight deposits (excluding central governments ’deposits), and (for the of up to 2 years and at agreed notice of up to 3 months (excluding central
euro area) central governments ’overnight monetary liabilities, which are governments ’deposits) and (for the euro area) central governments ’
not included in the consolidated balance sheet. From 2002 the German monetary liabilities with such maturities. —12M2 plus repo transactions,
contribution includes the euro banknote volume put into circulation by the money market fund shares, money market paper and debt securities up to 2Bundesbank in accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the years. —13Deposits with agreed maturities of over 2 years and at agreed
Eurosystem (see footnote 3 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). The notice of over 3 months, debt securities with maturities of over 2 years,volume of currency actually put into circulation by the Bundesbank can be capital and reserves. — 14 Non-existent in Germany. 
13*II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  European  monetary  union
  
 3  Banking system ’s liquidity position  * 
Stocks
  
 5  billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions ‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (includingmaintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Baseperiod currency operations operations facility operations facility operations deposits (net)  
4 reserves)  5 money  6 circulation  3 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2001         Jan  7 383.7 205.3 45.0 0.5 − 0.6 − 368.3 52.2 94.2 119.1 488.0
         Feb 377.9 188.9 49.8 2.6 − 0.4 − 354.8 57.0 86.3 120.7 476.0
         Mar 375.6 185.2 54.1 0.4 − 0.5 − 353.0 53.0 87.7 121.0 474.5
         Apr 382.1 172.4 58.4 2.2 − 0.5 − 354.6 49.5 89.1 121.4 476.4
         May 384.4 144.0 59.1 0.4 17.0 0.6 − 352.7 39.4 87.5 124.8 478.1
         Jun 385.0 161.7 59.1 0.2 − 0.4 − 351.1 41.3 87.5 125.7 477.3
         Jul 397.6 161.9 59.9 0.2 − 0.4 − 350.8 42.5 98.8 127.1 478.3
         Aug 402.1 164.0 60.0 0.1 − 0.2 − 347.6 48.8 101.8 127.8 475.6
         Sep 401.3 147.1 60.0 0.5 3.5 0.4 − 335.4 45.2 105.4 126.1 461.9
         Oct 389.9 136.7 60.0 1.1 − 0.1 − 325.2 43.6 93.6 125.1 450.4
         Nov 385.0 132.3 60.0 0.2 − 0.3 − 311.3 46.1 93.1 126.7 438.3
         Dec 383.7 122.5 60.0 0.5 12.4 0.8 − 298.0 43.5 109.3 127.4 426.2
2002         Jan 385.2 118.5 60.0 0.4 3.7 0.6 − 344.3 38.3 54.2 130.4 475.2
         Feb 386.0 127.3 60.0 0.2 − 0.1 − 306.2 49.6 85.2 132.6 438.8
         Mar 386.7 114.6 60.0 0.2 − 0.1 − 283.3 54.2 91.8 132.1 415.6
         Apr 395.4 112.7 60.0 0.4 − 0.2 − 285.9 55.9 95.3 131.2 417.3
         May 397.7 110.6 60.0 0.1 − 0.3 − 293.7 49.2 93.5 131.7 425.6
         Jun 396.2 112.6 60.0 0.5 − 0.4 − 300.8 45.1 91.2 131.8 433.0
         Jul 369.1 130.4 60.0 0.2 − 0.2 − 313.4 54.4 60.3 131.4 445.0
         Aug 360.0 139.2 55.2 0.1 − 0.1 − 322.7 50.9 50.8 129.9 452.8
         Sep 362.3 140.9 50.8 0.1 − 0.2 − 323.6 49.1 51.7 129.6 453.4
         Oct 370.0 146.1 45.3 0.1 − 0.1 − 329.2 45.6 58.2 128.3 457.6
         Nov 372.1 147.5 45.0 0.1 − 0.1 − 334.0 42.8 58.6 129.3 463.4
         Dec 371.5 168.1 45.0 1.1 2.0 0.2 − 350.7 51.7 55.5 129.5 480.5
2003         Jan 360.9 176.3 45.0 0.5 − 0.3 − 353.9 43.7 53.3 131.6 485.8
         Feb 356.4 168.6 45.0 0.3 − 0.3 − 340.7 50.2 48.0 131.1 472.2
         Mar 352.5 179.5 45.0 0.2 − 0.1 − 347.8 59.1 40.6 129.6 477.5
         Apr 337.4 179.4 45.0 0.1 − 0.2 − 358.5 52.1 20.5 130.6 489.3
         May 333.1 177.1 45.0 0.4 − 0.2 0.1 366.2 42.6 15.5 130.9 497.3
         Jun 331.3 194.7 45.0 0.4 − 0.3 0.2 373.2 52.6 13.2 131.9 505.3
         Jul 320.4 204.7 45.0 0.4 − 0.3 − 382.7 52.4 2.9 132.2 515.2
Deutsche Bundesbank
2001         Jan 93.0 103.1 28.4 0.3 − 0.3 − 131.2 0.1 57.7 35.6 167.1
         Feb 90.3 93.2 28.3 1.3 − 0.2 − 126.7 0.1 50.0 36.2 163.1
         Mar 89.1 87.6 33.2 0.2 − 0.4 − 126.2 0.1 47.6 35.9 162.4
         Apr 90.1 84.5 37.4 1.5 − 0.2 − 126.2 0.1 50.7 36.4 162.8
         May 90.0 67.4 37.8 0.2 7.5 0.5 − 124.8 0.1 47.6 37.4 162.7
         Jun 89.7 79.9 37.5 0.1 − 0.3 − 123.6 0.1 45.7 37.5 161.4
         Jul 92.8 85.4 37.0 0.1 − 0.3 − 121.8 0.1 55.5 37.7 159.7
         Aug 94.2 77.0 38.2 0.1 − 0.2 − 119.3 0.1 52.0 37.8 157.3
         Sep 93.7 73.3 38.9 0.1 1.3 0.1 − 115.4 0.1 54.6 37.1 152.7
         Oct 91.3 66.3 40.2 0.5 − 0.1 − 110.8 0.1 50.1 37.3 148.2
         Nov 89.8 68.2 38.5 0.2 − 0.2 − 104.6 0.1 53.8 38.0 142.9
         Dec 89.4 62.4 40.1 0.2 5.0 0.5 − 96.6 0.1 67.1 37.8 134.9
2002         Jan 89.9 63.3 41.1 0.3 1.4 0.3 − 91.7 0.1 64.9 39.0 131.0
         Feb 89.9 63.3 42.4 0.1 − 0.0 − 78.5 0.1 78.6 38.6 117.2
         Mar 90.0 58.5 40.7 0.2 − 0.1 − 79.7 0.1 71.2 38.3 118.1
         Apr 92.3 57.6 40.4 0.3 − 0.2 − 80.8 0.1 71.8 37.9 118.8
         May 92.3 53.1 39.7 0.1 − 0.3 − 83.8 0.1 63.1 38.0 122.0
         Jun 91.6 60.6 38.8 0.1 − 0.3 − 85.4 0.1 67.3 38.1 123.8
         Jul 84.7 67.6 37.1 0.2 − 0.2 − 89.2 0.1 62.0 38.1 127.5
         Aug 82.5 63.1 36.4 0.0 − 0.1 − 92.2 0.1 51.8 37.9 130.2
         Sep 82.4 64.4 32.7 0.1 − 0.1 − 92.4 0.0 49.1 37.9 130.4
         Oct 84.0 69.0 31.7 0.1 − 0.1 − 94.0 0.1 53.0 37.6 131.6
         Nov 84.3 73.2 31.6 0.1 − 0.1 − 94.6 0.1 56.5 37.9 132.6
         Dec 84.4 91.1 33.8 0.9 0.7 0.2 − 99.3 0.1 73.5 37.8 137.3
2003         Jan 82.3 85.1 36.1 0.5 − 0.1 − 98.3 0.1 66.9 38.6 137.0
         Feb 81.4 81.6 36.5 0.2 − 0.3 − 95.5 0.1 65.6 38.3 134.1
         Mar 81.4 90.0 34.9 0.1 − 0.1 − 97.5 0.1 70.9 37.9 135.5
         Apr 78.5 95.6 32.3 0.1 − 0.2 − 100.7 0.1 67.4 38.2 139.1
         May 77.6 98.8 32.4 0.4 − 0.1 0.1 102.5 0.1 68.4 38.1 140.7
         Jun 77.2 112.4 32.9 0.3 − 0.2 0.1 104.4 0.1 79.8 38.3 142.8
         Jul 74.3 115.5 32.4 0.3 − 0.2 − 107.1 0.1 77.1 38.2 145.4
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. —*The banking system ’s liquidity notes and other banknotes which have been issued by the national central
position is defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro-area banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in circulation. In accordancecredit institutions with the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the conso- with the accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for the issue oflidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statement euro banknotes, 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulationof the Bundesbank. —1The reserve maintenance period of the ESCB ’s are allocated on a monthly basis to the ECB. The counterpart of this adjust-
minimum reserve system starts on the 24th of each month and ends on the ment is shown under “Other factors ”. The remaining 92% of the value of
23rd of the following month. —2Source: ECB. —3From 2002, euro bank- the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly basis,
14*II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  European  monetary  union

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  European  monetary  union
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions ‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balancesin gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserveand foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenancecurrency operations operations facility operations facility operations deposits (net)  
4 reserves)  5 money  6 period circulation  3 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
−10.7 − 5.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − + 0.4 − + 7.9 − 8.9 −16.9 + 1.7 + 10.0 2001          Jan  7 
− 5.8 −16.4 + 4.8 + 2.1 −− 0.2 −− 13.5 + 4.8 −7.9 + 1.6 − 12.0          Feb
− 2.3 − 3.7 + 4.3 −2.2 − + 0.1 −− 1.8 − 4.0 + 1.4 + 0.3 − 1.5          Mar
+ 6.5 −12.8 + 4.3 + 1.8 −− 0.0 − + 1.6 − 3.5 + 1.4 + 0.4 + 1.9          Apr
+ 2.3 −28.4 + 0.7 −1.8 + 17.0 + 0.1 −− 1.9 −10.1 −1.6 + 3.4 + 1.7          May
+ 0.6 + 17.7 + 0.0 −0.2 − 17.0 −0.2 −− 1.6 + 1.9 + 0.0 + 0.9 − 0.8          Jun
+ 12.6 + 0.2 + 0.8 + 0.0 − + 0.0 −− 0.3 + 1.2 + 11.3 + 1.4 + 1.0          Jul
+ 4.5 + 2.1 + 0.1 −0.1 −− 0.2 −− 3.2 + 6.3 + 3.0 + 0.7 − 2.7          Aug
− 0.8 −16.9 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 3.5 + 0.2 −− 12.2 − 3.6 + 3.6 − 1.7 − 13.7          Sep
−11.4 −10.4 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 3.5 −0.3 −− 10.2 − 1.6 −11.8 − 1.0 − 11.5          Oct
− 4.9 − 4.4 − 0.0 −0.9 − + 0.2 −− 13.9 + 2.5 −0.5 + 1.6 − 12.1          Nov
− 1.3 − 9.8 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 12.4 + 0.5 −− 13.3 − 2.6 + 16.2 + 0.7 − 12.1          Dec
+ 1.5 − 4.0 − 0.0 −0.1 − 8.7 −0.2 − + 46.3 − 5.2 −55.1 + 3.0 + 49.0 2002          Jan
+ 0.8 + 8.8 + 0.0 −0.2 − 3.7 −0.5 −− 38.1 + 11.3 + 31.0 + 2.2 − 36.4          Feb
+ 0.7 −12.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 − + 0.0 −− 22.9 + 4.6 + 6.6 − 0.5 − 23.2          Mar
+ 8.7 − 1.9 − 0.0 + 0.2 − + 0.1 − + 2.6 + 1.7 + 3.5 − 0.9 + 1.7          Apr
+ 2.3 − 2.1 − 0.0 −0.3 − + 0.1 − + 7.8 − 6.7 −1.8 + 0.5 + 8.3          May
− 1.5 + 2.0 + 0.0 + 0.4 − + 0.1 − + 7.1 − 4.1 −2.3 + 0.1 + 7.4          Jun
−27.1 + 17.8 − 0.0 −0.3 −− 0.2 − + 12.6 + 9.3 −30.9 − 0.4 + 12.0          Jul
− 9.1 + 8.8 − 4.8 −0.1 −− 0.1 − + 9.3 − 3.5 −9.5 − 1.5 + 7.8          Aug
+ 2.3 + 1.7 − 4.4 + 0.0 − + 0.1 − + 0.9 − 1.8 + 0.9 − 0.3 + 0.6          Sep
+ 7.7 + 5.2 − 5.5 −0.0 −− 0.1 − + 5.6 − 3.5 + 6.5 − 1.3 + 4.2          Oct
+ 2.1 + 1.4 − 0.3 + 0.0 −− 0.0 − + 4.8 − 2.8 + 0.4 + 1.0 + 5.8          Nov
− 0.6 + 20.6 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 2.0 + 0.1 − + 16.7 + 8.9 −3.1 + 0.2 + 17.1          Dec
−10.6 + 8.2 + 0.0 −0.6 − 2.0 + 0.1 − + 3.2 − 8.0 −2.2 + 2.1 + 5.3 2003          Jan
− 4.5 − 7.7 + 0.0 −0.2 − + 0.0 −− 13.2 + 6.5 −5.3 − 0.5 − 13.6          Feb
− 3.9 + 10.9 + 0.0 −0.1 −− 0.2 − + 7.1 + 8.9 −7.4 − 1.5 + 5.3          Mar
−15.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 −0.1 − + 0.1 − + 10.7 − 7.0 −20.1 + 1.0 + 11.8          Apr
− 4.3 − 2.3 − 0.0 + 0.3 −− 0.0 + 0.1 + 7.7 − 9.5 −5.0 + 0.3 + 8.0          May
− 1.8 + 17.6 + 0.0 −0.0 − + 0.1 + 0.1 + 7.0 + 10.0 −2.3 + 1.0 + 8.0          Jun
−10.9 + 10.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 −− 0.0 − 0.2 + 9.5 − 0.2 −10.3 + 0.3 + 9.9          Jul
Deutsche Bundesbank
− 4.6 − 0.5 − 2.7 + 0.1 − + 0.2 −− 0.8 − 0.0 −7.4 + 0.3 − 0.2 2001          Jan
− 2.7 − 9.8 − 0.1 + 1.0 −− 0.1 −− 4.6 − 0.0 −7.7 + 0.6 − 4.0          Feb
− 1.2 − 5.6 + 4.8 −1.2 − + 0.1 −− 0.5 − 0.0 −2.4 − 0.4 − 0.7          Mar
+ 1.0 − 3.1 + 4.3 + 1.3 −− 0.2 −− 0.0 + 0.0 + 3.1 + 0.5 + 0.4          Apr
− 0.1 −17.2 + 0.3 −1.2 + 7.5 + 0.3 −− 1.4 + 0.0 −3.1 + 1.1 − 0.1          May
− 0.3 + 12.5 − 0.3 −0.1 − 7.5 −0.2 −− 1.2 + 0.0 −1.9 + 0.1 − 1.3          Jun
+ 3.2 + 5.5 − 0.5 + 0.0 − + 0.0 −− 1.9 − 0.0 + 9.9 + 0.2 − 1.7          Jul
+ 1.3 − 8.4 + 1.2 −0.1 −− 0.2 −− 2.4 − 0.0 −3.5 + 0.2 − 2.4          Aug
− 0.4 − 3.7 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 1.3 −0.0 −− 3.9 + 0.0 + 2.6 − 0.7 − 4.7          Sep
− 2.4 − 7.0 + 1.3 + 0.4 − 1.3 −0.0 −− 4.7 − 0.0 −4.5 + 0.2 − 4.5          Oct
− 1.5 + 2.0 − 1.7 −0.3 − + 0.2 −− 6.1 + 0.0 + 3.7 + 0.7 − 5.3          Nov
− 0.4 − 5.8 + 1.7 + 0.0 + 5.0 + 0.3 −− 8.1 + 0.0 + 13.3 − 0.1 − 7.9          Dec
+ 0.4 + 0.9 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 3.6 −0.2 −− 4.8 − 0.0 −2.2 + 1.1 − 3.9 2002          Jan
+ 0.0 + 0.1 + 1.3 −0.2 − 1.4 −0.3 −− 13.2 − 0.0 + 13.6 − 0.4 − 13.8          Feb
+ 0.1 − 4.9 − 1.7 + 0.1 − + 0.0 − + 1.2 − 0.0 −7.4 − 0.3 + 0.9          Mar
+ 2.4 − 0.9 − 0.3 + 0.1 − + 0.1 − + 1.0 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.4 + 0.7          Apr
− 0.0 − 4.5 − 0.7 −0.2 − + 0.1 − + 3.0 + 0.0 −8.7 + 0.1 + 3.3          May
− 0.7 + 7.5 − 0.9 + 0.1 −− 0.0 − + 1.6 − 0.0 + 4.2 + 0.2 + 1.8          Jun
− 6.9 + 7.0 − 1.7 + 0.0 −− 0.1 − + 3.8 + 0.0 −5.3 − 0.1 + 3.7          Jul
− 2.2 − 4.5 − 0.7 −0.1 −− 0.1 − + 3.0 − 0.0 −10.2 − 0.2 + 2.7          Aug
− 0.1 + 1.3 − 3.7 + 0.0 − + 0.1 − + 0.2 − 0.0 −2.8 − 0.0 + 0.2          Sep
+ 1.6 + 4.6 − 1.0 + 0.0 −− 0.0 − + 1.5 + 0.0 + 3.9 − 0.3 + 1.2          Oct
+ 0.4 + 4.3 − 0.1 −0.0 −− 0.0 − + 0.7 + 0.0 + 3.5 + 0.3 + 1.0          Nov
+ 0.1 + 17.8 + 2.2 + 0.9 + 0.7 + 0.1 − + 4.7 + 0.0 + 17.1 − 0.2 + 4.6          Dec
− 2.1 − 6.0 + 2.4 −0.5 − 0.7 −0.0 −− 1.0 − 0.0 −6.7 + 0.8 − 0.2 2003          Jan
− 0.9 − 3.4 + 0.4 −0.2 − + 0.1 −− 2.8 − 0.0 −1.2 − 0.3 − 2.9          Feb
+ 0.0 + 8.4 − 1.6 −0.1 −− 0.2 − + 2.0 + 0.0 + 5.2 − 0.4 + 1.4          Mar
− 2.8 + 5.6 − 2.6 −0.1 − + 0.1 − + 3.2 + 0.0 −3.5 + 0.3 + 3.6          Apr
− 0.9 + 3.2 + 0.1 + 0.3 −− 0.0 + 0.1 + 1.8 + 0.0 + 1.0 − 0.1 + 1.6          May
− 0.4 + 13.6 + 0.5 −0.1 − + 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.9 + 0.0 + 11.4 + 0.1 + 2.1          Jun
− 2.9 + 3.1 − 0.4 −0.0 −− 0.0 − 0.1 + 2.7 − 0.0 −2.7 − 0.1 + 2.6          Jul
to the NCBs, with each NCB showing in its balance sheet the percentage of statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statement of the
the euro banknotes in circulation that corresponds to its paid-up share in Bundesbank. —5Equal to the difference between the sum of liquidity-pro-
the ECB ’s capital. The difference between the value of the euro banknotes viding factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors. —6Calculated as
allocated to an NCB and the value of the euro banknotes which that NCB the sum of the “deposit facility ”,“banknotes in circulation ”and “credit
has put into circulation is likewise shown under “Other factors ”. From 2003 institutions ’current account holdings ”.—7Entry of Greece into the euro
euro banknotes only. —4Remaining items in the consolidated financial area on 1 January, 2001. 
15*II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  European  monetary  union

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1 Assets *
  
 5  billion
Claims on non-euro-area Claims on non-euro-area residents denominated
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
On investments, euro-area Balances Claims
reporting external loans residents with banks, arising from
date/ Gold and other denominated security the creditEnd of Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility undermonth  
1 assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
 Eurosystem 2
 
2002 Nov                22 788.7 131.1 246.9 32.0 214.9 21.0 3.8 3.8 −
                               29 796.5 131.1 245.6 32.0 213.6 20.0 3.5 3.5 −
         Dec                  6 812.7 131.1 248.4 32.0 216.4 20.1 3.7 3.7 −
                               13 818.7 131.0 250.7 31.9 218.8 20.2 3.7 3.7 −
                               20 820.4 131.0 248.6 31.9 216.6 20.2 3.7 3.7 −
                               27 832.6 130.9 248.6 32.5 216.1 19.9 4.0 4.0 −
2003 Jan                  3 3 795.0 130.7 3 236.8 3 31.3 3 205.5 3 19.9 4.0 4.0 −
                               10 786.6 130.7 237.1 31.3 205.7 16.6 4.1 4.1 −
                               17 773.3 130.7 235.4 31.2 204.2 15.6 4.4 4.4 −
                               24 778.9 130.7 231.8 31.2 200.6 16.6 4.4 4.4 −
                               31 786.7 130.6 233.3 31.2 202.2 18.3 4.9 4.9 −
         Feb                  7 782.0 130.6 231.4 31.1 200.3 17.5 5.3 5.3 −
                               14 775.4 130.6 229.8 31.2 198.6 17.3 5.7 5.7 −
                               21 784.8 130.3 228.0 31.2 196.8 17.7 6.2 6.2 −
                               28 790.6 130.3 228.3 31.2 197.2 17.3 5.9 5.9 −
         Mar                  7 750.0 130.3 227.9 31.0 196.9 17.4 6.2 6.2 −
                               14 838.9 130.3 226.9 31.0 195.9 17.0 5.5 5.5 −
                               21 802.3 130.3 223.9 31.6 192.4 17.7 5.1 5.1 −
                               28 798.7 130.3 224.1 31.5 192.7 16.8 5.2 5.2 −
         Apr                  4 3 774.4 3 122.7 3 216.9 3 30.8 3 186.1 17.1 4.8 4.8 −
                               11 770.6 122.7 216.0 30.8 185.2 16.7 4.5 4.5 −
                               18 776.5 122.7 215.8 30.7 185.0 16.5 4.6 4.6 −
                               25 800.6 122.3 215.8 31.2 184.5 16.9 4.6 4.6 −
         May                  2 760.4 122.3 214.5 31.2 183.2 16.7 4.6 4.6 −
                                 8 765.1 122.3 214.1 31.3 182.8 17.1 4.8 4.8 −
                               16 771.9 122.3 215.1 31.6 183.5 16.9 4.5 4.5 −
                               23 793.9 122.3 216.2 31.5 184.7 17.2 3.7 3.7 −
                               30 801.4 122.2 214.2 31.5 182.7 17.3 3.4 3.4 −
         Jun                  6 777.1 122.2 213.5 31.4 182.1 16.4 3.5 3.5 −
                               13 801.7 122.2 214.8 31.5 183.3 15.5 3.3 3.3 −
                               20 791.7 122.2 212.0 32.3 179.7 16.8 3.4 3.4 −
                               27 813.6 122.2 212.9 32.2 180.7 17.1 3.4 3.4 −
         Jul                  4 3 802.1 3 120.0 3 206.4 3 31.4 3 175.0 3 15.6 4.0 4.0 −
                               11 798.0 120.0 208.4 31.4 177.0 15.0 3.6 3.6 −
                               18 795.3 120.0 205.4 31.4 173.9 15.8 4.4 4.4 −
                               25 828.5 119.9 204.0 31.4 172.6 15.2 4.4 4.4 −
         Aug                  1 802.9 120.0 204.0 31.5 172.5 15.2 4.3 4.3 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2001         Sep 3 233.4 35.4 3 59.1 3 9.0 3 50.2 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Oct 226.6 35.4 59.5 8.8 50.7 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Nov 225.6 35.4 59.9 8.7 51.3 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Dec 3 239.9 3 35.0 3 58.2 3 8.7 3 49.5 − 0.3 0.3 −
2002         Jan 230.6 35.0 60.0 8.8 51.2 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Feb 221.4 35.0 59.9 8.8 51.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Mar 3 227.4 3 38.5 3 59.6 3 8.8 3 50.8 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Apr 205.3 38.5 58.0 8.3 49.6 − 0.3 0.3 −
         May 218.3 38.5 56.6 8.4 48.2 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Jun 3 217.9 3 35.4 3 51.2 8.8 3 42.4 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Jul 211.3 35.4 51.8 8.8 43.0 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Aug 218.3 35.4 50.9 8.7 42.2 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Sep 3 221.9 3 36.2 3 52.7 8.8 3 44.0 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Oct 226.4 36.2 52.1 8.6 43.5 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Nov 229.9 36.2 53.0 8.6 44.4 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Dec 3 240.0 36.2 3 48.8 8.3 3 40.5 − 0.3 0.3 −
2003         Jan 233.9 36.2 48.9 8.2 40.7 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Feb 236.2 36.2 49.2 8.2 41.0 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Mar 3 239.2 3 34.1 3 48.4 8.3 3 40.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Apr 230.5 34.1 47.0 8.2 38.7 − 0.3 0.3 −
         May 258.1 34.1 47.8 8.3 39.6 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Jun 3 258.2 3 33.4 3 45.0 8.3 3 36.7 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Jul 246.9 33.4 44.8 8.3 36.5 − 0.3 0.3 −
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the (NCBs). —The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold and
financial statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial financial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quarter. —
statements of the national central banks of the euro-area member states
16*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
    
 
Lending to euro-area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations
denominated in euro
 Other
 claims on euro-area credit Securities General    On
Credits institutions of euro-area government    reporting
Main Longer-term Fine-tuning Structural Marginal related denomi- residents debt    date/refinancing refinancing reverse reverse lending to margin nated in denominated denominated Other    End of
Total operations operations operations operations facility calls euro in euro in euro assets    month  
1 
Eurosystem 2
 
196.3 150.0 45.0 −− 1.2 0.0 0.2 33.1 67.2 89.1 2002 Nov                 22
206.1 161.0 45.0 −− 0.1 0.0 0.3 33.2 67.2 89.4                                29
219.7 173.8 45.0 −− 0.9 0.0 0.2 33.2 67.2 89.1          Dec                   6
221.8 176.8 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.2 33.2 67.1 90.7                                13
223.8 168.5 45.0 10.0 − 0.3 0.0 0.2 33.3 67.1 92.7                                20
236.6 191.5 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.1 33.1 66.3 93.1                                27
225.1 180.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.1 0.1 27.8 44.5 3 106.0 2003 Jan                   3
219.1 174.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.1 0.1 27.9 44.5 106.6                                10
208.6 161.0 45.0 −− 2.6 0.0 0.2 28.0 44.5 105.9                                17
215.3 170.0 45.0 −− 0.3 0.0 0.2 28.5 44.5 106.9                                24
219.2 174.0 45.0 −− 0.2 0.0 0.3 29.1 44.5 106.5                                31
214.0 169.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.3 30.7 44.4 107.7          Feb                   7
206.2 161.0 45.0 −− 0.1 0.0 0.3 31.7 44.4 109.4                                14
216.2 170.0 45.0 −− 1.1 0.0 0.3 32.6 44.4 109.2                                21
223.2 178.0 45.0 −− 0.1 0.0 0.6 33.5 44.4 107.2                                28
182.2 137.1 45.0 −− 0.1 0.0 0.9 33.5 44.3 107.2          Mar                   7
270.1 225.1 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.5 36.7 44.3 107.5                                14
234.9 189.0 45.0 −− 0.9 0.0 0.3 37.8 44.3 107.8                                21
232.0 187.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.3 38.1 44.3 107.4                                28
220.0 175.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.3 38.8 44.3 3 109.6          Apr                   4
217.1 172.0 45.0 −− 0.1 0.0 0.2 39.7 44.3 109.4                                11
223.0 178.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.1 39.8 44.3 109.7                                18
247.0 202.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.1 40.2 44.3 109.5                                25
208.0 163.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.1 40.3 44.3 109.6          May                   2
212.0 167.0 45.0 −−− 0.0 0.2 40.5 44.3 109.8                                  8
218.1 173.0 45.0 −− 0.1 0.0 0.2 41.0 44.3 109.6                                16
238.1 193.0 45.0 −− 0.1 0.0 0.2 42.3 44.3 109.6                                23
247.4 202.0 45.0 −− 0.3 0.1 0.3 42.3 44.3 110.1                                30
223.5 178.4 45.0 −− 0.1 0.0 0.2 43.1 44.3 110.3          Jun                   6
246.9 201.4 45.0 −− 0.4 0.1 0.3 43.4 44.3 111.0                                13
238.0 191.0 45.0 −− 1.9 0.1 0.3 43.8 44.3 110.9                                20
257.9 212.0 45.0 −− 0.8 0.1 0.2 44.1 44.3 111.3                                27
251.1 206.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.1 0.3 44.1 43.8 3 116.9          Jul                   4
245.1 200.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.3 44.5 43.8 117.4                                11
244.1 199.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.3 44.5 43.8 117.0                                18
277.8 232.0 45.0 −− 0.7 0.0 0.3 46.6 43.8 116.5                                25
252.1 207.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.1 0.2 46.9 43.8 116.5          Aug                   1
 Deutsche Bundesbank
111.7 70.2 40.3 −− 1.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 22.4 2001          Sep
108.2 69.8 38.4 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.7          Oct
106.8 45.0 40.4 − 21.3 0.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.7          Nov
123.0 80.5 41.1 −− 1.4 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.9          Dec
112.3 69.5 42.8 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.6 2002          Jan
103.7 61.7 40.4 −− 1.6 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.1          Feb
106.8 65.7 40.4 −− 0.7 − 0.0 − 4.4 17.7          Mar
86.6 46.7 39.6 −− 0.3 − 0.0 − 4.4 17.5          Apr
101.0 62.3 38.6 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 17.4          May
109.1 71.2 36.9 −− 0.9 − 0.0 − 4.4 17.5          Jun
98.2 61.8 36.4 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 21.2          Jul
100.3 68.3 32.0 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 26.9          Aug
104.2 72.4 31.7 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 24.0          Sep
103.9 72.4 31.6 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 29.4          Oct
111.1 77.0 34.0 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 24.8          Nov
125.5 87.1 36.1 −− 2.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 24.8          Dec
124.3 87.5 36.6 −− 0.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.8 2003          Jan
126.3 91.6 34.7 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.7          Feb
130.9 98.4 32.1 −− 0.4 − 0.0 − 4.4 21.1          Mar
125.0 92.5 32.5 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.7          Apr
151.8 118.7 32.9 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.7          May
155.0 122.5 32.4 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 20.1          Jun
144.0 115.1 28.8 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.9          Jul
 
1For the Eurosystem: financial statement for specific weekly dates; for the month; from 2002, end-of-month financial statement. —2Source: ECB. —
Bundesbank: up to end-2001, financial statement for the last Friday of each 3 Changes are due mainly to revalutions at the end of the quarter. 
17*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2 Liabilities *
  
 5  billion
Liabilities to euro-area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro-area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilitiesaccounts to euro-
On (covering Fine- area creditreporting the tuning Deposits institutions Debtdate/ Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
End of Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Othermonth  
1 liabilities Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment lation  2,3 liabilities
 Eurosystem 5
 
2002 Nov                22 788.7 334.6 126.8 126.3 0.5 −−− 0.2 2.0 55.1 50.2 4.9
                               29 796.5 340.0 121.9 121.9 0.0 −−− 0.2 2.0 64.8 59.6 5.3
         Dec                  6 812.7 351.3 127.1 127.0 0.1 −−− 0.3 2.0 62.2 56.6 5.6
                               13 818.7 355.7 130.0 129.9 0.1 −−− 0.0 2.0 58.5 53.6 4.9
                               20 820.4 367.9 127.9 126.7 1.2 −−− 0.0 2.0 50.0 44.9 5.0
                               27 832.6 374.6 129.3 129.1 0.2 −−− 0.0 2.0 55.1 49.8 5.2
2003 Jan                  3 6 795.0 354.5 130.0 129.9 0.1 −−− 0.0 2.0 47.4 42.4 5.0
                               10 786.6 346.3 133.5 133.4 0.1 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 48.5 43.6 4.9
                               17 773.3 341.6 132.9 132.7 0.1 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 42.5 37.3 5.2
                               24 778.9 338.2 127.2 127.2 0.0 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 59.0 54.0 5.0
                               31 786.7 339.5 126.8 126.6 0.1 −− 0.0 0.1 2.0 65.1 60.2 4.9
         Feb                  7 782.0 342.8 133.2 133.2 0.0 −−− 0.1 2.0 52.2 47.2 5.0
                               14 775.4 342.9 128.0 127.9 0.1 −−− 0.1 2.0 51.3 46.5 4.8
                               21 784.8 341.6 131.4 129.0 2.4 −−− 0.1 2.0 59.0 54.1 4.8
                               28 790.6 345.4 125.4 125.3 0.1 −−− 0.1 2.0 70.1 65.2 4.9
         Mar                  7 750.0 350.1 89.5 89.4 0.1 −−− 0.1 2.0 60.2 55.2 5.0
                               14 838.9 350.0 177.4 177.3 0.1 −−− 0.0 2.0 60.1 55.0 5.1
                               21 802.3 350.5 128.6 128.0 0.6 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 72.7 67.5 5.2
                               28 798.7 351.8 129.4 129.4 0.0 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 73.6 68.4 5.2
         Apr                  4 6 774.4 357.8 131.6 131.5 0.1 −− 0.0 0.1 2.0 53.9 48.6 5.3
                               11 770.6 360.2 128.4 128.3 0.0 −− 0.0 0.1 2.0 51.6 46.2 5.4
                               18 776.5 367.6 132.7 132.4 0.2 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 45.0 39.5 5.5
                               25 800.6 363.9 147.5 147.4 0.1 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 59.3 53.9 5.4
         May                  2 760.4 367.4 122.6 122.5 0.1 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 40.1 34.8 5.4
                                 8 765.1 368.1 129.4 129.3 0.1 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 37.7 32.2 5.5
                               16 771.9 366.9 128.6 128.5 0.1 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 46.3 41.0 5.3
                               23 793.9 365.3 126.3 121.7 0.7 3.9 − 0.0 0.0 2.0 69.3 64.1 5.2
                               30 801.4 371.0 134.9 134.8 0.1 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 65.5 60.3 5.2
         Jun                  6 777.1 376.0 112.7 112.7 0.1 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 58.9 53.4 5.5
                               13 801.7 376.5 139.1 139.0 0.1 −−− 0.0 2.0 55.1 49.7 5.4
                               20 791.7 376.0 134.4 134.1 0.3 −−− 0.0 2.0 48.4 42.9 5.5
                               27 813.6 377.2 131.0 130.9 0.1 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 73.0 67.7 5.3
         Jul                  4 6 802.1 383.7 133.3 133.2 0.1 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 57.9 52.7 5.3
                               11 798.0 386.2 130.9 130.9 0.0 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 52.1 46.7 5.4
                               18 795.3 386.9 133.8 133.7 0.0 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 45.7 40.4 5.3
                               25 828.5 386.3 142.6 142.5 0.0 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 70.6 65.3 5.3
         Aug                  1 802.9 392.1 126.0 125.9 0.1 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 56.8 51.4 5.4
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2001         Sep 6 233.4 112.0 48.3 48.2 0.0 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Oct 226.6 106.7 34.0 34.0 0.0 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Nov 225.6 99.0 49.9 49.8 0.1 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Dec 6 239.9 76.5 57.5 57.4 0.1 −−− − − 1.0 0.1 1.0
2002         Jan 230.6 82.5 46.1 46.1 0.0 −−− − − 1.0 0.1 0.9
         Feb 221.4 79.8 41.6 41.5 0.0 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.6
         Mar 6 227.4 80.5 42.0 42.0 0.1 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Apr 205.3 81.7 40.1 38.9 1.2 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.5
         May 218.3 84.1 44.9 44.9 0.0 −−− − − 0.6 0.0 0.6
         Jun 6 217.9 86.9 41.4 41.3 0.1 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Jul 211.3 90.0 40.7 40.6 0.0 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Aug 218.3 90.7 44.3 44.2 0.1 −−− − − 0.5 0.0 0.5
         Sep 6 221.9 92.0 41.0 41.0 0.0 −−− − − 0.6 0.0 0.5
         Oct 226.4 94.2 41.3 41.3 0.0 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Nov 229.9 95.7 41.0 40.9 0.0 −−− − − 0.8 0.1 0.7
         Dec 6 240.0 104.5 44.8 44.8 0.0 −−− − − 0.6 0.0 0.6
2003         Jan 233.9 94.5 40.9 40.8 0.1 −−− − − 0.5 0.0 0.5
         Feb 236.2 96.1 38.1 38.1 0.1 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.5
         Mar 6 239.2 98.1 48.1 48.0 0.0 −−− − − 0.5 0.0 0.4
         Apr 230.5 101.8 36.4 36.3 0.0 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         May 258.1 103.2 36.3 36.2 0.1 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Jun 6 258.2 105.2 38.8 38.8 0.0 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Jul 246.9 108.5 39.6 39.5 0.1 −−− − − 0.5 0.0 0.5
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the of each month; from 2002, end-of-month financial statement. —2From
financial statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial 2002, euro banknotes and up to end-2002, banknotes still in circulationstatements of the national central banks of the euro-area member states issued by the national central banks of the Eurosystem (see also footnote(NCBs). —The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold and 4). —3According to the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem on
financial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quar- the issue of euro banknotes, a share of 8% of the total value of the euroter.—1For the Eurosystem: financial statement for specific weekly dates; banknotes in circulation is allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The
for the Bundesbank: up to end-2001, financial statement for the last Friday
18*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
    
 
Liabilities to non-euro-area
residents denominated inforeign currency
Intra-  
Liabilities Eurosystem  
Liabilities to euro-area Liabilities Counterpart liability     Onto non-euro- residents Deposits, arising of special related to     reportingarea residents denominated balances from the drawing euro-  Capital    date/denominated in foreign and other rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and    End of credit facility
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF issue  
3 accounts reserves    month  1 liabilities  4 
Eurosystem 5
 
8.3 1.7 19.3 19.3 − 6.6 63.4 − 106.3 64.4 2002 Nov                 22
8.6 1.3 17.3 17.3 − 6.6 62.9 − 106.3 64.4                                29
8.5 1.3 20.0 20.0 − 6.6 62.6 − 106.3 64.4          Dec                   6
8.4 1.3 22.4 22.4 − 6.6 63.0 − 106.3 64.5                                13
9.5 1.4 20.7 20.7 − 6.6 63.7 − 106.3 64.4                                20
8.8 1.2 20.1 20.1 − 6.6 64.1 − 106.3 64.4                                27
11.6 1.1 6 21.0 6 21.0 − 6.3 6 73.8 − 6 82.8 64.3 2003 Jan                   3
8.3 1.1 19.7 19.7 − 6.3 73.6 − 82.8 64.2                                10
8.3 1.1 17.3 17.3 − 6.3 74.0 − 82.8 64.2                                17
8.9 1.1 15.0 15.0 − 6.3 74.2 − 82.8 64.1                                24
9.4 1.1 15.8 15.8 − 6.3 73.7 − 82.8 64.1                                31
8.5 1.0 15.8 15.8 − 6.3 73.3 − 82.8 64.1          Feb                   7
8.5 1.0 15.2 15.2 − 6.3 72.7 − 82.8 64.4                                14
8.4 1.0 14.1 14.1 − 6.3 74.5 − 82.8 63.5                                21
8.7 1.0 14.1 14.1 − 6.3 70.2 − 82.8 64.4                                28
8.7 1.1 14.8 14.8 − 6.3 69.9 − 82.8 64.4          Mar                   7
8.6 1.1 16.1 16.1 − 6.3 70.1 − 82.8 64.5                                14
8.4 1.1 14.7 14.7 − 6.3 70.6 − 82.8 64.5                                21
8.4 1.1 14.5 14.5 − 6.3 64.2 − 82.8 64.5                                28
8.9 1.1 15.4 15.4 − 6.2 65.1 − 6 68.0 64.5          Apr                   4
8.7 1.0 14.6 14.6 − 6.2 65.2 − 68.0 64.6                                11
9.2 1.0 14.3 14.3 − 6.2 65.9 − 68.0 64.6                                18
8.5 1.0 14.1 14.1 − 6.2 65.5 − 68.0 64.7                                25
9.5 1.0 13.0 13.0 − 6.2 65.9 − 67.9 64.7          May                   2
8.9 1.0 13.6 13.6 − 6.2 65.6 − 67.9 64.7                                  8
8.8 1.0 13.6 13.6 − 6.2 65.7 − 67.9 64.7                                16
9.6 1.0 16.0 16.0 − 6.2 65.2 − 67.9 65.0                                23
8.8 1.0 14.0 14.0 − 6.2 64.9 − 67.9 65.0                                30
9.0 1.0 13.7 13.7 − 6.2 64.6 − 67.9 65.0          Jun                   6
9.0 1.0 15.2 15.2 − 6.2 64.6 − 67.9 65.0                                13
10.6 1.0 14.6 14.6 − 6.2 65.7 − 67.9 65.0                                20
8.7 1.0 16.0 16.0 − 6.2 65.5 − 67.9 65.0                                27
8.8 0.9 6 16.4 6 16.4 − 6.0 6 65.8 − 6 62.2 65.0          Jul                   4
8.7 0.9 17.9 17.9 − 6.0 66.0 − 62.2 65.0                                11
8.9 0.9 16.7 16.7 − 6.0 67.1 − 62.2 65.0                                18
9.3 0.9 16.6 16.6 − 6.0 66.9 − 62.2 65.0                                25
9.1 0.9 16.3 16.3 − 6.0 66.6 − 62.2 65.0          Aug                   1
 Deutsche Bundesbank
6.8 0.0 1.8 1.8 − 1.7 15.3 . 6 41.8 5.1 2001          Sep
6.9 0.0 3.0 3.0 − 1.7 26.8 . 41.8 5.1          Oct
6.9 0.0 4.1 4.1 − 1.7 16.4 . 41.8 5.1          Nov
7.3 0.0 1.4 1.4 − 1.7 47.8 . 6 41.6 5.1          Dec
7.1 0.0 3.3 3.3 − 1.7 30.6 11.6 41.6 5.1 2002          Jan
7.0 0.0 3.2 3.2 − 1.7 32.6 8.2 41.6 5.1          Feb
7.0 0.0 6 3.0 6 3.0 − 1.7 30.9 11.6 6 44.8 5.1          Mar
7.0 0.0 2.4 2.4 − 1.7 9.1 12.9 44.8 5.1          Apr
7.0 0.0 1.6 1.6 − 1.7 12.7 15.7 44.8 5.1          May
6.9 0.0 2.3 2.3 − 1.6 20.9 16.7 6 35.5 5.1          Jun
7.1 0.0 3.0 3.0 − 1.6 8.9 18.8 35.5 5.1          Jul
7.1 0.0 2.3 2.3 − 1.6 9.2 22.0 35.5 5.1          Aug
7.2 0.0 2.8 2.8 − 1.6 10.2 24.1 6 37.3 5.1          Sep
7.1 0.0 2.4 2.4 − 1.6 10.6 26.2 37.3 5.1          Oct
7.1 0.0 3.1 3.1 − 1.6 10.5 27.6 37.3 5.1          Nov
7.1 0.0 1.8 1.8 − 1.6 11.1 29.1 6 34.2 5.0          Dec
7.8 0.0 2.2 2.2 − 1.6 17.6 29.6 34.2 5.0 2003          Jan
7.3 0.0 2.4 2.4 − 1.6 19.1 31.9 34.2 5.0          Feb
7.1 0.0 3.4 3.4 − 1.5 6 11.7 33.3 6 30.4 5.0          Mar
7.1 0.0 2.0 2.0 − 1.5 11.6 34.2 30.4 5.0          Apr
7.3 0.0 2.7 2.7 − 1.5 34.5 36.6 30.4 5.0          May
7.4 0.0 3.2 3.2 − 1.5 31.3 37.3 6 28.2 5.0          Jun
7.3 0.0 3.0 3.0 − 1.5 14.9 38.4 28.2 5.0          Jul
 
counterpart of this adjustment is disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem liability according to the aforementioned accounting regime and the value of euro
related to euro-banknote issue “. The remaining 92% of the value of the banknotes put into circulation is also disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem
euro banknotes in circulation is also allocated to the NCBs on a monthly claim/ liability related to banknote issue “.—4For the Deutsche Bundes-
basis, and each NCB shows in its balance sheet the share of the euro bank- bank: from 2003, including DM banknotes still in circulation (see also foot-notes issued which corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB ’s capital. The note 2). —5Source: ECB. —6Changes are due mainly to revaluations at the
difference between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to the NCB end of the quarter. 
19*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Assets
 
 Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999,  5  billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area  3 Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other member states to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and indi-
viduals
Secur- Secur-
Balance ities itiessheet Cash issued issued
Period total  
2 in hand Total Total Loans  3 by banks Total Loans  3 by banks Total Total Total Loans  3 
 End of year or month
 
1994 7,205.7 26.2 2,030.1 1,854.1 1,285.1 569.1 175.9 145.0 30.9 4,411.4 4,333.2 3,391.3 3,143.2
1995 7,778.7 27.3 2,210.2 2,019.0 1,399.8 619.3 191.2 158.0 33.2 4,723.3 4,635.0 3,548.8 3,298.7
1996 8,540.5 30.3 2,523.0 2,301.1 1,585.7 715.4 221.9 181.2 40.7 5,084.7 4,981.9 3,812.8 3,543.01997 9,368.2 30.7 2,836.0 2,580.7 1,758.6 822.1 255.3 208.8 46.5 5,408.8 5,269.5 4,041.3 3,740.81998 10,355.5 29.9 3,267.4 2,939.4 1,977.4 962.0 328.1 264.9 63.1 5,833.9 5,615.9 4,361.0 3,966.51999 5,678.5 17.2 1,836.9 1,635.0 1,081.4 553.6 201.9 161.8 40.1 3,127.4 2,958.6 2,326.4 2,093.4
2000 6,083.9 16.1 1,977.4 1,724.2 1,108.9 615.3 253.2 184.5 68.6 3,249.9 3,062.6 2,445.7 2,186.6
2001 6,303.1 14.6 2,069.7 1,775.5 1,140.6 634.9 294.2 219.8 74.4 3,317.1 3,084.9 2,497.1 2,235.72002 6,394.2 17.9 2,118.0 1,769.1 1,164.3 604.9 348.9 271.7 77.2 3,340.2 3,092.2 2,505.8 2,240.8
2001         Sep 6,295.9 13.7 2,070.9 1,778.2 1,142.2 635.9 292.7 216.8 75.9 3,283.9 3,056.0 2,471.5 2,218.7
         Oct 6,300.0 14.2 2,064.4 1,769.4 1,130.7 638.7 295.0 218.2 76.8 3,284.0 3,058.5 2,474.7 2,219.6
         Nov 6,320.2 13.7 2,082.6 1,779.3 1,144.1 635.3 303.2 227.1 76.1 3,299.4 3,073.7 2,479.4 2,226.6         Dec 6,303.1 14.6 2,069.7 1,775.5 1,140.6 634.9 294.2 219.8 74.4 3,317.1 3,084.9 2,497.1 2,235.7
2002         Jan 6,255.1 27.7 2,019.8 1,728.4 1,094.0 634.4 291.4 216.2 75.2 3,310.8 3,075.1 2,487.1 2,225.5
         Feb 6,230.4 19.5 2,004.6 1,725.2 1,084.2 641.0 279.4 202.9 76.5 3,311.9 3,074.7 2,485.5 2,227.3         Mar 6,269.8 16.9 2,033.3 1,744.1 1,096.1 647.9 289.3 213.2 76.1 3,310.6 3,065.5 2,478.9 2,230.3
         Apr 6,267.7 14.9 2,032.8 1,736.5 1,085.8 650.7 296.3 220.2 76.1 3,319.5 3,072.8 2,485.6 2,231.6
         May 6,304.5 14.7 2,055.5 1,749.0 1,096.7 652.2 306.6 230.7 75.8 3,323.3 3,074.2 2,485.6 2,232.0         Jun 6,277.4 14.3 2,073.9 1,758.9 1,111.2 647.6 315.1 238.1 77.0 3,304.8 3,059.5 2,477.9 2,233.2
         Jul 6,265.6 13.8 2,051.7 1,731.9 1,094.9 637.1 319.7 242.3 77.4 3,313.1 3,063.8 2,471.5 2,231.6
         Aug 6,290.6 13.6 2,073.4 1,746.9 1,113.0 634.0 326.5 249.2 77.3 3,310.9 3,064.3 2,480.6 2,231.5         Sep 6,341.1 13.3 2,077.4 1,745.3 1,113.3 632.1 332.0 253.8 78.3 3,323.1 3,074.8 2,490.6 2,242.3
         Oct 6,359.1 14.2 2,078.3 1,741.3 1,117.9 623.5 336.9 257.2 79.7 3,327.8 3,080.9 2,494.9 2,240.6
         Nov 6,453.5 13.2 2,130.2 1,780.8 1,150.6 630.2 349.5 267.3 82.1 3,336.6 3,088.4 2,496.7 2,238.4         Dec 6,394.2 17.9 2,118.0 1,769.1 1,164.3 604.9 348.9 271.7 77.2 3,340.2 3,092.2 2,505.8 2,240.8
2003         Jan 6,380.7 13.2 2,104.3 1,748.5 1,136.2 612.3 355.8 277.0 78.8 3,348.8 3,101.1 2,501.4 2,237.9
         Feb 6,424.9 13.2 2,124.3 1,751.7 1,142.1 611.7 370.5 289.5 81.1 3,347.4 3,097.7 2,501.7 2,239.2         Mar 6,434.8 12.9 2,121.5 1,747.2 1,135.0 614.4 371.9 288.9 83.1 3,346.7 3,100.4 2,498.0 2,238.1
         Apr 6,430.3 13.8 2,107.6 1,732.2 1,118.6 613.6 375.4 291.6 83.8 3,348.8 3,102.2 2,499.1 2,234.6
         May 6,467.7 14.0 2,144.0 1,756.9 1,143.6 613.2 387.1 303.3 83.8 3,347.2 3,101.9 2,499.2 2,232.0         Jun 6,472.9 13.3 2,139.0 1,748.0 1,137.1 610.9 390.9 305.4 85.5 3,330.2 3,089.9 2,502.9 2,239.7
 Changes 1
1995 587.7 1.1 184.6 169.3 114.7 54.6 15.2 13.0 2.3 322.1 312.1 201.2 188.11996 761.8 3.0 312.8 282.1 186.0 96.1 30.7 23.2 7.5 361.5 346.9 264.0 244.31997 825.6 0.5 313.1 279.6 172.9 106.7 33.5 27.6 5.9 324.0 287.5 228.4 197.61998 1,001.0 −0.8 422.2 355.7 215.1 140.6 66.4 56.2 10.2 440.4 363.3 337.5 245.2
1999 452.6 1.8 179.8 140.1 81.4 58.6 39.8 26.3 13.5 206.6 158.1 156.8 126.4
2000 401.5 −1.2 143.0 91.7 28.1 63.6 51.4 22.8 28.6 123.2 105.4 116.8 89.5
2001 244.9 −1.4 91.0 50.7 30.3 20.5 40.3 34.5 5.8 55.1 23.9 50.4 48.1
2002 165.7 3.3 63.6 6.5 23.7 −17.1 57.1 51.9 5.2 33.6 15.3 16.1 10.4
2001         Oct 1.6 0.4 −6.6 −8.9 −11.7 2.8 2.3 1.4 0.9 −0.2 2.3 3.0 0.8
         Nov 51.1 −0.5 18.2 10.0 13.4 −3.3 8.2 8.9 −0.7 15.7 14.4 3.7 6.0
         Dec −16.8 1.0 −12.3 −3.4 −3.5 0.1 −8.9 − 7.3 −1.7 18.9 12.4 18.7 10.1
2002         Jan −51.6 13.0 −49.6 −46.7 −46.6 −0.1 −2.9 − 3.7 0.8 −7.3 −10.4 −10.7 −11.0
         Feb −23.2 −8.2 −15.1 −3.1 −9.8 6.7 −12.0 − 13.3 1.2 1.8 0.1 −1.0 2.0
         Mar 42.2 −2.5 28.9 19.0 11.9 7.1 9.9 10.3 −0.4 −1.0 −8.9 −6.5 3.0
         Apr 7.7 −2.0 −0.9 −8.0 −10.3 2.3 7.1 7.0 0.1 11.0 8.7 8.1 2.3
         May 52.5 −0.2 23.2 12.8 11.1 1.8 10.4 10.5 −0.2 6.6 3.6 2.1 2.4
         Jun −5.8 −0.4 18.3 10.0 14.3 −4.3 8.3 7.4 0.9 −19.8 −17.1 −10.1 −1.1
         Jul −19.9 −0.5 −22.9 −27.5 −16.3 −11.1 4.5 4.2 0.3 7.2 3.6 −7.1 −2.6
         Aug 23.8 −0.2 21.9 15.1 18.1 −3.0 6.8 6.8 −0.0 −1.7 0.9 8.8 0.3
         Sep 51.3 −0.2 4.0 −1.6 0.3 −1.9 5.6 4.6 0.9 12.0 10.2 10.3 10.4
         Oct 20.3 0.9 0.8 −4.1 4.6 −8.7 4.9 3.5 1.5 4.6 6.2 4.4 −1.5
         Nov 97.2 −1.0 52.0 39.4 32.7 6.7 12.6 10.1 2.5 9.4 7.9 2.2 −1.8
         Dec −29.0 4.7 3.0 1.0 13.7 −12.7 1.9 4.4 −2.4 10.9 10.3 15.6 7.8
2003         Jan −13.9 −4.7 −24.3 −30.3 −28.1 −2.2 5.9 5.3 0.7 18.3 17.1 3.7 1.4
         Feb 41.4 0.1 17.2 3.2 5.9 −2.7 14.0 12.5 1.5 −1.6 −3.6 0.1 1.2
         Mar 14.3 −0.4 −2.9 −4.3 −7.1 2.8 1.4 − 0.6 2.1 0.2 3.3 −3.0 −0.5
         Apr 4.5 1.0 −13.7 −17.2 −16.5 −0.8 3.5 2.7 0.8 4.0 3.3 2.3 −2.1
         May 58.9 0.2 36.6 24.8 25.1 −0.3 11.9 11.8 0.1 1.3 1.9 2.3 −0.6
         Jun −5.4 −0.7 −5.2 −8.9 −6.5 −2.4 3.8 2.0 1.7 −18.0 −12.4 3.3 7.3
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey “in section data from money market funds. —1Statistical breaks have been eliminated
II. Unlike the other tables in section IV, this table includes −in addition to from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). —2Up to December
the figures reported by banks (including building and loan associations) − 1998, volume of business (balance sheet total plus endorsement liabilities
20*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
IV Banks
    
 
euro area  3 Claims on
non-euro-area
to non-banks in other member states residents
 Public Enterprises and Public
 authorities individuals authorities
Secur- Secur- of which Secur- of which Other
ities Total Loans  3 ities 4 Total Total Loans  3 Total Loans  3 ities Total Loans  3 assets   Period
End of year or month
 
248.1 941.9 650.1 291.8 78.2 39.6 39.6 38.6 8.3 30.3 548.8 479.6 189.2 1994
250.0 1,086.3 792.2 294.1 88.2 39.4 39.2 48.8 11.3 37.6 608.5 526.0 209.4 1995
269.7 1,169.1 857.8 311.4 102.8 36.8 36.8 66.0 17.2 48.8 678.1 575.3 224.4 1996300.6 1,228.2 911.0 317.2 139.2 41.9 41.2 97.3 23.4 73.9 839.6 710.2 253.1 1997394.5 1,254.9 939.1 315.8 218.0 62.5 56.0 155.5 35.6 119.9 922.0 758.0 302.2 1998233.0 632.1 488.4 143.7 168.8 65.3 35.9 103.6 20.7 82.8 511.2 404.2 185.8 1999
259.1 616.9 478.5 138.4 187.3 83.8 44.2 103.5 20.0 83.5 622.4 481.7 218.1 2000
261.3 587.8 468.7 119.1 232.3 111.3 53.7 121.0 26.2 94.8 727.3 572.0 174.3 2001265.0 586.4 448.5 137.9 248.0 125.0 63.6 123.0 25.5 97.5 738.1 589.2 179.9 2002
252.9 584.5 466.8 117.7 228.0 103.5 51.1 124.5 23.8 100.7 712.8 558.0 214.6 2001          Sep
255.1 583.8 467.7 116.1 225.5 105.2 51.7 120.3 24.1 96.2 722.0 563.7 215.5          Oct
252.8 594.3 477.4 116.9 225.7 107.8 52.4 117.9 24.8 93.1 741.7 584.8 182.8          Nov261.3 587.8 468.7 119.1 232.3 111.3 53.7 121.0 26.2 94.8 727.3 572.0 174.3          Dec
261.6 588.1 469.5 118.5 235.6 113.5 54.7 122.1 25.7 96.4 723.8 569.9 173.1 2002          Jan
258.2 589.2 466.9 122.3 237.2 114.6 56.1 122.6 25.8 96.8 721.8 566.7 172.6          Feb248.6 586.6 464.3 122.3 245.0 118.7 60.1 126.3 26.7 99.6 730.8 574.6 178.3          Mar
254.0 587.2 460.4 126.9 246.7 120.1 61.5 126.6 26.4 100.2 721.2 568.3 179.3          Apr
253.6 588.6 455.2 133.4 249.0 121.3 62.6 127.7 26.0 101.8 734.8 580.6 176.1          May244.6 581.6 450.0 131.6 245.4 118.1 61.5 127.2 26.0 101.2 712.6 559.4 171.7          Jun
239.9 592.3 458.1 134.2 249.3 118.1 59.8 131.2 26.5 104.7 712.9 557.9 174.2          Jul
249.1 583.7 448.5 135.2 246.6 114.3 58.3 132.3 26.9 105.4 722.0 566.9 170.7          Aug248.3 584.2 445.3 138.9 248.3 114.7 59.3 133.6 27.2 106.3 752.3 597.5 174.9          Sep
254.2 586.0 448.3 137.7 246.9 116.4 59.1 130.5 27.6 102.9 762.2 608.7 176.7          Oct
258.2 591.7 449.2 142.5 248.2 118.6 61.0 129.6 28.0 101.6 791.0 634.2 182.4          Nov265.0 586.4 448.5 137.9 248.0 125.0 63.6 123.0 25.5 97.5 738.1 589.2 179.9          Dec
263.4 599.8 453.0 146.7 247.6 121.8 60.5 125.8 26.5 99.3 738.3 591.8 176.2 2003          Jan
262.4 596.0 447.3 148.7 249.7 125.6 64.6 124.1 26.2 97.9 757.7 612.1 182.2          Feb259.9 602.4 444.0 158.4 246.3 126.8 64.5 119.5 26.2 93.3 778.6 630.9 175.1          Mar
264.5 603.1 445.8 157.4 246.6 129.9 66.2 116.7 25.2 91.5 787.6 641.1 172.5          Apr
267.2 602.7 439.8 162.9 245.3 130.7 66.7 114.6 26.5 88.2 792.4 644.3 170.2          May263.2 587.0 434.6 152.4 240.2 126.9 61.9 113.4 24.6 88.7 827.6 668.9 162.8          Jun
Changes 1
13.1 110.9 113.1 −2.1 10.0 −0.2 −0.4 10.2 3.0 7.3 59.7 46.3 20.2 1995
19.7 82.9 65.5 17.3 14.6 −2.6 −2.5 17.2 6.0 11.2 69.5 49.3 15.1 1996
30.8 59.1 53.3 5.8 36.5 5.1 4.4 31.4 6.1 25.3 159.4 132.9 28.6 199792.3 25.8 28.1 −2.3 77.1 18.9 13.0 58.3 12.5 45.7 83.9 52.0 55.3 1998
30.4 1.3 7.7 −6.4 48.4 12.2 6.4 36.2 2.0 34.2 33.1 13.8 31.3 1999
27.3 −11.4 −6.7 −4.6 17.8 16.8 7.2 1.0 −0.3 1.2 103.9 71.9 32.5 2000
2.4 −26.5 −9.8 −16.7 31.3 24.3 7.7 7.0 2.2 4.8 110.1 86.6 −9.9 2001
5.7 −0.8 −20.2 19.4 18.3 15.9 12.0 2.4 −0.6 3.0 65.7 64.1 −0.4 2002
2.2 −0.7 0.9 −1.5 −2.5 1.6 0.5 −4.1 0.3 −4.4 7.1 3.9 0.8 2001          Oct
−2.3 10.7 9.8 0.9 1.3 2.5 0.6 −1.2 0.6 −1.8 16.3 18.0 1.3          Nov
8.6 −6.3 −8.8 2.4 6.6 3.4 1.2 3.2 1.4 1.8 −15.9 −14.6 −8.5          Dec
0.3 0.3 0.8 −0.5 3.0 2.1 0.9 1.0 −0.6 1.5 −6.4 −6.4 −1.2 2002          Jan
−3.0 1.2 −2.6 3.8 1.6 1.1 1.3 0.5 0.1 0.4 −1.2 −2.7 −0.4          Feb
−9.6 −2.4 −2.6 0.2 7.9 4.1 4.1 3.8 1.0 2.8 11.3 11.5 5.6          Mar
5.7 0.6 −3.9 4.5 2.2 1.8 1.7 0.5 −0.2 0.7 −1.2 1.1 0.8          Apr
−0.3 1.6 −5.1 6.7 3.0 1.6 1.5 1.4 −0.3 1.6 25.8 23.0 −3.0          May
−9.0 −7.0 −5.1 −1.9 −2.7 −2.6 −0.5 −0.2 0.2 −0.4 0.6 −0.3 −4.5          Jun
−4.5 10.7 8.1 2.6 3.5 −0.3 −2.0 3.8 0.4 3.4 −6.1 −7.1 2.5          Jul
8.5 −7.9 −9.6 1.7 −2.6 −3.0 −0.9 0.4 −0.1 0.5 7.4 7.1 −3.5          Aug
−0.1 −0.1 −3.2 3.1 1.8 0.5 1.1 1.3 0.4 0.9 31.2 31.4 4.3          Sep
5.9 1.8 3.1 −1.2 −1.6 1.4 −0.2 −3.0 0.4 −3.4 12.2 11.8 1.7          Oct
4.0 5.7 0.9 4.8 1.4 2.3 2.0 −0.9 0.4 −1.3 31.1 27.5 5.7          Nov
7.8 −5.3 −0.8 −4.6 0.6 6.9 3.1 −6.3 −2.3 −4.0 −39.1 −32.8 −8.4          Dec
2.3 13.4 4.6 8.8 1.2 −1.8 −2.7 3.0 1.1 2.0 8.7 10.1 −11.8 2003          Jan
−1.0 −3.7 −5.7 2.0 2.0 3.8 4.1 −1.8 −0.3 −1.4 19.8 20.7 6.0          Feb
−2.5 6.4 −3.3 9.7 −3.2 1.3 0.0 −4.5 0.1 −4.5 24.5 21.9 −7.2          Mar
4.4 1.0 1.8 −0.9 0.7 3.4 1.9 −2.7 −1.0 −1.7 15.9 16.3 −2.6          Apr
2.9 −0.4 −5.9 5.5 −0.6 1.0 1.0 −1.6 1.5 −3.1 21.5 18.8 −0.7          May
−4.0 −15.7 −5.2 −10.5 −5.6 −4.1 −5.1 −1.4 −1.9 0.5 25.7 16.5 −7.3          Jun
and bills sent for collection from the banks ’portfolios prior to maturity) and bill-based lending instead of bill holdings. —4Including debt securities
trust funds. —3Up to December 1998, including fiduciary loans and arising from the exchange of equalisation claims. 
21*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Liabilities
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999,  5  billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area  4 
in the euro area  3 
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities  5 notice  6 
 
Balance in the in other of which of which
sheet home member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total  2 Total country states Total Total night Total  4 Total 3 months Total night 2 years  7 
 End of year or month
 
1994 7,205.7 1,650.9 1,483.5 167.4 3,082.7 2,894.4 510.4 1,288.3 549.2 1,095.8 654.6 80.1 4.1
1995 7,778.7 1,761.5 1,582.0 179.6 3,260.0 3,038.9 549.8 1,289.0 472.0 1,200.1 749.5 110.1 4.5
1996 8,540.5 1,975.3 1,780.2 195.1 3,515.9 3,264.0 638.1 1,318.5 430.6 1,307.4 865.7 137.3 7.51997 9,368.2 2,195.6 1,959.1 236.5 3,647.1 3,376.2 654.5 1,364.9 426.8 1,356.9 929.2 162.5 7.31998 10,355.5 2,480.3 2,148.9 331.4 3,850.8 3,552.2 751.6 1,411.1 461.6 1,389.6 971.9 187.4 9.41999 5,678.5 1,288.1 1,121.8 166.3 2,012.4 1,854.7 419.5 820.6 247.0 614.7 504.4 111.1 6.5
2000 6,083.9 1,379.4 1,188.9 190.5 2,051.4 1,873.6 441.4 858.8 274.3 573.5 450.5 107.9 6.9
2001 6,303.1 1,418.0 1,202.1 215.9 2,134.0 1,979.7 525.0 880.2 290.6 574.5 461.9 105.2 7.62002 6,394.2 1,478.7 1,236.2 242.4 2,170.0 2,034.9 574.8 884.9 279.3 575.3 472.9 87.4 8.1
2001         Sep 6,295.9 1,398.9 1,196.0 203.0 2,074.6 1,912.0 479.2 877.4 289.0 555.4 440.0 105.6 8.3
         Oct 6,300.0 1,386.9 1,176.9 210.0 2,077.0 1,914.5 482.5 875.6 287.3 556.4 442.8 107.1 7.7
         Nov 6,320.2 1,418.2 1,198.8 219.4 2,102.7 1,938.6 509.6 870.9 284.1 558.2 445.6 107.5 8.6         Dec 6,303.1 1,418.0 1,202.1 215.9 2,134.0 1,979.7 525.0 880.2 290.6 574.5 461.9 105.2 7.6
2002         Jan 6,255.1 1,375.4 1,153.3 222.2 2,112.2 1,957.1 511.0 872.8 281.4 573.4 464.3 105.0 8.1
         Feb 6,230.4 1,346.3 1,141.7 204.6 2,107.5 1,955.2 510.5 872.7 278.8 572.0 463.9 102.9 8.2         Mar 6,269.8 1,371.2 1,157.9 213.3 2,108.5 1,954.0 508.0 875.2 278.4 570.8 463.8 105.1 8.1
         Apr 6,267.7 1,362.1 1,129.9 232.1 2,099.9 1,948.3 515.1 871.3 274.5 561.8 456.7 104.1 10.1
         May 6,304.5 1,382.7 1,150.7 232.0 2,107.1 1,957.8 523.5 874.3 277.0 560.1 456.1 101.1 7.4         Jun 6,277.4 1,392.3 1,174.8 217.4 2,118.7 1,970.2 535.6 875.7 278.3 558.9 455.1 99.9 8.5
         Jul 6,265.6 1,371.7 1,149.6 222.1 2,111.9 1,964.9 531.2 876.2 278.0 557.5 453.6 99.5 8.0
         Aug 6,290.6 1,389.2 1,165.7 223.5 2,098.3 1,962.0 526.7 877.6 280.7 557.8 453.8 87.4 7.3         Sep 6,341.1 1,400.2 1,172.1 228.1 2,105.1 1,967.6 540.3 869.1 272.6 558.3 454.7 87.5 8.8
         Oct 6,359.1 1,419.4 1,177.2 242.2 2,114.5 1,979.6 542.0 877.8 279.0 559.7 456.9 86.6 8.2
         Nov 6,453.5 1,460.0 1,214.3 245.7 2,146.5 2,008.8 571.8 874.6 273.2 562.4 460.2 90.1 10.0         Dec 6,394.2 1,478.7 1,236.2 242.4 2,170.0 2,034.9 574.8 884.9 279.3 575.3 472.9 87.4 8.1
2003         Jan 6,380.7 1,457.2 1,213.2 244.0 2,160.0 2,024.7 564.4 882.9 275.8 577.4 477.0 88.5 9.1
         Feb 6,424.9 1,466.4 1,224.6 241.9 2,173.4 2,036.7 571.1 886.4 272.1 579.2 479.9 88.5 8.0         Mar 6,434.8 1,471.5 1,218.2 253.2 2,175.3 2,040.7 578.3 883.1 266.2 579.3 481.6 88.0 7.7
         Apr 6,430.3 1,455.5 1,200.9 254.6 2,176.2 2,044.3 585.8 880.6 264.8 577.9 482.7 86.5 8.2
         May 6,467.7 1,508.5 1,253.9 254.6 2,188.9 2,053.8 591.4 885.3 270.9 577.1 483.4 87.4 8.8         Jun 6,472.9 1,509.2 1,252.8 256.4 2,194.2 2,059.3 608.2 874.5 260.2 576.7 484.4 86.7 9.0
 Changes 1
1995 587.7 110.7 98.5 12.2 189.3 156.5 47.2 4.9 −76.5 104.3 99.1 30.0 0.4
1996 761.8 213.7 198.2 15.5 256.0 225.2 88.3 29.5 −41.4 107.3 116.2 27.2 3.0
1997 825.6 223.7 185.5 38.3 130.8 112.1 16.3 46.4 −3.8 49.4 60.3 25.0 −0.3
1998 1,001.0 277.0 182.8 94.2 205.9 176.8 97.8 46.3 34.8 32.7 42.0 26.2 2.01999 452.6 70.2 66.4 3.7 75.0 65.6 34.2 36.7 13.5 −5.3 7.4 7.5 1.7
2000 401.5 87.5 66.0 21.5 38.7 19.8 22.5 37.8 27.0 −40.5 −53.6 −4.2 0.3
2001 244.9 32.4 8.4 24.0 80.6 105.2 83.0 21.2 16.2 1.1 11.4 −4.0 0.4
2002 165.7 58.4 32.5 25.9 53.0 57.0 50.3 5.9 −11.0 0.8 11.0 −2.6 0.6
2001         Oct 1.6 −12.0 −19.1 7.1 2.1 2.4 3.2 −1.8 −1.7 1.0 2.8 1.4 −0.6
         Nov 51.1 30.8 21.4 9.4 25.4 24.0 26.9 −4.7 −3.3 1.8 2.8 0.2 1.0
         Dec −16.8 −0.3 3.3 −3.6 31.2 41.0 15.4 9.2 6.5 16.4 16.3 −2.3 −1.0
2002         Jan −51.6 −42.6 −48.9 6.3 −22.3 −22.8 −14.2 −7.5 −9.2 −1.2 2.4 −0.4 0.4
         Feb −23.2 −29.1 −11.5 −17.6 −4.7 −1.9 −0.4 −0.0 −2.6 −1.4 −0.4 −2.2 0.1
         Mar 42.2 24.9 16.2 8.7 1.2 −1.1 −2.5 2.5 −0.5 −1.2 −0.1 2.4 −0.1
         Apr 7.7 −9.2 −28.0 18.8 −7.9 −5.4 7.4 −3.8 −3.8 −9.0 −7.1 −0.6 1.9
         May 52.5 20.9 21.1 −0.1 9.2 11.0 8.8 3.9 3.2 −1.7 −0.6 −2.5 −2.6
         Jun −5.8 6.9 22.2 −15.3 11.9 12.1 12.0 1.3 1.3 −1.2 −1.0 −0.6 1.2
         Jul −19.9 −20.5 −25.2 4.6 −7.4 −5.6 −4.6 0.4 −0.4 −1.4 −1.5 −0.7 −0.6
         Aug 23.8 17.5 16.1 1.5 0.0 −2.8 −4.5 1.4 2.7 0.3 0.1 1.5 −0.7
         Sep 51.3 10.9 6.4 4.6 6.4 5.2 13.3 −8.6 −8.5 0.5 1.0 0.2 1.5
         Oct 20.3 19.2 5.1 14.1 9.6 12.2 1.8 9.0 6.4 1.4 2.2 −0.9 −0.6
         Nov 97.2 40.6 37.1 3.5 32.3 29.4 29.8 −3.2 −5.8 2.7 3.3 3.5 1.8
         Dec −29.0 18.7 22.0 −3.3 24.6 26.7 3.4 10.5 6.3 12.8 12.6 −2.2 −1.9
2003         Jan −13.9 −21.4 −23.0 1.6 −14.2 −13.7 −10.1 −5.7 −4.2 2.1 4.1 0.3 0.9
         Feb 41.4 9.2 11.3 −2.2 9.6 7.1 6.7 −1.4 −3.7 1.8 3.0 1.1 −0.9
         Mar 14.3 5.0 −6.3 11.3 2.1 4.1 7.4 −3.3 −5.9 0.1 1.7 −0.3 −0.3
         Apr 4.5 −16.0 −17.4 1.4 1.6 3.9 7.7 −2.4 −1.4 −1.4 1.1 −1.2 0.5
         May 58.9 50.3 50.3 −0.0 13.9 10.2 6.1 4.9 6.3 −0.8 0.7 1.5 0.7
         Jun −5.4 0.8 −1.1 1.8 4.6 5.1 16.4 −10.9 −10.8 −0.4 1.0 −0.9 0.1
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey “in section and bills sent for collection from the banks ’portfolios prior to maturity) and
II. Unlike the other tables in section IV, this table includes −in addition to liabilities incurred in the banks ’own name but on behalf of third parties. —
the figures reported by banks (including building and loan associations) − 3Up to December 1998, including liabilities arising from fiduciary loans and
data from money market funds. —1Statistical breaks have been eliminated liabilities arising from rediscounted bills (endorsement liabilities). —4Up to
from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). —2Up to December December 1998, including liabilities arising from fiduciary loans. —
1998, volume of business (balance sheet total plus endorsement liabilities
22*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
IV Banks
    
 
 Debt securities
issued  10 
in other member states  8 Deposits of
central governments  4 
With agreed At agreed Liabilitiesmaturities notice arising
of which from Money of which Liabilities
domestic market with to non- repos with
of which of which central non-banks fund euro- Capital maturities
up to up to govern- in the shares of up to area and Other
Total  
4 Total 3 months Total ments Total reserves   Period 2 years  7 euro area  9 issued  10 2 years  10 residents Liabilities
End of year or month
 
68.7 11.8 7.3 7.3 108.2 108.2 − 31.3 1,441.2 81.9 336.8 305.2 357.8 1994
97.3 11.4 8.3 8.3 111.0 111.0 − 39.1 1,608.1 70.3 393.9 325.0 391.0 1995
120.6 9.0 9.2 9.2 114.6 114.6 − 34.0 1,804.3 54.4 422.1 350.0 438.8 1996
145.8 9.2 9.4 9.4 108.3 108.3 − 28.6 1,998.3 62.5 599.2 388.1 511.3 1997
168.3 13.8 9.7 9.7 111.2 111.2 − 34.8 2,248.1 80.2 739.8 426.8 574.8 1998
99.7 8.9 4.8 3.7 46.6 45.9 2.0 20.8 1,323.6 97.4 487.9 262.6 281.1 1999
96.3 6.7 4.7 3.3 69.9 67.6 0.4 19.3 1,417.1 113.3 599.8 298.1 318.4 2000
92.4 9.0 5.2 3.8 49.1 46.9 4.9 33.2 1,445.4 129.3 647.6 319.2 300.8 200174.6 9.9 4.7 3.6 47.7 45.6 3.3 36.7 1,453.5 71.6 599.2 343.0 309.8 2002
92.3 7.3 5.0 3.6 57.0 54.0 2.8 28.0 1,471.1 125.6 692.2 314.2 314.0 2001          Sep
94.4 9.8 5.0 3.6 55.4 53.4 9.4 29.6 1,473.1 126.7 690.0 318.2 315.8          Oct
93.8 9.3 5.1 3.7 56.5 53.6 4.0 30.7 1,448.5 123.8 677.1 321.3 317.6          Nov92.4 9.0 5.2 3.8 49.1 46.9 4.9 33.2 1,445.4 129.3 647.6 319.2 300.8          Dec
91.8 8.1 5.1 3.8 50.1 47.4 2.5 35.0 1,450.5 122.2 668.3 320.1 291.1 2002          Jan
89.6 7.3 5.1 3.8 49.4 47.3 3.5 35.9 1,462.8 125.4 664.8 322.2 287.3          Feb92.0 9.3 5.0 3.7 49.4 46.9 3.7 35.8 1,479.4 129.0 666.4 323.3 281.6          Mar
89.4 8.3 4.7 3.5 47.5 45.8 3.4 35.9 1,478.2 133.1 673.4 325.3 289.7          Apr
89.1 9.5 4.7 3.4 48.2 45.6 4.7 35.4 1,480.6 134.6 673.3 329.0 291.6          May86.7 8.5 4.6 3.4 48.7 45.9 4.1 35.0 1,472.6 133.1 628.9 331.1 294.7          Jun
87.0 8.7 4.6 3.4 47.6 45.8 3.1 35.6 1,471.6 133.7 640.9 336.8 293.9          Jul
75.5 9.7 4.6 3.4 48.9 45.8 4.3 37.1 1,489.4 135.9 636.3 341.2 294.8          Aug74.2 8.8 4.5 3.4 49.9 46.7 10.7 37.0 1,490.2 137.0 647.7 344.8 305.5          Sep
73.9 9.1 4.5 3.4 48.3 46.8 9.6 37.6 1,485.9 137.5 642.5 343.7 306.0          Oct
75.6 9.4 4.5 3.4 47.6 46.3 6.4 37.5 1,496.8 148.2 653.5 343.0 309.8          Nov74.6 9.9 4.7 3.6 47.7 45.6 3.3 36.7 1,453.5 71.6 599.2 343.0 309.8          Dec
74.8 10.4 4.7 3.6 46.9 45.2 7.6 38.5 1,458.1 138.9 602.9 350.5 305.9 2003          Jan
75.9 12.3 4.6 3.6 48.2 45.1 10.9 39.8 1,468.4 145.7 606.7 353.9 305.4          Feb75.7 13.0 4.6 3.6 46.6 45.2 11.2 40.2 1,465.1 140.7 612.1 355.8 303.6          Mar
73.8 12.3 4.5 3.5 45.5 44.9 11.3 39.7 1,468.6 142.6 620.2 351.6 307.2          Apr
74.1 13.3 4.4 3.5 47.7 44.4 12.3 39.4 1,463.3 133.3 599.0 351.0 305.4          May73.4 12.2 4.4 3.5 48.1 44.6 10.8 38.6 1,468.0 126.7 594.8 350.3 307.0          Jun
Changes 1
28.6 −0.4 1.0 1.0 2.8 2.8 − 7.8 166.9 −11.5 57.2 19.8 36.0 1995
23.3 −2.4 0.9 0.9 3.6 3.6 −− 5.1 196.3 −15.9 28.1 25.0 47.8 1996
25.1 0.2 0.2 0.2 −6.2 −6.2 −− 4.5 194.8 8.1 172.3 37.1 71.2 1997
24.0 4.6 0.3 0.3 2.9 2.9 − 6.2 263.3 28.1 151.4 28.8 68.3 1998
5.9 1.5 −0.2 −1.3 1.9 1.2 0.6 3.5 168.0 65.1 89.7 38.0 7.7 1999
−4.5 −0.5 −0.1 −0.3 23.1 21.6 −1.6 −1.5 90.6 15.9 97.8 35.3 54.6 2000
−4.6 1.6 0.2 0.4 −20.5 −20.4 4.6 13.3 59.5 18.6 34.8 20.9 −1.1 2001
−2.6 1.1 −0.5 −0.3 −1.4 −1.3 −1.6 4.2 18.8 14.8 −2.1 25.9 9.7 2002
1.9 2.5 0.0 0.0 −1.6 −0.6 6.5 1.6 1.6 0.2 −4.9 4.0 2.7 2001          Oct
−0.8 −0.6 0.0 0.0 1.1 0.1 −5.3 1.1 8.5 0.3 −17.1 2.8 4.9          Nov
−1.5 −0.2 0.1 0.2 −7.4 −6.6 0.9 1.9 −3.2 5.5 −32.0 −1.6 −13.8          Dec
−0.8 −0.9 −0.1 −0.0 1.0 0.5 −2.4 2.0 4.0 −2.4 15.1 0.7 −6.0 2002          Jan
−2.2 −0.9 −0.1 −0.0 −0.7 −0.2 1.0 0.8 12.7 3.2 −2.8 2.3 −3.3          Feb
2.5 2.0 −0.0 −0.0 −0.0 −0.3 0.2 −0.1 16.9 3.6 3.7 1.2 −5.8          Mar
−2.3 −1.0 −0.3 −0.3 −1.9 −1.2 −0.3 0.2 0.9 4.1 15.9 2.3 5.8          Apr
0.2 1.3 −0.1 −0.0 0.7 −0.1 1.3 −0.0 6.2 1.7 12.6 4.1 −1.8          May
−1.8 −1.0 −0.0 0.0 0.5 0.3 −0.6 −0.3 −4.1 −2.1 −28.2 2.5 6.2          Jun
−0.1 0.2 −0.1 −0.0 −1.1 −0.1 −1.0 0.6 −3.4 −1.2 5.4 5.2 1.5          Jul
2.2 1.0 −0.0 −0.0 1.4 0.0 1.2 1.2 1.5 2.2 −2.6 4.7 0.2          Aug
−1.3 −0.9 −0.0 −0.0 1.0 0.8 6.4 0.1 1.0 1.0 12.4 3.5 10.5          Sep
−0.3 0.4 −0.0 −0.0 −1.7 0.1 −1.0 0.7 −3.8 0.6 −4.6 −1.1 1.4          Oct
1.8 0.3 −0.0 −0.0 −0.6 −0.5 −3.2 −0.2 11.9 10.7 13.2 −0.5 3.2          Nov
−0.6 0.6 0.2 0.2 0.1 −0.7 −3.1 −0.8 −24.8 −6.6 −42.1 1.0 −2.4          Dec
−0.6 −0.5 −0.0 0.0 −0.8 −0.4 5.3 1.8 2.4 0.6 11.3 5.6 −5.3 2003          Jan
2.0 2.8 −0.0 0.0 1.4 −0.1 2.2 1.3 8.1 6.8 4.4 3.6 3.0          Feb
−0.0 0.7 −0.1 −0.0 −1.6 0.1 0.4 0.6 0.8 −2.3 8.4 −0.8 −2.4          Mar
−1.6 −0.6 −0.1 −0.0 −1.1 −0.3 0.0 −0.6 3.5 −0.8 13.7 −0.8 3.1          Apr
0.9 1.2 −0.1 −0.0 2.2 −0.5 1.2 −0.2 3.4 −6.9 −8.2 0.7 −2.2          May
−1.0 −1.2 −0.1 −0.0 0.4 0.2 −1.5 −0.7 3.1 −4.6 −11.2 −3.5 3.0          Jun
5For the German contribution: from 1999, including deposits under savings collected separately from 1999 only; up to December 1998, included in the
and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). —6For the German contribution: up to deposits with agreed maturities of up to two years. —10In Germany, debt
the end of 1998, including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money marketalso footnote 5). —7Up to December 1998, with maturities of less than paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were published
four years. —8Excluding deposits of central governments. —9Data together with money market fund shares. 
23*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
IV Banks
 
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks*
  
 5  billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
  of which of which 
Loans
 Cash in hand and credit
Number of balances forreporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Othermonth tions total banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets
All categories of banks
 
2003         Jan 2,355 6,420.3 55.5 2,356.7 1,707.1 638.9 3,565.0 454.2 2,565.2 4.5 523.3 161.1 281.9
         Feb 2,355 6,460.6 52.3 2,381.3 1,732.9 637.2 3,578.5 466.4 2,568.3 4.4 522.7 160.4 288.2         Mar 2,354 6,470.0 60.4 2,389.1 1,735.1 642.9 3,580.3 473.2 2,558.3 4.4 528.2 159.4 280.9
         Apr 2,346 6,466.0 51.5 2,387.4 1,731.6 644.0 3,590.9 482.1 2,558.6 4.3 530.6 159.8 276.3
         May 2,338 6,505.1 52.3 2,434.3 1,776.0 647.7 3,582.2 474.0 2,555.5 4.5 533.9 161.4 275.0         June 2,311 6,511.2 54.3 2,459.7 1,798.0 650.5 3,570.5 466.4 2,554.9 4.5 530.8 160.3 266.3
Commercial banks 5
2003         May 269 1,876.8 16.9 677.7 538.0 135.2 973.9 256.7 542.4 2.3 165.7 93.5 114.7
         June 268 1,857.4 20.6 685.0 547.2 133.5 954.0 244.4 541.7 2.4 157.9 92.8 104.9
   Big banks 6
2003         May 4 1,101.8 8.8 407.2 347.2 58.0 533.1 152.1 282.0 1.4 94.4 82.6 70.0
         June 4 1,082.0 12.2 404.4 344.4 57.8 522.4 143.8 280.7 1.5 92.4 81.9 61.0
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2003         May 182 660.6 7.6 214.1 143.3 69.9 394.0 82.6 244.3 0.8 63.0 10.0 34.8
         June 181 665.0 7.3 222.7 152.1 69.6 391.3 83.0 245.1 0.8 58.9 10.1 33.7
   Branches of foreign banks
2003         May 83 114.4 0.5 56.3 47.5 7.3 46.8 22.0 16.2 0.1 8.3 0.8 10.0
         June 83 110.4 1.1 57.9 50.6 6.1 40.3 17.6 15.8 0.1 6.5 0.8 10.2
Land  banks
2003         May 14 1,342.1 3.4 687.7 567.9 116.6 569.8 65.4 408.1 0.3 90.8 33.8 47.3
         June 14 1,350.9 3.4 693.4 573.4 116.3 570.1 65.6 406.5 0.3 93.2 33.5 50.5
Savings banks
2003         May 505 975.6 16.9 227.6 75.2 151.5 693.4 75.8 527.2 1.2 88.7 14.4 23.3
         June 502 978.4 16.7 227.5 73.1 153.4 697.0 78.8 527.7 1.2 88.7 14.2 23.0
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives  
 
2003         May 2 196.8 2.3 126.5 88.7 37.5 52.2 10.7 23.2 0.1 17.5 10.3 5.5
         June 2 193.0 1.2 125.9 87.4 38.2 50.6 11.1 22.4 0.1 16.9 10.4 5.0
Credit cooperatives
2003         May 1,480 554.2 11.3 143.7 64.6 77.7 376.2 47.1 290.5 0.6 37.8 5.5 17.5
         June 1,456 554.3 11.2 141.4 60.9 78.9 378.7 48.6 291.0 0.6 38.4 5.5 17.5
Mortgage banks
2003         May 26 869.8 1.0 229.8 155.0 74.6 617.7 12.2 508.0 − 97.1 1.3 20.0
         June 26 868.3 0.8 232.2 156.8 75.1 615.2 10.8 505.4 − 98.9 1.3 18.8
Building and loan associations
2003         May 28 166.2 0.1 37.6 26.4 11.2 119.0 1.5 106.4 . 11.2 0.5 8.9
         June 28 166.8 0.0 38.0 26.7 11.3 119.3 1.4 107.0 . 10.9 0.6 8.9
Banks with special functions
2003         May 14 523.7 0.4 303.7 260.1 43.4 179.9 4.6 149.6 − 25.2 2.0 37.7
         June 15 542.1 0.3 316.5 272.5 43.7 185.5 5.7 153.1 − 25.9 2.0 37.9
Memo item: Foreign banks 7
2003         May 131 392.6 2.7 162.7 112.7 48.3 204.6 42.7 116.2 0.2 45.2 1.7 21.0
         June 131 396.2 4.2 170.4 120.7 48.4 199.5 39.6 115.8 0.2 43.6 1.6 20.4
  of which:  Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 8
2003         May 48 278.1 2.2 106.4 65.2 41.0 157.7 20.7 100.0 0.1 36.9 0.8 11.0
         June 48 285.8 3.1 112.6 70.1 42.4 159.2 22.0 100.0 0.1 37.1 0.8 10.2
*For the period up to December 1998, section IV (except for Table IV.1) included. For the definitions of the respective items, see the footnotes to
shows the assets and liabilities of banks (excluding building and loan Table IV.3. —1For building and loan associations: Including deposits under
associations) in liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). —2Included in time
Germany. The assets and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market deposits. —3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also
funds (which are also classified as MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not footnote 2). —4Including subordinated negotiable bearer debt
24*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
IV Banks
    
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which of which published
reserves,
Time deposits  1 Savings deposits  3 partici-
pation
Memo rights
item Bearer capital,
for for of which debt Liabilities funds for
up to and more arising At three Bank general securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking Other   End of months ’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year  1 repos  2 Total notice bonds risks   month standing  4 liabilities
All categories of banks
 
1,837.8 247.4 1,590.2 2,401.1 600.9 342.9 758.8 46.2 588.3 485.1 110.3 1,506.4 294.9 380.1 2003          Jan 
1,841.2 252.2 1,588.8 2,415.4 604.8 352.7 757.3 52.4 590.0 488.1 110.5 1,526.9 292.9 384.1          Feb 1,839.8 275.7 1,563.9 2,429.5 622.2 350.8 756.6 63.9 590.0 489.8 109.8 1,523.6 294.8 382.4          Mar 
1,838.1 279.1 1,558.9 2,428.1 625.7 351.5 753.2 61.2 588.5 490.8 109.1 1,519.1 296.1 384.5          Apr 
1,875.2 274.3 1,600.6 2,433.9 635.3 355.5 746.9 61.7 587.7 491.5 108.6 1,516.9 294.7 384.4          May1,875.3 293.6 1,581.6 2,434.2 652.7 337.5 748.7 55.6 587.2 492.5 108.1 1,521.7 294.0 386.0          June
Commercial banks 5
736.4 154.6 581.5 688.9 284.7 174.9 126.5 55.4 93.3 80.6 9.5 209.0 102.3 140.2 2003          May
727.0 163.4 563.4 681.9 290.7 160.9 126.8 48.8 93.9 81.5 9.6 210.7 101.6 136.1          June
Big banks 6
465.4 111.0 354.3 346.4 126.1 123.8 73.6 53.1 22.3 20.3 0.6 152.7 62.4 74.9 2003          May
455.7 118.5 337.2 338.7 129.1 112.1 74.1 46.4 22.9 20.9 0.6 153.2 61.7 72.6          June
Regional banks and other commercial banks
187.1 31.4 155.5 328.5 151.7 47.4 49.5 1.8 71.1 60.3 8.8 56.2 37.0 51.8 2003          May
188.7 28.6 159.9 329.5 154.4 45.9 49.2 2.1 71.0 60.6 9.0 57.5 36.9 52.4          June
Branches of foreign banks
83.9 12.2 71.6 14.1 6.9 3.7 3.4 0.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 3.0 13.6 2003          May
82.6 16.3 66.3 13.7 7.2 3.0 3.5 0.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 3.0 11.1          June
Land   banks
461.3 68.3 393.0 310.8 45.4 41.9 208.2 4.1 14.9 13.6 0.4 441.9 64.5 63.6 2003          May
460.4 73.9 386.5 315.9 51.8 39.3 209.5 4.5 14.9 13.7 0.4 445.1 63.3 66.3          June
Savings banks
213.2 7.5 205.7 630.1 184.7 61.6 10.3 − 302.2 245.7 71.3 43.1 45.7 43.5 2003          May
216.6 7.4 209.2 627.5 184.9 59.7 10.6 − 301.5 245.7 70.8 42.6 45.5 46.2          June
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives
 
116.6 31.3 85.4 32.2 6.5 7.5 18.2 1.8 −− 0.0 29.8 10.0 8.2 2003          May
111.6 34.1 77.4 32.9 8.8 6.3 17.8 1.7 −− 0.0 29.9 10.0 8.7          June
Credit cooperatives
74.5 2.3 72.3 397.6 111.5 58.1 24.0 − 176.8 151.2 27.2 31.4 29.4 21.3 2003          May
74.6 2.6 72.0 396.6 112.6 56.6 23.9 − 176.6 151.2 26.9 31.6 29.7 21.8          June
Mortgage banks
124.7 5.1 119.7 144.7 1.1 4.9 138.5 0.3 0.1 0.0 0.2 555.6 19.5 25.2 2003          May
125.1 4.1 121.0 145.8 1.6 6.1 137.9 0.6 0.1 0.0 0.2 552.6 19.5 25.3          June
Building and loan associations
29.7 2.1 27.6 105.9 0.3 0.7 104.5 − 0.3 0.3 0.1 6.8 7.2 16.6 2003          May
29.6 2.2 27.3 106.2 0.3 0.7 104.7 − 0.3 0.3 0.1 7.1 7.2 16.9          June
Banks with special functions
118.8 3.1 115.6 123.6 1.0 6.0 116.7 −−−− 199.3 16.1 65.8 2003          May
130.6 5.8 124.8 127.4 2.0 7.8 117.6 −−−− 202.2 17.1 64.9          June
Memo item:   Foreign banks 7
146.1 23.3 122.6 113.9 63.5 14.2 26.1 0.9 7.5 7.3 2.6 87.8 13.5 31.3 2003          May
152.1 28.0 124.0 116.0 66.5 13.3 26.1 0.9 7.5 7.3 2.6 87.2 13.5 27.4          June
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 8
62.2 11.1 51.0 99.8 56.6 10.5 22.7 0.3 7.5 7.3 2.5 87.8 10.6 17.7 2003          May
69.5 11.7 57.7 102.2 59.3 10.3 22.6 0.6 7.4 7.3 2.6 87.2 10.6 16.3          June
securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities. —5Commercial included in other categories of banks and the category ”Branches (with
banks comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks ”,”Regional banks and other dependent legal status) of foreign banks ”.—8Separate presentation of the
commercial banks ”and ”Branches of foreign banks ”.—6Deutsche Bank banks majority-owned by foreign banks included in the categories
AG, Dresdner Bank AG, Commerzbank AG and Bayerische Hypo- und Vereins- ”Regional banks and other commercial banks ” and ”Mortgage banks ”. 
bank AG. —7Sum of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks and
25*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
IV Banks
 
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis- à-vis residents*
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999,  5  billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs)  2,3 Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3,8 
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills andhand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro-area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins)  
1 bank Total and loans Bills  4 banks  5 banks  6 loans  7 Total Loans Bills  4 non-banks banks  9 
End of year or month*
 
1993 26.7 75.3 1,596.8 1,076.2 14.7 3.3 493.2 9.3 3,826.4 3,291.6 44.7 5.6 327.71994 25.0 61.5 1,695.6 1,150.6 17.4 4.6 513.6 9.5 4,137.2 3,502.8 45.9 2.2 433.7
1995 26.0 61.0 1,859.9 1,264.9 17.5 4.3 561.9 11.4 4,436.9 3,802.0 46.8 1.4 427.3
1996 28.9 59.7 2,134.0 1,443.3 17.9 3.4 657.2 12.2 4,773.1 4,097.9 44.8 5.9 437.21997 29.3 60.2 2,397.9 1,606.3 18.1 3.6 758.9 11.1 5,058.4 4,353.9 44.7 2.9 473.31998 28.5 63.6 2,738.2 1,814.7 14.6 12.2 887.7 9.1 5,379.8 4,639.7 32.8 5.0 527.81999 16.8 45.6 1,556.9 1,033.4 0.0 19.2 504.2 3.9 2,904.5 2,569.6 7.0 3.0 287.5
2000 15.6 50.8 1,639.6 1,056.1 0.0 26.8 556.6 3.6 3,003.7 2,657.3 6.5 2.3 304.7
2001 14.2 56.3 1,676.0 1,078.9 0.0 5.6 591.5 2.8 3,014.1 2,699.4 4.8 4.4 301.52002 17.5 45.6 1,691.3 1,112.3 0.0 7.8 571.2 2.7 2,997.2 2,685.0 4.1 3.3 301.9
2002         Jan 26.7 49.3 1,633.8 1,038.5 0.0 5.7 589.7 2.8 3,011.2 2,690.2 4.6 3.0 309.5
         Feb 18.8 42.0 1,636.3 1,035.4 0.0 5.2 595.7 2.8 3,006.1 2,689.6 4.4 2.8 305.4         Mar 16.5 44.4 1,653.0 1,045.6 0.0 5.8 601.5 2.7 2,996.9 2,689.9 4.5 2.7 295.9
         Apr 14.5 40.9 1,648.3 1,038.4 0.0 6.3 603.6 2.7 3,004.3 2,687.4 4.4 3.7 304.9
         May 14.3 45.4 1,655.7 1,044.4 0.0 6.1 605.2 2.7 3,005.7 2,682.8 4.2 4.6 310.2         June 13.9 43.8 1,668.4 1,061.5 0.0 6.3 600.6 2.7 2,990.8 2,678.8 4.3 5.2 298.7
         July 13.4 41.2 1,643.8 1,047.7 0.0 7.6 588.4 2.6 2,995.7 2,685.3 4.3 4.2 299.1
         Aug 13.2 46.0 1,650.2 1,060.1 0.0 7.7 582.4 2.7 2,987.3 2,675.6 4.2 3.9 300.6         Sep 13.0 42.3 1,652.7 1,064.4 0.0 8.5 579.8 2.7 2,995.5 2,683.2 4.2 3.9 301.2
         Oct 13.9 42.8 1,648.3 1,068.2 0.0 8.0 572.2 2.7 2,997.6 2,684.6 4.2 3.9 301.9
         Nov 12.9 41.7 1,689.1 1,102.1 0.0 13.3 573.8 2.6 3,003.5 2,683.3 4.1 3.6 309.5         Dec 17.5 45.6 1,691.3 1,112.3 0.0 7.8 571.2 2.7 2,997.2 2,685.0 4.1 3.3 301.9
2003         Jan 12.9 42.3 1,661.6 1,086.8 0.0 9.7 565.1 2.6 3,005.1 2,686.9 3.9 4.0 307.4
         Feb 12.9 39.0 1,667.6 1,095.5 0.0 9.7 562.3 2.5 3,001.9 2,682.6 3.8 3.6 308.9         Mar 12.6 47.5 1,655.8 1,081.1 0.0 10.0 564.7 2.5 3,005.5 2,677.5 3.8 4.8 316.4
         Apr 13.5 37.7 1,648.8 1,074.6 0.0 9.9 564.3 2.5 3,007.6 2,676.4 3.8 5.0 319.4
         May 13.7 38.3 1,674.3 1,099.7 0.0 9.2 565.3 2.5 3,003.6 2,667.8 3.9 4.5 324.5         June 12.9 40.9 1,665.5 1,090.9 0.0 9.9 564.7 2.5 2,992.4 2,670.2 3.9 3.9 311.4
Changes*
1994 −1.7 −13.8 + 99.1 + 73.6 + 2.7 + 1.3 + 21.3 + 0.1 + 320.5 + 240.2 + 1.2 −3.3 + 86.7
1995 + 1.0 −0.5 + 193.5 + 139.4 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 54.3 + 0.2 + 312.8 + 303.6 + 1.0 −0.8 + 2.9
1996 + 2.9 −1.3 + 257.8 + 161.8 + 0.4 − 1.1 + 95.8 + 0.8 + 336.3 + 311.7 −2.0 + 4.7 + 10.6
1997 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 262.5 + 160.7 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 102.6 −1.1 + 285.2 + 255.5 −0.1 −3.0 + 36.5
1998 −0.8 + 3.4 + 343.3 + 210.3 −3.6 + 8.6 + 130.0 −2.0 + 335.3 + 302.1 −11.9 + 2.1 + 52.1
1999 + 2.2 + 13.2 + 122.1 + 66.3 + 0.0 + 12.9 + 42.8 −0.7 + 156.1 + 136.9 + 2.6 + 0.4 + 16.7
2000 −1.1 + 5.1 + 83.6 + 21.7 −0.0 + 7.6 + 54.3 −0.3 + 100.7 + 83.7 −0.5 −0.8 + 19.0
2001 −1.4 + 5.5 + 34.6 + 20.1 −0.0 −21.3 + 35.8 −0.9 + 11.9 + 40.8 −1.6 + 1.6 + 0.3
2002 + 3.3 −10.7 + 15.0 + 33.1 + 0.0 + 2.3 −20.3 −0.2 −19.2 −18.0 −0.8 −1.1 + 1.7
2002         Jan + 12.5 −6.9 −42.5 −41.0 −0.0 + 0.1 − 1.6 −0.0 − 3.4 − 9.9 −0.3 −1.5 + 8.3
         Feb −8.0 −7.3 + 2.7 − 2.9 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 6.1 −0.0 − 4.9 − 0.5 −0.2 −0.2 − 4.1
         Mar −2.3 + 2.4 + 16.9 + 10.3 −0.0 + 0.6 + 6.0 −0.0 − 8.6 + 0.7 + 0.1 −0.1 − 9.3
         Apr −2.0 −3.5 − 5.0 − 7.2 − + 0.5 + 1.6 −0.0 + 8.1 − 2.3 −0.1 + 1.0 + 9.4
         May −0.2 + 4.5 + 7.7 + 6.2 −0.0 − 0.2 + 1.7 −0.1 + 2.2 − 3.9 −0.2 + 0.9 + 5.4
         June −0.4 −1.6 + 12.5 + 16.9 −0.0 + 0.1 − 4.6 + 0.0 −19.0 − 8.0 + 0.1 + 0.5 −11.5
         July −0.5 −2.5 −24.9 −13.8 − + 1.4 −12.4 −0.0 + 5.1 + 6.5 −0.0 −1.0 + 0.6
         Aug −0.2 + 4.8 + 6.4 + 12.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 6.0 + 0.0 − 8.4 − 9.6 −0.0 −0.2 + 1.5
         Sep −0.2 −3.8 + 2.6 + 4.4 − + 0.8 − 2.6 −0.0 + 7.9 + 7.3 −0.1 −0.0 + 0.7
         Oct + 0.9 + 0.6 − 4.4 + 3.8 −− 0.5 − 7.7 −0.0 + 2.0 + 1.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.6
         Nov −1.0 −1.1 + 40.8 + 33.9 + 0.0 + 5.3 + 1.6 −0.0 + 6.0 − 1.3 −0.0 −0.3 + 7.6
         Dec + 4.7 + 3.8 + 2.2 + 10.2 + 0.0 − 5.4 − 2.6 + 0.0 − 6.3 + 1.6 −0.1 −0.2 − 7.6
2003         Jan −4.6 −3.2 −29.7 −25.5 −0.0 + 1.9 − 6.1 −0.1 + 7.9 + 1.9 −0.1 + 0.6 + 5.5
         Feb + 0.0 −3.3 + 6.0 + 8.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 2.8 −0.0 − 3.3 − 4.3 −0.1 −0.4 + 1.5
         Mar −0.4 + 8.5 −11.8 −14.4 −0.0 + 0.2 + 2.4 −0.0 + 3.7 − 5.0 −0.0 + 1.3 + 7.4
         Apr + 0.9 −9.8 − 7.0 − 6.5 −− 0.1 − 0.4 −0.0 + 2.1 − 1.1 −0.0 + 0.2 + 3.1
         May + 0.2 + 0.6 + 25.5 + 25.1 −0.0 − 0.7 + 1.1 −0.1 − 3.8 − 8.7 + 0.1 −0.6 + 5.3
         June −0.7 + 2.6 − 8.8 − 8.8 −0.0 + 0.6 − 0.6 −0.0 −11.1 + 2.5 + 0.0 −0.5 −13.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the prior to maturity). —5Up to November 1993, included in securities (see also
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as footnote 6). —6Up to November 1993, including negotiable money market
provisional. Subsequent revisions which appear in the following Monthly paper; excluding registered debt securities. —7From 1999, no longer
Report , are not specially marked. —1Up to December 1998, domestic included in loans or deposits (see also footnote 3). —8Up to December
banknotes and coins. —2Up to December 1998, excluding loans to 1998, including loans to domestic building and loan associations. —
domestic building and loan associations. —3Up to December 1998, 9Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims
including fiduciary loans (see also footnote 7). —4Up to December 1998, (see also footnote 10). —10Including debt securities arising from the
bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from exchange of equalisation claims. —11Including liabilities arising from
rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks ’portfolios
26*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
IV Banks
    
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3,11,12  Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3,17 
Partici-patinginterestsin
Memo domestic Memo Memo
item banks Sight Time Redis- item Sight Time Savings Bank item Equalisa-
tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciary
loans  
7 Total 13,14  14,15  bills 16 loans  7 Total 15,18  bonds  20 loans  7   Period claims  10 enterprises posits  13 posits  19 
End of year or month*
 
75.3 81.6 59.5 1,395.2 380.2 917.9 69.2 27.9 2,788.1 513.6 1,123.6 859.4 219.1 72.4 199368.1 84.4 70.7 1,427.9 342.8 976.9 75.2 33.1 2,875.7 540.2 1,109.3 940.5 206.9 78.8 1994
71.3 88.1 83.2 1,539.4 363.9 1,065.1 75.5 35.0 3,021.1 579.9 1,086.1 1,046.1 227.4 81.6 1995
81.3 106.0 89.7 1,731.0 401.1 1,202.4 75.4 52.2 3,241.5 675.1 1,109.8 1,143.0 227.8 85.8 199676.0 107.6 95.1 1,902.3 427.6 1,349.1 75.6 50.0 3,341.9 689.8 1,146.9 1,182.1 236.9 86.1 199771.6 102.8 129.2 2,086.9 472.5 1,505.2 59.4 49.7 3,520.3 799.5 1,194.1 1,211.0 234.9 80.9 199837.5 58.0 75.6 1,122.0 114.4 1,007.3 0.3 29.8 1,905.3 420.4 759.6 614.7 110.7 42.1 1999
33.1 58.5 82.7 1,189.2 113.4 1,075.3 0.4 30.1 1,945.8 443.4 819.9 573.5 109.0 42.1 2000
4.0 57.0 95.9 1,204.9 123.1 1,081.6 0.3 27.2 2,034.0 526.4 827.0 574.5 106.0 43.3 20013.0 54.8 119.0 1,244.0 127.6 1,116.2 0.2 25.6 2,085.9 575.6 830.6 575.3 104.4 42.1 2002
3.9 56.7 89.6 1,159.4 115.6 1,043.6 0.2 27.3 2,009.8 511.5 819.9 573.4 105.1 42.4 2002          Jan 
3.9 56.4 95.1 1,148.5 119.8 1,028.5 0.2 27.3 2,007.8 511.3 819.7 572.0 104.8 42.2          Feb 3.9 56.2 95.4 1,164.8 126.0 1,038.6 0.2 27.1 2,006.6 509.2 821.7 570.8 104.9 42.1          Mar 
3.9 56.1 95.7 1,138.3 123.2 1,014.9 0.2 27.0 1,999.3 515.7 816.8 561.8 104.9 42.0          Apr 
3.9 56.0 95.8 1,158.7 113.4 1,045.1 0.1 26.8 2,009.4 523.8 820.6 560.1 105.0 41.9          May3.9 55.4 95.5 1,182.3 132.1 1,050.1 0.1 26.0 2,021.4 536.2 820.6 558.9 105.7 41.5          June
3.0 55.2 95.0 1,157.4 118.2 1,039.1 0.1 25.9 2,016.2 531.6 821.1 557.5 106.0 41.6          July
3.0 55.2 105.9 1,173.0 115.3 1,057.6 0.1 25.9 2,013.9 527.2 823.0 557.8 105.9 41.6          Aug 3.0 55.0 107.9 1,179.3 133.0 1,046.1 0.1 25.7 2,025.0 540.8 820.6 558.3 105.3 41.6          Sep 
3.0 55.1 111.5 1,184.4 130.0 1,054.2 0.1 25.7 2,037.6 543.1 829.8 559.7 105.0 41.6          Oct 
3.0 55.0 113.3 1,221.3 157.3 1,063.9 0.2 25.7 2,062.1 572.4 822.6 562.4 104.7 41.5          Nov 3.0 54.8 119.0 1,244.0 127.6 1,116.2 0.2 25.6 2,085.9 575.6 830.6 575.3 104.4 42.1          Dec 
3.0 54.7 118.4 1,214.6 134.8 1,079.7 0.2 25.5 2,076.4 565.2 830.3 577.4 103.5 42.1 2003          Jan 
3.0 54.8 118.0 1,224.7 134.5 1,090.1 0.2 25.6 2,084.6 571.6 830.0 579.2 103.7 41.9          Feb 3.0 54.8 116.1 1,218.0 144.0 1,073.9 0.2 25.5 2,089.6 578.9 828.4 579.3 103.0 42.1          Mar 
3.0 54.6 116.7 1,203.4 137.4 1,065.9 0.1 25.5 2,094.8 586.3 828.2 577.9 102.4 41.8          Apr 
3.0 54.5 119.6 1,254.2 146.4 1,107.7 0.1 25.5 2,101.9 591.7 831.2 577.1 101.9 41.7          May3.0 54.4 118.1 1,252.5 150.5 1,101.8 0.1 25.4 2,109.6 608.9 822.7 576.7 101.3 41.8          June
Changes*
−6.9 + 2.6 + 11.3 + 32.4 −31.4 + 53.0 + 6.0 + 4.9 + 85.0 + 28.3 −14.1 + 81.2 −12.2 + 1.8 1994
−1.2 + 7.3 + 12.5 + 134.2 + 20.4 + 111.5 + 0.4 + 2.0 + 158.3 + 48.9 −14.2 + 105.6 + 11.7 + 6.3 1995
+ 8.0 + 3.3 + 6.5 + 175.9 + 36.6 + 137.7 −0.2 + 1.7 + 218.4 + 94.3 + 23.2 + 96.9 + 0.7 + 3.3 1996
−5.3 + 1.6 + 5.4 + 175.9 + 31.6 + 146.7 + 0.2 −2.6 + 100.5 + 13.0 + 37.1 + 39.1 + 9.2 + 2.1 1997
−4.4 −4.8 + 34.1 + 179.0 + 39.7 + 156.4 −16.2 −0.9 + 179.3 + 110.6 + 47.2 + 28.9 −2.1 −5.3 1998
−0.6 + 0.1 + 9.3 + 69.0 − 1.8 + 81.8 −11.1 −0.4 + 67.3 + 32.7 + 48.4 − 4.5 −9.3 + 0.7 1999
−0.8 + 0.5 + 7.1 + 64.7 − 2.3 + 66.9 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 41.3 + 22.3 + 61.1 −40.5 −1.7 −0.0 2000
−29.1 −1.5 + 13.3 + 9.6 + 7.4 + 2.3 −0.2 −2.9 + 88.5 + 82.3 + 8.1 + 1.1 −2.9 + 1.0 2001
−1.0 −2.1 + 24.2 + 37.9 + 1.7 + 36.3 −0.1 −1.5 + 51.7 + 48.4 + 4.1 + 0.8 −1.6 −1.1 2002
−0.0 −0.3 −6.1 −46.1 −10.5 −35.6 −0.1 + 0.1 −24.4 − 15.2 − 7.1 − 1.2 −0.9 −0.9 2002          Jan 
−− 0.3 + 5.8 −10.8 + 4.3 −15.1 −0.0 −0.1 − 2.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 1.4 −0.3 −0.2          Feb 
−0.0 −0.3 + 0.3 + 16.4 + 6.3 + 10.1 −0.0 −0.2 − 1.2 − 2.0 + 2.0 − 1.2 + 0.1 −0.1          Mar 
+ 0.0 −0.1 + 0.3 −26.6 − 2.9 −23.7 + 0.0 −0.0 − 7.3 + 6.5 − 4.9 − 9.0 + 0.1 −0.1          Apr 
+ 0.0 −0.0 + 0.1 + 20.7 − 9.8 + 30.5 −0.0 −0.1 + 11.1 + 8.2 + 4.5 − 1.7 + 0.1 −0.1          May
−0.0 −0.6 −0.3 + 21.7 + 18.6 + 3.1 −0.0 −0.8 + 11.1 + 11.9 − 0.3 − 1.2 + 0.7 −0.3          June
−1.0 −0.2 −0.5 −24.9 −13.9 −11.0 −0.0 −0.1 − 5.3 − 4.7 + 0.5 − 1.4 + 0.3 + 0.0          July
+ 0.0 −0.0 + 11.5 + 16.4 − 2.9 + 19.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 2.3 − 4.4 + 1.9 + 0.3 −0.1 −0.0          Aug 
+ 0.0 −0.2 + 1.9 + 6.4 + 17.9 −11.5 + 0.0 −0.2 + 10.9 + 13.5 − 2.6 + 0.5 −0.5 −0.0          Sep 
−0.0 + 0.1 + 3.6 + 5.1 − 3.0 + 8.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 12.8 + 2.3 + 9.5 + 1.4 −0.3 + 0.0          Oct 
+ 0.0 −0.1 + 1.7 + 37.0 + 27.3 + 9.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 24.5 + 29.3 − 7.2 + 2.7 −0.3 −0.1          Nov 
−− 0.2 + 5.8 + 22.6 −29.7 + 52.3 + 0.0 −0.1 + 23.8 + 3.3 + 8.0 + 12.8 −0.3 + 0.6          Dec 
−0.0 −0.1 −0.6 −29.4 + 7.2 −36.5 −0.0 −0.2 − 9.5 − 10.4 − 0.3 + 2.1 −0.9 −0.0 2003          Jan 
−0.0 + 0.1 −0.4 + 17.8 − 0.3 + 18.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 7.6 + 6.4 − 0.3 + 1.8 −0.4 −0.2          Feb 
+ 0.0 −0.0 −1.9 − 6.7 + 9.5 −16.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 5.1 + 7.3 − 1.6 + 0.1 −0.7 −0.1          Mar 
−0.0 −0.2 + 0.6 −14.6 − 6.6 − 8.0 −0.0 + 0.0 + 5.1 + 7.4 − 0.2 − 1.4 −0.6 −0.2          Apr 
−− 0.1 + 3.0 + 50.8 + 8.9 + 41.9 −0.0 −0.0 + 7.1 + 5.4 + 3.0 − 0.8 −0.5 −0.1          May
−0.0 −0.1 −1.5 − 1.8 + 4.2 − 5.9 −0.0 −0.1 + 7.7 + 17.2 − 8.5 − 0.4 −0.6 + 0.1          June
registered debt securities, registered money market paper and up to December 1998, including endorsement liabilities arising from
non-negotiable bearer debt securities; including subordinated liabilities. — rediscounted bills. —17Up to December 1998, including liabilities to
12Up to December 1998, excluding liabilities to domestic building and loan domestic building and loan associations and money market funds. —
associations and money market funds. —13Up to December 1998, 18Since the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999,
including time deposits with terms of less than one month. —14Including including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). —
liabilities arising from monetary policy operations with the Bundesbank. — 19Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also
15Up to December 1998, excluding time deposits with terms of less than footnote 18). —20Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer
one month. —16Own acceptances and promissory notes outstanding and, debt securities. 
27*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
IV Banks
 
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis- à-vis non-residents*
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999,  5  billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills  3 negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills  3 Negotiable
(non- money money
euro-area Medium market Memo Medium market
banknotes and paper item and paper Securities Securities
and Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins)  1 Total Total term term banks  4 banks  5 loans  6 Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month*
 
1993 1.2 533.8 498.3 360.5 137.7 0.1 24.3 11.2 262.5 184.0 48.3 135.7 0.0 63.01994 1.2 492.3 455.0 309.0 146.0 0.1 23.7 13.5 257.4 173.0 35.0 138.0 0.6 66.5
1995 1.2 538.4 500.8 349.7 151.1 0.1 25.6 11.8 289.2 191.1 42.1 148.9 1.7 79.7
1996 1.4 588.9 544.2 386.6 157.6 0.3 31.5 13.0 352.0 230.4 60.2 170.2 4.9 103.91997 1.5 689.1 635.3 456.1 179.2 0.2 43.1 10.5 474.8 312.7 96.2 216.5 6.0 140.31998 1.5 774.9 706.9 533.6 173.3 0.4 58.7 9.0 610.3 364.9 93.9 270.9 11.6 211.01999 0.4 427.1 383.5 279.5 104.1 0.4 43.2 4.2 396.1 235.8 52.7 183.1 7.5 152.7
2000 0.4 507.7 441.4 325.4 116.0 1.3 65.0 3.6 475.8 286.8 71.1 215.7 6.5 182.5
2001 0.4 596.1 521.7 383.7 138.0 0.8 73.6 3.5 570.3 347.2 99.7 247.5 5.2 217.92002 0.3 690.6 615.3 468.0 147.2 0.9 74.4 2.7 558.8 332.6 92.6 240.0 9.3 216.9
2002         Jan 0.9 585.2 510.4 371.7 138.7 1.0 73.8 3.2 578.2 353.8 103.1 250.7 4.6 219.8
         Feb 0.7 568.5 493.0 351.0 142.0 1.4 74.1 3.1 582.3 355.9 103.6 252.3 5.8 220.6         Mar 0.4 581.2 505.6 362.4 143.2 1.3 74.3 2.9 596.4 366.7 113.3 253.4 7.2 222.5
         Apr 0.4 590.1 515.1 370.6 144.6 1.3 73.7 2.9 586.5 359.2 108.0 251.2 7.8 219.6
         May 0.4 613.3 538.2 395.3 142.9 1.2 74.0 2.8 589.1 359.6 111.2 248.5 6.6 222.9         June 0.4 609.7 534.3 399.4 135.0 1.2 74.1 2.8 575.1 348.2 105.1 243.1 5.2 221.7
         July 0.4 614.2 538.2 400.0 138.3 1.5 74.5 2.8 579.1 346.2 101.4 244.9 5.8 227.0
         Aug 0.3 631.2 554.9 413.3 141.6 1.5 74.8 2.8 576.0 344.3 98.9 245.4 8.9 222.8         Sep 0.3 659.5 582.6 439.2 143.4 1.9 75.0 2.8 584.9 353.7 109.3 244.4 9.5 221.7
         Oct 0.3 672.9 595.2 450.2 145.0 1.9 75.8 2.7 585.5 355.6 108.9 246.7 9.8 220.1
         Nov 0.3 711.7 630.2 484.4 145.7 5.6 76.0 2.8 588.8 358.2 111.0 247.2 9.9 220.7         Dec 0.3 690.6 615.3 468.0 147.2 0.9 74.4 2.7 558.8 332.6 92.6 240.0 9.3 216.9
2003         Jan 0.3 695.1 620.5 471.3 149.1 0.9 73.8 2.6 559.9 333.2 91.5 241.6 10.8 215.9
         Feb 0.3 713.7 637.5 488.8 148.6 1.3 74.9 2.6 576.6 352.7 109.9 242.8 10.2 213.8         Mar 0.3 733.3 654.1 504.0 150.1 1.0 78.3 2.6 574.8 354.5 113.1 241.3 8.5 211.8
         Apr 0.3 738.6 657.2 505.9 151.2 1.7 79.8 2.6 583.3 364.8 125.1 239.7 7.4 211.1
         May 0.3 760.1 676.4 524.6 151.8 1.3 82.4 2.5 578.6 362.3 126.8 235.6 6.8 209.4         June 0.4 794.3 707.2 553.1 154.1 1.3 85.8 2.6 578.1 351.6 115.2 236.4 7.0 219.5
Changes*
1994 + 0.0 −24.0 −27.5 −41.4 + 13.9 −0.0 + 0.1 + 3.4 − 1.6 −5.5 −12.3 + 6.7 + 0.6 + 5.1
1995 + 0.1 + 59.1 + 57.6 + 49.2 + 8.4 + 0.0 + 2.9 −1.4 + 38.3 + 21.3 + 7.8 + 13.6 + 1.1 + 16.1
1996 + 0.2 + 34.2 + 29.9 + 27.2 + 2.7 + 0.2 + 5.2 −1.1 + 58.4 + 36.2 + 17.0 + 19.2 + 3.1 + 21.4
1997 + 0.1 + 80.6 + 71.5 + 53.3 + 18.2 −0.1 + 10.4 −1.2 + 109.3 + 73.0 + 33.7 + 39.3 + 0.7 + 32.9
1998 −0.0 + 100.8 + 89.5 + 79.3 + 10.2 + 0.0 + 13.1 −1.8 + 122.0 + 42.7 −6.4 + 49.1 + 5.5 + 66.0
1999 −0.3 + 17.7 + 5.7 − 5.3 + 11.0 + 0.2 + 11.7 −0.0 + 85.8 + 42.8 + 8.4 + 34.4 + 1.3 + 41.8
2000 −0.0 + 78.9 + 56.5 + 44.6 + 11.8 + 0.9 + 21.6 −0.7 + 72.0 + 45.0 + 17.4 + 27.7 −1.2 + 28.2
2001 + 0.0 + 83.7 + 75.6 + 54.4 + 21.2 −0.5 + 8.5 −0.2 + 88.3 + 53.4 + 27.0 + 26.4 −1.5 + 36.3
2002 −0.1 + 120.3 + 118.0 + 99.4 + 18.6 + 0.1 + 2.2 −0.9 + 21.2 + 12.7 −0.4 + 13.2 + 4.6 + 3.9
2002         Jan + 0.5 −13.2 −13.5 −13.7 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.1 −0.4 + 4.8 + 3.5 + 2.6 + 0.9 −0.7 + 1.9
         Feb −0.2 −16.4 −17.1 −20.5 + 3.4 + 0.4 + 0.3 −0.1 + 4.6 + 2.5 + 0.6 + 1.8 + 1.2 + 1.0
         Mar −0.3 + 13.5 + 13.3 + 11.9 + 1.4 −0.1 + 0.2 −0.2 + 15.9 + 13.9 + 9.9 + 4.0 + 1.4 + 0.6
         Apr −0.1 + 12.7 + 13.0 + 10.7 + 2.3 −0.1 −0.3 −0.0 − 3.6 −2.4 −3.8 + 1.4 + 0.7 −1.8
         May + 0.0 + 28.7 + 28.2 + 28.2 −0.1 −0.1 + 0.6 −0.1 + 10.7 + 7.1 + 4.9 + 2.2 −1.0 + 4.6
         June −0.0 + 10.8 + 10.3 + 9.0 + 1.2 + 0.0 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 3.3 −2.9 −3.9 + 1.0 −1.2 + 0.8
         July −0.0 + 1.2 + 0.8 − 1.4 + 2.3 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.2 −5.3 −4.5 −0.7 + 0.5 + 4.6
         Aug −0.0 + 14.3 + 14.0 + 13.8 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.3 −0.0 − 2.0 −0.9 −2.3 + 1.3 + 3.1 −4.2
         Sep + 0.0 + 28.8 + 28.2 + 26.3 + 1.9 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 9.6 + 9.7 + 10.5 −0.8 + 0.6 −0.8
         Oct −0.0 + 13.8 + 13.0 + 11.3 + 1.7 + 0.1 + 0.8 −0.2 + 0.9 + 2.1 −0.3 + 2.5 + 0.2 −1.5
         Nov −0.0 + 40.1 + 36.2 + 35.0 + 1.2 + 3.6 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 4.7 + 3.8 + 2.4 + 1.4 + 0.1 + 0.8
         Dec + 0.0 −14.1 − 8.2 −11.3 + 3.1 −4.7 −1.2 −0.1 −20.8 −18.2 −16.7 −1.6 −0.4 −2.1
2003         Jan −0.1 + 9.2 + 9.6 + 6.6 + 3.0 −0.0 −0.4 −0.1 + 6.8 + 4.9 −0.0 + 4.9 + 1.6 + 0.2
         Feb + 0.0 + 18.9 + 17.3 + 17.5 −0.1 + 0.5 + 1.1 −0.0 + 16.8 + 19.6 + 18.3 + 1.3 −0.7 −2.2
         Mar + 0.0 + 21.4 + 18.3 + 16.3 + 2.0 −0.4 + 3.5 −0.0 + 0.3 + 3.5 + 3.6 −0.2 −1.6 −1.5
         Apr + 0.0 + 8.9 + 6.4 + 4.5 + 2.0 + 0.8 + 1.7 −0.0 + 12.8 + 13.7 + 12.8 + 0.9 −1.1 + 0.2
         May + 0.0 + 30.1 + 28.0 + 24.9 + 3.2 −0.4 + 2.5 −0.0 + 5.6 + 6.0 + 3.8 + 2.3 −0.4 −0.0
         June + 0.1 + 29.4 + 26.3 + 25.1 + 1.2 −0.0 + 3.2 + 0.0 − 6.2 −14.9 −12.6 −2.3 + 0.1 + 8.6
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the banknotes and coins. —2Up to December 1998, including fiduciary loans
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as (see also footnote 6). —3Up to December 1998, bill-based lending (bill
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from rediscounted bills and bills
Report , are not specially marked. —1Up to December 1998, foreign sent for collection from the banks ’portfolios prior to maturity). —
28*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
IV Banks
    
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
 Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bankinterests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memo
item and and item and item
Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciaryloans  
6 prises  7 Total Total  9 term  9 term loans  6 Total Total  9 term  9 term loans  6   Period deposits  8 deposits  8 
End of year or month*
 
15.5 30.1 328.1 82.9 236.0 122.5 113.5 9.2 162.8 16.9 139.2 39.1 100.1 6.7 199317.3 34.0 402.3 111.6 283.7 150.8 132.9 7.1 181.5 20.6 155.3 41.7 113.6 5.6 1994
16.7 38.8 463.7 116.9 339.7 191.6 148.2 7.0 224.4 22.1 198.0 45.3 152.6 4.4 1995
12.7 45.8 486.5 147.1 335.7 172.0 163.7 3.8 273.5 34.3 237.2 50.0 187.2 2.1 199615.7 54.7 670.3 226.0 440.2 254.3 185.9 4.0 333.9 43.5 285.7 63.0 222.7 4.8 199722.9 62.9 875.7 309.5 562.5 359.1 203.4 3.7 390.3 51.3 329.6 71.8 257.8 9.5 199813.6 33.9 483.6 65.6 418.0 332.3 85.6 2.0 284.4 23.8 260.6 64.9 195.7 5.8 1999
13.9 47.4 586.0 113.7 472.2 382.9 89.3 1.7 314.9 35.4 279.5 62.5 217.0 5.6 2000
13.8 47.6 622.7 91.9 530.8 434.5 96.3 1.4 350.6 34.0 316.6 97.6 219.0 5.3 200115.6 44.8 614.2 101.6 512.7 410.4 102.3 1.1 319.2 33.5 285.7 87.0 198.7 4.5 2002
13.7 47.2 638.6 130.5 508.1 412.3 95.8 1.3 361.3 36.0 325.2 102.2 223.0 5.3 2002          Jan 
14.0 47.4 616.5 122.8 493.7 396.3 97.4 1.3 360.4 34.6 325.8 105.0 220.8 5.1          Feb 14.1 47.0 627.0 122.0 505.0 406.5 98.4 1.3 363.2 35.0 328.2 106.4 221.8 5.1          Mar 
14.4 46.9 647.7 123.4 524.2 426.0 98.2 1.3 366.3 36.0 330.3 109.2 221.2 4.9          Apr 
14.1 47.4 646.2 119.3 526.9 428.8 98.1 1.2 366.0 34.9 331.1 112.7 218.4 4.7          May13.1 47.0 608.3 133.9 474.4 376.0 98.4 1.1 344.2 38.2 306.0 93.0 213.0 4.5          June
13.4 47.2 618.3 121.3 497.1 395.4 101.6 1.1 347.9 38.6 309.3 95.8 213.5 4.6          July
13.4 47.0 615.5 91.8 523.7 419.2 104.5 1.1 337.2 34.8 302.5 100.9 201.6 4.5          Aug 13.4 47.0 626.2 132.7 493.5 389.3 104.2 1.1 344.6 41.2 303.4 103.2 200.2 4.6          Sep 
14.2 45.7 633.0 116.1 516.9 412.9 104.1 1.1 342.4 38.2 304.2 99.4 204.8 4.6          Oct 
14.7 45.8 648.3 125.2 523.1 420.1 103.0 1.1 346.8 42.6 304.2 101.1 203.0 4.7          Nov 15.6 44.8 614.2 101.6 512.7 410.4 102.3 1.1 319.2 33.5 285.7 87.0 198.7 4.5          Dec 
15.4 42.7 623.1 112.6 510.5 406.1 104.4 1.0 324.7 35.7 289.1 95.4 193.7 4.4 2003          Jan 
15.4 42.4 616.4 117.7 498.7 392.8 105.9 1.0 330.8 33.2 297.6 107.5 190.1 4.3          Feb 15.4 43.3 621.7 131.7 490.0 384.4 105.6 1.0 339.8 43.3 296.5 109.2 187.3 4.2          Mar 
15.1 43.2 634.6 141.6 493.0 387.9 105.1 1.0 333.3 39.3 294.0 110.3 183.7 4.0          Apr 
14.7 41.7 620.9 128.0 492.9 386.0 106.9 1.0 332.0 43.6 288.4 109.8 178.7 3.8          May15.1 42.2 622.8 143.1 479.7 372.8 107.0 1.0 324.6 43.8 280.8 99.8 180.9 3.9          June
Changes*
−1.7 + 4.2 + 85.6 + 31.3 + 56.0 + 33.9 + 22.1 −1.7 + 23.1 + 3.9 + 19.8 + 3.4 + 16.4 −0.7 1994
−0.2 + 5.2 + 71.0 + 7.9 + 64.6 + 45.9 + 18.7 −1.5 + 47.8 + 2.2 + 46.5 + 4.1 + 42.4 −0.9 1995
−2.3 + 5.9 + 11.3 + 27.1 − 13.9 − 26.6 + 12.7 −1.9 + 44.7 + 11.7 + 35.0 + 3.7 + 31.3 −2.0 1996
+ 2.7 + 7.9 + 157.3 + 67.7 + 89.5 + 71.8 + 17.7 + 0.1 + 51.0 + 5.4 + 43.3 + 11.4 + 31.9 + 2.3 1997+ 7.7 + 8.8 + 215.6 + 87.7 + 128.1 + 108.1 + 20.0 −0.3 + 64.7 + 10.4 + 48.9 + 10.3 + 38.6 + 5.5 1998
+ 1.1 + 10.9 + 37.4 −9.2 + 46.6 + 47.6 −1.0 −0.0 + 61.0 + 7.2 + 53.8 + 15.9 + 37.9 + 0.1 1999
−0.2 + 12.8 + 90.0 + 47.0 + 43.0 + 42.9 + 0.1 −0.4 + 24.4 + 11.1 + 13.3 −2.9 + 16.2 −0.8 2000
−0.5 − 0.5 + 23.5 −23.6 + 47.0 + 42.4 + 4.6 −0.4 + 30.8 −1.8 + 32.6 + 33.3 −0.7 −0.6 2001
+ 1.7 + 1.6 + 22.7 + 14.6 + 8.1 − 1.3 + 9.4 −0.3 + 4.6 + 0.8 + 3.8 −4.6 + 8.4 −0.9 2002
−0.2 + 0.4 + 11.6 + 38.3 − 26.8 − 25.7 −1.0 −0.1 + 8.2 + 1.9 + 6.4 + 3.9 + 2.5 −0.1 2002          Jan 
+ 0.3 + 0.2 −21.7 −7.7 − 14.0 − 15.7 + 1.7 −0.0 −0.5 −1.4 + 0.9 + 2.9 −2.0 −0.2          Feb 
+ 0.2 − 0.3 + 11.9 −0.5 + 12.4 + 11.3 + 1.2 + 0.0 + 3.6 + 0.4 + 3.2 + 1.6 + 1.7 −0.0          Mar 
+ 0.3 + 0.2 + 27.1 + 2.3 + 24.8 + 24.3 + 0.5 −0.1 + 7.1 + 1.3 + 5.8 + 3.9 + 1.9 −0.2          Apr 
−0.3 + 1.1 + 7.3 −2.8 + 10.1 + 9.1 + 1.0 −0.0 + 5.4 −0.8 + 6.2 + 5.2 + 1.0 −0.2          May
−1.0 + 0.3 −27.3 + 16.1 − 43.4 − 44.4 + 1.0 −0.1 −14.5 + 3.7 −18.2 −17.6 −0.6 −0.3          June
+ 0.2 − 0.1 + 5.5 −13.6 + 19.0 + 16.3 + 2.7 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 2.1 −1.6 + 0.1          July
−0.0 − 0.2 − 1.5 −29.2 + 27.7 + 24.8 + 3.0 −0.0 + 4.7 −3.8 + 8.5 + 5.3 + 3.2 −0.0          Aug 
+ 0.1 + 0.0 + 11.3 + 40.9 − 29.6 − 29.6 −0.1 + 0.0 + 8.1 + 6.5 + 1.6 + 2.9 −1.3 + 0.1          Sep 
+ 0.7 + 0.1 + 7.2 −16.6 + 23.7 + 23.8 −0.1 −0.0 −1.9 −3.0 + 1.1 −3.8 + 4.8 −0.0          Oct 
+ 0.5 + 0.3 + 16.8 + 9.4 + 7.4 + 8.4 −0.9 −0.0 + 5.5 + 4.5 + 1.0 + 2.0 −1.0 + 0.1          Nov 
+ 0.9 − 0.4 −25.4 −22.0 − 3.4 − 3.8 + 0.5 −0.0 −21.6 −8.6 −13.0 −13.0 −0.1 −0.2          Dec 
−0.2 − 1.7 + 14.4 + 11.7 + 2.7 − 0.1 + 2.8 −0.1 + 9.1 + 2.5 + 6.6 + 9.2 −2.5 −0.1 2003          Jan 
+ 0.1 − 0.3 − 6.7 + 5.4 − 12.0 − 13.5 + 1.5 −0.0 + 6.6 −2.5 + 9.2 + 12.2 −3.1 −0.1          Feb 
−0.1 + 1.0 + 7.4 + 14.3 − 6.9 − 7.0 + 0.0 −0.0 + 10.3 + 10.2 + 0.1 + 2.0 −1.9 −0.1          Mar 
−0.3 + 0.1 + 17.1 + 10.6 + 6.5 + 6.4 + 0.2 + 0.0 −4.0 −3.8 −0.1 + 1.8 −1.9 −0.3          Apr 
−0.4 − 0.7 − 4.3 −11.8 + 7.5 + 4.2 + 3.3 −0.1 + 5.0 + 4.7 + 0.2 + 0.9 −0.7 −0.2          May
+ 0.4 + 0.1 − 2.9 + 14.1 − 17.0 − 16.2 −0.8 + 0.0 −10.9 + 0.0 −10.9 −10.6 −0.3 + 0.2          June
4Up to November 1993, included in securities (see also footnote 5). —5Up capital supplied to branches abroad. —8Up to December 1998, including
to November 1993, including negotiable money market paper; excluding time deposits with terms of less than one month. —9Up to December 1998,
registered debt securities. —6From 1999, no longer included in loans and excluding time deposits with terms of less than one month. 
deposits (see also footnote 2). —7Up to December 1998, including working
29*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
IV Banks
 
5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)*
  
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999,  5  billion
Short-term lending Medium and long-term
to public authorities to enter- to enterprises and individuals  1 
Lending to domesticnon-banks, total  
1,2 
   
including excluding Negoti-negotiable money ablemarket paper, Loans moneysecurities, and market Treasury
Period equalisation claims Total Total paper Total Loans bills  
5 Total Total bills 3,4 
End of year or month*
 
1993 3,826.4 3,417.8 563.2 544.2 540.8 3.4 19.0 16.8 2.2 3,263.2 2,441.81994 4,137.2 3,633.1 583.5 549.1 548.6 0.4 34.4 32.7 1.8 3,553.7 2,661.9
1995 4,436.9 3,936.9 615.2 584.0 583.3 0.7 31.3 30.5 0.8 3,821.7 2,785.5
1996 4,773.1 4,248.7 662.2 617.2 616.2 1.0 45.1 40.2 4.9 4,110.8 3,007.21997 5,058.4 4,506.2 667.8 625.8 624.8 1.0 41.9 40.1 1.9 4,390.6 3,223.41998 5,379.8 4,775.4 704.3 661.3 660.8 0.5 43.0 38.5 4.5 4,675.5 3,482.41999 2,904.5 2,576.5 355.3 328.9 328.7 0.2 26.4 23.6 2.8 2,549.2 1,943.6
2000 3,003.7 2,663.7 371.2 348.2 347.7 0.5 22.9 21.2 1.7 2,632.5 2,038.6
2001 3,014.1 2,704.2 387.9 356.7 355.2 1.5 31.2 28.2 2.9 2,626.2 2,070.22002 2,997.2 2,689.1 365.4 331.9 331.0 1.0 33.5 31.1 2.4 2,631.8 2,079.7
2002         Jan 3,011.2 2,694.8 377.4 345.5 344.6 0.9 31.8 29.8 2.1 2,633.8 2,078.2
         Feb 3,006.1 2,694.0 377.7 345.7 344.8 0.9 32.0 30.1 1.9 2,628.4 2,071.7         Mar 2,996.9 2,694.4 382.5 349.0 348.0 1.0 33.5 31.8 1.6 2,614.4 2,061.7
         Apr 3,004.3 2,691.8 379.1 348.2 347.1 1.1 30.8 28.2 2.6 2,625.3 2,069.3
         May 3,005.7 2,687.0 373.6 344.9 344.0 0.9 28.6 24.9 3.7 2,632.2 2,072.7         June 2,990.8 2,683.1 370.7 343.1 342.2 0.9 27.6 23.4 4.2 2,620.1 2,066.7
         July 2,995.7 2,689.5 370.4 335.5 334.1 1.5 34.9 32.2 2.7 2,625.3 2,068.5
         Aug 2,987.3 2,679.9 356.0 331.2 329.9 1.2 24.8 22.1 2.7 2,631.4 2,073.3         Sep 2,995.5 2,687.4 367.4 343.2 341.6 1.5 24.2 21.8 2.4 2,628.2 2,068.8
         Oct 2,997.6 2,688.8 364.2 335.7 334.2 1.5 28.5 26.1 2.4 2,633.4 2,076.6
         Nov 3,003.5 2,687.5 365.8 332.5 330.9 1.7 33.3 31.4 1.9 2,637.7 2,079.9         Dec 2,997.2 2,689.1 365.4 331.9 331.0 1.0 33.5 31.1 2.4 2,631.8 2,079.7
2003         Jan 3,005.1 2,690.8 371.1 329.7 328.5 1.2 41.4 38.6 2.8 2,634.0 2,076.5
         Feb 3,001.9 2,686.4 364.4 329.3 328.1 1.2 35.1 32.7 2.4 2,637.4 2,077.5         Mar 3,005.5 2,681.3 369.2 332.5 330.4 2.2 36.7 34.0 2.7 2,636.3 2,071.6
         Apr 3,007.6 2,680.2 366.3 326.5 324.2 2.2 39.8 37.0 2.8 2,641.3 2,079.0
         May 3,003.6 2,671.7 356.2 321.4 319.1 2.3 34.7 32.6 2.2 2,647.4 2,080.5         June 2,992.4 2,674.1 359.6 328.9 326.9 2.0 30.7 28.8 1.9 2,632.8 2,077.4
Changes*
1994 + 320.5 + 244.0 + 13.2 + 7.0 + 9.9 −2.9 + 6.2 + 6.6 −0.4 + 307.2 + 249.1
1995 + 312.8 + 311.9 + 35.9 + 37.9 + 37.7 + 0.2 − 1.9 − 1.0 −1.0 + 276.9 + 185.1
1996 + 336.3 + 312.9 + 44.3 + 32.6 + 32.2 + 0.4 + 11.7 + 7.4 + 4.3 + 292.0 + 221.51997 + 285.2 + 256.9 + 2.7 + 5.9 + 5.9 + 0.0 − 3.2 − 0.1 −3.0 + 282.5 + 219.9
1998 + 335.3 + 285.5 + 51.7 + 50.6 + 51.2 −0.6 + 1.1 − 1.6 + 2.7 + 283.6 + 258.3
1999 + 156.1 + 139.5 + 9.6 + 6.3 + 6.4 −0.0 + 3.3 + 2.9 + 0.4 + 146.4 + 146.4
2000 + 100.7 + 83.2 + 14.5 + 18.1 + 17.8 + 0.3 − 3.6 − 2.5 −1.1 + 86.1 + 93.8
2001 + 11.9 + 39.2 + 15.3 + 7.0 + 5.9 + 1.0 + 8.4 + 7.8 + 0.6 − 3.4 + 32.0
2002 − 19.2 − 18.8 −23.4 −25.7 −25.2 −0.5 + 2.3 + 2.9 −0.6 + 4.3 + 7.6
2002         Jan − 3.4 − 10.2 −11.3 −11.9 −11.4 −0.6 + 0.7 + 1.6 −0.9 + 7.9 + 8.1
         Feb − 4.9 − 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.3 −0.2 − 5.4 − 6.5
         Mar − 8.6 + 0.8 + 4.9 + 3.4 + 3.3 + 0.1 + 1.5 + 1.7 −0.2 − 13.5 − 9.7
         Apr + 8.1 − 2.4 − 3.4 − 0.8 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 2.6 − 3.6 + 1.0 + 11.5 + 8.2
         May + 2.2 − 4.1 − 5.1 − 2.9 − 2.8 −0.2 − 2.2 − 3.3 + 1.1 + 7.4 + 3.7
         June − 19.0 − 8.0 − 3.3 − 2.3 − 2.3 + 0.0 − 1.0 − 1.5 + 0.5 − 15.6 − 9.6
         July + 5.1 + 6.5 − 0.3 − 7.6 − 8.1 + 0.5 + 7.3 + 8.8 −1.5 + 5.5 + 2.1
         Aug − 8.4 − 9.6 −14.4 − 4.4 − 4.1 −0.2 −10.0 −10.1 + 0.0 + 6.1 + 4.0
         Sep + 7.9 + 7.2 + 11.2 + 11.8 + 11.5 + 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.3 −0.3 − 3.3 − 3.9
         Oct + 2.0 + 1.4 − 3.2 − 7.5 − 7.5 −0.0 + 4.3 + 4.3 + 0.0 + 5.2 + 7.7
         Nov + 6.0 − 1.3 + 1.4 − 3.4 − 3.5 + 0.1 + 4.8 + 5.2 −0.5 + 4.5 + 3.5
         Dec − 6.3 + 1.6 − 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.1 −0.7 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.5 − 5.9 − 0.3
2003         Jan + 7.9 + 1.7 + 5.7 − 2.2 − 2.4 + 0.2 + 7.9 + 7.5 + 0.4 + 2.2 − 3.6
         Feb − 3.3 − 4.4 − 6.7 − 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 6.3 − 5.9 −0.4 + 3.5 + 1.0
         Mar + 3.7 − 5.1 + 4.8 + 3.2 + 2.2 + 1.0 + 1.6 + 1.3 + 0.3 − 1.2 − 5.9
         Apr + 2.1 − 1.1 − 3.0 − 6.0 − 6.1 + 0.1 + 3.1 + 3.0 + 0.1 + 5.1 + 7.2
         May − 3.8 − 8.5 −10.1 − 5.0 − 5.1 + 0.1 − 5.1 − 4.5 −0.6 + 6.3 + 1.8
         June − 11.1 + 2.5 + 3.4 + 7.5 + 7.8 −0.3 − 4.1 − 3.8 −0.2 − 14.6 − 3.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the including fiduciary loans (see also footnote 9). —3Up to December 1998,
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising fromprovisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks ’portfolios
Report , are not specially marked. —1Up to December 1998, including loans prior to maturity). —4From 1999, including small amounts of medium-term
to domestic building and loan associations. —2Up to December 1998, series of bills. —5From December 1993, including other negotiable
30*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
IV Banks
    
 
lending  2,6 
prises and individuals  1,2 to public authorities  2 
Loans Loans
Memo Memo
item Equal- item
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term  7 term  8 loans  9 Total Total term  7 term  8 loans  9   Period Securities  6 ities 6,10 claims  11 
End of year or month*
 
2,241.5 253.9 1,987.5 134.2 66.1 821.4 537.1 36.8 500.3 193.5 75.3 15.5 19932,390.4 228.3 2,162.0 203.2 68.3 891.8 577.0 34.5 542.5 230.5 68.1 16.1 1994
2,522.0 214.1 2,307.9 192.9 70.6 1,036.2 713.0 74.5 638.4 234.4 71.3 17.5 1995
2,713.3 215.8 2,497.5 205.9 88.0 1,103.6 773.0 69.5 703.6 231.3 81.3 18.0 19962,900.0 216.2 2,683.8 234.1 89.3 1,167.2 833.8 53.0 780.8 239.2 76.0 18.3 19973,104.5 206.8 2,897.8 292.4 85.4 1,193.2 868.8 33.1 835.7 235.4 71.6 17.3 19981,764.8 182.5 1,582.3 178.9 49.2 605.6 459.5 30.9 428.6 108.6 37.5 8.7 1999
1,838.9 192.8 1,646.0 199.7 50.1 593.9 455.9 30.4 425.5 104.9 33.1 8.4 2000
1,880.5 191.1 1,689.4 189.7 48.9 556.0 440.3 25.6 414.6 111.8 4.0 8.0 20011,909.8 193.5 1,716.3 169.9 47.3 552.1 417.1 27.4 389.7 132.0 3.0 7.5 2002
1,880.9 189.1 1,691.8 197.3 48.7 555.7 439.6 26.7 412.9 112.2 3.9 8.0 2002          Jan 
1,882.5 189.3 1,693.3 189.1 48.5 556.8 436.6 26.1 410.5 116.2 3.9 8.0          Feb 1,882.3 189.4 1,692.9 179.4 48.2 552.7 432.2 25.6 406.6 116.5 3.9 7.9          Mar 
1,884.5 189.8 1,694.7 184.8 48.2 556.0 431.9 26.2 405.7 120.1 3.9 7.9          Apr 
1,888.0 189.9 1,698.1 184.7 48.1 559.5 430.1 26.3 403.8 125.5 3.9 7.9          May1,891.0 191.2 1,699.9 175.6 47.6 553.4 426.4 24.4 402.0 123.0 3.9 7.8          June
1,897.5 191.7 1,705.8 171.0 47.5 556.8 425.8 24.5 401.3 128.0 3.0 7.7          July
1,901.6 192.3 1,709.3 171.6 47.5 558.1 426.2 24.7 401.5 128.9 3.0 7.7          Aug 1,900.6 192.1 1,708.6 168.2 47.3 559.3 423.3 24.6 398.7 133.1 3.0 7.7          Sep 
1,906.5 193.8 1,712.6 170.1 47.5 556.8 422.1 24.7 397.4 131.8 3.0 7.6          Oct 
1,907.6 192.5 1,715.1 172.4 47.3 557.8 417.7 25.5 392.2 137.1 3.0 7.7          Nov 1,909.8 193.5 1,716.3 169.9 47.3 552.1 417.1 27.4 389.7 132.0 3.0 7.5          Dec 
1,909.4 194.8 1,714.6 167.1 47.0 557.4 414.2 30.0 384.2 140.3 3.0 7.7 2003          Jan 
1,911.1 194.0 1,717.1 166.5 47.1 559.9 414.4 31.5 382.9 142.5 3.0 7.7          Feb 1,907.1 193.1 1,714.0 164.5 47.2 564.6 409.8 29.9 379.8 151.9 3.0 7.6          Mar 
1,910.3 193.3 1,717.0 168.6 47.0 562.4 408.6 30.9 377.6 150.8 3.0 7.5          Apr 
1,912.9 193.2 1,719.7 167.6 47.0 566.9 407.1 31.5 375.5 156.9 3.0 7.5          May1,912.8 193.5 1,719.3 164.6 47.0 555.4 405.7 31.5 374.2 146.8 3.0 7.4          June
Changes*
+ 198.7 −29.2 + 227.9 + 48.5 + 1.9 + 58.2 + 26.2 − 2.4 + 28.5 + 38.3 − 6.9 + 0.7 1994
+ 176.0 − 1.9 + 177.9 + 3.3 + 5.9 + 91.8 + 91.8 + 15.3 + 76.6 − 0.4 − 1.2 + 1.5 1995
+ 204.4 + 1.6 + 202.8 + 14.0 + 3.1 + 70.4 + 65.7 − 5.5 + 71.2 − 3.3 + 8.0 + 0.1 1996
+ 189.0 + 0.3 + 188.7 + 29.5 + 1.4 + 62.6 + 60.6 −18.0 + 78.6 + 7.0 − 5.3 + 0.2 1997
+ 205.7 − 8.9 + 214.6 + 56.5 −3.9 + 25.3 + 35.0 −20.0 + 55.0 − 4.4 − 4.4 −0.9 1998
+ 121.8 + 25.1 + 96.8 + 24.6 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 8.5 + 6.2 + 2.3 − 7.8 − 0.6 −0.1 1999
+ 71.8 + 6.9 + 64.9 + 22.1 + 0.8 − 7.7 − 3.8 − 0.4 − 3.5 − 3.1 − 0.8 −0.3 2000
+ 41.9 − 2.8 + 44.7 − 9.8 −1.2 − 35.4 −16.5 − 5.5 −10.9 + 10.1 −29.1 −0.4 2001
+ 26.6 − 2.1 + 28.7 −19.0 −1.6 − 3.4 −23.1 + 1.0 −24.1 + 20.7 − 1.0 −0.5 2002
+ 0.3 − 2.1 + 2.4 + 7.8 −0.3 − 0.3 − 0.7 + 1.0 − 1.7 + 0.5 − 0.0 −0.0 2002          Jan 
+ 1.7 + 0.2 + 1.5 − 8.1 −0.2 + 1.1 − 3.0 − 0.6 − 2.4 + 4.1 −− 0.0          Feb 
+ 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.3 − 9.8 −0.2 − 3.9 − 4.4 − 0.5 − 3.9 + 0.5 − 0.0 −0.0          Mar 
+ 2.4 + 0.4 + 2.0 + 5.8 −0.1 + 3.3 − 0.3 + 0.6 − 0.9 + 3.6 + 0.0 −0.0          Apr 
+ 3.8 + 0.2 + 3.6 − 0.0 −0.0 + 3.6 − 1.9 + 0.0 − 1.9 + 5.5 + 0.0 −0.0          May
− 0.5 − 1.9 + 1.4 − 9.0 −0.5 − 6.1 − 3.6 − 1.8 − 1.8 − 2.4 − 0.0 −0.1          June
+ 6.4 + 0.5 + 5.9 − 4.4 −0.1 + 3.4 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.7 + 5.0 − 1.0 −0.1          July
+ 4.1 + 0.6 + 3.5 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 2.1 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 1.6 + 0.0 −0.0          Aug 
− 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.7 − 2.8 −0.2 + 0.6 − 2.9 − 0.1 − 2.8 + 3.5 + 0.0 −0.0          Sep 
+ 5.8 + 1.8 + 4.1 + 1.9 + 0.2 − 2.5 − 1.2 + 0.1 − 1.3 − 1.3 − 0.0 −0.0          Oct 
+ 1.3 − 2.8 + 4.1 + 2.3 −0.1 + 1.0 − 4.3 + 0.0 − 4.4 + 5.4 + 0.0 + 0.0          Nov 
+ 2.2 + 1.0 + 1.3 − 2.5 −0.0 − 5.7 − 0.6 + 1.9 − 2.5 − 5.1 −− 0.1          Dec 
− 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 3.2 −0.2 + 5.8 − 2.9 + 0.3 − 3.3 + 8.7 − 0.0 + 0.2 2003          Jan 
+ 1.7 − 0.7 + 2.4 − 0.7 + 0.1 + 2.4 + 0.2 + 1.5 − 1.3 + 2.2 − 0.0 + 0.0          Feb 
− 4.0 − 0.9 − 3.0 − 2.0 + 0.1 + 4.8 − 4.6 − 1.5 − 3.1 + 9.4 + 0.0 −0.1          Mar 
+ 3.2 + 0.2 + 3.0 + 4.0 −0.2 − 2.1 − 1.2 + 1.0 − 2.2 − 0.9 − 0.0 −0.0          Apr 
+ 2.6 − 0.1 + 2.7 − 0.8 −0.1 + 4.6 − 1.5 + 0.6 − 2.1 + 6.1 −− 0.0          May
− 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.4 − 3.0 + 0.0 − 11.5 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 1.4 −10.1 − 0.0 −0.1          June
money market paper; excluding mobilisation and liquidity paper. —6From notice of four years and more; from 1999, of more than five years. —9From
1999, breakdown of securities by medium and long-term lending no longer 1999, no longer included in lending (see also footnote 2). —10Excluding
possible. —7Up to December 1998, maturity or period of notice of more debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims (see also
than one year to less than four years; from 1999, more than one year up to footnote 11). —11Including debt securities arising from the exchange of
and including five years. —8Up to December 1998, maturity or period of equalisation claims. 
31*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
IV Banks
 
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and resident individuals, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
 
 5  billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and resident individuals (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding sec urities portfolios)  1 
of which  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
 
Financing
Mortgage institu-
loans tions
secured Whole- Agri- Electricity, Transport, (excluding
by gas and sale culture, storage MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which water and forestry and insurance
loans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- supply, Construc- retail and commu- enter-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing mining  2 tion trade  3 fishing nication prises
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2000 2,187.3 955.2 1,030.8 737.6 293.2 1,267.8 344.1 174.9 35.9 68.2 173.2 31.4 49.1 34.22001 2,236.3 981.4 1,053.9 757.7 296.2 1,295.6 346.1 174.3 36.7 67.9 172.9 31.3 50.0 39.0
2002         June 2,233.7 994.1 1,060.2 768.0 292.2 1,287.1 345.9 171.5 39.4 68.2 167.0 32.0 51.5 36.5
         Sep 2,242.7 1,000.0 1,064.3 770.7 293.6 1,286.1 344.5 168.2 38.3 66.9 165.7 32.5 50.5 42.1         Dec 2,241.2 1,008.9 1,068.7 776.3 292.4 1,277.3 340.1 161.5 37.4 64.6 162.6 31.3 51.3 39.5
2003         Mar 2,237.9 1,012.5 1,067.0 782.0 285.0 1,273.2 338.4 158.5 37.3 63.5 159.3 32.0 51.1 50.3
         June 2,240.1 1,011.4 1,070.5 782.5 288.0 1,267.1 338.0 157.8 37.0 62.9 156.9 32.5 52.2 48.7
 Short-term lending
2000 348.4 − 15.9 − 15.9 294.6 10.7 61.5 6.2 17.9 62.2 4.2 10.1 10.5
2001 355.8 − 15.9 − 15.9 304.1 10.6 59.6 5.5 17.8 63.5 4.1 9.3 14.2
2002         June 342.6 − 14.4 − 14.4 293.2 9.4 58.6 7.3 18.4 60.0 4.6 9.6 12.1
         Sep 342.1 − 14.1 − 14.1 291.2 9.1 56.6 6.1 17.5 59.3 4.8 8.8 17.0
         Dec 331.4 − 14.5 − 14.5 281.1 9.3 52.0 5.1 15.9 58.7 4.2 8.4 13.6
2003         Mar 330.7 − 13.7 − 13.7 282.8 8.8 50.6 4.8 16.0 57.4 4.5 8.0 24.2
         June 327.3 − 14.4 − 14.4 278.8 9.3 51.1 4.5 15.9 56.5 4.7 7.9 22.3
 Medium-term lending
2000 192.8 − 39.3 − 39.3 120.1 12.8 17.6 1.5 7.0 13.3 3.4 6.9 9.1
2001 191.1 − 37.1 − 37.1 120.1 12.0 18.5 1.9 6.5 13.4 3.2 7.2 7.7
2002         June 191.2 − 35.9 − 35.9 120.9 11.7 17.8 2.2 6.6 13.2 3.3 8.1 6.5
         Sep 192.1 − 35.7 − 35.7 121.0 11.6 18.0 2.4 6.6 13.3 3.3 8.1 6.7
         Dec 193.5 − 36.1 − 36.1 121.8 11.3 17.9 2.0 6.5 13.5 3.3 8.5 6.8
2003         Mar 193.1 − 35.9 − 35.9 121.3 11.4 17.7 2.2 6.3 13.1 3.3 9.1 6.3
         June 193.5 − 37.4 − 37.4 121.0 11.9 17.6 2.5 6.0 12.7 3.4 9.9 6.4
 Long-term lending
2000 1,646.0 955.2 975.5 737.6 238.0 853.1 320.6 95.9 28.2 43.4 97.7 23.9 32.1 14.6
2001 1,689.4 981.4 1,000.9 757.7 243.2 871.4 323.5 96.2 29.4 43.7 96.1 24.0 33.5 17.1
2002         June 1,699.9 994.1 1,009.9 768.0 241.9 873.0 324.8 95.1 29.9 43.2 93.9 24.1 33.8 17.9
         Sep 1,708.6 1,000.0 1,014.5 770.7 243.8 873.9 323.8 93.6 29.9 42.8 93.0 24.4 33.5 18.4         Dec 1,716.3 1,008.9 1,018.1 776.3 241.9 874.4 319.4 91.5 30.3 42.2 90.3 23.8 34.4 19.0
2003         Mar 1,714.0 1,012.5 1,017.3 782.0 235.3 869.1 318.2 90.2 30.4 41.2 88.8 24.2 34.1 19.8
         June 1,719.3 1,011.4 1,018.7 782.5 236.2 867.2 316.7 89.1 30.0 41.0 87.6 24.4 34.4 20.1
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2002         Q2 − 0.3 + 3.7 + 3.8 + 3.4 + 0.3 − 7.0 − 0.4 − 2.4 + 1.2 − 0.5 − 2.7 + 0.3 − 1.3 − 2.7
         Q3 + 8.8 + 4.8 + 5.7 + 3.6 + 2.1 − 1.2 − 0.6 − 3.4 − 1.1 − 1.4 − 1.4 + 0.5 − 1.1 + 5.6
         Q4 − 1.5 + 4.3 + 6.3 + 3.0 + 3.3 − 8.7 − 0.9 − 6.2 − 0.9 − 2.3 − 1.4 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 2.7
2003         Q1 − 3.3 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.3 − 4.2 − 1.8 − 2.9 − 0.1 − 1.1 − 3.5 + 0.7 − 0.2 + 10.3
         Q2 + 2.3 + 0.7 + 5.8 + 2.7 + 3.1 − 6.1 − 1.1 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 2.3 + 0.5 + 1.0 − 1.6
 Short-term lending
2002         Q2 − 6.0 −− 0.7 −− 0.7 − 6.5 − 0.6 − 0.5 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 1.4 + 0.3 − 0.9 − 3.5
         Q3 − 0.8 −− 0.2 −− 0.2 − 2.2 − 0.3 − 2.1 − 1.2 − 0.9 − 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.8 + 5.0
         Q4 −10.8 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 −10.2 + 0.2 − 4.6 − 1.0 − 1.6 − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 3.4
2003         Q1 − 0.7 −− 0.9 −− 0.9 + 1.6 − 0.6 − 1.5 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.3 − 0.4 + 10.6
         Q2 − 3.4 − + 0.4 − + 0.4 − 4.0 + 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 2.0
 Medium-term lending
2002         Q2 − 1.3 −− 0.5 −− 0.5 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 1.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.1
         Q3 + 0.8 −− 0.3 −− 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2
         Q4 − 0.1 −− 0.4 −− 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.1
2003         Q1 − 1.7 −− 0.3 −− 0.3 − 1.8 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.7
         Q2 + 0.4 − + 0.7 − + 0.7 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.8 + 0.1
 Long-term lending
2002         Q2 + 6.9 + 3.7 + 5.0 + 3.4 + 1.5 + 0.5 + 0.4 − 0.8 + 0.4 − 0.4 − 1.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.7
         Q3 + 8.7 + 4.8 + 6.2 + 3.6 + 2.7 + 0.9 − 0.2 − 1.5 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.5
         Q4 + 9.4 + 4.3 + 6.4 + 3.0 + 3.5 + 1.5 − 0.7 − 1.5 + 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.6
2003         Q1 − 1.0 − 0.4 + 1.2 + 0.4 + 0.9 − 4.1 − 1.2 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 1.0 − 1.6 + 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.4
         Q2 + 5.3 + 0.7 + 4.6 + 2.7 + 2.0 − 1.8 − 1.6 − 1.1 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.3
*Excluding lending by foreign branches. Breakdown of lending by building always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent alterations, which will
and loan associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical alterations appear in the following Monthly Report , are not specially marked. —
have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest date are 1Excluding loans on a trust basis. —2Including quarrying. —3Including
32*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
IV Banks
    
 
  
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which of which
Debit
balanceson wage,
Other Lending salaryreal to self- Lending and of which
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans  
5 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises enterprises persons  4 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
700.8 162.3 46.8 183.1 459.0 75.0 905.5 683.0 222.6 108.6 24.3 14.0 3.7 2000723.3 169.4 50.3 194.3 458.6 74.7 926.7 704.3 222.4 110.7 22.9 14.1 3.5 2001
720.9 169.4 48.8 197.9 456.1 74.7 932.5 710.8 221.7 112.3 22.7 14.1 3.5 2002          June
721.9 171.1 47.8 199.8 453.5 74.0 942.1 716.4 225.8 114.6 23.9 14.5 3.4          Sep 729.2 165.0 50.2 207.2 451.8 72.4 949.5 725.1 224.3 114.3 23.0 14.4 3.5          Dec 
721.1 163.6 48.6 206.4 448.1 72.9 950.5 725.0 225.4 115.5 22.1 14.3 3.5 2003          Mar 
719.1 163.2 48.5 206.8 444.1 71.9 958.8 729.0 229.8 114.2 22.7 14.2 3.5          June
Short-term lending
122.1 19.6 18.1 30.0 57.1 16.2 52.6 5.2 47.4 2.3 24.3 1.2 0.0 2000
130.1 21.6 20.4 34.1 56.0 15.8 50.3 5.3 45.0 2.8 22.9 1.4 0.0 2001
122.6 20.8 18.2 32.5 54.8 16.3 48.2 4.9 43.2 2.5 22.7 1.3 0.0 2002          June
121.0 20.9 17.3 33.0 53.8 16.1 49.2 5.0 44.2 2.5 23.9 1.7 0.0          Sep 123.3 19.8 19.1 34.7 53.8 14.8 48.5 5.2 43.3 2.4 23.0 1.7 0.0          Dec 
117.3 19.0 18.0 33.5 52.2 15.3 46.2 4.9 41.3 2.3 22.1 1.7 0.0 2003          Mar 
115.9 18.7 17.9 33.6 51.4 15.0 46.8 5.0 41.7 2.3 22.7 1.7 0.0          June
Medium-term lending
61.4 6.8 6.3 13.6 33.1 5.5 72.2 26.4 45.8 33.0 − 0.6 0.1 2000
61.9 6.7 6.5 14.7 31.2 5.3 70.5 25.0 45.4 33.4 − 0.6 0.1 2001
63.2 6.7 6.9 15.4 31.6 5.0 69.7 24.2 45.5 34.1 − 0.6 0.1 2002          June
62.6 6.6 6.6 15.9 31.3 4.9 70.5 24.1 46.4 35.0 − 0.6 0.1          Sep 
63.2 6.2 7.2 16.7 31.2 4.8 71.1 24.7 46.4 35.3 − 0.5 0.1          Dec 
63.5 6.1 6.7 17.8 31.4 4.8 71.3 24.5 46.9 36.1 − 0.5 0.1 2003          Mar 
62.5 6.1 6.3 17.6 31.0 4.7 72.0 25.4 46.6 36.4 − 0.5 0.1          June
Long-term lending
517.3 135.9 22.5 139.5 368.7 53.2 780.8 651.4 129.4 73.3 − 12.2 3.6 2000
531.3 141.1 23.4 145.6 371.3 53.7 806.0 674.0 132.0 74.4 − 12.1 3.5 2001
535.1 142.0 23.6 150.0 369.6 53.4 814.7 681.7 132.9 75.7 − 12.2 3.4 2002          June
538.3 143.5 24.0 150.9 368.3 53.0 822.4 687.3 135.1 77.0 − 12.2 3.4          Sep 
542.8 139.0 24.0 155.8 366.8 52.8 829.8 695.3 134.6 76.6 − 12.1 3.4          Dec 
540.3 138.5 23.9 155.1 364.4 52.8 832.9 695.7 137.3 77.2 − 12.0 3.4 2003          Mar 
540.7 138.4 24.3 155.6 361.8 52.2 840.1 698.6 141.5 75.5 − 12.0 3.4          June
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
+ 1.0 + 0.6 − 0.5 + 2.3 − 0.7 − 0.3 + 6.3 + 4.2 + 2.2 + 1.6 + 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.0 2002          Q2
+ 1.0 + 1.3 − 0.2 + 2.2 − 2.1 − 0.7 + 9.6 + 6.4 + 3.3 + 2.1 + 1.2 + 0.4 − 0.0          Q3
+ 6.1 − 2.2 + 2.4 + 4.8 − 1.5 − 1.7 + 7.3 + 7.1 + 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.9 − 0.1 + 0.0          Q4
− 7.4 − 1.3 − 1.6 − 0.2 − 3.8 − 0.2 + 1.0 + 1.9 − 0.9 + 1.8 − 1.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 2003          Q1
− 2.2 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 3.6 − 1.0 + 8.4 + 6.9 + 1.5 + 1.2 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0          Q2
Short-term lending
− 1.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.0 2002          Q2
− 1.6 + 0.1 − 1.0 + 0.5 − 0.9 − 0.2 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 1.2 + 0.4 + 0.0          Q3
+ 2.2 − 1.2 + 1.8 + 1.6 − 0.1 − 1.3 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.0          Q4
− 5.9 − 0.8 − 1.0 − 1.2 − 1.6 + 0.5 − 2.3 − 0.3 − 2.0 − 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 2003          Q1
− 1.4 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.3 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0          Q2
Medium-term lending
+ 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.2 − + 0.0 − 0.0 2002          Q2
− 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 1.0 −− 0.0 − 0.0          Q3
− 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.6 + 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 −− 0.0 + 0.0          Q4
− 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.4 + 0.8 −− 0.0 + 0.0 2003          Q1
− 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.3 − + 0.0 + 0.0          Q2
Long-term lending
+ 1.6 + 0.6 − 0.2 + 2.5 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 6.3 + 4.6 + 1.7 + 1.3 − + 0.1 − 0.0 2002          Q2
+ 3.2 + 1.2 + 1.0 + 1.4 − 1.0 − 0.3 + 7.8 + 6.4 + 1.4 + 1.1 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q3
+ 4.0 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 2.7 − 1.0 − 0.3 + 8.1 + 7.1 + 1.0 + 0.4 −− 0.1 + 0.0          Q4
− 0.7 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 2.2 − 0.6 + 3.2 + 2.4 + 0.7 + 1.1 −− 0.1 + 0.0 2003          Q1
+ 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.5 − 2.7 − 0.6 + 7.1 + 6.3 + 0.8 + 0.9 −− 0.0 − 0.0          Q2
the maintenance and repair of motor vehicles and durable consumer   
goods. —4Including sole proprietors. —5Excluding mortgage loans and   
housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit.  
33*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
   
 5  billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Included Subordinated
 liabilities in time
for up for up (excluding deposits:to and to and for more Bank negotiable liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  
4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month*
 
2000 1,945.8 443.4 819.9 274.7 545.2 9.0 536.2 573.5 109.0 42.1 25.9 −
2001 2,034.0 526.4 827.0 268.7 558.3 10.3 548.0 574.5 106.0 43.3 26.2 3.12002 2,085.9 575.6 830.6 258.3 572.3 8.8 563.5 575.3 104.4 42.1 27.9 1.5
2002         July 2,016.2 531.6 821.1 256.3 564.9 8.5 556.4 557.5 106.0 41.6 26.9 1.5
         Aug 2,013.9 527.2 823.0 259.4 563.6 8.5 555.2 557.8 105.9 41.6 27.1 2.0         Sep 2,025.0 540.8 820.6 257.8 562.8 8.4 554.3 558.3 105.3 41.6 27.5 6.7
         Oct 2,037.6 543.1 829.8 264.2 565.6 8.5 557.1 559.7 105.0 41.6 27.7 7.2
         Nov 2,062.1 572.4 822.6 254.0 568.7 8.7 560.0 562.4 104.7 41.5 27.9 3.0         Dec 2,085.9 575.6 830.6 258.3 572.3 8.8 563.5 575.3 104.4 42.1 27.9 1.5
2003         Jan 2,076.4 565.2 830.3 255.7 574.5 8.6 565.9 577.4 103.5 42.1 28.0 3.5
         Feb 2,084.6 571.6 830.0 253.5 576.6 8.3 568.3 579.2 103.7 41.9 29.0 4.1         Mar 2,089.6 578.9 828.4 249.9 578.5 8.5 570.0 579.3 103.0 42.1 28.9 5.2
         Apr 2,094.8 586.3 828.2 249.5 578.7 8.2 570.5 577.9 102.4 41.8 28.9 5.6
         May 2,101.9 591.7 831.2 253.9 577.2 8.1 569.2 577.1 101.9 41.7 29.3 3.8         June 2,109.6 608.9 822.7 245.9 576.8 8.0 568.8 576.7 101.3 41.8 29.8 5.7
Changes*
2001 + 88.5 + 82.3 + 8.1 − 6.0 + 14.1 + 1.3 + 12.8 + 1.1 −2.9 + 1.0 + 0.3 + 3.1
2002 + 51.7 + 48.4 + 4.1 −10.2 + 14.3 − 1.5 + 15.8 + 0.8 −1.6 − 1.1 + 1.8 − 1.6
2002         July − 5.3 − 4.7 + 0.5 − 0.3 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.8 − 1.4 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.1
         Aug − 2.3 − 4.4 + 1.9 + 3.1 − 1.2 + 0.0 − 1.2 + 0.3 −0.1 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.5
         Sep + 10.9 + 13.5 − 2.6 − 1.7 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.8 + 0.5 −0.5 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 4.7
         Oct + 12.8 + 2.3 + 9.5 + 6.4 + 3.1 + 0.1 + 3.0 + 1.4 −0.3 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.5
         Nov + 24.5 + 29.3 − 7.2 −10.3 + 3.1 + 0.2 + 2.9 + 2.7 −0.3 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 4.3
         Dec + 23.8 + 3.3 + 8.0 + 4.4 + 3.6 + 0.1 + 3.5 + 12.8 −0.3 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 1.5
2003         Jan − 9.5 − 10.4 − 0.3 − 2.6 + 2.3 − 0.1 + 2.4 + 2.1 −0.9 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 2.0
         Feb + 7.6 + 6.4 − 0.3 − 2.3 + 2.0 − 0.4 + 2.4 + 1.8 −0.4 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.7
         Mar + 5.1 + 7.3 − 1.6 − 3.6 + 2.0 + 0.3 + 1.7 + 0.1 −0.7 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 1.1
         Apr + 5.1 + 7.4 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.6 − 1.4 −0.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.4
         May + 7.1 + 5.4 + 3.0 + 4.5 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 1.4 − 0.8 −0.5 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 1.9
         June + 7.7 + 17.2 − 8.5 − 8.1 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.4 −0.6 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 1.9
Domestic public authorities End of year or month*
2000 149.1 16.6 127.7 62.1 65.5 1.2 64.4 2.7 2.1 36.0 1.4 −
2001 122.7 16.1 102.3 37.7 64.5 1.2 63.3 2.3 2.1 36.6 1.4 −
2002 113.9 16.6 93.3 30.9 62.4 0.9 61.5 2.1 1.9 36.3 1.2 −
2002         July 116.6 14.3 98.2 34.0 64.2 1.0 63.3 2.0 2.1 35.6 1.3 −
         Aug 115.4 13.4 97.8 33.5 64.4 1.0 63.4 2.0 2.1 35.6 1.3 −
         Sep 114.3 13.6 96.6 33.7 62.9 0.8 62.1 2.0 2.1 35.5 1.3 −
         Oct 109.7 13.8 91.9 29.0 62.9 0.8 62.1 2.0 2.0 35.6 1.3 −
         Nov 109.6 13.6 92.0 29.0 63.0 0.8 62.1 2.0 2.0 35.6 1.3 −
         Dec 113.9 16.6 93.3 30.9 62.4 0.9 61.5 2.1 1.9 36.3 1.2 −
2003         Jan 109.2 13.5 91.8 29.4 62.4 0.9 61.5 2.0 1.9 36.3 1.1 −
         Feb 111.1 15.2 92.0 30.0 61.9 0.6 61.4 2.0 1.8 36.2 1.1 −
         Mar 109.9 15.0 91.1 30.5 60.6 0.5 60.0 2.0 1.8 36.3 1.1 −
         Apr 107.6 14.5 89.4 29.1 60.3 0.6 59.8 1.9 1.8 36.3 1.1 −
         May 111.4 15.0 92.7 32.6 60.0 0.5 59.5 1.9 1.8 36.2 1.1 −
         June 114.5 18.1 92.6 32.6 60.1 0.5 59.5 1.9 1.7 36.2 1.1 −
Changes*
2001 − 26.4 − 0.6 − 25.4 −24.4 − 1.0 + 0.0 − 1.1 − 0.5 −0.0 + 0.7 − 0.0 −
2002 − 8.6 + 0.5 − 8.7 − 6.6 − 2.1 − 0.3 − 1.8 − 0.2 −0.2 − 0.3 − 0.2 −
2002         July − 1.9 − 0.2 − 1.7 − 1.7 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.0 −
         Aug − 1.2 − 0.9 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.2 − + 0.2 + 0.1 −0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 −
         Sep − 1.1 + 0.2 − 1.2 + 0.2 − 1.4 − 0.1 − 1.3 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 −
         Oct − 4.6 + 0.2 − 4.7 − 4.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 −0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 −
         Nov − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 −
         Dec + 4.3 + 3.0 + 1.3 + 1.8 − 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.1 −0.1 + 0.7 − 0.1 −
2003         Jan − 4.7 − 3.1 − 1.5 − 1.4 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 −0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 −
         Feb + 1.9 + 1.7 + 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 −0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 −
         Mar − 1.2 − 0.2 − 0.9 + 0.5 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 1.4 − 0.0 −0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 −
         Apr − 2.3 − 0.5 − 1.7 − 1.4 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 −0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −
         May + 3.8 + 0.5 + 3.3 + 3.5 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.0 −0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 −
         June + 3.1 + 3.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 −
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly
the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as Report , are not specially marked. —1Including subordinated liabilities and
34*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany* (cont ’d)
   
 5  billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Included Subordinated
 liabilities in time
for up for up (excluding deposits:to and to and for more Bank negotiable liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  
4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic enterprises and resident individuals End of year or month*
 
2000 1,796.7 426.8 692.2 212.6 479.6 7.8 471.8 570.8 106.9 6.1 24.5 −
2001 1,911.3 510.4 724.7 231.0 493.7 9.1 484.6 572.3 103.9 6.6 24.8 3.12002 1,972.0 559.0 737.3 227.5 509.8 7.9 502.0 573.2 102.5 5.8 26.6 1.5
2002         July 1,899.6 517.3 722.9 222.3 500.6 7.5 493.1 555.5 103.8 6.0 25.6 1.5
         Aug 1,898.5 513.8 725.2 225.9 499.3 7.5 491.7 555.8 103.8 6.0 25.8 2.0         Sep 1,910.7 527.3 724.0 224.1 499.8 7.6 492.2 556.3 103.2 6.1 26.2 6.7
         Oct 1,927.9 529.3 737.9 235.2 502.7 7.7 495.0 557.7 103.0 5.9 26.3 7.2
         Nov 1,952.5 558.8 730.6 224.9 505.7 7.8 497.9 560.5 102.7 5.9 26.5 3.0         Dec 1,972.0 559.0 737.3 227.5 509.8 7.9 502.0 573.2 102.5 5.8 26.6 1.5
2003         Jan 1,967.2 551.7 738.5 226.3 512.2 7.8 504.4 575.4 101.6 5.8 26.9 3.5
         Feb 1,973.5 556.4 738.1 223.4 514.6 7.7 506.9 577.2 101.9 5.7 27.8 4.1         Mar 1,979.8 563.9 737.3 219.4 518.0 8.0 510.0 577.3 101.2 5.8 27.8 5.2
         Apr 1,987.2 571.8 738.8 220.4 518.4 7.6 510.8 575.9 100.6 5.5 27.8 5.6
         May 1,990.5 576.7 738.5 221.3 517.2 7.5 509.7 575.1 100.1 5.5 28.1 3.8         June 1,995.2 590.8 730.0 213.3 516.7 7.5 509.2 574.8 99.6 5.5 28.7 5.7
Changes*
2001 + 115.0 + 82.9 + 33.5 + 18.4 + 15.1 + 1.3 + 13.8 + 1.5 −2.9 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 3.1
2002 + 60.3 + 47.9 + 12.8 − 3.6 + 16.4 − 1.2 + 17.5 + 1.0 −1.4 − 0.8 + 2.0 − 1.6
2002         July − 3.4 − 4.5 + 2.2 + 1.4 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 1.3 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.1
         Aug − 1.1 − 3.5 + 2.3 + 3.6 − 1.4 + 0.0 − 1.4 + 0.2 −0.1 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.5
         Sep + 12.0 + 13.3 − 1.4 − 1.9 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.5 + 0.5 −0.5 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 4.7
         Oct + 17.4 + 2.0 + 14.2 + 11.1 + 3.1 + 0.1 + 3.0 + 1.4 −0.2 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.5
         Nov + 24.6 + 29.5 − 7.3 −10.3 + 3.1 + 0.2 + 2.9 + 2.7 −0.3 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 4.3
         Dec + 19.5 + 0.3 + 6.7 + 2.6 + 4.1 + 0.0 + 4.1 + 12.7 −0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 1.5
2003         Jan − 4.8 − 7.3 + 1.2 − 1.2 + 2.4 − 0.1 + 2.4 + 2.2 −0.9 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 2.0
         Feb + 5.7 + 4.6 − 0.4 − 2.9 + 2.4 − 0.1 + 2.5 + 1.8 −0.3 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.7
         Mar + 6.3 + 7.5 − 0.7 − 4.1 + 3.3 + 0.3 + 3.1 + 0.1 −0.7 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 1.1
         Apr + 7.4 + 7.9 + 1.5 + 1.0 + 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.8 − 1.4 −0.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.4
         May + 3.3 + 4.9 − 0.3 + 0.9 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 1.1 − 0.8 −0.5 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 1.9
         June + 4.6 + 14.0 − 8.5 − 8.0 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.4 −0.5 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 1.9
of which:  Domestic enterprises End of year or month*
2000 635.1 158.1 447.6 89.0 358.5 2.7 355.8 5.2 24.2 5.9 14.1 −
2001 668.4 180.0 461.3 91.7 369.6 2.9 366.8 4.3 22.8 6.4 14.3 3.12002 700.4 194.6 479.4 99.2 380.2 1.5 378.7 4.4 22.0 5.6 15.8 1.5
2002         July 666.4 171.3 468.4 92.6 375.8 1.4 374.4 4.4 22.4 5.8 15.0 1.5
         Aug 663.0 166.4 469.8 95.6 374.2 1.4 372.8 4.4 22.4 5.8 15.1 2.0         Sep 676.4 180.1 469.7 95.3 374.4 1.4 373.0 4.4 22.2 5.8 15.5 6.7
         Oct 690.0 180.7 482.7 105.6 377.1 1.5 375.7 4.3 22.2 5.7 15.5 7.2
         Nov 692.6 189.0 476.9 97.4 379.5 1.6 378.0 4.3 22.3 5.7 15.7 3.0         Dec 700.4 194.6 479.4 99.2 380.2 1.5 378.7 4.4 22.0 5.6 15.8 1.5
2003         Jan 692.7 185.3 480.7 98.5 382.2 1.5 380.6 4.4 22.3 5.6 16.3 3.5
         Feb 692.3 183.6 481.8 97.7 384.1 1.5 382.7 4.4 22.5 5.5 16.5 4.1         Mar 695.4 186.2 482.3 95.4 386.9 1.8 385.2 4.4 22.5 5.6 16.5 5.2
         Apr 704.6 191.8 486.0 98.8 387.2 1.4 385.8 4.4 22.5 5.3 16.4 5.6
         May 705.7 192.3 486.3 100.2 386.1 1.4 384.7 4.6 22.4 5.2 16.7 3.8         June 710.6 202.0 481.6 96.1 385.5 1.4 384.1 4.7 22.4 5.3 17.2 5.7
Changes*
2001 + 33.6 + 21.2 + 14.7 + 2.6 + 12.1 + 0.1 + 11.9 − 0.9 −1.3 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 3.1
2002 + 31.1 + 13.4 + 18.3 + 7.4 + 10.9 − 1.3 + 12.2 + 0.1 −0.7 − 0.8 + 1.6 − 1.6
2002         July + 1.2 − 1.4 + 2.7 + 1.7 + 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.9 + 0.1 −0.2 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1
         Aug − 3.5 − 4.9 + 1.4 + 3.0 − 1.5 + 0.0 − 1.5 + 0.0 −0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.5
         Sep + 12.8 + 13.2 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.0 −0.2 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 4.7
         Oct + 13.8 + 0.6 + 13.2 + 10.3 + 2.9 + 0.1 + 2.9 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.5
         Nov + 2.6 + 8.3 − 5.8 − 8.2 + 2.4 + 0.1 + 2.3 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 4.3
         Dec + 7.9 + 5.5 + 2.5 + 1.8 + 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.7 + 0.1 −0.3 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 1.5
2003         Jan − 7.7 − 9.2 + 1.3 − 0.7 + 2.0 − 0.0 + 2.0 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 2.0
         Feb − 0.4 − 1.7 + 1.1 − 0.8 + 2.0 − 0.0 + 2.0 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.7
         Mar + 3.1 + 2.6 + 0.5 − 2.3 + 2.8 + 0.3 + 2.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 1.1
         Apr + 9.2 + 5.6 + 3.6 + 3.3 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.6 + 0.0 −0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.4
         May + 1.1 + 0.5 + 0.4 + 1.5 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 1.1 + 0.2 −0.0 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 1.9
         June + 4.9 + 9.6 − 4.7 − 4.2 − 0.6 −− 0.6 + 0.0 −0.1 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 1.9
liabilities arising from registered debt securities. —1Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). —4Including
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). —3Excluding deposits liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
35*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
IV Banks
 
8 Deposits of resident individuals and domestic non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
   
 5  billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Depositsof resident Resident individuals Resident individualsindividualsanddomestic Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month*
 
2000 1,161.5 268.7 259.3 47.7 176.0 35.6 9.4 244.6 225.5 34.9 168.9 21.72001 1,242.9 330.4 320.1 55.8 220.9 43.4 10.2 263.4 242.9 36.3 182.4 24.22002 1,271.6 364.5 352.8 61.3 241.4 50.0 11.7 257.9 238.3 35.2 180.5 22.6
2003         Jan 1,274.5 366.4 354.6 62.9 241.1 50.6 11.8 257.8 238.6 35.5 180.5 22.6
         Feb 1,281.2 372.8 360.5 63.6 245.0 51.9 12.2 256.2 237.2 35.1 179.9 22.2         Mar 1,284.4 377.7 365.7 62.7 250.1 52.9 12.1 255.0 235.0 33.9 179.2 21.9
         Apr 1,282.6 380.0 367.9 64.4 250.1 53.4 12.1 252.8 233.5 33.5 178.5 21.5
         May 1,284.8 384.4 372.0 65.0 252.9 54.2 12.4 252.2 232.2 33.3 177.7 21.2         June 1,284.6 388.8 375.5 64.0 256.6 54.9 13.3 248.5 228.9 32.1 176.1 20.7
Changes*
2001 + 81.3 + 61.7 + 60.8 + 8.1 + 45.0 + 7.8 + 0.8 + 18.8 + 17.4 + 1.4 + 13.5 + 2.52002 + 29.2 + 34.5 + 33.1 + 5.6 + 22.4 + 5.1 + 1.5 − 5.5 − 4.2 −1.0 −1.1 −2.1
2003         Jan + 2.9 + 1.9 + 1.8 + 1.6 − 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.3 −0.0 −0.0
         Feb + 6.1 + 6.4 + 6.0 + 0.7 + 3.9 + 1.4 + 0.4 − 1.6 − 1.4 −0.4 −0.6 −0.4
         Mar + 3.2 + 5.0 + 5.1 − 1.0 + 5.2 + 0.9 −0.1 − 1.2 − 2.3 −1.3 −0.7 −0.3
         Apr −1.8 + 2.3 + 2.3 + 1.7 − 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.0 − 2.2 − 1.5 −0.3 −0.7 −0.4
         May + 2.3 + 4.4 + 4.1 + 0.6 + 2.8 + 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.6 − 1.2 −0.3 −0.7 −0.2
         June −0.2 + 4.4 + 3.5 − 0.9 + 3.7 + 0.7 + 0.9 − 3.7 − 3.3 −1.2 −1.7 −0.5
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the Report , are not specially marked. —1Including subordinated liabilities and
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as liabilities arising from registered debt securities. —2Including deposits
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following MonthlyDEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
 
  
9 Deposits of domestic public authorities at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group
*
 
 5  billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 Land  governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
Domestic for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
public to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary authorities,
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans
End of year or month*
 
2000 149.1 67.6 2.1 22.6 42.8 0.0 12.5 20.3 3.1 2.1 15.0 0.1 23.32001 122.7 46.9 1.6 2.7 42.7 0.0 13.2 19.2 2.7 1.8 14.6 0.1 23.22002 113.9 45.6 0.9 3.6 41.1 0.0 13.5 18.9 2.5 1.4 14.9 0.1 22.6
2003         Jan 109.2 45.2 0.9 2.9 41.4 0.0 13.4 18.8 2.3 1.9 14.5 0.1 22.7
         Feb 111.1 45.1 0.6 3.1 41.3 0.0 13.3 20.4 3.1 2.8 14.4 0.1 22.7         Mar 109.9 45.2 0.6 4.5 40.0 0.0 13.4 20.7 3.4 2.8 14.4 0.1 22.6
         Apr 107.6 44.9 0.6 4.5 39.9 0.0 13.4 19.4 2.7 2.2 14.4 0.1 22.6
         May 111.4 44.4 0.4 4.4 39.6 0.0 13.4 19.8 3.1 2.3 14.4 0.1 22.6         June 114.5 44.6 0.8 4.8 39.0 0.0 13.5 23.5 5.3 3.8 14.3 0.1 22.5
Changes*
2001 −26.4 −20.4 −0.4 −19.9 −0.1 −0.0 + 0.5 −1.2 −0.6 −0.2 −0.4 + 0.0 + 0.1
2002 −8.6 −1.3 −0.6 + 0.9 −1.6 + 0.0 + 0.3 −0.3 −0.1 −0.4 + 0.3 −0.0 −0.6
2003         Jan −4.7 −0.4 −0.0 −0.6 + 0.3 −0.0 −0.1 −0.1 −0.2 + 0.5 −0.4 + 0.0 + 0.1
         Feb + 1.9 −0.1 −0.3 + 0.2 −0.1 + 0.0 −0.1 + 1.6 + 0.8 + 0.9 −0.1 −0.0 −0.0
         Mar −1.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 1.4 −1.3 −− 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 −0.0 −0.1
         Apr −2.3 −0.3 −0.1 −0.0 −0.2 −− 0.0 −1.3 −0.6 −0.6 −0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0
         May + 3.8 −0.5 −0.1 −0.1 −0.2 −− 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 −− 0.1
         June + 3.1 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.4 −0.6 −0.0 + 0.1 + 3.7 + 2.2 + 1.5 −0.1 + 0.0 −0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and which are included in ”Enterprises ”. Statistical breaks have been eliminated
its successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, east German Railways from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regardedand Federal Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the followingPost AG and Deutsche Telekom AG, and of publicly-owned enterprises,
36*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
IV Banks
     
 
 Savings deposits  3  Memo item
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year  2 
Included Subordinated
of which liabilities in time
Domestic Domestic (excluding deposits:
up to and up to and Bank negotiable liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arisingtions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  
4 loans from repos   Period individuals securities)  5 
End of year or month*
 
19.2 123.6 121.1 5.1 116.0 565.5 555.8 9.7 82.7 0.2 10.4 −2000
20.6 139.3 124.1 6.2 117.9 568.0 558.6 9.4 81.1 0.2 10.5 −2001
19.6 128.3 129.6 6.3 123.3 568.8 559.9 8.9 80.4 0.2 10.8 −2002
19.2 127.8 130.0 6.2 123.8 571.0 562.0 9.0 79.3 0.2 10.6 −2003         Jan 
19.0 125.8 130.5 6.2 124.3 572.8 563.7 9.1 79.4 0.2 11.3 −         Feb 
20.0 124.0 131.0 6.2 124.8 572.9 563.8 9.1 78.7 0.2 11.3 −         Mar 
19.4 121.6 131.2 6.2 125.0 571.5 562.4 9.1 78.2 0.2 11.4 −         Apr 
20.0 121.1 131.1 6.2 125.0 570.5 561.4 9.1 77.7 0.2 11.4 −         May
19.6 117.3 131.2 6.1 125.1 570.1 560.9 9.2 77.2 0.2 11.5 −         June
Changes*
+ 1.4 + 15.8 + 3.0 + 1.1 + 1.9 + 2.5 + 2.8 −0.3 −1.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 2001
− 1.3 −10.9 + 5.4 + 0.1 + 5.3 + 0.9 + 1.3 −0.5 −0.7 −0.0 + 0.3 −2002
− 0.4 − 0.5 + 0.4 −0.1 + 0.5 + 2.2 + 2.1 + 0.0 −1.1 + 0.0 −0.2 −2003         Jan 
− 0.2 − 2.0 + 0.5 −0.0 + 0.5 + 1.8 + 1.7 + 0.1 −0.5 + 0.0 + 0.1 −         Feb 
+ 1.0 − 1.8 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 −0.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 −         Mar 
− 0.6 − 2.3 + 0.2 −0.1 + 0.2 − 1.4 − 1.4 + 0.0 −0.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 −         Apr 
+ 0.6 − 0.6 −0.1 −0.0 −0.1 − 1.0 − 1.0 + 0.0 −0.5 + 0.0 + 0.0 −         May
− 0.4 − 3.8 + 0.1 −0.0 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.5 + 0.1 −0.5 + 0.0 + 0.1 −         June
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). —3Excluding deposits liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. —5Included in
under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). —4Including time deposits. DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
 
   
 
 
 
Local authorities and local authority associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans   Period
End of year or month*
 
30.2 8.9 15.7 2.0 3.6 0.1 31.1 2.5 21.7 5.7 1.2 0.1 200027.8 9.2 13.8 1.8 3.1 0.2 28.7 2.7 19.5 5.4 1.1 0.1 200127.6 10.5 12.2 2.0 3.0 0.2 21.7 2.7 13.7 4.5 0.9 0.1 2002
24.0 7.9 11.2 2.0 2.9 0.2 21.1 2.4 13.4 4.5 0.8 0.1 2003          Jan 
25.2 9.1 11.2 2.0 2.9 0.2 20.3 2.4 12.9 4.2 0.8 0.1          Feb 24.1 8.3 11.1 1.8 2.9 0.2 19.9 2.7 12.2 4.2 0.8 0.0          Mar 
23.6 8.3 10.6 1.8 2.8 0.2 19.7 2.9 11.8 4.2 0.8 0.0          Apr 
24.8 9.0 11.1 1.8 2.8 0.2 22.3 2.5 14.9 4.2 0.8 0.0          May23.4 8.5 10.3 1.8 2.8 0.2 22.9 3.6 13.7 4.9 0.8 0.0          June
Changes*
−2.4 + 0.2 −2.0 −0.2 −0.4 + 0.0 −2.4 + 0.2 −2.3 −0.3 −0.0 −0.0 2001
+ 0.0 + 1.3 −1.4 + 0.2 −0.1 + 0.0 −7.0 −0.0 −5.7 −1.0 −0.3 −0.0 2002
−3.6 −2.6 −0.9 −0.0 −0.1 + 0.0 −0.6 −0.3 −0.3 + 0.0 −0.0 −2003         Jan 
+ 1.1 + 1.2 −0.1 −0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −0.8 + 0.0 −0.5 −0.3 −0.0 −         Feb 
−1.1 −0.8 −0.1 −0.1 −0.1 −− 0.5 + 0.3 −0.7 + 0.0 −0.0 −0.0          Mar 
−0.5 −0.0 −0.4 + 0.0 −0.1 + 0.0 −0.1 + 0.2 −0.4 + 0.0 −0.0 −0.0          Apr 
+ 1.2 + 0.8 + 0.5 −− 0.0 −0.0 + 2.6 −0.4 + 3.1 −0.1 + 0.0 −         May
−1.4 −0.5 −0.8 −0.0 −0.0 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 1.1 −1.3 + 0.7 + 0.0 −0.0          June
Monthly Report , are not specially marked. —1Federal Railways Fund, liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. —3Including
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special deposits under savings and loan contracts. —4Excluding deposits under
Fund, ”German Unity ”Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. —2Including savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
37*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
IV Banks
 
10 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs)*
  
 5  billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at three months ’ at more than three Memo
notice months ’ notice item of which
Interest With
of which of which of which credited maturities
Special Special At three on of moresavings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months ’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities  
2 facilities  2 non-banks
End of year or month*
 
2000 585.2 573.5 450.5 309.0 123.0 104.4 11.7 8.3 19.3 115.9 109.0 94.4 6.82001 586.5 574.5 461.9 327.2 112.7 97.2 12.0 8.8 19.9 112.8 106.0 87.2 6.82002 586.2 575.3 472.8 343.5 102.4 88.5 10.9 8.1 17.6 111.3 104.4 86.3 6.9
2003         Feb 590.0 579.2 479.9 349.3 99.3 86.5 10.8 8.1 0.5 110.5 103.7 86.1 6.8
         Mar 590.0 579.3 481.6 350.9 97.7 85.0 10.8 8.1 0.5 109.8 103.0 85.5 6.8
         Apr 588.5 577.9 482.7 352.0 95.2 82.6 10.7 8.1 0.4 109.1 102.4 85.2 6.7
         May 587.7 577.1 483.4 352.9 93.7 81.1 10.6 8.1 0.4 108.6 101.9 84.9 6.7         June 587.2 576.7 484.4 352.9 92.3 79.6 10.5 8.1 0.3 108.1 101.3 84.6 6.7
Changes*
2001 + 1.3 + 1.1 + 11.4 + 15.5 −10.4 −7.2 + 0.3 + 0.5 . −2.9 −2.9 −7.1 −0.0
2002 −0.3 + 0.8 + 11.0 + 16.4 −10.2 −8.7 −1.1 −0.7 . −1.5 −1.6 −0.9 + 0.1
2003         Feb + 1.8 + 1.8 + 3.0 + 2.7 −1.2 −1.2 −0.1 + 0.0 . −0.4 −0.4 −0.1 −0.0
         Mar + 0.0 + 0.1 + 1.7 + 1.6 −1.6 −1.5 −0.1 + 0.0 . −0.7 −0.7 −0.6 −0.0
         Apr −1.5 −1.4 + 1.1 + 1.1 −2.5 −2.4 −0.1 −0.0 . −0.7 −0.6 −0.3 −0.0
         May −0.9 −0.8 + 0.7 + 0.9 −1.5 −1.5 −0.1 −0.0 . −0.5 −0.5 −0.3 −0.0
         June −0.4 −0.4 + 1.0 −0.0 −1.4 −1.4 −0.1 −0.0 . −0.5 −0.6 −0.3 + 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the loan contracts, which are classified as time deposits. —2Savings deposits
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the minimum or basic rate ofprovisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly interest. —3Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
Report , are not specially marked. —1Excluding deposits under savings and securities. 
 
   
11 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany
*
 
 5  billion
Non-negotiable bearer debt securities
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper and money market paper  6 
of which of which
with maturities of Subordinated
with maturities of
Certifi- more more non-
Floating Zero Foreign cates up to and more up to and more than 1 year than 1 year negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of including including than including including than debt debt
Period Total  1 bonds  2 deposit 1 year  1 Total 1 year 2 years 2 years bonds  2,3 bonds  4,5 2 years  1 2 years  1 securities securities
End of year or month*)
 
2000 1,412.5 283.1 22.1 128.2 19.7 87.9 62.7 1,261.9 2.7 0.4 1.0 1.3 38.3 2.42001 1,472.3 324.0 16.3 144.1 17.6 46.5 124.9 1,300.9 5.8 3.7 1.0 1.2 43.3 2.42002 1,462.9 339.2 16.1 159.5 34.7 62.3 120.1 1,280.5 9.9 7.8 0.7 1.3 42.4 2.3
2003         Feb 1,486.9 332.2 21.7 174.5 47.7 89.8 115.0 1,282.2 2.1 0.2 0.7 1.3 40.0 2.8
         Mar 1,483.9 335.4 21.5 173.7 45.8 85.8 113.9 1,284.2 2.2 0.3 0.6 1.3 39.7 2.8
         Apr 1,480.0 336.1 21.1 171.6 44.8 82.7 111.0 1,286.4 4.6 2.8 0.6 1.3 39.1 2.9
         May 1,478.0 339.1 20.0 168.7 46.1 83.0 104.5 1,290.6 2.2 0.4 0.6 1.3 38.9 2.9         June 1,482.7 338.6 20.5 171.6 44.1 80.9 100.0 1,301.7 2.2 0.4 0.6 1.2 39.0 2.9
Changes*
2001 + 56.2 + 33.3 −5.5 + 15.9 −2.1 −41.4 + 61.7 + 35.9 + 3.2 + 3.4 −0.1 −0.1 + 5.0 + 0.0
2002 + 9.1 + 6.3 −4.5 + 12.1 + 16.2 + 14.2 + 4.6 − 9.7 + 4.8 + 4.9 −0.3 + 0.2 −1.9 −0.1
2003         Feb + 15.6 −2.2 + 4.6 + 6.0 + 7.3 + 13.3 − 0.9 + 3.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 −0.0 −0.0 −2.2 + 0.0
         Mar − 3.0 + 3.2 −0.2 −0.8 −2.0 −4.0 − 1.1 + 2.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 −0.0 −0.0 −0.3 −0.0
         Apr − 3.9 + 0.7 −0.5 −2.1 −0.9 −3.1 − 2.9 + 2.1 + 2.4 + 2.4 −0.0 −0.0 −0.6 + 0.0
         May − 2.0 −3.4 −1.1 −2.9 + 1.2 + 0.3 − 6.5 + 4.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 −0.0 + 0.0 −0.2 + 0.0
         June + 4.6 −0.5 + 0.5 + 2.9 −2.0 −2.1 − 4.5 + 11.2 −0.0 + 0.1 −0.0 −0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the 2Including debt securities denominated in foreign currencies. —3Issue
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as value when floated. —4Including floating rate notes and zero coupon
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly bonds denominated in foreign currencies. —5Bonds denominated in
Report , are not specially marked. —1Decreases in June 2002 caused by non-euro-area currencies. —6Non-negotiable bearer debt securities are
transition to net recording of debt securities outstanding (ie less own debt classified among bank savings bonds (see also Table IV.10, foo tnote 3). 
securities). The statistical break has been eliminated from the changes. —
38*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
IV  Banks
  
12  Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany*
  Interim statements
  
 5  billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs)  5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memo
bal- item ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer Newand Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- enteredof Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations total loans  
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month  8 loans)  1 paper)  4 serves)  7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2002 28 163.8 25.2 0.2 11.7 40.8 58.6 7.9 10.4 0.4 29.5 100.8 3.5 6.9 7.1 79.6
2003         Apr 28 165.1 26.1 0.1 11.0 39.8 59.6 8.1 11.0 0.4 28.4 102.3 3.5 7.1 7.2 8.2
         May 28 166.2 26.4 0.1 11.2 39.4 60.2 8.2 11.2 0.4 29.4 102.4 3.5 6.8 7.2 8.0         Jun 28 166.8 26.6 0.1 11.3 39.2 61.0 8.3 10.9 0.4 29.2 102.6 3.6 7.1 7.2 8.2
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2003         Apr 17 118.1 20.2 0.1 5.8 25.7 42.5 7.5 7.9 0.2 20.4 69.3 3.3 7.1 4.7 5.2
         May 17 119.1 20.3 0.1 6.0 25.4 43.0 7.5 8.0 0.2 21.1 69.4 3.4 6.8 4.7 5.3         Jun 17 119.6 20.5 0.1 6.1 25.3 43.7 7.6 7.7 0.3 20.9 69.6 3.4 7.1 4.7 5.4
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2003         Apr 11 47.0 5.9 0.1 5.2 14.1 17.1 0.7 3.1 0.1 8.1 33.0 0.1 − 2.5 2.9
         May 11 47.1 6.0 0.1 5.2 14.0 17.2 0.7 3.2 0.1 8.2 33.0 0.2 − 2.5 2.7
         Jun 11 47.2 6.1 0.1 5.2 13.9 17.3 0.7 3.2 0.1 8.3 33.0 0.2 − 2.5 2.9
Trends in building and loan association business
  
 5  billion
Changes in deposits Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans  10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings andments loan contracts loan contracts  
9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited interim deposits of which of which
on under Applied Applied and of
which of Memo Amounts deposits cancelled to settle- to settle- bridging
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which item paid into
savings savings and which interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housing
and and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonusesloan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts  
9 tions  11 ceived  12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2002 22.9 2.7 4.3 44.0 29.4 40.6 17.2 3.8 9.3 3.1 14.2 10.9 7.8 14.2 11.2 0.5
2003         Apr 2.5 0.0 0.5 5.2 3.2 4.1 1.8 0.5 0.9 0.4 1.4 12.2 8.3 1.2 0.1
         May 2.0 0.0 0.4 3.8 2.3 3.5 1.4 0.3 0.6 0.2 1.4 12.2 8.2 1.2 0.1         Jun 2.1 0.0 0.4 3.8 2.4 3.6 1.4 0.3 0.7 0.3 1.5 12.1 8.2 1.2 ... 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2003         Apr 1.6 0.0 0.3 3.8 2.2 3.0 1.3 0.4 0.6 0.3 1.1 7.6 4.4 0.8 0.1
         May 1.3 0.0 0.3 2.7 1.4 2.5 1.0 0.2 0.4 0.1 1.1 7.5 4.2 0.8 0.0         Jun 1.4 0.0 0.2 2.6 1.5 2.6 1.0 0.2 0.4 0.2 1.2 7.5 4.2 0.8 ... 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2003         Apr 0.9 0.0 0.2 1.4 1.0 1.0 0.5 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.2 4.6 4.0 0.4 0.0
         May 0.6 0.0 0.2 1.2 0.9 0.9 0.5 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.3 4.6 4.0 0.4 0.0         Jun 0.7 0.0 0.2 1.2 0.9 1.0 0.5 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.3 4.6 4.0 0.4 ... 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum contractedSubsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are count as new contracts. —9For disbursements of deposits under savings
not specially marked. —1Including postal giro account balances, claims on and loan contracts arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capital
building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt securities disbursed “.—10Including housing bonuses credited. —11Only allocations
and central bank credit balances. —2Loans under savings and loan accepted by the beneficiaries; including allocations applied to settlement of
contracts and interim and bridging loans. —3Including money market interim and bridging loans. —12The amounts already credited to the
paper and small amounts of other securities issued by banks. —4Including accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in “Amounts paid into
equalisation claims. —5Including liabilities to building and loan savings and loan accounts “and “Interest and repayments received on
associations. —6Including small amounts of savings deposits. —7Including building loans “. 
participation rights capital and fund for general banking risks. —8Total
39*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
IV  Banks
  
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs)*
    
 5  billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
Loans Credit  balances and loans
German   
banks to German
(MFIs)   non-banks
withforeign foreignbranches Money of which Money
branches  1 
and/or and/or market enter- to marketforeign foreign Balance paper, prises foreign paper,subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- and indi- non- secur- Other
Period diaries diaries total Total Total banks banks Total Total Total viduals banks ities  
2 assets ities 2,3 
Foreign  branches End of year or month*
  
2000 71 212 1,558.2 829.4 722.1 211.0 511.1 107.3 656.7 501.5 21.7 17.1 479.9 155.2 72.02001 68 216 1,689.3 870.6 761.6 213.6 548.0 109.0 744.9 549.0 20.6 17.2 528.4 195.9 73.92002 60 205 1,407.4 679.9 572.3 198.3 374.0 107.6 668.5 484.0 18.8 15.0 465.1 184.6 59.0
2002         Aug 62 210 1,577.0 764.1 642.8 203.2 439.5 121.3 756.6 569.7 18.4 14.8 551.3 186.9 56.3
         Sep 61 208 1,559.2 761.8 646.1 201.7 444.4 115.7 752.3 559.7 19.0 15.3 540.7 192.6 45.1
         Oct 59 203 1,568.0 758.9 643.9 210.0 433.9 115.0 746.0 550.5 18.7 15.0 531.8 195.5 63.1
         Nov 60 204 1,585.7 760.8 646.0 216.9 429.1 114.8 755.5 555.8 19.0 15.7 536.8 199.7 69.4         Dec 60 205 1,407.4 679.9 572.3 198.3 374.0 107.6 668.5 484.0 18.8 15.0 465.1 184.6 59.0
2003         Jan 60 206 1,465.8 725.4 622.8 202.5 420.3 102.6 680.1 496.3 18.3 15.2 478.0 183.8 60.4
         Feb 60 206 1,439.6 693.9 592.3 197.4 394.8 101.6 691.5 506.8 18.4 15.2 488.4 184.7 54.2         Mar 60 206 1,402.0 669.4 564.6 186.0 378.5 104.9 684.0 500.4 17.4 14.8 483.0 183.6 48.6
         Apr 59 205 1,429.4 659.8 553.6 192.2 361.4 106.2 720.2 535.3 18.1 15.5 517.2 184.9 49.5
         May 58 205 1,429.1 660.4 560.4 192.7 367.6 100.0 714.1 529.3 17.9 14.7 511.4 184.9 54.6
Changes*
2001 −3 + 4 + 99.1 + 24.8 + 26.1 + 2.3 + 23.8 −1.3 + 72.7 + 35.6 −1.1 −0.0 + 36.7 + 37.1 + 1.6
2002 −8 −11 −139.1 −133.4 −139.9 −15.4 −124.5 + 6.5 −3.6 −9.2 −1.9 −2.2 −7.3 + 5.7 −2.2
2002         Aug −− + 20.8 −10.9 −10.7 + 2.2 −12.9 −0.2 + 35.1 + 27.4 −0.3 −0.2 + 27.6 + 7.8 −3.5
         Sep −1 −2 −14.1 −1.0 + 4.6 −1.5 + 6.2 −5.6 −2.0 −8.3 + 0.6 + 0.5 −8.9 + 6.3 −11.1
         Oct −2 −5 + 11.2 −2.0 −1.4 + 8.3 −9.7 −0.6 −4.9 −8.0 −0.3 −0.4 −7.7 + 3.1 + 18.1
         Nov + 1 + 1 + 24.4 + 4.3 + 4.2 + 6.9 −2.7 + 0.2 + 13.0 + 8.1 + 0.4 + 0.7 + 7.7 + 4.9 + 7.0
         Dec − +1 −137.1 −66.1 −61.2 −18.6 −42.6 −4.9 −65.2 −55.4 −0.2 −0.7 −55.2 −9.8 −5.8
2003         Jan − + 1 + 81.8 + 54.2 + 58.0 + 4.2 + 53.8 −3.8 + 23.7 + 21.4 −0.5 + 0.2 + 21.9 + 2.3 + 3.9
         Feb −− − 28.1 −32.0 −31.0 −5.1 −25.9 −1.0 + 10.3 + 9.6 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 9.6 + 0.7 −6.4
         Mar −− − 32.3 −22.7 −26.1 −11.4 −14.7 + 3.4 −4.7 −4.3 −1.0 −0.4 −3.3 −0.4 −4.9
         Apr −1 −1 + 37.5 −6.3 −7.8 + 6.2 −14.0 + 1.6 + 41.8 + 39.1 + 0.7 + 0.7 + 38.4 + 2.7 + 1.9
         May −1 − + 25.6 + 8.8 + 14.3 + 0.5 + 13.7 −5.5 + 8.7 + 5.0 −0.2 −0.8 + 5.2 + 3.7 + 8.1
  
  
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month*
  
2000 40 170 580.5 248.1 183.8 82.2 101.6 64.3 263.5 203.4 45.4 42.3 158.0 60.1 69.02001 46 200 811.5 342.4 262.8 105.7 157.1 79.6 382.2 293.1 51.9 47.7 241.2 89.2 87.02002 47 200 704.2 333.7 265.5 125.7 139.8 68.2 300.1 239.1 46.7 42.9 192.4 61.0 70.4
2002         Aug 49 199 693.7 314.7 242.0 111.9 130.0 72.7 302.7 243.9 47.8 44.8 196.1 58.8 76.3
         Sep 48 198 695.5 317.8 246.0 111.0 135.0 71.8 304.2 245.3 47.1 44.2 198.2 58.9 73.5
         Oct 47 200 700.6 320.4 249.4 111.4 138.0 71.0 306.6 245.5 46.6 43.7 198.9 61.1 73.6
         Nov 47 202 708.2 326.7 256.6 114.0 142.6 70.1 308.5 246.1 47.0 44.1 199.0 62.4 73.0         Dec 47 200 704.2 333.7 265.5 125.7 139.8 68.2 300.1 239.1 46.7 42.9 192.4 61.0 70.4
2003         Jan 47 198 675.8 311.1 243.2 121.4 121.8 67.9 293.6 231.0 45.4 42.8 185.5 62.6 71.1
         Feb 47 197 670.6 309.9 241.7 116.3 125.4 68.2 289.9 226.1 44.5 41.9 181.6 63.8 70.8         Mar 47 194 656.7 305.7 237.1 119.8 117.3 68.6 283.9 223.7 43.0 40.7 180.7 60.3 67.1
         Apr 48 195 652.2 303.7 236.3 122.4 114.0 67.4 282.3 220.8 42.2 39.9 178.6 61.5 66.3
         May 48 195 645.0 300.0 234.0 119.7 114.2 66.1 278.0 215.8 42.7 39.0 173.1 62.2 66.9
Changes*
2001 + 6 + 30 +229.9 + 92.5 + 78.0 + 23.5 + 54.6 + 14.5 +119.5 + 89.1 + 6.5 + 5.3 + 82.7 + 30.4 + 17.92002 + 1 +
 0 −78.3 + 6.7 + 13.3 + 20.0 −6.7 −6.6 −70.0 −42.0 −5.2 −4.8 −36.8 −28.1 −15.0
2002         Aug + 1 −1 −17.9 −13.0 −13.4 −4.9 −8.5 + 0.3 −3.4 −3.8 −0.3 −0.3 −3.5 + 0.4 −1.4
         Sep −1 −1 + 2.2 + 3.3 + 4.1 −0.9 + 5.0 −0.8 + 1.7 + 1.6 −0.7 −0.6 + 2.3 + 0.1 −2.8
         Oct −1 + 2 + 5.5 + 2.7 + 3.5 + 0.4 + 3.1 −0.8 + 2.5 + 0.4 −0.5 −0.4 + 0.8 + 2.2 + 0.2
         Nov − + 2 + 9.0 + 7.1 + 7.7 + 2.6 + 5.1 −0.6 + 2.5 + 1.2 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.8 + 1.3 −0.6
         Dec −− 2 + 4.6 + 11.6 + 12.1 + 11.7 + 0.4 −0.5 −4.8 −3.4 −0.4 −1.2 −3.0 −1.4 −2.1
2003         Jan −− 2 −23.1 −19.8 −20.3 −4.3 −16.1 + 0.5 −4.3 −5.9 −1.2 −0.1 −4.7 + 1.6 + 1.0
         Feb −− 1 −5.4 −1.1 −1.5 −5.1 + 3.7 + 0.3 −3.9 −5.0 −0.9 −0.9 −4.1 + 1.1 −0.4
         Mar −− 3 −12.2 −3.4 −4.0 + 3.5 −7.5 + 0.6 −5.2 −1.7 −1.5 −1.3 −0.2 −3.5 −3.6
         Apr + 1 + 1 −1.2 −0.5 + 0.1 + 2.5 −2.4 −0.7 −0.0 −1.2 −0.8 −0.8 −0.4 + 1.2 −0.7
         May −− + 0.1 −0.0 −0.1 −2.6 + 2.5 + 0.1 −0.8 −1.6 + 0.5 −0.9 −2.1 + 0.8 + 1.0
*From March 2000, including the foreign branches of building and loan population have not been eliminated from the flow figures for the foreign
associations. In this table “foreign “also includes the country of domicile of subsidiaries.) The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as
the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical revisions have been provisional; subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly
eliminated from the changes. (Breaks owing to changes in the reporting Report, are not specially marked. —1Several branches in a given
40*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
IV  Banks
        
  
Deposits
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  4 
Money
Short-term market Medium  and long-term
paper
of which of which and debt
enter- enter- Working securities
out- capital Other prises  and prises  and
German Foreign indi- indi- Foreign stand- and own liabil-
Total Total banks Total Total Total viduals Total viduals ing  5 funds ities  6   Period banks non-banks
End of year or month* Foreign  branches
  
1,186.1 799.5 158.2 641.4 386.5 60.9 58.4 51.6 2.5 2.4 325.7 272.3 22.0 77.9 20001,271.3 855.3 194.0 661.2 416.0 57.4 54.2 51.2 3.2 3.0 358.6 316.8 24.0 77.2 20011,116.0 758.5 250.1 508.4 357.5 62.6 58.4 55.0 4.2 3.8 294.9 212.1 25.9 53.6 2002
1,236.0 791.6 219.1 572.4 444.4 66.1 62.7 58.9 3.4 3.3 378.3 257.0 25.1 58.9 2002          Aug
1,223.7 787.6 231.3 556.3 436.0 63.8 60.5 57.7 3.4 3.3 372.2 249.5 25.0 61.0          Sep
1,241.7 804.7 241.6 563.0 437.0 66.3 62.9 59.3 3.3 3.3 370.7 236.1 25.0 65.2          Oct
1,263.4 834.9 257.4 577.5 428.5 69.2 65.7 62.0 3.5 3.4 359.4 234.9 25.0 62.5          Nov1,116.0 758.5 250.1 508.4 357.5 62.6 58.4 55.0 4.2 3.8 294.9 212.1 25.9 53.6          Dec
1,170.8 788.6 244.3 544.3 382.2 68.6 64.5 60.6 4.1 3.7 313.7 214.2 26.0 54.9 2003          Jan
1,158.7 771.4 244.9 526.6 387.3 71.1 65.8 62.0 5.3 5.0 316.2 199.0 26.2 55.6          Feb1,128.7 755.1 254.7 500.4 373.7 71.7 66.3 62.3 5.4 5.1 302.0 191.6 26.2 55.5          Mar
1,172.9 776.6 267.5 509.1 396.3 73.9 68.7 64.9 5.2 4.9 322.4 178.5 24.8 53.2          Apr
1,181.0 774.5 273.5 501.0 406.5 73.6 68.5 63.8 5.1 4.8 332.9 167.2 24.7 56.2          May
Changes*
+ 53.8 + 36.3 + 35.2 + 1.1 + 17.5 −3.7 −4.4 −0.6 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 21.2 + 44.6 + 2.1 −1.3 2001
−53.4 −31.7 + 56.0 −87.7 −21.7 + 5.2 + 4.2 + 3.8 + 1.0 + 0.8 −26.9 −104.8 + 1.8 + 17.2 2002
+ 26.9 + 5.3 + 6.6 −1.4 + 21.6 −1.1 −1.1 −1.1 + 0.0 −0.0 + 22.7 −6.1 + 0.1 −0.1 2002          Aug
−10.5 −2.4 + 12.2 −14.5 −8.1 −2.3 −2.3 −1.2 −0.0 −0.0 −5.8 −7.5 −0.1 + 3.9          Sep
+ 19.5 + 18.0 + 10.3 + 7.6 + 1.6 + 2.4 + 2.5 + 1.6 −0.0 −0.0 −0.9 −13.4 −0.0 + 5.2          Oct
+ 26.3 + 32.9 + 15.8 + 17.1 −6.5 + 2.9 + 2.8 + 2.7 + 0.1 + 0.1 −9.4 −1.2 −0.0 −0.7          Nov
−119.2 −58.7 −7.3 −51.4 −60.5 −6.6 −7.3 −6.9 + 0.7 + 0.5 −53.9 −22.8 + 0.9 + 4.0          Dec
+ 69.9 + 40.0 −5.8 + 45.8 + 29.9 + 6.0 + 6.1 + 5.5 −0.1 −0.1 + 23.9 + 2.2 + 0.1 + 9.6 2003          Jan
−13.0 −17.7 + 0.6 −18.3 + 4.7 + 2.6 + 1.3 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 2.2 −15.2 + 0.3 −0.1          Feb
−26.5 −14.1 + 9.8 −23.9 −12.4 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 −12.9 −7.5 −0.0 + 1.7          Mar
+ 50.8 + 25.8 + 12.8 + 13.1 + 25.0 + 2.2 + 2.5 + 2.6 −0.3 −0.2 + 22.8 −13.0 −1.4 + 1.1          Apr
+ 25.2 + 8.2 + 6.1 + 2.1 + 17.1 −0.3 −0.3 −1.1 −0.0 −0.0 + 17.4 −11.3 −0.1 + 11.8          May
  
  
End of year or month* Foreign  subsidiaries
  
414.6 267.9 61.0 207.0 146.7 32.5 29.2 21.9 3.2 3.2 114.2 56.3 34.7 74.9 2000576.5 362.5 79.2 283.3 214.0 36.4 32.5 23.9 3.9 3.8 177.6 99.8 47.3 87.9 2001503.5 307.7 99.5 208.2 195.7 27.0 22.5 21.1 4.5 4.5 168.7 78.4 43.0 79.3 2002
490.1 304.0 75.7 228.3 186.1 27.6 23.3 22.8 4.3 4.2 158.5 81.4 44.0 78.2 2002          Aug
488.8 300.6 78.0 222.6 188.2 28.8 24.1 23.6 4.6 4.6 159.4 81.6 43.3 81.7          Sep
495.9 301.0 79.1 221.9 194.9 27.7 23.1 22.6 4.6 4.5 167.2 81.7 43.2 79.7          Oct
502.8 308.8 81.8 227.0 194.0 26.4 22.1 21.6 4.3 4.2 167.6 81.0 43.2 81.1          Nov503.5 307.7 99.5 208.2 195.7 27.0 22.5 21.1 4.5 4.5 168.7 78.4 43.0 79.3          Dec
478.2 298.2 95.6 202.6 179.9 28.0 23.5 22.9 4.5 4.5 151.9 77.1 42.5 78.0 2003          Jan
474.6 297.1 89.6 207.5 177.5 28.2 23.7 23.1 4.6 4.5 149.3 80.0 42.0 74.0          Feb463.7 287.2 89.9 197.3 176.4 27.7 23.2 22.9 4.5 4.4 148.8 77.7 41.4 74.0          Mar
464.6 285.4 95.5 189.9 179.2 27.8 23.3 23.0 4.5 4.5 151.4 75.0 41.3 71.4          Apr
459.8 281.3 92.2 189.1 178.5 29.0 24.7 24.4 4.4 4.3 149.4 72.8 41.2 71.1          May
Changes*
+ 160.9 + 94.6 + 18.2 + 76.3 + 66.4 + 3.9 + 3.3 + 2.0 + 0.6 + 0.6 + 62.5 + 43.6 + 13.7 + 11.7 2001−47.1 −37.4 + 20.3 −57.8 −9.7 −9.4 −10.0 −2.9 + 0.6 + 0.6 −0.3 −21.4 −4.4 −5.4 2002
− 9.6 −2.8 + 4.3 −7.1 −6.7 −4.1 −1.5 + 2.2 −2.6 −2.6 −2.7 −1.5 −1.6 −5.2 2002          Aug
− 1.0 −3.1 + 2.3 −5.4 + 2.1 + 1.2 + 0.8 + 0.8 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 1.0 + 0.2 −0.7 + 3.6          Sep
+ 7.4 + 0.5 + 1.1 −0.5 + 6.8 −1.1 −1.0 −1.0 −0.1 −0.1 + 7.9 + 0.1 −0.1 −1.9          Oct
+ 8.1 + 8.6 + 2.7 + 5.9 −0.5 −1.3 −1.0 −1.0 −0.3 −0.3 + 0.8 −0.7 + 0.0 + 1.6          Nov
+ 8.1 + 3.5 + 17.7 −14.2 + 4.5 + 0.6 + 0.4 −0.5 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 3.9 −2.6 −0.3 −0.5          Dec
−21.0 −7.0 −3.9 −3.1 −14.1 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 1.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 −15.0 −1.3 −0.4 −0.3 2003          Jan
− 3.6 −1.2 −6.0 + 4.8 −2.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 −2.6 + 2.9 −0.5 −4.2          Feb
− 9.5 −8.9 + 0.3 −9.2 −0.7 −0.6 −0.5 −0.3 −0.1 −0.1 −0.1 −2.3 −0.6 + 0.3          Mar
+ 3.6 −0.1 + 5.6 −5.6 + 3.6 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 3.5 −2.6 −0.1 −2.1          Apr
+ 1.5 + 0.0 −3.3 + 3.3 + 1.5 + 1.2 + 1.4 + 1.4 −0.1 −0.1 + 0.2 −2.2 −0.0 + 0.9          May
country of domicile are regarded as a single branch. —2Treasury bills, subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt securities. —5Issues of
Treasury discount paper and other money market paper, debt negotiable and non-negotiable debt securities and money marketsecurities. —3Including own debt securities. —4Excluding paper. — 6 Including subordinated liabilities. 
41*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
V. Minimum reserves
 
1. Reserve ratios
Germany European monetary union
 
% of liabilities subject to reserve requirements % of reserve base  1 
Sight Time
Applicable from liabilities liabilities Applicable from Ratio Savings deposits
1995  August 1 2    2    1.5    1999  January 1 2    
    
1Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank of 1 December
1998 on the application of minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to whicha reserve ratio of 0 % applies, pursuant to article 4 (1)). 
 
  
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany up to the end of 1998
− pursuant to the Minimum Reserves Order of the Bundesbank −
 
DM million
Liabilities subject to reserve requirements Excess reserves  4 
Monthly Required as % of the
average  1 Total reserves  2 Level Sight liabilities Time liabilities Savings deposits Actual reserves  3 required  reserves Shortfall, total
1995         Dec. 2,066,565 579,337 519,456 967,772 36,492 37,337 845 2.3 3
1996         Dec. 2,201,464 655,483 474,342 1,071,639 38,671 39,522 851 2.2 4
1997         Dec. 2,327,879 734,986 476,417 1,116,477 40,975 41,721 745 1.8 3
1998         Dec. 2,576,889 865,444 564,878 1,146,567 45,805 46,432 627 1.4 4
1Pursuant to sections 5 to 7 of the Minimum Reserves Order. —2Amount balances of the credit institutions subject to reserve requirements on their
after applying the reserve ratios to the liabilities subject to reserve require- giro accounts at the Bundesbank. — 4 Actual reserves less required reserves. 
ments (section 5 (1) of the Minimum Reserves Order). —3Average credit
 
 
3. Reserve maintenance in the European monetary union
− from 1999, pursuant to the ECB Regulation governing minimum reserves according to article 19.1 of the
ECB/ESCB Statute −
 
Maintenance Required reserves
period before deduction Required reserves
of lump-sum Lump-sum beginning in  1 after deduction of
Reserve base  2 allowance  3 allowance  4 lump-sum allowance Actual reserves  5 Excess reserves  6 Shortfall, total  7 
European monetary union (  5  billion)
 
2002         Oct 6,460.4 129.2 0.6 128.7 129.2 0.5 0.0
         Nov 6,466.2 129.3 0.5 128.8 129.4 0.6 0.0         Dec 6,569.9 131.4 0.5 130.9 131.4 0.6 0.0
2003         Jan 6,549.1 131.0 0.5 130.4 131.0 0.6 0.0
         Feb 6,474.5 129.5 0.6 128.9 129.5 0.6 0.0         Mar 6,526.6 130.5 0.5 130.0 130.5 0.5 0.0
         Apr 6,544.6 130.9 0.5 130.3 130.8 0.5 0.0
         May 6,586.3 131.7 0.5 131.2 131.7 0.5 0.0         June  
p 6,606.0 132.1 0.5 131.6 132.0 0.5 0.0
Of which: Germany (  5  million)
2002         Oct 1,894,298 37,886 232 37,654 37,895 240 5
         Nov 1,887,201 37,744 231 37,513 37,727 214 38         Dec 1,929,396 38,588 231 38,356 38,574 217 2
2003         Jan 1,911,863 38,237 230 38,007 38,280 273 3
         Feb 1,891,376 37,828 230 37,597 37,876 279 4         Mar 1,912,098 38,242 230 38,012 38,224 212 4
         Apr 1,906,364 38,127 229 37,898 38,090 192 4
         May 1,911,254 38,225 228 37,997 38,220 223 2         June  
p 1,907,522 38,150 226 37,924 38,120 195 2
1The reserve maintenance period of the ESCB minimum reserve system base. —4Article 5 (2) of the Regulation of the European Central Bank of
starts on the 24th of each month and ends on the 23rd of the following 1 December 1998 on the application of minimum reserves. —5Average
month (the first reserve maintenance period lasted from January 1, 1999 to credit balances of the credit institutions subject to minimum reserve requ ire-
February 23, 1999). —2Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central ments on their reserve accounts at the respective national central bank. —
Bank of 1 December 1998 on the application of minimum reserves 6Actual reserves less required reserves after the deduction of the lump-sum
(excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio o f 0 % applies, pursuant to allowance. —7Required reserves after the deduction of the lump-sum
article 4 (1)). —3Amount after applying the reserve ratios to the reserve allowance. 
42*V. Minimum reserves

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
VI. Interest rates
  
1. ECB interest rates 2. Discount and lombard rates 3. Base rates
    of the Bundesbank
  
% p.a. % p.a. % p.a.
Base rate as per
Main Marginal Discount Rate
Deposit refinancing lending Lombard Transition Act
Applicable from facility operations  1 facility Applicable from Discount rate rate  2, 4, 5  Applicable from 3, 4, 5  
1999 Jan                  1 2.00 3.00 4.50 1994 Feb                18 5 1/4 6 3/4 1999 Jan                  1 2.50
         Jan                  4 2.75 3.00 3.25          Apr                15 5 6 1/2          May                 1 1.95
         Jan                22 2.00 3.00 4.50          May                13 4 1/2 6 
         Apr                  9 1.50 2.50 3.50 2000 Jan                  1 2.68
         Nov                  5 2.00 3.00 4.00 1995 Mar                31 4 6          May                  1 3.42
         Aug                25 3 1/2 5 1/2          Sep                  1 4.26
2000 Feb                  4 2.25 3.25 4.25          Dec                15 3 5 
         Mar                17 2.50 3.50 4.50   2001 Sep                  1 3.62
         Apr                28 2.75 3.75 4.75 1996 Apr                19 2 1/2 4 1/2
         June                 9 3.25 4.25 5.25          to 2002 Jan                  1 2.71
         Sep                  1 3.50 4.50 5.50 1998 Dec                31          to
         Oct                  6 3.75 4.75 5.75          Apr                  3
  
2001 May               11 3.50 4.50 5.50 Base rate as per
         Aug                31 3.25 4.25 5.25 Civil Code  6 
         Sep                18 2.75 3.75 4.75
         Nov                  9 2.25 3.25 4.25 2002 Jan                  1 2.57
         July                 1 2.47
2002 Dec                  6 1.75 2.75 3.75
2003 Jan                  1 1.97
2003 Mar                  7 1.50 2.50 3.50          July                  1 1.22
         June                 6 1.00 2.00 3.00
1Up to 21 June 2000 fixed rate tenders, from 28 June 2000 variable rate the field of civil law and judicial procedural law), in state legislation (as stipu -
tenders at minimum bid rate. —2From 1 August 1990 to 31 December 1993 lated in the Act Introducing the Civil Code) or in executory instruments and
this was also the rate for cash advances; from 1 January 1994 cash advances contracts based on such regulations, the following changes apply as fromhave no longer been granted. Wherever reference is made in an Act to the 1 January 2002: a) the rate for cash advances of the Federal Government isinterest rate applicable for cash advances of the Federal Government, the replaced by the base rate in the Civil Code increased by 1.5%, b) the lom-rate will be replaced by the base rate increased by 1.5 percentage points pur- bard rate is replaced by the ECB ’s marginal lending facility rate, c) the base
suant to the Discount Rate Transition Act (see also footnot e 4 a and 5). Pursu- rate pursuant to the Discount Rate Transition Act is replaced by the base
ant to the Discount Rate Transition Act, read in conjunction with the Lom- rate pursuant to section 247 of the Civil Code (see also footnote 5). —5Pur-
bard Rate Transition Regulation, the lombard rate is replaced from 1 Janu- suant to Article 4 section 1 of the Act on the Amendment of Provisions con-ary 1999 by the rate applied by the European Cental Bank (ECB) for its mar- cerning the Evaluation of Insurance Enterprises ’Capital Investment and the
ginal lending facility wherever the lombard rate is used as a reference vari- Repeal of the Discount Rate Transition Act, the Discount Rate Transition Act,
able for interest and other payments (see also footnot e 4 b and 5). —3Pur- the Regulation Governing the Use of the Base Rate as a Reference Variable
suant to the Discount Rate Transition Act, read in conjunction with the Regu- and the Lombard Rate Transition Regulation are repealed. Pursuant to Art -
lation Governing the Use of the Base Rate as a Reference Variable, this rate icle 4 section 2 of this act, from 4 April 2002 the discount rate and the basereplaces the discount rate from 1 January 1999 wherever the latter is used rate under the Discount Rate Transition Act are replaced by the base ratein contracts and regulations as a reference variable for interest and other pursuant to section 247 of the Civil Code, the lombard rate is replaced bypayments. This base rate is the discount rate of the Bundesbank which ap- the interest rate on the marginal lending facility of the ECB, and the inter-plied on 31 December 1998. It changes from January 1, May 1 and Septem- est rate for cash advances of the Federal Government by the base rate pursu-ber 1 of each year, and will change for the first time on 1 May 1999 if the ant to section 247 of the Civil Code increased by 1.5 percentage points. —
interest rate applied by the ECB to its longer-term refinancing operations 6Starting at 3.62%, it is adjusted on January 1 and July 1 of each year (for
(marginal rate) has changed by at least 0.5 percentage points (see also foot- the first time on 1 January 2002) by the percentage points by which the refe r-
note 4 c and 5). —4Wherever the rates listed in this column are used as a ence variable (most recent main refinancing operation of the ECB, marginal
reference variable for interest and other payments in Federal legislation (in rate) has increased or decreased since the last change in th e base rate. 
  
  
  
4. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders *
  
    
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bids Allotment Weighted
Amount Amount Fixed rate Minimum bid rate Marginal rate  
1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement  5  millions % p.a. ... days
Main refinancing operations
2003 June                 4 72,372 72,372 − 2.50 2.50 2.50 14
       June                 9 145,751 129,000 − 2.00 2.09 2.11 16
       June               18 111,215 62,000 − 2.00 2.12 2.12 14
       June               25 166,404 150,000 − 2.00 2.10 2.12 14
       July                 2 111,698 56,000 − 2.00 2.10 2.11 14
       July                 9 130,689 101,000 − 2.00 2.08 2.10 14
       July                 9 67,965 43,000 − 2.00 2.09 2.10 7
       July               16 147,621 98,000 − 2.00 2.08 2.09 14
       July               23 141,573 134,000 − 2.00 2.06 2.08 14
       July               30 114,569 73,000 − 2.00 2.06 2.07 14
       Aug                  6 174,505 144,000 − 2.00 2.05 2.06 14
       Aug                13 118,015 61,000 − 2.00 2.05 2.06 14
Longer-term refinancing operations
2003 May               29 30,218 15,000 −− 2.25 2.27 91
       June               26 28,694 15,000 −− 2.11 2.12 91
       July               31 25,416 15,000 −− 2.08 2.10 91
Source: ECB. —*Enlargement of the euro area on 1 January 2001 to allotted or collected. 
include Greece. —1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were
43*VI. Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
VI. Interest rates
 
5.  Money market rates, by month
  
% p.a.
Money market rates reported by Frankfurt banks  1 EURIBOR  3 
One- One- Three- Six- Nine- Twelve-
week month month month month month
Day-to-day money Three-month funds EONIA  2 funds funds funds funds funds funds
Monthly Lowest and Monthly Lowest and
Period averages highest rates averages highest rates Monthly averages
2001         July 4.51 4.25 −4.63 4.45 4.38 −4.50 4.51 4.54 4.52 4.47 4.39 4.33 4.31
         Aug 4.49 4.35 −4.53 4.33 4.21 −4.43 4.49 4.51 4.46 4.35 4.22 4.14 4.11
         Sep 3.97 2.95 −5.50 3.96 3.60 −4.27 3.99 4.08 4.05 3.98 3.88 3.80 3.77
         Oct 3.96 3.65 −4.76 3.58 3.48 −3.65 3.97 3.83 3.72 3.60 3.46 3.39 3.37
         Nov 3.51 3.15 −4.20 3.37 3.28 −3.50 3.51 3.48 3.43 3.39 3.26 3.20 3.20
         Dec 3.32 4 2.90 −4.05 3.33 3.26 −3.36 3.34 3.38 3.42 3.34 3.26 3.24 3.30
2002         Jan 3.29 2.45 −3.57 3.32 3.24 −3.38 3.29 3.35 3.35 3.34 3.34 3.39 3.48
         Feb 3.27 2.90 −3.35 3.34 3.31 −3.38 3.28 3.32 3.34 3.36 3.40 3.48 3.59
         Mar 3.25 2.90 −3.45 3.37 3.33 −3.45 3.26 3.33 3.35 3.39 3.50 3.65 3.82
         Apr 3.30 3.11 −3.75 3.39 3.35 −3.45 3.32 3.32 3.34 3.41 3.54 3.70 3.86
         May 3.31 3.21 −3.50 3.44 3.35 −3.52 3.31 3.34 3.37 3.47 3.63 3.80 3.96
         June 3.35 3.28 −3.65 3.45 3.40 −3.48 3.35 3.36 3.38 3.46 3.59 3.73 3.87
         July 3.30 3.15 −3.40 3.39 3.34 −3.44 3.30 3.34 3.36 3.41 3.48 3.56 3.64
         Aug 3.29 3.26 −3.36 3.33 3.29 −3.37 3.29 3.32 3.33 3.35 3.38 3.40 3.44
         Sep 3.31 3.26 −3.60 3.29 3.25 −3.34 3.32 3.32 3.32 3.31 3.27 3.23 3.24
         Oct 3.30 3.27 −3.50 3.24 3.18 −3.31 3.30 3.31 3.31 3.26 3.17 3.12 3.13
         Nov 3.30 3.10 −3.48 3.11 3.00 −3.23 3.30 3.32 3.23 3.12 3.04 3.01 3.02
         Dec 3.07 5 2.85 −3.75 2.93 2.83 −3.03 3.09 3.02 2.98 2.94 2.89 2.87 2.87
2003         Jan 2.79 2.00 −2.92 2.81 2.77 −2.86 2.79 2.85 2.85 2.83 2.76 2.72 2.70
         Feb 2.77 2.48 −2.85 2.67 2.48 −2.80 2.76 2.81 2.77 2.69 2.58 2.53 2.50
         Mar 2.71 2.33 −3.50 2.51 2.43 −2.58 2.75 2.66 2.60 2.53 2.45 2.42 2.41
         Apr 2.56 2.51 −2.75 2.52 2.47 −2.56 2.56 2.57 2.58 2.53 2.47 2.45 2.45
         May 2.56 2.15 −2.85 2.39 2.24 −2.50 2.56 2.61 2.52 2.40 2.31 2.27 2.25
         June 2.22 2.05 −2.80 2.13 2.09 −2.26 2.21 2.22 2.18 2.15 2.08 2.04 2.01
         July 2.08 1.86 −2.15 2.11 2.08 −2.14 2.08 2.12 2.13 2.13 2.09 2.07 2.08
1Money market rates are not fixed or quoted officially; the monthly aver- Moneyline Telerate (formerly Bridge Telerate). —3Euro Interbank Offered
ages computed from daily quotations are unweighted. —2Euro OverNight Rate: unweighted average rate calculated by Moneyline Telerate (formerly
Index Average: weighted average overnight rate for interbank operations Bridge Telerate) since 30 December 1998 according to the act/360calculated by the European Central Bank since 4 January 1999 on the basis method. —4At the end of December 3.50% to 4.05%. —5At the end of De-
of real turnover according to the act/360 method and published via cember 3.00% to 3.05%. 
 
 
6. Euro area retail bank interest rates *, o
  
% p.a.; period averages
Deposit interest rates Lending interest rates
With agreed maturity Redeemable at notice To enterprises To householdsUp to Up to Over Up to Over Up to Over Consumer For house
Period Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months 1 year 1 year lending purchase
2000 0.85 3.45 3.45 4.52 2.25 3.79 6.60 6.23 9.87 6.34
2001  
1 0.94 3.49 3.49 4.12 2.40 3.59 6.83 6.15 10.12 5.97
2002 0.73 2.80 2.80 3.85 2.13 2.85 6.13 5.71 9.78 5.54
2002         June 0.74 2.93 2.94 4.09 2.13 3.08 6.18 5.92 9.83 5.77
         July 0.74 2.89 2.90 4.02 2.13 3.02 6.16 5.79 9.78 5.68
         Aug 0.73 2.84 2.85 3.81 2.12 2.94 6.15 5.71 9.79 5.53         Sep 0.73 2.77 2.77 3.64 2.13 2.73 6.12 5.61 9.85 5.38
         Oct 0.72 2.74 2.74 3.58 2.11 2.63 6.13 5.54 9.72 5.26
         Nov 0.71 2.70 2.69 3.53 2.11 2.55 6.10 5.50 9.70 5.21         Dec 0.68 2.51 2.51 3.45 2.05 2.41 5.98 5.34 9.58 5.10
2003         Jan 0.63 2.43 2.42 3.30 2.04 2.34 5.87 5.27 9.48 4.91
         Feb 0.62 2.32 2.32 3.15 2.02 2.12 5.81 5.18 9.39 4.77         Mar 0.59 2.20 2.19 3.08 1.97 2.05 5.69 5.17 9.29 4.69
         Apr 0.56 2.15 2.14 3.14 1.93 2.05 5.57 5.14 9.23 4.70
         May 0.56 2.08 2.08 2.98 1.91 1.92 5.51 5.01 9.22 4.56         June 0.52 1.85 1.84 2.76 1.83 1.65 5.39 4.86 9.18 4.34
*These euro area retail bank interest rates should be used with caution and Member States. Furthermore, the national interest rates are not harmonised
for statistical purposes only, primarily to analyse their development over in terms of their coverage (new business and/or outstanding amounts), th e
time rather than their level. They are calculated as the weighted average of nature of the data (nominal or effective) or the compilation method. Thenational interest rates provided by the national central banks. The national country weights for the euro area retail bank interest rates are derived from
rates represent those rates that are currently available from national MFI balance sheet statistics or close proxies. The weights reflect thesources and which are judged to fit the standard categories. These national country-specific proportions of the relevant instruments within the eur o
rates have been aggregated to derive information for the euro area, in area, measured as outstanding amounts. The weights are adjusted monthly,some cases relying on proxies and working assumptions due to the so that interest rates and weights always refer to the same month. —1En-
heterogeneity observed in the national financial instruments across MU largement of the euro area on 1 January 2001 to include Greece. 
      
o Tables and notes taken from the ECB. 
44*VI. Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
VI. Interest rates
 
7. Lending and deposit rates of banks (MFIs) in Germany *, o, +
    Lending rates
 
% p.a.
Current account credit Bills discounted
Bills of less than  5  50,000
 5  100,000 and more  5  500,000 and more refinancable
less than  5  100,000 but less than  5  500,000 but less than  5  2.5 million at the Bundesbank
Reporting Average Average Average Average
period  1 interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread
2001         June 11.21 6.50 −13.25 10.13 6.50 −12.95 8.79 5.50 −12.00 6.91 5.42 −10.00
         July 11.12 6.50 −13.25 9.99 6.00 −12.95 8.73 5.50 −12.00 6.91 5.43 −10.00
         Aug 11.11 6.20 −13.25 10.03 6.00 −12.95 8.79 5.50 −12.10 6.84 5.18 −10.00
         Sep 11.06 6.00 −13.25 9.98 6.00 −12.75 8.75 5.50 −12.10 6.69 5.00 −10.00
         Oct 10.97 5.50 −13.25 9.93 5.50 −12.75 8.57 5.00 −12.00 6.57 4.55 −10.25
         Nov 10.87 5.50 −13.00 9.77 5.00 −12.75 8.49 4.90 −12.00 6.43 4.36 −10.25
         Dec 10.66 6.00 −13.00 9.64 5.50 −12.75 8.44 4.90 −12.00 6.23 3.46 −10.00
2002         Jan o 10.86 6.00 −13.00 9.62 5.50 −12.75 8.40 4.50 −12.00 6.34 4.30 −10.25
         Feb 10.84 6.00 −13.00 9.58 6.00 −12.75 8.42 5.50 −12.00 6.36 4.35 −10.25
         Mar 10.88 6.45 −13.00 9.64 6.00 −12.60 8.39 4.50 −12.00 6.28 4.25 −10.00
         Apr 10.90 6.00 −13.00 9.69 6.00 −12.75 8.49 5.00 −12.00 6.34 4.30 −10.25
         May 10.93 6.00 −13.00 9.69 5.50 −12.75 8.55 4.50 −12.00 6.36 4.35 −10.25
         June 10.88 6.30 −13.00 9.76 6.00 −12.75 8.48 4.50 −12.00 6.42 4.45 −10.25
         July 10.99 6.00 −13.00 9.70 5.50 −12.75 8.57 4.50 −12.00 6.40 4.38 −10.00
         Aug 11.00 6.00 −13.00 9.72 5.50 −12.75 8.57 4.50 −12.00 6.41 4.34 −10.25
         Sep 10.86 5.50 −13.00 9.78 6.00 −12.75 8.54 4.50 −12.00 6.37 4.30 −10.25
         Oct 10.92 5.50 −13.00 9.77 5.40 −12.75 8.58 4.50 −12.00 6.36 4.26 −10.25
         Nov 10.97 5.50 −13.00 9.73 5.50 −12.50 8.55 4.50 −12.00 6.29 4.10 −10.25
         Dec 10.88 5.50 −13.00 9.69 5.00 −12.75 8.56 4.00 −12.00 6.19 3.93 −10.25
2003         Jan 10.92 6.50 −13.00 9.68 5.50 −12.75 8.55 4.50 −12.00 6.12 3.83 −10.25
         Feb 10.84 5.65 −13.00 9.72 5.12 −12.75 8.55 4.00 −12.00 6.14 3.69 −10.00
         Mar 10.77 5.00 −13.00 9.58 4.75 −12.50 8.47 4.00 −12.00 6.03 3.56 −10.00
         Apr 10.81 6.00 −13.00 9.63 5.00 −12.50 8.42 3.84 −12.00 6.05 3.55 −10.00
         May 10.74 5.50 −13.00 9.60 5.00 −12.50 8.32 4.00 −12.00 5.96 3.40 −10.00
         June + 10.69 5.00 −13.00 9.48 4.50 −12.50 8.27 3.50 −12.00 5.79 3.14 −10.00
 
 
Long-term fixed-rate loans
to enterprises and self-employed persons
Instalment credits (excluding lending to the housing sector)  5 
 5  5,000 and more but not more than  5  15,000  2  5  100,000 and more  5  500,000 and more
Personal credit lines but less than  5  500,000 but less than  5  5 million
(overdraft facilities Effectivegranted to individuals) Monthly rate  
3 annual interest rate  4 Effective interest rate
Reporting Average Average Average Average Average
period  1 interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread
2001         June 12.68 11.50 −13.50 0.41 0.34 −0.49 10.76 8.76 −12.89 6.82 5.81 −8.66 6.62 5.75 −8.20
         July 12.68 11.25 −13.50 0.41 0.35 −0.49 10.78 8.92 −12.91 6.82 5.85 −8.63 6.60 5.70 −8.30
         Aug 12.66 11.25 −13.50 0.41 0.35 −0.49 10.80 8.89 −12.76 6.74 5.63 −8.60 6.52 5.50 −8.30
         Sep 12.66 11.25 −13.50 0.41 0.35 −0.49 10.80 8.95 −12.89 6.64 5.49 −8.50 6.43 5.38 −8.25
         Oct 12.61 11.25 −13.50 0.41 0.35 −0.49 10.76 8.80 −12.95 6.44 5.26 −8.50 6.21 5.17 −8.17
         Nov 12.54 11.25 −13.50 0.41 0.34 −0.49 10.65 8.68 −12.86 6.28 5.15 −8.50 6.05 5.04 −8.12
         Dec 12.48 11.00 −13.50 0.41 0.34 −0.49 10.64 8.78 −12.63 6.40 5.36 −8.50 6.16 5.25 −8.05
2002         Jan o 12.47 11.25 −13.50 0.41 0.33 −0.49 10.65 8.62 −12.68 6.48 5.50 −8.55 6.23 5.28 −8.25
         Feb 12.47 11.00 −13.50 0.41 0.34 −0.49 10.73 8.87 −12.77 6.57 5.55 −8.60 6.36 5.41 −8.50
         Mar 12.44 11.00 −13.50 0.41 0.34 −0.49 10.71 8.87 −12.68 6.77 5.80 −8.80 6.55 5.41 −8.55
         Apr 12.44 10.51 −13.50 0.41 0.34 −0.49 10.68 8.76 −12.80 6.82 5.80 −8.80 6.63 5.70 −8.45
         May 12.47 11.00 −13.50 0.41 0.34 −0.49 10.73 8.87 −12.96 6.86 5.90 −8.60 6.63 5.75 −8.45
         June 12.49 11.20 −13.50 0.41 0.33 −0.50 10.73 8.48 −13.00 6.75 5.77 −8.53 6.53 5.64 −8.25
         July 12.48 11.00 −13.50 0.41 0.33 −0.49 10.74 8.83 −13.00 6.68 5.71 −8.60 6.45 5.48 −8.25
         Aug 12.47 10.50 −13.50 0.42 0.33 −0.50 10.71 8.82 −13.00 6.51 5.33 −8.52 6.26 5.21 −8.25
         Sep 12.49 10.75 −13.50 0.41 0.34 −0.49 10.76 8.76 −13.00 6.37 5.12 −8.57 6.13 4.99 −8.25
         Oct 12.52 11.00 −13.50 0.41 0.34 −0.50 10.74 8.56 −13.05 6.32 5.17 −8.57 6.13 4.93 −8.25
         Nov 12.53 11.00 −13.50 0.42 0.34 −0.50 10.70 8.50 −13.07 6.26 4.99 −8.52 6.05 4.74 −8.20
         Dec 12.53 11.20 −13.50 0.41 0.33 −0.50 10.64 8.47 −13.00 6.13 4.88 −8.50 5.93 4.62 −8.20
2003         Jan 12.50 11.00 −13.50 0.42 0.33 −0.50 10.69 8.44 −13.07 5.97 4.65 −8.25 5.76 4.46 −8.00
         Feb 12.46 10.75 −13.50 0.41 0.33 −0.49 10.62 8.29 −13.07 5.84 4.44 −8.20 5.60 4.19 −7.85
         Mar 12.36 10.50 −13.50 0.41 0.32 −0.49 10.38 8.24 −13.07 5.84 4.43 −8.10 5.65 4.30 −8.00
         Apr 12.36 10.75 −13.50 0.41 0.33 −0.50 10.41 8.29 −13.07 5.90 4.60 −8.22 5.71 4.51 −8.00
         May 12.38 10.75 −13.50 0.41 0.33 −0.49 10.50 8.24 −13.07 5.67 4.22 −8.05 5.47 3.94 −7.93
         June + 12.31 10.75 −13.30 0.41 0.32 −0.49 10.39 8.13 −13.07 5.49 3.90 −7.65 5.29 3.73 −7.65
*The average rates are calculated as unweighted arithmetic means from 2003 issue of the Monthly Report. —1Second and third weeks of the
the interest rates reported to be within the spread. The spread is as- months indicated. —2With maturities between 36 months and
certained by eliminating the reports in the top 5% and the bottom 5% of 60 months. —3Interest rates as % per month of original amount of credit
the interest rate range. —oFor simplicity, the amount categories were taken up. Besides interest, most banks charge a one-off processing fee (gen-
redenominated to euro as from January 2002 by halving the previous erally 2%, in some cases 3%, of the credit amount). —4Calculated on the
Deutsche Mark amounts. —+The Deutsche Bundesbank ’s "Survey of basis of reported monthly rates (see footnote 3) and reported annual rates
lending and deposit rates" was carried out for the last time in the June 2003 on the respective amount of debt and on the basis of the respective pro-reporting month. It will be replaced by the "MFI interest rate statistics", cessing fees, taking due account of reported maturities. —5Lending to
which have been collected on a harmonised basis in the euro area from enterprises (with agreed maturities of more than five years) with agreedJanuary 2003. The results will probably first be published in the September interest rates locked in for more than five years. 
45*VI. Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
VI. Interest rates
 
7. Lending and deposit rates of banks (MFIs) in Germany *, o, +  (cont ’d)
    Lending rates
 
% p.a.
Mortgage loans secured by residential real estatewith interest rates fixed (effective interest rate)  
6 
with variable interest rates
for 2 years for 5 years for 10 years (effective interest rate)  6 
Reporting Average Average Average Average
period  1 interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread
2001         June 5.80 5.27 −6.54 5.84 5.54 −6.33 6.22 5.85 −6.59 6.64 5.48 −8.03
         July 5.78 5.22 −6.45 5.85 5.54 −6.37 6.24 5.77 −6.59 6.64 5.43 −8.03
         Aug 5.62 5.06 −6.35 5.69 5.43 −6.22 6.13 5.88 −6.54 6.57 5.43 −8.03
         Sep 5.41 4.75 −6.22 5.57 5.22 −6.22 6.08 5.85 −6.43 6.45 5.38 −7.82
         Oct 5.12 4.49 −5.96 5.36 5.01 −6.03 5.91 5.64 −6.43 6.30 4.96 −7.73
         Nov 4.95 4.33 −5.79 5.20 4.75 −5.75 5.70 5.38 −6.14 6.12 4.80 −7.71
         Dec 5.13 4.59 −5.90 5.42 4.90 −5.90 5.87 5.20 −6.22 6.15 4.85 −7.60
2002         Jan 5.19 4.65 −5.91 5.52 5.10 −6.06 5.95 5.36 −6.27 6.13 4.85 −7.50
         Feb 5.38 4.85 −6.11 5.66 5.32 −6.17 6.05 5.62 −6.42 6.14 4.80 −7.50
         Mar 5.61 5.12 −6.27 5.89 5.54 −6.33 6.26 5.84 −6.61 6.16 4.70 −7.50
         Apr 5.70 5.22 −6.38 5.96 5.56 −6.43 6.30 6.00 −6.69 6.26 5.10 −7.60
         May 5.73 5.22 −6.38 5.96 5.69 −6.43 6.30 6.01 −6.70 6.22 4.95 −7.50
         June 5.63 5.08 −6.27 5.86 5.54 −6.38 6.21 5.91 −6.59 6.21 5.02 −7.50
         July 5.47 4.85 −6.17 5.71 5.41 −6.27 6.10 5.85 −6.54 6.13 4.96 −7.49
         Aug 5.17 4.54 −5.90 5.42 5.08 −6.06 5.84 5.57 −6.38 6.04 4.87 −7.23
         Sep 4.95 4.28 −5.75 5.22 4.85 −5.96 5.69 5.38 −6.26 6.02 4.79 −7.49
         Oct 4.86 4.28 −5.75 5.14 4.75 −5.80 5.67 5.33 −6.22 5.93 4.59 −7.34
         Nov 4.76 4.07 −5.59 5.08 4.75 −5.75 5.62 5.27 −6.17 5.90 4.59 −7.34
         Dec 4.62 3.92 −5.54 4.96 4.59 −5.64 5.52 5.20 −6.17 5.83 4.44 −7.50
2003         Jan 4.41 3.71 −5.30 4.73 4.32 −5.38 5.36 5.02 −6.01 5.74 4.39 −7.23
         Feb 4.23 3.51 −5.39 4.52 4.10 −5.33 5.18 4.90 −5.90 5.64 4.07 −7.23
         Mar 4.18 3.56 −5.06 4.51 4.02 −5.22 5.19 4.80 −5.75 5.59 4.07 −7.23
         Apr 4.25 3.57 −5.12 4.63 4.12 −5.38 5.29 4.89 −5.85 5.58 4.07 −7.23
         May 3.99 3.25 −5.17 4.35 3.87 −5.38 5.02 4.65 −5.70 5.51 3.95 −7.23
         June + 3.72 3.03 −4.96 4.06 3.66 −5.06 4.77 4.43 −5.69 5.39 3.71 −7.23
 
 
    Deposit rates
 
% p.a.
Time deposits with agreed maturitiesof 1 month of 3 months
Higher-yieldingsight deposits  5  50,000 and more but  5  500,000 and more but  5  50,000 and more but
of individuals  
7 less than  5  50,000 less than  5  500,000 less than  5  2.5 million less than  5  500,000
Reporting Average Average Average Average Average
period  1 interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread
2001         June 2.42 0.50 −3.90 3.34 2.50 −4.00 3.73 3.10 −4.25 4.07 3.50 −4.44 3.84 3.15 −4.35
         July 2.41 0.50 −3.88 3.34 2.50 −4.00 3.73 3.10 −4.20 4.08 3.50 −4.50 3.83 3.20 −4.41
         Aug 2.39 0.50 −3.75 3.31 2.50 −4.00 3.70 3.00 −4.20 4.05 3.40 −4.45 3.76 3.10 −4.30
         Sep 2.26 0.50 −3.50 3.00 2.20 −3.85 3.38 2.70 −4.00 3.66 2.95 −4.15 3.47 2.60 −4.00
         Oct 2.10 0.50 −3.24 2.69 2.00 −3.40 3.07 2.40 −3.50 3.36 2.75 −3.75 3.12 2.40 −3.65
         Nov 1.96 0.50 −2.96 2.42 1.75 −3.00 2.77 2.20 −3.15 3.00 2.50 −3.30 2.83 2.17 −3.45
         Dec 1.92 0.50 −2.95 2.41 1.75 −3.00 2.76 2.23 −3.15 3.03 2.50 −3.40 2.78 2.20 −3.15
2002         Jan o 1.90 0.50 −2.85 2.37 1.70 −3.00 2.73 2.20 −3.10 3.00 2.50 −3.30 2.76 2.20 −3.11
         Feb 1.86 0.50 −2.85 2.30 1.65 −3.00 2.66 2.09 −3.05 2.89 2.45 −3.23 2.75 2.20 −3.13
         Mar 1.88 0.50 −2.80 2.34 1.70 −3.00 2.70 2.20 −3.10 2.94 2.40 −3.25 2.77 2.25 −3.17
         Apr 1.87 0.50 −3.00 2.34 1.70 −3.00 2.69 2.25 −3.05 2.94 2.50 −3.25 2.78 2.22 −3.20
         May 1.85 0.50 −2.75 2.33 1.67 −3.00 2.70 2.25 −3.05 2.94 2.40 −3.25 2.79 2.23 −3.20
         June 1.85 0.50 −2.75 2.35 1.70 −3.00 2.70 2.25 −3.10 2.94 2.50 −3.30 2.83 2.25 −3.25
         July 1.85 0.50 −2.80 2.35 1.75 −3.00 2.71 2.20 −3.10 2.95 2.50 −3.30 2.81 2.25 −3.25
         Aug 1.82 0.50 −2.75 2.33 1.66 −3.00 2.69 2.17 −3.10 2.92 2.40 −3.25 2.77 2.20 −3.10
         Sep 1.80 0.50 −2.75 2.29 1.65 −3.00 2.65 2.10 −3.07 2.89 2.35 −3.22 2.74 2.20 −3.10
         Oct 1.76 0.50 −2.75 2.29 1.65 −3.00 2.64 2.10 −3.02 2.88 2.40 −3.22 2.72 2.20 −3.10
         Nov 1.77 0.50 −2.75 2.24 1.57 −2.90 2.60 2.00 −3.00 2.84 2.30 −3.20 2.65 2.10 −3.00
         Dec 1.66 0.50 −2.55 2.04 1.45 −2.65 2.37 1.90 −2.80 2.60 2.10 −3.00 2.41 1.90 −2.90
2003         Jan 1.57 0.50 −2.50 1.94 1.40 −2.50 2.27 1.80 −2.65 2.51 2.00 −2.85 2.33 1.85 −2.75
         Feb 1.55 0.50 −2.38 1.82 1.21 −2.45 2.17 1.61 −2.55 2.39 2.00 −2.75 2.23 1.70 −2.65
         Mar 1.48 0.50 −2.25 1.72 1.13 −2.30 2.06 1.50 −2.50 2.30 1.90 −2.60 2.09 1.60 −2.55
         Apr 1.45 0.50 −2.25 1.68 1.10 −2.20 2.01 1.53 −2.40 2.24 1.80 −2.50 2.04 1.60 −2.50
         May 1.43 0.50 −2.25 1.66 1.10 −2.17 1.98 1.50 −2.35 2.21 1.70 −2.50 1.99 1.45 −2.50
         June + 1.26 0.50 −2.10 1.37 0.75 −2.00 1.67 1.15 −2.10 1.88 1.46 −2.30 1.75 1.20 −2.25
For footnotes *, o, +, 1to5see page 45*. —6The figures refer to the time upon in each case by the credit institutions involved are taken into account
when the contract was concluded and not to the entire duration of the con- (at present mostly monthly payment and inclusion). —7Only such interest
tract. The calculation of the effective interest rate is based on an annual re- rates are taken into account as are above the relevant standard terms of t he
demption rate of 1% plus interest saved; the repayment conditions agreed banks included in the survey. 
46*VI. Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
VI. Interest rates
 
7. Lending and deposit rates of banks (MFIs) in Germany *, o, +  (cont ’d)
    Deposit rates
 
% p.a.
Savings deposits
Bank savings bondswith regular with minimum rates of with higher rates of return  
9 
interest payments return  8 (without a duration of contract being agreed)
with agreed notice of 3 months
with agreed notice  5  5,000 and more  5  10,000 and more
maturity of 4 years of 3 months less than  5  5,000 but less than  5  10,000 but less than  5  25,000
Reporting Average Average Average Average Average
period  1 interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread
2001         June 4.31 3.95 −4.60 1.21 1.00 −2.00 2.29 1.50 −3.66 2.87 1.75 −4.00 3.09 2.00 −4.00
         July 4.26 3.90 −4.60 1.20 1.00 −2.00 2.26 1.50 −3.50 2.85 1.75 −4.00 3.07 2.00 −4.00
         Aug 4.16 3.75 −4.50 1.18 1.00 −1.75 2.20 1.50 −3.35 2.77 1.75 −3.75 3.02 2.00 −4.00
         Sep 3.99 3.60 −4.35 1.16 1.00 −1.75 2.11 1.35 −3.25 2.63 1.60 −3.50 2.88 1.85 −3.90
         Oct 3.77 3.40 −4.20 1.14 1.00 −1.75 2.01 1.25 −3.05 2.47 1.50 −3.50 2.69 1.85 −3.50
         Nov 3.48 3.00 −4.00 1.11 0.75 −1.50 1.86 1.25 −2.75 2.25 1.50 −3.00 2.49 1.75 −3.20
         Dec 3.65 3.10 −4.00 1.08 0.75 −1.50 1.81 1.25 −2.75 2.18 1.50 −3.00 2.42 1.75 −3.00
2002         Jan o 3.73 3.25 −4.10 1.07 0.75 −1.50 1.78 1.25 −2.75 2.15 1.50 −2.75 2.40 1.70 −3.00
         Feb 3.90 3.25 −4.25 1.06 0.75 −1.50 1.78 1.25 −2.70 2.14 1.50 −2.75 2.37 1.60 −3.00
         Mar 4.07 3.30 −4.50 1.05 0.75 −1.50 1.79 1.25 −2.75 2.14 1.50 −2.80 2.38 1.60 −3.00
         Apr 4.15 3.30 −4.50 1.04 0.75 −1.50 1.78 1.25 −2.60 2.15 1.50 −2.80 2.38 1.60 −3.00
         May 4.15 3.30 −4.50 1.04 0.75 −1.50 1.79 1.25 −2.60 2.16 1.50 −2.80 2.40 1.75 −3.00
         June 4.12 3.30 −4.50 1.04 0.75 −1.50 1.78 1.25 −2.50 2.15 1.50 −2.80 2.40 1.75 −3.00
         July 4.01 3.30 −4.40 1.03 0.75 −1.50 1.78 1.15 −2.60 2.16 1.50 −2.81 2.40 1.75 −3.00
         Aug 3.70 3.12 −4.05 1.01 0.75 −1.50 1.76 1.00 −2.50 2.14 1.50 −2.80 2.36 1.60 −3.00
         Sep 3.50 3.05 −4.00 1.00 0.75 −1.50 1.75 1.25 −2.50 2.12 1.50 −2.75 2.34 1.50 −3.00
         Oct 3.38 2.85 −4.00 0.99 0.75 −1.50 1.71 1.01 −2.50 2.10 1.40 −2.75 2.32 1.50 −3.00
         Nov 3.35 2.85 −3.75 0.99 0.75 −1.50 1.69 1.00 −2.50 2.07 1.35 −2.75 2.31 1.50 −3.00
         Dec 3.23 2.75 −3.70 0.96 0.75 −1.50 1.63 1.00 −2.50 1.97 1.25 −2.75 2.19 1.50 −2.95
2003         Jan 3.02 2.70 −3.50 0.95 0.75 −1.25 1.61 1.00 −2.50 1.90 1.25 −2.95 2.13 1.50 −3.15
         Feb 2.83 2.50 −3.30 0.91 0.75 −1.25 1.57 1.00 −2.30 1.83 1.25 −2.70 2.07 1.50 −2.80
         Mar 2.69 2.20 −3.10 0.86 0.50 −1.25 1.47 1.00 −2.25 1.71 1.15 −2.70 1.93 1.25 −2.80
         Apr 2.80 2.40 −3.20 0.80 0.50 −1.13 1.41 1.00 −2.20 1.68 1.10 −2.35 1.86 1.25 −2.45
         May 2.61 2.25 −3.05 0.78 0.50 −1.13 1.37 1.00 −2.20 1.64 1.10 −2.20 1.82 1.25 −2.37
         June + 2.28 1.95 −2.75 0.71 0.50 −1.00 1.23 0.65 −2.00 1.48 0.80 −2.20 1.69 1.00 −2.30
 
 
Savings deposits with higher rates of return  9  and with duration of contract being agreed for
 5  10,000 and more but less than  5  25,000   (total rate of return) 10
with agreed notice of 3 months with agreed notice of more than 3 months
and a duration of contract of and a duration of contract of
more than 1 year and up to
up to and including 1 year and including 4 years more than 4 years up to and including 1 year more than 4 years
Reporting Average Average Average Average Average
period  1 interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread
2001         June 3.67 2.80 −4.20 3.93 3.25 −4.30 4.48 3.64 −5.22 3.85 2.50 −4.25 4.35 3.90 −4.78
         July 3.64 2.80 −4.15 3.91 3.25 −4.45 4.48 3.64 −5.25 3.80 2.50 −4.05 4.33 3.90 −4.75
         Aug 3.52 2.60 −4.00 3.83 3.20 −4.30 4.42 3.60 −5.40 3.68 2.50 −4.00 4.22 3.84 −4.73
         Sep 3.32 2.40 −3.90 3.62 2.61 −4.25 4.32 3.36 −5.42 3.33 2.50 −3.65 4.06 3.72 −4.73
         Oct 2.94 2.25 −3.45 3.36 2.60 −3.88 4.17 3.00 −5.40 3.01 2.50 −3.50 3.85 3.50 −4.50
         Nov 2.64 2.00 −3.25 3.09 2.48 −3.50 4.01 2.66 −5.40 2.75 2.00 −3.50 3.53 2.93 −4.30
         Dec 2.63 1.75 −3.10 3.14 2.48 −4.00 3.98 2.88 −5.40 2.79 2.20 −3.20 3.63 3.00 −4.30
2002         Jan o 2.67 2.00 −3.10 3.23 2.50 −4.25 3.98 2.91 −5.08 2.80 2.00 −3.20 3.74 3.25 −4.25
         Feb 2.76 2.00 −3.25 3.32 2.60 −4.00 4.07 2.91 −5.13 2.91 2.20 −3.50 3.84 3.25 −4.20
         Mar 2.84 2.10 −3.30 3.45 2.50 −4.25 4.15 3.13 −5.13 3.00 2.40 −3.50 3.96 3.25 −4.40
         Apr 2.89 2.10 −3.40 3.50 2.25 −4.25 4.17 2.91 −5.13 3.07 2.50 −3.70 3.97 3.25 −4.44
         May 2.91 2.10 −3.40 3.48 2.50 −4.25 4.20 2.91 −5.13 3.08 2.20 −4.00 3.98 3.25 −4.50
         June 2.93 2.10 −3.40 3.52 2.25 −4.25 4.21 2.91 −5.15 3.08 2.20 −4.00 3.97 3.10 −4.50
         July 2.89 2.10 −3.30 3.48 2.25 −4.10 4.14 2.91 −5.08 3.02 2.50 −3.50 3.90 3.15 −4.29
         Aug 2.73 2.00 −3.25 3.19 2.25 −4.00 4.02 2.91 −5.02 2.94 2.45 −3.50 3.68 2.85 −4.21
         Sep 2.61 1.90 −3.20 3.08 2.42 −3.80 3.90 2.90 −5.02 2.73 2.25 −3.25 3.54 3.00 −4.04
         Oct 2.53 1.95 −3.25 2.88 2.12 −3.50 3.84 2.75 −5.08 2.63 2.25 −3.00 3.43 2.70 −4.04
         Nov 2.46 1.75 −3.00 2.84 2.08 −3.44 3.80 2.75 −5.08 2.55 2.15 −3.00 3.41 2.75 −4.00
         Dec 2.34 1.75 −2.80 2.77 2.08 −3.44 3.68 2.50 −4.82 2.41 1.95 −3.00 3.30 2.75 −3.75
2003         Jan 2.20 1.75 −2.75 2.60 2.00 −3.44 3.62 2.50 −4.82 2.34 1.90 −3.00 3.14 2.54 −3.60
         Feb 2.08 1.75 −2.55 2.44 1.78 −3.50 3.52 2.31 −4.82 2.12 1.75 −4.00 2.99 2.50 −3.39
         Mar 1.93 1.45 −2.40 2.32 1.50 −3.00 3.36 2.24 −4.82 2.05 1.60 −4.00 2.77 2.38 −3.25
         Apr 1.92 1.43 −2.30 2.30 1.50 −2.90 3.39 2.25 −4.86 2.05 1.65 −3.50 2.81 2.30 −3.40
         May 1.86 1.30 −2.30 2.21 1.50 −2.85 3.30 2.24 −4.80 1.92 1.45 −2.50 2.74 2.25 −3.80
         June + 1.62 1.20 −2.20 1.90 1.25 −2.50 3.08 2.00 −4.43 1.65 1.35 −2.20 2.46 2.00 −3.55
For footnotes *, o, +, 1to5see page 45*; for footnotes 6and 7see page mium or a bonus is granted. —10Rate of return which is paid when savings
46*. —8Only a minimum rate of return is granted, but no premium or plans are held until maturity or when savings objectives have been
bonus. —9An interest rate above the minimum rate of return and/or a pre- achieved. 
47*VI. Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
VII. Capital market
 
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  *)
  
Debt securities
Sales PurchasesDomestic debt securities  
1 Residents
Credit in- Bundes-
Sales stitutions bank
= Public Foreign including opentotal Bank Indus- debt debt building marketpur- debt trial secur- secur- and loan Non- oper- Non-
Period chases Total securities bonds ities  
2 ities 3 Total  4 assc. 5 banks  6 ations  5 residents  7 
DM million
1990 244,827 220,340 136,799 − 67 83,609 24,487 225,066 91,833 133,266 − 33 19,763
1991 231,965 219,346 131,670 667 87,011 12,619 173,099 45,095 127,310 694 58,8661992 291,762 284,054 106,857 − 175 177,376 7,708 170,873 132,236 37,368 1,269 120,887
1993 395,110 382,571 151,812 200 230,560 12,539 183,195 164,436 20,095 − 1,336 211,915
1994 303,339 276,058 117,185 − 65 158,939 27,281 279,989 126,808 154,738 − 1,557 23,349
1995 227,099 203,029 162,538 − 350 40,839 24,070 141,282 49,193 94,409 − 2,320 85,815
1996 254,359 233,519 191,341 649 41,529 20,840 148,250 117,352 31,751 − 853 106,109
1997 332,655 250,688 184,911 1,563 64,214 81,967 204,378 144,177 60,201 − 128,276
1998 418,841 308,201 254,367 3,143 50,691 110,640 245,802 203,342 42,460 − 173,038
 5  million
1999 292,663 198,068 156,399 2,184 39,485 94,595 155,766 74,728 81,038 − 136,898
2000 226,594 157,994 120,154 12,605 25,234 68,600 154,089 91,447 62,642 − 72,505
2001 180,899 86,656 55,918 14,473 16,262 94,245 114,467 35,848 78,619 − 66,432
2002 180,957 124,035 47,296 14,506 62,235 56,922 91,562 13,536 78,026 − 89,395
2003         Apr 19,329 11,476 − 1,500 4,380 8,595 7,853 12,265 339 11,926 − 7,064
         May 17,788 11,846 4,351 4,322 3,173 5,942 5,991 5,636 355 − 11,797
         June 9,599 4,044 − 179 − 887 5,111 5,555 3,242 − 2,777 6,019 − 6,357
 
  
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-purchases shares  
8 shares  9 Total  10 tutions  5  11 Non-banks  6 residents  12 
Period
DM million
1990 50,070 28,021 22,048 52,631 7,215 45,416 − 2,561
1991 33,478 13,317 20,161 32,247 2,466 29,781 1,2301992 32,595 17,226 15,370 40,651 2,984 37,667 − 8,055
1993 39,355 19,512 19,843 30,871 4,133 26,738 8,4851994 55,125 29,160 25,966 54,466 1,622 52,844 659
1995 46,422 23,600 22,822 49,354 11,945 37,409 − 2,931
1996 72,491 34,212 38,280 55,962 12,627 43,335 16,5291997 119,522 22,239 97,280 96,844 8,547 88,297 22,6771998 249,504 48,796 200,708 149,151 20,252 128,899 100,352
 5  million
1999 150,013 36,010 114,005 103,136 18,637 84,499 46,877
2000 139,704 22,733 116,973 159,528 23,293 136,235 − 19,826
2001 82,286 17,575 64,714 − 2,127 − 14,714 12,587 84,412
2002 52,185 9,232 42,954 30,444 − 23,236 53,680 21,740
2003         Apr − 7,562 4,675 − 12,237 − 6,439 3,986 − 10,425 − 1,123
         May 4,888 264 4,624 7,211 570 6,641 − 2,323
         June 11,180 693 10,487 5,267 904 4,363 5,913
*Until the end of 1999, debt securities comprise the bonds and money ment funds. —7Net purchases or net sales ( −) of domestic debt securities by
market paper of domestic banks, from January 2000 all fixed-interest non-residents; transaction values. —8At issue prices. —9Net purchases or
securities. Investment fund certificates see Table VII.6. —1Net sales at net sales ( −) of foreign shares (including direct investment) by residents;
market values plus/less changes in issuers ’portfolios of their own debt transaction values. —10Domestic and foreign shares. —11Up to the end
securities. —2Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and of 1998, excluding shares under syndicate agreement. —12Net purchases
Treuhand agency. —3Net purchases or net sales ( −) of foreign debt or net sales ( −) of domestic shares (including direct investment) −before
securities by residents; transaction values. —4Domestic and foreign debt 1989 also including domestic investment fund certificates −by
securities. —5Book values; statistically adjusted. —6Residual; also non-residents; transaction values. —The figures for the latest data are to be
including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic invest- regarded as provisional; corrections are not specially marked.  
48*VII. Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
VII. Capital market
 
2. Sales of debt securities issued by borrowers domiciled in Germany  *)
 
 
Until the end of 1998 DM nominal million value, from 1999  5  million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item:
Foreign  DM/euro
Mortgage Communal bonds issued Debt securities
bonds bonds issued by spe- by German-
All bank debt (Hypotheken- ( Öffentliche Other bank Industrial Public managed cialised credit
Period Total securities pfandbriefe) Pfandbriefe) institutions bonds  2 syndicates debt securities debt securities  3 
Gross sales  4 
1990 428,698 286,709 14,923 70,701 89,755 111,326 − 141,990 35,168
1991 442,089 292,092 19,478 91,489 80,738 100,386 707 149,288 32,8321992 572,767 318,522 33,633 134,363 49,195 101,333 − 254,244 57,282
1993 733,126 434,829 49,691 218,496 34,028 132,616 457 297,841 87,3091994 627,331 412,585 44,913 150,115 39,807 177,750 486 214,261 61,465
1995 620,120 470,583 43,287 208,844 41,571 176,877 200 149,338 102,719
1996 731,992 563,076 41,439 246,546 53,508 221,582 1,742 167,173 112,3701997 846,567 621,683 53,168 276,755 54,829 236,933 1,915 222,972 114,8131998 1,030,827 789,035 71,371 344,609 72,140 300,920 3,392 238,400 149,542
 5  million
1999 571,269 448,216 27,597 187,661 59,760 173,200 2,570 120,483 57,202
2000 659,148 500,895 34,528 143,107 94,556 228,703 8,114 150,137 31,597
2001 687,988 505,646 34,782 112,594 106,166 252,103 11,328 171,012 10,6052002 818,725 569,232 41,496 119,880 117,506 290,353 17,574 231,923 10,313
2003         Mar 84,288 53,301 2,545 5,735 8,852 36,169 2,836 28,151 −
         Apr 74,802 51,146 6,899 7,043 10,286 26,919 3,366 20,290 −
         May 81,254 59,023 4,550 11,798 9,856 32,819 2,810 19,422 −
         June 75,207 49,503 5,675 7,652 8,036 28,140 2,159 23,545 −
of which: Debt securities with a maturity of over 4 years  5 
1990 272,642 133,347 10,904 43,250 26,767 52,425 − 139,295 29,791
1991 303,326 172,171 11,911 65,642 54,878 39,741 707 130,448 22,7721992 430,479 211,775 28,594 99,627 40,267 43,286 − 218,703 51,939
1993 571,533 296,779 43,365 160,055 26,431 66,923 230 274,524 82,0491994 429,369 244,806 36,397 109,732 29,168 69,508 306 184,255 53,351
1995 409,469 271,763 30,454 141,629 28,711 70,972 200 137,503 85,221
1996 473,560 322,720 27,901 167,811 35,522 91,487 1,702 149,139 92,5821997 563,333 380,470 41,189 211,007 41,053 87,220 1,820 181,047 98,4131998 694,414 496,444 59,893 288,619 54,385 93,551 2,847 195,122 139,645
 5  million
1999 324,888 226,993 16,715 124,067 37,778 48,435 2,565 95,331 44,013
2000 319,330 209,187 20,724 102,664 25,753 60,049 6,727 103,418 27,008
2001 299,751 202,337 16,619 76,341 42,277 67,099 7,479 89,933 6,4802002 309,157 176,486 16,338 59,459 34,795 65,892 12,149 120,527 9,213
2003         Mar 33,388 17,558 929 3,196 2,119 11,314 325 15,505 −
         Apr 28,604 18,444 4,388 4,735 2,342 6,979 552 9,608 −
         May 31,552 18,860 3,350 7,098 3,104 5,308 − 12,692 −
         June 30,256 16,016 2,768 4,559 2,835 5,854 1,757 12,483 −
Net sales  6 
1990 226,707 140,327 − 3,922 − 72 73,287 71,036 − 67 86,449 21,717
1991 227,822 139,396 4,729 22,290 65,985 46,390 558 87,868 18,5831992 304,751 115,786 13,104 58,235 19,585 24,864 − 175 189,142 34,114
1993 403,212 159,982 22,496 122,917 − 13,156 27,721 180 243,049 43,701
1994 270,088 116,519 18,184 54,316 − 6,897 50,914 − 62 153,630 21,634
1995 205,482 173,797 18,260 96,125 3,072 56,342 − 354 32,039 61,020
1996 238,427 195,058 11,909 121,929 6,020 55,199 585 42,788 69,9511997 257,521 188,525 16,471 115,970 12,476 43,607 1,560 67,437 63,1811998 327,991 264,627 22,538 162,519 18,461 61,111 3,118 60,243 84,308
 5  million
1999 209,096 170,069 2,845 80,230 31,754 55,238 2,185 36,840 22,728
2000 155,615 122,774 5,937 29,999 30,089 56,751 7,320 25,522 − 16,705
2001 84,122 60,905 6,932 − 9,254 28,808 34,416 8,739 14,479 − 30,657
2002 131,976 56,393 7,936 − 26,806 20,707 54,561 14,306 61,277 − 44,546
2003         Mar 18,025 2,993 − 2,725 − 4,323 2,200 7,841 2,836 12,196 − 6,292
         Apr 6,312 − 1,629 4,396 − 4,388 1,488 − 3,125 3,295 4,646 − 3,333
         May 10,671 5,826 405 3,867 2,853 − 1,299 2,688 2,157 − 3,530
         June 5,994 2,442 261 646 1,089 446 1,195 2,356 − 6,688
*For definitions see the notes in the Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. —4Gross sales means only
Report 2, Capital market statistics. —1Excluding registered bank debt initial sales of newly issued securities. —5Maximum maturity according to
securities. —2Debt securities of enterprises. —3Including Federal Railways the terms of issue. — 6 Gross sales less redemptions. 
49*VII. Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
VII. Capital market
 
3. Outstanding amount of debt securities issued by borrowers domiciled in Germany  * 
  
Until the end of 1998 DM million nominal value, from 1999  5  million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item:
 Foreign  DM/euro
End of year Mortgage Communal bonds issued
or month/ bonds bonds by German- Debt securities of
Maturity All bank specialised Other bank Industrial Public managed (Öffentliche (Hypotheken-
in years Total bonds syndicates credit institutions debt securities debt securities debt securities Pfandbriefe) pfandbriefe)
DM million
1990 1,458,943 900,977 138,025 369,901 155,045 238,005 2,604 555,362 223,176
1991 1,686,765 1,040,374 142,757 392,190 221,031 284,396 3,161 643,230 241,760
1992 1,991,515 1,156,162 155,862 450,424 240,616 309,259 2,983 832,370 275,873
1993 2,394,728 1,316,142 178,357 573,341 227,463 336,981 3,163 1,075,422 319,575
1994 2,664,814 1,432,661 196,541 627,657 219,214 389,249 3,101 1,229,053 341,210
1995 2,870,295 1,606,459 214,803 723,781 222,286 445,589 2,746 1,261,090 402,229
1996 3,108,724 1,801,517 226,711 845,710 228,306 500,790 3,331 1,303,877 472,180
1997 3,366,245 1,990,041 243,183 961,679 240,782 544,397 4,891 1,371,313 535,359
1998 3,694,234 2,254,668 265,721 1,124,198 259,243 605,507 8,009 1,431,558 619,668
 5  million
1999 2,097,926 1,322,863 134,814 655,024 163,284 369,741 6,280 768,783 339,560
2000 2,265,121 1,445,736 140,751 685,122 157,374 462,488 13,599 805,786 322,856
2001 2,349,243 1,506,640 147,684 675,868 201,721 481,366 22,339 820,264 292,199
2002 2,481,220 1,563,034 155,620 649,061 222,427 535,925 36,646 881,541 247,655
2003         Apr 2,547,020 1,580,872 158,049 626,650 243,608 552,564 47,032 919,116 225,967
         May 2,557,691 1,586,698 158,454 630,517 246,461 551,265 49,721 921,273 222,436
         June 2,563,685 1,589,140 158,716 631,162 247,550 551,712 50,916 923,629 215,748
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  2 Position at end-June 2003 
925,861 629,504 51,949 238,516 73,424 265,615 14,322 282,034 75,025    less than 2
602,150 420,977 45,624 180,100 71,115 124,138 16,899 164,276 42,387 2 to less than 4
416,321 255,332 35,745 112,335 44,789 62,464 5,788 155,201 59,974 4 to less than 6
253,285 133,860 14,346 63,696 19,349 36,468 4,476 114,948 22,825 6 to less than 8
194,530 77,405 10,517 23,948 14,684 28,257 5,741 111,383 4,610 8 to less than 10
46,568 34,587 490 8,103 7,569 18,425 1,990 9,991 6,883 10 to less than 15
17,096 12,168 44 1,564 5,977 4,583 427 4,501 1,207 15 to less than 20
107,876 25,307 − 2,902 10,643 11,762 1,274 81,296 2,839 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers ’portfolios. — debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of the residual
1Excluding debt securities handed to the trustee for temporary safe amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc. 
custody. —2Calculated from month under review until final maturity for
50* 
 
4. Circulation of shares issued by residents of Germany
  
Until the end of 1998 DM million nominal value, from 1999  5  million nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies ’ capital due to
Memo item:
Share circulation
at market values
Share Net increase or cash payment contribution (market capita-capital= and ex- merger reduction lisation) net decrease(-) contribution of shares,
change of of claims and circulation at during period mining shares, of capital level at end
under issue of and other transfer change of and of period end of period convertible GmbH shares,
Period under review review bonds  
1 etc. of assets bonus shares real assets legal form liquidation under review  2 
DM million
1990 144,686 12,650 7,362 751 3,715 1,049 − 43 1,284 − 1,466 .
1991 151,618 6,932 3,656 610 2,416 407 − 182 411 − 386 .
1992 160,813 9,198 4,295 728 1,743 1,073 − 732 3,030 − 942 .
1993 168,005 7,190 5,224 772 387 876 10 707 − 783 .
1994 o 190,012 14,237 6,114 1,446 1,521 1,883 − 447 5,086 − 1,367 .
1995 211,231 21,217 5,894 1,498 1,421 1,421 − 623 13,739 − 2,133 .
1996 3 216,461 7,131 8,353 1,355 396 1,684 − 3,056 833 − 2,432 .
1997 221,575 5,115 4,164 2,722 370 1,767 − 2,423 197 − 1,678 .
1998 238,156 16,578 6,086 2,566 658 8,607 − 4,055 3,905 − 1,188 .
 5  million
1999 133,513 11,747 5,519 2,008 190 1,075 2,099 1,560 − 708 1,603,304
2000 147,629 14,115 3,620 3,694 618 8,089 − 1,986 1,827 − 1,745 1,353,000
2001 166,187 18,561 7,987 4,057 1,106 8,448 1,018 − 905 − 3,152 1,205,613
2002 168,716 2,528 4,307 1,291 486 1,690 − 868 − 2,152 − 2,224 647,492
2003         Apr 161,519 373 401 21 23 18 − 19 − 33 − 38 687,348
         May 162,041 522 204 37 6 56 − 29 361 − 112 688,666
         June 162,106 65 214 77 − 20 1,012 − 1,069 − 188 739,025
oFrom January 1994 including the shares of east German companies and enterprises whose shares are listed on the regulated free market. Source:
(resultant increase in share circulation: DM 7,771 million). —1Including share Bundesbank calculations based on data of the "Herausgebergemeinschaft
issues out of company profits. —2Including enterprises whose shares are lis- Wertpapier-Mitteilungen" and the "Deutsche B örse AG". —3Figure reduced
ted on the Official Market, on the Regulated Market or on the New Market by DM 1,902 million owing to revisions. 
50*VII. Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
VII. Capital market
 
5. Yields and indices on German securities
  
               
Yields on bonds outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices  2 , 3 
Public bonds Bank debt securities Bonds Shares
Memo item:
Listed ForeignFederal securities DM/euro
bonds
With re- With re- issued by German Germansidual matur- sidual matur- German- bond iBoxx- CDAX share
managed index index ities of over 9 ities of over 9 Industrial
 5 -Germany- share price
Total Total Total Total to 10 years bonds (REX) price index index (DAX) to 10 years  4 syndicates  1,5 
Average End- End- End-
Period % p.a. daily rate 1998=100 1987=100 1987=1000
1990 8.9 8.8 8.8 8.7 9.0 8.9 9.0 9.2 93.50 . 145.00 1,398.23
1991 8.7 8.6 8.6 8.5 8.9 8.6 8.9 9.2 96.35 . 148.16 1,577.981992 8.1 8.0 8.0 7.8 8.3 8.1 8.7 8.8 101.54 . 134.92 1,545.051993 6.4 6.3 6.3 6.5 6.5 6.8 6.9 6.8 109.36 . 191.13 2,266.681994 6.7 6.7 6.7 6.9 6.8 7.2 7.0 6.9 99.90 . 176.87 2,106.58
1995 6.5 6.5 6.5 6.9 6.5 7.2 6.9 6.8 109.18 . 181.47 2,253.88
1996 5.6 5.6 5.6 6.2 5.5 6.4 5.8 5.8 110.37 . 217.47 2,888.691997 5.1 5.1 5.1 5.6 5.0 5.9 5.2 5.5 111.01 . 301.47 4,249.691998 4.5 4.4 4.4 4.6 4.5 4.9 5.0 5.3 118.18 100.00 343.64 5,002.391999 4.3 4.3 4.3 4.5 4.3 4.9 5.0 5.4 110.60 92.52 445.95 6,958.14
2000 5.4 5.3 5.2 5.3 5.6 5.8 6.2 6.3 112.48 94.11 396.59 6,433.61
2001 4.8 4.7 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.3 5.9 6.2 113.12 94.16 319.38 5,160.102002 4.7 4.6 4.6 4.8 4.7 5.1 6.0 5.6 117.56 97.80 188.46 2,892.63
2003         Apr 3.8 3.9 3.9 4.2 3.8 4.4 5.5 4.7 118.22 98.15 190.67 2,942.04
         May 3.5 3.5 3.6 3.8 3.4 4.0 4.9 4.4 120.83 100.00 192.07 2,982.68         June 3.3 3.3 3.4 3.6 3.2 3.8 4.5 4.1 119.90 99.50 205.73 3,220.58
         July 3.6 3.6 3.6 4.0 3.5 4.2 4.5 4.3 118.76 97.59 221.81 3,487.86
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of included in the calculation. Monthly figures are calculated on the basis of
issue of over 4 years, if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Conver- the yields on all the business days of a month. The annual figures are the un-
tible debt securities, etc., debt securities with unscheduled redemption, weighted means of the monthly figures. —2End of year or month. —
zero-coupon bonds, floating-rate notes and bonds not denominated in DM 3Source: German Stock Exchange plc. —4Only bonds eligible as underlying
or euros are not included. Group yields for the various categories of secu- instruments for futures contracts are included; calculated as unweightedrities are weighted with the amounts outstanding of the debt securities averages. — 5 As far as quoted on German stock exchanges. 
 
 
6. Sales and purchases of investment fund certificates in Germany
  
Sales of investment fund certificates Purchases
Domestic funds (sales receipts) Residents
Investment funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Non-banks  2 and loanassociations  1 
of which
of which of which
Sales Open- Special- Foreign Foreign= Secur- end ised invest- invest-total Money ities- real invest- ment mentpur- market based estate ment Foreign fund cer- fund cer- Non-resi-chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  
3 Total Total tificates Total tificates dents  4 
Period
DM million
1990 25,788 26,857 7,904 − 8,032 − 128 18,952 −1,069 25,766 4,296 − 362 21,470 − 707 22
1991 50,064 37,492 13,738 − 11,599 2,144 23,754 12,572 49,890 8,594 − 5 41,296 12,577 174
1992 81,514 20,474 −3,102 −− 9,189 6,087 23,575 61,040 81,518 10,495 2,152 71,023 58,888 − 4
1993 80,259 61,672 20,791 − 6,075 14,716 40,881 18,587 76,258 16,982 2,476 59,276 16,111 4,001
1994 130,995 108,914 63,263 31,180 24,385 7,698 45,650 22,081 125,943 9,849 − 689 116,094 22,770 5,052
1995 55,246 54,071 16,777 6,147 3,709 6,921 37,294 1,175 56,295 12,172 188 44,123 987 −1,049
1996 83,386 79,110 16,517 −4,706 7,273 13,950 62,592 4,276 85,704 19,924 1,685 65,780 2,591 −2,318
1997 145,805 138,945 31,501 −5,001 30,066 6,436 107,445 6,860 149,977 35,924 340 114,053 6,520 −4,172
1998 187,641 169,748 38,998 5,772 27,814 4,690 130,750 17,893 190,416 43,937 961 146,479 16,507 −2,775
 5  million
1999 111,282 97,197 37,684 3,347 23,269 7,395 59,513 14,086 105,521 19,862 − 637 85,659 14,722 5,761
2000 117,676 85,160 39,712 −2,188 36,818 −2,824 45,448 32,516 106,674 14,454 92 92,220 32,424 11,000
2001 96,511 76,811 35,522 12,410 9,195 10,159 41,289 19,701 95,407 10,251 2,703 85,156 16,997 1,1052002 66,267 59,482 25,907 3,682 7,247 14,916 33,575 6,784 66,507 2,100 3,007 64,407 3,778 − 241
2003         Apr 4,375 4,575 2,275 − 670 1,172 1,762 2,300 − 200 4,361 − 68 70 4,429 − 270 14
         May 5,206 4,881 1,845 − 55 575 1,325 3,036 325 5,289 603 − 190 4,686 515 − 83
         June 4,221 4,294 2,851 − 854 1,577 2,175 1,443 − 73 4,209 116 − 154 4,093 81 12
1Book values. —2Residual. —3Net purchases or net sales ( −) of foreign non-residents; transaction values (before 1989 classified as shares). —The
investment fund certificates by residents; transaction values. —4Net figures for the latest data are to be regarded as provisional; corrections are
purchases or net sales ( −) of domestic investment fund certificates by not specially marked. 
51*VII. Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
1. Finances of the public sector *
    
Up to the end of 1998, DM billion / from 1999,  5  billion
Central, regional and local authorities  1 Social security funds  2 Public sector, total
Receipts Expenditure
of which
Balance Balance Balance
Other of of of
Person- operat- receipts receipts receipts
of nel ex- ing ex- Capital Finan- and Ex- and Ex- andwhich pend- pend- Current Interest forma- cial expend- Re- pend- expend- Re- pend- expend-
Period Total Taxes  
3 Total  4 iture iture grants paid tion aid  5 iture ceipts  6 iture iture ceipts iture iture
1993 928.7 749.1 1,060.2 296.8 136.0 340.5 102.1 97.0 87.3 −131.5 660.8 658.7 + 2.1 1,492.1 1,621.5 −129.4
1994 995.2 786.2 1,102.2 315.5 137.3 353.4 114.0 93.2 86.5 −106.9 694.1 693.7 + 0.4 1,596.4 1,702.9 −106.5
1995 1,026.4 814.2 1,136.4 324.8 135.5 367.2 129.0 90.1 86.3 −110.1 731.2 743.8 −12.5 1,664.9 1,787.5 −122.6
1996 1,000.3 800.0 1,121.8 326.2 137.0 362.2 130.7 83.9 80.1 −121.5 769.4 784.0 −14.6 1,665.6 1,801.6 −136.1
1997 1,014.3 797.2 1,108.9 325.0 135.7 356.3 132.1 80.1 79.2 −94.5 797.3 794.5 + 2.9 1,705.3 1,797.0 −91.7
1998 1,072.1 833.0 1,128.8 325.4 137.4 373.7 133.7 79.7 79.8 −56.7 812.2 808.9 + 3.3 1,765.5 1,818.9 −53.4
1999 566.1 453.1 592.9 168.7 72.4 202.7 69.8 40.8 38.0 −26.8 429.1 425.6 + 3.5 925.2 948.5 −23.3
2000  p 612.3 467.3 595.5 169.3 73.7 205.7 67.6 40.7 37.9 + 16.8 434.0 434.1 −0.1 974.8 958.0 + 16.8
2001  pe 554.0 446.2 601.0 169.9 70.1 213.5 66.6 40.9 39.6 −47.0 445.2 449.1 −3.9 921.9 972.8 −50.9
2002  pe 547.5 441.7 607.3 173.1 69.0 226.0 66.1 38.2 33.8 −59.8 457.2 465.1 −7.9 920.3 988.0 −67.7
2001         Q1 7 126.7 105.1 147.8 39.5 16.4 55.5 22.0 6.5 7.8 −21.1 108.8 109.7 −0.9 213.5 235.5 −22.0
         Q2 139.4 110.9 136.7 39.3 15.8 54.0 12.6 8.0 6.4 + 2.6 110.1 111.8 −1.7 229.6 228.7 + 0.9
         Q3 136.3 109.5 146.2 40.1 15.6 52.2 19.0 10.0 9.3 −9.9 109.6 111.9 −2.3 227.4 239.5 −12.2
         Q4 149.9 121.3 167.3 49.5 21.8 52.4 12.7 14.5 16.0 −17.3 115.1 114.5 + 0.6 248.9 265.7 −16.8
2002         Q1 118.3 98.6 150.2 39.9 15.3 57.9 24.0 6.5 6.0 −31.8 111.3 112.8 −1.5 206.4 239.8 −33.4
         Q2 137.8 105.1 141.8 40.4 15.6 58.5 11.9 7.8 6.7 −4.0 113.0 115.6 −2.6 228.9 235.6 −6.6
         Q3 135.3 109.4 148.7 41.4 16.5 54.7 19.2 9.7 7.8 −13.4 113.1 116.6 −3.5 228.0 244.9 −16.9
         Q4 p 154.4 129.0 164.7 49.9 21.1 55.8 10.7 13.5 13.4 −10.3 119.3 120.0 −0.7 254.7 265.7 −11.0
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical insurance are estimated. —3The tax revenue shown here is taken from the
Office. —*The budgetary definition used here differs from the methods budget statistics and may differ from the data given in Table VIII. 4, which
employed for the government account of the national accounts and, in case are based on the tax statistics. —4Including discrepancies in clearing
of the quarterly figures, in some respects also from the financial statistics. — transactions between the central, regional and local authorities. —
1Incl. subsidiary budgets. The quarterly figures, unlike the annual figures 5Expenditure on investment grants, loans and acquisition of participating
based on the annual accounts statistics of the Federal Statistical Office, do interests. —6Including Federal Government liquidity assistance to the
not include municipal special-purpose associations and various special Federal Labour Office. —7Owing to modifications of the system of
accounts. For the receipts of Bundesbank profit see footnote 1 to Table VIII. classification, especially shifts between Other operating expenditur e and
2.—2The annual figures differ from the sum of the quarterly figures, as Current grants. 
the latter are all provisional. The quarterly figures for some fields of
2. Finances of the Federal Government, L änder Governments and local authorities *
  
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM billion / from 1999,  5  billion
Federal Government L änder Governments Local authorities
Western  2,  3 Eastern  3 Western  3 Eastern  3 
Period Receipts  1 Expenditure Receipts Expenditure Receipts Expenditure Receipts Expenditure Receipts Expenditure
1993 401.6 462.5 326.5 352.8 76.4 92.5 222.5 230.9 54.4 59.0
1994 439.6 478.9 328.8 357.0 79.3 95.9 228.9 235.1 53.9 59.2
1995 439.3 489.9 338.6 370.2 88.4 101.5 225.6 237.9 58.7 60.8
1996 411.9 490.4 344.8 379.7 93.7 105.5 227.7 232.9 55.0 57.71997 416.8 480.3 349.2 376.5 94.3 105.2 222.9 226.9 52.6 54.21998 439.0 495.6 360.5 380.3 96.4 104.7 231.4 226.3 51.5 52.41999 240.3 266.5 191.6 196.6 50.0 53.3 119.8 117.5 26.1 26.3
2000  
4 292.1 265.2 193.4 200.9 50.7 53.6 122.4 120.5 25.6 25.6
2001  pe 239.9 260.9 184.0 207.1 49.7 53.2 119.2 123.4 24.8 25.4
2002  pe 238.9 271.5 181.8 206.7 46.6 53.7 119.5 123.7 25.1 25.4
2001         Q1 50.8 66.4 44.8 49.8 12.0 11.6 25.5 28.8 5.2 5.5
         Q2 57.6 59.9 46.3 47.5 11.5 11.8 28.8 28.1 5.8 5.8         Q3 62.3 66.3 44.6 49.4 11.7 12.5 29.6 29.9 6.1 6.2         Q4 69.1 68.3 47.6 59.6 14.4 16.4 35.4 36.0 7.5 7.7
2002         Q1 47.4 68.9 42.4 49.4 10.2 12.0 24.7 29.1 5.2 5.4
         Q2 56.3 62.6 43.3 48.8 11.1 11.9 28.8 29.1 5.9 5.8         Q3 62.7 70.6 45.3 49.3 11.8 12.9 29.1 30.5 6.1 6.2         Q4
p 72.5 69.5 50.2 58.5 13.5 16.1 37.0 35.4 7.8 7.7
2003         Q1 p 46.6 71.9 42.2 51.1 9.7 12.6 . . . .
52*Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Fund for Inherited Liabilities. —2Including Berlin, Bremen, Hamburg.
Office. —*See corresponding footnote to Table VIII. 1. —1The Including Berlin (East). —3The quarterly figures, unlike the annual figures
Bundesbank profit transfer is shown in full until 1994; from 1995 only the based on the annual accounts statistics of the Federal Statistical Office, d o
DM 7 billion scheduled in the budget is shown. Since that time, receipts not include various special accounts. —4Including receipts from the UMTS
over and above the scheduled amount accrue directly to the Redemption licence auctions. 
52*VIII. Public finance in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
3. Finances of the Government in the national accounts *
    
Up to the end of 1998, DM billion / from 1999,  5  billion
Item 1995  1 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000  2 2001  pe 2002  pe 
Receipts 1,647.8 1,704.0 1,726.8 1,775.9 943.4 963.7 951.5 952.7
of which
Taxes 825.8 850.0 856.9 897.4 490.4 511.7 488.3 485.0Social security contributions 662.5 696.7 720.1 727.7 375.7 378.5 383.6 388.7
Expenditure 1,764.9 1,826.6 1,826.5 1,859.6 973.2 991.8 1,009.0 1,028.9
of which
Intermediate input 143.2 142.7 140.2 144.1 76.9 78.5 81.6 84.3Employee compensation 315.9 319.6 319.0 319.3 165.4 165.6 164.9 165.9Interest 128.9 131.7 133.2 136.4 68.8 68.2 67.8 67.2Social security benefits  
3 902.8 970.7 984.7 998.4 523.1 534.7 548.1 573.0
Gross capital formation 80.5 76.4 69.4 69.9 37.8 37.0 35.8 33.7
Financial balance − 117.1 − 122.7 − 99.7 − 83.7 − 29.7 − 28.0 − 57.5 − 76.2
as a percentage of the grossdomestic product − 3.3 − 3.4 − 2.7 − 2.2 − 1.5 − 1.4 − 2.8 − 3.6
Memo item
Debt as defined inMaastricht Treaty 2,010.0 2,143.9 2,232.9 2,298.2 1,210.3 1,221.8 1,232.8 1,282.8
as a percentage of the grossdomestic product 57.1 59.8 61.0 60.9 61.2 60.2 59.5 60.8
Source: Federal Statistical Office. —*Figures according to ESA 95. In unadjusted terms, the deficit amounted to 9.8% of GDP. —2Adjusted
Notwithstanding the figures shown by the Federal Statistical Office, for receipts from UMTS licence auctions. In the accounts of the Federalcalculated including −with no impact on the balance −customs duties, the Statistical Office, such receipts (50.85  5 billion) are recorded under "net
EU share in VAT revenue and EU subsidies. —1Adjusted for the balance of increase in non-produced assets", with the result that government spending
notional capital transfers between the public sector and the corporate is lower and a surplus (22.8  5 billion or 1.1% of GDP) is shown. —
sector, mainly in connection with the winding-up of the Treuhand agency. 3 Monetary social security benefits and social benefits in kind. 
4. Tax revenue of the central, regional and local authorities
    
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999,  5  million
Federal and L änder Governments and European Union Local authorities  4 
Länder Governments
of which Balance of
Federal of which European in the untransferred
Period Total Total  1 Government  2 Total New L änder Union  3 Total New L änder tax shares  5 
1991 661,920 577,150 321,334 224,321 19,139 31,495 84,633 2,540 + 137
1992 731,738 638,423 356,849 247,372 23,807 34,203 93,374 4,034 − 58
1993 749,119 653,015 360,250 256,131 27,542 36,634 95,809 5,863 + 2951994 786,162 688,785 386,145 261,947 32,052 40,692 97,116 7,677 + 260
1995 814,190 719,332 390,807 288,520 . 40,005 94,498 8,460 + 359
1996 799,998 706,071 372,390 294,232 . 39,449 94,641 7,175 − 714
1997 797,154 700,739 368,244 290,771 . 41,724 96,531 7,703 − 117
1998 833,013 727,888 379,491 306,127 . 42,271 104,960 8,841 + 1641999 453,068 396,734 211,727 164,724 . 20,284 56,333 4,810 + 1
2000 467,253 410,117 219,034 169,249 . 21,833 57,241 4,895 − 104
2001 446,248 392,189 213,342 159,115 . 19,732 54,047 4,590 + 122002 441,703 389,162 214,371 156,231 . 18,560 52,490 4,769 + 51
2003         Q1 . 84,210 43,325 35,379 . 5,506 . . .
         Q2
p . 95,360 51,614 38,249 . 5,497 . . .
2003         Feb . 27,683 14,801 11,165 . 1,718 . . .
         Mar . 28,788 16,550 10,971 . 1,268 . . .
         Apr . 26,880 14,315 10,733 . 1,831 . . .
         May . 30,708 17,075 11,775 . 1,859 . . .         June
p . 37,773 20,224 15,741 . 1,807 . . .
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. —1Including receipts from the revenue. —4Including local authority taxes of Berlin, Bremen and
Equalisation of Burdens levies.  —2Before deduction of supplementary Hamburg. —5Difference between the local authorities ’share in the
Federal grants and shares in the revenue of mineral oil tax remitted to the income taxes received by the L änder cash offices in the period in question
Länder Governments. —3Including the (GNP-related) receipts accruing to (see Table VIII. 5) and the amounts passed on to the local authorities during
the EU from 1988 to the detriment of the Federal Government ’s tax the same period. 
53*VIII. Public finance in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
5. Tax revenue, by type
    
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999,  5  million
Joint taxes Memo
item
Income taxes  2 Turnover taxes  5,  6 Local
author-
As- Invest- ities’
sessed ment Value- Turnover Share EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income added tax on in trade Federal L änder customs income
Period Total  1 Total tax  3 tax tion tax taxes  4 Total tax imports tax  6,  7 taxes  8 taxes  8 duties taxes  9 
1991 615,506 298,804 214,175 41,532 31,716 11,381 179,672 98,797 80,875 5,986 92,583 29,113 8,307 38,356
1992 681,751 331,310 247,322 41,531 31,184 11,273 197,712 117,274 80,438 6,923 104,802 32,963 7,742 43,3281993 697,988 341,785 257,987 33,234 27,830 22,734 216,306 174,492 41,814 4,181 93,678 34,720 7,240 44,9731994 734,234 343,055 266,522 25,510 19,569 31,455 235,698 195,265 40,433 6,271 105,410 36,551 7,173 45,450
1995 765,374 344,554 282,701 13,997 18,136 29,721 234,622 198,496 36,126 8,412 134,013 36,602 7,117 46,042
1996 746,958 317,807 251,278 11,616 29,458 25,456 237,208 200,381 36,827 8,945 137,865 38,540 6,592 40,8871997 740,272 313,794 248,672 5,764 33,267 26,092 240,900 199,934 40,966 8,732 135,264 34,682 6,900 39,5331998 775,028 340,231 258,276 11,116 36,200 34,640 250,214 203,684 46,530 10,284 130,513 37,300 6,486 47,1401999 422,012 184,408 133,809 10,887 22,359 17,353 137,155 111,600 25,555 5,463 72,235 19,564 3,186 25,277
2000 436,115 192,381 135,733 12,225 23,575 20,849 140,871 107,140 33,732 5,521 75,504 18,444 3,394 25,998
2001 417,358 170,817 132,626 8,771 −426 29,845 138,935 104,463 34,472 5,510 79,277 19,628 3,191 25,170
2002 414,008 165,096 132,190 7,541 2,864 22,502 138,195 105,463 32,732 5,752 83,494 18,576 2,896 24,846
2003         Q1 89,121 34,118 30,589 −5,449 2,443 6,535 33,706 25,526 8,179 358 15,209 5,050 681 4,911
         Q2
p 101,351 40,199 31,683 2,596 1,221 4,698 33,301 24,958 8,343 1,641 20,786 4,753 672 5,991
2003         Feb 29,245 8,746 9,785 −1,745 −372 1,077 12,862 10,087 2,776 246 5,664 1,484 244 1,562
         Mar 30,016 10,687 9,331 −2,948 3,042 1,263 9,881 6,948 2,933 18 7,475 1,714 240 1,227
         Apr 28,509 8,877 10,399 −1,377 −1,071 926 10,389 7,657 2,733 1,113 6,316 1,591 223 1,630
         May 32,409 10,638 10,615 −1,243 −336 1,602 11,798 8,815 2,984 490 7,678 1,554 250 1,701
         June p 40,433 20,683 10,669 5,216 2,629 2,170 11,113 8,487 2,626 37 6,792 1,608 199 2,660
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. —1This total, unlike that in Table VIII. supplementary Federal grant to the pension insurance funds; 2.2% of the
4, includes neither the revenue from Equalisation of Burdens levies, trade balance went to the local authorities, of the new balance: 50.5% to thetax on returns and capital (less Federal and L änder shares in trade tax), the Federal Government, 49.5% to the L änder Governments, from 2000 50.25%
taxes on land and buildings and other local authority taxes, nor the balance to the Federal Government, 49.75% to the L änder Governments, from 2002
of untransferred tax shares. —2The yield of wage tax and assessed income 49.6% to the Federal Government, 50.4% to the L änder Governments. The
tax was distributed among the Federal Government, the L änder EU share must likewise be deducted from the Federal Government ’s share
Governments and the local authorities in the ratio of 42.5 : 42.5 : 15 from stated. —6Since 1991 the distribution of turnover tax and the level and
1980, and the yield of corporation tax and investment income tax between distribution of the share in trade tax have been affected by the financing ofthe Federal Government and the L änder Governments in the ratio of 50 : 50 the debt service of the "German Unity" Fund. —7Federal Government and
from 1970. —3From 1996, after deduction of child benefit. —4From L änder Governments 50% each. From 1998 Federal Government 42.2%,
February 1993 including revenue from the tax on interest income, in which L änder Governments 57.8%. —8For breakdown see Table VIII. 6. —9From
the local authorities have a share of 12%. —5From 1998 3.64% and from 1998 including the share in turnover taxes. 
1999 5.63% went to the Federal Government in advance to finance the
6. Individual taxes of the Federal Government, L änder Governments and local authorities
    
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999,  5  million
Federal taxes L änder taxes Local authority taxes
Insur- Electri- Other Motor Inherit- Other Taxes on Other
Mineral Tobacco Spirits ance city Federal vehicle Property ance Beer L änder Trade land and local
Period oil tax tax tax tax tax taxes  1 tax tax tax tax taxes tax  2 buildings taxes  3 
1991 47,266 19,592 5,648 5,862 . 14,215 11,012 6,729 2,636 1,647 7,090 41,297 9,921 1,181
1992 55,166 19,253 5,545 8,094 . 16,744 13,317 6,750 3,030 1,625 8,241 44,848 10,783 1,2811993 56,300 19,459 5,134 9,290 . 3,495 14,059 6,784 3,044 1,769 9,065 42,266 11,663 1,3831994 63,847 20,264 4,889 11,400 . 5,011 14,169 6,627 3,479 1,795 10,482 44,086 12,664 1,445
1995 64,888 20,595 4,837 14,104 . 29,590 13,806 7,855 3,548 1,779 9,613 42,058 13,744 1,426
1996 68,251 20,698 5,085 14,348 . 29,484 13,743 9,035 4,054 1,718 9,990 45,880 14,642 1,4631997 66,008 21,155 4,662 14,127 . 29,312 14,418 1,757 4,061 1,698 12,749 48,601 15,503 1,5091998 66,677 21,652 4,426 13,951 . 23,807 15,171 1,063 4,810 1,662 14,594 50,508 16,228 1,5321999 36,444 11,655 2,233 7,116 1,816 12,973 7,039 537 3,056 846 8,086 27,060 8,636 824
2000 37,826 11,443 2,151 7,243 3,356 13,485 7,015 433 2,982 844 7,171 27,025 8,849 784
2001 40,690 12,072 2,143 7,427 4,322 12,622 8,376 290 3,069 829 7,064 24,534 9,076 7902002 42,193 13,778 2,149 8,327 5,097 11,951 7,592 239 3,021 811 6,913 23,489 9,261 696
2003         Q1 4,878 1,950 383 3,999 1,161 2,838 1,999 77 749 172 2,052 . . .
         Q2
p 10,741 3,600 467 1,594 1,588 2,797 1,977 80 899 200 1,597 . . .
2003         Feb 1,375 516 52 2,694 344 684 546 15 163 54 706 . . .
         Mar 3,533 1,220 261 613 620 1,229 672 27 300 56 659 . . .
         Apr 3,539 1,071 132 484 396 694 688 6 276 56 565 . . .
         May 3,627 1,850 174 627 613 788 655 11 303 71 514 . . .         June
p 3,575 679 160 483 579 1,316 634 63 321 73 518 . . .
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. —1Other excise taxes and the income until mid-1992, and again since the beginning of 1995. —2On returns and
and corporation tax surcharge ("solidarity surcharge") levied from mid-1991 capital. — 3 Including tax-like receipts.   
54*VIII. Public finance in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
7. Indebtedness of the public sector *
    
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999,  5  million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
5−year lending owing to
Bundes- Treasury special Federal Debt by credit Social German Equalisa-
End of year bank discount Treasury Federal savings secur- institu- security unifica- tionor month Total advances paper  
1 notes  2,  3 bonds  2 bonds ities  2 tions  4 funds Other  4 tion 5 claims Other  6 
Public authorities
1996 2,126,320 . 27,609 231,102 176,164 96,391 618,262 836,582 770 39,450 9,960 89,826 203
1997 2,215,893 . 26,336 249,507 177,721 99,317 662,516 879,021 663 29,907 1,315 89,376 2161998 2,280,154 . 25,631 227,536 199,774 92,698 723,403 894,456 550 26,073 1,249 88,582 2021999 1,199,975 . 12,594 102,364 120,998 41,621 416,051 450,111 281 10,200 476 45,175 1052000 1,211,439 . 11,616 109,951 126,276 35,991 438,888 433,443 211 10,524 285 44,146 1082001 1,223,929 . 23,036 151,401 130,045 26,395 448,148 422,440 174 13,110 85 8,986 108
2002         Mar 1,249,857 . 17,817 158,695 133,421 22,648 461,617 431,066 218 15,234 49 8,986 109
         June 1,251,125 . 22,252 176,996 133,289 20,636 463,906 408,991 239 15,681 51 8,986 101         Sep 1,269,119 . 31,440 193,052 135,502 19,752 462,459 401,797 227 16,893 50 7,848 102         Dec 
p 1,277,630 . 30,815 203,951 137,669 17,898 456,300 404,168 195 18,664 29 7,845 97
Federal Government 7,  8
1996 839,883 . 26,789 55,289 176,164 96,391 434,295 32,988 5 7,766 1,330 8,684 183
1997 905,691 . 25,286 78,848 177,721 99,317 481,619 31,845 5 870 1,300 8,684 1971998 957,983 . 24,666 84,760 199,274 92,698 519,718 24,125 − 2,603 1,270 8,684 186
1999 714,069 . 11,553 44,335 120,498 41,621 379,808 67,872 60 2,568 476 45,175 1042000 715,819 . 11,516 44,678 123,642 35,991 400,490 52,836 29 2,099 285 44,146 1072001 701,077 . 21,136 59,643 119,911 26,395 416,195 47,111 26 1,481 85 8,986 107
2002         Mar 721,619 . 16,917 59,622 123,287 22,648 429,270 59,356 12 1,365 49 8,986 108
         June 716,787 . 21,389 66,445 123,155 20,636 431,039 43,600 12 1,374 51 8,986 100         Sep 726,896 . 30,982 72,762 125,316 19,752 429,452 39,392 0 1,242 50 7,848 101         Dec 725,405 . 30,227 78,584 127,484 17,898 422,558 39,517 0 1,167 29 7,845 97
2003         Mar 745,400 . 30,085 80,348 132,987 15,434 435,146 42,281 − 1,183 −1 7,845 94
West German L änder Governments
1996 477,361 . 320 91,969 . . . 372,449 54 12,567 . − 2
1997 505,297 . 350 86,639 . . . 406,499 47 11,760 . − 2
1998 525,380 . 520 83,390 . . . 430,709 43 10,716 . − 2
1999 274,208 . 150 43,033 . . . 226,022 23 4,979 . − 1
2000 282,431 . − 48,702 . . . 227,914 22 5,792 . . 1
2001 305,788 . 1,800 67,721 . . . 228,270 5 7,991 . . 1
2002         Mar 310,210 . 800 73,844 . . . 225,475 58 10,032 . . 1
         June 314,447 . 750 83,192 . . . 219,729 79 10,697 . . 1         Sep 320,617 . 250 92,220 . . . 216,121 79 11,946 . . 1         Dec 328,390 . 250 97,556 . . . 217,241 63 13,280 . . 1
2003         Mar 339,986 . 300 109,109 . . . 213,990 77 16,509 . . 1
East German L änder Governments
1996 80,985 . 500 26,820 . . . 53,483 − 182 . . .
1997 90,174 . 700 27,540 . . . 61,697 15 222 . . .1998 98,192 . 445 27,228 . . . 70,289 − 230 . . .
1999 53,200 . 891 14,517 . . . 37,602 − 189 . . .
2000 55,712 . 100 16,092 . . . 39,339 − 182 . . .
2001 58,771 . 100 20,135 . . . 37,382 − 1,154 . . .
2002         Mar 59,143 . 100 21,328 . . . 36,256 − 1,460 . . .
         June 60,156 . 112 23,387 . . . 35,399 − 1,258 . . .
         Sep 61,533 . 208 24,097 . . . 35,860 − 1,368 . . .
         Dec 63,782 . 338 23,838 . . . 37,953 − 1,653 . . .
2003         Mar 64,965 . 245 26,134 . . . 36,351 − 2,235 . . .
West German local authorities 9
1996 158,613 . . 200 . . 1,280 152,311 174 4,648 . . .
1997 160,162 . . 300 . . 1,330 154,145 149 4,238 . . .1998 158,960 . . 300 . . 1,330 153,208 119 4,003 . . .1999 81,511 . . 153 . . 680 78,726 53 1,898 . . .2000 81,414 . . 153 . . 680 78,656 33 1,891 . . .2001 82,203 . . 153 . . 629 79,470 29 1,922 . . .
2002         Mar 82,900 . . 153 . . 629 80,168 30 1,920 . . .
         June 83,700 . . 153 . . 629 80,968 30 1,920 . . .         Sep 84,000 . . 153 . . 629 81,268 30 1,920 . . .         Dec 
p 84,097 . . 153 . . 629 81,307 22 1,986 . . .
East German local authorities  9
1996 38,976 . . 225 . . 400 37,922 308 121 . . .
1997 38,688 . . 225 . . 400 37,623 273 167 . . .1998 39,873 . . 225 . . 460 38,777 255 156 . . .1999 20,726 . . 51 . . 335 20,138 124 78 . . .2000 17,048 . . 51 . . 335 16,497 114 50 . . .2001 17,005 . . − . . 284 16,581 107 33 . . .
2002         Mar 16,880 . . − . . 284 16,456 110 30 . . .
         June 16,700 . . − . . 284 16,276 110 30 . . .
         Sep 16,700 . . − . . 284 16,276 110 30 . . .
         Dec 
p 16,745 . . − . . 284 16,318 102 41 . . .
For footnotes see end of the table. 
55*VIII. Public finance in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
7. Indebtedness of the public sector * (cont ’d)
    
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999,  5  million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
5−year lending owing to
Bundes- Treasury special Federal Debt by credit Social German Equalisa-
End of year bank discount Treasury Federal savings secur- institu- security unifica- tionor month Total advances paper  
1 notes  2,  3 bonds  2 bonds ities  2 tions  4 funds Other  4 tion 5 claims Other  6 
“German Unity “Fund / Indemnification Fund 7
1996 83,556 . −−− . 44,321 38,020 5 1,210 . . .
1997 79,717 . −−− . 44,347 34,720 5 645 . . .
1998 79,413 . −−− . 47,998 30,975 − 440 . . .
1999 40,234 . − 275 500 . 28,978 10,292 − 189 . . .
2000 40,629 . − 275 2,634 . 29,797 7,790 − 133 . . .
2001 39,923 . − 3,748 10,134 . 21,577 4,315 − 149 . . .
2002         Mar 40,006 . − 3,748 10,134 . 21,732 4,315 − 7 7...
         June 40,028 . − 3,820 10,134 . 21,902 4,147 − 2 6...
         Sep 40,047 . − 3,820 10,134 . 22,049 4,019 − 2 6...
         Dec 39,810 . − 3,820 10,134 . 22,685 3,146 − 2 6...
2003         Mar 39,833 . . 4,694 10,134 . 23,420 1,585 −− ...
         June 39,600 . . 4,694 10,134 . 23,443 1,329 −− ...
ERP Special Fund 7
1996 34,135 . .... 10,750 23,385 −− ...
1997 33,650 . .... 10,810 22,840 −− ...
1998 34,159 . .... 11,944 20,988 − 1,227 . . .
1999 16,028 . .... 6,250 9,458 21 299 . . .
2000 18,386 . .... 7,585 10,411 13 377 . . .
2001 19,161 . .... 9,462 9,310 8 381 . . .
2002         Mar 19,098 . . . − . 9,701 9,039 8 350 . . .
         June 19,308 . . . − . 10,052 8,873 8 376 . . .
         Sep 19,327 . . . 51 . 10,045 8,863 8 361 . . .         Dec 19,400 . . . 51 . 10,144 8,686 8 512 . . .
2003         Mar 19,369 . . . 51 . 10,138 8,660 8 512 . . .
         June 19,399 . . . 51 . 10,169 8,660 8 512 . . .
Federal Railways Fund 7,  8
1996 77,785 . . 1,882 − . 28,749 41,537 130 5,489 . . .
1997 77,254 . . 1,927 − . 25,634 44,807 115 4,772 . . .
1998 77,246 . . − 500 . 31,648 42,488 79 2,531 . . .
1999         June 39,231 . . − 1,023 . 16,805 20,401 34 968 . . .
Debt-Processing Fund / Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities 7,  8
1996 331,918 . − 54,718 − . 98,468 81,380 95 7,468 8,630 81,142 19
1997 322,032 . − 54,028 − . 98,377 81,616 54 7,233 15 80,692 17
1998 304,978 . − 31,633 − . 110,006 79,226 54 4,167 −20 79,899 15
1999         June 151,097 . − 11,127 2,000 . 58,897 36,133 27 2,015 −9 40,902 4
“Use of Hard Coal “Equalisation Fund 7,  8
1996 3,108 . .... − 3,108 −− ...
1997 3,229 . .... − 3,229 −− ...
1998 3,971 . .... 3 0 0 3,671 −− ...
1999         June 2,302 . .... 1 5 3 2,148 −− ...
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical accordance with the London Debts agreement; excluding debt securities i n
Office. —*Excluding public authorities ’mutual indebtedness. — own portfolios. —7The debt incurred through the joint issue of Federal
1Predominantly Treasury discount paper. —2Excluding paper in the securities is recorded here −in contrast to the capital market statistics −
issuers ’portfolios. —3Länder Treasury paper also covers the long-term under the Federal Government and its special funds in accordance with the
maturity category. —4Mainly loans against borrowers ’notes. Including agreed distribution ratios. —8Since July 1, 1999 the Federal Government
loans raised abroad. Other loans from non-banks, including loans from has assumed joint responsibility for the debts of the Redemption Fund forsupplementary public pension funds and liabilities arising from the Inherited Liabilities, the Federal Railway Fund and the Equalisation Fund forinvestment assistance levy. —5Old liabilities arising from residential Safeguarding the Use of Coal. The special funds mentioned are only
construction and liabilities arising from residential construction by the recorded under the Federal Government from July. —9Data other than
former GDR ’s armed forces and from residential construction in connection end-of-year figures have been estimated. Including indebtedness of munici-
with the return of the troops of the former USSR in eastern Germany to pal special-purpose associations. their home country. —6Old debt mainly expressed in foreign currency, in
56*VIII. Public finance in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
8. Changes in public sector indebtedness *
    
Net borrowing  1 
Level at end of 2001 20022001 2002  
p Total 1st hf Q3 Q4 Total  p 1st hf Q3 Q4  p 
Item  5  million
Borrowers
Federal Government  2 701,077 725,405 −14,910 −24,394 + 6,820 + 2,665 + 24,328 + 15,709 + 10,110 −1,491
"German Unity" Fund 39,638 39,441 − 787 + 9 − 41 − 754 − 197 + 64 −− 261
ERP Special Fund 19,161 19,400 + 775 + 604 + 449 − 278 + 239 + 147 + 19 + 73
Indemnification Fund 285 369 + 81 + 43 + 21 + 17 + 84 + 40 + 19 + 25
West  German  Länder 305,788 328,390 + 23,357 + 5,617 + 7,422 + 10,318 + 22,603 + 8,660 + 6,170 + 7,774 Governments
East German  Länder 58,771 63,782 + 3,059 + 472 + 1,365 + 1,222 + 5,011 + 1,385 + 1,377 + 2,249 Governments
West German local authorities  3 82,203 84,097 + 2,487 + 1,250 − 460 + 1,697 + 2,718 + 1,275 + 900 + 543
East German local authorities  3 17,005 16,745 + 162 − 124 −+ 286 − 146 − 211 − 30 + 95
Total 1,223,929 1,277,630 + 14,224 −16,524 + 15,576 + 15,173 + 54,640 + 27,068 + 18,564 + 9,008
Types of debt
Treasury discount paper  4 23,036 30,815 + 11,420 + 2,130 + 5,803 + 3,488 + 7,779 − 785 + 9,188 − 625
Treasury notes  5 151,401 203,951 + 41,449 + 14,542 + 12,724 + 14,183 + 52,551 + 25,595 + 16,056 + 10,900
Five-year special Federal bonds  5 130,045 137,669 + 3,770 + 3,616 + 1,067 − 913 + 7,623 + 3,244 + 2,213 + 2,167
Federal savings bonds 26,395 17,898 −9,596 −5,746 −1,422 −2,428 −8,497 −5,759 − 884 −1,854
Debt securities  5 448,148 456,300 + 9,260 + 6,897 + 336 + 2,027 + 8,152 + 15,758 −1,446 −6,159
Direct lending by
credit institutions  6 422,440 404,168 −9,100 −4,213 −1,802 −3,086 −17,334 −13,578 −6,624 + 2,868
Loans from social security funds 174 195 − 37 − 26 − 3− 8 + 21 + 64 − 12 − 32
Other loans  6 13,070 18,623 + 2,586 + 351 + 36 + 2,199 + 5,553 + 2,571 + 1,212 + 1,770
Old debt  7 193 126 − 200 − 43 − 17 − 140 − 67 − 42 − 0− 25
Equalisation claims 8,986 7,845 −35,328 −34,033 −1,144 − 150 −1,142 −− 1,139 − 3
Investment assistance levy 40 41 − 0− 0− 0− 0− 0− 0+ 0+ 0
Total 1,223,929 1,277,630 + 14,224 −16,524 + 15,576 + 15,173 + 54,640 + 27,068 + 18,564 + 9,008
Creditors
Banking system
Bundesbank 4,440 4,440 −−−−−−−−
Credit institutions 534,400 532,900 −29,304 −15,083 −11,361 −2,859 − 562 −1,529 + 270 + 697
Domestic non-banks
Social security funds 174 195 − 31 − 6− 20 − 5 + 21 + 65 − 12 − 32
Other  8,  r 231,815 229,595 + 30,541 + 4,647 + 9,357 + 16,537 −2,220 − 369 − 794 −1,057
Foreign creditors  pe,  r 453,100 510,500 + 13,017 −6,083 + 17,600 + 1,500 + 57,400 + 28,900 + 19,100 + 9,400
Total 1,223,929 1,277,630 + 14,224 −16,524 + 15,576 + 15,173 + 54,640 + 27,068 + 18,564 + 9,008
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Treasury discount paper. —5Excluding paper in the issuers ’portfolios. —
Office. —*Excluding public authorities ’mutual indebtedness. —1Net 6Including loans raised abroad. —7Old liabilities arising from residential
borrowing differs from the change in indebtedness, which includes the construction and liabilities arising from the residential construction of th e
assumption and reduction of debts. —2See Table VIII. 7, footnote 8. — former GDR ’s armed forces and from residential construction in connection
3Data other than end-of-year figures have been estimated. Including with the return of the troops of the former USSR based in eastern Germany
indebtedness of municipal special-purpose associations and municipal to their home country, and old debt in accordance with the London Debtshospitals. —4Excluding mobilisation and liquidity paper. Predominantly Agreement. — 8 Ascertained as a difference. 
9. Loans raised by public authorities against borrowers ’ notes
    
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999,  5  million
End of year Federal "German ERP L änder Local Federal Inherited "Use of Hard
or month Govern- Unity" Special Govern- authorities Railways Liabilites Coal" Equal-
Total  1 ment  2,  3 Fund Fund ments 4,  5 Fund  3 Fund  3 isation Fund  3 
1998 898,030 23,094 31,415 22,215 504,148 184,942 45,098 83,447 3,671
1999 444,031 64,704 10,481 9,778 264,158 94,909 −− −
2000 431,364 54,731 7,178 10,801 268,362 90,292 −− −
2001 416,068 44,791 4,464 9,699 267,988 89,126 −− −
2002 Mar 409,176 41,751 4,392 9,397 264,741 88,895 −− −
June 404,661 40,431 4,172 9,256 262,574 88,228 −− −
Sep 401,432 39,267 4,044 9,231 260,611 88,280 −− −
Dec p 398,910 34,636 3,172 9,205 262,840 89,057 −− −
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical 3See Table VIII. 7, footnote 8. —4Data other than end-of-year figures have
Office. —1Excluding Debt Register claims and cash advances. Including been estimated. Including municipal special-purpose associations and
small amounts of: mortgage loans, land charges in annuity and other forms, municipal hospitals. — 5 Including contractually agreed loans. 
and debts outstanding. —2Including Equalisation of Burdens Fund. —
57*VIII. Public finance in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
10. Indebtedness of the Federal Government
    
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999,  5  million
Treasury Indebtedness
discount paper  1 to non-banks Old debt
Federal Direct
of which Treasury 5 −year Debt lending owing to
Treasury paper/ special Federal secur- by credit Social German Equal-
End of year financing Treasury Federal savings ities institu- security Other unifica- isationor month Total Total paper notes  
2 bonds  2 bonds 2 tions  3,  4 funds 3,  5,  6  tion 7 claims Other  8 
1996 839,883 26,789 7,166 55,289 176,164 96,391 434,295 32,988 5 7,766 1,330 8,684 183
1997 905,691 25,286 5,221 78,848 177,721 99,317 481,619 31,845 5 870 1,300 8,684 1971998 957,983 24,666 4,558 84,760 199,274 92,698 519,718 24,125 − 2,603 1,270 8,684 186
1999  
9 714,069 11,553 1,584 44,335 120,498 41,621 379,808 67,872 60 2,568 476 45,175 104
2000 715,819 11,516 1,805 44,678 123,642 35,991 400,490 52,836 29 2,099 285 44,146 1072001 701,077 21,136 1,658 59,643 119,911 26,395 416,195 47,111 26 1,481 85 8,986 1072002 725,405 30,227 1,618 78,584 127,484 17,898 422,558 39,517 0 1,167 29 7,845 97
2002         July 726,077 21,253 1,763 71,385 123,144 20,773 430,911 49,222 12 1,374 54 7,848 102
         Aug 723,931 26,149 1,724 71,540 124,334 20,057 430,140 42,323 12 1,374 52 7,848 101         Sep 726,896 30,982 1,700 72,762 125,316 19,752 429,452 39,392 0 1,242 50 7,848 101
         Oct 728,799 30,977 1,663 78,405 125,954 18,011 425,750 40,487 0 1,242 26 7,848 99
         Nov 734,678 30,466 1,622 78,933 126,472 17,852 434,650 37,089 0 1,242 28 7,848 99         Dec 725,405 30,227 1,618 78,584 127,484 17,898 422,558 39,517 0 1,167 29 7,845 97
2003         Jan 743,400 30,218 1,549 84,053 127,786 15,408 426,630 50,171 0 1,167 30 7,845 95
         Feb 745,992 30,081 1,462 84,808 129,055 15,515 428,692 48,701 0 1,167 36 7,845 94         Mar 745,400 30,085 1,375 80,348 132,987 15,434 435,146 42,281 − 1,183 −1 7,845 94
         Apr 747,512 30,048 1,308 80,447 133,377 15,458 429,019 50,040 − 1,183 4 7,845 92
         May 749,175 30,490 1,275 85,842 134,238 14,414 431,160 43,917 − 1,183 −2 7,845 89
         June 749,920 30,416 1,236 82,834 140,442 14,284 428,166 43,744 − 2,102 −4 7,845 91
         July
p 759,774 30,818 1,183 87,689 141,135 13,763 426,322 51,153 − 2,102 −4 6,706 91
1Excluding mobilisation and liquidity paper. In November 1999, including with the return of the troops of the former USSR based in eastern Germany
cash bills. —2Excluding paper in the issuers ’portfolios. —3Including loans to their home country. —8Commutation and compensation debt and old
raised abroad. —4Including money market debt. —5Including loans debt mainly expressed in foreign currency. —9Since July 1, 1999 the
granted by supplementary pension funds for government employees. — Federal Government has assumed joint responsibility for the debts of the
6Including liabilities arising from the investment assistance levy. — Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, the Federal Railway Fund and the
7Assumption of liabilities arising from residential construction of the Equalisation Fund for Safeguarding the Use of Coal. The special funds
former GDR ’s armed forces and from residential construction in connection mentioned are ascribed to the Federal Government from July 1999. 
11. Federal Government borrowing in the market
    
Up to the end of 1998, DM billion / from 1999,  5  billion
of which
5−year special Loans against Change in
Total new borrowing Debt Securities Federal bonds Other securities  2 borrowers ’ notes Money money
market market
Period gross  1 net gross  1 net gross  1 net gross  1 net gross net debt deposits
1996 + 185,696 + 83,049 + 54,038 + 31,988 + 45,445 + 5,445 + 67,015 + 39,586 + 15,050 + 1,906 + 4,148 + 6,548
1997 + 250,074 + 65,808 + 79,323 + 47,323 + 59,557 + 1,557 + 98,275 + 24,983 + 12,950 − 8,009 − 30 − 3,304
1998 + 228,050 + 52,292 + 78,304 + 38,099 + 55,078 + 21,553 + 85,706 − 1,327 + 12,023 − 2,927 − 3,065 − 5,440
1999 + 139,865 + 31,631 + 53,931 + 114,080 + 22,229 + 18,610 + 44,904 − 5,836 + 14,861 + 52,897 + 3,937 + 1,832
2000 + 122,725 + 1,750 + 49,395 + 20,682 + 26,342 + 3,144 + 45,278 − 5,323 + 7,273 − 9,973 − 5,563 − 940
2001 + 135,018 − 14,741 + 36,511 + 15,705 + 19,603 − 3,730 + 69,971 + 14,989 + 5,337 − 9,941 + 3,595 − 1,495
2002 + 178,203 + 24,328 + 41,378 + 6,364 + 36,037 + 7,572 + 93,853 + 19,535 + 4,716 −10,155 + 2,221 + 22
2002         Jan-July + 101,030 + 25,000 + 25,244 + 14,717 + 16,261 + 3,233 + 49,181 + 6,236 + 3,278 − 5,076 + 7,066 + 316
2003         Jan-July  p + 145,056 + 34,369 + 38,947 + 3,763 + 27,572 + 13,652 + 60,753 + 5,560 + 6,740 + 1,526 + 11,046 + 196
2002         July + 27,272 + 9,291 + 10,400 − 127 − 11 − 11 + 9,934 + 4,941 + 610 − 716 + 6,338 + 133
         Aug + 6,663 − 2,147 − 772 − 772 + 8,739 + 1,189 + 5,360 + 4,337 + 135 − 100 − 6,799 + 228
         Sep + 9,231 + 2,966 − 688 − 688 + 983 + 983 + 11,072 + 5,748 + 590 − 348 − 2,727 + 1,413
         Oct + 20,715 + 1,903 + 8,082 − 3,702 + 637 + 637 + 10,797 + 3,897 + 94 − 10 + 1,106 − 1,181
         Nov + 23,264 + 5,880 + 8,900 + 8,900 + 8,562 + 518 + 5,171 − 141 + 543 − 3,487 + 88 − 564
         Dec + 17,300 − 9,273 + 611 −12,092 + 854 + 1,012 + 12,273 − 542 + 76 − 1,134 + 3,487 − 191
2003         Jan + 34,388 + 17,995 + 11,187 + 4,071 + 292 + 302 + 10,732 + 2,969 + 628 − 895 + 11,549 + 449
         Feb + 14,560 + 2,592 + 2,063 + 2,063 + 7,831 + 1,269 + 5,793 + 725 + 40 − 305 − 1,166 + 112
         Mar + 11,908 − 592 + 6,451 + 6,454 + 3,924 + 3,933 + 7,071 − 4,536 + 633 − 234 − 6,170 + 6
         Apr + 17,202 + 2,112 + 3,736 − 6,127 + 380 + 390 + 5,001 + 86 + 100 − 225 + 7,984 − 92
         May + 15,681 + 1,663 + 2,133 + 2,141 + 8,260 + 861 + 10,443 + 4,794 + 565 − 404 − 5,720 + 61
         June + 20,815 + 745 + 2,025 − 2,994 + 6,192 + 6,204 + 11,496 − 3,212 + 1,156 + 801 − 54 − 215
         July p + 30,502 + 9,854 + 11,352 − 1,844 + 693 + 693 + 10,217 + 4,735 + 3,618 + 2,786 + 4,623 − 124
1After deduction of repurchases. —2Federal Treasury notes, Federal   
savings bonds, Treasury discount paper, Treasury financing paper.    
58*VIII. Public finance in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
12. Receipts, expenditure and assets of the wage and
salary earners ’ pension insurance funds
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999,  5  million
Receipts  1 Expenditure  1 Assets  5 
of which of which Memor-
Balance Mort- andum
Pen- of receipts gage item
Pension sioners ’ and and Adminis-
Contri- Federal pay- health expend- other Real trative
Period Total butions  2 payments Total ments  3 insurance  4 iture Total Deposits  6 Securities loans  7 estate assets
Western Germany
1996  8 288,761 236,036 50,478 288,716 237,464 16,809 + 45 14,456 9,608 2,119 2,500 229 8,863
1997 305,606 248,463 54,896 295,635 246,011 17,892 + 9,971 14,659 10,179 1,878 2,372 230 9,2611998 317,340 250,063 65,191 304,155 254,783 18,636 + 13,185 18,194 14,201 1,493 2,274 226 9,573
1999 169,124 128,191 39,884 159,819 134,536 9,910 + 9,305 13,623 11,559 824 1,127 114 4,904
2000 173,020 128,057 43,638 166,569 139,180 10,253 + 6,451 14,350 11,459 1,676 1,105 110 4,8892001  
8 178,293 130,064 46,710 172,382 144,374 10,610 + 5,911 13,973 10,646 1,517 1,699 111 4,917
2002  p 181,534 131,103 48,993 178,746 149,822 11,359 + 2,788 9,832 6,948 1,072 1,686 126 4,927
2002         Q1 43,411 30,893 12,212 43,792 36,898 2,719 − 381 11,943 8,712 1,427 1,698 106 4,933
         Q2 44,541 31,949 12,222 43,927 36,784 2,711 + 614 10,663 7,490 1,366 1,696 111 4,954         Q3 45,371 32,663 12,280 44,799 37,746 2,872 + 572 8,911 5,919 1,182 1,689 121 4,947         Q4 48,213 35,599 12,279 45,928 37,894 3,056 + 2,285 9,832 6,948 1,072 1,686 126 4,927
2003         Q1 45,408 31,969 13,173 45,117
r 38,234 2,900 + 291 8,686 5,649 1,230 1,685 122 4,874
         Q2 46,373 32,875 13,212 45,379 38,127 2,898 + 994 7,698 4,906 980 1,686 126 4,867
Eastern Germany
1996 74,790 46,580 17,910 83,830 68,316 4,851 −9,040 . . . . . .
1997 79,351 48,939 20,065 87,424 70,500 5,388 −8,073 . . . . . .
1998 81,072 47,764 23,564 90,863 73,040 5,757 −9,791 . . . . . .
1999 43,214 24,015 14,744 47,641 38,383 3,040 −4,427 . . . . . .
2000 43,513 22,655 15,224 49,385 39,419 3,112 −5,872 . . . . . .
2001  p 44,462 21,984 16,383 50,943 40,356 3,152 −6,481 . . . . . .
2002  p 45,275 21,697 17,608 53,040 41,778 3,264 −7,765 . . . . . .
2002         Q1 11,070 5,157 4,410 13,106 10,373 793 −2,036 . . . . . .
         Q2 11,493 5,455 4,558 13,046 10,228 797 −1,553 . . . . . .
         Q3 10,757 5,275 4,334 13,391 10,530 832 −2,634 . . . . . .
         Q4 11,955 5,810 4,306 13,397 10,547 842 −1,442 . . . . . .
2003         Q1 11,187 5,320 4,588 13,359 r 10,649 827 −2,172 . . . . . .
         Q2 11,457 5,474 4,537 13,405 10,636 837 −1,948 . . . . . .
Source: Federal Minister of Labour and Social Affairs and Association of deducted from pension payments. —4From 1995 including nursing
German Pension Insurance Funds. —1The annual figures differ from the insurance scheme for pensioners. —5Largely corresponds to fluctuation
sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. From 1993 reserves. Level at the end of the year or quarter. From 1992 figures for theincluding financial compensation payments. Excluding investment spending whole of Germany. —6Including cash resources. —7Excluding loans to
and proceeds. —2Including contributions for recipients of public financial other social security funds; including participating interests. —8Excluding
benefits. —3Payments by pension insurance funds to health insurance receipts arising from the higher valuation of participating interests. 
institutions under section 50 of the Social Security Code V have been
13. Receipts and expenditure of the Federal Labour Office
    
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999,  5  million
Receipts Expenditure
Subsidies
of which of which or work-
ing fund
Promotion of vocational Promo- Balance credits
Unemployment relief  3,  4 training  4,  5 tion of of receipts of the
winter and Federal
Contri- Western Eastern Western Eastern con- expend- Govern-
Period Total  1 butions Levies  2 Total Total Germany Germany Total Germany Germany struction iture ment
Germany
1996 91,825 85,073 3,346 105,588 57,123 40,186 16,938 36,478 18,368 18,111 903 −13,763 13,756
1997 93,149 85,793 2,959 102,723 60,273 40,309 19,964 31,418 16,117 15,301 443 −9,574 9,574
1998 91,088 86,165 2,868 98,852 53,483 35,128 18,355 34,279 16,784 17,496 471 −7,764 7,719
1999 47,954 45,141 1,467 51,694 25,177 16,604 8,573 20,558 10,480 10,078 279 −3,740 3,739
2000 49,606 46,359 1,403 50,473 23,946 15,615 8,331 20,324 10,534 9,790 294 − 868 867
2001 50,682 47,337 1,640 52,613 25,036 16,743 8,294 20,713 11,094 9,619 268 −1,931 1,931
2002 50,885 47,405 2,088 56,508 27,610 19,751 7,860 21,011 11,568 9,443 245 −5,623 5,623
2002         Q1 11,502 11,188 51 13,093 6,587 4,608 1,979 4,665 2,523 2,142 139 −1,591 3,720
         Q2 12,200 11,459 433 14,141 7,098 5,005 2,093 5,230 2,903 2,327 97 −1,941 2,200
         Q3 12,710 11,808 528 13,905 6,708 4,839 1,869 5,182 2,849 2,334 7 −1,195 854
         Q4 14,473 12,951 1,077 15,369 7,218 5,299 1,919 5,933 3,293 2,640 2 − 896 −1,151
2003         Q1 11,617 11,281 48 14,408 7,647 5,422 2,225 4,785 2,576 2,209 180 −2,790 5,151
         Q2 12,272 11,487 536 14,667 7,975 5,708 2,267 4,721 2,623 2,098 84 −2,395 2,408
Source: Federal Labour Office. —1Excluding Federal Government liquidity replacement for the unemployment benefits. —4Including contributions to
assistance. —2Levies to promote winter construction and to pay bank- the statutory health insurance, and to the pension insurance funds. —
ruptcy compensation to employees. —3Unemployment benefits, 5Vocational training, measures to foster the commencement of work,
short-time-working benefits. Including the integration allowance paid to rehabilitation, job creation measures, grants to personnel service age ncies,
resettlers from eastern Europe and emigrants from the GDR as a wage protection and business start-up grants. 
59*VIII. Public finance in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
IX. Economic conditions
  
1. Origin and expenditure of domestic product, distribution of national income    Germany
    
  1998   1999   2000   2001   2002   1999   2000   2001   2002   1999   2000   2001   2002
DM Change from % of
Item billion  5  billion previous year in % total
at  1995  prices
I.Origin of domestic product
Producing sector(excluding construction) 855.2 429.4 445.6 447.3 446.5 −1.8 3.8 0.4 −0.2 22.4 22.6 22.6 22.5
Construction 205.3 105.5 102.6 96.0 90.4 0.5 −2.7 −6.5 −5.8 5.5 5.2 4.8 4.6
Distribution, catering trade,and transportation  
1 614.6 335.3 352.9 361.8 366.1 6.7 5.3 2.5 1.2 17.5 17.9 18.3 18.5
Financing, rents and corporateservices  
2 1,028.6 548.3 572.6 585.2 595.4 4.3 4.4 2.2 1.7 28.6 29.1 29.5 30.0
Public and private services  3 737.6 380.6 387.3 391.6 396.5 0.9 1.8 1.1 1.2 19.9 19.7 19.8 20.0
All economic sectors 3,487.2 1,823.3 1,885.3 1,906.5 1,919.0 2.3 3.4 1.1 0.7 95.2 95.7 96.2 96.7
Memo item: Enterprise sector 3,041.7 1,595.6 1,656.7 1,679.3 1,692.7 2.6 3.8 1.4 0.8 83.3 84.1 84.8 85.3
Economic sectors, adjusted  4 3,320.2 1,730.3 1,785.5 1,801.4 1,809.6 1.9 3.2 0.9 0.5 90.4 90.7 90.9 91.2
Gross domestic product 3,669.9 1,914.8 1,969.5 1,980.8 1,984.3 2.0 2.9 0.6 0.2 100 100 100 100
II.Expenditure of domestic product
Private consumption  5 2,072.8 1,099.2 1,114.8 1,131.6 1,124.3 3.7 1.4 1.5 −0.6 57.4 56.6 57.1 56.7
Government consumption 726.3 375.0 379.6 382.6 388.5 1.0 1.2 0.8 1.5 19.6 19.3 19.3 19.6Machinery and equipment 292.5 160.3 175.5 165.4 149.9 7.2 9.5 −5.8 −9.4 8.4 8.9 8.3 7.6
Construction 479.5 248.7 242.1 227.7 214.3 1.4 −2.6 −6.0 −5.9 13.0 12.3 11.5 10.8
Other investment  
6 40.0 23.2 25.2 26.5 27.1 13.5 8.4 5.0 2.5 1.2 1.3 1.3 1.4
Changes in stocks  7 3.2 −6.6 −2.7 −15.2 −13.9 . . . . −0.3 −0.1 −0.8 −0.7
Domestic demand 3,614.3 1,899.8 1,934.5 1,918.6 1,890.3 2.8 1.8 −0.8 −1.5 99.2 98.2 96.9 95.3
Net exports 55.6 15.0 35.0 62.2 94.0 . . . . 0.8 1.8 3.1 4.7
Exports 1,078.6 582.5 662.1 695.4 713.8 5.6 13.7 5.0 2.6 30.4 33.6 35.1 36.0Imports 1,023.0 567.4 627.1 633.1 619.8 8.5 10.5 1.0 −2.1 29.6 31.8 32.0 31.2
Gross domestic product 3,669.9 1,914.8 1,969.5 1,980.8 1,984.3 2.0 2.9 0.6 0.2 100 100 100 100
at  current  prices
III.Expenditure of domestic product
Private consumption  5 2,173.3 1,156.5 1,190.9 1,232.2 1,241.9 4.1 3.0 3.5 0.8 58.5 58.7 59.5 58.9
Government consumption 722.7 378.8 387.2 393.5 402.8 2.5 2.2 1.6 2.4 19.1 19.1 19.0 19.1Machinery and equipment 293.5 159.6 175.8 166.3 150.9 6.4 10.2 −5.4 −9.3 8.1 8.7 8.0 7.2
Construction 475.3 245.2 240.2 226.2 212.8 0.9 −2.1 −5.8 −6.0 12.4 11.8 10.9 10.1
Other investment  
6 38.3 21.4 22.8 23.7 24.1 9.1 6.7 4.1 1.7 1.1 1.1 1.1 1.1
Changes in stocks  7 14.1 0.9 5.2 −9.4 −7.3 . . . . 0.0 0.3 −0.5 −0.3
Domestic demand 3,717.2 1,962.3 2,022.2 2,032.6 2,025.2 3.3 3.0 0.5 −0.4 99.2 99.6 98.1 96.1
Net exports 56.4 16.3 7.8 38.6 83.0 . . . . 0.8 0.4 1.9 3.9
Exports 1,095.6 587.0 685.4 726.9 748.3 4.8 16.8 6.1 2.9 29.7 33.8 35.1 35.5Imports 1,039.2 570.7 677.6 688.3 665.2 7.4 18.7 1.6 −3.4 28.8 33.4 33.2 31.6
Gross domestic product 3,773.6 1,978.6 2,030.0 2,071.2 2,108.2 2.6 2.6 2.0 1.8 100 100 100 100
IV.Prices (1995=100)
Private consumption 104.8 105.2 106.8 108.9 110.5 0.4 1.5 1.9 1.4 . . . .Gross domestic product 102.8 103.3 103.1 104.6 106.2 0.5 −0.3 1.4 1.6 . . . .
Terms of trade 100.0 100.2 95.8 96.2 97.7 0.2 −4.4 0.4 1.6 . . . .
V.Distribution of national income
Wages and salaries 2,015.6 1,058.0 1,099.0 1,120.4 1,130.0 2.7 3.9 1.9 0.9 72.0 72.8 73.2 72.3Entrepreneurial and propertyincome 805.0 411.1 410.3 410.9 432.0 −0.1 −0.2 0.2 5.1 28.0 27.2 26.8 27.7
National income 2,820.6 1,469.0 1,509.2 1,531.2 1,562.0 1.9 2.7 1.5 2.0 100 100 100 100
Memo item: Gross national
income 3,746.2 1,965.9 2,020.9 2,055.8 2,099.1 2.6 2.8 1.7 2.1 . . . .(Gross nat. product)
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in May 2003. —1Includ- on products (offset against subsidies on products). —5Including private
ing telecommunications. —2Financial intermediation, real estate activities, non-commercial organisations. —6Intangible fixed capital formation (inter
rents and corporate services. —3Including care-at-home services. —4Gross alia, EDP software, copyrights) and economically useful animals and
value added after deduction of assumed bank charges, but excluding taxes plants. — 7 Including net increase in valuables. 
60*IX. Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
 IX. Economic conditions
 
2. Output in the producing sector     
  
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Industry  1 
Producing sector, Intermediate
total Total goods  2 Capital goods  3 Consumer goods  4 Energy  5 Construction
Change Change Change Change Change Change Change
from from from from from from fromprevious previous previous previous previous previous previousyear year year year year year year
Period in % in % in % in % in % in % in %
1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 
Germany  
  
1999 107.7 + 1.4 111.5 + 1.7 110.7 + 1.8 118.0 + 1.5 103.3 + 1.7 100.0 −0.4 87.9 + 0.8
2000 113.4 + 5.3 119.1 + 6.8 116.9 + 5.6 130.9 + 10.9 105.6 + 2.2 99.7 −0.3 84.9 −3.4
2001 113.2 −0.2 119.9 + 0.7 116.1 −0.7 134.3 + 2.6 105.2 −0.4 98.1 −1.6 78.9 −7.1
2002 111.8 −1.2 118.4 −1.3 116.2 + 0.1 131.1 −2.4 103.6 −1.5 98.4 + 0.3 76.7 −2.8
  
2002         June  6 116.1 −1.4 123.7 −1.4 120.4 −1.0 141.0 −1.3 103.9 −2.4 86.9 + 1.5 86.5 −3.1
         July 112.6 −0.4 118.6 −0.3 119.4 + 1.2 129.8 −0.8 101.2 −1.8 90.0 + 1.1 88.0 −3.2
         Aug 104.8 −0.6 110.1 −0.4 112.5 + 1.9 116.1 −0.9 97.2 −3.6 89.1 + 1.4 80.2 −4.9
         Sep 119.0 −0.8 126.2 −0.6 123.4 + 1.9 141.1 −2.7 109.0 −1.3 92.7 + 0.8 90.0 −3.4
         Oct 118.5 −0.1 124.6 + 0.2 123.4 + 2.0 134.7 −0.7 112.0 −1.1 103.6 + 5.3 88.0 −6.8
         Nov 120.9 + 3.1 128.3 + 4.0 123.1 + 4.7 144.8 + 4.3 113.0 + 2.2 104.6 −0.8 83.0 −2.0
         Dec 104.6 −0.8 111.5 + 0.1 98.5 + 1.7 135.8 −0.8 98.1 −0.5 108.4 −3.0 54.7 −10.6
2003         Jan  r 102.3 + 1.0 109.9 + 1.8 110.8 + 2.8 117.3 + 2.4 97.5 −1.4 112.1 + 0.7 44.1 −9.1
         Feb  r 105.6 + 1.1 114.5 + 2.2 111.1 + 0.0 129.5 + 6.2 98.0 −1.3 106.2 + 7.7 44.7 −22.7
         Mar  r 7 119.1 + 0.5 127.1 + 1.0 124.8 + 1.3 143.2 + 2.2 107.4 −2.3 110.7 + 6.9 7 71.3 −9.1
         Apr  x 7 111.2 −0.5 117.2 −0.3 117.5 + 0.8 127.5 −2.0 101.6 + 0.7 101.7 + 4.4 7 77.8 −6.6
         May  x 7 108.7 + 0.1 114.7 + 0.5 115.3 + 0.0 125.3 + 2.0 98.1 −1.3 96.9 + 2.8 7 76.7 −6.1
         June  x 7 113.6 −2.2 120.1 −2.9 119.6 −0.7 133.0 −5.7 102.0 −1.8 94.2 + 8.4 7 83.0 −4.0
Western Germany  
  
1999 107.2 + 1.2 110.1 + 1.3 109.1 + 1.4 117.1 + 1.2 101.1 + 1.2 100.6 −0.6 88.9 + 1.4
2000 112.7 + 5.1 117.1 + 6.4 114.3 + 4.8 129.8 + 10.8 102.8 + 1.7 99.9 −0.7 87.5 −1.6
2001 112.4 −0.3 117.5 + 0.3 113.2 −1.0 132.9 + 2.4 101.9 −0.9 97.9 −2.0 82.2 −6.1
2002 110.6 −1.6 115.5 −1.7 112.7 −0.4 129.3 −2.7 99.6 −2.3 98.2 + 0.3 80.9 −1.6
  
2002         June  6 114.9 −1.6 120.8 −1.8 116.8 −1.4 139.2 −1.6 100.0 −3.0 86.5 + 1.4 91.1 −1.9
         July 111.6 −0.4 116.1 −0.4 115.8 + 0.8 128.7 −0.7 97.9 −2.0 89.6 + 0.9 93.1 −1.6
         Aug 102.9 −0.8 106.7 −0.7 108.4 + 1.4 113.7 −1.2 93.2 −3.9 88.9 + 1.6 83.0 −3.4
         Sep 117.6 −1.1 123.0 −1.1 119.4 + 1.5 138.9 −3.3 105.1 −2.0 92.7 + 1.0 94.5 −2.4
         Oct 117.0 −0.3 121.3 −0.3 119.7 + 1.8 132.7 −1.2 107.1 −2.3 103.4 + 5.3 92.8 −6.1
         Nov 119.3 + 2.8 124.8 + 3.6 119.3 + 4.4 142.5 + 4.3 107.8 + 0.8 104.5 −0.8 87.3 −0.7
         Dec 103.5 −1.1 108.5 −0.5 95.4 + 1.1 133.8 −1.0 93.1 −2.2 108.1 −3.0 58.3 −8.6
2003         Jan  r 101.5 + 0.8 107.2 + 1.4 107.6 + 2.5 115.6 + 2.1 93.8 −2.0 111.9 + 0.7 46.9 −7.9
         Feb  r 105.1 + 1.2 111.9 + 2.0 107.8 −0.4 128.0 + 6.2 94.6 −1.6 106.1 + 7.7 48.3 −20.8
         Mar  r 7 118.2 + 0.5 124.1 + 0.7 121.0 + 0.8 141.3 + 2.1 103.5 −2.4 110.5 + 7.0 7 76.9 −7.7
         Apr  x 7 110.1 −0.7 114.3 −0.6 113.8 + 0.5 126.1 −2.0 97.6 + 0.1 101.4 + 4.2 7 83.3 −6.0
         May  x 7 107.4 + 0.0 111.7 + 0.4 111.3 −0.4 123.9 + 2.0 94.0 −1.6 96.7 + 2.7 7 81.8 −5.2
         June  x 7 112.3 −2.3 117.0 −3.1 115.2 −1.4 131.8 −5.3 97.9 −2.1 93.9 + 8.6 7 88.6 −2.7
Eastern Germany  
  
1999 114.4 + 4.9 135.8 + 7.6 137.1 + 8.9 135.6 + 7.4 134.0 + 5.9 95.1 + 1.2 84.2 −0.9
2000 121.5 + 6.2 152.7 + 12.4 157.0 + 14.5 153.2 + 13.0 145.7 + 8.7 98.3 + 3.4 75.5 −10.3
2001 123.0 + 1.2 160.0 + 4.8 162.6 + 3.6 163.6 + 6.8 152.6 + 4.7 99.5 + 1.2 67.0 −11.3
2002 125.3 + 1.9 167.1 + 4.4 171.2 + 5.3 168.5 + 3.0 159.7 + 4.7 99.9 + 0.4 61.6 −8.1
  
2002         June  6 129.9 + 1.2 172.6 + 3.6 177.7 + 3.4 178.6 + 4.5 158.8 + 2.8 90.2 + 2.3 70.1 −8.1
         July 123.9 −0.4 161.6 + 2.0 175.9 + 5.6 153.4 −2.2 147.8 + 0.0 92.8 + 2.5 69.8 −9.8
         Aug 127.1 + 1.1 167.4 + 4.4 177.1 + 7.3 166.4 + 4.5 153.5 −0.3 91.0 + 0.2 70.0 −10.6
         Sep 135.7 + 2.9 180.4 + 6.4 185.8 + 5.8 188.5 + 8.4 164.2 + 5.4 92.5 −1.4 73.7 −8.2
         Oct 136.1 + 3.2 180.1 + 6.4 181.7 + 4.2 177.2 + 7.3 180.6 + 9.3 104.8 + 4.4 70.8 −9.8
         Nov 139.1 + 4.7 187.4 + 8.6 183.7 + 7.9 194.4 + 4.2 186.3 + 14.8 105.0 −1.5 67.4 −7.9
         Dec 117.4 + 3.0 162.1 + 8.4 147.9 + 8.9 178.0 + 2.5 168.2 + 14.7 110.8 −3.1 41.8 −19.5
2003         Jan  r 111.6 + 2.8 155.8 + 5.9 161.7 + 6.7 152.7 + 6.2 149.8 + 4.5 113.5 + 0.4 33.9 −14.6
         Feb  r 111.2 −0.3 157.6 + 4.0 163.1 + 4.2 161.7 + 7.1 145.2 + 0.3 107.1 + 7.6 31.7 −31.2
         Mar  r 7 129.6 + 0.9 178.5 + 3.7 185.2 + 6.2 184.7 + 4.6 162.3 −1.3 111.9 + 6.0 7 51.0 −16.1
         Apr  x 7 123.6 + 0.9 165.4 + 2.7 175.1 + 3.2 158.5 −0.9 157.5 + 5.8 104.3 + 5.8 7 57.8 −9.8
         May  x 7 123.2 + 0.2 165.4 + 2.1 178.4 + 3.8 155.3 + 1.0 155.5 + 0.3 98.5 + 3.4 7 58.5 −10.1
         June  x 7 128.1 −1.4 172.1 −0.3 188.5 + 6.1 158.6 −11.2 160.5 + 1.1 96.2 + 6.7 7 63.0 −10.1
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. —oBy means of ducing materials, and especially manufacture of refined petroleum pro-
the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. —1Manufacturing sector, ducts. —6Influenced by the exceptional working-day situation. —7Pro-
unless assigned to the main grouping energy, plus mining and quarrying. — visional up to adjustment to the figures of the annual overall survey in the
2Including mining and quarrying except energy-producing materials. —3In- construction sector. —xProvisional; adjusted in advance by the Federal Stat-
cluding manufacture of motor vehicles, trailers and semi-trailers. —4In- istical Office, by way of estimates, to the results of the Quarterly Production
cluding printing and service activities related to printing. —5Electricity, Survey for the second quarter (industry in Germany: + 0.2%). 
gas, steam and hot water supply, mining and quarrying of energy-pro-
61* IX. Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
 IX. Economic conditions
 
3. Orders received by industry *  
  
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Industry
 
Total Domestic orders Foreign orders Intermediate goods Capital goods  1 Consumer goods  2 
Change Change Change Change Change Change
from from from from from fromprevious previous previous previous previous previousyear year year year year year
Period 2000=100 in % 2000=100 in % 2000=100 in % 2000=100 in % 2000=100 in % 2000=100 in %
Germany  
  
1999 87.8 + 2.1 92.3 − 0.2 82.1 + 5.4 87.5 + 0.8 86.0 + 3.4 95.9 + 0.8
2000 99.9 + 13.8 99.9 + 8.2 99.9 + 21.7 100.0 + 14.3 100.0 + 16.3 99.9 + 4.2
2001 98.3 − 1.6 97.6 − 2.3 99.1 − 0.8 95.9 − 4.1 99.4 − 0.6 101.4 + 1.5
2002 98.3 + 0.0 94.6 − 3.1 102.8 + 3.7 96.4 + 0.5 99.6 + 0.2 99.0 − 2.4
 
2002         June 101.1 − 1.6 96.2 − 2.0 107.1 − 1.0 100.0 − 0.9 103.1 − 1.9 96.1 − 2.2
         July 97.8 + 0.4 95.8 − 1.8 100.3 + 3.2 97.5 + 1.5 98.8 + 0.7 94.4 − 4.6
         Aug 91.7 + 1.2 90.5 − 3.2 93.2 + 7.1 89.5 + 0.8 92.4 + 3.7 96.0 − 6.5
         Sep 101.8 + 3.1 98.3 − 1.2 106.2 + 8.8 100.2 + 5.0 101.8 + 3.2 107.4 − 1.6
         Oct 100.3 + 4.7 97.7 + 1.7 103.6 + 8.6 99.7 + 4.9 100.5 + 6.7 101.9 − 2.7
         Nov 101.6 + 6.3 97.4 + 2.4 106.8 + 11.0 99.4 + 7.8 103.6 + 6.3 100.3 + 0.9         Dec 91.9 − 1.8 88.4 − 1.4 96.2 − 2.3 86.5 + 2.2 97.7 − 4.4 85.5 − 3.0
2003         Jan 97.9 + 3.1 92.4 − 0.2 104.7 + 6.8 97.7 + 4.8 98.2 + 3.0 97.0 − 2.4
         Feb 98.5 + 3.2 95.4 + 3.5 102.4 + 3.1 96.5 + 2.2 99.3 + 5.6 102.1 − 1.9
         Mar 105.6 − 0.8 100.3 − 0.6 112.2 − 1.1 105.2 + 2.3 105.4 − 2.0 106.5 − 6.0
         Apr 97.2 − 0.1 93.2 − 1.2 102.2 + 1.1 97.4 + 0.1 98.3 + 0.9 92.3 − 5.2
         May 93.0 − 5.7 91.0 − 0.1 95.5 −11.6 93.6 − 2.4 94.1 − 8.2 86.2 − 5.9
         June  
p 100.1 − 1.0 94.2 − 2.1 107.4 + 0.3 98.6 − 1.4 104.1 + 1.0 88.3 − 8.1
Western Germany  
  
1999 88.0 + 1.9 92.7 − 0.6 82.4 + 5.5 88.0 + 0.6 86.0 + 3.5 96.5 + 0.6
2000 99.9 + 13.5 99.9 + 7.8 100.0 + 21.4 99.9 + 13.5 100.0 + 16.3 99.9 + 3.5
2001 97.8 − 2.1 97.2 − 2.7 98.6 − 1.4 95.1 − 4.8 99.2 − 0.8 101.1 + 1.2
2002 97.3 − 0.5 93.7 − 3.6 101.6 + 3.0 95.1 + 0.0 98.9 − 0.3 98.3 − 2.8
 
2002         June 100.3 − 2.0 95.1 − 3.0 106.4 − 1.0 99.0 − 1.0 102.6 − 2.5 95.0 − 2.9
         July 97.5 + 0.4 95.3 − 2.0 100.2 + 3.3 96.2 + 1.1 99.4 + 1.2 94.2 − 4.8
         Aug 90.2 + 0.2 89.2 − 4.2 91.4 + 5.8 87.7 + 0.1 91.0 + 2.4 95.3 − 7.3
         Sep 101.1 + 3.3 97.4 − 1.3 105.5 + 8.9 98.8 + 4.9 101.5 + 3.5 106.9 − 1.9
         Oct 99.4 + 4.3 96.6 + 1.2 102.7 + 8.1 98.2 + 4.5 99.9 + 6.3 101.1 − 3.0
         Nov 100.3 + 5.5 96.4 + 2.0 105.0 + 9.5 98.3 + 7.7 102.1 + 4.9 99.3 + 0.5         Dec 90.5 − 2.6 86.9 − 2.1 94.8 − 3.2 85.5 + 2.3 95.9 − 5.5 84.7 − 3.3
2003         Jan 96.9 + 2.5 91.7 − 0.2 103.1 + 5.6 95.2 + 3.8 98.4 + 2.9 96.2 − 2.7
         Feb 97.7 + 3.1 94.7 + 3.3 101.2 + 2.7 95.0 + 1.6 98.7 + 5.4 101.9 − 2.0
         Mar 104.2 − 0.1 99.1 − 1.1 110.4 + 1.0 103.4 + 2.4 104.4 − 0.4 105.9 − 6.4
         Apr 95.9 − 0.8 91.8 − 2.1 100.8 + 0.6 95.1 − 1.1 97.7 + 0.5 91.2 − 5.7
         May 91.8 − 6.5 89.4 − 1.0 94.7 −12.1 91.5 − 3.3 93.6 − 9.1 84.9 − 6.1
         June  
p 99.1 − 1.2 92.2 − 3.0 107.3 + 0.8 96.5 − 2.5 104.0 + 1.4 87.2 − 8.2
Eastern Germany  
  
1999 84.6 + 4.7 87.8 + 3.9 77.0 + 7.1 82.8 + 6.4 86.0 + 2.9 86.9 + 5.8
2000 99.9 + 18.1 100.0 + 13.9 99.9 + 29.7 99.9 + 20.7 100.0 + 16.3 100.0 + 15.1
2001 104.9 + 5.0 102.4 + 2.4 110.9 + 11.0 106.0 + 6.1 103.4 + 3.4 106.1 + 6.12002 111.0 + 5.8 104.0 + 1.6 127.8 + 15.2 111.7 + 5.4 110.7 + 7.1 109.4 + 3.1
 
2002         June 112.0 + 4.9 107.5 + 7.2 122.7 + 0.2 112.7 + 2.5 111.2 + 7.2 111.9 + 5.8
         July 101.1 − 0.7 100.9 − 1.5 101.5 + 1.1 112.5 + 5.5 89.7 − 7.9 98.3 − 1.2
         Aug 112.5 + 14.3 104.2 + 6.7 132.4 + 32.3 111.7 + 7.7 114.6 + 24.7 107.5 + 4.9         Sep 111.8 + 2.5 107.8 + 0.1 121.5 + 8.2 116.0 + 5.8 106.7 − 1.2 114.9 + 3.6
         Oct 113.8 + 10.7 109.9 + 7.1 123.0 + 19.0 116.2 + 8.3 111.0 + 15.9 114.8 + 2.5
         Nov 118.9 + 16.1 107.8 + 5.8 145.5 + 40.6 112.6 + 10.0 126.4 + 25.8 115.6 + 5.7         Dec 111.1 + 7.7 104.8 + 5.0 126.1 + 13.1 99.1 + 3.7 126.7 + 11.8 98.7 + 3.8
2003         Jan 111.3 + 9.4 99.7 + 0.1 139.2 + 30.6 128.1 + 16.9 93.7 + 2.1 110.3 + 2.4
         Feb 110.6 + 7.4 103.3 + 6.3 128.2 + 9.8 113.4 + 8.3 108.9 + 8.5 105.4 − 0.9
         Mar 123.7 − 8.6 112.6 + 4.4 150.5 −25.3 126.4 + 2.5 122.7 −19.6 116.3 − 0.5
         Apr 115.0 + 8.0 107.8 + 7.6 132.4 + 8.9 123.2 + 11.0 107.5 + 6.5 110.4 + 0.4
         May 109.6 + 5.1 107.8 + 7.8 113.8 − 0.6 117.5 + 6.3 102.0 + 5.9 106.8 − 2.8
         June  
p 113.9 + 1.7 115.8 + 7.7 109.4 −10.8 123.2 + 9.3 106.1 − 4.6 106.1 − 5.2
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. —*Economic means of the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. —1Including manu-
activities of the manufacturing sector, in particular, excluding manufacture facture of motor vehicles, trailers and semitrailers. —2Including printing
of food products, beverages, tobacco and refined petroleum products; and service activities related to printing. results for kinds of activity units; figures excluding value-added tax. —oBy
62* IX. Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
 IX. Economic conditions
 
4. Orders received by construction *   
  
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Germany Western Germany Eastern Germany
Housing Public Housing Public Housing Public Industrial Industrial Industrial
con- construc- construc- con- construc- construc- con- construc- construc-
Total struction tion  1 tion Total struction tion  1 tion Total struction tion  1 tion
 Change Change Change
 from from from
 previous previous previous
 year year year
Period 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 in % 2000 = 100 in % 2000 = 100 in %
1999 109.3 −2.1 119.6 106.1 106.7 107.4 + 0.8 114.6 104.3 106.4 115.6 −10.0 134.7 112.3 107.3
2000 99.9 −8.6 100.0 99.9 100.0 99.9 −7.0 99.9 99.9 100.0 100.0 −13.5 100.0 99.9 100.0
2001 94.5 −5.4 82.9 96.9 99.0 97.4 −2.5 87.6 99.9 100.7 85.2 −14.8 68.3 86.4 94.2
2002 88.7 −6.1 72.8 91.5 95.6 90.9 −6.7 79.6 93.1 95.6 81.7 −4.1 51.9 85.8 95.7
   
2002         May 92.3 −13.9 78.5 89.0 104.5 93.4 −15.1 85.1 90.6 101.9 88.6 −10.1 58.2 83.2 112.2
         June 106.3 −11.5 84.4 102.7 124.1 108.5 −10.3 90.9 104.7 124.2 99.1 −15.3 64.7 95.2 123.7
         July 93.8 −5.4 69.3 95.9 106.9 96.4 −4.3 75.2 98.7 107.2 85.6 −9.5 51.3 86.1 105.7
         Aug 88.3 −11.3 71.0 85.7 102.2 87.1 −13.2 74.4 84.9 97.7 92.4 −4.1 60.8 88.4 115.3
         Sep 101.9 −2.4 77.4 100.8 118.3 103.4 −4.2 83.3 101.1 118.9 96.9 + 3.6 59.3 99.9 116.6
         Oct 84.5 −8.3 67.5 84.8 94.9 86.0 −9.3 75.4 85.6 93.1 80.1 −4.1 43.4 82.2 100.1
         Nov 74.7 −8.2 68.4 74.9 78.5 73.8 −9.9 75.3 72.8 74.0 77.8 −2.1 47.5 82.4 91.5
         Dec 79.3 −0.3 70.1 89.1 74.0 83.1 −2.2 80.3 93.0 73.2 67.3 + 8.5 38.9 75.5 76.4
2003         Jan 56.8 −9.3 49.7 61.7 55.6 58.5 −11.2 55.3 62.1 56.2 51.2 −2.3 32.5 60.3 53.7
         Feb 64.4 −12.9 54.6 67.4 67.0 67.5 −8.7 59.4 68.9 71.1 54.2 −26.9 40.0 62.4 54.9
         Mar 88.6 −20.8 78.9 86.4 97.3 91.7 −24.3 87.1 87.7 99.4 78.8 −3.7 53.9 81.5 91.1
         Apr 82.5 −13.2 69.9 81.9 90.9 84.9 −13.8 76.9 84.3 90.8 74.6 −11.5 48.4 73.8 91.1
         May 82.7 −10.4 66.6 83.1 92.4 81.6 −12.6 70.7 79.7 90.8 86.2 −2.7 54.0 95.1 97.0
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. —*Values exclusive gineering". —oBundesbank calculation. —1Including the railways and
of value-added tax. The figures refer to the economic classifications "Site pre- post office. paration" and "Building of complete constructions or parts thereof; civil en-
 
 
5. Retail trade turnover *)
    Germany
  
Retail trade  1 Memo item
of which:  by enterprises ’ main product range of which
Pharmaceutical Household
and medical articles, Retail trade plus retailgoods, cosmetic Clothing, hardware, sales of motor vehicles
Food, beverages, and toilet footwear and paints and glass and motorcycles plus Retail sales of
Total tobacco  
2 articles  2 leather goods  2 2  3 sales of automotive fuel motor vehicles  4 
Change from Change Change Change Change Change from Change
from from from from from previous year in % previous year in %
previous previous previous previous previous
not year year year year not year price- price-
Period in % in % in % in % in % 2000 = 100 adjusted adjusted  5 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 adjusted adjusted  5 2000 = 100
1995 96.7 + 1.3 + 0.7 97.0 + 3.3 78.5 + 6.5 104.0 + 0.0 97.5 −2.6 94.8 + 1.8 + 1.1 86.1 + 3.6
1996 97.0 + 0.3 −0.6 97.0 + 0.0 81.8 + 4.2 103.2 −0.8 96.4 −1.1 96.0 + 1.3 + 0.3 90.7 + 5.3
1997 95.9 −1.1 −1.7 95.7 −1.3 83.4 + 2.0 101.4 −1.7 95.2 −1.2 95.8 −0.2 −0.7 94.0 + 3.6
1998 96.9 + 1.0 + 1.1 97.1 + 1.5 88.2 + 5.8 100.3 −1.1 98.2 + 3.2 97.5 + 1.8 + 1.5 99.2 + 5.5
1999 97.7 + 0.8 + 0.5 98.0 + 0.9 94.7 + 7.4 100.2 −0.1 97.6 −0.6 98.7 + 1.2 + 0.8 102.9 + 3.7
2000 100.0 + 2.4 + 1.2 100.0 + 2.0 100.0 + 5.6 100.0 −0.2 100.0 + 2.5 100.0 + 1.3 + 0.1 100.0 −2.8
2001 101.8 + 1.8 . 104.7 + 4.7 107.3 + 7.3 99.5 −0.5 96.5 −3.5 101.9 + 1.9 . 102.4 + 2.4
2002 100.1 −1.7 −2.2 107.4 + 2.6 111.1 + 3.5 94.6 −4.9 89.0 −7.8 101.0 −0.9 −1.6 105.2 + 2.7
 
2002         June 93.4 −3.7 −3.5 103.2 −1.3 106.1 + 1.8 85.3 −3.1 81.3 −10.5 97.0 −2.1 −2.2 110.5 + 3.8
         July 99.7 + 1.4 + 1.5 107.0 + 4.4 114.8 + 6.1 92.8 −0.5 88.4 −2.5 102.8 + 2.6 + 2.2 114.8 + 7.9
         Aug 97.0 −1.8 −1.2 107.8 + 2.7 109.4 + 2.9 86.5 −2.9 84.9 −6.7 97.0 −1.6 −1.3 96.6 −0.4
         Sep 96.9 −0.4 −0.3 100.8 + 3.4 107.3 + 6.9 100.1 −9.1 85.6 −5.0 97.4 + 0.8 + 0.3 99.9 + 5.9
         Oct 105.6 + 1.1 + 1.4 109.5 + 3.3 114.9 + 4.2 110.2 + 5.3 94.7 −7.1 106.5 + 1.8 + 1.9 111.6 + 4.9
         Nov 106.3 −3.8 −3.4 112.2 + 0.7 113.3 + 0.4 98.3 −10.5 97.8 −8.3 105.8 −3.5 −3.1 106.1 −1.9
         Dec 119.8 −2.5 −2.6 124.7 + 1.4 126.7 + 2.4 118.5 −4.7 104.4 −8.0 114.9 −1.3 −2.1 98.6 + 5.0
2003         Jan 93.6 + 1.4 + 1.8 101.7 + 4.3 111.2 + 2.8 81.5 −1.0 78.8 −2.6 92.4 + 1.3 + 1.3 89.1 + 0.7
         Feb 87.9 + 1.2 + 1.2 98.0 + 3.0 104.7 + 4.2 67.7 −5.7 77.3 −0.8 89.1 + 1.3 + 1.2 94.6 + 1.4
         Mar 99.6 −2.5 −2.8 108.5 −3.6 109.1 + 0.1 91.2 −5.0 93.9 + 3.8 103.0 −1.2 −1.5 116.0 + 3.0
         Apr 102.8 + 1.8 + 2.1 113.5 + 5.4 112.9 + 0.0 97.1 + 0.2 91.5 −1.4 105.8 + 0.9 + 1.1 117.5 −1.8
         May 99.4 −0.7 −0.2 109.0 −1.1 111.3 + 1.6 94.5 −2.4 88.3 + 0.1 103.1 + 0.9 + 1.0 116.7 + 5.9
         June  e 93.0 −0.4 −0.5 105.1 + 1.8 107.8 + 1.6 83.1 −2.6 80.3 −1.2 97.0 + 0.0 −0.3 ... ...
Source: Federal Statistical Office. —*Excluding value-added tax; figures tive fuel. —2Retail sales in stores. —3Including furniture and lighting
from 2002 provisional, partly revised and, judging by past experience, sub- equipment. —4Including motor vehicle parts and accessories. —5Up to and
ject to considerable uncertainty in the most recent months. —1Excluding including 2000, at 1995 prices; from 2001, at 2000 prices. 
sales of motor vehicles and motorcycles and excluding the sale of automo-
63* IX. Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
 IX. Economic conditions
 
6. Labour market * 
  
 
Persons in
Employed  1,2,r Employees  1 employment  3 Persons Unemployed  2 
employed
Mining under Personsand employ- under-manu- ment pro- goingfactur- Short- motion Change vocational
Change from Change ing Con- time schemes further from Unem-previous year from sector
2  5 previous ploy- training  2 workers  2 struction  4 Vacancies,
previous year, ment 2 
Thou- Thou- Thou- year Thou- thou- thou- rate 2  6 
Period sands in % sands sands in % Thousands sands sands in % sands
Germany  
  
2000 38,750 + 1.8 + 676 34,748 + 1.8 6,373 1,053 86 316 352 3,889 −211 9.7 514
2001 38,914 + 0.4 + 164 34,835 + 0.3 6,395 958 123 243 345 3,852 − 37 9.4 506
2002 38,668 −0.6 −245 34,590 −0.7 6,218 8 883 207 192 332 4,060 + 209 9.8 451
2002         July 38,681 −0.6 −226 6,214 894 173 187 315 4,047 + 248 9.7 471
         Aug 38,705 −0.7 −288 34,662 −0.8 6,220 895 145 191 320 4,018 + 229 9.6 458
         Sep 38,868 −0.9 −335 6,215 893 216 199 337 3,942 + 199 9.5 420
         Oct 38,926 −0.9 −354 6,187 884 214 202 342 3,930 + 204 9.4 378
         Nov 38,842 −1.1 −448 34,773 −1.1 6,165 873 205 197 339 4,026 + 237 9.7 344
         Dec 38,630 −1.3 −505 6,128 849 165 180 318 4,225 + 262 10.1 324
2003         Jan 37,790 −1.5 −560 ... 788 195 155 299 4,623 + 333 11.1 350
         Feb 37,733 −1.6 −608 33,803 −1.5 ... 757 227 150 287 4,706 + 410 11.3 388
         Mar 37,835 −1.7 −660 ... p 778 244 143 275 4,608 + 452 11.1 415
         Apr 38,029 −1.7 −670 ... p 795 242 138 262 4,495 + 471 10.8 419
         May o 38,096 o −1.7 o −660 ... ... ... p 801 225 134 255 4,342 + 396 7 10.4 393
         June ... ... ... ... ... 222 131 241 4,257 + 303 10.2 373
         July ... ... ... ... ... 196 131 220 4,352 + 305 10.4 367
Western Germany 9  
  
2000 . . . . . 5,761 749 59 59 202 2,380 −224 7.6 448
2001 . . . . . 5,769 696 94 53 197 2,320 − 60 7.2 436
2002 . . . . . 5,593 8 654 162 42 192 2,498 + 178 7.7 377
2002         July . . . . . 5,590 662 142 43 182 2,482 + 203 7.6 394
         Aug . . . . . 5,592 662 103 42 183 2,477 + 197 7.5 375         Sep . . . . . 5,585 660 140 42 196 2,440 + 184 7.4 345
         Oct . . . . . 5,559 654 154 41 200 2,450 + 182 7.5 312
         Nov . . . . . 5,540 647 156 41 198 2,520 + 199 7.7 285         Dec . . . . . 5,506 632 131 38 186 2,647 + 212 8.1 270
2003         Jan . . . . . ... 593 157 35 175 2,898 + 262 8.8 294
         Feb . . . . . ... 572 187 34 168 2,951 + 317 9.0 328         Mar . . . . . ...
p 586 199 33 165 2,880 + 352 8.8 348
         Apr . . . . . ... p 597 201 32 160 2,811 + 363 8.6 350
         May . . . . . ... p 601 187 31 159 2,715 + 306 7 8.2 327
         June . . . . . ... ... 182 30 151 2,663 + 255 8.1 306
         July . . . . . ... ... 162 29 137 2,734 + 253 8.3 300
Eastern Germany 10  
  
2000 . . . . . 612 305 27 257 150 1,508 + 13 17.2 66
2001 . . . . . 626 262 29 190 148 1,532 + 23 17.3 702002 . . . . . 625
8 229 45 150 140 1,563 + 31 17.7 74
2002         July . . . . . 624 232 31 145 133 1,565 + 45 17.7 78
         Aug . . . . . 628 232 41 148 136 1,541 + 32 17.4 83         Sep . . . . . 630 233 77 157 141 1,502 + 15 17.0 75
         Oct . . . . . 628 231 60 160 142 1,480 + 22 16.8 65
         Nov . . . . . 626 227 49 157 141 1,506 + 38 17.0 59         Dec . . . . . 622 217 34 142 132 1,578 + 49 17.9 54
2003         Jan . . . . . ... 196 39 120 125 1,725 + 71 19.5 55
         Feb . . . . . ... 185 40 116 118 1,756 + 94 19.9 61         Mar . . . . . ...
p 192 45 110 110 1,728 + 99 19.6 67
         Apr . . . . . ... p 198 41 106 102 1,684 + 108 19.1 69
         May . . . . . ... p 200 38 103 96 1,628 + 90 7 18.6 67
         June . . . . . ... ... 39 102 89 1,594 + 48 18.3 67
         July . . . . . ... ... 34 102 82 1,618 + 53 18.5 67
Source: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Labour Office. —*Monthly fig- labour force. —7From May 2003 calculated on the basis of new labour
ures: levels at end of month; employed persons and employees: averages; force figures. —8The figures from March 2002 onwards are positively in-
short-time workers: levels at mid-month; annual and quarterly figures: aver- fluenced by the fact that construction firms which are required to repo rt
ages. —1Work-place concept. —2Annual figures, calculated by the Bundes- and which have been identified in the course of drawing up the corporate
bank; deviations from the official figures are due to rounding. —3In- register are included for the first time. —9Excluding West Berlin; for the
cluding active proprietors. —4The figures refer to the economic classifica- mining, manufacturing and construction sectors, including persons
tions ”Site preparation ”and ”Building of complete constructions or parts employed in West Berlin. —10Including West Berlin; for the mining,
thereof; civil engineering ”.—5Employees involved in job creation schemes manufacturing and construction sectors, excluding persons employed in
and structural adjustment measures (SAM). —6Relative to the total civilian West Berlin. — o First preliminary estimate. 
64* IX. Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
 IX. Economic conditions
 
7. Prices
 Germany
  
Indices of Index of world market
Consumer price index foreign trade prices prices  of raw materials  4 
Other Index of
durable producerand non- prices ofdurable Overall industrial Index ofconsumer Services con- products producergoods excluding struction prices of sold on the
excluding house House price domestic Other raw agricultural
Total Food Energy  
1 rents  2 rents level  2 market  3 Exports Imports Energy  5 products  3 materials  6 energy  1,  2 
Period 2000 = 100 1995 = 100
Index level  
  
1999 98.6 100.6 100.3 87.7 99.0 98.8 98.5 98.5 89.9 100.9 100.2 132.8 93.0
2000 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 99.2 101.8 95.4 104.4 111.4 231.0 110.0
2001 102.0 105.1 100.3 105.7 102.5 101.2 99.4 104.9 100.8 105.4 112.1 209.2 102.92002 103.4 106.1 101.1 106.0 105.0 102.6 99.5 104.4 94.6 105.3 109.3 201.2 97.9
 
2001         Aug 102.3 105.3 100.2 106.1 103.5 101.4 99.4 105.1 101.9 105.4 111.7 218.4 99.7
         Sep 102.3 105.1 100.3 107.4 102.7 101.4 105.2 102.6 105.3 111.1 214.9 96.1
         Oct 102.0 105.2 100.5 104.0 102.4 101.5 104.3 100.9 105.0 109.3 181.1 94.1
         Nov 101.8 104.5 100.7 102.3 102.2 101.6 99.3 104.0 100.5 104.9 108.7 164.9 97.0         Dec 102.8 105.2 100.8 101.4 105.8 101.6 103.7 99.8 104.8 108.5 163.0 95.8
2002         Jan 102.9 108.7 101.4 103.5 103.5 102.0 104.3 98.2 104.9 109.1 169.9 98.3
         Feb 103.2 108.0 101.5 104.1 104.3 102.2 99.4 104.4 99.4 104.9 109.6 178.3 101.6         Mar 103.4 107.8 101.5 106.0 104.3 102.4 104.7 99.7 105.2 110.5 208.0 104.3
         Apr 103.3 107.8 101.3 108.1 103.5 102.4 104.6 96.0 105.4 110.7 219.8 102.8
         May 103.4 107.7 101.2 106.9 104.4 102.5 99.5 104.6 94.5 105.4 110.1 213.3 98.5         June 103.4 106.6 101.1 105.9 104.9 102.6 104.5 93.7 105.4 108.7 197.4 95.6
         July 103.7 105.9 100.9 105.9 106.5 102.7 104.2 93.5 105.3 108.2 197.1 94.0
         Aug 103.5 104.7 100.8 106.2 106.2 102.8 99.5 104.1 93.4 105.4 108.8 206.5 94.3         Sep 103.4 104.5 100.9 107.2 105.3 102.8 104.3 94.6 105.5 109.5 218.2 96.0
         Oct 103.3 104.1 100.9 107.6 104.8 102.9 104.6 94.3 105.5 109.5 212.8 96.8
         Nov 103.0 103.6 101.0 105.1 104.5 103.0 99.4 104.4 94.8 105.4 108.0 189.0 96.8         Dec 104.0 104.0 100.9 105.6 107.9 103.0 104.6 94.4 105.4 109.0 204.5 95.5
2003         Jan 104.0 105.3 101.4 110.7 105.1 103.2 106.0 94.8 105.5 109.6 216.8 94.7
         Feb 104.5 105.9 101.6 113.0 105.9 103.4 99.6 106.4 96.4 105.8 110.3 228.4 95.7         Mar 104.6 106.3 101.6 113.8 105.6 103.5 106.5 94.8 105.8 109.6 210.1 95.1
         Apr 104.3 106.6 101.4 110.2 105.8 103.7 106.3 94.9 105.7 107.4 178.0 94.4
         May 104.1 106.8 101.4 108.2 105.6 103.7 99.6 106.0
p 94.3 105.3 105.9 170.3 89.6
         June 104.4 107.1 101.3 108.8 106.1 103.8 105.9 p 95.5 105.1 105.8 181.0 88.0
         July 104.6 106.3 101.1 109.2 107.4 103.8 ... ... ... ... 191.6 89.8
Change from previous year in %  
  
1999 + 0.6 − 1.1 + 0.1 + 4.0 + 0.3 + 1.1 −0.3 − 1.0 − 6.0 − 0.5 − 0.5 + 36.5 − 3.8
2000 + 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.3 + 14.0 + 1.0 + 1.2 + 0.7 + 3.4 + 6.1 + 3.5 + 11.2 + 73.9 + 18.3
2001 + 2.0 + 5.1 + 0.3 + 5.7 + 2.5 + 1.2 + 0.2 + 3.0 + 5.7 + 1.0 + 0.6 − 9.4 − 6.5
2002 + 1.4 + 1.0 + 0.8 + 0.3 + 2.4 + 1.4 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 6.2 − 0.1 − 2.5 − 3.8 − 4.9
 
2001         Aug + 2.2 + 6.0 + 0.6 + 5.5 + 2.8 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 2.7 + 4.5 + 0.4 − 0.9 −10.3 −10.2
         Sep + 2.0 + 6.3 + 0.5 + 1.2 + 2.9 + 1.2 + 1.9 + 5.0 − 0.3 − 3.6 −21.9 −16.8
         Oct + 1.8 + 6.4 + 0.7 − 0.8 + 2.9 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 1.8 − 0.8 − 5.6 −34.6 −17.9
         Nov + 1.5 + 5.1 + 0.8 − 3.1 + 2.9 + 1.2 −0.2 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.9 − 6.6 −41.6 −15.7
         Dec + 1.6 + 5.0 + 0.8 − 2.5 + 2.9 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 1.0 − 0.7 − 4.7 −24.5 −13.9
2002         Jan + 2.1 + 6.6 + 1.4 + 0.4 + 2.6 + 1.3 − 0.1 + 2.1 − 0.4 − 3.4 −18.2 − 8.3
         Feb + 1.8 + 5.4 + 1.4 − 1.9 + 2.6 + 1.4 −0.1 − 0.3 + 0.9 − 0.5 − 3.5 −20.3 − 5.8
         Mar + 2.0 + 4.2 + 1.4 + 0.1 + 2.8 + 1.5 − 0.2 − 2.9 − 0.4 − 2.5 − 2.3 − 2.3
         Apr + 1.5 + 2.3 + 1.2 + 0.7 + 1.9 + 1.4 − 0.8 − 6.8 − 0.3 − 2.8 − 1.1 − 4.0
         May + 1.2 + 0.2 + 1.0 − 2.6 + 2.9 + 1.4 + 0.0 − 0.9 − 8.9 − 0.6 − 4.3 −10.7 − 9.2
         June + 1.0 − 1.1 + 0.9 − 2.8 + 2.6 + 1.5 − 1.1 − 6.6 − 0.6 − 5.2 −17.7 −11.8
         July + 1.2 − 1.1 + 0.7 − 0.6 + 2.7 + 1.5 − 1.0 − 7.0 − 0.5 − 4.2 −11.4 −11.6
         Aug + 1.2 − 0.6 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 2.6 + 1.4 + 0.1 − 1.0 − 8.3 + 0.0 − 2.6 − 5.4 − 5.4
         Sep + 1.1 − 0.6 + 0.6 − 0.2 + 2.5 + 1.4 − 0.9 − 7.8 + 0.2 − 1.4 + 1.5 − 0.1
         Oct + 1.3 − 1.0 + 0.4 + 3.5 + 2.3 + 1.4 + 0.3 − 6.5 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 17.5 + 2.9
         Nov + 1.2 − 0.9 + 0.3 + 2.7 + 2.3 + 1.4 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 5.7 + 0.5 − 0.6 + 14.6 − 0.2
         Dec + 1.2 − 1.1 + 0.1 + 4.1 + 2.0 + 1.4 + 0.9 − 5.4 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 25.5 − 0.3
2003         Jan + 1.1 − 3.1 + 0.0 + 7.0 + 1.5 + 1.2 + 1.6 − 3.5 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 27.6 − 3.7
         Feb + 1.3 − 1.9 + 0.1 + 8.5 + 1.5 + 1.2 + 0.2 + 1.9 − 3.0 + 0.9 + 0.6 + 28.1 − 5.8
         Mar + 1.2 − 1.4 + 0.1 + 7.4 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 1.7 − 4.9 + 0.6 − 0.8 + 1.0 − 8.8
         Apr + 1.0 − 1.1 + 0.1 + 1.9 + 2.2 + 1.3 + 1.6 − 1.1 + 0.3 − 3.0 −19.0 − 8.2
         May + 0.7 − 0.8 + 0.2 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 1.3 p − 0.2 − 0.1 − 3.8 −20.2 − 9.0
         June + 1.0 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 2.7 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 1.3 p + 1.9 − 0.3 − 2.7 − 8.3 − 7.9
         July + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 3.1 + 0.8 + 1.1 ... ... ... ... − 2.8 − 4.5
Source: Federal Statistical Office; for index of world market prices: HWWA In- 3Excluding value-added tax. —4HWWA index of raw material prices, on a
stitute. —1Electricity, gas and other fuels. —2Calculated by the Bundes- euro basis. —5Coal and crude oil. —6Food, beverages and tobacco as well
bank on the basis of figures provided by the Federal Statistical Office. — as industrial raw materials. 
65* IX. Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
IX. Economic conditions
  
8. Households ’ income *
Germany
  
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999  5  billion
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries  1 salaries  2 Saving  6 ratio  7 benefits received  3 "Mass income"  4 Disposable income  5 
Change Change Change Change Change Change
from from from from from fromprevious previous previous previous previous previous
Period DM /  5 year in % DM /  5 year in % DM /  5 year in % DM /  5 year in % DM /  5 year in % DM /  5 year in % %
1991 1,355.4 . 941.4 . 426.2 . 1,367.6 . 1,917.5 . 250.1 . 13.0
1992 1,467.3 8.3 1,003.0 6.5 473.9 11.2 1,476.9 8.0 2,054.3 7.1 266.1 6.4 13.01993 1,505.9 2.6 1,032.7 3.0 511.2 7.9 1,543.9 4.5 2,120.6 3.2 261.3 −1.8 12.3
1994 1,528.1 1.5 1,029.3 −0.3 529.4 3.6 1,558.6 1.0 2,181.9 2.9 254.0 −2.8 11.6
1995 1,577.1 3.2 1,037.9 0.8 553.7 4.6 1,591.7 2.1 2,256.4 3.4 252.1 −0.7 11.2
1996 1,594.0 1.1 1,032.7 −0.5 595.7 7.6 1,628.3 2.3 2,307.5 2.3 249.5 −1.0 10.8
1997 1,591.3 −0.2 1,015.9 −1.6 609.6 2.3 1,625.5 −0.2 2,356.5 2.1 244.7 −1.9 10.4
1998 1,624.3 2.1 1,038.9 2.3 621.5 1.9 1,660.3 2.1 2,422.8 2.8 249.6 2.0 10.31999 855.4 3.0 549.3 3.4 328.6 3.4 877.8 3.4 1,281.6 3.5 125.1 −2.0 9.8
2000 885.5 3.5 572.8 4.3 339.5 3.3 912.3 3.9 1,320.4 3.0 129.5 3.5 9.8
2001 904.6 2.2 593.1 3.5 347.1 2.3 940.2 3.1 1,370.2 3.8 138.1 6.7 10.12002 911.5 0.8 594.2 0.2 364.9 5.1 959.0 2.0 1,386.0 1.2 144.2 4.4 10.4
2001         Q2 217.2 2.5 140.2 4.1 86.0 2.4 226.1 3.5 342.3 4.2 32.6 8.6 9.5
         Q3 225.4 1.7 152.0 3.1 86.5 2.9 238.5 3.0 335.6 3.2 28.0 5.0 8.3         Q4 253.4 1.5 163.9 3.2 87.6 1.7 251.5 2.7 352.3 3.9 31.7 9.3 9.0
2002         Q1 210.5 0.9 137.7 0.5 90.9 4.4 228.6 2.0 344.0 1.2 47.7 4.2 13.9
         Q2 218.9 0.8 140.3 0.1 89.9 4.6 230.3 1.8 343.7 0.4 33.4 2.3 9.7         Q3 228.0 1.1 153.1 0.7 91.4 5.6 244.5 2.5 341.2 1.7 29.7 6.3 8.7         Q4 254.1 0.3 163.1 −0.5 92.7 5.8 255.7 1.7 357.1 1.4 33.4 5.2 9.3
2003         Q1 211.9 0.7 137.7 0.0 93.7 3.0 231.4 1.2 352.3 2.4 49.2 3.1 14.0
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in May 2003. —*House- wages and salaries plus monetary social benefits received. —5"Mass
holds including non-profit institutions which serve households. —1Resi- income" plus operating surplus, self-employed persons ’income, property in-
dence concept. —2After deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages come (net), other current transfers received, income of non-profit
and salaries and employees ’contributions to the social security funds. — organisations which serve households, less taxes (excluding wage tax and
3Cash benefits from the social security funds, central, regional and local consumption-related taxes) and other current transfers paid. Including t he
authorities and foreign countries, pension payments (net), social security increase in claims on company pension funds. —6Including the increase in
benefits from private insurance schemes, less social security contributions on claims on company pension funds. —7Saving as a percentage of disposable
social benefits, consumption-related taxes and public charges. —4Net income. 
  
  
9. Pay rates and actual earnings
Germany
    
Overall economy Producing sector (including construction)
Negotiated wage and salary level  1 Wages and salaries Negotiated wage and salary level  1 Wages and salaries
per employee per employee
on an hourly basis on a monthly basis on an hourly basis on a monthly basis (work-place concept)  2 (work-place concept)  3 
% from % from % from % from % from % from
previous previous previous previous previous previous
Period 1995=100 year 1995=100 year 1995=100 year 1995=100 year 1995=100 year 1995=100 year
1991 76.7 . 78.6 . 82.4 . 73.4 . 76.9 . 77.6 .
1992 85.8 12.0 87.3 11.0 91.0 10.4 82.9 12.9 85.9 11.7 88.4 13.91993 92.2 7.5 92.9 6.5 95.0 4.4 90.6 9.3 92.0 7.1 92.3 4.41994 95.3 3.4 95.6 2.9 96.9 2.0 94.3 4.1 94.8 3.0 96.1 4.1
1995 100.0 4.9 100.0 4.6 100.0 3.2 100.0 6.1 100.0 5.5 100.0 4.1
1996 102.6 2.6 102.4 2.4 101.4 1.4 103.8 3.8 102.9 2.9 102.9 2.91997 104.1 1.5 103.9 1.5 101.7 0.3 105.8 1.9 104.6 1.7 104.7 1.71998 106.2 1.9 105.7 1.8 102.7 1.0 107.7 1.8 106.4 1.7 106.4 1.61999 109.2 2.9 108.6 2.7 104.3 1.5 110.9 3.0 109.4 2.9 108.3 1.8
2000 111.4 2.0 110.8 2.0 106.0 1.7 113.1 2.0 111.6 2.0 111.2 2.7
2001 113.6 2.0 113.0 2.0 108.0 1.9 115.2 1.8 113.6 1.8 113.7 2.22002 116.6 2.6 115.9 2.6 109.6 1.5 118.8 3.1 117.2 3.1 116.0 2.0
2001         Q3 117.3 2.0 116.7 1.9 107.5 1.6 123.5 2.0 121.9 2.0 109.2 2.0
         Q4 128.5 2.2 127.8 2.1 120.0 1.8 127.7 2.0 125.9 2.0 122.6 1.7
2002         Q1 106.3 2.5 105.7 2.4 102.1 1.3 106.3 2.1 104.9 2.2 108.2 0.9
         Q2 107.8 2.8 107.2 2.8 105.2 1.3 109.1 3.5 107.7 3.6 117.8 1.9         Q3 120.3 2.6 119.7 2.5 109.6 2.0 127.4 3.1 125.7 3.1 112.9 3.4         Q4 131.9 2.6 131.1 2.6 121.6 1.4 132.3 3.6 130.5 3.6 125.4 2.3
2003         Q1 109.5 3.0 108.9 3.1 104.3 2.1 110.0 3.5 108.5 3.5 . .
         Q2 109.7 1.8 109.1 1.8 . . 111.6 2.3 110.1 2.2 . .
2002         Dec 108.8 2.8 108.2 2.8 . . 110.0 3.7 108.5 3.7 117.1 3.3
2003         Jan 109.0 2.6 108.5 2.7 . . 110.0 3.7 108.5 3.7 . .
         Feb 109.0 2.6 108.5 2.7 . . 110.0 3.6 108.5 3.6 . .         Mar 110.4 3.7 109.8 3.8 . . 110.0 3.2 108.5 3.1 . .
         Apr 109.3 2.4 108.8 2.4 . . 110.5 3.4 109.0 3.4 . .
         May 109.7 1.2 109.2 1.3 . . 111.9 0.7 110.3 0.7 . .         June 110.0 1.8 109.4 1.8 . . 112.6 2.8 111.0 2.7 . .
1Current data are normally revised upwards on account of additional supply, and excluding installation and building completion work. Calculated
reports. —2Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in May by the Bundesbank on the basis of data from the Federal Statistical Office,
2003. —3Producing sector, excluding electricity, gas, steam and hot water using the old and new classifications of the economic sectors. 
66*IX. Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the European monetary union *
  
 5  million
2002 2003
Position 2000 2001 1 2002 Q3 Q4 Q1 Mar Apr May
Current account −65,994 −19,359 + 59,604 + 23,015 + 22,427 + 2,802 + 4,037 −8,608 − 449 A.
1. Foreign trade
Exports (f.o.b.) incl. supplementary items 989,826 1,033,029 1,059,260 263,213 273,903 252,608 86,921 86,298 84,295Imports (f.o.b.) incl. supplementary items 958,276 957,556 928,157 224,688 239,312 235,285 80,738 78,917 76,035
Balance + 31,553 + 75,473 + 131,101 + 38,524 + 34,590 + 17,322 + 6,182 + 7,381 + 8,261
2. Services
Receipts 287,455 324,954 331,954 89,808 85,165 75,307 26,374 26,446 26,071Expenditure 304,943 328,678 320,877 83,908 81,128 74,252 24,826 25,653 24,571
Balance −17,488 −3,724 + 11,075 + 5,900 + 4,036 + 1,055 + 1,548 + 794 + 1,499
3. Factor income (balance) −25,492 −39,870 −36,595 −10,662 −2,363 −12,558 − 646 −10,464 −4,624
4. Current transfers
Transfer payments from non-residents 66,720 75,274 84,226 18,413 19,892 32,579 7,045 4,706 5,122Transfer payments to non-residents 121,284 126,518 130,204 29,160 33,729 35,595 10,092 11,025 10,707
Balance −54,564 −51,244 −45,978 −10,747 −13,837 −3,017 −3,047 −6,320 −5,585
Balance of capital transfers + 9,839 + 9,531 + 11,624 + 2,323 + 2,625 + 1,948 + 817 + 88 + 368B.
C. + 66,883 −24,864 −132,150 −50,254 −53,874 −30,539 + 7,895 + 7,845 −30,959 Financial account (net capital exports: −)
1. Direct investment −16,504 −102,808 −33,636 −11,966 + 3,581 −7,655 −7,709 −20,175 − 324
Investment outside the euro area −443,251 −259,169 −163,462 −32,486 −28,518 −40,699 −17,085 −22,781 −1,195
Foreign investment in the euro area + 426,744 + 156,361 + 129,824 + 20,520 + 32,098 + 33,043 + 9,376 + 2,605 + 872
2. Investment in securities −111,550 + 64,737 + 108,388 + 35,672 + 36,242 + 2,799 + 17,618 + 9,286 + 7,010
Investment outside the euro area −408,986 −291,027 −177,846 −19,828 −28,796 −51,392 −7,398 −12,100 −30,447
Equities −285,922 −108,333 −40,768 + 12,719 −7,463 + 9,983 + 7,385 −3,026 −5,814
Bonds and notes −114,280 −160,125 −80,645 −17,330 −16,094 −50,993 −15,044 −16,145 −18,765
Money market paper −8,775 −22,572 −56,431 −15,216 −5,239 −10,380 + 262 + 7,070 −5,868
Foreign investment in the euro area + 297,430 + 355,764 + 286,233 + 55,500 + 65,038 + 54,191 + 25,016 + 21,386 + 37,457
Equities + 49,940 + 233,244 + 88,195 + 5,995 + 11,781 + 4,853 −10,754 + 10,173 −7,917
Bonds and notes + 239,199 + 115,145 + 133,502 + 26,333 + 38,647 + 49,669 + 40,820 + 527 + 46,033Money market paper + 8,288 + 7,375 + 64,538 + 23,173 + 14,612 − 332 −5,050 + 10,686 − 659
3. Financial derivatives −3,441 −3,469 −13,989 −9,631 −4,004 − 92 + 180 −4,648 + 576
4. Credit transactions and other
investment (balance) + 180,810 −1,133 −190,680 −59,732 −88,376 −37,472 −7,187 + 22,855 −39,660
Eurosystem − 221 + 5,004 −1,092 + 133 + 2,075 −4,951 − 507 − 240 + 1,557
Public authorities −1,477 + 2,472 −8,261 −3,340 − 720 −10,173 + 4,484 + 3,748 −2,042
Credit institutions + 158,435 + 5,913 −141,168 −25,325 −85,754 − 842 −6,568 + 23,229 −31,522
long-term + 2,460 −22,896 + 21,985 − 69−2,181 −4,868 −2,135 − 522 + 668
short-term + 155,969 + 28,815 −163,152 −25,254 −83,574 + 4,025 −4,433 + 23,751 −32,190
Enterprises and individuals + 24,088 −14,522 −40,158 −31,200 −3,974 −21,504 −4,595 −3,882 −7,653
5. Change in the monetary reserves of
    the eurosystem (Increase: −) + 17,568 + 17,815 −2,235 −4,596 −1,317 + 11,881 + 4,992 + 527 + 1,438
Balance of unclassifiable transactions −10,731 + 34,695 + 60,923 + 24,914 + 28,823 + 25,791 −12,749 + 676 + 31,039 D.
*Source: European Central Bank. —1From January 2001, including   
Greece.  
67*X. Foreign trade and payments

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(Balances)
 
 
Current account Memo item:
Change in Capital trans-
the Bundes- fers and pur-
Change in bank ’s net chases / sales
Supple- external of intangible the monetary
Balance mentary non- reserves at Balance of assets aton current Foreign trade Factor Current produced Financial transaction transaction unclassifiable
Period account  
1 items  4  5 Services  6 income transfers assets  7 account  7 values  8 values  8 trade  1  2  3 transactions
DM million
1989 + 104,112 + 134,576 −4,107 −18,445 + 26,872 −34,784 −2,064 −110,286 −5,405 + 13,643 + 18,997
1990  o + 73,001 + 105,382 −3,833 −26,138 + 32,859 −35,269 −4,975 −89,497 −11,611 + 33,082 −10,976
1991 −36,277 + 21,899 −2,804 −30,703 + 33,144 −57,812 −4,565 + 12,614 + 9,605 + 18,623 − 319
1992 −30,023 + 33,656 −1,426 −44,993 + 33,962 −51,222 −1,963 + 69,792 −52,888 + 15,082 −68,745
1993 −23,071 + 60,304 −3,038 −52,559 + 27,373 −55,151 −1,915 + 21,442 + 22,795 −19,251 + 35,766
1994 −46,760 + 71,762 −1,104 −62,814 + 4,852 −59,455 −2,637 + 57,871 + 2,846 −11,321 −12,242
1995 −38,657 + 85,303 −4,722 −63,999 + 178 −55,416 −3,845 + 63,647 −10,355 −10,791 −17,754
1996 −20,729 + 98,538 −5,264 −64,829 + 1,815 −50,989 −3,283 + 23,607 + 1,882 − 1,478 + 1,610
1997 −15,756 + 116,467 −7,360 −69,535 − 2,588 −52,738 + 52 + 31 + 6,640 + 9,033 + 8,468
1998 −21,666 + 126,970 −5,934 −76,062 −13,337 −53,304 + 1,289 + 32,810 −7,128 − 5,305 −8,231
1999 −45,780 + 127,542 −13,656 −91,964 −18,775 −48,927 − 301 −44,849 + 24,517 + 66,413 −72,364
2000 −54,655 + 115,645 −13,691 −97,534 − 3,593 −55,482 + 13,345 + 71,006 + 11,429 −41,125 + 94,329
2001 + 8,185 + 186,771 −10,624 −100,168 −14,141 −53,652 − 756 −41,892 + 11,797 + 22,665 + 63,911
 5  million
1999 −23,407 + 65,211 −6,982 −47,020 − 9,599 −25,016 − 154 −22,931 + 12,535 + 33,956 −36,999
2000 −27,945 + 59,128 −7,000 −49,868 − 1,837 −28,368 + 6,823 + 36,305 + 5,844 −21,027 + 48,230
2001 + 4,185 + 95,495 −5,432 −51,215 − 7,230 −27,432 − 387 −21,419 + 6,032 + 11,588 + 32,677
2002 + 59,690 + 129,674 −5,935 −38,246 + 751 −26,555 − 212 −86,103 + 2,065 + 24,560 −33,292
2000         Q3 −15,206 + 13,116 −1,774 −16,175 − 3,035 − 7,338 + 7,412 −13,768 + 2,155 + 19,407 + 22,523
         Q4 − 7,126 + 13,234 −2,560 −10,516 + 1,050 − 8,332 − 419 −9,530 + 2,052 + 15,023 + 17,137
2001         Q1 + 1,064 + 22,540 −1,420 −13,575 − 858 − 5,623 + 552 + 4,035 + 4,072 − 9,723 −11,749
         Q2 − 4,038 + 22,104 −1,503 −13,043 − 3,408 − 8,189 − 13 + 17,775 + 2,039 −15,763 + 21,099
         Q3 − 1,889 + 25,547 −1,779 −16,642 − 2,765 − 6,250 − 446 − 141 −2,165 + 4,639 −13,360
         Q4 + 9,048 + 25,303 − 730 − 7,955 − 199 − 7,371 − 479 −43,088 + 2,085 + 32,434 + 36,688
2002         Q1 + 13,221 + 32,638 −1,049 −11,092 − 2,148 − 5,128 + 160 + 721 −1,352 −12,750 −18,496
         Q2 + 12,418 + 30,766 −1,389 − 8,875 + 466 − 8,550 − 75 −20,119 + 2,432 + 5,343 + 1,694
         Q3 + 12,340 + 34,000 −1,566 −12,808 − 1,829 − 5,457 + 62 −19,490 + 87 + 7,002 −17,588
         Q4 + 21,711 + 32,270 −1,931 − 5,471 + 4,262 − 7,419 − 359 −47,215 + 898 + 24,964 + 1,099
2003         Q1 + 9,680 + 29,304 −1,354 − 8,612 − 4,337 − 5,321 + 5 −15,950 −1,495 + 7,760 + 3,444
         Q2  p + 8,838 + 29,799 −1,899 − 8,945 − 2,468 − 7,649 + 151 −29,254 + 1,505 + 18,760 + 22,123
2001         Jan − 5,897 + 5,662 − 566 − 5,267 − 5,206 − 520 + 515 −3,522 + 1,400 + 7,504 −5,988
         Feb + 3,945 + 7,171 − 528 − 3,061 + 2,644 − 2,280 + 119 −2,784 + 1,180 − 2,461 −3,873
         Mar + 3,016 + 9,707 − 325 − 5,247 + 1,704 − 2,823 − 83 + 10,341 + 1,492 −14,766 −1,888
         Apr + 835 + 6,166 − 642 − 3,581 + 1,183 − 2,290 − 149 + 8,860 + 1,205 −10,751 + 9,404
         May − 525 + 8,212 − 464 − 4,280 − 1,276 − 2,716 − 145 + 22,378 + 508 −22,216 − 53
         June − 4,348 + 7,727 − 397 − 5,182 − 3,315 − 3,182 + 281 −13,463 + 326 + 17,204 + 11,749
         July − 3,198 + 9,441 − 567 − 5,397 − 3,970 − 2,705 − 226 + 5,225 − 151 − 1,650 −10,589
         Aug + 1,564 + 9,038 − 699 − 6,539 + 1,276 − 1,512 − 172 + 3,554 + 460 − 5,406 −4,247
         Sep − 255 + 7,069 − 513 − 4,707 − 71 − 2,033 − 47 −8,920 −2,474 + 11,696 + 1,476
         Oct + 3,413 + 9,661 − 219 − 4,721 + 1,575 − 2,882 − 140 −1,322 −1,001 − 950 −1,307
         Nov + 969 + 7,351 − 425 − 3,095 + 5 − 2,867 − 180 −20,220 + 204 + 19,227 + 6,860
         Dec + 4,666 + 8,290 − 86 − 139 − 1,779 − 1,622 − 159 −21,546 + 2,882 + 14,158 + 31,135
2002         Jan + 1,775 + 10,335 − 515 − 3,917 − 4,823 + 695 + 477 + 8,769 −1,747 − 9,274 −17,916
         Feb + 3,883 + 10,285 − 332 − 3,192 + 206 − 3,084 − 155 −4,946 + 67 + 1,151 + 1,535
         Mar + 7,563 + 12,018 − 203 − 3,982 + 2,468 − 2,739 − 162 −3,102 + 328 − 4,626 −2,116
         Apr + 4,211 + 9,690 − 916 − 2,659 + 1,058 − 2,961 − 148 − 125 + 1,657 − 5,594 −9,839
         May + 3,512 + 10,001 − 565 − 3,230 − 231 − 2,462 + 47 − 417 + 1,379 − 4,521 + 3,826
         June + 4,694 + 11,076 + 93 − 2,986 − 362 − 3,127 + 26 −19,576 − 603 + 15,459 + 7,707
         July + 1,788 + 12,155 − 774 − 3,785 − 3,956 − 1,853 − 203 −11,581 − 548 + 10,545 −15,567
         Aug + 3,341 + 10,653 − 317 − 5,824 + 196 − 1,366 + 86 −6,178 + 886 + 1,865 −5,579
         Sep + 7,212 + 11,192 − 474 − 3,200 + 1,931 − 2,238 + 179 −1,731 − 252 − 5,408 + 3,559
         Oct + 5,680 + 11,369 − 414 − 3,869 + 1,950 − 3,356 − 82 −19,457 + 570 + 13,290 −5,279
         Nov + 9,305 + 12,304 − 627 − 1,645 + 1,565 − 2,291 − 137 −4,333 − 842 − 3,992 + 4,265
         Dec + 6,727 + 8,597 − 889 + 43 + 748 − 1,772 − 139 −23,425 + 1,171 + 15,666 + 2,112
2003         Jan − 1,313 + 8,980 − 708 − 3,920 − 4,907 − 759 + 475 −5,645 − 97 + 6,580 + 6,799
         Feb + 4,370 + 10,668 − 142 − 2,932 − 577 − 2,647 − 504 −20,067 − 320 + 16,521 + 677
         Mar + 6,622 + 9,656 − 505 − 1,760 + 1,147 − 1,916 + 33 + 9,763 −1,078 −15,340 −4,032
         Apr + 3,138 + 9,216 − 897 − 2,872 + 331 − 2,640 − 123 −5,647 + 1,449 + 1,184 + 1,477
         May + 2,971 + 10,210 − 557 − 3,124 − 1,168 − 2,390 + 156 −10,122 − 854 + 7,849 + 22,684
         June  p + 2,730 + 10,373 − 444 − 2,948 − 1,630 − 2,620 + 118 −13,485 + 910 + 9,727 −2,037
oFrom July 1990 including the external transactions of the former GDR. — included up to December 1992 in Supplementary trade items. —4Mainly
1From the beginning of 1993 figures subject to significant uncertainty warehouse transactions for account of residents and deduction of goods
owing to changes in the method of data collection in foreign trade. — returned. —5See footnote 3. —6Excluding the expenditure on freight and
2Special trade according to the official foreign trade statistics: imports c.i.f., insurance included in the c.i.f. import value. —7Capital exports: −.—
exports f.o.b. —3From January 1993 including additional estimates for 8 Increase: −. 
external transactions which do not have to be reported and which are
68*X. Foreign trade and payments

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
by group of countries and country *
 
  5  million
2003
Group of countries / Country 2000 2001 2002 1 January February March April May June  p 
All countries  2 Exports 597,440 638,268 648,306 53,337 53,750 55,745 53,709 54,209 54,100
Imports 538,311 542,774 518,632 44,357 43,082 46,089 44,493 43,999 43,727Balance + 59,128 + 95,495 + 129,674 + 8,980 + 10,668 + 9,656 + 9,216 + 10,210 + 10,373
I. Exports 460,422 481,991 484,077 39,770 40,581 42,866 39,933 39,702 ...Industrial countries
Imports 389,927 390,269 366,342 30,503 30,689 32,901 31,237 31,327 ...Balance + 70,495 + 91,722 + 117,734 + 9,267 + 9,892 + 9,966 + 8,695 + 8,375 ...
Exports 337,375 351,611 354,801 29,082 30,160 32,850 29,937 29,283 ... 1. EU member countries
Imports 273,951 277,034 263,807 20,971 22,367 23,868 22,676 22,305 ...Balance + 63,424 + 74,577 + 90,994 + 8,110 + 7,793 + 8,982 + 7,261 + 6,978 ...
of  which
Exports 264,870 275,384 276,215 22,525 23,242 25,431 23,526 22,965 ... EMU member
Imports 217,946 221,680 212,567 16,565 17,946 19,326 18,352 18,238 ... countries
Balance + 46,924 + 53,704 + 63,647 + 5,960 + 5,296 + 6,105 + 5,175 + 4,727 ...
of which
Austria Exports 32,436 33,486 33,270 2,686 2,738 3,103 2,876 2,779 ...
Imports 20,497 20,664 20,972 1,553 1,656 1,974 1,782 1,734 ...Balance + 11,939 + 12,822 + 12,298 + 1,134 + 1,082 + 1,130 + 1,095 + 1,045 ...
Belgium and Exports 32,728 35,187 34,128 2,691 2,878 3,125 2,846 2,779 ...
Luxemburg Imports 26,230 28,521 27,260 1,939 2,246 2,490 2,367 2,551 ...
Balance + 6,499 + 6,666 + 6,868 + 752 + 633 + 635 + 480 + 228 ...
France Exports 67,418 69,601 69,776 5,699 5,707 6,348 5,917 5,568 ...
Imports 50,862 49,743 48,221 3,865 4,210 4,290 4,210 3,891 ...Balance + 16,556 + 19,858 + 21,555 + 1,833 + 1,497 + 2,058 + 1,707 + 1,677 ...
Italy Exports 45,011 47,119 47,443 3,987 4,071 4,465 4,044 4,076 ...
Imports 35,776 35,280 33,527 2,577 2,625 3,159 2,793 2,822 ...Balance + 9,235 + 11,839 + 13,916 + 1,409 + 1,447 + 1,306 + 1,251 + 1,255 ...
Netherlands Exports 38,993 40,011 39,540 3,164 3,358 3,624 3,456 3,214 ...
Imports 44,739 43,233 41,793 3,431 3,882 3,868 3,675 3,781 ...Balance − 5,745 − 3,222 − 2,253 − 267 − 524 − 244 − 220 − 567 ...
Spain Exports 26,732 27,841 29,655 2,508 2,657 2,835 2,609 2,741 ...
Imports 16,087 15,226 15,453 1,253 1,382 1,481 1,458 1,365 ...Balance + 10,645 + 12,615 + 14,202 + 1,254 + 1,275 + 1,354 + 1,151 + 1,375 ...
Sweden Exports 13,524 12,978 13,471 1,128 1,139 1,309 1,208 1,169 ...
Imports 10,202 8,999 8,831 716 784 840 869 798 ...Balance + 3,322 + 3,979 + 4,640 + 411 + 355 + 469 + 339 + 372 ...
United Exports 49,377 52,764 54,228 4,588 4,852 4,938 4,281 4,225 ...
Kingdom Imports 36,923 37,259 33,135 2,780 2,864 2,940 2,711 2,633 ...
Balance + 12,453 + 15,505 + 21,093 + 1,808 + 1,988 + 1,998 + 1,571 + 1,592 ...
Exports 39,944 39,987 40,447 3,331 3,288 3,139 3,181 3,466 ... 2. Other European
Imports 36,800 39,165 38,804 3,848 3,436 3,499 3,060 3,923 ... industrial countries  
3 
Balance + 3,144 + 821 + 1,644 − 518 − 148 − 360 + 120 − 457 ...
of which
Switzerland Exports 25,596 27,489 26,635 2,198 2,209 2,084 2,088 2,250 ...
Imports 18,797 19,753 19,507 1,674 1,530 1,600 1,616 1,668 ...Balance + 6,799 + 7,737 + 7,128 + 524 + 679 + 483 + 473 + 582 ...
Exports 83,103 90,393 88,828 7,357 7,134 6,877 6,815 6,953 ... 3. Non-European
Imports 79,176 74,069 63,731 5,683 4,886 5,533 5,501 5,099 ... industrial countries
Balance + 3,926 + 16,324 + 25,097 + 1,674 + 2,248 + 1,343 + 1,313 + 1,854 ...
of which
Japan Exports 13,195 13,103 12,171 996 918 960 949 886 ...
Imports 26,847 22,910 19,032 1,648 1,436 1,682 1,644 1,561 ...Balance −13,651 − 9,807 − 6,860 − 652 − 518 − 722 − 695 − 675 ...
Exports 61,764 67,824 66,596 5,488 5,356 5,146 5,069 5,252 ... United States
Imports 47,121 45,982 39,994 3,651 3,100 3,500 3,515 3,226 ...Balance + 14,643 + 21,842 + 26,603 + 1,837 + 2,256 + 1,645 + 1,553 + 2,027 ...
II. Exports 70,318 83,246 91,021 7,481 7,468 7,406 8,141 8,314 ...Countries in transition
Imports 82,900 90,341 93,095 8,510 7,930 8,328 8,266 8,381 ...Balance −12,582 − 7,095 − 2,074 −1,028 − 462 − 923 − 125 − 67 ...
of which
Central and east Exports 59,900 69,914 75,186 5,980 6,069 5,974 6,562 6,698 ...European countries Imports 62,781 68,701 70,441 6,008 5,951 6,379 6,122 6,336 ...in transition Balance − 2,882 + 1,213 + 4,745 − 27 + 118 − 405 + 439 + 361 ...
People ‘s Republic Exports 9,459 12,118 14,495 1,383 1,292 1,328 1,472 1,507 ...
of China  
4 Imports 18,553 19,942 21,068 2,314 1,830 1,777 1,965 1,894 ...
Balance − 9,094 − 7,824 − 6,572 − 931 − 538 − 449 − 492 − 387 ...
III. Exports 65,023 71,477 71,576 5,952 5,597 5,372 5,497 6,071 ...Developing countries
Imports 64,742 61,490 56,912 5,287 4,412 4,802 4,935 4,236 ...Balance + 282 + 9,987 + 14,664 + 665 + 1,185 + 570 + 562 + 1,835 ... of  which
Exports 24,029 24,735 25,012 2,070 1,946 1,880 2,114 2,100 ... Emerging markets in
Imports 30,498 28,351 26,393 2,431 2,101 2,269 2,067 1,943 ... south-east Asia  
5 
Balance − 6,469 − 3,616 − 1,381 − 361 − 155 − 390 + 47 + 157 ...
OPEC-countries Exports 10,729 13,669 14,578 1,179 1,088 1,086 995 1,154 ...
Imports 10,235 8,220 6,960 768 485 555 784 530 ...Balance + 494 + 5,449 + 7,618 + 410 + 604 + 532 + 211 + 624 ...
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (f.o.b.) by country of destination, and other supplies for ships and aircraft and other data not classif iable by
imports (c.i.f.) by country of origin. Inclusion of individual countries in region. —3Including Cyprus. —4Excluding Hong Kong. —5Brunei
groups of countries according to the current position. —1The import Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore,
figures on "All countries" include revisions for the year 2002 which have not Republic of Korea, Taiwan and Thailand. yet been broken down by region for Non-EU countries. —2Including fuel
69*X. Foreign trade and payments

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
4. Services and factor income of the Federal Republic of Germany
(Balances)
 
Until the end of 1998 DM million, from 1999  5  million
Services
other services
of which
 
Patents Compen- Services  of Construction
Trans- Financial and sation of Investment Government selfemployed and  assembly
Period Total Travel  1 services licences Total income portation  2 transactions  3 persons  4 work,  repairs employees  5 
1998 −76,062 −64,465 + 5,449 + 3,011 −4,044 + 5,462 −21,474 −2,586 −2,484 −1,584 −11,753
1999 −47,020 −36,421 + 2,882 + 1,005 −1,896 + 1,997 −14,588 −2,245 − 403 − 756 −8,843
2000 −49,868 −37,420 + 3,385 + 980 −2,904 + 2,221 −16,130 −2,733 − 782 − 512 −1,325
2001 −51,215 −37,416 + 4,144 + 509 −2,395 + 3,488 −19,545 −2,536 −1,123 − 257 −6,974
2002 −38,246 −35,243 + 3,032 + 584 −1,414 + 5,257 −10,461 −2,026 − 363 − 354 + 1,105
2001         Q4 − 7,955 − 6,877 + 1,129 + 147 − 563 + 974 −2,765 − 640 − 312 − 1 − 198
2002         Q1 −11,092 − 6,811 + 194 − 48 − 440 + 1,059 −5,044 − 524 − 388 + 132 −2,280
         Q2 − 8,875 − 8,454 + 1,027 + 104 − 655 + 1,228 −2,126 − 505 − 158 − 148 + 614
         Q3 −12,808 −13,331 + 717 + 179 − 442 + 1,707 −1,638 − 539 + 194 − 310 −1,519
         Q4 − 5,471 − 6,647 + 1,094 + 350 + 123 + 1,263 −1,653 − 457 − 10 − 29 + 4,291
2003         Q1 − 8,612 − 6,564 + 751 + 423 − 216 + 1,227 −4,234 − 556 + 170 + 173 −4,511
         Q2 − 8,945 − 7,607 + 1,310 − 68 − 229 + 1,202 −3,553 − 489 − 32 − 143 −2,325
2002         Aug − 5,824 − 5,683 + 171 − 8 + 27 + 890 −1,221 − 180 + 160 − 97 + 293
         Sep − 3,200 − 4,367 + 252 + 112 − 36 + 402 + 438 − 156 − 4 − 111 + 2,042
         Oct − 3,869 − 3,400 + 394 + 289 − 51 + 329 −1,430 − 139 + 101 − 13 + 1,963
         Nov − 1,645 − 1,698 + 249 + 7 + 38 + 390 − 631 − 145 − 65 − 9 + 1,574
         Dec + 43 − 1,548 + 451 + 54 + 135 + 544 + 407 − 173 − 46 − 6 + 754
2003         Jan − 3,920 − 2,658 + 144 + 207 − 73 + 419 −1,960 − 216 + 56 + 59 −4,966
         Feb − 2,932 − 1,675 + 156 + 149 + 0 + 384 −1,946 − 120 + 60 + 52 − 629
         Mar − 1,760 − 2,231 + 451 + 68 − 143 + 424 − 328 − 221 + 54 + 62 + 1,084
         Apr − 2,872 − 2,402 + 375 − 321 − 109 + 426 − 841 − 196 − 43 − 42 + 373
         May − 3,124 − 2,218 + 290 + 62 − 55 + 351 −1,553 − 136 + 15 − 50 −1,119
         June − 2,948 − 2,987 + 646 + 192 − 65 + 424 −1,159 − 156 − 4 − 51 −1,580
1From January 2002 figures subject to significant uncertainty. —2Ex- vices supplied. —4Engineering and other technical services, research and
cluding the expenditure on freight included in the c.i.f. import value. — development, commercial services etc. — 5 Wages and salaries. 
3Including the receipts from foreign military agencies for goods and ser-
5. Current transfers of the Federal Republic of Germany 6. Capital transfers
(Balances) (Balances)
Until the end of 1998 DM million, from 1999  5  million DM million /  5  million
Public  1 Private  1 
International
Organisations  2 
 
of which other Remittances other
European current by foreign current
Period Total Total Total Communities Total workers transfers Total  4 Public  1 Private  1 transfers  3 
1998 −53,304 −37,317 −33,077 −30,382 −4,240 −15,987 −6,936 −9,051 + 1,289 −2,441 + 3,730
1999 −25,016 −17,348 −15,428 −13,846 −1,920 −7,667 −3,429 −4,239 − 154 −1,351 + 1,197
2000 −28,368 −19,095 −17,100 −15,398 −1,996 −9,272 −3,458 −5,814 −1,599 −1,189 − 410
2001 −27,432 −16,927 −14,257 −12,587 −2,670 −10,505 −3,520 −6,985 − 387 −1,361 + 974
2002 −26,555 −15,644 −12,416 −11,214 −3,227 −10,911 −3,470 −7,441 − 212 −1,416 + 1,204
2001         Q4 −7,371 −4,779 −3,720 −3,543 −1,059 −2,592 − 880 −1,712 − 479 − 455 − 24
2002         Q1 −5,128 −2,315 −1,256 − 832 −1,059 −2,813 − 868 −1,946 + 160 − 229 + 389
         Q2 −8,550 −5,262 −5,254 −4,997 − 8 −3,289 − 868 −2,421 − 75 − 274 + 199
         Q3 −5,457 −3,585 −2,746 −2,387 − 838 −1,873 − 868 −1,005 + 62 − 348 + 410
         Q4 −7,419 −4,483 −3,161 −2,998 −1,322 −2,936 − 868 −2,069 − 359 − 565 + 207
2003         Q1 −5,321 −3,310 −2,294 −1,628 −1,016 −2,011 − 833 −1,178 + 5 − 233 + 238
         Q2 −7,649 −5,162 −5,126 −4,795 − 36 −2,488 − 833 −1,655 + 151 − 276 + 427
2002         Aug −1,366 − 774 − 397 − 272 − 376 − 593 − 289 − 304 + 86 − 95 + 181
         Sep −2,238 −1,719 −1,507 −1,478 − 212 − 518 − 289 − 229 + 179 − 86 + 265
         Oct −3,356 −2,107 −1,538 −1,472 − 569 −1,249 − 289 − 960 − 82 − 104 + 22
         Nov −2,291 −1,456 − 996 − 953 − 460 − 836 − 289 − 547 − 137 − 248 + 111
         Dec −1,772 − 920 − 627 − 572 − 293 − 852 − 289 − 562 − 139 − 213 + 74
2003         Jan − 759 − 247 + 94 + 517 − 341 − 512 − 278 − 234 + 475 − 104 + 580
         Feb −2,647 −1,889 −1,499 −1,296 − 390 − 758 − 278 − 480 − 504 − 87 − 416
         Mar −1,916 −1,174 − 889 − 850 − 285 − 742 − 278 − 464 + 33 − 41 + 74
         Apr −2,640 −1,915 −1,754 −1,712 − 161 − 725 − 278 − 447 − 123 − 70 − 53
         May −2,390 −1,476 −1,647 −1,565 + 171 − 914 − 278 − 636 + 156 − 90 + 246
         June −2,620 −1,771 −1,725 −1,519 − 46 − 849 − 278 − 571 + 118 − 116 + 234
1The classification of "public" and "private" transfers depends on which (excluding capital transfers). —3Payments to developing countries, pension
sector the participating domestic body belongs to. —2Current contri- payments, tax revenue and refunds, etc. —4Where identifiable; in
butions to the budgets of international organisations and to the EU budget particular, debt forgiveness. 
70*X. Foreign trade and payments

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
7. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
  
 5  million
2002 2003
Item 2000 2001 2002 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Apr May June
I. Net German investment abroad
(Increase/capital exports: −) −355,670 −270,851 −258,451 −93,592 −26,547 −95,947 −64,914 −25,918 −20,320 −18,676
1. Direct investment  1 −60,030 −36,314 −28,700 −16,437 − 6,256 −16,036 + 12,714 + 3,036 + 4,138 + 5,541
Equity capital −59,125 −61,618 −46,821 −12,158 − 5,102 − 7,471 − 1,479 + 87 − 759 − 807
Reinvested earnings  2 + 1,671 + 13,949 − 2,630 − 652 − 661 −−−−−
Credit transactions ofGerman direct investors + 3,281 + 16,360 + 27,883 − 1,578 + 1,727 − 6,787 + 15,978 + 3,635 + 5,551 + 6,792
Other capital − 5,857 − 5,005 − 7,132 − 2,050 − 2,220 − 1,778 − 1,785 − 686 − 654 − 444
2. Portfolio investment −203,368 −129,559 −69,036 − 8,305 − 9,436 + 5,562 −20,131 + 4,485 − 9,432 −15,185
Equities  
3 −102,252 −15,614 − 5,330 + 6,440 − 5,448 + 14,707 − 731 + 12,138 − 3,165 − 9,704
Investment fund certificates  4 −32,516 −19,701 − 6,784 − 1,275 + 576 − 3,100 − 51 + 200 − 325 + 73
Bonds and notes  5 −70,251 −95,098 −50,806 −10,521 − 7,185 − 9,616 −21,003 − 9,690 − 7,240 − 4,073
Money market instruments + 1,651 + 853 − 6,116 − 2,949 + 2,622 + 3,571 + 1,653 + 1,837 + 1,298 − 1,482
3. Financial derivatives  6 − 5,490 + 6,278 − 533 − 3,838 + 340 + 2,865 − 2,036 − 3,912 − 270 + 2,146
4. Credit transactions −84,596 −109,871 −158,634 −64,670 −10,909 −87,752 −54,820 −29,176 −14,654 −10,990
Credit institutions  7 −101,533 −130,648 −130,536 −45,819 −30,296 −74,254 −66,528 −20,722 −34,680 −11,126
Long-term −40,156 −47,636 −31,790 − 4,224 − 9,514 −11,479 − 8,019 − 3,120 − 5,750 + 851
Short-term −61,378 −83,012 −98,746 −41,595 −20,782 −62,774 −58,509 −17,602 −28,930 −11,978
Enterprises and individuals − 5,116 −19,217 + 744 − 4,698 + 18,746 −17,690 − 8,335 −10,454 − 1,354 + 3,473
Long-term + 91 − 1,857 − 400 + 93 − 384 − 756 − 635 − 167 − 250 − 217
Short-term  7 − 5,207 −17,360 + 1,144 − 4,791 + 19,130 −16,934 − 7,701 −10,287 − 1,104 + 3,690
General government −19,920 + 15,980 + 7,168 + 4,249 − 368 + 950 − 547 + 541 − 1,326 + 239
Long-term − 1,079 + 257 + 218 − 61 + 14 + 309 − 5+ 6 − 62 + 50
Short-term  7 −18,841 + 15,723 + 6,950 + 4,310 − 382 + 641 − 541 + 534 − 1,264 + 189
Bundesbank + 41,972 + 24,015 −36,010 −18,402 + 1,009 + 3,242 + 20,590 + 1,460 + 22,706 − 3,575
5. Other investment  8 − 2,185 − 1,385 − 1,549 − 341 − 287 − 588 − 641 − 351 − 102 − 188
II. Net foreign investment in Germany
(Increase/capital imports: +) + 391,974 + 249,433 + 172,348 + 74,101 −20,668 + 79,998 + 35,660 + 20,271 + 10,199 + 5,191
1. Direct investment  1 + 218,184 + 23,990 + 35,635 + 2,305 + 5,655 + 8,454 + 9,107 + 313 + 386 + 8,407
Equity capital + 121,532 + 30,089 + 26,985 + 2,576 + 1,754 + 9,064 + 2,406 + 648 + 1,350 + 408
Reinvested earnings  2 − 5,839 −17,513 − 8,379 − 2,098 − 2,091 − 900 − 900 − 300 − 300 − 300
Credit transactions offoreign direct investors + 102,826 + 11,558 + 17,225 + 1,924 + 6,034 + 385 + 7,653 − 6− 650 + 8,310
Other capital − 335 − 143 − 197 − 97− 41− 96− 53− 29− 13− 10
2. Portfolio investment + 47,583 + 156,175 + 105,998 + 41,564 − 2,894 + 30,557 + 27,506 + 5,901 + 9,326 + 12,279
Equities  
3 −35,923 + 88,638 + 16,844 − 428 + 2,533 − 2,580 + 2,345 − 1,177 − 2,388 + 5,911
Investment fund certificates + 11,000 + 1,105 − 241 + 975 − 1,271 − 901 − 58 + 14 − 83 + 12
Bonds and notes  5 + 73,955 + 81,246 + 79,231 + 24,075 − 563 + 22,682 + 24,817 + 6,698 + 7,433 + 10,686
Money market instruments − 1,450 −14,815 + 10,164 + 16,942 − 3,593 + 11,355 + 401 + 367 + 4,364 − 4,330
3. Credit transactions + 125,945 + 69,221 + 30,641 + 30,191 −23,422 + 40,983 − 975 + 14,035 + 484 −15,494
Credit institutions  7 + 115,294 + 54,341 + 28,321 + 28,422 −19,542 + 41,251 − 502 + 13,564 + 1,160 −15,226
Long-term + 15,665 + 4,425 + 18,247 + 5,534 + 3,244 − 3,099 − 158 − 1,675 + 2,839 − 1,322
Short-term + 99,629 + 49,916 + 10,075 + 22,888 −22,786 + 44,350 − 344 + 15,239 − 1,679 −13,904
Enterprises and individuals + 9,711 + 11,412 + 3,334 + 1,506 − 3,083 − 2,278 − 2,184 + 658 − 1,945 − 897
Long-term + 4,014 + 11,351 + 5,142 + 1,472 + 1,444 − 6,014 + 775 − 319 + 553 + 540
Short-term  7 + 5,698 + 61 − 1,807 + 34 − 4,527 + 3,736 − 2,959 + 976 − 2,499 − 1,437
General Government + 526 + 837 − 1,667 − 466 + 12 + 313 + 1,683 + 1,246 + 436 + 1
Long-term − 372 − 217 − 112 + 541 − 159 + 3,407 − 138 − 94− 99 + 55
Short-term  7 + 898 + 1,054 − 1,555 − 1,007 + 171 − 3,094 + 1,821 + 1,340 + 535 − 54
Bundesbank + 414 + 2,631 + 653 + 728 − 809 + 1,697 + 28 − 1,432 + 832 + 628
4. Other investment + 263 + 47 + 74 + 42 − 8+ 5+ 2 2+ 2 1+ 3 − 1
III. Balance of all statistically
recorded financial movements(Net capital exports: −) + 36,305 −21,419 −86,103 −19,490 −47,215 −15,950 −29,254 − 5,647 −10,122 −13,485
1From 1996, new definition for direct investment. —2Estimated. — action values shown here are mostly derived from changes in stocks. As far
3Including participation rights. —4From 1991 including accumulated as possible, purely statistical changes have been eliminated. —8In
earnings. —5From 1975 excluding accrued interest. —6Options, whether particular, subscriptions of the Federal Government to International
or not evidenced by securities, and financial futures contracts. —7The trans- Organisations. 
71*X. Foreign trade and payments

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
8. External position of the Bundesbank *
 
 
DM million
Monetary reserves and other claims on non-residents Liabilities to non-residents
Monetary reserves
Reserve
positionin theInter- Liabilitiesnational arising Net Liabilities
Monetary arising from externalFund and Claims Loans and from liquidity position
Foreign special on the external Treasury (col. 1 other claims
End of year currency drawing ECB  
2 on non- trans- discount less
or month Total Total Gold rights (net) Total paper col. 8) balances  1 residents  3 actions  4 
1234567891 0 1 1
1990 106,446 104,023 13,688 64,517 7,373 18,445 2,423 52,259 52,259 − 54,188
1991 97,345 94,754 13,688 55,424 8,314 17,329 2,592 42,335 42,335 − 55,010
1992 143,959 141,351 13,688 85,845 8,199 33,619 2,608 26,506 26,506 − 117,453
1993 122,763 120,143 13,688 61,784 8,496 36,176 2,620 39,541 23,179 16,362 83,2221994 115,965 113,605 13,688 60,209 7,967 31,742 2,360 24,192 19,581 4,611 91,774
1995 123,261 121,307 13,688 68,484 10,337 28,798 1,954 16,390 16,390 − 106,871
1996 120,985 119,544 13,688 72,364 11,445 22,048 1,441 15,604 15,604 − 105,381
1997 127,849 126,884 13,688 76,673 13,874 22,649 966 16,931 16,931 − 110,918
1998 135,085 134,005 17,109 100,363 16,533 − 1,079 15,978 15,978 − 119,107
*Valuation of the gold holdings and the claims on non-residents according Monetary Cooperation Fund −EMCF). —3Including loans to the World
to section 26 (2) of the Bundesbank Act and the provisions of the Bank. —4Including liquidity paper sold to non-residents by the
Commercial Code, especially section 253. In the course of the year, valuation Bundesbank; excluding the liquidity Treasury discount paper sold toat the balance sheet rates of the preceding year. —1Mainly US dollar non-residents between March 1993 and March 1995, as shown in column 10. 
assets. —2European Central Bank (until 1993 claims on the European
 
 
 
9. External position of the Bundesbank in the European monetary union o
 5  million
Monetary reserves and other claims on non-residents
Monetary reserves
Reserve
position
in the Inter-
national OtherMonetary Other claims on Net externalFund and claims on Claims residents position of the
Gold special Foreign non-euro- within the in other Bundesbank Liabilities
End of year and gold drawing currency area Eurosystem EMU member to non- (col.1 lessor month Total Total rights reserves (net)  
2 countries col.9) receivables residents  1  3 residents  3 
1234567891 0
1999         Jan  4 95,316 93,940 29,312 8,461 56,167 140 1,225 11 8,169 87,146
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 8,332 52,420 9,162 39,746 11 6,179 135,779
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 7,762 53,377 313 6,620 14 6,592 94,1702001 76,147 93,215 35,005 8,721 49,489 312 − 17,385 5 8,752 67,396
2002 103,948 85,002 36,208 8,272 40,522 312 18,466 167 9,005 94,942
2002         Feb 98,392 99,230 38,095 8,874 52,260 312 − 1,152 2 10,354 88,038
         Mar 99,489 98,130 38,505 8,840 50,786 312 1,045 1 10,077 89,412
         Apr 106,936 94,779 38,072 8,205 48,502 312 11,842 2 9,298 97,638
         May 100,886 91,942 38,649 8,040 45,253 312 8,630 2 8,448 92,438         June 88,199 86,649 35,435 8,848 42,366 312 1,236 1 9,219 78,980
         July 105,187 87,718 34,596 8,897 44,225 312 17,156 1 10,163 95,025
         Aug 110,682 87,466 35,197 8,797 43,471 312 22,902 1 9,432 101,250         Sep 108,889 88,937 36,225 8,751 43,961 312 19,639 1 9,966 98,923
         Oct 112,748 87,441 35,530 8,594 43,317 312 24,993 2 9,473 103,276
         Nov 108,615 87,610 35,517 8,542 43,551 312 20,688 5 10,272 98,343         Dec 103,948 85,002 36,208 8,272 40,522 312 18,466 167 9,005 94,942
2003         Jan 98,272 85,235 37,934 8,023 39,278 312 12,237 488 9,898 88,374
         Feb 95,491 83,685 35,721 8,008 39,956 312 11,001 493 9,669 85,822         Mar 98,240 82,530 34,100 8,348 40,083 312 14,908 490 10,599 87,641
         Apr 93,702 79,453 33,442 8,123 37,888 312 13,496 441 9,126 84,575
         May 70,456 78,904 34,252 7,871 36,781 312 − 9,216 455 9,818 60,638
         June 73,550 78,425 33,435 8,292 36,698 312 − 5,663 476 10,537 63,014
         July 90,714 79,218 34,759 8,289 36,170 312 10,710 474 10,375 80,339
oClaims and liabilities vis- à-vis all countries within and outside EMU. Until Deutsche Bundesbank ’s cross-border payments within the Eurosystem. From
December 2000, the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, by virtue November 2000 including the TARGET positions which were previouslyof revaluations, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the levels shown (in columns 6 and 9) as bilateral assets and liabilities vis- à-vis national
are computed on the basis of cumulative transaction values. From January central banks outside the Eurosystem. —3See footnote 2. —4Euro
2001 onwards, all end-of-month levels will be valued at market prices. — opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at January 1, 1999. 
1Including loans to the World Bank. —2Including the balances in the
72*X. Foreign trade and payments

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
10. Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
 5  million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities to non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  to foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms paymentsor month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received
operations operations
All countries
 
1999 277,331 52,774 224,557 115,564 108,993 100,777 8,216 293,849 56,632 237,217 166,026 71,191 52,047 19,1442000 320,874 43,462 277,412 152,752 124,660 116,971 7,689 446,060 52,663 393,397 309,024 84,373 63,093 21,2802001 358,120 62,434 295,686 171,939 123,747 114,857 8,890 505,266 60,132 445,134 354,561 90,573 65,988 24,5852002  
4 331,671 63,817 267,854 148,913 118,941 111,406 7,535 533,423 57,696 475,727 387,850 87,877 62,622 25,255
2003         Mar 365,303 83,807 281,496 161,235 120,261 112,073 8,188 537,523 52,892 484,631 397,079 87,552 61,438 26,114
         Apr 375,875 95,351 280,524 160,039 120,485 112,026 8,459 542,697 55,237 487,460 401,611 85,849 58,492 27,357
         May 376,906 97,670 279,236 162,005 117,231 108,883 8,348 547,108 53,389 493,719 409,876 83,843 56,369 27,474         June 371,087 94,122 276,965 158,842 118,123 109,957 8,166 561,051 52,586 508,465 422,120 86,345 58,953 27,392
EU countries 5
 
1999 157,617 47,992 109,625 56,450 53,175 48,500 4,675 194,809 49,243 145,566 111,605 33,961 27,532 6,4292000 177,782 39,563 138,219 78,298 59,921 55,718 4,203 323,049 45,473 277,576 237,583 39,993 32,457 7,5362001 198,118 58,039 140,079 79,205 60,874 55,371 5,503 372,937 53,683 319,254 275,749 43,505 34,716 8,7892002  
4 200,930 60,118 140,812 84,643 56,169 51,693 4,476 402,561 52,503 350,058 307,920 42,138 32,650 9,488
2003         Mar 229,843 78,227 151,616 92,907 58,709 53,974 4,735 397,172 47,861 349,311 307,232 42,079 32,281 9,798
         Apr 242,500 90,107 152,393 93,530 58,863 53,905 4,958 403,056 50,335 352,721 312,181 40,540 30,136 10,404
         May 244,294 92,648 151,646 94,547 57,099 52,379 4,720 406,278 48,524 357,754 318,616 39,138 29,114 10,024         June 238,984 88,772 150,212 92,683 57,529 52,846 4,683 418,923 48,031 370,892 330,316 40,576 30,475 10,101
of which: EMU member countries 1
 
1999 104,071 25,946 78,125 38,747 39,378 36,074 3,304 151,179 38,117 113,062 88,763 24,299 20,173 4,1262000 120,976 22,737 98,239 52,976 45,263 42,389 2,874 247,830 33,698 214,132 185,595 28,537 23,569 4,9682001 126,519 33,787 92,732 46,599 46,133 42,771 3,362 295,943 38,361 257,582 225,711 31,871 24,878 6,9932002  
4 129,490 32,521 96,969 54,542 42,427 39,350 3,077 331,733 37,366 294,367 263,863 30,504 22,996 7,508
2003         Mar 144,188 40,276 103,912 59,300 44,612 41,395 3,217 328,097 30,622 297,475 266,985 30,490 22,773 7,717
         Apr 152,727 48,888 103,839 59,603 44,236 40,977 3,259 330,387 31,027 299,360 270,308 29,052 21,227 7,825
         May 157,155 52,354 104,801 61,249 43,552 40,334 3,218 336,550 31,168 305,382 276,404 28,978 21,037 7,941         June 154,414 49,419 104,995 61,119 43,876 40,655 3,221 341,992 30,586 311,406 281,675 29,731 21,651 8,080
Other industrial countries 3 6
 
1999 71,958 3,595 68,363 45,540 22,823 21,220 1,603 68,024 4,870 63,154 44,518 18,636 15,387 3,2492000 84,502 2,925 81,577 54,272 27,305 25,673 1,632 84,464 4,711 79,753 56,986 22,767 18,621 4,1462001 100,786 3,364 97,422 71,842 25,580 24,082 1,498 93,269 4,178 89,091 64,595 24,496 19,648 4,8482002  
4 77,144 2,743 74,401 48,866 25,535 24,303 1,232 90,594 3,267 87,327 64,544 22,783 18,081 4,702
2003         Mar 83,202 4,204 78,998 53,236 25,762 24,560 1,202 95,937 3,176 92,761 70,360 22,401 17,510 4,891
         Apr 81,036 3,913 77,123 51,652 25,471 24,289 1,182 95,504 3,010 92,494 70,551 21,943 16,854 5,089
         May 79,625 3,721 75,904 51,579 24,325 23,139 1,186 95,550 2,961 92,589 71,471 21,118 15,901 5,217         June 79,544 3,941 75,603 50,473 25,130 23,985 1,145 96,427 2,708 93,719 71,876 21,843 16,779 5,064
Countries in transition
 
1999 16,402 231 16,171 4,603 11,568 10,934 634 6,256 78 6,178 481 5,697 3,119 2,5782000 19,082 240 18,842 5,028 13,814 13,104 710 8,202 113 8,089 928 7,161 4,384 2,7772001 20,444 204 20,240 6,103 14,137 13,449 688 9,095 151 8,944 1,699 7,245 4,341 2,9042002  
4 20,339 332 20,007 5,680 14,327 13,586 741 10,106 175 9,931 2,119 7,812 4,574 3,238
2003         Mar 20,399 258 20,141 5,750 14,391 13,632 759 10,680 164 10,516 2,519 7,997 4,551 3,446
         Apr 20,741 265 20,476 5,889 14,587 13,809 778 11,062 177 10,885 2,616 8,269 4,618 3,651
         May 21,455 251 21,204 6,620 14,584 13,782 802 12,187 193 11,994 3,283 8,711 4,875 3,836         June 21,666 290 21,376 6,739 14,637 13,852 785 12,643 168 12,475 3,329 9,146 5,264 3,882
Developing countries 2
 
1999 31,354 956 30,398 8,971 21,427 20,123 1,304 24,760 2,441 22,319 9,422 12,897 6,009 6,8882000 39,508 734 38,774 15,154 23,620 22,476 1,144 30,345 2,366 27,979 13,527 14,452 7,631 6,8212001 38,772 827 37,945 14,789 23,156 21,955 1,201 29,965 2,120 27,845 12,518 15,327 7,283 8,0442002  
4 33,258 624 32,634 9,724 22,910 21,824 1,086 30,162 1,751 28,411 13,267 15,144 7,317 7,827
2003         Mar 31,859 1,118 30,741 9,342 21,399 19,907 1,492 33,734 1,691 32,043 16,968 15,075 7,096 7,979
         Apr 31,598 1,066 30,532 8,968 21,564 20,023 1,541 33,075 1,715 31,360 16,263 15,097 6,884 8,213
         May 31,532 1,050 30,482 9,259 21,223 19,583 1,640 33,093 1,711 31,382 16,506 14,876 6,479 8,397         June 30,893 1,119 29,774 8,947 20,827 19,274 1,553 33,058 1,679 31,379 16,599 14,780 6,435 8,345
* Including the assets and liabilities vis- à-vis non-residents of individuals in Greece from January 2001. —2Including Cyprus until April 2002. —
Germany. The assets and liabilities vis- à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in 3Including Cyprus from May 2002. —4Change in the range of enterprises
Germany are shown in Table 4 of Section IV, "Banks". Statistical increases required to report owing to an increase in the exemtion limit. —5Including
and decreases have not been eliminated; to this extent the changes in totals Guernsey, Jersey and Isle of Man until December 2002. —6Including
are not comparable with the figures shown in Table X, 7. —1Including Guernsey, Jersey and Isle of Man from January 2003. 
73*X. Foreign trade and payments

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
X. Foreign trade and payments
11. Deutsche Mark and euro exchange rates of selected currencies *
Yearly Japan Denmark Sweden Norway Switzerland Canada Australia New Zealand United States United Kingdom
or monthly
average USD JPY DKK SEK GBP NOK CHF CAD AUD  1 NZD 1 
Historic spot middle rates on the Frankfurt exchange (1 or 100 currency units = DEM ...)
      
1991 1.6612 1.2346 25.932 27.421 2.926  25.580 115.740 1.4501 1.2942 0.95891992 1.5595 1.2313 25.869 26.912 2.753  25.143 111.198 1.2917 1.1476 0.84061993 1.6544 1.4945 25.508 21.248 2.483  23.303 111.949 1.2823 1.1235 0.89401994 1.6218 1.5870 25.513 21.013 2.4816 22.982 118.712 1.1884 1.1848 0.9605
1995 1.4338 1.5293 25.570 20.116 2.2620 22.614 121.240 1.0443 1.0622 0.9399
1996 1.5037 1.3838 25.945 22.434 2.3478 23.292 121.891 1.1027 1.1782 1.03571997 1.7348 1.4378 26.249 22.718 2.8410 24.508 119.508 1.2533 1.2889 1.14531998 1.7592 1.3484 26.258 22.128 2.9142 23.297 121.414 1.1884 1.1070 0.9445
      
Euro reference exchange rates published by the European Central Bank (EUR 1 = currency units ...) 2
      
1999 1.0658 121.32 7.4355 8.8075 0.65874 8.3104 1.6003 1.5840 1.6523 2.01452000 0.9236 99.47 7.4538 8.4452 0.60948 8.1129 1.5579 1.3706 1.5889 2.02882001 0.8956 108.68 7.4521 9.2551 0.62187 8.0484 1.5105 1.3864 1.7319 2.13002002 0.9456 118.06 7.4305 9.1611 0.62883 7.5086 1.4670 1.4838 1.7376 2.0366
2001         Oct 0.9059 109.86 7.4367 9.5780 0.62393 7.9970 1.4793 1.4224 1.7955 2.1863
         Nov 0.8883 108.68 7.4452 9.4166 0.61838 7.9224 1.4663 1.4153 1.7172 2.1322         Dec 0.8924 113.38 7.4431 9.4359 0.62012 7.9911 1.4749 1.4075 1.7348 2.1456
2002         Jan 0.8833 117.12 7.4329 9.2275 0.61659 7.9208 1.4745 1.4135 1.7094 2.0826
         Feb 0.8700 116.23 7.4299 9.1828 0.61160 7.7853 1.4775 1.3880 1.6963 2.0771         Mar 0.8758 114.75 7.4324 9.0594 0.61574 7.7183 1.4678 1.3903 1.6695 2.0261
         Apr 0.8858 115.81 7.4341 9.1358 0.61407 7.6221 1.4658 1.4008 1.6537 1.9995
         May 0.9170 115.86 7.4356 9.2208 0.62823 7.5207 1.4572 1.4210 1.6662 1.9859         June 0.9554 117.80 7.4330 9.1137 0.64405 7.4043 1.4721 1.4627 1.6793 1.9517
         July 0.9922 117.11 7.4301 9.2689 0.63870 7.4050 1.4624 1.5321 1.7922 2.0646
         Aug 0.9778 116.31 7.4270 9.2489 0.63633 7.4284 1.4636 1.5333 1.8045 2.1076         Sep 0.9808 118.38 7.4271 9.1679 0.63059 7.3619 1.4649 1.5434 1.7927 2.0847
         Oct 0.9811 121.57 7.4297 9.1051 0.62994 7.3405 1.4650 1.5481 1.7831 2.0381
         Nov 1.0014 121.65 7.4280 9.0818 0.63709 7.3190 1.4673 1.5735 1.7847 2.0155         Dec 1.0183 124.20 7.4264 9.0961 0.64218 7.2948 1.4679 1.5872 1.8076 1.9947
2003         Jan 1.0622 126.12 7.4324 9.1733 0.65711 7.3328 1.4621 1.6364 1.8218 1.9648
         Feb 1.0773 128.60 7.4317 9.1455 0.66977 7.5439 1.4674 1.6299 1.8112 1.9457         Mar 1.0807 128.16 7.4274 9.2265 0.68255 7.8450 1.4695 1.5943 1.7950 1.9497
         Apr 1.0848 130.12 7.4255 9.1541 0.68902 7.8317 1.4964 1.5851 1.7813 1.9700
         May 1.1582 135.83 7.4246 9.1559 0.71322 7.8715 1.5155 1.6016 1.7866 2.0083         June 1.1663 138.05 7.4250 9.1182 0.70224 8.1619 1.5411 1.5798 1.7552 2.0069
         July 1.1372 134.99 7.4332 9.1856 0.70045 8.2893 1.5476 1.5694 1.7184 1.9386
*Calculated from daily quotations. —1Exchange rates from Australia and central banks at 2.15 p.m. For additional euro reference exchange rates of
New Zealand; those for New Zealand calculated from rates as at the middle the ECB, see Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Report 5, Exchange rateand end of the month. —2The ECB publishes daily euro reference ex- statistics. 
change rates, which are calculated on the basis of the concertation between
12. Exchange rates for the national currencies of the EMU countries, the Deutsche Mark value of the ECU *
and euro conversion rates
France Italy Netherlands Belgium/ Austria Spain Finland Ireland Portugal Greece ECU values  1 
Yearly Luxembourg GRD  100 /
average FRF  100 ITL  1,000 NLG  100 BEF/LUF  100 ATS  100 ESP  100 FIM  100 IEP  1 PTE  100 EUR  1  2 ECU  1
Historic spot middle rates on the Frankfurt exchange in DEM
   
1991 29.409 1.3377 88.742 4.857  14.211 1.597  41.087 2.671  1.149  0.9103 2.050761992 29.500 1.2720 88.814 4.857  14.211 1.529  34.963 2.656  1.157  0.8178 2.020311993 29.189 1.0526 89.017 4.785  14.214 1.303  28.915 2.423  1.031  0.7213 1.936391994 29.238 1.0056 89.171 4.8530 14.214 1.2112 31.108 2.4254 0.9774 0.6683 1.92452
1995 28.718 0.8814 89.272 4.8604 14.214 1.1499 32.832 2.2980 0.9555 0.6182 1.87375
1996 29.406 0.9751 89.243 4.8592 14.214 1.1880 32.766 2.4070 0.9754 0.6248 1.909541997 29.705 1.0184 88.857 4.8464 14.210 1.1843 33.414 2.6297 0.9894 0.6349 1.964381998 29.829 1.0132 88.714 4.8476 14.213 1.1779 32.920 2.5049 0.9763 0.5952 1.969131999 . . . . . . . . . 325.76 .
2000 . . . . . . . . . 336.63 .
      
Irrevocable euro conversion rates (EUR 1 = currency units ...) 3
   
6.55957 1936.27 2.20371 40.3399 13.7603 166.386 5.94573 0.787564 200.482 4 340.750 5 1.95583
*Calculated from daily quotations. —1According to data from the Euro- ence exchange rates of the ECB (EU R 1 = GRD ...). —3Applicable from
pean Commission. —2Until 1998 reciprocal values of the exchange rates for 1 January 1999. —4Applicable from 1 January 2001. —5Deutsche Mark
the Deutsche Mark, published by the Bank of Greece; from 1999 euro refer- conversion rate. 
74*X. Foreign trade and payments

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
13. Effective exchange rates * of the euro and selected foreign currencies
  
1999 Q1 = 100
Memo item: Effective nominal exchange rates of selected foreign
Indicators of the German economy ’s currencies against the currencies of 19 industrial
Effective exchange rate of the euro price competitiveness  3,4 countries  3,5,6 
Narrow group  1 Broad group  2 19 industrial countries  5 49 countries  7 
Real Real on the basis
of the on the basis on the basis
on the basis of Pound Canadian Swiss Japanese of consumer of consumer deflators of
Period Nominal prices Nominal prices consumer prices US dollar sterling dollar franc yen total sales  8 
1995 107.8 108.8 93.2 106.7 109.5 110.4 109.5 86.1 84.0 106.4 105.4 115.6
1996 107.9 108.8 95.4 105.5 106.1 106.8 104.9 90.9 85.9 108.8 104.2 100.61997 99.1 99.5 90.4 96.5 100.7 101.4 98.9 98.8 99.8 109.7 97.9 95.91998 101.5 101.3 96.6 99.1 100.9 101.1 100.1 103.4 103.3 103.5 99.9 89.71999 95.7 95.8 96.6 95.8 97.8 98.0 97.6 100.8 102.3 102.2 98.3 105.1
2000 85.7 86.3 88.2 86.0 91.8 92.6 91.0 105.4 105.2 103.6 96.8 117.9
2001 87.3 88.6 91.0 87.7 92.1 93.0 91.3 112.0 103.6 100.5 100.5 106.72002 90.0 92.5 95.6 91.7
p 93.4 94.0 92.5 110.7 104.2 98.7 104.9 100.8
1998         Q1 98.8 98.8 92.6 96.4 99.3 99.8 98.7 103.2 104.5 107.3 100.1 92.5
         Q2 100.2 100.1 94.2 97.4 100.6 100.7 99.1 104.8 104.8 106.5 98.5 86.8         Q3 102.5 102.5 97.8 100.3 101.6 102.1 101.0 106.3 104.1 102.0 99.4 83.7         Q4 104.2 103.8 101.7 102.4 101.9 101.8 101.5 99.4 99.8 98.0 101.6 95.7
1999         Q1 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0
         Q2 96.1 96.0 96.5 96.0 98.5 98.3 97.8 102.8 102.8 103.5 98.6 99.0         Q3 94.6 94.7 95.5 94.7 97.2 97.8 97.2 101.4 102.3 102.3 97.7 106.2         Q4 92.2 92.2 94.2 92.6 95.5 95.9 95.5 99.1 104.1 102.8 96.7 115.2
2000         Q1 89.0 89.5 91.1 89.3 93.6 94.8 93.5 101.5 106.4 104.9 95.1 114.9
         Q2 86.0 86.4 88.4 86.4 92.1 92.5 91.2 104.3 105.4 103.7 96.5 118.4         Q3 84.8 85.4 87.3 85.1 91.4 92.1 90.3 106.2 103.9 104.1 97.2 119.2         Q4 83.0 83.8 85.9 83.4 90.2 91.0 89.1 109.4 105.0 101.6 98.2 119.2
2001         Jan 89.2 89.9 91.7 88.6 . 94.0 92.2 107.7 102.4 102.7 100.0 108.3
         Feb 88.3 89.1 91.0 88.1 92.8 93.9 92.1 108.8 102.0 101.6 99.2 109.9         Mar 88.4 89.4 91.4 88.4 . 93.6 91.9 111.5 102.9 99.7 99.3 106.0
         Apr 87.6 88.8 91.0 88.0 . 93.1 91.4 113.0 103.7 100.0 99.4 104.9
         May 85.9 87.2 89.3 86.2 91.5 92.4 90.4 113.1 104.3 101.3 98.3 107.5         June 84.7 86.0 88.1 85.0 . 91.9 89.8 114.1 104.4 102.7 98.5 108.3
         July 85.4 86.8 89.1 85.9 . 92.7 90.7 114.3 104.9 102.5 99.5 105.8
         Aug 87.7 89.0 91.8 88.3 91.7 93.4 91.9 111.6 103.0 101.1 100.4 106.4         Sep 88.0 89.3 92.6 89.0 . 93.1 91.9 110.7 103.8 99.1 102.2 108.2
         Oct 88.0 89.6 92.8 89.1 . 92.7 91.5 111.8 103.7 99.0 103.0 106.2
         Nov 86.8 88.4 91.3 87.6 92.3 92.0 90.5 113.3 104.0 97.8 103.4 106.3         Dec 87.7 89.8 91.9 88.5 . 93.5 91.7 114.1 104.3 99.0 103.3 102.1
2002         Jan 87.6 90.0 91.6 88.1 . 93.6 91.4 116.4 104.9 97.9 103.3 98.3
         Feb 86.8 89.0 91.1 87.4 92.3 93.3 90.9 117.3 105.3 98.5 102.7 98.2         Mar 86.8 89.3 91.3 87.8 . 93.2 90.8 116.1 104.6 98.7 103.4 99.8
         Apr 87.2 89.7 91.7 88.1 . 92.7 90.4 115.3 105.2 99.0 103.8 99.4
         May 88.6 91.1 93.7 89.9 93.0 93.2 91.3 112.0 103.5 100.4 105.1 101.2         June 90.6 93.2 96.4 92.5 . 94.2 92.7 109.0 101.9 101.0 104.9 101.7
         July 91.7 94.4 98.2 94.2 . 95.2 94.4 106.0 103.5 99.4 106.0 104.3
         Aug 91.1 93.6 97.7 93.5
p 94.0 94.5 93.6 107.3 103.5 98.0 105.7 104.3
         Sep 91.2 93.8 98.0 93.7 . 94.1 93.2 107.6 104.7 97.7 105.6 102.5
         Oct 91.7 94.3 98.5 94.2 . 94.0 93.3 108.5 105.0 97.6 105.8 99.8
         Nov 92.5 95.1 99.3 94.6 p 94.4 94.0 93.1 106.8 104.3 97.7 106.1 100.8
         Dec 93.6 96.7 100.4 96.0 . 95.6 94.7 106.0 104.0 98.3 106.5 99.6
2003         Jan 95.8 98.8 103.0 98.1 . 96.3 95.7 103.0 102.6 98.8 107.9 100.4
         Feb 97.1 100.2 104.4 99.4 p 96.2 97.0 96.5 102.2 101.2 100.5 108.0 99.2
         Mar 97.9 101.2 105.1 100.2 . 97.0 96.5 101.4 99.3 103.0 108.1 99.8
         Apr 98.6 102.1 105.2 100.3 . 96.8 96.2 101.4 98.7 104.1 106.4 98.6
         May 102.5 106.0 109.1 103.8 p 98.0 98.3 97.7 96.7 96.9 109.0 106.5 97.7
         June 102.7 106.5 109.3 104.0 . 98.7 98.0 96.1 98.9 111.2 104.9 96.3
         July 101.4 105.2 107.8 102.5 . 98.5 97.4 97.8 98.5 109.5 103.9 97.3
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of April 2000, page 39 ff. —2ECB calculations. In addition to the countries
the currency concerned. —1ECB calculations based on the weighted belonging to the narrow group (see footnote 1), this group also includes the
averages of the effective exchange rates of the euro or, prior to 1999, of the following countries: Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, China, Croatia, Cypru s, Czech
exchange rates of the currencies preceding the euro against the currencies Republic, Estonia, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico ,
of the following countries: Australia, Canada, Denmark, Greece, Hong Kong, Morocco, New Zealand, Philippines, Poland, Romania, Russian Federatio n,
Japan, Norway, Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, United Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand and Turkey. —3The
Kingdom and United States. The weights used in these calculations are method of calculation is consistent with the procedure used by the ECB tobased on manufactured goods trade between 1995 and 1997 and capture compute the effective exchange rates of the euro (see Monthly Bulletin,third-market effects. From January 2001, Greece ceased to be a partner November 2001, page 50 ff.). —4Decline in the values implies an increase in
country in the effective exchange rate of the euro; the weighting scheme competitiveness. —5EMU countries and narrow group of the ECB except
was adjusted accordingly. Due to the change in the weighting scheme, Australia, Hong Kong, Singapore and South Korea. —6Figures up to
effective exchange rate data as from January 2001 are not fully comparable end-1998, computed by linking with the figures published up to Octoberwith earlier data. Where consumer prices were not yet available, estimates 2001. —7EMU countries and broad group of the ECB. —8Annual and
have been used. For details of the methodology see: ECB, Monthly Bulletin, quarterly averages. 
75*X. Foreign trade and payments

76*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003

Overview of
publications
by the Deutsche
BundesbankThis overview provides information
about selected recent economic andstatistical publications by the DeutscheBundesbank. Unless otherwise indi-cated, these publications are availablein both English and German, in printedform and on the internet.
The publications are available free of
charge from the Press and Public Rela-tions Division. For a small fee to covercosts, a file which is updated monthlyand contains approximately 40,000time series published by the Bundes-bank can be obtained on magnetictape cassette or ZIP disk from the Divi-sion Statistical data processing, math-ematical methods. Orders should besent, in writing, to one of the ad-dresses listed on the reverse of the titlepage. Selected time series can also bedownloaded from the internet.
Annual Report
Monthly Report
For information on the articles published between
1990 and 2002 see the index attached to the Janu-ary 2003 Monthly Report.
September 2002
– The performance of German credit institutions
in 2001
– Productivity developments in Germany– Quotas and voting shares in the IMF
77*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003

October 2002
– Amendments to the Banking Act caused by
the Fourth Financial Market Promotion Act
– The development of bank lending to the pri-
vate sector
– Fundamental determinants of real exchange
rate movements in the central and east Euro-
pean accession countries
November 2002
– The economic scene in Germany in autumn
2002
December 2002
– Recent tax revenue trends– Macroeconomic development of earnings and
costs since the early 1990s
– Developments in the external economic rela-
tions of the EU accession countries in central
and eastern Europe
– Reports from the Economic Research Centre
January 2003
– Reserve assets: their development and import-
ance in monetary union
– Role and importance of interest rate derivatives– The new “Minimum requirements for the
credit business of credit institutions” and
Basel II
– Reports from the Economic Research Centre
February 2003
– The economic scene in Germany around the
turn of 2002-03
March 2003
– The Eurosystem’s monetary policy framework –
experience to date and measures to improve its
efficiency– Macroeconomic aspects of share price devel-
opments
– The development of production potential in
Germany
– German balance of payments in 2002
April 2003
– The development of public finances in Ger-
many following qualification for Europeanmonetary union
– The development of bank deposits in Germany– German enterprises’ profitability and financing
in 2001
– Financial sanctions: legal framework and im-
plementation in Germany
May 2003
– The economic scene in Germany in spring
2003
June 2003
– The debate on deflationary risks in Germany– Overall financial flows in 2002– The development of German enterprises’ inter-
national capital links between end-1998 andend-2001
– German results of euro-area bank lending
survey
– Monetary policy: how relevant are other policy-
makers? Bundesbank Spring Conference 2003
July 2003
– Economic and monetary policy cooperation
between the EU and the acceding countriesfollowing the signature of the accession treaty
– The state of public finance in the EU acceding
countries
– Financial markets in central and east European
countries before accession to the EU
– Reports from the Economic Research Centre
August 2003
– The economic scene in Germany in summer
2003
78*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003

Statistical Supplements to the
Monthly Report1
1 Banking statistics (monthly)
2 Capital market statistics (monthly)
3 Balance of payments statistics (monthly)
4 Seasonally adjusted business statistics (monthly)5 Exchange rate statistics (quarterly)
Special Publications
The monetary policy of the Bundesbank,
October 19952
Makro-ökonometrisches Mehr-Länder-Modell,November 1996
3
Europäische Organisationen und Gremien im Be-reich von Währung und Wirtschaft, May 1997
3
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 bis1989, August 1999
3
The market for German Federal securities,
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model: MEMMOD,
June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Die Europäische Wirtschafts- und Währungsunion,
December 20023
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im Bereichvon Währung und Wirtschaft, March 2003
3
Special Statistical Publications
1 Banking statistics guidelines and customer clas-
sification, January 20034,52 Bankenstatistik Kundensystematik Firmenver-
zeichnisse, June 20033,6
3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen,
January 20003
4 Financial accounts for Germany 1991 to 2001,
September 20025
5 Annual accounts of west German enterprises
1971 to 1996, March 19991
6 Ratios from annual accounts of German enter-
prises between 1998 and 2000, March 20033
7 Erläuterungen zu den Leistungspositionen der
Zahlungsbilanz, September 20013
8 Balance of payments statistics of the Fed-
eral Republic of Germany, 2nd edition,February 1991
o
9 Securities deposits,
August 2002
10 International capital links,
June 20031
11 Balance of payments by region,
August 2002
12 Technologische Dienstleistungen in der Zah-
lungsbilanz, May 20023
79*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
1Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data
contained in the German originals are available in English.
2Also available in French, Spanish, Russian and Chinese.
3Available in German only.
4Only the sections “Monthly Balance Sheet Statistics”,
“External position” and “Customer classification”(“Overall survey on sectoral classification”, “Survey on
breakdown by industry or activity” and “Explanatory
notes on the system of customer classification by industry
or activity”) are available in English.
5Current version only available on the internet at half-
yearly intervals.6Current version only available on the internet at quar-
terly intervals.oNot available on the internet.

80*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
August 2003
Discussion papers
by the Economic Research Centre
February 2003 05/03
A comparision of dynamic panel data estimators:Monte Carlo evidence and an application to theinvestment function
March 2003 06/03
A Vectorautoregressive Investment Model (VIM)and Monetary Policy Transmission: Panel Evidence
from German Firms
March 2003 07/03
Die internationale Integration der Geldmärkte in
den mittel- und osteuropäischen Beitrittsländern:
Abweichungen von der gedeckten Zinsparität,Kapitalverkehrskontrollen und Ineffizienten desFinanzsektors
March 2003 08/03
Die internationale Integration der Devisenmärktein den mittel- und osteuropäischen Beitrittslän-
dern: Spekulative Effizienz, Transaktionskosten
und Wechselkursprämien
March 2003 09/03
Determinants of German FDI: New Evidence from
Micro-Data
March 2003 10/03
On the Stability of Different Financial Systems
April 2003 11/03
Determinants of German Foreign Direct Invest-
ment in Latin American and Asian Emerging Mar-kets in the 1990sJune 2003 12/03Active monetary policy, passive fiscal policy andthe value of public debt: some further monetaryarithmetic
June 2003 13/03
Bidder Behavior in Repo Auctions without Mini-mum Bid Rate: Evidence from the Bundesbank
June 2003 14/03
Did the Bundesbank React to Stock Price Move-
ments?
Earlier discussion papers are available on the inter-
net, in some cases as abstracts.
Banking legislation
1 Bundesbank Act and Statute of the European
System of Central Banks and of the EuropeanCentral Bank, June 1998
2 Gesetz über das Kreditwesen, February 2001
3
2a Grundsatz I über die Eigenmittel der Institute,
January 20013
2b Grundsatz II über die Liquidität der Institute,
August 19993
7 Instruction sheet for the reporting of large ex-
posures and loans of 3 million Deutsche Markor more pursuant to sections 13 to 14 of theBanking Act, September 1998
For footnotes, see p 79*.

