Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
Vol. 55
No. 2

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
Deutsche Bundesbank
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 1460431 Frankfurt am Main
Postfach 10 06 02
60006 Frankfurt am MainFederal Republic of Germany
Tel +49 69 9566-1
or +49 69 9566 . . . plus extension
number
Telex 41227 within Germany
414431 from abroad
Fax +49 69 56010 71
Internet http://www.bundesbank.deReproduction permitted only if source is stated.ISSN 0418-8292The German original of this Monthly Report
went to press on 14 February 2003Annual and weekly publishing schedules for
selected statistics of the Deutsche Bundes-bank can be downloaded from our internetsite. The statistical data are also published onthe internet.
TheMonthly Report is published by the Deut-
sche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main, by vir-tue of section 18 of the Bundesbank Act. It isavailable to interested parties free of charge.

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
ContentsThe economic scene in Germany
around the turn of 2002-03 5
The international and European setting 6
The financial markets in Germany 21Economic conditions in Germany 29Foreign trade and payments 38Public finance 45
Statistical Section 1*
Key economic data for EMU 6*
Overall monetary survey in the EMU 8*Consolidated financial statementof the Eurosystem 16*Banks 20*Minimum reserves 42*Interest rates 43*Capital market 48*Public finance in Germany 52*Economic conditions 60*Foreign trade and payments 67*
Overview of publications by the
Deutsche Bundesbank 77*

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
4

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
5The economic scene
in Germany aroundthe turn of 2002-03

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
6The international
and EuropeansettingDevelopments in the global economy
The recovery of the world economy slowed
down noticeably in autumn 2002; in indus-trial countries it even ground to a halt. Thispicture of the economic situation haschanged little since the turn of 2002-03.Manufacturing output (excluding construc-tion) in the G7 countries and the smaller westEuropean countries fell by a seasonally adjust-ed
12% between October and December;
however, at +2%, it was still distinctly higherthan a year before. On average over the pastyear, industrial production was down by 1%on the year; it has declined by 4% since2000. The growing threat of a war in theMiddle East which, along with the unrest inVenezuela, has led to a steep rise in oil prices,above all placed a great strain on the worldeconomy in autumn. The after-effects of thestock market slide increased the strains. Inaddition, the debt financing conditions wereless favourable for companies in industrialcountries than the low money market ratesand low interest rates on government bondswould suggest, especially owing to the ratherhigh risk premia. All of these factors are ul-timately rooted in a pronounced lack of confi-dence, which is having a retarding influenceon the economy.
The global economy’s starting position at the
beginning of 2003 tended to be unfavour-able. Even though the business expectationsof companies in several industrial countriesrecently brightened somewhat, consumerconfidence continued to decline. Growinguncertainty on the financial markets regard-ing the potential economic consequences ofGlobal recovery
slowed down in
autumn
No
improvement
following turn
of 2002-03

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
7a war put an additional strain on share prices
worldwide in the past few weeks. In all likeli-hood the current economic slump will beovercome only once the existing major confi-dence deficits have been eliminated and therisk premia on the markets have receded. Areduction in geopolitical tensions is essential.
It is not possible to estimate adequately the
potential impact which an escalation of hos-tilities in the Middle East would have on theworld economy. The consequential costs tothe economy ultimately hinge on too manyvariables. These costs will depend inter alia
on the length and intensity of a potential mili-tary conflict.
1If the military conflict were to
be short and followed by peace in the region,the oil price might go back down rapidly, andconfidence among investors and consumerswould improve. However, a protracted con-flict would probably lead to stubbornly highoil prices and cause an additional setback tothe world economy.
The South-East Asian emerging market econ-
omies have so far been largely able to disas-sociate themselves from the unsatisfactoryeconomic developments experienced in theindustrial countries in autumn 2002 becausetheir domestic economies were mostly ro-bust. Exporters in this region continue to beheavily dependent on the US economy, espe-1995=100, seasonally adjusted, log scale
1995 96 97 98 99 00 01 2002JapanUnited KingdomEuro areaof which
United StatesSelected
countries 1three-month moving average
monthlyIndustrial production *
in selected countries
Source: national statistics, Eurostat and the
Bundesbank’s own calculations. — *Includ-
ing mining and energy, excluding construc-
tion. — 1In addition to euro-area countries
and countries shown, the list includes
Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland
and Canada; weighted with the respectiveshare in gross value added of industry in
those countries in 1995.
Deutsche Bundesbank108
104
100
96
92108
104
100
96104120
100116
96112
96108
104116132
112128
108124
104120
100116
98120
116
112
108
104
100
98
1For the United States alone, the costs of war, which in-
clude not only military expenditure but also expenditure
on reconstruction, the real income effect of higher oil
prices and the strain on the economy are – accumulated
over several years – estimated at around US$100 billion if
the war were to progress in the USA’s favour. If the war
were not to progress in the USA’s favour, however, overall
costs could amount to over US$1.9 trillion. See William D
Nordhaus, The Economic Consequences of a War with
Iraq, NBER Working Paper No 9361, December 2002.War scenarios
are incalculable
South-East Asia

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
8cially the US demand for IT products, al-
though China seems more and more to be as-serting its position as the economic drivingforce in South-East Asia. Chinese economicgrowth in 2002 is estimated to have averaged8%, a somewhat faster pace than in 2001.However, it is debatable whether this pacecan be maintained. Consumer prices in Chinaare likely to have fallen by
34% last year. At
the same time, there was particular pressureon companies’ profit margins which, alongwith banks’ increased risk awareness, hasbeen curtailing industrial investment lending.Indonesia suffered a severe economic setbackdue to the terrorist attack on Bali. The con-comitant uncertainty could also ripple over toIndonesia’s neighbours, especially Malaysiaand the Philippines.
The situation in Latin America remained tense
in the past few months but has not deterior-ated further since the summer months. Thepolitical unrest in Venezuela plunged theeconomy into a severe crisis. However, morepositive signals from Argentina and Brazil off-set the Venezuelan situation. The Argenti-nean economy appeared to bottom out insummer 2002. Industrial production stabilisedat a low level. Real GDP , however, is still esti-mated to have fallen by more than one-tenthon average in 2002. Since 1999, the fall hasbeen nearly one-fifth. A lasting upswing isonly likely to occur once the domestic politicalsituation has become secure, the banking sys-tem is back on its feet and an agreement hasbeen reached with national and internationalprivate creditors. The financial market turbu-lence in Brazil, which had erupted in theperiod leading up to the presidential electionsin October 2002, eased noticeably as of late.
One key reason is that the newly electedpresident has declared his willingness to con-tinue the stabilisation policy agreed by theprevious government with the IMF. The pre-mia on Brazilian government bonds in com-parison with US government bonds fell from2,451 basis points at the end of Septemberto 1,374 basis points in mid-February. In thesecond half of 2002, total economic produc-tion picked up surprisingly sharply.
The central and east European EU accession
countries recently received only weak stimulifrom abroad owing to the renewed economicslump in the industrial countries. Domesticdemand, however, continued its upwardtrend for the most part. In 2002, there wasconsiderable disparity in growth among thecountries in this category, ranging from
34%
in Poland to 5% in Lithuania as well as in Lat-via according to the European Commission’sNovember 2002 estimates. After a relativelyweak start at the beginning of 2002, the Rus-sian economy resumed stronger growth asthe year progressed. The economy was sup-ported mainly by private consumption. Thiswas reflected by the fact that imports pickedup sharply and the current account surplusdeclined noticeably despite a rise in the ex-port value of oil and gas. Real GDP , having in-creased by 4% on the year, is likely to haveexpanded more slowly than in the three pre-ceding years.
According to initial estimates, in the last quar-
ter of 2002 the US economy grew by only
14% on the previous period after adjustment
for seasonal and working-day variations. ThisLatin AmericaCentral and
eastern Europe
US economy

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
9is the weakest result since summer 2001,
when total economic production had evenfallen slightly in the aggregate. However, pro-duction actually increased considerably (by2
12%) on average for 2002. The more slug-
gish pace of private consumption was a par-ticularly noteworthy factor in last quarter’sslowdown. This was caused by a distinct de-cline in car purchases which, in turn, was at-tributable mainly to the anticipatory effectstriggered by the financing campaign of carmanufacturers last summer. Exports provedto be an additional restraint on growth; in thefourth quarter, they were down by just under
12% on the previous period, while imports
continued to rise. Private gross fixed capitalformation, which grew by
34%, formed a
certain counterweight. Industrial investmentrose for the first time since the third quarterof 2000 and housing investment continuedits upward trend. Government expenditureon consumption and investment increasedsubstantially.
The economic climate remained subdued
after the turn of the year as well. In January,consumer confidence ebbed to its lowestlevel since November 1993. The expectationscomponent was particularly low, undoubtedlyin conjunction with the looming threat ofwar. The absence of a drastic improvement inthe labour market was an additional factor.The geopolitical risks are probably putting astrain on investment activity too. US export-ers’ price competitiveness, however, has im-proved noticeably in the past few monthsowing to the depreciation of the US dollar onforeign exchange markets. Conversely, how-ever, higher import prices might cause con-sumer price inflation to rise in the coming
months. In December, annual consumer priceinflation rose to 2.4% owing to a base effect;core inflation, however, fell slightly to 1.9%.
The US government recently presented a new
economic stimulus and growth package tothe US Congress for ratification. This packagewill provide US$674 billion worth of reliefover the next ten years, more than half ofwhich is accounted for by the abolition of thedividend tax. Another major feature is thatmeasures adopted as part of the 2001 in-come tax reform and scheduled to take effectgradually over the next few years will bemoved forward. In addition, federal un-employment benefits are to be extended. Ifthe economic stimulus package passes Con-gress without any major changes, the tax bur-den on the private sector for 2003 could bereduced by about US$102 billion. The directdemand stimulus – which, however, wouldnot come to bear until the second half of theyear – would amount to an estimated US$50billion to US$80 billion, or 0.5% to 0.8% ofGDP . The relief would be even greater in theelection year 2004. Account needs to betaken not only of the short-term economicstimuli but also of the growth-promoting ef-fects of the package, which arise mainly fromthe abolition of the tax on dividends. This in-creases investors’ yields on their invested cap-ital. At the same time, it eliminates the exist-ing distortions in allocation caused by the fa-vourable tax treatment enjoyed by internal fi-nance relative to external finance. However,the fact that the US government budget is, asa result, likely to slide further into deficit than
The US
government’s
economic
stimulus
package

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
10already expected in the next few years should
be assessed critically.
The Japanese economy, which had seen
strong growth in summer at a projectedseasonally adjusted and annualised rate of3
12%, lost steam in the last quarter of 2002;
however, real GDP was still12% higher than
in the third quarter. (By contrast, in autumn,industrial production fell by a seasonally ad-justed 1% on the previous period.) The keyfactor in the overall economic slowdown wasthe reduction in domestic driving forces. Fall-ing household income caused by reducedwage and salary payments and the persistent-ly bleak employment situation impaired con-sumer confidence. In the fourth quarter, thevolume of incoming orders for mechanicalengineering products remained at the lowlevel of the preceding period. There was noevidence of an end to the slump in the con-struction sector either. By contrast, exportsgrew quite strongly, even taking into accountthe backlog effects in trade with the UnitedStates, where dockworkers’ strikes had inter-mittently disrupted export shipping. The rele-vant contribution to growth was one-halfpercentage point higher than in the previousquarter. The outlook for exporters, however,has recently clouded over somewhat, particu-larly because of the sluggishness of the USeconomy. Consumer price deflation has vis-ibly slowed down. Its average level for theperiod between November and January was“only” -0.4% on the year, compared with-1.5% in the January-February 2002 period.The consumer price index fell by 1% on aver-age for 2002 and was thus 2
12% lower thanits record high of 1998. A vicious circle of de-
flation has not yet materialised in Japan.
According to initial estimates, fourth-quarter
real GDP in the UK rose by almost12% after
adjustment for seasonal and working-dayvariations, ie considerably more slowly than insummer (+1%). It was up by 2
14% on the
year. Total growth for 2002 amounted to1
34%. One reason for the slowdown in
growth was that real value added in themanufacturing sector, having risen slightly inthe third quarter, went back down after sea-sonal adjustment. Another reason is thatgrowth in parts of the services sector weak-ened. However, value added in the retailtrade, buoyed by the unabated propensity ofUK households to consume, showed renewedstrong growth. Turnover in the period be-tween October and December was 1
12%
higher than in the preceding quarter and wasup 3
12% on the year. Private consumption in
the United Kingdom is being supported bothby considerable increases in the value of resi-dential property and by the favourable labourmarket situation. In autumn, consumer prices(excluding mortgage rates) were 2.6% higherthan a year earlier compared with 2.0% inthe summer quarter. However, measured interms of the harmonised price index, whichwas up 1.5% in the fourth quarter, inflationin the United Kingdom was clearly below theeuro-area average.
Macroeconomic trends in the euro area
Real euro-area GDP rose by a seasonally ad-
justed
14% in the third quarter, ie at nearlyJapan United
Kingdom

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
11the same pace as in spring. It was up by 1%
on the year. Net exports, which also includeintra-euro-area exports and imports, gave asomewhat greater boost to growth than do-mestic demand did. Private consumption in-creased more strongly than in the past at aseasonally adjusted rate of
12% and, for the
first time since the end of 2000, fixed capitalformation did not decline. Unlike in the twopreceding quarters, however, these factorswere offset by a negative growth contribu-tion on the part of inventory investment.
In the last quarter of the year, euro-area GDP
– based on the national estimates available todate – is expected to have grown somewhatmore weakly than in summer. In the October-November period, industrial production, al-though distinctly higher than in the summerquarter after seasonal adjustment (+
34%), is
not likely to have maintained this trend in De-cember owing, among other things, to alarger number of extra days taken off in con-junction with public holidays to create longweekends. This is also indicated by the de-cline in capacity utilisation in the manufactur-ing sector between October and January; it isnow almost as low as in mid-2002. In add-ition, adverse weather conditions hamperedconstruction work in the northern euro-areacountries more than usual.
The overall low level of economic growth in
autumn 2002 seems to have continued fol-lowing the turn of 2002-03. According to themonthly survey on behalf of the EuropeanCommission, industrial confidence sank inJanuary after having brightened somewhat inDecember. The main reason was a decline inproduction expectations in nearly all euro-
area countries. Consumer sentiment deterior-ated in January for the fourth time in succes-sion. The number of negative responses wasthus higher than at any time since spring1997.
The unemployment level, which has been per-
sistently on the rise for around one-and-a-halfyears, rose somewhat more sharply in au-tumn 2002. In the fourth quarter, an averageof 11.78 million people (after seasonal adjust-ment) were without work according to Euro-stat’s standardised definition. This was around640,000 persons more than a year before.The unemployment rate was 8.5%. The aver-age for 2002 was 8.2% as against 8.0% in2001.Seasonally adjusted, beginning of quarter levels
%
1991 20031991-2002
averageCapacity utilisation
in the manufacturing
sector of the euro area
Source: European Commission business sur-
veys.
Deutsche Bundesbank85
84
83
82818079
78
77
92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02The economy in
the second half
of 2002
Results of the
EU surveyUnemployment

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
12In terms of the Harmonised Index of Con-
sumer Prices (HICP), consumer prices were upby a seasonally adjusted +0.5% in the lastquarter of 2002. This increase was somewhatstronger than in the summer quarter; theyear-on-year difference increased to 2.3%.Inflation pressures were greatest on the vola-tile components. If these components are ex-cluded, the rate of price increase was thesame as in the previous period. The year-on-year rise in core inflation decreased slightlyfrom 2.5% to 2.3%. Consumer goods pricesrose by an average of 2.2% over the pastyear. The rate of inflation was thus somewhatlower than in the two preceding years. At2.5%, the rate of inflation excluding unpro-cessed foods and energy was clearly higherthan the comparable figures for 2000 and2001. The lowest rate of price increase withinthe euro area last year was recorded by Ger-many (+1.4%). This compares with inflationrates of up to 2.0% in Belgium, Austria,France, Finland and Luxembourg. Italy’s infla-tion rate was 2.6% and in the other countriesinflation was well over 3%; in Ireland it evenhit 4.7%. In January 2003, year-on-year con-sumer price inflation – according to Eurostatestimates – went down to 2.1%.
Euro-area current account
and exchange rates
The somewhat muted trend which had al-
ready characterised euro-area exports to non-euro-area countries throughout the whole of2002 continued in autumn. Positive externalstimuli to the euro-area economy were thuslargely non-existent. Between September andNovember 2002, the last three months for
which information is available, goods exportsto non-euro-area countries were down by
12% on the preceding three-month period
after adjustment for seasonal variations. Totalgoods imports in the period between Sep-tember and November just barely reached thepreceding period’s levels. On balance, theeuro area’s trade surplus receded slightly tojust over 333 billion following 334 billion in
the preceding three-month period.
By contrast, “invisible” current account trans-
actions recorded slightly lower net expend-iture in the period under review than in theprevious period after adjustment for seasonalvariations. Developments in the services sec-tor were the key factor: in the period be-tween September and November, the surpluson services rose to 36 billion following 32 bil-
lion in the preceding period. This positive con-tribution by services to the current accountwas not completely offset by larger net cur-rent transfers to non-residents – with net ex-penditure for cross-border factor incomeremaining virtually unchanged. This meansthat, after adjustment for seasonal influ-ences, the euro-area current account closedwith a surplus of 318 billion for the period
from September to November, a somewhatlarger surplus than in the preceding three-month period (June-August: just under 317
billion).
After a relatively calm autumn on the foreign
exchange markets last year, the euro appreci-ated distinctly at the turn of 2002-03. Theeuro rose so sharply against various curren-cies that new three-year highs were reachedConsumer
prices
Foreign trade
and current
accountExchange rate
developments

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
13repeatedly. Geopolitical tensions propelled
the euro’s exchange rate against the US dollarinto an even more prominent position thanusual.
After the US Federal Reserve had cut interest
rates sharply which, against the backgroundof disappointing figures for the US economy,was seen as proof of the US economy’s weak-ness, the euro appreciated distinctly in thefirst half of November 2002. During thisperiod, it once again surpassed parity withthe US dollar and, in mid-November, wastrading at US$1.01, its level of last July. In thesecond half of November, however, the eurowas initially forced to relinquish its gains afterUS GDP growth in the third quarter of 2002was revised upwards and new statistics onconsumer confidence made the US economicsituation look somewhat brighter.
At the beginning of December, the euro
began to appreciate considerably and sustain-ably against the US dollar once it becameknown that the US unemployment rate hadreached an eight-year high of 6% in the pre-ceding month and that the US fiscal deficitwill probably rise by a large margin in thecoming years. This has also brought the ques-tion of the sustainability of the large US cur-rent account deficit more to the fore, giving afurther boost to the euro’s exchange rateagainst the US dollar. The interest rate cut bythe European Central Bank in early Decemberhad been expected by most market partici-pants and thus had no discernible impact onfurther exchange rate movements. After-wards, market sentiment turned furtheragainst the US dollar given the growingthreat of a war with Iraq and increasing un-
certainty about the development of the USbudget deficit as well as the considerable fis-cal burden caused by the announced eco-nomic stimulus package. The euro was trad-ing at almost US$1.08 as this report went topress. It was thus around 8% higher than inNovember last year but still lower than at thebeginning of monetary union.
In the past three months, the euro appreci-
ated noticeably against the Japanese yen toofollowing distinct gains in September 2002.After trading at just under ¥122 at the begin-ning of November last year, the euro rose tojust over ¥130 by the time this report went topress, thus appreciating at a slightly slowerpace than against the US dollar. Indicationsby the Bank of Japan of rising uncertaintyabout the sustainability of the Japanese eco-nomic recovery were just one factor whichplaced a strain on the yen. The downgradingof a few Japanese financial institutions’ creditratings reinforced existing doubts on the mar-ket that the urgently needed structural re-forms are being implemented quickly and un-compromisingly. Official comments that theyen was clearly overvalued gave market par-ticipants the impression that foreign ex-change market intervention could be expect-ed. This is likely to have heightened thedownward pressure on the yen.
During the period under review, the euro
clearly rose against the pound sterling aswell. In the past few years already, the closeties between the UK and US economiescaused both currencies to develop largely inparallel. Whereas the relatively robust UK
US dollar
Yen
Pound sterling

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
14economy had maintained the value of the
pound sterling against the euro at a relativelyhigh level well into the autumn months oflast year, the pound was hit by increasingsigns of a weakening economy in the periodunder review. As this report went to press,the euro was trading at £0.66, ie just over4
12% higher than in early November last
year.During the period under review, the euro rose
by around 5% against the weighted averageof the currencies of the euro area’s 12 mostimportant trading partners, ie a slightly lowerappreciation than against the US dollar alone.As of late, the euro’s effective exchange ratewas thus 9% higher than at the beginning of2002. The rise in the euro’s value over thepast few weeks, however, is less a reflectionof the euro area’s economic strength than theresult of the aforementioned negative factorsburdening the other currencies. It must benoted, moreover, that capital flows (direct in-vestment and securities transactions taken to-gether) have changed direction; since spring2002, the euro area has been a net capitalimporter. Evidently the euro has becomemore important as an international invest-ment and reserve currency. The euro’s recentconsiderable appreciation has undoubtedlytended to impair the price competitivenessof euro-area suppliers, especially as the ex-change rate shifts took place very quickly.However, euro-area companies, in terms ofexchange rates, are still in a somewhat betterposition than at the beginning of monetaryunion. In terms of the weighted average ofthe currencies of the euro area’s most im-portant trading partners, the euro is (in realterms) currently around 1% lower than at thebeginning of 1999.
Monetary policy and financial markets
in the euro area
After having left the Eurosystem’s interest
rates unchanged over the autumn months,the Governing Council of the ECB, at itsLog scale
Effective exchange rate1
1999 Q1 = 100
Monthly data Daily data
1999 2000 2001 2002 03Exchange rate of the euro
103
100
97
94
91
88
85
82
79
%Lin scale
Change 2in the rate of the euro
against the ...
... US dollar ... Japanese
    yen... pound
    sterling
since the beginning of 1999since the beginning of 2002
1According to ECB calculations, against the
currencies of 12 countries (before 2001, 13
countries). — 2 Appreciation of the euro: +.
Latest position: 13 February 2003.
Deutsche Bundesbank25+
20+
15+
10+
5+
0
5−
10−
15−Effective
exchange rate
of the euro
Interest rate
move in
December

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
15Money market management and liquidity needs
Around the turn of the year, the Eurosystem’s
provision of funds was based on the marked
fluctuations in general government deposits
with the Eurosystem – especially towards the
end of the reserve maintenance periods and at
the end of each month – as well as on the exten-
sive calendar-related changes in the volume of
banknotes in circulation. Ongoing money mar-
ket management was not restricted to main refi-
nancing operations; in December, a fine-tuning
operation was conducted as well. On 4 Decem-
ber, just before the Eurosystem cut its interest
rates as had generally been expected, the bid-
ding volume for main refinancing operations re-
mained, surprisingly, only just below the credit
institutions’ short-term liquidity needs, whereas
on 18 December, main refinancing operations
were marked by unexpected and considerable
underbidding. This prompted the Eurosystem to
conduct, on 18 December, a liquidity-providing
six-day quick variable-rate tender to fill the un-
planned liquidity gap. Nevertheless, at the end
of the reserve maintenance period, the marginal
lending facility was greatly utilised owing inter
aliato unexpectedly heavy liquidity withdrawals
from the market. In January, however, the re-
serve maintenance period closed with increased
recourse to the deposit facility following what
tended to be abundant allotment in the last
main refinancing operation of the period.
Between October and January, funds in the
amount of 527 billion net were withdrawn from
credit institutions owing to the autonomous fac-
tors determining liquidity (see adjacent table).
This is mainly a reflection of the especially sharp
rise in the volume of banknotes in circulation
over the Christmas period. Moreover, the min-
imum reserve requirement increased by 53.2 bil-
lion during the period under review. In order to
cover the heightened liquidity needs, the Euro-
system increased the outstanding volume of
open market operations by 529.9 billion to an
average of 5221.3 billion.
1For longer-term trends and the contribution of the
Deutsche Bundesbank, see pages 14* and 15* of the Statis-tical Section of the Monthly Report .— 2Including end
of quarter valuation adjustments with no impact on li-quidity. — 3Including monetary policy operations con-
cluded in stage two and still outstanding in stage three(outright transactions and the issuance of debt certifi-cates).
Deutsche BundesbankFactors determining bank liquidity1
5billion; calculated on the basis of
daily averages of the maintenance periods
2002
Item24 Oct
to23 Nov24 Nov
to23 Dec24 Dec
to23 Jan
I Provision (+) or absorption
(–) of central bankbalances by
1 Change in volume of
banknotes in circulation(increase: –) – 4.8 – 16.7 – 3.2
2 Change in general
government depositswith the Eurosystem(increase: –) + 2.8 – 8.9 + 8.0
3 Change in net foreign
reserves
2+ 2.1 – 0.6 – 10.6
4 Other factors3– 0.4 + 3.1 + 2.2
Total – 0.3 – 23.1 – 3.6
II Monetary policy oper-
ations of the Eurosystem
1 Open market
operations
(a) Main refinancing
operations + 1.4 + 20.6 + 8.2
(b) Longer-term
refinancingoperations – 0.3 + 0.0 € 0.0
(c) Other operations – + 2.0 – 2.0
2 Standing facilities
(a) Marginal lending
facility + 0.0 + 1.0 – 0.6
(b) Deposit facility
(increase: –) + 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.1
Total + 1.1 + 23.5 + 5.5
III Change in credit institu-
tions’ current accounts(I + II) + 1.0 + 0.2 + 2.1
IV Change in the minimum
reserve requirement(increase: –) – 1.0 – 0.1 – 2.1

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
16meeting in early December, lowered each of
the key interest rates by half a percentagepoint. On 6 December 2002, the interestrates on the marginal lending facility andthe deposit facility were lowered to 3.75%and 1.75% respectively; since 11 December2002, all main refinancing operations havebeen conducted as variable rate tenders witha minimum bid rate of 2.75%. The recedingthreat of inflation towards the end of theyear provided room for this interest rate cut.Although M3 had grown quite strongly upuntil then, this continued to reflect investors’pronounced preference for safe and liquidassets. The sluggish pace of longer-termmonetary capital formation with banks andthe slowdown in credit growth in the euroarea, as well as the slumping economy, areall points in favour of this assessment. Theample supply of liquidity in the economy isunlikely to generate any immediate inflation-ary risks in the foreseeable future. In addition,the rise in the euro’s external value forms acounterweight to the higher oil prices.
The interest rate cut by the ECB in early De-
cember had been expected by the moneymarket. This was reflected in correspondingdiscounts on forward rates relative to short-term money market rates. In the second halfof December, the overnight money rate(Eonia) became increasingly volatile. Under-bidding in the main refinancing operation set-tled in mid-December contributed to this. TheECB countered the concomitant rise in inter-est rates with a fine-tuning operation withoutcompletely preventing the interest rate fluctu-ation. At the end of 2002, the usual end-of-year liquidity bottlenecks once again trig-gered a noticeable increase in the overnight
money rate. In January, Eonia approached themarginal allotment rate for main refinancingoperations, although it slid briefly at the endof the maintenance period. Time depositrates have also continued to fall since theinterest rate cut, especially in the longer-termsegment, causing the yield curve on themoney market to remain inverted. Marketparticipants are evidently expecting a furtherreduction in central bank rates.
Following strong euro-area M3 growth up to
late summer of last year, monetary growthbetween October and December weakenedperceptibly compared with the precedingquarter although it remained high. In thefourth quarter, M3 rose at a seasonally adjust-ed and annualised rate of 6
12% following
912% in the third quarter. This growth, how-
ever, varied considerably over the quarter.After expanding sharply in November, it grewonly moderately in December. All in all, how-ever, the three-month moving average of theannual growth rates of M3 changed little,falling from 7.1% between July and Septem-ber to 6.9% between October and Decem-ber. In the light of the major uncertainty con-cerning further economic developments bothin and outside the euro area as well as themedium-term outlook for interest rates andsecurities prices on financial markets, invest-ors continued to prefer safe and liquid assets.Given the low capital market rates and the re-newed setback suffered by the stock marketsin January as well as the uncertainty concern-ing a possible war with Iraq, the situation islikely to have changed little up to the presenttime.
Tension on the
money market
in DecemberMoney stock up
sharply

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
17Of the individual components of the money
stock M3, overnight deposits, in particular,went up in the fourth quarter. However, asharp rise in November was countered bymeagre increases in October and in Decem-ber. The sluggish increase in December couldalso be explained in connection with thesharp rise in the volume of euro currency incirculation in that month; after seasonal ad-justment, euro currency in circulation re-sumed its stronger expansion in the fourthquarter. All in all, M1 grew strongly again inthe autumn months. By contrast, the expan-sion of other short-term bank deposits wasonly muted in the period under review. Theperformance of deposits with an agreed ma-turity of up to two years dampened monetarygrowth; in the past 12 months, they wereeven reduced slightly. Between October andDecember, marketable instruments likewiserose only moderately after having increasedsharply in the preceding quarter. Money mar-ket fund shares were once again in demand;unlike in earlier years, however, the numberof such shares in circulation even increased inthe fourth quarter. This contrasted with a re-duction in repo transactions, money marketpaper and short-term bank debt securities.
Euro-area MFIs increased their loans to the
domestic private sector by only a relativelysmall margin in the fourth quarter. These roseat a seasonally adjusted and annual rate of3% during the period under review, whichwas again weaker than a quarter earlier (justunder 4
12%). The muted economic activity in
the euro area, in particular, may have curbedthe demand for credit. Heightened uncer-tainty surrounding the economic outlook mayhave reinforced individuals’ reluctance to bor-
row. Even if credit growth in the euro areacontinues to show great disparity, in mostparticipating countries a clear decline in creditgrowth may be observed. Only if securitisedlending to domestic enterprises is included isthe slump much less pronounced. The year-on-year change in total lending to the domes-tic private sector fell from 5.0% at the end ofSeptember to 4.7% at the end of December.
In the fourth quarter, loans and securitised
lending to the public sector in the euro areaincreased in the aggregate. The decline in se-curitised lending to domestic general govern-ment which is typical of the season contrast-ed with the increase in loans which is typicalin the fourth quarter.Seasonally adjusted, change from previous year
%
%
Memo item
German contribution
to M3
Scale reducedEuro area
Three-month moving
average
Reference value: 4½%Growth of the money stock
M3 in the euro area
Deutsche Bundesbank12+
10+
8+
6+
4+
2+
0
2−8
7654
3
1999 2000 2001 2002Components of
the money
stock
Balance-sheet
counterparts

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
18Monetary capital formation at euro-area MFIs
was weaker in the period under review thanat the same time a year earlier. The increasein the amount of funds invested in depositswith a maturity of more than two years wasoffset mainly by a clear decline in sales oflonger-term bank debt securities. In addition,the year-on-year increase in capital and re-serves was more muted. Moreover, paymenttransactions with non-euro-area countrieshad an expansionary impact on monetary
growth during the period under review. In-flows of funds were considerable, causing thenet external asset position vis-à-vis non-euro-area countries to rise by 382.4 billion follow-
ing rises of 330.5 billion in the third quarter
and 343.6 billion in the fourth quarter of
2001.
The fall in long-term interest rates, which has
characterised bond market movements sincethe early summer of 2002, continuedthroughout the period under review. This isconsistent with market players’ expectations,which have undergone a downward correc-tion in several stages since summer. Thedownward slide of interest rates was inter-rupted only briefly in mid-October 2002when yields on the euro-area capital marketshot up by nearly 40 basis points within just afew days. However, this was caused not by afundamental re-evaluation of the euro area’seconomic situation but by portfolio shiftsfrom bonds to stocks, for which at timesmore optimistic assessments prevailed aftervarious positive company reports had tem-porarily boosted market expectations. Thisnewly-found optimism was short-lived, how-ever. In the second half of October, long-terminterest rates remained relatively steady ataround 4
34% but then receded. At the
turn of the year, the decline in interest ratesaccelerated. As this report went to press inmid-February, the average yield on ten-yeareuro-area government bonds was just over4%. Since last summer, capital market rateshave fallen by nearly one-and-a-half percent-age points.Daily data
%
Per-
cent-
age
points%
Per-
cent-
age
pointsYield spread of European
corporate bonds2
2002 2003Yield spread
between the US bond market
and the euro-area averageYield on ten-year government
bonds outstanding
Euro-area
average 1
USABond market yields
in the euro area
1Weighted average yield on ten-year gov-
ernment bonds issued by all euro-area
countries; weighted by GDP. — 2Seven to
ten-year BBB-rated European corporate
bonds over government bonds with com-parable maturities; source: Merrill Lynch
indices.
Deutsche Bundesbank3.0
2.5
2.01.50.5+
0
0.5−
1.0−5.5
4.55.0
4.04.5
3.5
JF M A MJJASO N DJF MFall in capital
market rates

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
19The euro-area capital market has noticeably
detached itself from the “standards” set bythe US market. At all events, in contrast tothe euro area, there was no clear interest ratetrend in the United States. Yields on ten-yearUS Treasuries rose more sharply in mid-October than their euro-area counterpartsbut then plummeted back to their originallevel more quickly. Since early October, long-term US interest rates have hovered aroundthe 4% mark. The euro area’s interest rateadvantage has therefore decreased fromaround three-quarters of a percentage pointto minuscule values.
The decline in interest rates during the period
under review was more pronounced in thebond market’s shorter-term segment than inthe other maturity segments. This has furtheraccentuated the inverted shape of the shortend of the yield curve which was already vis-ible in autumn.
The decline in nominal euro capital market
rates was also reflected in a corresponding re-duction in real interest rates whereas marketplayers’ long-term inflation expectations, cal-culated from inflation-indexed bonds and sur-veys, have hardly changed. The real yield onten-year German Federal bonds, calculatedon the basis of inflation forecasts, fell to2
12% by January. Such low levels were last
reached at the turn of 1998-99.
Since mid-October 2002, the tense situation
which existed in the corporate bond marketsegment has become noticeably more re-laxed. The risk premia on these instrumentshave clearly declined since then, yet are stillhigher than in early summer of last year. The
debt securities of enterprises with a low creditrating have particularly benefited from thistrend. The risk premium on BBB-rated corpor-ate bonds, for instance, has gone down fromits peak for the year of 280 basis pointsreached in mid-October to around 200 basispoints.Monthly data
 5 
%
... as a percentage
    of the respective
    share price2Expected average annual
corporate profits ...
... per share2Dow Jones EuroStoxx index 1Share price developments
and profit estimates
for Europeanpublic limited companies
1End of 1991 = 100; source:  Deutsche Börse
AG. — 2Based on I / B / E / S analyst estimates
for the Dow Jones EuroStoxx index; source:
Thomson Financial.
Deutsche Bundesbank8
7
6
5421
20
19
1817
16
15500
450400350300
250
200
2000 2001 2002 2003Interest rate
advantage over
United States
diminished
Yield curve
moved
downwards
Lower real
interest rates
Declining
stock price
uncertainty and
risk premia on
corporate
bonds

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
20During the period under review, the decline
in stock prices on European stock markets ini-tially continued. Then, as mentioned earlier,in mid-October the trend was temporarily re-versed, which benefited, in particular, tech-nology stocks, the prices of which had earlierplunged especially precipitously. This turn-around in sentiment on the stock marketwas, however, ultimately not fuelled by im-provements in the market fundamentals.Analysts’ estimates of current and expectedfuture profits have hardly changed since Oc-tober 2002. Subsequently, the situation onthe stock market has therefore been markedby pronounced restraint and uncertainty
among investors.
Only the telecommunications sector was at
times able to escape the broad collapse ofstock prices in December, whereas technol-ogy stocks surrendered a major share of theirprice gains. In January, stock prices continuedto nosedive, which meant that as this reportwent to press the EuroStoxx index was onlysomewhat higher than its low of early Octo-ber and nearly 60% below its high of March2000.
Interim peak
on stock
markets...
...only briefly
interrupts
nosedive of
stock prices

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
21The financial
markets in GermanyCapital market and bank interest rates
In line with European yields, German capital
market rates have fallen by around14per-
centage point since early October 2002.When this Monthly Report went to press in
mid-February, the yield on ten-year Federalbonds outstanding was around 4%, the low-est level since the start of 1999. Comparedwith the average rate of other European gov-ernment bonds, the interest rate discount onthese bonds was halved from just under 20basis points in the first three quarters of 2002to just over 10 basis points in February 2003.However, this does not mean that Federalbonds are about to lose their benchmarkfunction in the euro-area bond market, afunction which gives the Federal Govern-ment, as the issuer of these bonds, an “inter-est rate advantage” over the other public sec-tor borrowers in the euro area. Owing to theliquid secondary market and the status of theBund future as the most important instru-ment for hedging against long-term interestrate risks in the euro area, Federal bonds con-tinue to play a key role. The Federal Govern-ment’s reduced interest rate advantage in theeuro-area bond market is therefore betterseen as linked to its very tight budgetary situ-ation.
For this reason, Federal bonds also lost some-
thing of their preferred status among borrow-ers compared with bonds issued by banks. Inany case, the interest rate premium of ten-year debt securities issued by domestic creditinstitutions over comparable Federal bondsdeclined to less than 20 basis points by Janu-ary. It subsequently recovered slightly. Overall,Less attention
paid to
benchmark
function of
Federal bonds
Decrease in
interest rate
premiums of
bank bonds

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
22interest rate premiums on bank bonds are at
much the same level as in spring 2002 beforethe increase in risk premia in the summermonths, ie at a historical low.
In parallel with developments in the German
capital market, longer-term bank interestrates on lending and deposits have shown afurther decline in recent months. BetweenOctober 2002 and January 2003 the interestrate charged on mortgage loans with a rateof interest locked in for ten years went downby an average of 0.3 percentage point to5.4%. Effective interest rates on long-termfixed-rate corporate loans decreased some-what more sharply, ranging between 5.8%and 6% depending on the size of the loan.Among longer-term deposits, it was mainlythe rates of interest paid on savings bondsand savings deposits with interest rates fixed
for correspondingly long periods which fellconsiderably. In January they averagedaround 3%, which was 0.3 to 0.4 percentagepoint lower than in October last year.
In this connection, the decline in the interest
rates on banks’ short-term deposits is alsonoteworthy; it was already under way beforethe key interest rate was reduced in Decem-ber, in line with the development of the cor-responding money market rates. In January,for instance, the interest rate on fixed-termdeposits with maturities of one month andthree months ( 350,000 to less than
3500,000) was, at 2.3%, also just under 0.4
percentage point down on October. It wasonly for some types of short-term variable-yield loans and only after the ECB’s most re-cent interest rate move that a further down-ward movement in rates occurred. Above all,the rates on bills discounted, which are gen-erally relatively well collateralised, declined byan average of around 0.2 percentage point to6.1%, with the variable rates on mortgageloans falling by the same amount to 5.7%.They thus hit their lowest levels for aroundthree years.
By contrast, there has so far been only a slight
reduction in the rates charged for current ac-count credit as well as for instalment creditand personal credit lines for private custom-ers. In fact, for smaller loans in this category,various upward adjustments were made. InJanuary the average rate charged for largercurrent account loans ( 3100,000 to
3500,000) was 9.7%, with 10.7% being
charged for instalment credit and 12.5% for“
Daily data
%
Basis
points“Interest rate advantage” of Federal bonds
 over other euro-area government bonds (enlarged scale)
2003Yield on ...
... ten-year government bonds
    outstanding of the other euro-area
    countries
... ten-year
    Federal bonds outstandingInterest rate advantages”
of Federal bonds
in the euro-area bond market
Deutsche Bundesbank30
20
10
05.5
5.0
4.5
4.0
2001 2002
Decline in bank
rates, especially
on deposits and
longer-term
loans
Slight fall in
interest rates
charged for
current account
credit

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
23personal credit lines, ie only a few basis points
below the rates charged in the precedingmonths. As was evident from earlier interestrate reductions, the banks are endeavouringto improve their interest rate margin, at leastfor a time, by making somewhat lagged inter-est rate adjustments in their lending business.A further factor is likely to have been that thebanks are now evidently taking greater ac-count of credit risks in their interest ratecharges. The existing very narrow interestrate margins were, in many cases, felt to beno longer sufficient. Owing to the markedrise in insolvencies, the increased default risksin short-term lending are likely, in the currentsituation, to have been a prime factor in de-termining how the banks set their terms.Given higher risks, it also seems appropriateto adjust the relevant terms in order to makemore efficient use of national savings.Whether the attempt to improve margins willmeet with success, however, will be decidedby inter-bank competition. There is still likelyto be major pressure on banks to pass thelower refinancing costs on to their customers.
Share prices
Share issuing had been on a downward slide
since the summer and continued to fall inearly October. Prices then rose by a aroundone-quarter towards the middle of themonth, before going back down again withwide fluctuations. Only the prices of telecom-munications and utilities shares managed toavoid the downward trend and improve.Since November renewed scepticism aboutopportunities for further growth have, how-ever, set in across a broad front. As the risk of
war has increased, uncertainties have grown,putting greater pressure on share prices, espe-cially in recent weeks. In mid-February thebroad market index for German equities(CDAX) was at times beneath its low level re-corded in the first half of October. Comparedwith the historical peak in March 2000, thismeans a loss of more than two-thirds. Ger-man equity market capitalisation also declinedstrongly and, at the end of 2002, was morethan 60% down on its spring 2000 level.
Although prices have hardly shown any over-
all change, the valuation level of Germanblue chips (ratio of price to expected year-on-year profits) has gone up again slightly sinceOctober 2002. In keeping with the down-ward revision of economic expectations and
Monthly averages
%
2003Current account credit 1
Lending to
enterprises2
Mortgageloans
3
Yield onbank bonds
4Bank interest rates
in Germany
1 5  500,000 and more, but less than  5  2.5 
million. — 2 Long-term fixed-rate loans to
enterprises and self-employed persons of
 5 100,000 and more, but less than
 5  500,000. — 3 On residential property; ef-
fective interest rate, locked in for tenyears. — 4 With a mean residual maturity
of more than nine and up to ten years.
Deutsche Bundesbank9
8
7
6
5
4
1999 2000 2001 2002
Ups and downs
on the equity
market

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
24given the marked slump in profits in 2002,
analysts are now expecting a later recovery incorporate profits than they did some monthsago.
Borrowing in the securities markets
Despite buoyant issuing activity, net redemp-
tions were recorded in the German bondmarket in the final quarter of 2002. Calcu-lated at market prices, gross sales of debtsecurities issued by domestic borrowersamounted to 3250 billion, compared with
3232 billion in the preceding three-month
period. However, these were offset by excep-tionally high redemptions and increases in is-suers’ holdings of their own bonds and notesamounting to nearly 3264 billion. The volumeof domestic bonds outstanding thus fell in
the fourth quarter by more than 313 billion
after a rise of almost 353 billion in the third
quarter. All in all, the outstanding volume offixed interest securities issued by domesticborrowers was 32,481 billion at the end of
2002, thus exceeding its previous year’s valueby 5.6%. At 35 billion, net sales of foreign
paper in the German market were also welldown on the quarter ( 313 billion) and thus
offset only some of the net redemptions ofbonds issued by domestic borrowers. Overall,between October and December 2002around 39 billion net worth of domestic and
foreign debt securities were redeemed, com-pared with 366 billion raised in the previous
three months.
Net redemptions on the German bond mar-
ket were mostly of bank bonds (- 318 billion),
which accounted for nearly two-thirds of thetotal domestic bonds outstanding. At the endof 2002, the value of this paper outstandingwas only 3.7% up on the year. Net redemp-tions were of all types of bank bonds exceptdebt securities issued by specialised credit in-stitutions, which were sold for 35 billion (net)
in the fourth quarter. Public Pfandbriefe out-standing were down by 313 billion, other
bank bonds by 38 billion and mortgage
Pfandbriefe by 31 billion.
Between October and December 2002 the
public sector added 34 billion to its bond
market debt. By contrast, 324 billion of new
funds were raised on the capital market inthe third quarter of 2002. Up to the end of2002, the volume of public sector bonds out-standing was 7.5% up on the year. The Fed-Investment activity in the German
securities markets
5billion
2002 2001
ItemJuly to
SepOct to
DecOct to
Dec
Bonds and notes
Residents 27.1 – 2.6 21.8
Credit institutions 1 – 5.0 – 19.7 – 1.9
of which
Foreign bonds andnotes
2 6.5 – 7.0 3.2
Non-banks 3 32.1 17.1 23.7
of which
Domestic bonds andnotes 25.2 5.5 3.6
Non-residents
2 39.0 – 6.3 21.6
Shares
Residents 3.9 5.7 13.2
Credit institutions 1 – 5.6 0.0 – 2.2
of which
Domestic shares – 4.2 – 1.3 2.2
Non-banks 3 9.5 5.6 15.3
of which
Domestic shares 6.0 – 1.0 4.9
Non-residents 2 – 0.1 3.7 – 1.1
Mutual fund shares
Investment in specialised
funds 7.4 23.2 20.3Investment in funds open tothe general public 4.6 3.2 13.4of which: Share-based funds – 0.5 1.4 2.4
1Book values, statistically adjusted. — 2Transaction
values. — 3Residual.
Deutsche Bundesbank
Bond salesHigh net
redemptions of
bank bonds
Few issues of
public sector
bonds

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
25eral Government issued 311 billion (net)
worth of debt securities in the autumn quar-ter, most of which were two-year Treasurynotes ( 36 billion) and ten-year Federal bonds
(34 billion). The Land governments issued 36
billion (net) worth of new bonds. Debt secur-ities issued by public sector issuers, especiallythe Treuhand agency and the former FederalPost Office, were redeemed for 313 billion.
Issuing activity in the German equity market
was still very subdued in the fourth quarter of2002. As in the preceding three months, do-mestic enterprises raised only 31
12billion by
placing new shares. In the same period, for-eign shares were sold in the German marketfor38 billion (previous quarter: 32 billion).
The total funds raised in the equity marketthus went up from 34 billion in the third
quarter to 39
12billion in the fourth.
Investment activity in the securities
markets
Domestic non-banks were the sole purchasers
in the bond market in the fourth quarter ( 317
billion), buying mainly foreign paper ( 312 bil-
lion). Domestic banks and foreign investorsreduced their bond portfolios by 320 billion
and36 billion respectively. The latter primarily
sold bonds issued by private borrowers (- 311
billion) and purchased public sector bonds(35 billion).
The tendency towards international diversifi-
cation of equity portfolios, which has beengoing on for some years, continued in thelast quarter of 2002. In that period, residentinvestors purchased 38 billion worth of for-
eign shares and sold 32
12billion of domestic
paper. While credit institutions made hardlyany change to their equity portfolios, domes-tic non-banks upped their equity holdings by35
12billion. Non-resident investors purchased
3312billion of German equities.
Sales of mutual fund shares picked up again
in the final quarter of 2002. Domestic funds 5 bn 5 bn
2003Money market and open-end
real estate fundsNew investment in selected
funds open to the general public
Share-
basedfundsDAX performance index 1Equity prices and
selected investment in funds
1 End-of-month levels; end-1987 = 1000.
Source: Deutsche Börse AG.
Deutsche Bundesbank10+
8+
6+
4+
2+
0
2−14+
12+
10+
8+
6+
4+
2+
0
2−8000
7000
6000
5000
4000
3000
2500
1999 2000 2001 2002Funds raised
in the equity
market
Bond purchases
Share
purchases
Mutual fund
shares

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
26raised 326 billion from the sale of shares,
which was more than twice as much as in thepreceding quarter. However, the increaseconcerned only the specialised funds pre-ferred by institutional investors ( 323 billion,
following 37 billion in the third quarter),
which usually record marked inflows towardsthe end of the year. Mutual funds open tothe general public raised only 33 billion from
the sale of shares (previous quarter: 35 bil-
lion). Foreign funds also raised less ( 32 billion)
than in the previous period ( 33 billion).
Private investors continued to invest primarily
in open-end real estate funds ( 31.7 billion),
which are considered safe. However, the tem-porary price rises in the equity market also re-vived interest in share-based funds ( 31.4 bil-
lion). Particularly after the price recovery inmid-October, such funds again sold more
shares, after sustaining outflows of 30.5 bil-
lion in the summer months.
Deposit and lending business of
monetary financial institutions (MFIs)with domestic customers
In the final quarter of 2002 there was a sea-
sonally adjusted relatively moderate increasein domestic customers’ overnight depositswith German MFIs. These deposits expandedby a seasonally adjusted annual rate of 4
12%
compared with 11% in the previous quarter.A sharp increase in November was followedby a distinct decline in December. This also re-flected the investment behaviour of the otherfinancial institutions. They had made notice-able additions to their sight deposits at do-mestic banks between September and No-vember but reduced them again in December.On balance, they thus curbed the increase inovernight deposits in the fourth quarter. Bycontrast, the volume of sight deposits builtup by both non-financial enterprises and indi-viduals in the quarter under review was moreor less normal for the time of year.
In seasonally adjusted terms, deposits with an
agreed maturity of up to two years remainedvirtually unchanged in the fourth quarter, hav-ing been reduced perceptibly between Julyand September. In contrast to their usual be-haviour, both resident individuals and thepublic sector (excluding the Federal Govern-ment) did not add to their holdings of short-term time deposits in the last quarter of 2002;they even reduced them. Only domestic en-Lending and deposits of monetary
financial institutions (MFIs)in Germany
*
5billion
2002 2001
ItemOct to
DecOct to
Dec
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight + 34.6 + 45.6
With agreed maturities
up to 2 years + 7.2 + 1.6over 2 years + 9.4 + 1.0
At agreed notice
2
up to 3 months + 18.1 + 21.8over 3 months – 1.2 – 2.7
Lending
To domestic enterprises andresident individuals
Unsecuritised + 0.8 + 16.8Securitised + 17.1 + 8.6
To domestic public authorities
Unsecuritised + 2.7 + 1.9Securitised – 1.0 + 1.8
*As well as banks (including building and loan associ-
ations, but excluding the Bundesbank), monetary finan-cial institutions (MFIs) here also include money marketfunds; see also Table IV.1 in the Statistical Section of theMonthly Report .—1Enterprises, individuals and public
authorities. — 2Savings deposits.
Deutsche BundesbankModerate
increase in
overnight
deposits
Short-term time
deposits
stagnated...

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
27terprises made a marked increase in their
short-term time deposits. At the same time,deposits with an agreed maturity of over twoyears increased sharply. Resident individualsand German insurance companies again bothadded considerably to their longer-term timedeposits in the period under review. In thepreceding quarters, insurance companies –traditionally the largest group of investors inthis particular type of deposits – had shownconsiderable restraint.
Deposits with an agreed period of notice of
three months again increased considerablybetween October and December. All in all,the trend in favour of short-term savings de-posits (which has been observed since the be-ginning of the interest rate reduction phaseat the start of 2001) continued in the lastquarter of 2002. The currently rather low rateof interest is accompanied by comparativelylow opportunity costs of money holdings.This means that the appeal of short-term sav-ings deposits is probably mainly determinedat present by the fact that they are fairly read-ily available. By contrast, deposits with anagreed period of notice of more than threemonths were continuously reduced. The de-cline accelerated again in the fourth quarter,after a relatively small reduction in the fourthquarter.
In seasonally adjusted terms, lending by Ger-
man MFIs to the domestic private sector stag-nated in the fourth quarter. Loans to enter-prises and individuals were, in fact, reducedconsiderably. In particular, banks’ short-termloans were decreased markedly while me-dium to long-term bank loans to the domes-tic private sector were expanded slightly be-
tween October and December. Given the dif-ficult economic situation, enterprises, in par-ticular, reduced their short-term liabilities toGerman MFIs considerably or they used thefavourable interest rate situation to consoli-date their indebtedness over the longer term.The greater reluctance of banks to enter intonew business seems to have contributed insome cases to the weak development ofshort-term lending, given the fact that thepressure of low returns in the German bank-ing industry has led to a keener awareness ofrisk. By contrast, in recent months the banksexpanded their securitised lending to domes-tic enterprises. In this connection, only Ger-man credit institutions’ holdings of sharesand other equities increased on balance,which suggests, in part, that related restruc-
Seasonally adjusted
 5 bn
%Lin scale
Change from previous yearLog scale
Loans1Loans to domestic enterprises
and resident individuals
1End-of-month level; adjusted for statis-
tical changes.
Deutsche Bundesbank8
6
4
2
02250
2200
2150
2100
2050
2000
1950
1999 2000 2001 2002...but longer-
term time
deposits
increased
sharply
Marked
increase in
short-term
savings deposits
Lending to the
private sector

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
28turing processes are taking place in the cor-
porate sector.
According to the borrower statistics, all eco-
nomic sectors contributed to the marked de-cline in lending by German banks to the do-mestic corporate sector in the fourth quarterof 2002. In addition to manufacturing, whichhas been reducing its debt steadily sincespring 2001, the other financial institutionsand insurance companies also cut back theirborrowing from German banks; in the previ-ous quarter they had still raised considerableamounts of funds. Moreover, the services sec-tor and commercial enterprises also reducedtheir liabilities to the credit institutions. Bycontrast, the German banks increased theirlending to resident individuals and housingconstruction somewhat. However, commen-
surate with the weak development of theeconomy and the associated income uncer-tainty, borrowers demonstrated little propen-sity to take up such loans.
Lending by domestic MFIs to the German
public sector went up in the final quarter by31.7 billion; in the previous year the increase
was 33.7 billion. On balance, only unsecuri-
tised lending was increased in the periodunder review. In addition to the Land govern-
ments, the municipalities also borrowed add-itional funds from German banks, while theFederal Government reduced its bank debt.Domestic MFIs reduced their holdings of se-curities issued by the German public sector by31 billion in the fourth quarter.
Lending, by
borrower
Lending to the
public sector

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
29Economic conditions
in GermanyUnderlying trends
The German economy was stagnating in the
last few months of 2002. According to theBundesbank’s initial figures, fourth-quarterreal gross domestic product (GDP), adjustedfor seasonal and working-day variations, mayhave been slightly down on the precedingthree-month period. This would mean a year-on-year increase – as in the third quarter – ofaround
12% in working-day and calendar-
month terms. This assessment is consistentwith initial calculations by the Federal Statis-tical Office, according to which overall outputin 2002 went up by no more than 0.2% onan annual average.
This means that the economy has been in a
period of quasi-stagnation for more than twoyears. One factor in this has undoubtedlybeen the global slowdown in growth, espe-cially as Germany is particularly heavily em-bedded in the international division of labour.Even so, the present sluggishness of theeconomy is probably not due solely to cyclic-al – and therefore rapidly reversible – factors.Home-made causes are becoming increasing-ly apparent. These include rigidities on the la-bour market, the heavy burden of taxes andlevies as well as misincentives in the social se-curity systems. Uncertainties about the courseof economic policy have also placed a strain onunderlying sentiment in the business sector.
Nevertheless, it would be rash to conclude on
the basis of the present bleak findings that aself-perpetuating downward process is underway. In fact, the results of business surveys aswell as incoming orders give cause for hopeStagnation
but...
...no danger
of recession

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
30that the German economy can make up
ground again during the first few months ofthis year. That applies especially to industry,where demand picked up slightly followingthe slowdown in summer. Enterprises’ outputexpectations, which are surveyed by the IfoInstitute, have also shown some improve-ment. By contrast, actual production in thefinal quarter of 2002 was lower than in sum-mer – not least owing to the particular pat-tern of public holidays and “bridge days”(days taken off work to make up a long week-end). Furthermore, the intermittent cold wea-ther led to hold-ups in the construction sector.This is likely to have caused a delay in startingwork on the increased number of single-family houses commissioned by households.Consumers remained very cautious in their
current consumption spending. As is revealedby the surveys of the consumer research insti-tution, Gesellschaft für Konsumforschung
(GfK), sentiment worsened dramatically to-wards the end of 2002. Both the outlook forincomes, which had recovered temporarily insummer after the conclusion of the payround, and expectations regarding economicactivity remained well in the negative range.The already low propensity to make majorpurchases showed a further deterioration. Asa result, retail purchases were cut back per-ceptibly in November. Even December, withits traditional Christmas trade, failed to bringa turn for the better. Registrations of newmotor vehicles did hold up at quite a highlevel, however.
The unfavourable labour market situation
with its continuing decline in employmentand a further rise in unemployment certainlyalso played a part in weak consumer demand.The Federal government has initiated somereform measures acting on the proposals ofthe Hartz commission, but time is requiredfor their implementation. Also, further stepsare needed. There are, however, no indica-tions of a reluctance to consume resultingfrom the expectation of a deflationary pricetrend. In actual fact, price reductions under-taken by the retail trade in one-off promo-tions attracted lively interest from buyers.
Output and labour market
Industrial output in the fourth quarter was
down on the summer months. In seasonally Overall economic growth
Percentage change in real GDP
year on year
Periodseasonally
adjustedquarteronquarterworking-
dayadjustedin
calendar-monthterms
2000 Q3 0.0 3.1 2.4
Q4 0.1 1.8 0.9
2001 Q1 0.6 1.9 1.4
Q2 – 0.0 0.7 0.6Q3 – 0.2 0.4 0.4Q4 – 0.3 0.0 – 0.1
2002 Q1 0.3 – 0.2 – 1.2
Q2 0.2 – 0.1 0.4Q3 0.3 0.4 0.9Q4 (Bundes-
bank estimate) – 0
1212
Deutsche BundesbankWeak
consumption

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
31adjusted terms, it was around12% lower.
Even so, for the first time in some while therewas year-on-year increase of 1%, since aneven sharper fall in output had been recordedin autumn 2001. As mentioned, the currentdevelopment was not due to a weakening ofdemand but rather to the way in which thepublic holidays fell. Combined with “bridgedays”, these were apparently often used for aholiday, which led to matching adjustmentsof production. The months most affectedwere October and – to a somewhat lesser ex-tent – December. This was only partly offsetby November, which had no particular fea-tures affecting the number of working days.According to the Ifo surveys, reduced produc-tion led to an increase in the volume of orderson hand.
The decreases in output were far greater than
average in the consumer goods sector. Produ-cers of both durable and non-durable goodsmade a marked cutback in production. In theother sectors, however, such cutbacks wereon a smaller scale. Among the intermediategoods sectors, manufacture of plastics and ofglass and ceramics held up quite well, whilethere were fairly sharp falls in production inthe chemicals and man-made fibres industry.In the capital goods sector, a marked reduc-tion in the volume of production in the motorvehicle industry contrasted with a stable out-put in the manufacture of precision instru-ments and in the aircraft industry.
In seasonally adjusted terms, industrial cap-
acity utilisation, which is surveyed regularlyby the Ifo Institute, was no higher in Decem-ber than it had been at the end of the secondquarter. It did not show an increase on the
year either and remained well below thelonger-term average. While utilisation offixed assets in the intermediate goods sectorwas somewhat higher towards the end of theyear than it had been 12 months earlier, theother sectors failed to match that level.
Construction activity in autumn was affected
adversely not only by the particular holidayBalance
Balance
Households’ assessment
of the economic situation2
1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003Business climate in the
industrial sector 1
monthly
five-month
moving averageSentiment in the
industrial sector and
among households
1Seasonally adjusted data of the Ifo Insti-
tute; western Germany. — 2Bundesbank
calculations on the basis of data from the
GfK.
Deutsche Bundesbank50+
40+
30+
20+
10+
0
10−
20−
30−
40−20+
10+
0
10−
20−
30−Special effects
in terms
of output
Stagnating
capacity
utilisation

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
32effects but also by intermittently unfavour-
able weather conditions. Seasonally adjustedconstruction output in the fourth quarter islikely to have been lower overall than in thepreceding months. It is still not possible togauge the precise scale at present owing tothe fact that the revisions for the monthsfrom March to September 2002, derivedfrom the overall survey, have not yet been in-corporated into the figures. The year-on-yearfall of 7
14%, which is already known, indi-
cates that developments have remained quiteunfavourable. It is very likely that much thesame applies to the finishing trades as well.Turnover in this subsector (for which figuresare currently available up to and including thethird quarter) also showed a perceptible de-cline.
The situation on the labour market has deteri-
orated further over the past few months.First, there was an accelerated reduction inemployment. Second, following a temporaryhiatus, unemployment began to increasestrongly again. According to the figures ofthe Federal Statistical Office, the seasonallyadjusted number of persons in work hadfallen to 38.5 million by November, with thepace of the decline latterly showing a markedincrease. The year-on-year fall increased from250,000 in mid-2002 to 375,000 in Novem-ber, which corresponds to a figure of -1%.
Construction and industry were the main
contributors to this development, althoughthe services sector, too, showed very little em-ployment growth on the year. The situationbecame increasingly unfavourable especiallyin the trade, hotels and restaurants and trans-port sectors. Only public and private serviceshave largely maintained their overall staffinglevels.
The rise in unemployment, which had nearly
come to a standstill in summer owing to anumber of special factors, has continuedagain during the past few months. By theend of January, the number of persons offi-cially registered as unemployed had risen to aSeasonally adjusted, quarterly
%%
Capacity utilisation 1
0Mean 1993-2002Lin scale
Change from previous yearLog scale
Output
1995 = 100Output and utilisation
in industry
1Results of the Ifo business survey.
Deutsche Bundesbank88
85
82
799+
6+
3+
0
3−
6−124
121
118
115
112
109
106
103
100
1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002
Decline in
construction
workSignificant fall
in employment
Unemployment
up again

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
33seasonally adjusted 4.27 million. The season-
ally adjusted average monthly increase in theperiod from October to January was almost44,000. In January 2003, the figure showed arise of 335,000 on the year. The seasonallyadjusted unemployment rate, as calculatedby the Federal Labour Office, went up to10.3%. According to the standardised EUmethod, which is based on the number of un-employed persons as a percentage of thecivilian labour force, the figure was 8.6%.
The fact that most jobs are being cut back in
industry is evident, not least, from the con-tinued disproportionately large increase in thelevel of male unemployment. With an aver-age of more than 26,000 persons affectedbetween October and January, the rise wasone-and-a-half times higher than the rise inunemployment for women, a larger propor-tion of whom are employed in the servicessector.
The use of labour market policy measures
continued to hold up at a high level recently,although it was somewhat lower than oneyear earlier. At the end of January, the num-ber of persons attending vocational trainingcourses and taking part in job creationschemes, receiving assistance from the Fed-eral Labour Office in addition to the regulatedprogrammes or on back-to-work grants to-talled somewhat more than 640,000.
Orders
The flow of orders to industry became some-
what broader again during the last fewmonths of 2002. In seasonally adjusted
terms, the volume of new orders during theperiod from October to December was justunder
12% up on the third quarter. The year-
on-year figure, which in the third quarter – atslightly more than +1% – had turned positivefor the first time in some while, went up to+2
12%.Quarterly
Millions
%Thou-
sands
0
2003Unemployment rate
(seasonally adjusted)
JanJanChange from previous yearUnemployed
(seasonally adjusted)
JanOct /
NovChange from previous
yearOct /
NovEmployed
(seasonally adjusted)Labour market
Deutsche Bundesbank12
1110
9400+
0
400−4.6
4.2
3.8
3.4800+
400+
0
400−38.8
38.4
38.0
37.637.236.8
- - 
1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002
Increase in
volume of
orders

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
34Demand from abroad, in particular, showed a
sharp rise in October and November. The factthat December lagged considerably behindthis may, to a certain extent, have been dueto the continuing slowdown in the worldeconomy and the persistent appreciation ofthe euro on the foreign exchange markets.What is likely to have been the crucial factor –judging from past experience – is that thespecific pattern of working days with the ex-tended Christmas break had a marked ad-
verse impact on the flow of orders. On anaverage of the fourth quarter, seasonally ad-justed new orders were just as high as in thepreceding quarter. The year-on-year increaseamounted to 5
12%.
Following a fairly long period of stagnation,
the domestic orders situation was pointingupwards slightly in autumn. Seasonally ad-justed, their level in the period from Octoberto December was
34% up on the third quar-
ter. This meant that, for the first time in one-and-a-half years, they were also somewhathigher in year-on-year terms. All the majorsectors of industry shared in this upturn. Itwas most marked in the case of consumergoods producers, however, which were thusable to offset a good part of the sharp lossessustained during the summer. The intermedi-ate and capital goods sectors also recordedpositive figures, however.
Construction demand, which was declining
well into the summer of 2002, has flattenedout. In seasonally adjusted terms, incomingconstruction orders in the fourth quarter arelikely to have been just as high as in the pre-ceding three-month period. Housing con-struction, in particular, had a stabilising ef-fect, recording a surge in orders in Novemberand, probably, also in December. (The statis-tics for December will not appear until afterthisMonthly Report has been published). This
surge was so powerful that a seasonally ad-justed increase of around one-tenth may beexpected for the quarter as a whole. Takingconstruction permits as a yardstick, orderswere mainly for single and two-family hous-Seasonally adjusted, quarterly, log scale
DomesticForeignNew orders
Volume, 1995 = 100
TotalDemand in industry
Deutsche Bundesbank95115
100110
105
100120160
115155
105150
110145
100140
135
130
125
120165130
125
120
115
110
105
100
95
1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002
Subdued export
businessSlight increase
in domestic
orders
Expansion
in demand
for housing
construction

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
35ing. It may be concluded from this that clients
were principally concerned with placing anorder before the announced changes in as-sistance for housing construction came intoeffect in 2003, thus ensuring that they bene-fited from the earlier, more favourable terms.The pick-up in demand might therefore befollowed by a renewed slowdown at a laterdate.
This would imply that the tendency to weak-
ness in construction demand might continueas before, especially as there was no identifi-able improvement in the other subsectors upto the end of the period under review. At allevents, industrial construction orders in thetwo-month period of October and Novemberwere a seasonally adjusted 3
14% down on
the third quarter, with the corresponding fig-ure for public construction being -1
12%. The
year-on-year figures were -1114% and -7%,
respectively.
Prices
At the turn of 2002-03, prices in the domes-
tic markets became caught up in the wake ofthe dramatic increase in international oilprices. Following a period of stabilisation per-sisting into the autumn, during which pricesfor a barrel of Brent North Sea Oil fell toaround US$23, prices in the past few weekshave gone back up to over US$30. The mainreason for this was not so much general sup-ply shortages. The crucial factors were fear ofa war in Iraq with its potential consequencesand an almost total loss of Venezuelan pro-duction, which plays a major role in supplyingthe United States. An end to this speculation-
driven surge in oil prices is not in sight. Theappreciation of the euro against the US dollaris alleviating the situation to a certain extent,especially as the appreciation affects not onlyimports of energy but also many importedgoods. Even so, compared with their low inNovember, German import prices have beenshowing a distinct increase again, rising by aseasonally adjusted 1% in December (moreSeasonally adjusted, quarterly, log scale
...in housing
   construction...of the
   public sectorConstruction orders...
...of industrial
   enterprisesVolume, 1995 = 100
Construction orders, total
Oct/
NovDemand for
construction work
Deutsche Bundesbank110
100
90
80
70
60
4550100
90
80100
90
80
70100
90
80
70
65
1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002- - - - 
Sharp oil
price rise

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
36recent statistics are unavailable at present).
The year-on-year figure, which had beenclearly negative in November at -0.6%, wentup to +0.5%. Excluding energy, there was aseasonally adjusted fall of 0.3%. The year-on-year decline increased to 1.6%, comparedwith -0.8% in October.
At the consumer level, the effects of the oil
price increases were intensified by further taxrises. For example, taxes on electricity andfuels have been increased in the fifth stage ofthe ecology tax. Added to this was a two-thirds increase in tax on gas. The secondstage of the tobacco tax also entered intoforce. According to reports from some Län-
der,the consumer price index went up by a
total of just over
12% in January in seasonally
adjusted terms. Excluding energy and taxes, itis likely to have remained stable. The year-on-year rate of price increase – as in Novemberand December – was 1.1%. Without the fur-ther tax measures, the inflation rate wouldhave been roughly
12percentage point lower.
The domestic factory gate prices of industrial
products likewise showed an identifiable en-ergy effect. The rate of price increase in De-cember, at a seasonally adjusted 0.3%, wasnoticeably higher than in the precedingmonths. The year-on-year inflation rate wentup to 0.9%, having been as low as 0.4% inNovember. Excluding energy, producer pricesremained nearly constant over the past fewmonths. Against a backdrop of the persistentsluggishness in business, there were still noidentifiable price adjustments for construc-tion work towards the end of 2002: the pricelevel remained nearly unchanged in both sea-Year-on-year change, quarterly
%
%
2003House rents
eServices excluding
house rentsIndustrial goods
excluding energy sourcesEnergy sourcesFoodTotal
JanConsumer prices
eProduct groups Bundesbank estimate.
Deutsche Bundesbank4+
2+
04+
2+
02+
0
2−16+
14+
12+
10+
8+
6+
4+
2+
0
2−
4−
6−6+
4+
2+
0
2−4+
2+
0
1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002Further
consumer tax
increases
Producer prices
show a stable
underlying
trend

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
37sonally adjusted and year-on-year terms. Sea-
sonally adjusted producer prices for agricul-tural products did go up somewhat duringthe past few months, but were still 4.9%down on the year in December.1995 = 100, seasonally adjusted
Enlarged scale
Import prices
2003Log scale
Prices of
raw materials 1Prices of raw materials
and imports
1HWWA Index of World Market Prices of
Raw Materials, on a euro basis (up to and
including 1998 on a DM basis); not season-
ally adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank120
115
110
105
100
95200
180
160
140
120
100
80
1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
38Foreign trade
and paymentsForeign trade and current account
Germany’s external environment continued
to be marked by a high degree of uncertaintytowards the end of the fourth quarter of2002: shifts in exchange rate patterns, thesituation on the international financial mar-kets and geopolitical tensions clouded worldeconomic prospects. In the light of this, de-velopments in German foreign trade provedto be fairly robust in the fourth quarter of2002. Orders received from abroad weremore or less at the same level as in the previ-ous quarter. At the same time, export expect-ations brightened during the quarter al-though they became somewhat less optimis-tic again at the beginning of this year. It istrue that Germany’s exports of goods did notquite maintain the level they had reachedafter the exceptionally rapid growth of thethird quarter (-
12%). Even so, there was a dis-
cernible upturn in Germany’s exports ofgoods during the year, with exports in thesecond half 2002 showing an increase of justover 3
12% over the first six months of the
year.
The main stimulus for German exports in the
final quarter of 2002 came from other euro-area countries. At least, that is indicated bythe statistics for October and November (thebreakdown of foreign trade is available onlyup to the end of November so far). Accordingto these statistics, Germany’s average month-ly exports to the other euro-area countries inOctober and November rose by a seasonallyadjusted 1% over the monthly averageachieved in the third quarter. At the sametime, there was a slight downturn (of justExports of
goods
Breakdown of
exports

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
39under 1%) in exports to non-euro-area coun-
tries. This was due mainly to a fall in exportsto EU countries which are not participating inmonetary union (-3
12%). Fewer German
goods (-212%) were also exported to de-
veloping countries (excluding OPEC). By con-trast, there was again a small increase (of+1%) in trade with the United States. Ger-man exporters also increased their sales tothe central and east European countries intransition (+1
12%). The OPEC countries and
Japan, too, stimulated German exports on amonthly average of October and November(+5% and +3
12% respectively compared with
the third quarter). This means that the appre-ciation of the euro evidently had no detri-mental effect on the regional breakdown ofGerman exports in the fourth quarter of2002. This may be due not only to uncertainlags but also to the fact that, although Ger-many’s price competitiveness vis-à-vis non-euro-area countries deteriorated in the fourthquarter of 2002, its competitiveness vis-à-visthese countries was still favourable in historic-al terms (almost 8% above the long-termaverage).
1
Experience has shown, however, that cyclical-ly induced changes in demand in major ex-port markets also affect German exports ofgoods. For example, the comparatively mod-est level of investment worldwide evidentlyhad a dampening effect on German exportsales. As this is the area in which German ex-porters are particularly strong, they immedi-ately felt the effects of lower demand for cap-ital goods. At all events, this is indicated bythe breakdown of exported goods in Octoberand November, which shows a 3% fall in theexports of capital goods compared with the
monthly average in the third quarter. By con-trast, sales of semi-finished goods stagnatedwhile there was actually a significant increase(of 4%) in consumer goods turnover owing 5 bn
%Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
2003JanLin scale
Export expectations2Orders received
from abroad
values, 1995 = 100monthlymonthly 1Log scale
ExportsExport trend
1Monthly values adjusted to match quar-
terly level. — 2Results of the Ifo business
survey; balances of positive and negative
company reports.
Deutsche Bundesbank20+
15+
10+
5+
0
5−150
140
130
120160170180170
160
150
140
130
120
1999 2000 2001 2002
1The euro continued to appreciate after the turn of the
year. When this report went to press, the indicator of
Germany’s price competitiveness vis-à-vis 19 industrial
countries was approximately 3% above the long-term
average.

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
40to the comparatively robust private consump-
tion in major export markets.
The seasonally adjusted value of German im-
ports increased by just under 2% in thefourth quarter, which was more than twice asmuch as in the previous quarter. The increasewas not much less in real terms either be-cause import prices had remained more orless unchanged (+0.2%).
While Germany imported appreciably fewer
goods from other euro-area countries (-3%),imports from non-euro-area countries rose ona monthly average of October and Novemberby 4% compared with the average of thethird quarter. More goods were imported, forexample, from the United States (+11%) andfrom the central and east European countriesin transition (+5%). Imports from the EUcountries which are not participating in Euro-pean monetary union also rose fairly sharply,at just over 6
12%. However, the 20% in-
crease in imports from the OPEC countries,measured on a monthly average of Octoberand November and compared with the aver-age of the third quarter, was particularly pro-nounced. This was unlikely to have been dueto price effects as the price of crude oil didnot rise substantially again until Decemberwhereas in both October and November ithad actually declined. Consequently, thesharp rise in imports from the OPEC countriessuggests an increase in volume. The most im-portant explanation might be considerationsabout ensuring adequate stocks in the lightof the geopolitical tensions. According to pre-vious seasonally adjusted fourth-quarter fig-ures, the actual increase in energy importswas correspondingly steep, at 4%.
2Imports
of semi-finished goods and consumer goodsalso increased in the fourth quarter (3
12%
and 3% respectively). By contrast, demandfor imported capital goods was also lower inGermany (-3
12%). In particular, foreign car
manufacturers (-3%) and the chemical indus-try (-2
12%) recorded falling sales on the Ger-
man market whereas manufacturers of mech-anical engineering products enjoyed a 1
12%
increase in sales. The imports of foreign ICTproducts stagnated in the period under re-view.
Germany ran a seasonally adjusted fourth-
quarter trade surplus of 331
12billion, which
was somewhat less than in the third quarter.At the same time, the deficit on services fellslightly to 38 billion compared with just under
39 billion in the previous period. Furthermore,
net factor income amounted to 31 billion
whereas in the third quarter there had beennet expenditure here of 31
12billion. At 3512
billion net, just under 31 billion more was
paid to non-residents in current transfersthan in the previous quarter. As a result, thesurplus on current account between Octoberand December declined to 316
12billion (sea-
sonally adjusted) compared with a surplus of318 billion in the third quarter.
2The very different rates of growth between imports
from the OPEC countries and imports of energy arise
from the difference in their shares of imports as a whole.
Whereas in the regional breakdown the OPEC countries
have a 112% share of total German imports, energy im-
ports in the breakdown of goods account for almost 9%
of total imports. If account is taken of these different
ratios, import growth rates in the fourth quarter are en-
tirely comparable.Imports of
goods
Breakdown of
imports
Current
account

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
41Financial transactions
The modest economic prospects and the ris-
ing geopolitical tensions determined eventson the international financial markets in thefourth quarter of last year. Underpinned bythe decline in inflationary pressures – particu-larly in the euro area – and falling centralbank rates on both sides of the Atlantic,bond yields in many countries decreased fur-ther. At the same time, there were substantialshifts in exchange rate patterns in favour ofthe euro. Whereas this scenario made theeuro area as a whole a more attractive loca-tion for the portfolio investments of inter-nationally operating investors and – accord-ing to the information so far available – sub-stantial amounts of foreign capital continuedto be drawn into the area, it appears that inthe case of Germany it tended to be thenegative factors which were predominant. Atall events, Germany recorded net capital ex-ports through portfolio investment and non-securitised credit transactions between Sep-tember and December 2002.
There was a marked reversal in the flow of
capital through portfolio investment in thefourth quarter of 2002. All in all, outflows offunds amounted to 314
12billion net whereas
in the previous quarter there had been netcapital imports of 331 billion.
3This sizeable
swing was essentially due to the actions offoreign investors, who withdrew 35 billion
net from the German securities markets be-Major items of the balance
of payments
5billion
2001 2002
Item Q4 r Q3 Q4
I Current account
1 Foreign trade 1
Exports (fob) 160.3 161.8 168.2
Imports (cif) 135.0 128.6 137.0
Balance + 25.3 + 33.2 + 31.2
2 Services (balance) – 9.2 – 11.2 – 5.43 Factor income (balance) – 1.3 – 3.8 + 2.04 Current transfers (balance) – 7.2 – 5.7 – 6.7
Balance on current account
2 + 7.1 + 10.9 + 19.2
Memo item
Balances, seasonally adjusted
1 Foreign trade + 25.5 + 34.8 + 31.32 Services – 11.6 – 8.9 – 8.23 Factor income – 1.5 – 1.6 + 1.14 Current transfers – 6.2 – 4.8 – 5.6
Current account
2 + 5.6 + 18.0 + 16.7
II Balance of capital transfers 3 – 0.5 + 0.1 – 0.4
III Balance of financial account 4 – 44.1 – 19.7 – 48.4
IV Change in the foreign reserves
at transaction values(increase: –)
5 + 2.1 + 0.1 + 0.9
V Balance of unclassifiable
transactions + 35.4 + 8.6 + 28.6
1Special trade according to the official foreign trade statistics
(source: Federal Statistical Office). — 2Includes supplementary
trade items. — 3Including the acquisition/disposal of non-
produced non-financial assets. — 4For details see the table
“Financial transactions” on page 43. — 5Excluding allocation of
SDRs and changes due to value adjustments.
Deutsche Bundesbank3These figures contain major revisions owing to late re-
ports and additional estimates for statistically unclassified
foreign portfolio acquisitions in Germany. As usual, the
other corrections in the financial account will be under-
taken during the annual revision in March.Trends in
financial
transactions
Portfolio
investment

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
42tween October and December 2002. In the
previous three months substantial amounts offoreign funds ( 339
12billion) had flowed into
Germany by virtue of its reputation as a safehaven. It is possible that during the periodunder review uncertainty on the part of for-eign investors in connection with the fiscaldebate in Germany was reflected in a reorien-tation of their portfolio investments. At allevents, there were net foreign sales of bothprivate bonds (- 311
12billion) – mainly bank
debt securities – and money market paper(-33
12billion) as well as investment fund cer-
tificates (- 3112billion). By contrast, foreign in-
vestors spent 39 billion on German public
bonds, which “in difficult times” are alwaysin particular demand as secure and liquid in-vestment instruments. To a lesser extent theyalso invested in the German share market(32
12billion) even though prices there were
moving more slowly than on other markets.
While foreign investors withdrew from the
German securities markets, German investorscontinued to act extremely cautiously in viewof the great uncertainty surrounding invest-ment abroad. They again invested somewhatmore capital ( 39
12billion) in foreign securities
between October and December 2002 thanin the previous three-month period ( 38
12bil-
lion). However, this figure was far below theamounts that had been invested abroad atthe start of monetary union, for example. Inthe period under review share market invest-ment accounted for about half of the totalamount invested abroad ( 35
12billion) where-
as in each of the previous two quarters Ger-man investors had sold foreign shares on bal-ance. They invested a further 37 billion in for-
eign bonds and notes. Whereas in the recentpast most of the demand had been for europaper, German savers tended to show a pref-erence for foreign-currency bonds in the finalquarter of 2002. Yen-denominated paper aswell as issues denominated in US dollars andpounds sterling played a dominant role here.
In contrast to portfolio transactions, direct in-
vestment saw inflows of capital amounting to31
12billion. German enterprises increased
their participating interests abroad by 3512
billion between October and December
2002. That was significantly less than in theprevious quarter ( 316 billion). In the period
under review the sole target of German directinvestment was other euro-area countries. Atthe same time, foreign proprietors providedtheir branches domiciled in Germany with 5 bn
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4Public bonds and notes
Private bonds and notesForeign investment in
German bonds and notes
Deutsche Bundesbank20
1510
5
05−
10−
2002
Foreign invest-
ment in foreign
securitiesGerman invest-
ment in foreign
securities
Direct
investment

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
43funds amounting to 37 billion net. The bulk
of these funds involved intra-group creditsfrom foreign parent companies to their sub-sidiaries operating in Germany. Almost all ofthe incoming capital came from the euroarea. Whereas foreign direct investment inGermany had long been defying the negativeglobal economic conditions, foreign direct in-vestment has now definitely been decliningdiscernibly since the middle of 2002.
The non-securitised credit transactions of
German non-banks with non-residents result-ed in substantial net inflows of capital. Asusual, enterprises and individuals reducedtheir bank balances abroad towards the endof the year (window dressing). All in all, thenet capital imports of these economic sectorsamounted to about 315 billion between Oc-
tober and December 2002. In the case ofpublic authorities, by contrast, cross-bordercredit transactions during this period resultedin outflows of 3
12billion net.
The non-securitised foreign transactions of
the monetary financial institutions were ofmuch greater importance during the periodunder review. As in the previous two periods,there were net capital exports. In the periodunder review these amounted to 350 billion.
Between October and December 2002 thecredit institutions expanded their business,mainly lending operations, with foreign cus-tomers substantially. By contrast, the externaltransactions of the Bundesbank recordedunder credit transactions (excluding foreignreserves) almost entirely cancelled out duringthe period under review.Financial transactions
5billion, net capital exports: –
2001 2002
Item Q4 r Q3 Q4
1 Direct investment + 1.1 – 12.3 + 1.3
German investment
abroad – 7.1 – 15.8 – 5.6Foreign investmentin Germany + 8.2 + 3.5 + 6.8
2 Portfolio investment – 4.9 + 31.2 – 14.4
German investment
abroad – 31.1 – 8.3 – 9.4
Shares – 2.8 + 6.4 – 5.4
Investment fundcertificates – 5.0 – 1.3 + 0.6Bonds and notes – 26.1 – 10.5 – 7.2Money market paper + 2.9 – 2.9 + 2.6
Foreign investment
in Germany + 26.2 + 39.5 – 5.0
Shares + 0.4 – 0.4 + 2.5
Investment fundcertificates + 4.2 + 1.0 – 1.3Bonds and notes + 24.2 + 22.0 – 2.7Money market paper – 2.5 + 16.9 – 3.6
3 Financial derivatives
1 – 1.0 – 3.8 + 0.3
4 Credit transactions – 39.0 – 34.5 – 35.2
Credit institutions – 58.6 – 17.4 – 49.8
Long-term – 27.7 + 1.3 – 6.3
Short-term – 30.9 – 18.7 – 43.6
Enterprises and
individuals – 9.3 – 3.2 + 15.1
Long-term + 0.9 + 1.6 + 1.1
Short-term – 10.3 – 4.8 + 14.0
General government – 5.7 + 3.8 – 0.6
Long-term + 0.2 + 0.5 – 0.1
Short-term – 5.8 + 3.3 – 0.5
Bundesbank + 34.6 – 17.7 + 0.2
5 Other investment – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.36 Balance of all
statistically recordedcapital flows – 44.1 – 19.7 – 48.4
Memo item
Change in the foreignreserves at transactionvalues (increase: –)
2 +2 . 1 +0 . 1 +0 . 9
1Securitised and non-securitised options and financial
futures contracts. — 2Excluding allocation of SDRs and
changes due to value adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankCredit
transactions of
non-banks
Credit trans-
actions of the
banking sector

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
44The foreign reserves of the Bundesbank de-
clined – at transaction values – by just under31 billion between October and December
2002. This means that they declined as a re-sult of transactions by a total of slightly morethan 32 billion in 2002. In the period under
review, however, revaluations played a great-er role. Holding gains in the case of goldcould only partly offset the losses sustained
as a result of the depreciation of the US dol-lar. At the end of 2002 Germany’s foreign re-serves amounted to the equivalent of 385 bil-
lion compared with 389 billion at the end of
September 2002 and just over 393 billion at
the beginning of last year.Foreign
reserves of the
Bundesbank

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
45Public financeCentral, state and local government
In the fourth quarter of 2002 the central,
state and local government budgets – accord-ing to the results available so far – recorded amore favourable outturn than in the sameperiod in 2001. However, at that time the de-velopment had been influenced by severalnegative exceptional factors, which meansthat the budgetary position has not necessar-ily changed for the better. In 2002 as awhole, each level of government (excludingthe special funds) expanded its deficit consid-erably. The combined deficit of central, stateand local government amounted to over 360
billion, after having already risen sharply to347 billion in 2001. The main reason for this
was the fall in tax receipts which also draggeddown total revenue. Expenditure growth ac-celerated, not least owing to a sharp increasein labour market-related spending; the risewas probably under 2%, however.
Budgetary developments this year are being
influenced by considerable uncertainties withregard to the overall economic outlook andthe effects of fiscal measures which havebeen taken or which are still under discus-sion. The budgetary plans of the Federal Gov-ernment and the Land Governments envisage
markedly lower deficits vis-à-vis the results for2002. A key requirement for achieving this,however, is the imposition of tight expend-iture curbs in accordance with the targets setby the Financial Planning Council. Anothermajor consideration will be whether the totalamount of the envisaged consolidation meas-ures is actually implemented.Overview

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
46Tax receipts1in the fourth quarter of 2002
went up by just over 6% vis-à-vis the sameperiod last year, after declining sharply in thefirst half of the year and stagnating in thethird quarter. This end-of-year improvementwas, however, partly attributable to the factthat corporation tax receipts had beendented by 31
12billion at the end of 2001
inter alia by an exceptionally high tax refund.
But even after allowing for this special factor,corporation tax receipts recovered, whereasthe other income tax receipts did not quitematch the corresponding figures from theprevious year and turnover tax receipts in-creased only marginally. According to the pre-liminary outturn – which includes only an es-timate for local authority taxes – tax revenuein 2002 as a whole was 1.2% lower than in2001. The overall tax ratio (as defined in thegovernment’s financial statistics) receded fur-
ther by 0.7 percentage point to 20.9%, afteralready decreasing sharply in 2001 mainly asa result of the tax reform. Although tax re-ceipts exceeded the most recent official esti-mate from November by 31
12billion, they still
fell325 billion (just over 1% of GDP) short of
the comparable tax estimate from autumn2001 – on which the budgets were largelybased. The tax shortfalls vis-à-vis the budgetplans were consequently twice as high as in2001.
These shortfalls affected almost all major
taxes. Turnover tax receipts declined for thesecond consecutive year with a drop of
12%
and thus fell 3712billion below the expect-
ations of autumn 2001. This was mainly dueto the fact that nominal domestic demanddecreased last year for the first time in a longwhile. Moreover, the measures aimed at com-bating tax fraud, which were adopted at theend of 2001, did not apparently yield any sig-nificant additional revenue. The shortfalls incorporation tax receipts were even higher(38
12billion), although positive receipts of
just under 33 billion were recorded, after cor-
poration tax receipts had been marginally ex-ceeded by refunds in 2001. Corporation taxyielded considerably less than the amountthat might have been arithmetically expectedfrom the tailing-off effect of the large distri-butions of retained profits in 2001. Besidesthe further decline in advance tax paymentsas a result of the unfavourable earningstrend, a notable factor was the considerableChange from previous year
%
Tax receipts, total 1
1st hf 2nd hf 1st hf 2nd hf Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4Tax revenue
1Including EU shares in German tax rev-
enue, but excluding receipts from local au-
thority taxes, which are not yet known for
the last quarter recorded.
Deutsche Bundesbank8+
6+
4+
2+
0
2−
4−
6−
2000 2001 2002
1Including EU tax shares in German tax revenue, but ex-
cluding receipts from local government taxes, which are
not yet known.Tax revenue in
the fourth
quarter and in
2002 as a
whole...

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
47refunds in respect of fiscal 2001 with its poor
profitability for which the corporate tax re-turns for 2001 appear to have been submit-ted earlier than usual by many firms. It wasalso the last chance for corporations to claimtax write-downs on their participating inter-ests before the tax exemption of capital gainsfrom the sale of domestic participating inter-ests came into force at the beginning of2002.
2Wage tax receipts declined marginally
vis-à-vis the previous year and were conse-quently almost 35 billion lower than expected
in the autumn 2001 forecast. Before deduct-ing child benefit, which was increased lastyear, they rose by 1
34%. This weak trend was
mainly due to the fact that gross wages andsalaries grew last year by just under 1%,which was 2 percentage points less than ini-tially expected.
A marked rise in tax revenue – which is likely
to exceed that of nominal GDP – is expectedthis year. This is due inter alia to the planned
and partly adopted tax measures. A tax rev-enue increase of just over 4% was antici-pated in the official estimate from November.If the additional revenue arising from curbingthe exemptions from the “ecology tax” andthe draft Act to Reduce Tax Subsidies is in-cluded, this gives a revenue increase of 5
12%,
based on the nominal economic growth ex-pected at that time of just over 3%. As thingsstand now, however, it appears likely thatoverall economic growth will be down on theexpectations made in autumn. Furthermore,it is still uncertain to what extent the Bundes-rat will approve those parts of the tax pack-age that require its assent.
3In the fourth quarter the Federal Governmentbudget recorded a surplus of 33 billion,
which was somewhat higher than in thefourth quarter of 2001. In 2002 as a whole,however, the deficit rose steeply by 311
12bil-
lion to 33212billion. This also significantly
overshot the original budgetary expectations(323
12billion).4On the one hand, this was at-Trends in the revenue from major taxes
Revenue
in5billion
Full year
Type of tax 2001 2002Change
frompre-viousyearin %
Wage tax 132.6 132.2 – 0.3
Assessed income tax 8.8 7.5 – 14.0Corporation tax – 0.4 2.9 .Turnover tax 138.9 138.2 – 0.5
of which Q4
Wage tax 38.9 38.9 – 0.0
Assessed income tax 4.7 4.5 – 3.2
Corporation tax – 1.9 3.2 .Turnover tax 35.6 36.0 + 0.9
Deutsche Bundesbank
2Losses arising from the sale of participating interests
were likewise tax-deductible only until 2001.
3For an assessment of the draft Act to Reduce Tax Sub-
sidies now being considered by the Bundestag and the
Act Continuing the Ecological Tax Reform, which has al-
ready been passed, see details in Deutsche Bundesbank,
Recent tax revenue trends, Monthly Report, Decem-
ber 2002, in particular pp 27 ff.
4However, the budget outturn was more favourable (by
3412billion) than the supplementary budget adopted by
the Federal Cabinet in November last year which, with a
deficit of just under 33712billion, took account of the tax
shortfalls expected at the time and higher labour market-
related expenditure. Tax revenue exceeded the corres-
ponding estimate by almost 3112billion, while expend-
iture was just over 33 billion below expectations.... and this year Federal
Government
budget
in 2002...

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
48tributable to sizeable tax shortfalls, which –
after netting with lower transfers to the EUbudget – amounted to a little more than 37
billion. On the other hand, payments relatingto unemployment assistance and grants tothe Federal Labour Office together exceededthe expectations by 35
12billion. Other ex-
penditure was, however, 3312billion lower
than anticipated. This applies particularly tointerest payments, which profited from highpremiums on the new issues of Federal secur-ities, and guarantees. In the case of non-taxrevenue, privatisation proceeds were downby around 33 billion, but this was offset by
additional receipts in other areas (such as in-creased loan repayments). On balance, themarked overshooting of the targeted budgetdeficit was not due to a lax budgetary policybut was primarily a consequence of themacroeconomic trend, which was far more
unfavourable than expected.
The Federal draft budget for 2003, which
was revised after the German parliamentaryelections of September 2002, envisages thatthe deficit will decline noticeably to justunder 319
12billion, whereas the original
plans had anticipated a deficit of 316 billion.
The upward revision of the estimated deficitis due to tax revenue shortfalls. Although the2002 outturn was somewhat more favour-able than had been expected in November,the budget for 2003 is subject to consider-able risks. The Federal Government mean-while expects real economic growth of merelyaround 1%; this is
12percentage point lower
than estimated in autumn 2002. This newforecast, too, is subject to significant risks.Moreover, the plans also include numerousrelief measures, the realisation of whichseems uncertain at the moment. For example,the projected extent of the savings from im-plementing the planned labour market re-form (Hartz plan) is not yet assured.
If the 2003 Federal draft budget can be suc-
cessfully implemented in a difficult macroeco-nomic climate, this would represent a consid-erable consolidation advance. Expenditure isto be cut by almost 2% vis-à-vis the supple-mentary budget estimate for 2002 and by
12% compared with the lower outturn for
last year; even including additional expend-iture on account of flood damage, this wouldbe in line with the provisions of the FinancialPlanning Council’s guidelines. This will requireactual enforcement of the announced meas-ures in the course of the budget implementa- 5 bn
 5 bn cumulative
20022001
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4Quarterly results
2001
2002The Federal Government’s
financial balance in
2001 and 2002
Deutsche Bundesbank15−
20−
25−
30−
35−5+
0
5−
10−
15−
20−... and in 2003

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
49tion and ensuring that the envisaged volume
of relief measures is actually achieved. Suchstructural consolidation is imperative in viewof the large deficit recorded last year and alsowith regard to the credibility of national andinternational fiscal policy agreements.
The special funds recorded a surplus of 38 bil-
lion in 2002, exceeding the figure for 2001by33 billion. The main reason for this was
the marked increase in the share of the Bun-desbank profit accruing to the RedemptionFund for Inherited Liabilities. However, thesurplus is expected to decrease noticeably in2003.
Although the deficit of the Land Govern-
ments fell by 34 billion in the fourth quarter
of 2002 compared with the previous year to311 billion, the deficit in the last quarter of
2001 had been particularly high owing toseveral significant exceptional factors, such assizeable tax refunds, the repayment of naturalgas extraction royalties and a substantial ac-quisition of participating interests. Contraryto the plans – which originally predicted adeficit reduction to about 320 billion – the
deficit in 2002 as a whole came to 331 bil-
lion, thereby further exceeding the alreadyhigh amount of 326 billion registered in
2001. The principal cause of this was thedrop in tax receipts. At first glance, expend-iture growth appears to have been stopped.However, after being adjusted to accountfor the aforementioned exceptional burdens,spending increased by 1
12%; expenditure on
personnel had a particular impact here, risingmore markedly by 2
12%. The budget plans of
state government for 2003 envisage signifi-cantly lower deficits (of around 323 billion ac-
cording to the current state of planning), notleast by resorting to one-off measures, suchas asset disposals. However, as is the casewith the Federal Government, the plans con-tain a large degree of uncertainty.
For local government only the results for the
first three quarters are available. During thisperiod, the deficit amounted to just under36
12billion, which was double the figure for
the first three quarters of 2001. The con-tinued sharp decline in tax receipts (by 6
12%)
was the main reason for the decrease of al-most 1
12% in overall revenue. By contrast,
expenditure growth accelerated to just under2%; a further decline in construction invest-ment was offset by a significant rise in socialbenefits, personnel expenditure and otheroperating expenditure. The development inthe fourth quarter – which is not yet known –is unlikely to have had a decisive impact onthe unfavourable underlying tendency for2002 as a whole. The financial situation is notexpected to improve this year, not least dueto the fact that the forthcoming final settle-ment of the municipal tax-sharing arrange-ments is likely to result in lower grants to thelocal authorities. Furthermore, additional per-sonnel expenditure will arise from the paysettlement for the public sector for the localauthorities in eastern Germany, in particular,due to the further approximation of the wagescales for eastern Germany to the westernlevel.
Indebtedness of central, state and local gov-
ernment rose by just under 39 billion in the
fourth quarter. Besides a relatively small in-Special funds
Land
GovernmentsLocal
authorities
Indebtedness

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
50crease in capital market indebtedness ( 312bil-
lion), short-term cash advances and moneymarket loans went up sharply by just over 38
billion. In 2002 as a whole, net market bor-rowing amounted to 354
12billion. Whereas
public authorities had much greater recourseto tradable capital market securities ( 367 bil-
lion net), their outstanding amount of bankloans not serving to assure liquidity in theshort term declined by over 315
12billion.
Social security funds
Although the wages and salary earners’ pen-
sion insurance scheme recorded its customarysurplus in the fourth quarter of 2002 (of al-most 31 billion), it was more than 31
12billion
lower than in the same period of 2001. Themain reason for this was the weak trend in
contribution receipts. In 2002 as a whole thedeficit reached 35 billion, thus exceeding the
figure for 2001 by 34
12billion. With the deci-
sion to reduce the lower limit for the fluctu-ation reserve to 80% of one month’s expend-iture in order to be able to keep the contribu-tion rate at 19.1%, the foundations for an in-crease in the deficit had been laid. But the ac-tual level of the fluctuation reserve recordedat the end of 2002 – 63% of one month’sexpenditure – fell well short even of the re-duced target since the growth of gross wagesand salaries subject to compulsory insurancecontributions was appreciably dampened bythe unfavourable economic development.
Following the high deficit last year, both a rise
in the contribution rate to 19.9% and a fur-ther increase in the Federal grant from thelast stage of the ecological tax reform wouldhave been necessary at the beginning of theyear in the light of the expectations of au-tumn 2002 to bring the fluctuation reserveback up to the minimum level. In order tocurb the negative macroeconomic impact ofsuch an increase in non-wage labour costs,the required level of fluctuation reserves wasreduced further to at least 50% of a month’sexpenditure. In addition, the ceiling for earn-ings subject to contributions was raised mark-edly. These measures made it possible to limitthe rise in contribution rates to 19.5% (from19.1%). However, in the meantime, severalnew burdens have appeared on the horizon.For example, the 2003 Annual Economic Re-port reduced the projected growth rate ofgross wages and salaries by
12percentage
point to 2%. In addition, revenue shortfallsNet borrowing in the market by
central, state and local government
5billion
of which
Period TotalSecuri-
ties 1Loansagainstborrow-ers’notes
2MemoitemAcquisi-tion bynon-resi-dents
2001 + 14.2 + 56.3 – 6.6 + 1.1
of which
Q1 – 10.4 + 13.9 + 9.7 – 11.8Q2 – 6.1 + 7.5 – 13.7 – 0.5Q3 + 15.6 + 18.5 – 1.8 + 14.9Q4 + 15.2 + 16.4 – 0.9 – 1.6
2002
pe + 54.5 + 67.0 – 11.3 ...
of which
Q1 + 25.6 + 15.2 + 10.5 + 7.2Q2 + 1.5 + 22.9 – 21.4 + 11.7Q3 + 18.6 + 25.1 – 5.4 + 15.5Q4
pe + 8.9 + 3.8 + 5.1 ...
1Excluding equalisation claims. — 2Including cash ad-
vances and money market borrowing.
Deutsche Bundesbank
Statutory
pension
insurance
schemeOutlook
for 2003

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
51are anticipated to ensue from the new ar-
rangements applying to low-paid part-timeworkers. Further strains may arise from thepossibility as from December of shifting wageand salary payments to the end of the monthcontained in the latest public sector paysettlement as the related social security con-tributions will only be recorded in the follow-ing month, resulting in a one-off gap at theend of 2003. Therefore, the statutory pensioninsurance fund is likely to record a deficit in2003, too.
The Federal Labour Office saw its deficit
reach 31 billion in the fourth quarter of 2002,
after recording a surplus of 3
12billion in the
same period of 2001. A marginal decrease inrevenue from contributions contrasted with asteep increase in expenditure of just under11%. In 2002 as a whole the financial gapamounted to 35
12billion, which was almost
three times as high as the outturn in 2001and as the budgeted deficit for 2002. Whilerevenue grew by only
12%, expenditure rose
by 712%. The cost of unemployment benefit
went up by almost 10%, chiefly as a result ofa jump in the number of recipients.
5Expend-
iture on active labour market measures roseby 1
12%. Whereas spending on job creation
measures fell by over one-sixth, spending onvocational training expanded by just under6%.
Despite the assumed anticipated further in-
crease in the number of unemployed personsby 80,000 to 4.14 million, the Federal LabourOffice’s budget plans do not foresee a deficitin 2003. However, the macroeconomic trendis now being assessed more negatively and,according to the Annual Economic Report
presented at the end of January, a steeperrise in the number of unemployed persons (toaround 4.2 million) is now expected. This willlead to additional risks for both revenueand expenditure. Furthermore, it is uncertainwhether the total budgetary relief expectedfrom the adoption of the laws on modernlabour market services (Hartz reforms) willactually be realised. Unless additional savingsare made in the field of active labour marketpolicy schemes which are significantly higherthan those already envisaged in the budget, aFederal Government grant may be necessaryin 2003, too, to offset a new deficit.Quarterly
 5 bn
 5 bn
Surplus (+) or deficit (−)Revenue
ExpenditureWage and salary earners’
pension insurance scheme
Deutsche Bundesbank6+
4+
2+
0
2−58
56
54
5250
2000 2001 2002
5The number of unemployed persons averaged 4.06 mil-
lion during the year (compared with 3.89 million forecast
in the budget plans) and the number of people receiving
unemployment benefit also exceeded the estimate by
some 170,000.Federal Labour
Office
Outlook for
2003

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
52Health insurance contributions were in-
creased at the beginning of 2002, in part inorder to replenish the reserves following thesubstantial deficit sustained in 2001. Theaverage rate went up by over 0.3 percentagepoint to 14.0%. This was the main reasonwhy the revenue of the statutory health insur-ance funds grew by just under 3
12% in the
first three quarters. However, expendituregrew nearly as fast, fuelled primarily by asurge in the outflow of funds spent on
pharmaceuticals and hospital treatment. Theoutturns of the other social security sectorsindicate an unfavourable contribution trendin the fourth quarter of 2002, which means itis unlikely that the deficit was lower last yearthan the almost 33 billion recorded in 2001.
This year numerous measures are envisaged,which should yield total savings of 33 billion,
such as compulsory discounts in the pharma-ceutical sector, a freeze on budgets for hos-pital and doctors’ fees and making it harderfor patients to switch to private health insur-ance schemes by raising the earnings ceilingbelow which such a switch is not possible.Even so, many statutory health insurance in-stitutions had to raise their contribution rateagain perceptibly, so that the average rate isnow probably around 14.4%.
General government budget trends
According to the preliminary outturn, the
general government deficit ratio, as definedin the Maastricht Treaty, was 3.7% in 2002compared with 2.8% in 2001.
6On 21 Janu-
ary the Ecofin Council decided that Germanyhas an excessive deficit as defined in theMaastricht Treaty (see box on page 53).Whereas the sharp rise in the deficit in 2001was largely attributable to the sizeable taxcuts and was therefore of a structural nature,the fiscal policy stance in 2002 had little bear-ing on the increase in the deficit. The mainQuarterly
 5 bn
 5 bn 5 bn
Surplus (+) or deficit (−)Expenditure on...
...unemployment benefits and
   short-time working benefits
...vocational
   training 2Expenditure, total
Revenue 1Federal Labour Office
1Excluding Federal Government liquidity
assistance. — 2Including job creation meas-
ures.
Deutsche Bundesbank0.5+
0
0.5−
1.0−
1.5−
2.0−7.0
6.5
6.0
5.5
5.0
4.5
4.015.5
15.0
14.5
14.0
13.5
13.0
12.5
12.0
11.5
11.0
2000 2001 2002
6At the beginning of each year, the Federal Statistical
Office publishes the preliminary national accounts out-
turn for the previous year, in which the development in
the fourth quarter, in particular, is largely estimated.Statutory
health
insurance
schemeDeficit ratio
over 3%
in 2002

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
53The excessive deficit procedure applied to Germany
In the Maastricht Treaty adopted in 1992 –
which was later concretised and supplement-ed by the Stability and Growth Pact – themember states of the European Union com-mitted themselves to avoiding excessive def-icits. In particular, the provisions stipulatethat the government debt ratio and the def-icit ratio may exceed their respective refer-ence values of 60% and 3% only in very ex-ceptional circumstances. This is intended toensure sound public finances and inter alia
make it easier for the European Central Bankto carry out its task of safeguarding price sta-bility. To ensure compliance with these provi-sions, an early warning system for undesirablefiscal developments and a system of sanctions(“excessive deficit procedure”) were estab-lished. A year ago the European Commissionrecommended that an early warning be is-sued to Germany (and also to Portugal) be-cause it had fallen well short of the targetsset in the 2001 stability programme and itsdeficit ratio was very close to the 3% ceiling.However, the Ecofin Council did not put theCommission’s recommendation to the votesince Germany had already promised to try tocomply with the reference value for the def-icit ratio in 2002 and to achieve a close-to-balance budget by 2004.
Last November the European Commission
forecast a deficit ratio for Germany of 3.8% in2002. A similar figure was assumed in the Ger-man stability programme which was updatedin December. On 21 January this year theEcofin Council, acting on a recommendationfrom the European Commission, then decidedthat an excessive deficit existed in Germany.After Portugal, Germany thus became thesecond country since the beginning of monet-ary union for which an excessive deficit pro-cedure has been set in train. At the sametime, the Council issued a recommendation toGermany. It calls for the German governmentto correct its excessive deficit as rapidly aspossible. In addition Germany is urged to seekresolutely to achieve the aim – based on pre-dicted growth of 1
12% – of reducing the def-
icit ratio in 2003 to 234% as envisaged inthe updated stability programme. The Coun-
cil’s recommendation notably demands strin-gent budget management and the implemen-tation of the measures announced for thisyear, amounting to 1% of GDP. In line withthe provisions of the Stability and GrowthPact, Germany has been given a deadline offour months, ie until 21 May 2003, to carrythis out. If any of these measures are not im-plemented, they should be replaced by othersso as to maintain the overall volume of con-solidation. Finally, the Council recommendedGermany to prevent its debt ratio from in-creasing further in 2003, and to reduce it insubsequent years. If Germany fails to carryout these recommendations, further stepswill be taken which may ultimately lead tothe imposition of sanctions, which may in-clude severe fines.
In its opinion on the updated German stabil-
ity programme, the Council considers the realgrowth rate expected for 2003 of 1
12% (which
has since been revised to 1% in the FederalGovernment’s Annual Economic Report) to beoverly optimistic. In order to enhance thecountry’s growth potential, the Council callsfor reforms of the labour market and the so-cial security systems. In the Council’s view, theobjective of reaching a structural budget pos-ition that is close to balance by 2006, as envis-aged in the programme, is attainable only ifthe announced measures are implemented infull, the expenditure targets for 2003 and2004 are met and strict spending limits are setfor the subsequent years, too. Given theseprovisions, the structural budget positionwould improve by more than 0.5% of GDPeach year except in 2005. The German author-ities have been requested to ensure that thenext stages of the tax reform in 2004 and2005 are compatible with a steady adjustmentpath towards a balanced budget. Althoughthe Council welcomed the agreements on the“national stability pact”, it considered theminsufficient to guarantee compliance with thegeneral government budget objectives in thecontext of Germany’s federalist system.
Deutsche Bundesbank

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
54reason for the rise was the much weaker rev-
enue trend both of central, state and localgovernment and of the social security funds.The overall taxes and social security ratio re-ceded by almost
34percentage point, even
though some excise taxes and health insur-ance contributions were raised substantially.Revenue from taxes and social security contri-butions developed far more unfavourablythan would have been expected based on thedevelopment of nominal GDP . Not least, tem-porary factors, such as write-downs in thecorporate sector, are also likely to have hadan impact.
In 2002 expenditure grew by 2% and thus
somewhat more sharply than in 2001 (1
34%),
even though several extraordinary burdenshad been recorded in 2001 – especially fortheLand Governments. Expenditure in 2002,
however, was fuelled particularly by the in-crease in child benefit and the marked rise inlabour market-related spending. The outlaysof the social security funds went up consider-ably more sharply (by 3
12%) than those of
central, state and local government (2%, or1% excluding transfers to the social securityfunds). Among other factors, lower invest-ment spending and – in view of the favour-able interest rate – broadly stagnating interestexpenditure had a dampening effect on theoverall expenditure of central, state and localgovernment.
The development of public finance in the cur-
rent year is marked by great uncertainty ensu-ing from geopolitical and macroeconomicrisks. Furthermore, various fiscal projects arestill being debated in parliament, and the im-pact of some measures which have already
been adopted is difficult to gauge. Neverthe-less, from the present vantage point it stillseems feasible to reduce the general govern-ment deficit ratio to a maximum of 3%. Ifthe planned consolidation package is imple-mented in full and, concurrently, a stringentbudgetary course is maintained in line withthe Financial Planning Council’s guidelines,the deficit ratio is still likely to fall noticeablyeven if real GDP growth is weaker than thefigure of 1
12% assumed in the German stabil-
ity programme. The revenue trend, in particu-lar, will make itself felt because the taxes andsocial security ratio will rise considerably inthe wake of the higher contribution rates tothe statutory pension insurance scheme andthe statutory health insurance fund and thetax measures (primarily concerning excisetaxes). Lowering the high deficits of the socialsecurity funds will necessitate introducingand implementing reforms of the statutoryhealth insurance system and the Federal La-bour Office and, in addition, keeping expend-iture under tight control.
The updated German stability programme
presented in December emphasises the im-portance of the European Stability andGrowth Pact as the anchor of a stability-oriented fiscal policy in Europe. According tothe medium-term forecast, the general gov-ernment deficit ratio is to be lowered to2
34% this year and completely eliminated by
2006 (see table on page 55). This is to be at-tained by reducing the government expend-iture ratio by 4 percentage points while leav-ing the taxes and social security ratio un-altered. The forecast is based on the assump-2003 marked
by great
uncertaintyStability
programme
envisages
balanced
budget by 2006

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
55tion that the agreements reached by the Fi-
nancial Planning Council to limit spending areobserved and that an economical expenditurepolicy is pursued up to 2006. Further assump-tions are that the planned consolidationmeasures will be implemented largely in linewith the government’s decisions from last au-tumn, that the budgets of the social securityfunds will close more or less in balance andthat the overall economic climate will im-prove steadily over the next few years. In themeantime, however, the Federal Government– in its Annual Economic Report – has as-sessed the macroeconomic outlook for 2003less favourably. The expectation for real GDPgrowth was lowered by
12percentage point
to around 1%. Nonetheless, the deficit ratiois still not expected to exceed 3%.The past two years in Germany were marked
by a dramatic increase in the general govern-ment deficit. Starting from a non-balancedbudget in 2000 when the economic climatewas favourable, this resulted last year in anovershooting of the 3% ceiling set by theMaastricht Treaty. The deficit increase and thegeneral fiscal policy discussion have contrib-uted to widespread uncertainty, particularlysince doubts have arisen regarding the man-ageability and the future orientation of fiscalpolicy, and the fiscal policy framework in Eur-ope has been called into question in somequarters.
German fiscal policy is now faced with the
task of reinforcing public confidence in theability of government to govern and in thenational and international fiscal rules by im-Key data of the Federal Government’s updated stability programme
in %
Item 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006
Basis scenario:
Real GDP growth
Stability programme 2002 0.612 112 214 214 214
Stability programme 200134 114 212 212 212 –
Deficit ratio (–)
Stability programme 2002 – 2.8 – 334 –234 –112 –1 0
Stability programme 2001 – 212 –2 –1 –0 –0 –
Debt ratio
Stability programme 2002 59.5 61 6112 6012 5912 5712
Stability programme 2001 60 60 59 57 5512 –
Structural deficit ratio (–) – 234 –3 –2 –1 –1 –12
Risk scenario (stability programme 2002):
Real GDP growth 0.612 112 222
Deficit ratio (–) – 2.8 – 334 –234 –112 –1 –12
Deutsche Bundesbank
Uncertainty
also concerning
fiscal policy
orientation
Sustainable
consolidation
through
implementing
the announced
course

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
56plementing a sustainable consolidation pro-
cess. In the shorter term – even based on theless favourable outlook for macroeconomicgrowth assumed in the Annual Economic Re-port – every effort should be made this year,as also demanded by the Ecofin Council, toimplement the announced extent of the fiscalmeasures and to comply with the nationalagreements at all budgetary levels to ensurethat the 3% deficit ceiling is not breached. Inthe medium term the strategy outlined in thestability programme of reducing governmentactivity with a view to reaching a balanced
budget position and subsequently facilitatingfurther tax cuts should be vigorously support-ed as this would improve the conditions forachieving growth. All levels of governmentshould therefore critically reappraise their cur-rent service level and not baulk at making un-popular decisions. Each of the tiers of govern-ment should be obligated to achieve a bal-anced budgetary position in the mediumterm.

Statistical
SectionDeutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
1*

ContentsI Key economic data for European
monetary union
1 Monetary developments and interest
rates 6*
2 Foreign trade and payments 6*3 General economic indicators 7*
II Overall monetary survey in the
European monetary union
1 The money stock and its counterparts 8*
2 Consolidated balance sheet of mon-
etary financial institutions (MFIs) 10*
3 Banking system’s liquidity position 14*
III Consolidated financial statement
of the Eurosystem
1 Assets 16*
2 Liabilities 18*
IV Banks
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary
financial institutions (excluding theBundesbank) in Germany 20*
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks
(MFIs) in Germany, by category ofbanks 24*
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-à-vis residents 26*
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents 28*Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
2*

5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) 30*
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic enterprises and residentindividuals, housing loans, sectors ofeconomic activity 32*
7 Deposits of domestic
non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs)in Germany 34*
8 Deposits of resident individuals and
domestic non-profit institutions atbanks (MFIs) in Germany 36*
9 Deposits of domestic public author-
ities at banks (MFIs) in Germany, bycreditor group 36*
10 Savings deposits and bank savings
bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germanysold to non-banks (non-MFIs) 38*
11 Debt securities and money market
paper outstanding of banks (MFIs)in Germany 38*
12 Building and loan associations (MFIs)
in Germany 39*
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign
branches and foreign subsidiaries ofGerman banks (MFIs) 40*
V Minimum reserves
1 Reserve ratios 42*
2 Reserve maintenance in Germany up
to the end of 1998 42*
3 Reserve maintenance in the Euro-
pean monetary union 42*VI Interest rates
1 ECB interest rates 43*
2 Discount and lombard rates of the
Bundesbank 43*
3 Base rates 43*4 Eurosystem monetary policy opera-
tions allotted through tenders 43*
5 Money market rates, by month 44*6 Euro area retail bank interest rates 44*7 Lending and deposit rates of banks
(MFIs) in Germany 45*
VII Capital market
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities
and shares in Germany 48*
2 Sales of debt securities issued by
borrowers domiciled in Germany 49*
3 Outstanding amount of debt secur-
ities issued by borrowers domiciledin Germany 50*
4 Circulation of shares issued by resi-
dents of Germany 50*
5 Yields and indices on German
securities 51*
6 Sales and purchases of investment
fund certificates in Germany 51*Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
3*

VIII Public finance in Germany
1 Finances of the public sector 52*
2 Finances of the Federal
Government, Länder Governmentsand local authorities 52*
3 Finances of the Government
in the national accounts 53*
4 Tax revenue of the central,
regional and local authorities 53*
5 Tax revenue, by type 54*6 Individual taxes of the Federal
Government, Länder Governmentsand local authorities 54*
7 Indebtedness of the public sector 55*8 Changes in public sector
indebtedness 57*
9 Loans raised by public authorities
against borrowers’ notes 57*
10 Indebtedness of the Federal
Government 58*
11 Federal Government borrowing
in the market 58*
12 Receipts, expenditure and assets of
the wage and salary earners’pension insurance funds 59*
13 Receipts and expenditure of the
Federal Labour Office 59*
IX Economic conditions
1 Origin and expenditure of
domestic product, distribution ofnational income 60*
2 Output in the producing sector 61*3 Orders received by industry 62*4 Orders received by construction 63*5 Retail trade turnover 63*6 Labour market 64*
7 Prices 65*8 Households’ income 66*9 Pay rates and actual earnings 66*
X Foreign trade and payments
1 Major items of the balance of pay-
ments of the European monetaryunion 67*
2 Major items of the balance of pay-
ments of the Federal Republic ofGermany 68*
3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the
Federal Republic of Germany, bygroup of countries and country 69*
4 Services and factor income of the
Federal Republic of Germany 70*
5 Current transfers of the Federal
Republic of Germany 70*
6 Capital transfers 70*7 Financial account of the Federal
Republic of Germany 71*
8 External position of the Bundesbank 72*9 External position of the Bundesbank
in the European monetary union 72*
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises
in Germany (other than banks)vis-à-vis non-residents 73*
11 Deutsche Mark and euro exchange
rates of selected currencies 74*
12 Exchange rates for the national
currencies of the EMU countries,the Deutsche Mark value of theECU and euro conversion rates 74*
13 Effective exchange rates of the euro
and selected foreign currencies 75*Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
4*

Abbreviations and symbols
eestimated
pprovisional
pepartly estimated
rrevised
...Data available at a later date
.Data unknown, not to be published or
not meaningful
0Less than 0.5 but more than nil
–nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to round-
ing.Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
5*

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
 I Key economic data for European monetary union
 
1 Monetary developments and interest rates
 
 
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions  1  2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
 M 3  3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3−month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
moving average MFI lending, and capital 3−month ment bonds
M1 M2 (centred) total individuals formation  4 EONIA  5, 7 EURIBOR  6, 7 outstanding  8 
Period Change from previous year,in % % p. a. as a monthly average
2001          Jun 4.0 4.3 5.4 5.1 5.7 8.4 3.4 4.54 4.45 5.2
         Jul 3.4 4.4 5.6 5.6 5.8 8.2 2.7 4.51 4.47 5.2
         Aug 3.6 4.4 5.8 6.0 5.5 7.7 2.3 4.49 4.35 5.0         Sep 5.0 5.1 6.7 6.6 5.2 7.1 2.5 3.99 3.98 5.0
         Oct 5.2 5.5 7.3 7.2 5.1 6.9 2.6 3.97 3.60 4.8
         Nov 5.9 6.0 7.7 7.6 5.4 7.0 3.6 3.51 3.39 4.6         Dec 5.5 6.4 7.9 7.8 5.2 6.7 4.7 3.34 3.34 4.9
2002          Jan 6.6 6.7 7.7 7.6 5.2 6.2 4.8 3.29 3.34 5.0
         Feb 6.2 6.3 7.3 7.4 5.1 6.0 4.8 3.28 3.36 5.1         Mar 6.0 6.3 7.2 7.2 4.8 5.4 4.7 3.26 3.39 5.3
         Apr 6.6 6.3 7.2 7.3 4.4 5.1 4.6 3.32 3.41 5.3
         May 6.7 6.7 7.6 7.3 4.5 5.3 5.2 3.31 3.47 5.3         Jun 6.8 6.4 7.1 7.2 4.4 5.3 4.3 3.35 3.46 5.2
         Jul 7.6 6.5 7.0 7.0 4.0 4.8 4.9 3.30 3.41 5.0
         Aug 7.6 6.4 7.0 7.1 4.2 5.1 5.2 3.29 3.35 4.7         Sep 8.2 6.6 7.2 7.0 4.3 5.0 5.1 3.32 3.31 4.5
         Oct 8.3 6.8 6.9 7.1 4.3 4.9 4.8 3.30 3.26 4.6
         Nov 9.2 6.9 7.1 6.9 4.0 4.6 4.9 3.30 3.12 4.6         Dec 9.8 6.5 6.8 ... 4.0 4.7 4.3 3.09 2.94 4.4
2003          Jan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2.79 2.83 4.2
1 Source: ECB. — 2 Saisonally adjusted. — 3 Excluding holdings of money Average. — 6 Euro InterBank Offered Rate. — 7 See also footnotes to table
market fund shares
/units by non-residents of the euro area. — 4 Longer- VI.5., p. 44*. — 8 GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds; from
term liabilities to euro area non-MFIs. — 5Euro OverNight Index 2001 Euro12. 
 
 
2 Foreign trade and payments  * 
  
 
Selected items of the EMU balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1 
Current account Capital account Effective exchange rate  3 
of which Direct Securities Credit Monetary
Balance Trade balance Balance investment transactions reserves Dollar rate nominal real  4 transactions  2 
Period
 5 
 million Euro/US-$ 1st q 1999=100
2001          Jun − 3,008 + 7,994 − 6,072 − 6,037 + 26,021 − 25,208 − 849 0.8532 84.7 86.3
         Jul − 790 + 10,548 − 25,607 − 2,803 − 4,527 − 18,313 + 36 0.8607 85.4 87.1
         Aug + 5,257 + 7,428 − 6,123 − 5,910 + 204 − 4,485 + 4,068 0.9005 87.7 89.3         Sep + 743 + 6,019 − 21,326 − 15,612 + 46,607 − 50,706 − 1,615 0.9111 88.0 89.7
         Oct + 4,122 + 11,397 − 22,033 + 4,005 − 1,535 − 21,843 − 2,661 0.9059 88.0 90.0
         Nov + 2,668 + 8,846 − 6,834 + 11,690 + 17,096 − 35,681 + 60 0.8883 86.8 88.8         Dec + 2,295 + 10,439 − 3,197 + 831 − 17,117 + 7,232 + 5,856 0.8924 87.7 89.9
2002          Jan − 94 + 3,109 − 49,540 + 9 − 38,477 − 5,759 − 5,313 0.8833 87.6 90.3
         Feb + 4,399 + 9,999 + 6,741 − 8,915 − 11,195 + 24,396 + 2,455 0.8700 86.8 89.4         Mar + 7,444 + 13,222 + 16,327 − 6,091 − 569 + 23,192 − 205 0.8758 86.8 89.6
         Apr − 5,284 + 7,823 + 13,626 + 9,301 + 13,475 − 17,512 + 8,361 0.8858 87.2 90.1
         May + 2,339 + 10,037 + 2,313 + 1,308 + 27,508 − 28,401 + 1,897 0.9170 88.6 91.5         Jun + 5,810 + 12,876 − 44,979 − 18,537 + 13,361 − 36,286 − 3,517 0.9554 90.6 93.6
         Jul + 5,704 + 16,166 − 20,932 − 6,600 − 1,265 − 10,515 − 2,552 0.9922 91.7 94.7
         Aug + 10,882 + 12,079 − 13,401 + 3,147 + 3,691 − 21,994 + 1,756 0.9778 91.1 94.0         Sep + 8,656 + 11,570 − 21,334 − 3,197 + 17,383 − 31,720 − 3,800 0.9808 91.2 94.2
         Oct + 3,718 + 11,698 − 21,469 − 5,019 + 19,391 − 37,977 + 2,136 0.9811 91.7 94.8
         Nov + 10,281 + 13,560 − 28,585 + 3,919 + 8,575 − 38,504 − 2,575 1.0014 92.5 95.5         Dec ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.0183 93.6 96.8
2003          Jan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.0622 95.8 99.3
 
*  Source: ECB. — 1  See also tables X.12 and 13, p. 74−75. — 2  Including on consumer prices. 
financial derivatives. — 3  Vis-a-vis a narrow group of countries. — 4  Based
6* I Key economic data for European monetary union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
I.  Key economic data for European monetary union 
 
3. General economic indicators
 
 
                   
Period Belgium Germany Finland France Greece Ireland Italy Luxembourg Austria Portugal Spain EMU 7 Netherlands
Real gross domestic product 1
1999 3.2 2.0 3.4 3.2 3.6 11.1 1.6 6.0 4.0 2.7 3.8 4.2 2.8
2000 3.7 2.9 5.5 3.8 4.2 10.0 2.9 8.9 3.3 3.5 3.7 4.2 3.5
2001 0.8 0.6 0.6 1.8 4.1 5.7 1.8 1.0 1.3 0.7 1.6 2.7 1.4
2001          2nd qtr 1.3 0.6 0.4 2.0 4.0 6.7 2.3 1.7 0.5 2.8 2.0 1.6
         3rd qtr 0.8 0.4 0.1 1.9 3.5 4.3 1.9 1.1 0.3 0.9 2.5 1.3         4th qtr −0.5 −0.1 −1.1 0.7 3.7 1.1 0.4 0.6 −0.4 1.0 2.6 0.5
2002          1st qtr −0.5 −1.2 −1.5 0.3 4.3 4.7 −0.2 −0.1 0.4 1.0 1.9 −0.2
         2nd qtr 0.3 0.4 3.1 1.0 4.0 6.6 0.1 0.0 1.0 1.2 2.1 0.7         3rd qtr 1.4 0.9 2.3 1.4 3.6 6.9 0.3 0.5 0.9 −0.5 1.7 1.1
Industrial production 1, 2
2000 5.3 6.2 11.2 3.5 0.5 15.4 4.8 4.3 4.0 8.9 −1.9 4.0 5.5
2001 −1.0 0.5 −1.0 0.9 1.4 10.2 −1.2 1.8 1.4 0.8 3.1 −1.1 0.4
2002 ... 6 p −1.3 ... −1.0 ... ... ... ... −1.8 ... ... 0.2 ...
2001          3rd qtr −0.9 −1.1 −3.3 2.4 2.5 3.6 −1.3 2.5 1.2 0.2 0.8 −0.4 −0.2
         4th qtr −5.2 −3.7 −4.7 −2.2 0.1 −2.6 −5.6 1.3 −1.5 −2.4 1.8 −2.0 −3.6
2002          1st qtr −0.8 −4.0 ... −2.6 −1.1 3.0 −3.4 −2.7 −2.9 −2.1 −1.6 −3.9 −2.7
         2nd qtr 2.9 −1.8 ... −0.3 2.4 11.3 −2.3 5.9 −2.9 2.4 1.7 1.0 −0.6
         3rd qtr 2.9 −0.4 ... −1.2 −1.2 10.6 −2.9 −0.5 −1.5 0.3 0.2 1.4 −0.6
         4th qtr ... 6 p 1.0 ... 0.1 ... ... ... ... 0.3 ... ... 2.5 ...
Capacity utilisation 3
2000 84.0 85.9 86.8 87.5 78.1 78.6 78.8 87.8 84.7 84.5 81.2 80.6 84.22001 82.3 85.1 85.7 87.4 77.6 78.4 78.9 88.7 84.6 83.1 81.7 79.6 83.62002 79.6 82.0 82.7 85.3 77.0 75.9 77.3 85.1 82.9 80.6 79.4 77.2 81.2
2001          4th qtr 80.2 83.3 84.5 86.3 76.8 75.2 77.9 87.8 83.8 81.4 79.7 78.3 82.22002          1st qtr 79.2 82.4 82.0 85.5 75.4 77.5 76.9 86.9 83.5 80.9 77.9 76.3 81.1
         2nd qtr 79.6 81.5 82.7 85.8 76.7 76.3 77.3 84.3 82.9 80.6 79.4 77.0 81.2         3rd qtr 80.1 82.0 83.0 85.3 79.0 72.8 76.9 83.8 82.5 80.5 79.1 76.3 81.0         4th qtr 79.6 82.1 83.1 84.7 76.8 76.9 78.0 85.3 82.8 80.4 81.2 79.3 81.5
2003          1st qtr 79.3 82.1 82.1 84.4 75.8 74.5 77.5 84.1 82.5 80.5 77.7 78.6 81.1
Unemployment rate 4
2000 6.9 7.8 9.8 9.3 11.1 4.3 10.4 2.3 2.9 3.7 4.1 11.3 8.5
2001 6.7 7.7 9.1 8.5 10.5 3.9 9.4 2.0 2.5 3.6 4.1 10.6 8.02002 7.3 8.2 9.1 8.7 ... 4.4 ... 2.4 ... 4.1 5.0 11.4 8.2
2002          July 7.4 8.2 9.2 8.8 4.4 9.0 2.4 2.8 4.1 5.0 11.4 8.3
         Aug. 7.3 8.3 9.2 8.8 4.4 9.0 2.5 2.8 4.2 5.2 11.5 8.3         Sep. 7.3 8.3 9.1 8.8 4.4 9.0 2.5 2.8 4.2 5.3 11.6 8.4
         Oct. 7.4 8.4 9.0 8.8 4.4 8.9 2.6 2.9 4.1 5.5 11.8 8.4
         Nov. 7.5 8.4 9.0 8.8 4.4 ... 2.6 2.9 4.1 5.6 11.9 8.5         Dec. 7.6 8.5 9.0 8.9 4.4 ... 2.7 ... 4.1 5.8 12.0 8.5
2003          Jan. ... 8.6 ... ... ... ... ... ... 4.1 ... ... ...
Harmonised index of consumer prices 1
2000 2.7 2.1 3.0 1.8 2.9 5.3 2.6 3.8 2.3 2.0 2.8 3.5 2.3
2001 2.4 2.4 2.7 1.8 3.7 4.0 2.3 2.4 5.1 2.3 4.4 2.8 2.52002 1.6 1.3 2.0 1.9 3.9 4.7 2.6 2.1 3.9 1.7 3.7 3.6 2.2
2002          July 1.1 1.0 2.0 1.6 3.6 4.2 2.4 1.9 3.8 1.5 3.6 3.5 1.9
         Aug. 1.3 1.0 1.8 1.8 3.8 4.5 2.6 2.0 3.8 2.1 3.9 3.7 2.1         Sep. 1.2 1.0 1.4 1.8 3.8 4.5 2.8 2.2 3.7 1.6 3.8 3.5 2.1
         Oct. 1.3 1.3 1.7 1.9 3.9 4.4 2.8 2.5 3.6 1.7 4.1 4.0 2.3
         Nov. 1.1 1.0 1.7 2.1 3.9 4.7 2.9 2.7 3.4 1.7 4.1 3.9 2.2         Dec. 1.3 1.1 1.7 2.2 3.5 4.6 3.0 2.8 3.5 1.7 4.0 4.0 2.3
2003          Jan. ... 1.1 ... ... ... ... 3.1 ... 2.9 ... ... 3.8 ...
General government financial balance 5
1999 −0.5 −1.5 1.9 −1.6 −1.9 2.2 −1.8 3.6 0.7 −2.3 −2.4 −1.1 −1.3
2000 0.1 1.1 7.0 −1.3 −1.8 4.4 −0.5 5.6 2.2 −1.5 −2.9 −0.6 0.2
2001 0.4 −2.8 4.9 −1.4 −1.2 1.5 −2.2 6.1 0.1 0.2 −4.1 −0.1 −1.5
General government debt 5
1999 114.9 61.2 46.8 58.5 105.1 49.7 114.5 6.0 63.1 64.9 54.4 63.1 71.92000 109.2 60.2 44.0 57.3 106.2 39.1 110.5 5.6 55.8 63.6 53.3 60.5 69.4
2001 107.6 59.5 43.4 57.3 107.0 36.4 109.8 5.6 52.8 63.2 55.5 57.1 69.2
Sources: National data, European Commission, Eurostat, European persons in civilian employment; seasonally adjusted. —5  As a percen-
Central Bank. Latest data are partly based on press reports and are tage of GDP; Maastricht Treaty definition, ESA95; including proceeds from
provisional. —1  Annual percentage changes; GDP of Greece and Portugal is sales of UMTS licenses in 2000 and 2001. —6  Adjusted in advance by the Fe-
calculated from seasonally adjusted data. —2  Manufacturing, mining, gas deral Statistical Office by way of estimates to the results of the Quarterly Pro-
and electricity; adjusted for working-day variations (except France and duction Survey for the fourth quarter (industry in Germany: + 1.6 %). —7  In-
Spain). —3  Manufacturing, in %; seasonally adjusted; data are collected cluding Greece (Harmonised index of consumer prices, General government
in January, April, July and October. —4  Standardised, as a percentage of financial balance and General government debt only from 2001). 
7*I.  Key economic data for European monetary union 

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
 
1 The money stock and its counterparts*)
  
  
 
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II. Net claims on III. Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises Publicand individuals authorities Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturitieson non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over 2 Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  
3 Securities Securities reserves  4 
 European monetary union (  5  billion) 1
 
2001          Sep 42.2 45.5 −2.0 −3.3 −4.3 30.8 49.1 18.4 26.4 0.8 −0.9 17.5 9.0
         Oct 24.5 36.8 8.4 −12.3 −9.6 25.1 43.7 18.5 18.6 −0.3 −1.7 12.7 7.9
         Nov 72.5 48.6 −1.1 23.8 7.9 27.4 66.0 38.7 18.9 −1.6 −1.1 18.7 2.9
         Dec 39.4 46.1 24.2 −6.7 −10.3 − 8.8 −26.4 −17.5 28.6 7.3 0.1 7.6 13.6
2002          Jan 36.2 17.5 4.9 18.7 21.8 −14.2 − 0.2 14.1 25.2 3.6 −3.6 11.0 14.2
         Feb 28.8 24.9 8.7 3.9 1.2 −10.9 0.3 11.2 9.0 1.6 −1.0 9.3 −0.8
         Mar 70.7 48.5 −10.4 22.2 16.9 − 5.7 19.9 25.6 23.7 3.7 −1.3 18.7 2.6
         Apr 26.1 44.6 3.0 −18.5 1.5 − 2.8 18.0 20.7 −6.3 −0.2 −1.9 1.0 −5.2
         May 39.0 32.1 3.9 6.9 9.7 38.9 73.9 35.0 25.8 3.5 −1.2 19.7 3.7
         Jun 32.5 32.4 −6.9 0.1 −1.3 40.8 −26.8 −67.6 −5.5 3.3 −0.2 8.6 −17.2
         Jul −18.8 −15.1 −12.1 −3.8 −2.0 − 2.3 − 2.4 − 0.0 19.8 1.3 −0.0 8.8 9.7
         Aug − 7.1 6.9 6.7 −14.0 −3.1 14.2 −10.6 −24.8 13.8 2.2 0.2 2.7 8.7
         Sep 55.2 40.8 5.0 14.4 11.5 18.7 65.6 46.9 23.4 1.0 0.4 12.1 9.9
         Oct 28.0 30.9 12.3 −2.9 −2.5 29.7 55.1 25.4 9.4 1.3 −1.0 9.1 −0.0
         Nov 41.2 26.1 6.6 15.1 6.1 35.0 84.7 49.7 21.9 3.6 −0.5 15.7 3.0
         Dec 47.7 57.5 24.1 −9.8 −17.4 17.7 −35.4 −53.0 4.5 13.1 0.1 −10.8 2.1
 German contribution (  5  billion) 2 
2001          Sep − 6.2 7.9 −4.6 −14.0 −10.9 25.4 23.8 −1.6 −0.0 0.6 −0.8 2.5 −2.3
         Oct − 0.2 4.6 3.3 −4.8 −6.0 9.6 7.6 −2.0 2.4 −0.8 −1.8 1.6 3.4
         Nov 15.7 6.2 −0.4 9.5 −0.9 30.5 15.3 −15.2 7.6 −1.6 −1.0 8.9 1.3
         Dec 18.9 22.1 10.8 −3.1 4.2 19.1 −18.0 −37.1 −0.8 1.4 0.1 −4.7 2.5
2002          Jan − 7.3 −8.7 1.5 1.3 1.0 −21.5 −5.2 16.3 2.8 1.9 −3.6 2.7 1.9
         Feb 1.8 0.1 −3.2 1.7 4.2 1.8 −0.3 −2.1 5.0 1.2 −1.0 3.2 1.6
         Mar − 1.0 −2.4 −9.5 1.4 3.0 7.6 10.6 3.0 13.3 3.5 −1.1 10.1 0.9
         Apr 11.0 9.9 5.8 1.1 5.2 −20.2 −3.0 17.2 −7.7 −1.3 −1.9 −2.1 −2.4
         May 6.6 3.7 −0.2 2.9 8.4 10.7 24.6 13.9 0.4 −0.4 −1.1 2.2 −0.4
         Jun −19.8 −12.6 −11.1 −7.2 −2.2 25.7 0.1 −25.6 −0.5 −0.7 −0.2 2.3 −1.9
         Jul 7.2 −7.4 −2.8 14.6 6.1 −16.5 −5.7 10.8 11.2 0.5 0.1 8.2 2.4
         Aug − 1.7 5.8 6.4 −7.5 2.2 11.0 6.4 −4.5 8.9 −0.2 0.1 5.2 3.7
         Sep 12.0 10.8 −0.7 1.2 4.1 15.4 31.0 15.6 1.5 −0.5 −0.5 2.0 0.5
         Oct 4.6 5.8 7.4 −1.2 −4.6 17.8 11.6 −6.1 0.1 1.9 −0.8 −0.3 −0.7
         Nov 9.4 4.6 4.3 4.8 3.5 19.2 32.0 12.8 5.8 4.1 −0.6 0.4 1.9
         Dec 5.7 17.8 10.8 −12.1 −8.5 2.2 −40.5 −42.7 −11.3 3.1 0.2 −17.0 2.4
 German contribution (DM billion) 2 
2001          Sep −12.0 15.4 −8.9 −27.4 −21.4 49.6 46.5 −3.1 −0.1 1.1 −1.5 4.8 −4.5
         Oct − 0.4 9.0 6.4 −9.4 −11.7 18.8 14.9 −3.8 4.7 −1.5 −3.6 3.1 6.7
         Nov 30.7 12.2 −0.7 18.6 −1.7 59.7 29.9 −29.8 14.9 −3.1 −1.9 17.3 2.6
         Dec 37.0 43.2 21.2 −6.1 8.2 37.3 −35.2 −72.5 −1.5 2.7 0.1 −9.2 4.8
2002          Jan −14.4 −16.9 2.9 2.6 2.0 −42.0 −10.1 31.9 5.6 3.7 −7.1 5.3 3.7
         Feb 3.5 0.2 −6.3 3.3 8.3 3.5 −0.6 −4.1 9.8 2.4 −2.0 6.3 3.1
         Mar − 2.0 −4.7 −18.6 2.7 5.9 14.9 20.8 5.9 26.1 6.8 −2.2 19.8 1.7
         Apr 21.4 19.3 11.4 2.2 10.3 −39.5 −5.8 33.7 −15.0 −2.5 −3.8 −4.1 −4.6
         May 13.0 7.2 −0.4 5.8 16.3 21.0 48.1 27.1 0.7 −0.7 −2.2 4.3 −0.7
         Jun −38.7 −24.7 −21.6 −14.0 −4.3 50.2 0.1 −50.1 −1.0 −1.4 −0.4 4.5 −3.7
         Jul 14.0 −14.5 −5.5 28.5 11.9 −32.3 −11.2 21.1 21.9 1.1 0.1 16.0 4.7
         Aug − 3.4 11.3 12.5 −14.7 4.3 21.5 12.6 −8.9 17.4 −0.3 0.3 10.2 7.3
         Sep 23.5 21.1 −1.4 2.4 8.0 30.1 60.6 30.5 3.0 −1.0 −0.9 3.9 1.0
         Oct 9.1 11.4 14.6 −2.3 −9.0 34.7 22.8 −12.0 0.2 3.8 −1.6 −0.7 −1.3
         Nov 18.4 8.9 8.5 9.5 6.9 37.5 62.5 25.1 11.4 8.1 −1.2 0.8 3.7
         Dec 11.2 34.9 21.1 −23.7 −16.7 4.2 −79.2 −83.5 −22.0 6.0 0.5 −33.3 4.7
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of liabilities of central governments. —6The German contributions to the
monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (table II.2); statistical breaks have been Eurosystem ’s monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as
eliminated from the flow figures. —1Source: ECB. —2Owing to changes in national monetary aggregates, and are therefore not comparable to the
the definitions of the items and differences in the range of reporting erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2 or M3. —7In Germany, bank debt
institutions, the figures are not comparable with those published for securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market
Germany up to end of 1998. —3Excluding MFIs portfolios; for the German paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were published in this
contribution: excluding German MFIs portfolios of securities issued by MFIs table together with money market fund certificates. —8From 2002 euro
in the euro area. —4After deduction of inter-MFI participations. —5For currency in circulation plus outstanding national banknotes and coins.
the European monetary union: including the counterparts of monetary Excluding euro-area MFIs ’cash in hand denominated in euro or in
8*II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
 
   
 
V. Other factors VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  6,7,11  
Money Stock M2 Money
of which market  paper
Intra- Money Stock M1 and debt
Eurosystem Deposits securitiesliability/ with an Deposits Money with
IV. De- claim agreed at agreed market maturities
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo- fund of up to    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac- 2 years    
central  gov- certificates
ernments Total  5 issue  12 Total Total Total lation  8 deposits  9 2 years  9 tions (net)  3,11 (net)  3,7,11   Period months  9,10 
European Monetary union (  5  billion) 1
 
− 5.4 8.4 − 43.5 46.3 57.7 −9.6 67.4 −18.2 6.8 − 5.1 3.2 − 0.9 2001         Sep
5.2 1.7 − 24.1 2.6 − 12.6 −14.2 1.6 3.3 11.8 9.5 11.5 0.5          Oct
− 2.9 29.6 − 54.3 48.7 32.0 −15.7 47.8 1.9 14.8 − 9.2 9.7 5.0          Nov
− 11.5 −86.2 − 99.7 116.4 63.8 −40.0 103.8 11.1 41.5 − 7.4 − 1.3 − 8.0          Dec
10.3 − 4.2 −− 9.4 − 26.2 − 40.6 6.8 − 47.3 − 6.7 21.1 − 2.3 19.5 − 0.4 2002         Jan
6.3 1.8 − 0.7 − 10.7 − 10.8 −6.2 − 4.6 − 4.0 4.1 4.9 10.4 − 3.9          Feb
1.1 1.1 − 39.1 27.1 11.4 14.0 − 2.6 12.3 3.4 8.4 3.3 0.3          Mar
0.5 −13.8 − 42.9 39.8 40.2 7.4 32.8 5.4 − 5.8 − 1.5 7.9 − 3.3          Apr
− 8.6 12.5 − 48.3 27.5 14.3 12.2 2.1 10.9 2.3 6.7 4.0 10.0          May
5.9 47.0 − 25.9 46.3 60.6 12.0 48.6 −20.6 6.3 − 6.1 − 7.2 − 7.0          Jun
− 2.9 −24.6 −− 13.5 − 15.9 − 22.9 11.0 − 33.8 4.2 2.8 − 0.7 12.0 − 8.9          Jul
− 10.8 − 9.3 − 13.3 − 7.9 − 27.3 4.4 − 31.7 13.5 6.0 7.7 12.3 1.2          Aug
1.8 3.5 − 45.2 41.8 62.5 5.6 56.9 −22.8 2.2 2.4 − 2.7 3.6          Sep
5.2 22.8 − 20.3 18.5 − 8.6 7.2 − 15.8 20.4 6.7 − 2.8 2.1 2.6          Oct
− 3.4 −15.1 − 72.8 65.0 61.2 7.5 53.8 − 7.3 11.1 − 4.4 14.7 − 2.6          Nov
− 11.3 −10.6 − 82.8 96.9 73.9 19.8 54.1 − 6.9 30.0 − 3.1 − 6.6 − 4.4          Dec
 German contribution (  5  billion) 2
− 2.9 6.9 − 15.3 14.4 14.5 −4.6 19.1 − 1.2 1.0 − 1.7 1.5 1.1 2001          Sep
− 1.6 4.1 − 4.5 0.4 − 3.3 −6.0 2.6 0.9 2.8 6.5 1.6 − 4.1          Oct
1.1 18.8 − 18.7 19.3 20.3 −7.5 27.8 − 3.8 2.8 − 5.3 1.1 3.7          Nov
− 7.4 27.1 − 19.2 13.2 − 9.5 −24.4 14.9 6.3 16.5 0.9 1.9 3.2          Dec
1.0 − 6.3 11.6 − 26.4 − 25.7 − 18.0 13 −4.1 − 13.8 −10.2 2.4 − 2.4 2.0 − 0.2 2002         Jan
− 0.7 − 4.9 − 3.4 4.2 − 0.1 3.9 4.5 − 0.6 − 3.5 − 0.5 1.0 0.8 2.4          Feb
− 0.0 − 8.6 3.4 1.9 1.5 − 0.0 2.6 − 2.6 1.6 − 0.1 0.2 − 0.1 0.4          Mar
− 1.9 − 1.4 1.3 1.8 0.2 12.4 3.1 9.3 − 4.8 − 7.3 − 0.3 0.2 1.7          Apr
0.7 − 0.6 2.9 16.9 12.6 8.7 2.5 6.2 4.5 − 0.6 1.3 − 0.0 3.0          May
0.5 − 5.1 1.0 11.0 15.7 16.4 3.3 13.1 0.3 − 1.0 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 3.7          Jun
− 1.1 −13.7 2.0 − 5.8 − 3.2 − 1.5 3.7 − 5.1 − 0.2 − 1.5 − 1.0 0.6 − 2.2          Jul
1.3 − 4.3 3.2 3.3 − 0.4 − 4.3 0.9 − 5.2 3.7 0.1 1.2 1.2 1.4          Aug
1.0 10.7 2.2 14.2 8.4 16.5 1.6 14.9 − 9.0 1.0 6.4 0.1 − 0.8          Sep
− 1.6 8.5 2.0 15.5 11.7 2.7 1.5 1.2 6.8 2.2 − 1.0 0.7 4.1          Oct
− 0.6 − 6.1 1.5 29.5 32.1 34.3 2.5 31.8 − 5.6 3.3 − 3.2 − 0.2 0.8          Nov
0.0 − 3.8 1.5 22.9 25.4 5.3 4.3 1.0 7.2 12.8 − 3.1 − 0.8 1.3          Dec
 German contribution (DM billion) 2
− 5.7 13.5 − 29.9 28.1 28.4 −9.0 37.4 − 2.3 2.0 − 3.4 3.0 2.2 2001          Sep
− 3.1 8.1 − 8.7 0.8 − 6.5 −11.6 5.2 1.7 5.5 12.7 3.1 − 7.9          Oct
2.2 36.8 − 36.6 37.7 39.8 −14.6 54.4 − 7.5 5.5 −10.4 2.2 7.2          Nov
− 14.5 52.9 − 37.5 25.9 − 18.6 −47.8 29.2 12.3 32.2 1.8 3.7 6.2          Dec
1.9 −12.3 22.7 − 51.6 − 50.3 − 35.1 13 −8.1 − 27.0 −19.9 4.7 − 4.7 3.9 − 0.4 2002          Jan
− 1.3 − 9.7 − 6.6 8.1 − 0.2 7.5 8.8 − 1.2 − 6.8 − 0.9 1.9 1.6 4.8          Feb
− 0.1 −16.8 6.6 3.8 2.9 − 0.1 5.0 − 5.1 3.1 − 0.1 0.3 − 0.3 0.9          Mar
− 3.7 − 2.8 2.5 3.5 0.4 24.2 6.1 18.1 − 9.4 − 14.4 − 0.6 0.3 3.3          Apr
1.4 − 1.2 5.6 33.1 24.6 16.9 4.8 12.1 8.8 − 1.2 2.6 − 0.0 5.9          May
0.9 −10.0 2.0 21.6 30.6 32.0 6.5 25.6 0.6 − 2.0 − 1.2 − 0.7 − 7.2          Jun
− 2.1 −26.8 4.0 − 11.3 − 6.3 − 2.9 7.2 − 10.1 − 0.4 − 2.9 − 2.0 1.2 − 4.3          Jul
2.6 − 8.4 6.2 6.5 − 0.8 − 8.4 1.8 − 10.1 7.3 0.2 2.3 2.4 2.6          Aug
2.0 21.0 4.2 27.7 16.5 32.2 3.1 29.1 −17.5 1.9 12.5 0.2 − 1.5          Sep
− 3.2 16.6 4.0 30.2 22.8 5.3 2.9 2.4 13.2 4.3 − 2.0 1.3 8.1          Oct
− 1.3 −12.0 2.8 57.7 62.7 67.1 4.9 62.2 −10.9 6.4 − 6.4 − 0.3 1.6          Nov
0.1 − 7.4 3.0 44.7 49.6 10.5 8.5 2.0 14.1 25.1 − 6.0 − 1.5 2.6          Dec
currencies of the euro area. From 2002 the German contribution contains deposits. —11Paper held by residents outside the euro area has been
the euro banknote volume put into circulation by the Bundesbank eliminated. —12For the German contribution: the difference between the
according to the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see footnote volume of euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the
4 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put amount disclosed according to the accounting regime chosen by theinto circulation by the Bundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total Eurosystem (see also footnote 4 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). —
the item "Intra-Eurosystem liability/claim related to banknote issue". — 13Includes statistically non-eliminated decrease of
 5 
11.6 billion (DM22.7
9For the European monetary union: including the monetary liabilities of billion) owing to the changed method of recording banknote circulation
central governments (Post Office, Treasury). —10In Germany, only savings (see also footnotes 8 and 12). 
9*II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
 
 
 
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and individuals Public authorities
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
assets or Debt other Debt euro-area Other
Period liabilities Total Total Advances securities  3 equities Total Advances securities  4 residents assets
 European monetary union (  5  billion) 1
 
2001          Sep 13,318.6 9,309.1 7,284.1 6,421.9 327.4 534.7 2,025.0 829.8 1,195.2 2,697.8 1,311.7
         Oct 13,424.2 9,339.1 7,325.2 6,451.6 329.9 543.7 2,014.0 827.2 1,186.8 2,742.5 1,342.5
         Nov 13,574.5 9,413.9 7,379.6 6,501.9 333.1 544.6 2,034.3 843.3 1,191.0 2,827.6 1,333.0         Dec 13,576.6 9,451.5 7,424.5 6,519.3 336.9 568.3 2,026.9 847.7 1,179.2 2,807.6 1,317.6
2002          Jan 13,667.3 9,495.6 7,444.5 6,534.4 341.9 568.2 2,051.1 844.8 1,206.3 2,829.4 1,342.3
         Feb 13,657.3 9,520.7 7,465.5 6,548.7 349.9 566.8 2,055.2 847.5 1,207.7 2,833.0 1,303.5         Mar 13,694.3 9,595.0 7,513.3 6,606.1 346.6 560.6 2,081.7 852.6 1,229.1 2,845.1 1,254.2
         Apr 13,680.1 9,612.6 7,551.0 6,641.2 342.9 566.9 2,061.7 832.4 1,229.2 2,826.3 1,241.2
         May 13,711.5 9,645.1 7,573.7 6,659.7 345.0 569.0 2,071.4 829.2 1,242.3 2,845.7 1,220.7         Jun 13,642.2 9,667.2 7,598.1 6,691.1 343.0 563.9 2,069.1 830.1 1,239.0 2,731.1 1,243.9
         Jul 13,679.0 9,653.0 7,587.1 6,692.6 345.3 549.2 2,065.9 828.5 1,237.4 2,756.5 1,269.5
         Aug 13,649.0 9,645.6 7,592.6 6,692.3 341.0 559.2 2,053.0 818.0 1,235.0 2,745.1 1,258.4         Sep 13,822.2 9,700.6 7,626.6 6,726.8 350.8 549.1 2,073.9 820.8 1,253.1 2,813.3 1,308.3
         Oct 13,863.8 9,726.2 7,657.3 6,742.7 353.1 561.5 2,068.8 820.4 1,248.5 2,863.5 1,274.1
         Nov 14,010.7 9,761.6 7,677.9 6,754.5 356.7 566.7 2,083.6 829.2 1,254.4 2,937.0 1,312.1         Dec 13,928.3 9,779.0 7,725.0 6,778.0 367.8 579.2 2,054.1 836.4 1,217.7 2,837.0 1,312.3
 German contribution (  5  billion) 2 
2001          Sep 4,323.3 3,288.4 2,575.0 2,269.7 63.7 241.6 713.3 495.0 218.3 808.1 226.8
         Oct 4,334.4 3,288.4 2,579.9 2,271.3 64.4 244.2 708.6 496.2 212.4 818.3 227.6
         Nov 4,336.2 3,303.9 2,587.2 2,279.0 64.8 243.4 716.6 506.6 210.0 837.9 194.5         Dec 4,328.2 3,321.6 2,608.3 2,289.4 66.0 252.9 713.3 499.3 213.9 821.2 185.4
2002          Jan 4,321.4 3,315.2 2,600.6 2,280.2 66.9 253.4 714.6 499.7 215.0 820.0 186.2
         Feb 4,322.9 3,316.3 2,600.1 2,283.4 65.1 251.6 716.2 497.1 219.1 822.1 184.4         Mar 4,334.0 3,315.0 2,597.6 2,290.4 67.2 240.1 717.4 495.4 221.9 829.6 189.3
         Apr 4,330.7 3,324.0 2,605.7 2,293.1 69.0 243.7 718.3 491.2 227.1 816.6 190.1
         May 4,341.9 3,327.7 2,606.9 2,294.6 69.2 243.2 720.8 485.6 235.2 827.5 186.7         Jun 4,291.6 3,309.3 2,596.0 2,294.8 69.7 231.6 713.3 480.4 232.8 800.0 182.3
         Jul 4,303.6 3,317.5 2,589.5 2,291.3 69.8 228.4 728.0 489.0 239.0 801.2 184.9
         Aug 4,307.0 3,315.3 2,594.9 2,289.8 67.1 238.0 720.4 479.8 240.6 810.2 181.5         Sep 4,355.6 3,327.5 2,605.3 2,301.6 66.5 237.3 722.2 477.0 245.2 841.9 186.1
         Oct 4,370.5 3,332.3 2,611.3 2,299.8 69.8 241.7 721.0 480.4 240.6 850.3 188.0
         Nov 4,413.9 3,341.1 2,615.3 2,299.5 69.6 246.2 725.8 481.7 244.1 879.3 193.5         Dec 4,359.8 3,344.9 2,631.6 2,305.1 66.7 259.8 713.3 477.9 235.4 823.8 191.1
 German contribution (DM billion) 2 
2001          Sep 8,455.7 6,431.5 5,036.3 4,439.2 124.5 472.6 1,395.2 968.1 427.0 1,580.6 443.6
         Oct 8,477.3 6,431.6 5,045.8 4,442.3 126.0 477.5 1,385.8 970.5 415.3 1,600.5 445.1
         Nov 8,481.0 6,461.8 5,060.2 4,457.3 126.7 476.1 1,401.6 990.9 410.7 1,638.7 380.5         Dec 8,465.3 6,496.5 5,101.4 4,477.7 129.1 494.7 1,395.0 976.6 418.4 1,606.2 362.6
2002          Jan 8,451.9 6,484.0 5,086.3 4,459.7 130.9 495.7 1,397.7 977.3 420.4 1,603.7 364.2
         Feb 8,454.8 6,486.2 5,085.4 4,465.9 127.4 492.1 1,400.8 972.2 428.6 1,607.8 360.7         Mar 8,476.5 6,483.6 5,080.5 4,479.6 131.4 469.5 1,403.1 969.0 434.1 1,622.6 370.3
         Apr 8,470.2 6,501.2 5,096.3 4,484.9 134.9 476.6 1,404.8 960.6 444.2 1,597.2 371.8
         May 8,492.0 6,508.4 5,098.7 4,487.8 135.3 475.6 1,409.8 949.7 460.0 1,618.4 365.2         Jun 8,393.6 6,472.4 5,077.4 4,488.2 136.2 452.9 1,395.0 939.6 455.4 1,564.7 356.6
         Jul 8,417.2 6,488.5 5,064.7 4,481.5 136.6 446.6 1,423.8 956.4 467.4 1,567.0 361.7
         Aug 8,423.8 6,484.3 5,075.2 4,478.5 131.2 465.5 1,409.0 938.4 470.6 1,584.5 355.0         Sep 8,518.8 6,508.1 5,095.6 4,501.5 130.0 464.1 1,412.5 932.9 479.7 1,646.6 364.0
         Oct 8,548.0 6,517.3 5,107.2 4,497.9 136.5 472.7 1,410.1 939.5 470.6 1,663.0 367.6
         Nov 8,632.8 6,534.6 5,115.1 4,497.3 136.2 481.6 1,419.5 942.1 477.4 1,719.7 378.5         Dec 8,526.9 6,542.1 5,147.0 4,508.3 130.5 508.2 1,395.2 934.7 460.4 1,611.1 373.7
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building Germany up to the end of 1998. —3Including money market paper of
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank enterprises. —4Including Treasury bills and other money market paper of
and central banks (the Eurosystem). —1Source: ECB. —2Owing to changes public authorities. —5From 2002 euro currency in circulation plus
in the definitions of the items and differences in the range of reporting outstanding national banknotes and coins. Excluding MFIs ‘cash in hand (in
institutions, the figures are not comparable with those published for euro). From 2002 the German contribution contains the euro banknote
10*II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
 
   
 
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and individuals
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  7 
over
Currency 1 year
in of which up to up to over up to over
Total in euro  6 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months   Period circulation  5 
European monetary union (  5  billion) 1
 
309.6 5,475.9 5,132.4 5,170.9 1,680.4 933.4 81.5 1,136.0 1,221.6 118.0 2001          Sep
295.5 5,494.4 5,144.7 5,183.4 1,678.9 938.6 81.1 1,136.1 1,232.4 116.4          Oct
279.7 5,554.1 5,200.8 5,249.5 1,728.6 944.2 79.9 1,134.9 1,246.6 115.3          Nov239.7 5,699.4 5,360.0 5,403.1 1,826.5 952.3 80.0 1,142.4 1,286.5 115.3          Dec
246.5 5,670.7 5,318.9 5,363.4 1,773.6 948.3 79.5 1,146.2 1,304.0 111.8 2002          Jan
240.3 5,671.9 5,311.3 5,359.8 1,768.1 946.9 78.7 1,148.1 1,307.2 110.8          Feb
254.3 5,686.3 5,327.3 5,376.5 1,769.8 954.6 80.4 1,151.5 1,310.6 109.5          Mar
261.7 5,711.7 5,355.4 5,401.0 1,797.8 959.7 81.0 1,150.8 1,304.2 107.5          Apr
273.9 5,714.0 5,366.7 5,409.7 1,801.1 961.3 81.5 1,153.0 1,306.4 106.4          May285.8 5,749.6 5,407.9 5,438.3 1,844.4 938.5 81.5 1,155.0 1,312.7 106.2          Jun
296.8 5,726.2 5,384.9 5,422.5 1,816.1 948.3 82.6 1,154.1 1,315.4 106.2          Jul
301.2 5,688.8 5,358.6 5,396.2 1,783.7 959.7 83.3 1,142.5 1,320.6 106.4          Aug306.7 5,731.0 5,399.2 5,434.7 1,837.3 941.0 82.9 1,143.6 1,323.2 106.8          Sep
313.9 5,746.0 5,410.6 5,446.2 1,819.2 964.2 82.8 1,144.9 1,329.4 105.8          Oct
321.4 5,801.0 5,466.9 5,504.6 1,871.3 956.8 82.4 1,148.3 1,340.5 105.3          Nov341.2 5,877.7 5,564.0 5,588.9 1,924.4 948.8 81.0 1,160.5 1,368.9 105.3          Dec
 German contribution (  5  billion) 2
105.8 2,075.2 1,979.0 1,939.6 472.7 240.0 18.3 650.5 441.9 116.2 2001          Sep
99.9 2,077.6 1,982.9 1,945.0 475.5 241.8 18.6 650.0 444.8 114.4          Oct
92.4 2,103.2 2,006.3 1,973.0 504.0 240.7 18.7 648.7 447.5 113.5          Nov68.0 2,135.1 2,048.0 2,010.0 519.0 244.7 18.6 650.2 463.9 113.6          Dec
8 63.8 2,113.2 2,024.0 1,989.9 506.4 236.6 18.5 652.0 466.4 110.0 2002          Jan
68.3 2,108.1 2,019.4 1,986.2 505.6 235.1 17.1 653.5 465.9 109.0          Feb70.9 2,109.1 2,021.9 1,989.1 504.1 237.3 17.1 656.8 465.9 107.8          Mar
74.0 2,100.4 2,015.8 1,984.7 513.9 234.0 17.1 655.2 458.6 105.9          Apr
76.5 2,107.7 2,023.6 1,987.3 519.1 234.2 17.1 654.1 457.9 104.8          May79.8 2,119.3 2,035.6 1,997.1 530.9 234.4 17.3 653.0 457.0 104.6          Jun
83.4 2,112.5 2,030.5 1,993.2 525.8 235.8 17.6 653.9 455.5 104.6          Jul
84.3 2,098.8 2,018.1 1,979.2 521.5 239.6 17.6 640.1 455.6 104.8          Aug85.9 2,105.7 2,023.7 1,987.6 536.6 233.0 17.5 639.6 456.5 104.3          Sep
87.4 2,115.1 2,035.2 2,003.0 538.0 243.7 17.5 641.5 458.8 103.5          Oct
89.9 2,147.3 2,066.9 2,035.6 569.5 237.6 17.9 645.7 462.0 102.9          Nov89.4 2,170.6 2,092.0 2,054.1 567.4 242.7 18.2 648.0 474.8 103.1          Dec
 German contribution (DM billion) 2
207.0 4,058.8 3,870.7 3,793.6 924.5 469.4 35.9 1,272.2 864.3 227.3 2001          Sep
195.4 4,063.4 3,878.2 3,804.2 929.9 472.9 36.3 1,271.3 869.9 223.8          Oct180.7 4,113.6 3,924.1 3,858.9 985.8 470.7 36.5 1,268.7 875.2 222.0          Nov132.9 4,175.9 4,005.5 3,931.2 1,015.2 478.6 36.4 1,271.6 907.4 222.1          Dec
8 124.8 4,133.1 3,958.6 3,891.8 990.5 462.7 36.2 1,275.2 912.2 215.1 2002          Jan
133.6 4,123.1 3,949.5 3,884.6 988.8 459.9 33.5 1,278.1 911.3 213.1          Feb138.7 4,125.0 3,954.6 3,890.3 986.0 464.2 33.5 1,284.6 911.3 210.9          Mar
144.7 4,108.0 3,942.5 3,881.8 1,005.1 457.6 33.5 1,281.5 897.0 207.1          Apr
149.6 4,122.4 3,957.8 3,886.7 1,015.2 458.1 33.5 1,279.4 895.7 204.9          May156.0 4,145.0 3,981.3 3,906.0 1,038.3 458.5 33.8 1,277.2 893.8 204.5          Jun
163.2 4,131.7 3,971.2 3,898.4 1,028.4 461.2 34.4 1,279.0 890.9 204.6          Jul
165.0 4,105.0 3,947.1 3,871.0 1,020.0 468.6 34.5 1,252.0 891.0 204.9          Aug168.1 4,118.3 3,958.0 3,887.3 1,049.4 455.7 34.3 1,251.0 892.9 204.0          Sep
170.9 4,136.7 3,980.5 3,917.6 1,052.2 476.7 34.3 1,254.7 897.2 202.4          Oct
175.8 4,199.8 4,042.5 3,981.3 1,113.8 464.7 35.1 1,262.9 903.6 201.3          Nov174.9 4,245.3 4,091.6 4,017.6 1,109.7 474.6 35.6 1,267.4 928.6 201.7          Dec
volume put into circulation by the Bundesbank according to the accounting liability items"). —6Excluding central governments deposits. —7In
regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see footnote 4 on banknote circulation in Germany, only saving deposits. —8Includes decrease of
 5 
11.6 billion
Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into circulation by the (DM22.7 billion) owing to the changed method of recording banknote
Bundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the item circulation (see also footnote 5). "Intra-Eurosystem liability/claim related to banknote issue" (see "Other
11*II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (cont ’d)*
 
 
 
Liabilities (cont ’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont ’d)  
 
Public authorities Repo transactions Debt securitieswith counterparties
Other public authorities in the euro area
With agreed At agreedmaturities of notice of  
3 
Money
over of which market of which
Central 1 year Enterprises fund denom-govern- up to up to over up to over and inated certificates
Period ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total individuals (net)  
4,6 Total in euro
 European monetary union (  5  billion) 1
 
2001          Sep 149.4 155.5 69.5 54.4 1.6 27.0 2.5 0.6 225.7 220.2 381.2 1,752.3 1,396.0
         Oct 154.7 156.3 71.4 53.4 1.6 26.8 2.5 0.5 235.1 227.2 392.3 1,766.5 1,399.2
         Nov 151.8 152.8 69.5 51.9 1.6 26.7 2.6 0.5 225.9 218.3 400.8 1,758.8 1,372.7         Dec 140.3 156.0 69.7 54.9 1.7 26.7 2.6 0.5 218.5 214.6 398.0 1,760.1 1,376.4
2002          Jan 150.0 157.3 74.1 51.4 1.7 27.0 2.5 0.5 216.2 211.4 416.6 1,775.4 1,375.2
         Feb 156.3 155.7 75.1 49.4 1.7 26.6 2.5 0.5 221.1 215.8 427.0 1,778.3 1,380.2         Mar 157.5 152.3 69.3 51.8 1.6 26.7 2.5 0.5 229.6 224.9 431.2 1,793.8 1,389.4
         Apr 158.0 152.7 71.9 50.0 1.4 26.6 2.5 0.4 228.1 223.8 437.5 1,785.7 1,382.9
         May 149.4 154.8 68.8 55.2 1.4 26.6 2.4 0.4 234.8 230.7 442.6 1,805.2 1,392.3         Jun 155.3 156.0 71.6 53.3 1.5 26.7 2.4 0.4 229.6 225.9 439.2 1,788.7 1,392.4
         Jul 152.4 151.3 69.3 51.4 1.5 26.3 2.4 0.4 228.8 224.9 450.3 1,796.2 1,398.4
         Aug 141.7 150.8 67.8 52.4 1.5 26.3 2.4 0.4 236.5 231.9 463.4 1,814.2 1,415.6         Sep 147.2 149.1 70.7 48.4 1.3 25.9 2.4 0.4 238.3 234.4 460.4 1,812.7 1,416.2
         Oct 152.4 147.4 72.2 45.3 1.3 25.6 2.5 0.4 235.6 232.1 462.7 1,823.0 1,414.7
         Nov 149.0 147.4 71.9 45.6 1.3 25.6 2.5 0.4 229.6 225.8 477.1 1,830.8 1,421.8         Dec 137.7 151.1 75.8 45.1 1.4 25.6 2.8 0.4 226.5 224.0 470.1 1,811.5 1,416.2
 German contribution (  5  billion) 2
2001          Sep 57.0 78.5 15.4 36.9 1.0 23.0 1.7 0.6 2.8 2.8 28.0 815.5 709.0
         Oct 55.4 77.1 15.3 35.8 1.0 22.8 1.7 0.5 9.4 9.4 29.6 813.4 707.5
         Nov 56.6 73.6 14.7 33.0 1.0 22.7 1.7 0.5 4.0 4.0 30.7 792.9 678.1         Dec 49.1 75.9 14.6 35.2 1.2 22.7 1.7 0.5 4.9 4.9 32.6 791.9 676.0
2002          Jan 50.1 73.3 13.6 33.3 1.2 23.0 1.7 0.5 2.5 2.5 34.5 795.7 672.2
         Feb 49.4 72.5 13.8 32.6 1.2 22.7 1.7 0.5 3.5 3.5 35.4 801.2 678.8         Mar 49.4 70.6 12.6 32.0 1.2 22.8 1.6 0.5 3.7 3.7 35.8 811.6 687.2
         Apr 47.5 68.2 11.8 30.6 1.0 22.7 1.6 0.4 3.4 3.4 35.9 808.5 685.1
         May 48.2 72.3 12.4 34.2 1.0 22.7 1.6 0.4 4.7 4.7 35.4 810.5 683.8         Jun 48.7 73.5 13.8 34.1 1.1 22.6 1.6 0.4 4.1 4.1 35.0 805.1 684.0
         Jul 47.6 71.7 13.9 32.3 1.0 22.5 1.5 0.4 3.1 3.1 35.6 813.3 687.2
         Aug 48.9 70.7 13.0 32.2 1.0 22.6 1.6 0.4 4.3 4.3 37.1 836.1 702.8         Sep 49.9 68.2 13.1 30.0 0.9 22.2 1.6 0.4 10.7 10.7 37.0 837.1 702.4
         Oct 48.3 63.7 12.8 26.0 0.9 22.0 1.6 0.4 9.6 9.6 37.6 840.5 695.4
         Nov 47.7 64.1 13.1 26.2 0.9 21.9 1.6 0.4 6.4 6.4 37.5 840.8 691.9         Dec 47.7 68.7 15.7 27.7 1.0 22.2 1.6 0.4 3.3 3.3 36.8 820.4 677.2
 German contribution (DM billion) 2
2001          Sep 111.5 153.6 30.1 72.1 2.0 45.0 3.3 1.1 5.6 5.6 54.7 1,595.1 1,386.7
         Oct 108.4 150.8 30.0 70.0 2.0 44.5 3.3 1.0 18.3 18.3 57.8 1,590.9 1,383.8
         Nov 110.6 144.0 28.7 64.5 2.0 44.4 3.4 1.0 7.9 7.9 60.0 1,550.7 1,326.2         Dec 96.1 148.5 28.6 68.9 2.3 44.4 3.4 1.0 9.7 9.6 63.7 1,548.9 1,322.2
2002          Jan 98.0 143.3 26.6 65.1 2.4 45.0 3.3 0.9 5.0 5.0 67.6 1,556.3 1,314.8
         Feb 96.7 141.8 27.0 63.8 2.4 44.4 3.3 0.9 6.9 6.9 69.2 1,567.0 1,327.7         Mar 96.6 138.1 24.6 62.6 2.4 44.5 3.2 0.9 7.2 7.2 70.0 1,587.3 1,344.1
         Apr 92.9 133.3 23.1 59.9 2.0 44.4 3.1 0.9 6.6 6.6 70.2 1,581.3 1,339.9
         May 94.3 141.4 24.2 66.8 2.0 44.4 3.1 0.9 9.2 9.2 69.3 1,585.2 1,337.4         Jun 95.2 143.8 26.9 66.7 2.1 44.2 3.0 0.9 8.1 8.1 68.5 1,574.7 1,337.8
         Jul 93.1 140.3 27.2 63.2 2.0 44.1 3.0 0.8 6.1 6.1 69.7 1,590.6 1,344.1
         Aug 95.7 138.3 25.3 62.9 2.0 44.1 3.1 0.8 8.3 8.3 72.5 1,635.3 1,374.5         Sep 97.7 133.3 25.5 58.7 1.8 43.4 3.1 0.8 20.8 20.8 72.3 1,637.3 1,373.7
         Oct 94.5 124.6 25.1 50.9 1.7 43.0 3.0 0.8 18.9 18.9 73.6 1,643.9 1,360.2
         Nov 93.2 125.3 25.7 51.2 1.7 42.8 3.1 0.8 12.5 12.5 73.3 1,644.6 1,353.3         Dec 93.3 134.4 30.8 54.2 1.9 43.5 3.2 0.8 6.5 6.5 72.0 1,604.6 1,324.5
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building published in this table together with money market fund certificates. —
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank 6Paper held by residents outside the euro area has been eliminated. —
and central banks (the Eurosystem). —1Source: ECB. —2Owing to changes 7Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued. —8After deduction of
in the definitions of the items and differences in the range of reporting Inter-MFI participations. —9The German contributions to the Eurosystem ’s
institutions, the figures are not comparable with those published for monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national
Germany up to the end of 1998. —3In Germany: only savings deposits. — monetary aggregates, and are therefore not comparable to the erstwhile
4Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the German contribution: excluding German money stocks M1, M2 or M3. —10Currency in circulation (from
German MFIs portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro area. —5In 2002 euro currency in circulation plus outstanding national banknotes and
Germany, bank debt securities with maturities of up to one year are classed coins), overnight deposits (excluding central governments ’deposits), and
as money market paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were (for EMU) central governments ’overnight monetary liabilities,
12*II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
 
   
 
 Memo item
 Other liability items Monetary aggregates  9 
 
issued (net)  4 
With maturities of
of which Monetary
Intra- liabilitiesEurosystem- of central
Liabilities liability/ govern-
over to non- Excess claim Monetary ments1 year euro-area Capital of related to capital (Post,   
up to up to over residents and inter-MFI banknote formation Office,1 year  
5,6 2 years  6 2 years 7 reseves  8 liabilities Total issue  15 M1 10 M2 11 M3 6,12 13   Period Treasury)  14 
European monetary union (  5  billion) 1
 
94.9 52.7 1,604.7 2,643.4 970.4 18.7 1,541.4 − 2,124.7 4,495.3 5,249.9 3,856.5 140.8 2001          Sep
98.3 51.1 1,617.0 2,665.2 981.1 5.5 1,588.7 − 2,111.6 4,497.9 5,274.7 3,877.9 142.5          Oct
97.4 54.9 1,606.6 2,729.9 982.6 10.4 1,632.4 − 2,144.3 4,548.2 5,327.1 3,866.6 143.7          Nov
89.0 57.6 1,613.6 2,723.0 995.2 − 8.5 1,551.8 − 2,207.9 4,664.6 5,427.0 3,893.7 150.7          Dec
96.6 45.9 1,632.9 2,759.4 1,007.6 2.0 1,573.6 − 2,168.4 4,639.7 5,414.4 3,925.9 158.0 2002          Jan
90.2 49.3 1,638.8 2,767.9 1,011.5 1.1 1,538.8 − 2,157.4 4,628.7 5,415.5 3,936.2 158.7          Feb
89.4 48.6 1,655.8 2,791.2 1,010.6 1.3 1,496.6 − 2,168.5 4,654.9 5,453.0 3,954.6 159.8          Mar
84.5 51.0 1,650.2 2,774.0 1,004.5 − 8.9 1,486.6 − 2,207.2 4,691.2 5,491.5 3,940.0 161.0          Apr
93.8 50.8 1,660.5 2,755.0 1,008.7 − 7.3 1,485.2 − 2,219.3 4,712.8 5,534.3 3,955.6 160.8          May
84.8 48.8 1,655.2 2,619.9 985.7 10.7 1,533.6 − 2,277.9 4,752.8 5,554.4 3,929.2 161.0          Jun
77.5 48.6 1,670.1 2,648.1 993.4 − 2.9 1,542.7 − 2,256.1 4,742.8 5,547.4 3,950.4 159.2          Jul
80.1 47.0 1,687.0 2,616.3 1,004.2 − 0.2 1,525.4 − 2,228.6 4,734.3 5,560.8 3,966.9 161.7          Aug
84.0 47.9 1,680.8 2,674.7 1,015.7 − 5.0 1,588.0 − 2,291.0 4,775.7 5,605.8 3,973.2 161.8          Sep
85.9 48.4 1,688.7 2,697.8 1,013.9 3.4 1,568.2 − 2,282.3 4,793.5 5,625.5 3,979.2 162.7          Oct
83.3 48.6 1,698.9 2,737.8 1,016.0 − 4.0 1,601.5 − 2,342.3 4,857.3 5,695.3 3,994.6 163.5          Nov
79.1 48.6 1,683.8 2,628.6 997.0 2.9 1,573.3 − 2,424.3 4,959.1 5,782.7 3,972.8 169.7          Dec
 German contribution (  5  billion) 2
19.4 42.6 753.5 746.5 259.6 − 39.5 329.2 − 593.9 1,333.8 1,426.6 1,803.4 −2001          Sep
19.1 39.6 754.6 747.4 263.0 − 37.5 331.6 − 590.7 1,334.3 1,432.0 1,805.4 −         Oct
16.9 42.4 733.6 736.7 264.4 − 21.8 333.7 − 611.1 1,353.7 1,447.7 1,783.4 −         Nov
17.9 44.5 729.5 702.1 265.3 10.6 317.7 − 601.6 1,367.0 1,466.9 1,781.7 −         Dec
22.4 35.1 738.2 724.3 267.2 − 0.1 320.2 11.6 583.8 1,341.5 1,436.1 1,790.8 −2002          Jan
22.3 37.6 741.2 721.4 272.1 − 0.6 313.4 8.2 587.7 1,341.4 1,440.2 1,798.9 −         Feb
22.7 37.7 751.2 721.6 272.4 − 2.7 311.6 11.6 587.6 1,342.8 1,442.6 1,811.4 −         Mar
22.9 38.7 746.9 728.3 270.0 − 1.1 311.4 12.9 599.7 1,342.7 1,441.9 1,801.1 −         Apr
25.2 39.4 745.9 730.3 269.8 − 8.2 315.1 15.7 607.9 1,354.0 1,458.7 1,797.8 −         May
23.1 38.1 743.9 687.4 265.5 − 24.8 320.1 16.7 624.4 1,369.8 1,470.1 1,790.1 −         Jun
21.9 38.7 752.7 705.4 267.7 − 39.0 321.5 18.8 623.1 1,366.9 1,466.2 1,801.9 −         Jul
24.5 37.5 774.2 698.5 272.4 − 50.5 326.0 22.0 618.8 1,366.4 1,469.6 1,814.5 −         Aug
24.4 36.8 775.9 713.6 274.4 − 48.6 339.8 24.1 635.6 1,375.1 1,483.9 1,816.9 −         Sep
28.2 37.1 775.2 706.9 272.8 − 42.1 342.7 26.2 638.2 1,386.7 1,499.3 1,815.4 −         Oct
28.1 38.1 774.7 717.4 274.2 − 47.5 347.9 27.6 672.5 1,418.7 1,528.6 1,819.8 −         Nov
27.8 38.7 753.9 661.9 277.7 − 56.9 356.5 29.1 672.6 1,438.6 1,545.2 1,805.4 −         Dec
 German contribution (DM billion) 2
37.9 83.4 1,473.8 1,460.1 507.8 − 77.2 643.9 − 1,161.6 2,608.7 2,790.2 3,527.2 −2001          Sep
37.4 77.5 1,475.9 1,461.8 514.5 − 73.4 648.6 − 1,155.3 2,609.6 2,800.7 3,531.1 −         Oct
33.0 82.9 1,434.8 1,440.8 517.2 − 42.6 652.7 − 1,195.3 2,647.6 2,831.4 3,488.0 −         Nov
35.1 87.0 1,426.8 1,373.1 518.9 20.8 621.4 − 1,176.7 2,673.6 2,869.1 3,484.7 −         Dec
43.9 68.6 1,443.8 1,416.6 522.6 − 0.3 626.3 22.7 1,141.9 2,623.7 2,808.8 3,502.5 −2002          Jan
43.7 73.6 1,449.7 1,411.0 532.1 − 1.1 613.0 16.1 1,149.4 2,623.5 2,816.9 3,518.3 −         Feb
44.5 73.6 1,469.2 1,411.4 532.8 − 5.3 609.5 22.7 1,149.2 2,626.3 2,821.6 3,542.8 −         Mar
44.8 75.7 1,460.8 1,424.5 528.0 − 2.1 609.0 25.2 1,172.9 2,626.0 2,820.1 3,522.7 −         Apr
49.3 77.0 1,458.9 1,428.3 527.7 − 16.1 616.4 30.7 1,189.0 2,648.2 2,853.0 3,516.1 −         May
45.1 74.6 1,455.0 1,344.4 519.3 − 48.5 626.1 32.8 1,221.2 2,679.1 2,875.4 3,501.1 −         Jun
42.9 75.6 1,472.1 1,379.6 523.6 − 76.2 628.9 36.7 1,218.7 2,673.3 2,867.6 3,524.2 −         Jul
47.8 73.3 1,514.2 1,366.1 532.8 − 98.8 637.6 43.0 1,210.3 2,672.4 2,874.3 3,548.9 −         Aug
47.7 71.9 1,517.6 1,395.7 536.6 − 95.0 664.6 47.2 1,243.0 2,689.4 2,902.2 3,553.5 −         Sep
55.2 72.6 1,516.2 1,382.6 533.5 − 82.4 670.2 51.2 1,248.2 2,712.1 2,932.4 3,550.7 −         Oct
54.9 74.4 1,515.2 1,403.0 536.3 − 92.9 680.4 54.0 1,315.3 2,774.6 2,989.8 3,559.3 −         Nov
54.4 75.7 1,474.5 1,294.5 543.2 −111.3 697.3 57.0 1,315.5 2,813.6 3,022.2 3,531.0 −         Dec
which are not included in the consolidated balance sheet. From 2002 the governments ’monetary liabilities with such maturities. —12M2 plus repo
German contribution contains the euro banknote volume put into transactions, money market fund certificates, money market paper and debt
circulation by the Bundesbank according to the accounting regime chosen securities up to 2 years. —13Deposits with agreed maturities of over 2
by the Eurosystem (see footnote 4 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). years and at agreed notice of over 3 months, debt securities with maturitiesThe volume of currency actually put into circulation by the Bundesbank can of over 2 years, capital and reserves. —14Non-existent in Germany. —
be calculated by adding to this total the item "Intra-Eurosystem 15For the German contibution: the difference between the volume of euro
liability/claim related to banknote issue". —11M1 plus deposits with banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed
agreed maturities of up to 2 years and at agreed notice of up to 3 months according to the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also(excluding central governments ’deposits) and (for EMU) central footnote 4 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 
13*II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  European  monetary  union
  
 3  Banking system ’s liquidity position  * 
Stocks
  
 5  billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions ‘
current
account
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (includingmaintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Baseperiod currency operations operations facility operations facility operations deposits (net)  
4 reserves)  5 money  6 circulation  3 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2000          Jul 380.8 157.9 59.9 0.4 − 0.5 − 357.0 50.4 76.8 114.2 471.7
         Aug 382.0 163.1 55.4 0.1 − 0.3 − 359.2 48.8 80.0 112.4 471.9
         Sep 381.6 173.1 51.1 0.3 − 0.2 − 354.8 56.6 81.2 113.3 468.3
         Oct 396.3 176.5 45.7 0.5 − 0.2 − 354.5 47.4 102.5 114.4 469.1
         Nov 398.6 183.7 45.0 0.2 − 0.2 − 352.7 49.8 109.2 115.7 468.6
         Dec 394.4 210.4 45.0 0.4 − 0.2 − 360.4 61.1 111.1 117.4 478.0
2001          Jan  7 383.7 205.3 45.0 0.5 − 0.6 − 368.3 52.2 94.2 119.1 488.0
         Feb 377.9 188.9 49.8 2.6 − 0.4 − 354.8 57.0 86.3 120.7 476.0
         Mar 375.6 185.2 54.1 0.4 − 0.5 − 353.0 53.0 87.7 121.0 474.5
         Apr 382.1 172.4 58.4 2.2 − 0.5 − 354.6 49.5 89.1 121.4 476.4
         May 384.4 144.0 59.1 0.4 17.0 0.6 − 352.7 39.4 87.5 124.8 478.1
         Jun 385.0 161.7 59.1 0.2 − 0.4 − 351.1 41.3 87.5 125.7 477.3
         Jul 397.6 161.9 59.9 0.2 − 0.4 − 350.8 42.5 98.8 127.1 478.3
         Aug 402.1 164.0 60.0 0.1 − 0.2 − 347.6 48.8 101.8 127.8 475.6
         Sep 401.3 147.1 60.0 0.5 3.5 0.4 − 335.4 45.2 105.4 126.1 461.9
         Oct 389.9 136.7 60.0 1.1 − 0.1 − 325.2 43.6 93.6 125.1 450.4
         Nov 385.0 132.3 60.0 0.2 − 0.3 − 311.3 46.1 93.1 126.7 438.3
         Dec 383.7 122.5 60.0 0.5 12.4 0.8 − 298.0 43.5 109.3 127.4 426.2
2002          Jan 385.2 118.5 60.0 0.4 3.7 0.6 − 344.3 38.3 54.2 130.4 475.2
         Feb 386.0 127.3 60.0 0.2 − 0.1 − 306.2 49.6 85.2 132.6 438.8
         Mar 386.7 114.6 60.0 0.2 − 0.1 − 283.3 54.2 91.8 132.1 415.6
         Apr 395.4 112.7 60.0 0.4 − 0.2 − 285.9 55.9 95.3 131.2 417.3
         May 397.7 110.6 60.0 0.1 − 0.3 − 293.7 49.2 93.5 131.7 425.6
         Jun 396.2 112.6 60.0 0.5 − 0.4 − 300.8 45.1 91.2 131.8 433.0
         Jul 369.1 130.4 60.0 0.2 − 0.2 − 313.4 54.4 60.3 131.4 445.0
         Aug 360.0 139.2 55.2 0.1 − 0.1 − 322.7 50.9 50.8 129.9 452.8
         Sep 362.3 140.9 50.8 0.1 − 0.2 − 323.6 49.1 51.7 129.6 453.4
         Oct 370.0 146.1 45.3 0.1 − 0.1 − 329.2 45.6 58.2 128.3 457.6
         Nov 372.1 147.5 45.0 0.1 − 0.1 − 334.0 42.8 58.6 129.3 463.4
         Dec 371.5 168.1 45.0 1.1 2.0 0.2 − 350.7 51.7 55.5 129.5 480.5
2003          Jan 360.9 176.3 45.0 0.5 − 0.3 − 353.9 43.7 53.3 131.6 485.8
Deutsche Bundesbank
2000          Jul 93.4 67.9 33.3 0.2 − 0.4 − 131.8 0.1 27.6 35.1 167.2
         Aug 93.0 71.6 34.9 0.1 − 0.1 − 131.9 0.1 33.1 34.5 166.5
         Sep 92.6 81.9 33.8 0.3 − 0.1 − 131.4 0.1 42.6 34.4 165.9
         Oct 97.0 87.2 30.7 0.3 − 0.1 − 131.1 0.1 49.5 34.5 165.7
         Nov 98.2 99.1 30.7 0.2 − 0.1 − 130.1 0.1 63.0 34.9 165.1
         Dec 97.6 103.5 31.1 0.2 − 0.1 − 132.0 0.1 65.0 35.2 167.4
2001          Jan 93.0 103.1 28.4 0.3 − 0.3 − 131.2 0.1 57.7 35.6 167.1
         Feb 90.3 93.2 28.3 1.3 − 0.2 − 126.7 0.1 50.0 36.2 163.1
         Mar 89.1 87.6 33.2 0.2 − 0.4 − 126.2 0.1 47.6 35.9 162.4
         Apr 90.1 84.5 37.4 1.5 − 0.2 − 126.2 0.1 50.7 36.4 162.8
         May 90.0 67.4 37.8 0.2 7.5 0.5 − 124.8 0.1 47.6 37.4 162.7
         Jun 89.7 79.9 37.5 0.1 − 0.3 − 123.6 0.1 45.7 37.5 161.4
         Jul 92.8 85.4 37.0 0.1 − 0.3 − 121.8 0.1 55.5 37.7 159.7
         Aug 94.2 77.0 38.2 0.1 − 0.2 − 119.3 0.1 52.0 37.8 157.3
         Sep 93.7 73.3 38.9 0.1 1.3 0.1 − 115.4 0.1 54.6 37.1 152.7
         Oct 91.3 66.3 40.2 0.5 − 0.1 − 110.8 0.1 50.1 37.3 148.2
         Nov 89.8 68.2 38.5 0.2 − 0.2 − 104.6 0.1 53.8 38.0 142.9
         Dec 89.4 62.4 40.1 0.2 5.0 0.5 − 96.6 0.1 67.1 37.8 134.9
2002          Jan 89.9 63.3 41.1 0.3 1.4 0.3 − 91.7 0.1 64.9 39.0 131.0
         Feb 89.9 63.3 42.4 0.1 − 0.0 − 78.5 0.1 78.6 38.6 117.2
         Mar 90.0 58.5 40.7 0.2 − 0.1 − 79.7 0.1 71.2 38.3 118.1
         Apr 92.3 57.6 40.4 0.3 − 0.2 − 80.8 0.1 71.8 37.9 118.8
         May 92.3 53.1 39.7 0.1 − 0.3 − 83.8 0.1 63.1 38.0 122.0
         Jun 91.6 60.6 38.8 0.1 − 0.3 − 85.4 0.1 67.3 38.1 123.8
         Jul 84.7 67.6 37.1 0.2 − 0.2 − 89.2 0.1 62.0 38.1 127.5
         Aug 82.5 63.1 36.4 0.0 − 0.1 − 92.2 0.1 51.8 37.9 130.2
         Sep 82.4 64.4 32.7 0.1 − 0.1 − 92.4 0.0 49.1 37.9 130.4
         Oct 84.0 69.0 31.7 0.1 − 0.1 − 94.0 0.1 53.0 37.6 131.6
         Nov 84.3 73.2 31.6 0.1 − 0.1 − 94.6 0.1 56.5 37.9 132.6
         Dec 84.4 91.1 33.8 0.9 0.7 0.2 − 99.3 0.1 73.5 37.8 137.3
2003          Jan 82.3 85.1 36.1 0.5 − 0.1 − 98.3 0.1 66.9 38.6 137.0
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. —*The banking system ’s liquidity notes and other banknotes which have been issued by the national central
position is defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro-area banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in circulation. In accordancecredit institutions with the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the conso- with the accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for the issue oflidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statement euro banknotes, 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulationof the Bundesbank. —1The reserve maintenance period of the ESCB ’s are allocated on a monthly basis to the ECB. The counterpart of this adjust-
minimum reserve system starts on the 24th of each month and ends on the ment is shown under „Other factors". The remaining 92% of the value of
23rd of the following month. —2Source: ECB. —3From 2002, euro bank- the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly basis,
14*II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  European  monetary  union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  European  monetary  union
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions ‘
current
account
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserveand foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenancecurrency operations operations facility operations facility operations deposits (net)  
4 reserves)  5 money  6 period circulation  3 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
+ 2.7 + 17.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.2 −0.3 − + 2.9 + 12.1 + 4.7 − 0.0 + 2.6 2000          Jul
+ 1.2 + 5.2 − 4.5 −0.3 −− 0.2 − + 2.2 − 1.6 + 3.2 − 1.8 + 0.2          Aug
− 0.4 + 10.0 − 4.3 + 0.2 −− 0.1 −− 4.4 + 7.8 + 1.2 + 0.9 − 3.6          Sep
+ 14.7 + 3.4 − 5.4 + 0.2 − + 0.0 −− 0.3 − 9.2 + 21.3 + 1.1 + 0.8          Oct
+ 2.3 + 7.2 − 0.7 −0.3 − + 0.0 −− 1.8 + 2.4 + 6.7 + 1.3 − 0.5          Nov
− 4.2 + 26.7 − 0.0 + 0.2 − + 0.0 − + 7.7 + 11.3 + 1.9 + 1.7 + 9.4          Dec
−10.7 − 5.1
+ 0.0 + 0.1 − + 0.4 − + 7.9 − 8.9 −16.9 + 1.7 + 10.0 2001          Jan  7 
− 5.8 −16.4 + 4.8 + 2.1 −− 0.2 −− 13.5 + 4.8 −7.9 + 1.6 − 12.0          Feb
− 2.3 − 3.7 + 4.3 −2.2 − + 0.1 −− 1.8 − 4.0 + 1.4 + 0.3 − 1.5          Mar
+ 6.5 −12.8 + 4.3 + 1.8 −− 0.0 − + 1.6 − 3.5 + 1.4 + 0.4 + 1.9          Apr
+ 2.3 −28.4 + 0.7 −1.8 + 17.0 + 0.1 −− 1.9 −10.1 −1.6 + 3.4 + 1.7          May
+ 0.6 + 17.7
+ 0.0 −0.2 − 17.0 −0.2 −− 1.6 + 1.9 + 0.0 + 0.9 − 0.8          Jun
+ 12.6 + 0.2 + 0.8 + 0.0 − + 0.0 −− 0.3 + 1.2 + 11.3 + 1.4 + 1.0          Jul
+ 4.5 + 2.1 + 0.1 −0.1 −− 0.2 −− 3.2 + 6.3 + 3.0 + 0.7 − 2.7          Aug
− 0.8 −16.9
+ 0.0 + 0.4 + 3.5 + 0.2 −− 12.2 − 3.6 + 3.6 − 1.7 − 13.7          Sep
−11.4 −10.4 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 3.5 −0.3 −− 10.2 − 1.6 −11.8 − 1.0 − 11.5          Oct
− 4.9 − 4.4 − 0.0 −0.9 − + 0.2 −− 13.9 + 2.5 −0.5 + 1.6 − 12.1          Nov
− 1.3 − 9.8
+ 0.0 + 0.3 + 12.4 + 0.5 −− 13.3 − 2.6 + 16.2 + 0.7 − 12.1          Dec
+ 1.5 − 4.0 − 0.0 −0.1 − 8.7 −0.2 − + 46.3 − 5.2 −55.1 + 3.0 + 49.0 2002          Jan
+ 0.8 + 8.8
+ 0.0 −0.2 − 3.7 −0.5 −− 38.1 + 11.3 + 31.0 + 2.2 − 36.4          Feb
+ 0.7 −12.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 − + 0.0 −− 22.9 + 4.6 + 6.6 − 0.5 − 23.2          Mar
+ 8.7 − 1.9 − 0.0 + 0.2 − + 0.1 − + 2.6 + 1.7 + 3.5 − 0.9 + 1.7          Apr
+ 2.3 − 2.1 − 0.0 −0.3 − + 0.1 − + 7.8 − 6.7 −1.8 + 0.5 + 8.3          May
− 1.5 + 2.0 + 0.0 + 0.4 − + 0.1 − + 7.1 − 4.1 −2.3 + 0.1 + 7.4          Jun
−27.1 + 17.8 − 0.0 −0.3 −− 0.2 − + 12.6 + 9.3 −30.9 − 0.4 + 12.0          Jul
− 9.1 + 8.8 − 4.8 −0.1 −− 0.1 − + 9.3 − 3.5 −9.5 − 1.5 + 7.8          Aug
+ 2.3 + 1.7 − 4.4 + 0.0 − + 0.1 − + 0.9 − 1.8 + 0.9 − 0.3 + 0.6          Sep
+ 7.7 + 5.2 − 5.5 −0.0 −− 0.1 − + 5.6 − 3.5 + 6.5 − 1.3 + 4.2          Oct
+ 2.1 + 1.4 − 0.3 + 0.0 −− 0.0 − + 4.8 − 2.8 + 0.4 + 1.0 + 5.8          Nov
− 0.6 + 20.6 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 2.0 + 0.1 − + 16.7 + 8.9 −3.1 + 0.2 + 17.1          Dec
−10.6 + 8.2
+ 0.0 −0.6 − 2.0 + 0.1 − + 3.2 − 8.0 −2.2 + 2.1 + 5.3 2003          Jan
Deutsche Bundesbank
+ 0.2 + 8.3 − 2.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 −− 0.1 − 0.0 + 6.4 − 0.0 − 0.1 2000          Jul
− 0.4 + 3.7 + 1.6 −0.2 −− 0.3 − + 0.1 − 0.0 + 5.6 − 0.6 − 0.8          Aug
− 0.5 + 10.3 − 1.1 + 0.2 −− 0.0 −− 0.5 + 0.0 + 9.5 − 0.1 − 0.6          Sep
+ 4.5 + 5.3 − 3.1 + 0.0 − + 0.0 −− 0.3 + 0.0 + 6.9 + 0.1 − 0.2          Oct
+ 1.2 + 11.8 − 0.0 −0.2 −
+ 0.0 −− 1.0 + 0.0 + 13.4 + 0.4 − 0.6          Nov
− 0.6 + 4.5 + 0.5 + 0.1 − + 0.0 − + 1.9 + 0.0 + 2.1 + 0.4 + 2.3          Dec
− 4.6 − 0.5 − 2.7 + 0.1 − + 0.2 −− 0.8 − 0.0 −7.4 + 0.3 − 0.2 2001          Jan
− 2.7 − 9.8 − 0.1 + 1.0 −− 0.1 −− 4.6 − 0.0 −7.7 + 0.6 − 4.0          Feb
− 1.2 − 5.6 + 4.8 −1.2 − + 0.1 −− 0.5 − 0.0 −2.4 − 0.4 − 0.7          Mar
+ 1.0 − 3.1 + 4.3 + 1.3 −− 0.2 −− 0.0 + 0.0 + 3.1 + 0.5 + 0.4          Apr
− 0.1 −17.2 + 0.3 −1.2 + 7.5 + 0.3 −− 1.4 + 0.0 −3.1 + 1.1 − 0.1          May
− 0.3 + 12.5 − 0.3 −0.1 − 7.5 −0.2 −− 1.2 + 0.0 −1.9 + 0.1 − 1.3          Jun
+ 3.2 + 5.5 − 0.5 + 0.0 − + 0.0 −− 1.9 − 0.0 + 9.9 + 0.2 − 1.7          Jul
+ 1.3 − 8.4 + 1.2 −0.1 −− 0.2 −− 2.4 − 0.0 −3.5 + 0.2 − 2.4          Aug
− 0.4 − 3.7 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 1.3 −0.0 −− 3.9 + 0.0 + 2.6 − 0.7 − 4.7          Sep
− 2.4 − 7.0 + 1.3 + 0.4 − 1.3 −0.0 −− 4.7 − 0.0 −4.5 + 0.2 − 4.5          Oct
− 1.5 + 2.0 − 1.7 −0.3 − + 0.2 −− 6.1 + 0.0 + 3.7 + 0.7 − 5.3          Nov
− 0.4 − 5.8 + 1.7 + 0.0 + 5.0 + 0.3 −− 8.1 + 0.0 + 13.3 − 0.1 − 7.9          Dec
+ 0.4 + 0.9 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 3.6 −0.2 −− 4.8 − 0.0 −2.2 + 1.1 − 3.9 2002          Jan
+ 0.0 + 0.1 + 1.3 −0.2 − 1.4 −0.3 −− 13.2 − 0.0 + 13.6 − 0.4 − 13.8          Feb
+ 0.1 − 4.9 − 1.7 + 0.1 − + 0.0 − + 1.2 − 0.0 −7.4 − 0.3 + 0.9          Mar
+ 2.4 − 0.9 − 0.3 + 0.1 − + 0.1 − + 1.0 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.4 + 0.7          Apr
− 0.0 − 4.5 − 0.7 −0.2 − + 0.1 − + 3.0 + 0.0 −8.7 + 0.1 + 3.3          May
− 0.7 + 7.5 − 0.9 + 0.1 −− 0.0 − + 1.6 − 0.0 + 4.2 + 0.2 + 1.8          Jun
− 6.9 + 7.0 − 1.7 + 0.0 −− 0.1 − + 3.8 + 0.0 −5.3 − 0.1 + 3.7          Jul
− 2.2 − 4.5 − 0.7 −0.1 −− 0.1 − + 3.0 − 0.0 −10.2 − 0.2 + 2.7          Aug
− 0.1 + 1.3 − 3.7 + 0.0 − + 0.1 − + 0.2 − 0.0 −2.8 − 0.0 + 0.2          Sep
+ 1.6 + 4.6 − 1.0 + 0.0 −− 0.0 − + 1.5 + 0.0 + 3.9 − 0.3 + 1.2          Oct
+ 0.4 + 4.3 − 0.1 −0.0 −− 0.0 − + 0.7 + 0.0 + 3.5 + 0.3 + 1.0          Nov
+ 0.1 + 17.8 + 2.2 + 0.9 + 0.7 + 0.1 − + 4.7
+ 0.0 + 17.1 − 0.2 + 4.6          Dec
− 2.1 − 6.0 + 2.4 −0.5 − 0.7 −0.0 −− 1.0 − 0.0 −6.7 + 0.8 − 0.2 2003          Jan
to the NCBs, with each NCB showing in its balance sheet the percentage of system and the financial statement of the Bundesbank. —5Equal to the dif-
the euro banknotes in circulation that corresponds to its paid-up share in ference between the sum of liquidity-providing factors and the sum of li-
the ECB ’s capital. The difference between the value of the euro banknotes quidity-absorbing factors. —6Calculated as the sum of the „deposit facili-
allocated to an NCB and the value of the euro banknotes which that NCB ty", „banknotes in circulation" and „credit institutions ’current account hold-
has put into circulation is likewise shown under „Other factors". — ings". — 7 Entry of Greece into the euro area on 1 January, 2001. 
4Remaining items in the consolidated financial statement of the Euro-
15*II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  European  monetary  union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1 Assets *
 
 
 5  billion
Claims on non-euro area Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
On investments, euro area Balances Claims
reporting external loans residents with banks, arising from
date/ Gold and other denominated security the creditEnd of Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility undermonth  
1 assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
 Eurosystem 2
 
2002 May                17 785.5 139.5 262.2 30.9 231.2 22.9 5.0 5.0 −
                               24 788.8 139.5 261.1 30.9 230.2 23.1 5.0 5.0 −
                               31 793.3 139.4 259.4 30.9 228.5 24.1 5.1 5.1 −
         Jun                  7 788.4 139.4 260.1 30.9 229.3 23.6 5.1 5.1 −
                               14 783.6 139.4 261.8 30.8 231.1 22.9 5.1 5.1 −
                               21 793.7 139.4 263.2 34.5 228.7 22.0 5.0 5.0 −
                               28 3 780.8 3 128.3 3 238.0 3 32.6 3 205.3 3 19.7 4.5 4.5 −
         Jul                  5 764.7 128.3 237.9 32.5 205.4 19.3 4.6 4.6 −
                               12 765.6 128.3 239.4 32.5 206.9 19.5 4.8 4.8 −
                               19 776.0 128.3 240.1 32.4 207.7 20.2 4.9 4.9 −
                               26 783.5 128.3 240.9 32.3 208.6 20.4 4.9 4.9 −
         Aug                  2 771.6 128.3 240.1 32.3 207.8 20.0 4.9 4.9 −
                                 9 768.6 128.3 239.4 32.1 207.3 19.3 4.8 4.8 −
                               16 763.5 128.3 237.4 32.4 205.0 19.4 4.9 4.9 −
                               23 764.1 128.3 240.0 32.4 207.6 17.9 4.8 4.8 −
                               30 770.8 128.3 238.5 32.4 206.0 17.0 5.3 5.3 −
         Sep                  6 765.6 128.3 239.7 32.5 207.2 18.5 4.8 4.8 −
                               13 762.1 128.3 241.4 32.4 209.0 18.2 4.6 4.6 −
                               20 772.6 128.3 243.0 32.4 210.6 18.5 4.8 4.8 −
                               27 772.8 128.3 242.5 32.4 210.1 18.3 5.0 5.0 −
         Oct                  4 3 778.3 3 131.2 3 248.3 32.6 3 215.7 18.5 4.5 4.5 −
                               11 778.7 131.2 247.2 32.6 214.6 19.4 4.2 4.2 −
                               18 774.3 131.2 246.4 32.5 213.9 19.6 4.2 4.2 −
                               25 798.0 131.2 246.6 32.4 214.2 21.0 4.6 4.6 −
         Nov                  1 779.7 131.2 244.9 32.3 212.6 21.0 4.3 4.3 −
                                 8 777.5 131.2 246.4 32.1 214.3 19.8 3.8 3.8 −
                               15 773.3 131.1 246.9 32.0 214.9 20.4 3.9 3.9 −
                               22 788.7 131.1 246.9 32.0 214.9 21.0 3.8 3.8 −
                               29 796.5 131.1 245.6 32.0 213.6 20.0 3.5 3.5 −
         Dec                  6 812.7 131.1 248.4 32.0 216.4 20.1 3.7 3.7 −
                               13 818.7 131.0 250.7 31.9 218.8 20.2 3.7 3.7 −
                               20 820.4 131.0 248.6 31.9 216.6 20.2 3.7 3.7 −
                               27 832.6 130.9 248.6 32.5 216.1 19.9 4.0 4.0 −
2003 Jan                  3 3 795.0 130.7 3 236.8 31.3 3 205.5 19.9 4.0 4.0 −
                               10 786.6 130.7 237.1 31.3 205.7 16.6 4.1 4.1 −
                               17 773.3 130.7 235.4 31.2 204.2 15.6 4.4 4.4 −
                               24 778.9 130.7 231.8 31.2 200.6 16.6 4.4 4.4 −
                               31 786.7 130.6 233.3 31.2 202.2 18.3 4.9 4.9 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2001          Mar 3 245.3 3 32.7 3 60.5 3 7.8 3 52.7 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Apr 239.1 32.7 59.4 7.7 51.7 − 0.3 0.3 −
         May 229.8 32.7 58.8 7.7 51.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Jun 3 247.3 3 35.5 3 60.3 3 8.2 3 52.2 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Jul 241.0 35.4 60.4 8.2 52.3 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Aug 238.4 35.4 60.0 8.1 51.9 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Sep 3 233.4 35.4 3 59.1 3 9.0 3 50.2 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Oct 226.6 35.4 59.5 8.8 50.7 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Nov 225.6 35.4 59.9 8.7 51.3 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Dec 3 239.9 3 35.0 3 58.2 3 8.7 3 49.5 − 0.3 0.3 −
2002          Jan 230.6 35.0 60.0 8.8 51.2 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Feb 221.4 35.0 59.9 8.8 51.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Mar 3 227.4 3 38.5 3 59.6 3 8.8 3 50.8 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Apr 205.3 38.5 58.0 8.3 49.6 − 0.3 0.3 −
         May 218.3 38.5 56.6 8.4 48.2 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Jun 3 217.9 3 35.4 3 51.2 8.8 3 42.4 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Jul 211.3 35.4 51.8 8.8 43.0 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Aug 218.3 35.4 50.9 8.7 42.2 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Sep 3 221.9 3 36.2 3 52.7 8.8 3 44.0 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Oct 226.4 36.2 52.1 8.6 43.5 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Nov 229.9 36.2 53.0 8.6 44.4 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Dec 3 240.0 36.2 3 48.8 8.3 3 40.5 − 0.3 0.3 −
2003          Jan 233.9 36.2 48.9 8.2 40.7 − 0.3 0.3 −
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the area. —The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold and
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the statements of the financial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quarter. —
national central banks of the EU member countries (NCBs) of the euro 1For the Eurosystem: financial statement for specific weekly dates;
16*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations
denominated in euro
 Other claims on euro area credit Securities General    On
Credits institutions of euro area government    reporting
Main Longer-term Fine-tuning Structural Marginal related denomi- residents debt    date/refinancing refinancing reverse reverse lending to margin nated in denominated denominated Other    End of
Total operations operations operations operations facility calls euro in euro in euro assets    month  
1 
Eurosystem 2
 
169.0 109.0 60.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.3 29.9 67.7 88.9 2002 May                 17
173.0 113.0 60.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.2 30.2 67.7 89.0                                24
178.4 118.0 60.0 −− 0.4 0.0 0.2 29.9 67.7 89.1                                31
173.3 113.0 60.0 −− 0.3 0.0 0.2 29.9 67.7 89.1          Jun                   7
167.0 107.0 60.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.2 30.1 67.7 89.2                                14
175.9 112.0 60.0 −− 3.9 0.0 0.2 30.2 67.7 90.1                                21
201.0 140.0 60.0 −− 0.9 0.0 0.5 30.5 67.7 90.7                                28
187.0 127.0 60.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.4 30.6 67.7 88.8          Jul                   5
186.0 126.0 60.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.4 30.5 67.7 89.1                                12
194.4 134.0 60.0 −− 0.4 0.0 0.2 30.7 67.7 89.5                                19
204.7 149.0 55.0 −− 0.7 0.0 0.4 30.7 67.7 85.5                                26
194.0 139.0 55.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.4 30.5 67.7 85.6          Aug                   2
192.1 137.0 55.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.4 30.6 67.6 86.0                                  9
189.1 134.0 55.0 −− 0.1 0.0 0.2 30.7 67.2 86.3                                16
189.0 134.0 55.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.1 30.9 67.2 85.7                                23
197.0 147.0 50.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.4 31.4 67.2 85.8                                30
191.0 141.0 50.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.2 31.5 67.2 84.2          Sep                   6
186.1 136.0 50.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.2 31.5 67.2 84.7                                13
194.0 144.0 50.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.2 31.5 67.2 85.1                                20
194.1 149.0 45.0 −− 0.1 0.0 0.3 31.5 67.2 85.6                                27
190.4 145.0 45.0 −− 0.4 0.0 0.6 3 32.1 67.2 85.5          Oct                   4
191.0 146.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.6 32.3 67.2 85.5                                11
187.1 142.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.1 0.4 32.3 67.2 85.8                                18
209.1 164.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.1 0.2 32.1 67.2 86.0                                25
190.1 145.0 45.0 −− 0.1 0.0 0.4 32.3 67.2 88.4          Nov                   1
189.0 144.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.4 32.6 67.2 87.1                                  8
183.1 138.0 45.0 −− 0.1 0.0 0.4 32.7 67.2 87.6                                15
196.3 150.0 45.0 −− 1.2 0.0 0.2 33.1 67.2 89.1                                22
206.1 161.0 45.0 −− 0.1 0.0 0.3 33.2 67.2 89.4                                29
219.7 173.8 45.0 −− 0.9 0.0 0.2 33.2 67.2 89.1          Dec                   6
221.8 176.8 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.2 33.2 67.1 90.7                                13
223.8 168.5 45.0 10.0 − 0.3 0.0 0.2 33.3 67.1 92.7                                20
236.6 191.5 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.1 33.1 66.3 93.1                                27
225.1 180.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.1 0.1 27.8 44.5 3 106.0 2003 Jan                   3
219.1 174.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.1 0.1 27.9 44.5 106.6                                10
208.6 161.0 45.0 −− 2.6 0.0 0.2 28.0 44.5 105.9                                17
215.3 170.0 45.0 −− 0.3 0.0 0.2 28.5 44.5 106.9                                24
219.2 174.0 45.0 −− 0.2 0.0 0.3 29.1 44.5 106.5                                31
 Deutsche Bundesbank
119.3 81.2 38.0 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 28.0 2001          Mar
124.0 86.3 37.7 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.2          Apr
115.1 77.3 37.7 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.4          May
128.2 91.2 36.9 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.6          Jun
121.8 83.5 38.3 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.7          Jul
114.0 74.5 39.1 −− 0.4 − 0.0 − 4.4 24.2          Aug
111.7 70.2 40.3 −− 1.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 22.4          Sep
108.2 69.8 38.4 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.7          Oct
106.8 45.0 40.4 − 21.3 0.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.7          Nov
123.0 80.5 41.1 −− 1.4 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.9          Dec
112.3 69.5 42.8 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.6 2002          Jan
103.7 61.7 40.4 −− 1.6 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.1          Feb
106.8 65.7 40.4 −− 0.7 − 0.0 − 4.4 17.7          Mar
86.6 46.7 39.6 −− 0.3 − 0.0 − 4.4 17.5          Apr
101.0 62.3 38.6 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 17.4          May
109.1 71.2 36.9 −− 0.9 − 0.0 − 4.4 17.5          Jun
98.2 61.8 36.4 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 21.2          Jul
100.3 68.3 32.0 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 26.9          Aug
104.2 72.4 31.7 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 24.0          Sep
103.9 72.4 31.6 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 29.4          Oct
111.1 77.0 34.0 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 24.8          Nov
125.5 87.1 36.1 −− 2.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 24.8          Dec
124.3 87.5 36.6 −− 0.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.8 2003          Jan
 
for the Bundesbank: up to the end of 2001 financial statement for the last 2Source: ECB. —3Changes are due mainly to revalutions at the end of the
Friday of each month, from 2002 end-of-month financial statement. — quarter. 
17*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
 5  billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilitiesaccounts to euro
On (covering Fine- area creditreporting the tuning Deposits institutions Debtdate/ Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
End of Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Othermonth  
1 liabilities Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment lation  2  3 liabilities
 Eurosystem 4
 
2002 May                17 785.5 297.2 133.3 133.2 0.0 −− 0.0 2.2 2.9 47.3 41.2 6.0
                               24 788.8 295.2 128.6 128.5 0.0 −−− 2.2 2.9 60.7 54.8 5.9
                               31 793.3 299.0 130.2 130.1 0.1 −− 0.0 2.4 2.9 59.9 54.0 5.9
         Jun                  7 788.4 302.9 132.9 132.9 0.1 −− 0.0 2.5 2.9 48.0 42.1 5.8
                               14 783.6 303.6 128.2 128.2 0.0 −− 0.0 2.4 2.9 46.0 40.3 5.7
                               21 793.7 304.5 135.0 132.3 2.7 −− 0.0 2.2 2.9 48.3 42.5 5.9
                               28 5 780.8 308.8 134.9 134.8 0.1 −− 0.0 2.0 2.9 70.9 65.2 5.7
         Jul                  5 764.7 315.1 129.1 128.7 0.0 −− 0.4 0.2 2.9 57.5 52.7 4.8
                               12 765.6 316.7 129.4 129.4 0.0 −− 0.0 0.1 2.9 54.5 49.9 4.6
                               19 776.0 317.2 128.6 128.0 0.6 −− 0.0 0.0 2.9 62.7 58.0 4.7
                               26 783.5 317.6 132.4 132.3 0.0 −− 0.0 0.1 2.9 69.6 65.0 4.5
         Aug                  2 771.6 324.0 129.3 129.2 0.0 −− 0.0 0.0 2.9 55.3 50.6 4.7
                                 9 768.6 326.0 127.6 127.6 0.0 −− 0.0 0.3 2.9 52.3 47.6 4.7
                               16 763.5 325.8 129.4 129.4 0.0 −− 0.0 0.2 2.9 47.5 42.7 4.8
                               23 764.1 321.2 131.3 128.7 2.6 −− 0.0 0.1 2.9 49.8 45.1 4.7
                               30 770.8 321.8 126.1 125.9 0.1 −− 0.0 0.1 2.9 63.8 59.0 4.8
         Sep                  6 765.6 325.8 129.9 129.8 0.0 −− 0.0 0.3 2.9 51.7 47.0 4.7
                               13 762.1 325.7 126.8 126.8 0.0 −− 0.0 0.1 2.9 50.1 45.4 4.7
                               20 772.6 324.5 130.0 129.9 0.1 −− 0.0 0.1 2.9 55.8 51.0 4.8
                               27 772.8 325.4 126.9 126.9 0.0 −−− 0.2 2.9 58.8 53.7 5.0
         Oct                  4 5 778.3 331.7 127.3 127.3 0.1 −− 0.0 0.2 2.9 47.8 42.9 4.9
                               11 778.7 331.6 132.3 132.3 0.0 −−− 0.4 2.9 43.9 39.1 4.8
                               18 774.3 330.8 128.9 128.8 0.0 −− 0.0 0.2 2.9 43.8 39.1 4.7
                               25 798.0 329.6 136.8 136.8 0.0 −− 0.0 0.1 2.9 59.1 54.4 4.6
         Nov                  1 779.7 334.8 122.7 122.6 0.0 −− 0.0 0.1 2.9 50.6 45.8 4.8
                                 8 777.5 336.7 130.7 130.6 0.1 −−− 0.3 2.0 41.2 35.9 5.3
                               15 773.3 335.7 129.7 129.6 0.1 −−− 0.2 2.0 36.8 32.0 4.8
                               22 788.7 334.6 126.8 126.3 0.5 −−− 0.2 2.0 55.1 50.2 4.9
                               29 796.5 340.0 121.9 121.9 0.0 −−− 0.2 2.0 64.8 59.6 5.3
         Dec                  6 812.7 351.3 127.1 127.0 0.1 −−− 0.3 2.0 62.2 56.6 5.6
                               13 818.7 355.7 130.0 129.9 0.1 −−− 0.0 2.0 58.5 53.6 4.9
                               20 820.4 367.9 127.9 126.7 1.2 −−− 0.0 2.0 50.0 44.9 5.0
                               27 832.6 374.6 129.3 129.1 0.2 −−− 0.0 2.0 55.1 49.8 5.2
2003 Jan                  3 5 795.0 354.5 130.0 129.9 0.1 −−− 0.0 2.0 47.4 42.4 5.0
                               10 786.6 346.3 133.5 133.4 0.1 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 48.5 43.6 4.9
                               17 773.3 341.6 132.9 132.7 0.1 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 42.5 37.3 5.2
                               24 778.9 338.2 127.2 127.2 0.0 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 59.0 54.0 5.0
                               31 786.7 339.5 126.8 126.6 0.1 −− 0.0 0.1 2.0 65.1 60.2 4.9
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2001          Mar 5 245.3 125.3 45.1 45.0 0.1 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Apr 239.1 125.0 40.8 40.8 0.0 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         May 229.8 124.1 32.6 32.5 0.1 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Jun 5 247.3 121.9 42.7 42.5 0.2 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Jul 241.0 119.9 33.6 33.6 0.0 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Aug 238.4 116.5 48.0 48.0 0.0 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Sep 5 233.4 112.0 48.3 48.2 0.0 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Oct 226.6 106.7 34.0 34.0 0.0 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Nov 225.6 99.0 49.9 49.8 0.1 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Dec 5 239.9 76.5 57.5 57.4 0.1 −−− − − 1.0 0.1 1.0
2002          Jan 230.6 82.5 46.1 46.1 0.0 −−− − − 1.0 0.1 0.9
         Feb 221.4 79.8 41.6 41.5 0.0 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.6
         Mar 5 227.4 80.5 42.0 42.0 0.1 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Apr 205.3 81.7 40.1 38.9 1.2 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.5
         May 218.3 84.1 44.9 44.9 0.0 −−− − − 0.6 0.0 0.6
         Jun 5 217.9 86.9 41.4 41.3 0.1 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Jul 211.3 90.0 40.7 40.6 0.0 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Aug 218.3 90.7 44.3 44.2 0.1 −−− − − 0.5 0.0 0.5
         Sep 5 221.9 92.0 41.0 41.0 0.0 −−− − − 0.6 0.0 0.5
         Oct 226.4 94.2 41.3 41.3 0.0 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Nov 229.9 95.7 41.0 40.9 0.0 −−− − − 0.8 0.1 0.7
         Dec 5 240.0 104.5 44.8 44.8 0.0 −−− − − 0.6 0.0 0.6
2003          Jan 233.9 94.5 40.9 40.8 0.1 −−− − − 0.5 0.0 0.5
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the for the Bundesbank: up to the end of 2001 financial statement for the last
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the statements of the Friday of each month, from 2002 end-of-month financial statement. —
national central banks of the EU member countries (NCBs) of the euro 2From 2002 euro banknotes and up to end of 2002 banknotes still in
area. —The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold and circulation issued by the national central banks of the Eurosystem. —
financial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quar- 3According to the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem on the
ter.—1For the Eurosystem: financial statement for specific weekly dates; issue of euro banknotes, a share of 8% of the total value of the euro
18*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated inforeign currency
 
Liabilities Intra-  
Liabilities to euro area Liabilities Counterpart Eurosystem     Onto non-euro residents Deposits, arising of special liability     reportingarea residents denominated balances from the drawing related to  Capital    date/denominated in foreign and other rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and    End of credit facility
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF liabilities issue  
3 accounts reserves    month  1 
Eurosystem 4
 
8.6 1.5 19.4 19.4 − 7.0 65.4 − 136.9 63.8 2002 May                 17
8.4 1.4 18.8 18.8 − 7.0 62.6 − 136.9 64.1                                24
8.5 1.4 18.2 18.2 − 7.0 62.9 − 136.9 64.1                                31
8.6 1.4 18.6 18.6 − 7.0 62.5 − 136.9 64.3          Jun                   7
8.3 1.4 20.0 20.0 − 7.0 62.4 − 136.9 64.3                                14
8.9 1.4 19.1 19.1 − 7.0 62.9 − 136.9 64.3                                21
8.4 1.6 5 16.9 5 16.9 − 6.5 5 64.4 − 5 99.1 64.3                                28
8.5 1.2 16.9 16.9 − 6.5 63.3 − 99.1 64.3          Jul                   5
8.6 1.2 18.8 18.8 − 6.5 63.3 − 99.1 64.3                                12
8.6 1.5 20.0 20.0 − 6.5 64.5 − 99.1 64.3                                19
9.0 1.3 21.5 21.5 − 6.5 59.3 − 99.1 64.3                                26
9.4 1.4 20.4 20.4 − 6.5 59.1 − 99.1 64.3          Aug                   2
8.6 1.3 19.7 19.7 − 6.5 59.9 − 99.1 64.3                                  9
8.6 1.3 17.3 17.3 − 6.5 60.5 − 99.1 64.3                                16
9.1 1.3 18.4 18.4 − 6.5 60.0 − 99.1 64.3                                23
9.0 1.3 16.1 16.1 − 6.5 59.8 − 99.1 64.3                                30
8.7 1.3 15.1 15.1 − 6.5 60.0 − 99.1 64.3          Sep                   6
8.6 1.3 16.6 16.6 − 6.5 60.0 − 99.1 64.3                                13
9.0 1.5 18.1 18.1 − 6.5 60.7 − 99.1 64.3                                20
8.9 1.4 17.9 17.9 − 6.5 60.5 − 99.1 64.3                                27
9.2 1.3 18.1 18.1 − 6.6 5 62.5 − 5 106.3 64.3          Oct                   4
8.5 1.3 18.0 18.0 − 6.6 62.6 − 106.3 64.3                                11
8.3 1.4 17.3 17.3 − 6.6 63.5 − 106.3 64.3                                18
8.4 1.6 18.8 18.8 − 6.6 63.6 − 106.3 64.3                                25
8.4 1.4 17.3 17.3 − 6.6 64.3 − 106.3 64.2          Nov                   1
8.5 1.4 17.0 17.0 − 6.6 62.7 − 106.3 64.2                                  8
8.4 1.6 17.1 17.1 − 6.6 64.7 − 106.3 64.2                                15
8.3 1.7 19.3 19.3 − 6.6 63.4 − 106.3 64.4                                22
8.6 1.3 17.3 17.3 − 6.6 62.9 − 106.3 64.4                                29
8.5 1.3 20.0 20.0 − 6.6 62.6 − 106.3 64.4          Dec                   6
8.4 1.3 22.4 22.4 − 6.6 63.0 − 106.3 64.5                                13
9.5 1.4 20.7 20.7 − 6.6 63.7 − 106.3 64.4                                20
8.8 1.2 20.1 20.1 − 6.6 64.1 − 106.3 64.4                                27
11.6 1.1 5 21.0 5 21.0 − 6.3 5 73.8 − 5 82.8 64.3 2003 Jan                   3
8.3 1.1 19.7 19.7 − 6.3 73.6 − 82.8 64.2                                10
8.3 1.1 17.3 17.3 − 6.3 74.0 − 82.8 64.2                                17
8.9 1.1 15.0 15.0 − 6.3 74.2 − 82.8 64.1                                24
9.4 1.1 15.8 15.8 − 6.3 73.7 − 82.8 64.1                                31
 Deutsche Bundesbank
6.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 1.7 19.2 . 5 41.4 5.1 2001          Mar
6.8 0.0 −−− 1.7 17.8 . 41.4 5.1          Apr
7.2 0.0 −−− 1.7 17.1 . 41.4 5.1          May
6.8 0.0 −−− 1.8 23.2 . 5 45.2 5.1          Jun
6.8 0.0 −−− 1.8 28.0 . 45.2 5.1          Jul
6.8 0.0 −−− 1.8 14.4 . 45.2 5.1          Aug
6.8 0.0 1.8 1.8 − 1.7 15.3 . 5 41.8 5.1          Sep
6.9 0.0 3.0 3.0 − 1.7 26.8 . 41.8 5.1          Oct
6.9 0.0 4.1 4.1 − 1.7 16.4 . 41.8 5.1          Nov
7.3 0.0 1.4 1.4 − 1.7 47.8 . 5 41.6 5.1          Dec
7.1 0.0 3.3 3.3 − 1.7 30.6 11.6 41.6 5.1 2002          Jan
7.0 0.0 3.2 3.2 − 1.7 32.6 8.2 41.6 5.1          Feb
7.0 0.0 5 3.0 5 3.0 − 1.7 30.9 11.6 5 44.8 5.1          Mar
7.0 0.0 2.4 2.4 − 1.7 9.1 12.9 44.8 5.1          Apr
7.0 0.0 1.6 1.6 − 1.7 12.7 15.7 44.8 5.1          May
6.9 0.0 2.3 2.3 − 1.6 20.9 16.7 5 35.5 5.1          Jun
7.1 0.0 3.0 3.0 − 1.6 8.9 18.8 35.5 5.1          Jul
7.1 0.0 2.3 2.3 − 1.6 9.2 22.0 35.5 5.1          Aug
7.2 0.0 2.8 2.8 − 1.6 10.2 24.1 5 37.3 5.1          Sep
7.1 0.0 2.4 2.4 − 1.6 10.6 26.2 37.3 5.1          Oct
7.1 0.0 3.1 3.1 − 1.6 10.5 27.6 37.3 5.1          Nov
7.1 0.0 1.8 1.8 − 1.6 11.1 29.1 5 34.2 5.0          Dec
7.8 0.0 2.2 2.2 − 1.6 17.6 29.6 34.2 5.0 2003          Jan
 
banknotes in circulation is allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to the NCB according tocounterpart of this adjustment is disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem liability the aforementioned accounting regime, and the value of euro banknotes
related to banknote issue. “The remaining 92% of the value of the euro put into circulation, is also disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem claim/ liability
banknotes in circulation are allocated to the NCBs on a monthly basis too, related to banknote issue. “— 4Source: ECB. —5Changes are due mainly
whereby each NCB shows in its balance sheet a share of the euro banknotes to revaluations at the end of the quarter. issued corresponding to its paid-up share in the ECB ’s capital. The difference
19*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Assets
 
 Up to the end of 1998, DM billion; from 1999,  5  billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area  3 Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other member states to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and indi-
viduals
Secur- Secur-
Balance ities itiessheet Cash issued issued
Period total  
2 in hand Total Total Loans  3 by banks Total Loans  3 by banks Total Total Total Loans  3 
 End of year or month
 
1994 7,205.7 26.2 2,030.1 1,854.1 1,285.1 569.1 175.9 145.0 30.9 4,411.4 4,333.2 3,391.3 3,143.2
1995 7,778.7 27.3 2,210.2 2,019.0 1,399.8 619.3 191.2 158.0 33.2 4,723.3 4,635.0 3,548.8 3,298.7
1996 8,540.5 30.3 2,523.0 2,301.1 1,585.7 715.4 221.9 181.2 40.7 5,084.7 4,981.9 3,812.8 3,543.01997 9,368.2 30.7 2,836.0 2,580.7 1,758.6 822.1 255.3 208.8 46.5 5,408.8 5,269.5 4,041.3 3,740.81998 10,355.5 29.9 3,267.4 2,939.4 1,977.4 962.0 328.1 264.9 63.1 5,833.9 5,615.9 4,361.0 3,966.51999 5,678.5 17.2 1,836.9 1,635.0 1,081.4 553.6 201.9 161.8 40.1 3,127.4 2,958.6 2,326.4 2,093.4
2000 6,083.9 16.1 1,977.4 1,724.2 1,108.9 615.3 253.2 184.5 68.6 3,249.9 3,062.6 2,445.7 2,186.6
2001 6,303.1 14.6 2,069.7 1,775.5 1,140.6 634.9 294.2 219.8 74.4 3,317.1 3,084.9 2,497.1 2,235.72002 6,409.2 17.9 2,132.7 1,781.1 1,164.3 616.8 351.7 271.7 79.9 3,340.5 3,092.8 2,506.9 2,241.4
2001          Mar 6,259.3 13.1 2,037.0 1,749.6 1,111.2 638.4 287.4 215.0 72.3 3,309.4 3,095.3 2,487.6 2,204.2
         Apr 6,283.6 13.7 2,036.3 1,750.8 1,101.7 649.1 285.5 211.3 74.2 3,311.9 3,092.6 2,492.9 2,202.3
         May 6,312.3 13.9 2,038.9 1,756.7 1,106.2 650.5 282.2 206.5 75.7 3,323.1 3,095.6 2,497.6 2,210.5         Jun 6,283.8 13.8 2,050.4 1,753.5 1,112.4 641.1 296.9 221.0 75.9 3,295.9 3,070.6 2,473.6 2,212.8
         Jul 6,225.8 13.8 2,036.5 1,748.3 1,100.6 647.7 288.2 213.2 75.0 3,298.4 3,073.9 2,466.3 2,206.8
         Aug 6,236.5 13.5 2,037.6 1,751.9 1,113.0 638.9 285.7 210.6 75.1 3,289.2 3,061.6 2,464.3 2,207.2         Sep 6,295.9 13.7 2,070.9 1,778.2 1,142.2 635.9 292.7 216.8 75.9 3,283.9 3,056.0 2,471.5 2,218.7
         Oct 6,300.0 14.2 2,064.4 1,769.4 1,130.7 638.7 295.0 218.2 76.8 3,284.0 3,058.5 2,474.7 2,219.6
         Nov 6,320.2 13.7 2,082.6 1,779.3 1,144.1 635.3 303.2 227.1 76.1 3,299.4 3,073.7 2,479.4 2,226.6         Dec 6,303.1 14.6 2,069.7 1,775.5 1,140.6 634.9 294.2 219.8 74.4 3,317.1 3,084.9 2,497.1 2,235.7
2002          Jan 6,255.1 27.7 2,019.8 1,728.4 1,094.0 634.4 291.4 216.2 75.2 3,310.8 3,075.1 2,487.1 2,225.5
         Feb 6,230.4 19.5 2,004.6 1,725.2 1,084.2 641.0 279.4 202.9 76.5 3,311.9 3,074.7 2,485.5 2,227.3         Mar 6,269.8 16.9 2,033.3 1,744.1 1,096.1 647.9 289.3 213.2 76.1 3,310.6 3,065.5 2,478.9 2,230.3
         Apr 6,267.7 14.9 2,032.8 1,736.5 1,085.8 650.7 296.3 220.2 76.1 3,319.5 3,072.8 2,485.6 2,231.6
         May 6,304.5 14.7 2,055.5 1,749.0 1,096.7 652.2 306.6 230.7 75.8 3,323.3 3,074.2 2,485.6 2,232.0         Jun 6,277.4 14.3 2,073.9 1,758.9 1,111.2 647.6 315.1 238.1 77.0 3,304.8 3,059.5 2,477.9 2,233.2
         Jul 6,265.6 13.8 2,051.7 1,731.9 1,094.9 637.1 319.7 242.3 77.4 3,313.1 3,063.8 2,471.5 2,231.6
         Aug 6,290.6 13.6 2,073.4 1,746.9 1,113.0 634.0 326.5 249.2 77.3 3,310.9 3,064.3 2,480.6 2,231.5         Sep 6,341.1 13.3 2,077.4 1,745.3 1,113.3 632.1 332.0 253.8 78.3 3,323.1 3,074.8 2,490.6 2,242.3
         Oct 6,359.1 14.2 2,078.3 1,741.3 1,117.9 623.5 336.9 257.2 79.7 3,327.8 3,080.9 2,494.9 2,240.6
         Nov 6,453.5 13.2 2,130.2 1,780.8 1,150.6 630.2 349.5 267.3 82.1 3,336.6 3,088.4 2,496.7 2,238.4         Dec 6,409.2 17.9 2,132.7 1,781.1 1,164.3 616.8 351.7 271.7 79.9 3,340.5 3,092.8 2,506.9 2,241.4
 Changes 1
1995 587.7 1.1 184.6 169.3 114.7 54.6 15.2 13.0 2.3 322.1 312.1 201.2 188.11996 761.8 3.0 312.8 282.1 186.0 96.1 30.7 23.2 7.5 361.5 346.9 264.0 244.31997 825.6 0.5 313.1 279.6 172.9 106.7 33.5 27.6 5.9 324.0 287.5 228.4 197.61998 1,001.0 −0.8 422.2 355.7 215.1 140.6 66.4 56.2 10.2 440.4 363.3 337.5 245.2
1999 452.6 1.8 179.8 140.1 81.4 58.6 39.8 26.3 13.5 206.6 158.1 156.8 126.4
2000 401.5 −1.2 143.0 91.7 28.1 63.6 51.4 22.8 28.6 123.2 105.4 116.8 89.5
2001 244.9 −1.4 91.0 50.7 30.3 20.5 40.3 34.5 5.8 55.1 23.9 50.4 48.1
2002 166.9 3.3 63.6 5.9 23.7 −17.9 57.8 51.9 5.9 28.4 10.4 11.7 6.6
2001          Apr 24.1 0.6 −2.0 −0.1 −10.9 10.7 −1.9 − 3.7 1.8 2.7 −2.5 5.5 −1.7
         May 12.3 0.1 2.4 5.9 4.6 1.3 −3.5 − 4.8 1.3 7.5 0.6 2.3 5.9
         Jun −26.6 −0.1 11.6 −3.2 6.2 −9.4 14.8 14.5 0.3 −26.5 −24.4 −23.6 2.7
         Jul −47.6 −0.0 −13.8 −5.2 −11.8 6.7 −8.7 − 7.8 −0.8 4.5 4.5 −6.1 −4.8
         Aug 25.5 −0.3 1.3 3.6 12.4 −8.8 −2.3 − 2.6 0.2 −5.2 −8.9 −0.5 1.9
         Sep 56.7 0.3 33.2 26.3 29.2 −3.0 6.9 6.2 0.8 −6.2 −6.5 6.4 10.6
         Oct 1.6 0.4 −6.6 −8.9 −11.7 2.8 2.3 1.4 0.9 −0.2 2.3 3.0 0.8
         Nov 51.1 −0.5 18.2 10.0 13.4 −3.3 8.2 8.9 −0.7 15.7 14.4 3.7 6.0
         Dec −16.8 1.0 −12.3 −3.4 −3.5 0.1 −8.9 − 7.3 −1.7 18.9 12.4 18.7 10.1
2002          Jan −51.6 13.0 −49.6 −46.7 −46.6 −0.1 −2.9 − 3.7 0.8 −7.3 −10.4 −10.7 −11.0
         Feb −23.2 −8.2 −15.1 −3.1 −9.8 6.7 −12.0 − 13.3 1.2 1.8 0.1 −1.0 2.0
         Mar 42.2 −2.5 28.9 19.0 11.9 7.1 9.9 10.3 −0.4 −1.0 −8.9 −6.5 3.0
         Apr 7.7 −2.0 −0.9 −8.0 −10.3 2.3 7.1 7.0 0.1 11.0 8.7 8.1 2.3
         May 52.5 −0.2 23.2 12.8 11.1 1.8 10.4 10.5 −0.2 6.6 3.6 2.1 2.4
         Jun −5.7 −0.4 18.4 9.7 14.3 −4.5 8.6 7.4 1.3 −19.8 −17.1 −10.1 −1.1
         Jul −19.6 −0.5 −22.6 −27.2 −16.3 −10.9 4.6 4.2 0.3 7.2 3.6 −7.1 −2.6
         Aug 23.8 −0.2 21.8 15.0 18.1 −3.1 6.8 6.8 −0.0 −1.7 0.9 8.8 0.3
         Sep 51.3 −0.2 4.0 −1.6 0.3 −1.9 5.6 4.6 0.9 12.0 10.2 10.3 10.4
         Oct 20.4 0.9 0.9 −4.0 4.6 −8.6 4.9 3.5 1.4 4.6 6.2 4.4 −1.5
         Nov 97.2 −1.0 52.0 39.4 32.7 6.7 12.6 10.1 2.5 9.4 7.9 2.2 −1.8
         Dec −28.2 4.7 2.6 0.4 13.8 −13.4 2.3 4.4 −2.1 5.7 5.4 11.2 4.0
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey “in section data from money market funds. —1Statistical breaks have been eliminated
II. Unlike the other tables in section IV, this table includes −in addition to from the flow figures. —2Up to December 1998, volume of business
the figures reported by banks (including building and loan associations) − (balance sheet total plus endorsement liabilities and bills sent for
20*IV Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
IV Banks
 
   
 
euro area  3 Claims on
non-euro-area
to non-banks in other member states residents
 Public Enterprises and Public authorities individuals authorities
Secur- Secur- of which Secur- of which Other
ities Total Loans  
3 ities 4 Total Total Loans  3 Total Loans  3 ities Total Loans  3 assets   Period
End of year or month
 
248.1 941.9 650.1 291.8 78.2 39.6 39.6 38.6 8.3 30.3 548.8 479.6 189.2 1994
250.0 1,086.3 792.2 294.1 88.2 39.4 39.2 48.8 11.3 37.6 608.5 526.0 209.4 1995
269.7 1,169.1 857.8 311.4 102.8 36.8 36.8 66.0 17.2 48.8 678.1 575.3 224.4 1996300.6 1,228.2 911.0 317.2 139.2 41.9 41.2 97.3 23.4 73.9 839.6 710.2 253.1 1997394.5 1,254.9 939.1 315.8 218.0 62.5 56.0 155.5 35.6 119.9 922.0 758.0 302.2 1998233.0 632.1 488.4 143.7 168.8 65.3 35.9 103.6 20.7 82.8 511.2 404.2 185.8 1999
259.1 616.9 478.5 138.4 187.3 83.8 44.2 103.5 20.0 83.5 622.4 481.7 218.1 2000
261.3 587.8 468.7 119.1 232.3 111.3 53.7 121.0 26.2 94.8 727.3 572.0 174.3 2001265.5 585.9 448.0 137.9 247.7 124.7 63.6 123.0 25.5 97.5 738.1 589.2 180.0 2002
283.4 607.7 482.5 125.2 214.1 95.1 49.0 119.0 24.1 94.9 670.6 522.6 229.3 2001          Mar
290.7 599.6 477.1 122.5 219.3 99.5 48.3 119.9 24.0 95.9 689.7 536.9 231.9          Apr
287.1 598.0 475.5 122.5 227.5 103.5 48.4 123.9 24.3 99.7 698.1 541.1 238.4          May260.7 597.1 469.2 127.8 225.2 104.4 50.8 120.8 24.5 96.3 693.2 535.9 230.4          Jun
259.5 607.6 470.3 137.3 224.5 103.2 49.7 121.4 24.0 97.3 663.1 510.4 214.1          Jul
257.0 597.3 469.5 127.8 227.5 102.0 49.2 125.6 24.1 101.5 683.8 531.3 212.6          Aug252.9 584.5 466.8 117.7 228.0 103.5 51.1 124.5 23.8 100.7 712.8 558.0 214.6          Sep
255.1 583.8 467.7 116.1 225.5 105.2 51.7 120.3 24.1 96.2 722.0 563.7 215.5          Oct
252.8 594.3 477.4 116.9 225.7 107.8 52.4 117.9 24.8 93.1 741.7 584.8 182.8          Nov261.3 587.8 468.7 119.1 232.3 111.3 53.7 121.0 26.2 94.8 727.3 572.0 174.3          Dec
261.6 588.1 469.5 118.5 235.6 113.5 54.7 122.1 25.7 96.4 723.8 569.9 173.1 2002          Jan
258.2 589.2 466.9 122.3 237.2 114.6 56.1 122.6 25.8 96.8 721.8 566.7 172.6          Feb
248.6 586.6 464.3 122.3 245.0 118.7 60.1 126.3 26.7 99.6 730.8 574.6 178.3          Mar
254.0 587.2 460.4 126.9 246.7 120.1 61.5 126.6 26.4 100.2 721.2 568.3 179.3          Apr
253.6 588.6 455.2 133.4 249.0 121.3 62.6 127.7 26.0 101.8 734.8 580.6 176.1          May244.6 581.6 450.0 131.6 245.4 118.1 61.5 127.2 26.0 101.2 712.6 559.4 171.7          Jun
239.9 592.3 458.1 134.2 249.3 118.1 59.8 131.2 26.5 104.7 712.9 557.9 174.2          Jul
249.1 583.7 448.5 135.2 246.6 114.3 58.3 132.3 26.9 105.4 722.0 566.9 170.7          Aug248.3 584.2 445.3 138.9 248.3 114.7 59.3 133.6 27.2 106.3 752.3 597.5 174.9          Sep
254.2 586.0 448.3 137.7 246.9 116.4 59.1 130.5 27.6 102.9 762.2 608.7 176.7          Oct
258.2 591.7 449.2 142.5 248.2 118.6 61.0 129.6 28.0 101.6 791.0 634.2 182.4          Nov265.5 585.9 448.0 137.9 247.7 124.7 63.6 123.0 25.5 97.5 738.1 589.2 180.0          Dec
Changes 1
13.1 110.9 113.1 −2.1 10.0 −0.2 −0.4 10.2 3.0 7.3 59.7 46.3 20.2 1995
19.7 82.9 65.5 17.3 14.6 −2.6 −2.5 17.2 6.0 11.2 69.5 49.3 15.1 1996
30.8 59.1 53.3 5.8 36.5 5.1 4.4 31.4 6.1 25.3 159.4 132.9 28.6 199792.3 25.8 28.1 −2.3 77.1 18.9 13.0 58.3 12.5 45.7 83.9 52.0 55.3 1998
30.4 1.3 7.7 −6.4 48.4 12.2 6.4 36.2 2.0 34.2 33.1 13.8 31.3 1999
27.3 −11.4 −6.7 −4.6 17.8 16.8 7.2 1.0 −0.3 1.2 103.9 71.9 32.5 2000
2.4 −26.5 −9.8 −16.7 31.3 24.3 7.7 7.0 2.2 4.8 110.1 86.6 −9.9 2001
5.1 −1.3 −20.7 19.4 18.0 15.6 12.0 2.4 −0.6 3.0 65.9 64.3 5.6 2002
7.2 −8.1 −5.4 −2.7 5.3 4.4 −0.6 0.9 −0.1 1.0 20.1 15.2 2.6 2001          Apr
−3.6 −1.7 −1.6 −0.1 6.9 3.5 −0.4 3.5 0.1 3.4 −4.1 −6.5 6.4          May
−26.3 −0.9 −6.2 5.4 −2.0 1.0 2.4 −3.0 0.2 −3.2 −3.7 −4.2 −8.0          Jun
−1.3 10.6 1.0 9.6 −0.0 −0.9 −0.8 0.9 −0.3 1.2 −21.9 −18.4 −16.4          Jul
−2.4 −8.4 −0.7 −7.7 3.7 −0.8 −0.1 4.5 0.2 4.3 31.3 30.2 −1.6          Aug
−4.2 −12.9 −2.8 −10.1 0.3 1.5 1.9 −1.1 −0.3 −0.8 27.3 25.1 2.1          Sep
2.2 −0.7 0.9 −1.5 −2.5 1.6 0.5 −4.1 0.3 −4.4 7.1 3.9 0.8          Oct
−2.3 10.7 9.8 0.9 1.3 2.5 0.6 −1.2 0.6 −1.8 16.3 18.0 1.3          Nov
8.6 −6.3 −8.8 2.4 6.6 3.4 1.2 3.2 1.4 1.8 −15.9 −14.6 −8.5          Dec
0.3 0.3 0.8 −0.5 3.0 2.1 0.9 1.0 −0.6 1.5 −6.4 −6.4 −1.2 2002          Jan
−3.0 1.2 −2.6 3.8 1.6 1.1 1.3 0.5 0.1 0.4 −1.2 −2.7 −0.4          Feb
−9.6 −2.4 −2.6 0.2 7.9 4.1 4.1 3.8 1.0 2.8 11.3 11.5 5.6          Mar
5.7 0.6 −3.9 4.5 2.2 1.8 1.7 0.5 −0.2 0.7 −1.2 1.1 0.8          Apr
−0.3 1.6 −5.1 6.7 3.0 1.6 1.5 1.4 −0.3 1.6 25.8 23.0 −3.0          May
−9.0 −7.0 −5.1 −1.9 −2.7 −2.6 −0.5 −0.2 0.2 −0.4 0.6 −0.3 −4.5          Jun
−4.5 10.7 8.1 2.6 3.5 −0.3 −2.0 3.8 0.4 3.4 −6.1 −7.1 2.5          Jul
8.5 −7.9 −9.6 1.7 −2.6 −3.0 −0.9 0.4 −0.1 0.5 7.4 7.1 −3.5          Aug
−0.1 −0.1 −3.2 3.1 1.8 0.5 1.1 1.3 0.4 0.9 31.2 31.4 4.3          Sep
5.9 1.8 3.1 −1.2 −1.6 1.4 −0.2 −3.0 0.4 −3.4 12.2 11.8 1.7          Oct
4.0 5.7 0.9 4.8 1.4 2.3 2.0 −0.9 0.4 −1.3 31.1 27.5 5.7          Nov
7.2 −5.8 −1.3 −4.6 0.3 6.6 3.1 −6.3 −2.3 −4.0 −38.9 −32.6 −2.4          Dec
collection from the banks ’portfolios prior to maturity) and trust funds. — instead of bill holdings. —4Including debt securities arising from the
3Up to December 1998, including fiduciary loans and bill-based lending exchange of equalisation claims. 
21*IV Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Liabilities
 
Up to the end of 1998, DM billion; from 1999,  5  billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area  4 
in the euro area  3 
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities  5 notice  6 
 
Balance in the in other of which of which
sheet home member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total  2 Total country states Total Total night Total  4 Total 3 months Total night 2 years  7 
 End of year or month
 
1994 7,205.7 1,650.9 1,483.5 167.4 3,082.7 2,894.4 510.4 1,288.3 549.2 1,095.8 654.6 80.1 4.1
1995 7,778.7 1,761.5 1,582.0 179.6 3,260.0 3,038.9 549.8 1,289.0 472.0 1,200.1 749.5 110.1 4.5
1996 8,540.5 1,975.3 1,780.2 195.1 3,515.9 3,264.0 638.1 1,318.5 430.6 1,307.4 865.7 137.3 7.51997 9,368.2 2,195.6 1,959.1 236.5 3,647.1 3,376.2 654.5 1,364.9 426.8 1,356.9 929.2 162.5 7.31998 10,355.5 2,480.3 2,148.9 331.4 3,850.8 3,552.2 751.6 1,411.1 461.6 1,389.6 971.9 187.4 9.41999 5,678.5 1,288.1 1,121.8 166.3 2,012.4 1,854.7 419.5 820.6 247.0 614.7 504.4 111.1 6.5
2000 6,083.9 1,379.4 1,188.9 190.5 2,051.4 1,873.6 441.4 858.8 274.3 573.5 450.5 107.9 6.9
2001 6,303.1 1,418.0 1,202.1 215.9 2,134.0 1,979.7 525.0 880.2 290.6 574.5 461.9 105.2 7.62002 6,409.2 1,478.7 1,236.3 242.4 2,169.9 2,034.8 574.4 885.2 279.7 575.3 472.9 87.4 8.1
2001          Mar 6,259.3 1,396.1 1,179.9 216.2 2,040.4 1,874.4 440.7 868.1 281.8 565.6 443.0 108.4 7.6
         Apr 6,283.6 1,399.2 1,170.1 229.1 2,044.2 1,878.0 450.8 864.5 279.0 562.7 442.1 108.0 7.5
         May 6,312.3 1,397.2 1,169.6 227.7 2,053.8 1,883.9 453.9 870.1 282.1 559.9 440.4 110.9 8.8         Jun 6,283.8 1,390.9 1,183.6 207.3 2,061.5 1,893.3 462.1 872.4 283.7 558.7 440.1 109.2 8.2
         Jul 6,225.8 1,374.9 1,168.1 206.8 2,055.1 1,888.4 458.8 873.2 285.8 556.4 439.0 106.9 7.6
         Aug 6,236.5 1,367.7 1,168.2 199.4 2,058.6 1,893.2 461.9 876.2 289.0 555.1 439.0 105.5 6.6         Sep 6,295.9 1,398.9 1,196.0 203.0 2,074.6 1,912.0 479.2 877.4 289.0 555.4 440.0 105.6 8.3
         Oct 6,300.0 1,386.9 1,176.9 210.0 2,077.0 1,914.5 482.5 875.6 287.3 556.4 442.8 107.1 7.7
         Nov 6,320.2 1,418.2 1,198.8 219.4 2,102.7 1,938.6 509.6 870.9 284.1 558.2 445.6 107.5 8.6         Dec 6,303.1 1,418.0 1,202.1 215.9 2,134.0 1,979.7 525.0 880.2 290.6 574.5 461.9 105.2 7.6
2002          Jan 6,255.1 1,375.4 1,153.3 222.2 2,112.2 1,957.1 511.0 872.8 281.4 573.4 464.3 105.0 8.1
         Feb 6,230.4 1,346.3 1,141.7 204.6 2,107.5 1,955.2 510.5 872.7 278.8 572.0 463.9 102.9 8.2         Mar 6,269.8 1,371.2 1,157.9 213.3 2,108.5 1,954.0 508.0 875.2 278.4 570.8 463.8 105.1 8.1
         Apr 6,267.7 1,362.1 1,129.9 232.1 2,099.9 1,948.3 515.1 871.3 274.5 561.8 456.7 104.1 10.1
         May 6,304.5 1,382.7 1,150.7 232.0 2,107.1 1,957.8 523.5 874.3 277.0 560.1 456.1 101.1 7.4         Jun 6,277.4 1,392.3 1,174.8 217.4 2,118.7 1,970.2 535.6 875.7 278.3 558.9 455.1 99.9 8.5
         Jul 6,265.6 1,371.7 1,149.6 222.1 2,111.9 1,964.9 531.2 876.2 278.0 557.5 453.6 99.5 8.0
         Aug 6,290.6 1,389.2 1,165.7 223.5 2,098.3 1,962.0 526.7 877.6 280.7 557.8 453.8 87.4 7.3         Sep 6,341.1 1,400.2 1,172.1 228.1 2,105.1 1,967.6 540.3 869.1 272.6 558.3 454.7 87.5 8.8
         Oct 6,359.1 1,419.4 1,177.2 242.2 2,114.5 1,979.6 542.0 877.8 279.0 559.7 456.9 86.6 8.2
         Nov 6,453.5 1,460.0 1,214.3 245.7 2,146.5 2,008.8 571.8 874.6 273.2 562.4 460.2 90.1 10.0         Dec 6,409.2 1,478.7 1,236.3 242.4 2,169.9 2,034.8 574.4 885.2 279.7 575.3 472.9 87.4 8.1
 Changes 1
1995 587.7 110.7 98.5 12.2 189.3 156.5 47.2 4.9 −76.5 104.3 99.1 30.0 0.4
1996 761.8 213.7 198.2 15.5 256.0 225.2 88.3 29.5 −41.4 107.3 116.2 27.2 3.0
1997 825.6 223.7 185.5 38.3 130.8 112.1 16.3 46.4 −3.8 49.4 60.3 25.0 −0.3
1998 1,001.0 277.0 182.8 94.2 205.9 176.8 97.8 46.3 34.8 32.7 42.0 26.2 2.01999 452.6 70.2 66.4 3.7 75.0 65.6 34.2 36.7 13.5 −5.3 7.4 7.5 1.7
2000 401.5 87.5 66.0 21.5 38.7 19.8 22.5 37.8 27.0 −40.5 −53.6 −4.2 0.3
2001 244.9 32.4 8.4 24.0 80.6 105.2 83.0 21.2 16.2 1.1 11.4 −4.0 0.4
2002 166.9 58.4 32.5 25.9 53.4 56.9 49.9 6.2 −10.7 0.8 11.0 −2.1 0.6
2001          Apr 24.1 2.1 −10.7 12.8 3.6 3.6 10.0 −3.5 −2.8 −2.9 −0.9 −0.4 −0.3
         May 12.3 −2.2 −0.5 −1.7 8.4 5.2 2.7 5.3 3.0 −2.8 −1.7 2.2 1.3
         Jun −26.6 −6.3 14.0 −20.3 7.8 9.4 8.3 2.4 1.6 −1.2 −0.3 −1.5 −0.6
         Jul −47.6 −16.0 −15.5 −0.6 −5.4 −4.4 −3.1 1.0 2.2 −2.4 −1.1 −1.9 −0.5
         Aug 25.5 −7.2 0.1 −7.4 4.7 5.3 3.4 3.2 3.3 −1.2 0.0 −0.7 −1.1
         Sep 56.7 31.3 27.8 3.5 15.7 18.7 17.3 1.2 −0.0 0.2 1.0 −0.1 1.7
         Oct 1.6 −12.0 −19.1 7.1 2.1 2.4 3.2 −1.8 −1.7 1.0 2.8 1.4 −0.6
         Nov 51.1 30.8 21.4 9.4 25.4 24.0 26.9 −4.7 −3.3 1.8 2.8 0.2 1.0
         Dec −16.8 −0.3 3.3 −3.6 31.2 41.0 15.4 9.2 6.5 16.4 16.3 −2.3 −1.0
2002          Jan −51.6 −42.6 −48.9 6.3 −22.3 −22.8 −14.2 −7.5 −9.2 −1.2 2.4 −0.4 0.4
         Feb −23.2 −29.1 −11.5 −17.6 −4.7 −1.9 −0.4 −0.0 −2.6 −1.4 −0.4 −2.2 0.1
         Mar 42.2 24.9 16.2 8.7 1.2 −1.1 −2.5 2.5 −0.5 −1.2 −0.1 2.4 −0.1
         Apr 7.7 −9.2 −28.0 18.8 −7.9 −5.4 7.4 −3.8 −3.8 −9.0 −7.1 −0.6 1.9
         May 52.5 20.9 21.1 −0.1 9.2 11.0 8.8 3.9 3.2 −1.7 −0.6 −2.5 −2.6
         Jun −5.7 6.9 22.2 −15.3 11.9 12.1 12.0 1.3 1.3 −1.2 −1.0 −0.6 1.2
         Jul −19.6 −20.5 −25.2 4.6 −7.4 −5.6 −4.6 0.4 −0.4 −1.4 −1.5 −0.7 −0.6
         Aug 23.8 17.5 16.1 1.5 0.0 −2.8 −4.5 1.4 2.7 0.3 0.1 1.5 −0.7
         Sep 51.3 10.9 6.4 4.6 6.9 5.2 13.3 −8.6 −8.5 0.5 1.0 0.6 1.5
         Oct 20.4 19.2 5.1 14.1 9.6 12.2 1.8 9.0 6.4 1.4 2.2 −0.9 −0.6
         Nov 97.2 40.6 37.1 3.5 32.3 29.4 29.8 −3.2 −5.8 2.7 3.3 3.5 1.8
         Dec −28.2 18.8 22.0 −3.3 24.5 26.6 3.0 10.8 6.6 12.8 12.6 −2.1 −1.8
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey “in section from the banks ’portfolios prior to maturity) and liabilities incurred in the
II. Unlike the other tables in section IV, this table includes −in addition to banks ’own name but on behalf of third parties. —3Up to December 1998,
the figures reported by banks (including building and loan associations) − including liabilities arising from fiduciary loans and liabilities arising from
data from money market funds. —1Statistical breaks have been eliminated rediscounted bills (endorsement liabilities). —4Up to December 1998,
from the flow figures. —2Up to December 1998, volume of business including liabilities arising from fiduciary loans. —5For the German
(balance sheet total plus endorsement liabilities and bills sent for collection contribution: from 1999, including deposits under savings and loan
22*IV Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Debt securities
issued  10 
in other member states  8 Deposits of
central governments  4 
With agreed At agreed Liabilities
maturities notice arising
of which from Money of which Liabilities
domestic market with to non- repos with
of which of which central non-banks fund euro- Capital maturities
up to up to govern- in the shares of up to area and Other
Total  4 Total 3 months Total ments Total reserves   Period 2 years  7 euro area  9 issued  10 2 years  10 residents Liabilities
End of year or month
 
68.7 11.8 7.3 7.3 108.2 108.2 − 31.3 1,441.2 81.9 336.8 305.2 357.8 1994
97.3 11.4 8.3 8.3 111.0 111.0 − 39.1 1,608.1 70.3 393.9 325.0 391.0 1995
120.6 9.0 9.2 9.2 114.6 114.6 − 34.0 1,804.3 54.4 422.1 350.0 438.8 1996
145.8 9.2 9.4 9.4 108.3 108.3 − 28.6 1,998.3 62.5 599.2 388.1 511.3 1997
168.3 13.8 9.7 9.7 111.2 111.2 − 34.8 2,248.1 80.2 739.8 426.8 574.8 1998
99.7 8.9 4.8 3.7 46.6 45.9 2.0 20.8 1,323.6 97.4 487.9 262.6 281.1 1999
96.3 6.7 4.7 3.3 69.9 67.6 0.4 19.3 1,417.1 113.3 599.8 298.1 318.4 2000
92.4 9.0 5.2 3.8 49.1 46.9 4.9 33.2 1,445.4 129.3 647.6 319.2 300.8 200174.6 9.9 4.7 3.6 47.7 45.6 3.3 36.8 1,465.9 140.9 599.4 343.7 311.5 2002
95.8 7.7 5.0 3.5 57.6 56.1 0.9 22.7 1,457.8 113.8 720.4 302.5 318.5 2001          Mar
95.6 7.7 5.0 3.5 58.1 55.5 1.4 23.3 1,460.3 116.3 725.9 301.8 327.6          Apr
97.1 8.4 5.0 3.5 59.0 55.1 1.8 23.4 1,466.2 117.4 744.6 304.7 320.5          May96.1 8.7 5.0 3.5 58.9 55.2 1.1 24.2 1,468.0 118.0 717.9 307.2 313.0          Jun
94.2 8.0 5.0 3.5 59.8 55.3 1.7 25.0 1,473.1 123.7 682.5 310.3 303.3          Jul
94.0 8.4 5.0 3.6 59.9 54.5 4.6 26.5 1,468.1 123.5 693.7 312.6 304.9          Aug92.3 7.3 5.0 3.6 57.0 54.0 2.8 28.0 1,471.1 125.6 692.2 314.2 314.0          Sep
94.4 9.8 5.0 3.6 55.4 53.4 9.4 29.6 1,473.1 126.7 690.0 318.2 315.8          Oct
93.8 9.3 5.1 3.7 56.5 53.6 4.0 30.7 1,448.5 123.8 677.1 321.3 317.6          Nov92.4 9.0 5.2 3.8 49.1 46.9 4.9 33.2 1,445.4 129.3 647.6 319.2 300.8          Dec
91.8 8.1 5.1 3.8 50.1 47.4 2.5 35.0 1,450.5 122.2 668.3 320.1 291.1 2002          Jan
89.6 7.3 5.1 3.8 49.4 47.3 3.5 35.9 1,462.8 125.4 664.8 322.2 287.3          Feb
92.0 9.3 5.0 3.7 49.4 46.9 3.7 35.8 1,479.4 129.0 666.4 323.3 281.6          Mar
89.4 8.3 4.7 3.5 47.5 45.8 3.4 35.9 1,478.2 133.1 673.4 325.3 289.7          Apr
89.1 9.5 4.7 3.4 48.2 45.6 4.7 35.4 1,480.6 134.6 673.3 329.0 291.6          May86.7 8.5 4.6 3.4 48.7 45.9 4.1 35.0 1,472.6 133.1 628.9 331.1 294.7          Jun
87.0 8.7 4.6 3.4 47.6 45.8 3.1 35.6 1,471.6 133.7 640.9 336.8 293.9          Jul
75.5 9.7 4.6 3.4 48.9 45.8 4.3 37.1 1,489.4 135.9 636.3 341.2 294.8          Aug74.2 8.8 4.5 3.4 49.9 46.7 10.7 37.0 1,490.2 137.0 647.7 344.8 305.5          Sep
73.9 9.1 4.5 3.4 48.3 46.8 9.6 37.6 1,485.9 137.5 642.5 343.7 306.0          Oct
75.6 9.4 4.5 3.4 47.6 46.3 6.4 37.5 1,496.8 148.2 653.5 343.0 309.8          Nov74.6 9.9 4.7 3.6 47.7 45.6 3.3 36.8 1,465.9 140.9 599.4 343.7 311.5          Dec
Changes 1
28.6 −0.4 1.0 1.0 2.8 2.8 − 7.8 166.9 −11.5 57.2 19.8 36.0 1995
23.3 −2.4 0.9 0.9 3.6 3.6 −− 5.1 196.3 −15.9 28.1 25.0 47.8 1996
25.1 0.2 0.2 0.2 −6.2 −6.2 −− 4.5 194.8 8.1 172.3 37.1 71.2 1997
24.0 4.6 0.3 0.3 2.9 2.9 − 6.2 263.3 28.1 151.4 28.8 68.3 1998
5.9 1.5 −0.2 −1.3 1.9 1.2 0.6 3.5 168.0 65.1 89.7 38.0 7.7 1999
−4.5 −0.5 −0.1 −0.3 23.1 21.6 −1.6 −1.5 90.6 15.9 97.8 35.3 54.6 2000
−4.6 1.6 0.2 0.4 −20.5 −20.4 4.6 13.3 59.5 18.6 34.8 20.9 −1.1 2001
−2.1 1.5 −0.5 −0.3 −1.4 −1.3 −1.6 4.2 17.8 15.4 −2.2 25.9 11.0 2002
−0.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.5 −0.7 0.5 0.7 2.6 2.5 6.7 −0.7 8.6 2001          Apr
1.0 0.1 −0.0 0.0 0.9 −0.4 0.4 0.0 1.3 1.0 2.2 2.1 0.2          May
−0.9 0.3 0.0 0.0 −0.1 0.1 −0.7 0.9 2.8 0.5 −25.2 2.6 −8.3          Jun
−1.4 −0.6 0.0 0.0 0.9 0.1 0.6 0.8 7.7 5.8 −25.0 3.6 −13.8          Jul
0.3 0.4 0.0 0.0 0.1 −0.8 2.9 1.5 −2.9 −0.5 24.7 2.9 −1.1          Aug
−1.8 −1.1 0.0 0.0 −2.9 −0.5 −1.7 1.5 2.5 2.0 −3.7 1.5 9.6          Sep
1.9 2.5 0.0 0.0 −1.6 −0.6 6.5 1.6 1.6 0.2 −4.9 4.0 2.7          Oct
−0.8 −0.6 0.0 0.0 1.1 0.1 −5.3 1.1 8.5 0.3 −17.1 2.8 4.9          Nov
−1.5 −0.2 0.1 0.2 −7.4 −6.6 0.9 1.9 −3.2 5.5 −32.0 −1.6 −13.8          Dec
−0.8 −0.9 −0.1 −0.0 1.0 0.5 −2.4 2.0 4.0 −2.4 15.1 0.7 −6.0 2002          Jan
−2.2 −0.9 −0.1 −0.0 −0.7 −0.2 1.0 0.8 12.7 3.2 −2.8 2.3 −3.3          Feb
2.5 2.0 −0.0 −0.0 −0.0 −0.3 0.2 −0.1 16.9 3.6 3.7 1.2 −5.8          Mar
−2.3 −1.0 −0.3 −0.3 −1.9 −1.2 −0.3 0.2 0.9 4.1 15.9 2.3 5.8          Apr
0.2 1.3 −0.1 −0.0 0.7 −0.1 1.3 −0.0 6.2 1.7 12.6 4.1 −1.8          May
−1.8 −1.0 −0.0 0.0 0.5 0.3 −0.6 −0.3 −3.8 −1.8 −28.2 2.5 5.9          Jun
−0.1 0.2 −0.1 −0.0 −1.1 −0.1 −1.0 0.6 −3.4 −1.2 5.4 5.2 1.6          Jul
2.2 1.0 −0.0 −0.0 1.4 0.0 1.2 1.2 1.5 2.3 −2.6 4.7 0.2          Aug
−0.9 −0.4 −0.0 −0.0 1.0 0.8 6.4 0.1 1.0 1.0 11.9 3.5 10.6          Sep
−0.3 0.4 −0.0 −0.0 −1.7 0.1 −1.0 0.7 −3.9 0.6 −4.6 −1.1 1.5          Oct
1.8 0.3 −0.0 −0.0 −0.6 −0.5 −3.2 −0.2 11.9 10.7 13.2 −0.5 3.2          Nov
−0.5 0.6 0.2 0.2 0.1 −0.7 −3.1 −0.8 −26.1 −6.3 −41.8 1.0 −0.8          Dec
contracts (see Table IV.12). —6For the German contribution: up to the end with agreed maturities of up to two years. —10In Germany, debt securities
of 1998, including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market paper; up to
footnote 5). —7Up to December 1998, with maturities of less than four the January 2002 Monthly Report they were published together with money
years. —8Excluding deposits of central governments. —9Data collected market fund shares. 
separately from 1999 only; up to December 1998, included in the deposits
23*IV Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
IV Banks
 
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks *
 
 
 5  billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
  of which of which 
Loans
 Cash in hand and credit
Number of balances forreporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Othermonth tions total banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets
All categories of banks
 
2002          Jul 2,437 6,308.1 55.1 2,258.0 1,585.9 662.9 3,574.8 462.7 2,568.1 4.9 526.1 142.2 278.0
         Aug 2,424 6,331.8 59.6 2,281.4 1,614.9 657.2 3,563.4 446.1 2,573.3 4.9 523.3 152.9 274.6         Sep 2,394 6,381.8 55.6 2,312.2 1,646.9 654.8 3,580.4 468.0 2,568.3 4.8 522.9 154.8 278.7
         Oct 2,373 6,399.9 57.1 2,321.2 1,663.3 648.0 3,583.0 464.4 2,575.3 4.8 522.0 157.2 281.4
         Nov 2,365 6,495.3 55.0 2,400.9 1,732.2 649.8 3,592.4 468.5 2,572.5 4.8 530.2 159.1 288.0         Dec 2,365 6,452.3 63.5 2,381.9 1,727.4 645.6 3,556.0 450.0 2,567.0 4.7 518.6 163.7 287.1
Commercial banks 5
2002          Nov 273 1,862.5 22.4 662.4 523.9 125.3 959.5 245.0 540.3 2.2 161.1 94.9 123.3         Dec 273 1,829.7 24.4 659.8 527.6 127.2 929.1 227.3 538.5 2.3 150.8 96.3 120.2
   Big banks 6
2002          Nov 4 1,089.7 14.1 378.8 320.4 55.6 536.3 142.5 286.2 1.3 99.1 84.5 76.0         Dec 4 1,056.2 13.1 377.4 316.5 57.9 506.6 125.4 283.2 1.4 89.8 85.3 73.8
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2002          Nov 186 660.8 7.8 228.5 155.7 62.6 380.9 83.3 237.4 0.8 56.1 9.6 34.1         Dec 186 664.9 10.7 226.8 161.7 63.2 381.8 83.7 238.7 0.8 55.4 10.2 35.4
   Branches of foreign banks
2002          Nov 83 112.0 0.6 55.1 47.8 7.1 42.3 19.2 16.7 0.1 5.9 0.8 13.3         Dec 83 108.6 0.5 55.6 49.4 6.1 40.7 18.2 16.6 0.1 5.6 0.8 10.9
Land  banks
2002          Nov 14 1,336.2 3.1 675.2 546.4 126.2 574.9 70.4 409.5 0.4 90.7 34.3 48.7         Dec 14 1,324.2 3.2 664.2 539.2 123.7 573.9 68.2 411.1 0.3 91.0 33.9 49.0
Savings banks
2002          Nov 520 983.6 17.1 236.6 80.8 155.0 692.3 76.7 522.9 1.4 90.7 13.1 24.6         Dec 520 997.9 20.3 243.0 88.7 153.6 695.2 78.7 524.7 1.4 89.9 14.4 25.0
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives  
 
2002          Nov 2 200.8 0.5 130.4 93.2 36.9 54.6 11.7 24.5 0.1 18.1 9.3 6.2         Dec 2 198.5 0.7 125.5 88.9 36.4 54.6 11.3 24.6 0.1 18.0 10.3 7.4
Credit cooperatives
2002          Nov 1,489 556.7 11.1 147.2 69.5 76.7 376.6 48.6 289.4 0.7 37.6 4.2 17.6         Dec 1,489 559.7 13.2 145.3 68.5 75.9 378.0 49.6 290.1 0.7 37.3 5.4 17.8
Mortgage banks
2002          Nov 25 876.8 0.5 222.0 144.6 76.3 632.1 7.9 525.4 − 98.8 1.1 21.0
         Dec 25 872.6 1.2 223.1 146.6 75.6 625.6 8.3 519.7 − 97.4 1.2 21.5
Building and loan associations
2002          Nov 28 161.4 0.0 36.2 24.7 11.6 116.5 1.5 105.1 . 9.9 0.4 8.2         Dec 28 163.8 0.0 37.1 25.4 11.7 117.7 1.6 105.7 . 10.4 0.4 8.6
Banks with special functions
2002          Nov 14 517.3 0.3 290.9 249.1 41.8 186.0 6.7 155.4 − 23.3 1.8 38.4
         Dec 14 505.9 0.5 283.9 242.5 41.4 182.0 5.1 152.6 − 23.8 1.9 37.6
Memo item: Foreign banks 7
2002          Nov 131 387.5 2.9 156.8 114.9 41.6 197.8 39.5 118.0 0.2 39.5 1.7 28.4         Dec 132 385.9 3.3 159.1 118.2 40.7 197.5 40.3 116.9 0.2 39.8 1.7 24.3
  of which:  Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 8
2002          Nov 48 275.5 2.4 101.7 67.1 34.4 155.5 20.3 101.3 0.1 33.5 0.9 15.1         Dec 49 277.4 2.8 103.5 68.7 34.6 156.9 22.1 100.3 0.1 34.2 0.9 13.3
*For the period up to December 1998, section IV (except for Table IV.1) included. For the definitions of the respective items, see the footnotes to
shows the assets and liabilities of banks (excluding building and loan Table IV.3. —1For building and loan associations: Including deposits under
associations) in liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in savings and loan contracts (see Table IV. 12). —2Included in time
Germany. The assets and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market deposits. —3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also
funds (which are also classified as MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not footnote 2). —4Including subordinated negotiable bearer debt
24*IV Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
IV Banks
 
   
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
  (including
of which of which published
reserves,
Time deposits  1 Savings deposits  3 partici-pation
Memo rights
item Bearer capital,
for for of which debt Liabilities
funds for
up to and more arising At three Bank general securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking Other   End of months ’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year  1 repos  2 Total notice bonds risks   month standing  4 liabilities
All categories of banks
 
1,775.9 239.5 1,536.2 2,364.1 570.2 344.1 768.5 30.9 568.3 461.5 113.0 1,510.7 284.1 373.3 2002          Jul
1,788.7 207.1 1,581.3 2,351.1 561.9 352.3 755.5 35.9 568.6 461.6 112.9 1,527.7 290.0 374.4          Aug
1,805.6 265.8 1,539.6 2,369.7 582.0 353.1 753.2 45.0 569.1 462.6 112.3 1,530.9 290.5 385.2          Sep
1,817.5 246.1 1,571.1 2,380.0 581.3 355.6 760.7 43.9 570.4 464.8 111.9 1,525.7 290.3 386.4          Oct
1,869.8 282.5 1,587.0 2,408.9 615.0 347.1 762.0 46.5 573.1 468.1 111.7 1,534.5 291.0 391.1          Nov1,858.3 229.1 1,628.9 2,405.1 609.1 337.1 761.4 33.6 586.2 480.9 111.3 1,505.3 291.7 391.9          Dec
Commercial banks 5
713.9 159.6 554.1 667.0 270.7 170.9 127.6 42.0 88.8 73.5 9.1 230.0 105.1 146.5 2002          Nov
701.5 121.7 579.5 655.2 268.4 158.1 128.5 29.2 91.1 76.1 9.1 223.2 104.9 144.9          Dec
Big banks 6
441.7 104.2 337.5 339.1 125.4 117.7 74.4 38.8 20.9 18.7 0.8 164.2 67.0 77.7 2002          Nov
428.8 82.3 346.5 322.6 125.0 99.9 75.3 23.9 21.6 19.5 0.8 159.2 67.0 78.5          Dec
Regional banks and other commercial banks
191.9 45.5 146.1 314.8 139.7 48.3 50.5 1.0 67.9 54.8 8.3 65.8 35.3 53.1 2002          Nov
194.1 30.9 163.0 318.3 137.6 52.4 50.5 2.1 69.4 56.5 8.4 63.9 35.1 53.5          Dec
Branches of foreign banks
80.3 9.8 70.5 13.1 5.6 4.8 2.7 2.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 2.9 15.7 2002          Nov
78.6 8.5 70.0 14.3 5.8 5.8 2.7 3.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 2.9 12.8          Dec
Land   banks
480.5 66.9 413.6 304.6 41.9 39.5 208.4 3.0 14.3 13.1 0.5 426.9 62.3 61.9 2002          Nov
472.6 51.1 421.5 302.4 41.4 38.5 207.4 2.0 14.5 13.2 0.5 419.1 62.6 67.5          Dec
Savings banks
215.1 6.5 208.6 627.1 182.1 64.5 10.2 − 297.3 236.2 73.0 46.3 44.5 50.6 2002          Nov
228.3 11.9 216.5 634.2 181.7 65.5 10.4 − 303.9 242.6 72.8 46.0 44.6 44.7          Dec
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives
 
118.6 35.6 82.9 29.7 6.6 4.7 18.4 1.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 33.9 9.8 8.9 2002          Nov
116.1 33.0 83.1 29.7 5.7 5.6 18.4 1.8 −− 0.0 31.9 9.7 11.1          Dec
Credit cooperatives
75.7 2.1 73.5 396.5 111.5 59.4 24.5 − 172.3 144.9 28.8 33.2 28.5 22.8 2002          Nov
76.9 2.4 74.5 399.1 109.3 60.3 24.6 − 176.3 148.7 28.5 32.7 28.7 22.3          Dec
Mortgage banks
118.3 6.7 111.5 140.8 1.1 2.5 136.9 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.2 573.3 18.6 25.8 2002          Nov
121.0 4.3 116.7 142.3 1.2 4.0 136.8 0.5 0.1 0.0 0.2 564.7 18.7 25.9          Dec
Building and loan associations
29.5 2.2 27.3 101.1 0.2 0.7 99.7 − 0.3 0.3 0.1 7.2 7.1 16.5 2002          Nov
29.9 2.0 27.9 104.3 0.3 0.7 102.9 − 0.3 0.3 0.1 6.9 7.1 15.5          Dec
Banks with special functions
118.3 2.8 115.5 142.1 0.9 4.9 136.3 0.1 −−− 183.8 15.1 58.0 2002          Nov
111.9 2.8 109.1 138.0 1.2 4.4 132.4 0.2 −−− 180.8 15.3 59.9          Dec
Memo item:   Foreign banks 7
138.4 23.1 115.2 103.0 51.3 15.0 27.6 2.4 6.7 6.4 2.4 97.1 12.9 36.2 2002          Nov
140.9 21.5 119.3 105.2 51.4 17.2 27.2 3.6 6.9 6.6 2.5 96.6 13.0 30.3          Dec
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 8
58.1 13.3 44.7 89.9 45.7 10.2 24.9 0.1 6.7 6.4 2.4 97.1 10.0 20.5 2002          Nov
62.3 12.9 49.3 90.9 45.6 11.5 24.5 0.5 6.9 6.6 2.5 96.6 10.2 17.4          Dec
securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities. —5Commercial included in other categories of banks and the category ”Branches (with
banks comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks ”,”Regional banks and other dependent legal status) of foreign banks ”— 8Separate presentation of the
commercial banks ”and ”Branches of foreign banks ”.—6Deutsche Bank banks majority-owned by foreign banks included in the categories
AG, Dresdner Bank AG, Commerzbank AG and Bayerische Hypo- und Vereins- ”Regional banks and other commercial banks ” and ”Mortgage banks ”. 
bank AG. —7Sum of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks and
25*IV Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
IV Banks
 
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis- à-vis residents *
 
 
Up to the end of 1998, DM billion; from 1999,  5  billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs)  2, 3 Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3, 8 
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills and
hand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro-area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins)  1 bank Total and loans Bills  4 banks  5 banks  6 loans  7 Total Loans Bills  4 non-banks banks  9 
End of year or month *
 
1993 26.7 75.3 1,596.8 1,076.2 14.7 3.3 493.2 9.3 3,826.4 3,291.6 44.7 5.6 327.7
1994 25.0 61.5 1,695.6 1,150.6 17.4 4.6 513.6 9.5 4,137.2 3,502.8 45.9 2.2 433.7
1995 26.0 61.0 1,859.9 1,264.9 17.5 4.3 561.9 11.4 4,436.9 3,802.0 46.8 1.4 427.3
1996 28.9 59.7 2,134.0 1,443.3 17.9 3.4 657.2 12.2 4,773.1 4,097.9 44.8 5.9 437.21997 29.3 60.2 2,397.9 1,606.3 18.1 3.6 758.9 11.1 5,058.4 4,353.9 44.7 2.9 473.31998 28.5 63.6 2,738.2 1,814.7 14.6 12.2 887.7 9.1 5,379.8 4,639.7 32.8 5.0 527.81999 16.8 45.6 1,556.9 1,033.4 0.0 19.2 504.2 3.9 2,904.5 2,569.6 7.0 3.0 287.5
2000 15.6 50.8 1,639.6 1,056.1 0.0 26.8 556.6 3.6 3,003.7 2,657.3 6.5 2.3 304.7
2001 14.2 56.3 1,676.0 1,078.9 0.0 5.6 591.5 2.8 3,014.1 2,699.4 4.8 4.4 301.52002 17.5 45.6 1,691.3 1,112.3 0.0 7.8 571.2 2.7 2,997.2 2,685.0 4.1 3.3 301.9
2001          Jul 13.2 50.5 1,661.4 1,046.9 0.0 14.4 600.0 3.4 3,008.2 2,671.1 5.7 4.4 323.0
         Aug 13.0 49.3 1,665.7 1,060.7 0.0 12.9 592.1 2.8 2,995.3 2,671.0 5.6 3.7 311.1         Sep 13.2 51.2 1,689.6 1,087.9 0.0 11.2 590.6 2.8 2,989.9 2,679.6 5.6 4.9 295.7
         Oct 13.6 54.4 1,676.9 1,072.8 0.0 11.1 593.0 2.9 2,992.5 2,681.6 5.5 4.4 297.1
         Nov 13.2 55.9 1,684.1 1,084.2 0.0 7.5 592.3 2.8 3,009.4 2,698.5 5.3 3.7 297.9         Dec 14.2 56.3 1,676.0 1,078.9 0.0 5.6 591.5 2.8 3,014.1 2,699.4 4.8 4.4 301.5
2002          Jan 26.7 49.3 1,633.8 1,038.5 0.0 5.7 589.7 2.8 3,011.2 2,690.2 4.6 3.0 309.5
         Feb 18.8 42.0 1,636.3 1,035.4 0.0 5.2 595.7 2.8 3,006.1 2,689.6 4.4 2.8 305.4         Mar 16.5 44.4 1,653.0 1,045.6 0.0 5.8 601.5 2.7 2,996.9 2,689.9 4.5 2.7 295.9
         Apr 14.5 40.9 1,648.3 1,038.4 0.0 6.3 603.6 2.7 3,004.3 2,687.4 4.4 3.7 304.9
         May 14.3 45.4 1,655.7 1,044.4 0.0 6.1 605.2 2.7 3,005.7 2,682.8 4.2 4.6 310.2         Jun 13.9 43.8 1,668.4 1,061.5 0.0 6.3 600.6 2.7 2,990.8 2,678.8 4.3 5.2 298.7
         Jul 13.4 41.2 1,643.8 1,047.7 0.0 7.6 588.4 2.6 2,995.7 2,685.3 4.3 4.2 299.1
         Aug 13.2 46.0 1,650.2 1,060.1 0.0 7.7 582.4 2.7 2,987.3 2,675.6 4.2 3.9 300.6         Sep 13.0 42.3 1,652.7 1,064.4 0.0 8.5 579.8 2.7 2,995.5 2,683.2 4.2 3.9 301.2
         Oct 13.9 42.8 1,648.3 1,068.2 0.0 8.0 572.2 2.7 2,997.6 2,684.6 4.2 3.9 301.9
         Nov 12.9 41.7 1,689.1 1,102.1 0.0 13.3 573.8 2.6 3,003.5 2,683.3 4.1 3.6 309.5         Dec 17.5 45.6 1,691.3 1,112.3 0.0 7.8 571.2 2.7 2,997.2 2,685.0 4.1 3.3 301.9
Changes *
1994 −1.7 −13.8 + 99.1 + 73.6 + 2.7 + 1.3 + 21.3 + 0.1 + 320.5 + 240.2 + 1.2 −3.3 + 86.7
1995 + 1.0 −0.5 + 193.5 + 139.4 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 54.3 + 0.2 + 312.8 + 303.6 + 1.0 −0.8 + 2.9
1996 + 2.9 −1.3 + 257.8 + 161.8 + 0.4 − 1.1 + 95.8 + 0.8 + 336.3 + 311.7 −2.0 + 4.7 + 10.6
1997 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 262.5 + 160.7 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 102.6 −1.1 + 285.2 + 255.5 −0.1 −3.0 + 36.5
1998 −0.8 + 3.4 + 343.3 + 210.3 −3.6 + 8.6 + 130.0 −2.0 + 335.3 + 302.1 −11.9 + 2.1 + 52.1
1999 + 2.2 + 13.2 + 122.1 + 66.3 + 0.0 + 12.9 + 42.8 −0.7 + 156.1 + 136.9 + 2.6 + 0.4 + 16.7
2000 −1.1 + 5.1 + 83.6 + 21.7 −0.0 + 7.6 + 54.3 −0.3 + 100.7 + 83.7 −0.5 −0.8 + 19.0
2001 −1.4 + 5.5 + 34.6 + 20.1 −0.0 −21.3 + 35.8 −0.9 + 11.9 + 40.8 −1.6 + 1.6 + 0.3
2002 + 3.3 −10.7 + 15.0 + 33.1 + 0.0 + 2.3 −20.3 −0.2 −19.2 −18.0 −0.8 −1.1 + 1.7
2001          Jul + 0.0 + 4.4 − 9.2 −15.4 −0.0 − 2.4 + 8.6 + 0.0 + 1.7 − 3.7 −0.0 + 2.1 + 4.3
         Aug −0.3 −1.2 + 5.7 + 15.2 −− 1.5 − 8.0 −0.6 − 9.6 + 1.3 −0.1 −0.7 −10.1
         Sep + 0.3 + 1.9 + 23.5 + 26.7 −0.0 − 1.7 − 1.5 −0.0 − 6.3 + 7.8 + 0.0 + 0.6 −14.7
         Oct + 0.4 + 3.2 −13.0 −15.3 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 2.4 −0.0 + 2.4 + 1.7 −0.1 −0.5 + 1.3
         Nov −0.5 + 1.6 + 6.9 + 11.1 −− 3.6 − 0.6 −0.1 + 16.1 + 15.9 −0.1 −0.7 + 1.0
         Dec + 1.0 + 0.3 − 7.7 − 5.4 −0.0 − 1.9 − 0.3 −0.0 + 5.8 + 1.7 −0.5 + 0.7 + 3.8
2002          Jan + 12.5 −6.9 −42.5 −41.0 −0.0 + 0.1 − 1.6 −0.0 − 3.4 − 9.9 −0.3 −1.5 + 8.3
         Feb −8.0 −7.3 + 2.7 − 2.9 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 6.1 −0.0 − 4.9 − 0.5 −0.2 −0.2 − 4.1
         Mar −2.3 + 2.4 + 16.9 + 10.3 −0.0 + 0.6 + 6.0 −0.0 − 8.6 + 0.7 + 0.1 −0.1 − 9.3
         Apr −2.0 −3.5 − 5.0 − 7.2 − + 0.5 + 1.6 −0.0 + 8.1 − 2.3 −0.1 + 1.0 + 9.4
         May −0.2 + 4.5 + 7.7 + 6.2 −0.0 − 0.2 + 1.7 −0.1 + 2.2 − 3.9 −0.2 + 0.9 + 5.4
         Jun −0.4 −1.6 + 12.5 + 16.9 −0.0 + 0.1 − 4.6 + 0.0 −19.0 − 8.0 + 0.1 + 0.5 −11.5
         Jul −0.5 −2.5 −24.9 −13.8 − + 1.4 −12.4 −0.0 + 5.1 + 6.5 −0.0 −1.0 + 0.6
         Aug −0.2 + 4.8 + 6.4 + 12.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 6.0 + 0.0 − 8.4 − 9.6 −0.0 −0.2 + 1.5
         Sep −0.2 −3.8 + 2.6 + 4.4 − + 0.8 − 2.6 −0.0 + 7.9 + 7.3 −0.1 −0.0 + 0.7
         Oct + 0.9 + 0.6 − 4.4 + 3.8 −− 0.5 − 7.7 −0.0 + 2.0 + 1.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.6
         Nov −1.0 −1.1 + 40.8 + 33.9 + 0.0 + 5.3 + 1.6 −0.0 + 6.0 − 1.3 −0.0 −0.3 + 7.6
         Dec + 4.7 + 3.8 + 2.2 + 10.2 + 0.0 − 5.4 − 2.6 + 0.0 − 6.3 + 1.7 −0.1 −0.2 − 7.6
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the prior to maturity). —5Up to November 1993, included in securities (see also
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as footnote 6). —6Up to November 1993, including negotiable money market
provisional. Subsequent revisions which appear in the following Monthly paper; excluding registered debt securities. —7From 1999, no longer
Report , are not specially marked. —1Up to December 1998, domestic included in loans or deposits (see also footnote 3). —8Up to December
banknotes and coins. —2Up to December 1998, excluding loans to 1998, including loans to domestic building and loan associations. —
domestic building and loan associations. —3Up to December 1998, 9Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims
including fiduciary loans (see also footnote 7). —4Up to December 1998, (see also footnote 10). —10Including debt securities arising from the
bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from exchange of equalisation claims. —11Including liabilities arising from
rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks ’portfolios registered debt securities, registered money market paper and
26*IV Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3, 11, 12  Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3, 17 
Partici-
patinginterestsin
Memo domestic Memo Memo
item banks Sight Time Redis- item Sight Time Savings Bank item Equalisa-tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciary
loans  
7 Total 13, 14  14, 15  bills 16 loans  7 Total 15, 18  bonds  20 loans  7   Period claims  10 enterprises posits  13 posits  19 
End of year or month *
 
75.3 81.6 59.5 1,395.2 380.2 917.9 69.2 27.9 2,788.1 513.6 1,123.6 859.4 219.1 72.4 1993
68.1 84.4 70.7 1,427.9 342.8 976.9 75.2 33.1 2,875.7 540.2 1,109.3 940.5 206.9 78.8 1994
71.3 88.1 83.2 1,539.4 363.9 1,065.1 75.5 35.0 3,021.1 579.9 1,086.1 1,046.1 227.4 81.6 1995
81.3 106.0 89.7 1,731.0 401.1 1,202.4 75.4 52.2 3,241.5 675.1 1,109.8 1,143.0 227.8 85.8 199676.0 107.6 95.1 1,902.3 427.6 1,349.1 75.6 50.0 3,341.9 689.8 1,146.9 1,182.1 236.9 86.1 199771.6 102.8 129.2 2,086.9 472.5 1,505.2 59.4 49.7 3,520.3 799.5 1,194.1 1,211.0 234.9 80.9 199837.5 58.0 75.6 1,122.0 114.4 1,007.3 0.3 29.8 1,905.3 420.4 759.6 614.7 110.7 42.1 1999
33.1 58.5 82.7 1,189.2 113.4 1,075.3 0.4 30.1 1,945.8 443.4 819.9 573.5 109.0 42.1 2000
4.0 57.0 95.9 1,204.9 123.1 1,081.6 0.3 27.2 2,034.0 526.4 827.0 574.5 106.0 43.3 2001
3.0 54.8 118.9 1,244.0 127.6 1,116.2 0.2 25.6 2,085.9 575.6 830.6 575.3 104.4 42.1 2002
4.0 56.7 89.4 1,168.2 116.2 1,051.8 0.2 28.1 1,948.4 461.4 821.0 556.4 109.7 42.7 2001          Jul
4.0 57.6 89.6 1,167.9 119.2 1,048.4 0.2 28.1 1,953.2 463.5 825.0 555.1 109.6 42.8          Aug
4.0 57.4 89.0 1,196.4 137.1 1,059.1 0.2 28.1 1,971.0 480.2 826.1 555.4 109.3 42.7          Sep
4.0 57.2 88.7 1,177.5 124.2 1,053.1 0.2 28.1 1,977.5 483.7 829.0 556.4 108.4 42.4          Oct
4.0 57.0 87.2 1,198.9 146.7 1,052.0 0.2 27.9 1,999.2 511.0 822.5 558.2 107.6 42.5          Nov4.0 57.0 95.9 1,204.9 123.1 1,081.6 0.3 27.2 2,034.0 526.4 827.0 574.5 106.0 43.3          Dec
3.9 56.7 89.6 1,159.4 115.6 1,043.6 0.2 27.3 2,009.8 511.5 819.9 573.4 105.1 42.4 2002          Jan
3.9 56.4 95.1 1,148.5 119.8 1,028.5 0.2 27.3 2,007.8 511.3 819.7 572.0 104.8 42.2          Feb
3.9 56.2 95.4 1,164.8 126.0 1,038.6 0.2 27.1 2,006.6 509.2 821.7 570.8 104.9 42.1          Mar
3.9 56.1 95.7 1,138.3 123.2 1,014.9 0.2 27.0 1,999.3 515.7 816.8 561.8 104.9 42.0          Apr
3.9 56.0 95.8 1,158.7 113.4 1,045.1 0.1 26.8 2,009.4 523.8 820.6 560.1 105.0 41.9          May3.9 55.4 95.5 1,182.3 132.1 1,050.1 0.1 26.0 2,021.4 536.2 820.6 558.9 105.7 41.5          Jun
3.0 55.2 95.0 1,157.4 118.2 1,039.1 0.1 25.9 2,016.2 531.6 821.1 557.5 106.0 41.6          Jul
3.0 55.2 105.9 1,173.0 115.3 1,057.6 0.1 25.9 2,013.9 527.2 823.0 557.8 105.9 41.6          Aug3.0 55.0 107.9 1,179.3 133.0 1,046.1 0.1 25.7 2,025.0 540.8 820.6 558.3 105.3 41.6          Sep
3.0 55.1 111.5 1,184.4 130.0 1,054.2 0.1 25.7 2,037.6 543.1 829.8 559.7 105.0 41.6          Oct
3.0 55.0 113.3 1,221.3 157.3 1,063.9 0.2 25.7 2,062.1 572.4 822.6 562.4 104.7 41.5          Nov3.0 54.8 118.9 1,244.0 127.6 1,116.2 0.2 25.6 2,085.9 575.6 830.6 575.3 104.4 42.1          Dec
Changes *
−6.9 + 2.6 + 11.3 + 32.4 −31.4 + 53.0 + 6.0 + 4.9 + 85.0 + 28.3 −14.1 + 81.2 −12.2 + 1.8 1994
−1.2 + 7.3 + 12.5 + 134.2 + 20.4 + 111.5 + 0.4 + 2.0 + 158.3 + 48.9 −14.2 + 105.6 + 11.7 + 6.3 1995
+ 8.0 + 3.3 + 6.5 + 175.9 + 36.6 + 137.7 −0.2 + 1.7 + 218.4 + 94.3 + 23.2 + 96.9 + 0.7 + 3.3 1996
−5.3 + 1.6 + 5.4 + 175.9 + 31.6 + 146.7 + 0.2 −2.6 + 100.5 + 13.0 + 37.1 + 39.1 + 9.2 + 2.1 1997
−4.4 −4.8 + 34.1 + 179.0 + 39.7 + 156.4 −16.2 −0.9 + 179.3 + 110.6 + 47.2 + 28.9 −2.1 −5.3 1998
−0.6 + 0.1 + 9.3 + 69.0 − 1.8 + 81.8 −11.1 −0.4 + 67.3 + 32.7 + 48.4 − 4.5 −9.3 + 0.7 1999
−0.8 + 0.5 + 7.1 + 64.7 − 2.3 + 66.9 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 41.3 + 22.3 + 61.1 −40.5 −1.7 −0.0 2000
−29.1 −1.5 + 13.3 + 9.6 + 7.4 + 2.3 −0.2 −2.9 + 88.5 + 82.3 + 8.1 + 1.1 −2.9 + 1.0 2001
−1.0 −2.1 + 24.1 + 37.9 + 1.7 + 36.3 −0.1 −1.5 + 51.7 + 48.4 + 4.1 + 0.8 −1.6 −1.1 2002
−0.9 −0.1 + 3.0 −14.5 − 9.8 − 4.7 −0.0 −0.2 − 4.4 − 3.1 + 1.2 − 2.4 −0.1 + 0.1 2001          Jul
+ 0.0 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 1.1 + 4.5 − 3.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 5.3 + 2.7 + 4.0 − 1.2 −0.1 + 0.1          Aug
+ 0.0 −0.1 −0.5 + 28.1 + 17.4 + 10.7 −0.0 −0.0 + 17.8 + 16.7 + 1.2 + 0.2 −0.3 −0.2          Sep
−0.0 −0.1 −0.3 −19.1 −13.1 − 6.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 6.3 + 3.4 + 2.9 + 1.0 −0.9 −0.2          Oct
+ 0.0 −0.2 −1.5 + 20.5 + 22.0 − 1.5 −0.0 −0.2 + 21.5 + 27.1 − 6.6 + 1.8 −0.8 + 0.0          Nov
+ 0.0 + 0.0 + 8.7 + 5.9 −23.7 + 29.6 + 0.1 −0.7 + 34.7 + 15.4 + 4.5 + 16.4 −1.5 + 0.8          Dec
−0.0 −0.3 −6.1 −46.1 −10.5 −35.6 −0.1 + 0.1 −24.4 − 15.2 − 7.1 − 1.2 −0.9 −0.9 2002          Jan
−− 0.3 + 5.8 −10.8 + 4.3 −15.1 −0.0 −0.1 − 2.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 1.4 −0.3 −0.2          Feb
−0.0 −0.3 + 0.3 + 16.4 + 6.3 + 10.1 −0.0 −0.2 − 1.2 − 2.0 + 2.0 − 1.2 + 0.1 −0.1          Mar
+ 0.0 −0.1 + 0.3 −26.6 − 2.9 −23.7 + 0.0 −0.0 − 7.3 + 6.5 − 4.9 − 9.0 + 0.1 −0.1          Apr
+ 0.0 −0.0 + 0.1 + 20.7 − 9.8 + 30.5 −0.0 −0.1 + 11.1 + 8.2 + 4.5 − 1.7 + 0.1 −0.1          May
−0.0 −0.6 −0.3 + 21.7 + 18.6 + 3.1 −0.0 −0.8 + 11.1 + 11.9 − 0.3 − 1.2 + 0.7 −0.3          Jun
−1.0 −0.2 −0.5 −24.9 −13.9 −11.0 −0.0 −0.1 − 5.3 − 4.7 + 0.5 − 1.4 + 0.3 + 0.0          Jul
+ 0.0 −0.0 + 11.5 + 16.4 − 2.9 + 19.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 2.3 − 4.4 + 1.9 + 0.3 −0.1 −0.0          Aug
+ 0.0 −0.2 + 1.9 + 6.4 + 17.9 −11.5 + 0.0 −0.2 + 10.9 + 13.5 − 2.6 + 0.5 −0.5 −0.0          Sep
−0.0 + 0.1 + 3.6 + 5.1 − 3.0 + 8.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 12.8 + 2.3 + 9.5 + 1.4 −0.3 + 0.0          Oct
+ 0.0 −0.1 + 1.7 + 37.0 + 27.3 + 9.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 24.5 + 29.3 − 7.2 + 2.7 −0.3 −0.1          Nov
−− 0.2 + 5.7 + 22.6 −29.7 + 52.3 + 0.0 −0.1 + 23.8 + 3.3 + 8.0 + 12.8 −0.3 + 0.6          Dec
non-negotiable bearer debt securities; including subordinated liabilities. — rediscounted bills. —17Up to December 1998, including liabilities to
12Up to December 1998, excluding liabilities to domestic building and loan domestic building and loan associations and money market funds. —
associations and money market funds. —13Up to December 1998, 18Since the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999,
including time deposits with terms of less than one month. —14Including including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). —
liabilities arising from monetary policy operations with the Bundesbank. — 19Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote
15Up to December 1998, excluding time deposits with terms of less than 18). —20Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
one month. —16Own acceptances and promissory notes outstanding and, securities. 
up to December 1998, including endorsement liabilities arising from
27*IV Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
IV Banks
 
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis- à-vis non-residents *
 
 
Up to the end of 1998, DM billion; from 1999,  5  billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills  3 negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills  3 Negotiable
(non- money money
euro-area Medium market Memo Medium market
banknotes and paper item and paper Securities Securities
and Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins)  1 Total Total term term banks  4 banks  5 loans  6 Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
1993 1.2 533.8 498.3 360.5 137.7 0.1 24.3 11.2 262.5 184.0 48.3 135.7 0.0 63.0
1994 1.2 492.3 455.0 309.0 146.0 0.1 23.7 13.5 257.4 173.0 35.0 138.0 0.6 66.5
1995 1.2 538.4 500.8 349.7 151.1 0.1 25.6 11.8 289.2 191.1 42.1 148.9 1.7 79.7
1996 1.4 588.9 544.2 386.6 157.6 0.3 31.5 13.0 352.0 230.4 60.2 170.2 4.9 103.91997 1.5 689.1 635.3 456.1 179.2 0.2 43.1 10.5 474.8 312.7 96.2 216.5 6.0 140.31998 1.5 774.9 706.9 533.6 173.3 0.4 58.7 9.0 610.3 364.9 93.9 270.9 11.6 211.01999 0.4 427.1 383.5 279.5 104.1 0.4 43.2 4.2 396.1 235.8 52.7 183.1 7.5 152.7
2000 0.4 507.7 441.4 325.4 116.0 1.3 65.0 3.6 475.8 286.8 71.1 215.7 6.5 182.5
2001 0.4 596.1 521.7 383.7 138.0 0.8 73.6 3.5 570.3 347.2 99.7 247.5 5.2 217.92002 0.3 690.6 615.3 468.0 147.2 0.9 74.4 2.7 558.8 332.6 92.6 240.0 9.4 216.8
2001          Jul 0.5 540.4 465.0 341.1 123.9 1.8 73.6 3.5 549.6 330.2 92.8 237.4 6.6 212.8
         Aug 0.5 560.0 485.2 358.5 126.7 1.8 73.0 3.5 550.4 327.7 95.2 232.6 6.7 215.9         Sep 0.5 589.0 513.6 384.2 129.4 1.8 73.6 3.5 557.1 333.4 98.4 235.1 6.5 217.2
         Oct 0.5 591.9 516.9 384.5 132.4 1.5 73.4 3.5 561.4 338.0 100.4 237.6 6.1 217.3
         Nov 0.5 608.4 534.2 399.9 134.3 1.1 73.1 3.6 573.0 352.3 110.1 242.3 5.2 215.5         Dec 0.4 596.1 521.7 383.7 138.0 0.8 73.6 3.5 570.3 347.2 99.7 247.5 5.2 217.9
2002          Jan 0.9 585.2 510.4 371.7 138.7 1.0 73.8 3.2 578.2 353.8 103.1 250.7 4.6 219.8
         Feb 0.7 568.5 493.0 351.0 142.0 1.4 74.1 3.1 582.3 355.9 103.6 252.3 5.8 220.6         Mar 0.4 581.2 505.6 362.4 143.2 1.3 74.3 2.9 596.4 366.7 113.3 253.4 7.2 222.5
         Apr 0.4 590.1 515.1 370.6 144.6 1.3 73.7 2.9 586.5 359.2 108.0 251.2 7.8 219.6
         May 0.4 613.3 538.2 395.3 142.9 1.2 74.0 2.8 589.1 359.6 111.2 248.5 6.6 222.9         Jun 0.4 609.7 534.3 399.4 135.0 1.2 74.1 2.8 575.1 348.2 105.1 243.1 5.2 221.7
         Jul 0.4 614.2 538.2 400.0 138.3 1.5 74.5 2.8 579.1 346.2 101.4 244.9 5.8 227.0
         Aug 0.3 631.2 554.9 413.3 141.6 1.5 74.8 2.8 576.0 344.3 98.9 245.4 8.9 222.8         Sep 0.3 659.5 582.6 439.2 143.4 1.9 75.0 2.8 584.9 353.7 109.3 244.4 9.5 221.7
         Oct 0.3 672.9 595.2 450.2 145.0 1.9 75.8 2.7 585.5 355.6 108.9 246.7 9.8 220.1
         Nov 0.3 711.7 630.2 484.4 145.7 5.6 76.0 2.8 588.8 358.2 111.0 247.2 9.9 220.7         Dec 0.3 690.6 615.3 468.0 147.2 0.9 74.4 2.7 558.8 332.6 92.6 240.0 9.4 216.8
Changes *
1994 + 0.0 −24.0 −27.5 −41.4 + 13.9 −0.0 + 0.1 + 3.4 − 1.6 −5.5 −12.3 + 6.7 + 0.6 + 5.1
1995 + 0.1 + 59.1 + 57.6 + 49.2 + 8.4 + 0.0 + 2.9 −1.4 + 38.3 + 21.3 + 7.8 + 13.6 + 1.1 + 16.1
1996 + 0.2 + 34.2 + 29.9 + 27.2 + 2.7 + 0.2 + 5.2 −1.1 + 58.4 + 36.2 + 17.0 + 19.2 + 3.1 + 21.4
1997 + 0.1 + 80.6 + 71.5 + 53.3 + 18.2 −0.1 + 10.4 −1.2 + 109.3 + 73.0 + 33.7 + 39.3 + 0.7 + 32.9
1998 −0.0 + 100.8 + 89.5 + 79.3 + 10.2 + 0.0 + 13.1 −1.8 + 122.0 + 42.7 −6.4 + 49.1 + 5.5 + 66.0
1999 −0.3 + 17.7 + 5.7 − 5.3 + 11.0 + 0.2 + 11.7 −0.0 + 85.8 + 42.8 + 8.4 + 34.4 + 1.3 + 41.8
2000 −0.0 + 78.9 + 56.5 + 44.6 + 11.8 + 0.9 + 21.6 −0.7 + 72.0 + 45.0 + 17.4 + 27.7 −1.2 + 28.2
2001 + 0.0 + 83.7 + 75.6 + 54.4 + 21.2 −0.5 + 8.5 −0.2 + 88.3 + 53.4 + 27.0 + 26.4 −1.5 + 36.3
2002 −0.1 + 120.3 + 118.0 + 99.4 + 18.6 + 0.1 + 2.2 −0.9 + 21.2 + 12.7 −0.4 + 13.2 + 4.7 + 3.8
2001          Jul −0.0 −23.7 −24.0 −25.6 + 1.6 + 0.3 −0.0 −0.0 − 6.3 −2.4 −3.6 + 1.2 + 0.7 −4.7
         Aug −0.0 + 24.0 + 24.2 + 20.2 + 4.1 −0.0 −0.2 + 0.0 + 8.6 + 4.3 + 4.0 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 4.1
         Sep + 0.0 + 28.1 + 27.5 + 25.2 + 2.3 + 0.1 + 0.5 −0.0 + 5.7 + 4.9 + 3.0 + 1.9 −0.2 + 1.0
         Oct + 0.0 + 2.0 + 2.5 − 0.3 + 2.8 −0.3 −0.2 + 0.0 + 2.7 + 3.2 + 1.4 + 1.8 −0.4 −0.0
         Nov −0.0 + 15.1 + 16.0 + 14.5 + 1.5 −0.5 −0.5 + 0.0 + 10.3 + 12.1 + 9.1 + 3.0 −1.0 −0.9
         Dec −0.1 −12.8 −13.2 −16.6 + 3.4 −0.2 + 0.6 −0.0 − 3.7 −6.6 −10.6 + 4.0 −0.0 + 2.9
2002          Jan + 0.5 −13.2 −13.5 −13.7 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.1 −0.4 + 4.8 + 3.5 + 2.6 + 0.9 −0.7 + 1.9
         Feb −0.2 −16.4 −17.1 −20.5 + 3.4 + 0.4 + 0.3 −0.1 + 4.6 + 2.5 + 0.6 + 1.8 + 1.2 + 1.0
         Mar −0.3 + 13.5 + 13.3 + 11.9 + 1.4 −0.1 + 0.2 −0.2 + 15.9 + 13.9 + 9.9 + 4.0 + 1.4 + 0.6
         Apr −0.1 + 12.7 + 13.0 + 10.7 + 2.3 −0.1 −0.3 −0.0 − 3.6 −2.4 −3.8 + 1.4 + 0.7 −1.8
         May + 0.0 + 28.7 + 28.2 + 28.2 −0.1 −0.1 + 0.6 −0.1 + 10.7 + 7.1 + 4.9 + 2.2 −1.0 + 4.6
         Jun −0.0 + 10.8 + 10.3 + 9.0 + 1.2 + 0.0 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 3.3 −2.9 −3.9 + 1.0 −1.2 + 0.8
         Jul −0.0 + 1.2 + 0.8 − 1.4 + 2.3 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.2 −5.3 −4.5 −0.7 + 0.5 + 4.6
         Aug −0.0 + 14.3 + 14.0 + 13.8 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.3 −0.0 − 2.0 −0.9 −2.3 + 1.3 + 3.1 −4.2
         Sep + 0.0 + 28.8 + 28.2 + 26.3 + 1.9 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 9.6 + 9.7 + 10.5 −0.8 + 0.6 −0.8
         Oct −0.0 + 13.8 + 13.0 + 11.3 + 1.7 + 0.1 + 0.8 −0.2 + 0.9 + 2.1 −0.3 + 2.5 + 0.2 −1.5
         Nov −0.0 + 40.1 + 36.2 + 35.0 + 1.2 + 3.6 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 4.7 + 3.8 + 2.4 + 1.4 + 0.1 + 0.8
         Dec + 0.0 −14.1 − 8.2 −11.3 + 3.1 −4.7 −1.2 −0.1 −20.8 −18.2 −16.7 −1.6 −0.3 −2.2
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the banknotes and coins. —2Up to December 1998, including fiduciary loans
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as (see also footnote 6). —3Up to December 1998, bill-based lending (bill
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from rediscounted bills and bills
Report , are not specially marked. —1Up to December 1998, foreign sent for collection from the banks ’portfolios prior to
28*IV Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
 Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bank
interests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memo
item and and item and item
Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciaryloans  
6 prises  7 Total Total  9 term  9 term loans  6 Total Total  9 term  9 term loans  6   Period deposits  8 deposits  8 
End of year or month *
 
15.5 30.1 328.1 82.9 236.0 122.5 113.5 9.2 162.8 16.9 139.2 39.1 100.1 6.7 1993
17.3 34.0 402.3 111.6 283.7 150.8 132.9 7.1 181.5 20.6 155.3 41.7 113.6 5.6 1994
16.7 38.8 463.7 116.9 339.7 191.6 148.2 7.0 224.4 22.1 198.0 45.3 152.6 4.4 1995
12.7 45.8 486.5 147.1 335.7 172.0 163.7 3.8 273.5 34.3 237.2 50.0 187.2 2.1 199615.7 54.7 670.3 226.0 440.2 254.3 185.9 4.0 333.9 43.5 285.7 63.0 222.7 4.8 199722.9 62.9 875.7 309.5 562.5 359.1 203.4 3.7 390.3 51.3 329.6 71.8 257.8 9.5 199813.6 33.9 483.6 65.6 418.0 332.3 85.6 2.0 284.4 23.8 260.6 64.9 195.7 5.8 1999
13.9 47.4 586.0 113.7 472.2 382.9 89.3 1.7 314.9 35.4 279.5 62.5 217.0 5.6 2000
13.8 47.6 622.7 91.9 530.8 434.5 96.3 1.4 350.6 34.0 316.6 97.6 219.0 5.3 200115.6 44.8 614.2 101.6 512.7 410.4 102.3 1.1 319.2 33.5 285.7 86.9 198.7 4.5 2002
14.7 49.3 635.4 132.5 502.8 414.1 88.7 1.5 367.1 42.0 325.2 91.5 233.6 6.0 2001          Jul
14.3 49.2 640.1 106.9 533.3 445.0 88.3 1.5 368.3 37.7 330.6 100.6 230.0 5.7          Aug
14.2 49.1 645.2 144.7 500.5 409.0 91.6 1.5 360.8 36.7 324.2 92.2 231.9 5.7          Sep
14.1 49.8 637.1 133.7 503.4 412.3 91.1 1.4 376.6 37.0 339.6 105.9 233.6 5.8          Oct
14.2 50.0 643.3 120.4 522.9 429.6 93.3 1.4 365.7 38.8 327.0 107.5 219.5 5.9          Nov13.8 47.6 622.7 91.9 530.8 434.5 96.3 1.4 350.6 34.0 316.6 97.6 219.0 5.3          Dec
13.7 47.2 638.6 130.5 508.1 412.3 95.8 1.3 361.3 36.0 325.2 102.2 223.0 5.3 2002          Jan
14.0 47.4 616.5 122.8 493.7 396.3 97.4 1.3 360.4 34.6 325.8 105.0 220.8 5.1          Feb
14.1 47.0 627.0 122.0 505.0 406.5 98.4 1.3 363.2 35.0 328.2 106.4 221.8 5.1          Mar
14.4 46.9 647.7 123.4 524.2 426.0 98.2 1.3 366.3 36.0 330.3 109.2 221.2 4.9          Apr
14.1 47.4 646.2 119.3 526.9 428.8 98.1 1.2 366.0 34.9 331.1 112.7 218.4 4.7          May13.1 47.0 608.3 133.9 474.4 376.0 98.4 1.1 344.2 38.2 306.0 93.0 213.0 4.5          Jun
13.4 47.2 618.3 121.3 497.1 395.4 101.6 1.1 347.9 38.6 309.3 95.8 213.5 4.6          Jul
13.4 47.0 615.5 91.8 523.7 419.2 104.5 1.1 337.2 34.8 302.5 100.9 201.6 4.5          Aug13.4 47.0 626.2 132.7 493.5 389.3 104.2 1.1 344.6 41.2 303.4 103.2 200.2 4.6          Sep
14.2 45.7 633.0 116.1 516.9 412.9 104.1 1.1 342.4 38.2 304.2 99.4 204.8 4.6          Oct
14.7 45.8 648.3 125.2 523.1 420.1 103.0 1.1 346.8 42.6 304.2 101.1 203.0 4.7          Nov15.6 44.8 614.2 101.6 512.7 410.4 102.3 1.1 319.2 33.5 285.7 86.9 198.7 4.5          Dec
Changes *
−1.7 + 4.2 + 85.6 + 31.3 + 56.0 + 33.9 + 22.1 −1.7 + 23.1 + 3.9 + 19.8 + 3.4 + 16.4 −0.7 1994
−0.2 + 5.2 + 71.0 + 7.9 + 64.6 + 45.9 + 18.7 −1.5 + 47.8 + 2.2 + 46.5 + 4.1 + 42.4 −0.9 1995
−2.3 + 5.9 + 11.3 + 27.1 − 13.9 − 26.6 + 12.7 −1.9 + 44.7 + 11.7 + 35.0 + 3.7 + 31.3 −2.0 1996
+ 2.7 + 7.9 + 157.3 + 67.7 + 89.5 + 71.8 + 17.7 + 0.1 + 51.0 + 5.4 + 43.3 + 11.4 + 31.9 + 2.3 1997+ 7.7 + 8.8 + 215.6 + 87.7 + 128.1 + 108.1 + 20.0 −0.3 + 64.7 + 10.4 + 48.9 + 10.3 + 38.6 + 5.5 1998
+ 1.1 + 10.9 + 37.4 −9.2 + 46.6 + 47.6 −1.0 −0.0 + 61.0 + 7.2 + 53.8 + 15.9 + 37.9 + 0.1 1999
−0.2 + 12.8 + 90.0 + 47.0 + 43.0 + 42.9 + 0.1 −0.4 + 24.4 + 11.1 + 13.3 −2.9 + 16.2 −0.8 2000
−0.5 − 0.5 + 23.5 −23.6 + 47.0 + 42.4 + 4.6 −0.4 + 30.8 −1.8 + 32.6 + 33.3 −0.7 −0.6 2001
+ 1.7 + 1.6 + 22.7 + 14.6 + 8.1 − 1.3 + 9.4 −0.3 + 4.6 + 0.8 + 3.8 −4.7 + 8.5 −0.9 2002
+ 0.0 + 1.1 −32.2 −17.6 − 14.6 − 15.5 + 0.9 −0.0 + 7.6 −3.3 + 10.9 + 10.8 + 0.1 + 0.1 2001          Jul
−0.0 + 0.5 + 14.3 −24.3 + 38.7 + 38.1 + 0.5 −0.0 + 6.7 −3.9 + 10.6 + 10.2 + 0.3 + 0.1          Aug
−0.1 − 0.2 + 3.4 + 37.7 − 34.2 − 37.4 + 3.1 −0.0 −8.4 −1.1 −7.4 −8.7 + 1.3 −0.0          Sep
−0.2 + 0.5 −10.3 −11.4 + 1.1 + 1.7 −0.6 −0.1 + 14.7 + 0.3 + 14.5 + 13.4 + 1.1 −0.0          Oct
+ 0.0 + 0.0 + 3.1 −13.8 + 16.9 + 15.1 + 1.8 −0.0 −12.6 + 1.6 −14.2 + 1.0 −15.2 −0.0          Nov
−0.4 − 2.6 −22.5 −28.8 + 6.3 + 3.5 + 2.8 + 0.0 −16.0 −4.8 −11.2 −10.1 −1.1 −0.6          Dec
−0.2 + 0.4 + 11.6 + 38.3 − 26.8 − 25.7 −1.0 −0.1 + 8.2 + 1.9 + 6.4 + 3.9 + 2.5 −0.1 2002          Jan
+ 0.3 + 0.2 −21.7 −7.7 − 14.0 − 15.7 + 1.7 −0.0 −0.5 −1.4 + 0.9 + 2.9 −2.0 −0.2          Feb
+ 0.2 − 0.3 + 11.9 −0.5 + 12.4 + 11.3 + 1.2 + 0.0 + 3.6 + 0.4 + 3.2 + 1.6 + 1.7 −0.0          Mar
+ 0.3 + 0.2 + 27.1 + 2.3 + 24.8 + 24.3 + 0.5 −0.1 + 7.1 + 1.3 + 5.8 + 3.9 + 1.9 −0.2          Apr
−0.3 + 1.1 + 7.3 −2.8 + 10.1 + 9.1 + 1.0 −0.0 + 5.4 −0.8 + 6.2 + 5.2 + 1.0 −0.2          May
−1.0 + 0.3 −27.3 + 16.1 − 43.4 − 44.4 + 1.0 −0.1 −14.5 + 3.7 −18.2 −17.6 −0.6 −0.3          Jun
+ 0.2 − 0.1 + 5.5 −13.6 + 19.0 + 16.3 + 2.7 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 2.1 −1.6 + 0.1          Jul
−0.0 − 0.2 − 1.5 −29.2 + 27.7 + 24.8 + 3.0 −0.0 + 4.7 −3.8 + 8.5 + 5.3 + 3.2 −0.0          Aug
+ 0.1 + 0.0 + 11.3 + 40.9 − 29.6 − 29.6 −0.1 + 0.0 + 8.1 + 6.5 + 1.6 + 2.9 −1.3 + 0.1          Sep
+ 0.7 + 0.1 + 7.2 −16.6 + 23.7 + 23.8 −0.1 −0.0 −1.9 −3.0 + 1.1 −3.8 + 4.8 −0.0          Oct
+ 0.5 + 0.3 + 16.8 + 9.4 + 7.4 + 8.4 −0.9 −0.0 + 5.5 + 4.5 + 1.0 + 2.0 −1.0 + 0.1          Nov
+ 0.9 − 0.4 −25.4 −22.0 − 3.4 − 3.8 + 0.5 −0.0 −21.6 −8.6 −13.0 −13.0 −0.0 −0.2          Dec
maturity). —4Up to November 1993, included in securities (see also 1998, including working capital supplied to branches abroad. —8Up to
footnote 5). —5Up to November 1993, including negotiable money market December 1998, including time deposits with terms of less than one
paper; excluding registered debt securities. —6From 1999, no longer month. —9Up to December 1998, excluding time deposits with terms of
included in loans and deposits (see also footnote 2). —7Up to December less than one month. 
29*IV Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
IV Banks
 
5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
Up to the end of 1998, DM billion; from 1999,  5  billion
Short-term lending Medium and long-term
to public authorities to enter- to enterprises and individuals  1 
Lending to domestic
non-banks, total  1, 2 
   
including excluding Negoti-
negotiable money ablemarket paper, Loans moneysecurities, and market Treasury
Period equalisation claims Total Total paper Total Loans bills  
5 Total Total bills 3, 4 
End of year or month *
 
1993 3,826.4 3,417.8 563.2 544.2 540.8 3.4 19.0 16.8 2.2 3,263.2 2,441.8
1994 4,137.2 3,633.1 583.5 549.1 548.6 0.4 34.4 32.7 1.8 3,553.7 2,661.9
1995 4,436.9 3,936.9 615.2 584.0 583.3 0.7 31.3 30.5 0.8 3,821.7 2,785.5
1996 4,773.1 4,248.7 662.2 617.2 616.2 1.0 45.1 40.2 4.9 4,110.8 3,007.21997 5,058.4 4,506.2 667.8 625.8 624.8 1.0 41.9 40.1 1.9 4,390.6 3,223.41998 5,379.8 4,775.4 704.3 661.3 660.8 0.5 43.0 38.5 4.5 4,675.5 3,482.41999 2,904.5 2,576.5 355.3 328.9 328.7 0.2 26.4 23.6 2.8 2,549.2 1,943.6
2000 3,003.7 2,663.7 371.2 348.2 347.7 0.5 22.9 21.2 1.7 2,632.5 2,038.6
2001 3,014.1 2,704.2 387.9 356.7 355.2 1.5 31.2 28.2 2.9 2,626.2 2,070.22002 2,997.2 2,689.1 365.4 331.9 331.0 1.0 33.5 31.1 2.4 2,631.8 2,079.7
2001          Jul 3,008.2 2,676.9 380.0 353.5 352.2 1.2 26.6 23.4 3.2 2,628.2 2,047.3
         Aug 2,995.3 2,676.6 371.3 345.9 344.6 1.4 25.4 23.1 2.3 2,624.0 2,052.4         Sep 2,989.9 2,685.2 379.9 354.4 352.5 1.9 25.5 22.4 3.0 2,610.0 2,051.2
         Oct 2,992.5 2,687.1 376.7 350.1 348.7 1.4 26.6 23.6 3.0 2,615.8 2,058.9
         Nov 3,009.4 2,703.8 388.0 351.1 349.9 1.2 36.9 34.4 2.5 2,621.4 2,064.6         Dec 3,014.1 2,704.2 387.9 356.7 355.2 1.5 31.2 28.2 2.9 2,626.2 2,070.2
2002          Jan 3,011.2 2,694.8 377.4 345.5 344.6 0.9 31.8 29.8 2.1 2,633.8 2,078.2
         Feb 3,006.1 2,694.0 377.7 345.7 344.8 0.9 32.0 30.1 1.9 2,628.4 2,071.7         Mar 2,996.9 2,694.4 382.5 349.0 348.0 1.0 33.5 31.8 1.6 2,614.4 2,061.7
         Apr 3,004.3 2,691.8 379.1 348.2 347.1 1.1 30.8 28.2 2.6 2,625.3 2,069.3
         May 3,005.7 2,687.0 373.6 344.9 344.0 0.9 28.6 24.9 3.7 2,632.2 2,072.7         Jun 2,990.8 2,683.1 370.7 343.1 342.2 0.9 27.6 23.4 4.2 2,620.1 2,066.7
         Jul 2,995.7 2,689.5 370.4 335.5 334.1 1.5 34.9 32.2 2.7 2,625.3 2,068.5
         Aug 2,987.3 2,679.9 356.0 331.2 329.9 1.2 24.8 22.1 2.7 2,631.4 2,073.3         Sep 2,995.5 2,687.4 367.4 343.2 341.6 1.5 24.2 21.8 2.4 2,628.2 2,068.8
         Oct 2,997.6 2,688.8 364.2 335.7 334.2 1.5 28.5 26.1 2.4 2,633.4 2,076.6
         Nov 3,003.5 2,687.5 365.8 332.5 330.9 1.7 33.3 31.4 1.9 2,637.7 2,079.9         Dec 2,997.2 2,689.1 365.4 331.9 331.0 1.0 33.5 31.1 2.4 2,631.8 2,079.7
Changes *
1994 + 320.5 + 244.0 + 13.2 + 7.0 + 9.9 −2.9 + 6.2 + 6.6 −0.4 + 307.2 + 249.1
1995 + 312.8 + 311.9 + 35.9 + 37.9 + 37.7 + 0.2 − 1.9 − 1.0 −1.0 + 276.9 + 185.1
1996 + 336.3 + 312.9 + 44.3 + 32.6 + 32.2 + 0.4 + 11.7 + 7.4 + 4.3 + 292.0 + 221.51997 + 285.2 + 256.9 + 2.7 + 5.9 + 5.9 + 0.0 − 3.2 − 0.1 −3.0 + 282.5 + 219.9
1998 + 335.3 + 285.5 + 51.7 + 50.6 + 51.2 −0.6 + 1.1 − 1.6 + 2.7 + 283.6 + 258.3
1999 + 156.1 + 139.5 + 9.6 + 6.3 + 6.4 −0.0 + 3.3 + 2.9 + 0.4 + 146.4 + 146.4
2000 + 100.7 + 83.2 + 14.5 + 18.1 + 17.8 + 0.3 − 3.6 − 2.5 −1.1 + 86.1 + 93.8
2001 + 11.9 + 39.2 + 15.3 + 7.0 + 5.9 + 1.0 + 8.4 + 7.8 + 0.6 − 3.4 + 32.0
2002 − 19.2 − 18.8 −23.4 −25.7 −25.2 −0.5 + 2.3 + 2.9 −0.6 + 4.3 + 7.6
2001          Jul + 1.7 − 3.8 − 3.8 − 8.7 − 8.6 −0.1 + 4.9 + 2.7 + 2.2 + 5.5 − 0.3
         Aug − 9.6 + 1.2 − 7.2 − 6.1 − 6.2 + 0.1 − 1.2 − 0.3 −0.9 − 2.4 + 5.1
         Sep − 6.3 + 7.8 + 7.1 + 7.7 + 7.1 + 0.5 − 0.6 − 0.7 + 0.1 − 13.4 − 1.2
         Oct + 2.4 + 1.5 − 3.8 − 5.0 − 4.5 −0.5 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 0.0 + 6.2 + 8.1
         Nov + 16.1 + 15.8 + 10.8 + 0.5 + 0.7 −0.2 + 10.3 + 10.8 −0.5 + 5.3 + 5.2
         Dec + 5.8 + 1.3 + 0.5 + 6.2 + 5.9 + 0.3 − 5.7 − 6.2 + 0.4 + 5.4 + 5.9
2002          Jan − 3.4 − 10.2 −11.3 −11.9 −11.4 −0.6 + 0.7 + 1.6 −0.9 + 7.9 + 8.1
         Feb − 4.9 − 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.3 −0.2 − 5.4 − 6.5
         Mar − 8.6 + 0.8 + 4.9 + 3.4 + 3.3 + 0.1 + 1.5 + 1.7 −0.2 − 13.5 − 9.7
         Apr + 8.1 − 2.4 − 3.4 − 0.8 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 2.6 − 3.6 + 1.0 + 11.5 + 8.2
         May + 2.2 − 4.1 − 5.1 − 2.9 − 2.8 −0.2 − 2.2 − 3.3 + 1.1 + 7.4 + 3.7
         Jun − 19.0 − 8.0 − 3.3 − 2.3 − 2.3 + 0.0 − 1.0 − 1.5 + 0.5 − 15.6 − 9.6
         Jul + 5.1 + 6.5 − 0.3 − 7.6 − 8.1 + 0.5 + 7.3 + 8.8 −1.5 + 5.5 + 2.1
         Aug − 8.4 − 9.6 −14.4 − 4.4 − 4.1 −0.2 −10.0 −10.1 + 0.0 + 6.1 + 4.0
         Sep + 7.9 + 7.2 + 11.2 + 11.8 + 11.5 + 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.3 −0.3 − 3.3 − 3.9
         Oct + 2.0 + 1.4 − 3.2 − 7.5 − 7.5 −0.0 + 4.3 + 4.3 + 0.0 + 5.2 + 7.7
         Nov + 6.0 − 1.3 + 1.4 − 3.4 − 3.5 + 0.1 + 4.8 + 5.2 −0.5 + 4.5 + 3.5
         Dec − 6.3 + 1.6 − 0.3 − 0.6 + 0.1 −0.7 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.5 − 5.9 − 0.2
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the including fiduciary loans (see also footnote 9). —3Up to December 1998,
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks ’portfolios
Report , are not specially marked. —1Up to December 1998, including loans prior to maturity). —4From 1999, including small amounts of medium-term
to domestic building and loan associations. —2Up to December 1998, series of bills. —5From December 1993, including other negotiable
30*IV Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
IV Banks
 
   
 
lending  2, 6 
prises and individuals  1, 2 to public authorities  2 
Loans Loans
Memo Memo
item Equal- item
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term  7 term  8 loans  9 Total Total term  7 term  8 loans  9   Period Securities  6 ities 6, 10 claims  11 
End of year or month *
 
2,241.5 253.9 1,987.5 134.2 66.1 821.4 537.1 36.8 500.3 193.5 75.3 15.5 1993
2,390.4 228.3 2,162.0 203.2 68.3 891.8 577.0 34.5 542.5 230.5 68.1 16.1 1994
2,522.0 214.1 2,307.9 192.9 70.6 1,036.2 713.0 74.5 638.4 234.4 71.3 17.5 1995
2,713.3 215.8 2,497.5 205.9 88.0 1,103.6 773.0 69.5 703.6 231.3 81.3 18.0 19962,900.0 216.2 2,683.8 234.1 89.3 1,167.2 833.8 53.0 780.8 239.2 76.0 18.3 19973,104.5 206.8 2,897.8 292.4 85.4 1,193.2 868.8 33.1 835.7 235.4 71.6 17.3 19981,764.8 182.5 1,582.3 178.9 49.2 605.6 459.5 30.9 428.6 108.6 37.5 8.7 1999
1,838.9 192.8 1,646.0 199.7 50.1 593.9 455.9 30.4 425.5 104.9 33.1 8.4 2000
1,880.5 191.1 1,689.4 189.7 48.9 556.0 440.3 25.6 414.6 111.8 4.0 8.0 20011,909.8 193.5 1,716.4 169.9 47.3 552.1 417.1 27.4 389.7 132.0 3.0 7.5 2002
1,854.6 188.8 1,665.8 192.7 48.5 580.9 446.7 26.6 420.1 130.2 4.0 8.2 2001          Jul
1,862.7 189.7 1,672.9 189.7 49.4 571.6 446.2 26.6 419.7 121.4 4.0 8.2          Aug
1,866.1 190.0 1,676.1 185.1 49.2 558.8 444.1 25.7 418.4 110.7 4.0 8.2          Sep
1,870.9 189.8 1,681.1 188.0 49.1 556.9 443.9 25.5 418.4 109.0 4.0 8.1          Oct
1,876.6 190.0 1,686.6 188.0 48.8 556.8 442.9 25.6 417.3 110.0 4.0 8.1          Nov1,880.5 191.1 1,689.4 189.7 48.9 556.0 440.3 25.6 414.6 111.8 4.0 8.0          Dec
1,880.9 189.1 1,691.8 197.3 48.7 555.7 439.6 26.7 412.9 112.2 3.9 8.0 2002          Jan
1,882.5 189.3 1,693.3 189.1 48.5 556.8 436.6 26.1 410.5 116.2 3.9 8.0          Feb
1,882.3 189.4 1,692.9 179.4 48.2 552.7 432.2 25.6 406.6 116.5 3.9 7.9          Mar
1,884.5 189.8 1,694.7 184.8 48.2 556.0 431.9 26.2 405.7 120.1 3.9 7.9          Apr
1,888.0 189.9 1,698.1 184.7 48.1 559.5 430.1 26.3 403.8 125.5 3.9 7.9          May1,891.0 191.2 1,699.9 175.6 47.6 553.4 426.4 24.4 402.0 123.0 3.9 7.8          Jun
1,897.5 191.7 1,705.8 171.0 47.5 556.8 425.8 24.5 401.3 128.0 3.0 7.7          Jul
1,901.6 192.3 1,709.3 171.6 47.5 558.1 426.2 24.7 401.5 128.9 3.0 7.7          Aug1,900.6 192.1 1,708.6 168.2 47.3 559.3 423.3 24.6 398.7 133.1 3.0 7.7          Sep
1,906.5 193.8 1,712.6 170.1 47.5 556.8 422.1 24.7 397.4 131.8 3.0 7.6          Oct
1,907.6 192.5 1,715.1 172.4 47.3 557.8 417.7 25.5 392.2 137.1 3.0 7.7          Nov1,909.8 193.5 1,716.4 169.9 47.3 552.1 417.1 27.4 389.7 132.0 3.0 7.5          Dec
Changes *
+ 198.7 −29.2 + 227.9 + 48.5 + 1.9 + 58.2 + 26.2 − 2.4 + 28.5 + 38.3 − 6.9 + 0.7 1994
+ 176.0 − 1.9 + 177.9 + 3.3 + 5.9 + 91.8 + 91.8 + 15.3 + 76.6 − 0.4 − 1.2 + 1.5 1995
+ 204.4 + 1.6 + 202.8 + 14.0 + 3.1 + 70.4 + 65.7 − 5.5 + 71.2 − 3.3 + 8.0 + 0.1 1996
+ 189.0 + 0.3 + 188.7 + 29.5 + 1.4 + 62.6 + 60.6 −18.0 + 78.6 + 7.0 − 5.3 + 0.2 1997
+ 205.7 − 8.9 + 214.6 + 56.5 −3.9 + 25.3 + 35.0 −20.0 + 55.0 − 4.4 − 4.4 −0.9 1998
+ 121.8 + 25.1 + 96.8 + 24.6 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 8.5 + 6.2 + 2.3 − 7.8 − 0.6 −0.1 1999
+ 71.8 + 6.9 + 64.9 + 22.1 + 0.8 − 7.7 − 3.8 − 0.4 − 3.5 − 3.1 − 0.8 −0.3 2000
+ 41.9 − 2.8 + 44.7 − 9.8 −1.2 − 35.4 −16.5 − 5.5 −10.9 + 10.1 −29.1 −0.4 2001
+ 26.6 − 2.1 + 28.7 −19.0 −1.6 − 3.4 −23.1 + 1.0 −24.1 + 20.7 − 1.0 −0.5 2002
+ 3.8 − 0.6 + 4.4 − 4.0 −0.0 + 5.8 − 1.6 − 0.2 − 1.4 + 8.3 − 0.9 −0.1 2001          Jul
+ 8.1 + 0.9 + 7.2 − 3.0 + 0.9 − 7.4 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 7.0 + 0.0 −0.0          Aug
+ 3.4 + 0.3 + 3.1 − 4.6 −0.1 − 12.2 − 2.1 − 0.8 − 1.3 −10.1 + 0.0 −0.0          Sep
+ 5.1 + 0.1 + 5.0 + 2.9 −0.1 − 1.9 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 1.6 − 0.0 −0.0          Oct
+ 5.3 − 0.1 + 5.3 − 0.1 −0.2 + 0.1 − 1.0 + 0.1 − 1.1 + 1.1 + 0.0 + 0.0          Nov
+ 4.1 + 1.2 + 3.0 + 1.8 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 2.6 + 0.1 − 2.7 + 2.0 + 0.0 −0.1          Dec
+ 0.3 − 2.1 + 2.4 + 7.8 −0.3 − 0.3 − 0.7 + 1.0 − 1.7 + 0.5 − 0.0 −0.0 2002          Jan
+ 1.7 + 0.2 + 1.5 − 8.1 −0.2 + 1.1 − 3.0 − 0.6 − 2.4 + 4.1 −− 0.0          Feb
+ 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.3 − 9.8 −0.2 − 3.9 − 4.4 − 0.5 − 3.9 + 0.5 − 0.0 −0.0          Mar
+ 2.4 + 0.4 + 2.0 + 5.8 −0.1 + 3.3 − 0.3 + 0.6 − 0.9 + 3.6 + 0.0 −0.0          Apr
+ 3.8 + 0.2 + 3.6 − 0.0 −0.0 + 3.6 − 1.9 + 0.0 − 1.9 + 5.5 + 0.0 −0.0          May
− 0.5 − 1.9 + 1.4 − 9.0 −0.5 − 6.1 − 3.6 − 1.8 − 1.8 − 2.4 − 0.0 −0.1          Jun
+ 6.4 + 0.5 + 5.9 − 4.4 −0.1 + 3.4 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.7 + 5.0 − 1.0 −0.1          Jul
+ 4.1 + 0.6 + 3.5 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 2.1 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 1.6 + 0.0 −0.0          Aug
− 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.7 − 2.8 −0.2 + 0.6 − 2.9 − 0.1 − 2.8 + 3.5 + 0.0 −0.0          Sep
+ 5.8 + 1.8 + 4.1 + 1.9 + 0.2 − 2.5 − 1.2 + 0.1 − 1.3 − 1.3 − 0.0 −0.0          Oct
+ 1.3 − 2.8 + 4.1 + 2.3 −0.1 + 1.0 − 4.3 + 0.0 − 4.4 + 5.4 + 0.0 + 0.0          Nov
+ 2.2 + 1.0 + 1.3 − 2.5 −0.0 − 5.7 − 0.6 + 1.9 − 2.5 − 5.1 −− 0.1          Dec
money market paper; excluding mobilisation and liquidity paper. —6From notice of four years and more; from 1999, of more than five years. —9From
1999, breakdown of securities by medium and long-term lending no longer 1999, no longer included in lending (see also footnote 2). —10Excluding
possible. —7Up to December 1998, maturity or period of notice of more debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims (see also
than one year to less than four years; from 1999, more than one year up to footnote 11). —11Including debt securities arising from the exchange of
and including five years. —8Up to December 1998, maturity or period of equalisation claims. 
31*IV Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
IV Banks
 
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and resident individuals, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
 
 5  billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and resident individuals (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding sec urities portfolios)  1 
of which  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
 
Financing
Mortgage institu-
loans tions  4 
secured Whole- Agri- Electricity, Transport, (excluding
by gas and sale culture, storage MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which water and forestry and insurance
loans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- supply, Construc- retail and commu- enter-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing mining  2 tion trade  3 fishing nication prises
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
1999 2,094.2 899.3 991.3 691.5 299.9 1,209.0 332.0 166.2 33.7 67.1 173.0 31.1 47.2 27.5
2000 2,187.3 955.2 1,030.8 737.6 293.2 1,267.8 344.1 174.9 35.9 68.2 173.2 31.4 49.1 34.2
2001          Dec 2,236.3 981.4 1,053.9 757.7 296.2 1,295.6 346.1 174.3 36.7 67.9 172.9 31.3 50.0 39.0
2002          Mar 2,230.8 983.7 1,055.7 759.9 295.7 1,291.7 345.8 173.8 38.1 68.5 169.3 31.6 51.7 39.0
         Jun 2,233.7 994.1 1,060.2 768.0 292.2 1,287.1 345.9 171.5 39.4 68.2 167.0 32.0 51.5 36.5         Sep 2,242.7 1,000.0 1,064.3 770.7 293.6 1,286.1 344.5 168.2 38.3 66.9 165.7 32.5 50.5 42.1         Dec 2,241.2 1,009.0 1,068.7 776.3 292.4 1,277.4 340.1 161.5 37.4 64.6 162.6 31.3 51.3 39.5
 Short-term lending
1999 329.4 − 17.6 − 17.6 276.9 11.8 57.3 4.3 17.9 61.4 4.5 10.6 8.8
2000 348.4 − 15.9 − 15.9 294.6 10.7 61.5 6.2 17.9 62.2 4.2 10.1 10.5
2001          Dec 355.8 − 15.9 − 15.9 304.1 10.6 59.6 5.5 17.8 63.5 4.1 9.3 14.2
2002          Mar 348.5 − 15.1 − 15.1 299.5 10.1 59.1 6.6 18.5 61.1 4.3 10.5 15.7
         Jun 342.6 − 14.4 − 14.4 293.2 9.4 58.6 7.3 18.4 60.0 4.6 9.6 12.1
         Sep 342.1 − 14.1 − 14.1 291.2 9.1 56.6 6.1 17.5 59.3 4.8 8.8 17.0
         Dec 331.4 − 14.5 − 14.5 281.2 9.3 52.0 5.1 15.9 58.7 4.2 8.4 13.6
 Medium-term lending  
8 
1999 182.5 − 42.6 − 42.6 109.1 13.4 16.7 1.7 6.9 13.0 3.4 6.3 4.0
2000 192.8 − 39.3 − 39.3 120.1 12.8 17.6 1.5 7.0 13.3 3.4 6.9 9.1
2001          Dec 191.1 − 37.1 − 37.1 120.1 12.0 18.5 1.9 6.5 13.4 3.2 7.2 7.7
2002          Mar 189.4 − 36.4 − 36.4 120.0 11.9 18.8 1.9 6.4 13.2 3.3 7.7 6.4
         Jun 191.2 − 35.9 − 35.9 120.9 11.7 17.8 2.2 6.6 13.2 3.3 8.1 6.5
         Sep 192.1 − 35.7 − 35.7 121.0 11.6 18.0 2.4 6.6 13.3 3.3 8.1 6.7
         Dec 193.5 − 36.1 − 36.1 121.8 11.3 17.9 2.0 6.5 13.5 3.3 8.5 6.8
 Long-term lending  1, 9 
1999 1,582.3 899.3 931.1 691.5 239.7 823.0 306.8 92.3 27.7 42.2 98.7 23.3 30.3 14.72000 1,646.0 955.2 975.5 737.6 238.0 853.1 320.6 95.9 28.2 43.4 97.7 23.9 32.1 14.6
2001          Dec 1,689.4 981.4 1,000.9 757.7 243.2 871.4 323.5 96.2 29.4 43.7 96.1 24.0 33.5 17.1
2002          Mar 1,692.9 983.7 1,004.1 759.9 244.2 872.3 323.8 95.9 29.5 43.5 94.9 24.1 33.5 17.0
         Jun 1,699.9 994.1 1,009.9 768.0 241.9 873.0 324.8 95.1 29.9 43.2 93.9 24.1 33.8 17.9         Sep 1,708.6 1,000.0 1,014.5 770.7 243.8 873.9 323.8 93.6 29.9 42.8 93.0 24.4 33.5 18.4         Dec 1,716.4 1,009.0 1,018.1 776.3 241.8 874.4 319.4 91.5 30.3 42.2 90.3 23.8 34.4 19.0
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2002          1st qtr − 5.7 + 1.6 + 1.3 + 1.4 − 0.2 − 4.1 − 0.4 − 0.2 + 1.3 + 0.5 − 3.7 + 0.3 + 1.7 + 0.1
         2nd qtr − 0.3 + 3.7 + 3.8 + 3.4 + 0.3 − 7.0 − 0.4 − 2.4 + 1.2 − 0.5 − 2.7 + 0.3 − 1.3 − 2.7
         3rd qtr + 8.8 + 4.8 + 5.7 + 3.6 + 2.1 − 1.2 − 0.6 − 3.4 − 1.1 − 1.4 − 1.4 + 0.5 − 1.1 + 5.6
         4th qtr − 1.5 + 4.4 + 6.5 + 3.4 + 3.1 − 8.7 − 0.8 − 6.2 − 0.9 − 2.3 − 1.4 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 2.7
 Short-term lending
2002          1st qtr − 7.8 −− 0.8 −− 0.8 − 5.1 − 0.6 − 0.5 + 1.1 + 0.7 − 2.3 + 0.2 + 1.2 + 1.4
         2nd qtr − 6.0 −− 0.7 −− 0.7 − 6.5 − 0.6 − 0.5 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 1.4 + 0.3 − 0.9 − 3.5
         3rd qtr − 0.8 −− 0.2 −− 0.2 − 2.2 − 0.3 − 2.1 − 1.2 − 0.9 − 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.8 + 5.0
         4th qtr −10.8 − + 0.2 − + 0.2 −10.2 + 0.1 − 4.6 − 1.0 − 1.6 − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 3.4
 Medium-term lending  8 
2002          1st qtr − 1.5 −− 0.6 −− 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 1.3
         2nd qtr − 1.3 −− 0.5 −− 0.5 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 1.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.1
         3rd qtr + 0.8 −− 0.3 −− 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2
         4th qtr − 0.1 −− 0.6 −− 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.1
 Long-term lending  1, 9 
2002          1st qtr + 3.6 + 1.6 + 2.7 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 0.9 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 1.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0
         2nd qtr + 6.9 + 3.7 + 5.0 + 3.4 + 1.5 + 0.5 + 0.4 − 0.8 + 0.4 − 0.4 − 1.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.7
         3rd qtr + 8.7 + 4.8 + 6.2 + 3.6 + 2.7 + 0.9 − 0.2 − 1.5 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.5
         4th qtr + 9.4 + 4.4 + 6.8 + 3.4 + 3.4 + 1.5 − 0.3 − 1.5 + 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.6
*Excluding lending by foreign branches. Up to December 1998, lending by always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent alterations, which will
banks (excluding building and loan associations) in Germany; including appear in the following Monthly Report , are not specially marked. —1Up
lending to building and loan associations. From 1999, lending by monetary to December 1998, including loans on a trust basis; from 1999, loans on a
financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany; breakdown of lending by building trust basis are no longer included in lending. —2Including quarrying. —
and loan associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical alterations 3Including the maintenance and repair of motor vehicles and durable
have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest date are consumer goods. —4Up to December 1998, excluding credit institutions
32*IV Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
IV Banks
 
   
 
 
 
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items Other lending Services sector (including the professions)  5 
of which of which
Debitbalanceson wage,
Other Lending salaryreal to self- Lending and of which
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans  
7 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises enterprises persons  6 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
663.1 154.1 42.8 168.3 449.4 73.9 871.4 655.7 215.7 105.7 23.6 13.7 3.6 1999
700.8 162.3 46.8 183.1 459.0 75.0 905.5 683.0 222.6 108.6 24.3 14.0 3.7 2000
723.3 169.4 50.3 194.3 458.6 74.7 926.7 704.3 222.4 110.7 22.9 14.1 3.5 2001          Dec
719.7 168.9 49.2 195.6 455.5 75.1 925.4 706.4 219.0 109.5 22.3 13.8 3.5 2002          Mar
720.9 169.4 48.8 197.9 456.1 74.7 932.5 710.8 221.7 112.3 22.7 14.1 3.5          Jun
721.9 171.1 47.8 199.8 453.5 74.0 942.1 716.4 225.8 114.6 23.9 14.5 3.4          Sep729.2 164.9 50.2 207.2 451.8 72.4 949.5 725.2 224.3 114.3 23.0 14.4 3.5          Dec
Short-term lending
112.2 18.6 17.1 27.5 55.9 15.6 51.1 5.7 45.4 2.5 23.6 1.3 0.0 1999122.1 19.6 18.1 30.0 57.1 16.2 52.6 5.2 47.4 2.3 24.3 1.2 0.0 2000
130.1 21.6 20.4 34.1 56.0 15.8 50.3 5.3 45.0 2.8 22.9 1.4 0.0 2001          Dec
123.8 20.8 18.2 33.3 54.9 16.5 47.9 5.0 42.9 2.5 22.3 1.1 0.0 2002          Mar
122.6 20.8 18.2 32.5 54.8 16.3 48.2 4.9 43.2 2.5 22.7 1.3 0.0          Jun
121.0 20.9 17.3 33.0 53.8 16.1 49.2 5.0 44.2 2.5 23.9 1.7 0.0          Sep123.2 19.7 19.1 34.7 53.8 14.8 48.5 5.2 43.3 2.4 23.0 1.7 0.0          Dec
Medium-term lending  
8
57.0 7.1 4.0 12.3 33.3 5.6 72.7 29.2 43.5 31.0 − 0.7 0.1 1999
61.4 6.8 6.3 13.6 33.1 5.5 72.2 26.4 45.8 33.0 − 0.6 0.1 2000
61.9 6.7 6.5 14.7 31.2 5.3 70.5 25.0 45.4 33.4 − 0.6 0.1 2001          Dec
62.2 6.7 7.2 14.9 30.7 5.1 68.9 24.5 44.4 32.7 − 0.6 0.1 2002          Mar
63.2 6.7 6.9 15.4 31.6 5.0 69.7 24.2 45.5 34.1 − 0.6 0.1          Jun
62.6 6.6 6.6 15.9 31.3 4.9 70.5 24.1 46.4 35.0 − 0.6 0.1          Sep
63.2 6.2 7.2 16.7 31.2 4.8 71.1 24.7 46.4 35.3 − 0.5 0.1          Dec
Long-term lending  1, 9
493.9 128.5 21.8 128.5 360.1 52.7 747.5 620.8 126.7 72.2 − 11.7 3.5 1999
517.3 135.9 22.5 139.5 368.7 53.2 780.8 651.4 129.4 73.3 − 12.2 3.6 2000
531.3 141.1 23.4 145.6 371.3 53.7 806.0 674.0 132.0 74.4 − 12.1 3.5 2001          Dec
533.7 141.4 23.8 147.4 369.8 53.4 808.6 676.9 131.7 74.4 − 12.1 3.4 2002          Mar
535.1 142.0 23.6 150.0 369.6 53.4 814.7 681.7 132.9 75.7 − 12.2 3.4          Jun
538.3 143.5 24.0 150.9 368.3 53.0 822.4 687.3 135.1 77.0 − 12.2 3.4          Sep
542.8 139.0 24.0 155.8 366.8 52.8 829.8 695.3 134.5 76.6 − 12.1 3.4          Dec
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
− 4.2 − 0.5 − 0.8 + 1.1 − 2.7 + 0.3 − 1.3 + 1.7 − 3.0 − 1.0 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.0 2002          1st qtr
+ 1.0 + 0.6 − 0.5 + 2.3 − 0.7 − 0.3 + 6.3 + 4.2 + 2.2 + 1.6 + 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.0          2nd qtr
+ 1.0 + 1.3 − 0.2 + 2.2 − 2.1 − 0.7 + 9.6 + 6.4 + 3.3 + 2.1 + 1.2 + 0.4 − 0.0          3rd qtr
+ 6.2 − 2.8 + 2.4 + 5.0 − 1.5 − 1.6 + 7.3 + 7.2 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.9 − 0.1 + 0.0          4th qtr
Short-term lending
− 7.0 − 0.7 − 2.2 − 0.8 − 1.1 + 0.7 − 2.3 − 0.3 − 2.1 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.3 + 0.0 2002          1st qtr
− 1.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.0          2nd qtr
− 1.6 + 0.1 − 1.0 + 0.5 − 0.9 − 0.2 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 1.2 + 0.4 + 0.0          3rd qtr
+ 2.2 − 1.2 + 1.8 + 1.6 − 0.1 − 1.3 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.0          4th qtr
Medium-term lending  8
+ 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 1.6 − 0.5 − 1.0 − 0.8 −− 0.0 + 0.0 2002          1st qtr
+ 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.2 − + 0.0 − 0.0          2nd qtr
− 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 1.0 −− 0.0 − 0.0          3rd qtr
− 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.6 + 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 −− 0.0 + 0.0          4th qtr
Long-term lending  1, 9
+ 2.2 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 1.7 − 1.1 − 0.3 + 2.6 + 2.5 + 0.1 + 0.1 − + 0.0 − 0.1 2002          1st qtr
+ 1.6 + 0.6 − 0.2 + 2.5 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 6.3 + 4.6 + 1.7 + 1.3 − + 0.1 − 0.0          2nd qtr
+ 3.2 + 1.2 + 1.0 + 1.4 − 1.0 − 0.3 + 7.8 + 6.4 + 1.4 + 1.1 − + 0.0 − 0.0          3rd qtr
+ 4.0 − 1.2 + 0.0 + 2.9 − 1.0 − 0.2 + 8.1 + 7.2 + 0.9 + 0.4 −− 0.1 + 0.0          4th qtr
(other than building and loan associations); from 1999, excluding banks even in the form of instalment credit. —8Up to December 1998, maturity
(MFIs) and excluding financial leasing institutions; see also footnote 5. — or period of notice of more than 1 year to less than 4 years; from 1999,
5From 1999, including financial leasing institutions. —6From 1999, more than 1 year up to and including 5 years. —9Up to December 1998,
including sole proprietors; up to December 1998, sole proprietors were maturity or period of notice of 4 years and more; from 1999, of more than 5
assigned to enterprises. —7Excluding mortgage loans and housing loans, years. 
33*IV Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
 
  
 5  billion
Time deposits  1, 2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Included Subordinated
 liabilities in time
for up for up (excluding deposits:
to and to and for more Bank negotiable liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month *
 
2000 1,945.8 443.4 819.9 274.7 545.2 9.0 536.2 573.5 109.0 42.1 25.9 −
2001 2,034.0 526.4 827.0 268.7 558.3 10.3 548.0 574.5 106.0 43.3 26.2 3.1
2002 2,085.9 575.6 830.6 258.3 572.3 8.8 563.5 575.3 104.4 42.1 27.9 1.5
2002          Jan 2,009.8 511.5 819.9 257.8 562.1 10.2 551.9 573.4 105.1 42.4 26.1 1.1
         Feb 2,007.8 511.3 819.7 256.3 563.5 8.6 554.8 572.0 104.8 42.2 26.2 1.2         Mar 2,006.6 509.2 821.7 256.4 565.3 8.5 556.8 570.8 104.9 42.1 26.3 1.5
         Apr 1,999.3 515.7 816.8 252.5 564.3 8.3 556.0 561.8 104.9 42.0 26.3 1.2
         May 2,009.4 523.8 820.6 255.9 564.7 8.3 556.4 560.1 105.0 41.9 26.3 2.0         Jun 2,021.4 536.2 820.6 256.6 564.0 8.4 555.6 558.9 105.7 41.5 26.6 1.4
         Jul 2,016.2 531.6 821.1 256.3 564.9 8.5 556.4 557.5 106.0 41.6 26.9 1.5
         Aug 2,013.9 527.2 823.0 259.4 563.6 8.5 555.2 557.8 105.9 41.6 27.1 2.0         Sep 2,025.0 540.8 820.6 257.8 562.8 8.4 554.3 558.3 105.3 41.6 27.5 6.7
         Oct 2,037.6 543.1 829.8 264.2 565.6 8.5 557.1 559.7 105.0 41.6 27.7 7.2
         Nov 2,062.1 572.4 822.6 254.0 568.7 8.7 560.0 562.4 104.7 41.5 27.9 3.0         Dec 2,085.9 575.6 830.6 258.3 572.3 8.8 563.5 575.3 104.4 42.1 27.9 1.5
Changes *
2001 + 88.5 + 82.3 + 8.1 − 6.0 + 14.1 + 1.3 + 12.8 + 1.1 −2.9 + 1.0 + 0.3 + 3.1
2002 + 51.7 + 48.4 + 4.1 −10.2 + 14.3 − 1.5 + 15.8 + 0.8 −1.6 − 1.1 + 1.8 − 1.6
2002          Jan − 24.4 − 15.2 − 7.1 −10.9 + 3.9 − 0.1 + 4.0 − 1.2 −0.9 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 2.0
         Feb − 2.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 1.5 + 1.4 − 1.5 + 2.9 − 1.4 −0.3 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.2
         Mar − 1.2 − 2.0 + 2.0 + 0.1 + 1.8 − 0.2 + 2.0 − 1.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.3
         Apr − 7.3 + 6.5 − 4.9 − 3.9 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.8 − 9.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.4
         May + 11.1 + 8.2 + 4.5 + 3.9 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.5 − 1.7 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.8
         Jun + 11.1 + 11.9 − 0.3 + 0.6 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.9 − 1.2 + 0.7 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.6
         Jul − 5.3 − 4.7 + 0.5 − 0.3 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.8 − 1.4 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.1
         Aug − 2.3 − 4.4 + 1.9 + 3.1 − 1.2 + 0.0 − 1.2 + 0.3 −0.1 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.5
         Sep + 10.9 + 13.5 − 2.6 − 1.7 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.8 + 0.5 −0.5 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 4.7
         Oct + 12.8 + 2.3 + 9.5 + 6.4 + 3.1 + 0.1 + 3.0 + 1.4 −0.3 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.5
         Nov + 24.5 + 29.3 − 7.2 −10.3 + 3.1 + 0.2 + 2.9 + 2.7 −0.3 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 4.3
         Dec + 23.8 + 3.3 + 8.0 + 4.4 + 3.6 + 0.1 + 3.5 + 12.8 −0.3 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 1.5
Domestic public authorities End of year or month *
2000 149.1 16.6 127.7 62.1 65.5 1.2 64.4 2.7 2.1 36.0 1.4 −
2001 122.7 16.1 102.3 37.7 64.5 1.2 63.3 2.3 2.1 36.6 1.4 −
2002 113.9 16.6 93.3 30.9 62.4 0.9 61.5 2.1 1.9 36.3 1.2 −
2002          Jan 120.6 14.1 102.3 36.0 66.4 1.2 65.2 2.2 2.0 35.9 1.3 −
         Feb 119.6 14.5 101.0 34.7 66.2 1.2 65.1 2.1 2.0 35.8 1.3 −
         Mar 117.4 13.8 99.5 34.2 65.3 1.1 64.2 2.1 2.0 35.6 1.3 −
         Apr 113.7 12.4 97.3 32.9 64.4 0.9 63.5 2.0 2.1 35.5 1.3 −
         May 116.9 12.7 100.1 35.5 64.6 1.0 63.6 2.0 2.1 35.5 1.3 −
         Jun 118.5 14.5 99.9 35.7 64.2 1.0 63.2 2.0 2.1 35.2 1.3 −
         Jul 116.6 14.3 98.2 34.0 64.2 1.0 63.3 2.0 2.1 35.6 1.3 −
         Aug 115.4 13.4 97.8 33.5 64.4 1.0 63.4 2.0 2.1 35.6 1.3 −
         Sep 114.3 13.6 96.6 33.7 62.9 0.8 62.1 2.0 2.1 35.5 1.3 −
         Oct 109.7 13.8 91.9 29.0 62.9 0.8 62.1 2.0 2.0 35.6 1.3 −
         Nov 109.6 13.6 92.0 29.0 63.0 0.8 62.1 2.0 2.0 35.6 1.3 −
         Dec 113.9 16.6 93.3 30.9 62.4 0.9 61.5 2.1 1.9 36.3 1.2 −
Changes *
2001 − 26.4 − 0.6 − 25.4 −24.4 − 1.0 + 0.0 − 1.1 − 0.5 −0.0 + 0.7 − 0.0 −
2002 − 8.6 + 0.5 − 8.7 − 6.6 − 2.1 − 0.3 − 1.8 − 0.2 −0.2 − 0.3 − 0.2 −
2002          Jan − 2.1 − 2.0 + 0.1 − 1.8 + 1.9 − 0.0 + 1.9 − 0.1 −0.1 − 0.7 − 0.1 −
         Feb − 0.9 + 0.5 − 1.4 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 −0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 −
         Mar − 2.3 − 0.8 − 1.5 − 0.6 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.9 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 −
         Apr − 3.6 − 1.4 − 2.2 − 1.3 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 −
         May + 3.4 + 0.4 + 3.1 + 2.9 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 −
         Jun + 1.5 + 1.8 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 −
         Jul − 1.9 − 0.2 − 1.7 − 1.7 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.0 −
         Aug − 1.2 − 0.9 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.2 − + 0.2 + 0.1 −0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 −
         Sep − 1.1 + 0.2 − 1.2 + 0.2 − 1.4 − 0.1 − 1.3 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 −
         Oct − 4.6 + 0.2 − 4.7 − 4.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 −0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 −
         Nov − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 −
         Dec + 4.3 + 3.0 + 1.3 + 1.8 − 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.1 −0.1 + 0.7 − 0.1 −
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly
the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as Report , are not specially marked. —1Including subordinated liabilities and
34*IV Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont ’d)
 
  
 5  billion
Time deposits  1, 2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Included Subordinated
 liabilities in time
for up for up (excluding deposits:
to and to and for more Bank negotiable liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic enterprises and resident individuals End of year or month *
 
2000 1,796.7 426.8 692.2 212.6 479.6 7.8 471.8 570.8 106.9 6.1 24.5 −
2001 1,911.3 510.4 724.7 231.0 493.7 9.1 484.6 572.3 103.9 6.6 24.8 3.1
2002 1,972.0 559.0 737.3 227.5 509.8 7.9 502.0 573.2 102.5 5.8 26.6 1.5
2002          Jan 1,889.3 497.4 717.5 221.8 495.7 9.0 486.7 571.2 103.1 6.4 24.8 1.1
         Feb 1,888.2 496.7 718.8 221.6 497.2 7.5 489.7 569.8 102.8 6.4 24.9 1.2         Mar 1,889.2 495.4 722.2 222.2 500.0 7.3 492.6 568.7 102.8 6.5 25.0 1.5
         Apr 1,885.5 503.3 719.5 219.6 499.9 7.4 492.5 559.8 102.9 6.4 25.0 1.2
         May 1,892.5 511.1 720.5 220.4 500.1 7.4 492.8 558.0 102.9 6.4 25.0 2.0         Jun 1,903.0 521.8 720.8 220.9 499.8 7.4 492.4 556.9 103.6 6.3 25.3 1.4
         Jul 1,899.6 517.3 722.9 222.3 500.6 7.5 493.1 555.5 103.8 6.0 25.6 1.5
         Aug 1,898.5 513.8 725.2 225.9 499.3 7.5 491.7 555.8 103.8 6.0 25.8 2.0         Sep 1,910.7 527.3 724.0 224.1 499.8 7.6 492.2 556.3 103.2 6.1 26.2 6.7
         Oct 1,927.9 529.3 737.9 235.2 502.7 7.7 495.0 557.7 103.0 5.9 26.3 7.2
         Nov 1,952.5 558.8 730.6 224.9 505.7 7.8 497.9 560.5 102.7 5.9 26.5 3.0         Dec 1,972.0 559.0 737.3 227.5 509.8 7.9 502.0 573.2 102.5 5.8 26.6 1.5
Changes *
2001 + 115.0 + 82.9 + 33.5 + 18.4 + 15.1 + 1.3 + 13.8 + 1.5 −2.9 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 3.1
2002 + 60.3 + 47.9 + 12.8 − 3.6 + 16.4 − 1.2 + 17.5 + 1.0 −1.4 − 0.8 + 2.0 − 1.6
2002          Jan − 22.2 − 13.2 − 7.2 − 9.1 + 2.0 − 0.1 + 2.1 − 1.1 −0.8 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 2.0
         Feb − 1.1 − 0.6 + 1.2 − 0.3 + 1.5 − 1.5 + 3.0 − 1.4 −0.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.2
         Mar + 1.1 − 1.3 + 3.4 + 0.7 + 2.7 − 0.1 + 2.9 − 1.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.3
         Apr − 3.7 + 7.9 − 2.7 − 2.6 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 8.9 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.4
         May + 7.6 + 7.9 + 1.4 + 1.0 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 1.7 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.8
         Jun + 9.5 + 10.1 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 1.2 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.6
         Jul − 3.4 − 4.5 + 2.2 + 1.4 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 1.3 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.1
         Aug − 1.1 − 3.5 + 2.3 + 3.6 − 1.4 + 0.0 − 1.4 + 0.2 −0.1 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.5
         Sep + 12.0 + 13.3 − 1.4 − 1.9 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.5 + 0.5 −0.5 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 4.7
         Oct + 17.4 + 2.0 + 14.2 + 11.1 + 3.1 + 0.1 + 3.0 + 1.4 −0.2 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.5
         Nov + 24.6 + 29.5 − 7.3 −10.3 + 3.1 + 0.2 + 2.9 + 2.7 −0.3 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 4.3
         Dec + 19.5 + 0.3 + 6.7 + 2.6 + 4.1 + 0.0 + 4.1 + 12.7 −0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 1.5
of which:  Domestic enterprises End of year or month *
2000 635.1 158.1 447.6 89.0 358.5 2.7 355.8 5.2 24.2 5.9 14.1 −
2001 668.4 180.0 461.3 91.7 369.6 2.9 366.8 4.3 22.8 6.4 14.3 3.12002 700.4 194.6 479.4 99.2 380.2 1.5 378.7 4.4 22.0 5.6 15.8 1.5
2002          Jan 654.1 171.4 455.7 84.1 371.7 2.9 368.8 4.3 22.7 6.2 14.3 1.1
         Feb 649.7 164.4 458.4 85.1 373.3 1.4 371.9 4.3 22.6 6.2 14.4 1.2         Mar 650.0 160.1 462.9 87.3 375.6 1.4 374.3 4.3 22.6 6.3 14.4 1.5
         Apr 651.9 162.1 463.1 87.6 375.5 1.4 374.0 4.3 22.5 6.2 14.4 1.2
         May 659.0 167.8 464.5 88.9 375.6 1.4 374.2 4.2 22.5 6.2 14.4 2.0         Jun 665.5 172.7 466.1 90.8 375.2 1.4 373.8 4.3 22.6 6.1 14.7 1.4
         Jul 666.4 171.3 468.4 92.6 375.8 1.4 374.4 4.4 22.4 5.8 15.0 1.5
         Aug 663.0 166.4 469.8 95.6 374.2 1.4 372.8 4.4 22.4 5.8 15.1 2.0         Sep 676.4 180.1 469.7 95.3 374.4 1.4 373.0 4.4 22.2 5.8 15.5 6.7
         Oct 690.0 180.7 482.7 105.6 377.1 1.5 375.7 4.3 22.2 5.7 15.5 7.2
         Nov 692.6 189.0 476.9 97.4 379.5 1.6 378.0 4.3 22.3 5.7 15.7 3.0         Dec 700.4 194.6 479.4 99.2 380.2 1.5 378.7 4.4 22.0 5.6 15.8 1.5
Changes *
2001 + 33.6 + 21.2 + 14.7 + 2.6 + 12.1 + 0.1 + 11.9 − 0.9 −1.3 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 3.1
2002 + 31.1 + 13.4 + 18.3 + 7.4 + 10.9 − 1.3 + 12.2 + 0.1 −0.7 − 0.8 + 1.6 − 1.6
2002          Jan − 14.5 − 8.9 − 5.5 − 7.6 + 2.1 + 0.0 + 2.0 − 0.0 −0.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 2.0
         Feb − 4.5 − 6.9 + 2.5 + 1.0 + 1.4 − 1.5 + 2.9 + 0.0 −0.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.2
         Mar + 0.4 − 4.2 + 4.6 + 2.2 + 2.4 − 0.0 + 2.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.3
         Apr + 1.9 + 1.9 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 −0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.4
         May + 7.4 + 5.7 + 1.7 + 1.5 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.8
         Jun + 5.7 + 4.4 + 1.2 + 1.7 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.6
         Jul + 1.2 − 1.4 + 2.7 + 1.7 + 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.9 + 0.1 −0.2 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1
         Aug − 3.5 − 4.9 + 1.4 + 3.0 − 1.5 + 0.0 − 1.5 + 0.0 −0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.5
         Sep + 12.8 + 13.2 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.0 −0.2 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 4.7
         Oct + 13.8 + 0.6 + 13.2 + 10.3 + 2.9 + 0.1 + 2.9 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.5
         Nov + 2.6 + 8.3 − 5.8 − 8.2 + 2.4 + 0.1 + 2.3 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 4.3
         Dec + 7.9 + 5.5 + 2.5 + 1.8 + 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.7 + 0.1 −0.3 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 1.5
liabilities arising from registered debt securities. —1Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). —4Including
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). —3Excluding deposits liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
35*IV Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
IV Banks
 
8 Deposits of resident individuals and domestic non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany *
 
  
 5  billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1, 2 
Deposits by creditor group by creditor group
of residentindividuals Resident individuals Resident individualsanddomesticnon- Domestic
commercial Self- non-profit Self-organisa- employed Other institu- employed Other
Period Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees tions, total individuals individuals
End of year or month *
 
2000 1,161.5 268.7 259.3 47.7 176.0 35.6 9.4 244.6 225.5 34.9 168.9 21.7
2001 1,242.9 330.4 320.1 55.8 220.9 43.4 10.2 263.4 242.9 36.3 182.4 24.22002 1,271.6 364.5 352.8 61.3 241.4 50.0 11.7 257.9 238.3 35.2 180.5 22.6
2002          Jul 1,233.2 346.0 335.2 58.8 230.3 46.1 10.9 254.6 235.2 35.1 177.8 22.2
         Aug 1,235.5 347.4 336.4 59.8 230.6 46.0 11.0 255.4 235.5 35.3 177.9 22.3         Sep 1,234.3 347.1 335.6 58.7 229.3 47.6 11.5 254.2 235.2 35.0 177.5 22.8
         Oct 1,237.9 348.6 337.4 60.5 229.1 47.7 11.2 255.2 235.9 35.3 177.8 22.9
         Nov 1,260.0 369.7 358.6 63.6 244.5 50.4 11.1 253.7 235.1 34.9 177.2 23.0         Dec 1,271.6 364.5 352.8 61.3 241.4 50.0 11.7 257.9 238.3 35.2 180.5 22.6
Changes *
2001 + 81.3 + 61.7 + 60.8 + 8.1 + 45.0 + 7.8 + 0.8 + 18.8 + 17.4 + 1.4 + 13.5 + 2.52002 + 29.2 + 34.5 + 33.1 + 5.6 + 22.4 + 5.1 + 1.5 − 5.5 − 4.2 −1.0 −1.1 −2.1
2002          Jul −4.6 − 3.1 − 2.9 + 1.7 − 4.1 −0.6 −0.2 − 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.4 −0.2 + 0.0
         Aug + 2.4 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 1.1 + 0.4 −0.1 + 0.1 + 0.8 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1
         Sep −0.8 + 0.2 − 0.4 − 1.1 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.5 − 1.1 − 0.3 −0.3 + 0.1 −0.1
         Oct + 3.6 + 1.5 + 1.7 + 1.8 − 0.2 + 0.1 −0.3 + 1.0 + 0.7 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.1
         Nov + 22.1 + 21.1 + 21.2 + 3.1 + 15.5 + 2.7 −0.1 − 1.5 − 0.8 −0.4 −0.6 + 0.2
         Dec + 11.6 − 5.3 − 5.8 − 2.3 − 3.1 −0.4 + 0.5 + 4.2 + 3.2 + 0.3 + 3.3 −0.5
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the Report , are not specially marked. —1Including subordinated liabilities and
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as liabilities arising from registered debt securities. —2Including deposits
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following MonthlyDeutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
 
  
9 Deposits of domestic public authorities at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group 
*
 
 5  billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 Land  governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
Domestic for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
public to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary authorities,
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans
End of year or month *
 
2000 149.1 67.6 2.1 22.6 42.8 0.0 12.5 20.3 3.1 2.1 15.0 0.1 23.3
2001 122.7 46.9 1.6 2.7 42.7 0.0 13.2 19.2 2.7 1.8 14.6 0.1 23.22002 113.9 45.6 0.9 3.6 41.1 0.0 13.5 18.9 2.5 1.4 14.9 0.1 22.6
2002          Jul 116.6 45.8 0.5 2.6 42.7 0.0 12.6 21.4 3.2 3.4 14.7 0.1 22.7
         Aug 115.4 45.8 0.6 2.4 42.8 0.0 12.6 19.9 1.8 3.2 14.7 0.1 22.8         Sep 114.3 46.7 0.6 4.2 41.9 0.0 12.6 21.3 2.8 3.7 14.7 0.1 22.7
         Oct 109.7 46.8 1.1 3.7 41.9 0.1 12.7 19.6 2.5 2.3 14.7 0.1 22.7
         Nov 109.6 46.3 0.6 3.6 42.0 0.1 12.7 18.1 2.0 1.3 14.8 0.1 22.7         Dec 113.9 45.6 0.9 3.6 41.1 0.0 13.5 18.9 2.5 1.4 14.9 0.1 22.6
Changes *
2001 −26.4 −20.4 −0.4 −19.9 −0.1 −0.0 + 0.5 −1.2 −0.6 −0.2 −0.4 + 0.0 + 0.1
2002 −8.6 −1.3 −0.6 + 0.9 −1.6 + 0.0 + 0.3 −0.3 −0.1 −0.4 + 0.3 −0.0 −0.6
2002          Jul −1.9 −0.1 −0.3 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.4 + 0.0 −0.0 −0.0 + 0.0
         Aug −1.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 −0.2 + 0.1 −− 0.0 −1.5 −1.4 −0.2 + 0.1 −0.0 + 0.0
         Sep −1.1 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 1.8 −1.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.4 + 1.0 + 0.5 −0.0 + 0.0 −0.1
         Oct −4.6 + 0.1 + 0.5 −0.5 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 −1.6 −0.3 −1.3 −0.0 −0.0 + 0.0
         Nov −0.1 −0.5 −0.5 −0.1 + 0.1 −− 0.0 −1.5 −0.5 −1.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 −0.0
         Dec + 4.3 −0.7 + 0.3 −0.0 −0.9 −0.1 + 0.8 + 0.8 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.1 −0.0 −0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and which are included in ”Enterprises ”. Statistical breaks have been eliminated
its successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, east German Railways from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded
and Federal Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the followingPost AG and Deutsche Telekom AG, and of publicly-owned enterprises,
36*IV Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
IV Banks
 
    
 
 Savings deposits  3  Memo item
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year  2 
Included Subordinated
of which liabilities in time
Domestic Domestic (excluding deposits:
up to and up to and Bank negotiable liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arising
tions 1 year Total 2 year 2 years Total tions bonds  4 loans from repos   Period individuals securities)  5 
End of year or month *)
 
19.2 123.6 121.1 5.1 116.0 565.5 555.8 9.7 82.7 0.2 10.4 −2000
20.6 139.3 124.1 6.2 117.9 568.0 558.6 9.4 81.1 0.2 10.5 −2001
19.6 128.3 129.6 6.3 123.3 568.8 559.9 8.9 80.4 0.2 10.8 −2002
19.4 129.7 124.9 6.1 118.8 551.2 542.1 9.1 81.4 0.2 10.7 −2002          Jul
19.9 130.3 125.1 6.2 118.9 551.4 542.3 9.1 81.4 0.2 10.7 −         Aug
19.0 128.9 125.4 6.2 119.2 551.9 542.9 9.1 81.0 0.2 10.7 −         Sep
19.3 129.7 125.5 6.2 119.3 553.4 544.4 9.0 80.8 0.2 10.8 −         Oct
18.6 127.5 126.2 6.3 119.9 556.1 547.3 8.8 80.4 0.2 10.8 −         Nov
19.6 128.3 129.6 6.3 123.3 568.8 559.9 8.9 80.4 0.2 10.8 −         Dec
Changes *)
+ 1.4 + 15.8 + 3.0 + 1.1 + 1.9 + 2.5 + 2.8 −0.3 −1.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 2001
− 1.3 −10.9 + 5.4 + 0.1 + 5.3 + 0.9 + 1.3 −0.5 −0.7 −0.0 + 0.3 −2002
− 0.8 − 0.4 −0.1 + 0.1 −0.2 − 1.5 − 1.5 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.1 −2002          Jul
+ 0.5 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 −0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −         Aug
− 0.9 − 1.5 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.6 −0.0 −0.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 −         Sep
+ 0.3 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 1.5 + 1.5 −0.0 −0.2 −0.0 + 0.1 −         Oct
− 0.7 − 2.1 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 2.8 + 3.0 −0.2 −0.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 −         Nov
+ 1.0 + 0.8 + 3.4 + 0.1 + 3.4 + 12.6 + 12.6 + 0.1 + 0.0 −0.0 −0.1 −         Dec
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). —3Excluding deposits liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. —5Included in
under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). —4Including time deposits. Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
 
   
 
 
 
Local authorities and local authority associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2, 4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans   Period
End of year or month *
 
30.2 8.9 15.7 2.0 3.6 0.1 31.1 2.5 21.7 5.7 1.2 0.1 2000
27.8 9.2 13.8 1.8 3.1 0.2 28.7 2.7 19.5 5.4 1.1 0.1 200127.6 10.5 12.2 2.0 3.0 0.2 21.7 2.7 13.7 4.5 0.9 0.1 2002
25.0 8.1 12.0 1.9 2.9 0.2 24.3 2.5 16.0 4.9 1.0 0.1 2002          Jul
26.9 8.6 13.4 1.9 3.0 0.2 22.7 2.4 14.4 4.9 1.0 0.1          Aug
25.2 8.0 12.4 1.9 2.9 0.2 21.1 2.2 13.4 4.5 1.0 0.1          Sep
24.3 8.0 11.5 1.9 2.9 0.2 18.9 2.2 11.4 4.5 0.9 0.1          Oct
25.2 8.6 11.9 1.9 2.9 0.2 19.9 2.5 12.3 4.3 0.9 0.1          Nov27.6 10.5 12.2 2.0 3.0 0.2 21.7 2.7 13.7 4.5 0.9 0.1          Dec
Changes *
−2.4 + 0.2 −2.0 −0.2 −0.4 + 0.0 −2.4 + 0.2 −2.3 −0.3 −0.0 −0.0 2001
+ 0.0 + 1.3 −1.4 + 0.2 −0.1 + 0.0 −7.0 −0.0 −5.7 −1.0 −0.3 −0.0 2002
−0.5 −0.0 −0.5 + 0.0 −0.0 + 0.0 −1.6 −0.2 −1.2 −0.1 −0.0 −2002          Jul
+ 1.9 + 0.5 + 1.4 −0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −1.6 −0.1 −1.5 + 0.0 + 0.0 −         Aug
−1.7 −0.7 −1.0 −0.0 −0.0 + 0.0 −1.6 −0.2 −1.0 −0.4 −0.0 −0.0          Sep
−0.9 + 0.0 −0.9 −0.0 −0.0 −− 2.2 + 0.0 −2.0 −0.0 −0.2 −         Oct
+ 0.9 + 0.6 + 0.3 −0.0 −0.0 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.3 + 0.9 −0.2 −0.0 −         Nov
+ 2.4 + 1.9 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 1.8 + 0.2 + 1.4 + 0.2 + 0.0 −0.0          Dec
Monthly Report , are not specially marked. —1Federal Railways Fund, liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. —3Including
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special deposits under savings and loan contracts. —4Excluding deposits under
Fund, ”German Unity ”Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. —2Including savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
37*IV Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
IV Banks
 
10 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
 5  billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at three months ’ at more than three Memo
notice months ’ notice item of which
Interest With
of which of which of which credited maturities
Special Special At three on of moresavings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months ’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities  
2 facilities  2 non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2000 585.2 573.5 450.5 309.0 123.0 104.4 11.7 8.3 19.3 115.9 109.0 94.4 6.8
2001 586.5 574.5 461.9 327.2 112.7 97.2 12.0 8.8 19.9 112.8 106.0 87.2 6.82002 586.2 575.3 472.9 343.5 102.4 88.5 10.9 8.1 17.6 111.3 104.4 86.3 6.9
2002          Aug 568.6 557.8 453.8 327.5 104.0 90.3 10.8 7.9 0.4 112.9 105.9 87.6 7.0
         Sep 569.1 558.3 454.7 328.4 103.6 90.0 10.8 7.8 0.5 112.3 105.3 87.2 7.0
         Oct 570.4 559.7 456.9 331.1 102.8 89.1 10.7 7.8 0.5 111.9 105.0 86.9 6.9
         Nov 573.1 562.4 460.2 334.4 102.2 88.5 10.7 7.9 0.5 111.7 104.7 86.7 6.9         Dec 586.2 575.3 472.9 343.5 102.4 88.5 10.9 8.1 12.2 111.3 104.4 86.3 6.9
Changes *
2001 + 1.3 + 1.1 + 11.4 + 15.5 −10.4 −7.2 + 0.3 + 0.5 . −2.9 −2.9 −7.1 −0.0
2002 −0.3 + 0.8 + 11.0 + 16.4 −10.3 −8.7 −1.1 −0.7 . −1.5 −1.6 −0.9 + 0.1
2002          Aug + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 1.0 + 0.2 −0.1 −0.0 −0.0 . −0.1 −0.1 + 0.0 −0.0
         Sep + 0.5 + 0.5 + 1.0 + 0.9 −0.5 −0.3 −0.0 −0.0 . −0.6 −0.5 −0.4 −0.0
         Oct + 1.4 + 1.4 + 2.2 + 2.6 −0.8 −0.9 −0.0 + 0.0 . −0.4 −0.3 −0.3 −0.1
         Nov + 2.7 + 2.7 + 3.3 + 3.4 −0.6 −0.6 −0.0 + 0.0 . −0.2 −0.3 −0.2 + 0.1
         Dec + 13.0 + 12.8 + 12.6 + 9.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.2 . −0.4 −0.3 −0.4 −0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the loan contracts, which are classified as time deposits. —2Savings deposits
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the minimum or basic rate of
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly interest. —3Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
Report , are not specially marked. —1Excluding deposits under savings and securities. 
 
   
11 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany 
*
 
 5  billion
Non-negotiable bearer debt securities
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper and money market paper  6 
of which of which
with maturities of Subordinated
with maturities of
Certifi- more more non-
Floating Zero Foreign cates up to and more up to and more than 1 year than 1 year negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of including including than including including than debt debt
Period Total  1 bonds  2 deposit 1 year  1 Total 1 year 2 years 2 years bonds  2, 3 bonds  4, 5 2 years  1 2 years  1 securities securities
 
2000 1,412.5 283.1 22.1 128.2 19.7 87.9 62.7 1,261.9 2.7 0.4 1.0 1.3 38.3 2.4
2001 1,472.3 324.0 16.3 144.1 17.6 46.5 124.9 1,300.9 5.8 3.7 1.0 1.2 43.3 2.42002 1,462.9 339.2 16.1 159.5 34.7 62.3 120.1 1,280.5 9.9 7.8 0.7 1.3 42.4 2.3
2002          Aug 1,483.1 345.9 16.9 156.4 27.9 59.0 119.0 1,305.2 9.3 7.2 0.8 1.3 44.6 2.4
         Sep 1,486.9 346.5 19.3 160.1 31.8 62.3 118.9 1,305.6 9.4 7.3 0.8 1.3 44.0 2.4
         Oct 1,482.3 341.7 18.0 164.9 32.6 65.2 115.8 1,301.2 9.3 7.1 0.8 1.4 43.4 2.4
         Nov 1,491.4 341.2 18.2 166.4 34.3 71.5 118.1 1,301.8 10.0 7.9 0.7 1.4 43.2 2.4         Dec 1,462.9 339.2 16.1 159.5 34.7 62.3 120.1 1,280.5 9.9 7.8 0.7 1.3 42.4 2.3
Changes *
2001 + 56.2 + 33.3 −5.5 + 15.9 −2.1 −41.4 + 61.7 + 35.9 + 3.2 + 3.4 −0.1 −0.1 + 5.0 + 0.0
2002 + 9.1 + 6.3 −4.5 + 12.1 + 16.2 + 14.2 + 4.6 − 9.7 + 4.8 + 4.9 −0.3 + 0.2 −1.9 −0.1
2002          Aug − 0.8 + 4.9 + 0.9 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 1.7 − 1.0 − 1.5 + 0.0 + 0.1 −0.0 + 0.0 −1.0 −
         Sep + 3.8 + 0.6 −0.8 + 3.7 + 4.0 + 3.4 − 0.0 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.1 −0.0 −0.0 −0.6 −0.0
         Oct − 4.6 −4.8 −1.3 + 4.9 + 0.8 + 2.9 − 3.1 − 4.4 −0.1 −0.1 −0.0 + 0.1 −0.5 −0.0
         Nov + 9.1 −0.5 + 0.1 + 1.4 + 1.7 + 6.3 + 2.3 + 0.5 + 0.7 + 0.8 −0.0 −0.0 −0.3 + 0.0
         Dec −28.4 −1.9 −2.1 −6.9 + 0.3 −9.1 + 2.0 −21.3 −0.2 −0.1 −0.0 −0.1 −0.8 −0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the 2Including debt securities denominated in foreign currencies. —3Issue
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as value when floated. —4Including floating rate notes and zero coupon
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly bonds denominated in foreign currencies. —5Bonds denominated in
Report , are not specially marked. —1Decreases in June 2002 caused by non-euro-area currencies. —6Non-negotiable bearer debt securities are
transition to net recording of debt securities outstanding (ie less own debt classified among bank savings bonds (see also Table IV.10, foo tnote 3). 
securities). The statistical break has been eliminated from the changes. —
38*IV Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
IV  Banks
  
12  Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *
  Interim statements
  
 5  billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs)  5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memo
bal- item ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer New
and Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- enteredof Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of year sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
or month ations total loans  
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month  8 loans)  1 paper)  4 serves)  7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2002 28 163.8 25.2 0.2 11.7 40.8 58.6 7.9 10.4 0.4 29.5 100.8 3.5 6.9 7.1 79.6
2002          Oct 28 160.5 24.0 0.2 11.5 41.4 57.4 7.7 9.8 0.4 28.9 97.3 3.4 7.2 7.1 6.7
         Nov 28 161.4 24.5 0.2 11.6 41.1 57.8 7.7 9.9 0.4 29.1 97.7 3.4 7.2 7.1 7.1         Dec 28 163.8 25.2 0.2 11.7 40.8 58.6 7.9 10.4 0.4 29.5 100.8 3.5 6.9 7.1 9.5
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2002          Oct 17 115.2 19.1 0.1 6.3 26.8 40.8 7.1 7.2 0.2 20.8 66.2 3.2 7.2 4.6 4.3         Nov 17 115.8 19.6 0.1 6.3 26.6 41.1 7.1 7.2 0.2 21.0 66.4 3.3 7.2 4.6 4.5         Dec 17 117.5 19.8 0.1 6.4 26.4 41.7 7.3 7.7 0.3 21.0 68.5 3.3 6.9 4.6 6.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2002          Oct 11 45.3 4.8 0.1 5.2 14.6 16.6 0.6 2.6 0.1 8.1 31.2 0.1 − 2.5 2.4
         Nov 11 45.5 4.9 0.1 5.2 14.5 16.7 0.6 2.7 0.1 8.1 31.3 0.1 − 2.5 2.7
         Dec 11 46.3 5.5 0.1 5.3 14.5 16.9 0.6 2.7 0.1 8.5 32.3 0.1 − 2.5 3.5
Trends in building and loan association business
  
 5  billion
Changes in deposits Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans  10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings andments loan contracts loan contracts  
9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited interim deposits of which of which
on under Applied Applied and ofwhich of Memo Amounts deposits
cancelled to settle- to settle- bridging
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which item paid intosavings savings and which interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housing
and and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonusesloan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts  
9 tions  11 ceived  12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2002 22.9 2.7 4.3 44.0 29.4 40.6 17.2 3.8 9.3 3.1 14.2 10.9 7.8 14.2 . 0.5
2002          Oct 1.8 0.0 0.4 3.9 2.6 3.7 1.5 0.4 0.9 0.3 1.3 10.6 7.9 1.2 0.0
         Nov 1.9 0.0 0.4 3.4 2.1 3.0 1.2 0.3 0.6 0.2 1.2 10.8 7.8 1.1 0.0         Dec 2.5 2.4 0.4 3.7 2.3 3.5 1.3 0.3 0.7 0.2 1.5 10.9 7.8 1.3 . 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2002          Oct 1.2 0.0 0.2 2.8 1.8 2.7 1.1 0.3 0.6 0.2 1.0 6.4 4.1 0.8 0.0         Nov 1.2 0.0 0.2 2.3 1.3 2.2 0.8 0.2 0.4 0.2 0.9 6.4 4.0 0.8 0.0         Dec 1.6 1.6 0.2 2.5 1.4 2.4 0.9 0.2 0.4 0.2 1.1 6.5 4.0 0.9 . 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2002          Oct 0.6 0.0 0.1 1.1 0.8 1.0 0.4 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.2 4.2 3.8 0.4 0.0         Nov 0.6 0.0 0.1 1.1 0.8 0.9 0.4 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.3 4.4 3.8 0.4 0.0         Dec 0.8 0.8 0.2 1.2 0.9 1.1 0.5 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.4 4.4 3.8 0.4 . 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are count as new contracts. —9For disbursements of deposits under savings
not specially marked. —1Including postal giro account balances, claims on and loan contracts arising from the allocation of contracts see "Capital
building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt securities disbursed". —10Including housing bonuses credited. —11Only allocations
and central bank credit balances. —2Loans under savings and loan accepted by the beneficiaries; including allocations applied to settlement of
contracts and interim and bridging loans. —3Including money market interim and bridging loans. —12The amounts already credited to the
paper and small amounts of other securities issued by banks. —4Including accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in “Amounts paid into
equalisation claims. —5Including liabilities to building and loan savings and loan accounts “and “Interest and repayments received on
associations. —6Including small amounts of savings deposits. —7Including building loans “. 
participation rights capital and fund for general banking risks. —8Total
39*IV  Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
IV  Banks
  
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
  
  
 5  billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
Loans Credit  balances and loans
German   
banks to German
(MFIs)   non-banks
withforeign foreignbranches Money of which Money
branches  1 
and/or and/or market enter- to marketforeign foreign Balance paper, prises foreign paper,subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- and indi- non- secur- Other
Period diaries diaries total Total Total banks banks Total Total Total viduals banks ities  
2 assets ities 2,  3 
Foreign  branches End of year or month *
  
1999 66 187 1,311.9 714.6 614.2 177.0 437.2 100.4 533.9 386.2 26.6 20.8 359.6 147.7 63.4
2000 71 212 1,558.2 829.4 722.1 211.0 511.1 107.3 656.7 501.5 21.7 17.1 479.9 155.2 72.02001 68 216 1,689.3 870.6 761.6 213.6 548.0 109.0 744.9 549.0 20.6 17.2 528.4 195.9 73.9
2002          Feb 68 216 1,735.3 920.3 800.6 218.6 582.0 119.6 737.2 544.8 19.9 16.3 524.9 192.4 77.8
         Mar 65 214 1,718.9 905.4 788.3 216.0 572.3 117.1 732.8 540.8 19.1 15.4 521.7 192.0 80.7
         Apr 64 213 1,720.0 907.4 764.5 230.2 534.3 143.0 745.1 576.7 19.4 15.3 557.3 168.4 67.4
         May 63 212 1,677.0 870.7 737.5 219.5 518.0 133.1 756.6 579.2 19.2 15.0 560.0 177.4 49.7         Jun 63 211 1,548.6 795.4 672.9 206.4 466.5 122.6 694.8 524.6 18.4 14.3 506.2 170.3 58.4
         Jul 62 210 1,561.1 776.9 655.0 201.1 453.9 122.0 723.7 544.2 18.7 15.0 525.5 179.5 60.4
         Aug 62 210 1,577.0 764.1 642.8 203.2 439.5 121.3 756.6 569.7 18.4 14.8 551.3 186.9 56.3         Sep 61 208 1,559.2 761.8 646.1 201.7 444.4 115.7 752.3 559.7 19.0 15.3 540.7 192.6 45.1
         Oct 59 203 1,568.0 758.9 643.9 210.0 433.9 115.0 746.0 550.5 18.7 15.0 531.8 195.5 63.1
         Nov 60 204 1,585.7 760.8 646.0 216.9 429.1 114.8 755.5 555.8 19.0 15.7 536.8 199.7 69.4
Changes *
2000 + 5 + 25 +214.0 + 97.0 + 92.3 + 33.7 + 58.6 + 4.7 +108.3 +104.0 −5.3 −4.1 +109.4 + 4.3 + 8.7
2001 −3 + 4 + 99.1 + 24.8 + 26.1 + 2.3 + 23.8 −1.3 + 72.7 + 35.6 −1.1 −0.0 + 36.7 + 37.1 + 1.6
2002          Feb −− − 17.5 −12.8 −19.5 −7.8 −11.7 + 6.8 −11.6 −7.5 −0.2 −0.4 −7.3 −4.1 + 6.9
         Mar −3 −2 −10.7 −12.1 −9.9 −2.5 −7.4 −2.2 −1.5 −1.9 −0.8 −0.8 −1.1 + 0.3 + 2.9
         Apr −1 −1 + 25.5 + 13.4 −13.7 + 14.1 −27.8 + 27.1 + 25.0 + 45.4 + 0.2 −0.2 + 45.1 −20.4 −12.8
         May −1 −1 −4.3 −20.5 −13.0 −10.6 −2.4 −7.5 + 29.9 + 17.0 −0.1 −0.3 + 17.1 + 12.9 −13.7
         Jun −− 1 −80.1 −55.4 −47.5 −13.1 −34.4 −7.9 −37.7 −36.2 −0.8 −0.7 −35.3 −1.6 + 13.1
         Jul −1 −1 −8.2 −26.9 −25.1 −5.3 −19.7 −1.9 + 19.0 + 11.7 + 0.2 + 0.7 + 11.5 + 7.3 −0.2
         Aug −− + 20.8 −10.9 −10.7 + 2.2 −12.9 −0.2 + 35.1 + 27.4 −0.3 −0.2 + 27.6 + 7.8 −3.5
         Sep −1 −2 −14.1 −1.0 + 4.6 −1.5 + 6.2 −5.6 −2.0 −8.3 + 0.6 + 0.5 −8.9 + 6.3 −11.1
         Oct −2 −5 + 11.2 −2.0 −1.4 + 8.3 −9.7 −0.6 −4.9 −8.0 −0.3 −0.4 −7.7 + 3.1 + 18.1
         Nov + 1 + 1 + 24.4 + 4.3 + 4.2 + 6.9 −2.7 + 0.2 + 13.0 + 8.1 + 0.4 + 0.7 + 7.7 + 4.9 + 7.0
  
  
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month *
  
1999 39 161 530.6 242.0 178.6 71.1 107.5 63.4 234.6 174.2 41.5 37.5 132.7 60.4 53.9
2000 40 170 580.5 248.1 183.8 82.2 101.6 64.3 263.5 203.4 45.4 42.3 158.0 60.1 69.02001 46 200 811.5 342.4 262.8 105.7 157.1 79.6 382.2 293.1 51.9 47.7 241.2 89.2 87.0
2002          Feb 46 201 803.5 348.0 268.1 101.7 166.4 79.9 367.6 277.2 49.4 45.7 227.8 90.4 87.9
         Mar 47 201 813.9 349.4 268.3 105.3 163.0 81.1 368.7 277.4 49.7 46.3 227.7 91.4 95.8
         Apr 47 200 760.9 346.8 272.6 108.6 164.0 74.2 325.8 258.1 49.4 46.1 208.7 67.7 88.3
         May 48 201 751.8 343.3 269.0 113.0 156.1 74.3 317.6 259.4 49.5 46.4 209.9 58.2 90.9         Jun 48 201 732.2 334.7 261.9 106.2 155.7 72.8 311.4 253.9 48.4 45.2 205.5 57.6 86.0
         Jul 48 200 712.7 328.4 255.8 116.8 139.0 72.6 306.6 248.2 48.1 45.0 200.1 58.4 77.7
         Aug 49 199 693.7 314.7 242.0 111.9 130.0 72.7 302.7 243.9 47.8 44.8 196.1 58.8 76.3         Sep 48 198 695.5 317.8 246.0 111.0 135.0 71.8 304.2 245.3 47.1 44.2 198.2 58.9 73.5
         Oct 47 200 700.6 320.4 249.4 111.4 138.0 71.0 306.6 245.5 46.6 43.7 198.9 61.1 73.6
         Nov 47 202 708.2 326.7 256.6 114.0 142.6 70.1 308.5 246.1 47.0 44.1 199.0 62.4 73.0
Changes *
2000 + 1 + 9 + 38.4 + 2.1 + 2.4 + 11.1 −8.7 −0.3 + 21.8 + 21.8 + 3.9 + 4.8 + 17.9 + 0.0 + 14.5
2001 + 6 + 30 +229.9 + 92.5 + 78.0 + 23.5 + 54.6 + 14.5 +119.5 + 89.1 + 6.5 + 5.3 + 82.7 + 30.4 + 17.9
2002          Feb −− − 11.0 −6.3 −5.3 −6.6 + 1.3 −1.0 −2.5 −1.4 −1.4 −1.5 −− 1.1 −2.2
         Mar + 1 − + 11.6 + 2.0 + 0.6 + 3.6 −2.9 + 1.4 + 1.6 + 0.7 + 0.3 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.9 + 8.0
         Apr −− 1 −47.2 + 0.3 + 6.1 + 3.3 + 2.9 −5.9 −40.3 −16.7 −0.3 −0.2 −16.4 −23.6 −7.2
         May + 1 + 1 −1.2 + 0.7 −0.6 + 4.4 −5.0 + 1.3 −5.1 + 4.4 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 4.3 −9.5 + 3.1
         Jun −− − 9.6 −3.5 −3.6 −6.8 + 3.2 + 0.1 −1.8 −1.2 −1.1 −1.2 −0.1 −0.6 −4.3
         Jul −− 1 −23.8 −8.6 −7.7 + 10.7 −18.3 −0.9 −6.6 −7.4 −0.3 −0.2 −7.1 + 0.8 −8.5
         Aug + 1 −1 −17.9 −13.0 −13.4 −4.9 −8.5 + 0.3 −3.4 −3.8 −0.3 −0.3 −3.5 + 0.4 −1.4
         Sep −1 −1 + 2.2 + 3.3 + 4.1 −0.9 + 5.0 −0.8 + 1.7 + 1.6 −0.7 −0.6 + 2.3 + 0.1 −2.8
         Oct −1 + 2 + 5.5 + 2.7 + 3.5 + 0.4 + 3.1 −0.8 + 2.5 + 0.4 −0.5 −0.4 + 0.8 + 2.2 + 0.2
         Nov − + 2 + 9.0 + 7.1 + 7.7 + 2.6 + 5.1 −0.6 + 2.5 + 1.2 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.8 + 1.3 −0.6
*From March 2000, including the foreign branches of building and loan population have not been eliminated from the flow figures for the foreign
associations. In this table “foreign “also includes the country of domicile of subsidiaries.) The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as
the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical revisions have been provisional; subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly
eliminated from the changes. (Breaks owing to changes in the reporting Report, are not specially marked. —1Several branches in a given
40*IV  Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
IV  Banks
  
      
  
Deposits
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  4 
Money
Short-term market Medium  and long-term
paper
of which of which and debt
enter- enter- Working securities
out- capital Other prises  and prises  and
German Foreign indi- indi- Foreign stand- and own liabil-
Total Total banks Total Total Total viduals Total viduals ing  5 funds ities  6   Period banks non-banks
End of year or month * Foreign  branches
  
988.6 671.8 148.3 523.6 316.7 60.7 57.9 52.8 2.8 2.7 256.0 234.4 14.0 75.0 1999
1,186.1 799.5 158.2 641.4 386.5 60.9 58.4 51.6 2.5 2.4 325.7 272.3 22.0 77.9 2000
1,271.3 855.3 194.0 661.2 416.0 57.4 54.2 51.2 3.2 3.0 358.6 316.8 24.0 77.2 2001
1,323.0 883.6 190.0 693.6 439.4 65.8 62.6 60.2 3.2 3.0 373.6 303.9 24.3 84.1 2002          Feb
1,306.0 882.5 199.4 683.1 423.5 62.8 59.6 56.9 3.3 3.1 360.7 310.3 24.3 78.3          Mar
1,334.9 883.5 209.5 674.0 451.4 77.8 74.5 71.1 3.3 3.2 373.6 303.7 24.5 56.9          Apr
1,298.2 850.1 213.0 637.1 448.1 75.1 71.8 68.0 3.3 3.2 373.1 293.4 25.0 60.3          May1,200.4 791.3 209.8 581.5 409.1 63.6 60.3 56.6 3.3 3.2 345.5 264.5 24.9 58.8          Jun
1,212.9 788.3 212.5 575.8 424.5 67.2 63.9 60.0 3.4 3.3 357.3 263.1 25.0 60.1          Jul
1,236.0 791.6 219.1 572.4 444.4 66.1 62.7 58.9 3.4 3.3 378.3 257.0 25.1 58.9          Aug1,223.7 787.6 231.3 556.3 436.0 63.8 60.5 57.7 3.4 3.3 372.2 249.5 25.0 61.0          Sep
1,241.7 804.7 241.6 563.0 437.0 66.3 62.9 59.3 3.3 3.3 370.7 236.1 25.0 65.2          Oct
1,263.4 834.9 257.4 577.5 428.5 69.2 65.7 62.0 3.5 3.4 359.4 234.9 25.0 62.5          Nov
Changes *
+ 170.8 +108.8 + 9.1 + 99.6 + 62.0 −0.0 + 0.4 −1.3 −0.4 −0.4 + 62.0 + 37.9 + 8.0 −2.7 2000
+ 53.8 + 36.3 + 35.2 + 1.1 + 17.5 −3.7 −4.4 −0.6 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 21.2 + 44.6 + 2.1 −1.3 2001
+ 9.7 −11.9 −2.4 −9.5 + 21.7 −0.0 −0.0 −0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 21.7 −30.4 −0.0 + 3.1 2002          Feb
−12.4 + 1.8 + 9.5 −7.7 −14.2 −2.9 −3.0 −3.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 −11.2 + 6.4 −0.0 −4.8          Mar
+ 48.2 + 13.5 + 10.1 + 3.4 + 34.7 + 15.0 + 14.9 + 14.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 19.7 −6.6 + 0.2 −16.2          Apr
− 8.4 −15.6 + 3.5 −19.0 + 7.2 −2.7 −2.7 −3.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 9.9 −10.3 + 0.5 + 13.8          May
−63.1 −36.5 −3.2 −33.4 −26.6 −11.4 −11.5 −11.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 −15.1 −29.0 −0.1 + 12.1          Jun
− 2.1 −11.6 + 2.7 −14.3 + 9.5 + 3.6 + 3.5 + 3.4 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 5.9 −1.4 + 0.1 −4.8          Jul
+ 26.9 + 5.3 + 6.6 −1.4 + 21.6 −1.1 −1.1 −1.1 + 0.0 −0.0 + 22.7 −6.1 + 0.1 −0.1          Aug
−10.5 −2.4 + 12.2 −14.5 −8.1 −2.3 −2.3 −1.2 −0.0 −0.0 −5.8 −7.5 −0.1 + 3.9          Sep
+ 19.5 + 18.0 + 10.3 + 7.6 + 1.6 + 2.4 + 2.5 + 1.6 −0.0 −0.0 −0.9 −13.4 −0.0 + 5.2          Oct
+ 26.3 + 32.9 + 15.8 + 17.1 −6.5 + 2.9 + 2.8 + 2.7 + 0.1 + 0.1 −9.4 −1.2 −0.0 −0.7          Nov
  
  
End of year or month * Foreign  subsidiaries
  
383.4 250.7 56.9 193.8 132.7 21.6 19.8 18.3 1.7 1.7 111.1 51.5 29.0 66.7 1999
414.6 267.9 61.0 207.0 146.7 32.5 29.2 21.9 3.2 3.2 114.2 56.3 34.7 74.9 2000576.5 362.5 79.2 283.3 214.0 36.4 32.5 23.9 3.9 3.8 177.6 99.8 47.3 87.9 2001
568.8 361.3 61.9 299.4 207.5 33.0 29.2 24.1 3.8 3.8 174.5 98.9 48.3 87.5 2002          Feb
578.1 376.1 65.6 310.5 202.0 32.9 29.1 24.1 3.8 3.8 169.1 101.0 48.0 86.8          Mar
547.7 344.3 66.6 277.7 203.4 33.7 29.9 25.4 3.8 3.7 169.7 81.9 47.1 84.1          Apr
539.5 339.9 71.3 268.7 199.6 32.3 28.5 24.4 3.8 3.7 167.3 82.1 46.4 83.8          May521.7 326.3 72.5 253.8 195.4 31.8 28.1 24.0 3.7 3.7 163.6 81.4 45.4 83.7          Jun
500.8 307.6 71.5 236.1 193.3 31.7 24.8 20.6 6.9 6.8 161.6 82.9 45.6 83.4          Jul
490.1 304.0 75.7 228.3 186.1 27.6 23.3 22.8 4.3 4.2 158.5 81.4 44.0 78.2          Aug488.8 300.6 78.0 222.6 188.2 28.8 24.1 23.6 4.6 4.6 159.4 81.6 43.3 81.7          Sep
495.9 301.0 79.1 221.9 194.9 27.7 23.1 22.6 4.6 4.5 167.2 81.7 43.2 79.7          Oct
502.8 308.8 81.8 227.0 194.0 26.4 22.1 21.6 4.3 4.2 167.6 81.0 43.2 81.1          Nov
Changes *
+ 20.6 + 9.9 + 2.9 + 7.0 + 10.7 + 10.9 + 9.4 + 3.6 + 1.5 + 1.5 −0.3 + 4.8 + 5.4 + 7.6 2000
+ 160.9 + 94.6 + 18.2 + 76.3 + 66.4 + 3.9 + 3.3 + 2.0 + 0.6 + 0.6 + 62.5 + 43.6 + 13.7 + 11.7 2001
−10.7 −7.9 −8.2 + 0.3 −2.9 −2.0 −2.0 −1.6 −0.0 −0.0 −0.8 + 0.5 + 0.3 −1.0 2002          Feb
+ 10.5 + 15.5 + 3.7 + 11.7 −5.0 −0.1 −0.1 −0.0 −− − 4.9 + 2.1 −0.3 −0.6          Mar
−25.1 −28.1 + 1.0 −29.1 + 3.0 + 0.7 + 0.8 + 1.3 −0.1 −0.1 + 2.2 −19.2 −0.9 −2.1          Apr
− 0.9 + 0.4 + 4.6 −4.2 −1.4 −1.4 −1.4 −1.0 −0.0 −0.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 −0.7 + 0.2          May
− 8.7 −7.4 + 1.3 −8.7 −1.3 −0.4 −0.4 −0.4 −0.0 −0.0 −0.9 −0.7 −1.0 + 0.9          Jun
−25.0 −21.4 −1.0 −20.3 −3.6 −0.1 −3.3 −3.4 + 3.2 + 3.2 −3.5 + 1.5 + 0.2 −0.5          Jul
− 9.6 −2.8 + 4.3 −7.1 −6.7 −4.1 −1.5 + 2.2 −2.6 −2.6 −2.7 −1.5 −1.6 −5.2          Aug
− 1.0 −3.1 + 2.3 −5.4 + 2.1 + 1.2 + 0.8 + 0.8 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 1.0 + 0.2 −0.7 + 3.6          Sep
+ 7.4 + 0.5 + 1.1 −0.5 + 6.8 −1.1 −1.0 −1.0 −0.1 −0.1 + 7.9 + 0.1 −0.1 −1.9          Oct
+ 8.1 + 8.6 + 2.7 + 5.9 −0.5 −1.3 −1.0 −1.0 −0.3 −0.3 + 0.8 −0.7 + 0.0 + 1.6          Nov
country of domicile are regarded as a single branch. —2Treasury bills, subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt securities. —5Issues of
Treasury discount paper and other money market paper, debt negotiable and non-negotiable debt securities and money market
securities. —3Including own debt securities. —4Excluding paper. — 6 Including subordinated liabilities. 
41*IV  Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
V. Minimum reserves
 
1. Reserve ratios
Germany European monetary union
 
% of liabilities subject to reserve requirements % of reserve base  1 
Sight Time
Applicable from liabilities liabilities Applicable from Ratio Savings deposits
1995  August 1 2    2    1.5    1999  January 1 2    
 
   
1Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank of 1 December
1998 on the application of minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which
a reserve ratio of 0 % applies, pursuant to article 4 (1)). 
 
  
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany up to the end of 1998
− pursuant to the Minimum Reserves Order of the Bundesbank −
 
DM million
Liabilities subject to reserve requirements Excess reserves  4 
Monthly Required as % of the
average  1 Total reserves  2 Level Sight liabilities Time liabilities Savings deposits Actual reserves  3 required  reserves Shortfall, total
1995          Dec. 2,066,565 579,337 519,456 967,772 36,492 37,337 845 2.3 3
1996          Dec. 2,201,464 655,483 474,342 1,071,639 38,671 39,522 851 2.2 41997          Dec. 2,327,879 734,986 476,417 1,116,477 40,975 41,721 745 1.8 31998          Dec. 2,576,889 865,444 564,878 1,146,567 45,805 46,432 627 1.4 4
1Pursuant to sections 5 to 7 of the Minimum Reserves Order. —2Amount balances of the credit institutions subject to reserve requirements on their
after applying the reserve ratios to the liabilities subject to reserve require- giro accounts at the Bundesbank. — 4 Actual reserves less required reserves. 
ments (section 5 (1) of the Minimum Reserves Order). —3Average credit
 
 
3. Reserve maintenance in the European monetary union
− from 1999, pursuant to the ECB Regulation governing minimum reserves according to article 19.1 of the
ECB/ESCB Statute −
 
Maintenance Required reserves
period before deduction Required reserves
of lump-sum Lump-sum beginning in  1 after deduction of
Reserve base  2 allowance  3 allowance  4 lump-sum allowance Actual reserves  5 Excess reserves  6 Shortfall, total  7 
European monetary union (  5  billion)
 
2002          Apr. 6,578.6 131.6 0.6 131.0 131.5 0.5 0.0
         May 6,581.0 131.6 0.6 131.0 131.7 0.6 0.0         June 6,560.9 131.2 0.6 130.7 131.3 0.6 0.0
         July 6,490.8 129.8 0.6 129.3 129.7 0.5 0.0
         Aug. 6,477.9 129.6 0.6 129.0 129.5 0.5 0.0         Sep. 6,411.9 128.2 0.6 127.7 128.2 0.5 0.0
         Oct. 6,460.4 129.2 0.6 128.7 129.2 0.5 0.0
         Nov.  
r 6,466.2 129.3 0.5 128.8 129.4 0.6 0.0
         Dec.  p 6,566.0 131.3 0.5 130.9 131.4 0.6 0.0
Of which: Germany (  5  million)
2002          Apr. 1,899,520 37,990 246 37,745 37,931 187 1
         May 1,903,413 38,068 245 37,823 38,100 276 4         June 1,899,951 37,999 242 37,757 38,040 282 1
         July 1,896,682 37,934 238 37,696 37,867 171 4
         Aug. 1,892,420 37,848 234 37,614 37,823 209 2         Sep. 1,879,343 37,587 232 37,354 37,545 190 1
         Oct. 1,894,298 37,886 232 37,654 37,895 240 5
         Nov. 1,887,201 37,744 231 37,513 37,727 214 38         Dec.  
p 1,929,396 38,588 231 38,356 38,574 217 2
1The reserve maintenance period of the ESCB minimum reserve system base. —4Article 5 (2) of the Regulation of the European Central Bank of
starts on the 24th of each month and ends on the 23rd of the following 1 December 1998 on the application of minimum reserves. —5Average
month (the first reserve maintenance period lasted from January 1, 1999 to credit balances of the credit institutions subject to minimum reserve requ ire-
February 23, 1999). —2Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central ments on their reserve accounts at the respective national central bank. —
Bank of 1 December 1998 on the application of minimum reserves 6Actual reserves less required reserves after the deduction of the lump-sum
(excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio o f 0 % applies, pursuant to allowance. —7Required reserves after the deduction of the lump-sum
article 4 (1)). —3Amount after applying the reserve ratios to the reserve allowance. 
42*V. Minimum reserves

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
VI. Interest rates
  
1. ECB interest rates 2. Discount and lombard rates 3. Base rates
    of the Bundesbank
  
% p.a. % p.a. % p.a.
Base rate as per
Main Marginal Discount Rate
Deposit refinancing lending Lombard Transition Act
Applicable from facility operations  1 facility Applicable from Discount rate rate  2, 4, 5  Applicable from 3, 4, 5  
1999 Jan.                 1 2.00 3.00 4.50 1994 Feb.                18 5 1/4 6 3/4 1999 Jan.                 1 2.50
         Jan.                 4 2.75 3.00 3.25          Apr.                15 5 6 1/2          May                 1 1.95
         Jan.               22 2.00 3.00 4.50          May                13 4 1/2 6 
         Apr.                 9 1.50 2.50 3.50 2000 Jan.                  1 2.68
         Nov.                 5 2.00 3.00 4.00 1995 Mar.                31 4 6          May                  1 3.42
         Aug.               25 3 1/2 5 1/2          Sep.                 1 4.26
2000 Feb.                 4 2.25 3.25 4.25          Dec.                15 3 5 
         Mar.               17 2.50 3.50 4.50   2001 Sep.                  1 3.62
         Apr.               28 2.75 3.75 4.75 1996 Apr.                19 2 1/2 4 1/2
         June                 9 3.25 4.25 5.25          to 2002 Jan.                  1 2.71
         Sep.                 1 3.50 4.50 5.50 1998 Dec.                31          to
         Oct.                 6 3.75 4.75 5.75          Apr.                  3
  
2001 May               11 3.50 4.50 5.50 Base rate as per
         Aug.               31 3.25 4.25 5.25 Civil Code  6 
         Sep.               18 2.75 3.75 4.75
         Nov.                 9 2.25 3.25 4.25 2002 Jan.                  1 2.57
         July                 1 2.47
2002 Dec.                 6 1.75 2.75 3.75
2003 Jan.                 1 1.97
1Up to 21 June 2000 fixed rate tenders, from 28 June 2000 variable rate the field of civil law and judicial procedural law), in state legislation (as stipu -
tenders at minimum bid rate. —2From 1 August 1990 to 31 December 1993 lated in the Act Introducing the Civil Code) or in executory instruments and
this was also the rate for cash advances; from 1 January 1994 cash advances contracts based on such regulations, the following changes apply as from
have no longer been granted. Wherever reference is made in an Act to the 1 January 2002: a) the rate for cash advances of the Federal Government isinterest rate applicable for cash advances of the Federal Government, the replaced by the base rate in the Civil Code increased by 1.5%, b) the lom-rate will be replaced by the base rate increased by 1.5 percentage points pur- bard rate is replaced by the ECB ’s marginal lending facility rate, c) the base
suant to the Discount Rate Transition Act (see also footnot e 4 a and 5). Pursu- rate pursuant to the Discount Rate Transition Act is replaced by the base
ant to the Discount Rate Transition Act, read in conjunction with the Lom- rate pursuant to section 247 of the Civil Code (see also footnote 5). —5Pur-
bard Rate Transition Regulation, the lombard rate is replaced from 1 Janu- suant to Article 4 section 1 of the Act on the Amendment of Provisions con-ary 1999 by the rate applied by the European Cental Bank (ECB) for its mar- cerning the Evaluation of Insurance Enterprises ’Capital Investment and the
ginal lending facility wherever the lombard rate is used as a reference vari- Repeal of the Discount Rate Transition Act, the Discount Rate Transition Act,
able for interest and other payments (see also footnot e 4 b and 5). —3Pur- the Regulation Governing the Use of the Base Rate as a Reference Variable
suant to the Discount Rate Transition Act, read in conjunction with the Regu- and the Lombard Rate Transition Regulation are repealed. Pursuant to Art -
lation Governing the Use of the Base Rate as a Reference Variable, this rate icle 4 section 2 of this act, from 4 April 2002 the discount rate and the basereplaces the discount rate from 1 January 1999 wherever the latter is used rate under the Discount Rate Transition Act are replaced by the base ratein contracts and regulations as a reference variable for interest and other pursuant to section 247 of the Civil Code, the lombard rate is replaced bypayments. This base rate is the discount rate of the Bundesbank which ap- the interest rate on the marginal lending facility of the ECB, and the inter-plied on 31 December 1998. It changes from January 1, May 1 and Septem- est rate for cash advances of the Federal Government by the base rate pursu-ber 1 of each year, and will change for the first time on 1 May 1999 if the ant to section 247 of the Civil Code increased by 1.5 percentage points. —
interest rate applied by the ECB to its longer-term refinancing operations 6Starting at 3.62%, it is adjusted on January 1 and July 1 of each year (for
(marginal rate) has changed by at least 0.5 percentage points (see also foot- the first time on 1 January 2002) by the percentage points by which the refe r-
note 4 c and 5). —4Wherever the rates listed in this column are used as a ence variable (most recent main refinancing operation of the ECB, marginal
reference variable for interest and other payments in Federal legislation (in rate) has increased or decreased since the last change in th e base rate. 
  
  
  
4. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders *
  
  
  
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bids Allotment Weighted
Amount Amount Fixed rate Minimum bid rate Marginal rate  1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement
 5 
 millions % p.a. ... days
Main refinancing operations
2002 Dec.               24 146,157 88,000 − 2.75 3.02 3.08 15
       Dec.               31 117,377 92,000 − 2.75 2.85 2.95 15
2003 Jan.                 8 133,781 82,000 − 2.75 2.83 2.84 14
       Jan.               15 120,349 79,000 − 2.75 2.80 2.81 14
       Jan.               22 123,705 91,000 − 2.75 2.80 2.81 14
       Jan.               29 114,931 83,000 − 2.75 2.79 2.81 14
       Feb.                 5 115,836 86,000 − 2.75 2.78 2.79 14
       Feb.               12 100,544 75,000 − 2.75 2.76 2.78 14
Longer-term refinancing operations
2002 Oct.               31 27,820 15,000 −− 3.22 3.24 91
       Nov.               28 38,644 15,000 −− 3.02 3.04 91
       Dec.               23 42,305 15,000 −− 2.93 2.95 94
2003 Jan.               30 31,716 15,000 −− 2.78 2.80 90
Other tender operations
2002 Dec.               18 28,480 10,000 − 2.75 2.80 2.82 6
Source: ECB. —*Enlargement of the euro area on 1 January 2001 to allotted or collected. 
include Greece. —1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were
43*VI. Interest rates

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
VI. Interest rates
 
5.  Money market rates, by month
 
 
% p.a.
Money market rates reported by Frankfurt banks  1 EURIBOR  3 
One- One- Three- Six- Nine- Twelve-
week month month month month month
Day-to-day money Three-month funds EONIA  2 funds funds funds funds funds funds
Monthly Lowest and Monthly Lowest and
Period averages highest rates averages highest rates Monthly averages
2001          Jan. 4.75 4.15 −4.88 4.75 4.65 −4.84 4.76 4.81 4.80 4.77 4.68 4.60 4.57
         Feb. 4.98 4.73 −5.75 4.74 4.67 −4.81 4.99 4.83 4.80 4.76 4.67 4.61 4.59
         Mar. 4.77 4.20 −4.93 4.69 4.52 −4.78 4.78 4.82 4.78 4.71 4.58 4.49 4.47
         Apr. 5.04 4.71 −5.80 4.66 4.52 −4.80 5.06 4.88 4.78 4.68 4.57 4.50 4.48
         May 4.64 4.41 −4.90 4.62 4.49 −4.81 4.65 4.66 4.66 4.64 4.56 4.53 4.52
         June 4.53 4.30 −4.85 4.43 4.37 −4.50 4.54 4.56 4.53 4.45 4.35 4.33 4.31
         July 4.51 4.25 −4.63 4.45 4.38 −4.50 4.51 4.54 4.52 4.47 4.39 4.33 4.31
         Aug. 4.49 4.35 −4.53 4.33 4.21 −4.43 4.49 4.51 4.46 4.35 4.22 4.14 4.11
         Sep. 3.97 2.95 −5.50 3.96 3.60 −4.27 3.99 4.08 4.05 3.98 3.88 3.80 3.77
         Oct. 3.96 3.65 −4.76 3.58 3.48 −3.65 3.97 3.83 3.72 3.60 3.46 3.39 3.37
         Nov. 3.51 3.15 −4.20 3.37 3.28 −3.50 3.51 3.48 3.43 3.39 3.26 3.20 3.20
         Dec. 3.32 4 2.90 −4.05 3.33 3.26 −3.36 3.34 3.38 3.42 3.34 3.26 3.24 3.30
2002          Jan. 3.29 2.45 −3.57 3.32 3.24 −3.38 3.29 3.35 3.35 3.34 3.34 3.39 3.48
         Feb. 3.27 2.90 −3.35 3.34 3.31 −3.38 3.28 3.32 3.34 3.36 3.40 3.48 3.59
         Mar. 3.25 2.90 −3.45 3.37 3.33 −3.45 3.26 3.33 3.35 3.39 3.50 3.65 3.82
         Apr. 3.30 3.11 −3.75 3.39 3.35 −3.45 3.32 3.32 3.34 3.41 3.54 3.70 3.86
         May 3.31 3.21 −3.50 3.44 3.35 −3.52 3.31 3.34 3.37 3.47 3.63 3.80 3.96
         June 3.35 3.28 −3.65 3.45 3.40 −3.48 3.35 3.36 3.38 3.46 3.59 3.73 3.87
         July 3.30 3.15 −3.40 3.39 3.34 −3.44 3.30 3.34 3.36 3.41 3.48 3.56 3.64
         Aug. 3.29 3.26 −3.36 3.33 3.29 −3.37 3.29 3.32 3.33 3.35 3.38 3.40 3.44
         Sep. 3.31 3.26 −3.60 3.29 3.25 −3.34 3.32 3.32 3.32 3.31 3.27 3.23 3.24
         Oct. 3.30 3.27 −3.50 3.24 3.18 −3.31 3.30 3.31 3.31 3.26 3.17 3.12 3.13
         Nov. 3.30 3.10 −3.48 3.11 3.00 −3.23 3.30 3.32 3.23 3.12 3.04 3.01 3.02
         Dec. 3.07 5 2.85 −3.75 2.93 2.83 −3.03 3.09 3.02 2.98 2.94 2.89 2.87 2.87
2003          Jan. 2.79 2.00 −2.92 2.81 2.77 −2.86 2.79 2.85 2.85 2.83 2.76 2.72 2.70
1Money market rates are not fixed or quoted officially; the monthly aver- Moneyline Telerate (formerly Bridge Telerate). —3Euro Interbank Offered
ages computed from daily quotations are unweighted. —2Euro OverNight Rate: unweighted average rate calculated by Moneyline Telerate (formerly
Index Average: weighted average overnight rate for interbank operations Bridge Telerate) since 30 December 1998 according to the act/360
calculated by the European Central Bank since 4 January 1999 on the basis method. —4At the end of December 3.50% to 4.05%. —5At the end of De-
of real turnover according to the act/360 method and published via cember 3.00% to 3.05%. 
 
 
6. Euro area retail bank interest rates *, o
  
% p.a.; period averages
Deposit interest rates Lending interest rates
With agreed maturity Redeemable at notice To enterprises To householdsUp to Up to Over Up to Over Up to Over Consumer For house
Period Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months 1 year 1 year lending purchase
2000 0.85 3.45 3.45 4.52 2.25 3.79 6.60 6.23 9.87 6.34
2001  
1 0.94 3.49 3.49 4.12 2.40 3.59 6.83 6.15 10.12 5.97
2002 0.73 2.80 2.80 3.85 2.13 2.85 6.13 5.71 9.76 5.54
2001          Dec. 0.74 2.79 2.78 3.77 2.17 2.79 6.26 5.69 9.81 5.522002          Jan. 0.73 2.77 2.77 3.83 2.17 2.80 6.18 5.63 9.78 5.53
         Feb. 0.73 2.78 2.79 3.95 2.15 2.91 6.16 5.75 9.81 5.61         Mar. 0.73 2.84 2.84 4.07 2.15 3.00 6.09 5.85 9.76 5.74
         Apr. 0.74 2.89 2.90 4.13 2.14 3.07 6.17 5.96 9.81 5.81
         May 0.74 2.91 2.92 4.15 2.15 3.08 6.20 5.98 9.85 5.82         June 0.74 2.93 2.94 4.09 2.13 3.08 6.18 5.92 9.82 5.77
         July 0.74 2.89 2.90 4.02 2.13 3.02 6.16 5.79 9.76 5.68
         Aug. 0.73 2.84 2.85 3.81 2.12 2.94 6.14 5.70 9.77 5.53         Sep. 0.73 2.77 2.77 3.64 2.13 2.73 6.11 5.61 9.82 5.37
         Oct. 0.72 2.74 2.74 3.58 2.11 2.63 6.12 5.54 9.70 5.26
         Nov. 0.71 2.70 2.69 3.53 2.11 2.55 6.09 5.50 9.67 5.20         Dec. 0.68 2.51 2.51 3.45 2.06 2.41 5.97 5.34 9.59 5.10
*These euro area retail bank interest rates should be used with caution and Member States. Furthermore, the national interest rates are not harmonised
for statistical purposes only, primarily to analyse their development over in terms of their coverage (new business and/or outstanding amounts), th e
time rather than their level. They are calculated as the weighted average of nature of the data (nominal or effective) or the compilation method. The
national interest rates provided by the national central banks. The national country weights for the euro area retail bank interest rates are derived from
rates represent those rates that are currently available from national MFI balance sheet statistics or close proxies. The weights reflect thesources and which are judged to fit the standard categories. These national country-specific proportions of the relevant instruments within the eur o
rates have been aggregated to derive information for the euro area, in area, measured as outstanding amounts. The weights are adjusted monthly,some cases relying on proxies and working assumptions due to the so that interest rates and weights always refer to the same month. —1En-
heterogeneity observed in the national financial instruments across MU largement of the euro area on 1 January 2001 to include Greece. 
      
o Tables and notes taken from the ECB. 
44*VI. Interest rates

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
VI. Interest rates
 
7. Lending and deposit rates of banks (MFIs) in Germany *, o
    Lending rates
 
% p.a.
Current account credit Bills discountedBills of less than 
 5 
 50,000
 5 
 100,000 and more
 5 
 500,000 and more refinancable
less than 
 5 
 100,000 but less than 
 5 
 500,000 but less than 
 5 
 2.5 million at the Bundesbank
Reporting Average Average Average Average
period  1 interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread
2001          Jan. 11.35 8.75 −13.50 10.30 8.00 −12.95 9.12 7.00 −12.25 6.99 5.50 −10.00
         Feb. 11.13 8.00 −13.25 10.15 7.50 −12.95 8.95 7.00 −12.00 6.98 5.40 −9.81
         Mar. 11.17 7.00 −13.25 10.03 6.50 −13.00 8.86 6.00 −12.00 7.00 5.50 −10.00
         Apr. 11.14 6.80 −13.25 10.07 6.50 −13.00 8.85 6.00 −12.25 6.96 5.39 −10.00
         May 11.12 6.50 −13.25 10.09 6.00 −12.75 8.84 5.60 −12.00 6.86 4.78 −10.00
         June 11.21 6.50 −13.25 10.13 6.50 −12.95 8.79 5.50 −12.00 6.91 5.42 −10.00
         July 11.12 6.50 −13.25 9.99 6.00 −12.95 8.73 5.50 −12.00 6.91 5.43 −10.00
         Aug. 11.11 6.20 −13.25 10.03 6.00 −12.95 8.79 5.50 −12.10 6.84 5.18 −10.00
         Sep. 11.06 6.00 −13.25 9.98 6.00 −12.75 8.75 5.50 −12.10 6.69 5.00 −10.00
         Oct. 10.97 5.50 −13.25 9.93 5.50 −12.75 8.57 5.00 −12.00 6.57 4.55 −10.25
         Nov. 10.87 5.50 −13.00 9.77 5.00 −12.75 8.49 4.90 −12.00 6.43 4.36 −10.25
         Dec. 10.66 6.00 −13.00 9.64 5.50 −12.75 8.44 4.90 −12.00 6.23 3.46 −10.00
2002          Jan. o 10.86 6.00 −13.00 9.62 5.50 −12.75 8.40 4.50 −12.00 6.34 4.30 −10.25
         Feb. 10.84 6.00 −13.00 9.58 6.00 −12.75 8.42 5.50 −12.00 6.36 4.35 −10.25
         Mar. 10.88 6.45 −13.00 9.64 6.00 −12.60 8.39 4.50 −12.00 6.28 4.25 −10.00
         Apr. 10.90 6.00 −13.00 9.69 6.00 −12.75 8.49 5.00 −12.00 6.34 4.30 −10.25
         May 10.93 6.00 −13.00 9.69 5.50 −12.75 8.55 4.50 −12.00 6.36 4.35 −10.25
         June 10.88 6.30 −13.00 9.76 6.00 −12.75 8.48 4.50 −12.00 6.42 4.45 −10.25
         July 10.99 6.00 −13.00 9.70 5.50 −12.75 8.57 4.50 −12.00 6.40 4.38 −10.00
         Aug. 11.00 6.00 −13.00 9.72 5.50 −12.75 8.57 4.50 −12.00 6.41 4.34 −10.25
         Sep. 10.86 5.50 −13.00 9.78 6.00 −12.75 8.54 4.50 −12.00 6.37 4.30 −10.25
         Oct. 10.92 5.50 −13.00 9.77 5.40 −12.75 8.58 4.50 −12.00 6.36 4.26 −10.25
         Nov. 10.97 5.50 −13.00 9.73 5.50 −12.50 8.55 4.50 −12.00 6.29 4.10 −10.25
         Dec. 10.88 5.50 −13.00 9.69 5.00 −12.75 8.56 4.00 −12.00 6.19 3.93 −10.25
2003          Jan. 10.92 6.50 −13.00 9.68 5.50 −12.75 8.55 4.50 −12.00 6.12 3.83 −10.25
 
 
Long-term fixed-rate loans
to enterprises and self-employed persons
Instalment credits (excluding lending to the housing sector)  5 
 5 
 5,000 and more but not more than 
 5 
 15,000  2  5  100,000 and more  5  500,000 and more
Personal credit lines but less than 
 5 
 500,000 but less than 
 5 
 5 million
(overdraft facilities Effective
granted to individuals) Monthly rate  3 annual interest rate  4 Effective interest rate
Reporting Average Average Average Average Averageperiod  
1 interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread
2001          Jan. 12.63 11.00 −13.50 0.41 0.34 −0.50 10.82 8.95 −12.95 6.89 5.82 −8.57 6.66 5.68 −8.25
         Feb. 12.61 10.75 −13.50 0.41 0.34 −0.50 10.82 8.88 −12.91 6.89 5.79 −8.64 6.65 5.63 −8.25
         Mar. 12.67 11.25 −13.75 0.41 0.34 −0.50 10.76 8.77 −12.77 6.78 5.75 −8.50 6.56 5.64 −8.05
         Apr. 12.70 11.25 −13.75 0.41 0.33 −0.49 10.71 8.76 −12.77 6.77 5.75 −8.57 6.53 5.57 −8.05
         May 12.70 11.50 −13.50 0.41 0.33 −0.49 10.75 8.69 −12.89 6.81 5.83 −8.65 6.60 5.69 −8.01
         June 12.68 11.50 −13.50 0.41 0.34 −0.49 10.76 8.76 −12.89 6.82 5.81 −8.66 6.62 5.75 −8.20
         July 12.68 11.25 −13.50 0.41 0.35 −0.49 10.78 8.92 −12.91 6.82 5.85 −8.63 6.60 5.70 −8.30
         Aug. 12.66 11.25 −13.50 0.41 0.35 −0.49 10.80 8.89 −12.76 6.74 5.63 −8.60 6.52 5.50 −8.30
         Sep. 12.66 11.25 −13.50 0.41 0.35 −0.49 10.80 8.95 −12.89 6.64 5.49 −8.50 6.43 5.38 −8.25
         Oct. 12.61 11.25 −13.50 0.41 0.35 −0.49 10.76 8.80 −12.95 6.44 5.26 −8.50 6.21 5.17 −8.17
         Nov. 12.54 11.25 −13.50 0.41 0.34 −0.49 10.65 8.68 −12.86 6.28 5.15 −8.50 6.05 5.04 −8.12
         Dec. 12.48 11.00 −13.50 0.41 0.34 −0.49 10.64 8.78 −12.63 6.40 5.36 −8.50 6.16 5.25 −8.05
2002          Jan. o 12.47 11.25 −13.50 0.41 0.33 −0.49 10.65 8.62 −12.68 6.48 5.50 −8.55 6.23 5.28 −8.25
         Feb. 12.47 11.00 −13.50 0.41 0.34 −0.49 10.73 8.87 −12.77 6.57 5.55 −8.60 6.36 5.41 −8.50
         Mar. 12.44 11.00 −13.50 0.41 0.34 −0.49 10.71 8.87 −12.68 6.77 5.80 −8.80 6.55 5.41 −8.55
         Apr. 12.44 10.51 −13.50 0.41 0.34 −0.49 10.68 8.76 −12.80 6.82 5.80 −8.80 6.63 5.70 −8.45
         May 12.47 11.00 −13.50 0.41 0.34 −0.49 10.73 8.87 −12.96 6.86 5.90 −8.60 6.63 5.75 −8.45
         June 12.49 11.20 −13.50 0.41 0.33 −0.50 10.73 8.48 −13.00 6.75 5.77 −8.53 6.53 5.64 −8.25
         July 12.48 11.00 −13.50 0.41 0.33 −0.49 10.74 8.83 −13.00 6.68 5.71 −8.60 6.45 5.48 −8.25
         Aug. 12.47 10.50 −13.50 0.42 0.33 −0.50 10.71 8.82 −13.00 6.51 5.33 −8.52 6.26 5.21 −8.25
         Sep. 12.49 10.75 −13.50 0.41 0.34 −0.49 10.76 8.76 −13.00 6.37 5.12 −8.57 6.13 4.99 −8.25
         Oct. 12.52 11.00 −13.50 0.41 0.34 −0.50 10.74 8.56 −13.05 6.32 5.17 −8.57 6.13 4.93 −8.25
         Nov. 12.53 11.00 −13.50 0.42 0.34 −0.50 10.70 8.50 −13.07 6.26 4.99 −8.52 6.05 4.74 −8.20
         Dec. 12.53 11.20 −13.50 0.41 0.33 −0.50 10.64 8.47 −13.00 6.13 4.88 −8.50 5.93 4.62 −8.20
2003          Jan. 12.50 11.00 −13.50 0.42 0.33 −0.50 10.69 8.44 −13.07 5.97 4.65 −8.25 5.76 4.46 −8.00
*The average rates are calculated as unweighted arithmetic means from 60 months. —3Interest rates as % per month of original amount of credit
the interest rates reported to be within the spread. The spread is as- taken up. Besides interest, most banks charge a one-off processing fee (gen-certained by eliminating the reports in the top 5% and the bottom 5% of erally 2%, in some cases 3%, of the credit amount). —4Calculated on the
the interest rate range. The figures for the latest date are always to be re- basis of reported monthly rates (see footnote 3) and reported annual ratesgarded as provisional; subsequent alterations, which will appear in the on the respective amount of debt and on the basis of the respective pro-following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —oFor simplicity, the cessing fees, taking due account of reported maturities. —5Lending to
amount categories were redenominated to euro as from January 2002 by enterprises (with agreed maturities of more than five years) with agreedhalving the previous Deutsche Mark amounts. —1Second and third weeks interest rates locked in for more than five years. 
of the months indicated. —2With maturities between 36 months and
45*VI. Interest rates

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
VI. Interest rates
 
7. Lending and deposit rates of banks (MFIs) in Germany *, o  (cont ’d)
    Lending rates
 
% p.a.
Mortgage loans secured by residential real estatewith interest rates fixed (effective interest rate)  
6 
with variable interest rates
for 2 years for 5 years for 10 years (effective interest rate)  6 
Reporting Average Average Average Average
period  1 interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread
2001          Jan. 5.95 5.41 −6.60 5.93 5.59 −6.54 6.22 5.96 −6.70 6.72 5.64 −8.11
         Feb. 5.94 5.43 −6.59 5.90 5.59 −6.51 6.17 5.96 −6.54 6.71 5.61 −8.03
         Mar. 5.85 5.27 −6.49 5.80 5.47 −6.35 6.12 5.85 −6.54 6.67 5.56 −8.03
         Apr. 5.80 5.27 −6.54 5.78 5.43 −6.33 6.11 5.85 −6.54 6.64 5.48 −8.03
         May 5.88 5.34 −6.59 5.87 5.54 −6.43 6.20 5.77 −6.64 6.66 5.59 −8.03
         June 5.80 5.27 −6.54 5.84 5.54 −6.33 6.22 5.85 −6.59 6.64 5.48 −8.03
         July 5.78 5.22 −6.45 5.85 5.54 −6.37 6.24 5.77 −6.59 6.64 5.43 −8.03
         Aug. 5.62 5.06 −6.35 5.69 5.43 −6.22 6.13 5.88 −6.54 6.57 5.43 −8.03
         Sep. 5.41 4.75 −6.22 5.57 5.22 −6.22 6.08 5.85 −6.43 6.45 5.38 −7.82
         Oct. 5.12 4.49 −5.96 5.36 5.01 −6.03 5.91 5.64 −6.43 6.30 4.96 −7.73
         Nov. 4.95 4.33 −5.79 5.20 4.75 −5.75 5.70 5.38 −6.14 6.12 4.80 −7.71
         Dec. 5.13 4.59 −5.90 5.42 4.90 −5.90 5.87 5.20 −6.22 6.15 4.85 −7.60
2002          Jan. 5.19 4.65 −5.91 5.52 5.10 −6.06 5.95 5.36 −6.27 6.13 4.85 −7.50
         Feb. 5.38 4.85 −6.11 5.66 5.32 −6.17 6.05 5.62 −6.42 6.14 4.80 −7.50
         Mar. 5.61 5.12 −6.27 5.89 5.54 −6.33 6.26 5.84 −6.61 6.16 4.70 −7.50
         Apr. 5.70 5.22 −6.38 5.96 5.56 −6.43 6.30 6.00 −6.69 6.26 5.10 −7.60
         May 5.73 5.22 −6.38 5.96 5.69 −6.43 6.30 6.01 −6.70 6.22 4.95 −7.50
         June 5.63 5.08 −6.27 5.86 5.54 −6.38 6.21 5.91 −6.59 6.21 5.02 −7.50
         July 5.47 4.85 −6.17 5.71 5.41 −6.27 6.10 5.85 −6.54 6.13 4.96 −7.49
         Aug. 5.17 4.54 −5.90 5.42 5.08 −6.06 5.84 5.57 −6.38 6.04 4.87 −7.23
         Sep. 4.95 4.28 −5.75 5.22 4.85 −5.96 5.69 5.38 −6.26 6.02 4.79 −7.49
         Oct. 4.86 4.28 −5.75 5.14 4.75 −5.80 5.67 5.33 −6.22 5.93 4.59 −7.34
         Nov. 4.76 4.07 −5.59 5.08 4.75 −5.75 5.62 5.27 −6.17 5.90 4.59 −7.34
         Dec. 4.62 3.92 −5.54 4.96 4.59 −5.64 5.52 5.20 −6.17 5.83 4.44 −7.50
2003          Jan. 4.41 3.71 −5.30 4.73 4.32 −5.38 5.36 5.02 −6.01 5.74 4.39 −7.23
 
 
    Deposit rates
 
% p.a.
Time deposits with agreed maturities
of 1 month of 3 months
Higher-yielding
sight deposits
 5 
 50,000 and more but
 5 
 500,000 and more but
 5 
 50,000 and more but
of individuals  7 less than  5  50,000 less than  5  500,000 less than  5  2.5 million less than  5  500,000
Reporting Average Average Average Average Average
period  1 interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread
2001          Jan. 2.43 0.50 −4.00 3.56 2.60 −4.25 3.96 3.20 −4.50 4.33 3.60 −4.75 4.06 3.39 −4.60
         Feb. 2.50 0.50 −4.00 3.46 2.55 −4.15 3.87 3.20 −4.45 4.21 3.50 −4.70 4.01 3.30 −4.50
         Mar. 2.48 0.50 −4.00 3.53 2.75 −4.25 3.95 3.25 −4.50 4.31 3.50 −4.75 4.05 3.40 −4.50
         Apr. 2.49 0.50 −4.00 3.48 2.59 −4.20 3.91 3.20 −4.50 4.27 3.50 −4.70 3.99 3.25 −4.50
         May 2.44 0.50 −4.00 3.46 2.50 −4.20 3.85 3.10 −4.40 4.20 3.50 −4.65 3.95 3.20 −4.50
         June 2.42 0.50 −3.90 3.34 2.50 −4.00 3.73 3.10 −4.25 4.07 3.50 −4.44 3.84 3.15 −4.35
         July 2.41 0.50 −3.88 3.34 2.50 −4.00 3.73 3.10 −4.20 4.08 3.50 −4.50 3.83 3.20 −4.41
         Aug. 2.39 0.50 −3.75 3.31 2.50 −4.00 3.70 3.00 −4.20 4.05 3.40 −4.45 3.76 3.10 −4.30
         Sep. 2.26 0.50 −3.50 3.00 2.20 −3.85 3.38 2.70 −4.00 3.66 2.95 −4.15 3.47 2.60 −4.00
         Oct. 2.10 0.50 −3.24 2.69 2.00 −3.40 3.07 2.40 −3.50 3.36 2.75 −3.75 3.12 2.40 −3.65
         Nov. 1.96 0.50 −2.96 2.42 1.75 −3.00 2.77 2.20 −3.15 3.00 2.50 −3.30 2.83 2.17 −3.45
         Dec. 1.92 0.50 −2.95 2.41 1.75 −3.00 2.76 2.23 −3.15 3.03 2.50 −3.40 2.78 2.20 −3.15
2002          Jan. o 1.90 0.50 −2.85 2.37 1.70 −3.00 2.73 2.20 −3.10 3.00 2.50 −3.30 2.76 2.20 −3.11
         Feb. 1.86 0.50 −2.85 2.30 1.65 −3.00 2.66 2.09 −3.05 2.89 2.45 −3.23 2.75 2.20 −3.13
         Mar. 1.88 0.50 −2.80 2.34 1.70 −3.00 2.70 2.20 −3.10 2.94 2.40 −3.25 2.77 2.25 −3.17
         Apr. 1.87 0.50 −3.00 2.34 1.70 −3.00 2.69 2.25 −3.05 2.94 2.50 −3.25 2.78 2.22 −3.20
         May 1.85 0.50 −2.75 2.33 1.67 −3.00 2.70 2.25 −3.05 2.94 2.40 −3.25 2.79 2.23 −3.20
         June 1.85 0.50 −2.75 2.35 1.70 −3.00 2.70 2.25 −3.10 2.94 2.50 −3.30 2.83 2.25 −3.25
         July 1.85 0.50 −2.80 2.35 1.75 −3.00 2.71 2.20 −3.10 2.95 2.50 −3.30 2.81 2.25 −3.25
         Aug. 1.82 0.50 −2.75 2.33 1.66 −3.00 2.69 2.17 −3.10 2.92 2.40 −3.25 2.77 2.20 −3.10
         Sep. 1.80 0.50 −2.75 2.29 1.65 −3.00 2.65 2.10 −3.07 2.89 2.35 −3.22 2.74 2.20 −3.10
         Oct. 1.76 0.50 −2.75 2.29 1.65 −3.00 2.64 2.10 −3.02 2.88 2.40 −3.22 2.72 2.20 −3.10
         Nov. 1.77 0.50 −2.75 2.24 1.57 −2.90 2.60 2.00 −3.00 2.84 2.30 −3.20 2.65 2.10 −3.00
         Dec. 1.66 0.50 −2.55 2.04 1.45 −2.65 2.37 1.90 −2.80 2.60 2.10 −3.00 2.41 1.90 −2.90
2003          Jan. 1.57 0.50 −2.50 1.94 1.40 −2.50 2.27 1.80 −2.65 2.51 2.00 −2.85 2.33 1.85 −2.75
For footnotes *, o, 1to5see page 45*. —6The figures refer to the time upon in each case by the credit institutions involved are taken into account
when the contract was concluded and not to the entire duration of the con- (at present mostly monthly payment and inclusion). —7Only such interest
tract. The calculation of the effective interest rate is based on an annual re- rates are taken into account as are above the relevant standard terms of t he
demption rate of 1% plus interest saved; the repayment conditions agreed banks included in the survey. 
46*VI. Interest rates

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
VI. Interest rates
 
7. Lending and deposit rates of banks (MFIs) in Germany *, o  (cont ’d)
    Deposit rates
 
% p.a.
Savings deposits
Bank savings bonds
with regular with minimum rates of with higher rates of return  9 
interest payments return  8 (without a duration of contract being agreed)
with agreed notice of 3 months
with agreed notice
 5 
 5,000 and more
 5 
 10,000 and more
maturity of 4 years of 3 months less than 
 5 
 5,000 but less than 
 5 
 10,000 but less than 
 5 
 25,000
Reporting Average Average Average Average Average
period  1 interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread
2001          Jan. 4.47 4.10 −5.00 1.26 1.00 −2.00 2.37 1.50 −3.80 2.95 1.80 −4.10 3.21 2.00 −4.33
         Feb. 4.42 4.00 −4.75 1.25 1.00 −2.00 2.35 1.50 −3.75 2.94 1.80 −4.00 3.17 2.00 −4.25
         Mar. 4.37 4.00 −4.75 1.24 1.00 −2.00 2.36 1.50 −3.75 2.97 1.80 −4.00 3.20 2.00 −4.32
         Apr. 4.27 3.95 −4.60 1.23 1.00 −2.00 2.36 1.50 −3.75 2.95 1.95 −4.00 3.18 2.00 −4.30
         May 4.31 4.00 −4.65 1.24 1.00 −2.00 2.33 1.50 −3.75 2.92 1.80 −4.00 3.14 2.00 −4.26
         June 4.31 3.95 −4.60 1.21 1.00 −2.00 2.29 1.50 −3.66 2.87 1.75 −4.00 3.09 2.00 −4.00
         July 4.26 3.90 −4.60 1.20 1.00 −2.00 2.26 1.50 −3.50 2.85 1.75 −4.00 3.07 2.00 −4.00
         Aug. 4.16 3.75 −4.50 1.18 1.00 −1.75 2.20 1.50 −3.35 2.77 1.75 −3.75 3.02 2.00 −4.00
         Sep. 3.99 3.60 −4.35 1.16 1.00 −1.75 2.11 1.35 −3.25 2.63 1.60 −3.50 2.88 1.85 −3.90
         Oct. 3.77 3.40 −4.20 1.14 1.00 −1.75 2.01 1.25 −3.05 2.47 1.50 −3.50 2.69 1.85 −3.50
         Nov. 3.48 3.00 −4.00 1.11 0.75 −1.50 1.86 1.25 −2.75 2.25 1.50 −3.00 2.49 1.75 −3.20
         Dec. 3.65 3.10 −4.00 1.08 0.75 −1.50 1.81 1.25 −2.75 2.18 1.50 −3.00 2.42 1.75 −3.00
2002          Jan. o 3.73 3.25 −4.10 1.07 0.75 −1.50 1.78 1.25 −2.75 2.15 1.50 −2.75 2.40 1.70 −3.00
         Feb. 3.90 3.25 −4.25 1.06 0.75 −1.50 1.78 1.25 −2.70 2.14 1.50 −2.75 2.37 1.60 −3.00
         Mar. 4.07 3.30 −4.50 1.05 0.75 −1.50 1.79 1.25 −2.75 2.14 1.50 −2.80 2.38 1.60 −3.00
         Apr. 4.15 3.30 −4.50 1.04 0.75 −1.50 1.78 1.25 −2.60 2.15 1.50 −2.80 2.38 1.60 −3.00
         May 4.15 3.30 −4.50 1.04 0.75 −1.50 1.79 1.25 −2.60 2.16 1.50 −2.80 2.40 1.75 −3.00
         June 4.12 3.30 −4.50 1.04 0.75 −1.50 1.78 1.25 −2.50 2.15 1.50 −2.80 2.40 1.75 −3.00
         July 4.01 3.30 −4.40 1.03 0.75 −1.50 1.78 1.15 −2.60 2.16 1.50 −2.81 2.40 1.75 −3.00
         Aug. 3.70 3.12 −4.05 1.01 0.75 −1.50 1.76 1.00 −2.50 2.14 1.50 −2.80 2.36 1.60 −3.00
         Sep. 3.50 3.05 −4.00 1.00 0.75 −1.50 1.75 1.25 −2.50 2.12 1.50 −2.75 2.34 1.50 −3.00
         Oct. 3.38 2.85 −4.00 0.99 0.75 −1.50 1.71 1.01 −2.50 2.10 1.40 −2.75 2.32 1.50 −3.00
         Nov. 3.35 2.85 −3.75 0.99 0.75 −1.50 1.69 1.00 −2.50 2.07 1.35 −2.75 2.31 1.50 −3.00
         Dec. 3.23 2.75 −3.70 0.96 0.75 −1.50 1.63 1.00 −2.50 1.97 1.25 −2.75 2.19 1.50 −2.95
2003          Jan. 3.02 2.70 −3.50 0.95 0.75 −1.25 1.61 1.00 −2.50 1.90 1.25 −2.95 2.13 1.50 −3.15
 
 
Savings deposits with higher rates of return  9  and with duration of contract being agreed for
 5 
 10,000 and more but less than 
 5 
 25,000   (total rate of return) 10
with agreed notice of 3 months with agreed notice of more than 3 months
and a duration of contract of and a duration of contract of
more than 1 year and up to
up to and including 1 year and including 4 years more than 4 years up to and including 1 year more than 4 years
Reporting Average Average Average Average Averageperiod  
1 interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread
2001          Jan. 3.98 3.00 −4.50 4.18 3.25 −4.75 4.59 3.60 −5.30 4.01 2.30 −4.50 4.51 4.04 −5.05
         Feb. 3.86 2.90 −4.40 4.11 3.25 −4.75 4.54 3.60 −5.30 3.99 2.50 −4.50 4.49 4.08 −4.83
         Mar. 3.84 2.99 −4.35 4.06 3.30 −4.62 4.52 3.60 −5.30 3.99 2.50 −4.50 4.42 3.95 −4.78
         Apr. 3.71 2.90 −4.25 3.96 3.25 −4.50 4.47 3.60 −5.25 3.91 2.50 −4.50 4.33 3.95 −4.75
         May 3.74 3.00 −4.25 3.99 3.25 −4.35 4.50 3.64 −5.22 3.91 2.60 −4.35 4.36 3.95 −4.75
         June 3.67 2.80 −4.20 3.93 3.25 −4.30 4.48 3.64 −5.22 3.85 2.50 −4.25 4.35 3.90 −4.78
         July 3.64 2.80 −4.15 3.91 3.25 −4.45 4.48 3.64 −5.25 3.80 2.50 −4.05 4.33 3.90 −4.75
         Aug. 3.52 2.60 −4.00 3.83 3.20 −4.30 4.42 3.60 −5.40 3.68 2.50 −4.00 4.22 3.84 −4.73
         Sep. 3.32 2.40 −3.90 3.62 2.61 −4.25 4.32 3.36 −5.42 3.33 2.50 −3.65 4.06 3.72 −4.73
         Oct. 2.94 2.25 −3.45 3.36 2.60 −3.88 4.17 3.00 −5.40 3.01 2.50 −3.50 3.85 3.50 −4.50
         Nov. 2.64 2.00 −3.25 3.09 2.48 −3.50 4.01 2.66 −5.40 2.75 2.00 −3.50 3.53 2.93 −4.30
         Dec. 2.63 1.75 −3.10 3.14 2.48 −4.00 3.98 2.88 −5.40 2.79 2.20 −3.20 3.63 3.00 −4.30
2002          Jan. o 2.67 2.00 −3.10 3.23 2.50 −4.25 3.98 2.91 −5.08 2.80 2.00 −3.20 3.74 3.25 −4.25
         Feb. 2.76 2.00 −3.25 3.32 2.60 −4.00 4.07 2.91 −5.13 2.91 2.20 −3.50 3.84 3.25 −4.20
         Mar. 2.84 2.10 −3.30 3.45 2.50 −4.25 4.15 3.13 −5.13 3.00 2.40 −3.50 3.96 3.25 −4.40
         Apr. 2.89 2.10 −3.40 3.50 2.25 −4.25 4.17 2.91 −5.13 3.07 2.50 −3.70 3.97 3.25 −4.44
         May 2.91 2.10 −3.40 3.48 2.50 −4.25 4.20 2.91 −5.13 3.08 2.20 −4.00 3.98 3.25 −4.50
         June 2.93 2.10 −3.40 3.52 2.25 −4.25 4.21 2.91 −5.15 3.08 2.20 −4.00 3.97 3.10 −4.50
         July 2.89 2.10 −3.30 3.48 2.25 −4.10 4.14 2.91 −5.08 3.02 2.50 −3.50 3.90 3.15 −4.29
         Aug. 2.73 2.00 −3.25 3.19 2.25 −4.00 4.02 2.91 −5.02 2.94 2.45 −3.50 3.68 2.85 −4.21
         Sep. 2.61 1.90 −3.20 3.08 2.42 −3.80 3.90 2.90 −5.02 2.73 2.25 −3.25 3.54 3.00 −4.04
         Oct. 2.53 1.95 −3.25 2.88 2.12 −3.50 3.84 2.75 −5.08 2.63 2.25 −3.00 3.43 2.70 −4.04
         Nov. 2.46 1.75 −3.00 2.84 2.08 −3.44 3.80 2.75 −5.08 2.55 2.15 −3.00 3.41 2.75 −4.00
         Dec. 2.34 1.75 −2.80 2.77 2.08 −3.44 3.68 2.50 −4.82 2.41 1.95 −3.00 3.30 2.75 −3.75
2003          Jan. 2.20 1.75 −2.75 2.60 2.00 −3.44 3.62 2.50 −4.82 2.34 1.90 −3.00 3.14 2.54 −3.60
For footnotes *, o, 1to5see page 45*; for footnotes 6and 7see page mium or a bonus is granted. —10Rate of return which is paid when savings
46*. —8Only a minimum rate of return is granted, but no premium or plans are held until maturity or when savings objectives have been
bonus. —9An interest rate above the minimum rate of return and/or a pre- achieved. 
47*VI. Interest rates

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
VII. Capital market
 
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  *)
 
 
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities  1 Residents
Credit in- Bundes-
Sales stitutions bank
= Public Foreign including open
total Bank Indus- debt debt building marketpur- debt trial secur- secur- and loan Non- oper- Non-
Period chases Total securities bonds ities  
2 ities 3 Total  4 assc. 5 banks  6 ations  5 residents  7 
DM million
1990 244,827 220,340 136,799 − 67 83,609 24,487 225,066 91,833 133,266 − 33 19,763
1991 231,965 219,346 131,670 667 87,011 12,619 173,099 45,095 127,310 694 58,866
1992 291,762 284,054 106,857 − 175 177,376 7,708 170,873 132,236 37,368 1,269 120,887
1993 395,110 382,571 151,812 200 230,560 12,539 183,195 164,436 20,095 − 1,336 211,915
1994 303,339 276,058 117,185 − 65 158,939 27,281 279,989 126,808 154,738 − 1,557 23,349
1995 227,099 203,029 162,538 − 350 40,839 24,070 141,282 49,193 94,409 − 2,320 85,815
1996 254,359 233,519 191,341 649 41,529 20,840 148,250 117,352 31,751 − 853 106,109
1997 332,655 250,688 184,911 1,563 64,214 81,967 204,378 144,177 60,201 − 128,276
1998 418,841 308,201 254,367 3,143 50,691 110,640 245,802 203,342 42,460 − 173,038
 5 
 million
1999 292,727 198,068 156,399 2,184 39,485 94,659 155,808 74,728 81,080 − 136,920
2000 229,167 157,994 120,154 12,605 25,234 71,173 156,532 91,447 65,085 − 72,635
2001 180,899 86,656 55,918 14,473 16,262 94,245 115,501 35,848 79,653 − 65,398
2002 180,957 124,035 47,296 14,506 62,235 56,922 99,251 13,526 85,725 − 81,706
2002          Oct. 4,440 2,865 − 4,326 3,035 4,157 1,575 4,457 − 9,674 14,131 −− 17
         Nov. 33,168 25,770 9,937 561 15,272 7,398 29,257 17,377 11,880 − 3,911
         Dec. − 46,483 −42,073 −23,475 − 2,879 −15,719 − 4,410 − 36,316 − 27,386 − 8,930 −− 10,167
 
  
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-purchases shares  
8 shares  9 Total  10 tutions  5  11 Non-banks  6 residents  12 
Period
DM million
1990 50,070 28,021 22,048 52,631 7,215 45,416 − 2,561
1991 33,478 13,317 20,161 32,247 2,466 29,781 1,230
1992 32,595 17,226 15,370 40,651 2,984 37,667 − 8,055
1993 39,355 19,512 19,843 30,871 4,133 26,738 8,4851994 55,125 29,160 25,966 54,466 1,622 52,844 659
1995 46,422 23,600 22,822 49,354 11,945 37,409 − 2,931
1996 72,491 34,212 38,280 55,962 12,627 43,335 16,529
1997 119,522 22,239 97,280 96,844 8,547 88,297 22,6771998 249,504 48,796 200,708 149,151 20,252 128,899 100,352
 5 
 million
1999 149,980 36,010 113,969 103,487 18,637 84,850 46,493
2000 138,535 22,733 115,802 156,274 23,293 132,981 − 17,738
2001 82,286 17,575 64,714 − 2,127 − 14,714 12,587 84,412
2002 52,185 9,232 42,954 30,444 − 23,235 53,679 21,740
2002          Oct. 3,137 573 2,564 2,316 1,285 1,031 821
         Nov. 192 264 − 72 − 1,001 − 1,823 822 1,193
         Dec. 6,080 558 5,522 4,377 585 3,792 1,703
*Until the end of 1999, debt securities comprise the bonds and money ment funds. —7Net purchases or net sales ( −) of domestic debt securities by
market paper of domestic banks, from January 2000 all fixed-interest non-residents; transaction values. —8At issue prices. —9Net purchases or
securities. Investment fund certificates see Table VII.6. —1Net sales at net sales ( −) of foreign shares (including direct investment) by residents;
market values plus/less changes in issuers ’portfolios of their own debt transaction values. —10Domestic and foreign shares. —11Up to the end
securities. —2Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and of 1998, excluding shares under syndicate agreement. —12Net purchases
Treuhand agency. —3Net purchases or net sales ( −) of foreign debt or net sales ( −) of domestic shares (including direct investment) −before
securities by residents; transaction values. —4Domestic and foreign debt 1989 also including domestic investment fund certificates −by
securities. —5Book values; statistically adjusted. —6Residual; also non-residents; transaction values. —Figures of 2001 and 2002 revised owing
including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic invest- to changes in the balance of payments statistics. 
48*VII. Capital market

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
VII. Capital market
 
2. Sales of debt securities issued by borrowers domiciled in Germany  *)
 
 
Until the end of 1998 DM nominal million value, from 1999  5  million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item:
Foreign  DM/euro
Mortgage Communal bonds issued Debt securities
bonds bonds issued by spe- by German-
All bank debt (Hypotheken- ( Öffentliche Other bank Industrial Public managed cialised credit
Period Total securities pfandbriefe) Pfandbriefe) institutions bonds  2 syndicates debt securities debt securities  3 
Gross sales  4 
1990 428,698 286,709 14,923 70,701 89,755 111,326 − 141,990 35,168
1991 442,089 292,092 19,478 91,489 80,738 100,386 707 149,288 32,832
1992 572,767 318,522 33,633 134,363 49,195 101,333 − 254,244 57,282
1993 733,126 434,829 49,691 218,496 34,028 132,616 457 297,841 87,309
1994 627,331 412,585 44,913 150,115 39,807 177,750 486 214,261 61,465
1995 620,120 470,583 43,287 208,844 41,571 176,877 200 149,338 102,719
1996 731,992 563,076 41,439 246,546 53,508 221,582 1,742 167,173 112,3701997 846,567 621,683 53,168 276,755 54,829 236,933 1,915 222,972 114,8131998 1,030,827 789,035 71,371 344,609 72,140 300,920 3,392 238,400 149,542
 5 
 million
1999 571,269 448,216 27,597 187,661 59,760 173,200 2,570 120,483 57,202
2000 659,148 500,895 34,528 143,107 94,556 228,703 8,114 150,137 31,597
2001 687,988 505,646 34,782 112,594 106,166 252,103 11,328 171,012 10,6052002 818,725 569,232 41,496 119,880 117,506 290,353 17,574 231,923 10,313
2002          Aug. 54,522 36,213 1,776 6,771 8,161 19,506 608 17,701 −
         Sep. 74,271 57,798 4,810 12,010 10,889 30,090 1,617 14,856 −
         Oct. 70,276 46,917 2,606 10,905 10,711 22,694 697 22,663 500
         Nov. 83,424 59,197 3,362 10,096 14,294 31,446 353 23,874 −
         Dec. 61,284 45,115 4,405 9,184 7,746 23,781 833 15,336 −
of which: Debt securities with a maturity of over 4 years  5 
1990 272,642 133,347 10,904 43,250 26,767 52,425 − 139,295 29,791
1991 303,326 172,171 11,911 65,642 54,878 39,741 707 130,448 22,772
1992 430,479 211,775 28,594 99,627 40,267 43,286 − 218,703 51,939
1993 571,533 296,779 43,365 160,055 26,431 66,923 230 274,524 82,049
1994 429,369 244,806 36,397 109,732 29,168 69,508 306 184,255 53,351
1995 409,469 271,763 30,454 141,629 28,711 70,972 200 137,503 85,221
1996 473,560 322,720 27,901 167,811 35,522 91,487 1,702 149,139 92,5821997 563,333 380,470 41,189 211,007 41,053 87,220 1,820 181,047 98,4131998 694,414 496,444 59,893 288,619 54,385 93,551 2,847 195,122 139,645
 5 
 million
1999 324,888 226,993 16,715 124,067 37,778 48,435 2,565 95,331 44,013
2000 319,330 209,187 20,724 102,664 25,753 60,049 6,727 103,418 27,008
2001 299,751 202,337 16,619 76,341 42,277 67,099 7,479 89,933 6,4802002 309,157 176,486 16,338 59,459 34,795 65,892 12,149 120,527 9,213
2002          Aug. 21,973 10,660 667 3,468 1,468 5,057 153 11,159 −
         Sep. 30,255 25,604 1,978 6,395 2,610 14,622 1,555 3,096 −
         Oct. 24,393 14,004 866 4,894 3,218 5,026 534 9,856 500
         Nov. 32,633 13,389 527 5,950 3,539 3,372 290 18,954 −
         Dec. 14,431 11,847 1,453 4,602 2,352 3,440 230 2,354 −
Net sales  6 
1990 226,707 140,327 − 3,922 − 72 73,287 71,036 − 67 86,449 21,717
1991 227,822 139,396 4,729 22,290 65,985 46,390 558 87,868 18,5831992 304,751 115,786 13,104 58,235 19,585 24,864 − 175 189,142 34,114
1993 403,212 159,982 22,496 122,917 − 13,156 27,721 180 243,049 43,701
1994 270,088 116,519 18,184 54,316 − 6,897 50,914 − 62 153,630 21,634
1995 205,482 173,797 18,260 96,125 3,072 56,342 − 354 32,039 61,020
1996 238,427 195,058 11,909 121,929 6,020 55,199 585 42,788 69,9511997 257,521 188,525 16,471 115,970 12,476 43,607 1,560 67,437 63,1811998 327,991 264,627 22,538 162,519 18,461 61,111 3,118 60,243 84,308
 5 
 million
1999 209,096 170,069 2,845 80,230 31,754 55,238 2,185 36,840 22,728
2000 155,615 122,774 5,937 29,999 30,089 56,751 7,320 25,522 − 16,705
2001 84,122 60,905 6,932 − 9,254 28,808 34,416 8,739 14,479 − 30,657
2002 131,976 56,393 7,936 − 26,806 20,707 54,561 14,306 61,277 − 44,546
2002          Aug. 5,853 − 423 − 813 − 1,785 362 1,813 557 5,719 − 3,436
         Sep. 33,336 23,775 2,762 2,906 − 2,654 20,762 1,562 7,999 − 13,041
         Oct. − 2,230 − 5,555 − 970 − 5,261 1,864 − 1,187 502 2,823 − 2,873
         Nov. 20,206 10,675 − 1,917 − 1,016 5,774 7,834 − 652 10,184 − 5,686
         Dec. − 38,401 − 24,489 583 − 9,619 − 2,936 − 12,516 622 − 14,534 − 2,984
*For definitions see the notes in the Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. —4Gross sales means only
Report 2, Capital market statistics. —1Excluding registered bank debt initial sales of newly issued securities. —5Maximum maturity according to
securities. —2Debt securities of enterprises. —3Including Federal Railways the terms of issue. — 6 Gross sales less redemptions. 
49*VII. Capital market

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
VII. Capital market
 
3. Outstanding amount of debt securities issued by borrowers domiciled in Germany  * 
 
 
Until the end of 1998 DM million nominal value, from 1999  5  million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item:
 Foreign  DM/euro
End of year Mortgage Communal bonds issued
or month/ bonds bonds by German- Debt securities of
Maturity All bank specialised Other bank Industrial Public managed (Öffentliche (Hypotheken-
in years Total bonds syndicates credit institutions debt securities debt securities debt securities Pfandbriefe) pfandbriefe)
DM million
1990 1,458,943 900,977 138,025 369,901 155,045 238,005 2,604 555,362 223,176
1991 1,686,765 1,040,374 142,757 392,190 221,031 284,396 3,161 643,230 241,7601992 1,991,515 1,156,162 155,862 450,424 240,616 309,259 2,983 832,370 275,8731993 2,394,728 1,316,142 178,357 573,341 227,463 336,981 3,163 1,075,422 319,5751994 2,664,814 1,432,661 196,541 627,657 219,214 389,249 3,101 1,229,053 341,210
1995 2,870,295 1,606,459 214,803 723,781 222,286 445,589 2,746 1,261,090 402,229
1996 3,108,724 1,801,517 226,711 845,710 228,306 500,790 3,331 1,303,877 472,1801997 3,366,245 1,990,041 243,183 961,679 240,782 544,397 4,891 1,371,313 535,3591998 3,694,234 2,254,668 265,721 1,124,198 259,243 605,507 8,009 1,431,558 619,668
 5 
 million
1999 2,097,926 1,322,863 134,814 655,024 163,284 369,741 6,280 768,783 339,560
2000 2,265,121 1,445,736 140,751 685,122 157,374 462,488 13,599 805,786 322,856
2001 2,349,243 1,506,640 147,684 675,868 201,721 481,366 22,339 820,264 292,1992002 2,481,220 1,563,034 155,620 649,061 222,427 535,925 36,646 881,541 247,655
2002          Oct. 2,499,415 1,576,848 156,954 659,697 219,590 540,607 36,676 885,891 256,325
         Nov. 2,519,621 1,587,523 155,037 658,680 225,364 548,442 36,023 896,075 250,639         Dec. 2,481,220 1,563,034 155,620 649,061 222,427 535,925 36,646 881,541 247,655
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  2 Position at end-December 2002 
919,414 633,570 61,987 240,385 66,846 264,355 4,548 281,294 84,209    less than 2
580,914 410,289 39,536 182,377 62,903 125,474 13,833 156,792 51,848 2 to less than 4
383,573 233,934 28,831 119,097 31,282 54,725 7,282 142,357 56,734 4 to less than 6
248,489 144,490 15,126 69,337 23,279 36,748 3,556 100,443 31,966 6 to less than 8
189,201 71,290 9,508 22,275 15,385 24,123 5,872 112,039 8,707 8 to less than 10
41,445 32,225 623 10,661 6,759 14,182 645 8,576 8,335 10 to less than 15
18,998 13,417 9 2,096 6,671 4,641 427 5,154 2,384 15 to less than 20
99,184 23,815 − 2,833 9,304 11,679 484 74,885 3,472 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers ’portfolios. — debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of the residual
1Excluding debt securities handed to the trustee for temporary safe amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc. 
custody. —2Calculated from month under review until final maturity for
50* 
 
4. Circulation of shares issued by residents of Germany
  
Until the end of 1998 DM million nominal value, from 1999  5  million nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies ’ capital due to
Memo item:
Share circulation
at market values
Share Net increase or cash payment contribution (market capita-
capital= and ex- merger reduction lisation) net decrease(-) contribution of shares,
change of of claims and circulation at during period mining shares, of capital level at end
under issue of and other transfer change of and of period end of period convertible GmbH shares,
Period under review review bonds  1 etc. of assets bonus shares real assets legal form liquidation under review  2 
DM million
1990 144,686 12,650 7,362 751 3,715 1,049 − 43 1,284 − 1,466 .
1991 151,618 6,932 3,656 610 2,416 407 − 182 411 − 386 .
1992 160,813 9,198 4,295 728 1,743 1,073 − 732 3,030 − 942 .
1993 168,005 7,190 5,224 772 387 876 10 707 − 783 .
1994 o 190,012 14,237 6,114 1,446 1,521 1,883 − 447 5,086 − 1,367 .
1995 211,231 21,217 5,894 1,498 1,421 1,421 − 623 13,739 − 2,133 .
1996 3 216,461 7,131 8,353 1,355 396 1,684 − 3,056 833 − 2,432 .
1997 221,575 5,115 4,164 2,722 370 1,767 − 2,423 197 − 1,678 .
1998 238,156 16,578 6,086 2,566 658 8,607 − 4,055 3,905 − 1,188 .
 5 
 million
1999 133,513 11,747 5,519 2,008 190 1,075 2,099 1,560 − 708 1,603,304
2000 147,629 14,115 3,620 3,694 618 8,089 − 1,986 1,827 − 1,745 1,353,000
2001 166,187 18,561 7,987 4,057 1,106 8,448 1,018 − 905 − 3,152 1,205,613
2002 168,716 2,528 4,307 1,291 486 1,690 − 868 − 2,152 − 2,224 647,492
2002          Oct. 168,558 312 285 76 4 3 329 − 348 − 39 725,865
         Nov. 168,910 353 150 20 35 231 24 24 − 130 747,909
         Dec. 168,716 − 195 335 299 42 73 − 228 − 110 − 606 647,492
oFrom January 1994 including the shares of east German companies Market and enterprises whose shares are listed on the regulated free mar-
(resultant increase in share circulation: DM 7,771 million). —1Including ket. Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data of the "Herausgeberge-
share issues out of company profits. —2Including enterprises whose shares meinschaft Wertpapier-Mitteilungen" and the "Deutsche B örse AG". —
are listed on the Official Market, on the Regulated Market or on the New 3 Figure reduced by DM 1,902 million owing to revisions. 
50*VII. Capital market

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
VII. Capital market
 
5. Yields and indices on German securities
 
 
               
Yields on bonds outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices  2 , 3 
Public bonds Bank debt securities Bonds Shares
Memo item:
Listed Foreign
Federal securities DM/euro
bonds
With re- With re- issued by German Germansidual matur- sidual matur- German- bond iBoxx- CDAX share
managed index index ities of over 9 ities of over 9 Industrial
 5 -Germany- share price
Total Total Total Total to 10 years bonds (REX) price index index (DAX) to 10 years  4 syndicates  1,5 
Average End- End- End-
Period % p.a. daily rate 1998=100 1987=100 1987=1000
1990 8.9 8.8 8.8 8.7 9.0 8.9 9.0 9.2 93.50 . 145.00 1,398.23
1991 8.7 8.6 8.6 8.5 8.9 8.6 8.9 9.2 96.35 . 148.16 1,577.981992 8.1 8.0 8.0 7.8 8.3 8.1 8.7 8.8 101.54 . 134.92 1,545.051993 6.4 6.3 6.3 6.5 6.5 6.8 6.9 6.8 109.36 . 191.13 2,266.681994 6.7 6.7 6.7 6.9 6.8 7.2 7.0 6.9 99.90 . 176.87 2,106.58
1995 6.5 6.5 6.5 6.9 6.5 7.2 6.9 6.8 109.18 . 181.47 2,253.88
1996 5.6 5.6 5.6 6.2 5.5 6.4 5.8 5.8 110.37 . 217.47 2,888.691997 5.1 5.1 5.1 5.6 5.0 5.9 5.2 5.5 111.01 . 301.47 4,249.691998 4.5 4.4 4.4 4.6 4.5 4.9 5.0 5.3 118.18 100.00 343.64 5,002.391999 4.3 4.3 4.3 4.5 4.3 4.9 5.0 5.4 110.60 92.52 445.95 6,958.14
2000 5.4 5.3 5.2 5.3 5.6 5.8 6.2 6.3 112.48 94.11 396.59 6,433.61
2001 4.8 4.7 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.3 5.9 6.2 113.12 94.16 319.38 5,160.102002 4.7 4.6 4.6 4.8 4.7 5.1 6.0 5.6 117.56 97.80 188.46 2,892.63
2002          Oct. 4.3 4.2 4.2 4.5 4.3 4.8 6.0 5.3 115.60 96.27 204.83 3,152.85
         Nov. 4.2 4.2 4.2 4.5 4.2 4.8 6.1 5.1 115.65 96.30 214.18 3,320.32         Dec. 4.1 4.1 4.1 4.3 4.1 4.6 5.9 4.9 117.56 97.80 188.46 2,892.63
2003          Jan. 3.9 3.9 3.9 4.2 3.8 4.4 5.7 4.6 118.54 98.60 179.89 2,747.83
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of included in the calculation. Monthly figures are calculated on the basis of
issue of over 4 years, if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Conver- the yields on all the business days of a month. The annual figures are the un-
tible debt securities, etc., debt securities with unscheduled redemption, weighted means of the monthly figures. —2End of year or month. —
zero-coupon bonds, floating-rate notes and bonds not denominated in DM 3Source: German Stock Exchange plc. —4Only bonds eligible as underlying
or euros are not included. Group yields for the various categories of secu- instruments for futures contracts are included; calculated as unweighted
rities are weighted with the amounts outstanding of the debt securities averages. — 5 As far as quoted on German stock exchanges. 
 
 
6. Sales and purchases of investment fund certificates in Germany
  
Sales of investment fund certificates Purchases
Domestic funds (sales receipts) Residents
Investment funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Non-banks  2 and loanassociations  1 
of which
of which of which
Sales Open- Special- Foreign Foreign= Secur- end ised invest- invest-total Money ities- real invest- ment mentpur- market based estate ment Foreign fund cer- fund cer- Non-resi-chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  
3 Total Total tificates Total tificates dents  4 
Period
DM million
1990 25,788 26,857 7,904 − 8,032 − 128 18,952 −1,069 25,766 4,296 − 362 21,470 − 707 22
1991 50,064 37,492 13,738 − 11,599 2,144 23,754 12,572 49,890 8,594 − 5 41,296 12,577 174
1992 81,514 20,474 −3,102 −− 9,189 6,087 23,575 61,040 81,518 10,495 2,152 71,023 58,888 − 4
1993 80,259 61,672 20,791 − 6,075 14,716 40,881 18,587 76,258 16,982 2,476 59,276 16,111 4,001
1994 130,995 108,914 63,263 31,180 24,385 7,698 45,650 22,081 125,943 9,849 − 689 116,094 22,770 5,052
1995 55,246 54,071 16,777 6,147 3,709 6,921 37,294 1,175 56,295 12,172 188 44,123 987 −1,049
1996 83,386 79,110 16,517 −4,706 7,273 13,950 62,592 4,276 85,704 19,924 1,685 65,780 2,591 −2,318
1997 145,805 138,945 31,501 −5,001 30,066 6,436 107,445 6,860 149,977 35,924 340 114,053 6,520 −4,172
1998 187,641 169,748 38,998 5,772 27,814 4,690 130,750 17,893 190,416 43,937 961 146,479 16,507 −2,775
 5 
 million
1999 111,253 97,197 37,684 3,347 23,269 7,395 59,513 14,056 105,492 19,862 − 637 85,630 14,693 5,761
2000 117,688 85,160 39,712 −2,188 36,818 −2,824 45,448 32,528 106,749 14,454 92 92,295 32,436 10,939
2001 96,511 76,811 35,522 12,410 9,195 10,159 41,289 19,701 95,407 10,251 2,703 85,156 16,997 1,105
2002 79,672 72,887 26,113 3,682 7,443 14,916 46,773 6,784 79,912 2,099 3,007 77,813 3,778 − 241
2002          Oct. 6,437 6,140 740 602 − 603 888 5,399 297 6,518 456 − 131 6,062 428 − 81
         Nov. 4,743 4,786 2,402 − 92 1,916 597 2,385 − 43 4,439 3,526 278 913 − 321 304
         Dec. 14,682 15,511 94 − 654 565 233 15,416 − 829 16,176 2,481 1,579 13,695 −2,408 −1,494
1Book values. —2Residual. —3Net purchases or net sales ( −) of foreign non-residents; transaction values (before 1989 classified as shares). —
investment fund certificates by residents; transaction values. —4Net Figures of 2001 and 2002 revised owing to changes in the balance of
purchases or net sales ( −) of domestic investment fund certificates by payments statistics. 
51*VII. Capital market

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
1. Finances of the public sector *
  
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM billion / from 1999,  5  billion
Central, regional and local authorities  1 Social security funds  2 Public sector, total
Receipts Expenditure
of which
Balance Balance Balance
Other of of of
Person- operat- receipts receipts receipts
of nel ex- ing ex- Capital Finan- and Ex- and Ex- and
which pend- pend- Current Interest forma- cial expend- Re- pend- expend- Re- pend- expend-
Period Total Taxes  3 Total  4 iture iture grants paid tion aid  5 iture ceipts  6 iture iture ceipts iture iture
1992 904.1 731.7 1,013.9 285.7 134.0 304.8 100.6 101.1 86.1 −109.8 609.1 617.4 −8.3 1,436.0 1,554.2 −118.1
1993 928.7 749.1 1,060.2 296.8 136.0 340.5 102.1 97.0 87.3 −131.5 660.8 658.7 + 2.1 1,492.1 1,621.5 −129.4
1994 995.2 786.2 1,102.2 315.5 137.3 353.4 114.0 93.2 86.5 −106.9 694.1 693.7 + 0.4 1,596.4 1,702.9 −106.5
1995 1,026.4 814.2 1,136.4 324.8 135.5 367.2 129.0 90.1 86.3 −110.1 731.2 743.8 −12.5 1,664.9 1,787.5 −122.6
1996 1,000.3 800.0 1,121.8 326.2 137.0 362.2 130.7 83.9 80.1 −121.5 769.4 784.0 −14.6 1,665.6 1,801.6 −136.1
1997 1,014.3 797.2 1,108.9 325.0 135.7 356.3 132.1 80.1 79.2 −94.5 797.3 794.5 + 2.9 1,705.3 1,797.0 −91.7
1998 1,072.1 833.0 1,128.8 325.4 137.4 373.7 133.7 79.7 79.8 −56.7 812.2 808.9 + 3.3 1,765.5 1,818.9 −53.4
1999  p 566.0 453.1 592.9 168.7 72.4 202.7 69.8 40.8 38.0 −27.0 429.1 425.7 + 3.5 925.1 948.6 −23.5
2000  pe 613.3 467.3 594.8 169.0 73.7 205.5 67.6 40.8 38.0 + 18.5 434.0 434.1 −0.1 975.7 957.3 + 18.4
2001  pe 553.9 446.2 601.0 169.9 70.1 213.4 66.6 40.9 39.6 −47.1 444.2 448.4 −4.2 920.8 972.1 −51.3
2001          1st qtr 7 126.7 105.1 147.8 39.5 16.4 55.5 22.0 6.5 7.8 −21.1 108.8 109.7 −0.9 213.5 235.5 −22.0
         2nd qtr 139.4 110.9 136.7 39.3 15.8 54.0 12.6 8.0 6.4 + 2.6 110.1 111.8 −1.7 229.6 228.7 + 0.9
         3rd qtr 136.3 109.5 146.2 40.1 15.6 52.2 19.0 10.0 9.3 −9.9 109.6 111.9 −2.3 227.4 239.5 −12.2
         4th qtr 149.9 121.3 167.3 49.5 21.8 52.4 12.7 14.5 16.0 −17.3 115.1 114.5 + 0.6 248.9 265.7 −16.8
2002          1st qtr 118.3 98.6 150.2 39.9 15.3 57.9 24.0 6.5 6.0 −31.8 111.3 112.8 −1.5 206.4 239.8 −33.4
         2nd qtr 137.8 105.1 141.8 40.4 15.6 58.5 11.9 7.8 6.7 −4.0 113.0 115.6 −2.6 228.9 235.6 −6.6
         3rd qtr p 135.3 109.4 148.7 41.4 16.5 54.7 19.2 9.7 7.8 −13.4 113.1 116.6 −3.5 228.0 244.9 −16.9
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical insurance are estimated. —3The tax revenue shown here is taken from the
Office. —*The budgetary definition used here differs from the methods budget statistics and may differ from the data given in Table VIII. 4, which
employed for the government account of the national accounts and, in case are based on the tax statistics. —4Including discrepancies in clearing
of the quarterly figures, in some respects also from the financial statistics. — transactions between the central, regional and local authorities. —
1Incl. subsidiary budgets. The quarterly figures, unlike the annual figures 5Expenditure on investment grants, loans and acquisition of participating
based on the annual accounts statistics of the Federal Statistical Office, do interests. —6Including Federal Government liquidity assistance to the
not include municipal special-purpose associations and various special Federal Labour Office. —7Owing to modifications of the system of
accounts. For the receipts of Bundesbank profit see footnote 1 to Table VIII. classification, especially shifts between Other operating expenditur e and
2.—2The annual figures differ from the sum of the quarterly figures, as Current grants. 
the latter are all provisional. The quarterly figures for some fields of
2. Finances of the Federal Government, L änder Governments and local authorities *
  
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM billion / from 1999,  5  billion
Federal Government L änder Governments Local authorities
Western  2,  3 Eastern  3 Western  3 Eastern  3 
Period Receipts  1 Expenditure Receipts Expenditure Receipts Expenditure Receipts Expenditure Receipts Expenditure
1992 398.4 431.7 318.2 336.3 73.0 86.0 212.6 221.6 50.3 57.5
1993 401.6 462.5 326.5 352.8 76.4 92.5 222.5 230.9 54.4 59.01994 439.6 478.9 328.8 357.0 79.3 95.9 228.9 235.1 53.9 59.2
1995 439.3 489.9 338.6 370.2 88.4 101.5 225.6 237.9 58.7 60.8
1996 411.9 490.4 344.8 379.7 93.7 105.5 227.7 232.9 55.0 57.71997 416.8 480.3 349.2 376.5 94.3 105.2 222.9 226.9 52.6 54.21998 439.0 495.6 360.5 380.3 96.4 104.7 231.4 226.3 51.5 52.41999  
p 240.3 266.5 191.6 196.6 50.0 53.3 119.8 117.5 26.1 26.3
2000  4,  pe  291.4 264.6 195.6 200.4 50.5 53.9 121.4 119.9 25.6 25.6
2001  pe 240.0 261.0 184.0 207.1 49.7 53.2 119.2 123.4 24.8 25.4
2001          1st qtr 50.8 66.4 44.8 49.8 12.0 11.6 25.5 28.8 5.2 5.5         2nd qtr 57.6 59.9 46.3 47.5 11.5 11.8 28.8 28.1 5.8 5.8         3rd qtr 62.3 66.3 44.6 49.4 11.7 12.5 29.6 29.9 6.1 6.2         4th qtr 69.1 68.3 47.6 59.6 14.4 16.4 35.4 36.0 7.5 7.7
2002          1st qtr 47.4 68.9 42.4 49.4 10.2 12.0 24.7 29.1 5.2 5.4
         2nd qtr 56.3 62.6 43.3 48.8 11.1 11.9 28.8 29.1 5.9 5.8         3rd qtr
p 62.7 70.6 45.3 49.3 11.8 12.9 29.1 30.5 6.1 6.2
52*Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Fund for Inherited Liabilities. —2Including Berlin, Bremen, Hamburg.
Office. —*See corresponding footnote to Table VIII. 1. —1The Including Berlin (East). —3The quarterly figures, unlike the annual figures
Bundesbank profit transfer is shown in full until 1994; from 1995 only the based on the annual accounts statistics of the Federal Statistical Office, d o
DM 7 billion scheduled in the budget is shown. Since that time, receipts not include various special accounts. —4Including receipts from the UMTS
over and above the scheduled amount accrue directly to the Redemption licence auctions. 
52*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
3. Finances of the Government in the national accounts *
  
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM billion / from 1999,  5  billion
Item 1995  1 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000  2 2001  pe 2002  pe 
Receipts 1,647.8 1,704.0 1,726.8 1,775.9 943.4 963.7 951.5 953.2
of which
Taxes 825.8 850.0 856.9 897.4 490.4 511.7 488.3 486.7Social security contributions 662.5 696.7 720.1 727.7 375.7 378.5 383.6 388.4
Expenditure 1,764.9 1,826.6 1,826.5 1,859.6 973.2 991.8 1,009.0 1,030.4of which
Intermediate input 143.2 142.7 140.2 144.1 76.9 78.5 81.6 84.1Employee compensation 315.9 319.6 319.0 319.3 165.4 165.6 164.9 166.0Interest 128.9 131.7 133.2 136.4 68.8 68.2 67.8 67.9Social security benefits  
3 902.8 970.7 984.7 998.4 523.1 534.7 548.1 572.2
Gross capital formation 80.5 76.4 69.4 69.9 37.8 37.0 35.8 33.6
Financial balance − 117.1 − 122.7 − 99.7 − 83.7 − 29.7 − 28.0 − 57.5 − 77.2
as a percentage of the grossdomestic product − 3.3 − 3.4 − 2.7 − 2.2 − 1.5 − 1.4 − 2.8 − 3.7
Memo itemDeficit of the Treuhand agency . . . .....
Debt as defined inMaastricht Treatyas a percentage of the grossdomestic product 57.1 59.8 61.0 60.9 61.2 60.2 59.5 .
Source: Federal Statistical Office. —*Figures according to ESA 95. In unadjusted terms, the deficit amounted to 9.8% of GDP. —2Adjusted
Notwithstanding the figures shown by the Federal Statistical Office, for receipts from UMTS licence auctions. In the accounts of the Federal
calculated including −with no impact on the balance −customs duties, the Statistical Office, such receipts (50.85
 5 
billion) are recorded under "net
EU share in VAT revenue and EU subsidies. —1Adjusted for the balance of increase in non-produced assets", with the result that government spending
notional capital transfers between the public sector and the corporate is lower and a surplus (22.8
 5 
billion or 1.1% of GDP) is shown. —
sector, mainly in connection with the winding-up of the Treuhand agency. 3 Monetary social security benefits and social benefits in kind. 
4. Tax revenue of the central, regional and local authorities
  
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999,  5  million
Federal and L änder Governments and European Union Local authorities  4 
Länder Governments
of which Balance of
Federal of which European in the untransferred
Period Total Total  1 Government  2 Total New L änder Union  3 Total New L änder tax shares  5 
1991 661,920 577,150 321,334 224,321 19,139 31,495 84,633 2,540 + 137
1992 731,738 638,423 356,849 247,372 23,807 34,203 93,374 4,034 − 58
1993 749,119 653,015 360,250 256,131 27,542 36,634 95,809 5,863 + 2951994 786,162 688,785 386,145 261,947 32,052 40,692 97,116 7,677 + 260
1995 814,190 719,332 390,807 288,520 . 40,005 94,498 8,460 + 359
1996 799,998 706,071 372,390 294,232 . 39,449 94,641 7,175 − 714
1997 797,154 700,739 368,244 290,771 . 41,724 96,531 7,703 − 117
1998 833,013 727,888 379,491 306,127 . 42,271 104,960 8,841 + 1641999 453,068 396,734 211,727 164,724 . 20,284 56,333 4,810 + 1
2000 467,253 410,117 219,034 169,249 . 21,833 57,241 4,895 − 104
2001 446,248 392,189 213,342 159,115 . 19,732 54,047 4,590 + 12
2002 . 389,162 214,371 156,231 . 18,560 . . .
2002          3rd qtr
p 109,260 96,068 54,091 38,718 . 3,259 12,964 ... + 228
         4th qtr . 114,869 66,554 44,091 . 4,224 . . .2002          Aug. . 29,448 17,200 11,273 . 976 . . .
         Sep. . 35,501 19,136 14,769 . 1,595 . . .
         Oct. . 29,706 16,362 11,754 . 1,590 . . .
         Nov. . 26,838 14,608 10,628 . 1,602 . . .         Dec. . 58,325 35,584 21,710 . 1,032 . . .
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. —1Including receipts from the revenue. —4Including local authority taxes of Berlin, Bremen and
Equalisation of Burdens levies.  —2Before deduction of supplementary Hamburg. —5Difference between the local authorities ’share in the
Federal grants and shares in the revenue of mineral oil tax remitted to the income taxes received by the L änder cash offices in the period in question
Länder Governments. —3Including the (GNP-related) receipts accruing to (see Table VIII. 5) and the amounts passed on to the local authorities during
the EU from 1988 to the detriment of the Federal Government ’s tax the same period. 
53*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
5. Tax revenue, by type
  
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999,  5  million
Joint taxes Memo
item
Income taxes  2 Turnover taxes  5,  6 Localauthor-
As- Invest- ities’
sessed ment Value- Turnover Share EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income added tax on in trade Federal L änder customs income
Period Total  
1 Total tax  3 tax tion tax taxes  4 Total tax imports tax  6,  7 taxes  8 taxes  8 duties taxes  9 
1991 615,506 298,804 214,175 41,532 31,716 11,381 179,672 98,797 80,875 5,986 92,583 29,113 8,307 38,356
1992 681,751 331,310 247,322 41,531 31,184 11,273 197,712 117,274 80,438 6,923 104,802 32,963 7,742 43,3281993 697,988 341,785 257,987 33,234 27,830 22,734 216,306 174,492 41,814 4,181 93,678 34,720 7,240 44,9731994 734,234 343,055 266,522 25,510 19,569 31,455 235,698 195,265 40,433 6,271 105,410 36,551 7,173 45,450
1995 765,374 344,554 282,701 13,997 18,136 29,721 234,622 198,496 36,126 8,412 134,013 36,602 7,117 46,042
1996 746,958 317,807 251,278 11,616 29,458 25,456 237,208 200,381 36,827 8,945 137,865 38,540 6,592 40,8871997 740,272 313,794 248,672 5,764 33,267 26,092 240,900 199,934 40,966 8,732 135,264 34,682 6,900 39,5331998 775,028 340,231 258,276 11,116 36,200 34,640 250,214 203,684 46,530 10,284 130,513 37,300 6,486 47,1401999 422,012 184,408 133,809 10,887 22,359 17,353 137,155 111,600 25,555 5,463 72,235 19,564 3,186 25,277
2000 436,115 192,381 135,733 12,225 23,575 20,849 140,871 107,140 33,732 5,521 75,504 18,444 3,394 25,998
2001 417,358 170,817 132,626 8,771 −426 29,845 138,935 104,463 34,472 5,510 79,277 19,628 3,191 25,170
2002 414,008 165,096 132,190 7,541 2,864 22,502 138,195 105,463 32,732 5,752 83,494 18,576 2,896 24,846
2002          3rd qtr 102,229 40,904 31,896 3,317 965 4,726 34,226 25,937 8,290 1,411 20,297 4,638 753 6,160
         4th qtr 122,343 50,206 38,912 4,537 3,195 3,562 35,970 27,022 8,948 2,801 28,401 4,219 747 7,474
2002          Aug. 31,154 9,578 10,593 −1,278 −1,122 1,384 11,947 9,130 2,817 442 7,368 1,564 255 1,706
         Sep. 38,099 18,925 9,550 5,901 2,650 825 11,282 8,683 2,599 6 6,219 1,418 249 2,598
         Oct. 31,276 10,098 9,539 −1,037 203 1,392 11,382 8,591 2,791 999 7,019 1,535 244 1,571
         Nov. 28,421 8,066 9,597 −1,209 −1,068 747 12,418 9,491 2,928 454 5,847 1,380 256 1,583
         Dec. 62,645 32,042 19,776 6,783 4,061 1,423 12,169 8,940 3,229 1,348 15,535 1,304 248 4,320
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. —1This total, unlike that in Table VIII. supplementary Federal grant to the pension insurance funds; 2.2% of the
4, includes neither the revenue from Equalisation of Burdens levies, trade balance went to the local authorities, of the new balance: 50.5% to the
tax on returns and capital (less Federal and L änder shares in trade tax), the Federal Government, 49.5% to the L änder Governments, from 2000 50.25%
taxes on land and buildings and other local authority taxes, nor the balance to the Federal Government, 49.75% to the L änder Governments, from 2002
of untransferred tax shares. —2The yield of wage tax and assessed income 49.6% to the Federal Government, 50.4% to the L änder Governments. The
tax was distributed among the Federal Government, the L änder EU share must likewise be deducted from the Federal Government ’s share
Governments and the local authorities in the ratio of 42.5 : 42.5 : 15 from stated. —6Since 1991 the distribution of turnover tax and the level and
1980, and the yield of corporation tax and investment income tax between distribution of the share in trade tax have been affected by the financing ofthe Federal Government and the L änder Governments in the ratio of 50 : 50 the debt service of the "German Unity" Fund. —7Federal Government and
from 1970. —3From 1996, after deduction of child benefit. —4From L änder Governments 50% each. From 1998 Federal Government 42.2%,
February 1993 including revenue from the tax on interest income, in which L änder Governments 57.8%. —8For breakdown see Table VIII. 6. —9From
the local authorities have a share of 12%. —5From 1998 3.64% and from 1998 including the share in turnover taxes. 
1999 5.63% went to the Federal Government in advance to finance the
6. Individual taxes of the Federal Government, L änder Governments and local authorities
  
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999,  5  million
Federal taxes L änder taxes Local authority taxes
Insur- Electri- Other Motor Inherit- Other Taxes on Other
Mineral Tobacco Spirits ance city Federal vehicle Property ance Beer L änder Trade land and local
Period oil tax tax tax tax tax taxes  1 tax tax tax tax taxes tax  2 buildings taxes  3 
1991 47,266 19,592 5,648 5,862 . 14,215 11,012 6,729 2,636 1,647 7,090 41,297 9,921 1,181
1992 55,166 19,253 5,545 8,094 . 16,744 13,317 6,750 3,030 1,625 8,241 44,848 10,783 1,2811993 56,300 19,459 5,134 9,290 . 3,495 14,059 6,784 3,044 1,769 9,065 42,266 11,663 1,3831994 63,847 20,264 4,889 11,400 . 5,011 14,169 6,627 3,479 1,795 10,482 44,086 12,664 1,445
1995 64,888 20,595 4,837 14,104 . 29,590 13,806 7,855 3,548 1,779 9,613 42,058 13,744 1,426
1996 68,251 20,698 5,085 14,348 . 29,484 13,743 9,035 4,054 1,718 9,990 45,880 14,642 1,4631997 66,008 21,155 4,662 14,127 . 29,312 14,418 1,757 4,061 1,698 12,749 48,601 15,503 1,5091998 66,677 21,652 4,426 13,951 . 23,807 15,171 1,063 4,810 1,662 14,594 50,508 16,228 1,5321999 36,444 11,655 2,233 7,116 1,816 12,973 7,039 537 3,056 846 8,086 27,060 8,636 824
2000 37,826 11,443 2,151 7,243 3,356 13,485 7,015 433 2,982 844 7,171 27,025 8,849 784
2001 40,690 12,072 2,143 7,427 4,322 12,622 8,376 290 3,069 829 7,064 24,534 9,076 7902002 42,193 13,778 2,149 8,327 5,097 11,951 7,592 239 3,021 811 6,913 . . .
2002          3rd qtr
p 10,154 3,577 511 1,804 1,407 2,845 1,816 72 798 226 1,726 5,639 2,634 169
         4th qtr 16,219 5,053 841 1,271 1,640 3,378 1,586 48 766 193 1,626 . . .2002          Aug. 3,166 1,705 220 1,029 516 733 578 42 274 78 593 . . .
         Sep. 3,591 681 107 365 277 1,198 545 5 274 74 520 . . .
         Oct. 3,442 1,738 207 373 563 697 596 16 269 71 583 . . .
         Nov. 3,379 683 166 561 393 664 529 12 242 66 531 . . .         Dec. 9,398 2,631 467 337 685 2,017 462 19 255 57 511 . . .
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. —1Other excise taxes and the income until mid-1992, and again since the beginning of 1995. —2On returns and
and corporation tax surcharge ("solidarity surcharge") levied from mid-1991 capital. — 3 Including tax-like receipts.   
54*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
7. Indebtedness of the public sector *
  
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999,  5  million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
5−year lending owing to
Bundes- Treasury special Federal Debt by credit Social German Equalisa-
End of year bank discount Treasury Federal savings secur- institu- security unifica- tion
or month Total advances paper  1 notes  2,  3 bonds  2 bonds ities  2 tions  4 funds Other  4 tion 5 claims Other  6 
Public authorities
1995 1,993,476 . 8,072 240,514 170,719 78,456 586,573 764,875 1,263 40,621 15,106 87,079 198
1996 2,126,320 . 27,609 231,102 176,164 96,391 618,262 836,582 770 39,450 9,960 89,826 2031997 2,215,893 . 26,336 249,507 177,721 99,317 662,516 879,021 663 29,907 1,315 89,376 2161998 2,280,154 . 25,631 227,536 199,774 92,698 723,403 894,456 550 26,073 1,249 88,582 2021999 1,199,975 . 12,594 102,364 120,998 41,621 416,051 450,111 281 10,200 476 45,175 1052000 1,211,439 . 11,616 109,951 126,276 35,991 438,888 433,443 211 10,524 285 44,146 108
2001          Dec. 1,223,929 . 23,036 151,401 130,045 26,395 448,148 422,440 174 13,110 85 8,986 108
2002          Mar. 1,249,857 . 17,817 158,695 133,421 22,648 461,617 431,066 218 15,234 49 8,986 109
         June 1,251,125 . 22,252 176,996 133,289 20,636 463,906 408,991 239 15,681 51 8,986 101         Sep.
p 1,269,119 . 31,440 193,052 135,502 19,752 462,459 401,797 227 16,893 50 7,848 102
Federal Government 7,  8
1995 756,834 . 8,072 52,354 170,719 78,456 402,307 26,572 15 8,119 1,360 8,684 1761996 839,883 . 26,789 55,289 176,164 96,391 434,295 32,988 5 7,766 1,330 8,684 1831997 905,691 . 25,286 78,848 177,721 99,317 481,619 31,845 5 870 1,300 8,684 1971998 957,983 . 24,666 84,760 199,274 92,698 519,718 24,125 − 2,603 1,270 8,684 186
1999 714,069 . 11,553 44,335 120,498 41,621 379,808 67,872 60 2,568 476 45,175 1042000 715,819 . 11,516 44,678 123,642 35,991 400,490 52,836 29 2,099 285 44,146 107
2001          Dec. 701,077 . 21,136 59,643 119,911 26,395 416,195 47,111 26 1,481 85 8,986 107
2002          Mar. 721,619 . 16,917 59,622 123,287 22,648 429,270 59,356 12 1,365 49 8,986 108
         June 716,787 . 21,389 66,445 123,155 20,636 431,039 43,600 12 1,374 51 8,986 100         Sep. 726,896 . 30,982 72,762 125,316 19,752 429,452 39,392 0 1,242 50 7,848 101
West German L änder Governments
1995 442,536 . − 91,152 . . − 339,084 358 11,940 . − 2
1996 477,361 . 320 91,969 . . − 372,449 54 12,567 . − 2
1997 505,297 . 350 86,639 . . − 406,499 47 11,760 . − 2
1998 525,380 . 520 83,390 . . − 430,709 43 10,716 . − 2
1999 274,208 . 150 43,033 . . − 226,022 23 4,979 . − 1
2000 282,431 . − 48,702 . . − 227,914 22 5,792 . . 1
2001          Dec. 305,788 . 1,800 67,721 . . − 228,270 5 7,991 . . 1
2002          Mar. 310,210 . 800 73,844 . . − 225,475 58 10,032 . . 1
         June 314,447 . 750 83,192 . . − 219,729 79 10,697 . . 1
         Sep. p 320,617 . 250 92,220 . . − 216,121 79 11,946 . . 1
East German L änder Governments
1995 69,151 . − 25,345 . . − 43,328 17 461 . . .
1996 80,985 . 500 26,820 . . − 53,483 − 182 . . .
1997 90,174 . 700 27,540 . . − 61,697 15 222 . . .
1998 98,192 . 445 27,228 . . − 70,289 − 230 . . .
1999 53,200 . 891 14,517 . . − 37,602 − 189 . . .
2000 55,712 . 100 16,092 . . − 39,339 − 182 . . .
2001          Dec. 58,771 . 100 20,135 . . − 37,382 − 1,154 . . .
2002          Mar. 59,143 . 100 21,328 . . − 36,256 − 1,460 . . .
         June 60,156 . 112 23,387 . . − 35,399 − 1,258 . . .
         Sep. p 61,533 . 208 24,097 . . − 35,860 − 1,368 . . .
West German local authorities 9
1995 157,271 . . − . . 1,000 151,127 283 4,861 . . .
1996 158,613 . . 200 . . 1,280 152,311 174 4,648 . . .1997 160,162 . . 300 . . 1,330 154,145 149 4,238 . . .1998 158,960 . . 300 . . 1,330 153,208 119 4,003 . . .1999 81,511 . . 153 . . 680 78,726 53 1,898 . . .2000 81,414 . . 153 . . 680 78,656 33 1,891 . . .
2001          Dec. 82,203 . . 153 . . 629 79,470 29 1,922 . . .
2002          Mar. 82,900 . . 153 . . 629 80,168 30 1,920 . . .
         June 83,700 . . 153 . . 629 80,968 30 1,920 . . .         Sep.
p 84,000 . . 153 . . 629 81,268 30 1,920 . . .
East German local authorities  9
1995 36,830 . . 225 . . 400 35,427 347 431 . . .1996 38,976 . . 225 . . 400 37,922 308 121 . . .1997 38,688 . . 225 . . 400 37,623 273 167 . . .1998 39,873 . . 225 . . 460 38,777 255 156 . . .1999 20,726 . . 51 . . 335 20,138 124 78 . . .2000 17,048 . . 51 . . 335 16,497 114 50 . . .
2001          Dec. 17,005 . . − . . 284 16,581 107 33 . . .
2002          Mar. 16,880 . . − . . 284 16,456 110 30 . . .
         June 16,700 . . − . . 284 16,276 110 30 . . .
         Sep.
p 16,700 . . − . . 284 16,276 110 30 . . .
For footnotes see end of the table. 
55*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
7. Indebtedness of the public sector * (cont ’d)
  
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999,  5  million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
5−year lending owing to
Bundes- Treasury special Federal Debt by credit Social German Equalisa-
End of year bank discount Treasury Federal savings secur- institu- security unifica- tion
or month Total advances paper  1 notes  2,  3 bonds  2 bonds ities  2 tions  4 funds Other  4 tion 5 claims Other  6 
“German Unity “Fund / Indemnification Fund 7
1995 87,146 . − 8,891 − . 44,398 31,925 5 1,927 . . .
1996 83,556 . −−− . 44,321 38,020 5 1,210 . . .
1997 79,717 . −−− . 44,347 34,720 5 645 . . .
1998 79,413 . −−− . 47,998 30,975 − 440 . . .
1999 40,234 . − 275 500 . 28,978 10,292 − 189 . . .
2000 40,629 . − 275 2,634 . 29,797 7,790 − 133 . . .
2001          Dec. 39,923 . − 3,748 10,134 . 21,577 4,315 − 149 . . .
2002          Mar. 40,006 . − 3,748 10,134 . 21,732 4,315 − 7 7...
         June 40,028 . − 3,820 10,134 . 21,902 4,147 − 2 6...
         Sep. 40,047 . − 3,820 10,134 . 22,049 4,019 − 2 6...
ERP Special Fund 7
1995 34,200 . .... 10,745 23,455 −− ...
1996 34,135 . .... 10,750 23,385 −− ...
1997 33,650 . .... 10,810 22,840 −− ...
1998 34,159 . .... 11,944 20,988 − 1,227 . . .
1999 16,028 . .... 6,250 9,458 21 299 . . .
2000 18,386 . .... 7,585 10,411 13 377 . . .
2001          Dec. 19,161 . .... 9,462 9,310 8 381 . . .
2002          Mar. 19,098 . . . − . 9,701 9,039 8 350 . . .
         June 19,308 . . . − . 10,052 8,873 8 376 . . .
         Sep. 19,327 . . . 51 . 10,045 8,863 8 361 . . .
Federal Railways Fund 7,  8
1995 78,400 . . 3,848 − . 28,992 39,005 140 6,415 . . .
1996 77,785 . . 1,882 − . 28,749 41,537 130 5,489 . . .
1997 77,254 . . 1,927 − . 25,634 44,807 115 4,772 . . .
1998 77,246 . . − 500 . 31,648 42,488 79 2,531 . . .
1999          June 39,231 . . − 1,023 . 16,805 20,401 34 968 . . .
Debt-Processing Fund / Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities 7,  8
1995 328,888 . − 58,699 − . 98,731 72,732 98 6,468 13,745 78,395 21
1996 331,918 . − 54,718 − . 98,468 81,380 95 7,468 8,630 81,142 19
1997 322,032 . − 54,028 − . 98,377 81,616 54 7,233 15 80,692 17
1998 304,978 . − 31,633 − . 110,006 79,226 54 4,167 −20 79,899 15
1999          June 151,097 . − 11,127 2,000 . 58,897 36,133 27 2,015 −9 40,902 4
“Use of Hard Coal “Equalisation Fund 7,  8
1995 2,220 . .... − 2,220 −− ...
1996 3,108 . .... − 3,108 −− ...
1997 3,229 . .... − 3,229 −− ...
1998 3,971 . .... 3 0 0 3,671 −− ...
1999          June 2,302 . .... 1 5 3 2,148 −− ...
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical accordance with the London Debts agreement; excluding debt securities i n
Office. —*Excluding public authorities ’mutual indebtedness. — own portfolios. —7The debt incurred through the joint issue of Federal
1Predominantly Treasury discount paper. —2Excluding paper in the securities is recorded here −in contrast to the capital market statistics −
issuers ’portfolios. —3Länder Treasury paper also covers the long-term under the Federal Government and its special funds in accordance with the
maturity category. —4Mainly loans against borrowers ’notes. Including agreed distribution ratios. —8Since July 1, 1999 the Federal Government
loans raised abroad. Other loans from non-banks, including loans from has assumed joint responsibility for the debts of the Redemption Fund forsupplementary public pension funds and liabilities arising from the Inherited Liabilities, the Federal Railway Fund and the Equalisation Fund forinvestment assistance levy. —5Old liabilities arising from residential Safeguarding the Use of Coal. The special funds mentioned are only
construction and liabilities arising from residential construction by the recorded under the Federal Government from July. —9Data other than
former GDR ’s armed forces and from residential construction in connection end-of-year figures have been estimated. Including indebtedness of munici-
with the return of the troops of the former USSR in eastern Germany to pal special-purpose associations. their home country. —6Old debt mainly expressed in foreign currency, in
56*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
8. Changes in public sector indebtedness *
  
  
Net borrowing  1 
Level at end of 2001 2002
2001 Total 1st qtr 2nd qtr 3rd qtr 4th qtr 1st qtr 2nd qtr 3rd qtr  p Sep. 2002  p 
Item
 5 
 million
Borrowers
Federal Government  2 701,077 726,896 −14,908 −16,138 −8,256 + 6,820 + 2,665 + 20,542 −4,833 + 10,110
"German Unity" Fund 39,638 39,702 − 787 + 748 − 739 − 41 − 754 + 64 −−
ERP Special Fund 19,161 19,327 + 775 + 513 + 91 + 449 − 278 − 63 + 210 + 19
Indemnification Fund 285 344 + 81 + 21 + 22 + 21 + 17 + 19 + 21 + 19
West  German  Länder 305,788 320,617 + 23,357 + 3,307 + 2,310 + 7,422 + 10,318 + 4,422 + 4,237 + 6,170 Governments
East German  Länder 58,771 61,533 + 3,059 + 318 + 154 + 1,365 + 1,222 + 372 + 1,013 + 1,377 Governments
West German local authorities  3 82,203 84,000 + 2,487 + 815 + 435 − 460 + 1,697 + 275 + 1,000 + 900
East German local authorities  3 17,005 16,700 + 162 − 22 − 102 −+ 286 − 31 − 180 − 30
Total 1,223,929 1,269,119 + 14,224 −10,438 −6,086 + 15,576 + 15,173 + 25,601 + 1,468 + 18,564
Types of debt
Treasury discount paper  4 23,036 31,440 + 11,420 + 182 + 1,948 + 5,803 + 3,488 −5,219 + 4,434 + 9,188
Treasury notes  5 151,401 193,052 + 41,449 + 8,866 + 5,676 + 12,724 + 14,183 + 7,294 + 18,301 + 16,056
Five-year special Federal bonds  5 130,045 135,502 + 3,770 + 1,464 + 2,153 + 1,067 − 913 + 3,375 − 132 + 2,213
Federal savings bonds 26,395 19,752 −9,596 −1,431 −4,315 −1,422 −2,428 −3,748 −2,012 − 884
Debt securities  5 448,148 462,459 + 9,260 + 4,838 + 2,059 + 336 + 2,027 + 13,469 + 2,289 −1,446
Direct lending by
credit institutions  6 422,440 401,797 −9,100 + 10,382 −14,596 −1,802 −3,086 + 8,297 −21,875 −6,624
Loans from social security funds 174 227 − 37 − 8− 18 − 3− 8 + 44 + 21 − 12
Other loans  6 13,070 16,852 + 2,586 − 643 + 994 + 36 + 2,199 + 2,124 + 447 + 1,212
Old debt  7 193 152 − 200 − 45 + 2 − 17 − 140 − 36 − 6− 0
Equalisation claims 8,986 7,847 −35,328 −34,044 + 11 −1,144 − 150 −− − 1,139
Investment assistance levy 40 41 − 0− 0− 0− 0− 0+ 0 −+0
Total 1,223,929 1,269,119 + 14,224 −10,438 −6,086 + 15,576 + 15,173 + 25,601 + 1,468 + 18,564
Creditors
Banking system
Bundesbank 4,440 4,440 −−−−−−−−
Credit institutions 534,400 532,700 −29,304 −3,235 −11,848 −11,361 −2,859 + 11,671 −13,200 + 270
Domestic non-banks
Social security funds 174 227 − 31 − 0− 5− 20 − 5 + 44 + 21 − 12
Other  8 243,710 256,152 + 42,436 + 4,566 + 6,222 + 12,028 + 19,620 + 6,689 + 2,947 + 2,806
Foreign creditors  pe 441,205 475,600 + 1,123 −11,769 − 456 + 14,930 −1,583 + 7,195 + 11,700 + 15,500
Total 1,223,929 1,269,119 + 14,224 −10,438 −6,086 + 15,576 + 15,173 + 25,601 + 1,468 + 18,564
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Treasury discount paper. —5Excluding paper in the issuers ’portfolios. —
Office. —*Excluding public authorities ’mutual indebtedness. —1Net 6Including loans raised abroad. —7Old liabilities arising from residential
borrowing differs from the change in indebtedness, which includes the construction and liabilities arising from the residential construction of th e
assumption and reduction of debts. —2See Table VIII. 7, footnote 8. — former GDR ’s armed forces and from residential construction in connection
3Data other than end-of-year figures have been estimated. Including with the return of the troops of the former USSR based in eastern Germany
indebtedness of municipal special-purpose associations and municipal to their home country, and old debt in accordance with the London Debts
hospitals. —4Excluding mobilisation and liquidity paper. Predominantly Agreement. — 8 Ascertained as a difference. 
9. Loans raised by public authorities against borrowers ’ notes
  
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999,  5  million
End of year Federal "German ERP L änder Local Federal Inherited "Use of Hard
or month Govern- Unity" Special Govern- authorities Railways Liabilites Coal" Equal-
Total  1 ment  2,  3 Fund Fund ments 4,  5 Fund  3 Fund  3 isation Fund  3 
1998 898,030 23,094 31,415 22,215 504,148 184,942 45,098 83,447 3,671
1999 444,031 64,704 10,481 9,778 264,158 94,909 −− −
2000 431,364 54,731 7,178 10,801 268,362 90,292 −− −
2001 Sep. 418,633 47,487 4,418 9,998 267,602 89,129 −− −
Dec. 416,068 44,791 4,464 9,699 267,988 89,126 −− −
2002 Mar. 409,176 41,751 4,392 9,397 264,741 88,895 −− −
June 404,661 40,431 4,172 9,256 262,574 88,228 −− −
Sep. p 401,432 39,267 4,044 9,231 260,611 88,280 −− −
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical 3See Table VIII. 7, footnote 8. —4Data other than end-of-year figures have
Office. —1Excluding Debt Register claims and cash advances. Including been estimated. Including municipal special-purpose associations and
small amounts of: mortgage loans, land charges in annuity and other forms, municipal hospitals. — 5 Including contractually agreed loans. 
and debts outstanding. —2Including Equalisation of Burdens Fund. —
57*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
10. Indebtedness of the Federal Government
  
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999,  5  million
Treasury Indebtedness
discount paper  1 to non-banks Old debt
Federal Direct
of which Treasury 5 −year Debt lending owing to
Treasury paper/ special Federal secur- by credit Social German Equal-
End of year financing Treasury Federal savings ities institu- security Other unifica- isation
or month Total Total paper notes  2 bonds  2 bonds 2 tions  3,  4 funds 3,  5,  6  tion 7 claims Other  8 
1996 839,883 26,789 7,166 55,289 176,164 96,391 434,295 32,988 5 7,766 1,330 8,684 183
1997 905,691 25,286 5,221 78,848 177,721 99,317 481,619 31,845 5 870 1,300 8,684 1971998 957,983 24,666 4,558 84,760 199,274 92,698 519,718 24,125 − 2,603 1,270 8,684 186
1999  
9 714,069 11,553 1,584 44,335 120,498 41,621 379,808 67,872 60 2,568 476 45,175 104
2000 715,819 11,516 1,805 44,678 123,642 35,991 400,490 52,836 29 2,099 285 44,146 1072001 701,077 21,136 1,658 59,643 119,911 26,395 416,195 47,111 26 1,481 85 8,986 1072002  
p 724,960 30,197 1,587 78,584 127,326 17,889 422,307 39,442 0 1,242 28 7,848 99
2002          Jan. 713,928 16,852 1,658 58,910 119,373 24,779 427,130 56,198 26 1,481 85 8,986 109         Feb. 716,611 16,886 1,693 59,226 122,524 24,752 428,296 54,242 26 1,481 85 8,986 108         Mar. 721,619 16,917 1,724 59,622 123,287 22,648 429,270 59,356 12 1,365 49 8,986 108
         Apr. 714,032 11,709 1,787 64,533 123,500 22,666 431,935 49,165 12 1,366 54 8,986 106
         May 715,840 16,623 1,788 64,891 123,015 21,967 430,935 47,891 12 1,366 50 8,986 103         June 716,787 21,389 1,776 66,445 123,155 20,636 431,039 43,600 12 1,374 51 8,986 100
         July 726,077 21,253 1,763 71,385 123,144 20,773 430,911 49,222 12 1,374 54 7,848 102
         Aug. 723,931 26,149 1,724 71,540 124,334 20,057 430,140 42,323 12 1,374 52 7,848 101         Sep. 726,896 30,982 1,700 72,762 125,316 19,752 429,452 39,392 0 1,242 50 7,848 101
         Oct. 728,799 30,977 1,663 78,405 125,954 18,011 425,750 40,487 0 1,242 26 7,848 99
         Nov. 734,678 30,466 1,622 78,933 126,472 17,852 434,650 37,089 0 1,242 28 7,848 99         Dec.
p 724,960 30,197 1,587 78,584 127,326 17,889 422,307 39,442 0 1,242 28 7,848 99
2003          Jan. p 742,899 30,172 1,504 84,053 127,618 15,360 426,383 50,096 0 1,242 28 7,848 99
1Excluding mobilisation and liquidity paper. In November 1999, including with the return of the troops of the former USSR based in eastern Germany
cash bills. —2Excluding paper in the issuers ’portfolios. —3Including loans to their home country. —8Commutation and compensation debt and old
raised abroad. —4Including money market debt. —5Including loans debt mainly expressed in foreign currency. —9Since July 1, 1999 the
granted by supplementary pension funds for government employees. — Federal Government has assumed joint responsibility for the debts of the
6Including liabilities arising from the investment assistance levy. — Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, the Federal Railway Fund and the
7Assumption of liabilities arising from residential construction of the Equalisation Fund for Safeguarding the Use of Coal. The special funds
former GDR ’s armed forces and from residential construction in connection mentioned are ascribed to the Federal Government from July 1999. 
11. Federal Government borrowing in the market
  
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM billion / from 1999,  5  billion
of which
5−year special Loans against Change in
Total new borrowing Debt Securities Federal bonds Other securities  2 borrowers ’ notes Money money
market market
Period gross  1 net gross  1 net gross  1 net gross  1 net gross net debt deposits
1996 + 185,696 + 83,049 + 54,038 + 31,988 + 45,445 + 5,445 + 67,015 + 39,586 + 15,050 + 1,906 + 4,148 + 6,548
1997 + 250,074 + 65,808 + 79,323 + 47,323 + 59,557 + 1,557 + 98,275 + 24,983 + 12,950 − 8,009 − 30 − 3,304
1998 + 228,050 + 52,292 + 78,304 + 38,099 + 55,078 + 21,553 + 85,706 − 1,327 + 12,023 − 2,927 − 3,065 − 5,440
1999 + 139,865 + 31,631 + 53,931 + 114,080 + 22,229 + 18,610 + 44,904 − 5,836 + 14,861 + 52,897 + 3,937 + 1,832
2000 + 122,725 + 1,750 + 49,395 + 20,682 + 26,342 + 3,144 + 45,278 − 5,323 + 7,273 − 9,973 − 5,563 − 940
2001 + 135,018 − 14,741 + 36,511 + 15,705 + 19,603 − 3,730 + 69,971 + 14,989 + 5,337 − 9,941 + 3,595 − 1,495
2001          Jan.-Dec. + 135,018 − 14,741 + 36,511 + 15,705 + 19,603 − 3,730 + 69,971 + 14,989 + 5,337 − 9,941 + 3,595 − 1,495
2002          Jan.-Dec.  p + 178,173 + 23,883 + 41,378 + 6,112 + 36,037 + 7,415 + 93,823 + 19,495 + 4,716 −10,155 + 2,221 + 22
2002          Jan. + 25,679 + 12,851 + 10,935 + 10,935 − 539 − 539 + 4,961 − 6,634 + 686 − 549 + 9,635 + 630
         Feb. + 10,575 + 2,683 + 1,165 + 1,165 + 9,669 + 3,151 + 572 + 323 + 117 − 1,009 − 948 + 83
         Mar. + 15,492 + 5,009 + 975 + 975 + 763 + 763 + 6,740 − 1,677 + 548 − 1,482 + 6,467 + 9
         Apr. + 3,637 − 7,587 + 2,665 + 2,665 + 214 + 214 + 9,919 − 278 + 708 − 321 − 9,870 − 307
         May + 9,842 + 1,807 − 1,000 − 1,000 + 6,025 − 485 + 5,543 + 4,574 + 522 − 28 − 1,247 − 190
         June + 8,533 + 947 + 104 + 104 + 140 + 140 + 11,512 + 4,988 + 88 − 971 − 3,311 − 41
         July + 27,272 + 9,291 + 10,400 − 127 − 11 − 11 + 9,934 + 4,941 + 610 − 716 + 6,338 + 133
         Aug. + 6,663 − 2,147 − 772 − 772 + 8,739 + 1,189 + 5,360 + 4,337 + 135 − 100 − 6,799 + 228
         Sep. + 9,231 + 2,966 − 688 − 688 + 983 + 983 + 11,072 + 5,748 + 590 − 348 − 2,727 + 1,413
         Oct. + 20,715 + 1,903 + 8,082 − 3,702 + 637 + 637 + 10,797 + 3,897 + 94 − 10 + 1,106 − 1,181
         Nov. + 23,264 + 5,880 + 8,900 + 8,900 + 8,562 + 518 + 5,171 − 141 + 543 − 3,487 + 88 − 564
         Dec. p + 17,270 − 9,718 + 611 −12,344 + 854 + 854 + 12,242 − 582 + 76 − 1,134 + 3,487 − 191
2003          Jan. p + 34,373 + 17,938 + 11,187 + 4,076 + 292 + 292 + 10,717 + 2,916 + 628 − 895 + 11,549 + 449
1After deduction of repurchases. —2Federal Treasury notes, Federal   
savings bonds, Treasury discount paper, Treasury financing paper.  
  
58*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
12. Receipts, expenditure and assets of the wage and
salary earners ’ pension insurance funds
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999,  5  million
Receipts  1 Expenditure  1 Assets  5 
of which of which Memor-
Balance Mort- andum
Pen- of receipts gage item
Pension sioners ’ and and Adminis-
Contri- Federal pay- health expend- other Real trative
Period Total butions  2 payments Total ments  3 insurance  4 iture Total Deposits  6 Securities loans  7 estate assets
Western Germany
1996  8 288,761 236,036 50,478 288,716 237,464 16,809 + 45 14,456 9,608 2,119 2,500 229 8,863
1997 305,606 248,463 54,896 295,635 246,011 17,892 + 9,971 14,659 10,179 1,878 2,372 230 9,261
1998 317,340 250,063 65,191 304,155 254,783 18,636 + 13,185 18,194 14,201 1,493 2,274 226 9,573
1999 169,124 128,191 39,884 159,819 134,536 9,910 + 9,305 13,623 11,559 824 1,127 114 4,904
2000 173,020 128,057 43,638 166,569 139,189 10,253 + 6,451 14,350 11,459 1,676 1,105 110 4,8892001  
8,  p 178,293 130,064 46,710 172,382 143,863 10,610 + 5,911 13,973 10,646 1,517 1,699 111 4,917
2002  p 181,534 131,103 48,993 178,746 149,322 11,359 + 2,788 9,832 6,948 1,072 1,686 126 4,927
2001          4th qtr 47,452 35,514 11,588 43,530 36,400 2,701 + 3,922 13,973 10,646 1,517 1,699 111 4,917
2002          1st qtr 43,411 30,893 12,212 43,792 36,898 2,719 − 381 11,943 8,712 1,427 1,698 106 4,933
         2nd qtr 44,541 31,949 12,222 43,927 36,784 2,711 + 614 10,663 7,490 1,366 1,696 111 4,954
         3rd qtr 45,371 32,663 12,280 44,799 37,746 2,872 + 572 8,911 5,919 1,182 1,689 121 4,947         4th qtr 48,213 35,599 12,279 45,928 37,894 3,056 + 2,285 9,832 6,948 1,072 1,686 126 4,927
Eastern Germany
1996 74,790 46,580 17,910 83,830 68,316 4,851 −9,040 . . . . . .
1997 79,351 48,939 20,065 87,424 70,500 5,388 −8,073 . . . . . .
1998 81,072 47,764 23,564 90,863 73,040 5,757 −9,791 . . . . . .
1999 43,214 24,015 14,744 47,641 38,383 3,040 −4,427 . . . . . .
2000 43,513 22,655 15,224 49,385 39,414 3,112 −5,872 . . . . . .
2001  p 44,462 21,984 16,383 50,943 40,254 3,152 −6,481 . . . . . .
2002  p 45,275 21,697 17,608 53,040 41,678 3,264 −7,765 . . . . . .
2001          4th qtr 11,446 5,860 4,107 12,857 10,221 788 −1,411 . . . . . .
2002          1st qtr 11,070 5,157 4,410 13,106 10,373 793 −2,036 . . . . . .
         2nd qtr 11,493 5,455 4,558 13,046 10,228 797 −1,553 . . . . . .
         3rd qtr 10,757 5,275 4,334 13,391 10,530 832 −2,634 . . . . . .
         4th qtr 11,955 5,810 4,306 13,397 10,547 842 −1,442 . . . . . .
Source: Federal Minister of Labour and Social Affairs and Association of including nursing insurance scheme for pensioners . —5Largely cor-
German Pension Insurance Funds. —1The annual figures differ from the responds to fluctuation reserves. Level at the end of the year or quarter.
sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. From 1993 From 1992 figures for the whole of Germany. —6Including cash
including financial compensation payments. —2Including contributions for resources. —7Excluding loans to other social security funds; including
recipients of public financial benefits. —3Payments by pension insurance participating interests. —8Excluding receipts arising from the higher
funds to health insurance institutions under section 50 of the Social Security valuation of participating interests. 
Code V have been deducted from pension payments. —4From 1995
13. Receipts and expenditure of the Federal Labour Office
  
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999,  5  million
Receipts Expenditure
Subsidies
of which of which or work-
ing fund
Promotion of vocational Promo- Balance credits
Unemployment relief  3,  4 training  4,  5 tion of of receipts of thewinter and Federal
Contri- Western Eastern Western Eastern con- expend- Govern-
Period Total  
1 butions Levies  2 Total Total Germany Germany Total Germany Germany struction iture ment
Germany
1996 91,825 85,073 3,346 105,588 57,123 40,186 16,938 36,478 18,368 18,111 903 −13,763 13,756
1997 93,149 85,793 2,959 102,723 60,273 40,309 19,964 31,418 16,117 15,301 443 −9,574 9,574
1998 91,088 86,165 2,868 98,852 53,483 35,128 18,355 34,279 16,784 17,496 471 −7,764 7,719
1999 47,954 45,141 1,467 51,694 25,177 16,604 8,573 20,558 10,480 10,078 279 −3,740 3,739
2000 49,606 46,359 1,403 50,473 23,946 15,615 8,331 20,324 10,534 9,790 294 − 868 867
2001 50,682 47,337 1,640 52,613 25,036 16,743 8,294 20,713 11,094 9,619 268 −1,931 1,931
2002 50,885 47,405 2,088 56,508 27,610 19,751 7,860 21,011 11,568 9,443 245 −5,623 5,623
2001          4th qtr 14,319 13,045 770 13,866 6,321 4,366 1,955 5,637 2,973 2,664 3 + 453 −2,771
2002          1st qtr 11,502 11,188 51 13,093 6,587 4,608 1,979 4,665 2,523 2,142 139 −1,591 3,720
         2nd qtr 12,200 11,459 433 14,141 7,098 5,005 2,093 5,230 2,903 2,327 97 −1,941 2,200
         3rd qtr 12,710 11,808 528 13,905 6,708 4,839 1,869 5,182 2,849 2,334 7 −1,195 854
         4th qtr 14,473 12,951 1,077 15,369 7,218 5,299 1,919 5,933 3,293 2,640 2 − 896 −1,151
Source: Federal Labour Office. —1Excluding Federal Government liquidity replacement for the unemployment benefits. —4Including contributions to
assistance. —2Levies to promote winter construction and to pay bank- the statutory health insurance, and to the pension insurance funds. —
ruptcy compensation to employees. —3Unemployment benefits, 5Vocational training, measures to foster the commencement of work,
short-time-working benefits. Including the integration allowance paid to rehabilitation and job creation measures. resettlers from eastern Europe and emigrants from the GDR as a
59*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
IX. Economic conditions
  
1. Origin and expenditure of domestic product, distribution of national income
    Germany
    
  1998   1999   2000   2001   2002   1999   2000   2001   2002   1999   2000   2001   2002
DM Change from % of
Item billion
 5 
 billion previous year in % total
at  1995  prices
I.Origin of domestic product
Producing sector
(excluding construction) 855.2 429.4 445.6 447.3 445.5 −1.8 3.8 0.4 −0.4 22.4 22.6 22.6 22.5
Construction 205.3 105.5 102.6 96.0 90.2 0.5 −2.7 −6.5 −6.1 5.5 5.2 4.8 4.5
Distribution, catering trade,and transportation  
1 614.6 335.3 352.9 361.8 367.6 6.7 5.3 2.5 1.6 17.5 17.9 18.3 18.5
Financing, rents and corporateservices  
2 1,028.6 548.3 572.6 585.2 593.8 4.3 4.4 2.2 1.5 28.6 29.1 29.5 29.9
Public and private services  3 737.6 380.6 387.3 391.6 396.0 0.9 1.8 1.1 1.1 19.9 19.7 19.8 20.0
All economic sectors 3,487.2 1,823.3 1,885.3 1,906.5 1,917.3 2.3 3.4 1.1 0.6 95.2 95.7 96.2 96.6Memo item: Enterprise sector 3,041.7 1,595.6 1,656.7 1,679.3 1,690.7 2.6 3.8 1.4 0.7 83.3 84.1 84.8 85.2
Economic sectors, adjusted  
4 3,320.2 1,730.3 1,785.5 1,801.4 1,807.8 1.9 3.2 0.9 0.4 90.4 90.7 90.9 91.1
Gross domestic product 3,669.9 1,914.8 1,969.5 1,980.8 1,984.2 2.0 2.9 0.6 0.2 100 100 100 100
II.Expenditure of domestic product
Private consumption  5 2,072.8 1,099.2 1,114.8 1,131.6 1,126.2 3.7 1.4 1.5 −0.5 57.4 56.6 57.1 56.8
Government consumption 726.3 375.0 379.6 382.6 388.5 1.0 1.2 0.8 1.5 19.6 19.3 19.3 19.6
Machinery and equipment 292.5 160.3 175.5 165.4 151.5 7.2 9.5 −5.8 −8.4 8.4 8.9 8.3 7.6
Construction 479.5 248.7 242.1 227.7 214.2 1.4 −2.6 −6.0 −5.9 13.0 12.3 11.5 10.8
Other investment  6 40.0 23.2 25.2 26.5 27.1 13.5 8.4 5.0 2.5 1.2 1.3 1.3 1.4
Changes in stocks  7 3.2 −6.6 −2.7 −15.2 −14.3 . . . . −0.3 −0.1 −0.8 −0.7
Domestic demand 3,614.3 1,899.8 1,934.5 1,918.6 1,893.2 2.8 1.8 −0.8 −1.3 99.2 98.2 96.9 95.4
Net exports 55.6 15.0 35.0 62.2 91.0 . . . . 0.8 1.8 3.1 4.6
Exports 1,078.6 582.5 662.1 695.4 715.7 5.6 13.7 5.0 2.9 30.4 33.6 35.1 36.1Imports 1,023.0 567.4 627.1 633.1 624.7 8.5 10.5 1.0 −1.3 29.6 31.8 32.0 31.5
Gross domestic product 3,669.9 1,914.8 1,969.5 1,980.8 1,984.2 2.0 2.9 0.6 0.2 100 100 100 100
at  current  prices
III.Expenditure of domestic product
Private consumption  5 2,173.3 1,156.5 1,190.9 1,232.2 1,243.6 4.1 3.0 3.5 0.9 58.5 58.7 59.5 58.9
Government consumption 722.7 378.8 387.2 393.5 402.7 2.5 2.2 1.6 2.3 19.1 19.1 19.0 19.1Machinery and equipment 293.5 159.6 175.8 166.3 153.6 6.4 10.2 −5.4 −7.7 8.1 8.7 8.0 7.3
Construction 475.3 245.2 240.2 226.2 212.6 0.9 −2.1 −5.8 −6.0 12.4 11.8 10.9 10.1
Other investment  
6 38.3 21.4 22.8 23.7 24.1 9.1 6.7 4.1 1.7 1.1 1.1 1.1 1.1
Changes in stocks  7 14.1 0.9 5.2 −9.4 −8.0 . . . . 0.0 0.3 −0.5 −0.4
Domestic demand 3,717.2 1,962.3 2,022.2 2,032.6 2,028.7 3.3 3.0 0.5 −0.2 99.2 99.6 98.1 96.0
Net exports 56.4 16.3 7.8 38.6 83.8 . . . . 0.8 0.4 1.9 4.0
Exports 1,095.6 587.0 685.4 726.9 748.6 4.8 16.8 6.1 3.0 29.7 33.8 35.1 35.4Imports 1,039.2 570.7 677.6 688.3 664.8 7.4 18.7 1.6 −3.4 28.8 33.4 33.2 31.5
Gross domestic product 3,773.6 1,978.6 2,030.0 2,071.2 2,112.4 2.6 2.6 2.0 2.0 100 100 100 100
IV.Prices (1995=100)
Private consumption 104.8 105.2 106.8 108.9 110.4 0.4 1.5 1.9 1.4 . . . .Gross domestic product 102.8 103.3 103.1 104.6 106.5 0.5 −0.3 1.4 1.8 . . . .
Terms of trade 100.0 100.2 95.8 96.2 98.3 0.2 −4.4 0.4 2.2 . . . .
V.Distribution of national income
Wages and salaries 2,015.6 1,058.0 1,099.0 1,120.4 1,131.5 2.7 3.9 1.9 1.0 72.0 72.8 73.2 72.6Entrepreneurial and propertyincome 805.0 411.1 410.3 410.9 428.1 −0.1 −0.2 0.2 4.2 28.0 27.2 26.8 27.4
National income 2,820.6 1,469.0 1,509.2 1,531.2 1,559.5 1.9 2.7 1.5 1.8 100 100 100 100
Memo item: Gross national
income 3,746.2 1,965.9 2,020.9 2,055.8 2,099.7 2.6 2.8 1.7 2.1 . . . .
(Gross nat. product)
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in January 2003. Prelimi- bank charges, but excluding taxes on products (offset against subsi dies on
nary figure. —1Including telecommunications. —2Financial interme- products). —5Including private non-commercial organisations. —6Intangi-
diation, real estate activities, rents and corporate services. —3Including ble fixed capital formation (inter alia, EDP software, copyrights) and eco-
care-at-home services. —4Gross value added after deduction of assumed nomically useful animals and plants. — 7 Including net increase in valuables. 
60*IX. Economic conditions

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
 IX. Economic conditions
 
2. Output in the producing sector     
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Industry  1 
Producing sector, Intermediate
total Total goods  2 Capital goods  3 Consumer goods  4 Energy  5 Construction
Change Change Change Change Change Change Changefrom from from from from from fromprevious previous previous previous previous previous previousyear year year year year year year
Period in % in % in % in % in % in % in %
1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 
Germany  
  
1999 107.8 + 1.5 111.5 + 1.7 110.7 + 1.8 118.0 + 1.5 103.3 + 1.7 100.0 −0.4 87.9 + 0.8
2000 113.4 + 5.2 119.1 + 6.8 116.9 + 5.6 130.9 + 10.9 105.6 + 2.2 99.7 −0.3 84.9 −3.4
2001 113.2 −0.2 119.9 + 0.7 116.1 −0.7 134.3 + 2.6 105.2 −0.4 98.1 −1.6 79.0 −6.9
2002  x 111.4 −1.6 118.2 −1.4 116.2 + 0.1 131.0 −2.5 103.0 −2.1 98.5 + 0.4 74.4 −5.8
  
2001          Dec. 105.5 −4.4 111.5 −5.0 96.9 −8.3 136.9 −4.0 98.7 −1.6 111.8 + 4.7 61.2 −6.3
2002          Jan. 100.9 −4.2 107.6 −4.4 107.4 −4.6 114.4 −5.3 98.2 −2.3 111.1 −0.9 48.4 −5.3
         Feb. 104.2 −4.6 111.7 −4.9 110.6 −3.7 121.8 −7.2 98.9 −2.8 98.8 −1.6 57.7 −2.2
         Mar. 7 117.7 −2.7 125.4 −3.5 123.0 −1.7 139.4 −6.3 109.1 −1.3 103.4 −0.6 7 75.3 + 3.4
         Apr. 7 111.6 −1.4 117.8 −1.5 116.9 −0.2 130.1 −2.3 101.5 −2.4 97.4 −1.0 7 79.6 −1.4
         May  6 7 108.3 −3.6 114.3 −3.5 115.4 −1.7 122.9 −5.8 100.2 −2.4 94.3 + 2.2 7 78.3 −8.6
         June  6 7 116.1 −1.4 124.2 −1.0 121.1 −0.5 141.1 −1.3 104.5 −1.9 87.0 + 1.6 7 83.0 −7.2
         July 7 111.7 −1.2 118.3 −0.5 118.5 + 0.4 129.8 −0.8 101.0 −2.0 88.2 −0.9 7 84.7 −6.8
         Aug. 7 104.2 −1.2 109.7 −0.7 111.7 + 1.2 116.1 −0.9 97.0 −3.8 90.0 + 2.4 7 76.9 −8.8
         Sep. 7 118.9 −0.8 126.4 −0.4 124.1 + 2.5 141.1 −2.7 108.9 −1.4 93.4 + 1.4 7 86.6 −7.2
         Oct.  x 117.6 −0.8 123.6 −0.6 122.6 + 1.3 134.5 −0.9 109.3 −3.5 103.8 + 5.5 87.1 −7.6
         Nov.  x 120.2 + 2.5 127.3 + 3.2 122.3 + 4.0 144.8 + 4.3 110.2 −0.4 105.3 −0.1 82.1 −3.1
         Dec.  x 104.9 −0.6 112.1 + 0.5 100.2 + 3.4 135.9 −0.7 97.4 −1.3 108.9 −2.6 53.6 −12.4
Western Germany  
  
1999 107.2 + 1.2 110.1 + 1.3 109.0 + 1.3 117.1 + 1.2 101.1 + 1.2 100.6 −0.6 88.9 + 1.4
2000 112.7 + 5.1 117.1 + 6.4 114.3 + 4.9 129.8 + 10.8 102.8 + 1.7 99.8 −0.8 87.5 −1.6
2001 112.4 −0.3 117.6 + 0.4 113.2 −1.0 132.9 + 2.4 101.9 −0.9 97.9 −1.9 82.2 −6.1
2002  x 110.4 −1.8 115.4 −1.9 112.8 −0.4 129.2 −2.8 99.4 −2.5 98.3 + 0.4 78.8 −4.1
  
2001          Dec. 104.8 −4.6 109.2 −5.4 94.4 −8.6 135.2 −4.4 95.3 −2.0 111.5 + 4.4 63.8 −5.5
2002          Jan. 100.3 −4.4 105.3 −4.8 104.6 −5.0 113.0 −5.7 95.1 −2.5 110.9 −1.1 50.8 −3.2
         Feb. 103.6 −5.0 109.4 −5.4 107.7 −4.3 120.4 −7.7 95.7 −3.3 98.7 −1.8 60.9 −2.2
         Mar. 7 116.9 −3.2 122.7 −4.1 119.8 −2.4 137.7 −6.6 105.3 −1.8 103.2 −0.7 7 80.5 + 4.8
         Apr. 7 110.8 −1.6 115.3 −1.9 113.6 −0.6 128.7 −2.7 98.2 −2.5 97.2 −1.1 7 85.2 + 0.5
         May  6 7 107.2 −3.8 111.5 −3.9 111.8 −2.3 121.4 −6.0 96.3 −2.7 94.2 + 2.5 7 83.3 −7.1
         June  6 7 115.1 −1.5 121.3 −1.5 117.5 −0.8 139.3 −1.6 100.7 −2.3 86.6 + 1.5 7 88.0 −5.4
         July 7 110.9 −1.1 115.8 −0.7 115.1 + 0.2 128.7 −0.7 97.8 −2.1 87.9 −1.0 7 90.2 −4.7
         Aug. 7 102.4 −1.3 106.4 −1.0 107.8 + 0.8 113.7 −1.2 93.1 −4.0 89.8 + 2.6 7 80.1 −6.8
         Sep. 7 117.7 −1.0 123.4 −0.8 120.5 + 2.4 138.9 −3.3 105.1 −2.0 93.4 + 1.6 7 91.5 −5.5
         Oct.  x 116.4 −0.9 120.7 −0.8 119.1 + 1.3 132.5 −1.3 105.7 −3.6 103.6 + 5.5 91.9 −6.9
         Nov.  x 118.9 + 2.5 124.2 + 3.1 118.7 + 3.8 142.4 + 4.2 106.3 −0.6 105.2 −0.1 86.5 −1.6
         Dec.  x 104.0 −0.8 109.3 + 0.1 97.1 + 2.9 133.7 −1.1 93.7 −1.7 108.5 −2.7 57.1 −10.5
Eastern Germany  
  
1999 114.4 + 4.8 135.8 + 7.6 137.1 + 8.9 135.6 + 7.4 134.0 + 5.9 95.1 + 1.2 84.2 −1.1
2000 121.5 + 6.2 152.7 + 12.4 157.0 + 14.5 153.2 + 13.0 145.7 + 8.7 98.3 + 3.4 75.6 −10.2
2001 123.0 + 1.2 160.1 + 4.8 162.6 + 3.6 163.6 + 6.8 152.6 + 4.7 99.5 + 1.2 67.1 −11.2
2002  x 123.1 + 0.1 165.0 + 3.1 169.4 + 4.2 169.1 + 3.4 154.0 + 0.9 100.1 + 0.6 58.6 −12.7
  
2001          Dec. 114.0 −1.1 149.5 −0.6 135.7 −5.5 173.7 + 3.3 146.5 + 2.2 114.3 + 7.4 51.9 −9.6
2002          Jan. 108.4 −1.4 146.7 + 0.5 151.6 + 0.1 143.9 + 2.0 142.1 −0.2 113.1 + 1.1 39.7 −13.7
         Feb. 111.2 + 1.3 151.0 + 2.0 155.9 + 3.3 150.9 −0.3 143.7 + 2.2 99.5 + 0.2 46.2 −1.7
         Mar. 7 126.9 + 2.6 171.8 + 3.9 174.3 + 6.6 176.5 + 0.2 163.2 + 3.8 105.4 + 0.9 7 56.5 −3.3
         Apr. 7 120.8 + 0.8 160.7 + 3.5 169.3 + 5.2 160.0 + 5.9 148.2 −1.5 98.6 −0.4 7 59.5 −9.7
         May  6 7 121.4 −1.9 161.9 + 1.3 171.9 + 4.2 154.1 −2.2 154.5 + 0.2 95.2 + 0.1 7 60.3 −15.4
         June  6 7 128.2 −0.2 172.4 + 3.5 177.2 + 3.1 179.1 + 4.8 158.3 + 2.5 90.2 + 2.3 7 65.1 −14.8
         July 7 121.3 −2.5 159.9 + 0.9 172.3 + 3.5 154.2 −1.7 146.6 −0.8 90.8 + 0.3 7 65.0 −16.0
         Aug. 7 124.7 −0.9 165.6 + 3.3 173.7 + 5.1 166.5 + 4.6 152.5 −1.0 91.9 + 1.2 7 65.3 −16.7
         Sep. 7 132.7 + 0.6 177.5 + 4.7 180.2 + 2.6 187.9 + 8.1 163.2 + 4.7 93.5 −0.3 7 68.8 −14.5
         Oct.  x 131.8 −0.1 172.8 + 2.1 177.4 + 1.7 178.1 + 7.9 160.4 −3.0 105.4 + 5.0 69.8 −11.1
         Nov.  x 134.8 + 1.5 180.1 + 4.3 179.6 + 5.5 195.5 + 4.8 165.8 + 2.2 105.9 −0.7 66.4 −9.3
         Dec.  x 115.5 + 1.3 159.0 + 6.4 149.4 + 10.1 183.0 + 5.4 149.8 + 2.3 112.0 −2.0 40.9 −21.2
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. —oBy means of ducing materials, and especially manufacture of refined petroleum pro-
the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. —1Manufacturing sector, ducts. —6Influenced by the exceptional working-day situation. —7Pro-
unless assigned to the main grouping energy, plus mining and quarrying. — visional up to adjustment to the figures of the annual overall survey in the
2Including mining and quarrying except energy-producing materials. —3In- construction sector. —xProvisional; adjusted in advance by the Federal Stat-
cluding manufacture of motor vehicles, trailers and semi-trailers. —4In- istical Office, by way of estimates, to the results of the Quarterly Production
cluding printing and service activities related to printing. —5Electricity, Survey for the fourth quarter (industry in Germany: + 1.6%). 
gas, steam and hot water supply, mining and quarrying of energy-pro-
61* IX. Economic conditions

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
 IX. Economic conditions
 
3. Orders received by industry *  
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Industry
 
Total Domestic orders Foreign orders Intermediate goods Capital goods  1 Consumer goods  2 
Change Change Change Change Change Change
from from from from from fromprevious previous previous previous previous previousyear year year year year year
Period 1995=100 in % 1995=100 in % 1995=100 in % 1995=100 in % 1995=100 in % 1995=100 in %
Germany  
  
1999 113.3 + 2.1 102.7 − 0.3 132.3 + 5.5 106.3 + 0.9 123.9 + 3.3 101.0 + 0.9
2000 128.9 + 13.8 111.2 + 8.3 161.0 + 21.7 121.3 + 14.1 144.1 + 16.3 105.2 + 4.22001 126.8 − 1.6 108.6 − 2.3 159.7 − 0.8 116.4 − 4.0 143.3 − 0.6 106.8 + 1.5
2002  
p 126.9 + 0.1 105.4 − 2.9 165.6 + 3.7 117.1 + 0.6 143.7 + 0.3 104.2 − 2.4
 
2001          Dec. 120.9 − 5.5 99.9 − 4.2 158.9 − 7.0 102.6 − 8.1 147.6 − 4.4 92.6 − 2.3
2002          Jan. 123.0 − 4.3 103.9 − 5.0 157.4 − 3.5 113.0 − 7.5 138.4 − 2.3 104.7 − 2.4
         Feb. 123.0 − 5.9 102.6 − 7.7 159.7 − 3.7 114.6 − 4.4 135.3 − 7.5 109.5 − 4.1
         Mar. 137.5 − 2.7 112.3 − 8.3 183.0 + 4.4 124.8 − 2.9 155.5 − 2.8 119.3 − 1.3
         Apr. 125.6 + 0.7 105.0 − 2.9 162.9 + 5.4 118.3 + 1.7 140.3 + 0.1 102.6 + 0.5
         May 127.3 + 0.7 101.4 − 5.1 174.0 + 7.6 116.5 − 1.0 147.9 + 2.9 96.3 − 2.5
         June 130.4 − 1.6 107.0 − 2.1 172.7 − 0.9 121.5 − 0.7 148.6 − 2.0 101.1 − 2.2
         July 126.1 + 0.3 106.5 − 2.0 161.5 + 3.3 118.4 + 1.5 142.3 + 0.6 99.4 − 4.6
         Aug. 118.3 + 1.2 100.7 − 3.3 150.1 + 7.1 108.7 + 0.7 133.1 + 3.7 101.1 − 6.6
         Sep. 131.4 + 3.2 109.4 − 1.3 171.2 + 8.9 121.6 + 4.9 146.8 + 3.2 113.0 − 1.6
         Oct. 129.4 + 4.7 108.7 + 1.6 166.9 + 8.7 121.0 + 4.8 144.8 + 6.7 107.3 − 2.6
         Nov. 131.1 + 6.3 108.3 + 2.4 172.2 + 11.1 120.7 + 8.0 149.4 + 6.5 105.5 + 0.8         Dec.  
p 119.1 − 1.5 98.7 − 1.2 155.9 − 1.9 105.5 + 2.8 141.4 − 4.2 90.6 − 2.2
Western Germany  
  
1999 112.3 + 1.9 101.8 − 0.6 130.2 + 5.4 104.5 + 0.5 123.9 + 3.4 99.7 + 0.7
2000 127.5 + 13.5 109.7 + 7.8 158.0 + 21.4 118.7 + 13.6 144.0 + 16.2 103.1 + 3.42001 124.8 − 2.1 106.7 − 2.7 155.8 − 1.4 112.9 − 4.9 142.8 − 0.8 104.4 + 1.3
2002  
p 124.2 − 0.5 103.0 − 3.5 160.7 + 3.1 112.9 + 0.0 142.6 − 0.1 101.6 − 2.7
 
2001          Dec. 118.6 − 5.4 97.5 − 4.1 154.8 − 6.8 99.3 − 9.0 146.4 − 3.6 90.3 − 2.3
2002          Jan. 121.0 − 4.8 101.9 − 5.7 153.8 − 3.7 108.9 − 8.6 138.8 − 2.2 102.2 − 2.8
         Feb. 120.9 − 6.1 100.7 − 8.4 155.7 − 3.4 111.0 − 4.1 134.9 − 8.0 107.3 − 4.3
         Mar. 133.1 − 4.4 110.0 − 8.8 172.8 + 1.0 120.0 − 4.1 151.0 − 5.3 116.9 − 1.4
         Apr. 123.4 + 0.8 103.1 − 2.6 158.4 + 5.0 114.3 + 1.2 140.0 + 0.7 99.9 + 0.4
         May 125.4 + 1.0 99.2 − 5.3 170.3 + 8.2 112.5 − 1.6 148.4 + 3.8 93.3 − 2.9
         June 127.9 − 2.0 104.4 − 3.0 168.2 − 1.0 117.6 − 1.0 147.7 − 2.6 98.2 − 2.7
         July 124.4 + 0.4 104.6 − 2.1 158.4 + 3.4 114.3 + 1.1 143.1 + 1.2 97.3 − 4.8
         Aug. 115.1 + 0.2 98.0 − 4.2 144.4 + 5.7 104.1
+ 0.0 131.0 + 2.3 98.4 − 7.3
         Sep. 129.0 + 3.4 107.0 − 1.3 166.8 + 8.9 117.3 + 4.8 146.3 + 3.6 110.4 − 1.8
         Oct. 126.8 + 4.4 106.0 + 1.0 162.4 + 8.2 116.7 + 4.5 143.8 + 6.1 104.5 − 2.9
         Nov. 128.0 + 5.5 105.8 + 2.0 166.1 + 9.6 116.7 + 7.7 147.2 + 5.1 102.5 + 0.5         Dec.  
p 115.8 − 2.4 95.5 − 2.1 150.6 − 2.7 101.7 + 2.4 138.5 − 5.4 88.0 − 2.5
Eastern Germany  
  
1999 129.7 + 4.6 113.9 + 3.9 209.7 + 6.8 134.7 + 6.4 124.6 + 2.7 131.8 + 6.0
2000 153.4 + 18.3 129.8 + 14.0 272.8 + 30.1 162.6 + 20.7 145.3 + 16.6 151.5 + 14.9
2001 161.2 + 5.1 133.0 + 2.5 303.9 + 11.4 172.9 + 6.3 150.3 + 3.4 160.9 + 6.22002  
p 170.7 + 5.9 135.1 + 1.6 350.6 + 15.4 182.6 + 5.6 161.0 + 7.1 164.6 + 2.3
 
2001          Dec. 160.3 − 6.2 130.7 − 4.3 309.8 −10.1 156.0 + 3.6 168.0 −13.8 144.5 − 4.0
2002          Jan. 155.5 + 1.5 128.8 + 1.9 290.3 + 0.6 179.0 + 6.5 131.8 − 4.5 162.1 + 2.3
         Feb. 156.4 − 3.6 126.2 − 1.2 308.9 − 8.3 170.7 − 7.6 142.1 + 0.8 159.6 − 1.6
         Mar. 210.6 + 19.5 140.8 − 3.4 563.7 + 70.3 201.3 + 10.1 227.7 + 33.2 175.8 + 1.7
         Apr. 162.4 − 0.9 129.3 − 6.0 329.9 + 10.9 181.2 + 7.3 144.1 − 9.8 165.3 + 2.2
         May 159.8 − 2.4 129.5 − 2.3 312.8 − 2.7 180.2 + 5.3 139.3 −11.7 164.9 + 3.5
         June 172.8 + 4.9 140.0 + 7.4 338.6 − 0.1 183.9 + 2.5 163.5 + 7.4 168.2 + 5.0
         July 154.3 − 1.5 130.3 − 2.1 275.4
+ 0.0 183.4 + 5.4 128.6 − 9.2 147.5 − 2.3
         Aug. 172.8 + 14.9 135.1 + 7.0 363.3 + 33.6 182.1 + 7.7 166.7 + 26.7 161.5 + 3.9         Sep. 172.1 + 2.0 139.9 − 0.5 334.7 + 7.4 189.4 + 5.9 155.6 − 2.6 172.8 + 2.6
         Oct. 174.2 + 10.5 142.2 + 6.9 336.2 + 19.1 189.5 + 8.2 160.4 + 16.0 172.6 + 1.5         Nov. 182.8 + 16.8 139.8 + 6.1 399.9 + 42.1 183.7 + 9.9 184.1 + 27.7 173.6 + 4.5         Dec.  
p 174.6 + 8.9 139.2 + 6.5 353.8 + 14.2 166.2 + 6.5 188.1 + 12.0 151.3 + 4.7
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. —*Economic means of the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. —1Including manu-
activities of the manufacturing sector, in particular, excluding manufacture facture of motor vehicles, trailers and semitrailers. —2Including printing
of food products, beverages, tobacco and refined petroleum products; and service activities related to printing. results for kinds of activity units; figures excluding value-added tax. —oBy
62* IX. Economic conditions

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
 IX. Economic conditions
 
4. Orders received by construction *   
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Germany Western Germany Eastern Germany
Housing Public Housing Public Housing Public Industrial Industrial Industrial
con- construc- construc- con- construc- construc- con- construc- construc-
Total struction tion  1 tion Total struction tion  1 tion Total struction tion  1 tion
 Change Change Change
 from from from
 previous previous previous
 year year year
Period 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 in % 1995 = 100 in % 1995 = 100 in %
1998 83.9 −0.6 82.4 79.9 90.1 86.6 + 0.6 83.4 86.7 88.8 77.7 −3.5 80.4 64.7 93.8
1999 82.2 −2.0 78.2 80.2 87.6 87.3 + 0.8 84.0 88.7 88.0 69.9 −10.0 66.2 61.1 86.2
2000 75.1 −8.6 65.4 75.6 82.1 81.2 −7.0 73.3 84.9 82.7 60.5 −13.4 49.2 54.4 80.3
2001 71.0 −5.5 54.2 73.3 81.3 79.2 −2.5 64.2 84.9 83.3 51.6 −14.7 33.6 47.1 75.6
   
2001          Nov. 61.2 −3.2 39.9 69.4 67.7 66.7 −2.6 47.1 79.7 65.6 48.1 −4.9 25.3 46.1 73.5
         Dec. 59.7 −14.0 39.4 67.0 66.7 69.1 −10.5 48.5 80.6 70.6 37.5 −26.2 20.9 36.1 55.7
2002          Jan. 47.1 −8.2 38.0 51.9 48.3 53.6 −8.2 47.3 59.7 51.0 31.7 −7.6 19.1 34.0 40.6
         Feb. 55.5 −3.0 40.9 62.7 58.1 60.1 −7.5 49.7 66.8 59.7 44.8 + 16.1 23.0 53.6 53.7
         Mar. 84.0 + 5.5 55.6 96.4 90.9 98.5 + 10.5 69.5 118.8 95.8 49.7 −13.3 27.2 45.8 77.3
         Apr. 71.4 −4.9 52.8 72.3 84.9 80.1 −6.8 64.8 82.1 88.7 50.9 + 2.4 28.3 50.1 74.4
         May 69.3 −14.0 51.3 67.3 85.8 75.9 −15.2 62.4 77.0 84.3 53.6 −10.1 28.6 45.3 90.1
         June 79.9 −11.4 55.2 77.6 101.9 88.2 −10.3 66.6 88.9 102.8 60.1 −15.2 31.9 52.0 99.3
         July 70.4 −5.5 45.3 72.4 87.7 78.4 −4.2 55.1 83.8 88.7 51.7 −9.6 25.2 46.8 84.8
         Aug. 66.4 −11.2 46.4 64.8 83.9 70.8 −13.3 54.5 72.2 80.8 55.9 −4.1 29.9 48.1 92.5
         Sep. 76.5 −2.4 50.6 76.3 97.1 84.0 −4.1 61.0 85.9 98.3 58.7 + 3.7 29.2 54.5 93.7
         Oct. 63.5 −8.2 44.1 64.2 77.9 69.9 −9.2 55.2 72.7 77.0 48.5 −4.0 21.3 44.8 80.4
         Nov. 56.2 −8.2 44.8 56.7 64.5 60.0 −10.0 55.2 61.9 61.3 47.1 −2.1 23.4 44.9 73.5
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. —*Values exclusive gineering". —oBundesbank calculation. —1Including the railways and
of value-added tax. The figures refer to the economic classifications "Site pre- post office. 
paration" and "Building of complete constructions or parts thereof; civil en-
 
 
5. Retail trade turnover *)
    Germany
  
Retail trade  1 Memo item
of which:  by enterprises ’ main product range of which
Pharmaceutical
and medical Retail trade plus retailgoods, cosmetic Clothing, Furniture and sales of motor vehicles
Food, beverages, and toilet footwear and lighting and motorcycles plus Retail sales of
Total tobacco  
2 articles  2 leather goods  2 equipment  2 sales of automotive fuel motor vehicles  3 
Change from Change Change Change Change Change from Change
from from from from from previous year in % previous year in %
previous previous previous previous previous
not year year year year not year price- price-
Period in % in % in % in % in % 2000 = 100 adjusted adjusted  4 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 adjusted adjusted  4 2000 = 100
1999 97.7 + 0.8 + 0.5 98.0 + 0.9 94.7 + 7.4 100.2 −0.1 102.3 −2.0 98.7 + 1.2 + 0.8 102.9 + 3.7
2000 100.0 + 2.4 + 1.2 100.0 + 2.0 100.0 + 5.6 100.0 −0.2 100.0 −2.2 100.0 + 1.3 + 0.1 100.0 −2.8
2001 101.8 + 1.8 + 0.2 104.7 + 4.7 107.3 + 7.3 99.5 −0.5 98.6 −1.4 101.9 + 1.9 + 0.3 102.3 + 2.3
2002  e 99.8 −2.0 −2.3 105.5 + 0.8 110.7 + 3.2 94.9 −4.6 89.9 −8.8 100.5 −1.4 −2.0 103.4 + 1.1
 
2001          July 98.2 + 3.0 + 0.5 102.5 + 7.0 108.2 + 10.2 93.3 −0.4 88.9 −4.7 100.1 + 3.6 + 1.3 106.3 + 4.9
         Aug. 98.7 + 2.3 + 0.3 104.9 + 7.8 106.4 + 8.1 89.1 −4.1 87.9 −0.2 98.5 + 2.3 + 0.3 96.9 + 2.0
         Sep. 97.3 −1.0 −2.3 97.5 + 1.4 100.4 + 3.1 110.2 + 5.9 91.6 −4.7 96.6 −0.6 −1.9 94.1 + 1.7
         Oct. 104.3 + 2.7 + 1.3 105.9 + 7.6 110.2 + 8.5 104.7 −5.3 105.7 + 0.6 104.5 + 4.2 + 2.9 106.3 + 11.1
         Nov. 110.5 + 2.4 + 1.3 111.4 + 6.8 112.8 + 7.5 109.8 + 1.5 112.8 −2.6 109.6 + 3.4 + 2.3 108.0 + 8.3
         Dec. 122.9 −0.4 −1.5 122.9 + 3.7 123.6 + 7.4 124.4 −3.4 116.4 −4.9 116.4 −0.4 −1.6 93.7 −0.2
2002          Jan. 92.4 −2.6 −4.2 95.7 + 2.0 108.2 + 1.9 83.4 −5.2 86.9 −7.6 91.1 −2.0 −3.7 87.1 + 0.7
         Feb. 86.7 −1.4 −2.7 93.1 + 2.9 100.4 + 4.1 72.7 −5.0 85.7 −7.9 87.6 −0.6 −2.1 91.8 + 3.0
         Mar. 102.2 −2.3 −3.6 110.5 + 2.6 108.9 + 2.2 96.9 −2.4 93.4 −14.5 104.0 −3.2 −4.6 110.7 −6.3
         Apr. 101.1 + 0.1 −0.9 105.5 + 0.4 114.3 + 11.1 97.9 −4.8 92.9 −4.8 104.6 + 2.0 + 0.9 117.6 + 9.4
         May 99.9 −4.4 −4.7 108.3 −0.7 109.4 −0.1 97.0 −10.0 83.8 −12.9 101.8 −4.6 −5.2 108.3 −5.1
         June 93.2 −3.9 −3.7 101.2 −3.2 106.0 + 1.7 85.7 −2.7 78.4 −13.0 96.6 −2.5 −2.7 108.7 + 2.2
         July 99.3 + 1.1 + 1.6 105.0 + 2.4 114.8 + 6.1 93.2 −0.1 87.1 −2.0 102.3 + 2.2 + 2.1 113.0 + 6.3
         Aug. 96.5 −2.2 −2.0 105.9 + 1.0 109.5 + 2.9 86.0 −3.5 80.4 −8.5 96.4 −2.1 −2.1 95.4 −1.5
         Sep. 96.3 −1.0 −0.7 99.0 + 1.5 107.4 + 7.0 99.6 −9.6 85.3 −6.9 96.8 + 0.2 + 0.2 98.6 + 4.8
         Oct. 105.0 + 0.7 + 0.9 107.4 + 1.4 114.5 + 3.9 109.3 + 4.4 98.7 −6.6 105.8 + 1.2 + 1.0 109.7 + 3.2
         Nov. 106.0 −4.1 −3.8 111.0 −0.4 113.6 + 0.7 98.9 −9.9 100.1 −11.3 105.1 −4.1 −4.1 102.9 −4.7
         Dec.  e 119.1 −3.1 −3.2 123.5 + 0.5 121.7 −1.5 118.7 −4.6 105.8 −9.1 114.0 −2.1 −2.4 96.7 + 3.2
Source: Federal Statistical Office. —*Excluding value-added tax; figures sales of motor vehicles and motorcycles and excluding the sale of automo-
from 2001 provisional, partly revised and, judging by past experience, sub- tive fuel. —2Retail sales in stores. —3Including motor vehicle parts and
ject to considerable uncertainty in the most recent months. —1Excluding accessories. — 4 At 1995 prices. 
63* IX. Economic conditions

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
 IX. Economic conditions
 
6. Labour market * 
 
 
 
Persons in
Employed  1,2 Employees  1 employment  3 Persons Unemployed  2 
employed
Mining under Persons
and employ- under-manu- ment pro- goingfactur- Short- motion Change vocational
Change from Change ing Con- time schemes further from Unem-previous year from sector
2  5 previous ploy- training  2 workers  2 struction  4 Vacancies,
previous year, ment 2 
Thou- Thou- Thou- year Thou- thou- thou- rate 2  6 
Period sands in % sands sands in % Thousands sands sands in % sands
Germany  
  
2000 38,753 + 1.8 + 675 34,748 + 1.8 6,373 1,053 86 316 352 3,889 −211 9.7 514
2001 38,919 + 0.4 + 166 34,835 + 0.3 6,395 958 123 243 345 3,852 − 37 9.4 506
2002 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 207 192 332 4,060 + 209 9.8 451
2001          Dec. 39,139 −0.2 − 67 6,336 921 176 215 319 3,964 + 155 9.6 389
2002          Jan. 38,354 −0.2 − 69 6,272 864 212 198 317 4,290 + 197 10.4 422
         Feb. 38,343 −0.2 − 81 34,302 −0.3 6,247 840 246 192 326 4,296 + 184 10.4 487
         Mar. 38,495 −0.3 −104 6,237 8 879 258 187 335 4,156 + 156 10.0 527
         Apr. 38,697 −0.3 −121 6,219 897 245 185 345 4,024 + 156 9.7 537
         May 38,752 −0.5 −190 34,637 −0.5 6,207 897 201 184 348 3,946 + 226 7 9.5 517
         June 38,719 −0.6 −250 6,198 896 202 185 336 3,954 + 260 9.5 497
         July 38,675 −0.6 −240 6,214 894 173 187 315 4,047 + 248 9.7 471
         Aug. 38,716 −0.7 −286 34,644 −0.9 6,220 895 145 191 320 4,018 + 229 9.6 458
         Sep. 38,898 −0.8 −315 6,215 893 216 199 337 3,942 + 199 9.5 420
         Oct. 38,963 −0.8 −325 6,187 884 214 202 342 3,930 + 204 9.4 378
         Nov. o 38,922 o −0.9 o −373 ... ... 6,165 873 205 197 339 4,026 + 237 9.7 344
         Dec. ... ... ... ... ... 165 180 318 4,225 + 262 10.1 324
2003          Jan. ... ... ... ... ... 195 155 299 4,623 + 333 11.1 350
Western Germany 9  
  
2000 . . . . . 5,761 749 59 59 202 2,380 −224 7.6 448
2001 . . . . . 5,769 696 94 53 197 2,320 − 60 7.2 436
2002 . . . . . ... ... 162 42 192 2,498 + 178 7.7 377
2001          Dec. . . . . . 5,708 674 144 45 179 2,435 + 130 7.5 330
2002          Jan. . . . . . 5,649 640 177 44 179 2,636 + 168 8.1 362
         Feb. . . . . . 5,626 624 203 43 186 2,634 + 167 8.1 414         Mar. . . . . . 5,616
8 652 213 42 193 2,527 + 143 7.8 443
         Apr. . . . . . 5,597 666 202 42 201 2,448 + 140 7.5 451         May . . . . . 5,585 665 162 43 203 2,409 + 187
7 7.3 433
         June . . . . . 5,575 663 164 43 197 2,408 + 191 7.3 415
         July . . . . . 5,590 662 142 43 182 2,482 + 203 7.6 394
         Aug. . . . . . 5,592 662 103 42 183 2,477 + 197 7.5 375         Sep. . . . . . 5,585 660 140 42 196 2,440 + 184 7.4 345
         Oct. . . . . . 5,559 654 154 41 200 2,450 + 182 7.5 312
         Nov. . . . . . 5,540 647 156 41 198 2,520 + 199 7.7 285         Dec. . . . . . ... ... 131 38 186 2,647 + 212 8.1 270
2003          Jan. . . . . . ... ... 157 35 175 2,898 + 262 8.8 294
Eastern Germany 10  
  
2000 . . . . . 612 305 27 257 150 1,508 + 13 17.2 66
2001 . . . . . 626 262 29 190 148 1,532 + 23 17.3 702002 . . . . . ... ... 45 150 140 1,563 + 31 17.7 74
2001          Dec. . . . . . 628 247 31 170 140 1,529 + 24 17.3 59
2002          Jan. . . . . . 623 224 35 155 138 1,654 + 28 18.7 60
         Feb. . . . . . 622 215 43 149 140 1,662 + 17 18.8 72         Mar. . . . . . 621
8 227 45 145 142 1,629 + 13 18.4 84
         Apr. . . . . . 622 231 43 143 144 1,576 + 16 17.8 86         May . . . . . 622 232 39 142 145 1,538 + 39
7 17.4 84
         June . . . . . 623 232 38 142 140 1,546 + 69 17.5 82
         July . . . . . 624 232 31 145 133 1,565 + 45 17.7 78
         Aug. . . . . . 628 232 41 148 136 1,541 + 32 17.4 83         Sep. . . . . . 630 233 77 157 141 1,502 + 15 17.0 75
         Oct. . . . . . 628 231 60 160 142 1,480 + 22 16.8 65
         Nov. . . . . . 626 227 49 157 141 1,506 + 38 17.0 59         Dec. . . . . . ... ... 34 142 132 1,578 + 49 17.9 54
2003          Jan. . . . . . ... ... 39 120 125 1,725 + 71 19.5 55
Source: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Labour Office. —*Monthly fig- labour force. —7From May 2002 calculated on the basis of new labour
ures: levels at end of month; employed persons and employees: averages; force figures. —8The figures from March 2002 onwards are positively in-
short-time workers: levels at mid-month; annual and quarterly figures: aver- fluenced by the fact that construction firms which are required to repo rt
ages. —1Work-place concept. —2Annual figures, calculated by the Bundes- and which have been identified in the course of drawing up the corporate
bank; deviations from the official figures are due to rounding. —3In- register are included for the first time. —9Excluding West Berlin; for the
cluding active proprietors. —4The figures refer to the economic classifica- mining, manufacturing and construction sectors, including persons
tions ”Site preparation ”and ”Building of complete constructions or parts employed in West Berlin. —10Including West Berlin; for the mining,
thereof; civil engineering ”.—5Employees involved in job creation schemes manufacturing and construction sectors, excluding persons employed in
and structural adjustment measures (SAM). —6Relative to the total civilian West Berlin. — o First preliminary estimate. 
64* IX. Economic conditions

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
 IX. Economic conditions
 
7. Prices
 Germany
 
 
Consumer price index for all households Indices of
foreign trade prices
By region By product group Index of
producer
Other prices of Index ofdurable Overall industrial Index of worldand non- Services con- products producer marketdurable excluding struction prices prices sold on the
Western Eastern consumer house House price domestic of farm of raw
Total Germany Germany Food goods rents  
1 rents level  1 market  2 Exports Imports products  2 materials  3 
Period 1995 = 100
Index level  
  
1999 104.9 104.8 105.7 101.9 102.8 106.4 109.2 98.5 98.5 89.9 100.9 100.2 113.4
2000 106.9 106.9 107.5 101.5 106.1 108.0 110.6 99.2 101.8 95.4 104.4 111.4 172.2
2001 109.6 109.4 110.6 106.8 108.3 111.2 112.0 99.4 104.9 100.8 105.4 112.1 157.52002 111.0 110.9 111.8 108.0 109.1 113.6 113.5 99.5 104.4
p 94.6 105.3 109.3 151.0
 
2001          Feb. 109.0 108.9 109.8 103.9 108.1 111.0 111.5 99.5 104.7 98.5 105.4 113.6 167.4         Mar. 109.1 109.0 110.0 105.1 108.2 110.7 111.6 104.9 102.7 105.6 113.3 161.3
         Apr. 109.5 109.3 110.4 107.0 108.5 110.4 111.7 105.4 103.0 105.7 113.9 166.4
         May 110.0 109.8 111.1 109.0 109.2 110.3 111.8 99.5 105.6 103.7 106.0 115.0 175.4         June 110.2 110.0 111.2 109.3 109.0 111.2 111.9 105.7 100.3 106.0 114.7 176.0
         July 110.2 110.0 111.3 108.7 108.4 112.7 112.0 105.2 100.5 105.8 113.0 166.0
         Aug. 110.0 109.8 111.0 107.3 108.4 112.5 112.1 99.4 105.1 101.9 105.4 111.7 160.7         Sep. 110.0 109.8 111.0 107.1 108.9 111.7 112.2 105.2 102.6 105.3 111.1 157.2
         Oct. 109.7 109.5 110.7 107.2 108.2 111.2 112.3 104.3 100.9 105.0 109.3 138.9
         Nov. 109.5 109.3 110.5 106.6 107.9 111.1 112.4 99.3 104.0 100.5 104.9 108.7 131.9         Dec. 109.6 109.4 110.7 107.2 107.8 111.4 112.5 103.7 99.8 104.8 108.5 130.2
2002          Jan. 110.6 110.4 111.7 110.4 108.7 112.2 112.9 104.3 98.2 104.9 109.1 135.1
         Feb. 110.9 110.7 111.9 109.8 108.9 113.0 113.0 99.4 104.4 99.4 104.9 109.6 141.1         Mar. 111.1 110.9 112.0 109.6 109.4 113.0 113.2 104.7 99.7 105.2 110.5 157.5
         Apr. 111.2 111.0 112.1 109.5 109.8 112.6 113.3 104.6 96.0 105.4 110.7 162.9
         May 111.2 111.0 112.0 109.4 109.4 113.2 113.4 99.5 104.6 94.5 105.4 110.1 157.5         June 111.1 110.9 111.7 108.4 109.1 113.9 113.5 104.5 93.7 105.4 108.7 147.9
         July 111.3 111.2 111.9 107.7 108.9 115.2 113.6 104.2 93.5 105.3 108.2 147.0
         Aug. 111.2 111.1 111.7 106.8 108.9 115.0 113.7 99.5 104.1 93.4 105.4 108.8 152.0         Sep. 111.1 111.0 111.8 106.6 109.3 114.2 113.7 104.3 94.6 105.5 109.5 158.8
         Oct. 111.1 111.0 111.6 106.2 109.4 114.0 113.8 104.6 94.3 105.5 109.5 156.5
         Nov. 110.7 110.5 111.3 105.7 108.9 113.4 113.9 99.4 104.4 94.8 105.4 108.0 144.2         Dec. 110.8 110.7 111.3 106.0 109.0 113.6 114.0 104.6
p 94.9 105.4 109.0 151.9
2003          Jan. e 111.8 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 157.0
Change from previous year in %  
  
1999 + 0.6 + 0.7 + 0.4 − 1.1 + 0.9 + 0.3 + 1.1 − 0.3 − 1.0 − 6.0 − 0.5 − 0.5 + 16.9
2000 + 1.9 + 2.0 + 1.7 − 0.4 + 3.2 + 1.5 + 1.3 + 0.7 + 3.4 + 6.1 + 3.5 + 11.2 + 51.9
2001 + 2.5 + 2.3 + 2.9 + 5.2 + 2.1 + 3.0 + 1.3 + 0.2 + 3.0 + 5.7 + 1.0 + 0.6 − 8.5
2002 + 1.3 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 1.1 + 0.7 + 2.2 + 1.3 + 0.1 − 0.5 p − 6.2 − 0.1 − 2.5 − 4.1
 
2001          Feb. + 2.6 + 2.6 + 2.7 + 1.9 + 3.2 + 3.2 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 4.7 + 5.7 + 2.5 + 5.4 + 6.5         Mar. + 2.5 + 2.5 + 2.8 + 3.8 + 2.8 + 3.1 + 1.2 + 4.9 + 8.7 + 2.4 + 4.2 − 0.1
         Apr. + 2.9 + 2.8 + 3.2 + 5.0 + 3.4 + 2.5 + 1.2 + 5.0 + 9.1 + 2.0 + 5.1 + 11.0         May + 3.5 + 3.4 + 3.8 + 6.7 + 3.9 + 3.1 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 4.6 + 9.0 + 1.6 + 4.0 + 1.9         June + 3.1 + 3.0 + 3.4 + 6.9 + 2.9 + 3.1 + 1.2 + 4.3 + 3.9 + 1.6 + 3.6 + 3.4
         July + 2.6 + 2.5 + 3.2 + 6.8 + 2.2 + 3.0 + 1.2 + 3.1 + 3.4 + 1.1 + 1.7 − 1.0
         Aug. + 2.6 + 2.4 + 3.0 + 6.2 + 2.2 + 3.0 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 2.7 + 4.5 + 0.4 − 0.9 −10.3
         Sep. + 2.1 + 2.0 + 2.8 + 6.4 + 1.2 + 3.1 + 1.2 + 1.9 + 5.0 − 0.3 − 3.6 −20.4
         Oct. + 2.0 + 2.0 + 2.7 + 6.6 + 0.7 + 3.2 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 1.8 − 0.8 − 5.6 −29.9
         Nov. + 1.7 + 1.5 + 2.0 + 5.4 + 0.1 + 2.8 + 1.3 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.9 − 6.6 −34.4
         Dec. + 1.7 + 1.6 + 2.2 + 5.3 + 0.3 + 2.8 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 1.0 − 0.7 − 4.7 −21.2
2002          Jan. + 2.1 + 2.0 + 2.4 + 6.7 + 1.3 + 2.2 + 1.3 − 0.1 + 2.1 − 0.4 − 3.4 −15.0
         Feb. + 1.7 + 1.7 + 1.9 + 5.7 + 0.7 + 1.8 + 1.3 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.9 − 0.5 − 3.5 −15.7
         Mar. + 1.8 + 1.7 + 1.8 + 4.3 + 1.1 + 2.1 + 1.4 − 0.2 − 2.9 − 0.4 − 2.5 − 2.4
         Apr. + 1.6 + 1.6 + 1.5 + 2.3 + 1.2 + 2.0 + 1.4 − 0.8 − 6.8 − 0.3 − 2.8 − 2.1
         May + 1.1 + 1.1 + 0.8 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 2.6 + 1.4
+ 0.0 − 0.9 − 8.9 − 0.6 − 4.3 −10.2
         June + 0.8 + 0.8 + 0.4 − 0.8 + 0.1 + 2.4 + 1.4 − 1.1 − 6.6 − 0.6 − 5.2 −16.0
         July + 1.0 + 1.1 + 0.5 − 0.9 + 0.5 + 2.2 + 1.4 − 1.0 − 7.0 − 0.5 − 4.2 −11.4
         Aug. + 1.1 + 1.2 + 0.6 − 0.5 + 0.5 + 2.2 + 1.4 + 0.1 − 1.0 − 8.3
+ 0.0 − 2.6 − 5.4
         Sep. + 1.0 + 1.1 + 0.7 − 0.5 + 0.4 + 2.2 + 1.3 − 0.9 − 7.8 + 0.2 − 1.4 + 1.0
         Oct. + 1.3 + 1.4 + 0.8 − 0.9 + 1.1 + 2.5 + 1.3 + 0.3 − 6.5 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 12.7
         Nov. + 1.1 + 1.1 + 0.7 − 0.8 + 0.9 + 2.1 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 5.7 + 0.5 − 0.6 + 9.3
         Dec. + 1.1 + 1.2 + 0.5 − 1.1 + 1.1 + 2.0 + 1.3 + 0.9 p − 4.9 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 16.7
2003          Jan. e + 1.1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... + 16.2
Source: Federal Statistical Office; for index of world market prices: HWWA In- by the Federal Statistical Office. —2Excluding value-added tax. —3HWWA
stitute. —1Calculated by the Bundesbank on the basis of figures provided index of raw material prices, on a euro basis. 
65* IX. Economic conditions

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
IX. Economic conditions
  
8. Households ’ income *
Germany
  
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999  5  billion
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries  1 salaries  2 Saving  6 ratio  7 benefits received  3 "Mass income"  4 Disposable income  5 
Change Change Change Change Change Change
from from from from from fromprevious previous previous previous previous previous
Period DM / 
 5 
year in % DM / 
 5 
year in % DM / 
 5 
year in % DM / 
 5 
year in % DM / 
 5 
year in % DM / 
 5 
year in % %
1991 1,355.4 . 941.4 . 426.2 . 1,367.6 . 1,917.5 . 250.1 . 13.0
1992 1,467.3 8.3 1,003.0 6.5 473.9 11.2 1,476.9 8.0 2,054.3 7.1 266.1 6.4 13.01993 1,505.9 2.6 1,032.7 3.0 511.2 7.9 1,543.9 4.5 2,120.6 3.2 261.3 −1.8 12.3
1994 1,528.1 1.5 1,029.3 −0.3 529.4 3.6 1,558.6 1.0 2,181.9 2.9 254.0 −2.8 11.6
1995 1,577.1 3.2 1,037.9 0.8 553.7 4.6 1,591.7 2.1 2,256.4 3.4 252.1 −0.7 11.2
1996 1,594.0 1.1 1,032.7 −0.5 595.7 7.6 1,628.3 2.3 2,307.5 2.3 249.5 −1.0 10.8
1997 1,591.3 −0.2 1,015.9 −1.6 609.6 2.3 1,625.5 −0.2 2,356.5 2.1 244.7 −1.9 10.4
1998 1,624.3 2.1 1,038.9 2.3 621.5 1.9 1,660.3 2.1 2,422.8 2.8 249.6 2.0 10.31999 855.4 3.0 549.3 3.4 328.6 3.4 877.8 3.4 1,281.6 3.5 125.1 −2.0 9.8
2000 885.5 3.5 572.8 4.3 339.5 3.3 912.3 3.9 1,320.4 3.0 129.5 3.5 9.82001 904.6 2.2 593.1 3.5 347.1 2.3 940.2 3.1 1,370.2 3.8 138.1 6.7 10.1
2000          3rd qtr 221.8 3.6 147.5 4.1 84.1 2.8 231.6 3.6 325.2 3.3 26.6 2.7 8.2
         4th qtr 249.6 3.2 158.8 4.2 86.1 3.3 244.9 3.9 339.1 1.1 29.0 −2.8 8.6
2001          1st qtr 208.6 3.2 137.0 3.9 87.1 2.0 224.0 3.1 340.0 3.8 45.8 4.6 13.5         2nd qtr 217.2 2.5 140.2 4.1 86.0 2.4 226.1 3.5 342.3 4.2 32.6 8.6 9.5         3rd qtr 225.4 1.7 152.0 3.1 86.5 2.9 238.5 3.0 335.6 3.2 28.0 5.0 8.3         4th qtr 253.4 1.5 163.9 3.2 87.6 1.7 251.5 2.7 352.3 3.9 31.7 9.3 9.0
2002          1st qtr 211.1 1.2 138.4 1.0 91.1 4.6 229.4 2.4 343.9 1.1 47.5 3.6 13.8
         2nd qtr 219.5 1.0 141.2 0.8 90.1 4.7 231.3 2.3 343.1 0.2 32.9 1.0 9.6         3rd qtr 228.3 1.3 153.7 1.1 92.0 6.4 245.7 3.0 341.0 1.6 29.2 4.4 8.6
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in November 2002. — charges. —4Net wages and salaries plus monetary social benefits
*Households including non-profit institutions which serve households. — received. —5"Mass income" plus operating surplus, self-employed persons ’
1Residence concept. —2After deducting the wage tax payable on gross income, property income (net), other current transfers received, income of
wages and salaries and employees ’contributions to the social security non-profit organisations which serve households, less taxes (excluding wage
funds. —3Cash benefits from the social security funds, central, regional tax and consumption-related taxes) and other current transfers paid. Includ-
and local authorities and foreign countries, pension payments (net), social ing the increase in claims on company pension funds. —6Including the
security benefits from private insurance schemes, less social security increase in claims on company pension funds. —7Saving as a percentage of
contributions on social benefits, consumption-related taxes and public disposable income. 
  
  
9. Pay rates and actual earnings
Germany
    
Overall economy Producing sector (including construction)
Negotiated wage and salary level  1 Wages and salaries Negotiated wage and salary level  1 Wages and salaries
per employee per employee
on an hourly basis on a monthly basis on an hourly basis on a monthly basis (work-place concept)  2 (work-place concept)  3 
% from % from % from % from % from % from
previous previous previous previous previous previous
Period 1995=100 year 1995=100 year 1995=100 year 1995=100 year 1995=100 year 1995=100 year
1991 76.7 . 78.6 . 82.4 . 73.4 . 76.9 . 77.6 .
1992 85.8 12.0 87.3 11.0 91.0 10.4 82.9 12.9 85.9 11.7 88.4 13.91993 92.2 7.5 92.9 6.5 95.0 4.4 90.6 9.3 92.0 7.1 92.3 4.41994 95.4 3.4 95.6 2.9 96.9 2.0 94.3 4.1 94.8 3.0 96.1 4.1
1995 100.0 4.9 100.0 4.6 100.0 3.2 100.0 6.1 100.0 5.5 100.0 4.1
1996 102.6 2.6 102.4 2.4 101.4 1.4 103.8 3.8 102.9 2.9 102.9 2.91997 104.1 1.5 103.9 1.5 101.7 0.3 105.8 1.9 104.6 1.7 104.7 1.71998 106.2 2.0 105.8 1.8 102.7 1.0 107.7 1.8 106.4 1.7 106.4 1.61999 109.2 2.8 108.6 2.7 104.3 1.5 110.9 3.0 109.4 2.9 108.3 1.8
2000 111.4 2.0 110.8 2.0 106.0 1.7 113.2 2.0 111.6 2.0 111.2 2.7
2001 113.6 2.0 113.0 2.0 108.0 1.9 115.2 1.8 113.6 1.8 113.7 2.22002 116.5 2.6 115.9 2.6 . . 118.7 3.1 117.1 3.1 . .
2001          1st qtr 103.8 2.1 103.2 2.1 100.8 2.3 104.1 1.6 102.6 1.6 107.2 3.1
         2nd qtr 104.8 1.8 104.3 1.8 103.9 2.0 105.4 1.5 104.0 1.5 115.6 2.4         3rd qtr 117.3 2.0 116.6 1.9 107.5 1.6 123.5 2.0 121.9 2.0 109.2 2.0         4th qtr 128.6 2.2 127.9 2.1 120.0 1.8 127.7 2.0 125.9 2.0 122.6 1.7
2002          1st qtr 106.3 2.4 105.7 2.4 102.3 1.5 106.3 2.1 104.9 2.2 108.2 0.9
         2nd qtr 107.7 2.8 107.2 2.8 105.5 1.6 109.1 3.5 107.7 3.5 117.8 1.9         3rd qtr 120.2 2.5 119.6 2.5 109.8 2.2 127.3 3.1 125.7 3.1 112.9 3.4         4th qtr 131.9 2.6 131.2 2.6 . . 132.1 3.5 130.4 3.5 . .
2002          June 108.0 2.9 107.5 2.9 . . 109.5 3.6 108.1 3.7 122.0 2.9
         July 144.1 2.2 143.4 2.2 . . 163.1 2.7 161.0 2.7 116.3 4.3
         Aug. 108.2 2.9 107.6 2.9 . . 109.4 3.3 107.9 3.4 111.8 2.0         Sep. 108.4 2.5 107.8 2.5 . . 109.5 3.4 108.1 3.5 110.4 3.6
         Oct. 108.5 2.6 107.9 2.6 . . 109.8 3.6 108.3 3.6 114.4 2.3
         Nov. 178.6 2.5 177.6 2.5 . . 176.7 3.4 174.4 3.4 144.6 1.3         Dec. 108.7 2.8 108.1 2.8 . . 109.8 3.6 108.4 3.6 . .
1Current data are normally revised upwards on account of additional Calculated by the Bundesbank on the basis of data from the Federal
reports. —2Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in Novem- Statistical Office, using the old and new classifications of the economic
ber 2002. —3Producing sector, excluding electricity, gas, steam and hot sectors. 
water supply, and excluding installation and building completion work.
66*IX. Economic conditions

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the European monetary union *
 
 
 5  million
2002
Position 1999 2000 2001 1 1st qtr 2nd qtr 3rd qtr Sep. Oct. Nov.
Current account −19,025 −60,364 −13,778 + 11,749 + 2,865 + 25,242 + 8,656 + 3,718 + 10,281 A.
1. Foreign trade
Exports (f.o.b.) incl. supplementary items 818,251 989,822 1,032,971 254,309 266,766 262,775 88,072 97,635 90,597
Imports (f.o.b.) incl. supplementary items 742,552 958,233 957,141 227,976 236,030 222,961 76,502 85,937 77,037
Balance + 75,702 + 31,592 + 75,830 + 26,330 + 30,736 + 39,815 + 11,570 + 11,698 + 13,560
2. Services
Receipts 247,385 287,014 321,572 71,586 83,890 89,002 29,355 28,708 24,984Expenditure 258,096 298,546 320,648 76,068 77,173 81,688 25,362 27,316 24,251
Balance −10,711 −11,535 + 921 −4,483 + 6,718 + 7,315 + 3,993 + 1,392 + 733
3. Factor income (balance) −37,296 −27,023 −39,746 −7,387 −16,033 −10,829 −1,998 −3,071 − 121
4. Current transfers
Transfer payments from non-residents 64,821 67,634 75,686 31,047 15,349 18,186 5,809 5,117 6,777Transfer payments to non-residents 111,544 121,035 126,469 33,760 33,905 29,245 10,719 11,419 10,668
Balance −46,720 −53,398 −50,783 −2,712 −18,556 −11,059 −4,910 −6,302 −3,891
Balance of capital transfers + 12,797 + 9,836 + 8,924 + 3,105 + 3,453 + 2,300 + 1,147 + 1,469 + 412B.
C. + 11,651 + 69,955 −40,508 −26,472 −29,040 −55,667 −21,334 −21,469 −28,585 Financial account (net capital exports: −)
1. Direct investment −120,118 −12,289 −101,495 −14,997 −7,928 −6,650 −3,197 −5,019 + 3,919
Investment outside the euro area −320,505 −436,259 −255,835 −56,017 −45,827 −27,681 −14,734 −11,390 −10,450
Foreign investment in the euro area + 200,384 + 423,970 + 154,343 + 41,020 + 37,899 + 21,031 + 11,537 + 6,371 + 14,369
2. Investment in securities −42,955 −115,170 + 38,137 −51,808 + 57,423 + 29,659 + 16,795 + 19,419 + 9,701
Investment outside the euro area −311,299 −411,316 −287,957 −72,983 −52,133 −18,453 + 1,052 −2,359 −11,670
Equities −156,464 −287,914 −108,569 −33,606 −13,613 + 12,932 + 14,056 + 639 + 1,589
Bonds and notes −154,953 −114,573 −158,723 −20,817 −23,396 −16,955 −5,478 −6,738 −6,944
Money market paper + 118 −8,829 −20,668 −18,561 −15,123 −14,432 −7,526 + 3,739 −6,314
Foreign investment in the euro area + 268,347 + 296,146 + 326,091 + 21,175 + 109,556 + 48,112 + 15,743 + 21,779 + 21,371
Equities + 92,300 + 50,749 + 231,137 + 30,372 + 30,888 + 4,090 + 1,512 −4,176 + 14,542
Bonds and notes + 117,005 + 232,191 + 90,440 + 994 + 52,511 + 23,005 + 12,460 + 12,082 + 12,081Money market paper + 59,042 + 13,206 + 4,514 −10,190 + 26,157 + 21,018 + 1,772 + 13,872 −5,252
3. Financial derivatives + 3,767 −2,163 −3,736 + 1,567 −3,079 −9,850 + 588 − 28−1,126
4. Credit transactions and other
investment (balance) + 160,829 + 182,012 + 8,765 + 41,829 −82,199 −64,229 −31,720 −37,977 −38,504
Eurosystem + 4,587 − 221 + 5,004 + 775 −4,075 + 133 + 1,910 − 407 + 2,093
Public authorities −9,707 −1,247 + 1,870 −9,042 + 4,792 −3,346 + 862 + 1,037 −1,100
Credit institutions + 177,500 + 159,021 + 6,815 + 44,219 −73,595 −26,579 −24,825 −31,862 −30,921
long-term + 6,611 + 3,052 −24,299 + 8,163 + 12,823 + 1,024 −7,215 + 3,068 −14,782
short-term + 170,896 + 155,970 + 31,123 + 36,055 −86,418 −27,600 −17,609 −34,930 −16,139
Enterprises and individuals −11,554 + 24,465 −4,924 + 5,877 −9,321 −34,438 −9,668 −6,745 −8,576
5. Change in the monetary reserves of
    the eurosystem (Increase: −) + 10,128 + 17,568 + 17,815 −3,063 + 6,741 −4,596 −3,800 + 2,136 −2,575
Balance of unclassifiable transactions −5,420 −19,427 + 45,356 + 11,617 + 22,722 + 28,126 + 11,532 + 16,282 + 17,892 D.
*Source: European Central Bank. —1From January 2001, including   
Greece.  
67*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(Balances)
 
 
Current account Memo item:
Change in Capital trans-
the Bundes- fers and pur-
Change in bank ’s net chases / sales
Supple- external of intangible the monetary
Balance of mentary non- reserves at Balance of assets aton current Foreign trade Factor Current produced Financial transaction transaction unclassifiable
Period account  
1 items  4  5 Services  6 income transfers assets  7 account  7 values  8 values  8 trade  1  2  3 transactions
DM million
1989 + 107,346 + 134,576 −4,107 −15,210 + 26,872 −34,784 −2,064 −110,286 −5,405 + 10,409 + 18,997
1990  o + 79,475 + 105,382 −3,833 −19,664 + 32,859 −35,269 −4,975 −89,497 −11,611 + 26,608 −10,976
1991 −30,416 + 21,899 −2,804 −24,842 + 33,144 −57,812 −4,565 + 12,614 + 9,605 + 12,762 − 319
1992 −22,924 + 33,656 −1,426 −37,894 + 33,962 −51,222 −1,963 + 69,792 −52,888 + 7,983 −68,745
1993 −16,155 + 60,304 −3,038 −45,080 + 27,373 −55,714 −1,915 + 21,442 + 22,795 −26,167 + 35,766
1994 −38,805 + 71,762 −1,104 −54,374 + 4,852 −59,940 −2,637 + 57,871 + 2,846 −19,276 −12,242
1995 −29,671 + 85,303 −4,722 −54,720 + 178 −55,710 −3,845 + 63,647 −10,355 −19,776 −17,754
1996 −11,959 + 98,538 −5,264 −55,330 + 1,391 −51,294 −3,283 + 23,613 + 1,882 −10,253 + 1,610
1997 − 4,727 + 116,467 −7,360 −58,715 − 2,376 −52,742 + 52 − 76 + 6,640 − 1,889 + 8,468
1998 −10,905 + 126,970 −5,934 −65,301 −13,337 −53,304 + 1,289 + 17,042 −7,128 − 298 −8,231
1999 −34,991 + 127,542 −13,643 −81,088 −17,535 −50,266 − 301 −51,015 + 24,517 + 61,790 −72,364
2000 −44,225 + 115,645 −13,390 −86,887 − 6,503 −53,089 + 13,351 + 67,177 + 11,429 −47,731 + 94,329
2001 + 7,728 + 186,771 −9,559 −92,650 −24,660 −52,174 −1,892 r −44,012 + 11,797 + 26,379 + 63,911 
 5 
 million
1999 −17,891 + 65,211 −6,976 −41,460 − 8,966 −25,701 − 154 −26,084 + 12,535 + 31,593 −36,999
2000 −22,612 + 59,128 −6,846 −44,425 − 3,325 −27,144 + 6,826 + 34,347 + 5,844 −24,405 + 48,230
2001 + 3,951 + 95,495 −4,887 −47,371 −12,609 −26,676 − 967 r −22,503 + 6,032 + 13,487 + 32,677
2002  p + 52,524 + 126,103 −5,748 −34,887 − 7,338 −25,605 − 204 −87,226 + 2,065 + 32,840 −33,292
2000          1st qtr − 1,231 + 16,372 −1,368 −10,011 − 788 − 5,436 + 160 + 38,650 − 751 −36,828 + 32,016
         2nd qtr − 2,845 + 16,406 −1,272 −11,559 + 121 − 6,542 − 330 + 28,540 + 2,388 −27,753 −23,447
         3rd qtr −11,690 + 13,116 −1,745 −12,778 − 3,122 − 7,161 + 7,412 −14,904 + 2,155 + 17,026 + 22,523
         4th qtr − 6,846 + 13,234 −2,462 −10,077 + 464 − 8,005 − 416 −17,939 + 2,052 + 23,150 + 17,137
2001          1st qtr − 497 + 22,540 −1,413 −12,613 − 3,523 − 5,487 + 552 r + 4,032 + 4,072 − 8,159 −11,749
         2nd qtr − 3,863 + 22,104 −1,517 −12,154 − 4,307 − 7,988 − 597 r + 17,766 + 2,039 −15,345 + 21,099
         3rd qtr + 1,212 + 25,547 −1,402 −13,406 − 3,510 − 6,017 − 446 r − 156 −2,165 + 1,554 −13,360
         4th qtr + 7,098 + 25,303 − 555 − 9,198 − 1,269 − 7,183 − 476 r −44,145 + 2,085 + 35,438 + 36,688
2002          1st qtr + 10,533 + 31,822 −1,265 −10,589 − 4,410 − 5,025 + 160 r + 631 −1,352 − 9,972 −18,496
         2nd qtr + 11,872 + 29,897 − 970 − 7,750 − 1,138 − 8,166 − 67r −19,833 + 2,432 + 5,595 + 1,694
         3rd qtr + 10,873 + 33,163 −1,629 −11,167 − 3,753 − 5,741 + 63 r −19,671 + 87 + 8,649 −17,588
         4th qtr p + 19,246 + 31,221 −1,884 − 5,381 + 1,963 − 6,673 − 360 −48,352 + 898 + 28,568 + 1,099
2000          July − 2,795 + 5,943 − 422 − 3,251 − 2,018 − 3,046 + 105 + 2,542 + 1,180 − 1,031 + 23,600
         Aug. − 5,727 + 2,920 − 808 − 4,870 − 349 − 2,620 + 7,766 −11,981 + 345 + 9,597 + 11,758
         Sep. − 3,167 + 4,254 − 515 − 4,657 − 755 − 1,494 − 458 −5,465 + 630 + 8,461 −12,834
         Oct. − 1,121 + 6,794 − 955 − 4,531 + 556 − 2,985 − 125 −4,453 + 538 + 5,162 + 19,591
         Nov. − 2,589 + 4,765 − 395 − 3,112 − 990 − 2,857 − 143 −4,991 + 466 + 7,256 + 5,015
         Dec. − 3,136 + 1,675 −1,111 − 2,435 + 898 − 2,164 − 149 −8,495 + 1,047 + 10,733 −7,468
2001          Jan. − 5,506 + 5,662 − 565 − 4,749 − 5,357 − 497 + 515 r −3,519 + 1,400 + 7,110 −5,988
         Feb. + 1,315 + 7,171 − 522 − 2,793 − 295 − 2,246 + 119 r −2,789 + 1,180 + 175 −3,873
         Mar. + 3,695 + 9,707 − 326 − 5,071 + 2,129 − 2,744 − 83r + 10,340 + 1,492 −15,444 −1,888
         Apr. + 1,215 + 6,166 − 647 − 2,938 + 868 − 2,235 − 149 r + 8,856 + 1,205 −11,126 + 9,404
         May − 290 + 8,212 − 465 − 4,060 − 1,320 − 2,657 − 732 r + 22,379 + 508 −21,865 − 53
         June − 4,787 + 7,727 − 405 − 5,156 − 3,856 − 3,097 + 284 r −13,469 + 326 + 17,645 + 11,749
         July − 2,618 + 9,441 − 394 − 4,950 − 4,115 − 2,599 − 226 r + 5,222 − 151 − 2,226 −10,589
         Aug. + 3,271 + 9,038 − 584 − 4,803 + 1,085 − 1,465 − 172 r + 3,547 + 460 − 7,106 −4,247
         Sep. + 559 + 7,069 − 424 − 3,653 − 480 − 1,953 − 47r −8,925 −2,474 + 10,886 + 1,476
         Oct. + 4,201 + 9,661 − 98 − 3,850 + 1,282 − 2,793 − 140 r −1,325 −1,001 − 1,735 −1,307
         Nov. + 1,555 + 7,351 − 284 − 2,811 + 53 − 2,754 − 180 r −20,229 + 204 + 18,650 + 6,860
         Dec. + 1,342 + 8,290 − 172 − 2,536 − 2,603 − 1,637 − 156 r −22,591 + 2,882 + 18,523 + 31,135
2002          Jan. + 510 + 10,076 − 448 − 4,081 − 5,761 + 724 + 477 r + 8,655 −1,747 − 7,894 −17,916
         Feb. + 3,009 + 10,008 − 387 − 3,237 − 360 − 3,015 − 155 r −4,902 + 67 + 1,981 + 1,535
         Mar. + 7,013 + 11,738 − 431 − 3,271 + 1,711 − 2,734 − 162 r −3,121 + 328 − 4,059 −2,116
         Apr. + 3,964 + 9,390 − 360 − 2,654 + 380 − 2,792 − 147 r − 2 + 1,657 − 5,472 −9,839
         May + 3,894 + 9,742 − 405 − 2,267 − 815 − 2,360 + 50 r − 349 + 1,379 − 4,973 + 3,826
         June + 4,015 + 10,765 − 204 − 2,829 − 703 − 3,014 + 30 r −19,482 − 603 + 16,041 + 7,707
         July + 163 + 11,872 − 564 − 4,642 − 4,753 − 1,749 − 203 r −11,612 − 548 + 12,200 −15,567
         Aug. + 4,152 + 10,387 − 478 − 3,876 − 388 − 1,493 + 87 r −6,258 + 886 + 1,132 −5,579
         Sep. + 6,557 + 10,904 − 586 − 2,649 + 1,388 − 2,499 + 179 r −1,801 − 252 − 4,683 + 3,559
         Oct. + 4,938 + 11,065 − 583 − 3,516 + 1,224 − 3,252 − 82r −19,590 + 570 + 14,165 −5,279
         Nov. + 8,072 + 11,992 − 677 − 1,731 + 698 − 2,210 − 135 −4,945 − 842 − 2,149 + 4,265
         Dec.  p + 6,235 + 8,164 − 624 − 134 + 41 − 1,211 − 142 −23,817 + 1,171 + 16,552 + 2,112
oFrom July 1990 including the external transactions of the former GDR. — included up to December 1992 in Supplementary trade items. —4Mainly
1From the beginning of 1993 figures subject to significant uncertainty warehouse transactions for account of residents and deduction of goods
owing to changes in the method of data collection in foreign trade. — returned. —5See footnote 3. —6Excluding the expenditure on freight and
2Special trade according to the official foreign trade statistics: imports c.i.f., insurance included in the c.i.f. import value. —7Capital exports: −.—
exports f.o.b. —3From January 1993 including additional estimates for 8 Increase: −. 
external transactions which do not have to be reported and which are
68*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
by group of countries and country *
 
  5  million
2002
Group of countries / Country 1999 2000 2001 August September October November Jan. / Nov. December  p 
All countries  1 Exports 510,008 597,440 638,268 597,457 51,920 55,019 58,575 58,766 50,899
Imports 444,797 538,311 542,774 479,518 41,532 44,115 47,510 46,774 42,735Balance + 65,211 + 59,128 + 95,495 + 117,939 + 10,387 + 10,904 + 11,065 + 11,992 + 8,164
I. Exports 396,139 460,422 481,991 446,251 37,956 40,845 43,798 43,953 ...Industrialised
Imports 332,947 389,927 390,269 340,710 29,006 30,879 33,295 33,349 ... countries
Balance + 63,192 + 70,495 + 91,722 + 105,540 + 8,951 + 9,966 + 10,503 + 10,604 ...
Exports 293,377 337,375 351,611 326,736 27,374 29,719 31,606 32,641 ... 1. EU member countries
Imports 239,652 273,951 277,034 246,040 20,938 22,763 23,953 24,119 ...
Balance + 53,725 + 63,424 + 74,577 + 80,696 + 6,436 + 6,957 + 7,653 + 8,522 ...
of  which
Exports 229,837 264,870 275,384 254,238 20,590 22,717 24,640 25,482 ... EMU member
Imports 193,146 217,946 221,680 198,707 16,719 18,507 19,178 19,282 ... countries
Balance + 36,691 + 46,924 + 53,704 + 55,531 + 3,871 + 4,210 + 5,462 + 6,199 ...
of which
Austria Exports 28,295 32,436 33,486 30,611 2,625 2,813 3,130 3,057 ...
Imports 18,288 20,497 20,664 19,391 1,569 1,725 1,953 1,994 ...Balance + 10,007 + 11,939 + 12,822 + 11,220 + 1,056 + 1,088 + 1,177 + 1,063 ...
Belgium and Exports 28,821 32,728 35,187 31,564 2,682 2,790 3,078 3,071 ...Luxemburg Imports 22,880 26,230 28,521 26,549 2,255 2,489 2,574 2,419 ...
Balance + 5,942 + 6,499 + 6,666 + 5,015 + 427 + 300 + 504 + 652 ...
France Exports 58,578 67,418 69,601 64,283 5,215 5,704 6,106 6,254 ...
Imports 45,559 50,862 49,743 45,504 3,812 4,154 4,458 4,383 ...Balance + 13,019 + 16,556 + 19,858 + 18,779 + 1,403 + 1,550 + 1,649 + 1,871 ...
Italy Exports 38,335 45,011 47,119 43,654 3,195 3,856 4,239 4,361 ...
Imports 33,107 35,776 35,280 30,832 2,390 2,684 3,017 3,030 ...Balance + 5,229 + 9,235 + 11,839 + 12,822 + 805 + 1,172 + 1,222 + 1,331 ...
Netherlands Exports 34,355 38,993 40,011 36,138 3,089 3,257 3,483 3,667 ...
Imports 36,089 44,739 43,233 39,021 3,455 3,840 3,518 3,930 ...Balance − 1,734 − 5,745 − 3,222 − 2,883 − 366 − 584 − 35 − 264 ...
Spain Exports 22,684 26,732 27,841 27,298 1,992 2,404 2,701 2,964 ...
Imports 14,666 16,087 15,226 14,456 978 1,223 1,423 1,519 ...Balance + 8,018 + 10,645 + 12,615 + 12,842 + 1,013 + 1,181 + 1,278 + 1,445 ...
Sweden Exports 11,657 13,524 12,978 12,371 1,061 1,174 1,293 1,351 ...
Imports 8,305 10,202 8,999 8,218 695 741 859 819 ...Balance + 3,352 + 3,322 + 3,979 + 4,154 + 365 + 433 + 434 + 533 ...
United Exports 43,124 49,377 52,764 50,104 4,892 4,875 4,673 4,722 ...Kingdom Imports 30,757 36,923 37,259 30,935 2,777 2,723 3,052 3,060 ...
Balance + 12,367 + 12,453 + 15,505 + 19,169 + 2,115 + 2,152 + 1,621 + 1,662 ...
Exports 33,895 39,944 39,987 37,307 3,267 3,519 3,755 3,631 ... 2. Other European
Imports 30,644 36,800 39,165 35,550 2,852 3,268 3,714 3,402 ... industrial countries  
2 
Balance + 3,251 + 3,144 + 821 + 1,758 + 415 + 251 + 40 + 230 ...
of which
Switzerland Exports 22,808 25,596 27,489 24,577 2,173 2,276 2,469 2,349 ...
Imports 17,070 18,797 19,753 18,034 1,624 1,603 1,805 1,714 ...
Balance + 5,738 + 6,799 + 7,737 + 6,543 + 549 + 673 + 663 + 635 ...
Exports 68,867 83,103 90,393 82,207 7,315 7,607 8,437 7,681 ... 3. Non-European
Imports 62,651 79,176 74,069 59,121 5,216 4,849 5,627 5,829 ... industrial countries
Balance + 6,216 + 3,926 + 16,324 + 23,087 + 2,099 + 2,758 + 2,810 + 1,852 ...
of which
Japan Exports 10,367 13,195 13,103 11,227 948 1,083 1,208 1,065 ...
Imports 21,779 26,847 22,910 17,588 1,629 1,504 1,786 1,629 ...
Balance −11,412 −13,651 − 9,807 − 6,361 − 680 − 421 − 578 − 564 ...
Exports 51,425 61,764 67,824 61,753 5,532 5,618 6,329 5,797 ... United States
Imports 36,790 47,121 45,982 37,121 3,201 3,002 3,443 3,840 ...Balance + 14,635 + 14,643 + 21,842 + 24,633 + 2,331 + 2,616 + 2,886 + 1,957 ...
II. Exports 56,717 70,318 83,246 83,601 7,570 8,099 8,581 8,245 ...Countries in transition
Imports 62,533 82,900 90,341 85,453 7,708 7,877 8,746 8,559 ...Balance − 5,816 −12,582 − 7,095 − 1,852 − 138 + 222 − 164 − 313 ...
of which
Central and east Exports 49,020 59,900 69,914 69,223 6,036 6,718 7,164 6,840 ...European countries Imports 47,723 62,781 68,701 64,842 5,685 5,910 6,437 6,324 ...in transition Balance + 1,297 − 2,882 + 1,213 + 4,382 + 351 + 808 + 727 + 515 ...
People ‘s Republic Exports 6,949 9,459 12,118 13,143 1,442 1,270 1,284 1,302 ...
of China  
3 Imports 13,795 18,553 19,942 19,171 1,820 1,799 2,173 2,142 ...Balance − 6,846 − 9,094 − 7,824 − 6,027 − 378 − 529 − 889 − 840 ...
III. Exports 55,987 65,023 71,477 66,113 6,257 5,967 5,999 6,439 ...Developing countries
Imports 48,779 64,742 61,490 52,765 4,758 5,306 5,411 4,811 ...Balance + 7,208 + 282 + 9,987 + 13,347 + 1,500 + 660 + 588 + 1,629 ...
of which
Newly industrial- Exports 18,775 24,029 24,735 23,072 2,136 2,170 2,223 2,134 ...ising countries in Imports 22,586 30,498 28,351 24,265 2,131 2,216 2,535 2,457 ...south-east Asia  
4 Balance − 3,811 − 6,469 − 3,616 − 1,192 + 5 − 46 − 312 − 323 ...
OPEC-countries Exports 9,135 10,756 13,698 13,395 1,181 1,204 1,264 1,322 ...
Imports 6,425 10,244 8,231 6,448 497 641 797 690 ...Balance + 2,710 + 512 + 5,467 + 6,947 + 684 + 563 + 467 + 631 ...
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (f.o.b.) by country of destination, region. —2Including Cyprus. —3Excluding Hong Kong. —4Brunei
imports (c.i.f.) by country of origin. Inclusion of individual countries in Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore,
groups of countries according to the current position. —1Including fuel Republic of Korea, Taiwan and Thailand. 
and other supplies for ships and aircraft and other data not classifiable by
69*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
4. Services and factor income of the Federal Republic of Germany
(Balances)
 
Until the end of 1998 DM million, from 1999  5  million
Services
other services
of which
 
Patents Compen- Services  of Construction
Trans- Financial and sation of Investment Government selfemployed and  assembly
Period Total Travel  1 services licences Total income portation  2 transactions  3 persons  4 work,  repairs employees  5 
1998 −65,301 −53,704 + 5,449 + 3,011 −4,044 + 5,462 −21,474 −2,586 −2,484 −1,584 −11,753
1999 −41,460 −30,645 + 2,881 + 1,018 −1,896 + 1,973 −14,792 −2,245 − 409 − 836 −8,130
2000 −44,425 −31,574 + 3,379 + 959 −2,924 + 2,177 −16,443 −2,725 − 912 − 885 −2,440
2001 −47,371 −32,377 + 4,139 + 439 −2,335 + 3,301 −20,539 −2,576 −1,293 −1,471 −11,138
2002 −34,887 −29,802 + 3,830 + 532 −1,236 + 4,879 −13,090 −2,019 − 712 −1,324 −6,013
2001          2nd qtr −12,154 − 8,656 + 1,153 + 208 − 532 + 804 −5,132 − 625 − 213 − 408 −3,900
         3rd qtr −13,406 −10,723 + 1,182 + 175 − 579 + 803 −4,265 − 640 − 142 − 685 −2,825
         4th qtr − 9,198 − 6,261 + 976 + 161 − 571 + 933 −4,437 − 665 − 346 − 340 − 929
2002          1st qtr −10,589 − 5,974 + 764 − 60 − 300 + 992 −6,011 − 536 − 468 − 22 −4,388
         2nd qtr − 7,750 − 7,664 + 1,192 + 70 − 578 + 1,131 −1,901 − 515 − 253 − 347 − 791
         3rd qtr −11,167 −10,316 + 811 + 188 − 452 + 1,601 −3,000 − 540 + 40 − 632 −3,121
         4th qtr − 5,381 − 5,849 + 1,064 + 334 + 94 + 1,154 −2,178 − 427 − 31 − 324 + 2,287
2002          Feb. − 3,237 − 1,704 + 252 − 78 − 91 + 309 −1,925 − 174 − 174 − 11 − 350
         Mar. − 3,271 − 2,064 + 331 − 6 − 107 + 315 −1,741 − 152 − 109 − 20 + 1,731
         Apr. − 2,654 − 2,523 + 425 + 64 − 197 + 441 − 865 − 193 − 95 − 103 + 483
         May − 2,267 − 2,584 + 186 + 26 − 28 + 362 − 230 − 164 − 44 − 118 − 697
         June − 2,829 − 2,558 + 580 − 20 − 354 + 328 − 805 − 158 − 114 − 126 − 577
         July − 4,642 − 3,323 + 295 + 76 − 429 + 380 −1,642 − 205 − 15 − 209 −4,545
         Aug. − 3,876 − 3,719 + 201 − 14 + 89 + 852 −1,284 − 184 + 115 − 204 − 184
         Sep. − 2,649 − 3,273 + 315 + 126 − 112 + 370 − 75 − 151 − 60 − 219 + 1,608
         Oct. − 3,516 − 2,801 + 390 + 289 − 51 + 306 −1,649 − 137 + 78 − 114 + 1,339
         Nov. − 1,731 − 1,625 + 237 + 7 + 41 + 367 − 757 − 128 − 70 − 110 + 809
         Dec. − 134 − 1,423 + 438 + 38 + 104 + 481 + 228 − 162 − 38 − 100 + 140
1From January 2002 figures subject to significant uncertainty. —2Ex- vices supplied. —4Engineering and other technical services, research and
cluding the expenditure on freight included in the c.i.f. import value. — development, commercial services etc. — 5 Wages and salaries. 
3Including the receipts from foreign military agencies for goods and ser-
5. Current transfers of the Federal Republic of Germany 6. Capital transfers
(Balances) (Balances)
Until the end of 1998 DM million, from 1999  5  million DM million /  5  million
Public  1 Private  1 
International
Organisations  2 
 
of which other Remittances otherEuropean current by foreign current
Period Total Total Total Communities Total workers transfers Total  
4 Public  1 Private  1 transfers  3 
1998 −53,304 −37,317 −33,077 −30,382 −4,240 −15,987 −6,936 −9,051 + 1,289 −2,441 + 3,730
1999 −25,701 −17,404 −15,428 −13,846 −1,976 −8,296 −3,429 −4,867 − 154 −1,351 + 1,197
2000 −27,144 −19,045 −17,100 −15,398 −1,944 −8,100 −3,458 −4,642 −1,596 −1,186 − 410
2001 −26,676 −17,024 −14,482 −12,812 −2,542 −9,653 −3,520 −6,132 − 967 −1,355 + 387
2002 −25,605 −15,032 −11,880 −10,684 −3,152 −10,574 −3,470 −7,103 − 204 −1,375 + 1,171
2001          2nd qtr −7,988 −5,144 −5,346 −4,927 + 202 −2,845 − 880 −1,964 − 597 − 252 − 345
         3rd qtr −6,017 −3,956 −3,027 −2,467 − 929 −2,062 − 880 −1,182 − 446 − 327 − 118
         4th qtr −7,183 −5,026 −3,997 −3,820 −1,029 −2,157 − 880 −1,277 − 476 − 452 − 24
2002          1st qtr −5,025 −2,357 −1,256 − 832 −1,101 −2,668 − 868 −1,801 + 160 − 229 + 389
         2nd qtr −8,166 −5,239 −5,254 −4,997 + 15 −2,928 − 868 −2,060 − 67 − 277 + 210
         3rd qtr −5,741 −3,514 −2,746 −2,387 − 768 −2,227 − 868 −1,360 + 63 − 348 + 411
         4th qtr −6,673 −3,922 −2,624 −2,468 −1,298 −2,751 − 868 −1,883 − 360 − 521 + 161
2002          Feb. −3,015 −2,005 −1,575 −1,391 − 430 −1,010 − 289 − 721 − 155 − 75 − 80
         Mar. −2,734 −1,882 −1,602 −1,570 − 279 − 852 − 289 − 563 − 162 − 80 − 82
         Apr. −2,792 −2,055 −1,889 −1,788 − 165 − 737 − 289 − 448 − 147 − 89 − 58
         May −2,360 −1,489 −1,697 −1,633 + 208 − 872 − 289 − 582 + 50 − 98 + 148
         June −3,014 −1,695 −1,667 −1,576 − 28 −1,319 − 289 −1,030 + 30 − 91 + 121
         July −1,749 −1,079 − 842 − 637 − 237 − 670 − 289 − 381 − 203 − 168 − 35
         Aug. −1,493 − 760 − 397 − 272 − 363 − 733 − 289 − 444 + 87 − 95 + 181
         Sep. −2,499 −1,675 −1,507 −1,478 − 168 − 824 − 289 − 535 + 179 − 86 + 265
         Oct. −3,252 −2,084 −1,538 −1,472 − 546 −1,168 − 289 − 879 − 82 − 104 + 22
         Nov. −2,210 −1,436 − 997 − 954 − 440 − 773 − 289 − 484 − 135 − 248 + 113
         Dec. −1,211 − 402 − 90 − 42 − 312 − 810 − 289 − 520 − 142 − 169 + 27
1The classification of "public" and "private" transfers depends on which (excluding capital transfers). —3Payments to developing countries, pension
sector the participating domestic body belongs to. —2Current contri- payments, tax revenue and refunds, etc. —4Where identifiable; in
butions to the budgets of international organisations and to the EU budget particular, debt forgiveness. 
70*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
7. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
 
 
 5  million
2002 r 
Item 2000 2001 r 2002 r 1st qtr 2nd qtr 3rd qtr 4th qtr Oct. Nov. Dec.
I. Net German investment abroad
(Increase/capital exports: −) −353,152 −284,800 −256,444 −57,019 −79,976 −92,940 −26,509 −30,727 −36,130 + 40,348
1. Direct investment  1 −54,045 −50,263 −26,070 − 2,609 − 2,081 −15,785 − 5,595 − 3,288 + 839 − 3,146
Equity capital −49,616 −61,618 −46,821 − 8,867 −20,694 −12,158 − 5,102 − 400 − 3,258 − 1,444
Reinvested earnings  2 − 2,300 −−−−−−−−−
Credit transactions of
German direct investors + 3,627 + 16,360 + 27,883 + 7,516 + 20,219 − 1,578 + 1,727 − 2,464 + 4,769 − 577
Other capital − 5,756 − 5,005 − 7,132 − 1,258 − 1,605 − 2,050 − 2,220 − 424 − 672 − 1,125
2. Portfolio investment −208,511 −129,559 −69,036 −32,361 −18,934 − 8,305 − 9,436 − 4,641 − 4,988 + 194
Equities  3 −104,809 −15,614 − 5,330 − 7,439 + 1,117 + 6,440 − 5,448 − 2,770 + 2,368 − 5,046
Investment fund certificates  4 −32,529 −19,701 − 6,784 − 5,087 − 998 − 1,275 + 576 − 297 + 43 + 829
Bonds and notes  5 −72,758 −95,098 −50,806 −15,314 −17,785 −10,521 − 7,185 − 1,067 − 8,008 + 1,890
Money market instruments + 1,585 + 853 − 6,116 − 4,522 − 1,268 − 2,949 + 2,622 − 508 + 610 + 2,521
3. Financial derivatives  6 − 4,211 + 6,278 − 533 + 1,771 + 1,194 − 3,838 + 340 − 1,270 + 914 + 696
4. Credit transactions −84,203 −109,871 −159,256 −23,348 −59,707 −64,670 −11,531 −21,437 −32,787 + 42,693
Credit institutions  7 −101,513 −130,648 −130,536 − 305 −54,117 −45,819 −30,295 −15,567 −40,185 + 25,457
Long-term −40,136 −47,636 −31,790 − 9,717 − 8,336 − 4,224 − 9,514 − 4,233 − 2,621 − 2,660
Short-term −61,378 −83,012 −98,746 + 9,413 −45,782 −41,595 −20,782 −11,334 −37,564 + 28,117
Enterprises and individuals − 4,742 −19,217 + 413 − 7,782 − 5,521 − 4,698 + 18,415 − 357 + 2,793 + 15,979
Long-term + 465 − 1,857 − 400 − 174 + 66 + 93 − 384 − 113 − 45− 226
Short-term  7 − 5,207 −17,360 + 813 − 7,608 − 5,587 − 4,791 + 18,799 − 244 + 2,838 + 16,205
General government −19,920 + 15,980 + 6,877 + 3,164 + 123 + 4,249 − 659 − 158 + 304 − 805
Long-term − 1,079 + 257 + 218 + 114 + 151 − 61 + 14 − 5+ 5 9 − 40
Short-term  7 −18,841 + 15,723 + 6,660 + 3,050 − 27 + 4,310 − 673 − 153 + 245 − 765
Bundesbank + 41,972 + 24,015 −36,010 −18,425 − 191 −18,402 + 1,009 − 5,355 + 4,302 + 2,062
5. Other investment  8 − 2,183 − 1,385 − 1,549 − 471 − 449 − 341 − 287 − 90− 108 − 89
II. Net foreign investment in Germany
(Increase/capital imports: +) + 387,499 + 262,297 + 169,218 + 57,650 + 60,143 + 73,268 −21,843 + 11,137 + 31,185 −64,165
1. Direct investment  1 + 211,786 + 37,903 + 40,414 + 13,875 + 16,190 + 3,503 + 6,846 + 2,430 + 2,206 + 2,211
Equity capital + 114,495 + 30,089 + 26,985 + 11,919 + 10,737 + 2,576 + 1,754 − 71 + 657 + 1,168
Reinvested earnings  2 − 3,600 − 3,600 − 3,600 − 900 − 900 − 900 − 900 − 300 − 300 − 300
Credit transactions offoreign direct investors + 101,226 + 11,558 + 17,225 + 2,884 + 6,384 + 1,924 + 6,034 + 2,813 + 1,850 + 1,371Other capital − 335 − 143 − 197 − 28− 31− 97− 41− 12− 1− 28
2. Portfolio investment + 49,104 + 155,141 + 98,309 + 24,869 + 38,918 + 39,533 − 5,011 + 774 + 5,369 −11,154
Equities  
3 −34,469 + 88,638 + 16,844 + 5,080 + 9,659 − 428 + 2,533 + 871 + 1,154 + 508
Investment fund certificates + 10,938 + 1,105 − 241 + 1,066 − 1,011 + 975 − 1,271 − 81 + 304 − 1,494
Bonds and notes  5 + 69,159 + 80,212 + 71,542 + 28,049 + 24,129 + 22,044 − 2,680 + 401 + 1,514 − 4,595
Money market instruments + 3,475 −14,815 + 10,164 − 9,327 + 6,142 + 16,942 − 3,593 − 417 + 2,397 − 5,572
3. Credit transactions + 126,564 + 69,221 + 30,390 + 18,883 + 4,989 + 30,191 −23,672 + 7,933 + 23,611 −55,217
Credit institutions  7 + 115,294 + 54,341 + 28,321 + 13,908 + 5,533 + 28,422 −19,542 + 5,569 + 21,410 −46,521
Long-term + 15,665 + 4,425 + 18,247 + 4,342 + 5,127 + 5,534 + 3,244 + 4,720 − 1,936 + 460
Short-term + 99,629 + 49,916 + 10,075 + 9,567 + 406 + 22,888 −22,786 + 849 + 23,346 −46,981
Enterprises and individuals + 10,101 + 11,412 + 3,084 + 7,084 − 2,173 + 1,506 − 3,334 + 2,126 + 1,777 − 7,237
Long-term + 4,400 + 11,351 + 5,142 + 2,165 + 60 + 1,472 + 1,444 + 1,920 + 1,060 − 1,536
Short-term  7 + 5,701 + 61 − 2,058 + 4,919 − 2,233 + 34 − 4,778 + 206 + 717 − 5,701
General Government + 756 + 837 − 1,667 − 3,391 + 2,177 − 466 + 12 + 731 − 382 − 337
Long-term − 142 − 217 − 112 − 318 − 176 + 541 − 159 − 173 − 322 + 335
Short-term  7 + 898 + 1,054 − 1,555 − 3,072 + 2,353 − 1,007 + 171 + 904 − 60− 672
Bundesbank + 414 + 2,631 + 653 + 1,281 − 548 + 728 − 809 − 493 + 806 − 1,121
4. Other investment + 45 + 32 + 105 + 23 + 46 + 42 − 6− 0− 0− 6
III. Balance of all statistically
recorded financial movements(Net capital exports: −) + 34,347 −22,503 −87,226 + 631 −19,833 −19,671 −48,352 −19,590 − 4,945 −23,817
1From 1996, new definition for direct investment. —2Estimated. — action values shown here are mostly derived from changes in stocks. As far
3Including participation rights. —4From 1991 including accumulated as possible, purely statistical changes have been eliminated. —8In
earnings. —5From 1975 excluding accrued interest. —6Options, whether particular, subscriptions of the Federal Government to International
or not evidenced by securities, and financial futures contracts. —7The trans- Organisations. 
71*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
8. External position of the Bundesbank *
 
 
DM million
Monetary reserves and other claims on non-residents Liabilities to non-residents
Monetary reserves
Reserve
positionin theInter- Liabilitiesnational arising Net Liabilities
Monetary arising from externalFund and Claims Loans and from liquidity position
Foreign special on the external Treasury (col. 1 other claims
End of year currency drawing ECB  
2 on non- trans- discount less
or month Total Total Gold rights (net) Total paper col. 8) balances  1 residents  3 actions  4 
1234567891 0 1 1
1990 106,446 104,023 13,688 64,517 7,373 18,445 2,423 52,259 52,259 − 54,188
1991 97,345 94,754 13,688 55,424 8,314 17,329 2,592 42,335 42,335 − 55,010
1992 143,959 141,351 13,688 85,845 8,199 33,619 2,608 26,506 26,506 − 117,453
1993 122,763 120,143 13,688 61,784 8,496 36,176 2,620 39,541 23,179 16,362 83,222
1994 115,965 113,605 13,688 60,209 7,967 31,742 2,360 24,192 19,581 4,611 91,774
1995 123,261 121,307 13,688 68,484 10,337 28,798 1,954 16,390 16,390 − 106,871
1996 120,985 119,544 13,688 72,364 11,445 22,048 1,441 15,604 15,604 − 105,381
1997 127,849 126,884 13,688 76,673 13,874 22,649 966 16,931 16,931 − 110,918
1998 135,085 134,005 17,109 100,363 16,533 − 1,079 15,978 15,978 − 119,107
*Valuation of the gold holdings and the claims on non-residents according Monetary Cooperation Fund −EMCF). —3Including loans to the World
to section 26 (2) of the Bundesbank Act and the provisions of the Bank. —4Including liquidity paper sold to non-residents by the
Commercial Code, especially section 253. In the course of the year, valuation Bundesbank; excluding the liquidity Treasury discount paper sold to
at the balance sheet rates of the preceding year. —1Mainly US dollar non-residents between March 1993 and March 1995, as shown in column 10. 
assets. —2European Central Bank (until 1993 claims on the European
  
 
9. External position of the Bundesbank in the European monetary union o
 5  million
Monetary reserves and other claims on non-residents
Monetary reserves
Reserve
position
in the Inter-
national OtherMonetary Other claims on Net externalFund and claims on Claims residents position of the
Gold special Foreign non-euro- within the in other Bundesbank Liabilities
End of year and gold drawing currency area Eurosystem EMU member to non- (col.1 lessor month Total Total rights reserves (net)  
2 countries col.9) receivables residents  1  3 residents  3 
1234567891 0
1999          Jan.  4 95,316 93,940 29,312 8,461 56,167 140 1,225 11 8,169 87,146
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 8,332 52,420 9,162 39,746 11 6,179 135,779
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 7,762 53,377 313 6,620 14 6,592 94,1702001 76,147 93,215 35,005 8,721 49,489 312 − 17,385 5 8,752 67,396
2002 103,948 85,002 36,208 8,272 40,522 312 18,466 167 9,005 94,942
2001          Aug. 109,011 89,890 33,414 7,765 48,711 312 18,803 6 6,860 102,151
         Sep. 112,045 94,538 35,399 8,989 50,151 312 17,189 6 8,658 103,387
         Oct. 115,487 95,552 34,531 8,643 52,378 312 19,616 7 10,783 104,704
         Nov. 108,934 95,395 34,309 8,745 52,341 312 13,217 9 11,093 97,841         Dec. 76,147 93,215 35,005 8,721 49,489 312 − 17,385 5 8,752 67,396
2002          Jan. 98,116 97,392 36,220 8,855 52,316 312 409 3 10,455 87,661         Feb. 98,392 99,230 38,095 8,874 52,260 312 − 1,152 2 10,354 88,038
         Mar. 99,489 98,130 38,505 8,840 50,786 312 1,045 1 10,077 89,412
         Apr. 106,936 94,779 38,072 8,205 48,502 312 11,842 2 9,298 97,638
         May 100,886 91,942 38,649 8,040 45,253 312 8,630 2 8,448 92,438         June 88,199 86,649 35,435 8,848 42,366 312 1,236 1 9,219 78,980
         July 105,187 87,718 34,596 8,897 44,225 312 17,156 1 10,163 95,025
         Aug. 110,682 87,466 35,197 8,797 43,471 312 22,902 1 9,432 101,250         Sep. 108,889 88,937 36,225 8,751 43,961 312 19,639 1 9,966 98,923
         Oct. 112,748 87,441 35,530 8,594 43,317 312 24,993 2 9,473 103,276
         Nov. 108,615 87,610 35,517 8,542 43,551 312 20,688 5 10,272 98,343         Dec. 103,948 85,002 36,208 8,272 40,522 312 18,466 167 9,005 94,942
2003          Jan. 98,272 85,235 37,934 8,023 39,278 312 12,237 488 9,898 88,374
oClaims and liabilities vis- à-vis all countries within and outside EMU. Until Deutsche Bundesbank ’s cross-border payments within the Eurosystem. From
December 2000, the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, by virtue November 2000 including the TARGET positions which were previously
of revaluations, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the levels shown (in columns 6 and 9) as bilateral assets and liabilities vis- à-vis national
are computed on the basis of cumulative transaction values. From January central banks outside the Eurosystem. —3See footnote 2. —4Euro
2001 onwards, all end-of-month levels will be valued at market prices. — opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at January 1, 1999. 
1Including loans to the World Bank. —2Including the balances in the
72*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
10. Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
 5  million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities to non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  to foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms payments
or month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received operations operations
All countries
 
1999 277,331 52,774 224,557 115,564 108,993 100,777 8,216 293,849 56,632 237,217 166,026 71,191 52,047 19,144
2000 320,874 43,462 277,412 152,752 124,660 116,971 7,689 446,060 52,663 393,397 309,024 84,373 63,093 21,2802001 358,120 62,434 295,686 171,939 123,747 114,857 8,890 505,266 60,132 445,134 354,561 90,573 65,988 24,5852002  
4 327,821 63,167 264,654 145,713 118,941 111,406 7,535 533,423 57,696 475,727 387,850 87,877 62,622 25,255
2002          Sep.  r 350,948 81,997 268,951 148,669 120,282 111,998 8,284 528,930 62,213 466,717 381,222 85,495 59,295 26,200
         Oct.  r 354,285 81,816 272,469 149,634 122,835 114,073 8,762 533,937 62,908 471,029 383,637 87,392 59,850 27,542
         Nov.  r 345,871 78,624 267,247 143,786 123,461 115,369 8,092 538,802 63,889 474,913 386,839 88,074 61,309 26,765
         Dec. 327,821 63,167 264,654 145,713 118,941 111,406 7,535 533,423 57,696 475,727 387,850 87,877 62,622 25,255
EU countries
 
1999 157,617 47,992 109,625 56,450 53,175 48,500 4,675 194,809 49,243 145,566 111,605 33,961 27,532 6,4292000 177,782 39,563 138,219 78,298 59,921 55,718 4,203 323,049 45,473 277,576 237,583 39,993 32,457 7,5362001 198,118 58,039 140,079 79,205 60,874 55,371 5,503 372,937 53,683 319,254 275,749 43,505 34,716 8,7892002  
4 200,280 59,468 140,812 84,643 56,169 51,693 4,476 402,561 52,503 350,058 307,920 42,138 32,650 9,488
2002          Sep.  r 217,989 77,105 140,884 83,219 57,665 52,363 5,302 404,461 57,193 347,268 306,777 40,491 30,755 9,736
         Oct.  r 221,960 77,070 144,890 85,780 59,110 53,577 5,533 408,041 57,764 350,277 308,427 41,850 31,623 10,227
         Nov.  r 214,009 73,792 140,217 81,124 59,093 54,227 4,866 408,385 58,869 349,516 307,730 41,786 32,075 9,711
         Dec. 200,280 59,468 140,812 84,643 56,169 51,693 4,476 402,561 52,503 350,058 307,920 42,138 32,650 9,488
of which: EMU member countries 1
 
1999 104,071 25,946 78,125 38,747 39,378 36,074 3,304 151,179 38,117 113,062 88,763 24,299 20,173 4,126
2000 120,976 22,737 98,239 52,976 45,263 42,389 2,874 247,830 33,698 214,132 185,595 28,537 23,569 4,9682001 126,519 33,787 92,732 46,599 46,133 42,771 3,362 295,943 38,361 257,582 225,711 31,871 24,878 6,9932002  
4 129,490 32,521 96,969 54,542 42,427 39,350 3,077 331,733 37,366 294,367 263,863 30,504 22,996 7,508
2002          Sep. 139,717 46,889 92,828 49,732 43,096 39,707 3,389 332,227 41,325 290,902 260,984 29,918 22,233 7,685
         Oct. 137,812 44,700 93,112 48,959 44,153 40,610 3,543 335,225 41,527 293,698 262,999 30,699 22,538 8,161
         Nov. 132,230 39,106 93,124 48,678 44,446 41,258 3,188 336,807 42,163 294,644 263,919 30,725 23,007 7,718         Dec. 129,490 32,521 96,969 54,542 42,427 39,350 3,077 331,733 37,366 294,367 263,863 30,504 22,996 7,508
Other industrial countries 3
 
1999 71,958 3,595 68,363 45,540 22,823 21,220 1,603 68,024 4,870 63,154 44,518 18,636 15,387 3,2492000 84,502 2,925 81,577 54,272 27,305 25,673 1,632 84,464 4,711 79,753 56,986 22,767 18,621 4,1462001 100,786 3,364 97,422 71,842 25,580 24,082 1,498 93,269 4,178 89,091 64,595 24,496 19,648 4,8482002  
4 73,944 2,743 71,201 45,666 25,535 24,303 1,232 90,594 3,267 87,327 64,544 22,783 18,081 4,702
2002          Sep. 77,671 3,065 74,606 49,004 25,602 24,468 1,134 83,851 3,008 80,843 59,103 21,740 16,688 5,052
         Oct. 78,018 3,044 74,974 48,144 26,830 25,541 1,289 85,655 3,170 82,485 60,459 22,026 16,612 5,414
         Nov.  r 76,045 2,917 73,128 47,002 26,126 24,843 1,283 89,904 3,140 86,764 64,340 22,424 17,348 5,076
         Dec. 73,944 2,743 71,201 45,666 25,535 24,303 1,232 90,594 3,267 87,327 64,544 22,783 18,081 4,702
Countries in transition
 
1999 16,402 231 16,171 4,603 11,568 10,934 634 6,256 78 6,178 481 5,697 3,119 2,578
2000 19,082 240 18,842 5,028 13,814 13,104 710 8,202 113 8,089 928 7,161 4,384 2,7772001 20,444 204 20,240 6,103 14,137 13,449 688 9,095 151 8,944 1,699 7,245 4,341 2,9042002  
4 20,339 332 20,007 5,680 14,327 13,586 741 10,106 175 9,931 2,119 7,812 4,574 3,238
2002          Sep. 20,384 265 20,119 5,807 14,312 13,590 722 10,152 185 9,967 2,081 7,886 4,734 3,152
         Oct. 20,449 328 20,121 5,611 14,510 13,780 730 10,590 185 10,405 2,177 8,228 4,841 3,387
         Nov. 20,821 271 20,550 5,594 14,956 14,195 761 10,678 109 10,569 2,060 8,509 5,071 3,438         Dec. 20,339 332 20,007 5,680 14,327 13,586 741 10,106 175 9,931 2,119 7,812 4,574 3,238
Developing countries 2
 
1999 31,354 956 30,398 8,971 21,427 20,123 1,304 24,760 2,441 22,319 9,422 12,897 6,009 6,8882000 39,508 734 38,774 15,154 23,620 22,476 1,144 30,345 2,366 27,979 13,527 14,452 7,631 6,8212001 38,772 827 37,945 14,789 23,156 21,955 1,201 29,965 2,120 27,845 12,518 15,327 7,283 8,0442002  
4 33,258 624 32,634 9,724 22,910 21,824 1,086 30,162 1,751 28,411 13,267 15,144 7,317 7,827
2002          Sep. 34,904 1,562 33,342 10,639 22,703 21,577 1,126 30,466 1,827 28,639 13,261 15,378 7,118 8,260
         Oct. 33,858 1,374 32,484 10,099 22,385 21,175 1,210 29,651 1,789 27,862 12,574 15,288 6,774 8,514
         Nov. 34,996 1,644 33,352 10,066 23,286 22,104 1,182 29,835 1,771 28,064 12,709 15,355 6,815 8,540         Dec. 33,258 624 32,634 9,724 22,910 21,824 1,086 30,162 1,751 28,411 13,267 15,144 7,317 7,827
* Including the assets and liabilities vis- à-vis non-residents of individuals in are not comparable with the figures shown in Table X, 7. —1Including
Germany. The assets and liabilities vis- à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in Greece from January 2001. —2Including Cyprus until April 2002. —
Germany are shown in Table 4 of Section IV, "Banks". Statistical increases 3Including Cyprus from May 2002. —4Change in the range of enterprises
and decreases have not been eliminated; to this extent the changes in totals required to report owing to an increase in the exemtion limit. 
73*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
X. Foreign trade and payments
11. Deutsche Mark and euro exchange rates of selected currencies *
Yearly Japan Denmark Sweden Norway Switzerland Canada Australia New Zealand United States United Kingdom
or monthly
average USD JPY DKK SEK GBP NOK CHF CAD AUD  1 NZD 1 
Historic spot middle rates on the Frankfurt exchange (1 or 100 currency units = DEM ...)
      
1991 1.6612 1.2346 25.932 27.421 2.926  25.580 115.740 1.4501 1.2942 0.95891992 1.5595 1.2313 25.869 26.912 2.753  25.143 111.198 1.2917 1.1476 0.84061993 1.6544 1.4945 25.508 21.248 2.483  23.303 111.949 1.2823 1.1235 0.89401994 1.6218 1.5870 25.513 21.013 2.4816 22.982 118.712 1.1884 1.1848 0.9605
1995 1.4338 1.5293 25.570 20.116 2.2620 22.614 121.240 1.0443 1.0622 0.9399
1996 1.5037 1.3838 25.945 22.434 2.3478 23.292 121.891 1.1027 1.1782 1.03571997 1.7348 1.4378 26.249 22.718 2.8410 24.508 119.508 1.2533 1.2889 1.14531998 1.7592 1.3484 26.258 22.128 2.9142 23.297 121.414 1.1884 1.1070 0.9445
      
Euro reference exchange rates published by the European Central Bank (EUR 1 = currency units ...) 2
      
1999 1.0658 121.32 7.4355 8.8075 0.65874 8.3104 1.6003 1.5840 1.6523 2.01452000 0.9236 99.47 7.4538 8.4452 0.60948 8.1129 1.5579 1.3706 1.5889 2.02882001 0.8956 108.68 7.4521 9.2551 0.62187 8.0484 1.5105 1.3864 1.7319 2.13002002 0.9456 118.06 7.4305 9.1611 0.62883 7.5086 1.4670 1.4838 1.7376 2.0366
2001          Apr. 0.8920 110.36 7.4633 9.1120 0.62168 8.1146 1.5287 1.3903 1.7847 2.1975
         May 0.8742 106.50 7.4612 9.0576 0.61328 7.9927 1.5334 1.3473 1.6813 2.0723         June 0.8532 104.30 7.4539 9.2106 0.60890 7.9360 1.5225 1.3016 1.6469 2.0589
         July 0.8607 107.21 7.4447 9.2637 0.60857 7.9714 1.5135 1.3153 1.6890 2.1074
         Aug. 0.9005 109.34 7.4450 9.3107 0.62672 8.0552 1.5144 1.3857 1.7169 2.0895         Sep. 0.9111 108.20 7.4413 9.6744 0.62291 7.9985 1.4913 1.4260 1.8036 2.1781
         Oct. 0.9059 109.86 7.4367 9.5780 0.62393 7.9970 1.4793 1.4224 1.7955 2.1863
         Nov. 0.8883 108.68 7.4452 9.4166 0.61838 7.9224 1.4663 1.4153 1.7172 2.1322         Dec. 0.8924 113.38 7.4431 9.4359 0.62012 7.9911 1.4749 1.4075 1.7348 2.1456
2002          Jan. 0.8833 117.12 7.4329 9.2275 0.61659 7.9208 1.4745 1.4135 1.7094 2.0826
         Feb. 0.8700 116.23 7.4299 9.1828 0.61160 7.7853 1.4775 1.3880 1.6963 2.0771         Mar. 0.8758 114.75 7.4324 9.0594 0.61574 7.7183 1.4678 1.3903 1.6695 2.0261
         Apr. 0.8858 115.81 7.4341 9.1358 0.61407 7.6221 1.4658 1.4008 1.6537 1.9995
         May 0.9170 115.86 7.4356 9.2208 0.62823 7.5207 1.4572 1.4210 1.6662 1.9859         June 0.9554 117.80 7.4330 9.1137 0.64405 7.4043 1.4721 1.4627 1.6793 1.9517
         July 0.9922 117.11 7.4301 9.2689 0.63870 7.4050 1.4624 1.5321 1.7922 2.0646
         Aug. 0.9778 116.31 7.4270 9.2489 0.63633 7.4284 1.4636 1.5333 1.8045 2.1076         Sep. 0.9808 118.38 7.4271 9.1679 0.63059 7.3619 1.4649 1.5434 1.7927 2.0847
         Oct. 0.9811 121.57 7.4297 9.1051 0.62994 7.3405 1.4650 1.5481 1.7831 2.0381
         Nov. 1.0014 121.65 7.4280 9.0818 0.63709 7.3190 1.4673 1.5735 1.7847 2.0155         Dec. 1.0183 124.20 7.4264 9.0961 0.64218 7.2948 1.4679 1.5872 1.8076 1.9947
2003          Jan. 1.0622 126.12 7.4324 9.1733 0.65711 7.3328 1.4621 1.6364 1.8218 1.9648
*Calculated from daily quotations. —1Exchange rates from Australia and central banks at 2.15 p.m. For additional euro reference exchange rates of
New Zealand; those for New Zealand calculated from rates as at the middle the ECB, see Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Report 5, Exchange rate
and end of the month. —2The ECB publishes daily euro reference ex- statistics. 
change rates, which are calculated on the basis of the concertation between
12. Exchange rates for the national currencies of the EMU countries, the Deutsche Mark value of the ECU *
and euro conversion rates
France Italy Netherlands Belgium/ Austria Spain Finland Ireland Portugal Greece ECU values  1 
Yearly Luxembourg GRD  100 /
average FRF  100 ITL  1,000 NLG  100 BEF/LUF  100 ATS  100 ESP  100 FIM  100 IEP  1 PTE  100 EUR  1  2 ECU  1 .
Historic spot middle rates on the Frankfurt exchange in DEM
   
1991 29.409 1.3377 88.742 4.857  14.211 1.597  41.087 2.671  1.149  0.9103 2.050761992 29.500 1.2720 88.814 4.857  14.211 1.529  34.963 2.656  1.157  0.8178 2.020311993 29.189 1.0526 89.017 4.785  14.214 1.303  28.915 2.423  1.031  0.7213 1.936391994 29.238 1.0056 89.171 4.8530 14.214 1.2112 31.108 2.4254 0.9774 0.6683 1.92452
1995 28.718 0.8814 89.272 4.8604 14.214 1.1499 32.832 2.2980 0.9555 0.6182 1.87375
1996 29.406 0.9751 89.243 4.8592 14.214 1.1880 32.766 2.4070 0.9754 0.6248 1.909541997 29.705 1.0184 88.857 4.8464 14.210 1.1843 33.414 2.6297 0.9894 0.6349 1.964381998 29.829 1.0132 88.714 4.8476 14.213 1.1779 32.920 2.5049 0.9763 0.5952 1.969131999 . . . . . . . . . 325.76 .
2000 . . . . . . . . . 336.63 .
      
Irrevocable euro conversion rates (EUR 1 = currency units ...) 3
   
6.55957 1936.27 2.20371 40.3399 13.7603 166.386 5.94573 0.787564 200.482 4 340.750 5 1.95583
*Calculated from daily quotations. —1According to data from the Euro- ence exchange rates of the ECB (EU R 1 = GRD ...). —3Applicable from
pean Commission. —2Until 1998 reciprocal values of the exchange rates for 1 January 1999. —4Applicable from 1 January 2001. —5Deutsche Mark
the Deutsche Mark, published by the Bank of Greece; from 1999 euro refer- conversion rate. 
74*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportFebruary 2003
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
13. Effective exchange rates * of the euro and selected foreign currencies
 
 
1st qtr 1999 = 100
Memo item: Effective nominal exchange rates of selected foreign
Indicators of the German economy ’s currencies against the currencies of 19 industrial
Effective exchange rate of the euro price competitiveness  3  4 countries  3  5  6 
Narrow group  1 Broad group  2 19 industrial countries  5 49 countries  7 
Real Real on the basis
of the on the basis on the basis
on the basis of Pound Canadian Swiss Japanese of consumer of consumer deflators of
Period Nominal prices Nominal prices consumer prices US dollar sterling dollar franc yen total sales  8 
1995 107.8 108.8 93.2 107.8 109.5 110.4 110.2 86.1 84.0 106.4 105.4 115.6
1996 107.9 108.8 95.4 105.9 106.1 106.8 105.2 90.9 85.9 108.8 104.2 100.61997 99.1 99.5 90.4 96.6 100.7 101.4 99.0 98.8 99.8 109.7 97.9 95.91998 101.5 101.3 96.6 99.1 100.9 101.1 100.1 103.4 103.3 103.5 99.9 89.71999 95.7 95.7 96.6 95.8 97.8 98.0 97.7 100.8 102.3 102.2 98.3 105.1
2000 85.7 86.5 88.2 86.3 91.9 93.2 91.7 105.4 105.2 103.6 96.8 117.9
2001 87.3 88.9 91.0 88.1
p 92.1 94.2 92.4 112.0 103.6 100.5 100.5 106.7
2002 90.0 92.9 95.6 92.0 p 93.7 95.1 93.6 110.7 104.2 98.7 104.9 100.8
1998          1st qtr 98.8 98.8 92.6 96.4 99.4 99.8 98.8 103.2 104.5 107.3 100.1 92.5         2nd qtr 100.2 100.1 94.2 97.4 100.7 100.7 99.1 104.8 104.8 106.5 98.5 86.8         3rd qtr 102.5 102.5 97.8 100.2 101.6 102.1 101.0 106.3 104.1 102.0 99.4 83.7         4th qtr 104.2 103.8 101.7 102.4 101.9 101.8 101.5 99.4 99.8 98.0 101.6 95.7
1999          1st qtr 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 99.9 99.9 100.0 100.0 100.1
         2nd qtr 96.1 96.0 96.5 96.0 98.6 98.3 97.8 102.8 102.9 103.5 98.6 99.0         3rd qtr 94.6 94.7 95.5 94.6 97.2 97.8 97.2 101.4 102.4 102.3 97.7 106.2         4th qtr 92.2 92.2 94.2 92.6 95.5 95.9 95.5 99.1 104.1 102.8 96.7 115.2
2000          Jan. 90.2 90.8 92.4 90.7 . 95.9 94.8 99.7 106.5 104.8 95.4 115.5
         Feb. 89.2 89.8 91.2 89.6 93.8 95.5 94.1 102.3 106.5 105.2 95.2 112.5         Mar. 87.7 88.3 89.7 88.1 . 94.3 92.9 102.4 106.3 104.6 94.7 116.8
         Apr. 86.1 86.6 88.4 86.7 . 93.2 91.9 103.0 107.7 104.3 95.9 118.6
         May 84.5 85.0 86.9 85.1 92.1 92.1 91.0 106.4 106.0 103.0 96.3 118.3         June 87.4 88.1 89.9 88.1 . 93.8 92.7 103.6 102.5 103.7 97.2 118.3
         July 86.9 87.9 89.4 87.5 . 94.3 92.7 104.5 103.4 103.9 97.7 116.8
         Aug. 84.6 85.5 87.0 85.1 91.4 92.8 90.9 106.3 104.9 104.0 96.7 118.6         Sep. 82.8 83.6 85.3 83.3 . 91.8 89.8 107.7 103.5 104.3 97.2 122.3
         Oct. 81.6 82.4 84.4 82.2 . 90.9 88.9 109.4 106.4 102.7 97.8 121.4
         Nov. 82.3 83.3 85.1 82.9 90.3 91.3 89.3 110.2 104.6 100.7 97.5 121.1         Dec. 85.4 86.4 88.1 85.8 . 92.8 91.3 108.7 104.1 101.5 99.4 115.1
2001          Jan. 89.2 90.2 91.7 89.0 . 95.2 93.3 107.7 102.4 102.7 100.0 108.3
         Feb. 88.3 89.4 91.0 88.3 92.8 95.2 93.2 108.8 102.0 101.6 99.2 109.9         Mar. 88.4 89.8 91.4 88.9 . 95.0 93.2 111.5 102.9 99.7 99.3 106.0
         Apr. 87.6 89.1 91.0 88.4 . 94.2 92.7 113.0 103.7 100.0 99.4 104.9
         May 85.9 87.6 89.3 86.7 91.6 93.6 91.7 113.1 104.3 101.3 98.3 107.5         June 84.7 86.3 88.1 85.3 . 93.1 90.9 114.1 104.4 102.7 98.5 108.3
         July 85.4 87.1 89.1 86.2 . 93.8 91.8 114.3 104.9 102.5 99.5 105.8
         Aug. 87.7 89.3 91.8 88.6
p 91.8 94.7 92.9 111.6 103.0 101.1 100.4 106.4
         Sep. 88.0 89.7 92.6 89.3 . 94.3 93.1 110.7 103.9 99.1 102.2 108.2
         Oct. 88.0 90.0 92.8 89.5 . 93.9 92.7 111.8 103.7 99.0 103.0 106.2
         Nov. 86.8 88.8 91.3 88.0 p 92.3 93.2 91.7 113.3 104.0 97.8 103.4 106.3
         Dec. 87.7 89.9 91.9 88.6 . 93.8 92.1 114.1 104.3 99.0 103.3 102.1
2002          Jan. 87.6 90.3 91.6 88.4 . 95.1 92.6 116.4 104.9 97.9 103.3 98.3
         Feb. 86.8 89.4 91.1 87.8 p 92.4 94.6 92.1 117.3 105.4 98.5 102.7 98.2
         Mar. 86.8 89.6 91.3 88.2 . 94.3 92.0 116.1 104.6 98.7 103.4 99.8
         Apr. 87.2 90.1 91.7 88.5 . 93.9 91.6 115.3 105.2 99.0 103.8 99.4
         May 88.6 91.5 93.7 90.4 p 93.2 94.3 92.6 112.0 103.5 100.4 105.1 101.2
         June 90.6 93.6 96.4 92.8 . 95.4 94.0 109.0 101.9 101.0 104.9 101.7
         July 91.7 94.7 98.2 94.4 . 96.3 95.3 106.0 103.5 99.4 106.0 104.3
         Aug. 91.1 94.0 97.7 93.8 p 94.2 95.5 94.8 107.3 103.5 98.0 105.7 104.3
         Sep. 91.2 94.2 98.0 94.1 . 95.4 94.6 107.6 104.7 97.7 105.6 102.5
         Oct. 91.7 94.8 98.5 94.6 . 95.3 94.6 108.5 105.0 97.6 105.8 99.8
         Nov. 92.5 95.5 99.3 95.0 p 95.1 95.3 94.4 106.8 104.3 97.7 106.1 100.8
         Dec. 93.6 96.8 100.4 96.1 . 95.8 95.0 106.0 104.0 98.3 106.5 99.6
2003          Jan. 95.8 99.3 103.0 98.5 . 97.6 97.1 103.0 102.6 98.8 107.9 100.4
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of April 2000, page 39 ff. —2ECB calculations; in addition to the countries
the currency concerned. —1ECB calculations based on the weighted belonging to the narrow group (see footnote 1), this group also includes the
averages of the effective exchange rates of the euro or, prior to 1999, of the following countries: Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, China, Croatia, Cypru s, Czech
exchange rates of the currencies preceding the euro against the currencies Republic, Estonia, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico ,
of the following countries: Australia, Canada, Denmark, Greece, Hong Kong, Morocco, New Zealand, Philippines, Poland, Romania, Russia, Slovakia,
Japan, Norway, Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, United Slovenia, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand and Turkey. —3The method of
Kingdom and United States. The weights used in these calculations are calculation is consistent with the procedure used by the ECB to compute thebased on manufactured goods trade between 1995 and 1997 and capture effective exchange rates of the euro (see Monthly Bulletin, November 2001,third-market effects. From January 2001, Greece ceased to be a partner page 50 ff.). —4Decline in the values implies an increase in
country in the effective exchange rate of the euro; the weighting scheme competitiveness. —5EMU countries and narrow group of the ECB except
was adjusted accordingly. Due to change in the weighting scheme, effective Australia, Hong Kong, Singapore and South Korea. —6Figures up to
exchange rate data as from January 2001 are not fully comparable with end-1998, computed by linking with the figures published up to Octoberearlier observations. For the prices are not yet available, estimates have 2001. —7EMU countries and broad group of the ECB. —8Annual and
been used. For the definition of the method see: ECB, Monthly Bulletin, quarterly averages. 
75*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
76*

Overview of
publicationsby the DeutscheBundesbankThis overview provides information
about selected recent economic andstatistical publications by the DeutscheBundesbank. Unless otherwise indi-cated, these publications are availablein both English and German, in printedform and on the internet.
The publications are available free of
charge from the Press and Public Rela-tions Division. For a small fee to covercosts, a file which is updated monthlyand contains approximately 40,000time series published by the Bundes-bank can be obtained on magnetictape cassette or ZIP disk from the Divi-sion Statistical data processing, math-ematical methods. Orders should besent, in writing, to one of the ad-dresses listed on the reverse of the titlepage. Selected time series can also bedownloaded from the internet.
Annual Report
Monthly Report
For information on the articles published between
1990 and 2002 see the index attached to the Janu-
ary 2003 Monthly Report.
March 2002
– Circulation of the Deutsche Mark – from cur-
rency reform to European monetary union
– German balance of payments in 2001
– The pass-through from market interest rates to
bank lending rates in GermanyDeutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
77*

April 2002
– Government benefits for families
– German enterprises’ profitability and financing
in 2000
– RTGSplus– successfully established
May 2002
– The economic scene in Germany in spring
2002
June 2002
– Overall financial flows in 2001
– The evolution of accounting standards for
credit institutions
– Consequences of increasing capital flows for
exchange rate policy – observations and pro-
spects worldwide
– Direct investment in the real and financial sec-
tor – the Bundesbank Spring Conference 2002
July 2002
– Consumer prices and the changeover from
Deutsche Mark to euro
– Funded old-age provision and the financial
markets
– Monetary policy and investment behaviour – an
empirical study
– Reports from the Economic Research Centre
August 2002
– The economic scene in Germany in summer
2002
September 2002
– The performance of German credit institutions
in 2001
– Productivity developments in Germany– Quotas and voting shares in the IMFOctober 2002
– Amendments to the Banking Act caused by
the Fourth Financial Market Promotion Act
– The development of bank lending to the pri-
vate sector
– Fundamental determinants of real exchange
rate movements in the central and east Euro-
pean accession countries
November 2002
– The economic scene in Germany in autumn
2002
December 2002
– Recent tax revenue trends– Macroeconomic development of earnings and
costs since the early 1990s
– Developments in the external economic rela-
tions of the EU accession countries in centraland eastern Europe
– Reports from the Economic Research Centre
January 2003
– Reserve assets: their development and import-
ance in monetary union
– Role and importance of interest rate derivatives
– The new “Minimum requirements for the
credit business of credit institutions” andBasel II
– Reports from the Economic Research Centre
February 2003
– The economic scene in Germany around the
turn of 2002-03Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
78*

Statistical Supplements to the
Monthly Report1
1 Banking statistics (monthly)
2 Capital market statistics (monthly)
3 Balance of payments statistics (monthly)
4 Seasonally adjusted business statistics (monthly)5 Exchange rate statistics (quarterly)
Special Publications
The monetary policy of the Bundesbank,
October 19952
Makro-ökonometrisches Mehr-Länder-Modell,November 1996
3
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im Bereichvon Währung und Wirtschaft, April 1997
3
Europäische Organisationen und Gremien im Be-reich von Währung und Wirtschaft, May 1997
3
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 bis
1989, August 19993
The market for German Federal securities, May
2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model: MEMMOD,
June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Special Statistical Publications
1 Banking statistics guidelines and customer clas-
sification, January 20034,5
2 Bankenstatistik Kundensystematik Firmenver-
zeichnisse, January 20033,63 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen,
January 20003
4 Financial accounts for Germany 1991 to 2001,
September 20025
5 Annual accounts of west German enterprises
1971 to 1996, March 19991
6 Ratios from the annual accounts of west and
east German enterprises for 1998, September
20011,5
7 Erläuterungen zu den Leistungspositionen der
Zahlungsbilanz, September 20013
8 Balance of payments statistics of the Federal
Republic of Germany, 2nd edition, February
1991o
9 Securities deposits,
August 2002
10 International capital links,
May 20021
11 Balance of payments by region,
August 2002
12 Technologische Dienstleistungen in der Zah-
lungsbilanz, May 20023Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
79*1Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data
contained in the German originals are available in English.
2Also available in French, Spanish, Russian and Chinese.
3Available in German only.
4Only the sections “Monthly Balance Sheet Statistics”,
“External position” and “Customer classification”
(“Overall survey on sectoral classification”, “Survey on
breakdown by industry or activity” and “Explanatory
notes on the system of customer classification by industry
or activity”) are available in English.
5Current version only available on the internet at half-
yearly intervals.
6Current version only available on the internet at quar-
terly intervals.oNot available on the internet.

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2003
80*Discussion papers
by the Economic Research Centre
September 2002 23/02
Dynamic Q-investment functions for Germanyusing panel balance sheet data and a new algo-
rithm for the capital stock at replacement values
October 2002 24/02
Tail Wags Dog? Time-varying Information Shares inthe Bund Market
October 2002 25/02
Time Variation in the Tail Behaviour of Bund
Futures Returns
November 2002 26/02
Bootstrapping Autoregressions with ConditionalHeteroskedasticity of Unknown Form
November 2002 27/02
Cost-Push Shocks and Monetary Policy in Open
Economies
November 2002 28/02
Further Evidence On The Relationship BetweenFirm Investment And Financial Status
November 2002 29/02
Genetic Learning as an Explanation of Stylized Facts
of Foreign Exchange Markets
December 2002 30/02
Wechselkurszielzonen, wirtschaftlicher Aufholpro-zess und endogene Realignmentrisiken
3December 2002 31/02Optimal factor taxation under wage bargaining – adynamic perspective
January 2003 01/03
Testing mean-variance efficiency in CAPM with
possibly non-gaussian errors: an exact stimulation-based approach
Earlier discussion papers are available on the inter-
net, in some cases as abstracts.
Banking legislation
1 Bundesbank Act and Statute of the European
System of Central Banks and of the European
Central Bank, June 1998
2 Gesetz über das Kreditwesen, February 20013
2a Grundsatz I über die Eigenmittel der Institute,
January 20013
2b Grundsatz II über die Liquidität der Institute,
August 19993
7 Instruction sheet for the reporting of large ex-
posures and loans of 3 million Deutsche Mark
or more pursuant to sections 13 to 14 of theBanking Act, September 1998
For footnotes, see p 79*.

