MONTHLY REPORT
DECEMBER JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL
2003
Vol 55
No 12

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
Deutsche Bundesbank
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 1460431 Frankfurt am Main
Postfach 10 06 02
60006 Frankfurt am MainFederal Republic of Germany
Tel +49 69 9566 -1
or +49 69 9566 plus extension
number
Telex 41227 within Germany
414431 from abroad
Fax +49 69 5601071
Internet http://www.bundesbank.deReproduction permitted only if source is stated.ISSN 0418 -8292The German original of this Monthly Report
went to press on 12 December 2003.Annual and weekly publishing schedules for
selected statistics of the Deutsche Bundes-bank can be downloaded from our internetsite. The statistical data are also published onthe internet.
TheMonthly Report is published by the Deut-
sche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main, by vir-tue of section 18 of the Bundesbank Act. It isavailable to interested parties free of charge.
This is a translation of the original German-
language version, which is the sole authorita-tive text.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
ContentsReport on the stability of the
German financial system 5
Overview 5
Macroeconomic outlook and risk factors 8International financial system andfinancial markets 14Financial intermediaries in Germany 27Financial infrastructure 49
Stress testing the German banking
system 53
Commentaries 63
Economic conditions 63
Public finances 65Securities markets 67Balance of payments 69
Statistical Section 1*
Key economic data for EMU 6*
Overall monetary survey in the EMU 8*Consolidated financial statementof the Eurosystem 16*Banks 20*Minimum reserves 42*Interest rates 43*Capital market 48*Public finance in Germany 52*Economic conditions 60*Foreign trade and payments 67*
Overview of publications by the
Deutsche Bundesbank 77*

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
4

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
5Report on the stability
of the German
financial systemOverview
For decades the German financial system has
proved to be efficient and stable. Since theSecond World War Germany has not wit-nessed the financial crises and systemic mis-alignments – entailing, in some cases enor-mous macroeconomic costs – that have beenexperienced in many of the world’s other in-dustrial countries. Supported by a high de-gree of price stability, a culture in whichfinancial relationships are long-term hasevolved. This has been of particular benefit toenterprises, although general governmentand households have also gained, and hasstrengthened the sustainability of the finan-cial system.
At the beginning of the new millennium,
however, a number of underlying factors es-sential to financial stability deteriorated. Untilthe middle of 2000 the German stock marketparticipated in the global cycle of exagger-ated price movements and the ensuing pain-ful corrections. It is true that, owing to thelimited role played by shareholding in the ac-cumulation of financial assets in Germany,German households sustained relatively smalllosses when the equity price bubble burst.Nevertheless, the stock market slump resultedin a severe decline in the value of bank andinsurance company investment portfolios aswell as reductions in turnover in and earningsfrom products and services associated withthe capital market. Some of these reductionswere dramatic and occurred primarily in thefield of investment banking, on which a num-ber of big banks had previously been concen-trating. In addition, the gradual deteriorationStability culture
in Germany
Underlying
factors
deteriorated
at times but
financial
stability
not at risk

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
6in the banks’ profitability as a result of con-
stantly shrinking interest rate margins and theneed for large value adjustments in the lightof the persistent macroeconomic stagnationin Germany were contributory factors in theplunge of large sections of the German bank-ing system into a profitability crisis. This de-velopment became so entrenched that theinternational financial markets and ratingagencies also viewed the profitability of somelarge banks with increasing scepticism. How-ever, at no time did these pressures jeopardisethe stability of the German financial systemas a whole. In the context of its Financial Sec-tor Assessment Program the InternationalMonetary Fund, too, verified the resilience ofthe German financial system. Even so, it be-came clear that there was a significant needfor adjustment in the German banking indus-try and for careful monitoring of develop-ments that are relevant to stability.
During 2003 the conditions affecting the sta-
bility of the German financial system againbrightened considerably, even though furtheradjustments are still necessary on the part offinancial intermediaries. The two factors giv-ing rise to the improvement are the betterprospects for overall economic growth andthe determination with which the Germanbanks are tackling their profitability crisis. Themore favourable growth prospects in Ger-many are due, first, to the faster expansion ofthe world economy, including a recovery inthe euro area, and, second, the improvementthat has now emerged in the economic envir-onment within Germany itself. In particular,enterprises have made progress in creatingleaner production and cost structures and inalleviating their debt positions. However, the
number of corporate insolvencies in 2003 willprobably exceed the prior-year record ofsome 37,600. The large internationally oper-ating banks have responded to their structur-ally deteriorated earnings situation by exten-sively altering their strategies with a view tolowering costs, reducing risks and improvingprofitability. Additionally, all three pillars ofthe banking industry (private commercialbanks, savings banks and credit cooperatives)are putting in place instruments and struc-tures to manage credit risk and other oper-ational risks more efficiently and to make bet-ter use of returns to scale when processingoperations that can be standardised.
The reduced tension on the financial markets
is also reinforcing the generally more positivepicture that is now emerging. Whereas astrong pre-occupation with security had beendetermining market sentiment well into thesecond quarter of 2003, investors have nowregained confidence and are displaying great-er willingness to run risks. The improved out-look is being reflected in a marked recoveryon the stock markets and a favourable finan-cing environment for enterprises operating inthe capital market.
However, any disruption of the cyclical recov-
ery process will pose a downside risk to theimprovement in the underlying conditions ne-cessary for a stable financial system. Such dis-ruptions could be triggered by, for example,external geopolitical shocks or sharp fluctu-ations in the global financial markets. Thepronounced external imbalances, especially inthe case of the United States, which require
Outlook for
financial
stability again
brighter
Remaining risk
factors

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
7gradual correction, represent a latent risk that
abrupt movements will occur in foreign ex-change rates and that a possible overshoot-ing may follow. This risk could be increased ifthe worldwide provision of liquidity were tooaccommodating as that could encourage ex-cessive rises in asset prices and the transfer ofunrealistic valuations from one market to an-other. Such exaggerated prices may jeopard-ise the stability of real economic expansionand of financial flows if, in the course ofgrowing cyclical momentum or increasingrisks for consumer prices, there is a turn-around in interest rate movements. An up-ward movement in interest rates could haveconsiderable negative repercussions, especial-ly in economies where signs of an overheatedreal estate market are concomitant with alarge level of private sector debt. The current-ly favourable financing conditions for emer-ging economies might in some cases beahead of the improvement in fundamentals.Any slowdown in the cyclical recovery processmight have a further detrimental effecton corporate credit quality worldwide. Thiswould set off a process of correction in thecorporate bond market, where the narrowerspreads of the past few months indicate amore optimistic assessment of the credit risksof large enterprises; it would also underminethe efforts of the banks to reduce the needfor value adjustments in their banking book.
Maintaining financial stability is posing a chal-
lenge for all market participants. The banksand insurance companies must continue toredefine their business strategies, make last-ing improvements to their profitability and,where necessary, clean up their balancesheets. Further structural improvements are
necessary in this area so that the Germanbanking system can regain a sustainable levelof profitability. In the light of this the bankingindustry and the policy-making bodies shouldalso carefully consider the reform proposalsput forward by the experts of the Internation-al Monetary Fund.
The Bundesbank has a particular interest in
the stability of the financial system. Sound fi-nancial and banking systems are a necessityin modern economies with their inherent div-isions of labour. There are many reasons whythe Bundesbank shares responsibility formaintaining financial stability. As an integralpart of the Eurosystem it is responsible formonetary stability, ie for the maintenance ofprice stability and for an efficient refinancingprocess between the central bank and thebanking system. Safeguarding monetary sta-bility is a necessary but not sufficient condi-tion for ensuring financial stability. As one ofthe bodies responsible for banking supervi-sion the Bundesbank monitors the banks’ ob-servance of the regulatory framework andanalyses the banks’ economic performance.However, the entrepreneurial responsibilityfor the success of each bank remains un-affected by this. As an operator of paymentsystems the Bundesbank is directly involved inthe efficient channelling of payment flows.At the same time, it carries out a supervisoryfunction in the field of payments. Finally, theBundesbank is itself an active participant inthe financial markets. This accumulation ofareas of responsibility also implies that theBundesbank is involved in international bod-ies concerned with financial stability.
ChallengesRole of the
central banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
8The importance which the central banks at-
tach to the stability of the financial systemshas increased substantially over the past fewyears. Several factors have helped to bringthis about. The internationalisation of the fi-nancial flows has increased the degree of in-tegration of the national financial systemsand therefore also the risks of contagion. Therapidly improving efficiency of the financialsystems has seen a massive increase in thevolumes and speed of transactions and there-fore probably also the degree of sensitivity inthe event of sharp changes in data and as-sessments. In particular, the interactions be-tween financial and real economic stabilityhave without doubt become more complexand pronounced.
The term financial stability broadly describes a
steady state in which the financial system effi-ciently performs its key economic functions,such as allocating resources and spreadingrisk as well as settling payments, and is ableto do so even in the event of shocks, stresssituations and periods of profound structuralchange. The central banks require a broadanalytical spectrum if they are to be able toidentify potential risks as early as possible andto recognise the emergence of any undesir-able developments. First, the analyses musttake account of the relevant developments inthe real economy, on the international finan-cial markets and at the systemically relevantintermediaries or groups of intermediaries.Second, a critical assessment of the quality ofthe regulatory framework governing marketsand intermediaries as well as of the sound-ness of the technical systems serving, for ex-ample, payment transactions and securities
settlement is necessary.
This is the first report that the Bundesbank
has published on the stability of the Germanfinancial system. In future it will report regu-larly on its assessment of financial stabilityand the potential risks.
Macroeconomic outlook and risk factors
The stability of the financial system is various-
ly influenced by the macroeconomic environ-ment. This applies both to the nature andscale of the operations handled by financialintermediaries and to the risks incurred, espe-cially in the case of lending business and trad-ing activities. Given the high degree of open-ness of the German economy, not only na-tional developments but also global economicconditions are highly important.
World economyWorld economic growth has picked up no-
ticeably since the second quarter of 2003.Consequently, the risks to the stability of thefinancial system arising from global economicdevelopments have declined. According toestimates published in the IMF’s World Eco-
nomic Outlook of September 2003, however,
global output will probably increase in 2003by 3
1/C254% on an annual average and therefore
not much faster than in 2002. The reason forthis is the weak momentum in the first fewmonths of 2003. Now, the outlook for 2004is also being assessed much more favourably;the IMF forecasts that the world economy willDefinition
of financial
stability
Global
economic
situation and
outlook more
favourable

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
9grow by just over 4% and therefore faster
than at any time since 2000. The expansionin real world trade will likewise acceleratesharply.
World economic recovery during 2003 is due
to a large extent to the declining effect ofnegative global factors. In addition, produ-cing enterprises used these difficult times torestructure and consolidate in the real and fi-nancial sectors. Sentiment both in businessand in households has improved significantly.Expectations of a marked recovery in theworld economy have also been underpinnedby the expansionary monetary and fiscal pol-icies in most industrial countries.
The cyclical recovery in the world economy,
however, is not yet broadly based across allregions but, instead, is concentrated in theUnited States and east Asia as well as in thecentral and east European countries in transi-tion. The euro area is still catching up. Al-though the situation has eased somewhat inLatin America, potential setbacks are still con-siderable. Given the likelihood that externalimbalances will continue to grow worldwide,such a constellation appears to be pregnantwith disruptive possibilities and scarcely sus-tainable in the long run. The risk of abrupt ex-change rate movements has increased as aresult. The persistent threat of terrorism andthe prolonged tension in the Middle East con-tinue to be a source of considerable uncer-tainty for the world economy. The high inter-national crude oil prices at present reflectthis. By contrast, concerns about deflation,which were still widespread in the secondquarter, especially on the financial markets,have now largely dissipated. Instead, the re-
covery process is being assisted by the steadyprice climate in the industrial countries.
United StatesIn the third quarter of the year the US econ-
omy grew faster than it had done at any timesince the beginning of 1984. A rapid rate ofgrowth is likewise emerging in the fourthquarter of the year. Fiscal stimuli are the mainreason for this, although these will weakenin the course of 2004. Nevertheless, thechances of a lasting upturn have improvedsubstantially during the past few months, pri-marily because the recovery is now increas-ingly having an impact on the labour market.The fear that a period of jobless growth couldensue and that the cyclical improvementmight therefore be short-lived has now di-minished discernibly as a result.
The financial position of US consumers is still
not unproblematical. US household debt hasincreased markedly during the past fewyears, reaching a record of approximately110% in terms of disposable income in 2002.It is true that the burden of debt servicing hasgrown much more slowly owing to the de-cline in borrowing costs as a result of lowermarket interest rates and extensive mortgagerestructuring. However, the situation couldchange if interest rates, especially for con-sumer credit, were to rise again in the courseof the upswing. The low saving ratio is an-other reason why the financial vulnerability ofhouseholds is not to be underrated.
Regional
variations
in global
recovery
and riskSharp recovery
in US economy
Financing
circumstances
of house-
holds...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
10The financial situation of non-financial enter-
prises in the United States has improved, bycontrast. The financial markets have alreadyrecognised this by reducing the spreads ofcorporate bonds. First, the increase in debthas slowed down appreciably. Second, enter-prises have increasingly shifted from short-term to longer-term liabilities over the pastfew years and are now therefore more finan-cially sound. All in all, the imbalances in UScorporate balance sheets are apparently be-coming less pronounced. In the mediumterm, however, a number of US enterpriseswill have to replenish their company pensionfunds in order to remedy the lack of coverthat has arisen owing to the stock marketslump since 2000 and the low interest ratelevel.
The potential rate of disruption for US enter-
prises and individuals is closely related towhat is known as the twin deficits, ie thesharply increased public sector deficit and thechronically large current account deficitwhich is expected to amount to 5% of grossdomestic product (GDP) in 2003. This is ac-companied by the danger that, if there werea decline in the willingness of internationalcreditors to provide funds, the relationshipbetween interest rates and exchange rates inthe United States would be severely dis-turbed. The private sector would be particu-larly badly affected if there were a sharp risein interest rates at the long end of the marketbecause the heavy demand from the govern-ment for credit is to be seen as largely inelas-tic vis-/C224-vis interest rates. Such a risk analysismust also take account of the fact that forquite some time a significant proportion ofUS capital imports has not been driven by pri-
vate investors’ expectations of high yields. In-stead, it has been based on the interventionoperations of Asian central banks on the for-eign exchange market.
JapanThe Japanese economy returned to a growth
path early in 2002. For 2003 an increase ofjust over 2% is expected in real GDP; this isthe highest growth rate since the upswing in2000. The greatest stimulus to the Japaneseeconomy is currently coming from the rapidgrowth in neighbouring countries and inNorth America; these two regions absorbabout 70% of Japan’s exports of goods.Buoyant domestic demand has also beenstimulating the high rate of expansion. Onepossible reason for the sharp rise in businessinvestment is the fact that the major enter-prises have now made considerable progressin their real and financial restructuring. Evenso, much consolidation work is still necessaryin the case of the small to medium-sized en-terprises. This appears to be one reason whythe rapid rate of expansion in business invest-ment in 2003 will probably not be sustainableand the increase in overall economic output– according to the OECD’s autumn forecast –will be less in 2004, at 1
3/C254%, than in 2003. In
the event of a sharp appreciation in the yen,which (as is usual in forecasts) is not part ofthe assumptions made in the OECD forecast,further growth losses would result. It is truethat the deflationary tendencies have now re-ceded markedly and no longer constitute anappreciable impediment to economic recov-ery. Yet the OECD estimates that the decline...and
non-financial
enterprises
Risks from large
twin deficitsRemarkable
cyclical upturn
in Japan

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
11in consumer prices will accelerate somewhat
next year.
Euro areaThe first signs of a recovery emerged in the
euro area during the second half of 2003.Nevertheless, the Eurosystem’s business cycleexperts expect the annual rise in real GDP tobe no more than between 0.2% and 0.6%.A growth rate of between 1.1% and 2.1%after working-day adjustment is forecast for2004 as the expansionary forces are expectedto strengthen discernibly. Foreign demand isexpected to provide considerable impetus,and this will have a knock-on effect on thedomestic economy, particularly investment.But the risk of a marked depreciation of theUS dollar and of a resultant adjustment bur-den is a significant potential handicap.
Generally speaking, however, the conditions
in the euro area for a self-perpetuating up-turn appear to be fairly favourable. For ex-ample, the current account is running a slightsurplus, and the financial situation of enter-prises and households has stabilised. Newborrowing by non-financial enterprises in theeuro area has fallen significantly since 2000.The consolidation efforts of the telecommuni-cation companies have played a key role inthis. The level of corporate debt – measuredin terms of GDP – has been virtually un-changed since 2001, whereas in the secondhalf of the 1990s it had risen sharply. Anotherfactor is that lending to households has in-creased much more slowly since 2000. If therelatively high saving ratio is also taken intoaccount, the financial vulnerability of house-holds in the euro area may be considered
low. Public finances are in a somewhat differ-ent situation, however. The aggregate gov-ernment budget deficit in the euro area islikely to decrease somewhat during the cyclic-al upturn; according to the autumn forecastof the European Commission, however, it willamount to 2.7% of GDP in each of the nexttwo years and will therefore still be fairlylarge in historical terms.
GermanyIn 2003 the German economy was again un-
able to leave the path of stagnation. RealGDP for the year as a whole is expected to beno greater than in 2002. The labour markethas felt the pressure to cut jobs even further;the number of employed persons in Septem-ber 2003 was 1.2% below the correspondinglevel in 2002. The seasonally adjusted un-employment rate (as nationally defined) hasnow declined somewhat since the secondquarter; when this report went to press, itamounted to 10.5%. This is primarily a reflec-tion of the numerous legislative initiatives forrestructuring the labour market.
Major preconditions for a cyclical recovery of
the German economy have now improved.Particularly the turnaround in the world econ-omy that set in during the second quarterand the now recognisable signs of a cyclicalrecovery in the euro area have already liftedthe mood in manufacturing considerably. Theground is well prepared for more growthfrom the financing side; again, the cost situ-ation is less tight and is having a stabilising ef-fect on profits. However, significant shifts in
Still catching up
Basis for upturn
at macro-
economic and
microeconomic
level goodReal GDP
stagnated
in 2003...
...but basis for
recovery better

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
12exchange rate parities would have a detri-
mental effect on the German economy, espe-cially in the initial phase of the recovery pro-cess.
The adjustment processes in the corporate
sector have already made considerable pro-gress. This is true of inventories as well as ofthe capital stock. However, considerableheadway has also been made in the financialsector where adjustment usually takes some
time (see chart on this page). The capitalrequirements of non-financial enterprises,which in the period from 1998 to 2000 werealso determined by a sharp growth in finan-cial assets (eg participating interests), havesince declined substantially. It is likely that, onbalance, bank loans were repaid in the firsthalf of 2003. As in the previous year, the fi-nancial balance might have been positiveagain. The stabilisation of the debt ratio, thedeclining (net) interest rate burden and sav-ings on the cost side have meant that the fi-nancing circumstances of enterprises havetaken a turn for the better.
The generally more favourable picture emer-
ging of the overall financing circumstances ofGerman enterprises, however, must not ob-scure remaining weaknesses. The greatest ofthese is enterprises’ level of capital, which isfairly low by international standards. Thenthere is the sharp rise in corporate insolven-cies. Partly as a result of changes in statutoryregulations, there was a 42% increase inthese between 1999 and 2002. The extentof creditors’ expected outstanding claimsdoubled to about 359 billion in 2002 com-
pared with the year before. This was primarilythe result of an accumulation of major cor-porate failures. In the first eight months of2003 – the latest point for which official fig-ures are available – the number of petitionsfor insolvency was 6
1/C252% higher than in the
same period the year before. However, thesum total of expected claims was one-quarterlower, partly because there were fewer majorcorporate collapses than in the correspondingperiod a year earlier. If the forecast cyclical re-%
%%
Financing via bank loans3
1991 2002(Net) interest burden2Debt ratio 1Corporate *
financial indicators
*Non-financial corporations, including
quasi-corporations pursuant to ESA 95. —
1As a percentage of gross value added;
end-of-year figures. — 2Net interest ex-
penditure as a percentage of the operating
surplus. — 3Financing via domestic bank
loans as a percentage of the total cash
flow.
Deutsche Bundesbank30+
20+
10+
0
10−30
20
10160
150
140
130
120110
92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01
Financing
circumstances
of producing
enterprisesIncrease in
corporate
insolvencies

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
13covery does occur, it is likely that the number
of cases of insolvency will also decline in thenext few years.
Consumption and investment by households
(as defined in ESA 95) were weak in 2003.Despite generally stable consumer prices, dis-posable income was squeezed as unemploy-ment grew and the burden of levies in-creased. Furthermore, in view of the growinglabour market risks and the continuing de-bate on reform in Germany, the private savingratio has risen again. Even so, surveys showthat the general mood has now significantlyimproved, but the propensity to purchasewas still muted at the time that this reportwent to press.
In 2004 private consumption will initially
benefit from the cut in income tax and subse-quently from the gradual improvement onthe labour market. The price climate willprobably also remain consumer-friendly in2004 despite the rise in indirect taxes and ad-ministered prices. The construction of privatehousing, by contrast, will continue to sufferfrom the high ratios of unoccupied dwellingsand the uncertain income prospects in thelonger term. Changes here will be no morethan piecemeal in 2004 although the finan-cing conditions, building prices and construc-tion times will probably still be attractive.
The decline in the demand for construction
services was also the primary reason forhouseholds’ limited need for new net bor-rowing (see chart on this page), especially asborrowing for consumption purposes normal-ly plays no more than a minor role. Anothercurbing factor might have been the banks’
more restrictive credit standards, even if therestrictions in the case of households weremuch less severe than those applying to thecorporate sector. The borrowing ratio, that isto say, new borrowing as a percentage of ex-penditure on consumption and investment,has fallen to a historical low. In the light ofthis, it appears that the falling trend that hasbeen observed in households’ (gross) debtratio since 2000 has continued so far;at the end of June households’ liabilitiesamounted to 109% of disposable incomecompared with 114% at the end of 1999.
1
This, together with the low interest rate level,as % of disposable income
Interest payment ratio
H1
1991 2003End of
June
2003Debt ratio 1Household * indebtedness
and interest burden
* Defined according to ESA 95. —
1End-of-year figure.
Deutsche Bundesbank8.0
7.5
7.0
6.5116
112
108
104
100
96
92
88
84
- - 
92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02
1The debt ratio of households in Germany is not directly
comparable with that of the United States because – in
accordance with ESA 95 – it also includes the fairly size-
able debt of sole proprietors.Households
showing little
inclination to
spend...
...but some
improvement
expected
in 2004
Financial
situation of
households ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
14has significantly reduced the interest pay-
ments ratio of households. At just over 7% ofdisposable income, it does not constitute, onaverage, an excessively large item in thehousehold budget.
If the assets held by households are also
taken into consideration, the fairly sizeable(gross) liabilities of households by internation-al standards can be seen in quite a differentlight (see chart on this page). For example,the value of net assets is currently about fivetimes that of disposable income. Althoughhouseholds’ net assets position deterioratedsomewhat in Germany, too, as a result of theslump on the stock market between 2000and 2002, the creditworthiness of house-holds probably suffered little overall owing tothe comparatively small significance of share-holding in Germany and the largely stable
real estate prices.
There has, however, been a sharp rise in the
number of consumer insolvencies, a phenom-enon which had not been possible until theintroduction of the Insolvency Code of 1999;the number of foreclosure sales is much high-er still. From a macroeconomic point of view,however, it should be noted that personalbankruptcies and foreclosures are still verysmall in relation to the number of house-holds. For example, the market value of thecompulsory sales of real estate – which, inci-dentally, are not due only to insolvency butalso to other reasons such as divorce – wasan estimated 312 billion in Germany in 2002.
This compares with an outstanding credit vol-ume of 31 trillion. Furthermore, the ultimate
loss for the banks is limited, not least becauseof the “conservative” valuation rules whichthey apply.
International financial system
and financial markets
Global financial systemDevelopments in the international financial
markets were characterised by major changesin the interest rate and equity markets duringthe year (see chart on page 15). In the bondmarkets, a marked upward correction of cap-ital market yields kicked in globally in June,these yields having previously fallen to a lowwhich had not been seen for decades. Thestrongest price slide since 1994, which beganin the US and Japanese markets, causedas % of disposable income, year-end data
LiabilitiesFinancial assetsNet wealth 1
1991 2002Households’
financial position
1Including real estate, excluding durable
goods.
Deutsche Bundesbank550
500
450
400350
300
250
200
150100
50
92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01
... and asset
and liability
positionRise in
consumer
insolvencies
Turnaround
in the capital
market ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
15yields on ten-year US government bonds to
rise by around 130 basis points to 4.5% bymid-August and was accompanied as timewent on by a sharp increase in implied volatil-ity. Yields on euro-area government bondsalso followed this interest rate pattern to amore subdued extent and in mid-August, atroughly 4.25%, were some 75 basis pointsabove their June low.
A number of factors were responsible for the
sharp correction. Declining risk aversion onthe part of investors led to a reversal of theprevious safe haven flows to the bondmarkets. A reduction in the geopolitical un-certainties connected with the Iraq war andlessening concern about possible deflationarydevelopments were both instrumental in thisregard. After what was for many market play-ers a surprisingly small cut in US official inter-est rates on 25 June (Federal Funds ratedown by 25 basis points to 1%), “unconven-tional monetary policy measures” such as theFed purchasing long-term government bondsalso seemed less likely. Against this backdrop,speculative positions were liquidated.
The turnaround in yields, however, also re-
flected growing economic optimism, particu-larly in the United States, Japan and othercountries in East Asia. The bond marketsthus picked up the more optimistic sentimentwhich had already been affecting the equitymarkets. The upsurge in yields was addition-ally driven by technical factors, such as theextensive hedging activities of players in theUS mortgage market. The heavy demand forinstruments to hedge against exposure tointerest rate risk led to temporary tensions,%
%
%
Implied volatilities
in the bond market2
US Treasury
future
Eurex Bund
futureEuro area
10-yeargovernment bond yield
(right-hand scale)
DAX 1
(left-hand scale)Euro Stoxx 1
(left-hand scale)End-of-week figures
USA
10-yeargovernment bond yield
(right-hand scale)
S&P 500 1
(left-hand scale)Swings in the stock
and bond markets
Sources: Bloomberg, Thomson Financial Da-
tastream. — 1Beginning of January
2002 = 100. — 2Moving five-day averages;
calculated from the price of at-the-money
options.
Deutsche Bundesbank14
12
10
86
45.2
4.8
4.44.0
3.6
3.2110
100
90
8070
60
505.6
5.2
4.8
4.4
4.0
3.63.2110
100
90
80
70
2002 2003... caused by
greater risk
propensity ...
... and growing
economic
optimism

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
16especially in the market for US interest rate
swaps. Finally, a further negative factor af-fecting long-term capital market rates wasthe increasing supply pressure caused by theenlargement of the budget deficits both inthe United States and on this side of theAtlantic.
The upward trend of capital market yields
was interrupted by a countermovement inSeptember, when the US dollar rate took asharp tumble in the foreign exchange mar-kets, increasing global uncertainty aboutthe associated economic outlook. In mid-November renewed concerns about terroristattacks also put downward pressure on theevolution of yields. In early December thelevel of long-term yields on US Treasuries wasagain slightly below that on comparableeuro-area government bonds although realUS growth and inflation expectations, as de-rived from expert surveys (Consensus Fore-cast), were far higher than the correspondingfigures for the euro area. Regression analysesindicate that the average yield on euro-areagovernment bonds is in line with growth andinflation expectations in the euro area while,despite the sharp increase in recent months,the actual interest rate level in the UnitedStates is still significantly lower than the inter-est rate level estimated on the basis of thesetwo important explanatory factors.
2Al-
though the Fed’s announcement that the ac-commodating monetary policy stance couldbe maintained for a considerable period
seems to be having a subduing effect, marketplayers’ inflation expectations could changeabruptly, given the plentiful supply of liquid-ity. Measured in terms of the implied volatilityof ten-year US government bonds, marketplayers’ uncertainty about the further evolu-tion of interest rates is still higher than in thefirst half of the year.
The turnaround in the international equity
markets occurred shortly after the start of theIraq war (see chart on page 15). The initial im-petus came less from new economic datathan from the fact that the indices had gonethrough a three-year price slide following thegradual deflation of the equity market bub-ble. Thus in March 2003 the S&P 500 indexwas down by around 45% compared withthe peak in 2000 and the EuroStoxx byaround 65% while the DAX recorded a pricefall of as much as 70%. Evaluations had thusagain declined to close to or even belowlong-term averages, such as in relation to theprice-earnings ratio. The share price increasesince the second quarter probably reflects tosome extent a decline in the relatively highrisk premiums compared with the stock mar-ket boom in the late 1990s. However, empir-ical analyses for the German market indicatean increase in the volatility of the DAX and, inparticular, of its constituent stocks in recentyears. Hence a higher risk premium would ap-pear warranted – without an increase in thelevel of volatility per se necessarily also imply-ing an increase in the risks for financial stabil-ity (see box on page 17). Another factorwhich favoured the equity market turnaroundinitially was the phase of low interest rates in
2This was based on an estimation period from January
1998 to November 2003 (for US data) and from January
1999 to November 2003 (for euro-area data). In addition,
a variable for the uncertainty in the equity market con-
cerned was introduced into the estimation (implied vola-
tility of stock options), which proved to be significant in
all cases.Persistent
uncertainty
in the bond
marketTurnaround
in the equity
market after
three-year
price slide ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
17Deutsche BundesbankChange in DAX volatility
Volatility in the German stock market rose consider-
ably in conjunction with the stock market boom in the second half of the 1990s and the subsequent price corrections. Since then, the ﬂ  uctuation range 
of daily equity yields has increased markedly, as has its persistence. Much more frequently than in the past, days on which the DAX is highly volatile are followed by days with similarly great ﬂ  uctuations. 
The likelihood of extreme price ﬂ  uctuations has also 
increased noticeably. 
An empirical study 
1 of the equity yield ﬂ  uctu ations 
of the DAX index shows a marked increase in 
volatility over the past six years. July 1997 has been 
identiﬁ  ed as the turning point. The asymmetric 95% 
conﬁ dence interval for the estimated turning point 
ranges from March 1997 to August 1998. Not only 
did the DAX itself become signiﬁ  cantly more vola-
tile, there was also a sharp increase in the volatility of the individual stocks on which the index is based. The estimation of a GARCH(1.1) model before and 
after the turning point shows an unconditional 
variance more than 2.5 times higher, as well as an increase in the persistence parameters after 1997. 
The kurtosis, a measure of the incidence of extreme 
price swings, also increased distinctly.
At the current time it is not possible to say whether 
this rise in volatility will be permanent. By compari-
son, the estimation of a Markov switching model with a high and a low volatility regime based on his-torical data from 1965 onwards shows that although 
temporary phases of high volatility occurred prior to 
1997, they all lasted less than six months. As the current high volatility regime has already persisted for more than ﬁ  ve years, this could be taken as an 
indication of a lasting structural break.
Decomposing the monthly realised volatility of 
a typical DAX-listed enterprise into a company-
speciﬁ  c or idiosyncratic component and a market 
component clearly shows that, although market volatility has likewise increased over time, the break in the volatility dynamic is essentially due to the far 
more pronounced increase in idiosyncratic volatil-
ity (see adjacent chart). The divergent trends in the volatility of individual stocks and that of the index – which is ultimately composed of weighted 
prices of individual DAX stocks – can be explained 
by a declining correlation between the yields on individual DAX stocks. It is true that this improves the possibilities for risk diversiﬁ  cation. However, 
the sharp rise in company-speciﬁ  c volatility means 
that, particularly in the case of less diversiﬁ  ed invest-
ments – for example, due to investment constraints 
or to large corporate (cross) holdings in other enter-
prises – these portfolios are becoming riskier overall, despite the risk-reducing effect of the declining cor-relations. German households have adapted to this 
over the past years by investing a signiﬁ  cantly larger 
proportion of their ﬁ  nancial wealth in pre-diversi-
ﬁ ed investments, such as mutual funds, rather than 
individual stocks.
As the stock market in Germany becomes increas-ingly important – also in connection with the emergence of a funded component of old-age 
provision – the implications of stock market volatil-
ity for the functioning of the markets and the real economy become a more central issue. 
2 However, 
a greater degree of volatility does not endanger 
the stability of a ﬁ  nancial system per se ; rather, 
disruptions are usually caused by sudden leaps in volatility.
1 On this and the following comments see J Stapf and 
T Werner (2003), How wacky is the DAX? The changing 
structure of German stock market volatility , Deutsche 
Bundesbank discussion paper, series 1: papers from the Economic Research Centre, No 18/2003. — 2 For a current 
overview see IMF, Global Financial Stability Report, Septem-
ber 2003, Washington, especially chapter 2.Monthly values
Idiosyncratic volatility
1988 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 2002Market volatilityTotal volatilityDecomposition of the volatility
0.02
0.0100.03
0.02
0.0100.05
0.040.03
0.02
0.010

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
18the bond market. It prompted investors to
look for higher yields and thus to switch fromsecurity-oriented liquid forms of investmentto the equity markets.
As the year wore on, however, the upturn on
the equity market was bolstered increasinglyby the more positive profit expectationswhich accompanied the improved outlook formacroeconomic growth and the implementa-tion of corporate restructuring measures. Thesharp movements of prices in the bond mar-ket and of rates in the foreign exchange mar-ket only temporarily disrupted this trend. Asthe year progressed, the DAX recorded con-siderable price gains and was thus able topartly reverse the sharp losses sustained dur-ing the previous year.
Although from spring onwards the marked
price gains caused a further general increasein the evaluation level in the internationalequity markets (see chart on page 19), Ger-many and the euro area recently again re-corded a slight decline in the price-earningsratio as year-on-year profit expectations rosemore sharply than share prices. In Novemberthe price-earnings ratio based on expected12 months’ forward earnings was 15.2 forthe enterprises included in the DAX and 14.6for those in the EuroStoxx. For US equities(S&P 500) the corresponding figure was 17.2and for UK shares (FTSE 100) 18.4. Overall,there would currently seem to be little riskarising from incorrect evaluations in theequity markets, at least as far as the DAX andthe EuroStoxx are concerned. However, this isdependent on there being no interruption inthe ongoing economic recovery implicit in the
profit estimates.
The downward trend of the US dollar on the
foreign exchange market vis-/C224-vis a numberof currencies continued in 2003 following atrend reversal in early 2002. Alongside the USbudget deficit, the main problem is the grow-ing US current account deficit, which is moredifficult to finance because interest rate dif-ferentials in the capital market and particular-ly in the money market have militated againstUS dollar investments. After the US dollar re-covered somewhat in the summer months asa result of improved growth expectations inthe USA, the sentiment in the foreign ex-change markets with regard to the US cur-rency then clouded again in September. Inthe markets this led, in particular, to an ap-preciation of the yen, which, given the USdollar interventions by the Japanese monet-ary authorities, had previously been movingsideways for months. The US dollar also fellagainst the euro, reaching a new low in earlyDecember; it has lost just under 30% of itsparity value since early 2002. However, thehigh level of volatility that characterised theforeign exchange markets for a time had nomajor impact on capital market rates, and sofar the financial institutions also seem to havecoped well with the weak dollar. In view ofthe persistently high need for financing todeal with the US current account deficit,however, there is still considerable potentialfor abrupt swings in exchange rates. Theinterest rate and exchange rate levels couldalso be at risk if the Asian central banks wereto reduce their large investment in the US
... partly
reversed the
previous year’s
sharp share
price losses
Evaluation level
close to long-
term averagesConsiderable
potential
for abrupt
exchange rate
movements
in the forex
market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
19bond market associated with dollar interven-
tions.
Given the plentiful supply of liquidity in the fi-
nancial markets, the financing conditionscontinued to be favourable for enterprisesthat are active in the capital markets. Theinterest rate spread of corporate bonds overgovernment bonds with comparable matur-ities narrowed perceptibly during the courseof the year, which was particularly advanta-geous for bonds with lower investment graderatings
3and those in the speculative grade
segment (high yield bonds)4(see chart on
page 20). Against this background, net issu-ing activity in the international bond marketby enterprises, particularly from westernEurope, was buoyant.
The narrowing of the credit risk spread pre-
sumably owed much to investors’ search forhigher yields. Another factor is the growingexpectation of an improvement in firms’credit quality as the economic recovery pro-gresses. The distinct narrowing of the spreadin recent months meanwhile raises the ques-tion of whether market developments haveperhaps shot too far ahead of the actual situ-ation, which would harbour the risk of areversal.
This is indicated by globally ambiguous sig-
nals as to whether credit quality is stabilising.With regard to corporate bonds in the USAand the rest of the world, there has been adownward trend in the number of defaults(see chart on page 21). In terms of the ratingof bond issuers, however, a further slight de-cline occurred in credit quality in the courseof the year, although the scale of the down-
grades decreased considerably. In westernEurope, insurance corporations, utilities andtelecommunications enterprises, which in thepast contributed substantially to the wave ofdowngrading, recorded a certain stabilisationfrom the middle of the year. Although theoutlook of the rating agencies suggests that afurther slowing of the downgrading trendcan be expected, downgrades will probablycontinue to outnumber upgrades in the com-ing months. The persistently high level of cor-porate debt means that the risks for creditquality will continue if the economic recoveryand the development of corporate profits lagDAX
Euro StoxxS&P 500FTSE 100Price-earnings ratio
of major stock indices *
Source: Thomson Financial Datastream. —
*Based on earnings expectations over the
next twelve-month period according to
I / B / E / S.
Deutsche Bundesbank24
22
20
18
16
14
12
2002 2003
3Bonds with a Standard & Poor’s BBB rating or with a
Moody’s Baa rating or higher.
4Bonds with a Standard & Poor’s BB rating or with a
Moody’s Ba rating or lower.Favourable
financing
conditions for
enterprises
active in the
capital market
Risks of a
reversal for
corporate
bonds
Credit quality
not yet fully
stabilised

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
20behind expectations. The high level of house-
hold debt also remains a negative factor; thisdebt is largely secured by real estate assets(see section on pages 23-27). Therefore, thefurther development of markets allowing thetrading of credit risks from the enterprise andhousehold sectors could improve the financialinstitutions’ robustness provided that certaincriteria such as market transparency and pro-fessional risk management are met (see box
on page 22).
That credit risk spreads may possibly have
narrowed too much is also suggested by thefact that higher risk margins compared withbond spreads and the persistently restrictiveconditions applied in banks’ lending businessindicate that markets and credit institutionsare estimating default risk differently.
5In the
third quarter the euro-area banks whosecredit business is surveyed each quarter againslightly tightened their credit standards in re-spect of lending to enterprises. Their some-what more restrictive lending policy affectedenterprises of all sizes and was reflected prin-cipally in a widening of the margins, especial-ly for riskier loans, which suggests that banksare still pursuing a risk-differentiated lendingpolicy. Furthermore, the banks surveyed setstricter standards with regard to collateral,lending volume, covenants and maturity.However, the somewhat more restrictivelending behaviour coincided with a decline incredit demand on the part of enterprises. Theinstitutions did not expect demand to pick upslightly until the final quarter.
Euro-area money marketOwing to weak economic developments,
2003 was characterised in the euro-areamoney market by a sharp decline in interestrates coupled with considerable fluctuations.In addition, geopolitical uncertainties – par-End-of-week figures
Basis
pointsBasis
pointsBasis
points
Reduced scale
Speculative-grade2
Euro
area
USAUSA
AAABBBInvestment-grade 1
Euro area
AAABBBCredit spreads
of corporate bonds
over government bonds
Source: Merrill Lynch. — 1Seven to
ten-year corporate bonds from the relevant
rating grade vis-à-vis government bonds
with a comparable maturity. — 2Corporate
bonds with a residual maturity of at leastone year vis-à-vis government bonds with a
comparable maturity.
Deutsche Bundesbank1400
1200
1000
800
600400300
200100
0300
200100
0
2002 2003
5However, other factors such as the different corpus of
enterprises in the corporate bond and bank loan markets,
varying loan maturities and price setting leeways are also
relevant to the interest rate differential.Further slight
tightening of
credit standards
in the euro area
Fall in interest
rates in 2003

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
21ticularly the Iraq war – had a negative impact
on the euro-area money market at times. TheEurosystem responded to the decline in risksto price stability in the euro-area memberstates in the first half of 2003 by cutting thekey interest rates by 25 basis points on6 March and by a further 50 basis points on5 June.
6
These perceptible changes in interest ratesover the course of the year were accompan-ied at least in the first half of 2003 by a clearincrease in uncertainty among market partici-pants. Up to the middle of the year, forinstance, the implied volatility in the euromoney market, measured in terms of pricesof at-the-money options on three-monthEuribor futures contracts, was high. BetweenJanuary and November 2003 the volatility ofthe Eonia went up from 8 to 35 basis pointsyear on year. This development was not de-termined solely by the two cuts in key interestrates made in 2003. The volatility (measuredin terms of the standard deviation) of thespread between the Eonia and the minimumbid rate likewise increased from 8 to 14 basispoints. The spread was subject to particularlymarked fluctuations, especially in the dayspreceding and following the two key interestrate cuts. However, the average fluctuationsin the spread at the end of the minimum re-serve periods were also greater than in 2002.US$
billion
US$
billion
%
1990 95 00 2003Defaults on bonds2
Rest
of the worldUSACredit quality
improves
Credit quality
deteriorates... in western Europe 1
010203040506070Credit quality
improves
Credit quality
deterioratesChanges in companies’ ratings ...
... in the USA 1
0102030405060708090100Balance of bond volume affectedby rating changes (left-hand scale)
Number of upgrades as % of all
rating changes (right-hand scale)Credit quality indicators
Source: Moody’s, Bundesbank calcula-
tions. — 1Moving average over four
quarters. -  = Latest position: 2003 Q3. —
2As well as insolvencies, this includes
default on interest payments and capital
repayments. Number of issuers affected as
a percentage of all issuers with a ratinggrade; moving average over twelve
months.
Deutsche Bundesbank6
5
4321
0100
50
0
50−
100−
150−
200−
250−250+
200+
150+
100+
50+
0
50−
100−
150−
200−
250−
- - - 
- 
6The term structure of interest rates in the money mar-
ket signalled expectations of a further increase in interest
rates from the middle of 2003. The yield curve had be-
come inverse during the first half of 2003 but it returned
to normal from early August. At the end of November
the 12-month Euribor was again some 30 basis points
above the one-month rate. That had last occurred in
summer 2002.Money market
rates more
volatile in 2003

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
22Increasing transfer of credit risks
In the past few years the range of financial
markets has developed significantly as a result
of the rapid growth of trade in credit risks.
Important credit risk transfer instruments are
various types of asset-backed securities and
credit derivatives, in particular credit default
swaps. Although it is difficult to gauge the
market volumes precisely because the statis-
tical data are insufficient and not comparable
at an international level, the notional amount
of credit derivatives outstanding worldwide
in December 2002, for example, is estimated
at up to US$2 trillion. 1Significant growth
rates have likewise been recorded in Europe
in the issuance of asset-backed securities, al-
though the market volumes are still consider-
ably smaller than those of the US market. In
Germany this market segment will be add-
itionally boosted by the true-sale initiative
launched by the German banking sector.
The transfer of credit risks opens up oppor-
tunities to improve the risk management of
financial institutions and can contribute to a
more efficient allocation of risks within the fi-
nancial system as well as a better availability
of credit. New investment alternatives are
being offered to credit risk purchasers.
Available information indicates that much of
the credit risk transfer activity is occurring
within the banking sector. 2It would appear
that larger, internationally operating banks
tend to be net sellers of credit risk (ie protec-
tion buyers), whereas regional banks in Eur-
ope, for example, tend to be net buyers (ie
protection sellers). In addition, a significant
amount of credit risk is also being transferred
to other market players, in particular to insur-
ance companies.It is likely that the broader dispersion of credit
risks ensuing from risk transfer activities con-
tributed to improving the resilience of the
global financial system during the latest
global economic slowdown. However, the fol-
lowing weaknesses and potential risks should
not be overlooked.
– At the level of individual institutions, trad-
ing in credit risk transfer instruments in-
creases the risk management require-
ments which result, for example, from the
more complex assessment of credit risk
and legal risks. To this extent, it is difficult
to estimate the possible increased risk of
losses, particularly in the case of less ex-
perienced market players such as in the in-
surance sector.
– The credit derivatives market – like the
other derivatives markets – is character-
ised by a high concentration of intermedi-
ary activities on a small group of global
institutions. This is accompanied by a
concentration of counterparty risks and
makes the market susceptible to spill-over
effects or market disruptions, for example
if individual institutions withdraw.
– The credit derivatives market is insuffi-
ciently transparent since the sparse in-
formation provides an inadequate over-
view of both the redistribution of credit
risks and of risk concentrations. An im-
provement in market players’ disclosure
practice is therefore urgently required in
order to strengthen market discipline.
Furthermore, the statistical reporting obli-
gations of the principal market players vis-
/C224-vis central banks/supervisory authorities
should be reinforced.
1Source: British Bankers’ Association, see Bank for Inter-
national Settlements, Committee on the Global FinancialSystem, Credit risk transfer, January 2003. — 2See FitchRatings, Global Credit Derivatives: Risk Management or
Risk?, 10 March 2003 and Fitch Ratings, Global Credit
Derivatives: A Qualified Success, 24 September 2003.
Deutsche Bundesbank

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
23By contrast, uncertainty with regard to the
credit status of counterparties in the inter-bank money market declined steadily in thefirst half of 2003. This is clearly shown by thespread between unsecured and securedmoney market transactions, the “depo-repospread”. After one-year rates went up sharplyfrom 7 or 8 basis points in the second half of2002 to, at times, more than 12 basis points,between January and July 2003 the spreadagain narrowed to its initial level, where it hassince remained.
The liquidity situation in the euro-area money
market can be assessed by looking at thetrend in daily turnover. The Eurosystem’sMoney Market Study 2002 had alreadyshown that daily turnover in the euro areamoney market was increasing slightly; thistrend continued in 2003 and, according toinitial estimations, will become more pro-nounced. The importance of the unsecuredmarket has declined in recent years in favourof the repo market. This development showsthat, for money market players, professionalrisk management, especially in the field ofcredit risk, is gaining in importance. The sameconclusion may be inferred from the growingconcentration on shorter maturities.
Another key yardstick for assessing money
market liquidity is the volume of derivative in-struments which are used, on the one hand,to actively manage risks and, on the other, tobuild up speculative positions. With Eoniaswaps, currency swaps, forward rate agree-ments and other instruments, the euro-areamoney market is well developed in this re-spect, too. With regard to the volume ofturnover, a year-on-year two-digit percentage
growth in derivative instruments is expectedin 2003.
In 2003 the euro-area money market showed
that it can also easily ensure a cleared marketbetween the euro-area credit institutionseven in economically and geopolitically diffi-cult times. It thus made a decisive contribu-tion to the stability of financial intermediariesin the euro area.
Selected risks in major countriesAs the multi-year trend towards greater inter-
national integration of the German financialsystem continues, the susceptibility to shocksfrom abroad has tended to increase. In thisrespect the close relations between bankingsystems are of particular importance. In anumber of countries, the real estate marketboom brought about by favourable financingconditions proved to be an important main-stay of lending business during the economicdownturn. Owing to the key position ofbanks in financing, fairly large fluctuations inthe values of real estate used as collateral forloans may have a direct impact on the stabil-ity of the financial system. Sizeable priceswings on real estate markets resulting fromdemand or supply shocks are not uncommonin many countries as volume adjustments canbe made only with a time lag. However, priceincreases which persist over years run the riskof being excessive. In Germany’s case there is
Declining
uncertainty in
the interbank
money market
High degree
of liquidity
coupled with
growing share
of the repo
market ...
... and greater
recourse to
derivativesKey role of real
estate markets
for financial
stability ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
24currently no indication of the real estate mar-
ket overheating.7
In the euro area, the Netherlands and Spainare two examples of major economies inwhich real estate prices and mortgage debthave risen far more quickly since the mid-1990s than nominal GDP (see above chart).In the Netherlands, the upward movement ofprices nonetheless slowed down at the endof 2000, in line with real economic growth,and has since maintained its high level, whilein Spain the price surge continued well into2003. In addition to the general risk factorsof income growth and unemployment, a fur-ther risk on the Spanish mortgage market isthe prevalence of variable mortgage rates,which could result in unexpected burdens forsome borrowers. According to rating agencycalculations, however, the leading banks in
the mortgage market in the two countries aresufficiently profitable or have enough reservesto withstand a moderate increase in creditdefaults.
In the United Kingdom real estate prices have
recently far outstripped income growth. Espe-cially for first-time buyers, ie households whohave no existing real estate assets to trade in,it has become perceptibly more expensive toenter the housing market, which will prob-ably depress demand in this sector consider-ably. Variable rate mortgage loans or fixedrate agreements with a very short maturityare also traditionally predominant on the UKmortgage market. In conjunction with thedramatic rise in real estate prices and a histor-ically high level of household debt, the vul-nerability of the UK financial system to aninterest rate shock increased during 2003. Sofar, however, the default rates on mortgageloans are low, thanks to favourable financingconditions and low unemployment. More-over, the safety margin between the averagemortgage and the market value of the mort-gaged property has increased to around 25%in the case of new agreements. This figureshould be interpreted with caution as thecreditor banks may be unable to realise thefull market value in the event of a foreclosure.However, rating agencies, which base theirassessments on a broader set of ratios, like-wise consider that the leading banks in theUK mortgage market are sufficiently robustto withstand a certain increase in loan de-
1995 Q1 = 100
1995 2003Netherlands
SpainUSAUKReal estate prices in relation
to nominal GDP
Sources: national statistics, Bundesbank cal-
culations.
Deutsche Bundesbank160
150
140
130
120
110
100
90
96 97 98 99 00 01 02
7See Deutsche Bundesbank, Price indicators for the
housing market, Monthly Report, September 2003,
pp 45-58.... in the
euro area ...... and in
the United
Kingdom

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
25faults. In addition to these direct credit risks,
a sharp rise in interest rates could have adampening effect on private consumptiondemand, as a result of which the business cli-mate would also cool for banks.
As real estate prices have risen and interest
rates gone down, house owners in the UnitedStates – like those in the United Kingdom –resorted to substantial equity cash withdraw-als for consumption purposes without produ-cing an increase in the direct debt service bur-den. Owing to fixed interest rate agreementsand long maturities, most house owners inthe USA are, however, likely to be better pro-tected against rising mortgage rates in themedium term than borrowers in the UnitedKingdom. Signs of the real estate marketoverheating are – apart from regional “blips”– also weaker in the United States at present.
Relations with the US banking system are of
considerable importance for internationallyoperating German banks. Indicators such ascredit spreads, ratings and share prices sug-gest that, despite the preceding economicslowdown, the US financial system is stable.Bolstered by low interest rates and a boomingreal estate market, many banks made recordprofits in the first half of 2003. The share ofproblem loans in the banks’ portfolios has de-creased and is back at the 2000 level. Thiswas mainly due to mortgage and consumerlending, whereas the frequency of paymentdefaults on corporate loans is only slowly de-clining from the cyclical peak reached in mid-2002. The banks are showing correspondingrestraint in granting new loans to commercialborrowers.The stability of the Japanese banking sector
has been the particular focus of internationalattention in recent years. The Japanese gov-ernment has taken various steps to improvethe situation in the banking sector. One aim isto reduce the share of bad debts in the overallvolume of loans. Given the strained earningssituation of credit institutions – in the previ-ous two financial years Japanese banks re-corded huge losses instead of the profits ini-tially announced – the accelerated write-offof problem loans represented a major chal-lenge. This is also evidenced by the firstnationalisation of a major regional bank,Ashikaga Bank, at the end of November ongrounds of overindebtedness. The IndustrialRevitalisation Corporation of Japan (IRCJ),which began operations at the start of May2003, is to purchase ¥10 trillion worth of badloans from banks in the next two years andto restructure the borrower enterprises con-cerned in the three years after that.
The tense situation at Japanese banks can
also be seen from the unfavourable compos-ition of their capital. For example, externalauditors now have to assess whether the vol-ume of deferred tax assets (DTA) in the bal-ance sheet is appropriate.
8Given the difficult
earnings situation of the banks, the fact thatat the end of March 2003 DTA accounted forhalf the core capital of the big Japanesebanks also put pressure on the banks’ credit-worthiness.
8This concerns expected future reductions in tax liability
which increase the core capital in the balance sheet al-
ready during the current year but can only be actually
realised once (taxable) profits are recorded again in the
future.Limited risk of
the US real
estate market
overheating
US banking
system robustNumber of bad
debts still
high in Japan
Problematic
composition
of Japanese
banks’ capital ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
26For the first half of the current financial year,
which ends in March 2004, the four majorbanking groups recorded a return to profit-ability. The economic recovery had a positiveeffect. In addition, the sharp rise in Japaneseshare prices since the end of the first quarterhas afforded the banks some relief, as it in-creased the market value of their participat-ing interests. This points to the relatively highdependence of profitability on financial mar-ket developments, a situation which is com-
pounded by low operating results, especiallyin credit business.
As the global economy recovered, the
emerging markets’ prospects of rising exportbusiness improved. Moreover, they continuedto benefit from the plentiful supply of liquid-ity in the international financial markets. As aresult of the strong, yield-driven demand foremerging market bonds, risk premiums ongovernment bonds fell below their long-termaverages in mid-2003 (see adjacent chart).Major public sector borrowers in the emer-ging markets took advantage of these favour-able conditions to cover a large part of theirexternal financing needs for 2003 at an earlystage. Nonetheless, the risks for the emer-ging-market countries arising from the inter-est rate cycle in industrial countries – whichhas been moving upwards since June – arelikely to remain as the adjustment process inmany countries still has some way to go.A renewed increase in risk premiums for theemerging markets would result in growingdebt servicing costs from rollover loans andnew debt. In Latin America, particular risksare arising from the negative impact on confi-dence caused by the high levels of domesticgovernment debt and the relatively smallinvolvement in international trade. In Asia– particularly in China, Indonesia and SouthKorea – but also in Russia and Hungary, risksto the stability of the domestic banks couldcome from the strong growth of lending tothe private sector.
In the recent past, of the key emerging mar-
kets in the global economy, Argentina, Brazil End-of-week figures
Basis
points
Basis
points
Reduced scale
Selected countries
RussiaBrazil
TurkeyGroups of countries
EMBs, global
Europe 1Latin America
AsiaRisk premiums *
on government bonds from
emerging-market countries
Source: JP Morgan. — *Yield on bonds
denominated in US dollars less yield on
long-term US government bonds. — 1In-
cluding Russia, Turkey, Ukraine.
Deutsche Bundesbank3000
2500
2000
15001000
500
01500
1200
900
600
300
0
2002 2003
... but return
to profitability
expectedEmerging
markets still
favoured by
search for
higher yields

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
27and Turkey, in particular, were affected by ser-
ious balance of payments crises. After the cri-sis which began in 2001, the economic situ-ation in Argentina took a turn for the better.Negotiations with the IMF about refinancingmatured Fund loans and about a three-yearadjustment programme were concluded atthe end of September. At the same time, theArgentine government proposed reschedul-ing private creditors’ loans, the aim being tomassively reduce its debt service burden. InBrazil there was a marked decline in financialand economic risks compared with the end of2002. The month-on-month rise in inflationwas eradicated, the current account was inbalance in the first ten months of 2003 andthe government pursued an ambitious reformcourse. However, the persistently high level ofdomestic government debt and its consider-able volatility – owing to its pegging to theexchange rate and the central bank’s targetrate for overnight money – harbour a consid-erable risk for confidence. In Turkey the finan-cial and economic risks declined considerablyafter the end of the Iraq war. Future financialand economic prospects depend mainly onwhether the government keeps strictly to itsconsolidation and reform course. The govern-ment’s target is a comparatively ambitiousprimary surplus of 6
1/C252% of GDP in 2003,
which it will use to meet its internal and ex-ternal payment obligations. Moreover, Turkeyis currently benefiting from US$8.5 billionworth of bilateral financial aid from theUnited States.Financial intermediaries in Germany
For many decades now, Germany has been
home to one of the most stable and efficientbanking systems in the world. For a longtime, growth in the economy as a whole anda stable currency created a favourable macro-economic environment for the banking indus-try. Conversely, the specific structure of theGerman banking industry played a decisiverole in developing the strengths of the Ger-man economy. The clear decentralisation ofthe banking industry supported the creationof a strong Mittelstand and offset regional
disparities in economic performance. Stablerelationship banking and close links betweenprivate banks and industry have resulted in asteady provision of corporate financing alsoin periods of slack economic activity. Thelong-term nature of such financial relation-ships provided further stability against self-perpetuating economic downturns.
Over the course of the 1990s this environ-
ment changed fundamentally. The specificmacroeconomic advantages in Germanydwindled. Growth-inhibiting structural prob-lems increasingly took centre stage. However,the changes in banking itself, triggered by ad-vances in information and communicationtechnology as well as the liberalisation ofthe financial markets, probably had an evengreater impact than the developments in theeconomy as a whole. In particular, technicaladvances have greatly increased the possibil-ity of exploiting returns to scale in the stand-ardised processing of retail operations. Thishas created enormous pressure to acquiregreater size and larger volume in retail busi-Stability and
efficiency
Change in the
macroeconomic
environment
and technical
progress ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
28ness and consequently has led to consolida-
tion in the banking industry.
In this context, the extensive regional reach
and structure of the German banking indus-try, with even large institutions havingcomparatively low market shares, suddenlyturned out to be more of a liability. The questfor size and market share as well as competi-tion with new products and distribution chan-nels led to an even more competitive environ-ment. The profitability of the German bank-ing industry began to erode. For a time, con-centrating on capital market products andservices appeared to offer a way out of theongoing earnings crunch. At the end of the1990s, investment banking, in particular,generated high earnings. But in connectionwith the developments in the equity marketsespecially the big banks became increasinglydependent on volatile sources of revenue.
From mid-2000 the macroeconomic environ-
ment began to deteriorate. Although thiswas in line with the global trend in the bank-ing industry, the duration, extent and effectswere felt particularly hard by German banks.First, the sluggishness of growth was morepersistent in Germany than in other industrialcountries. The wave of corporate insolvenciesin Germany increased accordingly, which re-sulted in a significant need for risk provision-ing in the German banks’ loan portfolios.Second, it became apparent that the diversifi-cation of the domestic banking market couldnot prevent the banking system’s cyclical vul-nerability. Owing to fierce competition, over-capacity and sub-optimal operating size, prof-itability sank too low under normal economiccircumstances. Furthermore, many large banks
in the private banking sector as well as sev-eral of the public Landesbanken were notable to benefit enough from the stabilisingeffect originating from the relatively stableearnings flow in retail business. This initiateda fundamental discussion (also within thecontext of the credit crunch hypothesis
9)o n
the earnings and structural situation of theGerman banking system.
The German banking industry reacted de-
cisively to the cost problem and since 2002 inparticular has been taking vigorous counter-measures. Many institutions, especially the bigbanks, have introduced drastic cost-cuttingprogrammes. All three pillars (private com-mercial banks, savings banks and credit co-operatives) launched or intensified initiativesto modernise their banking services, ie to bet-ter exploit economies of scale and synergiesthroughout their affiliated network or to re-duce their range of in-house work throughoutsourcing. There are first signs of success.Increasingly effective retrenchment measureshave helped to lower administrative costs.
The planned revision of the international cap-
ital adequacy rules (Basel II) is likewise alreadyhaving a galvanising effect on efforts to im-prove risk management in lending business.This has prompted all banks to focus theircredit relationships more on risk/return con-siderations; this approach, which has alwaysbeen prevalent in the organised capital mar-
9See Deutsche Bundesbank, The development of bank
lending to the private sector, Monthly Report, October
2002, pp 31-46, and Deutsche Bundesbank, German re-
sults of euro-area bank lending survey, Monthly Report,
June 2003, pp 67-76.... are altering
the competitive
environment
Deterioration in
environment at
start of decadeReaction of
the banking
industry and
initial successes
Galvanising
effect of Basel II

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
29kets, is thus now being applied to loans, too.
Cautiously raising margins in lending businesswill pave the way for a gradual recovery ofincome.
The combination of cost reductions and
greater risk awareness led to improvementsin the earnings situation in all three pillars ofthe German banking system in the first threequarters of 2003 despite the general eco-nomic stagnation. The important thing tonote is that the German banking system isnow correcting past undesirable trends on itsown. The slight recovery should encouragebanks to continue their efforts in order toreturn to the path of sustained earnings.
Current trends at large, internationally
operating banks
After the big internationally operating Ger-
man banks reported poor results and in somecases even losses in 2002 – owing primarilyto high risk provisioning – they responded byembarking on a comprehensive strategic re-orientation. The various measures differ in in-tensity and time horizon. Reductions in stafflevels, streamlining the branch network andthe sale of participating interests are amongthe measures which have more of a short-term effect. In addition, the banking industryis putting in place instruments and structureswhich will tend to have a long-term impact.These include the launch of a true-sale initia-tive in Germany, which will contribute to en-hancing flexibility in the treatment of creditrisks. Furthermore, there are promising strat-egies to slice up the value chain with the re-sult of an “industrialisation” of the processes,eg through the creation of credit factories
and securities settlement centres as well asoutsourcing. Above and beyond that it willcontinue to be necessary to scrutinise currentbusiness strategies and for institutions to pos-ition themselves convincingly vis-/C224-vis thenational and international competition.
The aggregated balance sheet of a selected
group of large internationally active banks
10
shows a steep decline of their risk-weightedassets to 31,125 billion (see table on page 30
and chart on page 31)
11. All of the banks, as
was the case with other groups of banks, ful-filled the statutory capital adequacy require-ments both in accordance with Principle I andthe Basel standards at all times. The core cap-ital (“tier 1”) ratio of the aggregate of thelarge internationally operating banks im-proved markedly over the course of 2003 to7.95%, two-thirds of which were a result ofthe reduction of credit risk. Consequently,these banks made significant progress incomparison with other EU institutions.
10The aggregate comprises a group of eight German
banks from all three sectors, the consolidated balance
sheet totals of which all exceed 3250 billion (as at 30 June
2003). All of the banks in the group operate not only in
Germany but also carry out major operations in the inter-
national markets as well. The amount of claims on non-
residents, both in absolute terms and as a percentage of
the balance sheet total, was used as a measure of defin-
ing the term “internationally active”. The following an-
alysis is based on the respective consolidated data of the
institutions.
11One point to bear in mind is that in the relatively small
aggregate of large internationally operating banks busi-
ness trends are influenced to a great degree by extraor-
dinary factors which arise at all institutions due to numer-
ous strategic reorientations and restructurings. A case in
point is the deconsolidation of the mortgage business of
three large banks in the second half of 2002.Strategic
reorientation
triggered by
unsatisfactory
earnings result
in 2002Balance sheet
trends

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
30Hidden losses,12the majority of which origin-
ated during the price slide in the equity mar-kets between spring 2001 and spring 2003,are likely to have been reduced somewhat asa result of the stock market recovery over thecourse of 2003. Above and beyond that, thevolume of hidden losses has been reducedsignificantly through write-downs and therealisation of losses in the course of streamlin-ing the portfolios of participating interests,securities and loans. Some institutions, how-ever, need to make further adjustments.
The large internationally operating banks
managed to bring their operational businessout of the red in 2003. Taken together, gen-eral administrative spending and risk provi-sioning amounted to approximately 90% ofthe operating profits (net interest income plusnet commission income plus the result from
trading business) in the first nine months of2003. The earnings improvement witnessedthus far in 2003 was, however, due mainly toa reduction in the two aforementioned costitems (see chart on page 32). Furthermore,while the recovery in the financial markets inthe spring brought about an increase in thetrading result, it fell again sharply in the sum-mer. This development, together with thefact that this profit component tends to behighly volatile, means it can hardly bedeemed suitable as the sole driver of a funda-mental and sustained improvement in earn-ings.Balance sheet trends of large, internationally operating German banks
Volume of
businessof which
Claims onnon-banksRisk-weighted
assets
1Risk-weightedassets
1/
balance sheettotalCore capital
ratio
1
As at end in 5billion As percentage
2000 Q4 3,384 1,586 1,397 41 6.49
2001 Q2 3,749 1,739 1,472 39 6.63
Q4 3,817 1,740 1,436 38 6.98
2002 Q2 3,622 1,691 1,407 39 6.91
Q4 3,336 1,440 1,278 38 6.94
2003 Q2 3,506 1,539 1,204 34 7.66
Q3 3,305 1,399 1,125 34 7.95
1In accordance with Principle 1 consolidation pursuant to
sections 10 and 10a of the Banking Act (excluding marketrisk positions).
Deutsche Bundesbank
12“Hidden losses” originate if the market value of an
asset falls below its value as recorded in the balance
sheet (book value).Hidden losses
Improved
results in 2003

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
31The cost-income ratio (general administra-
tive spending as a percentage of operatingprofits) improved from 78% in 2002 to 73%in the first nine months of 2003. At the sametime, however, it must be mentioned that themore narrowly defined ratio of general ad-ministrative spending to gross yield (netinterest income plus commission income)remained at the high level of 90%. Thus theeffects of cost-cutting measures on generaladministrative spending approximately offsetthe losses in net interest and commission in-come following the reduction of assets andother operations. Hence, the result from trad-ing business made the largest contribution to-wards improving the cost-income ratio in thefirst nine months of 2003.
These figures show that the banks’ short-term
measures to change course have definitelyhad an effect. First, the earnings situation hasalready stabilised, albeit at a low level, thanksin part to a markedly improved trading result.Fears of a downward spiral in the wake of de-clining business, underutilisation of capacity,an increase in unit costs and a further deteri-oration of earnings have hitherto not materi-alised. Second, following persistent restruc-turing efforts, banks now have more leewayfor new lending business. In addition, a great-er focus on core business segments, for ex-ample by reducing participating interests, cre-ates structures which should facilitate a sus-tained recovery process in the medium term.In order to achieve this, savings on the costside, after exhausting the “defensive” poten-tial of staff reductions and branch closures,must be continued by the initiated or pendingmeasures aimed at slicing up the value chain
and taking advantage of returns to scale.
The advances made to date in curbing costs
and in risk provisioning need to be comple-mented by progress on the income side. Con-vincing business strategies and a clear orien-tation towards profitable business segmentsand customer groups are necessary in orderto generate new sources of income throughproduct innovations and further improve-ments in the quality of service in both inter-est-earning business and commission busi-ness. The objective must be to return to asustained earnings path.
The success stories among smaller commer-
cial banks and foreign banks show that this ispossible. By pursuing a consistent strategic
Half-year-end data
 5 billion
Absolute change from the preceding period
1
H2 H1 H2 H1 H2 H1 Q30as % of the balance sheet totalRisk-weighted assets *
of large, internationally
operating German banks
*Pursuant to the consolidated Principle I in
accordance with sections 10 and 10a of the
Banking Act (excluding market risks posi-
tions). — 1Third quarter of 2003 vis-à-vis
first quarter of 2003.
Deutsche Bundesbank150+
100+
50+
0
50−
100−
150−45
40
35
30
2000 2001 2002 2003Cost-income
ratio
Change of
course evident

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
32orientation, several of these banks have suc-
ceeded in positioning themselves excellentlyin lucrative market segments and niches.
As from the financial year 2005 all capital
market oriented credit institutions are re-quired to switch the accounting method usedfor their consolidated financial statements toInternational Accounting Standards or Inter-national Financial Reporting Standards (IAS/IFRS). This changeover will have an impact onthe financial sector not only with respect tothe conversion costs that will be incurred; thewider implications of the new accountingstandards, including for the stability of thefinancial system, are far more significant. Sev-eral of the standards that are most relevantto the banking sector (IAS 32 and IAS 39)continue to be at the centre of heated de-bate. It is to be expected, inter alia, that
banks’ reported earnings will become morevolatile. A detailed critique is contained in thebox on pages 34-35.
Risk situation in the German banking
industry
Following a difficult year in 2002, German
banks showed signs of improving their risksituation in 2003. The German financial sys-tem has at all times possessed a remarkableamount of resilience. This view is supportedby the Financial System Stability Assessmentconducted by the IMF in November 2003.The stress tests on the market and credit riskscarried out by the Bundesbank in this contextdemonstrate that despite the difficult earn-ings situation, the short and medium-termstability of the German banking industry wasnot and is not threatened.
13
As regards market risks, equity price risks, inparticular, are of relevance owing to the bigbanks’ significant holdings of participatinginterests. The interest rate risk, by contrast, isrelatively moderate. Given the large share ofpositions hedged by derivatives, the direct ex-change-rate risk plays only a minor role;hence the recent steep slide of the US dollarshould likewise have no direct impact.
The effects of a prolonged weakness of the
US dollar on overall business activity would,however, impair the quality of the banks’loan portfolios. Credit risk is the greatest indi-vidual risk that banks face. This risk is deter-as % of operating income
2000 2001 2002 20030
Q1 to Q3Risk
provi-sions
General
adminis-trative
spendingSelected exposure items
of large, internationally
operating German banks
Deutsche Bundesbank110
100
90
80
70
60
13See the following article “Stress testing the German
banking system”, pp 53-61 of this Report.Changeover
to IASResilience of
the German
financial system
Market risks
Credit risk and
the level of
business activity

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
33mined primarily by borrowers’ probability of
default, which is closely related to cyclicaltrends. Thus the exceptionally steep rise inwrite-downs on credit portfolios in 2002 ac-companied a phase of economic stagnation(see chart on this page).
Even so, this connection should not be
viewed mechanically. Banks have a host ofcontrol instruments at their disposal to atleast partly decouple an overall economicslowdown from the incurrence of losses incredit business. For example, banks can dif-ferentiate their prices and lending policies toa greater extent according to risk. They canminimise potential losses through more strin-gent collateral requirements and loan coven-ants. And they can use credit derivatives tohedge large credit exposures or, on the in-come side, to assume risks and take advan-tage of arbitrage opportunities in the mar-kets. Thus on balance, the markets for creditrisk transfers offer banks a way of fine-tuningtheir own risk profile and of diversifying risks,provide greater flexibility in terms of businesspolicy and result in more efficient pricingthrough the market. Although the markets inGermany as well as those in other euro-areacountries still lag behind the Anglo-Americancredit risk transfer markets, banks are usingthe entire range of the aforementioned possi-bilities, albeit at varying levels of intensity,which implies heightened risk awareness.This should, however, not lead to the delusionthat a sound credit business only requires acommercially viable pricing policy and thepartial transfer of credit risks. In particular, acareful credit assessment and an informedcredit decision at the beginning of the lend-ing process remain of paramount import-
ance.
The greater risk differentiation in banks’ lend-
ing policy is attested by the data obtainedfrom the Bank Lending Survey,
14which indi-
cate that the spreads between high-risk andaverage-risk loans have widened. Subse-quently, especially in the spring, Germanbanks raised their collateral requirements andtightened the covenants. One indication ofgreater risk differentiation might also be seenin the fact that the spreads between corpor-ate loans up to 31 million and those with a
greater volume, which are generally grantedto lower-risk borrowers, have risen.%
%
Enlarged scale
Individual value adjustments
in relation to lending
to non-banksReal GDP
Year-on-year changeIndividual value adjustments
over the business cycle
Deutsche Bundesbank1.4
1.31.2
1.1
1.00.9
0.83.5
3.0
2.5
2.01.5
1.0
0.5
0
1998 1999 2000 2001 2002
14See Deutsche Bundesbank Monthly Report, November
2003, pp 30-31.Managing
credit risk
Greater risk
differentiation

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
34Fair value accounting and stability of the financial system
The IAS Regulation adopted by the European
Commission on 19 July 20021requires that from
2005 all listed companies in the European Uniondraw up their accounts – at least their consoli-dated financial statements – according to Inter-national Accounting Standards (IAS). The aim isto further harmonise accounting in Europe inorder to ensure that the European capital mar-ket functions efficiently in the Community andin the single European market. Convergence be-tween IAS and US Generally Accepted Account-ing Principles (US GAAP) should achieve an ac-ceptance of European annual financial state-ments in the United States. IAS is being trans-lated into European law according to a complexformalised procedure so as to enable thesestandards to be further developed by the inde-pendent International Accounting StandardsBoard (IASB). All IAS standards, with the excep-tion of IAS 32 and IAS 39 which are currentlybeing revised, were translated into Europeanlaw in an en bloc endorsement.
2
The IAS has introduced fair value accountinginto German accounting practice. Although pro-posals for full fair value accounting in the IAShave failed in the past owing to massive andbroad-based opposition, the IASB’s proposal torevise IAS 39 includes the option of valuing all fi-nancial instruments at their fair value.
3The in-tention of this rule is to avoid problems which
arise from presenting risk-compensating hedg-ing relationships between different businesstransactions (hedge accounting). The IASB is en-deavouring to come up with a further proposalto amend IAS 39 which allows hedges to be ac-counted for at the portfolio level (macro hedgeapproach
4) and which corresponds to state-of-
the-art risk management approaches of banks incontinental Europe. Still unresolved, however,are the issues of properly accounting for prema-ture repayments in the context of the require-ments for measuring the effectiveness of thehedging relationships and including core de-posits (sight deposits and savings deposits) in thehedged net portfolio position. In the light ofthese problems, the objective of the fair valueoption – in which both the underyling transac-tion and the hedging transaction can be shownat fair value – is still of importance. However, itcannot be ruled out that, on the basis of this op-tion, accounting practice will gradually movetowards full fair value accounting over time.Therefore, reservations have been expressedconcerning this option or the excessively liberaluse of this option. Such reservations have beenexpressed, inter alia , by the Basel Committee on
Banking Supervision
5, and the European Central
Bank, but also by the Deutsche Bundesbank6.
1Regulation (EC) No 1606/2002 of the European Parliament and of
the Council of 19 July 2002 concerning the use of International Ac-counting Standards (IAS Regulation) (OJ L243 of 11 September 2002);other relevant Directives in this context are the Fair Value Directive(Council Directive 2001/65/EC of 27 September 2001) and the Modern-isation Directive (Directive 2003/51/EC of the European Parliamentand of the Council of 18 June 2003 amending Council Directives78/660/EEC, 83/349/EEC, 86/635/EEC and 91/674/EEC on the annual and
consolidated accounts of certain types of companies, banks and otherfinancial institutions and insurance undertakings). — 2Commission
Regulation (EC) No 1725/2003 of 29 September 2003 adopting certaininternational accounting standards in accordance with Regulation(EC) No 1606/2002 of the European Parliament and of the Council (OJL261 of 13 October 2003). — 3Exposure Draft of Proposed Amend-
Deutsche Bundesbank

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
35The criticisms of moving towards full fair value
accounting focus on questioning the relevanceand reliability of fair values. For financial instru-ments which are held to maturity, shifts in theyield curve are unimportant. Thus the fair valueapproach merely results in artificial volatility ofthe results. Objective market values are not avail-able for many financial instruments because theyare not traded on liquid markets. This particular-ly concerns traditional lending business, which inGermany is characterised by long maturities. Thisgenerates a wide range of possible subjectivefair values, depending on the assessment of thefuture cash flows and of the risk-adequate dis-counting factor. An especially questionable fea-ture is the facility to take account of the borrow-er’s own creditworthiness when measuring thefair value of liabilities. A deterioration of theborrower’s own creditworthiness would lead toa reduction of its own liabilities and a corres-ponding increase in recorded income. On thewhole, the probable higher volatility is likely toincrease market fluctuations in a procyclical di-rection and to encourage behavioural adjust-ments that tend to result in shorter maturities,greater recourse to contracts with variable inter-est rates and, ultimately, greater short-termismin business life. The fair value option allows anindividual changeover to this accounting stand-ard at the company level and even at the level of
individual transaction categories. This impairsthe comparability of company annual accounts,the informative value of business statistics aggre-gated on this basis and hence, in the end, theability of the capital markets to function correct-ly.
Against this background, the spread of fair
value-oriented accounting in Germany merits acautious assessment. The European Commission’sRegulation stipulates its use solely for the con-solidated financial statements of listed com-panies. These focus on the information functionof the annual accounts. IAS accounting shouldnot be used for other annual accounts, particu-larly single-entity financial statements, at leastfor the time being. For the purpose of companylaw and the resultant function of determiningprofit from the point of view of capital preserva-tion, the traditional German GAAP based onthe Commercial Code – cautiously modernised –should be maintained. Many companies wouldthen be spared the burden of converting tothe new accounting standards. Admittedly, thiswould imply that companies affiliated to agroup would then have to apply two differentaccounting systems in the future.
ments to IAS 32, Financial Instruments: Disclosure and Presentation,
and IAS 39, Financial Instruments: Recognition and Measurement,IASB, June 2002. — 4Exposure Draft of Proposed Amendments to
IAS 39 Financial Instruments: Recognition and Measurement: FairValue Hedge Accounting for a Portfolio Hedge of Interest Rate Risk,IASB August 2003. — 5The Committee has recently commented in
this sense on the Exposure Draft of Proposed Amendments to IAS 39Financial Instruments: Recognition and Measurement: Fair Value
Hedge Accounting for a Portfolio Hedge of Interest Rate Risk, IASBAugust 2003. — 6See Deutsche Bundesbank, The evolution of ac-
counting standards for credit institutions, Monthly Report, June 2002,
pp 39-54.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
36The greater orientation of lending policy to
the risk level and increased protection againstlosses in the event of a default represent anadjustment process of banks to the higherlevel of corporate insolvencies and is import-ant for financial stability. In this way, even ifthe overall macroeconomic situation remainsdifficult, the level of risk provisioning can belowered. This mechanism seemed to be pay-ing off in 2003, although it is still too early tomake a quantitative statement on the basis ofthe assessments available during the period.
The conservative stance currently being taken
by German banks with respect to new riskscan also be seen in the analysis of sectoraland country risks. Since 2002, the year inwhich credit risks increased, banks havereacted by reducing risk assets as well as di-versifying their risk to a greater extent. How-
ever, a considerable share of the credit port-folio restructuring was probably driven bydemand. Even so, the credit risk arising fromthe corporate portfolio, measured in terms ofthe exposure at risk,
15increased further com-
pared with 2002, owing to the general de-terioration of enterprises’ creditworthiness.Above all, the commercial real estate sector(both domestic and international) accountedfor a large share of the overall risk (see charton this page). Excluding this sector, the ex-Real estate
services
56%
Manufacture of consumer goods
and provision of services
8%Construction
7%Technology and communication
5%Wholesale and retail trade
5%Manufacture of machinery and
other equipment4%Culture, sport and media
4%Transport
3%Others
8%Exposure at risk by sector *
Source: Moody’s KMV, Bundesbank calculations. — *Only lending to enterprises, excluding the financial
intermediation sector (as reported to the central credit register for loans of  5 1.5 million or more). The
exposure at risk is the product of the expected default frequency (EDF) and the credit volume.
Deutsche Bundesbank
15The exposure at risk is defined here as the product of
the credit volume (as reported to the central credit regis-
ter for loans of 31.5 million or more) and the associated
default probability of a given segment (sector, country).
For the sector-specific risks Moody’s KMV Expected De-
fault Frequencies (EDF) were taken as the default prob-
abilities. For the country-specific risks the corresponding
Standard & Poor’s ratings were used, after having been
transformed into a cardinal scale based on enterprises’
two-year default data.Adjustment
process
Sectoral risks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
37Half-year-end data
DM
billion 5 billion
80
70
60
5040
30
20
10
0
oExposure at risk 1by region2
AsiaLatin America
(Western hemisphere)European transition countries
Source: Standard and Poor’s, Bundesbank calculations. — 1The exposure at risk is the product of the average
default probability and the credit volume (as reported to the central credit register for loans of  5 1.5 million or
more). The default probability was determined on the basis of the average two-year default rates of companies
with relevant S&P ratings. — 2Regions defined according to the IMF classification, International Financial
Statistics. — oFrom 1999 onwards amounts are in euro.
Deutsche Bundesbank40+
35+
30+
25+
20+
15+
10+
5+
00
1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003As at June 2003
 5 billion
 5 billion
Exposure et risk 1
Enlarged scale
Argen-
tinaIndo-
nesiaTurkey Brazil Russia Vene-
zuelaPanama India Poland Philip-
pinesMexico China Para-
guayUru-
guayPaki-
stanTotal lending volume
Argen-
tinaIndo-
nesiaTurkey Brazil Russia Vene-
zuelaPanama India Poland Philip-
pinesMexico China Para-
guayUru-
guayPaki-
stanLending to selected transition and emerging-market countries
4
3
2
1
020
15
10
5
0

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
38posure at risk would have increased only
moderately. An improvement has been dis-cernible as from the middle of 2003. Sincethen the probabilities of default, measured byMoody’s KMV
16Expected Default Frequencies
(EDF), have declined.
As the German banking system is by far the
largest creditor group for cross-border lend-ing in the form of loans or purchases of secur-ities – measured by the volume of asset items
according to BIS statistics – country risk is alsoa major potential risk factor. At the end ofJune 2003, German banks’ foreign credit ex-posure
17totalled 32.9 trillion. While less than
ten per cent of this total represented expos-ure to emerging-market and transition coun-tries, this share nonetheless warrants a moredetailed analysis. With an outstanding totalexposure at risk of currently around 39 billion,
the credit risk arising from the aforemen-tioned categories of countries was rather lowcompared with the trend since 1998 (seechart on page 37). The largest volume of ex-posure at risk is to Latin America. At almost34 billion, Argentina (which owing to its re-
cent default is rated at a default probability of100%) accounts for the largest single creditrisk amount,
18followed by Brazil with 3800
million. Furthermore, the volume of exposureat risk to Venezuela, Paraguay and Uruguayhas increased following recent rating down-grades. Among the European emerging mar-kets and transition countries, Turkey, in par-ticular, has a considerable exposure at risk(3809 million). Russia, which for years had
been rated as a relatively high credit riskcountry, has benefited of late from rating up-grades to currently BB. In Asia, Indonesiastands out with exposure at risk of 3962 mil-
lion.Daily data
Basis
pointsLin scale
Credit default swap premiums
for large German banks2Log scale
Share price movementsof bank stocks
 1
Beginning of 2002 = 100
GermanyMemo item
USA
Japan
Deutsche Bank
Dresdner BankHypoVereinsbank
CommerzbankMarket indicators for the
German banking sector
1Source: Datastream, Bundesbank calcula-
tions. — 2Source: Morgan Stanley.
Deutsche Bundesbank400
350
300250
200
150100
50
0140
120
100
80
60130
110
90
70
50
45
2002 2003
16Expected Default Frequencies represent default prob-
abilities calculated by Moody’s KMV Credit Monitor for
listed enterprises.
17As reported to the central credit register for loans of
31.5 million or more.
18The exposure at risk is not the same as the expected
loss given default, which is the loss taking into account
the recovery rate. The recovery rate is determined princi-
pally by collateral and anticipated repayments.Country risks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
39Market indicators
Indicators are available for the big banks
which are active in the capital markets. Theseindicators contain the financial markets’ as-sessments of the performance and stability ofthe financial intermediaries (see chart onpage 38). According to these assessments,the situation of big banks stabilised in 2003.Equity prices, driven in part by takeover ru-mours, indicate that doubts about whetherthe situation would improve diminished inthe course of the year. Thus the market capit-alisation of the three listed big banks in-creased from its nadir ( 325.7 billion) in March
of 2003 to 341.2 billion. However, this is still
low by international standards. Apparentlythe financial markets do not yet have suffi-cient confidence in the ability of the Germanbanking system to again become highly prof-itable in future.
Credit default swap premiums and ratings do
not provide any clear-cut signals concerningdefault risk. After credit risk swap premiumshad in some cases risen to dramatic levels inthe late summer of 2002, the trend since thespring of 2003 indicates a marked decline inthe default risk. In the meantime, two of thefour big banks have actually managed topush their scores below the level which hadexisted in the summer of 2002.
The external ratings assigned by large inter-
national agencies and commonly used defaultrisk measures such as the EDF point more to-wards a stabilisation of, than a significant de-cline in, the level of default risk (see adjacenttable). However, the recent rating record ofthe German banking industry has not been
uniform. Thus whereas the pace of down-grading of big banks, which had acceleratedconsiderably in 2002, came to a halt in 2003(with one exception), several Landesbankenwere downgraded during 2003.
Savings banks and cooperative banksSavings banks and cooperative banks, with
their extensive branch network and productrange, are oriented towards retail customersand the Mittelstand. Funding is provided pri-
marily through customer deposits, althoughin the last five years the shares of refinancingthrough the interbank market and the bondmarket have risen slightly. Assets compriseprimarily loans to domestic enterprises andindividuals. Credit to the latter includes a con-Changes in ratings of German
big banks since 1986
S&P
long-term local issuercredit ratingsMoody’s
issuer ratings
BankDate of
change RatingDate of
change Rating
Deutsche Feb 1986 AAA May 1995 Aaa
Bank Aug 1998 AA+ Dec 1996 Aa1
May 1999 AA May 1999 Aa3May 2002 AA–
Dresdner Sep 1995 AA+ July 1998 Aa1
Bank Nov 1997 AA June 1999 Aa3
Apr 2000 AA– July 2001 Aa2Oct 2002 A+ Oct 2002 Aa3Mar 2003 A July 2003 A1
Hypo- Sep 1998 AA– June 1998 Aa2
Vereins- Oct 1999 A+ Mar 2000 Aa3bank Feb 2002 A July 2002 A1
Dec 2002 A– Jan 2003 A3
Commerz- Nov 1994 AA– May 1995 Aa2
bank Feb 2001 A+ June 1998 Aa3
Dec 2001 A July 2001 Aa3Oct 2002 A– Aug 2001 A1
Dec 2002 A2
Deutsche BundesbankAssessment of
equity markets
improves
Credit default
swaps
RatingsRetail business
a stabilising
factor

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
40Balance sheet items
Per-
cent-
age
points
Claims on
banksSecurities
including
bank bondsClaims on
non-banksLiabilities to
banksLiabilities to
non-banksBondsEnlarged scale
Change from July 1998Savings banks
Credit cooperativesas % of the average volume  of business; as at July 2003Major components of savings banks’ and credit
cooperatives’ balance sheets and profit and loss accounts
5+
0
5−
10−70
6050
40
302010
0
as % of the average volume of business
Savings banks
Net interest received
General administrative spending
Net commissions received
Risk provisionsProfit and loss account items
Deutsche Bundesbank3.0
2.52.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0
1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002as % of the average volume of business
Credit cooperatives
Net interest received
General administrative spending
Net commissions received
Risk provisions3.0
2.52.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0
1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
41siderable share of borrowing to finance hous-
ing construction (see chart on page 40).Owing to the large share of interest-bearingitems in the balance sheet, net interest in-come determines the medium-term earningspotential of savings banks and cooperativebanks to a large extent. Commission businesschiefly focuses on income from giro oper-ations and securities business with customerswhich, although it generates steady income,leaves little room for enhancing profitability.
In Germany, savings banks and cooperative
banks, which have a dominant position in re-tail banking, benefited the most from thetrend apparent in many countries in the diffi-cult financial year 2002 according to whichretail business was the mainstay of earnings.The ongoing sluggish growth forced them,too, to undertake large write-downs on theirloan portfolio. Nonetheless, they were able toimprove their operating result and conse-quently reduce their cost-income ratio (sav-ings banks lowered this ratio by three per-centage points to 68% and cooperativebanks by four percentage points to 75%).In 2003 the operating result is likely to haveimproved slightly further and the risk provi-sioning requirement to have declined.
In the second half of the 1990s the net inter-
est result was squeezed by higher fundingcosts and lower income from maturity trans-formation (see chart on page 40). But in2003, as in 2002, savings banks and coopera-tive banks probably managed to prevent afurther decline in interest income. They bene-fited from the continued high liquidity prefer-ence as well as the yield curve, which wassomewhat steeper than was the case in the
preceding year. However, as competition insome retail business segments is actuallybecoming more intense, the leeway availableto these banks to boost their interest incomeappears limited in the longer term.
On the cost side, by contrast, there would
seem to be some additional potential toachieve savings through the pursuit of a morerisk-oriented policy in lending business, theexploitation of synergies – particularly inback-office activities – and further consolida-tion. In this respect, these two bankinggroups have a somewhat differing profile. Al-though the savings banks have fewer individ-ual institutions, they are larger and havea denser branch network. The cooperativebanking sector, by contrast, has more, butsmaller institutions (see chart on page 42).The cooperative bank sector has a greater in-ternal division of labour within its networkthan the savings bank sector. The cooperativesector is also further ahead in streamlining itsmulti-tiered network structure.
At the level of individual institutions, the
main risks for both the savings banks andcredit cooperatives come from the quality oftheir exposures to small and medium-sizedenterprises. Since both sectors are made upof a large number of small institutions withconsequently a small capital base and a busi-ness strategy focused on their locality, the riskdiversification of their banking book tends tobe fairly limited in terms of exposure size andgeographical spread. For example, 13% of allsavings banks and 21% of all credit coopera-tives carry more than 40% of their business
Earnings ...... and costs
Risks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
42volume in the form of large exposures19(see
chart on page 43).
Better risk diversification and greater risk sus-
tainability – which ultimately strengthen sys-temic stability – are the current focus of manymeasures and initiatives of all parties con-cerned. In particular, efforts are being under-taken to offer individual institutions possibil-ities to achieve regional diversificationthrough synthetic means, ie the deploymentof credit derivatives. The ongoing consolida-tion process will ultimately lead to a compar-able result – larger, more diversified and morerisk-viable units.
With the elimination of public guarantees
for the solvency ( Anstaltslast ) and liabilities
(Gew/C228hrtr/C228gerhaftung ) of public-sector insti-tutions from mid-July 2005, the savings bank
sector will have to redefine the role of theLandesbank and their future business model.Adjustments are necessary as the end of stateguarantees – which will presumably push uprefinancing costs – affects the role which theLandesbanken play in risk taking and trans-formation and consequently their competitiveposition. The main emphasis of the currentadjustments is on greater integration of eachLandesbank and its primary institutions intoan affiliated network. The individual regionalnetworks have begun to tackle the process ofintegrating the Landesbank and its affiliatedsavings banks via various approaches at vari-ous speeds. The necessary decisions shouldbe made as soon as possible, not least toachieve a favourable starting point for a rat-ing through rating agencies. In the longerterm, in addition to the current debate con-cerning an efficient division of duties be-tween the Landesbanken and the savingsbanks, there is also likely to be a discussionon the allocation of tasks between the Lan-desbanken and the central institution of thesavings bank organisation. Another questionis the extent to which further consolidation,and thus a decline in capacities, will be need-ed in order to lastingly improve the earningsof the Landesbanken.
Log scale
Branches
Savings banks
Credit cooperatives
1990 2002Savings banksInstitutions
Credit cooperativesNumber of savings banks
and credit cooperatives
and their branches
Deutsche Bundesbank20000
17500
15000
12500800
600700
5006003500
25003000
20002500
15001750
91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01
19Large exposures are defined as loans to an individual
borrower or a borrower unit which amount to or exceed
at least 10% of the liable capital or own funds.Measures to
safeguard
medium-term
stability
Role of the
Landesbanken

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
43Appendix: Comments on the IMF’s
proposals for structural reforms in theGerman banking sector
The IMF made various recommendations in its
Financial System Stability Assessment. In thesavings bank sector, these were as follows:transformation of the status of Landesbankeninto private-law corporations so as to enablethem to obtain capital on the capital markets;elimination of existing legal and other barriersto consolidation within and across the threepillars of the German banking industry inorder to facilitate a market-oriented restruc-turing process; abolition of regional limita-tions on banking accompanied by strength-ened corporate governance and supervision;modification of the institutional protectionschemes in the public and cooperative bank-ing sectors through the introduction of risk-differentiated premiums and a reduction inprotection coverage over time; improvementsin transparency and corporate governance atpublic sector banks and a review of the extentof public sector involvement in the bankingsector.
The role of public authorities is to define a
framework ensuring the stability of the finan-cial system as well as the appropriate andmarket-oriented provision of financial serviceswithin a highly competitive environment. An-other requirement is to ensure that the finan-cial system duly transmits monetary policystimuli to the real economy. Reform consider-ations must be gauged primarily by their im-plications for the stability of the banking andfinancial system as well as the system’s abilityto function. It should be noted that the Ger-man financial system has up to now exhibited
a high degree of resilience to crises. One prin-ciple that should be acknowledged – andwhich is also underlined by the IMF – is thatan efficient banking system must be open tomarket-oriented change. In view of the rapidevolution of the financial systems in the wakeof internationalisation and capital marketorientation, existing structures which hithertohave proved viable must likewise be opento critical review. A fundamental change inthe competitive environment in Germany willoccur already in July 2005 with the phasingout of public guarantees for the solvency(Anstaltslast ) and liabilities ( Gew/C228hrtr/C228gerhaf-
tung ) of public sector institutions.
A core thesis of the IMF paper is that the un-
satisfactory level of profitability in the Ger-
As at June 2003
Institu-
tions
in %
Large exposures as a percentage
of the average business volumeaccumulatedSavings banks
Credit cooperatives
< 10 < 20 < 30 < 40 < 50 < 60 < 70 < 80 ≥ 80Share of large exposures *
in savings banks’ and
credit cooperatives’
average business volume
*Pursuant to sections 13, 13a and 13b of
the Banking Act. — Example: for approxi-
mately 40% of all saving banks, large ex-
posures account for between 20% and 30%
of their business volume.
Deutsche Bundesbank100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
2010
0Framework
for structural
changes
Competition
and profitability

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
44man banking system is attributable to the
three-pillar structure and, in particular, to therole of the public sector banks. The IMF infersthat the savings banks’ business policy, whichis geared towards public welfare, tends tofoster the misallocation of resources and leadto efficiency losses with potentially negativeeconomic consequences, such as welfare andstability losses. With all due respect to theIMF’s arguments, however, it is a moot ques-tion whether the trend-decline in profitabilityin the German banking system is essentiallyattributable to the three-pillar structure orwhether this structure is the principal barrierto improving the situation. Unsatisfactoryprofitability is a common feature of practicallyall categories of banks. In actual fact, lowprofitability has been largely attributable – atleast in recent years – to the German econo-my’s low growth momentum and the result-ant declining earnings as well as high loandefaults. At the same time, the economicstagnation has also highlighted the structuralearnings problems.
Furthermore, all of the categories of banks in
Germany are undergoing an extensive re-structuring process, which is reflected notleast in a substantial shedding of staff butalso in a marked reduction in the number ofindependent banks and of branches. Thus,from 1990 to 2002, the number of branchesfell by 19% in the case of savings banks, by21% in the cooperative bank sector and by33% in the case of big banks. In the sameperiod, the number of institutions in the sav-ings bank sector decreased by 33% and inthe cooperative bank sector by 56%. There-fore, structural changes are already being im-plemented irrespective of the three-pillar dis-
cussion.
The public-law status of the regional Landes-
banken and the municipal savings banks wasoriginally chosen to make it easier for themto fulfil a public mandate. This mandate wasdefined, in particular, as ensuring a nation-wide provision of banking services to thepublic and to small and medium-sized com-mercial firms, as well as supporting regionaland structural policies.
Today, with their national or global business
activities, Landesbanken have moved a longway from those traditional principles. In re-cent years they have considerably stepped uptheir foreign and investment banking busi-ness. In order to improve their profitabilityand gain market share, some Landesbankenhave incurred substantial risks, which canhardly be justified on the basis of a publicmandate. By contrast, the majority of savingsbanks still have a regional orientation. Theycontinue to play a key role in the financing ofsmall and medium-sized firms. In addition,the mostly long-term orientation of theirbusiness relationships merits a positive assess-ment from a stability perspective. Markettrends with potentially procyclical effectswere followed only to a more minor extent.The nationwide provision of banking servicesmay be considered to be largely ensurednowadays. This is due not only to the savingsbanks but also to the branch networks of thecooperative sector and other institutions.
The public mandate is no longer as significant
as it was in the past. Moreover, the procure-
Changing
public mandate

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
45ment of equity capital is hampered by the
public-law status and, besides, is virtually im-possible from public sources. The procure-ment of new capital is a key requirementgiven the public sector banks’ relatively lowlevel of capital funding by internationalstandards. Most of the savings banks havebeen able to boost their own funds throughprofit retention. In addition, equity can alsobe provided outside the form of a public limit-ed company (AG).
Some Landesbanken have already fulfilled the
prerequisites for obtaining authorisation tochange their status to that of a private-lawcorporation. This course could also be pur-sued by other Landesbanken. The transform-ation of Landesbanken and savings banksinto private-law corporations might providethe basis for a restructuring process, whichwould need to be carried out prudently andultimately would be up to the owners andthe relevant state legislatures. This is unlikelyto involve a complete change from public toprivate ownership in the foreseeable future,an assumption which is supported by experi-ence in other countries.
The regional principle was introduced with
the aim of facilitating a largely uniformcourse of economic development by makingfinancial resources available in economicallyweak areas, too. Furthermore, the regionalprinciple limits risks (no acceptance of risks interritories which lie outside the guarantor’sgeographical area) but also reduces competi-tion by providing the savings banks with aterritorial monopoly.One argument against the strict application
of the regional principle is that it restrictscompetition between the savings banks. Thisself-imposed decentralisation prevents profit-able institutions from capturing new marketshares and protects less profitable institutionsfrom competitors. Coupled with the econom-ic benefits of having a public-law status, thiscan lead to an excessive presence of savingsbanks in local markets. A relaxation of the re-gional principle could ultimately strengthenboth competition and systemic stability. How-ever, this advantage must be weighed upagainst a possible loss of geographical prox-imity. It remains to be seen to what extentthe regional principle in its current form willbe further developed or diluted at public-lawcredit institutions.
Critics object that the institutional protection
insurance scheme which safeguards the exist-ence of public-law institutions contains astructure-conserving element. They add thatinstitutional creditors are hardly in need ofprotection anyway. On the other hand, itshould be noted that institutional protectioninsurance strengthens creditors’ confidencein the network of affiliated institutions as awhole, which contributes significantly to thestability of the overall system. In addition, thestructure of the institutional protection insur-ance scheme is fully in keeping with Euro-pean regulations.
In view of its inherent function of ensuring
public confidence, institutional protection in-surance within a network of affiliated institu-tions should be maintained. The criticismscan be taken on board by cautiously modify-
Regional
principleInstitutional
protection
insurance

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
46ing the existing scheme, in particular through
a risk-based calibration of contributions – fol-lowing the example set by the private banksand the cooperative banking sector – and byspecifically monitoring the individual banks’risk situation without calling into question theinstrument of institutional protection insur-ance – which on the whole has proved bene-ficial.
Greater transparency and a better corporate
governance structure are generally desirableat public sector institutions, too. Possible ap-proaches include revising the statutory regu-lations governing the management board(Verwaltungsrat ) with a view to reducing the
scope for political influence, introducing aquota system for board membership accord-ing to interest groups – similar to the regula-tions governing appointments to supervisoryboards ( Aufsichtsr/C228te ) – and bringing the de-
tailed regulations regarding the powers andtasks of the management board into line withthe provisions of the Stock Corporation Act(Aktiengesetz ).
Insurance companiesIn the past five years, the German insurance
sector has grown faster than the banking sec-tor. Insurers’ aggregate balance sheet total in-creased by 50.6% (compared with 33.4%in the case of credit institutions). Given thedemographic trends and the consequent ris-ing demand for private pension products, thisis predominantly attributable to growth in thelife insurance sector. Whereas in many otherEuropean countries, for example the Nether-lands, Belgium or Switzerland, the sectoralboundaries are becoming increasingly blurred
through the creation of financial conglomer-ates, the “bancassurance forms” of cooper-ation and cross-shareholding still currentlypredominate in Germany. The ratio of insur-ance commissions to total commissions re-ceived by banks has therefore been ratherlow up to now, for example 8.7% in the caseof credit cooperatives in 2002. By contrast,the fact that, on 30 June 2003, 11.0% of theinvestment portfolios of life insurance com-panies was made up of mortgage loan, landcharge and annuity charge claims, and18.8% of borrowers’ notes and loans showsthat life insurers have an important positionas financial intermediaries on the credit mar-kets, too.
Despite recent negative media coverage, the
German life insurance industry has continuedto record growing gross premiums over thepast five years (see chart on page 47). Whilstthe (relatively low) ratio of expenditure oninsurance operations to gross premiumschanged only slightly throughout the period,expenditure on claims and insurance tech-nical reserves grew more slowly than grosspremiums. At the same time, the stock mar-ket slumps and the prolonged phase of lowinterest rates for bonds mean that insurers’capital investment income has declinedsteeply since 2000. This is problematic from aprudential point of view as around 50% ofthe life insurance products sold in Germanynot only have legally guaranteed minimumrates of return but also pay policyholders bo-nuses, in particular from capital investments.The keen competition for new customers inrecent years has led to what appears to be
Transparency
and corporate
governance at
savings banks
Significance
of insurers in
the German
financial systemProfitability of
life insurers
marked by
falling capital
income and
high bonus
payments

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
47generous bonus policies (in comparison with
the declining capital investment income) beingfinanced by the liquidation of hidden reservesand the reserve for premium refunds,
20which
is actually designed to serve as a safety net.The fact that this policy is unsustainable inthe long run can be seen in the insurancecompanies’ increasing efforts to lower thetotal bonuses allocated to policyholders. Thelowering of the guaranteed minimum rate ofreturn from 3.25% to 2.75% on 1 January2004 is likewise a response to the alteredcapital market conditions; this is likely to af-ford the insurance companies only moderaterelief in the short term, however, as thelowered interest rate will apply only to newbusiness. Given the strongly fragmented mar-ket, high capital market losses and the in-creasingly complex demands of asset/liabilitymanagement, it is conceivable that the trendtowards consolidation in the life insurance in-dustry may continue.
Capital investments, which make up more
than 90% of the assets side of an average lifeinsurer’s balance sheet, have decreased invalue since 2000 not only because of the de-pletion of hidden reserves in the wake of anexcessively generous bonus policy but alsoowing to a sharp decline in share prices onthe stock markets. Thus the collapse of onerelatively small German life insurance com-pany was ultimately attributable to its largeamount of hidden losses. The assumption ofData on German life
insurance companies
Sources: Federal Financial Supervisory Authority
(BaFin), Federal Supervisory Office for Insurance
Enterprises (BAV), FitchRatings. — 1Profit for the
year plus transfer to the reserve for premium
refunds. — 2Quotient of the difference between the
market value and book value of all capitalinvestments and the market value of the capital
investments. —
3Interest rate on policyholders’
credit balances for the following year. — oFrom
1999 onwards all amounts are in euro.
Deutsche BundesbankCapital investment
Total volume (book value as at 30 June 2003)
 5 605 billion
Participating interests
and shares in affiliated
undertakings 3%
Stocks 2%
Bonds
8%
Mutual fund
shares
23%Other
capital investments
5%
Registered debt securities
and various loans 59%DM
billion
% 5 billion
Remuneration policy
Hidden reserves2
Rates of change of reserve
for premium refundsRate of 
return for
customers3
Guaranteed rate of
return (new business)160
120
8040
0
oMajor components of the
profit and loss account
Insurance costs including
insurance technical reserves
Gross premiums earned
Capital investment income
Total surplus 1
Operating costs
15+
10+
5+
0
5−
10−
15−80
604020
0
1998 1999 2000 2001 2002
20The surplus remaining with a life insurer following the
direct credit to policyholders is initially allocated to the re-
serve for premium refunds; it is credited to the policy-
holders only after a time lag of two years. Thus, a tem-
porary decrease in the gross result does not necessitate
an immediate adjustment of the existing bonus rates.Losses on
equity
investments ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
48that company’s portfolio by the rescue com-
pany Protektor AG, which was set up in 2002as a private sector entity, was the industry’sfirst-ever bailout. The hidden reserves of allinsurance companies in direct equity invest-ments and mutual funds (including mixedfunds and pure bond-based funds) totalling29.4% at the end of 1999 changed into hid-den losses of 8.6% by the end of 2002.Above all the write-downs to the currentvalue on the reporting date of 31 December
2003 but also the share price recovery willmean that the hidden losses in all equityinvestments – according to the estimates ofthe German Insurance Association ( Gesamt-
verband der deutschen Versicherungswirt-schaft ) – will decrease from around 316 bil-
lion in 2002 to around 35 billion by the end
of 2003.
The partial shifting of the dissolved equity
portfolios into bonds increases the proportionof fixed-income assets which are likely to suf-fer a price decline in the event of a persistentrise in interest rates. However, the scenario ofhigher interest rates could have a positive netimpact on the profitability of life insurancecompanies as the potentially higher depreci-ation requirement ought, at least in the me-dium term, to be offset by future higher inter-est income and more favourable reinvestmentopportunities (including for other fixed-income capital investments which show noimpairment losses).
The gross premiums of reinsurance com-
panies rose sharply over the past five years inline with the global trend. This was offsetby a big rise in insurance costs in 2001 andabove all in 2002 as a result of an unexpectedsurge in major claims and asbestos risks in theUSA. This growth was additionally boosted,however, by an incautious approach to newbusiness at the end of the 1990s. All in all, re-insurers had to cope with a steep slide in theirinsurance technical result,
21which since 1997Daily data
Basis
pointsLin scale
Credit default swap premiums
for selected German insurers3
Allianz
Munich ReBeginning of 2002 = 100, log scale
DAX share
price index 2Share price index
of German
life insurers 1Market indicators
for the German
insurance sector
1Source: Datastream. — 2Source: Deut-
sche Börse AG, Bundesbank calculations. —
3Source: Morgan Stanley.
Deutsche Bundesbank130
120
110100
90
80
70
6050
40
30
20
10160
140
120
100
80
60
405070
2002 2003
21The insurance technical result is that part of the over-
all result due to the production and sale of insurance
cover.... accompanied
by possible
interest gains
on bonds
Strained
profitability
situation for
reinsurers

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
49had already been negative. Moreover, re-
insurers, too, were affected by low capital in-vestment income. However, they were lessbadly hit than the life insurers, as the equityportfolios of reinsurance companies are moregeographically diversified (in accordance withthe international orientation of their business)and because reinsurers generally hold smallerequity portfolios than life insurers. Regardlessof a possible improvement in the situation onthe capital market, the aim must be to returnthe actual insurance business to profitability.
The underlying trend shown by the market in-
dicators for the largest German insurancecompanies is similar to that for the bankingindustry (see chart on page 48 and adjacenttable). After hitting lows in the late spring of2003, equity prices have meanwhile stabilisedat a low level. Nonetheless, insurers have upto now hardly shared in the current recoveryin the DAX index, which suggests a “waitand see” approach on the part of the marketparticipants. By contrast, credit default swappremiums, which are a measure of the de-fault risk in the markets’ expectations, havesince early September fallen back to their farlower level of the summer of 2002 followinga period of divergent developments. More-over, in view of various capitalisation meas-ures, the major international agencies’ ratingsfor key insurance companies have stabilised,albeit at a lower level. The downgradingtrend on the part of these agencies ended forthe time being in August 2003.Financial infrastructure
Payment and securities settlement systems
are key components of a financial market in-frastructure. International standards such asthe Core Principles for Systemically ImportantPayment Systems
22and the Recommendations
for Securities Settlement Systems23have been
agreed in order to strengthen this infrastruc-ture and maintain the stability of the financialsystem as a whole. As part of its assessmentof the German financial sector’s stability car-Changes in ratings of German
insurance companies since 1991
S&P
Insurer FinancialStrength RatingsMoody’s
Insurance FinancialStrength Ratings
Insurance
companyDate of
change RatingDate of
change Rating
Allianz Nov 1998 AAA
July 2001 AA+Oct 2002 AAMar 2003 AA–
Munich Re Jan 1991 AAA Aug 1998 Aaa
Dec 2002 AA+ Sep 2002 Aa1Mar 2003 AA– Apr 2003 Aa3Aug 2003 A+
Hannover Re Feb 1993 AA+ Oct 1998 Aa2
Dec 2001 AA Jan 2001 Aa3Apr 2003 AA– Nov 2001 A2
Mar 2003 Baa1
Deutsche Bundesbank
22Report by the Committee on Payment and Settlement
Systems (CPSS) entitled “Core Principles for Systemically
Important Payment Systems”, Bank for International
Settlements, Basel, January 2001.
23Report by the Committee on Payment and Settlement
Systems (CPSS) and the Technical Committee of the Inter-
national Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO)
entitled “Recommendations for Securities Settlement
Systems”, Bank for International Settlements, Basel, No-
vember 2001.Some
stabilisation
of market
indicators
Compliance
with
internationally
agreed core
principles and
recommen-
dations

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
50ried out in the spring of 2003, the IMF
also reviewed the German systems’ compli-ance with these standards. With regard tothe systemically important payment systemRTGS
plus, which is operated by the Bundes-
bank, the IMF concluded that all the applic-able core principles are being complied within full and that the Bundesbank fulfils therequirements concerning the transparencyof its payment systems policy. The assessmentof the securities settlement system operatedby the German central securities depositoryClearstream Banking AG Frankfurt (Clear-stream) was likewise positive, except in onerespect.
The IMF’s only reservation concerned the un-
winding risk. The Bundesbank, together withClearstream and market participants, has forsome time been working on eliminating thisrisk. The first stage of a new settlement modelwas introduced on 14 November 2003. Theunwinding risk, which until now could resultfrom liquidity problems on the part of a par-ticipant, has been totally eliminated in night-time processing as the purchasers of secur-ities must provide upfront liquidity (ie creditbalances or collateralised credit lines) in theirBundesbank accounts for the transactions tobe settled. In a further step, this procedurewill be extended to day-time processing infuture. The securities settlement system willthen be in full compliance with the inter-national Recommendations for SecuritiesSettlement Systems and, therefore, with theIMF’s requirements.
The Bundesbank also fulfils its statutory man-
date to contribute to the stability of the pay-ment and clearing systems by helping to en-
sure that appropriate crisis management ar-rangements are in place. To this end a com-munication infrastructure for serious crisisand contingency scenarios in individual pay-ment transactions has been created for Ger-many as a financial centre in consultationwith the central associations of the Germanbanking industry represented in the CentralCredit Committee and key market partici-pants. In an emergency, information aboutthe current situation can be exchanged quick-ly and above all precisely via this network andfurther action can be coordinated. For thesake of efficiency, only the financial system’sleading players in payment transactions areinvolved in the communication network.A default on their part would – measured interms of the volume or value of the trans-actions settled in the large-value paymentsystem – represent a systemic risk.
In September 2002, the private sector global
foreign exchange settlement system Continu-ous Linked Settlement (CLS) commenced op-eration. Several German banks are participat-ing directly in CLS as so-called settlementmembers. In CLS, both legs of a foreign ex-change transaction are settled on a paymentversus payment basis. CLS largely eliminatesthe settlement risk which, in the event ofasynchronous settlement, often persists forseveral business days, may be quite extensiveand constitutes a major potential risk to thestability of the financial system. However,participation in CLS brings other risks to thefore. Thus the CLS settlement process placesgreater demands on banks’ liquidity manage-ment as – sometimes very high-value – fund-
Changes in
the monetary
clearing of
securities tradesCrisis
management
for payment
and clearing
systems
Continuous
Linked
Settlement
(CLS)

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
51ing payments have to be made within a limit-
ed time frame and by predetermined dead-lines. This challenge does not appear to becausing the banks any problems so far, whichis attributable not least to the fact that instru-ments are available to reduce their time-critical liquidity requirement on the settle-ment day. The operational complexity andinterdependencies of CLS play a major role,as any failure on the part of a component orplayer in the CLS system can have seriousrepercussions. Since the introduction of CLS,appropriate security precautions and inter-
action between all of the participants in-volved have prevented disruptions in the CLSenvironment from having far-reaching conse-quences. All the central banks (including theBundesbank) whose currencies are eligibleto be settled in CLS will continue to closelymonitor the liquidity and operational risks inthe context of the cooperative oversight ofthe CLS system and will also keep a close eyeon the remaining settlement risks in the mar-ket as well as their management.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
52

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
53Stress testing
the German
banking systemStress tests are a valuable aid in assess-
ing the stability of the banking system.They permit a forward-looking analysisand a uniform approach to identifyingpotential risks to the banking systemas a whole. Naturally enough, the as-sumptions made about risk scenariosmean that subjective elements enterinto the stress tests. Continuous per-formance and development of stresstests are therefore needed. The IMF,too, regards stress tests as an import-ant component of its Financial SectorAssessment Program. This is the back-ground against which the Bundesbankand the Federal Financial SupervisoryAgency, in cooperation with the IMF,conducted stress tests for the Germanfinancial system. The results have con-firmed the resilience of the German fi-nancial system. Despite the scale of theassumed shocks and the fact that thefinancial intermediaries were alreadyin a difficult position owing to the eco-nomic slowdown, the banks possessedsufficient capital to cushion the hypo-thetical losses. It is not only the capitaland reserves base which is crucial forthe long-term stability of the banks,however. The institutions also have tomake further progress in their effortsto achieve a sustained improvement intheir profitability and in limiting theircredit and market risks.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
54Aim and object of the analyses
In the first half of 2003, the IMF appraised
the stability of the German financial systemas part of the Financial Sector AssessmentProgram (FSAP). This included the perform-ance of stress tests for the German credit in-stitutions. The aim of these analyses was todetect potential weaknesses of the bankingsystem when faced with extremely intensemarket changes or adverse macroeconomicdevelopments. The IMF analyses focused oncredit and market risks. Extensive macrostress tests were also conducted. The stresstests were designed and implemented in co-operation with the Federal Ministry of Fi-nance, the Bundesbank and the Federal Fi-nancial Supervisory Agency. The referencedate for the analyses was 31 January 2003.
Credit riskFor most banks, credit risk remains the most
important single risk. In the narrower sense,credit risk denotes the risk that borrowers willnot meet their contractual payment obliga-tions or that they will fail to meet them punc-tually (default risk). In the broader sense,credit risk is understood as the risk of a gen-eral deterioration in the borrower’s creditquality, without such a deterioration neces-sarily resulting in a default.
Under the current prudential rules (Basel I),
banks have to hold capital amounting to atleast 8% of their risk-weighted assets inorder to cover their credit risks. A new versionof the Basel Capital Accord is planned (Basel II),in which there will be a fundamental revisionof the risk weights for the individual asset cat-
egories. In view of this, the stress tests con-ducted in cooperation with the IMF alreadyused the risk-weighted assets in accordancewith Basel II as a basis for measuring thecredit risk. The tests were able to draw on theresults of the Third Quantitative Impact Study(QIS 3) published by the Basel Commitee onBanking Supervision. Thanks to this study, auniform database on the credit quality struc-ture of the loan portfolios of a representativesample of German banks was available. Thissample comprised the large internationallyactive banks (group 1) and a number ofother Landesbanken , savings and cooperative
banks (group 2).
One parameter that is crucial in determining
the risk weighting under Basel II is the prob-ability of default by the individual borrower.The credit risk scenarios provided for a uni-form, proportional 30% and 60% increase inthe borrowers’ probability of default (PD). Acomparison with the default rates in the rat-ing categories of Standard & Poor’s revealsthat such changes in the PDs roughly corres-pond to a one or two-step rating downgradefor the entire loan portfolio. Given the factthat there was already a high insolvency ratelevel on the reference date for the analysis,the second scenario, in particular, is thereforeto be assessed as very conservative.
The change ratios of the risk assets shown in
the table on page 56 confirm the importanceof the credit risk for banks. On average, thebanks in group 1 – with a ratio of 15% in thesecond scenario – displayed a slightly higherincrease in risks than did the banks in group 2
FSAP
Default risk
and risk of
deterioration in
credit quality
Quantitative
Impact Study
by the Basel
CommiteeBorrowers’
probabilities
of default
Heightened
credit risk

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
55The design of stress tests
In contrast to forecasts, stress tests have
to simulate extreme deviations from nor-
mal market developments. In that sense,
they use “unrealistic” scenarios as a basis.
On the other hand, the assumed scen-
arios for the risk factors have to be plaus-
ible to some extent in order to avoid in-
correct conclusions.
In statistical methods of scenario selec-
tion, the common probability distribu-
tion of the relevant risk parameters
(interest rates, equity prices, etc) are esti-
mated from historical data. Then, scen-
arios representing the extreme events of
the distribution (low-probability events)
are selected. This method has the ad-
vantage that probability levels can be
assigned to the scenarios. These are
employed mainly in sensitivity analyses
where only a single risk factor is
“stressed”.
Model-based analysis is another scenario
option. This is applied especially if the
impact of macroeconomic aggregates
is to be studied (macro stress tests).
This method is based on an econometric
model, in which the interrelationships of
the relevant risk factors can be shown.The method ultimately used for selecting
the stress test scenarios depends crucially
on data availability. For example, in the
area of market risk, where prices are
quoted nearly continuously, statistical
methods are often preferred. By contrast,
in the area of credit risk, expert apprais-
als or model-based procedures tend to
be used.
The banks’ risk positions are normally cal-
culated in the form of changes in the
market value of assets. The calculations
may be performed by the banks them-
selves using their own risk models (“bot-
tom up”) or centrally by the supervisory
authorities (“top down”). Mixed ap-
proaches are also feasible, with some of
the risk positions being calculated by the
supervisors and others determined by
the institutions. The “bottom up” ap-
proach is suited mainly to the field of
market risk as many banks possess com-
parable market risk models. In the field
of credit risk and in the case of macro
stress tests, the heterogeneity of the
models means that a “top down” ap-
proach tends to be called for.
Deutsche Bundesbank

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
56with an average of 13%. In the most extreme
case, a ratio of 22% was measured: owing toits adequate capital base, this bank, too, wasable to comply with the regulatory capitalratio. The main reason for the relatively sharpincrease in the risk-weighted assets in theabove-mentioned scenarios is the large per-centage of loans on German banks’ balancesheets. Nevertheless, the IMF, too, is of theopinion that, since the institutions are wellcapitalised, credit risk does not pose a riskto the stability of the banking system. Takingas a basis, say, the average capital ratio of11%, a maximum 22% increase in the risk-weighted assets leads to a lowering of theregulatory capital ratio to 9%, which is dis-tinctly higher than the 8% ratio required bythe regulations.Market risk
A second important risk category – market
risk – was included in the stress tests. Theterm “market risk” refers to the risk of achange in market value owing to changes inmarket prices. Market risk is usually brokendown into the categories of interest rate risk,equity price risk, exchange rate and volatilityrisks.
1
As in the analysis of the credit risk, the cal-culations were confined to a representativesample of internationally active banks and aselection of other banks. The sample for mar-ket risk is not identical with the sample forcredit risk, however, as the latter was com-piled for the requirements of another survey.For the purpose of conducting the stresstests, these banks were asked to calculate thechanges in the market value of their positionsin the banking and trading books based onpredetermined scenarios. For the sake of sim-plicity, it was assumed that the losses whicharose were reflected directly in changes in thevalue of the balance sheet assets. Possibleadjustment measures by the banks as well asdiffering accounting rules for the bankingand trading books were not taken into ac-count.
2Results of the stress tests for
credit risk*
Reference date: End-January 2003
Change in the risk-weighted assets
under Basel II as a percentageof the liable capital
Increase in PDs
amounting to ... Mean valueWorst
result Best result
Group 1
1
... 30% 8.22 9.96 6.46
... 60% 15.31 17.47 12.12
Group 2 2
... 30% 7.22 11.72 4.31
... 60% 13.18 21.89 8.53
*Calculations for a selection of German banks based on
the Third Quantitative Impact Study of the Basel Com-mittee on Banking Supervision. — 1Large internation-
ally active banks. — 2Other banks.
Deutsche Bundesbank
1Volatility is a major parameter in price formulas of de-
rivative instruments. Conversely, by resolving the price
formulas, the implied volatility may be derived from the
quoted prices of the derivatives. This represents, so to
speak, the market view with regard to the future volatility
of the securities underlying the derivative instrument.
2In reality, banks constantly adjust to changes in market
conditions. Nevertheless, under extreme market condi-
tions, the scope for action may be severely restricted.Banking and
trading book
positions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
57For the equity price risk, a sudden unexpected
30% slide in equity prices within a period ofone month taking place simultaneously on allmarkets was assumed. The equity price riskwas calculated for both the trading book andthe banking book (at market values). Notleast on account of the quite low generalequity price level at the time, the further,sharp slump in equity prices was a relativelyimprobable scenario (albeit a meaningful oneas a stress test).
The entire term structure was used in the de-
sign of stress tests for the interest rate risksince particular problems are caused by assy-metrical changes in interest rates. Three dif-ferent types of shifts in the yield curve wereassumed (see table above): twists in the curveat the short end, parallel shifts over all matur-ities and fluctuations in the middle range. In
each case, the shifts were calibrated so thatthe scenario in question is to be expectedonly once in 25 years. The changes in the in-dividual maturity segments amounted to upto 110 basis points.
The exchange rate risk was calculated assum-
ing a 15% appreciation or depreciation of theeuro within one month. This scenario corres-ponds to the largest monthly change in theEUR/USD or DEM/USD exchange rate sincethe end of 1992.
Proportional increases of 35%, 30% and
25% respectively were assumed for interestrate volatilities, exchange rate volatilities andstock market volatilities. The rates of changewere calculated using historical data.Scenarios for the yield curve
Changes in basis points
Euro area USA Japan
Positionshort-
term 1medium-term
2long-term
3short-term
1medium-term
2long-term
3short-term
1medium-term
2long-term
3
Twist (+) 110 60 40 100 50 30 100 40 30
Parallel (+) 70 70 70 65 65 65 60 60 60Peak (+) 0 30 0 0 25 0 0 20 0
Twist (–) – 110 – 60 – 40 – 100 – 40 – 30 0 – 20 – 15
Parallel (–) – 70 – 70 – 70 – 40 – 40 – 40 0 0 0Peak (–) 0 – 30 0 0 – 25 0 0 – 10 0
1Not more than three months. — 2More than three
months but not more than five years. — 3More than five
years.
Deutsche Bundesbank
Fall in stock
market prices
Shifts in the
yield curveExchange rate
changes
Volatilty
changes

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
58The equity price risk is the most important
market risk for the large internationallyactive banks (see table above). The meanhypothethical loss amounted to just over 8%.In one case, it was, in fact, somewhat morethan 20% of the equity capital. No bankundershot the 8% regulatory capital ratio,however.
3The crucial factor in the large
banks’ higher-than-average equity price riskis their large portfolio of participating inter-ests. In relation to the trading book on itsown, the equity price risk is much lower.
The interest rate risk is crucial especially for
small and medium-sized institutions. Themaximum loss in the stress tests was 12% ofthe equity capital. One likely reason for thecomparatively high interest rate risk is thefact that smaller institutions are unable toconclude interest rate hedging operations to
the same extent as large institutions.
As might be expected, the exchange rate risk
and the volatility risk play a secondary role forboth categories of institutions. Usually, thecredit institutions are hedged almost entirelyagainst the exchange rate risk, which funda-mentally harbours a major risk potential. Thebanks’ volatility risk is normally low as well.
Macro stress tests
In all the stress tests considered so far, only
a single risk factor was changed (univariatestress tests). This means implicitly making thevery simplifying assumption of a null correl-ation between the risk factors. In reality, how-ever, it tends to be the case that simultaneouschanges in the risk factors are observed. Uni-variate stress tests should therefore be sup-plemented by multivariate stress tests, inwhich more than one risk factor at a time ischanged. Simply combining the univariatescenarios is impractical, however, as they pro-duce very unrealistic results in most cases. Forthat reason, historical risk factor situationsthat have actually occurred are often used.However, historical simulation severely re-stricts the choice of possible scenarios. Onealternative, which was also adopted for theFSAP in Germany, is provided by a model-based selection of scenarios in a macro stresstest.Results of the stress tests for market risk
Change in market value
as a percentage of the
liable capital
Scenario 1Mean
valueWorst
resultBest
result
Group 1 2
Decline in share prices – 8.48 – 20.40 – 0.21
Interest rates: twist (+) – 1.27 – 2.58 – 0.22
Interest rates: parallel (+) – 0.86 – 1.80 0.17Interest rates: peak (+) – 0.46 – 1.14 – 0.05
Interest rates: twist (–) 1.16 0.29 1.89
Interest rates: parallel (–) 0.67 – 1.16 1.65
Interest rates: peak (–) 0.52 0.03 1.06
Euro appreciation – 0.44 – 2.15 1.88
Euro depreciation 0.38 – 1.88 2.24
Volatility 0.05 – 0.22 0.29
Group 2
3
Decline in share prices – 1.71 – 6.98 0.00
Interest rates: twist (+) – 2.33 – 9.13 0.16
Interest rates: parallel (+) – 2.86 – 11.75 0.81
Interest rates: peak (+) – 0.95 – 3.53 0.10
Interest rates: twist (–) 2.20 – 1.14 9.35
Interest rates: parallel (–) 2.77 – 0.89 12.12
Interest rates: peak (–) 0.96 – 0.19 3.57
Euro appreciation 0.22 – 1.92 1.90
Euro depreciation – 0.53 – 3.73 1.40
Volatility 0.03 – 0.35 0.56
Sources: Deutsche Bundesbank, institutions’ calcula-
tions. — 1The scenarios are defined as follows: 30%
decline in equity prices; interest rate scenarios as in the
table on page 57; +/-15% movement in the exchange
rate; change in volatility for interest rates, exchange
rates and shares of 35%, 30% and 25% respectively. —
2Large internationally active banks. — 3Other banks.
Deutsche Bundesbank
3Assuming, say, an average capital ratio of 11%, a loss
of 20% results in a lowering of the capital ratio to just on
9%.Equity price risk
Interest rate riskExchange rate
and volatility
risks
Model-based
scenarios

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
59For this purpose, the Bundesbank and the
IMF studied three macroeconomic frameworkscenarios. The impacts of these scenarios onthe relevant risk factors for the years 2003and 2004 were determined using the Bundes-bank’s macroeconometric model. In doing so,it was assumed that the central bank leavesinterest rates unchanged. An econometric re-gression equation for the banks’ specific pro-visions created the link to the banks’ creditrisk. The market risk (which is not shownbelow owing to its minor importance) wascalculated by the banks themselves. Thethree macro scenarios considered are listedbelow.
Scenario 1: at the start of 2003, when the
stress tests were conducted, major geopolit-ical uncertainty prevailed on account of thelooming war in Iraq. This then actually tookplace in March. The framework scenario en-visaged a 45% hike in oil prices in the firsthalf of the year and a 1% increase in US mili-tary spending. Furthermore, a global 10% fallin equity prices and a
1/C252percentage point rise
in the saving ratio in all industrial countrieswere assumed. In the model calculations, thisscenario led to real GDP diverging from thebaseline scenario by 0.6 percentage point inthe first year.
Scenario 2: in this scenario, a 0.3 percentage
point increase in the saving ratio and an in-crease in capital costs of 100 basis pointswere assumed for Germany. In the model cal-culations, this led to a decline of 0.2 percent-age point in real GDP in the first year com-pared with the baseline scenario.Scenario 3: this assumed a gradual increase in
the US saving ratio to 4%, a gradual declinein the US current account deficit and an 8%depreciation of the US dollar. This scenarioled to a decline of 0.3 percentage point inreal GDP growth in the first year comparedwith the baseline scenario.
Using the econometric model, the impact on
credit risk was calculated for the various scen-arios. Using a panel approach, the banks’specific provisions were explained by individ-ual balance sheet data and by macroeco-nomic variables.
l
it= 0.37 lit–1+ 0.14 lit–2– 0.3 DKit–1–
6.5DGDP t+ 10.7 rt+eit
where
–ldenotes the transformed specific provi-
sions ratio, l=l nSPQ
1/C0SPQ/C16/C17
,
–DKthe credit expansion of the bank,
–DGDP the growth of real GDP
–rthe short-term interest rates, and
–ethe residual.
The above model equation resulted from esti-
mations for the commercial banks, savingsbanks and cooperative banks. The underlyingdatabase consisted of the balance sheet dataof all credit institutions (complete survey). Asexpected, the importance of current econom-ic growth for loan losses is confirmed in theestimations. A 1 percentage point decline inMacro-
economic
framework
scenarios
Iraq war
Negative
demand shockAdjustment
of global
imbalances
Panel
estimation
GDP and
interest rates
as systemic
risk factors

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
60GDP growth thus leads to an increase in the
provisions of roughly 7%. With regard to theapparently strong influence of the interestrates, it has to be borne in mind that largeinterest rate changes are comparatively rare.Moreover, economic developments and inter-est rates generally run in parallel, leadingto opposite impacts on value adjustments.Among the considered balance sheet data,credit expansion is the main significant factor.The negative sign is probably due to the factthat there is a lower probability of default fornew loans. A certain persistency of the pro-visions is also evident. This is revealed bythe importance of lagged value adjustmentratios.
As an outcome, it may be noted that the
macro scenarios produced no indication of arisk to the stability of the banking system (see
table above). The allowance for loan lossesfor 2003 rose on average by a maximum of7% and the level of provisions went up to amaximum of 3.5% of the credit volume,which is not unusual by historical standards.Owing to the assumed upward revision ofeconomic growth in the second year of eachstress scenario, there was a marked decline inthe average provisions in 2004. Institutionsalready having high value adjustments weremore strongly affected by the stress scenariosin 2003 and also benefited less from the eco-nomic recovery in the following year.Results of the macro stress tests*
Figures as a percentage; reference date: end-January 2003
YearGrowth of
allowancefor loansSpecific
provisions
1Allowancefor loanlosses
1
(Mean value)Specific
provisionslevel:
1
5% quantileSpecific
provisionslevel:
1
medianSpecific
provisionslevel:
1
95% quantile
Baseline scenario
2003 4.1 0.94 3.43 0.86 3.11 9.78
2004 – 6.3 0.85 3.22 0.69 2.91 10.02
Iraq war
2003 6.9 0.98 3.52 0.89 3.21 10.00
2004 – 4.4 0.88 3.37 0.72 3.03 10.39
Negative demand shock
2003 5.1 0.95 3.46 0.87 3.14 9.86
2004 – 4.4 0.87 3.31 0.71 2.98 10.21
Adjustment of global imbalances
2003 – 7.6 0.83 3.04 0.72 2.80 9.11
2004 – 20.0 0.71 2.48 0.48 2.14 8.30
*Panel estimation based on German banks’ balance sheet
data. — 1Share of loans to non-banks.
Deutsche Bundesbank
Macro-
economic
scenarios reveal
no unusual risks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
61Overall judgement
In its overall judgement, the IMF attested that
the German banking system has a notableresilience. Because they are well capitalised,the banks were able to pass the stress testssatisfactorily. The most significant risks for thebanks resulted mainly from a further deterior-ation in the credit quality of their borrowers.Furthermore, a further slump in equity pricesis likely to harbour a certain risk potentialespecially for larger banks owing to their size-able portfolios of participating interests.
Considering the macroeconomic setting at
the reference date for the stress tests and theadjustment measures currently being taken
by the banks, this generally good result is verysignificant.
Despite the satisfactory stress test results,
there is a need for further adjustment in theGerman banking system. It is not only thecapital and reserves base that is crucial forthe long-term stability of the banks. Rather,the institutions have to improve, first andforemost, their profitability and limit theircredit and market risks by intensive risk man-agement. The relevant steps already taken bythe banks therefore have to be pursued con-sistently in the future.
IMF confirms
the resilience
of the banking
system, ...... but
improvement
in profitability
is crucial for
long-term
stability

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
62

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
63CommentariesEconomic conditions
Economy as a wholeAccording to Federal Statistical Office data,
German gross domestic product (GDP) in thethird quarter of 2003 was up 0.2% on thequarter after seasonal and working-day ad-justment. This signified the end to a spell offalling output that began in winter 2003.That development has given way to a slightupturn. Up to now, however, stronger ex-ports have been the sole driving force behindgrowth. By contrast, domestic demand hasfallen significantly. This has depressed im-ports, which has been a further factor con-tributing to higher net exports.
IndustryIndustrial orders and output at the beginning
of the fourth quarter nevertheless point to acyclical improvement in the domestic econ-omy as well. Internal demand, in particular,has improved, with all major product groupsranging from intermediate goods throughcapital goods to consumer goods putting in apositive performance.
In seasonally adjusted terms, October saw a
sharp expansion in industrial output followingstagnation in the third quarter. The almost3% increase on August and September over-states the pace of economic growth, how-ever, as holiday effects had dampened outputactivity during those months. It thereforeseems reasonable to assume that backlog ef-fects came into play in October.GDP in Q3
2003
Orders received
Output

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
64Construction
The situation in construction is likely to have
deteriorated again in October. According tothe currently available data, seasonally adjust-ed construction output was, in fact, some-what up on the two preceding months. Thefigures for the period from March to Septem-ber, once the results of the overall surveyhave been incorporated, are likely to be re-vised upward to such an extent that businessactivity in October will show a decline. Theidentifiable period of stabilisation during thesecond and third quarters did not continue inearly autumn, with year-on-year output stillshowing a clear decline of about 4%.
Seasonally adjusted demand for construction
work in September was slightly up on themonth (more recent statistics are unavailableat present). Demand in the third quarter as awhole was around 1
3/C254% higher than the
average for the period from April to June.Even so, new construction orders for the July-September period were still well down on theyear (-7%). While there was a slight recoveryin demand for residential and public construc-tion, industrial customers remained cautious.
Labour marketThe labour market situation remained un-
favourable up to the end of the period underreview. As initially estimated by the FederalStatistical Office, there was a further season-ally adjusted fall in the number of persons inwork in September. At 38.12 million, the fig-ure was almost 30,000 down on the month.Economic conditions in Germany*
Seasonally adjusted
New orders (volume); 2000 = 100
Industry 1
Period Total Domestic ForeignCon-
struction
2003 Q1 97.3 93.4 102.3 81.1
Q2 95.5 91.8 100.2 79.2Q3 96.9 92.3 102.7 80.6
Aug 96.3 90.9 103.1 78.5
Sep 98.1 93.6 103.7 79.4
Oct 100.1 96.1 105.0 ...
Output; 1995 = 100Industry
2
of which
TotalInter-
mediategoodsCapital
goods
3Con-struction
2003 Q1 119.6 117.0 134.0 70.5
Q2 117.9 116.5 129.8 71.2Q3 117.7 114.6 131.5 71.2
Aug 116.6 113.4 129.7 70.0
Sep 116.1 113.5 130.1 69.8
Oct 119.8 117.1 136.3 70.7
Labour market
Em-
ployed
4VacanciesUn-
employed
Number in thousandsUn-
employ-mentratein %
5
2003 Q1 38,297 385 4,321 10.4
Q2 38,250 361 4,421 10.6Q3 38,149 344 4,400 10.6
Sep 38,119 335 4,393 10.5Oct ... 328 4,381 10.5
Nov ... 326 4,363 10.5
1995 =100 2000=100
Import
pricesProducer
prices ofindustrialprod-ucts
6Con-structionprices
7Con-sumerprices
2003 Q1 109.8 104.3 100.3 104.3
Q2 106.1 103.8 100.3 104.3Q3 106.6 104.1 100.3 104.5
Aug 107.1 104.1 . 104.5
Sep 106.5 104.1 . 104.7
Oct 106.8 104.3 . 104.9
Nov ... ... . 104.8
*Data in many cases provisional. — 1Manufacturing sectors
excluding, in particular, food products, beverages and to-bacco, and refined petroleum products. — 2Manufacturing
industries not classified under energy plus mining andquarrying. — 3Including manufacture of motor vehicles,
trailers and semi-trailers. — 4Workplace concept. — 5Meas-
ured on the basis of all civilian members of the labourforce. — 6Domestic sales. — 7Calculated by the Bundes-
bank; not seasonally adjusted. Mid-quarter level.
Deutsche BundesbankOutput
Orders received
Employment

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
65The year-on-year decline was 455,000 or
1.2%.
As in previous months, the seasonally adjust-
ed number of persons registered as un-employed with the Federal Labour Office fellin November. The end-of-month figure was4.36 million, ie almost 20,000 persons fewerthan before. The year-on-year increase,which was as much as 295,000 in the thirdquarter, went down to 160,000. As calcu-lated by the Federal Labour Office, theseasonally adjusted unemployment rate re-mained unchanged at 10.5% in November.The corresponding figure, using the Europeanstandardised method, was 9.3%.
The slight decrease in unemployment was
mainly attributable to the continued applica-tion of more stringent registration require-ments. Furthermore, there have been virtuallyno further cutbacks in traditional labour mar-ket policy measures such as job creationschemes (including structural adjustment)and vocational training. More direct assist-ance has also been provided through bridgingallowances and business start-up loans aswell as through the immediate employmentcreation programme for reducing unemploy-ment among young people. From a cyclicalpoint of view, the unemployment situationhas not improved.
PricesPrice developments remained moderate dur-
ing the period under review, with seasonallyadjusted consumer prices dipping slightly inNovember even though the year-on-year rateof price increase went up to 1.3% (HICP
1.3%). The main reason for this was the up-ward pressure on the prices of seasonal fooditems and petrol.
International prices for Brent North Sea Oil,
which are usually passed on to domesticprices very quickly, rose at times in Novemberto over US$30. The average price for themonth was around US$28
3/C254, which is more
or less in line with the figure for October.Since there was little fluctuation in the euro/US dollar exchange rate in November, euro oilprices also remained virtually unchanged.Their marked rise in the previous monthpushed up German import prices slightly(relevant figures are available only up to Octo-ber), although the level was still 2.5% downon the year. The oil price rise in October alsoaccelerated the pace of inflation in factorygate prices, the year-on-year rate of price in-crease being 1.7%.
Public finances
Indebtedness of central, state and local
government
In October the indebtedness of central, state
and local government rose more sharply by39.2 billion following a much smaller increase
of30.6 billion in September, a month of
major tax payments. Net borrowing by cen-tral government amounted to 32.9 billion on
balance. Redemptions of money market loansworth 313.2 billion were offset by new cap-
ital market debt totalling 316.1 billion. The
Federal Government raised 36.3 billion netUnemployment
Labour market
policy measures
Consumer
pricesOil prices and
import prices
October

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
66from the sale of five-year Federal notes
(Bobls). The allotment by tender of the newseries 143, which carries a 3.5% interest rate,which is
1/C252percentage point above that of
the previous series, yielded 36.4 billion alone.
In addition, the outstanding amount of Fed-eral bonds (Bunds) rose again steeply by 35.9
billion. The redemption of a Federal Railwaysbond, carrying a 6.125% coupon, with a vol-ume of 32.6 billion was offset, in particular,
by the allotment by tender of a newly intro-duced Bund with a 4.25% interest rate,which raised 37.8 billion. The outstanding
amount of two-year Federal Treasury notes(Sch/C228tze) also increased again significantly by34.7 billion. In the case of the six-month
Bubills, the overall amount outstanding roseby30.4 billion, while repayments of Federalsavings notes again exceeded new sales by
31 billion.
The bulk of net borrowing in October, namely
36 billion, was accounted for by state govern-
ment, after it had already raised 322.4 billion
(actual cash inflow) in the first three quarters.Thus its new borrowing has already exceededthe amount of 324 billion budgeted for the
entire year. The rise in the debt level in Octo-ber was primarily due to a 33.5 billion in-
crease in the outstanding amount of Treasurynotes. The largest single issue was by theState of North Rhine-Westphalia carrying acoupon of 3.5% with a maturity of five years.In addition, the outstanding volume of cashadvances rose by 32.5 billion. By contrast,
there was virtually no net change in the out-standing amount of loans against borrowers’notes, which were formerly used very widelyby state government. Thus the trend of issu-ing securities in order to meet long-term cap-ital requirements continued. Local govern-ment indebtedness appears to have increasedonly moderately in October.
Central government borrowingIn November central government reduced its
indebtedness by 30.2 billion overall. It raised
32.6 billion on the money market. However,
this was offset by capital market redemptionsof32.8 billion. In terms of actual cash-flows,
net new borrowing from January to the endof November now stands at 343.5 billion. As
the budget initially envisaged net borrowingof318.9 billion (albeit strictly measured by
the amount due to accrue in the accountingyear), the Federal Government has since pre-Net borrowing in the market
5billion
2002 2003
Borrower Totalof
whichJan-OctJan-
Oct
pe Oct pe
Central govern-ment
1 + 24.4 + 27.8 + 43.8 + 2.9
State government + 27.6 + 22.0 + 28.4 + 6.0Local govern-
ment
2, pe + 2.4 + 2.2 + 5.2 + 0.4
ERP Special Fund + 0.2 + 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.1German Unity
Fund – 0.2 + 0.1 – 0.3 –
Central, state and
local government,total + 54.5 + 52.3 + 77.0 + 9.2
1Including the off-budget special funds not shown
separately here. — 2Including special-purpose associ-
ations.
Deutsche Bundesbank
November

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
67sented a supplementary budget with new
borrowing of 343.4 billion. Given that results
in December are usually relatively favourableowing to major tax payments, this targetseems attainable from today’s perspective.
Gross borrowing in the capital market
amounted to 314 billion in November and
was largely achieved through the sale ofBobls ( 36.7 billion). The topping-up of the
series 143, which was launched in the previ-ous month, raised 35.9 billion via the tender
allotment; interest rates, which were upagain on the month, resulted in a discount of1
1/C254% or a yield mark-up of just over3/C2510per-
centage point. 36 billion had to be spent on
the redemption of the series 129, which wasalso issued with a 3.5% coupon in 1998, sothat the overall amount of Bobls outstandingrose by only 30.7 billion. The Federal Govern-
ment raised 35.8 billion from Bubills. 34.9 bil-
lion had to be spent on maturing Bubills, withthe result that the stock of Bubills likewiseincreased only slightly. In connection withmarket-smoothing operations, central gov-ernment sold Bunds worth 30.7 billion in
November. The redemption of a Treuhandbond from 1993 bearing 6% interest with avolume of 35.1 billion thus reduced the out-
standing amount of these long-term bondsby34.4 billion.
Securities markets
Bond marketThe German bond market experienced very
buoyant issuing activity in October. Domesticborrowers issued debt securities to a nominal
value of 3114.6 billion, compared with 395.2
billion in September. At 327 billion, net sales
less redemptions and changes in issuers’holdings of their own bonds were more thandouble the previous month’s figure. Most ofthese sales were of debt securities with ma-turities of up to (and including) four years.Sales of foreign bonds and notes also in-creased, raising 39.8 billion in Germany in the
month under review (previous month: 35.2
billion). Most of these were denominated ineuro ( 38.3 billion).
Just under half of the borrowing was by the
public sector, which expanded its bondeddebt by 312.3 billion (September: 33.6 bil-
lion). On balance, the Federal Government is-sued 313.7 billion worth of bonds. Net issuesNet borrowing in the market by central
government
5billion; 2003
NovemberJanuary-
November
Item Gross Net Gross Net
Change in money
market debt 2.6 2.6 1.7 1.7
Change in capital
market debt, total 1 14.0 – 2.8 211.9 41.9
Treasury discount
paper (Bubills) 5.8 0.9 57.4 4.4
Federal Treasury
financing paper 0.0 – 0.0 0.7 – 0.4
Treasury notes (Sch/C228tze) 0.3 0.3 38.4 2 12.0
Five-year Federal notes
(Bobls) 6.7 0.7 42.5 16.1
Federal savings notes 0.0 0.0 0.6 – 5.1
Federal bonds (Bunds) 0.7 – 4.4 62.0 3 13.1
Bank loans 0.4 – 0.4 10.4 – 3.0
Loans from non-banks – – – 6.1
Other debt – – – – 1.2
Total borrowing 16.6 – 0.2 213.6 43.5
1Memo item: Planned borrowing for 2003 as a whole in the sup-
plementary budget: 5228 billion gross, 543.4 billion net. — 2In-
cluding borrowing for the German Unity Fund: 542.8 billion. —
3Including borrowing for the German Unity Fund and the ERP
Special Fund: 566.2 billion.
Deutsche Bundesbank
Bond salesPublic sector
bonds

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
68of ten-year Federal bonds ( 37.8 billion) were
in the forefront, followed by five-year Federalnotes ( 37.0 billion) and two-year Federal
Treasury notes ( 34.8 billion).
1The state gov-
ernments (L/C228nder) raised 33.8 billion net in
the bond market in October. Furthermore,32.6 billion worth of debt securities issued by
the former Federal Railways were redeemed,as were 32.5 billion of those issued by the
former Federal Post Office.
At310.4 billion, net sales of bank bonds
were roughly the same as in the previousmonth ( 39.1 billion). Other bank bonds were
the frontrunners; their volume in the marketincreased by 310.4 billion, most of which was
accounted for by bonds with maturities ofless than four years. Specialised credit institu-tions issued 35.2 billion net worth of debtsecurities. By contrast, 34.5 billion worth of
public Pfandbriefe and 30.7 billion of mort-
gage Pfandbriefe were redeemed. Sales ofcorporate bonds picked up again in October,with net issues amounting to 34.2 billion
(September: 30.3 billion).
Foreign investors were the principal pur-
chasers in the German bond market in Octo-ber, acquiring 319.6 billion worth of domestic
debt securities. Two-thirds of these were pub-lic sector issues. German credit institutions ex-panded their bond portfolios by 312.5 billion,
most of which was invested in foreign paper(36.8 billion). Domestic non-banks bought
33.0 billion of foreign equities and 31.7 bil-
lion of domestic equities.
Equity marketThe recovery of prices in the German equity
market, which has been under way sinceMarch, has not so far been reflected in a not-able increase in the volume of issues. In Octo-ber domestic enterprises placed new sharesto a market value of 30.7 billion. Although
the average monthly volume of issues, at31.1 billion, was well up on the previous year
(30.8 billion), this was solely due to a large
issue in April. Despite comparatively low netsales, domestic and foreign investors mademajor shifts in their portfolios. While resi-dent investors – especially non-banks – raised310.4 billion from the sale of German equitiesSales and purchases
of bonds and notes
5billion
2003 2002
Item Sep Oct Oct
Sales of domestic bonds
and notes 1 13.0 27.0 2.9
of which
Bank bonds 9.1 10.4 – 4.3Public sector bonds 3.6 12.3 4.2
Foreign bonds andnotes
2 5.2 9.8 1.6
Purchases
Residents 16.4 17.1 3.7
Credit institutions 3 12.6 12.5 – 9.7
Non-banks 4 3.8 4.7 13.3
of which
Domestic bondsand notes 8.4 1.7 10.6
Non-residents
2 1.7 19.6 0.8
Total sales/purchases 18.1 36.7 4.4
1Net sales at market values plus/minus changes in issuers’
holdings of their own bonds. — 2Transaction values. —
3Book values, statistically adjusted. — 4Residual.
Deutsche Bundesbank
1The individual items for the Federal Government are
shown at nominal values rather than at market values,
and no account is taken of the changes in its holdings of
Federal bonds. The sum total of these individual items
therefore normally fails to tally with the aforementioned
total net sales of Federal Government bonds.Bank bonds
and corporate
bondsBond purchases
Share sales and
purchases

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
69in the month under review, non-residents in-
creased their commitment in the Germanequity market by 312.2 billion.
Mutual fund sharesDomestic mutual funds raised only limited
funds – 30.3 billion – from sales in October
(September: 32.8 billion), these accruing sole-
ly to the specialised funds preferred by institu-tional investors. As share prices rose andbond prices fell, this group of investors shift-ed resources from bond-based funds (- 33.2
billion) to share-based funds (+ 32.1 billion)
and mixed funds (+ 31.0 billion). Similar
movements could be observed in funds opento the general public; inflows to share-basedfunds ( 30.8 billion), open-end real estate
funds ( 30.4 billion) and mixed funds ( 30.2 bil-
lion) and outflows from money market funds(31.0 billion) and bond-based funds ( 30.4 bil-
lion) meant that things were kept on an evenkeel. In October, sales of foreign mutual fundshares raised 30.4 billion. As usual, the main
purchasers of mutual fund shares were do-mestic non-banks ( 33.9 billion), followed by
foreign investors ( 31.2 billion). By contrast,
domestic banks reduced their holdings ofmutual fund shares by 34.4 billion.
Balance of payments
In October, Germany’s current account sur-
plus amounted to 36.3 billion. The main rea-
son for the surplus being 33.1 billion lower
than in September was a decline in the for-eign trade surplus. At the same time, how-ever, a fall was recorded in the deficit on in-visible current transactions, which is that part
of the current account comprising services,factor income and current transfers.
According to provisional figures from the Fed-
eral Statistical Office, the foreign trade sur-plus went down by 33.6 billion compared
with the previous month to 310.8 billion in
October. After adjustment for seasonal vari-ations, the trading result fell by 34
1/C252billion to
just under 310 billion. This was caused by a
decidedly strong seasonally adjusted fall inexported goods, while, at the same time,imported goods rose somewhat. The valueof exports in October was 6
1/C252% below
the – comparatively high – September levelwhereas imports went up by 1
1/C252%. If the ex-
ports in September and October are com-bined in order to smooth out monthly fluctu-ations, the value exceeded that of the corres-ponding period (July-August 2003) by 1
1/C252%.
As regards invisible current transactions with
non-residents, there was a deficit of 33.8 bil-
lion in October as opposed to 34.7 billion in
the previous month. The fall was caused byboth a smaller deficit on cross-border services(32.6 billion compared with 33.3 billion previ-
ously) and a net decline in current transfers tonon-residents ( 31.8 billion compared with
32.7 billion in September). Net payments of
factor income to residents were down andstood at 30.6 billion in October (compared
with 31.3 billion in September).
There was a high level of net capital imports
through securities transactions ( 320.7 billion)
in October when turnover was brisk. This fol-lowed low net outflows of funds in Septem-Sales and
purchases
of mutual
fund shares
Current
accountForeign trade
Invisibles
Portfolio
investment

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
70ber ( 31.4 billion). The main reason for this de-
velopment was that foreign portfolio invest-ors purchased German securities worth 333.1
billion – the highest amount since June 2001.German bonds and notes ( 317.6 billion) as
well as shares ( 312.3 billion) aroused the
interest of foreign investors whereas demandfor money market instruments was compara-tively low at 32.0 billion. German investors
likewise increased their new investmentabroad, namely from 32.9 billion in Septem-
ber to 312.4 billion in October. This was
largely in the form of net purchases of foreignbonds and notes ( 38.2 billion), all of which
were euro-denominated. In addition, they in-vested to a more limited extent in shares(32.2 billion), money market paper ( 31.6 bil-
lion) and investment fund certificates ( 30.4
billion).
In contrast to portfolio investment, direct in-
vestment resulted in strong net capital ex-ports ( 311.8 billion). Foreign proprietors with-
drew 39.4 billion net from Germany, primarily
by reducing credit to their German branches.German enterprises, however, strengthenedtheir international presence and invested32.4 billion abroad.
With regard to the non-banks’ non-securi-
tised credit transactions, funds amounting to31.4 billion were transferred from Germany.
Enterprises and individuals accounted for30.8 billion and general government for 30.6
billion. The domestic banking system record-ed net capital exports amounting to 313.3
billion, a reflection, as it were, of all othercross-border transactions. Whereas credit in-stitutions attracted 38.1 billion of funds in netMajor items of the balance
of payments
5billion
2002 2003
Item Oct Sep r Oct
I Current account
1 Foreign trade 1
Exports (fob) 58.9 58.2 58.2Imports (cif) 47.4 43.9 47.4
Balance + 11.5 + 14.3 + 10.8
Memo itemSeasonally adjustedfigures
Exports (fob) 54.9 58.1 54.2Imports (cif) 44.4 43.7 44.4
2 Supplementary trade
items
2 –0 . 4 –0 . 3 –0 . 7
3 Services
Receipts 9.9 9.4 9.0Expenditure 13.8 12.8 11.7
Balance – 3.9 – 3.3 – 2.6
4 Factor income (net) + 1.9 + 1.3 + 0.65 Current transfers
from non-residents 0.7 1.0 0.7to non-residents 4.0 3.6 2.5
Balance – 3.4 – 2.7 – 1.8
Balance on current account + 5.8 + 9.4 + 6.3
II Capital transfers (net)
3 –0 . 1 –0 . 1 –0 . 0
III Financial account
(net capital exports: –)
Direct investment – 1.5 + 0.5 – 11.8
German investmentabroad – 3.5 – 0.3 – 2.4Foreign investmentin Germany + 2.0 + 0.8 – 9.4
Portfolio investment – 3.1 – 1.4 + 20.7
German investmentabroad – 4.6 – 2.9 – 12.4of which
Shares – 2.8 + 2.0 – 2.2Bonds and notes – 1.1 – 5.6 – 8.2
Foreign investmentin Germany + 1.6 + 1.5 + 33.1of which
Shares + 0.9 + 0.7 + 12.3Bonds and notes + 1.2 – 0.5 + 17.6
Financial derivatives – 1.3 – 1.7 + 2.0Credit transactions – 13.5 + 8.5 – 14.8
Credit institutions – 10.0 + 7.4 + 8.1
of whichShort-term – 10.5 + 13.7 + 11.1
Enterprises and individuals + 1.7 – 3.8 – 0.8General government + 0.6 + 1.1 – 0.6Bundesbank – 5.8 + 3.8 – 21.4
Other investment – 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.2
Overall balance on financial
account – 19.5 + 5.5 – 4.0
IV Change in the foreign
reserves at transaction values(increase: –)
4 + 0.6 – 0.3 – 0.3
V Balance of unclassifiable
transactions + 13.1 – 14.6 – 1.9
1Special trade according to the official foreign trade statistics
(source: Federal Statistical Office). — 2Mainly warehouse trans-
actions for account of residents and deduction of goods re-turned. — 3Including the acquisition/disposal of non-produced
non-financial assets. — 4Excluding allocation of SDRs and ex-
cluding changes due to value adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankDirect
investment
Credit
transactions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
71terms, the Bundesbank registered outflows of
321.4 billion, essentially via balances in con-
nection with the payment system TARGET.The foreign reserves of the Bundesbank rose
– at transaction values – by 30.3 billion in
October.Foreign
reserves

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
72

Statistical
Section
1*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003

ContentsI Key economic data for European
monetary union
1 Monetary developments and interest
rates 6*
2 Foreign trade and payments 6*
3 General economic indicators 7*
II Overall monetary survey in the
European monetary union
1 The money stock and its counterparts 8*2 Consolidated balance sheet of mon-
etary financial institutions (MFIs) 10*
3 Banking system’s liquidity position 14*
III Consolidated financial statement
of the Eurosystem
1 Assets 16*2 Liabilities 18*
IV Banks
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary
financial institutions (excluding theBundesbank) in Germany 20*
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks
(MFIs) in Germany, by category ofbanks 24*
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-/C224-vis residents 26*
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-/C224-vis non-residents 28*
2*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003

5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) 30*
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic enterprises and resident
individuals, housing loans, sectors ofeconomic activity 32*
7 Deposits of domestic
non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs)in Germany 34*
8 Deposits of resident individuals and
domestic non-profit institutions atbanks (MFIs) in Germany 36*
9 Deposits of domestic public author-
ities at banks (MFIs) in Germany, bycreditor group 36*
10 Savings deposits and bank savings
bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germanysold to non-banks (non-MFIs) 38*
11 Debt securities and money market
paper outstanding of banks (MFIs)in Germany 38*
12 Building and loan associations (MFIs)
in Germany 39*
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign
branches and foreign subsidiaries ofGerman banks (MFIs) 40*
V Minimum reserves
1 Reserve ratios 42*2 Reserve maintenance in Germany up
to the end of 1998 42*
3 Reserve maintenance in the Euro-
pean monetary union 42*VI Interest rates
1 ECB interest rates 43*2 Discount and lombard rates of the
Bundesbank 43*
3 Base rates 43*4 Eurosystem monetary policy opera-
tions allotted through tenders 43*
5 Money market rates, by month 44*6 Euro area retail bank interest rates 44*7 Interest rates and volumes for out-
standing amounts and new businessof German banks (MFIs) 45*
VII Capital market
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities
and shares in Germany 48*
2 Sales of debt securities issued by
borrowers domiciled in Germany 49*
3 Outstanding amount of debt secur-
ities issued by borrowers domiciledin Germany 50*
4 Circulation of shares issued by resi-
dents of Germany 50*
5 Yields and indices on German
securities 51*
6 Sales and purchases of investment
fund certificates in Germany 51*
3*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003

VIII Public finance in Germany
1 Finances of the public sector 52*
2 Finances of the Federal
Government, L/C228nder Governmentsand local authorities 52*
3 Finances of the Government
in the national accounts 53*
4 Tax revenue of the central,
regional and local authorities 53*
5 Tax revenue, by type 54*6 Individual taxes of the Federal
Government, L/C228nder Governmentsand local authorities 54*
7 Indebtedness of the public sector 55*8 Changes in public sector
indebtedness 57*
9 Loans raised by public authorities
against borrowers’ notes 57*
10 Indebtedness of the Federal
Government 58*
11 Federal Government borrowing
in the market 58*
12 Receipts, expenditure and assets of
the wage and salary earners’pension insurance funds 59*
13 Receipts and expenditure of the
Federal Labour Office 59*
IX Economic conditions
1 Origin and expenditure of
domestic product, distribution ofnational income 60*
2 Output in the producing sector 61*3 Orders received by industry 62*4 Orders received by construction 63*5 Retail trade turnover 63*6 Labour market 64*7 Prices 65*8 Households’ income 66*9 Pay rates and actual earnings 66*
X Foreign trade and payments
1 Major items of the balance of pay-
ments of the European monetaryunion 67*
2 Major items of the balance of pay-
ments of the Federal Republic ofGermany 68*
3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the
Federal Republic of Germany, bygroup of countries and country 69*
4 Services and factor income of the
Federal Republic of Germany 70*
5 Current transfers of the Federal
Republic of Germany 70*
6 Capital transfers 70*7 Financial account of the Federal
Republic of Germany 71*
8 External position of the Bundesbank 72*9 External position of the Bundesbank
in the European monetary union 72*
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises
in Germany (other than banks)vis-/C224-vis non-residents 73*
11 Deutsche Mark and euro exchange
rates of selected currencies 74*
12 Exchange rates for the national
currencies of the EMU countries,the Deutsche Mark value of theECU and euro conversion rates 74*
13 Effective exchange rates of the euro
and selected foreign currencies 75*
4*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003

Abbreviations and symbols
eestimated
pprovisional
pepartly estimated
rrevised
...Data available at a later date
.Data unknown, not to be published or
not meaningful
0Less than 0.5 but more than nil
–nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to round-ing.
5*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
 I Key economic data for European monetary union
 
1 Monetary developments and interest rates
 
 
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions  1, 2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
 M 3  3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3-month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
MFI lending, and capital 3-month ment bonds moving  average
M1 M2 (centred) total individuals formation  4 EONIA  5, 7 EURIBOR  6, 7 outstanding  8 
Period Change from previous year, in % % p. a. as a monthly average
2002          Apr 6.7 6.4 7.2 7.3 4.4 5.1 4.6 3.32 3.41 5.3
         May 6.8 6.7 7.5 7.3 4.5 5.3 5.2 3.31 3.47 5.3         Jun 6.9 6.4 7.1 7.2 4.4 5.3 4.3 3.35 3.46 5.2
         Jul 7.6 6.5 7.0 7.0 4.0 4.8 5.0 3.30 3.41 5.0
         Aug 7.7 6.4 6.9 7.0 4.2 5.1 5.3 3.29 3.35 4.7         Sep 8.0 6.5 7.1 7.0 4.3 5.0 5.2 3.32 3.31 4.5
         Oct 8.3 6.8 6.9 7.0 4.3 4.9 5.0 3.30 3.26 4.6
         Nov 9.0 6.8 7.0 6.9 3.9 4.6 5.0 3.30 3.12 4.6         Dec 9.9 6.6 6.9 7.1 4.1 4.7 4.9 3.09 2.94 4.4
2003          Jan 9.5 6.6 7.3 7.4 4.2 4.8 4.6 2.79 2.83 4.2
         Feb 10.5 7.4 8.0 7.8 4.4 5.0 4.7 2.76 2.69 4.0         Mar 11.8 8.0 8.0 8.2 4.2 4.8 4.4 2.75 2.53 4.1
         Apr 11.2 8.0 8.7 8.4 4.8 5.2 4.7 2.56 2.53 4.2
         May 11.6 8.5 8.5 8.5 5.1 5.3 4.5 2.56 2.40 3.9         Jun 11.5 8.4 8.4 8.5 4.9 5.2 5.1 2.21 2.15 3.7
         Jul 11.6 8.5 8.7 8.4 5.5 5.6 5.3 2.08 2.13 4.0
         Aug 12.0 8.6 8.2 8.1 5.5 5.6 5.3 2.10 2.14 4.2         Sep 11.4 8.1 7.6 7.9 5.6 5.6 5.2 2.02 2.15 4.2
         Oct 12.5 8.2 8.0 ... 5.8 5.5 5.8 2.01 2.14 4.3
         Nov ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.97 2.16 4.4
1 Source: ECB. — 2 Saisonally adjusted. — 3 Excluding holdings of money Average. — 6 Euro InterBank Offered Rate. — 7 See also footnotes to table
market fund shares
/units by non-residents of the euro area. — 4 Longer- VI.5., p. 44*. — 8 GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds; from
term liabilities to euro area non-MFIs. — 5Euro OverNight Index 2001 Euro12. 
 
 
2 Foreign trade and payments  * 
  
 
Selected items of the EMU balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1 
Current account Capital account Effective exchange rate  3 
of which Direct Securities Credit Monetary
Balance Trade balance Balance investment transactions reserves Dollar rate nominal real  4 transactions  2 
Period
 5 
 million Euro/US-$ 1st q 1999=100
2002          Apr − 5,573 + 7,136 + 22,047 + 9,616 + 20,878 − 16,801 + 8,355 0.8858 87.2 89.7
         May + 684 + 10,276 + 13,398 + 1,981 + 38,566 − 29,047 + 1,897 0.9170 88.6 91.1         Jun + 7,482 + 13,894 − 38,762 − 18,348 + 18,455 − 35,353 − 3,517 0.9554 90.6 93.2
         Jul + 8,172 + 16,026 − 16,898 − 5,992 + 405 − 8,698 − 2,612 0.9922 91.7 94.4
         Aug + 9,275 + 11,263 − 30,402 + 1,505 − 11,283 − 22,437 + 1,812 0.9778 91.1 93.6         Sep + 8,385 + 10,828 − 6,347 − 6,319 + 21,707 − 17,950 − 3,785 0.9808 91.2 93.8
         Oct + 4,584 + 12,457 − 13,892 − 6,929 + 28,063 − 37,162 + 2,136 0.9811 91.7 94.3
         Nov + 10,609 + 12,449 − 18,879 + 7,298 + 14,337 − 38,094 − 2,420 1.0014 92.5 95.1         Dec + 7,948 + 9,584 − 15,721 − 6,406 − 3,261 − 5,002 − 1,052 1.0183 93.6 96.7
2003          Jan − 5,191 + 1,491 − 12,195 − 2,196 − 2,109 − 9,439 + 1,549 1.0622 95.8 98.8
         Feb + 3,356 + 8,690 − 19,618 + 2,882 − 6,683 − 21,156 + 5,340 1.0773 97.1 100.2         Mar + 4,271 + 6,451 + 6,676 − 1,543 + 13,343 − 10,116 + 4,992 1.0807 97.9 101.2
         Apr − 9,966 + 6,947 + 16,105 − 18,418 + 20,442 + 13,325 + 756 1.0848 98.6 102.1
         May − 149 + 7,630 − 33,417 + 673 + 2,491 − 36,959 + 378 1.1582 102.5 106.1         Jun + 3,104 + 10,545 − 24,030 + 23,121 + 16,434 − 64,436 + 851 1.1663 102.7 106.6
         Jul + 1,968 + 15,323 − 6,124 − 3,221 − 38,326 + 33,813 + 1,610 1.1372 101.4 105.2
         Aug + 4,908 + 10,613 − 2,960 − 2,575 − 44,121 + 43,400 + 336 1.1139 100.3 103.9         Sep + 9,272 + 12,652 − 13,767 − 9,551 + 8,237 − 12,221 − 232 1.1222 99.9 103.5
         Oct ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.1692 101.3 105.2
         Nov ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.1702 101.2 105.1
*  Source: ECB. — 1  See also tables X.12 and 13, p. 74−75. — 2  Including
financial derivatives. — 3  Vis-à-vis a narrow group of countries. — 4  Based
on consumer prices. 
6* I Key economic data for European monetary union

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
I  Key economic data for Euro area
 
3  General economic indicators
 
 
                   
Luxem- Nether- Euro
Period Belgium Germany Finland France Greece Ireland Italy bourg lands Austria Portugal Spain area 7 
Real gross domestic product 1 
2000 3.8 2.9 5.1 3.8 4.4 10.1 3.1 9.1 3.5 3.4 3.7 4.2 3.5
2001 0.6 0.8 1.2 2.1 4.0 6.2 1.8 1.2 1.2 0.8 1.6 2.8 1.62002 0.7 0.2 2.2 1.2 3.8 6.9 0.4 1.3 0.2 1.4 0.4 2.0 0.9
2002          Q2 0.3 0.5 3.6 1.4 4.0 7.5 0.3 0.2 1.2 1.9 2.1 1.1
         Q3 1.3 0.9 2.7 1.6 3.6 7.2 0.5 0.7 1.4 −0.2 1.9 1.3
         Q4 2.2 0.3 3.2 0.8 3.2 7.5 0.7 0.1 1.4 −1.4 2.1 0.9
2003          Q1 1.6 0.4 1.9 1.2 4.3 0.7 0.6 −0.2 0.3 −1.3 2.4 0.9
         Q2 1.0 −0.7 0.9 −0.7 4.5 2.1 0.3 −1.2 0.9 −2.1 2.3 −0.2
         Q3 ... −0.2 1.6 −0.2 ... ... ... −1.1 ... −0.9 2.4 0.0
Industrial production 1,2 
2000 5.2 6.2 11.8 3.5 7.2 15.6 4.0 5.0 3.5 9.0 −0.2 4.4 5.3
2001 −0.3 0.5 0.1 1.2 1.0 10.1 −1.1 3.2 0.5 2.8 3.1 −1.5 0.5
2002 1.3 −1.1 1.7 −1.0 1.7 7.8 −1.3 0.4 −0.9 0.9 −0.2 0.2 −0.5
2002          Q2 2.0 −2.0 5.1 −0.6 4.0 11.3 −2.1 4.0 −1.4 2.9 1.8 −1.1 −0.6
         Q3 4.0 −0.2 3.0 −1.7 0.1 10.6 −0.1 −0.3 −0.6 0.6 0.4 0.4 0.2
         Q4 2.3 1.4 5.2 −0.1 3.1 6.6 0.7 1.7 0.4 1.5 −1.9 2.5 1.3
2003          Q1 −0.3 1.8 2.1 0.8 0.9 2.5 −0.5 4.5 1.1 3.7 0.7 1.5 1.1
         Q2 −2.2 0.2 −1.5 −2.0 2.4 2.4 −1.4 −1.3 −3.4 ... −2.4 1.7 −0.6
         Q3 −2.6 6p −0.8 1.8 −1.8 ... 6.2 −0.1 4.5 −2.8 ... 1.6 0.9 −0.4
Capacity utilisation in industry 3 
2001 82.3 84.4 85.7 87.4 77.6 78.4 78.9 88.7 84.6 83.1 81.7 79.6 83.42002 79.6 82.3 82.7 85.3 77.0 75.9 77.3 85.1 82.9 80.2 79.4 77.2 81.42003 78.7 82.0 81.9 84.9 76.5 75.1 76.3 84.7 81.7 80.0 77.9 78.9 81.0
2002          Q3 80.1 82.4 83.0 85.3 79.0 72.8 76.9 83.8 82.5 80.2 79.1 76.3 81.2
         Q4 79.6 82.7 83.1 84.7 76.8 76.9 78.0 85.3 82.8 79.1 81.2 79.3 81.7
2003          Q1 79.3 82.3 82.2 85.1 75.8 74.5 77.5 84.1 82.5 79.7 77.7 78.6 81.3
         Q2 78.6 81.8 82.8 84.9 77.1 75.1 75.6 85.9 81.9 80.4 78.5 78.2 80.8         Q3 77.9 81.0 80.7 84.8 76.8 77.1 76.1 84.8 81.0 79.4 75.8 79.5 80.7         Q4 79.0 82.9 82.0 84.8 76.1 73.6 76.1 83.9 81.4 80.3 79.6 79.3 81.2
Unemployment rate 4 
2000 6.9 7.8 9.8 9.3 11.0 4.3 10.4 2.3 2.9 3.7 4.1 11.3 8.52001 6.7 7.8 9.1 8.5 10.4 3.9 9.4 2.1 2.5 3.6 4.1 10.6 8.02002 7.3 8.6 9.1 8.8 10.0 4.3 9.0 2.8 2.7 4.3 5.1 11.3 8.4
2003          May 7.9 9.4 9.2 9.3 4.6 8.6 3.6 3.8 4.3 6.4 11.3 8.8
         June 8.0 9.3 9.1 9.4 4.6 8.6 3.7 3.8 4.4 6.4 11.3 8.8
         July 8.1 9.3 9.1 9.4 4.7 8.5 3.8 3.8 4.4 6.3 11.3 8.8
         Aug 8.0 9.4 9.0 9.5 4.7 ... 3.8 3.9 4.4 6.3 11.2 8.8         Sep 8.0 9.3 8.9 9.5 4.6 ... 3.8 4.0 4.5 6.6 11.2 8.8
         Oct 8.1 9.3 8.9 9.6 4.6 ... 3.9 ... 4.5 6.9 11.2 8.8
         Nov ... 9.3 ... ... 4.6 ... ... ... 4.5 ... ... ...
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1 
2000 2.7 1.4 3.0 1.8 2.9 5.3 2.6 3.8 2.3 2.0 2.8 3.5 2.12001 2.4 1.9 2.7 1.8 3.7 4.0 2.3 2.4 5.1 2.3 4.4 2.8 2.32002 1.6 1.3 2.0 1.9 3.9 4.7 2.6 2.1 3.9 1.7 3.7 3.6 2.3
2003          May 0.9 0.6 1.1 1.8 3.5 3.9 2.9 2.3 2.3 0.9 3.7 2.7 1.8
         June 1.5 0.9 1.2 1.9 3.6 3.8 2.9 2.0 2.1 1.0 3.4 2.8 1.9
         July 1.4 0.8 1.0 1.9 3.5 3.9 2.9 1.9 2.1 1.0 2.9 2.9 1.9
         Aug 1.6 1.1 1.2 2.0 3.3 3.9 2.7 2.3 2.2 1.0 2.9 3.1 2.1         Sep 1.7 1.1 1.2 2.3 ... 3.8 3.0 2.7 2.0 1.4 3.2 3.0 2.2
         Oct 1.4 1.1 0.9 2.3 ... 3.3
p 2.8 1.8 1.9 p 1.0 2.8 2.7 p 2.0
         Nov 1.8 1.3 ... p 2.5 ... p 3.3 e 2.8 2.0 p 2.0 ... ... ... e 2.2
General government financial balance 5 
2000 0.2 1.3 7.1 −1.4 −1.9 4.4 −0.6 6.4 2.2 −1.5 −2.8 −0.8 0.2
2001 0.6 −2.8 5.2 −1.5 −1.5 0.9 −2.6 6.1 0.0 0.3 −4.2 −0.3 −1.7
2002 0.1 −3.5 4.2 −3.1 −1.2 −0.2 −2.3 2.5 −1.6 −0.2 −2.7 0.1 −2.2
General government debt 5 
2000 109.6 60.2 44.6 57.2 106.2 38.4 110.6 5.5 55.9 66.8 53.3 60.5 69.6
2001 108.5 59.5 44.0 56.8 106.9 36.1 109.5 5.5 52.9 67.3 55.5 56.8 69.22002 105.8 60.8 42.7 59.0 104.7 32.4 106.7 5.7 52.4 67.3 58.1 53.8 69.0
Sources: National data, European Commission, Eurostat, European Central adjusted. —5  As a percentage of GDP; Maastricht Treaty definition, ESA 95;
Bank. Latest data are partly based on press reports and are provisional. — including proceeds from sales of UMTS licences. —6  Adjusted in advance by
1  Annual percentage change; GDP of Greece and Portugal is calculated the Federal Statistical Office, by way of estimates, to the results of the
from seasonally adjusted data. —2  Manufacturing, mining and energy; ad- Quarterly Production Survey for the third quarter (industry in Germany: on
justed for working-day variations. —3  Manufacturing, in %; seasonally average, + 0.9 %). —7  Including Greece (Harmonised Index of Consumer
adjusted; data are collected in January, April, July and October. — Prices, general government financial balance and general government debt
4  Standardised, as a percentage of the civilian labour force; seasonally from 2001 only). 
7*I  Key economic data for Euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
 
1 The money stock and its counterparts *
  
a European monetary union 
  
 5 
 billion
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises Publicand individuals authorities Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturitieson non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  
2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2002          Mar 70.7 48.5 −10.4 22.1 16.9 − 5.6 19.9 25.5 23.8 3.7 −1.3 18.7 2.7
         Apr 26.1 44.6 3.0 −18.5 1.5 − 3.0 17.5 20.5 −6.3 −0.2 −1.9 1.0 −5.2
         May 39.0 32.1 3.9 6.9 9.7 39.0 73.8 34.8 25.8 3.5 −1.2 19.7 3.7
         Jun 32.6 32.5 −6.9 0.1 −1.3 41.0 −26.8 −67.8 −5.5 3.3 −0.2 8.6 −17.1
         Jul −18.9 −15.1 −12.3 −3.8 −2.0 1.5 − 3.5 − 5.0 24.7 1.3 −0.0 13.8 9.6
         Aug − 6.9 7.1 6.8 −14.0 −3.1 14.1 −10.7 −24.8 14.1 2.2 0.2 2.7 9.0
         Sep 54.6 40.3 4.9 14.3 11.5 18.1 65.5 47.4 22.8 1.0 0.4 12.1 9.3
         Oct 28.0 31.0 12.4 −3.0 −2.6 29.7 55.1 25.5 9.4 1.3 −1.0 9.1 0.0
         Nov 41.3 26.2 6.8 15.1 6.1 34.9 84.4 49.5 21.7 3.6 −0.5 16.6 2.0
         Dec 50.8 56.9 14.9 −6.1 −14.1 21.8 −33.2 −55.0 23.6 16.5 0.1 −1.9 8.9
2003          Jan 51.0 29.6 4.8 21.4 20.0 6.9 17.5 10.6 16.2 −0.3 −2.1 6.7 11.9
         Feb 51.0 35.6 4.3 15.4 17.8 10.1 66.6 56.5 11.1 7.0 −1.2 9.7 −4.5
         Mar 48.4 39.1 7.7 9.3 8.7 14.0 6.6 − 7.5 13.4 7.3 −1.6 12.5 −4.8
         Apr 87.3 71.7 27.7 15.6 21.0 − 4.1 40.0 44.1 4.7 −2.8 −2.6 9.8 0.3
         May 69.3 42.6 14.2 26.7 30.7 40.7 41.8 1.1 17.7 6.6 −1.3 19.0 −6.5
         Jun 14.9 27.9 −6.6 −13.0 −13.9 59.5 40.3 −19.2 19.4 2.8 −1.6 11.2 6.9
         Jul 35.3 14.5 −5.4 20.7 12.8 −39.7 −33.1 6.6 31.4 5.3 −2.1 19.3 8.9
         Aug − 0.1 11.1 5.0 −11.2 −5.0 −31.5 −70.6 −39.1 17.0 7.7 −1.6 3.2 7.7
         Sep 61.3 37.1 3.5 24.2 23.0 15.0 27.7 12.7 20.1 −0.5 −0.7 20.1 1.2
         Oct 49.8 27.3 −0.6 22.6 22.2 11.2 50.2 39.0 32.4 4.9 0.1 25.2 2.3
  
  
b German contribution
 
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises Publicand individuals authorities Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturitieson non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  
2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2002          Mar − 1.0 −2.4 −9.5 1.4 3.0 7.6 10.6 3.0 13.3 3.5 −1.1 10.1 0.9
         Apr 11.0 9.9 5.8 1.1 5.2 −20.2 −3.0 17.2 −7.7 −1.3 −1.9 −2.1 −2.4
         May 6.6 3.7 −0.2 2.9 8.4 10.7 24.6 13.9 0.4 −0.4 −1.1 2.2 −0.4
         Jun −19.8 −12.6 −11.1 −7.2 −2.2 25.7 0.1 −25.6 −0.5 −0.7 −0.2 2.3 −1.9
         Jul 7.2 −7.4 −2.8 14.6 6.1 −16.5 −5.7 10.8 11.2 0.5 0.1 8.2 2.4
         Aug − 1.7 5.8 6.4 −7.5 2.2 11.0 6.4 −4.5 8.9 −0.2 0.1 5.2 3.7
         Sep 12.0 10.8 −0.7 1.2 4.1 14.9 31.0 15.6 1.5 −0.5 −0.5 2.0 0.5
         Oct 4.6 5.8 7.4 −1.2 −4.6 17.8 11.6 −6.1 0.1 1.9 −0.8 −0.3 −0.7
         Nov 9.4 4.6 4.3 4.8 3.5 19.2 32.0 12.8 5.8 4.1 −0.6 0.4 1.9
         Dec 5.7 17.8 6.8 −12.1 −8.5 2.2 −40.5 −42.7 −9.8 3.1 0.2 −17.0 2.4
2003          Jan 18.3 1.8 3.1 16.4 10.8 − 6.1 8.7 14.8 4.1 −1.6 −2.0 3.8 3.9
         Feb − 1.5 5.7 −1.3 −7.2 0.5 10.2 20.1 9.9 4.4 6.3 −1.2 0.9 −1.5
         Mar 4.6 2.7 −1.2 1.9 5.1 18.8 25.2 6.4 1.7 1.9 −1.6 −1.1 2.6
         Apr 4.9 6.6 5.9 −1.7 −2.6 4.3 14.4 10.1 −2.6 −2.0 −2.5 0.5 1.5
         May 1.9 4.0 3.0 −2.1 2.4 27.3 22.4 −5.0 −2.8 −1.6 −1.5 4.8 −4.4
         Jun −18.0 −0.9 −3.0 −17.1 −10.0 38.2 24.4 −13.8 4.8 0.1 −1.4 3.7 2.4
         Jul 0.6 −8.4 −0.5 9.0 −1.6 −24.5 −18.6 5.9 8.7 4.9 −2.1 4.9 1.0
         Aug −13.6 2.7 0.9 −16.3 −11.0 16.6 −20.6 −37.2 5.7 3.2 −1.5 2.2 1.8
         Sep 17.7 12.8 −3.6 4.9 10.8 − 1.9 10.5 12.4 2.3 −1.3 −0.7 9.1 −4.8
         Oct − 2.4 −9.9 −3.4 7.5 4.5 6.4 −0.1 −6.6 3.4 0.3 0.1 2.9 0.2
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of liabilities of central governments. —5Including the monetary liabilities of
monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have been central governments (Post Office, Treasury). —6In Germany, only savings
eliminated from the flow figures (see also the “Notes on the figures “in the deposits. —7Paper held by residents outside the euro area has been
“Explanatory notes “in the Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Report 1, eliminated. —8Less German MFIs ’holdings of paper issued by euro-area
p 30). —1Source: ECB. —2Excluding MFIs ’portfolios. —3After deduction MFIs. MFIs. —9Up to end-2002, including national banknotes
of inter-MFI participations. —4Including the counterparts of monetary
8*II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
 
 
 
a European monetary union 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V )  5,6,10  
Money stock M2 Debt secur-
of which ities with
Intra- Money stock M1 maturities
Eurosystem Deposits of up toliability/ with an Deposits Money 2 years
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market (incl money
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund market    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares paper)    central  gov-
ernments Total  4 issue Total Total Total lation deposits  5 2 years  5 tions (net)  2,7  Period (net)  2,7,8 months  5,6 
1.7 0.4 − 39.0 27.3 11.5 14.0 − 2.6 12.3 3.5 8.4 3.3 0.2 2002          Mar
0.0 −13.1 − 42.4 39.4 40.2 7.4 32.8 5.4 − 6.2 − 1.5 7.9 − 3.4          Apr
− 8.5 12.7 − 48.1 27.6 14.3 12.2 2.1 10.9 2.4 6.7 4.0 9.8          May
6.0 47.6 − 25.5 46.2 60.5 11.8 48.6 −20.6 6.3 − 6.1 − 7.3 − 7.4          Jun
− 3.1 −25.8 −− 13.2 − 15.8 − 22.9 11.0 − 33.8 4.2 3.0 − 0.7 12.0 − 8.7          Jul
− 11.0 − 9.6 − 13.6 − 7.5 − 27.1 4.5 − 31.7 13.5 6.2 7.7 12.3 1.1          Aug
1.6 3.3 − 45.1 41.8 62.5 5.6 56.9 −23.3 2.6 2.4 − 2.7 3.6          Sep
5.5 22.0 − 20.8 19.0 − 8.7 7.2 − 15.8 20.5 7.1 − 2.8 2.0 2.6          Oct
− 4.3 −13.3 − 72.1 64.4 60.1 7.5 52.6 − 7.3 11.6 − 4.4 14.7 − 2.7          Nov
− 11.0 −28.4 − 88.4 102.2 76.3 19.8 56.5 − 7.8 32.6 − 2.8 − 6.1 − 3.9          Dec
15.2 18.8 − 7.6 − 33.6 − 59.4 −7.4 − 52.0 2.5 23.3 14.7 19.4 7.2 2003          Jan
18.6 − 8.3 − 39.7 27.1 8.9 7.2 1.7 2.4 15.8 0.9 12.1 − 0.4          Feb
− 1.1 12.0 − 38.1 54.0 46.8 7.9 38.9 − 6.2 13.4 − 9.8 4.3 − 10.5          Mar
− 16.5 7.2 − 87.8 49.2 30.3 9.1 21.2 10.2 8.8 6.4 11.8 20.3          Apr
10.4 24.6 − 57.3 65.3 38.6 7.4 31.2 19.0 7.7 1.0 8.8 − 17.7          May
30.2 19.3 − 5.4 29.6 53.8 7.3 46.5 −39.0 14.8 −16.5 − 0.9 − 6.9          Jun
− 24.6 −17.4 − 6.1 − 4.6 − 17.4 11.1 − 28.5 3.0 9.8 5.5 10.3 − 5.0          Jul
− 10.5 −32.0 −− 6.1 − 2.9 − 14.6 1.2 − 15.8 3.8 7.9 − 3.0 2.1 − 2.3          Aug
21.3 29.5 − 5.5 16.4 45.4 2.2 43.2 −29.5 0.4 − 4.3 − 8.4 1.8          Sep
− 18.2 0.8 − 46.0 19.3 5.1 6.4 − 1.3 11.8 2.4 13.5 6.8 6.4          Oct
 
 
 b German contribution 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V )  5,6,10  
of which Components of money stock
Debt securities
Deposits with
Intra- with an Deposits Money maturities
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market of up to 2 years
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund (incl money    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac- shares market    central  gov-
ernments Total issue  9,11 lation Total deposits 2 years months  6 tions (net)  7,8 paper)(net)  7  Period
− 0.0 − 6.0 3.4 2.6 − 0.6 − 2.6 1.6 − 0.1 0.2 − 0.2 0.5 2002          Mar
− 1.9 1.7 1.3 3.1 − 1.4 9.3 − 4.8 − 7.3 − 0.3 − 0.3 2.1          Apr
0.7 1.9 2.9 2.5 14.4 6.2 4.5 − 0.6 1.3 0.4 2.5          May
0.5 − 1.8 1.0 3.3 7.6 13.1 0.3 − 1.0 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 3.7          Jun
− 1.1 − 10.0 2.0 3.7 − 9.4 − 5.1 − 0.2 − 1.5 − 1.0 0.3 − 1.8          Jul
1.3 − 3.4 3.2 0.9 2.4 − 5.2 3.7 0.1 1.2 1.3 1.2          Aug
1.0 12.3 2.2 1.6 12.1 14.9 − 9.0 1.0 6.4 0.1 − 0.8          Sep
− 1.6 9.9 2.0 1.5 14.0 1.2 6.8 2.2 − 1.0 0.6 4.2          Oct
− 0.6 − 3.6 1.5 2.5 27.0 31.8 − 5.6 3.3 − 3.2 − 0.2 0.8          Nov
0.0 0.6 1.5 4.3 18.5 1.0 7.2 12.8 − 3.1 − 0.5 0.9          Dec
− 0.8 12.2 0.5 − 0.7 − 3.2 − 9.3 − 4.7 4.1 5.3 2.5 − 1.1 2003         Jan
1.4 − 16.6 2.2 1.7 19.5 5.6 − 0.7 3.0 2.3 1.3 8.1          Feb
− 1.7 22.8 1.5 2.5 0.4 7.1 − 5.2 1.7 0.4 0.6 − 4.0          Mar
− 1.1 4.2 0.9 2.8 8.7 8.2 − 2.0 1.1 0.0 − 0.0 1.4          Apr
2.2 14.6 2.4 1.3 15.3 6.8 7.4 0.7 1.0 0.4 − 1.0          May
0.4 13.2 0.6 2.8 1.9 16.4 − 11.8 1.0 − 1.5 − 0.5 − 1.7          Jun
− 2.8 − 15.7 1.1 3.4 − 14.2 − 12.5 − 1.3 2.0 0.2 − 0.4 − 2.2          Jul
0.6 − 4.5 2.5 − 0.1 1.2 1.7 2.9 2.7 1.5 − 0.5 − 7.2          Aug
0.3 11.8 1.3 0.9 1.4 10.8 − 13.8 0.9 3.2 − 0.1 0.5          Sep
− 0.7 − 4.8 1.2 1.3 6.1 3.9 − 3.5 0.9 5.6 − 0.7 − 0.1          Oct
and coins still in circulation. —10The German contributions to the Euro- and the amount disclosed in accordance with the accounting regime chosen
system ’s monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 3 on banknote circulation in Table
national monetary aggregates and are therefore not comparable with the III.2). —12Includes decrease of
 5 
68 billion owing to the exclusion of
erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2 or M3. —11The difference currency in circulation. 
between the volume of euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank
9*II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
 
 
 
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and individuals Public authorities
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
End of assets or Debt other Debt euro-area Other
year/month liabilities Total Total Loans securities  2 equities Total Loans securities  3 residents assets
 European monetary union (  5  billion) 1
 
2001          Sep 13,318.6 9,309.1 7,284.1 6,421.9 327.4 534.7 2,025.0 829.8 1,195.2 2,697.8 1,311.7
         Oct 13,424.2 9,339.1 7,325.2 6,451.6 329.9 543.7 2,014.0 827.2 1,186.8 2,742.5 1,342.5
         Nov 13,574.5 9,413.9 7,379.6 6,501.9 333.1 544.6 2,034.3 843.3 1,191.0 2,827.6 1,333.0         Dec 13,576.7 9,451.3 7,424.4 6,519.3 336.9 568.1 2,026.9 847.7 1,179.2 2,807.8 1,317.6
2002          Jan 13,667.3 9,495.6 7,444.4 6,534.4 341.9 568.1 2,051.1 844.8 1,206.3 2,829.6 1,342.2
         Feb 13,657.2 9,520.6 7,465.4 6,548.7 349.9 566.7 2,055.3 847.5 1,207.8 2,833.2 1,303.4         Mar 13,694.4 9,594.9 7,513.2 6,606.1 346.6 560.5 2,081.7 852.6 1,229.1 2,845.2 1,254.2
         Apr 13,680.2 9,612.5 7,550.9 6,641.2 342.9 566.8 2,061.7 832.4 1,229.3 2,826.5 1,241.2
         May 13,711.6 9,645.0 7,573.6 6,659.7 345.0 568.9 2,071.5 829.2 1,242.3 2,845.8 1,220.7         Jun 13,642.3 9,667.1 7,598.0 6,691.1 343.0 563.9 2,069.1 830.1 1,239.0 2,731.2 1,243.9
         Jul 13,679.1 9,652.9 7,587.0 6,692.6 345.3 549.1 2,065.9 828.5 1,237.4 2,756.7 1,269.5
         Aug 13,649.2 9,645.5 7,592.5 6,692.3 341.0 559.1 2,053.0 818.0 1,235.0 2,745.3 1,258.4         Sep 13,822.3 9,700.5 7,626.6 6,726.8 350.8 549.1 2,073.9 820.8 1,253.2 2,813.5 1,308.3
         Oct 13,863.8 9,726.2 7,657.3 6,742.7 353.1 561.5 2,068.8 820.4 1,248.5 2,863.5 1,274.1
         Nov 14,010.7 9,761.6 7,678.0 6,754.5 356.7 566.8 2,083.6 829.2 1,254.4 2,937.0 1,312.1         Dec 13,931.1 9,779.1 7,721.2 6,781.5 367.1 572.7 2,057.8 836.8 1,221.0 2,840.3 1,311.7
2003          Jan 13,975.3 9,853.1 7,748.0 6,804.4 374.9 568.7 2,105.1 829.0 1,276.0 2,852.5 1,269.7
         Feb 14,114.0 9,905.1 7,777.7 6,831.2 381.2 565.3 2,127.5 828.4 1,299.1 2,909.4 1,299.5         Mar 14,124.7 9,941.7 7,807.7 6,854.4 386.7 566.6 2,134.0 828.9 1,305.1 2,895.2 1,287.7
         Apr 14,228.2 10,027.2 7,880.5 6,890.9 404.2 585.4 2,146.8 823.3 1,323.5 2,906.3 1,294.6
         May 14,301.8 10,088.4 7,911.3 6,906.8 407.1 597.5 2,177.0 818.9 1,358.2 2,878.4 1,335.1         Jun 14,383.3 10,104.9 7,944.5 6,944.2 406.2 594.1 2,160.4 817.9 1,342.5 2,959.3 1,319.1
         Jul 14,380.9 10,165.6 7,984.1 6,964.6 402.8 616.7 2,181.6 825.9 1,355.7 2,942.7 1,272.5
         Aug 14,370.3 10,172.6 8,002.8 6,976.8 405.4 620.6 2,169.8 820.0 1,349.8 2,929.9 1,267.8         Sep 14,415.3 10,220.5 8,028.4 6,999.4 412.1 616.9 2,192.1 820.8 1,371.3 2,886.6 1,308.1
         Oct 14,522.0 10,267.2 8,057.3 7,027.3 415.7 614.3 2,209.9 821.2 1,388.7 2,949.2 1,305.6
 German contribution (  5  billion) 
2001          Sep 4,323.3 3,288.4 2,575.0 2,269.7 63.7 241.6 713.3 495.0 218.3 808.1 226.8
         Oct 4,334.4 3,288.4 2,579.9 2,271.3 64.4 244.2 708.6 496.2 212.4 818.3 227.6
         Nov 4,336.2 3,303.9 2,587.2 2,279.0 64.8 243.4 716.6 506.6 210.0 837.9 194.5         Dec 4,328.2 3,321.6 2,608.3 2,289.4 66.0 252.9 713.3 499.3 213.9 821.2 185.4
2002          Jan 4,321.4 3,315.2 2,600.6 2,280.2 66.9 253.4 714.6 499.7 215.0 820.0 186.2
         Feb 4,322.9 3,316.3 2,600.1 2,283.4 65.1 251.6 716.2 497.1 219.1 822.1 184.4         Mar 4,334.0 3,315.0 2,597.6 2,290.4 67.2 240.1 717.4 495.4 221.9 829.6 189.3
         Apr 4,330.7 3,324.0 2,605.7 2,293.1 69.0 243.7 718.3 491.2 227.1 816.6 190.1
         May 4,341.9 3,327.7 2,606.9 2,294.6 69.2 243.2 720.8 485.6 235.2 827.5 186.7         Jun 4,291.6 3,309.3 2,596.0 2,294.8 69.7 231.6 713.3 480.4 232.8 800.0 182.3
         Jul 4,303.6 3,317.5 2,589.5 2,291.3 69.8 228.4 728.0 489.0 239.0 801.2 184.9
         Aug 4,307.0 3,315.3 2,594.9 2,289.8 67.1 238.0 720.4 479.8 240.6 810.2 181.5         Sep 4,355.6 3,327.5 2,605.3 2,301.6 66.5 237.3 722.2 477.0 245.2 841.9 186.1
         Oct 4,370.5 3,332.3 2,611.3 2,299.8 69.8 241.7 721.0 480.4 240.6 850.3 188.0
         Nov 4,413.9 3,341.1 2,615.3 2,299.5 69.6 246.2 725.8 481.7 244.1 879.3 193.5         Dec 4,359.5 3,344.6 2,630.8 2,304.4 66.6 259.8 713.8 478.4 235.4 823.8 191.1
2003          Jan 4,360.7 3,353.2 2,623.2 2,298.5 66.1 258.7 730.0 484.0 246.1 824.1 183.4
         Feb 4,383.3 3,351.8 2,627.3 2,303.8 66.5 257.0 724.6 477.9 246.6 841.9 189.5         Mar 4,395.2 3,351.2 2,624.8 2,302.6 67.2 255.0 726.4 474.6 251.7 861.8 182.2
         Apr 4,400.8 3,353.3 2,629.0 2,300.8 67.3 260.9 724.3 475.4 248.9 867.7 179.8
         May 4,401.1 3,351.6 2,629.9 2,298.8 67.9 263.2 721.7 470.7 251.1 871.9 177.5         Jun 4,411.5 3,334.6 2,629.8 2,301.7 67.0 261.1 704.8 463.7 241.2 906.3 170.6
         Jul 4,391.1 3,334.6 2,620.8 2,293.4 64.4 263.0 713.9 474.3 239.6 891.4 165.1
         Aug 4,373.2 3,322.7 2,624.8 2,296.4 64.5 263.9 697.9 469.1 228.8 886.0 164.4         Sep 4,384.6 3,337.1 2,634.6 2,309.9 64.2 260.5 702.5 463.0 239.4 877.7 169.8
         Oct 4,387.2 3,333.2 2,624.5 2,303.4 66.5 254.6 708.8 466.1 242.7 882.7 171.3
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building circulation; up to end-2002, also including national banknotes and coi ns still
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p 12*). Excluding MFIs ‘cash in hand (in
and national central banks (the Eurosystem). —1Source: ECB. —2Including euro). From 2002, the German contribution includes the volume of euro
money market paper of enterprises. —3Including Treasury bills and other banknotes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with the
money market paper of public authorities. —4From 2002, euro currency in
10*II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
 
   
 
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and individuals
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  6 
over
Currency 1 year and
in of which up to up to over up to over
Total in euro  5 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months  End of circulation  4 
year/month
European monetary union (  5  billion) 1
 
309.6 5,474.3 5,132.4 5,170.9 1,680.4 933.4 81.5 1,136.0 1,221.6 118.0 2001          Sep
295.5 5,493.0 5,144.7 5,183.4 1,678.9 938.6 81.1 1,136.1 1,232.4 116.4          Oct
279.7 5,552.5 5,200.8 5,249.5 1,728.6 944.2 79.9 1,134.9 1,246.6 115.3          Nov239.7 5,698.1 5,360.0 5,403.0 1,826.5 952.2 80.0 1,142.4 1,286.5 115.3          Dec
246.5 5,669.6 5,318.9 5,363.4 1,773.6 948.3 79.5 1,146.2 1,304.0 111.8 2002          Jan
240.3 5,671.3 5,311.3 5,359.8 1,768.1 946.9 78.7 1,148.1 1,307.2 110.8          Feb
254.3 5,686.3 5,327.3 5,376.5 1,769.8 954.6 80.4 1,151.5 1,310.6 109.5          Mar
261.7 5,711.2 5,355.4 5,401.0 1,797.8 959.7 81.0 1,150.8 1,304.2 107.5          Apr
273.9 5,713.5 5,366.7 5,409.7 1,801.1 961.3 81.5 1,153.0 1,306.4 106.4          May285.8 5,749.3 5,407.9 5,438.3 1,844.4 938.5 81.5 1,155.0 1,312.7 106.2          Jun
296.6 5,725.7 5,384.9 5,422.5 1,816.1 948.2 82.6 1,154.1 1,315.4 106.2          Jul
301.1 5,688.0 5,358.6 5,396.2 1,783.7 959.7 83.3 1,142.5 1,320.6 106.4          Aug306.7 5,730.1 5,399.2 5,434.7 1,837.3 941.0 82.9 1,143.6 1,323.2 106.8          Sep
313.9 5,745.4 5,410.6 5,446.2 1,819.2 964.2 82.8 1,144.9 1,329.4 105.8          Oct
321.4 5,799.5 5,466.9 5,504.6 1,871.3 956.8 82.4 1,148.3 1,340.5 105.3          Nov341.2 5,880.6 5,567.9 5,593.3 1,924.2 947.6 81.2 1,163.9 1,371.1 105.3          Dec
312.1 5,869.6 5,536.2 5,568.9 1,876.2 952.9 76.7 1,168.4 1,391.4 103.3 2003          Jan
319.3 5,912.7 5,560.0 5,586.2 1,874.6 952.5 75.4 1,175.8 1,405.9 102.1          Feb
327.2 5,963.0 5,609.5 5,639.3 1,913.7 947.6 75.9 1,182.8 1,418.8 100.5          Mar
336.3 5,978.2 5,638.7 5,670.1 1,930.4 960.1 74.2 1,179.8 1,427.6 97.9          Apr
343.8 6,039.9 5,694.2 5,714.0 1,954.8 971.0 73.0 1,185.4 1,433.2 96.6          May351.0 6,099.1 5,714.2 5,743.3 2,000.9 938.8 72.4 1,188.4 1,447.8 95.0          Jun
361.5 6,091.6 5,737.3 5,768.5 2,008.9 942.9 72.1 1,194.7 1,457.0 92.9          Jul
362.7 6,087.4 5,739.7 5,777.4 1,996.4 949.4 72.2 1,204.0 1,464.0 91.4          Aug364.9 6,115.9 5,752.6 5,787.0 2,036.3 920.8 72.9 1,202.6 1,463.8 90.6          Sep
371.3 6,118.0 5,768.8 5,805.9 2,031.6 934.8 73.3 1,207.6 1,467.9 90.7          Oct
 German contribution (  5  billion) 
105.8 2,075.2 1,979.0 1,939.6 472.7 240.0 18.3 650.5 441.9 116.2 2001          Sep
99.9 2,077.6 1,982.9 1,945.0 475.5 241.8 18.6 650.0 444.8 114.4          Oct
92.4 2,103.2 2,006.3 1,973.0 504.0 240.7 18.7 648.7 447.5 113.5          Nov68.0 2,135.1 2,048.0 2,010.0 519.0 244.7 18.6 650.2 463.9 113.6          Dec
7 63.8 2,113.2 2,024.0 1,989.9 506.4 236.6 18.5 652.0 466.4 110.0 2002          Jan
68.3 2,108.1 2,019.4 1,986.2 505.6 235.1 17.1 653.5 465.9 109.0          Feb
70.9 2,109.1 2,021.9 1,989.1 504.1 237.3 17.1 656.8 465.9 107.8          Mar
74.0 2,100.4 2,015.8 1,984.7 513.9 234.0 17.1 655.2 458.6 105.9          Apr
76.5 2,107.7 2,023.6 1,987.3 519.1 234.2 17.1 654.1 457.9 104.8          May79.8 2,119.3 2,035.6 1,997.1 530.9 234.4 17.3 653.0 457.0 104.6          Jun
83.4 2,112.5 2,030.5 1,993.2 525.8 235.8 17.6 653.9 455.5 104.6          Jul
84.3 2,098.8 2,018.1 1,979.2 521.5 239.6 17.6 640.1 455.6 104.8          Aug85.9 2,105.7 2,023.7 1,987.6 536.6 233.0 17.5 639.6 456.5 104.3          Sep
87.4 2,115.1 2,035.2 2,003.0 538.0 243.7 17.5 641.5 458.8 103.5          Oct
89.9 2,147.3 2,066.9 2,035.6 569.5 237.6 17.9 645.7 462.0 102.9          Nov94.2 2,170.7 2,092.1 2,054.2 567.8 242.4 18.2 648.0 474.8 103.1          Dec
84.9 2,159.7 2,082.0 2,048.3 561.2 238.7 18.6 649.7 478.9 101.2 2003          Jan
86.6 2,173.9 2,094.9 2,058.5 564.8 237.3 18.5 656.1 481.8 100.0          Feb
89.0 2,175.8 2,098.2 2,063.3 572.0 232.8 18.6 657.9 483.5 98.4          Mar
91.9 2,176.7 2,100.4 2,068.2 580.4 233.5 18.1 655.8 484.6 95.8          Apr
93.2 2,189.4 2,112.0 2,073.9 585.9 236.9 17.8 653.8 485.3 94.3          May96.0 2,194.7 2,115.7 2,076.1 600.0 225.8 17.6 653.4 486.3 92.9          Jun
99.4 2,183.0 2,107.8 2,071.3 591.1 225.3 17.3 658.5 488.3 90.8          Jul
99.3 2,193.4 2,117.6 2,082.5 593.2 228.9 17.5 662.7 491.0 89.3          Aug
100.2 2,188.3 2,112.7 2,079.6 603.5 217.2 17.5 661.0 491.8 88.5          Sep
101.5 2,189.3 2,114.2 2,084.1 607.5 216.1 17.8 661.3 492.8 88.6          Oct
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see footnote 3 on banknote liability items “).—5Excluding central governments ’deposits. —6In
circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into circulation Germany, only saving deposits. —7Includes decrease of
 5 
11.6 billion
by the Bundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the item (DM22.7 billion) owing to the change in the method of recording banknote
“Intra-Eurosystem liability/claim related to banknote issue “(see “Other circulation (see also footnote 4). 
11*II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (cont ’d) *
 
 
 
Liabilities (cont ’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont ’d)  
 
Public authorities Repo transactions Debt securitieswith non-banks
Other public authorities in the euro area
With agreed At agreedmaturities of notice of  
2 
Money
over of which market of which
Central 1 year and Enterprises fund denom-
End of govern- up to up to over up to over and shares inatedyear/month ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total individuals (net)  
3 Total in euro
 European monetary union (  5  billion) 1
 
2001          Sep 147.8 155.5 69.5 54.4 1.6 27.0 2.5 0.6 225.7 220.2 381.2 1,753.9 1,475.3
         Oct 153.3 156.3 71.4 53.4 1.6 26.8 2.5 0.5 235.1 227.2 392.3 1,767.9 1,481.4
         Nov 150.2 152.8 69.5 51.9 1.6 26.7 2.6 0.5 225.9 218.3 400.8 1,760.3 1,454.6         Dec 139.0 156.0 69.7 54.9 1.7 26.7 2.6 0.5 218.5 214.6 398.0 1,760.8 1,447.7
2002          Jan 148.9 157.3 74.1 51.4 1.7 27.0 2.5 0.5 216.2 211.4 416.6 1,775.9 1,457.5
         Feb 155.7 155.7 75.1 49.4 1.7 26.6 2.5 0.5 221.1 215.8 427.0 1,778.2 1,456.9         Mar 157.5 152.3 69.3 51.8 1.6 26.7 2.5 0.5 229.6 224.9 431.2 1,793.1 1,468.5
         Apr 157.5 152.7 71.9 50.0 1.4 26.6 2.5 0.4 228.1 223.8 437.5 1,785.5 1,460.7
         May 149.0 154.8 68.8 55.2 1.4 26.6 2.4 0.4 234.8 230.7 442.6 1,805.0 1,475.7         Jun 155.0 156.0 71.6 53.3 1.5 26.7 2.4 0.4 229.6 225.9 439.2 1,788.3 1,470.9
         Jul 151.9 151.3 69.3 51.4 1.5 26.3 2.4 0.4 228.8 224.9 450.3 1,796.1 1,473.8
         Aug 141.0 150.8 67.8 52.4 1.5 26.3 2.4 0.4 236.5 231.9 463.4 1,814.3 1,493.3         Sep 146.3 149.1 70.7 48.4 1.3 25.9 2.4 0.4 238.3 234.4 460.4 1,813.0 1,491.3
         Oct 151.8 147.4 72.2 45.3 1.3 25.6 2.5 0.4 235.6 232.1 462.7 1,823.0 1,490.3
         Nov 147.5 147.4 71.9 45.6 1.3 25.6 2.5 0.4 229.6 225.8 477.1 1,831.1 1,491.9         Dec 136.4 150.9 75.6 45.1 1.4 25.6 2.8 0.4 226.9 224.4 470.6 1,818.6 1,490.8
2003          Jan 154.7 145.9 70.8 45.9 1.2 24.8 2.8 0.4 233.0 229.7 534.9 1,794.7 1,482.5
         Feb 175.8 150.6 72.0 49.9 1.0 24.4 2.9 0.4 233.8 230.3 547.2 1,803.1 1,486.5         Mar 176.2 147.5 71.6 47.1 0.9 24.5 3.0 0.3 224.0 220.8 550.8 1,804.5 1,486.6
         Apr 159.7 148.4 74.8 45.2 1.0 24.2 3.0 0.3 230.5 227.0 563.0 1,834.5 1,517.1
         May 170.1 155.9 76.7 50.8 0.9 24.1 3.0 0.3 231.4 227.8 571.1 1,821.0 1,515.2         Jun 200.3 155.5 79.8 46.8 0.9 24.6 3.0 0.3 214.9 211.9 571.0 1,833.9 1,517.5
         Jul 173.0 150.1 74.8 46.4 0.9 24.5 3.2 0.3 220.1 216.5 585.5 1,849.7 1,519.2
         Aug 162.5 147.5 73.6 45.7 0.9 23.9 3.1 0.3 217.1 214.2 587.7 1,861.5 1,514.6         Sep 183.8 145.1 74.8 42.1 1.0 23.9 3.1 0.3 211.7 208.0 577.3 1,864.8 1,521.2
         Oct 165.6 146.4 78.4 40.0 0.9 23.8 3.0 0.4 225.1 221.5 583.8 1,899.5 1,543.1
 German contribution (  5  billion) 
2001          Sep 57.0 78.5 15.4 36.9 1.0 23.0 1.7 0.6 2.8 2.8 27.2 816.3 734.6
         Oct 55.4 77.1 15.3 35.8 1.0 22.8 1.7 0.5 9.4 9.4 27.9 815.1 734.0
         Nov 56.6 73.6 14.7 33.0 1.0 22.7 1.7 0.5 4.0 4.0 28.5 795.0 702.6         Dec 49.1 75.9 14.6 35.2 1.2 22.7 1.7 0.5 4.9 4.9 30.2 794.3 699.5
2002          Jan 50.1 73.3 13.6 33.3 1.2 23.0 1.7 0.5 2.5 2.5 31.4 798.9 700.3
         Feb 49.4 72.5 13.8 32.6 1.2 22.7 1.7 0.5 3.5 3.5 31.8 804.7 706.4         Mar 49.4 70.6 12.6 32.0 1.2 22.8 1.6 0.5 3.7 3.7 31.6 815.2 715.0
         Apr 47.5 68.2 11.8 30.6 1.0 22.7 1.6 0.4 3.4 3.4 31.3 812.8 712.9
         May 48.2 72.3 12.4 34.2 1.0 22.7 1.6 0.4 4.7 4.7 31.7 814.1 712.6         Jun 48.7 73.5 13.8 34.1 1.1 22.6 1.6 0.4 4.1 4.1 31.3 808.9 712.2
         Jul 47.6 71.7 13.9 32.3 1.0 22.5 1.5 0.4 3.1 3.1 31.6 817.3 715.7
         Aug 48.9 70.7 13.0 32.2 1.0 22.6 1.6 0.4 4.3 4.3 32.9 840.1 733.6         Sep 49.9 68.2 13.1 30.0 0.9 22.2 1.6 0.4 10.7 10.7 33.0 841.1 733.7
         Oct 48.3 63.7 12.8 26.0 0.9 22.0 1.6 0.4 9.6 9.6 33.6 844.6 730.7
         Nov 47.7 64.1 13.1 26.2 0.9 21.9 1.6 0.4 6.4 6.4 33.4 844.9 728.7         Dec 47.7 68.7 15.7 27.7 1.0 22.2 1.6 0.4 3.3 3.3 33.0 826.4 716.6
2003          Jan 46.9 64.5 12.7 26.9 1.0 21.8 1.7 0.4 8.6 8.6 35.5 817.6 702.1
         Feb 48.3 67.2 14.8 28.0 0.7 21.7 1.7 0.4 10.9 10.9 36.8 825.8 710.3         Mar 46.6 65.9 14.5 27.1 0.7 21.6 1.6 0.3 11.2 11.2 37.4 819.4 701.0
         Apr 45.5 63.1 14.1 24.9 0.7 21.5 1.6 0.3 11.3 11.3 37.2 818.7 699.8
         May 47.7 67.8 14.8 28.9 0.7 21.5 1.6 0.3 12.3 12.3 37.7 814.0 698.7         Jun 48.1 70.5 17.4 28.4 0.7 22.1 1.6 0.3 10.8 10.8 37.1 819.6 699.7
         Jul 45.3 66.3 14.0 27.9 0.6 21.9 1.6 0.3 10.9 10.9 36.8 822.7 696.4
         Aug 46.0 65.0 14.0 27.1 0.6 21.2 1.7 0.3 12.4 12.4 36.3 821.8 688.4         Sep 46.3 62.5 13.9 24.7 0.7 21.2 1.7 0.3 15.6 15.6 36.2 825.6 689.8
         Oct 45.5 59.7 13.8 22.1 0.6 21.2 1.6 0.4 21.1 21.1 35.5 829.7 692.4
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building securities issued. —6After deduction of inter-MFI participations. —7The
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank German contributions to the Eurosystem ’s monetary aggregates should on
and national central banks (the Eurosystem). —1Source: ECB. —2In no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and are
Germany, only savings deposits. —3Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the therefore not comparable to the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2 or
German contribution, excluding German MFIs ’portfolios of securities issued M3. —8From 2003, including DM banknotes still in circulation (see also foot-
by MFIs in the euro area. —4In Germany, bank debt securities with note 4 on p 10*). —9For the German contribution, the difference between
maturities of up to one year are classed as money market paper; up to the the volume of euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the
January 2002 Monthly Report , they were published in this table together amount disclosed in accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the
with money market fund shares. —5Excluding liabilities arising from Eurosystem (see also footnote 3 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). —
12*II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
 
   
 
 Memo item
 Other liability items Monetary aggregates  7 
 (German contribution, From 2002
issued (net)  3 excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
of which Monetary
Intra- liabilities
Eurosystem- of centralliability/ govern-
over Liabilities Excess claim Monetary ments1 year and to non- Capital of related to capital (Post,
up to up to over euro-area and inter-MFI banknote forma- Office, End of1 year  
4 2 years 2 years residents  5 reseves  6 liabilities Total  8 issue  9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12 tion 13 year/month Treasury)  14 
European monetary union (  5  billion) 1
 
... ... 1,604.7 2,643.4 970.4 18.7 1,541.4 − 2,124.7 4,496.3 5,250.8 3,856.5 141.7 2001          Sep
... ... 1,617.0 2,665.2 981.1 5.5 1,588.7 − 2,111.6 4,499.1 5,275.9 3,877.9 143.7          Oct
... ... 1,606.6 2,729.9 982.6 10.4 1,632.4 − 2,144.3 4,549.8 5,328.6 3,866.6 145.3          Nov
... ... 1,613.6 2,723.0 995.2 − 8.5 1,551.8 − 2,207.9 4,667.7 5,430.2 3,893.7 153.9          Dec
... ... 1,632.9 2,759.4 1,007.5 2.0 1,573.6 − 2,168.4 4,639.2 5,414.0 3,925.9 157.5 2002          Jan
... ... 1,638.8 2,768.0 1,011.5 1.1 1,538.8 − 2,157.4 4,628.4 5,415.3 3,936.2 158.4          Feb
... ... 1,655.8 2,791.3 1,010.7 1.3 1,496.6 − 2,168.5 4,654.7 5,452.8 3,954.6 159.7          Mar
... ... 1,650.2 2,773.9 1,004.6 − 8.9 1,486.6 − 2,207.2 4,690.6 5,490.9 3,940.1 160.5          Apr
... ... 1,660.6 2,755.0 1,008.8 − 7.3 1,485.2 − 2,219.3 4,712.4 5,533.8 3,955.7 160.4          May
... ... 1,655.2 2,619.9 985.8 10.7 1,533.6 − 2,277.8 4,752.2 5,553.8 3,929.3 160.6          Jun
... ... 1,670.1 2,648.2 993.4 − 2.9 1,542.7 − 2,255.9 4,742.3 5,546.9 3,950.5 158.9          Jul
... ... 1,687.0 2,616.3 1,004.3 − 0.2 1,525.4 − 2,228.6 4,734.2 5,560.7 3,967.0 161.7          Aug
... ... 1,680.8 2,674.8 1,015.9 − 5.0 1,588.0 − 2,291.1 4,776.1 5,606.1 3,973.4 162.3          Sep
... ... 1,688.7 2,697.9 1,014.0 3.3 1,568.2 − 2,282.2 4,794.4 5,626.3 3,979.4 163.6          Oct
... ... 1,698.9 2,737.7 1,016.2 − 4.0 1,601.5 − 2,341.9 4,858.3 5,696.1 3,994.0 164.6          Nov
... ... 1,689.7 2,627.2 1,006.5 8.8 1,550.8 − 2,425.5 4,964.6 5,788.6 3,991.5 174.5          Dec
... ... 1,684.7 2,662.5 1,017.8 9.8 1,540.9 − 2,360.5 4,923.2 5,800.2 3,999.4 193.1 2003          Jan
... ... 1,693.6 2,714.3 1,010.9 12.9 1,559.8 − 2,369.4 4,950.2 5,840.3 4,007.1 196.7          Feb
... ... 1,704.2 2,694.1 1,001.0 14.4 1,545.7 − 2,415.6 5,002.6 5,876.8 4,013.4 196.7          Mar
... ... 1,709.7 2,715.1 997.0 − 19.8 1,593.5 − 2,444.6 5,048.8 5,966.2 4,009.0 196.3          Apr
... ... 1,714.2 2,653.4 993.8 − 2.9 1,650.4 − 2,480.2 5,106.8 6,014.4 4,014.3 199.7          May
... ... 1,734.5 2,671.6 997.7 17.7 1,626.4 − 2,522.6 5,127.3 6,010.8 4,040.5 185.9          Jun
... ... 1,756.7 2,681.5 998.7 8.0 1,584.3 − 2,503.4 5,121.4 6,018.1 4,067.9 153.7          Jul
... ... 1,771.0 2,679.9 1,014.3 − 2.5 1,562.3 − 2,490.8 5,122.9 6,016.5 4,104.9 154.9          Aug
... ... 1,771.9 2,640.0 1,010.6 3.8 1,626.3 − 2,533.0 5,133.7 6,014.1 4,099.8 154.2          Sep
... ... 1,800.3 2,689.0 1,008.6 15.0 1,611.8 − 2,538.5 5,154.0 6,061.0 4,131.2 152.7          Oct
 German contribution (  5  billion) 
20.1 42.6 753.5 746.5 259.6 − 39.5 329.2 − 593.9 1,333.8 1,426.6 1,803.4 −2001          Sep
20.8 39.6 754.6 747.4 263.0 − 37.5 331.6 − 590.7 1,334.3 1,432.0 1,805.4 −         Oct
19.0 42.4 733.6 736.7 264.4 − 21.8 333.7 − 611.1 1,353.7 1,447.7 1,783.4 −         Nov
20.4 44.5 729.5 702.1 265.3 10.6 317.7 − 601.6 1,367.0 1,466.9 1,781.7 −         Dec
25.6 35.1 738.2 724.3 267.2 − 0.1 384.0 11.6 520.0 1,277.7 1,372.3 1,790.8 −2002          Jan
25.8 37.6 741.2 721.4 272.1 − 0.6 381.8 8.2 519.4 1,273.1 1,371.9 1,798.9 −         Feb
26.3 37.7 751.2 722.2 272.4 − 2.7 382.5 11.6 516.7 1,271.9 1,371.2 1,811.4 −         Mar
27.0 38.7 747.1 730.0 270.0 − 1.1 384.0 12.9 525.7 1,268.7 1,369.1 1,801.3 −         Apr
28.9 39.4 745.9 730.3 269.8 − 8.2 391.6 15.7 531.4 1,277.5 1,382.2 1,797.8 −         May
26.8 38.1 743.9 687.4 265.5 − 24.8 399.9 16.7 544.6 1,290.0 1,390.4 1,790.1 −         Jun
26.0 38.7 752.7 705.4 267.7 − 39.0 405.0 18.8 539.7 1,283.4 1,382.7 1,801.9 −         Jul
28.4 37.5 774.2 698.7 272.4 − 50.5 410.3 22.0 534.5 1,282.0 1,385.1 1,814.5 −         Aug
28.4 36.8 775.9 713.6 274.4 − 48.6 425.8 24.1 549.6 1,289.2 1,397.9 1,816.9 −         Sep
32.2 37.1 775.2 706.9 272.8 − 42.1 430.1 26.2 550.8 1,299.3 1,411.9 1,815.4 −         Oct
32.1 38.1 774.7 717.3 274.2 − 47.5 437.8 27.6 582.6 1,328.8 1,438.8 1,819.8 −         Nov
32.1 39.0 755.3 661.0 277.7 − 56.9 444.3 29.1 583.5 1,349.2 1,456.6 1,806.8 −         Dec
26.9 37.4 753.4 670.0 283.0 − 50.3 436.6 29.6 574.0 1,339.7 1,448.0 1,809.5 −2003          Jan
34.6 37.7 753.4 679.1 279.5 − 63.2 440.5 31.9 579.5 1,347.5 1,467.5 1,811.1 −         Feb
31.9 36.5 751.0 682.5 280.3 − 48.9 437.6 33.3 586.5 1,350.9 1,467.8 1,809.6 −         Mar
33.5 36.3 748.9 686.4 281.1 − 55.5 444.9 34.2 594.5 1,357.8 1,476.1 1,803.5 −         Apr
32.2 34.1 747.7 666.8 277.5 − 43.6 447.0 36.6 600.7 1,371.8 1,488.0 1,795.1 −         May
33.0 31.6 754.9 661.1 279.0 − 42.6 451.8 37.3 617.5 1,377.9 1,490.4 1,802.6 −         Jun
30.6 31.7 760.4 668.9 280.4 − 63.1 451.5 38.4 605.0 1,366.0 1,476.0 1,812.5 −         Jul
25.7 29.5 766.7 640.6 285.5 − 67.4 450.4 40.8 607.2 1,374.0 1,477.8 1,825.8 −         Aug
26.4 29.3 770.0 639.9 279.8 − 60.1 459.3 42.2 617.3 1,370.9 1,478.3 1,820.9 −         Sep
25.7 29.8 774.2 638.3 279.6 − 63.5 457.2 43.4 621.3 1,372.3 1,484.5 1,825.3 −         Oct
10Overnight deposits (excluding central governments ’deposits), and (for maturities. —12M2 plus repo transactions, money market fund shares,
the euro area) currency in circulation, central governments ’overnight money market paper and debt securities up to 2 years. —13Deposits with
monetary liabilities, which are not included in the consolidated balance agreed maturities of over 2 years and at agreed notice of over 3 months,
sheet. —11M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities of up to 2 years and at debt securities with maturities of over 2 years, capital and reserves. —
agreed notice of up to 3 months (excluding central governments ’deposits) 14 Non-existent in Germany. 
and (for the euro area) central governments ’monetary liabilities with such
13*II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  European  monetary  union
  
 3  Banking system ’s liquidity position  * 
Stocks
  
 5  billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions ‘
current
account
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (includingmaintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Baseperiod currency operations operations facility operations facility operations deposits (net)  
4 reserves)  5 money  6 circulation  3 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2001          Jul 397.6 161.9 59.9 0.2 − 0.4 − 350.8 42.5 98.8 127.1 478.3
         Aug 402.1 164.0 60.0 0.1 − 0.2 − 347.6 48.8 101.8 127.8 475.6
         Sep 401.3 147.1 60.0 0.5 3.5 0.4 − 335.4 45.2 105.4 126.1 461.9
         Oct 389.9 136.7 60.0 1.1 − 0.1 − 325.2 43.6 93.6 125.1 450.4
         Nov 385.0 132.3 60.0 0.2 − 0.3 − 311.3 46.1 93.1 126.7 438.3
         Dec 383.7 122.5 60.0 0.5 12.4 0.8 − 298.0 43.5 109.3 127.4 426.2
2002          Jan 385.2 118.5 60.0 0.4 3.7 0.6 − 344.3 38.3 54.2 130.4 475.2
         Feb 386.0 127.3 60.0 0.2 − 0.1 − 306.2 49.6 85.2 132.6 438.8
         Mar 386.7 114.6 60.0 0.2 − 0.1 − 283.3 54.2 91.8 132.1 415.6
         Apr 395.4 112.7 60.0 0.4 − 0.2 − 285.9 55.9 95.3 131.2 417.3
         May 397.7 110.6 60.0 0.1 − 0.3 − 293.7 49.2 93.5 131.7 425.6
         Jun 396.2 112.6 60.0 0.5 − 0.4 − 300.8 45.1 91.2 131.8 433.0
         Jul 369.1 130.4 60.0 0.2 − 0.2 − 313.4 54.4 60.3 131.4 445.0
         Aug 360.0 139.2 55.2 0.1 − 0.1 − 322.7 50.9 50.8 129.9 452.8
         Sep 362.3 140.9 50.8 0.1 − 0.2 − 323.6 49.1 51.7 129.6 453.4
         Oct 370.0 146.1 45.3 0.1 − 0.1 − 329.2 45.6 58.2 128.3 457.6
         Nov 372.1 147.5 45.0 0.1 − 0.1 − 334.0 42.8 58.6 129.3 463.4
         Dec 371.5 168.1 45.0 1.1 2.0 0.2 − 350.7 51.7 55.5 129.5 480.5
2003          Jan 360.9 176.3 45.0 0.5 − 0.3 − 353.9 43.7 53.3 131.6 485.8
         Feb 356.4 168.6 45.0 0.3 − 0.3 − 340.7 50.2 48.0 131.1 472.2
         Mar 352.5 179.5 45.0 0.2 − 0.1 − 347.8 59.1 40.6 129.6 477.5
         Apr 337.4 179.4 45.0 0.1 − 0.2 − 358.5 52.1 20.5 130.6 489.3
         May 333.1 177.1 45.0 0.4 − 0.2 0.1 366.2 42.6 15.5 130.9 497.3
         Jun 331.3 194.7 45.0 0.4 − 0.3 0.2 373.2 52.6 13.2 131.9 505.3
         Jul 320.4 204.7 45.0 0.4 − 0.3 − 382.7 52.4 2.9 132.2 515.2
         Aug 315.8 213.4 45.0 0.2 − 0.1 − 391.6 51.5 −1.6 132.8 524.6
         Sep 315.0 214.0 45.0 0.1 − 0.6 − 391.7 54.4 −4.4 132.0 524.2
         Oct 321.3 208.4 45.0 0.1 − 0.2 − 395.5 48.3 −1.1 131.9 527.5
         Nov 321.8 205.8 45.0 0.1 − 0.3 − 399.4 43.4 −2.2 131.8 531.4
Deutsche Bundesbank
2001          Jul 92.8 85.4 37.0 0.1 − 0.3 − 121.8 0.1 55.5 37.7 159.7
         Aug 94.2 77.0 38.2 0.1 − 0.2 − 119.3 0.1 52.0 37.8 157.3
         Sep 93.7 73.3 38.9 0.1 1.3 0.1 − 115.4 0.1 54.6 37.1 152.7
         Oct 91.3 66.3 40.2 0.5 − 0.1 − 110.8 0.1 50.1 37.3 148.2
         Nov 89.8 68.2 38.5 0.2 − 0.2 − 104.6 0.1 53.8 38.0 142.9
         Dec 89.4 62.4 40.1 0.2 5.0 0.5 − 96.6 0.1 67.1 37.8 134.9
2002          Jan 89.9 63.3 41.1 0.3 1.4 0.3 − 91.7 0.1 64.9 39.0 131.0
         Feb 89.9 63.3 42.4 0.1 − 0.0 − 78.5 0.1 78.6 38.6 117.2
         Mar 90.0 58.5 40.7 0.2 − 0.1 − 79.7 0.1 71.2 38.3 118.1
         Apr 92.3 57.6 40.4 0.3 − 0.2 − 80.8 0.1 71.8 37.9 118.8
         May 92.3 53.1 39.7 0.1 − 0.3 − 83.8 0.1 63.1 38.0 122.0
         Jun 91.6 60.6 38.8 0.1 − 0.3 − 85.4 0.1 67.3 38.1 123.8
         Jul 84.7 67.6 37.1 0.2 − 0.2 − 89.2 0.1 62.0 38.1 127.5
         Aug 82.5 63.1 36.4 0.0 − 0.1 − 92.2 0.1 51.8 37.9 130.2
         Sep 82.4 64.4 32.7 0.1 − 0.1 − 92.4 0.0 49.1 37.9 130.4
         Oct 84.0 69.0 31.7 0.1 − 0.1 − 94.0 0.1 53.0 37.6 131.6
         Nov 84.3 73.2 31.6 0.1 − 0.1 − 94.6 0.1 56.5 37.9 132.6
         Dec 84.4 91.1 33.8 0.9 0.7 0.2 − 99.3 0.1 73.5 37.8 137.3
2003          Jan 82.3 85.1 36.1 0.5 − 0.1 − 98.3 0.1 66.9 38.6 137.0
         Feb 81.4 81.6 36.5 0.2 − 0.3 − 95.5 0.1 65.6 38.3 134.1
         Mar 81.4 90.0 34.9 0.1 − 0.1 − 97.5 0.1 70.9 37.9 135.5
         Apr 78.5 95.6 32.3 0.1 − 0.2 − 100.7 0.1 67.4 38.2 139.1
         May 77.6 98.8 32.4 0.4 − 0.1 0.1 102.5 0.1 68.4 38.1 140.7
         Jun 77.2 112.4 32.9 0.3 − 0.2 0.1 104.4 0.1 79.8 38.3 142.8
         Jul 74.3 115.5 32.4 0.3 − 0.2 − 107.1 0.1 77.1 38.2 145.4
         Aug 73.7 111.0 29.6 0.2 − 0.1 − 109.6 0.1 66.5 38.2 147.9
         Sep 73.9 114.0 29.1 0.1 − 0.4 − 109.8 0.1 69.2 37.7 147.9
         Oct 75.7 106.5 29.7 0.1 − 0.2 − 110.8 0.1 63.4 37.5 148.4
         Nov 76.1 102.3 30.8 0.0 − 0.2 − 111.5 0.1 60.0 37.5 149.1
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. —*The banking system ’s liquidity notes and other banknotes which have been issued by the national central
position is defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro-area banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in circulation. In accordancecredit institutions with the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the conso- with the accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for the issue oflidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statement euro banknotes, 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulationof the Bundesbank. —1The reserve maintenance period of the ESCB ’s are allocated on a monthly basis to the ECB. The counterpart of this adjust-
minimum reserve system starts on the 24th of each month and ends on the ment is shown under “Other factors ”. The remaining 92% of the value of
23rd of the following month. —2Source: ECB. —3From 2002, euro bank- the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly basis,
14*II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  European  monetary  union

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  European  monetary  union
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions ‘
current
account
Net assets Longer- Other Other balancesin gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserveand foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenancecurrency operations operations facility operations facility operations deposits (net)  
4 reserves)  5 money  6 period circulation  3 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
+ 12.6 + 0.2 + 0.8 + 0.0 − + 0.0 −− 0.3 + 1.2 + 11.3 + 1.4 + 1.0 2001          Jul
+ 4.5 + 2.1 + 0.1 −0.1 −− 0.2 −− 3.2 + 6.3 + 3.0 + 0.7 − 2.7          Aug
− 0.8 −16.9
+ 0.0 + 0.4 + 3.5 + 0.2 −− 12.2 − 3.6 + 3.6 − 1.7 − 13.7          Sep
−11.4 −10.4 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 3.5 −0.3 −− 10.2 − 1.6 −11.8 − 1.0 − 11.5          Oct
− 4.9 − 4.4 − 0.0 −0.9 − + 0.2 −− 13.9 + 2.5 −0.5 + 1.6 − 12.1          Nov
− 1.3 − 9.8
+ 0.0 + 0.3 + 12.4 + 0.5 −− 13.3 − 2.6 + 16.2 + 0.7 − 12.1          Dec
+ 1.5 − 4.0 − 0.0 −0.1 − 8.7 −0.2 − + 46.3 − 5.2 −55.1 + 3.0 + 49.0 2002          Jan
+ 0.8 + 8.8
+ 0.0 −0.2 − 3.7 −0.5 −− 38.1 + 11.3 + 31.0 + 2.2 − 36.4          Feb
+ 0.7 −12.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 − + 0.0 −− 22.9 + 4.6 + 6.6 − 0.5 − 23.2          Mar
+ 8.7 − 1.9 − 0.0 + 0.2 − + 0.1 − + 2.6 + 1.7 + 3.5 − 0.9 + 1.7          Apr
+ 2.3 − 2.1 − 0.0 −0.3 − + 0.1 − + 7.8 − 6.7 −1.8 + 0.5 + 8.3          May
− 1.5 + 2.0 + 0.0 + 0.4 − + 0.1 − + 7.1 − 4.1 −2.3 + 0.1 + 7.4          Jun
−27.1 + 17.8 − 0.0 −0.3 −− 0.2 − + 12.6 + 9.3 −30.9 − 0.4 + 12.0          Jul
− 9.1 + 8.8 − 4.8 −0.1 −− 0.1 − + 9.3 − 3.5 −9.5 − 1.5 + 7.8          Aug
+ 2.3 + 1.7 − 4.4 + 0.0 − + 0.1 − + 0.9 − 1.8 + 0.9 − 0.3 + 0.6          Sep
+ 7.7 + 5.2 − 5.5 −0.0 −− 0.1 − + 5.6 − 3.5 + 6.5 − 1.3 + 4.2          Oct
+ 2.1 + 1.4 − 0.3 + 0.0 −− 0.0 − + 4.8 − 2.8 + 0.4 + 1.0 + 5.8          Nov
− 0.6 + 20.6 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 2.0 + 0.1 − + 16.7 + 8.9 −3.1 + 0.2 + 17.1          Dec
−10.6 + 8.2
+ 0.0 −0.6 − 2.0 + 0.1 − + 3.2 − 8.0 −2.2 + 2.1 + 5.3 2003          Jan
− 4.5 − 7.7
+ 0.0 −0.2 − + 0.0 −− 13.2 + 6.5 −5.3 − 0.5 − 13.6          Feb
− 3.9 + 10.9
+ 0.0 −0.1 −− 0.2 − + 7.1 + 8.9 −7.4 − 1.5 + 5.3          Mar
−15.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 −0.1 − + 0.1 − + 10.7 − 7.0 −20.1 + 1.0 + 11.8          Apr
− 4.3 − 2.3 − 0.0 + 0.3 −− 0.0 + 0.1 + 7.7 − 9.5 −5.0 + 0.3 + 8.0          May
− 1.8 + 17.6 + 0.0 −0.0 − + 0.1 + 0.1 + 7.0 + 10.0 −2.3 + 1.0 + 8.0          Jun
−10.9 + 10.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 −− 0.0 − 0.2 + 9.5 − 0.2 −10.3 + 0.3 + 9.9          Jul
− 4.6 + 8.7 − 0.0 −0.2 −− 0.2 − + 8.9 − 0.9 −4.5 + 0.6 + 9.4          Aug
− 0.8 + 0.6 − 0.0 −0.1 − + 0.5 − + 0.1 + 2.9 −2.8 − 0.8 − 0.4          Sep
+ 6.3 − 5.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 −− 0.4 − + 3.8 − 6.1 + 3.3 − 0.1 + 3.3          Oct
+ 0.5 − 2.6 − 0.0 −0.0 − + 0.1 − + 3.9 − 4.9 −1.1 − 0.1 + 3.9          Nov
Deutsche Bundesbank
+ 3.2 + 5.5 − 0.5 + 0.0 − + 0.0 −− 1.9 − 0.0 + 9.9 + 0.2 − 1.7 2001          Jul
+ 1.3 − 8.4 + 1.2 −0.1 −− 0.2 −− 2.4 − 0.0 −3.5 + 0.2 − 2.4          Aug
− 0.4 − 3.7 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 1.3 −0.0 −− 3.9 + 0.0 + 2.6 − 0.7 − 4.7          Sep
− 2.4 − 7.0 + 1.3 + 0.4 − 1.3 −0.0 −− 4.7 − 0.0 −4.5 + 0.2 − 4.5          Oct
− 1.5 + 2.0 − 1.7 −0.3 − + 0.2 −− 6.1 + 0.0 + 3.7 + 0.7 − 5.3          Nov
− 0.4 − 5.8 + 1.7 + 0.0 + 5.0 + 0.3 −− 8.1 + 0.0 + 13.3 − 0.1 − 7.9          Dec
+ 0.4 + 0.9 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 3.6 −0.2 −− 4.8 − 0.0 −2.2 + 1.1 − 3.9 2002          Jan
+ 0.0 + 0.1 + 1.3 −0.2 − 1.4 −0.3 −− 13.2 − 0.0 + 13.6 − 0.4 − 13.8          Feb
+ 0.1 − 4.9 − 1.7 + 0.1 − + 0.0 − + 1.2 − 0.0 −7.4 − 0.3 + 0.9          Mar
+ 2.4 − 0.9 − 0.3 + 0.1 − + 0.1 − + 1.0 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.4 + 0.7          Apr
− 0.0 − 4.5 − 0.7 −0.2 − + 0.1 − + 3.0 + 0.0 −8.7 + 0.1 + 3.3          May
− 0.7 + 7.5 − 0.9 + 0.1 −− 0.0 − + 1.6 − 0.0 + 4.2 + 0.2 + 1.8          Jun
− 6.9 + 7.0 − 1.7 + 0.0 −− 0.1 − + 3.8 + 0.0 −5.3 − 0.1 + 3.7          Jul
− 2.2 − 4.5 − 0.7 −0.1 −− 0.1 − + 3.0 − 0.0 −10.2 − 0.2 + 2.7          Aug
− 0.1 + 1.3 − 3.7 + 0.0 − + 0.1 − + 0.2 − 0.0 −2.8 − 0.0 + 0.2          Sep
+ 1.6 + 4.6 − 1.0 + 0.0 −− 0.0 − + 1.5 + 0.0 + 3.9 − 0.3 + 1.2          Oct
+ 0.4 + 4.3 − 0.1 −0.0 −− 0.0 − + 0.7 + 0.0 + 3.5 + 0.3 + 1.0          Nov
+ 0.1 + 17.8 + 2.2 + 0.9 + 0.7 + 0.1 − + 4.7
+ 0.0 + 17.1 − 0.2 + 4.6          Dec
− 2.1 − 6.0 + 2.4 −0.5 − 0.7 −0.0 −− 1.0 − 0.0 −6.7 + 0.8 − 0.2 2003          Jan
− 0.9 − 3.4 + 0.4 −0.2 − + 0.1 −− 2.8 − 0.0 −1.2 − 0.3 − 2.9          Feb
+ 0.0 + 8.4 − 1.6 −0.1 −− 0.2 − + 2.0 + 0.0 + 5.2 − 0.4 + 1.4          Mar
− 2.8 + 5.6 − 2.6 −0.1 − + 0.1 − + 3.2
+ 0.0 −3.5 + 0.3 + 3.6          Apr
− 0.9 + 3.2 + 0.1 + 0.3 −− 0.0 + 0.1 + 1.8 + 0.0 + 1.0 − 0.1 + 1.6          May
− 0.4 + 13.6 + 0.5 −0.1 − + 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.9 + 0.0 + 11.4 + 0.1 + 2.1          Jun
− 2.9 + 3.1 − 0.4 −0.0 −− 0.0 − 0.1 + 2.7 − 0.0 −2.7 − 0.1 + 2.6          Jul
− 0.6 − 4.6 − 2.8 −0.1 −− 0.1 − + 2.5 + 0.0 −10.5 + 0.1 + 2.5          Aug
+ 0.2 + 3.1 − 0.5 −0.1 − + 0.3 − + 0.2 − 0.0 + 2.6 − 0.5 − 0.0          Sep
+ 1.8 − 7.5 + 0.6 + 0.0 −− 0.2 − + 1.0 − 0.0 −5.7 − 0.2 + 0.6          Oct
+ 0.4 − 4.3 + 1.2 −0.0 −− 0.0 − + 0.7 + 0.0 −3.4 + 0.0 + 0.7          Nov
to the NCBs, with each NCB showing in its balance sheet the percentage of statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statement of the
the euro banknotes in circulation that corresponds to its paid-up share in Bundesbank. —5Equal to the difference between the sum of liquidity-pro-
the ECB ’s capital. The difference between the value of the euro banknotes viding factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors. —6Calculated as
allocated to an NCB and the value of the euro banknotes which that NCB the sum of the “deposit facility ”,“banknotes in circulation ”and “credit
has put into circulation is likewise shown under “Other factors ”. From 2003 institutions ’ current account holdings ”. 
euro banknotes only. —4Remaining items in the consolidated financial  
15*II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  European  monetary  union

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1 Assets *
 
 
 5  billion
Claims on non-euro-area Claims on non-euro-area residents denominated
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
On investments, euro-area Balances Claims
reporting external loans residents with banks, arising from
date/ Gold and other denominated security the creditEnd of Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility undermonth assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
 Eurosystem 1
 
2003 Mar                28 798.7 130.3 224.1 31.5 192.7 16.8 5.2 5.2 −
         Apr                  4 2 774.4 2 122.7 2 216.9 2 30.8 2 186.1 17.1 4.8 4.8 −
                               11 770.6 122.7 216.0 30.8 185.2 16.7 4.5 4.5 −
                               18 776.5 122.7 215.8 30.7 185.0 16.5 4.6 4.6 −
                               25 800.6 122.3 215.8 31.2 184.5 16.9 4.6 4.6 −
         May                  2 760.4 122.3 214.5 31.2 183.2 16.7 4.6 4.6 −
                                 9 765.1 122.3 214.1 31.3 182.8 17.1 4.8 4.8 −
                               16 771.9 122.3 215.1 31.6 183.5 16.9 4.5 4.5 −
                               23 793.9 122.3 216.2 31.5 184.7 17.2 3.7 3.7 −
                               30 801.4 122.2 214.2 31.5 182.7 17.3 3.4 3.4 −
         Jun                  6 777.1 122.2 213.5 31.4 182.1 16.4 3.5 3.5 −
                               13 801.7 122.2 214.8 31.5 183.3 15.5 3.3 3.3 −
                               20 791.7 122.2 212.0 32.3 179.7 16.8 3.4 3.4 −
                               27 813.6 122.2 212.9 32.2 180.7 17.1 3.4 3.4 −
         Jul                  4 2 802.1 2 120.0 2 206.4 2 31.4 2 175.0 2 15.6 4.0 4.0 −
                               11 798.0 120.0 208.4 31.4 177.0 15.0 3.6 3.6 −
                               18 795.3 120.0 205.4 31.4 173.9 15.8 4.4 4.4 −
                               25 828.5 119.9 204.0 31.4 172.6 15.2 4.4 4.4 −
2003 Aug                  1 802.9 120.0 204.0 31.5 172.5 15.2 4.3 4.3 −
                                 8 812.6 120.0 203.2 31.9 171.3 15.2 4.4 4.4 −
                               15 798.4 120.0 203.0 31.9 171.1 14.7 4.4 4.4 −
                               22 800.2 119.8 202.2 31.9 170.3 14.8 4.8 4.8 −
                               29 814.8 119.8 203.5 31.9 171.5 15.2 4.6 4.6 −
         Sep                  5 809.5 119.8 201.5 32.0 169.5 15.2 4.4 4.4 −
                               12 804.4 119.8 202.6 32.5 170.1 14.6 4.5 4.5 −
                               19 813.6 119.8 199.6 32.5 167.1 16.4 4.5 4.5 −
                               26 829.2 119.7 202.4 32.3 170.1 14.8 4.6 4.6 −
         Oct                  3 2 813.6 2 130.8 2 201.0 32.2 2 168.8 15.1 5.0 5.0 −
                               10 815.9 130.8 200.8 32.2 168.6 15.8 4.7 4.7 −
                               17 803.7 130.8 198.3 32.3 166.0 15.8 4.9 4.9 −
                               24 812.5 130.8 198.0 32.2 165.8 16.4 5.1 5.1 −
                               31 818.6 130.8 199.7 32.1 167.5 15.4 5.0 5.0 −
         Nov                  7 813.5 130.7 198.8 32.2 166.7 15.9 5.0 5.0 −
                               14 811.9 130.6 195.7 32.2 163.5 15.8 5.1 5.1 −
                               21 827.1 130.5 196.1 31.9 164.2 15.2 5.5 5.5 −
                               28 833.3 130.4 194.8 31.9 162.8 14.2 5.5 5.5 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2002          Jan 230.6 35.0 60.0 8.8 51.2 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Feb 221.4 35.0 59.9 8.8 51.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Mar 2 227.4 2 38.5 2 59.6 2 8.8 2 50.8 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Apr 205.3 38.5 58.0 8.3 49.6 − 0.3 0.3 −
         May 218.3 38.5 56.6 8.4 48.2 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Jun 2 217.9 2 35.4 2 51.2 8.8 2 42.4 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Jul 211.3 35.4 51.8 8.8 43.0 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Aug 218.3 35.4 50.9 8.7 42.2 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Sep 2 221.9 2 36.2 2 52.7 8.8 2 44.0 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Oct 226.4 36.2 52.1 8.6 43.5 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Nov 229.9 36.2 53.0 8.6 44.4 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Dec 2 240.0 36.2 2 48.8 8.3 2 40.5 − 0.3 0.3 −
2003          Jan 233.9 36.2 48.9 8.2 40.7 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Feb 236.2 36.2 49.2 8.2 41.0 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Mar 2 239.2 2 34.1 2 48.4 8.3 2 40.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Apr 230.5 34.1 47.0 8.2 38.7 − 0.3 0.3 −
         May 258.1 34.1 47.8 8.3 39.6 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Jun 2 258.2 2 33.4 2 45.0 8.3 2 36.7 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Jul 246.9 33.4 44.8 8.3 36.5 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Aug 248.9 33.4 45.5 8.3 37.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Sep 2 257.5 2 36.5 2 44.7 8.5 2 36.2 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Oct 257.6 36.5 45.0 8.5 36.5 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Nov 254.4 36.5 44.5 8.5 36.0 − 0.3 0.3 −
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the statements of the national central banks of the euro-area member states
financial statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial (NCBs). The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold
16*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Lending to euro-area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations
denominated in euro
 Other claims on euro-area credit Securities General    On
Credits institutions of euro-area government    reporting
Main Longer-term Fine-tuning Structural Marginal related denomi- residents debt    date/refinancing refinancing reverse reverse lending to margin nated in denominated denominated Other    End of
Total operations operations operations operations facility calls euro in euro in euro assets    month
Eurosystem 1
 
232.0 187.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.3 38.1 44.3 107.4 2003 Mar                 28
220.0 175.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.3 38.8 44.3 2 109.6          Apr                   4
217.1 172.0 45.0 −− 0.1 0.0 0.2 39.7 44.3 109.4                                11
223.0 178.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.1 39.8 44.3 109.7                                18
247.0 202.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.1 40.2 44.3 109.5                                25
208.0 163.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.1 40.3 44.3 109.6          May                   2
212.0 167.0 45.0 −−− 0.0 0.2 40.5 44.3 109.8                                  9
218.1 173.0 45.0 −− 0.1 0.0 0.2 41.0 44.3 109.6                                16
238.1 193.0 45.0 −− 0.1 0.0 0.2 42.3 44.3 109.6                                23
247.4 202.0 45.0 −− 0.3 0.1 0.3 42.3 44.3 110.1                                30
223.5 178.4 45.0 −− 0.1 0.0 0.2 43.1 44.3 110.3          Jun                   6
246.9 201.4 45.0 −− 0.4 0.1 0.3 43.4 44.3 111.0                                13
238.0 191.0 45.0 −− 1.9 0.1 0.3 43.8 44.3 110.9                                20
257.9 212.0 45.0 −− 0.8 0.1 0.2 44.1 44.3 111.3                                27
251.1 206.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.1 0.3 44.1 43.8 2 116.9          Jul                   4
245.1 200.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.3 44.5 43.8 117.4                                11
244.1 199.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.3 44.5 43.8 117.0                                18
277.8 232.0 45.0 −− 0.7 0.0 0.3 46.6 43.8 116.5                                25
252.1 207.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.1 0.2 46.9 43.8 116.5 2003 Aug                   1
262.1 217.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.1 0.2 47.1 43.8 116.5                                  8
250.0 205.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.2 47.2 43.8 115.2                                15
251.7 205.0 45.0 −− 1.7 0.0 0.3 47.9 43.8 114.8                                22
264.1 219.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.3 48.5 43.8 115.1                                29
260.0 215.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.4 49.3 43.8 115.1          Sep                   5
253.0 208.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.3 50.0 43.8 115.7                                12
263.0 218.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.3 50.4 43.8 115.8                                19
276.1 231.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.3 51.2 43.8 116.4                                26
249.3 204.0 45.0 −− 0.3 0.0 0.4 51.2 43.8 2 117.2          Oct                   3
250.0 205.0 45.0 −−− 0.0 0.3 51.9 43.8 117.8                                10
240.3 195.0 45.0 −− 0.2 0.0 0.4 52.4 43.8 117.0                                17
248.0 203.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.4 52.5 43.8 117.5                                24
252.1 207.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.4 53.0 43.8 118.5                                31
246.1 201.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.1 0.6 53.4 43.8 119.3          Nov                   7
247.0 202.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.7 53.1 43.8 120.1                                14
262.5 217.0 45.0 −− 0.5 0.0 0.8 53.0 43.8 119.5                                21
270.3 225.3 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.8 53.6 43.8 120.1                                28
 Deutsche Bundesbank
112.3 69.5 42.8 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.6 2002          Jan
103.7 61.7 40.4 −− 1.6 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.1          Feb
106.8 65.7 40.4 −− 0.7 − 0.0 − 4.4 17.7          Mar
86.6 46.7 39.6 −− 0.3 − 0.0 − 4.4 17.5          Apr
101.0 62.3 38.6 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 17.4          May
109.1 71.2 36.9 −− 0.9 − 0.0 − 4.4 17.5          Jun
98.2 61.8 36.4 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 21.2          Jul
100.3 68.3 32.0 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 26.9          Aug
104.2 72.4 31.7 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 24.0          Sep
103.9 72.4 31.6 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 29.4          Oct
111.1 77.0 34.0 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 24.8          Nov
125.5 87.1 36.1 −− 2.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 24.8          Dec
124.3 87.5 36.6 −− 0.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.8 2003          Jan
126.3 91.6 34.7 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.7          Feb
130.9 98.4 32.1 −− 0.4 − 0.0 − 4.4 21.1          Mar
125.0 92.5 32.5 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.7          Apr
151.8 118.7 32.9 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.7          May
155.0 122.5 32.4 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 20.1          Jun
144.0 115.1 28.8 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.9          Jul
145.2 116.0 29.1 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 20.1          Aug
151.4 121.5 29.7 −− 0.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 2 20.1          Sep
133.0 101.9 31.1 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 38.4          Oct
145.4 115.0 30.4 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 23.3          Nov
 
and financial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quar- of the quarter. ter.—1Source: ECB. —2Changes are due mainly to revalutions at the end
17*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
 5  billion
Liabilities to euro-area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro-area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilitiesaccounts to euro-
On (covering Fine- area creditreporting the tuning Deposits institutions Debtdate/ Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
End of Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Othermonth liabilities Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment lation  
1,2 liabilities
 Eurosystem 4
 
2003 Mar                28 798.7 351.8 129.4 129.4 0.0 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 73.6 68.4 5.2
         Apr                  4 5 774.4 357.8 131.6 131.5 0.1 −− 0.0 0.1 2.0 53.9 48.6 5.3
                               11 770.6 360.2 128.4 128.3 0.0 −− 0.0 0.1 2.0 51.6 46.2 5.4
                               18 776.5 367.6 132.7 132.4 0.2 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 45.0 39.5 5.5
                               25 800.6 363.9 147.5 147.4 0.1 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 59.3 53.9 5.4
         May                  2 760.4 367.4 122.6 122.5 0.1 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 40.1 34.8 5.4
                                 9 765.1 368.1 129.4 129.3 0.1 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 37.7 32.2 5.5
                               16 771.9 366.9 128.6 128.5 0.1 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 46.3 41.0 5.3
                               23 793.9 365.3 126.3 121.7 0.7 3.9 − 0.0 0.0 2.0 69.3 64.1 5.2
                               30 801.4 371.0 134.9 134.8 0.1 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 65.5 60.3 5.2
         Jun                  6 777.1 376.0 112.7 112.7 0.1 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 58.9 53.4 5.5
                               13 801.7 376.5 139.1 139.0 0.1 −−− 0.0 2.0 55.1 49.7 5.4
                               20 791.7 376.0 134.4 134.1 0.3 −−− 0.0 2.0 48.4 42.9 5.5
                               27 813.6 377.2 131.0 130.9 0.1 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 73.0 67.7 5.3
         Jul                  4 5 802.1 383.7 133.3 133.2 0.1 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 57.9 52.7 5.3
                               11 798.0 386.2 130.9 130.9 0.0 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 52.1 46.7 5.4
                               18 795.3 386.9 133.8 133.7 0.0 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 45.7 40.4 5.3
                               25 828.5 386.3 142.6 142.5 0.0 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 70.6 65.3 5.3
2003 Aug                  1 802.9 392.1 126.0 125.9 0.1 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 56.8 51.4 5.4
                                 8 812.6 395.1 134.6 134.6 0.0 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 55.6 50.2 5.3
                               15 798.4 395.0 129.2 129.2 0.0 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 48.7 43.3 5.3
                               22 800.2 390.0 136.2 135.0 1.2 −− 0.0 0.1 2.0 48.8 43.5 5.3
                               29 814.8 390.4 131.0 131.0 0.0 −− 0.0 0.1 2.0 66.9 61.7 5.3
         Sep                  5 809.5 393.9 133.4 133.3 0.1 −− 0.0 0.1 2.0 57.0 51.7 5.3
                               12 804.4 393.6 131.3 131.3 0.0 −− 0.0 0.1 2.0 54.2 48.9 5.4
                               19 813.6 392.1 129.1 128.7 0.5 −− 0.0 0.1 2.0 67.7 62.2 5.5
                               26 829.2 391.5 135.7 135.7 0.0 −−− 0.1 2.0 76.1 70.9 5.2
         Oct                  3 5 813.6 397.6 129.4 129.4 0.0 −−− 0.1 2.0 50.0 44.4 5.6
                               10 815.9 398.0 132.8 132.7 0.1 −− 0.0 0.1 2.0 48.2 42.8 5.4
                               17 803.7 396.8 131.0 130.3 0.7 −− 0.0 0.2 2.0 40.4 35.2 5.3
                               24 812.5 395.4 127.8 127.8 0.0 −− 0.0 0.2 2.0 53.5 48.4 5.2
                               31 818.6 398.4 128.2 128.2 0.0 −− 0.0 0.2 2.0 55.0 49.4 5.6
         Nov                  7 813.5 401.9 133.4 133.4 0.0 −− 0.0 0.2 1.1 41.4 36.0 5.4
                               14 811.9 401.9 132.5 132.4 0.1 −− 0.0 0.2 1.1 43.2 37.3 5.9
                               21 827.1 400.5 129.0 127.2 1.8 −−− 0.2 1.1 62.2 56.3 5.8
                               28 833.3 405.2 125.0 124.9 0.1 −− 0.0 0.2 1.1 70.3 64.2 6.1
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2002          Jan 230.6 82.5 46.1 46.1 0.0 −−− − − 1.0 0.1 0.9
         Feb 221.4 79.8 41.6 41.5 0.0 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.6
         Mar 5 227.4 80.5 42.0 42.0 0.1 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Apr 205.3 81.7 40.1 38.9 1.2 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.5
         May 218.3 84.1 44.9 44.9 0.0 −−− − − 0.6 0.0 0.6
         Jun 5 217.9 86.9 41.4 41.3 0.1 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Jul 211.3 90.0 40.7 40.6 0.0 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Aug 218.3 90.7 44.3 44.2 0.1 −−− − − 0.5 0.0 0.5
         Sep 5 221.9 92.0 41.0 41.0 0.0 −−− − − 0.6 0.0 0.5
         Oct 226.4 94.2 41.3 41.3 0.0 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Nov 229.9 95.7 41.0 40.9 0.0 −−− − − 0.8 0.1 0.7
         Dec 5 240.0 104.5 44.8 44.8 0.0 −−− − − 0.6 0.0 0.6
2003          Jan 233.9 94.5 40.9 40.8 0.1 −−− − − 0.5 0.0 0.5
         Feb 236.2 96.1 38.1 38.1 0.1 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.5
         Mar 5 239.2 98.1 48.1 48.0 0.0 −−− − − 0.5 0.0 0.4
         Apr 230.5 101.8 36.4 36.3 0.0 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         May 258.1 103.2 36.3 36.2 0.1 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Jun 5 258.2 105.2 38.8 38.8 0.0 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Jul 246.9 108.5 39.6 39.5 0.1 −−− − − 0.5 0.0 0.5
         Aug 248.9 108.6 41.0 41.0 0.0 −−− − − 0.5 0.0 0.4
         Sep 5 257.5 109.2 41.7 41.7 0.0 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Oct 257.6 110.8 42.0 42.0 0.0 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Nov 254.4 112.7 36.4 36.4 0.0 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the circulation issued by the national central banks of the Eurosystem (see also
financial statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial footnote 3). —2According to the accounting regime chosen by the
statements of the national central banks of the euro-area member states Eurosystem on the issue of euro banknotes, a share of 8% of the total value(NCBs). The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold and of the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated to the ECB on a monthlyfinancial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quar- basis. The counterpart of this adjustment is disclosed as anter.—1From 2002, euro banknotes and up to end-2002, banknotes still in “Intra-Eurosystem liability related to euro-banknote issue “. The remaining
18*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Liabilities to non-euro-area
residents denominated inforeign currency
Intra-  
Liabilities Eurosystem  
Liabilities to euro-area Liabilities Counterpart liability     Onto non-euro- residents Deposits, arising of special related to     reportingarea residents denominated balances from the drawing euro-  Capital    date/denominated in foreign and other rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and    End of credit facility
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF issue  
2 accounts reserves    month liabilities  3 
Eurosystem 4
 
8.4 1.1 14.5 14.5 − 6.3 64.2 − 82.8 64.5 2003 Mar                 28
8.9 1.1 15.4 15.4 − 6.2 65.1 − 5 68.0 64.5          Apr                   4
8.7 1.0 14.6 14.6 − 6.2 65.2 − 68.0 64.6                                11
9.2 1.0 14.3 14.3 − 6.2 65.9 − 68.0 64.6                                18
8.5 1.0 14.1 14.1 − 6.2 65.5 − 68.0 64.7                                25
9.5 1.0 13.0 13.0 − 6.2 65.9 − 67.9 64.7          May                   2
8.9 1.0 13.6 13.6 − 6.2 65.6 − 67.9 64.7                                  9
8.8 1.0 13.6 13.6 − 6.2 65.7 − 67.9 64.7                                16
9.6 1.0 16.0 16.0 − 6.2 65.2 − 67.9 65.0                                23
8.8 1.0 14.0 14.0 − 6.2 64.9 − 67.9 65.0                                30
9.0 1.0 13.7 13.7 − 6.2 64.6 − 67.9 65.0          Jun                   6
9.0 1.0 15.2 15.2 − 6.2 64.6 − 67.9 65.0                                13
10.6 1.0 14.6 14.6 − 6.2 65.7 − 67.9 65.0                                20
8.7 1.0 16.0 16.0 − 6.2 65.5 − 67.9 65.0                                27
8.8 0.9 5 16.4 5 16.4 − 6.0 5 65.8 − 5 62.2 65.0          Jul                   4
8.7 0.9 17.9 17.9 − 6.0 66.0 − 62.2 65.0                                11
8.9 0.9 16.7 16.7 − 6.0 67.1 − 62.2 65.0                                18
9.3 0.9 16.6 16.6 − 6.0 66.9 − 62.2 65.0                                25
9.1 0.9 16.3 16.3 − 6.0 66.6 − 62.2 65.0 2003 Aug                   1
9.0 0.8 15.8 15.8 − 6.0 66.4 − 62.2 65.0                                  8
9.4 0.8 14.8 14.8 − 6.0 65.2 − 62.2 65.0                                15
9.3 0.8 14.9 14.9 − 6.0 64.8 − 62.2 65.0                                22
9.4 0.8 16.5 16.5 − 6.0 64.3 − 62.2 65.0                                29
9.7 0.8 15.0 15.0 − 6.0 64.4 − 62.2 65.0          Sep                   5
9.6 0.8 15.0 15.0 − 6.0 64.5 − 62.2 65.0                                12
9.3 0.8 13.8 13.8 − 6.0 65.5 − 62.2 65.0                                19
9.3 0.8 15.4 15.4 − 6.0 65.2 − 62.2 65.0                                26
9.5 0.7 17.2 17.2 − 6.0 5 65.0 − 5 71.2 65.0          Oct                   3
9.4 0.7 17.8 17.8 − 6.0 64.9 − 71.2 65.0                                10
9.5 0.6 15.2 15.2 − 6.0 65.8 − 71.2 65.0                                17
9.4 0.7 15.5 15.5 − 6.0 65.8 − 71.2 65.0                                24
9.6 0.8 16.2 16.2 − 6.0 66.0 − 71.2 65.0                                31
9.6 0.7 17.2 17.2 − 6.0 65.9 − 71.2 65.0          Nov                   7
9.7 0.7 14.2 14.2 − 6.0 66.2 − 71.2 65.0                                14
9.8 0.7 14.6 14.6 − 6.0 66.7 − 71.2 65.0                                21
9.7 0.7 12.3 12.3 − 6.0 66.7 − 71.2 65.0                                28
 Deutsche Bundesbank
7.1 0.0 3.3 3.3 − 1.7 30.6 11.6 41.6 5.1 2002          Jan
7.0 0.0 3.2 3.2 − 1.7 32.6 8.2 41.6 5.1          Feb
7.0 0.0 5 3.0 5 3.0 − 1.7 30.9 11.6 5 44.8 5.1          Mar
7.0 0.0 2.4 2.4 − 1.7 9.1 12.9 44.8 5.1          Apr
7.0 0.0 1.6 1.6 − 1.7 12.7 15.7 44.8 5.1          May
6.9 0.0 2.3 2.3 − 1.6 20.9 16.7 5 35.5 5.1          Jun
7.1 0.0 3.0 3.0 − 1.6 8.9 18.8 35.5 5.1          Jul
7.1 0.0 2.3 2.3 − 1.6 9.2 22.0 35.5 5.1          Aug
7.2 0.0 2.8 2.8 − 1.6 10.2 24.1 5 37.3 5.1          Sep
7.1 0.0 2.4 2.4 − 1.6 10.6 26.2 37.3 5.1          Oct
7.1 0.0 3.1 3.1 − 1.6 10.5 27.6 37.3 5.1          Nov
7.1 0.0 1.8 1.8 − 1.6 11.1 29.1 5 34.2 5.0          Dec
7.8 0.0 2.2 2.2 − 1.6 17.6 29.6 34.2 5.0 2003          Jan
7.3 0.0 2.4 2.4 − 1.6 19.1 31.9 34.2 5.0          Feb
7.1 0.0 3.4 3.4 − 1.5 5 11.7 33.3 5 30.4 5.0          Mar
7.1 0.0 2.0 2.0 − 1.5 11.6 34.2 30.4 5.0          Apr
7.3 0.0 2.7 2.7 − 1.5 34.5 36.6 30.4 5.0          May
7.4 0.0 3.2 3.2 − 1.5 31.3 37.3 5 28.2 5.0          Jun
7.3 0.0 3.0 3.0 − 1.5 14.9 38.4 28.2 5.0          Jul
7.4 0.0 3.5 3.5 − 1.5 12.4 40.8 28.2 5.0          Aug
7.3 0.0 3.6 3.6 − 1.5 16.2 42.2 5 30.2 5.0          Sep
7.4 0.0 3.9 3.9 − 1.5 12.9 43.4 30.2 5.0          Oct
7.4 0.0 3.2 3.2 − 1.5 12.9 44.4 30.2 5.0          Nov
 
92% of the value of the euro banknotes in circulation is also allocated to regime and the value of euro banknotes put into circulation is also disclosedthe NCBs on a monthly basis, and each NCB shows in its balance sheet the as an “Intra-Eurosystem claim/ liability related to banknote issue “.—3For
share of the euro banknotes issued which corresponds to its paid-up share the Deutsche Bundesbank: from 2003, including DM banknotes still in circu-in the ECB ’s capital. The difference between the value of the euro bank- lation (see also footnote 1). —4Source: ECB. —5Changes are due mainly
notes allocated to the NCB according to the aforementioned accounting to revaluations at the end of the quarter. 
19*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Assets
 
 
 Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, 
 5 
 billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area  3 Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other member states to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and indi-
viduals
Secur- Secur-
Balance ities itiessheet Cash issued issued
Period total  
2 in hand Total Total Loans  3 by banks Total Loans  3 by banks Total Total Total Loans  3 
 End of year or month
 
1994 7,205.7 26.2 2,030.1 1,854.1 1,285.1 569.1 175.9 145.0 30.9 4,411.4 4,333.2 3,391.3 3,143.2
1995 7,778.7 27.3 2,210.2 2,019.0 1,399.8 619.3 191.2 158.0 33.2 4,723.3 4,635.0 3,548.8 3,298.7
1996 8,540.5 30.3 2,523.0 2,301.1 1,585.7 715.4 221.9 181.2 40.7 5,084.7 4,981.9 3,812.8 3,543.01997 9,368.2 30.7 2,836.0 2,580.7 1,758.6 822.1 255.3 208.8 46.5 5,408.8 5,269.5 4,041.3 3,740.81998 10,355.5 29.9 3,267.4 2,939.4 1,977.4 962.0 328.1 264.9 63.1 5,833.9 5,615.9 4,361.0 3,966.51999 5,678.5 17.2 1,836.9 1,635.0 1,081.4 553.6 201.9 161.8 40.1 3,127.4 2,958.6 2,326.4 2,093.4
2000 6,083.9 16.1 1,977.4 1,724.2 1,108.9 615.3 253.2 184.5 68.6 3,249.9 3,062.6 2,445.7 2,186.6
2001 6,303.1 14.6 2,069.7 1,775.5 1,140.6 634.9 294.2 219.8 74.4 3,317.1 3,084.9 2,497.1 2,235.72002 6,394.2 17.9 2,118.0 1,769.1 1,164.3 604.9 348.9 271.7 77.2 3,340.2 3,092.2 2,505.8 2,240.8
2002          Jan 6,255.1 27.7 2,019.8 1,728.4 1,094.0 634.4 291.4 216.2 75.2 3,310.8 3,075.1 2,487.1 2,225.5
         Feb 6,230.4 19.5 2,004.6 1,725.2 1,084.2 641.0 279.4 202.9 76.5 3,311.9 3,074.7 2,485.5 2,227.3         Mar 6,269.8 16.9 2,033.3 1,744.1 1,096.1 647.9 289.3 213.2 76.1 3,310.6 3,065.5 2,478.9 2,230.3
         Apr 6,267.7 14.9 2,032.8 1,736.5 1,085.8 650.7 296.3 220.2 76.1 3,319.5 3,072.8 2,485.6 2,231.6
         May 6,304.5 14.7 2,055.5 1,749.0 1,096.7 652.2 306.6 230.7 75.8 3,323.3 3,074.2 2,485.6 2,232.0         Jun 6,277.4 14.3 2,073.9 1,758.9 1,111.2 647.6 315.1 238.1 77.0 3,304.8 3,059.5 2,477.9 2,233.2
         Jul 6,265.6 13.8 2,051.7 1,731.9 1,094.9 637.1 319.7 242.3 77.4 3,313.1 3,063.8 2,471.5 2,231.6
         Aug 6,290.6 13.6 2,073.4 1,746.9 1,113.0 634.0 326.5 249.2 77.3 3,310.9 3,064.3 2,480.6 2,231.5         Sep 6,341.1 13.3 2,077.4 1,745.3 1,113.3 632.1 332.0 253.8 78.3 3,323.1 3,074.8 2,490.6 2,242.3
         Oct 6,359.1 14.2 2,078.3 1,741.3 1,117.9 623.5 336.9 257.2 79.7 3,327.8 3,080.9 2,494.9 2,240.6
         Nov 6,453.5 13.2 2,130.2 1,780.8 1,150.6 630.2 349.5 267.3 82.1 3,336.6 3,088.4 2,496.7 2,238.4         Dec 6,394.2 17.9 2,118.0 1,769.1 1,164.3 604.9 348.9 271.7 77.2 3,340.2 3,092.2 2,505.8 2,240.8
2003          Jan 6,380.7 13.2 2,104.3 1,748.5 1,136.2 612.3 355.8 277.0 78.8 3,348.8 3,101.1 2,501.4 2,237.9
         Feb 6,424.9 13.2 2,124.3 1,751.7 1,142.1 611.7 370.5 289.5 81.1 3,347.4 3,097.7 2,501.7 2,239.2         Mar 6,434.8 12.9 2,121.5 1,747.2 1,135.0 614.4 371.9 288.9 83.1 3,346.7 3,100.4 2,498.0 2,238.1
         Apr 6,430.3 13.8 2,107.6 1,732.2 1,118.6 613.6 375.4 291.6 83.8 3,348.8 3,102.2 2,499.1 2,234.6
         May 6,467.7 14.0 2,144.0 1,756.9 1,143.6 613.2 387.1 303.3 83.8 3,347.2 3,101.9 2,499.2 2,232.0         Jun 6,472.9 13.3 2,139.0 1,748.0 1,137.1 610.9 390.9 305.4 85.5 3,330.2 3,089.9 2,502.9 2,239.7
         Jul 6,425.7 13.3 2,113.5 1,728.1 1,109.7 618.4 385.3 297.4 88.0 3,330.2 3,093.7 2,494.1 2,231.1
         Aug 6,395.1 13.5 2,105.5 1,720.3 1,104.5 615.8 385.2 296.8 88.3 3,318.3 3,084.7 2,495.6 2,231.4         Sep 6,403.1 13.3 2,099.4 1,712.2 1,095.3 616.9 387.2 297.5 89.7 3,332.6 3,089.6 2,504.9 2,245.2
         Oct 6,399.3 13.6 2,092.9 1,715.9 1,096.1 619.9 376.9 285.3 91.7 3,328.8 3,086.1 2,496.9 2,242.9
 Changes 1
1995 587.7 1.1 184.6 169.3 114.7 54.6 15.2 13.0 2.3 322.1 312.1 201.2 188.1
1996 761.8 3.0 312.8 282.1 186.0 96.1 30.7 23.2 7.5 361.5 346.9 264.0 244.31997 825.6 0.5 313.1 279.6 172.9 106.7 33.5 27.6 5.9 324.0 287.5 228.4 197.61998 1,001.0 −0.8 422.2 355.7 215.1 140.6 66.4 56.2 10.2 440.4 363.3 337.5 245.2
1999 452.6 1.8 179.8 140.1 81.4 58.6 39.8 26.3 13.5 206.6 158.1 156.8 126.4
2000 401.5 −1.2 143.0 91.7 28.1 63.6 51.4 22.8 28.6 123.2 105.4 116.8 89.5
2001 244.9 −1.4 91.0 50.7 30.3 20.5 40.3 34.5 5.8 55.1 23.9 50.4 48.1
2002 165.7 3.3 63.6 6.5 23.7 −17.1 57.1 51.9 5.2 33.6 15.3 16.1 10.4
2002          Feb −23.2 −8.2 −15.1 −3.1 −9.8 6.7 −12.0 − 13.3 1.2 1.8 0.1 −1.0 2.0
         Mar 42.2 −2.5 28.9 19.0 11.9 7.1 9.9 10.3 −0.4 −1.0 −8.9 −6.5 3.0
         Apr 7.7 −2.0 −0.9 −8.0 −10.3 2.3 7.1 7.0 0.1 11.0 8.7 8.1 2.3
         May 52.5 −0.2 23.2 12.8 11.1 1.8 10.4 10.5 −0.2 6.6 3.6 2.1 2.4
         Jun −5.8 −0.4 18.3 10.0 14.3 −4.3 8.3 7.4 0.9 −19.8 −17.1 −10.1 −1.1
         Jul −19.9 −0.5 −22.9 −27.5 −16.3 −11.1 4.5 4.2 0.3 7.2 3.6 −7.1 −2.6
         Aug 23.8 −0.2 21.9 15.1 18.1 −3.0 6.8 6.8 −0.0 −1.7 0.9 8.8 0.3
         Sep 51.3 −0.2 4.0 −1.6 0.3 −1.9 5.6 4.6 0.9 12.0 10.2 10.3 10.4
         Oct 20.3 0.9 0.8 −4.1 4.6 −8.7 4.9 3.5 1.5 4.6 6.2 4.4 −1.5
         Nov 97.2 −1.0 52.0 39.4 32.7 6.7 12.6 10.1 2.5 9.4 7.9 2.2 −1.8
         Dec −29.0 4.7 3.0 1.0 13.7 −12.7 1.9 4.4 −2.4 10.9 10.3 15.6 7.8
2003          Jan −13.9 −4.7 −24.3 −30.3 −28.1 −2.2 5.9 5.3 0.7 18.3 17.1 3.7 1.4
         Feb 41.4 0.1 17.2 3.2 5.9 −2.7 14.0 12.5 1.5 −1.6 −3.6 0.1 1.2
         Mar 14.3 −0.4 −2.9 −4.3 −7.1 2.8 1.4 − 0.6 2.1 0.2 3.3 −3.0 −0.5
         Apr 4.5 1.0 −13.7 −17.2 −16.5 −0.8 3.5 2.7 0.8 4.0 3.3 2.3 −2.1
         May 58.9 0.2 36.6 24.8 25.1 −0.3 11.9 11.8 0.1 1.3 1.9 2.3 −0.6
         Jun −5.9 −0.7 −5.2 −8.9 −6.5 −2.4 3.8 2.0 1.7 −18.0 −12.5 3.2 7.2
         Jul −49.6 −0.1 −25.7 −20.1 −27.4 7.3 −5.6 − 8.0 2.4 0.6 4.5 −8.1 −8.1
         Aug −43.7 0.2 −8.1 −7.9 −5.2 −2.7 −0.3 − 0.5 0.3 −13.6 −10.0 0.5 −0.6
         Sep 26.2 −0.2 −5.9 −8.1 −9.2 1.2 2.1 0.7 1.4 17.7 7.4 11.8 16.2
         Oct −5.0 0.3 −6.5 4.1 0.8 3.3 −10.6 − 12.6 2.0 −2.4 −2.6 −7.9 −2.3
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey “in section data from money market funds. —1Statistical breaks have been eliminated
II. Unlike the other tables in section IV, this table includes −in addition to from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). —2Up to December
the figures reported by banks (including building and loan associations) − 1998, volume of business (balance sheet total plus endorsement liabilities
20*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
IV Banks
 
   
 
 
euro area  3 Claims on
non-euro-area
to non-banks in other member states residents
 Public Enterprises and Public authorities individuals authorities
Secur- Secur- of which Secur- of which Other
ities Total Loans  
3 ities 4 Total Total Loans  3 Total Loans  3 ities Total Loans  3 assets   Period
End of year or month
 
248.1 941.9 650.1 291.8 78.2 39.6 39.6 38.6 8.3 30.3 548.8 479.6 189.2 1994
250.0 1,086.3 792.2 294.1 88.2 39.4 39.2 48.8 11.3 37.6 608.5 526.0 209.4 1995
269.7 1,169.1 857.8 311.4 102.8 36.8 36.8 66.0 17.2 48.8 678.1 575.3 224.4 1996300.6 1,228.2 911.0 317.2 139.2 41.9 41.2 97.3 23.4 73.9 839.6 710.2 253.1 1997394.5 1,254.9 939.1 315.8 218.0 62.5 56.0 155.5 35.6 119.9 922.0 758.0 302.2 1998233.0 632.1 488.4 143.7 168.8 65.3 35.9 103.6 20.7 82.8 511.2 404.2 185.8 1999
259.1 616.9 478.5 138.4 187.3 83.8 44.2 103.5 20.0 83.5 622.4 481.7 218.1 2000
261.3 587.8 468.7 119.1 232.3 111.3 53.7 121.0 26.2 94.8 727.3 572.0 174.3 2001265.0 586.4 448.5 137.9 248.0 125.0 63.6 123.0 25.5 97.5 738.1 589.2 179.9 2002
261.6 588.1 469.5 118.5 235.6 113.5 54.7 122.1 25.7 96.4 723.8 569.9 173.1 2002          Jan
258.2 589.2 466.9 122.3 237.2 114.6 56.1 122.6 25.8 96.8 721.8 566.7 172.6          Feb
248.6 586.6 464.3 122.3 245.0 118.7 60.1 126.3 26.7 99.6 730.8 574.6 178.3          Mar
254.0 587.2 460.4 126.9 246.7 120.1 61.5 126.6 26.4 100.2 721.2 568.3 179.3          Apr
253.6 588.6 455.2 133.4 249.0 121.3 62.6 127.7 26.0 101.8 734.8 580.6 176.1          May244.6 581.6 450.0 131.6 245.4 118.1 61.5 127.2 26.0 101.2 712.6 559.4 171.7          Jun
239.9 592.3 458.1 134.2 249.3 118.1 59.8 131.2 26.5 104.7 712.9 557.9 174.2          Jul
249.1 583.7 448.5 135.2 246.6 114.3 58.3 132.3 26.9 105.4 722.0 566.9 170.7          Aug248.3 584.2 445.3 138.9 248.3 114.7 59.3 133.6 27.2 106.3 752.3 597.5 174.9          Sep
254.2 586.0 448.3 137.7 246.9 116.4 59.1 130.5 27.6 102.9 762.2 608.7 176.7          Oct
258.2 591.7 449.2 142.5 248.2 118.6 61.0 129.6 28.0 101.6 791.0 634.2 182.4          Nov265.0 586.4 448.5 137.9 248.0 125.0 63.6 123.0 25.5 97.5 738.1 589.2 179.9          Dec
263.4 599.8 453.0 146.7 247.6 121.8 60.5 125.8 26.5 99.3 738.3 591.8 176.2 2003          Jan
262.4 596.0 447.3 148.7 249.7 125.6 64.6 124.1 26.2 97.9 757.7 612.1 182.2          Feb
259.9 602.4 444.0 158.4 246.3 126.8 64.5 119.5 26.2 93.3 778.6 630.9 175.1          Mar
264.5 603.1 445.8 157.4 246.6 129.9 66.2 116.7 25.2 91.5 787.6 641.1 172.5          Apr
267.2 602.7 439.8 162.9 245.3 130.7 66.7 114.6 26.5 88.2 792.4 644.3 170.2          May263.2 587.0 434.6 152.4 240.2 126.9 61.9 113.4 24.6 88.7 827.6 668.9 162.8          Jun
263.0 599.6 444.9 154.7 236.5 126.7 62.3 109.8 24.9 84.9 811.5 651.6 157.3          Jul
264.1 589.1 440.6 148.5 233.6 129.2 65.0 104.4 24.1 80.3 801.2 642.0 156.6          Aug259.8 584.6 435.2 149.4 243.1 129.7 64.7 113.4 23.4 90.0 795.8 642.4 161.9          Sep
254.0 589.2 436.6 152.6 242.7 127.6 60.5 115.2 25.1 90.1 800.7 644.0 163.3          Oct
Changes 1
13.1 110.9 113.1 −2.1 10.0 −0.2 −0.4 10.2 3.0 7.3 59.7 46.3 20.2 1995
19.7 82.9 65.5 17.3 14.6 −2.6 −2.5 17.2 6.0 11.2 69.5 49.3 15.1 1996
30.8 59.1 53.3 5.8 36.5 5.1 4.4 31.4 6.1 25.3 159.4 132.9 28.6 1997
92.3 25.8 28.1 −2.3 77.1 18.9 13.0 58.3 12.5 45.7 83.9 52.0 55.3 1998
30.4 1.3 7.7 −6.4 48.4 12.2 6.4 36.2 2.0 34.2 33.1 13.8 31.3 1999
27.3 −11.4 −6.7 −4.6 17.8 16.8 7.2 1.0 −0.3 1.2 103.9 71.9 32.5 2000
2.4 −26.5 −9.8 −16.7 31.3 24.3 7.7 7.0 2.2 4.8 110.1 86.6 −9.9 2001
5.7 −0.8 −20.2 19.4 18.3 15.9 12.0 2.4 −0.6 3.0 65.7 64.1 −0.4 2002
−3.0 1.2 −2.6 3.8 1.6 1.1 1.3 0.5 0.1 0.4 −1.2 −2.7 −0.4 2002          Feb
−9.6 −2.4 −2.6 0.2 7.9 4.1 4.1 3.8 1.0 2.8 11.3 11.5 5.6          Mar
5.7 0.6 −3.9 4.5 2.2 1.8 1.7 0.5 −0.2 0.7 −1.2 1.1 0.8          Apr
−0.3 1.6 −5.1 6.7 3.0 1.6 1.5 1.4 −0.3 1.6 25.8 23.0 −3.0          May
−9.0 −7.0 −5.1 −1.9 −2.7 −2.6 −0.5 −0.2 0.2 −0.4 0.6 −0.3 −4.5          Jun
−4.5 10.7 8.1 2.6 3.5 −0.3 −2.0 3.8 0.4 3.4 −6.1 −7.1 2.5          Jul
8.5 −7.9 −9.6 1.7 −2.6 −3.0 −0.9 0.4 −0.1 0.5 7.4 7.1 −3.5          Aug
−0.1 −0.1 −3.2 3.1 1.8 0.5 1.1 1.3 0.4 0.9 31.2 31.4 4.3          Sep
5.9 1.8 3.1 −1.2 −1.6 1.4 −0.2 −3.0 0.4 −3.4 12.2 11.8 1.7          Oct
4.0 5.7 0.9 4.8 1.4 2.3 2.0 −0.9 0.4 −1.3 31.1 27.5 5.7          Nov
7.8 −5.3 −0.8 −4.6 0.6 6.9 3.1 −6.3 −2.3 −4.0 −39.1 −32.8 −8.4          Dec
2.3 13.4 4.6 8.8 1.2 −1.8 −2.7 3.0 1.1 2.0 8.7 10.1 −11.8 2003          Jan
−1.0 −3.7 −5.7 2.0 2.0 3.8 4.1 −1.8 −0.3 −1.4 19.8 20.7 6.0          Feb
−2.5 6.4 −3.3 9.7 −3.2 1.3 0.0 −4.5 0.1 −4.5 24.5 21.9 −7.2          Mar
4.4 1.0 1.8 −0.9 0.7 3.4 1.9 −2.7 −1.0 −1.7 15.9 16.3 −2.6          Apr
2.9 −0.4 −5.9 5.5 −0.6 1.0 1.0 −1.6 1.5 −3.1 21.5 18.8 −0.7          May
−4.0 −15.7 −5.2 −10.5 −5.6 −4.1 −5.1 −1.4 −1.9 0.5 25.2 16.1 −7.3          Jun
0.0 12.6 10.3 2.3 −3.9 −0.3 0.3 −3.6 0.3 −3.9 −18.6 −19.0 −5.9          Jul
1.1 −10.5 −4.3 −6.2 −3.6 2.2 2.4 −5.8 −0.9 −4.8 −21.0 −19.0 −1.2          Aug
−4.3 −4.4 −5.4 0.9 10.3 1.0 0.3 9.3 −0.5 9.9 10.2 14.5 4.4          Sep
−5.6 5.3 1.4 3.9 0.1 −2.0 −4.3 2.2 1.6 0.5 −0.5 −3.6 4.1          Oct
and bills sent for collection from the banks ’portfolios prior to maturity) and bill-based lending instead of bill holdings. —4Including debt securities
trust funds. —3Up to December 1998, including fiduciary loans and arising from the exchange of equalisation claims. 
21*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Liabilities
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999,  5  billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area  4 
in the euro area  3 
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities  5 notice  6 
 
Balance in the in other of which of which
sheet home member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total  2 Total country states Total Total night Total  4 Total 3 months Total night 2 years  7 
 
1994 7,205.7 1,650.9 1,483.5 167.4 3,082.7 2,894.4 510.4 1,288.3 549.2 1,095.8 654.6 80.1 4.1
1995 7,778.7 1,761.5 1,582.0 179.6 3,260.0 3,038.9 549.8 1,289.0 472.0 1,200.1 749.5 110.1 4.5
1996 8,540.5 1,975.3 1,780.2 195.1 3,515.9 3,264.0 638.1 1,318.5 430.6 1,307.4 865.7 137.3 7.51997 9,368.2 2,195.6 1,959.1 236.5 3,647.1 3,376.2 654.5 1,364.9 426.8 1,356.9 929.2 162.5 7.31998 10,355.5 2,480.3 2,148.9 331.4 3,850.8 3,552.2 751.6 1,411.1 461.6 1,389.6 971.9 187.4 9.41999 5,678.5 1,288.1 1,121.8 166.3 2,012.4 1,854.7 419.5 820.6 247.0 614.7 504.4 111.1 6.5
2000 6,083.9 1,379.4 1,188.9 190.5 2,051.4 1,873.6 441.4 858.8 274.3 573.5 450.5 107.9 6.9
2001 6,303.1 1,418.0 1,202.1 215.9 2,134.0 1,979.7 525.0 880.2 290.6 574.5 461.9 105.2 7.62002 6,394.2 1,478.7 1,236.2 242.4 2,170.0 2,034.9 574.8 884.9 279.3 575.3 472.9 87.4 8.1
2002          Jan 6,255.1 1,375.4 1,153.3 222.2 2,112.2 1,957.1 511.0 872.8 281.4 573.4 464.3 105.0 8.1
         Feb 6,230.4 1,346.3 1,141.7 204.6 2,107.5 1,955.2 510.5 872.7 278.8 572.0 463.9 102.9 8.2         Mar 6,269.8 1,371.2 1,157.9 213.3 2,108.5 1,954.0 508.0 875.2 278.4 570.8 463.8 105.1 8.1
         Apr 6,267.7 1,362.1 1,129.9 232.1 2,099.9 1,948.3 515.1 871.3 274.5 561.8 456.7 104.1 10.1
         May 6,304.5 1,382.7 1,150.7 232.0 2,107.1 1,957.8 523.5 874.3 277.0 560.1 456.1 101.1 7.4         Jun 6,277.4 1,392.3 1,174.8 217.4 2,118.7 1,970.2 535.6 875.7 278.3 558.9 455.1 99.9 8.5
         Jul 6,265.6 1,371.7 1,149.6 222.1 2,111.9 1,964.9 531.2 876.2 278.0 557.5 453.6 99.5 8.0
         Aug 6,290.6 1,389.2 1,165.7 223.5 2,098.3 1,962.0 526.7 877.6 280.7 557.8 453.8 87.4 7.3         Sep 6,341.1 1,400.2 1,172.1 228.1 2,105.1 1,967.6 540.3 869.1 272.6 558.3 454.7 87.5 8.8
         Oct 6,359.1 1,419.4 1,177.2 242.2 2,114.5 1,979.6 542.0 877.8 279.0 559.7 456.9 86.6 8.2
         Nov 6,453.5 1,460.0 1,214.3 245.7 2,146.5 2,008.8 571.8 874.6 273.2 562.4 460.2 90.1 10.0         Dec 6,394.2 1,478.7 1,236.2 242.4 2,170.0 2,034.9 574.8 884.9 279.3 575.3 472.9 87.4 8.1
2003          Jan 6,380.7 1,457.2 1,213.2 244.0 2,160.0 2,024.7 564.4 882.9 275.8 577.4 477.0 88.5 9.1
         Feb 6,424.9 1,466.4 1,224.6 241.9 2,173.4 2,036.7 571.1 886.4 272.1 579.2 479.9 88.5 8.0         Mar 6,434.8 1,471.5 1,218.2 253.2 2,175.3 2,040.7 578.3 883.1 266.2 579.3 481.6 88.0 7.7
         Apr 6,430.3 1,455.5 1,200.9 254.6 2,176.2 2,044.3 585.8 880.6 264.8 577.9 482.7 86.5 8.2
         May 6,467.7 1,508.5 1,253.9 254.6 2,188.9 2,053.8 591.4 885.3 270.9 577.1 483.4 87.4 8.8         Jun 6,472.9 1,509.2 1,252.8 256.4 2,194.2 2,059.3 608.2 874.5 260.2 576.7 484.4 86.7 9.0
         Jul 6,425.7 1,457.9 1,207.6 250.3 2,182.5 2,051.4 595.2 879.5 259.0 576.8 486.5 85.7 9.3
         Aug 6,395.1 1,450.5 1,198.0 252.5 2,193.0 2,061.5 597.8 885.7 261.3 578.0 489.3 85.5 8.9         Sep 6,403.1 1,451.2 1,188.3 262.9 2,187.8 2,057.4 607.3 871.8 248.1 578.3 490.2 84.2 9.6
         Oct 6,399.3 1,439.5 1,179.5 260.0 2,188.8 2,057.9 610.1 868.5 243.9 579.4 491.2 85.4 10.7
 Changes 1
1995 587.7 110.7 98.5 12.2 189.3 156.5 47.2 4.9 −76.5 104.3 99.1 30.0 0.4
1996 761.8 213.7 198.2 15.5 256.0 225.2 88.3 29.5 −41.4 107.3 116.2 27.2 3.0
1997 825.6 223.7 185.5 38.3 130.8 112.1 16.3 46.4 −3.8 49.4 60.3 25.0 −0.3
1998 1,001.0 277.0 182.8 94.2 205.9 176.8 97.8 46.3 34.8 32.7 42.0 26.2 2.0
1999 452.6 70.2 66.4 3.7 75.0 65.6 34.2 36.7 13.5 −5.3 7.4 7.5 1.7
2000 401.5 87.5 66.0 21.5 38.7 19.8 22.5 37.8 27.0 −40.5 −53.6 −4.2 0.3
2001 244.9 32.4 8.4 24.0 80.6 105.2 83.0 21.2 16.2 1.1 11.4 −4.0 0.4
2002 165.7 58.4 32.5 25.9 53.0 57.0 50.3 5.9 −11.0 0.8 11.0 −2.6 0.6
2002          Feb −23.2 −29.1 −11.5 −17.6 −4.7 −1.9 −0.4 −0.0 −2.6 −1.4 −0.4 −2.2 0.1
         Mar 42.2 24.9 16.2 8.7 1.2 −1.1 −2.5 2.5 −0.5 −1.2 −0.1 2.4 −0.1
         Apr 7.7 −9.2 −28.0 18.8 −7.9 −5.4 7.4 −3.8 −3.8 −9.0 −7.1 −0.6 1.9
         May 52.5 20.9 21.1 −0.1 9.2 11.0 8.8 3.9 3.2 −1.7 −0.6 −2.5 −2.6
         Jun −5.8 6.9 22.2 −15.3 11.9 12.1 12.0 1.3 1.3 −1.2 −1.0 −0.6 1.2
         Jul −19.9 −20.5 −25.2 4.6 −7.4 −5.6 −4.6 0.4 −0.4 −1.4 −1.5 −0.7 −0.6
         Aug 23.8 17.5 16.1 1.5 0.0 −2.8 −4.5 1.4 2.7 0.3 0.1 1.5 −0.7
         Sep 51.3 10.9 6.4 4.6 6.4 5.2 13.3 −8.6 −8.5 0.5 1.0 0.2 1.5
         Oct 20.3 19.2 5.1 14.1 9.6 12.2 1.8 9.0 6.4 1.4 2.2 −0.9 −0.6
         Nov 97.2 40.6 37.1 3.5 32.3 29.4 29.8 −3.2 −5.8 2.7 3.3 3.5 1.8
         Dec −29.0 18.7 22.0 −3.3 24.6 26.7 3.4 10.5 6.3 12.8 12.6 −2.2 −1.9
2003          Jan −13.9 −21.4 −23.0 1.6 −14.2 −13.7 −10.1 −5.7 −4.2 2.1 4.1 0.3 0.9
         Feb 41.4 9.2 11.3 −2.2 9.6 7.1 6.7 −1.4 −3.7 1.8 3.0 1.1 −0.9
         Mar 14.3 5.0 −6.3 11.3 2.1 4.1 7.4 −3.3 −5.9 0.1 1.7 −0.3 −0.3
         Apr 4.5 −16.0 −17.4 1.4 1.6 3.9 7.7 −2.4 −1.4 −1.4 1.1 −1.2 0.5
         May 58.9 50.3 50.3 −0.0 13.9 10.2 6.1 4.9 6.3 −0.8 0.7 1.5 0.7
         Jun −5.9 0.8 −1.1 1.8 4.6 5.1 16.4 −10.9 −10.8 −0.4 1.0 −0.9 −0.0
         Jul −49.6 −51.4 −45.4 −6.1 −11.8 −7.9 −13.0 5.1 −1.1 0.1 2.1 −1.1 0.5
         Aug −43.7 −7.4 −9.6 2.1 9.7 9.6 2.3 6.1 2.3 1.3 2.8 −0.5 −0.5
         Sep 26.2 0.7 −9.8 10.5 −4.0 −3.5 10.0 −13.7 −13.1 0.2 0.9 −0.8 0.8
         Oct −5.0 −10.0 −7.4 −2.6 0.9 0.5 2.8 −3.4 −4.2 1.1 1.0 1.1 1.1
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey “in section and bills sent for collection from the banks ’portfolios prior to maturity) and
II. Unlike the other tables in section IV, this table includes −in addition to liabilities incurred in the banks ’own name but on behalf of third parties. —
the figures reported by banks (including building and loan associations) − 3Up to December 1998, including liabilities arising from fiduciary loans and
data from money market funds. —1Statistical breaks have been eliminated liabilities arising from rediscounted bills (endorsement liabilities). —4Up to
from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). —2Up to December December 1998, including liabilities arising from fiduciary loans. —
1998, volume of business (balance sheet total plus endorsement liabilities
22*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Debt securities
issued  10 
in other member states  8 Deposits of
central governments  4 
With agreed At agreed Liabilities
maturities notice arising
of which from Money of which Liabilities
domestic market with to non- repos with
of which of which central non-banks fund euro- Capital maturities
up to up to govern- in the shares of up to area and Other
Total  4 Total 3 months Total ments Total reserves   Period 2 years  7 euro area  9 issued  10 2 years  10 residents Liabilities
End of year or month
 
68.7 11.8 7.3 7.3 108.2 108.2 − 31.3 1,441.2 81.9 336.8 305.2 357.8 1994
97.3 11.4 8.3 8.3 111.0 111.0 − 39.1 1,608.1 70.3 393.9 325.0 391.0 1995
120.6 9.0 9.2 9.2 114.6 114.6 − 34.0 1,804.3 54.4 422.1 350.0 438.8 1996
145.8 9.2 9.4 9.4 108.3 108.3 − 28.6 1,998.3 62.5 599.2 388.1 511.3 1997
168.3 13.8 9.7 9.7 111.2 111.2 − 34.8 2,248.1 80.2 739.8 426.8 574.8 1998
99.7 8.9 4.8 3.7 46.6 45.9 2.0 20.8 1,323.6 97.4 487.9 262.6 281.1 1999
96.3 6.7 4.7 3.3 69.9 67.6 0.4 19.3 1,417.1 113.3 599.8 298.1 318.4 2000
92.4 9.0 5.2 3.8 49.1 46.9 4.9 33.2 1,445.4 129.3 647.6 319.2 300.8 200174.6 9.9 4.7 3.6 47.7 45.6 3.3 36.7 1,453.5 71.6 599.2 343.0 309.8 2002
91.8 8.1 5.1 3.8 50.1 47.4 2.5 35.0 1,450.5 122.2 668.3 320.1 291.1 2002          Jan
89.6 7.3 5.1 3.8 49.4 47.3 3.5 35.9 1,462.8 125.4 664.8 322.2 287.3          Feb
92.0 9.3 5.0 3.7 49.4 46.9 3.7 35.8 1,479.4 129.0 666.4 323.3 281.6          Mar
89.4 8.3 4.7 3.5 47.5 45.8 3.4 35.9 1,478.2 133.1 673.4 325.3 289.7          Apr
89.1 9.5 4.7 3.4 48.2 45.6 4.7 35.4 1,480.6 134.6 673.3 329.0 291.6          May86.7 8.5 4.6 3.4 48.7 45.9 4.1 35.0 1,472.6 133.1 628.9 331.1 294.7          Jun
87.0 8.7 4.6 3.4 47.6 45.8 3.1 35.6 1,471.6 133.7 640.9 336.8 293.9          Jul
75.5 9.7 4.6 3.4 48.9 45.8 4.3 37.1 1,489.4 135.9 636.3 341.2 294.8          Aug74.2 8.8 4.5 3.4 49.9 46.7 10.7 37.0 1,490.2 137.0 647.7 344.8 305.5          Sep
73.9 9.1 4.5 3.4 48.3 46.8 9.6 37.6 1,485.9 137.5 642.5 343.7 306.0          Oct
75.6 9.4 4.5 3.4 47.6 46.3 6.4 37.5 1,496.8 148.2 653.5 343.0 309.8          Nov74.6 9.9 4.7 3.6 47.7 45.6 3.3 36.7 1,453.5 71.6 599.2 343.0 309.8          Dec
74.8 10.4 4.7 3.6 46.9 45.2 7.6 38.5 1,458.1 138.9 602.9 350.5 305.9 2003          Jan
75.9 12.3 4.6 3.6 48.2 45.1 10.9 39.8 1,468.4 145.7 606.7 353.9 305.4          Feb
75.7 13.0 4.6 3.6 46.6 45.2 11.2 40.2 1,465.1 140.7 612.1 355.8 303.6          Mar
73.8 12.3 4.5 3.5 45.5 44.9 11.3 39.7 1,468.6 142.6 620.2 351.6 307.2          Apr
74.1 13.3 4.4 3.5 47.7 44.4 12.3 39.4 1,463.3 133.3 599.0 351.0 305.4          May73.4 12.2 4.4 3.5 48.1 44.6 10.8 38.7 1,470.0 128.7 594.8 348.2 307.0          Jun
72.1 12.1 4.3 3.4 45.3 43.8 10.9 38.4 1,482.8 133.0 603.6 348.1 301.6          Jul
72.4 12.8 4.2 3.4 45.9 43.8 12.4 38.1 1,480.0 122.1 579.2 344.1 298.0          Aug70.5 12.0 4.1 3.3 46.2 43.4 15.6 37.9 1,485.5 124.4 579.7 341.1 304.3          Sep
70.6 12.7 4.0 3.3 45.5 43.0 21.1 37.4 1,494.1 125.9 574.2 344.7 299.4          Oct
Changes 1
28.6 −0.4 1.0 1.0 2.8 2.8 − 7.8 166.9 −11.5 57.2 19.8 36.0 1995
23.3 −2.4 0.9 0.9 3.6 3.6 −− 5.1 196.3 −15.9 28.1 25.0 47.8 1996
25.1 0.2 0.2 0.2 −6.2 −6.2 −− 4.5 194.8 8.1 172.3 37.1 71.2 1997
24.0 4.6 0.3 0.3 2.9 2.9 − 6.2 263.3 28.1 151.4 28.8 68.3 1998
5.9 1.5 −0.2 −1.3 1.9 1.2 0.6 3.5 168.0 65.1 89.7 38.0 7.7 1999
−4.5 −0.5 −0.1 −0.3 23.1 21.6 −1.6 −1.5 90.6 15.9 97.8 35.3 54.6 2000
−4.6 1.6 0.2 0.4 −20.5 −20.4 4.6 13.3 59.5 18.6 34.8 20.9 −1.1 2001
−2.6 1.1 −0.5 −0.3 −1.4 −1.3 −1.6 4.2 18.8 14.8 −2.1 25.9 9.7 2002
−2.2 −0.9 −0.1 −0.0 −0.7 −0.2 1.0 0.8 12.7 3.2 −2.8 2.3 −3.3 2002          Feb
2.5 2.0 −0.0 −0.0 −0.0 −0.3 0.2 −0.1 16.9 3.6 3.7 1.2 −5.8          Mar
−2.3 −1.0 −0.3 −0.3 −1.9 −1.2 −0.3 0.2 0.9 4.1 15.9 2.3 5.8          Apr
0.2 1.3 −0.1 −0.0 0.7 −0.1 1.3 −0.0 6.2 1.7 12.6 4.1 −1.8          May
−1.8 −1.0 −0.0 0.0 0.5 0.3 −0.6 −0.3 −4.1 −2.1 −28.2 2.5 6.2          Jun
−0.1 0.2 −0.1 −0.0 −1.1 −0.1 −1.0 0.6 −3.4 −1.2 5.4 5.2 1.5          Jul
2.2 1.0 −0.0 −0.0 1.4 0.0 1.2 1.2 1.5 2.2 −2.6 4.7 0.2          Aug
−1.3 −0.9 −0.0 −0.0 1.0 0.8 6.4 0.1 1.0 1.0 12.4 3.5 10.5          Sep
−0.3 0.4 −0.0 −0.0 −1.7 0.1 −1.0 0.7 −3.8 0.6 −4.6 −1.1 1.4          Oct
1.8 0.3 −0.0 −0.0 −0.6 −0.5 −3.2 −0.2 11.9 10.7 13.2 −0.5 3.2          Nov
−0.6 0.6 0.2 0.2 0.1 −0.7 −3.1 −0.8 −24.8 −6.6 −42.1 1.0 −2.4          Dec
−0.6 −0.5 −0.0 0.0 −0.8 −0.4 5.3 1.8 2.4 0.6 11.3 5.6 −5.3 2003          Jan
2.0 2.8 −0.0 0.0 1.4 −0.1 2.2 1.3 8.1 6.8 4.4 3.6 3.0          Feb
−0.0 0.7 −0.1 −0.0 −1.6 0.1 0.4 0.6 0.8 −2.3 8.4 −0.8 −2.4          Mar
−1.6 −0.6 −0.1 −0.0 −1.1 −0.3 0.0 −0.6 3.5 −0.8 13.7 −0.8 3.1          Apr
0.9 1.2 −0.1 −0.0 2.2 −0.5 1.2 −0.2 3.4 −6.9 −8.2 0.7 −2.2          May
−0.8 −1.0 −0.1 −0.0 0.4 0.2 −1.5 −0.7 3.1 −4.5 −11.4 −3.5 2.8          Jun
−1.5 −0.2 −0.1 −0.1 −2.8 −0.8 0.2 −0.3 12.1 4.3 7.0 −0.2 −5.2          Jul
0.0 0.6 −0.1 −0.0 0.6 0.0 1.5 −0.3 −7.1 −10.9 −32.4 −4.8 −2.8          Aug
−1.5 −0.7 −0.1 −0.1 0.3 −0.4 3.2 −0.2 11.6 2.4 12.3 −1.9 4.5          Sep
0.1 0.7 −0.1 −0.1 −0.7 −0.4 5.6 −0.5 7.8 1.5 −10.3 3.4 −1.9          Oct
5For the German contribution: from 1999, including deposits under savings collected separately from 1999 only; up to December 1998, included in the
and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). —6For the German contribution: up to deposits with agreed maturities of up to two years. —10In Germany, debt
the end of 1998, including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market
also footnote 5). —7Up to December 1998, with maturities of less than paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were published
four years. —8Excluding deposits of central governments. —9Data together with money market fund shares. 
23*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
IV Banks
 
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks*
 
 
 5  billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
  of which of which 
Loans
 Cash in hand and credit
Number of balances forreporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Othermonth tions total banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets
All categories of banks
 
2003          May 2,338 6,505.1 52.3 2,434.3 1,776.0 647.7 3,582.2 474.0 2,555.5 4.5 533.9 161.4 275.0
         June 2,311 6,511.2 54.3 2,459.7 1,798.0 650.5 3,570.5 466.4 2,554.9 4.5 530.8 160.3 266.3
         July 2,285 6,464.7 53.7 2,424.8 1,753.0 659.3 3,563.4 455.9 2,560.6 4.6 530.0 162.2 260.6
         Aug 2,271 6,434.7 56.0 2,408.1 1,738.5 658.8 3,548.2 440.1 2,571.5 4.5 519.1 161.9 260.5         Sep 2,251 6,441.9 55.5 2,397.7 1,727.1 659.4 3,565.0 460.5 2,561.9 4.5 527.0 158.8 264.9
         Oct 2,235 6,434.4 58.0 2,387.0 1,711.0 665.3 3,569.5 452.4 2,571.1 4.4 528.4 158.0 262.0
Commercial banks 5
2003          Sep 262 1,814.1 18.7 665.3 530.1 130.6 936.1 245.7 537.8 2.5 142.8 89.3 104.6
         Oct 261 1,798.2 20.9 656.4 522.6 129.5 935.1 235.0 542.7 2.4 146.3 88.3 97.5
   Big banks 6
2003          Sep 4 1,061.0 10.9 398.1 341.9 54.1 508.8 149.5 275.7 1.6 78.2 78.7 64.4         Oct 4 1,055.1 12.9 392.1 335.6 54.9 507.1 142.4 274.9 1.5 83.3 77.6 65.4
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2003          Sep 175 657.2 7.1 218.3 146.3 70.6 388.2 78.5 246.8 0.8 58.9 9.8 33.7         Oct 173 649.6 7.2 213.5 142.5 69.3 390.2 75.7 252.4 0.8 58.0 9.8 28.9
   Branches of foreign banks
2003          Sep 83 95.9 0.6 48.9 41.8 5.9 39.1 17.7 15.3 0.1 5.7 0.8 6.5         Oct 84 93.5 0.8 50.7 44.5 5.3 37.7 16.9 15.5 0.0 5.0 0.9 3.3
Land  banks
2003          Sep 13 1,338.0 4.6 676.2 549.2 123.6 576.3 64.7 412.0 0.3 96.8 34.4 46.5         Oct 13 1,337.6 3.8 669.4 539.4 126.9 578.6 67.3 409.4 0.3 98.5 34.6 51.3
Savings banks
2003          Sep 495 980.0 18.8 221.3 64.5 156.2 702.4 77.0 532.3 1.1 91.6 14.4 23.0         Oct 494 983.1 19.0 223.6 65.8 156.9 703.2 75.3 534.5 1.1 91.9 14.5 22.8
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives  
 
2003          Sep 2 186.4 0.3 120.3 83.4 36.5 47.5 9.7 21.8 0.1 15.8 11.0 7.4         Oct 2 188.3 1.7 124.8 86.7 37.8 44.3 11.1 21.7 0.1 11.3 11.4 6.1
Credit cooperatives
2003          Sep 1,412 555.5 11.6 139.2 56.8 80.6 381.6 47.5 294.0 0.6 39.3 5.6 17.5         Oct 1,398 557.7 11.6 141.1 58.5 80.8 381.9 46.3 295.5 0.6 39.4 5.6 17.5
Mortgage banks
2003          Sep 26 865.6 0.9 231.1 153.6 77.3 614.6 9.5 501.8 − 103.2 1.7 17.3
         Oct 26 865.2 0.7 228.2 149.2 78.9 616.6 10.1 503.3 − 103.0 1.2 18.4
Building and loan associations
2003          Sep 27 168.7 0.0 39.1 28.5 10.6 120.4 1.5 108.3 . 10.5 0.4 8.8         Oct 27 168.9 0.1 38.4 27.6 10.7 121.3 1.4 108.8 . 11.1 0.4 8.8
Banks with special functions
2003          Sep 14 533.8 0.5 305.2 261.0 44.0 186.3 4.8 153.8 − 26.9 2.0 39.7
         Oct 14 535.6 0.2 305.2 261.1 43.8 188.6 5.9 155.0 − 26.8 2.0 39.6
Memo item: Foreign banks 7
2003          Sep 130 380.9 3.0 161.0 109.3 50.3 197.0 37.8 115.9 0.2 42.7 1.6 18.4         Oct 129 373.6 3.2 157.3 105.7 50.5 195.7 37.9 116.0 0.1 41.2 1.6 15.8
  of which:  Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 8
2003          Sep 47 285.0 2.4 112.1 67.5 44.4 157.9 20.1 100.6 0.1 37.1 0.8 11.9         Oct 45 280.1 2.4 106.5 61.2 45.2 158.0 21.0 100.6 0.1 36.3 0.7 12.5
*For the period up to December 1998, section IV (except for Table IV.1) included. For the definitions of the respective items, see the footnotes to
shows the assets and liabilities of banks (excluding building and loan Table IV.3. —1For building and loan associations: Including deposits under
associations) in liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). —2Included in time
Germany. The assets and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market deposits. —3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also
funds (which are also classified as MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not footnote 2). —4Including subordinated negotiable bearer debt
24*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
IV Banks
 
   
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which of which published
reserves,
Time deposits  1 Savings deposits  3 partici-pation
Memo rights
item Bearer capital,
for for of which debt Liabilities
funds for
up to and more arising At three Bank general securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking Other   End of months ’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year  1 repos  2 Total notice bonds risks   month standing  4 liabilities
All categories of banks
 
1,875.2 274.3 1,600.6 2,433.9 635.3 355.5 746.9 61.7 587.7 491.5 108.6 1,516.9 294.7 384.4 2003          May
1,875.3 293.6 1,581.6 2,434.2 652.7 337.5 748.7 55.6 587.2 492.5 108.1 1,521.7 294.0 386.0          June
1,825.0 247.1 1,577.7 2,430.3 635.9 346.7 752.9 65.4 587.2 494.6 107.6 1,533.8 294.6 380.9          July
1,799.3 228.9 1,570.3 2,436.1 638.0 343.3 759.3 57.9 588.4 497.3 107.1 1,526.4 295.0 377.8          Aug 1,795.8 260.3 1,535.3 2,438.9 648.7 341.6 753.5 71.4 588.5 498.2 106.5 1,530.5 293.3 383.4          Sep 
1,776.8 251.2 1,525.4 2,447.3 649.7 347.0 754.5 71.8 589.5 499.2 106.6 1,542.9 293.4 374.0          Oct 
Commercial banks 5
686.1 148.0 537.9 688.3 284.9 171.0 126.5 64.5 96.6 85.3 9.3 210.5 98.4 130.7 2003          Sep 
672.9 143.1 529.6 693.6 282.0 176.1 129.0 62.3 97.1 86.1 9.3 210.5 98.5 122.7          Oct 
Big banks 6
425.5 108.9 316.6 352.7 127.9 124.6 73.3 60.9 26.4 24.5 0.6 153.4 58.0 71.4 2003          Sep 
417.6 105.7 311.9 355.5 123.7 131.8 72.8 60.2 26.7 24.8 0.5 153.4 58.0 70.7          Oct 
Regional banks and other commercial banks
190.3 27.2 162.9 320.0 148.6 42.2 50.3 2.5 70.2 60.7 8.7 57.2 37.5 52.2 2003          Sep 
185.5 26.0 159.3 321.6 148.8 40.2 53.4 1.4 70.5 61.2 8.7 57.1 37.3 48.1          Oct 
Branches of foreign banks
70.3 11.9 58.4 15.5 8.4 4.2 2.9 1.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 2.9 7.1 2003          Sep 
69.8 11.5 58.3 16.5 9.4 4.2 2.9 0.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 3.2 4.0          Oct 
Land   banks
442.4 64.3 378.0 322.7 52.8 38.9 214.5 5.1 15.7 14.5 0.8 446.7 63.3 62.9 2003          Sep 
438.9 62.3 376.6 321.6 51.9 39.3 214.0 6.8 15.6 14.5 0.8 452.7 63.3 61.1          Oct 
Savings banks
218.2 5.7 212.5 624.2 186.3 57.8 10.4 − 299.7 246.2 70.0 42.6 45.9 49.1 2003          Sep 
218.8 5.3 213.6 625.4 188.4 56.6 10.4 − 299.8 246.1 70.2 42.7 46.0 50.2          Oct 
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives
 
107.3 30.8 76.4 31.0 6.5 6.9 17.6 1.7 −− 0.0 28.6 10.0 9.5 2003          Sep 
109.4 30.3 79.2 31.3 7.6 6.1 17.5 2.6 −− 0.0 28.9 10.0 8.8          Oct 
Credit cooperatives
74.8 2.1 72.6 395.9 114.5 55.3 23.9 − 176.1 151.8 26.1 31.2 30.1 23.6 2003          Sep 
74.1 2.0 72.0 397.5 116.1 54.9 24.0 − 176.6 152.1 26.0 31.1 30.1 24.9          Oct 
Mortgage banks
123.3 5.1 118.2 147.0 1.3 5.3 140.2 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.2 549.1 21.3 25.0 2003          Sep 
121.0 4.1 116.9 147.8 1.3 5.4 140.9 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.2 549.4 21.3 25.9          Oct 
Building and loan associations
30.1 2.1 28.0 107.0 0.3 0.7 105.5 − 0.3 0.3 0.1 7.1 7.1 17.3 2003          Sep 
30.1 1.6 28.6 107.0 0.3 0.8 105.5 − 0.3 0.3 0.1 7.2 7.1 17.4          Oct 
Banks with special functions
113.7 2.1 111.7 123.0 2.2 5.7 115.1 −−−− 214.6 17.1 65.3 2003          Sep 
111.6 2.5 109.1 123.3 2.1 7.9 113.2 −−− 0.0 220.5 17.1 63.0          Oct 
Memo item:   Foreign banks 7
136.9 22.5 114.3 115.7 68.5 11.8 25.4 1.2 7.4 7.2 2.6 88.5 14.1 25.8 2003          Sep 
130.4 21.5 108.7 116.6 69.2 11.7 25.8 0.8 7.3 7.1 2.6 88.6 14.1 23.9          Oct 
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 8
66.6 10.5 55.9 100.2 60.1 7.7 22.5 0.1 7.3 7.2 2.6 88.5 11.2 18.6 2003          Sep 
60.6 10.1 50.4 100.1 59.7 7.5 22.9 0.1 7.3 7.1 2.5 88.6 10.9 19.9          Oct 
securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities. —5Commercial included in other categories of banks and the category ”Branches (with
banks comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks ”,”Regional banks and other dependent legal status) of foreign banks ”.—8Separate presentation of the
commercial banks ”and ”Branches of foreign banks ”.—6Deutsche Bank banks majority-owned by foreign banks included in the categories
AG, Dresdner Bank AG, Commerzbank AG and Bayerische Hypo- und Vereins- ”Regional banks and other commercial banks ” and ”Mortgage banks ”. 
bank AG. —7Sum of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks and
25*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
IV Banks
 
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis- à-vis residents*
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999,  5  billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs)  2,3 Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3,8 
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills and
hand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro-area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins)  1 bank Total and loans Bills  4 banks  5 banks  6 loans  7 Total Loans Bills  4 non-banks banks  9 
End of year or month*
 
1993 26.7 75.3 1,596.8 1,076.2 14.7 3.3 493.2 9.3 3,826.4 3,291.6 44.7 5.6 327.7
1994 25.0 61.5 1,695.6 1,150.6 17.4 4.6 513.6 9.5 4,137.2 3,502.8 45.9 2.2 433.7
1995 26.0 61.0 1,859.9 1,264.9 17.5 4.3 561.9 11.4 4,436.9 3,802.0 46.8 1.4 427.3
1996 28.9 59.7 2,134.0 1,443.3 17.9 3.4 657.2 12.2 4,773.1 4,097.9 44.8 5.9 437.21997 29.3 60.2 2,397.9 1,606.3 18.1 3.6 758.9 11.1 5,058.4 4,353.9 44.7 2.9 473.31998 28.5 63.6 2,738.2 1,814.7 14.6 12.2 887.7 9.1 5,379.8 4,639.7 32.8 5.0 527.81999 16.8 45.6 1,556.9 1,033.4 0.0 19.2 504.2 3.9 2,904.5 2,569.6 7.0 3.0 287.5
2000 15.6 50.8 1,639.6 1,056.1 0.0 26.8 556.6 3.6 3,003.7 2,657.3 6.5 2.3 304.7
2001 14.2 56.3 1,676.0 1,078.9 0.0 5.6 591.5 2.8 3,014.1 2,699.4 4.8 4.4 301.52002 17.5 45.6 1,691.3 1,112.3 0.0 7.8 571.2 2.7 2,997.2 2,685.0 4.1 3.3 301.9
2002          May 14.3 45.4 1,655.7 1,044.4 0.0 6.1 605.2 2.7 3,005.7 2,682.8 4.2 4.6 310.2
         June 13.9 43.8 1,668.4 1,061.5 0.0 6.3 600.6 2.7 2,990.8 2,678.8 4.3 5.2 298.7
         July 13.4 41.2 1,643.8 1,047.7 0.0 7.6 588.4 2.6 2,995.7 2,685.3 4.3 4.2 299.1
         Aug 13.2 46.0 1,650.2 1,060.1 0.0 7.7 582.4 2.7 2,987.3 2,675.6 4.2 3.9 300.6         Sep 13.0 42.3 1,652.7 1,064.4 0.0 8.5 579.8 2.7 2,995.5 2,683.2 4.2 3.9 301.2
         Oct 13.9 42.8 1,648.3 1,068.2 0.0 8.0 572.2 2.7 2,997.6 2,684.6 4.2 3.9 301.9
         Nov 12.9 41.7 1,689.1 1,102.1 0.0 13.3 573.8 2.6 3,003.5 2,683.3 4.1 3.6 309.5         Dec 17.5 45.6 1,691.3 1,112.3 0.0 7.8 571.2 2.7 2,997.2 2,685.0 4.1 3.3 301.9
2003          Jan 12.9 42.3 1,661.6 1,086.8 0.0 9.7 565.1 2.6 3,005.1 2,686.9 3.9 4.0 307.4
         Feb 12.9 39.0 1,667.6 1,095.5 0.0 9.7 562.3 2.5 3,001.9 2,682.6 3.8 3.6 308.9         Mar 12.6 47.5 1,655.8 1,081.1 0.0 10.0 564.7 2.5 3,005.5 2,677.5 3.8 4.8 316.4
         Apr 13.5 37.7 1,648.8 1,074.6 0.0 9.9 564.3 2.5 3,007.6 2,676.4 3.8 5.0 319.4
         May 13.7 38.3 1,674.3 1,099.7 0.0 9.2 565.3 2.5 3,003.6 2,667.8 3.9 4.5 324.5         June 12.9 40.9 1,665.5 1,090.9 0.0 9.9 564.7 2.5 2,992.4 2,670.2 3.9 3.9 311.4
         July 12.9 40.5 1,645.6 1,063.8 0.0 10.9 571.0 2.4 2,996.0 2,671.8 4.0 3.4 314.7
         Aug 13.2 42.5 1,636.2 1,056.4 0.0 9.3 570.5 2.4 2,986.9 2,667.9 4.0 3.4 309.6         Sep 12.9 42.1 1,627.9 1,047.0 0.0 9.7 571.2 2.4 2,995.7 2,676.3 3.9 2.1 311.4
         Oct 13.3 44.3 1,630.0 1,046.2 0.0 9.7 574.1 2.4 2,992.9 2,675.4 3.9 3.1 308.4
Changes*
1994 −1.7 −13.8 + 99.1 + 73.6 + 2.7 + 1.3 + 21.3 + 0.1 + 320.5 + 240.2 + 1.2 −3.3 + 86.7
1995 + 1.0 −0.5 + 193.5 + 139.4 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 54.3 + 0.2 + 312.8 + 303.6 + 1.0 −0.8 + 2.9
1996 + 2.9 −1.3 + 257.8 + 161.8 + 0.4 − 1.1 + 95.8 + 0.8 + 336.3 + 311.7 −2.0 + 4.7 + 10.6
1997 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 262.5 + 160.7 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 102.6 −1.1 + 285.2 + 255.5 −0.1 −3.0 + 36.5
1998 −0.8 + 3.4 + 343.3 + 210.3 −3.6 + 8.6 + 130.0 −2.0 + 335.3 + 302.1 −11.9 + 2.1 + 52.1
1999 + 2.2 + 13.2 + 122.1 + 66.3 + 0.0 + 12.9 + 42.8 −0.7 + 156.1 + 136.9 + 2.6 + 0.4 + 16.7
2000 −1.1 + 5.1 + 83.6 + 21.7 −0.0 + 7.6 + 54.3 −0.3 + 100.7 + 83.7 −0.5 −0.8 + 19.0
2001 −1.4 + 5.5 + 34.6 + 20.1 −0.0 −21.3 + 35.8 −0.9 + 11.9 + 40.8 −1.6 + 1.6 + 0.3
2002 + 3.3 −10.7 + 15.0 + 33.1 + 0.0 + 2.3 −20.3 −0.2 −19.2 −18.0 −0.8 −1.1 + 1.7
2002          May −0.2 + 4.5 + 7.7 + 6.2 −0.0 − 0.2 + 1.7 −0.1 + 2.2 − 3.9 −0.2 + 0.9 + 5.4
         June −0.4 −1.6 + 12.5 + 16.9 −0.0 + 0.1 − 4.6 + 0.0 −19.0 − 8.0 + 0.1 + 0.5 −11.5
         July −0.5 −2.5 −24.9 −13.8 − + 1.4 −12.4 −0.0 + 5.1 + 6.5 −0.0 −1.0 + 0.6
         Aug −0.2 + 4.8 + 6.4 + 12.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 6.0 + 0.0 − 8.4 − 9.6 −0.0 −0.2 + 1.5
         Sep −0.2 −3.8 + 2.6 + 4.4 − + 0.8 − 2.6 −0.0 + 7.9 + 7.3 −0.1 −0.0 + 0.7
         Oct + 0.9 + 0.6 − 4.4 + 3.8 −− 0.5 − 7.7 −0.0 + 2.0 + 1.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.6
         Nov −1.0 −1.1 + 40.8 + 33.9 + 0.0 + 5.3 + 1.6 −0.0 + 6.0 − 1.3 −0.0 −0.3 + 7.6
         Dec + 4.7 + 3.8 + 2.2 + 10.2 + 0.0 − 5.4 − 2.6 + 0.0 − 6.3 + 1.6 −0.1 −0.2 − 7.6
2003          Jan −4.6 −3.2 −29.7 −25.5 −0.0 + 1.9 − 6.1 −0.1 + 7.9 + 1.9 −0.1 + 0.6 + 5.5
         Feb + 0.0 −3.3 + 6.0 + 8.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 2.8 −0.0 − 3.3 − 4.3 −0.1 −0.4 + 1.5
         Mar −0.4 + 8.5 −11.8 −14.4 −0.0 + 0.2 + 2.4 −0.0 + 3.7 − 5.0 −0.0 + 1.3 + 7.4
         Apr + 0.9 −9.8 − 7.0 − 6.5 −− 0.1 − 0.4 −0.0 + 2.1 − 1.1 −0.0 + 0.2 + 3.1
         May + 0.2 + 0.6 + 25.5 + 25.1 −0.0 − 0.7 + 1.1 −0.1 − 3.8 − 8.7 + 0.1 −0.6 + 5.3
         June −0.7 + 2.6 − 8.8 − 8.8 −0.0 + 0.6 − 0.6 −0.0 −11.1 + 2.5 + 0.0 −0.5 −13.1
         July −0.0 −0.4 −20.1 −27.2 −0.0 + 0.8 + 6.3 −0.0 + 3.8 + 1.6 + 0.1 −0.3 + 3.4
         Aug + 0.2 + 2.0 − 9.4 − 7.4 −0.0 − 1.5 − 0.5 −0.0 − 9.1 − 3.9 −0.0 −0.0 − 5.1
         Sep −0.2 −0.3 − 7.8 − 9.4 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 1.2 −0.0 + 9.6 + 8.4 −0.1 −1.3 + 2.6
         Oct + 0.3 + 2.2 + 2.1 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 2.9 + 0.0 − 2.8 − 0.9 −0.0 + 1.1 − 3.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the prior to maturity). —5Up to November 1993, included in securities (see also
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as footnote 6). —6Up to November 1993, including negotiable money market
provisional. Subsequent revisions which appear in the following Monthly paper; excluding registered debt securities. —7From 1999, no longer
Report , are not specially marked. —1Up to December 1998, domestic included in loans or deposits (see also footnote 3). —8Up to December
banknotes and coins. —2Up to December 1998, excluding loans to 1998, including loans to domestic building and loan associations. —
domestic building and loan associations. —3Up to December 1998, 9Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims
including fiduciary loans (see also footnote 7). —4Up to December 1998, (see also footnote 10). —10Including debt securities arising from the
bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from exchange of equalisation claims. —11Including liabilities arising from
rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks ’portfolios
26*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3,11,12  Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3,17 
Partici-
patinginterestsin
Memo domestic Memo Memo
item banks Sight Time Redis- item Sight Time Savings Bank item Equalisa-tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciary
loans  
7 Total 13,14  14,15  bills 16 loans  7 Total 15,18  bonds  20 loans  7   Period claims  10 enterprises posits  13 posits  19 
End of year or month*
 
75.3 81.6 59.5 1,395.2 380.2 917.9 69.2 27.9 2,788.1 513.6 1,123.6 859.4 219.1 72.4 1993
68.1 84.4 70.7 1,427.9 342.8 976.9 75.2 33.1 2,875.7 540.2 1,109.3 940.5 206.9 78.8 1994
71.3 88.1 83.2 1,539.4 363.9 1,065.1 75.5 35.0 3,021.1 579.9 1,086.1 1,046.1 227.4 81.6 1995
81.3 106.0 89.7 1,731.0 401.1 1,202.4 75.4 52.2 3,241.5 675.1 1,109.8 1,143.0 227.8 85.8 199676.0 107.6 95.1 1,902.3 427.6 1,349.1 75.6 50.0 3,341.9 689.8 1,146.9 1,182.1 236.9 86.1 199771.6 102.8 129.2 2,086.9 472.5 1,505.2 59.4 49.7 3,520.3 799.5 1,194.1 1,211.0 234.9 80.9 199837.5 58.0 75.6 1,122.0 114.4 1,007.3 0.3 29.8 1,905.3 420.4 759.6 614.7 110.7 42.1 1999
33.1 58.5 82.7 1,189.2 113.4 1,075.3 0.4 30.1 1,945.8 443.4 819.9 573.5 109.0 42.1 2000
4.0 57.0 95.9 1,204.9 123.1 1,081.6 0.3 27.2 2,034.0 526.4 827.0 574.5 106.0 43.3 2001
3.0 54.8 119.0 1,244.0 127.6 1,116.2 0.2 25.6 2,085.9 575.6 830.6 575.3 104.4 42.1 2002
3.9 56.0 95.8 1,158.7 113.4 1,045.1 0.1 26.8 2,009.4 523.8 820.6 560.1 105.0 41.9 2002          May
3.9 55.4 95.5 1,182.3 132.1 1,050.1 0.1 26.0 2,021.4 536.2 820.6 558.9 105.7 41.5          June
3.0 55.2 95.0 1,157.4 118.2 1,039.1 0.1 25.9 2,016.2 531.6 821.1 557.5 106.0 41.6          July
3.0 55.2 105.9 1,173.0 115.3 1,057.6 0.1 25.9 2,013.9 527.2 823.0 557.8 105.9 41.6          Aug 3.0 55.0 107.9 1,179.3 133.0 1,046.1 0.1 25.7 2,025.0 540.8 820.6 558.3 105.3 41.6          Sep 
3.0 55.1 111.5 1,184.4 130.0 1,054.2 0.1 25.7 2,037.6 543.1 829.8 559.7 105.0 41.6          Oct 
3.0 55.0 113.3 1,221.3 157.3 1,063.9 0.2 25.7 2,062.1 572.4 822.6 562.4 104.7 41.5          Nov 3.0 54.8 119.0 1,244.0 127.6 1,116.2 0.2 25.6 2,085.9 575.6 830.6 575.3 104.4 42.1          Dec 
3.0 54.7 118.4 1,214.6 134.8 1,079.7 0.2 25.5 2,076.4 565.2 830.3 577.4 103.5 42.1 2003          Jan 
3.0 54.8 118.0 1,224.7 134.5 1,090.1 0.2 25.6 2,084.6 571.6 830.0 579.2 103.7 41.9          Feb 
3.0 54.8 116.1 1,218.0 144.0 1,073.9 0.2 25.5 2,089.6 578.9 828.4 579.3 103.0 42.1          Mar 
3.0 54.6 116.7 1,203.4 137.4 1,065.9 0.1 25.5 2,094.8 586.3 828.2 577.9 102.4 41.8          Apr 
3.0 54.5 119.6 1,254.2 146.4 1,107.7 0.1 25.5 2,101.9 591.7 831.2 577.1 101.9 41.7          May3.0 54.4 118.1 1,252.5 150.5 1,101.8 0.1 25.4 2,109.6 608.9 822.7 576.7 101.3 41.8          June
2.0 54.2 119.1 1,207.7 123.6 1,084.0 0.1 25.3 2,102.3 595.6 829.0 576.8 100.9 41.7          July
2.0 54.6 118.8 1,198.2 120.9 1,077.2 0.1 25.7 2,111.4 598.5 834.5 578.0 100.4 41.7          Aug 2.0 54.4 115.1 1,188.2 116.0 1,072.0 0.1 25.5 2,112.3 608.8 825.4 578.3 99.9 41.5          Sep 
2.0 53.9 115.0 1,179.6 122.1 1,057.4 0.1 25.3 2,115.3 611.5 824.5 579.4 100.0 40.7          Oct 
Changes*
−6.9 + 2.6 + 11.3 + 32.4 −31.4 + 53.0 + 6.0 + 4.9 + 85.0 + 28.3 −14.1 + 81.2 −12.2 + 1.8 1994
−1.2 + 7.3 + 12.5 + 134.2 + 20.4 + 111.5 + 0.4 + 2.0 + 158.3 + 48.9 −14.2 + 105.6 + 11.7 + 6.3 1995
+ 8.0 + 3.3 + 6.5 + 175.9 + 36.6 + 137.7 −0.2 + 1.7 + 218.4 + 94.3 + 23.2 + 96.9 + 0.7 + 3.3 1996
−5.3 + 1.6 + 5.4 + 175.9 + 31.6 + 146.7 + 0.2 −2.6 + 100.5 + 13.0 + 37.1 + 39.1 + 9.2 + 2.1 1997
−4.4 −4.8 + 34.1 + 179.0 + 39.7 + 156.4 −16.2 −0.9 + 179.3 + 110.6 + 47.2 + 28.9 −2.1 −5.3 1998
−0.6 + 0.1 + 9.3 + 69.0 − 1.8 + 81.8 −11.1 −0.4 + 67.3 + 32.7 + 48.4 − 4.5 −9.3 + 0.7 1999
−0.8 + 0.5 + 7.1 + 64.7 − 2.3 + 66.9 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 41.3 + 22.3 + 61.1 −40.5 −1.7 −0.0 2000
−29.1 −1.5 + 13.3 + 9.6 + 7.4 + 2.3 −0.2 −2.9 + 88.5 + 82.3 + 8.1 + 1.1 −2.9 + 1.0 2001
−1.0 −2.1 + 24.2 + 37.9 + 1.7 + 36.3 −0.1 −1.5 + 51.7 + 48.4 + 4.1 + 0.8 −1.6 −1.1 2002
+ 0.0 −0.0 + 0.1 + 20.7 − 9.8 + 30.5 −0.0 −0.1 + 11.1 + 8.2 + 4.5 − 1.7 + 0.1 −0.1 2002          May
−0.0 −0.6 −0.3 + 21.7 + 18.6 + 3.1 −0.0 −0.8 + 11.1 + 11.9 − 0.3 − 1.2 + 0.7 −0.3          June
−1.0 −0.2 −0.5 −24.9 −13.9 −11.0 −0.0 −0.1 − 5.3 − 4.7 + 0.5 − 1.4 + 0.3 + 0.0          July
+ 0.0 −0.0 + 11.5 + 16.4 − 2.9 + 19.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 2.3 − 4.4 + 1.9 + 0.3 −0.1 −0.0          Aug 
+ 0.0 −0.2 + 1.9 + 6.4 + 17.9 −11.5 + 0.0 −0.2 + 10.9 + 13.5 − 2.6 + 0.5 −0.5 −0.0          Sep 
−0.0 + 0.1 + 3.6 + 5.1 − 3.0 + 8.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 12.8 + 2.3 + 9.5 + 1.4 −0.3 + 0.0          Oct 
+ 0.0 −0.1 + 1.7 + 37.0 + 27.3 + 9.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 24.5 + 29.3 − 7.2 + 2.7 −0.3 −0.1          Nov 
−− 0.2 + 5.8 + 22.6 −29.7 + 52.3 + 0.0 −0.1 + 23.8 + 3.3 + 8.0 + 12.8 −0.3 + 0.6          Dec 
−0.0 −0.1 −0.6 −29.4 + 7.2 −36.5 −0.0 −0.2 − 9.5 − 10.4 − 0.3 + 2.1 −0.9 −0.0 2003          Jan 
−0.0 + 0.1 −0.4 + 17.8 − 0.3 + 18.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 7.6 + 6.4 − 0.3 + 1.8 −0.4 −0.2          Feb 
+ 0.0 −0.0 −1.9 − 6.7 + 9.5 −16.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 5.1 + 7.3 − 1.6 + 0.1 −0.7 −0.1          Mar 
−0.0 −0.2 + 0.6 −14.6 − 6.6 − 8.0 −0.0 + 0.0 + 5.1 + 7.4 − 0.2 − 1.4 −0.6 −0.2          Apr 
−− 0.1 + 3.0 + 50.8 + 8.9 + 41.9 −0.0 −0.0 + 7.1 + 5.4 + 3.0 − 0.8 −0.5 −0.1          May
−0.0 −0.1 −1.5 − 1.7 + 4.2 − 5.9 −0.0 −0.1 + 7.7 + 17.2 − 8.5 − 0.4 −0.6 + 0.1          June
−1.0 −0.2 + 1.0 −44.9 −27.0 −18.0 −0.0 −0.1 − 7.1 − 13.3 + 6.5 + 0.1 −0.4 −0.0          July
−0.0 + 0.3 −0.3 − 9.5 − 2.7 − 6.8 −0.0 + 0.4 + 9.1 + 2.9 + 5.5 + 1.3 −0.5 −0.1          Aug 
+ 0.0 −0.2 −3.6 − 8.7 − 3.5 − 5.2 −0.0 −0.2 + 0.8 + 10.3 − 9.1 + 0.2 −0.5 −0.2          Sep 
−0.0 −0.4 −0.2 − 8.6 + 6.1 −14.7 + 0.0 −0.2 + 3.0 + 2.7 − 0.9 + 1.1 + 0.1 −0.3          Oct 
registered debt securities, registered money market paper and up to December 1998, including endorsement liabilities arising from
non-negotiable bearer debt securities; including subordinated liabilities. — rediscounted bills. —17Up to December 1998, including liabilities to
12Up to December 1998, excluding liabilities to domestic building and loan domestic building and loan associations and money market funds. —
associations and money market funds. —13Up to December 1998, 18Since the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999,
including time deposits with terms of less than one month. —14Including including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). —
liabilities arising from monetary policy operations with the Bundesbank. — 19Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also
15Up to December 1998, excluding time deposits with terms of less than footnote 18). —20Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer
one month. —16Own acceptances and promissory notes outstanding and, debt securities. 
27*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
IV Banks
 
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis- à-vis non-residents*
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999,  5  billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills  3 negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills  3 Negotiable
(non- money money
euro-area Medium market Memo Medium market
banknotes and paper item and paper Securities Securities
and Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins)  1 Total Total term term banks  4 banks  5 loans  6 Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month*
 
1993 1.2 533.8 498.3 360.5 137.7 0.1 24.3 11.2 262.5 184.0 48.3 135.7 0.0 63.0
1994 1.2 492.3 455.0 309.0 146.0 0.1 23.7 13.5 257.4 173.0 35.0 138.0 0.6 66.5
1995 1.2 538.4 500.8 349.7 151.1 0.1 25.6 11.8 289.2 191.1 42.1 148.9 1.7 79.7
1996 1.4 588.9 544.2 386.6 157.6 0.3 31.5 13.0 352.0 230.4 60.2 170.2 4.9 103.91997 1.5 689.1 635.3 456.1 179.2 0.2 43.1 10.5 474.8 312.7 96.2 216.5 6.0 140.31998 1.5 774.9 706.9 533.6 173.3 0.4 58.7 9.0 610.3 364.9 93.9 270.9 11.6 211.01999 0.4 427.1 383.5 279.5 104.1 0.4 43.2 4.2 396.1 235.8 52.7 183.1 7.5 152.7
2000 0.4 507.7 441.4 325.4 116.0 1.3 65.0 3.6 475.8 286.8 71.1 215.7 6.5 182.5
2001 0.4 596.1 521.7 383.7 138.0 0.8 73.6 3.5 570.3 347.2 99.7 247.5 5.2 217.92002 0.3 690.6 615.3 468.0 147.2 0.9 74.4 2.7 558.8 332.6 92.6 240.0 9.3 216.9
2002          May 0.4 613.3 538.2 395.3 142.9 1.2 74.0 2.8 589.1 359.6 111.2 248.5 6.6 222.9
         June 0.4 609.7 534.3 399.4 135.0 1.2 74.1 2.8 575.1 348.2 105.1 243.1 5.2 221.7
         July 0.4 614.2 538.2 400.0 138.3 1.5 74.5 2.8 579.1 346.2 101.4 244.9 5.8 227.0
         Aug 0.3 631.2 554.9 413.3 141.6 1.5 74.8 2.8 576.0 344.3 98.9 245.4 8.9 222.8         Sep 0.3 659.5 582.6 439.2 143.4 1.9 75.0 2.8 584.9 353.7 109.3 244.4 9.5 221.7
         Oct 0.3 672.9 595.2 450.2 145.0 1.9 75.8 2.7 585.5 355.6 108.9 246.7 9.8 220.1
         Nov 0.3 711.7 630.2 484.4 145.7 5.6 76.0 2.8 588.8 358.2 111.0 247.2 9.9 220.7         Dec 0.3 690.6 615.3 468.0 147.2 0.9 74.4 2.7 558.8 332.6 92.6 240.0 9.3 216.9
2003          Jan 0.3 695.1 620.5 471.3 149.1 0.9 73.8 2.6 559.9 333.2 91.5 241.6 10.8 215.9
         Feb 0.3 713.7 637.5 488.8 148.6 1.3 74.9 2.6 576.6 352.7 109.9 242.8 10.2 213.8         Mar 0.3 733.3 654.1 504.0 150.1 1.0 78.3 2.6 574.8 354.5 113.1 241.3 8.5 211.8
         Apr 0.3 738.6 657.2 505.9 151.2 1.7 79.8 2.6 583.3 364.8 125.1 239.7 7.4 211.1
         May 0.3 760.1 676.4 524.6 151.8 1.3 82.4 2.5 578.6 362.3 126.8 235.6 6.8 209.4         June 0.4 794.3 707.2 553.1 154.1 1.3 85.8 2.6 578.1 351.6 115.2 236.4 7.0 219.5
         July 0.3 779.1 689.4 533.9 155.5 1.4 88.3 2.6 567.4 345.3 106.5 238.8 6.8 215.3
         Aug 0.3 771.9 682.3 522.9 159.4 1.3 88.3 2.6 561.3 344.3 101.3 243.0 7.4 209.5         Sep 0.4 769.8 680.3 520.2 160.1 1.3 88.2 2.3 569.4 346.6 110.3 236.3 7.2 215.6
         Oct 0.4 757.0 664.9 502.0 162.9 0.9 91.2 1.6 576.6 348.6 106.0 242.6 8.0 219.9
Changes*
1994 + 0.0 −24.0 −27.5 −41.4 + 13.9 −0.0 + 0.1 + 3.4 − 1.6 −5.5 −12.3 + 6.7 + 0.6 + 5.1
1995 + 0.1 + 59.1 + 57.6 + 49.2 + 8.4 + 0.0 + 2.9 −1.4 + 38.3 + 21.3 + 7.8 + 13.6 + 1.1 + 16.1
1996 + 0.2 + 34.2 + 29.9 + 27.2 + 2.7 + 0.2 + 5.2 −1.1 + 58.4 + 36.2 + 17.0 + 19.2 + 3.1 + 21.4
1997 + 0.1 + 80.6 + 71.5 + 53.3 + 18.2 −0.1 + 10.4 −1.2 + 109.3 + 73.0 + 33.7 + 39.3 + 0.7 + 32.9
1998 −0.0 + 100.8 + 89.5 + 79.3 + 10.2 + 0.0 + 13.1 −1.8 + 122.0 + 42.7 −6.4 + 49.1 + 5.5 + 66.0
1999 −0.3 + 17.7 + 5.7 − 5.3 + 11.0 + 0.2 + 11.7 −0.0 + 85.8 + 42.8 + 8.4 + 34.4 + 1.3 + 41.8
2000 −0.0 + 78.9 + 56.5 + 44.6 + 11.8 + 0.9 + 21.6 −0.7 + 72.0 + 45.0 + 17.4 + 27.7 −1.2 + 28.2
2001 + 0.0 + 83.7 + 75.6 + 54.4 + 21.2 −0.5 + 8.5 −0.2 + 88.3 + 53.4 + 27.0 + 26.4 −1.5 + 36.3
2002 −0.1 + 120.3 + 118.0 + 99.4 + 18.6 + 0.1 + 2.2 −0.9 + 21.2 + 12.7 −0.4 + 13.2 + 4.6 + 3.9
2002          May + 0.0 + 28.7 + 28.2 + 28.2 −0.1 −0.1 + 0.6 −0.1 + 10.7 + 7.1 + 4.9 + 2.2 −1.0 + 4.6
         June −0.0 + 10.8 + 10.3 + 9.0 + 1.2 + 0.0 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 3.3 −2.9 −3.9 + 1.0 −1.2 + 0.8
         July −0.0 + 1.2 + 0.8 − 1.4 + 2.3 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.2 −5.3 −4.5 −0.7 + 0.5 + 4.6
         Aug −0.0 + 14.3 + 14.0 + 13.8 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.3 −0.0 − 2.0 −0.9 −2.3 + 1.3 + 3.1 −4.2
         Sep + 0.0 + 28.8 + 28.2 + 26.3 + 1.9 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 9.6 + 9.7 + 10.5 −0.8 + 0.6 −0.8
         Oct −0.0 + 13.8 + 13.0 + 11.3 + 1.7 + 0.1 + 0.8 −0.2 + 0.9 + 2.1 −0.3 + 2.5 + 0.2 −1.5
         Nov −0.0 + 40.1 + 36.2 + 35.0 + 1.2 + 3.6 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 4.7 + 3.8 + 2.4 + 1.4 + 0.1 + 0.8
         Dec + 0.0 −14.1 − 8.2 −11.3 + 3.1 −4.7 −1.2 −0.1 −20.8 −18.2 −16.7 −1.6 −0.4 −2.1
2003          Jan −0.1 + 9.2 + 9.6 + 6.6 + 3.0 −0.0 −0.4 −0.1 + 6.8 + 4.9 −0.0 + 4.9 + 1.6 + 0.2
         Feb + 0.0 + 18.9 + 17.3 + 17.5 −0.1 + 0.5 + 1.1 −0.0 + 16.8 + 19.6 + 18.3 + 1.3 −0.7 −2.2
         Mar + 0.0 + 21.4 + 18.3 + 16.3 + 2.0 −0.4 + 3.5 −0.0 + 0.3 + 3.5 + 3.6 −0.2 −1.6 −1.5
         Apr + 0.0 + 8.9 + 6.4 + 4.5 + 2.0 + 0.8 + 1.7 −0.0 + 12.8 + 13.7 + 12.8 + 0.9 −1.1 + 0.2
         May + 0.0 + 30.1 + 28.0 + 24.9 + 3.2 −0.4 + 2.5 −0.0 + 5.6 + 6.0 + 3.8 + 2.3 −0.4 −0.0
         June + 0.1 + 29.4 + 26.3 + 25.1 + 1.2 −0.0 + 3.2 + 0.0 − 6.2 −14.9 −12.6 −2.3 + 0.1 + 8.6
         July −0.1 −16.5 −19.1 −20.3 + 1.2 + 0.2 + 2.4 −0.0 −12.3 −7.5 −9.0 + 1.5 −0.3 −4.6
         Aug + 0.0 −13.2 −12.8 −15.3 + 2.5 −0.1 −0.3 + 0.0 −13.0 −6.1 −6.4 + 0.2 + 0.5 −7.3
         Sep + 0.0 + 5.7 + 5.4 + 2.9 + 2.5 −0.0 + 0.4 −0.3 + 19.1 + 10.6 + 10.8 −0.2 + 0.0 + 8.5
         Oct −0.0 −14.4 −17.0 −18.8 + 1.8 −0.4 + 3.0 −0.0 + 3.1 −1.9 −4.4 + 2.5 + 0.8 + 4.2
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the banknotes and coins. —2Up to December 1998, including fiduciary loans
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as (see also footnote 6). —3Up to December 1998, bill-based lending (bill
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from rediscounted bills and bills
Report , are not specially marked. —1Up to December 1998, foreign sent for collection from the banks ’portfolios prior to maturity). —
28*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
 Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bank
interests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memo
item and and item and item
Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciaryloans  
6 prises  7 Total Total  9 term  9 term loans  6 Total Total  9 term  9 term loans  6   Period deposits  8 deposits  8 
End of year or month*
 
15.5 30.1 328.1 82.9 236.0 122.5 113.5 9.2 162.8 16.9 139.2 39.1 100.1 6.7 1993
17.3 34.0 402.3 111.6 283.7 150.8 132.9 7.1 181.5 20.6 155.3 41.7 113.6 5.6 1994
16.7 38.8 463.7 116.9 339.7 191.6 148.2 7.0 224.4 22.1 198.0 45.3 152.6 4.4 1995
12.7 45.8 486.5 147.1 335.7 172.0 163.7 3.8 273.5 34.3 237.2 50.0 187.2 2.1 199615.7 54.7 670.3 226.0 440.2 254.3 185.9 4.0 333.9 43.5 285.7 63.0 222.7 4.8 199722.9 62.9 875.7 309.5 562.5 359.1 203.4 3.7 390.3 51.3 329.6 71.8 257.8 9.5 199813.6 33.9 483.6 65.6 418.0 332.3 85.6 2.0 284.4 23.8 260.6 64.9 195.7 5.8 1999
13.9 47.4 586.0 113.7 472.2 382.9 89.3 1.7 314.9 35.4 279.5 62.5 217.0 5.6 2000
13.8 47.6 622.7 91.9 530.8 434.5 96.3 1.4 350.6 34.0 316.6 97.6 219.0 5.3 200115.6 44.8 614.2 101.6 512.7 410.4 102.3 1.1 319.2 33.5 285.7 87.0 198.7 4.5 2002
14.1 47.4 646.2 119.3 526.9 428.8 98.1 1.2 366.0 34.9 331.1 112.7 218.4 4.7 2002          May
13.1 47.0 608.3 133.9 474.4 376.0 98.4 1.1 344.2 38.2 306.0 93.0 213.0 4.5          June
13.4 47.2 618.3 121.3 497.1 395.4 101.6 1.1 347.9 38.6 309.3 95.8 213.5 4.6          July
13.4 47.0 615.5 91.8 523.7 419.2 104.5 1.1 337.2 34.8 302.5 100.9 201.6 4.5          Aug 13.4 47.0 626.2 132.7 493.5 389.3 104.2 1.1 344.6 41.2 303.4 103.2 200.2 4.6          Sep 
14.2 45.7 633.0 116.1 516.9 412.9 104.1 1.1 342.4 38.2 304.2 99.4 204.8 4.6          Oct 
14.7 45.8 648.3 125.2 523.1 420.1 103.0 1.1 346.8 42.6 304.2 101.1 203.0 4.7          Nov 15.6 44.8 614.2 101.6 512.7 410.4 102.3 1.1 319.2 33.5 285.7 87.0 198.7 4.5          Dec 
15.4 42.7 623.1 112.6 510.5 406.1 104.4 1.0 324.7 35.7 289.1 95.4 193.7 4.4 2003          Jan 
15.4 42.4 616.4 117.7 498.7 392.8 105.9 1.0 330.8 33.2 297.6 107.5 190.1 4.3          Feb 
15.4 43.3 621.7 131.7 490.0 384.4 105.6 1.0 339.8 43.3 296.5 109.2 187.3 4.2          Mar 
15.1 43.2 634.6 141.6 493.0 387.9 105.1 1.0 333.3 39.3 294.0 110.3 183.7 4.0          Apr 
14.7 41.7 620.9 128.0 492.9 386.0 106.9 1.0 332.0 43.6 288.4 109.8 178.7 3.8          May15.1 42.2 622.8 143.1 479.7 372.8 106.9 1.0 324.6 43.8 280.8 99.8 180.9 3.9          June
15.2 43.1 617.2 123.6 493.7 384.1 109.6 0.9 328.0 40.3 287.7 108.5 179.2 3.9          July
15.3 43.1 601.1 108.0 493.1 386.3 106.8 0.3 324.7 39.5 285.2 103.5 181.7 4.7          Aug 15.0 43.7 607.5 144.2 463.3 361.2 102.1 0.3 326.6 40.0 286.6 109.5 177.1 6.8          Sep 
11.7 43.0 597.1 129.1 468.0 360.1 107.9 0.3 332.0 38.2 293.8 116.4 177.5 3.4          Oct 
Changes*
−1.7 + 4.2 + 85.6 + 31.3 + 56.0 + 33.9 + 22.1 −1.7 + 23.1 + 3.9 + 19.8 + 3.4 + 16.4 −0.7 1994
−0.2 + 5.2 + 71.0 + 7.9 + 64.6 + 45.9 + 18.7 −1.5 + 47.8 + 2.2 + 46.5 + 4.1 + 42.4 −0.9 1995
−2.3 + 5.9 + 11.3 + 27.1 − 13.9 − 26.6 + 12.7 −1.9 + 44.7 + 11.7 + 35.0 + 3.7 + 31.3 −2.0 1996
+ 2.7 + 7.9 + 157.3 + 67.7 + 89.5 + 71.8 + 17.7 + 0.1 + 51.0 + 5.4 + 43.3 + 11.4 + 31.9 + 2.3 1997
+ 7.7 + 8.8 + 215.6 + 87.7 + 128.1 + 108.1 + 20.0 −0.3 + 64.7 + 10.4 + 48.9 + 10.3 + 38.6 + 5.5 1998
+ 1.1 + 10.9 + 37.4 −9.2 + 46.6 + 47.6 −1.0 −0.0 + 61.0 + 7.2 + 53.8 + 15.9 + 37.9 + 0.1 1999
−0.2 + 12.8 + 90.0 + 47.0 + 43.0 + 42.9 + 0.1 −0.4 + 24.4 + 11.1 + 13.3 −2.9 + 16.2 −0.8 2000
−0.5 − 0.5 + 23.5 −23.6 + 47.0 + 42.4 + 4.6 −0.4 + 30.8 −1.8 + 32.6 + 33.3 −0.7 −0.6 2001
+ 1.7 + 1.6 + 22.7 + 14.6 + 8.1 − 1.3 + 9.4 −0.3 + 4.6 + 0.8 + 3.8 −4.6 + 8.4 −0.9 2002
−0.3 + 1.1 + 7.3 −2.8 + 10.1 + 9.1 + 1.0 −0.0 + 5.4 −0.8 + 6.2 + 5.2 + 1.0 −0.2 2002          May
−1.0 + 0.3 −27.3 + 16.1 − 43.4 − 44.4 + 1.0 −0.1 −14.5 + 3.7 −18.2 −17.6 −0.6 −0.3          June
+ 0.2 − 0.1 + 5.5 −13.6 + 19.0 + 16.3 + 2.7 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 2.1 −1.6 + 0.1          July
−0.0 − 0.2 − 1.5 −29.2 + 27.7 + 24.8 + 3.0 −0.0 + 4.7 −3.8 + 8.5 + 5.3 + 3.2 −0.0          Aug 
+ 0.1 + 0.0 + 11.3 + 40.9 − 29.6 − 29.6 −0.1 + 0.0 + 8.1 + 6.5 + 1.6 + 2.9 −1.3 + 0.1          Sep 
+ 0.7 + 0.1 + 7.2 −16.6 + 23.7 + 23.8 −0.1 −0.0 −1.9 −3.0 + 1.1 −3.8 + 4.8 −0.0          Oct 
+ 0.5 + 0.3 + 16.8 + 9.4 + 7.4 + 8.4 −0.9 −0.0 + 5.5 + 4.5 + 1.0 + 2.0 −1.0 + 0.1          Nov 
+ 0.9 − 0.4 −25.4 −22.0 − 3.4 − 3.8 + 0.5 −0.0 −21.6 −8.6 −13.0 −13.0 −0.1 −0.2          Dec 
−0.2 − 1.7 + 14.4 + 11.7 + 2.7 − 0.1 + 2.8 −0.1 + 9.1 + 2.5 + 6.6 + 9.2 −2.5 −0.1 2003          Jan 
+ 0.1 − 0.3 − 6.7 + 5.4 − 12.0 − 13.5 + 1.5 −0.0 + 6.6 −2.5 + 9.2 + 12.2 −3.1 −0.1          Feb 
−0.1 + 1.0 + 7.4 + 14.3 − 6.9 − 7.0 + 0.0 −0.0 + 10.3 + 10.2 + 0.1 + 2.0 −1.9 −0.1          Mar 
−0.3 + 0.1 + 17.1 + 10.6 + 6.5 + 6.4 + 0.2 + 0.0 −4.0 −3.8 −0.1 + 1.8 −1.9 −0.3          Apr 
−0.4 − 0.7 − 4.3 −11.8 + 7.5 + 4.2 + 3.3 −0.1 + 5.0 + 4.7 + 0.2 + 0.9 −0.7 −0.2          May
+ 0.4 + 0.1 − 3.0 + 14.1 − 17.1 − 16.2 −0.8 + 0.0 −10.9 + 0.0 −10.9 −10.6 −0.3 + 0.2          June
+ 0.0 + 0.3 − 6.9 −19.8 + 12.8 + 10.4 + 2.4 −0.1 + 2.7 −3.6 + 6.4 + 8.5 −2.1 −0.0          July
+ 0.2 − 0.5 −22.3 −16.7 − 5.6 − 1.7 −3.9 −0.0 −7.3 −1.1 −6.2 −5.9 −0.2 + 0.1          Aug 
−0.3 + 1.2 + 16.1 + 37.6 − 21.5 − 18.4 −3.1 −0.0 + 7.8 + 1.1 + 6.7 + 7.5 −0.8 + 2.1          Sep 
+ 0.0 − 0.8 −11.8 −15.4 + 3.6 − 1.5 + 5.1 − + 1.4 −1.8 + 3.2 + 6.7 −3.6 + 0.0          Oct 
4Up to November 1993, included in securities (see also footnote 5). —5Up capital supplied to branches abroad. —8Up to December 1998, including
to November 1993, including negotiable money market paper; excluding time deposits with terms of less than one month. —9Up to December 1998,
registered debt securities. —6From 1999, no longer included in loans and excluding time deposits with terms of less than one month. 
deposits (see also footnote 2). —7Up to December 1998, including working
29*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
IV Banks
 
5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)*
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999,  5  billion
Lending to domestic Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total  1,2 
      to public authorities to enter- to enterprises and individuals  1 
 
including excluding Negoti-
negotiable money ablemarket paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total paper Total Loans bills  
5 Total Total bills 3,4 
End of year or month*
 
1993 3,826.4 3,417.8 563.2 544.2 540.8 3.4 19.0 16.8 2.2 3,263.2 2,441.8
1994 4,137.2 3,633.1 583.5 549.1 548.6 0.4 34.4 32.7 1.8 3,553.7 2,661.9
1995 4,436.9 3,936.9 615.2 584.0 583.3 0.7 31.3 30.5 0.8 3,821.7 2,785.5
1996 4,773.1 4,248.7 662.2 617.2 616.2 1.0 45.1 40.2 4.9 4,110.8 3,007.21997 5,058.4 4,506.2 667.8 625.8 624.8 1.0 41.9 40.1 1.9 4,390.6 3,223.41998 5,379.8 4,775.4 704.3 661.3 660.8 0.5 43.0 38.5 4.5 4,675.5 3,482.41999 2,904.5 2,576.5 355.3 328.9 328.7 0.2 26.4 23.6 2.8 2,549.2 1,943.6
2000 3,003.7 2,663.7 371.2 348.2 347.7 0.5 22.9 21.2 1.7 2,632.5 2,038.6
2001 3,014.1 2,704.2 387.9 356.7 355.2 1.5 31.2 28.2 2.9 2,626.2 2,070.22002 2,997.2 2,689.1 365.4 331.9 331.0 1.0 33.5 31.1 2.4 2,631.8 2,079.7
2002          May 3,005.7 2,687.0 373.6 344.9 344.0 0.9 28.6 24.9 3.7 2,632.2 2,072.7
         June 2,990.8 2,683.1 370.7 343.1 342.2 0.9 27.6 23.4 4.2 2,620.1 2,066.7
         July 2,995.7 2,689.5 370.4 335.5 334.1 1.5 34.9 32.2 2.7 2,625.3 2,068.5
         Aug 2,987.3 2,679.9 356.0 331.2 329.9 1.2 24.8 22.1 2.7 2,631.4 2,073.3         Sep 2,995.5 2,687.4 367.4 343.2 341.6 1.5 24.2 21.8 2.4 2,628.2 2,068.8
         Oct 2,997.6 2,688.8 364.2 335.7 334.2 1.5 28.5 26.1 2.4 2,633.4 2,076.6
         Nov 3,003.5 2,687.5 365.8 332.5 330.9 1.7 33.3 31.4 1.9 2,637.7 2,079.9         Dec 2,997.2 2,689.1 365.4 331.9 331.0 1.0 33.5 31.1 2.4 2,631.8 2,079.7
2003          Jan 3,005.1 2,690.8 371.1 329.7 328.5 1.2 41.4 38.6 2.8 2,634.0 2,076.5
         Feb 3,001.9 2,686.4 364.4 329.3 328.1 1.2 35.1 32.7 2.4 2,637.4 2,077.5         Mar 3,005.5 2,681.3 369.2 332.5 330.4 2.2 36.7 34.0 2.7 2,636.3 2,071.6
         Apr 3,007.6 2,680.2 366.3 326.5 324.2 2.2 39.8 37.0 2.8 2,641.3 2,079.0
         May 3,003.6 2,671.7 356.2 321.4 319.1 2.3 34.7 32.6 2.2 2,647.4 2,080.5         June 2,992.4 2,674.1 359.6 328.9 326.9 2.0 30.7 28.8 1.9 2,632.8 2,077.4
         July 2,996.0 2,675.8 357.5 315.5 314.2 1.3 42.0 39.8 2.2 2,638.6 2,081.8
         Aug 2,986.9 2,671.9 346.7 308.2 306.8 1.4 38.5 36.5 2.0 2,640.2 2,090.5         Sep 2,995.7 2,680.2 356.7 323.8 322.9 0.9 32.9 31.7 1.2 2,639.0 2,088.3
         Oct 2,992.9 2,679.3 353.9 317.3 316.3 1.0 36.6 34.5 2.1 2,639.0 2,087.5
Changes*
1994 + 320.5 + 244.0 + 13.2 + 7.0 + 9.9 −2.9 + 6.2 + 6.6 −0.4 + 307.2 + 249.1
1995 + 312.8 + 311.9 + 35.9 + 37.9 + 37.7 + 0.2 − 1.9 − 1.0 −1.0 + 276.9 + 185.1
1996 + 336.3 + 312.9 + 44.3 + 32.6 + 32.2 + 0.4 + 11.7 + 7.4 + 4.3 + 292.0 + 221.5
1997 + 285.2 + 256.9 + 2.7 + 5.9 + 5.9 + 0.0 − 3.2 − 0.1 −3.0 + 282.5 + 219.9
1998 + 335.3 + 285.5 + 51.7 + 50.6 + 51.2 −0.6 + 1.1 − 1.6 + 2.7 + 283.6 + 258.3
1999 + 156.1 + 139.5 + 9.6 + 6.3 + 6.4 −0.0 + 3.3 + 2.9 + 0.4 + 146.4 + 146.4
2000 + 100.7 + 83.2 + 14.5 + 18.1 + 17.8 + 0.3 − 3.6 − 2.5 −1.1 + 86.1 + 93.8
2001 + 11.9 + 39.2 + 15.3 + 7.0 + 5.9 + 1.0 + 8.4 + 7.8 + 0.6 − 3.4 + 32.0
2002 − 19.2 − 18.8 −23.4 −25.7 −25.2 −0.5 + 2.3 + 2.9 −0.6 + 4.3 + 7.6
2002          May + 2.2 − 4.1 − 5.1 − 2.9 − 2.8 −0.2 − 2.2 − 3.3 + 1.1 + 7.4 + 3.7
         June − 19.0 − 8.0 − 3.3 − 2.3 − 2.3 + 0.0 − 1.0 − 1.5 + 0.5 − 15.6 − 9.6
         July + 5.1 + 6.5 − 0.3 − 7.6 − 8.1 + 0.5 + 7.3 + 8.8 −1.5 + 5.5 + 2.1
         Aug − 8.4 − 9.6 −14.4 − 4.4 − 4.1 −0.2 −10.0 −10.1 + 0.0 + 6.1 + 4.0
         Sep + 7.9 + 7.2 + 11.2 + 11.8 + 11.5 + 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.3 −0.3 − 3.3 − 3.9
         Oct + 2.0 + 1.4 − 3.2 − 7.5 − 7.5 −0.0 + 4.3 + 4.3 + 0.0 + 5.2 + 7.7
         Nov + 6.0 − 1.3 + 1.4 − 3.4 − 3.5 + 0.1 + 4.8 + 5.2 −0.5 + 4.5 + 3.5
         Dec − 6.3 + 1.6 − 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.1 −0.7 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.5 − 5.9 − 0.3
2003          Jan + 7.9 + 1.7 + 5.7 − 2.2 − 2.4 + 0.2 + 7.9 + 7.5 + 0.4 + 2.2 − 3.6
         Feb − 3.3 − 4.4 − 6.7 − 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 6.3 − 5.9 −0.4 + 3.5 + 1.0
         Mar + 3.7 − 5.1 + 4.8 + 3.2 + 2.2 + 1.0 + 1.6 + 1.3 + 0.3 − 1.2 − 5.9
         Apr + 2.1 − 1.1 − 3.0 − 6.0 − 6.1 + 0.1 + 3.1 + 3.0 + 0.1 + 5.1 + 7.2
         May − 3.8 − 8.5 −10.1 − 5.0 − 5.1 + 0.1 − 5.1 − 4.5 −0.6 + 6.3 + 1.8
         June − 11.1 + 2.5 + 3.4 + 7.5 + 7.8 −0.3 − 4.1 − 3.8 −0.2 − 14.6 − 3.1
         July + 3.8 + 1.7 − 1.9 −13.2 −12.7 −0.5 + 11.3 + 11.0 + 0.2 + 5.7 + 4.3
         Aug − 9.1 − 4.0 −10.7 − 7.3 − 7.4 + 0.1 − 3.4 − 3.3 −0.1 + 1.6 + 8.7
         Sep + 9.6 + 8.3 + 10.0 + 15.6 + 16.1 −0.5 − 5.6 − 4.8 −0.9 − 0.4 − 2.2
         Oct − 2.8 − 0.9 − 2.8 − 6.5 − 6.6 + 0.1 + 3.7 + 2.7 + 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.8
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the including fiduciary loans (see also footnote 9). —3Up to December 1998,
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks ’portfolios
Report , are not specially marked. —1Up to December 1998, including loans prior to maturity). —4From 1999, including small amounts of medium-term
to domestic building and loan associations. —2Up to December 1998, series of bills. —5From December 1993, including other negotiable
30*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
IV Banks
 
   
 
lending  2,6 
prises and individuals  1,2 to public authorities  2 
Loans Loans
Memo Memo
item Equal- item
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term  7 term  8 loans  9 Total term  7 term  8 loans  9   Period Securities  6 ities 6,10 claims  11 
End of year or month*
 
2,241.5 253.9 1,987.5 134.2 66.1 821.4 537.1 36.8 500.3 193.5 75.3 15.5 1993
2,390.4 228.3 2,162.0 203.2 68.3 891.8 577.0 34.5 542.5 230.5 68.1 16.1 1994
2,522.0 214.1 2,307.9 192.9 70.6 1,036.2 713.0 74.5 638.4 234.4 71.3 17.5 1995
2,713.3 215.8 2,497.5 205.9 88.0 1,103.6 773.0 69.5 703.6 231.3 81.3 18.0 19962,900.0 216.2 2,683.8 234.1 89.3 1,167.2 833.8 53.0 780.8 239.2 76.0 18.3 19973,104.5 206.8 2,897.8 292.4 85.4 1,193.2 868.8 33.1 835.7 235.4 71.6 17.3 19981,764.8 182.5 1,582.3 178.9 49.2 605.6 459.5 30.9 428.6 108.6 37.5 8.7 1999
1,838.9 192.8 1,646.0 199.7 50.1 593.9 455.9 30.4 425.5 104.9 33.1 8.4 2000
1,880.5 191.1 1,689.4 189.7 48.9 556.0 440.3 25.6 414.6 111.8 4.0 8.0 20011,909.8 193.5 1,716.3 169.9 47.3 552.1 417.1 27.4 389.7 132.0 3.0 7.5 2002
1,888.0 189.9 1,698.1 184.7 48.1 559.5 430.1 26.3 403.8 125.5 3.9 7.9 2002          May
1,891.0 191.2 1,699.9 175.6 47.6 553.4 426.4 24.4 402.0 123.0 3.9 7.8          June
1,897.5 191.7 1,705.8 171.0 47.5 556.8 425.8 24.5 401.3 128.0 3.0 7.7          July
1,901.6 192.3 1,709.3 171.6 47.5 558.1 426.2 24.7 401.5 128.9 3.0 7.7          Aug 1,900.6 192.1 1,708.6 168.2 47.3 559.3 423.3 24.6 398.7 133.1 3.0 7.7          Sep 
1,906.5 193.8 1,712.6 170.1 47.5 556.8 422.1 24.7 397.4 131.8 3.0 7.6          Oct 
1,907.6 192.5 1,715.1 172.4 47.3 557.8 417.7 25.5 392.2 137.1 3.0 7.7          Nov 1,909.8 193.5 1,716.3 169.9 47.3 552.1 417.1 27.4 389.7 132.0 3.0 7.5          Dec 
1,909.4 194.8 1,714.6 167.1 47.0 557.4 414.2 30.0 384.2 140.3 3.0 7.7 2003          Jan 
1,911.1 194.0 1,717.1 166.5 47.1 559.9 414.4 31.5 382.9 142.5 3.0 7.7          Feb 
1,907.1 193.1 1,714.0 164.5 47.2 564.6 409.8 29.9 379.8 151.9 3.0 7.6          Mar 
1,910.3 193.3 1,717.0 168.6 47.0 562.4 408.6 30.9 377.6 150.8 3.0 7.5          Apr 
1,912.9 193.2 1,719.7 167.6 47.0 566.9 407.1 31.5 375.5 156.9 3.0 7.5          May1,912.8 193.5 1,719.3 164.6 47.0 555.4 405.7 31.5 374.2 146.8 3.0 7.4          June
1,916.9 193.9 1,723.0 164.9 46.9 556.8 404.9 31.3 373.6 149.8 2.0 7.3          July
1,924.6 195.5 1,729.1 165.9 47.3 549.7 403.9 32.9 371.1 143.7 2.0 7.2          Aug 1,922.2 195.0 1,727.2 166.1 47.2 550.6 403.3 33.7 369.6 145.3 2.0 7.2          Sep 
1,926.6 195.5 1,731.1 160.9 46.8 551.4 402.0 32.5 369.4 147.5 2.0 7.2          Oct 
Changes*
+ 198.7 −29.2 + 227.9 + 48.5 + 1.9 + 58.2 + 26.2 − 2.4 + 28.5 + 38.3 − 6.9 + 0.7 1994
+ 176.0 − 1.9 + 177.9 + 3.3 + 5.9 + 91.8 + 91.8 + 15.3 + 76.6 − 0.4 − 1.2 + 1.5 1995
+ 204.4 + 1.6 + 202.8 + 14.0 + 3.1 + 70.4 + 65.7 − 5.5 + 71.2 − 3.3 + 8.0 + 0.1 1996
+ 189.0 + 0.3 + 188.7 + 29.5 + 1.4 + 62.6 + 60.6 −18.0 + 78.6 + 7.0 − 5.3 + 0.2 1997
+ 205.7 − 8.9 + 214.6 + 56.5 −3.9 + 25.3 + 35.0 −20.0 + 55.0 − 4.4 − 4.4 −0.9 1998
+ 121.8 + 25.1 + 96.8 + 24.6 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 8.5 + 6.2 + 2.3 − 7.8 − 0.6 −0.1 1999
+ 71.8 + 6.9 + 64.9 + 22.1 + 0.8 − 7.7 − 3.8 − 0.4 − 3.5 − 3.1 − 0.8 −0.3 2000
+ 41.9 − 2.8 + 44.7 − 9.8 −1.2 − 35.4 −16.5 − 5.5 −10.9 + 10.1 −29.1 −0.4 2001
+ 26.6 − 2.1 + 28.7 −19.0 −1.6 − 3.4 −23.1 + 1.0 −24.1 + 20.7 − 1.0 −0.5 2002
+ 3.8 + 0.2 + 3.6 − 0.0 −0.0 + 3.6 − 1.9 + 0.0 − 1.9 + 5.5 + 0.0 −0.0 2002          May
− 0.5 − 1.9 + 1.4 − 9.0 −0.5 − 6.1 − 3.6 − 1.8 − 1.8 − 2.4 − 0.0 −0.1          June
+ 6.4 + 0.5 + 5.9 − 4.4 −0.1 + 3.4 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.7 + 5.0 − 1.0 −0.1          July
+ 4.1 + 0.6 + 3.5 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 2.1 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 1.6 + 0.0 −0.0          Aug 
− 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.7 − 2.8 −0.2 + 0.6 − 2.9 − 0.1 − 2.8 + 3.5 + 0.0 −0.0          Sep 
+ 5.8 + 1.8 + 4.1 + 1.9 + 0.2 − 2.5 − 1.2 + 0.1 − 1.3 − 1.3 − 0.0 −0.0          Oct 
+ 1.3 − 2.8 + 4.1 + 2.3 −0.1 + 1.0 − 4.3 + 0.0 − 4.4 + 5.4 + 0.0 + 0.0          Nov 
+ 2.2 + 1.0 + 1.3 − 2.5 −0.0 − 5.7 − 0.6 + 1.9 − 2.5 − 5.1 −− 0.1          Dec 
− 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 3.2 −0.2 + 5.8 − 2.9 + 0.3 − 3.3 + 8.7 − 0.0 + 0.2 2003          Jan 
+ 1.7 − 0.7 + 2.4 − 0.7 + 0.1 + 2.4 + 0.2 + 1.5 − 1.3 + 2.2 − 0.0 + 0.0          Feb 
− 4.0 − 0.9 − 3.0 − 2.0 + 0.1 + 4.8 − 4.6 − 1.5 − 3.1 + 9.4 + 0.0 −0.1          Mar 
+ 3.2 + 0.2 + 3.0 + 4.0 −0.2 − 2.1 − 1.2 + 1.0 − 2.2 − 0.9 − 0.0 −0.0          Apr 
+ 2.6 − 0.1 + 2.7 − 0.8 −0.1 + 4.6 − 1.5 + 0.6 − 2.1 + 6.1 −− 0.0          May
− 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.4 − 3.0 + 0.0 − 11.5 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 1.4 −10.1 − 0.0 −0.1          June
+ 4.1 + 0.4 + 3.7 + 0.3 −0.1 + 1.4 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 3.1 − 1.0 −0.1          July
+ 7.8 + 1.6 + 6.1 + 1.0 + 0.4 − 7.1 − 1.0 + 1.5 − 2.5 − 6.1 − 0.0 −0.1          Aug 
− 2.4 − 0.5 − 1.9 + 0.2 −0.2 + 1.8 − 0.6 + 0.9 − 1.5 + 2.4 + 0.0 −0.0          Sep 
+ 4.3 + 0.5 + 3.8 − 5.1 −0.4 + 0.8 − 1.4 − 1.2 − 0.1 + 2.2 − 0.0 −0.0          Oct 
money market paper; excluding mobilisation and liquidity paper. —6From notice of four years and more; from 1999, of more than five years. —9From
1999, breakdown of securities by medium and long-term lending no longer 1999, no longer included in lending (see also footnote 2). —10Excluding
possible. —7Up to December 1998, maturity or period of notice of more debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims (see also
than one year to less than four years; from 1999, more than one year up to footnote 11). —11Including debt securities arising from the exchange of
and including five years. —8Up to December 1998, maturity or period of equalisation claims. 
31*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
IV Banks
 
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and resident individuals, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
 
 5  billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and resident individuals (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding sec urities portfolios)  1 
of which  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
 
Financing
Mortgage institu-
loans tions
secured Whole- Agri- Electricity, Transport, (excluding
by gas and sale culture, storage MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which water and forestry and insurance
loans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- supply, Construc- retail and commu- enter-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing mining  2 tion trade  3 fishing nication prises
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2000 2,187.3 955.2 1,030.8 737.6 293.2 1,267.8 344.1 174.9 35.9 68.2 173.2 31.4 49.1 34.2
2001 2,236.3 981.4 1,053.9 757.7 296.2 1,295.6 346.1 174.3 36.7 67.9 172.9 31.3 50.0 39.0
2002          Sep 2,242.7 1,000.0 1,064.3 770.7 293.6 1,286.1 344.5 168.2 38.3 66.9 165.7 32.5 50.5 42.1
         Dec 2,241.2 1,008.9 1,068.7 776.3 292.4 1,277.3 340.1 161.5 37.4 64.6 162.6 31.3 51.3 39.5
2003          Mar 2,237.9 1,012.5 1,067.0 782.0 285.0 1,273.2 338.4 158.5 37.3 63.5 159.3 32.0 51.1 50.3
         June 2,240.1 1,011.4 1,070.5 782.5 288.0 1,267.1 338.0 157.8 37.0 62.9 156.9 32.5 52.2 48.7         Sep 2,245.6 1,106.2 1,077.5 845.7 231.8 1,262.1 338.1 154.4 36.2 61.7 153.3 32.9 53.6 53.9
 Short-term lending
2000 348.4 − 15.9 − 15.9 294.6 10.7 61.5 6.2 17.9 62.2 4.2 10.1 10.5
2001 355.8 − 15.9 − 15.9 304.1 10.6 59.6 5.5 17.8 63.5 4.1 9.3 14.2
2002          Sep 342.1 − 14.1 − 14.1 291.2 9.1 56.6 6.1 17.5 59.3 4.8 8.8 17.0
         Dec 331.4 − 14.5 − 14.5 281.1 9.3 52.0 5.1 15.9 58.7 4.2 8.4 13.6
2003          Mar 330.7 − 13.7 − 13.7 282.8 8.8 50.6 4.8 16.0 57.4 4.5 8.0 24.2
         June 327.3 − 14.4 − 14.4 278.8 9.3 51.1 4.5 15.9 56.5 4.7 7.9 22.3
         Sep 323.3 − 14.0 − 14.0 274.7 8.7 48.7 4.0 15.1 54.6 4.7 7.8 26.3
 Medium-term lending
2000 192.8 − 39.3 − 39.3 120.1 12.8 17.6 1.5 7.0 13.3 3.4 6.9 9.1
2001 191.1 − 37.1 − 37.1 120.1 12.0 18.5 1.9 6.5 13.4 3.2 7.2 7.7
2002          Sep 192.1 − 35.7 − 35.7 121.0 11.6 18.0 2.4 6.6 13.3 3.3 8.1 6.7
         Dec 193.5 − 36.1 − 36.1 121.8 11.3 17.9 2.0 6.5 13.5 3.3 8.5 6.8
2003          Mar 193.1 − 35.9 − 35.9 121.3 11.4 17.7 2.2 6.3 13.1 3.3 9.1 6.3
         June 193.5 − 37.4 − 37.4 121.0 11.9 17.6 2.5 6.0 12.7 3.4 9.9 6.4
         Sep 195.0 − 38.0 − 38.0 121.4 12.0 17.6 2.2 6.1 12.6 3.4 10.5 6.4
 Long-term lending
2000 1,646.0 955.2 975.5 737.6 238.0 853.1 320.6 95.9 28.2 43.4 97.7 23.9 32.1 14.62001 1,689.4 981.4 1,000.9 757.7 243.2 871.4 323.5 96.2 29.4 43.7 96.1 24.0 33.5 17.1
2002          Sep 1,708.6 1,000.0 1,014.5 770.7 243.8 873.9 323.8 93.6 29.9 42.8 93.0 24.4 33.5 18.4
         Dec 1,716.3 1,008.9 1,018.1 776.3 241.9 874.4 319.4 91.5 30.3 42.2 90.3 23.8 34.4 19.0
2003          Mar 1,714.0 1,012.5 1,017.3 782.0 235.3 869.1 318.2 90.2 30.4 41.2 88.8 24.2 34.1 19.8
         June 1,719.3 1,011.4 1,018.7 782.5 236.2 867.2 316.7 89.1 30.0 41.0 87.6 24.4 34.4 20.1         Sep 1,727.2 1,106.2 1,025.5 845.7 179.8 866.1 317.4 88.1 30.0 40.6 86.1 24.7 35.2 21.2
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2002          Q3 + 8.8 + 4.8 + 5.7 + 3.6 + 2.1 − 1.2 − 0.6 − 3.4 − 1.1 − 1.4 − 1.4 + 0.5 − 1.1 + 5.6
         Q4 − 1.5 + 4.3 + 6.3 + 3.0 + 3.3 − 8.7 − 0.9 − 6.2 − 0.9 − 2.3 − 1.4 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 2.7
2003          Q1 − 3.3 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.3 − 4.2 − 1.8 − 2.9 − 0.1 − 1.1 − 3.5 + 0.7 − 0.2 + 10.3
         Q2 + 2.2 + 0.7 + 5.8 + 2.7 + 3.1 − 6.1 − 1.1 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 2.3 + 0.5 + 1.0 − 1.6
         Q3 + 5.4 + 4.5 + 7.9 + 5.8 + 2.1 − 4.9 − 0.8 − 3.5 − 0.8 − 1.1 − 3.4 + 0.4 + 1.4 + 5.1
 Short-term lending
2002          Q3 − 0.8 −− 0.2 −− 0.2 − 2.2 − 0.3 − 2.1 − 1.2 − 0.9 − 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.8 + 5.0
         Q4 −10.8 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 −10.2 + 0.2 − 4.6 − 1.0 − 1.6 − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 3.4
2003          Q1 − 0.7 −− 0.9 −− 0.9 + 1.6 − 0.6 − 1.5 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.3 − 0.4 + 10.6
         Q2 − 3.4 − + 0.4 − + 0.4 − 4.0 + 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 2.0
         Q3 − 4.0 −− 0.4 −− 0.4 − 4.2 − 0.7 − 2.4 − 0.6 − 0.8 − 1.8 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 3.9
 Medium-term lending
2002          Q3 + 0.8 −− 0.3 −− 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2
         Q4 − 0.1 −− 0.4 −− 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.1
2003          Q1 − 1.7 −− 0.3 −− 0.3 − 1.8 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.7
         Q2 + 0.4 − + 0.7 − + 0.7 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.8 + 0.1
         Q3 + 1.5 − + 0.5 − + 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.1
 Long-term lending
2002          Q3 + 8.7 + 4.8 + 6.2 + 3.6 + 2.7 + 0.9 − 0.2 − 1.5 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.5
         Q4 + 9.4 + 4.3 + 6.4 + 3.0 + 3.5 + 1.5 − 0.7 − 1.5 + 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.6
2003          Q1 − 1.0 − 0.4 + 1.2 + 0.4 + 0.9 − 4.1 − 1.2 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 1.0 − 1.6 + 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.4
         Q2 + 5.3 + 0.7 + 4.6 + 2.7 + 2.0 − 1.8 − 1.6 − 1.1 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.3
         Q3 + 7.9 + 4.5 + 7.8 + 5.8 + 2.0 − 1.1 − 0.2 − 1.0 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 1.5 + 0.3 + 0.8 + 1.1
*Excluding lending by foreign branches. Breakdown of lending by building always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent alterations, which will
and loan associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical alterations appear in the following Monthly Report , are not specially marked. —
have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest date are 1Excluding loans on a trust basis. —2Including quarrying. —3Including
32*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
IV Banks
 
   
 
 
 
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which of which
Debitbalanceson wage,
Other Lending salaryreal to self- Lending and of which
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans  
5 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises enterprises persons  4 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
700.8 162.3 46.8 183.1 459.0 75.0 905.5 683.0 222.6 108.6 24.3 14.0 3.7 2000
723.3 169.4 50.3 194.3 458.6 74.7 926.7 704.3 222.4 110.7 22.9 14.1 3.5 2001
721.9 171.1 47.8 199.8 453.5 74.0 942.1 716.4 225.8 114.6 23.9 14.5 3.4 2002          Sep 
729.2 165.0 50.2 207.2 451.8 72.4 949.5 725.1 224.3 114.3 23.0 14.4 3.5          Dec 
721.1 163.6 48.6 206.4 448.1 72.9 950.5 725.0 225.4 115.5 22.1 14.3 3.5 2003          Mar 
719.1 163.2 48.5 206.8 444.5 71.9 958.8 729.1 229.8 114.2 22.7 14.2 3.5          June
716.1 162.3 48.6 205.7 441.8 70.2 969.6 735.9 233.7 116.1 23.2 13.8 3.5          Sep 
Short-term lending
122.1 19.6 18.1 30.0 57.1 16.2 52.6 5.2 47.4 2.3 24.3 1.2 0.0 2000130.1 21.6 20.4 34.1 56.0 15.8 50.3 5.3 45.0 2.8 22.9 1.4 0.0 2001
121.0 20.9 17.3 33.0 53.8 16.1 49.2 5.0 44.2 2.5 23.9 1.7 0.0 2002          Sep 
123.3 19.8 19.1 34.7 53.8 14.8 48.5 5.2 43.3 2.4 23.0 1.7 0.0          Dec 
117.3 19.0 18.0 33.5 52.2 15.3 46.2 4.9 41.3 2.3 22.1 1.7 0.0 2003          Mar 
115.9 18.7 17.9 33.6 51.8 15.0 46.8 5.0 41.7 2.3 22.7 1.7 0.0          June
113.5 17.9 18.3 32.1 50.6 14.4 47.2 5.2 42.0 2.3 23.2 1.4 0.0          Sep 
Medium-term lending
61.4 6.8 6.3 13.6 33.1 5.5 72.2 26.4 45.8 33.0 − 0.6 0.1 2000
61.9 6.7 6.5 14.7 31.2 5.3 70.5 25.0 45.4 33.4 − 0.6 0.1 2001
62.6 6.6 6.6 15.9 31.3 4.9 70.5 24.1 46.4 35.0 − 0.6 0.1 2002          Sep 
63.2 6.2 7.2 16.7 31.2 4.8 71.1 24.7 46.4 35.3 − 0.5 0.1          Dec 
63.5 6.1 6.7 17.8 31.4 4.8 71.3 24.5 46.9 36.1 − 0.5 0.1 2003          Mar 
62.5 6.1 6.3 17.6 31.0 4.7 72.0 25.4 46.6 36.4 − 0.5 0.1          June
62.5 5.9 6.0 17.7 30.8 4.6 73.1 26.0 47.2 37.3 − 0.5 0.1          Sep 
Long-term lending
517.3 135.9 22.5 139.5 368.7 53.2 780.8 651.4 129.4 73.3 − 12.2 3.6 2000
531.3 141.1 23.4 145.6 371.3 53.7 806.0 674.0 132.0 74.4 − 12.1 3.5 2001
538.3 143.5 24.0 150.9 368.3 53.0 822.4 687.3 135.1 77.0 − 12.2 3.4 2002          Sep 
542.8 139.0 24.0 155.8 366.8 52.8 829.8 695.3 134.6 76.6 − 12.1 3.4          Dec 
540.3 138.5 23.9 155.1 364.4 52.8 832.9 695.7 137.3 77.2 − 12.0 3.4 2003          Mar 
540.7 138.4 24.3 155.6 361.8 52.2 840.1 698.6 141.5 75.5 − 12.0 3.4          June
540.1 138.4 24.2 155.9 360.4 51.2 849.2 704.7 144.5 76.5 − 11.9 3.4          Sep 
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
+ 1.0 + 1.3 − 0.2 + 2.2 − 2.1 − 0.7 + 9.6 + 6.4 + 3.3 + 2.1 + 1.2 + 0.4 − 0.0 2002          Q3
+ 6.1 − 2.2 + 2.4 + 4.8 − 1.5 − 1.7 + 7.3 + 7.1 + 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.9 − 0.1 + 0.0          Q4
− 7.4 − 1.3 − 1.6 − 0.2 − 3.8 − 0.2 + 1.0 + 1.9 − 0.9 + 1.8 − 1.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 2003          Q1
− 2.2 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 3.2 − 1.0 + 8.4 + 6.9 + 1.5 + 1.2 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0          Q2
− 3.1 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 2.4 − 1.4 + 10.8 + 8.8 + 2.0 + 2.1 + 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.0          Q3
Short-term lending
− 1.6 + 0.1 − 1.0 + 0.5 − 0.9 − 0.2 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 1.2 + 0.4 + 0.0 2002          Q3
+ 2.2 − 1.2 + 1.8 + 1.6 − 0.1 − 1.3 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.0          Q4
− 5.9 − 0.8 − 1.0 − 1.2 − 1.6 + 0.5 − 2.3 − 0.3 − 2.0 − 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 2003          Q1
− 1.4 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0          Q2
− 2.3 − 0.8 + 0.4 − 1.5 − 1.2 − 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.0          Q3
Medium-term lending
− 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 1.0 −− 0.0 − 0.0 2002          Q3
− 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.6 + 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 −− 0.0 + 0.0          Q4
− 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.4 + 0.8 −− 0.0 + 0.0 2003          Q1
− 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.3 − + 0.0 + 0.0          Q2
− 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 0.6 + 0.9 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q3
Long-term lending
+ 3.2 + 1.2 + 1.0 + 1.4 − 1.0 − 0.3 + 7.8 + 6.4 + 1.4 + 1.1 − + 0.0 − 0.0 2002          Q3
+ 4.0 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 2.7 − 1.0 − 0.3 + 8.1 + 7.1 + 1.0 + 0.4 −− 0.1 + 0.0          Q4
− 0.7 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 2.2 − 0.6 + 3.2 + 2.4 + 0.7 + 1.1 −− 0.1 + 0.0 2003          Q1
+ 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.5 − 2.7 − 0.6 + 7.1 + 6.3 + 0.8 + 0.9 −− 0.0 − 0.0          Q2
− 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.7 − 1.0 − 0.7 + 9.2 + 8.0 + 1.2 + 1.1 −− 0.1 − 0.0          Q3
the maintenance and repair of motor vehicles and durable consumer   
goods. —4Including sole proprietors. —5Excluding mortgage loans and   
housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit.  
33*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
  
 5  billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Included Subordinated
 liabilities in time
for up for up (excluding deposits:
to and to and for more Bank negotiable liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month*
 
2000 1,945.8 443.4 819.9 274.7 545.2 9.0 536.2 573.5 109.0 42.1 25.9 −
2001 2,034.0 526.4 827.0 268.7 558.3 10.3 548.0 574.5 106.0 43.3 26.2 3.1
2002 2,085.9 575.6 830.6 258.3 572.3 8.8 563.5 575.3 104.4 42.1 27.9 1.5
2002          Nov 2,062.1 572.4 822.6 254.0 568.7 8.7 560.0 562.4 104.7 41.5 27.9 3.0
         Dec 2,085.9 575.6 830.6 258.3 572.3 8.8 563.5 575.3 104.4 42.1 27.9 1.5
2003          Jan 2,076.4 565.2 830.3 255.7 574.5 8.6 565.9 577.4 103.5 42.1 28.0 3.5
         Feb 2,084.6 571.6 830.0 253.5 576.6 8.3 568.3 579.2 103.7 41.9 29.0 4.1         Mar 2,089.6 578.9 828.4 249.9 578.5 8.5 570.0 579.3 103.0 42.1 28.9 5.2
         Apr 2,094.8 586.3 828.2 249.5 578.7 8.2 570.5 577.9 102.4 41.8 28.9 5.6
         May 2,101.9 591.7 831.2 253.9 577.2 8.1 569.2 577.1 101.9 41.7 29.3 3.8         June 2,109.6 608.9 822.7 245.9 576.8 8.0 568.8 576.7 101.3 41.8 29.8 5.7
         July 2,102.3 595.6 829.0 246.4 582.6 8.0 574.6 576.8 100.9 41.7 29.8 7.1
         Aug 2,111.4 598.5 834.5 248.0 586.5 8.0 578.5 578.0 100.4 41.7 30.1 6.1         Sep 2,112.3 608.8 825.4 240.3 585.1 7.9 577.2 578.3 99.9 41.5 30.1 11.6
         Oct 2,115.3 611.5 824.5 238.7 585.7 8.0 577.7 579.4 100.0 40.7 30.4 14.5
Changes*
2001 + 88.5 + 82.3 + 8.1 − 6.0 + 14.1 + 1.3 + 12.8 + 1.1 −2.9 + 1.0 + 0.3 + 3.1
2002 + 51.7 + 48.4 + 4.1 −10.2 + 14.3 − 1.5 + 15.8 + 0.8 −1.6 − 1.1 + 1.8 − 1.6
2002          Nov + 24.5 + 29.3 − 7.2 −10.3 + 3.1 + 0.2 + 2.9 + 2.7 −0.3 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 4.3
         Dec + 23.8 + 3.3 + 8.0 + 4.4 + 3.6 + 0.1 + 3.5 + 12.8 −0.3 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 1.5
2003          Jan − 9.5 − 10.4 − 0.3 − 2.6 + 2.3 − 0.1 + 2.4 + 2.1 −0.9 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 2.0
         Feb + 7.6 + 6.4 − 0.3 − 2.3 + 2.0 − 0.4 + 2.4 + 1.8 −0.4 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.7
         Mar + 5.1 + 7.3 − 1.6 − 3.6 + 2.0 + 0.3 + 1.7 + 0.1 −0.7 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 1.1
         Apr + 5.1 + 7.4 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.6 − 1.4 −0.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.4
         May + 7.1 + 5.4 + 3.0 + 4.5 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 1.4 − 0.8 −0.5 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 1.9
         June + 7.7 + 17.2 − 8.5 − 8.1 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.4 −0.6 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 1.9
         July − 7.1 − 13.3 + 6.5 + 0.7 + 5.8 − 0.1 + 5.9 + 0.1 −0.4 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.4
         Aug + 9.1 + 2.9 + 5.5 + 1.6 + 3.9 + 0.0 + 3.9 + 1.3 −0.5 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 1.0
         Sep + 0.8 + 10.3 − 9.1 − 7.8 − 1.4 − 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.2 −0.5 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 5.4
         Oct + 3.0 + 2.7 − 0.9 − 1.5 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 1.1 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 2.9
Domestic public authorities End of year or month*
2000 149.1 16.6 127.7 62.1 65.5 1.2 64.4 2.7 2.1 36.0 1.4 −
2001 122.7 16.1 102.3 37.7 64.5 1.2 63.3 2.3 2.1 36.6 1.4 −
2002 113.9 16.6 93.3 30.9 62.4 0.9 61.5 2.1 1.9 36.3 1.2 −
2002          Nov 109.6 13.6 92.0 29.0 63.0 0.8 62.1 2.0 2.0 35.6 1.3 −
         Dec 113.9 16.6 93.3 30.9 62.4 0.9 61.5 2.1 1.9 36.3 1.2 −
2003          Jan 109.2 13.5 91.8 29.4 62.4 0.9 61.5 2.0 1.9 36.3 1.1 −
         Feb 111.1 15.2 92.0 30.0 61.9 0.6 61.4 2.0 1.8 36.2 1.1 −
         Mar 109.9 15.0 91.1 30.5 60.6 0.5 60.0 2.0 1.8 36.3 1.1 −
         Apr 107.6 14.5 89.4 29.1 60.3 0.6 59.8 1.9 1.8 36.3 1.1 −
         May 111.4 15.0 92.7 32.6 60.0 0.5 59.5 1.9 1.8 36.2 1.1 −
         June 114.5 18.1 92.6 32.6 60.1 0.5 59.5 1.9 1.7 36.2 1.1 −
         July 109.0 14.5 90.9 31.5 59.4 0.5 58.9 1.9 1.7 36.2 1.1 −
         Aug 107.7 14.7 89.2 30.8 58.4 0.5 57.9 2.0 1.7 36.1 1.1 −
         Sep 105.0 15.4 85.9 28.7 57.2 0.5 56.7 2.0 1.7 36.0 1.1 −
         Oct 101.6 15.2 82.7 25.7 57.0 0.5 56.5 2.0 1.7 35.8 1.1 −
Changes*
2001 − 26.4 − 0.6 − 25.4 −24.4 − 1.0 + 0.0 − 1.1 − 0.5 −0.0 + 0.7 − 0.0 −
2002 − 8.6 + 0.5 − 8.7 − 6.6 − 2.1 − 0.3 − 1.8 − 0.2 −0.2 − 0.3 − 0.2 −
2002          Nov − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 −
         Dec + 4.3 + 3.0 + 1.3 + 1.8 − 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.1 −0.1 + 0.7 − 0.1 −
2003          Jan − 4.7 − 3.1 − 1.5 − 1.4 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 −0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 −
         Feb + 1.9 + 1.7 + 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 −0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 −
         Mar − 1.2 − 0.2 − 0.9 + 0.5 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 1.4 − 0.0 −0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 −
         Apr − 2.3 − 0.5 − 1.7 − 1.4 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 −0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −
         May + 3.8 + 0.5 + 3.3 + 3.5 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.0 −0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 −
         June + 3.1 + 3.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 −
         July − 5.4 − 3.7 − 1.8 − 1.1 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.0 −0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 −
         Aug − 0.5 + 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 −0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 −
         Sep − 2.6 + 0.7 − 3.3 − 2.1 − 1.2 + 0.0 − 1.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 −
         Oct − 3.4 − 0.2 − 3.2 − 3.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 −0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 −
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly
the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as Report , are not specially marked. —1Including subordinated liabilities and
34*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany* (cont ’d)
 
  
 5  billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Included Subordinated
 liabilities in time
for up for up (excluding deposits:
to and to and for more Bank negotiable liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic enterprises and resident individuals End of year or month*
 
2000 1,796.7 426.8 692.2 212.6 479.6 7.8 471.8 570.8 106.9 6.1 24.5 −
2001 1,911.3 510.4 724.7 231.0 493.7 9.1 484.6 572.3 103.9 6.6 24.8 3.1
2002 1,972.0 559.0 737.3 227.5 509.8 7.9 502.0 573.2 102.5 5.8 26.6 1.5
2002          Nov 1,952.5 558.8 730.6 224.9 505.7 7.8 497.9 560.5 102.7 5.9 26.5 3.0
         Dec 1,972.0 559.0 737.3 227.5 509.8 7.9 502.0 573.2 102.5 5.8 26.6 1.5
2003          Jan 1,967.2 551.7 738.5 226.3 512.2 7.8 504.4 575.4 101.6 5.8 26.9 3.5
         Feb 1,973.5 556.4 738.1 223.4 514.6 7.7 506.9 577.2 101.9 5.7 27.8 4.1         Mar 1,979.8 563.9 737.3 219.4 518.0 8.0 510.0 577.3 101.2 5.8 27.8 5.2
         Apr 1,987.2 571.8 738.8 220.4 518.4 7.6 510.8 575.9 100.6 5.5 27.8 5.6
         May 1,990.5 576.7 738.5 221.3 517.2 7.5 509.7 575.1 100.1 5.5 28.1 3.8         June 1,995.2 590.8 730.0 213.3 516.7 7.5 509.2 574.8 99.6 5.5 28.7 5.7
         July 1,993.3 581.2 738.1 214.9 523.2 7.5 515.7 574.8 99.2 5.5 28.7 7.1
         Aug 2,003.8 583.8 745.3 217.2 528.1 7.5 520.6 576.0 98.7 5.5 28.9 6.1         Sep 2,007.3 593.4 739.5 211.6 527.9 7.4 520.5 576.2 98.1 5.5 29.0 11.6
         Oct 2,013.7 596.3 741.8 213.0 528.7 7.5 521.2 577.4 98.3 5.0 29.2 14.5
Changes*
2001 + 115.0 + 82.9 + 33.5 + 18.4 + 15.1 + 1.3 + 13.8 + 1.5 −2.9 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 3.1
2002 + 60.3 + 47.9 + 12.8 − 3.6 + 16.4 − 1.2 + 17.5 + 1.0 −1.4 − 0.8 + 2.0 − 1.6
2002          Nov + 24.6 + 29.5 − 7.3 −10.3 + 3.1 + 0.2 + 2.9 + 2.7 −0.3 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 4.3
         Dec + 19.5 + 0.3 + 6.7 + 2.6 + 4.1 + 0.0 + 4.1 + 12.7 −0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 1.5
2003          Jan − 4.8 − 7.3 + 1.2 − 1.2 + 2.4 − 0.1 + 2.4 + 2.2 −0.9 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 2.0
         Feb + 5.7 + 4.6 − 0.4 − 2.9 + 2.4 − 0.1 + 2.5 + 1.8 −0.3 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.7
         Mar + 6.3 + 7.5 − 0.7 − 4.1 + 3.3 + 0.3 + 3.1 + 0.1 −0.7 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 1.1
         Apr + 7.4 + 7.9 + 1.5 + 1.0 + 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.8 − 1.4 −0.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.4
         May + 3.3 + 4.9 − 0.3 + 0.9 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 1.1 − 0.8 −0.5 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 1.9
         June + 4.6 + 14.0 − 8.5 − 8.0 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.4 −0.5 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 1.9
         July − 1.7 − 9.6 + 8.2 + 1.8 + 6.5 − 0.0 + 6.5 + 0.1 −0.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.4
         Aug + 9.6 + 2.6 + 6.3 + 2.3 + 4.0 + 0.0 + 4.0 + 1.2 −0.5 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 1.0
         Sep + 3.5 + 9.6 − 5.8 − 5.6 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.2 −0.5 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 5.4
         Oct + 6.4 + 2.9 + 2.3 + 1.5 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 1.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 2.9
of which:  Domestic enterprises End of year or month*
2000 635.1 158.1 447.6 89.0 358.5 2.7 355.8 5.2 24.2 5.9 14.1 −
2001 668.4 180.0 461.3 91.7 369.6 2.9 366.8 4.3 22.8 6.4 14.3 3.1
2002 700.4 194.6 479.4 99.2 380.2 1.5 378.7 4.4 22.0 5.6 15.8 1.5
2002          Nov 692.6 189.0 476.9 97.4 379.5 1.6 378.0 4.3 22.3 5.7 15.7 3.0
         Dec 700.4 194.6 479.4 99.2 380.2 1.5 378.7 4.4 22.0 5.6 15.8 1.5
2003          Jan 692.7 185.3 480.7 98.5 382.2 1.5 380.6 4.4 22.3 5.6 16.3 3.5
         Feb 692.3 183.6 481.8 97.7 384.1 1.5 382.7 4.4 22.5 5.5 16.5 4.1         Mar 695.4 186.2 482.3 95.4 386.9 1.8 385.2 4.4 22.5 5.6 16.5 5.2
         Apr 704.6 191.8 486.0 98.8 387.2 1.4 385.8 4.4 22.5 5.3 16.4 5.6
         May 705.7 192.3 486.3 100.2 386.1 1.4 384.7 4.6 22.4 5.2 16.7 3.8         June 710.6 202.0 481.6 96.1 385.5 1.4 384.1 4.7 22.4 5.3 17.2 5.7
         July 711.2 192.4 491.5 99.5 392.1 1.5 390.6 4.8 22.5 5.3 17.2 7.1
         Aug 716.9 189.6 500.0 103.2 396.8 1.5 395.2 4.8 22.4 5.3 17.4 6.1         Sep 723.7 200.7 495.9 99.7 396.2 1.5 394.7 4.8 22.3 5.3 17.4 11.6
         Oct 727.9 201.0 500.0 103.2 396.8 1.5 395.3 4.8 22.1 4.7 17.4 14.5
Changes*
2001 + 33.6 + 21.2 + 14.7 + 2.6 + 12.1 + 0.1 + 11.9 − 0.9 −1.3 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 3.1
2002 + 31.1 + 13.4 + 18.3 + 7.4 + 10.9 − 1.3 + 12.2 + 0.1 −0.7 − 0.8 + 1.6 − 1.6
2002          Nov + 2.6 + 8.3 − 5.8 − 8.2 + 2.4 + 0.1 + 2.3 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 4.3
         Dec + 7.9 + 5.5 + 2.5 + 1.8 + 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.7 + 0.1 −0.3 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 1.5
2003          Jan − 7.7 − 9.2 + 1.3 − 0.7 + 2.0 − 0.0 + 2.0 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 2.0
         Feb − 0.4 − 1.7 + 1.1 − 0.8 + 2.0 − 0.0 + 2.0 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.7
         Mar + 3.1 + 2.6 + 0.5 − 2.3 + 2.8 + 0.3 + 2.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 1.1
         Apr + 9.2 + 5.6 + 3.6 + 3.3 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.6 + 0.0 −0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.4
         May + 1.1 + 0.5 + 0.4 + 1.5 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 1.1 + 0.2 −0.0 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 1.9
         June + 4.9 + 9.6 − 4.7 − 4.2 − 0.6 −− 0.6 + 0.0 −0.1 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 1.9
         July + 0.8 − 9.5 + 10.1 + 3.5 + 6.6 + 0.1 + 6.5 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.4
         Aug + 4.8 − 2.8 + 7.6 + 3.7 + 3.9 + 0.1 + 3.8 + 0.1 −0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 1.0
         Sep + 6.8 + 11.1 − 4.1 − 3.5 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.1 −0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 5.4
         Oct + 4.3 + 0.3 + 4.1 + 3.5 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.0 −0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 2.9
liabilities arising from registered debt securities. —1Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). —4Including
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). —3Excluding deposits liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
35*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
IV Banks
 
8 Deposits of resident individuals and domestic non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
  
 5  billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits
of resident Resident individuals Resident individualsindividualsanddomestic Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month*
 
2000 1,161.5 268.7 259.3 47.7 176.0 35.6 9.4 244.6 225.5 34.9 168.9 21.7
2001 1,242.9 330.4 320.1 55.8 220.9 43.4 10.2 263.4 242.9 36.3 182.4 24.22002 1,271.6 364.5 352.8 61.3 241.4 50.0 11.7 257.9 238.3 35.2 180.5 22.6
2003          May 1,284.8 384.4 372.0 65.0 252.9 54.2 12.4 252.2 232.2 33.3 177.7 21.2
         June 1,284.6 388.8 375.5 64.0 256.6 54.9 13.3 248.5 228.9 32.1 176.1 20.7
         July 1,282.1 388.8 376.3 65.8 255.8 54.7 12.5 246.6 227.4 31.7 175.2 20.4
         Aug 1,286.9 394.2 381.9 67.1 259.5 55.3 12.2 245.3 226.2 31.5 174.5 20.2         Sep 1,283.6 392.7 379.9 65.5 258.7 55.6 12.8 243.6 224.4 31.1 173.5 19.8
         Oct 1,285.8 395.3 382.7 68.9 258.7 55.2 12.5 241.7 223.1 30.9 172.7 19.6
Changes*
2001 + 81.3 + 61.7 + 60.8 + 8.1 + 45.0 + 7.8 + 0.8 + 18.8 + 17.4 + 1.4 + 13.5 + 2.5
2002 + 29.2 + 34.5 + 33.1 + 5.6 + 22.4 + 5.1 + 1.5 − 5.5 − 4.2 −1.0 −1.1 −2.1
2003          May + 2.3 + 4.4 + 4.1 + 0.6 + 2.8 + 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.6 − 1.2 −0.3 −0.7 −0.2
         June −0.2 + 4.4 + 3.5 − 0.9 + 3.7 + 0.7 + 0.9 − 3.7 − 3.3 −1.2 −1.7 −0.5
         July −2.5 − 0.0 + 0.8 + 1.8 − 0.8 −0.2 −0.8 − 1.9 − 1.5 −0.3 −0.9 −0.3
         Aug + 4.8 + 5.4 + 5.7 + 1.3 + 3.7 + 0.6 −0.2 − 1.3 − 1.2 −0.2 −0.7 −0.3
         Sep −3.3 − 1.5 − 2.0 − 1.6 − 0.8 + 0.4 + 0.6 − 1.7 − 1.8 −0.3 −1.0 −0.4
         Oct + 2.2 + 2.5 + 2.8 + 3.3 − 0.1 −0.5 −0.3 − 1.8 − 1.3 −0.3 −0.8 −0.2
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the Report , are not specially marked. —1Including subordinated liabilities and
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as liabilities arising from registered debt securities. —2Including deposits
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following MonthlyDEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
 
  
9 Deposits of domestic public authorities at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group
*
 
 5  billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 Land  governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
Domestic for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
public to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary authorities,
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans
End of year or month*
 
2000 149.1 67.6 2.1 22.6 42.8 0.0 12.5 20.3 3.1 2.1 15.0 0.1 23.3
2001 122.7 46.9 1.6 2.7 42.7 0.0 13.2 19.2 2.7 1.8 14.6 0.1 23.22002 113.9 45.6 0.9 3.6 41.1 0.0 13.5 18.9 2.5 1.4 14.9 0.1 22.6
2003          May 111.4 44.4 0.4 4.4 39.6 0.0 13.4 19.8 3.1 2.3 14.4 0.1 22.6
         June 114.5 44.6 0.8 4.8 39.0 0.0 13.5 23.5 5.3 3.8 14.3 0.1 22.5
         July 109.0 43.8 0.5 4.8 38.5 0.0 13.5 20.9 3.4 3.3 14.2 0.1 22.4
         Aug 107.7 43.8 0.8 4.8 38.2 0.0 13.5 19.6 2.7 2.5 14.2 0.1 22.3         Sep 105.0 43.4 1.6 4.8 37.0 0.0 13.4 20.2 3.2 2.8 14.2 0.1 22.3
         Oct 101.6 43.0 1.5 4.7 36.8 0.0 13.2 19.0 3.0 1.9 14.1 0.1 22.3
Changes*
2001 −26.4 −20.4 −0.4 −19.9 −0.1 −0.0 + 0.5 −1.2 −0.6 −0.2 −0.4 + 0.0 + 0.1
2002 −8.6 −1.3 −0.6 + 0.9 −1.6 + 0.0 + 0.3 −0.3 −0.1 −0.4 + 0.3 −0.0 −0.6
2003          May + 3.8 −0.5 −0.1 −0.1 −0.2 −− 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 −− 0.1
         June + 3.1 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.4 −0.6 −0.0 + 0.1 + 3.7 + 2.2 + 1.5 −0.1 + 0.0 −0.1
         July −5.4 −0.8 −0.3 −0.0 −0.5 + 0.0 −0.0 −2.6 −1.9 −0.5 −0.2 −− 0.0
         Aug −0.5 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.1 −0.3 − + 0.0 −1.4 −0.6 −0.8 + 0.0 −− 0.1
         Sep −2.6 −0.4 + 0.8 −0.0 −1.2 −− 0.1 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.2 −0.0 −0.0 −0.1
         Oct −3.4 −0.4 −0.1 −0.2 −0.2 −0.0 −0.2 −1.1 −0.2 −0.8 −0.1 − + 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and which are included in ”Enterprises ”. Statistical breaks have been eliminated
its successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, east German Railways from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded
and Federal Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the followingPost AG and Deutsche Telekom AG, and of publicly-owned enterprises,
36*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
IV Banks
 
    
 
 Savings deposits  3  Memo item
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year  2 
Included Subordinated
of which liabilities in time
Domestic Domestic (excluding deposits:
up to and up to and Bank negotiable liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arising
tions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  4 loans from repos   Period individuals securities)  5 
End of year or month*
 
19.2 123.6 121.1 5.1 116.0 565.5 555.8 9.7 82.7 0.2 10.4 −2000
20.6 139.3 124.1 6.2 117.9 568.0 558.6 9.4 81.1 0.2 10.5 −2001
19.6 128.3 129.6 6.3 123.3 568.8 559.9 8.9 80.4 0.2 10.8 −2002
20.0 121.1 131.1 6.2 125.0 570.5 561.4 9.1 77.7 0.2 11.4 −2003          May
19.6 117.3 131.2 6.1 125.1 570.1 560.9 9.2 77.2 0.2 11.5 −         June
19.2 115.5 131.1 6.0 125.1 570.1 560.8 9.2 76.7 0.2 11.5 −         July
19.1 114.0 131.3 6.0 125.3 571.2 561.9 9.3 76.2 0.2 11.6 −         Aug 
19.1 111.8 131.7 5.9 125.8 571.5 562.2 9.3 75.8 0.2 11.6 −         Sep 
18.6 109.8 131.9 6.0 125.9 572.6 563.3 9.3 76.2 0.2 11.9 −         Oct 
Changes*
+ 1.4 + 15.8 + 3.0 + 1.1 + 1.9 + 2.5 + 2.8 −0.3 −1.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 2001
− 1.3 −10.9 + 5.4 + 0.1 + 5.3 + 0.9 + 1.3 −0.5 −0.7 −0.0 + 0.3 −2002
+ 0.6 − 0.6 −0.1 −0.0 −0.1 − 1.0 − 1.0 + 0.0 −0.5 + 0.0 + 0.0 −2003          May
− 0.4 − 3.8 + 0.1 −0.0 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.5 + 0.1 −0.5 + 0.0 + 0.1 −         June
− 0.4 − 1.8 −0.1 −0.1 −0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 −0.5 − + 0.0 −         July
− 0.1 − 1.5 + 0.2 −0.1 + 0.2 + 1.1 + 1.1 + 0.0 −0.5 + 0.0 + 0.1 −         Aug 
+ 0.0 − 2.2 + 0.4 −0.0 + 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.0 −0.4 −0.0 −0.0 −         Sep 
− 0.5 − 2.0 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.3 −         Oct 
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). —3Excluding deposits liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. —5Included in
under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). —4Including time deposits. DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
 
   
 
 
 
Local authorities and local authority associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans   Period
End of year or month*
 
30.2 8.9 15.7 2.0 3.6 0.1 31.1 2.5 21.7 5.7 1.2 0.1 2000
27.8 9.2 13.8 1.8 3.1 0.2 28.7 2.7 19.5 5.4 1.1 0.1 200127.6 10.5 12.2 2.0 3.0 0.2 21.7 2.7 13.7 4.5 0.9 0.1 2002
24.8 9.0 11.1 1.8 2.8 0.2 22.3 2.5 14.9 4.2 0.8 0.0 2003          May
23.4 8.5 10.3 1.8 2.8 0.2 22.9 3.6 13.7 4.9 0.8 0.0          June
23.0 8.2 10.1 1.9 2.8 0.2 21.3 2.3 13.3 4.9 0.8 0.0          July
24.9 9.2 11.0 1.9 2.8 0.2 19.4 2.0 12.5 4.1 0.8 0.0          Aug 23.0 8.3 10.0 1.9 2.8 0.2 18.4 2.4 11.1 4.2 0.8 0.0          Sep 
22.7 8.6 9.4 1.9 2.8 0.2 16.9 2.1 9.7 4.3 0.8 0.0          Oct 
Changes*
−2.4 + 0.2 −2.0 −0.2 −0.4 + 0.0 −2.4 + 0.2 −2.3 −0.3 −0.0 −0.0 2001
+ 0.0 + 1.3 −1.4 + 0.2 −0.1 + 0.0 −7.0 −0.0 −5.7 −1.0 −0.3 −0.0 2002
+ 1.2 + 0.8 + 0.5 −− 0.0 −0.0 + 2.6 −0.4 + 3.1 −0.1 + 0.0 −2003          May
−1.4 −0.5 −0.8 −0.0 −0.0 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 1.1 −1.3 + 0.7 + 0.0 −0.0          June
−0.4 −0.3 −0.2 + 0.1 −0.0 + 0.0 −1.6 −1.2 −0.4 −0.1 −0.0 −         July
+ 1.9 + 1.0 + 0.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −1.1 −0.3 −0.9 + 0.1 + 0.0 −0.0          Aug 
−1.9 −0.9 −1.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −0.9 + 0.4 −1.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 −0.0          Sep 
−0.3 + 0.4 −0.5 −0.1 −0.1 + 0.0 −1.6 −0.2 −1.4 + 0.1 −0.0 −0.0          Oct 
Monthly Report , are not specially marked. —1Federal Railways Fund, liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. —3Including
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special deposits under savings and loan contracts. —4Excluding deposits under
Fund, ”German Unity ”Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. —2Including savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
37*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
IV Banks
 
10 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs)*
 
 
 5  billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at three months ’ at more than three Memo
notice months ’ notice item of which
Interest With
of which of which of which credited maturities
Special Special At three on of moresavings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months ’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities  
2 facilities  2 non-banks
End of year or month*
 
2000 585.2 573.5 450.5 309.0 123.0 104.4 11.7 8.3 19.3 115.9 109.0 94.4 6.8
2001 586.5 574.5 461.9 327.2 112.7 97.2 12.0 8.8 19.9 112.8 106.0 87.2 6.82002 586.2 575.3 472.8 343.5 102.4 88.5 10.9 8.1 17.6 111.3 104.4 86.3 6.9
2003          June 587.2 576.7 484.4 352.9 92.3 79.6 10.5 8.1 0.3 108.1 101.3 84.6 6.7
         July 587.2 576.8 486.5 362.1 90.3 77.7 10.4 8.1 0.4 107.6 100.9 84.4 6.7
         Aug 588.4 578.0 489.3 365.0 88.8 76.3 10.3 8.1 0.4 107.1 100.4 84.1 6.7         Sep 588.5 578.3 490.2 365.9 88.1 75.6 10.2 8.0 0.4 106.5 99.9 83.6 6.7
         Oct 589.5 579.4 491.2 367.5 88.2 75.4 10.1 8.0 0.4 106.6 100.0 83.7 6.7
Changes*
2001 + 1.3 + 1.1 + 11.4 + 15.5 −10.4 −7.2 + 0.3 + 0.5 . −2.9 −2.9 −7.1 −0.0
2002 −0.3 + 0.8 + 11.0 + 16.4 −10.2 −8.7 −1.1 −0.7 . −1.5 −1.6 −0.9 + 0.1
2003          June −0.4 −0.4 + 1.0 −0.0 −1.4 −1.4 −0.1 −0.0 . −0.5 −0.6 −0.3 + 0.0
         July −0.0 + 0.1 + 2.1 + 1.4 −2.0 −1.9 −0.1 −0.0 . −0.5 −0.4 −0.2 −0.0
         Aug + 1.2 + 1.3 + 2.8 + 2.9 −1.5 −1.5 −0.1 −0.0 . −0.5 −0.5 −0.3 + 0.0
         Sep + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.9 + 0.9 −0.7 −0.7 −0.1 −0.0 . −0.6 −0.5 −0.5 −0.0
         Oct + 1.0 + 1.1 + 1.0 + 1.0 + 0.1 −0.2 −0.1 −0.1 . + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 −0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the loan contracts, which are classified as time deposits. —2Savings deposits
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the minimum or basic rate of
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly interest. —3Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
Report , are not specially marked. —1Excluding deposits under savings and securities. 
 
   
11 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany
*
 
 5  billion
Non-negotiable bearer debt securities
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper and money market paper  6 
of which of which
with maturities of Subordinated
with maturities of
Certifi- more more non-
Floating Zero Foreign cates up to and more up to and more than 1 year than 1 year negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of including including than including including than debt debt
Period Total  1 bonds  2 deposit 1 year  1 Total 1 year 2 years 2 years bonds  2,3 bonds  4,5 2 years  1 2 years  1 securities securities
End of year or month*)
 
2000 1,412.5 283.1 22.1 128.2 19.7 87.9 62.7 1,261.9 2.7 0.4 1.0 1.3 38.3 2.4
2001 1,472.3 324.0 16.3 144.1 17.6 46.5 124.9 1,300.9 5.8 3.7 1.0 1.2 43.3 2.42002 1,462.9 339.2 16.1 159.5 34.7 62.3 120.1 1,280.5 9.9 7.8 0.7 1.3 42.4 2.3
2003          June 1,482.7 338.6 20.5 171.6 44.1 80.9 100.0 1,301.7 2.2 0.4 0.6 1.2 39.0 2.9
         July 1,494.5 344.8 23.5 177.1 42.2 79.5 105.1 1,310.0 2.2 0.5 0.5 1.2 39.3 3.0
         Aug 1,487.0 342.1 22.1 179.9 35.6 68.0 101.0 1,318.0 2.2 0.5 0.5 1.2 39.4 3.0         Sep 1,490.7 339.4 21.8 180.8 37.4 69.2 100.9 1,320.6 2.3 0.5 0.5 1.3 39.9 3.0
         Oct 1,502.7 347.4 20.7 186.9 40.4 70.7 104.8 1,327.1 2.3 0.5 0.5 1.3 40.2 3.2
Changes*
2001 + 56.2 + 33.3 −5.5 + 15.9 −2.1 −41.4 + 61.7 + 35.9 + 3.2 + 3.4 −0.1 −0.1 + 5.0 + 0.0
2002 + 9.1 + 6.3 −4.5 + 12.1 + 16.2 + 14.2 + 4.6 − 9.7 + 4.8 + 4.9 −0.3 + 0.2 −1.9 −0.1
2003          June + 4.6 −0.5 + 0.5 + 2.9 −2.0 −2.1 − 4.5 + 11.2 −0.0 + 0.1 −0.0 −0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0
         July + 11.9 + 6.2 + 3.1 + 5.5 −1.9 −1.4 + 5.1 + 8.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 −0.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.0
         Aug − 7.5 −2.7 −1.4 + 2.9 −6.6 −11.5 − 4.1 + 8.0 −0.0 + 0.0 −0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1
         Sep + 3.7 −2.7 −0.3 + 0.9 + 1.8 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 2.7 + 0.1 + 0.1 −0.0 + 0.0 + 0.5 −0.0
         Oct + 12.0 + 7.8 −1.1 + 6.1 + 3.0 + 1.6 + 4.0 + 6.5 −0.0 −0.1 + 0.0 − + 0.3 + 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the 2Including debt securities denominated in foreign currencies. —3Issue
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as value when floated. —4Including floating rate notes and zero coupon
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly bonds denominated in foreign currencies. —5Bonds denominated in
Report , are not specially marked. —1Decreases in June 2002 caused by non-euro-area currencies. —6Non-negotiable bearer debt securities are
transition to net recording of debt securities outstanding (ie less own debt classified among bank savings bonds (see also Table IV.10, foo tnote 3). 
securities). The statistical break has been eliminated from the changes. —
38*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
IV  Banks
  
12  Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany*
  Interim statements
  
 5  billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs)  5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memo
bal- item ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer New
and Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- enteredof Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations total loans  
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month  8 loans)  1 paper)  4 serves)  7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2002 28 163.8 25.2 0.2 11.7 40.8 58.6 7.9 10.4 0.4 29.5 100.8 3.5 6.9 7.1 79.6
2003          Aug 27 167.7 27.0 0.1 11.1 38.5 62.2 8.5 11.0 0.4 30.0 102.9 3.6 6.8 7.1 8.2
         Sep 27 168.7 28.4 0.1 10.6 38.2 63.0 8.7 10.5 0.4 29.7 103.3 3.7 7.1 7.1 8.9         Oct 27 168.9 27.6 0.1 10.7 38.0 63.5 8.8 11.1 0.4 29.7 103.2 3.8 7.2 7.1 8.9
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2003          Aug 16 120.3 20.8 0.1 5.9 24.8 44.8 7.8 7.7 0.3 21.7 69.9 3.5 6.8 4.6 5.5         Sep 16 121.1 22.0 0.1 5.5 24.6 45.5 8.0 7.1 0.3 21.4 70.2 3.5 7.1 4.6 6.0         Oct 16 121.5 21.4 0.1 5.5 24.4 45.9 8.1 7.7 0.3 21.6 70.3 3.6 7.2 4.6 5.8
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2003          Aug 11 47.4 6.2 0.1 5.2 13.7 17.4 0.7 3.3 0.1 8.2 33.0 0.2 − 2.5 2.7
         Sep 11 47.6 6.4 0.1 5.1 13.6 17.5 0.7 3.4 0.1 8.3 33.0 0.2 − 2.5 2.9
         Oct 11 47.4 6.1 0.1 5.2 13.6 17.5 0.7 3.4 0.1 8.2 33.0 0.2 − 2.5 3.0
Trends in building and loan association business
  
 5  billion
Changes in deposits Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans  10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings andments loan contracts loan contracts  
9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited interim deposits of which of which
on under Applied Applied and ofwhich of Memo Amounts deposits
cancelled to settle- to settle- bridging
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which item paid intosavings savings and which interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housing
and and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonusesloan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts  
9 tions  11 ceived  12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2002 22.9 2.7 4.3 44.0 29.4 40.6 17.2 3.8 9.3 3.1 14.2 10.9 7.8 14.2 11.2 0.5
2003          Aug 2.0 0.0 0.5 3.9 2.2 3.3 1.3 0.3 0.5 0.2 1.5 12.4 8.1 1.2 0.0
         Sep 2.1 0.0 0.5 3.7 2.1 3.5 1.3 0.3 0.6 0.2 1.6 12.4 8.0 1.2 2.9 0.0         Oct 2.0 0.1 0.5 4.4 2.9 4.0 1.6 0.4 0.8 0.3 1.6 12.5 8.2 1.1 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2003          Aug 1.4 0.0 0.3 2.7 1.4 2.5 0.9 0.2 0.4 0.2 1.2 7.8 4.1 0.8 0.0         Sep 1.5 0.0 0.3 2.5 1.2 2.5 0.8 0.2 0.4 0.2 1.3 7.7 4.0 0.8 2.0 0.0         Oct 1.4 0.0 0.3 3.1 1.9 2.9 1.1 0.3 0.5 0.2 1.3 7.8 4.2 0.8 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2003          Aug 0.6 0.0 0.2 1.1 0.8 0.9 0.4 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.3 4.7 4.0 0.4 0.0         Sep 0.6 0.0 0.2 1.2 0.9 1.0 0.5 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.3 4.7 4.0 0.4 1.0 0.0         Oct 0.6 0.0 0.2 1.3 1.0 1.1 0.5 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.3 4.7 4.0 0.4 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are count as new contracts. —9For disbursements of deposits under savings
not specially marked. —1Including postal giro account balances, claims on and loan contracts arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capital
building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt securities disbursed “.—10Including housing bonuses credited. —11Only allocations
and central bank credit balances. —2Loans under savings and loan accepted by the beneficiaries; including allocations applied to settlement of
contracts and interim and bridging loans. —3Including money market interim and bridging loans. —12The amounts already credited to the
paper and small amounts of other securities issued by banks. —4Including accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in “Amounts paid into
equalisation claims. —5Including liabilities to building and loan savings and loan accounts “and “Interest and repayments received on
associations. —6Including small amounts of savings deposits. —7Including building loans “. 
participation rights capital and fund for general banking risks. —8Total
39*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
IV  Banks
  
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs)*
  
  
 5  billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
Loans Credit  balances and loans
German   
banks to German
(MFIs)   non-banks
withforeign foreignbranches Money of which Money
branches  1 
and/or and/or market enter- to marketforeign foreign Balance paper, prises foreign paper,subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- and indi- non- secur- Other
Period diaries diaries total Total Total banks banks Total Total Total viduals banks ities  
2 assets ities 2,3 
Foreign  branches End of year or month*
  
2000 71 212 1,558.2 829.4 722.1 211.0 511.1 107.3 656.7 501.5 21.7 17.1 479.9 155.2 72.0
2001 68 216 1,689.3 870.6 761.6 213.6 548.0 109.0 744.9 549.0 20.6 17.2 528.4 195.9 73.92002 60 205 1,407.4 679.9 572.3 198.3 374.0 107.6 668.5 484.0 18.8 15.0 465.1 184.6 59.0
2002          Dec 60 205 1,407.4 679.9 572.3 198.3 374.0 107.6 668.5 484.0 18.8 15.0 465.1 184.6 59.0
2003          Jan 60 206 1,465.8 725.4 622.8 202.5 420.3 102.6 680.1 496.3 18.3 15.2 478.0 183.8 60.4
         Feb 60 206 1,439.6 693.9 592.3 197.4 394.8 101.6 691.5 506.8 18.4 15.2 488.4 184.7 54.2         Mar 60 206 1,402.0 669.4 564.6 186.0 378.5 104.9 684.0 500.4 17.4 14.8 483.0 183.6 48.6
         Apr 59 205 1,429.4 659.8 553.6 192.2 361.4 106.2 720.2 535.3 18.1 15.5 517.2 184.9 49.5
         May 58 205 1,429.1 660.4 560.4 192.7 367.6 100.0 714.1 529.3 17.9 14.7 511.4 184.9 54.6         Jun 58 205 1,455.9 672.3 580.1 190.6 389.5 92.2 716.6 524.9 17.3 14.8 507.6 191.7 67.0
         Jul 55 202 1,434.0 651.3 570.4 192.4 377.9 81.0 704.0 492.8 19.2 16.0 473.5 211.3 78.6
         Aug 54 202 1,415.0 627.2 551.3 177.8 373.5 75.8 717.8 504.8 19.5 15.8 485.3 213.0 70.0         Sep 54 201 1,380.3 634.8 560.8 171.2 389.6 74.0 685.3 484.2 19.1 16.3 465.0 201.2 60.1
Changes*
2001 −3 + 4 + 99.1 + 24.8 + 26.1 + 2.3 + 23.8 −1.3 + 72.7 + 35.6 −1.1 −0.0 + 36.7 + 37.1 + 1.6
2002 −8 −11 −139.1 −133.4 −139.9 −15.4 −124.5 + 6.5 −3.6 −9.2 −1.9 −2.2 −7.3 + 5.7 −2.2
2002          Dec − +1 −137.1 −66.1 −61.2 −18.6 −42.6 −4.9 −65.2 −55.4 −0.2 −0.7 −55.2 −9.8 −5.8
2003          Jan − + 1 + 81.8 + 54.2 + 58.0 + 4.2 + 53.8 −3.8 + 23.7 + 21.4 −0.5 + 0.2 + 21.9 + 2.3 + 3.9
         Feb −− − 28.1 −32.0 −31.0 −5.1 −25.9 −1.0 + 10.3 + 9.6 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 9.6 + 0.7 −6.4
         Mar −− − 32.3 −22.7 −26.1 −11.4 −14.7 + 3.4 −4.7 −4.3 −1.0 −0.4 −3.3 −0.4 −4.9
         Apr −1 −1 + 37.5 −6.3 −7.8 + 6.2 −14.0 + 1.6 + 41.8 + 39.1 + 0.7 + 0.7 + 38.4 + 2.7 + 1.9
         May −1 − + 25.6 + 8.8 + 14.3 + 0.5 + 13.7 −5.5 + 8.7 + 5.0 −0.2 −0.8 + 5.2 + 3.7 + 8.1
         Jun −− + 12.3 + 7.1 + 15.2 −2.1 + 17.3 −8.1 −5.5 −10.3 −0.6 + 0.1 −9.7 + 4.8 + 10.7
         Jul −3 −3 −26.6 −22.6 −11.3 + 1.8 −13.1 −11.3 −15.1 −34.0 + 1.9 + 1.2 −35.9 + 18.9 + 11.2
         Aug −1 −− 37.1 −30.3 −24.8 −14.6 −10.2 −5.5 + 3.5 + 4.6 + 0.3 −0.2 + 4.3 −1.1 −10.2
         Sep −− 1 −9.1 + 15.8 + 17.0 −6.6 + 23.5 −1.2 −18.0 −9.8 −0.4 + 0.5 −9.4 −8.2 −6.9
  
  
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month*
  
2000 40 170 580.5 248.1 183.8 82.2 101.6 64.3 263.5 203.4 45.4 42.3 158.0 60.1 69.0
2001 46 200 811.5 342.4 262.8 105.7 157.1 79.6 382.2 293.1 51.9 47.7 241.2 89.2 87.02002 47 200 704.2 333.7 265.5 125.7 139.8 68.2 300.1 239.1 46.7 42.9 192.4 61.0 70.4
2002          Dec 47 200 704.2 333.7 265.5 125.7 139.8 68.2 300.1 239.1 46.7 42.9 192.4 61.0 70.4
2003          Jan 47 198 675.8 311.1 243.2 121.4 121.8 67.9 293.6 231.0 45.4 42.8 185.5 62.6 71.1
         Feb 47 197 670.6 309.9 241.7 116.3 125.4 68.2 289.9 226.1 44.5 41.9 181.6 63.8 70.8         Mar 47 194 656.7 305.7 237.1 119.8 117.3 68.6 283.9 223.7 43.0 40.7 180.7 60.3 67.1
         Apr 48 195 652.2 303.7 236.3 122.4 114.0 67.4 282.3 220.8 42.2 39.9 178.6 61.5 66.3
         May 48 195 645.0 300.0 234.0 119.7 114.2 66.1 278.0 215.8 42.7 39.0 173.1 62.2 66.9         Jun 48 196 651.1 302.6 236.8 123.4 113.3 65.9 283.2 220.3 41.9 38.7 178.5 62.9 65.3
         Jul 47 195 668.1 323.1 255.1 127.5 127.6 68.0 278.0 215.0 41.2 38.5 173.7 63.0 67.1
         Aug 47 194 666.8 313.5 246.2 126.4 119.8 67.3 284.9 219.6 41.8 38.7 177.8 65.3 68.4         Sep 47 190 661.6 311.9 248.2 131.2 117.1 63.6 274.6 209.8 40.3 37.4 169.5 64.8 75.1
Changes*
2001 + 6 + 30 +229.9 + 92.5 + 78.0 + 23.5 + 54.6 + 14.5 +119.5 + 89.1 + 6.5 + 5.3 + 82.7 + 30.4 + 17.92002 + 1
+ 0 −78.3 + 6.7 + 13.3 + 20.0 −6.7 −6.6 −70.0 −42.0 −5.2 −4.8 −36.8 −28.1 −15.0
2002          Dec −− 2 + 4.6 + 11.6 + 12.1 + 11.7 + 0.4 −0.5 −4.8 −3.4 −0.4 −1.2 −3.0 −1.4 −2.1
2003          Jan −− 2 −23.1 −19.8 −20.3 −4.3 −16.1 + 0.5 −4.3 −5.9 −1.2 −0.1 −4.7 + 1.6 + 1.0
         Feb −− 1 −5.4 −1.1 −1.5 −5.1 + 3.7 + 0.3 −3.9 −5.0 −0.9 −0.9 −4.1 + 1.1 −0.4
         Mar −− 3 −12.2 −3.4 −4.0 + 3.5 −7.5 + 0.6 −5.2 −1.7 −1.5 −1.3 −0.2 −3.5 −3.6
         Apr + 1 + 1 −1.2 −0.5 + 0.1 + 2.5 −2.4 −0.7 −0.0 −1.2 −0.8 −0.8 −0.4 + 1.2 −0.7
         May −− + 0.1 −0.0 −0.1 −2.6 + 2.5 + 0.1 −0.8 −1.6 + 0.5 −0.9 −2.1 + 0.8 + 1.0
         Jun − + 1 + 2.3 + 0.6 + 1.6 + 3.7 −2.1 −1.0 + 3.5 + 2.9 −0.9 −0.3 + 3.8 + 0.6 −1.8
         Jul −1 −1 + 15.9 + 20.0 + 18.0 + 4.0 + 14.0 + 2.0 −5.8 −6.0 −0.6 −0.2 −5.4 + 0.2 + 1.7
         Aug −− 1 −6.0 −12.0 −10.3 −1.1 −9.2 −1.6 + 4.8 + 2.6 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 2.0 + 2.2 + 1.1
         Sep −− 4 + 2.1 + 1.8 + 4.2 + 4.8 −0.6 −2.4 −6.9 −6.5 −1.5 −1.3 −5.0 −0.4 + 7.1
*From March 2000, including the foreign branches of building and loan population have not been eliminated from the flow figures for the foreign
associations. In this table “foreign “also includes the country of domicile of subsidiaries.) The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as
the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical revisions have been provisional; subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly
eliminated from the changes. (Breaks owing to changes in the reporting Report, are not specially marked. —1Several branches in a given
40*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
IV  Banks
  
      
  
Deposits
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  4 
Money
Short-term market Medium  and long-term
paper
of which of which and debt
enter- enter- Working securities
out- capital Other prises  and prises  and
German Foreign indi- indi- Foreign stand- and own liabil-
Total Total banks Total Total Total viduals Total viduals ing  5 funds ities  6   Period banks non-banks
End of year or month* Foreign  branches
  
1,186.1 799.5 158.2 641.4 386.5 60.9 58.4 51.6 2.5 2.4 325.7 272.3 22.0 77.9 2000
1,271.3 855.3 194.0 661.2 416.0 57.4 54.2 51.2 3.2 3.0 358.6 316.8 24.0 77.2 20011,116.0 758.5 250.1 508.4 357.5 62.6 58.4 55.0 4.2 3.8 294.9 212.1 25.9 53.6 2002
1,116.0 758.5 250.1 508.4 357.5 62.6 58.4 55.0 4.2 3.8 294.9 212.1 25.9 53.6 2002          Dec
1,170.8 788.6 244.3 544.3 382.2 68.6 64.5 60.6 4.1 3.7 313.7 214.2 26.0 54.9 2003          Jan
1,158.7 771.4 244.9 526.6 387.3 71.1 65.8 62.0 5.3 5.0 316.2 199.0 26.2 55.6          Feb
1,128.7 755.1 254.7 500.4 373.7 71.7 66.3 62.3 5.4 5.1 302.0 191.6 26.2 55.5          Mar
1,172.9 776.6 267.5 509.1 396.3 73.9 68.7 64.9 5.2 4.9 322.4 178.5 24.8 53.2          Apr
1,181.0 774.5 273.5 501.0 406.5 73.6 68.5 63.8 5.1 4.8 332.9 167.2 24.7 56.2          May1,205.6 795.5 286.5 508.9 410.1 71.9 66.8 62.5 5.1 4.8 338.2 165.5 24.8 60.1          Jun
1,178.6 779.5 292.7 486.8 399.0 77.7 72.6 67.5 5.1 4.8 321.4 164.0 24.8 66.6          Jul
1,165.2 787.6 292.0 495.6 377.6 73.2 68.1 63.1 5.1 4.8 304.4 159.5 24.8 65.6          Aug1,143.7 749.9 274.6 475.3 393.8 73.5 68.1 63.3 5.4 5.1 320.3 149.7 24.7 62.2          Sep
Changes*
+ 53.8 + 36.3 + 35.2 + 1.1 + 17.5 −3.7 −4.4 −0.6 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 21.2 + 44.6 + 2.1 −1.3 2001
−53.4 −31.7 + 56.0 −87.7 −21.7 + 5.2 + 4.2 + 3.8 + 1.0 + 0.8 −26.9 −104.8 + 1.8 + 17.2 2002
−119.2 −58.7 −7.3 −51.4 −60.5 −6.6 −7.3 −6.9 + 0.7 + 0.5 −53.9 −22.8 + 0.9 + 4.0 2002          Dec
+ 69.9 + 40.0 −5.8 + 45.8 + 29.9 + 6.0 + 6.1 + 5.5 −0.1 −0.1 + 23.9 + 2.2 + 0.1 + 9.6 2003          Jan
−13.0 −17.7 + 0.6 −18.3 + 4.7 + 2.6 + 1.3 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 2.2 −15.2 + 0.3 −0.1          Feb
−26.5 −14.1 + 9.8 −23.9 −12.4 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 −12.9 −7.5 −0.0 + 1.7          Mar
+ 50.8 + 25.8 + 12.8 + 13.1 + 25.0 + 2.2 + 2.5 + 2.6 −0.3 −0.2 + 22.8 −13.0 −1.4 + 1.1          Apr
+ 25.2 + 8.2 + 6.1 + 2.1 + 17.1 −0.3 −0.3 −1.1 −0.0 −0.0 + 17.4 −11.3 −0.1 + 11.8          May
+ 14.7 + 15.1 + 13.0 + 2.1 −0.4 −1.7 −1.7 −1.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.3 −1.7 + 0.0 −0.7          Jun
−30.1 −17.8 + 6.2 −24.0 −12.4 + 5.7 + 5.8 + 4.9 −0.1 −0.1 −18.1 −1.4 + 0.0 + 4.9          Jul
−25.5 + 0.6 −0.7 + 1.3 −26.1 −4.5 −4.5 −4.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 −21.5 −4.6 + 0.0 −7.1          Aug
− 3.9 −27.7 −17.4 −10.3 + 23.8 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 23.5 −9.7 −0.1 + 4.7          Sep
  
  
End of year or month* Foreign  subsidiaries
  
414.6 267.9 61.0 207.0 146.7 32.5 29.2 21.9 3.2 3.2 114.2 56.3 34.7 74.9 2000
576.5 362.5 79.2 283.3 214.0 36.4 32.5 23.9 3.9 3.8 177.6 99.8 47.3 87.9 2001503.5 307.7 99.5 208.2 195.7 27.0 22.5 21.1 4.5 4.5 168.7 78.4 43.0 79.3 2002
503.5 307.7 99.5 208.2 195.7 27.0 22.5 21.1 4.5 4.5 168.7 78.4 43.0 79.3 2002          Dec
478.2 298.2 95.6 202.6 179.9 28.0 23.5 22.9 4.5 4.5 151.9 77.1 42.5 78.0 2003          Jan
474.6 297.1 89.6 207.5 177.5 28.2 23.7 23.1 4.6 4.5 149.3 80.0 42.0 74.0          Feb
463.7 287.2 89.9 197.3 176.4 27.7 23.2 22.9 4.5 4.4 148.8 77.7 41.4 74.0          Mar
464.6 285.4 95.5 189.9 179.2 27.8 23.3 23.0 4.5 4.5 151.4 75.0 41.3 71.4          Apr
459.8 281.3 92.2 189.1 178.5 29.0 24.7 24.4 4.4 4.3 149.4 72.8 41.2 71.1          May465.1 284.0 94.2 189.8 181.1 28.5 24.2 23.7 4.3 4.3 152.6 74.7 41.5 69.8          Jun
477.4 287.0 94.0 192.9 190.4 31.2 26.9 26.6 4.3 4.3 159.2 77.4 42.7 70.7          Jul
477.4 292.2 96.5 195.7 185.2 28.2 23.6 23.3 4.5 4.5 157.1 75.3 43.0 71.1          Aug478.5 292.6 95.8 196.9 185.9 29.8 25.6 25.3 4.2 4.2 156.0 69.3 40.8 73.1          Sep
Changes*
+ 160.9 + 94.6 + 18.2 + 76.3 + 66.4 + 3.9 + 3.3 + 2.0 + 0.6 + 0.6 + 62.5 + 43.6 + 13.7 + 11.7 2001−47.1 −37.4 + 20.3 −57.8 −9.7 −9.4 −10.0 −2.9 + 0.6 + 0.6 −0.3 −21.4 −4.4 −5.4 2002
+ 8.1 + 3.5 + 17.7 −14.2 + 4.5 + 0.6 + 0.4 −0.5 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 3.9 −2.6 −0.3 −0.5 2002          Dec
−21.0 −7.0 −3.9 −3.1 −14.1 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 1.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 −15.0 −1.3 −0.4 −0.3 2003          Jan
− 3.6 −1.2 −6.0 + 4.8 −2.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 −2.6 + 2.9 −0.5 −4.2          Feb
− 9.5 −8.9 + 0.3 −9.2 −0.7 −0.6 −0.5 −0.3 −0.1 −0.1 −0.1 −2.3 −0.6 + 0.3          Mar
+ 3.6 −0.1 + 5.6 −5.6 + 3.6 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 3.5 −2.6 −0.1 −2.1          Apr
+ 1.5 + 0.0 −3.3 + 3.3 + 1.5 + 1.2 + 1.4 + 1.4 −0.1 −0.1 + 0.2 −2.2 −0.0 + 0.9          May
+ 2.0 + 0.6 + 2.0 −1.4 + 1.4 −0.5 −0.5 −0.7 −0.1 −0.1 + 1.9 + 1.9 + 0.3 −1.8          Jun
+ 11.4 + 2.4 −0.1 + 2.6 + 9.0 + 2.7 + 2.7 + 2.9 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 6.2 + 2.7 + 1.1 + 0.6          Jul
− 3.8 + 2.7 + 2.4 + 0.3 −6.6 −3.1 −3.3 −3.3 + 0.2 + 0.2 −3.5 −2.1 + 0.3 −0.4          Aug
+ 7.5 + 4.7 −0.7 + 5.4 + 2.8 + 1.7 + 2.0 + 2.0 −0.3 −0.3 + 1.2 −6.0 −2.2 + 2.8          Sep
country of domicile are regarded as a single branch. —2Treasury bills, subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt securities. —5Issues of
Treasury discount paper and other money market paper, debt negotiable and non-negotiable debt securities and money market
securities. —3Including own debt securities. —4Excluding paper. — 6 Including subordinated liabilities. 
41*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
V  Minimum reserves
 
1  Reserve ratios
Germany European monetary union
 
% of liabilities subject to reserve requirements % of reserve base  1 
Sight Time
Applicable from liabilities liabilities Applicable from Ratio Savings deposits
1995  August 1 2    2    1.5    1999  January 1 2    
 
   
1Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank of 1 December
1998 on the application of minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which
a reserve ratio of 0 % applies, pursuant to article 4 (1)). 
 
  
2  Reserve maintenance in Germany up to the end of 1998
− pursuant to the Minimum Reserves Order of the Bundesbank −
 
DM million
Liabilities subject to reserve requirements Excess reserves  4 
Monthly Required as % of the
average  1 Total reserves  2 Level Sight liabilities Time liabilities Savings deposits Actual reserves  3 required  reserves Shortfall, total
1995          Dec 2,066,565 579,337 519,456 967,772 36,492 37,337 845 2.3 3
1996          Dec 2,201,464 655,483 474,342 1,071,639 38,671 39,522 851 2.2 41997          Dec 2,327,879 734,986 476,417 1,116,477 40,975 41,721 745 1.8 31998          Dec 2,576,889 865,444 564,878 1,146,567 45,805 46,432 627 1.4 4
1Pursuant to sections 5 to 7 of the Minimum Reserves Order. —2Amount balances of the credit institutions subject to reserve requirements on their
after applying the reserve ratios to the liabilities subject to reserve require- giro accounts at the Bundesbank. — 4 Actual reserves less required reserves. 
ments (section 5 (1) of the Minimum Reserves Order). —3Average credit
 
 
3  Reserve maintenance in the European monetary union
− from 1999, pursuant to the ECB Regulation governing minimum reserves according to article 19.1 of the
ECB/ESCB Statute −
 
Maintenance Required reserves
period before deduction Required reserves
of lump-sum Lump-sum beginning in  1 after deduction of
Reserve base  2 allowance  3 allowance  4 lump-sum allowance Actual reserves  5 Excess reserves  6 Shortfall, total  7 
European monetary union (  5  billion)
 
2003          Feb 6,474.5 129.5 0.6 128.9 129.5 0.6 0.0
         Mar 6,526.6 130.5 0.5 130.0 130.5 0.5 0.0
         Apr 6,544.6 130.9 0.5 130.3 130.8 0.5 0.0
         May 6,586.3 131.7 0.5 131.2 131.7 0.5 0.0         June 6,606.0 132.1 0.5 131.6 132.0 0.5 0.0
         July 6,633.3 132.7 0.5 132.1 132.7 0.5 0.0
         Aug 6,593.8 131.9 0.5 131.3 131.8 0.5 0.0         Sep 6,588.6 131.8 0.5 131.2 131.8 0.5 0.0
         Oct  
p 6,578.0 131.6 0.5 131.0 131.7 0.7 0.0
Of which: Germany (  5  million)
2003          Feb 1,891,376 37,828 230 37,597 37,876 279 4
         Mar 1,912,098 38,242 230 38,012 38,224 212 4
         Apr 1,906,364 38,127 229 37,898 38,090 192 4
         May 1,911,254 38,225 228 37,997 38,220 223 2         June 1,907,522 38,150 226 37,924 38,120 195 2
         July 1,908,858 38,177 223 37,954 38,172 218 3
         Aug 1,883,921 37,678 221 37,458 37,642 184 3         Sep 1,871,273 37,425 219 37,207 37,406 199 1
         Oct  
p 1,872,119 37,442 218 37,224 37,457 233 5
1The reserve maintenance period of the ESCB minimum reserve system base. —4Article 5 (2) of the Regulation of the European Central Bank of
starts on the 24th of each month and ends on the 23rd of the following 1 December 1998 on the application of minimum reserves. —5Average
month (the first reserve maintenance period lasted from January 1, 1999 to credit balances of the credit institutions subject to minimum reserve requ ire-
February 23, 1999). —2Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central ments on their reserve accounts at the respective national central bank. —
Bank of 1 December 1998 on the application of minimum reserves 6Actual reserves less required reserves after the deduction of the lump-sum
(excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio o f 0 % applies, pursuant to allowance. —7Required reserves after the deduction of the lump-sum
article 4 (1)). —3Amount after applying the reserve ratios to the reserve allowance. 
42*V  Minimum reserves

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
VI Interest rates
  
1 ECB interest rates 2 Discount and lombard rates 3 Base rates
   of the Bundesbank
  
% pa % pa % pa
Base rate as per
Main Marginal Discount Rate
Deposit refinancing lending Lombard Transition Act
Applicable from facility operations  1 facility Applicable from Discount rate rate  2,  4,  5  Applicable from 3,  4,  5  
1999 Jan                  1 2.00 3.00 4.50 1994 Feb                18 5 1/4 6 3/4 1999 Jan                  1 2.50
         Jan                  4 2.75 3.00 3.25          Apr                15 5 6 1/2          May                 1 1.95
         Jan                22 2.00 3.00 4.50          May                13 4 1/2 6 
         Apr                  9 1.50 2.50 3.50 2000 Jan                  1 2.68
         Nov                  5 2.00 3.00 4.00 1995 Mar                31 4 6          May                  1 3.42
         Aug                25 3 1/2 5 1/2          Sep                  1 4.26
2000 Feb                  4 2.25 3.25 4.25          Dec                15 3 5 
         Mar                17 2.50 3.50 4.50   2001 Sep                  1 3.62
         Apr                28 2.75 3.75 4.75 1996 Apr                19 2 1/2 4 1/2
         June                 9 3.25 4.25 5.25          to 2002 Jan                  1 2.71
         Sep                  1 3.50 4.50 5.50 1998 Dec                31          to
         Oct                  6 3.75 4.75 5.75          Apr                  3
  
2001 May               11 3.50 4.50 5.50 Base rate as per
         Aug                31 3.25 4.25 5.25 Civil Code  6 
         Sep                18 2.75 3.75 4.75
         Nov                  9 2.25 3.25 4.25 2002 Jan                  1 2.57
         July                 1 2.47
2002 Dec                  6 1.75 2.75 3.75
2003 Jan                  1 1.97
2003 Mar                  7 1.50 2.50 3.50          July                  1 1.22
         June                 6 1.00 2.00 3.00
1Up to 21 June 2000, fixed rate tenders; from 28 June 2000, variable rate Federal legislation (in the field of civil law and judicial procedural law), in
tenders at minimum bid rate. —2From 1 August 1990 to 31 December 1993 state legislation (as stipulated in the Act Introducing the Civil Code) or in
this was also the rate for cash advances; from 1 January 1994 cash advances executory instruments and contracts based on such regulations, the follow-
have no longer been granted. Wherever reference is made in an Act to the ing changes apply as from 1 January 2002: (a) the rate for cash advances ofinterest rate applicable for cash advances of the Federal Government, the the Federal Government has been replaced by the base rate in the Civilrate will be replaced by the base rate increased by 1.5 percentage points pur- Code increased by 1.5%; (b) the lombard rate has been replaced by thesuant to the Discount Rate Transition Act (see also footnote 4 (a) and 5). Pur- ECB ’s marginal lending facility rate; (c) the base rate pursuant to the Dis-
suant to the Discount Rate Transition Act, read in conjunction with the Lom- count Rate Transition Act has been replaced by the base rate pursuant tobard Rate Transition Regulation, the lombard rate has been replaced with section 247 of the Civil Code (see also footnote 5). —5Pursuant to Article 4,
effect from 1 January 1999 by the rate applied by the European Cental Bank section 1 of the Act on the Amendment of Provisions concerning the(ECB) for its marginal lending facility wherever the lombard rate is used as a Evaluation of Insurance Enterprises ’Capital Investment, the Discount Rate
reference variable for interest and other payments (see also footnote 4 (b) Transition Act, the Regulation Governing the Use of the Base Rate as aand 5). —3Pursuant to the Discount Rate Transition Act, read in con- Reference Variable and the Lombard Rate Transition Regulation have been
junction with the Regulation Governing the Use of the Base Rate as a Refer- repealed. Pursuant to Article 4 section 2 of the same Act, from 4 April 2002ence Variable, this rate has replaced the discount rate from 1 January 1999 the discount rate and the base rate under the Discount Rate Transition Actwherever the latter is used in contracts and regulations as a reference vari- were replaced by the base rate pursuant to section 247 of the Civil Code,able for interest and other payments. This base rate is the discount rate of the lombard rate by the ECB ’s marginal lending facility, and the interest
the Bundesbank which applied on 31 December 1998. It changes on 1 Janu- rate for cash advances of the Federal Government by the base rate pursuantary, 1 May and 1 September of each year, and will change for the first time to section 247 of the Civil Code increased by 1.5 percentage points. —
on 1 May 1999 if the interest rate applied by the ECB to its longer-term re- 6Starting at 3.62%, it is adjusted on 1 January and 1 July of each year (for
financing operations (marginal rate) has changed by at least 0.5 percentage the first time on 1 January 2002) by the percentage points by which the refe r-
point (see also footnote 4 (c) and 5). —4Wherever the rates listed in this ence variable (the ECB ’s most recent main refinancing operation, marginal
column are used as a reference variable for interest and other payments in rate) has increased or decreased since the last change in the bas e rate. 
  
    
4 Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders
  
    
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid Allotment Weighted
amount amount Fixed rate Minimum bid rate Marginal rate  
1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement
 5 
 million % pa ... days
Main refinancing operations
2003 Sep                24 109,738 81,000 − 2.00 2.06 2.07 14
       Oct                  1 164,023 123,000 − 2.00 2.05 2.06 14
       Oct                  8 135,884 82,000 − 2.00 2.05 2.06 14
       Oct                15 153,304 113,000 − 2.00 2.05 2.05 12
       Oct                22 119,327 90,000 − 2.00 2.04 2.05 14
       Oct                27 135,867 117,000 − 2.00 2.04 2.05 15
       Nov                  5 125,765 84,000 − 2.00 2.04 2.05 14
       Nov                11 126,830 118,000 − 2.00 2.03 2.04 15
       Nov                19 113,354 99,000 − 2.00 2.00 2.02 14
       Nov                26 126,291 126,291 − 2.00 2.00 2.02 14
       Dec                  3 137,154 121,000 − 2.00 2.00 2.03 14
       Dec                10 129,319 116,000 − 2.00 2.00 2.01 13
Longer-term refinancing operations
2003 Sep                25 28,436 15,000 −− 2.10 2.12 84
       Oct                30 32,384 15,000 −− 2.13 2.14 91
       Nov                27 25,402 15,000 −− 2.12 2.13 91
Source: ECB. —1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were   
allotted or collected.  
43*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
VI Interest rates
 
5 Money market rates, by month
 
 
% pa
Money market rates reported by Frankfurt banks  1 Euribor  3 
One- One- Three- Six- Nine- Twelve-
week month month month month month
Overnight money Three-month funds Eonia  2 funds funds funds funds funds funds
Reporting Monthly Lowest and Monthly Lowest andperiod averages highest rates averages highest rates Monthly averages
2001          Nov 3.51 3.15 −4.20 3.37 3.28 −3.50 3.51 3.48 3.43 3.39 3.26 3.20 3.20
         Dec 3.32
4 2.90 −4.05 3.33 3.26 −3.36 3.34 3.38 3.42 3.34 3.26 3.24 3.30
2002          Jan 3.29 2.45 −3.57 3.32 3.24 −3.38 3.29 3.35 3.35 3.34 3.34 3.39 3.48
         Feb 3.27 2.90 −3.35 3.34 3.31 −3.38 3.28 3.32 3.34 3.36 3.40 3.48 3.59
         Mar 3.25 2.90 −3.45 3.37 3.33 −3.45 3.26 3.33 3.35 3.39 3.50 3.65 3.82
         Apr 3.30 3.11 −3.75 3.39 3.35 −3.45 3.32 3.32 3.34 3.41 3.54 3.70 3.86
         May 3.31 3.21 −3.50 3.44 3.35 −3.52 3.31 3.34 3.37 3.47 3.63 3.80 3.96
         June 3.35 3.28 −3.65 3.45 3.40 −3.48 3.35 3.36 3.38 3.46 3.59 3.73 3.87
         July 3.30 3.15 −3.40 3.39 3.34 −3.44 3.30 3.34 3.36 3.41 3.48 3.56 3.64
         Aug 3.29 3.26 −3.36 3.33 3.29 −3.37 3.29 3.32 3.33 3.35 3.38 3.40 3.44
         Sep 3.31 3.26 −3.60 3.29 3.25 −3.34 3.32 3.32 3.32 3.31 3.27 3.23 3.24
         Oct 3.30 3.27 −3.50 3.24 3.18 −3.31 3.30 3.31 3.31 3.26 3.17 3.12 3.13
         Nov 3.30 3.10 −3.48 3.11 3.00 −3.23 3.30 3.32 3.23 3.12 3.04 3.01 3.02
         Dec 3.07 5 2.85 −3.75 2.93 2.83 −3.03 3.09 3.02 2.98 2.94 2.89 2.87 2.87
2003          Jan 2.79 2.00 −2.92 2.81 2.77 −2.86 2.79 2.85 2.85 2.83 2.76 2.72 2.70
         Feb 2.77 2.48 −2.85 2.67 2.48 −2.80 2.76 2.81 2.77 2.69 2.58 2.53 2.50
         Mar 2.71 2.33 −3.50 2.51 2.43 −2.58 2.75 2.66 2.60 2.53 2.45 2.42 2.41
         Apr 2.56 2.51 −2.75 2.52 2.47 −2.56 2.56 2.57 2.58 2.53 2.47 2.45 2.45
         May 2.56 2.15 −2.85 2.39 2.24 −2.50 2.56 2.61 2.52 2.40 2.31 2.27 2.25
         June 2.22 2.05 −2.80 2.13 2.09 −2.26 2.21 2.22 2.18 2.15 2.08 2.04 2.01
         July 2.08 1.86 −2.15 2.11 2.08 −2.14 2.08 2.12 2.13 2.13 2.09 2.07 2.08
         Aug 2.09 2.04 −2.50 2.12 2.10 −2.15 2.10 2.10 2.12 2.14 2.17 2.21 2.28
         Sep 2.03 1.35 −2.15 2.13 2.09 −2.16 2.02 2.11 2.13 2.15 2.18 2.21 2.26
         Oct 2.02 1.40 −2.11 2.13 2.09 −2.16 2.01 2.08 2.10 2.14 2.17 2.23 2.30
         Nov 1.98 1.35 −2.14 2.15 2.11 −2.17 1.97 2.06 2.09 2.16 2.22 2.31 2.41
1Money market rates are not fixed or quoted officially; the monthly aver- Moneyline Telerate (formerly Bridge Telerate). —3Euro Interbank Offered
ages computed from daily quotations are unweighted. —2Euro OverNight Rate: unweighted average rate calculated by Moneyline Telerate (formerly
Index Average: weighted average overnight rate for interbank operations Bridge Telerate) since 30 December 1998 according to the act/360
calculated by the European Central Bank since 4 January 1999 on the basis method. —4At end-December, 3.50% to 4.05%. —5At end-December,
of real turnover according to the act/360 method and published via 3.00% to 3.05%. 
 
 
6 Euro-area retail bank interest rates *, o, +
  
% pa; period averages
Deposit rates Lending rates
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of to enterprises to householdsup to and up to and up to and up to and
Reporting including including over including over including over Consumer For house
period Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months 1 year 1 year lending purchase
2000 0.85 3.45 3.45 4.52 2.25 3.79 6.60 6.23 9.87 6.34
2001  
1 0.94 3.49 3.49 4.12 2.40 3.59 6.83 6.15 10.12 5.97
2002 0.73 2.80 2.80 3.85 2.13 2.85 6.13 5.71 9.78 5.54
2002          Sep 0.73 2.77 2.77 3.64 2.13 2.73 6.12 5.61 9.85 5.38         Oct 0.72 2.74 2.74 3.58 2.11 2.63 6.13 5.54 9.72 5.26
         Nov 0.71 2.70 2.69 3.53 2.11 2.55 6.10 5.50 9.70 5.21         Dec 0.68 2.51 2.51 3.45 2.05 2.41 5.98 5.34 9.58 5.10
2003          Jan 0.63 2.43 2.42 3.29 2.04 2.34 5.87 5.27 9.48 4.91
         Feb 0.62 2.32 2.32 3.15 2.02 2.12 5.81 5.18 9.39 4.77         Mar 0.59 2.20 2.19 3.08 1.97 2.05 5.69 5.17 9.29 4.69
         Apr 0.56 2.15 2.14 3.14 1.93 2.05 5.57 5.14 9.24 4.70
         May 0.56 2.08 2.08 2.98 1.91 1.92 5.51 5.01 9.22 4.56         June 0.52 1.85 1.84 2.76 1.83 1.65 5.39 4.86 9.15 4.34
         July
+ 0.46 1.78 1.77 2.65 1.77 1.48 5.26 4.70 9.01 4.16
         Aug 0.46 1.75 1.75 2.50 1.61 1.43 5.24 4.82 9.07 4.23
         Sep 0.46 1.73 1.72 2.54 1.60 1.41 5.24 4.78 9.06 4.36
*These euro-area retail bank interest rates should be used with caution and terms of their coverage (new business and/or outstanding amounts), the
for statistical purposes only, primarily to analyse their development over nature of the data (nominal or effective) or the compilation method. The
time rather than their level. They are calculated as the weighted average of country weights for the euro-area retail bank interest rates are derivednational interest rates provided by the national central banks. The national from MFI balance sheet statistics or close proxies. The weights reflect the
rates represent those rates that are currently available from national country-specific proportions of the relevant instruments within the eurosources and which are judged to fit the standard categories. These national area, measured as outstanding amounts. The weights are adjusted monthly,rates have been aggregated to derive information for the euro area, in which means that interest rates and weights always refer to the samesome cases relying on proxies and working assumptions due to the hetero- month. —+From July 2003, the aggregated figures are partially based on
geneity observed in the national financial instruments across euro-area national estimates. —1Euro area enlarged on 1 January 2001 to include
countries. Furthermore, the national interest rates are not harmonised in Greece. 
      
o Tables and notes taken from the ECB. 
44*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
VI Interest rates
 
7 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
   Outstanding amounts o
 
Households ’ deposits Non-financial corporations ’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
up to and including 2 years over 2 years up to and including 2 years over 2 yearsEffective Effective Effective Effective
End of interest rate  
1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 
month % pa
 5 
 million % pa
 5 
 million % pa
 5 
 million % pa
 5 
 million
2003          Jan 2.65 151,997 3.33 184,483 2.72 78,517 5.00 30,799
         Feb 2.53 149,588 3.33 188,293 2.60 79,509 5.05 30,693         Mar 2.45 147,530 3.31 188,390 2.52 77,837 5.00 29,937
         Apr 2.38 144,900 3.30 188,257 2.47 78,278 5.09 29,035
         May 2.36 144,074 3.28 188,011 2.44 79,303 5.08 28,165         June 2.15 139,931 3.27 187,960 2.13 76,477 5.09 28,180
         July 2.06 137,602 3.25 187,705 2.07 77,253 5.06 28,346
         Aug 2.04 135,705 3.24 187,639 2.05 80,491 5.03 28,452         Sep 2.00 133,458 3.23 187,511 2.04 77,051 5.04 29,069
         Oct 1.99 131,553 3.22 187,892 2.02 80,075 5.02 29,042
 
 
 
Housing loans to households  3 Consumer credit and other loans to households  4, 5 
with a maturity of
up to and including over 1 year and up to up to and including over 1 year and up to
1 year  6 and including 5 years over 5 years 1 year  6 and including 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effectiveinterest interest interest interest interest interest
End of rate  
1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
month % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa
 5 
 million
 5 
 million
 5 
 million
 5 
 million
 5 
 million
 5 
 million
2003          Jan 5.86 7,556 5.46 31,290 5.96 864,296 9.19 93,025 6.65 71,201 6.41 333,989
         Feb 5.85 7,392 5.45 31,146 5.96 865,776 9.36 92,205 6.63 71,146 6.43 334,186         Mar 5.83 7,445 5.41 31,086 5.95 872,486 9.32 92,563 6.63 71,519 6.42 327,047
         Apr 5.77 7,375 5.36 31,073 5.94 872,835 9.21 91,072 6.61 71,614 6.42 328,610
         May 5.70 7,482 5.32 31,264 5.93 874,918 9.18 89,467 6.56 71,774 6.41 328,951         June 5.72 7,870 5.27 32,349 5.91 874,476 9.19 91,794 6.55 70,545 6.40 330,208
         July 5.53 7,737 5.20 32,621 5.88 876,066 9.01 89,466 6.49 71,055 6.36 332,014
         Aug 5.54 7,963 5.15 32,709 5.87 877,689 8.91 87,862 6.40 71,011 6.34 333,305         Sep 5.48 8,022 5.11 32,871 5.85 879,014 8.94 90,945 6.38 70,957 6.34 333,058
         Oct 5.50 7,772 5.07 33,146 5.83 882,459 8.87 89,275 6.36 70,622 6.32 332,145
 
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to and including 1 year  6 over 1 year and up to and including 5 years over 5 years
End of Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 
month % pa
 5 
 million % pa
 5 
 million % pa
 5 
 million
2003          Jan 5.22 205,132 4.93 88,111 5.55 491,747
         Feb 5.32 203,528 4.96 87,569 5.54 491,589         Mar 5.25 200,784 4.90 87,358 5.51 488,963
         Apr 5.19 197,032 4.84 87,555 5.49 490,877
         May 5.16 194,503 4.81 87,344 5.47 491,026         June 5.05 200,061 4.68 87,487 5.45 487,708
         July 4.92 192,725 4.58 87,735 5.42 487,473
         Aug 4.89 188,935 4.54 88,871 5.40 489,036         Sep 4.88 193,086 4.51 88,151 5.39 486,570
         Oct 4.83 188,695 4.48 88,248 5.37 487,583
*The MFI interest rate statistics are based on the interest rates applied by and loans for debt restructuring at interest rates below market rates are no t
MFIs and the related volumes of euro-denominated deposits and loans to included in the calculation. —1The effective interest rates may always be
households and non-financial corporations domiciled in the euro area. The calculated either as annualised agreed interest rates or as narrowly defi ned
household sector comprises individuals (including sole proprietors) and effective rates. Both calculation methods cover all interest payments on
non-profit institutions serving households. Non-financial corporations in- deposits and loans but not any other related charges which may occur fo r
clude all enterprises other than insurance companies, banks and other finan- enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and
cial institutions. The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis credit insurance. Disagios are regarded as interest payments and inc luded in
in the euro area from January 2003 are being collected in Germany on a the interest rate calculation. The annualised agreed interest rate and thesample basis. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as provi- narrowly defined effective rate differ in the underlying method of annua l-
sional. Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are ising interest rate payments. —2Data based on monthly balance sheet
not specially marked. Further information on the new interest rate statistics statistics. —3Secured and unsecured loans for home purchase, including
can be found on the Bundesbank ’s website (Statistics / Reporting System / building and home improvements; including loans granted by building and
Banking statistics / EWU-Zinsstatistik). This information is currently available loan associations and interim credits as well as transmitted loa ns granted by
in German only. —oThe statistics on outstanding amounts are collected at the reporting agents in their own name and for their own account. —
the end of the month. At the close of booking on the last day of the 4Consumer credits are loans granted for the purpose of personal use in the
reference month, institutions are required to identify interest rates and consumption of goods and services. —5For the purpose of these statistics,
volumes of all existing deposit and credit business and to calculate a other loans are loans granted for other purposes such as business, debtweighted average rate for each reporting category. Non-performing loans consolidation, education etc. — 6 Including overdrafts. 
45*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
VI Interest rates
 
7 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont ’d)
   New business +
 
Households ’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of  8 
up to and including over 1 year and up to up to and including
Overnight 1 year and including 2 years over 2 years 3 months over 3 months
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate  1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa
 5 
 million
 5 
 million
 5 
 million
 5 
 million
 5 
 million
 5 
 million
2003          Jan 1.20 367,117 2.60 38,283 3.06 2,532 3.52 3,568 2.39 475,951 3.31 99,697
         Feb 1.25 373,381 2.42 30,394 2.89 1,263 3.17 3,649 2.36 478,914 3.27 98,505         Mar 1.24 378,520 2.37 34,735 2.99 1,061 2.99 2,430 2.28 480,503 3.23 96,972
         Apr 1.21 380,747 2.30 34,394 3.01 1,009 2.99 2,876 2.28 481,578 3.17 94,447
         May 1.20 385,009 2.29 30,733 2.69 886 2.92 4,288 2.21 482,057 3.13 92,895         June 1.16 389,213 2.13 31,655 2.69 767 2.82 3,585 2.16 482,986 3.05 91,487
         July 1.06 389,222 1.98 29,175 2.54 665 2.63 1,689 2.11 484,903 2.97 89,440
         Aug 1.05 394,794 2.07 25,650 2.59 627 2.68 1,378 2.08 487,501 2.92 87,902         Sep 1.06 393,137 1.88 28,352 2.46 679 2.73 1,891 2.04 488,412 2.88 87,195
         Oct 1.07 395,533 1.94 28,477 2.47 986 2.93 3,332 2.10 489,364 2.83 87,310
 
 
 
Non-financial corporations ’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
over 1 year and up to
Overnight up to and including 1 year and including 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % pa
 5 
 million % pa
 5 
 million % pa
 5 
 million % pa
 5 
 million
2003          Jan 1.42 114,861 2.71 45,720 4.64 307 4.36 1,133
         Feb 1.47 115,231 2.62 39,388 3.35 196 4.48 843         Mar 1.40 112,327 2.48 31,973 2.59 259 4.03 1,664
         Apr 1.39 115,850 2.38 33,955 2.47 196 3.54 1,681
         May 1.39 118,034 2.40 33,417 2.43 56 3.40 502         June 1.25 121,685 2.05 41,507 2.29 322 3.30 887
         July 1.16 120,786 2.03 61,029 2.02 109 4.23 424
         Aug 1.16 118,994 2.00 40,582 2.52 187 3.68 2,473         Sep 1.15 124,565 1.94 34,584 2.61 210 3.92 1,179
         Oct 1.15 127,129 1.93 40,008 2.41 156 4.02 4,523
 
 
 
Loans to households
Consumer loans with an initial rate fixation of  4 Other loans with an initial rate fixation of  5 
up to and including up to and including over 1 year and up to over 1 year and up to
Total 1 year  10 over 5 years 1 year  10 over 5 years and including 5 years and including 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest interest interest interest interest interest interest
period rate  9 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 
% pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa
 5 
 million
 5 
 million
 5 
 million
 5 
 million
 5 
 million
 5 
 million
2003          Jan 7.78 5.87 3,776 6.69 4,415 8.88 2,912 4.91 16,141 5.53 1,686 5.76 2,290
         Feb 7.90 5.78 2,160 6.71 5,214 8.92 3,136 4.45 9,944 5.70 1,485 5.51 2,437         Mar 7.84 5.78 2,441 6.67 5,053 8.72 3,966 4.66 13,036 5.35 1,619 5.39 3,140
         Apr 7.82 5.68 2,303 6.67 4,880 8.83 4,109 4.65 8,388 5.27 1,834 5.47 2,764
         May 7.87 5.71 1,520 6.69 4,796 8.94 3,489 4.22 8,472 5.43 1,546 5.39 2,637         June 7.76 5.48 2,443 6.64 4,936 8.87 3,773 3.80 10,157 5.00 1,603 4.93 2,973
         July 7.83 5.58 1,913 6.59 5,969 8.75 4,405 3.76 9,268 4.94 1,802 5.06 2,654
         Aug 7.73 5.57 1,388 6.36 4,844 8.66 3,658 3.84 7,060 4.96 1,461 5.03 2,316         Sep 7.65 5.41 1,785 6.33 5,374 8.36 4,575 3.69 9,281 4.94 1,693 5.24 2,684
         Oct 7.52 5.26 2,631 6.33 5,095 8.42 4,398 3.72 11,679 5.00 3,368 5.26 2,543
For footnotes * and 1to6, see p 45*. —+In the case of deposits with an weighted average rates across all new agreements concluded during the
agreed maturity and all loans excluding overdrafts, new business covers all reporting month. In the case of overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at
new agreements between households or non-financial corporations and the notice and overdrafts, new business is collected in the same way as outstand -
bank. This includes all financial arrangements in which terms have been ing amounts for the sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding
agreed for the first time in the reporting month as well as all newly deposit and lending business at the end of the month has to be incorpor-negotiated (but extant) deposit and lending contracts. The following cases ated in the calculation of average rates of interest. —7Estimated. The
are not regarded as new business (ie they are included in outstanding volume of new business is extrapolated to form the underlying total usingamounts): (a) Prolongations of existing deposit and loan contracts that are the Horvitz-Thompson estimator. —8Including fidelity and growth
carried out automatically without any active involvement of the housholds premia. —9Annual percentage rate of charge as defined in Directive
or non-financial corporations; (b) Changes in variable interest rates caused 87/102/EEC, which contains other related charges which may occur forby pre-scheduled automatic interest rate adjustments; (c) Changes from enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guarantees andfixed to floating interest rates or vice versa which have been agreed at the credit insurance. — 10 Including variable rate loans; excluding overdrafts. 
beginning of the contract. The interest rates are calculated as volume-
46*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
VI Interest rates
 
7 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont ’d)
   New business +
 
Loans to households (cont ’d)
Housing loans with an initial rate fixation of  3 
up to and including over 1 year and up to over 5 years and up to
Overdrafts  11 Total 1 year  10 and including 5 years and including 10 years over 10 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting Volume  12 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 interest rate  1 interest rate  9 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % pa
 5 
 million % pa % pa
 5 
 milion % pa
 5 
 million % pa
 5 
 million % pa
 5 
 million
2003          Jan 10.57 66,323 5.39 5.45 3,113 4.94 2,871 5.39 6,402 5.38 3,161
         Feb 10.84 65,329 5.18 5.27 2,151 4.76 2,260 5.19 4,859 5.19 3,228         Mar 10.73 66,616 5.07 5.27 2,057 4.60 2,559 5.05 6,252 5.12 3,342
         Apr 10.71 64,751 5.04 5.23 2,321 4.48 3,135 5.03 7,423 5.17 3,661
         May 10.58 62,766 4.97 5.17 1,697 4.46 2,676 4.97 4,755 5.03 3,151         June 10.65 64,982 4.82 5.00 2,253 4.37 2,685 4.80 5,062 4.85 3,149
         July 10.44 63,287 4.69 4.58 2,805 4.16 3,589 4.70 6,864 4.85 3,973
         Aug 10.38 63,305 4.79 4.73 1,695 4.25 2,701 4.81 5,441 4.91 3,600         Sep 10.47 64,592 4.90 4.63 2,033 4.52 3,166 4.96 6,143 5.03 3,584
         Oct 10.41 62,939 4.90 4.44 2,463 4.48 3,292 5.00 6,201 5.08 3,200
 
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations
Other loans up to and including 
 5 
 1 million with an initial rate fixation of  5, 13 
over 1 year and up to
Overdrafts  11 up to and including 1 year  10 and including 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate  1 Volume  12 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % pa
 5 
 million % pa
 5 
 million % pa
 5 
 million % pa
 5 
 million
2003          Jan 6.73 96,563 5.42 8,671 5.29 1,410 5.36 1,636
         Feb 6.84 96,831 4.94 8,189 5.28 1,134 5.32 1,469         Mar 6.76 94,106 4.98 8,664 5.27 1,530 5.28 2,577
         Apr 6.71 91,535 5.06 8,346 5.18 1,489 5.26 1,645
         May 6.64 90,296 4.80 7,566 5.11 1,235 5.16 1,699         June 6.60 93,175 4.49 7,813 4.94 1,008 5.11 1,483
         July 6.51 88,185 4.39 7,881 4.88 1,575 4.90 1,620
         Aug 6.54 86,025 4.36 5,782 4.91 1,626 4.93 1,714         Sep 6.40 88,489 4.52 7,119 5.00 1,205 5.02 1,671
         Oct 6.47 83,874 4.51 7,345 4.99 1,471 5.08 1,868
 
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont ’d)
Other loans over 
 5 
 1 million with an initial rate fixation of  5, 13 
up to and including 1 year  10 over 5 years over 1 year and up to and including 5 years .
Reporting Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 
period % pa
 5 
 million % pa
 5 
 million % pa
 5 
 million
2003          Jan 4.05 42,168 4.27 3,681 4.93 4,988
         Feb 3.88 33,419 4.62 4,027 4.96 4,321         Mar 3.89 37,816 4.86 3,283 4.72 4,631
         Apr 3.87 35,932 4.12 2,944 4.85 5,828
         May 3.62 31,599 3.80 3,613 4.61 6,152         June 3.25 38,751 3.89 3,627 4.26 6,164
         July 3.32 33,140 3.91 2,885 4.27 6,336
         Aug 3.36 27,749 3.84 2,478 4.50 4,873         Sep 3.24 34,013 3.84 3,239 4.72 4,921
         Oct 3.25 34,631 4.06 3,284 4.63 5,125
For footnotes *and 1to6, see p 45*. For footnotes +and 7to10, see The volume of outstanding amounts reported is extrapolated to form the
p 46*. —11Overdrafts are defined as debit balances on current accounts. underlying total using the Horvitz-Thompson estimator. —13The amount
They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether they are within or refers to the single loan transaction considered as new business.  
beyond the limits agreed between customers and the bank. —12Estimated.
47*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
VII Capital market
 
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  *)
 
 
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities  1 Residents
Credit in- Bundes-
Sales stitutions bank
= Public Foreign including open
total Bank Indus- debt debt building marketpur- debt trial secur- secur- and loan Non- oper- Non-
Period chases Total securities bonds ities  
2 ities 3 Total  4 assc. 5 banks  6 ations  5 residents  7 
DM million
1990 244,827 220,340 136,799 − 67 83,609 24,487 225,066 91,833 133,266 − 33 19,763
1991 231,965 219,346 131,670 667 87,011 12,619 173,099 45,095 127,310 694 58,866
1992 291,762 284,054 106,857 − 175 177,376 7,708 170,873 132,236 37,368 1,269 120,887
1993 395,110 382,571 151,812 200 230,560 12,539 183,195 164,436 20,095 − 1,336 211,915
1994 303,339 276,058 117,185 − 65 158,939 27,281 279,989 126,808 154,738 − 1,557 23,349
1995 227,099 203,029 162,538 − 350 40,839 24,070 141,282 49,193 94,409 − 2,320 85,815
1996 254,359 233,519 191,341 649 41,529 20,840 148,250 117,352 31,751 − 853 106,109
1997 332,655 250,688 184,911 1,563 64,214 81,967 204,378 144,177 60,201 − 128,276
1998 418,841 308,201 254,367 3,143 50,691 110,640 245,802 203,342 42,460 − 173,038
 5 
 million
1999 292,663 198,068 156,399 2,184 39,485 94,595 155,766 74,728 81,038 − 136,898
2000 226,594 157,994 120,154 12,605 25,234 68,600 154,089 91,447 62,642 − 72,505
2001 180,899 86,656 55,918 14,473 16,262 94,245 114,467 35,848 78,619 − 66,432
2002 180,957 124,035 47,296 14,506 62,235 56,922 91,562 13,536 78,026 − 89,395
2003          Aug − 7,923 − 8,827 −10,818 1,143 849 904 640 − 14,625 15,265 −− 8,563
         Sep 18,119 12,963 9,058 267 3,638 5,156 16,404 12,630 3,774 − 1,715
         Oct 36,746 26,957 10,387 4,246 12,324 9,789 17,126 12,463 4,663 − 19,620
 
  
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-purchases shares  
8 shares  9 Total  10 tutions  5  11 Non-banks  6 residents  12 
Period
DM million
1990 50,070 28,021 22,048 52,631 7,215 45,416 − 2,561
1991 33,478 13,317 20,161 32,247 2,466 29,781 1,230
1992 32,595 17,226 15,370 40,651 2,984 37,667 − 8,055
1993 39,355 19,512 19,843 30,871 4,133 26,738 8,4851994 55,125 29,160 25,966 54,466 1,622 52,844 659
1995 46,422 23,600 22,822 49,354 11,945 37,409 − 2,931
1996 72,491 34,212 38,280 55,962 12,627 43,335 16,529
1997 119,522 22,239 97,280 96,844 8,547 88,297 22,6771998 249,504 48,796 200,708 149,151 20,252 128,899 100,352
 5 
 million
1999 150,013 36,010 114,005 103,136 18,637 84,499 46,877
2000 139,704 22,733 116,973 159,528 23,293 136,235 − 19,826
2001 82,286 17,575 64,714 − 2,127 − 14,714 12,587 84,412
2002 52,185 9,232 42,954 30,444 − 23,236 53,680 21,740
2003          Aug 391 125 266 − 1,649 − 380 − 1,269 2,040
         Sep 1,002 1,286 − 284 278 − 982 1,260 724
         Oct 2,290 744 1,546 − 9,957 454 − 10,411 12,247
*Until the end of 1999, debt securities comprise the bonds and money ment funds. —7Net purchases or net sales ( −) of domestic debt securities by
market paper of domestic banks, from January 2000 all fixed-interest non-residents; transaction values. —8At issue prices. —9Net purchases or
securities. Investment fund certificates see Table VII.6. —1Net sales at net sales ( −) of foreign shares (including direct investment) by residents;
market values plus/less changes in issuers ’portfolios of their own debt transaction values. —10Domestic and foreign shares. —11Up to the end
securities. —2Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and of 1998, excluding shares under syndicate agreement. —12Net purchases
Treuhand agency. —3Net purchases or net sales ( −) of foreign debt or net sales ( −) of domestic shares (including direct investment) −before
securities by residents; transaction values. —4Domestic and foreign debt 1989 also including domestic investment fund certificates −by
securities. —5Book values; statistically adjusted. —6Residual; also non-residents; transaction values. —The figures for the latest data are to be
including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic invest- regarded as provisional; corrections are not specially marked.  
48*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
VII Capital market
 
2 Sales of debt securities issued by borrowers domiciled in Germany  *)
 
 
Until the end of 1998 DM nominal million value, from 1999  5  million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item:
Foreign  DM/euro
Mortgage Communal bonds issued Debt securities
bonds bonds issued by spe- by German-
All bank debt (Hypotheken- ( Öffentliche Other bank Industrial Public managed cialised credit
Period Total securities pfandbriefe) Pfandbriefe) institutions bonds  2 syndicates debt securities debt securities  3 
Gross sales  4 
1990 428,698 286,709 14,923 70,701 89,755 111,326 − 141,990 35,168
1991 442,089 292,092 19,478 91,489 80,738 100,386 707 149,288 32,832
1992 572,767 318,522 33,633 134,363 49,195 101,333 − 254,244 57,282
1993 733,126 434,829 49,691 218,496 34,028 132,616 457 297,841 87,3091994 627,331 412,585 44,913 150,115 39,807 177,750 486 214,261 61,465
1995 620,120 470,583 43,287 208,844 41,571 176,877 200 149,338 102,719
1996 731,992 563,076 41,439 246,546 53,508 221,582 1,742 167,173 112,3701997 846,567 621,683 53,168 276,755 54,829 236,933 1,915 222,972 114,8131998 1,030,827 789,035 71,371 344,609 72,140 300,920 3,392 238,400 149,542
 5 
 million
1999 571,269 448,216 27,597 187,661 59,760 173,200 2,570 120,483 57,202
2000 659,148 500,895 34,528 143,107 94,556 228,703 8,114 150,137 31,597
2001 687,988 505,646 34,782 112,594 106,166 252,103 11,328 171,012 10,6052002 818,725 569,232 41,496 119,880 117,506 290,353 17,574 231,923 10,313
2003          July 91,686 63,280 4,410 8,695 16,651 33,525 1,778 26,628 −
         Aug 59,741 43,662 1,936 9,084 11,248 21,394 810 15,269 −
         Sep 79,597 55,626 4,795 10,870 12,361 27,600 632 23,339 −
         Oct 92,016 59,710 3,240 6,347 12,925 37,198 1,159 31,148 1,500
of which: Debt securities with a maturity of over 4 years  5 
1990 272,642 133,347 10,904 43,250 26,767 52,425 − 139,295 29,791
1991 303,326 172,171 11,911 65,642 54,878 39,741 707 130,448 22,772
1992 430,479 211,775 28,594 99,627 40,267 43,286 − 218,703 51,939
1993 571,533 296,779 43,365 160,055 26,431 66,923 230 274,524 82,0491994 429,369 244,806 36,397 109,732 29,168 69,508 306 184,255 53,351
1995 409,469 271,763 30,454 141,629 28,711 70,972 200 137,503 85,221
1996 473,560 322,720 27,901 167,811 35,522 91,487 1,702 149,139 92,5821997 563,333 380,470 41,189 211,007 41,053 87,220 1,820 181,047 98,4131998 694,414 496,444 59,893 288,619 54,385 93,551 2,847 195,122 139,645
 5 
 million
1999 324,888 226,993 16,715 124,067 37,778 48,435 2,565 95,331 44,013
2000 319,330 209,187 20,724 102,664 25,753 60,049 6,727 103,418 27,008
2001 299,751 202,337 16,619 76,341 42,277 67,099 7,479 89,933 6,4802002 309,157 176,486 16,338 59,459 34,795 65,892 12,149 120,527 9,213
2003          July 36,234 21,806 1,825 2,727 9,622 7,631 1,500 12,928 −
         Aug 24,361 16,156 965 3,871 6,108 5,212 657 7,548 −
         Sep 29,022 20,045 2,205 5,841 3,387 8,612 43 8,934 −
         Oct 33,947 14,192 749 2,290 1,758 9,396 473 19,281 1,500
Net sales  6 
1990 226,707 140,327 − 3,922 − 72 73,287 71,036 − 67 86,449 21,717
1991 227,822 139,396 4,729 22,290 65,985 46,390 558 87,868 18,583
1992 304,751 115,786 13,104 58,235 19,585 24,864 − 175 189,142 34,114
1993 403,212 159,982 22,496 122,917 − 13,156 27,721 180 243,049 43,701
1994 270,088 116,519 18,184 54,316 − 6,897 50,914 − 62 153,630 21,634
1995 205,482 173,797 18,260 96,125 3,072 56,342 − 354 32,039 61,020
1996 238,427 195,058 11,909 121,929 6,020 55,199 585 42,788 69,9511997 257,521 188,525 16,471 115,970 12,476 43,607 1,560 67,437 63,1811998 327,991 264,627 22,538 162,519 18,461 61,111 3,118 60,243 84,308
 5 
 million
1999 209,096 170,069 2,845 80,230 31,754 55,238 2,185 36,840 22,728
2000 155,615 122,774 5,937 29,999 30,089 56,751 7,320 25,522 − 16,705
2001 84,122 60,905 6,932 − 9,254 28,808 34,416 8,739 14,479 − 30,657
2002 131,976 56,393 7,936 − 26,806 20,707 54,561 14,306 61,277 − 44,546
2003          July 18,004 11,754 1,117 − 3,774 5,454 8,957 1,276 4,974 − 6,254
         Aug − 6,667 − 9,184 − 993 − 886 3,240 − 10,545 725 1,792 − 1,233
         Sep 9,794 9,725 1,682 − 1,645 3,626 6,062 230 − 161 − 4,765
         Oct 27,014 7,854 − 1,366 − 6,267 4,983 10,504 795 18,365 − 2,967
*For definitions see the notes in the Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. —4Gross sales means only
Report 2, Capital market statistics. —1Excluding registered bank debt initial sales of newly issued securities. —5Maximum maturity according to
securities. —2Debt securities of enterprises. —3Including Federal Railways the terms of issue. — 6 Gross sales less redemptions. 
49*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
VII Capital market
 
3 Outstanding amount of debt securities issued by borrowers domiciled in Germany  * 
 
 
Until the end of 1998 DM million nominal value, from 1999  5  million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item:
 Foreign  DM/euro
End of year Mortgage Communal bonds issued
or month/ bonds bonds by German- Debt securities of
Maturity All bank specialised Other bank Industrial Public managed (Öffentliche (Hypotheken-
in years Total bonds syndicates credit institutions debt securities debt securities debt securities Pfandbriefe) pfandbriefe)
DM million
1990 1,458,943 900,977 138,025 369,901 155,045 238,005 2,604 555,362 223,176
1991 1,686,765 1,040,374 142,757 392,190 221,031 284,396 3,161 643,230 241,760
1992 1,991,515 1,156,162 155,862 450,424 240,616 309,259 2,983 832,370 275,873
1993 2,394,728 1,316,142 178,357 573,341 227,463 336,981 3,163 1,075,422 319,575
1994 2,664,814 1,432,661 196,541 627,657 219,214 389,249 3,101 1,229,053 341,210
1995 2,870,295 1,606,459 214,803 723,781 222,286 445,589 2,746 1,261,090 402,229
1996 3,108,724 1,801,517 226,711 845,710 228,306 500,790 3,331 1,303,877 472,180
1997 3,366,245 1,990,041 243,183 961,679 240,782 544,397 4,891 1,371,313 535,359
1998 3,694,234 2,254,668 265,721 1,124,198 259,243 605,507 8,009 1,431,558 619,668
 5 
 million
1999 2,097,926 1,322,863 134,814 655,024 163,284 369,741 6,280 768,783 339,560
2000 2,265,121 1,445,736 140,751 685,122 157,374 462,488 13,599 805,786 322,856
2001 2,349,243 1,506,640 147,684 675,868 201,721 481,366 22,339 820,264 292,199
2002 2,481,220 1,563,034 155,620 649,061 222,427 535,925 36,646 881,541 247,655
2003          Aug 2,575,022 1,591,710 158,840 626,502 256,245 550,123 52,916 930,395 208,261
         Sep 2,584,816 1,601,436 160,522 624,858 259,871 556,185 53,146 930,234 203,497
         Oct 2,611,829 1,609,289 159,156 618,591 264,854 566,688 53,941 948,599 200,530
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  2 Position at end-October 2003 
938,461 634,430 52,769 238,148 71,105 272,406 18,565 285,467 64,906    less than 2
619,084 426,155 46,607 183,557 80,129 115,864 14,306 178,623 42,998 2 to less than 4
426,738 258,979 33,491 103,743 49,479 72,264 5,247 162,515 56,664 4 to less than 6
250,375 135,685 17,753 59,223 21,445 37,264 7,410 107,280 20,873 6 to less than 8
189,439 74,503 7,887 20,794 16,966 28,856 5,453 109,483 5,995 8 to less than 10
55,339 38,220 614 8,121 7,240 22,245 1,060 16,058 5,048 10 to less than 15
18,044 13,685 35 1,742 6,215 5,692 432 3,928 1,207 15 to less than 20
114,347 27,633 − 3,261 12,274 12,098 1,469 85,245 2,839 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers ’portfolios. — debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of the residual
1Excluding debt securities handed to the trustee for temporary safe amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc. 
custody. —2Calculated from month under review until final maturity for
50* 
 
4 Circulation of shares issued by residents of Germany
  
Until the end of 1998 DM million nominal value, from 1999  5  million nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies ’ capital due to
Memo item:
Share circulationat market values
Share Net increase or cash payment contribution (market capita-
capital= and ex- merger reduction lisation) net decrease(-) contribution of shares,
change of of claims and circulation at during period mining shares, of capital level at end
under issue of and other transfer change of and of period end of period convertible GmbH shares,
Period under review review bonds  
1 etc. of assets bonus shares real assets legal form liquidation under review  2 
DM million
1990 144,686 12,650 7,362 751 3,715 1,049 − 43 1,284 − 1,466 .
1991 151,618 6,932 3,656 610 2,416 407 − 182 411 − 386 .
1992 160,813 9,198 4,295 728 1,743 1,073 − 732 3,030 − 942 .
1993 168,005 7,190 5,224 772 387 876 10 707 − 783 .
1994 o 190,012 14,237 6,114 1,446 1,521 1,883 − 447 5,086 − 1,367 .
1995 211,231 21,217 5,894 1,498 1,421 1,421 − 623 13,739 − 2,133 .
1996 3 216,461 7,131 8,353 1,355 396 1,684 − 3,056 833 − 2,432 .
1997 221,575 5,115 4,164 2,722 370 1,767 − 2,423 197 − 1,678 .
1998 238,156 16,578 6,086 2,566 658 8,607 − 4,055 3,905 − 1,188 .
 5 
 million
1999 133,513 11,747 5,519 2,008 190 1,075 2,099 1,560 − 708 1,603,304
2000 147,629 14,115 3,620 3,694 618 8,089 − 1,986 1,827 − 1,745 1,353,000
2001 166,187 18,561 7,987 4,057 1,106 8,448 1,018 − 905 − 3,152 1,205,613
2002 168,716 2,528 4,307 1,291 486 1,690 − 868 − 2,152 − 2,224 647,492
2003          Aug 161,545 − 785 80 217 5 13 − 225 − 825 − 50 775,402
         Sep 162,925 1,380 450 103 51 217 974 − 243 − 171 746,482
         Oct 162,701 − 224 315 75 0 14 − 439 66 − 256 803,272
oFrom January 1994 including the shares of east German companies whose shares are listed on the free market. Source: Bundesbank calculations
(resultant increase in share circulation: DM 7,771 million). —1Including share based on data of the "Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mitteilungen"
issues out of company profits. —2Including enterprises whose shares are lis- and the "Deutsche B örse AG". —3Figure reduced by DM 1,902 million
ted on the official market, on the regulated market or on the Neuer Markt owing to revisions. 
(stock market segment was closed down on 24 March 2003) and enterprises
50*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
VII Capital market
 
5 Yields and indices on German securities
 
 
               
Yields on bonds outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices  2 , 3 
Public bonds Bank debt securities Bonds Shares
Memo item:
Listed Foreign
Federal securities DM/euro
bonds
With re- With re- issued by German Germansidual matur- sidual matur- German- bond iBoxx- CDAX share
managed index index ities of over 9 ities of over 9 Industrial
 5 -Germany- share price
Total Total Total Total to 10 years bonds (REX) price index index (DAX) to 10 years  4 syndicates  1,5 
Average End- End- End-
Period % p.a. daily rate 1998=100 1987=100 1987=1000
1990 8.9 8.8 8.8 8.7 9.0 8.9 9.0 9.2 93.50 . 145.00 1,398.23
1991 8.7 8.6 8.6 8.5 8.9 8.6 8.9 9.2 96.35 . 148.16 1,577.981992 8.1 8.0 8.0 7.8 8.3 8.1 8.7 8.8 101.54 . 134.92 1,545.051993 6.4 6.3 6.3 6.5 6.5 6.8 6.9 6.8 109.36 . 191.13 2,266.681994 6.7 6.7 6.7 6.9 6.8 7.2 7.0 6.9 99.90 . 176.87 2,106.58
1995 6.5 6.5 6.5 6.9 6.5 7.2 6.9 6.8 109.18 . 181.47 2,253.88
1996 5.6 5.6 5.6 6.2 5.5 6.4 5.8 5.8 110.37 . 217.47 2,888.691997 5.1 5.1 5.1 5.6 5.0 5.9 5.2 5.5 111.01 . 301.47 4,249.691998 4.5 4.4 4.4 4.6 4.5 4.9 5.0 5.3 118.18 100.00 343.64 5,002.391999 4.3 4.3 4.3 4.5 4.3 4.9 5.0 5.4 110.60 92.52 445.95 6,958.14
2000 5.4 5.3 5.2 5.3 5.6 5.8 6.2 6.3 112.48 94.11 396.59 6,433.61
2001 4.8 4.7 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.3 5.9 6.2 113.12 94.16 319.38 5,160.102002 4.7 4.6 4.6 4.8 4.7 5.1 6.0 5.6 117.56 97.80 188.46 2,892.63
2003          Aug 3.8 3.9 3.9 4.1 3.8 4.4 4.4 4.6 117.58 97.43 223.55 3,484.58
         Sep 3.8 3.9 3.9 4.2 3.8 4.4 4.5 4.5 118.79 98.57 210.34 3,256.78
         Oct 3.9 3.9 4.0 4.2 3.8 4.4 4.4 4.5 116.90 96.85 234.95 3,655.99
         Nov 4.0 4.1 4.1 4.4 4.0 4.5 4.4 4.3 116.48 96.20 240.05 3,745.95
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of included in the calculation. Monthly figures are calculated on the basis of
issue of over 4 years, if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Conver- the yields on all the business days of a month. The annual figures are the un-
tible debt securities, etc., debt securities with unscheduled redemption, weighted means of the monthly figures. —2End of year or month. —
zero-coupon bonds, floating-rate notes and bonds not denominated in DM 3Source: German Stock Exchange plc. —4Only bonds eligible as underlying
or euros are not included. Group yields for the various categories of secu- instruments for futures contracts are included; calculated as unweighted
rities are weighted with the amounts outstanding of the debt securities averages. — 5 As far as quoted on German stock exchanges. 
 
 
6 Sales and purchases of investment fund certificates in Germany
  
Sales of investment fund certificates Purchases
Domestic funds (sales receipts) Residents
Investment funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Non-banks  2 and loanassociations  1 
of which
of which of which
Sales Open- Special- Foreign Foreign= Secur- end ised invest- invest-total Money ities- real invest- ment mentpur- market based estate ment Foreign fund cer- fund cer- Non-resi-chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  
3 Total Total tificates Total tificates dents  4 
Period
DM million
1990 25,788 26,857 7,904 − 8,032 − 128 18,952 −1,069 25,766 4,296 − 362 21,470 − 707 22
1991 50,064 37,492 13,738 − 11,599 2,144 23,754 12,572 49,890 8,594 − 5 41,296 12,577 174
1992 81,514 20,474 −3,102 −− 9,189 6,087 23,575 61,040 81,518 10,495 2,152 71,023 58,888 − 4
1993 80,259 61,672 20,791 − 6,075 14,716 40,881 18,587 76,258 16,982 2,476 59,276 16,111 4,001
1994 130,995 108,914 63,263 31,180 24,385 7,698 45,650 22,081 125,943 9,849 − 689 116,094 22,770 5,052
1995 55,246 54,071 16,777 6,147 3,709 6,921 37,294 1,175 56,295 12,172 188 44,123 987 −1,049
1996 83,386 79,110 16,517 −4,706 7,273 13,950 62,592 4,276 85,704 19,924 1,685 65,780 2,591 −2,318
1997 145,805 138,945 31,501 −5,001 30,066 6,436 107,445 6,860 149,977 35,924 340 114,053 6,520 −4,172
1998 187,641 169,748 38,998 5,772 27,814 4,690 130,750 17,893 190,416 43,937 961 146,479 16,507 −2,775
 5 
 million
1999 111,282 97,197 37,684 3,347 23,269 7,395 59,513 14,086 105,521 19,862 − 637 85,659 14,722 5,761
2000 117,676 85,160 39,712 −2,188 36,818 −2,824 45,448 32,516 106,674 14,454 92 92,220 32,424 11,000
2001 96,511 76,811 35,522 12,410 9,195 10,159 41,289 19,701 95,407 10,251 2,703 85,156 16,997 1,105
2002 66,267 59,482 25,907 3,682 7,247 14,916 33,575 6,784 66,507 2,100 3,007 64,407 3,778 − 241
2003          Aug 2,785 2,484 1,809 − 334 1,535 620 675 301 2,031 608 358 1,423 − 57 754
         Sep 2,592 2,837 − 292 − 52− 454 236 3,129 − 245 3,505 74 − 1 3,431 − 244 − 913
         Oct 732 292 − 8− 980 548 432 301 440 − 459 − 4,363 − 5 3,904 445 1,191
1Book values. —2Residual. —3Net purchases or net sales ( −) of foreign non-residents; transaction values (before 1989 classified as shares). —The
investment fund certificates by residents; transaction values. —4Net figures for the latest data are to be regarded as provisional; corrections are
purchases or net sales ( −) of domestic investment fund certificates by not specially marked. 
51*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
1 General government budgetary position *
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999,  5  billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds  2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which
Other
operat- Fixed Compen-
of ing ex- asset Finan- Ex- Ex- sation
which pend- Current forma- cial Re- pend- Re- pend- of em-
Period Total Taxes  3 Total  4 ployees iture grants Interest tion aid  5 Balance venue  6 iture Balance venue iture Balance
1993 928.7 749.1 1,060.2 296.8 136.0 340.5 102.1 97.0 87.3 −131.5 660.8 658.7 + 2.1 1,492.1 1,621.5 −129.4
1994 995.2 786.2 1,102.2 315.5 137.3 353.4 114.0 93.2 86.5 −106.9 694.1 693.7 + 0.4 1,596.4 1,702.9 −106.5
1995 1,026.4 814.2 1,136.4 324.8 135.5 367.2 129.0 90.1 86.3 −110.1 731.2 743.8 −12.5 1,664.9 1,787.5 −122.6
1996 1,000.3 800.0 1,121.8 326.2 137.0 362.2 130.7 83.9 80.1 −121.5 769.4 784.0 −14.6 1,665.6 1,801.6 −136.1
1997 1,014.3 797.2 1,108.9 325.0 135.7 356.3 132.1 80.1 79.2 −94.5 797.3 794.5 + 2.9 1,705.3 1,797.0 −91.7
1998 1,072.1 833.0 1,128.8 325.4 137.4 373.7 133.7 79.7 79.8 −56.7 812.2 808.9 + 3.3 1,765.5 1,818.9 −53.4
1999 566.1 453.1 592.9 168.7 72.4 202.7 69.8 40.8 38.0 −26.8 429.1 425.6 + 3.5 925.2 948.6 −23.4
2000  p 612.3 467.3 595.5 169.3 73.7 205.7 67.6 40.7 37.9 + 16.8 433.8 434.2 −0.4 974.6 958.2 + 16.4
2001  7,pe 554.0 446.2 601.0 169.9 70.1 213.5 66.6 40.9 39.6 −47.0 445.0 449.1 −4.1 921.8 972.9 −51.1
2002  pe 547.5 441.7 607.3 173.1 69.0 226.0 66.1 38.2 33.8 −59.8 458.1 466.5 −8.5 920.8 989.0 −68.3
2002          Q1 118.3 98.6 150.2 39.9 15.3 57.9 24.0 6.5 6.0 −31.8 111.3 112.8 −1.5 206.4 239.8 −33.4
         Q2 137.8 105.1 141.8 40.4 15.6 58.5 11.9 7.8 6.7 −4.0 113.0 115.6 −2.6 228.9 235.6 −6.6
         Q3 135.3 109.4 148.7 41.4 16.5 54.7 19.2 9.7 7.8 −13.4 113.1 116.6 −3.5 228.0 244.9 −16.9
         Q4  p 154.4 129.0 164.7 49.9 21.1 55.8 10.7 13.5 13.4 −10.3 119.3 120.0 −0.7 254.7 265.7 −11.0
2003          Q1  p 117.2 96.3 154.5 40.9 15.6 61.8 23.6 5.6 6.5 −37.3 116.3 116.8 −0.5 207.7 245.5 −37.8
         Q2  p 135.8 108.9 143.8 40.9 15.5 61.2 10.8 7.5 7.5 −8.0 115.5 118.4 −2.9 228.2 239.1 −10.9
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical for some insurance sectors are estimated. —3The tax revenue shown here
Office. —*The budgetary definition used here differs from that employed is taken from the budget statistics and may differ from the data given in
for the government account in the national accounts and, in the case of the Table VIII.4, which are based on the tax statistics. —4Including
quarterly figures, in some respects also from the financial statistics. — discrepancies in clearing transactions between central, state and local
1Including subsidiary budgets. Unlike the annual figure based on the government. —5Expenditure on investment grants, loans and acquisition
annual accounts statistics of the Federal Statistical Office, the quarterly of participating interests. —6Including Federal Government liquidity
figures do not include municipal special purpose associations and various assistance to the Federal Labour Office. —7Owing to modifications of the
special accounts. For more details on revenue from the Bundesbank profit, system of classification, shifts occurred, in particular, between othersee footnote 1 to Table VIII.2. —2The annual figures differ from the sum of operating expenditure and current grants. 
the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. The quarterly figures
2 Budgetary position of central, state and local government *
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999,  5  billion
Central government State government Local government
Western  2,3 Eastern  3 Western  3 Eastern  3 
Period Revenue  1 Expenditure Revenue Expenditure Revenue Expenditure Revenue Expenditure Revenue Expenditure
1993 401.6 462.5 326.5 352.8 76.4 92.5 222.5 230.9 54.4 59.0
1994 439.6 478.9 328.8 357.0 79.3 95.9 228.9 235.1 53.9 59.2
1995 439.3 489.9 338.6 370.2 88.4 101.5 225.6 237.9 58.7 60.8
1996 411.9 490.4 344.8 379.7 93.7 105.5 227.7 232.9 55.0 57.71997 416.8 480.3 349.2 376.5 94.3 105.2 222.9 226.9 52.6 54.21998 439.0 495.6 360.5 380.3 96.4 104.7 231.4 226.3 51.5 52.41999 240.3 266.5 191.6 196.6 50.0 53.3 119.8 117.5 26.1 26.3
2000  
4 292.1 265.2 193.4 200.9 50.7 53.6 122.4 120.5 25.6 25.6
2001  pe 239.9 260.9 184.0 207.1 49.7 53.2 119.2 123.4 24.8 25.4
2002  pe 238.9 271.5 181.8 206.7 46.6 53.7 119.5 123.7 25.1 25.4
2002          Q1 47.4 68.9 42.4 49.4 10.2 12.0 24.7 29.1 5.2 5.4
         Q2 56.3 62.6 43.3 48.8 11.1 11.9 28.8 29.1 5.9 5.8         Q3 62.7 70.6 45.3 49.3 11.8 12.9 29.1 30.5 6.1 6.2         Q4  
p 72.5 69.5 50.2 58.5 13.5 16.1 37.0 35.4 7.8 7.7
2003          Q1  p 46.6 71.9 42.2 51.1 9.7 12.6 25.2 29.4 5.3 5.6
         Q2  p 59.1 64.6 44.4 50.2 12.0 12.0 26.7 29.1 5.6 5.8
52*Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Inherited Liabilities. —2Including (eastern and western) Berlin, Bremen and
Office. —*See corresponding footnote to Table VIII.1. —1Up to 1994, the Hamburg. —3Unlike the annual figure based on the annual accounts
Bundesbank profit transfer is shown in full; from 1995 onwards, only the statistics of the Federal Statistical Office, the quarterly figures do not
DM7 billion envisaged in the budget is shown. From 1995, revenue over and include various special accounts. —4Including proceeds from the sale of
above the envisaged amount accrues directly to the Redemption Fund for UMTS licences. 
52*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
3 Government fiscal position as defined in the national accounts *
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999,  5  billion
Item 1995  1 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000  2 2001  pe 2002  pe 
Revenue 1,647.8 1,704.0 1,726.8 1,775.9 943.2 965.5 951.0 954.1
of which
Taxes 825.8 850.0 856.9 897.4 490.4 511.7 488.3 486.0Social contributions 662.5 696.7 720.1 727.7 375.4 378.1 383.6 389.0
Expenditure 1,764.9 1,826.6 1,826.5 1,859.6 972.6 989.5 1,009.9 1,028.4of which
Intermediate consumption 143.2 142.7 140.2 144.1 76.2 78.0 81.1 84.5Compensation of Employees 315.9 319.6 319.0 319.3 165.4 165.7 165.5 167.7
Interest 128.9 131.7 133.2 136.4 68.9 68.4 67.7 65.2
Social benefits  
3 902.8 970.7 984.7 998.4 523.1 532.7 548.7 572.9
Gross capital formation 80.5 76.4 69.4 69.9 37.8 37.0 35.9 34.3
Net lending/net borrowing − 117.1 − 122.7 − 99.7 − 83.7 − 29.4 − 24.0 − 58.9 − 74.3
as a percentage of GDP − 3.3 − 3.4 − 2.7 − 2.2 − 1.5 − 1.2 − 2.8 − 3.5
Memo item
Debt as defined in the
Maastricht Treaty 2,010.0 2,143.9 2,232.9 2,298.2 1,210.3 1,221.8 1,232.8 1,283.5
as a percentage of GDP 57.1 59.8 61.0 60.9 61.2 60.2 59.5 60.8
Source: Federal Statistical Office. —*Figures in accordance with ESA 95. In terms, the deficit amounted to 9.8% of GDP. —2Adjusted for proceeds
contrast to the figures shown by the Federal Statistical Office, totals include from the sale of UMTS licences. The figures of the Federal Statistical Office
(without affecting net lending/net borrowing) customs duties, the EU share record such proceeds (
 5 
50.85 billion) under "net increase in non-produced
in VAT revenue and EU subsidies. —1Adjusted for the balance of notional assets", with the result that government expenditure is lower and a surplus
capital transfers between government and the corporate sector, mainly in (
 5 
22.8 billion or 1.1% of GDP) is shown. —3Including social benefits in
connection with the dissolution of the Treuhand agency. In unadjusted kind. 
4 Tax revenue of central, state and local government
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999,  5  million
Central and state government and European Union Local government  4 
State government
of which of which Balance of
Central Eastern European Eastern untransferred
Period Total Total  1 government  2 Total Germany Union  3 Total Germany tax shares  5 
1991 661,920 577,150 321,334 224,321 19,139 31,495 84,633 2,540 + 137
1992 731,738 638,423 356,849 247,372 23,807 34,203 93,374 4,034 − 58
1993 749,119 653,015 360,250 256,131 27,542 36,634 95,809 5,863 + 2951994 786,162 688,785 386,145 261,947 32,052 40,692 97,116 7,677 + 260
1995 814,190 719,332 390,807 288,520 . 40,005 94,498 8,460 + 359
1996 799,998 706,071 372,390 294,232 . 39,449 94,641 7,175 − 714
1997 797,154 700,739 368,244 290,771 . 41,724 96,531 7,703 − 117
1998 833,013 727,888 379,491 306,127 . 42,271 104,960 8,841 + 1641999 453,068 396,734 211,727 164,724 . 20,284 56,333 4,810 + 1
2000 467,253 410,117 219,034 169,249 . 21,833 57,241 4,895 − 104
2001 446,248 392,189 213,342 159,115 . 19,732 54,047 4,590 + 12
2002 441,703 389,162 214,371 156,231 . 18,560 52,490 4,769 + 51
2003          Q2 108,777 95,360 51,614 38,249 . 5,497 12,528 1,047 + 890
         Q3 . 96,012 52,229 38,203 . 5,580 . . .
2003          June . 37,773 20,224 15,741 . 1,807 . . .
         July . 31,520 17,327 12,334 . 1,858 . . .
         Aug . 27,902 15,111 10,944 . 1,846 . . .         Sep . 36,590 19,790 14,925 . 1,876 . . .
         Oct . 28,389 16,562 11,140 . 688 . . .
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. —1Including receipts from the 1988. —4Including local government taxes in Berlin, Bremen and
Equalisation of Burdens levies.  —2Before deducting supplementary Hamburg. —5Difference between the local government ’s share in the
central government grants and shares in the revenue of mineral oil tax income taxes received by the state government cash offices in the period in
remitted to state government. —3Including the additional (GNP-related) question (see Table VIII.5) and the amounts passed on to local government
revenue accruing to the EU from the central government tax revenue from during the same period. 
53*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
5 Tax revenue, by type
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999,  5  million
Joint taxes Memo
item
Income taxes  2 Turnover taxes  5,6 Localgovern-
As- Invest- Central State ment
Local
sessed ment Value- Turnover govern- govern- EU share in business
Wage income Corpora- income added tax on ment ment customs income tax trans-
Period Total  1 Total tax  3 tax tion tax taxes  4 Total tax (VAT) imports taxes  8 taxes  8 duties taxes  9 fers 6,7 
1991 615,506 298,804 214,175 41,532 31,716 11,381 179,672 98,797 80,875 5,986 92,583 29,113 8,307 38,356
1992 681,751 331,310 247,322 41,531 31,184 11,273 197,712 117,274 80,438 6,923 104,802 32,963 7,742 43,3281993 697,988 341,785 257,987 33,234 27,830 22,734 216,306 174,492 41,814 4,181 93,678 34,720 7,240 44,9731994 734,234 343,055 266,522 25,510 19,569 31,455 235,698 195,265 40,433 6,271 105,410 36,551 7,173 45,450
1995 765,374 344,554 282,701 13,997 18,136 29,721 234,622 198,496 36,126 8,412 134,013 36,602 7,117 46,042
1996 746,958 317,807 251,278 11,616 29,458 25,456 237,208 200,381 36,827 8,945 137,865 38,540 6,592 40,8871997 740,272 313,794 248,672 5,764 33,267 26,092 240,900 199,934 40,966 8,732 135,264 34,682 6,900 39,5331998 775,028 340,231 258,276 11,116 36,200 34,640 250,214 203,684 46,530 10,284 130,513 37,300 6,486 47,1401999 422,012 184,408 133,809 10,887 22,359 17,353 137,155 111,600 25,555 5,463 72,235 19,564 3,186 25,277
2000 436,115 192,381 135,733 12,225 23,575 20,849 140,871 107,140 33,732 5,521 75,504 18,444 3,394 25,998
2001 417,358 170,817 132,626 8,771 −426 29,845 138,935 104,463 34,472 5,510 79,277 19,628 3,191 25,170
2002 414,008 165,096 132,190 7,541 2,864 22,502 138,195 105,463 32,732 5,752 83,494 18,576 2,896 24,846
2003          Q2 101,351 40,199 31,683 2,596 1,221 4,698 33,301 24,958 8,343 1,641 20,786 4,753 672 5,991
         Q3 102,140 39,615 32,137 2,982 1,180 3,315 34,211 26,102 8,110 1,800 21,225 4,534 756 6,129
2003          June 40,433 20,683 10,669 5,216 2,629 2,170 11,113 8,487 2,626 37 6,792 1,608 199 2,660
         July 33,363 11,162 11,942 −1,631 −716 1,567 11,388 8,577 2,811 1,219 7,758 1,586 250 1,843
         Aug 29,604 9,199 10,559 −1,182 −1,186 1,007 11,726 9,027 2,699 566 6,422 1,453 238 1,702
         Sep 39,174 19,254 9,636 5,795 3,081 741 11,097 8,498 2,599 15 7,045 1,495 267 2,583         Oct 29,966 9,003 9,753 −1,093 −354 698 11,104 8,120 2,985 1,140 6,934 1,523 262 1,577
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. —1This total, unlike that in Table the statutory pension insurance scheme, with 2.2% of the balance accruing
VIII.4, does not include the receipts from the Equalisation of Burdens levies, to local government; of the residual balance, 50.5% was allocated to ce ntral
local business tax on earnings and capital (less local business tax tranfers to government and 49.5% to state government; in 2000 and 2001, 50.25% was
central and state government), the real property taxes and other local allocated to central government and 49.75% to state government; sincegovernment taxes, or the balance of untransferred tax shares. —2From 2002 49.6% has been allocated to central government and 50.4% to state
1980, the revenue from wage tax and assessed income tax has been government. The EU share must also be deducted from the aforementionedallocated to central, state and local government in the ratio of 42.5:42.5:15, central government share. —6Since 1991 the distribution of turnover tax
and revenue from corporation tax and investment income tax has been and the level and distribution of local business tax transfers have beenallocated to central and state government in the ratio of 50:50. —3From affected by the financing of the debt service of the German Unity Fund. —
1996, after deducting child benefit. —4From February 1993, including 7Central government and state government 50% each. From 1998, central
revenue from the withholding tax on interest income, in which local government 42.2%, state government 57.8%. —8For the breakdown, see
government has a share of 12%. —5In 1998, 3.64% and from 1999, 5.63% Table VIII.6. — 9 From 1998, including the share in turnover taxes. 
was allocated to central government to finance the supplementary grant to
6 Specific taxes levied by central, state and local government
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999,  5  million
Central government taxes State government taxes Local government taxes
Other Other Other
central state local
Insur- Electri- govern- Motor Inherit- govern- Local Real govern-
Mineral Tobacco Spirits ance city ment vehicle Wealth ance Beer ment busi- property ment
Period oil tax tax tax tax tax taxes  1 tax tax tax tax taxes ness taxes taxes  3 
1991 47,266 19,592 5,648 5,862 . 14,215 11,012 6,729 2,636 1,647 7,090 41,297 9,921 1,181
1992 55,166 19,253 5,545 8,094 . 16,744 13,317 6,750 3,030 1,625 8,241 44,848 10,783 1,2811993 56,300 19,459 5,134 9,290 . 3,495 14,059 6,784 3,044 1,769 9,065 42,266 11,663 1,3831994 63,847 20,264 4,889 11,400 . 5,011 14,169 6,627 3,479 1,795 10,482 44,086 12,664 1,445
1995 64,888 20,595 4,837 14,104 . 29,590 13,806 7,855 3,548 1,779 9,613 42,058 13,744 1,426
1996 68,251 20,698 5,085 14,348 . 29,484 13,743 9,035 4,054 1,718 9,990 45,880 14,642 1,4631997 66,008 21,155 4,662 14,127 . 29,312 14,418 1,757 4,061 1,698 12,749 48,601 15,503 1,5091998 66,677 21,652 4,426 13,951 . 23,807 15,171 1,063 4,810 1,662 14,594 50,508 16,228 1,5321999 36,444 11,655 2,233 7,116 1,816 12,973 7,039 537 3,056 846 8,086 27,060 8,636 824
2000 37,826 11,443 2,151 7,243 3,356 13,485 7,015 433 2,982 844 7,171 27,025 8,849 784
2001 40,690 12,072 2,143 7,427 4,322 12,622 8,376 290 3,069 829 7,064 24,534 9,076 7902002 42,193 13,778 2,149 8,327 5,097 11,951 7,592 239 3,021 811 6,913 23,489 9,261 696
2003          Q2 10,741 3,600 467 1,594 1,588 2,797 1,977 80 899 200 1,597 6,321 2,585 161
         Q3 10,607 3,749 521 1,724 1,855 2,768 1,776 36 844 228 1,651 . . .
2003          June 3,575 679 160 483 579 1,316 634 63 321 73 518 . . .
         July 3,564 1,836 207 419 886 846 688 15 250 79 555 . . .
         Aug 3,400 747 156 934 477 708 536 8 287 79 543 . . .         Sep 3,643 1,166 158 371 493 1,214 551 13 307 70 554 . . .
         Oct 3,305 1,734 199 385 607 703 581 10 287 68 576 . . .
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. —1Other excise taxes and the income until mid-1992, and again since the beginning of 1995. —2On earnings and
and corporation tax surcharge ("solidarity surcharge") levied from mid-1991 capital. — 3 Including tax-like revenue.   
54*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
7 General government debt *
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999,  5  million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
Treasury Five-year lending arising  from
Bundes- discount Federal Federal by credit Social German Equalisa-
End of year bank paper Treasury notes savings institu- security tion unifica-
or month Total advances (Bubills)  1 notes  2,3 (Bobls)  2 notes Bonds  2 tions  4 funds Other  4 tion 5 claims Other  6 
General government
1997 2,215,893 . 26,336 249,507 177,721 99,317 662,516 879,021 663 29,907 1,315 89,376 216
1998 2,280,154 . 25,631 227,536 199,774 92,698 723,403 894,456 550 26,073 1,249 88,582 2021999 1,199,975 . 12,594 102,364 120,998 41,621 416,051 450,111 281 10,200 476 45,175 1052000 1,211,439 . 11,616 109,951 126,276 35,991 438,888 433,443 211 10,524 285 44,146 1082001 1,223,929 . 23,036 151,401 130,045 26,395 448,148 422,440 174 13,110 85 8,986 108
2002          Sep 1,269,119 . 31,440 193,052 135,502 19,752 462,459 401,797 227 16,893 50 7,848 102
         Dec 1,277,630 . 30,815 203,951 137,669 17,898 456,300
r 404,046 r 137 r 18,844 29 7,845 97
2003          Mar 1,311,333 . 30,630 220,438 143,172 15,434 469,566 r 401,492 r 135 r 22,528 −1 7,845 95
         June 1,325,969 . 31,165 232,373 150,627 14,284 462,639 r 401,353 r 135 r 25,460 −4 7,845 92
Central government 7,8 
1997 905,691 . 25,286 78,848 177,721 99,317 481,619 31,845 5 870 1,300 8,684 197
1998 957,983 . 24,666 84,760 199,274 92,698 519,718 24,125 − 2,603 1,270 8,684 186
1999 714,069 . 11,553 44,335 120,498 41,621 379,808 67,872 60 2,568 476 45,175 104
2000 715,819 . 11,516 44,678 123,642 35,991 400,490 52,836 29 2,099 285 44,146 1072001 701,077 . 21,136 59,643 119,911 26,395 416,195 47,111 26 1,481 85 8,986 107
2002          Sep 726,896 . 30,982 72,762 125,316 19,752 429,452 39,392 0 1,242 50 7,848 101
         Dec 725,405 . 30,227 78,584 127,484 17,898 422,558 39,517 0 1,167 29 7,845 97
2003          Mar 745,400 . 30,085 80,348 132,987 15,434 435,146 42,281 − 1,183 −1 7,845 94
         June 749,920 . 30,416 82,834 140,442 14,284 428,166 43,744 − 2,102 −4 7,845 91
         Sep 766,213 . 32,892 85,526 136,544 13,754 434,085 49,360 186 7,076 −6 6,706 90
State government (western)
1997 505,297 . 350 86,639 . . . 406,499 47 11,760 . − 2
1998 525,380 . 520 83,390 . . . 430,709 43 10,716 . − 2
1999 274,208 . 150 43,033 . . . 226,022 23 4,979 . − 1
2000 282,431 . − 48,702 . . . 227,914 22 5,792 . . 1
2001 305,788 . 1,800 67,721 . . . 228,270 5 7,991 . . 1
2002          Sep 320,617 . 250 92,220 . . . 216,121 79 11,946 . . 1
         Dec 328,390 . 250 97,556 . . . r 217,333 r 5r 13,246 . . 1
2003          Mar 339,986 . 300 109,109 . . . r 213,990 r 7r 16,579 . . 1
         June 345,390 . 322 116,274 . . . r 209,820 r 8r 18,966 . . 1
         Sep p 348,006 . 322 118,815 . . . 208,313 3 20,552 . . 1
State government (eastern)
1997 90,174 . 700 27,540 . . . 61,697 15 222 . . .1998 98,192 . 445 27,228 . . . 70,289 − 230 . . .
1999 53,200 . 891 14,517 . . . 37,602 − 189 . . .
2000 55,712 . 100 16,092 . . . 39,339 − 182 . . .
2001 58,771 . 100 20,135 . . . 37,382 − 1,154 . . .
2002          Sep 61,533 . 208 24,097 . . . 35,860 − 1,368 . . .
         Dec 63,782 . 338 23,838 . . .
r 37,739 −r 1,867 . . .
2003          Mar 64,965 . 245 26,134 . . . r 36,351 −r 2,235 . . .
         June 66,910 . 427 28,418 . . . r 36,204 −r 1,861 . . .
         Sep p 66,595 . 211 28,260 . . . 36,214 − 1,911 . . .
Local government (western) 9 
1997 160,162 . . 300 . . 1,330 154,145 149 4,238 . . .1998 158,960 . . 300 . . 1,330 153,208 119 4,003 . . .1999 81,511 . . 153 . . 680 78,726 53 1,898 . . .2000 81,414 . . 153 . . 680 78,656 33 1,891 . . .2001 82,203 . . 153 . . 629 79,470 29 1,922 . . .
2002          Sep 84,000 . . 153 . . 629 81,268 30 1,920 . . .
         Dec 84,097 . . 153 . . 629 81,307 22 1,986 . . .
2003          Mar 85,100 . . 153 . . 578 82,369 20 1,980 . . .
         June 88,000 . . 153 . . 578 85,269 20 1,980 . . .
Local government (eastern) 9 
1997 38,688 . . 225 . . 400 37,623 273 167 . . .1998 39,873 . . 225 . . 460 38,777 255 156 . . .1999 20,726 . . 51 . . 335 20,138 124 78 . . .2000 17,048 . . 51 . . 335 16,497 114 50 . . .2001 17,005 . . − . . 284 16,581 107 33 . . .
2002          Sep 16,700 . . − . . 284 16,276 110 30 . . .
         Dec 16,745 . . − . . 284 16,318 102 41 . . .
2003          Mar 16,680 . . − . . 284 16,256 100 40 . . .
         June 16,750 . . − . . 284 16,326 100 40 . . .
For footnotes, see end of the table. 
55*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
7 General government debt * (cont ’d)
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999,  5  million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
Treasury Five-year lending arising  from
Bundes- discount Federal Federal by credit Social German Equalisa-
End of year bank paper Treasury notes savings institu- security tion unifica-
or month Total advances (Bubills)  1 notes  2,3 (Bobls)  2 notes Bonds  2 tions  4 funds Other  4 tion 5 claims Other  6 
German Unity Fund/Indemnification Fund 7 
1997 79,717 . −−− . 44,347 34,720 5 645 . . .
1998 79,413 . −−− . 47,998 30,975 − 440 . . .
1999 40,234 . − 275 500 . 28,978 10,292 − 189 . . .
2000 40,629 . − 275 2,634 . 29,797 7,790 − 133 . . .
2001 39,923 . − 3,748 10,134 . 21,577 4,315 − 149 . . .
2002          Sep 40,047 . − 3,820 10,134 . 22,049 4,019 − 2 6...
         Dec 39,810 . − 3,820 10,134 . 22,685 3,146 − 2 6...
2003          Mar 39,833 . . 4,694 10,134 . 23,420 1,585 −− ...
         June 39,600 . . 4,694 10,134 . 23,443 1,329 −− ...
         Sep 39,625 . . 4,694 10,134 . 24,005 793 −− ...
ERP Special Fund 7 
1997 33,650 . .... 10,810 22,840 −− ...
1998 34,159 . .... 11,944 20,988 − 1,227 . . .
1999 16,028 . . . − . 6,250 9,458 21 299 . . .
2000 18,386 . . . − . 7,585 10,411 13 377 . . .
2001 19,161 . . . − . 9,462 9,310 8 381 . . .
2002          Sep 19,327 . . . 51 . 10,045 8,863 8 361 . . .
         Dec 19,400 . . . 51 . 10,144 8,686 8 512 . . .
2003          Mar 19,369 . . . 51 . 10,138 8,660 8 512 . . .
         June 19,399 . . . 51 . 10,169 8,660 8 512 . . .         Sep 19,399 . . . 51 . 10,169 8,660 8 512 . . .
Federal Railways Fund 7,8 
1997 77,254 . . 1,927 − . 25,634 44,807 115 4,772 . . .
1998 77,246 . . − 500 . 31,648 42,488 79 2,531 . . .
1999          June 39,231 . . − 1,023 . 16,805 20,401 34 968 . . .
Debt Processing Fund/Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities 7,8 
1997 322,032 . − 54,028 − . 98,377 81,616 54 7,233 15 80,692 17
1998 304,978 . − 31,633 − . 110,006 79,226 54 4,167 −20 79,899 15
1999          June 151,097 . − 11,127 2,000 . 58,897 36,133 27 2,015 −9 40,902 4
Equalisation Fund for Safeguarding the Use of Coal 7,8 
1997 3,229 . .... − 3,229 −− ...
1998 3,971 . .... 3 0 0 3,671 −− ...
1999          June 2,302 . .... 1 5 3 2,148 −− ...
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical 6Old debt mainly denominated in foreign currency, in accordance with the
Office. —*Excluding intergovernment debt. —1Predominantly Treasury London Debts Agreement; excluding debt securities in own portfolios. —
discount paper (Bubills). —2Excluding issuers ’holdings of their own 7In contrast to the capital market statistics, the debt incurred through the
securities. —3Treasury notes issued by state government include long-term joint issuance of Federal securities is recorded here under central
paper. —4Mainly loans against borrowers ’notes. Including loans raised government and its special funds in accordance with the agreed distribution
abroad. Other loans from non-banks, including loans from supplementary ratios. —8Since 1 July 1999 central government has assumed joint
public pension funds and liabilities arising from the investment assistance responsibility for the debts of the Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabi lities,
levy. —5Old liabilities arising from housing construction and liabilities the Federal Railways Fund and the Equalisation Fund for Safeguarding the
arising from housing construction by the former GDR ’s armed forces and Use of Coal. From July, the aforementioned special funds are recorded
from housing construction in connection with the return of the troops of under central government. —9Data other than year-end figures have been
the former USSR stationed in eastern Germany to their home country. — estimated. Including debt of municipal special purpose associations. 
56*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
8 Change in general government debt *
  
  
Net borrowing  1 
End of 2002 2003
2002 Total Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 1st hf Q1 Q2 June 2003
Item  5  million
Borrowers
Central government  2 725,405 749,920 + 24,328 + 20,542 −4,833 + 10,110 −1,491 + 24,515 + 19,995 + 4,520
German Unity Fund 39,441 39,183 − 197 + 64 −− − 261 − 258 − 2− 256
ERP Special Fund 19,400 19,399 + 239 − 63 + 210 + 19 + 73 − 1− 31 + 30
Indemnification Fund 369 416 + 84 + 19 + 21 + 19 + 25 + 47 + 25 + 23
State government (western) 328,390 345,390 + 22,603 + 4,422 + 4,237 + 6,170 + 7,774 + 17,000 + 11,596 + 5,404
State government (eastern) 63,782 66,910 + 5,011 + 372 + 1,013 + 1,377 + 2,249 + 3,128 + 1,183 + 1,945Local government (western)  
3 84,097 88,000 + 2,630 + 275 + 1,000 + 900 + 455 + 3,742 + 2,003 + 1,739
Local government (eastern)  3 16,745 16,750 − 242 − 32 − 180 − 30 − 1+ 1 7 − 46 + 63
Total 1,277,630 1,325,969 + 54,455 + 25,599 + 1,468 + 18,564 + 8,823 + 48,190 + 34,722 + 13,468
Debt by category
Treasury  discount 30,815 31,165 + 7,779 −5,219 + 4,434 + 9,188 − 625 + 350 − 185 + 535 paper  (Bubills)  4 
Treasury notes  5 203,951 232,373 + 52,551 + 7,294 + 18,301 + 16,056 + 10,900 + 28,422 + 16,486 + 11,936
Five-year Federal notes (Bobls)  5 137,669 150,627 + 7,623 + 3,375 − 132 + 2,213 + 2,167 + 12,958 + 5,504 + 7,455
Federal savings notes 17,898 14,284 −8,497 −3,748 −2,012 − 884 −1,854 −3,614 −2,464 −1,150
Bonds  5 456,300 462,639 + 8,152 + 13,469 + 2,289 −1,446 −6,159 + 6,339 + 13,266 −6,927
Direct lending bycredit institutions  
6  r 404,046 401,353 −17,640 + 8,297 −21,875 −6,624 + 2,562 −2,842 −1,535 −1,307
Loans from social security funds  r 137 135 − 37 + 44 + 21 − 12 − 90 − 1− 2+ 1
Other loans  6  r 18,803 25,419 + 5,733 + 2,124 + 447 + 1,212 + 1,950 + 6,616 + 3,684 + 2,932
Old debt  7 126 88 − 67 − 36 − 6− 0− 25 − 39 − 33 − 6
Equalisation claims 7,845 7,845 −1,142 −− − 1,139 − 3+ 0 −+0
Investment assistance levy 41 41 − 0− 0 −+0 +0 +0 +0 − 0
Total 1,277,630 1,325,969 + 54,455 + 25,599 + 1,468 + 18,564 + 8,823 + 48,190 + 34,722 + 13,468
Creditors
Banking system
Bundesbank 4,440 4,440 −−−−−−−−
Credit institutions  r 532,800 537,400 − 846 + 11,671 −13,200 + 270 + 413 + 4,451 + 13,319 −8,868
Domestic non-banks
Social security funds  r 137 135 − 37 + 44 + 21 − 12 − 90 − 1− 2+ 1
Other  8  r 229,753 237,394 −2,062 + 1,684 −2,053 − 794 − 899 + 7,641 + 1,905 + 5,736
Foreign creditors  pe 510,500 546,600 + 57,400 + 12,200 + 16,700 + 19,100 + 9,400 + 36,100 + 19,500 + 16,600
Total 1,277,630 1,325,969 + 54,455 + 25,599 + 1,468 + 18,564 + 8,823 + 48,190 + 34,722 + 13,468
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical own securities. —6Including loans raised abroad. —7Old liabilities arising
Office. —*Excluding intergovernment debt. —1Net borrowing differs from housing construction and liabilities arising from the housing
from the change in debt, which includes the assumption and transfer of construction of the former GDR ’s armed forces and from housing
debts. —2See Table VIII.7, footnote 8. —3Data other than year-end construction in connection with the return of the troops of the former USSR
figures have been estimated. Including debt of municipal special purpose stationed in eastern Germany to their home country, and old debt in
associations. —4Excluding mobilisation and liquidity paper. Predominantly accordance with the London Debts Agreement. —8Ascertained as a
Treasury discount paper (Bubills). —5Excluding issuers ’holdings of their residual. 
9 Loans raised by general government against borrowers ’ notes
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999,  5  million
Redemption Equalisation
Central German ERP Federal Fund for Fund  for Safe-
End of year govern- Unity Special State Local Railways Inherited guarding  the
or month Total  1 ment  2,3 Fund Fund government government  4,5 Fund  3 Liabilites  3 Use of Coal 3 
1998 898,030 23,094 31,415 22,215 504,148 184,942 45,098 83,447 3,671
1999 444,031 64,704 10,481 9,778 264,158 94,909 −− −
2000 431,364 54,731 7,178 10,801 268,362 90,292 −− −
2001 416,067 44,791 4,464 9,699 267,988 89,126 −− −
2002 June 404,661 40,431 4,172 9,256 262,574 88,228 −− −
Sep 401,432 39,267 4,044 9,231 260,611 88,280 −− −
Dec 398,910 34,636 3,172 9,205 262,840 89,057 −− −
2003 Mar 396,685 33,202 1,585 9,180 264,827 87,892 −− −
June 396,008 33,375 1,329 9,180 263,083 89,041 −− −
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical 3See Table VIII.7, footnote 8. —4Data other than year-end figures have
Office. —1Excluding Debt Register claims and cash advances. Including been estimated. Including municipal special purpose associations. —
small amounts of mortgage loans, land charges in annuity and other forms, 5 Including contractually agreed loans. 
and debts outstanding. —2Including Equalisation of Burdens Fund. —
57*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
10 Central government debt
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999,  5  million
Treasury discount Indebtedness
paper (Bubills)  1 to non-banks Old debt
of which Direct
Federal Federal Five-year lending arising  from
Treasury Treasury Federal Federal Federal by credit Social German Equal-
End of year financing notes notes savings bonds institu- security isation unifica-
or month Total Total paper (Sch ätze) 2 (Bobls)  2 notes (Bunds)  2 tions  3,4 funds Other  3,5,6 tion 7 claims Other  8 
1996 839,883 26,789 7,166 55,289 176,164 96,391 434,295 32,988 5 7,766 1,330 8,684 183
1997 905,691 25,286 5,221 78,848 177,721 99,317 481,619 31,845 5 870 1,300 8,684 1971998 957,983 24,666 4,558 84,760 199,274 92,698 519,718 24,125 − 2,603 1,270 8,684 186
1999  
9 714,069 11,553 1,584 44,335 120,498 41,621 379,808 67,872 60 2,568 476 45,175 104
2000 715,819 11,516 1,805 44,678 123,642 35,991 400,490 52,836 29 2,099 285 44,146 1072001 701,077 21,136 1,658 59,643 119,911 26,395 416,195 47,111 26 1,481 85 8,986 1072002 725,405 30,227 1,618 78,584 127,484 17,898 422,558 39,517 0 1,167 29 7,845 97
2002          Nov 734,678 30,466 1,622 78,933 126,472 17,852 434,650 37,089 0 1,242 28 7,848 99
         Dec 725,405 30,227 1,618 78,584 127,484 17,898 422,558 39,517 0 1,167 29 7,845 97
2003          Jan 743,400 30,218 1,549 84,053 127,786 15,408 426,630 50,171 0 1,167 30 7,845 95
         Feb 745,992 30,081 1,462 84,808 129,055 15,515 428,692 48,701 0 1,167 36 7,845 94         Mar 745,400 30,085 1,375 80,348 132,987 15,434 435,146 42,281 − 1,183 −1 7,845 94
         Apr 747,512 30,048 1,308 80,447 133,377 15,458 429,019 50,040 − 1,183 4 7,845 92
         May 749,175 30,490 1,275 85,842 134,238 14,414 431,160 43,917 − 1,183 −2 7,845 89
         June 749,920 30,416 1,236 82,834 140,442 14,284 428,166 43,744 − 2,102 −4 7,845 91
         July 760,392 30,842 1,207 87,689 141,157 13,804 426,319 51,688 − 2,102 −7 6,706 91
         Aug 764,368 31,420 1,206 88,295 135,298 13,754 433,479 53,227 − 2,102 −7 6,706 93
         Sep 766,213 32,892 1,229 85,526 136,544 13,754 434,085 49,360 186 7,076 −6 6,706 90
         Oct 769,146 33,239 1,218 90,274 142,861 12,761 439,993 35,959 186 7,076 2 6,706 89         Nov 
p 768,930 34,154 1,188 90,602 143,566 12,781 435,626 38,142 186 7,076 2 6,706 89
1Excluding mobilisation and liquidity paper. In November 1999, including with the return of the troops of the former USSR stationed in eastern
cash bills. —2Excluding issuers ’holdings of their own securities. — Germany to their home country. —8Commutation and compensation debt
3Including loans raised abroad. —4Including money market loans. — and old debt mainly denominated in foreign currency. —9Since 1 July 1999
5Including loans granted by supplementary pension funds for government central government has assumed joint responsibility for the debts of the
employees. —6Including liabilities arising from the investment assistance Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, the Federal Railways Fund and
levy. —7Assumption of liabilities arising from housing construction for the the Equalisation Fund for Safeguarding the Use of Coal. From July 1999, the
former GDR ’s armed forces and from housing construction in connection aforementioned special funds are included under central government. 
11 Central government borrowing in the market
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999,  5  million
of which
Five-year Loans against Change in
Total new borrowing Federal bonds (Bunds) Federal notes (Bobls) Other securities  2 borrowers ’ notes Money money
market market
Period Gross  1 Net Gross  1 Net Gross  1 Net Gross  1 Net Gross Net loans deposits
1996 + 185,696 + 83,049 + 54,038 + 31,988 + 45,445 + 5,445 + 67,015 + 39,586 + 15,050 + 1,906 + 4,148 + 6,548
1997 + 250,074 + 65,808 + 79,323 + 47,323 + 59,557 + 1,557 + 98,275 + 24,983 + 12,950 − 8,009 − 30 − 3,304
1998 + 228,050 + 52,292 + 78,304 + 38,099 + 55,078 + 21,553 + 85,706 − 1,327 + 12,023 − 2,927 − 3,065 − 5,440
1999 + 139,865 + 31,631 + 53,931 + 114,080 + 22,229 + 18,610 + 44,904 − 5,836 + 14,861 + 52,897 + 3,937 + 1,832
2000 + 122,725 + 1,750 + 49,395 + 20,682 + 26,342 + 3,144 + 45,278 − 5,323 + 7,273 − 9,973 − 5,563 − 940
2001 + 135,018 − 14,741 + 36,511 + 15,705 + 19,603 − 3,730 + 69,971 + 14,989 + 5,337 − 9,941 + 3,595 − 1,495
2002 + 178,203 + 24,328 + 41,378 + 6,364 + 36,037 + 7,572 + 93,853 + 19,535 + 4,716 −10,155 + 2,221 + 22
2002          Jan-Nov + 160,903 + 33,601 + 40,767 + 18,455 + 35,182 + 6,561 + 81,580 + 20,077 + 4,641 − 9,021 − 1,266 + 213
2003          Jan-Nov  p + 213,615 + 43,525 + 61,967 + 13,068 + 42,462 + 16,082 + 97,137 + 10,827 + 10,381 + 3,051 + 1,669 + 74
2002          Nov + 23,264 + 5,880 + 8,900 + 8,900 + 8,562 + 518 + 5,171 − 141 + 543 − 3,487 + 88 − 564
         Dec + 17,300 − 9,273 + 611 −12,092 + 854 + 1,012 + 12,273 − 542 + 76 − 1,134 + 3,487 − 191
2003          Jan + 34,388 + 17,995 + 11,187 + 4,071 + 292 + 302 + 10,732 + 2,969 + 628 − 895 + 11,549 + 449
         Feb + 14,560 + 2,592 + 2,063 + 2,063 + 7,831 + 1,269 + 5,793 + 725 + 40 − 305 − 1,166 + 112
         Mar + 11,908 − 592 + 6,451 + 6,454 + 3,924 + 3,933 + 7,071 − 4,536 + 633 − 234 − 6,170 + 6
         Apr + 17,202 + 2,112 + 3,736 − 6,127 + 380 + 390 + 5,001 + 86 + 100 − 225 + 7,984 − 92
         May + 15,681 + 1,663 + 2,133 + 2,141 + 8,260 + 861 + 10,443 + 4,794 + 565 − 404 − 5,720 + 61
         June + 20,815 + 745 + 2,025 − 2,994 + 6,192 + 6,204 + 11,496 − 3,212 + 1,156 + 801 − 54 − 215
         July + 31,062 + 10,472 + 11,352 − 1,847 + 693 + 715 + 10,241 + 4,801 + 4,153 + 3,321 + 4,623 − 124
         Aug + 15,812 + 3,976 + 7,161 + 7,161 + 657 − 5,859 + 6,329 + 1,134 + 1,440 + 1,315 + 225 + 328
         Sep + 23,605 + 1,845 + 6,694 + 606 + 1,246 + 1,246 + 13,693 − 1,297 + 977 + 298 + 995 − 73
         Oct + 11,968 + 2,933 + 8,442 + 5,908 + 6,317 + 6,317 + 10,100 + 4,102 + 296 − 214 −13,187 − 188
         Nov p + 16,614 − 216 + 722 − 4,367 + 6,671 + 705 + 6,238 + 1,263 + 394 − 408 + 2,590 − 189
1After deduction of repurchases. —2Federal Treasury notes (Sch ätze),   
Federal savings notes, Treasury discount paper (Bubills), Federal Treasury   
financing paper.  
58*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
12 Revenue, expenditure and assets of the wage and
salary earners ’ pension insurance fund
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999,  5  million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 Assets  5 
of which of which
Payments Balance Mort- Memo
from Pen- of revenue gage item
central Pension sioners ’ and and Adminis-
Contri- govern- pay- health expend- other Real trative
Period Total butions  2 ment Total ments  3 insurance  4 iture Total Deposits  6 Securities loans  7 estate assets
Western Germany
1996  8 288,761 236,036 50,478 288,716 237,464 16,809 + 45 14,456 9,608 2,119 2,500 229 8,863
1997 305,606 248,463 54,896 295,635 246,011 17,892 + 9,971 14,659 10,179 1,878 2,372 230 9,261
1998 317,340 250,063 65,191 304,155 254,783 18,636 + 13,185 18,194 14,201 1,493 2,274 226 9,573
1999 169,124 128,191 39,884 159,819 134,536 9,910 + 9,305 13,623 11,559 824 1,127 114 4,904
2000 173,020 128,057 43,638 166,569 139,180 10,253 + 6,451 14,350 11,459 1,676 1,105 110 4,8892001  
8 178,293 130,064 46,710 172,382 144,374 10,610 + 5,911 13,973 10,646 1,517 1,699 111 4,917
2002 182,132 131,109 49,416 178,754 149,636 11,245 + 3,378 9,826 6,943 1,072 1,685 126 4,878
2002          Q1 43,411 30,893 12,212 43,792 36,898 2,719 − 381 11,943 8,712 1,427 1,698 106 4,933
         Q2 44,541 31,949 12,222 43,927 36,784 2,711 + 614 10,663 7,490 1,366 1,696 111 4,954
         Q3 45,371 32,663 12,280 44,799 37,746 2,872 + 572 8,911 5,919 1,182 1,689 121 4,947         Q4 48,213 35,599 12,279 45,928 37,894 3,056 + 2,285 9,826 6,943 1,072 1,685 126 4,878
2003          Q1 45,408 31,969 13,173 45,117 38,234 2,900 + 291 8,686 5,649 1,230 1,685 122 4,874
         Q2 46,373 32,875 13,212 45,379 38,127 2,898 + 994 7,698 4,906 980 1,686 126 4,867         Q3 47,229 33,668 13,296 46,157 38,652 3,000 + 1,072 6,348 3,822 727 1,683 116 4,855
Eastern Germany
1996 74,790 46,580 17,910 83,830 68,316 4,851 −9,040 . . . . . .
1997 79,351 48,939 20,065 87,424 70,500 5,388 −8,073 . . . . . .
1998 81,072 47,764 23,564 90,863 73,040 5,757 −9,791 . . . . . .
1999 43,214 24,015 14,744 47,641 38,383 3,040 −4,427 . . . . . .
2000 43,513 22,655 15,224 49,385 39,419 3,112 −5,872 . . . . . .
2001 44,462 21,984 16,383 50,943 40,356 3,152 −6,481 . . . . . .
2002  p 45,657 21,701 17,542 53,161 41,497 3,253 −7,504 . . . . . .
2002          Q1 11,070 5,157 4,410 13,106 10,373 793 −2,036 . . . . . .
         Q2 11,493 5,455 4,558 13,046 10,228 797 −1,553 . . . . . .
         Q3 10,757 5,275 4,334 13,391 10,530 832 −2,634 . . . . . .
         Q4 11,955 5,810 4,306 13,397 10,547 842 −1,442 . . . . . .
2003          Q1 11,187 5,320 4,588 13,359 10,649 827 −2,172 . . . . . .
         Q2 11,457 5,474 4,537 13,405 10,636 837 −1,948 . . . . . .
         Q3 11,461 5,417 4,534 13,548 10,757 858 −2,087 . . . . . .
Source: Federal Minister of Labour and Social Affairs and Association of deducted from pension payments. —4From 1995, including long-term care
German Pension Insurance Funds. —1The annual figures do not tally with insurance for pensioners. —5Largely corresponds to fluctuation reserves.
the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. From 1993, End of year or quarter. From 1992, figures for the whole of Germany. —
including financial compensation payments. Excluding investment spending 6Including cash. —7Excluding loans to other social security funds;
and proceeds. —2Including contributions for recipients of government including participating interests. —8Excluding income arising from the
cash benefits. —3Payments by pension insurance funds to health insurance revaluation of participating interests. 
institutions under section 50 of the Social Security Code V have been
13 Revenue and expenditure of the Federal Labour Office
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999,  5  million
Revenue Expenditure
Grant or
of which of which working
capital
Promo- loans
Unemployment support  3,4 Job promotion  4,5 tion of fromwinter central
Contri- Western Eastern Western Eastern con- govern-
Period Total  
1 butions Levies  2 Total Total Germany Germany Total Germany Germany struction Balance ment
Germany
1996 91,825 85,073 3,346 105,588 57,123 40,186 16,938 36,478 18,368 18,111 903 −13,763 13,756
1997 93,149 85,793 2,959 102,723 60,273 40,309 19,964 31,418 16,117 15,301 443 −9,574 9,574
1998 91,088 86,165 2,868 98,852 53,483 35,128 18,355 34,279 16,784 17,496 471 −7,764 7,719
1999 47,954 45,141 1,467 51,694 25,177 16,604 8,573 20,558 10,480 10,078 279 −3,740 3,739
2000 49,606 46,359 1,403 50,473 23,946 15,615 8,331 20,324 10,534 9,790 294 − 868 867
2001 50,682 47,337 1,640 52,613 25,036 16,743 8,294 20,713 11,094 9,619 268 −1,931 1,931
2002 50,885 47,405 2,088 56,508 27,610 19,751 7,860 21,011 11,568 9,443 245 −5,623 5,623
2002          Q1 11,502 11,188 51 13,093 6,587 4,608 1,979 4,665 2,523 2,142 139 −1,591 3,720
         Q2 12,200 11,459 433 14,141 7,098 5,005 2,093 5,230 2,903 2,327 97 −1,941 2,200
         Q3 12,710 11,808 528 13,905 6,708 4,839 1,869 5,182 2,849 2,334 7 −1,195 854
         Q4 14,473 12,951 1,077 15,369 7,218 5,299 1,919 5,933 3,293 2,640 2 − 896 −1,151
2003          Q1 11,617 11,281 48 14,408 7,647 5,422 2,225 4,785 2,576 2,209 180 −2,790 5,151
         Q2 12,272 11,487 536 14,667 7,975 5,708 2,267 4,721 2,623 2,098 84 −2,395 2,408
         Q3 12,828 11,797 619 13,645 7,251 5,313 1,938 4,453 2,462 1,991 7 − 817 514
Source: Federal Labour Office. —1Excluding central government liquidity insurance funds and statutory pension insurance sheme. —5Vocational
assistance. —2Levies to promote winter construction and to pay bank- training, measures to encourage job take-up, rehabilitation, job creation
ruptcy compensation to employees. —3Unemployment benefit, short-time measures, subsidies granted to Personnel Service Agencies (PSAs),
working benefit. —4Including contributions to the statutory health compensation top-up payments and business start-up grants. 
59*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
IX Economic conditions
  
1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
  Germany
  
  
1st half 1st half
  1999   2000   2001   2002   2003   2000   2001   2002   2003   1999   2000   2001   2002
Annual Percentage
Item
 5 
 billion percentage change of total
At  1995  prices
I Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 430.5 447.3 444.3 443.8 218.0 3.9 −0.7 −0.1 0.7 22.5 22.7 22.4 22.3
Construction 105.1 102.1 95.8 90.1 40.5 −2.9 −6.1 −5.9 −6.9 5.5 5.2 4.8 4.5
Wholesale/retail trade, hotel andrestaurant services, transportand storage  
1 334.5 353.5 367.6 371.3 182.0 5.7 4.0 1.0 0.7 17.5 17.9 18.5 18.7
Financing, renting and businessservices  
2 546.6 570.9 589.7 595.9 295.2 4.4 3.3 1.1 0.3 28.5 29.0 29.7 29.9
Public and private services  3 382.1 388.4 389.6 394.8 196.9 1.6 0.3 1.3 0.0 20.0 19.7 19.6 19.8
All economic sectors 1,823.5 1,886.7 1,911.5 1,919.9 944.6 3.5 1.3 0.4 0.1 95.2 95.8 96.2 96.5Memo item: Enterprise sector 1,596.1 1,658.5 1,684.3 1,693.4 831.2 3.9 1.6 0.5 0.1 83.4 84.2 84.8 85.1
Economic sectors, adjusted  
4 1,730.5 1,786.4 1,806.6 1,815.2 891.4 3.2 1.1 0.5 −0.1 90.4 90.7 91.0 91.2
Gross domestic product 1,914.8 1,969.5 1,986.2 1,989.7 978.1 2.9 0.8 0.2 −0.2 100 100 100 100
II Use of domestic product
Private consumption  5 1,099.1 1,120.6 1,136.9 1,125.3 553.1 2.0 1.4 −1.0 0.3 57.4 56.9 57.2 56.6
Government consumption 374.3 378.0 382.0 388.4 192.1 1.0 1.0 1.7 0.3 19.5 19.2 19.2 19.5Machinery and equipment 160.3 176.5 167.8 152.5 71.3 10.1 −4.9 −9.1 −2.2 8.4 9.0 8.4 7.7
Premises 248.7 242.1 230.5 217.1 99.1 −2.6 −4.8 −5.8 −5.7 13.0 12.3 11.6 10.9
Other investment  
6 23.4 25.5 27.0 27.4 13.6 9.0 5.6 1.6 1.6 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.4
Changes in inventories  7 −5.7 −8.1 −24.7 −22.0 6.2 . . . . −0.3 −0.4 −1.2 −1.1
Domestic use 1,900.2 1,934.7 1,919.4 1,888.6 935.4 1.8 −0.8 −1.6 0.5 99.2 98.2 96.6 94.9
Net exports 14.6 34.8 66.8 101.1 42.7 . . . . 0.8 1.8 3.4 5.1
Exports 581.8 661.5 698.8 722.6 357.5 13.7 5.6 3.4 1.6 30.4 33.6 35.2 36.3Imports 567.2 626.7 632.0 621.5 314.8 10.5 0.9 −1.7 4.0 29.6 31.8 31.8 31.2
Gross domestic product 1,914.8 1,969.5 1,986.2 1,989.7 978.1 2.9 0.8 0.2 −0.2 100 100 100 100
At  current  prices
III Use of domestic product
Private consumption  5 1,156.0 1,196.2 1,232.7 1,236.5 612.5 3.5 3.0 0.3 1.2 58.4 58.9 59.4 58.6
Government consumption 378.2 385.6 394.1 404.4 195.0 2.0 2.2 2.6 0.9 19.1 19.0 19.0 19.2Machinery and equipment 159.6 176.7 167.4 151.9 70.1 10.7 −5.3 −9.3 −4.1 8.1 8.7 8.1 7.2
Premises 245.2 240.2 228.9 215.5 98.5 −2.1 −4.7 −5.9 −5.8 12.4 11.8 11.0 10.2
Other investment  
6 21.6 23.2 24.4 24.6 12.0 7.3 5.0 1.0 0.1 1.1 1.1 1.2 1.2
Changes in inventories  7 2.1 0.7 −15.0 −13.2 14.5 . . . . 0.1 0.0 −0.7 −0.6
Domestic use 1,962.6 2,022.5 2,032.5 2,019.7 1,002.5 3.1 0.5 −0.6 1.1 99.2 99.6 98.0 95.7
Net exports 16.0 7.5 41.2 90.7 39.2 . . . . 0.8 0.4 2.0 4.3
Exports 586.4 686.1 731.5 757.6 373.5 17.0 6.6 3.6 1.3 29.6 33.8 35.3 35.9Imports 570.4 678.6 690.2 667.0 334.3 19.0 1.7 −3.4 2.5 28.8 33.4 33.3 31.6
Gross domestic product 1,978.6 2,030.0 2,073.7 2,110.4 1,041.7 2.6 2.2 1.8 0.7 100 100 100 100
IV Prices (1995 = 100)
Private consumption 105.2 106.7 108.4 109.9 110.7 1.5 1.6 1.3 1.0 . . . .Gross domestic product 103.3 103.1 104.4 106.1 106.5 −0.3 1.3 1.6 0.9 . . . .
Terms of trade 100.2 95.8 95.8 97.7 98.4 −4.4 0.1 1.9 1.1 . . . .
V Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,057.8 1,099.1 1,121.3 1,130.5 537.5 3.9 2.0 0.8 0.5 72.0 72.9 72.7 71.9Entrepreneurial and propertyincome 410.4 409.3 420.9 441.1 221.9 −0.3 2.8 4.8 −2.9 28.0 27.1 27.3 28.1
National income 1,468.2 1,508.4 1,542.2 1,571.5 759.4 2.7 2.2 1.9 −0.5 100 100 100 100
Memo item: Gross nationalincome 1,965.1 2,020.3 2,065.6 2,108.8 1,031.5 2.8 2.2 2.1 0.3 . . . .
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in November 2003. — 5Including non-profit institutions serving households. —6Intangible fixed
1Including communication services. —2Financial intermediation, real asset formation (inter alia, computer software and entertainment, literary
estate activities, renting and business services. —3Including care-at-home or artistic originals) and cultivated assets. —7Including net increase in
services. —4Gross value added after deduction of assumed bank charges, valuables. 
but excluding taxes on products (offset against subsidies on products). —
60*IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
 IX Economic conditions
 
2 Output in the production sector     
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which
Industry  1 
Production sector, Intermediate
total Total goods  2 Capital goods  3 Consumer goods  4 Energy  5 Construction
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annualpercent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change
1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 
Germany  
  
1999 107.8 + 1.5 111.5 + 1.7 110.7 + 1.8 118.0 + 1.5 103.3 + 1.7 100.0 −0.4 87.9 + 0.8
2000 113.4 + 5.2 119.1 + 6.8 116.9 + 5.6 130.9 + 10.9 105.6 + 2.2 99.7 −0.3 84.9 −3.4
2001 113.2 −0.2 119.9 + 0.7 116.1 −0.7 134.3 + 2.6 105.2 −0.4 98.1 −1.6 78.9 −7.1
2002 111.8 −1.2 118.4 −1.3 116.2 + 0.1 131.1 −2.4 103.6 −1.5 98.4 + 0.3 76.7 −2.8
  
2002          Oct 118.5 −0.1 124.6 + 0.2 123.4 + 2.0 134.6 −0.8 112.0 −1.1 103.6 + 5.3 88.0 −6.8
         Nov 120.9 + 3.1 128.3 + 4.0 123.1 + 4.7 144.8 + 4.4 113.0 + 2.2 104.6 −0.8 83.0 −2.0
         Dec 104.6 −0.8 111.5 + 0.1 98.5 + 1.7 135.8 −0.8 98.1 −0.5 108.4 −3.0 54.7 −10.6
2003          Jan 102.3 + 1.0 109.9 + 1.8 110.8 + 2.8 117.3 + 2.4 97.5 −1.4 112.1 + 0.7 43.6 −10.1
         Feb 105.5 + 1.0 114.5 + 2.2 111.1
+ 0.0 129.5 + 6.2 98.0 −1.3 106.2 + 7.7 44.2 −23.5
         Mar 6 119.0 + 0.3 127.1 + 0.9 124.8 + 1.3 143.3 + 2.2 107.4 −2.3 110.7 + 6.9 6 70.5 −10.1
         Apr 6 111.9 + 0.1 118.2 + 0.5 118.4 + 1.5 128.7 −1.1 102.4 + 1.5 101.7 + 4.4 6 76.9 −7.7
         May 6 109.4 + 0.7 115.6 + 1.3 116.3 + 0.9 126.2 + 2.7 98.8 −0.6 96.9 + 2.8 6 75.8 −7.2
         June 6 114.1 −1.7 121.1 −2.1 120.2 −0.2 134.6 −4.5 102.8 −1.1 93.1 + 7.1 6 82.4 −4.7
         July  x 6 114.1 + 1.3 120.8 + 1.9 119.7 + 0.3 134.3 + 3.5 102.9 + 1.7 91.5 + 1.7 6 85.4 −3.0
         Aug  x 6 101.7 −3.0 107.0 −2.8 108.5 −3.6 112.4 −3.2 96.4 −0.8 90.9 + 2.0 6 74.5 −7.1
         Sep  x 6 116.4 −2.2 123.1 −2.5 119.6 −3.1 139.2 −1.4 105.5 −3.2 99.2 + 7.0 6 84.1 −6.6
         Oct  + 119.2 + 0.6 126.2 + 1.3 123.6 + 0.2 141.1 + 4.8 109.0 −2.7 102.5 −1.1 84.4 −4.1
Western Germany  
  
1999 107.2 + 1.2 110.1 + 1.3 109.1 + 1.4 117.2 + 1.3 101.1 + 1.2 100.6 −0.6 88.9 + 1.4
2000 112.7 + 5.1 117.1 + 6.4 114.3 + 4.8 129.9 + 10.8 102.8 + 1.7 99.9 −0.7 87.5 −1.6
2001 112.4 −0.3 117.5 + 0.3 113.2 −1.0 132.9 + 2.3 101.9 −0.9 97.9 −2.0 82.2 −6.1
2002 110.6 −1.6 115.5 −1.7 112.7 −0.4 129.3 −2.7 99.6 −2.3 98.2 + 0.3 80.9 −1.6
  
2002          Oct 117.0 −0.3 121.3 −0.3 119.7 + 1.8 132.6 −1.3 107.1 −2.3 103.4 + 5.3 92.8 −6.1
         Nov 119.3 + 2.8 124.8 + 3.6 119.3 + 4.4 142.5 + 4.4 107.8 + 0.8 104.5 −0.8 87.3 −0.7
         Dec 103.5 −1.1 108.5 −0.5 95.4 + 1.1 133.8 −1.0 93.1 −2.2 108.1 −3.0 58.3 −8.6
2003          Jan 101.5 + 0.8 107.2 + 1.4 107.6 + 2.5 115.6 + 2.1 93.8 −2.0 111.9 + 0.7 46.4 −8.8
         Feb 105.0 + 1.1 111.9 + 2.0 107.8 −0.4 128.0 + 6.2 94.6 −1.6 106.1 + 7.7 47.8 −21.6
         Mar 6 118.1 + 0.3 124.1 + 0.6 121.0 + 0.8 141.4 + 2.1 103.5 −2.4 110.5 + 7.0 6 76.1 −8.6
         Apr 6 110.6 −0.3 115.0 + 0.0 114.5 + 1.1 127.1 −1.2 97.7 + 0.2 101.4 + 4.2 6 82.5 −6.9
         May 6 107.9 + 0.5 112.3 + 0.9 112.1 + 0.4 124.7 + 2.6 94.0 −1.6 96.7 + 2.7 6 80.9 −6.3
         June 6 112.6 −2.0 117.7 −2.6 115.6 −1.0 133.2 −4.3 97.9 −2.1 92.9 + 7.4 6 87.8 −3.6
         July  x 6 113.0 + 1.3 117.9 + 1.6 115.8 + 0.0 133.0 + 3.4 98.9 + 1.0 91.1 + 1.7 6 91.1 −2.1
         Aug  x 6 99.5 −3.3 103.2 −3.3 103.8 −4.2 109.9 −3.3 92.0 −1.3 90.4 + 1.7 6 77.5 −6.6
         Sep  x 6 114.8 −2.4 119.6 −2.8 114.8 −3.9 137.0 −1.4 101.7 −3.2 99.0 + 6.8 6 89.2 −5.6
         Oct  + 117.6 + 0.5 122.7 + 1.2 119.0 −0.6 139.2 + 5.0 104.4 −2.5 102.3 −1.1 89.2 −3.9
Eastern Germany  
  
1999 114.4 + 4.9 135.8 + 7.6 137.1 + 8.9 135.6 + 7.4 134.0 + 5.9 95.1 + 1.2 84.2 −0.9
2000 121.5 + 6.2 152.7 + 12.4 157.0 + 14.5 153.2 + 13.0 145.7 + 8.7 98.3 + 3.4 75.5 −10.3
2001 123.0 + 1.2 160.0 + 4.8 162.6 + 3.6 163.6 + 6.8 152.6 + 4.7 99.5 + 1.2 67.0 −11.3
2002 125.3 + 1.9 167.1 + 4.4 171.2 + 5.3 168.5 + 3.0 159.7 + 4.7 99.9 + 0.4 61.6 −8.1
  
2002          Oct 136.1 + 3.2 180.1 + 6.4 181.8 + 4.2 177.2 + 7.3 180.5 + 9.2 104.8 + 4.4 70.8 −9.8
         Nov 139.1 + 4.7 187.4 + 8.6 183.7 + 7.9 194.4 + 4.2 186.3 + 14.9 105.0 −1.5 67.4 −7.9
         Dec 117.4 + 3.0 162.1 + 8.4 147.9 + 8.9 178.0 + 2.5 168.2 + 14.7 110.8 −3.1 41.8 −19.5
2003          Jan 111.4 + 2.6 155.8 + 5.9 161.7 + 6.6 152.7 + 6.2 149.8 + 4.5 113.5 + 0.4 33.3 −16.1
         Feb 111.0 −0.4 157.6 + 4.0 163.1 + 4.2 161.7 + 7.1 145.2 + 0.3 107.1 + 7.6 31.2 −32.3
         Mar 6 129.4 + 0.7 178.5 + 3.7 185.2 + 6.2 184.7 + 4.6 162.3 −1.3 111.9 + 6.0 6 50.2 −17.4
         Apr 6 126.9 + 3.6 171.7 + 6.6 179.7 + 5.9 162.1 + 1.3 169.0 + 13.7 104.3 + 5.8 6 56.9 −11.2
         May 6 126.3 + 2.7 171.6 + 5.9 183.0 + 6.5 158.7 + 3.2 166.8 + 7.6 98.4 + 3.3 6 57.6 −11.5
         June 6 131.8 + 1.5 179.0 + 3.7 193.1 + 8.7 164.3 −8.0 172.0 + 8.2 95.0 + 5.3 6 63.1 −10.0
         July  x 6 127.3 + 2.7 169.9 + 5.1 181.9 + 3.4 162.6 + 6.0 158.7 + 7.4 95.1 + 2.5 6 64.8 −7.2
         Aug  x 6 127.6 + 0.4 171.2 + 2.3 182.9 + 3.3 165.5 −0.5 158.9 + 3.5 94.6 + 4.0 6 63.7 −9.0
         Sep  x 6 135.4 −0.2 182.6 + 1.2 195.1 + 5.0 186.7 −1.0 159.5 −2.9 101.2 + 9.4 6 65.6 −11.0
         Oct  + 138.3 + 1.6 186.1 + 3.3 196.8 + 8.3 182.8 + 3.2 173.2 −4.0 104.5 −0.3 67.3 −4.9
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. —oUsing the visional up to adjustment to the figures of the annual overall survey in the
Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. —1Manufacturing sector, unless construction sector. —xProvisional; adjusted in advance by the Federal Stat-
assigned to the main grouping energy, plus mining and quarrying. —2In- istical Office, by way of estimates, to the results of the Quarterly Production
cluding mining and quarrying. —3Including manufacture of motor ve- Survey for the third quarter (industry in Germany: on average, + 0.9%). —
hicles, trailers and semi-trailers. —4Including printing and service activities +Provisional; adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical Office, by way of
related to printing. —5Electricity, gas, steam and hot water supply, and, in estimates, to the results of the Quarterly Production Survey for the fourth
particular, mining of coal and lignite, extraction of crude petroleum and quarter (industry in Germany: + 0.9%). natural gas and manufacture of refined petroleum products. —6Pro-
61* IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
 IX Economic conditions
 
3 Orders received by industry *  
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which of which
 
Industry,
total Domestic orders Foreign orders Intermediate goods Capital goods  1 Consumer goods  2 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annualpercent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age
Period 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change
Germany  
  
1999 87.8 + 2.1 92.3 − 0.2 82.1 + 5.4 87.5 + 0.8 86.0 + 3.4 95.9 + 0.8
2000 99.9 + 13.8 99.9 + 8.2 99.9 + 21.7 100.0 + 14.3 100.0 + 16.3 99.9 + 4.2
2001 98.3 − 1.6 97.6 − 2.3 99.1 − 0.8 95.9 − 4.1 99.4 − 0.6 101.4 + 1.5
2002 98.2 − 0.1 94.6 − 3.1 102.8 + 3.7 96.4 + 0.5 99.6 + 0.2 99.0 − 2.4
 
2002          Oct 100.3 + 4.7 97.7 + 1.7 103.6 + 8.6 99.7 + 4.9 100.5 + 6.7 102.0 − 2.6
         Nov 101.6 + 6.3 97.4 + 2.4 106.8 + 11.0 99.4 + 7.8 103.6 + 6.3 100.2 + 0.8         Dec 91.8 − 1.9 88.4 − 1.4 96.1 − 2.4 86.5 + 2.2 97.6 − 4.5 85.5 − 2.8
2003          Jan 97.9 + 3.1 92.4 − 0.2 104.7 + 6.8 97.7 + 4.8 98.2 + 3.0 97.0 − 2.4
         Feb 98.5 + 3.2 95.4 + 3.5 102.4 + 3.1 96.5 + 2.2 99.3 + 5.6 102.1 − 1.9
         Mar 105.5 − 0.8 100.2 − 0.7 112.1 − 1.1 105.2 + 2.3 105.4 − 2.0 106.5 − 6.0
         Apr 97.2 − 0.2 93.2 − 1.3 102.2 + 1.1 97.4 + 0.1 98.3 + 0.9 92.3 − 5.3
         May 93.0 − 5.7 91.0 − 0.1 95.5 −11.6 93.6 − 2.4 94.1 − 8.2 86.2 − 5.9
         June 100.1 − 1.0 94.2 − 2.1 107.6 + 0.5 98.6 − 1.4 104.3 + 1.2 88.5 − 7.9
         July 97.3 − 0.5 94.8 − 1.0 100.4 + 0.1 97.8 + 0.3 98.1 − 0.7 92.0 − 2.5
         Aug 90.3 − 1.5 87.9 − 2.9 93.3 + 0.1 89.7 + 0.2 90.3 − 2.3 92.5 − 3.6
         Sep 102.7 + 0.9 98.3
+ 0.0 108.2 + 1.9 100.6 + 0.4 104.4 + 2.6 102.6 − 4.5
         Oct  p 102.2 + 1.9 99.0 + 1.3 106.3 + 2.6 101.8 + 2.1 102.3 + 1.8 103.0 + 1.0
Western Germany  
  
1999 88.0 + 1.9 92.7 − 0.6 82.4 + 5.5 88.0 + 0.6 86.0 + 3.5 96.5 + 0.6
2000 99.9 + 13.5 99.9 + 7.8 100.0 + 21.4 99.9 + 13.5 100.0 + 16.3 99.9 + 3.52001 97.8 − 2.1 97.2 − 2.7 98.6 − 1.4 95.1 − 4.8 99.1 − 0.9 101.1 + 1.2
2002 97.3 − 0.5 93.7 − 3.6 101.6 + 3.0 95.1
+ 0.0 98.9 − 0.2 98.3 − 2.8
 
2002          Oct 99.4 + 4.3 96.6 + 1.2 102.7 + 8.1 98.2 + 4.5 99.9 + 6.3 101.1 − 3.1
         Nov 100.3 + 5.5 96.4 + 2.0 105.0 + 9.5 98.3 + 7.7 102.1 + 4.9 99.3 + 0.5         Dec 90.5 − 2.6 86.9 − 2.1 94.7 − 3.3 85.5 + 2.3 95.8 − 5.6 84.7 − 3.2
2003          Jan 96.9 + 2.5 91.7 − 0.2 103.1 + 5.6 95.2 + 3.8 98.4 + 2.9 96.2 − 2.7
         Feb 97.7 + 3.1 94.7 + 3.3 101.2 + 2.7 95.0 + 1.6 98.7 + 5.4 101.9 − 2.0
         Mar 104.2 − 0.1 99.1 − 1.1 110.3 + 1.0 103.4 + 2.4 104.3 − 0.4 105.9 − 6.4
         Apr 95.9 − 0.9 91.8 − 2.2 100.8 + 0.6 95.1 − 1.1 97.7 + 0.5 91.2 − 5.7
         May 91.8 − 6.5 89.4 − 1.0 94.7 −12.1 91.5 − 3.3 93.6 − 9.1 84.9 − 6.1
         June 99.2 − 1.1 92.2 − 3.0 107.5 + 1.0 96.5 − 2.5 104.2 + 1.6 87.4 − 8.0
         July 96.2 − 1.3 93.6 − 1.8 99.3 − 0.9 95.6 − 0.6 97.8 − 1.6 91.2 − 3.2
         Aug 89.0 − 1.3 86.3 − 3.3 92.3 + 1.0 87.0 − 0.8 90.0 − 1.1 91.4 − 4.1
         Sep 101.2 + 0.1 96.2 − 1.2 107.1 + 1.5 98.2 − 0.6 103.3 + 1.9 101.5 − 5.1
         Oct  
p 100.9 + 1.5 97.3 + 0.7 105.2 + 2.4 99.3 + 1.1 101.9 + 2.0 101.7 + 0.6
Eastern Germany  
  
1999 84.6 + 4.7 87.8 + 3.9 77.0 + 7.1 82.8 + 6.4 86.0 + 2.9 86.9 + 6.0
2000 99.9 + 18.1 100.0 + 13.9 99.9 + 29.7 99.9 + 20.7 100.0 + 16.3 100.0 + 15.1
2001 104.9 + 5.0 102.4 + 2.4 110.9 + 11.0 106.0 + 6.1 103.4 + 3.4 106.0 + 6.02002 111.0 + 5.8 104.0 + 1.6 127.8 + 15.2 111.7 + 5.4 110.7 + 7.1 109.4 + 3.2
 
2002          Oct 113.8 + 10.7 109.9 + 7.1 123.0 + 19.0 116.2 + 8.3 111.0 + 15.7 114.8 + 2.5         Nov 118.9 + 16.1 107.8 + 5.8 145.5 + 40.6 112.6 + 10.0 126.4 + 25.8 115.6 + 5.7         Dec 111.1 + 7.7 104.8 + 5.0 126.1 + 13.1 99.1 + 3.7 126.7 + 11.8 98.7 + 3.7
2003          Jan 111.3 + 9.4 99.7 + 0.1 139.2 + 30.6 128.1 + 16.9 93.7 + 2.1 110.3 + 2.5
         Feb 110.6 + 7.4 103.3 + 6.3 128.2 + 9.8 113.4 + 8.3 108.9 + 8.5 105.4 − 0.9
         Mar 123.7 − 8.6 112.5 + 4.3 150.5 −25.3 126.4 + 2.5 122.6 −19.7 116.3 − 0.6
         Apr 115.0 + 8.0 107.8 + 7.6 132.4 + 8.9 123.2 + 11.0 107.5 + 6.5 110.4 + 0.5         May 109.6 + 5.1 107.8 + 7.8 113.8 − 0.6 117.5 + 6.3 102.0 + 5.9 106.8 − 2.8
         June 114.3 + 2.1 116.0 + 7.9 110.1 −10.3 123.2 + 9.3 106.7 − 4.0 106.5 − 4.8
         July 112.3 + 11.1 107.6 + 6.5 123.6 + 21.8 123.8 + 10.0 101.7 + 13.3 105.9 + 7.7         Aug 108.3 − 3.7 105.5 + 1.2 115.1 −13.1 121.1 + 8.4 94.3 −17.7 109.9 + 2.2
         Sep 124.2 + 11.1 121.0 + 12.2 132.0 + 8.6 128.1 + 10.4 121.1 + 13.5 120.0 + 4.4
         Oct  
p 120.7 + 6.1 117.1 + 6.6 129.3 + 5.1 130.7 + 12.5 109.5 − 1.4 123.0 + 7.1
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. —*Economic tax. —oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. —1Including
activities of the manufacturing sector, in particular excluding manufacture manufacture of motor vehicles, trailers and semi-trailers. —2Including print-
of food products, beverages, tobacco and refined petroleum products; ing and service activities related to printing. 
results for specific operational segments; figures excluding value-added
62* IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
 IX Economic conditions
 
4 Orders received by construction *   
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Germany Western Germany Eastern Germany
Public Public Public
Housing sector Housing sector Housing sector Industrial Industrial Industrial
con- construc- construc- con- construc- construc- con- construc- construc-
Total struction tion  1 tion Total struction tion  1 tion Total struction tion  1 tion
 Annual Annual Annual
 per- per- per- centage centage centage
Period change
2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100
1999 109.3 −2.2 119.6 106.1 106.7 107.4 + 0.8 114.6 104.3 106.4 115.5 −10.0 134.6 112.2 107.2
2000 100.0 −8.5 100.0 99.9 100.0 99.9 −7.0 99.9 99.9 100.0 100.0 −13.4 100.0 99.9 100.0
2001 94.5 −5.5 82.9 96.9 99.0 97.4 −2.5 87.6 99.9 100.7 85.2 −14.8 68.3 86.4 94.2
2002 88.7 −6.1 72.8 91.5 95.6 90.9 −6.7 79.6 93.1 95.6 81.7 −4.1 51.9 85.8 95.7
   
2002          Sep 101.9 −2.6 77.4 100.8 118.4 103.4 −4.2 83.3 101.1 118.9 97.1 + 3.3 59.4 99.9 116.9
         Oct 84.5 −8.3 67.5 84.8 94.9 86.0 −9.3 75.4 85.6 93.1 80.0 −4.2 43.3 82.2 99.9
         Nov 74.8 −8.0 68.5 74.9 78.6 73.8 −9.9 75.3 72.8 74.0 77.9 −1.8 47.6 82.4 91.7
         Dec 79.3 −0.3 70.1 89.1 74.0 83.1 −2.2 80.3 93.0 73.2 67.3 + 8.5 38.9 75.5 76.4
2003          Jan 56.8 −9.3 49.7 61.7 55.5 58.5 −11.2 55.3 62.1 56.2 51.2 −2.1 32.5 60.3 53.5
         Feb 64.4 −13.0 54.6 67.4 67.0 67.5 −8.7 59.4 68.9 71.1 54.3 −26.7 40.1 62.4 54.9
         Mar 88.7 −20.7 78.9 86.4 97.4 91.7 −24.4 87.1 87.7 99.4 79.0 −4.0 54.0 81.5 91.6
         Apr 82.4 −13.4 69.8 81.9 90.9 84.9 −13.8 76.9 84.3 90.8 74.5 −11.3 48.3 73.8 90.9
         May 82.7 −10.3 66.6 83.1 92.4 81.6 −12.6 70.7 79.7 90.8 86.2 −2.7 54.0 95.1 96.9
         June 94.4 −11.3 75.8 91.9 108.9 95.9 −11.6 83.8 92.1 108.1 89.7 −9.8 51.4 91.1 111.2
         July 90.6 −3.4 71.1 86.6 107.3 91.1 −5.5 79.0 85.7 105.1 89.0 + 4.2 46.9 89.9 113.5
         Aug 81.1 −8.3 67.8 76.1 95.0 81.7 −6.2 73.9 74.7 94.8 79.2 −14.3 49.0 81.0 95.7
         Sep 91.2 −10.5 76.3 88.8 103.2 91.2 −11.8 84.8 85.3 102.4 90.9 −6.4 50.2 101.3 105.4
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. —*Values exclusive engineering". —oBundesbank calculation. —1Including the railways and
of value-added tax. The figures refer to the economic classifications "Site post office. preparation" and "Building of complete constructions or parts thereof; civil
 
 
5 Retail trade turnover *
    Germany
  
Retail trade  1 Memo item
of which:  By enterprises ’ main product range of which
Pharmaceutical Household
and medical articles, Retail trade plus retailgoods, cosmetic Clothing, hardware, sales of motor vehicles
Food, beverages, and toilet footwear and paints and glass and motorcycles and Retail sales of
Total tobacco  
2 articles  2 leather goods  2 2  3 sales of automotive fuel motor vehicles  4 
Annual percent- Annual percent-
age change Annual Annual Annual Annual age change Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
Not age age age age Not age Price- Price-
Period change change change change change 2000 = 100 adjusted adjusted  5 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 adjusted adjusted  5 2000 = 100
1995 96.7 + 1.3 + 0.7 97.0 + 3.3 78.5 + 6.5 104.0 + 0.0 97.5 −2.6 94.8 + 1.8 + 1.1 86.1 + 3.6
1996 97.0 + 0.3 −0.6 97.0
+ 0.0 81.8 + 4.2 103.2 −0.8 96.4 −1.1 96.0 + 1.3 + 0.3 90.7 + 5.3
1997 95.9 −1.1 −1.7 95.7 −1.3 83.4 + 2.0 101.4 −1.7 95.2 −1.2 95.8 −0.2 −0.7 94.0 + 3.6
1998 96.9 + 1.0 + 1.1 97.1 + 1.5 88.2 + 5.8 100.3 −1.1 98.2 + 3.2 97.5 + 1.8 + 1.5 99.2 + 5.5
1999 97.7 + 0.8 + 0.5 98.0 + 0.9 94.7 + 7.4 100.2 −0.1 97.6 −0.6 98.7 + 1.2 + 0.8 102.9 + 3.7
2000 100.0 + 2.4 + 1.2 100.0 + 2.0 100.0 + 5.6 100.0 −0.2 100.0 + 2.5 100.0 + 1.3 + 0.1 100.0 −2.8
2001 101.8 + 1.8 . 104.7 + 4.7 107.3 + 7.3 99.5 −0.5 96.5 −3.5 101.9 + 1.9 . 102.4 + 2.4
2002 100.2 −1.6 −2.1 107.4 + 2.6 111.1 + 3.5 94.7 −4.8 88.8 −8.0 101.1 −0.8 −1.5 105.3 + 2.8
 
2002          Oct 105.8 + 1.3 + 1.5 109.6 + 3.4 115.0 + 4.3 110.2 + 5.3 94.4 −7.4 106.7 + 2.0 + 2.0 111.8 + 5.1
         Nov 106.4 −3.7 −3.2 112.3 + 0.8 113.4 + 0.4 98.3 −10.5 97.5 −8.5 105.9 −3.4 −3.0 106.2 −1.8
         Dec 120.0 −2.4 −2.5 124.8 + 1.5 126.9 + 2.6 118.6 −4.7 104.3 −8.1 115.1 −1.1 −2.0 98.8 + 5.2
2003          Jan 93.7 + 1.5 + 2.0 101.6 + 4.2 111.3 + 2.8 81.4 −1.2 78.8 −2.2 92.5 + 1.4 + 1.7 89.4 + 0.8
         Feb 88.0 + 1.4 + 1.2 97.9 + 2.9 104.9 + 4.4 67.6 −5.8 77.1 −1.0 89.2 + 1.5 + 1.2 94.7 + 1.5
         Mar 99.6 −2.7 −2.9 108.4 −3.6 109.1
+ 0.0 91.1 −5.1 93.6 + 3.5 103.1 −1.2 −1.5 116.3 + 3.4
         Apr 103.2 + 2.1 + 2.4 113.6 + 5.5 113.3 + 0.3 97.1 + 0.2 91.9 −0.9 106.2 + 1.1 + 1.3 117.6 −1.9
         May 100.7 + 0.5 + 1.0 110.7 + 0.5 111.6 + 1.9 94.0 −3.0 90.2 + 2.4 104.0 + 1.7 + 1.8 116.2 + 5.3
         June 92.8 −0.7 −1.0 105.3 + 2.0 107.0 + 0.8 82.7 −3.0 79.9 −1.5 96.9 −0.2 −0.6 112.2 + 1.4
         July 98.2 −1.7 −1.8 108.8 + 1.7 118.2 + 2.8 87.7 −5.5 85.7 −2.7 102.9 −0.1 −0.5 120.4 + 4.8
         Aug 91.5 −5.9 −6.0 106.1 −1.7 104.5 −4.6 75.2 −13.2 79.3 −6.4 92.7 −4.6 −5.0 96.5 −0.2
         Sep 97.3 + 0.3 + 0.1 103.5 + 2.5 110.1 + 2.5 96.5 −3.7 85.0 −0.4 98.8 + 1.3 + 0.9 105.0 + 5.2
         Oct  e 104.2 −1.5 −2.0 110.8 + 1.1 115.0 + 0.0 106.7 −3.2 93.0 −1.5 105.8 −0.8 −1.5 ... ...
Source: Federal Statistical Office. —*Excluding value-added tax; figures tive fuel. —2Retail sales in stores. —3Including furniture and lighting
from 2002 provisional, partly revised and, judging by past experience, sub- equipment. —4Including motor vehicle parts and accessories. —5Up to
ject to considerable uncertainty in the most recent months. —1Excluding (and including) 2000, at 1995 prices; from 2001, at 2000 prices. 
sales of motor vehicles and motorcycles and excluding the sale of automo-
63* IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
 IX Economic conditions
 
6 Labour market * 
 
 
 
Persons in
Employed  1,2 Employees  1 employment  3 Unemployed  2 
Persons
Mining employed Persons
and under under-manu- employ- goingfactur- Short- ment pro- vocationaling Con- time motion further Unem-
Annual change Annual sector Annual ploy- Vacan-
schemes  2,5 training  2 workers  2 struction  4 
percen- change, ment cies,
Thou- Thou- Thou- tage Thou- thou- rate  2,6 thou-
Period sands in % sands sands change Thousands sands sands in % sands  2 
Germany  
  
2000 38,750 + 1.8 + 676 34,745 + 1.8 6,373 1,053 86 316 352 3,889 −211 9.7 514
2001 38,914 + 0.4 + 164 34,834 + 0.3 6,395 958 123 243 345 3,852 − 37 9.4 506
2002 38,668 −0.6 −246 34,577 −0.7 6,218 8 883 207 192 332 4,060 + 209 9.8 451
2002          Nov 38,842 −1.1 −448 34,702 −1.3 6,165 873 205 197 339 4,026 + 237 9.7 344
         Dec 38,630 −1.3 −505 6,128 849 165 180 318 4,225 + 262 10.1 324
2003          Jan 37,796 −1.4 −554 ... 788 195 155 299 4,623 + 333 11.1 350
         Feb 37,779 −1.5 −562 33,733 −1.7 ... 757 227 150 287 4,706 + 410 11.3 388
         Mar 37,928 −1.5 −567 ... p 778 244 143 275 4,608 + 452 11.1 415
         Apr 38,178 −1.3 −521 ... p 795 242 138 262 4,495 + 471 10.8 419
         May 38,250 −1.3 −506 34,112 −1.5 ... p 801 225 134 255 4,342 + 396 7 10.4 393
         June 38,266 −1.2 −460 ... p 803 222 131 241 4,257 + 303 10.2 373
         July 38,188 −1.3 −493 ... p 804 196 131 220 4,352 + 305 10.4 367
         Aug 38,232 −1.2 −473 34,125 −1.5 ... p 807 150 131 212 4,314 + 296 10.4 356
         Sep o 38,414 o −1.2 o −454 ... p 805 169 133 221 4,207 + 265 10.1 330
         Oct ... ... ... ... ... 163 138 231 4,152 + 222 10.0 297
         Nov ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 162 140 235 4,184 + 159 10.0 275
Western Germany 9  
  
2000 . . . . . 5,761 749 59 59 202 2,380 −224 7.6 448
2001 . . . . . 5,769 696 94 53 197 2,320 − 60 7.2 436
2002 . . . . . 5,593 8 654 162 42 192 2,498 + 178 7.7 377
2002          Nov . . . . . 5,540 647 156 41 198 2,520 + 199 7.7 285         Dec . . . . . 5,506 632 131 38 186 2,647 + 212 8.1 270
2003          Jan . . . . . ... 593 157 35 175 2,898 + 262 8.8 294
         Feb . . . . . ... 572 187 34 168 2,951 + 317 9.0 328         Mar . . . . . ...
p 586 199 33 165 2,880 + 352 8.8 348
         Apr . . . . . ... p 597 201 32 160 2,811 + 363 8.6 350
         May . . . . . ... p 601 187 31 159 2,715 + 306 7 8.2 327
         June . . . . . ... p 601 182 30 151 2,663 + 255 8.1 306
         July . . . . . ... p 601 162 29 137 2,734 + 253 8.3 300
         Aug . . . . . ... p 602 119 28 133 2,723 + 246 8.3 287
         Sep . . . . . ... p 601 139 27 141 2,653 + 213 8.1 261
         Oct . . . . . ... ... 136 27 149 2,638 + 188 8.0 237         Nov . . . . . ... ... 135 26 152 2,666 + 145 8.1 222
Eastern Germany 10  
  
2000 . . . . . 612 305 27 257 150 1,508 + 13 17.2 662001 . . . . . 626 262 29 190 148 1,532 + 23 17.3 702002 . . . . . 625
8 229 45 150 140 1,563 + 31 17.7 74
2002          Nov . . . . . 626 227 49 157 141 1,506 + 38 17.0 59         Dec . . . . . 622 217 34 142 132 1,578 + 49 17.9 54
2003          Jan . . . . . ... 196 39 120 125 1,725 + 71 19.5 55
         Feb . . . . . ... 185 40 116 118 1,756 + 94 19.9 61         Mar . . . . . ...
p 192 45 110 110 1,728 + 99 19.6 67
         Apr . . . . . ... p 198 41 106 102 1,684 + 108 19.1 69
         May . . . . . ... p 200 38 103 96 1,628 + 90 7 18.6 67
         June . . . . . ... p 202 39 102 89 1,594 + 48 18.3 67
         July . . . . . ... p 204 34 102 82 1,618 + 53 18.5 67
         Aug . . . . . ... p 205 31 104 80 1,591 + 50 18.2 69
         Sep . . . . . ... p 204 30 106 81 1,554 + 52 17.8 69
         Oct . . . . . ... ... 27 112 82 1,514 + 34 17.3 60         Nov . . . . . ... ... 27 113 83 1,519 + 13 17.4 53
Source: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Labour Office. —*Monthly fig- force. —7From May 2003, calculated on the basis of new labour force
ures: end of month; employed persons and employees: averages; short-time figures. —8The figures from March 2002 onwards are positively affected by
workers: mid-month; annual and quarterly figures: averages. — the fact that construction firms which are required to report and which
1Work-place concept. —2Annual figures, calculated by the Bundesbank; de- have been identified in the course of drawing up the corporate register are
viations from the official figures are due to rounding. —3Including active included for the first time. —9Excluding western Berlin; for the mining,
proprietors. —4The figures refer to the economic classifications ”Site manufacturing and construction sectors, including persons employed in
preparation ”and ”Building of complete constructions or parts thereof; civil western Berlin. —10 Including western Berlin; for the mining,
engineering ”.—5Employees involved in job creation schemes and struc- manufacturing and construction sectors, excluding persons employed in
tural adjustment measures (SAM). —6Relative to the total civilian labour western Berlin. — o First preliminary estimate. 
64* IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
 IX Economic conditions
 
7 Prices
 Germany
 
 
Consumer price index
Indices of Index of world market
of which foreign trade prices prices  of raw materials  5 
Other Index of
durable producerand non- prices ofdurable industrial Index ofconsumer Services Con- products producergoods excluding struction prices of sold on the
excluding house House price domestic Other raw agricultural
Total Food Energy  
1 rents  2 rents index  2,3 market  4 Exports Imports Energy  6 products  4 materials  7 energy  1,2 
Period 2000 = 100 1995 = 100 2000 = 100
Index level  
  
1999 98.6 100.6 100.3 87.7 99.0 98.8 99.3 2 97.0 89.9 100.9 100.2 57.6 83.1
2000 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 95.4 104.4 111.4 100.0 100.0
2001 102.0 105.1 100.3 105.7 102.5 101.2 100.3 103.0 100.8 105.4 112.1 91.4 91.92002 103.4 106.1 101.1 106.0 105.0 102.6 100.2 102.4 94.6 105.3 109.3 86.1 91.1
 
2001          Dec 102.8 105.2 100.8 101.4 105.8 101.6 101.8 99.8 104.8 108.5 70.8 87.1
2002          Jan 102.9 108.7 101.4 103.5 103.5 102.0 102.3 98.2 104.9 109.1 73.7 89.3
         Feb 103.2 108.0 101.5 104.1 104.3 102.2 100.2 102.3 99.4 104.9 109.6 77.2 91.6         Mar 103.4 107.8 101.5 106.0 104.3 102.4 102.7 99.7 105.2 110.5 89.6 94.3
         Apr 103.3 107.8 101.3 108.1 103.5 102.4 102.5 96.0 105.4 110.7 94.4 93.6
         May 103.4 107.7 101.2 106.9 104.4 102.5 100.2 102.5 94.5 105.4 110.1 91.4 90.8         June 103.4 106.6 101.1 105.9 104.9 102.6 102.5 93.7 105.4 108.7 84.3 89.9
         July 103.7 105.9 100.9 105.9 106.5 102.7 102.2 93.5 105.3 108.2 84.0 89.4
         Aug 103.5 104.7 100.8 106.2 106.2 102.8 100.3 102.1 93.4 105.4 108.8 87.9 89.9         Sep 103.4 104.5 100.9 107.2 105.3 102.8 102.2 94.6 105.5 109.5 92.9 91.8
         Oct 103.3 104.1 100.9 107.6 104.8 102.9 102.5 94.3 105.5 109.5 90.5 92.1
         Nov 103.0 103.6 101.0 105.1 104.5 103.0 100.2 102.2 94.8 105.4 108.0 80.5 90.8         Dec 104.0 104.0 100.9 105.6 107.9 103.0 102.4 94.4 105.4 109.0 87.2 89.6
2003          Jan 104.0 105.3 101.4 110.7 105.1 103.2 103.8 94.8 105.5 109.6 92.2 88.3
         Feb 104.5 105.9 101.6 113.0 105.9 103.4 100.3 104.2 96.4 105.8 110.3 97.3 89.7         Mar 104.6 106.3 101.6 113.8 105.6 103.5 104.4 94.8 105.8 109.6 89.5 88.3
         Apr 104.3 106.6 101.4 110.2 105.8 103.7 104.2 94.9 105.7 107.4 76.0 87.8
         May 104.1 106.8 101.4 108.2 105.6 103.7 100.3 103.9 93.9 105.3 105.9 72.5 83.5         June 104.4 107.1 101.3 108.8 106.1 103.8 103.9 95.3 105.1 105.8 77.0 81.3
         July 104.6 106.3 101.1 109.2 107.4 103.8 104.1 92.4 105.1 106.0 81.5 82.7
         Aug 104.6 105.1 101.0 110.4 107.7 103.9 100.3 104.1 93.9 105.2 106.9 86.4 85.2         Sep 104.5 105.6 101.4 109.7 106.7 103.9 104.2
p 97.4 105.4 106.7 78.7 87.5
         Oct 104.5 105.7 101.4 110.0 106.4 103.9 104.2 p 95.9 105.3 106.8 81.0 88.7
         Nov 104.3 105.5 101.4 109.5 105.8 104.1 ... ... ... ... ... 81.7 91.0
Annual percentage change  
  
1999 + 0.6 − 1.1 + 0.1 + 4.0 + 0.3 + 1.1 −0.3 2 − 1.0 − 6.0 − 0.5 − 0.5 + 37.1 − 6.2
2000 + 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.3 + 14.0 + 1.0 + 1.2 + 0.7 2 + 3.1 + 6.1 + 3.5 + 11.2 + 73.6 + 20.3
2001 + 2.0 + 5.1 + 0.3 + 5.7 + 2.5 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 3.0 + 5.7 + 1.0 + 0.6 − 8.6 − 8.1
2002 + 1.4 + 1.0 + 0.8 + 0.3 + 2.4 + 1.4 −0.1 − 0.6 − 6.2 − 0.1 − 2.5 − 5.8 − 0.9
 
2001          Dec + 1.6 + 5.0 + 0.8 − 2.5 + 2.9 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 1.0 − 0.7 − 4.7 −25.1 −13.8
2002          Jan + 2.1 + 6.6 + 1.4 + 0.4 + 2.6 + 1.3 − 0.2 + 2.1 − 0.4 − 3.4 −19.0 − 7.7
         Feb + 1.8 + 5.4 + 1.4 − 1.9 + 2.6 + 1.4 −0.1 − 0.5 + 0.9 − 0.5 − 3.5 −21.1 − 5.1
         Mar + 2.0 + 4.2 + 1.4 + 0.1 + 2.8 + 1.5 − 0.3 − 2.9 − 0.4 − 2.5 − 4.0 − 0.6
         Apr + 1.5 + 2.3 + 1.2 + 0.7 + 1.9 + 1.4 − 1.1 − 6.8 − 0.3 − 2.8 − 2.9 − 1.2
         May + 1.2 + 0.2 + 1.0 − 2.6 + 2.9 + 1.4 −0.1 − 1.3 − 8.9 − 0.6 − 4.3 −12.3 − 6.5
         June + 1.0 − 1.1 + 0.9 − 2.8 + 2.6 + 1.5 − 1.3 − 6.6 − 0.6 − 5.2 −19.5 − 6.9
         July + 1.2 − 1.1 + 0.7 − 0.6 + 2.7 + 1.5 − 1.1 − 7.0 − 0.5 − 4.2 −13.4 − 5.4
         Aug + 1.2 − 0.6 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 2.6 + 1.4
+ 0.0 − 1.1 − 8.3 + 0.0 − 2.6 − 7.5 + 1.5
         Sep + 1.1 − 0.6 + 0.6 − 0.2 + 2.5 + 1.4 − 1.1 − 7.8 + 0.2 − 1.4 − 0.4 + 7.9
         Oct + 1.3 − 1.0 + 0.4 + 3.5 + 2.3 + 1.4 + 0.1 − 6.5 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 14.7 + 10.2
         Nov + 1.2 − 0.9 + 0.3 + 2.7 + 2.3 + 1.4 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 5.7 + 0.5 − 0.6 + 12.1 + 3.9
         Dec + 1.2 − 1.1 + 0.1 + 4.1 + 2.0 + 1.4 + 0.6 − 5.4 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 23.2 + 2.9
2003          Jan + 1.1 − 3.1
+ 0.0 + 7.0 + 1.5 + 1.2 + 1.5 − 3.5 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 25.1 − 1.1
         Feb + 1.3 − 1.9 + 0.1 + 8.5 + 1.5 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 1.9 − 3.0 + 0.9 + 0.6 + 26.0 − 2.1
         Mar + 1.2 − 1.4 + 0.1 + 7.4 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 1.7 − 4.9 + 0.6 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 6.4
         Apr + 1.0 − 1.1 + 0.1 + 1.9 + 2.2 + 1.3 + 1.7 − 1.1 + 0.3 − 3.0 −19.5 − 6.2
         May + 0.7 − 0.8 + 0.2 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 3.8 −20.7 − 8.0
         June + 1.0 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 2.7 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 1.4 + 1.7 − 0.3 − 2.7 − 8.7 − 9.6
         July + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 3.1 + 0.8 + 1.1 + 1.9 − 1.2 − 0.2 − 2.0 − 3.0 − 7.5
         Aug + 1.1 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 4.0 + 1.4 + 1.1
+ 0.0 + 2.0 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 1.7 − 1.7 − 5.2
         Sep + 1.1 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 2.3 + 1.3 + 1.1 + 2.0 p + 3.0 − 0.1 − 2.6 −15.3 − 4.7
         Oct + 1.2 + 1.5 + 0.5 + 2.2 + 1.5 + 1.0 + 1.7 p + 1.7 − 0.2 − 2.5 −10.5 − 3.7
         Nov + 1.3 + 1.8 + 0.4 + 4.2 + 1.2 + 1.1 ... ... ... ... ... + 1.5 + 0.2
Source: Federal Statistical Office; for index of world market prices: HWWA In- Overall construction price level. —4Excluding value-added tax. —5HWWA
stitute. —1Electricity, gas and other fuels. —2Bundesbank calculation index of raw material prices ’euro area ’on a euro basis. —6Coal and crude
based on data provided by the Federal Statistical Office. —3Previously: oil. — 7 Food, beverages and tobacco as well as industrial raw materials. 
65* IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
IX Economic conditions
  
8 Households ’ income *
Germany
  
Up to end-1998 DM billion; from 1999  5  billion
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries  1 salaries  2 Saving  6 ratio  7 benefits received  3 "Mass income"  4 Disposable income  5 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age
Period DM / 
 5 
change DM / 
 5 
change DM / 
 5 
change DM / 
 5 
change DM / 
 5 
change DM / 
 5 
change %
1991 1,355.4 . 941.4 . 426.2 . 1,367.6 . 1,917.5 . 250.1 . 13.0
1992 1,467.3 8.3 1,003.0 6.5 473.9 11.2 1,476.9 8.0 2,054.3 7.1 266.1 6.4 13.01993 1,505.9 2.6 1,032.7 3.0 511.2 7.9 1,543.9 4.5 2,120.6 3.2 261.3 −1.8 12.3
1994 1,528.1 1.5 1,029.3 −0.3 529.4 3.6 1,558.6 1.0 2,181.9 2.9 254.0 −2.8 11.6
1995 1,577.1 3.2 1,037.9 0.8 553.7 4.6 1,591.7 2.1 2,256.4 3.4 252.1 −0.7 11.2
1996 1,594.0 1.1 1,032.7 −0.5 595.7 7.6 1,628.3 2.3 2,307.5 2.3 249.5 −1.0 10.8
1997 1,591.3 −0.2 1,015.9 −1.6 609.6 2.3 1,625.5 −0.2 2,356.5 2.1 244.7 −1.9 10.4
1998 1,624.3 2.1 1,038.9 2.3 621.5 1.9 1,660.3 2.1 2,422.8 2.8 249.6 2.0 10.31999 855.4 3.0 549.2 3.4 327.5 3.1 876.7 3.3 1,281.1 3.4 125.1 −1.9 9.8
2000 884.6 3.4 571.7 4.1 338.1 3.2 909.8 3.8 1,325.5 3.5 129.3 3.3 9.82001 903.7 2.2 592.4 3.6 347.5 2.8 939.8 3.3 1,373.7 3.6 141.0 9.1 10.32002 910.4 0.7 593.5 0.2 365.0 5.1 958.5 2.0 1,382.8 0.7 146.3 3.8 10.6
2001          Q4 253.4 1.6 164.0 3.4 87.9 3.0 251.9 3.2 352.8 3.6 32.3 11.8 9.1
2002          Q1 210.4 1.0 137.5 0.4 91.1 4.6 228.6 2.0 343.7 0.7 47.3 3.1 13.8
         Q2 218.6 0.7 140.0 0.1 90.0 4.5 230.0 1.8 342.7 0.2 34.2 2.1 10.0         Q3 227.3 1.1 152.4 0.5 91.5 5.8 243.9 2.5 340.5 0.8 30.8 4.6 9.0         Q4 254.1 0.2 163.6 −0.3 92.5 5.3 256.1 1.7 356.0 0.9 34.1 5.7 9.6
2003          Q1 211.1 0.3 136.8 −0.5 93.9 3.1 230.7 0.9 351.2 2.2 50.1 5.9 14.3
         Q2 218.4 −0.1 138.3 −1.2 92.8 3.1 231.1 0.5 346.7 1.1 35.3 3.4 10.2
         Q3 226.8 −0.2 150.9 −1.0 93.2 1.9 244.1 0.1 341.5 0.3 31.6 2.5 9.2
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in November 2003. — plus monetary social benefits received. —5"Mass income" plus operating
*Households including non-profit institutions serving households. —1Resi- surplus, mixed income, property income (net), other current transfers
dence concept. —2After deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages received, income of non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (ex-
and salaries and employees ’contributions to the social security funds. — cluding wage tax and consumption-related taxes) and other current trans-
3Social security benefits in cash from the social security funds, central, state fers paid. Including the increase in claims on company pension funds. —6In-
and local government and foreign countries, pension payments (net), cluding the increase in claims on company pension funds. —7Saving as a
private funded social benefits, less social contributions on social benefits, percentage of disposable income. 
consumption-related taxes and public charges. —4Net wages and salaries
  
  
9 Pay rates and actual earnings
Germany
    
Overall economy Production sector (including construction)
Negotiated wage and salary level  1 Wages and salaries Negotiated wage and salary level  1 Wages and salaries
per employee per employee
on an hourly basis on a monthly basis on an hourly basis on a monthly basis (work-place concept)  2 (work-place concept)  3 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
Period 1995 = 100 change 1995 = 100 change 1995 = 100 change 1995 = 100 change 1995 = 100 change change 1995 = 100
1991 76.7 . 78.6 . 82.4 . 73.4 . 76.9 . 77.6 .
1992 85.8 12.0 87.3 11.0 91.0 10.4 82.9 12.9 85.9 11.7 88.4 13.91993 92.2 7.5 92.9 6.5 95.0 4.4 90.6 9.3 92.0 7.1 92.3 4.41994 95.3 3.4 95.6 2.9 96.9 2.0 94.3 4.1 94.8 3.0 96.1 4.1
1995 100.0 4.9 100.0 4.6 100.0 3.2 100.0 6.1 100.0 5.5 100.0 4.1
1996 102.6 2.6 102.4 2.4 101.4 1.4 103.8 3.8 102.9 2.9 102.9 2.91997 104.1 1.5 103.9 1.5 101.7 0.3 105.8 1.9 104.6 1.7 104.7 1.71998 106.1 1.9 105.7 1.8 102.7 1.0 107.7 1.8 106.4 1.7 106.4 1.61999 109.2 2.9 108.6 2.7 104.3 1.5 110.9 3.0 109.4 2.9 108.3 1.8
2000 111.4 2.0 110.8 2.0 105.9 1.6 113.2 2.0 111.6 2.0 111.2 2.7
2001 113.6 2.0 113.0 2.0 107.9 1.9 115.2 1.8 113.6 1.8 113.7 2.22002 116.7 2.7 116.0 2.7 109.5 1.5 118.9 3.2 117.3 3.2 116.0 2.0
2001          Q4 128.6 2.2 127.8 2.1 120.0 1.8 127.7 2.0 126.0 2.0 122.6 1.7
2002          Q1 106.3 2.5 105.7 2.4 102.0 1.2 106.3 2.2 104.9 2.2 108.2 0.9
         Q2 107.8 2.8 107.2 2.8 105.1 1.3 109.2 3.6 107.8 3.6 117.8 1.9         Q3 120.4 2.6 119.7 2.6 109.3 1.9 127.5 3.2 125.8 3.2 112.9 3.4         Q4 132.3 2.9 131.5 2.9 121.9 1.5 132.4 3.7 130.6 3.7 125.4 2.3
2003          Q1 109.5 3.0 109.0 3.1 104.1 2.1 110.1 3.5 108.6 3.5 . .
         Q2 110.1 2.2 109.6 2.2 106.6 1.4 111.8 2.3 110.3 2.3 . .         Q3 123.0 2.2 122.4 2.3 110.7 1.3 131.2 2.9 129.4 2.8 . .
2003          Apr 109.7 2.7 109.2 2.8 . . 110.6 3.4 109.1 3.4 . .
         May 110.2 1.6 109.7 1.7 . . 112.0 0.8 110.5 0.7 . .         June 110.5 2.2 109.9 2.3 . . 112.7 2.9 111.2 2.8 . .
         July 147.8 2.3 147.0 2.4 . . 168.4 3.0 166.0 3.0 . .
         Aug 110.7 2.2 110.1 2.3 . . 112.6 2.9 111.1 2.8 . .         Sep 110.7 2.1 110.2 2.2 . . 112.7 2.7 111.1 2.7 . .
         Oct 110.8 2.0 110.2 2.1 . . 112.7 2.5 111.1 2.5 . .
1Current data are normally revised upwards on account of additional Calculated by the Bundesbank on the basis of data from the Federal
reports. —2Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in Statistical Office, using the old and new classifications of the economic
November 2003. —3Production sector, excluding electricity, gas, steam and sectors. 
hot water supply, and excluding installation and building completion work.
66*IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
X Foreign trade and payments
 
1 Major items of the balance of payments of the European monetary union *
 
 
 5  million
2003
Position 2000 2001 1 2002 Q1 Q2 Q3 July Aug Sep
Current account −67,554 −14,496 + 67,020 + 2,436 −7,011 + 16,148 + 1,968 + 4,908 + 9,272 A.
1. Foreign trade
Exports (f.o.b.) incl. supplementary items 989,826 1,033,850 1,059,597 252,630 253,464 257,110 91,726 77,060 88,324
Imports (f.o.b.) incl. supplementary items 958,276 960,256 928,982 235,998 228,343 218,521 76,403 66,446 75,672
Balance + 31,553 + 73,597 + 130,617 + 16,632 + 25,122 + 38,588 + 15,323 + 10,613 + 12,652
2. Services
Receipts 287,455 324,525 332,173 75,678 78,192 84,584 30,725 26,710 27,149Expenditure 304,943 325,625 320,839 74,067 73,886 79,491 27,916 25,924 25,651
Balance −17,488 −1,100 + 11,336 + 1,610 + 4,306 + 5,094 + 2,809 + 786 + 1,499
3. Factor income (balance) −27,052 −35,730 −28,243 −12,705 −17,238 −10,214 −10,069 − 950 + 805
4. Current transfers
Transfer payments from non-residents 66,720 78,780 85,715 32,581 15,198 16,243 5,860 5,420 4,963Transfer payments to non-residents 121,284 130,049 132,406 35,681 34,400 33,564 11,955 10,962 10,647
Balance −54,564 −51,263 −46,690 −3,100 −19,202 −17,322 −6,095 −5,542 −5,685
Balance of capital transfers + 9,839 + 6,698 + 10,894 + 1,957 + 1,821 + 2,668 + 801 + 1,676 + 191B.
C. + 68,443 −24,407 −97,217 −25,137 −41,342 −22,851 −6,124 −2,960 −13,767 Financial account (net capital exports: −)
1. Direct investment −14,944 −102,384 −41,497 − 857 + 5,376 −15,347 −3,221 −2,575 −9,551
Investment outside the euro area −442,262 −304,981 −183,504 −36,475 −30,060 −25,518 −7,620 −5,894 −12,004
Foreign investment in the euro area + 427,315 + 202,597 + 142,005 + 35,618 + 35,437 + 10,170 + 4,399 + 3,318 + 2,453
2. Investment in securities −111,550 + 68,075 + 103,427 + 7,039 + 42,168 −69,849 −35,635 −42,471 + 8,257
Investment outside the euro area −410,666 −288,246 −173,906 −47,263 −96,309 −62,549 −29,519 −12,176 −20,854
Equities −285,922 −104,755 −40,179 + 10,775 −32,320 −14,875 −8,112 − 244 −6,519
Bonds and notes −114,280 −155,839 −88,945 −49,943 −53,896 −49,340 −27,225 −12,384 −9,731
Money market paper −10,455 −27,646 −44,785 −8,095 −10,092 + 1,665 + 5,817 + 452 −4,604
Foreign investment in the euro area + 299,110 + 356,318 + 277,331 + 54,302 + 138,477 −7,300 −6,116 −30,295 + 29,111
Equities + 49,940 + 233,200 + 90,756 + 3,721 + 30,464 + 20,849 + 13,111 −6,124 + 13,862
Bonds and notes + 239,199 + 114,017 + 127,683 + 47,883 + 97,474 −19,692 −17,435 −11,155 + 8,898
Money market paper + 9,968 + 9,098 + 58,894 + 2,698 + 10,541 −8,456 −1,792 −13,015 + 6,351
3. Financial derivatives −3,441 −1,481 −10,227 −2,488 −2,801 −4,361 −2,691 −1,650 − 20
4. Credit transactions and other
investment (balance) + 180,810 −6,429 −146,647 −40,711 −88,070 + 64,992 + 33,813 + 43,400 −12,221
Eurosystem − 221 + 5,028 + 18,181 −4,950 + 2,426 + 3,112 + 1,657 + 785 + 670
Public authorities −1,477 + 2,552 −8,251 −10,173 + 2,322 + 3,854 − 899 + 761 + 3,992
Credit institutions + 158,435 + 3,249 −136,384 −5,285 −76,193 + 76,108 + 46,374 + 39,961 −10,227
long-term + 2,460 −24,234 + 21,098 −4,952 + 579 −1,332 + 2,434 − 685 −3,081
short-term + 155,969 + 27,483 −157,487 − 334 −76,774 + 77,440 + 43,940 + 40,646 −7,146
Enterprises and individuals + 24,088 −17,261 −20,193 −20,299 −16,622 −18,081 −13,318 + 1,893 −6,656
5. Change in the monetary reserves of
    the eurosystem (Increase: −) + 17,568 + 17,815 −2,277 + 11,881 + 1,985 + 1,714 + 1,610 + 336 − 232
Balance of unclassifiable transactions −10,731 + 32,208 + 19,304 + 20,745 + 46,530 + 4,035 + 3,355 −3,624 + 4,304 D.
*Source: European Central Bank. —1From January 2001, including   
Greece.  
67*X Foreign trade and payments

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
X Foreign trade and payments
 
2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(Balances)
 
 
Current account Memo item:
Change in Capital trans-
the Bundes- fers and pur-
Change in bank ’s net chases / sales
Supple- external of intangible the monetary
Balance mentary non- reserves at Balance of assets aton current Foreign trade Factor Current produced Financial transaction transaction unclassifiable
Period account  
1 items  4  5 Services  6 income transfers assets  7 account  7 values  8 values  8 trade  1  2  3 transactions
DM million
1989 + 104,112 + 134,576 −4,107 −18,445 + 26,872 −34,784 −2,064 −110,286 −5,405 + 13,643 + 18,997
1990  o + 73,001 + 105,382 −3,833 −26,138 + 32,859 −35,269 −4,975 −89,497 −11,611 + 33,082 −10,976
1991 −36,277 + 21,899 −2,804 −30,703 + 33,144 −57,812 −4,565 + 12,614 + 9,605 + 18,623 − 319
1992 −30,023 + 33,656 −1,426 −44,993 + 33,962 −51,222 −1,963 + 69,792 −52,888 + 15,082 −68,745
1993 −23,071 + 60,304 −3,038 −52,559 + 27,373 −55,151 −1,915 + 21,442 + 22,795 −19,251 + 35,766
1994 −46,760 + 71,762 −1,104 −62,814 + 4,852 −59,455 −2,637 + 57,871 + 2,846 −11,321 −12,242
1995 −38,657 + 85,303 −4,722 −63,999 + 178 −55,416 −3,845 + 63,647 −10,355 −10,791 −17,754
1996 −20,729 + 98,538 −5,264 −64,829 + 1,815 −50,989 −3,283 + 23,607 + 1,882 − 1,478 + 1,610
1997 −15,756 + 116,467 −7,360 −69,535 − 2,588 −52,738 + 52 + 31 + 6,640 + 9,033 + 8,468
1998 −21,666 + 126,970 −5,934 −76,062 −13,337 −53,304 + 1,289 + 32,810 −7,128 − 5,305 −8,231
1999 −45,780 + 127,542 −13,656 −91,964 −18,775 −48,927 − 301 −44,849 + 24,517 + 66,413 −72,364
2000 −54,655 + 115,645 −13,691 −97,534 − 3,593 −55,482 + 13,345 + 71,006 + 11,429 −41,125 + 94,329
2001 + 8,185 + 186,771 −10,624 −100,168 −14,141 −53,652 − 756 −41,892 + 11,797 + 22,665 + 63,911
 5 
 million
1999 −23,407 + 65,211 −6,982 −47,020 − 9,599 −25,016 − 154 −22,931 + 12,535 + 33,956 −36,999
2000 −27,945 + 59,128 −7,000 −49,868 − 1,837 −28,368 + 6,823 + 36,305 + 5,844 −21,027 + 48,230
2001 + 4,185 + 95,495 −5,432 −51,215 − 7,230 −27,432 − 387 −21,419 + 6,032 + 11,588 + 32,677
2002 + 62,804 + 132,788 −5,935 −38,246 + 751 −26,555 − 212 −86,103 + 2,065 + 21,445 −33,292
2000          Q4 − 7,126 + 13,234 −2,560 −10,516 + 1,050 − 8,332 − 419 −9,530 + 2,052 + 15,023 + 17,137
2001          Q1 + 1,064 + 22,540 −1,420 −13,575 − 858 − 5,623 + 552 + 4,035 + 4,072 − 9,723 −11,749
         Q2 − 4,038 + 22,104 −1,503 −13,043 − 3,408 − 8,189 − 13 + 17,775 + 2,039 −15,763 + 21,099
         Q3 − 1,889 + 25,547 −1,779 −16,642 − 2,765 − 6,250 − 446 − 141 −2,165 + 4,639 −13,360
         Q4 + 9,048 + 25,303 − 730 − 7,955 − 199 − 7,371 − 479 −43,088 + 2,085 + 32,434 + 36,688
2002          Q1 + 13,911 + 33,328 −1,049 −11,092 − 2,148 − 5,128 + 160 + 721 −1,352 −13,440 −18,496
         Q2 + 13,373 + 31,721 −1,389 − 8,875 + 466 − 8,550 − 75 −20,119 + 2,432 + 4,388 + 1,694
         Q3 + 13,883 + 35,543 −1,566 −12,808 − 1,829 − 5,457 + 62 −19,490 + 87 + 5,459 −17,588
         Q4 + 21,637 + 32,195 −1,931 − 5,471 + 4,262 − 7,419 − 359 −47,215 + 898 + 25,039 + 1,099
2003          Q1 + 9,680 + 29,304 −1,354 − 8,612 − 4,337 − 5,321 + 5 −15,950 −1,495 + 7,760 + 3,444
         Q2 + 8,634 + 29,813 −1,919 − 8,888 − 2,475 − 7,896 + 152 −28,535 + 1,505 + 18,245 + 22,123
         Q3 + 12,933 + 38,908 −1,344 −12,553 − 3,832 − 8,245 + 208 −2,358 − 751 −10,033 −15,902
2001          May − 525 + 8,212 − 464 − 4,280 − 1,276 − 2,716 − 145 + 22,378 + 508 −22,216 − 53
         June − 4,348 + 7,727 − 397 − 5,182 − 3,315 − 3,182 + 281 −13,463 + 326 + 17,204 + 11,749
         July − 3,198 + 9,441 − 567 − 5,397 − 3,970 − 2,705 − 226 + 5,225 − 151 − 1,650 −10,589
         Aug + 1,564 + 9,038 − 699 − 6,539 + 1,276 − 1,512 − 172 + 3,554 + 460 − 5,406 −4,247
         Sep − 255 + 7,069 − 513 − 4,707 − 71 − 2,033 − 47 −8,920 −2,474 + 11,696 + 1,476
         Oct + 3,413 + 9,661 − 219 − 4,721 + 1,575 − 2,882 − 140 −1,322 −1,001 − 950 −1,307
         Nov + 969 + 7,351 − 425 − 3,095 + 5 − 2,867 − 180 −20,220 + 204 + 19,227 + 6,860
         Dec + 4,666 + 8,290 − 86 − 139 − 1,779 − 1,622 − 159 −21,546 + 2,882 + 14,158 + 31,135
2002          Jan + 1,966 + 10,526 − 515 − 3,917 − 4,823 + 695 + 477 + 8,769 −1,747 − 9,465 −17,916
         Feb + 4,156 + 10,558 − 332 − 3,192 + 206 − 3,084 − 155 −4,946 + 67 + 878 + 1,535
         Mar + 7,789 + 12,245 − 203 − 3,982 + 2,468 − 2,739 − 162 −3,102 + 328 − 4,853 −2,116
         Apr + 4,537 + 10,015 − 916 − 2,659 + 1,058 − 2,961 − 148 − 125 + 1,657 − 5,920 −9,839
         May + 3,919 + 10,408 − 565 − 3,230 − 231 − 2,462 + 47 − 417 + 1,379 − 4,928 + 3,826
         June + 4,917 + 11,299 + 93 − 2,986 − 362 − 3,127 + 26 −19,576 − 603 + 15,236 + 7,707
         July + 2,856 + 13,224 − 774 − 3,785 − 3,956 − 1,853 − 203 −11,581 − 548 + 9,476 −15,567
         Aug + 3,165 + 10,477 − 317 − 5,824 + 196 − 1,366 + 86 −6,178 + 886 + 2,040 −5,579
         Sep + 7,862 + 11,842 − 474 − 3,200 + 1,931 − 2,238 + 179 −1,731 − 252 − 6,058 + 3,559
         Oct + 5,840 + 11,529 − 414 − 3,869 + 1,950 − 3,356 − 82 −19,457 + 570 + 13,129 −5,279
         Nov + 9,284 + 12,283 − 627 − 1,645 + 1,565 − 2,291 − 137 −4,333 − 842 − 3,970 + 4,265
         Dec + 6,513 + 8,383 − 889 + 43 + 748 − 1,772 − 139 −23,425 + 1,171 + 15,880 + 2,112
2003          Jan − 1,313 + 8,980 − 708 − 3,920 − 4,907 − 759 + 475 −5,645 − 97 + 6,580 + 6,799
         Feb + 4,370 + 10,668 − 142 − 2,932 − 577 − 2,647 − 504 −20,067 − 320 + 16,521 + 677
         Mar + 6,622 + 9,656 − 505 − 1,760 + 1,147 − 1,916 + 33 + 9,763 −1,078 −15,340 −4,032
         Apr + 3,138 + 9,216 − 897 − 2,872 + 331 − 2,640 − 123 −5,647 + 1,449 + 1,184 + 1,477
         May + 2,971 + 10,210 − 557 − 3,124 − 1,169 − 2,390 + 156 −10,122 − 854 + 7,849 + 22,684
         June + 2,526 + 10,387 − 465 − 2,892 − 1,638 − 2,867 + 119 −12,766 + 910 + 9,211 −2,037
         July + 1,230 + 14,159 − 621 − 4,133 − 5,325 − 2,850 + 62 + 754 + 225 − 2,271 −16,353
         Aug + 2,299 + 10,424 − 461 − 5,080 + 157 − 2,742 + 224 −8,631 − 717 + 6,825 −3,057
         Sep + 9,405 + 14,325 − 263 − 3,341 + 1,336 − 2,653 − 78 + 5,519 − 259 −14,587 + 3,508
         Oct  p + 6,265 + 10,772 − 673 − 2,629 + 616 − 1,821 − 30 −4,032 − 255 − 1,947 −21,689
oFrom July 1990 including the external transactions of the former GDR. — included up to December 1992 in Supplementary trade items. —4Mainly
1From the beginning of 1993 figures subject to significant uncertainty warehouse transactions for account of residents and deduction of goods
owing to changes in the method of data collection in foreign trade. — returned. —5See footnote 3. —6Excluding the expenditure on freight and
2Special trade according to the official foreign trade statistics: imports c.i.f., insurance included in the c.i.f. import value. —7Capital exports: −.—
exports f.o.b. —3From January 1993 including additional estimates for 8 Increase: −. 
external transactions which do not have to be reported and which are
68*X Foreign trade and payments

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
X Foreign trade and payments
 
3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
by group of countries and country *
 
  5  million
 2003
Group of countries / Country  2000  2001  2002 Jan / Sep June July August September October  p 
All countries  1 Exports 597,440 638,268 651,320 490,395 54,039 57,749 49,675 58,183 58,187
Imports 538,311 542,774 518,532 392,371 43,652 43,590 39,251 43,858 47,415Balance + 59,128 + 95,495 + 132,788 + 98,024 + 10,387 + 14,159 + 10,424 + 14,325 + 10,772
I. Exports 460,422 481,991 486,520 363,200 39,692 42,012 35,568 43,077 ...Industrial countries
Imports 389,927 390,269 367,287 275,510 30,904 30,193 27,514 30,243 ...Balance + 70,495 + 91,722 + 119,233 + 87,690 + 8,788 + 11,819 + 8,054 + 12,834 ...
Exports 337,375 351,611 354,813 270,099 29,614 30,696 26,273 32,204 ... 1. EU member countries
Imports 273,951 277,034 262,849 198,501 22,440 22,203 19,428 22,243 ...
Balance + 63,424 + 74,577 + 91,964 + 71,598 + 7,174 + 8,493 + 6,845 + 9,961 ...
of  which
Exports 264,870 275,384 276,270 210,074 23,387 23,950 19,952 25,097 ... EMU member
Imports 217,946 221,680 211,642 160,968 18,324 18,373 15,523 18,321 ... countries
Balance + 46,924 + 53,704 + 64,628 + 49,107 + 5,062 + 5,577 + 4,429 + 6,776 ...
of which
Austria Exports 32,436 33,486 33,863 25,734 2,766 2,923 2,759 3,103 ...
Imports 20,497 20,664 21,047 15,565 1,644 1,831 1,613 1,780 ...Balance + 11,939 + 12,822 + 12,816 + 10,169 + 1,123 + 1,092 + 1,146 + 1,323 ...
Belgium and Exports 32,728 35,187 34,108 26,530 2,717 2,783 2,859 3,850 ...Luxemburg Imports 26,230 28,521 26,505 20,729 2,280 2,441 2,060 2,356 ...
Balance + 6,499 + 6,666 + 7,603 + 5,801 + 438 + 342 + 799 + 1,494 ...
France Exports 67,418 69,601 68,721 51,735 5,962 6,090 4,576 5,869 ...
Imports 50,862 49,743 48,200 36,137 4,272 4,009 3,254 4,136 ...Balance + 16,556 + 19,858 + 20,521 + 15,598 + 1,690 + 2,081 + 1,323 + 1,733 ...
Italy Exports 45,011 47,119 47,335 35,916 4,069 4,281 2,856 4,068 ...
Imports 35,776 35,280 33,482 25,126 2,918 3,063 2,374 2,796 ...Balance + 9,235 + 11,839 + 13,853 + 10,790 + 1,151 + 1,218 + 481 + 1,272 ...
Netherlands Exports 38,993 40,011 40,463 30,015 3,335 3,240 3,141 3,484 ...
Imports 44,739 43,233 40,751 32,329 3,519 3,388 3,290 3,494 ...Balance − 5,745 − 3,222 − 288 − 2,313 − 184 − 148 − 150 − 10 ...
Spain Exports 26,732 27,841 29,436 23,721 2,705 2,768 2,104 2,794 ...
Imports 16,087 15,226 15,532 12,210 1,490 1,410 999 1,370 ...Balance + 10,645 + 12,615 + 13,903 + 11,511 + 1,215 + 1,357 + 1,105 + 1,424 ...
Sweden Exports 13,524 12,978 13,496 10,475 1,138 1,008 1,088 1,288 ...
Imports 10,202 8,999 8,868 7,104 797 791 692 817 ...Balance + 3,322 + 3,979 + 4,628 + 3,371 + 341 + 217 + 397 + 470 ...
United Exports 49,377 52,764 53,761 41,036 4,231 4,924 4,146 4,851 ...Kingdom Imports 36,923 37,259 33,075 23,797 2,575 2,451 2,426 2,417 ...
Balance + 12,453 + 15,505 + 20,685 + 17,239 + 1,656 + 2,473 + 1,720 + 2,434 ...
Exports 39,944 39,987 40,687 30,470 3,554 3,735 3,161 3,615 ... 2. Other European
Imports 36,800 39,165 39,420 29,958 3,116 3,022 3,140 2,913 ... industrial countries  
2 
Balance + 3,144 + 821 + 1,267 + 512 + 437 + 714 + 22 + 702 ...
of which
Switzerland Exports 25,596 27,489 26,702 19,553 2,309 2,324 1,936 2,156 ...
Imports 18,797 19,753 19,461 14,010 1,508 1,588 1,378 1,449 ...
Balance + 6,799 + 7,737 + 7,241 + 5,543 + 801 + 736 + 558 + 707 ...
Exports 83,103 90,393 91,020 62,631 6,524 7,580 6,134 7,257 ... 3. Non-European
Imports 79,176 74,069 65,019 47,050 5,348 4,968 4,947 5,086 ... industrial countries
Balance + 3,926 + 16,324 + 26,001 + 15,580 + 1,177 + 2,612 + 1,187 + 2,172 ...
of which
Japan Exports 13,195 13,103 12,576 8,615 876 1,085 898 1,047 ...
Imports 26,847 22,910 19,896 14,171 1,734 1,535 1,351 1,581 ...
Balance −13,651 − 9,807 − 7,320 − 5,556 − 858 − 450 − 453 − 534 ...
Exports 61,764 67,824 68,263 46,601 4,833 5,588 4,475 5,393 ... United States
Imports 47,121 45,982 40,376 29,865 3,283 3,158 3,217 3,215 ...Balance + 14,643 + 21,842 + 27,887 + 16,736 + 1,550 + 2,430 + 1,258 + 2,178 ...
II. Exports 70,318 83,246 91,284 73,977 8,799 9,076 8,249 9,043 ...Countries in transition
Imports 82,900 90,341 93,662 74,601 8,126 8,712 7,510 8,839 ...Balance −12,582 − 7,095 − 2,378 − 624 + 672 + 364 + 739 + 204 ...
of which
Central and east Exports 59,900 69,914 75,373 59,297 7,110 7,141 6,568 7,196 ...European countries Imports 62,781 68,701 70,686 55,596 6,103 6,662 5,489 6,545 ...in transition Balance − 2,882 + 1,213 + 4,687 + 3,702 + 1,007 + 479 + 1,079 + 651 ...
People ‘s Republic Exports 9,459 12,118 14,571 13,625 1,571 1,803 1,553 1,716 ...
of China  
3 Imports 18,553 19,942 21,338 17,568 1,882 1,875 1,873 2,158 ...Balance − 9,094 − 7,824 − 6,768 − 3,943 − 311 − 71 − 320 − 442 ...
III. Exports 65,023 71,477 71,884 52,148 5,424 6,551 5,736 5,949 ...Developing countries
Imports 64,742 61,490 56,940 41,746 4,565 4,628 4,176 4,705 ...Balance + 282 + 9,987 + 14,944 + 10,402 + 859 + 1,923 + 1,560 + 1,244 ...
of  which
Exports 24,029 24,735 25,282 18,420 1,838 2,245 2,012 2,214 ... Emerging markets in
Imports 30,498 28,351 26,660 19,017 2,006 1,905 2,002 2,293 ... south-east Asia  
4 
Balance − 6,469 − 3,616 − 1,377 − 597 − 168 + 340 + 10 − 79 ...
OPEC-countries Exports 10,729 13,669 14,689 10,425 1,096 1,309 1,329 1,188 ...
Imports 10,235 8,220 6,977 5,375 617 524 494 619 ...Balance + 494 + 5,449 + 7,713 + 5,050 + 479 + 786 + 835 + 569 ...
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (f.o.b.) by country of destination, region. —2Including Cyprus. —3Excluding Hong Kong. —4Brunei Darus-
imports (c.i.f.) by country of origin. Inclusion of individual countries in salam, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore, Republ ic of
groups of countries according to the current position. —1Including fuel Korea, Taiwan and Thailand. 
and other supplies for ships and aircraft and other data not classifiable by
69*X Foreign trade and payments

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
X Foreign trade and payments
 
4 Services and factor income of the Federal Republic of Germany
(Balances)
 
Until the end of 1998 DM million, from 1999  5  million
Services
other services
of which
 
Patents Compen- Services  of Construction
Trans- Financial and sation of Investment Government selfemployed and  assembly
Period Total Travel  1 services licences Total income portation  2 transactions  3 persons  4 work,  repairs employees  5 
1998 −76,062 −64,465 + 5,449 + 3,011 −4,044 + 5,462 −21,474 −2,586 −2,484 −1,584 −11,753
1999 −47,020 −36,421 + 2,882 + 1,005 −1,896 + 1,997 −14,588 −2,245 − 403 − 756 −8,843
2000 −49,868 −37,420 + 3,385 + 980 −2,904 + 2,221 −16,130 −2,733 − 782 − 512 −1,325
2001 −51,215 −37,416 + 4,144 + 509 −2,395 + 3,488 −19,545 −2,536 −1,123 − 257 −6,974
2002 −38,246 −35,243 + 3,032 + 584 −1,414 + 5,257 −10,461 −2,026 − 363 − 354 + 1,105
2002          Q1 −11,092 − 6,811 + 194 − 48 − 440 + 1,059 −5,044 − 524 − 388 + 132 −2,280
         Q2 − 8,875 − 8,454 + 1,027 + 104 − 655 + 1,228 −2,126 − 505 − 158 − 148 + 614
         Q3 −12,808 −13,331 + 717 + 179 − 442 + 1,707 −1,638 − 539 + 194 − 310 −1,519
         Q4 − 5,471 − 6,647 + 1,094 + 350 + 123 + 1,263 −1,653 − 457 − 10 − 29 + 4,291
2003          Q1 − 8,612 − 6,564 + 751 + 423 − 216 + 1,227 −4,234 − 556 + 170 + 173 −4,511
         Q2 − 8,888 − 7,607 + 1,296 − 94 − 236 + 1,202 −3,449 − 487 + 6 − 143 −2,333
         Q3 −12,553 −12,623 + 484 + 348 − 383 + 1,313 −1,692 − 403 + 241 − 303 −3,529
2002          Dec + 43 − 1,548 + 451 + 54 + 135 + 544 + 407 − 173 − 46 − 6 + 754
2003          Jan − 3,920 − 2,658 + 144 + 207 − 73 + 419 −1,960 − 216 + 56 + 59 −4,966
         Feb − 2,932 − 1,675 + 156 + 149 + 0 + 384 −1,946 − 120 + 60 + 52 − 629
         Mar − 1,760 − 2,231 + 451 + 68 − 143 + 424 − 328 − 221 + 54 + 62 + 1,084
         Apr − 2,872 − 2,402 + 375 − 321 − 109 + 426 − 841 − 196 − 43 − 42 + 373
         May − 3,124 − 2,218 + 290 + 62 − 55 + 351 −1,553 − 136 + 15 − 50 −1,119
         June − 2,892 − 2,987 + 632 + 165 − 72 + 424 −1,055 − 155 + 34 − 51 −1,587
         July − 4,133 − 3,480 + 133 + 135 − 136 + 467 −1,252 − 169 + 156 − 91 −5,235
         Aug − 5,080 − 5,370 + 215 + 147 − 74 + 403 − 401 − 124 + 65 − 107 + 264
         Sep − 3,341 − 3,773 + 136 + 66 − 173 + 442 − 39 − 111 + 19 − 105 + 1,441
         Oct − 2,629 − 2,469 + 65 + 46 − 113 + 375 − 533 − 129 − 5 − 15 + 631
1From January 2002 figures subject to significant uncertainty. —2Ex- vices supplied. —4Engineering and other technical services, research and
cluding the expenditure on freight included in the c.i.f. import value. — development, commercial services etc. — 5 Wages and salaries. 
3Including the receipts from foreign military agencies for goods and ser-
5 Current transfers of the Federal Republic of Germany 6 Capital transfers
(Balances) (Balances)
Until the end of 1998 DM million, from 1999  5  million DM million /  5  million
Public  1 Private  1 
International
Organisations  2 
 
of which other Remittances otherEuropean current by foreign current
Period Total Total Total Communities Total workers transfers Total  
4 Public  1 Private  1 transfers  3 
1998 −53,304 −37,317 −33,077 −30,382 −4,240 −15,987 −6,936 −9,051 + 1,289 −2,441 + 3,730
1999 −25,016 −17,348 −15,428 −13,846 −1,920 −7,667 −3,429 −4,239 − 154 −1,351 + 1,197
2000 −28,368 −19,095 −17,100 −15,398 −1,996 −9,272 −3,458 −5,814 −1,599 −1,189 − 410
2001 −27,432 −16,927 −14,257 −12,587 −2,670 −10,505 −3,520 −6,985 − 387 −1,361 + 974
2002 −26,555 −15,644 −12,416 −11,214 −3,227 −10,911 −3,470 −7,441 − 212 −1,416 + 1,204
2002          Q1 −5,128 −2,315 −1,256 − 832 −1,059 −2,813 − 868 −1,946 + 160 − 229 + 389
         Q2 −8,550 −5,262 −5,254 −4,997 − 8 −3,289 − 868 −2,421 − 75 − 274 + 199
         Q3 −5,457 −3,585 −2,746 −2,387 − 838 −1,873 − 868 −1,005 + 62 − 348 + 410
         Q4 −7,419 −4,483 −3,161 −2,998 −1,322 −2,936 − 868 −2,069 − 359 − 565 + 207
2003          Q1 −5,321 −3,310 −2,294 −1,628 −1,016 −2,011 − 833 −1,178 + 5 − 233 + 238
         Q2 −7,896 −5,411 −5,373 −4,789 − 37 −2,486 − 833 −1,653 + 152 − 276 + 427
         Q3 −8,245 −6,014 −4,896 −4,650 −1,118 −2,231 − 833 −1,398 + 208 − 249 + 457
2002          Dec −1,772 − 920 − 627 − 572 − 293 − 852 − 289 − 562 − 139 − 213 + 74
2003          Jan − 759 − 247 + 94 + 517 − 341 − 512 − 278 − 234 + 475 − 104 + 580
         Feb −2,647 −1,889 −1,499 −1,296 − 390 − 758 − 278 − 480 − 504 − 87 − 416
         Mar −1,916 −1,174 − 889 − 850 − 285 − 742 − 278 − 464 + 33 − 41 + 74
         Apr −2,640 −1,915 −1,754 −1,712 − 161 − 725 − 278 − 447 − 123 − 70 − 53
         May −2,390 −1,476 −1,647 −1,565 + 171 − 914 − 278 − 636 + 156 − 90 + 246
         June −2,867 −2,020 −1,972 −1,512 − 48 − 847 − 278 − 569 + 119 − 115 + 234
         July −2,850 −2,095 −1,655 −1,491 − 441 − 754 − 278 − 477 + 62 − 84 + 147
         Aug −2,742 −2,054 −1,579 −1,556 − 476 − 688 − 278 − 410 + 224 − 73 + 297
         Sep −2,653 −1,864 −1,662 −1,603 − 201 − 789 − 278 − 511 − 78 − 91 + 13
         Oct −1,821 −1,075 − 631 − 514 − 445 − 746 − 278 − 468 − 30 − 92 + 61
1The classification of "public" and "private" transfers depends on which (excluding capital transfers). —3Payments to developing countries, pension
sector the participating domestic body belongs to. —2Current contri- payments, tax revenue and refunds, etc. —4Where identifiable; in
butions to the budgets of international organisations and to the EU budget particular, debt forgiveness. 
70*X Foreign trade and payments

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
X Foreign trade and payments
 
7 Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
 
 
 5  million
2002 2003
Item 2000 2001 2002 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Aug Sep Oct
I. Net German investment abroad
(Increase/capital exports: −) −355,670 −270,851 −258,451 −26,547 −95,947 −63,257 + 1,092 + 23,852 −21,237 −17,180
1. Direct investment  1 −60,030 −36,314 −28,700 − 6,256 −16,036 + 14,170 − 4,963 + 784 − 305 − 2,380
Equity capital −59,125 −61,618 −46,821 − 5,102 − 7,471 − 1,557 − 2,533 − 497 − 1,886 + 344
Reinvested earnings  2 + 1,671 + 13,949 − 2,630 − 661 −−−−−−
Credit transactions of
German direct investors + 3,281 + 16,360 + 27,883 + 1,727 − 6,787 + 17,512 − 682 + 1,762 + 1,847 − 1,830
Other capital − 5,857 − 5,005 − 7,132 − 2,220 − 1,778 − 1,785 − 1,748 − 480 − 266 − 893
2. Portfolio investment −203,368 −129,559 −69,036 − 9,436 + 5,562 −20,019 − 5,483 − 1,327 − 2,938 −12,434
Equities  3 −102,252 −15,614 − 5,330 − 5,448 + 14,707 − 816 − 693 − 122 + 1,972 − 2,206
Investment fund certificates  4 −32,516 −19,701 − 6,784 + 576 − 3,100 − 101 − 160 − 301 + 245 − 440
Bonds and notes  5 −70,251 −95,098 −50,806 − 7,185 − 9,616 −20,576 − 1,219 + 1,574 − 5,589 − 8,238
Money market instruments + 1,651 + 853 − 6,116 + 2,622 + 3,571 + 1,474 − 3,411 − 2,479 + 433 − 1,550
3. Financial derivatives  6 − 5,490 + 6,278 − 533 + 340 + 2,865 − 2,089 + 328 + 769 − 1,658 + 2,022
4. Credit transactions −84,596 −109,871 −158,634 −10,909 −87,752 −54,678 + 11,816 + 23,702 −16,009 − 4,195
Credit institutions  7 −101,533 −130,648 −130,536 −30,296 −74,254 −66,528 + 29,417 + 19,138 −16,432 + 18,653
Long-term −40,156 −47,636 −31,790 − 9,514 −11,479 − 8,019 − 8,176 − 2,755 − 2,598 − 4,409
Short-term −61,378 −83,012 −98,746 −20,782 −62,774 −58,509 + 37,593 + 21,892 −13,834 + 23,062
Enterprises and individuals − 5,116 −19,217 + 744 + 18,746 −17,690 − 8,193 − 1,872 + 7,065 − 3,047 − 741
Long-term + 91 − 1,857 − 400 − 384 − 756 − 492 − 768 − 193 − 420 − 16
Short-term  7 − 5,207 −17,360 + 1,144 + 19,130 −16,934 − 7,701 − 1,104 + 7,258 − 2,627 − 725
General government −19,920 + 15,980 + 7,168 − 368 + 950 − 547 − 160 + 413 − 256 − 241
Long-term − 1,079 + 257 + 218 + 14 + 309 − 5 + 274 + 221 + 0 + 23
Short-term  7 −18,841 + 15,723 + 6,950 − 382 + 641 − 541 − 434 + 192 − 256 − 265
Bundesbank + 41,972 + 24,015 −36,010 + 1,009 + 3,242 + 20,590 −15,569 − 2,914 + 3,725 −21,866
5. Other investment  8 − 2,185 − 1,385 − 1,549 − 287 − 588 − 641 − 606 − 76− 327 − 193
II. Net foreign investment in Germany
(Increase/capital imports: +) + 391,974 + 249,433 + 172,348 −20,668 + 79,998 + 34,722 − 3,450 −32,483 + 26,757 + 13,148
1. Direct investment  1 + 218,184 + 23,990 + 35,635 + 5,655 + 8,454 + 9,475 + 6,323 + 2,186 + 783 − 9,422
Equity capital + 121,532 + 30,089 + 26,985 + 1,754 + 9,064 + 2,900 + 4,335 + 2,524 + 1,224 + 32Reinvested earnings  
2 − 5,839 −17,513 − 8,379 − 2,091 − 900 − 900 − 900 − 300 − 300 − 300
Credit transactions offoreign direct investors + 102,826 + 11,558 + 17,225 + 6,034 + 385 + 7,540 + 2,861 − 121 − 102 − 9,114
Other capital − 335 − 143 − 197 − 41− 96− 66 + 27 + 82 − 39− 40
2. Portfolio investment + 47,583 + 156,175 + 105,998 − 2,894 + 30,557 + 25,964 − 4,173 − 6,078 + 1,507 + 33,146
Equities  
3 −35,923 + 88,638 + 16,844 + 2,533 − 2,580 + 2,331 + 3,391 + 1,731 + 704 + 12,335
Investment fund certificates + 11,000 + 1,105 − 241 − 1,271 − 901 − 58− 799 + 754 − 913 + 1,191
Bonds and notes  5 + 73,955 + 81,246 + 79,231 − 563 + 22,682 + 23,979 + 5,280 + 2,401 − 464 + 17,611
Money market instruments − 1,450 −14,815 + 10,164 − 3,593 + 11,355 − 289 −12,045 −10,964 + 2,179 + 2,009
3. Credit transactions + 125,945 + 69,221 + 30,641 −23,422 + 40,983 − 742 − 5,606 −28,610 + 24,472 −10,572
Credit institutions  7 + 115,294 + 54,341 + 28,321 −19,542 + 41,251 − 502 − 9,450 −29,637 + 23,812 −10,547
Long-term + 15,665 + 4,425 + 18,247 + 3,244 − 3,099 − 158 − 7,429 − 4,112 − 3,752 + 1,375
Short-term + 99,629 + 49,916 + 10,075 −22,786 + 44,350 − 344 − 2,021 −25,525 + 27,565 −11,922
Enterprises and individuals + 9,711 + 11,412 + 3,334 − 3,083 − 2,278 − 1,951 + 1,150 + 183 − 714 − 109
Long-term + 4,014 + 11,351 + 5,142 + 1,444 − 6,014 + 1,006 + 1,148 + 1,166 − 507 + 115
Short-term  7 + 5,698 + 61 − 1,807 − 4,527 + 3,736 − 2,958 + 1 − 983 − 207 − 224
General Government + 526 + 837 − 1,667 + 12 + 313 + 1,683 + 2,277 + 270 + 1,332 − 349
Long-term − 372 − 217 − 112 − 159 + 3,407 − 138 − 183 − 31− 101 − 3
Short-term  7 + 898 + 1,054 − 1,555 + 171 − 3,094 + 1,821 + 2,460 + 301 + 1,433 − 347
Bundesbank + 414 + 2,631 + 653 − 809 + 1,697 + 28 + 418 + 574 + 42 + 433
4. Other investment + 263 + 47 + 74 − 8+ 5+ 2 5+ 6+ 1 9 − 6− 3
III. Balance of all statistically
recorded financial movements(Net capital exports: −) + 36,305 −21,419 −86,103 −47,215 −15,950 −28,535 − 2,358 − 8,631 + 5,519 − 4,032
1From 1996, new definition for direct investment. —2Estimated. — action values shown here are mostly derived from changes in stocks. As far
3Including participation rights. —4From 1991 including accumulated as possible, purely statistical changes have been eliminated. —8In
earnings. —5From 1975 excluding accrued interest. —6Options, whether particular, subscriptions of the Federal Government to International
or not evidenced by securities, and financial futures contracts. —7The trans- Organisations. 
71*X Foreign trade and payments

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
X Foreign trade and payments
 
8 External position of the Bundesbank *
 
 
DM million
Monetary reserves and other claims on non-residents Liabilities to non-residents
Monetary reserves
Reserve
positionin theInter- Liabilitiesnational arising Net Liabilities
Monetary arising from externalFund and Claims Loans and from liquidity position
Foreign special on the external Treasury (col. 1 other claims
End of year currency drawing ECB  
2 on non- trans- discount less
or month Total Total Gold rights (net) Total paper col. 8) balances  1 residents  3 actions  4 
1234567891 0 1 1
1990 106,446 104,023 13,688 64,517 7,373 18,445 2,423 52,259 52,259 − 54,188
1991 97,345 94,754 13,688 55,424 8,314 17,329 2,592 42,335 42,335 − 55,010
1992 143,959 141,351 13,688 85,845 8,199 33,619 2,608 26,506 26,506 − 117,453
1993 122,763 120,143 13,688 61,784 8,496 36,176 2,620 39,541 23,179 16,362 83,222
1994 115,965 113,605 13,688 60,209 7,967 31,742 2,360 24,192 19,581 4,611 91,774
1995 123,261 121,307 13,688 68,484 10,337 28,798 1,954 16,390 16,390 − 106,871
1996 120,985 119,544 13,688 72,364 11,445 22,048 1,441 15,604 15,604 − 105,381
1997 127,849 126,884 13,688 76,673 13,874 22,649 966 16,931 16,931 − 110,918
1998 135,085 134,005 17,109 100,363 16,533 − 1,079 15,978 15,978 − 119,107
*Valuation of the gold holdings and the claims on non-residents according Monetary Cooperation Fund −EMCF). —3Including loans to the World
to section 26 (2) of the Bundesbank Act and the provisions of the Bank. —4Including liquidity paper sold to non-residents by the
Commercial Code, especially section 253. In the course of the year, valuation Bundesbank; excluding the liquidity Treasury discount paper sold to
at the balance sheet rates of the preceding year. —1Mainly US dollar non-residents between March 1993 and March 1995, as shown in column 10. 
assets. —2European Central Bank (until 1993 claims on the European
  
 
9 External position of the Bundesbank in the European monetary union o
 5  million
Monetary reserves and other claims on non-residents
Monetary reserves
Reserve
position
in the Inter-
national OtherMonetary Other claims on Net externalFund and claims on Claims residents position of the
Gold special Foreign non-euro- within the in other Bundesbank Liabilities
End of year and gold drawing currency area Eurosystem EMU member to non- (col. 1 lessor month Total Total rights reserves (net)  
2 countries col. 9) receivables residents  1  3 residents  3 
1234567891 0
1999          Jan  4 95,316 93,940 29,312 8,461 56,167 140 1,225 11 8,169 87,146
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 8,332 52,420 9,162 39,746 11 6,179 135,779
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 7,762 53,377 313 6,620 14 6,592 94,1702001 76,147 93,215 35,005 8,721 49,489 312 − 17,385 5 8,752 67,396
2002 103,948 85,002 36,208 8,272 40,522 312 18,466 167 9,005 94,942
2002          June 88,199 86,649 35,435 8,848 42,366 312 1,236 1 9,219 78,980
         July 105,187 87,718 34,596 8,897 44,225 312 17,156 1 10,163 95,025
         Aug 110,682 87,466 35,197 8,797 43,471 312 22,902 1 9,432 101,250         Sep 108,889 88,937 36,225 8,751 43,961 312 19,639 1 9,966 98,923
         Oct 112,748 87,441 35,530 8,594 43,317 312 24,993 2 9,473 103,276
         Nov 108,615 87,610 35,517 8,542 43,551 312 20,688 5 10,272 98,343         Dec 103,948 85,002 36,208 8,272 40,522 312 18,466 167 9,005 94,942
2003          Jan 98,272 85,235 37,934 8,023 39,278 312 12,237 488 9,898 88,374
         Feb 95,491 83,685 35,721 8,008 39,956 312 11,001 493 9,669 85,822         Mar 98,240 82,530 34,100 8,348 40,083 312 14,908 490 10,599 87,641
         Apr 93,702 79,453 33,442 8,123 37,888 312 13,496 441 9,126 84,575
         May 70,456 78,904 34,252 7,871 36,781 312 − 9,216 455 9,818 60,638
         June 73,550 78,425 33,435 8,292 36,698 312 − 5,663 476 10,537 63,014
         July 90,714 79,218 34,759 8,289 36,170 312 10,710 474 10,375 80,339         Aug 98,605 84,197 37,546 8,583 38,068 312 13,592 504 11,060 87,545         Sep 91,894 81,206 36,491 8,492 36,223 312 9,902 474 10,879 81,016
         Oct 113,947 81,401 36,595 8,539 36,267 312 31,794 440 11,319 102,628
         Nov 97,130 79,624 36,705 8,374 34,545 312 16,742 452 10,518 86,612
oClaims and liabilities vis- à-vis all countries within and outside EMU. Until Deutsche Bundesbank ’s cross-border payments within the Eurosystem. From
December 2000, the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, by virtue November 2000 including the TARGET positions which were previously
of revaluations, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the levels shown (in columns 6 and 9) as bilateral assets and liabilities vis- à-vis national
are computed on the basis of cumulative transaction values. From January central banks outside the Eurosystem. —3See footnote 2. —4Euro
2001 onwards, all end-of-month levels will be valued at market prices. — opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at January 1, 1999. 
1Including loans to the World Bank. —2Including the balances in the
72*X Foreign trade and payments

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
X  Foreign trade and payments
 
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germ any (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
 5  million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities to non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  to foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms payments
or month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received operations operations
All countries
 
1999 277,331 52,774 224,557 115,564 108,993 100,777 8,216 293,849 56,632 237,217 166,026 71,191 52,047 19,144
2000 320,874 43,462 277,412 152,752 124,660 116,971 7,689 446,060 52,663 393,397 309,024 84,373 63,093 21,2802001 358,120 62,434 295,686 171,939 123,747 114,857 8,890 505,266 60,132 445,134 354,561 90,573 65,988 24,5852002  
4 331,671 63,817 267,854 148,913 118,941 111,406 7,535 533,423 57,696 475,727 387,850 87,877 62,622 25,255
2003          July 375,825 100,628 275,197 157,637 117,560 108,783 8,777 562,441 54,421 508,020 422,652 85,368 57,438 27,930         Aug 362,972 93,794 269,178 154,685 114,493 105,949 8,544 562,617 55,781 506,836 423,467 83,369 54,984 28,385         Sep  
r 369,299 95,393 273,906 157,407 116,499 108,083 8,416 567,725 53,879 513,846 427,170 86,676 58,702 27,974
         Oct 371,358 96,793 274,565 156,178 118,387 109,782 8,605 554,035 53,563 500,472 412,163 88,309 59,983 28,326
EU countries 5
 
1999 157,617 47,992 109,625 56,450 53,175 48,500 4,675 194,809 49,243 145,566 111,605 33,961 27,532 6,4292000 177,782 39,563 138,219 78,298 59,921 55,718 4,203 323,049 45,473 277,576 237,583 39,993 32,457 7,5362001 198,118 58,039 140,079 79,205 60,874 55,371 5,503 372,937 53,683 319,254 275,749 43,505 34,716 8,7892002  
4 200,930 60,118 140,812 84,643 56,169 51,693 4,476 402,561 52,503 350,058 307,920 42,138 32,650 9,488
2003          July 245,747 95,324 150,423 94,053 56,370 51,171 5,199 421,066 49,850 371,216 331,270 39,946 29,646 10,300         Aug 233,986 88,711 145,275 91,045 54,230 49,286 4,944 422,322 51,183 371,139 333,921 37,218 27,021 10,197         Sep 236,075 88,856 147,219 91,292 55,927 51,061 4,866 421,465 49,377 372,088 332,343 39,745 29,740 10,005
         Oct 240,091 90,524 149,567 92,449 57,118 52,187 4,931 411,771 48,943 362,828 322,411 40,417 30,276 10,141
of which: EMU member countries 1
 
1999 104,071 25,946 78,125 38,747 39,378 36,074 3,304 151,179 38,117 113,062 88,763 24,299 20,173 4,126
2000 120,976 22,737 98,239 52,976 45,263 42,389 2,874 247,830 33,698 214,132 185,595 28,537 23,569 4,9682001 126,519 33,787 92,732 46,599 46,133 42,771 3,362 295,943 38,361 257,582 225,711 31,871 24,878 6,9932002  
4 129,490 32,521 96,969 54,542 42,427 39,350 3,077 331,733 37,366 294,367 263,863 30,504 22,996 7,508
2003          July 155,644 51,199 104,445 61,649 42,796 39,412 3,384 342,583 31,942 310,641 281,227 29,414 21,373 8,041         Aug 148,203 47,517 100,686 59,608 41,078 37,824 3,254 342,750 32,524 310,226 283,037 27,189 19,351 7,838         Sep 153,217 50,539 102,678 60,512 42,166 38,967 3,199 342,882 31,208 311,674 282,592 29,082 21,420 7,662
         Oct 152,915 48,779 104,136 60,754 43,382 40,068 3,314 343,318 30,658 312,660 282,947 29,713 22,002 7,711
Other industrial countries 3 6
 
1999 71,958 3,595 68,363 45,540 22,823 21,220 1,603 68,024 4,870 63,154 44,518 18,636 15,387 3,249
2000 84,502 2,925 81,577 54,272 27,305 25,673 1,632 84,464 4,711 79,753 56,986 22,767 18,621 4,1462001 100,786 3,364 97,422 71,842 25,580 24,082 1,498 93,269 4,178 89,091 64,595 24,496 19,648 4,8482002  
4 77,144 2,743 74,401 48,866 25,535 24,303 1,232 90,594 3,267 87,327 64,544 22,783 18,081 4,702
2003          July 77,891 3,849 74,042 48,619 25,423 24,234 1,189 95,321 2,736 92,585 71,349 21,236 15,948 5,288         Aug 76,418 3,511 72,907 48,798 24,109 22,887 1,222 94,368 2,708 91,660 70,107 21,553 16,106 5,447         Sep  
r 80,885 4,982 75,903 51,150 24,753 23,592 1,161 100,344 2,534 97,810 75,611 22,199 16,954 5,245
         Oct 77,717 4,360 73,357 48,194 25,163 23,989 1,174 96,879 2,722 94,157 71,848 22,309 17,098 5,211
Countries in transition
 
1999 16,402 231 16,171 4,603 11,568 10,934 634 6,256 78 6,178 481 5,697 3,119 2,5782000 19,082 240 18,842 5,028 13,814 13,104 710 8,202 113 8,089 928 7,161 4,384 2,7772001 20,444 204 20,240 6,103 14,137 13,449 688 9,095 151 8,944 1,699 7,245 4,341 2,9042002  
4 20,339 332 20,007 5,680 14,327 13,586 741 10,106 175 9,931 2,119 7,812 4,574 3,238
2003          July 21,008 298 20,710 6,086 14,624 13,836 788 11,783 173 11,610 2,517 9,093 5,057 4,036         Aug 21,199 280 20,919 6,135 14,784 13,996 788 11,827 184 11,643 2,588 9,055 4,809 4,246         Sep 21,193 245 20,948 6,010 14,938 14,165 773 12,211 194 12,017 2,697 9,320 5,241 4,079
         Oct 21,888 288 21,600 6,074 15,526 14,719 807 12,793 184 12,609 2,719 9,890 5,677 4,213
Developing countries 2
 
1999 31,354 956 30,398 8,971 21,427 20,123 1,304 24,760 2,441 22,319 9,422 12,897 6,009 6,888
2000 39,508 734 38,774 15,154 23,620 22,476 1,144 30,345 2,366 27,979 13,527 14,452 7,631 6,8212001 38,772 827 37,945 14,789 23,156 21,955 1,201 29,965 2,120 27,845 12,518 15,327 7,283 8,0442002  
4 33,258 624 32,634 9,724 22,910 21,824 1,086 30,162 1,751 28,411 13,267 15,144 7,317 7,827
2003          July 31,179 1,157 30,022 8,879 21,143 19,542 1,601 34,271 1,662 32,609 17,516 15,093 6,787 8,306         Aug 31,369 1,292 30,077 8,707 21,370 19,780 1,590 34,100 1,706 32,394 16,851 15,543 7,048 8,495         Sep 31,146 1,310 29,836 8,955 20,881 19,265 1,616 33,705 1,774 31,931 16,519 15,412 6,767 8,645
         Oct 31,662 1,621 30,041 9,461 20,580 18,887 1,693 32,592 1,714 30,878 15,185 15,693 6,932 8,761
* Including the assets and liabilities vis- à-vis non-residents of individuals in Greece from January 2001. —2Including Cyprus until April 2002. —
Germany. The assets and liabilities vis- à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in 3Including Cyprus from May 2002. —4Change in the range of enterprises
Germany are shown in Table 4 of Section IV, "Banks". Statistical increases required to report owing to an increase in the exemtion limit. —5Including
and decreases have not been eliminated; to this extent the changes in totals Guernsey, Jersey and Isle of Man until December 2002. —6Including
are not comparable with the figures shown in Table X, 7. —1Including Guernsey, Jersey and Isle of Man from January 2003. 
73*X  Foreign trade and payments

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
X Foreign trade and payments
11 Deutsche Mark and euro exchange rates of selected currencies *
Yearly Japan Denmark Sweden Norway Switzerland Canada Australia New Zealand United States United Kingdom
or monthly
average USD JPY DKK SEK GBP NOK CHF CAD AUD  1 NZD 1 
Historic spot middle rates on the Frankfurt exchange (1 or 100 currency units = DEM ...)
      
1991 1.6612 1.2346 25.932 27.421 2.926  25.580 115.740 1.4501 1.2942 0.9589
1992 1.5595 1.2313 25.869 26.912 2.753  25.143 111.198 1.2917 1.1476 0.84061993 1.6544 1.4945 25.508 21.248 2.483  23.303 111.949 1.2823 1.1235 0.89401994 1.6218 1.5870 25.513 21.013 2.4816 22.982 118.712 1.1884 1.1848 0.9605
1995 1.4338 1.5293 25.570 20.116 2.2620 22.614 121.240 1.0443 1.0622 0.9399
1996 1.5037 1.3838 25.945 22.434 2.3478 23.292 121.891 1.1027 1.1782 1.03571997 1.7348 1.4378 26.249 22.718 2.8410 24.508 119.508 1.2533 1.2889 1.14531998 1.7592 1.3484 26.258 22.128 2.9142 23.297 121.414 1.1884 1.1070 0.9445
      
Euro reference exchange rates published by the European Central Bank (EUR 1 = currency units ...) 2
      
1999 1.0658 121.32 7.4355 8.8075 0.65874 8.3104 1.6003 1.5840 1.6523 2.01452000 0.9236 99.47 7.4538 8.4452 0.60948 8.1129 1.5579 1.3706 1.5889 2.02882001 0.8956 108.68 7.4521 9.2551 0.62187 8.0484 1.5105 1.3864 1.7319 2.13002002 0.9456 118.06 7.4305 9.1611 0.62883 7.5086 1.4670 1.4838 1.7376 2.0366
2002          Feb 0.8700 116.23 7.4299 9.1828 0.61160 7.7853 1.4775 1.3880 1.6963 2.0771
         Mar 0.8758 114.75 7.4324 9.0594 0.61574 7.7183 1.4678 1.3903 1.6695 2.0261
         Apr 0.8858 115.81 7.4341 9.1358 0.61407 7.6221 1.4658 1.4008 1.6537 1.9995
         May 0.9170 115.86 7.4356 9.2208 0.62823 7.5207 1.4572 1.4210 1.6662 1.9859         June 0.9554 117.80 7.4330 9.1137 0.64405 7.4043 1.4721 1.4627 1.6793 1.9517
         July 0.9922 117.11 7.4301 9.2689 0.63870 7.4050 1.4624 1.5321 1.7922 2.0646
         Aug 0.9778 116.31 7.4270 9.2489 0.63633 7.4284 1.4636 1.5333 1.8045 2.1076         Sep 0.9808 118.38 7.4271 9.1679 0.63059 7.3619 1.4649 1.5434 1.7927 2.0847
         Oct 0.9811 121.57 7.4297 9.1051 0.62994 7.3405 1.4650 1.5481 1.7831 2.0381
         Nov 1.0014 121.65 7.4280 9.0818 0.63709 7.3190 1.4673 1.5735 1.7847 2.0155         Dec 1.0183 124.20 7.4264 9.0961 0.64218 7.2948 1.4679 1.5872 1.8076 1.9947
2003          Jan 1.0622 126.12 7.4324 9.1733 0.65711 7.3328 1.4621 1.6364 1.8218 1.9648
         Feb 1.0773 128.60 7.4317 9.1455 0.66977 7.5439 1.4674 1.6299 1.8112 1.9457         Mar 1.0807 128.16 7.4274 9.2265 0.68255 7.8450 1.4695 1.5943 1.7950 1.9497
         Apr 1.0848 130.12 7.4255 9.1541 0.68902 7.8317 1.4964 1.5851 1.7813 1.9700
         May 1.1582 135.83 7.4246 9.1559 0.71322 7.8715 1.5155 1.6016 1.7866 2.0083         June 1.1663 138.05 7.4250 9.1182 0.70224 8.1619 1.5411 1.5798 1.7552 2.0069
         July 1.1372 134.99 7.4332 9.1856 0.70045 8.2893 1.5476 1.5694 1.7184 1.9386
         Aug 1.1139 132.38 7.4322 9.2378 0.69919 8.2558 1.5400 1.5570 1.7114 1.9137         Sep 1.1222 128.94 7.4273 9.0682 0.69693 8.1952 1.5474 1.5330 1.6967 1.9227
         Oct 1.1692 128.12 7.4301 9.0105 0.69763 8.2274 1.5485 1.5489 1.6867 1.9446
         Nov 1.1702 127.84 7.4370 8.9939 0.69278 8.1969 1.5590 1.5361 1.6337 1.8608
*Calculated from daily quotations. —1Exchange rates from Australia and central banks at 2.15 p.m. For additional euro reference exchange rates of
New Zealand; those for New Zealand calculated from rates as at the middle the ECB, see Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Report 5, Exchange rate
and end of the month. —2The ECB publishes daily euro reference ex- statistics. 
change rates, which are calculated on the basis of the concertation between
12 Exchange rates for the national currencies of the EMU countries, the Deutsche Mark value of the ECU *
and euro conversion rates
France Italy Netherlands Belgium/ Austria Spain Finland Ireland Portugal Greece ECU values  1 
Yearly Luxembourg GRD  100 /
average FRF  100 ITL  1,000 NLG  100 BEF/LUF  100 ATS  100 ESP  100 FIM  100 IEP  1 PTE  100 EUR  1  2 ECU  1
Historic spot middle rates on the Frankfurt exchange in DEM
   
1991 29.409 1.3377 88.742 4.857  14.211 1.597  41.087 2.671  1.149  0.9103 2.05076
1992 29.500 1.2720 88.814 4.857  14.211 1.529  34.963 2.656  1.157  0.8178 2.020311993 29.189 1.0526 89.017 4.785  14.214 1.303  28.915 2.423  1.031  0.7213 1.936391994 29.238 1.0056 89.171 4.8530 14.214 1.2112 31.108 2.4254 0.9774 0.6683 1.92452
1995 28.718 0.8814 89.272 4.8604 14.214 1.1499 32.832 2.2980 0.9555 0.6182 1.87375
1996 29.406 0.9751 89.243 4.8592 14.214 1.1880 32.766 2.4070 0.9754 0.6248 1.909541997 29.705 1.0184 88.857 4.8464 14.210 1.1843 33.414 2.6297 0.9894 0.6349 1.964381998 29.829 1.0132 88.714 4.8476 14.213 1.1779 32.920 2.5049 0.9763 0.5952 1.969131999 . . . . . . . . . 325.76 .
2000 . . . . . . . . . 336.63 .
      
Irrevocable euro conversion rates (EUR 1 = currency units ...) 3
   
6.55957 1936.27 2.20371 40.3399 13.7603 166.386 5.94573 0.787564 200.482 4 340.750 5 1.95583
*Calculated from daily quotations. —1According to data from the Euro- ence exchange rates of the ECB (EU R 1 = GRD ...). —3Applicable from
pean Commission. —2Until 1998 reciprocal values of the exchange rates for 1 January 1999. —4Applicable from 1 January 2001. —5Deutsche Mark
the Deutsche Mark, published by the Bank of Greece; from 1999 euro refer- conversion rate. 
74*X Foreign trade and payments

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
X Foreign trade and payments
 
13 Effective exchange rates * of the euro and selected foreign currencies
 
 
1999 Q1 = 100
Memo item: Effective nominal exchange rates of selected foreign
Indicators of the German economy ’s currencies against the currencies of 19 industrial
Effective exchange rate of the euro price competitiveness  3,4 countries  3,5,6 
Narrow group  1 Broad group  2 19 industrial countries  5 49 countries  7 
Real Real on the basis
of the on the basis on the basis
on the basis of Pound Canadian Swiss Japanese of consumer of consumer deflators of
Period Nominal prices Nominal prices consumer prices US dollar sterling dollar franc yen total sales  8 
1995 107.8 108.8 93.2 107.9 109.6 110.4 110.3 86.1 84.0 106.4 105.4 115.6
1996 107.9 108.8 95.4 106.0 106.2 106.8 105.2 90.9 85.9 108.8 104.2 100.61997 99.1 99.5 90.4 96.7 100.7 101.4 99.0 98.8 99.8 109.7 97.9 95.91998 101.5 101.3 96.6 99.2 100.9 101.1 100.1 103.4 103.3 103.5 99.9 89.71999 95.7 95.8 96.6 95.9 97.8 98.0 97.7 100.8 102.3 102.2 98.3 105.1
2000 85.7 86.3 88.2 86.2 91.9 92.6 91.1 105.4 105.2 103.6 96.8 117.9
2001 87.3 88.6 91.0 87.9 92.1 93.0 91.4 112.0 103.6 100.5 100.5 106.72002 90.0 92.5 95.6 91.8 93.3 94.0 92.6 110.7 104.2 98.7 104.9 100.8
1998          Q1 98.8 98.8 92.6 96.4 99.4 99.8 98.7 103.2 104.5 107.3 100.1 92.5
         Q2 100.2 100.1 94.2 97.5 100.7 100.7 99.1 104.8 104.8 106.5 98.5 86.8         Q3 102.5 102.5 97.8 100.4 101.6 102.1 101.1 106.3 104.1 102.0 99.4 83.7         Q4 104.2 103.8 101.7 102.6 101.8 101.8 101.6 99.4 99.8 98.0 101.6 95.7
1999          Q1 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0
         Q2 96.1 96.0 96.5 96.1 98.6 98.3 97.8 102.8 102.8 103.5 98.6 99.0         Q3 94.6 94.7 95.5 94.8 97.1 97.8 97.3 101.4 102.3 102.3 97.7 106.2         Q4 92.2 92.2 94.2 92.8 95.6 95.9 95.6 99.1 104.1 102.8 96.7 115.2
2000          Q1 89.0 89.5 91.1 89.3 93.8 94.8 93.5 101.5 106.4 104.9 95.1 114.9
         Q2 86.0 86.4 88.4 86.5 92.0 92.5 91.3 104.3 105.4 103.7 96.5 118.4         Q3 84.8 85.4 87.3 85.2 91.4 92.1 90.4 106.2 103.9 104.1 97.2 119.2         Q4 83.0 83.8 85.9 83.7 90.3 91.0 89.3 109.4 105.0 101.6 98.2 119.2
2001          Jan 89.2 89.9 91.7 88.7 . 94.0 92.3 107.7 102.4 102.7 100.0 108.3
         Feb 88.3 89.1 91.0 88.0 92.8 93.9 92.1 108.8 102.0 101.6 99.2 109.9         Mar 88.4 89.4 91.4 88.5 . 93.6 92.0 111.5 102.9 99.7 99.3 106.0
         Apr 87.6 88.8 91.0 88.1 . 93.1 91.5 113.0 103.7 100.0 99.4 104.9
         May 85.9 87.2 89.3 86.4 91.5 92.4 90.5 113.1 104.3 101.3 98.3 107.5         June 84.7 86.0 88.1 85.2 . 91.9 89.8 114.1 104.4 102.7 98.5 108.3
         July 85.4 86.8 89.1 86.0 . 92.7 90.8 114.3 104.9 102.5 99.5 105.8
         Aug 87.7 89.0 91.8 88.4 91.8 93.4 91.9 111.6 103.0 101.1 100.4 106.4         Sep 88.0 89.3 92.6 89.1 . 93.1 92.0 110.7 103.8 99.1 102.2 108.2
         Oct 88.0 89.6 92.8 89.3 . 92.7 91.6 111.8 103.7 99.0 103.0 106.2
         Nov 86.8 88.4 91.3 87.8 92.3 92.0 90.7 113.3 104.0 97.8 103.4 106.3         Dec 87.7 89.8 91.9 88.7 . 93.5 91.9 114.1 104.3 99.0 103.3 102.1
2002          Jan 87.6 90.0 91.6 88.1 . 93.6 91.4 116.4 104.9 97.9 103.3 98.3
         Feb 86.8 89.0 91.1 87.4 92.3 93.3 90.9 117.3 105.3 98.5 102.7 98.2         Mar 86.8 89.3 91.3 87.9 . 93.2 90.9 116.1 104.6 98.7 103.4 99.8
         Apr 87.2 89.7 91.7 88.2 . 92.7 90.5 115.3 105.2 99.0 103.8 99.4
         May 88.6 91.1 93.7 90.0 93.0 93.2 91.4 112.0 103.5 100.4 105.1 101.2         June 90.6 93.2 96.4 92.6 . 94.2 92.8 109.0 101.9 101.0 104.9 101.7
         July 91.7 94.4 98.2 94.3 . 95.2 94.4 106.0 103.5 99.4 106.0 104.3
         Aug 91.1 93.6 97.7 93.6 93.8 94.6 93.6 107.3 103.5 98.0 105.7 104.3         Sep 91.2 93.8 98.0 93.8 . 94.1 93.3 107.6 104.7 97.7 105.6 102.5
         Oct 91.7 94.3 98.5 94.4 . 94.0 93.3 108.5 105.0 97.6 105.8 99.8
         Nov 92.5 95.1 99.3 94.9 94.2 94.0 93.3 106.8 104.3 97.7 106.1 100.8         Dec 93.6 96.7 100.4 96.3 . 95.6 94.9 106.0 104.0 98.3 106.5 99.6
2003          Jan 95.8 98.8 103.0 98.1 . 96.3 95.8 103.0 102.6 98.8 107.9 100.4
         Feb 97.1 100.2 104.4 99.4 95.9 97.0 96.5 102.2 101.2 100.5 108.0 99.2         Mar 97.9 101.2 105.1 100.3 . 97.0 96.6 101.4 99.3 103.0 108.1 99.8
         Apr 98.6 102.1 105.2 100.6 . 96.9 96.3 101.4 98.7 104.1 106.4 98.6
         May 102.5 106.1 109.1 104.1
p 97.5 98.3 97.9 96.7 96.9 109.0 106.5 97.7
         June 102.7 106.6 109.3 104.5 . 98.7 98.3 96.1 98.9 111.2 104.9 96.3
         July 101.4 105.2 107.8 102.9 . 98.8 97.9 97.8 98.5 109.5 103.9 97.3
         Aug 100.3 103.9 106.6 101.6 p 97.1 98.1 97.1 99.1 98.1 108.4 104.0 98.3
         Sep 99.9 103.5 106.4 101.5 . 97.2 96.5 97.2 98.2 110.5 103.3 101.1
         Oct 101.3 105.2 108.3 103.3 . 97.6 97.2 93.3 98.8 113.1 103.7 103.7
         Nov 101.2 105.1 108.3 103.2 ... 97.3 96.9 93.0 99.5 114.1 102.9 103.9
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of April 2000, page 39 ff. —2ECB calculations. In addition to the countries
the currency concerned. —1ECB calculations based on the weighted belonging to the narrow group (see footnote 1), this group also includes the
averages of the effective exchange rates of the euro or, prior to 1999, of the following countries: Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, China, Croatia, Cypru s, Czech
exchange rates of the currencies preceding the euro against the currencies Republic, Estonia, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico ,
of the following countries: Australia, Canada, Denmark, Greece, Hong Kong, Morocco, New Zealand, Philippines, Poland, Romania, Russian Federatio n,
Japan, Norway, Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, United Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand and Turkey. —3The
Kingdom and United States. The weights used in these calculations are method of calculation is consistent with the procedure used by the ECB to
based on manufactured goods trade between 1995 and 1997 and capture compute the effective exchange rates of the euro (see Monthly Bulletin,third-market effects. From January 2001, Greece ceased to be a partner November 2001, page 50 ff.). —4Decline in the values implies an increase in
country in the effective exchange rate of the euro; the weighting scheme competitiveness. —5EMU countries and narrow group of the ECB except
was adjusted accordingly. Due to the change in the weighting scheme, Australia, Hong Kong, Singapore and South Korea. —6Figures up to
effective exchange rate data as from January 2001 are not fully comparable end-1998, computed by linking with the figures published up to Octoberwith earlier data. Where consumer prices were not yet available, estimates 2001. —7EMU countries and broad group of the ECB. —8Annual and
have been used. For details of the methodology see: ECB, Monthly Bulletin, quarterly averages. 
75*X Foreign trade and payments

76*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003

Overview of
publications
by the Deutsche
BundesbankThis overview provides information
about selected recent economic andstatistical publications by the DeutscheBundesbank. Unless otherwise indi-cated, these publications are availablein both English and German, in printedform and on the internet.
The publications are available free of
charge from the Press and Public Rela-tions Division. For a small fee to covercosts, a file which is updated monthlyand contains approximately 40,000time series published by the Bundes-bank can be obtained on magnetictape cassette or ZIP disk from the Divi-sion Statistical data processing, math-ematical methods. Orders should besent, in writing, to one of the ad-dresses listed on the reverse of the titlepage. Selected time series can also bedownloaded from the internet.
Annual Report
Monthly Report
For information on the articles published between
1990 and 2002 see the index attached to the Janu-ary 2003 Monthly Report.
January 2003
– Reserve assets: their development and import-
ance in monetary union
– Role and importance of interest rate derivatives
77*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003

– The new “Minimum requirements for the
credit business of credit institutions” and
Basel II
– Reports from the Economic Research Centre
February 2003
– The economic scene in Germany around the
turn of 2002-03
March 2003
– The Eurosystem’s monetary policy framework –
experience to date and measures to improve its
efficiency
– Macroeconomic aspects of share price devel-
opments
– The development of production potential in
Germany
– German balance of payments in 2002
April 2003
– The development of public finances in Ger-
many following qualification for European
monetary union
– The development of bank deposits in Germany
– German enterprises’ profitability and financing
in 2001
– Financial sanctions: legal framework and im-
plementation in Germany
May 2003
– The economic scene in Germany in spring
2003
June 2003
– The debate on deflationary risks in Germany
– Overall financial flows in 2002
– The development of German enterprises’ inter-
national capital links between end-1998 and
end-2001
– German results of euro-area bank lending
survey
– Monetary policy: how relevant are other policy-
makers? Bundesbank Spring Conference 2003July 2003
– Economic and monetary policy cooperation
between the EU and the acceding countries
following the signature of the accession treaty
– The state of public finance in the EU acceding
countries
– Financial markets in central and east European
countries before accession to the EU
– Reports from the Economic Research Centre
August 2003
– The economic scene in Germany in summer
2003
September 2003
– The performance of German credit institutions
in 2002
– Price indicators for the housing market
– Approaches to the validation of internal rating
systems
October 2003
– Germany’s competitive position and foreign
trade within the euro area
– The economic situation of small and medium-
sized enterprises in Germany
– Development and significance of education
expenditure in Germany
November 2003
– The economic scene in Germany in autumn
2003
– The monetary constitution under the Consti-
tution for Europe
December 2003
– Report on the stability of the German financial
system
– Stress testing the German banking system
78*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003

Statistical Supplements to the
Monthly Report1
1 Banking statistics (monthly)
2 Capital market statistics (monthly)
3 Balance of payments statistics (monthly)
4 Seasonally adjusted business statistics (monthly)5 Exchange rate statistics (quarterly)
Special Publications
The monetary policy of the Bundesbank,
October 19952
Makro-/C246konometrisches Mehr-L/C228nder-Modell,November 1996
3
Europ/C228ische Organisationen und Gremien im Be-reich von W/C228hrung und Wirtschaft, May 1997
3
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 bis1989, August 1999
3
The market for German Federal securities,
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model: MEMMOD,
June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Die Europ/C228ische Wirtschafts- und W/C228hrungsunion,
December 20023
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im Bereichvon W/C228hrung und Wirtschaft, March 2003
3
Special Statistical Publications
1 Banking statistics guidelines and customer clas-
sification, July 20034,52 Bankenstatistik Kundensystematik Firmenver-
zeichnisse, December 20033,6
3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen,
January 20003
4 Financial accounts for Germany 1991 to 2002,
September 20037
5 Annual accounts of west German enterprises
1971 to 1996, March 19991
6 Ratios from annual accounts of German enter-
prises between 1998 and 2000, March 20031, 7
7 Erl/C228uterungen zu den Leistungspositionen der
Zahlungsbilanz, September 20013
8 Balance of payments statistics of the Fed-
eral Republic of Germany, 2nd edition,February 1991
o
9 Securities deposits,
September 2003
10 International capital links,
June 20031, 7
11 Balance of payments by region,
August 2003
12 Technologische Dienstleistungen in der Zah-
lungsbilanz, May 20023
79*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
1Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data
contained in the German originals are available in English.
2Also available in French, Spanish, Russian and Chinese.
3Available in German only.
4Only the sections “Monthly Balance Sheet Statistics”,
“External position” and “Customer classification”(“Overall survey on sectoral classification”, “Survey on
breakdown by industry or activity” and “Explanatory
notes on the system of customer classification by industry
or activity”) are available in English.
5Current version only available on the internet at half-
yearly intervals.6Current version only available on the internet at quar-
terly intervals.7Available on the internet only.oNot available on the internet.

80*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
December 2003
Discussion papers*
Series 1
Economic Research Centre
March 2003 08/03
Die internationale Integration der Devisenm/C228rktein den mittel- und osteurop/C228ischen Beitrittsl/C228n-
dern: Spekulative Effizienz, Transaktionskosten
und Wechselkurspr/C228mien
March 2003 09/03
Determinants of German FDI: New Evidence fromMicro-Data
March 2003 10/03
On the Stability of Different Financial Systems
April 2003 11/03
Determinants of German Foreign Direct Invest-
ment in Latin American and Asian Emerging Mar-
kets in the 1990s
June 2003 12/03
Active monetary policy, passive fiscal policy andthe value of public debt: some further monetary
arithmetic
June 2003 13/03
Bidder Behavior in Repo Auctions without Mini-
mum Bid Rate: Evidence from the Bundesbank
June 2003 14/03
Did the Bundesbank React to Stock Price Move-ments?
15/2003
Money in a New-Keynesian model estimated with
German data
16/2003
Exact tests and confidence sets for the tail coeffi-cient of a-stable distributions17/2003The Forecasting Performance of German StockOption Densities
18/2003
How wacky is the DAX? The changing structure of
German stock market volatility
Series 2
Banking and Financial Supervision
1/2003
Measuring the Discriminative Power of Rating
Systems
2/2003
Credit Risk Factor Modeling and the Basel II IRBApproach
Banking legislation
1 Bundesbank Act and Statute of the European
System of Central Banks and of the EuropeanCentral Bank, June 1998
2 Gesetz /C252ber das Kreditwesen, February 2001
3
2a Grundsatz I /C252ber die Eigenmittel der Institute,
January 20013
2b Grundsatz II /C252ber die Liquidit/C228t der Institute,
August 19993
7 Instruction sheet for the reporting of large ex-
posures and loans of 3 million Deutsche Markor more pursuant to sections 13 to 14 of the
Banking Act, September 1998
*Earlier discussion papers are available on the internet,
in some cases as abstracts.
For footnotes, see p 79*.

