MONTHLY REPORT
NOVEMBER DECEMBER JANUARY FEBRUARY MARCH
2003
Vol 55
No 1 1

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
Deutsche Bundesbank
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 1460431 Frankfurt am Main
Postfach 10 06 02
60006 Frankfurt am MainFederal Republic of Germany
Tel +49 69 9566 -1
or +49 69 9566 plus extension
number
Telex 41227 within Germany
414431 from abroad
Fax +49 69 5601071
Internet http://www.bundesbank.deReproduction permitted only if source is stated.ISSN 0418 -8292The German original of this Monthly Report
went to press on 14 November 2003.Annual and weekly publishing schedules for
selected statistics of the Deutsche Bundes-bank can be downloaded from our internetsite. The statistical data are also published onthe internet.
TheMonthly Report is published by the Deut-
sche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main, by vir-tue of section 18 of the Bundesbank Act. It isavailable to interested parties free of charge.
This is a translation of the original German-
language version, which is the sole authorita-tive text.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
ContentsThe economic scene in Germany
in autumn 2003 5
The international and European setting 6
The financial markets in Germany 24Economic conditions in Germany 34Foreign trade and payments 45Public finance 52
The Stability and Growth Pactis facing its acid test 61
The monetary constitution under the
Constitution for Europe 65
Statistical Section 1*
Key economic data for EMU 6*
Overall monetary survey in the EMU 8*Consolidated financial statementof the Eurosystem 16*Banks 20*Minimum reserves 42*Interest rates 43*Capital market 48*Public finance in Germany 52*Economic conditions 60*Foreign trade and payments 67*
Overview of publications by the
Deutsche Bundesbank 77*

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
4

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
5The economic
scene in Germany
in autumn 2003

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
6Global and
European settingWorld economic activity
The global forces of growth, having already
prevailed in the second quarter, gained mo-mentum after mid-year. By far the strongeststimuli to growth again came from the USeconomy, which in the third quarter grew atits fastest pace since early 1984. The Japan-ese economy benefited from strong importdemand from its Asian neighbours and theUnited States as well as from brisk domesticdemand. Although the euro area was notable to keep up with the fast pace of eco-nomic growth in the USA and the sharp up-turn in Japan, many signs in the euro area arenow pointing to a gradual cyclical recoverythere, too. Overall economic output in the in-dustrial countries, having already picked upperceptibly in the second quarter, grew in thethird quarter – according to initial estimatesbased on preliminary GDP figures for theUSA, the euro area, Japan and the UnitedKingdom – by a seasonally adjusted 1% onthe period, and thus by 2
1/C254% on the year.
Prices in the industrial countries remainedsteady in the third quarter. Average third-quarter consumer price inflation was 1.6%.Excluding Japan, which dragged the averagedown by a wide margin, it was 2.2%.
The East Asian emerging economies grew
particularly rapidly. The continuing economicboom in China, rising US demand, exchangerate advantages and domestic recovery fol-lowing the eradication of the SARS epidemicin the affected countries were all major fac-tors in this development. Latin America, too,is seeing more and more signs of a cyclical re-covery. Besides an improvement in the globalGlobal recovery
in progress

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
7economic situation, the rise in commodity
prices also played a key role. The central andeast European countries have remained on agrowth path. This is particularly the casefor the oil-exporting CIS countries; owing tohuge oil revenues, Russian GDP is projectedto grow by 6% to 7% this year, accompaniedby large current account and general govern-ment budget surpluses.
The underlying economic conditions for a
continuation of the recovery process de-veloped rather favourably. For the most part,share prices on major stock exchanges con-tinued to rise, a development which was part-ly associated with the mostly favourable quar-terly results of US enterprises; in addition,debt financing remained inexpensive. Thebusiness climate and consumer confidence inthe industrial countries improved perceptibly.Additionally, exchange rate volatility on for-eign exchange markets remained moderate.This picture is clouded somewhat by therather high oil prices and the sharp rises inthe prices of non-energy commodities, whichin early November amounted, on a US dollarbasis, to 15
1/C252% on the year.
According to the latest IMF forecast, the
global economy will continue to pick upsteam next year. The forecast states thatglobal GDP growth will rise to 4% next yearfrom 3
1/C254% this year. The currently large
growth gap between the major industrial re-gions, especially between the USA and theeuro area, is unlikely to narrow in 2004. Thegrowth rate in each economic zone is expect-ed to rise by just under 1
1/C252percentage points
to 4% and 2% respectively. This assumes anexchange rate of US$1.12 to the euro. The
IMF predicts that the volume of world tradewill increase by 5
1/C252% in 2004 (against only
3% in 2003). From today’s perspective, this ismore likely to be the lower end.
In its forecast, the IMF still believes that the
downside risks outweigh the upside risks. Itlists, first and foremost, the global current ac-count imbalances and, associated with these,the global economy’s major dependence onthe United States. This could trigger abruptexchange rate movements which would re-sult in the associated adjustment burdenbeing borne disproportionately by certaineconomic areas. In addition, the IMF thinksthat the improvement in financing conditionsin the emerging markets in recent months ismainly a cyclical phenomenon which couldIMF forecast for 2003 and 2004*
Item 2001 2002 2003 2004
Real gross domestic
product Annual percentage change
Advanced
economies 1 +1 . 0 +1 . 8 +1 . 8 +2 . 9
of which
United States + 0.3 + 2.4 + 2.6 + 3.9Japan + 0.4 + 0.2 + 2.0 + 1.4Euro area + 1.5 + 0.9 + 0.5 + 1.9
Consumer prices
2
Advanced
economies 1 +2 . 2+1 . 5 +1 . 8 +1 . 3
of which
United States + 2.8 + 1.6 + 2.1 + 1.3Japan – 0.7 – 0.9 – 0.3 – 0.6Euro area + 2.4 + 2.3 + 2.0 + 1.6
UnemploymentNumber of unemployed persons as a
percentage of the labour force
Advanced
economies
1 5.9 6.4 6.7 6.6
of which
United States 4.8 5.8 6.0 5.7Japan 5.0 5.4 5.5 5.4Euro area 8.0 8.4 9.1 9.2
*Source: IMF, World Economic Outlook, September 2003. —
1Including Taiwan, Hong Kong, South Korea and Singapore. —
2For the euro area, HICP.
Deutsche BundesbankOverall, good
conditions for
continued
revival
IMF autumn
forecast
optimistic ...... despite
considerable
risks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
8reverse itself if interest rates in the industrial
countries were to rise. Against this back-ground, the IMF regards the massive publicsector debt in some emerging economies as aserious problem. By contrast, the deflationrisk, which had been considered very high inthe second quarter, is held by financial mar-kets and analysts at international institutionsto be negligible.Driven by strong fiscal stimuli and all-time
low interest rates, the US economy grew inthe third quarter of 2003, according to initialestimates, by a seasonally and working-day-adjusted 1
3/C254% on the period and by 31/C254%o n
the year. The greatest contribution to growthwas made by private consumption, whichgrew by 1
1/C252% after seasonal adjustment.
Durables were especially popular among con-sumers. The sharp rise in disposable incomedid not make a dent in saving; the savingratio, at a seasonally adjusted 3.3%, wasbarely above its second-quarter level. Afteradjustment for seasonal variations, commer-cial investment went up by 2
3/C254% and hous-
ing investment by 43/C254%. At the same time
real exports rose sharply, by 21/C254%. The dy-
namic growth in final demand, however, didnot completely impact on output because therate of inventory depletion was even higherthan in the second quarter. Surprisingly, how-ever, imports were not higher than in thesecond quarter, causing real net exports toimprove slightly, to -5.3% of GDP . The per-sonal consumption deflator (excluding foodand energy), which is the US Federal Reserve’spreferred measure, was 1
1/C254% up on the year
in the third quarter, as in the second quarter.
The progressive revival of production in the
USA had an impact on the labour market,too, in the September-October period. Thenumber of non-farm jobs rose by a seasonallyadjusted
1/C254% from the preceding two-month
period but was still down on the year. In Oc-tober the seasonally adjusted unemploymentrate fell slightly to 6.0% from as high as6.4% in June. This will probably have allayedthe – at times – widely shared concern thatSeasonally adjusted
%
%
%
%Euro areaUnited KingdomJapanUSAQuarterly percentage changeGrowth trends in
selected industrial countries
Deutsche Bundesbank1.0+
0.5+
0
0.5−1.5+
1.0+
0.5+
02.0+
1.5+
1.0+
0.5+
0
0.5−
1.0−
1.5−2.0+
1.5+
1.0+
0.5+
0
0.5−
2000 2001 2002 2003Strong growth
in USA
Labour market
now also
picking up
steam

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
9jobless growth was on the horizon and that
this would cause the upswing to sputter at anearly stage.
In the recovery stage of the early 1990s, it
was initially feared that the US economywould be mired in a jobless recovery. How-ever, these fears receded when, following alengthy time lag, employment once againmoved distinctly upwards. Since the end ofthe last recession in the USA, which is datedby US business cycle experts as November2001, it has taken longer than before forsigns of a turnaround on the labour mar-kets to accumulate, as now appears to bethe case. This means that the employmentthreshold – the growth rate from which em-ployment rises – is now higher than it used tobe. A study by the Federal Reserve Bank ofNew York describes this as a new type of up-swing which is driven more by productivitygrowth than by increased employment.
1Ac-
cording to the report, the key factor in the ex-tremely delayed reaction on the labour mar-ket was that job losses in the two previous re-cessions had been due more than in the pastto structural change and were therefore long-er-lasting and less a factor of cyclical capacityfluctuations. The study went on to state thatit had taken more time to create new jobsthan to recall workers to old positions in thewake of a rising phase of the business cycle.
Real GDP in Japan again rose sharply in the
third quarter. It was up by just over
1/C252%f r o m
the second quarter after seasonal adjustmentand by 2
1/C252% from the third quarter of 2002.
Overall economic growth was fairly broadlybased in that the brisk domestic demandwent hand in hand with the dynamic rise in
exports. The distinct rise (of 2
3/C254% after sea-
sonal adjustment) in commercial investmentis mostly attributable to an improved earningsoutlook and higher capacity utilisation, givencontinued low financing costs. Private resi-dential construction likewise grew strongly.Domestic activity was retarded by govern-ment investment, which fell by 4% afteradjustment for seasonal variations. Third-quarter private consumption stagnated at theprevious period’s level. The main reason wasthe distinct decline in labour income. In add-ition, the cool summer weather reduced thedemand for seasonal goods.
Expansion was driven by foreign demand,
too, in the third quarter. Real exports as de-fined in the national accounts rose by a sea-sonally adjusted 2
3/C254% and were thus 91/C252%
up on the year. Japanese exporters benefitedboth from the faster pace of economicgrowth in the USA and from strong economicgrowth in the East Asian neighbouring coun-tries. Taken together, these countries pur-chase around 70% of Japan’s exports. Indi-vidually, the USA is at the top with 25%, fol-lowed by China with 12% and South Koreawith 7%. Japan’s exports of goods to Chinagrew in July-August 2003 by no less than30% on the year. The Chinese economy isnot only a large sales market for Japan but isincreasingly becoming a tough competitor onworld markets and especially in the region.Japanese exporters could encounter even
1See E L Groshen and S Potter, Has Structural Change
Contributed to a Jobless Recovery?, Federal Reserve Bank
of New York, Current Issues in Economics and Finance,
Vol 9, August 2003, p 2.Time lag in
reaction of
employment
because of
structural
change
Japan

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
10more intense competition if the yen continues
to appreciate against the US dollar and theEast Asian currencies which are effectivelypegged to it.
According to initial calculations, the UK econ-
omy grew by just over
1/C252% in the third
quarter after adjustment for seasonal andworking-day variations, matching its second-quarter level. The year-on-year increase wasnearly 2%. At the same time, this is likely tobe the annual average growth rate, whichwill make the United Kingdom once again byfar the fastest growing economy among thelarge EU countries. Of the various sectors, itwas services which provided far and away thegreatest stimuli in the third quarter; their realgross value added was up by a seasonally ad-justed
3/C254% from the second quarter. Indus-
trial production (excluding construction), bycontrast, was down on the period in the thirdquarter. On the demand side, GDP growth(for which national accounts data are not yetavailable) is likely to have been given a strongboost by household consumer expenditure.At all events, retail sales, which make up amajor portion of private consumption, wereup in July-August by 1
1/C254% from the second
quarter after seasonal adjustment. Consump-tion benefited in particular from the favour-able labour market situation and the currentlycalm price climate. Measured in terms of theHICP , UK inflation averaged 1.4% betweenJuly and September.Macroeconomic trends in the euro area
Signs of a moderate cyclical revival in the
euro area have been mounting since mid-year. According to Eurostat’s Flash Estimatebased on four preliminary country results, realGDP rose by just under
1/C252% in the third quar-
ter after seasonal adjustment. In the previousthree quarters, GDP either stagnated or, as inthe second quarter, declined slightly. It was
1/C254% down on the year.
Industrial output made a major contribution
to overall economic growth in the third quar-ter. In July-August it was a seasonally adjust-ed
1/C254% higher than the depressed second-
quarter level. This was also the year-on-yeargrowth rate. The production of energy andconsumer goods rose particularly sharply onthe quarter. The manufacture of intermediategoods and capital goods did not grow quiteas strongly. The fact that capacity utilisationin manufacturing rose after mid-year for thefirst time since the fourth quarter of 2002 isconsistent with this picture. Capacity utilisa-tion, however, has not yet returned to itslonger-term average. In a country-by-countryview, the rise in utilisation was concentratedon Germany and some smaller euro-areacountries. In the other major countries, ieFrance, Italy and Spain, October surveys arestill not indicating an expansion in capacityutilisation.
In October business confidence increased for
the third time in succession. The main reasonwas a less gloomy assessment of order books.September had already witnessed distinctlymore optimism regarding output. The sur-United
KingdomGDP growth in
third quarter
Industrial
output
EU survey

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
11veyed enterprises’ business hopes were based
particularly on a revival in foreign demand. Bycontrast, consumer confidence has held firmat a rather low level since August. This ispartly associated with the persistent pessim-ism among households regarding their in-come prospects in the following 12 months.
Unemployment hardly rose any further re-
cently. The remarkable thing about this is thatGDP growth after mid-year was still quitemoderate. It is possible that many enterprisesare keeping certain staff reserves in expect-ation of an economic recovery. Another pos-sible explanation is that, particularly in Ger-many, the criteria for obtaining unemploy-ment benefits have been tightened, andthis has lead to increased numbers of per-sons leaving the ranks of the registeredunemployed for another form of non-employment.
2The seasonally adjusted num-
ber of unemployed persons in the euro arearose by only around 30,000 in the third quar-ter, as against 240,000 in the first quarterand 120,000 in the second quarter. The(standardised) unemployment rate was un-changed at 8.8%. A year earlier, it had been8.5%. France, Germany and Spain, amongothers, reported rates which were well abovethe average. No relevant third-quarter infor-mation is so far available for Italy. It is remark-able, however, that in Italy the standardisedunemployment rate in the second quarterwas lower than the euro-area average for thefirst time ever.
After mid-year consumer prices again rose
somewhat faster than in the second quarter.In the third quarter the Harmonised Index ofConsumer Prices (HICP) rose by just over
1/C252%
on the period after seasonal adjustment. Thisrepresents an increase of 2
1/C254% on the year.
The year-on-year rate rose slightly, from1.9% in the second quarter to 2.0% in thethird. It was only the volatile HICP compon-ents which played a major role. Unprocessedfood prices went up by no less than 1
3/C254%o n
the period. The extremely hot and dry wea-ther in many parts of Europe was a contribut-ing factor. Energy prices rose by
1/C252% after
falling in the second quarter. In the thirdquarter core inflation, which covers processedfood, non-energy industrial goods and ser-Seasonally adjusted, beginning of quarter levels
%
1991 20031991-2002
averageCapacity utilisation
in the manufacturing
sector of the euro area
Source: European Commission business sur-
veys.
Deutsche Bundesbank85
84
83
82818079
78
77
92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02
2This special effect will impact on the standardised
method of calculating the unemployment rate in Ger-
many and thus in the euro area as a whole because the
results of the Labour Force Survey, conducted once a year
in the spring, are updated in the following few months
using the official unemployment statistics.Labour market
Consumer
prices

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
12vices, was about as high as in the preceding
quarters; it amounted to 1.9% on the year.According to the Eurostat Flash Estimate,consumer prices rose in October – as in Au-gust and September – by 2.1%.
Inflation differentials in the euro area appear
to be slowly receding. At 2.9 percentagepoints, the difference between the lowest in-flation rate, namely 1.0% in Germany, andthe highest rate, again recorded by Ireland,was smaller than in the second quarter(3.2 percentage points). This spread had aver-aged as much as 3.4 percentage points forthe whole of 2002. Other measurements ofdivergence confirm the decline in the infla-tion differential. Even though relative pricechanges, which may be reflected in differ-ences in national inflation rates, are essentialfor a monetary union to function properly, insome cases they seem to have been quitelarge in the past few years. At all events,greater consistency in euro-area price move-ments at a stability-oriented level would fos-ter economic growth.
Current account and exchange rates
In the third quarter (statistical information
is available until August) euro-area foreigntrade tended downwards. Overall, in theJune-August period exports of goods weredown by
1/C252% on the previous period (March-
May) after seasonal adjustment. During thesame period, imports of goods fell even moresharply (by 2
1/C252%). The euro area’s trade sur-
plus therefore rose to 3281/C252billion during
the period under review, following a surplusof around 3241/C252billion in the March-May
period.
However, the deficit on “invisible” current
transactions with non-euro-area partners alsoincreased somewhat from the previous peri-od’s levels. Rising net expenditure on currenttransfers was the main reason. By contrast,the factor income deficit fell slightly. Thesurplus on services remained virtually un-changed. On the whole, the euro area’sseasonally adjusted current account betweenJune and August closed with a surplus of34
1/C252billion, 32 billion higher than its surplus
in the preceding three-month period. If thefirst eight months of the current year aretaken together, the euro-area current accountran only a slight surplus ( 32
1/C252billion). This
contrasted with a cumulative surplus of over335 billion in the corresponding period a year
earlier. The key factors behind this declinewere the poorer trading result ( 317
1/C252billion)
and increased factor income payments ( 315
billion).
After the euro, at the end of May, had
reached its highest quotations against keycurrencies since the start of monetary union,it was subsequently forced to relinquish someof its gains. In recent weeks, however, theeuro has tended to resume its rise against theUS dollar while fluctuating within a rathertight margin against most other major curren-cies.
After the euro had surged in the second quar-
ter, culminating in a euro exchange rate ofjust over US$1.19 at the end of May, the rateinitially seemed to stabilise at that level. AfterSmaller
inflation
differentials
Foreign trade
and current
accountExchange rate
movements
US dollar

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
13the US Federal Reserve had cut interest rates
in late June, however, the euro posted distinctlosses. It had fallen to US$1.09 by the end ofAugust. This move, coupled with the Fed’soptimistic assessment of the economy, evi-dently led to an upward revision in market ex-pectations regarding future developments inthe US economy. Optimism regarding the USdollar was fed even further in August bynews that second-quarter growth in the USAhad distinctly exceeded expectations. In add-ition, new data on capital goods orders andon consumer confidence made the US eco-nomic situation look quite bright. Althoughthe euro area was also the subject of positiveeconomic reports, market players expectedeuro-area countries’ recovery to be compara-tively slow. The disparity in the economic out-look temporarily reversed the USA’s interestrate disadvantage against euro-area rates atthe long end of the market. Finally, profit-taking on foreign exchange markets duringthis period probably also put a strain on theeuro.
The renewed exchange rate turnaround
began in early September when reports ofunexpectedly weak US labour market datacaused the US economic situation to looksomewhat bleaker. The term “jobless recov-ery” began to make the rounds. The IMF’swarning that the US dollar might abruptly fallin the light of the large US current accountdeficit is likely to have put an additional strainon the US dollar. In their closing statement atthe G-7 meeting in Dubai in late September,the finance ministers and central bank gov-ernors of the leading industrial countries ad-vocated greater exchange rate flexibility. Im-mediately afterwards, the US dollar sustained
distinct losses against all key currencies. Mar-ket players evidently interpreted this state-ment as saying that central banks which hadrepeatedly intervened on foreign exchangemarkets to stabilise their currencies wouldstop doing so in the near future. To makematters worse, this statement generallystepped up the pressure on the US dollar todepreciate (for a more detailed explanationsee pages 14-15). As this report went topress, the euro was trading at just underUS$1.17, or only around 2% below the all-time high it had reached in May, and thus justunder 12% higher than its level at the begin-ning of the year.
In Japan, too, the publication of positive eco-
nomic data made the economic outlook lookbrighter during the period under review. Themore optimistic outlook for a recovery of theJapanese economy caused the yen initially tostrengthen distinctly against the euro duringthe period under review. The yen picked upsomewhat against the US dollar, too, in Au-gust. However, the upward pressure washalted in early September when the Bank ofJapan intervened on the foreign exchangemarkets. Immediately after the G-7 meeting,however, the yen went back up sharplyagainst the US dollar, a development which– as mentioned earlier – indicates a change inmarket players’ assessment of Japan’s ex-change rate policy. As of late, the yen appre-ciated against the euro, too. As this reportwent to press, the euro was trading at justunder ¥127, around 10% below its peak atthe end of May and around 2% higher thanits level at the beginning of the year.
Yen

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
14Deutsche BundesbankChanges in market expectations regarding the euro-US dollar exchange rate before and after the 
G-7 meeting in Dubai
In September, major currencies underwent a renewed 
turnaround on international foreign exchange markets. The euro, which slid slightly in the summer months after peaking at the end of May, again posted major gains dur-ing September – especially against the US dollar. Market players’ assessments evidently changed greatly, one of the cited reasons being the statement on exchange rates submitted by ﬁ  nance ministers and central bank gover-
nors at the G-7 meeting in Dubai. In the following, the 
changes in market expectations regarding the euro-US 
dollar rate are calculated from derivatives prices. 
Derivatives are ﬁ  nancial products whose current value is 
”derived” from the potential change in the price of an 
”underlying” asset. The prices for derivatives negotiated on the market therefore reﬂ  ect market players’ expecta-
tions regarding future movements in the asset underly-
ing the transaction (the ”underlying asset”). One ana-
lytical instrument for ﬁ  ltering out and combining these 
expectations inherent in the individual prices is the risk-neutral density function. Assuming that market players are risk-neutral, this function can be used to calculate 
the implied probability that the value of the underlying 
asset will be within a certain range at the maturity date of the derivative. The advantage of using a risk-neutral density function to present the complex information 
contained in the derivatives is that overall market senti-
ment at any speciﬁ  c time can be shown. 
The method here uses information contained in the 
prices quoted for four derivatives to derive the implied 
density function. These are (a) the forward exchange 
rate, which in arithmetical terms corresponds to the expected value of the calculated density, (b) a call or put option ”at-the-money” from which the ”implied vola-
tility”, which represents the average dispersion or the second moment of the density, is extracted, (c) the ”risk 
reversal”, a combination that involves buying an ”out-of-the-money” call option and selling an ”out-of-the-money” put option and that captures asymmetrical price sentiment (the third moment or the slope of the density) and (d) the strangle, a combination of simultaneously purchased call and put options which can be interpreted as a measure of extreme price swings at the tails of the density, compared to normal distribution.
1
As with all indicators based on ﬁ  nancial market prices, 
it must also be remembered when interpreting risk-neu-tral densities that market quotations may be affected 
by factors other than changed expectations. There may, 
for instance, be certain market situations which cause liquidity shortages. These would have a distorting effect on prices and therefore also on densities. Consideration 
must also be given to the fact that, in the methodol-
ogy used in this article, the insufﬁ  cient availability of 
options with different strike prices makes an interpola-tion procedure necessary, and this could considerably constrain the informational content, particularly at the 
wings of the density. Finally, it is important to bear in 
mind when interpreting the indicator that the densities represent pure probability measures only if risk-neutral-ity is assumed. If this assumption does not hold, market 
players’ risk assessment is also captured. However, the 
signiﬁ  cance of risk premia on foreign exchange markets 
tends to be minor and potentially affects only the mean value and not the ”form” of the density.  
Taking these constraints into account, it becomes appar-
ent that market assessments of the future euro-US dollar rate have changed under the inﬂ  uence of the G-7 meet-
ing on 20 September 2003. The chart on the opposite 
page shows the three density functions of future one-
1 The methodology used here is described in depth in Deutsche 
Bundesbank, Instruments used to analyse market expectations: risk-neutral density functions, Monthly Report , October 2001, pp 31-47. It 
is based on an article by A M Malz (1997), Estimating the Probability 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
15month exchange rate movements (as seen on the day 
concerned) which can be calculated from market prices of just over two weeks before the meeting (4 September 2003), the preceding Friday (19 September 2003) and the Monday immediately following the meeting (22 September 2003). The density functions display the fol-lowing characteristics.
–  After the summit, market players expected the spot 
exchange rate in a month’s time to be just over 6 cents 
higher than they had done two weeks prior to the summit (spot rate effect).
–  Moreover, the change in market expectations is 
revealed by the ”reversed” skewness of the densities. Fourteen days before the G-7 meeting the markets thought a sharp depreciation of the euro against the US dollar was more likely than an equally sharp appre-
ciation. However, as the summit approached, expecta-
tions of asymmetrical exchange rate movements were reversed and peaked immediately after the closing statement was published. The value of the risk reversal, 
which determines the extent of the symmetry break, 
changed very distinctly over those two weeks under the inﬂ  uence of events. In the chart, these expecta-
tions are represented by the densities which are now 
steeper on the left-hand side (and thus right-skewed).
–  Market players’ general risk assessment for relatively 
strong exchange rate movements (in the sense of implied volatility of the ”at-the-money” call option) 
went up only slightly. In purely nominal terms, the 
value of the implied volatility after the meeting was just over 10% higher than it had been two weeks prior to the meeting. In the chart, this would ceteris pari-
bus be reﬂ  ected in a slightly ﬂ  atter and wider density curve. In this case, however, the high skewness value, 
which compresses the density function from the left 
side, overcompensates for the volatility effect.
–  By contrast, the probability of extreme exchange rate 
swings assessed by market players has largely remained 
the same. In the chart, this is recognisable because the curvature at the tails is nearly unchanged.
In summary, it can be stated that the G-7 meeting left 
a distinct mark in market players’ expectations. Despite 
the exchange rate level already achieved, the markets appeared to be generally optimistic about the euro and perceived an increased ”unilateral” depreciation of the 
US dollar against the single currency.
Distribution of the Future Exchange Rate from Option Prices, The 
Journal of Derivatives , Vol 5 (2), pp 18-36.Density
function
value
0.9 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3
Euro-US dollar exchange rate in 30 daysUS$ per
EuroDensity on 22 Sep 2003
immediately after the
G-7 meeting
Density on
19 Sep 2003
immediately before
the G-7 meetingDensity on
4 Sep 2003Risk-neutral density functions:
Changes in market expectations
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
16After surrendering a large portion of its previ-
ous gains against the pound sterling in June2003, the euro subsequently fluctuated be-tween around £0.68 and just under £0.71.Following the publication of new GDP data,according to which the UK economy con-tinued to grow in the third quarter, the eurorecently came under some pressure againstthe pound sterling. In addition, the marketshad evidently anticipated the Bank of Eng-land’s interest rate hike of early November
2003. The euro was trading at just over £0.69as this report went to press. It is thus around4% lower than its all-time high, which itreached in May 2003, and just over 6% high-er than at the beginning of the year.
During the third quarter the euro initially fell
distinctly on a weighted average against thecurrencies of the euro area’s 12 most import-ant trading partners but subsequently re-covered a large percentage of the groundlost. As this report went to press, it wasaround 3
1/C252% lower than its May 2003 all-
time high and 61/C252% higher than at the begin-
ning of the year. Based on long-term aver-ages, the implications of the euro’s real ef-fective exchange rate for price competitive-ness in the euro area should be largely con-sidered neutral. The exchange rate is there-fore unlikely to prevent the generally expect-ed recovery of the global economy and worldtrade from giving a boost to the euro area asa whole and Germany, in particular.
Monetary policy and financial markets
in the euro area
The Governing Council of the European Cen-
tral Bank did not change the Eurosystem’s keyinterest rates during the months under re-view. The weekly main refinancing operationswere all conducted as variable rate tenderswith a minimum bid rate of 2% while theinterest rates on the marginal refinancing fa-cility and the deposit facility remained at 3%and 1% respectively. The steady interest ratepolicy course was based on the assessmentLog scale
US$
££¥
¥
Effective nominal
exchange rate 1
1999 Q1 = 100
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003... pound sterling... yenAgainst the ...
... US dollarExchange rate of the euro *
*End-of-month levels; from 2003 daily
data. — 1According to ECB calculations,
against the currencies of 12 countries (be-
fore 2001, 13 countries).
Deutsche Bundesbank105
100
95
90
85
800.650.75
0.600.70
0.570.6590135
95130
100125
105120
115
110
1051401.20
1.15
1.10
1.05
1.00
0.95
0.90
0.85
Pound sterlingEffective
exchange rate
of the euro
Eurosystem
interest rates
unchanged ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
17Money market management and liquidity needs
Main refinancing operations continued to meet the
bulk of credit institutions’ liquidity needs during the
past three reserve maintenance periods. As expected,
longer-term refinancing operations were only of sec-ondary importance. There were no fine-tuning oper-ations during the period under review.
Following a very generous allotment in the 23 July
main refinancing operation, which initially broughtovernight interest rates closer to the minimum bid rate,
the Eonia gradually climbed again in August, reaching
2.07% on 15 August even though the Eurosystem wasproviding a sufficient level of liquidity given the devel-opment of autonomous factors and the minimum
reserve requirement. At the end of the July-August
reserve maintenance period, the Eonia actually reached2.45%. The likely cause of this was the recourse to thedeposit facility from Friday 22 August to Sunday 24 Au-
gust, which absorbed 51.2 billion of liquidity.
The allotment volumes of the main refinancing oper-
ations during the following two reserve maintenance
periods were generous, enabling the ECB to bring the
Eonia back down to five basis points above the min-imum bid rate by the middle of October. Owing to theample supply of liquidity at the end of the August-
September and September-October reserve mainten-
ance periods, however, the Eonia fell to 1.34% and1.44% respectively, with the net recourse to the de-posit facility for the same periods totalling 57.2 billion
and 51.9 billion.
Between July and October the autonomous factors de-
termining bank liquidity withdrew 53.8 billion net
from credit institutions (see adjacent table). During the
period under review a 512.8 billion increase in the
banknotes in circulation put a drain on liquidity butthis was partly offset by the liquidity created through
the 54.1 billion decrease in general government de-
posits. If account is taken of the change in both netforeign reserves and other factors, thus cancelling outthe impact of the end-of-quarter revaluation on 30 Sep-
tember, an additional 54.9 billion of liquidity stemmed
from these two positions. This was primarily attribut-able to the increase in the Eurosystem’s holdings ofeuro-denominated securities that are listed under
“Other factors” and not connected with monetary pol-
icy.
The Eurosystem met the remaining liquidity require-
ments throughout the period under review by boost-
ing the volume of its main refinancing operations by53.7 billion to an average of 5208.4 billion for the Sep-
tember-October reserve maintenance period.
1For longer-term trends and the contribution of the
Deutsche Bundesbank, see pages 14* and 15* of the Statis-tical Section of the Monthly Report .— 2Including end-
of-quarter valuation adjustments with no impact onliquidity. — 3Including monetary policy operations con-cluded in stage two and still outstanding in stage three
(outright transactions and the issuance of debt certificates)as well as financial assets not connected with monetarypolicy.
Deutsche BundesbankFactors determining bank liquidity1
5billion; calculated on the basis of
daily averages of the maintenance periods
2003
Item24 July
to23 Aug24 Aug
to23 Sep24 Sep
to23 Oct
I Provision (+) or absorption
(–) of central bankbalances by
1 Change in banknotes in
circulation (increase: –) – 8.9 – 0.1 – 3.8
2 Change in general
government depositswith the Eurosystem(increase: –) + 0.9 – 2.9 + 6.1
3 Change in net foreign
reserves
2– 4.6 – 0.8 + 6.3
4 Other factors3+ 4.5 + 2.8 – 3.3
Total – 8.1 – 1.0 + 5.3
II Monetary policy oper-
ations of the Eurosystem
1 Open market
operations
(a) Main refinancing
operations + 8.7 + 0.6 – 5.6
(b) Longer-term
refinancingoperations – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.0
(c) Other operations – – –
2 Standing facilities
(a) Marginal lending
facility – 0.2 – 0.1 + 0.0
(b) Deposit facility
(increase: –) + 0.2 – 0.5 + 0.4
Total + 8.7 + 0.0 – 5.2
III Change in credit institu-
tions’ current accounts(I + II) + 0.6 – 1.0 + 0.1
IV Change in the minimum
reserve requirement(increase: –) + 0.6 – 0.8 + 0.1

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
18that the outlook for price stability in the euro
area would remain favourable. The real sectordid not appear to pose any danger to pricestability. During the period under review therewere mounting signs of a tentative second-half recovery, with exporters likely to benefitfrom the reinvigoration of the world economyand euro-area demand from low interestrates and generally favourable financing con-ditions. Even so, the continued low capacityutilisation means that price pressures will re-main muted for the foreseeable future.
There do not seem to be any immediate infla-
tion risks stemming from the monetary side,either. In the third quarter the money stockM3 rose perceptibly more slowly than in thepreceding quarters. Liquidity in the euro area,however, continues to be very abundant. Thismeans that, on the whole, economic agents
have more money at their disposal than theyneed to finance overall long-term economicactivity. This large surplus of liquidity, how-ever, is largely the result of earlier portfolioshifts, which means it is being held mostly forinvestment purposes. However, since onecannot rule out the possibility that it will beused for expenditure purposes, the closemonitoring of monetary developments is stillappropriate.
Given that the minimum bid rate on main re-
financing operations was stable, the over-night money rate (Eonia) hardly changed inthe past few months apart from fluctuationsat the end of the reserve maintenanceperiods and at the end of the month. By con-trast, the money market rates in the longer-term maturity segments rose during theperiod under review. Only temporarily didthey fall to the Eonia level; in October theyrose once again, and as this report went topress, they had surpassed their early-Augustlevel. On the whole, investors are now ex-pecting interest rates to rise, somethingwhich is reflected in forward interest rates.
Euro-area M3 grew distinctly more slowly in
the third quarter than in the preceding quar-ters. At the end of September the seasonallyadjusted and annualised growth rate was5
1/C252%, against 91/C252% at the end of June and
71/C252% at the end of March. The three-month
moving average of annual growth rates wentdown from 8.5% for the April-June period to8.1% for the July-September period. Investorsevidently leaned more towards non-M3 in-vestment vehicles; the situation on the finan-Seasonally adjusted, annual percentage change
%
Reference value: 4½%Three-month moving average
MonthlyGrowth of the money
stock M3 in the euro area
Deutsche Bundesbank9
87
6
54
3
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003
... and stable
outlook for
pricesMoney market
interest rates
Decline in
monetary
growth

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
19cial markets, which is characterised by revived
economic optimism, may have contributed tothis development. Share prices went up onthe whole in the third quarter, and uncer-tainty about future price movements, whichis reflected in the relevant option prices, tend-ed to decline further. The situation on thebond markets, which in the preceding quar-ter had encouraged money holding, calmeddown in the third quarter following a percep-tible upward correction of capital marketrates.
Of the individual components of M3, over-
night deposits once again rose sharply in thethird quarter. Their seasonally adjusted, annu-alised growth rate rose from 8
1/C252% in the
second quarter to 91/C252% in the third quarter.
Currency holdings likewise grew more sharplyin the July-September period than in the pre-ceding three-month period. The seasonallyadjusted and annualised three-month growthrate of currency in circulation was just over25
1/C252% at the end of September, after being
191/C252% at the end of June. Although currency
in circulation accounts for only 6% of M3,it recently contributed around 1 percentagepoint to the annual growth rate of M3, whichwas 7.4%. The money stock M1 accordinglygrew significantly faster than the M3 aggre-gate. A contributory factor, however, wasthat, during the period under review, thegrowth of other short-term bank deposits(excluding overnight deposits) was relativelysubdued. The strong seasonally adjusted risein deposits redeemable at notice of up tothree months was tempered by a decline indeposits with an agreed maturity of up totwo years. The configuration of interest on 5 billion, seasonally adjusted,
change over the period given
 5 billionContraction ExpansionBalance sheet counterparts 1
Loans to
enterprises
and individuals
Public sector
borrowing2
Net external
asset
position
Monetary capital
formation
Other
counterpartsof M3
3Money stock
April to June 2003
Increase in M3
July to September 2003Euro-area M3 and its
balance sheet counterparts
1Changes in balance sheet counterparts
are shown in terms of whether they expand
(+) or contract (−) the money stock. —
2Loans to general government less
euro-area general government deposits
and  holdings of securities issued by theMFI sector. — 3Calculated as errors and
omissions from the remaining items of the
consolidated balance sheet of the MFI
sector.
Deutsche Bundesbank150+120+90+60+30+0 30−60−90−120−Money stock
components

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
20bank deposits is once again likely to have had
an impact on this prolonged shift in the in-vestment spectrum. Data published by theECB on interest rates in euro-area banks’ re-tail business indicate that the interest ratespread between short-term savings depositsand short-term time deposits continued tonarrow. Between July and September market-able instruments went back down slightlyafter seasonal adjustment following stronggrowth in the preceding quarter. Investorsresident in the euro area (excluding MFIs)once again had a great demand for moneymarket fund shares/units; at the same time,however, they reduced their repurchase oper-ations and their holdings of money marketpaper and short-term bank debt securities is-sued by euro-area MFIs.
Of the balance sheet counterparts, monetary
growth was particularly tempered during theperiod under review by voluminous outflowsof funds to non-euro-area countries. The netexternal position of the MFI sector, which re-flects non-banks’ payment transactions withnon-euro-area countries, went down by360.7 billion in the third quarter after rising
by396.1 billion in the preceding quarter. The
reversal of payment flows was due mainly toportfolio transactions with non-residents.
Moreover, between July and September lend-
ing to euro-area enterprises and individualswas down somewhat from the April-Juneperiod. However, this was only because euro-area MFIs bought fewer securities issuedby the resident private sector. The pace ofgrowth in loans to the private sector, by con-trast, accelerated compared with the preced-ing quarters. It grew faster on the quarter
than M3 for the first time since early 2002.Not only low interest rates but also the ex-pected cyclical recovery may have contributedto increasing the propensity of private non-banks to borrow. Also, MFIs granted largevolumes of credit to the euro-area public sec-tor, which rose by a non-seasonally-adjusted333.7 billion in the third quarter. In the same
period of the previous year, lending had fallenby33.5 billion. During the period under
review, as in the preceding quarters, thisgrowth was due almost exclusively to pur-chases of securities issued by general govern-ment in the euro area.
The propensity to deposit funds with euro-
area MFIs over the longer term continued toaccelerate during the period under reviewand, thus, tended to dampen monetarygrowth. Between July and September MFIs’longer-term financial liabilities grew at a sea-sonally adjusted annualised rate of 8
1/C252%
compared with 4% at the end of June. It wasprobably the rise in capital market rates, inparticular, which again enabled banks toplace longer-term bank debt securities withnon-MFIs. At 342.1 billion (not seasonally ad-
justed), the rise was yet again somewhathigher than in the preceding quarter (+ 340.0
billion) and much higher than in the sameperiod a year before (+ 328.6 billion). In add-
ition, deposits with an agreed maturity ofover two years rose sharply (+ 313.8 billion)
whereas deposits redeemable at notice ofover three months went down by 34.2 billion,
a slower rate of decline than in the precedingquarters.Balance sheet
counterparts

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
21During the third quarter, euro-area financial
markets were influenced by brightened eco-nomic expectations. However, the equity andbond markets became temporarily more vola-tile, which indicates that market players arestill somewhat uncertain about the vigour ofa potential economic upturn. Memories ofthe beginning of 2002 may also have playeda part. At that time, financial markets reactedto positive signals from sentiment indicatorswhich later were not borne out by actual eco-nomic developments.
The average yield on ten-year government
bonds issued by euro-area countries rose dis-tinctly up until mid-July. It subsequently grewat a much slower rate. In early September theyield, at 4.4%, was nearly 1 percentage pointhigher than in mid-June. During September,however, it temporarily retreated to justunder 4%. The main reason may well beportfolio shifts from shares to bonds, a movewhich is consistent with the coincidence offalling share prices in September. Interestrates picked up again in October. As this re-port went to press, the average yield on ten-year government bonds in the euro area was4
1/C252%.
Yields on long-term US government bonds
were much more volatile than Europeaninterest rates during the period under review.The US interest rate level, after falling justover 40 basis points below the yield on com-parable euro-area government bonds in June,subsequently rose much more distinctly. InAugust, yields on US Treasuries were at timesaround 40 basis points higher than Europeanbond yields. The interest rate gap had alreadyclosed by the time this report went to press,
however.
The distinct rise in long-term nominal interest
rates since mid-year is primarily a reflection ofhigher real interest rates and therefore of animprovement in the business outlook. This iscertainly the result if market players’ long-term inflation expectations are used as thebasis for the expected rate of price increases;Daily data
%
Per-
cent-
age
points%
Per-
cent-
age
pointsYield spreads of European
corporate bonds2
2002 2003Spread of US bond yields
over the euro-area averageYield on ten-year government
bonds outstanding
Euro-area
average 1
USABond yields in the
euro area and the USA
1Weighted average of the yields on ten-
year government bonds of all euro-area
countries; GDP-weighted. — 2Spread of
seven to ten-year BBB-rated European cor-
porate bonds over euro-area governmentbonds with a comparable maturity. Source:
Merrill Lynch Indices.
Deutsche Bundesbank3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.50.5+
0
0.5−
1.0−6.0
4.55.5
4.05.0
3.54.5
3.0Financial
markets under
the influence
of brightened
economic
expectations
European
long-term
yields quite
volatile
US and
European
long-term
interest rate
levels converge
Rise in real
interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
22as this report went to press, the markets ex-
pected inflation rates of 1.8% in the euroarea and 2.2% in the USA. In the USA, in par-ticular, the real interest rates measured in thisfashion currently stand at 2.2% for ten-yeargovernment bonds and thus are distinctlyhigher than in June, when they were below1%. The real interest rate on long-term euro-area government bonds, currently 2.5%, isstill perceptibly below its average level, whichsince the start of monetary union in 1999 has
been around 3%.
The share price gains posted on euro-area
markets since March 2003 increased duringthe period under review. In August the DowJones EuroStoxx price index initially continuedto rise, and at the end of the month it wasaround 40% higher than its low of mid-March. It was not until September that losses,which were at times substantial, were in-curred. This was caused by market players’doubts about the fundamental justification ofthe share price upswing of the previous fewmonths and also by intermittent fears of an“expectations bubble”. However, share pricessoon recovered, resulting in a 13% rise in theDow Jones EuroStoxx price index since mid-year.
Market players’ equity market uncertainty,
measured in terms of the implied volatility ofoption prices in the Dow Jones EuroStoxx50price index, has been in constant declinesince March when the latest price upswingbegan. It has now fallen below its averageof between 1999 and the present. On thewhole, this indicates a rise in confidence inthe current share price level.
Analysts are assessing enterprises’ earnings
outlook somewhat more positively, too. Theforecast for average profits over the next12 months for the Dow Jones EuroStoxx priceindex was increased from 315.0 in August to
315.6 in October.
3The longer-term earnings
outlook, too, has improved since August afterMonthly data
 5 
Price-earnings ratio2Average expected corporate
profit per share2Dow Jones EuroStoxxshare price index
 1Price movements and profit
estimates for European
public limited companies
1End-1991 = 100; source:  Deutsche Börse
AG. — 2Based on year-on-year I / B / E / S
analyst estimates of the Dow Jones
EuroStoxx share price index; source: Thom-
son Financial.
Deutsche Bundesbank27
2421
18
151221
20191817
16
15500
450400
350
300250200150
2000 2001 2002 2003
3I/B/E/S analysts’ estimates.Share price
gains
Uncertainty on
equity markets
declines
Fall in valuation
level owing
to slight rise
in earnings
expectations

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
23being distinctly lower since the beginning of
the year. The valuation level of Europeanshares therefore improved slightly despitethe rallies during the period under review.The price-earnings ratio, based on expectedprofits over the next 12 months, was around14.7 in October.
The brightening of the economic outlook is
being reflected in more favourable financingconditions on the market for corporatebonds, too. Since mid-year, risk premia onBBB-rated bonds over government bonds ofcomparable maturity have fallen by just over30 basis points to less than 1 percentagepoint. As late as October 2002, the interestrate premium was at times as high as 280basis points. This probably reflects investors’increased demand for higher-yielding alterna-tives given the currently low rate of return ongovernment bonds. All the same, the lowerratio of downgrades to upgrades of com-panies by credit rating agencies is a sign thatcredit risk is on the decline. In the third quar-ter of this year, only 1
1/C252times as many bonds
were downgraded as upgraded. This con-trasts with a ratio of 13 to 1 in the first quar-ter. Whereas the decline in risk premia on thecorporate bond market was associated withfalling share prices in the first three monthsof this year, current developments are nowconsistent once again with share price gains.
In line with the positive outlook for the econ-
omy, the yield curve for German federal se-curities, which serves as a benchmark for theeuro area, has again become steeper sincemid-year. The spread between money marketrates, which remained virtually unchangedduring the period under review, and the in-creased long-term interest rates went up toaround 2
1/C252percentage points. The inverted
shape of the yield curve at the short end inJune and July has vanished completely. Thismay be interpreted as a sign that bond mar-ket participants do not expect the ECB tolower interest rates any further.Interest premia
on non-top-
rated corporate
bonds continue
to fallMarkets no
longer expect
further ECB rate
cuts

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
24The financial markets
in GermanyCapital market and bank interest rates
German capital market rates fluctuated dur-
ing the summer and autumn months, risingby slightly more than
1/C252percentage point to
just under 41/C252% – in line with euro-area inter-
est rates. In the period under review, theaverage interest rate discount on ten-yearFederal bonds was just under
1/C2510percentage
point below the average of other Europeangovernment bonds. At least some of the nar-rowing of the “yield advantage” of Federalbonds in the euro capital market was presum-ably due to the tense budgetary situation.The yield advantage of ten-year bank bondsover comparable Federal bonds should alsobe viewed in this light; at the time of going topress, it was just under 16 basis points downon the average in previous years.
The carry-over effects of the key interest rate
reduction in early June this year left theirmark on bank rates, particularly those onshorter-term loans and deposits. At all events,the new euro-area MFI interest rate statisticsproduced a further slight decline in short-term bank rates in the third quarter. Amongshort-term deposits, interest rates on house-holds’ deposits with agreed maturities of upto one year fell by roughly
1/C254percentage
point to below 2%. By contrast, the rates ofinterest on short-term time deposits of non-financial enterprises did not evolve uniformly.The earlier reduction in the key interest ratewas also still affecting banks’ short-term lend-ing business. Households, in particular, wereable to take advantage of housing loans withan initial interest rate fixation of up to oneyear. The interest rate charged by banks onPersistently
small “yield
advantage” of
Federal bonds
over bonds of
other euro-area
countries ...
... and over
bank bonds
Further slight
decline in
short-term
bank rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
25this type of loan shrank from 5.0% in June to
4.6% in September. Furthermore, the interestrates on household consumer credit alsowent down across the entire range of matur-ities. By contrast, in the field of lending to en-terprises, the only real decline was in therates charged on overdrafts; between Juneand September 2003 these went down by0.2 percentage point to 6.4%. It needs to beborne in mind that, in terms of the associatedrisks, this credit category is far more hetero-geneous than the aforementioned housingloans. The interest rates on new corporateloans agreed by banks thus depend not onlyon general interest rate developments butalso, to a greater extent, on the borrower’srisk rating.
Some longer-term bank rates went up in line
with the increase in capital market rates,which rose as the economic outlook im-proved. In particular, the rates charged onloans to non-financial enterprises with acredit volume of more than 31 million and an
interest rate fixation of more than five yearswent up by
1/C252percentage point to 4.7%. The
bank rates charged for smaller-volume cor-porate credit developed unevenly across thesector, a fact which should probably also beseen as connected with risk assessment. Theaverage rates charged on housing loans withan initial interest rate fixation of more thanone year rose by an average of just under0.2 percentage point, particularly after the in-crease in capital market rates which tookplace in late summer.Borrowing in the securities markets
Fewer funds were raised in the German bond
market in the third quarter of 2003 than inthe preceding quarter. Although domesticborrowers issued 3275 billion worth of debt
securities in both the second and third quar-ters, a greater number of redemptions andchanges in issuers’ holdings of their ownpaper resulted in net sales amounting to only320 billion in the period under review – as op-
posed to 327
1/C252billion in the previous three-
month period. Far fewer foreign bonds ( 341/C252
billion) were sold in Germany in the third
quarter than in the previous quarter ( 319 bil-
lion). Hence the overall amount of fundsraised ( 324
1/C252billion) was only half as much as
in the preceding quarter.Daily data
%
Basis
points Interest rate discount
of Federal bonds compared with
other euro-area government bonds
(enlarged scale)
2002 2003Yield on ...
... ten-year government bonds outstanding    of the other euro-area countries
... ten-year Federal
    bonds outstandingInterest rate discount
of Federal bonds
in the euro-area bond market
Deutsche Bundesbank30
20
10
05.5
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
Increase
in some
longer-term
bank rates
Bond sales
subdued

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
26In the second quarter sales had been mainly
of public bonds; between July and Septemberbank debt securities were again the front run-ners. In that period, German credit institu-tions raised 39
1/C252billion in the bond market.
There was a continuation of the multi-yeartrend away from public Pfandbriefe (- 37 bil-
lion in this quarter) towards debt securities is-sued by specialised credit institutions (+ 311
1/C252
billion). Issues of other bank bonds raised
331/C252billion net and issues of mortgage
Pfandbriefe raised 32 billion net.
The public sector upped its bond market debt
by39 billion in the third quarter, from 317 bil-
lion in the previous quarter. Apart from thefact that the Federal Government raisedfewer funds in the market ( 312
1/C252billion), this
was mainly due to distinctly reduced borrow-ing by the state governments ( L/C228nder ). Fol-
lowing record figures of 313 billion and 311
billion in the previous two quarters, only 321/C252
billion net worth of state government bonds
were sold in the third quarter of 2003.Of Federal Government debt securities, thegreatest demand was for ten-year bonds(37
1/C252billion), followed by 30-year bonds
(34 billion) and Federal Treasury notes ( 321/C252
billion). On balance, 36 billion worth of five-
year Federal notes (Bobls) were redeemed, aswas a 35 billion debt security issued by the
Treuhand agency. This borrower no longerissues debt securities in its own name but inconjunction with the Federal Government.
There was a marked decline in sales of cor-
porate bonds ( 31
1/C252billion) between July and
September 2003 (previous quarter: 38 bil-
lion). Issuing activity was particularly buoyantin the first half of the year, resulting in anoverall year-on-year increase of almost 45%in the volume outstanding of corporatebonds and commercial paper issued by do-mestic non-banks. This indicates that the im-portance of these financing instruments isgrowing.
After a temporary increase in spring, German
equity market issues slowed again. In thethird quarter of 2003, domestic shares wereissued to a market value of 32 billion;
two-thirds of these shares were unlisted. Theequity market recovery and the associatedimprovement in financing opportunities werethus not yet being reflected in greater re-course to this financing channel.Daily data
%
Percent-
age
points
Yield advantage of bank bonds
over Federal bonds 1Yield on ...
... bank bonds
    outstanding 1
... Federal bonds    outstanding
 1Bond market valuation
of German financial
institutions
1With mean residual maturities of more
than nine years up to and including ten
years.
Deutsche Bundesbank0.50+
0.25+
05.50
5.255.004.754.50
4.25
4.003.753.503.25
2002 2003
Increase in sales
of bank bonds
Decline in
issues of public
bondsDecline in sales
of corporate
bonds
Few funds
raised in the
equity market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
27New MFI interest rate statistics
The new MFI (monetary financial institutions)
interest rate statistics have been collected in auniform manner in all euro-area countriessince January 2003. The German results in-clude data submitted by a representative sam-ple of around 200 banks, with all interestrates being weighted with the respectivelending or deposit volumes. The new MFIinterest rate statistics supersede the Bundes-bank’s statistics on lending and deposit rates,which were discontinued after June 2003. Theold method recorded the unweighted interestrates on new business in standardised depositand lending products most frequently agreedby German banks with their retail customers.The results produced by the two methods areextremely difficult to compare because thenew MFI interest rate statistics are conceptu-ally very different from the previous statistics.
The German contribution to the MFI interest
rate statistics covers the interest rates appliedby MFIs in Germany and the related volumesof euro-denominated deposits and loans tohouseholds and non-finanical corporationsdomiciled in the euro area. The lending anddeposit categories were redefined and har-monised in order to represent the new busi-ness of all euro-area banks adequately.
The MFI interest rate statistics include not
only interest rates and volumes of new busi-ness but also the corresponding data for out-standing amounts by lending and deposit cat-egory; for the latter, the end of the month isthe cut-off date. When the books are closedat the end of the month, reporting institu-tions calculate the effective interest rates andvolumes of all outstanding deposit and lend-ing business and calculate a weighted aver-age interest rate for each reporting category.Banks use two different procedures for cap-
turing new business. In the case of depositswith an agreed maturity and of all loans ex-cluding overdrafts, new business encompassesall new agreements between customers andbanks. These include all financial arrange-ments in which terms have been agreed forthe first time in the reporting month as wellas all outstanding contracts newly negotiatedwith active involvement by the customers.The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted average rates, with account beingtaken of all new agreements concluded dur-ing the reporting month. In the case of over-night deposits, deposits redeemable at noticeand overdrafts, however, new business is col-lected (like outstanding amounts) at the endof the month in question.
Effective interest rates are calculated either as
annualised agreed rates or as narrowly de-fined effective rates, which cover interest pay-ments but no other related costs (such as forenquiries, administration, preparation ofdocuments, guarantees and credit insurance).In addition, for the overarching categories of“consumer credit” and “housing loans” tohouseholds, the annual percentage rate ofcharge as defined in Directive 87/102/EEC,which comprises the total costs to the custom-er, is also to be reported.
A more comprehensive introduction to the
new MFI interest rate statistics will probablybe published in a forthcoming edition of theBundesbank’s Monthly Report. Further infor-
mation on the new interest rate statistics canbe found on the Bundesbank’s website(www.bundesbank.de, under Statistics/Re-porting system/Banking statistics/EWU-Zins-statistik). Not all of this information is avail-able in English yet.
Deutsche Bundesbank

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
28Investment activity in the securities
markets
Non-banks were the main purchasers in the
German bond market in the third quarter of2003. They added 327 billion to their bond
portfolios. Public debt securities accountedfor most of this figure ( 318 billion). Domestic
credit institutions purchased 34 billion worth
of debt securities. On balance, their pur-chases comprised almost exclusively bankbonds. By contrast, foreign investors sold 36
billion net worth of German debt securities.The vast majority of these were public debtsecurities.
Purchases by non-banks also determined the
shape of things in the equity market. Invest-ors from that sector purchased 32
1/C252billionnet of equities, all of which were foreign
equities. By contrast, domestic credit institu-tions parted with 31
1/C252billion worth of equi-
ties. Foreign investors added 331/C252billion to
their portfolios of German shares.
The third quarter saw a further decline in in-
vestment in mutual fund shares, from 314 bil-
lion in the preceding period to 37 billion. Pur-
chases were mainly effected by institutionalinvestors, which invested 34 billion net in the
specialised funds tailored to their investmentneeds. By contrast, only 32
1/C252billion was
raised from sales accruing to mutual fundsopen to the general public. Private investorscontinued to focus on open-end real estatefunds (which are considered particularly safe),followed by mixed funds and bond-basedfunds. Money market funds, however, had tocope with outflows; their volume declined by31 billion.
Share prices
On balance, German equity market prices
rose far more sharply in the third quarter thanEuropean or US equity prices. However, theearlier downturn in German equity marketprices had also been more pronounced thanin the other two markets. Even after the lat-est increase, German equity prices were stillmore than 50% below their March 2000peak. Between July and mid-November 2003the broad market index for German equities(CDAX) gained slightly less than 20%, com-pared with a mere 13% increase for the DowJones EuroStoxx price index and just under8% for the US S&P 500 index. The GermanInvestment activity in the German
securities markets
5billion
2003 2002
ItemApr to
JuneJuly to
SepJuly to
Sep
Bonds and notes
Residents 22.8 30.9 25.1
Credit institutions 3.2 4.0 – 5.0of which
Foreign bonds and notes 10.1 0.2 6.5
Non-banks 19.6 27.0 30.1of which
Domestic bonds and notes 10.6 22.6 23.2
Non-residents 23.7 – 6.2 41.0
Shares
Residents 6.2 1.2 3.9
Credit institutions 5.5 – 1.5 – 5.6of which
Domestic shares 0.2 0.0 – 4.2
Non-banks 0.7 2.7 9.5of which
Domestic shares 2.9 – 1.3 6.0
Non-residents 2.5 3.4 – 0.1
Mutual fund shares
Investment in specialised funds 6.8 4.0 7.4
Investment in funds open to thegeneral public 7.0 2.6 4.6of which: Share-based funds 2.0 0.3 – 0.5
Deutsche Bundesbank
Bonds and
notes
purchased
mainly by
non-banks
Share
purchases
constantDecline in
investment in
mutual fund
shares
Strong price
increases in the
German equity
market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
29index initially continued its dynamic upward
trend until mid-September. Subsequently,however, there was a temporary marked slideof over 10% – triggered by doubts about thesustainability of the price upswing – beforeprices began to rise again.
The 28% increase in the value of German
equities in the course of the year, which waslikewise greater than that of European or USshares, also has to be viewed against thebackdrop of a gradual improvement in theeconomic outlook for Germany and thestronger increase in profit expectations com-pared with the other euro-area countries. Forinstance, the year-on-year profit expectationsfor the equities in the German share index(DAX) improved by nearly 11% between Apriland October while for the Dow Jones Euro-Stoxx index an increase of only just under 4%was expected.
1Despite price gains in the
third quarter, the valuation level of Germanshares thus remained virtually constant overthe past few months. Based on the expectedearnings for the next 12 months, the averageprice-earnings ratio was 15.2, ie somewhathigher than for the Dow-Jones EuroStoxxprice index (14.7). The current valuation levelis comparable with the average DAX price-earnings ratio of 15.5 between 1990 and thestart of the equity upswing in 1997. Whenthe share price increase reached its peak in2000, values were occasionally as high as 30.Deposit and lending business of
monetary financial institutions (MFIs)with domestic customers
Overnight deposits placed by domestic cus-
tomers with German MFIs again rose sharplyin the third quarter of 2003. In the periodunder review, households, in particular, builtup their overnight deposits more stronglythan is otherwise usual between July andSeptember. However, compared with the pre-vious two quarters, there was a further per-ceptible easing of the pace at which the over-night deposits of domestic non-banks wereexpanded. The seasonally adjusted and annu-alised growth rate decreased from 15
1/C252%a t
the end of June to 10% at the end of Sep-Lending and deposits of monetary
financial institutions (MFIs)in Germany
*
5billion
2003 2002
ItemJuly to
SepJuly to
Sep
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight – 0.8 + 4.3
With agreed maturities
up to 2 years – 12.0 – 6.2over 2 years + 9.5 – 0.6
At agreed notice
up to 3 months + 5.8 – 0.4over 3 months – 4.2 – 0.2
Lending
to domestic enterprises andhouseholds
Unsecuritised + 6.6 + 8.1Securitised – 3.2 + 3.9
to domestic government
Unsecuritised + 0.6 – 4.7Securitised – 3.0 + 7.5
*As well as banks (including building and loan associ-
ations, but excluding the Bundesbank), monetary finan-cial institutions (MFIs) here also include money marketfunds; see also Table IV1 in the Statistical Section of theMonthly Report .—1Enterprises, households and gov-
ernment.
Deutsche Bundesbank
1I/B/E/S analysts’ estimates.No change in
valuation level
of German
shares
Further sharp
increase in
overnight
deposits

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
30Deutsche BundesbankBank lending survey
Wider risk-differentiated margin spread
According to the results of the Eurosystem’s fourth bank 
lending survey,2 the respondent institutions in Germany 
continued to tighten slightly their credit standards as 
applied to some loans and credit lines to enterprises in 
the third quarter of 2003. This was unrelated to the size of the enterprises or the loan maturity. Essentially, the credit institutions again pointed to higher risk assess-
ment as the cause, especially given the general economic 
outlook and sector-speciﬁ  c or company-speciﬁ  c factors; 
however, the responses suggested that, to an extent, increases in banks’ cost of capital had also played a role. 
For housing loans and household consumer credit, how-
ever, the credit standards remained largely unchanged in the third quarter of 2003. The institutions do not 
expect substantial changes in their credit standards for 
loans to enterprises or for consumer credit in the fourth quarter of 2003, although a slight tightening is evident for housing loans (see adjacent chart).
The trend towards a sustained broadening of margins 
for riskier loans continued in all areas of credit business covered by the survey, indicating a wider risk-differenti-
ated spread of banks’ loan margins (see chart on page 
31). During the past quarters, there was a steady decline, however, in the tendency for the margins on average loans to widen; in the case of housing loans, the data 
supplied by the banks in the third quarter suggest that, 
to an extent, there was actually a narrowing of the mar-
1 Difference between the sum of the percentages for “tightened 
considerably” and “tightened somewhat” and the sum of the per-centages for “eased somewhat” and “eased considerably”. — 2 See 
Deutsche Bundesbank, German results of euro-area bank lending sur-%%%
Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Expectations
for Q4
2002 2003Consumer creditTo households
Housing loansTo enterprisesChanges in the credit standards applied
to the approval of loans or credit lines 1
40+
30+
20+
10+
040+
30+
20+
10+
0
10–60+
50+
40+
30+
20+
10+
0

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
31gins on average loans. With regard to the other lending 
conditions, the respondent banks also indicated that they were applying somewhat stricter criteria to loans or credit lines to enterprises – partly in respect of credit volume but also of collateral.
According to the survey, there was a further slight 
decrease in loan demand from enterprises, whereas 
for consumer credit the demand was unchanged and for housing loans to households it was edging slightly upwards. According to the data supplied by the respond-
ents, the main factor contributing to the further slight 
reduction in loan demand from enterprises was lower ﬁ nancing needs for ﬁ  xed investment, whereas debt 
restructuring again generated positive demand effects. 
With regard to households, uncertainty as to the future of the government grant to home buyers among other things increased demand for housing loans. Depressed 
consumer conﬁ  dence was meanwhile still having a 
dampening effect, although this was not as strong as it had been. Compared with the aggregate results for the euro area, the replies from the respondent German 
institutions more frequently express expectations of 
an increase in loan demand from both enterprises and households in the fourth quarter. Overall, however, the German survey results were more or less in line with the 
aggregate results for the euro area.
3
vey, Monthly Report , June 2003, pp 67-76. — 3 See European Central 
Bank, Monthly Bulletin , November 2003, pp 13-15.%
%
%%
%
Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
2002 2003Consumer creditTo households
Housing loansTo enterprises
Riskier loans
Average loansChanges in loan margins 1
50+
40+
30+
20+
10+
090+
50+80+
40+70+
30+60+
20+50+
10+
0
10–
20–100+
50+90+
40+80+
30+70+
60+
50+

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
32tember. In addition to the share market recov-
ery, the normalisation of the bond marketsituation is likely to have been a contributoryfactor here; the situation had encouraged li-quidity holding, particularly in the previousquarter.
In the period under review, there was also a
marked expansion in deposits with an agreedperiod of notice of three months. The bulk ofthe increase was clearly attributable to specialsavings forms with a higher rate of interest.However, savings deposits with a comparablylow minimum or basic rate of interest alsopicked up in the past three months. All in all,savings deposits with an agreed period of no-tice of three months seem to have becomemore attractive to investors of late – especial-ly compared with deposits with an agreedmaturity of up to two years. Correspondingly,
short-term time deposits were reduced sharp-ly in the period under review. However, thiswas brought about not only by householdsbut also by domestic government, which hadbuilt up fairly large volumes of such depositsin the previous quarter.
In seasonally adjusted terms, there was a
marked increase in longer-term bank depositsin the period under review. This increase wassolely in deposits with maturities of morethan two years, which came mainly from in-surance corporations. In the previous quarter,insurance corporations, which are traditional-ly the most important group of investors forthis type of deposits, had made perceptiblecuts in their longer-term time deposits. De-posits with an agreed period of notice ofmore than three months were reduced fur-ther in the third quarter. They thus continuedtheir trend decline, which has been underway since spring 2001 and which even accel-erated further of late.
In seasonally adjusted terms, there was again
only a slight expansion in loans by GermanMFIs to the domestic private sector betweenJuly and September. The increase was roughlyequally spread over securitised and unsecuri-tised lending. Overall, the third-quarter in-crease in unsecuritised lending to German en-terprises and households was similar in scaleto that of the previous quarter, even thoughgrowth was slower for medium to long-termunsecuritised lending. As an annualised fig-ure, unsecuritised lending to the private sec-tor in Germany went up at a seasonally ad-justed rate of just under 1%. Again, weak
Seasonally adjusted
 5 bn
%Lin scale
Year-on-year changeLog scale
Loans1Loans to domestic enterprises
and households
1End of month; adjusted for statistical
changes.
Deutsche Bundesbank8
6
4
2
02250
2200
2150
2100
2050
2000
1950
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003
Sharp increase
in short-term
savings
deposits ...... and marked
reduction in
short-term time
deposits
Marked
increase in
longer-term
bank deposits
Lending to the
private sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
33economic growth in Germany is likely to have
been the main factor behind this minor in-crease in lending. Moreover, the latest resultsof the Bank Lending Survey indicate thatbanks have again been tightening their lend-ing conditions slightly (see box entitled “Banklending survey” on pages 30-31).
Lending to the domestic private sector was
curbed mainly by the ongoing decline inunsecuritised lending to enterprises and self-employed persons. In addition to wholesaleand retail traders, manufacturing and con-struction enterprises also reduced their bor-rowing from German banks again. Borrowingby the services sector continued the down-ward trend that it has now been pursuing fora year. By contrast, employees increased theirborrowing from German banks again in the
period under review, after having reduced itslightly in the previous quarter. However,housing loans were again the principal main-stay of domestic lending business. There wasa further expansion of medium to long-termlending, in particular. The low interest ratecharged on mortgage loans probably alsoplayed a role in this development.
Lending to the public sector in the third quar-
ter decreased by 32.4 billion net. This was
due solely to the reduction in banks’ port-folios of securities issued by the public sector(-33.0 billion). By contrast, banks increased
their unsecuritised lending to public sectorborrowers in Germany by 30.6 billion.
Lending, by
borrower
Lending to the
public sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
34Economic conditions
in GermanyUnderlying trends
After declining somewhat in the first half of
2003, German economic output picked upslightly in the summer months. Accordingto initial figures from the Federal StatisticalOffice, third-quarter real gross domestic prod-uct (GDP) was 0.2% up on the precedingthree-month period after adjustment for sea-sonal and working-day variations, although itwas still down on the year in both working-day and calendar-month terms. The currentnational accounts figures confirm the assess-ment that there has been a slight cyclical up-turn, although there is unlikely to have beenan increase in overall capacity utilisation sofar.
At all events, recent surveys by, for example,
the Ifo Institute reveal a somewhat more posi-tive assessment of the current situation. Ex-pectations about the future development ofthe economy have been quite optimistic forsome time. This is probably due mainly to theimproved global economic setting and enter-prises’ internal consolidation efforts in realeconomic and financial terms. Judging by thestatistics on orders in industry and construc-tion as well as on households’ propensity toconsume, it will probably only be during2004 that these factors will start to havea greater impact. As the indicators look atpresent, it remains to be seen whether a sus-tained and broadly based cyclical improve-ment will set in as soon as early next year.
The slight increase in GDP in the third quarter
was due mainly to the external component.First, exports of goods and services picked upSlight increase
in GDP
Net exports
provide strong
contribution to
growth

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
35following a sharp decline in the second quar-
ter and were up on their level during thefirst few months of the year. Second, im-ports – having already declined in the springquarter in the wake of the continuing eco-nomic slowdown – showed a further fall.
There were hardly any identifiable domestic
stimuli to growth. Investment in machineryand equipment, for example, remained weak.Given persistent marked underutilisation,there was very little need for expanding cap-acity. With regard to buildings, a large num-ber of vacant properties, particularly in termsof office space and housing, may have had adampening impact. Moreover, public infra-structure investment is still suffering as a re-sult of the poor government budgetary pos-ition.
Households’ consumption spending remained
subdued. Even though surveys show growingconfidence with regard to the economy ingeneral and the outlook for incomes, therehas been scarcely any improvement so far inthe propensity to purchase durable consumergoods. This is also clear from retail trade turn-over, which – at constant prices – was bothdown on the second quarter and down onthe year in the third quarter. This was not ad-equately offset by a renewed increase in pur-chases of private cars. The propensity to con-sume was not encouraged by the continuingunfavourable situation on the labour market,which is characterised by a persistent shed-ding of labour, or by the ongoing debate onnew public levies and cuts as part of a re-organisation of the social security systems.While disposable incomes remained largelyunchanged, there is likely to have been an in-
crease in the private saving ratio.
Output and labour market
Third-quarter industrial output was marked
by sharp fluctuations, which make it difficultto determine the cyclical trend. This was dueto the unusual timing of the summer schoolholidays this year. While July was much lessaffected than in the past, there was a concen-tration of holiday periods in August and (at asignificantly lower level) September. Seasonaladjustment is based on an average holidaypattern over the medium term and cannotcompletely compensate for such exceptionalcircumstances.
Adjusted for seasonal and working-day
variations, quarterly
%DM bn  5 bn
Lin scale
Year-on-year change880900920940960980
oLog scale
Real GDP 1Economic growth in Germany
1At 1995 prices. — oFrom 1999, in euro.
Deutsche Bundesbank4+
2+
0
2−500
490
480
470
460
450
1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003Domestic
demand still
weak
Sharp
fluctuations
in output

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
36On an average of the period from July to Sep-
tember, seasonally adjusted industrial outputwas no higher than in the second quarter andwas more than 1% down on the year. Thisshows that the cyclical slowdown in the in-dustrial sector has not yet been overcome.The moderate increase in capacity utilisationin the past few months points in the samedirection. According to Ifo Institute data, sea-sonally adjusted capacity utilisation in Sep-tember was a good 1 percentage point high-er than in June. However, it was no higherthan the comparable figures for the end oflast year and the start of 2003 and still downon the medium-term average.
Capital goods was the only sector in which
there was an expansion of production in thethird quarter with a seasonally adjusted in-crease in output of just under 1% on the pre-ceding three-month period. Nevertheless, asthe preceding cutbacks had been especiallymarked, the figure still failed to match thelevel at the turn of 2002-03. Producers ofintermediate goods made further cutbacks inproduction over the past few months. Theyear-on-year figure, which had shown an in-crease in the second quarter, was 2
1/C252%
down on the year. Producers of consumergoods were more or less able to hold theirown. In the third quarter as a whole, theiroutput was around 1% down on the compar-able level in 2002.
Judging by the information on turnover, the
sole improvement was in industrial exportbusiness. This, in turn, has to be seen in thecontext of a marked decline in the spring.The improvement was therefore mainly aSeasonally adjusted, monthly
Balance
Balance
Propensity to purchase
consumer durables3
1997 98 99 00 01 02 2003Households’ assessment of the
economic situation3
MonthlyCurrent situation 1Business expectations 11991 = 100
Business climate in the
industrial sector 1, 2Sentiment in the industrial
sector and among households
1 Source: Ifo Institute. — 2 Western Ger-
many. — 3  Based on data from the Gesell-
schaft für Konsumforschung. Moving
five-month averages.
Deutsche Bundesbank40+
20+
0
20−
40−
60−40+
20+
0
20−
40−110
105
100
959085
80
75110
105100
95
90
85Slight fall
in output
Improvement
in exports

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
37case of drawing close to the earlier level. Do-
mestic business activity remained withoutmomentum up to the end of the periodunder review.
In seasonally adjusted terms, third-quarter
construction output was slightly up on thepreceding three-month period. Taking ac-count of the upward revision to be expectedwith the overall survey, output in this sectorin the second quarter was probably just ashigh as in the last few months of 2002. Thismeans that the long prevailing downwardtrend at least appears to have come to a haltfor the time being. However, the year-on-year fall of around 5% (including the annualrevision of approximately -2
1/C254%) shows that
the level of output is still very low. This appliesparticularly to the building industry, whichhas been showing larger-than-average cut-backs for some while.
The situation in trade worsened in the sum-
mer months. In spring, both wholesale andretail trade turnover was higher (at constantprices) than in the comparable period of2002. However, at the end of the periodunder review, the figures were showing a de-cline on the year. In terms of the wholesaletrade, there was a fall especially in the case offood and raw materials. In the retail trade,purchases of articles of clothing and ofhousehold furniture and appliances were par-ticularly down. There were continuing falls inturnover in the hotel and catering trade. Thisaffected hotels, hotel/restaurants, restaurantsand caf/C216s almost equally.According to surveys, in some branches of
the services sector the situation has improvedsomewhat in recent months, however. Thereare increasing reports of growth in turnoverin the third quarter, albeit starting from acomparatively low level. Not least the trans-port sector is likely to have benefited fromthe upturn in output in the economy as awhole. The banking industry as well, how-ever, appears to have achieved a turn for theSeasonally adjusted, quarterly
%%
Capacity utilisation 1
0 Mean 1993-2002 Lin scale
Year-on-year changeLog scale
Output
1995 = 100Output and utilisation
in industry
1Results of the Ifo business survey.
Deutsche Bundesbank88
85
82
799+
6+
3+
0
3−
6−124
121
118
115
112
109
106
103
1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003Slight increase
in construction
output
Declining trade
turnover
Slight
improvement
in the case of
services

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
38better. By contrast, service providers in the IT
sector were remaining relatively cautious upto the end of the period under review andwere generally still a long way from matchingearlier very high figures.
Even though firms have become distinctly
more optimistic, there are no signs of an im-provement yet in terms of employment. Ra-tionalisation and cutbacks are still the orderof the day, with employment being reduced
up to the end of the period under review.Even though there has been a sharp increasein the one-person businesses promoted bythe Federal Labour Office and in mini-jobs, theofficially recorded seasonally adjusted totalnumber of persons in work fell to 38.1 millionin the third quarter. This was 100,000 downon the second-quarter average and around470,000 fewer than 12 months earlier, whichcorresponds to a figure of -1.2%. The fall inemployment in the construction sector con-tinued to be much sharper, even though thenegative trend appears to be flattening out.The producing sector as well as the trade,hotels and restaurants and transport sectorsalso registered job losses that were higherthan the year-on-year average. However, thesituation is more favourable for business ser-vice providers, as it is for public and privateservice providers. Nevertheless, fewer newjob opportunities were now being created re-cently in that sector, too. Moreover, it shouldbe borne in mind that these are likely to havebeen mostly part-time rather than full-timejobs.
Despite the continuing job cuts, unemploy-
ment has been declining recently. At the endof October, the official seasonally adjustedunemployment figure, at 4.38 million, was60,000 lower than at its most recent peak inApril. Although this was still 220,000 personsmore than one year earlier, the maximum in-crease had been more than 470,000. In Octo-ber, the seasonally adjusted unemploymentrate, as calculated by the Federal Labour Of-fice, was 10.5%. Using the internationallystandardised method, the figure was 9.3%.Quarterly
Millions
Millions
%Thou-
sands
Thou-
sands
0Unemployment rate
(seasonally adjusted)
Oct.Oct.Lin scale
Year-on-year changeReduced log scale
Unemployed
(seasonally adjusted)
Oct.Lin scale
Year-on year
change38.8
38.4
38.0
37.6
37.2Log scale
Employed
(seasonally
adjusted)Labour market
Deutsche Bundesbank12
1110
9400+
0
400−4.6
4.2
3.8800+
400+
0
400−
800−
- 
1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003
Despite
continuing
fall in
employment ......falling
unemployment

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
39The crucial reason for the decline in reported
unemployment was a stricter application ofregistration criteria by the labour exchanges.According to the Federal Labour Office, in-creased efforts to update applicant levels andto encourage unemployed persons to play anactive role in job-seeking in connection withlegislation on labour market reform led inmany cases to what was at least a temporaryoutflow from the official statistics. Accordingto the economic research institutions in theirrecent autumn report, the statistical adjust-ments could result in the number of un-employed persons going down by more than100,000 this year.
Orders
Demand for industrial products remained
very subdued in the third quarter. It did re-cover slightly in seasonally adjusted termscompared with the second quarter, but neworders had fallen to a new low during thatperiod. So far, there has been a failure tomatch the fourth-quarter level of 2002 andthe level of the first few months of 2003.How low the intake of orders was up to theend of the period under review is also re-vealed by the fact that the figure was
1/C252%
down on the year. At present, there is no signof a widespread upturn in business activity.
Domestic customers, in particular, remained
restrained in their ordering. Even thoughorders in the third quarter were just as highas in the preceding three-month period inseasonally adjusted terms, they were clearlydown on the year at -1
1/C252%. This was due, inparticular, to sharp falls in business in the con-
sumer goods sector. There was little demandnot least for household furniture and forclothing in some cases. Producers of inter-mediate goods did not perform quite so un-favourably, although here, too, orders in thethird quarter were around 2% down on theyear. Capital goods held up at the previousyear’s level.Seasonally adjusted, quarterly, log scale
DomesticForeignNew orders
Volume, 2000 = 100
TotalDemand for
industrial goods
Deutsche Bundesbank105
100
95
9085105
80100
7295
7590
85105
100
95
90
85
80
1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003Subdued
demand for
industrial
products

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
40Following a slump in the second quarter, the
flow of export orders has picked up again inthe last few months, almost matching the fig-ure for the first quarter in seasonally adjustedterms. A slight increase on the year wasalso achieved, following a notable failure tomatch the comparable period of 2002 in thepreceding quarter. Nevertheless, the improve-ment has not been broadly based so far andis being sustained largely by the intermediategoods sector. Frequent orders were placed for
electricity generation and distribution equip-ment as well as rubber and plastic products,for example. The improvement was notice-ably more subdued in the other sectors of in-dustry, however. While capital goods achievedat least a slight seasonally adjusted increasein the third quarter, the consumer goods sec-tor suffered a further downturn.
The situation in construction orders improved
somewhat in the summer months. In season-ally adjusted terms, new orders in the two-month period of July and August were 2
3/C254%
up on the second quarter. Even so, it seemsdoubtful whether this has brought an end tothe prevailing downward trend over the pastfew years, which has led to a further declineof around 5
1/C252% in the past 12 months. One
of the reasons for the upturn in the thirdquarter was an accumulation of road con-struction and railway orders. This is unlikelyto continue in the immediate future.
So far, it is hardly possible to assume a turn
for the better in housing construction either.Seasonally adjusted construction orders inJuly and August did attain their highest levelso far this year and the year-on-year fall nar-rowed to just over
1/C252%, compared with a fig-
ure of -12% in the second quarter. Construc-tion permits do not suggest an upturn overthe past few months, however. Rather, fol-lowing a marked rise at the end of 2002 andat the start of 2003, they are tending to godown again. That increase is likely to havebeen due mainly to the debate in late 2002/early 2003 on cuts in housing constructionassistance, which many customers wanted toSeasonally adjusted, quarterly, log scale
...in housing construction...from the
   public sectorConstruction orders...
...from industrial
   enterprisesVolume, 2000 = 100
Total
construction
orders July /
AugDemand for
construction work
Deutsche Bundesbank140
130
120
110
100
90
80
70
60110
100
90
80110
100
90
80
75120
110
100
90
80
1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003- - - - 
Temporary
improvement
in construction
orders

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
41pre-empt. It may be that some of the permits
have now been translated into actual con-struction work. After this special movementhas run its course, it may be expected thatthe placing of new construction orders willlevel off.
Surveys suggest that demand has picked up
in the last few months in the case of serviceproviders, especially those providing servicesto businesses and those in the IT sector. Thetotal number of firms submitting a positiveassessment significantly extended their lead.Tax consultants, auditors and the advertisingindustry were especially optimistic. In the ITand telecommunications sectors, the prepon-derance of negative judgements has becomenoticeably smaller.
Prices and wages
Price developments in Germany were very
moderate up to the end of the period underreview. The year-on-year rate of consumerprice increase was no more than 1.2% in Oc-tober. The fact that there has been a some-what more rapid pace of increase since thesummer, which followed a period of largelystable prices in the first half of the year, wasmainly due to higher price for seasonal fooditems and energy including, in particular,refined petroleum products. Seasonal foodproducts were affected by comparativelypoor harvests in the wake of adverse weatherconditions. Refined petroleum products fol-lowed movements on the world oil markets.After adjustment for these special factors, theyear-on-year rate of consumer price increase,even recently, has not exceeded 1%. A signifi-
cant factor in this was that the year-on-yearincrease in the prices of industrial goods, inparticular, was no more than 0.5%. This part-ly offset the faster rate of inflation in the caseof services, which was 1.5% in October. Hous-ing rents were 1 % higher than 12 months pre-viously.
International oil prices went up again in Octo-
ber. This largely offset their decline in Sep-tember. At US$29, a barrel of North SeaBrent crude oil was not only around US$2more expensive in month-on-month terms,the price almost matched the already highlevel in August. Given the start of the coldperiod of the year, the spot market prices forheating oil, in particular, reached new highs.In the case of petrol the rise remained withinConsumer prices
Annual percentage change
2003
ItemPer-
cent-ageweight-i n gQ 1Q 2Q 3O c t
Energy 8.1 7.7 2.0 3.2 2.2
of which
Refined petroleumproducts 4.2 14.4 0.7 1.9 – 0.6
Food 9.0 – 2.2 – 0.6 0.7 1.5
of which
Seasonal products 1.6 – 9.5 – 2.6 2.2 6.2
Industrial goods 31.3 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.5Services 27.1 1.4 1.4 1.2 1.5
of which
Package holidays 2.0 1.0 2.5 – 0.5 – 1.7
Rents 24.4 1.2 1.2 1.1 1.0
Total 100.0 1.2 0.9 1.1 1.2
Memo item
Harmonised Index ofConsumer Prices 100.0 1.1 0.9 1.0 1.1
Deutsche BundesbankImprovement
in the case of
service
providers
Moderate price
developments
Rise in oil prices

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
42narrow bounds. The appreciation of the euro
against the US dollar calmed price move-ments somewhat but the upward pressure onprices remained in terms of the underlyingtrend.
The poor harvests were clearly reflected in
the producer prices of plant products. Theoverall year-on-year increase in vegetable sell-ing prices up to September was 8.5%. Therewere even double-digit rates for domesticallyproduced vegetables and for potatoes. Thiswas partly offset by animal products: at theend of the period under review, these werescarcely more expensive than in 2002. Foragricultural products as a whole, there was a3% year-on-year increase in prices.Industrial factory gate prices remained largely
constant over the past few months. Excludingenergy, which is affected by internationalmovements, producer prices in Septemberwere no more than 0.3% higher than in thesame period of 2002. While the pace of priceincrease in capital and consumer goods wassomewhat faster, intermediate goods weremarginally cheaper in year-on-year terms.Construction prices remained unchangedoverall in the third quarter of 2003. Therewas no year-on-year price change either.Slight price reductions in road constructioncontrasted with a slight rise in the case ofcommercial and industrial buildings.
There was only a small “wage round” this
year. This was due to the fact that, in additionto improved negotiated rates of pay for2002, further pay round increases for 2003had already been agreed last year in severalsectors such as metal-working and electricalengineering, construction and private bank-ing. On the whole, the new agreements inthe 2003 pay round were lower than thoselast year. This means that the overall negoti-ated pay level is likely to go up by just under2
1/C252% this year, compared with an increase of
2.7% in 2002. Last year’s higher pay agree-ments had an impact especially in the firstfew months of 2003, however. Enterprises’effective cost burden was somewhat lower,as is revealed by the still clearly negativewage drift.
The collective pay settlement for the public
sector concluded in January is scheduled torun for a total of 27 months with two one-offpayments in March 2003 and NovemberSeasonally adjusted, log scale
Enlarged scale
Import prices
1995 = 100Prices of
raw materials 1
2000 = 100Prices of raw materials
and imports
1HWWA Index of World Market Prices of
Raw Materials “Euroland” on a euro basis;not seasonally adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank120
115
110
105
100
95120
110
100
90
80
70
60
50
1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003
Seasonal food
products more
expensiveIndustrial and
construction
prices
unchanged
2003 wage
round
Pay settlement
in the public
sector,...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
432004 and an increase in the contractually
agreed basic rates of pay for salaried staffand wage earners of 2.4% on 1 January2003 and of 1% in each case in January 2004and May 2004. The pay adjustment agreedfor eastern Germany provided for the earn-ings of public sector employees being raisedfrom 90% to 91% of the corresponding westGerman negotiated pay rates as of 1 January2003, rising to 92
1/C252% from the start of 2004.
Complete parity is to be achieved by the endof 2007 or, for those in higher pay categor-ies, by the end of 2009. As an alleviatingfactor for the employers, the abolition ofone employee-selectable work-free day wasagreed, as was a reduction (to be introducedup to the end of 2004) when employeesmove up into the next age category of basicremuneration. In many L/C228nder, there have al-
ready been reductions in special payments forcivil servants ( Beamte ) in the current year.
With collective pay agreements starting to
run at different times across the regions, thenegotiated rates of pay in the chemicals in-dustry were raised with a one-off payment of340 for the first month in which the new pay
agreement came into effect and a 2.6% in-crease for a further 12 months. As a furtherstep towards parity with rates of remuner-ation in western Germany, east German em-ployees additionally received a previouslyagreed 2.8% increase in their pay level fromOctober 2003. Furthermore, from 2004working hours can be “saved up” for an ex-tended period to be used either as free timebefore retirement or for training measureswith employers sharing the costs.The new pay agreement for the printing in-
dustry runs for a total of 24 months and pro-vides for three months without an increase(“zero months”) followed by an improvementin employees’ negotiated rates of remuner-ation amounting to 1.5% as of 1 July 2003and a further 1.7% as of 1 June 2004. Add-itionally, the collective agreement on pre-retirement part-time work, which was sched-uled to run out in the middle of 2004, wasextended by three years. In the retail trade,too, the new agreements generally run fortwo years. With slight differences from regionto region, negotiated pay rates will be in-creased this year (after three “zero months”or one-off payments) by between 1.6% and1.8% and again by roughly the same per-centage next year, with a somewhat higherincrease in pay in the lower wage and salarycategories. In addition, given the extendedshopping hours, pay bonuses were agreed forworking on Saturday afternoons.
In spring, the unions of the German Trade
Union Federation (DGB) and the Federal asso-ciation representing the temporary employ-ment and personnel services industry ( Bun-
desverband Zeitarbeit Personal-Dienstleistun-gen e.V. ) concluded the very first pay agree-
ment for temporary and part-time workers.The impetus for this was provided by the FirstAct Promoting Modern Labour Market Ser-vices of December 2002, under which sub-contracted workers can demand to be remu-nerated like permanent staff if no appropriatecollective pay agreement is in place. For west-ern Germany, the new agreement establishesa grid consisting of nine pay categories withhourly rates ranging between 36.85 and
...in the
chemicals
industry,......in the
printing
industry,...
...the retail
trade
... and for
temporary or
part-time work

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
44315.50. In the event of an extended, uninter-
rupted period of employment with the sameclient, remuneration can be raised by up to7.5%. Reduced rates apply in eastern Ger-many. The rates of pay will be increased by
2.5% at the start of 2005, 2006 and 2007 re-spectively.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
45Foreign trade
and paymentsForeign trade and current account
The external environment for German ex-
porters improved noticeably in the summermonths. Economic activity gained increasingmomentum in non-euro-area countries inparticular, although positive trends were alsoin evidence within the euro area itself. More-over, the price competitiveness of Germansuppliers did not deteriorate further. Againstthis background, German exports of goods inthe third quarter were up by 4
1/C252% on the
previous three-month period in seasonally ad-justed terms.
At the same time, there were also improve-
ments in the outlook for German foreigntrade. For example, industry’s export expect-ations as recorded by the Ifo Institute im-proved perceptibly over the summer follow-ing a neutral outlook in the spring; they wereclearly optimistic again in the months fromAugust to October 2003. There was likewisean upturn in the flow of orders from abroad,which gives cause to expect that exports willtend to increase further over the next fewmonths.
The data available for the third quarter up to
now – statistical information on foreign tradeby region and sector is not yet available forSeptember – show that the external stimulicame from both euro-area and non-euro-areacountries. On an average of the months Julyand August, German exporters were able toincrease their deliveries to euro-area coun-tries – which account for around 43% of allGerman exports and are thus of considerableimportance for German exporters – by a sea-External
environment
Breakdown of
exports

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
46sonally adjusted 21/C252% in comparison with
the second quarter. In this respect, they arelikely to have profited from the slight upturnin economic activity in the other euro-areacountries and from their own increasing pricecompetitiveness in comparison with othereuro-area suppliers. Outside the euro area,exports inter alia to the other EU member
states also rose sharply (4%). The turnoverfrom exports to the central and east Euro-pean countries in transition – the second
most important selling area for Germangoods – was also markedly higher than in thespring (+3
1/C252%). By contrast, a decline in the
exports of goods to the United States was re-corded (-2
1/C252%) whilst exports to the emer-
ging markets in South-East Asia stagnated.In these regions with comparatively stronggrowth, the dampening influences of the pre-ceding appreciation of the euro obviouslyoutweighed the stimulatory cyclical effects.
Not all of the products supplied by German
exporters were able to profit equally from theheightened demand for exports. Exports ofconsumer goods showed particularly buoyantgrowth (7%). The fact that more capitalgoods were sold in July and August than inthe previous period (3%) also suggests an up-turn in investment worldwide. The increase inexports was especially obvious in the Germaninformation and communication sector. Therewas a sharp rise in deliveries of data process-ing equipment and exports from the commu-nication technology area in particular. How-ever, car manufacturers also managed to in-crease their sales of motor vehicles on foreignmarkets in the summer. By contrast, the risein exports of intermediate goods was onlyminimal in the July-August period despitea substantial increase in exports from thechemical industry.
In the third quarter, German imports of goods
fell by a seasonally adjusted 1% on the rele-vant reference period (April-June). The de-crease was actually somewhat greater in realterms as import prices rose by
1/C252% in the re-
view period. There was above all a substantial 5 bn
%Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
monthlyLin scale
Export expectations2Orders received
from abroad
values, 2000 = 100monthlymonthly 1
Log scale
ExportsExport trend
1Monthly values adjusted to match quar-
terly level. — 2Results of the Ifo business
survey; balances of positive and negative
company reports.
Deutsche Bundesbank20+
15+
10+
5+
0
5−110
105
100
95
90
85
80
75180
170
160
150
140
130
120
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003
Imports of
goods

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
47decline in imports from non-euro-area coun-
tries in the summer months (as already men-tioned, data by region and sector is not yetavailable for September), for example thosefrom the OPEC countries (-26%), Japan andthe emerging markets in South-East Asia(-3
1/C252% in each case), which of course make
up only a small share of German imports. Thefact that domestic demand for intermediategoods (-6
1/C252%) and consumer goods (-4%)
from abroad was decidedly weak in the thirdquarter may have contributed to this develop-ment. The level of German imports of goodsfrom euro-area countries – which at 41% ac-count for the largest share of all German im-ports – remained virtually unchanged. Con-trary to the overall trend, German importsfrom the United States increased by almost3%; products from the dollar area have evi-dently become more attractive owing to thesharp depreciation of the US currency. Maybesuppliers in the euro area and the USA alsobenefited from the fact that domestic importsof capital goods increased somewhat (1
1/C252%).
After adjustment for seasonal variations, the
divergent development in the exports and im-ports of goods in the third quarter of 2003resulted in an increase of 39 billion in Ger-
many’s trade surplus, which stood at nearly340 billion. At the same time, the deficit in in-
visible current account transactions with non-residents was smaller in the third quarter thanin the preceding three-month period. Thiswas due mainly to cross-border net paymentsof factor income, which were 33 billion down
on the quarter. By contrast, the deficit onGermany’s services account remained un-changed and, on balance, slightly larger cur-rent transfers to non-residents were recorded.
In the third quarter, the German currentaccount therefore closed with a seasonallyadjusted surplus of 320 billion compared with
38 billion in the preceding three-month
period.
Financial transactions
In the third quarter, events on the internation-
al financial markets were marked by graduallyprevailing economic optimism, which wasfuelled primarily by positive economic signalsfrom the USA and Japan. Concerns about de-flation, which had pushed down bond yieldsto almost record lows in the spring, were thusalso dispelled. As a result, interest rates roseagain worldwide and the share indices in theTrend in foreign trade by region and
by categories of goods
Seasonally adjusted average of July to August
period 2003 vis-/C224-vis average of April to Juneperiod 2003 in %
ItemEx-
portsIm-
ports
Total + 2.6 – 1.8Selected country/group of countries
Euro-area countries + 2.4 + 0.0
Other EU countries + 4.1 – 2.3United States – 2.4 + 2.9Japan + 4.6 – 3.6Central and east Europeancountries in transition + 3.4 – 2.0OPEC countries + 12.4 – 26.1Emerging markets in South-EastAsia + 0.4 – 3.7
Categories of goods
Selected main categories
Intermediate goods + 0.5 – 6.6Capital goods + 3.0 + 1.6Consumer goods + 6.9 – 4.2Energy sources . – 4.9
Selected categories
Chemicals + 7.7 – 9.4Machinery + 1.1 – 4.3Motor vehicles and motor vehicleparts + 3.3 + 4.7Information technology + 9.5 + 0.5
Deutsche Bundesbank
Current
account
Trends in
financial
transactions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
48major financial centres recovered. The euro
initially weakened on the foreign exchangemarkets and only traded more firmly againas of early September. As far as can be dis-cerned from German financial transactions,investors operating globally were, on thewhole, comparatively cautious in their invest-ment activities in view of these internationalinfluences. At all events, the capital flows re-corded remained within fairly narrow bounds.All in all, from July to September, net out-flows of funds predominated in portfolio in-vestment and direct investment in Germanyas well as in the euro area as a whole (accord-ing to the euro-area statistical data availableup to now).
In the area of portfolio investment, which
reacts particularly sensitively to changes inthe economic outlook and earnings pro-spects, a turnaround was recorded during theperiod under review, although at 315 billion
it remained within normal proportions. In thesecond quarter of 2003, net inflows into Ger-many from portfolio transactions totalled 36
billion; in the July-September period, net cap-ital exports amounted to 39 billion.
The altered preferences of non-resident in-
vestors with regard to their portfolio manage-ment were felt particularly strongly. In thesecond quarter, they still invested funds inGermany amounting to 326 billion, but in the
period under review they withdrew 33
1/C252bil-
lion (net) of capital from Germany. The with-drawal almost exclusively affected moneymarket paper held by foreign investors inGermany, ie bonds with a maturity of up toone year, which foreign owners reduced byMajor items of the balance
of payments
5billion
2002 2003
I t e m Q 3Q 2Q 3
I Current account
1 Foreign trade 1
Exports (fob) 162.8 r 162.0 165.7
Imports (cif) 127.2 r 132.1 126.8
Balance + 35.5 + 29.8 + 38.9
2 Services (balance) – 12.8 – 8.9 – 12.73 Factor income (balance) – 1.8 – 2.5 – 3.84 Current transfers (balance) – 5.5 – 7.9 – 8.2
Balance on current account
2 + 13.9 + 8.6 + 12.8
Memo item
Balances, seasonally adjusted
1 Foreign trade + 36.2 + 30.6 + 39.42 Services – 9.2 – 9.2 – 9.23 Factor income + 0.2 – 4.4 – 1.44 Current transfers – 4.8 – 7.4 – 7.7
Current account
2 + 20.9 + 8.0 + 20.0
II Balance of capital transfers 3 +0 . 1 +0 . 2 +0 . 2
III Balance of financial account 4 – 19.5 – 28.5 – 2.5
IV Change in the foreign reserves
at transaction values(increase: –)
5 + 0.1 + 1.5 – 0.8
V Balance of unclassifiable
transactions + 5.5 + 18.2 – 9.7
1Special trade according to the official foreign trade statistics
(source: Federal Statistical Office). — 2Includes supplementary
trade items. — 3Including the acquisition/disposal of non-
produced non-financial assets. — 4For details see the table
“Financial transactions” on page 49. — 5Excluding allocation of
SDRs and changes due to value adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankPortfolio
investment
Foreign
investment in
German ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
49312 billion. However, this portfolio adjust-
ment may possibly have been a counter-movement to the strong inflows into short-dated paper in the first quarter of the yearwhen the harsh world economic climate andhigh degree of uncertainty on the inter-national financial markets drove investors toopt for the security of liquid money marketpaper, which is largely shielded from pricelosses.
Other securitised domestic assets were only in
part able to profit from the dissolution of thismoney market position. Thus, foreign invest-ors acquired only 35
1/C252billion worth of Ger-
man bonds and notes (in comparison with324 billion in the preceding three-month
period), possibly in response to the very vola-tile price environment for longer-term paperwith a trend towards rising interest ratesin the period under review. However, non-residents also continued to hold back in pur-chasing shares despite the quite positive pricedevelopments on the German equity marketin the summer ( 33
1/C252billion after 321/C252billion
in the second quarter).
German investors also continued to find for-
eign dividend-bearing paper only moderatelyattractive despite improvements in the worldeconomy. At all events, their cross-borderequity investments remained at just under 31
billion in the third quarter, too. However, atthe beginning of the year, they had – affectedby the global bear market – sold foreign equi-ties worth 314
1/C252billion. It was likewise in
keeping with the general caution exercisedby German investors that – for the first timesince the beginning of monetary union – theyFinancial transactions
5billion, net capital exports: –
2002 2003
I t e m Q 3Q 2Q 3
1 Direct investment – 14.1 + 23.6 – 1.6
German investment
abroad – 16.4 + 14.2 – 7.6Foreign investmentin Germany + 2.3 + 9.5 + 6.0
2 Portfolio investment + 33.3 + 5.9 – 9.1
German investment
abroad – 8.3 – 20.0 – 5.4
Shares + 6.4 – 0.8 – 0.7
Investment fundcertificates – 1.3 – 0.1 – 0.3Bonds and notes – 10.5 – 20.6 + 0.4Money market paper – 2.9 + 1.5 – 4.8
Foreign investment
in Germany + 41.6 + 26.0 – 3.6
Shares – 0.4 + 2.3 + 3.4
Investment fundcertificates + 1.0 – 0.1 – 0.8Bonds and notes + 24.1 + 24.0 + 5.6Money market paper + 16.9 – 0.3 – 11.8
3 Financial derivatives
1 – 3.8 – 2.1 + 1.2
4 Credit transactions – 34.5 – 55.4 + 7.5
Credit institutions – 17.4 – 67.0 + 20.0
Long-term + 1.3 – 8.2 – 15.6
Short-term – 18.7 – 58.9 + 35.6
Enterprises and
individuals – 3.2 – 10.1 + 0.6
Long-term + 1.6 + 0.5 + 0.5
Short-term – 4.8 – 10.7 + 0.1
General government + 3.8 + 1.1 + 2.1
Long-term + 0.5 – 0.1 + 0.1
Short-term + 3.3 + 1.3 + 2.0
Bundesbank – 17.7 + 20.6 – 15.2
5 Other investment – 0.3 – 0.6 – 0.66 Balance of all
statistically recordedcapital flows – 19.5 – 28.5 – 2.5
Memo item
Change in the foreignreserves at transactionvalues (increase: –)
2 + 0.1 + 1.5 – 0.8
1Securitised and non-securitised options and financial
futures contracts. — 2Excluding allocation of SDRs and
changes due to value adjustments.
Deutsche Bundesbank... money
market paper
... bonds and
notes
... shares
German
investment in
foreign ...
... shares

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
50sold foreign bonds and notes on balance in a
quarter ( 31/C252billion) after hitherto having
added such paper to their portfolios in theamount of 319 billion on a quarterly average.
The reduction ultimately affected only foreigncurrency bonds, which apparently were nega-tively affected by the altered interest andexchange rate pattern. By contrast, foreignmoney market paper aroused keen interest inthe period under review ( 35 billion) while lit-
tle attention was paid to investment fund cer-tificates in portfolio decisions. All in all, there-fore, from July to September, German invest-ors acquired 35
1/C252billion worth of securities is-
sued by non-residents as opposed to 320 bil-
lion worth in the preceding three months.
As in the case of portfolio investment, net
capital exports were also recorded on balancefor direct investment from July to September
(311/C252billion). However, this amount was
quite small in comparison with the inflow offunds in the previous quarter ( 323
1/C252billion).
The main reason for this reversal was thechange in the investment behaviour of Ger-man enterprises. Whereas, in the spring,German firms had still repatriated invest-able funds on a large scale – predominantlythrough loans taken up by their foreign sub-sidiaries (“reverse flows”) –, in the periodunder review, they again provided their for-eign branches and subsidiaries with capitaltotalling 37
1/C252billion.
With regard to financial flows in the opposite
direction, foreign firms extended their sphereof activity in Germany and invested around36 billion in the July-September period.
Around two-thirds of these funds were allo-cated to increasing the equity capital of non-resident companies in their German branchesand subsidiaries. Evidently, investors from theUSA – through holding companies domiciledin Luxembourg and Ireland – were particularlyinterested in Germany as an investment loca-tion.
In the period under review, net capital im-
ports of 32
1/C252billion were recorded for the
non-securitised credit transactions of non-banks following net capital exports in the pre-ceding quarter ( 39 billion). General govern-
ment thereby drew on funds which it hadheld at credit institutions abroad ( 32 billion).
In addition, enterprises and individuals trans-ferred funds totalling 3
1/C252billion net to Ger-
many, for instance, in slightly reducing theirbalances with non-resident banks.Capital exports: −
 5 bn
Quarterly
average since
the start of
monetary union
Q  1Q  2Q  3Q  4Q  1Q  2Q  3German investment in
foreign bonds and notes
Deutsche Bundesbank4+
0
4−
8−
12−
16−
20−
2002 2003
... bonds and
notes
... money
market paper
Direct
investmentGerman direct
investment
abroad
Foreign direct
investment in
Germany
Credit
transactions of
non-banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
51In the field of non-securitised credit trans-
actions of German commercial banks, a re-duction in external assets gave rise to fundsamounting to 320 billion in Germany. This
was offset by net claim increases on thepart of the Deutsche Bundesbank in theperiod under review ( 315 billion), mainly as
a result of the large-value payment systemTARGET. All in all, therefore, the operationsof the entire banking system resulted in aslight reduction in its net external position(35 billion).The foreign reserves of the Bundesbank,
changes in which are not contained in thedata on cross-border credit transactions, in-creased by 31 billion at transaction values in
the July-September period. The increase wassomewhat sharper ( 32 billion) if valued at cur-
rent balance sheet rates, ie at the prevailingmarket prices and exchange rates at the endof the third quarter. The main reason for thiswas the higher price of gold. On 30 Sep-tember 2003, the German foreign reservesamounted to 381 billion.
Credit
transactions of
the banking
systemBundesbank
foreign reserves

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
52Public financesBudgetary development of central, state
and local government
In the third quarter of 2003, as in the first
half of the year, the combined deficit of cen-tral and state government (the results forlocal government are not yet known) in-creased year on year, rising by 311 billion to
323 billion. Expenditure grew quite sharply by
just over 3%; this was fuelled mainly by high-er interest payments of central governmentand a further increase in Federal grants to thestatutory pension insurance scheme. By con-trast, revenue fell by 3
1/C252%, not least because
– unlike last year – no sizeable privatisationproceeds accrued to Federal Government.
In 2003 as a whole, the combined deficit of
central, state and local government will riseagain sharply, probably to around 380 billion,
having already increased in the two previousyears by a total of 326 billion to 360 billion.
Consequently, the original budgetary targets,which had envisaged a reduction, will not bemet. Moreover, the constitutional upper limitfor net borrowing, defined by the level ofgovernment investment, will also be clearlyovershot by most tiers of government. Thisreflects, in particular, the persistent sluggish-ness in tax revenue and the acceleratedexpenditure growth compared with the lastthree years – to which the exceptional add-itional expenditure in connection with floodrelief made a contribution. The precariousbudgetary situation, the causes of which areprimarily structural, makes comprehensiveconsolidation necessary. Central and stategovernment must resolutely implement theappropriate measures. Bringing forward theUnderlying
trends

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
53third stage of the income tax reform without
comprehensive counter-financing would ag-gravate the strained budgetary situation evenfurther.
In the third quarter, the tax receipts
1of gen-
eral government barely matched last year’scorresponding level, after having increased by
1/C252% in the first six months of 2003. Of the
direct taxes, wage tax receipts increased by amere
3/C254%; this was considerably less than in
the second quarter (just over 2%), which hadbeen buoyed by one-off payments resultingfrom certain pay settlements. The fall in theemployment level continued to have a damp-ening effect on wage tax receipts. The rev-enue from assessed income tax remained sig-nificantly below its level in the same periodlast year (-10%), which was caused by bothprepayments and retrospective payments.Among investment income taxes, revenuefrom interest income taxation fell by 10
1/C252%,
not least because of the lower interest rates.Revenue from non-assessed taxes on earn-ings – essentially investment income tax ondividends – declined by almost two-fifthsowing to lower dividend payments. By con-trast, corporation tax receipts continued torise sharply (+22
1/C252%). This was mainly due to
the dwindling importance of the special fac-tors related to the changeover in the taxregime introduced by the tax reform, whichhad had a dampening effect on receipts.
In the case of indirect taxes, receipts from
turnover tax only just reached their level inthe third quarter of 2002. Thus the weak rev-enue trend that has been evident since 2001persisted. This can largely be explained bythe subdued development of domestic de-
mand. By contrast, receipts from mineral oiltax (+4
1/C252%), electricity tax (+32%) and to-
bacco tax (+5%) continued to rise sharply inthe wake of the raising of the rates at the be-ginning of the year.
Tax revenue in 2003 as a whole will be much
lower than officially forecast in May, mainlybecause of the persistent economic slow-down. According to the new tax estimateexecuted on 4 to 6 November, tax revenuewill only just reach last year’s level; receiptsare expected to fall approximately 38 billion
short of the May estimate. Thus, despitesome tax increases, there will be a further de-Year-on-year change
%
Tax receipts, total 1
1st hf 2nd hf 1st hf 2nd hf Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4Tax revenue
1Including EU shares in German tax rev-
enue, but excluding receipts from local au-
thority taxes, which are not yet known for
the last quarter recorded.
Deutsche Bundesbank4+
3+
2+
1+
0
1−
2−
3−
4−
5−
2001 2002 2003
1Including EU shares in German tax revenue but exclud-
ing receipts from local government taxes, which are not
yet known.Tax revenue in
the third
quarter ...
... and in 2003
as a whole

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
54cline in the overall tax ratio this year. Based
on the Federal Government’s assumption ofnominal economic growth of around 1%(and a stagnation of real economic output),the overall tax ratio, as defined in the govern-ment’s financial statistics, will fall by
1/C254per-
centage point to 20.7%.
The revenue shortfalls vis-/C224-vis the spring esti-
mate relate chiefly to wage tax and turnovertax, mainly reflecting the fact that the declinein employment was even sharper and thegrowth of nominal domestic demand evenweaker than previously expected. Further-more, revenue from corporation tax, assessedincome tax, non-assessed taxes on earningsand mineral oil tax is likewise considerablydown on earlier expectations. By contrast,after the surprisingly favourable result inthe second quarter – primarily attributable
to higher payments in respect of previousyears – revenue from local business tax for2003 as a whole looks set to be higher thanestimated in May.
Tax shortfalls vis-/C224-vis the May estimate will
go up again next year because, as a result ofthe delayed upturn, economic growth, whichthe tax estimate is based upon, will again beless than previously expected (with nominalgrowth at 2
1/C252% and real growth at 11/C252%t o
2%).2The new official forecast anticipates
that, based on the assumption of no changesin tax legislation, tax revenue will fall 310
1/C252
billion short of the May estimate. Compared
with the current year, this amounts to an in-crease of 2
3/C254%. In addition, net tax revenue
will decrease by a further 361/C252billion if the
measures planned by the Federal Govern-ment, but which have not yet been agreed byParliament, come into force. These include,on the one hand, the advancement of thethird stage of the tax reform by one year to2004 and, on the other hand, in particular,the abolition of tax concessions and loop-holes envisaged in the 2004 budgetary stabil-ity concept, as well as the additional receiptshoped for from the planned tax amnesty. Ifthese measures are implemented, it is esti-mated that tax revenue in 2004 would in-crease by little more than 1% on 2003, whichwould cause the overall tax ratio to decreasefurther.Trends in the revenue from major taxes
Revenue
in5billion
Q1 to Q3
Type of tax 2002 2003Annual
percent-agechange
Wage tax 93.3 94.4 + 1.2
Assessed income tax 3.0 0.1 – 95.7Corporation tax – 0.3 4.8 .Turnover tax 102.2 101.2 – 1.0
of which Q3
Wage tax 31.932.1 + 0.8
Assessed income tax 3.3 3.0 – 10.1
Corporation tax 1.0 1.2 + 22.4Turnover tax 34.2 34.2 – 0.0
Deutsche Bundesbank
2In spring, by contrast, the Federal Government had ex-
pected GDP to grow in 2004 by 3% in nominal terms
and 2% in real terms.Tax receipts
in 2004

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
55In the third quarter the deficit recorded by
Federal Government rose over twelve monthsby39 billion to 317 billion. This was primarily
due to the fact that no privatisation proceedsworthy of mention were posted as revenue,in contrast to last year ( 34
1/C252billion). However,
tax receipts, too, fell by 3% owing to weakeconomic activity, as well as a significant risein transfers to the EU (offset against tax rev-enue). Overall revenue fell by just over 8%.Expenditure went up substantially by 5
1/C252%.
In particular, interest payments increasedsharply because, in contrast to last year, se-curities were issued at a sizeable discount.Other factors include the sharp rise in grantsto the statutory pension insurance schemeand transfers to the Flood Relief Fund. Bycontrast, the growth in labour market-relatedspending slowed down.
The full-year deficit will be far higher than
was expected in the budget adopted inspring ( 319
1/C252billion). Consequently, the Fed-
eral Government has presented a supplemen-tary budget, which envisages a deficit of 344
billion, taking into account shortfalls in taxrevenue and additional labour market-relatedspending. This assumes that a surplus will begenerated in the fourth quarter, which seemsquite possible, particularly given the budget-ed privatisation proceeds amounting to 35
1/C252
billion which had not been posted as revenue
by the end of September.
According to the most recent decisions by the
Budget Committee of the Bundestag, it is an-ticipated that the Federal budget deficit willdecline to less than 330 billion in 2004. This
takes into account both the shortfalls fromthe planned advancement of the third stage
of the income tax reform, as well as a com-prehensive consolidation package. The latesttax estimate forecasts shortfalls of almost 36
billion vis-/C224-vis the Federal Government’s ori-ginal plans
3, which will, however, be partly
offset by the fact that transfers to the EU willbe just over 31 billion less. These shortfalls
are supposed to be compensated by privatisa-tion proceeds totalling 37 billion. However, a
great degree of uncertainty still surrounds theplans. For example, the date for the introduc-tion of the motorway toll for heavy goodsvehicles has still not been set. Furthermore, aglobal cut in expenditure not yet specifiedwill have to be implemented, not least be-cause the original plan to cut the Federal 5 bn
 5 bn
Cumulative
20032002
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4Quarterly results
2002
2003The Federal Government’s
financial balance in
2002 and 2003
Deutsche Bundesbank15−
20−
25−
30−
35−
40−
45−
50−5+
0
5−
10−
15−
20−
25−
3See Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report, August
2003, p 53 f.Federal budget
in the third
quarter ...
... and in 2003
as a whole
Outlook for
2004

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
56grant to the statutory pension insurance
scheme will not be implemented. Moreover, alarge part of the planned major consolidationmeasures also require the approval of theBundesrat. Finally, it is difficult to estimate thevolume of relief which some of the measureswill provide (such as the tax amnesty). Inorder to justify the renewed overstepping ofthe constitutional upper limit for net borrow-ing, the Federal Government is once again in-voking the exemption clause that this is ne-cessary to avert a disruption of the overalleconomic equilibrium.
The high deficits both this year and in the
coming year highlight the urgent need forconsolidation. Comprehensive measures arenecessary to reduce the deficit, and the Fed-eral Government has presented correspond-ing proposals to this end. Measures whichlead to budget relief and at the same time im-prove the outlook for macroeconomic growthare especially suited to contributing to suc-cessful consolidation. Such measures include,in particular, cuts in subsidies and the reviewof social benefits that impair labour supplyand demand. If the Federal grant to the statu-tory pension insurance fund, the largest itemof expenditure in the Federal budget even be-fore interest payments, is not included, evengreater cuts must be made elsewhere. Privat-isation proceeds, which are offset by a reduc-tion in other government assets and are ul-timately tantamount to credit financing, canhardly engineer a lasting improvement in thebudgetary position.
In the third quarter, there was a small deficit
in the special funds, whereas a year previous-ly there had been a surplus. The surplus to be
expected for 2003 as a whole is likely to beless than the amount recorded in 2002. Thisis mainly because the share of the Bundes-bank profit allocated to the RedemptionFund for Inherited Liabilities was considerablysmaller than in 2002.
In the third quarter, the deficit of state gov-
ernment, at 36 billion, exceeded the deficit in
the same period in 2002 by 31 billion. With
tax revenue almost stagnant, overall revenueincreased only slightly. By contrast, expend-iture rose by 2
1/C252%. Alongside flood-related
expenditure, personnel expenditure went uprelatively sharply by 3
1/C252% as a result of the
adjustment of civil servants’ pay in July; thelatter primarily affects the west Germanstates because of the composition of staff.For 2003 as a whole, the budgets envisagethat the deficits would decline to 325 billion.
However, owing to the sluggish developmentof tax receipts, in particular, it is likely that therecord deficit of 331 billion recorded in 2002
will be exceeded.
The state government budgets will be under
a great deal of pressure in 2004, too. The cur-rent plans envisage a total deficit of 322 bil-
lion. In some budgets, even if the third stageof the income tax reform is not brought for-ward, the constitutional upper limit for netborrowing will be exceeded yet again despitethe fact that numerous states are planningextensive savings. These measures will alsoaffect civil servants in the form of a reduc-tion in annual bonus payments and, in somestates, an extension of working hours. In add-ition, cuts are planned in grants to the privateThe need for
consolidation in
the Federal
budget
Special fundsState
government
in 2003 ...
... and in 2004

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
57sector and to other areas of the public sector.
According to the new tax estimate, there willalso be further shortfalls in tax revenue. Add-itional cuts in expenditure are therefore es-sential in order to limit the deficits.
For local government, only the results for the
second quarter are currently available. Duringthis period a deficit of 32
1/C252billion was record-
ed, following a balanced result in 2002. Therewas a sharp decline of 7% in receipts. Thiswas primarily due to a slump in revenue fromeconomic activity by two-fifths or just over31 billion.
4Transfers from state government
also fell by 71/C252%. By contrast, tax receipts in-
creased by just under 11/C252% thanks to a more
favourable trend in local business tax. On theexpenditure side, personnel costs rose by2
1/C252%. The fact that year-on-year total ex-
penditure remained virtually unchanged isultimately due to investment, which was al-most one-tenth below the 2002 level despitethe funds spent on flood relief. Overall, noimprovement is expected for the fiscal situ-ation in the second half of 2003. However,the measures planned for next year to im-prove local authority finances would bringabout perceptible relief.
In the third quarter, the indebtedness of cen-
tral, state and local government rose againsharply by 320
1/C252billion. The bulk of the new
borrowing ( 3141/C252billion) was raised on the
capital market. However, money market debtalso increased by 36 billion. The largest bor-
rower was central government, which wasfaced with a borrowing requirement of 316
1/C252
billion. State government borrowed 33 billion
on the credit markets. There was a furthermoderate rise in the indebtedness of local
government, whereas that of the specialfunds remained virtually unchanged.
Social security funds
In the third quarter of 2003, the deficit of the
wage and salary earners’ pension insurancescheme declined to 31 billion, half its level in
2002. Revenue increased by 4%, not leastbecause of higher Federal grants. This wasdue to the last stage of the ecological tax re-form and the fact that Federal grants are alsolinked to (among other things) the level ofthe contribution rate, which was raised from19.1% to 19.5% at the beginning of 2003.Net borrowing in the market by
central, state and local government
5billion
of which
Period TotalSecuri-
ties 1Loansagainstborrow-ers’notes
2MemoitemAcquisi-tion bynon-resi-dents
2002 + 54.5 + 67.6 – 11.9 + 57.4
of which
Q1 + 25.6 + 15.2 + 10.5 + 12.2Q2 + 1.5 + 22.9 – 21.4 + 16.7Q3 + 18.6 + 25.1 – 5.4 + 19.1Q 4 +8 . 8 +4 . 4 +4 . 4 +9 . 4
2003
Q1 + 34.7 + 32.6 + 2.1 + 19.5Q2 + 13.5 + 11.8 + 1.6 + 16.6Q3
pe + 20.5 + 9.4 + 12.2 ...
1Excluding equalisation claims. — 2Including cash ad-
vances and money market borrowing.
Deutsche Bundesbank
4This related to large non-recurrent income which ac-
crued to the city of Stuttgart last year.Local
government
IndebtednessStatutory
pension
insurance
scheme

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
58Although revenue from contributions also
increased by 3%, adjusted for the increasein the maximum level of earnings subjectto contributions and the higher contributionrate, the increase was negligible, mainlybecause of the unfavourable employmenttrend. Expenditure growth slowed down to2%. This was primarily due to the fact thatthe mid-year pension increase, at 1.04% inwestern Germany and 1.19% in eastern Ger-many, was much lower than in 2002.
5None-
theless, contrary to the budget plan, a consid-erable deficit can be expected in 2003 as awhole. It is therefore likely that the minimumfluctuation reserve, which has already beenlowered to just 0.5 month’s expenditure, willnot be attained at end of the year.In order to avoid raising the contribution rate
in 2004, which otherwise would have beennecessary in view of these developments, arange of measures have been adopted tobring about relief in the short term. These in-clude forgoing the pension adjustment inmid-2004, shifting the payment date for newpensions from the beginning to the end ofthe month, transferring the full contributionburden to the long-term care insurancescheme to pensioners themselves, as well asfurther reducing the minimum fluctuationreserve to a mere 0.2 month’s expenditure.However, with the reduction of the reserves,the statutory pension insurance scheme couldbe dependent on liquidity assistance fromcentral government next year to finance itscurrent expenditure. This would noticeably in-crease the general government deficit ratio,making a renewed breach of the Maastrichtdeficit criterion next year all the more likely.
Beyond 2004, the intention is to implement
gradual reforms to take effect over the longterm to limit the rise in the contribution ratecaused by the demographic trend. Hence asof 2005 the pension adjustment formula is tobe supplemented by a “sustainability factor”,as proposed by both the R/C252rup Commissionand the Herzog Commission. Future pensionadjustments would then be smaller if theratio of pensioners to contribution-payers in-creases. In addition, from 2006, the earliestpossible retirement age due to unemploy-Quarterly
 5 bn
 5 bn
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (−)Log scale
RevenueExpenditureWage and salary earners’
pension insurance scheme
Deutsche Bundesbank4+
2+
0
2−58
56
54
52
2001 2002 2003
5Alongside the weaker wage trend, this also reflected
the fact that notional expenditure on supplementary pri-
vate pension plans was factored into the pension adjust-
ment formula for the first time. In statistical terms this
factor alone will cut pension adjustments by roughly
0.6 percentage point per year from 2003 to 2010.Short-term
relief
measures ...
... and
longer-term
reform
measures

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
59ment or under pre-retirement part-time
working schemes will gradually be raisedfrom 60 to 63 years, and periods of collegeeducation will no longer be recognised forthe purposes of additional pension entitle-ments. These measures will help to limit non-wage labour costs and thus ultimately topave the way for an improvement in the em-ployment situation. However, given the likeli-hood of a further rising life expectancy,meaning that pensions will be drawn for anincreasingly longer period and the volume ofbenefits payable by the pay-as-you-go statu-tory pension insurance scheme will constantlyexpand, an increase in the statutory retire-ment age beyond 65 years appears essentialin the longer term.
In the third quarter of 2003, the Federal La-
bour Office’s deficit, at just under 31 billion,
was 3
1/C252billion below the figure during the
same period last year. While expenditure fellby 2%, revenue increased by 1%. However,the main reason for this rise was the in-creased revenue from the insolvency compen-sation levy. Despite the increase in the max-imum level of earnings subject to contribu-tions, contribution revenues in the third quar-ter were slightly down on the year. This wasattributable both to the decline in employ-ment and to the subdued wage trends.
Expenditure on unemployment benefit in the
third quarter of 2003 was 8% up on last year.By contrast, spending on active labour marketpolicies in the third quarter was almost 17%below the figure in the same period last year.The number of people participating in thesemeasures declined accordingly, which alsocontributed to the rise in the number of
people registered as unemployed.
The deficit of the Federal Labour Office,
which amounted to a total of 36 billion in the
first nine months, will probably widen some-what in 2003 as a whole. The additional rev-enue from contributions as a result of Christ-mas bonuses will be offset by a seasonal de-terioration on the labour market. The FederalQuarterly
 5 bn
 5 bn 5 bn
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (−)Expenditure on...
...unemployment benefits
   and short-time work-
   ing benefits
...vocational training 2Log scale
Expenditure, total
Revenue 1Federal Labour Office
1 Excluding Federal Government liquidity
assistance. — 2 Including job creation meas-
ures.
Deutsche Bundesbank1+
0
1−
2−
3−8.0
7.5
7.0
6.5
6.0
5.5
5.0
4.516
15
14
13
12
11
2001 2002 2003Federal Labour
Office
Outlook for
2003 and
beyond

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
60budget envisages a grant to the Labour Office
next year of just over 35 billion. The Third and
Fourth Act Promoting Modern Labour MarketServices and the Act to Reform the LabourMarket will probably have hardly any impacton the Federal Labour Office’s budget bal-ance in 2004. It is true that spending on ac-tive labour market policy measures in respectof recipients of unemployment assistance isdue to cease with the introduction of thenew “unemployment benefit II”, which amal-gamates unemployment assistance and socialassistance paid to persons who are able towork and will in principle be financed by cen-tral government. However, the Federal La-bour Office is to pay a compensatory amountto central government. The shortening ofthe period of entitlement to unemploymentbenefit will not have a major impact until2007 because of the transitional periods.
In the first half of the year, the deficit of the
statutory health insurance fund, at just under32 billion, was a mere 3
1/C252billion down on
the previous year. Revenue from contributionsincreased by 1
3/C254%, which is explained entire-
ly by the rise in the average contribution ratefrom 14.0% to 14.3%. The trend in spendingwas determined by the cost-saving measuresagreed last year, ie compulsory price dis-counts and strict budget caps. Total expend-iture on benefits rose by only
1/C252%. Nor can
any surplus be expected in the second half ofthe year, not least because of shortfalls incontributions owing to declining bonus pay-ments and to contribution payers opting forspecial occupational pension arrangementswhich are not subject to social security contri-butions in their company pension arrange-
ments.
It is anticipated that the health system reform
agreed for 2004 will yield substantial financialrelief. This is intended to be used to lower thecontribution rate to an average of 13.6%next year. However, as things stand now,there would then be a danger of the deficit-ary financial development persisting, whereasconsiderable surpluses would be needed toreduce the accumulated debt and replenishthe statutory reserves.
Outlook for the general government
sector as a whole
The general government deficit ratio as de-
fined in the Maastricht Treaty will increaseagain this year – possibly to more than 4% –having already significantly overstepped the3% ceiling last year at 3.5%. The increase isprimarily attributable to the negative cyclicalimpact, which is depressing revenues fromtax and social security contributions and re-sulting in a sharp growth in labour market-related spending.
Without the impact of the adverse cyclical
situation, the deficit ratio would have beenalmost unchanged. On the one hand, meas-ures were being taken to significantly relievethe general government budgets. The Euro-pean Commission therefore decided that theconditions imposed for 2003 under the ex-cessive deficit procedure had been fulfilled.These relief measures include an increasein social security contributions and indirect
Statutory
health
insurance fundFurther cyclical
increase in the
deficit
Consolidation
measures offset
by other factors

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
61The Stability and Growth Pact is facing its acid test
In January this year, the Ecofin Council reached
the decision that Germany has an excessive def-icit and called on the country to take consolida-tion measures amounting to 1% of GDP withinfour months. Furthermore, Germany is to correctthe excessive deficit “as quickly as possible” inline with the Stability and Growth Pact. Accord-ing to the provisions of the Pact, this has to becompleted by next year at the latest, unlessthere are “special circumstances”.
1
Since May 2003, the excessive deficit procedureinitiated against Germany has been held inabeyance because the Commission consideredthat consolidation measures on the necessaryscale had been taken within the four-monthdeadline. Since then, Germany’s fiscal policy hasbeen scrutinised closely by the European Com-mission and the Ecofin Council. If the adoptedmeasures were not implemented or the Councilconsidered them to be insufficient, Germanywould be given a warning as the last step beforesanctions are imposed. This may very soon bethe case because the autumn forecast recentlypublished by the European Commission antici-pates that in 2004 Germany will record a deficitratio of 3.9% under status-quo conditions and aratio of 3
1/C254% if all measures proposed are taken
into account. The reference value of 3% wouldthen have been overshot for the third time in arow. The Federal Government, too, is now ex-pecting a deficit ratio of more than 3% nextyear.
An excessive deficit procedure was also launched
against France in June 2003. Since the Council’srecommendations have not been implemented,the Commission has proposed issuing a warningto France. However, the deadline for correctingthe excessive deficit is to be extended from 2004to 2005. The Commission based this proposal pri-marily on the economic growth outlook inFrance which deteriorated steeply comparedwith June. It took the view that the scope ofconsolidation required to achieve the 3% ceilingin 2004 has expanded sharply. Formally, the Pactmay allow such an extension of the deadline. Itis, however, questionable whether this also cor-responds to the objective of the excessive deficitprocedure to achieve a rapid correction of un-welcome budgetary developments, if necessary,through the use of sanctions. This applies all the
more since the consolidation requirement in2004 is higher in part because the recommenda-tions for 2003 have not been implemented. Nowthat the deadline is to be extended, a failure toachieve the reference value for the deficit ratioin three consecutive years might likewise not bepunished by sanctions. Yet according to theCommission’s forecast, real economic growth inFrance will not be negative in any of these years.Growth of 1.7% is expected next year. Accordingto the Stability and Growth Pact, however, thereference value may only be overshot if real GDPdecreases by at least 2% (a decline of at least0.75% is sufficient if the Council acknowledges“further supporting evidence”). The Commis-sion’s recommendation also calls on France totake consolidation measures amounting to 1%of GDP in 2004. In the Council meeting of 4 No-vember, a decision on the Commission’s recom-mendations was postponed until the end of themonth.
Generally speaking, a “soft” interpretation of
the Pact reduces the credibility of the fiscal rulesunderpinning monetary union and poses consid-erable medium and long-term risks. Political in-centives to borrow may result in excessive def-icits becoming the rule rather than the excep-tion in several countries and may mean thatcountries lose sight of the objective laid down inthe Pact of achieving a budgetary positionwhich is at least close to balance in the mediumterm. Persistent higher government borrowingmay lead to a rise in capital market interestrates, which would have a negative impact oneconomic growth potential and employmenttrends. Rising government debt ratios restrictthe available budgetary policy options on ac-count of the growing interest burdens and makeit harder to tackle the challenges resulting fromthe foreseeable budgetary burdens arising fromdemographic developments. Furthermore it willbe more difficult for monetary policy to guaran-tee long-term price stability with low interestrates. Finally, relationships between the euro-area countries may become strained if the euroarea as a whole is affected by the negative im-pact of undesirable fiscal developments in indi-vidual member countries.
1See also Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report, Febru-
ary 2003, p 53 in particular.
Deutsche Bundesbank

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
62taxes. Central, state and local government
are also pursuing a stringent budget manage-ment policy reflected in, amongst otherthings, the continued reduction of staffinglevels. Furthermore, cost-cutting measureswere agreed in respect of labour market-related spending and healthcare expenditure.However, these consolidation measures werelargely offset by other negative factors in ayear-on-year comparison. For example, theresources being spent by government toovercome the flood damage are temporarilyincreasing expenditure. Greater funds than inrecent years are again required for transfersto the EU. Social security contributions (ad-justed for the changes in the contributionrate) are increasing more slowly than mighthave been expected in view of the growthtrend of gross wages and salaries, which is, inany case, lagging behind that of nominalGDP . Finally, non-tax revenue – particularlythe Bundesbank profit – is smaller than it waslast year.
The outlook for public finances next year is
very uncertain. A raft of legislative projectsthat are of major significance for the develop-ment of general government finances are stillgoing through the process of parliamentarydeliberation. Furthermore, the financial impli-cations of some of these projects – ie in thecase of the tax amnesty and the measures tocombat tax evasion and illicit work – are verydifficult to assess. The Federal Governmentno longer expects that it will be possible toavoid overshooting the 3% ceiling again.Thus if the third stage of the tax reform wereto be brought forward, this would place aheavy burden on public finances, whereas theconsolidation measures might be less exten-
sive than initially announced because there isdoubt as to whether they will be implement-ed in full. Moreover, a further deficit is ex-pected in the case of the social security fundsoverall. This is because of the plan for a fur-ther significant reduction in the fluctuationreserves of the statutory pension insurancescheme, as well as the decision to extendover some years the required debt reductionand the replenishment of reserves in thestatutory health insurance fund. The envis-aged increase in privatisation proceeds willnot reduce the deficit as defined by the Maas-tricht Treaty because they are merely the re-sult of a sale of government financial assets.
There are signs that German fiscal policy
makers are backtracking from the objectiveof achieving the 3% ceiling laid down in theMaastricht Treaty next year. However, thecredibility of the fiscal policy framework inEurope, which is vital for the medium andlong-term success of European monetaryunion, should not be jeopardised by Germanyrunning up an excessive deficit for the thirdyear running (see the box on page 61). As theGerman Council of Economic Experts haslikewise noted, strict implementation of theStability and Growth Pact would not impedesustainable economic growth. In order toavoid further damage to the Pact as the guar-antor of a stability-oriented fiscal policy in theeuro area, an advancement of the third stageof the tax reform would have to be coupledwith comprehensive consolidation measures.
A functioning European Stability and Growth
Pact is of major importance not least because
Deficit in 2004
to breach the
3% ceiling for
the third time?Stability and
Growth Pact
in danger ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
63Development of the long-term sustainability of public finances in 2002
The question as to whether the long-term sustain-
ability of public finances improved or deterioratedlast year can be analysed using the technique ofgenerational accounting. The annual consolidationrequirement derived therefrom gives some indica-tion of the change in the long-term fiscal burdenswhich are to be expected, in particular in view ofprojected demographic changes.
1The annual con-
solidation requirement indicates by how many per-centage points the general government expend-iture ratio would have to be lowered or the generalgovernment revenue ratio raised to enable the fis-cal position prevailing in the base year to be sus-tained over the long term without any furtherchanges. Changes in the macroeconomic settingensuing from demographic trends or reactions topolicy measures are disregarded, however.
Two different scenarios are considered within the
context of generational accounting. A “status-quo-scenario” assumes that the fiscal conditions prevail-ing in the base year will remain unchanged in thefuture. The age-specific per capita amounts for theindividual government revenue and expenditurecategories that are observed in the base year arekept constant – except for an adjustment for prod-uctivity growth. By contrast, a “policy scenario”captures policy changes which have been adoptedin the base year but which will take (full) effectonly at a future date. This facilitates a more realisticassessment of what additional fiscal policy meas-ures are needed.
Under the status quo scenario, the annual consoli-
dation requirement increased significantly last yearby just over
3/C254percentage point to 53/C254% of GDP.
This sharp deterioration was partly due to the un-favourable cyclical development. Adjusted for cyc-lical influences, the annual consolidation require-ment went up by just over
1/C254percentage point to,
likewise, 53/C254% of GDP.2Tax revenue from corporate
profits and capital income, turnover tax and socialsecurity contributions were much weaker again lastyear than might have been expected in the light ofchanges in legislation and the development of theirmacroeconomic assessment bases. This could not be
offset by the increase in indirect taxes and the risein the average contribution rate to the statutoryhealth insurance funds. On the expenditure side,the rise in child benefit was accompanied, inter
alia, by generally tight budget management.
Under the policy scenario the annual consolidation
requirement last year was lower, at just over 5% ofGDP, than in the adjusted status quo scenario owingto the measures due to come into effect at a laterdate. This was attributable to future savings by thestatutory pension insurance scheme which exceedthe additional tax relief measures adopted for thenext few years. However, compared with 2001, thesustainability of public finances has deterioratedmarkedly in the policy scenario, too. The annualconsolidation requirement rose by
3/C254percentage
point. The measures that had already been adoptedin 2001 for last year, which per se should have sug-gested a significant reduction of the consolidationrequirement in the adjusted status quo scenario,play no part here because they were included in thepolicy scenario for 2001. The deterioration is attrib-utable to the aforementioned exceptional revenueshortfalls and would have been even greater if themeasures adopted in 2002 but which will only comeinto effect at a later date had not lowered the an-nual consolidation requirement. Relief was afford-ed, in particular, by the measures adopted in 2002which came into effect this year, affecting the socialsecurity funds. For example, the contribution ratesto the statutory pension insurance scheme and thestatutory health insurance funds were raised. Inaddition, savings were made on the expenditureside in the statutory health insurance funds.
Even though these figures must be interpreted with
caution, the results show that last year the fiscalpolicy course was still far from sustainable. Com-pared with 2001, the long-term sustainability ofpublic finances – also when adjusted for cyclical in-fluences – actually deteriorated further; this was,however, attributable to exceptional revenue short-falls and not to fiscal policy measures.
1For the methodological and empirical basis used for cal-
culating the results shown here, see Deutsche Bundesbank,The long-term sustainability of public finance – an analysisbased on generational accounting, Monthly Report, De-
cember 2001, pp 29-43 and B Manzke (2002), The long-
term sustainability of public finance in Germany, Discus-sionpaper 10/02 of the Economic Research Centre of the
Deutsche Bundesbank. — 2The values for 2001 have
changed compared with those given in the DeutscheBundesbank, Monthly Report, May 2002, p 72, primarily
as a result of a new estimation of the cyclically relatedbudget components.
Deutsche Bundesbank

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
64the EU countries will be better able to deal
with the prospective long-term budgetaryburdens if they fulfil the requirements of thePact. The results of new calculations made bythe Bundesbank based on a generational ac-counting approach, taking the legislative sta-tus quo for government benefits and levies inforce in 2002, show that there is a need forfurther action to safeguard the long-term sus-
tainability of public finances in Germany (seethe box on page 63). Speedily achieving abudgetary position close to balance and therelated reduction of the government debtratio would make an important contributiontowards ensuring that future generations arenot overburdened.
... and conse-
quently also the
achievement
of long-term
sustainability of
public finances

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
65The monetary
constitution under
the Constitution
for Europe*An intergovernmental conference
meeting in the composition of theHeads of State or Government andministers for foreign affairs of the15 member states and 10 accedingstates was opened on 4 October 2003.The goal of the negotiations is to es-tablish a “Constitution for Europe”.The negotiations are based on a draftTreaty prepared by the Convention onthe Future of Europe which was sub-mitted to the Italian Council Presidencyby Convention President Val/C216ry Giscardd’Estaing.
1
Starting point: no changes in substance
All participants of the Convention fundamen-
tally recognised that the “Maastricht” monet-ary system, which was largely modelled onthe Deutsche Bundesbank, had proved itsworth; the euro’s success is also the successof the monetary constitution adopted withthe Maastricht Treaty of 1992.
2The inclusion
of key elements of the German monetaryconstitution in the European framework waswhat gained the support of the German pub-lic for contributing the Deutsche Mark to theoverarching framework of European unity.
*Draft Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe as
submitted on 18 July 2003 (CONV 850/03).
1The 2001 Laeken European Council convened the Con-
vention and mandated it to create a transparent, simple
and democratic legal framework for the European Union.
The Convention not only consolidated the existing legal
framework for the EU and the EC in a single treaty but
also – in a significant innovation – drew up a charter of
fundamental rights and submitted proposals for reform-
ing the institutional framework.
2OJ 1992 C 191, p 1.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
66Prior to the start of monetary union, polit-
icians and monetary policy makers stressedthe theme of continuity in the monetaryframework in order to instil confidence in theeuro. They saw a great advantage in enshrin-ing the fundamental principles of monetarypolicy, especially the primary objective ofprice stability and the independence of cen-tral banks, in the European context. They sawlittle threat of the Maastricht Treaty beingchanged or watered down for the simple rea-son that all member states would have to rat-ify such amendments.
Against that background, there was a con-
sensus at all policymaking levels for the Maas-tricht monetary constitution of 1992 to betransferred from the Treaty establishing theEuropean Community (EC Treaty) to the Con-stitution without any changes in substance.Therefore, both the European Central Bank(ECB)
3and the Ecofin Council called on the
Convention not to make any changes in sub-stance, ie to transfer the Maastricht monetaryregime to the Constitutional Treaty with onlypurely technical adjustments.
The Convention did not fully abide by the re-
quest not to make any material amendmentsto the Maastricht monetary constitution. TheECB
4has already pointed this out.
Price stability as the Union’s objective
Whereas Article 2 of the EC Treaty currently
expressly declares the objective of the Unionto be “non-inflationary growth” and Article 4establishes price stability in an open marketeconomy with free competition as an object-
ive of the Community and the memberstates, the Convention’s draft list of theUnion’s objectives (Article 3) refers only to“balanced economic growth”; the specificmeaning of “balanced” is open to interpret-ation.
Price stability is not merely an operational ob-
jective of the European System of CentralBanks (ESCB). The obligation to maintainprice stability was firmly established as afoundation of the Maastricht monetary con-stitution not only for the ESCB but also forthe Community and all member states. Bycontrast, Part I of the draft Constitutionmakes maintaining price stability incumbenton the ESCB only (Article I-29 (2)). The draftConstitution thus gives cause for concernthat, in the future, price stability could besubordinated to other Union objectives,thereby undercutting the goal of stability. TheBundesbank therefore joins the ECB
5in advo-
cating the inclusion of price stability and non-inflationary growth in the Union’s objectivesin order to counteract any potential weaken-ing of the commitment to stability. For theformation of a European culture of stability,which is still in its infancy, the Constitutionalobjectives, which are prominently placed inPart I of the draft, have particular signifi-cance.
3Letter from the President of the ECB, Wim Duisenberg,
to Convention President Giscard d’Estaing of 5 June
2003.
4Opinion of the European Central Bank of 19 Septem-
ber 2003 at the request of the Council of the European
Union on the draft Treaty establishing a Constitution for
Europe (CON/2003/20), OJ 2003 C 229, pp 7-8 (para-
graph 8).
5Opinion of the ECB (see footnote 4), OJ 2003 C 229,
pp 7-8 (paragraph 8).

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
67The architecture of the ESCB
The call for “no changes in substance” af-
fects more than the material objective ofprice stability – it also affects the institutionaland procedural rules for the ESCB, whichwere likewise an inherent basis for monetaryunion when the Deutsche Mark was surren-dered and on which confidence in the eurorests.
The ECB’s classification as an institution
When the ESCB’s institutional structure was
established in Maastricht, one deliberately re-frained from classifying the ECB as a Commu-nity institution, opting instead to treat theECB and the ESCB as institutions sui generis .
They are Community bodies but not institu-tions in the narrow sense; from the outset,the intention was to avoid creating the im-pression that the ECB is governed by the gen-eral rules applicable to Community institu-tions. This special status has so far providedadditional protection of the ECB’s independ-ence. By contrast, a passage was insertedinto the draft Constitution explicitly classify-ing the ECB as an EU institution (Article I-29(3)). This relinquishes the special status ac-corded to the ECB and, indirectly, the ESCB inthe Maastricht Treaty.
The ECB has institutional features which set it
distinctly apart from EU institutions. Whereasthe latter have no legal personality and re-ceive their financial resources from the EUbudget, the ECB does have a separate legalpersonality and is funded by the national cen-tral banks; moreover, the ECB’s capital be-
longs to the national central banks as bodiesof the member states. The ECB’s profit is dis-tributed to the national central banks accord-ing to their respective share in the capital key;in the case of the Bundesbank, these fundsare channelled indirectly into the Federalbudget.
Giving the ECB institution status would obli-
gate it to practise “full mutual cooperation”(Article I-18 (3)) with the other institutions.
6
The effects remain to be seen. The questionof whether the obligation of full mutual co-operation will lead to calls for ex ante coord-
ination of monetary policy with other policyareas, such as fiscal policy, is a particularlycharged issue.
The incorporation of the ECB into the frame-
work of EU institutions creates ambiguities inother areas as well. One question raised inthis context is whether the special regulationgoverning the ECB
7in the case of non-
contractual liability (according to which itshall make good any damage caused by itsservants) will be done away with if the ECB’sstatus is that of a Community institution andthe ECB (as an institution) is covered by thegeneral rules applying to EU institutions.
8This
means that the European Union would as-
6All doubts as to whether this obligation even applies to
the ECB and the Court of Auditors as “other institutions”
were removed by the group of legal experts at the inter-
governmental conference; see CIG 4/03, Editorial and
legal comments on the draft Treaty establishing a Consti-
tution for Europe – Basic document, p 55.
7Draft Article III-337; currently Article 288 of the EC
Treaty.
8According to the group of legal experts of the intergov-
ernmental conference in a preliminary edited draft Treaty
establishing a Constitution for Europe, loc cit (footnote 6),
pp 488-489.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
68sume liability for the ECB as one of its institu-
tions, which might have an impact onfinancial relations between the ECB and theEU.
The aforementioned ECB Opinion of 19 Sep-
tember 2003 makes no provision for its expli-cit designation being changed to that of an“institution” in Article I-29 (3) of the Consti-tution. However, the ECB has recommendedthat the headings of the respective sectionsbe changed so that the section dealing withthe ECB and ESCB is entitled “The Institution-al Framework of the Union” rather than “TheUnion’s Institutions”.
9For the purposes of in-
terpreting the Constitution, such as definingobligations vis-/C224-vis other institutions, thiscould be a means of maintaining a specialstatus for the ECB.
Independence of the national central
banks
Article 108 of the EC Treaty equally provides
for the independence of the national centralbanks which are members of the ESCB andfor that of the ECB. This is fully in line withthe concept of the ESCB, in which the ECB isbound to cooperate with the national centralbanks exactly as they are bound to cooperatewith the ECB. The governors of the nationalcentral banks are members of the ECB’s su-preme decision-making body, the GoverningCouncil. The national central banks imple-ment monetary policy, and their staff are in-volved in more than 60 ESCB committees andworking groups which prepare and imple-ment monetary policy, draft rules for monet-ary policy instruments, coordinate the system
in international fora, assist the GoverningCouncil in drafting legislation for the euroarea and set common rules for banknote pro-duction and payment settlement. The funda-mental central banking tasks, especially mon-etary policy, are conferred on the whole sys-tem by virtue of Article I-29 (1) and (2) of thedraft. By contrast, Article I-29 (3) refers onlyto the ECB’s independence and not to the in-dependence of the national central banks.
This is confusing because, according to the
Maastricht monetary constitution, the ESCBand the ECB are treated equally (Article 8 ofthe EC Treaty). Setting the rules for the ECBin Part I and those for the ESCB in Part IIIcould be construed as altering the currentclose links between the ECB and the nationalcentral banks and as a (further) amendmentto the Maastricht Treaty.
These concerns are evidently shared by the
ECB, which, in its Opinion of 19 Septem-ber 2003,
10called for both the ECB and the
national central banks to be referred to asbeing independent.
Conclusions
The young European monetary constitution
enshrined in the Maastricht Treaty has provedits worth. Particular caution is required whensupposedly technical adjustments result in
9Opinion of the European Central Bank (see footnote 4),
OJ 2003 C 229, pp 7-8 (paragraph 11).
10Opinion of the European Central Bank of 19 Septem-
ber 2003 (see footnote 4), OJ 2003 C 229, pp 7-9 (para-
graph 12).

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
69amendments to the Treaty which may have
far-reaching implications for the Europeanmonetary constitution. It is up to the polit-icians with responsibility in this field partici-pating in the intergovernmental conferenceto make the right moves. Stability and institu-tional continuity must remain the guidingprinciple for the European monetary regime
as well as the foundation for confidence inthe euro. When the Deutsche Mark wasgiven up, politicians promised to maintain aculture of stability and central bank inde-pendence on the European stage. It is time toremind them of that promise.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
70

Statistical
Section
1*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003

ContentsI Key economic data for European
monetary union
1 Monetary developments and interest
rates 6*
2 Foreign trade and payments 6*3 General economic indicators 7*
II Overall monetary survey in the
European monetary union
1 The money stock and its counterparts 8*
2 Consolidated balance sheet of mon-
etary financial institutions (MFIs) 10*
3 Banking system’s liquidity position 14*
III Consolidated financial statement
of the Eurosystem
1 Assets 16*
2 Liabilities 18*
IV Banks
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary
financial institutions (excluding theBundesbank) in Germany 20*
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks
(MFIs) in Germany, by category ofbanks 24*
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-/C224-vis residents 26*
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-/C224-vis non-residents 28*
2*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003

5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) 30*
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic enterprises and residentindividuals, housing loans, sectors ofeconomic activity 32*
7 Deposits of domestic
non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs)in Germany 34*
8 Deposits of resident individuals and
domestic non-profit institutions atbanks (MFIs) in Germany 36*
9 Deposits of domestic public author-
ities at banks (MFIs) in Germany, bycreditor group 36*
10 Savings deposits and bank savings
bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germanysold to non-banks (non-MFIs) 38*
11 Debt securities and money market
paper outstanding of banks (MFIs)in Germany 38*
12 Building and loan associations (MFIs)
in Germany 39*
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign
branches and foreign subsidiaries ofGerman banks (MFIs) 40*
V Minimum reserves
1 Reserve ratios 42*
2 Reserve maintenance in Germany up
to the end of 1998 42*
3 Reserve maintenance in the Euro-
pean monetary union 42*VI Interest rates
1 ECB interest rates 43*
2 Discount and lombard rates of the
Bundesbank 43*
3 Base rates 43*4 Eurosystem monetary policy opera-
tions allotted through tenders 43*
5 Money market rates, by month 44*6 Euro area retail bank interest rates 44*7 Interest rates and volumes for out-
standing amounts and new businessof German banks (MFIs) 45*
VII Capital market
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities
and shares in Germany 48*
2 Sales of debt securities issued by
borrowers domiciled in Germany 49*
3 Outstanding amount of debt secur-
ities issued by borrowers domiciledin Germany 50*
4 Circulation of shares issued by resi-
dents of Germany 50*
5 Yields and indices on German
securities 51*
6 Sales and purchases of investment
fund certificates in Germany 51*
3*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003

VIII Public finance in Germany
1 Finances of the public sector 52*
2 Finances of the Federal
Government, L/C228nder Governmentsand local authorities 52*
3 Finances of the Government
in the national accounts 53*
4 Tax revenue of the central,
regional and local authorities 53*
5 Tax revenue, by type 54*6 Individual taxes of the Federal
Government, L/C228nder Governmentsand local authorities 54*
7 Indebtedness of the public sector 55*8 Changes in public sector
indebtedness 57*
9 Loans raised by public authorities
against borrowers’ notes 57*
10 Indebtedness of the Federal
Government 58*
11 Federal Government borrowing
in the market 58*
12 Receipts, expenditure and assets of
the wage and salary earners’pension insurance funds 59*
13 Receipts and expenditure of the
Federal Labour Office 59*
IX Economic conditions
1 Origin and expenditure of
domestic product, distribution ofnational income 60*
2 Output in the producing sector 61*3 Orders received by industry 62*4 Orders received by construction 63*5 Retail trade turnover 63*6 Labour market 64*
7 Prices 65*8 Households’ income 66*9 Pay rates and actual earnings 66*
X Foreign trade and payments
1 Major items of the balance of pay-
ments of the European monetaryunion 67*
2 Major items of the balance of pay-
ments of the Federal Republic ofGermany 68*
3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the
Federal Republic of Germany, bygroup of countries and country 69*
4 Services and factor income of the
Federal Republic of Germany 70*
5 Current transfers of the Federal
Republic of Germany 70*
6 Capital transfers 70*7 Financial account of the Federal
Republic of Germany 71*
8 External position of the Bundesbank 72*9 External position of the Bundesbank
in the European monetary union 72*
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises
in Germany (other than banks)vis-/C224-vis non-residents 73*
11 Deutsche Mark and euro exchange
rates of selected currencies 74*
12 Exchange rates for the national
currencies of the EMU countries,the Deutsche Mark value of theECU and euro conversion rates 74*
13 Effective exchange rates of the euro
and selected foreign currencies 75*
4*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003

Abbreviations and symbols
eestimated
pprovisional
pepartly estimated
rrevised
...Data available at a later date
.Data unknown, not to be published or
not meaningful
0Less than 0.5 but more than nil
–nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to round-
ing.
5*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
 I Key economic data for European monetary union
 
1 Monetary developments and interest rates
 
 
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions  1, 2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
 M 3  3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3-month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
MFI lending, and capital 3-month ment bonds moving  average
M1 M2 (centred) total individuals formation  4 EONIA  5, 7 EURIBOR  6, 7 outstanding  8 
Period Change from previous year, in % % p. a. as a monthly average
2002          Mar 6.0 6.3 7.2 7.2 4.8 5.4 4.7 3.26 3.39 5.3
         Apr 6.7 6.4 7.2 7.3 4.4 5.1 4.6 3.32 3.41 5.3
         May 6.8 6.7 7.5 7.3 4.5 5.3 5.2 3.31 3.47 5.3         Jun 6.9 6.4 7.1 7.2 4.4 5.3 4.3 3.35 3.46 5.2
         Jul 7.6 6.5 7.0 7.0 4.0 4.8 5.0 3.30 3.41 5.0
         Aug 7.7 6.4 6.9 7.0 4.2 5.1 5.3 3.29 3.35 4.7         Sep 8.0 6.5 7.1 7.0 4.3 5.0 5.2 3.32 3.31 4.5
         Oct 8.3 6.8 6.9 7.0 4.3 4.9 5.0 3.30 3.26 4.6
         Nov 9.0 6.8 7.0 6.9 3.9 4.6 5.0 3.30 3.12 4.6         Dec 9.9 6.6 6.9 7.1 4.1 4.7 4.9 3.09 2.94 4.4
2003          Jan 9.5 6.6 7.3 7.4 4.2 4.8 4.5 2.79 2.83 4.2
         Feb 10.5 7.4 8.0 7.8 4.4 4.9 4.6 2.76 2.69 4.0         Mar 11.8 8.0 8.0 8.2 4.1 4.8 4.3 2.75 2.53 4.1
         Apr 11.2 8.0 8.6 8.4 4.8 5.1 4.6 2.56 2.53 4.2
         May 11.4 8.5 8.5 8.5 5.1 5.3 4.4 2.56 2.40 3.9         Jun 11.4 8.3 8.4 8.5 4.9 5.2 5.0 2.21 2.15 3.7
         Jul 11.5 8.5 8.6 8.4 5.4 5.6 5.2 2.08 2.13 4.0
         Aug 11.8 8.5 8.2 8.1 5.5 5.6 5.3 2.10 2.14 4.2         Sep 11.3 8.0 7.4 ... 5.5 5.5 5.3 2.02 2.15 4.2
         Oct ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2.01 2.14 4.3
1 Source: ECB. — 2 Saisonally adjusted. — 3 Excluding holdings of money Average. — 6 Euro InterBank Offered Rate. — 7 See also footnotes to table
market fund shares
/units by non-residents of the euro area. — 4 Longer- VI.5., p. 44*. — 8 GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds; from
term liabilities to euro area non-MFIs. — 5Euro OverNight Index 2001 Euro12. 
 
 
2 Foreign trade and payments  * 
  
 
Selected items of the EMU balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1 
Current account Capital account Effective exchange rate  3 
of which Direct Securities Credit Monetary
Balance Trade balance Balance investment transactions reserves Dollar rate nominal real  4 transactions  2 
Period  5  million Euro/US-$ 1st q 1999=100
2002          Mar + 8,897 + 13,361 + 22,229 − 10,616 + 4,291 + 28,786 − 233 0.8758 86.8 89.3
         Apr − 5,573 + 7,136 + 22,047 + 9,616 + 20,878 − 16,801 + 8,355 0.8858 87.2 89.7
         May + 684 + 10,276 + 13,398 + 1,981 + 38,566 − 29,047 + 1,897 0.9170 88.6 91.1         Jun + 7,482 + 13,894 − 38,762 − 18,348 + 18,455 − 35,353 − 3,517 0.9554 90.6 93.2
         Jul + 8,172 + 16,026 − 16,898 − 5,992 + 405 − 8,698 − 2,612 0.9922 91.7 94.4
         Aug + 9,275 + 11,263 − 30,402 + 1,505 − 11,283 − 22,437 + 1,812 0.9778 91.1 93.6         Sep + 8,385 + 10,828 − 6,347 − 6,319 + 21,707 − 17,950 − 3,785 0.9808 91.2 93.8
         Oct + 4,584 + 12,457 − 13,892 − 6,929 + 28,063 − 37,162 + 2,136 0.9811 91.7 94.3
         Nov + 10,609 + 12,449 − 18,879 + 7,298 + 14,337 − 38,094 − 2,420 1.0014 92.5 95.1         Dec + 7,948 + 9,584 − 15,721 − 6,406 − 3,261 − 5,002 − 1,052 1.0183 93.6 96.7
2003          Jan − 5,191 + 1,491 − 12,195 − 2,196 − 2,109 − 9,439 + 1,549 1.0622 95.8 98.8
         Feb + 3,356 + 8,690 − 19,618 + 2,882 − 6,683 − 21,156 + 5,340 1.0773 97.1 100.2         Mar + 4,271 + 6,451 + 6,676 − 1,543 + 13,343 − 10,116 + 4,992 1.0807 97.9 101.2
         Apr − 9,966 + 6,947 + 16,105 − 18,418 + 20,442 + 13,325 + 756 1.0848 98.6 102.1
         May − 149 + 7,630 − 33,417 + 673 + 2,491 − 36,959 + 378 1.1582 102.5 106.1         Jun + 3,104 + 10,545 − 24,030 + 23,121 + 16,434 − 64,436 + 851 1.1663 102.7 106.6
         Jul + 1,968 + 15,323 − 6,124 − 3,221 − 38,326 + 33,813 + 1,610 1.1372 101.4 105.2
         Aug + 5,009 + 10,628 + 3,289 − 1,694 − 40,174 + 44,821 + 336 1.1139 100.3 103.9         Sep ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.1222 99.9 103.6
         Oct ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.1692 101.3 105.1
*  Source: ECB. — 1  See also tables X.12 and 13, p. 74−75. — 2  Including
financial derivatives. — 3  Vis-à-vis a narrow group of countries. — 4  Based
on consumer prices. 
6* I Key economic data for European monetary union

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
I  Key economic data for Euro area
 
3  General economic indicators
 
 
                   
Luxem- Nether- Euro
Period Belgium Germany Finland France Greece Ireland Italy bourg lands Austria Portugal Spain area 7 
Real gross domestic product 1 
2000 3.7 2.9 5.1 3.8 4.4 10.1 3.1 9.1 3.5 3.4 3.7 4.2 3.5
2001 0.8 0.8 1.2 2.1 4.0 6.2 1.8 1.2 1.2 0.8 1.6 2.8 1.62002 0.7 0.2 2.2 1.2 3.8 6.9 0.4 1.3 0.2 1.4 0.4 2.0 0.9
2002          Q2 0.4 0.5 3.6 1.5 4.0 7.5 0.3 0.2 1.2 1.9 2.1 1.1
         Q3 1.3 0.9 2.8 1.6 3.6 7.2 0.5 0.7 1.4 −0.4 1.9 1.3
         Q4 1.7 0.3 3.3 0.9 3.2 7.5 0.7 0.1 1.4 −1.3 2.1 1.0
2003          Q1 1.4 0.4 1.8 1.3 4.3 0.7 0.6 −0.2 0.3 −1.2 2.4 0.9
         Q2 ... −0.7 0.7 −0.6 4.5 2.1 0.3 −1.2 0.9 −2.3 2.1 −0.2
         Q3 ... −0.2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Industrial production 1,2 
2000 5.2 6.2 11.8 3.5 7.2 15.6 4.0 5.0 3.5 9.0 −0.2 4.4 5.3
2001 −0.3 0.5 0.1 1.2 1.0 10.1 −1.1 3.2 0.5 2.8 3.1 −1.5 0.5
2002 1.3 −1.1 1.7 −1.0 1.7 7.8 −1.3 0.4 −0.9 0.9 −0.2 0.2 −0.5
2002          Q2 2.0 −2.0 5.1 −0.6 4.0 11.3 −2.1 4.0 −1.4 2.9 1.8 −1.1 −0.6
         Q3 4.0 −0.3 3.0 −1.7 0.1 10.6 −0.1 −0.3 −0.6 0.6 0.4 0.4 0.1
         Q4 2.3 1.4 5.2 −0.1 3.1 6.6 0.7 1.7 0.4 1.5 −1.9 2.5 1.3
2003          Q1 −0.3 1.9 2.1 0.8 0.9 2.5 −0.5 4.1 1.1 3.7 0.7 1.5 1.1
         Q2 −2.0 0.2 −1.5 −2.0 2.4 2.4 −1.4 −1.3 −3.4 ... −2.4 1.7 −0.6
         Q3 ... 6p −1.3 1.8 −1.8 ... 6.6 −0.1 4.7 −2.8 ... 1.5 0.9 ...
Capacity utilisation in industry 3 
2001 82.3 84.4 85.7 87.4 77.6 78.4 78.9 88.7 84.6 83.1 81.7 79.6 83.42002 79.6 82.3 82.7 85.3 77.0 75.9 77.3 85.1 82.9 80.2 79.4 77.2 81.42003 78.7 82.0 81.9 84.9 76.5 75.1 76.3 84.7 81.7 80.0 77.3 78.9 81.0
2002          Q3 80.1 82.4 83.0 85.3 79.0 72.8 76.9 83.8 82.5 80.2 79.1 76.3 81.2
         Q4 79.6 82.7 83.1 84.7 76.8 76.9 78.0 85.3 82.8 79.1 81.2 79.3 81.7
2003          Q1 79.3 82.3 82.2 85.1 75.8 74.5 77.5 84.1 82.5 79.7 77.7 78.6 81.3
         Q2 78.6 81.8 82.8 84.9 77.1 75.1 75.6 85.9 81.9 80.4 78.5 78.2 80.8         Q3 77.9 81.0 80.7 84.8 76.8 77.1 76.1 84.8 81.0 79.4 75.8 79.5 80.7         Q4 79.0 82.9 82.0 84.8 76.1 73.6 76.1 83.9 81.4 80.3 77.0 79.3 81.2
Unemployment rate 4 
2000 6.9 7.8 9.8 9.3 11.0 4.3 10.4 2.3 2.8 3.7 4.1 11.3 8.52001 6.7 7.8 9.1 8.5 10.4 3.9 9.4 2.1 2.4 3.6 4.1 10.6 8.02002 7.3 8.6 9.1 8.8 10.0 4.4 9.0 2.8 2.7 4.3 5.1 11.3 8.4
2003          Apr 7.9 9.4 9.2 9.3 4.6 8.7 3.5 3.9 4.3 6.4 11.3 8.8
         May 7.9 9.4 9.2 9.3 4.6 8.6 3.6 4.0 4.3 6.5 11.3 8.8         June 8.0 9.3 9.1 9.4 4.7 8.6 3.7 4.1 4.4 6.6 11.3 8.8
         July 8.1 9.3 9.1 9.4 4.7 8.5 3.8 4.1 4.4 6.8 11.3 8.8
         Aug 8.0 9.4 9.0 9.5 4.7 ... 3.8 4.2 4.5 6.9 11.2 8.8         Sep 8.0 9.4 8.9 9.5 4.7 ... 3.8 ... 4.5 7.4 11.2 8.8
         Oct ... 9.3 ... ... ... ... ... ... 4.5 ... 11.2 ...
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1 
2000 2.7 1.4 3.0 1.8 2.9 5.3 2.6 3.8 2.3 2.0 2.8 3.5 2.1
2001 2.4 1.9 2.7 1.8 3.7 4.0 2.3 2.4 5.1 2.3 4.4 2.8 2.32002 1.6 1.3 2.0 1.9 3.9 4.7 2.6 2.1 3.9 1.7 3.7 3.6 2.3
2003          Apr 1.4 1.0 1.3 1.9 3.3 4.6 3.0 3.0 2.2 1.3 3.7 3.2 2.1
         May 0.9 0.6 1.1 1.8 3.5 3.9 2.9 2.3 2.3 0.9 3.7 2.7 1.8         June 1.5 0.9 1.2 1.9 3.6 3.8 2.9 2.0 2.1 1.0 3.4 2.8 1.9
         July 1.4 0.8 1.0 1.9 3.5 3.9 2.9 1.9 2.1 1.0 2.9 2.9 1.9
         Aug 1.6 1.1 1.2 2.0 3.3 3.9 2.7 2.3 2.2 1.0 2.9 3.1 2.1         Sep 1.7 1.1 1.2
p 2.3 ... 3.8 p 3.0 2.7 p 2.0 p 1.3 3.2 3.0 p 2.1
         Oct 1.4 1.1 ... p 2.3 ... p 3.3 p 2.8 1.8 p 1.9 ... ... 2.7 e 2.1
General government financial balance 5 
2000 0.2 1.3 7.1 −1.4 −1.9 4.4 −0.6 6.4 2.2 −1.5 −2.8 −0.8 0.2
2001 0.6 −2.8 5.2 −1.5 −1.5 0.9 −2.6 6.1 0.0 0.3 −4.2 −0.3 −1.7
2002 0.1 −3.5 4.2 −3.1 −1.2 −0.2 −2.3 2.5 −1.6 −0.2 −2.7 0.1 −2.2
General government debt 5 
2000 109.6 60.2 44.6 57.2 106.2 38.4 110.6 5.5 55.9 66.8 53.3 60.5 69.62001 108.5 59.5 44.0 56.8 106.9 36.1 109.5 5.5 52.9 67.3 55.5 56.8 69.22002 105.8 60.8 42.7 59.0 104.7 32.4 106.7 5.7 52.4 67.3 58.1 53.8 69.0
Sources: National data, European Commission, Eurostat, European Central adjusted. —5  As a percentage of GDP; Maastricht Treaty definition, ESA 95;
Bank. Latest data are partly based on press reports and are provisional. — including proceeds from sales of UMTS licences. —6  Adjusted in advance by
1  Annual percentage change; GDP of Greece and Portugal is calculated the Federal Statistical Office, by way of estimates, to the results of the
from seasonally adjusted data. —2  Manufacturing, mining and energy; ad- Quarterly Production Survey for the third quarter (industry in Germany: on
justed for working-day variations. —3  Manufacturing, in %; seasonally average, + 0.9 %). —7  Including Greece (Harmonised Index of Consumer
adjusted; data are collected in January, April, July and October. — Prices, general government financial balance and general government debt
4  Standardised, as a percentage of the civilian labour force; seasonally from 2001 only). 
7*I  Key economic data for Euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
 
1 The money stock and its counterparts *
  
a European monetary union 
  
 5  billion
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises Publicand individuals authorities Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturitieson non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  
2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2002          Feb 28.8 24.9 8.7 3.9 1.2 − 8.2 3.0 11.2 9.0 1.6 −1.0 9.3 −0.8
         Mar 70.7 48.5 −10.4 22.1 16.9 − 5.6 19.9 25.5 23.8 3.7 −1.3 18.7 2.7
         Apr 26.1 44.6 3.0 −18.5 1.5 − 3.0 17.5 20.5 −6.3 −0.2 −1.9 1.0 −5.2
         May 39.0 32.1 3.9 6.9 9.7 39.0 73.8 34.8 25.8 3.5 −1.2 19.7 3.7
         Jun 32.6 32.5 −6.9 0.1 −1.3 41.0 −26.8 −67.8 −5.5 3.3 −0.2 8.6 −17.1
         Jul −18.9 −15.1 −12.3 −3.8 −2.0 1.5 − 3.5 − 5.0 24.7 1.3 −0.0 13.8 9.6
         Aug − 6.9 7.1 6.8 −14.0 −3.1 14.1 −10.7 −24.8 14.1 2.2 0.2 2.7 9.0
         Sep 54.6 40.3 4.9 14.3 11.5 18.1 65.5 47.4 22.8 1.0 0.4 12.1 9.3
         Oct 28.0 31.0 12.4 −3.0 −2.6 29.7 55.1 25.5 9.4 1.3 −1.0 9.1 0.0
         Nov 41.3 26.2 6.8 15.1 6.1 34.9 84.4 49.5 21.7 3.6 −0.5 16.6 2.0
         Dec 50.8 56.9 14.9 −6.1 −14.1 21.8 −33.2 −55.0 23.6 16.5 0.1 −1.9 8.9
2003          Jan 49.4 28.1 3.5 21.4 20.0 7.0 18.0 10.7 13.2 −2.3 −2.1 6.5 11.0
         Feb 51.0 35.6 4.3 15.4 17.8 10.1 66.6 56.5 11.1 7.1 −1.2 9.7 −4.5
         Mar 48.4 39.1 7.7 9.3 8.7 14.1 6.6 − 7.5 13.3 7.3 −1.6 12.5 −4.8
         Apr 87.3 71.7 27.7 15.6 21.0 − 4.1 40.0 44.1 4.8 −2.8 −2.6 9.8 0.3
         May 69.3 42.6 14.2 26.7 30.7 40.8 41.8 1.1 18.0 6.9 −1.3 19.0 −6.5
         Jun 14.9 27.9 −6.6 −13.0 −13.9 59.4 40.3 −19.1 19.3 2.8 −1.6 11.2 6.9
         Jul 35.3 14.5 −5.4 20.7 12.8 −39.8 −33.4 6.4 31.4 5.2 −2.1 19.4 8.9
         Aug − 0.2 11.0 5.0 −11.2 −5.1 −31.4 −70.7 −39.3 16.9 7.6 −1.6 3.2 7.7
         Sep 60.7 36.5 3.9 24.2 23.2 10.5 27.1 16.6 23.3 0.9 −0.6 19.5 3.4
  
  
b German contribution
 
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises Publicand individuals authorities Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturitieson non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  
2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2002          Feb 1.8 0.1 −3.2 1.7 4.2 1.8 −0.3 −2.1 5.0 1.2 −1.0 3.2 1.6
         Mar − 1.0 −2.4 −9.5 1.4 3.0 7.6 10.6 3.0 13.3 3.5 −1.1 10.1 0.9
         Apr 11.0 9.9 5.8 1.1 5.2 −20.2 −3.0 17.2 −7.7 −1.3 −1.9 −2.1 −2.4
         May 6.6 3.7 −0.2 2.9 8.4 10.7 24.6 13.9 0.4 −0.4 −1.1 2.2 −0.4
         Jun −19.8 −12.6 −11.1 −7.2 −2.2 25.7 0.1 −25.6 −0.5 −0.7 −0.2 2.3 −1.9
         Jul 7.2 −7.4 −2.8 14.6 6.1 −16.5 −5.7 10.8 11.2 0.5 0.1 8.2 2.4
         Aug − 1.7 5.8 6.4 −7.5 2.2 11.0 6.4 −4.5 8.9 −0.2 0.1 5.2 3.7
         Sep 12.0 10.8 −0.7 1.2 4.1 14.9 31.0 15.6 1.5 −0.5 −0.5 2.0 0.5
         Oct 4.6 5.8 7.4 −1.2 −4.6 17.8 11.6 −6.1 0.1 1.9 −0.8 −0.3 −0.7
         Nov 9.4 4.6 4.3 4.8 3.5 19.2 32.0 12.8 5.8 4.1 −0.6 0.4 1.9
         Dec 5.7 17.8 6.8 −12.1 −8.5 2.2 −40.5 −42.7 −9.8 3.1 0.2 −17.0 2.4
2003          Jan 18.3 1.8 3.1 16.4 10.8 − 6.1 8.7 14.8 4.1 −1.6 −2.0 3.8 3.9
         Feb − 1.5 5.7 −1.3 −7.2 0.5 10.2 20.1 9.9 4.4 6.3 −1.2 0.9 −1.5
         Mar 4.6 2.7 −1.2 1.9 5.1 18.8 25.2 6.4 1.7 1.9 −1.6 −1.1 2.6
         Apr 4.9 6.6 5.9 −1.7 −2.6 4.3 14.4 10.1 −2.6 −2.0 −2.5 0.5 1.5
         May 1.9 4.0 3.0 −2.1 2.4 27.3 22.4 −5.0 −2.8 −1.6 −1.5 4.8 −4.4
         Jun −18.0 −0.9 −3.0 −17.1 −10.0 38.2 24.4 −13.8 4.8 0.1 −1.4 3.7 2.4
         Jul 0.6 −8.4 −0.5 9.0 −1.6 −24.5 −18.6 5.9 8.7 4.9 −2.1 4.9 1.0
         Aug −13.6 2.7 0.9 −16.3 −11.0 16.6 −20.6 −37.2 5.7 3.2 −1.5 2.2 1.8
         Sep 16.8 11.9 −3.6 4.9 10.8 − 2.0 10.8 12.8 2.2 −1.3 −0.7 9.1 −4.8
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of of inter-MFI participations. —4Including the counterparts of monetary
monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have been liabilities of central governments. —5Including the monetary liabilities of
eliminated from the flow figures (see also the “Notes on the figures “in the central governments (Post Office, Treasury). —6In Germany, only savings
“Explanatory notes “in the Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Report 1, deposits. —7Paper held by residents outside the euro area has been
p 30). —1Source: ECB. —2Excluding MFIs ’portfolios. —3After deduction eliminated. —8Excluding MFIs portfolios. —9Up to end-2002, including
8*II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
 
 
 
a European monetary union 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V )  5,6,10  
Money stock M2 Debt securi-
of which ties with
Intra- Money stock M1 maturities
Eurosystem Deposits of up toliability/ with an Deposits Money 2 years
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market (incl.money
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund market    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares paper)    central  gov-
ernments Total  4 issue Total Total Total lation deposits  5 2 years  5 tions (net)  2,10  Period (net)  2,7,8 months  5,6 
6.9 3.8 − 0.9 − 10.5 − 10.8 −6.2 − 4.6 − 4.0 4.4 4.9 10.4 − 3.9 2002          Feb
1.7 0.4 − 39.0 27.3 11.5 14.0 − 2.6 12.3 3.5 8.4 3.3 0.2          Mar
0.0 −13.1 − 42.4 39.4 40.2 7.4 32.8 5.4 − 6.2 − 1.5 7.9 − 3.4          Apr
− 8.5 12.7 − 48.1 27.6 14.3 12.2 2.1 10.9 2.4 6.7 4.0 9.8          May
6.0 47.6 − 25.5 46.2 60.5 11.8 48.6 −20.6 6.3 − 6.1 − 7.3 − 7.4          Jun
− 3.1 −25.8 −− 13.2 − 15.8 − 22.9 11.0 − 33.8 4.2 3.0 − 0.7 12.0 − 8.7          Jul
− 11.0 − 9.6 − 13.6 − 7.5 − 27.1 4.5 − 31.7 13.5 6.2 7.7 12.3 1.1          Aug
1.6 3.3 − 45.1 41.8 62.5 5.6 56.9 −23.3 2.6 2.4 − 2.7 3.6          Sep
5.5 22.0 − 20.8 19.0 − 8.7 7.2 − 15.8 20.5 7.1 − 2.8 2.0 2.6          Oct
− 4.3 −13.3 − 72.1 64.4 60.1 7.5 52.6 − 7.3 11.6 − 4.4 14.7 − 2.7          Nov
− 11.0 −28.4 − 88.4 102.2 76.3 19.8 56.5 − 7.8 32.6 − 2.8 − 6.1 − 3.9          Dec
15.2 20.4 − 7.6 − 33.4 − 59.5 −7.4 − 52.1 3.4 22.6 14.7 19.3 7.2 2003          Jan
18.6 − 7.5 − 38.9 26.3 8.1 7.2 0.9 2.4 15.8 0.9 12.1 − 0.4          Feb
− 1.1 12.1 − 38.0 54.0 46.7 7.9 38.8 − 6.1 13.3 − 9.8 4.3 − 10.5          Mar
− 16.5 7.4 − 87.5 49.0 30.1 9.1 21.0 10.2 8.7 6.4 11.8 20.3          Apr
10.4 27.1 − 54.6 62.5 36.0 7.4 28.6 18.8 7.7 1.0 8.8 − 17.7          May
30.2 18.9 − 5.8 30.1 54.3 7.3 47.0 −39.0 14.8 −16.5 − 0.9 − 6.9          Jun
− 24.6 −16.5 − 5.2 − 5.6 − 18.4 11.1 − 29.5 3.1 9.8 5.5 10.3 − 5.0          Jul
− 10.5 −31.7 −− 6.4 − 3.2 − 14.9 1.2 − 16.1 3.7 8.0 − 3.0 2.1 − 2.3          Aug
21.3 23.5 − 3.2 16.6 45.1 2.2 43.0 −29.9 1.5 − 4.3 − 8.2 − 0.9          Sep
 
 
 b German contribution 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V )  5,6,10  
of which Components of money stock
Debt securities
Deposits with
Intra- with an Deposits Money maturities
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market of up to 2 years
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund (incl. money    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac- shares market    central  gov-
ernments Total issue  9,11 lation Total deposits 2 years months  6 tions (net)  7,8 paper)(net)  7  Period
− 0.7 − 0.5 − 3.4 4.5 − 0.3 − 0.6 − 3.5 − 0.5 1.0 0.5 2.8 2002          Feb
− 0.0 − 6.0 3.4 2.6 − 0.6 − 2.6 1.6 − 0.1 0.2 − 0.2 0.5          Mar
− 1.9 1.7 1.3 3.1 − 1.4 9.3 − 4.8 − 7.3 − 0.3 − 0.3 2.1          Apr
0.7 1.9 2.9 2.5 14.4 6.2 4.5 − 0.6 1.3 0.4 2.5          May
0.5 − 1.8 1.0 3.3 7.6 13.1 0.3 − 1.0 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 3.7          Jun
− 1.1 − 10.0 2.0 3.7 − 9.4 − 5.1 − 0.2 − 1.5 − 1.0 0.3 − 1.8          Jul
1.3 − 3.4 3.2 0.9 2.4 − 5.2 3.7 0.1 1.2 1.3 1.2          Aug
1.0 12.3 2.2 1.6 12.1 14.9 − 9.0 1.0 6.4 0.1 − 0.8          Sep
− 1.6 9.9 2.0 1.5 14.0 1.2 6.8 2.2 − 1.0 0.6 4.2          Oct
− 0.6 − 3.6 1.5 2.5 27.0 31.8 − 5.6 3.3 − 3.2 − 0.2 0.8          Nov
0.0 0.6 1.5 4.3 18.5 1.0 7.2 12.8 − 3.1 − 0.5 0.9          Dec
− 0.8 12.2 0.5 − 0.7 − 3.2 − 9.3 − 4.7 4.1 5.3 2.5 − 1.1 2003          Jan
1.4 − 16.6 2.2 1.7 19.5 5.6 − 0.7 3.0 2.3 1.3 8.1          Feb
− 1.7 22.8 1.5 2.5 0.4 7.1 − 5.2 1.7 0.4 0.6 − 4.0          Mar
− 1.1 4.2 0.9 2.8 8.7 8.2 − 2.0 1.1 0.0 − 0.0 1.4          Apr
2.2 14.6 2.4 1.3 15.3 6.8 7.4 0.7 1.0 0.4 − 1.0          May
0.4 13.2 0.6 2.8 1.9 16.4 − 11.8 1.0 − 1.5 − 0.5 − 1.7          Jun
− 2.8 − 15.7 1.1 3.4 − 14.2 − 12.5 − 1.3 2.0 0.2 − 0.4 − 2.2          Jul
0.6 − 4.5 2.5 − 0.1 1.2 1.7 2.9 2.7 1.5 − 0.5 − 7.2          Aug
0.3 10.9 1.3 0.9 1.4 10.7 − 13.8 0.9 3.2 − 0.1 0.5          Sep
national banknotes an coins still in circulation. —10The German the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in accordance with the
contributions to the Eurosystem ’s monetary aggregates should on no accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 3 on
account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and are therefore banknote circulation in Table III.2). —12Includes decrease of 68 billion
not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2 or M3. — owing to the exclusion of currency in circulation. 
11The difference between the volume of euro banknotes actually issued by
9*II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
 
 
 
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and individuals Public authorities
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
End of assets or Debt other Debt euro-area Other
year/month liabilities Total Total Loans securities  2 equities Total Loans securities  3 residents assets
 European monetary union (  5  billion) 1
 
2001          Aug 13,144.3 9,260.1 7,238.5 6,369.6 323.7 545.1 2,021.6 828.8 1,192.9 2,624.7 1,259.5
         Sep 13,318.6 9,309.1 7,284.1 6,421.9 327.4 534.7 2,025.0 829.8 1,195.2 2,697.8 1,311.7
         Oct 13,424.2 9,339.1 7,325.2 6,451.6 329.9 543.7 2,014.0 827.2 1,186.8 2,742.5 1,342.5
         Nov 13,574.5 9,413.9 7,379.6 6,501.9 333.1 544.6 2,034.3 843.3 1,191.0 2,827.6 1,333.0         Dec 13,576.7 9,451.3 7,424.4 6,519.3 336.9 568.1 2,026.9 847.7 1,179.2 2,807.8 1,317.6
2002          Jan 13,667.3 9,495.6 7,444.4 6,534.4 341.9 568.1 2,051.1 844.8 1,206.3 2,829.6 1,342.2
         Feb 13,657.2 9,520.6 7,465.4 6,548.7 349.9 566.7 2,055.3 847.5 1,207.8 2,833.2 1,303.4         Mar 13,694.4 9,594.9 7,513.2 6,606.1 346.6 560.5 2,081.7 852.6 1,229.1 2,845.2 1,254.2
         Apr 13,680.2 9,612.5 7,550.9 6,641.2 342.9 566.8 2,061.7 832.4 1,229.3 2,826.5 1,241.2
         May 13,711.6 9,645.0 7,573.6 6,659.7 345.0 568.9 2,071.5 829.2 1,242.3 2,845.8 1,220.7         Jun 13,642.3 9,667.1 7,598.0 6,691.1 343.0 563.9 2,069.1 830.1 1,239.0 2,731.2 1,243.9
         Jul 13,679.1 9,652.9 7,587.0 6,692.6 345.3 549.1 2,065.9 828.5 1,237.4 2,756.7 1,269.5
         Aug 13,649.2 9,645.5 7,592.5 6,692.3 341.0 559.1 2,053.0 818.0 1,235.0 2,745.3 1,258.4         Sep 13,822.3 9,700.5 7,626.6 6,726.8 350.8 549.1 2,073.9 820.8 1,253.2 2,813.5 1,308.3
         Oct 13,863.8 9,726.2 7,657.3 6,742.7 353.1 561.5 2,068.8 820.4 1,248.5 2,863.5 1,274.1
         Nov 14,010.7 9,761.6 7,678.0 6,754.5 356.7 566.8 2,083.6 829.2 1,254.4 2,937.0 1,312.1         Dec 13,931.1 9,779.1 7,721.2 6,781.5 367.1 572.7 2,057.8 836.8 1,221.0 2,840.3 1,311.7
2003          Jan 13,972.1 9,851.5 7,747.0 6,804.7 374.8 567.5 2,104.4 828.9 1,275.5 2,851.9 1,268.7
         Feb 14,112.8 9,903.9 7,776.4 6,831.2 381.2 564.0 2,127.5 828.4 1,299.1 2,909.4 1,299.5         Mar 14,123.4 9,940.5 7,806.5 6,854.4 386.7 565.3 2,134.0 828.9 1,305.1 2,895.2 1,287.7
         Apr 14,227.0 10,026.0 7,879.3 6,890.9 404.2 584.2 2,146.8 823.3 1,323.5 2,906.3 1,294.6
         May 14,300.6 10,087.1 7,910.1 6,906.8 407.1 596.2 2,177.0 818.9 1,358.2 2,878.4 1,335.1         Jun 14,382.1 10,103.7 7,943.3 6,944.2 406.2 592.9 2,160.4 817.9 1,342.5 2,959.3 1,319.1
         Jul 14,379.4 10,164.4 7,982.9 6,964.6 402.8 615.4 2,181.6 825.9 1,355.7 2,942.5 1,272.5
         Aug 14,369.1 10,171.3 8,001.5 6,976.7 405.4 619.4 2,169.8 820.0 1,349.8 2,929.8 1,268.0         Sep 14,419.3 10,219.4 8,027.8 6,999.0 412.3 616.4 2,191.6 820.7 1,370.9 2,885.3 1,314.7
 German contribution (  5  billion) 
2001          Aug 4,298.5 3,293.6 2,566.3 2,256.4 62.8 247.0 727.3 498.1 229.3 780.0 224.9         Sep 4,323.3 3,288.4 2,575.0 2,269.7 63.7 241.6 713.3 495.0 218.3 808.1 226.8
         Oct 4,334.4 3,288.4 2,579.9 2,271.3 64.4 244.2 708.6 496.2 212.4 818.3 227.6
         Nov 4,336.2 3,303.9 2,587.2 2,279.0 64.8 243.4 716.6 506.6 210.0 837.9 194.5         Dec 4,328.2 3,321.6 2,608.3 2,289.4 66.0 252.9 713.3 499.3 213.9 821.2 185.4
2002          Jan 4,321.4 3,315.2 2,600.6 2,280.2 66.9 253.4 714.6 499.7 215.0 820.0 186.2
         Feb 4,322.9 3,316.3 2,600.1 2,283.4 65.1 251.6 716.2 497.1 219.1 822.1 184.4         Mar 4,334.0 3,315.0 2,597.6 2,290.4 67.2 240.1 717.4 495.4 221.9 829.6 189.3
         Apr 4,330.7 3,324.0 2,605.7 2,293.1 69.0 243.7 718.3 491.2 227.1 816.6 190.1
         May 4,341.9 3,327.7 2,606.9 2,294.6 69.2 243.2 720.8 485.6 235.2 827.5 186.7         Jun 4,291.6 3,309.3 2,596.0 2,294.8 69.7 231.6 713.3 480.4 232.8 800.0 182.3
         Jul 4,303.6 3,317.5 2,589.5 2,291.3 69.8 228.4 728.0 489.0 239.0 801.2 184.9
         Aug 4,307.0 3,315.3 2,594.9 2,289.8 67.1 238.0 720.4 479.8 240.6 810.2 181.5         Sep 4,355.6 3,327.5 2,605.3 2,301.6 66.5 237.3 722.2 477.0 245.2 841.9 186.1
         Oct 4,370.5 3,332.3 2,611.3 2,299.8 69.8 241.7 721.0 480.4 240.6 850.3 188.0
         Nov 4,413.9 3,341.1 2,615.3 2,299.5 69.6 246.2 725.8 481.7 244.1 879.3 193.5         Dec 4,359.5 3,344.6 2,630.8 2,304.4 66.6 259.8 713.8 478.4 235.4 823.8 191.1
2003          Jan 4,360.7 3,353.2 2,623.2 2,298.5 66.1 258.7 730.0 484.0 246.1 824.1 183.4
         Feb 4,383.3 3,351.8 2,627.3 2,303.8 66.5 257.0 724.6 477.9 246.6 841.9 189.5         Mar 4,395.2 3,351.2 2,624.8 2,302.6 67.2 255.0 726.4 474.6 251.7 861.8 182.2
         Apr 4,400.8 3,353.3 2,629.0 2,300.8 67.3 260.9 724.3 475.4 248.9 867.7 179.8
         May 4,401.1 3,351.6 2,629.9 2,298.8 67.9 263.2 721.7 470.7 251.1 871.9 177.5         Jun 4,411.5 3,334.6 2,629.8 2,301.7 67.0 261.1 704.8 463.7 241.2 906.3 170.6
         Jul 4,391.1 3,334.6 2,620.8 2,293.4 64.4 263.0 713.9 474.3 239.6 891.4 165.1
         Aug 4,373.2 3,322.7 2,624.8 2,296.4 64.5 263.9 697.9 469.1 228.8 886.0 164.4         Sep 4,384.6 3,337.0 2,634.5 2,309.8 64.2 260.5 702.5 463.0 239.4 877.8 169.8
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building circulation; up to end-2002, also including national banknotes and coins still
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p 12*). Excluding MFIs ‘cash in hand (in
and national central banks (the Eurosystem). —1Source: ECB. —2Including euro). From 2002 the German contribution includes the volume of euro
money market paper of enterprises. —3Including Treasury bills and other banknotes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with the
money market paper of public authorities. —4From 2002, euro currency in
10*II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
 
   
 
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and individuals
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  6 
over
Currency 1 year and
in of which up to up to over up to over
Total in euro  5 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months  End of circulation  4 
year/month
European monetary union (  5  billion) 1
 
319.2 5,421.7 5,070.7 5,117.3 1,617.5 949.6 81.4 1,134.7 1,215.3 118.9 2001          Aug
309.6 5,474.3 5,132.4 5,170.9 1,680.4 933.4 81.5 1,136.0 1,221.6 118.0          Sep
295.5 5,493.0 5,144.7 5,183.4 1,678.9 938.6 81.1 1,136.1 1,232.4 116.4          Oct
279.7 5,552.5 5,200.8 5,249.5 1,728.6 944.2 79.9 1,134.9 1,246.6 115.3          Nov239.7 5,698.1 5,360.0 5,403.0 1,826.5 952.2 80.0 1,142.4 1,286.5 115.3          Dec
246.5 5,669.6 5,318.9 5,363.4 1,773.6 948.3 79.5 1,146.2 1,304.0 111.8 2002          Jan
240.3 5,671.3 5,311.3 5,359.8 1,768.1 946.9 78.7 1,148.1 1,307.2 110.8          Feb254.3 5,686.3 5,327.3 5,376.5 1,769.8 954.6 80.4 1,151.5 1,310.6 109.5          Mar
261.7 5,711.2 5,355.4 5,401.0 1,797.8 959.7 81.0 1,150.8 1,304.2 107.5          Apr
273.9 5,713.5 5,366.7 5,409.7 1,801.1 961.3 81.5 1,153.0 1,306.4 106.4          May285.8 5,749.3 5,407.9 5,438.3 1,844.4 938.5 81.5 1,155.0 1,312.7 106.2          Jun
296.6 5,725.7 5,384.9 5,422.5 1,816.1 948.2 82.6 1,154.1 1,315.4 106.2          Jul
301.1 5,688.0 5,358.6 5,396.2 1,783.7 959.7 83.3 1,142.5 1,320.6 106.4          Aug306.7 5,730.1 5,399.2 5,434.7 1,837.3 941.0 82.9 1,143.6 1,323.2 106.8          Sep
313.9 5,745.4 5,410.6 5,446.2 1,819.2 964.2 82.8 1,144.9 1,329.4 105.8          Oct
321.4 5,799.5 5,466.9 5,504.6 1,871.3 956.8 82.4 1,148.3 1,340.5 105.3          Nov341.2 5,880.6 5,567.9 5,593.3 1,924.2 947.6 81.2 1,163.9 1,371.1 105.3          Dec
312.1 5,869.2 5,535.9 5,568.6 1,877.1 950.7 79.8 1,166.7 1,391.0 103.3 2003          Jan
319.3 5,910.5 5,557.8 5,584.1 1,874.6 950.4 78.3 1,173.5 1,405.2 102.1          Feb327.2 5,960.9 5,607.4 5,637.2 1,913.7 946.6 77.8 1,180.5 1,418.0 100.5          Mar
336.3 5,976.1 5,636.6 5,668.0 1,930.4 959.1 76.2 1,177.6 1,426.8 97.9          Apr
343.8 6,037.9 5,692.3 5,712.0 1,954.8 969.8 75.1 1,183.5 1,432.4 96.6          May351.0 6,097.1 5,712.2 5,741.3 2,000.9 937.5 74.5 1,186.4 1,446.9 95.0          Jun
361.5 6,089.6 5,735.2 5,766.5 2,008.9 941.6 74.3 1,192.7 1,456.0 92.9          Jul
362.7 6,085.5 5,737.6 5,775.4 1,996.6 948.1 74.4 1,202.0 1,463.0 91.3          Aug364.9 6,115.8 5,751.9 5,786.9 2,036.3 919.3 74.7 1,202.0 1,463.9 90.8          Sep
 German contribution (  5  billion) 
110.5 2,059.2 1,960.9 1,922.0 455.6 240.7 18.1 649.7 440.9 117.0 2001          Aug105.8 2,075.2 1,979.0 1,939.6 472.7 240.0 18.3 650.5 441.9 116.2          Sep
99.9 2,077.6 1,982.9 1,945.0 475.5 241.8 18.6 650.0 444.8 114.4          Oct92.4 2,103.2 2,006.3 1,973.0 504.0 240.7 18.7 648.7 447.5 113.5          Nov68.0 2,135.1 2,048.0 2,010.0 519.0 244.7 18.6 650.2 463.9 113.6          Dec
7 63.8 2,113.2 2,024.0 1,989.9 506.4 236.6 18.5 652.0 466.4 110.0 2002          Jan68.3 2,108.1 2,019.4 1,986.2 505.6 235.1 17.1 653.5 465.9 109.0          Feb70.9 2,109.1 2,021.9 1,989.1 504.1 237.3 17.1 656.8 465.9 107.8          Mar
74.0 2,100.4 2,015.8 1,984.7 513.9 234.0 17.1 655.2 458.6 105.9          Apr
76.5 2,107.7 2,023.6 1,987.3 519.1 234.2 17.1 654.1 457.9 104.8          May79.8 2,119.3 2,035.6 1,997.1 530.9 234.4 17.3 653.0 457.0 104.6          Jun
83.4 2,112.5 2,030.5 1,993.2 525.8 235.8 17.6 653.9 455.5 104.6          Jul
84.3 2,098.8 2,018.1 1,979.2 521.5 239.6 17.6 640.1 455.6 104.8          Aug85.9 2,105.7 2,023.7 1,987.6 536.6 233.0 17.5 639.6 456.5 104.3          Sep
87.4 2,115.1 2,035.2 2,003.0 538.0 243.7 17.5 641.5 458.8 103.5          Oct
89.9 2,147.3 2,066.9 2,035.6 569.5 237.6 17.9 645.7 462.0 102.9          Nov94.2 2,170.7 2,092.1 2,054.2 567.8 242.4 18.2 648.0 474.8 103.1          Dec
84.9 2,159.7 2,082.0 2,048.3 561.2 238.7 18.6 649.7 478.9 101.2 2003          Jan
86.6 2,173.9 2,094.9 2,058.5 564.8 237.3 18.5 656.1 481.8 100.0          Feb89.0 2,175.8 2,098.2 2,063.3 572.0 232.8 18.6 657.9 483.5 98.4          Mar
91.9 2,176.7 2,100.4 2,068.2 580.4 233.5 18.1 655.8 484.6 95.8          Apr
93.2 2,189.4 2,112.0 2,073.9 585.9 236.9 17.8 653.8 485.3 94.3          May96.0 2,194.7 2,115.7 2,076.1 600.0 225.8 17.6 653.4 486.3 92.9          Jun
99.4 2,183.0 2,107.8 2,071.3 591.1 225.3 17.3 658.5 488.3 90.8          Jul
99.3 2,193.4 2,117.6 2,082.5 593.2 228.9 17.5 662.7 491.0 89.3          Aug
100.2 2,188.3 2,112.6 2,079.6 603.5 217.2 17.5 661.0 491.8 88.5          Sep
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see footnote 3 on banknote liability items “).—5Excluding central governments deposits. —6In
circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into circulation Germany, only saving deposits. —7Includes decrease of  5 11.6 billion
by the Bundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the item (DM22.7 billion) owing to the change in the method of recording banknote
“Intra-Eurosystem liability/claim related to banknote issue “(see “Other circulation (see also footnote 4). 
11*II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (cont ’d) *
 
 
 
Liabilities (cont ’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont ’d)  
 
Public authorities Repo transactions Debt securitieswith non-banks
Other public authorities in the euro area
With agreed At agreedmaturities of notice of  
2 
Money
over of which market of which
Central 1 year and Enterprises fund denom-
End of govern- up to up to over up to over and shares inatedyear/month ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total individuals (net)  
3 Total in euro
 European monetary union (  5  billion) 1
 
2001          Aug 152.4 152.0 63.8 56.1 1.8 27.3 2.5 0.6 230.8 225.3 377.6 1,731.1 1,474.4
         Sep 147.8 155.5 69.5 54.4 1.6 27.0 2.5 0.6 225.7 220.2 381.2 1,753.9 1,475.3
         Oct 153.3 156.3 71.4 53.4 1.6 26.8 2.5 0.5 235.1 227.2 392.3 1,767.9 1,481.4
         Nov 150.2 152.8 69.5 51.9 1.6 26.7 2.6 0.5 225.9 218.3 400.8 1,760.3 1,454.6         Dec 139.0 156.0 69.7 54.9 1.7 26.7 2.6 0.5 218.5 214.6 398.0 1,760.8 1,447.7
2002          Jan 148.9 157.3 74.1 51.4 1.7 27.0 2.5 0.5 216.2 211.4 416.6 1,775.9 1,457.5
         Feb 155.7 155.7 75.1 49.4 1.7 26.6 2.5 0.5 221.1 215.8 427.0 1,778.2 1,456.9         Mar 157.5 152.3 69.3 51.8 1.6 26.7 2.5 0.5 229.6 224.9 431.2 1,793.1 1,468.5
         Apr 157.5 152.7 71.9 50.0 1.4 26.6 2.5 0.4 228.1 223.8 437.5 1,785.5 1,460.7
         May 149.0 154.8 68.8 55.2 1.4 26.6 2.4 0.4 234.8 230.7 442.6 1,805.0 1,475.7         Jun 155.0 156.0 71.6 53.3 1.5 26.7 2.4 0.4 229.6 225.9 439.2 1,788.3 1,470.9
         Jul 151.9 151.3 69.3 51.4 1.5 26.3 2.4 0.4 228.8 224.9 450.3 1,796.1 1,473.8
         Aug 141.0 150.8 67.8 52.4 1.5 26.3 2.4 0.4 236.5 231.9 463.4 1,814.3 1,493.3         Sep 146.3 149.1 70.7 48.4 1.3 25.9 2.4 0.4 238.3 234.4 460.4 1,813.0 1,491.3
         Oct 151.8 147.4 72.2 45.3 1.3 25.6 2.5 0.4 235.6 232.1 462.7 1,823.0 1,490.3
         Nov 147.5 147.4 71.9 45.6 1.3 25.6 2.5 0.4 229.6 225.8 477.1 1,831.1 1,491.9         Dec 136.4 150.9 75.6 45.1 1.4 25.6 2.8 0.4 226.9 224.4 470.6 1,818.6 1,490.8
2003          Jan 154.7 145.9 70.8 45.9 1.2 24.8 2.8 0.4 233.0 229.7 534.9 1,794.7 1,481.4
         Feb 175.8 150.6 72.0 49.9 1.0 24.4 2.9 0.4 233.8 230.3 547.2 1,803.1 1,486.5         Mar 176.2 147.5 71.6 47.1 0.9 24.5 3.0 0.3 224.0 220.8 550.8 1,804.5 1,486.6
         Apr 159.7 148.4 74.8 45.2 1.0 24.2 3.0 0.3 230.5 227.0 563.0 1,834.5 1,517.1
         May 170.1 155.9 76.7 50.8 0.9 24.1 3.0 0.3 231.4 227.8 571.1 1,821.0 1,515.2         Jun 200.3 155.5 79.8 46.8 0.9 24.6 3.0 0.3 214.9 211.9 571.0 1,833.9 1,517.5
         Jul 173.0 150.1 74.8 46.4 0.9 24.5 3.2 0.3 220.1 216.6 585.5 1,849.7 1,519.2
         Aug 162.5 147.5 73.6 45.7 0.9 23.9 3.1 0.3 217.1 214.2 587.7 1,861.5 1,514.6         Sep 183.8 145.1 74.7 42.1 1.0 23.9 3.1 0.3 211.7 208.1 577.5 1,861.6 1,519.6
 German contribution (  5  billion) 
2001          Aug 60.0 77.2 13.3 37.6 1.0 23.1 1.7 0.6 4.6 4.6 25.6 812.2 731.4         Sep 57.0 78.5 15.4 36.9 1.0 23.0 1.7 0.6 2.8 2.8 27.2 816.3 734.6
         Oct 55.4 77.1 15.3 35.8 1.0 22.8 1.7 0.5 9.4 9.4 27.9 815.1 734.0
         Nov 56.6 73.6 14.7 33.0 1.0 22.7 1.7 0.5 4.0 4.0 28.5 795.0 702.6         Dec 49.1 75.9 14.6 35.2 1.2 22.7 1.7 0.5 4.9 4.9 30.2 794.3 699.5
2002          Jan 50.1 73.3 13.6 33.3 1.2 23.0 1.7 0.5 2.5 2.5 31.4 798.9 700.3
         Feb 49.4 72.5 13.8 32.6 1.2 22.7 1.7 0.5 3.5 3.5 31.8 804.7 706.4         Mar 49.4 70.6 12.6 32.0 1.2 22.8 1.6 0.5 3.7 3.7 31.6 815.2 715.0
         Apr 47.5 68.2 11.8 30.6 1.0 22.7 1.6 0.4 3.4 3.4 31.3 812.8 712.9
         May 48.2 72.3 12.4 34.2 1.0 22.7 1.6 0.4 4.7 4.7 31.7 814.1 712.6         Jun 48.7 73.5 13.8 34.1 1.1 22.6 1.6 0.4 4.1 4.1 31.3 808.9 712.2
         Jul 47.6 71.7 13.9 32.3 1.0 22.5 1.5 0.4 3.1 3.1 31.6 817.3 715.7
         Aug 48.9 70.7 13.0 32.2 1.0 22.6 1.6 0.4 4.3 4.3 32.9 840.1 733.6         Sep 49.9 68.2 13.1 30.0 0.9 22.2 1.6 0.4 10.7 10.7 33.0 841.1 733.7
         Oct 48.3 63.7 12.8 26.0 0.9 22.0 1.6 0.4 9.6 9.6 33.6 844.6 730.7
         Nov 47.7 64.1 13.1 26.2 0.9 21.9 1.6 0.4 6.4 6.4 33.4 844.9 728.7         Dec 47.7 68.7 15.7 27.7 1.0 22.2 1.6 0.4 3.3 3.3 33.0 826.4 716.6
2003          Jan 46.9 64.5 12.7 26.9 1.0 21.8 1.7 0.4 8.6 8.6 35.5 817.6 702.1
         Feb 48.3 67.2 14.8 28.0 0.7 21.7 1.7 0.4 10.9 10.9 36.8 825.8 710.3         Mar 46.6 65.9 14.5 27.1 0.7 21.6 1.6 0.3 11.2 11.2 37.4 819.4 701.0
         Apr 45.5 63.1 14.1 24.9 0.7 21.5 1.6 0.3 11.3 11.3 37.2 818.7 699.8
         May 47.7 67.8 14.8 28.9 0.7 21.5 1.6 0.3 12.3 12.3 37.7 814.0 698.7         Jun 48.1 70.5 17.4 28.4 0.7 22.1 1.6 0.3 10.8 10.8 37.1 819.6 699.7
         Jul 45.3 66.3 14.0 27.9 0.6 21.9 1.6 0.3 10.9 10.9 36.8 822.7 696.4
         Aug 46.0 65.0 14.0 27.1 0.6 21.2 1.7 0.3 12.4 12.4 36.3 821.8 688.4         Sep 46.3 62.5 13.9 24.7 0.7 21.2 1.7 0.3 15.6 15.6 36.2 825.6 689.8
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building securities issued. —6After deduction of inter-MFI participations. —7The
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank German contributions to the Eurosystem ’s monetary aggregates should on
and national central banks (the Eurosystem). —1Source: ECB. —2In no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and are
Germany: only savings deposits. —3Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the therefore not comparable to the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2 or
German contribution: excluding German MFIs ’portfolios of securities issued M3. —8From 2003, including DM banknotes still in circulation (see also foot-
by MFIs in the euro area. —4In Germany, bank debt securities with note 4 on p 10*). —9For the German contribution: the difference between
maturities of up to one year are classed as money market paper; up to the the volume of euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the
January 2002 Monthly Report they were published in this table together amount disclosed in accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the
with money market fund shares. —5Excluding liabilities arising from Eurosystem (see also footnote 3 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). —
12*II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
 
   
 
 Memo item
 Other liability items Monetary aggregates  7  (For
 German contribution: From 2002
issued (net)  3 excluding currency in circulation)
With maturities of
of which Monetary
Intra- liabilities
Eurosystem- of centralliability/ govern-
over Liabilities Excess claim Monetary ments1 year and to non- Capital of related to capital (Post,
up to up to over euro-area and inter-MFI banknote forma- Office, End of1 year  
4 2 years 2 years residents  5 reseves  6 liabilities Total  8 issue  9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12 tion 13 year/month Treasury)  14 
European monetary union (  5  billion) 1
 
... ... 1,586.2 2,623.2 959.9 − 8.6 1,489.4 − 2,066.7 4,449.0 5,199.9 3,827.5 141.9 2001          Aug
... ... 1,604.7 2,643.4 970.4 18.7 1,541.4 − 2,124.7 4,496.3 5,250.8 3,856.5 141.7          Sep
... ... 1,617.0 2,665.2 981.1 5.5 1,588.7 − 2,111.6 4,499.1 5,275.9 3,877.9 143.7          Oct
... ... 1,606.6 2,729.9 982.6 10.4 1,632.4 − 2,144.3 4,549.8 5,328.6 3,866.6 145.3          Nov
... ... 1,613.6 2,723.0 995.2 − 8.5 1,551.8 − 2,207.9 4,667.7 5,430.2 3,893.7 153.9          Dec
... ... 1,632.9 2,759.4 1,007.5 2.0 1,573.6 − 2,168.4 4,639.2 5,414.0 3,925.9 157.5 2002          Jan
... ... 1,638.8 2,768.0 1,011.5 1.1 1,538.8 − 2,157.4 4,628.4 5,415.3 3,936.2 158.4          Feb
... ... 1,655.8 2,791.3 1,010.7 1.3 1,496.6 − 2,168.5 4,654.7 5,452.8 3,954.6 159.7          Mar
... ... 1,650.2 2,773.9 1,004.6 − 8.9 1,486.6 − 2,207.2 4,690.6 5,490.9 3,940.1 160.5          Apr
... ... 1,660.6 2,755.0 1,008.8 − 7.3 1,485.2 − 2,219.3 4,712.4 5,533.8 3,955.7 160.4          May
... ... 1,655.2 2,619.9 985.8 10.7 1,533.6 − 2,277.8 4,752.2 5,553.8 3,929.3 160.6          Jun
... ... 1,670.1 2,648.2 993.4 − 2.9 1,542.7 − 2,255.9 4,742.3 5,546.9 3,950.5 158.9          Jul
... ... 1,687.0 2,616.3 1,004.3 − 0.2 1,525.4 − 2,228.6 4,734.2 5,560.7 3,967.0 161.7          Aug
... ... 1,680.8 2,674.8 1,015.9 − 5.0 1,588.0 − 2,291.1 4,776.1 5,606.1 3,973.4 162.3          Sep
... ... 1,688.7 2,697.9 1,014.0 3.3 1,568.2 − 2,282.2 4,794.4 5,626.3 3,979.4 163.6          Oct
... ... 1,698.9 2,737.7 1,016.2 − 4.0 1,601.5 − 2,341.9 4,858.3 5,696.1 3,994.0 164.6          Nov
... ... 1,689.7 2,627.2 1,006.5 8.8 1,550.8 − 2,425.5 4,964.6 5,788.6 3,991.5 174.5          Dec
... ... 1,684.5 2,662.9 1,016.3 9.7 1,541.0 − 2,342.7 4,906.8 5,782.6 3,996.0 175.3 2003          Jan
... ... 1,693.6 2,714.2 1,009.7 15.1 1,559.8 − 2,350.9 4,931.7 5,821.8 4,003.7 178.1          Feb
... ... 1,704.2 2,694.1 999.8 16.5 1,545.7 − 2,396.9 4,984.0 5,858.2 4,009.8 178.0          Mar
... ... 1,709.7 2,715.1 995.8 − 17.7 1,593.5 − 2,425.7 5,030.0 5,947.4 4,005.6 177.3          Apr
... ... 1,714.2 2,653.4 992.6 − 1.0 1,650.4 − 2,458.7 5,085.3 5,992.8 4,011.1 178.1          May
... ... 1,734.5 2,671.6 996.5 19.7 1,626.4 − 2,501.5 5,106.3 5,989.8 4,037.3 164.8          Jun
... ... 1,756.7 2,681.2 997.5 10.0 1,584.3 − 2,481.4 5,099.3 5,996.2 4,064.6 131.6          Jul
... ... 1,771.0 2,679.8 1,013.1 − 0.6 1,562.4 − 2,468.6 5,100.6 5,994.3 4,101.6 132.5          Aug
... ... 1,771.3 2,642.9 1,010.5 3.4 1,631.1 − 2,510.4 5,111.6 5,989.5 4,098.8 131.6          Sep
 German contribution (  5  billion) 
20.1 41.6 750.5 745.8 260.9 − 39.5 319.2 − 579.4 1,319.4 1,411.2 1,801.7 −2001          Aug
20.1 42.6 753.5 746.5 259.6 − 39.5 329.2 − 593.9 1,333.8 1,426.6 1,803.4 −         Sep
20.8 39.6 754.6 747.4 263.0 − 37.5 331.6 − 590.7 1,334.3 1,432.0 1,805.4 −         Oct
19.0 42.4 733.6 736.7 264.4 − 21.8 333.7 − 611.1 1,353.7 1,447.7 1,783.4 −         Nov
20.4 44.5 729.5 702.1 265.3 10.6 317.7 − 601.6 1,367.0 1,466.9 1,781.7 −         Dec
25.6 35.1 738.2 724.3 267.2 − 0.1 384.0 11.6 520.0 1,277.7 1,372.3 1,790.8 −2002          Jan
25.8 37.6 741.2 721.4 272.1 − 0.6 381.8 8.2 519.4 1,273.1 1,371.9 1,798.9 −         Feb
26.3 37.7 751.2 722.2 272.4 − 2.7 382.5 11.6 516.7 1,271.9 1,371.2 1,811.4 −         Mar
27.0 38.7 747.1 730.0 270.0 − 1.1 384.0 12.9 525.7 1,268.7 1,369.1 1,801.3 −         Apr
28.9 39.4 745.9 730.3 269.8 − 8.2 391.6 15.7 531.4 1,277.5 1,382.2 1,797.8 −         May
26.8 38.1 743.9 687.4 265.5 − 24.8 399.9 16.7 544.6 1,290.0 1,390.4 1,790.1 −         Jun
26.0 38.7 752.7 705.4 267.7 − 39.0 405.0 18.8 539.7 1,283.4 1,382.7 1,801.9 −         Jul
28.4 37.5 774.2 698.7 272.4 − 50.5 410.3 22.0 534.5 1,282.0 1,385.1 1,814.5 −         Aug
28.4 36.8 775.9 713.6 274.4 − 48.6 425.8 24.1 549.6 1,289.2 1,397.9 1,816.9 −         Sep
32.2 37.1 775.2 706.9 272.8 − 42.1 430.1 26.2 550.8 1,299.3 1,411.9 1,815.4 −         Oct
32.1 38.1 774.7 717.3 274.2 − 47.5 437.8 27.6 582.6 1,328.8 1,438.8 1,819.8 −         Nov
32.1 39.0 755.3 661.0 277.7 − 56.9 444.3 29.1 583.5 1,349.2 1,456.6 1,806.8 −         Dec
26.9 37.4 753.4 670.0 283.0 − 50.3 436.6 29.6 574.0 1,339.7 1,448.0 1,809.5 −2003          Jan
34.6 37.7 753.4 679.1 279.5 − 63.2 440.5 31.9 579.5 1,347.5 1,467.5 1,811.1 −         Feb
31.9 36.5 751.0 682.5 280.3 − 48.9 437.6 33.3 586.5 1,350.9 1,467.8 1,809.6 −         Mar
33.5 36.3 748.9 686.4 281.1 − 55.5 444.9 34.2 594.5 1,357.8 1,476.1 1,803.5 −         Apr
32.2 34.1 747.7 666.8 277.5 − 43.6 447.0 36.6 600.7 1,371.8 1,488.0 1,795.1 −         May
33.0 31.6 754.9 661.1 279.0 − 42.6 451.8 37.3 617.5 1,377.9 1,490.4 1,802.6 −         Jun
30.6 31.7 760.4 668.9 280.4 − 63.1 451.5 38.4 605.0 1,366.0 1,476.0 1,812.5 −         Jul
25.7 29.5 766.7 640.6 285.5 − 67.4 450.4 40.8 607.2 1,374.0 1,477.8 1,825.8 −         Aug
26.4 29.3 770.0 639.9 279.8 − 60.1 459.3 42.2 617.3 1,370.9 1,478.3 1,820.9 −         Sep
10Currency in circulation (from 2002, euro currency in circulation; up to calculated by adding to this total the item “Intra-Eurosystem liability/claim
end-2002, including national banknotes and coins still in circulation), related to banknote issue “.—11M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities
overnight deposits (excluding central governments ’deposits), and (for the of up to 2 years and at agreed notice of up to 3 months (excluding central
euro area) central governments ’overnight monetary liabilities, which are governments ’deposits) and (for the euro area) central governments ’
not included in the consolidated balance sheet. From 2002 the German monetary liabilities with such maturities. —12M2 plus repo transactions,
contribution includes the euro banknote volume put into circulation by the money market fund shares, money market paper and debt securities up to 2Bundesbank in accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the years. —13Deposits with agreed maturities of over 2 years and at agreed
Eurosystem (see footnote 3 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). The notice of over 3 months, debt securities with maturities of over 2 years,volume of currency actually put into circulation by the Bundesbank can be capital and reserves. — 14 Non-existent in Germany. 
13*II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  European  monetary  union
  
 3  Banking system ’s liquidity position  * 
Stocks
  
 5  billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions ‘
current
account
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (includingmaintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Baseperiod currency operations operations facility operations facility operations deposits (net)  
4 reserves)  5 money  6 circulation  3 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2001          Apr 382.1 172.4 58.4 2.2 − 0.5 − 354.6 49.5 89.1 121.4 476.4
         May 384.4 144.0 59.1 0.4 17.0 0.6 − 352.7 39.4 87.5 124.8 478.1
         Jun 385.0 161.7 59.1 0.2 − 0.4 − 351.1 41.3 87.5 125.7 477.3
         Jul 397.6 161.9 59.9 0.2 − 0.4 − 350.8 42.5 98.8 127.1 478.3
         Aug 402.1 164.0 60.0 0.1 − 0.2 − 347.6 48.8 101.8 127.8 475.6
         Sep 401.3 147.1 60.0 0.5 3.5 0.4 − 335.4 45.2 105.4 126.1 461.9
         Oct 389.9 136.7 60.0 1.1 − 0.1 − 325.2 43.6 93.6 125.1 450.4
         Nov 385.0 132.3 60.0 0.2 − 0.3 − 311.3 46.1 93.1 126.7 438.3
         Dec 383.7 122.5 60.0 0.5 12.4 0.8 − 298.0 43.5 109.3 127.4 426.2
2002          Jan 385.2 118.5 60.0 0.4 3.7 0.6 − 344.3 38.3 54.2 130.4 475.2
         Feb 386.0 127.3 60.0 0.2 − 0.1 − 306.2 49.6 85.2 132.6 438.8
         Mar 386.7 114.6 60.0 0.2 − 0.1 − 283.3 54.2 91.8 132.1 415.6
         Apr 395.4 112.7 60.0 0.4 − 0.2 − 285.9 55.9 95.3 131.2 417.3
         May 397.7 110.6 60.0 0.1 − 0.3 − 293.7 49.2 93.5 131.7 425.6
         Jun 396.2 112.6 60.0 0.5 − 0.4 − 300.8 45.1 91.2 131.8 433.0
         Jul 369.1 130.4 60.0 0.2 − 0.2 − 313.4 54.4 60.3 131.4 445.0
         Aug 360.0 139.2 55.2 0.1 − 0.1 − 322.7 50.9 50.8 129.9 452.8
         Sep 362.3 140.9 50.8 0.1 − 0.2 − 323.6 49.1 51.7 129.6 453.4
         Oct 370.0 146.1 45.3 0.1 − 0.1 − 329.2 45.6 58.2 128.3 457.6
         Nov 372.1 147.5 45.0 0.1 − 0.1 − 334.0 42.8 58.6 129.3 463.4
         Dec 371.5 168.1 45.0 1.1 2.0 0.2 − 350.7 51.7 55.5 129.5 480.5
2003          Jan 360.9 176.3 45.0 0.5 − 0.3 − 353.9 43.7 53.3 131.6 485.8
         Feb 356.4 168.6 45.0 0.3 − 0.3 − 340.7 50.2 48.0 131.1 472.2
         Mar 352.5 179.5 45.0 0.2 − 0.1 − 347.8 59.1 40.6 129.6 477.5
         Apr 337.4 179.4 45.0 0.1 − 0.2 − 358.5 52.1 20.5 130.6 489.3
         May 333.1 177.1 45.0 0.4 − 0.2 0.1 366.2 42.6 15.5 130.9 497.3
         Jun 331.3 194.7 45.0 0.4 − 0.3 0.2 373.2 52.6 13.2 131.9 505.3
         Jul 320.4 204.7 45.0 0.4 − 0.3 − 382.7 52.4 2.9 132.2 515.2
         Aug 315.8 213.4 45.0 0.2 − 0.1 − 391.6 51.5 −1.6 132.8 524.6
         Sep 315.0 214.0 45.0 0.1 − 0.6 − 391.7 54.4 −4.4 132.0 524.2
         Oct 321.3 208.4 45.0 0.1 − 0.2 − 395.5 48.3 −1.1 131.9 527.5
Deutsche Bundesbank
2001          Apr 90.1 84.5 37.4 1.5 − 0.2 − 126.2 0.1 50.7 36.4 162.8
         May 90.0 67.4 37.8 0.2 7.5 0.5 − 124.8 0.1 47.6 37.4 162.7
         Jun 89.7 79.9 37.5 0.1 − 0.3 − 123.6 0.1 45.7 37.5 161.4
         Jul 92.8 85.4 37.0 0.1 − 0.3 − 121.8 0.1 55.5 37.7 159.7
         Aug 94.2 77.0 38.2 0.1 − 0.2 − 119.3 0.1 52.0 37.8 157.3
         Sep 93.7 73.3 38.9 0.1 1.3 0.1 − 115.4 0.1 54.6 37.1 152.7
         Oct 91.3 66.3 40.2 0.5 − 0.1 − 110.8 0.1 50.1 37.3 148.2
         Nov 89.8 68.2 38.5 0.2 − 0.2 − 104.6 0.1 53.8 38.0 142.9
         Dec 89.4 62.4 40.1 0.2 5.0 0.5 − 96.6 0.1 67.1 37.8 134.9
2002          Jan 89.9 63.3 41.1 0.3 1.4 0.3 − 91.7 0.1 64.9 39.0 131.0
         Feb 89.9 63.3 42.4 0.1 − 0.0 − 78.5 0.1 78.6 38.6 117.2
         Mar 90.0 58.5 40.7 0.2 − 0.1 − 79.7 0.1 71.2 38.3 118.1
         Apr 92.3 57.6 40.4 0.3 − 0.2 − 80.8 0.1 71.8 37.9 118.8
         May 92.3 53.1 39.7 0.1 − 0.3 − 83.8 0.1 63.1 38.0 122.0
         Jun 91.6 60.6 38.8 0.1 − 0.3 − 85.4 0.1 67.3 38.1 123.8
         Jul 84.7 67.6 37.1 0.2 − 0.2 − 89.2 0.1 62.0 38.1 127.5
         Aug 82.5 63.1 36.4 0.0 − 0.1 − 92.2 0.1 51.8 37.9 130.2
         Sep 82.4 64.4 32.7 0.1 − 0.1 − 92.4 0.0 49.1 37.9 130.4
         Oct 84.0 69.0 31.7 0.1 − 0.1 − 94.0 0.1 53.0 37.6 131.6
         Nov 84.3 73.2 31.6 0.1 − 0.1 − 94.6 0.1 56.5 37.9 132.6
         Dec 84.4 91.1 33.8 0.9 0.7 0.2 − 99.3 0.1 73.5 37.8 137.3
2003          Jan 82.3 85.1 36.1 0.5 − 0.1 − 98.3 0.1 66.9 38.6 137.0
         Feb 81.4 81.6 36.5 0.2 − 0.3 − 95.5 0.1 65.6 38.3 134.1
         Mar 81.4 90.0 34.9 0.1 − 0.1 − 97.5 0.1 70.9 37.9 135.5
         Apr 78.5 95.6 32.3 0.1 − 0.2 − 100.7 0.1 67.4 38.2 139.1
         May 77.6 98.8 32.4 0.4 − 0.1 0.1 102.5 0.1 68.4 38.1 140.7
         Jun 77.2 112.4 32.9 0.3 − 0.2 0.1 104.4 0.1 79.8 38.3 142.8
         Jul 74.3 115.5 32.4 0.3 − 0.2 − 107.1 0.1 77.1 38.2 145.4
         Aug 73.7 111.0 29.6 0.2 − 0.1 − 109.6 0.1 66.5 38.2 147.9
         Sep 73.9 114.0 29.1 0.1 − 0.4 − 109.8 0.1 69.2 37.7 147.9
         Oct 75.7 106.5 29.7 0.1 − 0.2 − 110.8 0.1 63.4 37.5 148.4
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. —*The banking system ’s liquidity notes and other banknotes which have been issued by the national central
position is defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro-area banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in circulation. In accordancecredit institutions with the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the conso- with the accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for the issue oflidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statement euro banknotes, 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulationof the Bundesbank. —1The reserve maintenance period of the ESCB ’s are allocated on a monthly basis to the ECB. The counterpart of this adjust-
minimum reserve system starts on the 24th of each month and ends on the ment is shown under “Other factors ”. The remaining 92% of the value of
23rd of the following month. —2Source: ECB. —3From 2002, euro bank- the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly basis,
14*II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  European  monetary  union

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  European  monetary  union
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions ‘
current
account
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserveand foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenancecurrency operations operations facility operations facility operations deposits (net)  
4 reserves)  5 money  6 period circulation  3 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
+ 6.5 −12.8 + 4.3 + 1.8 −− 0.0 − + 1.6 − 3.5 + 1.4 + 0.4 + 1.9 2001          Apr
+ 2.3 −28.4 + 0.7 −1.8 + 17.0 + 0.1 −− 1.9 −10.1 −1.6 + 3.4 + 1.7          May
+ 0.6 + 17.7 + 0.0 −0.2 − 17.0 −0.2 −− 1.6 + 1.9 + 0.0 + 0.9 − 0.8          Jun
+ 12.6 + 0.2 + 0.8 + 0.0 − + 0.0 −− 0.3 + 1.2 + 11.3 + 1.4 + 1.0          Jul
+ 4.5 + 2.1 + 0.1 −0.1 −− 0.2 −− 3.2 + 6.3 + 3.0 + 0.7 − 2.7          Aug
− 0.8 −16.9 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 3.5 + 0.2 −− 12.2 − 3.6 + 3.6 − 1.7 − 13.7          Sep
−11.4 −10.4 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 3.5 −0.3 −− 10.2 − 1.6 −11.8 − 1.0 − 11.5          Oct
− 4.9 − 4.4 − 0.0 −0.9 − + 0.2 −− 13.9 + 2.5 −0.5 + 1.6 − 12.1          Nov
− 1.3 − 9.8 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 12.4 + 0.5 −− 13.3 − 2.6 + 16.2 + 0.7 − 12.1          Dec
+ 1.5 − 4.0 − 0.0 −0.1 − 8.7 −0.2 − + 46.3 − 5.2 −55.1 + 3.0 + 49.0 2002          Jan
+ 0.8 + 8.8 + 0.0 −0.2 − 3.7 −0.5 −− 38.1 + 11.3 + 31.0 + 2.2 − 36.4          Feb
+ 0.7 −12.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 − + 0.0 −− 22.9 + 4.6 + 6.6 − 0.5 − 23.2          Mar
+ 8.7 − 1.9 − 0.0 + 0.2 − + 0.1 − + 2.6 + 1.7 + 3.5 − 0.9 + 1.7          Apr
+ 2.3 − 2.1 − 0.0 −0.3 − + 0.1 − + 7.8 − 6.7 −1.8 + 0.5 + 8.3          May
− 1.5 + 2.0 + 0.0 + 0.4 − + 0.1 − + 7.1 − 4.1 −2.3 + 0.1 + 7.4          Jun
−27.1 + 17.8 − 0.0 −0.3 −− 0.2 − + 12.6 + 9.3 −30.9 − 0.4 + 12.0          Jul
− 9.1 + 8.8 − 4.8 −0.1 −− 0.1 − + 9.3 − 3.5 −9.5 − 1.5 + 7.8          Aug
+ 2.3 + 1.7 − 4.4 + 0.0 − + 0.1 − + 0.9 − 1.8 + 0.9 − 0.3 + 0.6          Sep
+ 7.7 + 5.2 − 5.5 −0.0 −− 0.1 − + 5.6 − 3.5 + 6.5 − 1.3 + 4.2          Oct
+ 2.1 + 1.4 − 0.3 + 0.0 −− 0.0 − + 4.8 − 2.8 + 0.4 + 1.0 + 5.8          Nov
− 0.6 + 20.6 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 2.0 + 0.1 − + 16.7 + 8.9 −3.1 + 0.2 + 17.1          Dec
−10.6 + 8.2 + 0.0 −0.6 − 2.0 + 0.1 − + 3.2 − 8.0 −2.2 + 2.1 + 5.3 2003          Jan
− 4.5 − 7.7 + 0.0 −0.2 − + 0.0 −− 13.2 + 6.5 −5.3 − 0.5 − 13.6          Feb
− 3.9 + 10.9 + 0.0 −0.1 −− 0.2 − + 7.1 + 8.9 −7.4 − 1.5 + 5.3          Mar
−15.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 −0.1 − + 0.1 − + 10.7 − 7.0 −20.1 + 1.0 + 11.8          Apr
− 4.3 − 2.3 − 0.0 + 0.3 −− 0.0 + 0.1 + 7.7 − 9.5 −5.0 + 0.3 + 8.0          May
− 1.8 + 17.6 + 0.0 −0.0 − + 0.1 + 0.1 + 7.0 + 10.0 −2.3 + 1.0 + 8.0          Jun
−10.9 + 10.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 −− 0.0 − 0.2 + 9.5 − 0.2 −10.3 + 0.3 + 9.9          Jul
− 4.6 + 8.7 − 0.0 −0.2 −− 0.2 − + 8.9 − 0.9 −4.5 + 0.6 + 9.4          Aug
− 0.8 + 0.6 − 0.0 −0.1 − + 0.5 − + 0.1 + 2.9 −2.8 − 0.8 − 0.4          Sep
+ 6.3 − 5.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 −− 0.4 − + 3.8 − 6.1 + 3.3 − 0.1 + 3.3          Oct
Deutsche Bundesbank
+ 1.0 − 3.1 + 4.3 + 1.3 −− 0.2 −− 0.0 + 0.0 + 3.1 + 0.5 + 0.4 2001          Apr
− 0.1 −17.2 + 0.3 −1.2 + 7.5 + 0.3 −− 1.4 + 0.0 −3.1 + 1.1 − 0.1          May
− 0.3 + 12.5 − 0.3 −0.1 − 7.5 −0.2 −− 1.2 + 0.0 −1.9 + 0.1 − 1.3          Jun
+ 3.2 + 5.5 − 0.5 + 0.0 − + 0.0 −− 1.9 − 0.0 + 9.9 + 0.2 − 1.7          Jul
+ 1.3 − 8.4 + 1.2 −0.1 −− 0.2 −− 2.4 − 0.0 −3.5 + 0.2 − 2.4          Aug
− 0.4 − 3.7 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 1.3 −0.0 −− 3.9 + 0.0 + 2.6 − 0.7 − 4.7          Sep
− 2.4 − 7.0 + 1.3 + 0.4 − 1.3 −0.0 −− 4.7 − 0.0 −4.5 + 0.2 − 4.5          Oct
− 1.5 + 2.0 − 1.7 −0.3 − + 0.2 −− 6.1 + 0.0 + 3.7 + 0.7 − 5.3          Nov
− 0.4 − 5.8 + 1.7 + 0.0 + 5.0 + 0.3 −− 8.1 + 0.0 + 13.3 − 0.1 − 7.9          Dec
+ 0.4 + 0.9 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 3.6 −0.2 −− 4.8 − 0.0 −2.2 + 1.1 − 3.9 2002          Jan
+ 0.0 + 0.1 + 1.3 −0.2 − 1.4 −0.3 −− 13.2 − 0.0 + 13.6 − 0.4 − 13.8          Feb
+ 0.1 − 4.9 − 1.7 + 0.1 − + 0.0 − + 1.2 − 0.0 −7.4 − 0.3 + 0.9          Mar
+ 2.4 − 0.9 − 0.3 + 0.1 − + 0.1 − + 1.0 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.4 + 0.7          Apr
− 0.0 − 4.5 − 0.7 −0.2 − + 0.1 − + 3.0 + 0.0 −8.7 + 0.1 + 3.3          May
− 0.7 + 7.5 − 0.9 + 0.1 −− 0.0 − + 1.6 − 0.0 + 4.2 + 0.2 + 1.8          Jun
− 6.9 + 7.0 − 1.7 + 0.0 −− 0.1 − + 3.8 + 0.0 −5.3 − 0.1 + 3.7          Jul
− 2.2 − 4.5 − 0.7 −0.1 −− 0.1 − + 3.0 − 0.0 −10.2 − 0.2 + 2.7          Aug
− 0.1 + 1.3 − 3.7 + 0.0 − + 0.1 − + 0.2 − 0.0 −2.8 − 0.0 + 0.2          Sep
+ 1.6 + 4.6 − 1.0 + 0.0 −− 0.0 − + 1.5 + 0.0 + 3.9 − 0.3 + 1.2          Oct
+ 0.4 + 4.3 − 0.1 −0.0 −− 0.0 − + 0.7 + 0.0 + 3.5 + 0.3 + 1.0          Nov
+ 0.1 + 17.8 + 2.2 + 0.9 + 0.7 + 0.1 − + 4.7 + 0.0 + 17.1 − 0.2 + 4.6          Dec
− 2.1 − 6.0 + 2.4 −0.5 − 0.7 −0.0 −− 1.0 − 0.0 −6.7 + 0.8 − 0.2 2003          Jan
− 0.9 − 3.4 + 0.4 −0.2 − + 0.1 −− 2.8 − 0.0 −1.2 − 0.3 − 2.9          Feb
+ 0.0 + 8.4 − 1.6 −0.1 −− 0.2 − + 2.0 + 0.0 + 5.2 − 0.4 + 1.4          Mar
− 2.8 + 5.6 − 2.6 −0.1 − + 0.1 − + 3.2 + 0.0 −3.5 + 0.3 + 3.6          Apr
− 0.9 + 3.2 + 0.1 + 0.3 −− 0.0 + 0.1 + 1.8 + 0.0 + 1.0 − 0.1 + 1.6          May
− 0.4 + 13.6 + 0.5 −0.1 − + 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.9 + 0.0 + 11.4 + 0.1 + 2.1          Jun
− 2.9 + 3.1 − 0.4 −0.0 −− 0.0 − 0.1 + 2.7 − 0.0 −2.7 − 0.1 + 2.6          Jul
− 0.6 − 4.6 − 2.8 −0.1 −− 0.1 − + 2.5 + 0.0 −10.5 + 0.1 + 2.5          Aug
+ 0.2 + 3.1 − 0.5 −0.1 − + 0.3 − + 0.2 − 0.0 + 2.6 − 0.5 − 0.0          Sep
+ 1.8 − 7.5 + 0.6 + 0.0 −− 0.2 − + 1.0 − 0.0 −5.7 − 0.2 + 0.6          Oct
to the NCBs, with each NCB showing in its balance sheet the percentage of statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statement of the
the euro banknotes in circulation that corresponds to its paid-up share in Bundesbank. —5Equal to the difference between the sum of liquidity-pro-
the ECB ’s capital. The difference between the value of the euro banknotes viding factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors. —6Calculated as
allocated to an NCB and the value of the euro banknotes which that NCB the sum of the “deposit facility ”,“banknotes in circulation ”and “credit
has put into circulation is likewise shown under “Other factors ”. From 2003 institutions ’current account holdings ”.—7Entry of Greece into the euro
euro banknotes only. —4Remaining items in the consolidated financial area on 1 January, 2001. 
15*II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  European  monetary  union

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1 Assets *
 
 
 5  billion
Claims on non-euro-area Claims on non-euro-area residents denominated
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
On investments, euro-area Balances Claims
reporting external loans residents with banks, arising from
date/ Gold and other denominated security the creditEnd of Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility undermonth  
1 assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
 Eurosystem 2
 
2003 Feb                 28 790.6 130.3 228.3 31.2 197.2 17.3 5.9 5.9 −
         Mar                   7 750.0 130.3 227.9 31.0 196.9 17.4 6.2 6.2 −
                               14 838.9 130.3 226.9 31.0 195.9 17.0 5.5 5.5 −
                               21 802.3 130.3 223.9 31.6 192.4 17.7 5.1 5.1 −
                               28 798.7 130.3 224.1 31.5 192.7 16.8 5.2 5.2 −
         Apr                   4 3 774.4 3 122.7 3 216.9 3 30.8 3 186.1 17.1 4.8 4.8 −
                               11 770.6 122.7 216.0 30.8 185.2 16.7 4.5 4.5 −
                               18 776.5 122.7 215.8 30.7 185.0 16.5 4.6 4.6 −
                               25 800.6 122.3 215.8 31.2 184.5 16.9 4.6 4.6 −
         May                   2 760.4 122.3 214.5 31.2 183.2 16.7 4.6 4.6 −
                                 9 765.1 122.3 214.1 31.3 182.8 17.1 4.8 4.8 −
                               16 771.9 122.3 215.1 31.6 183.5 16.9 4.5 4.5 −
                               23 793.9 122.3 216.2 31.5 184.7 17.2 3.7 3.7 −
                               30 801.4 122.2 214.2 31.5 182.7 17.3 3.4 3.4 −
         Jun                   6 777.1 122.2 213.5 31.4 182.1 16.4 3.5 3.5 −
                               13 801.7 122.2 214.8 31.5 183.3 15.5 3.3 3.3 −
                               20 791.7 122.2 212.0 32.3 179.7 16.8 3.4 3.4 −
                               27 813.6 122.2 212.9 32.2 180.7 17.1 3.4 3.4 −
2003 Jul                   4 3 802.1 3 120.0 3 206.4 3 31.4 3 175.0 3 15.6 4.0 4.0 −
                               11 798.0 120.0 208.4 31.4 177.0 15.0 3.6 3.6 −
                               18 795.3 120.0 205.4 31.4 173.9 15.8 4.4 4.4 −
                               25 828.5 119.9 204.0 31.4 172.6 15.2 4.4 4.4 −
         Aug                   1 802.9 120.0 204.0 31.5 172.5 15.2 4.3 4.3 −
                                 8 812.6 120.0 203.2 31.9 171.3 15.2 4.4 4.4 −
                               15 798.4 120.0 203.0 31.9 171.1 14.7 4.4 4.4 −
                               22 800.2 119.8 202.2 31.9 170.3 14.8 4.8 4.8 −
                               29 814.8 119.8 203.5 31.9 171.5 15.2 4.6 4.6 −
         Sep                   5 809.5 119.8 201.5 32.0 169.5 15.2 4.4 4.4 −
                               12 804.4 119.8 202.6 32.5 170.1 14.6 4.5 4.5 −
                               19 813.6 119.8 199.6 32.5 167.1 16.4 4.5 4.5 −
                               26 829.2 119.7 202.4 32.3 170.1 14.8 4.6 4.6 −
         Oct                   3 3 813.6 3 130.8 3 201.0 3 32.2 3 168.8 15.1 5.0 5.0 −
                               10 815.9 130.8 200.8 32.2 168.6 15.8 4.7 4.7 −
                               17 803.7 130.8 198.3 32.3 166.0 15.8 4.9 4.9 −
                               24 812.5 130.8 198.0 32.2 165.8 16.4 5.1 5.1 −
                               31 818.6 130.8 199.7 32.1 167.5 15.4 5.0 5.0 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2001          Dec 3 239.9 3 35.0 3 58.2 3 8.7 3 49.5 − 0.3 0.3 −
2002          Jan 230.6 35.0 60.0 8.8 51.2 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Feb 221.4 35.0 59.9 8.8 51.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Mar 3 227.4 3 38.5 3 59.6 3 8.8 3 50.8 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Apr 205.3 38.5 58.0 8.3 49.6 − 0.3 0.3 −
         May 218.3 38.5 56.6 8.4 48.2 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Jun 3 217.9 3 35.4 3 51.2 8.8 3 42.4 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Jul 211.3 35.4 51.8 8.8 43.0 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Aug 218.3 35.4 50.9 8.7 42.2 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Sep 3 221.9 3 36.2 3 52.7 8.8 3 44.0 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Oct 226.4 36.2 52.1 8.6 43.5 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Nov 229.9 36.2 53.0 8.6 44.4 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Dec 3 240.0 36.2 3 48.8 8.3 3 40.5 − 0.3 0.3 −
2003          Jan 233.9 36.2 48.9 8.2 40.7 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Feb 236.2 36.2 49.2 8.2 41.0 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Mar 3 239.2 3 34.1 3 48.4 8.3 3 40.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Apr 230.5 34.1 47.0 8.2 38.7 − 0.3 0.3 −
         May 258.1 34.1 47.8 8.3 39.6 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Jun 3 258.2 3 33.4 3 45.0 8.3 3 36.7 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Jul 246.9 33.4 44.8 8.3 36.5 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Aug 248.9 33.4 45.5 8.3 37.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Sep 3 257.5 3 36.5 3 44.7 8.5 3 36.2 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Oct 257.6 36.5 45.0 8.5 36.5 − 0.3 0.3 −
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the (NCBs). —The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold and
financial statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial financial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quarter. —
statements of the national central banks of the euro-area member states
16*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Lending to euro-area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations
denominated in euro
 Other claims on euro-area credit Securities General    On
Credits institutions of euro-area government    reporting
Main Longer-term Fine-tuning Structural Marginal related denomi- residents debt    date/refinancing refinancing reverse reverse lending to margin nated in denominated denominated Other    End of
Total operations operations operations operations facility calls euro in euro in euro assets    month  
1 
Eurosystem 2
 
223.2 178.0 45.0 −− 0.1 0.0 0.6 33.5 44.4 107.2 2003 Feb                 28
182.2 137.1 45.0 −− 0.1 0.0 0.9 33.5 44.3 107.2          Mar                   7
270.1 225.1 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.5 36.7 44.3 107.5                                14
234.9 189.0 45.0 −− 0.9 0.0 0.3 37.8 44.3 107.8                                21
232.0 187.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.3 38.1 44.3 107.4                                28
220.0 175.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.3 38.8 44.3 3 109.6          Apr                   4
217.1 172.0 45.0 −− 0.1 0.0 0.2 39.7 44.3 109.4                                11
223.0 178.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.1 39.8 44.3 109.7                                18
247.0 202.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.1 40.2 44.3 109.5                                25
208.0 163.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.1 40.3 44.3 109.6          May                   2
212.0 167.0 45.0 −−− 0.0 0.2 40.5 44.3 109.8                                  9
218.1 173.0 45.0 −− 0.1 0.0 0.2 41.0 44.3 109.6                                16
238.1 193.0 45.0 −− 0.1 0.0 0.2 42.3 44.3 109.6                                23
247.4 202.0 45.0 −− 0.3 0.1 0.3 42.3 44.3 110.1                                30
223.5 178.4 45.0 −− 0.1 0.0 0.2 43.1 44.3 110.3          Jun                   6
246.9 201.4 45.0 −− 0.4 0.1 0.3 43.4 44.3 111.0                                13
238.0 191.0 45.0 −− 1.9 0.1 0.3 43.8 44.3 110.9                                20
257.9 212.0 45.0 −− 0.8 0.1 0.2 44.1 44.3 111.3                                27
251.1 206.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.1 0.3 44.1 43.8 3 116.9 2003 Jul                   4
245.1 200.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.3 44.5 43.8 117.4                                11
244.1 199.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.3 44.5 43.8 117.0                                18
277.8 232.0 45.0 −− 0.7 0.0 0.3 46.6 43.8 116.5                                25
252.1 207.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.1 0.2 46.9 43.8 116.5          Aug                   1
262.1 217.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.1 0.2 47.1 43.8 116.5                                  8
250.0 205.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.2 47.2 43.8 115.2                                15
251.7 205.0 45.0 −− 1.7 0.0 0.3 47.9 43.8 114.8                                22
264.1 219.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.3 48.5 43.8 115.1                                29
260.0 215.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.4 49.3 43.8 115.1          Sep                   5
253.0 208.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.3 50.0 43.8 115.7                                12
263.0 218.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.3 50.4 43.8 115.8                                19
276.1 231.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.3 51.2 43.8 116.4                                26
249.3 204.0 45.0 −− 0.3 0.0 0.4 51.2 43.8 3 117.2          Oct                   3
250.0 205.0 45.0 −−− 0.0 0.3 51.9 43.8 117.8                                10
240.3 195.0 45.0 −− 0.2 0.0 0.4 52.4 43.8 117.0                                17
248.0 203.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.4 52.5 43.8 117.5                                24
252.1 207.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.4 53.0 43.8 118.5                                31
 Deutsche Bundesbank
123.0 80.5 41.1 −− 1.4 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.9 2001          Dec
112.3 69.5 42.8 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.6 2002          Jan
103.7 61.7 40.4 −− 1.6 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.1          Feb
106.8 65.7 40.4 −− 0.7 − 0.0 − 4.4 17.7          Mar
86.6 46.7 39.6 −− 0.3 − 0.0 − 4.4 17.5          Apr
101.0 62.3 38.6 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 17.4          May
109.1 71.2 36.9 −− 0.9 − 0.0 − 4.4 17.5          Jun
98.2 61.8 36.4 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 21.2          Jul
100.3 68.3 32.0 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 26.9          Aug
104.2 72.4 31.7 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 24.0          Sep
103.9 72.4 31.6 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 29.4          Oct
111.1 77.0 34.0 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 24.8          Nov
125.5 87.1 36.1 −− 2.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 24.8          Dec
124.3 87.5 36.6 −− 0.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.8 2003          Jan
126.3 91.6 34.7 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.7          Feb
130.9 98.4 32.1 −− 0.4 − 0.0 − 4.4 21.1          Mar
125.0 92.5 32.5 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.7          Apr
151.8 118.7 32.9 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.7          May
155.0 122.5 32.4 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 20.1          Jun
144.0 115.1 28.8 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.9          Jul
145.2 116.0 29.1 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 20.1          Aug
151.4 121.5 29.7 −− 0.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 3 20.1          Sep
133.0 101.9 31.1 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 38.4          Oct
 
1For the Eurosystem: financial statement for specific weekly dates; for the month; from 2002, end-of-month financial statement. —2Source: ECB. —
Bundesbank: up to end-2001, financial statement for the last Friday of each 3 Changes are due mainly to revalutions at the end of the quarter. 
17*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
 5  billion
Liabilities to euro-area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro-area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilitiesaccounts to euro-
On (covering Fine- area creditreporting the tuning Deposits institutions Debtdate/ Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related toEnd of Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Othermonth  
1 liabilities Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment lation  2,3 liabilities
 Eurosystem 5
 
2003 Feb                 28 790.6 345.4 125.4 125.3 0.1 −−− 0.1 2.0 70.1 65.2 4.9
         Mar                   7 750.0 350.1 89.5 89.4 0.1 −−− 0.1 2.0 60.2 55.2 5.0
                               14 838.9 350.0 177.4 177.3 0.1 −−− 0.0 2.0 60.1 55.0 5.1
                               21 802.3 350.5 128.6 128.0 0.6 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 72.7 67.5 5.2
                               28 798.7 351.8 129.4 129.4 0.0 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 73.6 68.4 5.2
         Apr                   4 6 774.4 357.8 131.6 131.5 0.1 −− 0.0 0.1 2.0 53.9 48.6 5.3
                               11 770.6 360.2 128.4 128.3 0.0 −− 0.0 0.1 2.0 51.6 46.2 5.4
                               18 776.5 367.6 132.7 132.4 0.2 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 45.0 39.5 5.5
                               25 800.6 363.9 147.5 147.4 0.1 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 59.3 53.9 5.4
         May                   2 760.4 367.4 122.6 122.5 0.1 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 40.1 34.8 5.4
                                 9 765.1 368.1 129.4 129.3 0.1 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 37.7 32.2 5.5
                               16 771.9 366.9 128.6 128.5 0.1 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 46.3 41.0 5.3
                               23 793.9 365.3 126.3 121.7 0.7 3.9 − 0.0 0.0 2.0 69.3 64.1 5.2
                               30 801.4 371.0 134.9 134.8 0.1 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 65.5 60.3 5.2
         Jun                   6 777.1 376.0 112.7 112.7 0.1 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 58.9 53.4 5.5
                               13 801.7 376.5 139.1 139.0 0.1 −−− 0.0 2.0 55.1 49.7 5.4
                               20 791.7 376.0 134.4 134.1 0.3 −−− 0.0 2.0 48.4 42.9 5.5
                               27 813.6 377.2 131.0 130.9 0.1 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 73.0 67.7 5.3
2003 Jul                   4 6 802.1 383.7 133.3 133.2 0.1 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 57.9 52.7 5.3
                               11 798.0 386.2 130.9 130.9 0.0 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 52.1 46.7 5.4
                               18 795.3 386.9 133.8 133.7 0.0 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 45.7 40.4 5.3
                               25 828.5 386.3 142.6 142.5 0.0 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 70.6 65.3 5.3
         Aug                   1 802.9 392.1 126.0 125.9 0.1 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 56.8 51.4 5.4
                                 8 812.6 395.1 134.6 134.6 0.0 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 55.6 50.2 5.3
                               15 798.4 395.0 129.2 129.2 0.0 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 48.7 43.3 5.3
                               22 800.2 390.0 136.2 135.0 1.2 −− 0.0 0.1 2.0 48.8 43.5 5.3
                               29 814.8 390.4 131.0 131.0 0.0 −− 0.0 0.1 2.0 66.9 61.7 5.3
         Sep                   5 809.5 393.9 133.4 133.3 0.1 −− 0.0 0.1 2.0 57.0 51.7 5.3
                               12 804.4 393.6 131.3 131.3 0.0 −− 0.0 0.1 2.0 54.2 48.9 5.4
                               19 813.6 392.1 129.1 128.7 0.5 −− 0.0 0.1 2.0 67.7 62.2 5.5
                               26 829.2 391.5 135.7 135.7 0.0 −−− 0.1 2.0 76.1 70.9 5.2
         Oct                   3 6 813.6 397.6 129.4 129.4 0.0 −−− 0.1 2.0 50.0 44.4 5.6
                               10 815.9 398.0 132.8 132.7 0.1 −− 0.0 0.1 2.0 48.2 42.8 5.4
                               17 803.7 396.8 131.0 130.3 0.7 −− 0.0 0.2 2.0 40.4 35.2 5.3
                               24 812.5 395.4 127.8 127.8 0.0 −− 0.0 0.2 2.0 53.5 48.4 5.2
                               31 818.6 398.4 128.2 128.2 0.0 −− 0.0 0.2 2.0 55.0 49.4 5.6
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2001          Dec 6 239.9 76.5 57.5 57.4 0.1 −−− − − 1.0 0.1 1.0
2002          Jan 230.6 82.5 46.1 46.1 0.0 −−− − − 1.0 0.1 0.9
         Feb 221.4 79.8 41.6 41.5 0.0 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.6
         Mar 6 227.4 80.5 42.0 42.0 0.1 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Apr 205.3 81.7 40.1 38.9 1.2 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.5
         May 218.3 84.1 44.9 44.9 0.0 −−− − − 0.6 0.0 0.6
         Jun 6 217.9 86.9 41.4 41.3 0.1 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Jul 211.3 90.0 40.7 40.6 0.0 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Aug 218.3 90.7 44.3 44.2 0.1 −−− − − 0.5 0.0 0.5
         Sep 6 221.9 92.0 41.0 41.0 0.0 −−− − − 0.6 0.0 0.5
         Oct 226.4 94.2 41.3 41.3 0.0 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Nov 229.9 95.7 41.0 40.9 0.0 −−− − − 0.8 0.1 0.7
         Dec 6 240.0 104.5 44.8 44.8 0.0 −−− − − 0.6 0.0 0.6
2003          Jan 233.9 94.5 40.9 40.8 0.1 −−− − − 0.5 0.0 0.5
         Feb 236.2 96.1 38.1 38.1 0.1 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.5
         Mar 6 239.2 98.1 48.1 48.0 0.0 −−− − − 0.5 0.0 0.4
         Apr 230.5 101.8 36.4 36.3 0.0 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         May 258.1 103.2 36.3 36.2 0.1 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Jun 6 258.2 105.2 38.8 38.8 0.0 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Jul 246.9 108.5 39.6 39.5 0.1 −−− − − 0.5 0.0 0.5
         Aug 248.9 108.6 41.0 41.0 0.0 −−− − − 0.5 0.0 0.4
         Sep 6 257.5 109.2 41.7 41.7 0.0 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Oct 257.6 110.8 42.0 42.0 0.0 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the of each month; from 2002, end-of-month financial statement. —2From
financial statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial 2002, euro banknotes and up to end-2002, banknotes still in circulationstatements of the national central banks of the euro-area member states issued by the national central banks of the Eurosystem (see also footnote(NCBs). —The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold and 4). —3According to the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem on
financial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quar- the issue of euro banknotes, a share of 8% of the total value of the euroter.—1For the Eurosystem: financial statement for specific weekly dates; banknotes in circulation is allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The
for the Bundesbank: up to end-2001, financial statement for the last Friday
18*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Liabilities to non-euro-area
residents denominated inforeign currency
Intra-  
Liabilities Eurosystem  
Liabilities to euro-area Liabilities Counterpart liability     Onto non-euro- residents Deposits, arising of special related to     reportingarea residents denominated balances from the drawing euro-  Capital    date/denominated in foreign and other rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and    End of credit facility
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF issue  
3 accounts reserves    month  1 liabilities  4 
Eurosystem 5
 
8.7 1.0 14.1 14.1 − 6.3 70.2 − 82.8 64.4 2003 Feb                 28
8.7 1.1 14.8 14.8 − 6.3 69.9 − 82.8 64.4          Mar                   7
8.6 1.1 16.1 16.1 − 6.3 70.1 − 82.8 64.5                                14
8.4 1.1 14.7 14.7 − 6.3 70.6 − 82.8 64.5                                21
8.4 1.1 14.5 14.5 − 6.3 64.2 − 82.8 64.5                                28
8.9 1.1 15.4 15.4 − 6.2 65.1 − 6 68.0 64.5          Apr                   4
8.7 1.0 14.6 14.6 − 6.2 65.2 − 68.0 64.6                                11
9.2 1.0 14.3 14.3 − 6.2 65.9 − 68.0 64.6                                18
8.5 1.0 14.1 14.1 − 6.2 65.5 − 68.0 64.7                                25
9.5 1.0 13.0 13.0 − 6.2 65.9 − 67.9 64.7          May                   2
8.9 1.0 13.6 13.6 − 6.2 65.6 − 67.9 64.7                                  9
8.8 1.0 13.6 13.6 − 6.2 65.7 − 67.9 64.7                                16
9.6 1.0 16.0 16.0 − 6.2 65.2 − 67.9 65.0                                23
8.8 1.0 14.0 14.0 − 6.2 64.9 − 67.9 65.0                                30
9.0 1.0 13.7 13.7 − 6.2 64.6 − 67.9 65.0          Jun                   6
9.0 1.0 15.2 15.2 − 6.2 64.6 − 67.9 65.0                                13
10.6 1.0 14.6 14.6 − 6.2 65.7 − 67.9 65.0                                20
8.7 1.0 16.0 16.0 − 6.2 65.5 − 67.9 65.0                                27
8.8 0.9 6 16.4 6 16.4 − 6.0 6 65.8 − 6 62.2 65.0 2003 Jul                   4
8.7 0.9 17.9 17.9 − 6.0 66.0 − 62.2 65.0                                11
8.9 0.9 16.7 16.7 − 6.0 67.1 − 62.2 65.0                                18
9.3 0.9 16.6 16.6 − 6.0 66.9 − 62.2 65.0                                25
9.1 0.9 16.3 16.3 − 6.0 66.6 − 62.2 65.0          Aug                   1
9.0 0.8 15.8 15.8 − 6.0 66.4 − 62.2 65.0                                  8
9.4 0.8 14.8 14.8 − 6.0 65.2 − 62.2 65.0                                15
9.3 0.8 14.9 14.9 − 6.0 64.8 − 62.2 65.0                                22
9.4 0.8 16.5 16.5 − 6.0 64.3 − 62.2 65.0                                29
9.7 0.8 15.0 15.0 − 6.0 64.4 − 62.2 65.0          Sep                   5
9.6 0.8 15.0 15.0 − 6.0 64.5 − 62.2 65.0                                12
9.3 0.8 13.8 13.8 − 6.0 65.5 − 62.2 65.0                                19
9.3 0.8 15.4 15.4 − 6.0 65.2 − 62.2 65.0                                26
9.5 0.7 17.2 17.2 − 6.0 6 65.0 − 6 71.2 65.0          Oct                   3
9.4 0.7 17.8 17.8 − 6.0 64.9 − 71.2 65.0                                10
9.5 0.6 15.2 15.2 − 6.0 65.8 − 71.2 65.0                                17
9.4 0.7 15.5 15.5 − 6.0 65.8 − 71.2 65.0                                24
9.6 0.8 16.2 16.2 − 6.0 66.0 − 71.2 65.0                                31
 Deutsche Bundesbank
7.3 0.0 1.4 1.4 − 1.7 47.8 . 6 41.6 5.1 2001          Dec
7.1 0.0 3.3 3.3 − 1.7 30.6 11.6 41.6 5.1 2002          Jan
7.0 0.0 3.2 3.2 − 1.7 32.6 8.2 41.6 5.1          Feb
7.0 0.0 6 3.0 6 3.0 − 1.7 30.9 11.6 6 44.8 5.1          Mar
7.0 0.0 2.4 2.4 − 1.7 9.1 12.9 44.8 5.1          Apr
7.0 0.0 1.6 1.6 − 1.7 12.7 15.7 44.8 5.1          May
6.9 0.0 2.3 2.3 − 1.6 20.9 16.7 6 35.5 5.1          Jun
7.1 0.0 3.0 3.0 − 1.6 8.9 18.8 35.5 5.1          Jul
7.1 0.0 2.3 2.3 − 1.6 9.2 22.0 35.5 5.1          Aug
7.2 0.0 2.8 2.8 − 1.6 10.2 24.1 6 37.3 5.1          Sep
7.1 0.0 2.4 2.4 − 1.6 10.6 26.2 37.3 5.1          Oct
7.1 0.0 3.1 3.1 − 1.6 10.5 27.6 37.3 5.1          Nov
7.1 0.0 1.8 1.8 − 1.6 11.1 29.1 6 34.2 5.0          Dec
7.8 0.0 2.2 2.2 − 1.6 17.6 29.6 34.2 5.0 2003          Jan
7.3 0.0 2.4 2.4 − 1.6 19.1 31.9 34.2 5.0          Feb
7.1 0.0 3.4 3.4 − 1.5 6 11.7 33.3 6 30.4 5.0          Mar
7.1 0.0 2.0 2.0 − 1.5 11.6 34.2 30.4 5.0          Apr
7.3 0.0 2.7 2.7 − 1.5 34.5 36.6 30.4 5.0          May
7.4 0.0 3.2 3.2 − 1.5 31.3 37.3 6 28.2 5.0          Jun
7.3 0.0 3.0 3.0 − 1.5 14.9 38.4 28.2 5.0          Jul
7.4 0.0 3.5 3.5 − 1.5 12.4 40.8 28.2 5.0          Aug
7.3 0.0 3.6 3.6 − 1.5 16.2 42.2 6 30.2 5.0          Sep
7.4 0.0 3.9 3.9 − 1.5 12.9 43.4 30.2 5.0          Oct
 
counterpart of this adjustment is disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem liability according to the aforementioned accounting regime and the value of euro
related to euro-banknote issue “. The remaining 92% of the value of the banknotes put into circulation is also disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem
euro banknotes in circulation is also allocated to the NCBs on a monthly claim/ liability related to banknote issue “.—4For the Deutsche Bundes-
basis, and each NCB shows in its balance sheet the share of the euro bank- bank: from 2003, including DM banknotes still in circulation (see also foot-notes issued which corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB ’s capital. The note 2). —5Source: ECB. —6Changes are due mainly to revaluations at the
difference between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to the NCB end of the quarter. 
19*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Assets
 
 
 Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999,  5  billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area  3 Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other member states to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and indi-viduals
Secur- Secur-
Balance ities itiessheet Cash issued issued
Period total  
2 in hand Total Total Loans  3 by banks Total Loans  3 by banks Total Total Total Loans  3 
 End of year or month
 
1994 7,205.7 26.2 2,030.1 1,854.1 1,285.1 569.1 175.9 145.0 30.9 4,411.4 4,333.2 3,391.3 3,143.2
1995 7,778.7 27.3 2,210.2 2,019.0 1,399.8 619.3 191.2 158.0 33.2 4,723.3 4,635.0 3,548.8 3,298.7
1996 8,540.5 30.3 2,523.0 2,301.1 1,585.7 715.4 221.9 181.2 40.7 5,084.7 4,981.9 3,812.8 3,543.01997 9,368.2 30.7 2,836.0 2,580.7 1,758.6 822.1 255.3 208.8 46.5 5,408.8 5,269.5 4,041.3 3,740.81998 10,355.5 29.9 3,267.4 2,939.4 1,977.4 962.0 328.1 264.9 63.1 5,833.9 5,615.9 4,361.0 3,966.51999 5,678.5 17.2 1,836.9 1,635.0 1,081.4 553.6 201.9 161.8 40.1 3,127.4 2,958.6 2,326.4 2,093.4
2000 6,083.9 16.1 1,977.4 1,724.2 1,108.9 615.3 253.2 184.5 68.6 3,249.9 3,062.6 2,445.7 2,186.6
2001 6,303.1 14.6 2,069.7 1,775.5 1,140.6 634.9 294.2 219.8 74.4 3,317.1 3,084.9 2,497.1 2,235.72002 6,394.2 17.9 2,118.0 1,769.1 1,164.3 604.9 348.9 271.7 77.2 3,340.2 3,092.2 2,505.8 2,240.8
2001          Dec 6,303.1 14.6 2,069.7 1,775.5 1,140.6 634.9 294.2 219.8 74.4 3,317.1 3,084.9 2,497.1 2,235.7
2002          Jan 6,255.1 27.7 2,019.8 1,728.4 1,094.0 634.4 291.4 216.2 75.2 3,310.8 3,075.1 2,487.1 2,225.5
         Feb 6,230.4 19.5 2,004.6 1,725.2 1,084.2 641.0 279.4 202.9 76.5 3,311.9 3,074.7 2,485.5 2,227.3         Mar 6,269.8 16.9 2,033.3 1,744.1 1,096.1 647.9 289.3 213.2 76.1 3,310.6 3,065.5 2,478.9 2,230.3
         Apr 6,267.7 14.9 2,032.8 1,736.5 1,085.8 650.7 296.3 220.2 76.1 3,319.5 3,072.8 2,485.6 2,231.6
         May 6,304.5 14.7 2,055.5 1,749.0 1,096.7 652.2 306.6 230.7 75.8 3,323.3 3,074.2 2,485.6 2,232.0         Jun 6,277.4 14.3 2,073.9 1,758.9 1,111.2 647.6 315.1 238.1 77.0 3,304.8 3,059.5 2,477.9 2,233.2
         Jul 6,265.6 13.8 2,051.7 1,731.9 1,094.9 637.1 319.7 242.3 77.4 3,313.1 3,063.8 2,471.5 2,231.6
         Aug 6,290.6 13.6 2,073.4 1,746.9 1,113.0 634.0 326.5 249.2 77.3 3,310.9 3,064.3 2,480.6 2,231.5         Sep 6,341.1 13.3 2,077.4 1,745.3 1,113.3 632.1 332.0 253.8 78.3 3,323.1 3,074.8 2,490.6 2,242.3
         Oct 6,359.1 14.2 2,078.3 1,741.3 1,117.9 623.5 336.9 257.2 79.7 3,327.8 3,080.9 2,494.9 2,240.6
         Nov 6,453.5 13.2 2,130.2 1,780.8 1,150.6 630.2 349.5 267.3 82.1 3,336.6 3,088.4 2,496.7 2,238.4         Dec 6,394.2 17.9 2,118.0 1,769.1 1,164.3 604.9 348.9 271.7 77.2 3,340.2 3,092.2 2,505.8 2,240.8
2003          Jan 6,380.7 13.2 2,104.3 1,748.5 1,136.2 612.3 355.8 277.0 78.8 3,348.8 3,101.1 2,501.4 2,237.9
         Feb 6,424.9 13.2 2,124.3 1,751.7 1,142.1 611.7 370.5 289.5 81.1 3,347.4 3,097.7 2,501.7 2,239.2         Mar 6,434.8 12.9 2,121.5 1,747.2 1,135.0 614.4 371.9 288.9 83.1 3,346.7 3,100.4 2,498.0 2,238.1
         Apr 6,430.3 13.8 2,107.6 1,732.2 1,118.6 613.6 375.4 291.6 83.8 3,348.8 3,102.2 2,499.1 2,234.6
         May 6,467.7 14.0 2,144.0 1,756.9 1,143.6 613.2 387.1 303.3 83.8 3,347.2 3,101.9 2,499.2 2,232.0         Jun 6,472.9 13.3 2,139.0 1,748.0 1,137.1 610.9 390.9 305.4 85.5 3,330.2 3,089.9 2,502.9 2,239.7
         Jul 6,425.7 13.3 2,113.5 1,728.1 1,109.7 618.4 385.3 297.4 88.0 3,330.2 3,093.7 2,494.1 2,231.1
         Aug 6,395.1 13.5 2,105.5 1,720.3 1,104.5 615.8 385.2 296.8 88.3 3,318.3 3,084.7 2,495.6 2,231.4         Sep 6,403.1 13.3 2,099.4 1,712.2 1,095.3 616.9 387.2 297.5 89.7 3,332.6 3,089.6 2,504.9 2,245.2
 Changes 1
1995 587.7 1.1 184.6 169.3 114.7 54.6 15.2 13.0 2.3 322.1 312.1 201.2 188.11996 761.8 3.0 312.8 282.1 186.0 96.1 30.7 23.2 7.5 361.5 346.9 264.0 244.31997 825.6 0.5 313.1 279.6 172.9 106.7 33.5 27.6 5.9 324.0 287.5 228.4 197.61998 1,001.0 −0.8 422.2 355.7 215.1 140.6 66.4 56.2 10.2 440.4 363.3 337.5 245.2
1999 452.6 1.8 179.8 140.1 81.4 58.6 39.8 26.3 13.5 206.6 158.1 156.8 126.4
2000 401.5 −1.2 143.0 91.7 28.1 63.6 51.4 22.8 28.6 123.2 105.4 116.8 89.5
2001 244.9 −1.4 91.0 50.7 30.3 20.5 40.3 34.5 5.8 55.1 23.9 50.4 48.1
2002 165.7 3.3 63.6 6.5 23.7 −17.1 57.1 51.9 5.2 33.6 15.3 16.1 10.4
2002          Jan −51.6 13.0 −49.6 −46.7 −46.6 −0.1 −2.9 − 3.7 0.8 −7.3 −10.4 −10.7 −11.0
         Feb −23.2 −8.2 −15.1 −3.1 −9.8 6.7 −12.0 − 13.3 1.2 1.8 0.1 −1.0 2.0
         Mar 42.2 −2.5 28.9 19.0 11.9 7.1 9.9 10.3 −0.4 −1.0 −8.9 −6.5 3.0
         Apr 7.7 −2.0 −0.9 −8.0 −10.3 2.3 7.1 7.0 0.1 11.0 8.7 8.1 2.3
         May 52.5 −0.2 23.2 12.8 11.1 1.8 10.4 10.5 −0.2 6.6 3.6 2.1 2.4
         Jun −5.8 −0.4 18.3 10.0 14.3 −4.3 8.3 7.4 0.9 −19.8 −17.1 −10.1 −1.1
         Jul −19.9 −0.5 −22.9 −27.5 −16.3 −11.1 4.5 4.2 0.3 7.2 3.6 −7.1 −2.6
         Aug 23.8 −0.2 21.9 15.1 18.1 −3.0 6.8 6.8 −0.0 −1.7 0.9 8.8 0.3
         Sep 51.3 −0.2 4.0 −1.6 0.3 −1.9 5.6 4.6 0.9 12.0 10.2 10.3 10.4
         Oct 20.3 0.9 0.8 −4.1 4.6 −8.7 4.9 3.5 1.5 4.6 6.2 4.4 −1.5
         Nov 97.2 −1.0 52.0 39.4 32.7 6.7 12.6 10.1 2.5 9.4 7.9 2.2 −1.8
         Dec −29.0 4.7 3.0 1.0 13.7 −12.7 1.9 4.4 −2.4 10.9 10.3 15.6 7.8
2003          Jan −13.9 −4.7 −24.3 −30.3 −28.1 −2.2 5.9 5.3 0.7 18.3 17.1 3.7 1.4
         Feb 41.4 0.1 17.2 3.2 5.9 −2.7 14.0 12.5 1.5 −1.6 −3.6 0.1 1.2
         Mar 14.3 −0.4 −2.9 −4.3 −7.1 2.8 1.4 − 0.6 2.1 0.2 3.3 −3.0 −0.5
         Apr 4.5 1.0 −13.7 −17.2 −16.5 −0.8 3.5 2.7 0.8 4.0 3.3 2.3 −2.1
         May 58.9 0.2 36.6 24.8 25.1 −0.3 11.9 11.8 0.1 1.3 1.9 2.3 −0.6
         Jun −5.9 −0.7 −5.2 −8.9 −6.5 −2.4 3.8 2.0 1.7 −18.0 −12.5 3.2 7.2
         Jul −49.6 −0.1 −25.7 −20.1 −27.4 7.3 −5.6 − 8.0 2.4 0.6 4.5 −8.1 −8.1
         Aug −43.7 0.2 −8.1 −7.9 −5.2 −2.7 −0.3 − 0.5 0.3 −13.6 −10.0 0.5 −0.6
         Sep 26.2 −0.2 −5.9 −8.1 −9.2 1.2 2.1 0.7 1.4 17.7 7.4 11.8 16.2
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey “in section data from money market funds. —1Statistical breaks have been eliminated
II. Unlike the other tables in section IV, this table includes −in addition to from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). —2Up to December
the figures reported by banks (including building and loan associations) − 1998, volume of business (balance sheet total plus endorsement liabilities
20*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
IV Banks
 
   
 
 
euro area  3 Claims on
non-euro-area
to non-banks in other member states residents
 Public Enterprises and Public authorities individuals authorities
Secur- Secur- of which Secur- of which Other
ities Total Loans  
3 ities 4 Total Total Loans  3 Total Loans  3 ities Total Loans  3 assets   Period
End of year or month
 
248.1 941.9 650.1 291.8 78.2 39.6 39.6 38.6 8.3 30.3 548.8 479.6 189.2 1994
250.0 1,086.3 792.2 294.1 88.2 39.4 39.2 48.8 11.3 37.6 608.5 526.0 209.4 1995
269.7 1,169.1 857.8 311.4 102.8 36.8 36.8 66.0 17.2 48.8 678.1 575.3 224.4 1996300.6 1,228.2 911.0 317.2 139.2 41.9 41.2 97.3 23.4 73.9 839.6 710.2 253.1 1997394.5 1,254.9 939.1 315.8 218.0 62.5 56.0 155.5 35.6 119.9 922.0 758.0 302.2 1998233.0 632.1 488.4 143.7 168.8 65.3 35.9 103.6 20.7 82.8 511.2 404.2 185.8 1999
259.1 616.9 478.5 138.4 187.3 83.8 44.2 103.5 20.0 83.5 622.4 481.7 218.1 2000
261.3 587.8 468.7 119.1 232.3 111.3 53.7 121.0 26.2 94.8 727.3 572.0 174.3 2001265.0 586.4 448.5 137.9 248.0 125.0 63.6 123.0 25.5 97.5 738.1 589.2 179.9 2002
261.3 587.8 468.7 119.1 232.3 111.3 53.7 121.0 26.2 94.8 727.3 572.0 174.3 2001          Dec
261.6 588.1 469.5 118.5 235.6 113.5 54.7 122.1 25.7 96.4 723.8 569.9 173.1 2002          Jan
258.2 589.2 466.9 122.3 237.2 114.6 56.1 122.6 25.8 96.8 721.8 566.7 172.6          Feb248.6 586.6 464.3 122.3 245.0 118.7 60.1 126.3 26.7 99.6 730.8 574.6 178.3          Mar
254.0 587.2 460.4 126.9 246.7 120.1 61.5 126.6 26.4 100.2 721.2 568.3 179.3          Apr
253.6 588.6 455.2 133.4 249.0 121.3 62.6 127.7 26.0 101.8 734.8 580.6 176.1          May244.6 581.6 450.0 131.6 245.4 118.1 61.5 127.2 26.0 101.2 712.6 559.4 171.7          Jun
239.9 592.3 458.1 134.2 249.3 118.1 59.8 131.2 26.5 104.7 712.9 557.9 174.2          Jul
249.1 583.7 448.5 135.2 246.6 114.3 58.3 132.3 26.9 105.4 722.0 566.9 170.7          Aug248.3 584.2 445.3 138.9 248.3 114.7 59.3 133.6 27.2 106.3 752.3 597.5 174.9          Sep
254.2 586.0 448.3 137.7 246.9 116.4 59.1 130.5 27.6 102.9 762.2 608.7 176.7          Oct
258.2 591.7 449.2 142.5 248.2 118.6 61.0 129.6 28.0 101.6 791.0 634.2 182.4          Nov265.0 586.4 448.5 137.9 248.0 125.0 63.6 123.0 25.5 97.5 738.1 589.2 179.9          Dec
263.4 599.8 453.0 146.7 247.6 121.8 60.5 125.8 26.5 99.3 738.3 591.8 176.2 2003          Jan
262.4 596.0 447.3 148.7 249.7 125.6 64.6 124.1 26.2 97.9 757.7 612.1 182.2          Feb259.9 602.4 444.0 158.4 246.3 126.8 64.5 119.5 26.2 93.3 778.6 630.9 175.1          Mar
264.5 603.1 445.8 157.4 246.6 129.9 66.2 116.7 25.2 91.5 787.6 641.1 172.5          Apr
267.2 602.7 439.8 162.9 245.3 130.7 66.7 114.6 26.5 88.2 792.4 644.3 170.2          May263.2 587.0 434.6 152.4 240.2 126.9 61.9 113.4 24.6 88.7 827.6 668.9 162.8          Jun
263.0 599.6 444.9 154.7 236.5 126.7 62.3 109.8 24.9 84.9 811.5 651.6 157.3          Jul
264.1 589.1 440.6 148.5 233.6 129.2 65.0 104.4 24.1 80.3 801.2 642.0 156.6          Aug259.8 584.6 435.2 149.4 243.1 129.7 64.7 113.4 23.4 90.0 795.8 642.4 161.9          Sep
Changes 1
13.1 110.9 113.1 −2.1 10.0 −0.2 −0.4 10.2 3.0 7.3 59.7 46.3 20.2 1995
19.7 82.9 65.5 17.3 14.6 −2.6 −2.5 17.2 6.0 11.2 69.5 49.3 15.1 1996
30.8 59.1 53.3 5.8 36.5 5.1 4.4 31.4 6.1 25.3 159.4 132.9 28.6 199792.3 25.8 28.1 −2.3 77.1 18.9 13.0 58.3 12.5 45.7 83.9 52.0 55.3 1998
30.4 1.3 7.7 −6.4 48.4 12.2 6.4 36.2 2.0 34.2 33.1 13.8 31.3 1999
27.3 −11.4 −6.7 −4.6 17.8 16.8 7.2 1.0 −0.3 1.2 103.9 71.9 32.5 2000
2.4 −26.5 −9.8 −16.7 31.3 24.3 7.7 7.0 2.2 4.8 110.1 86.6 −9.9 2001
5.7 −0.8 −20.2 19.4 18.3 15.9 12.0 2.4 −0.6 3.0 65.7 64.1 −0.4 2002
0.3 0.3 0.8 −0.5 3.0 2.1 0.9 1.0 −0.6 1.5 −6.4 −6.4 −1.2 2002          Jan
−3.0 1.2 −2.6 3.8 1.6 1.1 1.3 0.5 0.1 0.4 −1.2 −2.7 −0.4          Feb
−9.6 −2.4 −2.6 0.2 7.9 4.1 4.1 3.8 1.0 2.8 11.3 11.5 5.6          Mar
5.7 0.6 −3.9 4.5 2.2 1.8 1.7 0.5 −0.2 0.7 −1.2 1.1 0.8          Apr
−0.3 1.6 −5.1 6.7 3.0 1.6 1.5 1.4 −0.3 1.6 25.8 23.0 −3.0          May
−9.0 −7.0 −5.1 −1.9 −2.7 −2.6 −0.5 −0.2 0.2 −0.4 0.6 −0.3 −4.5          Jun
−4.5 10.7 8.1 2.6 3.5 −0.3 −2.0 3.8 0.4 3.4 −6.1 −7.1 2.5          Jul
8.5 −7.9 −9.6 1.7 −2.6 −3.0 −0.9 0.4 −0.1 0.5 7.4 7.1 −3.5          Aug
−0.1 −0.1 −3.2 3.1 1.8 0.5 1.1 1.3 0.4 0.9 31.2 31.4 4.3          Sep
5.9 1.8 3.1 −1.2 −1.6 1.4 −0.2 −3.0 0.4 −3.4 12.2 11.8 1.7          Oct
4.0 5.7 0.9 4.8 1.4 2.3 2.0 −0.9 0.4 −1.3 31.1 27.5 5.7          Nov
7.8 −5.3 −0.8 −4.6 0.6 6.9 3.1 −6.3 −2.3 −4.0 −39.1 −32.8 −8.4          Dec
2.3 13.4 4.6 8.8 1.2 −1.8 −2.7 3.0 1.1 2.0 8.7 10.1 −11.8 2003          Jan
−1.0 −3.7 −5.7 2.0 2.0 3.8 4.1 −1.8 −0.3 −1.4 19.8 20.7 6.0          Feb
−2.5 6.4 −3.3 9.7 −3.2 1.3 0.0 −4.5 0.1 −4.5 24.5 21.9 −7.2          Mar
4.4 1.0 1.8 −0.9 0.7 3.4 1.9 −2.7 −1.0 −1.7 15.9 16.3 −2.6          Apr
2.9 −0.4 −5.9 5.5 −0.6 1.0 1.0 −1.6 1.5 −3.1 21.5 18.8 −0.7          May
−4.0 −15.7 −5.2 −10.5 −5.6 −4.1 −5.1 −1.4 −1.9 0.5 25.2 16.1 −7.3          Jun
0.0 12.6 10.3 2.3 −3.9 −0.3 0.3 −3.6 0.3 −3.9 −18.6 −19.0 −5.9          Jul
1.1 −10.5 −4.3 −6.2 −3.6 2.2 2.4 −5.8 −0.9 −4.8 −21.0 −19.0 −1.2          Aug
−4.3 −4.4 −5.4 0.9 10.3 1.0 0.3 9.3 −0.5 9.9 10.2 14.5 4.4          Sep
and bills sent for collection from the banks ’portfolios prior to maturity) and bill-based lending instead of bill holdings. —4Including debt securities
trust funds. —3Up to December 1998, including fiduciary loans and arising from the exchange of equalisation claims. 
21*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Liabilities
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999,  5  billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area  4 
in the euro area  3 
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities  5 notice  6 
 
Balance in the in other of which of which
sheet home member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total  2 Total country states Total Total night Total  4 Total 3 months Total night 2 years  7 
 
1994 7,205.7 1,650.9 1,483.5 167.4 3,082.7 2,894.4 510.4 1,288.3 549.2 1,095.8 654.6 80.1 4.1
1995 7,778.7 1,761.5 1,582.0 179.6 3,260.0 3,038.9 549.8 1,289.0 472.0 1,200.1 749.5 110.1 4.5
1996 8,540.5 1,975.3 1,780.2 195.1 3,515.9 3,264.0 638.1 1,318.5 430.6 1,307.4 865.7 137.3 7.51997 9,368.2 2,195.6 1,959.1 236.5 3,647.1 3,376.2 654.5 1,364.9 426.8 1,356.9 929.2 162.5 7.31998 10,355.5 2,480.3 2,148.9 331.4 3,850.8 3,552.2 751.6 1,411.1 461.6 1,389.6 971.9 187.4 9.41999 5,678.5 1,288.1 1,121.8 166.3 2,012.4 1,854.7 419.5 820.6 247.0 614.7 504.4 111.1 6.5
2000 6,083.9 1,379.4 1,188.9 190.5 2,051.4 1,873.6 441.4 858.8 274.3 573.5 450.5 107.9 6.9
2001 6,303.1 1,418.0 1,202.1 215.9 2,134.0 1,979.7 525.0 880.2 290.6 574.5 461.9 105.2 7.62002 6,394.2 1,478.7 1,236.2 242.4 2,170.0 2,034.9 574.8 884.9 279.3 575.3 472.9 87.4 8.1
2001          Dec 6,303.1 1,418.0 1,202.1 215.9 2,134.0 1,979.7 525.0 880.2 290.6 574.5 461.9 105.2 7.62002          Jan 6,255.1 1,375.4 1,153.3 222.2 2,112.2 1,957.1 511.0 872.8 281.4 573.4 464.3 105.0 8.1
         Feb 6,230.4 1,346.3 1,141.7 204.6 2,107.5 1,955.2 510.5 872.7 278.8 572.0 463.9 102.9 8.2         Mar 6,269.8 1,371.2 1,157.9 213.3 2,108.5 1,954.0 508.0 875.2 278.4 570.8 463.8 105.1 8.1
         Apr 6,267.7 1,362.1 1,129.9 232.1 2,099.9 1,948.3 515.1 871.3 274.5 561.8 456.7 104.1 10.1
         May 6,304.5 1,382.7 1,150.7 232.0 2,107.1 1,957.8 523.5 874.3 277.0 560.1 456.1 101.1 7.4         Jun 6,277.4 1,392.3 1,174.8 217.4 2,118.7 1,970.2 535.6 875.7 278.3 558.9 455.1 99.9 8.5
         Jul 6,265.6 1,371.7 1,149.6 222.1 2,111.9 1,964.9 531.2 876.2 278.0 557.5 453.6 99.5 8.0
         Aug 6,290.6 1,389.2 1,165.7 223.5 2,098.3 1,962.0 526.7 877.6 280.7 557.8 453.8 87.4 7.3         Sep 6,341.1 1,400.2 1,172.1 228.1 2,105.1 1,967.6 540.3 869.1 272.6 558.3 454.7 87.5 8.8
         Oct 6,359.1 1,419.4 1,177.2 242.2 2,114.5 1,979.6 542.0 877.8 279.0 559.7 456.9 86.6 8.2
         Nov 6,453.5 1,460.0 1,214.3 245.7 2,146.5 2,008.8 571.8 874.6 273.2 562.4 460.2 90.1 10.0         Dec 6,394.2 1,478.7 1,236.2 242.4 2,170.0 2,034.9 574.8 884.9 279.3 575.3 472.9 87.4 8.1
2003          Jan 6,380.7 1,457.2 1,213.2 244.0 2,160.0 2,024.7 564.4 882.9 275.8 577.4 477.0 88.5 9.1
         Feb 6,424.9 1,466.4 1,224.6 241.9 2,173.4 2,036.7 571.1 886.4 272.1 579.2 479.9 88.5 8.0         Mar 6,434.8 1,471.5 1,218.2 253.2 2,175.3 2,040.7 578.3 883.1 266.2 579.3 481.6 88.0 7.7
         Apr 6,430.3 1,455.5 1,200.9 254.6 2,176.2 2,044.3 585.8 880.6 264.8 577.9 482.7 86.5 8.2
         May 6,467.7 1,508.5 1,253.9 254.6 2,188.9 2,053.8 591.4 885.3 270.9 577.1 483.4 87.4 8.8         Jun 6,472.9 1,509.2 1,252.8 256.4 2,194.2 2,059.3 608.2 874.5 260.2 576.7 484.4 86.7 9.0
         Jul 6,425.7 1,457.9 1,207.6 250.3 2,182.5 2,051.4 595.2 879.5 259.0 576.8 486.5 85.7 9.3
         Aug 6,395.1 1,450.5 1,198.0 252.5 2,193.0 2,061.5 597.8 885.7 261.3 578.0 489.3 85.5 8.9         Sep 6,403.1 1,451.2 1,188.3 262.9 2,187.8 2,057.4 607.3 871.8 248.1 578.3 490.2 84.2 9.6
 Changes 1
1995 587.7 110.7 98.5 12.2 189.3 156.5 47.2 4.9 −76.5 104.3 99.1 30.0 0.4
1996 761.8 213.7 198.2 15.5 256.0 225.2 88.3 29.5 −41.4 107.3 116.2 27.2 3.0
1997 825.6 223.7 185.5 38.3 130.8 112.1 16.3 46.4 −3.8 49.4 60.3 25.0 −0.3
1998 1,001.0 277.0 182.8 94.2 205.9 176.8 97.8 46.3 34.8 32.7 42.0 26.2 2.01999 452.6 70.2 66.4 3.7 75.0 65.6 34.2 36.7 13.5 −5.3 7.4 7.5 1.7
2000 401.5 87.5 66.0 21.5 38.7 19.8 22.5 37.8 27.0 −40.5 −53.6 −4.2 0.3
2001 244.9 32.4 8.4 24.0 80.6 105.2 83.0 21.2 16.2 1.1 11.4 −4.0 0.4
2002 165.7 58.4 32.5 25.9 53.0 57.0 50.3 5.9 −11.0 0.8 11.0 −2.6 0.6
2002          Jan −51.6 −42.6 −48.9 6.3 −22.3 −22.8 −14.2 −7.5 −9.2 −1.2 2.4 −0.4 0.4
         Feb −23.2 −29.1 −11.5 −17.6 −4.7 −1.9 −0.4 −0.0 −2.6 −1.4 −0.4 −2.2 0.1
         Mar 42.2 24.9 16.2 8.7 1.2 −1.1 −2.5 2.5 −0.5 −1.2 −0.1 2.4 −0.1
         Apr 7.7 −9.2 −28.0 18.8 −7.9 −5.4 7.4 −3.8 −3.8 −9.0 −7.1 −0.6 1.9
         May 52.5 20.9 21.1 −0.1 9.2 11.0 8.8 3.9 3.2 −1.7 −0.6 −2.5 −2.6
         Jun −5.8 6.9 22.2 −15.3 11.9 12.1 12.0 1.3 1.3 −1.2 −1.0 −0.6 1.2
         Jul −19.9 −20.5 −25.2 4.6 −7.4 −5.6 −4.6 0.4 −0.4 −1.4 −1.5 −0.7 −0.6
         Aug 23.8 17.5 16.1 1.5 0.0 −2.8 −4.5 1.4 2.7 0.3 0.1 1.5 −0.7
         Sep 51.3 10.9 6.4 4.6 6.4 5.2 13.3 −8.6 −8.5 0.5 1.0 0.2 1.5
         Oct 20.3 19.2 5.1 14.1 9.6 12.2 1.8 9.0 6.4 1.4 2.2 −0.9 −0.6
         Nov 97.2 40.6 37.1 3.5 32.3 29.4 29.8 −3.2 −5.8 2.7 3.3 3.5 1.8
         Dec −29.0 18.7 22.0 −3.3 24.6 26.7 3.4 10.5 6.3 12.8 12.6 −2.2 −1.9
2003          Jan −13.9 −21.4 −23.0 1.6 −14.2 −13.7 −10.1 −5.7 −4.2 2.1 4.1 0.3 0.9
         Feb 41.4 9.2 11.3 −2.2 9.6 7.1 6.7 −1.4 −3.7 1.8 3.0 1.1 −0.9
         Mar 14.3 5.0 −6.3 11.3 2.1 4.1 7.4 −3.3 −5.9 0.1 1.7 −0.3 −0.3
         Apr 4.5 −16.0 −17.4 1.4 1.6 3.9 7.7 −2.4 −1.4 −1.4 1.1 −1.2 0.5
         May 58.9 50.3 50.3 −0.0 13.9 10.2 6.1 4.9 6.3 −0.8 0.7 1.5 0.7
         Jun −5.9 0.8 −1.1 1.8 4.6 5.1 16.4 −10.9 −10.8 −0.4 1.0 −0.9 −0.0
         Jul −49.6 −51.4 −45.4 −6.1 −11.8 −7.9 −13.0 5.1 −1.1 0.1 2.1 −1.1 0.5
         Aug −43.7 −7.4 −9.6 2.1 9.7 9.6 2.3 6.1 2.3 1.3 2.8 −0.5 −0.5
         Sep 26.2 0.7 −9.8 10.5 −4.0 −3.5 10.0 −13.7 −13.1 0.2 0.9 −0.8 0.8
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey “in section and bills sent for collection from the banks ’portfolios prior to maturity) and
II. Unlike the other tables in section IV, this table includes −in addition to liabilities incurred in the banks ’own name but on behalf of third parties. —
the figures reported by banks (including building and loan associations) − 3Up to December 1998, including liabilities arising from fiduciary loans and
data from money market funds. —1Statistical breaks have been eliminated liabilities arising from rediscounted bills (endorsement liabilities). —4Up to
from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). —2Up to December December 1998, including liabilities arising from fiduciary loans. —
1998, volume of business (balance sheet total plus endorsement liabilities
22*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Debt securities
issued  10 
in other member states  8 Deposits of
central governments  4 
With agreed At agreed Liabilities
maturities notice arising
of which from Money of which Liabilities
domestic market with to non- repos with
of which of which central non-banks fund euro- Capital maturities
up to up to govern- in the shares of up to area and Other
Total  4 Total 3 months Total ments Total reserves   Period 2 years  7 euro area  9 issued  10 2 years  10 residents Liabilities
End of year or month
 
68.7 11.8 7.3 7.3 108.2 108.2 − 31.3 1,441.2 81.9 336.8 305.2 357.8 1994
97.3 11.4 8.3 8.3 111.0 111.0 − 39.1 1,608.1 70.3 393.9 325.0 391.0 1995
120.6 9.0 9.2 9.2 114.6 114.6 − 34.0 1,804.3 54.4 422.1 350.0 438.8 1996
145.8 9.2 9.4 9.4 108.3 108.3 − 28.6 1,998.3 62.5 599.2 388.1 511.3 1997
168.3 13.8 9.7 9.7 111.2 111.2 − 34.8 2,248.1 80.2 739.8 426.8 574.8 1998
99.7 8.9 4.8 3.7 46.6 45.9 2.0 20.8 1,323.6 97.4 487.9 262.6 281.1 1999
96.3 6.7 4.7 3.3 69.9 67.6 0.4 19.3 1,417.1 113.3 599.8 298.1 318.4 2000
92.4 9.0 5.2 3.8 49.1 46.9 4.9 33.2 1,445.4 129.3 647.6 319.2 300.8 200174.6 9.9 4.7 3.6 47.7 45.6 3.3 36.7 1,453.5 71.6 599.2 343.0 309.8 2002
92.4 9.0 5.2 3.8 49.1 46.9 4.9 33.2 1,445.4 129.3 647.6 319.2 300.8 2001          Dec91.8 8.1 5.1 3.8 50.1 47.4 2.5 35.0 1,450.5 122.2 668.3 320.1 291.1 2002          Jan
89.6 7.3 5.1 3.8 49.4 47.3 3.5 35.9 1,462.8 125.4 664.8 322.2 287.3          Feb92.0 9.3 5.0 3.7 49.4 46.9 3.7 35.8 1,479.4 129.0 666.4 323.3 281.6          Mar
89.4 8.3 4.7 3.5 47.5 45.8 3.4 35.9 1,478.2 133.1 673.4 325.3 289.7          Apr
89.1 9.5 4.7 3.4 48.2 45.6 4.7 35.4 1,480.6 134.6 673.3 329.0 291.6          May86.7 8.5 4.6 3.4 48.7 45.9 4.1 35.0 1,472.6 133.1 628.9 331.1 294.7          Jun
87.0 8.7 4.6 3.4 47.6 45.8 3.1 35.6 1,471.6 133.7 640.9 336.8 293.9          Jul
75.5 9.7 4.6 3.4 48.9 45.8 4.3 37.1 1,489.4 135.9 636.3 341.2 294.8          Aug74.2 8.8 4.5 3.4 49.9 46.7 10.7 37.0 1,490.2 137.0 647.7 344.8 305.5          Sep
73.9 9.1 4.5 3.4 48.3 46.8 9.6 37.6 1,485.9 137.5 642.5 343.7 306.0          Oct
75.6 9.4 4.5 3.4 47.6 46.3 6.4 37.5 1,496.8 148.2 653.5 343.0 309.8          Nov74.6 9.9 4.7 3.6 47.7 45.6 3.3 36.7 1,453.5 71.6 599.2 343.0 309.8          Dec
74.8 10.4 4.7 3.6 46.9 45.2 7.6 38.5 1,458.1 138.9 602.9 350.5 305.9 2003          Jan
75.9 12.3 4.6 3.6 48.2 45.1 10.9 39.8 1,468.4 145.7 606.7 353.9 305.4          Feb75.7 13.0 4.6 3.6 46.6 45.2 11.2 40.2 1,465.1 140.7 612.1 355.8 303.6          Mar
73.8 12.3 4.5 3.5 45.5 44.9 11.3 39.7 1,468.6 142.6 620.2 351.6 307.2          Apr
74.1 13.3 4.4 3.5 47.7 44.4 12.3 39.4 1,463.3 133.3 599.0 351.0 305.4          May73.4 12.2 4.4 3.5 48.1 44.6 10.8 38.7 1,470.0 128.7 594.8 348.2 307.0          Jun
72.1 12.1 4.3 3.4 45.3 43.8 10.9 38.4 1,482.8 133.0 603.6 348.1 301.6          Jul
72.4 12.8 4.2 3.4 45.9 43.8 12.4 38.1 1,480.0 122.1 579.2 344.1 298.0          Aug70.5 12.0 4.1 3.3 46.2 43.4 15.6 37.9 1,485.5 124.4 579.7 341.1 304.3          Sep
Changes 1
28.6 −0.4 1.0 1.0 2.8 2.8 − 7.8 166.9 −11.5 57.2 19.8 36.0 1995
23.3 −2.4 0.9 0.9 3.6 3.6 −− 5.1 196.3 −15.9 28.1 25.0 47.8 1996
25.1 0.2 0.2 0.2 −6.2 −6.2 −− 4.5 194.8 8.1 172.3 37.1 71.2 1997
24.0 4.6 0.3 0.3 2.9 2.9 − 6.2 263.3 28.1 151.4 28.8 68.3 1998
5.9 1.5 −0.2 −1.3 1.9 1.2 0.6 3.5 168.0 65.1 89.7 38.0 7.7 1999
−4.5 −0.5 −0.1 −0.3 23.1 21.6 −1.6 −1.5 90.6 15.9 97.8 35.3 54.6 2000
−4.6 1.6 0.2 0.4 −20.5 −20.4 4.6 13.3 59.5 18.6 34.8 20.9 −1.1 2001
−2.6 1.1 −0.5 −0.3 −1.4 −1.3 −1.6 4.2 18.8 14.8 −2.1 25.9 9.7 2002
−0.8 −0.9 −0.1 −0.0 1.0 0.5 −2.4 2.0 4.0 −2.4 15.1 0.7 −6.0 2002          Jan
−2.2 −0.9 −0.1 −0.0 −0.7 −0.2 1.0 0.8 12.7 3.2 −2.8 2.3 −3.3          Feb
2.5 2.0 −0.0 −0.0 −0.0 −0.3 0.2 −0.1 16.9 3.6 3.7 1.2 −5.8          Mar
−2.3 −1.0 −0.3 −0.3 −1.9 −1.2 −0.3 0.2 0.9 4.1 15.9 2.3 5.8          Apr
0.2 1.3 −0.1 −0.0 0.7 −0.1 1.3 −0.0 6.2 1.7 12.6 4.1 −1.8          May
−1.8 −1.0 −0.0 0.0 0.5 0.3 −0.6 −0.3 −4.1 −2.1 −28.2 2.5 6.2          Jun
−0.1 0.2 −0.1 −0.0 −1.1 −0.1 −1.0 0.6 −3.4 −1.2 5.4 5.2 1.5          Jul
2.2 1.0 −0.0 −0.0 1.4 0.0 1.2 1.2 1.5 2.2 −2.6 4.7 0.2          Aug
−1.3 −0.9 −0.0 −0.0 1.0 0.8 6.4 0.1 1.0 1.0 12.4 3.5 10.5          Sep
−0.3 0.4 −0.0 −0.0 −1.7 0.1 −1.0 0.7 −3.8 0.6 −4.6 −1.1 1.4          Oct
1.8 0.3 −0.0 −0.0 −0.6 −0.5 −3.2 −0.2 11.9 10.7 13.2 −0.5 3.2          Nov
−0.6 0.6 0.2 0.2 0.1 −0.7 −3.1 −0.8 −24.8 −6.6 −42.1 1.0 −2.4          Dec
−0.6 −0.5 −0.0 0.0 −0.8 −0.4 5.3 1.8 2.4 0.6 11.3 5.6 −5.3 2003          Jan
2.0 2.8 −0.0 0.0 1.4 −0.1 2.2 1.3 8.1 6.8 4.4 3.6 3.0          Feb
−0.0 0.7 −0.1 −0.0 −1.6 0.1 0.4 0.6 0.8 −2.3 8.4 −0.8 −2.4          Mar
−1.6 −0.6 −0.1 −0.0 −1.1 −0.3 0.0 −0.6 3.5 −0.8 13.7 −0.8 3.1          Apr
0.9 1.2 −0.1 −0.0 2.2 −0.5 1.2 −0.2 3.4 −6.9 −8.2 0.7 −2.2          May
−0.8 −1.0 −0.1 −0.0 0.4 0.2 −1.5 −0.7 3.1 −4.5 −11.4 −3.5 2.8          Jun
−1.5 −0.2 −0.1 −0.1 −2.8 −0.8 0.2 −0.3 12.1 4.3 7.0 −0.2 −5.2          Jul
0.0 0.6 −0.1 −0.0 0.6 0.0 1.5 −0.3 −7.1 −10.9 −32.4 −4.8 −2.8          Aug
−1.5 −0.7 −0.1 −0.1 0.3 −0.4 3.2 −0.2 11.6 2.4 12.3 −1.9 4.5          Sep
5For the German contribution: from 1999, including deposits under savings collected separately from 1999 only; up to December 1998, included in the
and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). —6For the German contribution: up to deposits with agreed maturities of up to two years. —10In Germany, debt
the end of 1998, including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market
also footnote 5). —7Up to December 1998, with maturities of less than paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were published
four years. —8Excluding deposits of central governments. —9Data together with money market fund shares. 
23*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
IV Banks
 
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks*
 
 
 5  billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
  of which of which 
Loans
 Cash in hand and credit
Number of balances forreporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Othermonth tions total banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets
All categories of banks
 
2003          Apr 2,346 6,466.0 51.5 2,387.4 1,731.6 644.0 3,590.9 482.1 2,558.6 4.3 530.6 159.8 276.3
         May 2,338 6,505.1 52.3 2,434.3 1,776.0 647.7 3,582.2 474.0 2,555.5 4.5 533.9 161.4 275.0         June 2,311 6,511.2 54.3 2,459.7 1,798.0 650.5 3,570.5 466.4 2,554.9 4.5 530.8 160.3 266.3
         July 2,285 6,464.7 53.7 2,424.8 1,753.0 659.3 3,563.4 455.9 2,560.6 4.6 530.0 162.2 260.6
         Aug 2,271 6,434.7 56.0 2,408.1 1,738.5 658.8 3,548.2 440.1 2,571.5 4.5 519.1 161.9 260.5         Sep 2,251 6,441.9 55.5 2,397.7 1,727.1 659.4 3,565.0 460.5 2,561.9 4.5 527.0 158.8 264.9
Commercial banks 5
2003          Aug 262 1,806.1 21.9 668.4 533.6 131.1 919.0 230.1 541.1 2.5 137.5 92.8 104.0         Sep 262 1,814.1 18.7 665.3 530.1 130.6 936.1 245.7 537.8 2.5 142.8 89.3 104.6
   Big banks 6
2003          Aug 4 1,051.5 13.4 399.7 343.6 54.6 493.4 135.8 279.8 1.6 72.1 81.9 63.2         Sep 4 1,061.0 10.9 398.1 341.9 54.1 508.8 149.5 275.7 1.6 78.2 78.7 64.4
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2003          Aug 175 653.6 7.8 216.7 145.3 70.4 384.7 75.1 246.2 0.8 59.4 10.2 34.3         Sep 175 657.2 7.1 218.3 146.3 70.6 388.2 78.5 246.8 0.8 58.9 9.8 33.7
   Branches of foreign banks
2003          Aug 83 101.0 0.7 52.0 44.7 6.1 40.9 19.2 15.2 0.1 6.1 0.8 6.5         Sep 83 95.9 0.6 48.9 41.8 5.9 39.1 17.7 15.3 0.1 5.7 0.8 6.5
Land  banks
2003          Aug 13 1,343.7 3.0 683.2 557.3 121.9 577.7 62.2 415.5 0.3 96.3 34.1 45.7         Sep 13 1,338.0 4.6 676.2 549.2 123.6 576.3 64.7 412.0 0.3 96.8 34.4 46.5
Savings banks
2003          Aug 498 977.9 16.9 224.6 68.1 155.7 699.2 75.1 531.7 1.1 90.9 14.3 22.9         Sep 495 980.0 18.8 221.3 64.5 156.2 702.4 77.0 532.3 1.1 91.6 14.4 23.0
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives  
 
2003          Aug 2 189.2 1.7 122.2 83.8 38.1 48.6 10.0 22.1 0.1 16.1 11.0 5.8         Sep 2 186.4 0.3 120.3 83.4 36.5 47.5 9.7 21.8 0.1 15.8 11.0 7.4
Credit cooperatives
2003          Aug 1,429 555.5 11.6 141.2 58.8 80.7 379.7 46.3 293.4 0.6 39.2 5.6 17.4         Sep 1,412 555.5 11.6 139.2 56.8 80.6 381.6 47.5 294.0 0.6 39.3 5.6 17.5
Mortgage banks
2003          Aug 26 861.9 0.7 227.3 151.2 75.9 615.3 10.2 504.2 − 100.8 1.6 17.1
         Sep 26 865.6 0.9 231.1 153.6 77.3 614.6 9.5 501.8 − 103.2 1.7 17.3
Building and loan associations
2003          Aug 27 167.7 0.0 38.2 27.1 11.1 120.3 1.4 107.8 . 11.0 0.4 8.8         Sep 27 168.7 0.0 39.1 28.5 10.6 120.4 1.5 108.3 . 10.5 0.4 8.8
Banks with special functions
2003          Aug 14 532.6 0.3 303.0 258.4 44.3 188.4 4.8 155.8 − 27.3 2.0 38.8
         Sep 14 533.8 0.5 305.2 261.0 44.0 186.3 4.8 153.8 − 26.9 2.0 39.7
Memo item: Foreign banks 7
2003          Aug 130 385.0 3.2 166.8 116.1 49.4 197.4 39.1 115.7 0.2 42.1 1.7 15.9         Sep 130 380.9 3.0 161.0 109.3 50.3 197.0 37.8 115.9 0.2 42.7 1.6 18.4
  of which:  Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 8
2003          Aug 47 284.0 2.6 114.8 71.4 43.3 156.5 19.8 100.5 0.1 36.0 0.9 9.4         Sep 47 285.0 2.4 112.1 67.5 44.4 157.9 20.1 100.6 0.1 37.1 0.8 11.9
*For the period up to December 1998, section IV (except for Table IV.1) included. For the definitions of the respective items, see the footnotes to
shows the assets and liabilities of banks (excluding building and loan Table IV.3. —1For building and loan associations: Including deposits under
associations) in liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). —2Included in time
Germany. The assets and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market deposits. —3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also
funds (which are also classified as MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not footnote 2). —4Including subordinated negotiable bearer debt
24*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
IV Banks
 
   
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which of which published
reserves,
Time deposits  1 Savings deposits  3 partici-pation
Memo rights
item Bearer capital,
for for of which debt Liabilities
funds for
up to and more arising At three Bank general securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking Other   End of months ’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year  1 repos  2 Total notice bonds risks   month standing  4 liabilities
All categories of banks
 
1,838.1 279.1 1,558.9 2,428.1 625.7 351.5 753.2 61.2 588.5 490.8 109.1 1,519.1 296.1 384.5 2003          Apr 
1,875.2 274.3 1,600.6 2,433.9 635.3 355.5 746.9 61.7 587.7 491.5 108.6 1,516.9 294.7 384.4          May1,875.3 293.6 1,581.6 2,434.2 652.7 337.5 748.7 55.6 587.2 492.5 108.1 1,521.7 294.0 386.0          June
1,825.0 247.1 1,577.7 2,430.3 635.9 346.7 752.9 65.4 587.2 494.6 107.6 1,533.8 294.6 380.9          July
1,799.3 228.9 1,570.3 2,436.1 638.0 343.3 759.3 57.9 588.4 497.3 107.1 1,526.4 295.0 377.8          Aug 1,795.8 260.3 1,535.3 2,438.9 648.7 341.6 753.5 71.4 588.5 498.2 106.5 1,530.5 293.3 383.4          Sep 
Commercial banks 5
688.9 127.4 561.5 671.4 274.3 165.5 126.3 51.7 96.0 84.4 9.3 210.1 101.8 133.9 2003          Aug 686.1 148.0 537.9 688.3 284.9 171.0 126.5 64.5 96.6 85.3 9.3 210.5 98.4 130.7          Sep 
Big banks 6
426.8 91.9 334.9 336.9 119.6 117.8 73.3 48.3 25.6 23.7 0.6 153.0 61.8 72.9 2003          Aug 425.5 108.9 316.6 352.7 127.9 124.6 73.3 60.9 26.4 24.5 0.6 153.4 58.0 71.4          Sep 
Regional banks and other commercial banks
187.8 22.4 165.3 319.0 146.5 43.3 50.1 2.5 70.4 60.7 8.7 57.0 37.1 52.7 2003          Aug 190.3 27.2 162.9 320.0 148.6 42.2 50.3 2.5 70.2 60.7 8.7 57.2 37.5 52.2          Sep 
Branches of foreign banks
74.3 13.0 61.3 15.4 8.2 4.4 2.9 0.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 2.9 8.3 2003          Aug 70.3 11.9 58.4 15.5 8.4 4.2 2.9 1.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 2.9 7.1          Sep 
Land   banks
445.8 56.3 389.5 324.6 49.5 42.3 216.2 4.2 15.8 14.6 0.8 447.4 63.4 62.5 2003          Aug 442.4 64.3 378.0 322.7 52.8 38.9 214.5 5.1 15.7 14.5 0.8 446.7 63.3 62.9          Sep 
Savings banks
213.9 5.9 208.0 628.7 188.7 59.2 10.4 − 300.0 246.4 70.4 42.6 45.8 46.9 2003          Aug 
218.2 5.7 212.5 624.2 186.3 57.8 10.4 − 299.7 246.2 70.0 42.6 45.9 49.1          Sep 
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives
 
107.1 28.8 78.3 33.0 7.4 8.0 17.7 1.8 −− 0.0 29.4 10.0 9.7 2003          Aug 
107.3 30.8 76.4 31.0 6.5 6.9 17.6 1.7 −− 0.0 28.6 10.0 9.5          Sep 
Credit cooperatives
74.5 1.8 72.6 397.2 115.0 55.8 23.9 − 176.1 151.6 26.3 31.3 30.0 22.5 2003          Aug 
74.8 2.1 72.6 395.9 114.4 55.3 23.9 − 176.1 151.8 26.1 31.2 30.1 23.6          Sep 
Mortgage banks
123.1 3.1 120.0 148.8 1.6 6.1 140.8 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.2 545.7 19.8 24.6 2003          Aug 123.3 5.1 118.2 147.0 1.3 5.3 140.2 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.2 549.1 21.3 25.0          Sep 
Building and loan associations
30.4 2.1 28.3 106.5 0.3 0.7 105.1 − 0.3 0.3 0.1 6.8 7.1 16.9 2003          Aug 
30.1 2.1 28.0 107.0 0.3 0.7 105.5 − 0.3 0.3 0.1 7.1 7.1 17.3          Sep 
Banks with special functions
115.8 3.6 112.2 125.8 1.3 5.6 118.9 −−−− 213.1 17.1 60.8 2003          Aug 
113.7 2.1 111.7 123.0 2.2 5.7 115.1 −−−− 214.6 17.1 65.3          Sep 
Memo item:   Foreign banks 7
142.5 21.9 120.6 116.1 67.6 12.5 26.0 1.0 7.4 7.2 2.6 88.0 13.9 24.5 2003          Aug 136.9 22.5 114.3 115.7 68.5 11.8 25.4 1.2 7.4 7.2 2.6 88.5 14.1 25.8          Sep 
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 8
68.2 8.9 59.3 100.7 59.5 8.2 23.1 0.1 7.4 7.2 2.5 88.0 10.9 16.3 2003          Aug 66.6 10.5 55.9 100.2 60.1 7.7 22.5 0.1 7.3 7.2 2.6 88.5 11.2 18.6          Sep 
securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities. —5Commercial included in other categories of banks and the category ”Branches (with
banks comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks ”,”Regional banks and other dependent legal status) of foreign banks ”.—8Separate presentation of the
commercial banks ”and ”Branches of foreign banks ”.—6Deutsche Bank banks majority-owned by foreign banks included in the categories
AG, Dresdner Bank AG, Commerzbank AG and Bayerische Hypo- und Vereins- ”Regional banks and other commercial banks ” and ”Mortgage banks ”. 
bank AG. —7Sum of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks and
25*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
IV Banks
 
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis- à-vis residents*
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999,  5  billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs)  2,3 Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3,8 
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills and
hand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro-area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins)  1 bank Total and loans Bills  4 banks  5 banks  6 loans  7 Total Loans Bills  4 non-banks banks  9 
End of year or month*
 
1993 26.7 75.3 1,596.8 1,076.2 14.7 3.3 493.2 9.3 3,826.4 3,291.6 44.7 5.6 327.7
1994 25.0 61.5 1,695.6 1,150.6 17.4 4.6 513.6 9.5 4,137.2 3,502.8 45.9 2.2 433.7
1995 26.0 61.0 1,859.9 1,264.9 17.5 4.3 561.9 11.4 4,436.9 3,802.0 46.8 1.4 427.3
1996 28.9 59.7 2,134.0 1,443.3 17.9 3.4 657.2 12.2 4,773.1 4,097.9 44.8 5.9 437.21997 29.3 60.2 2,397.9 1,606.3 18.1 3.6 758.9 11.1 5,058.4 4,353.9 44.7 2.9 473.31998 28.5 63.6 2,738.2 1,814.7 14.6 12.2 887.7 9.1 5,379.8 4,639.7 32.8 5.0 527.81999 16.8 45.6 1,556.9 1,033.4 0.0 19.2 504.2 3.9 2,904.5 2,569.6 7.0 3.0 287.5
2000 15.6 50.8 1,639.6 1,056.1 0.0 26.8 556.6 3.6 3,003.7 2,657.3 6.5 2.3 304.7
2001 14.2 56.3 1,676.0 1,078.9 0.0 5.6 591.5 2.8 3,014.1 2,699.4 4.8 4.4 301.52002 17.5 45.6 1,691.3 1,112.3 0.0 7.8 571.2 2.7 2,997.2 2,685.0 4.1 3.3 301.9
2002          Apr 14.5 40.9 1,648.3 1,038.4 0.0 6.3 603.6 2.7 3,004.3 2,687.4 4.4 3.7 304.9
         May 14.3 45.4 1,655.7 1,044.4 0.0 6.1 605.2 2.7 3,005.7 2,682.8 4.2 4.6 310.2         June 13.9 43.8 1,668.4 1,061.5 0.0 6.3 600.6 2.7 2,990.8 2,678.8 4.3 5.2 298.7
         July 13.4 41.2 1,643.8 1,047.7 0.0 7.6 588.4 2.6 2,995.7 2,685.3 4.3 4.2 299.1
         Aug 13.2 46.0 1,650.2 1,060.1 0.0 7.7 582.4 2.7 2,987.3 2,675.6 4.2 3.9 300.6         Sep 13.0 42.3 1,652.7 1,064.4 0.0 8.5 579.8 2.7 2,995.5 2,683.2 4.2 3.9 301.2
         Oct 13.9 42.8 1,648.3 1,068.2 0.0 8.0 572.2 2.7 2,997.6 2,684.6 4.2 3.9 301.9
         Nov 12.9 41.7 1,689.1 1,102.1 0.0 13.3 573.8 2.6 3,003.5 2,683.3 4.1 3.6 309.5         Dec 17.5 45.6 1,691.3 1,112.3 0.0 7.8 571.2 2.7 2,997.2 2,685.0 4.1 3.3 301.9
2003          Jan 12.9 42.3 1,661.6 1,086.8 0.0 9.7 565.1 2.6 3,005.1 2,686.9 3.9 4.0 307.4
         Feb 12.9 39.0 1,667.6 1,095.5 0.0 9.7 562.3 2.5 3,001.9 2,682.6 3.8 3.6 308.9         Mar 12.6 47.5 1,655.8 1,081.1 0.0 10.0 564.7 2.5 3,005.5 2,677.5 3.8 4.8 316.4
         Apr 13.5 37.7 1,648.8 1,074.6 0.0 9.9 564.3 2.5 3,007.6 2,676.4 3.8 5.0 319.4
         May 13.7 38.3 1,674.3 1,099.7 0.0 9.2 565.3 2.5 3,003.6 2,667.8 3.9 4.5 324.5         June 12.9 40.9 1,665.5 1,090.9 0.0 9.9 564.7 2.5 2,992.4 2,670.2 3.9 3.9 311.4
         July 12.9 40.5 1,645.6 1,063.8 0.0 10.9 571.0 2.4 2,996.0 2,671.8 4.0 3.4 314.7
         Aug 13.2 42.5 1,636.2 1,056.4 0.0 9.3 570.5 2.4 2,986.9 2,667.9 4.0 3.4 309.6         Sep 12.9 42.1 1,627.9 1,047.0 0.0 9.7 571.2 2.4 2,995.7 2,676.3 3.9 2.1 311.4
Changes*
1994 −1.7 −13.8 + 99.1 + 73.6 + 2.7 + 1.3 + 21.3 + 0.1 + 320.5 + 240.2 + 1.2 −3.3 + 86.7
1995 + 1.0 −0.5 + 193.5 + 139.4 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 54.3 + 0.2 + 312.8 + 303.6 + 1.0 −0.8 + 2.9
1996 + 2.9 −1.3 + 257.8 + 161.8 + 0.4 − 1.1 + 95.8 + 0.8 + 336.3 + 311.7 −2.0 + 4.7 + 10.6
1997 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 262.5 + 160.7 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 102.6 −1.1 + 285.2 + 255.5 −0.1 −3.0 + 36.5
1998 −0.8 + 3.4 + 343.3 + 210.3 −3.6 + 8.6 + 130.0 −2.0 + 335.3 + 302.1 −11.9 + 2.1 + 52.1
1999 + 2.2 + 13.2 + 122.1 + 66.3 + 0.0 + 12.9 + 42.8 −0.7 + 156.1 + 136.9 + 2.6 + 0.4 + 16.7
2000 −1.1 + 5.1 + 83.6 + 21.7 −0.0 + 7.6 + 54.3 −0.3 + 100.7 + 83.7 −0.5 −0.8 + 19.0
2001 −1.4 + 5.5 + 34.6 + 20.1 −0.0 −21.3 + 35.8 −0.9 + 11.9 + 40.8 −1.6 + 1.6 + 0.3
2002 + 3.3 −10.7 + 15.0 + 33.1 + 0.0 + 2.3 −20.3 −0.2 −19.2 −18.0 −0.8 −1.1 + 1.7
2002          Apr −2.0 −3.5 − 5.0 − 7.2 − + 0.5 + 1.6 −0.0 + 8.1 − 2.3 −0.1 + 1.0 + 9.4
         May −0.2 + 4.5 + 7.7 + 6.2 −0.0 − 0.2 + 1.7 −0.1 + 2.2 − 3.9 −0.2 + 0.9 + 5.4
         June −0.4 −1.6 + 12.5 + 16.9 −0.0 + 0.1 − 4.6 + 0.0 −19.0 − 8.0 + 0.1 + 0.5 −11.5
         July −0.5 −2.5 −24.9 −13.8 − + 1.4 −12.4 −0.0 + 5.1 + 6.5 −0.0 −1.0 + 0.6
         Aug −0.2 + 4.8 + 6.4 + 12.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 6.0 + 0.0 − 8.4 − 9.6 −0.0 −0.2 + 1.5
         Sep −0.2 −3.8 + 2.6 + 4.4 − + 0.8 − 2.6 −0.0 + 7.9 + 7.3 −0.1 −0.0 + 0.7
         Oct + 0.9 + 0.6 − 4.4 + 3.8 −− 0.5 − 7.7 −0.0 + 2.0 + 1.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.6
         Nov −1.0 −1.1 + 40.8 + 33.9 + 0.0 + 5.3 + 1.6 −0.0 + 6.0 − 1.3 −0.0 −0.3 + 7.6
         Dec + 4.7 + 3.8 + 2.2 + 10.2 + 0.0 − 5.4 − 2.6 + 0.0 − 6.3 + 1.6 −0.1 −0.2 − 7.6
2003          Jan −4.6 −3.2 −29.7 −25.5 −0.0 + 1.9 − 6.1 −0.1 + 7.9 + 1.9 −0.1 + 0.6 + 5.5
         Feb + 0.0 −3.3 + 6.0 + 8.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 2.8 −0.0 − 3.3 − 4.3 −0.1 −0.4 + 1.5
         Mar −0.4 + 8.5 −11.8 −14.4 −0.0 + 0.2 + 2.4 −0.0 + 3.7 − 5.0 −0.0 + 1.3 + 7.4
         Apr + 0.9 −9.8 − 7.0 − 6.5 −− 0.1 − 0.4 −0.0 + 2.1 − 1.1 −0.0 + 0.2 + 3.1
         May + 0.2 + 0.6 + 25.5 + 25.1 −0.0 − 0.7 + 1.1 −0.1 − 3.8 − 8.7 + 0.1 −0.6 + 5.3
         June −0.7 + 2.6 − 8.8 − 8.8 −0.0 + 0.6 − 0.6 −0.0 −11.1 + 2.5 + 0.0 −0.5 −13.1
         July −0.0 −0.4 −20.1 −27.2 −0.0 + 0.8 + 6.3 −0.0 + 3.8 + 1.6 + 0.1 −0.3 + 3.4
         Aug + 0.2 + 2.0 − 9.4 − 7.4 −0.0 − 1.5 − 0.5 −0.0 − 9.1 − 3.9 −0.0 −0.0 − 5.1
         Sep −0.2 −0.3 − 7.8 − 9.4 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 1.2 −0.0 + 9.6 + 8.4 −0.1 −1.3 + 2.6
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the prior to maturity). —5Up to November 1993, included in securities (see also
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as footnote 6). —6Up to November 1993, including negotiable money market
provisional. Subsequent revisions which appear in the following Monthly paper; excluding registered debt securities. —7From 1999, no longer
Report , are not specially marked. —1Up to December 1998, domestic included in loans or deposits (see also footnote 3). —8Up to December
banknotes and coins. —2Up to December 1998, excluding loans to 1998, including loans to domestic building and loan associations. —
domestic building and loan associations. —3Up to December 1998, 9Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims
including fiduciary loans (see also footnote 7). —4Up to December 1998, (see also footnote 10). —10Including debt securities arising from the
bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from exchange of equalisation claims. —11Including liabilities arising from
rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks ’portfolios
26*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3,11,12  Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3,17 
Partici-
patinginterestsin
Memo domestic Memo Memo
item banks Sight Time Redis- item Sight Time Savings Bank item Equalisa-tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciary
loans  
7 Total 13,14  14,15  bills 16 loans  7 Total 15,18  bonds  20 loans  7   Period claims  10 enterprises posits  13 posits  19 
End of year or month*
 
75.3 81.6 59.5 1,395.2 380.2 917.9 69.2 27.9 2,788.1 513.6 1,123.6 859.4 219.1 72.4 1993
68.1 84.4 70.7 1,427.9 342.8 976.9 75.2 33.1 2,875.7 540.2 1,109.3 940.5 206.9 78.8 1994
71.3 88.1 83.2 1,539.4 363.9 1,065.1 75.5 35.0 3,021.1 579.9 1,086.1 1,046.1 227.4 81.6 1995
81.3 106.0 89.7 1,731.0 401.1 1,202.4 75.4 52.2 3,241.5 675.1 1,109.8 1,143.0 227.8 85.8 199676.0 107.6 95.1 1,902.3 427.6 1,349.1 75.6 50.0 3,341.9 689.8 1,146.9 1,182.1 236.9 86.1 199771.6 102.8 129.2 2,086.9 472.5 1,505.2 59.4 49.7 3,520.3 799.5 1,194.1 1,211.0 234.9 80.9 199837.5 58.0 75.6 1,122.0 114.4 1,007.3 0.3 29.8 1,905.3 420.4 759.6 614.7 110.7 42.1 1999
33.1 58.5 82.7 1,189.2 113.4 1,075.3 0.4 30.1 1,945.8 443.4 819.9 573.5 109.0 42.1 2000
4.0 57.0 95.9 1,204.9 123.1 1,081.6 0.3 27.2 2,034.0 526.4 827.0 574.5 106.0 43.3 2001
3.0 54.8 119.0 1,244.0 127.6 1,116.2 0.2 25.6 2,085.9 575.6 830.6 575.3 104.4 42.1 2002
3.9 56.1 95.7 1,138.3 123.2 1,014.9 0.2 27.0 1,999.3 515.7 816.8 561.8 104.9 42.0 2002          Apr 
3.9 56.0 95.8 1,158.7 113.4 1,045.1 0.1 26.8 2,009.4 523.8 820.6 560.1 105.0 41.9          May3.9 55.4 95.5 1,182.3 132.1 1,050.1 0.1 26.0 2,021.4 536.2 820.6 558.9 105.7 41.5          June
3.0 55.2 95.0 1,157.4 118.2 1,039.1 0.1 25.9 2,016.2 531.6 821.1 557.5 106.0 41.6          July
3.0 55.2 105.9 1,173.0 115.3 1,057.6 0.1 25.9 2,013.9 527.2 823.0 557.8 105.9 41.6          Aug 3.0 55.0 107.9 1,179.3 133.0 1,046.1 0.1 25.7 2,025.0 540.8 820.6 558.3 105.3 41.6          Sep 
3.0 55.1 111.5 1,184.4 130.0 1,054.2 0.1 25.7 2,037.6 543.1 829.8 559.7 105.0 41.6          Oct 
3.0 55.0 113.3 1,221.3 157.3 1,063.9 0.2 25.7 2,062.1 572.4 822.6 562.4 104.7 41.5          Nov 3.0 54.8 119.0 1,244.0 127.6 1,116.2 0.2 25.6 2,085.9 575.6 830.6 575.3 104.4 42.1          Dec 
3.0 54.7 118.4 1,214.6 134.8 1,079.7 0.2 25.5 2,076.4 565.2 830.3 577.4 103.5 42.1 2003          Jan 
3.0 54.8 118.0 1,224.7 134.5 1,090.1 0.2 25.6 2,084.6 571.6 830.0 579.2 103.7 41.9          Feb 3.0 54.8 116.1 1,218.0 144.0 1,073.9 0.2 25.5 2,089.6 578.9 828.4 579.3 103.0 42.1          Mar 
3.0 54.6 116.7 1,203.4 137.4 1,065.9 0.1 25.5 2,094.8 586.3 828.2 577.9 102.4 41.8          Apr 
3.0 54.5 119.6 1,254.2 146.4 1,107.7 0.1 25.5 2,101.9 591.7 831.2 577.1 101.9 41.7          May3.0 54.4 118.1 1,252.5 150.5 1,101.8 0.1 25.4 2,109.6 608.9 822.7 576.7 101.3 41.8          June
2.0 54.2 119.1 1,207.7 123.6 1,084.0 0.1 25.3 2,102.3 595.6 829.0 576.8 100.9 41.7          July
2.0 54.6 118.8 1,198.2 120.9 1,077.2 0.1 25.7 2,111.4 598.5 834.5 578.0 100.4 41.7          Aug 2.0 54.4 115.1 1,188.2 116.0 1,072.0 0.1 25.5 2,112.3 608.8 825.4 578.3 99.9 41.5          Sep 
Changes*
−6.9 + 2.6 + 11.3 + 32.4 −31.4 + 53.0 + 6.0 + 4.9 + 85.0 + 28.3 −14.1 + 81.2 −12.2 + 1.8 1994
−1.2 + 7.3 + 12.5 + 134.2 + 20.4 + 111.5 + 0.4 + 2.0 + 158.3 + 48.9 −14.2 + 105.6 + 11.7 + 6.3 1995
+ 8.0 + 3.3 + 6.5 + 175.9 + 36.6 + 137.7 −0.2 + 1.7 + 218.4 + 94.3 + 23.2 + 96.9 + 0.7 + 3.3 1996
−5.3 + 1.6 + 5.4 + 175.9 + 31.6 + 146.7 + 0.2 −2.6 + 100.5 + 13.0 + 37.1 + 39.1 + 9.2 + 2.1 1997
−4.4 −4.8 + 34.1 + 179.0 + 39.7 + 156.4 −16.2 −0.9 + 179.3 + 110.6 + 47.2 + 28.9 −2.1 −5.3 1998
−0.6 + 0.1 + 9.3 + 69.0 − 1.8 + 81.8 −11.1 −0.4 + 67.3 + 32.7 + 48.4 − 4.5 −9.3 + 0.7 1999
−0.8 + 0.5 + 7.1 + 64.7 − 2.3 + 66.9 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 41.3 + 22.3 + 61.1 −40.5 −1.7 −0.0 2000
−29.1 −1.5 + 13.3 + 9.6 + 7.4 + 2.3 −0.2 −2.9 + 88.5 + 82.3 + 8.1 + 1.1 −2.9 + 1.0 2001
−1.0 −2.1 + 24.2 + 37.9 + 1.7 + 36.3 −0.1 −1.5 + 51.7 + 48.4 + 4.1 + 0.8 −1.6 −1.1 2002
+ 0.0 −0.1 + 0.3 −26.6 − 2.9 −23.7 + 0.0 −0.0 − 7.3 + 6.5 − 4.9 − 9.0 + 0.1 −0.1 2002          Apr 
+ 0.0 −0.0 + 0.1 + 20.7 − 9.8 + 30.5 −0.0 −0.1 + 11.1 + 8.2 + 4.5 − 1.7 + 0.1 −0.1          May
−0.0 −0.6 −0.3 + 21.7 + 18.6 + 3.1 −0.0 −0.8 + 11.1 + 11.9 − 0.3 − 1.2 + 0.7 −0.3          June
−1.0 −0.2 −0.5 −24.9 −13.9 −11.0 −0.0 −0.1 − 5.3 − 4.7 + 0.5 − 1.4 + 0.3 + 0.0          July
+ 0.0 −0.0 + 11.5 + 16.4 − 2.9 + 19.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 2.3 − 4.4 + 1.9 + 0.3 −0.1 −0.0          Aug 
+ 0.0 −0.2 + 1.9 + 6.4 + 17.9 −11.5 + 0.0 −0.2 + 10.9 + 13.5 − 2.6 + 0.5 −0.5 −0.0          Sep 
−0.0 + 0.1 + 3.6 + 5.1 − 3.0 + 8.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 12.8 + 2.3 + 9.5 + 1.4 −0.3 + 0.0          Oct 
+ 0.0 −0.1 + 1.7 + 37.0 + 27.3 + 9.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 24.5 + 29.3 − 7.2 + 2.7 −0.3 −0.1          Nov 
−− 0.2 + 5.8 + 22.6 −29.7 + 52.3 + 0.0 −0.1 + 23.8 + 3.3 + 8.0 + 12.8 −0.3 + 0.6          Dec 
−0.0 −0.1 −0.6 −29.4 + 7.2 −36.5 −0.0 −0.2 − 9.5 − 10.4 − 0.3 + 2.1 −0.9 −0.0 2003          Jan 
−0.0 + 0.1 −0.4 + 17.8 − 0.3 + 18.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 7.6 + 6.4 − 0.3 + 1.8 −0.4 −0.2          Feb 
+ 0.0 −0.0 −1.9 − 6.7 + 9.5 −16.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 5.1 + 7.3 − 1.6 + 0.1 −0.7 −0.1          Mar 
−0.0 −0.2 + 0.6 −14.6 − 6.6 − 8.0 −0.0 + 0.0 + 5.1 + 7.4 − 0.2 − 1.4 −0.6 −0.2          Apr 
−− 0.1 + 3.0 + 50.8 + 8.9 + 41.9 −0.0 −0.0 + 7.1 + 5.4 + 3.0 − 0.8 −0.5 −0.1          May
−0.0 −0.1 −1.5 − 1.7 + 4.2 − 5.9 −0.0 −0.1 + 7.7 + 17.2 − 8.5 − 0.4 −0.6 + 0.1          June
−1.0 −0.2 + 1.0 −44.9 −27.0 −18.0 −0.0 −0.1 − 7.1 − 13.3 + 6.5 + 0.1 −0.4 −0.0          July
−0.0 + 0.3 −0.3 − 9.5 − 2.7 − 6.8 −0.0 + 0.4 + 9.1 + 2.9 + 5.5 + 1.3 −0.5 −0.1          Aug 
+ 0.0 −0.2 −3.6 − 8.7 − 3.5 − 5.2 −0.0 −0.2 + 0.8 + 10.3 − 9.1 + 0.2 −0.5 −0.2          Sep 
registered debt securities, registered money market paper and up to December 1998, including endorsement liabilities arising from
non-negotiable bearer debt securities; including subordinated liabilities. — rediscounted bills. —17Up to December 1998, including liabilities to
12Up to December 1998, excluding liabilities to domestic building and loan domestic building and loan associations and money market funds. —
associations and money market funds. —13Up to December 1998, 18Since the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999,
including time deposits with terms of less than one month. —14Including including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). —
liabilities arising from monetary policy operations with the Bundesbank. — 19Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also
15Up to December 1998, excluding time deposits with terms of less than footnote 18). —20Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer
one month. —16Own acceptances and promissory notes outstanding and, debt securities. 
27*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
IV Banks
 
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis- à-vis non-residents*
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999,  5  billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills  3 negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills  3 Negotiable
(non- money money
euro-area Medium market Memo Medium market
banknotes and paper item and paper Securities Securities
and Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins)  1 Total Total term term banks  4 banks  5 loans  6 Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month*
 
1993 1.2 533.8 498.3 360.5 137.7 0.1 24.3 11.2 262.5 184.0 48.3 135.7 0.0 63.0
1994 1.2 492.3 455.0 309.0 146.0 0.1 23.7 13.5 257.4 173.0 35.0 138.0 0.6 66.5
1995 1.2 538.4 500.8 349.7 151.1 0.1 25.6 11.8 289.2 191.1 42.1 148.9 1.7 79.7
1996 1.4 588.9 544.2 386.6 157.6 0.3 31.5 13.0 352.0 230.4 60.2 170.2 4.9 103.91997 1.5 689.1 635.3 456.1 179.2 0.2 43.1 10.5 474.8 312.7 96.2 216.5 6.0 140.31998 1.5 774.9 706.9 533.6 173.3 0.4 58.7 9.0 610.3 364.9 93.9 270.9 11.6 211.01999 0.4 427.1 383.5 279.5 104.1 0.4 43.2 4.2 396.1 235.8 52.7 183.1 7.5 152.7
2000 0.4 507.7 441.4 325.4 116.0 1.3 65.0 3.6 475.8 286.8 71.1 215.7 6.5 182.5
2001 0.4 596.1 521.7 383.7 138.0 0.8 73.6 3.5 570.3 347.2 99.7 247.5 5.2 217.92002 0.3 690.6 615.3 468.0 147.2 0.9 74.4 2.7 558.8 332.6 92.6 240.0 9.3 216.9
2002          Apr 0.4 590.1 515.1 370.6 144.6 1.3 73.7 2.9 586.5 359.2 108.0 251.2 7.8 219.6
         May 0.4 613.3 538.2 395.3 142.9 1.2 74.0 2.8 589.1 359.6 111.2 248.5 6.6 222.9         June 0.4 609.7 534.3 399.4 135.0 1.2 74.1 2.8 575.1 348.2 105.1 243.1 5.2 221.7
         July 0.4 614.2 538.2 400.0 138.3 1.5 74.5 2.8 579.1 346.2 101.4 244.9 5.8 227.0
         Aug 0.3 631.2 554.9 413.3 141.6 1.5 74.8 2.8 576.0 344.3 98.9 245.4 8.9 222.8         Sep 0.3 659.5 582.6 439.2 143.4 1.9 75.0 2.8 584.9 353.7 109.3 244.4 9.5 221.7
         Oct 0.3 672.9 595.2 450.2 145.0 1.9 75.8 2.7 585.5 355.6 108.9 246.7 9.8 220.1
         Nov 0.3 711.7 630.2 484.4 145.7 5.6 76.0 2.8 588.8 358.2 111.0 247.2 9.9 220.7         Dec 0.3 690.6 615.3 468.0 147.2 0.9 74.4 2.7 558.8 332.6 92.6 240.0 9.3 216.9
2003          Jan 0.3 695.1 620.5 471.3 149.1 0.9 73.8 2.6 559.9 333.2 91.5 241.6 10.8 215.9
         Feb 0.3 713.7 637.5 488.8 148.6 1.3 74.9 2.6 576.6 352.7 109.9 242.8 10.2 213.8         Mar 0.3 733.3 654.1 504.0 150.1 1.0 78.3 2.6 574.8 354.5 113.1 241.3 8.5 211.8
         Apr 0.3 738.6 657.2 505.9 151.2 1.7 79.8 2.6 583.3 364.8 125.1 239.7 7.4 211.1
         May 0.3 760.1 676.4 524.6 151.8 1.3 82.4 2.5 578.6 362.3 126.8 235.6 6.8 209.4         June 0.4 794.3 707.2 553.1 154.1 1.3 85.8 2.6 578.1 351.6 115.2 236.4 7.0 219.5
         July 0.3 779.1 689.4 533.9 155.5 1.4 88.3 2.6 567.4 345.3 106.5 238.8 6.8 215.3
         Aug 0.3 771.9 682.3 522.9 159.4 1.3 88.3 2.6 561.3 344.3 101.3 243.0 7.4 209.5         Sep 0.4 769.8 680.3 520.2 160.1 1.3 88.2 2.3 569.4 346.6 110.3 236.3 7.2 215.6
Changes*
1994 + 0.0 −24.0 −27.5 −41.4 + 13.9 −0.0 + 0.1 + 3.4 − 1.6 −5.5 −12.3 + 6.7 + 0.6 + 5.1
1995 + 0.1 + 59.1 + 57.6 + 49.2 + 8.4 + 0.0 + 2.9 −1.4 + 38.3 + 21.3 + 7.8 + 13.6 + 1.1 + 16.1
1996 + 0.2 + 34.2 + 29.9 + 27.2 + 2.7 + 0.2 + 5.2 −1.1 + 58.4 + 36.2 + 17.0 + 19.2 + 3.1 + 21.4
1997 + 0.1 + 80.6 + 71.5 + 53.3 + 18.2 −0.1 + 10.4 −1.2 + 109.3 + 73.0 + 33.7 + 39.3 + 0.7 + 32.9
1998 −0.0 + 100.8 + 89.5 + 79.3 + 10.2 + 0.0 + 13.1 −1.8 + 122.0 + 42.7 −6.4 + 49.1 + 5.5 + 66.0
1999 −0.3 + 17.7 + 5.7 − 5.3 + 11.0 + 0.2 + 11.7 −0.0 + 85.8 + 42.8 + 8.4 + 34.4 + 1.3 + 41.8
2000 −0.0 + 78.9 + 56.5 + 44.6 + 11.8 + 0.9 + 21.6 −0.7 + 72.0 + 45.0 + 17.4 + 27.7 −1.2 + 28.2
2001 + 0.0 + 83.7 + 75.6 + 54.4 + 21.2 −0.5 + 8.5 −0.2 + 88.3 + 53.4 + 27.0 + 26.4 −1.5 + 36.3
2002 −0.1 + 120.3 + 118.0 + 99.4 + 18.6 + 0.1 + 2.2 −0.9 + 21.2 + 12.7 −0.4 + 13.2 + 4.6 + 3.9
2002          Apr −0.1 + 12.7 + 13.0 + 10.7 + 2.3 −0.1 −0.3 −0.0 − 3.6 −2.4 −3.8 + 1.4 + 0.7 −1.8
         May + 0.0 + 28.7 + 28.2 + 28.2 −0.1 −0.1 + 0.6 −0.1 + 10.7 + 7.1 + 4.9 + 2.2 −1.0 + 4.6
         June −0.0 + 10.8 + 10.3 + 9.0 + 1.2 + 0.0 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 3.3 −2.9 −3.9 + 1.0 −1.2 + 0.8
         July −0.0 + 1.2 + 0.8 − 1.4 + 2.3 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.2 −5.3 −4.5 −0.7 + 0.5 + 4.6
         Aug −0.0 + 14.3 + 14.0 + 13.8 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.3 −0.0 − 2.0 −0.9 −2.3 + 1.3 + 3.1 −4.2
         Sep + 0.0 + 28.8 + 28.2 + 26.3 + 1.9 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 9.6 + 9.7 + 10.5 −0.8 + 0.6 −0.8
         Oct −0.0 + 13.8 + 13.0 + 11.3 + 1.7 + 0.1 + 0.8 −0.2 + 0.9 + 2.1 −0.3 + 2.5 + 0.2 −1.5
         Nov −0.0 + 40.1 + 36.2 + 35.0 + 1.2 + 3.6 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 4.7 + 3.8 + 2.4 + 1.4 + 0.1 + 0.8
         Dec + 0.0 −14.1 − 8.2 −11.3 + 3.1 −4.7 −1.2 −0.1 −20.8 −18.2 −16.7 −1.6 −0.4 −2.1
2003          Jan −0.1 + 9.2 + 9.6 + 6.6 + 3.0 −0.0 −0.4 −0.1 + 6.8 + 4.9 −0.0 + 4.9 + 1.6 + 0.2
         Feb + 0.0 + 18.9 + 17.3 + 17.5 −0.1 + 0.5 + 1.1 −0.0 + 16.8 + 19.6 + 18.3 + 1.3 −0.7 −2.2
         Mar + 0.0 + 21.4 + 18.3 + 16.3 + 2.0 −0.4 + 3.5 −0.0 + 0.3 + 3.5 + 3.6 −0.2 −1.6 −1.5
         Apr + 0.0 + 8.9 + 6.4 + 4.5 + 2.0 + 0.8 + 1.7 −0.0 + 12.8 + 13.7 + 12.8 + 0.9 −1.1 + 0.2
         May + 0.0 + 30.1 + 28.0 + 24.9 + 3.2 −0.4 + 2.5 −0.0 + 5.6 + 6.0 + 3.8 + 2.3 −0.4 −0.0
         June + 0.1 + 29.4 + 26.3 + 25.1 + 1.2 −0.0 + 3.2 + 0.0 − 6.2 −14.9 −12.6 −2.3 + 0.1 + 8.6
         July −0.1 −16.5 −19.1 −20.3 + 1.2 + 0.2 + 2.4 −0.0 −12.3 −7.5 −9.0 + 1.5 −0.3 −4.6
         Aug + 0.0 −13.2 −12.8 −15.3 + 2.5 −0.1 −0.3 + 0.0 −13.0 −6.1 −6.4 + 0.2 + 0.5 −7.3
         Sep + 0.0 + 5.7 + 5.4 + 2.9 + 2.5 −0.0 + 0.4 −0.3 + 19.1 + 10.6 + 10.8 −0.2 + 0.0 + 8.5
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the banknotes and coins. —2Up to December 1998, including fiduciary loans
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as (see also footnote 6). —3Up to December 1998, bill-based lending (bill
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from rediscounted bills and bills
Report , are not specially marked. —1Up to December 1998, foreign sent for collection from the banks ’portfolios prior to maturity). —
28*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
 Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bank
interests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memo
item and and item and item
Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciaryloans  
6 prises  7 Total Total  9 term  9 term loans  6 Total Total  9 term  9 term loans  6   Period deposits  8 deposits  8 
End of year or month*
 
15.5 30.1 328.1 82.9 236.0 122.5 113.5 9.2 162.8 16.9 139.2 39.1 100.1 6.7 1993
17.3 34.0 402.3 111.6 283.7 150.8 132.9 7.1 181.5 20.6 155.3 41.7 113.6 5.6 1994
16.7 38.8 463.7 116.9 339.7 191.6 148.2 7.0 224.4 22.1 198.0 45.3 152.6 4.4 1995
12.7 45.8 486.5 147.1 335.7 172.0 163.7 3.8 273.5 34.3 237.2 50.0 187.2 2.1 199615.7 54.7 670.3 226.0 440.2 254.3 185.9 4.0 333.9 43.5 285.7 63.0 222.7 4.8 199722.9 62.9 875.7 309.5 562.5 359.1 203.4 3.7 390.3 51.3 329.6 71.8 257.8 9.5 199813.6 33.9 483.6 65.6 418.0 332.3 85.6 2.0 284.4 23.8 260.6 64.9 195.7 5.8 1999
13.9 47.4 586.0 113.7 472.2 382.9 89.3 1.7 314.9 35.4 279.5 62.5 217.0 5.6 2000
13.8 47.6 622.7 91.9 530.8 434.5 96.3 1.4 350.6 34.0 316.6 97.6 219.0 5.3 200115.6 44.8 614.2 101.6 512.7 410.4 102.3 1.1 319.2 33.5 285.7 87.0 198.7 4.5 2002
14.4 46.9 647.7 123.4 524.2 426.0 98.2 1.3 366.3 36.0 330.3 109.2 221.2 4.9 2002          Apr 
14.1 47.4 646.2 119.3 526.9 428.8 98.1 1.2 366.0 34.9 331.1 112.7 218.4 4.7          May13.1 47.0 608.3 133.9 474.4 376.0 98.4 1.1 344.2 38.2 306.0 93.0 213.0 4.5          June
13.4 47.2 618.3 121.3 497.1 395.4 101.6 1.1 347.9 38.6 309.3 95.8 213.5 4.6          July
13.4 47.0 615.5 91.8 523.7 419.2 104.5 1.1 337.2 34.8 302.5 100.9 201.6 4.5          Aug 13.4 47.0 626.2 132.7 493.5 389.3 104.2 1.1 344.6 41.2 303.4 103.2 200.2 4.6          Sep 
14.2 45.7 633.0 116.1 516.9 412.9 104.1 1.1 342.4 38.2 304.2 99.4 204.8 4.6          Oct 
14.7 45.8 648.3 125.2 523.1 420.1 103.0 1.1 346.8 42.6 304.2 101.1 203.0 4.7          Nov 15.6 44.8 614.2 101.6 512.7 410.4 102.3 1.1 319.2 33.5 285.7 87.0 198.7 4.5          Dec 
15.4 42.7 623.1 112.6 510.5 406.1 104.4 1.0 324.7 35.7 289.1 95.4 193.7 4.4 2003          Jan 
15.4 42.4 616.4 117.7 498.7 392.8 105.9 1.0 330.8 33.2 297.6 107.5 190.1 4.3          Feb 15.4 43.3 621.7 131.7 490.0 384.4 105.6 1.0 339.8 43.3 296.5 109.2 187.3 4.2          Mar 
15.1 43.2 634.6 141.6 493.0 387.9 105.1 1.0 333.3 39.3 294.0 110.3 183.7 4.0          Apr 
14.7 41.7 620.9 128.0 492.9 386.0 106.9 1.0 332.0 43.6 288.4 109.8 178.7 3.8          May15.1 42.2 622.8 143.1 479.7 372.8 106.9 1.0 324.6 43.8 280.8 99.8 180.9 3.9          June
15.2 43.1 617.2 123.6 493.7 384.1 109.6 0.9 328.0 40.3 287.7 108.5 179.2 3.9          July
15.3 43.1 601.1 108.0 493.1 386.3 106.8 0.3 324.7 39.5 285.2 103.5 181.7 4.7          Aug 15.0 43.7 607.5 144.2 463.3 361.2 102.1 0.3 326.6 40.0 286.6 109.5 177.1 6.8          Sep 
Changes*
−1.7 + 4.2 + 85.6 + 31.3 + 56.0 + 33.9 + 22.1 −1.7 + 23.1 + 3.9 + 19.8 + 3.4 + 16.4 −0.7 1994
−0.2 + 5.2 + 71.0 + 7.9 + 64.6 + 45.9 + 18.7 −1.5 + 47.8 + 2.2 + 46.5 + 4.1 + 42.4 −0.9 1995
−2.3 + 5.9 + 11.3 + 27.1 − 13.9 − 26.6 + 12.7 −1.9 + 44.7 + 11.7 + 35.0 + 3.7 + 31.3 −2.0 1996
+ 2.7 + 7.9 + 157.3 + 67.7 + 89.5 + 71.8 + 17.7 + 0.1 + 51.0 + 5.4 + 43.3 + 11.4 + 31.9 + 2.3 1997+ 7.7 + 8.8 + 215.6 + 87.7 + 128.1 + 108.1 + 20.0 −0.3 + 64.7 + 10.4 + 48.9 + 10.3 + 38.6 + 5.5 1998
+ 1.1 + 10.9 + 37.4 −9.2 + 46.6 + 47.6 −1.0 −0.0 + 61.0 + 7.2 + 53.8 + 15.9 + 37.9 + 0.1 1999
−0.2 + 12.8 + 90.0 + 47.0 + 43.0 + 42.9 + 0.1 −0.4 + 24.4 + 11.1 + 13.3 −2.9 + 16.2 −0.8 2000
−0.5 − 0.5 + 23.5 −23.6 + 47.0 + 42.4 + 4.6 −0.4 + 30.8 −1.8 + 32.6 + 33.3 −0.7 −0.6 2001
+ 1.7 + 1.6 + 22.7 + 14.6 + 8.1 − 1.3 + 9.4 −0.3 + 4.6 + 0.8 + 3.8 −4.6 + 8.4 −0.9 2002
+ 0.3 + 0.2 + 27.1 + 2.3 + 24.8 + 24.3 + 0.5 −0.1 + 7.1 + 1.3 + 5.8 + 3.9 + 1.9 −0.2 2002          Apr 
−0.3 + 1.1 + 7.3 −2.8 + 10.1 + 9.1 + 1.0 −0.0 + 5.4 −0.8 + 6.2 + 5.2 + 1.0 −0.2          May
−1.0 + 0.3 −27.3 + 16.1 − 43.4 − 44.4 + 1.0 −0.1 −14.5 + 3.7 −18.2 −17.6 −0.6 −0.3          June
+ 0.2 − 0.1 + 5.5 −13.6 + 19.0 + 16.3 + 2.7 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 2.1 −1.6 + 0.1          July
−0.0 − 0.2 − 1.5 −29.2 + 27.7 + 24.8 + 3.0 −0.0 + 4.7 −3.8 + 8.5 + 5.3 + 3.2 −0.0          Aug 
+ 0.1 + 0.0 + 11.3 + 40.9 − 29.6 − 29.6 −0.1 + 0.0 + 8.1 + 6.5 + 1.6 + 2.9 −1.3 + 0.1          Sep 
+ 0.7 + 0.1 + 7.2 −16.6 + 23.7 + 23.8 −0.1 −0.0 −1.9 −3.0 + 1.1 −3.8 + 4.8 −0.0          Oct 
+ 0.5 + 0.3 + 16.8 + 9.4 + 7.4 + 8.4 −0.9 −0.0 + 5.5 + 4.5 + 1.0 + 2.0 −1.0 + 0.1          Nov 
+ 0.9 − 0.4 −25.4 −22.0 − 3.4 − 3.8 + 0.5 −0.0 −21.6 −8.6 −13.0 −13.0 −0.1 −0.2          Dec 
−0.2 − 1.7 + 14.4 + 11.7 + 2.7 − 0.1 + 2.8 −0.1 + 9.1 + 2.5 + 6.6 + 9.2 −2.5 −0.1 2003          Jan 
+ 0.1 − 0.3 − 6.7 + 5.4 − 12.0 − 13.5 + 1.5 −0.0 + 6.6 −2.5 + 9.2 + 12.2 −3.1 −0.1          Feb 
−0.1 + 1.0 + 7.4 + 14.3 − 6.9 − 7.0 + 0.0 −0.0 + 10.3 + 10.2 + 0.1 + 2.0 −1.9 −0.1          Mar 
−0.3 + 0.1 + 17.1 + 10.6 + 6.5 + 6.4 + 0.2 + 0.0 −4.0 −3.8 −0.1 + 1.8 −1.9 −0.3          Apr 
−0.4 − 0.7 − 4.3 −11.8 + 7.5 + 4.2 + 3.3 −0.1 + 5.0 + 4.7 + 0.2 + 0.9 −0.7 −0.2          May
+ 0.4 + 0.1 − 3.0 + 14.1 − 17.1 − 16.2 −0.8 + 0.0 −10.9 + 0.0 −10.9 −10.6 −0.3 + 0.2          June
+ 0.0 + 0.3 − 6.9 −19.8 + 12.8 + 10.4 + 2.4 −0.1 + 2.7 −3.6 + 6.4 + 8.5 −2.1 −0.0          July
+ 0.2 − 0.5 −22.3 −16.7 − 5.6 − 1.7 −3.9 −0.0 −7.3 −1.1 −6.2 −5.9 −0.2 + 0.1          Aug 
−0.3 + 1.2 + 16.1 + 37.6 − 21.5 − 18.4 −3.1 −0.0 + 7.8 + 1.1 + 6.7 + 7.5 −0.8 + 2.1          Sep 
4Up to November 1993, included in securities (see also footnote 5). —5Up capital supplied to branches abroad. —8Up to December 1998, including
to November 1993, including negotiable money market paper; excluding time deposits with terms of less than one month. —9Up to December 1998,
registered debt securities. —6From 1999, no longer included in loans and excluding time deposits with terms of less than one month. 
deposits (see also footnote 2). —7Up to December 1998, including working
29*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
IV Banks
 
5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)*
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999,  5  billion
Lending to domestic Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total  1,2 
      to public authorities to enter- to enterprises and individuals  1 
 
including excluding Negoti-
negotiable money ablemarket paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total paper Total Loans bills  
5 Total Total bills 3,4 
End of year or month*
 
1993 3,826.4 3,417.8 563.2 544.2 540.8 3.4 19.0 16.8 2.2 3,263.2 2,441.8
1994 4,137.2 3,633.1 583.5 549.1 548.6 0.4 34.4 32.7 1.8 3,553.7 2,661.9
1995 4,436.9 3,936.9 615.2 584.0 583.3 0.7 31.3 30.5 0.8 3,821.7 2,785.5
1996 4,773.1 4,248.7 662.2 617.2 616.2 1.0 45.1 40.2 4.9 4,110.8 3,007.21997 5,058.4 4,506.2 667.8 625.8 624.8 1.0 41.9 40.1 1.9 4,390.6 3,223.41998 5,379.8 4,775.4 704.3 661.3 660.8 0.5 43.0 38.5 4.5 4,675.5 3,482.41999 2,904.5 2,576.5 355.3 328.9 328.7 0.2 26.4 23.6 2.8 2,549.2 1,943.6
2000 3,003.7 2,663.7 371.2 348.2 347.7 0.5 22.9 21.2 1.7 2,632.5 2,038.6
2001 3,014.1 2,704.2 387.9 356.7 355.2 1.5 31.2 28.2 2.9 2,626.2 2,070.22002 2,997.2 2,689.1 365.4 331.9 331.0 1.0 33.5 31.1 2.4 2,631.8 2,079.7
2002          Apr 3,004.3 2,691.8 379.1 348.2 347.1 1.1 30.8 28.2 2.6 2,625.3 2,069.3
         May 3,005.7 2,687.0 373.6 344.9 344.0 0.9 28.6 24.9 3.7 2,632.2 2,072.7         June 2,990.8 2,683.1 370.7 343.1 342.2 0.9 27.6 23.4 4.2 2,620.1 2,066.7
         July 2,995.7 2,689.5 370.4 335.5 334.1 1.5 34.9 32.2 2.7 2,625.3 2,068.5
         Aug 2,987.3 2,679.9 356.0 331.2 329.9 1.2 24.8 22.1 2.7 2,631.4 2,073.3         Sep 2,995.5 2,687.4 367.4 343.2 341.6 1.5 24.2 21.8 2.4 2,628.2 2,068.8
         Oct 2,997.6 2,688.8 364.2 335.7 334.2 1.5 28.5 26.1 2.4 2,633.4 2,076.6
         Nov 3,003.5 2,687.5 365.8 332.5 330.9 1.7 33.3 31.4 1.9 2,637.7 2,079.9         Dec 2,997.2 2,689.1 365.4 331.9 331.0 1.0 33.5 31.1 2.4 2,631.8 2,079.7
2003          Jan 3,005.1 2,690.8 371.1 329.7 328.5 1.2 41.4 38.6 2.8 2,634.0 2,076.5
         Feb 3,001.9 2,686.4 364.4 329.3 328.1 1.2 35.1 32.7 2.4 2,637.4 2,077.5         Mar 3,005.5 2,681.3 369.2 332.5 330.4 2.2 36.7 34.0 2.7 2,636.3 2,071.6
         Apr 3,007.6 2,680.2 366.3 326.5 324.2 2.2 39.8 37.0 2.8 2,641.3 2,079.0
         May 3,003.6 2,671.7 356.2 321.4 319.1 2.3 34.7 32.6 2.2 2,647.4 2,080.5         June 2,992.4 2,674.1 359.6 328.9 326.9 2.0 30.7 28.8 1.9 2,632.8 2,077.4
         July 2,996.0 2,675.8 357.5 315.5 314.2 1.3 42.0 39.8 2.2 2,638.6 2,081.8
         Aug 2,986.9 2,671.9 346.7 308.2 306.8 1.4 38.5 36.5 2.0 2,640.2 2,090.5         Sep 2,995.7 2,680.2 356.7 323.8 322.9 0.9 32.9 31.7 1.2 2,639.0 2,088.3
Changes*
1994 + 320.5 + 244.0 + 13.2 + 7.0 + 9.9 −2.9 + 6.2 + 6.6 −0.4 + 307.2 + 249.1
1995 + 312.8 + 311.9 + 35.9 + 37.9 + 37.7 + 0.2 − 1.9 − 1.0 −1.0 + 276.9 + 185.1
1996 + 336.3 + 312.9 + 44.3 + 32.6 + 32.2 + 0.4 + 11.7 + 7.4 + 4.3 + 292.0 + 221.51997 + 285.2 + 256.9 + 2.7 + 5.9 + 5.9 + 0.0 − 3.2 − 0.1 −3.0 + 282.5 + 219.9
1998 + 335.3 + 285.5 + 51.7 + 50.6 + 51.2 −0.6 + 1.1 − 1.6 + 2.7 + 283.6 + 258.3
1999 + 156.1 + 139.5 + 9.6 + 6.3 + 6.4 −0.0 + 3.3 + 2.9 + 0.4 + 146.4 + 146.4
2000 + 100.7 + 83.2 + 14.5 + 18.1 + 17.8 + 0.3 − 3.6 − 2.5 −1.1 + 86.1 + 93.8
2001 + 11.9 + 39.2 + 15.3 + 7.0 + 5.9 + 1.0 + 8.4 + 7.8 + 0.6 − 3.4 + 32.0
2002 − 19.2 − 18.8 −23.4 −25.7 −25.2 −0.5 + 2.3 + 2.9 −0.6 + 4.3 + 7.6
2002          Apr + 8.1 − 2.4 − 3.4 − 0.8 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 2.6 − 3.6 + 1.0 + 11.5 + 8.2
         May + 2.2 − 4.1 − 5.1 − 2.9 − 2.8 −0.2 − 2.2 − 3.3 + 1.1 + 7.4 + 3.7
         June − 19.0 − 8.0 − 3.3 − 2.3 − 2.3 + 0.0 − 1.0 − 1.5 + 0.5 − 15.6 − 9.6
         July + 5.1 + 6.5 − 0.3 − 7.6 − 8.1 + 0.5 + 7.3 + 8.8 −1.5 + 5.5 + 2.1
         Aug − 8.4 − 9.6 −14.4 − 4.4 − 4.1 −0.2 −10.0 −10.1 + 0.0 + 6.1 + 4.0
         Sep + 7.9 + 7.2 + 11.2 + 11.8 + 11.5 + 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.3 −0.3 − 3.3 − 3.9
         Oct + 2.0 + 1.4 − 3.2 − 7.5 − 7.5 −0.0 + 4.3 + 4.3 + 0.0 + 5.2 + 7.7
         Nov + 6.0 − 1.3 + 1.4 − 3.4 − 3.5 + 0.1 + 4.8 + 5.2 −0.5 + 4.5 + 3.5
         Dec − 6.3 + 1.6 − 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.1 −0.7 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.5 − 5.9 − 0.3
2003          Jan + 7.9 + 1.7 + 5.7 − 2.2 − 2.4 + 0.2 + 7.9 + 7.5 + 0.4 + 2.2 − 3.6
         Feb − 3.3 − 4.4 − 6.7 − 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 6.3 − 5.9 −0.4 + 3.5 + 1.0
         Mar + 3.7 − 5.1 + 4.8 + 3.2 + 2.2 + 1.0 + 1.6 + 1.3 + 0.3 − 1.2 − 5.9
         Apr + 2.1 − 1.1 − 3.0 − 6.0 − 6.1 + 0.1 + 3.1 + 3.0 + 0.1 + 5.1 + 7.2
         May − 3.8 − 8.5 −10.1 − 5.0 − 5.1 + 0.1 − 5.1 − 4.5 −0.6 + 6.3 + 1.8
         June − 11.1 + 2.5 + 3.4 + 7.5 + 7.8 −0.3 − 4.1 − 3.8 −0.2 − 14.6 − 3.1
         July + 3.8 + 1.7 − 1.9 −13.2 −12.7 −0.5 + 11.3 + 11.0 + 0.2 + 5.7 + 4.3
         Aug − 9.1 − 4.0 −10.7 − 7.3 − 7.4 + 0.1 − 3.4 − 3.3 −0.1 + 1.6 + 8.7
         Sep + 9.6 + 8.3 + 10.0 + 15.6 + 16.1 −0.5 − 5.6 − 4.8 −0.9 − 0.4 − 2.2
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the including fiduciary loans (see also footnote 9). —3Up to December 1998,
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks ’portfolios
Report , are not specially marked. —1Up to December 1998, including loans prior to maturity). —4From 1999, including small amounts of medium-term
to domestic building and loan associations. —2Up to December 1998, series of bills. —5From December 1993, including other negotiable
30*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
IV Banks
 
   
 
lending  2,6 
prises and individuals  1,2 to public authorities  2 
Loans Loans
Memo Memo
item Equal- item
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term  7 term  8 loans  9 Total term  7 term  8 loans  9   Period Securities  6 ities 6,10 claims  11 
End of year or month*
 
2,241.5 253.9 1,987.5 134.2 66.1 821.4 537.1 36.8 500.3 193.5 75.3 15.5 1993
2,390.4 228.3 2,162.0 203.2 68.3 891.8 577.0 34.5 542.5 230.5 68.1 16.1 1994
2,522.0 214.1 2,307.9 192.9 70.6 1,036.2 713.0 74.5 638.4 234.4 71.3 17.5 1995
2,713.3 215.8 2,497.5 205.9 88.0 1,103.6 773.0 69.5 703.6 231.3 81.3 18.0 19962,900.0 216.2 2,683.8 234.1 89.3 1,167.2 833.8 53.0 780.8 239.2 76.0 18.3 19973,104.5 206.8 2,897.8 292.4 85.4 1,193.2 868.8 33.1 835.7 235.4 71.6 17.3 19981,764.8 182.5 1,582.3 178.9 49.2 605.6 459.5 30.9 428.6 108.6 37.5 8.7 1999
1,838.9 192.8 1,646.0 199.7 50.1 593.9 455.9 30.4 425.5 104.9 33.1 8.4 2000
1,880.5 191.1 1,689.4 189.7 48.9 556.0 440.3 25.6 414.6 111.8 4.0 8.0 20011,909.8 193.5 1,716.3 169.9 47.3 552.1 417.1 27.4 389.7 132.0 3.0 7.5 2002
1,884.5 189.8 1,694.7 184.8 48.2 556.0 431.9 26.2 405.7 120.1 3.9 7.9 2002          Apr 
1,888.0 189.9 1,698.1 184.7 48.1 559.5 430.1 26.3 403.8 125.5 3.9 7.9          May1,891.0 191.2 1,699.9 175.6 47.6 553.4 426.4 24.4 402.0 123.0 3.9 7.8          June
1,897.5 191.7 1,705.8 171.0 47.5 556.8 425.8 24.5 401.3 128.0 3.0 7.7          July
1,901.6 192.3 1,709.3 171.6 47.5 558.1 426.2 24.7 401.5 128.9 3.0 7.7          Aug 1,900.6 192.1 1,708.6 168.2 47.3 559.3 423.3 24.6 398.7 133.1 3.0 7.7          Sep 
1,906.5 193.8 1,712.6 170.1 47.5 556.8 422.1 24.7 397.4 131.8 3.0 7.6          Oct 
1,907.6 192.5 1,715.1 172.4 47.3 557.8 417.7 25.5 392.2 137.1 3.0 7.7          Nov 1,909.8 193.5 1,716.3 169.9 47.3 552.1 417.1 27.4 389.7 132.0 3.0 7.5          Dec 
1,909.4 194.8 1,714.6 167.1 47.0 557.4 414.2 30.0 384.2 140.3 3.0 7.7 2003          Jan 
1,911.1 194.0 1,717.1 166.5 47.1 559.9 414.4 31.5 382.9 142.5 3.0 7.7          Feb 1,907.1 193.1 1,714.0 164.5 47.2 564.6 409.8 29.9 379.8 151.9 3.0 7.6          Mar 
1,910.3 193.3 1,717.0 168.6 47.0 562.4 408.6 30.9 377.6 150.8 3.0 7.5          Apr 
1,912.9 193.2 1,719.7 167.6 47.0 566.9 407.1 31.5 375.5 156.9 3.0 7.5          May1,912.8 193.5 1,719.3 164.6 47.0 555.4 405.7 31.5 374.2 146.8 3.0 7.4          June
1,916.9 193.9 1,723.0 164.9 46.9 556.8 404.9 31.3 373.6 149.8 2.0 7.3          July
1,924.6 195.5 1,729.1 165.9 47.3 549.7 403.9 32.9 371.1 143.7 2.0 7.2          Aug 1,922.2 195.0 1,727.2 166.1 47.2 550.6 403.3 33.7 369.6 145.3 2.0 7.2          Sep 
Changes*
+ 198.7 −29.2 + 227.9 + 48.5 + 1.9 + 58.2 + 26.2 − 2.4 + 28.5 + 38.3 − 6.9 + 0.7 1994
+ 176.0 − 1.9 + 177.9 + 3.3 + 5.9 + 91.8 + 91.8 + 15.3 + 76.6 − 0.4 − 1.2 + 1.5 1995
+ 204.4 + 1.6 + 202.8 + 14.0 + 3.1 + 70.4 + 65.7 − 5.5 + 71.2 − 3.3 + 8.0 + 0.1 1996
+ 189.0 + 0.3 + 188.7 + 29.5 + 1.4 + 62.6 + 60.6 −18.0 + 78.6 + 7.0 − 5.3 + 0.2 1997
+ 205.7 − 8.9 + 214.6 + 56.5 −3.9 + 25.3 + 35.0 −20.0 + 55.0 − 4.4 − 4.4 −0.9 1998
+ 121.8 + 25.1 + 96.8 + 24.6 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 8.5 + 6.2 + 2.3 − 7.8 − 0.6 −0.1 1999
+ 71.8 + 6.9 + 64.9 + 22.1 + 0.8 − 7.7 − 3.8 − 0.4 − 3.5 − 3.1 − 0.8 −0.3 2000
+ 41.9 − 2.8 + 44.7 − 9.8 −1.2 − 35.4 −16.5 − 5.5 −10.9 + 10.1 −29.1 −0.4 2001
+ 26.6 − 2.1 + 28.7 −19.0 −1.6 − 3.4 −23.1 + 1.0 −24.1 + 20.7 − 1.0 −0.5 2002
+ 2.4 + 0.4 + 2.0 + 5.8 −0.1 + 3.3 − 0.3 + 0.6 − 0.9 + 3.6 + 0.0 −0.0 2002          Apr 
+ 3.8 + 0.2 + 3.6 − 0.0 −0.0 + 3.6 − 1.9 + 0.0 − 1.9 + 5.5 + 0.0 −0.0          May
− 0.5 − 1.9 + 1.4 − 9.0 −0.5 − 6.1 − 3.6 − 1.8 − 1.8 − 2.4 − 0.0 −0.1          June
+ 6.4 + 0.5 + 5.9 − 4.4 −0.1 + 3.4 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.7 + 5.0 − 1.0 −0.1          July
+ 4.1 + 0.6 + 3.5 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 2.1 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 1.6 + 0.0 −0.0          Aug 
− 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.7 − 2.8 −0.2 + 0.6 − 2.9 − 0.1 − 2.8 + 3.5 + 0.0 −0.0          Sep 
+ 5.8 + 1.8 + 4.1 + 1.9 + 0.2 − 2.5 − 1.2 + 0.1 − 1.3 − 1.3 − 0.0 −0.0          Oct 
+ 1.3 − 2.8 + 4.1 + 2.3 −0.1 + 1.0 − 4.3 + 0.0 − 4.4 + 5.4 + 0.0 + 0.0          Nov 
+ 2.2 + 1.0 + 1.3 − 2.5 −0.0 − 5.7 − 0.6 + 1.9 − 2.5 − 5.1 −− 0.1          Dec 
− 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 3.2 −0.2 + 5.8 − 2.9 + 0.3 − 3.3 + 8.7 − 0.0 + 0.2 2003          Jan 
+ 1.7 − 0.7 + 2.4 − 0.7 + 0.1 + 2.4 + 0.2 + 1.5 − 1.3 + 2.2 − 0.0 + 0.0          Feb 
− 4.0 − 0.9 − 3.0 − 2.0 + 0.1 + 4.8 − 4.6 − 1.5 − 3.1 + 9.4 + 0.0 −0.1          Mar 
+ 3.2 + 0.2 + 3.0 + 4.0 −0.2 − 2.1 − 1.2 + 1.0 − 2.2 − 0.9 − 0.0 −0.0          Apr 
+ 2.6 − 0.1 + 2.7 − 0.8 −0.1 + 4.6 − 1.5 + 0.6 − 2.1 + 6.1 −− 0.0          May
− 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.4 − 3.0 + 0.0 − 11.5 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 1.4 −10.1 − 0.0 −0.1          June
+ 4.1 + 0.4 + 3.7 + 0.3 −0.1 + 1.4 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 3.1 − 1.0 −0.1          July
+ 7.8 + 1.6 + 6.1 + 1.0 + 0.4 − 7.1 − 1.0 + 1.5 − 2.5 − 6.1 − 0.0 −0.1          Aug 
− 2.4 − 0.5 − 1.9 + 0.2 −0.2 + 1.8 − 0.6 + 0.9 − 1.5 + 2.4 + 0.0 −0.0          Sep 
money market paper; excluding mobilisation and liquidity paper. —6From notice of four years and more; from 1999, of more than five years. —9From
1999, breakdown of securities by medium and long-term lending no longer 1999, no longer included in lending (see also footnote 2). —10Excluding
possible. —7Up to December 1998, maturity or period of notice of more debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims (see also
than one year to less than four years; from 1999, more than one year up to footnote 11). —11Including debt securities arising from the exchange of
and including five years. —8Up to December 1998, maturity or period of equalisation claims. 
31*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
IV Banks
 
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and resident individuals, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
 
 5  billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and resident individuals (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities portfolios)  1 
of which  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
 
Financing
Mortgage institu-
loans tions
secured Whole- Agri- Electricity, Transport, (excluding
by gas and sale culture, storage MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which water and forestry and insurance
loans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- supply, Construc- retail and commu- enter-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing mining  2 tion trade  3 fishing nication prises
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2000 2,187.3 955.2 1,030.8 737.6 293.2 1,267.8 344.1 174.9 35.9 68.2 173.2 31.4 49.1 34.2
2001 2,236.3 981.4 1,053.9 757.7 296.2 1,295.6 346.1 174.3 36.7 67.9 172.9 31.3 50.0 39.0
2002          Sep 2,242.7 1,000.0 1,064.3 770.7 293.6 1,286.1 344.5 168.2 38.3 66.9 165.7 32.5 50.5 42.1
         Dec 2,241.2 1,008.9 1,068.7 776.3 292.4 1,277.3 340.1 161.5 37.4 64.6 162.6 31.3 51.3 39.5
2003          Mar 2,237.9 1,012.5 1,067.0 782.0 285.0 1,273.2 338.4 158.5 37.3 63.5 159.3 32.0 51.1 50.3
         June 2,240.1 1,011.4 1,070.5 782.5 288.0 1,267.1 338.0 157.8 37.0 62.9 156.9 32.5 52.2 48.7         Sep 2,245.6 1,106.2 1,077.5 845.7 231.8 1,262.1 338.1 154.4 36.2 61.7 153.3 32.9 53.6 53.9
 Short-term lending
2000 348.4 − 15.9 − 15.9 294.6 10.7 61.5 6.2 17.9 62.2 4.2 10.1 10.5
2001 355.8 − 15.9 − 15.9 304.1 10.6 59.6 5.5 17.8 63.5 4.1 9.3 14.2
2002          Sep 342.1 − 14.1 − 14.1 291.2 9.1 56.6 6.1 17.5 59.3 4.8 8.8 17.0
         Dec 331.4 − 14.5 − 14.5 281.1 9.3 52.0 5.1 15.9 58.7 4.2 8.4 13.6
2003          Mar 330.7 − 13.7 − 13.7 282.8 8.8 50.6 4.8 16.0 57.4 4.5 8.0 24.2
         June 327.3 − 14.4 − 14.4 278.8 9.3 51.1 4.5 15.9 56.5 4.7 7.9 22.3
         Sep 323.3 − 14.0 − 14.0 274.6 8.7 48.7 3.9 15.1 54.6 4.7 7.8 26.3
 Medium-term lending
2000 192.8 − 39.3 − 39.3 120.1 12.8 17.6 1.5 7.0 13.3 3.4 6.9 9.1
2001 191.1 − 37.1 − 37.1 120.1 12.0 18.5 1.9 6.5 13.4 3.2 7.2 7.7
2002          Sep 192.1 − 35.7 − 35.7 121.0 11.6 18.0 2.4 6.6 13.3 3.3 8.1 6.7
         Dec 193.5 − 36.1 − 36.1 121.8 11.3 17.9 2.0 6.5 13.5 3.3 8.5 6.8
2003          Mar 193.1 − 35.9 − 35.9 121.3 11.4 17.7 2.2 6.3 13.1 3.3 9.1 6.3
         June 193.5 − 37.4 − 37.4 121.0 11.9 17.6 2.5 6.0 12.7 3.4 9.9 6.4
         Sep 195.0 − 38.0 − 38.0 121.4 12.0 17.6 2.2 6.1 12.6 3.4 10.5 6.4
 Long-term lending
2000 1,646.0 955.2 975.5 737.6 238.0 853.1 320.6 95.9 28.2 43.4 97.7 23.9 32.1 14.62001 1,689.4 981.4 1,000.9 757.7 243.2 871.4 323.5 96.2 29.4 43.7 96.1 24.0 33.5 17.1
2002          Sep 1,708.6 1,000.0 1,014.5 770.7 243.8 873.9 323.8 93.6 29.9 42.8 93.0 24.4 33.5 18.4
         Dec 1,716.3 1,008.9 1,018.1 776.3 241.9 874.4 319.4 91.5 30.3 42.2 90.3 23.8 34.4 19.0
2003          Mar 1,714.0 1,012.5 1,017.3 782.0 235.3 869.1 318.2 90.2 30.4 41.2 88.8 24.2 34.1 19.8
         June 1,719.3 1,011.4 1,018.7 782.5 236.2 867.2 316.7 89.1 30.0 41.0 87.6 24.4 34.4 20.1         Sep 1,727.2 1,106.2 1,025.5 845.7 179.8 866.1 317.4 88.1 30.0 40.6 86.1 24.7 35.2 21.2
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2002          Q3 + 8.8 + 4.8 + 5.7 + 3.6 + 2.1 − 1.2 − 0.6 − 3.4 − 1.1 − 1.4 − 1.4 + 0.5 − 1.1 + 5.6
         Q4 − 1.5 + 4.3 + 6.3 + 3.0 + 3.3 − 8.7 − 0.9 − 6.2 − 0.9 − 2.3 − 1.4 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 2.7
2003          Q1 − 3.3 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.3 − 4.2 − 1.8 − 2.9 − 0.1 − 1.1 − 3.5 + 0.7 − 0.2 + 10.3
         Q2 + 2.2 + 0.7 + 5.8 + 2.7 + 3.1 − 6.1 − 1.1 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 2.3 + 0.5 + 1.0 − 1.6
         Q3 + 5.4 + 4.5 + 8.3 + 6.3 + 2.1 − 5.0 − 0.4 − 3.5 − 0.8 − 1.1 − 3.4 + 0.4 + 1.4 + 5.1
 Short-term lending
2002          Q3 − 0.8 −− 0.2 −− 0.2 − 2.2 − 0.3 − 2.1 − 1.2 − 0.9 − 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.8 + 5.0
         Q4 −10.8 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 −10.2 + 0.2 − 4.6 − 1.0 − 1.6 − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 3.4
2003          Q1 − 0.7 −− 0.9 −− 0.9 + 1.6 − 0.6 − 1.5 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.3 − 0.4 + 10.6
         Q2 − 3.4 − + 0.4 − + 0.4 − 4.0 + 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 2.0
         Q3 − 4.0 −− 0.4 −− 0.4 − 4.2 − 0.7 − 2.4 − 0.6 − 0.8 − 1.8 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 3.9
 Medium-term lending
2002          Q3 + 0.8 −− 0.3 −− 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2
         Q4 − 0.1 −− 0.4 −− 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.1
2003          Q1 − 1.7 −− 0.3 −− 0.3 − 1.8 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.7
         Q2 + 0.4 − + 0.7 − + 0.7 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.8 + 0.1
         Q3 + 1.5 − + 0.5 − + 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.1
 Long-term lending
2002          Q3 + 8.7 + 4.8 + 6.2 + 3.6 + 2.7 + 0.9 − 0.2 − 1.5 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.5
         Q4 + 9.4 + 4.3 + 6.4 + 3.0 + 3.5 + 1.5 − 0.7 − 1.5 + 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.6
2003          Q1 − 1.0 − 0.4 + 1.2 + 0.4 + 0.9 − 4.1 − 1.2 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 1.0 − 1.6 + 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.4
         Q2 + 5.3 + 0.7 + 4.6 + 2.7 + 2.0 − 1.8 − 1.6 − 1.1 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.3
         Q3 + 7.9 + 4.5 + 8.3 + 6.3 + 2.0 − 1.1 + 0.3 − 1.0 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 1.5 + 0.3 + 0.8 + 1.1
*Excluding lending by foreign branches. Breakdown of lending by building always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent alterations, which will
and loan associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical alterations appear in the following Monthly Report , are not specially marked. —
have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest date are 1Excluding loans on a trust basis. —2Including quarrying. —3Including
32*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
IV Banks
 
   
 
 
 
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which of which
Debitbalanceson wage,
Other Lending salaryreal to self- Lending and of which
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans  
5 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises enterprises persons  4 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
700.8 162.3 46.8 183.1 459.0 75.0 905.5 683.0 222.6 108.6 24.3 14.0 3.7 2000
723.3 169.4 50.3 194.3 458.6 74.7 926.7 704.3 222.4 110.7 22.9 14.1 3.5 2001
721.9 171.1 47.8 199.8 453.5 74.0 942.1 716.4 225.8 114.6 23.9 14.5 3.4 2002          Sep 
729.2 165.0 50.2 207.2 451.8 72.4 949.5 725.1 224.3 114.3 23.0 14.4 3.5          Dec 
721.1 163.6 48.6 206.4 448.1 72.9 950.5 725.0 225.4 115.5 22.1 14.3 3.5 2003          Mar 
719.1 163.2 48.5 206.8 444.5 71.9 958.8 729.1 229.8 114.2 22.7 14.2 3.5          June716.1 162.3 48.6 205.7 441.8 70.2 969.7 735.9 233.7 116.2 23.2 13.8 3.5          Sep 
Short-term lending
122.1 19.6 18.1 30.0 57.1 16.2 52.6 5.2 47.4 2.3 24.3 1.2 0.0 2000130.1 21.6 20.4 34.1 56.0 15.8 50.3 5.3 45.0 2.8 22.9 1.4 0.0 2001
121.0 20.9 17.3 33.0 53.8 16.1 49.2 5.0 44.2 2.5 23.9 1.7 0.0 2002          Sep 
123.3 19.8 19.1 34.7 53.8 14.8 48.5 5.2 43.3 2.4 23.0 1.7 0.0          Dec 
117.3 19.0 18.0 33.5 52.2 15.3 46.2 4.9 41.3 2.3 22.1 1.7 0.0 2003          Mar 
115.9 18.7 17.9 33.6 51.8 15.0 46.8 5.0 41.7 2.3 22.7 1.7 0.0          June113.5 17.9 18.3 32.1 50.6 14.4 47.3 5.2 42.0 2.4 23.2 1.4 0.0          Sep 
Medium-term lending
61.4 6.8 6.3 13.6 33.1 5.5 72.2 26.4 45.8 33.0 − 0.6 0.1 2000
61.9 6.7 6.5 14.7 31.2 5.3 70.5 25.0 45.4 33.4 − 0.6 0.1 2001
62.6 6.6 6.6 15.9 31.3 4.9 70.5 24.1 46.4 35.0 − 0.6 0.1 2002          Sep 
63.2 6.2 7.2 16.7 31.2 4.8 71.1 24.7 46.4 35.3 − 0.5 0.1          Dec 
63.5 6.1 6.7 17.8 31.4 4.8 71.3 24.5 46.9 36.1 − 0.5 0.1 2003          Mar 
62.5 6.1 6.3 17.6 31.0 4.7 72.0 25.4 46.6 36.4 − 0.5 0.1          June
62.5 5.9 6.0 17.7 30.8 4.6 73.1 26.0 47.2 37.3 − 0.5 0.1          Sep 
Long-term lending
517.3 135.9 22.5 139.5 368.7 53.2 780.8 651.4 129.4 73.3 − 12.2 3.6 2000
531.3 141.1 23.4 145.6 371.3 53.7 806.0 674.0 132.0 74.4 − 12.1 3.5 2001
538.3 143.5 24.0 150.9 368.3 53.0 822.4 687.3 135.1 77.0 − 12.2 3.4 2002          Sep 
542.8 139.0 24.0 155.8 366.8 52.8 829.8 695.3 134.6 76.6 − 12.1 3.4          Dec 
540.3 138.5 23.9 155.1 364.4 52.8 832.9 695.7 137.3 77.2 − 12.0 3.4 2003          Mar 
540.7 138.4 24.3 155.6 361.8 52.2 840.1 698.6 141.5 75.5 − 12.0 3.4          June
540.1 138.4 24.2 155.9 360.4 51.2 849.2 704.7 144.5 76.5 − 11.9 3.4          Sep 
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
+ 1.0 + 1.3 − 0.2 + 2.2 − 2.1 − 0.7 + 9.6 + 6.4 + 3.3 + 2.1 + 1.2 + 0.4 − 0.0 2002          Q3
+ 6.1 − 2.2 + 2.4 + 4.8 − 1.5 − 1.7 + 7.3 + 7.1 + 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.9 − 0.1 + 0.0          Q4
− 7.4 − 1.3 − 1.6 − 0.2 − 3.8 − 0.2 + 1.0 + 1.9 − 0.9 + 1.8 − 1.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 2003          Q1
− 2.2 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 3.2 − 1.0 + 8.4 + 6.9 + 1.5 + 1.2 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0          Q2
− 3.1 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 2.4 − 1.4 + 10.8 + 8.7 + 2.1 + 2.2 + 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.0          Q3
Short-term lending
− 1.6 + 0.1 − 1.0 + 0.5 − 0.9 − 0.2 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 1.2 + 0.4 + 0.0 2002          Q3
+ 2.2 − 1.2 + 1.8 + 1.6 − 0.1 − 1.3 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.0          Q4
− 5.9 − 0.8 − 1.0 − 1.2 − 1.6 + 0.5 − 2.3 − 0.3 − 2.0 − 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 2003          Q1
− 1.4 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0          Q2
− 2.3 − 0.8 + 0.4 − 1.5 − 1.2 − 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.0          Q3
Medium-term lending
− 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 1.0 −− 0.0 − 0.0 2002          Q3
− 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.6 + 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 −− 0.0 + 0.0          Q4
− 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.4 + 0.8 −− 0.0 + 0.0 2003          Q1
− 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.3 − + 0.0 + 0.0          Q2
− 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 0.6 + 0.9 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q3
Long-term lending
+ 3.2 + 1.2 + 1.0 + 1.4 − 1.0 − 0.3 + 7.8 + 6.4 + 1.4 + 1.1 − + 0.0 − 0.0 2002          Q3
+ 4.0 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 2.7 − 1.0 − 0.3 + 8.1 + 7.1 + 1.0 + 0.4 −− 0.1 + 0.0          Q4
− 0.7 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 2.2 − 0.6 + 3.2 + 2.4 + 0.7 + 1.1 −− 0.1 + 0.0 2003          Q1
+ 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.5 − 2.7 − 0.6 + 7.1 + 6.3 + 0.8 + 0.9 −− 0.0 − 0.0          Q2
− 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.7 − 1.0 − 0.7 + 9.2 + 8.0 + 1.2 + 1.1 −− 0.1 − 0.0          Q3
the maintenance and repair of motor vehicles and durable consumer   
goods. —4Including sole proprietors. —5Excluding mortgage loans and   
housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit.  
33*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
  
 5  billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Included Subordinated
 liabilities in time
for up for up (excluding deposits:
to and to and for more Bank negotiable liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month*
 
2000 1,945.8 443.4 819.9 274.7 545.2 9.0 536.2 573.5 109.0 42.1 25.9 −
2001 2,034.0 526.4 827.0 268.7 558.3 10.3 548.0 574.5 106.0 43.3 26.2 3.1
2002 2,085.9 575.6 830.6 258.3 572.3 8.8 563.5 575.3 104.4 42.1 27.9 1.5
2002          Oct 2,037.6 543.1 829.8 264.2 565.6 8.5 557.1 559.7 105.0 41.6 27.7 7.2
         Nov 2,062.1 572.4 822.6 254.0 568.7 8.7 560.0 562.4 104.7 41.5 27.9 3.0         Dec 2,085.9 575.6 830.6 258.3 572.3 8.8 563.5 575.3 104.4 42.1 27.9 1.5
2003          Jan 2,076.4 565.2 830.3 255.7 574.5 8.6 565.9 577.4 103.5 42.1 28.0 3.5
         Feb 2,084.6 571.6 830.0 253.5 576.6 8.3 568.3 579.2 103.7 41.9 29.0 4.1         Mar 2,089.6 578.9 828.4 249.9 578.5 8.5 570.0 579.3 103.0 42.1 28.9 5.2
         Apr 2,094.8 586.3 828.2 249.5 578.7 8.2 570.5 577.9 102.4 41.8 28.9 5.6
         May 2,101.9 591.7 831.2 253.9 577.2 8.1 569.2 577.1 101.9 41.7 29.3 3.8         June 2,109.6 608.9 822.7 245.9 576.8 8.0 568.8 576.7 101.3 41.8 29.8 5.7
         July 2,102.3 595.6 829.0 246.4 582.6 8.0 574.6 576.8 100.9 41.7 29.8 7.1
         Aug 2,111.4 598.5 834.5 248.0 586.5 8.0 578.5 578.0 100.4 41.7 30.1 6.1         Sep 2,112.3 608.8 825.4 240.3 585.1 7.9 577.2 578.3 99.9 41.5 30.1 11.6
Changes*
2001 + 88.5 + 82.3 + 8.1 − 6.0 + 14.1 + 1.3 + 12.8 + 1.1 −2.9 + 1.0 + 0.3 + 3.1
2002 + 51.7 + 48.4 + 4.1 −10.2 + 14.3 − 1.5 + 15.8 + 0.8 −1.6 − 1.1 + 1.8 − 1.6
2002          Oct + 12.8 + 2.3 + 9.5 + 6.4 + 3.1 + 0.1 + 3.0 + 1.4 −0.3 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.5
         Nov + 24.5 + 29.3 − 7.2 −10.3 + 3.1 + 0.2 + 2.9 + 2.7 −0.3 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 4.3
         Dec + 23.8 + 3.3 + 8.0 + 4.4 + 3.6 + 0.1 + 3.5 + 12.8 −0.3 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 1.5
2003          Jan − 9.5 − 10.4 − 0.3 − 2.6 + 2.3 − 0.1 + 2.4 + 2.1 −0.9 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 2.0
         Feb + 7.6 + 6.4 − 0.3 − 2.3 + 2.0 − 0.4 + 2.4 + 1.8 −0.4 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.7
         Mar + 5.1 + 7.3 − 1.6 − 3.6 + 2.0 + 0.3 + 1.7 + 0.1 −0.7 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 1.1
         Apr + 5.1 + 7.4 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.6 − 1.4 −0.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.4
         May + 7.1 + 5.4 + 3.0 + 4.5 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 1.4 − 0.8 −0.5 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 1.9
         June + 7.7 + 17.2 − 8.5 − 8.1 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.4 −0.6 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 1.9
         July − 7.1 − 13.3 + 6.5 + 0.7 + 5.8 − 0.1 + 5.9 + 0.1 −0.4 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.4
         Aug + 9.1 + 2.9 + 5.5 + 1.6 + 3.9 + 0.0 + 3.9 + 1.3 −0.5 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 1.0
         Sep + 0.8 + 10.3 − 9.1 − 7.8 − 1.4 − 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.2 −0.5 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 5.4
Domestic public authorities End of year or month*
2000 149.1 16.6 127.7 62.1 65.5 1.2 64.4 2.7 2.1 36.0 1.4 −
2001 122.7 16.1 102.3 37.7 64.5 1.2 63.3 2.3 2.1 36.6 1.4 −
2002 113.9 16.6 93.3 30.9 62.4 0.9 61.5 2.1 1.9 36.3 1.2 −
2002          Oct 109.7 13.8 91.9 29.0 62.9 0.8 62.1 2.0 2.0 35.6 1.3 −
         Nov 109.6 13.6 92.0 29.0 63.0 0.8 62.1 2.0 2.0 35.6 1.3 −
         Dec 113.9 16.6 93.3 30.9 62.4 0.9 61.5 2.1 1.9 36.3 1.2 −
2003          Jan 109.2 13.5 91.8 29.4 62.4 0.9 61.5 2.0 1.9 36.3 1.1 −
         Feb 111.1 15.2 92.0 30.0 61.9 0.6 61.4 2.0 1.8 36.2 1.1 −
         Mar 109.9 15.0 91.1 30.5 60.6 0.5 60.0 2.0 1.8 36.3 1.1 −
         Apr 107.6 14.5 89.4 29.1 60.3 0.6 59.8 1.9 1.8 36.3 1.1 −
         May 111.4 15.0 92.7 32.6 60.0 0.5 59.5 1.9 1.8 36.2 1.1 −
         June 114.5 18.1 92.6 32.6 60.1 0.5 59.5 1.9 1.7 36.2 1.1 −
         July 109.0 14.5 90.9 31.5 59.4 0.5 58.9 1.9 1.7 36.2 1.1 −
         Aug 107.7 14.7 89.2 30.8 58.4 0.5 57.9 2.0 1.7 36.1 1.1 −
         Sep 105.0 15.4 85.9 28.7 57.2 0.5 56.7 2.0 1.7 36.0 1.1 −
Changes*
2001 − 26.4 − 0.6 − 25.4 −24.4 − 1.0 + 0.0 − 1.1 − 0.5 −0.0 + 0.7 − 0.0 −
2002 − 8.6 + 0.5 − 8.7 − 6.6 − 2.1 − 0.3 − 1.8 − 0.2 −0.2 − 0.3 − 0.2 −
2002          Oct − 4.6 + 0.2 − 4.7 − 4.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 −0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 −
         Nov − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 −
         Dec + 4.3 + 3.0 + 1.3 + 1.8 − 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.1 −0.1 + 0.7 − 0.1 −
2003          Jan − 4.7 − 3.1 − 1.5 − 1.4 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 −0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 −
         Feb + 1.9 + 1.7 + 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 −0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 −
         Mar − 1.2 − 0.2 − 0.9 + 0.5 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 1.4 − 0.0 −0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 −
         Apr − 2.3 − 0.5 − 1.7 − 1.4 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 −0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −
         May + 3.8 + 0.5 + 3.3 + 3.5 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.0 −0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 −
         June + 3.1 + 3.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 −
         July − 5.4 − 3.7 − 1.8 − 1.1 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.0 −0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 −
         Aug − 0.5 + 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 −0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 −
         Sep − 2.6 + 0.7 − 3.3 − 2.1 − 1.2 + 0.0 − 1.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 −
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly
the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as Report , are not specially marked. —1Including subordinated liabilities and
34*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany* (cont ’d)
 
  
 5  billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Included Subordinated
 liabilities in time
for up for up (excluding deposits:
to and to and for more Bank negotiable liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic enterprises and resident individuals End of year or month*
 
2000 1,796.7 426.8 692.2 212.6 479.6 7.8 471.8 570.8 106.9 6.1 24.5 −
2001 1,911.3 510.4 724.7 231.0 493.7 9.1 484.6 572.3 103.9 6.6 24.8 3.1
2002 1,972.0 559.0 737.3 227.5 509.8 7.9 502.0 573.2 102.5 5.8 26.6 1.5
2002          Oct 1,927.9 529.3 737.9 235.2 502.7 7.7 495.0 557.7 103.0 5.9 26.3 7.2
         Nov 1,952.5 558.8 730.6 224.9 505.7 7.8 497.9 560.5 102.7 5.9 26.5 3.0         Dec 1,972.0 559.0 737.3 227.5 509.8 7.9 502.0 573.2 102.5 5.8 26.6 1.5
2003          Jan 1,967.2 551.7 738.5 226.3 512.2 7.8 504.4 575.4 101.6 5.8 26.9 3.5
         Feb 1,973.5 556.4 738.1 223.4 514.6 7.7 506.9 577.2 101.9 5.7 27.8 4.1         Mar 1,979.8 563.9 737.3 219.4 518.0 8.0 510.0 577.3 101.2 5.8 27.8 5.2
         Apr 1,987.2 571.8 738.8 220.4 518.4 7.6 510.8 575.9 100.6 5.5 27.8 5.6
         May 1,990.5 576.7 738.5 221.3 517.2 7.5 509.7 575.1 100.1 5.5 28.1 3.8         June 1,995.2 590.8 730.0 213.3 516.7 7.5 509.2 574.8 99.6 5.5 28.7 5.7
         July 1,993.3 581.2 738.1 214.9 523.2 7.5 515.7 574.8 99.2 5.5 28.7 7.1
         Aug 2,003.8 583.8 745.3 217.2 528.1 7.5 520.6 576.0 98.7 5.5 28.9 6.1         Sep 2,007.3 593.4 739.5 211.6 527.9 7.4 520.5 576.2 98.1 5.5 29.0 11.6
Changes*
2001 + 115.0 + 82.9 + 33.5 + 18.4 + 15.1 + 1.3 + 13.8 + 1.5 −2.9 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 3.1
2002 + 60.3 + 47.9 + 12.8 − 3.6 + 16.4 − 1.2 + 17.5 + 1.0 −1.4 − 0.8 + 2.0 − 1.6
2002          Oct + 17.4 + 2.0 + 14.2 + 11.1 + 3.1 + 0.1 + 3.0 + 1.4 −0.2 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.5
         Nov + 24.6 + 29.5 − 7.3 −10.3 + 3.1 + 0.2 + 2.9 + 2.7 −0.3 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 4.3
         Dec + 19.5 + 0.3 + 6.7 + 2.6 + 4.1 + 0.0 + 4.1 + 12.7 −0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 1.5
2003          Jan − 4.8 − 7.3 + 1.2 − 1.2 + 2.4 − 0.1 + 2.4 + 2.2 −0.9 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 2.0
         Feb + 5.7 + 4.6 − 0.4 − 2.9 + 2.4 − 0.1 + 2.5 + 1.8 −0.3 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.7
         Mar + 6.3 + 7.5 − 0.7 − 4.1 + 3.3 + 0.3 + 3.1 + 0.1 −0.7 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 1.1
         Apr + 7.4 + 7.9 + 1.5 + 1.0 + 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.8 − 1.4 −0.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.4
         May + 3.3 + 4.9 − 0.3 + 0.9 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 1.1 − 0.8 −0.5 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 1.9
         June + 4.6 + 14.0 − 8.5 − 8.0 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.4 −0.5 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 1.9
         July − 1.7 − 9.6 + 8.2 + 1.8 + 6.5 − 0.0 + 6.5 + 0.1 −0.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.4
         Aug + 9.6 + 2.6 + 6.3 + 2.3 + 4.0 + 0.0 + 4.0 + 1.2 −0.5 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 1.0
         Sep + 3.5 + 9.6 − 5.8 − 5.6 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.2 −0.5 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 5.4
of which:  Domestic enterprises End of year or month*
2000 635.1 158.1 447.6 89.0 358.5 2.7 355.8 5.2 24.2 5.9 14.1 −
2001 668.4 180.0 461.3 91.7 369.6 2.9 366.8 4.3 22.8 6.4 14.3 3.12002 700.4 194.6 479.4 99.2 380.2 1.5 378.7 4.4 22.0 5.6 15.8 1.5
2002          Oct 690.0 180.7 482.7 105.6 377.1 1.5 375.7 4.3 22.2 5.7 15.5 7.2
         Nov 692.6 189.0 476.9 97.4 379.5 1.6 378.0 4.3 22.3 5.7 15.7 3.0         Dec 700.4 194.6 479.4 99.2 380.2 1.5 378.7 4.4 22.0 5.6 15.8 1.5
2003          Jan 692.7 185.3 480.7 98.5 382.2 1.5 380.6 4.4 22.3 5.6 16.3 3.5
         Feb 692.3 183.6 481.8 97.7 384.1 1.5 382.7 4.4 22.5 5.5 16.5 4.1         Mar 695.4 186.2 482.3 95.4 386.9 1.8 385.2 4.4 22.5 5.6 16.5 5.2
         Apr 704.6 191.8 486.0 98.8 387.2 1.4 385.8 4.4 22.5 5.3 16.4 5.6
         May 705.7 192.3 486.3 100.2 386.1 1.4 384.7 4.6 22.4 5.2 16.7 3.8         June 710.6 202.0 481.6 96.1 385.5 1.4 384.1 4.7 22.4 5.3 17.2 5.7
         July 711.2 192.4 491.5 99.5 392.1 1.5 390.6 4.8 22.5 5.3 17.2 7.1
         Aug 716.9 189.6 500.0 103.2 396.8 1.5 395.2 4.8 22.4 5.3 17.4 6.1         Sep 723.7 200.7 495.9 99.7 396.2 1.5 394.7 4.8 22.3 5.3 17.4 11.6
Changes*
2001 + 33.6 + 21.2 + 14.7 + 2.6 + 12.1 + 0.1 + 11.9 − 0.9 −1.3 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 3.1
2002 + 31.1 + 13.4 + 18.3 + 7.4 + 10.9 − 1.3 + 12.2 + 0.1 −0.7 − 0.8 + 1.6 − 1.6
2002          Oct + 13.8 + 0.6 + 13.2 + 10.3 + 2.9 + 0.1 + 2.9 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.5
         Nov + 2.6 + 8.3 − 5.8 − 8.2 + 2.4 + 0.1 + 2.3 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 4.3
         Dec + 7.9 + 5.5 + 2.5 + 1.8 + 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.7 + 0.1 −0.3 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 1.5
2003          Jan − 7.7 − 9.2 + 1.3 − 0.7 + 2.0 − 0.0 + 2.0 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 2.0
         Feb − 0.4 − 1.7 + 1.1 − 0.8 + 2.0 − 0.0 + 2.0 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.7
         Mar + 3.1 + 2.6 + 0.5 − 2.3 + 2.8 + 0.3 + 2.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 1.1
         Apr + 9.2 + 5.6 + 3.6 + 3.3 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.6 + 0.0 −0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.4
         May + 1.1 + 0.5 + 0.4 + 1.5 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 1.1 + 0.2 −0.0 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 1.9
         June + 4.9 + 9.6 − 4.7 − 4.2 − 0.6 −− 0.6 + 0.0 −0.1 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 1.9
         July + 0.8 − 9.5 + 10.1 + 3.5 + 6.6 + 0.1 + 6.5 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.4
         Aug + 4.8 − 2.8 + 7.6 + 3.7 + 3.9 + 0.1 + 3.8 + 0.1 −0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 1.0
         Sep + 6.8 + 11.1 − 4.1 − 3.5 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.1 −0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 5.4
liabilities arising from registered debt securities. —1Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). —4Including
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). —3Excluding deposits liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
35*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
IV Banks
 
8 Deposits of resident individuals and domestic non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
  
 5  billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits
of resident Resident individuals Resident individualsindividualsanddomestic Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month*
 
2000 1,161.5 268.7 259.3 47.7 176.0 35.6 9.4 244.6 225.5 34.9 168.9 21.7
2001 1,242.9 330.4 320.1 55.8 220.9 43.4 10.2 263.4 242.9 36.3 182.4 24.22002 1,271.6 364.5 352.8 61.3 241.4 50.0 11.7 257.9 238.3 35.2 180.5 22.6
2003          Apr 1,282.6 380.0 367.9 64.4 250.1 53.4 12.1 252.8 233.5 33.5 178.5 21.5
         May 1,284.8 384.4 372.0 65.0 252.9 54.2 12.4 252.2 232.2 33.3 177.7 21.2         June 1,284.6 388.8 375.5 64.0 256.6 54.9 13.3 248.5 228.9 32.1 176.1 20.7
         July 1,282.1 388.8 376.3 65.8 255.8 54.7 12.5 246.6 227.4 31.7 175.2 20.4
         Aug 1,286.9 394.2 381.9 67.1 259.5 55.3 12.2 245.3 226.2 31.5 174.5 20.2         Sep 1,283.6 392.7 379.9 65.5 258.7 55.6 12.8 243.6 224.4 31.1 173.5 19.8
Changes*
2001 + 81.3 + 61.7 + 60.8 + 8.1 + 45.0 + 7.8 + 0.8 + 18.8 + 17.4 + 1.4 + 13.5 + 2.52002 + 29.2 + 34.5 + 33.1 + 5.6 + 22.4 + 5.1 + 1.5 − 5.5 − 4.2 −1.0 −1.1 −2.1
2003          Apr −1.8 + 2.3 + 2.3 + 1.7 − 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.0 − 2.2 − 1.5 −0.3 −0.7 −0.4
         May + 2.3 + 4.4 + 4.1 + 0.6 + 2.8 + 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.6 − 1.2 −0.3 −0.7 −0.2
         June −0.2 + 4.4 + 3.5 − 0.9 + 3.7 + 0.7 + 0.9 − 3.7 − 3.3 −1.2 −1.7 −0.5
         July −2.5 − 0.0 + 0.8 + 1.8 − 0.8 −0.2 −0.8 − 1.9 − 1.5 −0.3 −0.9 −0.3
         Aug + 4.8 + 5.4 + 5.7 + 1.3 + 3.7 + 0.6 −0.2 − 1.3 − 1.2 −0.2 −0.7 −0.3
         Sep −3.3 − 1.5 − 2.0 − 1.6 − 0.8 + 0.4 + 0.6 − 1.7 − 1.8 −0.3 −1.0 −0.4
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the Report , are not specially marked. —1Including subordinated liabilities and
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as liabilities arising from registered debt securities. —2Including deposits
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following MonthlyDEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
 
  
9 Deposits of domestic public authorities at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group
*
 
 5  billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 Land  governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
Domestic for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
public to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary authorities,
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans
End of year or month*
 
2000 149.1 67.6 2.1 22.6 42.8 0.0 12.5 20.3 3.1 2.1 15.0 0.1 23.3
2001 122.7 46.9 1.6 2.7 42.7 0.0 13.2 19.2 2.7 1.8 14.6 0.1 23.22002 113.9 45.6 0.9 3.6 41.1 0.0 13.5 18.9 2.5 1.4 14.9 0.1 22.6
2003          Apr 107.6 44.9 0.6 4.5 39.9 0.0 13.4 19.4 2.7 2.2 14.4 0.1 22.6
         May 111.4 44.4 0.4 4.4 39.6 0.0 13.4 19.8 3.1 2.3 14.4 0.1 22.6         June 114.5 44.6 0.8 4.8 39.0 0.0 13.5 23.5 5.3 3.8 14.3 0.1 22.5
         July 109.0 43.8 0.5 4.8 38.5 0.0 13.5 20.9 3.4 3.3 14.2 0.1 22.4
         Aug 107.7 43.8 0.8 4.8 38.2 0.0 13.5 19.6 2.7 2.5 14.2 0.1 22.3         Sep 105.0 43.4 1.6 4.8 37.0 0.0 13.4 20.2 3.2 2.8 14.2 0.1 22.3
Changes*
2001 −26.4 −20.4 −0.4 −19.9 −0.1 −0.0 + 0.5 −1.2 −0.6 −0.2 −0.4 + 0.0 + 0.1
2002 −8.6 −1.3 −0.6 + 0.9 −1.6 + 0.0 + 0.3 −0.3 −0.1 −0.4 + 0.3 −0.0 −0.6
2003          Apr −2.3 −0.3 −0.1 −0.0 −0.2 −− 0.0 −1.3 −0.6 −0.6 −0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0
         May + 3.8 −0.5 −0.1 −0.1 −0.2 −− 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 −− 0.1
         June + 3.1 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.4 −0.6 −0.0 + 0.1 + 3.7 + 2.2 + 1.5 −0.1 + 0.0 −0.1
         July −5.4 −0.8 −0.3 −0.0 −0.5 + 0.0 −0.0 −2.6 −1.9 −0.5 −0.2 −− 0.0
         Aug −0.5 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.1 −0.3 − + 0.0 −1.4 −0.6 −0.8 + 0.0 −− 0.1
         Sep −2.6 −0.4 + 0.8 −0.0 −1.2 −− 0.1 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.2 −0.0 −0.0 −0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and which are included in ”Enterprises ”. Statistical breaks have been eliminated
its successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, east German Railways from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded
and Federal Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the followingPost AG and Deutsche Telekom AG, and of publicly-owned enterprises,
36*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
IV Banks
 
    
 
 Savings deposits  3  Memo item
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year  2 
Included Subordinated
of which liabilities in time
Domestic Domestic (excluding deposits:
up to and up to and Bank negotiable liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arising
tions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  4 loans from repos   Period individuals securities)  5 
End of year or month*
 
19.2 123.6 121.1 5.1 116.0 565.5 555.8 9.7 82.7 0.2 10.4 −2000
20.6 139.3 124.1 6.2 117.9 568.0 558.6 9.4 81.1 0.2 10.5 −2001
19.6 128.3 129.6 6.3 123.3 568.8 559.9 8.9 80.4 0.2 10.8 −2002
19.4 121.6 131.2 6.2 125.0 571.5 562.4 9.1 78.2 0.2 11.4 −2003          Apr 
20.0 121.1 131.1 6.2 125.0 570.5 561.4 9.1 77.7 0.2 11.4 −         May
19.6 117.3 131.2 6.1 125.1 570.1 560.9 9.2 77.2 0.2 11.5 −         June
19.2 115.5 131.1 6.0 125.1 570.1 560.8 9.2 76.7 0.2 11.5 −         July
19.1 114.0 131.3 6.0 125.3 571.2 561.9 9.3 76.2 0.2 11.6 −         Aug 
19.1 111.8 131.7 5.9 125.8 571.5 562.2 9.3 75.8 0.2 11.6 −         Sep 
Changes*
+ 1.4 + 15.8 + 3.0 + 1.1 + 1.9 + 2.5 + 2.8 −0.3 −1.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 2001
− 1.3 −10.9 + 5.4 + 0.1 + 5.3 + 0.9 + 1.3 −0.5 −0.7 −0.0 + 0.3 −2002
− 0.6 − 2.3 + 0.2 −0.1 + 0.2 − 1.4 − 1.4 + 0.0 −0.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 −2003          Apr 
+ 0.6 − 0.6 −0.1 −0.0 −0.1 − 1.0 − 1.0 + 0.0 −0.5 + 0.0 + 0.0 −         May
− 0.4 − 3.8 + 0.1 −0.0 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.5 + 0.1 −0.5 + 0.0 + 0.1 −         June
− 0.4 − 1.8 −0.1 −0.1 −0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 −0.5 − + 0.0 −         July
− 0.1 − 1.5 + 0.2 −0.1 + 0.2 + 1.1 + 1.1 + 0.0 −0.5 + 0.0 + 0.1 −         Aug 
+ 0.0 − 2.2 + 0.4 −0.0 + 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.0 −0.4 −0.0 −0.0 −         Sep 
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). —3Excluding deposits liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. —5Included in
under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). —4Including time deposits. DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
 
   
 
 
 
Local authorities and local authority associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans   Period
End of year or month*
 
30.2 8.9 15.7 2.0 3.6 0.1 31.1 2.5 21.7 5.7 1.2 0.1 2000
27.8 9.2 13.8 1.8 3.1 0.2 28.7 2.7 19.5 5.4 1.1 0.1 200127.6 10.5 12.2 2.0 3.0 0.2 21.7 2.7 13.7 4.5 0.9 0.1 2002
23.6 8.3 10.6 1.8 2.8 0.2 19.7 2.9 11.8 4.2 0.8 0.0 2003          Apr 
24.8 9.0 11.1 1.8 2.8 0.2 22.3 2.5 14.9 4.2 0.8 0.0          May23.4 8.5 10.3 1.8 2.8 0.2 22.9 3.6 13.7 4.9 0.8 0.0          June
23.0 8.2 10.1 1.9 2.8 0.2 21.3 2.3 13.3 4.9 0.8 0.0          July
24.9 9.2 11.0 1.9 2.8 0.2 19.4 2.0 12.5 4.1 0.8 0.0          Aug 23.0 8.3 10.0 1.9 2.8 0.2 18.4 2.4 11.1 4.2 0.8 0.0          Sep 
Changes*
−2.4 + 0.2 −2.0 −0.2 −0.4 + 0.0 −2.4 + 0.2 −2.3 −0.3 −0.0 −0.0 2001
+ 0.0 + 1.3 −1.4 + 0.2 −0.1 + 0.0 −7.0 −0.0 −5.7 −1.0 −0.3 −0.0 2002
−0.5 −0.0 −0.4 + 0.0 −0.1 + 0.0 −0.1 + 0.2 −0.4 + 0.0 −0.0 −0.0 2003          Apr 
+ 1.2 + 0.8 + 0.5 −− 0.0 −0.0 + 2.6 −0.4 + 3.1 −0.1 + 0.0 −         May
−1.4 −0.5 −0.8 −0.0 −0.0 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 1.1 −1.3 + 0.7 + 0.0 −0.0          June
−0.4 −0.3 −0.2 + 0.1 −0.0 + 0.0 −1.6 −1.2 −0.4 −0.1 −0.0 −         July
+ 1.9 + 1.0 + 0.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −1.1 −0.3 −0.9 + 0.1 + 0.0 −0.0          Aug 
−1.9 −0.9 −1.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −0.9 + 0.4 −1.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 −0.0          Sep 
Monthly Report , are not specially marked. —1Federal Railways Fund, liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. —3Including
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special deposits under savings and loan contracts. —4Excluding deposits under
Fund, ”German Unity ”Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. —2Including savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
37*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
IV Banks
 
10 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs)*
 
 
 5  billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at three months ’ at more than three Memo
notice months ’ notice item of which
Interest With
of which of which of which credited maturities
Special Special At three on of moresavings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months ’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities  
2 facilities  2 non-banks
End of year or month*
 
2000 585.2 573.5 450.5 309.0 123.0 104.4 11.7 8.3 19.3 115.9 109.0 94.4 6.8
2001 586.5 574.5 461.9 327.2 112.7 97.2 12.0 8.8 19.9 112.8 106.0 87.2 6.82002 586.2 575.3 472.8 343.5 102.4 88.5 10.9 8.1 17.6 111.3 104.4 86.3 6.9
2003          May 587.7 577.1 483.4 352.9 93.7 81.1 10.6 8.1 0.4 108.6 101.9 84.9 6.7
         June 587.2 576.7 484.4 352.9 92.3 79.6 10.5 8.1 0.3 108.1 101.3 84.6 6.7
         July 587.2 576.8 486.5 362.1 90.3 77.7 10.4 8.1 0.4 107.6 100.9 84.4 6.7
         Aug 588.4 578.0 489.3 365.0 88.8 76.3 10.3 8.1 0.4 107.1 100.4 84.1 6.7         Sep 588.5 578.3 490.2 365.9 88.1 75.6 10.2 8.0 0.4 106.5 99.9 83.6 6.7
Changes*
2001 + 1.3 + 1.1 + 11.4 + 15.5 −10.4 −7.2 + 0.3 + 0.5 . −2.9 −2.9 −7.1 −0.0
2002 −0.3 + 0.8 + 11.0 + 16.4 −10.2 −8.7 −1.1 −0.7 . −1.5 −1.6 −0.9 + 0.1
2003          May −0.9 −0.8 + 0.7 + 0.9 −1.5 −1.5 −0.1 −0.0 . −0.5 −0.5 −0.3 −0.0
         June −0.4 −0.4 + 1.0 −0.0 −1.4 −1.4 −0.1 −0.0 . −0.5 −0.6 −0.3 + 0.0
         July −0.0 + 0.1 + 2.1 + 1.4 −2.0 −1.9 −0.1 −0.0 . −0.5 −0.4 −0.2 −0.0
         Aug + 1.2 + 1.3 + 2.8 + 2.9 −1.5 −1.5 −0.1 −0.0 . −0.5 −0.5 −0.3 + 0.0
         Sep + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.9 + 0.9 −0.7 −0.7 −0.1 −0.0 . −0.6 −0.5 −0.5 −0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the loan contracts, which are classified as time deposits. —2Savings deposits
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the minimum or basic rate of
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly interest. —3Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
Report , are not specially marked. —1Excluding deposits under savings and securities. 
 
   
11 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany
*
 
 5  billion
Non-negotiable bearer debt securities
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper and money market paper  6 
of which of which
with maturities of Subordinated
with maturities of
Certifi- more more non-
Floating Zero Foreign cates up to and more up to and more than 1 year than 1 year negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of including including than including including than debt debt
Period Total  1 bonds  2 deposit 1 year  1 Total 1 year 2 years 2 years bonds  2,3 bonds  4,5 2 years  1 2 years  1 securities securities
End of year or month*)
 
2000 1,412.5 283.1 22.1 128.2 19.7 87.9 62.7 1,261.9 2.7 0.4 1.0 1.3 38.3 2.4
2001 1,472.3 324.0 16.3 144.1 17.6 46.5 124.9 1,300.9 5.8 3.7 1.0 1.2 43.3 2.42002 1,462.9 339.2 16.1 159.5 34.7 62.3 120.1 1,280.5 9.9 7.8 0.7 1.3 42.4 2.3
2003          May 1,478.0 339.1 20.0 168.7 46.1 83.0 104.5 1,290.6 2.2 0.4 0.6 1.3 38.9 2.9
         June 1,482.7 338.6 20.5 171.6 44.1 80.9 100.0 1,301.7 2.2 0.4 0.6 1.2 39.0 2.9
         July 1,494.5 344.8 23.5 177.1 42.2 79.5 105.1 1,310.0 2.2 0.5 0.5 1.2 39.3 3.0
         Aug 1,487.0 342.1 22.1 179.9 35.6 68.0 101.0 1,318.0 2.2 0.5 0.5 1.2 39.4 3.0         Sep 1,490.7 339.4 22.2 180.8 37.1 69.2 100.9 1,320.6 2.3 0.5 0.5 1.3 39.9 3.0
Changes*
2001 + 56.2 + 33.3 −5.5 + 15.9 −2.1 −41.4 + 61.7 + 35.9 + 3.2 + 3.4 −0.1 −0.1 + 5.0 + 0.0
2002 + 9.1 + 6.3 −4.5 + 12.1 + 16.2 + 14.2 + 4.6 − 9.7 + 4.8 + 4.9 −0.3 + 0.2 −1.9 −0.1
2003          May − 2.0 −3.4 −1.1 −2.9 + 1.2 + 0.3 − 6.5 + 4.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 −0.0 + 0.0 −0.2 + 0.0
         June + 4.6 −0.5 + 0.5 + 2.9 −2.0 −2.1 − 4.5 + 11.2 −0.0 + 0.1 −0.0 −0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0
         July + 11.9 + 6.2 + 3.1 + 5.5 −1.9 −1.4 + 5.1 + 8.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 −0.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.0
         Aug − 7.5 −2.7 −1.4 + 2.9 −6.6 −11.5 − 4.1 + 8.0 −0.0 + 0.0 −0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1
         Sep + 3.7 −2.7 + 0.0 + 0.9 + 1.5 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 2.7 + 0.1 + 0.1 −0.0 + 0.0 + 0.5 −0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the 2Including debt securities denominated in foreign currencies. —3Issue
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as value when floated. —4Including floating rate notes and zero coupon
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly bonds denominated in foreign currencies. —5Bonds denominated in
Report , are not specially marked. —1Decreases in June 2002 caused by non-euro-area currencies. —6Non-negotiable bearer debt securities are
transition to net recording of debt securities outstanding (ie less own debt classified among bank savings bonds (see also Table IV.10, footnote 3). 
securities). The statistical break has been eliminated from the changes. —
38*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
IV  Banks
  
12  Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany*
  Interim statements
  
 5  billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs)  5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memo
bal- item ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer New
and Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- enteredof Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations total loans  
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month  8 loans)  1 paper)  4 serves)  7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2002 28 163.8 25.2 0.2 11.7 40.8 58.6 7.9 10.4 0.4 29.5 100.8 3.5 6.9 7.1 79.6
2003          Jul 27 167.3 26.6 0.1 11.2 38.9 61.7 8.4 11.1 0.4 29.8 102.7 3.6 6.7 7.2 8.9
         Aug 27 167.7 27.0 0.1 11.1 38.5 62.2 8.5 11.0 0.4 30.0 102.9 3.6 6.8 7.1 8.2         Sep 27 168.7 28.4 0.1 10.6 38.2 63.0 8.7 10.5 0.4 29.7 103.3 3.7 7.1 7.1 8.9
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2003          Jul 16 120.1 20.5 0.1 6.0 25.1 44.3 7.7 7.9 0.3 21.7 69.7 3.4 6.7 4.7 6.0         Aug 16 120.3 20.8 0.1 5.9 24.8 44.8 7.8 7.7 0.3 21.7 69.9 3.5 6.8 4.6 5.5         Sep 16 121.1 22.0 0.1 5.5 24.6 45.5 8.0 7.1 0.3 21.4 70.2 3.5 7.1 4.6 6.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2003          Jul 11 47.2 6.0 0.1 5.2 13.8 17.4 0.7 3.2 0.1 8.2 33.0 0.2 − 2.5 3.0
         Aug 11 47.4 6.2 0.1 5.2 13.7 17.4 0.7 3.3 0.1 8.2 33.0 0.2 − 2.5 2.7
         Sep 11 47.6 6.4 0.1 5.1 13.6 17.5 0.7 3.4 0.1 8.3 33.0 0.2 − 2.5 2.9
Trends in building and loan association business
  
 5  billion
Changes in deposits Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans  10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings andments loan contracts loan contracts  
9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited interim deposits of which of which
on under Applied Applied and ofwhich of Memo Amounts deposits
cancelled to settle- to settle- bridging
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which item paid intosavings savings and which interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housing
and and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonusesloan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts  
9 tions  11 ceived  12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2002 22.9 2.7 4.3 44.0 29.4 40.6 17.2 3.8 9.3 3.1 14.2 10.9 7.8 14.2 11.2 0.5
2003          Jul 2.3 0.0 0.5 4.7 2.7 4.2 1.7 0.4 0.8 0.3 1.7 12.3 8.0 1.3 0.1
         Aug 2.0 0.0 0.5 3.9 2.2 3.3 1.3 0.3 0.5 0.2 1.5 12.4 8.1 1.2 0.0         Sep 2.1 0.0 0.5 3.7 2.1 3.5 1.3 0.3 0.6 0.2 1.6 12.4 8.0 1.2 ... 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2003          Jul 1.6 0.0 0.3 3.4 1.8 3.2 1.2 0.3 0.5 0.3 1.4 7.8 4.1 0.8 0.0         Aug 1.4 0.0 0.3 2.7 1.4 2.5 0.9 0.2 0.4 0.2 1.2 7.8 4.1 0.8 0.0         Sep 1.5 0.0 0.3 2.5 1.2 2.5 0.8 0.2 0.4 0.2 1.3 7.7 4.0 0.8 ... 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2003          Jul 0.7 0.0 0.2 1.3 0.9 1.1 0.5 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.3 4.6 3.9 0.4 0.0         Aug 0.6 0.0 0.2 1.1 0.8 0.9 0.4 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.3 4.7 4.0 0.4 0.0         Sep 0.6 0.0 0.2 1.2 0.9 1.0 0.5 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.3 4.7 4.0 0.4 ... 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are count as new contracts. —9For disbursements of deposits under savings
not specially marked. —1Including postal giro account balances, claims on and loan contracts arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capital
building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt securities disbursed “.—10Including housing bonuses credited. —11Only allocations
and central bank credit balances. —2Loans under savings and loan accepted by the beneficiaries; including allocations applied to settlement of
contracts and interim and bridging loans. —3Including money market interim and bridging loans. —12The amounts already credited to the
paper and small amounts of other securities issued by banks. —4Including accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in “Amounts paid into
equalisation claims. —5Including liabilities to building and loan savings and loan accounts “and “Interest and repayments received on
associations. —6Including small amounts of savings deposits. —7Including building loans “. 
participation rights capital and fund for general banking risks. —8Total
39*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
IV  Banks
  
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs)*
  
  
 5  billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
Loans Credit  balances and loans
German   
banks to German
(MFIs)   non-banks
withforeign foreignbranches Money of which Money
branches  1 
and/or and/or market enter- to marketforeign foreign Balance paper, prises foreign paper,subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- and indi- non- secur- Other
Period diaries diaries total Total Total banks banks Total Total Total viduals banks ities  
2 assets ities 2,3 
Foreign  branches End of year or month*
  
2000 71 212 1,558.2 829.4 722.1 211.0 511.1 107.3 656.7 501.5 21.7 17.1 479.9 155.2 72.0
2001 68 216 1,689.3 870.6 761.6 213.6 548.0 109.0 744.9 549.0 20.6 17.2 528.4 195.9 73.92002 60 205 1,407.4 679.9 572.3 198.3 374.0 107.6 668.5 484.0 18.8 15.0 465.1 184.6 59.0
2002          Nov 60 204 1,585.7 760.8 646.0 216.9 429.1 114.8 755.5 555.8 19.0 15.7 536.8 199.7 69.4
         Dec 60 205 1,407.4 679.9 572.3 198.3 374.0 107.6 668.5 484.0 18.8 15.0 465.1 184.6 59.0
2003          Jan 60 206 1,465.8 725.4 622.8 202.5 420.3 102.6 680.1 496.3 18.3 15.2 478.0 183.8 60.4
         Feb 60 206 1,439.6 693.9 592.3 197.4 394.8 101.6 691.5 506.8 18.4 15.2 488.4 184.7 54.2         Mar 60 206 1,402.0 669.4 564.6 186.0 378.5 104.9 684.0 500.4 17.4 14.8 483.0 183.6 48.6
         Apr 59 205 1,429.4 659.8 553.6 192.2 361.4 106.2 720.2 535.3 18.1 15.5 517.2 184.9 49.5
         May 58 205 1,429.1 660.4 560.4 192.7 367.6 100.0 714.1 529.3 17.9 14.7 511.4 184.9 54.6         Jun 58 205 1,455.9 672.3 580.1 190.6 389.5 92.2 716.6 524.9 17.3 14.8 507.6 191.7 67.0
         Jul 55 202 1,434.0 651.3 570.4 192.4 377.9 81.0 704.0 492.8 19.2 16.0 473.5 211.3 78.6
         Aug 54 202 1,415.0 627.2 551.3 177.8 373.5 75.8 717.8 504.8 19.5 15.8 485.3 213.0 70.0
Changes*
2001 −3 + 4 + 99.1 + 24.8 + 26.1 + 2.3 + 23.8 −1.3 + 72.7 + 35.6 −1.1 −0.0 + 36.7 + 37.1 + 1.6
2002 −8 −11 −139.1 −133.4 −139.9 −15.4 −124.5 + 6.5 −3.6 −9.2 −1.9 −2.2 −7.3 + 5.7 −2.2
2002          Nov + 1 + 1 + 24.4 + 4.3 + 4.2 + 6.9 −2.7 + 0.2 + 13.0 + 8.1 + 0.4 + 0.7 + 7.7 + 4.9 + 7.0
         Dec − +1 −137.1 −66.1 −61.2 −18.6 −42.6 −4.9 −65.2 −55.4 −0.2 −0.7 −55.2 −9.8 −5.8
2003          Jan − + 1 + 81.8 + 54.2 + 58.0 + 4.2 + 53.8 −3.8 + 23.7 + 21.4 −0.5 + 0.2 + 21.9 + 2.3 + 3.9
         Feb −− − 28.1 −32.0 −31.0 −5.1 −25.9 −1.0 + 10.3 + 9.6 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 9.6 + 0.7 −6.4
         Mar −− − 32.3 −22.7 −26.1 −11.4 −14.7 + 3.4 −4.7 −4.3 −1.0 −0.4 −3.3 −0.4 −4.9
         Apr −1 −1 + 37.5 −6.3 −7.8 + 6.2 −14.0 + 1.6 + 41.8 + 39.1 + 0.7 + 0.7 + 38.4 + 2.7 + 1.9
         May −1 − + 25.6 + 8.8 + 14.3 + 0.5 + 13.7 −5.5 + 8.7 + 5.0 −0.2 −0.8 + 5.2 + 3.7 + 8.1
         Jun −− + 12.3 + 7.1 + 15.2 −2.1 + 17.3 −8.1 −5.5 −10.3 −0.6 + 0.1 −9.7 + 4.8 + 10.7
         Jul −3 −3 −26.6 −22.6 −11.3 + 1.8 −13.1 −11.3 −15.1 −34.0 + 1.9 + 1.2 −35.9 + 18.9 + 11.2
         Aug −1 −− 37.1 −30.3 −24.8 −14.6 −10.2 −5.5 + 3.5 + 4.6 + 0.3 −0.2 + 4.3 −1.1 −10.2
  
  
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month*
  
2000 40 170 580.5 248.1 183.8 82.2 101.6 64.3 263.5 203.4 45.4 42.3 158.0 60.1 69.0
2001 46 200 811.5 342.4 262.8 105.7 157.1 79.6 382.2 293.1 51.9 47.7 241.2 89.2 87.02002 47 200 704.2 333.7 265.5 125.7 139.8 68.2 300.1 239.1 46.7 42.9 192.4 61.0 70.4
2002          Nov 47 202 708.2 326.7 256.6 114.0 142.6 70.1 308.5 246.1 47.0 44.1 199.0 62.4 73.0
         Dec 47 200 704.2 333.7 265.5 125.7 139.8 68.2 300.1 239.1 46.7 42.9 192.4 61.0 70.4
2003          Jan 47 198 675.8 311.1 243.2 121.4 121.8 67.9 293.6 231.0 45.4 42.8 185.5 62.6 71.1
         Feb 47 197 670.6 309.9 241.7 116.3 125.4 68.2 289.9 226.1 44.5 41.9 181.6 63.8 70.8         Mar 47 194 656.7 305.7 237.1 119.8 117.3 68.6 283.9 223.7 43.0 40.7 180.7 60.3 67.1
         Apr 48 195 652.2 303.7 236.3 122.4 114.0 67.4 282.3 220.8 42.2 39.9 178.6 61.5 66.3
         May 48 195 645.0 300.0 234.0 119.7 114.2 66.1 278.0 215.8 42.7 39.0 173.1 62.2 66.9         Jun 48 196 651.1 302.6 236.8 123.4 113.3 65.9 283.2 220.3 41.9 38.7 178.5 62.9 65.3
         Jul 47 195 668.1 323.1 255.1 127.5 127.6 68.0 278.0 215.0 41.2 38.5 173.7 63.0 67.1
         Aug 47 194 666.8 313.5 246.2 126.4 119.8 67.3 284.9 219.6 41.8 38.7 177.8 65.3 68.4
Changes*
2001 + 6 + 30 +229.9 + 92.5 + 78.0 + 23.5 + 54.6 + 14.5 +119.5 + 89.1 + 6.5 + 5.3 + 82.7 + 30.4 + 17.92002 + 1 +
 0 −78.3 + 6.7 + 13.3 + 20.0 −6.7 −6.6 −70.0 −42.0 −5.2 −4.8 −36.8 −28.1 −15.0
2002          Nov − + 2 + 9.0 + 7.1 + 7.7 + 2.6 + 5.1 −0.6 + 2.5 + 1.2 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.8 + 1.3 −0.6
         Dec −− 2 + 4.6 + 11.6 + 12.1 + 11.7 + 0.4 −0.5 −4.8 −3.4 −0.4 −1.2 −3.0 −1.4 −2.1
2003          Jan −− 2 −23.1 −19.8 −20.3 −4.3 −16.1 + 0.5 −4.3 −5.9 −1.2 −0.1 −4.7 + 1.6 + 1.0
         Feb −− 1 −5.4 −1.1 −1.5 −5.1 + 3.7 + 0.3 −3.9 −5.0 −0.9 −0.9 −4.1 + 1.1 −0.4
         Mar −− 3 −12.2 −3.4 −4.0 + 3.5 −7.5 + 0.6 −5.2 −1.7 −1.5 −1.3 −0.2 −3.5 −3.6
         Apr + 1 + 1 −1.2 −0.5 + 0.1 + 2.5 −2.4 −0.7 −0.0 −1.2 −0.8 −0.8 −0.4 + 1.2 −0.7
         May −− + 0.1 −0.0 −0.1 −2.6 + 2.5 + 0.1 −0.8 −1.6 + 0.5 −0.9 −2.1 + 0.8 + 1.0
         Jun − + 1 + 2.3 + 0.6 + 1.6 + 3.7 −2.1 −1.0 + 3.5 + 2.9 −0.9 −0.3 + 3.8 + 0.6 −1.8
         Jul −1 −1 + 15.9 + 20.0 + 18.0 + 4.0 + 14.0 + 2.0 −5.8 −6.0 −0.6 −0.2 −5.4 + 0.2 + 1.7
         Aug −− 1 −6.0 −12.0 −10.3 −1.1 −9.2 −1.6 + 4.8 + 2.6 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 2.0 + 2.2 + 1.1
*From March 2000, including the foreign branches of building and loan population have not been eliminated from the flow figures for the foreign
associations. In this table “foreign “also includes the country of domicile of subsidiaries.) The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as
the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical revisions have been provisional; subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly
eliminated from the changes. (Breaks owing to changes in the reporting Report, are not specially marked. —1Several branches in a given
40*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
IV  Banks
  
      
  
Deposits
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  4 
Money
Short-term market Medium  and long-term
paper
of which of which and debt
enter- enter- Working securities
out- capital Other prises  and prises  and
German Foreign indi- indi- Foreign stand- and own liabil-
Total Total banks Total Total Total viduals Total viduals ing  5 funds ities  6   Period banks non-banks
End of year or month* Foreign  branches
  
1,186.1 799.5 158.2 641.4 386.5 60.9 58.4 51.6 2.5 2.4 325.7 272.3 22.0 77.9 2000
1,271.3 855.3 194.0 661.2 416.0 57.4 54.2 51.2 3.2 3.0 358.6 316.8 24.0 77.2 20011,116.0 758.5 250.1 508.4 357.5 62.6 58.4 55.0 4.2 3.8 294.9 212.1 25.9 53.6 2002
1,263.4 834.9 257.4 577.5 428.5 69.2 65.7 62.0 3.5 3.4 359.4 234.9 25.0 62.5 2002          Nov
1,116.0 758.5 250.1 508.4 357.5 62.6 58.4 55.0 4.2 3.8 294.9 212.1 25.9 53.6          Dec
1,170.8 788.6 244.3 544.3 382.2 68.6 64.5 60.6 4.1 3.7 313.7 214.2 26.0 54.9 2003          Jan
1,158.7 771.4 244.9 526.6 387.3 71.1 65.8 62.0 5.3 5.0 316.2 199.0 26.2 55.6          Feb1,128.7 755.1 254.7 500.4 373.7 71.7 66.3 62.3 5.4 5.1 302.0 191.6 26.2 55.5          Mar
1,172.9 776.6 267.5 509.1 396.3 73.9 68.7 64.9 5.2 4.9 322.4 178.5 24.8 53.2          Apr
1,181.0 774.5 273.5 501.0 406.5 73.6 68.5 63.8 5.1 4.8 332.9 167.2 24.7 56.2          May1,205.6 795.5 286.5 508.9 410.1 71.9 66.8 62.5 5.1 4.8 338.2 165.5 24.8 60.1          Jun
1,178.6 779.5 292.7 486.8 399.0 77.7 72.6 67.5 5.1 4.8 321.4 164.0 24.8 66.6          Jul
1,165.2 787.6 292.0 495.6 377.6 73.2 68.1 63.1 5.1 4.8 304.4 159.5 24.8 65.6          Aug
Changes*
+ 53.8 + 36.3 + 35.2 + 1.1 + 17.5 −3.7 −4.4 −0.6 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 21.2 + 44.6 + 2.1 −1.3 2001
−53.4 −31.7 + 56.0 −87.7 −21.7 + 5.2 + 4.2 + 3.8 + 1.0 + 0.8 −26.9 −104.8 + 1.8 + 17.2 2002
+ 26.3 + 32.9 + 15.8 + 17.1 −6.5 + 2.9 + 2.8 + 2.7 + 0.1 + 0.1 −9.4 −1.2 −0.0 −0.7 2002          Nov
−119.2 −58.7 −7.3 −51.4 −60.5 −6.6 −7.3 −6.9 + 0.7 + 0.5 −53.9 −22.8 + 0.9 + 4.0          Dec
+ 69.9 + 40.0 −5.8 + 45.8 + 29.9 + 6.0 + 6.1 + 5.5 −0.1 −0.1 + 23.9 + 2.2 + 0.1 + 9.6 2003          Jan
−13.0 −17.7 + 0.6 −18.3 + 4.7 + 2.6 + 1.3 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 2.2 −15.2 + 0.3 −0.1          Feb
−26.5 −14.1 + 9.8 −23.9 −12.4 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 −12.9 −7.5 −0.0 + 1.7          Mar
+ 50.8 + 25.8 + 12.8 + 13.1 + 25.0 + 2.2 + 2.5 + 2.6 −0.3 −0.2 + 22.8 −13.0 −1.4 + 1.1          Apr
+ 25.2 + 8.2 + 6.1 + 2.1 + 17.1 −0.3 −0.3 −1.1 −0.0 −0.0 + 17.4 −11.3 −0.1 + 11.8          May
+ 14.7 + 15.1 + 13.0 + 2.1 −0.4 −1.7 −1.7 −1.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.3 −1.7 + 0.0 −0.7          Jun
−30.1 −17.8 + 6.2 −24.0 −12.4 + 5.7 + 5.8 + 4.9 −0.1 −0.1 −18.1 −1.4 + 0.0 + 4.9          Jul
−25.5 + 0.6 −0.7 + 1.3 −26.1 −4.5 −4.5 −4.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 −21.5 −4.6 + 0.0 −7.1          Aug
  
  
End of year or month* Foreign  subsidiaries
  
414.6 267.9 61.0 207.0 146.7 32.5 29.2 21.9 3.2 3.2 114.2 56.3 34.7 74.9 2000
576.5 362.5 79.2 283.3 214.0 36.4 32.5 23.9 3.9 3.8 177.6 99.8 47.3 87.9 2001503.5 307.7 99.5 208.2 195.7 27.0 22.5 21.1 4.5 4.5 168.7 78.4 43.0 79.3 2002
502.8 308.8 81.8 227.0 194.0 26.4 22.1 21.6 4.3 4.2 167.6 81.0 43.2 81.1 2002          Nov
503.5 307.7 99.5 208.2 195.7 27.0 22.5 21.1 4.5 4.5 168.7 78.4 43.0 79.3          Dec
478.2 298.2 95.6 202.6 179.9 28.0 23.5 22.9 4.5 4.5 151.9 77.1 42.5 78.0 2003          Jan
474.6 297.1 89.6 207.5 177.5 28.2 23.7 23.1 4.6 4.5 149.3 80.0 42.0 74.0          Feb463.7 287.2 89.9 197.3 176.4 27.7 23.2 22.9 4.5 4.4 148.8 77.7 41.4 74.0          Mar
464.6 285.4 95.5 189.9 179.2 27.8 23.3 23.0 4.5 4.5 151.4 75.0 41.3 71.4          Apr
459.8 281.3 92.2 189.1 178.5 29.0 24.7 24.4 4.4 4.3 149.4 72.8 41.2 71.1          May465.1 284.0 94.2 189.8 181.1 28.5 24.2 23.7 4.3 4.3 152.6 74.7 41.5 69.8          Jun
477.4 287.0 94.0 192.9 190.4 31.2 26.9 26.6 4.3 4.3 159.2 77.4 42.7 70.7          Jul
477.4 292.2 96.5 195.7 185.2 28.2 23.6 23.3 4.5 4.5 157.1 75.3 43.0 71.1          Aug
Changes*
+ 160.9 + 94.6 + 18.2 + 76.3 + 66.4 + 3.9 + 3.3 + 2.0 + 0.6 + 0.6 + 62.5 + 43.6 + 13.7 + 11.7 2001−47.1 −37.4 + 20.3 −57.8 −9.7 −9.4 −10.0 −2.9 + 0.6 + 0.6 −0.3 −21.4 −4.4 −5.4 2002
+ 8.1 + 8.6 + 2.7 + 5.9 −0.5 −1.3 −1.0 −1.0 −0.3 −0.3 + 0.8 −0.7 + 0.0 + 1.6 2002          Nov
+ 8.1 + 3.5 + 17.7 −14.2 + 4.5 + 0.6 + 0.4 −0.5 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 3.9 −2.6 −0.3 −0.5          Dec
−21.0 −7.0 −3.9 −3.1 −14.1 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 1.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 −15.0 −1.3 −0.4 −0.3 2003          Jan
− 3.6 −1.2 −6.0 + 4.8 −2.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 −2.6 + 2.9 −0.5 −4.2          Feb
− 9.5 −8.9 + 0.3 −9.2 −0.7 −0.6 −0.5 −0.3 −0.1 −0.1 −0.1 −2.3 −0.6 + 0.3          Mar
+ 3.6 −0.1 + 5.6 −5.6 + 3.6 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 3.5 −2.6 −0.1 −2.1          Apr
+ 1.5 + 0.0 −3.3 + 3.3 + 1.5 + 1.2 + 1.4 + 1.4 −0.1 −0.1 + 0.2 −2.2 −0.0 + 0.9          May
+ 2.0 + 0.6 + 2.0 −1.4 + 1.4 −0.5 −0.5 −0.7 −0.1 −0.1 + 1.9 + 1.9 + 0.3 −1.8          Jun
+ 11.4 + 2.4 −0.1 + 2.6 + 9.0 + 2.7 + 2.7 + 2.9 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 6.2 + 2.7 + 1.1 + 0.6          Jul
− 3.8 + 2.7 + 2.4 + 0.3 −6.6 −3.1 −3.3 −3.3 + 0.2 + 0.2 −3.5 −2.1 + 0.3 −0.4          Aug
country of domicile are regarded as a single branch. —2Treasury bills, subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt securities. —5Issues of
Treasury discount paper and other money market paper, debt negotiable and non-negotiable debt securities and money market
securities. —3Including own debt securities. —4Excluding paper. — 6 Including subordinated liabilities. 
41*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
V  Minimum reserves
 
1  Reserve ratios
Germany European monetary union
 
% of liabilities subject to reserve requirements % of reserve base  1 
Sight Time
Applicable from liabilities liabilities Applicable from Ratio Savings deposits
1995  August 1 2    2    1.5    1999  January 1 2    
 
   
1Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank of 1 December
1998 on the application of minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which
a reserve ratio of 0 % applies, pursuant to article 4 (1)). 
 
  
2  Reserve maintenance in Germany up to the end of 1998
− pursuant to the Minimum Reserves Order of the Bundesbank −
 
DM million
Liabilities subject to reserve requirements Excess reserves  4 
Monthly Required as % of the
average  1 Total reserves  2 Level Sight liabilities Time liabilities Savings deposits Actual reserves  3 required  reserves Shortfall, total
1995          Dec. 2,066,565 579,337 519,456 967,772 36,492 37,337 845 2.3 3
1996          Dec. 2,201,464 655,483 474,342 1,071,639 38,671 39,522 851 2.2 41997          Dec. 2,327,879 734,986 476,417 1,116,477 40,975 41,721 745 1.8 31998          Dec. 2,576,889 865,444 564,878 1,146,567 45,805 46,432 627 1.4 4
1Pursuant to sections 5 to 7 of the Minimum Reserves Order. —2Amount balances of the credit institutions subject to reserve requirements on their
after applying the reserve ratios to the liabilities subject to reserve require- giro accounts at the Bundesbank. — 4 Actual reserves less required reserves. 
ments (section 5 (1) of the Minimum Reserves Order). —3Average credit
 
 
3  Reserve maintenance in the European monetary union
− from 1999, pursuant to the ECB Regulation governing minimum reserves according to article 19.1 of the
ECB/ESCB Statute −
 
Maintenance Required reserves
period before deduction Required reserves
of lump-sum Lump-sum beginning in  1 after deduction of
Reserve base  2 allowance  3 allowance  4 lump-sum allowance Actual reserves  5 Excess reserves  6 Shortfall, total  7 
European monetary union (  5  billion)
 
2003          Jan 6,549.1 131.0 0.5 130.4 131.0 0.6 0.0
         Feb 6,474.5 129.5 0.6 128.9 129.5 0.6 0.0         Mar 6,526.6 130.5 0.5 130.0 130.5 0.5 0.0
         Apr 6,544.6 130.9 0.5 130.3 130.8 0.5 0.0
         May 6,586.3 131.7 0.5 131.2 131.7 0.5 0.0         June 6,606.0 132.1 0.5 131.6 132.0 0.5 0.0
         July 6,633.3 132.7 0.5 132.1 132.7 0.5 0.0
         Aug 6,593.8 131.9 0.5 131.3 131.8 0.5 0.0         Sep  
p 6,587.6 131.8 0.5 131.2 131.8 0.5 0.0
Of which: Germany (  5  million)
2003          Jan 1,911,863 38,237 230 38,007 38,280 273 3         Feb 1,891,376 37,828 230 37,597 37,876 279 4         Mar 1,912,098 38,242 230 38,012 38,224 212 4
         Apr 1,906,364 38,127 229 37,898 38,090 192 4
         May 1,911,254 38,225 228 37,997 38,220 223 2         June 1,907,522 38,150 226 37,924 38,120 195 2
         July 1,908,858 38,177 223 37,954 38,172 218 3
         Aug 1,883,921 37,678 221 37,458 37,642 184 3         Sep  
p 1,871,273 37,425 219 37,207 37,406 199 1
1The reserve maintenance period of the ESCB minimum reserve system base. —4Article 5 (2) of the Regulation of the European Central Bank of
starts on the 24th of each month and ends on the 23rd of the following 1 December 1998 on the application of minimum reserves. —5Average
month (the first reserve maintenance period lasted from January 1, 1999 to credit balances of the credit institutions subject to minimum reserve require-
February 23, 1999). —2Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central ments on their reserve accounts at the respective national central bank. —
Bank of 1 December 1998 on the application of minimum reserves 6Actual reserves less required reserves after the deduction of the lump-sum
(excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0 % applies, pursuant to allowance. —7Required reserves after the deduction of the lump-sum
article 4 (1)). —3Amount after applying the reserve ratios to the reserve allowance. 
42*V  Minimum reserves

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
VI Interest rates
  
1 ECB interest rates 2 Discount and lombard rates 3 Base rates
   of the Bundesbank
  
% pa % pa % pa
Base rate as per
Main Marginal Discount Rate
Deposit refinancing lending Lombard Transition Act
Applicable from facility operations  1 facility Applicable from Discount rate rate  2, 4, 5  Applicable from 3, 4, 5  
1999 Jan                  1 2.00 3.00 4.50 1994 Feb                18 5 1/4 6 3/4 1999 Jan                  1 2.50
         Jan                  4 2.75 3.00 3.25          Apr                15 5 6 1/2          May                  1 1.95
         Jan                22 2.00 3.00 4.50          May                13 4 1/2 6 
         Apr                  9 1.50 2.50 3.50 2000 Jan                  1 2.68
         Nov                  5 2.00 3.00 4.00 1995 Mar                31 4 6          May                  1 3.42
         Aug                25 3 1/2 5 1/2          Sep                  1 4.26
2000 Feb                  4 2.25 3.25 4.25          Dec                15 3 5          Mar                17 2.50 3.50 4.50   2001 Sep                  1 3.62         Apr                28 2.75 3.75 4.75 1996 Apr                19 2 
1/2 4 1/2
         June                  9 3.25 4.25 5.25          to 2002 Jan                  1 2.71         Sep                  1 3.50 4.50 5.50 1998 Dec                31          to         Oct                  6 3.75 4.75 5.75          Apr                  3
  
2001 May                11 3.50 4.50 5.50 Base rate as per
         Aug                31 3.25 4.25 5.25 Civil Code  
6 
         Sep                18 2.75 3.75 4.75         Nov                  9 2.25 3.25 4.25 2002 Jan                  1 2.57
         July                  1 2.47
2002 Dec                  6 1.75 2.75 3.75
2003 Jan                  1 1.97
2003 Mar                  7 1.50 2.50 3.50          July                  1 1.22         June                  6 1.00 2.00 3.00
1Up to 21 June 2000 fixed rate tenders, from 28 June 2000 variable rate state legislation (as stipulated in the Act Introducing the Civil Code) or in
tenders at minimum bid rate. —2From 1 August 1990 to 31 December 1993 executory instruments and contracts based on such regulations, the follow-
this was also the rate for cash advances; from 1 January 1994 cash advances ing changes apply as from 1 January 2002: (a) the rate for cash advances ofhave no longer been granted. Wherever reference is made in an Act to the the Federal Government has been replaced by the base rate in the Civilinterest rate applicable for cash advances of the Federal Government, the Code increased by 1.5%, (b) the lombard rate has been replaced by therate will be replaced by the base rate increased by 1.5 percentage points pur- ECB ’s marginal lending facility rate, (c) the base rate pursuant to the Dis-
suant to the Discount Rate Transition Act (see also footnote 4 a and 5). Pursu- count Rate Transition Act has been replaced by the base rate pursuant toant to the Discount Rate Transition Act, read in conjunction with the Lom- section 247 of the Civil Code (see also footnote 5). —5Pursuant to Article 4
bard Rate Transition Regulation, the lombard rate has been replaced with section 1 of the Act on the Amendment of Provisions concerning theeffect from 1 January 1999 by the rate applied by the European Cental Bank Evaluation of Insurance Enterprises ’Capital Investment and the Repeal of
(ECB) for its marginal lending facility wherever the lombard rate is used as a the Discount Rate Transition Act, the Discount Rate Transition Act, thereference variable for interest and other payments (see also footnote 4 b Regulation Governing the Use of the Base Rate as a Reference Variable andand 5). —3Pursuant to the Discount Rate Transition Act, read in con- the Lombard Rate Transition Regulation are repealed. Pursuant to Article 4
junction with the Regulation Governing the Use of the Base Rate as a Refer- section 2 of this act, from 4 April 2002 the discount rate and the base rateence Variable, this rate has replaced the discount rate from 1 January 1999 under the Discount Rate Transition Act have been replaced by the base ratewherever the latter is used in contracts and regulations as a reference vari- pursuant to section 247 of the Civil Code, the lombard rate by the interestable for interest and other payments. This base rate is the discount rate of rate on the marginal lending facility of the ECB, and the interest rate forthe Bundesbank which applied on 31 December 1998. It changes from 1 Janu- cash advances of the Federal Government by the base rate pursuant toary, 1 May and 1 September of each year, and will change for the first time section 247 of the Civil Code increased by 1.5 percentage points. —
on 1 May 1999 if the interest rate applied by the ECB to its longer-term re- 6Starting at 3.62%, it is adjusted on 1 January and 1 July of each year (for
financing operations (marginal rate) has changed by at least 0.5 percentage the first time on 1 January 2002) by the percentage points by which the refer-point (see also footnote 4 c and 5). —4Wherever the rates listed in this ence variable (most recent main refinancing operation of the ECB, marginal
column are used as a reference variable for interest and other payments in rate) has increased or decreased since the last change in the base rate. Federal legislation (in the field of civil law and judicial procedural law), in
  
    
4 Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders
  
    
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid Allotment Weighted
amount amount Fixed rate Minimum bid rate Marginal rate  
1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement  5  million % pa ... days
Main refinancing operations
2003 Aug                27 121,927 75,000 − 2.00 2.08 2.08 14
       Sep                  3 185,556 140,000 − 2.00 2.07 2.08 14
       Sep                10 125,756 68,000 − 2.00 2.07 2.08 14
       Sep                17 177,865 150,000 − 2.00 2.07 2.08 14
       Sep                24 109,738 81,000 − 2.00 2.06 2.07 14
       Oct                  1 164,023 123,000 − 2.00 2.05 2.06 14
       Oct                  8 135,884 82,000 − 2.00 2.05 2.06 14
       Oct                15 153,304 113,000 − 2.00 2.05 2.05 12
       Oct                22 119,327 90,000 − 2.00 2.04 2.05 14
       Oct                27 135,867 117,000 − 2.00 2.04 2.05 15
       Nov                  5 125,765 84,000 − 2.00 2.04 2.05 14
       Nov                11 126,830 118,000 − 2.00 2.03 2.04 15
Longer-term refinancing operations
2003 Aug                28 35,940 15,000 −− 2.12 2.13 91
       Sep                25 28,436 15,000 −− 2.10 2.12 84
       Okt                30 32,384 15,000 −− 2.13 2.14 91
Source: ECB. —1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were   
allotted or collected.  
43*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
VI Interest rates
 
5 Money market rates, by month
 
 
% pa
Money market rates reported by Frankfurt banks  1 Euribor  3 
One- One- Three- Six- Nine- Twelve-
week month month month month month
Overnight money Three-month funds Eonia  2 funds funds funds funds funds funds
Reporting Monthly Lowest and Monthly Lowest andperiod averages highest rates averages highest rates Monthly averages
2001          Oct 3.96 3.65 −4.76 3.58 3.48 −3.65 3.97 3.83 3.72 3.60 3.46 3.39 3.37
         Nov 3.51 3.15 −4.20 3.37 3.28 −3.50 3.51 3.48 3.43 3.39 3.26 3.20 3.20
         Dec 3.32
4 2.90 −4.05 3.33 3.26 −3.36 3.34 3.38 3.42 3.34 3.26 3.24 3.30
2002          Jan 3.29 2.45 −3.57 3.32 3.24 −3.38 3.29 3.35 3.35 3.34 3.34 3.39 3.48
         Feb 3.27 2.90 −3.35 3.34 3.31 −3.38 3.28 3.32 3.34 3.36 3.40 3.48 3.59
         Mar 3.25 2.90 −3.45 3.37 3.33 −3.45 3.26 3.33 3.35 3.39 3.50 3.65 3.82
         Apr 3.30 3.11 −3.75 3.39 3.35 −3.45 3.32 3.32 3.34 3.41 3.54 3.70 3.86
         May 3.31 3.21 −3.50 3.44 3.35 −3.52 3.31 3.34 3.37 3.47 3.63 3.80 3.96
         June 3.35 3.28 −3.65 3.45 3.40 −3.48 3.35 3.36 3.38 3.46 3.59 3.73 3.87
         July 3.30 3.15 −3.40 3.39 3.34 −3.44 3.30 3.34 3.36 3.41 3.48 3.56 3.64
         Aug 3.29 3.26 −3.36 3.33 3.29 −3.37 3.29 3.32 3.33 3.35 3.38 3.40 3.44
         Sep 3.31 3.26 −3.60 3.29 3.25 −3.34 3.32 3.32 3.32 3.31 3.27 3.23 3.24
         Oct 3.30 3.27 −3.50 3.24 3.18 −3.31 3.30 3.31 3.31 3.26 3.17 3.12 3.13
         Nov 3.30 3.10 −3.48 3.11 3.00 −3.23 3.30 3.32 3.23 3.12 3.04 3.01 3.02
         Dec 3.07 5 2.85 −3.75 2.93 2.83 −3.03 3.09 3.02 2.98 2.94 2.89 2.87 2.87
2003          Jan 2.79 2.00 −2.92 2.81 2.77 −2.86 2.79 2.85 2.85 2.83 2.76 2.72 2.70
         Feb 2.77 2.48 −2.85 2.67 2.48 −2.80 2.76 2.81 2.77 2.69 2.58 2.53 2.50
         Mar 2.71 2.33 −3.50 2.51 2.43 −2.58 2.75 2.66 2.60 2.53 2.45 2.42 2.41
         Apr 2.56 2.51 −2.75 2.52 2.47 −2.56 2.56 2.57 2.58 2.53 2.47 2.45 2.45
         May 2.56 2.15 −2.85 2.39 2.24 −2.50 2.56 2.61 2.52 2.40 2.31 2.27 2.25
         June 2.22 2.05 −2.80 2.13 2.09 −2.26 2.21 2.22 2.18 2.15 2.08 2.04 2.01
         July 2.08 1.86 −2.15 2.11 2.08 −2.14 2.08 2.12 2.13 2.13 2.09 2.07 2.08
         Aug 2.09 2.04 −2.50 2.12 2.10 −2.15 2.10 2.10 2.12 2.14 2.17 2.21 2.28
         Sep 2.03 1.35 −2.15 2.13 2.09 −2.16 2.02 2.11 2.13 2.15 2.18 2.21 2.26
         Oct 2.02 1.40 −2.11 2.13 2.09 −2.16 2.01 2.08 2.10 2.14 2.17 2.23 2.30
1Money market rates are not fixed or quoted officially; the monthly aver- Moneyline Telerate (formerly Bridge Telerate). —3Euro Interbank Offered
ages computed from daily quotations are unweighted. —2Euro OverNight Rate: unweighted average rate calculated by Moneyline Telerate (formerly
Index Average: weighted average overnight rate for interbank operations Bridge Telerate) since 30 December 1998 according to the act/360
calculated by the European Central Bank since 4 January 1999 on the basis method. —4At the end of December 3.50% to 4.05%. —5At the end of De-
of real turnover according to the act/360 method and published via cember 3.00% to 3.05%. 
 
 
6 Euro-area retail bank interest rates *, o, +
  
% pa; period averages
Deposit interest rates Lending interest rates
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of to enterprises to householdsup to and up to and up to and up to and
Reporting including including over including over including over Consumer For home
period Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months 1 year 1 year lending purchase
2000 0.85 3.45 3.45 4.52 2.25 3.79 6.60 6.23 9.87 6.34
2001  
1 0.94 3.49 3.49 4.12 2.40 3.59 6.83 6.15 10.12 5.97
2002 0.73 2.80 2.80 3.85 2.13 2.85 6.13 5.71 9.78 5.54
2002          Sep 0.73 2.77 2.77 3.64 2.13 2.73 6.12 5.61 9.85 5.38         Oct 0.72 2.74 2.74 3.58 2.11 2.63 6.13 5.54 9.72 5.26
         Nov 0.71 2.70 2.69 3.53 2.11 2.55 6.10 5.50 9.70 5.21         Dec 0.68 2.51 2.51 3.45 2.05 2.41 5.98 5.34 9.58 5.10
2003          Jan 0.63 2.43 2.42 3.29 2.04 2.34 5.87 5.27 9.48 4.91
         Feb 0.62 2.32 2.32 3.15 2.02 2.12 5.81 5.18 9.39 4.77         Mar 0.59 2.20 2.19 3.08 1.97 2.05 5.69 5.17 9.29 4.69
         Apr 0.56 2.15 2.14 3.14 1.93 2.05 5.57 5.14 9.24 4.70
         May 0.56 2.08 2.08 2.98 1.91 1.92 5.51 5.01 9.22 4.56         June 0.52 1.85 1.84 2.76 1.83 1.65 5.39 4.86 9.15 4.34
         July
+ 0.46 1.78 1.77 2.65 1.77 1.48 5.26 4.70 9.01 4.16
         Aug 0.46 1.75 1.75 2.50 1.61 1.43 5.24 4.82 9.07 4.23
         Sep 0.46 1.73 1.72 2.54 1.60 1.41 5.24 4.78 9.06 4.36
*These euro-area retail bank interest rates should be used with caution and terms of their coverage (new business and/or outstanding amounts), the
for statistical purposes only, primarily to analyse their development over nature of the data (nominal or effective) or the compilation method. The
time rather than their level. They are calculated as the weighted average of country weights for the euro-area retail bank interest rates are derivednational interest rates provided by the national central banks. The national from MFI balance sheet statistics or close proxies. The weights reflect therates represent those rates that are currently available from national country-specific proportions of the relevant instruments within the eurosources and which are judged to fit the standard categories. These national area, measured as outstanding amounts. The weights are adjusted monthly,rates have been aggregated to derive information for the euro area, in which means that interest rates and weights always refer to the samesome cases relying on proxies and working assumptions due to the hetero- month. —+The aggregated figures are partially based on national
geneity observed in the national financial instruments across euro-area estimates as of July 2003. —1Euro area enlarged on 1 January 2001 to
countries. Furthermore, the national interest rates are not harmonised in include Greece. 
      
o Tables and notes taken from the ECB. 
44*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
VI Interest rates
 
7 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
   Outstanding amounts o
 
Households ’ deposits Non-financial corporations ’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
up to and including 2 years over 2 years up to and including 2 years over 2 yearsEffective Effective Effective Effective
End of interest rate  
1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 
month % pa  5  million % pa  5  million % pa  5  million % pa  5  million
2003          Jan 2.65 151,997 3.33 184,483 2.72 78,517 5.00 30,799
         Feb 2.53 149,588 3.33 188,293 2.60 79,509 5.05 30,693         Mar 2.45 147,530 3.31 188,390 2.52 77,837 5.00 29,937
         Apr 2.38 144,900 3.30 188,257 2.47 78,278 5.09 29,035
         May 2.36 144,074 3.28 188,011 2.44 79,303 5.08 28,165         June 2.15 139,931 3.27 187,960 2.13 76,477 5.09 28,180
         July 2.06 137,602 3.25 187,705 2.07 77,253 5.06 28,346
         Aug 2.04 135,705 3.24 187,639 2.05 80,491 5.03 28,452         Sep 2.00 133,458 3.23 187,511 2.04 77,051 5.03 29,077
 
  
Housing loans to households  3 Consumer credit and other loans to households  4, 5 
with a maturity of
up to and including over 1 year and up to up to and including over 1 year and up to
1 year  6 and including 5 years over 5 years 1 year  6 and including 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effectiveinterest interest interest interest interest interest
End of rate  
1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
month % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa  5  million  5  million  5  million  5  million  5  million  5  million
2003          Jan 5.86 7,556 5.46 31,290 5.96 864,296 9.19 93,025 6.65 71,201 6.41 333,989
         Feb 5.85 7,392 5.45 31,146 5.96 865,776 9.36 92,205 6.63 71,146 6.43 334,186         Mar 5.83 7,445 5.41 31,086 5.95 872,486 9.32 92,563 6.63 71,519 6.42 327,047
         Apr 5.77 7,375 5.36 31,073 5.94 872,835 9.21 91,072 6.61 71,614 6.42 328,610
         May 5.70 7,482 5.32 31,264 5.93 874,918 9.18 89,467 6.56 71,774 6.41 328,951         June 5.72 7,870 5.27 32,349 5.91 874,476 9.19 91,794 6.55 70,545 6.40 330,208
         July 5.53 7,737 5.20 32,621 5.88 876,066 9.01 89,466 6.49 71,055 6.36 332,014
         Aug 5.54 7,963 5.15 32,709 5.87 877,689 8.91 87,862 6.40 71,011 6.34 333,305         Sep 5.48 8,020 5.11 32,874 5.85 879,032 8.94 90,937 6.38 70,951 6.34 333,053
 
  
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to and including 1 year  6 over 1 year and up to and including 5 years over 5 years
End of Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 
month % pa  5  million % pa  5  million % pa  5  million
2003          Jan 5.22 205,132 4.93 88,111 5.55 491,747
         Feb 5.32 203,528 4.96 87,569 5.54 491,589         Mar 5.25 200,784 4.90 87,358 5.51 488,963
         Apr 5.19 197,032 4.84 87,555 5.49 490,877
         May 5.16 194,503 4.81 87,344 5.47 491,026         June 5.05 200,061 4.68 87,487 5.45 487,708
         July 4.92 192,725 4.58 87,735 5.42 487,473
         Aug 4.89 188,935 4.54 88,871 5.40 489,036         Sep 4.88 193,019 4.51 88,163 5.39 486,591
*The MFI interest rate statistics are based on the interest rates applied by and loans for debt restructuring at interest rates below market rates are not
MFIs and the related volumes of euro-denominated deposits and loans to included in the calculation. —1The effective interest rates may always be
households and non-financial corporations domiciled in the euro area. The calculated either as annualised agreed interest rates or as narrowly defined
household sector comprises individuals (including sole proprietors) and effective rates. Both calculation methods cover all interest payments onnon-profit institutions serving households. Non-financial corporations in- deposits and loans but not any other related charges which may occur forclude all enterprises other than insurance companies, banks and other finan- enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guarantees andcial institutions. The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis credit insurance. Disagios are regarded as interest payments and included inin the euro area from January 2003 are being collected in Germany on a the interest rate calculation. The annualised agreed interest rate and thesample basis. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as provi- narrowly defined effective rate differ in the underlying method of annual-sional. Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are ising interest rate payments. —2Data based on monthly balance sheet
not specially marked. Further information on the new interest rate statistics statistics. —3Secured and unsecured loans for home purchase, including
can be found on the Bundesbank ’s website (Statistics / Reporting System / building and home improvements; including loans granted by building and
Banking statistics / EWU-Zinsstatistik). This information is currently available loan associations and interim credits as well as transmitted loans granted byin German only. —oThe statistics on outstanding amounts are collected at the reporting agents in their own name and for their own account. —
the end of the month. At the close of booking on the last day of the 4Consumer credits are loans granted for the purpose of personal use in the
reference month, institutions are required to identify interest rates and consumption of goods and services. —5For the purpose of these statistics,
volumes of all existing deposit and credit business and to calculate a other loans are loans granted for other purposes such as business, debtweighted average rate for each reporting category. Non-performing loans consolidation, education etc. — 6 Including overdrafts. 
45*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
VI Interest rates
 
7 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont ’d)
   New business +
 
Households ’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of  8 
up to and including over 1 year and up to up to and including
Overnight 1 year and including 2 years over 2 years 3 months over 3 months
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate  1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa  5  million  5  million  5  million  5  million  5  million  5  million
2003          Jan 1.20 367,117 2.60 38,283 3.06 2,532 3.52 3,568 2.39 475,951 3.31 99,697
         Feb 1.25 373,381 2.42 30,394 2.89 1,263 3.17 3,649 2.36 478,914 3.27 98,505         Mar 1.24 378,520 2.37 34,735 2.99 1,061 2.99 2,430 2.28 480,503 3.23 96,972
         Apr 1.21 380,747 2.30 34,394 3.01 1,009 2.99 2,876 2.28 481,578 3.17 94,447
         May 1.20 385,009 2.29 30,733 2.69 886 2.92 4,288 2.21 482,057 3.13 92,895         June 1.16 389,213 2.13 31,655 2.69 767 2.82 3,585 2.16 482,986 3.05 91,487
         July 1.06 389,222 1.98 29,175 2.54 665 2.63 1,689 2.11 484,903 2.97 89,440
         Aug 1.05 394,794 2.07 25,650 2.59 627 2.68 1,378 2.08 487,501 2.92 87,902         Sep 1.06 393,136 1.88 28,352 2.46 679 2.83 1,921 2.04 488,412 2.88 87,195
 
  
Non-financial corporations ’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
over 1 year and up to
Overnight up to and including 1 year and including 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % pa  5  million % pa  5  million % pa  5  million % pa  5  million
2003          Jan 1.42 114,861 2.71 45,720 4.64 307 4.36 1,133
         Feb 1.47 115,231 2.62 39,388 3.35 196 4.48 843         Mar 1.40 112,327 2.48 31,973 2.59 259 4.03 1,664
         Apr 1.39 115,850 2.38 33,955 2.47 196 3.54 1,681
         May 1.39 118,034 2.40 33,417 2.43 56 3.40 502         June 1.25 121,685 2.05 41,507 2.29 322 3.30 887
         July 1.16 120,786 2.03 61,029 2.02 109 4.23 424
         Aug 1.16 118,994 2.00 40,582 2.52 187 3.68 2,473         Sep 1.15 124,565 1.94 34,583 2.61 210 3.92 1,179
 
  
Loans to households
Consumer loans with an initial rate fixation of  4 Other loans with an initial rate fixation of  5 
up to and including up to and including over 1 year and up to over 1 year and up to
Total 1 year  10 over 5 years 1 year  10 over 5 years and including 5 years and including 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest interest interest interest interest interest interest
period rate  9 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 
% pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa  5  million  5  million  5  million  5  million  5  million  5  million
2003          Jan 7.78 5.87 3,776 6.69 4,415 8.88 2,912 4.91 16,141 5.53 1,686 5.76 2,290
         Feb 7.90 5.78 2,160 6.71 5,214 8.92 3,136 4.45 9,944 5.70 1,485 5.51 2,437         Mar 7.84 5.78 2,441 6.67 5,053 8.72 3,966 4.66 13,036 5.35 1,619 5.39 3,140
         Apr 7.82 5.68 2,303 6.67 4,880 8.83 4,109 4.65 8,388 5.27 1,834 5.47 2,764
         May 7.87 5.71 1,520 6.69 4,796 8.94 3,489 4.22 8,472 5.43 1,546 5.39 2,637         June 7.76 5.48 2,443 6.64 4,936 8.87 3,773 3.80 10,157 5.00 1,603 4.93 2,973
         July 7.83 5.58 1,913 6.59 5,969 8.75 4,405 3.76 9,268 4.94 1,802 5.06 2,654
         Aug 7.73 5.57 1,388 6.36 4,844 8.66 3,658 3.84 7,060 4.96 1,461 5.03 2,316         Sep 7.65 5.41 1,785 6.33 5,375 8.36 4,576 3.69 9,281 4.94 1,694 5.24 2,684
For footnotes * and 1to6, see p 45*. —+In the case of deposits with an weighted average rates across all new agreements concluded during the
agreed maturity and all loans excluding overdrafts, new business covers all reporting month. In the case of overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at
new agreements between households or non-financial corporations and the notice and overdrafts, new business is collected in the same way as outstand-bank. This includes all financial arrangements in which terms have been ing amounts for the sake of simplicity. This means that all outstandingagreed for the first time in the reporting month as well as all newly deposit and lending business at the end of the month has to be incorpor-negotiated (but extant) deposit and lending contracts. The following cases ated in the calculation of average rates of interest. —7Estimated. The
are not regarded as new business (ie they are included in outstanding volume of new business is extrapolated to form the underlying total usingamounts): (a) Prolongations of existing deposit and loan contracts that are the Horvitz-Thompson estimator. —8Including fidelity and growth
carried out automatically without any active involvement of the housholds premia. —9Annual percentage rate of charge as defined in Directive
or non-financial corporations; (b) Changes in variable interest rates caused 87/102/EEC, which contains other related charges which may occur forby pre-scheduled automatic interest rate adjustments; (c) Changes from enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guarantees andfixed to floating interest rates or vice versa which have been agreed at the credit insurance. — 10 Including variable rate loans; excluding overdrafts. 
beginning of the contract. The interest rates are calculated as volume-
46*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
VI Interest rates
 
7 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont ’d)
   New business +
 
Loans to households (cont ’d)
Housing loans with an initial rate fixation of  3 
up to and including over 1 year and up to over 5 years and up to
Overdrafts  11 Total 1 year  10 and including 5 years and including 10 years over 10 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting Volume  12 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 interest rate  1 interest rate  9 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % pa  5  million % pa % pa  5  milion % pa  5  million % pa  5  million % pa  5  million
2003          Jan 10.57 66,323 5.39 5.45 3,113 4.94 2,871 5.39 6,402 5.38 3,161
         Feb 10.84 65,329 5.18 5.27 2,151 4.76 2,260 5.19 4,859 5.19 3,228         Mar 10.73 66,616 5.07 5.27 2,057 4.60 2,559 5.05 6,252 5.12 3,342
         Apr 10.71 64,751 5.04 5.23 2,321 4.48 3,135 5.03 7,423 5.17 3,661
         May 10.58 62,766 4.97 5.17 1,697 4.46 2,676 4.97 4,755 5.03 3,151         June 10.65 64,982 4.82 5.00 2,253 4.37 2,685 4.80 5,062 4.85 3,149
         July 10.44 63,287 4.69 4.58 2,805 4.16 3,589 4.70 6,864 4.85 3,973
         Aug 10.38 63,305 4.79 4.73 1,695 4.25 2,701 4.81 5,441 4.91 3,600         Sep 10.47 64,591 4.90 4.63 2,033 4.52 3,166 4.96 6,142 5.03 3,585
 
  
Loans to non-financial corporations
Other loans up to and including  5  1 million with an initial rate fixation of  5, 13 
over 1 year and up to
Overdrafts  11 up to and including 1 year  10 and including 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate  1 Volume  12 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % pa  5  million % pa  5  million % pa  5  million % pa  5  million
2003          Jan 6.73 96,563 5.42 8,671 5.29 1,410 5.36 1,636
         Feb 6.84 96,831 4.94 8,189 5.28 1,134 5.32 1,469         Mar 6.76 94,106 4.98 8,664 5.27 1,530 5.28 2,577
         Apr 6.71 91,535 5.06 8,346 5.18 1,489 5.26 1,645
         May 6.64 90,296 4.80 7,566 5.11 1,235 5.16 1,699         June 6.60 93,175 4.49 7,813 4.94 1,008 5.11 1,483
         July 6.51 88,185 4.39 7,881 4.88 1,575 4.90 1,620
         Aug 6.54 86,025 4.36 5,782 4.91 1,626 4.93 1,714         Sep 6.40 88,483 4.52 7,114 4.95 1,231 5.02 1,672
 
  
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont ’d)
Other loans over  5  1 million with an initial rate fixation of  5, 13 
up to and including 1 year  10 over 5 years over 1 year and up to and including 5 years .
Reporting Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 
period % pa  5  million % pa  5  million % pa  5  million
2003          Jan 4.05 42,168 4.27 3,681 4.93 4,988
         Feb 3.88 33,419 4.62 4,027 4.96 4,321         Mar 3.89 37,816 4.86 3,283 4.72 4,631
         Apr 3.87 35,932 4.12 2,944 4.85 5,828
         May 3.62 31,599 3.80 3,613 4.61 6,152         June 3.25 38,751 3.89 3,627 4.26 6,164
         July 3.32 33,140 3.91 2,885 4.27 6,336
         Aug 3.36 27,749 3.84 2,478 4.50 4,873         Sep 3.24 34,012 3.84 3,289 4.72 4,922
For footnotes *and 1to6, see p 45*. For footnotes +and 7to10, see The volume of outstanding amounts reported is extrapolated to form the
p 46*. —11Overdrafts are defined as debit balances on current accounts. underlying total using the Horvitz-Thompson estimator. —13The amount
They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether they are within or refers to the single loan transaction considered as new business. 
beyond the limits agreed between customers and the bank. —12Estimated.
47*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
VII Capital market
 
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  *)
 
 
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities  1 Residents
Credit in- Bundes-
Sales stitutions bank
= Public Foreign including open
total Bank Indus- debt debt building marketpur- debt trial secur- secur- and loan Non- oper- Non-
Period chases Total securities bonds ities  
2 ities 3 Total  4 assc. 5 banks  6 ations  5 residents  7 
DM million
1990 244,827 220,340 136,799 − 67 83,609 24,487 225,066 91,833 133,266 − 33 19,763
1991 231,965 219,346 131,670 667 87,011 12,619 173,099 45,095 127,310 694 58,866
1992 291,762 284,054 106,857 − 175 177,376 7,708 170,873 132,236 37,368 1,269 120,887
1993 395,110 382,571 151,812 200 230,560 12,539 183,195 164,436 20,095 − 1,336 211,915
1994 303,339 276,058 117,185 − 65 158,939 27,281 279,989 126,808 154,738 − 1,557 23,349
1995 227,099 203,029 162,538 − 350 40,839 24,070 141,282 49,193 94,409 − 2,320 85,815
1996 254,359 233,519 191,341 649 41,529 20,840 148,250 117,352 31,751 − 853 106,109
1997 332,655 250,688 184,911 1,563 64,214 81,967 204,378 144,177 60,201 − 128,276
1998 418,841 308,201 254,367 3,143 50,691 110,640 245,802 203,342 42,460 − 173,038
 5  million
1999 292,663 198,068 156,399 2,184 39,485 94,595 155,766 74,728 81,038 − 136,898
2000 226,594 157,994 120,154 12,605 25,234 68,600 154,089 91,447 62,642 − 72,505
2001 180,899 86,656 55,918 14,473 16,262 94,245 114,467 35,848 78,619 − 66,432
2002 180,957 124,035 47,296 14,506 62,235 56,922 91,562 13,536 78,026 − 89,395
2003          July 14,621 16,051 11,348 237 4,465 − 1,430 14,539 5,957 8,582 − 82
         Aug − 7,923 − 8,827 −10,818 1,143 849 904 640 − 14,625 15,265 −− 8,563
         Sep 17,952 12,963 9,058 267 3,638 4,989 15,691 12,630 3,061 − 2,261
 
  
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-purchases shares  
8 shares  9 Total  10 tutions  5  11 Non-banks  6 residents  12 
Period
DM million
1990 50,070 28,021 22,048 52,631 7,215 45,416 − 2,561
1991 33,478 13,317 20,161 32,247 2,466 29,781 1,230
1992 32,595 17,226 15,370 40,651 2,984 37,667 − 8,055
1993 39,355 19,512 19,843 30,871 4,133 26,738 8,4851994 55,125 29,160 25,966 54,466 1,622 52,844 659
1995 46,422 23,600 22,822 49,354 11,945 37,409 − 2,931
1996 72,491 34,212 38,280 55,962 12,627 43,335 16,529
1997 119,522 22,239 97,280 96,844 8,547 88,297 22,6771998 249,504 48,796 200,708 149,151 20,252 128,899 100,352
 5  million
1999 150,013 36,010 114,005 103,136 18,637 84,499 46,877
2000 139,704 22,733 116,973 159,528 23,293 136,235 − 19,826
2001 82,286 17,575 64,714 − 2,127 − 14,714 12,587 84,412
2002 52,185 9,232 42,954 30,444 − 23,236 53,680 21,740
2003          July 3,271 650 2,621 2,621 − 111 2,732 650
         Aug 391 125 266 − 1,649 − 380 − 1,269 2,040
         Sep 948 1,286 − 338 258 − 979 1,237 690
*Until the end of 1999, debt securities comprise the bonds and money ment funds. —7Net purchases or net sales ( −) of domestic debt securities by
market paper of domestic banks, from January 2000 all fixed-interest non-residents; transaction values. —8At issue prices. —9Net purchases or
securities. Investment fund certificates see Table VII.6. —1Net sales at net sales ( −) of foreign shares (including direct investment) by residents;
market values plus/less changes in issuers ’portfolios of their own debt transaction values. —10Domestic and foreign shares. —11Up to the end
securities. —2Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and of 1998, excluding shares under syndicate agreement. —12Net purchases
Treuhand agency. —3Net purchases or net sales ( −) of foreign debt or net sales ( −) of domestic shares (including direct investment) −before
securities by residents; transaction values. —4Domestic and foreign debt 1989 also including domestic investment fund certificates −by
securities. —5Book values; statistically adjusted. —6Residual; also non-residents; transaction values. —The figures for the latest data are to be
including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic invest- regarded as provisional; corrections are not specially marked. 
48*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
VII Capital market
 
2 Sales of debt securities issued by borrowers domiciled in Germany  *)
 
 
Until the end of 1998 DM nominal million value, from 1999  5  million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item:
Foreign  DM/euro
Mortgage Communal bonds issued Debt securities
bonds bonds issued by spe- by German-
All bank debt (Hypotheken- ( Öffentliche Other bank Industrial Public managed cialised credit
Period Total securities pfandbriefe) Pfandbriefe) institutions bonds  2 syndicates debt securities debt securities 3 
Gross sales  4 
1990 428,698 286,709 14,923 70,701 89,755 111,326 − 141,990 35,168
1991 442,089 292,092 19,478 91,489 80,738 100,386 707 149,288 32,832
1992 572,767 318,522 33,633 134,363 49,195 101,333 − 254,244 57,282
1993 733,126 434,829 49,691 218,496 34,028 132,616 457 297,841 87,3091994 627,331 412,585 44,913 150,115 39,807 177,750 486 214,261 61,465
1995 620,120 470,583 43,287 208,844 41,571 176,877 200 149,338 102,719
1996 731,992 563,076 41,439 246,546 53,508 221,582 1,742 167,173 112,3701997 846,567 621,683 53,168 276,755 54,829 236,933 1,915 222,972 114,8131998 1,030,827 789,035 71,371 344,609 72,140 300,920 3,392 238,400 149,542
 5  million
1999 571,269 448,216 27,597 187,661 59,760 173,200 2,570 120,483 57,202
2000 659,148 500,895 34,528 143,107 94,556 228,703 8,114 150,137 31,597
2001 687,988 505,646 34,782 112,594 106,166 252,103 11,328 171,012 10,6052002 818,725 569,232 41,496 119,880 117,506 290,353 17,574 231,923 10,313
2003          June 75,207 49,503 5,675 7,652 8,036 28,140 2,159 23,545 −
         July 91,686 63,280 4,410 8,695 16,651 33,525 1,778 26,628 −
         Aug 59,741 43,662 1,936 9,084 11,248 21,394 810 15,269 −
         Sep 79,597 55,626 4,795 10,870 12,361 27,600 632 23,339 −
of which: Debt securities with a maturity of over 4 years  5 
1990 272,642 133,347 10,904 43,250 26,767 52,425 − 139,295 29,791
1991 303,326 172,171 11,911 65,642 54,878 39,741 707 130,448 22,772
1992 430,479 211,775 28,594 99,627 40,267 43,286 − 218,703 51,939
1993 571,533 296,779 43,365 160,055 26,431 66,923 230 274,524 82,0491994 429,369 244,806 36,397 109,732 29,168 69,508 306 184,255 53,351
1995 409,469 271,763 30,454 141,629 28,711 70,972 200 137,503 85,221
1996 473,560 322,720 27,901 167,811 35,522 91,487 1,702 149,139 92,5821997 563,333 380,470 41,189 211,007 41,053 87,220 1,820 181,047 98,4131998 694,414 496,444 59,893 288,619 54,385 93,551 2,847 195,122 139,645
 5  million
1999 324,888 226,993 16,715 124,067 37,778 48,435 2,565 95,331 44,013
2000 319,330 209,187 20,724 102,664 25,753 60,049 6,727 103,418 27,008
2001 299,751 202,337 16,619 76,341 42,277 67,099 7,479 89,933 6,4802002 309,157 176,486 16,338 59,459 34,795 65,892 12,149 120,527 9,213
2003          June 30,256 16,016 2,768 4,559 2,835 5,854 1,757 12,483 −
         July 36,234 21,806 1,825 2,727 9,622 7,631 1,500 12,928 −
         Aug 24,361 16,156 965 3,871 6,108 5,212 657 7,548 −
         Sep 29,022 20,045 2,205 5,841 3,387 8,612 43 8,934 −
Net sales  6 
1990 226,707 140,327 − 3,922 − 72 73,287 71,036 − 67 86,449 21,717
1991 227,822 139,396 4,729 22,290 65,985 46,390 558 87,868 18,583
1992 304,751 115,786 13,104 58,235 19,585 24,864 − 175 189,142 34,114
1993 403,212 159,982 22,496 122,917 − 13,156 27,721 180 243,049 43,701
1994 270,088 116,519 18,184 54,316 − 6,897 50,914 − 62 153,630 21,634
1995 205,482 173,797 18,260 96,125 3,072 56,342 − 354 32,039 61,020
1996 238,427 195,058 11,909 121,929 6,020 55,199 585 42,788 69,9511997 257,521 188,525 16,471 115,970 12,476 43,607 1,560 67,437 63,1811998 327,991 264,627 22,538 162,519 18,461 61,111 3,118 60,243 84,308
 5  million
1999 209,096 170,069 2,845 80,230 31,754 55,238 2,185 36,840 22,728
2000 155,615 122,774 5,937 29,999 30,089 56,751 7,320 25,522 − 16,705
2001 84,122 60,905 6,932 − 9,254 28,808 34,416 8,739 14,479 − 30,657
2002 131,976 56,393 7,936 − 26,806 20,707 54,561 14,306 61,277 − 44,546
2003          June 5,994 2,442 261 646 1,089 446 1,195 2,356 − 6,688
         July 18,004 11,754 1,117 − 3,774 5,454 8,957 1,276 4,974 − 6,254
         Aug − 6,667 − 9,184 − 993 − 886 3,240 − 10,545 725 1,792 − 1,233
         Sep 9,794 9,725 1,682 − 1,645 3,626 6,062 230 − 161 − 4,765
*For definitions see the notes in the Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. —4Gross sales means only
Report 2, Capital market statistics. —1Excluding registered bank debt initial sales of newly issued securities. —5Maximum maturity according to
securities. —2Debt securities of enterprises. —3Including Federal Railways the terms of issue. — 6 Gross sales less redemptions. 
49*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
VII Capital market
 
3 Outstanding amount of debt securities issued by borrowers domiciled in Germany  * 
 
 
Until the end of 1998 DM million nominal value, from 1999  5  million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item:
 Foreign  DM/euro
End of year Mortgage Communal bonds issued
or month/ bonds bonds by German- Debt securities of
Maturity All bank specialised Other bank Industrial Public managed (Öffentliche (Hypotheken-
in years Total bonds syndicates credit institutions debt securities debt securities debt securities Pfandbriefe) pfandbriefe)
DM million
1990 1,458,943 900,977 138,025 369,901 155,045 238,005 2,604 555,362 223,176
1991 1,686,765 1,040,374 142,757 392,190 221,031 284,396 3,161 643,230 241,760
1992 1,991,515 1,156,162 155,862 450,424 240,616 309,259 2,983 832,370 275,873
1993 2,394,728 1,316,142 178,357 573,341 227,463 336,981 3,163 1,075,422 319,575
1994 2,664,814 1,432,661 196,541 627,657 219,214 389,249 3,101 1,229,053 341,210
1995 2,870,295 1,606,459 214,803 723,781 222,286 445,589 2,746 1,261,090 402,229
1996 3,108,724 1,801,517 226,711 845,710 228,306 500,790 3,331 1,303,877 472,180
1997 3,366,245 1,990,041 243,183 961,679 240,782 544,397 4,891 1,371,313 535,359
1998 3,694,234 2,254,668 265,721 1,124,198 259,243 605,507 8,009 1,431,558 619,668
 5  million
1999 2,097,926 1,322,863 134,814 655,024 163,284 369,741 6,280 768,783 339,560
2000 2,265,121 1,445,736 140,751 685,122 157,374 462,488 13,599 805,786 322,856
2001 2,349,243 1,506,640 147,684 675,868 201,721 481,366 22,339 820,264 292,199
2002 2,481,220 1,563,034 155,620 649,061 222,427 535,925 36,646 881,541 247,655
2003          July 2,581,689 1,600,894 159,833 627,388 253,005 560,668 52,192 928,603 209,494
         Aug 2,575,022 1,591,710 158,840 626,502 256,245 550,123 52,916 930,395 208,261
         Sep 2,584,816 1,601,436 160,522 624,858 259,871 556,185 53,146 930,234 203,497
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  2 Position at end-September 2003 
928,555 634,317 50,836 244,247 71,566 267,667 17,886 276,353 69,192    less than 2
611,746 410,591 47,035 173,433 75,565 114,558 13,759 187,396 41,840 2 to less than 4
425,180 266,825 36,523 110,560 48,482 71,258 5,732 152,623 57,244 4 to less than 6
253,129 138,537 14,690 63,065 22,798 37,984 7,363 107,228 20,132 6 to less than 8
189,942 76,463 10,806 20,571 16,790 28,296 5,496 107,983 5,001 8 to less than 10
44,690 34,197 596 8,016 6,729 18,856 1,010 9,483 6,042 10 to less than 15
16,937 12,658 35 1,776 6,168 4,679 432 3,847 1,207 15 to less than 20
114,634 27,848 − 3,188 11,772 12,887 1,469 85,319 2,839 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers ’portfolios. — debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of the residual
1Excluding debt securities handed to the trustee for temporary safe amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc. 
custody. —2Calculated from month under review until final maturity for
50* 
 
4 Circulation of shares issued by residents of Germany
  
Until the end of 1998 DM million nominal value, from 1999  5  million nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies ’ capital due to
Memo item:
Share circulation
at market values
Share Net increase or cash payment contribution (market capita-
capital= and ex- merger reduction lisation) net decrease(-) contribution of shares,
change of of claims and circulation at during period mining shares, of capital level at end
under issue of and other transfer change of and of period end of period convertible GmbH shares,
Period under review review bonds  1 etc. of assets bonus shares real assets legal form liquidation under review  2 
DM million
1990 144,686 12,650 7,362 751 3,715 1,049 − 43 1,284 − 1,466 .
1991 151,618 6,932 3,656 610 2,416 407 − 182 411 − 386 .
1992 160,813 9,198 4,295 728 1,743 1,073 − 732 3,030 − 942 .
1993 168,005 7,190 5,224 772 387 876 10 707 − 783 .
1994 o 190,012 14,237 6,114 1,446 1,521 1,883 − 447 5,086 − 1,367 .
1995 211,231 21,217 5,894 1,498 1,421 1,421 − 623 13,739 − 2,133 .
1996 3 216,461 7,131 8,353 1,355 396 1,684 − 3,056 833 − 2,432 .
1997 221,575 5,115 4,164 2,722 370 1,767 − 2,423 197 − 1,678 .
1998 238,156 16,578 6,086 2,566 658 8,607 − 4,055 3,905 − 1,188 .
 5  million
1999 133,513 11,747 5,519 2,008 190 1,075 2,099 1,560 − 708 1,603,304
2000 147,629 14,115 3,620 3,694 618 8,089 − 1,986 1,827 − 1,745 1,353,000
2001 166,187 18,561 7,987 4,057 1,106 8,448 1,018 − 905 − 3,152 1,205,613
2002 168,716 2,528 4,307 1,291 486 1,690 − 868 − 2,152 − 2,224 647,492
2003          July 162,330 224 267 345 22 8 11 − 157 − 272 759,462
         Aug 161,545 − 785 80 217 5 13 − 225 − 825 − 50 775,402
         Sep 162,925 1,380 450 103 51 217 974 − 243 − 171 746,482
oFrom January 1994 including the shares of east German companies and enterprises whose shares are listed on the regulated free market. Source:
(resultant increase in share circulation: DM 7,771 million). —1Including share Bundesbank calculations based on data of the "Herausgebergemeinschaft
issues out of company profits. —2Including enterprises whose shares are lis- Wertpapier-Mitteilungen" and the "Deutsche B örse AG". —3Figure reduced
ted on the Official Market, on the Regulated Market or on the New Market by DM 1,902 million owing to revisions. 
50*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
VII Capital market
 
5 Yields and indices on German securities
 
 
               
Yields on bonds outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices  2 , 3 
Public bonds Bank debt securities Bonds Shares
Memo item:
Listed Foreign
Federal securities DM/euro
bonds
With re- With re- issued by German Germansidual matur- sidual matur- German- bond iBoxx- CDAX share
managed index index ities of over 9 ities of over 9 Industrial
 5 -Germany- share price
Total Total Total Total to 10 years bonds (REX) price index index (DAX) to 10 years  4 syndicates  1,5 
Average End- End- End-
Period % p.a. daily rate 1998=100 1987=100 1987=1000
1990 8.9 8.8 8.8 8.7 9.0 8.9 9.0 9.2 93.50 . 145.00 1,398.23
1991 8.7 8.6 8.6 8.5 8.9 8.6 8.9 9.2 96.35 . 148.16 1,577.981992 8.1 8.0 8.0 7.8 8.3 8.1 8.7 8.8 101.54 . 134.92 1,545.051993 6.4 6.3 6.3 6.5 6.5 6.8 6.9 6.8 109.36 . 191.13 2,266.681994 6.7 6.7 6.7 6.9 6.8 7.2 7.0 6.9 99.90 . 176.87 2,106.58
1995 6.5 6.5 6.5 6.9 6.5 7.2 6.9 6.8 109.18 . 181.47 2,253.88
1996 5.6 5.6 5.6 6.2 5.5 6.4 5.8 5.8 110.37 . 217.47 2,888.691997 5.1 5.1 5.1 5.6 5.0 5.9 5.2 5.5 111.01 . 301.47 4,249.691998 4.5 4.4 4.4 4.6 4.5 4.9 5.0 5.3 118.18 100.00 343.64 5,002.391999 4.3 4.3 4.3 4.5 4.3 4.9 5.0 5.4 110.60 92.52 445.95 6,958.14
2000 5.4 5.3 5.2 5.3 5.6 5.8 6.2 6.3 112.48 94.11 396.59 6,433.61
2001 4.8 4.7 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.3 5.9 6.2 113.12 94.16 319.38 5,160.102002 4.7 4.6 4.6 4.8 4.7 5.1 6.0 5.6 117.56 97.80 188.46 2,892.63
2003          July 3.6 3.6 3.6 4.0 3.5 4.2 4.5 4.3 118.76 97.59 221.81 3,487.86
         Aug 3.8 3.9 3.9 4.1 3.8 4.4 4.4 4.6 117.58 97.43 223.55 3,484.58         Sep 3.8 3.9 3.9 4.2 3.8 4.4 4.5 4.5 118.79 98.57 210.34 3,256.78
         Oct 3.9 3.9 4.0 4.2 3.8 4.4 4.4 4.5 116.90 96.85 234.95 3,655.99
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of included in the calculation. Monthly figures are calculated on the basis of
issue of over 4 years, if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Conver- the yields on all the business days of a month. The annual figures are the un-
tible debt securities, etc., debt securities with unscheduled redemption, weighted means of the monthly figures. —2End of year or month. —
zero-coupon bonds, floating-rate notes and bonds not denominated in DM 3Source: German Stock Exchange plc. —4Only bonds eligible as underlying
or euros are not included. Group yields for the various categories of secu- instruments for futures contracts are included; calculated as unweightedrities are weighted with the amounts outstanding of the debt securities averages. — 5 As far as quoted on German stock exchanges. 
 
 
6 Sales and purchases of investment fund certificates in Germany
  
Sales of investment fund certificates Purchases
Domestic funds (sales receipts) Residents
Investment funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Non-banks  2 and loanassociations  1 
of which
of which of which
Sales Open- Special- Foreign Foreign= Secur- end ised invest- invest-total Money ities- real invest- ment mentpur- market based estate ment Foreign fund cer- fund cer- Non-resi-chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  
3 Total Total tificates Total tificates dents  4 
Period
DM million
1990 25,788 26,857 7,904 − 8,032 − 128 18,952 −1,069 25,766 4,296 − 362 21,470 − 707 22
1991 50,064 37,492 13,738 − 11,599 2,144 23,754 12,572 49,890 8,594 − 5 41,296 12,577 174
1992 81,514 20,474 −3,102 −− 9,189 6,087 23,575 61,040 81,518 10,495 2,152 71,023 58,888 − 4
1993 80,259 61,672 20,791 − 6,075 14,716 40,881 18,587 76,258 16,982 2,476 59,276 16,111 4,001
1994 130,995 108,914 63,263 31,180 24,385 7,698 45,650 22,081 125,943 9,849 − 689 116,094 22,770 5,052
1995 55,246 54,071 16,777 6,147 3,709 6,921 37,294 1,175 56,295 12,172 188 44,123 987 −1,049
1996 83,386 79,110 16,517 −4,706 7,273 13,950 62,592 4,276 85,704 19,924 1,685 65,780 2,591 −2,318
1997 145,805 138,945 31,501 −5,001 30,066 6,436 107,445 6,860 149,977 35,924 340 114,053 6,520 −4,172
1998 187,641 169,748 38,998 5,772 27,814 4,690 130,750 17,893 190,416 43,937 961 146,479 16,507 −2,775
 5  million
1999 111,282 97,197 37,684 3,347 23,269 7,395 59,513 14,086 105,521 19,862 − 637 85,659 14,722 5,761
2000 117,676 85,160 39,712 −2,188 36,818 −2,824 45,448 32,516 106,674 14,454 92 92,220 32,424 11,000
2001 96,511 76,811 35,522 12,410 9,195 10,159 41,289 19,701 95,407 10,251 2,703 85,156 16,997 1,105
2002 66,267 59,482 25,907 3,682 7,247 14,916 33,575 6,784 66,507 2,100 3,007 64,407 3,778 − 241
2003          July 1,382 1,278 1,120 − 539 308 1,376 158 104 2,022 1,140 378 882 − 274 − 640
         Aug 2,785 2,484 1,809 − 334 1,535 620 675 301 2,031 608 358 1,423 − 57 754
         Sep 2,688 2,837 − 292 − 52− 454 236 3,129 − 149 3,601 71 − 4 3,530 − 145 − 913
1Book values. —2Residual. —3Net purchases or net sales ( −) of foreign non-residents; transaction values (before 1989 classified as shares). —The
investment fund certificates by residents; transaction values. —4Net figures for the latest data are to be regarded as provisional; corrections are
purchases or net sales ( −) of domestic investment fund certificates by not specially marked. 
51*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
1 General government budgetary position *
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999,  5  billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds  2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which
Other
operat- Fixed Compen-
of ing ex- asset Finan- Ex- Ex- sation
which pend- Current forma- cial Re- pend- Re- pend- of em-
Period Total Taxes  3 Total  4 ployees iture grants Interest tion aid  5 Balance venue  6 iture Balance venue iture Balance
1993 928.7 749.1 1,060.2 296.8 136.0 340.5 102.1 97.0 87.3 −131.5 660.8 658.7 + 2.1 1,492.1 1,621.5 −129.4
1994 995.2 786.2 1,102.2 315.5 137.3 353.4 114.0 93.2 86.5 −106.9 694.1 693.7 + 0.4 1,596.4 1,702.9 −106.5
1995 1,026.4 814.2 1,136.4 324.8 135.5 367.2 129.0 90.1 86.3 −110.1 731.2 743.8 −12.5 1,664.9 1,787.5 −122.6
1996 1,000.3 800.0 1,121.8 326.2 137.0 362.2 130.7 83.9 80.1 −121.5 769.4 784.0 −14.6 1,665.6 1,801.6 −136.1
1997 1,014.3 797.2 1,108.9 325.0 135.7 356.3 132.1 80.1 79.2 −94.5 797.3 794.5 + 2.9 1,705.3 1,797.0 −91.7
1998 1,072.1 833.0 1,128.8 325.4 137.4 373.7 133.7 79.7 79.8 −56.7 812.2 808.9 + 3.3 1,765.5 1,818.9 −53.4
1999 566.1 453.1 592.9 168.7 72.4 202.7 69.8 40.8 38.0 −26.8 429.1 425.6 + 3.5 925.2 948.6 −23.4
2000  p 612.3 467.3 595.5 169.3 73.7 205.7 67.6 40.7 37.9 + 16.8 433.8 434.2 −0.4 974.6 958.2 + 16.4
2001  7,pe 554.0 446.2 601.0 169.9 70.1 213.5 66.6 40.9 39.6 −47.0 445.0 449.1 −4.1 921.8 972.9 −51.1
2002  pe 547.5 441.7 607.3 173.1 69.0 226.0 66.1 38.2 33.8 −59.8 457.7 465.5 −7.8 920.4 988.0 −67.6
2002          Q1 118.3 98.6 150.2 39.9 15.3 57.9 24.0 6.5 6.0 −31.8 111.3 112.8 −1.5 206.4 239.8 −33.4
         Q2 137.8 105.1 141.8 40.4 15.6 58.5 11.9 7.8 6.7 −4.0 113.0 115.6 −2.6 228.9 235.6 −6.6
         Q3 135.3 109.4 148.7 41.4 16.5 54.7 19.2 9.7 7.8 −13.4 113.1 116.6 −3.5 228.0 244.9 −16.9
         Q4  p 154.4 129.0 164.7 49.9 21.1 55.8 10.7 13.5 13.4 −10.3 119.3 120.0 −0.7 254.7 265.7 −11.0
2003          Q1  p 117.2 96.3 154.5 40.9 15.6 61.8 23.6 5.6 6.5 −37.3 116.3 116.8 −0.5 207.7 245.5 −37.8
         Q2  p 135.8 108.9 143.8 40.9 15.5 61.2 10.8 7.5 7.5 −8.1 115.5 118.4 −2.9 228.2 239.1 −10.9
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical for some insurance sectors are estimated. —3The tax revenue shown here
Office. —*The budgetary definition used here differs from that employed is taken from the budget statistics and may differ from the data given in
for the government account in the national accounts and, in the case of the Table VIII.4, which are based on the tax statistics. —4Including
quarterly figures, in some respects also from the financial statistics. — discrepancies in clearing transactions between central, state and local
1Including subsidiary budgets. Unlike the annual figure based on the government. —5Expenditure on investment grants, loans and acquisition
annual accounts statistics of the Federal Statistical Office, the quarterly of participating interests. —6Including Federal Government liquidity
figures do not include municipal special purpose associations and various assistance to the Federal Labour Office. —7Owing to modifications of the
special accounts. For more details on revenue from the Bundesbank profit, system of classification, shifts occurred, in particular, between othersee footnote 1 to Table VIII.2. —2The annual figures differ from the sum of operating expenditure and current grants. 
the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. The quarterly figures
2 Budgetary position of central, state and local government *
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999,  5  billion
Central government State government Local government
Western  2,3 Eastern  3 Western  3 Eastern  3 
Period Revenue  1 Expenditure Revenue Expenditure Revenue Expenditure Revenue Expenditure Revenue Expenditure
1993 401.6 462.5 326.5 352.8 76.4 92.5 222.5 230.9 54.4 59.0
1994 439.6 478.9 328.8 357.0 79.3 95.9 228.9 235.1 53.9 59.2
1995 439.3 489.9 338.6 370.2 88.4 101.5 225.6 237.9 58.7 60.8
1996 411.9 490.4 344.8 379.7 93.7 105.5 227.7 232.9 55.0 57.71997 416.8 480.3 349.2 376.5 94.3 105.2 222.9 226.9 52.6 54.21998 439.0 495.6 360.5 380.3 96.4 104.7 231.4 226.3 51.5 52.41999 240.3 266.5 191.6 196.6 50.0 53.3 119.8 117.5 26.1 26.3
2000  
4 292.1 265.2 193.4 200.9 50.7 53.6 122.4 120.5 25.6 25.6
2001  pe 239.9 260.9 184.0 207.1 49.7 53.2 119.2 123.4 24.8 25.4
2002  pe 238.9 271.5 181.8 206.7 46.6 53.7 119.5 123.7 25.1 25.4
2002          Q1 47.4 68.9 42.4 49.4 10.2 12.0 24.7 29.1 5.2 5.4
         Q2 56.3 62.6 43.3 48.8 11.1 11.9 28.8 29.1 5.9 5.8         Q3 62.7 70.6 45.3 49.3 11.8 12.9 29.1 30.5 6.1 6.2         Q4  
p 72.5 69.5 50.2 58.5 13.5 16.1 37.0 35.4 7.8 7.7
2003          Q1  p 46.6 71.9 42.2 51.1 9.7 12.6 25.2 29.4 5.3 5.6
         Q2  p 59.1 64.6 44.4 50.2 12.0 12.0 26.7 29.1 5.6 5.8
52*Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Inherited Liabilities. —2Including (eastern and western) Berlin, Bremen and
Office. —*See corresponding footnote to Table VIII.1. —1Up to 1994, the Hamburg. —3Unlike the annual figure based on the annual accounts
Bundesbank profit transfer is shown in full; from 1995 onwards, only the statistics of the Federal Statistical Office, the quarterly figures do not
DM7 billion envisaged in the budget is shown. From 1995, revenue over and include various special accounts. —4Including proceeds from the sale of
above the envisaged amount accrues directly to the Redemption Fund for UMTS licences. 
52*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
3 Government fiscal position as defined in the national accounts *
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999,  5  billion
Item 1995  1 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000  2 2001  pe 2002  pe 
Revenue 1,647.8 1,704.0 1,726.8 1,775.9 943.2 965.5 951.0 954.1
of which
Taxes 825.8 850.0 856.9 897.4 490.4 511.7 488.3 486.0Social contributions 662.5 696.7 720.1 727.7 375.4 378.1 383.6 389.0
Expenditure 1,764.9 1,826.6 1,826.5 1,859.6 972.6 989.5 1,009.9 1,028.4of which
Intermediate consumption 143.2 142.7 140.2 144.1 76.2 78.0 81.1 84.5Compensation of Employees 315.9 319.6 319.0 319.3 165.4 165.7 165.5 167.7Interest 128.9 131.7 133.2 136.4 68.9 68.4 67.7 65.2Social benefits  
3 902.8 970.7 984.7 998.4 523.1 532.7 548.7 572.9
Gross capital formation 80.5 76.4 69.4 69.9 37.8 37.0 35.9 34.3
Net lending/net borrowing − 117.1 − 122.7 − 99.7 − 83.7 − 29.4 − 24.0 − 58.9 − 74.3
as a percentage of GDP − 3.3 − 3.4 − 2.7 − 2.2 − 1.5 − 1.2 − 2.8 − 3.5
Memo itemDebt as defined in theMaastricht Treaty 2,010.0 2,143.9 2,232.9 2,298.2 1,210.3 1,221.8 1,232.8 1,283.5
as a percentage of GDP 57.1 59.8 61.0 60.9 61.2 60.2 59.5 60.8
Source: Federal Statistical Office. —*Figures in accordance with ESA 95. In terms, the deficit amounted to 9.8% of GDP. —2Adjusted for proceeds
contrast to the figures shown by the Federal Statistical Office, totals include from the sale of UMTS licences. The figures of the Federal Statistical Office
(without affecting net lending/net borrowing) customs duties, the EU share record such proceeds (  5 50.85 billion) under "net increase in non-produced
in VAT revenue and EU subsidies. —1Adjusted for the balance of notional assets", with the result that government expenditure is lower and a surplus
capital transfers between government and the corporate sector, mainly in (  5 22.8 billion or 1.1% of GDP) is shown. —3Including social benefits in
connection with the dissolution of the Treuhand agency. In unadjusted kind. 
4 Tax revenue of central, state and local government
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999,  5  million
Central and state government and European Union Local government  4 
State government
of which of which Balance of
Central Eastern European Eastern untransferred
Period Total Total  1 government  2 Total Germany Union  3 Total Germany tax shares  5 
1991 661,920 577,150 321,334 224,321 19,139 31,495 84,633 2,540 + 137
1992 731,738 638,423 356,849 247,372 23,807 34,203 93,374 4,034 − 58
1993 749,119 653,015 360,250 256,131 27,542 36,634 95,809 5,863 + 2951994 786,162 688,785 386,145 261,947 32,052 40,692 97,116 7,677 + 260
1995 814,190 719,332 390,807 288,520 . 40,005 94,498 8,460 + 359
1996 799,998 706,071 372,390 294,232 . 39,449 94,641 7,175 − 714
1997 797,154 700,739 368,244 290,771 . 41,724 96,531 7,703 − 117
1998 833,013 727,888 379,491 306,127 . 42,271 104,960 8,841 + 1641999 453,068 396,734 211,727 164,724 . 20,284 56,333 4,810 + 1
2000 467,253 410,117 219,034 169,249 . 21,833 57,241 4,895 − 104
2001 446,248 392,189 213,342 159,115 . 19,732 54,047 4,590 + 12
2002 441,703 389,162 214,371 156,231 . 18,560 52,490 4,769 + 51
2003          Q2  
p 108,773 95,360 51,614 38,249 . 5,497 12,556 ... + 856
         Q3 . 96,012 52,229 38,203 . 5,580 . . .2003          May . 30,708 17,075 11,775 . 1,859 . . .
         June . 37,773 20,224 15,741 . 1,807 . . .
         July . 31,520 17,327 12,334 . 1,858 . . .
         Aug . 27,902 15,111 10,944 . 1,846 . . .         Sep . 36,590 19,790 14,925 . 1,876 . . .
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. —1Including receipts from the 1988. —4Including local government taxes in Berlin, Bremen and
Equalisation of Burdens levies.  —2Before deducting supplementary Hamburg. —5Difference between the local government ’s share in the
central government grants and shares in the revenue of mineral oil tax income taxes received by the state government cash offices in the period in
remitted to state government. —3Including the additional (GNP-related) question (see Table VIII.5) and the amounts passed on to local government
revenue accruing to the EU from the central government tax revenue from during the same period. 
53*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
5 Tax revenue, by type
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999,  5  million
Joint taxes Memo
item
Income taxes  2 Turnover taxes  5,6 Localgovern-
As- Invest- Central State ment
Local
sessed ment Value- Turnover govern- govern- EU share in business
Wage income Corpora- income added tax on ment ment customs income tax trans-
Period Total  1 Total tax  3 tax tion tax taxes  4 Total tax (VAT) imports taxes  8 taxes  8 duties taxes  9 fers 6,7 
1991 615,506 298,804 214,175 41,532 31,716 11,381 179,672 98,797 80,875 5,986 92,583 29,113 8,307 38,356
1992 681,751 331,310 247,322 41,531 31,184 11,273 197,712 117,274 80,438 6,923 104,802 32,963 7,742 43,3281993 697,988 341,785 257,987 33,234 27,830 22,734 216,306 174,492 41,814 4,181 93,678 34,720 7,240 44,9731994 734,234 343,055 266,522 25,510 19,569 31,455 235,698 195,265 40,433 6,271 105,410 36,551 7,173 45,450
1995 765,374 344,554 282,701 13,997 18,136 29,721 234,622 198,496 36,126 8,412 134,013 36,602 7,117 46,042
1996 746,958 317,807 251,278 11,616 29,458 25,456 237,208 200,381 36,827 8,945 137,865 38,540 6,592 40,8871997 740,272 313,794 248,672 5,764 33,267 26,092 240,900 199,934 40,966 8,732 135,264 34,682 6,900 39,5331998 775,028 340,231 258,276 11,116 36,200 34,640 250,214 203,684 46,530 10,284 130,513 37,300 6,486 47,1401999 422,012 184,408 133,809 10,887 22,359 17,353 137,155 111,600 25,555 5,463 72,235 19,564 3,186 25,277
2000 436,115 192,381 135,733 12,225 23,575 20,849 140,871 107,140 33,732 5,521 75,504 18,444 3,394 25,998
2001 417,358 170,817 132,626 8,771 −426 29,845 138,935 104,463 34,472 5,510 79,277 19,628 3,191 25,170
2002 414,008 165,096 132,190 7,541 2,864 22,502 138,195 105,463 32,732 5,752 83,494 18,576 2,896 24,846
2003          Q2 101,351 40,199 31,683 2,596 1,221 4,698 33,301 24,958 8,343 1,641 20,786 4,753 672 5,991
         Q3 102,140 39,615 32,137 2,982 1,180 3,315 34,211 26,102 8,110 1,800 21,225 4,534 756 6,129
2003          May 32,409 10,638 10,615 −1,243 −336 1,602 11,798 8,815 2,984 490 7,678 1,554 250 1,701
         June 40,433 20,683 10,669 5,216 2,629 2,170 11,113 8,487 2,626 37 6,792 1,608 199 2,660
         July 33,363 11,162 11,942 −1,631 −716 1,567 11,388 8,577 2,811 1,219 7,758 1,586 250 1,843
         Aug 29,604 9,199 10,559 −1,182 −1,186 1,007 11,726 9,027 2,699 566 6,422 1,453 238 1,702
         Sep 39,174 19,254 9,636 5,795 3,081 741 11,097 8,498 2,599 15 7,045 1,495 267 2,583
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. —1This total, unlike that in Table the statutory pension insurance scheme, with 2.2% of the balance accruing
VIII.4, does not include the receipts from the Equalisation of Burdens levies, to local government; of the residual balance, 50.5% was allocated to central
local business tax on earnings and capital (less local business tax tranfers to government and 49.5% to state government; in 2000 and 2001, 50.25% wascentral and state government), the real property taxes and other local allocated to central government and 49.75% to state government; sincegovernment taxes, or the balance of untransferred tax shares. —2From 2002 49.6% has been allocated to central government and 50.4% to state
1980, the revenue from wage tax and assessed income tax has been government. The EU share must also be deducted from the aforementionedallocated to central, state and local government in the ratio of 42.5:42.5:15, central government share. —6Since 1991 the distribution of turnover tax
and revenue from corporation tax and investment income tax has been and the level and distribution of local business tax transfers have beenallocated to central and state government in the ratio of 50:50. —3From affected by the financing of the debt service of the German Unity Fund. —
1996, after deducting child benefit. —4From February 1993, including 7Central government and state government 50% each. From 1998, central
revenue from the withholding tax on interest income, in which local government 42.2%, state government 57.8%. —8For the breakdown, see
government has a share of 12%. —5In 1998, 3.64% and from 1999, 5.63% Table VIII.6. — 9 From 1998, including the share in turnover taxes. 
was allocated to central government to finance the supplementary grant to
6 Specific taxes levied by central, state and local government
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999,  5  million
Central government taxes State government taxes Local government taxes
Other Other Other
central state local
Insur- Electri- govern- Motor Inherit- govern- Local Real govern-
Mineral Tobacco Spirits ance city ment vehicle Wealth ance Beer ment busi- property ment
Period oil tax tax tax tax tax taxes  1 tax tax tax tax taxes ness taxes taxes  3 
1991 47,266 19,592 5,648 5,862 . 14,215 11,012 6,729 2,636 1,647 7,090 41,297 9,921 1,181
1992 55,166 19,253 5,545 8,094 . 16,744 13,317 6,750 3,030 1,625 8,241 44,848 10,783 1,2811993 56,300 19,459 5,134 9,290 . 3,495 14,059 6,784 3,044 1,769 9,065 42,266 11,663 1,3831994 63,847 20,264 4,889 11,400 . 5,011 14,169 6,627 3,479 1,795 10,482 44,086 12,664 1,445
1995 64,888 20,595 4,837 14,104 . 29,590 13,806 7,855 3,548 1,779 9,613 42,058 13,744 1,426
1996 68,251 20,698 5,085 14,348 . 29,484 13,743 9,035 4,054 1,718 9,990 45,880 14,642 1,4631997 66,008 21,155 4,662 14,127 . 29,312 14,418 1,757 4,061 1,698 12,749 48,601 15,503 1,5091998 66,677 21,652 4,426 13,951 . 23,807 15,171 1,063 4,810 1,662 14,594 50,508 16,228 1,5321999 36,444 11,655 2,233 7,116 1,816 12,973 7,039 537 3,056 846 8,086 27,060 8,636 824
2000 37,826 11,443 2,151 7,243 3,356 13,485 7,015 433 2,982 844 7,171 27,025 8,849 784
2001 40,690 12,072 2,143 7,427 4,322 12,622 8,376 290 3,069 829 7,064 24,534 9,076 7902002 42,193 13,778 2,149 8,327 5,097 11,951 7,592 239 3,021 811 6,913 23,489 9,261 696
2003          Q2  
p 10,741 3,600 467 1,594 1,588 2,797 1,977 80 899 200 1,597 6,315 2,584 163
         Q3 10,607 3,749 521 1,724 1,855 2,768 1,776 36 844 228 1,651 . . .2003          May 3,627 1,850 174 627 613 788 655 11 303 71 514 . . .
         June 3,575 679 160 483 579 1,316 634 63 321 73 518 . . .
         July 3,564 1,836 207 419 886 846 688 15 250 79 555 . . .
         Aug 3,400 747 156 934 477 708 536 8 287 79 543 . . .         Sep 3,643 1,166 158 371 493 1,214 551 13 307 70 554 . . .
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. —1Other excise taxes and the income until mid-1992, and again since the beginning of 1995. —2On earnings and
and corporation tax surcharge ("solidarity surcharge") levied from mid-1991 capital. — 3 Including tax-like revenue.   
54*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
7 General government debt *
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999,  5  million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
Treasury Five-year lending arising  from
Bundes- discount Federal Federal by credit Social German Equalisa-
End of year bank paper Treasury notes savings institu- security tion unifica-
or month Total advances (Bubills)  1 notes  2,3 (Bobls)  2 notes Bonds  2 tions  4 funds Other  4 tion 5 claims Other  6 
General government
1997 2,215,893 . 26,336 249,507 177,721 99,317 662,516 879,021 663 29,907 1,315 89,376 216
1998 2,280,154 . 25,631 227,536 199,774 92,698 723,403 894,456 550 26,073 1,249 88,582 2021999 1,199,975 . 12,594 102,364 120,998 41,621 416,051 450,111 281 10,200 476 45,175 1052000 1,211,439 . 11,616 109,951 126,276 35,991 438,888 433,443 211 10,524 285 44,146 1082001 1,223,929 . 23,036 151,401 130,045 26,395 448,148 422,440 174 13,110 85 8,986 108
2002          June 1,251,126 . 22,252 176,996 133,289 20,636 463,906 408,991 239 15,681 51 8,986 101
         Sep 1,269,119 . 31,440 193,052 135,502 19,752 462,459 401,797 227 16,893 50 7,848 102         Dec 1,277,630 . 30,815 203,951 137,669 17,898 456,300 404,168 195 18,664 29 7,845 97
2003          Mar 1,311,333 . 30,630 220,438 143,172 15,434 469,566 401,492 205 22,458 −1 7,845 95
         June 1,325,969 . 31,165 232,373 150,627 14,284 462,639 401,353 205 25,390 −4 7,845 92
Central government 7,8 
1997 905,691 . 25,286 78,848 177,721 99,317 481,619 31,845 5 870 1,300 8,684 197
1998 957,983 . 24,666 84,760 199,274 92,698 519,718 24,125 − 2,603 1,270 8,684 186
1999 714,069 . 11,553 44,335 120,498 41,621 379,808 67,872 60 2,568 476 45,175 1042000 715,819 . 11,516 44,678 123,642 35,991 400,490 52,836 29 2,099 285 44,146 1072001 701,077 . 21,136 59,643 119,911 26,395 416,195 47,111 26 1,481 85 8,986 107
2002          June 716,787 . 21,389 66,445 123,155 20,636 431,039 43,600 12 1,374 51 8,986 100
         Sep 726,896 . 30,982 72,762 125,316 19,752 429,452 39,392 0 1,242 50 7,848 101         Dec 725,405 . 30,227 78,584 127,484 17,898 422,558 39,517 0 1,167 29 7,845 97
2003          Mar 745,400 . 30,085 80,348 132,987 15,434 435,146 42,281 − 1,183 −1 7,845 94
         June 749,920 . 30,416 82,834 140,442 14,284 428,166 43,744 − 2,102 −4 7,845 91
State government (western)
1997 505,297 . 350 86,639 . . . 406,499 47 11,760 . − 2
1998 525,380 . 520 83,390 . . . 430,709 43 10,716 . − 2
1999 274,208 . 150 43,033 . . . 226,022 23 4,979 . − 1
2000 282,431 . − 48,702 . . . 227,914 22 5,792 . . 1
2001 305,788 . 1,800 67,721 . . . 228,270 5 7,991 . . 1
2002          June 314,447 . 750 83,192 . . . 219,729 79 10,697 . . 1
         Sep 320,617 . 250 92,220 . . . 216,121 79 11,946 . . 1         Dec 328,390 . 250 97,556 . . . 217,241 63 13,280 . . 1
2003          Mar 339,986 . 300 109,109 . . . 213,990 77 16,509 . . 1
         June 345,390 . 322 116,274 . . . 209,820 78 18,896 . . 1
State government (eastern)
1997 90,174 . 700 27,540 . . . 61,697 15 222 . . .1998 98,192 . 445 27,228 . . . 70,289 − 230 . . .
1999 53,200 . 891 14,517 . . . 37,602 − 189 . . .
2000 55,712 . 100 16,092 . . . 39,339 − 182 . . .
2001 58,771 . 100 20,135 . . . 37,382 − 1,154 . . .
2002          June 60,156 . 112 23,387 . . . 35,399 − 1,258 . . .
         Sep 61,533 . 208 24,097 . . . 35,860 − 1,368 . . .
         Dec 63,782 . 338 23,838 . . . 37,953 − 1,653 . . .
2003          Mar 64,965 . 245 26,134 . . . 36,351 − 2,235 . . .
         June 66,910 . 427 28,418 . . . 36,204 − 1,861 . . .
Local government (western) 9 
1997 160,162 . . 300 . . 1,330 154,145 149 4,238 . . .1998 158,960 . . 300 . . 1,330 153,208 119 4,003 . . .1999 81,511 . . 153 . . 680 78,726 53 1,898 . . .2000 81,414 . . 153 . . 680 78,656 33 1,891 . . .2001 82,203 . . 153 . . 629 79,470 29 1,922 . . .
2002          June 83,700 . . 153 . . 629 80,968 30 1,920 . . .
         Sep 84,000 . . 153 . . 629 81,268 30 1,920 . . .         Dec 84,097 . . 153 . . 629 81,307 22 1,986 . . .
2003          Mar 85,100 . . 153 . . 578 82,369 20 1,980 . . .
         June 88,000 . . 153 . . 578 85,269 20 1,980 . . .
Local government (eastern) 9 
1997 38,688 . . 225 . . 400 37,623 273 167 . . .1998 39,873 . . 225 . . 460 38,777 255 156 . . .1999 20,726 . . 51 . . 335 20,138 124 78 . . .2000 17,048 . . 51 . . 335 16,497 114 50 . . .2001 17,005 . . − . . 284 16,581 107 33 . . .
2002          June 16,700 . . − . . 284 16,276 110 30 . . .
         Sep 16,700 . . − . . 284 16,276 110 30 . . .
         Dec 16,745 . . − . . 284 16,318 102 41 . . .
2003          Mar 16,680 . . − . . 284 16,256 100 40 . . .
         June 16,750 . . − . . 284 16,326 100 40 . . .
For footnotes, see end of the table. 
55*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
7 General government debt * (cont ’d)
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999,  5  million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
Treasury Five-year lending arising  from
Bundes- discount Federal Federal by credit Social German Equalisa-
End of year bank paper Treasury notes savings institu- security tion unifica-
or month Total advances (Bubills)  1 notes  2,3 (Bobls)  2 notes Bonds  2 tions  4 funds Other  4 tion 5 claims Other  6 
German Unity Fund/Indemnification Fund 7 
1997 79,717 . −−− . 44,347 34,720 5 645 . . .
1998 79,413 . −−− . 47,998 30,975 − 440 . . .
1999 40,234 . − 275 500 . 28,978 10,292 − 189 . . .
2000 40,629 . − 275 2,634 . 29,797 7,790 − 133 . . .
2001 39,923 . − 3,748 10,134 . 21,577 4,315 − 149 . . .
2002          June 40,028 . − 3,820 10,134 . 21,902 4,147 − 2 6...
         Sep 40,047 . − 3,820 10,134 . 22,049 4,019 − 2 6...
         Dec 39,810 . − 3,820 10,134 . 22,685 3,146 − 2 6...
2003          Mar 39,833 . . 4,694 10,134 . 23,420 1,585 −− ...
         June 39,600 . . 4,694 10,134 . 23,443 1,329 −− ...
ERP Special Fund 7 
1997 33,650 . .... 10,810 22,840 −− ...
1998 34,159 . .... 11,944 20,988 − 1,227 . . .
1999 16,028 . . . − . 6,250 9,458 21 299 . . .
2000 18,386 . . . − . 7,585 10,411 13 377 . . .
2001 19,161 . . . − . 9,462 9,310 8 381 . . .
2002          June 19,308 . . . − . 10,052 8,873 8 376 . . .
         Sep 19,327 . . . 51 . 10,045 8,863 8 361 . . .
         Dec 19,400 . . . 51 . 10,144 8,686 8 512 . . .
2003          Mar 19,369 . . . 51 . 10,138 8,660 8 512 . . .
         June 19,399 . . . 51 . 10,169 8,660 8 512 . . .
Federal Railways Fund 7,8 
1997 77,254 . . 1,927 − . 25,634 44,807 115 4,772 . . .
1998 77,246 . . − 500 . 31,648 42,488 79 2,531 . . .
1999          June 39,231 . . − 1,023 . 16,805 20,401 34 968 . . .
Debt Processing Fund/Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities 7,8 
1997 322,032 . − 54,028 − . 98,377 81,616 54 7,233 15 80,692 17
1998 304,978 . − 31,633 − . 110,006 79,226 54 4,167 −20 79,899 15
1999          June 151,097 . − 11,127 2,000 . 58,897 36,133 27 2,015 −9 40,902 4
Equalisation Fund for Safeguarding the Use of Coal 7,8 
1997 3,229 . .... − 3,229 −− ...
1998 3,971 . .... 3 0 0 3,671 −− ...
1999          June 2,302 . .... 1 5 3 2,148 −− ...
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical 6Old debt mainly denominated in foreign currency, in accordance with the
Office. —*Excluding intergovernment debt. —1Predominantly Treasury London Debts Agreement; excluding debt securities in own portfolios. —
discount paper (Bubills). —2Excluding issuers ’holdings of their own 7In contrast to the capital market statistics, the debt incurred through the
securities. —3Treasury notes issued by state government include long-term joint issuance of Federal securities is recorded here under central
paper. —4Mainly loans against borrowers ’notes. Including loans raised government and its special funds in accordance with the agreed distribution
abroad. Other loans from non-banks, including loans from supplementary ratios. —8Since 1 July 1999 central government has assumed joint
public pension funds and liabilities arising from the investment assistance responsibility for the debts of the Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities,
levy. —5Old liabilities arising from housing construction and liabilities the Federal Railways Fund and the Equalisation Fund for Safeguarding the
arising from housing construction by the former GDR ’s armed forces and Use of Coal. From July, the aforementioned special funds are recorded
from housing construction in connection with the return of the troops of under central government. —9Data other than year-end figures have been
the former USSR stationed in eastern Germany to their home country. — estimated. Including debt of municipal special purpose associations. 
56*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
8 Change in general government debt *
  
  
Net borrowing  1 
End of 2002 2003
2002 Total Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 1st hf Q1 Q2 June 2003
Item  5  million
Borrowers
Central government  2 725,405 749,920 + 24,328 + 20,542 −4,833 + 10,110 −1,491 + 24,515 + 19,995 + 4,520
German Unity Fund 39,441 39,183 − 197 + 64 −− − 261 − 258 − 2− 256
ERP Special Fund 19,400 19,399 + 239 − 63 + 210 + 19 + 73 − 1− 31 + 30
Indemnification Fund 369 416 + 84 + 19 + 21 + 19 + 25 + 47 + 25 + 23
State government (western) 328,390 345,390 + 22,603 + 4,422 + 4,237 + 6,170 + 7,774 + 17,000 + 11,596 + 5,404
State government (eastern) 63,782 66,910 + 5,011 + 372 + 1,013 + 1,377 + 2,249 + 3,128 + 1,183 + 1,945Local government (western)  
3 84,097 88,000 + 2,630 + 275 + 1,000 + 900 + 455 + 3,742 + 2,003 + 1,739
Local government (eastern)  3 16,745 16,750 − 242 − 32 − 180 − 30 − 1+ 1 7 − 46 + 63
Total 1,277,630 1,325,969 + 54,455 + 25,599 + 1,468 + 18,564 + 8,823 + 48,190 + 34,722 + 13,468
Debt by category
Treasury  discount 30,815 31,165 + 7,779 −5,219 + 4,434 + 9,188 − 625 + 350 − 185 + 535 paper  (Bubills)  4 
Treasury notes  5 203,951 232,373 + 52,551 + 7,294 + 18,301 + 16,056 + 10,900 + 28,422 + 16,486 + 11,936
Five-year Federal notes (Bobls)  5 137,669 150,627 + 7,623 + 3,375 − 132 + 2,213 + 2,167 + 12,958 + 5,504 + 7,455
Federal savings notes 17,898 14,284 −8,497 −3,748 −2,012 − 884 −1,854 −3,614 −2,464 −1,150
Bonds  5 456,300 462,639 + 8,152 + 13,469 + 2,289 −1,446 −6,159 + 6,339 + 13,266 −6,927
Direct lending bycredit institutions  
6 404,168 401,353 −17,518 + 8,297 −21,875 −6,624 + 2,684 −2,964 −1,657 −1,307
Loans from social security funds 195 205 + 21 + 44 + 21 − 12 − 32 + 11 + 10 + 1
Other loans  6 18,623 25,349 + 5,553 + 2,124 + 447 + 1,212 + 1,770 + 6,726 + 3,794 + 2,932
Old debt  7 126 88 − 67 − 36 − 6− 0− 25 − 39 − 33 − 6
Equalisation claims 7,845 7,845 −1,142 −− − 1,139 − 3+ 0 −+0
Investment assistance levy 41 41 − 0− 0 −+0 +0 +0 +0 − 0
Total 1,277,630 1,325,969 + 54,455 + 25,599 + 1,468 + 18,564 + 8,823 + 48,190 + 34,722 + 13,468
Creditors
Banking system
Bundesbank 4,440 4,440 −−−−−−−−
Credit institutions 532,900 537,400 − 746 + 11,671 −13,200 + 270 + 513 + 4,351 + 13,219 −8,868
Domestic non-banks
Social security funds 195 205 + 21 + 44 + 21 − 12 − 32 + 11 + 10 + 1
Other  8 229,595 237,324 −2,220 + 1,684 −2,053 − 794 −1,057 + 7,729 + 1,993 + 5,736
Foreign creditors  pe 510,500 546,600 + 57,400 + 12,200 + 16,700 + 19,100 + 9,400 + 36,100 + 19,500 + 16,600
Total 1,277,630 1,325,969 + 54,455 + 25,599 + 1,468 + 18,564 + 8,823 + 48,190 + 34,722 + 13,468
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical own securities. —6Including loans raised abroad. —7Old liabilities arising
Office. —*Excluding intergovernment debt. —1Net borrowing differs from housing construction and liabilities arising from the housing
from the change in debt, which includes the assumption and transfer of construction of the former GDR ’s armed forces and from housing
debts. —2See Table VIII.7, footnote 8. —3Data other than year-end construction in connection with the return of the troops of the former USSR
figures have been estimated. Including debt of municipal special purpose stationed in eastern Germany to their home country, and old debt in
associations. —4Excluding mobilisation and liquidity paper. Predominantly accordance with the London Debts Agreement. —8Ascertained as a
Treasury discount paper (Bubills). —5Excluding issuers ’holdings of their residual. 
9 Loans raised by general government against borrowers ’ notes
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999,  5  million
Redemption Equalisation
Central German ERP Federal Fund for Fund  for Safe-
End of year govern- Unity Special State Local Railways Inherited guarding  the
or month Total  1 ment  2,3 Fund Fund government government  4,5 Fund  3 Liabilites  3 Use of Coal 3 
1998 898,030 23,094 31,415 22,215 504,148 184,942 45,098 83,447 3,671
1999 444,031 64,704 10,481 9,778 264,158 94,909 −− −
2000 431,364 54,731 7,178 10,801 268,362 90,292 −− −
2001 416,067 44,791 4,464 9,699 267,988 89,126 −− −
2002 June 404,661 40,431 4,172 9,256 262,574 88,228 −− −
Sep 401,432 39,267 4,044 9,231 260,611 88,280 −− −
Dec 398,910 34,636 3,172 9,205 262,840 89,057 −− −
2003 Mar 396,685 33,202 1,585 9,180 264,827 87,892 −− −
June 396,008 33,375 1,329 9,180 263,083 89,041 −− −
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical 3See Table VIII.7, footnote 8. —4Data other than year-end figures have
Office. —1Excluding Debt Register claims and cash advances. Including been estimated. Including municipal special purpose associations. —
small amounts of mortgage loans, land charges in annuity and other forms, 5 Including contractually agreed loans. 
and debts outstanding. —2Including Equalisation of Burdens Fund. —
57*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
10 Central government debt
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999,  5  million
Treasury discount Indebtedness
paper (Bubills)  1 to non-banks Old debt
of which Direct
Federal Federal Five-year lending arising  from
Treasury Treasury Federal Federal Federal by credit Social German Equal-
End of year financing notes notes savings bonds institu- security isation unifica-
or month Total Total paper (Sch ätze) 2 (Bobls)  2 notes (Bunds)  2 tions  3,4 funds Other  3,5,6 tion 7 claims Other  8 
1996 839,883 26,789 7,166 55,289 176,164 96,391 434,295 32,988 5 7,766 1,330 8,684 183
1997 905,691 25,286 5,221 78,848 177,721 99,317 481,619 31,845 5 870 1,300 8,684 1971998 957,983 24,666 4,558 84,760 199,274 92,698 519,718 24,125 − 2,603 1,270 8,684 186
1999  
9 714,069 11,553 1,584 44,335 120,498 41,621 379,808 67,872 60 2,568 476 45,175 104
2000 715,819 11,516 1,805 44,678 123,642 35,991 400,490 52,836 29 2,099 285 44,146 1072001 701,077 21,136 1,658 59,643 119,911 26,395 416,195 47,111 26 1,481 85 8,986 1072002 725,405 30,227 1,618 78,584 127,484 17,898 422,558 39,517 0 1,167 29 7,845 97
2002          Oct 728,799 30,977 1,663 78,405 125,954 18,011 425,750 40,487 0 1,242 26 7,848 99
         Nov 734,678 30,466 1,622 78,933 126,472 17,852 434,650 37,089 0 1,242 28 7,848 99         Dec 725,405 30,227 1,618 78,584 127,484 17,898 422,558 39,517 0 1,167 29 7,845 97
2003          Jan 743,400 30,218 1,549 84,053 127,786 15,408 426,630 50,171 0 1,167 30 7,845 95
         Feb 745,992 30,081 1,462 84,808 129,055 15,515 428,692 48,701 0 1,167 36 7,845 94         Mar 745,400 30,085 1,375 80,348 132,987 15,434 435,146 42,281 − 1,183 −1 7,845 94
         Apr 747,512 30,048 1,308 80,447 133,377 15,458 429,019 50,040 − 1,183 4 7,845 92
         May 749,175 30,490 1,275 85,842 134,238 14,414 431,160 43,917 − 1,183 −2 7,845 89
         June 749,920 30,416 1,236 82,834 140,442 14,284 428,166 43,744 − 2,102 −4 7,845 91
         July 760,392 30,842 1,207 87,689 141,157 13,804 426,319 51,688 − 2,102 −7 6,706 91
         Aug 764,368 31,420 1,206 88,295 135,298 13,754 433,479 53,227 − 2,102 −7 6,706 93
         Sep 766,213 32,892 1,229 85,526 136,544 13,754 434,085 49,360 186 7,076 −6 6,706 90
         Oct 
p 769,186 33,205 1,182 90,475 142,801 12,672 440,023 35,959 186 7,076 −6 6,706 89
1Excluding mobilisation and liquidity paper. In November 1999, including with the return of the troops of the former USSR stationed in eastern
cash bills. —2Excluding issuers ’holdings of their own securities. — Germany to their home country. —8Commutation and compensation debt
3Including loans raised abroad. —4Including money market loans. — and old debt mainly denominated in foreign currency. —9Since 1 July 1999
5Including loans granted by supplementary pension funds for government central government has assumed joint responsibility for the debts of the
employees. —6Including liabilities arising from the investment assistance Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, the Federal Railways Fund and
levy. —7Assumption of liabilities arising from housing construction for the the Equalisation Fund for Safeguarding the Use of Coal. From July 1999, the
former GDR ’s armed forces and from housing construction in connection aforementioned special funds are included under central government. 
11 Central government borrowing in the market
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999,  5  million
of which
Five-year Loans against Change in
Total new borrowing Federal bonds (Bunds) Federal notes (Bobls) Other securities  2 borrowers ’ notes Money money
market market
Period Gross  1 Net Gross  1 Net Gross  1 Net Gross  1 Net Gross Net loans deposits
1996 + 185,696 + 83,049 + 54,038 + 31,988 + 45,445 + 5,445 + 67,015 + 39,586 + 15,050 + 1,906 + 4,148 + 6,548
1997 + 250,074 + 65,808 + 79,323 + 47,323 + 59,557 + 1,557 + 98,275 + 24,983 + 12,950 − 8,009 − 30 − 3,304
1998 + 228,050 + 52,292 + 78,304 + 38,099 + 55,078 + 21,553 + 85,706 − 1,327 + 12,023 − 2,927 − 3,065 − 5,440
1999 + 139,865 + 31,631 + 53,931 + 114,080 + 22,229 + 18,610 + 44,904 − 5,836 + 14,861 + 52,897 + 3,937 + 1,832
2000 + 122,725 + 1,750 + 49,395 + 20,682 + 26,342 + 3,144 + 45,278 − 5,323 + 7,273 − 9,973 − 5,563 − 940
2001 + 135,018 − 14,741 + 36,511 + 15,705 + 19,603 − 3,730 + 69,971 + 14,989 + 5,337 − 9,941 + 3,595 − 1,495
2002 + 178,203 + 24,328 + 41,378 + 6,364 + 36,037 + 7,572 + 93,853 + 19,535 + 4,716 −10,155 + 2,221 + 22
2002          Jan-Oct + 137,639 + 27,721 + 31,867 + 9,555 + 26,620 + 6,042 + 76,409 + 20,218 + 4,098 − 5,534 − 1,354 + 777
2003          Jan-Oct  p + 197,137 + 43,781 + 61,276 + 17,465 + 35,731 + 15,317 + 91,065 + 9,643 + 9,987 + 3,459 − 922 + 263
2002          Oct + 20,715 + 1,903 + 8,082 − 3,702 + 637 + 637 + 10,797 + 3,897 + 94 − 10 + 1,106 − 1,181
         Nov + 23,264 + 5,880 + 8,900 + 8,900 + 8,562 + 518 + 5,171 − 141 + 543 − 3,487 + 88 − 564
         Dec + 17,300 − 9,273 + 611 −12,092 + 854 + 1,012 + 12,273 − 542 + 76 − 1,134 + 3,487 − 191
2003          Jan + 34,388 + 17,995 + 11,187 + 4,071 + 292 + 302 + 10,732 + 2,969 + 628 − 895 + 11,549 + 449
         Feb + 14,560 + 2,592 + 2,063 + 2,063 + 7,831 + 1,269 + 5,793 + 725 + 40 − 305 − 1,166 + 112
         Mar + 11,908 − 592 + 6,451 + 6,454 + 3,924 + 3,933 + 7,071 − 4,536 + 633 − 234 − 6,170 + 6
         Apr + 17,202 + 2,112 + 3,736 − 6,127 + 380 + 390 + 5,001 + 86 + 100 − 225 + 7,984 − 92
         May + 15,681 + 1,663 + 2,133 + 2,141 + 8,260 + 861 + 10,443 + 4,794 + 565 − 404 − 5,720 + 61
         June + 20,815 + 745 + 2,025 − 2,994 + 6,192 + 6,204 + 11,496 − 3,212 + 1,156 + 801 − 54 − 215
         July + 31,062 + 10,472 + 11,352 − 1,847 + 693 + 715 + 10,241 + 4,801 + 4,153 + 3,321 + 4,623 − 124
         Aug + 15,812 + 3,976 + 7,161 + 7,161 + 657 − 5,859 + 6,329 + 1,134 + 1,440 + 1,315 + 225 + 328
         Sep + 23,605 + 1,845 + 6,694 + 606 + 1,246 + 1,246 + 13,693 − 1,297 + 977 + 298 + 995 − 73
         Oct p + 12,104 + 2,973 + 8,473 + 5,938 + 6,257 + 6,257 + 10,266 + 4,181 + 296 − 214 −13,187 − 188
1After deduction of repurchases. —2Federal Treasury notes (Sch ätze),   
Federal savings notes, Treasury discount paper (Bubills), Federal Treasury   
financing paper.  
58*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
12 Revenue, expenditure and assets of the wage and
salary earners ’ pension insurance fund
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999,  5  million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 Assets  5 
of which of which
Payments Balance Mort- Memo
from Pen- of revenue gage item
central Pension sioners ’ and and Adminis-
Contri- govern- pay- health expend- other Real trative
Period Total butions  2 ment Total ments  3 insurance  4 iture Total Deposits  6 Securities loans  7 estate assets
Western Germany
1996  8 288,761 236,036 50,478 288,716 237,464 16,809 + 45 14,456 9,608 2,119 2,500 229 8,863
1997 305,606 248,463 54,896 295,635 246,011 17,892 + 9,971 14,659 10,179 1,878 2,372 230 9,261
1998 317,340 250,063 65,191 304,155 254,783 18,636 + 13,185 18,194 14,201 1,493 2,274 226 9,573
1999 169,124 128,191 39,884 159,819 134,536 9,910 + 9,305 13,623 11,559 824 1,127 114 4,904
2000 173,020 128,057 43,638 166,569 139,180 10,253 + 6,451 14,350 11,459 1,676 1,105 110 4,8892001  
8 178,293 130,064 46,710 172,382 144,374 10,610 + 5,911 13,973 10,646 1,517 1,699 111 4,917
2002 182,132 131,109 49,416 178,754 149,636 11,245 + 3,378 9,826 6,943 1,072 1,685 126 4,878
2002          Q1 43,411 30,893 12,212 43,792 36,898 2,719 − 381 11,943 8,712 1,427 1,698 106 4,933
         Q2 44,541 31,949 12,222 43,927 36,784 2,711 + 614 10,663 7,490 1,366 1,696 111 4,954
         Q3 45,371 32,663 12,280 44,799 37,746 2,872 + 572 8,911 5,919 1,182 1,689 121 4,947         Q4 48,213 35,599 12,279 45,928 37,894 3,056 + 2,285 9,826 6,943 1,072 1,685 126 4,878
2003          Q1 45,408 31,969 13,173 45,117 38,234 2,900 + 291 8,686 5,649 1,230 1,685 122 4,874
         Q2 46,373 32,875 13,212 45,379 38,127 2,898 + 994 7,698 4,906 980 1,686 126 4,867         Q3 47,229 33,668 13,296 46,157 38,652 3,000 + 1,072 6,348 3,822 727 1,683 116 4,855
Eastern Germany
1996 74,790 46,580 17,910 83,830 68,316 4,851 −9,040 . . . . . .
1997 79,351 48,939 20,065 87,424 70,500 5,388 −8,073 . . . . . .
1998 81,072 47,764 23,564 90,863 73,040 5,757 −9,791 . . . . . .
1999 43,214 24,015 14,744 47,641 38,383 3,040 −4,427 . . . . . .
2000 43,513 22,655 15,224 49,385 39,419 3,112 −5,872 . . . . . .
2001 44,462 21,984 16,383 50,943 40,356 3,152 −6,481 . . . . . .
2002  p 45,657 21,701 17,542 53,161 41,497 3,253 −7,504 . . . . . .
2002          Q1 11,070 5,157 4,410 13,106 10,373 793 −2,036 . . . . . .
         Q2 11,493 5,455 4,558 13,046 10,228 797 −1,553 . . . . . .
         Q3 10,757 5,275 4,334 13,391 10,530 832 −2,634 . . . . . .
         Q4 11,955 5,810 4,306 13,397 10,547 842 −1,442 . . . . . .
2003          Q1 11,187 5,320 4,588 13,359 10,649 827 −2,172 . . . . . .
         Q2 11,457 5,474 4,537 13,405 10,636 837 −1,948 . . . . . .
         Q3 11,461 5,417 4,534 13,548 10,757 858 −2,087 . . . . . .
Source: Federal Minister of Labour and Social Affairs and Association of deducted from pension payments. —4From 1995, including long-term care
German Pension Insurance Funds. —1The annual figures do not tally with insurance for pensioners. —5Largely corresponds to fluctuation reserves.
the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. From 1993, End of year or quarter. From 1992, figures for the whole of Germany. —
including financial compensation payments. Excluding investment spending 6Including cash. —7Excluding loans to other social security funds;
and proceeds. —2Including contributions for recipients of government including participating interests. —8Excluding income arising from the
cash benefits. —3Payments by pension insurance funds to health insurance revaluation of participating interests. 
institutions under section 50 of the Social Security Code V have been
13 Revenue and expenditure of the Federal Labour Office
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999,  5  million
Revenue Expenditure
Grant or
of which of which working
capital
Promo- loans
Unemployment support  3,4 Job promotion  4,5 tion of fromwinter central
Contri- Western Eastern Western Eastern con- govern-
Period Total  
1 butions Levies  2 Total Total Germany Germany Total Germany Germany struction Balance ment
Germany
1996 91,825 85,073 3,346 105,588 57,123 40,186 16,938 36,478 18,368 18,111 903 −13,763 13,756
1997 93,149 85,793 2,959 102,723 60,273 40,309 19,964 31,418 16,117 15,301 443 −9,574 9,574
1998 91,088 86,165 2,868 98,852 53,483 35,128 18,355 34,279 16,784 17,496 471 −7,764 7,719
1999 47,954 45,141 1,467 51,694 25,177 16,604 8,573 20,558 10,480 10,078 279 −3,740 3,739
2000 49,606 46,359 1,403 50,473 23,946 15,615 8,331 20,324 10,534 9,790 294 − 868 867
2001 50,682 47,337 1,640 52,613 25,036 16,743 8,294 20,713 11,094 9,619 268 −1,931 1,931
2002 50,885 47,405 2,088 56,508 27,610 19,751 7,860 21,011 11,568 9,443 245 −5,623 5,623
2002          Q1 11,502 11,188 51 13,093 6,587 4,608 1,979 4,665 2,523 2,142 139 −1,591 3,720
         Q2 12,200 11,459 433 14,141 7,098 5,005 2,093 5,230 2,903 2,327 97 −1,941 2,200
         Q3 12,710 11,808 528 13,905 6,708 4,839 1,869 5,182 2,849 2,334 7 −1,195 854
         Q4 14,473 12,951 1,077 15,369 7,218 5,299 1,919 5,933 3,293 2,640 2 − 896 −1,151
2003          Q1 11,617 11,281 48 14,408 7,647 5,422 2,225 4,785 2,576 2,209 180 −2,790 5,151
         Q2 12,272 11,487 536 14,667 7,975 5,708 2,267 4,721 2,623 2,098 84 −2,395 2,408
         Q3 12,828 11,797 619 13,645 7,251 5,313 1,938 4,453 2,462 1,991 7 − 817 514
Source: Federal Labour Office. —1Excluding central government liquidity insurance funds and statutory pension insurance sheme. —5Vocational
assistance. —2Levies to promote winter construction and to pay bank- training, measures to encourage job take-up, rehabilitation, job creation
ruptcy compensation to employees. —3Unemployment benefit, short-time measures, subsidies granted to Personnel Service Agencies (PSAs),
working benefit. —4Including contributions to the statutory health compensation top-up payments and business start-up grants. 
59*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
IX Economic conditions
  
1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
  Germany
  
  
1st half 1st half
  1999   2000   2001   2002   2003   2000   2001   2002   2003   1999   2000   2001   2002
Annual Percentage
Item  5  billion percentage change of total
At  1995  prices
I Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 430.5 447.3 444.3 443.8 217.8 3.9 −0.7 −0.1 0.6 22.5 22.7 22.4 22.3
Construction 105.1 102.1 95.8 90.1 40.5 −2.9 −6.1 −5.9 −7.0 5.5 5.2 4.8 4.5
Wholesale/retail trade, hotel andrestaurant services, transportand storage  
1 334.5 353.5 367.6 371.3 182.4 5.7 4.0 1.0 0.9 17.5 17.9 18.5 18.7
Financing, renting and businessservices  
2 546.6 570.9 589.7 595.9 295.0 4.4 3.3 1.1 0.2 28.5 29.0 29.7 29.9
Public and private services  3 382.1 388.4 389.6 394.8 197.3 1.6 0.3 1.3 0.2 20.0 19.7 19.6 19.8
All economic sectors 1,823.5 1,886.7 1,911.5 1,919.9 945.2 3.5 1.3 0.4 0.1 95.2 95.8 96.2 96.5Memo item: Enterprise sector 1,596.1 1,658.5 1,684.3 1,693.4 831.7 3.9 1.6 0.5 0.2 83.4 84.2 84.8 85.1
Economic sectors, adjusted  
4 1,730.5 1,786.4 1,806.6 1,815.2 892.0 3.2 1.1 0.5 0.0 90.4 90.7 91.0 91.2
Gross domestic product 1,914.8 1,969.5 1,986.2 1,989.7 978.6 2.9 0.8 0.2 −0.1 100 100 100 100
II Use of domestic product
Private consumption  5 1,099.1 1,120.6 1,136.9 1,125.3 555.3 2.0 1.4 −1.0 0.7 57.4 56.9 57.2 56.6
Government consumption 374.3 378.0 382.0 388.4 192.9 1.0 1.0 1.7 0.7 19.5 19.2 19.2 19.5Machinery and equipment 160.3 176.5 167.8 152.5 72.7 10.1 −4.9 −9.1 −0.3 8.4 9.0 8.4 7.7
Premises 248.7 242.1 230.5 217.1 99.2 −2.6 −4.8 −5.8 −5.6 13.0 12.3 11.6 10.9
Other investment  
6 23.4 25.5 27.0 27.4 13.6 9.0 5.6 1.6 1.6 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.4
Changes in inventories  7 −5.7 −8.1 −24.7 −22.0 3.5 . . . . −0.3 −0.4 −1.2 −1.1
Domestic use 1,900.2 1,934.7 1,919.4 1,888.6 937.1 1.8 −0.8 −1.6 0.7 99.2 98.2 96.6 94.9
Net exports 14.6 34.8 66.8 101.1 41.5 . . . . 0.8 1.8 3.4 5.1
Exports 581.8 661.5 698.8 722.6 357.4 13.7 5.6 3.4 1.6 30.4 33.6 35.2 36.3Imports 567.2 626.7 632.0 621.5 315.9 10.5 0.9 −1.7 4.4 29.6 31.8 31.8 31.2
Gross domestic product 1,914.8 1,969.5 1,986.2 1,989.7 978.6 2.9 0.8 0.2 −0.1 100 100 100 100
At  current  prices
III Use of domestic product
Private consumption  5 1,156.0 1,196.2 1,232.7 1,236.5 614.7 3.5 3.0 0.3 1.6 58.4 58.9 59.4 58.6
Government consumption 378.2 385.6 394.1 404.4 195.8 2.0 2.2 2.6 1.3 19.1 19.0 19.0 19.2Machinery and equipment 159.6 176.7 167.4 151.9 71.2 10.7 −5.3 −9.3 −2.6 8.1 8.7 8.1 7.2
Premises 245.2 240.2 228.9 215.5 98.6 −2.1 −4.7 −5.9 −5.7 12.4 11.8 11.0 10.2
Other investment  
6 21.6 23.2 24.4 24.6 12.0 7.3 5.0 1.0 0.2 1.1 1.1 1.2 1.2
Changes in inventories  7 2.1 0.7 −15.0 −13.2 11.5 . . . . 0.1 0.0 −0.7 −0.6
Domestic use 1,962.6 2,022.5 2,032.5 2,019.7 1,003.7 3.1 0.5 −0.6 1.2 99.2 99.6 98.0 95.7
Net exports 16.0 7.5 41.2 90.7 39.2 . . . . 0.8 0.4 2.0 4.3
Exports 586.4 686.1 731.5 757.6 373.5 17.0 6.6 3.6 1.3 29.6 33.8 35.3 35.9Imports 570.4 678.6 690.2 667.0 334.4 19.0 1.7 −3.4 2.5 28.8 33.4 33.3 31.6
Gross domestic product 1,978.6 2,030.0 2,073.7 2,110.4 1,042.9 2.6 2.2 1.8 0.8 100 100 100 100
IV Prices (1995 = 100)
Private consumption 105.2 106.7 108.4 109.9 110.7 1.5 1.6 1.3 0.9 . . . .Gross domestic product 103.3 103.1 104.4 106.1 106.6 −0.3 1.3 1.6 0.9 . . . .
Terms of trade 100.2 95.8 95.8 97.7 98.8 −4.4 0.1 1.9 1.5 . . . .
V Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,057.8 1,099.1 1,121.3 1,130.5 536.2 3.9 2.0 0.8 0.2 72.0 72.9 72.7 71.9Entrepreneurial and propertyincome 410.4 409.3 420.9 441.1 224.5 −0.3 2.8 4.8 −1.8 28.0 27.1 27.3 28.1
National income 1,468.2 1,508.4 1,542.2 1,571.5 760.7 2.7 2.2 1.9 −0.4 100 100 100 100
Memo item: Gross nationalincome 1,965.1 2,020.3 2,065.6 2,108.8 1,032.7 2.8 2.2 2.1 0.4 . . . .
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August 2003. —1In- cluding taxes on products (offset against subsidies on products). —5Includ-
cluding communication services. —2Financial intermediation, real estate ing non-profit institutions serving households. —6Intangible fixed asset for-
activities, renting and business services. —3Including care-at-home servi- mation (inter alia, computer software and entertainment, literary or artistic
ces.—4Gross value added after deduction of assumed bank charges, but ex- originals) and cultivated assets. — 7 Including net increase in valuables. 
60*IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
 IX Economic conditions
 
2 Output in the production sector     
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which
Industry  1 
Production sector, Intermediate
total Total goods  2 Capital goods  3 Consumer goods  4 Energy  5 Construction
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annualpercent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change
1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 
Germany  
  
1999 107.7 + 1.4 111.5 + 1.7 110.7 + 1.8 118.0 + 1.5 103.3 + 1.7 100.0 −0.4 87.9 + 0.8
2000 113.4 + 5.3 119.1 + 6.8 116.9 + 5.6 130.9 + 10.9 105.6 + 2.2 99.7 −0.3 84.9 −3.4
2001 113.2 −0.2 119.9 + 0.7 116.1 −0.7 134.3 + 2.6 105.2 −0.4 98.1 −1.6 78.9 −7.1
2002 111.8 −1.2 118.4 −1.3 116.2 + 0.1 131.1 −2.4 103.6 −1.5 98.4 + 0.3 76.7 −2.8
  
2002          Sep 119.0 −0.8 126.2 −0.6 123.4 + 1.9 141.1 −2.7 109.0 −1.3 92.7 + 0.8 90.0 −3.4
         Oct 118.5 −0.1 124.6 + 0.2 123.4 + 2.0 134.7 −0.7 112.0 −1.1 103.6 + 5.3 88.0 −6.8
         Nov 120.9 + 3.1 128.3 + 4.0 123.1 + 4.7 144.8 + 4.3 113.0 + 2.2 104.6 −0.8 83.0 −2.0
         Dec 104.6 −0.8 111.5 + 0.1 98.5 + 1.7 135.8 −0.8 98.1 −0.5 108.4 −3.0 54.7 −10.6
2003          Jan 102.3 + 1.0 109.9 + 1.8 110.8 + 2.8 117.3 + 2.4 97.5 −1.4 112.1 + 0.7 43.6 −10.1
         Feb 105.5 + 1.0 114.5 + 2.2 111.1 + 0.0 129.5 + 6.2 98.0 −1.3 106.2 + 7.7 44.2 −23.5
         Mar 6 119.0 + 0.4 127.1 + 1.0 124.8 + 1.3 143.2 + 2.2 107.4 −2.3 110.7 + 6.9 6 70.5 −10.1
         Apr 6 111.9 + 0.1 118.2 + 0.5 118.4 + 1.5 128.7 −1.1 102.4 + 1.5 101.7 + 4.4 6 76.9 −7.7
         May 6 109.4 + 0.7 115.6 + 1.3 116.3 + 0.9 126.3 + 2.8 98.8 −0.6 96.9 + 2.8 6 75.8 −7.2
         June 6 114.1 −1.7 121.1 −2.1 120.2 −0.2 134.6 −4.5 102.8 −1.1 93.1 + 7.1 6 82.4 −4.7
         July  x 6 114.1 + 1.3 120.8 + 1.9 119.7 + 0.3 134.3 + 3.5 102.9 + 1.7 91.5 + 1.7 6 85.4 −3.0
         Aug  x 6 101.7 −3.0 107.0 −2.8 108.5 −3.6 112.4 −3.2 96.4 −0.8 90.9 + 2.0 6 74.5 −7.1
         Sep  x 6 114.9 −3.4 122.0 −3.3 118.6 −3.9 137.6 −2.5 104.8 −3.9 90.9 −1.9 6 85.1 −5.4
Western Germany  
  
1999 107.2 + 1.2 110.1 + 1.3 109.1 + 1.4 117.1 + 1.2 101.1 + 1.2 100.6 −0.6 88.9 + 1.4
2000 112.7 + 5.1 117.1 + 6.4 114.3 + 4.8 129.8 + 10.8 102.8 + 1.7 99.9 −0.7 87.5 −1.6
2001 112.4 −0.3 117.5 + 0.3 113.2 −1.0 132.9 + 2.4 101.9 −0.9 97.9 −2.0 82.2 −6.1
2002 110.6 −1.6 115.5 −1.7 112.7 −0.4 129.3 −2.7 99.6 −2.3 98.2 + 0.3 80.9 −1.6
  
2002          Sep 117.6 −1.1 123.0 −1.1 119.4 + 1.5 138.9 −3.3 105.1 −2.0 92.7 + 1.0 94.5 −2.4
         Oct 117.0 −0.3 121.3 −0.3 119.7 + 1.8 132.7 −1.2 107.1 −2.3 103.4 + 5.3 92.8 −6.1
         Nov 119.3 + 2.8 124.8 + 3.6 119.3 + 4.4 142.5 + 4.3 107.8 + 0.8 104.5 −0.8 87.3 −0.7
         Dec 103.5 −1.1 108.5 −0.5 95.4 + 1.1 133.8 −1.0 93.1 −2.2 108.1 −3.0 58.3 −8.6
2003          Jan 101.5 + 0.8 107.2 + 1.4 107.6 + 2.5 115.6 + 2.1 93.8 −2.0 111.9 + 0.7 46.4 −8.8
         Feb 105.0 + 1.1 111.9 + 2.0 107.8 −0.4 128.0 + 6.2 94.6 −1.6 106.1 + 7.7 47.8 −21.6
         Mar 6 118.1 + 0.4 124.1 + 0.7 121.0 + 0.8 141.3 + 2.1 103.5 −2.4 110.5 + 7.0 6 76.1 −8.6
         Apr 6 110.6 −0.3 115.0 + 0.0 114.5 + 1.1 127.1 −1.2 97.7 + 0.2 101.4 + 4.2 6 82.5 −6.9
         May 6 107.9 + 0.5 112.3 + 0.9 112.1 + 0.4 124.8 + 2.7 94.0 −1.6 96.7 + 2.7 6 80.9 −6.3
         June 6 112.6 −2.0 117.7 −2.6 115.6 −1.0 133.2 −4.3 97.9 −2.1 92.9 + 7.4 6 87.8 −3.6
         July  x 6 113.0 + 1.3 117.9 + 1.6 115.8 + 0.0 133.0 + 3.3 98.9 + 1.0 91.1 + 1.7 6 91.1 −2.1
         Aug  x 6 99.5 −3.3 103.2 −3.3 103.8 −4.2 109.9 −3.3 92.0 −1.3 90.4 + 1.7 6 77.5 −6.6
         Sep  x 6 113.3 −3.7 118.5 −3.7 113.8 −4.7 135.5 −2.4 100.9 −4.0 90.6 −2.3 6 90.4 −4.3
Eastern Germany  
  
1999 114.4 + 4.9 135.8 + 7.6 137.1 + 8.9 135.6 + 7.4 134.0 + 5.9 95.1 + 1.2 84.2 −0.9
2000 121.5 + 6.2 152.7 + 12.4 157.0 + 14.5 153.2 + 13.0 145.7 + 8.7 98.3 + 3.4 75.5 −10.3
2001 123.0 + 1.2 160.0 + 4.8 162.6 + 3.6 163.6 + 6.8 152.6 + 4.7 99.5 + 1.2 67.0 −11.3
2002 125.3 + 1.9 167.1 + 4.4 171.2 + 5.3 168.5 + 3.0 159.7 + 4.7 99.9 + 0.4 61.6 −8.1
  
2002          Sep 135.7 + 2.9 180.4 + 6.4 185.8 + 5.8 188.5 + 8.4 164.2 + 5.3 92.5 −1.4 73.7 −8.2
         Oct 136.1 + 3.2 180.1 + 6.4 181.8 + 4.2 177.2 + 7.3 180.5 + 9.2 104.8 + 4.4 70.8 −9.8
         Nov 139.1 + 4.7 187.4 + 8.6 183.7 + 7.9 194.4 + 4.2 186.3 + 14.9 105.0 −1.5 67.4 −7.9
         Dec 117.4 + 3.0 162.1 + 8.4 147.9 + 8.9 178.0 + 2.5 168.2 + 14.7 110.8 −3.1 41.8 −19.5
2003          Jan 111.4 + 2.6 155.8 + 5.9 161.7 + 6.6 152.7 + 6.2 149.8 + 4.5 113.5 + 0.4 33.3 −16.1
         Feb 111.0 −0.4 157.6 + 4.0 163.1 + 4.2 161.7 + 7.1 145.2 + 0.3 107.1 + 7.6 31.2 −32.3
         Mar 6 129.4 + 0.7 178.5 + 3.7 185.2 + 6.2 184.7 + 4.6 162.3 −1.3 111.9 + 6.0 6 50.2 −17.4
         Apr 6 126.9 + 3.6 171.7 + 6.6 179.7 + 5.9 162.1 + 1.3 169.0 + 13.7 104.3 + 5.8 6 56.9 −11.2
         May 6 126.3 + 2.7 171.6 + 5.9 183.0 + 6.5 158.7 + 3.2 166.8 + 7.6 98.4 + 3.3 6 57.6 −11.5
         June 6 131.8 + 1.5 179.0 + 3.7 193.1 + 8.7 164.3 −8.0 172.0 + 8.2 95.0 + 5.3 6 63.1 −10.0
         July  x 6 127.3 + 2.7 169.9 + 5.1 181.9 + 3.4 162.6 + 6.0 158.7 + 7.4 95.1 + 2.5 6 64.8 −7.2
         Aug  x 6 127.6 + 0.4 171.2 + 2.3 182.9 + 3.3 165.5 −0.5 158.9 + 3.5 94.6 + 4.0 6 63.7 −9.0
         Sep  x 6 133.7 −1.5 181.2 + 0.4 193.8 + 4.3 183.6 −2.6 159.5 −2.9 93.2 + 0.8 6 65.8 −10.7
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. —oUsing the particular, mining of coal and lignite, extraction of crude petroleum and
Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. —1Manufacturing sector, unless natural gas and manufacture of refined petroleum products. —6Pro-
assigned to the main grouping energy, plus mining and quarrying. —2In- visional up to adjustment to the figures of the annual overall survey in the
cluding mining and quarrying. —3Including manufacture of motor ve- construction sector. —xProvisional; adjusted in advance by the Federal Stat-
hicles, trailers and semi-trailers. —4Including printing and service activities istical Office, by way of estimates, to the results of the Quarterly Production
related to printing. —5Electricity, gas, steam and hot water supply, and, in Survey for the third quarter (industry in Germany: on average, + 0.9%). 
61* IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
 IX Economic conditions
 
3 Orders received by industry *  
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which of which
 
Industry,
total Domestic orders Foreign orders Intermediate goods Capital goods  1 Consumer goods  2 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annualpercent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age
Period 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change
Germany  
  
1999 87.8 + 2.1 92.3 − 0.2 82.1 + 5.4 87.5 + 0.8 86.0 + 3.4 95.9 + 0.8
2000 99.9 + 13.8 99.9 + 8.2 99.9 + 21.7 100.0 + 14.3 100.0 + 16.3 99.9 + 4.2
2001 98.3 − 1.6 97.6 − 2.3 99.1 − 0.8 95.9 − 4.1 99.4 − 0.6 101.4 + 1.5
2002 98.2 − 0.1 94.6 − 3.1 102.8 + 3.7 96.4 + 0.5 99.6 + 0.2 99.0 − 2.4
 
2002          Sep 101.8 + 3.1 98.3 − 1.2 106.2 + 8.8 100.2 + 5.0 101.8 + 3.2 107.4 − 1.6
         Oct 100.3 + 4.7 97.7 + 1.7 103.6 + 8.6 99.7 + 4.9 100.5 + 6.7 102.0 − 2.6
         Nov 101.6 + 6.3 97.4 + 2.4 106.8 + 11.0 99.4 + 7.8 103.6 + 6.3 100.2 + 0.8         Dec 91.8 − 1.9 88.4 − 1.4 96.1 − 2.4 86.5 + 2.2 97.6 − 4.5 85.5 − 2.8
2003          Jan 97.9 + 3.1 92.4 − 0.2 104.7 + 6.8 97.7 + 4.8 98.2 + 3.0 97.0 − 2.4
         Feb 98.5 + 3.2 95.4 + 3.5 102.4 + 3.1 96.5 + 2.2 99.3 + 5.6 102.1 − 1.9
         Mar 105.5 − 0.8 100.2 − 0.7 112.1 − 1.1 105.2 + 2.3 105.4 − 2.0 106.5 − 6.0
         Apr 97.2 − 0.2 93.2 − 1.3 102.2 + 1.1 97.4 + 0.1 98.3 + 0.9 92.3 − 5.3
         May 93.0 − 5.7 91.0 − 0.1 95.5 −11.6 93.6 − 2.4 94.1 − 8.2 86.2 − 5.9
         June 100.1 − 1.0 94.2 − 2.1 107.6 + 0.5 98.6 − 1.4 104.3 + 1.2 88.5 − 7.9
         July 97.3 − 0.5 94.8 − 1.0 100.4 + 0.1 97.8 + 0.3 98.1 − 0.7 92.0 − 2.5
         Aug 90.3 − 1.5 87.9 − 2.9 93.3 + 0.1 89.7 + 0.2 90.3 − 2.3 92.5 − 3.6
         Sep  
p 101.7 − 0.1 97.4 − 0.9 107.0 + 0.8 99.8 − 0.4 103.2 + 1.4 101.8 − 5.2
Western Germany  
  
1999 88.0 + 1.9 92.7 − 0.6 82.4 + 5.5 88.0 + 0.6 86.0 + 3.5 96.5 + 0.6
2000 99.9 + 13.5 99.9 + 7.8 100.0 + 21.4 99.9 + 13.5 100.0 + 16.3 99.9 + 3.52001 97.8 − 2.1 97.2 − 2.7 98.6 − 1.4 95.1 − 4.8 99.1 − 0.9 101.1 + 1.2
2002 97.3 − 0.5 93.7 − 3.6 101.6 + 3.0 95.1 +
 0.0 98.9 − 0.2 98.3 − 2.8
 
2002          Sep 101.1 + 3.3 97.4 − 1.3 105.5 + 8.9 98.8 + 4.9 101.4 + 3.5 106.9 − 1.9
         Oct 99.4 + 4.3 96.6 + 1.2 102.7 + 8.1 98.2 + 4.5 99.9 + 6.3 101.1 − 3.1
         Nov 100.3 + 5.5 96.4 + 2.0 105.0 + 9.5 98.3 + 7.7 102.1 + 4.9 99.3 + 0.5
         Dec 90.5 − 2.6 86.9 − 2.1 94.7 − 3.3 85.5 + 2.3 95.8 − 5.6 84.7 − 3.2
2003          Jan 96.9 + 2.5 91.7 − 0.2 103.1 + 5.6 95.2 + 3.8 98.4 + 2.9 96.2 − 2.7
         Feb 97.7 + 3.1 94.7 + 3.3 101.2 + 2.7 95.0 + 1.6 98.7 + 5.4 101.9 − 2.0
         Mar 104.2 − 0.1 99.1 − 1.1 110.3 + 1.0 103.4 + 2.4 104.3 − 0.4 105.9 − 6.4
         Apr 95.9 − 0.9 91.8 − 2.2 100.8 + 0.6 95.1 − 1.1 97.7 + 0.5 91.2 − 5.7
         May 91.8 − 6.5 89.4 − 1.0 94.7 −12.1 91.5 − 3.3 93.6 − 9.1 84.9 − 6.1
         June 99.2 − 1.1 92.2 − 3.0 107.5 + 1.0 96.5 − 2.5 104.2 + 1.6 87.4 − 8.0
         July 96.2 − 1.3 93.6 − 1.8 99.3 − 0.9 95.6 − 0.6 97.8 − 1.6 91.2 − 3.2
         Aug 89.0 − 1.3 86.3 − 3.3 92.3 + 1.0 87.0 − 0.8 90.0 − 1.1 91.4 − 4.1
         Sep  p 100.1 − 1.0 95.3 − 2.2 105.9 + 0.4 97.4 − 1.4 102.1 + 0.7 100.6 − 5.9
Eastern Germany  
  
1999 84.6 + 4.7 87.8 + 3.9 77.0 + 7.1 82.8 + 6.4 86.0 + 2.9 86.9 + 6.0
2000 99.9 + 18.1 100.0 + 13.9 99.9 + 29.7 99.9 + 20.7 100.0 + 16.3 100.0 + 15.1
2001 104.9 + 5.0 102.4 + 2.4 110.9 + 11.0 106.0 + 6.1 103.4 + 3.4 106.0 + 6.02002 111.0 + 5.8 104.0 + 1.6 127.8 + 15.2 111.7 + 5.4 110.7 + 7.1 109.4 + 3.2
 
2002          Sep 111.8 + 2.5 107.8 + 0.1 121.5 + 8.2 116.0 + 5.8 106.7 − 1.2 114.9 + 3.6
         Oct 113.8 + 10.7 109.9 + 7.1 123.0 + 19.0 116.2 + 8.3 111.0 + 15.7 114.8 + 2.5         Nov 118.9 + 16.1 107.8 + 5.8 145.5 + 40.6 112.6 + 10.0 126.4 + 25.8 115.6 + 5.7         Dec 111.1 + 7.7 104.8 + 5.0 126.1 + 13.1 99.1 + 3.7 126.7 + 11.8 98.7 + 3.7
2003          Jan 111.3 + 9.4 99.7 + 0.1 139.2 + 30.6 128.1 + 16.9 93.7 + 2.1 110.3 + 2.5
         Feb 110.6 + 7.4 103.3 + 6.3 128.2 + 9.8 113.4 + 8.3 108.9 + 8.5 105.4 − 0.9
         Mar 123.7 − 8.6 112.5 + 4.3 150.5 −25.3 126.4 + 2.5 122.6 −19.7 116.3 − 0.6
         Apr 115.0 + 8.0 107.8 + 7.6 132.4 + 8.9 123.2 + 11.0 107.5 + 6.5 110.4 + 0.5         May 109.6 + 5.1 107.8 + 7.8 113.8 − 0.6 117.5 + 6.3 102.0 + 5.9 106.8 − 2.8
         June 114.3 + 2.1 116.0 + 7.9 110.1 −10.3 123.2 + 9.3 106.7 − 4.0 106.5 − 4.8
         July 112.3 + 11.1 107.6 + 6.5 123.6 + 21.8 123.8 + 10.0 101.7 + 13.3 105.9 + 7.7         Aug 108.3 − 3.7 105.5 + 1.2 115.1 −13.1 121.1 + 8.4 94.3 −17.7 109.9 + 2.2
         Sep  
p 123.5 + 10.5 120.4 + 11.7 131.1 + 7.9 127.7 + 10.1 120.1 + 12.6 120.1 + 4.5
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. —*Economic tax. —oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. —1Including
activities of the manufacturing sector, in particular excluding manufacture manufacture of motor vehicles, trailers and semi-trailers. —2Including print-
of food products, beverages, tobacco and refined petroleum products; ing and service activities related to printing. 
results for specific operational segments; figures excluding value-added
62* IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
 IX Economic conditions
 
4 Orders received by construction *   
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Germany Western Germany Eastern Germany
Public Public Public
Housing sector Housing sector Housing sector Industrial Industrial Industrial
con- construc- construc- con- construc- construc- con- construc- construc-
Total struction tion  1 tion Total struction tion  1 tion Total struction tion  1 tion
 Annual Annual Annual
 per- per- per- centage centage centage
Period change
2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100
1999 109.3 −2.1 119.6 106.1 106.7 107.4 + 0.8 114.6 104.3 106.4 115.6 −10.0 134.7 112.3 107.3
2000 99.9 −8.6 100.0 99.9 100.0 99.9 −7.0 99.9 99.9 100.0 100.0 −13.5 100.0 99.9 100.0
2001 94.5 −5.4 82.9 96.9 99.0 97.4 −2.5 87.6 99.9 100.7 85.2 −14.8 68.3 86.4 94.2
2002 88.7 −6.1 72.8 91.5 95.6 90.9 −6.7 79.6 93.1 95.6 81.7 −4.1 51.9 85.8 95.7
   
2002          Aug 88.3 −11.3 71.0 85.7 102.2 87.1 −13.2 74.4 84.9 97.7 92.4 −4.1 60.8 88.4 115.3
         Sep 101.9 −2.5 77.4 100.8 118.4 103.4 −4.2 83.3 101.1 118.9 96.9 + 3.6 59.3 99.9 116.7
         Oct 84.5 −8.3 67.5 84.8 94.9 86.0 −9.3 75.4 85.6 93.1 80.1 −4.1 43.4 82.2 100.0
         Nov 74.8 −8.0 68.4 74.9 78.6 73.8 −9.9 75.3 72.8 74.0 77.8 −2.1 47.5 82.4 91.6
         Dec 79.3 −0.3 70.1 89.1 74.0 83.1 −2.2 80.3 93.0 73.2 67.3 + 8.5 38.9 75.5 76.4
2003          Jan 56.8 −9.3 49.7 61.7 55.6 58.5 −11.2 55.3 62.1 56.2 51.2 −2.3 32.5 60.3 53.7
         Feb 64.4 −12.9 54.6 67.4 67.0 67.5 −8.7 59.4 68.9 71.1 54.2 −26.9 40.0 62.4 54.9
         Mar 88.7 −20.7 78.9 86.4 97.4 91.7 −24.3 87.1 87.7 99.4 78.8 −3.7 53.9 81.5 91.2
         Apr 82.5 −13.2 69.9 81.9 90.9 84.9 −13.8 76.9 84.3 90.8 74.6 −11.5 48.4 73.8 91.1
         May 82.7 −10.4 66.6 83.1 92.4 81.6 −12.6 70.7 79.7 90.8 86.2 −2.7 54.0 95.1 97.0
         June 94.4 −11.2 75.8 91.9 108.8 95.9 −11.6 83.8 92.1 108.1 89.4 −9.9 51.2 91.1 110.7
         July 90.7 −3.3 71.1 86.6 107.5 91.1 −5.5 79.0 85.7 105.1 89.3 + 4.3 47.0 89.9 114.1
         Aug 81.0 −8.3 67.7 76.1 94.9 81.7 −6.2 73.9 74.7 94.8 78.9 −14.6 48.8 81.0 95.0
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. —*Values exclusive engineering". —oBundesbank calculation. —1Including the railways and
of value-added tax. The figures refer to the economic classifications "Site post office. preparation" and "Building of complete constructions or parts thereof; civil
 
 
5 Retail trade turnover *
    Germany
  
Retail trade  1 Memo item
of which:  By enterprises ’ main product range of which
Pharmaceutical Household
and medical articles, Retail trade plus retailgoods, cosmetic Clothing, hardware, sales of motor vehicles
Food, beverages, and toilet footwear and paints and glass and motorcycles and Retail sales of
Total tobacco  
2 articles  2 leather goods  2 2  3 sales of automotive fuel motor vehicles  4 
Annual percent- Annual percent-
age change Annual Annual Annual Annual age change Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
Not age age age age Not age Price- Price-
Period change change change change change 2000 = 100 adjusted adjusted  5 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 adjusted adjusted  5 2000 = 100
1995 96.7 + 1.3 + 0.7 97.0 + 3.3 78.5 + 6.5 104.0 + 0.0 97.5 −2.6 94.8 + 1.8 + 1.1 86.1 + 3.6
1996 97.0 + 0.3 −0.6 97.0 + 0.0 81.8 + 4.2 103.2 −0.8 96.4 −1.1 96.0 + 1.3 + 0.3 90.7 + 5.3
1997 95.9 −1.1 −1.7 95.7 −1.3 83.4 + 2.0 101.4 −1.7 95.2 −1.2 95.8 −0.2 −0.7 94.0 + 3.6
1998 96.9 + 1.0 + 1.1 97.1 + 1.5 88.2 + 5.8 100.3 −1.1 98.2 + 3.2 97.5 + 1.8 + 1.5 99.2 + 5.5
1999 97.7 + 0.8 + 0.5 98.0 + 0.9 94.7 + 7.4 100.2 −0.1 97.6 −0.6 98.7 + 1.2 + 0.8 102.9 + 3.7
2000 100.0 + 2.4 + 1.2 100.0 + 2.0 100.0 + 5.6 100.0 −0.2 100.0 + 2.5 100.0 + 1.3 + 0.1 100.0 −2.8
2001 101.8 + 1.8 . 104.7 + 4.7 107.3 + 7.3 99.5 −0.5 96.5 −3.5 101.9 + 1.9 . 102.4 + 2.4
2002 100.2 −1.6 −2.1 107.4 + 2.6 111.1 + 3.5 94.7 −4.8 88.8 −8.0 101.1 −0.8 −1.5 105.3 + 2.8
 
2002          Sep 97.0 −0.3 −0.1 101.0 + 3.6 107.4 + 7.0 100.2 −9.0 85.4 −5.2 97.5 + 0.9 + 0.5 99.9 + 5.9
         Oct 105.9 + 1.4 + 1.5 109.6 + 3.4 115.0 + 4.3 110.2 + 5.3 94.5 −7.3 106.8 + 2.1 + 2.0 111.8 + 5.1
         Nov 106.4 −3.7 −3.2 112.3 + 0.8 113.4 + 0.4 98.3 −10.5 97.6 −8.4 106.0 −3.3 −3.0 106.3 −1.7
         Dec 120.0 −2.4 −2.5 124.9 + 1.5 126.9 + 2.6 118.6 −4.7 104.2 −8.2 115.1 −1.1 −2.0 98.8 + 5.2
2003          Jan 93.5 + 1.3 + 1.8 101.4 + 4.0 111.3 + 2.8 81.4 −1.2 78.8 −2.6 92.4 + 1.3 + 1.4 89.3 + 0.7
         Feb 87.7 + 1.0 + 0.9 97.7 + 2.7 104.9 + 4.4 67.6 −5.8 77.2 −0.9 89.0 + 1.3 + 1.0 94.9 + 1.7
         Mar 99.4 −2.9 −3.2 108.2 −3.8 109.2 + 0.1 91.1 −5.1 93.6 + 3.5 102.9 −1.4 −1.7 116.4 + 3.5
         Apr 102.9 + 1.8 + 2.1 113.3 + 5.2 113.3 + 0.3 97.0 + 0.1 91.9 −0.9 106.0 + 1.0 + 1.1 117.8 −1.8
         May 100.4 + 0.2 + 0.7 110.5 + 0.3 111.6 + 1.9 94.0 −3.0 90.3 + 2.5 103.8 + 1.5 + 1.6 116.4 + 5.5
         June 92.5 −1.1 −1.3 105.0 + 1.7 107.1 + 0.9 82.7 −3.0 80.0 −1.4 96.8 −0.3 −0.8 112.4 + 1.6
         July 97.9 −2.0 −2.2 108.4 + 1.3 117.8 + 2.5 87.8 −5.4 85.8 −2.6 102.6 −0.4 −0.9 120.3 + 4.7
         Aug 92.0 −5.3 −5.5 105.7 −2.0 106.5 −2.7 75.6 −12.7 80.6 −5.0 93.3 −4.0 −4.4 97.6 + 0.9
         Sep  e 96.8 −0.2 −0.4 103.4 + 2.4 109.0 + 1.5 95.9 −4.3 85.6 + 0.2 98.6 + 1.1 + 0.7 ... ...
Source: Federal Statistical Office. —*Excluding value-added tax; figures tive fuel. —2Retail sales in stores. —3Including furniture and lighting
from 2002 provisional, partly revised and, judging by past experience, sub- equipment. —4Including motor vehicle parts and accessories. —5Up to
ject to considerable uncertainty in the most recent months. —1Excluding (and including) 2000, at 1995 prices; from 2001, at 2000 prices. 
sales of motor vehicles and motorcycles and excluding the sale of automo-
63* IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
 IX Economic conditions
 
6 Labour market * 
 
 
 
Persons in
Employed  1,2 Employees  1 employment  3 Unemployed  2 
Persons
Mining employed Persons
and under under-manu- employ- goingfactur- Short- ment pro- vocationaling Con- time motion further Unem-
Annual change Annual sector Annual ploy- Vacan-
schemes  2,5 training  2 workers  2 struction  4 
percen- change, ment cies,
Thou- Thou- Thou- tage Thou- thou- rate  2,6 thou-
Period sands in % sands sands change Thousands sands sands in % sands  2 
Germany  
  
2000 38,750 + 1.8 + 676 34,745 + 1.8 6,373 1,053 86 316 352 3,889 −211 9.7 514
2001 38,914 + 0.4 + 164 34,834 + 0.3 6,395 958 123 243 345 3,852 − 37 9.4 506
2002 38,668 −0.6 −246 34,577 −0.7 6,218 8 883 207 192 332 4,060 + 209 9.8 451
2002          Oct 38,926 −0.9 −354 6,187 884 214 202 342 3,930 + 204 9.4 378
         Nov 38,842 −1.1 −448 34,702 −1.3 6,165 873 205 197 339 4,026 + 237 9.7 344
         Dec 38,630 −1.3 −505 6,128 849 165 180 318 4,225 + 262 10.1 324
2003          Jan 37,796 −1.4 −554 ... 788 195 155 299 4,623 + 333 11.1 350
         Feb 37,779 −1.5 −562 33,683 −1.8 ... 757 227 150 287 4,706 + 410 11.3 388
         Mar 37,928 −1.5 −567 ... p 778 244 143 275 4,608 + 452 11.1 415
         Apr 38,178 −1.3 −521 ... p 795 242 138 262 4,495 + 471 10.8 419
         May 38,250 −1.3 −506 33,954 −2.0 ... p 801 225 134 255 4,342 + 396 7 10.4 393
         June 38,266 −1.2 −460 ... p 803 222 131 241 4,257 + 303 10.2 373
         July 38,188 −1.3 −493 ... p 804 196 131 220 4,352 + 305 10.4 367
         Aug o 38,232 o −1.2 o −473 ... ... ... p 807 150 131 212 4,314 + 296 10.4 356
         Sep ... ... ... ... ... 169 133 221 4,207 + 265 10.1 330
         Oct ... ... ... ... ... 163 138 231 4,152 + 222 10.0 297
Western Germany 9  
  
2000 . . . . . 5,761 749 59 59 202 2,380 −224 7.6 448
2001 . . . . . 5,769 696 94 53 197 2,320 − 60 7.2 436
2002 . . . . . 5,593 8 654 162 42 192 2,498 + 178 7.7 377
2002          Oct . . . . . 5,559 654 154 41 200 2,450 + 182 7.5 312
         Nov . . . . . 5,540 647 156 41 198 2,520 + 199 7.7 285         Dec . . . . . 5,506 632 131 38 186 2,647 + 212 8.1 270
2003          Jan . . . . . ... 593 157 35 175 2,898 + 262 8.8 294
         Feb . . . . . ... 572 187 34 168 2,951 + 317 9.0 328         Mar . . . . . ...
p 586 199 33 165 2,880 + 352 8.8 348
         Apr . . . . . ... p 597 201 32 160 2,811 + 363 8.6 350
         May . . . . . ... p 601 187 31 159 2,715 + 306 7 8.2 327
         June . . . . . ... p 601 182 30 151 2,663 + 255 8.1 306
         July . . . . . ... p 601 162 29 137 2,734 + 253 8.3 300
         Aug . . . . . ... p 602 119 28 133 2,723 + 246 8.3 287
         Sep . . . . . ... ... 139 27 141 2,653 + 213 8.1 261
         Oct . . . . . ... ... 136 27 149 2,638 + 188 8.0 237
Eastern Germany 10  
  
2000 . . . . . 612 305 27 257 150 1,508 + 13 17.2 66
2001 . . . . . 626 262 29 190 148 1,532 + 23 17.3 702002 . . . . . 625
8 229 45 150 140 1,563 + 31 17.7 74
2002          Oct . . . . . 628 231 60 160 142 1,480 + 22 16.8 65         Nov . . . . . 626 227 49 157 141 1,506 + 38 17.0 59         Dec . . . . . 622 217 34 142 132 1,578 + 49 17.9 54
2003          Jan . . . . . ... 196 39 120 125 1,725 + 71 19.5 55
         Feb . . . . . ... 185 40 116 118 1,756 + 94 19.9 61         Mar . . . . . ...
p 192 45 110 110 1,728 + 99 19.6 67
         Apr . . . . . ... p 198 41 106 102 1,684 + 108 19.1 69
         May . . . . . ... p 200 38 103 96 1,628 + 90 7 18.6 67
         June . . . . . ... p 202 39 102 89 1,594 + 48 18.3 67
         July . . . . . ... p 204 34 102 82 1,618 + 53 18.5 67
         Aug . . . . . ... p 205 31 104 80 1,591 + 50 18.2 69
         Sep . . . . . ... ... 30 106 81 1,554 + 52 17.8 69
         Oct . . . . . ... ... 27 112 82 1,514 + 34 17.3 60
Source: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Labour Office. —*Monthly fig- force. —7From May 2003, calculated on the basis of new labour force
ures: end of month; employed persons and employees: averages; short-time figures. —8The figures from March 2002 onwards are positively affected by
workers: mid-month; annual and quarterly figures: averages. — the fact that construction firms which are required to report and which
1Work-place concept. —2Annual figures, calculated by the Bundesbank; de- have been identified in the course of drawing up the corporate register are
viations from the official figures are due to rounding. —3Including active included for the first time. —9Excluding western Berlin; for the mining,
proprietors. —4The figures refer to the economic classifications ”Site manufacturing and construction sectors, including persons employed in
preparation ”and ”Building of complete constructions or parts thereof; civil western Berlin. —10 Including western Berlin; for the mining,
engineering ”.—5Employees involved in job creation schemes and struc- manufacturing and construction sectors, excluding persons employed in
tural adjustment measures (SAM). —6Relative to the total civilian labour western Berlin. — o First preliminary estimate. 
64* IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
 IX Economic conditions
 
7 Prices
 Germany
 
 
Consumer price index
Indices of Index of world market
of which foreign trade prices prices  of raw materials  5 
Other Index of
durable producerand non- prices ofdurable industrial Index ofconsumer Services Con- products producergoods excluding struction prices of sold on theexcluding house House price domestic Other raw agricultural
Total Food Energy  
1 rents  2 rents index  2,3 market  4 Exports Imports Energy  6 products  4 materials  7 energy  1,2 
Period 2000 = 100 1995 = 100 2000 = 100
Index level  
  
1999 98.6 100.6 100.3 87.7 99.0 98.8 99.3 98.5 89.9 100.9 100.2 57.6 83.1
2000 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 101.8 95.4 104.4 111.4 100.0 100.0
2001 102.0 105.1 100.3 105.7 102.5 101.2 100.3 104.9 100.8 105.4 112.1 91.4 91.92002 103.4 106.1 101.1 106.0 105.0 102.6 100.2 104.4 94.6 105.3 109.3 86.1 91.1
 
2001          Nov 101.8 104.5 100.7 102.3 102.2 101.6 100.1 104.0 100.5 104.9 108.7 71.8 87.4         Dec 102.8 105.2 100.8 101.4 105.8 101.6 103.7 99.8 104.8 108.5 70.8 87.1
2002          Jan 102.9 108.7 101.4 103.5 103.5 102.0 104.3 98.2 104.9 109.1 73.7 89.3
         Feb 103.2 108.0 101.5 104.1 104.3 102.2 100.2 104.4 99.4 104.9 109.6 77.2 91.6         Mar 103.4 107.8 101.5 106.0 104.3 102.4 104.7 99.7 105.2 110.5 89.6 94.3
         Apr 103.3 107.8 101.3 108.1 103.5 102.4 104.6 96.0 105.4 110.7 94.4 93.6
         May 103.4 107.7 101.2 106.9 104.4 102.5 100.2 104.6 94.5 105.4 110.1 91.4 90.8         June 103.4 106.6 101.1 105.9 104.9 102.6 104.5 93.7 105.4 108.7 84.3 89.9
         July 103.7 105.9 100.9 105.9 106.5 102.7 104.2 93.5 105.3 108.2 84.0 89.4
         Aug 103.5 104.7 100.8 106.2 106.2 102.8 100.3 104.1 93.4 105.4 108.8 87.9 89.9         Sep 103.4 104.5 100.9 107.2 105.3 102.8 104.3 94.6 105.5 109.5 92.9 91.8
         Oct 103.3 104.1 100.9 107.6 104.8 102.9 104.6 94.3 105.5 109.5 90.5 92.1
         Nov 103.0 103.6 101.0 105.1 104.5 103.0 100.2 104.4 94.8 105.4 108.0 80.5 90.8         Dec 104.0 104.0 100.9 105.6 107.9 103.0 104.6 94.4 105.4 109.0 87.2 89.6
2003          Jan 104.0 105.3 101.4 110.7 105.1 103.2 106.0 94.8 105.5 109.6 92.2 88.3
         Feb 104.5 105.9 101.6 113.0 105.9 103.4 100.3 106.4 96.4 105.8 110.3 97.3 89.7         Mar 104.6 106.3 101.6 113.8 105.6 103.5 106.5 94.8 105.8 109.6 89.5 88.3
         Apr 104.3 106.6 101.4 110.2 105.8 103.7 106.3 94.9 105.7 107.4 76.0 87.8
         May 104.1 106.8 101.4 108.2 105.6 103.7 100.3 106.0 93.9 105.3 105.9 72.5 83.5         June 104.4 107.1 101.3 108.8 106.1 103.8 105.9 95.3 105.1 105.8 77.0 81.3
         July 104.6 106.3 101.1 109.2 107.4 103.8 106.2 92.4 105.1 106.0 81.5 82.7
         Aug 104.6 105.1 101.0 110.4 107.7 103.9 100.3 106.3
p 93.9 105.2 106.9 86.4 85.2
         Sep 104.5 105.6 101.4 109.7 106.7 103.9 106.3 p 97.4 105.4 106.7 78.7 87.5
         Oct 104.5 105.7 101.4 110.0 106.4 103.9 ... ... ... ... 81.0 88.7
Annual percentage change  
  
1999 + 0.6 − 1.1 + 0.1 + 4.0 + 0.3 + 1.1 −0.3 − 1.0 − 6.0 − 0.5 − 0.5 + 37.1 − 6.2
2000 + 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.3 + 14.0 + 1.0 + 1.2 + 0.7 + 3.4 + 6.1 + 3.5 + 11.2 + 73.6 + 20.3
2001 + 2.0 + 5.1 + 0.3 + 5.7 + 2.5 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 3.0 + 5.7 + 1.0 + 0.6 − 8.6 − 8.1
2002 + 1.4 + 1.0 + 0.8 + 0.3 + 2.4 + 1.4 −0.1 − 0.5 − 6.2 − 0.1 − 2.5 − 5.8 − 0.9
 
2001          Nov + 1.5 + 5.1 + 0.8 − 3.1 + 2.9 + 1.2 −0.2 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.9 − 6.6 −41.1 −15.6
         Dec + 1.6 + 5.0 + 0.8 − 2.5 + 2.9 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 1.0 − 0.7 − 4.7 −25.1 −13.8
2002          Jan + 2.1 + 6.6 + 1.4 + 0.4 + 2.6 + 1.3 − 0.1 + 2.1 − 0.4 − 3.4 −19.0 − 7.7
         Feb + 1.8 + 5.4 + 1.4 − 1.9 + 2.6 + 1.4 −0.1 − 0.3 + 0.9 − 0.5 − 3.5 −21.1 − 5.1
         Mar + 2.0 + 4.2 + 1.4 + 0.1 + 2.8 + 1.5 − 0.2 − 2.9 − 0.4 − 2.5 − 4.0 − 0.6
         Apr + 1.5 + 2.3 + 1.2 + 0.7 + 1.9 + 1.4 − 0.8 − 6.8 − 0.3 − 2.8 − 2.9 − 1.2
         May + 1.2 + 0.2 + 1.0 − 2.6 + 2.9 + 1.4 −0.1 − 0.9 − 8.9 − 0.6 − 4.3 −12.3 − 6.5
         June + 1.0 − 1.1 + 0.9 − 2.8 + 2.6 + 1.5 − 1.1 − 6.6 − 0.6 − 5.2 −19.5 − 6.9
         July + 1.2 − 1.1 + 0.7 − 0.6 + 2.7 + 1.5 − 1.0 − 7.0 − 0.5 − 4.2 −13.4 − 5.4
         Aug + 1.2 − 0.6 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 2.6 + 1.4 + 0.0 − 1.0 − 8.3 + 0.0 − 2.6 − 7.5 + 1.5
         Sep + 1.1 − 0.6 + 0.6 − 0.2 + 2.5 + 1.4 − 0.9 − 7.8 + 0.2 − 1.4 − 0.4 + 7.9
         Oct + 1.3 − 1.0 + 0.4 + 3.5 + 2.3 + 1.4 + 0.3 − 6.5 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 14.7 + 10.2
         Nov + 1.2 − 0.9 + 0.3 + 2.7 + 2.3 + 1.4 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 5.7 + 0.5 − 0.6 + 12.1 + 3.9
         Dec + 1.2 − 1.1 + 0.1 + 4.1 + 2.0 + 1.4 + 0.9 − 5.4 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 23.2 + 2.9
2003          Jan + 1.1 − 3.1 + 0.0 + 7.0 + 1.5 + 1.2 + 1.6 − 3.5 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 25.1 − 1.1
         Feb + 1.3 − 1.9 + 0.1 + 8.5 + 1.5 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 1.9 − 3.0 + 0.9 + 0.6 + 26.0 − 2.1
         Mar + 1.2 − 1.4 + 0.1 + 7.4 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 1.7 − 4.9 + 0.6 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 6.4
         Apr + 1.0 − 1.1 + 0.1 + 1.9 + 2.2 + 1.3 + 1.6 − 1.1 + 0.3 − 3.0 −19.5 − 6.2
         May + 0.7 − 0.8 + 0.2 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 1.3 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 3.8 −20.7 − 8.0
         June + 1.0 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 2.7 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 1.3 + 1.7 − 0.3 − 2.7 − 8.7 − 9.6
         July + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 3.1 + 0.8 + 1.1 + 1.9 − 1.2 − 0.2 − 2.0 − 3.0 − 7.5
         Aug + 1.1 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 4.0 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 0.0 + 2.1 p + 0.5 − 0.2 − 1.7 − 1.7 − 5.2
         Sep + 1.1 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 2.3 + 1.3 + 1.1 + 1.9 p + 3.0 − 0.1 − 2.6 −15.3 − 4.7
         Oct + 1.2 + 1.5 + 0.5 + 2.2 + 1.5 + 1.0 ... ... ... ... −10.5 − 3.7
Source: Federal Statistical Office; for index of world market prices: HWWA In- Overall construction price level. —4Excluding value-added tax. —5HWWA
stitute. —1Electricity, gas and other fuels. —2Bundesbank calculation index of raw material prices ’euro area ’on a euro basis. —6Coal and crude
based on data provided by the Federal Statistical Office. —3Previously: oil. — 7 Food, beverages and tobacco as well as industrial raw materials. 
65* IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
IX Economic conditions
  
8 Households ’ income *
Germany
  
Up to end-1998 DM billion; from 1999  5  billion
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries  1 salaries  2 Saving  6 ratio  7 benefits received  3 "Mass income"  4 Disposable income  5 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age
Period DM /  5 change DM /  5 change DM /  5 change DM /  5 change DM /  5 change DM /  5 change %
1991 1,355.4 . 941.4 . 426.2 . 1,367.6 . 1,917.5 . 250.1 . 13.0
1992 1,467.3 8.3 1,003.0 6.5 473.9 11.2 1,476.9 8.0 2,054.3 7.1 266.1 6.4 13.01993 1,505.9 2.6 1,032.7 3.0 511.2 7.9 1,543.9 4.5 2,120.6 3.2 261.3 −1.8 12.3
1994 1,528.1 1.5 1,029.3 −0.3 529.4 3.6 1,558.6 1.0 2,181.9 2.9 254.0 −2.8 11.6
1995 1,577.1 3.2 1,037.9 0.8 553.7 4.6 1,591.7 2.1 2,256.4 3.4 252.1 −0.7 11.2
1996 1,594.0 1.1 1,032.7 −0.5 595.7 7.6 1,628.3 2.3 2,307.5 2.3 249.5 −1.0 10.8
1997 1,591.3 −0.2 1,015.9 −1.6 609.6 2.3 1,625.5 −0.2 2,356.5 2.1 244.7 −1.9 10.4
1998 1,624.3 2.1 1,038.9 2.3 621.5 1.9 1,660.3 2.1 2,422.8 2.8 249.6 2.0 10.31999 855.4 3.0 549.2 3.4 327.5 3.1 876.7 3.3 1,281.1 3.4 125.1 −1.9 9.8
2000 884.6 3.4 571.7 4.1 338.1 3.2 909.8 3.8 1,325.5 3.5 129.3 3.3 9.82001 903.7 2.2 592.4 3.6 347.5 2.8 939.8 3.3 1,373.7 3.6 141.0 9.1 10.32002 910.4 0.7 593.5 0.2 365.0 5.1 958.5 2.0 1,382.8 0.7 146.3 3.8 10.6
2001          Q3 224.9 1.5 151.6 3.0 86.5 3.1 238.1 3.0 337.7 3.4 29.4 11.0 8.7
         Q4 253.4 1.6 164.0 3.4 87.9 3.0 251.9 3.2 352.8 3.6 32.3 11.8 9.1
2002          Q1 210.4 1.0 137.5 0.4 91.1 4.6 228.6 2.0 343.7 0.7 47.3 3.1 13.8
         Q2 218.6 0.7 140.0 0.1 90.0 4.5 230.0 1.8 342.7 0.2 34.2 2.1 10.0         Q3 227.3 1.1 152.4 0.5 91.5 5.8 243.9 2.5 340.5 0.8 30.8 4.6 9.0         Q4 254.1 0.2 163.6 −0.3 92.5 5.3 256.1 1.7 356.0 0.9 34.1 5.7 9.6
2003          Q1 210.9 0.2 136.7 −0.6 94.0 3.2 230.6 0.9 352.6 2.6 51.2 8.2 14.5
         Q2 217.8 −0.4 138.0 −1.5 93.0 3.4 231.0 0.4 348.8 1.8 35.5 4.0 10.2
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August 2003. — plus monetary social benefits received. —5"Mass income" plus operating
*Households including non-profit institutions serving households. —1Resi- surplus, mixed income, property income (net), other current transfers
dence concept. —2After deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages received, income of non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (ex-
and salaries and employees ’contributions to the social security funds. — cluding wage tax and consumption-related taxes) and other current trans-
3Social security benefits in cash from the social security funds, central, state fers paid. Including the increase in claims on company pension funds. —6In-
and local government and foreign countries, pension payments (net), cluding the increase in claims on company pension funds. —7Saving as a
private funded social benefits, less social contributions on social benefits, percentage of disposable income. 
consumption-related taxes and public charges. —4Net wages and salaries
  
  
9 Pay rates and actual earnings
Germany
    
Overall economy Production sector (including construction)
Negotiated wage and salary level  1 Wages and salaries Negotiated wage and salary level  1 Wages and salaries
per employee per employee
on an hourly basis on a monthly basis on an hourly basis on a monthly basis (work-place concept)  2 (work-place concept)  3 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
Period 1995 = 100 change 1995 = 100 change 1995 = 100 change 1995 = 100 change 1995 = 100 change change 1995 = 100
1991 76.7 . 78.6 . 82.4 . 73.4 . 76.9 . 77.6 .
1992 85.8 12.0 87.3 11.0 91.0 10.4 82.9 12.9 85.9 11.7 88.4 13.91993 92.2 7.5 92.9 6.5 95.0 4.4 90.6 9.3 92.0 7.1 92.3 4.41994 95.3 3.4 95.6 2.9 96.9 2.0 94.3 4.1 94.8 3.0 96.1 4.1
1995 100.0 4.9 100.0 4.6 100.0 3.2 100.0 6.1 100.0 5.5 100.0 4.1
1996 102.6 2.6 102.4 2.4 101.4 1.4 103.8 3.8 102.9 2.9 102.9 2.91997 104.1 1.5 103.9 1.5 101.7 0.3 105.8 1.9 104.6 1.7 104.7 1.71998 106.1 1.9 105.7 1.8 102.7 1.0 107.7 1.8 106.4 1.7 106.4 1.61999 109.2 2.9 108.6 2.7 104.3 1.5 110.9 3.0 109.4 2.9 108.3 1.8
2000 111.3 2.0 110.8 2.0 105.9 1.6 113.1 2.0 111.6 2.0 111.2 2.7
2001 113.6 2.0 113.0 2.0 107.9 1.9 115.2 1.8 113.6 1.8 113.7 2.22002 116.6 2.7 116.0 2.7 109.5 1.5 118.8 3.1 117.2 3.1 116.0 2.0
2001          Q4 128.5 2.2 127.8 2.1 120.0 1.8 127.7 2.0 125.9 2.0 122.6 1.7
2002          Q1 106.3 2.5 105.7 2.4 102.0 1.2 106.3 2.1 104.9 2.2 108.2 0.9
         Q2 107.8 2.8 107.2 2.8 105.1 1.3 109.1 3.5 107.7 3.6 117.8 1.9         Q3 120.3 2.6 119.7 2.6 109.3 1.9 127.4 3.1 125.7 3.1 112.9 3.4         Q4 132.2 2.9 131.5 2.9 121.9 1.5 132.3 3.6 130.5 3.6 125.4 2.3
2003          Q1 109.5 3.0 108.9 3.1 104.1 2.1 110.0 3.4 108.4 3.4 . .
         Q2 110.1 2.2 109.5 2.2 106.8 1.6 111.6 2.3 110.1 2.2 . .         Q3 123.0 2.2 122.4 2.3 . . 131.0 2.8 129.2 2.8 . .
2003          Mar 110.4 3.8 109.9 3.8 . . 110.0 3.1 108.4 3.1 . .
         Apr 109.7 2.7 109.2 2.8 . . 110.5 3.4 109.0 3.3 . .
         May 110.1 1.6 109.6 1.6 . . 111.9 0.7 110.3 0.6 . .         June 110.4 2.2 109.9 2.2 . . 112.5 2.8 111.0 2.7 . .
         July 147.7 2.3 147.0 2.3 . . 168.1 3.0 165.8 2.9 . .
         Aug 110.6 2.2 110.1 2.2 . . 112.4 2.8 110.9 2.8 . .         Sep 110.6 2.1 110.1 2.2 . . 112.5 2.6 110.9 2.6 . .
1Current data are normally revised upwards on account of additional supply, and excluding installation and building completion work. Calculated
reports. —2Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August by the Bundesbank on the basis of data from the Federal Statistical Office,
2003. —3Production sector, excluding electricity, gas, steam and hot water using the old and new classifications of the economic sectors. 
66*IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
X Foreign trade and payments
 
1 Major items of the balance of payments of the European monetary union *
 
 
 5  million
2002 2003
Position 2000 2001 1 2002 Q4 Q1 Q2 June July Aug
Current account −67,554 −14,496 + 67,020 + 23,141 + 2,436 −7,011 + 3,104 + 1,968 + 5,009 A.
1. Foreign trade
Exports (f.o.b.) incl. supplementary items 989,826 1,033,850 1,059,597 273,647 252,630 253,464 84,409 91,726 77,080
Imports (f.o.b.) incl. supplementary items 958,276 960,256 928,982 239,157 235,998 228,343 73,865 76,403 66,451
Balance + 31,553 + 73,597 + 130,617 + 34,490 + 16,632 + 25,122 + 10,545 + 15,323 + 10,628
2. Services
Receipts 287,455 324,525 332,173 84,385 75,678 78,192 27,204 30,725 26,763Expenditure 304,943 325,625 320,839 81,032 74,067 73,886 24,670 27,916 25,764
Balance −17,488 −1,100 + 11,336 + 3,355 + 1,610 + 4,306 + 2,534 + 2,809 + 999
3. Factor income (balance) −27,052 −35,730 −28,243 − 730 −12,705 −17,238 −2,759 −10,069 − 952
4. Current transfers
Transfer payments from non-residents 66,720 78,780 85,715 20,396 32,581 15,198 5,235 5,860 5,387Transfer payments to non-residents 121,284 130,049 132,406 34,372 35,681 34,400 12,451 11,955 11,054
Balance −54,564 −51,263 −46,690 −13,975 −3,100 −19,202 −7,216 −6,095 −5,667
Balance of capital transfers + 9,839 + 6,698 + 10,894 + 2,446 + 1,957 + 1,821 + 1,541 + 801 + 1,678B.
C. + 68,443 −24,407 −97,217 −48,492 −25,137 −41,342 −24,030 −6,124 + 3,289 Financial account (net capital exports: −)
1. Direct investment −14,944 −102,384 −41,497 −6,037 − 857 + 5,376 + 23,121 −3,221 −1,694
Investment outside the euro area −442,262 −304,981 −183,504 −41,165 −36,475 −30,060 + 9,905 −7,620 −5,805
Foreign investment in the euro area + 427,315 + 202,597 + 142,005 + 35,128 + 35,618 + 35,437 + 13,216 + 4,399 + 4,110
2. Investment in securities −111,550 + 68,075 + 103,427 + 42,000 + 7,039 + 42,168 + 15,950 −35,635 −37,874
Investment outside the euro area −410,666 −288,246 −173,906 −32,844 −47,263 −96,309 −43,620 −29,519 −12,014
Equities −285,922 −104,755 −40,179 −8,448 + 10,775 −32,320 −14,795 −8,112 − 325
Bonds and notes −114,280 −155,839 −88,945 −20,018 −49,943 −53,896 −21,586 −27,225 −12,436
Money market paper −10,455 −27,646 −44,785 −4,380 −8,095 −10,092 −7,238 + 5,817 + 747
Foreign investment in the euro area + 299,110 + 356,318 + 277,331 + 74,843 + 54,302 + 138,477 + 59,570 −6,116 −25,860
Equities + 49,940 + 233,200 + 90,756 + 13,503 + 3,721 + 30,464 + 21,816 + 13,111 −6,021
Bonds and notes + 239,199 + 114,017 + 127,683 + 46,666 + 47,883 + 97,474 + 44,924 −17,435 −7,047
Money market paper + 9,968 + 9,098 + 58,894 + 14,674 + 2,698 + 10,541 −7,169 −1,792 −12,791
3. Financial derivatives −3,441 −1,481 −10,227 −2,861 −2,488 −2,801 + 484 −2,691 −2,300
4. Credit transactions and other
investment (balance) + 180,810 −6,429 −146,647 −80,258 −40,711 −88,070 −64,436 + 33,813 + 44,821
Eurosystem − 221 + 5,028 + 18,181 + 5,794 −4,950 + 2,426 + 1,109 + 1,657 + 785
Public authorities −1,477 + 2,552 −8,251 − 722 −10,173 + 2,322 + 926 − 899 + 918
Credit institutions + 158,435 + 3,249 −136,384 −87,305 −5,285 −76,193 −64,185 + 46,374 + 39,806
long-term + 2,460 −24,234 + 21,098 −2,898 −4,952 + 579 + 1,157 + 2,434 −1,088
short-term + 155,969 + 27,483 −157,487 −84,406 − 334 −76,774 −65,343 + 43,940 + 40,894
Enterprises and individuals + 24,088 −17,261 −20,193 + 1,976 −20,299 −16,622 −2,285 −13,318 + 3,312
5. Change in the monetary reserves of
    the eurosystem (Increase: −) + 17,568 + 17,815 −2,277 −1,336 + 11,881 + 1,985 + 851 + 1,610 + 336
Balance of unclassifiable transactions −10,731 + 32,208 + 19,304 + 22,905 + 20,745 + 46,530 + 19,384 + 3,355 −9,976 D.
*Source: European Central Bank. —1From January 2001, including   
Greece.  
67*X Foreign trade and payments

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
X Foreign trade and payments
 
2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(Balances)
 
 
Current account Memo item:
Change in Capital trans-the Bundes- fers and pur-
Change in bank ’s net chases / sales
Supple- external of intangible the monetary
Balance mentary non- reserves at Balance of assets aton current Foreign trade Factor Current produced Financial transaction transaction unclassifiable
Period account  
1 items  4  5 Services  6 income transfers assets  7 account  7 values  8 values  8 trade  1  2  3 transactions
DM million
1989 + 104,112 + 134,576 −4,107 −18,445 + 26,872 −34,784 −2,064 −110,286 −5,405 + 13,643 + 18,997
1990  o + 73,001 + 105,382 −3,833 −26,138 + 32,859 −35,269 −4,975 −89,497 −11,611 + 33,082 −10,976
1991 −36,277 + 21,899 −2,804 −30,703 + 33,144 −57,812 −4,565 + 12,614 + 9,605 + 18,623 − 319
1992 −30,023 + 33,656 −1,426 −44,993 + 33,962 −51,222 −1,963 + 69,792 −52,888 + 15,082 −68,745
1993 −23,071 + 60,304 −3,038 −52,559 + 27,373 −55,151 −1,915 + 21,442 + 22,795 −19,251 + 35,766
1994 −46,760 + 71,762 −1,104 −62,814 + 4,852 −59,455 −2,637 + 57,871 + 2,846 −11,321 −12,242
1995 −38,657 + 85,303 −4,722 −63,999 + 178 −55,416 −3,845 + 63,647 −10,355 −10,791 −17,754
1996 −20,729 + 98,538 −5,264 −64,829 + 1,815 −50,989 −3,283 + 23,607 + 1,882 − 1,478 + 1,610
1997 −15,756 + 116,467 −7,360 −69,535 − 2,588 −52,738 + 52 + 31 + 6,640 + 9,033 + 8,468
1998 −21,666 + 126,970 −5,934 −76,062 −13,337 −53,304 + 1,289 + 32,810 −7,128 − 5,305 −8,231
1999 −45,780 + 127,542 −13,656 −91,964 −18,775 −48,927 − 301 −44,849 + 24,517 + 66,413 −72,364
2000 −54,655 + 115,645 −13,691 −97,534 − 3,593 −55,482 + 13,345 + 71,006 + 11,429 −41,125 + 94,329
2001 + 8,185 + 186,771 −10,624 −100,168 −14,141 −53,652 − 756 −41,892 + 11,797 + 22,665 + 63,911
 5  million
1999 −23,407 + 65,211 −6,982 −47,020 − 9,599 −25,016 − 154 −22,931 + 12,535 + 33,956 −36,999
2000 −27,945 + 59,128 −7,000 −49,868 − 1,837 −28,368 + 6,823 + 36,305 + 5,844 −21,027 + 48,230
2001 + 4,185 + 95,495 −5,432 −51,215 − 7,230 −27,432 − 387 −21,419 + 6,032 + 11,588 + 32,677
2002 + 62,804 + 132,788 −5,935 −38,246 + 751 −26,555 − 212 −86,103 + 2,065 + 21,445 −33,292
2000          Q4 − 7,126 + 13,234 −2,560 −10,516 + 1,050 − 8,332 − 419 −9,530 + 2,052 + 15,023 + 17,137
2001          Q1 + 1,064 + 22,540 −1,420 −13,575 − 858 − 5,623 + 552 + 4,035 + 4,072 − 9,723 −11,749
         Q2 − 4,038 + 22,104 −1,503 −13,043 − 3,408 − 8,189 − 13 + 17,775 + 2,039 −15,763 + 21,099
         Q3 − 1,889 + 25,547 −1,779 −16,642 − 2,765 − 6,250 − 446 − 141 −2,165 + 4,639 −13,360
         Q4 + 9,048 + 25,303 − 730 − 7,955 − 199 − 7,371 − 479 −43,088 + 2,085 + 32,434 + 36,688
2002          Q1 + 13,911 + 33,328 −1,049 −11,092 − 2,148 − 5,128 + 160 + 721 −1,352 −13,440 −18,496
         Q2 + 13,373 + 31,721 −1,389 − 8,875 + 466 − 8,550 − 75 −20,119 + 2,432 + 4,388 + 1,694
         Q3 + 13,883 + 35,543 −1,566 −12,808 − 1,829 − 5,457 + 62 −19,490 + 87 + 5,459 −17,588
         Q4 + 21,637 + 32,195 −1,931 − 5,471 + 4,262 − 7,419 − 359 −47,215 + 898 + 25,039 + 1,099
2003          Q1 + 9,680 + 29,304 −1,354 − 8,612 − 4,337 − 5,321 + 5 −15,950 −1,495 + 7,760 + 3,444
         Q2 + 8,634 + 29,813 −1,919 − 8,888 − 2,475 − 7,896 + 152 −28,535 + 1,505 + 18,245 + 22,123
         Q3  p + 12,818 + 38,904 −1,350 −12,708 − 3,805 − 8,222 + 213 −2,532 − 751 − 9,749 −15,902
2001          Apr + 835 + 6,166 − 642 − 3,581 + 1,183 − 2,290 − 149 + 8,860 + 1,205 −10,751 + 9,404
         May − 525 + 8,212 − 464 − 4,280 − 1,276 − 2,716 − 145 + 22,378 + 508 −22,216 − 53
         June − 4,348 + 7,727 − 397 − 5,182 − 3,315 − 3,182 + 281 −13,463 + 326 + 17,204 + 11,749
         July − 3,198 + 9,441 − 567 − 5,397 − 3,970 − 2,705 − 226 + 5,225 − 151 − 1,650 −10,589
         Aug + 1,564 + 9,038 − 699 − 6,539 + 1,276 − 1,512 − 172 + 3,554 + 460 − 5,406 −4,247
         Sep − 255 + 7,069 − 513 − 4,707 − 71 − 2,033 − 47 −8,920 −2,474 + 11,696 + 1,476
         Oct + 3,413 + 9,661 − 219 − 4,721 + 1,575 − 2,882 − 140 −1,322 −1,001 − 950 −1,307
         Nov + 969 + 7,351 − 425 − 3,095 + 5 − 2,867 − 180 −20,220 + 204 + 19,227 + 6,860
         Dec + 4,666 + 8,290 − 86 − 139 − 1,779 − 1,622 − 159 −21,546 + 2,882 + 14,158 + 31,135
2002          Jan + 1,966 + 10,526 − 515 − 3,917 − 4,823 + 695 + 477 + 8,769 −1,747 − 9,465 −17,916
         Feb + 4,156 + 10,558 − 332 − 3,192 + 206 − 3,084 − 155 −4,946 + 67 + 878 + 1,535
         Mar + 7,789 + 12,245 − 203 − 3,982 + 2,468 − 2,739 − 162 −3,102 + 328 − 4,853 −2,116
         Apr + 4,537 + 10,015 − 916 − 2,659 + 1,058 − 2,961 − 148 − 125 + 1,657 − 5,920 −9,839
         May + 3,919 + 10,408 − 565 − 3,230 − 231 − 2,462 + 47 − 417 + 1,379 − 4,928 + 3,826
         June + 4,917 + 11,299 + 93 − 2,986 − 362 − 3,127 + 26 −19,576 − 603 + 15,236 + 7,707
         July + 2,856 + 13,224 − 774 − 3,785 − 3,956 − 1,853 − 203 −11,581 − 548 + 9,476 −15,567
         Aug + 3,165 + 10,477 − 317 − 5,824 + 196 − 1,366 + 86 −6,178 + 886 + 2,040 −5,579
         Sep + 7,862 + 11,842 − 474 − 3,200 + 1,931 − 2,238 + 179 −1,731 − 252 − 6,058 + 3,559
         Oct + 5,840 + 11,529 − 414 − 3,869 + 1,950 − 3,356 − 82 −19,457 + 570 + 13,129 −5,279
         Nov + 9,284 + 12,283 − 627 − 1,645 + 1,565 − 2,291 − 137 −4,333 − 842 − 3,970 + 4,265
         Dec + 6,513 + 8,383 − 889 + 43 + 748 − 1,772 − 139 −23,425 + 1,171 + 15,880 + 2,112
2003          Jan − 1,313 + 8,980 − 708 − 3,920 − 4,907 − 759 + 475 −5,645 − 97 + 6,580 + 6,799
         Feb + 4,370 + 10,668 − 142 − 2,932 − 577 − 2,647 − 504 −20,067 − 320 + 16,521 + 677
         Mar + 6,622 + 9,656 − 505 − 1,760 + 1,147 − 1,916 + 33 + 9,763 −1,078 −15,340 −4,032
         Apr + 3,138 + 9,216 − 897 − 2,872 + 331 − 2,640 − 123 −5,647 + 1,449 + 1,184 + 1,477
         May + 2,971 + 10,210 − 557 − 3,124 − 1,169 − 2,390 + 156 −10,122 − 854 + 7,849 + 22,684
         June + 2,526 + 10,387 − 465 − 2,892 − 1,638 − 2,867 + 119 −12,766 + 910 + 9,211 −2,037
         July + 1,230 + 14,159 − 621 − 4,133 − 5,325 − 2,850 + 62 + 754 + 225 − 2,271 −16,353
         Aug + 2,299 + 10,424 − 461 − 5,080 + 158 − 2,742 + 224 −8,631 − 717 + 6,825 −3,057
         Sep  p + 9,290 + 14,321 − 268 − 3,495 + 1,362 − 2,631 − 73 + 5,345 − 259 −14,303 + 3,508
oFrom July 1990 including the external transactions of the former GDR. — included up to December 1992 in Supplementary trade items. —4Mainly
1From the beginning of 1993 figures subject to significant uncertainty warehouse transactions for account of residents and deduction of goods
owing to changes in the method of data collection in foreign trade. — returned. —5See footnote 3. —6Excluding the expenditure on freight and
2Special trade according to the official foreign trade statistics: imports c.i.f., insurance included in the c.i.f. import value. —7Capital exports: −.—
exports f.o.b. —3From January 1993 including additional estimates for 8 Increase: −. 
external transactions which do not have to be reported and which are
68*X Foreign trade and payments

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
X Foreign trade and payments
 
3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
by group of countries and country *
 
  5  million
 2003
Group of countries / Country  2000  2001  2002 r Jan / Aug May June July August September  p 
All countries  1 Exports 597,440 638,268 651,320 432,212 54,209 54,039 57,749 49,675 58,258
Imports 538,311 542,774 518,532 348,512 43,999 43,652 43,590 39,251 43,937Balance + 59,128 + 95,495 + 132,788 + 83,700 + 10,210 + 10,387 + 14,159 + 10,424 + 14,321
I. Exports 460,422 481,991 486,520 320,123 39,702 39,692 42,012 35,568 ...Industrial countries
Imports 389,927 390,269 367,287 245,267 31,327 30,904 30,193 27,514 ...Balance + 70,495 + 91,722 + 119,233 + 74,856 + 8,375 + 8,788 + 11,819 + 8,054 ...
Exports 337,375 351,611 354,813 237,895 29,283 29,614 30,696 26,273 ... 1. EU member countries
Imports 273,951 277,034 262,849 176,258 22,305 22,440 22,203 19,428 ...
Balance + 63,424 + 74,577 + 91,964 + 61,637 + 6,978 + 7,174 + 8,493 + 6,845 ...
of  which
Exports 264,870 275,384 276,270 184,977 22,965 23,387 23,950 19,952 ... EMU member
Imports 217,946 221,680 211,642 142,646 18,238 18,324 18,373 15,523 ... countries
Balance + 46,924 + 53,704 + 64,628 + 42,331 + 4,727 + 5,062 + 5,577 + 4,429 ...
of which
Austria Exports 32,436 33,486 33,863 22,631 2,779 2,766 2,923 2,759 ...
Imports 20,497 20,664 21,047 13,785 1,734 1,644 1,831 1,613 ...Balance + 11,939 + 12,822 + 12,816 + 8,846 + 1,045 + 1,123 + 1,092 + 1,146 ...
Belgium and Exports 32,728 35,187 34,108 22,680 2,779 2,717 2,783 2,859 ...Luxemburg Imports 26,230 28,521 26,505 18,373 2,551 2,280 2,441 2,060 ...
Balance + 6,499 + 6,666 + 7,603 + 4,307 + 228 + 438 + 342 + 799 ...
France Exports 67,418 69,601 68,721 45,866 5,568 5,962 6,090 4,576 ...
Imports 50,862 49,743 48,200 32,001 3,891 4,272 4,009 3,254 ...Balance + 16,556 + 19,858 + 20,521 + 13,865 + 1,677 + 1,690 + 2,081 + 1,323 ...
Italy Exports 45,011 47,119 47,335 31,848 4,076 4,069 4,281 2,856 ...
Imports 35,776 35,280 33,482 22,330 2,822 2,918 3,063 2,374 ...Balance + 9,235 + 11,839 + 13,853 + 9,518 + 1,255 + 1,151 + 1,218 + 481 ...
Netherlands Exports 38,993 40,011 40,463 26,532 3,214 3,335 3,240 3,141 ...
Imports 44,739 43,233 40,751 28,835 3,781 3,519 3,388 3,290 ...Balance − 5,745 − 3,222 − 288 − 2,304 − 567 − 184 − 148 − 150 ...
Spain Exports 26,732 27,841 29,436 20,927 2,741 2,705 2,768 2,104 ...
Imports 16,087 15,226 15,532 10,840 1,365 1,490 1,410 999 ...Balance + 10,645 + 12,615 + 13,903 + 10,087 + 1,375 + 1,215 + 1,357 + 1,105 ...
Sweden Exports 13,524 12,978 13,496 9,187 1,169 1,138 1,008 1,088 ...
Imports 10,202 8,999 8,868 6,287 798 797 791 692 ...Balance + 3,322 + 3,979 + 4,628 + 2,900 + 372 + 341 + 217 + 397 ...
United Exports 49,377 52,764 53,761 36,184 4,225 4,231 4,924 4,146 ...Kingdom Imports 36,923 37,259 33,075 21,380 2,633 2,575 2,451 2,426 ...
Balance + 12,453 + 15,505 + 20,685 + 14,805 + 1,592 + 1,656 + 2,473 + 1,720 ...
Exports 39,944 39,987 40,687 26,855 3,466 3,554 3,735 3,161 ... 2. Other European
Imports 36,800 39,165 39,420 27,044 3,923 3,116 3,022 3,140 ... industrial countries  
2 
Balance + 3,144 + 821 + 1,267 − 190 − 457 + 437 + 714 + 22 ...
of which
Switzerland Exports 25,596 27,489 26,702 17,397 2,250 2,309 2,324 1,936 ...
Imports 18,797 19,753 19,461 12,561 1,668 1,508 1,588 1,378 ...
Balance + 6,799 + 7,737 + 7,241 + 4,836 + 582 + 801 + 736 + 558 ...
Exports 83,103 90,393 91,020 55,373 6,953 6,524 7,580 6,134 ... 3. Non-European
Imports 79,176 74,069 65,019 41,965 5,099 5,348 4,968 4,947 ... industrial countries
Balance + 3,926 + 16,324 + 26,001 + 13,409 + 1,854 + 1,177 + 2,612 + 1,187 ...
of which
Japan Exports 13,195 13,103 12,576 7,568 886 876 1,085 898 ...
Imports 26,847 22,910 19,896 12,590 1,561 1,734 1,535 1,351 ...
Balance −13,651 − 9,807 − 7,320 − 5,022 − 675 − 858 − 450 − 453 ...
Exports 61,764 67,824 68,263 41,207 5,252 4,833 5,588 4,475 ... United States
Imports 47,121 45,982 40,376 26,649 3,226 3,283 3,158 3,217 ...Balance + 14,643 + 21,842 + 27,887 + 14,558 + 2,027 + 1,550 + 2,430 + 1,258 ...
II. Exports 70,318 83,246 91,284 64,934 8,314 8,799 9,076 8,249 ...Countries in transition
Imports 82,900 90,341 93,662 65,762 8,381 8,126 8,712 7,510 ...Balance −12,582 − 7,095 − 2,378 − 828 − 67 + 672 + 364 + 739 ...
of which
Central and east Exports 59,900 69,914 75,373 52,102 6,698 7,110 7,141 6,568 ...European countries Imports 62,781 68,701 70,686 49,051 6,336 6,103 6,662 5,489 ...in transition Balance − 2,882 + 1,213 + 4,687 + 3,051 + 361 + 1,007 + 479 + 1,079 ...
People ‘s Republic Exports 9,459 12,118 14,571 11,909 1,507 1,571 1,803 1,553 ...
of China  
3 Imports 18,553 19,942 21,338 15,409 1,894 1,882 1,875 1,873 ...Balance − 9,094 − 7,824 − 6,768 − 3,500 − 387 − 311 − 71 − 320 ...
III. Exports 65,023 71,477 71,884 46,199 6,071 5,424 6,551 5,736 ...Developing countries
Imports 64,742 61,490 56,940 37,041 4,236 4,565 4,628 4,176 ...Balance + 282 + 9,987 + 14,944 + 9,159 + 1,835 + 859 + 1,923 + 1,560 ...
of  which
Exports 24,029 24,735 25,282 16,206 2,100 1,838 2,245 2,012 ... Emerging markets in
Imports 30,498 28,351 26,660 16,724 1,943 2,006 1,905 2,002 ... south-east Asia  
4 
Balance − 6,469 − 3,616 − 1,377 − 518 + 157 − 168 + 340 + 10 ...
OPEC-countries Exports 10,729 13,669 14,689 9,238 1,154 1,096 1,309 1,329 ...
Imports 10,235 8,220 6,977 4,757 530 617 524 494 ...Balance + 494 + 5,449 + 7,713 + 4,481 + 624 + 479 + 786 + 835 ...
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (f.o.b.) by country of destination, region. —2Including Cyprus. —3Excluding Hong Kong. —4Brunei Darus-
imports (c.i.f.) by country of origin. Inclusion of individual countries in salam, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore, Republic ofgroups of countries according to the current position. —1Including fuel Korea, Taiwan and Thailand. 
and other supplies for ships and aircraft and other data not classifiable by
69*X Foreign trade and payments

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
X Foreign trade and payments
 
4 Services and factor income of the Federal Republic of Germany
(Balances)
 
Until the end of 1998 DM million, from 1999  5  million
Services
other services
of which
 
Patents Compen- Services  of Construction
Trans- Financial and sation of Investment Government selfemployed and  assembly
Period Total Travel  1 services licences Total income portation  2 transactions  3 persons  4 work,  repairs employees  5 
1998 −76,062 −64,465 + 5,449 + 3,011 −4,044 + 5,462 −21,474 −2,586 −2,484 −1,584 −11,753
1999 −47,020 −36,421 + 2,882 + 1,005 −1,896 + 1,997 −14,588 −2,245 − 403 − 756 −8,843
2000 −49,868 −37,420 + 3,385 + 980 −2,904 + 2,221 −16,130 −2,733 − 782 − 512 −1,325
2001 −51,215 −37,416 + 4,144 + 509 −2,395 + 3,488 −19,545 −2,536 −1,123 − 257 −6,974
2002 −38,246 −35,243 + 3,032 + 584 −1,414 + 5,257 −10,461 −2,026 − 363 − 354 + 1,105
2002          Q1 −11,092 − 6,811 + 194 − 48 − 440 + 1,059 −5,044 − 524 − 388 + 132 −2,280
         Q2 − 8,875 − 8,454 + 1,027 + 104 − 655 + 1,228 −2,126 − 505 − 158 − 148 + 614
         Q3 −12,808 −13,331 + 717 + 179 − 442 + 1,707 −1,638 − 539 + 194 − 310 −1,519
         Q4 − 5,471 − 6,647 + 1,094 + 350 + 123 + 1,263 −1,653 − 457 − 10 − 29 + 4,291
2003          Q1 − 8,612 − 6,564 + 751 + 423 − 216 + 1,227 −4,234 − 556 + 170 + 173 −4,511
         Q2 − 8,888 − 7,607 + 1,296 − 94 − 236 + 1,202 −3,449 − 487 + 6 − 143 −2,333
         Q3 −12,708 −12,623 + 341 + 368 − 378 + 1,312 −1,729 − 405 + 209 − 303 −3,503
2002          Nov − 1,645 − 1,698 + 249 + 7 + 38 + 390 − 631 − 145 − 65 − 9 + 1,574
         Dec + 43 − 1,548 + 451 + 54 + 135 + 544 + 407 − 173 − 46 − 6 + 754
2003          Jan − 3,920 − 2,658 + 144 + 207 − 73 + 419 −1,960 − 216 + 56 + 59 −4,966
         Feb − 2,932 − 1,675 + 156 + 149 + 0 + 384 −1,946 − 120 + 60 + 52 − 629
         Mar − 1,760 − 2,231 + 451 + 68 − 143 + 424 − 328 − 221 + 54 + 62 + 1,084
         Apr − 2,872 − 2,402 + 375 − 321 − 109 + 426 − 841 − 196 − 43 − 42 + 373
         May − 3,124 − 2,218 + 290 + 62 − 55 + 351 −1,553 − 136 + 15 − 50 −1,119
         June − 2,892 − 2,987 + 632 + 165 − 72 + 424 −1,055 − 155 + 34 − 51 −1,587
         July − 4,133 − 3,480 + 133 + 135 − 136 + 467 −1,252 − 169 + 156 − 91 −5,234
         Aug − 5,080 − 5,370 + 215 + 147 − 74 + 402 − 401 − 124 + 65 − 107 + 264
         Sep − 3,495 − 3,772 − 7+ 8 6 − 167 + 442 − 76 − 112 − 12 − 105 + 1,468
1From January 2002 figures subject to significant uncertainty. —2Ex- vices supplied. —4Engineering and other technical services, research and
cluding the expenditure on freight included in the c.i.f. import value. — development, commercial services etc. — 5 Wages and salaries. 
3Including the receipts from foreign military agencies for goods and ser-
5 Current transfers of the Federal Republic of Germany 6 Capital transfers
(Balances) (Balances)
Until the end of 1998 DM million, from 1999  5  million DM million /  5  million
Public  1 Private  1 
International
Organisations  2 
 
of which other Remittances otherEuropean current by foreign current
Period Total Total Total Communities Total workers transfers Total  
4 Public  1 Private  1 transfers  3 
1998 −53,304 −37,317 −33,077 −30,382 −4,240 −15,987 −6,936 −9,051 + 1,289 −2,441 + 3,730
1999 −25,016 −17,348 −15,428 −13,846 −1,920 −7,667 −3,429 −4,239 − 154 −1,351 + 1,197
2000 −28,368 −19,095 −17,100 −15,398 −1,996 −9,272 −3,458 −5,814 −1,599 −1,189 − 410
2001 −27,432 −16,927 −14,257 −12,587 −2,670 −10,505 −3,520 −6,985 − 387 −1,361 + 974
2002 −26,555 −15,644 −12,416 −11,214 −3,227 −10,911 −3,470 −7,441 − 212 −1,416 + 1,204
2002          Q1 −5,128 −2,315 −1,256 − 832 −1,059 −2,813 − 868 −1,946 + 160 − 229 + 389
         Q2 −8,550 −5,262 −5,254 −4,997 − 8 −3,289 − 868 −2,421 − 75 − 274 + 199
         Q3 −5,457 −3,585 −2,746 −2,387 − 838 −1,873 − 868 −1,005 + 62 − 348 + 410
         Q4 −7,419 −4,483 −3,161 −2,998 −1,322 −2,936 − 868 −2,069 − 359 − 565 + 207
2003          Q1 −5,321 −3,310 −2,294 −1,628 −1,016 −2,011 − 833 −1,178 + 5 − 233 + 238
         Q2 −7,896 −5,411 −5,373 −4,789 − 37 −2,486 − 833 −1,653 + 152 − 276 + 427
         Q3 −8,222 −6,011 −4,896 −4,649 −1,116 −2,211 − 833 −1,378 + 213 − 244 + 457
2002          Nov −2,291 −1,456 − 996 − 953 − 460 − 836 − 289 − 547 − 137 − 248 + 111
         Dec −1,772 − 920 − 627 − 572 − 293 − 852 − 289 − 562 − 139 − 213 + 74
2003          Jan − 759 − 247 + 94 + 517 − 341 − 512 − 278 − 234 + 475 − 104 + 580
         Feb −2,647 −1,889 −1,499 −1,296 − 390 − 758 − 278 − 480 − 504 − 87 − 416
         Mar −1,916 −1,174 − 889 − 850 − 285 − 742 − 278 − 464 + 33 − 41 + 74
         Apr −2,640 −1,915 −1,754 −1,712 − 161 − 725 − 278 − 447 − 123 − 70 − 53
         May −2,390 −1,476 −1,647 −1,565 + 171 − 914 − 278 − 636 + 156 − 90 + 246
         June −2,867 −2,020 −1,972 −1,512 − 48 − 847 − 278 − 569 + 119 − 115 + 234
         July −2,850 −2,095 −1,655 −1,491 − 441 − 754 − 278 − 477 + 62 − 84 + 147
         Aug −2,742 −2,054 −1,579 −1,556 − 476 − 688 − 278 − 410 + 224 − 73 + 297
         Sep −2,631 −1,862 −1,662 −1,603 − 200 − 769 − 278 − 491 − 73 − 87 + 14
1The classification of "public" and "private" transfers depends on which (excluding capital transfers). —3Payments to developing countries, pension
sector the participating domestic body belongs to. —2Current contri- payments, tax revenue and refunds, etc. —4Where identifiable; in
butions to the budgets of international organisations and to the EU budget particular, debt forgiveness. 
70*X Foreign trade and payments

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
X Foreign trade and payments
 
7 Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
 
 
 5  million
2002 2003
Item 2000 2001 2002 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 July Aug Sep
I. Net German investment abroad
(Increase/capital exports: −) −355,670 −270,851 −258,451 −26,547 −95,947 −63,257 + 636 − 1,523 + 23,852 −21,694
1. Direct investment  1 −60,030 −36,314 −28,700 − 6,256 −16,036 + 14,170 − 7,581 − 5,443 + 784 − 2,923
Equity capital −59,125 −61,618 −46,821 − 5,102 − 7,471 − 1,557 − 2,324 − 150 − 497 − 1,677
Reinvested earnings  2 + 1,671 + 13,949 − 2,630 − 661 −−−−−−
Credit transactions of
German direct investors + 3,281 + 16,360 + 27,883 + 1,727 − 6,787 + 17,512 − 3,503 − 4,291 + 1,762 − 974
Other capital − 5,857 − 5,005 − 7,132 − 2,220 − 1,778 − 1,785 − 1,754 − 1,002 − 480 − 272
2. Portfolio investment −203,368 −129,559 −69,036 − 9,436 + 5,562 −20,019 − 5,412 − 1,217 − 1,327 − 2,868
Equities  3 −102,252 −15,614 − 5,330 − 5,448 + 14,707 − 816 − 693 − 2,544 − 122 + 1,972
Investment fund certificates  4 −32,516 −19,701 − 6,784 + 576 − 3,100 − 101 − 256 − 104 − 301 + 149
Bonds and notes  5 −70,251 −95,098 −50,806 − 7,185 − 9,616 −20,576 + 359 + 2,796 + 1,574 − 4,011
Money market instruments + 1,651 + 853 − 6,116 + 2,622 + 3,571 + 1,474 − 4,822 − 1,365 − 2,479 − 978
3. Financial derivatives  6 − 5,490 + 6,278 − 533 + 340 + 2,865 − 2,089 + 1,198 + 1,217 + 769 − 788
4. Credit transactions −84,596 −109,871 −158,634 −10,909 −87,752 −54,678 + 13,036 + 4,123 + 23,702 −14,789
Credit institutions  7 −101,533 −130,648 −130,536 −30,296 −74,254 −66,528 + 29,417 + 26,711 + 19,138 −16,432
Long-term −40,156 −47,636 −31,790 − 9,514 −11,479 − 8,019 − 8,176 − 2,823 − 2,755 − 2,598
Short-term −61,378 −83,012 −98,746 −20,782 −62,774 −58,509 + 37,593 + 29,534 + 21,892 −13,834
Enterprises and individuals − 5,116 −19,217 + 744 + 18,746 −17,690 − 8,193 − 652 − 5,890 + 7,065 − 1,827
Long-term + 91 − 1,857 − 400 − 384 − 756 − 492 − 748 − 155 − 193 − 400
Short-term  7 − 5,207 −17,360 + 1,144 + 19,130 −16,934 − 7,701 + 96 − 5,735 + 7,258 − 1,427
General government −19,920 + 15,980 + 7,168 − 368 + 950 − 547 − 160 − 318 + 413 − 256
Long-term − 1,079 + 257 + 218 + 14 + 309 − 5 + 274 + 53 + 221 + 0
Short-term  7 −18,841 + 15,723 + 6,950 − 382 + 641 − 541 − 434 − 370 + 192 − 256
Bundesbank + 41,972 + 24,015 −36,010 + 1,009 + 3,242 + 20,590 −15,569 −16,380 − 2,914 + 3,725
5. Other investment  8 − 2,185 − 1,385 − 1,549 − 287 − 588 − 641 − 606 − 203 − 76− 327
II. Net foreign investment in Germany
(Increase/capital imports: +) + 391,974 + 249,433 + 172,348 −20,668 + 79,998 + 34,722 − 3,168 + 2,277 −32,483 + 27,039
1. Direct investment  1 + 218,184 + 23,990 + 35,635 + 5,655 + 8,454 + 9,475 + 5,974 + 3,355 + 2,186 + 434
Equity capital + 121,532 + 30,089 + 26,985 + 1,754 + 9,064 + 2,900 + 4,206 + 587 + 2,524 + 1,095Reinvested earnings  
2 − 5,839 −17,513 − 8,379 − 2,091 − 900 − 900 − 900 − 300 − 300 − 300
Credit transactions offoreign direct investors + 102,826 + 11,558 + 17,225 + 6,034 + 385 + 7,540 + 2,641 + 3,084 − 121 − 322
Other capital − 335 − 143 − 197 − 41− 96− 66 + 27 − 16 + 82 − 39
2. Portfolio investment + 47,583 + 156,175 + 105,998 − 2,894 + 30,557 + 25,964 − 3,646 + 398 − 6,078 + 2,034
Equities  
3 −35,923 + 88,638 + 16,844 + 2,533 − 2,580 + 2,331 + 3,373 + 956 + 1,731 + 686
Investment fund certificates + 11,000 + 1,105 − 241 − 1,271 − 901 − 58− 799 − 640 + 754 − 913
Bonds and notes  5 + 73,955 + 81,246 + 79,231 − 563 + 22,682 + 23,979 + 5,583 + 3,343 + 2,401 − 161
Money market instruments − 1,450 −14,815 + 10,164 − 3,593 + 11,355 − 289 −11,803 − 3,261 −10,964 + 2,422
3. Credit transactions + 125,945 + 69,221 + 30,641 −23,422 + 40,983 − 742 − 5,501 − 1,468 −28,610 + 24,577
Credit institutions  7 + 115,294 + 54,341 + 28,321 −19,542 + 41,251 − 502 − 9,450 − 3,626 −29,637 + 23,812
Long-term + 15,665 + 4,425 + 18,247 + 3,244 − 3,099 − 158 − 7,429 + 435 − 4,112 − 3,752
Short-term + 99,629 + 49,916 + 10,075 −22,786 + 44,350 − 344 − 2,021 − 4,061 −25,525 + 27,565
Enterprises and individuals + 9,711 + 11,412 + 3,334 − 3,083 − 2,278 − 1,951 + 1,254 + 1,681 + 183 − 610
Long-term + 4,014 + 11,351 + 5,142 + 1,444 − 6,014 + 1,006 + 1,256 + 490 + 1,166 − 400
Short-term  7 + 5,698 + 61 − 1,807 − 4,527 + 3,736 − 2,958 − 2 + 1,191 − 983 − 210
General Government + 526 + 837 − 1,667 + 12 + 313 + 1,683 + 2,277 + 675 + 270 + 1,332
Long-term − 372 − 217 − 112 − 159 + 3,407 − 138 − 183 − 51− 31− 101
Short-term  7 + 898 + 1,054 − 1,555 + 171 − 3,094 + 1,821 + 2,460 + 726 + 301 + 1,433
Bundesbank + 414 + 2,631 + 653 − 809 + 1,697 + 28 + 418 − 198 + 574 + 42
4. Other investment + 263 + 47 + 74 − 8+ 5+ 2 5+ 5 − 8+ 1 9 − 6
III. Balance of all statistically
recorded financial movements(Net capital exports: −) + 36,305 −21,419 −86,103 −47,215 −15,950 −28,535 − 2,532 + 754 − 8,631 + 5,345
1From 1996, new definition for direct investment. —2Estimated. — action values shown here are mostly derived from changes in stocks. As far
3Including participation rights. —4From 1991 including accumulated as possible, purely statistical changes have been eliminated. —8In
earnings. —5From 1975 excluding accrued interest. —6Options, whether particular, subscriptions of the Federal Government to International
or not evidenced by securities, and financial futures contracts. —7The trans- Organisations. 
71*X Foreign trade and payments

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
X Foreign trade and payments
 
8 External position of the Bundesbank *
 
 
DM million
Monetary reserves and other claims on non-residents Liabilities to non-residents
Monetary reserves
Reserve
positionin theInter- Liabilitiesnational arising Net LiabilitiesMonetary arising from externalFund and Claims Loans and from liquidity position
Foreign special on the external Treasury (col. 1 other claims
End of year currency drawing ECB  
2 on non- trans- discount less
or month Total Total Gold rights (net) Total paper col. 8) balances  1 residents  3 actions  4 
1234567891 0 1 1
1990 106,446 104,023 13,688 64,517 7,373 18,445 2,423 52,259 52,259 − 54,188
1991 97,345 94,754 13,688 55,424 8,314 17,329 2,592 42,335 42,335 − 55,010
1992 143,959 141,351 13,688 85,845 8,199 33,619 2,608 26,506 26,506 − 117,453
1993 122,763 120,143 13,688 61,784 8,496 36,176 2,620 39,541 23,179 16,362 83,222
1994 115,965 113,605 13,688 60,209 7,967 31,742 2,360 24,192 19,581 4,611 91,774
1995 123,261 121,307 13,688 68,484 10,337 28,798 1,954 16,390 16,390 − 106,871
1996 120,985 119,544 13,688 72,364 11,445 22,048 1,441 15,604 15,604 − 105,381
1997 127,849 126,884 13,688 76,673 13,874 22,649 966 16,931 16,931 − 110,918
1998 135,085 134,005 17,109 100,363 16,533 − 1,079 15,978 15,978 − 119,107
*Valuation of the gold holdings and the claims on non-residents according Monetary Cooperation Fund −EMCF). —3Including loans to the World
to section 26 (2) of the Bundesbank Act and the provisions of the Bank. —4Including liquidity paper sold to non-residents by the
Commercial Code, especially section 253. In the course of the year, valuation Bundesbank; excluding the liquidity Treasury discount paper sold to
at the balance sheet rates of the preceding year. —1Mainly US dollar non-residents between March 1993 and March 1995, as shown in column 10. 
assets. —2European Central Bank (until 1993 claims on the European
  
 
9 External position of the Bundesbank in the European monetary union o
 5  million
Monetary reserves and other claims on non-residents
Monetary reserves
Reserveposition
in the Inter-
national OtherMonetary Other claims on Net externalFund and claims on Claims residents position of the
Gold special Foreign non-euro- within the in other Bundesbank Liabilities
End of year and gold drawing currency area Eurosystem EMU member to non- (col. 1 lessor month Total Total rights reserves (net)  
2 countries col. 9) receivables residents  1  3 residents  3 
1234567891 0
1999          Jan  4 95,316 93,940 29,312 8,461 56,167 140 1,225 11 8,169 87,146
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 8,332 52,420 9,162 39,746 11 6,179 135,779
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 7,762 53,377 313 6,620 14 6,592 94,1702001 76,147 93,215 35,005 8,721 49,489 312 − 17,385 5 8,752 67,396
2002 103,948 85,002 36,208 8,272 40,522 312 18,466 167 9,005 94,942
2002          May 100,886 91,942 38,649 8,040 45,253 312 8,630 2 8,448 92,438
         June 88,199 86,649 35,435 8,848 42,366 312 1,236 1 9,219 78,980
         July 105,187 87,718 34,596 8,897 44,225 312 17,156 1 10,163 95,025
         Aug 110,682 87,466 35,197 8,797 43,471 312 22,902 1 9,432 101,250         Sep 108,889 88,937 36,225 8,751 43,961 312 19,639 1 9,966 98,923
         Oct 112,748 87,441 35,530 8,594 43,317 312 24,993 2 9,473 103,276
         Nov 108,615 87,610 35,517 8,542 43,551 312 20,688 5 10,272 98,343         Dec 103,948 85,002 36,208 8,272 40,522 312 18,466 167 9,005 94,942
2003          Jan 98,272 85,235 37,934 8,023 39,278 312 12,237 488 9,898 88,374
         Feb 95,491 83,685 35,721 8,008 39,956 312 11,001 493 9,669 85,822         Mar 98,240 82,530 34,100 8,348 40,083 312 14,908 490 10,599 87,641
         Apr 93,702 79,453 33,442 8,123 37,888 312 13,496 441 9,126 84,575
         May 70,456 78,904 34,252 7,871 36,781 312 − 9,216 455 9,818 60,638
         June 73,550 78,425 33,435 8,292 36,698 312 − 5,663 476 10,537 63,014
         July 90,714 79,218 34,759 8,289 36,170 312 10,710 474 10,375 80,339         Aug 98,605 84,197 37,546 8,583 38,068 312 13,592 504 11,060 87,545         Sep 91,894 81,206 36,491 8,492 36,223 312 9,902 474 10,879 81,016
         Oct 113,947 81,401 36,595 8,539 36,267 312 31,794 440 11,319 102,628
oClaims and liabilities vis- à-vis all countries within and outside EMU. Until Deutsche Bundesbank ’s cross-border payments within the Eurosystem. From
December 2000, the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, by virtue November 2000 including the TARGET positions which were previously
of revaluations, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the levels shown (in columns 6 and 9) as bilateral assets and liabilities vis- à-vis national
are computed on the basis of cumulative transaction values. From January central banks outside the Eurosystem. —3See footnote 2. —4Euro
2001 onwards, all end-of-month levels will be valued at market prices. — opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at January 1, 1999. 
1Including loans to the World Bank. —2Including the balances in the
72*X Foreign trade and payments

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
X  Foreign trade and payments
 
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germ any (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
 5  million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities to non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  to foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms payments
or month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received operations operations
All countries
 
1999 277,331 52,774 224,557 115,564 108,993 100,777 8,216 293,849 56,632 237,217 166,026 71,191 52,047 19,144
2000 320,874 43,462 277,412 152,752 124,660 116,971 7,689 446,060 52,663 393,397 309,024 84,373 63,093 21,2802001 358,120 62,434 295,686 171,939 123,747 114,857 8,890 505,266 60,132 445,134 354,561 90,573 65,988 24,5852002  
4 331,671 63,817 267,854 148,913 118,941 111,406 7,535 533,423 57,696 475,727 387,850 87,877 62,622 25,255
2003          June 368,697 94,122 274,575 156,452 118,123 109,957 8,166 559,261 53,186 506,075 419,730 86,345 58,953 27,392
         July 375,825 100,628 275,197 157,637 117,560 108,783 8,777 562,441 54,421 508,020 422,652 85,368 57,438 27,930
         Aug 362,972 93,794 269,178 154,685 114,493 105,949 8,544 562,617 55,781 506,836 423,467 83,369 54,984 28,385         Sep 370,899 94,193 276,706 160,207 116,499 108,083 8,416 567,725 53,879 513,846 427,170 86,676 58,702 27,974
EU countries 5
 
1999 157,617 47,992 109,625 56,450 53,175 48,500 4,675 194,809 49,243 145,566 111,605 33,961 27,532 6,4292000 177,782 39,563 138,219 78,298 59,921 55,718 4,203 323,049 45,473 277,576 237,583 39,993 32,457 7,5362001 198,118 58,039 140,079 79,205 60,874 55,371 5,503 372,937 53,683 319,254 275,749 43,505 34,716 8,7892002  
4 200,930 60,118 140,812 84,643 56,169 51,693 4,476 402,561 52,503 350,058 307,920 42,138 32,650 9,488
2003          June 238,384 88,772 149,612 92,083 57,529 52,846 4,683 418,923 48,631 370,292 329,716 40,576 30,475 10,101
         July 245,747 95,324 150,423 94,053 56,370 51,171 5,199 421,066 49,850 371,216 331,270 39,946 29,646 10,300
         Aug 233,986 88,711 145,275 91,045 54,230 49,286 4,944 422,322 51,183 371,139 333,921 37,218 27,021 10,197         Sep 236,075 88,856 147,219 91,292 55,927 51,061 4,866 421,465 49,377 372,088 332,343 39,745 29,740 10,005
of which: EMU member countries 1
 
1999 104,071 25,946 78,125 38,747 39,378 36,074 3,304 151,179 38,117 113,062 88,763 24,299 20,173 4,1262000 120,976 22,737 98,239 52,976 45,263 42,389 2,874 247,830 33,698 214,132 185,595 28,537 23,569 4,9682001 126,519 33,787 92,732 46,599 46,133 42,771 3,362 295,943 38,361 257,582 225,711 31,871 24,878 6,9932002  
4 129,490 32,521 96,969 54,542 42,427 39,350 3,077 331,733 37,366 294,367 263,863 30,504 22,996 7,508
2003          June 153,814 49,419 104,395 60,519 43,876 40,655 3,221 341,392 30,586 310,806 281,075 29,731 21,651 8,080
         July 155,644 51,199 104,445 61,649 42,796 39,412 3,384 342,583 31,942 310,641 281,227 29,414 21,373 8,041
         Aug 148,203 47,517 100,686 59,608 41,078 37,824 3,254 342,750 32,524 310,226 283,037 27,189 19,351 7,838         Sep 153,217 50,539 102,678 60,512 42,166 38,967 3,199 342,882 31,208 311,674 282,592 29,082 21,420 7,662
Other industrial countries 3 6
 
1999 71,958 3,595 68,363 45,540 22,823 21,220 1,603 68,024 4,870 63,154 44,518 18,636 15,387 3,2492000 84,502 2,925 81,577 54,272 27,305 25,673 1,632 84,464 4,711 79,753 56,986 22,767 18,621 4,1462001 100,786 3,364 97,422 71,842 25,580 24,082 1,498 93,269 4,178 89,091 64,595 24,496 19,648 4,8482002  
4 77,144 2,743 74,401 48,866 25,535 24,303 1,232 90,594 3,267 87,327 64,544 22,783 18,081 4,702
2003          June 78,334 3,941 74,393 49,263 25,130 23,985 1,145 95,217 2,708 92,509 70,666 21,843 16,779 5,064
         July 77,891 3,849 74,042 48,619 25,423 24,234 1,189 95,321 2,736 92,585 71,349 21,236 15,948 5,288
         Aug 76,418 3,511 72,907 48,798 24,109 22,887 1,222 94,368 2,708 91,660 70,107 21,553 16,106 5,447         Sep 82,485 3,782 78,703 53,950 24,753 23,592 1,161 100,344 2,534 97,810 75,611 22,199 16,954 5,245
Countries in transition
 
1999 16,402 231 16,171 4,603 11,568 10,934 634 6,256 78 6,178 481 5,697 3,119 2,5782000 19,082 240 18,842 5,028 13,814 13,104 710 8,202 113 8,089 928 7,161 4,384 2,7772001 20,444 204 20,240 6,103 14,137 13,449 688 9,095 151 8,944 1,699 7,245 4,341 2,9042002  
4 20,339 332 20,007 5,680 14,327 13,586 741 10,106 175 9,931 2,119 7,812 4,574 3,238
2003          June 21,086 290 20,796 6,159 14,637 13,852 785 12,063 168 11,895 2,749 9,146 5,264 3,882
         July 21,008 298 20,710 6,086 14,624 13,836 788 11,783 173 11,610 2,517 9,093 5,057 4,036
         Aug 21,199 280 20,919 6,135 14,784 13,996 788 11,827 184 11,643 2,588 9,055 4,809 4,246         Sep 21,193 245 20,948 6,010 14,938 14,165 773 12,211 194 12,017 2,697 9,320 5,241 4,079
Developing countries 2
 
1999 31,354 956 30,398 8,971 21,427 20,123 1,304 24,760 2,441 22,319 9,422 12,897 6,009 6,8882000 39,508 734 38,774 15,154 23,620 22,476 1,144 30,345 2,366 27,979 13,527 14,452 7,631 6,8212001 38,772 827 37,945 14,789 23,156 21,955 1,201 29,965 2,120 27,845 12,518 15,327 7,283 8,0442002  
4 33,258 624 32,634 9,724 22,910 21,824 1,086 30,162 1,751 28,411 13,267 15,144 7,317 7,827
2003          June 30,893 1,119 29,774 8,947 20,827 19,274 1,553 33,058 1,679 31,379 16,599 14,780 6,435 8,345
         July 31,179 1,157 30,022 8,879 21,143 19,542 1,601 34,271 1,662 32,609 17,516 15,093 6,787 8,306
         Aug 31,369 1,292 30,077 8,707 21,370 19,780 1,590 34,100 1,706 32,394 16,851 15,543 7,048 8,495         Sep 31,146 1,310 29,836 8,955 20,881 19,265 1,616 33,705 1,774 31,931 16,519 15,412 6,767 8,645
* Including the assets and liabilities vis- à-vis non-residents of individuals in Greece from January 2001. —2Including Cyprus until April 2002. —
Germany. The assets and liabilities vis- à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in 3Including Cyprus from May 2002. —4Change in the range of enterprises
Germany are shown in Table 4 of Section IV, "Banks". Statistical increases required to report owing to an increase in the exemtion limit. —5Including
and decreases have not been eliminated; to this extent the changes in totals Guernsey, Jersey and Isle of Man until December 2002. —6Including
are not comparable with the figures shown in Table X, 7. —1Including Guernsey, Jersey and Isle of Man from January 2003. 
73*X  Foreign trade and payments

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
X Foreign trade and payments
11 Deutsche Mark and euro exchange rates of selected currencies *
Yearly Japan Denmark Sweden Norway Switzerland Canada Australia New Zealand United States United Kingdom
or monthly
average USD JPY DKK SEK GBP NOK CHF CAD AUD  1 NZD 1 
Historic spot middle rates on the Frankfurt exchange (1 or 100 currency units = DEM ...)
      
1991 1.6612 1.2346 25.932 27.421 2.926  25.580 115.740 1.4501 1.2942 0.9589
1992 1.5595 1.2313 25.869 26.912 2.753  25.143 111.198 1.2917 1.1476 0.84061993 1.6544 1.4945 25.508 21.248 2.483  23.303 111.949 1.2823 1.1235 0.89401994 1.6218 1.5870 25.513 21.013 2.4816 22.982 118.712 1.1884 1.1848 0.9605
1995 1.4338 1.5293 25.570 20.116 2.2620 22.614 121.240 1.0443 1.0622 0.9399
1996 1.5037 1.3838 25.945 22.434 2.3478 23.292 121.891 1.1027 1.1782 1.03571997 1.7348 1.4378 26.249 22.718 2.8410 24.508 119.508 1.2533 1.2889 1.14531998 1.7592 1.3484 26.258 22.128 2.9142 23.297 121.414 1.1884 1.1070 0.9445
      
Euro reference exchange rates published by the European Central Bank (EUR 1 = currency units ...) 2
      
1999 1.0658 121.32 7.4355 8.8075 0.65874 8.3104 1.6003 1.5840 1.6523 2.01452000 0.9236 99.47 7.4538 8.4452 0.60948 8.1129 1.5579 1.3706 1.5889 2.02882001 0.8956 108.68 7.4521 9.2551 0.62187 8.0484 1.5105 1.3864 1.7319 2.13002002 0.9456 118.06 7.4305 9.1611 0.62883 7.5086 1.4670 1.4838 1.7376 2.0366
2002          Jan 0.8833 117.12 7.4329 9.2275 0.61659 7.9208 1.4745 1.4135 1.7094 2.0826
         Feb 0.8700 116.23 7.4299 9.1828 0.61160 7.7853 1.4775 1.3880 1.6963 2.0771         Mar 0.8758 114.75 7.4324 9.0594 0.61574 7.7183 1.4678 1.3903 1.6695 2.0261
         Apr 0.8858 115.81 7.4341 9.1358 0.61407 7.6221 1.4658 1.4008 1.6537 1.9995
         May 0.9170 115.86 7.4356 9.2208 0.62823 7.5207 1.4572 1.4210 1.6662 1.9859         June 0.9554 117.80 7.4330 9.1137 0.64405 7.4043 1.4721 1.4627 1.6793 1.9517
         July 0.9922 117.11 7.4301 9.2689 0.63870 7.4050 1.4624 1.5321 1.7922 2.0646
         Aug 0.9778 116.31 7.4270 9.2489 0.63633 7.4284 1.4636 1.5333 1.8045 2.1076         Sep 0.9808 118.38 7.4271 9.1679 0.63059 7.3619 1.4649 1.5434 1.7927 2.0847
         Oct 0.9811 121.57 7.4297 9.1051 0.62994 7.3405 1.4650 1.5481 1.7831 2.0381
         Nov 1.0014 121.65 7.4280 9.0818 0.63709 7.3190 1.4673 1.5735 1.7847 2.0155         Dec 1.0183 124.20 7.4264 9.0961 0.64218 7.2948 1.4679 1.5872 1.8076 1.9947
2003          Jan 1.0622 126.12 7.4324 9.1733 0.65711 7.3328 1.4621 1.6364 1.8218 1.9648
         Feb 1.0773 128.60 7.4317 9.1455 0.66977 7.5439 1.4674 1.6299 1.8112 1.9457         Mar 1.0807 128.16 7.4274 9.2265 0.68255 7.8450 1.4695 1.5943 1.7950 1.9497
         Apr 1.0848 130.12 7.4255 9.1541 0.68902 7.8317 1.4964 1.5851 1.7813 1.9700
         May 1.1582 135.83 7.4246 9.1559 0.71322 7.8715 1.5155 1.6016 1.7866 2.0083         June 1.1663 138.05 7.4250 9.1182 0.70224 8.1619 1.5411 1.5798 1.7552 2.0069
         July 1.1372 134.99 7.4332 9.1856 0.70045 8.2893 1.5476 1.5694 1.7184 1.9386
         Aug 1.1139 132.38 7.4322 9.2378 0.69919 8.2558 1.5400 1.5570 1.7114 1.9137         Sep 1.1222 128.94 7.4273 9.0682 0.69693 8.1952 1.5474 1.5330 1.6967 1.9227
         Oct 1.1692 128.12 7.4301 9.0105 0.69763 8.2274 1.5485 1.5489 1.6867 1.9446
*Calculated from daily quotations. —1Exchange rates from Australia and central banks at 2.15 p.m. For additional euro reference exchange rates of
New Zealand; those for New Zealand calculated from rates as at the middle the ECB, see Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Report 5, Exchange rate
and end of the month. —2The ECB publishes daily euro reference ex- statistics. 
change rates, which are calculated on the basis of the concertation between
12 Exchange rates for the national currencies of the EMU countries, the Deutsche Mark value of the ECU *
and euro conversion rates
France Italy Netherlands Belgium/ Austria Spain Finland Ireland Portugal Greece ECU values  1 
Yearly Luxembourg GRD  100 /
average FRF  100 ITL  1,000 NLG  100 BEF/LUF  100 ATS  100 ESP  100 FIM  100 IEP  1 PTE  100 EUR  1  2 ECU  1
Historic spot middle rates on the Frankfurt exchange in DEM
   
1991 29.409 1.3377 88.742 4.857  14.211 1.597  41.087 2.671  1.149  0.9103 2.05076
1992 29.500 1.2720 88.814 4.857  14.211 1.529  34.963 2.656  1.157  0.8178 2.020311993 29.189 1.0526 89.017 4.785  14.214 1.303  28.915 2.423  1.031  0.7213 1.936391994 29.238 1.0056 89.171 4.8530 14.214 1.2112 31.108 2.4254 0.9774 0.6683 1.92452
1995 28.718 0.8814 89.272 4.8604 14.214 1.1499 32.832 2.2980 0.9555 0.6182 1.87375
1996 29.406 0.9751 89.243 4.8592 14.214 1.1880 32.766 2.4070 0.9754 0.6248 1.909541997 29.705 1.0184 88.857 4.8464 14.210 1.1843 33.414 2.6297 0.9894 0.6349 1.964381998 29.829 1.0132 88.714 4.8476 14.213 1.1779 32.920 2.5049 0.9763 0.5952 1.969131999 . . . . . . . . . 325.76 .
2000 . . . . . . . . . 336.63 .
      
Irrevocable euro conversion rates (EUR 1 = currency units ...) 3
   
6.55957 1936.27 2.20371 40.3399 13.7603 166.386 5.94573 0.787564 200.482 4 340.750 5 1.95583
*Calculated from daily quotations. —1According to data from the Euro- ence exchange rates of the ECB (EUR 1 = GRD ...). —3Applicable from
pean Commission. —2Until 1998 reciprocal values of the exchange rates for 1 January 1999. —4Applicable from 1 January 2001. —5Deutsche Mark
the Deutsche Mark, published by the Bank of Greece; from 1999 euro refer- conversion rate. 
74*X Foreign trade and payments

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
X Foreign trade and payments
 
13 Effective exchange rates * of the euro and selected foreign currencies
 
 
1999 Q1 = 100
Memo item: Effective nominal exchange rates of selected foreign
Indicators of the German economy ’s currencies against the currencies of 19 industrial
Effective exchange rate of the euro price competitiveness  3,4 countries  3,5,6 
Narrow group  1 Broad group  2 19 industrial countries  5 49 countries  7 
Real Real on the basis
of the on the basis on the basis
on the basis of Pound Canadian Swiss Japanese of consumer of consumer deflators of
Period Nominal prices Nominal prices consumer prices US dollar sterling dollar franc yen total sales  8 
1995 107.8 108.8 93.2 107.9 109.6 110.4 110.3 86.1 84.0 106.4 105.4 115.6
1996 107.9 108.8 95.4 106.0 106.1 106.8 105.2 90.9 85.9 108.8 104.2 100.61997 99.1 99.5 90.4 96.7 100.6 101.4 99.0 98.8 99.8 109.7 97.9 95.91998 101.5 101.3 96.6 99.2 100.9 101.1 100.1 103.4 103.3 103.5 99.9 89.71999 95.7 95.8 96.6 95.9 97.9 98.0 97.7 100.8 102.3 102.2 98.3 105.1
2000 85.7 86.3 88.2 86.2 91.9 92.6 91.1 105.4 105.2 103.6 96.8 117.9
2001 87.3 88.6 91.0 87.9 92.1 93.0 91.4 112.0 103.6 100.5 100.5 106.72002 90.0 92.5 95.6 91.8
p 93.3 94.0 92.6 110.7 104.2 98.7 104.9 100.8
1998          Q1 98.8 98.8 92.6 96.4 99.4 99.8 98.7 103.2 104.5 107.3 100.1 92.5         Q2 100.2 100.1 94.2 97.5 100.6 100.7 99.1 104.8 104.8 106.5 98.5 86.8         Q3 102.5 102.5 97.8 100.4 101.7 102.1 101.1 106.3 104.1 102.0 99.4 83.7         Q4 104.2 103.8 101.7 102.6 101.9 101.8 101.6 99.4 99.8 98.0 101.6 95.7
1999          Q1 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0
         Q2 96.1 96.0 96.5 96.1 98.6 98.3 97.8 102.8 102.8 103.5 98.6 99.0         Q3 94.6 94.7 95.5 94.8 97.2 97.8 97.3 101.4 102.3 102.3 97.7 106.2         Q4 92.2 92.2 94.2 92.8 95.6 95.9 95.6 99.1 104.1 102.8 96.7 115.2
2000          Q1 89.0 89.5 91.1 89.3 93.9 94.8 93.5 101.5 106.4 104.9 95.1 114.9
         Q2 86.0 86.4 88.4 86.5 92.1 92.5 91.3 104.3 105.4 103.7 96.5 118.4         Q3 84.8 85.4 87.3 85.2 91.4 92.1 90.4 106.2 103.9 104.1 97.2 119.2         Q4 83.0 83.8 85.9 83.7 90.2 91.0 89.3 109.4 105.0 101.6 98.2 119.2
2001          Jan 89.2 89.9 91.7 88.7 . 94.0 92.3 107.7 102.4 102.7 100.0 108.3
         Feb 88.3 89.1 91.0 88.0 92.8 93.9 92.1 108.8 102.0 101.6 99.2 109.9         Mar 88.4 89.4 91.4 88.5 . 93.6 92.0 111.5 102.9 99.7 99.3 106.0
         Apr 87.6 88.8 91.0 88.1 . 93.1 91.5 113.0 103.7 100.0 99.4 104.9
         May 85.9 87.2 89.3 86.4 91.6 92.4 90.5 113.1 104.3 101.3 98.3 107.5         June 84.7 86.0 88.1 85.2 . 91.9 89.8 114.1 104.4 102.7 98.5 108.3
         July 85.4 86.8 89.1 86.0 . 92.7 90.8 114.3 104.9 102.5 99.5 105.8
         Aug 87.7 89.0 91.8 88.4 91.8 93.4 91.9 111.6 103.0 101.1 100.4 106.4         Sep 88.0 89.3 92.6 89.1 . 93.1 92.0 110.7 103.8 99.1 102.2 108.2
         Oct 88.0 89.6 92.8 89.3 . 92.7 91.6 111.8 103.7 99.0 103.0 106.2
         Nov 86.8 88.4 91.3 87.8 92.3 92.0 90.7 113.3 104.0 97.8 103.4 106.3         Dec 87.7 89.8 91.9 88.7 . 93.5 91.9 114.1 104.3 99.0 103.3 102.1
2002          Jan 87.6 90.0 91.6 88.1 . 93.6 91.4 116.4 104.9 97.9 103.3 98.3
         Feb 86.8 89.0 91.1 87.4 92.3 93.3 90.9 117.3 105.3 98.5 102.7 98.2         Mar 86.8 89.3 91.3 87.9 . 93.2 90.9 116.1 104.6 98.7 103.4 99.8
         Apr 87.2 89.7 91.7 88.2 . 92.7 90.5 115.3 105.2 99.0 103.8 99.4
         May 88.6 91.1 93.7 90.0 92.9 93.2 91.4 112.0 103.5 100.4 105.1 101.2         June 90.6 93.2 96.4 92.6 . 94.2 92.8 109.0 101.9 101.0 104.9 101.7
         July 91.7 94.4 98.2 94.3 . 95.2 94.4 106.0 103.5 99.4 106.0 104.3
         Aug 91.1 93.6 97.7 93.6
p 93.9 94.6 93.6 107.3 103.5 98.0 105.7 104.3
         Sep 91.2 93.8 98.0 93.8 . 94.1 93.3 107.6 104.7 97.7 105.6 102.5
         Oct 91.7 94.3 98.5 94.4 . 94.0 93.3 108.5 105.0 97.6 105.8 99.8
         Nov 92.5 95.1 99.3 94.9 p 94.2 94.0 93.3 106.8 104.3 97.7 106.1 100.8
         Dec 93.6 96.7 100.4 96.3 . 95.6 94.9 106.0 104.0 98.3 106.5 99.6
2003          Jan 95.8 98.8 103.0 98.1 . 96.3 95.8 103.0 102.6 98.8 107.9 100.4
         Feb 97.1 100.2 104.4 99.4 p 95.8 97.0 96.5 102.2 101.2 100.5 108.0 99.2
         Mar 97.9 101.2 105.1 100.3 . 97.0 96.6 101.4 99.3 103.0 108.1 99.8
         Apr 98.6 102.1 105.2 100.6 . 96.9 96.3 101.4 98.7 104.1 106.4 98.6
         May 102.5 106.1 109.1 104.1 p 97.4 98.3 97.9 96.7 96.9 109.0 106.5 97.7
         June 102.7 106.6 109.3 104.5 . 98.7 98.3 96.1 98.9 111.2 104.9 96.3
         July 101.4 105.2 107.8 102.9 . 98.8 97.9 97.8 98.5 109.5 103.9 97.3
         Aug 100.3 103.9 106.6 101.6 p 97.0 98.1 97.1 99.1 98.1 108.4 104.0 98.3
         Sep 99.9 103.6 106.4 101.5 . 97.2 96.5 97.2 98.2 110.5 103.3 101.1
         Oct 101.3 105.1 108.3 103.3 . 97.5 97.2 93.3 98.8 113.1 103.7 103.7
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of April 2000, page 39 ff. —2ECB calculations. In addition to the countries
the currency concerned. —1ECB calculations based on the weighted belonging to the narrow group (see footnote 1), this group also includes the
averages of the effective exchange rates of the euro or, prior to 1999, of the following countries: Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, China, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
exchange rates of the currencies preceding the euro against the currencies Republic, Estonia, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico,of the following countries: Australia, Canada, Denmark, Greece, Hong Kong, Morocco, New Zealand, Philippines, Poland, Romania, Russian Federation,Japan, Norway, Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, United Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand and Turkey. —3The
Kingdom and United States. The weights used in these calculations are method of calculation is consistent with the procedure used by the ECB tobased on manufactured goods trade between 1995 and 1997 and capture compute the effective exchange rates of the euro (see Monthly Bulletin,third-market effects. From January 2001, Greece ceased to be a partner November 2001, page 50 ff.). —4Decline in the values implies an increase in
country in the effective exchange rate of the euro; the weighting scheme competitiveness. —5EMU countries and narrow group of the ECB except
was adjusted accordingly. Due to the change in the weighting scheme, Australia, Hong Kong, Singapore and South Korea. —6Figures up to
effective exchange rate data as from January 2001 are not fully comparable end-1998, computed by linking with the figures published up to Octoberwith earlier data. Where consumer prices were not yet available, estimates 2001. —7EMU countries and broad group of the ECB. —8Annual and
have been used. For details of the methodology see: ECB, Monthly Bulletin, quarterly averages. 
75*X Foreign trade and payments

76*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003

Overview of
publications
by the Deutsche
BundesbankThis overview provides information
about selected recent economic andstatistical publications by the DeutscheBundesbank. Unless otherwise indi-cated, these publications are availablein both English and German, in printedform and on the internet.
The publications are available free of
charge from the Press and Public Rela-tions Division. For a small fee to covercosts, a file which is updated monthlyand contains approximately 40,000time series published by the Bundes-bank can be obtained on magnetictape cassette or ZIP disk from the Divi-sion Statistical data processing, math-ematical methods. Orders should besent, in writing, to one of the ad-dresses listed on the reverse of the titlepage. Selected time series can also bedownloaded from the internet.
Annual Report
Monthly Report
For information on the articles published between
1990 and 2002 see the index attached to the Janu-ary 2003 Monthly Report.
December 2002
– Recent tax revenue trends
– Macroeconomic development of earnings and
costs since the early 1990s
77*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003

– Developments in the external economic rela-
tions of the EU accession countries in centraland eastern Europe
– Reports from the Economic Research Centre
January 2003
– Reserve assets: their development and import-
ance in monetary union
– Role and importance of interest rate derivatives
– The new “Minimum requirements for the
credit business of credit institutions” andBasel II
– Reports from the Economic Research Centre
February 2003
– The economic scene in Germany around the
turn of 2002-03
March 2003
– The Eurosystem’s monetary policy framework –
experience to date and measures to improve its
efficiency
– Macroeconomic aspects of share price devel-
opments
– The development of production potential in
Germany
– German balance of payments in 2002
April 2003
– The development of public finances in Ger-
many following qualification for European
monetary union
– The development of bank deposits in Germany– German enterprises’ profitability and financing
in 2001
– Financial sanctions: legal framework and im-
plementation in Germany
May 2003
– The economic scene in Germany in spring
2003June 2003
– The debate on deflationary risks in Germany– Overall financial flows in 2002
– The development of German enterprises’ inter-
national capital links between end-1998 andend-2001
– German results of euro-area bank lending
survey
– Monetary policy: how relevant are other policy-
makers? Bundesbank Spring Conference 2003
July 2003
– Economic and monetary policy cooperation
between the EU and the acceding countries
following the signature of the accession treaty
– The state of public finance in the EU acceding
countries
– Financial markets in central and east European
countries before accession to the EU
– Reports from the Economic Research Centre
August 2003
– The economic scene in Germany in summer
2003
September 2003
– The performance of German credit institutions
in 2002
– Price indicators for the housing market
– Approaches to the validation of internal rating
systems
October 2003
– Germany’s competitive position and foreign
trade within the euro area
– The economic situation of small and medium-
sized enterprises in Germany
– Development and significance of education
expenditure in Germany
November 2003
– The economic scene in Germany in autumn
2003
– The monetary constitution under the Consti-
tution for Europe
78*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003

Statistical Supplements to the
Monthly Report1
1 Banking statistics (monthly)
2 Capital market statistics (monthly)
3 Balance of payments statistics (monthly)
4 Seasonally adjusted business statistics (monthly)5 Exchange rate statistics (quarterly)
Special Publications
The monetary policy of the Bundesbank,
October 19952
Makro-/C246konometrisches Mehr-L/C228nder-Modell,November 1996
3
Europ/C228ische Organisationen und Gremien im Be-reich von W/C228hrung und Wirtschaft, May 1997
3
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 bis1989, August 1999
3
The market for German Federal securities,
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model: MEMMOD,
June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Die Europ/C228ische Wirtschafts- und W/C228hrungsunion,
December 20023
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im Bereichvon W/C228hrung und Wirtschaft, March 2003
3
Special Statistical Publications
1 Banking statistics guidelines and customer clas-
sification, July 20034,52 Bankenstatistik Kundensystematik Firmenver-
zeichnisse, June 20033,6
3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen,
January 20003
4 Financial accounts for Germany 1991 to 2002,
September 20037
5 Annual accounts of west German enterprises
1971 to 1996, March 19991
6 Ratios from annual accounts of German enter-
prises between 1998 and 2000, March 20031, 7
7 Erl/C228uterungen zu den Leistungspositionen der
Zahlungsbilanz, September 20013
8 Balance of payments statistics of the Fed-
eral Republic of Germany, 2nd edition,February 1991
o
9 Securities deposits,
September 2003
10 International capital links,
June 20031, 7
11 Balance of payments by region,
August 2003
12 Technologische Dienstleistungen in der Zah-
lungsbilanz, May 20023
79*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
1Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data
contained in the German originals are available in English.
2Also available in French, Spanish, Russian and Chinese.
3Available in German only.
4Only the sections “Monthly Balance Sheet Statistics”,
“External position” and “Customer classification”
(“Overall survey on sectoral classification”, “Survey on
breakdown by industry or activity” and “Explanatory
notes on the system of customer classification by industry
or activity”) are available in English.
5Current version only available on the internet at half-
yearly intervals.
6Current version only available on the internet at quar-
terly intervals.
7Available on the internet only.oNot available on the internet.

80*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
November 2003
Discussion papers*
In future the Bundesbank’s series of discussion
papers will be classified under two different
headings. The papers written by the Economic
Research Centre will be published in Series 1,
whereas Series 2 will comprise papers focusing
on subjects in the field of banking and financial
supervision.
Series 1
Economic Research Centre
March 2003 08/03
Die internationale Integration der Devisenm/C228rktein den mittel- und osteurop/C228ischen Beitrittsl/C228n-dern: Spekulative Effizienz, Transaktionskosten
und Wechselkurspr/C228mien
March 2003 09/03
Determinants of German FDI: New Evidence from
Micro-Data
March 2003 10/03
On the Stability of Different Financial Systems
April 2003 11/03
Determinants of German Foreign Direct Invest-
ment in Latin American and Asian Emerging Mar-kets in the 1990s
June 2003 12/03
Active monetary policy, passive fiscal policy andthe value of public debt: some further monetaryarithmetic
June 2003 13/03
Bidder Behavior in Repo Auctions without Mini-
mum Bid Rate: Evidence from the Bundesbank
June 2003 14/03
Did the Bundesbank React to Stock Price Move-
ments?
15/2003
Money in a New-Keynesian model estimated withGerman data16/2003
Exact tests and confidence sets for the tail coeffi-cient of a-stable distributions
17/2003
The Forecasting Performance of German Stock
Option Densities
Series 2
Banking and Financial Supervision
1/2003
Measuring the Discriminative Power of Rating
Systems
2/2003
Credit Risk Factor Modeling and the Basel II IRBApproach
Banking legislation
1 Bundesbank Act and Statute of the European
System of Central Banks and of the EuropeanCentral Bank, June 1998
2 Gesetz /C252ber das Kreditwesen, February 2001
3
2a Grundsatz I /C252ber die Eigenmittel der Institute,
January 20013
2b Grundsatz II /C252ber die Liquidit/C228t der Institute,
August 19993
7 Instruction sheet for the reporting of large ex-
posures and loans of 3 million Deutsche Markor more pursuant to sections 13 to 14 of the
Banking Act, September 1998
*Earlier discussion papers are available on the internet,
in some cases as abstracts.
For footnotes, see p 79*.

