Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
Vol. 55
No. 5

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
Deutsche Bundesbank
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 1460431 Frankfurt am Main
Postfach 10 06 02
60006 Frankfurt am MainFederal Republic of Germany
Tel +49 69 9566-1
or +49 69 9566 . . . plus extension
number
Telex 41227 within Germany
414431 from abroad
Fax +49 69 56010 71
Internet http://www.bundesbank.deReproduction permitted only if source is stated.ISSN 0418-8292The German original of this Monthly Report
went to press on 20 May 2003Annual and weekly publishing schedules for
selected statistics of the Deutsche Bundes-bank can be downloaded from our internetsite. The statistical data are also published onthe internet.
TheMonthly Report is published by the Deut-
sche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main, by vir-tue of section 18 of the Bundesbank Act. It isavailable to interested parties free of charge.
This is a translation of the original German-
language version, which is the sole authorita-tive text.

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
ContentsThe economic scene in Germany
in spring 2003 5
The international and European setting 6
The financial markets in Germany 22Economic conditions in Germany 29Foreign trade and payments 39Public finance 48
Statistical Section 1*
Key economic data for EMU 6*
Overall monetary survey in the EMU 8*Consolidated financial statementof the Eurosystem 16*Banks 20*Minimum reserves 42*Interest rates 43*Capital market 48*Public finance in Germany 52*Economic conditions 60*Foreign trade and payments 67*
Overview of publications by the
Deutsche Bundesbank 77*

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
4

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
5The economic scene
in Germanyin spring 2003

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
6The international
and EuropeansettingDevelopments in the global economy
The major uncertainty in the global economy
and on the international financial markets,which peaked in the first half of March as theIraq war was approaching, has since receded.This is reflected mainly by the fact that thepreviously massively speculation-driven oilprices – in terms of the North Sea Brentblend – fell by one-quarter from their latestpeak of early March to US$25
12as this report
went to press. In addition, share prices, whichfor a long time had been bearish, tended tomove back upwards, largely cancelling outtheir decline in the first few months of thisyear against the background of reports of im-proved earnings, particularly in the UnitedStates. In April-May the hitherto gloomy con-sumer sentiment improved as well. Thismeans that important conditions for a globaleconomic recovery have improved. However,there are still questions regarding the sustain-ability and the strength of economic recovery.Now that the geopolitical uncertainty hasbeen reduced, fundamental factors such asthe macroeconomic imbalances in the USA,the chronic weakness of the Japanese bank-ing system and the protracted structuralproblems in Europe are increasingly comingto the fore. This already long list of potentialnegative factors has recently been joined byfears of a further spread of the SARS diseasewhich has broken out in east Asia.
Real economic recovery in the industrial
countries remained muted in the first quarter,too. The high market volatility, which is afunction of the geopolitical tension, and thecellar-dwelling consumer sentiment were cer-Improved
underlying
conditions
Industrial
output up in
the first quarter

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
7tainly key factors. In the first quarter of 2003,
however, industrial output rose quite sharply,by
12% from the previous period, after having
gone down by just as much in the last quarterof 2002. However, holidays and days takenoff to create long weekends in Decem-ber 2002, particularly in some European in-dustrial countries, had a noticeably adverseeffect on output. In the winter months of2003 industrial output was up by 2
14%o n
the year.
The fact that the price climate was calm on
the whole and that inflation in industrialcountries recently receded under the spell offalling energy prices is also a welcome devel-opment. In April consumer price inflation onthe year, at 1.8%, was 0.3 percentage pointslower than the average of the first quarter of2003 but visibly higher than the average forthe year 2002. This was mainly due to in-creases in indirect taxes in some industrialcountries at the beginning of the year and toslower deflation in Japan. Excluding Japan,the rate of price increase in April was 2.3%.
During the winter of 2002-03, the world
economy fell far short of expectations held asrecently as six months earlier. This was thebackground against which central bank inter-est rates were cut in the USA at the end oflast year and in the UK in February 2003. TheECB cut its interest rates in early Decemberand early March. Fiscal policy in the USA andthe UK, too, continues to be on an expan-sionary path. In the euro area, the automaticstabilisers are still being given space to work.The growth outlook for the year as a whole
was perceptibly tempered by the world’seconomies having got off to a generally weakstart in 2003 and by the extant economicstrains. Thus the IMF, in its latest forecast ofMarch, scaled back its September 2002 fore-cast for global economic growth by one-halfpercentage point to 3.2%, which wouldcause it to exceed its 2002 rate only slightly.The IMF also said that real world trade wouldgrow by 4.3%, a much faster growth ratethan in the two preceding years. This waspredicated on a quick end to the Iraq war andan average oil price of US$31 to the barrel.Nearly all major economic areas were affect-ed by the downward revisions. The IMF statedthat the pace of global expansion would notaccelerate perceptibly until 2004, when itwould reach 4.1%.IMF forecast for 2003 and 2004*
Item 2001 2002 2003 2004
Real gross domestic
product Annual percentage change
Advanced
economies 1 +0 . 9 +1 . 8 +1 . 9 +2 . 9
of which
United States + 0.3 + 2.4 + 2.2 + 3.6Japan + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.8 + 1.0Euro area + 1.4 + 0.8 + 1.1 + 2.3
Consumer prices
2
Advanced
economies 1 +2 . 2 +1 . 5 +1 . 9 +1 . 7
of which
United States + 2.8 + 1.6 + 2.3 + 2.3Japan – 0.7 – 0.9 – 0.7 – 0.6Euro area + 2.6 + 2.3 + 2.0 + 1.5
UnemploymentNumber of unemployed persons as a
percentage of the labour force
Advanced
economies
1 5.9 6.4 6.6 6.5
of which
United States 4.8 5.8 6.2 5.9Japan 5.0 5.4 5.5 5.4Euro area 8.0 8.3 8.8 8.7
*Source: IMF, World Economic Outlook, April 2003. — 1Including
Taiwan, Hong Kong, South Korea and Singapore. — 2Consumer
price index; for the euro area, HICP.
Deutsche BundesbankSubsiding
upward
pressure
on prices
Monetary and
fiscal policy
in major
economic areasIMF forecast for
the world
economy...

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
8According to the IMF, growth in the “ad-
vanced economies”, at an average for 2003of 1.9%, will be only a little higher than ayear earlier. However, this conceals substan-tial differences among the individual indus-trial countries. Among the G-7 nations alone,the spectrum ranges from
12% for Germany,
which is even behind Japan in this group, to2.8% for Canada. As regards the youngAsian industrial countries which are regardedas advanced economies (Korea, Taiwan,Singapore and the Hong Kong Special Ad-ministrative Region), their real GDP is forecastto rise by 4.1% (following growth of 4.6%the previous year).
The IMF expects a slight improvement for
Latin America, with macroeconomic produc-tion going up by 1
12% after having virtually
stagnated the year before. This is based inparticular on the improved outlook for Braziland Mexico. In addition, output may havegone up in Argentina for the first time since1998. The growth rate in the EU accessioncountries is predicted to remain high, at3.4% on the year, even though the figurehad to be revised downwards slightly fromthe autumn forecast. The 2003 forecast forRussia has been revised downwards substan-tially from 4.9% to 4.0%. The increasinglyevident weaknesses in the economy apartfrom the prosperous oil industry are the mainreason for this. The emerging market econ-omies in south and east Asia (includingChina) will, according to the IMF’s forecast,grow by 6.3% and therefore almost asstrongly as a year earlier.The IMF’s forecasts for the young Asian indus-
trial countries and the emerging marketeconomies of east Asia, however, are beingincreasingly called into question on accountof the negative economic effects of the SARSdisease which has been spreading throughoutthe region. The tourism industry has alreadybeen affected noticeably. Hong Kong andSingapore have been hit particularly hard,and to a lesser extent Malaysia, Thailand andIndonesia. What is also noticeable is that theresidents of the affected areas are curbingtheir consumption. In China, where mostcases of the disease have been registered, themacroeconomic effect of the losses sustainedby the tourism industry has been minor. How-ever, in some metropolitan areas consumerhabits have likewise changed. Even if it is stillimpossible at present to gauge the adverseeffect on GDP growth in the region to a reli-able extent, it must be noted that east Asiacan be expected to provide fewer expansion-ary stimuli to the world economy than hadbeen forecast just a few months ago.
1
According to provisional calculations, realGDP in the United States went up by
12%i n
the first quarter after adjustment for seasonaland working-day variations, surpassing its au-tumn 2002 rate by very little. It was up by2% on the year, as against 3% in the secondhalf of 2002. Private final demand, which re-flects underlying cyclical trends better thanGDP , rose by only
14% (after seasonal adjust-
ment) in the winter months. Private con-sumption, by far the most important demand
1According to the World Bank, growth losses in the
affected region could amount to one-third of a percent-
age point in 2003. However, this is a very rough estimate....advanced
economies
and...
...emerging
market
economiesEconomic
consequences
of SARS
USA

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
9component, was up by14%, therefore re-
maining on the flat growth path embarkedupon in the preceding quarter. Once againless was spent on durables (at constantprices), particularly cars. Factors influencinghouseholds’ reduced purchasing in the UnitedStates, which has persisted since autumn2002, probably include uncertainty followingthe intensification of the Iraq conflict and theattendant increase in fears of new terrorist at-tacks. This is reflected by the private savingratio, too: in the first quarter, it practicallyheld firm at the previous quarter’s high level.
Following the quick end to the war, however,
the uncertainty and fears held by US con-sumers appear to be fading into the back-ground. Consumer confidence has recentlyundergone a noticeable revival as of late. Inaddition, real purchasing power has beenboosted by falling oil prices. This has been re-flected by consumer price inflation, whichwent down from 3.0% in March to 2.2% inApril. Households, however, still have consid-erable doubts regarding the stability of thestatus quo. They are based not least on thepersistently unsatisfactory labour market. Thenumber of non-farming jobs has continued tofall in the past few months; jobs were shedparticularly in the manufacturing sector. Theseasonally adjusted unemployment rate rosefrom 5.7% in January to 6.0% in April, re-turning to its December 2002 levels.
Not only inventory investment, which was
only half its level of the previous period, butalso, and in particular, commercial investmentproved to be an impediment to growth.Commercial investment went down in thewinter months – after reviving slightly in the
fourth quarter of 2002 – by a seasonally ad-justed 1%, falling below its summer 2000peak of 12
12%. This is not surprising since
capacity utilisation in industry went downonce again. It is now at low levels lastreached in early 1983. What augurs well forthe current quarter, though, is that orders fordurable goods have perceptibly increased onaverage over the past few months.
Investment in new housing, by contrast,
provided renewed expansionary stimuli forgrowth in the first quarter, going up by justunder 3% after seasonal adjustment and by6
14% on the year. This was caused mainly by
the continued rise in prices for residentialproperty and all-time low mortgage rates.GDP growth in the United States was alsosustained in nominal terms by foreign tradein goods and services. Real net exports wereup by one-quarter of a percentage point ofGDP , with imports falling much more sharplythan exports.
In Japan, real GDP in the last quarter of 2002
– with support from exports – was up by aseasonally adjusted 2
14% from the end of
2001. Because it started off at a low level,however, the average annual increase wasonly
14%. In the first quarter of 2003, season-
ally adjusted macroeconomic output held firmat the previous period’s levels; however, it wasas much as 2
34% higher compared with the
previous year. Commercial investment onceagain provided expansionary stimuli. Startingfrom weak results for the preceding quarter,households’ consumer demand likewise point-ed upwards in the winter months. The under-Japan

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
10lying cyclical trend, however, has remained ra-
ther flat. This is indicated, above all, by the ab-sence of a trend turnaround in labour incomeand the persistently worrisome state of the la-bour market. GDP growth in Japan wasslowed down by the persistent trend declinein housing investment and in government in-vestment. Inventory investment fell as well. Inaddition, real exports went down in the firstquarter of 2003 after seasonal adjustment forthe first time since the end of 2001. Con-sumer price deflation, already on the declineover the past few months, ground to a virtualhalt in March-April – expressed as a year-on-year rate. Excluding energy and food, theyear-on-year rate was down to -0.3%.
In the first quarter of 2003, manufacturing
production in the United Kingdom, accordingto initial calculations, was up by
14% after ad-
justment for seasonal and calendar-day vari-ations, compared with
12% and 1% in the
two preceding quarters respectively. It rose by2
14% on the year as of late. The subsiding
momentum in the services sector, which hasbeen the most important sector supportingthe UK economy in the past few years, wasthe key factor in the slowing of growth. In-dustrial output continued to decline on athree-month average from January to Marchafter seasonal adjustment, yet at a slightlyslower pace than in autumn 2002.
The Retail Price Index of consumer prices ex-
cluding mortgage interest payments (RPIX),on the basis of which the UK government de-fines its inflation target (which the Bank ofEngland then has to meet), rose in the firstquarter of 2003 by 2.9% on the year. Thiswas the highest rate of price increase since
early 1988. This is accounted for by, aboveall, sharp rises in prices for housing, house-hold services and energy. Inflation in Aprilwas 3%, once again missing the inflationtarget of 2.5%. At first glance this inflationtarget seems like a rather generous anti-inflationary requirement considering that theeuro area defines price stability as inflationbelow 2%. In terms of the Harmonised Indexof Consumer Prices (HICP), however, whichthe ECB uses as a reference, inflation in theUK in March, at 1.6%, was not only half apercentage point lower than the euro-areainflation rate but was also within the euroarea’s stability standard.
2
Macroeconomic trends in the euro area
Euro-area GDP , after having been up by just
under12% in each of the previous three quar-
ters, hardly grew any further in the fourthquarter of 2002 after seasonal adjustment(+0.1%). On average for 2002, total outputincreased by 0.8%. The renewed slump inthe euro-area economy as 2002 drew to aclose was caused mainly by the fact that ex-ports, which had given the economy a strongboost in the summer half of the year, werebelow their previous year’s level after adjust-ment for seasonal effects. This braking effectwas tempered somewhat, however, by the
2An important methodological difference is that the
HICP generally uses the geometric mean of aggregating
prices at the most basic level, unlike the RPIX, which is an
arithmetic average of price relatives or of individual retail
prices. In addition, for conceptual reasons the two
methods use different baskets of goods, particularly re-
garding the usage of dwellings.United
Kingdom
GDP growth in
autumn 2002

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
11slight acceleration in the growth of real do-
mestic demand.
The euro-area economy remained listless fol-
lowing the turn of 2002-03. According toEurostat’s “flash estimate”, which has nowbeen published for the first time, first-quartermacroeconomic output stagnated at its au-tumn 2002 level after seasonal adjustmentand was thus 0.8% higher than a year earlier– information on the individual demand com-ponents is not yet available.
3Average indus-
trial output for the January-February periodwas just over
12% higher than that of the
fourth quarter of 2002 after seasonal adjust-ment. However, “production shifts” owing toholidays and days taken off to create longweekends need to be taken into consider-ation. Output was up by 1
12% on the year.
Initial country results, however, appear to in-dicate a decline in output in March after sea-sonal adjustment. This is also indicated by thedecline in capacity utilisation in the manufac-turing sector between January and April tolevels which were almost as low as in the firsthalf of 1997.
The indicator of industrial confidence de-
clined steadily between January and April.1995 = 100, seasonally adjusted; log scale
2003SpainItalyFranceof which
GermanyEuro areaThree-month moving average
MonthlyIndustrial output *
in the euro area
Sources: Eurostat and national statistics. —
*Excluding construction.
Deutsche Bundesbank121
118
115
112
109109
106
103
100121
118
115
112
109121
118
115
112
109
106124
121
118
115
112
109
1998 1999 2000 2001 20023According to statements issued by Eurostat, from now
on the “flash estimate” of euro-area GDP growth is to be
published between six and seven weeks after the end of
the quarter under report. This “flash estimate” is based
on GDP data for those member states for which such
data are already available: in mid-May, when first-quarter
figures were announced, these countries were Germany,
Greece, Italy and the Netherlands. In addition, the calcu-
lations for Spain and France, for which no GDP data for
the previous quarter were available during that period,
were based on other relevant indicators such as the in-
dustrial production index. The first regular GDP estimate
for the first quarter of 2003 has been announced for
5 June 2003.State of the
economy after
the turn of the
year
EU survey

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
12The April decline is due mainly to the fact
that the surveyed companies gave their orderbooks a much gloomier assessment than inthe past. This is consistent with the outcomeof the quarterly survey, according to whichnegative assessments of export expectationsin April outstripped positive assessments forthe first time since early 2002. However, con-sumer confidence recovered quickly since theend of the Iraq war – much like in the UnitedStates. One of the key factors in this improve-ment in sentiment is a more favourable as-sessment of macroeconomic trends over thecoming twelve months.
Unemployment rose distinctly faster in the
first few months of 2003. The exceptionallylong period of frost in the more northerlymember states may have contributed to thisdevelopment. In the first quarter an average
of 12.1 million people were without workafter seasonal adjustment, compared with11.3 million a year earlier. The standardisedunemployment rate was 8.6%, as against8.1% in early 2002. Portugal was hit hardestby the deteriorating labour market situation,followed by the Netherlands. However, Ger-many likewise saw a relatively sharp increasein unemployment. It is worth noting that thefour major euro-area countries of France,Germany, Italy and Spain all have unemploy-ment rates above the euro-area average.
Under the spell of the crisis-related increases
in crude oil prices, consumer prices rose at anaccelerated pace in the winter months of2003. They were up by a seasonally adjustedand annualised rate of no less than 3.2%.Euro-area consumer prices
Annual percentage change
2002 2003
I t e m Q 1Q 2Q 3Q 4Q 1A p r i lFood, drink and tobacco 4.9 2.9 2.3 2.3 2.0 2.4
Energy – 2.1 – 2.3 – 0.7 2.9 7.0 2.2Industrial goods (excluding energy) 1.7 1.6 1.3 1.2 0.7 0.8Services 3.1 3.1 3.3 3.1 2.7 2.9
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
(HICP) 2.5 2.1 2.1 2.3 2.3 2.1
Memo item
Excluding unprocessed food and energy 2.6 2.6 2.5 2.3 2.0 2.2
Deutsche Bundesbank
UnemploymentConsumer
prices

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
13However, because inflation in the second half
of 2002 had been rather muted, the cost ofliving in the first quarter of 2003 was up by“only” 2.3% on the year. A crucial reason forthe stability benchmark being overshot onceagain was the visible rise in energy prices,which were up 7.0% on the year. By contrast,quarter-on-quarter inflation, excluding thevolatile components of energy and unpro-cessed food, has held firm at a seasonally ad-justed 0.5%. This extrapolates to an annualrate of 2.0%. Year-on-year core inflation,too, fell from 2.3% in the fourth quarter of2002 to 2.0%. The differences among na-tional inflation rates are still very great. Thus,consumer prices rose by 5.0% in Ireland and4.0% in Portugal, whereas in Germany thisfigure was only 1.1%. The falling crude oilprices on international markets has led to areduction in euro-area inflation as well. InApril, consumer prices went down slightlyafter seasonal adjustment, and their annualrate of increase went down to 2.1%.
Current account and exchange rates
Since the world economy is still in the dol-
drums, euro-area exporters’ business withnon-euro-area countries gave them little orno stimuli at the turn of 2002-03. For ex-ample, between December 2002 andFebruary 2003 (statistics are availablethroughout this period) exports of goodswere down by 1% from their level of the pre-ceding three-month period after seasonal ad-justment. In the same period imports roseonly slightly, ie by
12%, from the previous
period. On balance, the euro area’s trade sur-plus went back down to 330 billion in the De-
cember-February period after having been ashigh as 333 billion in the September-
November 2002 period taken together.
By contrast, the euro area’s (seasonally adjust-
ed) deficit in “invisible” current transactionswith non-euro-area partners increased con-siderably from the previous period’s levels.The increase in net expenditure on factor in-come and the lower surplus on servicesplayed a major role in this development. Bycontrast, the deficit on current transfers wasreduced slightly, not enough to offset the de-terioration of the other two sub-accounts. Onthe whole, therefore, the euro area’s season-ally adjusted current account closed with asurplus of 311
12billion between December
and February, 3712billion lower than its sur-
plus in the preceding three-month period.
The euro has posted sizeable gains since the
beginning of the year. Events on foreign ex-change markets were initially characterisedabove all by geopolitical tensions. The intensi-fication of the Iraq conflict and the beginningof the war heightened market participants’uncertainty regarding further global econom-ic developments; this was reflected, above all,by the uneven movement of the US dollar.The end of armed conflict, though, hascaused attention on foreign exchange mar-kets to shift back to the fundamentals. Onbalance, this has strengthened the euro’s pos-ition further; in mid-May it reached new all-time highs against various other currencies.
After stabilising at around US$1.08 in
February 2003, the euro continued to rise in
Foreign trade
and current
accountExchange rate
developments
US dollar

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
14the first half of March, hitting a four-year
high of US$1.11. The renewed strengtheningof the euro against the US dollar was trig-gered by the publication of unexpectedly un-favourable US business indicators and nega-tive reports on the US job market situation.Political factors may have also put a strain onthe US dollar. By contrast, the interest ratecut by the European Central Bank in earlyMarch had no detectable impact on furthermovements in the exchange rate. In mid-
March the euro was forced to surrender itsprevious gains against the US dollar tempor-arily once the US ultimatum against the Iraqileadership made it clear that a war againstIraq was just around the corner.
The beginning of the Iraq war eliminated one
of the reasons for the existing uncertainty onforeign exchange markets and the US dollarwas initially able to appreciate distinctlyagainst all major currencies. Subsequently itwas mostly breaking news about the war thatdefined exchange rate movements. Greaterattention was paid to economic factors suchas the large US current account deficit, uncer-tainty surrounding the further developmentof the US budget deficit and negative reportsabout the state of the US economy only oncethe armed conflict had ended. These factors,along with the positive interest differential ofeuro-denominated assets, ultimately causedthe euro’s external value to increase. As thisreport went to press, the euro was trading atjust under US$1.17, and thus 1.2% lowerthan its highest level reached at the begin-ning of monetary union.
After having fallen temporarily, the euro went
back up distinctly against the Japanese yen,too. In the first half of February the euro con-tinued to rise against the yen before subse-quently having to surrender some of its previ-ous gains. The repatriation of funds fromabroad by Japanese financial institutionsshortly before the end of the Japanese fiscalyear is likely to have played a decisive role inthe temporary appreciation of the yen (whichalso took place against the US dollar). The fre-Log scale
US$
££¥
¥
Effective nominal
exchange rate 1
1999Q1 = 100
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003... pound sterling... yenAgainst the ...
... US dollarExchange rate of the euro *
*End-of-month levels; from 2002 daily
data. — 1According to ECB calculations,
against the currencies of 12 countries (be-
fore 2001, 13 countries).
Deutsche Bundesbank105
100
95
90
85
800.650.75
0.600.70
0.570.6590135
95130
100125
105120
115
110
1051.20
1.15
1.10
1.05
1.00
0.95
0.90
0.85
Yen

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
15quent changes in the direction of the euro-
yen rate which subsequently occurred weremarked by new information on the Iraq situ-ation. Once the end of the Iraq war had be-come foreseeable, however, the euro’s drivingforces regained the upper hand against theyen, too. In mid-May the euro repeatedlyovershot its peak levels of February 1999. Asthis report went to press, the euro traded at¥136 and thus 1.6% above its debut level.
The euro rose steadily without interruption
against the pound sterling in February, unlikeagainst the US dollar and the yen; its ex-change rate subsequently fluctuated within arather tight band of between £ 0.68 and£ 0.70. The pound sterling also fell somewhatagainst the US dollar during the period underreview. It encountered strains caused bymounting signs of a weakening of the UKeconomy. As it did against the yen, the europeaked against the pound sterling in mid-May, too, reaching levels as high as £ 0.72.As this report went to press, the euro wastrading just below this peak, at £ 0.71.
As a weighted average against the currencies
of the euro area’s 12 most important tradingpartners, the euro’s exchange rate has, onbalance, continued to rise amid relativelysharp fluctuations. As this report went topress, it was only 1% lower than its levelwhen monetary union was launched. Thequick and forceful recovery of the euro overthe past few months has undoubtedly dam-aged euro-area suppliers’ competitive pos-ition. At the same time, the euro’s appreci-ation – viewed in isolation – led to lower im-port prices. Future economic developments inthe euro area will depend, above all, on
strengthening companies’ competitive pos-ition by providing cost relief.
Monetary policy and financial markets in
the euro area
After the Eurosystem initially left its interest
rates in the first two months of 2003 at thelevel which had prevailed since earlyDecember 2002, the Governing Council ofthe ECB decided on 6 March 2003 to reduceits rates by one-quarter percentage pointeach. Since then, the interest rates on themarginal lending facility and the deposit facil-ity have been 3.50% and 1.50% respectively;since 12 March 2003, all main refinancing op-erations have been conducted as variable ratetenders with a minimum bid rate of 2.50%.By cutting interest rates, the GoverningCouncil was making use of the room formanoeuvre afforded by the further reductionof inflationary risks. The sluggish economicgrowth and the rise in the euro’s exchangerate, in particular, improved the medium-term outlook for price stability. In the spring,money holdings grew even more rapidly,causing the supply of liquidity to continue torise distinctly. However, the fact that creditgrowth in the euro area remained moderateand that the propensity to form long-termbank deposits was muted indicated that thestrong monetary growth was mostly a reflec-tion of investors’ pronounced preference forsafe and liquid assets, which rose even fur-ther in connection with the Iraq crisis and theconcomitant high level of uncertainty onfinancial markets. The ample supply of liquid-
Pound sterling
Effective
exchange rate
of the euroInterest rate cut
in March

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
16ity at present is therefore unlikely to generate
any immediate inflationary risks in the fore-seeable future.
Money market developments were character-
ised in the first quarter of 2003 by persistentrate cut expectations which, particularly atthe longer maturities, led to at times notice-able discounts on forward rates relative toshort-term money market rates. All the same,the overnight interest rate (Eonia) was for themost part held rather close to the minimumbid rate on main refinancing operations, withthe result that major deviations were general-ly restricted to the end of the maintenanceperiod or the end of the month. However, themain refinancing operation prior to the Gov-erning Council meeting on 6 March saw dis-tinct underbidding, with the resultant tightliquidity conditions leading to a perceptiblerise in money market rates. It was only on12 March, when the next regular main refi-nancing operation was settled (along with anadditional main refinancing operation with ashorter maturity in order to ameliorate thetight liquidity situation, a procedure knownas tender-splitting), that the Eonia recognis-ably began to reconverge towards the mar-ginal allotment rate. Even after this interestrate move the yield curve remained invertedsince market participants are apparently ex-pecting a further rate cut in the comingweeks.
In the first quarter of 2003, there was a re-
newed sharp increase in euro-area M3. Sea-sonally adjusted and annualised M3 growthin the period under review was 7
12% follow-
ing just over 7% in the fourth quarter ofReview of the ECB’s monetary
policy strategy
The Governing Council of the ECB con-
ducted a comprehensive review of theECB’s monetary policy strategy and tookthe following decisions at its meeting on8 May 2003.Price stability is still defined as a year-on-year increase in the Harmonised Index ofConsumer Prices (HICP) for the euro area ofbelow 2%. The Governing Council has nowclarified that it will aim to maintain infla-tion rates close to 2% over the mediumterm. This will provide a sufficient safetymargin to guard against the risks of defla-tion, take account of the possible presenceof a measurement bias in the HICP and ad-dress the implications of inflation differen-tials within the euro area.To facilitate the communication process,the “Introductory Statement” made by thePresident of the ECB at the press confer-ence after the Governing Council’s firstmeeting in each month will henceforthfollow a new structure. It will start withthe economic analysis to identify short tomedium-term risks to price stability. Thiswill be followed by the monetary analysisin order to assess medium to long-termtrends in inflation. As in the past, it willtake into account developments in a widerange of monetary indicators including M3,its components and counterparts, notablycredit, and various measures of excess li-quidity. The monetary analysis will mainlyserve as a means of cross-checking, from amedium to long-term perspective, the shortto medium-term risks to price stability as in-dicated by the economic analysis.To underscore the longer-term nature ofthe reference value for monetary growthas a benchmark for the assessment ofmonetary developments, the GoverningCouncil also decided to no longer conducta review of the reference value on an an-nual basis. However, it will continue to as-sess the underlying conditions and assump-tions and, if necessary, adjust the referencevalue.
Deutsche BundesbankMoney market
characterised
by rate cut ex-
pectations
Money stock
M3 up sharply

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
17Money market management and liquidity needs
Main refinancing operations were the sole method
of ongoing money market management in theEurosystem during the spring months. Pronouncedexpectations of interest rate cuts in the run-up tothe most recent cut in the central rates by the Gov-erning Council of the ECB in early March led to dis-tinct underbidding in the main refinancing oper-ation allotted on 4 March, which in turn led to atemporary sharp decrease in credit institutions’ cen-tral bank balances and in their ongoing compliancewith minimum reserve requirements. To offset theliquidity dislocation and to re-establish relativelyeven tender volumes, in the following week theEurosystem conducted a seven-day main refinan-cing operation alongside its regular two-week op-erations. (A similar tender-splitting operation wasalso conducted in early May after the volumes ofthe main refinancing operations in the second halfof April had diverged markedly.) During the periodunder review the Eurosystem, when gauging itsopen-market operations, made sure that the liquid-ity effects resulting from the fluctuations in generalgovernment deposits with the Eurosystem – particu-larly at the end of the reserve maintenance periodsand at the turn of each month – were offset as soonas possible. Moreover, it was necessary to neutralisethe inflows of funds resulting from the distributionon 26 March of the Bundesbank’s profit for the2002 financial year amounting to 55.4 billion. As
usual, credit institutions took recourse to standingfacilities primarily as part of their end-of-period re-serve management operations. It was only at thebeginning of March, following the underbidding,and at the end of the reserve management periodsthat the overnight money rate (Eonia) varied rela-tively sharply from the main refinancing rate.
Between January and April, funds in the amount of
53.7 billion net were withdrawn from credit institu-
tions owing to the autonomous factors determiningliquidity (see adjacent table). This was due to sev-eral factors: the increase in the demand for bank-notes (because of the Easter holidays, amongstother things), the rise in general government de-posits with the Eurosystem and the decline in thenet foreign reserves. By contrast, the main liquidity-boosting factors were the distribution of the Bun-desbank’s profit, which is contained under “Otherfactors”, and the increase in those financial assetsof the Eurosystem which are not connected withmonetary policy. The required level of minimum re-serve fell by 50.9 billion during the period under re-
view. The Eurosystem met the remaining additionalliquidity needs by increasing the volume of its openmarket operations by 53.1 billion to an average of
5224.4 billion.
1For longer-term trends and the contribution of the
Deutsche Bundesbank, see pages 14* and 15* of the Statis-tical Section of the Monthly Report .— 2Including end
of quarter valuation adjustments with no impact on li-quidity. — 3Including monetary policy operations conclud-
ed in stage two and still outstanding in stage three(outright transactions and the issuance of debt securities).
Deutsche BundesbankFactors determining bank liquidity1
5billion; calculated on the basis of
daily averages of the maintenance periods
Item24 Jan
to
23 Feb24 Feb
to
23 Mar24 Mar
to
23 Apr
I Provision (+) or absorption
(–) of central bank
balances by
1 Change in volume of
banknotes in circulation
(increase: –) + 13.2 – 7.1 – 10.7
2 Change in general
government deposits
with the Eurosystem
(increase: –) – 6.5 – 8.9 + 7.0
3 Change in net foreign
reserves2– 4.5 – 3.9 – 15.1
4 Other factors3+ 5.3 + 7.4 + 20.1
Total + 7.5 – 12.5 + 1.3
II Monetary policy opera-
tions of the Eurosystem
1 Open market
operations
(a) Main refinancing
operations – 7.7 + 10.9 – 0.1
(b) Longer-term
refinancing
operations € 0.0 € 0.0 – 0.0
(c) Other operations – – –
2 Standing facilities
(a) Marginal lending
facility – 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.1
(b) Deposit facility
(increase: –) + 0.0 + 0.2 – 0.1
Total – 7.9 + 11.0 – 0.3
III Change in credit institu-
tions’ credit balances (I + II) – 0.5 – 1.5 + 1.0
IV Change in the minimum
reserve requirement
(increase: –) + 0.4 + 1.5 – 1.0

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
182002. At the same time, the three-month
moving average of annual rates of changerose from 6.9% for the period between Octo-ber and December 2002 to 7.7% for theperiod between January and March 2003. Onaccount of the pronounced uncertainty onfinancial markets, investors continued to pre-fer safe and liquid assets held with banks,which are included in M3. M3 picked upsharply in the months of January and Febru-ary, particularly prior to the outbreak of theIraq war, when share prices continued theirdownward slide. In March, when the hope ofa quick end to the fighting temporarily lentmomentum to the equity markets, M3 grewat a more moderate pace than in the preced-ing months.Of the individual components of M3, cur-
rency in circulation and overnight depositsboth went up during the quarter under re-view. The renewed sharp rise in the volumeof banknotes and coins in circulation seemsto be a continued reflection of, above all, thereplenishment of cash hoards within and out-side of the euro area, which had been de-pleted sharply prior to the introduction ofeuro coins and notes. The continued dyna-mism of the growth of overnight depositswas probably fuelled not only by the lowrates of interest on alternative assets withlonger maturities but also by portfolio shifts.This is probably also true of other short-termbank deposits, which likewise grew stronglyduring the period under review. Interest wasfocused, however, exclusively on deposits re-deemable at notice of up to three months,which are currently considered to be an at-tractive form of investment not only in Ger-many. Deposits with an agreed maturity ofmore than two years, by contrast, were re-duced in the first quarter. Negotiable financialinstruments likewise went down during thequarter under review after adjustment forseasonal variations after having risen in thesummer and autumn months, in some casesdistinctly. As of late, it was not only thegrowth of repo transactions which was weak-er than in the same time in previous years.Holdings of money market paper and bankdebt securities were even reduced slightly, ina move atypical of the season, whereasmoney market fund shares/units continued tobe purchased in large volumes.
The relative weakness of demand for credit in
the euro area, which has been visible for
Seasonally adjusted, year-on-year change
%
%
Memo item
German contribution
to M3
Scale reduced
2003Euro area
Three-month moving
average
Reference value: 4½%Growth of the money stock
M3 in the euro area
Deutsche Bundesbank12+
10+
8+
6+
4+
2+
0
2−8
7654
3
1999 2000 2001 2002Components
of the money
stock
Balance sheet
counterparts

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
19some time, stands in a certain contrast to the
strong monetary growth. Credit expansionpicked up slightly in the first quarter of 2003,yet at a seasonally adjusted and annualisedrate of just under 4
12% (following 312%i n
the fourth quarter of 2002), loans to the do-mestic private sector grew much more slowlythan money holdings. Not even the inclusionof bank money advanced to the private sec-tor through the purchase of securities percep-tibly changes this picture. By contrast, MFIs’holdings of securities issued by the public sec-tor in the euro area rose sharply in the firstquarter. As opposed to the overall weaknessof private credit demand, at the same timetotal euro-area MFI lending to domestic gen-eral government rose noticeably in the firstquarter.
During the period under review, monetary
growth was given a major boost above all byinflows of funds from non-euro-area coun-tries to domestic non-banks, a phenomenonwhich is reflected in the euro-area bankingsystem’s consolidated balance sheet by a cor-responding rise in MFIs’ net external assets. Inaddition, the sluggish formation of monetarycapital at euro-area MFIs promoted monetarygrowth. Sales of longer-term bank debt se-curities were relatively sluggish, in particular,and the net depletion of savings depositswith an agreed maturity of over three monthscontinued.
Developments on capital markets were
marked in large part by the Iraq crisis in thewinter months. In this regard the oil priceplayed a prominent role, rising by over US$10to around US$33 per barrel betweenNovember 2002 and mid-March 2003. This
trend strained the further prospects for the al-ready reeling economy and encouraged in-vestors to continue their pullout from equitymarkets and to shift their portfolios to bondmarkets as “safe havens”. This way thedownward trend of long-term interest rateswas initially perpetuated, whereas equitymarket prices continued to slide. In mid-March the yield on ten-year euro-area gov-ernment bonds outstanding hit new lows,falling well below the 4% mark. In the UnitedStates the yields on “Treasuries” with thesame maturity fell to their lowest levels sincethe 1950s.
Only when market participants saw an im-
provement in the likelihood of a quick end toa conflict that had been simmering for a longtime did the trend reverse itself. Initial signswere already recognisable before the out-break of the war following the failure of UNSecurity Council negotiations in mid-March.Market agents apparently interpreted the re-fusal of the British and US draft resolution asa harbinger of an imminent and brief warwhich could soon put an end to the wide-spread uncertainty. They accordingly divestedthemselves of part of their bond positionsand invested the funds in more risky instru-ments, such as equities. Even before the warbroke out, yields on the European bond mar-ket consequently rose by just under one-fifthof a percentage point within days and by asmuch as one-third of a percentage point inthe United States.
After coalition forces made quick initial terri-
torial gains, hopes of a brief war became en-
Capital market
under the spell
of the Iraq crisis

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
20trenched. It also became apparent that fears
of negative impacts on the supply of oil towestern industrial countries were unfounded.This was reflected in a distinct decline in oilprices to “peacetime levels” and in a furtherrise in capital market rates. Improved growthexpectations, expressed by a rise in real inter-est rates, were the main factor behind therise in capital market rates. Thus, the realyield on French indexed bonds, which arepegged to the euro-area HICP , rose fromunder 2% to around 2
14%. The improvement
in growth expectations also caused shareprices to recover. All the same, price uncer-tainty on bond markets, measured as the im-plied volatility of the Bund future, remainedat a high level and only came back downslightly once hostilities actually ended in April.Yet even as this report was going to press inmid-May the implied volatility was still well
above the average of the preceding years. Itis therefore still too early to speak of a sus-tained easing of the situation on the capitalmarkets.
Despite the pronounced price uncertainty on
bond markets, the terms of finance in theeuro area do not stand in the way of an up-swing. After the war the long-term interestrates dropped to around 4%, just over onepercentage point lower than a year earlier. Byhistorical standards, real interest rates remainexceptionally low.
The interest rate premiums on European cor-
porate bonds likewise went down visibly. Thedecline was particularly pronounced in thecase of risk premiums on BBB-rated bonds,which in May were about 1
13percentage
points higher than those on governmentbonds. This figure was still over 2
12percent-
age points in October 2002. However, thisdecline overstates the calming of the marketfor corporate bonds since it is partly due todelays in downgrading by rating agencies.
4In
the fourth quarter of 2002, nearly six times asmany companies were downgraded as up-graded. In the first quarter of this year theratio of downgrades to upgrades even rose to13:1. This also explains how the trend in theyield spreads of corporate bonds sometimesseemed to be completely decoupled fromthose of the equity markets. It was only fromDaily data
%
Basis
points
2002 2003Yield spread
between the US bond market
and the euro-area averageYields on ten-year government
bonds outstanding
Euro-area average 1
USABond market yields
in the euro area
1Weighted average yield on ten-year gov-
ernment bonds issued by all euro-area
countries; weighted by GDP.
Deutsche Bundesbank50+
0
50−
100−5.5
5.04.54.03.5
JF M A M JJAS O N DJF M A M J
4Rating agencies sometimes react to news with a certain
time-lag. In the case of a general increase in risks, this ini-
tially leads to an expansion in risk premiums within a rat-
ing category. Once companies with sub-par creditworthi-
ness have been downgraded, the interest rate premium
then goes back down.Favourable
terms of
finance

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
21mid-March on that the decline in risk pre-
miums on corporate bonds was joined by ris-ing share prices.
Owing to the rise in medium and long-term
interest rates and the persistently low moneymarket rates, the slope of the yield curvegrew clearly steeper in the winter months.Market participants were apparently expect-ing the economy to recover over the longerterm and that interest rates would according-ly go back up. Lately, the yield curve has flat-tened again, however; this probably reflectsfears that the upswing might end up notbeing as pronounced as had been expectedin early April. At the same time, the invertedslope at the short end, which has recentlybeen becoming weaker, indicates that, eventhough interest rates are still expected to becut within the year, this is expected to be fol-lowed by a rise in interest rates.
Lately, enterprises’ earnings prospects have
still been assessed slightly more cautiouslythan at the beginning of the year. At allevents, equity market analysts are assumingslightly lower earnings per share for this fi-nancial year and the next. However, sinceEuropean equity markets have not returnedto their January levels despite the latest rise inshare prices, the price-earnings ratio of Euro-Stoxx shares went down once again betweenJanuary and April. This means that the valu-ation level is currently quite clearly below itslong-term average. This is even more the casefor US shares, however, whose price-earnings
ratio, given share price movements similar tothose in Europe, have fallen well below thebeginning-of-year levels owing to improvedearnings expectations for shares listed in theS&P 500.End-of-month levels
Basis
points
2003Quarterly
Changes in the ratings
of west European
enterprises3Lin scale
Risk premium on
euro-area corporate
bonds 2Log scale
Dow Jones
EuroStoxx index 1European enterprises’ stock
and bond market valuation
1 End of 1991  = 100. Source: Deutsche Börse
AG. — 2 Risk differential between seven to
ten-year European corporate bonds ratedBBB and government bonds with similar
maturities. Source: Merrill Lynch indices. —
3 Balance of downgrades and upgrades.
Source: Moody’s Investor Service.
Deutsche Bundesbank12
9
6
3
0300
250200150100500
450
400
350
300
250
200
150
1999 2000 2001 2002Yield curve
mirrors growth
expectations
Fall in earnings
forecast and
valuation level

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
22The financial markets
in GermanyCapital market and bank interest rates
In line with euro-area interest rates, there has
been a marked decline in the yields on Ger-man Federal bonds since the start of the year.In mid-May the yield on ten-year Federalbonds was, at 3.8%, more than
13percent-
age point down on the start of the year. Theinterest rate discount on Federal bonds overgovernment bonds of other euro-area coun-tries, which was just under
15percentage
point one year before, reached new lows ofless than 10 basis points in the period underreview. The decline in the “interest rate ad-vantage” of Federal bonds is also likely tohave been responsible for the currently lowinterest rate premium of bank bonds with thesame maturity. Besides the strained govern-ment budgetary position, the debate aboutGermany’s future classification by leading rat-ing agencies is also likely to have had a nega-tive impact on the “benchmark” premium ofGerman bonds.
Paralleling developments in the German
capital market, longer-term bank interestrates on lending and deposits also showed afurther decline between January and Marchbefore being raised again somewhat in April.During that period the interest rate chargedon mortgage loans at a rate of interest lockedin for ten years decreased by an average ofjust under
15percentage point to 5.2%. In
April, however, it went back up to 5.3%. Ef-fective interest rates on long-term fixed-ratecorporate loans developed along similar lines.Depending on the amount of the loan, theywere in the order of 5.7% to 5.9% at theend of the period under review. With regardContinued
pressure on the
“benchmark”
premium of
Federal bonds
Decline in bank
interest rates,
especially for
deposits and
longer-term
lending

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
23to longer-term deposits, a marked decline
was recorded primarily in the rates of interestpaid on savings bonds with rates locked in forlong periods. In March these interest rateswere 2.7%, just under
13percentage point
down on January; in April they went up againslightly to around 2.8%. The banks madefurther downward adjustments to their inter-est rates on short-term deposits. After themost recent reduction of the key interest ratein March, fixed-term deposits with one andthree month maturities were remunerated,on average, at just over 2% in April, morethan
14percentage point down on January.
Just as when previous interest rate cuts were
made, the banks endeavoured to use laggedinterest rate reductions on short-term lendingto bring about a temporary improvement intheir interest rate margin and to adjust ratesto take account of the increase in default risk.For instance, after the ECB’s most recentinterest rate move, the terms applying toshort-term current account credit and person-al credit lines for private customers have be-come only slightly more favourable thanthose for short-term fixed-term deposits. Onaverage, the April interest rates on largeramounts of current account lending (8.4%)and on personal credit lines (12.4%) were, re-spectively, 13 basis points and 14 basis pointsdown on the start of the year. The rates onbills discounted, which tend to be relativelywell collateralised, have declined since thestart of the year by an average of between7 and 16 basis points to 6.0% and those onvariable-rate mortgage loans have fallen bythe same amount to 5.6%.Share prices
Between the start of the year and mid-March,
German shares lost just under one-quarter oftheir value when measured on the CDAX, thebroad market index for German equities. Thedecline in German equity prices was thussharper than that of other European shareprices. However, the recovery of Germanshare prices which set in just before the startof the Iraq war was also more marked thanthat in the other euro-area equity markets:since mid-March the CDAX has risen by morethan one-quarter compared with a growth invalue of 20% for the European shares in-cluded in the Dow Jones EuroStoxx index.The development of German share pricessince the start of the year can be partly ex-plained by the impact of the Iraq war on the“
Daily data
%
Basis
points “Interest rate advantage” of Federal bonds
 over other euro-area government bonds
 (enlarged scale)
2002 2003Yield on ...
... ten-year government bonds
    outstanding of the other euro-area
    countries
... ten-year Federal
    bonds outstandingInterest rate advantages”
of Federal bonds
in the euro-area bond market
Deutsche Bundesbank30
20
10
05.5
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
JF M A M JJAS O N DJF M A M JLagged interest
rate reduction
on short-term
lending
German shares
very volatile by
international
standards

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
24German economy, which, at first, market
players evidently expected to be particularlynegative. This is indicated by a study of theeffects of the war on the financial markets asrevealed by the prices of relevant futures con-tracts.
1The study concludes that before the
start of the war, expectations were that theGerman equity market would be quite badlyaffected, while the negative consequencesfor the share markets of other euro-areacountries and the USA would be limited.
Borrowing in the securities markets
In the first quarter of 2003 sales in the
German bond market showed a distinct im-provement over the previous quarter. Domes-tic borrowers issued debt securities to a mar-ket value of 3316 billion, compared with
3250 billion in the final quarter of 2002.
After adjusting for redemptions and changesin issuers’ holdings of their own bonds, netsales amounted to 362 billion, compared
with net redemptions of 313 billion in the
preceding period. The volume outstanding offixed interest securities issued by German bor-rowers was thus 5.8% up on the year. In thefirst quarter 36 billion was raised from sales
of foreign bonds.
Half the funds raised at the start of the year
accrued to the public sector, which increasedits bonded debt by 335 billion. The volume of
public sector bonds outstanding was thus9.6% up on the year. In the first three monthsof the year the Federal Government issued329 billion (net) worth of debt securities.
Most of these were ten-year Federal bonds(315 billion), followed by five-year Federal
notes (Bobls) and 30-year bonds ( 36 billion
each). The Land governments issued 313 bil-
lion worth of new bonds. By contrast, a debtsecurity issued by the Treuhand agency wasredeemed for 37 billion. This borrower no
longer issues debt securities under its ownname but in conjunction with the FederalGovernment.
Market sales of bank bonds picked up in the
first quarter of 2003. Following net redemp-tions of 318 billion in the previous quarter,
German credit institutions raised 313 billion
in the bond market. The still comparativelylow level of recourse to the bond market is aMonthly averages
%
2003Current account credit 1
Lending to
enterprises2
Mortgageloans
3
Yield onbank bonds
4Bank interest rates
in Germany
1 5  500,000 and more, but less than  5  2.5 
million. — 2 Long-term fixed-rate loans to
enterprises and self-employed persons of
 5 100,000 and more, but less than
 5  500,000. — 3 On residential property; ef-
fective interest rate, locked in for tenyears. — 4 With a mean residual maturity
of more than nine and up to ten years.
Deutsche Bundesbank9
8
7
6
5
4
1999 2000 2001 2002
1Andrew Leigh, Justin Wolfers and Eric Zitzewitz (2003):
What Do Financial Markets Think of War in Iraq? , NBER
Working Paper No 9587.Buoyant bond
salesLarge issues of
public sector
bonds
Despite upturn,
weak sales of
bank bonds

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
25result of German banks’ low refinancing
needs connected with the low level of lend-ing activity. However, there was a continu-ation of the trend, which has been under wayfor some years, away from public Pfandbriefe(-318 billion) and mortgage Pfandbriefe
(-32 billion) towards debt securities issued by
specialised credit institutions ( 319 billion) and
other bank bonds ( 313 billion).
Sales of corporate bonds achieved a new
record high of 315 billion between January
and March. Roughly half of these funds wereraised as part of commercial paper pro-grammes. All in all, just under one-quarter ofnew borrowing in the German bond marketwas accounted for by debt securities issuedby non-financial enterprises. Despite veryhigh growth rates – their volume outstandingwas more than two-thirds up on the previousyear – their share in the volume outstandingof all domestic debt securities (2.8%) never-theless remains very small. While paper issuedabroad by German enterprises also needs tobe added, no precise figures on its volumeare available.
Although issuing activity in the German
equity market in the first three months of2003, at 33 billion (market value), was double
that of the previous quarter, it was wellbelow the figures for the bullish period at theend of the 1990s. Most of the volume ofissues was accounted for by unlisted shares(32 billion).
Memo item
Share of domestic fixed interest
securities in totalbonds outstanding
As at end-March 2003
Bonds issued by enterprises,
excluding credit institutions
2.8 %
Bank
bonds
61.6 %Public
sector
bonds35.6 %
1At market prices less redemptions and
changes in issuers’ holdings of their own
bonds; including money market paper. —
2Sales at market prices. — oFrom 1999, in
euro.
Deutsche BundesbankDM bn  5 bn
+  40
+  20
   0
oShares issued by
domestic enterprises2+ 180
+ 160
+ 140
+ 120+ 100
+  80
+  60
+  40
+  20
    0
−  20−  40Bonds issued by ... 1
... public authorities... domestic credit institutions... domestic enterprises,
    excluding credit institutionsNet borrowing in the
German capital markets
20+
10+
090+
80+
70+
60+
50+
40+
30+
20+
10+
0
10−
20−
1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003Buoyant
issuance of
corporate
bonds
Weak
borrowing in
the equity
market

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
26Investment activity in the securities
markets
Foreign investors were the principal pur-
chasers in the German bond market in thefirst quarter of 2003. They expanded theirportfolios of German debt securities by 335
billion. Their demand for private sector bonds(319 billion) and for public sector bonds ( 316
billion) was broadly similar. Domestic creditinstitutions purchased 320 billion worth of
fixed interest securities. Their main interestwas in public sector paper ( 321 billion). By
contrast, purchases of foreign bonds andsales of private sector bonds were, at around33 billion, roughly in balance. Domestic non-
banks, however, showed greater preferencefor private sector issues ( 312 billion). They
also bought 33 billion worth of foreign bondsand notes, while reducing their holdings of
domestic public sector bonds by 32 billion.
In the equity market, only domestic non-banks
increased their holdings of German equities(39 billion). By contrast, they sold 37 billion
worth of foreign equities. The credit institutionsshed both domestic (- 34 billion) and foreign
(-33 billion) paper. Foreign investors reduced
their portfolios of German shares by 32 billion.
Sales of mutual fund shares picked up again
in the first quarter of 2003. Domestic fundssold more shares ( 332 billion) than in the pre-
vious three months, when sales had beenquite strong in any case ( 326 billion). The in-
crease was solely in mutual funds open to thegeneral public, which sold 311 billion worth
of shares. By contrast, somewhat fewer re-sources ( 321 billion) than in the previous
quarter accrued to specialised funds, whichare tailored to the requirements of institution-al investors. Foreign funds ( 32 billion) played
a minor role.
Private investors continued to focus on open-
end real estate funds ( 37 billion), which are
considered particularly safe; their next prefer-ence was for money market funds ( 34 billion).
By contrast, share-based funds, whose inflowof resources tends to be used as a yardstickby which to assess the situation on the stockexchanges, recorded outflows amounting to31 billion. However, it should be noted that
the data on the sale of mutual fund sharescover only the first quarter of the year andtherefore reflect the reversal of sentiment inthe equity market from mid-March to a limit-ed extent only.Investment activity in the German
securities markets
5bn
2002 2003 2002
ItemOct to
DecJan to
MarJan to
Mar
Bonds and notes 1
Residents – 4.7 32.7 47.5
Credit institutions 2 – 19.7 20.0 22.3
of which
Foreign bonds and notes 3 – 7.0 2.7 9.1
Non-banks 4 15.0 12.7 25.1
of which
Domestic bonds and notes 3.4 9.4 14.4
Non-residents 3 – 4.2 35.4 20.7
Shares
Residents 5.7 – 3.9 10.7
Credit institutions 2 0.0 – 6.2 – 8.6
of which
Domestic shares – 1.3 – 3.5 – 5.4
Non-banks 4 5.6 2.2 19.3
of which
Domestic shares – 1.0 8.9 1.1
Non-residents 3 3.7 – 2.5 8.0
Mutual fund shares
Investment in specialised funds 23.2 21.4 5.0
Investment in funds open to thegeneral public 3.2 11.1 13.7of which: Share-based funds 1.4 – 0.8 1.0
1From the start of 2000, including debt securities with
maturities of up to one year issued by non-banks and commer-cial paper. — 2Book values, statistically adjusted. — 3Trans-
action values. — 4Residual.
Deutsche Bundesbank
Bond purchasesShare
purchases
Mutual fund
shares

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
27Deposit and lending business of
monetary financial institutions (MFIs)with domestic customers
With regard to the deposit business of Ger-
man MFIs with resident customers, in the firstquarter of 2003 investment was mainly in theliquid types of deposits, thus showing acontinuation of the trend already observedlast year. In addition to the high level ofuncertainty among investors, the currentlylow opportunity costs of short-term bank de-posits are likely to have encouraged liquidity-holding. Consequently, in seasonally adjustedterms, the predominant expansion from Janu-ary to March was in overnight deposits. In theperiod under review, they were stepped upextremely sharply, at a seasonally adjusted an-nualised year-on-year rate of 21
12%. Individ-
uals, in particular, increased their overnightdeposits in the first quarter far more stronglythan in previous years. Moreover, the usualseasonal decrease in sight deposits held byenterprises was weaker in the period underreview than in previous years; this was due tothe clear increase in holdings of overnight de-posits by financial enterprises.
In seasonally adjusted terms, deposits with an
agreed period of notice of three months alsoshowed a sharp increase between Januaryand March. There were probably furthermarked shifts away from short-term timedeposits (with an agreed maturity of up totwo years), these having undergone a markedreduction in the first quarter of 2003. Giventhe, at present, comparatively minor interestrate advantage of short-term time depositsover savings deposits with a three-monthperiod of notice, individuals, insurance com-
panies and other financial institutionsreduced their short-term time deposits.
In seasonally adjusted terms, longer-term
bank deposits were reduced on balance inthe period under review. In particular, therewas a decrease in holdings of savings depositswith an agreed period of notice of more thanthree months, while there was a moderateexpansion in longer-term time deposits in thequarter under review. It was mainly Germaninsurance companies, traditionally the domin-ant group of investors in this type of deposits,which formed longer-term time deposits inthe first quarter of 2003.
Seasonally adjusted lending by German MFIs
to the domestic private sector fell slightly inLending and deposits of monetary
financial institutions (MFIs)in Germany
*
5billion
2003 2002
ItemJan to
MarJan to
Mar
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight + 3.9 – 17.1
With agreed maturities
up to 2 years – 13.8 – 12.3over 2 years + 3.4 + 7.3
At agreed notice
2
up to 3 months + 8.8 + 1.9over 3 months – 4.7 – 5.7
Lending
To domestic enterprises andresident individuals
Unsecuritised + 2.1 – 6.0Securitised – 1.3 – 12.3
To domestic public authorities
Unsecuritised – 4.4 – 4.4Securitised + 20.5 + 3.5
*As well as banks (including building and loan associ-
ations, but excluding the Bundesbank), monetary finan-cial institutions (MFIs) here also include money marketfunds; see also Table IV.1 in the Statistical Section of theMonthly Report .—1Enterprises, individuals and public
authorities. — 2Savings deposits.
Deutsche BundesbankSharp increase
in overnight
deposits
Heavy invest-
ment in short-
term savings
deposits, too,...... but with
further
reduction in
short-term
time deposits
Overall
decrease in
longer-term
bank deposits
Lending to the
private sector

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
28the first three months of the year. In seasonal-
ly adjusted terms, however, the only reduc-tion was in securitised lending by domesticbanks to German enterprises. By contrast,there was a perceptible increase in loans tothe domestic private sector; growth in thisarea had been very weak for some time andthere was even a reduction in such loanstowards the end of last year. In particular,there was a marked increase in medium tolong-term loans. Unsecuritised short-termlending, however, showed little increase.
According to the borrowers statistics, in the
first quarter of the year additional loansgranted by German banks were, on balance,mainly for housing construction. In particular,the increase in medium to long-term housing
loans was perceptibly stronger than in thetwo preceding quarters. This was possiblydue to the lower interest rates for mortgageloans, which, in average quarterly terms,were up to
12percentage point lower than in
the previous quarter, depending on theinterest-rate lock-in period. While consumerlending likewise increased somewhat morestrongly than in the final quarter of 2002,growth in loans and advances to the domes-tic corporate sector continued to be weak.Ultimately, only the financial institutions andinsurance companies expanded their borrow-ing to any sizeable extent. This contrastedwith a decrease in lending to the othereconomic sectors. In particular, manufactur-ing made further perceptible reductions in itsdebt, but more strongly consumer-orientedsectors such as trade and services also paidoff their debt on balance. In addition to theslow pace of economic growth in Germany,this is likely to be due to greater restraint inlending on the part of the banks.
Lending by domestic MFIs to the German
public sector went up by 316.1 billion in the
first quarter; in the same period of 2002 ithad declined by 30.9 billion. On balance, this
was the outcome solely of investment insecurities issued by the public sector, with do-mestic MFIs increasing their holdings of suchsecurities by 320.5 billion in the first quarter.
By contrast, German banks’ unsecuritisedlending to the domestic public sector was re-duced.Seasonally adjusted
 5 bn
%Lin scale
Year-on-year change
2003Log scale
Loans1Loans to domestic enterprises
and resident individuals
1End-of-month level; adjusted for statis-
tical changes.
Deutsche Bundesbank8
6
4
2
02250
2200
2150
2100
2050
2000
1950
1999 2000 2001 2002
Lending by
borrowerLending to
public
authorities

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
29Economic conditions
in GermanyUnderlying trends
Overall output in the German economy,
which had not been increasing since the endof 2002, showed no signs of a recovery in thefirst few months of this year either. Accordingto a still provisional estimate by the FederalStatistical Office, real gross domestic product(GDP), after seasonal and working-day ad-justment, was 0.2% down on the final quar-ter of 2002. In working-day adjusted terms,this was a 0.2% increase on the year, com-pared with a previous figure of 0.7%. With-out taking account of the different number ofworking days, the figure was 0.5% (as in thefourth quarter of 2002).
The persistent period of stagnation in the
German economy, which has now lastedfor nearly three years, thus continued intothe winter months of 2003. Given such aflat underlying trend, even minor disruptionscan lead to cutbacks in output, without thisnecessarily implying a slide into recession anda slump in production. Nevertheless, thisshould be seen in the context of a further de-cline in overall capacity utilisation and thefact that the labour market has come underincreased pressure.
Looking at overall output by sector, only in-
dustry has been generating quite positivestimuli during the past few months. The waypublic holidays fell in the final quarter of2002 had led to reductions in output, butproduction was stepped up again in the firstfew months of this year. A large part of out-put is likely to have gone abroad; this was,however, accompanied by a high level ofGrowth still
stagnating
Technical
recovery in
industry;
further decline
in construction

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
30import activity. The propensity to invest re-
mained weak. Construction activity at thestart of the year showed a marked decline, infact, not least on account of the prolongedperiod of cold weather. The slight improve-ment in construction investment, which hadbecome apparent at the end of 2002 follow-ing an almost three-year period of contrac-tion, has thus faltered again for the timebeing. The cyclical weakness of the economyhas now also left its mark on the servicessector. According to surveys conducted bythe Centre for European Economic Researchin the first quarter of 2003, major businessservice providers reported a slowdown insales growth as well as a deterioration inprofitability.Households’ consumption in the first few
months of 2003 was influenced by higherspending on energy. Given the long period offrost, there is likely to have been an increaseddemand, not least, for heating oil. Additional-ly, retail purchases, which had fallen to a verylow level in the last few months of 2002,were stepped up again somewhat. By con-trast, there was a marked decline in new pri-vate motor vehicle registrations comparedwith the autumn of last year.
As is revealed by the surveys of households
conducted by the consumer research institu-tion, Gesellschaft für Konsumforschung (GfK),the underlying sentiment of consumers overthe past few months has remained negativebut has picked up somewhat from its low inthe autumn of last year. This was mainly dueto an improvement in the propensity to pur-chase durable consumer goods, which madea noticeable recovery from what was an ex-ceptionally low level by historical standards.However, the majority of those surveyed re-mained very sceptical with regard to expect-ations about incomes and the economy.Along with the adverse labour market out-look, the continuing uncertainty about theFederal government’s economic policy reformplans is also likely to have been a factor inthis.
Industry’s assessment of its business situation
and prospects has also continued to be char-acterised by caution and uncertainty of late.Following a temporary improvement, thebusiness climate, as surveyed by the Ifo insti-tute, has been tending to deteriorate again atthe end of the period under review, probably
Overall economic growth
Percentage change in real GDP
Year on year
PeriodSeason-
ally ad-justedquarteronquarterWorking-
dayadjustedUn-
adjustedfigure
2000 Q4 0.1 1.8 0.9
2001 Q1 0.6 1.9 1.4
Q2 – 0.0 0.7 0.6Q3 – 0.2 0.4 0.4Q4 – 0.3 0.0 – 0.1
2002 Q1 0.3 – 0.2 – 1.2
Q2 0.2 – 0.1 0.4Q3 0.3 0.4 1.0Q4 – 0.0 0.7 0.5
2003 Q1
1 – 0.2 0.2 0.5
1Initial estimate by the Federal Statistical Office.Somewhat
higher
consumption
spending by
households
Depressed
sentiment in
industry

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
31also reflecting exchange rate influences. None
of this points to confidence in a cyclical up-turn emerging in the foreseeable future, al-though there is just as little indication of asharp downturn. There is much to suggestthat the stagnant underlying trend in whichGerman finds itself will continue for the timebeing.
Output and labour market
In the first quarter of 2003, industry more
than made up for the dip in output in thefinal quarter of last year. On an average ofthe first three months, seasonally adjustedoutput was around
34% up on its autumn
2002 level. The last peak in summer 2002was exceeded by
14% and there was a 112%
increase on the year.
The sharpest upturn was in intermediate
goods. In the first three months of 2003, pro-ducers of intermediate goods raised their out-put by around 1
12% on the quarter in sea-
sonally adjusted terms. The year-on-year in-crease was more than 2
12%. Especially in the
chemicals industry, there was a perceptibleexpansion in output at the start of the year.Manufacturers of base metals also increasedtheir production. The capital goods sectoralso registered a slight increase. The fourth-quarter decline in this sector had been quitemarked, however. The recent expansion inoutput thus merely signifies a return to thelevel of summer 2002. Losses in the case ofmotor vehicle manufacturers contrasted withpositive developments in the manufacture ofmachinery and equipment as well as in med-ical and surgical equipment, electrical control
equipment and photographic equipment. Bycontrast, consumer goods showed an entirelyunfavourable development in output, withproduction declining recently following stag-nation for much of 2002. The figure wasmore than 2% down on the year.
After appearing to flatten out somewhat for
a time, the decline in construction sector out-Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
%%
Capacity utilisation 1
0Mean 1993-2002Lin scale
Year-on-year changeLog scale
Output
1995 = 100
MonthlyOutput and utilisation
in industry
1Results of the Ifo business survey.
Deutsche Bundesbank88
85
82
799+
6+
3+
0
3−
6−124
121
118
115
112
109
106
103
100
1996 97 98 99 00 01 2003 02Increase
in industrial
output
Slowdown in
construction

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
32put accelerated again markedly in the first
few months of 2003. In the first three monthsof the year, seasonally adjusted constructionoutput was 4
34% down on the already low
level of the final quarter of 2002. One factorin this was the cold winter weather in Januaryand February. The year-on-year fall, whichhad been around 6% on average in theperiod from October to December, increasedto 14%. General construction and civil engin-eering were both almost equally affected. Inaddition, turnover in the construction finish-ing trades were noticeably down on the com-parable levels of 2002.
Sluggish growth and the subdued economic
outlook have now taken their full toll on thelabour market. Employment has been con-tinuing to fall significantly. In the first quarter,the seasonally adjusted number of persons in
work fell to 38.36 million. Especially in thefirst two months of this year, there was an ac-celerated decline in employment, which waspartly due to the unfavourable weather con-ditions. The average monthly fall in thesecond half of 2002 had been just under40,000, compared with almost 50,000 inJanuary and February 2003. The year-on-yeardecline increased from 360,000 in the fourthquarter of 2002 to 480,000 in the first threemonths of the year. This is equivalent to a fallof 1.3%. In mid-April, there were 240,000persons working reduced hours, ie therewere roughly just as many persons workingshort time as 12 months previously.
Almost exactly mirroring cuts in staffing
levels, there was a sharp rise in unemploy-ment. At the end of April, a seasonally adjust-ed 4.46 million persons were officially regis-tered as unemployed, ie 240,000 more thanat the end of 2002 and 470,000 more than12 months previously. The seasonally adjustedunemployment rate, as calculated by the Fed-eral Labour Office, went up to 10.7%. As de-fined internationally, the figure was 9.4%.
There has been a further reduction in trad-
itional labour market policy measures as partof a reorientation of labour market promo-tion to standards of greater efficiency. Thenumber of participants in vocational training,job creation schemes and structural adjust-ment programmes fell to 400,000 at the endof April. This was 130,000 fewer personsthan one year earlier. The number of personsreceiving assistance from the Federal LabourOffice in addition to the regulated pro-
Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
%Lin scale
Year-on-year changeLog scale
Output
1995 =100
MonthlyOutput in the
construction sector
Deutsche Bundesbank10+
5+
0
5−
10−
15−
20−
25−100
95
90
85
80
75
70
65
1996 97 98 99 00 01 2003 02
Continuing
decline in
employmentMarked
increase in
unemployment
Cutback in
traditional
labour market
assistance

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
33grammes also fell by 30,000 on the year. This
contrasts with an increase in the number ofback-to-work grants and bridging allow-ances. These payments were made in roughly210,000 cases, ie almost 50% more than12 months previously. There were 340,000persons who made use of the fairly long-standing arrangement under which olderunemployed persons are allowed to decideagainst a further job placement (and are thusremoved from the statistics). The opportunityof pre-retirement part-time working pro-moted by the Federal Labour Office wastaken up by 70,000 persons.
Orders
Demand for industrial goods has been declin-
ing for some time. On an average of the firstquarter, the volume of seasonally adjusted in-coming orders was, in fact, more or less ashigh as in the second half of 2002, but thiswas mainly due to backlog effects from theautumn of 2002 coming into operation in thefirst few weeks of this year.
This was especially the case in export busi-
ness. Taking December and January togetherin order to smooth out the special factors, itbecomes apparent that seasonally adjustedforeign demand had been showing a generaltendency to decline from its former fairly highlevel since late summer 2002. It is not onlythe appreciation of the euro which is likely tohave had a retarding effect; the slowdown inthe global economy as well as paralysing un-certainty surrounding the Iraq conflict wereundoubtedly of major significance. Foreignorders in October and November had been
almost one-tenth up on the year, but onlymatched their previous year’s level in Februaryand March.
Domestic demand (in which there were
scarcely any identifiable special factors at theturn of the year) was largely holding up wellinto winter 2003. Nevertheless, it showed amarked seasonally adjusted decline in March.Quarterly
Millions
%Thou-
sands
0
1996 97 98 99 00 01 02 2003Unemployment rate
(seasonally adjusted)
AprApr Year-on-year changeUnemployed
(seasonally adjusted)AprJan /
FebYear-on-year change38.8
38.4
38.0
37.6
37.236.8Jan /
FebEmployed
(seasonally adjusted)Labour market
Deutsche Bundesbank12
1110
9400+
0
400−4.6
4.2
3.8
3.4800+
400+
0
400−
- - 
Falling demand
for industrial
goods
Decline in
export business
sharper...
...than decline
in domestic
demand

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
34An increase on the year of somewhat more
than 1% in January and February was fol-lowed by a fall of just over 2% in the finalmonth of the quarter. There was a slowdownboth in the intermediate and consumergoods sectors. Only capital goods producersrecorded a significant seasonally adjustedquarter-on-quarter and year-on-year rise inorders. One major factor in this was a highlevel of orders for transport equipment,which also had a ripple effect on the subcon-tracting sectors.
Demand for construction work declined dra-
matically in the first few months of the year.In January and February, seasonally adjustedconstruction orders were around 5% downon their level in the fourth quarter of 2002.This was more than one-tenth down on thesame period last year – a figure that was al-
ready very low owing to the fact that neworders had been declining persistently for sev-eral years. The decrease in demand was espe-cially obvious in residential construction. Inpart, this was due to quite a large numberof customers placing their orders during thelast few months of 2002 in anticipation ofthe cutbacks in government assistance forowner-occupied housing initially announcedfor the beginning of 2003. This resulted in a“gap” in ordering at the start of 2003, eventhough the cutback in subsidies was not thenadopted.
The downward trend in industrial construc-
tion orders, which had already been notice-able in 2002, accelerated further during theearly part of the current year. In January andFebruary, they were around one-tenth downon the fourth quarter in seasonally adjustedterms. The year-on-year fall, at not quite15%, was almost twice as large as in autumn2002. Taking the statistics on constructionpermits as a yardstick, the decline was espe-cially marked in the case of factory and work-shop buildings, although projects planned forretail outlets and warehouses as well as foradministrative buildings and office space alsoshrank at a double-digit rate. It was only inthe case of public sector contractors thatthere was no seasonally adjusted fall in Janu-ary and February. An improvement is hardlyto be expected, however, given the unfavour-able budgetary situation, especially of themunicipal governments – the biggest con-struction customers.
Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
%Lin scale  
Year-on-year change
Foreign
DomesticLog scale  
New orders
Volume, 2000 = 100
Total MonthlyDemand in industry
Deutsche Bundesbank20+
15+
10+
5+
0
5−
10−105
100
95
90
85
80
75
1996 97 98 99 00 01 2003 02
Further decline
in demand for
construction
work

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
35Prices
Prices have remained virtually stable recently.
In seasonally adjusted terms, there was evena slight fall in import prices in March and pro-ducer and consumer prices went down slight-ly in April, the year-on-year rates of increaseshowing a distinct decline. The main reasonfor this was the pass-through of marked ad-justments in international oil prices. In theeuro area this effect was reinforced by the ap-preciation of the single currency on the for-eign exchange markets. Prior to the war inIraq, fear of possible disruptions to oil sup-plies had intermittently pushed up prices tomore than US$33 for a barrel of North SeaBrent – a trend that was reversed immediatelyafter the outbreak of the war. Recently, spotprices have been no more than US$26. Forthe first time in some while, the price wastherefore somewhat down on the year. Cal-culated in euro, this represented a fall in priceof just over one-quarter.
With the seasonally adjusted rise in import
prices having already come to a standstillin February, imports became around
34%
cheaper in March. The year-on-year ratewent back down to -0.8%, compared withroughly +
12% in the preceding months.
Much of this price dampening was due tocrude oil and refined petroleum products, butthe fall in prices of other goods has continuedas well. This reflects both the subdued worldeconomy and the appreciation of the euro onthe foreign exchange markets. Capital goods,in particular, have been cheaper to importthan they have been for some time. Muchthe same applies, albeit not quite so notice-
ably, to consumer products.
For the first time in some while, seasonally
adjusted industrial producer prices fell, too, inApril. The year-on-year rate of increase fellback slightly to 1.6%, having been 1.7% inthe first quarter. Excluding energy, industrialproducer prices showed no change from thestart of the year and, at the end of the periodunder review, the year-on-year rate of in-crease remained at 0.7%. At 0.5%, the year-on-year rate of increase in the case of capitalgoods was far lower. This was due to signifi-cant reductions in the prices of office machin-ery, computers and communications equip-ment. Consumer goods cost 0.3% more inApril than 12 months previously. The rate ofSeasonally adjusted, quarterly
%Lin scale
Year-on-year change
Jan/
FebLog scale
Construction orders
Volume, 2000 = 100
MonthlyDemand for
construction work
Deutsche Bundesbank10+
0
10−
20−140
130
120
110
100
90
80
1996 97 98 99 00 01 2003 02Stable prices
Fall in import
pricesSlight rise
in industrial
prices

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
36price increase in the category of intermediate
goods was 1.0%.
The year-on-year rate of consumer price infla-
tion fell from 1.2% in the first quarter to1.0% in April. In seasonally adjusted terms,there was a slight month-on-month decline.This was due, in particular, to sharp reduc-tions in the prices of heating oil and petrol.Taken together, they were around 6
12%
cheaper than in March, thus falling to theirlowest level since the beginning of the year.Excluding energy, seasonally adjusted con-sumer prices rose again somewhat, with theyear-on-year figure going up from +0.6% to+0.9%. This was mainly due to the fact thatsome services, such as package holidays andaccommodation, were significantly more ex-pensive than in the same period of 2002owing to the late Easter holiday. Additionally,
the steady slight increase in housing rents hascontinued. At the end of the period under re-view, rents were 1.3% up on their corres-ponding 2002 level. By contrast, industrialgoods became slightly cheaper on average inseasonally adjusted terms, and were thushardly more expensive than 12 months earl-ier. Not only were computers and electronichome entertainment equipment cheaper;lower prices were also reported for clothingand shoes. These reductions more than offsetthe slight increase in the prices of furnitureand lighting equipment, motor vehicles aswell as books, magazines and newspapers.Although food did become slightly more ex-pensive in April, the increase was smallerthan is usual at the time of year. This meantthat, in seasonally adjusted terms, an increasein March was followed by a fall and thatprices were moving back towards their early-year level.
The actual construction costs for newly built
dwellings remained largely constant. In thefirst quarter of 2003, the construction costindex for residential buildings was scarcelyhigher than one year previously. A steadyslight increase in the cost of finishing workcontrasted with falling prices for shell con-struction work. Price movements in the caseof other construction measures also remainedwithin narrow bounds. The year-on-year rateof increase for office buildings was no morethan 0.3% and, for commercial buildings, nomore than 0.4%. In road construction, therewere price reductions of 0.5%. The overalllevel of construction prices has been more orless stable for over two years.
1995 = 100, seasonally adjusted
Enlarged scale
Import prices
1996 97 98 99 00 01 02 2003Log scale
Prices of
raw materials 1Prices of raw materials
and imports
1HWWA Index of World Market Prices of
Raw Materials, on a euro basis (up to and
including 1998 on a DM basis); not season-
ally adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank120
115
110
105
100
95200
180
160
140
120
100
80
Consumer
prices on
a stable
underlying
trendStable
construction
prices

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
37While data on residential building construc-
tion prices are published regularly in the offi-cial statistics, up to now there has been muchless information on house prices as a whole,ie including the land component. There wasalso a lack of data on the values of usedapartments and houses. To close this gap, theBundesbank has calculated price indices forsuch properties on the basis of data from theBulwien AG. Further details on this may befound in the explanatory notes on page 38.Year-on-year change, quarterly
%
%
Housing rentsServices excluding
housing rentsIndustrial goods
excluding energy sourcesEnergy sourcesFoodTotal
AprConsumer prices
Deutsche Bundesbank4+
2+
04+
2+
02+
0
2−16+
14+
12+
10+
8+
6+
4+
2+
0
2−
4−
6−6+
4+
2+
0
2−4+
2+
0
1996 97 98 99 00 01 2003 02New price index
for housing
prices

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
38Deutsche BundesbankNew price indices for housing in 
Germany
In recent years, house prices, just like stock prices, 
have been attracting greater attention from eco-nomic analysts. In some countries, especially the United States and the United Kingdom, the avail-able data show that house prices rise much more 
rapidly than consumer prices. For Germany, how-
ever, the indicators published so far by the BIS and other institutions point to a slump in house prices. Price ﬂ  uctuations may trigger macroeconomic 
effects that are relevant to monetary policy.
1 This 
raises questions as to the reliability and interna-tional comparability of house price indices.
Apart from complex problems of a conceptual and 
practical nature, price analysis on the housing mar-
kets is made more difﬁ  cult by the scarce availability 
of ofﬁ  cial statistical data. The Bundesbank bases the 
calculation of its new price indicators on information provided by Bulwien AG, which inter alia  collects 
price data on apartments and terraced houses for 
both ﬁ  rst-time occupation and resale in 60 German 
towns and cities. This information is condensed into indices by means of year-2000 population percent-ages. Although the new ﬁ  ndings generally indicate 
a stagnation or slight fall in prices in the second half 
of the 1990s, they by no means point to a price col-lapse. The overall series do conceal quite divergent developments from one region to another, however. A more detailed report on this as part of a separate study is scheduled for the second half of 2003.
1 See European Central Bank, Structural Factors in the 
EU Housing Markets, Frankfurt am Main 2003, on the monetary policy signiﬁ  cance of the housing markets.2000 = 100, log scale
Prices for apartmentsPrices for terraced houses
ResaleFirst-time occupation
106
104
102
100
98
96104
102
100
98
96
19951996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
39Foreign trade and
paymentsForeign trade and current account
Even if the end of the conflict in Iraq and the
recent decline in – speculatively excessive – oilprices meant that the severity of unfavour-able influences was reduced, the externalenvironment was still marked by uncertaintyabout the underlying global economic condi-tions in the first quarter of 2003. In particular,the economies of many major trading part-ners had still not fully regained their momen-tum. Consequently, the export expectationsof German enterprises for the following fewmonths deteriorated. Part of the reason forthis was presumably the lingering impact ofthe geopolitical tensions. Even so, Germanexporters are still expecting an increase in ex-ports this year. So far, however, these expect-ations have not been fully reflected in exportvolumes. All in all, German exports in the firstquarter of 2003 only slightly exceeded thosein the previous quarter after seasonal adjust-ment.
In view of the latest appreciation of the euro,
concern has grown that the German econ-omy might be further slowed down fromoutside. For example, the euro has recentlyappreciated by about 16
12% against the
US dollar compared with its average value inthe fourth quarter of 2002 and was tradingat just under US$1.17 when this report wentto press. This means that the bilateral ex-change rate exceeded its low of October2000 by 41%.
Depending on the extent to which additional
costs can be passed on and the hedging in-struments used, exchange rate movementsExternal
environment
Euro
appreciation
and ...

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
40have an impact on export sales prices and ex-
porters’ profit margins as well as on the levelof demand.
1The US dollar has a direct impact
on the exchange of goods between Germanyand the United States; about 10% of Germanexports go to the United States. In other mar-kets, however, German enterprises are also inindirect competition with US suppliers, withthe result that in a broader sense – includingthe third-market effects – the weight of the
US currency is greater at 13
12%.
An “import-oriented” examination of ex-
change rate effects is likewise important,especially in view of the exchange-rate-related reduction in the prices of imports.Such an examination shows that the US dollarhas a much greater impact on the import sidethan on the export side although importsfrom the United States account for only 8%of total German imports. One important rea-son for the greater weight of the US dollar isthat an estimated 21% of imported goodsare directly invoiced in US dollars whereasonly 18% of exported goods are invoiced inthat currency.
2Another reason is that, no
matter which currency is used for invoicing,some suppliers outside the United States alsohave to be ascribed to the dollar area.
Account has also to be taken of exchange
rate fluctuations against major currenciesother than the US dollar although these havebeen more moderate in recent months. Final-ly, it has also to be remembered that tradewith the other euro-area countries is extreme-ly important for German enterprises. The indi- 5 bn
%Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
2003monthlyLin scale
Export expectations2Orders received
from abroad
values, 2000 = 100monthlymonthly 1
Log scale
ExportsExport trend
1Monthly values adjusted to match quar-
terly level. — 2Results of the Ifo business
survey; balances of positive and negative
company reports.
Deutsche Bundesbank20+
15+
10+
5+
0
5−110
105
100
95
90
85
80
75180
170
160
150
140
130
120
1999 2000 2001 2002
1Hedging foreign currency claims (for example, through fu-
tures contracts or option deals) cushions the direct effects of
exchange rate fluctuations on exporters’ earnings for a time
but gives rise to hedging costs. Over the longer term, how-
ever, the effects of exchange rate movements always work
their way through either because hedging is possible only on
the basis of the new exchange rate level or because hedging
costs are rising sharply. Surveys show that in autumn/winter
2002/2003 an estimated four-fifths of all foreign currency
claims arising from export business were hedged.
2It is estimated that more than 70% of German exports
and imports are invoiced in euro. However, the effect of
the invoicing currency on the volume of foreign trade has
to be qualified in that the exchange rate risk must be
borne by the contracting parties regardless of the invoi-
cing currency chosen.... price com-
petitiveness

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
41cator of Germany’s price competitiveness pro-
vides a comprehensive picture of all the fac-tors mentioned.
3In terms of this indicator the
price competitiveness of German suppliershas declined by 4
12% on a trade-weighted
average since the fourth quarter of 2002; thedecline has therefore been much smaller thanthe appreciation of the euro against the USdollar. This buffer provided by the currencyappreciation is essentially due to the fact thatabout 43% of German exports are destinedfor the euro area and are therefore independ-ent of nominal exchange rate movements.Consequently, Germany’s current price com-petitiveness is fairly close to its long-termaverage and also more or less the same as atthe beginning of 1999. To that extent, it canbe regarded as almost “neutral”.
This means that, generally speaking, the stim-
uli which resulted from the euro’s previousweakness and which have fostered exports inrecent years have now subsided. However,they are disappearing at a time when theexport markets are showing only moderategrowth. Weak economic growth in the euroarea and, with respect to the breakdown ofgoods, the sluggish growth in world demandfor capital goods are having a retarding effecthere. As a rule, however, it is precisely marketgrowth which determines trends in Germanexports. While the appreciation of the euroalso reduces cost pressures by lowering im-port prices, enterprises benefit from this reliefto varying degrees depending on the eco-nomic sector to which they belong. If seen asa whole, the business of German enterprisesexposed to foreign competition has undoubt-edly become more difficult both on the ex-change rate front and in terms of market con-
ditions.
At the beginning of 2003 – a regional statis-
tical breakdown is available only up to theend of February – increased demand for
- - Log scale
US$
- 85
90
95
100
105Q1 1999 = 100, quarterly
Indicator of Germany’s
price competitiveness 1Monthly
Exchange rate of the euro
against the US dollar
Quarterly average+16.5%Euro exchange rate and
price competitiveness
1 Against 19 industrial countries based on
the price index of total sales; scale inverted:
rise in curve (fall in values) denotes increase
in competitiveness. —     = Latest position:
19 May 2003.
Deutsche Bundesbank1.20
1.15
1.10
1.05
1.00
0.95
0.90
0.85
− 4.6%
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003
3Over the longer term, competitiveness is influenced by
differences in production costs at home and abroad – in
addition to the effects of exchange rate movements al-
ready being felt in the short term. The indicator of price
competitiveness takes both factors into consideration.Exporting has
become more
difficult
Breakdown of
exports

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
42German exports came solely from markets
outside the euro area.4On an average of the
first two months of 2003 compared with anaverage of the fourth quarter of 2002 Ger-man exporters recorded increased turnover inseasonally adjusted terms, especially in thecentral and east European transitional coun-tries (+5%) and in the United States (+3%).Trade with customers in the emerging mar-kets of South-East Asia also grew vigorously(+5%). Exports of goods to the OPEC coun-tries, which had benefited from the furtherrise in oil prices at the beginning of the year,also grew strongly (+9%). German exportersalso increased their sales (by 3%) to the EUcountries outside the euro area. By contrast,exports to euro-area countries declined (by4%) not least as a result of the persistent cyc-lical weakness in the euro area. A slight in-crease in exports to these countries had beenrecorded in the previous quarter.
As major trading partners were slow to over-
come their reluctance to invest, exports ofcapital goods, German exporters’ most im-portant product range, increased only moder-ately at the beginning of the year (+1
12%).
Exports of machinery, for example, grew onlymarginally (+1%). Furthermore, exports ofmotor vehicles, which had boosted overallexport growth last year, failed to maintain thelevel reached in the fourth quarter of 2002(-1%). By contrast, a 3% increase in exportdemand for the products of the informationand communication sector was a positive fac-Regional trend in foreign trade
Country/group of countriesPercentage
shares in2002Average of
Jan-Feb2003 com-pared withaverage ofOct-Dec2002,seasonallyadjusted,as a per-centage
Exports
All countries 100.0 + 0.9
of which
Euro-area countries 42.6 – 4.1
Other EU countries 12.1 + 2.8United States 10.3 + 3.1Japan 1.9 – 5.3Central and east
European countriesin transition 11.6 + 4.8
OPEC countries 2.2 + 8.8Emerging markets in
South-East Asia 3.9 + 4.9
Imports
All countries 100.0 + 1.0
of which
Euro-area countries 41.6 – 3.6
Other EU countries 9.9 + 2.6United States 7.7 + 3.3Japan 3.6 + 0.9Central and east
European countriesin transition 13.5 + 4.0
OPEC countries 1.3 + 9.1Emerging markets in
South-East Asia 5.1 + 2.6
Deutsche Bundesbank
4This may also be the result of catching-up effects in
January as export deliveries in December were fairly low
owing to the specific pattern of public holidays in that
month. In the two-month period of January and February
this has a relatively large impact.

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
43tor. Exports of consumer goods, which, des-
pite the downturn in consumer confidence inmajor trading countries, also grew markedly– with an increase of 2
12% in the first quarter
of 2003 – following a strong performance inthe fourth quarter of 2002.
Owing to the sluggish growth in demand in
Germany at the turn of 2002-03, imports inthe first quarter of the year also showed onlya moderate increase over the previous quar-ter, rising by a seasonally adjusted 1
12%. This
means that, in terms of value, imports ofgoods rose more strongly than exports. Pri-marily as a result of the increase in the pricesof oil imports, import prices went up by justunder 1% at the same time. Consequently,imports also slightly exceeded their level inthe fourth quarter in real terms.
The low demand from German importers
mainly affected imports of goods from othereuro-area countries, which on an average ofJanuary and February declined by a seasonallyadjusted 3
12% compared with the average of
the fourth quarter of 2002. By contrast, im-ports from non-euro-area countries, whichaccount for just over 58% of total Germanimports, increased substantially. The main in-crease in demand was for goods from centraland east European countries (+4%) and fromthe United States (+3
12%). US goods had be-
come discernibly cheaper owing to the appre-ciation of the euro against the US dollarsince last year. However, the increased ordersplaced by German importers also benefitedthe emerging markets in South-East Asia andthe EU countries outside the euro area(+2
12% in each case). Imports from the OPECcountries experienced the highest rate of
growth (9%).5One reason for this increase
was the significant increase in the price ofpetroleum during the period under review.Another reason was volume since theamount of oil imported was probably influ-enced by the low temperatures at that timeof the year and by the increase in stocksowing to the geopolitical tensions. In responseto these effects, energy imports rose sharply(by 24%).
6Foreign manufacturers of capital
goods also increased their exports to Ger-many (+2
12%). The greatest increase in de-
mand was again for machinery (+3%) where-as imports of motor vehicles fell once more(-1
12%). There was a slight rise in foreign de-
liveries of semi-finished goods (+2%) but im-ports of products from the information andcommunication sector did not quite matchthe level in the final quarter of 2002 (-
12%).
Imports of consumer goods grew even moresluggishly. After increasing significantly in thefourth quarter of 2002, these imports werealmost 4% below the level in the previousquarter. This is a reflection of the sluggish de-mand from German households.
In the first quarter of 2003 the seasonally
adjusted trade surplus saw a slight decline of31
12billion, falling to 32912billion. At the
same time, the deficit on invisible currenttransactions with non-residents increased sig-nificantly. The main reason for this was the re-versal in the balance on factor income, which
5Even so, imports from the OPEC countries accounted
for only 112% of total German imports last year.
6It must be remembered here that the ratio of energy
imports to total imports was about six times higher than
the corresponding ratio of goods imported from the
OPEC countries.Imports of
goods
Breakdown of
imports
Current
account

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
44in the first three months of the year ran a sea-
sonally adjusted deficit of just under 3112bil-
lion compared with a surplus of nearly thesame level in the previous quarter; however,short-term fluctuations are quite usual, espe-cially in this current account item. Further-more, the net payments made to non-residents in the field of current transfers in-creased slightly to 37 billion. By contrast, the
deficit on services showed a small decline (to38
12billion). As a result, the surplus on cur-
rent account in the first quarter fell (seasonal-ly adjusted) to 311 billion compared with a
surplus of just over 315 billion in the final
quarter of the previous year.
Financial transactions
At the beginning of the year the international
financial markets were feeling the full effectsof the Iraq crisis and the gloomy outlook forthe global economy. The existing uncertaintyon the markets was reflected in further fallsin the yields of bonds issued by first-class bor-rowers while, conversely, the share indexes inthe major financial centres again declined.With the outbreak of war and the rapid mili-tary success of the Allies, however, a certaincountermovement set in at the end of thefirst quarter although this remained withinfairly narrow bounds as market players be-came more aware again of the fundamentaleconomic environment. At the same time,the euro, which had been gaining groundagainst most currencies since the beginningof the year and was trading very firmly as thisreport went to press, underwent a further up-ward surge. The underlying mood, which wasMajor items of the balance
of payments
5billion
2002 2003
I t e m Q 1Q 4Q 1
I Current account
1 Foreign trade 1
Exports (fob) 156.0 168.2 162.9
Imports (cif) 124.2 136.8 133.6
Balance + 31.8 + 31.4 + 29.4
2 Services (balance) – 11.3 – 5.7 – 8.73 Factor income (balance) – 4.0 + 2.4 – 4.44 Current transfers (balance) – 5.1 – 7.4 – 5.4
Balance on current account
2 + 10.3 + 18.8 + 9.6
Memo item
Balances, seasonally adjusted
1 Foreign trade + 32.2 + 31.1 + 29.42 Services – 11.4 – 8.8 – 8.53 Factor income – 1.1 + 1.5 – 1.34 Current transfers – 6.5 – 6.7 – 6.9
Current account
2 + 11.7 + 15.2 + 11.0
II Balance of capital transfers 3 + 0.2 – 0.4 – 0.0
III Balance of financial account 4 + 2.6 – 45.4 – 14.7
IV Change in the foreign reserves
at transaction values(increase: –)
5 – 1.4 + 0.9 – 1.5
V Balance of unclassifiable
transactions – 11.7 + 26.0 + 6.6
1Special trade according to the official foreign trade statistics
(source: Federal Statistical Office). — 2Includes supplementary
trade items. — 3Including the acquisition/disposal of non-
produced non-financial assets. — 4For details see the table
“Financial transactions” on page 45. — 5Excluding allocation of
SDRs and changes due to value adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankTrends in
financial
transactions

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
45marked by geopolitical and economic uncer-
tainty, is also partly reflected in Germany’sstatistically recorded financial transactionswith non-residents. Overall, there were sub-stantial net capital inflows through portfoliotransactions during the first three months ofthis year whereas net capital outflows in theother segments of the financial account tend-ed to dominate.
The international influences outlined above
are usually most apparent in the portfoliotransactions with non-residents; these result-ed in net capital imports of 337
12billion be-
tween January and March 2003. That repre-sented a clear reversal from the previousthree-month period when net capital out-flows of 312
12billion were recorded. A re-
organisation of portfolios was observed onthe part of both resident and non-resident in-vestors. All in all, non-resident investors ac-quired securitised assets in Germany worth332 billion; in the previous quarter there had
been net sales of German paper ( 33 billion).
In the light of the raw economic climate, thehigh degree of uncertainty on the financialmarkets and the unfavourable profitability es-timates for many German enterprises in theperiod under review, non-residents were li-quidating part of their German share holdings(32
12billion) and sold, in addition, shares in
German investment funds ( 31 billion). The re-
luctance of non-resident investors to buy Ger-man shares has been evident for some timenow and is a reflection of the unfavourableeconomic outlook in Germany. Over the ninemonths from July 2002 to March 2003 for-eigners’ purchases and sales of Germanshares more or less cancelled each other outFinancial transactions
5billion, net capital exports: –
2002 2003
I t e m Q 1Q 4Q 1
1 Direct investment + 11.3 + 1.3 – 7.8
German investment
abroad – 2.6 – 5.6 – 15.2Foreign investmentin Germany + 13.9 + 6.8 + 7.4
2 Portfolio investment – 5.6 – 12.3 + 37.5
German investment
abroad – 32.4 – 9.4 + 5.5
Shares – 7.4 – 5.4 + 14.7
Investment fundcertificates – 5.1 + 0.6 – 3.1Bonds and notes – 15.3 – 7.2 – 9.7Money market paper – 4.5 + 2.6 + 3.6
Foreign investment
in Germany + 26.8 – 2.9 + 32.0
Shares + 5.1 + 2.5 – 2.6
Investment fundcertificates + 1.1 – 1.3 – 0.9Bonds and notes + 30.0 – 0.6 + 22.5Money market paper – 9.3 – 3.6 + 12.9
3 Financial derivatives
1 +1 . 8 +0 . 3 +3 . 0
4 Credit transactions – 4.5 – 34.3 – 46.8
Credit institutions + 13.6 – 49.8 – 33.0
Long-term – 5.4 – 6.3 – 14.6
Short-term + 19.0 – 43.6 – 18.4
Enterprises and
individuals – 0.7 + 15.7 – 19.8
Long-term + 2.0 + 1.1 – 6.6
Short-term – 2.7 + 14.6 – 13.2
General government – 0.2 – 0.4 + 1.1
Long-term – 0.2 – 0.1 + 3.6
Short-term – 0.0 – 0.2 – 2.5
Bundesbank – 17.1 + 0.2 + 4.9
5 Other investment – 0.4 – 0.3 – 0.56 Balance of all
statistically recordedcapital flows + 2.6 – 45.4 – 14.7
Memo item
Change in the foreignreserves at transactionvalues (increase: –)
2 – 1.4 + 0.9 – 1.5
1Securitised and non-securitised options and financial
futures contracts. — 2Excluding allocation of SDRs and
changes due to value adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankPortfolio
investment
Foreign
investment
in German
securities

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
46whereas on a longer-term average – for ex-
ample, since the beginning of monetaryunion – foreign funds amounting to about 36
billion per quarter had flowed into Germany’sshare markets.
By contrast, foreign investors considered
interest-bearing paper very attractive duringthe first quarter of this year and added 335
12
billion worth of it to their portfolios (- 34 bil-
lion in the quarter earlier). Greatest demandwas for German bonds ( 322
12billion), espe-
cially government issues, which in times ofglobal uncertainty are regarded as a safehaven. Foreign investors also spent 313 billion
on German money market paper, ie debt cer-tificates with maturities of one year or less,which, in the light of the fairly large pricerisks at present, they possibly use to parkfunds in the short term. By contrast, demand
for longer-dated German bank bonds wassomewhat more subdued, a developmentwhich probably had something to do with areduction in the maturity range of foreignportfolios and a fairly tight supply on the pri-mary market.
Whereas non-residents evidently increased
their investment on the German marketagain, German investors withdrew capitalfrom the foreign securities markets in view ofthe difficult market environment. They re-duced their holdings of foreign securities by35
12billion after investing 3912billion net
abroad in the previous quarter. This reversalconceals a significant reorganisation of port-folios as German investors responded to thechanged underlying economic and politicalconditions. For example, they sold foreignequities worth as much as 314
12billion,
possibly as a result of the weakness of theinternational share markets. However, theyinvested only part of the resultant liquidity inother foreign paper, namely money marketfund certificates ( 33
12billion) – a financial
product with ready availability and a highlevel of security – and, once again, euro-denominated bonds issued by non-residentborrowers ( 38
12billion). This paper has regu-
larly enjoyed great popularity since the startof monetary union even if its interest advan-tage over German government bonds has lev-elled off considerably in recent months.
In contrast to portfolio investment, direct in-
vestment resulted in net exports of capital be-tween January and March 2003 ( 38 billion
compared with net capital imports of 31
12bil-Capital exports: +
 5 bn
 5 bn of which
Foreign shares
Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1TotalGerman portfolio investment
abroad
Deutsche Bundesbank10+
0
10−
20−40+
30+
20+
10+
0
10−
2001 2002 2003German
investment
in foreign
securities
Direct
investment

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
47lion in the final quarter of 2002). The main
reason for the reversal was the action ofresident enterprises, which again increasedtheir investment abroad ( 315 billion). Credits
which German proprietors granted to theirforeign subsidiaries accounted for a large partof this sum. The main targets of German dir-ect investment were other EU countries aswell as the United States.
Financial flows in the opposite direction, ie
direct investment in Germany, continued toreflect the declining global interest in cross-border corporate mergers and acquisitions.Although a total of 37
12billion in foreign fi-
nancing funds was paid to subsidiaries andbranches domiciled in Germany betweenJanuary and March 2003, capital injectionsfrom foreign parent companies to their Ger-man subsidiaries for the purposes of repayinglong-term bank loans accounted for the lion’sshare of this.
As in the case of direct investment, non-
securitised credit transactions resulted in theexport of funds between January and March(347 billion net). 320 billion net was due to
the operations of enterprises and individuals.This was due mainly to the usual seasonalrestocking of the balances held at foreignbanks, following the reduction in these bal-ances at the end of the previous year for bal-ance sheet purposes, and to the aforemen-tioned repayments of long-term credits takenup by German enterprises. By contrast, gen-eral government transactions resulted in im-ports of almost 31 billion in the period under
review. Larger capital imports ( 33
12billion)
were recorded at the long end of the mar-ket – primarily through the sale to non-residents of borrower’s notes issued by theLand governments.
Besides the net amounts of capital exported
by the non-banking sector, it was mainlythe non-securitised external operations ofthe banking system – which may also beseen as the counterpart of all other cross-border transactions (including the externaltransactions by the Bundesbank recorded ascredit operations) – that led to outflows offunds in non-securitised credit transactions(328 billion). The long-term credit operations
of the monetary financial institutions resultedin outflows of 314
12billion and their short-
term operations to a further outflow of 31812
billion. The Bundesbank, by contrast, incurred
a liability balance of 35 billion in the first
quarter – primarily as a result of the settle-ment of TARGET balances.
The foreign reserves of the Bundesbank,
which are shown separately from the credittransactions in the balance of payments, in-creased by 31
12billion at transaction values
between the beginning of January and theend of March. As the euro price of gold de-clined particularly significantly during thisperiod, the reserves at market prices amount-ed to only 382
12billion at the end of March
compared with 385 billion at the end of
2002.German direct
investment
abroad
Foreign direct
investment in
Germany
Credit
transactions of
non-banks ...... and the
banking system
Foreign
reserves of the
Bundesbank

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
48Public financeBudgetary development of central,
state and local government
In the first quarter of 2003 the deficit of cen-
tral and state government (the results of localgovernment are not yet known) amounted to336
12billion. This was considerably higher
than the deficit in the same period last yearwhich was already very high ( 331 billion).
Whereas revenue declined by
12% as a result
of lower tax receipts, expenditure rose sharplyby 4
12%. Particularly labour market-related
spending increased again considerably.
In 2003 as a whole, the budgets of central,
state and local government appear set to de-velop very unfavourably, which will result inanother increase in the deficit unless furthermeasures are taken. For example, as thingsstand today, the Federal Government and theLand governments will not be able to lower
their deficits as sharply as they had originallyexpected; their deficits will be barely lowerthan in the previous year. This is attributableto the sizeable tax shortfalls and also the add-itional labour market-related expenditure ofFederal Government. In the case of the localauthorities, a considerable deterioration ofthe budgetary position is expected vis-à-vis2002. This applies, too, to the special fundswhich are burdened by the sharp decrease inthe Bundesbank profit.
Tax receipts of general government
1de-
veloped disappointingly in the first quarter of2003 after showing a fairly positive trend for
1Including EU tax shares in German tax revenue but ex-
cluding receipts from local government taxes, which are
not yet known.Overview
Tax revenue
in the first
quarter...

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
49a short time in the last quarter of 2002. On
the whole, in the first three months of 2003they were almost 3% lower than the alreadysluggish figure for the previous year. Besidesseveral special effects, the unfavourable eco-nomic situation also continued to dampenthe revenue trend.
Among the various types of income taxes,
corporation tax receipts went up by 31
34bil-
lion to nearly 3212billion. The temporary rise
in the corporation tax rate by 112percentage
points to 26.5% to finance flood-relateddamage also played a role. However, the tax-reducing distribution effects which were con-siderably lower than the previous year had afar greater impact; this was reflected in a de-cline in revenue from non-assessed taxes onearnings (by 31
34billion or almost 40%). In
the case of assessed income tax, the negativebalance from inpayments and outpaymentswidened by a further 31
34billion to 3512bil-
lion. This result was dampened to an increas-ing extent by the tax grant to home buyers,which is primarily disbursed in March.
2Wage
tax developed very unfavourably; receiptsfrom this tax were merely
34% higher than in
the previous year. Besides the deterioratedemployment situation, the reduction of spe-cial payments at the end of 2002 and theshortfalls due to contribution payers optingfor direct insurance plans in their companypensions may have played a role in this devel-opment.
Among indirect taxes, revenue from turnover
tax declined in the first quarter by 2
12%. This
was caused not least by the unfavourable de-velopment of retail trade turnover. Despitethe increases in energy taxes which entered
into force at the beginning of the year, rev-enue from mineral oil tax has actually fallenby almost 15%; besides declining consump-tion, the shifts in payment dates at the begin-ning of the year were also an important fac-tor.
Because of the bad start to 2003 and the per-
sistently weak economic development, taxrevenue will develop considerably more slug-gishly than is expected in the budgetaryplans. According to the new estimate whichwas posted in mid-May by the WorkingGroup on Tax Estimates, which assumes agrowth in real GDP of
34% and in nominalYear-on-year change
%
Tax receipts, total 1
1st hf 2nd hf 1st hf 2nd hf Q1 Q2Tax revenue
1Including EU shares in German tax rev-
enue, but excluding receipts from local au-
thority taxes, which are not yet known for
the last quarter recorded.
Deutsche Bundesbank4+
3+
2+
1+
0
1−
2−
3−
4−
5−
2001 2002 2003
2This is due to the fact that a further generation grew
into this promotion scheme (each promotion measure
lasts eight years), which has existed since 1996....and in 2003
as a whole

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
50GDP of just over 2%, revenue will only go up
by just under 2%. Compared with the esti-mate from autumn of last year, this showsshortfalls amounting to 310
12billion. Of
these revisions, the two types of individualtaxes which yield the highest revenue, wagetax and turnover tax, are affected the most.When evaluating the outturn of the officialestimate, it should be borne in mind that, asthings stand today, economic growth in Ger-many is likely to be somewhat weaker thananticipated. According to the official esti-mate, the overall tax ratio (as defined in thegovernment’s financial statistics) will even godown slightly to 20.9% despite the tax in-creases which entered into force at the begin-ning of the year. Vis-à-vis the estimate fromMay of last year the tax estimate forecasts in-creasing shortfalls in the medium term; thesewill amount to 346
12billion or just under 2%
of GDP in 2006.
In the first quarter, the deficit recorded in the
Federal budget rose by 34 billion to 32512bil-
lion compared with the same figure last year.Revenue fell by 1
34%. This was mainly due to
the fact that tax revenue was 314% lower. Ex-
penditure rose sharply by 412%. This was
attributable, for one thing, to a significantincrease in grants to the statutory pension in-surance scheme – the best part of this in-crease will be financed by the last stage ofthe ecological tax reform. For another, labourmarket-related expenditure – unemploymentassistance and grants to the Federal LabourOffice – will expand considerably due to thehigher level of unemployment. In addition,the flood disaster fund received its first injec-tions of funds. By contrast, interest paymentswent down despite a sharp increase in thelevel of indebtedness. The low interest ratelevel made it possible to refinance at more fa-vourable rates. Moreover, the collection of asizeable premium on the issue of Federal se-curities had a particular expenditure-reducingimpact.
The Federal budget, which was adopted in
March, envisages a sharp decline in the deficitfor this year by 313 billion to 319
12billion.
This target, however, will not be reached, ac-cording to the most recent tax estimatewhich forecasts tax shortfalls vis-à-vis theplans (under comparable tax legislation)amounting to 34 billion. Furthermore, the
fact that proceeds associated with the Act toReduce Tax Subsidies will be lower than an-ticipated will result in revenue shortfalls. TheTrends in the revenue from major taxes
Revenue
in5bn
Q1
Type of tax 2003 2002Annual
percent-agechange
Wage tax 30.6 30.4 + 0.7
Assessed income tax – 5.4 – 3.6 .Corporation tax 2.4 0.7 + 267.2Turnover tax 33.7 34.5 – 2.4
Deutsche BundesbankFederal Govern-
ment in the first
quarter...
...and in 2003
as a whole

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
51plans also include additional revenue arising
from the Act on the Tax on Interest Income(32 billion), which is still being debated in pol-
itical circles and whose financial impact canbe estimated only with great uncertainty.
On the expenditure side, too, the estimates
are likely to be exceeded. Compared with thefigure for the previous year, a decline of
12%
is expected here, although considerable add-itional financial resources ( 33
12billion) will be
necessary to finance the reconstruction aidfund which was founded in connection withthe flooding. By contrast, as things now stand,a considerable rise in expenditure is expected.This is mainly attributable to high unforeseenlabour market-related expenditure burdens.For example, the grant to the Federal LabourOffice will not be repealed, as was originallyplanned. In the light of the increasing un-employment level – but also due to the factthat additional revenue associated with theHartz reforms will be lower than expected –the previous year’s amount may actually beovershot. Moreover, the expenditure for un-employment assistance – which according tothe plans should decline by more than 15%due, also, to the stricter eligibility require-ments for benefits – is likely to be significantlyhigher than the estimated amount.
In the first quarter the special funds recorded
a surplus of 3
12billion, whereas a deficit of
the same amount existed in the first quarterof 2002. The main reason was that when thereconstruction fund founded to finance theflood assistance was first included, the inpay-ments of the Federal and Land governments
exceeded outpayments by 31 billion. In 2003as a whole the surplus of the special funds –
which amounted to 39 billion last year – will,
however, decline considerably. This is becausethe Bundesbank’s profit distribution, whichis recorded in the budgets in the secondquarter, was 35
12billion; this was almost
36 billion lower than in the previous year
when it was characterised by several extra-ordinary factors. Of this distribution, 33.5 bil-
lion accrued to the Federal budget with therest going to the Redemption Fund for In-herited Liabilities.
TheLand governments’ budgets recorded a
deficit of 312 billion in the first quarter. The
level from the previous year – which was al-ready high – was thus exceeded by 33 billion.
Contrary to expectations, tax receipts wentdown again by just over 1
12%. Total non-tax 5 bn
I II III IV I IIThe Federal Government’s
financial balance
Deutsche Bundesbank3+
0
3−
6−
9−
12−
15−
18−
21−
24−
27−
2002 2003
Special funds
Land
governments

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
52revenue also went down marginally. How-
ever, the strong increase in expenditure of4% is partly due to the special factors and islikely to recede over the course of the year. In2003 as a whole, expenditure will go up by1% as a result of payments to the flood as-sistance fund alone. Furthermore, the envis-aged relatively considerable increase of 2.4%in civil servants’ pay is likely to have a signifi-cant impact. However, these additional bur-dens may be constrained through the envis-aged flexibility of holiday pay and Christmasbonuses.
Against this background, several Land gov-
ernments already adopted supplementarybudgets before the recent tax estimate; mostof these envisaged increased borrowing au-thorisation. As was the case in 2002, severalLand governments ran into conflict with the
constitutional ceilings. At the same time, theflood assistance payments, which are actuallyto be financed by postponing the next stageof the tax reform, have already been cited asgrounds to justify increased borrowing by de-claring most of them as investment expend-iture and thus taking them into accountwhen determining the permissible borrow-ing.
3The fact that a disruption of the macro-
economic equilibrium still needs to serve asjustification for new borrowing is a clear signof how strained the financial situation is. Thesignificant reduction of the deficit to 322 bil-
lion which has been planned in the budgetwill no longer be possible as things standtoday. Without further consolidation meas-ures, last year’s record deficit of 331 billion
may even be reached again this year.
For local government only the results for
2002 are available. In the final quarter, inview of the occasional gushing springs oftaxes and declining expenditure, the munici-pal budgets recorded a surplus of just over31
12billion following a deficit of a little more
than 312billion in the last three months of
2001. The overall deficit in 2002 amountedto34
12billion and overshot the amount from
2001 by just over 312billion, contrary to ex-
pectations. Total expenditure grew by justunder 1%. Whereas the rise in personnel ex-penditure accelerated to almost 2%, expend-Net borrowing in the market by
central, state and local government
5bn
of which
Period TotalSecuri-
ties 1Loansagainstborrow-ers’notes
2MemoitemAcquisi-tion bynon-resi-dents
2001 + 14.2 + 56.3 – 6.6 + 13.0
2002
pe + 54.5 + 67.6 – 12.0 + 51.0
of which
Q1 + 25.6 + 15.2 + 10.5 + 10.2Q2 + 1.5 + 22.9 – 21.4 + 15.2Q3 + 18.6 + 25.1 – 5.4 + 19.7Q4
pe +8 . 8 +4 . 4 +4 . 4 +5 . 9
2003
Q1pe + 34.2 + 31.4 + 2.8 ...
1Excluding equalisation claims. — 2Including cash ad-
vances and money market borrowing.
Deutsche Bundesbank
3Furthermore, in other areas, borrowing will also be jus-
tified by investment expenditure, which is already
covered in the budget plans by clearly allocated current
revenue. This procedure is often used not only for invest-
ment transfers which are funded out of general tax-
sharing arrangements, but also for significant individual
cases such as the use of current transfers for investment
purposes.Local
authorities

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
53iture on investment went down by 512%. A
further decline in tax receipts of just over 3%was offset, in particular, by an increase in pro-ceeds from the sale of participating interests,causing overall revenue to go up by another
12%. The fact that the outturn at the end of
2002 was ultimately more favourable thananticipated should not be interpreted as aneasing of the municipal financial situation.For example, revenue expectations for taxeswere also dampened by a renewed rise intrade tax contributions. Moreover, transfersfrom state government are also likely to belower due to the final settlement of previousyears and the low tax receipts at this level ofgovernment, too. Finally, proceeds from thesales of assets are no longer likely to reachthe high level of the previous year. On the ex-penditure side, there will be additional spend-ing on personnel arising from the pay settle-ments in the public sector. On the whole, thefear is that the deficit will rise sharply thisyear.
In the first quarter the indebtedness of cen-
tral, state and local government rose by 334
billion. Whereas 330 billion net was bor-
rowed on the capital markets, money marketdebt rose by 34 billion. The Federal Govern-
ment had the largest net borrowing require-ment ( 320 billion), even though the Bundes-
bank’s profit distribution (actual cash inflow)had already been posted in the first quarter.However, the Land governments also drew
considerably on the credit markets. The finan-cing requirement reached 313 billion. Local
government appears to have marginallyraised its indebtedness.Social security funds
The wages and salary earners’ pension insur-
ance scheme recorded a deficit of 32 billion
in the first quarter. This was 3
12billion lower
than the comparable figure from the previousyear. Revenue from contributions rose by3
12%. Adjusted for the increase in contribu-
tion rates from 19.1% to 19.5% this meantan increase of 2%. In view of the continuedshedding of jobs, the calculated increase incompulsory contributions from employedpersons was, however, below average (1%).This subdued rise itself was probably mainlydue to the increase in the maximum level ofearnings subject to contributions and alsopartially due to the one-off payment dis-bursed in March to public sector employees,which was agreed in the pay settlement. Bycontrast, revenue from contributions for re-cipients of unemployment benefits and un-employment assistance rose sharply; this is,however, a strain on the budgets of the Fed-eral Labour Office and the Federal Govern-ment. Furthermore, Federal grants to thepension insurance scheme were raised con-siderably. Besides the additional resources inconnection with the last stage of the eco-logical tax reform, the components peggedto the contribution rate also went up relative-ly steeply. All in all, the revenue from the pen-sion insurance scheme increased by 4
12%.
Expenditure went up somewhat less (by justunder 3
12%) than in the past few quarters. In
this context, the fact that the increase in thenumber of pension recipients is deceleratingas the discount rules for persons who takeearly retirement are increasingly taking effectalso had an impact.IndebtednessStatutory
pension
insurance
scheme

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
54Contrary to the plans, which envisaged a sur-
plus for this year, the statutory pension insur-ance scheme is likely to record a deficit in2003, too. Admittedly, the increase in ex-penditure is likely to continue deceleratingbecause in the case of the pension adjust-ments effective 1 July, a discount of around0.6 percentage point for imputed contribu-tions to the “Riester Rente” will be taken intoaccount and the average earnings in 2002grew less sharply than in 2001. However, therise of 1.04% in the western and 1.19% inthe eastern German Federal states will conse-quently be much lower than in the previousyear. The considerable deterioration in the la-bour market situation is likely to result in sig-nificant shortfalls in contributions. In add-ition, an increased use of the possibility forcontribution payers to opt for direct insuranceplans in their company pensions, which has
existed since 2002, and – as a result of newrules – low-paid employment as well as in-creased deduction provisions for unemploy-ment assistance may lead to further shortfallsin contributions. In addition, the possibility, asenvisaged in the pay settlement for the publicsector, to postpone the salary payment datein December 2003 may result in financialgaps. In the light of these risks, it is to befeared that at the end of 2003 the fluctuationreserve will undershoot its minimum reserverequirement of 0.5 month’s expenditure. Thecontribution rates would then have to beraised again in 2004 if no measures are takenon the expenditure side.
In the first quarter, the budget of the Federal
Labour Office was dominated by a consider-able increase in unemployment. The deficitgrew by just over 31 billion to almost 33 bil-
lion vis-à-vis the first quarter of 2002. Ex-penditure rose by 10%. As the number of un-employed persons went up by 10%, expend-iture on unemployment benefits went upconsiderably more sharply (by 16%) becausein phases of intense job cuts, the ratio of pay-ment recipients to unemployed persons usu-ally goes up. Following the temporary declinein the eastern German Federal states, spend-ing in this area is now increasing again signifi-cantly. Expenditure on active labour marketmeasures rose by 2.5% in total. The an-nounced savings have been concentrateduntil now on job creation measures, forwhich considerably less was spent in the firstquarter of this year compared with the firstthree months of 2002. By contrast, more wasspent on other vocational promotional
Quarterly
 5 bn
 5 bn
Surplus (+) or deficit (−)Revenue
ExpenditureWage and salary earners’
pension insurance scheme
Deutsche Bundesbank4+
2+
0
2−58
56
54
52
2001 2002 2003
Outlook for
2003Federal Labour
Office

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
55schemes. However, there was a significant
overall decline in the number of participants;this also partly explains the sharp increase inthe recorded level of unemployment.
According to the budget plan, the Federal
Labour Office should get through this year,for the first time since German reunification,without a Federal Government grant. How-ever, the situation has deteriorated consider-ably since the budget was prepared. For ex-ample, the starting position with a deficit of35.6 billion last year has already proved to be
more unfavourable. The total number of un-employed persons envisaged for 2003 of4.14 million was already overshot in Marchby almost 0.3 million after seasonal adjust-ment. Furthermore, it is debatable whetherthe anticipated savings of 32 billion can actu-
ally be accomplished by implementing themeasures more quickly. The cyclical trend isalso depressing the revenue from contribu-tions. Ultimately, the Federal Labour Office is,in fact, likely to record a rising deficit thisyear.
For the financial development of the statutory
health insurance funds results are availableonly until the end of 2002. According tothese results, the deficit reached 33 billion in
total. It increased marginally vis-à-vis 2001,even though the contribution rates wereraised by just over 0.3 percentage point onaverage. Despite this raise, revenue increasedby only 3%, since the revenue from compul-sory contributions paid by insured personswent up only marginally. Moreover, therewere considerable strains on the expenditureside. For example, expenditure on pharma-ceuticals grew by just over 4
12% despite as-
surances by the medical service associationsat the beginning of the year that a decreaseof 5% was in the pipeline. Additional ex-penditure of around 32 billion resulted from
this deviation alone. In the case of hospitaltreatment, too, the increase in expenditure of3% was decidedly higher than planned. Onbalance, the health insurance institutionswere unable to replenish their reserves to theQuarterly
 5 bn
 5 bn 5 bn
Surplus (+) or deficit (−)Expenditure on...
...unemployment benefits
   and short-time
   working benefits
...vocational training 2Expenditure, total
Revenue 1Federal Labour Office
1 Excluding Federal Government liquidity
assistance. — 2 Including job creation meas-
ures.
Deutsche Bundesbank0.5+
0
0.5−
1.0−
1.5−
2.0−
2.5−
3.0−7.5
7.06.5
6.0
5.55.0
4.515.5
15.0
14.5
14.0
13.5
13.012.5
12.0
11.511.0
2001 2002 2003Outlook for
2003
Statutory
health
insurance funds

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
56envisaged minimum level of 25% of one
month’s expenditure. It is more likely thatthey will resort to credit financing, which isnot actually legal.
These loans would have to be repaid this
year, which means the health insurance insti-tutions ought to record a surplus of billions ofeuro. Contributions rates were already raisedmarkedly at the beginning of the year toan average of 14.3%. This adjustment wasbased on the considerably more favourableassumptions of the financial situation and thecontinued macroeconomic trend. In addition,the relief measures adopted in autumn 2002should significantly depress expendituregrowth this year. This is, however, not likelyto be sufficient to even reach a balanced out-turn if the weak trend of revenue subject tocompulsory contributions persists. Therefore,another noticeable increase in average contri-bution rates will be required before the endof the year. In the light of the associated im-pairment to the macroeconomic outlook, thehealth care reforms announced for 2004 willalso be significant.
The statutory nursing care insurance scheme
recorded a deficit of 3
12billion in 2002 after
a virtually balanced outturn in the previousyear. Revenue only rose by just over 1%. Onthe other hand, expenditure growth acceler-ated to 3% due to an expansion of the rangeof benefits. The reserves have, however, re-mained virtually unchanged ( 35 billion) be-
cause the Federal Government repaid a loanof just over 3
12billion.4General government budget trends
Last year the overall deficit ratio – as defined
in the Maastricht Treaty – went up to 3.6%and the Ecofin Council declared an excessivedeficit for Germany.
5As things stand today,
the 3% ceiling will probably be overshot thisyear, too, if no other relief for the generalgovernment budgets is initiated in addition tothose decisions which have already beentaken. Admittedly, on the revenue side in par-ticular, several special consumer taxes and so-cial security contributions were increased.Moreover, in view of the high budget deficits,stringent budget management is expected atall levels of government. Finally, reductions instatutory health insurance benefits and inlabour market-related expenditure may alsomake themselves noticeable. These are, how-ever, offset by considerable burdens whichresult, in particular, from the unfavourablecyclical development expected this year andthe associated higher level of unemployment.Furthermore, flood-related expenditure, thelower Bundesbank profit and increasingtransfers to the EU all have an impact.
The Ecofin Council called on Germany to cor-
rect the excessive deficit as quickly as possibleand to implement the consolidation measuresannounced for this year amounting to 1% ofGDP or to replace this procedure with one ofequal proportions. Otherwise, Germany facesthe threat of sanctions under the excessive
4This repayment was not booked as revenue by the
statutory nursing care insurance scheme.
5For details, see Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report,
February 2003, p 53 and Deutsche Bundesbank, The de-
velopment of public finances in Germany following quali-
fication for European monetary union, Monthly Report,
April 2003, pp 15-32.Outlook for
2003
Statutory
nursing care
insurance
schemeThe 3% ceiling
is expected to
be overshot
again
All levels of
government are
under pressure

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
57deficit procedure. The pronounced federal
structure in Germany means that during a fis-cal decision-making process, agreement is re-quired from the various levels of government;this ultimately makes it more difficult to allo-cate responsibility for the overall outturn. Alllevels of government are showing high def-icits, with which the upper borrowing limitsunder budgetary law were reached and fre-quently even overshot. Against this back-ground, all fiscal policy decision makers arecalled upon to undertake the required con-solidation efforts. It is essential to fulfil theEuropean commitments and consequently topreserve the credibility of the existing fiscalrules in order to support the single Europeanmonetary policy – which is particularly attrib-utable to German initiative. This is a task forall levels of government.
The German Budget Principles Act – in line
with the Stability and Growth Pact – envis-ages the target of a balanced budget for the
Federal and Land governments. This means
that in the light of the high structural deficits,there is also a considerable consolidation re-quirement in the medium term. If there is aconsensus that the burden of taxes and socialsecurity contributions will not be increasedand that it will, in fact, be reduced further,adjustments have to be carried out on the ex-penditure side. The agreements made by theFinancial Planning Council, which envisages,inter alia , a tight constraint on expenditure
growth of central, state and local govern-ment for this year and the next, should play apart in this. Initially, the provisions need to befulfilled without shifting the burden to otherlevels of government. In the light of the me-dium-term outlook for the budgetary devel-opment of Federal and Land governments, an
extension of the cost-cutting decisions– which currently only cover 2003 and 2004 –also seems necessary.

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
58

Statistical
SectionDeutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
1*

ContentsI Key economic data for European
monetary union
1 Monetary developments and interest
rates 6*
2 Foreign trade and payments 6*
3 General economic indicators 7*
II Overall monetary survey in the
European monetary union
1 The money stock and its counterparts 8*2 Consolidated balance sheet of mon-
etary financial institutions (MFIs) 10*
3 Banking system’s liquidity position 14*
III Consolidated financial statement
of the Eurosystem
1 Assets 16*2 Liabilities 18*
IV Banks
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary
financial institutions (excluding theBundesbank) in Germany 20*
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks
(MFIs) in Germany, by category ofbanks 24*
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-à-vis residents 26*
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents 28*Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
2*

5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) 30*
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic enterprises and resident
individuals, housing loans, sectors ofeconomic activity 32*
7 Deposits of domestic
non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs)in Germany 34*
8 Deposits of resident individuals and
domestic non-profit institutions atbanks (MFIs) in Germany 36*
9 Deposits of domestic public author-
ities at banks (MFIs) in Germany, bycreditor group 36*
10 Savings deposits and bank savings
bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germanysold to non-banks (non-MFIs) 38*
11 Debt securities and money market
paper outstanding of banks (MFIs)in Germany 38*
12 Building and loan associations (MFIs)
in Germany 39*
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign
branches and foreign subsidiaries ofGerman banks (MFIs) 40*
V Minimum reserves
1 Reserve ratios 42*2 Reserve maintenance in Germany up
to the end of 1998 42*
3 Reserve maintenance in the Euro-
pean monetary union 42*VI Interest rates
1 ECB interest rates 43*2 Discount and lombard rates of the
Bundesbank 43*
3 Base rates 43*4 Eurosystem monetary policy opera-
tions allotted through tenders 43*
5 Money market rates, by month 44*6 Euro area retail bank interest rates 44*7 Lending and deposit rates of banks
(MFIs) in Germany 45*
VII Capital market
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities
and shares in Germany 48*
2 Sales of debt securities issued by
borrowers domiciled in Germany 49*
3 Outstanding amount of debt secur-
ities issued by borrowers domiciledin Germany 50*
4 Circulation of shares issued by resi-
dents of Germany 50*
5 Yields and indices on German
securities 51*
6 Sales and purchases of investment
fund certificates in Germany 51*Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
3*

VIII Public finance in Germany
1 Finances of the public sector 52*
2 Finances of the Federal
Government, Länder Governmentsand local authorities 52*
3 Finances of the Government
in the national accounts 53*
4 Tax revenue of the central,
regional and local authorities 53*
5 Tax revenue, by type 54*6 Individual taxes of the Federal
Government, Länder Governmentsand local authorities 54*
7 Indebtedness of the public sector 55*8 Changes in public sector
indebtedness 57*
9 Loans raised by public authorities
against borrowers’ notes 57*
10 Indebtedness of the Federal
Government 58*
11 Federal Government borrowing
in the market 58*
12 Receipts, expenditure and assets of
the wage and salary earners’pension insurance funds 59*
13 Receipts and expenditure of the
Federal Labour Office 59*
IX Economic conditions
1 Origin and expenditure of
domestic product, distribution ofnational income 60*
2 Output in the producing sector 61*3 Orders received by industry 62*4 Orders received by construction 63*5 Retail trade turnover 63*6 Labour market 64*7 Prices 65*8 Households’ income 66*9 Pay rates and actual earnings 66*
X Foreign trade and payments
1 Major items of the balance of pay-
ments of the European monetaryunion 67*
2 Major items of the balance of pay-
ments of the Federal Republic ofGermany 68*
3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the
Federal Republic of Germany, bygroup of countries and country 69*
4 Services and factor income of the
Federal Republic of Germany 70*
5 Current transfers of the Federal
Republic of Germany 70*
6 Capital transfers 70*7 Financial account of the Federal
Republic of Germany 71*
8 External position of the Bundesbank 72*9 External position of the Bundesbank
in the European monetary union 72*
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises
in Germany (other than banks)vis-à-vis non-residents 73*
11 Deutsche Mark and euro exchange
rates of selected currencies 74*
12 Exchange rates for the national
currencies of the EMU countries,the Deutsche Mark value of theECU and euro conversion rates 74*
13 Effective exchange rates of the euro
and selected foreign currencies 75*Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
4*

Abbreviations and symbols
eestimated
pprovisional
pepartly estimated
rrevised
...Data available at a later date
.Data unknown, not to be published or
not meaningful
0Less than 0.5 but more than nil
–nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to round-ing.Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
5*

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
 I Key economic data for European monetary union
 
1 Monetary developments and interest rates
 
 
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions  1  2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
 M 3  3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3−month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
moving average MFI lending, and capital 3−month ment bonds
M1 M2 (centred) total individuals formation  4 EONIA  5, 7 EURIBOR  6, 7 outstanding  8 
Period Change from previous year,in % % p. a. as a monthly average
2001          Sep 5.0 5.1 6.7 6.6 5.2 7.1 2.5 3.99 3.98 5.0
         Oct 5.1 5.4 7.3 7.2 5.1 6.9 2.6 3.97 3.60 4.8
         Nov 5.9 5.9 7.7 7.6 5.4 7.0 3.6 3.51 3.39 4.6         Dec 5.4 6.4 7.9 7.8 5.2 6.7 4.7 3.34 3.34 4.9
2002          Jan 6.6 6.8 7.7 7.6 5.2 6.2 4.8 3.29 3.34 5.0
         Feb 6.1 6.3 7.3 7.4 5.1 6.0 4.8 3.28 3.36 5.1         Mar 6.0 6.3 7.2 7.2 4.8 5.4 4.7 3.26 3.39 5.3
         Apr 6.7 6.4 7.3 7.3 4.4 5.1 4.6 3.32 3.41 5.3
         May 6.8 6.7 7.6 7.3 4.5 5.3 5.2 3.31 3.47 5.3         Jun 6.9 6.4 7.1 7.2 4.4 5.3 4.3 3.35 3.46 5.2
         Jul 7.6 6.5 7.0 7.0 4.0 4.8 5.0 3.30 3.41 5.0
         Aug 7.7 6.5 7.0 7.0 4.2 5.1 5.3 3.29 3.35 4.7         Sep 8.1 6.5 7.1 7.0 4.3 5.0 5.2 3.32 3.31 4.5
         Oct 8.3 6.8 6.9 7.0 4.3 4.9 5.0 3.30 3.26 4.6
         Nov 9.1 6.9 7.0 6.9 3.9 4.6 5.0 3.30 3.12 4.6         Dec 9.9 6.6 6.9 7.0 4.1 4.7 4.3 3.09 2.94 4.4
2003          Jan 9.5 6.5 7.2 7.3 4.1 4.8 3.9 2.79 2.83 4.2
         Feb 10.3 7.3 7.9 7.7 4.3 4.9 4.3 2.76 2.69 4.0         Mar 11.6 7.9 7.9 ... 4.0 4.6 4.0 2.75 2.53 4.1
         Apr ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2.56 2.53 4.2
1 Source: ECB. — 2 Saisonally adjusted. — 3 Excluding holdings of money Average. — 6 Euro InterBank Offered Rate. — 7 See also footnotes to table
market fund shares
/units by non-residents of the euro area. — 4 Longer- VI.5., p. 44*. — 8 GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds; from
term liabilities to euro area non-MFIs. — 5Euro OverNight Index 2001 Euro12. 
 
 
2 Foreign trade and payments  * 
  
 
Selected items of the EMU balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1 
Current account Capital account Effective exchange rate  3 
of which Direct Securities Credit Monetary
Balance Trade balance Balance investment transactions reserves Dollar rate nominal real  4 transactions  2 
Period
 5 
 million Euro/US-$ 1st q 1999=100
2001          Sep + 208 + 5,950 − 19,556 − 15,444 + 48,835 − 51,331 − 1,615 0.9111 88.0 89.3
         Oct + 3,581 + 11,274 − 21,286 + 3,605 + 573 − 22,803 − 2,661 0.9059 88.0 89.6
         Nov + 1,462 + 8,537 − 4,567 + 12,645 + 20,208 − 37,480 + 60 0.8883 86.8 88.4         Dec + 3,911 + 10,544 − 6,231 + 1,703 − 14,445 + 655 + 5,856 0.8924 87.7 89.8
2002          Jan − 144 + 3,058 − 39,383 + 1,191 − 30,295 − 4,967 − 5,313 0.8833 87.6 90.0
         Feb + 4,656 + 10,141 + 13,271 − 9,141 − 6,443 + 26,399 + 2,455 0.8700 86.8 89.0         Mar + 7,445 + 13,532 + 17,890 − 8,061 + 3,460 + 22,696 − 205 0.8758 86.8 89.3
         Apr − 5,803 + 7,258 + 14,785 + 8,104 + 17,392 − 19,073 + 8,361 0.8858 87.2 89.7
         May + 656 + 10,319 + 5,624 + 1,481 + 32,214 − 29,968 + 1,897 0.9170 88.6 91.1         Jun + 7,352 + 13,679 − 40,209 − 18,825 + 19,792 − 37,659 − 3,517 0.9554 90.6 93.2
         Jul + 4,817 + 15,278 − 17,417 − 6,663 + 2,509 − 10,712 − 2,552 0.9922 91.7 94.4
         Aug + 9,851 + 12,175 − 11,523 + 1,710 + 6,151 − 21,139 + 1,756 0.9778 91.1 93.6         Sep + 8,347 + 11,071 − 21,314 − 7,013 + 17,381 − 27,881 − 3,800 0.9808 91.2 93.8
         Oct + 3,828 + 12,317 − 18,530 − 7,069 + 24,809 − 38,486 + 2,216 0.9811 91.7 94.3
         Nov + 11,529 + 13,719 − 25,957 + 492 + 14,315 − 38,389 − 2,376 1.0014 92.5 95.1         Dec + 9,123 + 10,720 − 14,984 − 1,719 − 4,595 − 7,510 − 1,160 1.0183 93.6 96.7
2003          Jan − 6,476 + 812 − 15,560 − 916 − 6,540 − 9,646 + 1,542 1.0622 95.8 98.8
         Feb + 3,230 + 9,531 − 3,100 + 674 + 11,625 − 20,847 + 5,449 1.0773 97.1 100.2         Mar ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.0807 97.9 101.3
         Apr ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.0848 98.6 102.0
 
*  Source: ECB. — 1  See also tables X.12 and 13, p. 74−75. — 2  Including
financial derivatives. — 3  Vis-à-vis a narrow group of countries. — 4  Based
on consumer prices. 
6* I Key economic data for European monetary union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
I.  Key economic data for European monetary union 
 
3. General economic indicators
 
 
                   
Period Belgium Germany Finland France Greece Ireland Italy Luxembourg Austria Portugal Spain EMU 7 Netherlands
Real gross domestic product 1
2000 3.7 2.9 5.5 3.8 4.2 10.0 3.1 8.9 3.3 3.5 3.7 4.2 3.5
2001 0.8 0.6 0.6 2.1 4.1 5.7 1.8 1.2 1.3 0.7 1.6 2.7 1.52002 0.7 0.2 1.6 1.2 4.0 6.3 0.4 1.1 0.2 1.0 0.5 2.0 0.8
2001          Q4 −0.5 −0.1 −0.5 1.1 3.7 1.1 0.7 0.6 −0.4 1.0 2.6 0.7
2002          Q1 −0.7 −1.2 −1.3 0.6 4.5 4.9 −0.5 −0.1 0.5 1.3 1.9 −0.1
         Q2 0.4 0.4 3.0 1.3 4.2 6.4 0.2 0.2 1.1 1.9 2.1 1.0
         Q3 1.3 1.0 2.1 1.6 3.7 7.3 0.6 0.7 1.4 0.0 1.9 1.4         Q4 1.7 0.5 2.7 1.1 3.4 6.4 1.1 0.1 1.1 −1.3 2.2 1.1
2003          Q1 ... 0.5 ... ... 4.3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Industrial production 1, 2
2000 4.9 6.2 11.8 3.6 7.3 15.6 4.1 5.0 4.0 8.8 −0.2 4.4 5.4
2001 −0.4 0.5 −0.8 0.9 1.0 10.1 −1.2 3.2 1.4 0.8 3.1 −1.5 0.4
2002 1.5 −1.1 1.7 −0.9 1.7 7.8 −1.3 0.2 −2.1 0.1 −0.2 0.2 −0.6
2001          Q4 −4.3 −3.7 −6.2 −2.8 −0.3 −2.6 −4.8 1.7 −1.5 −2.4 1.8 −3.3 −3.5
2002          Q1 −3.6 −3.6 −6.3 −1.8 −0.5 3.0 −3.6 −3.8 −2.9 −2.1 −1.2 −1.1 −2.8
         Q2 2.9 −2.0 5.1 −0.6 4.0 11.3 −2.1 4.3 −2.9 2.4 1.8 −1.1 −0.7
         Q3 4.6 −0.3 2.8 −2.1 0.1 10.6 −0.1 −0.9 −1.4 0.3 0.4 0.4 0.0
         Q4 2.8 1.4 5.1 0.4 3.2 6.6 0.7 1.2 −1.1 −0.1 −1.9 2.5 1.2
2003          Q1 ... 6 p 1.5 0.7 ... ... 2.2 −0.6 4.4 ... ... 0.3 1.5 ...
Capacity utilisation 3
2000 84.0 85.9 86.8 87.5 78.1 78.6 78.8 87.8 84.7 84.5 81.2 80.6 84.22001 82.3 85.1 85.7 87.4 77.6 78.4 78.9 88.7 84.6 83.1 81.7 79.6 83.62002 79.6 82.0 82.7 85.3 77.0 75.9 77.3 85.1 82.9 80.6 79.4 77.2 81.2
2002          Q1 79.2 82.4 82.0 85.5 75.4 77.5 76.9 86.9 83.5 80.9 77.9 76.3 81.1
         Q2 79.6 81.5 82.7 85.8 76.7 76.3 77.3 84.3 82.9 80.6 79.4 77.0 81.2         Q3 80.1 82.0 83.0 85.3 79.0 72.8 76.9 83.8 82.5 80.5 79.1 76.3 81.0         Q4 79.6 82.1 83.1 84.7 76.8 76.9 78.0 85.3 82.8 80.4 81.2 79.3 81.5
2003          Q1 79.3 82.1 82.2 85.1 75.8 74.5 77.5 84.1 82.5 80.5 77.7 78.6 81.3
         Q2 78.6 82.0 82.8 84.8 77.1 75.1 75.6 85.9 81.9 80.7 78.5 78.2 80.9
Unemployment rate 4
2000 6.9 7.8 9.8 9.3 11.0 4.3 10.4 2.3 2.8 3.7 4.1 11.3 8.52001 6.7 7.8 9.1 8.5 10.4 3.9 9.4 2.1 2.4 3.6 4.1 10.6 8.02002 7.3 8.6 9.1 8.7 9.9 4.4 9.0 2.8 2.7 4.3 5.1 11.3 8.3
2002          Oct 7.4 8.7 9.0 8.8 4.4 8.9 3.0 3.0 4.3 5.8 11.4 8.4
         Nov 7.5 8.8 9.0 8.9 4.4 8.9 3.1 3.1 4.3 6.1 11.5 8.4         Dec 7.6 8.9 9.0 8.9 4.4 8.9 3.2 3.2 4.4 6.3 11.5 8.5
2003          Jan 7.7 9.0 9.0 9.0 4.5 9.0 3.2 3.4 4.3 6.6 11.4 8.6
         Feb 7.7 9.2 9.1 9.0 4.5 ... 3.3 3.6 4.2 6.8 11.4 8.6         Mar 7.8 9.3 9.1 9.1 4.5 ... 3.4 ... 4.3 7.0 11.4 8.7
         Apr ... 9.4 ... ... 4.6 ... ... ... 4.3 ... 11.4 ...
Harmonised index of consumer prices 1
2000 2.7 1.4 3.0 1.8 2.9 5.3 2.6 3.8 2.3 2.0 2.8 3.5 2.1
2001 2.4 1.9 2.7 1.8 3.7 4.0 2.3 2.4 5.1 2.3 4.4 2.8 2.32002 1.6 1.3 2.0 1.9 3.9 4.7 2.6 2.1 3.9 1.7 3.7 3.6 2.3
2002          Oct 1.3 1.3 1.7 1.9 3.9 4.4 2.8 2.5 3.6 1.7 4.1 4.0 2.3
         Nov 1.1 1.1 1.7 2.1 3.9 4.7 2.9 2.7 3.4 1.7 4.1 3.9 2.3         Dec 1.3 1.1 1.7 2.2 3.5 4.6 3.0 2.8 3.5 1.7 4.0 4.0 2.3
2003          Jan 1.2 0.9 1.4 1.9 3.3 4.7 2.9 3.3 2.9 1.7 4.0 3.8 2.1
         Feb 1.6 1.2 2.1 2.5 4.2 5.1 2.6 3.2 3.2 1.8 4.1 3.8 2.4         Mar 1.7 1.2 1.9 2.6 3.9 4.9 2.9 3.7 3.1 1.8 3.8 3.7 2.4
         Apr 1.4 1.0 1.3
p 1.9 3.3 4.6 p 3.0 3.0 p 2.5 p 1.2 3.7 3.2 p 2.1
General government financial balance 5
2000 0.1 1.1 6.9 −1.4 −1.9 4.3 −0.6 6.1 2.2 −1.5 −2.8 −0.8 0.1
2001 0.4 −2.8 5.1 −1.5 −1.4 1.1 −2.6 6.4 0.1 0.3 −4.2 −0.1 −1.6
2002 0.0 −3.6 4.7 −3.1 −1.2 −0.1 −2.3 2.6 −1.1 −0.6 −2.7 −0.1 −2.3
General government debt 5
2000 109.6 60.2 44.5 57.2 106.2 39.3 110.6 5.6 55.8 66.8 53.3 60.5 69.6
2001 108.5 59.5 43.8 56.8 107.0 36.8 109.5 5.6 52.8 67.3 55.6 56.9 69.22002 105.4 60.8 42.7 59.1 104.9 34.0 106.7 5.7 52.6 67.9 58.0 54.0 69.0
Sources: National data, European Commission, Eurostat, European persons in civilian employment; seasonally adjusted. —5  As a percen-
Central Bank. Latest data are partly based on press reports and are tage of GDP; Maastricht Treaty definition, ESA95; including proceeds from
provisional. —1  Annual percentage changes; GDP of Greece and Portugal is sales of UMTS licenses. —6  Adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical
calculated from seasonally adjusted data. —2  Manufacturing, mining, gas Office by way of estimates to the results of the Quarterly Production Survey
and electricity; adjusted for working-day variations (except France and for the first quarter (industry in Germany: + 0.2 %). —7  Including Greece
Spain). —3  Manufacturing, in %; seasonally adjusted; data are collected (Harmonised index of consumer prices, General government financial ba-
in January, April, July and October. —4  Standardised, as a percentage of lance and General government debt only from 2001). 
7*I.  Key economic data for European monetary union 

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
 
1 The money stock and its counterparts *
  
  
 
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises Publicand individuals authorities Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturitieson non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  
2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
 European monetary union (  5  billion) 1
 
2001          Dec 39.3 45.9 24.1 −6.6 −10.3 − 9.1 −26.2 −17.2 28.6 7.3 0.1 7.6 13.6
2002          Jan 36.3 17.5 5.0 18.7 21.9 −14.3 − 0.1 14.1 25.2 3.6 −3.6 11.0 14.2
         Feb 28.8 24.9 8.7 3.9 1.2 −11.0 0.3 11.3 9.0 1.6 −1.0 9.3 −0.8
         Mar 70.7 48.5 −10.4 22.1 16.9 − 5.6 19.9 25.5 23.8 3.7 −1.3 18.7 2.7
         Apr 26.1 44.6 3.0 −18.5 1.5 − 2.6 18.0 20.6 −6.3 −0.2 −1.9 1.0 −5.2
         May 39.0 32.1 3.9 6.9 9.7 39.0 73.9 34.9 25.8 3.5 −1.2 19.7 3.7
         Jun 32.6 32.5 −6.9 0.1 −1.3 41.0 −26.8 −67.8 −5.5 3.3 −0.2 8.6 −17.1
         Jul −18.9 −15.1 −12.3 −3.8 −2.0 2.7 − 2.4 − 5.1 24.7 1.3 −0.0 13.8 9.6
         Aug − 6.9 7.1 6.8 −14.0 −3.1 14.3 −10.5 −24.8 14.1 2.2 0.2 2.7 9.0
         Sep 54.6 40.3 4.9 14.3 11.5 18.1 65.5 47.4 22.8 1.0 0.4 12.1 9.3
         Oct 28.0 31.0 12.4 −3.0 −2.6 29.5 55.0 25.5 9.3 1.3 −1.0 9.1 −0.1
         Nov 41.3 26.2 6.8 15.1 6.1 35.1 84.7 49.6 22.4 3.6 −0.5 16.6 2.7
         Dec 50.9 58.4 20.9 −7.5 −14.9 17.9 −35.1 −53.0 0.6 13.5 0.1 −10.1 −2.9
2003          Jan 45.9 25.3 −2.2 20.6 19.9 6.6 17.3 10.6 11.6 −3.9 0.6 7.5 7.4
         Feb 47.2 30.8 5.3 16.4 17.8 12.0 68.6 56.7 24.4 9.9 −1.2 10.4 5.3
         Mar 45.1 31.3 4.0 13.9 12.4 7.4 − 6.2 −13.6 12.3 6.7 −1.6 9.0 −1.7
 German contribution (  5  billion) 
2001          Dec 18.9 22.1 10.8 −3.1 4.2 19.1 −18.0 −37.1 −0.8 1.4 0.1 −4.7 2.5
2002          Jan − 7.3 −8.7 1.5 1.3 1.0 −21.5 −5.2 16.3 2.8 1.9 −3.6 2.7 1.9
         Feb 1.8 0.1 −3.2 1.7 4.2 1.8 −0.3 −2.1 5.0 1.2 −1.0 3.2 1.6
         Mar − 1.0 −2.4 −9.5 1.4 3.0 7.6 10.6 3.0 13.3 3.5 −1.1 10.1 0.9
         Apr 11.0 9.9 5.8 1.1 5.2 −20.2 −3.0 17.2 −7.7 −1.3 −1.9 −2.1 −2.4
         May 6.6 3.7 −0.2 2.9 8.4 10.7 24.6 13.9 0.4 −0.4 −1.1 2.2 −0.4
         Jun −19.8 −12.6 −11.1 −7.2 −2.2 25.7 0.1 −25.6 −0.5 −0.7 −0.2 2.3 −1.9
         Jul 7.2 −7.4 −2.8 14.6 6.1 −16.5 −5.7 10.8 11.2 0.5 0.1 8.2 2.4
         Aug − 1.7 5.8 6.4 −7.5 2.2 11.0 6.4 −4.5 8.9 −0.2 0.1 5.2 3.7
         Sep 12.0 10.8 −0.7 1.2 4.1 14.9 31.0 15.6 1.5 −0.5 −0.5 2.0 0.5
         Oct 4.6 5.8 7.4 −1.2 −4.6 17.8 11.6 −6.1 0.1 1.9 −0.8 −0.3 −0.7
         Nov 9.4 4.6 4.3 4.8 3.5 19.2 32.0 12.8 5.8 4.1 −0.6 0.4 1.9
         Dec 5.7 17.8 6.8 −12.1 −8.5 2.2 −40.5 −42.7 −9.8 3.1 0.2 −17.0 2.4
2003          Jan 18.3 1.8 3.1 16.4 10.8 − 6.1 8.7 14.8 4.1 −1.6 −2.0 3.8 3.9
         Feb − 1.5 5.7 −1.3 −7.2 0.5 10.2 20.1 9.9 4.4 6.3 −1.2 0.9 −1.5
         Mar 0.2 −1.7 −1.2 1.9 5.1 18.7 25.4 6.7 1.7 1.9 −1.6 −1.1 2.6
 German contribution (DM billion) 
2001          Dec 37.0 43.2 21.2 −6.1 8.2 37.3 −35.2 −72.5 −1.5 2.7 0.1 −9.2 4.8
2002          Jan −14.4 −16.9 2.9 2.6 2.0 −42.0 −10.1 31.9 5.6 3.7 −7.1 5.3 3.7
         Feb 3.5 0.2 −6.3 3.3 8.3 3.5 −0.6 −4.1 9.8 2.4 −2.0 6.3 3.1
         Mar − 2.0 −4.7 −18.6 2.7 5.9 14.9 20.8 5.9 26.1 6.8 −2.2 19.8 1.7
         Apr 21.4 19.3 11.4 2.2 10.3 −39.5 −5.8 33.7 −15.0 −2.5 −3.8 −4.1 −4.6
         May 13.0 7.2 −0.4 5.8 16.3 21.0 48.1 27.1 0.7 −0.7 −2.2 4.3 −0.7
         Jun −38.7 −24.7 −21.6 −14.0 −4.3 50.2 0.1 −50.1 −1.0 −1.4 −0.4 4.5 −3.7
         Jul 14.0 −14.5 −5.5 28.5 11.9 −32.3 −11.2 21.1 21.9 1.1 0.1 16.0 4.7
         Aug − 3.4 11.3 12.5 −14.7 4.3 21.5 12.6 −8.9 17.4 −0.3 0.3 10.2 7.3
         Sep 23.5 21.1 −1.4 2.4 8.0 29.1 60.6 30.5 3.0 −1.0 −0.9 3.9 1.0
         Oct 9.1 11.4 14.6 −2.3 −9.0 34.7 22.8 −12.0 0.2 3.8 −1.6 −0.7 −1.3
         Nov 18.4 8.9 8.5 9.5 6.9 37.5 62.5 25.1 11.4 8.1 −1.2 0.8 3.7
         Dec 11.2 34.9 13.3 −23.7 −16.7 4.2 −79.2 −83.5 −19.2 6.0 0.5 −33.3 4.7
2003          Jan 35.7 3.6 6.0 32.1 21.1 −11.9 17.1 28.9 8.0 −3.1 −3.9 7.4 7.5
         Feb − 3.0 11.1 −2.5 −14.1 1.1 19.9 39.3 19.3 8.7 12.3 −2.4 1.7 −2.9
         Mar 0.4 −3.3 −2.4 3.7 10.1 36.5 49.6 13.1 3.3 3.6 −3.2 −2.1 5.1
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national
monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have been monetary aggregates and are therefore not comparable with the er stwhile
eliminated from the flow figures. —1Source: ECB. —2Excluding MFIs ’ German money stocks M1, M2 or M3. —6In Germany, bank debt securities
portfolios; for the German contribution: excluding German MFIs ’portfolios with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market paper; up to
of securities issued by MFIs in the euro area. —3After deduction of the January 2002 Monthly Report they were published in this table together
inter-MFI participations. —4For the European monetary union: including with money market fund shares. —7From 2002, euro currency in
the counterparts of monetary liabilities of central governments. For circulation; up to end-2002, including national banknotes and coins still in
Germany: as of 2003, also including DM banknotes still in circulation (see circulation. Excluding euro-area MFIs ’cash in hand denominated in euro or
also footnote 7). —5The German contributions to the Eurosystem ’s
8*II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
 
   
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V )  5,6,10  
Money stock M2 Money
of which market  paper
Intra- Money stock M1 and debt
Eurosystem Deposits securitiesliability/ with an Deposits Money with
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market maturities
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund of up to    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares 2 years    central  gov-
ernments Total  4 issue  11 Total Total Total lation  7 deposits  8 2 years  8 tions (net)  2,10 (net)  2,6,10   Period months  8,9 
European Monetary union (  5  billion) 1
 
− 11.2 −87.0 − 99.9 116.4 63.8 −40.0 103.8 11.1 41.5 − 7.4 − 1.3 − 7.8 2001         Dec
10.4 − 4.6 −− 9.1 − 26.2 − 40.6 6.8 − 47.3 − 6.7 21.1 − 2.3 19.5 − 0.2 2002         Jan
6.9 1.3 − 0.7 − 10.7 − 10.8 −6.2 − 4.6 − 4.0 4.1 4.9 10.4 − 3.9          Feb
1.7 0.6 − 39.0 27.1 11.4 14.0 − 2.6 12.3 3.4 8.4 3.3 0.2          Mar
0.0 −12.8 − 42.6 39.8 40.2 7.4 32.8 5.4 − 5.8 − 1.5 7.9 − 3.6          Apr
− 8.5 13.0 − 47.8 27.5 14.3 12.2 2.1 10.9 2.3 6.7 4.0 9.5          May
6.0 47.9 − 25.2 46.3 60.6 12.0 48.6 −20.6 6.3 − 6.1 − 7.3 − 7.8          Jun
− 3.1 −24.6 −− 13.2 − 15.9 − 22.9 11.0 − 33.8 4.2 2.8 − 0.7 12.0 − 8.6          Jul
− 11.0 − 8.9 − 13.2 − 7.9 − 27.3 4.4 − 31.7 13.5 6.0 7.7 12.3 1.1          Aug
1.6 3.7 − 44.7 41.4 62.5 5.6 56.9 −23.3 2.2 2.4 − 2.7 3.6          Sep
5.5 22.3 − 20.3 18.5 − 8.6 7.2 − 15.8 20.4 6.7 − 2.8 2.0 2.7          Oct
− 4.3 −14.5 − 72.8 65.0 61.2 7.5 53.8 − 7.3 11.1 − 4.4 14.7 − 2.6          Nov
− 11.0 − 3.7 − 82.8 96.3 74.0 19.8 54.2 − 8.0 30.3 − 3.2 − 6.6 − 3.7          Dec
15.6 15.1 − 10.2 − 28.8 − 58.6 −7.6 − 51.0 2.6 27.1 15.1 19.6 4.3 2003          Jan
18.3 −20.8 − 37.3 23.7 5.7 7.3 − 1.6 2.5 15.5 0.9 12.1 0.7          Feb
− 5.9 8.0 − 38.0 52.1 46.5 7.8 38.7 − 6.2 11.8 −10.6 4.2 − 7.7          Mar
 German contribution (  5  billion) 
− 7.4 27.1 − 19.2 13.2 − 9.5 −24.4 14.9 6.3 16.5 0.9 1.7 3.4 2001          Dec
1.0 − 6.3 11.6 − 26.3 − 25.7 − 18.0 12 −4.1 − 13.8 −10.2 2.4 − 2.4 1.2 0.6 2002          Jan
− 0.7 − 4.9 − 3.4 4.1 − 0.1 3.9 4.5 − 0.6 − 3.5 − 0.5 1.0 0.5 2.8          Feb
− 0.0 − 8.6 3.4 1.9 1.5 − 0.0 2.6 − 2.6 1.6 − 0.1 0.2 − 0.2 0.5          Mar
− 1.9 − 1.4 1.3 1.7 0.2 12.4 3.1 9.3 − 4.8 − 7.3 − 0.3 − 0.3 2.1          Apr
0.7 − 0.6 2.9 16.8 12.6 8.7 2.5 6.2 4.5 − 0.6 1.3 0.4 2.5          May
0.5 − 5.1 1.0 10.9 15.7 16.4 3.3 13.1 0.3 − 1.0 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 3.7          Jun
− 1.1 −13.7 2.0 − 5.8 − 3.2 − 1.5 3.7 − 5.1 − 0.2 − 1.5 − 1.0 0.3 − 1.8          Jul
1.3 − 4.3 3.2 3.3 − 0.4 − 4.3 0.9 − 5.2 3.7 0.1 1.2 1.3 1.2          Aug
1.0 10.7 2.2 13.7 8.4 16.5 1.6 14.9 − 9.0 1.0 6.4 0.1 − 0.8          Sep
− 1.6 8.5 2.0 15.5 11.7 2.7 1.5 1.2 6.8 2.2 − 1.0 0.6 4.2          Oct
− 0.6 − 6.1 1.5 29.5 32.1 34.3 2.5 31.8 − 5.6 3.3 − 3.2 − 0.2 0.8          Nov
0.0 − 3.8 1.5 22.8 25.4 5.3 4.3 1.0 7.2 12.8 − 3.1 − 0.5 0.9          Dec
− 0.8 12.9 0.5 − 3.9 − 10.6 − 10.0 −0.7 − 9.3 − 4.7 4.1 5.3 2.5 − 1.1 2003         Jan
1.4 −18.3 2.2 21.1 9.5 7.3 1.7 5.6 − 0.7 3.0 2.3 1.3 8.1          Feb
− 1.7 15.8 1.5 3.0 6.0 9.6 2.5 7.1 − 5.2 1.7 0.4 0.6 − 4.0          Mar
 German contribution (DM billion) 
− 14.5 52.9 − 37.6 25.9 − 18.6 −47.8 29.2 12.3 32.2 1.8 3.3 6.6 2001          Dec
1.9 −12.3 22.7 − 51.5 − 50.3 − 35.1 12 −8.1 − 27.0 −19.9 4.7 − 4.7 2.3 1.2 2002          Jan
− 1.3 − 9.7 − 6.6 8.1 − 0.2 7.5 8.8 − 1.2 − 6.8 − 0.9 1.9 1.0 5.4          Feb
− 0.1 −16.8 6.6 3.8 2.9 − 0.1 5.0 − 5.1 3.1 − 0.1 0.3 − 0.4 1.0          Mar
− 3.7 − 2.8 2.5 3.3 0.4 24.2 6.1 18.1 − 9.4 − 14.4 − 0.6 − 0.6 4.1          Apr
1.4 − 1.2 5.6 32.9 24.6 16.9 4.8 12.1 8.8 − 1.2 2.6 0.8 4.9          May
0.9 −10.0 2.0 21.4 30.6 32.0 6.5 25.6 0.6 − 2.0 − 1.2 − 1.0 − 7.2          Jun
− 2.1 −26.8 4.0 − 11.3 − 6.3 − 2.9 7.2 − 10.1 − 0.4 − 2.9 − 2.0 0.6 − 3.6          Jul
2.6 − 8.4 6.2 6.5 − 0.8 − 8.4 1.8 − 10.1 7.3 0.2 2.3 2.6 2.4          Aug
2.0 21.0 4.2 26.8 16.5 32.2 3.1 29.1 −17.5 1.9 12.5 0.2 − 1.5          Sep
− 3.2 16.6 4.0 30.2 22.8 5.3 2.9 2.4 13.2 4.3 − 2.0 1.2 8.2          Oct
− 1.3 −12.0 2.8 57.6 62.7 67.1 4.9 62.2 −10.9 6.4 − 6.4 − 0.3 1.6          Nov
0.1 − 7.4 3.0 44.6 49.6 10.5 8.5 2.0 14.1 25.1 − 6.0 − 0.9 1.8          Dec
− 1.6 25.2 1.0 − 7.7 − 20.7 − 19.5 −1.4 − 18.1 − 9.2 8.1 10.3 4.9 − 2.2 2003          Jan
2.8 −35.8 4.4 41.3 18.6 14.2 3.3 10.9 − 1.4 5.8 4.4 2.5 15.8          Feb
− 3.3 31.0 2.9 5.9 11.8 18.7 4.8 13.9 −10.1 3.2 0.8 1.2 − 7.8          Mar
in currencies of the euro area. From 2002 the German contribution contains deposits. —10Paper held by residents outside the euro area has been
the euro banknote volume put into circulation by the Bundesbank eliminated. —11For the German contribution: the difference between the
according to the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see footnote volume of euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the
3 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put amount disclosed in accordance with the accounting regime chosen by theinto circulation by the Bundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total Eurosystem (see also footnote 3 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). —
the item “Intra-Eurosystem liability/claim related to banknote issue “.— 12Includes statistically non-eliminated decrease of
 5 
11.6 billion (DM22.7
8For European monetary union: including the monetary liabilities of central billion) owing to the change in the method of recording banknote
governments (Post Office, Treasury). —9In Germany, only savings circulation (see also footnotes 7 and 11). 
9*II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
 
 
 
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and individuals Public authorities
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
End of assets or Debt other Debt euro-area Other
year/month liabilities Total Total Loans securities  2 equities Total Loans securities  3 residents assets
 European monetary union (  5  billion) 1
 
2001          Dec 13,576.7 9,451.3 7,424.4 6,519.3 336.9 568.1 2,026.9 847.7 1,179.2 2,807.8 1,317.6
2002          Jan 13,667.3 9,495.6 7,444.4 6,534.4 341.9 568.1 2,051.1 844.8 1,206.3 2,829.6 1,342.2
         Feb 13,657.2 9,520.6 7,465.4 6,548.7 349.9 566.7 2,055.3 847.5 1,207.8 2,833.2 1,303.4         Mar 13,694.4 9,594.9 7,513.2 6,606.1 346.6 560.5 2,081.7 852.6 1,229.1 2,845.2 1,254.2
         Apr 13,680.2 9,612.5 7,550.9 6,641.2 342.9 566.8 2,061.7 832.4 1,229.3 2,826.5 1,241.2
         May 13,711.6 9,645.0 7,573.6 6,659.7 345.0 568.9 2,071.5 829.2 1,242.3 2,845.8 1,220.7         Jun 13,642.3 9,667.1 7,598.0 6,691.1 343.0 563.9 2,069.1 830.1 1,239.0 2,731.2 1,243.9
         Jul 13,679.1 9,652.9 7,587.0 6,692.6 345.3 549.1 2,065.9 828.5 1,237.4 2,756.7 1,269.5
         Aug 13,649.2 9,645.5 7,592.5 6,692.3 341.0 559.1 2,053.0 818.0 1,235.0 2,745.3 1,258.4         Sep 13,822.3 9,700.5 7,626.6 6,726.8 350.8 549.1 2,073.9 820.8 1,253.2 2,813.5 1,308.3
         Oct 13,863.8 9,726.2 7,657.3 6,742.7 353.1 561.5 2,068.8 820.4 1,248.5 2,863.5 1,274.1
         Nov 14,010.7 9,761.6 7,678.0 6,754.5 356.7 566.8 2,083.6 829.2 1,254.4 2,937.0 1,312.1         Dec 13,929.6 9,780.7 7,724.4 6,778.0 367.7 578.6 2,056.4 836.2 1,220.2 2,838.2 1,310.7
2003          Jan 13,970.0 9,849.5 7,747.1 6,803.9 375.3 567.9 2,102.4 827.6 1,274.7 2,849.3 1,271.2
         Feb 14,113.2 9,899.9 7,774.2 6,827.2 381.7 565.3 2,125.7 828.0 1,297.7 2,907.8 1,305.5         Mar 14,125.8 9,937.1 7,800.0 6,850.9 383.4 565.7 2,137.1 829.3 1,307.8 2,884.6 1,304.2
 German contribution (  5  billion) 
2001          Dec 4,328.2 3,321.6 2,608.3 2,289.4 66.0 252.9 713.3 499.3 213.9 821.2 185.4
2002          Jan 4,321.4 3,315.2 2,600.6 2,280.2 66.9 253.4 714.6 499.7 215.0 820.0 186.2
         Feb 4,322.9 3,316.3 2,600.1 2,283.4 65.1 251.6 716.2 497.1 219.1 822.1 184.4         Mar 4,334.0 3,315.0 2,597.6 2,290.4 67.2 240.1 717.4 495.4 221.9 829.6 189.3
         Apr 4,330.7 3,324.0 2,605.7 2,293.1 69.0 243.7 718.3 491.2 227.1 816.6 190.1
         May 4,341.9 3,327.7 2,606.9 2,294.6 69.2 243.2 720.8 485.6 235.2 827.5 186.7         Jun 4,291.6 3,309.3 2,596.0 2,294.8 69.7 231.6 713.3 480.4 232.8 800.0 182.3
         Jul 4,303.6 3,317.5 2,589.5 2,291.3 69.8 228.4 728.0 489.0 239.0 801.2 184.9
         Aug 4,307.0 3,315.3 2,594.9 2,289.8 67.1 238.0 720.4 479.8 240.6 810.2 181.5         Sep 4,355.6 3,327.5 2,605.3 2,301.6 66.5 237.3 722.2 477.0 245.2 841.9 186.1
         Oct 4,370.5 3,332.3 2,611.3 2,299.8 69.8 241.7 721.0 480.4 240.6 850.3 188.0
         Nov 4,413.9 3,341.1 2,615.3 2,299.5 69.6 246.2 725.8 481.7 244.1 879.3 193.5         Dec 4,359.5 3,344.6 2,630.8 2,304.4 66.6 259.8 713.8 478.4 235.4 823.8 191.1
2003          Jan 4,360.7 3,353.2 2,623.2 2,298.5 66.1 258.7 730.0 484.0 246.1 824.1 183.4
         Feb 4,383.3 3,351.8 2,627.3 2,303.8 66.5 257.0 724.6 477.9 246.6 841.9 189.5         Mar 4,395.2 3,351.2 2,624.8 2,302.6 67.2 255.0 726.4 474.6 251.7 861.8 182.2
 German contribution (DM billion) 
2001          Dec 8,465.3 6,496.5 5,101.4 4,477.7 129.1 494.7 1,395.0 976.6 418.4 1,606.2 362.6
2002          Jan 8,451.9 6,484.0 5,086.3 4,459.7 130.9 495.7 1,397.7 977.3 420.4 1,603.7 364.2
         Feb 8,454.8 6,486.2 5,085.4 4,465.9 127.4 492.1 1,400.8 972.2 428.6 1,607.8 360.7         Mar 8,476.5 6,483.6 5,080.5 4,479.6 131.4 469.5 1,403.1 969.0 434.1 1,622.6 370.3
         Apr 8,470.2 6,501.2 5,096.3 4,484.9 134.9 476.6 1,404.8 960.6 444.2 1,597.2 371.8
         May 8,492.0 6,508.4 5,098.7 4,487.8 135.3 475.6 1,409.8 949.7 460.0 1,618.4 365.2         Jun 8,393.6 6,472.4 5,077.4 4,488.2 136.2 452.9 1,395.0 939.6 455.4 1,564.7 356.6
         Jul 8,417.2 6,488.5 5,064.7 4,481.5 136.6 446.6 1,423.8 956.4 467.4 1,567.0 361.7
         Aug 8,423.8 6,484.3 5,075.2 4,478.5 131.2 465.5 1,409.0 938.4 470.6 1,584.5 355.0         Sep 8,518.8 6,508.1 5,095.6 4,501.5 130.0 464.1 1,412.5 932.9 479.7 1,646.6 364.0
         Oct 8,548.0 6,517.3 5,107.2 4,497.9 136.5 472.7 1,410.1 939.5 470.6 1,663.0 367.6
         Nov 8,632.8 6,534.6 5,115.1 4,497.3 136.2 481.6 1,419.5 942.1 477.4 1,719.7 378.5         Dec 8,526.4 6,541.5 5,145.4 4,507.0 130.3 508.1 1,396.1 935.7 460.4 1,611.2 373.7
2003          Jan 8,528.8 6,558.3 5,130.5 4,495.4 129.2 505.9 1,427.8 946.5 481.2 1,611.8 358.7
         Feb 8,572.9 6,555.6 5,138.5 4,505.9 130.0 502.6 1,417.1 934.7 482.4 1,646.7 370.6         Mar 8,596.3 6,554.3 5,133.7 4,503.6 131.4 498.7 1,420.6 928.3 492.3 1,685.5 356.4
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building circulation; up to end-2002, also including national banknotes and coi ns still
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p 12*). Excluding MFIs ‘cash in hand (in
and national central banks (the Eurosystem). —1Source: ECB. —2Including euro). From 2002 the German contribution includes the volume of euro
money market paper of enterprises. —3Including Treasury bills and other banknotes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with the
money market paper of public authorities. —4From 2002, euro currency in
10*II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
 
   
 
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and individuals
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  6 
over
Currency 1 year and
in of which up to up to over up to over
Total in euro  5 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months  End of circulation  4 
year/month
European monetary union (  5  billion) 1
 
239.7 5,698.1 5,360.0 5,403.0 1,826.5 952.2 80.0 1,142.4 1,286.5 115.3 2001          Dec
246.5 5,669.6 5,318.9 5,363.4 1,773.6 948.3 79.5 1,146.2 1,304.0 111.8 2002          Jan
240.3 5,671.3 5,311.3 5,359.8 1,768.1 946.9 78.7 1,148.1 1,307.2 110.8          Feb
254.3 5,686.3 5,327.3 5,376.5 1,769.8 954.6 80.4 1,151.5 1,310.6 109.5          Mar
261.7 5,711.2 5,355.4 5,401.0 1,797.8 959.7 81.0 1,150.8 1,304.2 107.5          Apr
273.9 5,713.5 5,366.7 5,409.7 1,801.1 961.3 81.5 1,153.0 1,306.4 106.4          May285.8 5,749.3 5,407.9 5,438.3 1,844.4 938.5 81.5 1,155.0 1,312.7 106.2          Jun
296.8 5,725.7 5,384.9 5,422.5 1,816.1 948.2 82.6 1,154.1 1,315.4 106.2          Jul
301.2 5,688.0 5,358.6 5,396.2 1,783.7 959.7 83.3 1,142.5 1,320.6 106.4          Aug306.7 5,730.1 5,399.2 5,434.7 1,837.3 941.0 82.9 1,143.6 1,323.2 106.8          Sep
313.9 5,745.4 5,410.6 5,446.2 1,819.2 964.2 82.8 1,144.9 1,329.4 105.8          Oct
321.4 5,799.5 5,466.9 5,504.6 1,871.3 956.8 82.4 1,148.3 1,340.5 105.3          Nov341.2 5,876.1 5,563.9 5,588.6 1,924.6 947.6 81.0 1,160.8 1,369.2 105.3          Dec
312.0 5,869.3 5,536.0 5,568.5 1,878.8 950.2 79.3 1,162.8 1,391.4 105.9 2003          Jan
319.4 5,913.4 5,561.1 5,586.7 1,875.3 950.1 78.1 1,172.6 1,406.1 104.7          Feb
327.2 5,954.2 5,607.7 5,636.2 1,912.9 946.1 77.4 1,178.9 1,417.7 103.1          Mar
 German contribution (  5  billion) 
68.0 2,135.1 2,048.0 2,010.0 519.0 244.7 18.6 650.2 463.9 113.6 2001          Dec
7 63.8 2,113.2 2,024.0 1,989.9 506.4 236.6 18.5 652.0 466.4 110.0 2002          Jan
68.3 2,108.1 2,019.4 1,986.2 505.6 235.1 17.1 653.5 465.9 109.0          Feb
70.9 2,109.1 2,021.9 1,989.1 504.1 237.3 17.1 656.8 465.9 107.8          Mar
74.0 2,100.4 2,015.8 1,984.7 513.9 234.0 17.1 655.2 458.6 105.9          Apr
76.5 2,107.7 2,023.6 1,987.3 519.1 234.2 17.1 654.1 457.9 104.8          May79.8 2,119.3 2,035.6 1,997.1 530.9 234.4 17.3 653.0 457.0 104.6          Jun
83.4 2,112.5 2,030.5 1,993.2 525.8 235.8 17.6 653.9 455.5 104.6          Jul
84.3 2,098.8 2,018.1 1,979.2 521.5 239.6 17.6 640.1 455.6 104.8          Aug85.9 2,105.7 2,023.7 1,987.6 536.6 233.0 17.5 639.6 456.5 104.3          Sep
87.4 2,115.1 2,035.2 2,003.0 538.0 243.7 17.5 641.5 458.8 103.5          Oct
89.9 2,147.3 2,066.9 2,035.6 569.5 237.6 17.9 645.7 462.0 102.9          Nov94.2 2,170.7 2,092.1 2,054.2 567.8 242.4 18.2 648.0 474.8 103.1          Dec
84.9 2,159.7 2,082.0 2,048.3 561.2 238.7 18.6 649.7 478.9 101.2 2003          Jan
86.6 2,173.9 2,094.9 2,058.5 564.8 237.3 18.5 656.1 481.8 100.0          Feb
89.0 2,175.8 2,098.2 2,063.3 572.0 232.8 18.6 657.9 483.5 98.4          Mar
 German contribution (DM billion) 
132.9 4,175.9 4,005.5 3,931.2 1,015.2 478.6 36.4 1,271.6 907.4 222.1 2001          Dec
7 124.8 4,133.1 3,958.6 3,891.8 990.5 462.7 36.2 1,275.2 912.2 215.1 2002          Jan
133.6 4,123.1 3,949.5 3,884.6 988.8 459.9 33.5 1,278.1 911.3 213.1          Feb138.7 4,125.0 3,954.6 3,890.3 986.0 464.2 33.5 1,284.6 911.3 210.9          Mar
144.7 4,108.0 3,942.5 3,881.8 1,005.1 457.6 33.5 1,281.5 897.0 207.1          Apr
149.6 4,122.4 3,957.8 3,886.7 1,015.2 458.1 33.5 1,279.4 895.7 204.9          May156.0 4,145.0 3,981.3 3,906.0 1,038.3 458.5 33.8 1,277.2 893.8 204.5          Jun
163.2 4,131.7 3,971.2 3,898.4 1,028.4 461.2 34.4 1,279.0 890.9 204.6          Jul
165.0 4,105.0 3,947.1 3,871.0 1,020.0 468.6 34.5 1,252.0 891.0 204.9          Aug168.1 4,118.3 3,958.0 3,887.3 1,049.4 455.7 34.3 1,251.0 892.9 204.0          Sep
170.9 4,136.7 3,980.5 3,917.6 1,052.2 476.7 34.3 1,254.7 897.2 202.4          Oct
175.8 4,199.8 4,042.5 3,981.3 1,113.8 464.7 35.1 1,262.9 903.6 201.3          Nov184.3 4,245.5 4,091.8 4,017.7 1,110.5 474.0 35.5 1,267.4 928.6 201.7          Dec
166.0 4,223.9 4,072.0 4,006.2 1,097.7 466.9 36.4 1,270.7 936.6 197.8 2003          Jan
169.3 4,251.9 4,097.3 4,026.0 1,104.6 464.1 36.2 1,283.2 942.4 195.5          Feb
174.1 4,255.4 4,103.7 4,035.4 1,118.8 455.4 36.4 1,286.8 945.7 192.4          Mar
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see footnote 3 on banknote liability items “).—5Excluding central governments deposits. —6In
circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into circulation Germany, only saving deposits. —7Includes decrease of
 5 
11.6 billion
by the Bundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the item (DM22.7 billion) owing to the change in the method of recording banknote
“Intra-Eurosystem liability/claim related to banknote issue “(see “Other circulation (see also footnote 4). 
11*II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (cont ’d) *
 
 
 
Liabilities (cont ’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont ’d)  
 
Public authorities Repo transactions Debt securitieswith non-banks
Other public authorities in the euro area
With agreed At agreedmaturities of notice of  
2 
Money
over of which market of which
Central 1 year and Enterprises fund denom-
End of govern- up to up to over up to over and shares inatedyear/month ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total individuals (net)  
3 Total in euro
 European monetary union (  5  billion) 1
 
2001          Dec 139.0 156.0 69.7 54.9 1.7 26.7 2.6 0.5 218.5 214.6 398.0 1,760.7 1,447.7
2002          Jan 148.9 157.3 74.1 51.4 1.7 27.0 2.5 0.5 216.2 211.4 416.6 1,775.9 1,457.5
         Feb 155.7 155.7 75.1 49.4 1.7 26.6 2.5 0.5 221.1 215.8 427.0 1,778.2 1,456.9         Mar 157.5 152.3 69.3 51.8 1.6 26.7 2.5 0.5 229.6 224.9 431.2 1,793.1 1,468.5
         Apr 157.5 152.7 71.9 50.0 1.4 26.6 2.5 0.4 228.1 223.8 437.5 1,785.5 1,460.7
         May 149.0 154.8 68.8 55.2 1.4 26.6 2.4 0.4 234.8 230.7 442.6 1,805.0 1,475.7         Jun 155.0 156.0 71.6 53.3 1.5 26.7 2.4 0.4 229.6 225.9 439.2 1,788.3 1,470.9
         Jul 151.9 151.3 69.3 51.4 1.5 26.3 2.4 0.4 228.8 224.9 450.3 1,796.1 1,473.8
         Aug 141.0 150.8 67.8 52.4 1.5 26.3 2.4 0.4 236.5 231.9 463.4 1,814.3 1,493.3         Sep 146.3 149.1 70.7 48.4 1.3 25.9 2.4 0.4 238.3 234.4 460.4 1,813.0 1,491.3
         Oct 151.8 147.4 72.2 45.3 1.3 25.6 2.5 0.4 235.6 232.1 462.7 1,823.0 1,490.3
         Nov 147.5 147.4 71.9 45.6 1.3 25.6 2.5 0.4 229.6 225.8 477.1 1,831.7 1,491.9         Dec 136.4 151.1 75.8 45.1 1.4 25.6 2.8 0.4 226.4 224.0 470.1 1,814.5 1,482.9
2003          Jan 155.1 145.8 71.1 45.9 1.2 24.4 2.9 0.4 233.0 229.7 534.7 1,787.2 1,477.8
         Feb 175.9 150.8 72.2 49.9 1.0 24.4 2.9 0.4 233.9 230.4 547.0 1,797.3 1,481.5         Mar 170.0 148.0 71.6 47.5 0.9 24.6 3.1 0.3 223.3 220.1 550.4 1,798.2 1,481.2
 German contribution (  5  billion) 
2001          Dec 49.1 75.9 14.6 35.2 1.2 22.7 1.7 0.5 4.9 4.9 30.2 794.3 699.5
2002          Jan 50.1 73.3 13.6 33.3 1.2 23.0 1.7 0.5 2.5 2.5 31.4 798.9 700.3
         Feb 49.4 72.5 13.8 32.6 1.2 22.7 1.7 0.5 3.5 3.5 31.8 804.7 706.4         Mar 49.4 70.6 12.6 32.0 1.2 22.8 1.6 0.5 3.7 3.7 31.6 815.2 715.0
         Apr 47.5 68.2 11.8 30.6 1.0 22.7 1.6 0.4 3.4 3.4 31.3 812.8 712.9
         May 48.2 72.3 12.4 34.2 1.0 22.7 1.6 0.4 4.7 4.7 31.7 814.1 712.6         Jun 48.7 73.5 13.8 34.1 1.1 22.6 1.6 0.4 4.1 4.1 31.3 808.9 712.2
         Jul 47.6 71.7 13.9 32.3 1.0 22.5 1.5 0.4 3.1 3.1 31.6 817.3 715.7
         Aug 48.9 70.7 13.0 32.2 1.0 22.6 1.6 0.4 4.3 4.3 32.9 840.1 733.6         Sep 49.9 68.2 13.1 30.0 0.9 22.2 1.6 0.4 10.7 10.7 33.0 841.1 733.7
         Oct 48.3 63.7 12.8 26.0 0.9 22.0 1.6 0.4 9.6 9.6 33.6 844.6 730.7
         Nov 47.7 64.1 13.1 26.2 0.9 21.9 1.6 0.4 6.4 6.4 33.4 844.9 728.7         Dec 47.7 68.7 15.7 27.7 1.0 22.2 1.6 0.4 3.3 3.3 33.0 826.4 716.6
2003          Jan 46.9 64.5 12.7 26.9 1.0 21.8 1.7 0.4 8.6 8.6 35.5 817.6 702.1
         Feb 48.3 67.2 14.8 28.0 0.7 21.7 1.7 0.4 10.9 10.9 36.8 825.8 710.3         Mar 46.6 65.9 14.5 27.1 0.7 21.6 1.6 0.3 11.2 11.2 37.4 819.4 701.0
 German contribution (DM billion) 
2001          Dec 96.1 148.5 28.6 68.9 2.3 44.4 3.4 1.0 9.7 9.6 59.0 1,553.6 1,368.1
2002          Jan 98.0 143.3 26.6 65.1 2.4 45.0 3.3 0.9 5.0 5.0 61.3 1,562.5 1,369.7
         Feb 96.7 141.8 27.0 63.8 2.4 44.4 3.3 0.9 6.9 6.9 62.3 1,573.9 1,381.6         Mar 96.6 138.1 24.6 62.6 2.4 44.5 3.2 0.9 7.2 7.2 61.9 1,594.3 1,398.5
         Apr 92.9 133.3 23.1 59.9 2.0 44.4 3.1 0.9 6.6 6.6 61.3 1,589.7 1,394.4
         May 94.3 141.4 24.2 66.8 2.0 44.4 3.1 0.9 9.2 9.2 62.1 1,592.3 1,393.7         Jun 95.2 143.8 26.9 66.7 2.1 44.2 3.0 0.9 8.1 8.1 61.2 1,582.0 1,393.0
         Jul 93.1 140.3 27.2 63.2 2.0 44.1 3.0 0.8 6.1 6.1 61.7 1,598.6 1,399.8
         Aug 95.7 138.3 25.3 62.9 2.0 44.1 3.1 0.8 8.3 8.3 64.3 1,643.1 1,434.7         Sep 97.7 133.3 25.5 58.7 1.8 43.4 3.1 0.8 20.8 20.8 64.5 1,645.0 1,435.0
         Oct 94.5 124.6 25.1 50.9 1.7 43.0 3.0 0.8 18.9 18.9 65.7 1,651.9 1,429.1
         Nov 93.2 125.3 25.7 51.2 1.7 42.8 3.1 0.8 12.5 12.5 65.4 1,652.5 1,425.3         Dec 93.3 134.4 30.8 54.2 1.9 43.5 3.2 0.8 6.5 6.5 64.5 1,616.3 1,401.6
2003          Jan 91.7 126.1 24.9 52.6 1.9 42.7 3.2 0.8 16.8 16.8 69.4 1,599.2 1,373.2
         Feb 94.4 131.4 28.9 54.7 1.3 42.4 3.2 0.7 21.2 21.2 71.9 1,615.1 1,389.3         Mar 91.2 128.8 28.3 53.0 1.3 42.3 3.2 0.7 22.0 22.0 73.1 1,602.5 1,371.0
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building securities issued. —6After deduction of inter-MFI participations. —7The
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank German contributions to the Eurosystem ’s monetary aggregates should on
and national central banks (the Eurosystem). —1Source: ECB. —2In no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and are
Germany: only savings deposits. —3Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the therefore not comparable to the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2 or
German contribution: excluding German MFIs ’portfolios of securities issued M3. —8From 2003, including DM banknotes still in circulation (see also foot-
by MFIs in the euro area. —4In Germany, bank debt securities with note 4 on p 10*). —9For the German contribution: the difference between
maturities of up to one year are classed as money market paper; up to the the volume of euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the
January 2002 Monthly Report they were published in this table together amount disclosed in accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the
with money market fund shares. —5Excluding liabilities arising from Eurosystem (see also footnote 3 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). —
12*II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
 
   
 
 Memo item
 Other liability items Monetary aggregates  7 
 
issued (net)  3 
With maturities of
of which Monetary
Intra- liabilitiesEurosystem- of centralliability/ govern-
over Liabilities Excess claim Monetary ments1 year and to non- Capital of related to capital (Post,
up to up to over euro-area and inter-MFI banknote forma- Office, End of1 year  
4 2 years 2 years residents  5 reseves  6 liabilities Total  8 issue  9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12 tion 13 year/month Treasury)  14 
European monetary union (  5  billion) 1
 
... ... 1,613.6 2,723.1 995.2 − 8.5 1,551.8 − 2,207.9 4,664.6 5,427.0 3,893.7 150.7 2001          Dec
... ... 1,632.9 2,759.5 1,007.5 2.0 1,573.6 − 2,168.4 4,639.7 5,414.4 3,925.9 158.0 2002          Jan
... ... 1,638.8 2,768.0 1,011.5 1.1 1,538.8 − 2,157.4 4,628.7 5,415.5 3,936.2 158.7          Feb
... ... 1,655.8 2,791.3 1,010.7 1.3 1,496.6 − 2,168.5 4,654.8 5,453.0 3,954.6 159.8          Mar
... ... 1,650.2 2,774.0 1,004.6 − 8.9 1,486.6 − 2,207.2 4,691.2 5,491.5 3,940.1 161.0          Apr
... ... 1,660.6 2,755.1 1,008.8 − 7.3 1,485.2 − 2,219.3 4,712.8 5,534.2 3,955.7 160.8          May
... ... 1,655.2 2,620.0 985.8 10.7 1,533.6 − 2,277.9 4,752.8 5,554.4 3,929.3 161.0          Jun
... ... 1,670.1 2,648.2 993.4 − 2.9 1,542.7 − 2,256.1 4,742.8 5,547.4 3,950.5 159.2          Jul
... ... 1,687.0 2,616.4 1,004.3 − 0.2 1,525.4 − 2,228.6 4,734.3 5,560.8 3,967.0 161.7          Aug
... ... 1,680.8 2,674.8 1,015.9 − 5.0 1,588.0 − 2,291.0 4,775.7 5,605.8 3,973.4 161.8          Sep
... ... 1,688.7 2,697.9 1,013.9 3.3 1,568.2 − 2,282.3 4,793.5 5,625.5 3,979.3 162.7          Oct
... ... 1,698.9 2,737.8 1,016.0 − 4.0 1,601.5 − 2,342.3 4,857.3 5,695.3 3,994.6 163.5          Nov
... ... 1,685.0 2,629.3 995.8 4.3 1,571.8 − 2,424.4 4,958.4 5,783.3 3,973.0 169.7          Dec
... ... 1,680.9 2,665.1 1,001.8 4.2 1,562.5 − 2,342.7 4,905.1 5,780.0 3,976.2 172.4 2003          Jan
... ... 1,688.9 2,717.7 1,004.3 3.5 1,577.2 − 2,348.4 4,928.8 5,817.6 3,995.3 174.0          Feb
... ... 1,696.2 2,695.4 996.8 7.7 1,573.2 − 2,394.2 4,979.4 5,854.1 3,999.9 174.8          Mar
 German contribution (  5  billion) 
20.4 44.5 729.5 702.1 265.3 10.6 317.7 − 601.6 1,367.0 1,466.9 1,781.7 −2001          Dec
25.6 35.1 738.2 724.3 267.2 − 0.1 320.2 11.6 583.8 1,341.5 1,436.1 1,790.8 −2002          Jan
25.8 37.6 741.2 721.4 272.1 − 0.6 313.4 8.2 587.7 1,341.4 1,440.2 1,798.9 −         Feb
26.3 37.7 751.2 722.2 272.4 − 2.7 311.6 11.6 587.6 1,342.8 1,442.1 1,811.4 −         Mar
27.0 38.7 747.1 730.0 270.0 − 1.1 310.0 12.9 599.7 1,342.7 1,443.1 1,801.3 −         Apr
28.9 39.4 745.9 730.3 269.8 − 8.2 315.1 15.7 607.9 1,354.0 1,458.7 1,797.8 −         May
26.8 38.1 743.9 687.4 265.5 − 24.8 320.1 16.7 624.4 1,369.8 1,470.1 1,790.1 −         Jun
26.0 38.7 752.7 705.4 267.7 − 39.0 321.5 18.8 623.1 1,366.9 1,466.2 1,801.9 −         Jul
28.4 37.5 774.2 698.7 272.4 − 50.5 326.0 22.0 618.8 1,366.4 1,469.4 1,814.5 −         Aug
28.4 36.8 775.9 713.6 274.4 − 48.6 339.8 24.1 635.6 1,375.1 1,483.9 1,816.9 −         Sep
32.2 37.1 775.2 706.9 272.8 − 42.1 342.7 26.2 638.2 1,386.7 1,499.3 1,815.4 −         Oct
32.1 38.1 774.7 717.3 274.2 − 47.5 347.9 27.6 672.5 1,418.7 1,528.7 1,819.8 −         Nov
32.1 39.0 755.3 661.0 277.7 − 56.9 350.0 29.1 677.8 1,443.4 1,550.8 1,806.8 −         Dec
26.9 37.4 753.4 670.0 283.0 − 50.3 351.7 29.6 658.9 1,424.6 1,532.9 1,809.5 −2003          Jan
34.6 37.7 753.4 679.1 279.5 − 63.2 353.9 31.9 666.1 1,434.1 1,554.0 1,811.1 −         Feb
31.9 36.5 751.0 682.5 280.3 − 48.9 348.6 33.3 675.5 1,439.9 1,556.9 1,809.6 −         Mar
 German contribution (DM billion) 
39.8 87.0 1,426.8 1,373.1 518.9 20.8 621.4 − 1,176.7 2,673.6 2,869.1 3,484.7 −2001          Dec
50.1 68.6 1,443.8 1,416.6 522.6 − 0.3 626.3 22.7 1,141.9 2,623.7 2,808.8 3,502.5 −2002          Jan
50.6 73.6 1,449.7 1,411.0 532.1 − 1.1 613.0 16.1 1,149.4 2,623.5 2,816.9 3,518.3 −         Feb
51.5 73.6 1,469.2 1,412.4 532.8 − 5.3 609.5 22.7 1,149.2 2,626.3 2,820.5 3,542.8 −         Mar
52.7 75.7 1,461.3 1,427.7 528.0 − 2.1 606.3 25.2 1,172.9 2,626.0 2,822.4 3,523.1 −         Apr
56.4 77.0 1,458.9 1,428.4 527.7 − 16.1 616.4 30.7 1,189.0 2,648.2 2,852.9 3,516.1 −         May
52.4 74.6 1,455.0 1,344.4 519.3 − 48.5 626.1 32.8 1,221.2 2,679.1 2,875.4 3,501.1 −         Jun
50.8 75.6 1,472.1 1,379.6 523.6 − 76.2 628.9 36.7 1,218.7 2,673.3 2,867.6 3,524.2 −         Jul
55.6 73.3 1,514.2 1,366.5 532.8 − 98.8 637.6 43.0 1,210.3 2,672.4 2,873.9 3,548.9 −         Aug
55.5 71.9 1,517.6 1,395.7 536.6 − 95.0 664.6 47.2 1,243.0 2,689.4 2,902.2 3,553.5 −         Sep
63.1 72.6 1,516.2 1,382.6 533.5 − 82.4 670.2 51.2 1,248.2 2,712.1 2,932.4 3,550.7 −         Oct
62.8 74.4 1,515.2 1,403.0 536.3 − 92.9 680.4 54.0 1,315.3 2,774.6 2,989.8 3,559.3 −         Nov
62.8 76.3 1,477.2 1,292.7 543.2 −111.2 684.6 57.0 1,325.6 2,823.1 3,033.1 3,533.8 −         Dec
52.5 73.1 1,473.5 1,310.5 553.5 − 98.4 687.9 57.9 1,288.6 2,786.2 2,998.1 3,539.0 −2003          Jan
67.7 73.8 1,473.6 1,328.2 546.6 −123.5 692.2 62.3 1,302.8 2,804.8 3,039.4 3,542.1 −         Feb
62.3 71.3 1,468.9 1,334.8 548.3 − 95.7 681.7 65.2 1,321.3 2,816.2 3,045.0 3,539.3 −         Mar
10Currency in circulation (from 2002, euro currency in circulation; up to calculated by adding to this total the item “Intra-Eurosystem liability/claim
end-2002, including national banknotes and coins still in circulation), related to banknote issue “.—11M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities
overnight deposits (excluding central governments ’deposits), and (for the of up to 2 years and at agreed notice of up to 3 months (excluding central
euro area) central governments ’overnight monetary liabilities, which are governments ’deposits) and (for the euro area) central governments ’
not included in the consolidated balance sheet. From 2002 the German monetary liabilities with such maturities. —12M2 plus repo transactions,
contribution includes the euro banknote volume put into circulation by the money market fund shares, money market paper and debt securities up to 2
Bundesbank in accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the years. —13Deposits with agreed maturities of over 2 years and at agreed
Eurosystem (see footnote 3 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). The notice of over 3 months, debt securities with maturities of over 2 years,volume of currency actually put into circulation by the Bundesbank can be capital and reserves. — 14 Non-existent in Germany. 
13*II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  European  monetary  union
  
 3  Banking system ’s liquidity position  * 
Stocks
  
 5  billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions ‘
current
account
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (includingmaintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Baseperiod currency operations operations facility operations facility operations deposits (net)  
4 reserves)  5 money  6 circulation  3 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2000          Oct 396.3 176.5 45.7 0.5 − 0.2 − 354.5 47.4 102.5 114.4 469.1
         Nov 398.6 183.7 45.0 0.2 − 0.2 − 352.7 49.8 109.2 115.7 468.6
         Dec 394.4 210.4 45.0 0.4 − 0.2 − 360.4 61.1 111.1 117.4 478.0
2001          Jan  7 383.7 205.3 45.0 0.5 − 0.6 − 368.3 52.2 94.2 119.1 488.0
         Feb 377.9 188.9 49.8 2.6 − 0.4 − 354.8 57.0 86.3 120.7 476.0
         Mar 375.6 185.2 54.1 0.4 − 0.5 − 353.0 53.0 87.7 121.0 474.5
         Apr 382.1 172.4 58.4 2.2 − 0.5 − 354.6 49.5 89.1 121.4 476.4
         May 384.4 144.0 59.1 0.4 17.0 0.6 − 352.7 39.4 87.5 124.8 478.1
         Jun 385.0 161.7 59.1 0.2 − 0.4 − 351.1 41.3 87.5 125.7 477.3
         Jul 397.6 161.9 59.9 0.2 − 0.4 − 350.8 42.5 98.8 127.1 478.3
         Aug 402.1 164.0 60.0 0.1 − 0.2 − 347.6 48.8 101.8 127.8 475.6
         Sep 401.3 147.1 60.0 0.5 3.5 0.4 − 335.4 45.2 105.4 126.1 461.9
         Oct 389.9 136.7 60.0 1.1 − 0.1 − 325.2 43.6 93.6 125.1 450.4
         Nov 385.0 132.3 60.0 0.2 − 0.3 − 311.3 46.1 93.1 126.7 438.3
         Dec 383.7 122.5 60.0 0.5 12.4 0.8 − 298.0 43.5 109.3 127.4 426.2
2002          Jan 385.2 118.5 60.0 0.4 3.7 0.6 − 344.3 38.3 54.2 130.4 475.2
         Feb 386.0 127.3 60.0 0.2 − 0.1 − 306.2 49.6 85.2 132.6 438.8
         Mar 386.7 114.6 60.0 0.2 − 0.1 − 283.3 54.2 91.8 132.1 415.6
         Apr 395.4 112.7 60.0 0.4 − 0.2 − 285.9 55.9 95.3 131.2 417.3
         May 397.7 110.6 60.0 0.1 − 0.3 − 293.7 49.2 93.5 131.7 425.6
         Jun 396.2 112.6 60.0 0.5 − 0.4 − 300.8 45.1 91.2 131.8 433.0
         Jul 369.1 130.4 60.0 0.2 − 0.2 − 313.4 54.4 60.3 131.4 445.0
         Aug 360.0 139.2 55.2 0.1 − 0.1 − 322.7 50.9 50.8 129.9 452.8
         Sep 362.3 140.9 50.8 0.1 − 0.2 − 323.6 49.1 51.7 129.6 453.4
         Oct 370.0 146.1 45.3 0.1 − 0.1 − 329.2 45.6 58.2 128.3 457.6
         Nov 372.1 147.5 45.0 0.1 − 0.1 − 334.0 42.8 58.6 129.3 463.4
         Dec 371.5 168.1 45.0 1.1 2.0 0.2 − 350.7 51.7 55.5 129.5 480.5
2003          Jan 360.9 176.3 45.0 0.5 − 0.3 − 353.9 43.7 53.3 131.6 485.8
         Feb 356.4 168.6 45.0 0.3 − 0.3 − 340.7 50.2 48.0 131.1 472.2
         Mar 352.5 179.5 45.0 0.2 − 0.1 − 347.8 59.1 40.6 129.6 477.5
         Apr 337.4 179.4 45.0 0.1 − 0.2 − 358.5 52.1 20.5 130.6 489.3
Deutsche Bundesbank
2000          Oct 97.0 87.2 30.7 0.3 − 0.1 − 131.1 0.1 49.5 34.5 165.7
         Nov 98.2 99.1 30.7 0.2 − 0.1 − 130.1 0.1 63.0 34.9 165.1
         Dec 97.6 103.5 31.1 0.2 − 0.1 − 132.0 0.1 65.0 35.2 167.4
2001          Jan 93.0 103.1 28.4 0.3 − 0.3 − 131.2 0.1 57.7 35.6 167.1
         Feb 90.3 93.2 28.3 1.3 − 0.2 − 126.7 0.1 50.0 36.2 163.1
         Mar 89.1 87.6 33.2 0.2 − 0.4 − 126.2 0.1 47.6 35.9 162.4
         Apr 90.1 84.5 37.4 1.5 − 0.2 − 126.2 0.1 50.7 36.4 162.8
         May 90.0 67.4 37.8 0.2 7.5 0.5 − 124.8 0.1 47.6 37.4 162.7
         Jun 89.7 79.9 37.5 0.1 − 0.3 − 123.6 0.1 45.7 37.5 161.4
         Jul 92.8 85.4 37.0 0.1 − 0.3 − 121.8 0.1 55.5 37.7 159.7
         Aug 94.2 77.0 38.2 0.1 − 0.2 − 119.3 0.1 52.0 37.8 157.3
         Sep 93.7 73.3 38.9 0.1 1.3 0.1 − 115.4 0.1 54.6 37.1 152.7
         Oct 91.3 66.3 40.2 0.5 − 0.1 − 110.8 0.1 50.1 37.3 148.2
         Nov 89.8 68.2 38.5 0.2 − 0.2 − 104.6 0.1 53.8 38.0 142.9
         Dec 89.4 62.4 40.1 0.2 5.0 0.5 − 96.6 0.1 67.1 37.8 134.9
2002          Jan 89.9 63.3 41.1 0.3 1.4 0.3 − 91.7 0.1 64.9 39.0 131.0
         Feb 89.9 63.3 42.4 0.1 − 0.0 − 78.5 0.1 78.6 38.6 117.2
         Mar 90.0 58.5 40.7 0.2 − 0.1 − 79.7 0.1 71.2 38.3 118.1
         Apr 92.3 57.6 40.4 0.3 − 0.2 − 80.8 0.1 71.8 37.9 118.8
         May 92.3 53.1 39.7 0.1 − 0.3 − 83.8 0.1 63.1 38.0 122.0
         Jun 91.6 60.6 38.8 0.1 − 0.3 − 85.4 0.1 67.3 38.1 123.8
         Jul 84.7 67.6 37.1 0.2 − 0.2 − 89.2 0.1 62.0 38.1 127.5
         Aug 82.5 63.1 36.4 0.0 − 0.1 − 92.2 0.1 51.8 37.9 130.2
         Sep 82.4 64.4 32.7 0.1 − 0.1 − 92.4 0.0 49.1 37.9 130.4
         Oct 84.0 69.0 31.7 0.1 − 0.1 − 94.0 0.1 53.0 37.6 131.6
         Nov 84.3 73.2 31.6 0.1 − 0.1 − 94.6 0.1 56.5 37.9 132.6
         Dec 84.4 91.1 33.8 0.9 0.7 0.2 − 99.3 0.1 73.5 37.8 137.3
2003          Jan 82.3 85.1 36.1 0.5 − 0.1 − 98.3 0.1 66.9 38.6 137.0
         Feb 81.4 81.6 36.5 0.2 − 0.3 − 95.5 0.1 65.6 38.3 134.1
         Mar 81.4 90.0 34.9 0.1 − 0.1 − 97.5 0.1 70.9 37.9 135.5
         Apr 78.5 95.6 32.3 0.1 − 0.2 − 100.7 0.1 67.4 38.2 139.1
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. —*The banking system ’s liquidity notes and other banknotes which have been issued by the national central
position is defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro-area banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in circulation. In accordancecredit institutions with the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the conso- with the accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for the issue oflidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statement euro banknotes, 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulationof the Bundesbank. —1The reserve maintenance period of the ESCB ’s are allocated on a monthly basis to the ECB. The counterpart of this adjust-
minimum reserve system starts on the 24th of each month and ends on the ment is shown under “Other factors ”. The remaining 92% of the value of
23rd of the following month. —2Source: ECB. —3From 2002, euro bank- the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly basis,
14*II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  European  monetary  union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  European  monetary  union
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions ‘
current
account
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserveand foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenancecurrency operations operations facility operations facility operations deposits (net)  
4 reserves)  5 money  6 period circulation  3 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
+ 14.7 + 3.4 − 5.4 + 0.2 − + 0.0 −− 0.3 − 9.2 + 21.3 + 1.1 + 0.8 2000          Oct
+ 2.3 + 7.2 − 0.7 −0.3 − + 0.0 −− 1.8 + 2.4 + 6.7 + 1.3 − 0.5          Nov
− 4.2 + 26.7 − 0.0 + 0.2 − + 0.0 − + 7.7 + 11.3 + 1.9 + 1.7 + 9.4          Dec
−10.7 − 5.1
+ 0.0 + 0.1 − + 0.4 − + 7.9 − 8.9 −16.9 + 1.7 + 10.0 2001          Jan  7 
− 5.8 −16.4 + 4.8 + 2.1 −− 0.2 −− 13.5 + 4.8 −7.9 + 1.6 − 12.0          Feb
− 2.3 − 3.7 + 4.3 −2.2 − + 0.1 −− 1.8 − 4.0 + 1.4 + 0.3 − 1.5          Mar
+ 6.5 −12.8 + 4.3 + 1.8 −− 0.0 − + 1.6 − 3.5 + 1.4 + 0.4 + 1.9          Apr
+ 2.3 −28.4 + 0.7 −1.8 + 17.0 + 0.1 −− 1.9 −10.1 −1.6 + 3.4 + 1.7          May
+ 0.6 + 17.7
+ 0.0 −0.2 − 17.0 −0.2 −− 1.6 + 1.9 + 0.0 + 0.9 − 0.8          Jun
+ 12.6 + 0.2 + 0.8 + 0.0 − + 0.0 −− 0.3 + 1.2 + 11.3 + 1.4 + 1.0          Jul
+ 4.5 + 2.1 + 0.1 −0.1 −− 0.2 −− 3.2 + 6.3 + 3.0 + 0.7 − 2.7          Aug
− 0.8 −16.9
+ 0.0 + 0.4 + 3.5 + 0.2 −− 12.2 − 3.6 + 3.6 − 1.7 − 13.7          Sep
−11.4 −10.4 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 3.5 −0.3 −− 10.2 − 1.6 −11.8 − 1.0 − 11.5          Oct
− 4.9 − 4.4 − 0.0 −0.9 − + 0.2 −− 13.9 + 2.5 −0.5 + 1.6 − 12.1          Nov
− 1.3 − 9.8
+ 0.0 + 0.3 + 12.4 + 0.5 −− 13.3 − 2.6 + 16.2 + 0.7 − 12.1          Dec
+ 1.5 − 4.0 − 0.0 −0.1 − 8.7 −0.2 − + 46.3 − 5.2 −55.1 + 3.0 + 49.0 2002          Jan
+ 0.8 + 8.8
+ 0.0 −0.2 − 3.7 −0.5 −− 38.1 + 11.3 + 31.0 + 2.2 − 36.4          Feb
+ 0.7 −12.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 − + 0.0 −− 22.9 + 4.6 + 6.6 − 0.5 − 23.2          Mar
+ 8.7 − 1.9 − 0.0 + 0.2 − + 0.1 − + 2.6 + 1.7 + 3.5 − 0.9 + 1.7          Apr
+ 2.3 − 2.1 − 0.0 −0.3 − + 0.1 − + 7.8 − 6.7 −1.8 + 0.5 + 8.3          May
− 1.5 + 2.0 + 0.0 + 0.4 − + 0.1 − + 7.1 − 4.1 −2.3 + 0.1 + 7.4          Jun
−27.1 + 17.8 − 0.0 −0.3 −− 0.2 − + 12.6 + 9.3 −30.9 − 0.4 + 12.0          Jul
− 9.1 + 8.8 − 4.8 −0.1 −− 0.1 − + 9.3 − 3.5 −9.5 − 1.5 + 7.8          Aug
+ 2.3 + 1.7 − 4.4 + 0.0 − + 0.1 − + 0.9 − 1.8 + 0.9 − 0.3 + 0.6          Sep
+ 7.7 + 5.2 − 5.5 −0.0 −− 0.1 − + 5.6 − 3.5 + 6.5 − 1.3 + 4.2          Oct
+ 2.1 + 1.4 − 0.3 + 0.0 −− 0.0 − + 4.8 − 2.8 + 0.4 + 1.0 + 5.8          Nov
− 0.6 + 20.6 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 2.0 + 0.1 − + 16.7 + 8.9 −3.1 + 0.2 + 17.1          Dec
−10.6 + 8.2
+ 0.0 −0.6 − 2.0 + 0.1 − + 3.2 − 8.0 −2.2 + 2.1 + 5.3 2003          Jan
− 4.5 − 7.7
+ 0.0 −0.2 − + 0.0 −− 13.2 + 6.5 −5.3 − 0.5 − 13.6          Feb
− 3.9 + 10.9
+ 0.0 −0.1 −− 0.2 − + 7.1 + 8.9 −7.4 − 1.5 + 5.3          Mar
−15.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 −0.1 − + 0.1 − + 10.7 − 7.0 −20.1 + 1.0 + 11.8          Apr
Deutsche Bundesbank
+ 4.5 + 5.3 − 3.1 + 0.0 − + 0.0 −− 0.3 + 0.0 + 6.9 + 0.1 − 0.2 2000          Oct
+ 1.2 + 11.8 − 0.0 −0.2 −
+ 0.0 −− 1.0 + 0.0 + 13.4 + 0.4 − 0.6          Nov
− 0.6 + 4.5 + 0.5 + 0.1 − + 0.0 − + 1.9 + 0.0 + 2.1 + 0.4 + 2.3          Dec
− 4.6 − 0.5 − 2.7 + 0.1 − + 0.2 −− 0.8 − 0.0 −7.4 + 0.3 − 0.2 2001          Jan
− 2.7 − 9.8 − 0.1 + 1.0 −− 0.1 −− 4.6 − 0.0 −7.7 + 0.6 − 4.0          Feb
− 1.2 − 5.6 + 4.8 −1.2 − + 0.1 −− 0.5 − 0.0 −2.4 − 0.4 − 0.7          Mar
+ 1.0 − 3.1 + 4.3 + 1.3 −− 0.2 −− 0.0 + 0.0 + 3.1 + 0.5 + 0.4          Apr
− 0.1 −17.2 + 0.3 −1.2 + 7.5 + 0.3 −− 1.4 + 0.0 −3.1 + 1.1 − 0.1          May
− 0.3 + 12.5 − 0.3 −0.1 − 7.5 −0.2 −− 1.2 + 0.0 −1.9 + 0.1 − 1.3          Jun
+ 3.2 + 5.5 − 0.5 + 0.0 − + 0.0 −− 1.9 − 0.0 + 9.9 + 0.2 − 1.7          Jul
+ 1.3 − 8.4 + 1.2 −0.1 −− 0.2 −− 2.4 − 0.0 −3.5 + 0.2 − 2.4          Aug
− 0.4 − 3.7 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 1.3 −0.0 −− 3.9 + 0.0 + 2.6 − 0.7 − 4.7          Sep
− 2.4 − 7.0 + 1.3 + 0.4 − 1.3 −0.0 −− 4.7 − 0.0 −4.5 + 0.2 − 4.5          Oct
− 1.5 + 2.0 − 1.7 −0.3 − + 0.2 −− 6.1 + 0.0 + 3.7 + 0.7 − 5.3          Nov
− 0.4 − 5.8 + 1.7 + 0.0 + 5.0 + 0.3 −− 8.1 + 0.0 + 13.3 − 0.1 − 7.9          Dec
+ 0.4 + 0.9 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 3.6 −0.2 −− 4.8 − 0.0 −2.2 + 1.1 − 3.9 2002          Jan
+ 0.0 + 0.1 + 1.3 −0.2 − 1.4 −0.3 −− 13.2 − 0.0 + 13.6 − 0.4 − 13.8          Feb
+ 0.1 − 4.9 − 1.7 + 0.1 − + 0.0 − + 1.2 − 0.0 −7.4 − 0.3 + 0.9          Mar
+ 2.4 − 0.9 − 0.3 + 0.1 − + 0.1 − + 1.0 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.4 + 0.7          Apr
− 0.0 − 4.5 − 0.7 −0.2 − + 0.1 − + 3.0 + 0.0 −8.7 + 0.1 + 3.3          May
− 0.7 + 7.5 − 0.9 + 0.1 −− 0.0 − + 1.6 − 0.0 + 4.2 + 0.2 + 1.8          Jun
− 6.9 + 7.0 − 1.7 + 0.0 −− 0.1 − + 3.8 + 0.0 −5.3 − 0.1 + 3.7          Jul
− 2.2 − 4.5 − 0.7 −0.1 −− 0.1 − + 3.0 − 0.0 −10.2 − 0.2 + 2.7          Aug
− 0.1 + 1.3 − 3.7 + 0.0 − + 0.1 − + 0.2 − 0.0 −2.8 − 0.0 + 0.2          Sep
+ 1.6 + 4.6 − 1.0 + 0.0 −− 0.0 − + 1.5 + 0.0 + 3.9 − 0.3 + 1.2          Oct
+ 0.4 + 4.3 − 0.1 −0.0 −− 0.0 − + 0.7 + 0.0 + 3.5 + 0.3 + 1.0          Nov
+ 0.1 + 17.8 + 2.2 + 0.9 + 0.7 + 0.1 − + 4.7
+ 0.0 + 17.1 − 0.2 + 4.6          Dec
− 2.1 − 6.0 + 2.4 −0.5 − 0.7 −0.0 −− 1.0 − 0.0 −6.7 + 0.8 − 0.2 2003          Jan
− 0.9 − 3.4 + 0.4 −0.2 − + 0.1 −− 2.8 − 0.0 −1.2 − 0.3 − 2.9          Feb
+ 0.0 + 8.4 − 1.6 −0.1 −− 0.2 − + 2.0 + 0.0 + 5.2 − 0.4 + 1.4          Mar
− 2.8 + 5.6 − 2.6 −0.1 − + 0.1 − + 3.2
+ 0.0 −3.5 + 0.3 + 3.6          Apr
to the NCBs, with each NCB showing in its balance sheet the percentage of statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statement of the
the euro banknotes in circulation that corresponds to its paid-up share in Bundesbank. —5Equal to the difference between the sum of liquidity-pro-
the ECB ’s capital. The difference between the value of the euro banknotes viding factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors. —6Calculated as
allocated to an NCB and the value of the euro banknotes which that NCB the sum of the “deposit facility ”,“banknotes in circulation ”and “credit
has put into circulation is likewise shown under “Other factors ”. From 2003 institutions ’current account holdings ”.—7Entry of Greece into the euro
euro banknotes only. —4Remaining items in the consolidated financial area on 1 January, 2001. 
15*II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  European  monetary  union

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1 Assets *
 
 
 5  billion
Claims on non-euro-area Claims on non-euro-area residents denominated
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
On investments, euro-area Balances Claims
reporting external loans residents with banks, arising from
date/ Gold and other denominated security the creditEnd of Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility undermonth  
1 assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
 Eurosystem 2
 
2002 Aug                23 764.1 128.3 240.0 32.4 207.6 17.9 4.8 4.8 −
                               30 770.8 128.3 238.5 32.4 206.0 17.0 5.3 5.3 −
         Sep                  6 765.6 128.3 239.7 32.5 207.2 18.5 4.8 4.8 −
                               13 762.1 128.3 241.4 32.4 209.0 18.2 4.6 4.6 −
                               20 772.6 128.3 243.0 32.4 210.6 18.5 4.8 4.8 −
                               27 772.8 128.3 242.5 32.4 210.1 18.3 5.0 5.0 −
         Oct                  4 3 778.3 3 131.2 3 248.3 32.6 3 215.7 18.5 4.5 4.5 −
                               11 778.7 131.2 247.2 32.6 214.6 19.4 4.2 4.2 −
                               18 774.3 131.2 246.4 32.5 213.9 19.6 4.2 4.2 −
                               25 798.0 131.2 246.6 32.4 214.2 21.0 4.6 4.6 −
         Nov                  1 779.7 131.2 244.9 32.3 212.6 21.0 4.3 4.3 −
                                 8 777.5 131.2 246.4 32.1 214.3 19.8 3.8 3.8 −
                               15 773.3 131.1 246.9 32.0 214.9 20.4 3.9 3.9 −
                               22 788.7 131.1 246.9 32.0 214.9 21.0 3.8 3.8 −
                               29 796.5 131.1 245.6 32.0 213.6 20.0 3.5 3.5 −
         Dec                  6 812.7 131.1 248.4 32.0 216.4 20.1 3.7 3.7 −
                               13 818.7 131.0 250.7 31.9 218.8 20.2 3.7 3.7 −
                               20 820.4 131.0 248.6 31.9 216.6 20.2 3.7 3.7 −
                               27 832.6 130.9 248.6 32.5 216.1 19.9 4.0 4.0 −
2003 Jan                  3 3 795.0 130.7 3 236.8 31.3 3 205.5 19.9 4.0 4.0 −
                               10 786.6 130.7 237.1 31.3 205.7 16.6 4.1 4.1 −
                               17 773.3 130.7 235.4 31.2 204.2 15.6 4.4 4.4 −
                               24 778.9 130.7 231.8 31.2 200.6 16.6 4.4 4.4 −
                               31 786.7 130.6 233.3 31.2 202.2 18.3 4.9 4.9 −
         Feb                  7 782.0 130.6 231.4 31.1 200.3 17.5 5.3 5.3 −
                               14 775.4 130.6 229.8 31.2 198.6 17.3 5.7 5.7 −
                               21 784.8 130.3 228.0 31.2 196.8 17.7 6.2 6.2 −
                               28 790.6 130.3 228.3 31.2 197.2 17.3 5.9 5.9 −
         Mar                  7 750.0 130.3 227.9 31.0 196.9 17.4 6.2 6.2 −
                               14 838.9 130.3 226.9 31.0 195.9 17.0 5.5 5.5 −
                               21 802.3 130.3 223.9 31.6 192.4 17.7 5.1 5.1 −
                               28 798.7 130.3 224.1 31.5 192.7 16.8 5.2 5.2 −
         Apr                  4 3 774.4 3 122.7 3 216.9 3 30.8 3 186.1 17.1 4.8 4.8 −
                               11 770.6 122.7 216.0 30.8 185.2 16.7 4.5 4.5 −
                               18 776.5 122.7 215.8 30.7 185.0 16.5 4.6 4.6 −
                               25 800.6 122.3 215.8 31.2 184.5 16.9 4.6 4.6 −
         May                  2 760.4 122.3 214.5 31.2 183.2 16.7 4.6 4.6 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2001          Jun 3 247.3 3 35.5 3 60.3 3 8.2 3 52.2 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Jul 241.0 35.4 60.4 8.2 52.3 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Aug 238.4 35.4 60.0 8.1 51.9 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Sep 3 233.4 35.4 3 59.1 3 9.0 3 50.2 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Oct 226.6 35.4 59.5 8.8 50.7 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Nov 225.6 35.4 59.9 8.7 51.3 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Dec 3 239.9 3 35.0 3 58.2 3 8.7 3 49.5 − 0.3 0.3 −
2002          Jan 230.6 35.0 60.0 8.8 51.2 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Feb 221.4 35.0 59.9 8.8 51.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Mar 3 227.4 3 38.5 3 59.6 3 8.8 3 50.8 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Apr 205.3 38.5 58.0 8.3 49.6 − 0.3 0.3 −
         May 218.3 38.5 56.6 8.4 48.2 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Jun 3 217.9 3 35.4 3 51.2 8.8 3 42.4 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Jul 211.3 35.4 51.8 8.8 43.0 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Aug 218.3 35.4 50.9 8.7 42.2 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Sep 3 221.9 3 36.2 3 52.7 8.8 3 44.0 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Oct 226.4 36.2 52.1 8.6 43.5 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Nov 229.9 36.2 53.0 8.6 44.4 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Dec 3 240.0 36.2 3 48.8 8.3 3 40.5 − 0.3 0.3 −
2003          Jan 233.9 36.2 48.9 8.2 40.7 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Feb 236.2 36.2 49.2 8.2 41.0 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Mar 3 239.2 3 34.1 3 48.4 8.3 3 40.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Apr 230.5 34.1 47.0 8.2 38.7 − 0.3 0.3 −
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the (NCBs). —The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold and
financial statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial financial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quarter. —
statements of the national central banks of the euro-area member states 1For the Eurosystem: financial statement for specific weekly dates;
16*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Lending to euro-area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations
denominated in euro
 Other claims on euro-area credit Securities General    On
Credits institutions of euro-area government    reporting
Main Longer-term Fine-tuning Structural Marginal related denomi- residents debt    date/refinancing refinancing reverse reverse lending to margin nated in denominated denominated Other    End of
Total operations operations operations operations facility calls euro in euro in euro assets    month  
1 
Eurosystem 2
 
189.0 134.0 55.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.1 30.9 67.2 85.7 2002 Aug                 23
197.0 147.0 50.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.4 31.4 67.2 85.8                                30
191.0 141.0 50.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.2 31.5 67.2 84.2          Sep                   6
186.1 136.0 50.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.2 31.5 67.2 84.7                                13
194.0 144.0 50.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.2 31.5 67.2 85.1                                20
194.1 149.0 45.0 −− 0.1 0.0 0.3 31.5 67.2 85.6                                27
190.4 145.0 45.0 −− 0.4 0.0 0.6 3 32.1 67.2 85.5          Oct                   4
191.0 146.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.6 32.3 67.2 85.5                                11
187.1 142.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.1 0.4 32.3 67.2 85.8                                18
209.1 164.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.1 0.2 32.1 67.2 86.0                                25
190.1 145.0 45.0 −− 0.1 0.0 0.4 32.3 67.2 88.4          Nov                   1
189.0 144.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.4 32.6 67.2 87.1                                  8
183.1 138.0 45.0 −− 0.1 0.0 0.4 32.7 67.2 87.6                                15
196.3 150.0 45.0 −− 1.2 0.0 0.2 33.1 67.2 89.1                                22
206.1 161.0 45.0 −− 0.1 0.0 0.3 33.2 67.2 89.4                                29
219.7 173.8 45.0 −− 0.9 0.0 0.2 33.2 67.2 89.1          Dec                   6
221.8 176.8 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.2 33.2 67.1 90.7                                13
223.8 168.5 45.0 10.0 − 0.3 0.0 0.2 33.3 67.1 92.7                                20
236.6 191.5 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.1 33.1 66.3 93.1                                27
225.1 180.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.1 0.1 27.8 44.5 3 106.0 2003 Jan                   3
219.1 174.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.1 0.1 27.9 44.5 106.6                                10
208.6 161.0 45.0 −− 2.6 0.0 0.2 28.0 44.5 105.9                                17
215.3 170.0 45.0 −− 0.3 0.0 0.2 28.5 44.5 106.9                                24
219.2 174.0 45.0 −− 0.2 0.0 0.3 29.1 44.5 106.5                                31
214.0 169.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.3 30.7 44.4 107.7          Feb                   7
206.2 161.0 45.0 −− 0.1 0.0 0.3 31.7 44.4 109.4                                14
216.2 170.0 45.0 −− 1.1 0.0 0.3 32.6 44.4 109.2                                21
223.2 178.0 45.0 −− 0.1 0.0 0.6 33.5 44.4 107.2                                28
182.2 137.1 45.0 −− 0.1 0.0 0.9 33.5 44.3 107.2          Mar                   7
270.1 225.1 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.5 36.7 44.3 107.5                                14
234.9 189.0 45.0 −− 0.9 0.0 0.3 37.8 44.3 107.8                                21
232.0 187.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.3 38.1 44.3 107.4                                28
220.0 175.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.3 38.8 44.3 3 109.6          Apr                   4
217.1 172.0 45.0 −− 0.1 0.0 0.2 39.7 44.3 109.4                                11
223.0 178.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.1 39.8 44.3 109.7                                18
247.0 202.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.1 40.2 44.3 109.5                                25
208.0 163.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.1 40.3 44.3 109.6          May                   2
 Deutsche Bundesbank
128.2 91.2 36.9 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.6 2001          Jun
121.8 83.5 38.3 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.7          Jul
114.0 74.5 39.1 −− 0.4 − 0.0 − 4.4 24.2          Aug
111.7 70.2 40.3 −− 1.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 22.4          Sep
108.2 69.8 38.4 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.7          Oct
106.8 45.0 40.4 − 21.3 0.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.7          Nov
123.0 80.5 41.1 −− 1.4 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.9          Dec
112.3 69.5 42.8 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.6 2002          Jan
103.7 61.7 40.4 −− 1.6 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.1          Feb
106.8 65.7 40.4 −− 0.7 − 0.0 − 4.4 17.7          Mar
86.6 46.7 39.6 −− 0.3 − 0.0 − 4.4 17.5          Apr
101.0 62.3 38.6 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 17.4          May
109.1 71.2 36.9 −− 0.9 − 0.0 − 4.4 17.5          Jun
98.2 61.8 36.4 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 21.2          Jul
100.3 68.3 32.0 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 26.9          Aug
104.2 72.4 31.7 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 24.0          Sep
103.9 72.4 31.6 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 29.4          Oct
111.1 77.0 34.0 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 24.8          Nov
125.5 87.1 36.1 −− 2.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 24.8          Dec
124.3 87.5 36.6 −− 0.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.8 2003          Jan
126.3 91.6 34.7 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.7          Feb
130.9 98.4 32.1 −− 0.4 − 0.0 − 4.4 21.1          Mar
125.0 92.5 32.5 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.7          Apr
 
for the Bundesbank: up to end-2001, financial statement for the last Friday ECB. — 3 Changes are due mainly to revalutions at the end of the quarter. 
of each month; from 2002, end-of-month financial statement. —2Source:
17*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
 5  billion
Liabilities to euro-area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro-area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilitiesaccounts to euro-
On (covering Fine- area creditreporting the tuning Deposits institutions Debtdate/ Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
End of Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Othermonth  
1 liabilities Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment lation  2,3 liabilities
 Eurosystem 4
 
2002 Aug                23 764.1 321.2 131.3 128.7 2.6 −− 0.0 0.1 2.9 49.8 45.1 4.7
                               30 770.8 321.8 126.1 125.9 0.1 −− 0.0 0.1 2.9 63.8 59.0 4.8
         Sep                  6 765.6 325.8 129.9 129.8 0.0 −− 0.0 0.3 2.9 51.7 47.0 4.7
                               13 762.1 325.7 126.8 126.8 0.0 −− 0.0 0.1 2.9 50.1 45.4 4.7
                               20 772.6 324.5 130.0 129.9 0.1 −− 0.0 0.1 2.9 55.8 51.0 4.8
                               27 772.8 325.4 126.9 126.9 0.0 −−− 0.2 2.9 58.8 53.7 5.0
         Oct                  4 5 778.3 331.7 127.3 127.3 0.1 −− 0.0 0.2 2.9 47.8 42.9 4.9
                               11 778.7 331.6 132.3 132.3 0.0 −−− 0.4 2.9 43.9 39.1 4.8
                               18 774.3 330.8 128.9 128.8 0.0 −− 0.0 0.2 2.9 43.8 39.1 4.7
                               25 798.0 329.6 136.8 136.8 0.0 −− 0.0 0.1 2.9 59.1 54.4 4.6
         Nov                  1 779.7 334.8 122.7 122.6 0.0 −− 0.0 0.1 2.9 50.6 45.8 4.8
                                 8 777.5 336.7 130.7 130.6 0.1 −−− 0.3 2.0 41.2 35.9 5.3
                               15 773.3 335.7 129.7 129.6 0.1 −−− 0.2 2.0 36.8 32.0 4.8
                               22 788.7 334.6 126.8 126.3 0.5 −−− 0.2 2.0 55.1 50.2 4.9
                               29 796.5 340.0 121.9 121.9 0.0 −−− 0.2 2.0 64.8 59.6 5.3
         Dec                  6 812.7 351.3 127.1 127.0 0.1 −−− 0.3 2.0 62.2 56.6 5.6
                               13 818.7 355.7 130.0 129.9 0.1 −−− 0.0 2.0 58.5 53.6 4.9
                               20 820.4 367.9 127.9 126.7 1.2 −−− 0.0 2.0 50.0 44.9 5.0
                               27 832.6 374.6 129.3 129.1 0.2 −−− 0.0 2.0 55.1 49.8 5.2
2003 Jan                  3 5 795.0 354.5 130.0 129.9 0.1 −−− 0.0 2.0 47.4 42.4 5.0
                               10 786.6 346.3 133.5 133.4 0.1 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 48.5 43.6 4.9
                               17 773.3 341.6 132.9 132.7 0.1 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 42.5 37.3 5.2
                               24 778.9 338.2 127.2 127.2 0.0 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 59.0 54.0 5.0
                               31 786.7 339.5 126.8 126.6 0.1 −− 0.0 0.1 2.0 65.1 60.2 4.9
         Feb                  7 782.0 342.8 133.2 133.2 0.0 −−− 0.1 2.0 52.2 47.2 5.0
                               14 775.4 342.9 128.0 127.9 0.1 −−− 0.1 2.0 51.3 46.5 4.8
                               21 784.8 341.6 131.4 129.0 2.4 −−− 0.1 2.0 59.0 54.1 4.8
                               28 790.6 345.4 125.4 125.3 0.1 −−− 0.1 2.0 70.1 65.2 4.9
         Mar                  7 750.0 350.1 89.5 89.4 0.1 −−− 0.1 2.0 60.2 55.2 5.0
                               14 838.9 350.0 177.4 177.3 0.1 −−− 0.0 2.0 60.1 55.0 5.1
                               21 802.3 350.5 128.6 128.0 0.6 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 72.7 67.5 5.2
                               28 798.7 351.8 129.4 129.4 0.0 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 73.6 68.4 5.2
         Apr                  4 5 774.4 357.8 131.6 131.5 0.1 −− 0.0 0.1 2.0 53.9 48.6 5.3
                               11 770.6 360.2 128.4 128.3 0.0 −− 0.0 0.1 2.0 51.6 46.2 5.4
                               18 776.5 367.6 132.7 132.4 0.2 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 45.0 39.5 5.5
                               25 800.6 363.9 147.5 147.4 0.1 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 59.3 53.9 5.4
         May                  2 760.4 367.4 122.6 122.5 0.1 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 40.1 34.8 5.4
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2001          Jun 5 247.3 121.9 42.7 42.5 0.2 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Jul 241.0 119.9 33.6 33.6 0.0 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Aug 238.4 116.5 48.0 48.0 0.0 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Sep 5 233.4 112.0 48.3 48.2 0.0 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Oct 226.6 106.7 34.0 34.0 0.0 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Nov 225.6 99.0 49.9 49.8 0.1 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Dec 5 239.9 76.5 57.5 57.4 0.1 −−− − − 1.0 0.1 1.0
2002          Jan 230.6 82.5 46.1 46.1 0.0 −−− − − 1.0 0.1 0.9
         Feb 221.4 79.8 41.6 41.5 0.0 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.6
         Mar 5 227.4 80.5 42.0 42.0 0.1 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Apr 205.3 81.7 40.1 38.9 1.2 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.5
         May 218.3 84.1 44.9 44.9 0.0 −−− − − 0.6 0.0 0.6
         Jun 5 217.9 86.9 41.4 41.3 0.1 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Jul 211.3 90.0 40.7 40.6 0.0 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Aug 218.3 90.7 44.3 44.2 0.1 −−− − − 0.5 0.0 0.5
         Sep 5 221.9 92.0 41.0 41.0 0.0 −−− − − 0.6 0.0 0.5
         Oct 226.4 94.2 41.3 41.3 0.0 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Nov 229.9 95.7 41.0 40.9 0.0 −−− − − 0.8 0.1 0.7
         Dec 5 240.0 104.5 44.8 44.8 0.0 −−− − − 0.6 0.0 0.6
2003          Jan 233.9 94.5 40.9 40.8 0.1 −−− − − 0.5 0.0 0.5
         Feb 236.2 96.1 38.1 38.1 0.1 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.5
         Mar 5 239.2 98.1 48.1 48.0 0.0 −−− − − 0.5 0.0 0.4
         Apr 230.5 101.8 36.4 36.3 0.0 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the of each month; from 2002, end-of-month financial statement. —2From
financial statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial 2002, euro banknotes and up to end-2002, banknotes still in circulationstatements of the national central banks of the euro-area member states issued by the national central banks of the Eurosystem (see also footnote(NCBs). —The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold and 6). —3According to the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem on
financial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quar- the issue of euro banknotes, a share of 8% of the total value of the euroter.—1For the Eurosystem: financial statement for specific weekly dates; banknotes in circulation is allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The
for the Bundesbank: up to end-2001, financial statement for the last Friday
18*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Liabilities to non-euro-area
residents denominated inforeign currency
 
Liabilities Intra-  
Liabilities to euro-area Liabilities Counterpart Eurosystem     Onto non-euro- residents Deposits, arising of special liability     reportingarea residents denominated balances from the drawing related to  Capital    date/denominated in foreign and other rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and    End of credit facility
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF issue  
3 accounts reserves    month  1 liabilities  6 
Eurosystem 4
 
9.1 1.3 18.4 18.4 − 6.5 60.0 − 99.1 64.3 2002 Aug                 23
9.0 1.3 16.1 16.1 − 6.5 59.8 − 99.1 64.3                                30
8.7 1.3 15.1 15.1 − 6.5 60.0 − 99.1 64.3          Sep                   6
8.6 1.3 16.6 16.6 − 6.5 60.0 − 99.1 64.3                                13
9.0 1.5 18.1 18.1 − 6.5 60.7 − 99.1 64.3                                20
8.9 1.4 17.9 17.9 − 6.5 60.5 − 99.1 64.3                                27
9.2 1.3 18.1 18.1 − 6.6 5 62.5 − 5 106.3 64.3          Oct                   4
8.5 1.3 18.0 18.0 − 6.6 62.6 − 106.3 64.3                                11
8.3 1.4 17.3 17.3 − 6.6 63.5 − 106.3 64.3                                18
8.4 1.6 18.8 18.8 − 6.6 63.6 − 106.3 64.3                                25
8.4 1.4 17.3 17.3 − 6.6 64.3 − 106.3 64.2          Nov                   1
8.5 1.4 17.0 17.0 − 6.6 62.7 − 106.3 64.2                                  8
8.4 1.6 17.1 17.1 − 6.6 64.7 − 106.3 64.2                                15
8.3 1.7 19.3 19.3 − 6.6 63.4 − 106.3 64.4                                22
8.6 1.3 17.3 17.3 − 6.6 62.9 − 106.3 64.4                                29
8.5 1.3 20.0 20.0 − 6.6 62.6 − 106.3 64.4          Dec                   6
8.4 1.3 22.4 22.4 − 6.6 63.0 − 106.3 64.5                                13
9.5 1.4 20.7 20.7 − 6.6 63.7 − 106.3 64.4                                20
8.8 1.2 20.1 20.1 − 6.6 64.1 − 106.3 64.4                                27
11.6 1.1 5 21.0 5 21.0 − 6.3 5 73.8 − 5 82.8 64.3 2003 Jan                   3
8.3 1.1 19.7 19.7 − 6.3 73.6 − 82.8 64.2                                10
8.3 1.1 17.3 17.3 − 6.3 74.0 − 82.8 64.2                                17
8.9 1.1 15.0 15.0 − 6.3 74.2 − 82.8 64.1                                24
9.4 1.1 15.8 15.8 − 6.3 73.7 − 82.8 64.1                                31
8.5 1.0 15.8 15.8 − 6.3 73.3 − 82.8 64.1          Feb                   7
8.5 1.0 15.2 15.2 − 6.3 72.7 − 82.8 64.4                                14
8.4 1.0 14.1 14.1 − 6.3 74.5 − 82.8 63.5                                21
8.7 1.0 14.1 14.1 − 6.3 70.2 − 82.8 64.4                                28
8.7 1.1 14.8 14.8 − 6.3 69.9 − 82.8 64.4          Mar                   7
8.6 1.1 16.1 16.1 − 6.3 70.1 − 82.8 64.5                                14
8.4 1.1 14.7 14.7 − 6.3 70.6 − 82.8 64.5                                21
8.4 1.1 14.5 14.5 − 6.3 64.2 − 82.8 64.5                                28
8.9 1.1 15.4 15.4 − 6.2 65.1 − 5 68.0 64.5          Apr                   4
8.7 1.0 14.6 14.6 − 6.2 65.2 − 68.0 64.6                                11
9.2 1.0 14.3 14.3 − 6.2 65.9 − 68.0 64.6                                18
8.5 1.0 14.1 14.1 − 6.2 65.5 − 68.0 64.7                                25
9.5 1.0 13.0 13.0 − 6.2 65.9 − 67.9 64.7          May                   2
 Deutsche Bundesbank
6.8 0.0 −−− 1.8 23.2 . 5 45.2 5.1 2001          Jun
6.8 0.0 −−− 1.8 28.0 . 45.2 5.1          Jul
6.8 0.0 −−− 1.8 14.4 . 45.2 5.1          Aug
6.8 0.0 1.8 1.8 − 1.7 15.3 . 5 41.8 5.1          Sep
6.9 0.0 3.0 3.0 − 1.7 26.8 . 41.8 5.1          Oct
6.9 0.0 4.1 4.1 − 1.7 16.4 . 41.8 5.1          Nov
7.3 0.0 1.4 1.4 − 1.7 47.8 . 5 41.6 5.1          Dec
7.1 0.0 3.3 3.3 − 1.7 30.6 11.6 41.6 5.1 2002          Jan
7.0 0.0 3.2 3.2 − 1.7 32.6 8.2 41.6 5.1          Feb
7.0 0.0 5 3.0 5 3.0 − 1.7 30.9 11.6 5 44.8 5.1          Mar
7.0 0.0 2.4 2.4 − 1.7 9.1 12.9 44.8 5.1          Apr
7.0 0.0 1.6 1.6 − 1.7 12.7 15.7 44.8 5.1          May
6.9 0.0 2.3 2.3 − 1.6 20.9 16.7 5 35.5 5.1          Jun
7.1 0.0 3.0 3.0 − 1.6 8.9 18.8 35.5 5.1          Jul
7.1 0.0 2.3 2.3 − 1.6 9.2 22.0 35.5 5.1          Aug
7.2 0.0 2.8 2.8 − 1.6 10.2 24.1 5 37.3 5.1          Sep
7.1 0.0 2.4 2.4 − 1.6 10.6 26.2 37.3 5.1          Oct
7.1 0.0 3.1 3.1 − 1.6 10.5 27.6 37.3 5.1          Nov
7.1 0.0 1.8 1.8 − 1.6 11.1 29.1 5 34.2 5.0          Dec
7.8 0.0 2.2 2.2 − 1.6 17.6 29.6 34.2 5.0 2003          Jan
7.3 0.0 2.4 2.4 − 1.6 19.1 31.9 34.2 5.0          Feb
7.1 0.0 3.4 3.4 − 1.5 5 11.7 33.3 5 30.4 5.0          Mar
7.1 0.0 2.0 2.0 − 1.5 11.6 34.2 30.4 5.0          Apr
 
counterpart of this adjustment is disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem liability according to the aforementioned accounting regime and the value of euro
related to banknote issue “. The remaining 92% of the value of the euro banknotes put into circulation is also disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem
banknotes in circulation is also allocated to the NCBs on a monthly basis, claim/ liability related to banknote issue “.—4Source: ECB. —5Changes
and each NCB shows in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes are due mainly to revaluations at the end of the quarter. —6For the
issued which corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB ’s capital. The Deutsche Bundesbank: from 2003, including DM banknotes still in circu-
difference between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to the NCB lation (see also footnote 2). 
19*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Assets
 
 Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999,  5  billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area  3 Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other member states to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and indi-
viduals
Secur- Secur-
Balance ities itiessheet Cash issued issued
Period total  
2 in hand Total Total Loans  3 by banks Total Loans  3 by banks Total Total Total Loans  3 
 End of year or month
 
1994 7,205.7 26.2 2,030.1 1,854.1 1,285.1 569.1 175.9 145.0 30.9 4,411.4 4,333.2 3,391.3 3,143.2
1995 7,778.7 27.3 2,210.2 2,019.0 1,399.8 619.3 191.2 158.0 33.2 4,723.3 4,635.0 3,548.8 3,298.7
1996 8,540.5 30.3 2,523.0 2,301.1 1,585.7 715.4 221.9 181.2 40.7 5,084.7 4,981.9 3,812.8 3,543.01997 9,368.2 30.7 2,836.0 2,580.7 1,758.6 822.1 255.3 208.8 46.5 5,408.8 5,269.5 4,041.3 3,740.81998 10,355.5 29.9 3,267.4 2,939.4 1,977.4 962.0 328.1 264.9 63.1 5,833.9 5,615.9 4,361.0 3,966.51999 5,678.5 17.2 1,836.9 1,635.0 1,081.4 553.6 201.9 161.8 40.1 3,127.4 2,958.6 2,326.4 2,093.4
2000 6,083.9 16.1 1,977.4 1,724.2 1,108.9 615.3 253.2 184.5 68.6 3,249.9 3,062.6 2,445.7 2,186.6
2001 6,303.1 14.6 2,069.7 1,775.5 1,140.6 634.9 294.2 219.8 74.4 3,317.1 3,084.9 2,497.1 2,235.72002 6,394.2 17.9 2,118.0 1,769.1 1,164.3 604.9 348.9 271.7 77.2 3,340.2 3,092.2 2,505.8 2,240.8
2001          Jun 6,283.8 13.8 2,050.4 1,753.5 1,112.4 641.1 296.9 221.0 75.9 3,295.9 3,070.6 2,473.6 2,212.8
         Jul 6,225.8 13.8 2,036.5 1,748.3 1,100.6 647.7 288.2 213.2 75.0 3,298.4 3,073.9 2,466.3 2,206.8
         Aug 6,236.5 13.5 2,037.6 1,751.9 1,113.0 638.9 285.7 210.6 75.1 3,289.2 3,061.6 2,464.3 2,207.2         Sep 6,295.9 13.7 2,070.9 1,778.2 1,142.2 635.9 292.7 216.8 75.9 3,283.9 3,056.0 2,471.5 2,218.7
         Oct 6,300.0 14.2 2,064.4 1,769.4 1,130.7 638.7 295.0 218.2 76.8 3,284.0 3,058.5 2,474.7 2,219.6
         Nov 6,320.2 13.7 2,082.6 1,779.3 1,144.1 635.3 303.2 227.1 76.1 3,299.4 3,073.7 2,479.4 2,226.6         Dec 6,303.1 14.6 2,069.7 1,775.5 1,140.6 634.9 294.2 219.8 74.4 3,317.1 3,084.9 2,497.1 2,235.7
2002          Jan 6,255.1 27.7 2,019.8 1,728.4 1,094.0 634.4 291.4 216.2 75.2 3,310.8 3,075.1 2,487.1 2,225.5
         Feb 6,230.4 19.5 2,004.6 1,725.2 1,084.2 641.0 279.4 202.9 76.5 3,311.9 3,074.7 2,485.5 2,227.3         Mar 6,269.8 16.9 2,033.3 1,744.1 1,096.1 647.9 289.3 213.2 76.1 3,310.6 3,065.5 2,478.9 2,230.3
         Apr 6,267.7 14.9 2,032.8 1,736.5 1,085.8 650.7 296.3 220.2 76.1 3,319.5 3,072.8 2,485.6 2,231.6
         May 6,304.5 14.7 2,055.5 1,749.0 1,096.7 652.2 306.6 230.7 75.8 3,323.3 3,074.2 2,485.6 2,232.0         Jun 6,277.4 14.3 2,073.9 1,758.9 1,111.2 647.6 315.1 238.1 77.0 3,304.8 3,059.5 2,477.9 2,233.2
         Jul 6,265.6 13.8 2,051.7 1,731.9 1,094.9 637.1 319.7 242.3 77.4 3,313.1 3,063.8 2,471.5 2,231.6
         Aug 6,290.6 13.6 2,073.4 1,746.9 1,113.0 634.0 326.5 249.2 77.3 3,310.9 3,064.3 2,480.6 2,231.5         Sep 6,341.1 13.3 2,077.4 1,745.3 1,113.3 632.1 332.0 253.8 78.3 3,323.1 3,074.8 2,490.6 2,242.3
         Oct 6,359.1 14.2 2,078.3 1,741.3 1,117.9 623.5 336.9 257.2 79.7 3,327.8 3,080.9 2,494.9 2,240.6
         Nov 6,453.5 13.2 2,130.2 1,780.8 1,150.6 630.2 349.5 267.3 82.1 3,336.6 3,088.4 2,496.7 2,238.4         Dec 6,394.2 17.9 2,118.0 1,769.1 1,164.3 604.9 348.9 271.7 77.2 3,340.2 3,092.2 2,505.8 2,240.8
2003          Jan 6,380.7 13.2 2,104.3 1,748.5 1,136.2 612.3 355.8 277.0 78.8 3,348.8 3,101.1 2,501.4 2,237.9
         Feb 6,424.9 13.2 2,124.3 1,751.7 1,142.1 611.7 370.5 289.5 81.1 3,347.4 3,097.7 2,501.7 2,239.2         Mar 6,434.8 12.9 2,121.5 1,747.2 1,135.0 614.4 371.9 288.9 83.1 3,346.7 3,100.4 2,498.0 2,238.1
 Changes 1
1995 587.7 1.1 184.6 169.3 114.7 54.6 15.2 13.0 2.3 322.1 312.1 201.2 188.11996 761.8 3.0 312.8 282.1 186.0 96.1 30.7 23.2 7.5 361.5 346.9 264.0 244.31997 825.6 0.5 313.1 279.6 172.9 106.7 33.5 27.6 5.9 324.0 287.5 228.4 197.61998 1,001.0 −0.8 422.2 355.7 215.1 140.6 66.4 56.2 10.2 440.4 363.3 337.5 245.2
1999 452.6 1.8 179.8 140.1 81.4 58.6 39.8 26.3 13.5 206.6 158.1 156.8 126.4
2000 401.5 −1.2 143.0 91.7 28.1 63.6 51.4 22.8 28.6 123.2 105.4 116.8 89.5
2001 244.9 −1.4 91.0 50.7 30.3 20.5 40.3 34.5 5.8 55.1 23.9 50.4 48.1
2002 165.7 3.3 63.6 6.5 23.7 −17.1 57.1 51.9 5.2 33.6 15.3 16.1 10.4
2001          Jul −47.6 −0.0 −13.8 −5.2 −11.8 6.7 −8.7 − 7.8 −0.8 4.5 4.5 −6.1 −4.8
         Aug 25.5 −0.3 1.3 3.6 12.4 −8.8 −2.3 − 2.6 0.2 −5.2 −8.9 −0.5 1.9
         Sep 56.7 0.3 33.2 26.3 29.2 −3.0 6.9 6.2 0.8 −6.2 −6.5 6.4 10.6
         Oct 1.6 0.4 −6.6 −8.9 −11.7 2.8 2.3 1.4 0.9 −0.2 2.3 3.0 0.8
         Nov 51.1 −0.5 18.2 10.0 13.4 −3.3 8.2 8.9 −0.7 15.7 14.4 3.7 6.0
         Dec −16.8 1.0 −12.3 −3.4 −3.5 0.1 −8.9 − 7.3 −1.7 18.9 12.4 18.7 10.1
2002          Jan −51.6 13.0 −49.6 −46.7 −46.6 −0.1 −2.9 − 3.7 0.8 −7.3 −10.4 −10.7 −11.0
         Feb −23.2 −8.2 −15.1 −3.1 −9.8 6.7 −12.0 − 13.3 1.2 1.8 0.1 −1.0 2.0
         Mar 42.2 −2.5 28.9 19.0 11.9 7.1 9.9 10.3 −0.4 −1.0 −8.9 −6.5 3.0
         Apr 7.7 −2.0 −0.9 −8.0 −10.3 2.3 7.1 7.0 0.1 11.0 8.7 8.1 2.3
         May 52.5 −0.2 23.2 12.8 11.1 1.8 10.4 10.5 −0.2 6.6 3.6 2.1 2.4
         Jun −5.8 −0.4 18.3 10.0 14.3 −4.3 8.3 7.4 0.9 −19.8 −17.1 −10.1 −1.1
         Jul −19.9 −0.5 −22.9 −27.5 −16.3 −11.1 4.5 4.2 0.3 7.2 3.6 −7.1 −2.6
         Aug 23.8 −0.2 21.9 15.1 18.1 −3.0 6.8 6.8 −0.0 −1.7 0.9 8.8 0.3
         Sep 51.3 −0.2 4.0 −1.6 0.3 −1.9 5.6 4.6 0.9 12.0 10.2 10.3 10.4
         Oct 20.3 0.9 0.8 −4.1 4.6 −8.7 4.9 3.5 1.5 4.6 6.2 4.4 −1.5
         Nov 97.2 −1.0 52.0 39.4 32.7 6.7 12.6 10.1 2.5 9.4 7.9 2.2 −1.8
         Dec −29.0 4.7 3.0 1.0 13.7 −12.7 1.9 4.4 −2.4 10.9 10.3 15.6 7.8
2003          Jan −13.9 −4.7 −24.3 −30.3 −28.1 −2.2 5.9 5.3 0.7 18.3 17.1 3.7 1.4
         Feb 41.4 0.1 17.2 3.2 5.9 −2.7 14.0 12.5 1.5 −1.6 −3.6 0.1 1.2
         Mar 14.3 −0.4 −2.9 −4.3 −7.1 2.8 1.4 − 0.6 2.1 0.2 3.3 −3.0 −0.5
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey “in section data from money market funds. —1Statistical breaks have been eliminated
II. Unlike the other tables in section IV, this table includes −in addition to from the flow figures. —2Up to December 1998, volume of business
the figures reported by banks (including building and loan associations) − (balance sheet total plus endorsement liabilities and bills sent for
20*IV Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
IV Banks
 
   
 
euro area  3 Claims on
non-euro-area
to non-banks in other member states residents
 Public Enterprises and Public authorities individuals authorities
Secur- Secur- of which Secur- of which Other
ities Total Loans  
3 ities 4 Total Total Loans  3 Total Loans  3 ities Total Loans  3 assets   Period
End of year or month
 
248.1 941.9 650.1 291.8 78.2 39.6 39.6 38.6 8.3 30.3 548.8 479.6 189.2 1994
250.0 1,086.3 792.2 294.1 88.2 39.4 39.2 48.8 11.3 37.6 608.5 526.0 209.4 1995
269.7 1,169.1 857.8 311.4 102.8 36.8 36.8 66.0 17.2 48.8 678.1 575.3 224.4 1996300.6 1,228.2 911.0 317.2 139.2 41.9 41.2 97.3 23.4 73.9 839.6 710.2 253.1 1997394.5 1,254.9 939.1 315.8 218.0 62.5 56.0 155.5 35.6 119.9 922.0 758.0 302.2 1998233.0 632.1 488.4 143.7 168.8 65.3 35.9 103.6 20.7 82.8 511.2 404.2 185.8 1999
259.1 616.9 478.5 138.4 187.3 83.8 44.2 103.5 20.0 83.5 622.4 481.7 218.1 2000
261.3 587.8 468.7 119.1 232.3 111.3 53.7 121.0 26.2 94.8 727.3 572.0 174.3 2001265.0 586.4 448.5 137.9 248.0 125.0 63.6 123.0 25.5 97.5 738.1 589.2 179.9 2002
260.7 597.1 469.2 127.8 225.2 104.4 50.8 120.8 24.5 96.3 693.2 535.9 230.4 2001          Jun
259.5 607.6 470.3 137.3 224.5 103.2 49.7 121.4 24.0 97.3 663.1 510.4 214.1          Jul
257.0 597.3 469.5 127.8 227.5 102.0 49.2 125.6 24.1 101.5 683.8 531.3 212.6          Aug252.9 584.5 466.8 117.7 228.0 103.5 51.1 124.5 23.8 100.7 712.8 558.0 214.6          Sep
255.1 583.8 467.7 116.1 225.5 105.2 51.7 120.3 24.1 96.2 722.0 563.7 215.5          Oct
252.8 594.3 477.4 116.9 225.7 107.8 52.4 117.9 24.8 93.1 741.7 584.8 182.8          Nov261.3 587.8 468.7 119.1 232.3 111.3 53.7 121.0 26.2 94.8 727.3 572.0 174.3          Dec
261.6 588.1 469.5 118.5 235.6 113.5 54.7 122.1 25.7 96.4 723.8 569.9 173.1 2002          Jan
258.2 589.2 466.9 122.3 237.2 114.6 56.1 122.6 25.8 96.8 721.8 566.7 172.6          Feb
248.6 586.6 464.3 122.3 245.0 118.7 60.1 126.3 26.7 99.6 730.8 574.6 178.3          Mar
254.0 587.2 460.4 126.9 246.7 120.1 61.5 126.6 26.4 100.2 721.2 568.3 179.3          Apr
253.6 588.6 455.2 133.4 249.0 121.3 62.6 127.7 26.0 101.8 734.8 580.6 176.1          May244.6 581.6 450.0 131.6 245.4 118.1 61.5 127.2 26.0 101.2 712.6 559.4 171.7          Jun
239.9 592.3 458.1 134.2 249.3 118.1 59.8 131.2 26.5 104.7 712.9 557.9 174.2          Jul
249.1 583.7 448.5 135.2 246.6 114.3 58.3 132.3 26.9 105.4 722.0 566.9 170.7          Aug248.3 584.2 445.3 138.9 248.3 114.7 59.3 133.6 27.2 106.3 752.3 597.5 174.9          Sep
254.2 586.0 448.3 137.7 246.9 116.4 59.1 130.5 27.6 102.9 762.2 608.7 176.7          Oct
258.2 591.7 449.2 142.5 248.2 118.6 61.0 129.6 28.0 101.6 791.0 634.2 182.4          Nov265.0 586.4 448.5 137.9 248.0 125.0 63.6 123.0 25.5 97.5 738.1 589.2 179.9          Dec
263.4 599.8 453.0 146.7 247.6 121.8 60.5 125.8 26.5 99.3 738.3 591.8 176.2 2003          Jan
262.4 596.0 447.3 148.7 249.7 125.6 64.6 124.1 26.2 97.9 757.7 612.1 182.2          Feb
259.9 602.4 444.0 158.4 246.3 126.8 64.5 119.5 26.2 93.3 778.6 630.9 175.1          Mar
Changes 1
13.1 110.9 113.1 −2.1 10.0 −0.2 −0.4 10.2 3.0 7.3 59.7 46.3 20.2 1995
19.7 82.9 65.5 17.3 14.6 −2.6 −2.5 17.2 6.0 11.2 69.5 49.3 15.1 1996
30.8 59.1 53.3 5.8 36.5 5.1 4.4 31.4 6.1 25.3 159.4 132.9 28.6 199792.3 25.8 28.1 −2.3 77.1 18.9 13.0 58.3 12.5 45.7 83.9 52.0 55.3 1998
30.4 1.3 7.7 −6.4 48.4 12.2 6.4 36.2 2.0 34.2 33.1 13.8 31.3 1999
27.3 −11.4 −6.7 −4.6 17.8 16.8 7.2 1.0 −0.3 1.2 103.9 71.9 32.5 2000
2.4 −26.5 −9.8 −16.7 31.3 24.3 7.7 7.0 2.2 4.8 110.1 86.6 −9.9 2001
5.7 −0.8 −20.2 19.4 18.3 15.9 12.0 2.4 −0.6 3.0 65.7 64.1 −0.4 2002
−1.3 10.6 1.0 9.6 −0.0 −0.9 −0.8 0.9 −0.3 1.2 −21.9 −18.4 −16.4 2001          Jul
−2.4 −8.4 −0.7 −7.7 3.7 −0.8 −0.1 4.5 0.2 4.3 31.3 30.2 −1.6          Aug
−4.2 −12.9 −2.8 −10.1 0.3 1.5 1.9 −1.1 −0.3 −0.8 27.3 25.1 2.1          Sep
2.2 −0.7 0.9 −1.5 −2.5 1.6 0.5 −4.1 0.3 −4.4 7.1 3.9 0.8          Oct
−2.3 10.7 9.8 0.9 1.3 2.5 0.6 −1.2 0.6 −1.8 16.3 18.0 1.3          Nov
8.6 −6.3 −8.8 2.4 6.6 3.4 1.2 3.2 1.4 1.8 −15.9 −14.6 −8.5          Dec
0.3 0.3 0.8 −0.5 3.0 2.1 0.9 1.0 −0.6 1.5 −6.4 −6.4 −1.2 2002          Jan
−3.0 1.2 −2.6 3.8 1.6 1.1 1.3 0.5 0.1 0.4 −1.2 −2.7 −0.4          Feb
−9.6 −2.4 −2.6 0.2 7.9 4.1 4.1 3.8 1.0 2.8 11.3 11.5 5.6          Mar
5.7 0.6 −3.9 4.5 2.2 1.8 1.7 0.5 −0.2 0.7 −1.2 1.1 0.8          Apr
−0.3 1.6 −5.1 6.7 3.0 1.6 1.5 1.4 −0.3 1.6 25.8 23.0 −3.0          May
−9.0 −7.0 −5.1 −1.9 −2.7 −2.6 −0.5 −0.2 0.2 −0.4 0.6 −0.3 −4.5          Jun
−4.5 10.7 8.1 2.6 3.5 −0.3 −2.0 3.8 0.4 3.4 −6.1 −7.1 2.5          Jul
8.5 −7.9 −9.6 1.7 −2.6 −3.0 −0.9 0.4 −0.1 0.5 7.4 7.1 −3.5          Aug
−0.1 −0.1 −3.2 3.1 1.8 0.5 1.1 1.3 0.4 0.9 31.2 31.4 4.3          Sep
5.9 1.8 3.1 −1.2 −1.6 1.4 −0.2 −3.0 0.4 −3.4 12.2 11.8 1.7          Oct
4.0 5.7 0.9 4.8 1.4 2.3 2.0 −0.9 0.4 −1.3 31.1 27.5 5.7          Nov
7.8 −5.3 −0.8 −4.6 0.6 6.9 3.1 −6.3 −2.3 −4.0 −39.1 −32.8 −8.4          Dec
2.3 13.4 4.6 8.8 1.2 −1.8 −2.7 3.0 1.1 2.0 8.7 10.1 −11.8 2003          Jan
−1.0 −3.7 −5.7 2.0 2.0 3.8 4.1 −1.8 −0.3 −1.4 19.8 20.7 6.0          Feb
−2.5 6.4 −3.3 9.7 −3.2 1.3 0.0 −4.5 0.1 −4.5 24.5 21.9 −7.2          Mar
collection from the banks ’portfolios prior to maturity) and trust funds. — instead of bill holdings. —4Including debt securities arising from the
3Up to December 1998, including fiduciary loans and bill-based lending exchange of equalisation claims. 
21*IV Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Liabilities
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999,  5  billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area  4 
in the euro area  3 
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities  5 notice  6 
 
Balance in the in other of which of which
sheet home member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total  2 Total country states Total Total night Total  4 Total 3 months Total night 2 years  7 
 End of year or month
 
1994 7,205.7 1,650.9 1,483.5 167.4 3,082.7 2,894.4 510.4 1,288.3 549.2 1,095.8 654.6 80.1 4.1
1995 7,778.7 1,761.5 1,582.0 179.6 3,260.0 3,038.9 549.8 1,289.0 472.0 1,200.1 749.5 110.1 4.5
1996 8,540.5 1,975.3 1,780.2 195.1 3,515.9 3,264.0 638.1 1,318.5 430.6 1,307.4 865.7 137.3 7.51997 9,368.2 2,195.6 1,959.1 236.5 3,647.1 3,376.2 654.5 1,364.9 426.8 1,356.9 929.2 162.5 7.31998 10,355.5 2,480.3 2,148.9 331.4 3,850.8 3,552.2 751.6 1,411.1 461.6 1,389.6 971.9 187.4 9.41999 5,678.5 1,288.1 1,121.8 166.3 2,012.4 1,854.7 419.5 820.6 247.0 614.7 504.4 111.1 6.5
2000 6,083.9 1,379.4 1,188.9 190.5 2,051.4 1,873.6 441.4 858.8 274.3 573.5 450.5 107.9 6.9
2001 6,303.1 1,418.0 1,202.1 215.9 2,134.0 1,979.7 525.0 880.2 290.6 574.5 461.9 105.2 7.62002 6,394.2 1,478.7 1,236.2 242.4 2,170.0 2,034.9 574.8 884.9 279.3 575.3 472.9 87.4 8.1
2001          Jun 6,283.8 1,390.9 1,183.6 207.3 2,061.5 1,893.3 462.1 872.4 283.7 558.7 440.1 109.2 8.2         Jul 6,225.8 1,374.9 1,168.1 206.8 2,055.1 1,888.4 458.8 873.2 285.8 556.4 439.0 106.9 7.6
         Aug 6,236.5 1,367.7 1,168.2 199.4 2,058.6 1,893.2 461.9 876.2 289.0 555.1 439.0 105.5 6.6         Sep 6,295.9 1,398.9 1,196.0 203.0 2,074.6 1,912.0 479.2 877.4 289.0 555.4 440.0 105.6 8.3
         Oct 6,300.0 1,386.9 1,176.9 210.0 2,077.0 1,914.5 482.5 875.6 287.3 556.4 442.8 107.1 7.7
         Nov 6,320.2 1,418.2 1,198.8 219.4 2,102.7 1,938.6 509.6 870.9 284.1 558.2 445.6 107.5 8.6         Dec 6,303.1 1,418.0 1,202.1 215.9 2,134.0 1,979.7 525.0 880.2 290.6 574.5 461.9 105.2 7.6
2002          Jan 6,255.1 1,375.4 1,153.3 222.2 2,112.2 1,957.1 511.0 872.8 281.4 573.4 464.3 105.0 8.1
         Feb 6,230.4 1,346.3 1,141.7 204.6 2,107.5 1,955.2 510.5 872.7 278.8 572.0 463.9 102.9 8.2         Mar 6,269.8 1,371.2 1,157.9 213.3 2,108.5 1,954.0 508.0 875.2 278.4 570.8 463.8 105.1 8.1
         Apr 6,267.7 1,362.1 1,129.9 232.1 2,099.9 1,948.3 515.1 871.3 274.5 561.8 456.7 104.1 10.1
         May 6,304.5 1,382.7 1,150.7 232.0 2,107.1 1,957.8 523.5 874.3 277.0 560.1 456.1 101.1 7.4         Jun 6,277.4 1,392.3 1,174.8 217.4 2,118.7 1,970.2 535.6 875.7 278.3 558.9 455.1 99.9 8.5
         Jul 6,265.6 1,371.7 1,149.6 222.1 2,111.9 1,964.9 531.2 876.2 278.0 557.5 453.6 99.5 8.0
         Aug 6,290.6 1,389.2 1,165.7 223.5 2,098.3 1,962.0 526.7 877.6 280.7 557.8 453.8 87.4 7.3         Sep 6,341.1 1,400.2 1,172.1 228.1 2,105.1 1,967.6 540.3 869.1 272.6 558.3 454.7 87.5 8.8
         Oct 6,359.1 1,419.4 1,177.2 242.2 2,114.5 1,979.6 542.0 877.8 279.0 559.7 456.9 86.6 8.2
         Nov 6,453.5 1,460.0 1,214.3 245.7 2,146.5 2,008.8 571.8 874.6 273.2 562.4 460.2 90.1 10.0         Dec 6,394.2 1,478.7 1,236.2 242.4 2,170.0 2,034.9 574.8 884.9 279.3 575.3 472.9 87.4 8.1
2003          Jan 6,380.7 1,457.2 1,213.2 244.0 2,160.0 2,024.7 564.4 882.9 275.8 577.4 477.0 88.5 9.1
         Feb 6,424.9 1,466.4 1,224.6 241.9 2,173.4 2,036.7 571.1 886.4 272.1 579.2 479.9 88.5 8.0         Mar 6,434.8 1,471.5 1,218.2 253.2 2,175.3 2,040.7 578.3 883.1 266.2 579.3 481.6 88.0 7.7
 Changes 1
1995 587.7 110.7 98.5 12.2 189.3 156.5 47.2 4.9 −76.5 104.3 99.1 30.0 0.4
1996 761.8 213.7 198.2 15.5 256.0 225.2 88.3 29.5 −41.4 107.3 116.2 27.2 3.0
1997 825.6 223.7 185.5 38.3 130.8 112.1 16.3 46.4 −3.8 49.4 60.3 25.0 −0.3
1998 1,001.0 277.0 182.8 94.2 205.9 176.8 97.8 46.3 34.8 32.7 42.0 26.2 2.01999 452.6 70.2 66.4 3.7 75.0 65.6 34.2 36.7 13.5 −5.3 7.4 7.5 1.7
2000 401.5 87.5 66.0 21.5 38.7 19.8 22.5 37.8 27.0 −40.5 −53.6 −4.2 0.3
2001 244.9 32.4 8.4 24.0 80.6 105.2 83.0 21.2 16.2 1.1 11.4 −4.0 0.4
2002 165.7 58.4 32.5 25.9 53.0 57.0 50.3 5.9 −11.0 0.8 11.0 −2.6 0.6
2001          Jul −47.6 −16.0 −15.5 −0.6 −5.4 −4.4 −3.1 1.0 2.2 −2.4 −1.1 −1.9 −0.5
         Aug 25.5 −7.2 0.1 −7.4 4.7 5.3 3.4 3.2 3.3 −1.2 0.0 −0.7 −1.1
         Sep 56.7 31.3 27.8 3.5 15.7 18.7 17.3 1.2 −0.0 0.2 1.0 −0.1 1.7
         Oct 1.6 −12.0 −19.1 7.1 2.1 2.4 3.2 −1.8 −1.7 1.0 2.8 1.4 −0.6
         Nov 51.1 30.8 21.4 9.4 25.4 24.0 26.9 −4.7 −3.3 1.8 2.8 0.2 1.0
         Dec −16.8 −0.3 3.3 −3.6 31.2 41.0 15.4 9.2 6.5 16.4 16.3 −2.3 −1.0
2002          Jan −51.6 −42.6 −48.9 6.3 −22.3 −22.8 −14.2 −7.5 −9.2 −1.2 2.4 −0.4 0.4
         Feb −23.2 −29.1 −11.5 −17.6 −4.7 −1.9 −0.4 −0.0 −2.6 −1.4 −0.4 −2.2 0.1
         Mar 42.2 24.9 16.2 8.7 1.2 −1.1 −2.5 2.5 −0.5 −1.2 −0.1 2.4 −0.1
         Apr 7.7 −9.2 −28.0 18.8 −7.9 −5.4 7.4 −3.8 −3.8 −9.0 −7.1 −0.6 1.9
         May 52.5 20.9 21.1 −0.1 9.2 11.0 8.8 3.9 3.2 −1.7 −0.6 −2.5 −2.6
         Jun −5.8 6.9 22.2 −15.3 11.9 12.1 12.0 1.3 1.3 −1.2 −1.0 −0.6 1.2
         Jul −19.9 −20.5 −25.2 4.6 −7.4 −5.6 −4.6 0.4 −0.4 −1.4 −1.5 −0.7 −0.6
         Aug 23.8 17.5 16.1 1.5 0.0 −2.8 −4.5 1.4 2.7 0.3 0.1 1.5 −0.7
         Sep 51.3 10.9 6.4 4.6 6.4 5.2 13.3 −8.6 −8.5 0.5 1.0 0.2 1.5
         Oct 20.3 19.2 5.1 14.1 9.6 12.2 1.8 9.0 6.4 1.4 2.2 −0.9 −0.6
         Nov 97.2 40.6 37.1 3.5 32.3 29.4 29.8 −3.2 −5.8 2.7 3.3 3.5 1.8
         Dec −29.0 18.7 22.0 −3.3 24.6 26.7 3.4 10.5 6.3 12.8 12.6 −2.2 −1.9
2003          Jan −13.9 −21.4 −23.0 1.6 −14.2 −13.7 −10.1 −5.7 −4.2 2.1 4.1 0.3 0.9
         Feb 41.4 9.2 11.3 −2.2 9.6 7.1 6.7 −1.4 −3.7 1.8 3.0 1.1 −0.9
         Mar 14.3 5.0 −6.3 11.3 2.1 4.1 7.4 −3.3 −5.9 0.1 1.7 −0.3 −0.3
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey “in section from the banks ’portfolios prior to maturity) and liabilities incurred in the
II. Unlike the other tables in section IV, this table includes −in addition to banks ’own name but on behalf of third parties. —3Up to December 1998,
the figures reported by banks (including building and loan associations) − including liabilities arising from fiduciary loans and liabilities arising from
data from money market funds. —1Statistical breaks have been eliminated rediscounted bills (endorsement liabilities). —4Up to December 1998,
from the flow figures. —2Up to December 1998, volume of business including liabilities arising from fiduciary loans. —5For the German
(balance sheet total plus endorsement liabilities and bills sent for collection contribution: from 1999, including deposits under savings and loan
22*IV Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Debt securities
issued  10 
in other member states  8 Deposits of
central governments  4 
With agreed At agreed Liabilities
maturities notice arising
of which from Money of which Liabilities
domestic market with to non- repos with
of which of which central non-banks fund euro- Capital maturities
up to up to govern- in the shares of up to area and Other
Total  4 Total 3 months Total ments Total reserves   Period 2 years  7 euro area  9 issued  10 2 years  10 residents Liabilities
End of year or month
 
68.7 11.8 7.3 7.3 108.2 108.2 − 31.3 1,441.2 81.9 336.8 305.2 357.8 1994
97.3 11.4 8.3 8.3 111.0 111.0 − 39.1 1,608.1 70.3 393.9 325.0 391.0 1995
120.6 9.0 9.2 9.2 114.6 114.6 − 34.0 1,804.3 54.4 422.1 350.0 438.8 1996
145.8 9.2 9.4 9.4 108.3 108.3 − 28.6 1,998.3 62.5 599.2 388.1 511.3 1997
168.3 13.8 9.7 9.7 111.2 111.2 − 34.8 2,248.1 80.2 739.8 426.8 574.8 1998
99.7 8.9 4.8 3.7 46.6 45.9 2.0 20.8 1,323.6 97.4 487.9 262.6 281.1 1999
96.3 6.7 4.7 3.3 69.9 67.6 0.4 19.3 1,417.1 113.3 599.8 298.1 318.4 2000
92.4 9.0 5.2 3.8 49.1 46.9 4.9 33.2 1,445.4 129.3 647.6 319.2 300.8 200174.6 9.9 4.7 3.6 47.7 45.6 3.3 36.7 1,453.5 71.6 599.2 343.0 309.8 2002
96.1 8.7 5.0 3.5 58.9 55.2 1.1 24.2 1,468.0 118.0 717.9 307.2 313.0 2001          Jun
94.2 8.0 5.0 3.5 59.8 55.3 1.7 25.0 1,473.1 123.7 682.5 310.3 303.3          Jul
94.0 8.4 5.0 3.6 59.9 54.5 4.6 26.5 1,468.1 123.5 693.7 312.6 304.9          Aug92.3 7.3 5.0 3.6 57.0 54.0 2.8 28.0 1,471.1 125.6 692.2 314.2 314.0          Sep
94.4 9.8 5.0 3.6 55.4 53.4 9.4 29.6 1,473.1 126.7 690.0 318.2 315.8          Oct
93.8 9.3 5.1 3.7 56.5 53.6 4.0 30.7 1,448.5 123.8 677.1 321.3 317.6          Nov92.4 9.0 5.2 3.8 49.1 46.9 4.9 33.2 1,445.4 129.3 647.6 319.2 300.8          Dec
91.8 8.1 5.1 3.8 50.1 47.4 2.5 35.0 1,450.5 122.2 668.3 320.1 291.1 2002          Jan
89.6 7.3 5.1 3.8 49.4 47.3 3.5 35.9 1,462.8 125.4 664.8 322.2 287.3          Feb
92.0 9.3 5.0 3.7 49.4 46.9 3.7 35.8 1,479.4 129.0 666.4 323.3 281.6          Mar
89.4 8.3 4.7 3.5 47.5 45.8 3.4 35.9 1,478.2 133.1 673.4 325.3 289.7          Apr
89.1 9.5 4.7 3.4 48.2 45.6 4.7 35.4 1,480.6 134.6 673.3 329.0 291.6          May86.7 8.5 4.6 3.4 48.7 45.9 4.1 35.0 1,472.6 133.1 628.9 331.1 294.7          Jun
87.0 8.7 4.6 3.4 47.6 45.8 3.1 35.6 1,471.6 133.7 640.9 336.8 293.9          Jul
75.5 9.7 4.6 3.4 48.9 45.8 4.3 37.1 1,489.4 135.9 636.3 341.2 294.8          Aug74.2 8.8 4.5 3.4 49.9 46.7 10.7 37.0 1,490.2 137.0 647.7 344.8 305.5          Sep
73.9 9.1 4.5 3.4 48.3 46.8 9.6 37.6 1,485.9 137.5 642.5 343.7 306.0          Oct
75.6 9.4 4.5 3.4 47.6 46.3 6.4 37.5 1,496.8 148.2 653.5 343.0 309.8          Nov74.6 9.9 4.7 3.6 47.7 45.6 3.3 36.7 1,453.5 71.6 599.2 343.0 309.8          Dec
74.8 10.4 4.7 3.6 46.9 45.2 7.6 38.5 1,458.1 138.9 602.9 350.5 305.9 2003          Jan
75.9 12.3 4.6 3.6 48.2 45.1 10.9 39.8 1,468.4 145.7 606.7 353.9 305.4          Feb
75.7 13.0 4.6 3.6 46.6 45.2 11.2 40.2 1,465.1 140.7 612.1 355.8 303.6          Mar
Changes 1
28.6 −0.4 1.0 1.0 2.8 2.8 − 7.8 166.9 −11.5 57.2 19.8 36.0 1995
23.3 −2.4 0.9 0.9 3.6 3.6 −− 5.1 196.3 −15.9 28.1 25.0 47.8 1996
25.1 0.2 0.2 0.2 −6.2 −6.2 −− 4.5 194.8 8.1 172.3 37.1 71.2 1997
24.0 4.6 0.3 0.3 2.9 2.9 − 6.2 263.3 28.1 151.4 28.8 68.3 1998
5.9 1.5 −0.2 −1.3 1.9 1.2 0.6 3.5 168.0 65.1 89.7 38.0 7.7 1999
−4.5 −0.5 −0.1 −0.3 23.1 21.6 −1.6 −1.5 90.6 15.9 97.8 35.3 54.6 2000
−4.6 1.6 0.2 0.4 −20.5 −20.4 4.6 13.3 59.5 18.6 34.8 20.9 −1.1 2001
−2.6 1.1 −0.5 −0.3 −1.4 −1.3 −1.6 4.2 18.8 14.8 −2.1 25.9 9.7 2002
−1.4 −0.6 0.0 0.0 0.9 0.1 0.6 0.8 7.7 5.8 −25.0 3.6 −13.8 2001          Jul
0.3 0.4 0.0 0.0 0.1 −0.8 2.9 1.5 −2.9 −0.5 24.7 2.9 −1.1          Aug
−1.8 −1.1 0.0 0.0 −2.9 −0.5 −1.7 1.5 2.5 2.0 −3.7 1.5 9.6          Sep
1.9 2.5 0.0 0.0 −1.6 −0.6 6.5 1.6 1.6 0.2 −4.9 4.0 2.7          Oct
−0.8 −0.6 0.0 0.0 1.1 0.1 −5.3 1.1 8.5 0.3 −17.1 2.8 4.9          Nov
−1.5 −0.2 0.1 0.2 −7.4 −6.6 0.9 1.9 −3.2 5.5 −32.0 −1.6 −13.8          Dec
−0.8 −0.9 −0.1 −0.0 1.0 0.5 −2.4 2.0 4.0 −2.4 15.1 0.7 −6.0 2002          Jan
−2.2 −0.9 −0.1 −0.0 −0.7 −0.2 1.0 0.8 12.7 3.2 −2.8 2.3 −3.3          Feb
2.5 2.0 −0.0 −0.0 −0.0 −0.3 0.2 −0.1 16.9 3.6 3.7 1.2 −5.8          Mar
−2.3 −1.0 −0.3 −0.3 −1.9 −1.2 −0.3 0.2 0.9 4.1 15.9 2.3 5.8          Apr
0.2 1.3 −0.1 −0.0 0.7 −0.1 1.3 −0.0 6.2 1.7 12.6 4.1 −1.8          May
−1.8 −1.0 −0.0 0.0 0.5 0.3 −0.6 −0.3 −4.1 −2.1 −28.2 2.5 6.2          Jun
−0.1 0.2 −0.1 −0.0 −1.1 −0.1 −1.0 0.6 −3.4 −1.2 5.4 5.2 1.5          Jul
2.2 1.0 −0.0 −0.0 1.4 0.0 1.2 1.2 1.5 2.2 −2.6 4.7 0.2          Aug
−1.3 −0.9 −0.0 −0.0 1.0 0.8 6.4 0.1 1.0 1.0 12.4 3.5 10.5          Sep
−0.3 0.4 −0.0 −0.0 −1.7 0.1 −1.0 0.7 −3.8 0.6 −4.6 −1.1 1.4          Oct
1.8 0.3 −0.0 −0.0 −0.6 −0.5 −3.2 −0.2 11.9 10.7 13.2 −0.5 3.2          Nov
−0.6 0.6 0.2 0.2 0.1 −0.7 −3.1 −0.8 −24.8 −6.6 −42.1 1.0 −2.4          Dec
−0.6 −0.5 −0.0 0.0 −0.8 −0.4 5.3 1.8 2.4 0.6 11.3 5.6 −5.3 2003          Jan
2.0 2.8 −0.0 0.0 1.4 −0.1 2.2 1.3 8.1 6.8 4.4 3.6 3.0          Feb
−0.0 0.7 −0.1 −0.0 −1.6 0.1 0.4 0.6 0.8 −2.3 8.4 −0.8 −2.4          Mar
contracts (see Table IV.12). —6For the German contribution: up to the end with agreed maturities of up to two years. —10In Germany, debt securities
of 1998, including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market paper; up to
footnote 5). —7Up to December 1998, with maturities of less than four the January 2002 Monthly Report they were published together with money
years. —8Excluding deposits of central governments. —9Data collected market fund shares. 
separately from 1999 only; up to December 1998, included in the deposits
23*IV Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
IV Banks
 
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks*
 
 
 5  billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
  of which of which 
Loans
 Cash in hand and credit
Number of balances forreporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Othermonth tions total banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets
All categories of banks
 
2002          Oct 2,373 6,399.9 57.1 2,321.2 1,663.3 648.0 3,583.0 464.4 2,575.3 4.8 522.0 157.2 281.4
         Nov 2,365 6,495.3 55.0 2,400.9 1,732.2 649.8 3,592.4 468.5 2,572.5 4.8 530.2 159.1 288.0         Dec 2,365 6,452.3 63.5 2,381.9 1,727.4 645.6 3,556.0 450.0 2,566.9 4.7 518.7 163.8 287.1
2003          Jan 2,355 6,420.3 55.5 2,356.7 1,707.1 638.9 3,565.0 454.2 2,565.2 4.5 523.3 161.1 281.9
         Feb 2,355 6,460.6 52.3 2,381.3 1,732.9 637.2 3,578.5 466.4 2,568.3 4.4 522.7 160.4 288.2         Mar 2,354 6,470.0 60.4 2,389.1 1,735.1 642.9 3,580.3 473.2 2,558.3 4.4 528.2 159.4 280.9
Commercial banks 5
2003          Feb 272 1,827.3 19.2 633.2 498.8 128.5 953.9 245.7 541.7 2.0 154.5 93.3 127.8         Mar 271 1,830.1 27.1 633.9 502.0 126.0 955.8 245.2 540.2 2.1 160.2 92.2 121.2
   Big banks 6
2003          Feb 4 1,052.4 11.8 355.4 299.6 53.3 522.1 140.5 283.4 1.2 90.6 82.5 80.7         Mar 4 1,055.5 17.9 362.5 308.4 51.8 518.4 140.9 281.9 1.2 90.2 81.4 75.3
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2003          Feb 186 664.6 6.7 226.5 156.1 68.4 384.6 81.5 241.6 0.8 57.4 10.0 36.9         Mar 184 661.7 8.2 218.3 148.6 67.9 389.8 82.1 241.5 0.8 62.0 10.0 35.5
   Branches of foreign banks
2003          Feb 82 110.2 0.8 51.3 43.0 6.8 47.2 23.8 16.7 0.1 6.5 0.8 10.2         Mar 83 112.9 1.0 53.1 45.0 6.4 47.7 22.3 16.9 0.1 8.1 0.8 10.3
Land  banks
2003          Feb 14 1,339.2 2.5 681.9 564.4 115.6 573.3 66.1 412.7 0.4 89.8 33.5 47.9         Mar 14 1,353.8 3.7 692.4 569.6 120.1 576.7 71.2 410.1 0.3 89.9 33.6 47.4
Savings banks
2003          Feb 510 977.2 17.6 228.7 75.8 152.3 692.7 76.8 525.5 1.3 88.7 14.4 23.8         Mar 510 974.8 16.9 227.3 74.1 152.5 693.0 78.3 525.0 1.2 88.0 14.3 23.3
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives  
 
2003          Feb 2 195.4 0.3 125.9 90.2 35.7 53.8 10.6 24.4 0.1 18.1 10.3 5.1         Mar 2 194.5 0.4 126.3 89.0 37.2 52.4 10.8 23.8 0.1 17.1 10.3 5.1
Credit cooperatives
2003          Feb 1,489 555.3 11.4 144.5 66.6 76.1 376.4 48.4 289.6 0.7 37.5 5.5 17.5         Mar 1,489 554.0 10.9 143.4 65.6 76.6 376.5 48.8 288.9 0.6 37.8 5.5 17.7
Mortgage banks
2003          Feb 26 874.9 0.9 224.7 148.5 75.6 627.2 11.4 516.3 − 99.2 1.2 20.8
         Mar 26 870.3 0.8 223.1 146.3 76.7 624.8 12.0 512.7 − 99.0 1.2 20.2
Building and loan associations
2003          Feb 28 163.8 0.0 36.8 25.4 11.4 118.0 1.5 105.8 . 10.7 0.4 8.6         Mar 28 165.4 0.1 37.9 26.6 11.3 118.3 1.5 106.0 . 10.9 0.4 8.8
Banks with special functions
2003          Feb 14 527.7 0.3 305.7 263.3 42.1 183.0 5.9 152.4 − 24.2 1.9 36.7
         Mar 14 527.2 0.5 304.7 261.9 42.5 182.9 5.4 151.5 − 25.3 1.9 37.2
Memo item: Foreign banks 7
2003          Feb 130 387.9 2.4 154.5 109.3 43.6 204.4 44.9 116.5 0.2 42.4 1.6 24.9         Mar 131 396.1 4.5 159.9 112.7 45.3 204.9 42.9 116.2 0.2 45.1 1.6 25.2
  of which:  Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 8
2003          Feb 48 277.6 1.7 103.2 66.3 36.8 157.1 21.2 99.8 0.1 35.9 0.8 14.8         Mar 48 283.2 3.5 106.8 67.7 39.0 157.2 20.6 99.3 0.1 37.1 0.8 14.9
*For the period up to December 1998, section IV (except for Table IV.1) included. For the definitions of the respective items, see the footnotes to
shows the assets and liabilities of banks (excluding building and loan Table IV.3. —1For building and loan associations: Including deposits under
associations) in liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). —2Included in time
Germany. The assets and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market deposits. —3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also
funds (which are also classified as MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not footnote 2). —4Including subordinated negotiable bearer debt
24*IV Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
IV Banks
 
   
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which of which published
reserves,
Time deposits  1 Savings deposits  3 partici-pation
Memo rights
item Bearer capital,
for for of which debt Liabilities
funds for
up to and more arising At three Bank general securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking Other   End of months ’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year  1 repos  2 Total notice bonds risks   month standing  4 liabilities
All categories of banks
 
1,817.5 246.1 1,571.1 2,380.0 581.3 355.6 760.7 43.9 570.4 464.8 111.9 1,525.7 290.3 386.4 2002          Oct 
1,869.8 282.5 1,587.0 2,408.9 615.0 347.1 762.0 46.5 573.1 468.1 111.7 1,534.5 291.0 391.1          Nov 
1,858.3 229.1 1,628.9 2,405.1 609.1 337.1 761.4 33.6 586.2 480.9 111.3 1,505.3 291.7 391.9          Dec 
1,837.8 247.4 1,590.2 2,401.1 600.9 342.9 758.8 46.2 588.3 485.1 110.3 1,506.4 294.9 380.1 2003          Jan 
1,841.2 252.2 1,588.8 2,415.4 604.8 352.7 757.3 52.4 590.0 488.1 110.5 1,526.9 292.9 384.1          Feb 
1,839.8 275.7 1,563.9 2,429.5 622.2 350.8 756.6 63.9 590.0 489.8 109.8 1,523.6 294.8 382.4          Mar 
Commercial banks 5
689.7 137.7 551.8 667.7 263.9 172.1 128.4 46.7 93.6 79.4 9.6 220.8 102.8 146.2 2003          Feb 
693.2 146.4 546.7 678.9 276.8 170.3 128.3 54.9 93.9 80.3 9.6 213.3 104.1 140.6          Mar 
Big banks 6
419.2 101.2 317.9 332.4 114.3 120.3 74.7 44.7 22.4 20.4 0.7 158.3 64.1 78.4 2003          Feb 
422.3 104.9 317.4 339.2 121.3 120.0 74.6 53.0 22.6 20.6 0.7 155.0 64.1 74.8          Mar 
Regional banks and other commercial banks
190.4 25.2 165.0 322.3 143.3 48.4 50.4 1.3 71.2 59.0 8.9 62.5 35.8 53.6 2003          Feb 
188.8 30.2 158.4 325.9 148.7 46.7 50.3 1.2 71.3 59.8 9.0 58.3 37.0 51.7          Mar 
Branches of foreign banks
80.1 11.2 68.9 13.0 6.3 3.4 3.3 0.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 2.9 14.2 2003          Feb 
82.1 11.3 70.9 13.8 6.9 3.6 3.4 0.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 2.9 14.1          Mar 
Land   banks
468.1 65.0 403.1 307.6 43.1 40.7 208.4 3.4 14.8 13.5 0.5 433.6 64.1 65.9 2003          Feb 
466.3 69.6 396.6 313.5 45.9 41.8 210.6 6.9 14.8 13.5 0.4 444.5 64.3 65.3          Mar 
Savings banks
217.9 5.7 212.2 630.0 180.2 63.2 10.4 − 304.0 244.5 72.2 43.8 44.8 40.7 2003          Feb 
215.4 5.3 210.0 628.9 181.2 62.0 10.4 − 303.6 244.8 71.8 44.2 44.9 41.5          Mar 
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives
 
114.0 31.1 82.8 29.6 6.1 5.1 18.4 1.7 −− 0.0 31.7 10.0 10.2 2003          Feb 
114.4 38.9 75.5 29.6 6.3 5.2 18.1 1.6 −− 0.0 31.1 10.0 9.4          Mar 
Credit cooperatives
74.9 1.9 72.9 398.7 108.9 60.2 24.5 − 177.2 150.2 27.9 32.6 29.0 20.0 2003          Feb 
73.7 1.6 72.1 398.1 109.2 59.4 24.4 − 177.3 150.8 27.7 32.3 29.2 20.7          Mar 
Mortgage banks
126.2 6.1 120.1 142.9 1.6 3.6 137.6 0.6 0.1 0.0 0.2 561.2 19.4 25.1 2003          Feb 
128.6 6.7 121.9 143.0 1.2 3.6 137.9 0.3 0.1 0.0 0.2 553.0 19.5 26.2          Mar 
Building and loan associations
29.2 2.0 27.2 104.8 0.2 0.7 103.5 − 0.3 0.3 0.1 6.9 7.1 15.8 2003          Feb 
29.5 2.4 27.1 105.5 0.3 0.6 104.1 − 0.3 0.3 0.1 6.9 7.2 16.3          Mar 
Banks with special functions
121.3 2.7 118.5 134.1 0.8 7.1 126.1 0.1 −−− 196.3 15.8 60.3 2003          Feb 
118.7 4.7 114.1 131.9 1.3 7.9 122.7 0.2 −−− 198.3 15.7 62.6          Mar 
Memo item:   Foreign banks 7
140.7 21.6 119.0 107.9 57.3 13.9 26.9 1.3 7.4 7.1 2.5 92.2 13.3 33.8 2003          Feb 
149.2 23.8 125.4 111.5 61.1 13.7 26.8 1.1 7.5 7.2 2.5 87.8 13.3 34.4          Mar 
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 8
60.6 10.4 50.1 94.9 51.0 10.4 23.6 0.6 7.4 7.1 2.5 92.2 10.4 19.6 2003          Feb 
67.1 12.6 54.5 97.7 54.2 10.1 23.4 0.3 7.4 7.2 2.5 87.8 10.3 20.3          Mar 
securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities. —5Commercial included in other categories of banks and the category ”Branches (with
banks comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks ”,”Regional banks and other dependent legal status) of foreign banks ”.—8Separate presentation of the
commercial banks ”and ”Branches of foreign banks ”.—6Deutsche Bank banks majority-owned by foreign banks included in the categories
AG, Dresdner Bank AG, Commerzbank AG and Bayerische Hypo- und Vereins- ”Regional banks and other commercial banks ” and ”Mortgage banks ”. 
bank AG. —7Sum of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks and
25*IV Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
IV Banks
 
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis- à-vis residents*
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999,  5  billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs)  2,3 Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3,8 
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills and
hand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro-area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins)  1 bank Total and loans Bills  4 banks  5 banks  6 loans  7 Total Loans Bills  4 non-banks banks  9 
End of year or month*
 
1993 26.7 75.3 1,596.8 1,076.2 14.7 3.3 493.2 9.3 3,826.4 3,291.6 44.7 5.6 327.7
1994 25.0 61.5 1,695.6 1,150.6 17.4 4.6 513.6 9.5 4,137.2 3,502.8 45.9 2.2 433.7
1995 26.0 61.0 1,859.9 1,264.9 17.5 4.3 561.9 11.4 4,436.9 3,802.0 46.8 1.4 427.3
1996 28.9 59.7 2,134.0 1,443.3 17.9 3.4 657.2 12.2 4,773.1 4,097.9 44.8 5.9 437.21997 29.3 60.2 2,397.9 1,606.3 18.1 3.6 758.9 11.1 5,058.4 4,353.9 44.7 2.9 473.31998 28.5 63.6 2,738.2 1,814.7 14.6 12.2 887.7 9.1 5,379.8 4,639.7 32.8 5.0 527.81999 16.8 45.6 1,556.9 1,033.4 0.0 19.2 504.2 3.9 2,904.5 2,569.6 7.0 3.0 287.5
2000 15.6 50.8 1,639.6 1,056.1 0.0 26.8 556.6 3.6 3,003.7 2,657.3 6.5 2.3 304.7
2001 14.2 56.3 1,676.0 1,078.9 0.0 5.6 591.5 2.8 3,014.1 2,699.4 4.8 4.4 301.52002 17.5 45.6 1,691.3 1,112.3 0.0 7.8 571.2 2.7 2,997.2 2,685.0 4.1 3.3 301.9
2001          Oct 13.6 54.4 1,676.9 1,072.8 0.0 11.1 593.0 2.9 2,992.5 2,681.6 5.5 4.4 297.1
         Nov 13.2 55.9 1,684.1 1,084.2 0.0 7.5 592.3 2.8 3,009.4 2,698.5 5.3 3.7 297.9         Dec 14.2 56.3 1,676.0 1,078.9 0.0 5.6 591.5 2.8 3,014.1 2,699.4 4.8 4.4 301.5
2002          Jan 26.7 49.3 1,633.8 1,038.5 0.0 5.7 589.7 2.8 3,011.2 2,690.2 4.6 3.0 309.5
         Feb 18.8 42.0 1,636.3 1,035.4 0.0 5.2 595.7 2.8 3,006.1 2,689.6 4.4 2.8 305.4         Mar 16.5 44.4 1,653.0 1,045.6 0.0 5.8 601.5 2.7 2,996.9 2,689.9 4.5 2.7 295.9
         Apr 14.5 40.9 1,648.3 1,038.4 0.0 6.3 603.6 2.7 3,004.3 2,687.4 4.4 3.7 304.9
         May 14.3 45.4 1,655.7 1,044.4 0.0 6.1 605.2 2.7 3,005.7 2,682.8 4.2 4.6 310.2         June 13.9 43.8 1,668.4 1,061.5 0.0 6.3 600.6 2.7 2,990.8 2,678.8 4.3 5.2 298.7
         July 13.4 41.2 1,643.8 1,047.7 0.0 7.6 588.4 2.6 2,995.7 2,685.3 4.3 4.2 299.1
         Aug 13.2 46.0 1,650.2 1,060.1 0.0 7.7 582.4 2.7 2,987.3 2,675.6 4.2 3.9 300.6         Sep 13.0 42.3 1,652.7 1,064.4 0.0 8.5 579.8 2.7 2,995.5 2,683.2 4.2 3.9 301.2
         Oct 13.9 42.8 1,648.3 1,068.2 0.0 8.0 572.2 2.7 2,997.6 2,684.6 4.2 3.9 301.9
         Nov 12.9 41.7 1,689.1 1,102.1 0.0 13.3 573.8 2.6 3,003.5 2,683.3 4.1 3.6 309.5         Dec 17.5 45.6 1,691.3 1,112.3 0.0 7.8 571.2 2.7 2,997.2 2,685.0 4.1 3.3 301.9
2003          Jan 12.9 42.3 1,661.6 1,086.8 0.0 9.7 565.1 2.6 3,005.1 2,686.9 3.9 4.0 307.4
         Feb 12.9 39.0 1,667.6 1,095.5 0.0 9.7 562.3 2.5 3,001.9 2,682.6 3.8 3.6 308.9         Mar 12.6 47.5 1,655.8 1,081.1 0.0 10.0 564.7 2.5 3,005.5 2,677.5 3.8 4.8 316.4
Changes*
1994 −1.7 −13.8 + 99.1 + 73.6 + 2.7 + 1.3 + 21.3 + 0.1 + 320.5 + 240.2 + 1.2 −3.3 + 86.7
1995 + 1.0 −0.5 + 193.5 + 139.4 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 54.3 + 0.2 + 312.8 + 303.6 + 1.0 −0.8 + 2.9
1996 + 2.9 −1.3 + 257.8 + 161.8 + 0.4 − 1.1 + 95.8 + 0.8 + 336.3 + 311.7 −2.0 + 4.7 + 10.6
1997 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 262.5 + 160.7 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 102.6 −1.1 + 285.2 + 255.5 −0.1 −3.0 + 36.5
1998 −0.8 + 3.4 + 343.3 + 210.3 −3.6 + 8.6 + 130.0 −2.0 + 335.3 + 302.1 −11.9 + 2.1 + 52.1
1999 + 2.2 + 13.2 + 122.1 + 66.3 + 0.0 + 12.9 + 42.8 −0.7 + 156.1 + 136.9 + 2.6 + 0.4 + 16.7
2000 −1.1 + 5.1 + 83.6 + 21.7 −0.0 + 7.6 + 54.3 −0.3 + 100.7 + 83.7 −0.5 −0.8 + 19.0
2001 −1.4 + 5.5 + 34.6 + 20.1 −0.0 −21.3 + 35.8 −0.9 + 11.9 + 40.8 −1.6 + 1.6 + 0.3
2002 + 3.3 −10.7 + 15.0 + 33.1 + 0.0 + 2.3 −20.3 −0.2 −19.2 −18.0 −0.8 −1.1 + 1.7
2001          Oct + 0.4 + 3.2 −13.0 −15.3 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 2.4 −0.0 + 2.4 + 1.7 −0.1 −0.5 + 1.3
         Nov −0.5 + 1.6 + 6.9 + 11.1 −− 3.6 − 0.6 −0.1 + 16.1 + 15.9 −0.1 −0.7 + 1.0
         Dec + 1.0 + 0.3 − 7.7 − 5.4 −0.0 − 1.9 − 0.3 −0.0 + 5.8 + 1.7 −0.5 + 0.7 + 3.8
2002          Jan + 12.5 −6.9 −42.5 −41.0 −0.0 + 0.1 − 1.6 −0.0 − 3.4 − 9.9 −0.3 −1.5 + 8.3
         Feb −8.0 −7.3 + 2.7 − 2.9 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 6.1 −0.0 − 4.9 − 0.5 −0.2 −0.2 − 4.1
         Mar −2.3 + 2.4 + 16.9 + 10.3 −0.0 + 0.6 + 6.0 −0.0 − 8.6 + 0.7 + 0.1 −0.1 − 9.3
         Apr −2.0 −3.5 − 5.0 − 7.2 − + 0.5 + 1.6 −0.0 + 8.1 − 2.3 −0.1 + 1.0 + 9.4
         May −0.2 + 4.5 + 7.7 + 6.2 −0.0 − 0.2 + 1.7 −0.1 + 2.2 − 3.9 −0.2 + 0.9 + 5.4
         June −0.4 −1.6 + 12.5 + 16.9 −0.0 + 0.1 − 4.6 + 0.0 −19.0 − 8.0 + 0.1 + 0.5 −11.5
         July −0.5 −2.5 −24.9 −13.8 − + 1.4 −12.4 −0.0 + 5.1 + 6.5 −0.0 −1.0 + 0.6
         Aug −0.2 + 4.8 + 6.4 + 12.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 6.0 + 0.0 − 8.4 − 9.6 −0.0 −0.2 + 1.5
         Sep −0.2 −3.8 + 2.6 + 4.4 − + 0.8 − 2.6 −0.0 + 7.9 + 7.3 −0.1 −0.0 + 0.7
         Oct + 0.9 + 0.6 − 4.4 + 3.8 −− 0.5 − 7.7 −0.0 + 2.0 + 1.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.6
         Nov −1.0 −1.1 + 40.8 + 33.9 + 0.0 + 5.3 + 1.6 −0.0 + 6.0 − 1.3 −0.0 −0.3 + 7.6
         Dec + 4.7 + 3.8 + 2.2 + 10.2 + 0.0 − 5.4 − 2.6 + 0.0 − 6.3 + 1.6 −0.1 −0.2 − 7.6
2003          Jan −4.6 −3.2 −29.7 −25.5 −0.0 + 1.9 − 6.1 −0.1 + 7.9 + 1.9 −0.1 + 0.6 + 5.5
         Feb + 0.0 −3.3 + 6.0 + 8.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 2.8 −0.0 − 3.3 − 4.3 −0.1 −0.4 + 1.5
         Mar −0.4 + 8.5 −11.8 −14.4 −0.0 + 0.2 + 2.4 −0.0 + 3.7 − 5.0 −0.0 + 1.3 + 7.4
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the prior to maturity). —5Up to November 1993, included in securities (see also
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as footnote 6). —6Up to November 1993, including negotiable money market
provisional. Subsequent revisions which appear in the following Monthly paper; excluding registered debt securities. —7From 1999, no longer
Report , are not specially marked. —1Up to December 1998, domestic included in loans or deposits (see also footnote 3). —8Up to December
banknotes and coins. —2Up to December 1998, excluding loans to 1998, including loans to domestic building and loan associations. —
domestic building and loan associations. —3Up to December 1998, 9Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims
including fiduciary loans (see also footnote 7). —4Up to December 1998, (see also footnote 10). —10Including debt securities arising from the
bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from exchange of equalisation claims. —11Including liabilities arising from
rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks ’portfolios registered debt securities, registered money market paper and
26*IV Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3,11,12  Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3,17 
Partici-
patinginterestsin
Memo domestic Memo Memo
item banks Sight Time Redis- item Sight Time Savings Bank item Equalisa-tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciary
loans  
7 Total 13,14  14,15  bills 16 loans  7 Total 15,18  bonds  20 loans  7   Period claims  10 enterprises posits  13 posits  19 
End of year or month*
 
75.3 81.6 59.5 1,395.2 380.2 917.9 69.2 27.9 2,788.1 513.6 1,123.6 859.4 219.1 72.4 1993
68.1 84.4 70.7 1,427.9 342.8 976.9 75.2 33.1 2,875.7 540.2 1,109.3 940.5 206.9 78.8 1994
71.3 88.1 83.2 1,539.4 363.9 1,065.1 75.5 35.0 3,021.1 579.9 1,086.1 1,046.1 227.4 81.6 1995
81.3 106.0 89.7 1,731.0 401.1 1,202.4 75.4 52.2 3,241.5 675.1 1,109.8 1,143.0 227.8 85.8 199676.0 107.6 95.1 1,902.3 427.6 1,349.1 75.6 50.0 3,341.9 689.8 1,146.9 1,182.1 236.9 86.1 199771.6 102.8 129.2 2,086.9 472.5 1,505.2 59.4 49.7 3,520.3 799.5 1,194.1 1,211.0 234.9 80.9 199837.5 58.0 75.6 1,122.0 114.4 1,007.3 0.3 29.8 1,905.3 420.4 759.6 614.7 110.7 42.1 1999
33.1 58.5 82.7 1,189.2 113.4 1,075.3 0.4 30.1 1,945.8 443.4 819.9 573.5 109.0 42.1 2000
4.0 57.0 95.9 1,204.9 123.1 1,081.6 0.3 27.2 2,034.0 526.4 827.0 574.5 106.0 43.3 2001
3.0 54.8 119.0 1,244.0 127.6 1,116.2 0.2 25.6 2,085.9 575.6 830.6 575.3 104.4 42.1 2002
4.0 57.2 88.7 1,177.5 124.2 1,053.1 0.2 28.1 1,977.5 483.7 829.0 556.4 108.4 42.4 2001          Oct 
4.0 57.0 87.2 1,198.9 146.7 1,052.0 0.2 27.9 1,999.2 511.0 822.5 558.2 107.6 42.5          Nov 
4.0 57.0 95.9 1,204.9 123.1 1,081.6 0.3 27.2 2,034.0 526.4 827.0 574.5 106.0 43.3          Dec 
3.9 56.7 89.6 1,159.4 115.6 1,043.6 0.2 27.3 2,009.8 511.5 819.9 573.4 105.1 42.4 2002          Jan 
3.9 56.4 95.1 1,148.5 119.8 1,028.5 0.2 27.3 2,007.8 511.3 819.7 572.0 104.8 42.2          Feb 
3.9 56.2 95.4 1,164.8 126.0 1,038.6 0.2 27.1 2,006.6 509.2 821.7 570.8 104.9 42.1          Mar 
3.9 56.1 95.7 1,138.3 123.2 1,014.9 0.2 27.0 1,999.3 515.7 816.8 561.8 104.9 42.0          Apr 
3.9 56.0 95.8 1,158.7 113.4 1,045.1 0.1 26.8 2,009.4 523.8 820.6 560.1 105.0 41.9          May3.9 55.4 95.5 1,182.3 132.1 1,050.1 0.1 26.0 2,021.4 536.2 820.6 558.9 105.7 41.5          June
3.0 55.2 95.0 1,157.4 118.2 1,039.1 0.1 25.9 2,016.2 531.6 821.1 557.5 106.0 41.6          July
3.0 55.2 105.9 1,173.0 115.3 1,057.6 0.1 25.9 2,013.9 527.2 823.0 557.8 105.9 41.6          Aug 3.0 55.0 107.9 1,179.3 133.0 1,046.1 0.1 25.7 2,025.0 540.8 820.6 558.3 105.3 41.6          Sep 
3.0 55.1 111.5 1,184.4 130.0 1,054.2 0.1 25.7 2,037.6 543.1 829.8 559.7 105.0 41.6          Oct 
3.0 55.0 113.3 1,221.3 157.3 1,063.9 0.2 25.7 2,062.1 572.4 822.6 562.4 104.7 41.5          Nov 3.0 54.8 119.0 1,244.0 127.6 1,116.2 0.2 25.6 2,085.9 575.6 830.6 575.3 104.4 42.1          Dec 
3.0 54.7 118.4 1,214.6 134.8 1,079.7 0.2 25.5 2,076.4 565.2 830.3 577.4 103.5 42.1 2003          Jan 
3.0 54.8 118.0 1,224.7 134.5 1,090.1 0.2 25.6 2,084.6 571.6 830.0 579.2 103.7 41.9          Feb 
3.0 54.8 116.1 1,218.0 144.0 1,073.9 0.2 25.5 2,089.6 578.9 828.4 579.3 103.0 42.1          Mar 
Changes*
−6.9 + 2.6 + 11.3 + 32.4 −31.4 + 53.0 + 6.0 + 4.9 + 85.0 + 28.3 −14.1 + 81.2 −12.2 + 1.8 1994
−1.2 + 7.3 + 12.5 + 134.2 + 20.4 + 111.5 + 0.4 + 2.0 + 158.3 + 48.9 −14.2 + 105.6 + 11.7 + 6.3 1995
+ 8.0 + 3.3 + 6.5 + 175.9 + 36.6 + 137.7 −0.2 + 1.7 + 218.4 + 94.3 + 23.2 + 96.9 + 0.7 + 3.3 1996
−5.3 + 1.6 + 5.4 + 175.9 + 31.6 + 146.7 + 0.2 −2.6 + 100.5 + 13.0 + 37.1 + 39.1 + 9.2 + 2.1 1997
−4.4 −4.8 + 34.1 + 179.0 + 39.7 + 156.4 −16.2 −0.9 + 179.3 + 110.6 + 47.2 + 28.9 −2.1 −5.3 1998
−0.6 + 0.1 + 9.3 + 69.0 − 1.8 + 81.8 −11.1 −0.4 + 67.3 + 32.7 + 48.4 − 4.5 −9.3 + 0.7 1999
−0.8 + 0.5 + 7.1 + 64.7 − 2.3 + 66.9 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 41.3 + 22.3 + 61.1 −40.5 −1.7 −0.0 2000
−29.1 −1.5 + 13.3 + 9.6 + 7.4 + 2.3 −0.2 −2.9 + 88.5 + 82.3 + 8.1 + 1.1 −2.9 + 1.0 2001
−1.0 −2.1 + 24.2 + 37.9 + 1.7 + 36.3 −0.1 −1.5 + 51.7 + 48.4 + 4.1 + 0.8 −1.6 −1.1 2002
−0.0 −0.1 −0.3 −19.1 −13.1 − 6.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 6.3 + 3.4 + 2.9 + 1.0 −0.9 −0.2 2001          Oct 
+ 0.0 −0.2 −1.5 + 20.5 + 22.0 − 1.5 −0.0 −0.2 + 21.5 + 27.1 − 6.6 + 1.8 −0.8 + 0.0          Nov 
+ 0.0 + 0.0 + 8.7 + 5.9 −23.7 + 29.6 + 0.1 −0.7 + 34.7 + 15.4 + 4.5 + 16.4 −1.5 + 0.8          Dec 
−0.0 −0.3 −6.1 −46.1 −10.5 −35.6 −0.1 + 0.1 −24.4 − 15.2 − 7.1 − 1.2 −0.9 −0.9 2002          Jan 
−− 0.3 + 5.8 −10.8 + 4.3 −15.1 −0.0 −0.1 − 2.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 1.4 −0.3 −0.2          Feb 
−0.0 −0.3 + 0.3 + 16.4 + 6.3 + 10.1 −0.0 −0.2 − 1.2 − 2.0 + 2.0 − 1.2 + 0.1 −0.1          Mar 
+ 0.0 −0.1 + 0.3 −26.6 − 2.9 −23.7 + 0.0 −0.0 − 7.3 + 6.5 − 4.9 − 9.0 + 0.1 −0.1          Apr 
+ 0.0 −0.0 + 0.1 + 20.7 − 9.8 + 30.5 −0.0 −0.1 + 11.1 + 8.2 + 4.5 − 1.7 + 0.1 −0.1          May
−0.0 −0.6 −0.3 + 21.7 + 18.6 + 3.1 −0.0 −0.8 + 11.1 + 11.9 − 0.3 − 1.2 + 0.7 −0.3          June
−1.0 −0.2 −0.5 −24.9 −13.9 −11.0 −0.0 −0.1 − 5.3 − 4.7 + 0.5 − 1.4 + 0.3 + 0.0          July
+ 0.0 −0.0 + 11.5 + 16.4 − 2.9 + 19.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 2.3 − 4.4 + 1.9 + 0.3 −0.1 −0.0          Aug 
+ 0.0 −0.2 + 1.9 + 6.4 + 17.9 −11.5 + 0.0 −0.2 + 10.9 + 13.5 − 2.6 + 0.5 −0.5 −0.0          Sep 
−0.0 + 0.1 + 3.6 + 5.1 − 3.0 + 8.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 12.8 + 2.3 + 9.5 + 1.4 −0.3 + 0.0          Oct 
+ 0.0 −0.1 + 1.7 + 37.0 + 27.3 + 9.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 24.5 + 29.3 − 7.2 + 2.7 −0.3 −0.1          Nov 
−− 0.2 + 5.8 + 22.6 −29.7 + 52.3 + 0.0 −0.1 + 23.8 + 3.3 + 8.0 + 12.8 −0.3 + 0.6          Dec 
−0.0 −0.1 −0.6 −29.4 + 7.2 −36.5 −0.0 −0.2 − 9.5 − 10.4 − 0.3 + 2.1 −0.9 −0.0 2003          Jan 
−0.0 + 0.1 −0.4 + 17.8 − 0.3 + 18.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 7.6 + 6.4 − 0.3 + 1.8 −0.4 −0.2          Feb 
+ 0.0 −0.0 −1.9 − 6.7 + 9.5 −16.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 5.1 + 7.3 − 1.6 + 0.1 −0.7 −0.1          Mar 
non-negotiable bearer debt securities; including subordinated liabilities. — rediscounted bills. —17Up to December 1998, including liabilities to
12Up to December 1998, excluding liabilities to domestic building and loan domestic building and loan associations and money market funds. —
associations and money market funds. —13Up to December 1998, 18Since the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999,
including time deposits with terms of less than one month. —14Including including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). —
liabilities arising from monetary policy operations with the Bundesbank. — 19Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote
15Up to December 1998, excluding time deposits with terms of less than 18). —20Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
one month. —16Own acceptances and promissory notes outstanding and, securities. 
up to December 1998, including endorsement liabilities arising from
27*IV Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
IV Banks
 
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis- à-vis non-residents*
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999,  5  billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills  3 negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills  3 Negotiable
(non- money money
euro-area Medium market Memo Medium market
banknotes and paper item and paper Securities Securities
and Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins)  1 Total Total term term banks  4 banks  5 loans  6 Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month*
 
1993 1.2 533.8 498.3 360.5 137.7 0.1 24.3 11.2 262.5 184.0 48.3 135.7 0.0 63.0
1994 1.2 492.3 455.0 309.0 146.0 0.1 23.7 13.5 257.4 173.0 35.0 138.0 0.6 66.5
1995 1.2 538.4 500.8 349.7 151.1 0.1 25.6 11.8 289.2 191.1 42.1 148.9 1.7 79.7
1996 1.4 588.9 544.2 386.6 157.6 0.3 31.5 13.0 352.0 230.4 60.2 170.2 4.9 103.91997 1.5 689.1 635.3 456.1 179.2 0.2 43.1 10.5 474.8 312.7 96.2 216.5 6.0 140.31998 1.5 774.9 706.9 533.6 173.3 0.4 58.7 9.0 610.3 364.9 93.9 270.9 11.6 211.01999 0.4 427.1 383.5 279.5 104.1 0.4 43.2 4.2 396.1 235.8 52.7 183.1 7.5 152.7
2000 0.4 507.7 441.4 325.4 116.0 1.3 65.0 3.6 475.8 286.8 71.1 215.7 6.5 182.5
2001 0.4 596.1 521.7 383.7 138.0 0.8 73.6 3.5 570.3 347.2 99.7 247.5 5.2 217.92002 0.3 690.6 615.3 468.0 147.2 0.9 74.4 2.7 558.8 332.6 92.6 240.0 9.3 216.9
2001          Oct 0.5 591.9 516.9 384.5 132.4 1.5 73.4 3.5 561.4 338.0 100.4 237.6 6.1 217.3
         Nov 0.5 608.4 534.2 399.9 134.3 1.1 73.1 3.6 573.0 352.3 110.1 242.3 5.2 215.5         Dec 0.4 596.1 521.7 383.7 138.0 0.8 73.6 3.5 570.3 347.2 99.7 247.5 5.2 217.9
2002          Jan 0.9 585.2 510.4 371.7 138.7 1.0 73.8 3.2 578.2 353.8 103.1 250.7 4.6 219.8
         Feb 0.7 568.5 493.0 351.0 142.0 1.4 74.1 3.1 582.3 355.9 103.6 252.3 5.8 220.6         Mar 0.4 581.2 505.6 362.4 143.2 1.3 74.3 2.9 596.4 366.7 113.3 253.4 7.2 222.5
         Apr 0.4 590.1 515.1 370.6 144.6 1.3 73.7 2.9 586.5 359.2 108.0 251.2 7.8 219.6
         May 0.4 613.3 538.2 395.3 142.9 1.2 74.0 2.8 589.1 359.6 111.2 248.5 6.6 222.9         June 0.4 609.7 534.3 399.4 135.0 1.2 74.1 2.8 575.1 348.2 105.1 243.1 5.2 221.7
         July 0.4 614.2 538.2 400.0 138.3 1.5 74.5 2.8 579.1 346.2 101.4 244.9 5.8 227.0
         Aug 0.3 631.2 554.9 413.3 141.6 1.5 74.8 2.8 576.0 344.3 98.9 245.4 8.9 222.8         Sep 0.3 659.5 582.6 439.2 143.4 1.9 75.0 2.8 584.9 353.7 109.3 244.4 9.5 221.7
         Oct 0.3 672.9 595.2 450.2 145.0 1.9 75.8 2.7 585.5 355.6 108.9 246.7 9.8 220.1
         Nov 0.3 711.7 630.2 484.4 145.7 5.6 76.0 2.8 588.8 358.2 111.0 247.2 9.9 220.7         Dec 0.3 690.6 615.3 468.0 147.2 0.9 74.4 2.7 558.8 332.6 92.6 240.0 9.3 216.9
2003          Jan 0.3 695.1 620.5 471.3 149.1 0.9 73.8 2.6 559.9 333.2 91.5 241.6 10.8 215.9
         Feb 0.3 713.7 637.5 488.8 148.6 1.3 74.9 2.6 576.6 352.7 109.9 242.8 10.2 213.8         Mar 0.3 733.3 654.1 504.0 150.1 1.0 78.3 2.6 574.8 354.5 113.1 241.3 8.5 211.8
Changes*
1994 + 0.0 −24.0 −27.5 −41.4 + 13.9 −0.0 + 0.1 + 3.4 − 1.6 −5.5 −12.3 + 6.7 + 0.6 + 5.1
1995 + 0.1 + 59.1 + 57.6 + 49.2 + 8.4 + 0.0 + 2.9 −1.4 + 38.3 + 21.3 + 7.8 + 13.6 + 1.1 + 16.1
1996 + 0.2 + 34.2 + 29.9 + 27.2 + 2.7 + 0.2 + 5.2 −1.1 + 58.4 + 36.2 + 17.0 + 19.2 + 3.1 + 21.4
1997 + 0.1 + 80.6 + 71.5 + 53.3 + 18.2 −0.1 + 10.4 −1.2 + 109.3 + 73.0 + 33.7 + 39.3 + 0.7 + 32.9
1998 −0.0 + 100.8 + 89.5 + 79.3 + 10.2 + 0.0 + 13.1 −1.8 + 122.0 + 42.7 −6.4 + 49.1 + 5.5 + 66.0
1999 −0.3 + 17.7 + 5.7 − 5.3 + 11.0 + 0.2 + 11.7 −0.0 + 85.8 + 42.8 + 8.4 + 34.4 + 1.3 + 41.8
2000 −0.0 + 78.9 + 56.5 + 44.6 + 11.8 + 0.9 + 21.6 −0.7 + 72.0 + 45.0 + 17.4 + 27.7 −1.2 + 28.2
2001 + 0.0 + 83.7 + 75.6 + 54.4 + 21.2 −0.5 + 8.5 −0.2 + 88.3 + 53.4 + 27.0 + 26.4 −1.5 + 36.3
2002 −0.1 + 120.3 + 118.0 + 99.4 + 18.6 + 0.1 + 2.2 −0.9 + 21.2 + 12.7 −0.4 + 13.2 + 4.6 + 3.9
2001          Oct + 0.0 + 2.0 + 2.5 − 0.3 + 2.8 −0.3 −0.2 + 0.0 + 2.7 + 3.2 + 1.4 + 1.8 −0.4 −0.0
         Nov −0.0 + 15.1 + 16.0 + 14.5 + 1.5 −0.5 −0.5 + 0.0 + 10.3 + 12.1 + 9.1 + 3.0 −1.0 −0.9
         Dec −0.1 −12.8 −13.2 −16.6 + 3.4 −0.2 + 0.6 −0.0 − 3.7 −6.6 −10.6 + 4.0 −0.0 + 2.9
2002          Jan + 0.5 −13.2 −13.5 −13.7 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.1 −0.4 + 4.8 + 3.5 + 2.6 + 0.9 −0.7 + 1.9
         Feb −0.2 −16.4 −17.1 −20.5 + 3.4 + 0.4 + 0.3 −0.1 + 4.6 + 2.5 + 0.6 + 1.8 + 1.2 + 1.0
         Mar −0.3 + 13.5 + 13.3 + 11.9 + 1.4 −0.1 + 0.2 −0.2 + 15.9 + 13.9 + 9.9 + 4.0 + 1.4 + 0.6
         Apr −0.1 + 12.7 + 13.0 + 10.7 + 2.3 −0.1 −0.3 −0.0 − 3.6 −2.4 −3.8 + 1.4 + 0.7 −1.8
         May + 0.0 + 28.7 + 28.2 + 28.2 −0.1 −0.1 + 0.6 −0.1 + 10.7 + 7.1 + 4.9 + 2.2 −1.0 + 4.6
         June −0.0 + 10.8 + 10.3 + 9.0 + 1.2 + 0.0 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 3.3 −2.9 −3.9 + 1.0 −1.2 + 0.8
         July −0.0 + 1.2 + 0.8 − 1.4 + 2.3 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.2 −5.3 −4.5 −0.7 + 0.5 + 4.6
         Aug −0.0 + 14.3 + 14.0 + 13.8 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.3 −0.0 − 2.0 −0.9 −2.3 + 1.3 + 3.1 −4.2
         Sep + 0.0 + 28.8 + 28.2 + 26.3 + 1.9 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 9.6 + 9.7 + 10.5 −0.8 + 0.6 −0.8
         Oct −0.0 + 13.8 + 13.0 + 11.3 + 1.7 + 0.1 + 0.8 −0.2 + 0.9 + 2.1 −0.3 + 2.5 + 0.2 −1.5
         Nov −0.0 + 40.1 + 36.2 + 35.0 + 1.2 + 3.6 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 4.7 + 3.8 + 2.4 + 1.4 + 0.1 + 0.8
         Dec + 0.0 −14.1 − 8.2 −11.3 + 3.1 −4.7 −1.2 −0.1 −20.8 −18.2 −16.7 −1.6 −0.4 −2.1
2003          Jan −0.1 + 9.2 + 9.6 + 6.6 + 3.0 −0.0 −0.4 −0.1 + 6.8 + 4.9 −0.0 + 4.9 + 1.6 + 0.2
         Feb + 0.0 + 18.9 + 17.3 + 17.5 −0.1 + 0.5 + 1.1 −0.0 + 16.8 + 19.6 + 18.3 + 1.3 −0.7 −2.2
         Mar + 0.0 + 21.4 + 18.3 + 16.3 + 2.0 −0.4 + 3.5 −0.0 + 0.3 + 3.5 + 3.6 −0.2 −1.6 −1.5
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the banknotes and coins. —2Up to December 1998, including fiduciary loans
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as (see also footnote 6). —3Up to December 1998, bill-based lending (bill
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from rediscounted bills and bills
Report , are not specially marked. —1Up to December 1998, foreign sent for collection from the banks ’portfolios prior to
28*IV Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
 Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bank
interests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memo
item and and item and item
Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciaryloans  
6 prises  7 Total Total  9 term  9 term loans  6 Total Total  9 term  9 term loans  6   Period deposits  8 deposits  8 
End of year or month*
 
15.5 30.1 328.1 82.9 236.0 122.5 113.5 9.2 162.8 16.9 139.2 39.1 100.1 6.7 1993
17.3 34.0 402.3 111.6 283.7 150.8 132.9 7.1 181.5 20.6 155.3 41.7 113.6 5.6 1994
16.7 38.8 463.7 116.9 339.7 191.6 148.2 7.0 224.4 22.1 198.0 45.3 152.6 4.4 1995
12.7 45.8 486.5 147.1 335.7 172.0 163.7 3.8 273.5 34.3 237.2 50.0 187.2 2.1 199615.7 54.7 670.3 226.0 440.2 254.3 185.9 4.0 333.9 43.5 285.7 63.0 222.7 4.8 199722.9 62.9 875.7 309.5 562.5 359.1 203.4 3.7 390.3 51.3 329.6 71.8 257.8 9.5 199813.6 33.9 483.6 65.6 418.0 332.3 85.6 2.0 284.4 23.8 260.6 64.9 195.7 5.8 1999
13.9 47.4 586.0 113.7 472.2 382.9 89.3 1.7 314.9 35.4 279.5 62.5 217.0 5.6 2000
13.8 47.6 622.7 91.9 530.8 434.5 96.3 1.4 350.6 34.0 316.6 97.6 219.0 5.3 200115.6 44.8 614.2 101.6 512.7 410.4 102.3 1.1 319.2 33.5 285.7 87.0 198.7 4.5 2002
14.1 49.8 637.1 133.7 503.4 412.3 91.1 1.4 376.6 37.0 339.6 105.9 233.6 5.8 2001          Oct 
14.2 50.0 643.3 120.4 522.9 429.6 93.3 1.4 365.7 38.8 327.0 107.5 219.5 5.9          Nov 
13.8 47.6 622.7 91.9 530.8 434.5 96.3 1.4 350.6 34.0 316.6 97.6 219.0 5.3          Dec 
13.7 47.2 638.6 130.5 508.1 412.3 95.8 1.3 361.3 36.0 325.2 102.2 223.0 5.3 2002          Jan 
14.0 47.4 616.5 122.8 493.7 396.3 97.4 1.3 360.4 34.6 325.8 105.0 220.8 5.1          Feb 
14.1 47.0 627.0 122.0 505.0 406.5 98.4 1.3 363.2 35.0 328.2 106.4 221.8 5.1          Mar 
14.4 46.9 647.7 123.4 524.2 426.0 98.2 1.3 366.3 36.0 330.3 109.2 221.2 4.9          Apr 
14.1 47.4 646.2 119.3 526.9 428.8 98.1 1.2 366.0 34.9 331.1 112.7 218.4 4.7          May13.1 47.0 608.3 133.9 474.4 376.0 98.4 1.1 344.2 38.2 306.0 93.0 213.0 4.5          June
13.4 47.2 618.3 121.3 497.1 395.4 101.6 1.1 347.9 38.6 309.3 95.8 213.5 4.6          July
13.4 47.0 615.5 91.8 523.7 419.2 104.5 1.1 337.2 34.8 302.5 100.9 201.6 4.5          Aug 13.4 47.0 626.2 132.7 493.5 389.3 104.2 1.1 344.6 41.2 303.4 103.2 200.2 4.6          Sep 
14.2 45.7 633.0 116.1 516.9 412.9 104.1 1.1 342.4 38.2 304.2 99.4 204.8 4.6          Oct 
14.7 45.8 648.3 125.2 523.1 420.1 103.0 1.1 346.8 42.6 304.2 101.1 203.0 4.7          Nov 15.6 44.8 614.2 101.6 512.7 410.4 102.3 1.1 319.2 33.5 285.7 87.0 198.7 4.5          Dec 
15.4 42.7 623.1 112.6 510.5 406.1 104.4 1.0 324.7 35.7 289.1 95.4 193.7 4.4 2003          Jan 
15.4 42.4 616.4 117.7 498.7 392.8 105.9 1.0 330.8 33.2 297.6 107.5 190.1 4.3          Feb 
15.4 43.3 621.7 131.7 490.0 384.4 105.6 1.0 339.8 43.3 296.5 109.2 187.3 4.2          Mar 
Changes*
−1.7 + 4.2 + 85.6 + 31.3 + 56.0 + 33.9 + 22.1 −1.7 + 23.1 + 3.9 + 19.8 + 3.4 + 16.4 −0.7 1994
−0.2 + 5.2 + 71.0 + 7.9 + 64.6 + 45.9 + 18.7 −1.5 + 47.8 + 2.2 + 46.5 + 4.1 + 42.4 −0.9 1995
−2.3 + 5.9 + 11.3 + 27.1 − 13.9 − 26.6 + 12.7 −1.9 + 44.7 + 11.7 + 35.0 + 3.7 + 31.3 −2.0 1996
+ 2.7 + 7.9 + 157.3 + 67.7 + 89.5 + 71.8 + 17.7 + 0.1 + 51.0 + 5.4 + 43.3 + 11.4 + 31.9 + 2.3 1997+ 7.7 + 8.8 + 215.6 + 87.7 + 128.1 + 108.1 + 20.0 −0.3 + 64.7 + 10.4 + 48.9 + 10.3 + 38.6 + 5.5 1998
+ 1.1 + 10.9 + 37.4 −9.2 + 46.6 + 47.6 −1.0 −0.0 + 61.0 + 7.2 + 53.8 + 15.9 + 37.9 + 0.1 1999
−0.2 + 12.8 + 90.0 + 47.0 + 43.0 + 42.9 + 0.1 −0.4 + 24.4 + 11.1 + 13.3 −2.9 + 16.2 −0.8 2000
−0.5 − 0.5 + 23.5 −23.6 + 47.0 + 42.4 + 4.6 −0.4 + 30.8 −1.8 + 32.6 + 33.3 −0.7 −0.6 2001
+ 1.7 + 1.6 + 22.7 + 14.6 + 8.1 − 1.3 + 9.4 −0.3 + 4.6 + 0.8 + 3.8 −4.6 + 8.4 −0.9 2002
−0.2 + 0.5 −10.3 −11.4 + 1.1 + 1.7 −0.6 −0.1 + 14.7 + 0.3 + 14.5 + 13.4 + 1.1 −0.0 2001          Oct 
+ 0.0 + 0.0 + 3.1 −13.8 + 16.9 + 15.1 + 1.8 −0.0 −12.6 + 1.6 −14.2 + 1.0 −15.2 −0.0          Nov 
−0.4 − 2.6 −22.5 −28.8 + 6.3 + 3.5 + 2.8 + 0.0 −16.0 −4.8 −11.2 −10.1 −1.1 −0.6          Dec 
−0.2 + 0.4 + 11.6 + 38.3 − 26.8 − 25.7 −1.0 −0.1 + 8.2 + 1.9 + 6.4 + 3.9 + 2.5 −0.1 2002          Jan 
+ 0.3 + 0.2 −21.7 −7.7 − 14.0 − 15.7 + 1.7 −0.0 −0.5 −1.4 + 0.9 + 2.9 −2.0 −0.2          Feb 
+ 0.2 − 0.3 + 11.9 −0.5 + 12.4 + 11.3 + 1.2 + 0.0 + 3.6 + 0.4 + 3.2 + 1.6 + 1.7 −0.0          Mar 
+ 0.3 + 0.2 + 27.1 + 2.3 + 24.8 + 24.3 + 0.5 −0.1 + 7.1 + 1.3 + 5.8 + 3.9 + 1.9 −0.2          Apr 
−0.3 + 1.1 + 7.3 −2.8 + 10.1 + 9.1 + 1.0 −0.0 + 5.4 −0.8 + 6.2 + 5.2 + 1.0 −0.2          May
−1.0 + 0.3 −27.3 + 16.1 − 43.4 − 44.4 + 1.0 −0.1 −14.5 + 3.7 −18.2 −17.6 −0.6 −0.3          June
+ 0.2 − 0.1 + 5.5 −13.6 + 19.0 + 16.3 + 2.7 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 2.1 −1.6 + 0.1          July
−0.0 − 0.2 − 1.5 −29.2 + 27.7 + 24.8 + 3.0 −0.0 + 4.7 −3.8 + 8.5 + 5.3 + 3.2 −0.0          Aug 
+ 0.1 + 0.0 + 11.3 + 40.9 − 29.6 − 29.6 −0.1 + 0.0 + 8.1 + 6.5 + 1.6 + 2.9 −1.3 + 0.1          Sep 
+ 0.7 + 0.1 + 7.2 −16.6 + 23.7 + 23.8 −0.1 −0.0 −1.9 −3.0 + 1.1 −3.8 + 4.8 −0.0          Oct 
+ 0.5 + 0.3 + 16.8 + 9.4 + 7.4 + 8.4 −0.9 −0.0 + 5.5 + 4.5 + 1.0 + 2.0 −1.0 + 0.1          Nov 
+ 0.9 − 0.4 −25.4 −22.0 − 3.4 − 3.8 + 0.5 −0.0 −21.6 −8.6 −13.0 −13.0 −0.1 −0.2          Dec 
−0.2 − 1.7 + 14.4 + 11.7 + 2.7 − 0.1 + 2.8 −0.1 + 9.1 + 2.5 + 6.6 + 9.2 −2.5 −0.1 2003          Jan 
+ 0.1 − 0.3 − 6.7 + 5.4 − 12.0 − 13.5 + 1.5 −0.0 + 6.6 −2.5 + 9.2 + 12.2 −3.1 −0.1          Feb 
−0.1 + 1.0 + 7.4 + 14.3 − 6.9 − 7.0 + 0.0 −0.0 + 10.3 + 10.2 + 0.1 + 2.0 −1.9 −0.1          Mar 
maturity). —4Up to November 1993, included in securities (see also 1998, including working capital supplied to branches abroad. —8Up to
footnote 5). —5Up to November 1993, including negotiable money market December 1998, including time deposits with terms of less than one
paper; excluding registered debt securities. —6From 1999, no longer month. —9Up to December 1998, excluding time deposits with terms of
included in loans and deposits (see also footnote 2). —7Up to December less than one month. 
29*IV Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
IV Banks
 
5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)*
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999,  5  billion
Short-term lending Medium and long-term
to public authorities to enter- to enterprises and individuals  1 
Lending to domestic
non-banks, total  1,2 
   
including excluding Negoti-negotiable money ablemarket paper, Loans moneysecurities, and market Treasury
Period equalisation claims Total Total paper Total Loans bills  
5 Total Total bills 3,4 
End of year or month*
 
1993 3,826.4 3,417.8 563.2 544.2 540.8 3.4 19.0 16.8 2.2 3,263.2 2,441.8
1994 4,137.2 3,633.1 583.5 549.1 548.6 0.4 34.4 32.7 1.8 3,553.7 2,661.9
1995 4,436.9 3,936.9 615.2 584.0 583.3 0.7 31.3 30.5 0.8 3,821.7 2,785.5
1996 4,773.1 4,248.7 662.2 617.2 616.2 1.0 45.1 40.2 4.9 4,110.8 3,007.21997 5,058.4 4,506.2 667.8 625.8 624.8 1.0 41.9 40.1 1.9 4,390.6 3,223.41998 5,379.8 4,775.4 704.3 661.3 660.8 0.5 43.0 38.5 4.5 4,675.5 3,482.41999 2,904.5 2,576.5 355.3 328.9 328.7 0.2 26.4 23.6 2.8 2,549.2 1,943.6
2000 3,003.7 2,663.7 371.2 348.2 347.7 0.5 22.9 21.2 1.7 2,632.5 2,038.6
2001 3,014.1 2,704.2 387.9 356.7 355.2 1.5 31.2 28.2 2.9 2,626.2 2,070.22002 2,997.2 2,689.1 365.4 331.9 331.0 1.0 33.5 31.1 2.4 2,631.8 2,079.7
2001          Oct 2,992.5 2,687.1 376.7 350.1 348.7 1.4 26.6 23.6 3.0 2,615.8 2,058.9
         Nov 3,009.4 2,703.8 388.0 351.1 349.9 1.2 36.9 34.4 2.5 2,621.4 2,064.6         Dec 3,014.1 2,704.2 387.9 356.7 355.2 1.5 31.2 28.2 2.9 2,626.2 2,070.2
2002          Jan 3,011.2 2,694.8 377.4 345.5 344.6 0.9 31.8 29.8 2.1 2,633.8 2,078.2
         Feb 3,006.1 2,694.0 377.7 345.7 344.8 0.9 32.0 30.1 1.9 2,628.4 2,071.7         Mar 2,996.9 2,694.4 382.5 349.0 348.0 1.0 33.5 31.8 1.6 2,614.4 2,061.7
         Apr 3,004.3 2,691.8 379.1 348.2 347.1 1.1 30.8 28.2 2.6 2,625.3 2,069.3
         May 3,005.7 2,687.0 373.6 344.9 344.0 0.9 28.6 24.9 3.7 2,632.2 2,072.7         June 2,990.8 2,683.1 370.7 343.1 342.2 0.9 27.6 23.4 4.2 2,620.1 2,066.7
         July 2,995.7 2,689.5 370.4 335.5 334.1 1.5 34.9 32.2 2.7 2,625.3 2,068.5
         Aug 2,987.3 2,679.9 356.0 331.2 329.9 1.2 24.8 22.1 2.7 2,631.4 2,073.3         Sep 2,995.5 2,687.4 367.4 343.2 341.6 1.5 24.2 21.8 2.4 2,628.2 2,068.8
         Oct 2,997.6 2,688.8 364.2 335.7 334.2 1.5 28.5 26.1 2.4 2,633.4 2,076.6
         Nov 3,003.5 2,687.5 365.8 332.5 330.9 1.7 33.3 31.4 1.9 2,637.7 2,079.9         Dec 2,997.2 2,689.1 365.4 331.9 331.0 1.0 33.5 31.1 2.4 2,631.8 2,079.7
2003          Jan 3,005.1 2,690.8 371.1 329.7 328.5 1.2 41.4 38.6 2.8 2,634.0 2,076.5
         Feb 3,001.9 2,686.4 364.4 329.3 328.1 1.2 35.1 32.7 2.4 2,637.4 2,077.5         Mar 3,005.5 2,681.3 369.3 332.5 330.4 2.2 36.7 34.0 2.7 2,636.3 2,071.6
Changes*
1994 + 320.5 + 244.0 + 13.2 + 7.0 + 9.9 −2.9 + 6.2 + 6.6 −0.4 + 307.2 + 249.1
1995 + 312.8 + 311.9 + 35.9 + 37.9 + 37.7 + 0.2 − 1.9 − 1.0 −1.0 + 276.9 + 185.1
1996 + 336.3 + 312.9 + 44.3 + 32.6 + 32.2 + 0.4 + 11.7 + 7.4 + 4.3 + 292.0 + 221.51997 + 285.2 + 256.9 + 2.7 + 5.9 + 5.9 + 0.0 − 3.2 − 0.1 −3.0 + 282.5 + 219.9
1998 + 335.3 + 285.5 + 51.7 + 50.6 + 51.2 −0.6 + 1.1 − 1.6 + 2.7 + 283.6 + 258.3
1999 + 156.1 + 139.5 + 9.6 + 6.3 + 6.4 −0.0 + 3.3 + 2.9 + 0.4 + 146.4 + 146.4
2000 + 100.7 + 83.2 + 14.5 + 18.1 + 17.8 + 0.3 − 3.6 − 2.5 −1.1 + 86.1 + 93.8
2001 + 11.9 + 39.2 + 15.3 + 7.0 + 5.9 + 1.0 + 8.4 + 7.8 + 0.6 − 3.4 + 32.0
2002 − 19.2 − 18.8 −23.4 −25.7 −25.2 −0.5 + 2.3 + 2.9 −0.6 + 4.3 + 7.6
2001          Oct + 2.4 + 1.5 − 3.8 − 5.0 − 4.5 −0.5 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 0.0 + 6.2 + 8.1
         Nov + 16.1 + 15.8 + 10.8 + 0.5 + 0.7 −0.2 + 10.3 + 10.8 −0.5 + 5.3 + 5.2
         Dec + 5.8 + 1.3 + 0.5 + 6.2 + 5.9 + 0.3 − 5.7 − 6.2 + 0.4 + 5.4 + 5.9
2002          Jan − 3.4 − 10.2 −11.3 −11.9 −11.4 −0.6 + 0.7 + 1.6 −0.9 + 7.9 + 8.1
         Feb − 4.9 − 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.3 −0.2 − 5.4 − 6.5
         Mar − 8.6 + 0.8 + 4.9 + 3.4 + 3.3 + 0.1 + 1.5 + 1.7 −0.2 − 13.5 − 9.7
         Apr + 8.1 − 2.4 − 3.4 − 0.8 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 2.6 − 3.6 + 1.0 + 11.5 + 8.2
         May + 2.2 − 4.1 − 5.1 − 2.9 − 2.8 −0.2 − 2.2 − 3.3 + 1.1 + 7.4 + 3.7
         June − 19.0 − 8.0 − 3.3 − 2.3 − 2.3 + 0.0 − 1.0 − 1.5 + 0.5 − 15.6 − 9.6
         July + 5.1 + 6.5 − 0.3 − 7.6 − 8.1 + 0.5 + 7.3 + 8.8 −1.5 + 5.5 + 2.1
         Aug − 8.4 − 9.6 −14.4 − 4.4 − 4.1 −0.2 −10.0 −10.1 + 0.0 + 6.1 + 4.0
         Sep + 7.9 + 7.2 + 11.2 + 11.8 + 11.5 + 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.3 −0.3 − 3.3 − 3.9
         Oct + 2.0 + 1.4 − 3.2 − 7.5 − 7.5 −0.0 + 4.3 + 4.3 + 0.0 + 5.2 + 7.7
         Nov + 6.0 − 1.3 + 1.4 − 3.4 − 3.5 + 0.1 + 4.8 + 5.2 −0.5 + 4.5 + 3.5
         Dec − 6.3 + 1.6 − 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.1 −0.7 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.5 − 5.9 − 0.3
2003          Jan + 7.9 + 1.7 + 5.7 − 2.2 − 2.4 + 0.2 + 7.9 + 7.5 + 0.4 + 2.2 − 3.6
         Feb − 3.3 − 4.4 − 6.7 − 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 6.3 − 5.9 −0.4 + 3.5 + 1.0
         Mar + 3.7 − 5.0 + 4.8 + 3.2 + 2.2 + 1.0 + 1.6 + 1.3 + 0.3 − 1.2 − 5.9
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the including fiduciary loans (see also footnote 9). —3Up to December 1998,
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks ’portfolios
Report , are not specially marked. —1Up to December 1998, including loans prior to maturity). —4From 1999, including small amounts of medium-term
to domestic building and loan associations. —2Up to December 1998, series of bills. —5From December 1993, including other negotiable
30*IV Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
IV Banks
 
   
 
lending  2,6 
prises and individuals  1,2 to public authorities  2 
Loans Loans
Memo Memo
item Equal- item
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term  7 term  8 loans  9 Total Total term  7 term  8 loans  9   Period Securities  6 ities 6,10 claims  11 
End of year or month*
 
2,241.5 253.9 1,987.5 134.2 66.1 821.4 537.1 36.8 500.3 193.5 75.3 15.5 1993
2,390.4 228.3 2,162.0 203.2 68.3 891.8 577.0 34.5 542.5 230.5 68.1 16.1 1994
2,522.0 214.1 2,307.9 192.9 70.6 1,036.2 713.0 74.5 638.4 234.4 71.3 17.5 1995
2,713.3 215.8 2,497.5 205.9 88.0 1,103.6 773.0 69.5 703.6 231.3 81.3 18.0 19962,900.0 216.2 2,683.8 234.1 89.3 1,167.2 833.8 53.0 780.8 239.2 76.0 18.3 19973,104.5 206.8 2,897.8 292.4 85.4 1,193.2 868.8 33.1 835.7 235.4 71.6 17.3 19981,764.8 182.5 1,582.3 178.9 49.2 605.6 459.5 30.9 428.6 108.6 37.5 8.7 1999
1,838.9 192.8 1,646.0 199.7 50.1 593.9 455.9 30.4 425.5 104.9 33.1 8.4 2000
1,880.5 191.1 1,689.4 189.7 48.9 556.0 440.3 25.6 414.6 111.8 4.0 8.0 20011,909.8 193.5 1,716.3 169.9 47.3 552.1 417.1 27.4 389.7 132.0 3.0 7.5 2002
1,870.9 189.8 1,681.1 188.0 49.1 556.9 443.9 25.5 418.4 109.0 4.0 8.1 2001          Oct 
1,876.6 190.0 1,686.6 188.0 48.8 556.8 442.9 25.6 417.3 110.0 4.0 8.1          Nov 
1,880.5 191.1 1,689.4 189.7 48.9 556.0 440.3 25.6 414.6 111.8 4.0 8.0          Dec 
1,880.9 189.1 1,691.8 197.3 48.7 555.7 439.6 26.7 412.9 112.2 3.9 8.0 2002          Jan 
1,882.5 189.3 1,693.3 189.1 48.5 556.8 436.6 26.1 410.5 116.2 3.9 8.0          Feb 
1,882.3 189.4 1,692.9 179.4 48.2 552.7 432.2 25.6 406.6 116.5 3.9 7.9          Mar 
1,884.5 189.8 1,694.7 184.8 48.2 556.0 431.9 26.2 405.7 120.1 3.9 7.9          Apr 
1,888.0 189.9 1,698.1 184.7 48.1 559.5 430.1 26.3 403.8 125.5 3.9 7.9          May1,891.0 191.2 1,699.9 175.6 47.6 553.4 426.4 24.4 402.0 123.0 3.9 7.8          June
1,897.5 191.7 1,705.8 171.0 47.5 556.8 425.8 24.5 401.3 128.0 3.0 7.7          July
1,901.6 192.3 1,709.3 171.6 47.5 558.1 426.2 24.7 401.5 128.9 3.0 7.7          Aug 1,900.6 192.1 1,708.6 168.2 47.3 559.3 423.3 24.6 398.7 133.1 3.0 7.7          Sep 
1,906.5 193.8 1,712.6 170.1 47.5 556.8 422.1 24.7 397.4 131.8 3.0 7.6          Oct 
1,907.6 192.5 1,715.1 172.4 47.3 557.8 417.7 25.5 392.2 137.1 3.0 7.7          Nov 1,909.8 193.5 1,716.3 169.9 47.3 552.1 417.1 27.4 389.7 132.0 3.0 7.5          Dec 
1,909.4 194.8 1,714.6 167.1 47.0 557.4 414.2 30.0 384.2 140.3 3.0 7.7 2003          Jan 
1,911.1 194.0 1,717.1 166.5 47.1 559.9 414.4 31.5 382.9 142.5 3.0 7.7          Feb 
1,907.1 193.1 1,714.0 164.5 47.2 564.6 409.8 29.9 379.8 151.9 3.0 7.6          Mar 
Changes*
+ 198.7 −29.2 + 227.9 + 48.5 + 1.9 + 58.2 + 26.2 − 2.4 + 28.5 + 38.3 − 6.9 + 0.7 1994
+ 176.0 − 1.9 + 177.9 + 3.3 + 5.9 + 91.8 + 91.8 + 15.3 + 76.6 − 0.4 − 1.2 + 1.5 1995
+ 204.4 + 1.6 + 202.8 + 14.0 + 3.1 + 70.4 + 65.7 − 5.5 + 71.2 − 3.3 + 8.0 + 0.1 1996
+ 189.0 + 0.3 + 188.7 + 29.5 + 1.4 + 62.6 + 60.6 −18.0 + 78.6 + 7.0 − 5.3 + 0.2 1997
+ 205.7 − 8.9 + 214.6 + 56.5 −3.9 + 25.3 + 35.0 −20.0 + 55.0 − 4.4 − 4.4 −0.9 1998
+ 121.8 + 25.1 + 96.8 + 24.6 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 8.5 + 6.2 + 2.3 − 7.8 − 0.6 −0.1 1999
+ 71.8 + 6.9 + 64.9 + 22.1 + 0.8 − 7.7 − 3.8 − 0.4 − 3.5 − 3.1 − 0.8 −0.3 2000
+ 41.9 − 2.8 + 44.7 − 9.8 −1.2 − 35.4 −16.5 − 5.5 −10.9 + 10.1 −29.1 −0.4 2001
+ 26.6 − 2.1 + 28.7 −19.0 −1.6 − 3.4 −23.1 + 1.0 −24.1 + 20.7 − 1.0 −0.5 2002
+ 5.1 + 0.1 + 5.0 + 2.9 −0.1 − 1.9 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 1.6 − 0.0 −0.0 2001          Oct 
+ 5.3 − 0.1 + 5.3 − 0.1 −0.2 + 0.1 − 1.0 + 0.1 − 1.1 + 1.1 + 0.0 + 0.0          Nov 
+ 4.1 + 1.2 + 3.0 + 1.8 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 2.6 + 0.1 − 2.7 + 2.0 + 0.0 −0.1          Dec 
+ 0.3 − 2.1 + 2.4 + 7.8 −0.3 − 0.3 − 0.7 + 1.0 − 1.7 + 0.5 − 0.0 −0.0 2002          Jan 
+ 1.7 + 0.2 + 1.5 − 8.1 −0.2 + 1.1 − 3.0 − 0.6 − 2.4 + 4.1 −− 0.0          Feb 
+ 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.3 − 9.8 −0.2 − 3.9 − 4.4 − 0.5 − 3.9 + 0.5 − 0.0 −0.0          Mar 
+ 2.4 + 0.4 + 2.0 + 5.8 −0.1 + 3.3 − 0.3 + 0.6 − 0.9 + 3.6 + 0.0 −0.0          Apr 
+ 3.8 + 0.2 + 3.6 − 0.0 −0.0 + 3.6 − 1.9 + 0.0 − 1.9 + 5.5 + 0.0 −0.0          May
− 0.5 − 1.9 + 1.4 − 9.0 −0.5 − 6.1 − 3.6 − 1.8 − 1.8 − 2.4 − 0.0 −0.1          June
+ 6.4 + 0.5 + 5.9 − 4.4 −0.1 + 3.4 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.7 + 5.0 − 1.0 −0.1          July
+ 4.1 + 0.6 + 3.5 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 2.1 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 1.6 + 0.0 −0.0          Aug 
− 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.7 − 2.8 −0.2 + 0.6 − 2.9 − 0.1 − 2.8 + 3.5 + 0.0 −0.0          Sep 
+ 5.8 + 1.8 + 4.1 + 1.9 + 0.2 − 2.5 − 1.2 + 0.1 − 1.3 − 1.3 − 0.0 −0.0          Oct 
+ 1.3 − 2.8 + 4.1 + 2.3 −0.1 + 1.0 − 4.3 + 0.0 − 4.4 + 5.4 + 0.0 + 0.0          Nov 
+ 2.2 + 1.0 + 1.3 − 2.5 −0.0 − 5.7 − 0.6 + 1.9 − 2.5 − 5.1 −− 0.1          Dec 
− 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 3.2 −0.2 + 5.8 − 2.9 + 0.3 − 3.3 + 8.7 − 0.0 + 0.2 2003          Jan 
+ 1.7 − 0.7 + 2.4 − 0.7 + 0.1 + 2.4 + 0.2 + 1.5 − 1.3 + 2.2 − 0.0 + 0.0          Feb 
− 4.0 − 0.9 − 3.0 − 2.0 + 0.1 + 4.8 − 4.6 − 1.5 − 3.1 + 9.4 + 0.0 −0.1          Mar 
money market paper; excluding mobilisation and liquidity paper. —6From notice of four years and more; from 1999, of more than five years. —9From
1999, breakdown of securities by medium and long-term lending no longer 1999, no longer included in lending (see also footnote 2). —10Excluding
possible. —7Up to December 1998, maturity or period of notice of more debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims (see also
than one year to less than four years; from 1999, more than one year up to footnote 11). —11Including debt securities arising from the exchange of
and including five years. —8Up to December 1998, maturity or period of equalisation claims. 
31*IV Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
IV Banks
 
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and resident individuals, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
 
 5  billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and resident individuals (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding sec urities portfolios)  1 
of which  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
 
Financing
Mortgage institu-
loans tions
secured Whole- Agri- Electricity, Transport, (excluding
by gas and sale culture, storage MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which water and forestry and insurance
loans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- supply, Construc- retail and commu- enter-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing mining  2 tion trade  3 fishing nication prises
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2000 2,187.3 955.2 1,030.8 737.6 293.2 1,267.8 344.1 174.9 35.9 68.2 173.2 31.4 49.1 34.2
2001 2,236.3 981.4 1,053.9 757.7 296.2 1,295.6 346.1 174.3 36.7 67.9 172.9 31.3 50.0 39.0
2002          Mar 2,230.8 983.7 1,055.7 759.9 295.7 1,291.7 345.8 173.8 38.1 68.5 169.3 31.6 51.7 39.0
         June 2,233.7 994.1 1,060.2 768.0 292.2 1,287.1 345.9 171.5 39.4 68.2 167.0 32.0 51.5 36.5         Sep 2,242.7 1,000.0 1,064.3 770.7 293.6 1,286.1 344.5 168.2 38.3 66.9 165.7 32.5 50.5 42.1         Dec 2,241.2 1,008.9 1,068.7 776.3 292.4 1,277.3 340.1 161.5 37.4 64.6 162.6 31.3 51.3 39.5
2003          Mar 2,237.9 1,012.2 1,066.9 781.6 285.3 1,273.2 338.4 158.5 37.3 63.5 159.6 32.0 51.1 50.3
 Short-term lending
2000 348.4 − 15.9 − 15.9 294.6 10.7 61.5 6.2 17.9 62.2 4.2 10.1 10.5
2001 355.8 − 15.9 − 15.9 304.1 10.6 59.6 5.5 17.8 63.5 4.1 9.3 14.2
2002          Mar 348.5 − 15.1 − 15.1 299.5 10.1 59.1 6.6 18.5 61.1 4.3 10.5 15.7
         June 342.6 − 14.4 − 14.4 293.2 9.4 58.6 7.3 18.4 60.0 4.6 9.6 12.1
         Sep 342.1 − 14.1 − 14.1 291.2 9.1 56.6 6.1 17.5 59.3 4.8 8.8 17.0
         Dec 331.4 − 14.5 − 14.5 281.1 9.3 52.0 5.1 15.9 58.7 4.2 8.4 13.6
2003          Mar 330.7 − 13.7 − 13.7 282.8 8.8 50.6 4.8 16.0 57.4 4.5 8.0 24.3
 Medium-term lending
2000 192.8 − 39.3 − 39.3 120.1 12.8 17.6 1.5 7.0 13.3 3.4 6.9 9.1
2001 191.1 − 37.1 − 37.1 120.1 12.0 18.5 1.9 6.5 13.4 3.2 7.2 7.7
2002          Mar 189.4 − 36.4 − 36.4 120.0 11.9 18.8 1.9 6.4 13.2 3.3 7.7 6.4
         June 191.2 − 35.9 − 35.9 120.9 11.7 17.8 2.2 6.6 13.2 3.3 8.1 6.5
         Sep 192.1 − 35.7 − 35.7 121.0 11.6 18.0 2.4 6.6 13.3 3.3 8.1 6.7
         Dec 193.5 − 36.1 − 36.1 121.8 11.3 17.9 2.0 6.5 13.5 3.3 8.5 6.8
2003          Mar 193.1 − 35.9 − 35.9 121.3 11.4 17.7 2.2 6.2 13.4 3.3 9.1 6.3
 Long-term lending
2000 1,646.0 955.2 975.5 737.6 238.0 853.1 320.6 95.9 28.2 43.4 97.7 23.9 32.1 14.6
2001 1,689.4 981.4 1,000.9 757.7 243.2 871.4 323.5 96.2 29.4 43.7 96.1 24.0 33.5 17.1
2002          Mar 1,692.9 983.7 1,004.1 759.9 244.2 872.3 323.8 95.9 29.5 43.5 94.9 24.1 33.5 17.0
         June 1,699.9 994.1 1,009.9 768.0 241.9 873.0 324.8 95.1 29.9 43.2 93.9 24.1 33.8 17.9         Sep 1,708.6 1,000.0 1,014.5 770.7 243.8 873.9 323.8 93.6 29.9 42.8 93.0 24.4 33.5 18.4         Dec 1,716.3 1,008.9 1,018.1 776.3 241.9 874.4 319.4 91.5 30.3 42.2 90.3 23.8 34.4 19.0
2003          Mar 1,714.0 1,012.2 1,017.2 781.6 235.7 869.1 318.2 90.2 30.4 41.2 88.8 24.2 34.1 19.8
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2002          Q1 − 5.7 + 1.6 + 1.3 + 1.4 − 0.2 − 4.1 − 0.4 − 0.2 + 1.3 + 0.5 − 3.7 + 0.3 + 1.7 + 0.1
         Q2 − 0.3 + 3.7 + 3.8 + 3.4 + 0.3 − 7.0 − 0.4 − 2.4 + 1.2 − 0.5 − 2.7 + 0.3 − 1.3 − 2.7
         Q3 + 8.8 + 4.8 + 5.7 + 3.6 + 2.1 − 1.2 − 0.6 − 3.4 − 1.1 − 1.4 − 1.4 + 0.5 − 1.1 + 5.6
         Q4 − 1.5 + 4.3 + 6.3 + 3.0 + 3.3 − 8.7 − 0.9 − 6.2 − 0.9 − 2.3 − 1.4 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 2.7
2003          Q1 − 3.3 − 0.4 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 0.9 − 4.2 − 1.4 − 3.0 − 0.1 − 1.1 − 3.1 + 0.7 − 0.2 + 10.3
 Short-term lending
2002          Q1 − 7.8 −− 0.8 −− 0.8 − 5.1 − 0.6 − 0.5 + 1.1 + 0.7 − 2.3 + 0.2 + 1.2 + 1.4
         Q2 − 6.0 −− 0.7 −− 0.7 − 6.5 − 0.6 − 0.5 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 1.4 + 0.3 − 0.9 − 3.5
         Q3 − 0.8 −− 0.2 −− 0.2 − 2.2 − 0.3 − 2.1 − 1.2 − 0.9 − 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.8 + 5.0
         Q4 −10.8 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 −10.2 + 0.2 − 4.6 − 1.0 − 1.6 − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 3.4
2003          Q1 − 0.7 −− 0.9 −− 0.9 + 1.7 − 0.6 − 1.5 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.3 − 0.4 + 10.6
 Medium-term lending
2002          Q1 − 1.5 −− 0.6 −− 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 1.3
         Q2 − 1.3 −− 0.5 −− 0.5 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 1.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.1
         Q3 + 0.8 −− 0.3 −− 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2
         Q4 − 0.1 −− 0.4 −− 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.1
2003          Q1 − 1.7 −− 0.2 −− 0.2 − 1.8 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.7
 Long-term lending
2002          Q1 + 3.6 + 1.6 + 2.7 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 0.9 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 1.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0
         Q2 + 6.9 + 3.7 + 5.0 + 3.4 + 1.5 + 0.5 + 0.4 − 0.8 + 0.4 − 0.4 − 1.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.7
         Q3 + 8.7 + 4.8 + 6.2 + 3.6 + 2.7 + 0.9 − 0.2 − 1.5 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.5
         Q4 + 9.4 + 4.3 + 6.4 + 3.0 + 3.5 + 1.5 − 0.7 − 1.5 + 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.6
2003          Q1 − 1.0 − 0.4 + 2.2 + 0.3 + 1.9 − 4.1 − 0.9 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 1.0 − 1.6 + 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.3
*Excluding lending by foreign branches. Breakdown of lending by building always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent alterations, which will
and loan associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical alterations appear in the following Monthly Report , are not specially marked. —
have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest date are 1Excluding loans on a trust basis. —2Including quarrying. —3Including
32*IV Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
IV Banks
 
   
 
 
 
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which of which
Debitbalanceson wage,
Other Lending salaryreal to self- Lending and of which
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans  
5 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises enterprises persons  4 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
700.8 162.3 46.8 183.1 459.0 75.0 905.5 683.0 222.6 108.6 24.3 14.0 3.7 2000
723.3 169.4 50.3 194.3 458.6 74.7 926.7 704.3 222.4 110.7 22.9 14.1 3.5 2001
719.7 168.9 49.2 195.6 455.5 75.1 925.4 706.4 219.0 109.5 22.3 13.8 3.5 2002          Mar 
720.9 169.4 48.8 197.9 456.1 74.7 932.5 710.8 221.7 112.3 22.7 14.1 3.5          June
721.9 171.1 47.8 199.8 453.5 74.0 942.1 716.4 225.8 114.6 23.9 14.5 3.4          Sep 729.2 165.0 50.2 207.2 451.8 72.4 949.5 725.1 224.3 114.3 23.0 14.4 3.5          Dec 
720.8 163.6 48.6 206.4 448.1 72.9 950.5 725.0 225.5 115.5 22.1 14.3 3.5 2003          Mar 
Short-term lending
122.1 19.6 18.1 30.0 57.1 16.2 52.6 5.2 47.4 2.3 24.3 1.2 0.0 2000
130.1 21.6 20.4 34.1 56.0 15.8 50.3 5.3 45.0 2.8 22.9 1.4 0.0 2001
123.8 20.8 18.2 33.3 54.9 16.5 47.9 5.0 42.9 2.5 22.3 1.1 0.0 2002          Mar 
122.6 20.8 18.2 32.5 54.8 16.3 48.2 4.9 43.2 2.5 22.7 1.3 0.0          June
121.0 20.9 17.3 33.0 53.8 16.1 49.2 5.0 44.2 2.5 23.9 1.7 0.0          Sep 123.3 19.8 19.1 34.7 53.8 14.8 48.5 5.2 43.3 2.4 23.0 1.7 0.0          Dec 
117.3 19.0 18.0 33.5 52.2 15.3 46.2 4.9 41.3 2.3 22.1 1.7 0.0 2003          Mar 
Medium-term lending
61.4 6.8 6.3 13.6 33.1 5.5 72.2 26.4 45.8 33.0 − 0.6 0.1 2000
61.9 6.7 6.5 14.7 31.2 5.3 70.5 25.0 45.4 33.4 − 0.6 0.1 2001
62.2 6.7 7.2 14.9 30.7 5.1 68.9 24.5 44.4 32.7 − 0.6 0.1 2002          Mar 
63.2 6.7 6.9 15.4 31.6 5.0 69.7 24.2 45.5 34.1 − 0.6 0.1          June
62.6 6.6 6.6 15.9 31.3 4.9 70.5 24.1 46.4 35.0 − 0.6 0.1          Sep 
63.2 6.2 7.2 16.7 31.2 4.8 71.1 24.7 46.4 35.3 − 0.5 0.1          Dec 
63.2 6.1 6.7 17.8 31.4 4.8 71.3 24.5 46.9 36.1 − 0.5 0.1 2003          Mar 
Long-term lending
517.3 135.9 22.5 139.5 368.7 53.2 780.8 651.4 129.4 73.3 − 12.2 3.6 2000
531.3 141.1 23.4 145.6 371.3 53.7 806.0 674.0 132.0 74.4 − 12.1 3.5 2001
533.7 141.4 23.8 147.4 369.8 53.4 808.6 676.9 131.7 74.4 − 12.1 3.4 2002          Mar 
535.1 142.0 23.6 150.0 369.6 53.4 814.7 681.7 132.9 75.7 − 12.2 3.4          June
538.3 143.5 24.0 150.9 368.3 53.0 822.4 687.3 135.1 77.0 − 12.2 3.4          Sep 
542.8 139.0 24.0 155.8 366.8 52.8 829.8 695.3 134.6 76.6 − 12.1 3.4          Dec 
540.3 138.5 23.9 155.1 364.4 52.8 832.9 695.6 137.3 77.2 − 12.0 3.4 2003          Mar 
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
− 4.2 − 0.5 − 0.8 + 1.1 − 2.7 + 0.3 − 1.3 + 1.7 − 3.0 − 1.0 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.0 2002          Q1
+ 1.0 + 0.6 − 0.5 + 2.3 − 0.7 − 0.3 + 6.3 + 4.2 + 2.2 + 1.6 + 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.0          Q2
+ 1.0 + 1.3 − 0.2 + 2.2 − 2.1 − 0.7 + 9.6 + 6.4 + 3.3 + 2.1 + 1.2 + 0.4 − 0.0          Q3
+ 6.1 − 2.2 + 2.4 + 4.8 − 1.5 − 1.7 + 7.3 + 7.1 + 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.9 − 0.1 + 0.0          Q4
− 7.7 − 1.3 − 1.6 − 0.2 − 3.8 + 0.4 + 1.0 + 2.6 − 1.6 + 1.0 − 1.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 2003          Q1
Short-term lending
− 7.0 − 0.7 − 2.2 − 0.8 − 1.1 + 0.7 − 2.3 − 0.3 − 2.1 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.3 + 0.0 2002          Q1
− 1.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.0          Q2
− 1.6 + 0.1 − 1.0 + 0.5 − 0.9 − 0.2 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 1.2 + 0.4 + 0.0          Q3
+ 2.2 − 1.2 + 1.8 + 1.6 − 0.1 − 1.3 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.0          Q4
− 5.9 − 0.8 − 1.0 − 1.2 − 1.6 + 0.5 − 2.3 − 0.3 − 2.0 − 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 2003          Q1
Medium-term lending
+ 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 1.6 − 0.5 − 1.0 − 0.8 −− 0.0 + 0.0 2002          Q1
+ 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.2 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q2
− 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 1.0 −− 0.0 − 0.0          Q3
− 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.6 + 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 −− 0.0 + 0.0          Q4
− 1.1 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.4 + 0.8 −− 0.0 + 0.0 2003          Q1
Long-term lending
+ 2.2 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 1.7 − 1.1 − 0.3 + 2.6 + 2.5 + 0.1 + 0.1 − + 0.0 − 0.1 2002          Q1
+ 1.6 + 0.6 − 0.2 + 2.5 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 6.3 + 4.6 + 1.7 + 1.3 − + 0.1 − 0.0          Q2
+ 3.2 + 1.2 + 1.0 + 1.4 − 1.0 − 0.3 + 7.8 + 6.4 + 1.4 + 1.1 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q3
+ 4.0 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 2.7 − 1.0 − 0.3 + 8.1 + 7.1 + 1.0 + 0.4 −− 0.1 + 0.0          Q4
− 0.7 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 2.2 + 0.0 + 3.2 + 3.1 + 0.0 + 0.4 −− 0.1 + 0.0 2003          Q1
the maintenance and repair of motor vehicles and durable consumer   
goods. —4Including sole proprietors. —5Excluding mortgage loans and   
housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit.  
33*IV Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
  
 5  billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Included Subordinated
 liabilities in time
for up for up (excluding deposits:
to and to and for more Bank negotiable liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month*
 
2000 1,945.8 443.4 819.9 274.7 545.2 9.0 536.2 573.5 109.0 42.1 25.9 −
2001 2,034.0 526.4 827.0 268.7 558.3 10.3 548.0 574.5 106.0 43.3 26.2 3.1
2002 2,085.9 575.6 830.6 258.3 572.3 8.8 563.5 575.3 104.4 42.1 27.9 1.5
2002          Apr 1,999.3 515.7 816.8 252.5 564.3 8.3 556.0 561.8 104.9 42.0 26.3 1.2
         May 2,009.4 523.8 820.6 255.9 564.7 8.3 556.4 560.1 105.0 41.9 26.3 2.0         June 2,021.4 536.2 820.6 256.6 564.0 8.4 555.6 558.9 105.7 41.5 26.6 1.4
         July 2,016.2 531.6 821.1 256.3 564.9 8.5 556.4 557.5 106.0 41.6 26.9 1.5
         Aug 2,013.9 527.2 823.0 259.4 563.6 8.5 555.2 557.8 105.9 41.6 27.1 2.0         Sep 2,025.0 540.8 820.6 257.8 562.8 8.4 554.3 558.3 105.3 41.6 27.5 6.7
         Oct 2,037.6 543.1 829.8 264.2 565.6 8.5 557.1 559.7 105.0 41.6 27.7 7.2
         Nov 2,062.1 572.4 822.6 254.0 568.7 8.7 560.0 562.4 104.7 41.5 27.9 3.0         Dec 2,085.9 575.6 830.6 258.3 572.3 8.8 563.5 575.3 104.4 42.1 27.9 1.5
2003          Jan 2,076.4 565.2 830.3 255.7 574.5 8.6 565.9 577.4 103.5 42.1 28.0 3.5
         Feb 2,084.6 571.6 830.0 253.5 576.6 8.3 568.3 579.2 103.7 41.9 29.0 4.1         Mar 2,089.6 578.9 828.4 249.9 578.5 8.5 570.0 579.3 103.0 42.1 28.9 5.2
Changes*
2001 + 88.5 + 82.3 + 8.1 − 6.0 + 14.1 + 1.3 + 12.8 + 1.1 −2.9 + 1.0 + 0.3 + 3.1
2002 + 51.7 + 48.4 + 4.1 −10.2 + 14.3 − 1.5 + 15.8 + 0.8 −1.6 − 1.1 + 1.8 − 1.6
2002          Apr − 7.3 + 6.5 − 4.9 − 3.9 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.8 − 9.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.4
         May + 11.1 + 8.2 + 4.5 + 3.9 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.5 − 1.7 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.8
         June + 11.1 + 11.9 − 0.3 + 0.6 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.9 − 1.2 + 0.7 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.6
         July − 5.3 − 4.7 + 0.5 − 0.3 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.8 − 1.4 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.1
         Aug − 2.3 − 4.4 + 1.9 + 3.1 − 1.2 + 0.0 − 1.2 + 0.3 −0.1 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.5
         Sep + 10.9 + 13.5 − 2.6 − 1.7 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.8 + 0.5 −0.5 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 4.7
         Oct + 12.8 + 2.3 + 9.5 + 6.4 + 3.1 + 0.1 + 3.0 + 1.4 −0.3 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.5
         Nov + 24.5 + 29.3 − 7.2 −10.3 + 3.1 + 0.2 + 2.9 + 2.7 −0.3 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 4.3
         Dec + 23.8 + 3.3 + 8.0 + 4.4 + 3.6 + 0.1 + 3.5 + 12.8 −0.3 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 1.5
2003          Jan − 9.5 − 10.4 − 0.3 − 2.6 + 2.3 − 0.1 + 2.4 + 2.1 −0.9 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 2.0
         Feb + 7.6 + 6.4 − 0.3 − 2.3 + 2.0 − 0.4 + 2.4 + 1.8 −0.4 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.7
         Mar + 5.1 + 7.3 − 1.6 − 3.6 + 2.0 + 0.3 + 1.7 + 0.1 −0.7 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 1.1
Domestic public authorities End of year or month*
2000 149.1 16.6 127.7 62.1 65.5 1.2 64.4 2.7 2.1 36.0 1.4 −
2001 122.7 16.1 102.3 37.7 64.5 1.2 63.3 2.3 2.1 36.6 1.4 −
2002 113.9 16.6 93.3 30.9 62.4 0.9 61.5 2.1 1.9 36.3 1.2 −
2002          Apr 113.7 12.4 97.3 32.9 64.4 0.9 63.5 2.0 2.1 35.5 1.3 −
         May 116.9 12.7 100.1 35.5 64.6 1.0 63.6 2.0 2.1 35.5 1.3 −
         June 118.5 14.5 99.9 35.7 64.2 1.0 63.2 2.0 2.1 35.2 1.3 −
         July 116.6 14.3 98.2 34.0 64.2 1.0 63.3 2.0 2.1 35.6 1.3 −
         Aug 115.4 13.4 97.8 33.5 64.4 1.0 63.4 2.0 2.1 35.6 1.3 −
         Sep 114.3 13.6 96.6 33.7 62.9 0.8 62.1 2.0 2.1 35.5 1.3 −
         Oct 109.7 13.8 91.9 29.0 62.9 0.8 62.1 2.0 2.0 35.6 1.3 −
         Nov 109.6 13.6 92.0 29.0 63.0 0.8 62.1 2.0 2.0 35.6 1.3 −
         Dec 113.9 16.6 93.3 30.9 62.4 0.9 61.5 2.1 1.9 36.3 1.2 −
2003          Jan 109.2 13.5 91.8 29.4 62.4 0.9 61.5 2.0 1.9 36.3 1.1 −
         Feb 111.1 15.2 92.0 30.0 61.9 0.6 61.4 2.0 1.8 36.2 1.1 −
         Mar 109.9 15.0 91.1 30.5 60.6 0.5 60.0 2.0 1.8 36.3 1.1 −
Changes*
2001 − 26.4 − 0.6 − 25.4 −24.4 − 1.0 + 0.0 − 1.1 − 0.5 −0.0 + 0.7 − 0.0 −
2002 − 8.6 + 0.5 − 8.7 − 6.6 − 2.1 − 0.3 − 1.8 − 0.2 −0.2 − 0.3 − 0.2 −
2002          Apr − 3.6 − 1.4 − 2.2 − 1.3 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 −
         May + 3.4 + 0.4 + 3.1 + 2.9 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 −
         June + 1.5 + 1.8 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 −
         July − 1.9 − 0.2 − 1.7 − 1.7 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.0 −
         Aug − 1.2 − 0.9 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.2 − + 0.2 + 0.1 −0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 −
         Sep − 1.1 + 0.2 − 1.2 + 0.2 − 1.4 − 0.1 − 1.3 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 −
         Oct − 4.6 + 0.2 − 4.7 − 4.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 −0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 −
         Nov − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 −
         Dec + 4.3 + 3.0 + 1.3 + 1.8 − 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.1 −0.1 + 0.7 − 0.1 −
2003          Jan − 4.7 − 3.1 − 1.5 − 1.4 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 −0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 −
         Feb + 1.9 + 1.7 + 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 −0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 −
         Mar − 1.2 − 0.2 − 0.9 + 0.5 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 1.4 − 0.0 −0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 −
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly
the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as Report , are not specially marked. —1Including subordinated liabilities and
34*IV Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany* (cont ’d)
 
  
 5  billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Included Subordinated
 liabilities in time
for up for up (excluding deposits:
to and to and for more Bank negotiable liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic enterprises and resident individuals End of year or month*
 
2000 1,796.7 426.8 692.2 212.6 479.6 7.8 471.8 570.8 106.9 6.1 24.5 −
2001 1,911.3 510.4 724.7 231.0 493.7 9.1 484.6 572.3 103.9 6.6 24.8 3.1
2002 1,972.0 559.0 737.3 227.5 509.8 7.9 502.0 573.2 102.5 5.8 26.6 1.5
2002          Apr 1,885.5 503.3 719.5 219.6 499.9 7.4 492.5 559.8 102.9 6.4 25.0 1.2
         May 1,892.5 511.1 720.5 220.4 500.1 7.4 492.8 558.0 102.9 6.4 25.0 2.0         June 1,903.0 521.8 720.8 220.9 499.8 7.4 492.4 556.9 103.6 6.3 25.3 1.4
         July 1,899.6 517.3 722.9 222.3 500.6 7.5 493.1 555.5 103.8 6.0 25.6 1.5
         Aug 1,898.5 513.8 725.2 225.9 499.3 7.5 491.7 555.8 103.8 6.0 25.8 2.0         Sep 1,910.7 527.3 724.0 224.1 499.8 7.6 492.2 556.3 103.2 6.1 26.2 6.7
         Oct 1,927.9 529.3 737.9 235.2 502.7 7.7 495.0 557.7 103.0 5.9 26.3 7.2
         Nov 1,952.5 558.8 730.6 224.9 505.7 7.8 497.9 560.5 102.7 5.9 26.5 3.0         Dec 1,972.0 559.0 737.3 227.5 509.8 7.9 502.0 573.2 102.5 5.8 26.6 1.5
2003          Jan 1,967.2 551.7 738.5 226.3 512.2 7.8 504.4 575.4 101.6 5.8 26.9 3.5
         Feb 1,973.5 556.4 738.1 223.4 514.6 7.7 506.9 577.2 101.9 5.7 27.8 4.1         Mar 1,979.8 563.9 737.3 219.4 518.0 8.0 510.0 577.3 101.2 5.8 27.8 5.2
Changes*
2001 + 115.0 + 82.9 + 33.5 + 18.4 + 15.1 + 1.3 + 13.8 + 1.5 −2.9 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 3.1
2002 + 60.3 + 47.9 + 12.8 − 3.6 + 16.4 − 1.2 + 17.5 + 1.0 −1.4 − 0.8 + 2.0 − 1.6
2002          Apr − 3.7 + 7.9 − 2.7 − 2.6 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 8.9 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.4
         May + 7.6 + 7.9 + 1.4 + 1.0 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 1.7 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.8
         June + 9.5 + 10.1 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 1.2 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.6
         July − 3.4 − 4.5 + 2.2 + 1.4 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 1.3 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.1
         Aug − 1.1 − 3.5 + 2.3 + 3.6 − 1.4 + 0.0 − 1.4 + 0.2 −0.1 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.5
         Sep + 12.0 + 13.3 − 1.4 − 1.9 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.5 + 0.5 −0.5 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 4.7
         Oct + 17.4 + 2.0 + 14.2 + 11.1 + 3.1 + 0.1 + 3.0 + 1.4 −0.2 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.5
         Nov + 24.6 + 29.5 − 7.3 −10.3 + 3.1 + 0.2 + 2.9 + 2.7 −0.3 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 4.3
         Dec + 19.5 + 0.3 + 6.7 + 2.6 + 4.1 + 0.0 + 4.1 + 12.7 −0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 1.5
2003          Jan − 4.8 − 7.3 + 1.2 − 1.2 + 2.4 − 0.1 + 2.4 + 2.2 −0.9 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 2.0
         Feb + 5.7 + 4.6 − 0.4 − 2.9 + 2.4 − 0.1 + 2.5 + 1.8 −0.3 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.7
         Mar + 6.3 + 7.5 − 0.7 − 4.1 + 3.4 + 0.3 + 3.1 + 0.1 −0.7 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 1.1
of which:  Domestic enterprises End of year or month*
2000 635.1 158.1 447.6 89.0 358.5 2.7 355.8 5.2 24.2 5.9 14.1 −
2001 668.4 180.0 461.3 91.7 369.6 2.9 366.8 4.3 22.8 6.4 14.3 3.12002 700.4 194.6 479.4 99.2 380.2 1.5 378.7 4.4 22.0 5.6 15.8 1.5
2002          Apr 651.9 162.1 463.1 87.6 375.5 1.4 374.0 4.3 22.5 6.2 14.4 1.2
         May 659.0 167.8 464.5 88.9 375.6 1.4 374.2 4.2 22.5 6.2 14.4 2.0         June 665.5 172.7 466.1 90.8 375.2 1.4 373.8 4.3 22.6 6.1 14.7 1.4
         July 666.4 171.3 468.4 92.6 375.8 1.4 374.4 4.4 22.4 5.8 15.0 1.5
         Aug 663.0 166.4 469.8 95.6 374.2 1.4 372.8 4.4 22.4 5.8 15.1 2.0         Sep 676.4 180.1 469.7 95.3 374.4 1.4 373.0 4.4 22.2 5.8 15.5 6.7
         Oct 690.0 180.7 482.7 105.6 377.1 1.5 375.7 4.3 22.2 5.7 15.5 7.2
         Nov 692.6 189.0 476.9 97.4 379.5 1.6 378.0 4.3 22.3 5.7 15.7 3.0         Dec 700.4 194.6 479.4 99.2 380.2 1.5 378.7 4.4 22.0 5.6 15.8 1.5
2003          Jan 692.7 185.3 480.7 98.5 382.2 1.5 380.6 4.4 22.3 5.6 16.3 3.5
         Feb 692.3 183.6 481.8 97.7 384.1 1.5 382.7 4.4 22.5 5.5 16.5 4.1         Mar 695.4 186.2 482.3 95.4 386.9 1.8 385.2 4.4 22.5 5.6 16.5 5.2
Changes*
2001 + 33.6 + 21.2 + 14.7 + 2.6 + 12.1 + 0.1 + 11.9 − 0.9 −1.3 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 3.1
2002 + 31.1 + 13.4 + 18.3 + 7.4 + 10.9 − 1.3 + 12.2 + 0.1 −0.7 − 0.8 + 1.6 − 1.6
2002          Apr + 1.9 + 1.9 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 −0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.4
         May + 7.4 + 5.7 + 1.7 + 1.5 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.8
         June + 5.7 + 4.4 + 1.2 + 1.7 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.6
         July + 1.2 − 1.4 + 2.7 + 1.7 + 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.9 + 0.1 −0.2 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1
         Aug − 3.5 − 4.9 + 1.4 + 3.0 − 1.5 + 0.0 − 1.5 + 0.0 −0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.5
         Sep + 12.8 + 13.2 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.0 −0.2 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 4.7
         Oct + 13.8 + 0.6 + 13.2 + 10.3 + 2.9 + 0.1 + 2.9 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.5
         Nov + 2.6 + 8.3 − 5.8 − 8.2 + 2.4 + 0.1 + 2.3 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 4.3
         Dec + 7.9 + 5.5 + 2.5 + 1.8 + 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.7 + 0.1 −0.3 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 1.5
2003          Jan − 7.7 − 9.2 + 1.3 − 0.7 + 2.0 − 0.0 + 2.0 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 2.0
         Feb − 0.4 − 1.7 + 1.1 − 0.8 + 2.0 − 0.0 + 2.0 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.7
         Mar + 3.1 + 2.5 + 0.5 − 2.3 + 2.8 + 0.3 + 2.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 1.1
liabilities arising from registered debt securities. —1Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). —4Including
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). —3Excluding deposits liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
35*IV Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
IV Banks
 
8 Deposits of resident individuals and domestic non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
  
 5  billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits
of resident Resident individuals Resident individualsindividualsanddomestic Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month*
 
2000 1,161.5 268.7 259.3 47.7 176.0 35.6 9.4 244.6 225.5 34.9 168.9 21.7
2001 1,242.9 330.4 320.1 55.8 220.9 43.4 10.2 263.4 242.9 36.3 182.4 24.22002 1,271.6 364.5 352.8 61.3 241.4 50.0 11.7 257.9 238.3 35.2 180.5 22.6
2002          Oct 1,237.9 348.6 337.4 60.5 229.1 47.7 11.2 255.2 235.9 35.3 177.8 22.9
         Nov 1,260.0 369.7 358.6 63.6 244.5 50.4 11.1 253.7 235.1 34.9 177.2 23.0         Dec 1,271.6 364.5 352.8 61.3 241.4 50.0 11.7 257.9 238.3 35.2 180.5 22.6
2003          Jan 1,274.5 366.4 354.6 62.9 241.1 50.6 11.8 257.8 238.6 35.5 180.5 22.6
         Feb 1,281.2 372.8 360.5 63.6 245.0 51.9 12.2 256.2 237.2 35.1 179.9 22.2         Mar 1,284.4 377.7 365.7 62.7 250.1 52.9 12.1 255.0 235.0 33.9 179.2 21.9
Changes*
2001 + 81.3 + 61.7 + 60.8 + 8.1 + 45.0 + 7.8 + 0.8 + 18.8 + 17.4 + 1.4 + 13.5 + 2.52002 + 29.2 + 34.5 + 33.1 + 5.6 + 22.4 + 5.1 + 1.5 − 5.5 − 4.2 −1.0 −1.1 −2.1
2002          Oct + 3.6 + 1.5 + 1.7 + 1.8 − 0.2 + 0.1 −0.3 + 1.0 + 0.7 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.1
         Nov + 22.1 + 21.1 + 21.2 + 3.1 + 15.5 + 2.7 −0.1 − 1.5 − 0.8 −0.4 −0.6 + 0.2
         Dec + 11.6 − 5.3 − 5.8 − 2.3 − 3.1 −0.4 + 0.5 + 4.2 + 3.2 + 0.3 + 3.3 −0.5
2003          Jan + 2.9 + 1.9 + 1.8 + 1.6 − 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.3 −0.0 −0.0
         Feb + 6.1 + 6.4 + 6.0 + 0.7 + 3.9 + 1.4 + 0.4 − 1.6 − 1.4 −0.4 −0.6 −0.4
         Mar + 3.2 + 5.0 + 5.1 − 1.0 + 5.2 + 0.9 −0.1 − 1.2 − 2.3 −1.3 −0.7 −0.3
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the Report , are not specially marked. —1Including subordinated liabilities and
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as liabilities arising from registered debt securities. —2Including deposits
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following MonthlyDeutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
 
  
9 Deposits of domestic public authorities at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group
*
 
 5  billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 Land  governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
Domestic for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
public to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary authorities,
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans
End of year or month*
 
2000 149.1 67.6 2.1 22.6 42.8 0.0 12.5 20.3 3.1 2.1 15.0 0.1 23.3
2001 122.7 46.9 1.6 2.7 42.7 0.0 13.2 19.2 2.7 1.8 14.6 0.1 23.22002 113.9 45.6 0.9 3.6 41.1 0.0 13.5 18.9 2.5 1.4 14.9 0.1 22.6
2002          Oct 109.7 46.8 1.1 3.7 41.9 0.1 12.7 19.6 2.5 2.3 14.7 0.1 22.7
         Nov 109.6 46.3 0.6 3.6 42.0 0.1 12.7 18.1 2.0 1.3 14.8 0.1 22.7         Dec 113.9 45.6 0.9 3.6 41.1 0.0 13.5 18.9 2.5 1.4 14.9 0.1 22.6
2003          Jan 109.2 45.2 0.9 2.9 41.4 0.0 13.4 18.8 2.3 1.9 14.5 0.1 22.7
         Feb 111.1 45.1 0.6 3.1 41.3 0.0 13.3 20.4 3.1 2.8 14.4 0.1 22.7         Mar 109.9 45.2 0.6 4.5 40.0 0.0 13.4 20.7 3.4 2.8 14.4 0.1 22.6
Changes*
2001 −26.4 −20.4 −0.4 −19.9 −0.1 −0.0 + 0.5 −1.2 −0.6 −0.2 −0.4 + 0.0 + 0.1
2002 −8.6 −1.3 −0.6 + 0.9 −1.6 + 0.0 + 0.3 −0.3 −0.1 −0.4 + 0.3 −0.0 −0.6
2002          Oct −4.6 + 0.1 + 0.5 −0.5 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 −1.6 −0.3 −1.3 −0.0 −0.0 + 0.0
         Nov −0.1 −0.5 −0.5 −0.1 + 0.1 −− 0.0 −1.5 −0.5 −1.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 −0.0
         Dec + 4.3 −0.7 + 0.3 −0.0 −0.9 −0.1 + 0.8 + 0.8 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.1 −0.0 −0.1
2003          Jan −4.7 −0.4 −0.0 −0.6 + 0.3 −0.0 −0.1 −0.1 −0.2 + 0.5 −0.4 + 0.0 + 0.1
         Feb + 1.9 −0.1 −0.3 + 0.2 −0.1 + 0.0 −0.1 + 1.6 + 0.8 + 0.9 −0.1 −0.0 −0.0
         Mar −1.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 1.4 −1.3 −− 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 −0.0 −0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and which are included in ”Enterprises ”. Statistical breaks have been eliminated
its successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, east German Railways from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded
and Federal Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the followingPost AG and Deutsche Telekom AG, and of publicly-owned enterprises,
36*IV Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
IV Banks
 
    
 
 Savings deposits  3  Memo item
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year  2 
Included Subordinated
of which liabilities in time
Domestic Domestic (excluding deposits:
up to and up to and Bank negotiable liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arising
tions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  4 loans from repos   Period individuals securities)  5 
End of year or month*
 
19.2 123.6 121.1 5.1 116.0 565.5 555.8 9.7 82.7 0.2 10.4 −2000
20.6 139.3 124.1 6.2 117.9 568.0 558.6 9.4 81.1 0.2 10.5 −2001
19.6 128.3 129.6 6.3 123.3 568.8 559.9 8.9 80.4 0.2 10.8 −2002
19.3 129.7 125.5 6.2 119.3 553.4 544.4 9.0 80.8 0.2 10.8 −2002          Oct 
18.6 127.5 126.2 6.3 119.9 556.1 547.3 8.8 80.4 0.2 10.8 −         Nov 
19.6 128.3 129.6 6.3 123.3 568.8 559.9 8.9 80.4 0.2 10.8 −         Dec 
19.2 127.8 130.0 6.2 123.8 571.0 562.0 9.0 79.3 0.2 10.6 −2003          Jan 
19.0 125.8 130.5 6.2 124.3 572.8 563.7 9.1 79.4 0.2 11.3 −         Feb 
20.0 124.0 131.0 6.2 124.8 572.9 563.8 9.1 78.7 0.2 11.3 −         Mar 
Changes*
+ 1.4 + 15.8 + 3.0 + 1.1 + 1.9 + 2.5 + 2.8 −0.3 −1.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 2001
− 1.3 −10.9 + 5.4 + 0.1 + 5.3 + 0.9 + 1.3 −0.5 −0.7 −0.0 + 0.3 −2002
+ 0.3 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 1.5 + 1.5 −0.0 −0.2 −0.0 + 0.1 −2002          Oct 
− 0.7 − 2.1 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 2.8 + 3.0 −0.2 −0.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 −         Nov 
+ 1.0 + 0.8 + 3.4 + 0.1 + 3.4 + 12.6 + 12.6 + 0.1 + 0.0 −0.0 −0.1 −         Dec 
− 0.4 − 0.5 + 0.4 −0.1 + 0.5 + 2.2 + 2.1 + 0.0 −1.1 + 0.0 −0.2 −2003          Jan 
− 0.2 − 2.0 + 0.5 −0.0 + 0.5 + 1.8 + 1.7 + 0.1 −0.5 + 0.0 + 0.1 −         Feb 
+ 1.0 − 1.8 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 −0.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 −         Mar 
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). —3Excluding deposits liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. —5Included in
under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). —4Including time deposits. Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
 
   
 
 
 
Local authorities and local authority associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans   Period
End of year or month*
 
30.2 8.9 15.7 2.0 3.6 0.1 31.1 2.5 21.7 5.7 1.2 0.1 2000
27.8 9.2 13.8 1.8 3.1 0.2 28.7 2.7 19.5 5.4 1.1 0.1 200127.6 10.5 12.2 2.0 3.0 0.2 21.7 2.7 13.7 4.5 0.9 0.1 2002
24.3 8.0 11.5 1.9 2.9 0.2 18.9 2.2 11.4 4.5 0.9 0.1 2002          Oct 
25.2 8.6 11.9 1.9 2.9 0.2 19.9 2.5 12.3 4.3 0.9 0.1          Nov 
27.6 10.5 12.2 2.0 3.0 0.2 21.7 2.7 13.7 4.5 0.9 0.1          Dec 
24.0 7.9 11.2 2.0 2.9 0.2 21.1 2.4 13.4 4.5 0.8 0.1 2003          Jan 
25.2 9.1 11.2 2.0 2.9 0.2 20.3 2.4 12.9 4.2 0.8 0.1          Feb 
24.1 8.3 11.1 1.8 2.9 0.2 19.9 2.7 12.2 4.2 0.8 0.0          Mar 
Changes*
−2.4 + 0.2 −2.0 −0.2 −0.4 + 0.0 −2.4 + 0.2 −2.3 −0.3 −0.0 −0.0 2001
+ 0.0 + 1.3 −1.4 + 0.2 −0.1 + 0.0 −7.0 −0.0 −5.7 −1.0 −0.3 −0.0 2002
−0.9 + 0.0 −0.9 −0.0 −0.0 −− 2.2 + 0.0 −2.0 −0.0 −0.2 −2002          Oct 
+ 0.9 + 0.6 + 0.3 −0.0 −0.0 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.3 + 0.9 −0.2 −0.0 −         Nov 
+ 2.4 + 1.9 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 1.8 + 0.2 + 1.4 + 0.2 + 0.0 −0.0          Dec 
−3.6 −2.6 −0.9 −0.0 −0.1 + 0.0 −0.6 −0.3 −0.3 + 0.0 −0.0 −2003          Jan 
+ 1.1 + 1.2 −0.1 −0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −0.8 + 0.0 −0.5 −0.3 −0.0 −         Feb 
−1.1 −0.8 −0.1 −0.1 −0.1 −− 0.5 + 0.3 −0.7 + 0.0 −0.0 −0.0          Mar 
Monthly Report , are not specially marked. —1Federal Railways Fund, liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. —3Including
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special deposits under savings and loan contracts. —4Excluding deposits under
Fund, ”German Unity ”Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. —2Including savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
37*IV Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
IV Banks
 
10 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs)*
 
 
 5  billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at three months ’ at more than three Memo
notice months ’ notice item of which
Interest With
of which of which of which credited maturities
Special Special At three on of moresavings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months ’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities  
2 facilities  2 non-banks
End of year or month*
 
2000 585.2 573.5 450.5 309.0 123.0 104.4 11.7 8.3 19.3 115.9 109.0 94.4 6.8
2001 586.5 574.5 461.9 327.2 112.7 97.2 12.0 8.8 19.9 112.8 106.0 87.2 6.82002 586.2 575.3 472.8 343.5 102.4 88.5 10.9 8.1 17.6 111.3 104.4 86.3 6.9
2002          Nov 573.1 562.4 460.2 334.4 102.2 88.5 10.7 7.9 0.5 111.7 104.7 86.7 6.9
         Dec 586.2 575.3 472.8 343.5 102.4 88.5 10.9 8.1 12.2 111.3 104.4 86.3 6.9
2003          Jan 588.3 577.4 477.0 346.6 100.4 87.6 10.9 8.1 1.0 110.3 103.5 85.6 6.8
         Feb 590.0 579.2 479.9 349.3 99.3 86.5 10.8 8.1 0.5 110.5 103.7 86.1 6.8         Mar 590.0 579.3 481.6 350.9 97.7 85.0 10.8 8.1 0.5 109.8 103.0 85.5 6.8
Changes*
2001 + 1.3 + 1.1 + 11.4 + 15.5 −10.4 −7.2 + 0.3 + 0.5 . −2.9 −2.9 −7.1 −0.0
2002 −0.3 + 0.8 + 11.0 + 16.4 −10.2 −8.7 −1.1 −0.7 . −1.5 −1.6 −0.9 + 0.1
2002          Nov + 2.7 + 2.7 + 3.3 + 3.4 −0.6 −0.6 −0.0 + 0.0 . −0.2 −0.3 −0.2 + 0.1
         Dec + 13.0 + 12.8 + 12.6 + 9.1 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.2 . −0.4 −0.3 −0.4 −0.1
2003          Jan + 2.1 + 2.1 + 4.1 + 3.0 −2.0 −0.9 −0.0 + 0.0 . −1.0 −0.9 −0.7 −0.0
         Feb + 1.8 + 1.8 + 3.0 + 2.7 −1.2 −1.2 −0.1 + 0.0 . −0.4 −0.4 −0.1 −0.0
         Mar + 0.0 + 0.1 + 1.7 + 1.6 −1.6 −1.5 −0.1 + 0.0 . −0.7 −0.7 −0.6 −0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the loan contracts, which are classified as time deposits. —2Savings deposits
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the minimum or basic rate of
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly interest. —3Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
Report , are not specially marked. —1Excluding deposits under savings and securities. 
 
   
11 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany
*
 
 5  billion
Non-negotiable bearer debt securities
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper and money market paper  6 
of which of which
with maturities of Subordinated
with maturities of
Certifi- more more non-
Floating Zero Foreign cates up to and more up to and more than 1 year than 1 year negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of including including than including including than debt debt
Period Total  1 bonds  2 deposit 1 year  1 Total 1 year 2 years 2 years bonds  2,3 bonds  4,5 2 years  1 2 years  1 securities securities
End of year or month*)
 
2000 1,412.5 283.1 22.1 128.2 19.7 87.9 62.7 1,261.9 2.7 0.4 1.0 1.3 38.3 2.4
2001 1,472.3 324.0 16.3 144.1 17.6 46.5 124.9 1,300.9 5.8 3.7 1.0 1.2 43.3 2.42002 1,462.9 339.2 16.1 159.5 34.7 62.3 120.1 1,280.5 9.9 7.8 0.7 1.3 42.4 2.3
2002          Nov 1,491.4 341.2 18.2 166.4 34.3 71.5 118.1 1,301.8 10.0 7.9 0.7 1.4 43.2 2.4
         Dec 1,462.9 339.2 16.1 159.5 34.7 62.3 120.1 1,280.5 9.9 7.8 0.7 1.3 42.4 2.3
2003          Jan 1,463.7 334.4 17.8 163.7 39.3 68.9 115.9 1,278.9 9.8 7.8 0.7 1.3 42.7 2.2
         Feb 1,486.9 332.2 21.7 174.5 47.7 89.8 115.0 1,282.2 2.1 0.2 0.7 1.3 40.0 2.8         Mar 1,483.9 335.4 21.5 173.7 45.8 85.8 113.9 1,284.2 2.2 0.3 0.6 1.3 39.7 2.8
Changes*
2001 + 56.2 + 33.3 −5.5 + 15.9 −2.1 −41.4 + 61.7 + 35.9 + 3.2 + 3.4 −0.1 −0.1 + 5.0 + 0.0
2002 + 9.1 + 6.3 −4.5 + 12.1 + 16.2 + 14.2 + 4.6 − 9.7 + 4.8 + 4.9 −0.3 + 0.2 −1.9 −0.1
2002          Nov + 9.1 −0.5 + 0.1 + 1.4 + 1.7 + 6.3 + 2.3 + 0.5 + 0.7 + 0.8 −0.0 −0.0 −0.3 + 0.0
         Dec −28.4 −1.9 −2.1 −6.9 + 0.3 −9.1 + 2.0 −21.3 −0.2 −0.1 −0.0 −0.1 −0.8 −0.0
2003          Jan + 0.8 −4.8 + 1.7 + 4.2 + 4.6 + 6.5 − 4.2 − 1.5 −0.1 −0.1 −0.0 −0.0 + 0.4 −0.2
         Feb + 15.6 −2.2 + 4.6 + 6.0 + 7.3 + 13.3 − 0.9 + 3.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 −0.0 −0.0 −2.2 + 0.0
         Mar − 3.0 + 3.2 −0.2 −0.8 −2.0 −4.0 − 1.1 + 2.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 −0.0 −0.0 −0.3 −0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the 2Including debt securities denominated in foreign currencies. —3Issue
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as value when floated. —4Including floating rate notes and zero coupon
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly bonds denominated in foreign currencies. —5Bonds denominated in
Report , are not specially marked. —1Decreases in June 2002 caused by non-euro-area currencies. —6Non-negotiable bearer debt securities are
transition to net recording of debt securities outstanding (ie less own debt classified among bank savings bonds (see also Table IV.10, foo tnote 3). 
securities). The statistical break has been eliminated from the changes. —
38*IV Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
IV  Banks
  
12  Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany*
  Interim statements
  
 5  billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs)  5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memo
bal- item ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer New
and Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- enteredof Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations total loans  
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month  8 loans)  1 paper)  4 serves)  7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2002 28 163.8 25.2 0.2 11.7 40.8 58.6 7.9 10.4 0.4 29.5 100.8 3.5 6.9 7.1 79.6
2003          Jan 28 163.5 25.0 0.2 11.6 40.7 58.8 7.9 10.4 0.4 28.9 101.0 3.4 7.1 7.1 7.3
         Feb 28 163.8 25.3 0.2 11.4 40.2 59.1 8.0 10.7 0.4 28.8 101.4 3.4 6.9 7.1 7.4         Mar 28 165.4 26.5 0.1 11.3 40.0 59.4 8.1 10.9 0.4 29.1 102.0 3.4 6.9 7.2 8.2
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2003          Jan 17 117.3 19.6 0.1 6.3 26.3 41.8 7.3 7.6 0.3 20.7 68.6 3.3 7.1 4.6 4.6         Feb 17 117.3 19.7 0.1 6.2 25.9 42.1 7.3 7.9 0.3 20.7 68.8 3.3 6.9 4.6 4.6         Mar 17 118.7 20.7 0.1 6.1 25.8 42.3 7.4 7.9 0.2 21.1 69.2 3.3 6.9 4.7 5.3
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2003          Jan 11 46.2 5.3 0.1 5.3 14.4 16.9 0.6 2.8 0.1 8.1 32.5 0.2 − 2.5 2.7
         Feb 11 46.5 5.6 0.1 5.2 14.3 17.0 0.6 2.9 0.1 8.2 32.6 0.1 − 2.5 2.7
         Mar 11 46.7 5.8 0.1 5.3 14.2 17.1 0.6 3.0 0.1 8.0 32.9 0.1 − 2.5 2.9
Trends in building and loan association business
  
 5  billion
Changes in deposits Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans  10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings andments loan contracts loan contracts  
9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited interim deposits of which of which
on under Applied Applied and ofwhich of Memo Amounts deposits
cancelled to settle- to settle- bridging
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which item paid intosavings savings and which interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housing
and and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonusesloan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts  
9 tions  11 ceived  12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2002 22.9 2.7 4.3 44.0 29.4 40.6 17.2 3.8 9.3 3.1 14.2 10.9 7.8 14.2 11.2 0.5
2003          Jan 2.1 0.0 0.4 3.8 2.5 3.4 1.5 0.3 0.7 0.3 1.2 10.9 7.8 1.1 0.1
         Feb 2.1 0.0 0.4 3.5 2.4 2.9 1.2 0.3 0.6 0.2 1.1 11.1 8.0 1.2 0.1         Mar 2.7 0.0 0.5 4.2 2.8 3.6 1.6 0.3 0.7 0.3 1.3 11.2 8.0 1.4 ... 0.4
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2003          Jan 1.4 0.0 0.3 2.7 1.7 2.4 1.1 0.3 0.5 0.2 0.9 6.5 4.0 0.7 0.0         Feb 1.3 0.0 0.3 2.4 1.5 2.1 0.8 0.2 0.4 0.2 0.9 6.7 4.1 0.8 0.0         Mar 1.8 0.0 0.3 3.1 1.9 2.7 1.2 0.2 0.5 0.2 1.0 6.9 4.1 1.0 ... 0.4
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2003          Jan 0.7 − 0.2 1.1 0.8 0.9 0.4 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.3 4.4 3.8 0.4 0.0
         Feb 0.7 0.0 0.2 1.1 0.9 0.8 0.4 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.2 4.5 3.9 0.4 0.0         Mar 0.9 0.0 0.2 1.0 0.9 0.9 0.5 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.2 4.3 3.9 0.4 ... 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are count as new contracts. —9For disbursements of deposits under savings
not specially marked. —1Including postal giro account balances, claims on and loan contracts arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capital
building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt securities disbursed “.—10Including housing bonuses credited. —11Only allocations
and central bank credit balances. —2Loans under savings and loan accepted by the beneficiaries; including allocations applied to settlement of
contracts and interim and bridging loans. —3Including money market interim and bridging loans. —12The amounts already credited to the
paper and small amounts of other securities issued by banks. —4Including accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in “Amounts paid into
equalisation claims. —5Including liabilities to building and loan savings and loan accounts “and “Interest and repayments received on
associations. —6Including small amounts of savings deposits. —7Including building loans “. 
participation rights capital and fund for general banking risks. —8Total
39*IV  Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
IV  Banks
  
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs)*
  
  
 5  billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
Loans Credit  balances and loans
German   
banks to German
(MFIs)   non-banks
withforeign foreignbranches Money of which Money
branches  1 
and/or and/or market enter- to marketforeign foreign Balance paper, prises foreign paper,subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- and indi- non- secur- Other
Period diaries diaries total Total Total banks banks Total Total Total viduals banks ities  
2 assets ities 2,3 
Foreign  branches End of year or month*
  
2000 71 212 1,558.2 829.4 722.1 211.0 511.1 107.3 656.7 501.5 21.7 17.1 479.9 155.2 72.0
2001 68 216 1,689.3 870.6 761.6 213.6 548.0 109.0 744.9 549.0 20.6 17.2 528.4 195.9 73.92002 60 205 1,407.4 679.9 572.3 198.3 374.0 107.6 668.5 484.0 18.8 15.0 465.1 184.6 59.0
2002          May 63 212 1,677.0 870.7 737.5 219.5 518.0 133.1 756.6 579.2 19.2 15.0 560.0 177.4 49.7
         Jun 63 211 1,548.6 795.4 672.9 206.4 466.5 122.6 694.8 524.6 18.4 14.3 506.2 170.3 58.4
         Jul 62 210 1,561.1 776.9 655.0 201.1 453.9 122.0 723.7 544.2 18.7 15.0 525.5 179.5 60.4
         Aug 62 210 1,577.0 764.1 642.8 203.2 439.5 121.3 756.6 569.7 18.4 14.8 551.3 186.9 56.3         Sep 61 208 1,559.2 761.8 646.1 201.7 444.4 115.7 752.3 559.7 19.0 15.3 540.7 192.6 45.1
         Oct 59 203 1,568.0 758.9 643.9 210.0 433.9 115.0 746.0 550.5 18.7 15.0 531.8 195.5 63.1
         Nov 60 204 1,585.7 760.8 646.0 216.9 429.1 114.8 755.5 555.8 19.0 15.7 536.8 199.7 69.4         Dec 60 205 1,407.4 679.9 572.3 198.3 374.0 107.6 668.5 484.0 18.8 15.0 465.1 184.6 59.0
2003          Jan 60 206 1,465.8 725.4 622.8 202.5 420.3 102.6 680.1 496.3 18.3 15.2 478.0 183.8 60.4
         Feb 60 206 1,439.6 693.9 592.3 197.4 394.8 101.6 691.5 506.8 18.4 15.2 488.4 184.7 54.2
Changes*
2001 −3 + 4 + 99.1 + 24.8 + 26.1 + 2.3 + 23.8 −1.3 + 72.7 + 35.6 −1.1 −0.0 + 36.7 + 37.1 + 1.6
2002 −8 −11 −139.1 −133.4 −139.9 −15.4 −124.5 + 6.5 −3.6 −9.2 −1.9 −2.2 −7.3 + 5.7 −2.2
2002          May −1 −1 −4.3 −20.5 −13.0 −10.6 −2.4 −7.5 + 29.9 + 17.0 −0.1 −0.3 + 17.1 + 12.9 −13.7
         Jun −− 1 −80.1 −55.4 −47.5 −13.1 −34.4 −7.9 −37.7 −36.2 −0.8 −0.7 −35.3 −1.6 + 13.1
         Jul −1 −1 −8.2 −26.9 −25.1 −5.3 −19.7 −1.9 + 19.0 + 11.7 + 0.2 + 0.7 + 11.5 + 7.3 −0.2
         Aug −− + 20.8 −10.9 −10.7 + 2.2 −12.9 −0.2 + 35.1 + 27.4 −0.3 −0.2 + 27.6 + 7.8 −3.5
         Sep −1 −2 −14.1 −1.0 + 4.6 −1.5 + 6.2 −5.6 −2.0 −8.3 + 0.6 + 0.5 −8.9 + 6.3 −11.1
         Oct −2 −5 + 11.2 −2.0 −1.4 + 8.3 −9.7 −0.6 −4.9 −8.0 −0.3 −0.4 −7.7 + 3.1 + 18.1
         Nov + 1 + 1 + 24.4 + 4.3 + 4.2 + 6.9 −2.7 + 0.2 + 13.0 + 8.1 + 0.4 + 0.7 + 7.7 + 4.9 + 7.0
         Dec − +1 −137.1 −66.1 −61.2 −18.6 −42.6 −4.9 −65.2 −55.4 −0.2 −0.7 −55.2 −9.8 −5.8
2003          Jan − + 1 + 81.8 + 54.2 + 58.0 + 4.2 + 53.8 −3.8 + 23.7 + 21.4 −0.5 + 0.2 + 21.9 + 2.3 + 3.9
         Feb −− − 28.1 −32.0 −31.0 −5.1 −25.9 −1.0 + 10.3 + 9.6 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 9.6 + 0.7 −6.4
  
  
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month*
  
2000 40 170 580.5 248.1 183.8 82.2 101.6 64.3 263.5 203.4 45.4 42.3 158.0 60.1 69.0
2001 46 200 811.5 342.4 262.8 105.7 157.1 79.6 382.2 293.1 51.9 47.7 241.2 89.2 87.02002 47 200 704.2 333.7 265.5 125.7 139.8 68.2 300.1 239.1 46.7 42.9 192.4 61.0 70.4
2002          May 48 201 751.8 343.3 269.0 113.0 156.1 74.3 317.6 259.4 49.5 46.4 209.9 58.2 90.9
         Jun 48 201 732.2 334.7 261.9 106.2 155.7 72.8 311.4 253.9 48.4 45.2 205.5 57.6 86.0
         Jul 48 200 712.7 328.4 255.8 116.8 139.0 72.6 306.6 248.2 48.1 45.0 200.1 58.4 77.7
         Aug 49 199 693.7 314.7 242.0 111.9 130.0 72.7 302.7 243.9 47.8 44.8 196.1 58.8 76.3         Sep 48 198 695.5 317.8 246.0 111.0 135.0 71.8 304.2 245.3 47.1 44.2 198.2 58.9 73.5
         Oct 47 200 700.6 320.4 249.4 111.4 138.0 71.0 306.6 245.5 46.6 43.7 198.9 61.1 73.6
         Nov 47 202 708.2 326.7 256.6 114.0 142.6 70.1 308.5 246.1 47.0 44.1 199.0 62.4 73.0         Dec 47 200 704.2 333.7 265.5 125.7 139.8 68.2 300.1 239.1 46.7 42.9 192.4 61.0 70.4
2003          Jan 47 198 675.8 311.1 243.2 121.4 121.8 67.9 293.6 231.0 45.4 42.8 185.5 62.6 71.1
         Feb 47 197 670.6 309.9 241.7 116.3 125.4 68.2 289.9 226.1 44.5 41.9 181.6 63.8 70.8
Changes*
2001 + 6 + 30 +229.9 + 92.5 + 78.0 + 23.5 + 54.6 + 14.5 +119.5 + 89.1 + 6.5 + 5.3 + 82.7 + 30.4 + 17.92002 + 1
+ 0 −78.3 + 6.7 + 13.3 + 20.0 −6.7 −6.6 −70.0 −42.0 −5.2 −4.8 −36.8 −28.1 −15.0
2002          May + 1 + 1 −1.2 + 0.7 −0.6 + 4.4 −5.0 + 1.3 −5.1 + 4.4 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 4.3 −9.5 + 3.1
         Jun −− − 9.6 −3.5 −3.6 −6.8 + 3.2 + 0.1 −1.8 −1.2 −1.1 −1.2 −0.1 −0.6 −4.3
         Jul −− 1 −23.8 −8.6 −7.7 + 10.7 −18.3 −0.9 −6.6 −7.4 −0.3 −0.2 −7.1 + 0.8 −8.5
         Aug + 1 −1 −17.9 −13.0 −13.4 −4.9 −8.5 + 0.3 −3.4 −3.8 −0.3 −0.3 −3.5 + 0.4 −1.4
         Sep −1 −1 + 2.2 + 3.3 + 4.1 −0.9 + 5.0 −0.8 + 1.7 + 1.6 −0.7 −0.6 + 2.3 + 0.1 −2.8
         Oct −1 + 2 + 5.5 + 2.7 + 3.5 + 0.4 + 3.1 −0.8 + 2.5 + 0.4 −0.5 −0.4 + 0.8 + 2.2 + 0.2
         Nov − + 2 + 9.0 + 7.1 + 7.7 + 2.6 + 5.1 −0.6 + 2.5 + 1.2 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.8 + 1.3 −0.6
         Dec −− 2 + 4.6 + 11.6 + 12.1 + 11.7 + 0.4 −0.5 −4.8 −3.4 −0.4 −1.2 −3.0 −1.4 −2.1
2003          Jan −− 2 −23.1 −19.8 −20.3 −4.3 −16.1 + 0.5 −4.3 −5.9 −1.2 −0.1 −4.7 + 1.6 + 1.0
         Feb −− 1 −5.4 −1.1 −1.5 −5.1 + 3.7 + 0.3 −3.9 −5.0 −0.9 −0.9 −4.1 + 1.1 −0.4
*From March 2000, including the foreign branches of building and loan population have not been eliminated from the flow figures for the foreign
associations. In this table “foreign “also includes the country of domicile of subsidiaries.) The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as
the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical revisions have been provisional; subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly
eliminated from the changes. (Breaks owing to changes in the reporting Report, are not specially marked. —1Several branches in a given
40*IV  Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
IV  Banks
  
      
  
Deposits
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  4 
Money
Short-term market Medium  and long-term
paper
of which of which and debt
enter- enter- Working securities
out- capital Other prises  and prises  and
German Foreign indi- indi- Foreign stand- and own liabil-
Total Total banks Total Total Total viduals Total viduals ing  5 funds ities  6   Period banks non-banks
End of year or month* Foreign  branches
  
1,186.1 799.5 158.2 641.4 386.5 60.9 58.4 51.6 2.5 2.4 325.7 272.3 22.0 77.9 2000
1,271.3 855.3 194.0 661.2 416.0 57.4 54.2 51.2 3.2 3.0 358.6 316.8 24.0 77.2 20011,116.0 758.5 250.1 508.4 357.5 62.6 58.4 55.0 4.2 3.8 294.9 212.1 25.9 53.6 2002
1,298.2 850.1 213.0 637.1 448.1 75.1 71.8 68.0 3.3 3.2 373.1 293.4 25.0 60.3 2002          May
1,200.4 791.3 209.8 581.5 409.1 63.6 60.3 56.6 3.3 3.2 345.5 264.5 24.9 58.8          Jun
1,212.9 788.3 212.5 575.8 424.5 67.2 63.9 60.0 3.4 3.3 357.3 263.1 25.0 60.1          Jul
1,236.0 791.6 219.1 572.4 444.4 66.1 62.7 58.9 3.4 3.3 378.3 257.0 25.1 58.9          Aug1,223.7 787.6 231.3 556.3 436.0 63.8 60.5 57.7 3.4 3.3 372.2 249.5 25.0 61.0          Sep
1,241.7 804.7 241.6 563.0 437.0 66.3 62.9 59.3 3.3 3.3 370.7 236.1 25.0 65.2          Oct
1,263.4 834.9 257.4 577.5 428.5 69.2 65.7 62.0 3.5 3.4 359.4 234.9 25.0 62.5          Nov1,116.0 758.5 250.1 508.4 357.5 62.6 58.4 55.0 4.2 3.8 294.9 212.1 25.9 53.6          Dec
1,170.8 788.6 244.3 544.3 382.2 68.6 64.5 60.6 4.1 3.7 313.7 214.2 26.0 54.9 2003          Jan
1,158.7 771.4 244.9 526.6 387.3 71.1 65.8 62.0 5.3 5.0 316.2 199.0 26.2 55.6          Feb
Changes*
+ 53.8 + 36.3 + 35.2 + 1.1 + 17.5 −3.7 −4.4 −0.6 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 21.2 + 44.6 + 2.1 −1.3 2001
−53.4 −31.7 + 56.0 −87.7 −21.7 + 5.2 + 4.2 + 3.8 + 1.0 + 0.8 −26.9 −104.8 + 1.8 + 17.2 2002
− 8.4 −15.6 + 3.5 −19.0 + 7.2 −2.7 −2.7 −3.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 9.9 −10.3 + 0.5 + 13.8 2002          May
−63.1 −36.5 −3.2 −33.4 −26.6 −11.4 −11.5 −11.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 −15.1 −29.0 −0.1 + 12.1          Jun
− 2.1 −11.6 + 2.7 −14.3 + 9.5 + 3.6 + 3.5 + 3.4 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 5.9 −1.4 + 0.1 −4.8          Jul
+ 26.9 + 5.3 + 6.6 −1.4 + 21.6 −1.1 −1.1 −1.1 + 0.0 −0.0 + 22.7 −6.1 + 0.1 −0.1          Aug
−10.5 −2.4 + 12.2 −14.5 −8.1 −2.3 −2.3 −1.2 −0.0 −0.0 −5.8 −7.5 −0.1 + 3.9          Sep
+ 19.5 + 18.0 + 10.3 + 7.6 + 1.6 + 2.4 + 2.5 + 1.6 −0.0 −0.0 −0.9 −13.4 −0.0 + 5.2          Oct
+ 26.3 + 32.9 + 15.8 + 17.1 −6.5 + 2.9 + 2.8 + 2.7 + 0.1 + 0.1 −9.4 −1.2 −0.0 −0.7          Nov
−119.2 −58.7 −7.3 −51.4 −60.5 −6.6 −7.3 −6.9 + 0.7 + 0.5 −53.9 −22.8 + 0.9 + 4.0          Dec
+ 69.9 + 40.0 −5.8 + 45.8 + 29.9 + 6.0 + 6.1 + 5.5 −0.1 −0.1 + 23.9 + 2.2 + 0.1 + 9.6 2003          Jan
−13.0 −17.7 + 0.6 −18.3 + 4.7 + 2.6 + 1.3 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 2.2 −15.2 + 0.3 −0.1          Feb
  
  
End of year or month* Foreign  subsidiaries
  
414.6 267.9 61.0 207.0 146.7 32.5 29.2 21.9 3.2 3.2 114.2 56.3 34.7 74.9 2000
576.5 362.5 79.2 283.3 214.0 36.4 32.5 23.9 3.9 3.8 177.6 99.8 47.3 87.9 2001503.5 307.7 99.5 208.2 195.7 27.0 22.5 21.1 4.5 4.5 168.7 78.4 43.0 79.3 2002
539.5 339.9 71.3 268.7 199.6 32.3 28.5 24.4 3.8 3.7 167.3 82.1 46.4 83.8 2002          May
521.7 326.3 72.5 253.8 195.4 31.8 28.1 24.0 3.7 3.7 163.6 81.4 45.4 83.7          Jun
500.8 307.6 71.5 236.1 193.3 31.7 24.8 20.6 6.9 6.8 161.6 82.9 45.6 83.4          Jul
490.1 304.0 75.7 228.3 186.1 27.6 23.3 22.8 4.3 4.2 158.5 81.4 44.0 78.2          Aug488.8 300.6 78.0 222.6 188.2 28.8 24.1 23.6 4.6 4.6 159.4 81.6 43.3 81.7          Sep
495.9 301.0 79.1 221.9 194.9 27.7 23.1 22.6 4.6 4.5 167.2 81.7 43.2 79.7          Oct
502.8 308.8 81.8 227.0 194.0 26.4 22.1 21.6 4.3 4.2 167.6 81.0 43.2 81.1          Nov503.5 307.7 99.5 208.2 195.7 27.0 22.5 21.1 4.5 4.5 168.7 78.4 43.0 79.3          Dec
478.2 298.2 95.6 202.6 179.9 28.0 23.5 22.9 4.5 4.5 151.9 77.1 42.5 78.0 2003          Jan
474.6 297.1 89.6 207.5 177.5 28.2 23.7 23.1 4.6 4.5 149.3 80.0 42.0 74.0          Feb
Changes*
+ 160.9 + 94.6 + 18.2 + 76.3 + 66.4 + 3.9 + 3.3 + 2.0 + 0.6 + 0.6 + 62.5 + 43.6 + 13.7 + 11.7 2001
−47.1 −37.4 + 20.3 −57.8 −9.7 −9.4 −10.0 −2.9 + 0.6 + 0.6 −0.3 −21.4 −4.4 −5.4 2002
− 0.9 + 0.4 + 4.6 −4.2 −1.4 −1.4 −1.4 −1.0 −0.0 −0.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 −0.7 + 0.2 2002          May
− 8.7 −7.4 + 1.3 −8.7 −1.3 −0.4 −0.4 −0.4 −0.0 −0.0 −0.9 −0.7 −1.0 + 0.9          Jun
−25.0 −21.4 −1.0 −20.3 −3.6 −0.1 −3.3 −3.4 + 3.2 + 3.2 −3.5 + 1.5 + 0.2 −0.5          Jul
− 9.6 −2.8 + 4.3 −7.1 −6.7 −4.1 −1.5 + 2.2 −2.6 −2.6 −2.7 −1.5 −1.6 −5.2          Aug
− 1.0 −3.1 + 2.3 −5.4 + 2.1 + 1.2 + 0.8 + 0.8 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 1.0 + 0.2 −0.7 + 3.6          Sep
+ 7.4 + 0.5 + 1.1 −0.5 + 6.8 −1.1 −1.0 −1.0 −0.1 −0.1 + 7.9 + 0.1 −0.1 −1.9          Oct
+ 8.1 + 8.6 + 2.7 + 5.9 −0.5 −1.3 −1.0 −1.0 −0.3 −0.3 + 0.8 −0.7 + 0.0 + 1.6          Nov
+ 8.1 + 3.5 + 17.7 −14.2 + 4.5 + 0.6 + 0.4 −0.5 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 3.9 −2.6 −0.3 −0.5          Dec
−21.0 −7.0 −3.9 −3.1 −14.1 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 1.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 −15.0 −1.3 −0.4 −0.3 2003          Jan
− 3.6 −1.2 −6.0 + 4.8 −2.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 −2.6 + 2.9 −0.5 −4.2          Feb
country of domicile are regarded as a single branch. —2Treasury bills, subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt securities. —5Issues of
Treasury discount paper and other money market paper, debt negotiable and non-negotiable debt securities and money market
securities. —3Including own debt securities. —4Excluding paper. — 6 Including subordinated liabilities. 
41*IV  Banks

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
V. Minimum reserves
 
1. Reserve ratios
Germany European monetary union
 
% of liabilities subject to reserve requirements % of reserve base  1 
Sight Time
Applicable from liabilities liabilities Applicable from Ratio Savings deposits
1995  August 1 2    2    1.5    1999  January 1 2    
 
   
1Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank of 1 December
1998 on the application of minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which
a reserve ratio of 0 % applies, pursuant to article 4 (1)). 
 
  
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany up to the end of 1998
− pursuant to the Minimum Reserves Order of the Bundesbank −
 
DM million
Liabilities subject to reserve requirements Excess reserves  4 
Monthly Required as % of the
average  1 Total reserves  2 Level Sight liabilities Time liabilities Savings deposits Actual reserves  3 required  reserves Shortfall, total
1995          Dec. 2,066,565 579,337 519,456 967,772 36,492 37,337 845 2.3 3
1996          Dec. 2,201,464 655,483 474,342 1,071,639 38,671 39,522 851 2.2 41997          Dec. 2,327,879 734,986 476,417 1,116,477 40,975 41,721 745 1.8 31998          Dec. 2,576,889 865,444 564,878 1,146,567 45,805 46,432 627 1.4 4
1Pursuant to sections 5 to 7 of the Minimum Reserves Order. —2Amount balances of the credit institutions subject to reserve requirements on their
after applying the reserve ratios to the liabilities subject to reserve require- giro accounts at the Bundesbank. — 4 Actual reserves less required reserves. 
ments (section 5 (1) of the Minimum Reserves Order). —3Average credit
 
 
3. Reserve maintenance in the European monetary union
− from 1999, pursuant to the ECB Regulation governing minimum reserves according to article 19.1 of the
ECB/ESCB Statute −
 
Maintenance Required reserves
period before deduction Required reserves
of lump-sum Lump-sum beginning in  1 after deduction of
Reserve base  2 allowance  3 allowance  4 lump-sum allowance Actual reserves  5 Excess reserves  6 Shortfall, total  7 
European monetary union (  5  billion)
 
2002          July 6,490.8 129.8 0.6 129.3 129.7 0.5 0.0
         Aug 6,477.9 129.6 0.6 129.0 129.5 0.5 0.0         Sep 6,411.9 128.2 0.6 127.7 128.2 0.5 0.0
         Oct 6,460.4 129.2 0.6 128.7 129.2 0.5 0.0
         Nov 6,466.2 129.3 0.5 128.8 129.4 0.6 0.0         Dec 6,569.9 131.4 0.5 130.9 131.4 0.6 0.0
2003          Jan 6,546.4 130.9 0.5 130.4 131.0 0.6 0.0
         Feb 6,474.5 129.5 0.6 128.9 129.5 0.6 0.0         Mar  
p 6,526.6 130.5 0.5 130.0 130.5 0.5 0.0
Of which: Germany (  5  million)
2002          July 1,896,682 37,934 238 37,696 37,867 171 4
         Aug 1,892,420 37,848 234 37,614 37,823 209 2         Sep 1,879,343 37,587 232 37,354 37,545 190 1
         Oct 1,894,298 37,886 232 37,654 37,895 240 5
         Nov 1,887,201 37,744 231 37,513 37,727 214 38         Dec 1,929,396 38,588 231 38,356 38,574 217 2
2003          Jan 1,911,863 38,237 230 38,007 38,280 273 3
         Feb 1,891,376 37,828 230 37,597 37,876 279 4         Mar  
p 1,912,098 38,242 230 38,012 38,224 212 4
1The reserve maintenance period of the ESCB minimum reserve system base. —4Article 5 (2) of the Regulation of the European Central Bank of
starts on the 24th of each month and ends on the 23rd of the following 1 December 1998 on the application of minimum reserves. —5Average
month (the first reserve maintenance period lasted from January 1, 1999 to credit balances of the credit institutions subject to minimum reserve requ ire-
February 23, 1999). —2Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central ments on their reserve accounts at the respective national central bank. —
Bank of 1 December 1998 on the application of minimum reserves 6Actual reserves less required reserves after the deduction of the lump-sum
(excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio o f 0 % applies, pursuant to allowance. —7Required reserves after the deduction of the lump-sum
article 4 (1)). —3Amount after applying the reserve ratios to the reserve allowance. 
42*V. Minimum reserves

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
VI. Interest rates
  
1. ECB interest rates 2. Discount and lombard rates 3. Base rates
    of the Bundesbank
  
% p.a. % p.a. % p.a.
Base rate as per
Main Marginal Discount Rate
Deposit refinancing lending Lombard Transition Act
Applicable from facility operations  1 facility Applicable from Discount rate rate  2, 4, 5  Applicable from 3, 4, 5  
1999 Jan                  1 2.00 3.00 4.50 1994 Feb                18 5 1/4 6 3/4 1999 Jan                  1 2.50
         Jan                  4 2.75 3.00 3.25          Apr                15 5 6 1/2          May                 1 1.95
         Jan                22 2.00 3.00 4.50          May                13 4 1/2 6 
         Apr                  9 1.50 2.50 3.50 2000 Jan                  1 2.68
         Nov                  5 2.00 3.00 4.00 1995 Mar                31 4 6          May                  1 3.42
         Aug                25 3 1/2 5 1/2          Sep                  1 4.26
2000 Feb                  4 2.25 3.25 4.25          Dec                15 3 5 
         Mar                17 2.50 3.50 4.50   2001 Sep                  1 3.62
         Apr                28 2.75 3.75 4.75 1996 Apr                19 2 1/2 4 1/2
         June                 9 3.25 4.25 5.25          to 2002 Jan                  1 2.71
         Sep                  1 3.50 4.50 5.50 1998 Dec                31          to
         Oct                  6 3.75 4.75 5.75          Apr                  3
  
2001 May               11 3.50 4.50 5.50 Base rate as per
         Aug                31 3.25 4.25 5.25 Civil Code  6 
         Sep                18 2.75 3.75 4.75
         Nov                  9 2.25 3.25 4.25 2002 Jan                  1 2.57
         July                 1 2.47
2002 Dec                  6 1.75 2.75 3.75
2003 Jan                  1 1.97
2003 Mar                  7 1.50 2.50 3.50
1Up to 21 June 2000 fixed rate tenders, from 28 June 2000 variable rate the field of civil law and judicial procedural law), in state legislation (as stipu -
tenders at minimum bid rate. —2From 1 August 1990 to 31 December 1993 lated in the Act Introducing the Civil Code) or in executory instruments and
this was also the rate for cash advances; from 1 January 1994 cash advances contracts based on such regulations, the following changes apply as from
have no longer been granted. Wherever reference is made in an Act to the 1 January 2002: a) the rate for cash advances of the Federal Government isinterest rate applicable for cash advances of the Federal Government, the replaced by the base rate in the Civil Code increased by 1.5%, b) the lom-rate will be replaced by the base rate increased by 1.5 percentage points pur- bard rate is replaced by the ECB ’s marginal lending facility rate, c) the base
suant to the Discount Rate Transition Act (see also footnot e 4 a and 5). Pursu- rate pursuant to the Discount Rate Transition Act is replaced by the base
ant to the Discount Rate Transition Act, read in conjunction with the Lom- rate pursuant to section 247 of the Civil Code (see also footnote 5). —5Pur-
bard Rate Transition Regulation, the lombard rate is replaced from 1 Janu- suant to Article 4 section 1 of the Act on the Amendment of Provisions con-ary 1999 by the rate applied by the European Cental Bank (ECB) for its mar- cerning the Evaluation of Insurance Enterprises ’Capital Investment and the
ginal lending facility wherever the lombard rate is used as a reference vari- Repeal of the Discount Rate Transition Act, the Discount Rate Transition Act,
able for interest and other payments (see also footnot e 4 b and 5). —3Pur- the Regulation Governing the Use of the Base Rate as a Reference Variable
suant to the Discount Rate Transition Act, read in conjunction with the Regu- and the Lombard Rate Transition Regulation are repealed. Pursuant to Art -
lation Governing the Use of the Base Rate as a Reference Variable, this rate icle 4 section 2 of this act, from 4 April 2002 the discount rate and the basereplaces the discount rate from 1 January 1999 wherever the latter is used rate under the Discount Rate Transition Act are replaced by the base ratein contracts and regulations as a reference variable for interest and other pursuant to section 247 of the Civil Code, the lombard rate is replaced bypayments. This base rate is the discount rate of the Bundesbank which ap- the interest rate on the marginal lending facility of the ECB, and the inter-plied on 31 December 1998. It changes from January 1, May 1 and Septem- est rate for cash advances of the Federal Government by the base rate pursu-ber 1 of each year, and will change for the first time on 1 May 1999 if the ant to section 247 of the Civil Code increased by 1.5 percentage points. —
interest rate applied by the ECB to its longer-term refinancing operations 6Starting at 3.62%, it is adjusted on January 1 and July 1 of each year (for
(marginal rate) has changed by at least 0.5 percentage points (see also foot- the first time on 1 January 2002) by the percentage points by which the refe r-
note 4 c and 5). —4Wherever the rates listed in this column are used as a ence variable (most recent main refinancing operation of the ECB, marginal
reference variable for interest and other payments in Federal legislation (in rate) has increased or decreased since the last change in th e base rate. 
  
    
4. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders *
  
    
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bids Allotment Weighted
Amount Amount Fixed rate Minimum bid rate Marginal rate  
1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement
 5 
 millions % p.a. ... days
Main refinancing operations
2003 Mar                25 115,518 104,000 − 2.50 2.53 2.55 15
       Apr                  2 112,031 71,000 − 2.50 2.53 2.54 14
       Apr                  9 133,547 101,000 − 2.50 2.53 2.53 14
       Apr                16 126,889 77,000 − 2.50 2.53 2.54 14
       Apr                23 156,979 125,000 − 2.50 2.54 2.55 14
       Apr                30 106,071 38,000 − 2.50 2.55 2.55 14
       May                 7 67,356 53,000 − 2.50 2.53 2.54 7
       May                 7 120,843 76,000 − 2.50 2.53 2.54 14
       May               14 145,595 97,000 − 2.50 2.53 2.54 14
Longer-term refinancing operations
2003 Jan                30 31,716 15,000 −− 2.78 2.80 90
       Feb                27 24,863 15,000 −− 2.48 2.51 91
       Mar                27 33,367 15,000 −− 2.49 2.51 91
       Apr                30 35,096 15,000 −− 2.50 2.51 92
Other tender operations
2002 Dec                18 28,480 10,000 − 2.75 2.80 2.82 6
Source: ECB. —*Enlargement of the euro area on 1 January 2001 to allotted or collected. 
include Greece. —1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were
43*VI. Interest rates

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
VI. Interest rates
 
5.  Money market rates, by month
 
 
% p.a.
Money market rates reported by Frankfurt banks  1 EURIBOR  3 
One- One- Three- Six- Nine- Twelve-
week month month month month month
Day-to-day money Three-month funds EONIA  2 funds funds funds funds funds funds
Monthly Lowest and Monthly Lowest and
Period averages highest rates averages highest rates Monthly averages
2001          Apr 5.04 4.71 −5.80 4.66 4.52 −4.80 5.06 4.88 4.78 4.68 4.57 4.50 4.48
         May 4.64 4.41 −4.90 4.62 4.49 −4.81 4.65 4.66 4.66 4.64 4.56 4.53 4.52
         June 4.53 4.30 −4.85 4.43 4.37 −4.50 4.54 4.56 4.53 4.45 4.35 4.33 4.31
         July 4.51 4.25 −4.63 4.45 4.38 −4.50 4.51 4.54 4.52 4.47 4.39 4.33 4.31
         Aug 4.49 4.35 −4.53 4.33 4.21 −4.43 4.49 4.51 4.46 4.35 4.22 4.14 4.11
         Sep 3.97 2.95 −5.50 3.96 3.60 −4.27 3.99 4.08 4.05 3.98 3.88 3.80 3.77
         Oct 3.96 3.65 −4.76 3.58 3.48 −3.65 3.97 3.83 3.72 3.60 3.46 3.39 3.37
         Nov 3.51 3.15 −4.20 3.37 3.28 −3.50 3.51 3.48 3.43 3.39 3.26 3.20 3.20
         Dec 3.32 4 2.90 −4.05 3.33 3.26 −3.36 3.34 3.38 3.42 3.34 3.26 3.24 3.30
2002          Jan 3.29 2.45 −3.57 3.32 3.24 −3.38 3.29 3.35 3.35 3.34 3.34 3.39 3.48
         Feb 3.27 2.90 −3.35 3.34 3.31 −3.38 3.28 3.32 3.34 3.36 3.40 3.48 3.59
         Mar 3.25 2.90 −3.45 3.37 3.33 −3.45 3.26 3.33 3.35 3.39 3.50 3.65 3.82
         Apr 3.30 3.11 −3.75 3.39 3.35 −3.45 3.32 3.32 3.34 3.41 3.54 3.70 3.86
         May 3.31 3.21 −3.50 3.44 3.35 −3.52 3.31 3.34 3.37 3.47 3.63 3.80 3.96
         June 3.35 3.28 −3.65 3.45 3.40 −3.48 3.35 3.36 3.38 3.46 3.59 3.73 3.87
         July 3.30 3.15 −3.40 3.39 3.34 −3.44 3.30 3.34 3.36 3.41 3.48 3.56 3.64
         Aug 3.29 3.26 −3.36 3.33 3.29 −3.37 3.29 3.32 3.33 3.35 3.38 3.40 3.44
         Sep 3.31 3.26 −3.60 3.29 3.25 −3.34 3.32 3.32 3.32 3.31 3.27 3.23 3.24
         Oct 3.30 3.27 −3.50 3.24 3.18 −3.31 3.30 3.31 3.31 3.26 3.17 3.12 3.13
         Nov 3.30 3.10 −3.48 3.11 3.00 −3.23 3.30 3.32 3.23 3.12 3.04 3.01 3.02
         Dec 3.07 5 2.85 −3.75 2.93 2.83 −3.03 3.09 3.02 2.98 2.94 2.89 2.87 2.87
2003          Jan 2.79 2.00 −2.92 2.81 2.77 −2.86 2.79 2.85 2.85 2.83 2.76 2.72 2.70
         Feb 2.77 2.48 −2.85 2.67 2.48 −2.80 2.76 2.81 2.77 2.69 2.58 2.53 2.50
         Mar 2.71 2.33 −3.50 2.51 2.43 −2.58 2.75 2.66 2.60 2.53 2.45 2.42 2.41
         Apr 2.56 2.51 −2.75 2.52 2.47 −2.56 2.56 2.57 2.58 2.53 2.47 2.45 2.45
1Money market rates are not fixed or quoted officially; the monthly aver- Moneyline Telerate (formerly Bridge Telerate). —3Euro Interbank Offered
ages computed from daily quotations are unweighted. —2Euro OverNight Rate: unweighted average rate calculated by Moneyline Telerate (formerly
Index Average: weighted average overnight rate for interbank operations Bridge Telerate) since 30 December 1998 according to the act/360
calculated by the European Central Bank since 4 January 1999 on the basis method. —4At the end of December 3.50% to 4.05%. —5At the end of De-
of real turnover according to the act/360 method and published via cember 3.00% to 3.05%. 
 
 
6. Euro area retail bank interest rates *, o
  
% p.a.; period averages
Deposit interest rates Lending interest rates
With agreed maturity Redeemable at notice To enterprises To householdsUp to Up to Over Up to Over Up to Over Consumer For house
Period Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months 1 year 1 year lending purchase
2000 0.85 3.45 3.45 4.52 2.25 3.79 6.60 6.23 9.87 6.34
2001  
1 0.94 3.49 3.49 4.12 2.40 3.59 6.83 6.15 10.12 5.97
2002 0.73 2.80 2.80 3.85 2.13 2.85 6.13 5.71 9.78 5.54
2002          Mar 0.73 2.84 2.84 4.07 2.15 3.00 6.09 5.85 9.78 5.74         Apr 0.74 2.89 2.90 4.13 2.14 3.07 6.17 5.96 9.83 5.81
         May 0.74 2.91 2.92 4.15 2.15 3.08 6.20 5.98 9.87 5.82         June 0.74 2.93 2.94 4.09 2.13 3.08 6.18 5.92 9.83 5.77
         July 0.74 2.89 2.90 4.02 2.13 3.02 6.16 5.79 9.78 5.68
         Aug 0.73 2.84 2.85 3.81 2.12 2.94 6.15 5.71 9.79 5.53         Sep 0.73 2.77 2.77 3.64 2.13 2.73 6.12 5.61 9.85 5.38
         Oct 0.72 2.74 2.74 3.58 2.11 2.63 6.13 5.54 9.72 5.26
         Nov 0.71 2.70 2.69 3.53 2.11 2.55 6.10 5.50 9.70 5.21         Dec 0.68 2.51 2.51 3.45 2.05 2.41 5.97 5.34 9.58 5.09
2003          Jan 0.63 2.43 2.43 3.29 2.05 2.34 5.95 5.29 9.58 4.91
         Feb 0.62 2.32 2.32 3.15 2.02 2.12 5.89 5.19 9.51 4.78         Mar 0.59 2.20 2.19 3.08 1.98 2.05 5.76 5.17 9.36 4.69
*These euro area retail bank interest rates should be used with caution and Member States. Furthermore, the national interest rates are not harmonised
for statistical purposes only, primarily to analyse their development over in terms of their coverage (new business and/or outstanding amounts), th e
time rather than their level. They are calculated as the weighted average of nature of the data (nominal or effective) or the compilation method. The
national interest rates provided by the national central banks. The national country weights for the euro area retail bank interest rates are derived from
rates represent those rates that are currently available from national MFI balance sheet statistics or close proxies. The weights reflect thesources and which are judged to fit the standard categories. These national country-specific proportions of the relevant instruments within the eur o
rates have been aggregated to derive information for the euro area, in area, measured as outstanding amounts. The weights are adjusted monthly,some cases relying on proxies and working assumptions due to the so that interest rates and weights always refer to the same month. —1En-
heterogeneity observed in the national financial instruments across MU largement of the euro area on 1 January 2001 to include Greece. 
      
o Tables and notes taken from the ECB. 
44*VI. Interest rates

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
VI. Interest rates
 
7. Lending and deposit rates of banks (MFIs) in Germany *, o
    Lending rates
 
% p.a.
Current account credit Bills discountedBills of less than 
 5 
 50,000
 5 
 100,000 and more
 5 
 500,000 and more refinancable
less than 
 5 
 100,000 but less than 
 5 
 500,000 but less than 
 5 
 2.5 million at the Bundesbank
Reporting Average Average Average Average
period  1 interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread
2001          Apr 11.14 6.80 −13.25 10.07 6.50 −13.00 8.85 6.00 −12.25 6.96 5.39 −10.00
         May 11.12 6.50 −13.25 10.09 6.00 −12.75 8.84 5.60 −12.00 6.86 4.78 −10.00
         June 11.21 6.50 −13.25 10.13 6.50 −12.95 8.79 5.50 −12.00 6.91 5.42 −10.00
         July 11.12 6.50 −13.25 9.99 6.00 −12.95 8.73 5.50 −12.00 6.91 5.43 −10.00
         Aug 11.11 6.20 −13.25 10.03 6.00 −12.95 8.79 5.50 −12.10 6.84 5.18 −10.00
         Sep 11.06 6.00 −13.25 9.98 6.00 −12.75 8.75 5.50 −12.10 6.69 5.00 −10.00
         Oct 10.97 5.50 −13.25 9.93 5.50 −12.75 8.57 5.00 −12.00 6.57 4.55 −10.25
         Nov 10.87 5.50 −13.00 9.77 5.00 −12.75 8.49 4.90 −12.00 6.43 4.36 −10.25
         Dec 10.66 6.00 −13.00 9.64 5.50 −12.75 8.44 4.90 −12.00 6.23 3.46 −10.00
2002          Jan o 10.86 6.00 −13.00 9.62 5.50 −12.75 8.40 4.50 −12.00 6.34 4.30 −10.25
         Feb 10.84 6.00 −13.00 9.58 6.00 −12.75 8.42 5.50 −12.00 6.36 4.35 −10.25
         Mar 10.88 6.45 −13.00 9.64 6.00 −12.60 8.39 4.50 −12.00 6.28 4.25 −10.00
         Apr 10.90 6.00 −13.00 9.69 6.00 −12.75 8.49 5.00 −12.00 6.34 4.30 −10.25
         May 10.93 6.00 −13.00 9.69 5.50 −12.75 8.55 4.50 −12.00 6.36 4.35 −10.25
         June 10.88 6.30 −13.00 9.76 6.00 −12.75 8.48 4.50 −12.00 6.42 4.45 −10.25
         July 10.99 6.00 −13.00 9.70 5.50 −12.75 8.57 4.50 −12.00 6.40 4.38 −10.00
         Aug 11.00 6.00 −13.00 9.72 5.50 −12.75 8.57 4.50 −12.00 6.41 4.34 −10.25
         Sep 10.86 5.50 −13.00 9.78 6.00 −12.75 8.54 4.50 −12.00 6.37 4.30 −10.25
         Oct 10.92 5.50 −13.00 9.77 5.40 −12.75 8.58 4.50 −12.00 6.36 4.26 −10.25
         Nov 10.97 5.50 −13.00 9.73 5.50 −12.50 8.55 4.50 −12.00 6.29 4.10 −10.25
         Dec 10.88 5.50 −13.00 9.69 5.00 −12.75 8.56 4.00 −12.00 6.19 3.93 −10.25
2003          Jan 10.92 6.50 −13.00 9.68 5.50 −12.75 8.55 4.50 −12.00 6.12 3.83 −10.25
         Feb 10.84 5.65 −13.00 9.72 5.12 −12.75 8.55 4.00 −12.00 6.14 3.69 −10.00
         Mar 10.77 5.00 −13.00 9.58 4.75 −12.50 8.47 4.00 −12.00 6.03 3.56 −10.00
         Apr 10.81 6.00 −13.00 9.63 5.00 −12.50 8.42 3.84 −12.00 6.05 3.55 −10.00
 
 
Long-term fixed-rate loans
to enterprises and self-employed persons
Instalment credits (excluding lending to the housing sector)  5 
 5 
 5,000 and more but not more than 
 5 
 15,000  2  5  100,000 and more  5  500,000 and more
Personal credit lines but less than 
 5 
 500,000 but less than 
 5 
 5 million
(overdraft facilities Effective
granted to individuals) Monthly rate  3 annual interest rate  4 Effective interest rate
Reporting Average Average Average Average Averageperiod  
1 interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread
2001          Apr 12.70 11.25 −13.75 0.41 0.33 −0.49 10.71 8.76 −12.77 6.77 5.75 −8.57 6.53 5.57 −8.05
         May 12.70 11.50 −13.50 0.41 0.33 −0.49 10.75 8.69 −12.89 6.81 5.83 −8.65 6.60 5.69 −8.01
         June 12.68 11.50 −13.50 0.41 0.34 −0.49 10.76 8.76 −12.89 6.82 5.81 −8.66 6.62 5.75 −8.20
         July 12.68 11.25 −13.50 0.41 0.35 −0.49 10.78 8.92 −12.91 6.82 5.85 −8.63 6.60 5.70 −8.30
         Aug 12.66 11.25 −13.50 0.41 0.35 −0.49 10.80 8.89 −12.76 6.74 5.63 −8.60 6.52 5.50 −8.30
         Sep 12.66 11.25 −13.50 0.41 0.35 −0.49 10.80 8.95 −12.89 6.64 5.49 −8.50 6.43 5.38 −8.25
         Oct 12.61 11.25 −13.50 0.41 0.35 −0.49 10.76 8.80 −12.95 6.44 5.26 −8.50 6.21 5.17 −8.17
         Nov 12.54 11.25 −13.50 0.41 0.34 −0.49 10.65 8.68 −12.86 6.28 5.15 −8.50 6.05 5.04 −8.12
         Dec 12.48 11.00 −13.50 0.41 0.34 −0.49 10.64 8.78 −12.63 6.40 5.36 −8.50 6.16 5.25 −8.05
2002          Jan o 12.47 11.25 −13.50 0.41 0.33 −0.49 10.65 8.62 −12.68 6.48 5.50 −8.55 6.23 5.28 −8.25
         Feb 12.47 11.00 −13.50 0.41 0.34 −0.49 10.73 8.87 −12.77 6.57 5.55 −8.60 6.36 5.41 −8.50
         Mar 12.44 11.00 −13.50 0.41 0.34 −0.49 10.71 8.87 −12.68 6.77 5.80 −8.80 6.55 5.41 −8.55
         Apr 12.44 10.51 −13.50 0.41 0.34 −0.49 10.68 8.76 −12.80 6.82 5.80 −8.80 6.63 5.70 −8.45
         May 12.47 11.00 −13.50 0.41 0.34 −0.49 10.73 8.87 −12.96 6.86 5.90 −8.60 6.63 5.75 −8.45
         June 12.49 11.20 −13.50 0.41 0.33 −0.50 10.73 8.48 −13.00 6.75 5.77 −8.53 6.53 5.64 −8.25
         July 12.48 11.00 −13.50 0.41 0.33 −0.49 10.74 8.83 −13.00 6.68 5.71 −8.60 6.45 5.48 −8.25
         Aug 12.47 10.50 −13.50 0.42 0.33 −0.50 10.71 8.82 −13.00 6.51 5.33 −8.52 6.26 5.21 −8.25
         Sep 12.49 10.75 −13.50 0.41 0.34 −0.49 10.76 8.76 −13.00 6.37 5.12 −8.57 6.13 4.99 −8.25
         Oct 12.52 11.00 −13.50 0.41 0.34 −0.50 10.74 8.56 −13.05 6.32 5.17 −8.57 6.13 4.93 −8.25
         Nov 12.53 11.00 −13.50 0.42 0.34 −0.50 10.70 8.50 −13.07 6.26 4.99 −8.52 6.05 4.74 −8.20
         Dec 12.53 11.20 −13.50 0.41 0.33 −0.50 10.64 8.47 −13.00 6.13 4.88 −8.50 5.93 4.62 −8.20
2003          Jan 12.50 11.00 −13.50 0.42 0.33 −0.50 10.69 8.44 −13.07 5.97 4.65 −8.25 5.76 4.46 −8.00
         Feb 12.46 10.75 −13.50 0.41 0.33 −0.49 10.62 8.29 −13.07 5.84 4.44 −8.20 5.60 4.19 −7.85
         Mar 12.36 10.50 −13.50 0.41 0.32 −0.49 10.38 8.24 −13.07 5.84 4.43 −8.10 5.65 4.30 −8.00
         Apr 12.36 10.75 −13.50 0.41 0.33 −0.50 10.41 8.29 −13.07 5.90 4.60 −8.22 5.71 4.51 −8.00
*The average rates are calculated as unweighted arithmetic means from 60 months. —3Interest rates as % per month of original amount of credit
the interest rates reported to be within the spread. The spread is as- taken up. Besides interest, most banks charge a one-off processing fee (gen-certained by eliminating the reports in the top 5% and the bottom 5% of erally 2%, in some cases 3%, of the credit amount). —4Calculated on the
the interest rate range. The figures for the latest date are always to be re- basis of reported monthly rates (see footnote 3) and reported annual ratesgarded as provisional; subsequent alterations, which will appear in the on the respective amount of debt and on the basis of the respective pro-following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. —oFor simplicity, the cessing fees, taking due account of reported maturities. —5Lending to
amount categories were redenominated to euro as from January 2002 by enterprises (with agreed maturities of more than five years) with agreedhalving the previous Deutsche Mark amounts. —1Second and third weeks interest rates locked in for more than five years. 
of the months indicated. —2With maturities between 36 months and
45*VI. Interest rates

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
VI. Interest rates
 
7. Lending and deposit rates of banks (MFIs) in Germany *, o  (cont ’d)
    Lending rates
 
% p.a.
Mortgage loans secured by residential real estatewith interest rates fixed (effective interest rate)  
6 
with variable interest rates
for 2 years for 5 years for 10 years (effective interest rate)  6 
Reporting Average Average Average Average
period  1 interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread
2001          Apr 5.80 5.27 −6.54 5.78 5.43 −6.33 6.11 5.85 −6.54 6.64 5.48 −8.03
         May 5.88 5.34 −6.59 5.87 5.54 −6.43 6.20 5.77 −6.64 6.66 5.59 −8.03
         June 5.80 5.27 −6.54 5.84 5.54 −6.33 6.22 5.85 −6.59 6.64 5.48 −8.03
         July 5.78 5.22 −6.45 5.85 5.54 −6.37 6.24 5.77 −6.59 6.64 5.43 −8.03
         Aug 5.62 5.06 −6.35 5.69 5.43 −6.22 6.13 5.88 −6.54 6.57 5.43 −8.03
         Sep 5.41 4.75 −6.22 5.57 5.22 −6.22 6.08 5.85 −6.43 6.45 5.38 −7.82
         Oct 5.12 4.49 −5.96 5.36 5.01 −6.03 5.91 5.64 −6.43 6.30 4.96 −7.73
         Nov 4.95 4.33 −5.79 5.20 4.75 −5.75 5.70 5.38 −6.14 6.12 4.80 −7.71
         Dec 5.13 4.59 −5.90 5.42 4.90 −5.90 5.87 5.20 −6.22 6.15 4.85 −7.60
2002          Jan 5.19 4.65 −5.91 5.52 5.10 −6.06 5.95 5.36 −6.27 6.13 4.85 −7.50
         Feb 5.38 4.85 −6.11 5.66 5.32 −6.17 6.05 5.62 −6.42 6.14 4.80 −7.50
         Mar 5.61 5.12 −6.27 5.89 5.54 −6.33 6.26 5.84 −6.61 6.16 4.70 −7.50
         Apr 5.70 5.22 −6.38 5.96 5.56 −6.43 6.30 6.00 −6.69 6.26 5.10 −7.60
         May 5.73 5.22 −6.38 5.96 5.69 −6.43 6.30 6.01 −6.70 6.22 4.95 −7.50
         June 5.63 5.08 −6.27 5.86 5.54 −6.38 6.21 5.91 −6.59 6.21 5.02 −7.50
         July 5.47 4.85 −6.17 5.71 5.41 −6.27 6.10 5.85 −6.54 6.13 4.96 −7.49
         Aug 5.17 4.54 −5.90 5.42 5.08 −6.06 5.84 5.57 −6.38 6.04 4.87 −7.23
         Sep 4.95 4.28 −5.75 5.22 4.85 −5.96 5.69 5.38 −6.26 6.02 4.79 −7.49
         Oct 4.86 4.28 −5.75 5.14 4.75 −5.80 5.67 5.33 −6.22 5.93 4.59 −7.34
         Nov 4.76 4.07 −5.59 5.08 4.75 −5.75 5.62 5.27 −6.17 5.90 4.59 −7.34
         Dec 4.62 3.92 −5.54 4.96 4.59 −5.64 5.52 5.20 −6.17 5.83 4.44 −7.50
2003          Jan 4.41 3.71 −5.30 4.73 4.32 −5.38 5.36 5.02 −6.01 5.74 4.39 −7.23
         Feb 4.23 3.51 −5.39 4.52 4.10 −5.33 5.18 4.90 −5.90 5.64 4.07 −7.23
         Mar 4.18 3.56 −5.06 4.51 4.02 −5.22 5.19 4.80 −5.75 5.59 4.07 −7.23
         Apr 4.25 3.57 −5.12 4.63 4.12 −5.38 5.29 4.89 −5.85 5.58 4.07 −7.23
 
 
    Deposit rates
 
% p.a.
Time deposits with agreed maturities
of 1 month of 3 months
Higher-yielding
sight deposits
 5 
 50,000 and more but
 5 
 500,000 and more but
 5 
 50,000 and more but
of individuals  7 less than  5  50,000 less than  5  500,000 less than  5  2.5 million less than  5  500,000
Reporting Average Average Average Average Average
period  1 interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread
2001          Apr 2.49 0.50 −4.00 3.48 2.59 −4.20 3.91 3.20 −4.50 4.27 3.50 −4.70 3.99 3.25 −4.50
         May 2.44 0.50 −4.00 3.46 2.50 −4.20 3.85 3.10 −4.40 4.20 3.50 −4.65 3.95 3.20 −4.50
         June 2.42 0.50 −3.90 3.34 2.50 −4.00 3.73 3.10 −4.25 4.07 3.50 −4.44 3.84 3.15 −4.35
         July 2.41 0.50 −3.88 3.34 2.50 −4.00 3.73 3.10 −4.20 4.08 3.50 −4.50 3.83 3.20 −4.41
         Aug 2.39 0.50 −3.75 3.31 2.50 −4.00 3.70 3.00 −4.20 4.05 3.40 −4.45 3.76 3.10 −4.30
         Sep 2.26 0.50 −3.50 3.00 2.20 −3.85 3.38 2.70 −4.00 3.66 2.95 −4.15 3.47 2.60 −4.00
         Oct 2.10 0.50 −3.24 2.69 2.00 −3.40 3.07 2.40 −3.50 3.36 2.75 −3.75 3.12 2.40 −3.65
         Nov 1.96 0.50 −2.96 2.42 1.75 −3.00 2.77 2.20 −3.15 3.00 2.50 −3.30 2.83 2.17 −3.45
         Dec 1.92 0.50 −2.95 2.41 1.75 −3.00 2.76 2.23 −3.15 3.03 2.50 −3.40 2.78 2.20 −3.15
2002          Jan o 1.90 0.50 −2.85 2.37 1.70 −3.00 2.73 2.20 −3.10 3.00 2.50 −3.30 2.76 2.20 −3.11
         Feb 1.86 0.50 −2.85 2.30 1.65 −3.00 2.66 2.09 −3.05 2.89 2.45 −3.23 2.75 2.20 −3.13
         Mar 1.88 0.50 −2.80 2.34 1.70 −3.00 2.70 2.20 −3.10 2.94 2.40 −3.25 2.77 2.25 −3.17
         Apr 1.87 0.50 −3.00 2.34 1.70 −3.00 2.69 2.25 −3.05 2.94 2.50 −3.25 2.78 2.22 −3.20
         May 1.85 0.50 −2.75 2.33 1.67 −3.00 2.70 2.25 −3.05 2.94 2.40 −3.25 2.79 2.23 −3.20
         June 1.85 0.50 −2.75 2.35 1.70 −3.00 2.70 2.25 −3.10 2.94 2.50 −3.30 2.83 2.25 −3.25
         July 1.85 0.50 −2.80 2.35 1.75 −3.00 2.71 2.20 −3.10 2.95 2.50 −3.30 2.81 2.25 −3.25
         Aug 1.82 0.50 −2.75 2.33 1.66 −3.00 2.69 2.17 −3.10 2.92 2.40 −3.25 2.77 2.20 −3.10
         Sep 1.80 0.50 −2.75 2.29 1.65 −3.00 2.65 2.10 −3.07 2.89 2.35 −3.22 2.74 2.20 −3.10
         Oct 1.76 0.50 −2.75 2.29 1.65 −3.00 2.64 2.10 −3.02 2.88 2.40 −3.22 2.72 2.20 −3.10
         Nov 1.77 0.50 −2.75 2.24 1.57 −2.90 2.60 2.00 −3.00 2.84 2.30 −3.20 2.65 2.10 −3.00
         Dec 1.66 0.50 −2.55 2.04 1.45 −2.65 2.37 1.90 −2.80 2.60 2.10 −3.00 2.41 1.90 −2.90
2003          Jan 1.57 0.50 −2.50 1.94 1.40 −2.50 2.27 1.80 −2.65 2.51 2.00 −2.85 2.33 1.85 −2.75
         Feb 1.55 0.50 −2.38 1.82 1.21 −2.45 2.17 1.61 −2.55 2.39 2.00 −2.75 2.23 1.70 −2.65
         Mar 1.48 0.50 −2.25 1.72 1.13 −2.30 2.06 1.50 −2.50 2.30 1.90 −2.60 2.09 1.60 −2.55
         Apr 1.45 0.50 −2.25 1.68 1.10 −2.20 2.01 1.53 −2.40 2.24 1.80 −2.50 2.04 1.60 −2.50
For footnotes *, o, 1to5see page 45*. —6The figures refer to the time upon in each case by the credit institutions involved are taken into account
when the contract was concluded and not to the entire duration of the con- (at present mostly monthly payment and inclusion). —7Only such interest
tract. The calculation of the effective interest rate is based on an annual re- rates are taken into account as are above the relevant standard terms of t he
demption rate of 1% plus interest saved; the repayment conditions agreed banks included in the survey. 
46*VI. Interest rates

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
VI. Interest rates
 
7. Lending and deposit rates of banks (MFIs) in Germany *, o  (cont ’d)
    Deposit rates
 
% p.a.
Savings deposits
Bank savings bonds
with regular with minimum rates of with higher rates of return  9 
interest payments return  8 (without a duration of contract being agreed)
with agreed notice of 3 months
with agreed notice
 5 
 5,000 and more
 5 
 10,000 and more
maturity of 4 years of 3 months less than 
 5 
 5,000 but less than 
 5 
 10,000 but less than 
 5 
 25,000
Reporting Average Average Average Average Average
period  1 interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread
2001          Apr 4.27 3.95 −4.60 1.23 1.00 −2.00 2.36 1.50 −3.75 2.95 1.95 −4.00 3.18 2.00 −4.30
         May 4.31 4.00 −4.65 1.24 1.00 −2.00 2.33 1.50 −3.75 2.92 1.80 −4.00 3.14 2.00 −4.26
         June 4.31 3.95 −4.60 1.21 1.00 −2.00 2.29 1.50 −3.66 2.87 1.75 −4.00 3.09 2.00 −4.00
         July 4.26 3.90 −4.60 1.20 1.00 −2.00 2.26 1.50 −3.50 2.85 1.75 −4.00 3.07 2.00 −4.00
         Aug 4.16 3.75 −4.50 1.18 1.00 −1.75 2.20 1.50 −3.35 2.77 1.75 −3.75 3.02 2.00 −4.00
         Sep 3.99 3.60 −4.35 1.16 1.00 −1.75 2.11 1.35 −3.25 2.63 1.60 −3.50 2.88 1.85 −3.90
         Oct 3.77 3.40 −4.20 1.14 1.00 −1.75 2.01 1.25 −3.05 2.47 1.50 −3.50 2.69 1.85 −3.50
         Nov 3.48 3.00 −4.00 1.11 0.75 −1.50 1.86 1.25 −2.75 2.25 1.50 −3.00 2.49 1.75 −3.20
         Dec 3.65 3.10 −4.00 1.08 0.75 −1.50 1.81 1.25 −2.75 2.18 1.50 −3.00 2.42 1.75 −3.00
2002          Jan o 3.73 3.25 −4.10 1.07 0.75 −1.50 1.78 1.25 −2.75 2.15 1.50 −2.75 2.40 1.70 −3.00
         Feb 3.90 3.25 −4.25 1.06 0.75 −1.50 1.78 1.25 −2.70 2.14 1.50 −2.75 2.37 1.60 −3.00
         Mar 4.07 3.30 −4.50 1.05 0.75 −1.50 1.79 1.25 −2.75 2.14 1.50 −2.80 2.38 1.60 −3.00
         Apr 4.15 3.30 −4.50 1.04 0.75 −1.50 1.78 1.25 −2.60 2.15 1.50 −2.80 2.38 1.60 −3.00
         May 4.15 3.30 −4.50 1.04 0.75 −1.50 1.79 1.25 −2.60 2.16 1.50 −2.80 2.40 1.75 −3.00
         June 4.12 3.30 −4.50 1.04 0.75 −1.50 1.78 1.25 −2.50 2.15 1.50 −2.80 2.40 1.75 −3.00
         July 4.01 3.30 −4.40 1.03 0.75 −1.50 1.78 1.15 −2.60 2.16 1.50 −2.81 2.40 1.75 −3.00
         Aug 3.70 3.12 −4.05 1.01 0.75 −1.50 1.76 1.00 −2.50 2.14 1.50 −2.80 2.36 1.60 −3.00
         Sep 3.50 3.05 −4.00 1.00 0.75 −1.50 1.75 1.25 −2.50 2.12 1.50 −2.75 2.34 1.50 −3.00
         Oct 3.38 2.85 −4.00 0.99 0.75 −1.50 1.71 1.01 −2.50 2.10 1.40 −2.75 2.32 1.50 −3.00
         Nov 3.35 2.85 −3.75 0.99 0.75 −1.50 1.69 1.00 −2.50 2.07 1.35 −2.75 2.31 1.50 −3.00
         Dec 3.23 2.75 −3.70 0.96 0.75 −1.50 1.63 1.00 −2.50 1.97 1.25 −2.75 2.19 1.50 −2.95
2003          Jan 3.02 2.70 −3.50 0.95 0.75 −1.25 1.61 1.00 −2.50 1.90 1.25 −2.95 2.13 1.50 −3.15
         Feb 2.83 2.50 −3.30 0.91 0.75 −1.25 1.57 1.00 −2.30 1.83 1.25 −2.70 2.07 1.50 −2.80
         Mar 2.69 2.20 −3.10 0.86 0.50 −1.25 1.47 1.00 −2.25 1.71 1.15 −2.70 1.93 1.25 −2.80
         Apr 2.80 2.40 −3.20 0.80 0.50 −1.13 1.41 1.00 −2.20 1.68 1.10 −2.35 1.86 1.25 −2.45
 
 
Savings deposits with higher rates of return  9  and with duration of contract being agreed for
 5 
 10,000 and more but less than 
 5 
 25,000   (total rate of return) 10
with agreed notice of 3 months with agreed notice of more than 3 months
and a duration of contract of and a duration of contract of
more than 1 year and up to
up to and including 1 year and including 4 years more than 4 years up to and including 1 year more than 4 years
Reporting Average Average Average Average Averageperiod  
1 interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread interest rate Spread
2001          Apr 3.71 2.90 −4.25 3.96 3.25 −4.50 4.47 3.60 −5.25 3.91 2.50 −4.50 4.33 3.95 −4.75
         May 3.74 3.00 −4.25 3.99 3.25 −4.35 4.50 3.64 −5.22 3.91 2.60 −4.35 4.36 3.95 −4.75
         June 3.67 2.80 −4.20 3.93 3.25 −4.30 4.48 3.64 −5.22 3.85 2.50 −4.25 4.35 3.90 −4.78
         July 3.64 2.80 −4.15 3.91 3.25 −4.45 4.48 3.64 −5.25 3.80 2.50 −4.05 4.33 3.90 −4.75
         Aug 3.52 2.60 −4.00 3.83 3.20 −4.30 4.42 3.60 −5.40 3.68 2.50 −4.00 4.22 3.84 −4.73
         Sep 3.32 2.40 −3.90 3.62 2.61 −4.25 4.32 3.36 −5.42 3.33 2.50 −3.65 4.06 3.72 −4.73
         Oct 2.94 2.25 −3.45 3.36 2.60 −3.88 4.17 3.00 −5.40 3.01 2.50 −3.50 3.85 3.50 −4.50
         Nov 2.64 2.00 −3.25 3.09 2.48 −3.50 4.01 2.66 −5.40 2.75 2.00 −3.50 3.53 2.93 −4.30
         Dec 2.63 1.75 −3.10 3.14 2.48 −4.00 3.98 2.88 −5.40 2.79 2.20 −3.20 3.63 3.00 −4.30
2002          Jan o 2.67 2.00 −3.10 3.23 2.50 −4.25 3.98 2.91 −5.08 2.80 2.00 −3.20 3.74 3.25 −4.25
         Feb 2.76 2.00 −3.25 3.32 2.60 −4.00 4.07 2.91 −5.13 2.91 2.20 −3.50 3.84 3.25 −4.20
         Mar 2.84 2.10 −3.30 3.45 2.50 −4.25 4.15 3.13 −5.13 3.00 2.40 −3.50 3.96 3.25 −4.40
         Apr 2.89 2.10 −3.40 3.50 2.25 −4.25 4.17 2.91 −5.13 3.07 2.50 −3.70 3.97 3.25 −4.44
         May 2.91 2.10 −3.40 3.48 2.50 −4.25 4.20 2.91 −5.13 3.08 2.20 −4.00 3.98 3.25 −4.50
         June 2.93 2.10 −3.40 3.52 2.25 −4.25 4.21 2.91 −5.15 3.08 2.20 −4.00 3.97 3.10 −4.50
         July 2.89 2.10 −3.30 3.48 2.25 −4.10 4.14 2.91 −5.08 3.02 2.50 −3.50 3.90 3.15 −4.29
         Aug 2.73 2.00 −3.25 3.19 2.25 −4.00 4.02 2.91 −5.02 2.94 2.45 −3.50 3.68 2.85 −4.21
         Sep 2.61 1.90 −3.20 3.08 2.42 −3.80 3.90 2.90 −5.02 2.73 2.25 −3.25 3.54 3.00 −4.04
         Oct 2.53 1.95 −3.25 2.88 2.12 −3.50 3.84 2.75 −5.08 2.63 2.25 −3.00 3.43 2.70 −4.04
         Nov 2.46 1.75 −3.00 2.84 2.08 −3.44 3.80 2.75 −5.08 2.55 2.15 −3.00 3.41 2.75 −4.00
         Dec 2.34 1.75 −2.80 2.77 2.08 −3.44 3.68 2.50 −4.82 2.41 1.95 −3.00 3.30 2.75 −3.75
2003          Jan 2.20 1.75 −2.75 2.60 2.00 −3.44 3.62 2.50 −4.82 2.34 1.90 −3.00 3.14 2.54 −3.60
         Feb 2.08 1.75 −2.55 2.44 1.78 −3.50 3.52 2.31 −4.82 2.12 1.75 −4.00 2.99 2.50 −3.39
         Mar 1.93 1.45 −2.40 2.32 1.50 −3.00 3.36 2.24 −4.82 2.05 1.60 −4.00 2.77 2.38 −3.25
         Apr 1.92 1.43 −2.30 2.30 1.50 −2.90 3.39 2.25 −4.86 2.05 1.65 −3.50 2.81 2.30 −3.40
For footnotes *, o, 1to5see page 45*; for footnotes 6and 7see page mium or a bonus is granted. —10Rate of return which is paid when savings
46*. —8Only a minimum rate of return is granted, but no premium or plans are held until maturity or when savings objectives have been
bonus. —9An interest rate above the minimum rate of return and/or a pre- achieved. 
47*VI. Interest rates

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
VII. Capital market
 
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  *)
 
 
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities  1 Residents
Credit in- Bundes-
Sales stitutions bank
= Public Foreign including open
total Bank Indus- debt debt building marketpur- debt trial secur- secur- and loan Non- oper- Non-
Period chases Total securities bonds ities  
2 ities 3 Total  4 assc. 5 banks  6 ations  5 residents  7 
DM million
1990 244,827 220,340 136,799 − 67 83,609 24,487 225,066 91,833 133,266 − 33 19,763
1991 231,965 219,346 131,670 667 87,011 12,619 173,099 45,095 127,310 694 58,866
1992 291,762 284,054 106,857 − 175 177,376 7,708 170,873 132,236 37,368 1,269 120,887
1993 395,110 382,571 151,812 200 230,560 12,539 183,195 164,436 20,095 − 1,336 211,915
1994 303,339 276,058 117,185 − 65 158,939 27,281 279,989 126,808 154,738 − 1,557 23,349
1995 227,099 203,029 162,538 − 350 40,839 24,070 141,282 49,193 94,409 − 2,320 85,815
1996 254,359 233,519 191,341 649 41,529 20,840 148,250 117,352 31,751 − 853 106,109
1997 332,655 250,688 184,911 1,563 64,214 81,967 204,378 144,177 60,201 − 128,276
1998 418,841 308,201 254,367 3,143 50,691 110,640 245,802 203,342 42,460 − 173,038
 5 
 million
1999 292,663 198,068 156,399 2,184 39,485 94,595 155,766 74,728 81,038 − 136,898
2000 226,594 157,994 120,154 12,605 25,234 68,600 154,089 91,447 62,642 − 72,505
2001 180,899 86,656 55,918 14,473 16,262 94,245 114,467 35,848 78,619 − 66,432
2002 180,957 124,035 47,296 14,506 62,235 56,922 91,562 13,536 78,026 − 89,395
2003          Jan 24,214 22,618 1,014 7,299 14,305 1,596 14,031 6,796 7,235 − 10,183
         Feb 30,937 24,832 11,163 5,368 8,301 6,105 18,336 − 213 18,549 − 12,601
         Mar 13,000 14,596 596 1,948 12,052 − 1,596 350 13,398 − 13,048 − 12,650
 
  
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-purchases shares  
8 shares  9 Total  10 tutions  5  11 Non-banks  6 residents  12 
Period
DM million
1990 50,070 28,021 22,048 52,631 7,215 45,416 − 2,561
1991 33,478 13,317 20,161 32,247 2,466 29,781 1,230
1992 32,595 17,226 15,370 40,651 2,984 37,667 − 8,055
1993 39,355 19,512 19,843 30,871 4,133 26,738 8,4851994 55,125 29,160 25,966 54,466 1,622 52,844 659
1995 46,422 23,600 22,822 49,354 11,945 37,409 − 2,931
1996 72,491 34,212 38,280 55,962 12,627 43,335 16,529
1997 119,522 22,239 97,280 96,844 8,547 88,297 22,6771998 249,504 48,796 200,708 149,151 20,252 128,899 100,352
 5 
 million
1999 150,013 36,010 114,005 103,136 18,637 84,499 46,877
2000 139,704 22,733 116,973 159,528 23,293 136,235 − 19,826
2001 82,286 17,575 64,714 − 2,127 − 14,714 12,587 84,412
2002 52,185 9,232 42,954 30,444 − 23,236 53,680 21,740
2003          Jan − 1,214 723 − 1,937 − 794 − 665 − 129 − 420
         Feb − 3,851 872 − 4,723 − 1,343 − 3,239 1,896 − 2,508
         Mar − 1,338 1,286 − 2,624 − 1,782 − 2,264 482 444
*Until the end of 1999, debt securities comprise the bonds and money ment funds. —7Net purchases or net sales ( −) of domestic debt securities by
market paper of domestic banks, from January 2000 all fixed-interest non-residents; transaction values. —8At issue prices. —9Net purchases or
securities. Investment fund certificates see Table VII.6. —1Net sales at net sales ( −) of foreign shares (including direct investment) by residents;
market values plus/less changes in issuers ’portfolios of their own debt transaction values. —10Domestic and foreign shares. —11Up to the end
securities. —2Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and of 1998, excluding shares under syndicate agreement. —12Net purchases
Treuhand agency. —3Net purchases or net sales ( −) of foreign debt or net sales ( −) of domestic shares (including direct investment) −before
securities by residents; transaction values. —4Domestic and foreign debt 1989 also including domestic investment fund certificates −by
securities. —5Book values; statistically adjusted. —6Residual; also non-residents; transaction values. —The figures for the latest data are to be
including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic invest- regarded as provisional; corrections are not specially marked.  
48*VII. Capital market

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
VII. Capital market
 
2. Sales of debt securities issued by borrowers domiciled in Germany  *)
 
 
Until the end of 1998 DM nominal million value, from 1999  5  million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item:
Foreign  DM/euro
Mortgage Communal bonds issued Debt securities
bonds bonds issued by spe- by German-
All bank debt (Hypotheken- ( Öffentliche Other bank Industrial Public managed cialised credit
Period Total securities pfandbriefe) Pfandbriefe) institutions bonds  2 syndicates debt securities debt securities  3 
Gross sales  4 
1990 428,698 286,709 14,923 70,701 89,755 111,326 − 141,990 35,168
1991 442,089 292,092 19,478 91,489 80,738 100,386 707 149,288 32,832
1992 572,767 318,522 33,633 134,363 49,195 101,333 − 254,244 57,282
1993 733,126 434,829 49,691 218,496 34,028 132,616 457 297,841 87,3091994 627,331 412,585 44,913 150,115 39,807 177,750 486 214,261 61,465
1995 620,120 470,583 43,287 208,844 41,571 176,877 200 149,338 102,719
1996 731,992 563,076 41,439 246,546 53,508 221,582 1,742 167,173 112,3701997 846,567 621,683 53,168 276,755 54,829 236,933 1,915 222,972 114,8131998 1,030,827 789,035 71,371 344,609 72,140 300,920 3,392 238,400 149,542
 5 
 million
1999 571,269 448,216 27,597 187,661 59,760 173,200 2,570 120,483 57,202
2000 659,148 500,895 34,528 143,107 94,556 228,703 8,114 150,137 31,597
2001 687,988 505,646 34,782 112,594 106,166 252,103 11,328 171,012 10,6052002 818,725 569,232 41,496 119,880 117,506 290,353 17,574 231,923 10,313
2002          Dec 61,284 45,115 4,405 9,184 7,746 23,781 833 15,336 −
2003          Jan 104,022 69,454 3,500 16,283 15,605 34,065 2,302 32,265 −
         Feb 85,023 65,066 4,011 9,823 16,673 34,559 2,155 17,802 1,350
         Mar 84,288 53,301 2,545 5,735 8,852 36,169 2,836 28,151 −
of which: Debt securities with a maturity of over 4 years  5 
1990 272,642 133,347 10,904 43,250 26,767 52,425 − 139,295 29,791
1991 303,326 172,171 11,911 65,642 54,878 39,741 707 130,448 22,7721992 430,479 211,775 28,594 99,627 40,267 43,286 − 218,703 51,939
1993 571,533 296,779 43,365 160,055 26,431 66,923 230 274,524 82,0491994 429,369 244,806 36,397 109,732 29,168 69,508 306 184,255 53,351
1995 409,469 271,763 30,454 141,629 28,711 70,972 200 137,503 85,221
1996 473,560 322,720 27,901 167,811 35,522 91,487 1,702 149,139 92,5821997 563,333 380,470 41,189 211,007 41,053 87,220 1,820 181,047 98,4131998 694,414 496,444 59,893 288,619 54,385 93,551 2,847 195,122 139,645
 5 
 million
1999 324,888 226,993 16,715 124,067 37,778 48,435 2,565 95,331 44,013
2000 319,330 209,187 20,724 102,664 25,753 60,049 6,727 103,418 27,008
2001 299,751 202,337 16,619 76,341 42,277 67,099 7,479 89,933 6,4802002 309,157 176,486 16,338 59,459 34,795 65,892 12,149 120,527 9,213
2002          Dec 14,431 11,847 1,453 4,602 2,352 3,440 230 2,354 −
2003          Jan 46,733 25,549 942 10,669 6,007 7,930 1,606 19,579 −
         Feb 33,508 20,302 1,905 4,061 7,842 6,494 1,756 11,450 1,350
         Mar 33,388 17,558 929 3,196 2,119 11,314 325 15,505 −
Net sales  6 
1990 226,707 140,327 − 3,922 − 72 73,287 71,036 − 67 86,449 21,717
1991 227,822 139,396 4,729 22,290 65,985 46,390 558 87,868 18,5831992 304,751 115,786 13,104 58,235 19,585 24,864 − 175 189,142 34,114
1993 403,212 159,982 22,496 122,917 − 13,156 27,721 180 243,049 43,701
1994 270,088 116,519 18,184 54,316 − 6,897 50,914 − 62 153,630 21,634
1995 205,482 173,797 18,260 96,125 3,072 56,342 − 354 32,039 61,020
1996 238,427 195,058 11,909 121,929 6,020 55,199 585 42,788 69,9511997 257,521 188,525 16,471 115,970 12,476 43,607 1,560 67,437 63,1811998 327,991 264,627 22,538 162,519 18,461 61,111 3,118 60,243 84,308
 5 
 million
1999 209,096 170,069 2,845 80,230 31,754 55,238 2,185 36,840 22,728
2000 155,615 122,774 5,937 29,999 30,089 56,751 7,320 25,522 − 16,705
2001 84,122 60,905 6,932 − 9,254 28,808 34,416 8,739 14,479 − 30,657
2002 131,976 56,393 7,936 − 26,806 20,707 54,561 14,306 61,277 − 44,546
2002          Dec − 38,401 − 24,489 583 − 9,619 − 2,936 − 12,516 622 − 14,534 − 2,984
2003          Jan 20,790 3,345 − 657 − 6,131 7,168 2,964 2,190 15,255 − 2,757
         Feb 20,673 13,129 1,416 − 7,571 10,324 8,960 2,066 5,479 − 9,307
         Mar 18,025 2,993 − 2,725 − 4,323 2,200 7,841 2,836 12,196 − 6,292
*For definitions see the notes in the Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. —4Gross sales means only
Report 2, Capital market statistics. —1Excluding registered bank debt initial sales of newly issued securities. —5Maximum maturity according to
securities. —2Debt securities of enterprises. —3Including Federal Railways the terms of issue. — 6 Gross sales less redemptions. 
49*VII. Capital market

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
VII. Capital market
 
3. Outstanding amount of debt securities issued by borrowers domiciled in Germany  * 
 
 
Until the end of 1998 DM million nominal value, from 1999  5  million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item:
 Foreign  DM/euro
End of year Mortgage Communal bonds issued
or month/ bonds bonds by German- Debt securities of
Maturity All bank specialised Other bank Industrial Public managed (Öffentliche (Hypotheken-
in years Total bonds syndicates credit institutions debt securities debt securities debt securities Pfandbriefe) pfandbriefe)
DM million
1990 1,458,943 900,977 138,025 369,901 155,045 238,005 2,604 555,362 223,176
1991 1,686,765 1,040,374 142,757 392,190 221,031 284,396 3,161 643,230 241,760
1992 1,991,515 1,156,162 155,862 450,424 240,616 309,259 2,983 832,370 275,873
1993 2,394,728 1,316,142 178,357 573,341 227,463 336,981 3,163 1,075,422 319,575
1994 2,664,814 1,432,661 196,541 627,657 219,214 389,249 3,101 1,229,053 341,210
1995 2,870,295 1,606,459 214,803 723,781 222,286 445,589 2,746 1,261,090 402,229
1996 3,108,724 1,801,517 226,711 845,710 228,306 500,790 3,331 1,303,877 472,180
1997 3,366,245 1,990,041 243,183 961,679 240,782 544,397 4,891 1,371,313 535,359
1998 3,694,234 2,254,668 265,721 1,124,198 259,243 605,507 8,009 1,431,558 619,668
 5 
 million
1999 2,097,926 1,322,863 134,814 655,024 163,284 369,741 6,280 768,783 339,560
2000 2,265,121 1,445,736 140,751 685,122 157,374 462,488 13,599 805,786 322,856
2001 2,349,243 1,506,640 147,684 675,868 201,721 481,366 22,339 820,264 292,199
2002 2,481,220 1,563,034 155,620 649,061 222,427 535,925 36,646 881,541 247,655
2003          Jan 2,502,010 1,566,378 154,963 642,931 229,596 538,889 38,836 896,796 244,899
         Feb 2,522,684 1,579,507 156,379 635,360 239,919 547,849 40,902 902,275 235,591
         Mar 2,540,708 1,582,500 153,654 631,037 242,120 555,690 43,738 914,470 229,299
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  2 Position at end-March 2003 
949,979 652,499 59,357 242,814 73,630 276,696 9,462 288,018 72,697    less than 2
592,861 402,704 41,063 171,854 65,581 124,206 12,961 177,196 50,511 2 to less than 4
392,562 244,794 28,543 112,902 44,627 58,722 8,698 139,069 58,632 4 to less than 6
255,232 136,783 15,054 66,914 20,422 34,391 4,403 114,045 29,444 6 to less than 8
179,660 71,925 9,024 24,489 14,360 24,052 5,843 101,891 5,061 8 to less than 10
46,767 36,719 565 7,277 7,863 21,015 670 9,377 7,139 10 to less than 15
17,494 13,140 44 2,207 5,885 5,003 427 3,927 2,343 15 to less than 20
106,154 23,935 − 2,579 9,752 11,603 1,274 80,947 3,472 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers ’portfolios. — debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of the residual
1Excluding debt securities handed to the trustee for temporary safe amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc. 
custody. —2Calculated from month under review until final maturity for
50* 
 
4. Circulation of shares issued by residents of Germany
  
Until the end of 1998 DM million nominal value, from 1999  5  million nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies ’ capital due to
Memo item:
Share circulation
at market values
Share Net increase or cash payment contribution (market capita-
capital= and ex- merger reduction lisation) net decrease(-) contribution of shares,
change of of claims and circulation at during period mining shares, of capital level at end
under issue of and other transfer change of and of period end of period convertible GmbH shares,
Period under review review bonds  1 etc. of assets bonus shares real assets legal form liquidation under review  2 
DM million
1990 144,686 12,650 7,362 751 3,715 1,049 − 43 1,284 − 1,466 .
1991 151,618 6,932 3,656 610 2,416 407 − 182 411 − 386 .
1992 160,813 9,198 4,295 728 1,743 1,073 − 732 3,030 − 942 .
1993 168,005 7,190 5,224 772 387 876 10 707 − 783 .
1994 o 190,012 14,237 6,114 1,446 1,521 1,883 − 447 5,086 − 1,367 .
1995 211,231 21,217 5,894 1,498 1,421 1,421 − 623 13,739 − 2,133 .
1996 3 216,461 7,131 8,353 1,355 396 1,684 − 3,056 833 − 2,432 .
1997 221,575 5,115 4,164 2,722 370 1,767 − 2,423 197 − 1,678 .
1998 238,156 16,578 6,086 2,566 658 8,607 − 4,055 3,905 − 1,188 .
 5 
 million
1999 133,513 11,747 5,519 2,008 190 1,075 2,099 1,560 − 708 1,603,304
2000 147,629 14,115 3,620 3,694 618 8,089 − 1,986 1,827 − 1,745 1,353,000
2001 166,187 18,561 7,987 4,057 1,106 8,448 1,018 − 905 − 3,152 1,205,613
2002 168,716 2,528 4,307 1,291 486 1,690 − 868 − 2,152 − 2,224 647,492
2003          Jan 167,332 − 1,384 314 9 11 41 − 134 − 1,455 − 171 618,806
         Feb 167,346 14 362 − 14 45 − 497 137 − 45 616,015
         Mar 161,145 − 6,200 1,103 20 53 32 75 − 7,408 − 76 589,484
oFrom January 1994 including the shares of east German companies and enterprises whose shares are listed on the regulated free market. Source:
(resultant increase in share circulation: DM 7,771 million). —1Including share Bundesbank calculations based on data of the "Herausgebergemeinschaft
issues out of company profits. —2Including enterprises whose shares are lis- Wertpapier-Mitteilungen" and the "Deutsche B örse AG". —3Figure reduced
ted on the Official Market, on the Regulated Market or on the New Market by DM 1,902 million owing to revisions. 
50*VII. Capital market

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
VII. Capital market
 
5. Yields and indices on German securities
 
 
               
Yields on bonds outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices  2 , 3 
Public bonds Bank debt securities Bonds Shares
Memo item:
Listed Foreign
Federal securities DM/euro
bonds
With re- With re- issued by German Germansidual matur- sidual matur- German- bond iBoxx- CDAX share
managed index index ities of over 9 ities of over 9 Industrial
 5 -Germany- share price
Total Total Total Total to 10 years bonds (REX) price index index (DAX) to 10 years  4 syndicates  1,5 
Average End- End- End-
Period % p.a. daily rate 1998=100 1987=100 1987=1000
1990 8.9 8.8 8.8 8.7 9.0 8.9 9.0 9.2 93.50 . 145.00 1,398.23
1991 8.7 8.6 8.6 8.5 8.9 8.6 8.9 9.2 96.35 . 148.16 1,577.981992 8.1 8.0 8.0 7.8 8.3 8.1 8.7 8.8 101.54 . 134.92 1,545.051993 6.4 6.3 6.3 6.5 6.5 6.8 6.9 6.8 109.36 . 191.13 2,266.681994 6.7 6.7 6.7 6.9 6.8 7.2 7.0 6.9 99.90 . 176.87 2,106.58
1995 6.5 6.5 6.5 6.9 6.5 7.2 6.9 6.8 109.18 . 181.47 2,253.88
1996 5.6 5.6 5.6 6.2 5.5 6.4 5.8 5.8 110.37 . 217.47 2,888.691997 5.1 5.1 5.1 5.6 5.0 5.9 5.2 5.5 111.01 . 301.47 4,249.691998 4.5 4.4 4.4 4.6 4.5 4.9 5.0 5.3 118.18 100.00 343.64 5,002.391999 4.3 4.3 4.3 4.5 4.3 4.9 5.0 5.4 110.60 92.52 445.95 6,958.14
2000 5.4 5.3 5.2 5.3 5.6 5.8 6.2 6.3 112.48 94.11 396.59 6,433.61
2001 4.8 4.7 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.3 5.9 6.2 113.12 94.16 319.38 5,160.102002 4.7 4.6 4.6 4.8 4.7 5.1 6.0 5.6 117.56 97.80 188.46 2,892.63
2003          Jan 3.9 3.9 3.9 4.2 3.8 4.4 5.7 4.6 118.54 98.60 179.89 2,747.83
         Feb 3.6 3.7 3.7 4.0 3.6 4.2 6.1 4.6 119.33 99.28 167.39 2,547.05         Mar 3.7 3.7 3.8 4.0 3.6 4.2 6.5 4.6 118.59 98.49 160.20 2,423.87
         Apr 3.8 3.9 3.9 4.2 3.8 4.4 5.5 4.7 118.22 98.15 190.67 2,942.04
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of included in the calculation. Monthly figures are calculated on the basis of
issue of over 4 years, if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Conver- the yields on all the business days of a month. The annual figures are the un-
tible debt securities, etc., debt securities with unscheduled redemption, weighted means of the monthly figures. —2End of year or month. —
zero-coupon bonds, floating-rate notes and bonds not denominated in DM 3Source: German Stock Exchange plc. —4Only bonds eligible as underlying
or euros are not included. Group yields for the various categories of secu- instruments for futures contracts are included; calculated as unweighted
rities are weighted with the amounts outstanding of the debt securities averages. — 5 As far as quoted on German stock exchanges. 
 
 
6. Sales and purchases of investment fund certificates in Germany
  
Sales of investment fund certificates Purchases
Domestic funds (sales receipts) Residents
Investment funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Non-banks  2 and loanassociations  1 
of which
of which of which
Sales Open- Special- Foreign Foreign= Secur- end ised invest- invest-total Money ities- real invest- ment mentpur- market based estate ment Foreign fund cer- fund cer- Non-resi-chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  
3 Total Total tificates Total tificates dents  4 
Period
DM million
1990 25,788 26,857 7,904 − 8,032 − 128 18,952 −1,069 25,766 4,296 − 362 21,470 − 707 22
1991 50,064 37,492 13,738 − 11,599 2,144 23,754 12,572 49,890 8,594 − 5 41,296 12,577 174
1992 81,514 20,474 −3,102 −− 9,189 6,087 23,575 61,040 81,518 10,495 2,152 71,023 58,888 − 4
1993 80,259 61,672 20,791 − 6,075 14,716 40,881 18,587 76,258 16,982 2,476 59,276 16,111 4,001
1994 130,995 108,914 63,263 31,180 24,385 7,698 45,650 22,081 125,943 9,849 − 689 116,094 22,770 5,052
1995 55,246 54,071 16,777 6,147 3,709 6,921 37,294 1,175 56,295 12,172 188 44,123 987 −1,049
1996 83,386 79,110 16,517 −4,706 7,273 13,950 62,592 4,276 85,704 19,924 1,685 65,780 2,591 −2,318
1997 145,805 138,945 31,501 −5,001 30,066 6,436 107,445 6,860 149,977 35,924 340 114,053 6,520 −4,172
1998 187,641 169,748 38,998 5,772 27,814 4,690 130,750 17,893 190,416 43,937 961 146,479 16,507 −2,775
 5 
 million
1999 111,282 97,197 37,684 3,347 23,269 7,395 59,513 14,086 105,521 19,862 − 637 85,659 14,722 5,761
2000 117,676 85,160 39,712 −2,188 36,818 −2,824 45,448 32,516 106,674 14,454 92 92,220 32,424 11,000
2001 96,511 76,811 35,522 12,410 9,195 10,159 41,289 19,701 95,407 10,251 2,703 85,156 16,997 1,105
2002 79,672 72,887 26,113 3,682 7,443 14,916 46,773 6,784 79,912 2,100 3,007 77,812 3,778 − 241
2003          Jan 14,874 12,888 4,787 1,854 − 241 3,358 8,101 1,986 15,596 − 2,713 − 56 18,309 2,042 − 722
         Feb 9,762 9,700 3,485 944 702 2,045 6,215 62 9,710 573 − 208 9,137 270 52
         Mar 10,909 9,861 2,813 710 492 1,699 7,048 1,048 11,140 141 354 10,999 694 − 231
1Book values. —2Residual. —3Net purchases or net sales ( −) of foreign non-residents; transaction values (before 1989 classified as shares). —The
investment fund certificates by residents; transaction values. —4Net figures for the latest data are to be regarded as provisional; corrections are
purchases or net sales ( −) of domestic investment fund certificates by not specially marked. 
51*VII. Capital market

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
1. Finances of the public sector *
  
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM billion / from 1999,  5  billion
Central, regional and local authorities  1 Social security funds  2 Public sector, total
Receipts Expenditure
of which
Balance Balance Balance
Other of of of
Person- operat- receipts receipts receipts
of nel ex- ing ex- Capital Finan- and Ex- and Ex- and
which pend- pend- Current Interest forma- cial expend- Re- pend- expend- Re- pend- expend-
Period Total Taxes  3 Total  4 iture iture grants paid tion aid  5 iture ceipts  6 iture iture ceipts iture iture
1993 928.7 749.1 1,060.2 296.8 136.0 340.5 102.1 97.0 87.3 −131.5 660.8 658.7 + 2.1 1,492.1 1,621.5 −129.4
1994 995.2 786.2 1,102.2 315.5 137.3 353.4 114.0 93.2 86.5 −106.9 694.1 693.7 + 0.4 1,596.4 1,702.9 −106.5
1995 1,026.4 814.2 1,136.4 324.8 135.5 367.2 129.0 90.1 86.3 −110.1 731.2 743.8 −12.5 1,664.9 1,787.5 −122.6
1996 1,000.3 800.0 1,121.8 326.2 137.0 362.2 130.7 83.9 80.1 −121.5 769.4 784.0 −14.6 1,665.6 1,801.6 −136.1
1997 1,014.3 797.2 1,108.9 325.0 135.7 356.3 132.1 80.1 79.2 −94.5 797.3 794.5 + 2.9 1,705.3 1,797.0 −91.7
1998 1,072.1 833.0 1,128.8 325.4 137.4 373.7 133.7 79.7 79.8 −56.7 812.2 808.9 + 3.3 1,765.5 1,818.9 −53.4
1999 566.1 453.1 592.9 168.7 72.4 202.7 69.8 40.8 38.0 −26.8 429.1 425.6 + 3.5 925.2 948.5 −23.3
2000  pe 613.4 467.3 594.8 169.1 73.7 205.5 67.6 40.8 38.0 + 18.6 434.1 434.1 + 0.0 975.9 957.3 + 18.6
2001  pe 554.0 446.2 601.0 169.9 70.1 213.5 66.6 40.9 39.6 −47.0 444.5 448.4 −3.9 921.2 972.1 −50.9
2002  pe 547.5 441.7 607.3 173.1 69.0 226.0 66.1 38.2 33.8 −59.8 456.6 464.4 −7.8 919.7 987.3 −67.6
2001          Q1 7 126.7 105.1 147.8 39.5 16.4 55.5 22.0 6.5 7.8 −21.1 108.8 109.7 −0.9 213.5 235.5 −22.0
         Q2 139.4 110.9 136.7 39.3 15.8 54.0 12.6 8.0 6.4 + 2.6 110.1 111.8 −1.7 229.6 228.7 + 0.9
         Q3 136.3 109.5 146.2 40.1 15.6 52.2 19.0 10.0 9.3 −9.9 109.6 111.9 −2.3 227.4 239.5 −12.2
         Q4 149.9 121.3 167.3 49.5 21.8 52.4 12.7 14.5 16.0 −17.3 115.1 114.5 + 0.6 248.9 265.7 −16.8
2002          Q1 118.3 98.6 150.2 39.9 15.3 57.9 24.0 6.5 6.0 −31.8 111.3 112.8 −1.5 206.4 239.8 −33.4
         Q2 137.8 105.1 141.8 40.4 15.6 58.5 11.9 7.8 6.7 −4.0 113.0 115.6 −2.6 228.9 235.6 −6.6
         Q3 135.3 109.4 148.7 41.4 16.5 54.7 19.2 9.7 7.8 −13.4 113.1 116.6 −3.5 228.0 244.9 −16.9
         Q4 p 154.4 129.0 164.7 49.9 21.1 55.7 10.7 13.5 13.4 −10.3 119.3 120.0 −0.7 254.7 265.7 −11.0
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical insurance are estimated. —3The tax revenue shown here is taken from the
Office. —*The budgetary definition used here differs from the methods budget statistics and may differ from the data given in Table VIII. 4, which
employed for the government account of the national accounts and, in case are based on the tax statistics. —4Including discrepancies in clearing
of the quarterly figures, in some respects also from the financial statistics. — transactions between the central, regional and local authorities. —
1Incl. subsidiary budgets. The quarterly figures, unlike the annual figures 5Expenditure on investment grants, loans and acquisition of participating
based on the annual accounts statistics of the Federal Statistical Office, do interests. —6Including Federal Government liquidity assistance to the
not include municipal special-purpose associations and various special Federal Labour Office. —7Owing to modifications of the system of
accounts. For the receipts of Bundesbank profit see footnote 1 to Table VIII. classification, especially shifts between Other operating expenditur e and
2.—2The annual figures differ from the sum of the quarterly figures, as Current grants. 
the latter are all provisional. The quarterly figures for some fields of
2. Finances of the Federal Government, L änder Governments and local authorities *
  
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM billion / from 1999,  5  billion
Federal Government L änder Governments Local authorities
Western  2,  3 Eastern  3 Western  3 Eastern  3 
Period Receipts  1 Expenditure Receipts Expenditure Receipts Expenditure Receipts Expenditure Receipts Expenditure
1993 401.6 462.5 326.5 352.8 76.4 92.5 222.5 230.9 54.4 59.0
1994 439.6 478.9 328.8 357.0 79.3 95.9 228.9 235.1 53.9 59.2
1995 439.3 489.9 338.6 370.2 88.4 101.5 225.6 237.9 58.7 60.8
1996 411.9 490.4 344.8 379.7 93.7 105.5 227.7 232.9 55.0 57.71997 416.8 480.3 349.2 376.5 94.3 105.2 222.9 226.9 52.6 54.21998 439.0 495.6 360.5 380.3 96.4 104.7 231.4 226.3 51.5 52.41999 240.3 266.5 191.6 196.6 50.0 53.3 119.8 117.5 26.1 26.3
2000  
4,  pe  291.4 264.5 195.3 200.7 50.7 53.9 121.4 120.0 25.6 25.5
2001  pe 239.9 260.9 184.0 207.1 49.7 53.2 119.2 123.4 24.8 25.4
2002  pe 238.9 271.5 181.8 206.7 46.6 53.7 119.5 123.7 25.1 25.4
2001          Q1 50.8 66.4 44.8 49.8 12.0 11.6 25.5 28.8 5.2 5.5
         Q2 57.6 59.9 46.3 47.5 11.5 11.8 28.8 28.1 5.8 5.8         Q3 62.3 66.3 44.6 49.4 11.7 12.5 29.6 29.9 6.1 6.2         Q4 69.1 68.3 47.6 59.6 14.4 16.4 35.4 36.0 7.5 7.7
2002          Q1 47.4 68.9 42.4 49.4 10.2 12.0 24.7 29.1 5.2 5.4
         Q2 56.3 62.6 43.3 48.8 11.1 11.9 28.8 29.1 5.9 5.8         Q3 62.7 70.6 45.3 49.3 11.8 12.9 29.1 30.5 6.1 6.2         Q4
p 72.5 69.5 50.2 58.5 13.5 16.1 37.0 35.3 7.8 7.7
52*Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Fund for Inherited Liabilities. —2Including Berlin, Bremen, Hamburg.
Office. —*See corresponding footnote to Table VIII. 1. —1The Including Berlin (East). —3The quarterly figures, unlike the annual figures
Bundesbank profit transfer is shown in full until 1994; from 1995 only the based on the annual accounts statistics of the Federal Statistical Office, d o
DM 7 billion scheduled in the budget is shown. Since that time, receipts not include various special accounts. —4Including receipts from the UMTS
over and above the scheduled amount accrue directly to the Redemption licence auctions. 
52*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
3. Finances of the Government in the national accounts *
  
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM billion / from 1999,  5  billion
Item 1995  1 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000  2 2001  pe 2002  pe 
Receipts 1,647.8 1,704.0 1,726.8 1,775.9 943.4 963.7 951.5 952.7
of which
Taxes 825.8 850.0 856.9 897.4 490.4 511.7 488.3 485.0Social security contributions 662.5 696.7 720.1 727.7 375.7 378.5 383.6 388.7
Expenditure 1,764.9 1,826.6 1,826.5 1,859.6 973.2 991.8 1,009.0 1,028.9of which
Intermediate input 143.2 142.7 140.2 144.1 76.9 78.5 81.6 84.3Employee compensation 315.9 319.6 319.0 319.3 165.4 165.6 164.9 165.9Interest 128.9 131.7 133.2 136.4 68.8 68.2 67.8 67.2Social security benefits  
3 902.8 970.7 984.7 998.4 523.1 534.7 548.1 573.0
Gross capital formation 80.5 76.4 69.4 69.9 37.8 37.0 35.8 33.7
Financial balance − 117.1 − 122.7 − 99.7 − 83.7 − 29.7 − 28.0 − 57.5 − 76.2
as a percentage of the grossdomestic product − 3.3 − 3.4 − 2.7 − 2.2 − 1.5 − 1.4 − 2.8 − 3.6
Memo itemDebt as defined inMaastricht Treaty 2,010.0 2,143.9 2,232.9 2,298.2 1,210.3 1,221.8 1,232.8 1,282.8
as a percentage of the grossdomestic product 57.1 59.8 61.0 60.9 61.2 60.2 59.5 60.8
Source: Federal Statistical Office. —*Figures according to ESA 95. In unadjusted terms, the deficit amounted to 9.8% of GDP. —2Adjusted
Notwithstanding the figures shown by the Federal Statistical Office, for receipts from UMTS licence auctions. In the accounts of the Federal
calculated including −with no impact on the balance −customs duties, the Statistical Office, such receipts (50.85
 5 
billion) are recorded under "net
EU share in VAT revenue and EU subsidies. —1Adjusted for the balance of increase in non-produced assets", with the result that government spending
notional capital transfers between the public sector and the corporate is lower and a surplus (22.8
 5 
billion or 1.1% of GDP) is shown. —
sector, mainly in connection with the winding-up of the Treuhand agency. 3 Monetary social security benefits and social benefits in kind. 
4. Tax revenue of the central, regional and local authorities
  
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999,  5  million
Federal and L änder Governments and European Union Local authorities  4 
Länder Governments
of which Balance of
Federal of which European in the untransferred
Period Total Total  1 Government  2 Total New L änder Union  3 Total New L änder tax shares  5 
1991 661,920 577,150 321,334 224,321 19,139 31,495 84,633 2,540 + 137
1992 731,738 638,423 356,849 247,372 23,807 34,203 93,374 4,034 − 58
1993 749,119 653,015 360,250 256,131 27,542 36,634 95,809 5,863 + 2951994 786,162 688,785 386,145 261,947 32,052 40,692 97,116 7,677 + 260
1995 814,190 719,332 390,807 288,520 . 40,005 94,498 8,460 + 359
1996 799,998 706,071 372,390 294,232 . 39,449 94,641 7,175 − 714
1997 797,154 700,739 368,244 290,771 . 41,724 96,531 7,703 − 117
1998 833,013 727,888 379,491 306,127 . 42,271 104,960 8,841 + 1641999 453,068 396,734 211,727 164,724 . 20,284 56,333 4,810 + 1
2000 467,253 410,117 219,034 169,249 . 21,833 57,241 4,895 − 104
2001 446,248 392,189 213,342 159,115 . 19,732 54,047 4,590 + 12
2002 441,703 389,162 214,371 156,231 . 18,560 52,490 4,769 + 51
2002          Q4 128,517 114,869 66,554 44,091 . 4,224 18,017 1,405 −4,369
2003          Q1 . 84,210 43,325 35,379 . 5,506 . . .2002          Nov . 26,838 14,608 10,628 . 1,602 . . .
         Dec . 58,325 35,584 21,710 . 1,032 . . .
2003          Jan . 27,739 11,975 13,243 . 2,521 . . .
         Feb . 27,683 14,801 11,165 . 1,718 . . .         Mar . 28,788 16,550 10,971 . 1,268 . . .
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. —1Including receipts from the revenue. —4Including local authority taxes of Berlin, Bremen and
Equalisation of Burdens levies.  —2Before deduction of supplementary Hamburg. —5Difference between the local authorities ’share in the
Federal grants and shares in the revenue of mineral oil tax remitted to the income taxes received by the L änder cash offices in the period in question
Länder Governments. —3Including the (GNP-related) receipts accruing to (see Table VIII. 5) and the amounts passed on to the local authorities during
the EU from 1988 to the detriment of the Federal Government ’s tax the same period. 
53*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
5. Tax revenue, by type
  
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999,  5  million
Joint taxes Memo
item
Income taxes  2 Turnover taxes  5,  6 Localauthor-
As- Invest- ities’
sessed ment Value- Turnover Share EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income added tax on in trade Federal L änder customs income
Period Total  
1 Total tax  3 tax tion tax taxes  4 Total tax imports tax  6,  7 taxes  8 taxes  8 duties taxes  9 
1991 615,506 298,804 214,175 41,532 31,716 11,381 179,672 98,797 80,875 5,986 92,583 29,113 8,307 38,356
1992 681,751 331,310 247,322 41,531 31,184 11,273 197,712 117,274 80,438 6,923 104,802 32,963 7,742 43,3281993 697,988 341,785 257,987 33,234 27,830 22,734 216,306 174,492 41,814 4,181 93,678 34,720 7,240 44,9731994 734,234 343,055 266,522 25,510 19,569 31,455 235,698 195,265 40,433 6,271 105,410 36,551 7,173 45,450
1995 765,374 344,554 282,701 13,997 18,136 29,721 234,622 198,496 36,126 8,412 134,013 36,602 7,117 46,042
1996 746,958 317,807 251,278 11,616 29,458 25,456 237,208 200,381 36,827 8,945 137,865 38,540 6,592 40,8871997 740,272 313,794 248,672 5,764 33,267 26,092 240,900 199,934 40,966 8,732 135,264 34,682 6,900 39,5331998 775,028 340,231 258,276 11,116 36,200 34,640 250,214 203,684 46,530 10,284 130,513 37,300 6,486 47,1401999 422,012 184,408 133,809 10,887 22,359 17,353 137,155 111,600 25,555 5,463 72,235 19,564 3,186 25,277
2000 436,115 192,381 135,733 12,225 23,575 20,849 140,871 107,140 33,732 5,521 75,504 18,444 3,394 25,998
2001 417,358 170,817 132,626 8,771 −426 29,845 138,935 104,463 34,472 5,510 79,277 19,628 3,191 25,170
2002 414,008 165,096 132,190 7,541 2,864 22,502 138,195 105,463 32,732 5,752 83,494 18,576 2,896 24,846
2002          Q4 122,343 50,206 38,912 4,537 3,195 3,562 35,970 27,022 8,948 2,801 28,401 4,219 747 7,474
2003          Q1 89,121 34,118 30,589 −5,449 2,442 6,535 33,706 25,526 8,179 358 15,209 5,050 681 4,911
2002          Nov 28,421 8,066 9,597 −1,209 −1,068 747 12,418 9,491 2,928 454 5,847 1,380 256 1,583
         Dec 62,645 32,042 19,776 6,783 4,061 1,423 12,169 8,940 3,229 1,348 15,535 1,304 248 4,3202003          Jan 29,861 14,686 11,473 −756 −227 4,195 10,962 8,492 2,470 94 2,070 1,852 197 2,122
         Feb 29,245 8,745 9,785 −1,745 −373 1,077 12,862 10,087 2,776 246 5,664 1,484 244 1,562
         Mar 30,016 10,687 9,331 −2,948 3,042 1,263 9,881 6,948 2,933 18 7,475 1,714 240 1,227
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. —1This total, unlike that in Table VIII. supplementary Federal grant to the pension insurance funds; 2.2% of the
4, includes neither the revenue from Equalisation of Burdens levies, trade balance went to the local authorities, of the new balance: 50.5% to the
tax on returns and capital (less Federal and L änder shares in trade tax), the Federal Government, 49.5% to the L änder Governments, from 2000 50.25%
taxes on land and buildings and other local authority taxes, nor the balance to the Federal Government, 49.75% to the L änder Governments, from 2002
of untransferred tax shares. —2The yield of wage tax and assessed income 49.6% to the Federal Government, 50.4% to the L änder Governments. The
tax was distributed among the Federal Government, the L änder EU share must likewise be deducted from the Federal Government ’s share
Governments and the local authorities in the ratio of 42.5 : 42.5 : 15 from stated. —6Since 1991 the distribution of turnover tax and the level and
1980, and the yield of corporation tax and investment income tax between distribution of the share in trade tax have been affected by the financing ofthe Federal Government and the L änder Governments in the ratio of 50 : 50 the debt service of the "German Unity" Fund. —7Federal Government and
from 1970. —3From 1996, after deduction of child benefit. —4From L änder Governments 50% each. From 1998 Federal Government 42.2%,
February 1993 including revenue from the tax on interest income, in which L änder Governments 57.8%. —8For breakdown see Table VIII. 6. —9From
the local authorities have a share of 12%. —5From 1998 3.64% and from 1998 including the share in turnover taxes. 
1999 5.63% went to the Federal Government in advance to finance the
6. Individual taxes of the Federal Government, L änder Governments and local authorities
  
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999,  5  million
Federal taxes L änder taxes Local authority taxes
Insur- Electri- Other Motor Inherit- Other Taxes on Other
Mineral Tobacco Spirits ance city Federal vehicle Property ance Beer L änder Trade land and local
Period oil tax tax tax tax tax taxes  1 tax tax tax tax taxes tax  2 buildings taxes  3 
1991 47,266 19,592 5,648 5,862 . 14,215 11,012 6,729 2,636 1,647 7,090 41,297 9,921 1,181
1992 55,166 19,253 5,545 8,094 . 16,744 13,317 6,750 3,030 1,625 8,241 44,848 10,783 1,2811993 56,300 19,459 5,134 9,290 . 3,495 14,059 6,784 3,044 1,769 9,065 42,266 11,663 1,3831994 63,847 20,264 4,889 11,400 . 5,011 14,169 6,627 3,479 1,795 10,482 44,086 12,664 1,445
1995 64,888 20,595 4,837 14,104 . 29,590 13,806 7,855 3,548 1,779 9,613 42,058 13,744 1,426
1996 68,251 20,698 5,085 14,348 . 29,484 13,743 9,035 4,054 1,718 9,990 45,880 14,642 1,4631997 66,008 21,155 4,662 14,127 . 29,312 14,418 1,757 4,061 1,698 12,749 48,601 15,503 1,5091998 66,677 21,652 4,426 13,951 . 23,807 15,171 1,063 4,810 1,662 14,594 50,508 16,228 1,5321999 36,444 11,655 2,233 7,116 1,816 12,973 7,039 537 3,056 846 8,086 27,060 8,636 824
2000 37,826 11,443 2,151 7,243 3,356 13,485 7,015 433 2,982 844 7,171 27,025 8,849 784
2001 40,690 12,072 2,143 7,427 4,322 12,622 8,376 290 3,069 829 7,064 24,534 9,076 7902002 42,193 13,778 2,149 8,327 5,097 11,951 7,592 239 3,021 811 6,913 23,489 9,261 696
2002          Q4 16,219 5,053 841 1,271 1,640 3,378 1,586 48 766 193 1,626 6,836 2,008 131
2003          Q1 4,878 1,950 383 3,999 1,161 2,838 1,999 77 749 172 2,052 . . .
2002          Nov 3,379 683 166 561 393 664 529 12 242 66 531 . . .
         Dec 9,398 2,631 467 337 685 2,017 462 19 255 57 511 . . .
2003          Jan −29 213 70 693 198 926 782 36 286 62 687 . . .
         Feb 1,375 516 52 2,694 344 684 546 15 163 54 706 . . .
         Mar 3,533 1,220 261 613 620 1,229 672 27 300 56 659 . . .
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. —1Other excise taxes and the income until mid-1992, and again since the beginning of 1995. —2On returns and
and corporation tax surcharge ("solidarity surcharge") levied from mid-1991 capital. — 3 Including tax-like receipts.   
54*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
7. Indebtedness of the public sector *
  
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999,  5  million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
5−year lending owing to
Bundes- Treasury special Federal Debt by credit Social German Equalisa-
End of year bank discount Treasury Federal savings secur- institu- security unifica- tion
or month Total advances paper  1 notes  2,  3 bonds  2 bonds ities  2 tions  4 funds Other  4 tion 5 claims Other  6 
Public authorities
1995 1,993,476 . 8,072 240,514 170,719 78,456 586,573 764,875 1,263 40,621 15,106 87,079 198
1996 2,126,320 . 27,609 231,102 176,164 96,391 618,262 836,582 770 39,450 9,960 89,826 2031997 2,215,893 . 26,336 249,507 177,721 99,317 662,516 879,021 663 29,907 1,315 89,376 2161998 2,280,154 . 25,631 227,536 199,774 92,698 723,403 894,456 550 26,073 1,249 88,582 2021999 1,199,975 . 12,594 102,364 120,998 41,621 416,051 450,111 281 10,200 476 45,175 1052000 1,211,439 . 11,616 109,951 126,276 35,991 438,888 433,443 211 10,524 285 44,146 1082001 1,223,929 . 23,036 151,401 130,045 26,395 448,148 422,440 174 13,110 85 8,986 108
2002          Mar 1,249,857 . 17,817 158,695 133,421 22,648 461,617 431,066 218 15,234 49 8,986 109
         June 1,251,125 . 22,252 176,996 133,289 20,636 463,906 408,991 239 15,681 51 8,986 101         Sep 1,269,119 . 31,440 193,052 135,502 19,752 462,459 401,797 227 16,893 50 7,848 102         Dec 
pe 1,277,676 . 30,815 203,951 137,669 17,898 456,300 404,275 211 18,587 29 7,845 97
Federal Government 7,  8
1995 756,834 . 8,072 52,354 170,719 78,456 402,307 26,572 15 8,119 1,360 8,684 1761996 839,883 . 26,789 55,289 176,164 96,391 434,295 32,988 5 7,766 1,330 8,684 1831997 905,691 . 25,286 78,848 177,721 99,317 481,619 31,845 5 870 1,300 8,684 1971998 957,983 . 24,666 84,760 199,274 92,698 519,718 24,125 − 2,603 1,270 8,684 186
1999 714,069 . 11,553 44,335 120,498 41,621 379,808 67,872 60 2,568 476 45,175 1042000 715,819 . 11,516 44,678 123,642 35,991 400,490 52,836 29 2,099 285 44,146 1072001 701,077 . 21,136 59,643 119,911 26,395 416,195 47,111 26 1,481 85 8,986 107
2002          Mar 721,619 . 16,917 59,622 123,287 22,648 429,270 59,356 12 1,365 49 8,986 108
         June 716,787 . 21,389 66,445 123,155 20,636 431,039 43,600 12 1,374 51 8,986 100         Sep 726,896 . 30,982 72,762 125,316 19,752 429,452 39,392 0 1,242 50 7,848 101         Dec 725,405 . 30,227 78,584 127,484 17,898 422,558 39,517 0 1,167 29 7,845 97
West German L änder Governments
1995 442,536 . − 91,152 . . − 339,084 358 11,940 . − 2
1996 477,361 . 320 91,969 . . − 372,449 54 12,567 . − 2
1997 505,297 . 350 86,639 . . − 406,499 47 11,760 . − 2
1998 525,380 . 520 83,390 . . − 430,709 43 10,716 . − 2
1999 274,208 . 150 43,033 . . − 226,022 23 4,979 . − 1
2000 282,431 . − 48,702 . . − 227,914 22 5,792 . . 1
2001 305,788 . 1,800 67,721 . . − 228,270 5 7,991 . . 1
2002          Mar 310,210 . 800 73,844 . . − 225,475 58 10,032 . . 1
         June 314,447 . 750 83,192 . . − 219,729 79 10,697 . . 1
         Sep 320,617 . 250 92,220 . . − 216,121 79 11,946 . . 1
         Dec p 328,640 . 250 97,556 . . − 217,491 63 13,280 . . 1
East German L änder Governments
1995 69,151 . − 25,345 . . − 43,328 17 461 . . .
1996 80,985 . 500 26,820 . . − 53,483 − 182 . . .
1997 90,174 . 700 27,540 . . − 61,697 15 222 . . .
1998 98,192 . 445 27,228 . . − 70,289 − 230 . . .
1999 53,200 . 891 14,517 . . − 37,602 − 189 . . .
2000 55,712 . 100 16,092 . . − 39,339 − 182 . . .
2001 58,771 . 100 20,135 . . − 37,382 − 1,154 . . .
2002          Mar 59,143 . 100 21,328 . . − 36,256 − 1,460 . . .
         June 60,156 . 112 23,387 . . − 35,399 − 1,258 . . .
         Sep 61,533 . 208 24,097 . . − 35,860 − 1,368 . . .
         Dec p 63,155 . 338 23,838 . . − 37,326 − 1,653 . . .
West German local authorities 9
1995 157,271 . . − . . 1,000 151,127 283 4,861 . . .
1996 158,613 . . 200 . . 1,280 152,311 174 4,648 . . .1997 160,162 . . 300 . . 1,330 154,145 149 4,238 . . .1998 158,960 . . 300 . . 1,330 153,208 119 4,003 . . .1999 81,511 . . 153 . . 680 78,726 53 1,898 . . .2000 81,414 . . 153 . . 680 78,656 33 1,891 . . .2001 82,203 . . 153 . . 629 79,470 29 1,922 . . .
2002          Mar 82,900 . . 153 . . 629 80,168 30 1,920 . . .
         June 83,700 . . 153 . . 629 80,968 30 1,920 . . .         Sep 84,000 . . 153 . . 629 81,268 30 1,920 . . .         Dec 
pe 84,500 . . 153 . . 629 81,768 30 1,920 . . .
East German local authorities  9
1995 36,830 . . 225 . . 400 35,427 347 431 . . .1996 38,976 . . 225 . . 400 37,922 308 121 . . .1997 38,688 . . 225 . . 400 37,623 273 167 . . .1998 39,873 . . 225 . . 460 38,777 255 156 . . .1999 20,726 . . 51 . . 335 20,138 124 78 . . .2000 17,048 . . 51 . . 335 16,497 114 50 . . .2001 17,005 . . − . . 284 16,581 107 33 . . .
2002          Mar 16,880 . . − . . 284 16,456 110 30 . . .
         June 16,700 . . − . . 284 16,276 110 30 . . .
         Sep 16,700 . . − . . 284 16,276 110 30 . . .
         Dec 
pe 16,765 . . − . . 284 16,341 110 30 . . .
For footnotes see end of the table. 
55*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
7. Indebtedness of the public sector * (cont ’d)
  
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999,  5  million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
5−year lending owing to
Bundes- Treasury special Federal Debt by credit Social German Equalisa-
End of year bank discount Treasury Federal savings secur- institu- security unifica- tion
or month Total advances paper  1 notes  2,  3 bonds  2 bonds ities  2 tions  4 funds Other  4 tion 5 claims Other  6 
“German Unity “Fund / Indemnification Fund 7
1995 87,146 . − 8,891 − . 44,398 31,925 5 1,927 . . .
1996 83,556 . −−− . 44,321 38,020 5 1,210 . . .
1997 79,717 . −−− . 44,347 34,720 5 645 . . .
1998 79,413 . −−− . 47,998 30,975 − 440 . . .
1999 40,234 . − 275 500 . 28,978 10,292 − 189 . . .
2000 40,629 . − 275 2,634 . 29,797 7,790 − 133 . . .
2001 39,923 . − 3,748 10,134 . 21,577 4,315 − 149 . . .
2002          Mar 40,006 . − 3,748 10,134 . 21,732 4,315 − 7 7...
         June 40,028 . − 3,820 10,134 . 21,902 4,147 − 2 6...
         Sep 40,047 . − 3,820 10,134 . 22,049 4,019 − 2 6...
         Dec 39,810 . − 3,820 10,134 . 22,685 3,146 − 2 6...
ERP Special Fund 7
1995 34,200 . .... 10,745 23,455 −− ...
1996 34,135 . .... 10,750 23,385 −− ...
1997 33,650 . .... 10,810 22,840 −− ...
1998 34,159 . .... 11,944 20,988 − 1,227 . . .
1999 16,028 . .... 6,250 9,458 21 299 . . .
2000 18,386 . .... 7,585 10,411 13 377 . . .
2001 19,161 . .... 9,462 9,310 8 381 . . .
2002          Mar 19,098 . . . − . 9,701 9,039 8 350 . . .
         June 19,308 . . . − . 10,052 8,873 8 376 . . .
         Sep 19,327 . . . 51 . 10,045 8,863 8 361 . . .
         Dec 19,400 . . . 51 . 10,144 8,686 8 512 . . .
Federal Railways Fund 7,  8
1995 78,400 . . 3,848 − . 28,992 39,005 140 6,415 . . .
1996 77,785 . . 1,882 − . 28,749 41,537 130 5,489 . . .
1997 77,254 . . 1,927 − . 25,634 44,807 115 4,772 . . .
1998 77,246 . . − 500 . 31,648 42,488 79 2,531 . . .
1999          June 39,231 . . − 1,023 . 16,805 20,401 34 968 . . .
Debt-Processing Fund / Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities 7,  8
1995 328,888 . − 58,699 − . 98,731 72,732 98 6,468 13,745 78,395 21
1996 331,918 . − 54,718 − . 98,468 81,380 95 7,468 8,630 81,142 19
1997 322,032 . − 54,028 − . 98,377 81,616 54 7,233 15 80,692 17
1998 304,978 . − 31,633 − . 110,006 79,226 54 4,167 −20 79,899 15
1999          June 151,097 . − 11,127 2,000 . 58,897 36,133 27 2,015 −9 40,902 4
“Use of Hard Coal “Equalisation Fund 7,  8
1995 2,220 . .... − 2,220 −− ...
1996 3,108 . .... − 3,108 −− ...
1997 3,229 . .... − 3,229 −− ...
1998 3,971 . .... 3 0 0 3,671 −− ...
1999          June 2,302 . .... 1 5 3 2,148 −− ...
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical accordance with the London Debts agreement; excluding debt securities i n
Office. —*Excluding public authorities ’mutual indebtedness. — own portfolios. —7The debt incurred through the joint issue of Federal
1Predominantly Treasury discount paper. —2Excluding paper in the securities is recorded here −in contrast to the capital market statistics −
issuers ’portfolios. —3Länder Treasury paper also covers the long-term under the Federal Government and its special funds in accordance with the
maturity category. —4Mainly loans against borrowers ’notes. Including agreed distribution ratios. —8Since July 1, 1999 the Federal Government
loans raised abroad. Other loans from non-banks, including loans from has assumed joint responsibility for the debts of the Redemption Fund for
supplementary public pension funds and liabilities arising from the Inherited Liabilities, the Federal Railway Fund and the Equalisation Fund forinvestment assistance levy. —5Old liabilities arising from residential Safeguarding the Use of Coal. The special funds mentioned are only
construction and liabilities arising from residential construction by the recorded under the Federal Government from July. —9Data other than
former GDR ’s armed forces and from residential construction in connection end-of-year figures have been estimated. Including indebtedness of munici-
with the return of the troops of the former USSR in eastern Germany to pal special-purpose associations. their home country. —6Old debt mainly expressed in foreign currency, in
56*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
8. Changes in public sector indebtedness *
  
  
Net borrowing  1 
Level at end of 2001 2002
2001 2002  pe Total 1st hf Q3 Q4 Total  pe 1st hf Q3 Q4  pe 
Item
 5 
 million
Borrowers
Federal Government  2 701,077 725,405 −14,910 −24,394 + 6,820 + 2,665 + 24,328 + 15,709 + 10,110 −1,491
"German Unity" Fund 39,638 39,441 − 787 + 9 − 41 − 754 − 197 + 64 −− 261
ERP Special Fund 19,161 19,400 + 775 + 604 + 449 − 278 + 239 + 147 + 19 + 73
Indemnification Fund 285 369 + 81 + 43 + 21 + 17 + 84 + 40 + 19 + 25
West  German  Länder 305,788 328,640 + 23,357 + 5,617 + 7,422 + 10,318 + 22,853 + 8,660 + 6,170 + 8,024 Governments
East German  Länder 58,771 63,155 + 3,059 + 472 + 1,365 + 1,222 + 4,384 + 1,385 + 1,377 + 1,622 Governments
West German local authorities  3 82,203 84,500 + 2,487 + 1,250 − 460 + 1,697 + 2,895 + 1,275 + 900 + 720
East German local authorities  3 17,005 16,765 + 162 − 124 −+ 286 − 136 − 211 − 30 + 105
Total 1,223,929 1,277,676 + 14,224 −16,524 + 15,576 + 15,173 + 54,450 + 27,068 + 18,564 + 8,816
Types of debt
Treasury discount paper  4 23,036 30,815 + 11,420 + 2,130 + 5,803 + 3,488 + 7,779 − 785 + 9,188 − 625
Treasury notes  5 151,401 203,951 + 41,449 + 14,542 + 12,724 + 14,183 + 52,551 + 25,595 + 16,056 + 10,900
Five-year special Federal bonds  5 130,045 137,669 + 3,770 + 3,616 + 1,067 − 913 + 7,623 + 3,244 + 2,213 + 2,167
Federal savings bonds 26,395 17,898 −9,596 −5,746 −1,422 −2,428 −8,497 −5,759 − 884 −1,854
Debt securities  5 448,148 456,300 + 9,260 + 6,897 + 336 + 2,027 + 8,152 + 15,758 −1,446 −6,159
Direct lending by
credit institutions  6 422,440 404,275 −9,100 −4,213 −1,802 −3,086 −17,464 −13,578 −6,624 + 2,738
Loans from social security funds 174 211 − 37 − 26 − 3− 8 + 37 + 64 − 12 − 16
Other loans  6 13,070 18,546 + 2,586 + 351 + 36 + 2,199 + 5,477 + 2,571 + 1,212 + 1,694
Old debt  7 193 126 − 200 − 43 − 17 − 140 − 67 − 42 − 0− 25
Equalisation claims 8,986 7,845 −35,328 −34,033 −1,144 − 150 −1,142 −− 1,139 − 3
Investment assistance levy 40 41 − 0− 0− 0− 0− 0− 0+ 0+ 0
Total 1,223,929 1,277,676 + 14,224 −16,524 + 15,576 + 15,173 + 54,450 + 27,068 + 18,564 + 8,816
Creditors
Banking system
Bundesbank 4,440 4,440 −−−−−−−−
Credit institutions 534,400 533,000 −29,304 −15,083 −11,361 −2,859 − 699 −1,529 + 270 + 560
Domestic non-banks
Social security funds 174 211 − 31 − 6− 20 − 5 + 37 + 65 − 12 − 16
Other  8 231,815 235,925 + 30,541 + 4,647 + 9,357 + 16,537 + 4,110 + 3,131 −1,394 + 2,373
Foreign creditors  pe 453,100 504,100 + 13,017 −6,083 + 17,600 + 1,500 + 51,000 + 25,400 + 19,700 + 5,900
Total 1,223,929 1,277,676 + 14,224 −16,524 + 15,576 + 15,173 + 54,450 + 27,068 + 18,564 + 8,816
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Treasury discount paper. —5Excluding paper in the issuers ’portfolios. —
Office. —*Excluding public authorities ’mutual indebtedness. —1Net 6Including loans raised abroad. —7Old liabilities arising from residential
borrowing differs from the change in indebtedness, which includes the construction and liabilities arising from the residential construction of th e
assumption and reduction of debts. —2See Table VIII. 7, footnote 8. — former GDR ’s armed forces and from residential construction in connection
3Data other than end-of-year figures have been estimated. Including with the return of the troops of the former USSR based in eastern Germany
indebtedness of municipal special-purpose associations and municipal to their home country, and old debt in accordance with the London Debts
hospitals. —4Excluding mobilisation and liquidity paper. Predominantly Agreement. — 8 Ascertained as a difference. 
9. Loans raised by public authorities against borrowers ’ notes
  
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999,  5  million
End of year Federal "German ERP L änder Local Federal Inherited "Use of Hard
or month Govern- Unity" Special Govern- authorities Railways Liabilites Coal" Equal-
Total  1 ment  2,  3 Fund Fund ments 4,  5 Fund  3 Fund  3 isation Fund  3 
1998 898,030 23,094 31,415 22,215 504,148 184,942 45,098 83,447 3,671
1999 444,031 64,704 10,481 9,778 264,158 94,909 −− −
2000 431,364 54,731 7,178 10,801 268,362 90,292 −− −
2001 416,068 44,791 4,464 9,699 267,988 89,126 −− −
2002 Mar 409,176 41,751 4,392 9,397 264,741 88,895 −− −
June 404,661 40,431 4,172 9,256 262,574 88,228 −− −
Sep 401,432 39,267 4,044 9,231 260,611 88,280 −− −
Dec pe 398,926 34,636 3,172 9,205 262,840 89,073 −− −
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical 3See Table VIII. 7, footnote 8. —4Data other than end-of-year figures have
Office. —1Excluding Debt Register claims and cash advances. Including been estimated. Including municipal special-purpose associations and
small amounts of: mortgage loans, land charges in annuity and other forms, municipal hospitals. — 5 Including contractually agreed loans. 
and debts outstanding. —2Including Equalisation of Burdens Fund. —
57*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
10. Indebtedness of the Federal Government
  
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999,  5  million
Treasury Indebtedness
discount paper  1 to non-banks Old debt
Federal Direct
of which Treasury 5 −year Debt lending owing to
Treasury paper/ special Federal secur- by credit Social German Equal-
End of year financing Treasury Federal savings ities institu- security Other unifica- isation
or month Total Total paper notes  2 bonds  2 bonds 2 tions  3,  4 funds 3,  5,  6  tion 7 claims Other  8 
1996 839,883 26,789 7,166 55,289 176,164 96,391 434,295 32,988 5 7,766 1,330 8,684 183
1997 905,691 25,286 5,221 78,848 177,721 99,317 481,619 31,845 5 870 1,300 8,684 1971998 957,983 24,666 4,558 84,760 199,274 92,698 519,718 24,125 − 2,603 1,270 8,684 186
1999  
9 714,069 11,553 1,584 44,335 120,498 41,621 379,808 67,872 60 2,568 476 45,175 104
2000 715,819 11,516 1,805 44,678 123,642 35,991 400,490 52,836 29 2,099 285 44,146 1072001 701,077 21,136 1,658 59,643 119,911 26,395 416,195 47,111 26 1,481 85 8,986 1072002 725,405 30,227 1,618 78,584 127,484 17,898 422,558 39,517 0 1,167 29 7,845 97
2002          Apr 714,032 11,709 1,787 64,533 123,500 22,666 431,935 49,165 12 1,366 54 8,986 106
         May 715,840 16,623 1,788 64,891 123,015 21,967 430,935 47,891 12 1,366 50 8,986 103         June 716,787 21,389 1,776 66,445 123,155 20,636 431,039 43,600 12 1,374 51 8,986 100
         July 726,077 21,253 1,763 71,385 123,144 20,773 430,911 49,222 12 1,374 54 7,848 102
         Aug 723,931 26,149 1,724 71,540 124,334 20,057 430,140 42,323 12 1,374 52 7,848 101         Sep 726,896 30,982 1,700 72,762 125,316 19,752 429,452 39,392 0 1,242 50 7,848 101
         Oct 728,799 30,977 1,663 78,405 125,954 18,011 425,750 40,487 0 1,242 26 7,848 99
         Nov 734,678 30,466 1,622 78,933 126,472 17,852 434,650 37,089 0 1,242 28 7,848 99         Dec 725,405 30,227 1,618 78,584 127,484 17,898 422,558 39,517 0 1,167 29 7,845 97
2003          Jan 743,400 30,218 1,549 84,053 127,786 15,408 426,630 50,171 0 1,167 30 7,845 95
         Feb 745,992 30,081 1,462 84,808 129,055 15,515 428,692 48,701 0 1,167 36 7,845 94         Mar 745,400 30,085 1,375 80,348 132,987 15,434 435,146 42,281 − 1,183 −1 7,845 94
         Apr 
p 747,471 30,022 1,282 80,444 133,367 15,448 429,030 50,041 − 1,183 −1 7,845 94
1Excluding mobilisation and liquidity paper. In November 1999, including with the return of the troops of the former USSR based in eastern Germany
cash bills. —2Excluding paper in the issuers ’portfolios. —3Including loans to their home country. —8Commutation and compensation debt and old
raised abroad. —4Including money market debt. —5Including loans debt mainly expressed in foreign currency. —9Since July 1, 1999 the
granted by supplementary pension funds for government employees. — Federal Government has assumed joint responsibility for the debts of the
6Including liabilities arising from the investment assistance levy. — Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, the Federal Railway Fund and the
7Assumption of liabilities arising from residential construction of the Equalisation Fund for Safeguarding the Use of Coal. The special funds
former GDR ’s armed forces and from residential construction in connection mentioned are ascribed to the Federal Government from July 1999. 
11. Federal Government borrowing in the market
  
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM billion / from 1999,  5  billion
of which
5−year special Loans against Change in
Total new borrowing Debt Securities Federal bonds Other securities  2 borrowers ’ notes Money money
market market
Period gross  1 net gross  1 net gross  1 net gross  1 net gross net debt deposits
1996 + 185,696 + 83,049 + 54,038 + 31,988 + 45,445 + 5,445 + 67,015 + 39,586 + 15,050 + 1,906 + 4,148 + 6,548
1997 + 250,074 + 65,808 + 79,323 + 47,323 + 59,557 + 1,557 + 98,275 + 24,983 + 12,950 − 8,009 − 30 − 3,304
1998 + 228,050 + 52,292 + 78,304 + 38,099 + 55,078 + 21,553 + 85,706 − 1,327 + 12,023 − 2,927 − 3,065 − 5,440
1999 + 139,865 + 31,631 + 53,931 + 114,080 + 22,229 + 18,610 + 44,904 − 5,836 + 14,861 + 52,897 + 3,937 + 1,832
2000 + 122,725 + 1,750 + 49,395 + 20,682 + 26,342 + 3,144 + 45,278 − 5,323 + 7,273 − 9,973 − 5,563 − 940
2001 + 135,018 − 14,741 + 36,511 + 15,705 + 19,603 − 3,730 + 69,971 + 14,989 + 5,337 − 9,941 + 3,595 − 1,495
2002 + 178,203 + 24,328 + 41,378 + 6,364 + 36,037 + 7,572 + 93,853 + 19,535 + 4,716 −10,155 + 2,221 + 22
2002          Jan-Apr + 55,383 + 12,955 + 15,740 + 15,740 + 10,107 + 3,589 + 22,191 − 8,266 + 2,059 − 3,360 + 5,285 + 415
2003          Jan-Apr  p + 78,031 + 22,066 + 23,437 + 6,471 + 12,427 + 5,884 + 28,571 − 796 + 1,401 − 1,658 + 12,197 + 475
2002          Apr + 3,637 − 7,587 + 2,665 + 2,665 + 214 + 214 + 9,919 − 278 + 708 − 321 − 9,870 − 307
         May + 9,842 + 1,807 − 1,000 − 1,000 + 6,025 − 485 + 5,543 + 4,574 + 522 − 28 − 1,247 − 190
         June + 8,533 + 947 + 104 + 104 + 140 + 140 + 11,512 + 4,988 + 88 − 971 − 3,311 − 41
         July + 27,272 + 9,291 + 10,400 − 127 − 11 − 11 + 9,934 + 4,941 + 610 − 716 + 6,338 + 133
         Aug + 6,663 − 2,147 − 772 − 772 + 8,739 + 1,189 + 5,360 + 4,337 + 135 − 100 − 6,799 + 228
         Sep + 9,231 + 2,966 − 688 − 688 + 983 + 983 + 11,072 + 5,748 + 590 − 348 − 2,727 + 1,413
         Oct + 20,715 + 1,903 + 8,082 − 3,702 + 637 + 637 + 10,797 + 3,897 + 94 − 10 + 1,106 − 1,181
         Nov + 23,264 + 5,880 + 8,900 + 8,900 + 8,562 + 518 + 5,171 − 141 + 543 − 3,487 + 88 − 564
         Dec + 17,300 − 9,273 + 611 −12,092 + 854 + 1,012 + 12,273 − 542 + 76 − 1,134 + 3,487 − 191
2003          Jan + 34,388 + 17,995 + 11,187 + 4,071 + 292 + 302 + 10,732 + 2,969 + 628 − 895 + 11,549 + 449
         Feb + 14,560 + 2,592 + 2,063 + 2,063 + 7,831 + 1,269 + 5,793 + 725 + 40 − 305 − 1,166 + 112
         Mar + 11,908 − 592 + 6,451 + 6,454 + 3,924 + 3,933 + 7,071 − 4,536 + 633 − 234 − 6,170 + 6
         Apr p + 17,175 + 2,071 + 3,736 − 6,116 + 380 + 380 + 4,975 + 47 + 100 − 224 + 7,984 − 92
1After deduction of repurchases. —2Federal Treasury notes, Federal   
savings bonds, Treasury discount paper, Treasury financing paper.  
  
58*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
VIII. Public finance in Germany
  
12. Receipts, expenditure and assets of the wage and
salary earners ’ pension insurance funds
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999,  5  million
Receipts  1 Expenditure  1 Assets  5 
of which of which Memor-
Balance Mort- andum
Pen- of receipts gage item
Pension sioners ’ and and Adminis-
Contri- Federal pay- health expend- other Real trative
Period Total butions  2 payments Total ments  3 insurance  4 iture Total Deposits  6 Securities loans  7 estate assets
Western Germany
1996  8 288,761 236,036 50,478 288,716 237,464 16,809 + 45 14,456 9,608 2,119 2,500 229 8,863
1997 305,606 248,463 54,896 295,635 246,011 17,892 + 9,971 14,659 10,179 1,878 2,372 230 9,261
1998 317,340 250,063 65,191 304,155 254,783 18,636 + 13,185 18,194 14,201 1,493 2,274 226 9,573
1999 169,124 128,191 39,884 159,819 134,536 9,910 + 9,305 13,623 11,559 824 1,127 114 4,904
2000 173,020 128,057 43,638 166,569 139,189 10,253 + 6,451 14,350 11,459 1,676 1,105 110 4,8892001  
8,  p 178,293 130,064 46,710 172,382 143,863 10,610 + 5,911 13,973 10,646 1,517 1,699 111 4,917
2002  p 181,534 131,103 48,993 178,746 149,322 11,359 + 2,788 9,832 6,948 1,072 1,686 126 4,927
2002          Q1 43,411 30,893 12,212 43,792 36,898 2,719 − 381 11,943 8,712 1,427 1,698 106 4,933
         Q2 44,541 31,949 12,222 43,927 36,784 2,711 + 614 10,663 7,490 1,366 1,696 111 4,954         Q3 45,371 32,663 12,280 44,799 37,746 2,872 + 572 8,911 5,919 1,182 1,689 121 4,947         Q4 48,213 35,599 12,279 45,928 37,894 3,056 + 2,285 9,832 6,948 1,072 1,686 126 4,927
2003          Q1 45,408 31,969 13,173 45,117 38,108 2,900 + 291 8,686 5,649 1,230 1,685 122 4,874
Eastern Germany
1996 74,790 46,580 17,910 83,830 68,316 4,851 −9,040 . . . . . .
1997 79,351 48,939 20,065 87,424 70,500 5,388 −8,073 . . . . . .
1998 81,072 47,764 23,564 90,863 73,040 5,757 −9,791 . . . . . .
1999 43,214 24,015 14,744 47,641 38,383 3,040 −4,427 . . . . . .
2000 43,513 22,655 15,224 49,385 39,414 3,112 −5,872 . . . . . .
2001  p 44,462 21,984 16,383 50,943 40,254 3,152 −6,481 . . . . . .
2002  p 45,275 21,697 17,608 53,040 41,678 3,264 −7,765 . . . . . .
2002          Q1 11,070 5,157 4,410 13,106 10,373 793 −2,036 . . . . . .
         Q2 11,493 5,455 4,558 13,046 10,228 797 −1,553 . . . . . .
         Q3 10,757 5,275 4,334 13,391 10,530 832 −2,634 . . . . . .
         Q4 11,955 5,810 4,306 13,397 10,547 842 −1,442 . . . . . .
2003          Q1 11,187 5,320 4,588 13,359 10,624 827 −2,172 . . . . . .
Source: Federal Minister of Labour and Social Affairs and Association of deducted from pension payments. —4From 1995 including nursing
German Pension Insurance Funds. —1The annual figures differ from the insurance scheme for pensioners . —5Largely corresponds to fluctuation
sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. From 1993 reserves. Level at the end of the year or quarter. From 1992 figures for the
including financial compensation payments. Excluding investment spending whole of Germany. —6Including cash resources. —7Excluding loans to
and proceeds. —2Including contributions for recipients of public financial other social security funds; including participating interests. —8Excluding
benefits. —3Payments by pension insurance funds to health insurance receipts arising from the higher valuation of participating interests. 
institutions under section 50 of the Social Security Code V have been
13. Receipts and expenditure of the Federal Labour Office
  
  
Up to the end of 1998, DM million / from 1999,  5  million
Receipts Expenditure
Subsidies
of which of which or work-
ing fund
Promotion of vocational Promo- Balance credits
Unemployment relief  3,  4 training  4,  5 tion of of receipts of thewinter and Federal
Contri- Western Eastern Western Eastern con- expend- Govern-
Period Total  
1 butions Levies  2 Total Total Germany Germany Total Germany Germany struction iture ment
Germany
1996 91,825 85,073 3,346 105,588 57,123 40,186 16,938 36,478 18,368 18,111 903 −13,763 13,756
1997 93,149 85,793 2,959 102,723 60,273 40,309 19,964 31,418 16,117 15,301 443 −9,574 9,574
1998 91,088 86,165 2,868 98,852 53,483 35,128 18,355 34,279 16,784 17,496 471 −7,764 7,719
1999 47,954 45,141 1,467 51,694 25,177 16,604 8,573 20,558 10,480 10,078 279 −3,740 3,739
2000 49,606 46,359 1,403 50,473 23,946 15,615 8,331 20,324 10,534 9,790 294 − 868 867
2001 50,682 47,337 1,640 52,613 25,036 16,743 8,294 20,713 11,094 9,619 268 −1,931 1,931
2002 50,885 47,405 2,088 56,508 27,610 19,751 7,860 21,011 11,568 9,443 245 −5,623 5,623
2002          Q1 11,502 11,188 51 13,093 6,587 4,608 1,979 4,665 2,523 2,142 139 −1,591 3,720
         Q2 12,200 11,459 433 14,141 7,098 5,005 2,093 5,230 2,903 2,327 97 −1,941 2,200
         Q3 12,710 11,808 528 13,905 6,708 4,839 1,869 5,182 2,849 2,334 7 −1,195 854
         Q4 14,473 12,951 1,077 15,369 7,218 5,299 1,919 5,933 3,293 2,640 2 − 896 −1,151
2003          Q1 11,617 11,281 48 14,408 7,647 5,422 2,225 4,785 2,576 2,209 180 −2,790 5,151
Source: Federal Labour Office. —1Excluding Federal Government liquidity replacement for the unemployment benefits. —4Including contributions to
assistance. —2Levies to promote winter construction and to pay bank- the statutory health insurance, and to the pension insurance funds. —
ruptcy compensation to employees. —3Unemployment benefits, 5Vocational training, measures to foster the commencement of work,
short-time-working benefits. Including the integration allowance paid to rehabilitation, job creation measures, grants to personnel service age ncies,
resettlers from eastern Europe and emigrants from the GDR as a wage protection and business start-up grants. 
59*VIII. Public finance in Germany

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
IX. Economic conditions
  
1. Origin and expenditure of domestic product, distribution of national income
    Germany
    
  1998   1999   2000   2001   2002   1999   2000   2001   2002   1999   2000   2001   2002
DM Change from % of
Item billion
 5 
 billion previous year in % total
at  1995  prices
I.Origin of domestic product
Producing sector
(excluding construction) 855.2 429.4 445.6 447.3 446.5 −1.8 3.8 0.4 −0.2 22.4 22.6 22.6 22.5
Construction 205.3 105.5 102.6 96.0 90.4 0.5 −2.7 −6.5 −5.8 5.5 5.2 4.8 4.6
Distribution, catering trade,and transportation  
1 614.6 335.3 352.9 361.8 366.1 6.7 5.3 2.5 1.2 17.5 17.9 18.3 18.5
Financing, rents and corporateservices  
2 1,028.6 548.3 572.6 585.2 595.4 4.3 4.4 2.2 1.7 28.6 29.1 29.5 30.0
Public and private services  3 737.6 380.6 387.3 391.6 396.5 0.9 1.8 1.1 1.2 19.9 19.7 19.8 20.0
All economic sectors 3,487.2 1,823.3 1,885.3 1,906.5 1,919.0 2.3 3.4 1.1 0.7 95.2 95.7 96.2 96.7Memo item: Enterprise sector 3,041.7 1,595.6 1,656.7 1,679.3 1,692.7 2.6 3.8 1.4 0.8 83.3 84.1 84.8 85.3
Economic sectors, adjusted  
4 3,320.2 1,730.3 1,785.5 1,801.4 1,809.6 1.9 3.2 0.9 0.5 90.4 90.7 90.9 91.2
Gross domestic product 3,669.9 1,914.8 1,969.5 1,980.8 1,984.3 2.0 2.9 0.6 0.2 100 100 100 100
II.Expenditure of domestic product
Private consumption  5 2,072.8 1,099.2 1,114.8 1,131.6 1,124.3 3.7 1.4 1.5 −0.6 57.4 56.6 57.1 56.7
Government consumption 726.3 375.0 379.6 382.6 388.5 1.0 1.2 0.8 1.5 19.6 19.3 19.3 19.6
Machinery and equipment 292.5 160.3 175.5 165.4 149.9 7.2 9.5 −5.8 −9.4 8.4 8.9 8.3 7.6
Construction 479.5 248.7 242.1 227.7 214.3 1.4 −2.6 −6.0 −5.9 13.0 12.3 11.5 10.8
Other investment  6 40.0 23.2 25.2 26.5 27.1 13.5 8.4 5.0 2.5 1.2 1.3 1.3 1.4
Changes in stocks  7 3.2 −6.6 −2.7 −15.2 −13.9 . . . . −0.3 −0.1 −0.8 −0.7
Domestic demand 3,614.3 1,899.8 1,934.5 1,918.6 1,890.3 2.8 1.8 −0.8 −1.5 99.2 98.2 96.9 95.3
Net exports 55.6 15.0 35.0 62.2 94.0 . . . . 0.8 1.8 3.1 4.7
Exports 1,078.6 582.5 662.1 695.4 713.8 5.6 13.7 5.0 2.6 30.4 33.6 35.1 36.0Imports 1,023.0 567.4 627.1 633.1 619.8 8.5 10.5 1.0 −2.1 29.6 31.8 32.0 31.2
Gross domestic product 3,669.9 1,914.8 1,969.5 1,980.8 1,984.3 2.0 2.9 0.6 0.2 100 100 100 100
at  current  prices
III.Expenditure of domestic product
Private consumption  5 2,173.3 1,156.5 1,190.9 1,232.2 1,241.9 4.1 3.0 3.5 0.8 58.5 58.7 59.5 58.9
Government consumption 722.7 378.8 387.2 393.5 402.8 2.5 2.2 1.6 2.4 19.1 19.1 19.0 19.1Machinery and equipment 293.5 159.6 175.8 166.3 150.9 6.4 10.2 −5.4 −9.3 8.1 8.7 8.0 7.2
Construction 475.3 245.2 240.2 226.2 212.8 0.9 −2.1 −5.8 −6.0 12.4 11.8 10.9 10.1
Other investment  
6 38.3 21.4 22.8 23.7 24.1 9.1 6.7 4.1 1.7 1.1 1.1 1.1 1.1
Changes in stocks  7 14.1 0.9 5.2 −9.4 −7.3 . . . . 0.0 0.3 −0.5 −0.3
Domestic demand 3,717.2 1,962.3 2,022.2 2,032.6 2,025.2 3.3 3.0 0.5 −0.4 99.2 99.6 98.1 96.1
Net exports 56.4 16.3 7.8 38.6 83.0 . . . . 0.8 0.4 1.9 3.9
Exports 1,095.6 587.0 685.4 726.9 748.3 4.8 16.8 6.1 2.9 29.7 33.8 35.1 35.5Imports 1,039.2 570.7 677.6 688.3 665.2 7.4 18.7 1.6 −3.4 28.8 33.4 33.2 31.6
Gross domestic product 3,773.6 1,978.6 2,030.0 2,071.2 2,108.2 2.6 2.6 2.0 1.8 100 100 100 100
IV.Prices (1995=100)
Private consumption 104.8 105.2 106.8 108.9 110.5 0.4 1.5 1.9 1.4 . . . .Gross domestic product 102.8 103.3 103.1 104.6 106.2 0.5 −0.3 1.4 1.6 . . . .
Terms of trade 100.0 100.2 95.8 96.2 97.7 0.2 −4.4 0.4 1.6 . . . .
V.Distribution of national income
Wages and salaries 2,015.6 1,058.0 1,099.0 1,120.4 1,130.0 2.7 3.9 1.9 0.9 72.0 72.8 73.2 72.3Entrepreneurial and propertyincome 805.0 411.1 410.3 410.9 432.0 −0.1 −0.2 0.2 5.1 28.0 27.2 26.8 27.7
National income 2,820.6 1,469.0 1,509.2 1,531.2 1,562.0 1.9 2.7 1.5 2.0 100 100 100 100
Memo item: Gross national
income 3,746.2 1,965.9 2,020.9 2,055.8 2,099.1 2.6 2.8 1.7 2.1 . . . .
(Gross nat. product)
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in February 2003. —1In- ing taxes on products (offset against subsidies on products). —5Including
cluding telecommunications. —2Financial intermediation, real estate activi- private non-commercial organisations. —6Intangible fixed capital forma-
ties, rents and corporate services. —3Including care-at-home services. — tion (inter alia, EDP software, copyrights) and economically useful animals
4Gross value added after deduction of assumed bank charges, but exclud- and plants. — 7 Including net increase in valuables. 
60*IX. Economic conditions

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
 IX. Economic conditions
 
2. Output in the producing sector     
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Industry  1 
Producing sector, Intermediate
total Total goods  2 Capital goods  3 Consumer goods  4 Energy  5 Construction
Change Change Change Change Change Change Changefrom from from from from from fromprevious previous previous previous previous previous previousyear year year year year year year
Period in % in % in % in % in % in % in %
1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 1995 = 100 
Germany  
  
1999 107.8 + 1.5 111.5 + 1.7 110.7 + 1.8 118.0 + 1.5 103.3 + 1.7 100.0 −0.4 87.9 + 0.8
2000 113.4 + 5.2 119.1 + 6.8 116.9 + 5.6 130.9 + 10.9 105.6 + 2.2 99.7 −0.3 84.9 −3.4
2001 113.2 −0.2 119.9 + 0.7 116.1 −0.7 134.3 + 2.6 105.2 −0.4 98.1 −1.6 78.9 −7.1
2002  r 111.8 −1.2 118.4 −1.3 116.2 + 0.1 131.1 −2.4 103.6 −1.5 98.4 + 0.3 76.7 −2.8
  
2002          Mar  r 118.5 −2.1 125.9 −3.2 123.2 −1.5 140.1 −5.8 109.9 −0.5 103.6 −0.4 78.4 + 7.7
         Apr  r 111.8 −1.2 117.6 −1.7 116.6 −0.4 130.1 −2.3 100.9 −3.0 97.4 −1.0 83.3 + 3.3
         May  r 6 108.6 −3.5 114.1 −3.7 115.3 −1.9 122.9 −5.8 99.4 −3.2 94.3 + 2.2 81.7 −4.8
         June  r 6 116.1 −1.4 123.7 −1.4 120.4 −1.0 141.0 −1.3 103.9 −2.4 86.9 + 1.5 86.5 −3.1
         July  r 112.6 −0.4 118.6 −0.3 119.4 + 1.2 129.8 −0.8 101.2 −1.8 90.0 + 1.1 88.0 −3.2
         Aug  r 104.8 −0.6 110.1 −0.4 112.5 + 1.9 116.1 −0.9 97.2 −3.6 89.1 + 1.4 80.2 −4.9
         Sep  r 119.0 −0.8 126.2 −0.6 123.4 + 1.9 141.1 −2.7 109.0 −1.3 92.7 + 0.7 90.0 −3.4
         Oct  r 118.5 −0.1 124.6 + 0.2 123.4 + 2.0 134.6 −0.8 112.0 −1.1 103.6 + 5.3 88.0 −6.8
         Nov  r 120.9 + 3.1 128.3 + 4.0 123.1 + 4.7 144.8 + 4.3 113.0 + 2.2 104.6 −0.8 83.0 −2.0
         Dec  r 104.6 −0.9 111.5 + 0.0 98.5 + 1.7 135.8 −0.8 98.0 −0.7 108.4 −3.0 54.7 −10.6
2003          Jan  + 102.4 + 1.1 110.2 + 2.0 112.9 + 4.7 115.6 + 0.9 97.5 −1.4 111.9 + 0.5 43.5 −10.3
         Feb  + 105.4 + 0.9 114.5 + 2.2 113.1 + 1.8 127.6 + 4.7 97.8 −1.5 106.0 + 7.5 44.1 −23.7
         Mar  + 7 118.0 −0.4 126.0 + 0.1 125.0 + 1.5 140.8 + 0.5 106.1 −3.5 107.0 + 3.3 7 71.7 −8.5
Western Germany  
  
1999 107.2 + 1.2 110.1 + 1.3 109.1 + 1.4 117.1 + 1.2 101.1 + 1.2 100.6 −0.6 88.9 + 1.4
2000 112.7 + 5.1 117.1 + 6.4 114.3 + 4.8 129.8 + 10.8 102.8 + 1.7 99.8 −0.8 87.5 −1.6
2001 112.4 −0.3 117.6 + 0.4 113.2 −1.0 132.9 + 2.4 101.9 −0.9 97.9 −1.9 82.2 −6.1
2002  r 110.6 −1.6 115.5 −1.8 112.7 −0.4 129.3 −2.7 99.6 −2.3 98.2 + 0.3 80.9 −1.6
  
2002          Mar  r 117.6 −2.6 123.2 −3.7 120.0 −2.2 138.4 −6.2 106.0 −1.1 103.3 −0.6 83.3 + 8.5
         Apr  r 110.9 −1.5 115.0 −2.1 113.2 −1.0 128.7 −2.7 97.5 −3.2 97.3 −1.0 88.6 + 4.6
         May  r 6 107.4 −3.7 111.3 −4.1 111.7 −2.4 121.5 −6.0 95.5 −3.5 94.2 + 2.5 86.3 −3.9
         June  r 6 114.9 −1.6 120.8 −1.8 116.8 −1.4 139.2 −1.7 100.0 −3.0 86.5 + 1.4 91.1 −1.9
         July  r 111.6 −0.4 116.1 −0.4 115.8 + 0.8 128.7 −0.7 97.9 −2.0 89.6 + 0.9 93.1 −1.6
         Aug  r 102.9 −0.8 106.7 −0.7 108.4 + 1.4 113.7 −1.2 93.2 −3.9 88.9 + 1.6 83.0 −3.4
         Sep  r 117.6 −1.1 123.0 −1.1 119.4 + 1.5 138.9 −3.3 105.1 −2.0 92.7 + 0.9 94.5 −2.4
         Oct  r 117.0 −0.3 121.3 −0.3 119.7 + 1.8 132.6 −1.3 107.1 −2.3 103.4 + 5.3 92.8 −6.1
         Nov  r 119.3 + 2.8 124.8 + 3.6 119.3 + 4.4 142.5 + 4.3 107.8 + 0.8 104.5 −0.8 87.3 −0.7
         Dec  r 103.5 −1.2 108.5 −0.6 95.4 + 1.1 133.8 −1.0 93.0 −2.4 108.1 −3.0 58.3 −8.6
2003          Jan  + 101.6 + 0.9 107.4 + 1.6 109.7 + 4.5 113.9 + 0.6 93.7 −2.1 111.7 + 0.5 46.3 −9.0
         Feb  + 104.9 + 1.0 111.9 + 2.0 109.8 + 1.5 126.0 + 4.6 94.3 −1.9 105.9 + 7.5 47.7 −21.8
         Mar  + 7 117.0 −0.5 122.9 −0.2 121.2 + 1.0 138.8 + 0.3 102.0 −3.8 106.7 + 3.3 7 77.5 −7.0
Eastern Germany  
  
1999 114.4 + 4.9 135.8 + 7.6 137.1 + 8.9 135.6 + 7.4 134.0 + 5.9 95.1 + 1.2 84.2 −0.9
2000 121.5 + 6.2 152.7 + 12.4 157.0 + 14.5 153.2 + 13.0 145.7 + 8.7 98.3 + 3.4 75.5 −10.3
2001 123.0 + 1.2 160.1 + 4.8 162.6 + 3.6 163.6 + 6.8 152.6 + 4.7 99.5 + 1.2 67.0 −11.3
2002  r 125.3 + 1.9 167.1 + 4.4 171.2 + 5.3 168.5 + 3.0 159.7 + 4.7 99.9 + 0.4 61.6 −8.1
  
2002          Mar  r 128.5 + 3.9 172.2 + 4.2 174.4 + 6.7 176.6 + 0.2 164.5 + 4.6 105.6 + 1.1 60.8 + 4.1
         Apr  r 122.5 + 2.3 161.0 + 3.7 169.7 + 5.5 160.0 + 5.9 148.8 −1.1 98.6 −0.4 64.1 −2.7
         May  r 6 123.0 −0.6 162.0 + 1.4 171.9 + 4.2 153.8 −2.3 155.0 + 0.5 95.3 + 0.2 65.1 −8.6
         June  r 6 129.9 + 1.2 172.5 + 3.5 177.6 + 3.4 178.6 + 4.5 158.8 + 2.8 90.2 + 2.3 70.1 −8.1
         July  r 123.9 −0.4 161.6 + 2.0 176.0 + 5.7 153.4 −2.2 147.8 + 0.0 92.8 + 2.5 69.8 −9.8
         Aug  r 127.1 + 1.1 167.4 + 4.4 177.1 + 7.2 166.4 + 4.5 153.5 −0.3 91.0 + 0.2 70.0 −10.6
         Sep  r 135.7 + 2.9 180.4 + 6.4 185.8 + 5.8 188.5 + 8.4 164.2 + 5.4 92.5 −1.4 73.7 −8.2
         Oct  r 136.1 + 3.2 180.2 + 6.5 181.8 + 4.2 177.2 + 7.3 180.6 + 9.3 104.8 + 4.4 70.8 −9.8
         Nov  r 139.1 + 4.7 187.4 + 8.6 183.7 + 7.9 194.4 + 4.2 186.3 + 14.8 105.0 −1.5 67.4 −7.9
         Dec  r 117.4 + 3.0 162.1 + 8.4 147.9 + 9.0 178.0 + 2.5 168.2 + 14.7 110.8 −3.1 41.8 −19.5
2003          Jan  + 111.9 + 3.0 156.6 + 6.5 163.0 + 7.4 152.1 + 5.8 151.2 + 5.4 113.6 + 0.4 33.3 −16.1
         Feb  + 111.7 + 0.2 158.9 + 4.8 164.5 + 5.1 161.9 + 7.2 147.5 + 1.9 107.1 + 7.6 31.2 −32.3
         Mar  + 7 129.5 + 0.8 178.8 + 3.8 185.8 + 6.5 183.3 + 3.8 163.8 −0.4 109.6 + 3.8 7 50.8 −16.4
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. —oBy means of ducing materials, and especially manufacture of refined petroleum pro-
the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. —1Manufacturing sector, ducts. —6Influenced by the exceptional working-day situation. —7Pro-
unless assigned to the main grouping energy, plus mining and quarrying. — visional up to adjustment to the figures of the annual overall survey in the
2Including mining and quarrying except energy-producing materials. —3In- construction sector. —+Provisional; adjusted in advance by the Federal Stat-
cluding manufacture of motor vehicles, trailers and semi-trailers. —4In- istical Office, by way of estimates, to the results of the Quarterly Production
cluding printing and service activities related to printing. —5Electricity, Survey for the first quarter (industry in Germany: + 0.2%). 
gas, steam and hot water supply, mining and quarrying of energy-pro-
61* IX. Economic conditions

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
 IX. Economic conditions
 
3. Orders received by industry *  
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Industry
 
Total Domestic orders Foreign orders Intermediate goods Capital goods  1 Consumer goods  2 
Change Change Change Change Change Change
from from from from from fromprevious previous previous previous previous previousyear year year year year year
Period 2000=100 in % 2000=100 in % 2000=100 in % 2000=100 in % 2000=100 in % 2000=100 in %
Germany  
  
1999 87.8 + 2.1 92.3 − 0.2 82.1 + 5.4 87.5 + 0.8 86.0 + 3.4 95.9 + 0.8
2000 99.9 + 13.8 99.9 + 8.2 99.9 + 21.7 100.0 + 14.3 100.0 + 16.3 99.9 + 4.2
2001 98.3 − 1.6 97.6 − 2.3 99.1 − 0.8 95.9 − 4.1 99.4 − 0.6 101.4 + 1.5
2002 98.3
+ 0.0 94.6 − 3.1 102.8 + 3.7 96.4 + 0.5 99.6 + 0.2 99.0 − 2.4
 
2002          Mar 106.5 − 2.7 100.9 − 8.3 113.4 + 4.2 102.8 − 2.8 107.6 − 3.1 113.3 − 1.3
         Apr 97.3 + 0.6 94.3 − 3.1 101.1 + 5.3 97.3 + 1.6 97.4 + 0.2 97.4 + 0.4
         May 98.6 + 0.6 91.1 − 5.1 108.0 + 7.6 95.9 − 1.0 102.5 + 2.7 91.6 − 2.3
         June 101.1 − 1.6 96.2 − 2.0 107.1 − 1.0 100.0 − 0.9 103.1 − 1.9 96.1 − 2.2
         July 97.8 + 0.4 95.8 − 1.8 100.3 + 3.2 97.5 + 1.5 98.8 + 0.7 94.4 − 4.6
         Aug 91.7 + 1.2 90.5 − 3.2 93.2 + 7.1 89.5 + 0.8 92.4 + 3.7 96.0 − 6.5
         Sep 101.8 + 3.1 98.3 − 1.2 106.2 + 8.8 100.2 + 5.0 101.8 + 3.2 107.4 − 1.6
         Oct 100.3 + 4.7 97.7 + 1.7 103.6 + 8.6 99.7 + 4.9 100.5 + 6.7 101.9 − 2.7
         Nov 101.6 + 6.3 97.4 + 2.4 106.8 + 11.0 99.4 + 7.8 103.6 + 6.3 100.3 + 0.9         Dec 91.9 − 1.8 88.4 − 1.4 96.2 − 2.3 86.5 + 2.2 97.7 − 4.4 85.5 − 3.0
2003          Jan 98.0 + 3.2 92.6
+ 0.0 104.8 + 6.9 97.7 + 4.8 98.4 + 3.3 97.5 − 1.9
         Feb 98.7 + 3.5 95.6 + 3.7 102.5 + 3.2 96.4 + 2.1 99.6 + 6.0 102.2 − 1.8
         Mar  p 104.7 − 1.7 99.4 − 1.5 111.4 − 1.8 105.0 + 2.1 104.1 − 3.3 106.7 − 5.8
Western Germany  
  
1999 88.0 + 1.9 92.7 − 0.6 82.4 + 5.5 88.0 + 0.6 86.0 + 3.5 96.5 + 0.6
2000 99.9 + 13.5 99.9 + 7.8 100.0 + 21.4 99.9 + 13.5 100.0 + 16.3 99.9 + 3.52001 97.8 − 2.1 97.2 − 2.7 98.6 − 1.4 95.1 − 4.8 99.2 − 0.8 101.1 + 1.2
2002 97.3 − 0.5 93.7 − 3.6 101.6 + 3.0 95.1
+ 0.0 98.9 − 0.3 98.3 − 2.8
 
2002          Mar 104.3 − 4.4 100.2 − 8.7 109.3 + 1.0 101.0 − 4.1 104.8 − 5.2 113.1 − 1.6
         Apr 96.7 + 0.7 93.8 − 2.8 100.2 + 5.0 96.2 + 1.1 97.2 + 0.7 96.7 + 0.4
         May 98.2 + 0.9 90.3 − 5.3 107.7 + 8.1 94.6 − 1.7 103.0 + 3.8 90.4 − 2.8
         June 100.3 − 2.0 95.1 − 3.0 106.4 − 1.0 99.0 − 1.0 102.6 − 2.5 95.0 − 2.9
         July 97.5 + 0.4 95.3 − 2.0 100.2 + 3.3 96.2 + 1.1 99.4 + 1.2 94.2 − 4.8
         Aug 90.2 + 0.2 89.2 − 4.2 91.4 + 5.8 87.7 + 0.1 91.0 + 2.4 95.3 − 7.3
         Sep 101.1 + 3.3 97.4 − 1.3 105.5 + 8.9 98.8 + 4.9 101.5 + 3.5 106.9 − 1.9
         Oct 99.4 + 4.3 96.6 + 1.2 102.7 + 8.1 98.2 + 4.5 99.9 + 6.3 101.1 − 3.0
         Nov 100.3 + 5.5 96.4 + 2.0 105.0 + 9.5 98.3 + 7.7 102.1 + 4.9 99.3 + 0.5         Dec 90.5 − 2.6 86.9 − 2.1 94.8 − 3.2 85.5 + 2.3 95.9 − 5.5 84.7 − 3.3
2003          Jan 97.1 + 2.8 91.9
+ 0.0 103.2 + 5.7 95.2 + 3.8 98.7 + 3.2 96.7 − 2.2
         Feb 97.8 + 3.2 94.9 + 3.5 101.3 + 2.8 95.0 + 1.6 99.0 + 5.8 102.0 − 1.9
         Mar  p 103.5 − 0.8 98.3 − 1.9 109.6 + 0.3 103.3 + 2.3 102.9 − 1.8 106.1 − 6.2
Eastern Germany  
  
1999 84.6 + 4.7 87.8 + 3.9 77.0 + 7.1 82.8 + 6.4 86.0 + 2.9 86.9 + 5.8
2000 99.9 + 18.1 100.0 + 13.9 99.9 + 29.7 99.9 + 20.7 100.0 + 16.3 100.0 + 15.1
2001 104.9 + 5.0 102.4 + 2.4 110.9 + 11.0 106.0 + 6.1 103.4 + 3.4 106.1 + 6.12002 111.0 + 5.8 104.0 + 1.6 127.8 + 15.2 111.7 + 5.4 110.7 + 7.1 109.4 + 3.1
 
2002          Mar 135.4 + 17.8 107.9 − 3.9 201.6 + 66.3 123.3 + 10.0 152.7 + 29.3 116.9 + 2.3
         Apr 106.5 + 0.3 100.2 − 4.9 121.6 + 12.6 111.0 + 7.2 100.9 − 7.3 110.0 + 3.0
         May 104.3 − 2.8 100.0 − 2.5 114.5 − 3.4 110.5 + 5.3 96.3 −12.7 109.9 + 4.5
         June 112.0 + 4.9 107.5 + 7.2 122.7 + 0.2 112.7 + 2.5 111.2 + 7.2 111.9 + 5.8
         July 101.1 − 0.7 100.9 − 1.5 101.5 + 1.1 112.5 + 5.5 89.7 − 7.9 98.3 − 1.2
         Aug 112.5 + 14.3 104.2 + 6.7 132.4 + 32.3 111.7 + 7.7 114.6 + 24.7 107.5 + 4.9
         Sep 111.8 + 2.5 107.8 + 0.1 121.5 + 8.2 116.0 + 5.8 106.7 − 1.2 114.9 + 3.6
         Oct 113.8 + 10.7 109.9 + 7.1 123.0 + 19.0 116.2 + 8.3 111.0 + 15.9 114.8 + 2.5         Nov 118.9 + 16.1 107.8 + 5.8 145.5 + 40.6 112.6 + 10.0 126.4 + 25.8 115.6 + 5.7         Dec 111.1 + 7.7 104.8 + 5.0 126.1 + 13.1 99.1 + 3.7 126.7 + 11.8 98.7 + 3.8
2003          Jan 111.3 + 9.4 99.8 + 0.2 139.0 + 30.4 128.1 + 16.9 93.9 + 2.3 110.3 + 2.4
         Feb 110.5 + 7.3 103.2 + 6.2 128.0 + 9.6 113.3 + 8.2 108.8 + 8.4 105.3 − 1.0
         Mar  
p 122.7 − 9.4 111.6 + 3.4 149.2 −26.0 125.5 + 1.8 121.4 −20.5 115.9 − 0.9
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. —*Economic means of the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. —1Including manu-
activities of the manufacturing sector, in particular, excluding manufacture facture of motor vehicles, trailers and semitrailers. —2Including printing
of food products, beverages, tobacco and refined petroleum products; and service activities related to printing. 
results for kinds of activity units; figures excluding value-added tax. —oBy
62* IX. Economic conditions

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
 IX. Economic conditions
 
4. Orders received by construction *   
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Germany Western Germany Eastern Germany
Housing Public Housing Public Housing Public Industrial Industrial Industrial
con- construc- construc- con- construc- construc- con- construc- construc-
Total struction tion  1 tion Total struction tion  1 tion Total struction tion  1 tion
 Change Change Change
 from from from
 previous previous previous
 year year year
Period 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 in % 2000 = 100 in % 2000 = 100 in %
1999 109.4 −2.1 119.6 106.1 106.7 107.4 + 0.8 114.6 104.3 106.5 115.6 −10.0 134.7 112.3 107.4
2000 99.9 −8.7 100.0 99.9 100.0 99.9 −7.0 100.0 99.9 100.0 100.0 −13.5 100.0 99.9 100.0
2001 94.5 −5.4 82.9 96.9 99.0 97.4 −2.5 87.6 99.9 100.7 85.2 −14.8 68.3 86.4 94.2
2002 88.7 −6.1 72.8 91.5 95.6 90.9 −6.7 79.6 93.1 95.6 81.7 −4.1 51.9 85.9 95.7
   
2002          Feb 73.9 −2.9 62.6 83.0 70.8 73.9 −7.6 67.8 78.6 72.1 74.1 + 16.1 46.8 98.4 66.9
         Mar 111.8 + 5.6 85.0 127.4 110.8 121.1 + 10.6 94.8 139.7 115.7 82.0 −13.3 55.1 84.0 96.2
         Apr 95.2 −4.8 80.8 95.8 103.5 98.6 −6.7 88.4 96.8 107.2 84.2 + 2.6 57.7 92.0 92.6
         May 92.2 −14.1 78.4 89.0 104.5 93.3 −15.3 85.0 90.6 101.8 88.6 −10.1 58.2 83.2 112.2
         June 106.3 −11.4 84.4 102.7 124.1 108.5 −10.3 90.9 104.7 124.2 99.3 −15.2 64.7 95.5 123.7
         July 93.9 −5.3 69.4 95.9 106.9 96.5 −4.2 75.3 98.7 107.3 85.5 −9.5 51.3 86.0 105.7
         Aug 88.3 −11.3 71.0 85.7 102.2 87.1 −13.3 74.4 84.9 97.6 92.4 −4.1 60.8 88.5 115.3
         Sep 101.8 −2.4 77.3 100.8 118.3 103.4 −4.1 83.2 101.1 118.8 97.0 + 3.7 59.3 100.1 116.6
         Oct 84.6 −8.1 67.5 84.8 95.0 86.0 −9.3 75.4 85.6 93.1 80.1 −4.1 43.4 82.2 100.1
         Nov 74.8 −8.2 68.4 74.9 78.6 73.8 −10.0 75.3 72.8 74.1 77.8 −2.3 47.5 82.4 91.6
         Dec 79.3 −0.3 70.1 89.1 74.0 83.1 −2.2 80.3 93.0 73.2 67.3 + 8.5 38.9 75.5 76.4
2003          Jan 56.8 −9.4 49.7 61.7 55.6 58.5 −11.2 55.3 62.1 56.2 51.2 −2.3 32.5 60.2 53.7
         Feb 64.4 −12.9 54.6 67.5 67.0 67.6 −8.5 59.4 69.0 71.1 54.3 −26.7 40.0 62.5 54.9
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. —*Values exclusive gineering". —oBundesbank calculation. —1Including the railways and
of value-added tax. The figures refer to the economic classifications "Site pre- post office. 
paration" and "Building of complete constructions or parts thereof; civil en-
 
 
5. Retail trade turnover *)
    Germany
  
Retail trade  1 Memo item
of which:  by enterprises ’ main product range of which
Pharmaceutical
and medical Retail trade plus retailgoods, cosmetic Clothing, Furniture and sales of motor vehicles
Food, beverages, and toilet footwear and lighting and motorcycles plus Retail sales of
Total tobacco  
2 articles  2 leather goods  2 equipment  2 sales of automotive fuel motor vehicles  3 
Change from Change Change Change Change Change from Change
from from from from from previous year in % previous year in %
previous previous previous previous previous
not year year year year not year price- price-
Period in % in % in % in % in % 2000 = 100 adjusted adjusted  4 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 adjusted adjusted  4 2000 = 100
1999 97.7 + 0.8 + 0.5 98.0 + 0.9 94.7 + 7.4 100.2 −0.1 102.3 −2.0 98.7 + 1.2 + 0.8 102.9 + 3.7
2000 100.0 + 2.4 + 1.2 100.0 + 2.0 100.0 + 5.6 100.0 −0.2 100.0 −2.2 100.0 + 1.3 + 0.1 100.0 −2.8
2001 101.8 + 1.8 + 0.2 104.7 + 4.7 107.3 + 7.3 99.5 −0.5 98.6 −1.4 101.9 + 1.9 + 0.3 102.4 + 2.4
2002 99.8 −2.0 −2.3 106.0 + 1.2 111.1 + 3.5 94.7 −4.8 90.1 −8.6 100.8 −1.1 −1.7 105.2 + 2.7
 
2001          Oct 104.4 + 2.8 + 1.3 106.0 + 7.7 110.3 + 8.6 104.7 −5.3 105.6 + 0.5 104.6 + 4.3 + 2.9 106.4 + 11.2
         Nov 110.5 + 2.4 + 1.3 111.4 + 6.8 112.9 + 7.6 109.8 + 1.5 112.7 −2.7 109.6 + 3.4 + 2.3 108.1 + 8.4
         Dec 122.9 −0.4 −1.5 123.0 + 3.8 123.7 + 7.5 124.4 −3.4 116.3 −5.0 116.4 −0.4 −1.6 93.9
+ 0.0
2002          Jan 92.4 −2.6 −4.1 96.3 + 2.6 108.2 + 1.9 82.8 −5.9 87.1 −7.2 91.2 −1.9 −3.5 88.2 + 1.8
         Feb 86.8 −1.3 −2.6 93.7 + 3.4 100.5 + 4.3 72.3 −5.5 85.8 −7.7 87.9 −0.2 −1.7 93.2 + 4.5
         Mar 102.2 −2.3 −3.6 111.1 + 3.1 109.1 + 2.3 96.5 −2.8 93.2 −14.6 104.2 −3.0 −4.3 112.6 −4.8
         Apr 100.8 −0.2 −1.2 106.1 + 0.9 113.0 + 9.8 97.2 −5.4 92.1 −5.5 104.7 + 2.1 + 0.8 119.7 + 11.2
         May 99.9 −4.4 −4.7 108.9 −0.3 109.5 + 0.1 96.9 −10.1 82.7 −13.9 102.0 −4.4 −5.1 109.9 −3.7
         June 93.2 −3.9 −3.7 101.7 −2.8 106.2 + 1.9 85.7 −2.6 77.7 −13.8 96.9 −2.2 −2.5 110.6 + 3.8
         July 99.2 + 0.9 + 1.5 105.3 + 2.7 114.9 + 6.2 93.0 −0.3 87.2 −1.9 102.4 + 2.2 + 2.2 114.7 + 7.8
         Aug 96.4 −2.4 −2.1 106.3 + 1.2 109.4 + 2.9 85.9 −3.6 80.3 −8.5 96.5 −2.1 −2.1 96.4 −0.6
         Sep 96.3 −1.0 −0.8 99.4 + 1.9 107.3 + 6.9 99.7 −9.4 85.6 −6.6 96.9 + 0.3 + 0.2 99.9 + 5.9
         Oct 105.2 + 0.8 + 1.0 108.1 + 2.0 114.8 + 4.1 109.6 + 4.7 98.9 −6.3 106.2 + 1.5 + 1.4 111.7 + 5.0
         Nov 105.9 −4.2 −4.0 110.9 −0.4 113.4 + 0.4 97.9 −10.8 102.9 −8.7 105.5 −3.7 −3.8 106.2 −1.8
         Dec 119.5 −2.8 −2.7 123.6 + 0.5 127.1 + 2.7 118.3 −4.9 108.0 −7.1 114.8 −1.4 −1.6 99.2 + 5.6
2003          Jan 93.1 + 0.8 + 1.4 100.3 + 4.2 111.3 + 2.9 81.3 −1.8 83.1 −4.6 91.8 + 0.7 + 1.0 88.3 + 0.1
         Feb 87.0 + 0.2 + 0.7 95.2 + 1.6 104.7 + 4.2 69.0 −4.6 84.4 −1.6 88.8 + 1.0 + 1.3 96.6 + 3.6
         Mar  e 98.3 −3.8 ... 107.0 −3.7 108.6 −0.5 90.7 −6.0 93.0 −0.2 101.8 −2.3 ... 115.4 + 2.5
Source: Federal Statistical Office. —*Excluding value-added tax; figures sales of motor vehicles and motorcycles and excluding the sale of automo-
from 2002 provisional, partly revised and, judging by past experience, sub- tive fuel. —2Retail sales in stores. —3Including motor vehicle parts and
ject to considerable uncertainty in the most recent months. —1Excluding accessories. — 4 At 1995 prices. 
63* IX. Economic conditions

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
 IX. Economic conditions
 
6. Labour market * 
 
 
 
Persons in
Employed  1,2 Employees  1 employment  3 Persons Unemployed  2 
employed
Mining under Persons
and employ- under-manu- ment pro- goingfactur- Short- motion Change vocational
Change from Change ing Con- time schemes further from Unem-previous year from sector
2  5 previous ploy- training  2 workers  2 struction  4 Vacancies,
previous year, ment 2 
Thou- Thou- Thou- year Thou- thou- thou- rate 2  6 
Period sands in % sands sands in % Thousands sands sands in % sands
Germany  
  
2000 38,753 + 1.8 + 675 34,748 + 1.8 6,373 1,053 86 316 352 3,889 −211 9.7 514
2001 38,919 + 0.4 + 166 34,835 + 0.3 6,395 958 123 243 345 3,852 − 37 9.4 506
2002 38,690 −0.6 −229 34,590 −0.7 6,218 8 883 207 192 332 4,060 + 209 9.8 451
2002          Apr 38,697 −0.3 −121 6,219 897 245 185 345 4,024 + 156 9.7 537
         May 38,752 −0.5 −190 34,623 −0.6 6,207 897 201 184 348 3,946 + 226 7 9.5 517
         June 38,719 −0.6 −250 6,198 896 202 185 336 3,954 + 260 9.5 497
         July 38,675 −0.6 −240 6,214 894 173 187 315 4,047 + 248 9.7 471
         Aug 38,716 −0.7 −286 34,662 −0.8 6,220 895 145 191 320 4,018 + 229 9.6 458
         Sep 38,898 −0.8 −315 6,215 893 216 199 337 3,942 + 199 9.5 420
         Oct 38,963 −0.8 −325 6,187 884 214 202 342 3,930 + 204 9.4 378
         Nov 38,922 −0.9 −373 34,773 −1.1 6,165 873 205 197 339 4,026 + 237 9.7 344
         Dec 38,743 −1.0 −396 6,128 849 165 180 318 4,225 + 262 10.1 324
2003          Jan 37,909 −1.2 −445 ... 788 195 155 299 4,623 + 333 11.1 350
         Feb o 37,859 o −1.3 o −484 ... ... ... 757 227 150 287 4,706 + 410 11.3 388
         Mar ... ... ... ... ... 244 143 275 4,608 + 452 11.1 415
         Apr ... ... ... ... ... 242 138 262 4,495 + 471 10.8 419
Western Germany 9  
  
2000 . . . . . 5,761 749 59 59 202 2,380 −224 7.6 448
2001 . . . . . 5,769 696 94 53 197 2,320 − 60 7.2 436
2002 . . . . . 5,593 8 654 162 42 192 2,498 + 178 7.7 377
2002          Apr . . . . . 5,597 666 202 42 201 2,448 + 140 7.5 451
         May . . . . . 5,585 665 162 43 203 2,409 + 187 7 7.3 433
         June . . . . . 5,575 663 164 43 197 2,408 + 191 7.3 415
         July . . . . . 5,590 662 142 43 182 2,482 + 203 7.6 394
         Aug . . . . . 5,592 662 103 42 183 2,477 + 197 7.5 375         Sep . . . . . 5,585 660 140 42 196 2,440 + 184 7.4 345
         Oct . . . . . 5,559 654 154 41 200 2,450 + 182 7.5 312
         Nov . . . . . 5,540 647 156 41 198 2,520 + 199 7.7 285         Dec . . . . . 5,506 632 131 38 186 2,647 + 212 8.1 270
2003          Jan . . . . . ... 593 157 35 175 2,898 + 262 8.8 294
         Feb . . . . . ... 572 187 34 168 2,951 + 317 9.0 328         Mar . . . . . ... ... 199 33 165 2,880 + 352 8.8 348
         Apr . . . . . ... ... 201 32 160 2,811 + 363 8.6 350
Eastern Germany 10  
  
2000 . . . . . 612 305 27 257 150 1,508 + 13 17.2 66
2001 . . . . . 626 262 29 190 148 1,532 + 23 17.3 702002 . . . . . 625
8 229 45 150 140 1,563 + 31 17.7 74
2002          Apr . . . . . 622 231 43 143 144 1,576 + 16 17.8 86         May . . . . . 622 232 39 142 145 1,538 + 39
7 17.4 84
         June . . . . . 623 232 38 142 140 1,546 + 69 17.5 82
         July . . . . . 624 232 31 145 133 1,565 + 45 17.7 78
         Aug . . . . . 628 232 41 148 136 1,541 + 32 17.4 83         Sep . . . . . 630 233 77 157 141 1,502 + 15 17.0 75
         Oct . . . . . 628 231 60 160 142 1,480 + 22 16.8 65
         Nov . . . . . 626 227 49 157 141 1,506 + 38 17.0 59         Dec . . . . . 622 217 34 142 132 1,578 + 49 17.9 54
2003          Jan . . . . . ... 196 39 120 125 1,725 + 71 19.5 55
         Feb . . . . . ... 185 40 116 118 1,756 + 94 19.9 61         Mar . . . . . ... ... 45 110 110 1,728 + 99 19.6 67
         Apr . . . . . ... ... 41 106 102 1,684 + 108 19.1 69
Source: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Labour Office. —*Monthly fig- labour force. —7From May 2002 calculated on the basis of new labour
ures: levels at end of month; employed persons and employees: averages; force figures. —8The figures from March 2002 onwards are positively in-
short-time workers: levels at mid-month; annual and quarterly figures: aver- fluenced by the fact that construction firms which are required to repo rt
ages. —1Work-place concept. —2Annual figures, calculated by the Bundes- and which have been identified in the course of drawing up the corporate
bank; deviations from the official figures are due to rounding. —3In- register are included for the first time. —9Excluding West Berlin; for the
cluding active proprietors. —4The figures refer to the economic classifica- mining, manufacturing and construction sectors, including persons
tions ”Site preparation ”and ”Building of complete constructions or parts employed in West Berlin. —10Including West Berlin; for the mining,
thereof; civil engineering ”.—5Employees involved in job creation schemes manufacturing and construction sectors, excluding persons employed in
and structural adjustment measures (SAM). —6Relative to the total civilian West Berlin. — o First preliminary estimate. 
64* IX. Economic conditions

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
 IX. Economic conditions
 
7. Prices
 Germany
 
 
Indices of Index of world market
Consumer price index foreign trade prices prices  of raw materials  4 
Other Index of
durable producerand non- prices ofdurable Overall industrial Index ofconsumer Services con- products producergoods excluding struction prices of sold on the
excluding house House price domestic Other raw agricultural
Total Food Energy  
1 rents  2 rents level  2 market  3 Exports Imports Energy  5 products  3 materials  6 energy  1,  2 
Period 2000 = 100 1995 = 100
Index level  
  
1999 98.6 100.6 100.3 87.7 99.0 98.8 98.5 98.5 89.9 100.9 100.2 132.8 93.0
2000 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 99.2 101.8 95.4 104.4 111.4 231.0 110.0
2001 102.0 105.1 100.3 105.7 102.5 101.2 99.4 104.9 100.8 105.4 112.1 209.2 102.92002 103.4 106.1 101.1 106.0 105.0 102.6 99.5 104.4 94.6 105.3 109.3 201.2 97.9
 
2001          May 102.2 107.5 100.2 109.8 101.5 101.1 99.5 105.6 103.7 106.0 115.0 238.8 108.5         June 102.4 107.8 100.2 108.9 102.2 101.1 105.7 100.3 106.0 114.7 239.9 108.4
         July 102.5 107.1 100.2 106.5 103.7 101.2 105.2 100.5 105.8 113.0 222.4 106.3
         Aug 102.3 105.3 100.2 106.1 103.5 101.4 99.4 105.1 101.9 105.4 111.7 218.4 99.7         Sep 102.3 105.1 100.3 107.4 102.7 101.4 105.2 102.6 105.3 111.1 214.9 96.1
         Oct 102.0 105.2 100.5 104.0 102.4 101.5 104.3 100.9 105.0 109.3 181.1 94.1
         Nov 101.8 104.5 100.7 102.3 102.2 101.6 99.3 104.0 100.5 104.9 108.7 164.9 97.0         Dec 102.8 105.2 100.8 101.4 105.8 101.6 103.7 99.8 104.8 108.5 163.0 95.8
2002          Jan 102.9 108.7 101.4 103.5 103.5 102.0 104.3 98.2 104.9 109.1 169.9 98.3
         Feb 103.2 108.0 101.5 104.1 104.3 102.2 99.4 104.4 99.4 104.9 109.6 178.3 101.6         Mar 103.4 107.8 101.5 106.0 104.3 102.4 104.7 99.7 105.2 110.5 208.0 104.3
         Apr 103.3 107.8 101.3 108.1 103.5 102.4 104.6 96.0 105.4 110.7 219.8 102.8
         May 103.4 107.7 101.2 106.9 104.4 102.5 99.5 104.6 94.5 105.4 110.1 213.3 98.5         June 103.4 106.6 101.1 105.9 104.9 102.6 104.5 93.7 105.4 108.7 197.4 95.6
         July 103.7 105.9 100.9 105.9 106.5 102.7 104.2 93.5 105.3 108.2 197.1 94.0
         Aug 103.5 104.7 100.8 106.2 106.2 102.8 99.5 104.1 93.4 105.4 108.8 206.5 94.3         Sep 103.4 104.5 100.9 107.2 105.3 102.8 104.3 94.6 105.5 109.5 218.2 96.0
         Oct 103.3 104.1 100.9 107.6 104.8 102.9 104.6 94.3 105.5 109.5 212.8 96.8
         Nov 103.0 103.6 101.0 105.1 104.5 103.0 99.4 104.4 94.8 105.4 108.0 189.0 96.8         Dec 104.0 104.0 100.9 105.6 107.9 103.0 104.6 94.4 105.4 109.0 204.5 95.5
2003          Jan 104.0 105.3 101.4 110.7 105.1 103.2 106.0 94.8 105.5 109.6 216.8 94.0
         Feb 104.5 105.9 101.6 113.0 105.9 103.4 99.6 106.4 96.4 105.8 110.3 228.4 95.0         Mar 104.6 106.3 101.6 113.8 105.6 103.5 106.5
p 94.8 105.8 109.6 210.1 94.4
         Apr 104.3 106.6 101.4 110.2 105.8 103.7 106.3 ... ... ... 178.0 93.6
Change from previous year in %  
  
1999 + 0.6 − 1.1 + 0.1 + 4.0 + 0.3 + 1.1 −0.3 − 1.0 − 6.0 − 0.5 − 0.5 + 36.5 − 3.8
2000 + 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.3 + 14.0 + 1.0 + 1.2 + 0.7 + 3.4 + 6.1 + 3.5 + 11.2 + 73.9 + 18.3
2001 + 2.0 + 5.1 + 0.3 + 5.7 + 2.5 + 1.2 + 0.2 + 3.0 + 5.7 + 1.0 + 0.6 − 9.4 − 6.5
2002 + 1.4 + 1.0 + 0.8 + 0.3 + 2.4 + 1.4 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 6.2 − 0.1 − 2.5 − 3.8 − 4.9
 
2001          May + 2.7 + 6.5 + 0.3 + 13.9 + 2.5 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 4.6 + 9.0 + 1.6 + 4.0 + 4.8 − 4.1
         June + 2.5 + 6.8 + 0.4 + 8.8 + 2.8 + 1.1 + 4.3 + 3.9 + 1.6 + 3.6 + 3.8 + 2.5
         July + 2.2 + 6.7 + 0.5 + 5.9 + 2.7 + 1.1 + 3.1 + 3.4 + 1.1 + 1.7 − 1.1 − 1.0
         Aug + 2.2 + 6.0 + 0.6 + 5.5 + 2.8 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 2.7 + 4.5 + 0.4 − 0.9 −10.3 −10.2
         Sep + 2.0 + 6.3 + 0.5 + 1.2 + 2.9 + 1.2 + 1.9 + 5.0 − 0.3 − 3.6 −21.9 −16.8
         Oct + 1.8 + 6.4 + 0.7 − 0.8 + 2.9 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 1.8 − 0.8 − 5.6 −34.6 −17.9
         Nov + 1.5 + 5.1 + 0.8 − 3.1 + 2.9 + 1.2 −0.2 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.9 − 6.6 −41.6 −15.7
         Dec + 1.6 + 5.0 + 0.8 − 2.5 + 2.9 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 1.0 − 0.7 − 4.7 −24.5 −13.9
2002          Jan + 2.1 + 6.6 + 1.4 + 0.4 + 2.6 + 1.3 − 0.1 + 2.1 − 0.4 − 3.4 −18.2 − 8.3
         Feb + 1.8 + 5.4 + 1.4 − 1.9 + 2.6 + 1.4 −0.1 − 0.3 + 0.9 − 0.5 − 3.5 −20.3 − 5.8
         Mar + 2.0 + 4.2 + 1.4 + 0.1 + 2.8 + 1.5 − 0.2 − 2.9 − 0.4 − 2.5 − 2.3 − 2.3
         Apr + 1.5 + 2.3 + 1.2 + 0.7 + 1.9 + 1.4 − 0.8 − 6.8 − 0.3 − 2.8 − 1.1 − 4.0
         May + 1.2 + 0.2 + 1.0 − 2.6 + 2.9 + 1.4
+ 0.0 − 0.9 − 8.9 − 0.6 − 4.3 −10.7 − 9.2
         June + 1.0 − 1.1 + 0.9 − 2.8 + 2.6 + 1.5 − 1.1 − 6.6 − 0.6 − 5.2 −17.7 −11.8
         July + 1.2 − 1.1 + 0.7 − 0.6 + 2.7 + 1.5 − 1.0 − 7.0 − 0.5 − 4.2 −11.4 −11.6
         Aug + 1.2 − 0.6 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 2.6 + 1.4 + 0.1 − 1.0 − 8.3
+ 0.0 − 2.6 − 5.4 − 5.4
         Sep + 1.1 − 0.6 + 0.6 − 0.2 + 2.5 + 1.4 − 0.9 − 7.8 + 0.2 − 1.4 + 1.5 − 0.1
         Oct + 1.3 − 1.0 + 0.4 + 3.5 + 2.3 + 1.4 + 0.3 − 6.5 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 17.5 + 2.9
         Nov + 1.2 − 0.9 + 0.3 + 2.7 + 2.3 + 1.4 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 5.7 + 0.5 − 0.6 + 14.6 − 0.2
         Dec + 1.2 − 1.1 + 0.1 + 4.1 + 2.0 + 1.4 + 0.9 − 5.4 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 25.5 − 0.3
2003          Jan + 1.1 − 3.1
+ 0.0 + 7.0 + 1.5 + 1.2 + 1.6 − 3.5 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 27.6 − 4.4
         Feb + 1.3 − 1.9 + 0.1 + 8.5 + 1.5 + 1.2 + 0.2 + 1.9 − 3.0 + 0.9 + 0.6 + 28.1 − 6.5
         Mar + 1.2 − 1.4 + 0.1 + 7.4 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 1.7 p − 4.9 + 0.6 − 0.8 + 1.0 − 9.5
         Apr + 1.0 − 1.1 + 0.1 + 1.9 + 2.2 + 1.3 + 1.6 ... ... ... −19.0 − 8.9
Source: Federal Statistical Office; for index of world market prices: HWWA In- 3Excluding value-added tax. —4HWWA index of raw material prices, on a
stitute. —1Electricity, gas and other fuels. —2Calculated by the Bundes- euro basis. —5Coal and crude oil. —6Food, beverages and tobacco as well
bank on the basis of figures provided by the Federal Statistical Office. — as industrial raw materials. 
65* IX. Economic conditions

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
IX. Economic conditions
  
8. Households ’ income *
Germany
  
Until the end of 1998 DM billion, from 1999  5  billion
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries  1 salaries  2 Saving  6 ratio  7 benefits received  3 "Mass income"  4 Disposable income  5 
Change Change Change Change Change Change
from from from from from fromprevious previous previous previous previous previous
Period DM / 
 5 
year in % DM / 
 5 
year in % DM / 
 5 
year in % DM / 
 5 
year in % DM / 
 5 
year in % DM / 
 5 
year in % %
1991 1,355.4 . 941.4 . 426.2 . 1,367.6 . 1,917.5 . 250.1 . 13.0
1992 1,467.3 8.3 1,003.0 6.5 473.9 11.2 1,476.9 8.0 2,054.3 7.1 266.1 6.4 13.01993 1,505.9 2.6 1,032.7 3.0 511.2 7.9 1,543.9 4.5 2,120.6 3.2 261.3 −1.8 12.3
1994 1,528.1 1.5 1,029.3 −0.3 529.4 3.6 1,558.6 1.0 2,181.9 2.9 254.0 −2.8 11.6
1995 1,577.1 3.2 1,037.9 0.8 553.7 4.6 1,591.7 2.1 2,256.4 3.4 252.1 −0.7 11.2
1996 1,594.0 1.1 1,032.7 −0.5 595.7 7.6 1,628.3 2.3 2,307.5 2.3 249.5 −1.0 10.8
1997 1,591.3 −0.2 1,015.9 −1.6 609.6 2.3 1,625.5 −0.2 2,356.5 2.1 244.7 −1.9 10.4
1998 1,624.3 2.1 1,038.9 2.3 621.5 1.9 1,660.3 2.1 2,422.8 2.8 249.6 2.0 10.31999 855.4 3.0 549.3 3.4 328.6 3.4 877.8 3.4 1,281.6 3.5 125.1 −2.0 9.8
2000 885.5 3.5 572.8 4.3 339.5 3.3 912.3 3.9 1,320.4 3.0 129.5 3.5 9.82001 904.6 2.2 593.1 3.5 347.1 2.3 940.2 3.1 1,370.2 3.8 138.1 6.7 10.12002 911.5 0.8 594.2 0.2 364.9 5.1 959.0 2.0 1,386.0 1.2 144.2 4.4 10.4
2001          Q1 208.6 3.2 137.0 3.9 87.1 2.0 224.0 3.1 340.0 3.8 45.8 4.6 13.5
         Q2 217.2 2.5 140.2 4.1 86.0 2.4 226.1 3.5 342.3 4.2 32.6 8.6 9.5         Q3 225.4 1.7 152.0 3.1 86.5 2.9 238.5 3.0 335.6 3.2 28.0 5.0 8.3         Q4 253.4 1.5 163.9 3.2 87.6 1.7 251.5 2.7 352.3 3.9 31.7 9.3 9.0
2002          Q1 210.5 0.9 137.7 0.5 90.9 4.4 228.6 2.0 344.0 1.2 47.7 4.2 13.9
         Q2 218.9 0.8 140.3 0.1 89.9 4.6 230.3 1.8 343.7 0.4 33.4 2.3 9.7         Q3 228.0 1.1 153.1 0.7 91.4 5.6 244.5 2.5 341.2 1.7 29.7 6.3 8.7         Q4 254.1 0.3 163.1 −0.5 92.7 5.8 255.7 1.7 357.1 1.4 33.4 5.2 9.3
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in February 2003. — charges. —4Net wages and salaries plus monetary social benefits
*Households including non-profit institutions which serve households. — received. —5"Mass income" plus operating surplus, self-employed persons ’
1Residence concept. —2After deducting the wage tax payable on gross income, property income (net), other current transfers received, income of
wages and salaries and employees ’contributions to the social security non-profit organisations which serve households, less taxes (excluding wage
funds. —3Cash benefits from the social security funds, central, regional tax and consumption-related taxes) and other current transfers paid. Includ-
and local authorities and foreign countries, pension payments (net), social ing the increase in claims on company pension funds. —6Including the
security benefits from private insurance schemes, less social security increase in claims on company pension funds. —7Saving as a percentage of
contributions on social benefits, consumption-related taxes and public disposable income. 
  
  
9. Pay rates and actual earnings
Germany
    
Overall economy Producing sector (including construction)
Negotiated wage and salary level  1 Wages and salaries Negotiated wage and salary level  1 Wages and salaries
per employee per employee
on an hourly basis on a monthly basis on an hourly basis on a monthly basis (work-place concept)  2 (work-place concept)  3 
% from % from % from % from % from % from
previous previous previous previous previous previous
Period 1995=100 year 1995=100 year 1995=100 year 1995=100 year 1995=100 year 1995=100 year
1991 76.7 . 78.6 . 82.4 . 73.4 . 76.9 . 77.6 .
1992 85.8 12.0 87.3 11.0 91.0 10.4 82.9 12.9 85.9 11.7 88.4 13.91993 92.2 7.5 92.9 6.5 95.0 4.4 90.6 9.3 92.0 7.1 92.3 4.41994 95.3 3.4 95.6 2.9 96.9 2.0 94.3 4.1 94.8 3.0 96.1 4.1
1995 100.0 4.9 100.0 4.6 100.0 3.2 100.0 6.1 100.0 5.5 100.0 4.1
1996 102.6 2.6 102.4 2.4 101.4 1.4 103.8 3.8 102.9 2.9 102.9 2.91997 104.1 1.5 103.9 1.5 101.7 0.3 105.8 1.9 104.6 1.7 104.7 1.71998 106.2 1.9 105.7 1.8 102.7 1.0 107.7 1.8 106.4 1.7 106.4 1.61999 109.2 2.9 108.6 2.7 104.3 1.5 110.9 3.0 109.4 2.9 108.3 1.8
2000 111.4 2.0 110.8 2.0 106.0 1.7 113.1 2.0 111.6 2.0 111.2 2.7
2001 113.6 2.0 113.0 2.0 108.0 1.9 115.2 1.8 113.6 1.8 113.7 2.22002 116.6 2.6 115.9 2.6 109.6 1.5 118.8 3.1 117.2 3.1 116.0 2.0
2001          Q2 104.8 1.8 104.3 1.8 103.9 2.0 105.4 1.5 104.0 1.5 115.6 2.4
         Q3 117.4 2.0 116.7 1.9 107.5 1.6 123.5 2.0 121.9 2.0 109.2 2.0         Q4 128.6 2.2 127.8 2.1 120.0 1.8 127.7 2.0 125.9 2.0 122.6 1.7
2002          Q1 106.3 2.5 105.7 2.4 102.1 1.3 106.3 2.1 104.9 2.2 108.2 0.9
         Q2 107.8 2.8 107.2 2.8 105.2 1.3 109.1 3.5 107.7 3.5 117.8 1.9         Q3 120.4 2.6 119.7 2.6 109.6 2.0 127.4 3.1 125.7 3.1 112.9 3.4         Q4 132.0 2.6 131.2 2.6 121.6 1.4 132.3 3.6 130.5 3.6 125.4 2.3
2003          Q1 109.5 3.0 108.9 3.0 . . 110.0 3.5 108.5 3.5 . .
2002          Sep 108.4 2.5 107.8 2.5 . . 109.6 3.4 108.1 3.5 110.4 3.6
         Oct 108.5 2.6 107.9 2.6 . . 109.8 3.6 108.3 3.6 114.4 2.3
         Nov 178.6 2.5 177.6 2.5 . . 177.1 3.6 174.7 3.6 144.6 1.3         Dec 108.8 2.8 108.2 2.8 . . 110.0 3.7 108.5 3.7 117.1 3.3
2003          Jan 109.1 2.7 108.5 2.7 . . 110.0 3.7 108.5 3.7 . .
         Feb 109.1 2.7 108.4 2.7 . . 110.0 3.6 108.5 3.6 . .         Mar 110.4 3.7 109.8 3.7 . . 110.0 3.2 108.5 3.1 . .
1Current data are normally revised upwards on account of additional supply, and excluding installation and building completion work. Calculated
reports. —2Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in February by the Bundesbank on the basis of data from the Federal Statistical Office,
2003. —3Producing sector, excluding electricity, gas, steam and hot water using the old and new classifications of the economic sectors. 
66*IX. Economic conditions

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the European monetary union *
 
 
 5  million
2002 2003
Position 2000 2001 1 2002 Q2 Q3 Q4 Dec Jan Feb
Current account −65,994 −19,359 + 61,657 + 2,205 + 23,015 + 24,480 + 9,123 −6,476 + 3,230 A.
1. Foreign trade
Exports (f.o.b.) incl. supplementary items 989,826 1,033,029 1,059,663 267,253 263,213 274,306 84,855 81,756 83,487
Imports (f.o.b.) incl. supplementary items 958,276 957,556 926,395 235,997 224,688 237,550 74,135 80,945 73,956
Balance + 31,553 + 75,473 + 133,267 + 31,256 + 38,524 + 36,756 + 10,720 + 812 + 9,531
2. Services
Receipts 287,455 324,954 331,734 84,456 89,808 84,945 29,442 25,236 23,052Expenditure 304,943 328,678 320,734 78,570 83,908 80,985 27,020 25,615 23,332
Balance −17,488 −3,724 + 11,000 + 5,886 + 5,900 + 3,961 + 2,423 − 379 − 280
3. Factor income (balance) −25,492 −39,870 −36,581 −16,167 −10,662 −2,349 − 369 −10,057 −3,192
4. Current transfers
Transfer payments from non-residents 66,720 75,274 84,062 15,106 18,413 19,728 7,915 17,581 7,840Transfer payments to non-residents 121,284 126,518 130,090 33,875 29,160 33,615 11,566 14,433 10,669
Balance −54,564 −51,244 −46,030 −18,769 −10,747 −13,889 −3,651 + 3,148 −2,829
Balance of capital transfers + 9,839 + 9,531 + 11,841 + 3,463 + 2,323 + 2,842 + 922 + 2,072 − 863 B.
C. + 66,883 −24,864 −137,747 −19,800 −50,254 −59,471 −14,984 −15,560 −3,100 Financial account (net capital exports: −)
1. Direct investment −16,504 −102,808 −45,513 −9,240 −11,966 −8,296 −1,719 − 916 + 674
Investment outside the euro area −443,251 −259,169 −174,493 −46,990 −32,486 −39,549 −4,311 −10,935 −6,964
Foreign investment in the euro area + 426,744 + 156,361 + 128,980 + 37,749 + 20,520 + 31,254 + 2,592 + 10,019 + 7,637
2. Investment in securities −111,550 + 64,737 + 110,568 + 72,237 + 35,672 + 38,422 −2,564 −5,520 + 10,697
Investment outside the euro area −408,986 −291,027 −172,767 −54,233 −19,828 −23,717 −15,617 −22,644 −23,912
Equities −285,922 −108,333 −40,802 −13,886 + 12,719 −7,497 −6,603 + 2,038 − 77
Bonds and notes −114,280 −160,125 −78,058 −25,347 −17,330 −13,507 −4,454 −16,955 −25,144
Money market paper −8,775 −22,572 −53,905 −14,999 −15,216 −2,713 −4,560 −7,727 + 1,309
Foreign investment in the euro area + 297,430 + 355,764 + 283,334 + 126,469 + 55,500 + 62,139 + 13,053 + 17,124 + 34,609
Equities + 49,940 + 233,244 + 89,169 + 35,965 + 5,995 + 12,755 − 77 + 14,120 + 4,172
Bonds and notes + 239,199 + 115,145 + 128,605 + 61,407 + 26,333 + 33,750 + 11,455 + 4,322 + 17,836Money market paper + 8,288 + 7,375 + 65,561 + 29,097 + 23,173 + 15,635 + 1,676 −1,318 + 12,601
3. Financial derivatives −3,441 −3,469 −13,878 −2,839 −9,631 −3,893 −2,031 −1,020 + 928
4. Credit transactions and other
investment (balance) + 180,810 −1,133 −186,689 −86,700 −59,732 −84,385 −7,510 −9,646 −20,847
Eurosystem − 221 + 5,004 −1,094 −4,075 + 133 + 2,073 + 385 −1,929 −2,518
Public authorities −1,477 + 2,472 −8,258 + 4,674 −3,340 − 717 + 246 −8,543 −6,680
Credit institutions + 158,435 + 5,913 −137,762 −74,504 −25,325 −82,348 −19,915 + 9,915 − 621
long-term + 2,460 −22,896 + 23,575 + 15,368 − 69− 591 + 11,018 + 7,208 + 2,322
short-term + 155,969 + 28,815 −161,336 −89,872 −25,254 −81,758 −30,934 + 2,707 −2,943
Enterprises and individuals + 24,088 −14,522 −39,577 −12,797 −31,200 −3,393 + 11,774 −9,088 −11,028
5. Change in the monetary reserves of
    the eurosystem (Increase: −) + 17,568 + 17,815 −2,238 + 6,741 −4,596 −1,320 −1,160 + 1,542 + 5,449
Balance of unclassifiable transactions −10,731 + 34,695 + 64,250 + 14,133 + 24,914 + 32,150 + 4,939 + 19,964 + 733 D.
*Source: European Central Bank. —1From January 2001, including   
Greece.  
67*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(Balances)
 
 
Current account Memo item:
Change in Capital trans-
the Bundes- fers and pur-
Change in bank ’s net chases / sales
Supple- external of intangible the monetary
Balance of mentary non- reserves at Balance of assets aton current Foreign trade Factor Current produced Financial transaction transaction unclassifiable
Period account  
1 items  4  5 Services  6 income transfers assets  7 account  7 values  8 values  8 trade  1  2  3 transactions
DM million
1989 + 104,112 + 134,576 −4,107 −18,445 + 26,872 −34,784 −2,064 −110,286 −5,405 + 13,643 + 18,997
1990  o + 73,001 + 105,382 −3,833 −26,138 + 32,859 −35,269 −4,975 −89,497 −11,611 + 33,082 −10,976
1991 −36,277 + 21,899 −2,804 −30,703 + 33,144 −57,812 −4,565 + 12,614 + 9,605 + 18,623 − 319
1992 −30,023 + 33,656 −1,426 −44,993 + 33,962 −51,222 −1,963 + 69,792 −52,888 + 15,082 −68,745
1993 −23,071 + 60,304 −3,038 −52,559 + 27,373 −55,151 −1,915 + 21,442 + 22,795 −19,251 + 35,766
1994 −46,760 + 71,762 −1,104 −62,814 + 4,852 −59,455 −2,637 + 57,871 + 2,846 −11,321 −12,242
1995 −38,657 + 85,303 −4,722 −63,999 + 178 −55,416 −3,845 + 63,647 −10,355 −10,791 −17,754
1996 −20,729 + 98,538 −5,264 −64,829 + 1,815 −50,989 −3,283 + 23,607 + 1,882 − 1,478 + 1,610
1997 −15,756 + 116,467 −7,360 −69,535 − 2,588 −52,738 + 52 + 31 + 6,640 + 9,033 + 8,468
1998 −21,666 + 126,970 −5,934 −76,062 −13,337 −53,304 + 1,289 + 32,810 −7,128 − 5,305 −8,231
1999 −43,509 + 127,542 −13,656 −91,964 −16,504 −48,927 − 301 −47,120 + 24,517 + 66,413 −72,364
2000 −55,766 + 115,645 −13,691 −97,534 − 4,704 −55,482 + 13,345 + 72,117 + 11,429 −41,125 + 94,329
2001 + 1,919 + 186,771 −10,624 −100,168 −20,408 −53,652 − 756 −35,625 + 11,797 + 22,665 + 63,911
 5 
 million
1999 −22,246 + 65,211 −6,982 −47,020 − 8,438 −25,016 − 154 −24,092 + 12,535 + 33,956 −36,999
2000 −28,513 + 59,128 −7,000 −49,868 − 2,405 −28,368 + 6,823 + 36,873 + 5,844 −21,027 + 48,230
2001 + 981 + 95,495 −5,432 −51,215 −10,434 −27,432 − 387 −18,215 + 6,032 + 11,589 + 32,677
2002 + 48,881 + 126,243 −5,815 −38,335 − 6,658 −26,555 − 212 −78,694 + 2,065 + 27,959 −33,292
2000          Q2 − 3,322 + 16,406 −1,283 −12,322 + 707 − 6,831 − 330 + 24,447 + 2,388 −23,183 −23,447
         Q3 −15,354 + 13,116 −1,774 −16,175 − 3,183 − 7,338 + 7,412 −13,620 + 2,155 + 19,407 + 22,523
         Q4 − 7,261 + 13,234 −2,560 −10,516 + 915 − 8,332 − 419 −9,395 + 2,052 + 15,023 + 17,137
2001          Q1 + 257 + 22,540 −1,420 −13,575 − 1,665 − 5,623 + 552 + 4,841 + 4,072 − 9,723 −11,749
         Q2 − 4,839 + 22,104 −1,503 −13,043 − 4,209 − 8,189 − 13 + 18,576 + 2,039 −15,763 + 21,099
         Q3 − 2,688 + 25,547 −1,779 −16,642 − 3,564 − 6,250 − 446 + 659 −2,165 + 4,639 −13,360
         Q4 + 8,251 + 25,303 − 730 − 7,955 − 996 − 7,371 − 479 −42,291 + 2,085 + 32,434 + 36,688
2002          Q1 + 10,307 + 31,822 −1,049 −11,336 − 4,002 − 5,128 + 160 + 2,575 −1,352 −11,690 −18,496
         Q2 + 9,773 + 29,897 −1,389 − 8,797 − 1,387 − 8,550 − 75 −18,266 + 2,432 + 6,135 + 1,694
         Q3 + 9,995 + 33,163 −1,566 −12,466 − 3,679 − 5,457 + 62 −17,640 + 87 + 7,497 −17,588
         Q4 + 18,806 + 31,361 −1,811 − 5,736 + 2,410 − 7,419 − 359 −45,363 + 898 + 26,018 + 1,099
2003          Q1  p + 9,573 + 29,373 −1,362 − 8,703 − 4,374 − 5,360 − 16 −14,663 −1,495 + 6,601 + 3,444
2000          Oct − 1,490 + 6,794 − 985 − 5,281 + 1,120 − 3,137 − 125 −2,138 + 538 + 3,215 + 19,591
         Nov − 3,341 + 4,765 − 413 − 3,615 − 1,143 − 2,934 − 143 −4,031 + 466 + 7,049 + 5,015
         Dec − 2,430 + 1,675 −1,162 − 1,620 + 937 − 2,261 − 152 −3,226 + 1,047 + 4,760 −7,468
2001          Jan − 6,170 + 5,662 − 566 − 5,267 − 5,479 − 520 + 515 −3,250 + 1,400 + 7,504 −5,988
         Feb + 3,680 + 7,171 − 528 − 3,061 + 2,379 − 2,280 + 119 −2,519 + 1,180 − 2,461 −3,873
         Mar + 2,747 + 9,707 − 325 − 5,247 + 1,435 − 2,823 − 83 + 10,610 + 1,492 −14,766 −1,888
         Apr + 569 + 6,166 − 642 − 3,581 + 917 − 2,290 − 149 + 9,126 + 1,205 −10,751 + 9,404
         May − 796 + 8,212 − 464 − 4,280 − 1,547 − 2,716 − 145 + 22,649 + 508 −22,216 − 53
         June − 4,612 + 7,727 − 397 − 5,182 − 3,579 − 3,182 + 281 −13,199 + 326 + 17,204 + 11,749
         July − 3,466 + 9,441 − 567 − 5,397 − 4,238 − 2,705 − 226 + 5,494 − 151 − 1,650 −10,589
         Aug + 1,300 + 9,038 − 699 − 6,539 + 1,012 − 1,512 − 172 + 3,818 + 460 − 5,406 −4,247
         Sep − 522 + 7,069 − 513 − 4,707 − 338 − 2,033 − 47 −8,653 −2,474 + 11,696 + 1,476
         Oct + 3,145 + 9,661 − 219 − 4,721 + 1,307 − 2,882 − 140 −1,054 −1,001 − 950 −1,307
         Nov + 705 + 7,351 − 425 − 3,095 − 259 − 2,867 − 180 −19,956 + 204 + 19,227 + 6,860
         Dec + 4,401 + 8,290 − 86 − 139 − 2,044 − 1,622 − 159 −21,281 + 2,882 + 14,158 + 31,135
2002          Jan + 650 + 10,076 − 515 − 4,166 − 5,441 + 695 + 477 + 9,387 −1,747 − 8,767 −17,916
         Feb + 3,020 + 10,008 − 332 − 3,162 − 411 − 3,084 − 155 −4,329 + 67 + 1,397 + 1,535
         Mar + 6,637 + 11,738 − 203 − 4,009 + 1,849 − 2,739 − 162 −2,483 + 328 − 4,320 −2,116
         Apr + 3,336 + 9,390 − 916 − 2,617 + 439 − 2,961 − 148 + 494 + 1,657 − 5,338 −9,839
         May + 2,690 + 9,742 − 565 − 3,177 − 847 − 2,462 + 47 + 199 + 1,379 − 4,314 + 3,826
         June + 3,748 + 10,765 + 93 − 3,003 − 980 − 3,127 + 26 −18,958 − 603 + 15,787 + 7,707
         July + 766 + 11,872 − 774 − 3,908 − 4,571 − 1,853 − 203 −10,966 − 548 + 10,951 −15,567
         Aug + 2,597 + 10,387 − 317 − 5,686 − 421 − 1,366 + 86 −5,561 + 886 + 1,992 −5,579
         Sep + 6,632 + 10,904 − 474 − 2,873 + 1,313 − 2,238 + 179 −1,113 − 252 − 5,446 + 3,559
         Oct + 4,466 + 11,065 − 414 − 4,166 + 1,337 − 3,356 − 82 −18,844 + 570 + 13,891 −5,279
         Nov + 8,001 + 11,992 − 627 − 2,019 + 947 − 2,291 − 137 −3,715 − 842 − 3,305 + 4,265
         Dec + 6,339 + 8,304 − 770 + 449 + 127 − 1,772 − 139 −22,804 + 1,171 + 15,433 + 2,112
2003          Jan − 1,313 + 8,980 − 708 − 3,921 − 4,906 − 759 + 475 −5,645 − 97 + 6,580 + 6,799
         Feb + 4,370 + 10,668 − 142 − 2,932 − 577 − 2,647 − 504 −20,067 − 320 + 16,521 + 677
         Mar  p + 6,516 + 9,725 − 513 − 1,850 + 1,110 − 1,955 + 12 + 11,049 −1,078 −16,499 −4,032
oFrom July 1990 including the external transactions of the former GDR. — included up to December 1992 in Supplementary trade items. —4Mainly
1From the beginning of 1993 figures subject to significant uncertainty warehouse transactions for account of residents and deduction of goods
owing to changes in the method of data collection in foreign trade. — returned. —5See footnote 3. —6Excluding the expenditure on freight and
2Special trade according to the official foreign trade statistics: imports c.i.f., insurance included in the c.i.f. import value. —7Capital exports: −.—
exports f.o.b. —3From January 1993 including additional estimates for 8 Increase: −. 
external transactions which do not have to be reported and which are
68*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
by group of countries and country *
 
  5  million
2002 2003
Group of countries / Country 2000 2001 2002 October November December January February March  p 
All countries  1 Exports 597,440 638,268 648,306 58,575 58,766 50,849 53,337 53,750 55,843
Imports 538,311 542,774 522,062 47,510 46,774 42,544 44,357 43,082 46,118Balance + 59,128 + 95,495 + 126,243 + 11,065 + 11,992 + 8,304 + 8,980 + 10,668 + 9,725
I. Exports 460,422 481,991 484,077 43,798 43,953 37,826 39,770 40,581 ...Industrialised
Imports 389,927 390,269 371,414 33,295 33,349 30,703 30,503 30,689 ... countries
Balance + 70,495 + 91,722 + 112,663 + 10,503 + 10,604 + 7,123 + 9,267 + 9,892 ...
Exports 337,375 351,611 354,801 31,606 32,641 28,065 29,082 30,160 ... 1. EU member countries
Imports 273,951 277,034 268,878 23,953 24,119 22,839 20,971 22,367 ...
Balance + 63,424 + 74,577 + 85,923 + 7,653 + 8,522 + 5,227 + 8,110 + 7,793 ...
of  which
Exports 264,870 275,384 276,215 24,640 25,482 21,977 22,525 23,242 ... EMU member
Imports 217,946 221,680 217,138 19,178 19,282 18,431 16,565 17,946 ... countries
Balance + 46,924 + 53,704 + 59,077 + 5,462 + 6,199 + 3,546 + 5,960 + 5,296 ...
of which
Austria Exports 32,436 33,486 33,270 3,130 3,057 2,659 2,686 2,738 ...
Imports 20,497 20,664 21,174 1,953 1,994 1,783 1,553 1,656 ...Balance + 11,939 + 12,822 + 12,095 + 1,177 + 1,063 + 875 + 1,134 + 1,082 ...
Belgium and Exports 32,728 35,187 34,128 3,078 3,071 2,565 2,691 2,878 ...Luxemburg Imports 26,230 28,521 28,818 2,574 2,419 2,269 1,939 2,246 ...
Balance + 6,499 + 6,666 + 5,310 + 504 + 652 + 295 + 752 + 633 ...
France Exports 67,418 69,601 69,776 6,106 6,254 5,493 5,699 5,707 ...
Imports 50,862 49,743 49,374 4,458 4,383 3,870 3,865 4,210 ...Balance + 16,556 + 19,858 + 20,402 + 1,649 + 1,871 + 1,623 + 1,833 + 1,497 ...
Italy Exports 45,011 47,119 47,443 4,239 4,361 3,789 3,987 4,071 ...
Imports 35,776 35,280 33,618 3,017 3,030 2,786 2,577 2,625 ...Balance + 9,235 + 11,839 + 13,825 + 1,222 + 1,331 + 1,003 + 1,409 + 1,447 ...
Netherlands Exports 38,993 40,011 39,540 3,483 3,667 3,402 3,164 3,358 ...
Imports 44,739 43,233 43,122 3,518 3,930 4,101 3,431 3,882 ...Balance − 5,745 − 3,222 − 3,582 − 35 − 264 − 699 − 267 − 524 ...
Spain Exports 26,732 27,841 29,655 2,701 2,964 2,357 2,508 2,657 ...
Imports 16,087 15,226 15,731 1,423 1,519 1,275 1,253 1,382 ...Balance + 10,645 + 12,615 + 13,924 + 1,278 + 1,445 + 1,082 + 1,254 + 1,275 ...
Sweden Exports 13,524 12,978 13,471 1,293 1,351 1,099 1,128 1,139 ...
Imports 10,202 8,999 8,931 859 819 713 716 784 ...Balance + 3,322 + 3,979 + 4,540 + 434 + 533 + 387 + 411 + 355 ...
United Exports 49,377 52,764 54,228 4,673 4,722 4,124 4,588 4,852 ...Kingdom Imports 36,923 37,259 33,652 3,052 3,060 2,717 2,780 2,864 ...
Balance + 12,453 + 15,505 + 20,576 + 1,621 + 1,662 + 1,407 + 1,808 + 1,988 ...
Exports 39,944 39,987 40,447 3,755 3,631 3,140 3,331 3,288 ... 2. Other European
Imports 36,800 39,165 38,804 3,714 3,402 3,254 3,848 3,436 ... industrial countries  
2 
Balance + 3,144 + 821 + 1,644 + 40 + 230 − 114 − 518 − 148 ...
of which
Switzerland Exports 25,596 27,489 26,635 2,469 2,349 2,058 2,198 2,209 ...
Imports 18,797 19,753 19,507 1,805 1,714 1,473 1,674 1,530 ...
Balance + 6,799 + 7,737 + 7,128 + 663 + 635 + 585 + 524 + 679 ...
Exports 83,103 90,393 88,828 8,437 7,681 6,621 7,357 7,134 ... 3. Non-European
Imports 79,176 74,069 63,731 5,627 5,829 4,611 5,683 4,886 ... industrial countries
Balance + 3,926 + 16,324 + 25,097 + 2,810 + 1,852 + 2,010 + 1,674 + 2,248 ...
of which
Japan Exports 13,195 13,103 12,171 1,208 1,065 944 996 918 ...
Imports 26,847 22,910 19,032 1,786 1,629 1,444 1,648 1,436 ...
Balance −13,651 − 9,807 − 6,860 − 578 − 564 − 500 − 652 − 518 ...
Exports 61,764 67,824 66,596 6,329 5,797 4,843 5,488 5,356 ... United States
Imports 47,121 45,982 39,994 3,443 3,840 2,873 3,651 3,100 ...Balance + 14,643 + 21,842 + 26,603 + 2,886 + 1,957 + 1,970 + 1,837 + 2,256 ...
II. Exports 70,318 83,246 91,021 8,581 8,245 7,420 7,481 7,468 ...Countries in transition
Imports 82,900 90,341 93,095 8,746 8,559 7,642 8,510 7,930 ...Balance −12,582 − 7,095 − 2,074 − 164 − 313 − 222 −1,028 − 462 ...
of which
Central and east Exports 59,900 69,914 75,186 7,164 6,840 5,962 5,980 6,069 ...European countries Imports 62,781 68,701 70,441 6,437 6,324 5,599 6,008 5,951 ...in transition Balance − 2,882 + 1,213 + 4,745 + 727 + 515 + 363 − 27 + 118 ...
People ‘s Republic Exports 9,459 12,118 14,495 1,284 1,302 1,352 1,383 1,292 ...
of China  
3 Imports 18,553 19,942 21,068 2,173 2,142 1,897 2,314 1,830 ...Balance − 9,094 − 7,824 − 6,572 − 889 − 840 − 545 − 931 − 538 ...
III. Exports 65,023 71,477 71,576 5,999 6,439 5,464 5,952 5,597 ...Developing countries
Imports 64,742 61,490 56,912 5,411 4,811 4,147 5,287 4,412 ...Balance + 282 + 9,987 + 14,664 + 588 + 1,629 + 1,317 + 665 + 1,185 ...
of which
Newly industrial- Exports 24,029 24,735 25,012 2,223 2,134 1,940 2,070 1,946 ...ising countries in Imports 30,498 28,351 26,393 2,535 2,457 2,128 2,431 2,101 ...south-east Asia  
4 Balance − 6,469 − 3,616 − 1,381 − 312 − 323 − 188 − 361 − 155 ...
OPEC-countries Exports 10,729 13,669 14,578 1,260 1,319 1,206 1,179 1,088 ...
Imports 10,235 8,220 6,960 796 689 521 768 485 ...Balance + 494 + 5,449 + 7,618 + 465 + 630 + 686 + 410 + 604 ...
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (f.o.b.) by country of destination, region. —2Including Cyprus. —3Excluding Hong Kong. —4Brunei
imports (c.i.f.) by country of origin. Inclusion of individual countries in Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore,
groups of countries according to the current position. —1Including fuel Republic of Korea, Taiwan and Thailand. 
and other supplies for ships and aircraft and other data not classifiable by
69*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
4. Services and factor income of the Federal Republic of Germany
(Balances)
 
Until the end of 1998 DM million, from 1999  5  million
Services
other services
of which
 
Patents Compen- Services  of Construction
Trans- Financial and sation of Investment Government selfemployed and  assembly
Period Total Travel  1 services licences Total income portation  2 transactions  3 persons  4 work,  repairs employees  5 
1998 −76,062 −64,465 + 5,449 + 3,011 −4,044 + 5,462 −21,474 −2,586 −2,484 −1,584 −11,753
1999 −47,020 −36,421 + 2,882 + 1,005 −1,896 + 1,997 −14,588 −2,245 − 403 − 756 −7,682
2000 −49,868 −37,420 + 3,385 + 980 −2,904 + 2,221 −16,130 −2,733 − 782 − 512 −1,893
2001 −51,215 −37,416 + 4,144 + 509 −2,395 + 3,488 −19,545 −2,536 −1,123 − 257 −10,178
2002 −38,335 −35,997 + 3,697 + 584 −1,414 + 5,257 −10,461 −2,026 − 363 − 354 −6,304
2001          Q3 −16,642 −14,354 + 1,128 + 180 − 588 + 843 −3,853 − 636 − 121 − 260 −3,304
         Q4 − 7,955 − 6,877 + 1,129 + 147 − 563 + 974 −2,765 − 640 − 312 − 1 − 995
2002          Q1 −11,336 − 7,055 + 194 − 48 − 440 + 1,059 −5,045 − 524 − 388 + 132 −4,134
         Q2 − 8,797 − 8,376 + 1,027 + 104 − 655 + 1,228 −2,126 − 505 − 158 − 148 −1,239
         Q3 −12,466 −13,654 + 1,381 + 179 − 442 + 1,707 −1,638 − 539 + 194 − 310 −3,369
         Q4 − 5,736 − 6,912 + 1,094 + 350 + 123 + 1,263 −1,653 − 457 − 10 − 29 + 2,439
2003          Q1 − 8,703 − 6,614 + 746 + 418 − 135 + 1,227 −4,345 − 551 + 62 + 173 −4,547
2002          May − 3,177 − 2,820 + 159 + 89 − 67 + 398 − 937 − 159 + 9 − 51 − 796
         June − 3,003 − 2,992 + 513 − 19 − 344 + 362 − 523 − 152 − 103 − 58 − 922
         July − 3,908 − 3,405 + 293 + 75 − 432 + 415 − 854 − 203 + 38 − 102 −4,468
         Aug − 5,686 − 5,865 + 493 − 8 + 27 + 890 −1,221 − 180 + 160 − 97 − 324
         Sep − 2,873 − 4,383 + 595 + 112 − 36 + 402 + 438 − 156 − 4 − 111 + 1,424
         Oct − 4,166 − 3,698 + 394 + 289 − 51 + 329 −1,430 − 139 + 101 − 13 + 1,350
         Nov − 2,019 − 2,073 + 249 + 7 + 38 + 390 − 631 − 145 − 65 − 9 + 956
         Dec + 449 − 1,141 + 451 + 54 + 135 + 544 + 407 − 173 − 46 − 6 + 133
2003          Jan − 3,921 − 2,658 + 144 + 207 − 73 + 418 −1,960 − 216 + 56 + 59 −4,965
         Feb − 2,932 − 1,675 + 156 + 149 + 0 + 384 −1,946 − 120 + 60 + 52 − 629
         Mar − 1,850 − 2,281 + 446 + 62 − 62 + 424 − 439 − 215 − 54 + 62 + 1,048
1From January 2002 figures subject to significant uncertainty. —2Ex- vices supplied. —4Engineering and other technical services, research and
cluding the expenditure on freight included in the c.i.f. import value. — development, commercial services etc. — 5 Wages and salaries. 
3Including the receipts from foreign military agencies for goods and ser-
5. Current transfers of the Federal Republic of Germany 6. Capital transfers
(Balances) (Balances)
Until the end of 1998 DM million, from 1999  5  million DM million /  5  million
Public  1 Private  1 
International
Organisations  2 
 
of which other Remittances otherEuropean current by foreign current
Period Total Total Total Communities Total workers transfers Total  
4 Public  1 Private  1 transfers  3 
1998 −53,304 −37,317 −33,077 −30,382 −4,240 −15,987 −6,936 −9,051 + 1,289 −2,441 + 3,730
1999 −25,016 −17,348 −15,428 −13,846 −1,920 −7,667 −3,429 −4,239 − 154 −1,351 + 1,197
2000 −28,368 −19,095 −17,100 −15,398 −1,996 −9,272 −3,458 −5,814 −1,599 −1,189 − 410
2001 −27,432 −16,927 −14,257 −12,587 −2,670 −10,505 −3,520 −6,985 − 387 −1,361 + 974
2002 −26,555 −15,644 −12,416 −11,214 −3,227 −10,911 −3,470 −7,441 − 212 −1,416 + 1,204
2001          Q3 −6,250 −4,066 −3,079 −2,518 − 988 −2,183 − 880 −1,303 − 446 − 327 − 118
         Q4 −7,371 −4,779 −3,720 −3,543 −1,059 −2,592 − 880 −1,712 − 479 − 455 − 24
2002          Q1 −5,128 −2,315 −1,256 − 832 −1,059 −2,813 − 868 −1,946 + 160 − 229 + 389
         Q2 −8,550 −5,262 −5,254 −4,997 − 8 −3,289 − 868 −2,421 − 75 − 274 + 199
         Q3 −5,457 −3,585 −2,746 −2,387 − 838 −1,873 − 868 −1,005 + 62 − 348 + 410
         Q4 −7,419 −4,483 −3,161 −2,998 −1,322 −2,936 − 868 −2,069 − 359 − 565 + 207
2003          Q1 −5,360 −3,329 −2,294 −1,628 −1,035 −2,031 − 833 −1,198 − 16 − 254 + 237
2002          May −2,462 −1,491 −1,697 −1,633 + 206 − 971 − 289 − 682 + 47 − 99 + 146
         June −3,127 −1,712 −1,667 −1,576 − 45 −1,415 − 289 −1,126 + 26 − 91 + 117
         July −1,853 −1,092 − 842 − 637 − 250 − 761 − 289 − 472 − 203 − 168 − 35
         Aug −1,366 − 774 − 397 − 272 − 376 − 593 − 289 − 304 + 86 − 95 + 181
         Sep −2,238 −1,719 −1,507 −1,478 − 212 − 518 − 289 − 229 + 179 − 86 + 265
         Oct −3,356 −2,107 −1,538 −1,472 − 569 −1,249 − 289 − 960 − 82 − 104 + 22
         Nov −2,291 −1,456 − 996 − 953 − 460 − 836 − 289 − 547 − 137 − 248 + 111
         Dec −1,772 − 920 − 627 − 572 − 293 − 852 − 289 − 562 − 139 − 213 + 74
2003          Jan − 759 − 247 + 94 + 517 − 341 − 512 − 278 − 234 + 475 − 104 + 580
         Feb −2,647 −1,889 −1,499 −1,296 − 390 − 758 − 278 − 480 − 504 − 87 − 416
         Mar −1,955 −1,193 − 889 − 850 − 303 − 762 − 278 − 485 + 12 − 62 + 74
1The classification of "public" and "private" transfers depends on which (excluding capital transfers). —3Payments to developing countries, pension
sector the participating domestic body belongs to. —2Current contri- payments, tax revenue and refunds, etc. —4Where identifiable; in
butions to the budgets of international organisations and to the EU budget particular, debt forgiveness. 
70*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
7. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
 
 
 5  million
2002 2003
Item 2000 2001 2002 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Jan Feb Mar
I. Net German investment abroad
(Increase/capital exports: −) −357,341 −281,560 −255,821 −79,976 −92,940 −25,886 −94,839 −35,405 −38,192 −21,242
1. Direct investment  1 −61,701 −47,023 −26,070 − 2,081 −15,785 − 5,595 −15,225 −16,635 + 786 + 624
Equity capital −59,125 −61,618 −46,821 −20,694 −12,158 − 5,102 − 6,665 − 2,217 − 2,089 − 2,359
Reinvested earnings  2 + 0 + 3,240 −−−−−−−−
Credit transactions of
German direct investors + 3,281 + 16,360 + 27,883 + 20,219 − 1,578 + 1,727 − 6,946 −13,733 + 3,078 + 3,709
Other capital − 5,857 − 5,005 − 7,132 − 1,605 − 2,050 − 2,220 − 1,615 − 685 − 204 − 727
2. Portfolio investment −203,368 −129,559 −69,036 −18,934 − 8,305 − 9,436 + 5,506 + 189 − 138 + 5,455
Equities  3 −102,252 −15,614 − 5,330 + 1,117 + 6,440 − 5,448 + 14,707 + 3,771 + 6,029 + 4,907
Investment fund certificates  4 −32,516 −19,701 − 6,784 − 998 − 1,275 + 576 − 3,096 − 1,986 − 62− 1,048
Bonds and notes  5 −70,251 −95,098 −50,806 −17,785 −10,521 − 7,185 − 9,676 − 2,220 − 6,910 − 546
Money market instruments + 1,651 + 853 − 6,116 − 1,268 − 2,949 + 2,622 + 3,571 + 624 + 805 + 2,142
3. Financial derivatives  6 − 5,490 + 6,278 − 533 + 1,194 − 3,838 + 340 + 2,970 − 120 + 1,467 + 1,624
4. Credit transactions −84,596 −109,871 −158,634 −59,707 −64,670 −10,909 −87,578 −18,609 −40,084 −28,885
Credit institutions  7 −101,533 −130,648 −130,536 −54,117 −45,819 −30,295 −74,254 −15,353 −37,031 −21,871
Long-term −40,156 −47,636 −31,790 − 8,336 − 4,224 − 9,514 −11,479 − 8,319 − 1,306 − 1,854
Short-term −61,378 −83,012 −98,746 −45,782 −41,595 −20,782 −62,774 − 7,034 −35,724 −20,016
Enterprises and individuals − 5,116 −19,217 + 744 − 5,521 − 4,698 + 18,746 −17,517 −10,242 − 4,089 − 3,187
Long-term + 91 − 1,857 − 400 + 66 + 93 − 384 − 583 − 401 − 296 + 114
Short-term  7 − 5,207 −17,360 + 1,144 − 5,587 − 4,791 + 19,130 −16,934 − 9,841 − 3,793 − 3,301
General government −19,920 + 15,980 + 7,168 + 123 + 4,249 − 368 + 950 + 1,073 − 201 + 79
Long-term − 1,079 + 257 + 218 + 151 − 61 + 14 + 309 + 106 + 229 − 26
Short-term  7 −18,841 + 15,723 + 6,950 − 27 + 4,310 − 382 + 641 + 967 − 430 + 105
Bundesbank + 41,972 + 24,015 −36,010 − 191 −18,402 + 1,009 + 3,242 + 5,913 + 1,236 − 3,907
5. Other investment  8 − 2,185 − 1,385 − 1,549 − 449 − 341 − 287 − 511 − 230 − 222 − 59
II. Net foreign investment in Germany
(Increase/capital imports: +) + 394,213 + 263,346 + 177,127 + 61,711 + 75,299 −19,477 + 80,177 + 29,760 + 18,125 + 32,291
1. Direct investment  1 + 220,423 + 37,903 + 40,414 + 16,190 + 3,503 + 6,846 + 7,392 + 1,915 − 953 + 6,430
Equity capital + 121,532 + 30,089 + 26,985 + 10,737 + 2,576 + 1,754 + 9,391 + 1,954 + 303 + 7,133Reinvested earnings  
2 − 3,600 − 3,600 − 3,600 − 900 − 900 − 900 − 900 − 300 − 300 − 300
Credit transactions offoreign direct investors + 102,826 + 11,558 + 17,225 + 6,384 + 1,924 + 6,034 − 1,003 + 340 − 955 − 388
Other capital − 335 − 143 − 197 − 31− 97− 41− 96− 78− 1− 16
2. Portfolio investment + 47,583 + 156,175 + 105,998 + 40,521 + 41,564 − 2,894 + 31,953 + 8,954 + 10,142 + 12,857
Equities  
3 −35,923 + 88,638 + 16,844 + 9,659 − 428 + 2,533 − 2,581 − 507 − 2,512 + 438
Investment fund certificates + 11,000 + 1,105 − 241 − 1,011 + 975 − 1,271 − 901 − 722 + 52 − 231
Bonds and notes  5 + 73,955 + 81,246 + 79,231 + 25,732 + 24,075 − 563 + 22,529 + 4,921 + 2,581 + 15,027
Money market instruments − 1,450 −14,815 + 10,164 + 6,142 + 16,942 − 3,593 + 12,905 + 5,262 + 10,020 − 2,377
3. Credit transactions + 125,945 + 69,221 + 30,641 + 4,989 + 30,191 −23,422 + 40,826 + 18,895 + 8,932 + 12,999
Credit institutions  7 + 115,294 + 54,341 + 28,321 + 5,533 + 28,422 −19,542 + 41,251 + 17,753 + 6,181 + 17,316
Long-term + 15,665 + 4,425 + 18,247 + 5,127 + 5,534 + 3,244 − 3,099 + 550 − 1,835 − 1,815
Short-term + 99,629 + 49,916 + 10,075 + 406 + 22,888 −22,786 + 44,350 + 17,203 + 8,016 + 19,131
Enterprises and individuals + 9,711 + 11,412 + 3,334 − 2,173 + 1,506 − 3,083 − 2,302 + 2,481 + 1,159 − 5,942
Long-term + 4,014 + 11,351 + 5,142 + 60 + 1,472 + 1,444 − 6,021 − 297 + 1,447 − 7,171
Short-term  7 + 5,698 + 61 − 1,807 − 2,233 + 34 − 4,527 + 3,719 + 2,777 − 288 + 1,230
General Government + 526 + 837 − 1,667 + 2,177 − 466 + 12 + 181 − 2,321 + 1,831 + 671
Long-term − 372 − 217 − 112 − 176 + 541 − 159 + 3,275 + 259 + 1,853 + 1,163
Short-term  7 + 898 + 1,054 − 1,555 + 2,353 − 1,007 + 171 − 3,094 − 2,580 − 23− 492
Bundesbank + 414 + 2,631 + 653 − 548 + 728 − 809 + 1,697 + 982 − 238 + 953
4. Other investment + 263 + 47 + 74 + 11 + 42 − 8+ 6 − 4+ 4+ 6
III. Balance of all statistically
recorded financial movements(Net capital exports: −) + 36,873 −18,215 −78,694 −18,266 −17,640 −45,363 −14,663 − 5,645 −20,067 + 11,049
1From 1996, new definition for direct investment. —2Estimated. — action values shown here are mostly derived from changes in stocks. As far
3Including participation rights. —4From 1991 including accumulated as possible, purely statistical changes have been eliminated. —8In
earnings. —5From 1975 excluding accrued interest. —6Options, whether particular, subscriptions of the Federal Government to International
or not evidenced by securities, and financial futures contracts. —7The trans- Organisations. 
71*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
8. External position of the Bundesbank *
 
 
DM million
Monetary reserves and other claims on non-residents Liabilities to non-residents
Monetary reserves
Reserve
positionin theInter- Liabilitiesnational arising Net Liabilities
Monetary arising from externalFund and Claims Loans and from liquidity position
Foreign special on the external Treasury (col. 1 other claims
End of year currency drawing ECB  
2 on non- trans- discount less
or month Total Total Gold rights (net) Total paper col. 8) balances  1 residents  3 actions  4 
1234567891 0 1 1
1990 106,446 104,023 13,688 64,517 7,373 18,445 2,423 52,259 52,259 − 54,188
1991 97,345 94,754 13,688 55,424 8,314 17,329 2,592 42,335 42,335 − 55,010
1992 143,959 141,351 13,688 85,845 8,199 33,619 2,608 26,506 26,506 − 117,453
1993 122,763 120,143 13,688 61,784 8,496 36,176 2,620 39,541 23,179 16,362 83,222
1994 115,965 113,605 13,688 60,209 7,967 31,742 2,360 24,192 19,581 4,611 91,774
1995 123,261 121,307 13,688 68,484 10,337 28,798 1,954 16,390 16,390 − 106,871
1996 120,985 119,544 13,688 72,364 11,445 22,048 1,441 15,604 15,604 − 105,381
1997 127,849 126,884 13,688 76,673 13,874 22,649 966 16,931 16,931 − 110,918
1998 135,085 134,005 17,109 100,363 16,533 − 1,079 15,978 15,978 − 119,107
*Valuation of the gold holdings and the claims on non-residents according Monetary Cooperation Fund −EMCF). —3Including loans to the World
to section 26 (2) of the Bundesbank Act and the provisions of the Bank. —4Including liquidity paper sold to non-residents by the
Commercial Code, especially section 253. In the course of the year, valuation Bundesbank; excluding the liquidity Treasury discount paper sold to
at the balance sheet rates of the preceding year. —1Mainly US dollar non-residents between March 1993 and March 1995, as shown in column 10. 
assets. —2European Central Bank (until 1993 claims on the European
  
 
9. External position of the Bundesbank in the European monetary union o
 5  million
Monetary reserves and other claims on non-residents
Monetary reserves
Reserve
position
in the Inter-
national OtherMonetary Other claims on Net externalFund and claims on Claims residents position of the
Gold special Foreign non-euro- within the in other Bundesbank Liabilities
End of year and gold drawing currency area Eurosystem EMU member to non- (col.1 lessor month Total Total rights reserves (net)  
2 countries col.9) receivables residents  1  3 residents  3 
1234567891 0
1999          Jan  4 95,316 93,940 29,312 8,461 56,167 140 1,225 11 8,169 87,146
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 8,332 52,420 9,162 39,746 11 6,179 135,779
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 7,762 53,377 313 6,620 14 6,592 94,1702001 76,147 93,215 35,005 8,721 49,489 312 − 17,385 5 8,752 67,396
2002 103,948 85,002 36,208 8,272 40,522 312 18,466 167 9,005 94,942
2001          Nov 108,934 95,395 34,309 8,745 52,341 312 13,217 9 11,093 97,841
         Dec 76,147 93,215 35,005 8,721 49,489 312 − 17,385 5 8,752 67,396
2002          Jan 98,116 97,392 36,220 8,855 52,316 312 409 3 10,455 87,661         Feb 98,392 99,230 38,095 8,874 52,260 312 − 1,152 2 10,354 88,038
         Mar 99,489 98,130 38,505 8,840 50,786 312 1,045 1 10,077 89,412
         Apr 106,936 94,779 38,072 8,205 48,502 312 11,842 2 9,298 97,638
         May 100,886 91,942 38,649 8,040 45,253 312 8,630 2 8,448 92,438         June 88,199 86,649 35,435 8,848 42,366 312 1,236 1 9,219 78,980
         July 105,187 87,718 34,596 8,897 44,225 312 17,156 1 10,163 95,025
         Aug 110,682 87,466 35,197 8,797 43,471 312 22,902 1 9,432 101,250         Sep 108,889 88,937 36,225 8,751 43,961 312 19,639 1 9,966 98,923
         Oct 112,748 87,441 35,530 8,594 43,317 312 24,993 2 9,473 103,276
         Nov 108,615 87,610 35,517 8,542 43,551 312 20,688 5 10,272 98,343         Dec 103,948 85,002 36,208 8,272 40,522 312 18,466 167 9,005 94,942
2003          Jan 98,272 85,235 37,934 8,023 39,278 312 12,237 488 9,898 88,374
         Feb 95,491 83,685 35,721 8,008 39,956 312 11,001 493 9,669 85,822         Mar 98,240 82,530 34,100 8,348 40,083 312 14,908 490 10,599 87,641
         Apr 93,702 79,453 33,442 8,123 37,888 312 13,496 441 9,126 84,575
oClaims and liabilities vis- à-vis all countries within and outside EMU. Until Deutsche Bundesbank ’s cross-border payments within the Eurosystem. From
December 2000, the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, by virtue November 2000 including the TARGET positions which were previously
of revaluations, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the levels shown (in columns 6 and 9) as bilateral assets and liabilities vis- à-vis national
are computed on the basis of cumulative transaction values. From January central banks outside the Eurosystem. —3See footnote 2. —4Euro
2001 onwards, all end-of-month levels will be valued at market prices. — opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at January 1, 1999. 
1Including loans to the World Bank. —2Including the balances in the
72*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
10. Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
 5  million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities to non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  to foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms payments
or month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received operations operations
All countries
 
1999 277,331 52,774 224,557 115,564 108,993 100,777 8,216 293,849 56,632 237,217 166,026 71,191 52,047 19,144
2000 320,874 43,462 277,412 152,752 124,660 116,971 7,689 446,060 52,663 393,397 309,024 84,373 63,093 21,2802001 358,120 62,434 295,686 171,939 123,747 114,857 8,890 505,266 60,132 445,134 354,561 90,573 65,988 24,5852002  
4  r 331,021 63,167 267,854 148,913 118,941 111,406 7,535 533,423 57,696 475,727 387,850 87,877 62,622 25,255
2002          Dec  r 331,021 63,167 267,854 148,913 118,941 111,406 7,535 533,423 57,696 475,727 387,850 87,877 62,622 25,255
2003          Jan 351,270 77,953 273,317 155,249 118,068 110,372 7,696 531,432 61,087 470,345 385,581 84,764 58,414 26,350         Feb  
r 358,723 81,966 276,757 158,957 117,800 109,921 7,879 534,856 59,456 475,400 390,930 84,470 58,736 25,734
         Mar 364,653 83,157 281,496 161,235 120,261 112,073 8,188 537,523 52,892 484,631 397,079 87,552 61,438 26,114
EU countries 5
 
1999 157,617 47,992 109,625 56,450 53,175 48,500 4,675 194,809 49,243 145,566 111,605 33,961 27,532 6,4292000 177,782 39,563 138,219 78,298 59,921 55,718 4,203 323,049 45,473 277,576 237,583 39,993 32,457 7,5362001 198,118 58,039 140,079 79,205 60,874 55,371 5,503 372,937 53,683 319,254 275,749 43,505 34,716 8,7892002  
4 200,280 59,468 140,812 84,643 56,169 51,693 4,476 402,561 52,503 350,058 307,920 42,138 32,650 9,488
2002          Dec 200,280 59,468 140,812 84,643 56,169 51,693 4,476 402,561 52,503 350,058 307,920 42,138 32,650 9,488
2003          Jan 218,599 73,311 145,288 88,541 56,747 52,159 4,588 395,677 55,852 339,825 300,270 39,555 30,022 9,533
         Feb  r 224,195 76,818 147,377 90,737 56,640 52,050 4,590 399,069 54,266 344,803 304,423 40,380 30,641 9,739
         Mar 229,193 77,577 151,616 92,907 58,709 53,974 4,735 397,172 47,861 349,311 307,232 42,079 32,281 9,798
of which: EMU member countries 1
 
1999 104,071 25,946 78,125 38,747 39,378 36,074 3,304 151,179 38,117 113,062 88,763 24,299 20,173 4,1262000 120,976 22,737 98,239 52,976 45,263 42,389 2,874 247,830 33,698 214,132 185,595 28,537 23,569 4,9682001 126,519 33,787 92,732 46,599 46,133 42,771 3,362 295,943 38,361 257,582 225,711 31,871 24,878 6,9932002  
4 129,490 32,521 96,969 54,542 42,427 39,350 3,077 331,733 37,366 294,367 263,863 30,504 22,996 7,508
2002          Dec 129,490 32,521 96,969 54,542 42,427 39,350 3,077 331,733 37,366 294,367 263,863 30,504 22,996 7,508
2003          Jan 139,455 39,518 99,937 56,874 43,063 39,899 3,164 331,585 40,103 291,482 262,557 28,925 21,381 7,544
         Feb 140,816 38,948 101,868 58,878 42,990 39,845 3,145 334,213 39,235 294,978 265,714 29,264 21,562 7,702         Mar 144,188 40,276 103,912 59,300 44,612 41,395 3,217 328,097 30,622 297,475 266,985 30,490 22,773 7,717
Other industrial countries 3 6
 
1999 71,958 3,595 68,363 45,540 22,823 21,220 1,603 68,024 4,870 63,154 44,518 18,636 15,387 3,2492000 84,502 2,925 81,577 54,272 27,305 25,673 1,632 84,464 4,711 79,753 56,986 22,767 18,621 4,1462001 100,786 3,364 97,422 71,842 25,580 24,082 1,498 93,269 4,178 89,091 64,595 24,496 19,648 4,8482002  
4  r 77,144 2,743 74,401 48,866 25,535 24,303 1,232 90,594 3,267 87,327 64,544 22,783 18,081 4,702
2002          Dec  r 77,144 2,743 74,401 48,866 25,535 24,303 1,232 90,594 3,267 87,327 64,544 22,783 18,081 4,702
2003          Jan 81,006 3,418 77,588 52,281 25,307 24,073 1,234 91,622 3,322 88,300 66,538 21,762 16,908 4,854         Feb  
r 82,261 3,869 78,392 53,258 25,134 23,904 1,230 92,883 3,361 89,522 67,810 21,712 16,821 4,891
         Mar 83,202 4,204 78,998 53,236 25,762 24,560 1,202 95,937 3,176 92,761 70,360 22,401 17,510 4,891
Countries in transition
 
1999 16,402 231 16,171 4,603 11,568 10,934 634 6,256 78 6,178 481 5,697 3,119 2,5782000 19,082 240 18,842 5,028 13,814 13,104 710 8,202 113 8,089 928 7,161 4,384 2,7772001 20,444 204 20,240 6,103 14,137 13,449 688 9,095 151 8,944 1,699 7,245 4,341 2,9042002  
4 20,339 332 20,007 5,680 14,327 13,586 741 10,106 175 9,931 2,119 7,812 4,574 3,238
2002          Dec 20,339 332 20,007 5,680 14,327 13,586 741 10,106 175 9,931 2,119 7,812 4,574 3,238
2003          Jan 20,007 249 19,758 5,730 14,028 13,260 768 10,023 178 9,845 2,148 7,697 4,303 3,394
         Feb 20,097 265 19,832 5,733 14,099 13,365 734 10,320 161 10,159 2,367 7,792 4,474 3,318         Mar 20,399 258 20,141 5,750 14,391 13,632 759 10,680 164 10,516 2,519 7,997 4,551 3,446
Developing countries 2
 
1999 31,354 956 30,398 8,971 21,427 20,123 1,304 24,760 2,441 22,319 9,422 12,897 6,009 6,8882000 39,508 734 38,774 15,154 23,620 22,476 1,144 30,345 2,366 27,979 13,527 14,452 7,631 6,8212001 38,772 827 37,945 14,789 23,156 21,955 1,201 29,965 2,120 27,845 12,518 15,327 7,283 8,0442002  
4 33,258 624 32,634 9,724 22,910 21,824 1,086 30,162 1,751 28,411 13,267 15,144 7,317 7,827
2002          Dec 33,258 624 32,634 9,724 22,910 21,824 1,086 30,162 1,751 28,411 13,267 15,144 7,317 7,827
2003          Jan 31,658 975 30,683 8,697 21,986 20,880 1,106 34,110 1,735 32,375 16,625 15,750 7,181 8,569
         Feb 32,170 1,014 31,156 9,229 21,927 20,602 1,325 32,584 1,668 30,916 16,330 14,586 6,800 7,786         Mar 31,859 1,118 30,741 9,342 21,399 19,907 1,492 33,734 1,691 32,043 16,968 15,075 7,096 7,979
* Including the assets and liabilities vis- à-vis non-residents of individuals in Greece from January 2001. —2Including Cyprus until April 2002. —
Germany. The assets and liabilities vis- à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in 3Including Cyprus from May 2002. —4Change in the range of enterprises
Germany are shown in Table 4 of Section IV, "Banks". Statistical increases required to report owing to an increase in the exemtion limit. —5Including
and decreases have not been eliminated; to this extent the changes in totals Guernsey, Jersey and Isle of Man until December 2002. —6Including
are not comparable with the figures shown in Table X, 7. —1Including Guernsey, Jersey and Isle of Man from January 2003. 
73*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
X. Foreign trade and payments
11. Deutsche Mark and euro exchange rates of selected currencies *
Yearly Japan Denmark Sweden Norway Switzerland Canada Australia New Zealand United States United Kingdom
or monthly
average USD JPY DKK SEK GBP NOK CHF CAD AUD  1 NZD 1 
Historic spot middle rates on the Frankfurt exchange (1 or 100 currency units = DEM ...)
      
1991 1.6612 1.2346 25.932 27.421 2.926  25.580 115.740 1.4501 1.2942 0.9589
1992 1.5595 1.2313 25.869 26.912 2.753  25.143 111.198 1.2917 1.1476 0.84061993 1.6544 1.4945 25.508 21.248 2.483  23.303 111.949 1.2823 1.1235 0.89401994 1.6218 1.5870 25.513 21.013 2.4816 22.982 118.712 1.1884 1.1848 0.9605
1995 1.4338 1.5293 25.570 20.116 2.2620 22.614 121.240 1.0443 1.0622 0.9399
1996 1.5037 1.3838 25.945 22.434 2.3478 23.292 121.891 1.1027 1.1782 1.03571997 1.7348 1.4378 26.249 22.718 2.8410 24.508 119.508 1.2533 1.2889 1.14531998 1.7592 1.3484 26.258 22.128 2.9142 23.297 121.414 1.1884 1.1070 0.9445
      
Euro reference exchange rates published by the European Central Bank (EUR 1 = currency units ...) 2
      
1999 1.0658 121.32 7.4355 8.8075 0.65874 8.3104 1.6003 1.5840 1.6523 2.01452000 0.9236 99.47 7.4538 8.4452 0.60948 8.1129 1.5579 1.3706 1.5889 2.02882001 0.8956 108.68 7.4521 9.2551 0.62187 8.0484 1.5105 1.3864 1.7319 2.13002002 0.9456 118.06 7.4305 9.1611 0.62883 7.5086 1.4670 1.4838 1.7376 2.0366
2001          Aug 0.9005 109.34 7.4450 9.3107 0.62672 8.0552 1.5144 1.3857 1.7169 2.0895
         Sep 0.9111 108.20 7.4413 9.6744 0.62291 7.9985 1.4913 1.4260 1.8036 2.1781
         Oct 0.9059 109.86 7.4367 9.5780 0.62393 7.9970 1.4793 1.4224 1.7955 2.1863
         Nov 0.8883 108.68 7.4452 9.4166 0.61838 7.9224 1.4663 1.4153 1.7172 2.1322         Dec 0.8924 113.38 7.4431 9.4359 0.62012 7.9911 1.4749 1.4075 1.7348 2.1456
2002          Jan 0.8833 117.12 7.4329 9.2275 0.61659 7.9208 1.4745 1.4135 1.7094 2.0826
         Feb 0.8700 116.23 7.4299 9.1828 0.61160 7.7853 1.4775 1.3880 1.6963 2.0771         Mar 0.8758 114.75 7.4324 9.0594 0.61574 7.7183 1.4678 1.3903 1.6695 2.0261
         Apr 0.8858 115.81 7.4341 9.1358 0.61407 7.6221 1.4658 1.4008 1.6537 1.9995
         May 0.9170 115.86 7.4356 9.2208 0.62823 7.5207 1.4572 1.4210 1.6662 1.9859         June 0.9554 117.80 7.4330 9.1137 0.64405 7.4043 1.4721 1.4627 1.6793 1.9517
         July 0.9922 117.11 7.4301 9.2689 0.63870 7.4050 1.4624 1.5321 1.7922 2.0646
         Aug 0.9778 116.31 7.4270 9.2489 0.63633 7.4284 1.4636 1.5333 1.8045 2.1076         Sep 0.9808 118.38 7.4271 9.1679 0.63059 7.3619 1.4649 1.5434 1.7927 2.0847
         Oct 0.9811 121.57 7.4297 9.1051 0.62994 7.3405 1.4650 1.5481 1.7831 2.0381
         Nov 1.0014 121.65 7.4280 9.0818 0.63709 7.3190 1.4673 1.5735 1.7847 2.0155         Dec 1.0183 124.20 7.4264 9.0961 0.64218 7.2948 1.4679 1.5872 1.8076 1.9947
2003          Jan 1.0622 126.12 7.4324 9.1733 0.65711 7.3328 1.4621 1.6364 1.8218 1.9648
         Feb 1.0773 128.60 7.4317 9.1455 0.66977 7.5439 1.4674 1.6299 1.8112 1.9457         Mar 1.0807 128.16 7.4274 9.2265 0.68255 7.8450 1.4695 1.5943 1.7950 1.9497
         Apr 1.0848 130.12 7.4255 9.1541 0.68902 7.8317 1.4964 1.5851 1.7813 1.9700
*Calculated from daily quotations. —1Exchange rates from Australia and central banks at 2.15 p.m. For additional euro reference exchange rates of
New Zealand; those for New Zealand calculated from rates as at the middle the ECB, see Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Report 5, Exchange rate
and end of the month. —2The ECB publishes daily euro reference ex- statistics. 
change rates, which are calculated on the basis of the concertation between
12. Exchange rates for the national currencies of the EMU countries, the Deutsche Mark value of the ECU *
and euro conversion rates
France Italy Netherlands Belgium/ Austria Spain Finland Ireland Portugal Greece ECU values  1 
Yearly Luxembourg GRD  100 /
average FRF  100 ITL  1,000 NLG  100 BEF/LUF  100 ATS  100 ESP  100 FIM  100 IEP  1 PTE  100 EUR  1  2 ECU  1
Historic spot middle rates on the Frankfurt exchange in DEM
   
1991 29.409 1.3377 88.742 4.857  14.211 1.597  41.087 2.671  1.149  0.9103 2.05076
1992 29.500 1.2720 88.814 4.857  14.211 1.529  34.963 2.656  1.157  0.8178 2.020311993 29.189 1.0526 89.017 4.785  14.214 1.303  28.915 2.423  1.031  0.7213 1.936391994 29.238 1.0056 89.171 4.8530 14.214 1.2112 31.108 2.4254 0.9774 0.6683 1.92452
1995 28.718 0.8814 89.272 4.8604 14.214 1.1499 32.832 2.2980 0.9555 0.6182 1.87375
1996 29.406 0.9751 89.243 4.8592 14.214 1.1880 32.766 2.4070 0.9754 0.6248 1.909541997 29.705 1.0184 88.857 4.8464 14.210 1.1843 33.414 2.6297 0.9894 0.6349 1.964381998 29.829 1.0132 88.714 4.8476 14.213 1.1779 32.920 2.5049 0.9763 0.5952 1.969131999 . . . . . . . . . 325.76 .
2000 . . . . . . . . . 336.63 .
      
Irrevocable euro conversion rates (EUR 1 = currency units ...) 3
   
6.55957 1936.27 2.20371 40.3399 13.7603 166.386 5.94573 0.787564 200.482 4 340.750 5 1.95583
*Calculated from daily quotations. —1According to data from the Euro- ence exchange rates of the ECB (EU R 1 = GRD ...). —3Applicable from
pean Commission. —2Until 1998 reciprocal values of the exchange rates for 1 January 1999. —4Applicable from 1 January 2001. —5Deutsche Mark
the Deutsche Mark, published by the Bank of Greece; from 1999 euro refer- conversion rate. 
74*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
BundesbankMonthly ReportMay 2003
X. Foreign trade and payments
 
13. Effective exchange rates * of the euro and selected foreign currencies
 
 
1999 Q1 = 100
Memo item: Effective nominal exchange rates of selected foreign
Indicators of the German economy ’s currencies against the currencies of 19 industrial
Effective exchange rate of the euro price competitiveness  3,4 countries  3,5,6 
Narrow group  1 Broad group  2 19 industrial countries  5 49 countries  7 
Real Real on the basis
of the on the basis on the basis
on the basis of Pound Canadian Swiss Japanese of consumer of consumer deflators of
Period Nominal prices Nominal prices consumer prices US dollar sterling dollar franc yen total sales  8 
1995 107.8 108.8 93.2 106.7 109.5 110.4 109.5 86.1 84.0 106.4 105.4 115.6
1996 107.9 108.8 95.4 105.5 106.1 106.8 104.9 90.9 85.9 108.8 104.2 100.61997 99.1 99.5 90.4 96.5 100.7 101.4 98.9 98.8 99.8 109.7 97.9 95.91998 101.5 101.3 96.6 99.1 100.9 101.1 100.1 103.4 103.3 103.5 99.9 89.71999 95.7 95.7 96.6 95.8 97.8 98.0 97.6 100.8 102.3 102.2 98.3 105.1
2000 85.7 86.3 88.2 86.0 91.8 92.6 91.0 105.4 105.2 103.6 96.8 117.9
2001 87.3 88.6 91.0 87.8 92.1 93.0 91.3 112.0 103.6 100.5 100.5 106.72002 90.0 92.5 95.6 91.7
p 93.5 94.0 92.5 110.7 104.2 98.7 104.9 100.8
1998          Q1 98.8 98.8 92.6 96.4 99.3 99.8 98.7 103.2 104.5 107.3 100.1 92.5         Q2 100.2 100.1 94.2 97.4 100.6 100.7 99.1 104.8 104.8 106.5 98.5 86.8         Q3 102.5 102.5 97.8 100.3 101.6 102.1 101.0 106.3 104.1 102.0 99.4 83.7         Q4 104.2 103.8 101.7 102.4 101.9 101.8 101.5 99.4 99.8 98.0 101.6 95.7
1999          Q1 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 99.9 99.9 100.0 100.0 100.1
         Q2 96.1 96.0 96.5 96.0 98.5 98.3 97.8 102.8 102.9 103.5 98.6 99.0         Q3 94.6 94.7 95.5 94.6 97.2 97.8 97.2 101.4 102.4 102.3 97.7 106.2         Q4 92.2 92.2 94.2 92.6 95.5 95.9 95.5 99.1 104.1 102.8 96.7 115.2
2000          Jan 90.2 90.7 92.4 90.7 . 95.7 94.6 99.7 106.5 104.8 95.4 115.5
         Feb 89.2 89.7 91.2 89.4 93.6 95.1 93.6 102.3 106.5 105.2 95.2 112.5         Mar 87.7 88.1 89.7 87.9 . 93.7 92.2 102.4 106.3 104.6 94.7 116.8
         Apr 86.1 86.5 88.4 86.5 . 92.7 91.3 103.0 107.7 104.3 95.9 118.6
         May 84.5 84.8 86.9 84.8 92.1 91.6 90.2 106.4 106.0 103.0 96.3 118.3         June 87.4 87.9 89.9 87.8 . 93.2 92.0 103.6 102.5 103.7 97.2 118.3
         July 86.9 87.6 89.4 87.3 . 93.5 92.0 104.5 103.4 103.9 97.7 116.8
         Aug 84.6 85.3 87.0 84.9 91.4 92.1 90.1 106.3 104.9 104.0 96.7 118.6         Sep 82.8 83.4 85.3 83.1 . 90.8 88.9 107.7 103.5 104.3 97.2 122.3
         Oct 81.6 82.2 84.4 82.0 . 90.1 88.1 109.4 106.4 102.7 97.8 121.4
         Nov 82.3 83.0 85.1 82.5 90.2 90.4 88.3 110.2 104.6 100.7 97.5 121.1         Dec 85.4 86.4 88.1 85.7 . 92.6 91.0 108.7 104.1 101.5 99.4 115.1
2001          Jan 89.2 89.9 91.7 88.7 . 94.0 92.2 107.7 102.4 102.7 100.0 108.3
         Feb 88.3 89.1 91.0 88.1 92.8 93.9 92.1 108.8 102.0 101.6 99.2 109.9         Mar 88.4 89.4 91.4 88.5 . 93.6 91.9 111.5 102.9 99.7 99.3 106.0
         Apr 87.6 88.8 91.0 88.0 . 93.1 91.4 113.0 103.7 100.0 99.4 104.9
         May 85.9 87.2 89.3 86.3 91.6 92.4 90.4 113.1 104.3 101.3 98.3 107.5         June 84.7 86.0 88.1 85.1 . 91.9 89.8 114.1 104.4 102.7 98.5 108.3
         July 85.4 86.8 89.1 86.0 . 92.7 90.7 114.3 104.9 102.5 99.5 105.8
         Aug 87.7 89.0 91.8 88.3 91.7 93.4 91.9 111.6 103.0 101.1 100.4 106.4         Sep 88.0 89.3 92.6 89.1 . 93.1 91.9 110.7 103.9 99.1 102.2 108.2
         Oct 88.0 89.6 92.8 89.2 . 92.7 91.5 111.8 103.7 99.0 103.0 106.2
         Nov 86.8 88.4 91.3 87.6 92.3 92.0 90.5 113.3 104.0 97.8 103.4 106.3         Dec 87.7 89.8 91.9 88.5 . 93.5 91.7 114.1 104.3 99.0 103.3 102.1
2002          Jan 87.6 90.0 91.6 88.2 . 93.6 91.4 116.4 104.9 97.9 103.3 98.3
         Feb 86.8 89.0 91.1 87.5 92.3 93.3 90.9 117.3 105.4 98.5 102.7 98.2         Mar 86.8 89.3 91.3 87.9 . 93.2 90.8 116.1 104.6 98.7 103.4 99.8
         Apr 87.2 89.7 91.7 88.2 . 92.7 90.4 115.3 105.2 99.0 103.8 99.4
         May 88.6 91.1 93.7 90.0 93.1 93.2 91.3 112.0 103.5 100.4 105.1 101.2         June 90.6 93.2 96.4 92.5 . 94.2 92.7 109.0 101.9 101.0 104.9 101.7
         July 91.7 94.4 98.2 94.2 . 95.2 94.4 106.0 103.5 99.4 106.0 104.3
         Aug 91.1 93.6 97.7 93.6
p 94.1 94.5 93.6 107.3 103.5 98.0 105.7 104.3
         Sep 91.2 93.8 98.0 93.7 . 94.1 93.2 107.6 104.7 97.7 105.6 102.5
         Oct 91.7 94.3 98.5 94.2 . 94.0 93.3 108.5 105.0 97.6 105.8 99.8
         Nov 92.5 95.1 99.3 94.7 p 94.4 94.0 93.1 106.8 104.3 97.7 106.1 100.8
         Dec 93.6 96.7 100.4 96.0 . 95.6 94.7 106.0 104.0 98.3 106.5 99.6
2003          Jan 95.8 98.8 103.0 98.1 . 96.3 95.7 103.0 102.6 98.8 107.9 100.4
         Feb 97.1 100.2 104.4 99.4 p 96.3 97.0 96.5 102.2 101.2 100.5 108.0 99.2
         Mar 97.9 101.3 105.1 100.2 . 97.0 96.5 101.4 99.4 103.0 108.1 99.8
         Apr 98.6 102.0 105.2 100.2 . 96.7 95.9 101.4 98.7 104.1 106.4 98.6
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of April 2000, page 39 ff. —2ECB calculations; in addition to the countries
the currency concerned. —1ECB calculations based on the weighted belonging to the narrow group (see footnote 1), this group also includes the
averages of the effective exchange rates of the euro or, prior to 1999, of the following countries: Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, China, Croatia, Cypru s, Czech
exchange rates of the currencies preceding the euro against the currencies Republic, Estonia, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico ,
of the following countries: Australia, Canada, Denmark, Greece, Hong Kong, Morocco, New Zealand, Philippines, Poland, Romania, Russia, Slovakia,
Japan, Norway, Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, United Slovenia, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand and Turkey. —3The method of
Kingdom and United States. The weights used in these calculations are calculation is consistent with the procedure used by the ECB to compute thebased on manufactured goods trade between 1995 and 1997 and capture effective exchange rates of the euro (see Monthly Bulletin, November 2001,third-market effects. From January 2001, Greece ceased to be a partner page 50 ff.). —4Decline in the values implies an increase in
country in the effective exchange rate of the euro; the weighting scheme competitiveness. —5EMU countries and narrow group of the ECB except
was adjusted accordingly. Due to change in the weighting scheme, effective Australia, Hong Kong, Singapore and South Korea. —6Figures up to
exchange rate data as from January 2001 are not fully comparable with end-1998, computed by linking with the figures published up to Octoberearlier observations. For the prices are not yet available, estimates have 2001. —7EMU countries and broad group of the ECB. —8Annual and
been used. For the definition of the method see: ECB, Monthly Bulletin, quarterly averages. 
75*X. Foreign trade and payments

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
76*

Overview of
publicationsby the DeutscheBundesbankThis overview provides information
about selected recent economic andstatistical publications by the DeutscheBundesbank. Unless otherwise indi-cated, these publications are availablein both English and German, in printedform and on the internet.
The publications are available free of
charge from the Press and Public Rela-tions Division. For a small fee to covercosts, a file which is updated monthlyand contains approximately 40,000time series published by the Bundes-bank can be obtained on magnetictape cassette or ZIP disk from the Divi-sion Statistical data processing, math-ematical methods. Orders should besent, in writing, to one of the ad-dresses listed on the reverse of the titlepage. Selected time series can also bedownloaded from the internet.
Annual Report
Monthly Report
For information on the articles published between
1990 and 2002 see the index attached to the Janu-ary 2003 Monthly Report.
June 2002
– Overall financial flows in 2001– The evolution of accounting standards for
credit institutionsDeutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
77*

– Consequences of increasing capital flows for
exchange rate policy – observations and pro-
spects worldwide
– Direct investment in the real and financial sec-
tor – the Bundesbank Spring Conference 2002
July 2002
– Consumer prices and the changeover from
Deutsche Mark to euro
– Funded old-age provision and the financial
markets
– Monetary policy and investment behaviour – an
empirical study
– Reports from the Economic Research Centre
August 2002
– The economic scene in Germany in summer
2002
September 2002
– The performance of German credit institutions
in 2001
– Productivity developments in Germany– Quotas and voting shares in the IMF
October 2002
– Amendments to the Banking Act caused by
the Fourth Financial Market Promotion Act
– The development of bank lending to the pri-
vate sector
– Fundamental determinants of real exchange
rate movements in the central and east Euro-pean accession countries
November 2002
– The economic scene in Germany in autumn
2002
December 2002
– Recent tax revenue trends– Macroeconomic development of earnings and
costs since the early 1990s– Developments in the external economic rela-
tions of the EU accession countries in centraland eastern Europe
– Reports from the Economic Research Centre
January 2003
– Reserve assets: their development and import-
ance in monetary union
– Role and importance of interest rate derivatives– The new “Minimum requirements for the
credit business of credit institutions” andBasel II
– Reports from the Economic Research Centre
February 2003
– The economic scene in Germany around the
turn of 2002-03
March 2003
– The Eurosystem’s monetary policy framework –
experience to date and measures to improve its
efficiency
– Macroeconomic aspects of share price devel-
opments
– The development of production potential in
Germany
– German balance of payments in 2002
April 2003
– The development of public finances in Ger-
many following qualification for European
monetary union
– The development of bank deposits in Germany– German enterprises’ profitability and financing
in 2001
– Financial sanctions: legal framework and im-
plementation in Germany
May 2003
– The economic scene in Germany in spring
2003Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
78*

Statistical Supplements to the
Monthly Report1
1 Banking statistics (monthly)
2 Capital market statistics (monthly)
3 Balance of payments statistics (monthly)
4 Seasonally adjusted business statistics (monthly)5 Exchange rate statistics (quarterly)
Special Publications
The monetary policy of the Bundesbank,
October 19952
Makro-ökonometrisches Mehr-Länder-Modell,November 1996
3
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im Bereichvon Währung und Wirtschaft, April 1997
3
Europäische Organisationen und Gremien im Be-reich von Währung und Wirtschaft, May 1997
3
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 bis
1989, August 19993
The market for German Federal securities,
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model: MEMMOD,
June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002Die Europäische Wirtschafts- und Währungsunion,
December 2002
3
Special Statistical Publications
1 Banking statistics guidelines and customer clas-
sification, January 20034,52 Bankenstatistik Kundensystematik Firmenver-
zeichnisse, January 20033,6
3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen,
January 20003
4 Financial accounts for Germany 1991 to 2001,
September 20025
5 Annual accounts of west German enterprises
1971 to 1996, March 19991
6 Ratios from the annual accounts of German
enterprises between 1998 and 2000,March 2003
1
7 Erläuterungen zu den Leistungspositionen der
Zahlungsbilanz, September 20013
8 Balance of payments statistics of the Fed-
eral Republic of Germany, 2nd edition,February 1991
o
9 Securities deposits,
August 2002
10 International capital links,
May 20021
11 Balance of payments by region,
August 2002
12 Technologische Dienstleistungen in der Zah-
lungsbilanz, May 20023Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
79*1Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data
contained in the German originals are available in English.2Also available in French, Spanish, Russian and Chinese.
3Available in German only.
4Only the sections “Monthly Balance Sheet Statistics”,
“External position” and “Customer classification”(“Overall survey on sectoral classification”, “Survey on
breakdown by industry or activity” and “Explanatory
notes on the system of customer classification by industry
or activity”) are available in English.
5Current version only available on the internet at half-
yearly intervals.6Current version only available on the internet at quar-
terly intervals.oNot available on the internet.

Deutsche
Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2003
80*Discussion Papers
by the Economic Research Centre
January 2003 02/03
Finite-sample distributions of self-normalized sums
January 2003 03/03
The stock return-inflation puzzle and the asym-metric causality in stock returns, inflation and realactivity
February 2003 04/03
Multiple equilibrium overnight rates in a dynamic
interbank market game
February 2003 05/03
A comparision of dynamic panel data estimators:
Monte Carlo evidence and an application to theinvestment function
March 2003 06/03
A Vectorautoregressive Investment Model (VIM)and Monetary Policy Transmission: Panel Evidencefrom German Firms
March 2003 07/03
Die internationale Integration der Geldmärkte in
den mittel- und osteuropäischen Beitrittsländern:
Abweichungen von der gedeckten Zinsparität,Kapitalverkehrskontrollen und Ineffizienten desFinanzsektors
March 2003 08/03
Die internationale Integration der Devisenmärkte
in den mittel- und osteuropäischen Beitrittslän-
dern: Spekulative Effizienz, Transaktionskostenund WechselkursprämienMarch 2003 09/03Determinants of German FDI: New Evidence fromMicro-Data
March 2003 10/03
On the Stability of Different Financial Systems
April 2003 11/03
Determinants of German Foreign Direct Invest-ment in Latin American and Asian Emerging Mar-
kets in the 1990s
Earlier discussion papers are available on the inter-
net, in some cases as abstracts.
Banking legislation
1 Bundesbank Act and Statute of the European
System of Central Banks and of the EuropeanCentral Bank, June 1998
2 Gesetz über das Kreditwesen, February 2001
3
2a Grundsatz I über die Eigenmittel der Institute,
January 20013
2b Grundsatz II über die Liquidität der Institute,
August 19993
7 Instruction sheet for the reporting of large ex-
posures and loans of 3 million Deutsche Markor more pursuant to sections 13 to 14 of theBanking Act, September 1998
For footnotes, see p 79*.

