MONTHLY REPORT
MAY JUNE JULY AUGUST SEPTEMBER
2004
Vol 56
No 5

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
Deutsche Bundesbank
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 1460431 Frankfurt am MainGermany
Postal address
Postfach 10 06 02
60006 Frankfurt am MainGermany
Tel +49 69 9566 -1Fax +49 69 5601071Telex 41227 within Germany
414431 from abroad
Internet http://www.bundesbank.deReproduction permitted only if source is stated.ISSN 0418 -8292The German original of this Monthly Report
went to press on 14 May 2004.Annual and weekly publishing schedules for
selected statistics of the Deutsche Bundes-bank can be downloaded from our website.The statistical data are also published on theinternet.
TheMonthly Report is published by the Deut-
sche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main, by vir-tue of section 18 of the Bundesbank Act. It isavailable to interested parties free of charge.
This is a translation of the original German-
language version, which is the sole authorita-tive text.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
ContentsEffects of eastward enlargement
of the EU on the German economy 5
The economic scene in Germany
in spring 2004 23
Overview 24Global and European setting 28
The exchange rate regimesof the new EU member statesand exchange rate movementsagainst the euro 36
Monetary policy, capital markets and
banking business 39
Money market management andliquidity needs 40
Economic conditions in Germany 53
Working-day adjustments to consumerprices since April 2004 62
Foreign trade and payments 64Public finances 72
Statistical Section 1*
Key economic data for euro area 6*
Overall monetary survey in the euro area 8*Consolidated financial statementof the Eurosystem 16*Banks 20*Minimum reserves 42*Interest rates 43*

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
4Capital market 48*
Public finances in Germany 52*Economic conditions 60*External sector 67*
Overview of publications by the
Deutsche Bundesbank 77*

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
5Effects of eastward
enlargement
of the EU on the
German economyOn 1 May 2004, ten new members
were accepted into the EuropeanUnion (EU). This so-called eastwardenlargement of the EU represents aconsiderable challenge for all thecountries concerned and for the Com-munity institutions. Never before haveso many countries joined the EU at thesame time and never before have theeconomic differences within the groupof countries joining the EU and be-tween these and the existing memberstates been so great.
Although the EU’s pre-accession strat-
egy had already provided the newmember states with a “priveleged”position in relation to the EU helpingthem catch up with the existing mem-ber states, economic integration willbe additionally stimulated by furtherinstitutional and economic involve-ment. The effects will be felt mostly inthe new member states but are alsolikely to result in a variety of changesin Germany owing to its geographicalproximity and close economic relationswith those economies. The followingarticle examines the potential effectsof EU enlargement on Germany. Itcomes to the conclusion that Germanycan take advantage of the chancesof an increasing division of labour inEurope if its economic policy continuesto focus on reforms.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
6Eastward enlargement of the EU:
characteristics and special features
The accession of Cyprus (the Greek part), the
Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia,Lithuania, Malta, Poland, the Slovak Republicand Slovenia to the EU on 1 May 2004brought the number of EU states up to 25. Atthe same time, the EU population increasedby approximately 74 million or almost one-fifth. Looking at it from a purely quantitativedimension, the so-called eastward enlarge-ment of the EU is unprecedented. However,the bigger challenge is probably the integra-tion of states that are significantly differentfrom the existing EU members in their history,their economic development and their eco-nomic structure. Despite the generally rapidcatching-up process, there are still large dis-crepancies, particularly in respect of thestandard of living and economic strength.The per capita income of the new memberstates – measured in purchasing powerparities – amounts to less than 50% of theaverage of the “old” EU.
In addition, the new members themselves
represent a very heterogeneous group.Whereas Cyprus and Malta can already lookback at a long market-based tradition, theother eight states completed a fundamentaltransformation from socialist planned econ-omies to open market economies during the1990s. Considerable differences can also beidentified within the group of countries in re-spect of the per capita income. In the case ofSlovenia and Cyprus, this amounts to 70%and almost 80% respectively of the averagelevel of the EU 15 member states in terms ofpurchasing power parity; thus, they already
exceed Greece and Portugal. By contrast, theper capita income of Latvia is only around37% of the level of the EU 15 memberstates.
The following section will look at the current
status of Germany’s economic relations withthe new EU states in more detail. In particular,it will examine the possible effects of east-ward enlargement of the EU on the domesticeconomy. Significant implications of the en-larged single market can already be perceivedas the states had already had a preferentialstatus in relation to the EU since the start ofthe 1990s. EU enlargement is likely tostrengthen further the tendencies already inevidence. Furthermore, the influences on theGerman tax and social security systems are ofinterest in this context. Finally, some conclu-sions for economic policy are drawn from theanalysis.
Integration of trade and production
As a result of the opening-up of the markets
in central and eastern Europe at the start ofthe 1990s, the German trade relations withthe new EU states have already considerablyintensified. In these economies, there arose,on the one hand, a major need for imports of“western” products, above all, capital goods,which were required for the transformationof the former socialist planned economiesinto market economies. On the other hand,they offered cost advantages in production,particularly for inputs. As a result, they be-
Eastward
enlargement
of the EU
unprecedented
Major
differences
between the
new membersThe next step
Liberalisation
of foreign trade
as an impetus
for worldwide
economic
integration

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
7came attractive new locations within value-
added chains of German enterprises.
Germany is the new member states’ most im-
portant trading partner within the (old) EU.On an average of the period from 1993 to2003, German exports made up around 40%of total EU exports to the new memberstates. German imports from the ten partnercountries had regularly been just as high asthe total amount of imports of all the other“old” EU members put together.
German trade with the new EU member
states more than quadrupled between 1993and 2003. This means that last year Germanywas already obtaining over 10% of its im-ports from these economies (1993: 4%).These states are also playing an increasinglyimportant role for German exports. Almost
9% of German exports now go to thosestates, with the result that the new partnersquantitatively import approximately as muchfrom Germany as the United States does. Thethree largest economies, the Czech Republic,Hungary and Poland, account for four-fifthsof German trade with these states.
A large part of the trade integration of the
new member states had therefore alreadytaken place in the run-up to joining the EU. Insome sectors, imports from central and east-ern Europe have doubled. At least one-fifthof imports of wood products, printed matter,metal products, electrical machinery and ap-paratus, motor vehicles (including parts) andfurniture now comes from the new EU mem-ber states.2003
Exports ( 5 661.6 billion)
EU 25
(64.0%)
Other
countries
(36.0%)
New
EU countries
(8.5%)EU 15
(55.5%)Imports ( 5 532.0 billion)
EU 25
(61.2%)
Other
countries
(38.8%)
New
EU countries
(10.8%)EU 15
(50.4%)Germany’s trade relations with the enlarged EU
Deutsche BundesbankOther (1.7%)Hungary (1.8%)Poland (2.5%)Czech Republic (2.5%)
Other (2.2%)Hungary (2.3%)Poland (3.0%)Czech Republic (3.3%)
Germany the
most important
trading partner
Increasing
significance
of the new
members for
German foreign
trade

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
8The relative importance of imports from the
new EU states for the German economy canalso be seen in the proportion of goods im-ported from these countries in the overallsupply of goods to the German economy(sum of domestic turnover and imports fromall countries).
1In the case of clothing and fur-
niture, whose manufacture requires a com-paratively large application of simple func-tions and can therefore generally take placein the new member states more cheaply, theproportion amounts to one-tenth. Apart fromthat, it is mostly no greater than 5%. If thesize of the new member states’ economiescontinues to increase, though, their marketshare in Germany could continuously rise.
The increasing integration has so far not had
any direct effect on employment develop-ments in Germany on balance, even though
those employed in industries whose exportsare increasing seem to be gaining and thosein industries whose imports are increasing los-ing out.
2Although the fall in employment
that had begun in numerous industries afterthe end of the unification boom also con-tinued after 1997, it has noticeably weak-ened for the most part since then. In some in-dustrial sectors, there have even been in-Imports from the new EU countries by sector
In %
Change from Share of overall imports Share of domestic supply 1
Item 1997 to 2002 1997 2002 1997 2002
Textiles 62 7 12 4 7
Clothing – 10 15 13 10 9Wood and wood products 14 23 29 6 8Paper 170 3613
Printed matter 260 6 19 0 1Chemicals 39 3311
Rubber and plastic products 175 7 14 2 4Basic metals 43 8 10 3 4Metal products 81 15 22 2 4Machinery and equipment 137 8 14 2 5Office machinery and computers 529 2816
Electrical machinery and apparatus 110 15 21 4 8Radio receivers and components 273 3624
Controllers, optics 151 3613
Motor vehicles and motor vehicle parts 240 9 21 3 8Furniture, jewellery and toys 97 16 25 5 10
1Domestic supply = domestic sales + imports.
Deutsche Bundesbank
1Please note that such turnover as imports does not
refer only to finished products but also includes semi-
finished products and parts. The import content of ex-
ports should also be considered. On the other hand, a
loss in domestic value added as a result of higher exports
by the new member states to third countries is likewise
not included.
2Econometric studies have not found any substantial ef-
fects of foreign trade on wages and employment in Ger-
many either. See, for example, T Boeri and H Br/C252cker
(2001), The impact of eastern enlargement on employ-
ment and labour markets in the EU member states, Re-
port for the European Commission.Ambivalent
employment
effects

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
9creases in staffing again. Remarkably, this
also particularly applies to those industries inwhich the level of imports from the new EUstates has risen sharply. In the car industry, forinstance, the proportion of goods importedfrom those countries for domestic use in-creased between 1997 and 2002 from 3% to8%; at the same time, employment in Ger-many went up by 2.6% per year. In this con-nection, besides the cyclical factor, the importof vehicle parts from central and eastern Eur-ope is likely to have played a part. This hasstrengthened the price competitiveness ofthe German car industry. It is also becomingclear that a purely import-oriented view ofthe consequences of opening up the marketis not sufficient. In the case of furniture, how-ever, rising imports were accompanied by asharp fall in employment. This suggests thatthere is likely to be a crowding-out of domes-tic value added in this sector.
The rapid progress made in opening up the
markets of central and eastern Europe hasprobably had a positive effect on price devel-opments in Germany with regard to goodswhose production requires a comparativelylarge amount of low-skilled work. Furniture iscertainly one such good, as is clothing. Inthe case of textiles, however, the price-dampening effect from third countries is likelyto have been more significant than from thenew member states. In the short term, theaccession of these countries in itself is notexpected to have any substantial additionaleffects on the general price level in Germany.Although the consumer prices for goods and,above all, services are still considerably lowerin the new member states, in particular, thanin Germany, this is mainly a reflection of the
low wage costs of providing non-tradable ser-vices. Price adjustments will therefore takeplace primarily in the new member statesthemselves after joining the EU. Substantialpressure on prices for certain services wouldnot be expected in Germany until wages, es-pecially those for more basic activities, hadbeen appropriately adjusted following larger-scale immigration. Although this should bedelayed by interim arrangements, increasedinternational trade may raise the pressure tocreate a stronger upward spread of thequalification-based wage structure and, inthat way, influence the prices of more basicservices.
The so-called “gravitation approach” can be
used to assess the further development oftrade between Germany and the new mem-ber states. Besides per capita income, dis-tance is taken into particular consideration (asan approximation of transaction costs) as adeterminant of trade flows. A relevant studyby the Bundesbank came to the conclusionthat, from the new EU member states’ pointof view, imports from Germany were farabove the value that would be expected ac-cording to the gravitation model.
3This is ex-
plained by the leading role played by Germandirect investment and the high level of con-formity between the German export goodsstructure and the demand for imports in thecountries concerned. These factors could alsoprovide Germany with a future competitiveadvantage over other EU countries, bringing
3See Deutsche Bundesbank, Germany’s relative position
in the central and east European countries in transition,
Monthly Report , October 1999, p 15 ff.Positive price
developmentsFavourable
export
prospects

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
10with it a sustained above-average share of
foreign trade with the new member states.
Furthermore, since all the new EU states are
in a process of catching up economically, theresults of the gravitation approach are, on thebasis of previous years, more likely to under-estimate the potential long-term extent of bi-lateral trade.
4According to our own calcula-
tions, real exports by German enterprises tothe new EU states increase by
2/C253% with each
percentage point of real economic growth inthe region. Germany’s trade relations withthis region are therefore likely to experience afurther impetus despite the new memberstates having already successfully integratedto a greater than average extent.
Free movement of capital and
locational competition
The liberalisation of financial transactions, the
increased legal certainty as a result of joiningthe EU, the greater economic freedom afterincorporating the internal market regulationsand the efforts to improve the infrastructurein the new member states will continue to in-tensify locational competition in Europe. Inaddition to this, many new EU states haveshaped their tax legislation in a very invest-ment-friendly way and are therefore able tocounter other locational disadvantages suchas their peripheral position in some cases.
The economic catching-up process, above all,
of the central and east European countrieswas accompanied by large capital exportsfrom Germany to these states. At the end ofJune 2003 – the most recent data available at
present – the German assets position vis-/C224-visthe ten new EU states amounted to 368 bil-
lion compared with 331 billion at the end of
1997, the first year for which a reliable assetsposition could be drawn up. Direct invest-ment dominated the assets position at 331
billion and a share of just under 46%; it isalso particularly important in terms of realeconomics, owing not least to its interactionswith trade flows.
Following the fall of the Iron Curtain, German
direct investment increased especially rapidlyin neighbouring countries to the east. Ger-man firms invested significantly in this regionyear by year, particularly at the end of the1990s. Participating interests in privatised en-terprises, the build-up of trade and distribu-tion facilities as well as the building of manu-facturing plants played an important part inthis respect.
5In recent years, however, Ger-
man direct investment has noticeably fallen(see the chart on page 11).
4See also B Alecke, T Mitze and G Untiedt (2003), Das
Handelsvolumen der ostdeutschen Bundesl/C228nder mit Polen
und Tschechien im Zuge der EU-Osterweiterung: Ergebnisse
auf Basis eines Gravitationsmodells, DIW-Vierteljahreshefte
f/C252r Wirtschaftsforschung, Vol 72, pp 565-578. Further-
more, the study finds an uneven distribution of trade profits
between the L/C228nder . Bavaria and, some way behind, the
new L/C228nder bordering Poland or the Czech Republic,
recorded particularly high rates of growth.
5For more on the determinants of German direct invest-
ment in eastern Europe, see: C M Buch and F Toubal
(2003), Economic integration and FDI in transition econ-
omies: What can we learn from German data? Vierteljah-
reshefte zur Wirtschaftsforschung, Vol 72, pp 594-610.
See also: DIHK (2003), Produktionsverlagerung als der
Globalisierungsstrategie von Unternehmen, Ergebnisse
einer Unternehmensbefragung, Berlin, and DIHK (2000),
Investitionen im Ausland, Investitionsabsichten deutscher
Industrieunternehmen im Herbst 2000 f/C252r 2001, Ergeb-
nisse einer DIHK-Umfrage bei den Industrie- und Han-
delskammern vom Herbst 2000, Berlin.German capital
exports support
catching-up
processVital import-
ance of direct
investment

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
11The structure of the direct investment stocks
shows that the investment of German enter-prises in the new member states goes beyondthe (cost-related) shift of production. This cer-tainly plays an important role in the manufac-ture of transport equipment, which, at18
1/C252% at the end of 2002, had the largest
share of German direct investment in thenew member states. However, trade as wellas electricity, gas and water supply constituteother major targets for foreign investment; inthese areas, cost aspects are less importantthan other motives such as the supply of thelocal markets. Around 12
1/C252% of German dir-
ect investment stock in the new memberstates was invested in the wholesale or retailtrade, especially in the Czech Republic andPoland. Electricity, gas and water supply ac-counted for approximately 13%; the CzechRepublic, Hungary and Poland are the mostimportant target countries in this sector. To-gether with the fields of transport and com-munication, these sectors – with outdatedcapital stock in some cases – attracted thelion’s share of German purchases of partici-pating interests from mergers and acquisi-tions (85%). By contrast, the car sector ac-counted for only just under 10% of the M&Avolume. However, German car manufacturersand their suppliers have often not purchasedexisting production plants in the new EUstates but, instead, have built new premiseson greenfield sites. Investment in these is notincluded in the aforementioned figures.
German banks are less heavily represented in
terms of direct investment in the central andeast European EU countries. Only around8
1/C252% of total spending on M&A flowing intothe banking sector of the new EU countries
stemmed from German firms. Across all eco-nomic sectors, however, Germany had a 19%share of corporate acquisitions in the new EUcountries.
Differences in wage costs are an important
motive for direct investment by German en-terprises. Despite a sharp rise in recent years,the average income in the new central andeast European member states has so farreached only a fraction of the German value.In terms of the labour costs per hour worked,it stands at between 13% and 22% of theGerman level in the three largest countries,namely the Czech Republic, Hungary andPoland.DM bn  5 bn
1Direct investment flows. — 2According
to the international investment position as
of end-June 2003. — o From 1999, all
figures in euro.
Deutsche Bundesbank1993 2003
Direct investment stock2
Other
countries(44.7%)
New EU countries (5.0%)EU 15
(50.3%)EU 25
(55.3%)0+ 1.0+ 2.0+ 3.0+ 4.0+ 5.0+ 6.0
94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02oDirect investment in the new
member states 1
Capital exports +German direct investment
in the enlarged EU
3.0+
2.5+
2.0+
1.5+
1.0+
0.5+
0Weight of the
individual
sectors varies
Large
differential
in wage costs

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
12However, such wage gaps do not necessarily
induce shifts in capital. Wage gaps that result,for example, from different quality profiles ofthe economically active population or fromdifferences in the underlying conditions (suchas the infrastructure set-up) do not triggerany capital flows. It is difficult with the exist-ing data, though, to determine the differ-ences in productivity that are relevant for dir-ect investment. However, labour productivitycan serve as a rough indicator of the differen-tial between Germany and the new memberstates. On that basis, the productivity shortfallof the largest three new member statesamounts to between 60% and 70% com-pared with Germany; in recent years, it hasdeclined only slightly.
6According to these
data, unit labour costs in the largest threenew member states have so far not reachedeven half of the German level, despite a sharp
rise in recent years. This suggests that there isstill considerable potential not just for add-itional trade but also for further relocations.
In principle, the creation of new investment
opportunities abroad increases the minimumyield demanded for domestic investmentwhen the supply of capital is unchanged,affecting not just new investment but alsoreplacement investment. This is certainly wel-comed by domestic investors owing to thehigher rates of return but for the domesticreal economy this means that fixed capital in-vestment is falling (relatively). Capital mobilityleads to a part of domestic savings being in-Labour costs in selected new member states*
As a percentage of the German figures
Country/indicator 1999 2000 2001 2002
Poland
Compensation of employees 10.1 11.3 13.7 13.3Labour productivity 27.5 29.1 29.8 30.8Unit labour costs 36.7 38.8 46.0 43.2
Czech Republic
Compensation of employees 12.7 13.3 15.2 17.5Labour productivity 39.3 39.4 39.5 41.7Unit labour costs 32.3 33.7 38.4 41.9
Hungary
Compensation of employees 14.7 15.8 18.5 21.6Labour productivity 46.3 45.7 45.7 47.3Unit labour costs 31.7 34.5 40.4 45.6
Sources: Eurostat, Groningen Growth and Development Centre,
Bundesbank calculations. — *Figures on an hourly basis. Con-
verted on the basis of current exchange rates.
Deutsche Bundesbank
6In view of the problems in comparing the data on
hours worked and production, these data are to be
regarded only as indications.Increased
domestic
rate of return
requirements

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
13vested not in Germany but abroad, ie in the
new EU countries, for example. The capitalintensity of production in Germany then in-creases more slowly or possibly even goesdown somewhat, with the result that the realwages that are consistent with a constantemployment ratio are lower than in a refer-ence scenario without capital mobility.
Over the past few years, there has indeed
been a broad slump in investment in Ger-many where the national saving ratio has, inany case, been low.
7The overall net invest-
ment ratio, which, in addition to investmentin industrial assets, also comprises investmentin housing and public infrastructure, has fall-en to slightly above 3
1/C252% of the disposable
income of the domestic sectors. This meantthat the level of German (net) investmentabroad (equivalent to the difference betweendomestic savings and domestic fixed capitalformation) was recently similar to that of do-mestic investment. Fixed capital formation inGermany has evidently become considerablyless attractive than foreign investment (in-cluding German financial investment abroad).However, this is due to only a minor extent tothe opening up of the markets in central andeastern Europe. Most capital exports go tothe advanced economies.
Freedom of establishment, migration
and the labour market
The EC Treaty guarantees not only the free
movement of goods and capital but also free-dom of movement for workers, freedom of es-tablishment for the self-employed and freetrade in services even if this means work being
carried out in the beneficiary’ s country of domi-cile. Furthermore, it follows from the generalban on discrimination that citizens of otherEU countries working in EU member states areto be treated on an equal basis to residents.
In the Accession Treaty, however, transition
periods were agreed according to the so-called “2+3+2” model for all new memberstates except Cyprus and Malta. According tothis arrangement, during the first two yearsafter enlargement, the original 15 memberstates can apply national measures or meas-ures arising from bilateral agreements to re-%
Investment ratio
Saving ratio
1991 2003Saving and investment
in Germany *
*Overall ratio (excluding depreciation
allowances) as a percentage in each case of
the disposable income of the domestic
sectors.
Deutsche Bundesbank.12
11
10
98
7
65
4
3
92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02
7As a result of the long running period of stagnation,
the trend decline in the net investment ratio is possibly
overstated – especially compared with 1991 and 1992,
which were marked by the unification boom.Transition rules

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
14strict the access of employees from the new
member states to their labour markets with-out further justification. An initial extensionof these regulations is possible at the requestof the “old” member states. After a furtherperiod of three years freedom of movementwill, in principle, come into force. A memberstate can, however, demand a further two-year extension of the transition regime on thegrounds of serious existing or foreseeable dis-ruptions to its labour market. After sevenyears, the restrictions no longer apply. Apartfrom the United Kingdom and Ireland, theoriginal EU countries intend to make use ofthe transitional arrangements. Furthermore,Germany and Austria have been granted theright to limit free movement of services insome sectors for a maximum of seven yearswhere such freedom would entail the cross-border deployment of labour. In Germany,this applies to construction and a number ofother economic sectors. Freedom of estab-lishment for the self-employed is not subjectto any particular restrictions during the transi-tion period or subsequently.
Owing to the transitional arrangements that
will apply for a maximum of seven years,there will be no immediate influx of labourinto Germany. At the same time, freedom ofestablishment for the self-employed and freemovement of services (subject to considerablelimitations only in some sectors) will foster theintegration of the markets. The questionoften raised in this connection is whether thetransitional arrangements are necessary at allin view of there being little identifiable mobil-ity of labour between the original memberstates and even within the countries them-selves. The first thing that can be established
here is that the differences in income betweenthe original EU countries and the new EUmembers are very much greater than in theold EU or within individual countries. For ex-ample, the average monthly pay of an em-ployee in Poland amounted to approximately3835 in 2002 whereas the figure was 32,725
in Germany. Even in Greece and Portugal, EUcountries with low incomes, wages werearound 107% and 70% higher respectivelythan in Poland. Although the average cost ofliving in Poland is almost half what it is in Ger-many, the mathematical difference in real in-come from a Polish point of view amounts toapproximately 75% if this factor is taken intoconsideration. There are therefore definitematerial incentives for emigrating to the old“rich” member states. However, there arealso obstacles standing in the way of econom-ic success in a foreign country that need to beovercome first, eg language barriers. Further-more, most people feel better in their familiarsurroundings than in a foreign country. Forthat reason alone the economic differential isby no means the only determinant of migra-tion flows even if it is an important one.
In recent years, a series of studies has been
undertaken on the size of possible migrationflows between eastern and western Europewhen free movement is permitted.
8All these
8Seeinter alia T Boeri and H Br/C252cker et al (2001), The
impact of eastern enlargement on employment and la-
bour markets in the EU member states, Report for the
European Commission; H-W Sinn et al (2001), EU-Erwei-
terung und Arbeitskr/C228ftemigration, ifo Beitr/C228ge zur
Wirtschaftsforschung, Vol 2, Munich; P Alvarez-Plata,
H Br/C252cker, B Siliverstovs (2003), Potential migration from
central and eastern Europe into the EU-15 – an update,
DIW, Berlin.Large income
differential
Reasons for
migration

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
15estimations face the problem that there has
not been any freedom of movement betweenthe countries concerned for several decadesand empirical evidence from other regionstherefore has to be applied to eastern Europe.Consequently, these studies have largely fall-en back on Germany’s experience of migra-tion in the growing EU as well as in a numberof third countries since the beginning of the1960s. Certain factors that can change overtime, most notably differences in income andlabour market opportunities, regularly proveto be determinants of migration decisions insuch estimations as are demographic vari-ables in some cases. This is important in thatit is typically young people who migrate. Irre-spective of the size of the income gap, anageing population does not exert any majormigration pressure.
9In addition, there are un-
doubtedly significant timeless influences onmigration behaviour such as the geographicalproximity and cultural affinity of two coun-tries.
Differences in various migration scenarios re-
sult, on the one hand, from assumptionsabout the future economic development inthe new EU countries. The more quicklyprogress is made on the convergence of realincome and the better the employment op-portunities develop compared to Germany,the less immigration there will be. On theother hand, a large real income gap will re-main for a long time even if the economy de-velops very favourably in the new memberstates. The low starting level in those statesis reason enough for this. According to theeconometric estimates, some of which aremodelled very differently, between 100,000and 200,000 immigrants can be expected an-
nually in the first few years after the openingof the borders.
A more recent study based on surveys of
migration behaviour and conducted on be-half of the European Commission
10supports
the hypothesis of a somewhat weaker influx.Although there is a relatively strong generalinclination among many people in the newmember states to work in other EU countriesat some point, only a small proportion ofthose questioned actually pursue the matterfurther. Moreover, these people are typicallywell-educated and young. Taking into consid-eration all the arguments, there is therefore alot to be said for expecting a maximum netinflux of one million people from the newEU states in the first five years of free move-ment.
The labour market effects of increased immi-
gration crucially depend on which peopleemigrate under which conditions and howflexibly the labour market of the recipientcountry reacts to the influx. Owing to thepostponement of the starting date of freemovement, emigration to Germany will occurat a time when the economically active popu-lation is declining, and so the effects are likelyto be different from those derived in a scen-
9See M Fertig, C M Schmidt (2000), Aggregate-level mi-
gration studies as a tool for forecasting future migration
streams, IZA Discussion Paper No 183. Microeconometric
studies also show that age plays a very important role
when deciding to migrate. For an overview of this, see
T Bauer and K Zimmermann (1999), Assessment of pos-
sible migration pressure and its labour market impact fol-
lowing EU enlargement to central and eastern Europe,
IZA Research Report No 3.
10See H Krieger (2004), Migration trends in an enlarged
Europe, European Foundation for the Improvement of
Living and Working Conditions, Draft, 26.Migration
scenarios

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
16ario where the economically active popula-
tion is growing or at least not shrinking (orfrom those observed in the past).
The labour market success of migrants is
essentially determined by two factors. Thehuman capital specific to the country of ori-gin tends to diminish as a result of the emi-gration from the home country. At the sametime, it is often difficult for migrants to ex-ploit the full capacity of their career-specifichuman capital, especially as they need to ac-quire complementary country-specific humancapital, notably knowledge of the local lan-guage. Migrants therefore frequently look forwork in fields that do not place any great de-mands for country-specific or career-specifichuman capital. However, one advantage ofmigrants is their geographical mobility. Thosewho move to a foreign country to work gowhere the work is.
Immigration increases employment in the
adopted country if wages are sufficiently flex-ible and residents do not withdraw from thelabour market. Although additional employ-ment is possible only in the case of fairly low-paid jobs with a given capital stock, realwage reduction will be lower in the mediumterm following an adjustment of the capitalstock. Moreover, since the transition arrange-ments come to an end at the same time asthe economically active domestic populationwill start shrinking, there is unlikely to be anylasting downward wage pressure from theimmigration expected at that time. However,increased immigration might at least force anadjustment to the qualification-based wagestructure. Owing to their lack of country-specific human capital, migrants are fre-
quently in competition with less qualified do-mestic workers and may push down theirwages. The wages of better-educated resi-dents could even tend to rise more quickly ifthere is more immigration. If a disproportion-ately high number of low-qualified workersimmigrate and wages at the lower end of thewage scale are more rigid than at the higherend, additional immigration will add to do-mestic unemployment.
11
Given the likely demographic development inGermany, it is important that capital flowsand migration can at least be partly seen assubstitutes. The more vigorously immigrationis constrained, the stronger direct investmentin the new member states will be and theweaker fixed capital formation in Germanywill be. In view of the ageing population,however, Germany must have an interest inensuring that the basis for taxes and social se-curity contributions does not shrink but, ifpossible, continues to grow. From this pointof view, the immigration of workers must beallowed.
11See H Br/C252cker (2003), Die Arbeitsmarkteffekte der
Ost-West-Migration: Theoretische /C220berlegungen, Simula-
tionen und empirische Befunde, DIW Vierteljahreshefte
zur Wirtschaftsforschung, Vol 72, pp 579-593. In his
model calculations, Br/C252cker comes to the conclusion
that, under plausible assumptions, the unemployment
rate of the lower qualified could be 0.2 to 0.3 percentage
point higher than in the reference scenario. In other vari-
ations of his model calculations, the unemployment rate
of the low qualified economically active population rises
by more than 0.6 percentage point. The vast majority of
other empirical studies come to the conclusion for Ger-
many that, on the one hand, the labour market effects of
immigration are less pronounced than in Br/C252cker’s model
calculations but, on the other hand, the assumption that
the field of lower-skilled activities is more adversely
affected is confirmed.Effects of
migrationMigration
and movement
of capital

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
17The freedom of migration and establishment
is of particular importance for the east Ger-man border region. It is already possible toswitch to cheaper providers in the CzechRepublic or Poland for services such as hair-dressing, dentures and motor vehicle repairs.The restriction of freedom of migration cantherefore have only a very limited effect on“protecting” the regional labour market. Thedisadvantages of restricting freedom of es-tablishment and migration will therefore beparticularly noticeable here. In these regions,industrial estates have been built and residen-tial areas maintained at considerable expense.These currently stand empty, firstly, becauseinvestors are investing some kilometres fur-ther to the east owing to the low wage levelthere and, secondly, because some of theeast German population are emigrating tothe west owing to the economic problems.Unless the economies in the regions eitherside of the border integrate quickly, there is athreat of wastelands being created on theGerman side.
Effects of EU enlargement on general
government in Germany
EU enlargement affects public finances in
Germany in several respects. For example, theGerman fiscal system is exposed to height-ened international tax competition. Depend-ing on the extent and structure of the migra-tion induced by the accession of the newmember states, additional spending may beincurred, especially for social benefits. Thereare also likely to be additional fiscal burdensemanating from the EU budget since most ofthe new member states will be net beneficiar-
ies at first. On the other hand, tax competi-tion might raise the pressure to create a moretransparent, simpler tax system and, aboveall, one that promotes performance incen-tives. The same goes for the organisation ofthe social security systems.
Enlargement will considerably further height-
en tax competition within the EU as the newmember states offer considerably more at-tractive tax conditions for enterprises thanGermany does. They are planning even fur-ther tax cuts in some cases. This will increasethe pressure on the “old” countries – such asGermany – to further improve their tax condi-tions for enterprises.
The tax burden on corporate profits is far
lower in the new member states than in Ger-many (see the table on page 18). This appliesabove all to corporations which are exposedto international competitive pressures.Whereas their profits in Germany, despite therelief provided by the tax reform, are still sub-ject to a marginal tax burden of almost 39%in all, the maximum business tax rate in thenew member states is 28% (Czech Republic).In most cases it is still below 20%. Particularlyattractive are conditions in the Baltic states,which have tax rates of 15% (Latvia andLithuania) or in some cases do not tax corpor-ate profit at all (such as Estonia). Further-more, of the other countries, the CzechRepublic and Hungary are planning a furthercut in their corporation tax rate for thecoming years.
Risiks and
opportunities
for German
public financesHeightened tax
competition
New member
states with
attractive tax
rates ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
18Besides tax rates, regulations governing the
determination of profit are also of great im-portance for the choice of location and theinvestment decisions of enterprises. In mostof the new member states, however, theseare likewise designed very generously, espe-cially in respect of the depreciation rules.
12
Because of this, the effective tax burden oncorporate profits is mostly far lower than inGermany. A detailed analysis by the Centrefor European Economic Research
13found it to
range from 13% (Lithuania) to around 25%(Poland) compared with just over 37% inGermany for investments by corporationsdomiciled in these countries.
14Moreover, the
effective tax burden on corporate profits hascontinued to fall in some of the new memberstates during 2004.The maximum rates of personal income tax in
most of the new member states are also farlower than the German level (of 47.5% atpresent including the solidarity surcharge), afactor which is significant for enterprises’choice of location in respect of management.The Slovak Republic, which introduced a flattax of 19% at the start of this year, is themost attractive in this respect. In particular,Selected indicators on the tax burden in the new member states*
%
Average tax burden at the corporate level
in the case of...
Marginal tax rate on
profits of corporationsInvestments by
corporations residentin the countriesconcernedInvestments by
German corporationsin the countriesconcernedTop rate of
income taxAverage
overalltaxwedgeon thefactorlabour
1Standrate ofvalueaddedtax
Country 2003 2004 2003 2004 2003 2004 2003 2004 2002 2003Estonia 0/26
2 0/26 2 22.5 22.5 24.6 24.6 26 26 . 18
Latvia 19 15 17.8 14.3 23.4 20.1 25 25 . 18Lithuania 15 15 13.1 13.1 15.4 15.4 33 33 . 18Poland 27 19 24.7 17.5 29.8 23.1 40 40 42.7 22Slovak Republic 25 19 22.1 16.8 27.4 22.5 38 19 41.4 20Slovenia 25 25 21.6 21.6 33.4 33.4 50 50 . 20Czech Republic 31 28 (2006: 24) 24.2 (2006: 17.1) 31.9 (2006: 25.7) 32 32 43.5 22Hungary 18-20 16 (ultimate
aim: 12)19.4 14
3 24.9 19.8 3 40 38 46.3 25
By comparison
Germany 40 4 38.7 4 37.2 36.0 51.2 5 47.55 51.3 16
Source: German Federal Ministry of Finance, Centre for Euro-
pean Economic Research, OECD, ECB. — *Excluding Malta and
Cyprus (Greek part). — 1Wage tax and social security contribu-
tions of an average unmarried wage or salary earner in relationto gross earnings plus the employer’s share of social securitycontributions. — 2In the case of profit retention/profit
distribution. — 3Assuming a planned subsequent corporation
tax rate of 12%. — 4Corporation tax, trade tax and solidarity
surcharge. — 5Including solidarity surcharge.
Deutsche Bundesbank
12By contrast, the intertemporal offsetting of losses is,
in some cases, even more heavily restricted than in
Germany.
13See specifically: Centre for European Economic
Research and Ernst & Young (2003), Company Taxation
in the New EU Member States, Frankfurt am Main and
Mannheim.
14Only the “tax wedge” at enterprise level is recorded
here. For investment by German corporations in the
countries concerned, although the rates are somewhat
higher owing to the additional consideration taken of
withholding taxes on the profit distributions to the
German parent company, they are mostly still far below
the ratio in Germany.... and low
effective tax
rates for enter-
prises ...... as well as
low maximum
rates of
income tax

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
19the Baltic states – which likewise operate a
uniform rate – moderately tax top earners.One downside of the flat tax, however, is thatlow incomes are subject to a higher tax ratein the countries concerned than in Germany(where the starting rate has been 16% sincethe beginning of this year). If social securitycontributions, which also need to be takeninto account, are included, there are there-fore fewer advantages for average earners,for example, than there are under the fiscalrules applying in Germany whereas corporateprofits and top earners fare better in thesecountries. However, since total labour costsin the new EU countries amount to only afraction of the German level, this is of minorimportance for international locational com-petition.
The aforementioned conditions in the new
member states lead to the conclusion that, inview of the need to adapt the German taxsystem to take account of international com-petition, not only income tax tariffs but alsothe effective burden of direct taxes on in-comes should be cut further in Germany.
Firstly, the German social security system will
be affected by EU enlargement in that thecross-border mobility of labour will increase.This is likely to lead initially to more peopleemigrating to Germany from the new mem-ber states than vice versa, a developmentwhich will influence the income and expend-iture of the social security system. Secondly,the social security systems themselves repre-sent an important factor in locational deci-sions, and this factor will gain greater import-ance owing to the increased competitivepressure resulting from enlargement. What is
therefore important is not only the existingdesign of the social security systems but alsothe efforts that need to be made to reformthem.
Switching one’s country of employment as a
result of enormous differences in income is,in principle, advantageous as the loss of valueadded in terms of wages in the countries oforigin is likely to be lower than the profit ofadditional value added in the countries ofdestination. This migration is, however, espe-cially problematic when the tax and transfersystem of the country of destination offersimmediate incentives to migrate – particularlyto the low-skilled.
Article 42 of the EC Treaty stipulates coordin-
ation of the national social security systems inorder to ensure the free movement of work-ers that will be allowed following the transi-tion period. In practice, the existing rules atEU level mean that an unemployed immigrantmust first take up an employment subject tosocial security insurance contributions inorder to gain entitlement to social security in-surance in Germany and to claim other socialbenefits. However, only a brief period of em-ployment is sufficient for this if previousperiods of employment in the immigrant’shomeland are recognised. In respect of socialassistance, foreigners must, in principle, alsobe eligible for this form of benefit unless thiswere the only reason that they had travelledto Germany.
15A heavier burden on the Ger-
man social security systems after expiry of the
15See W Peter (2004), Sozialleistungsanspr/C252che von EU-
Ausl/C228ndern in Deutschland, in iw-trends, 1/2004, p 3 f.Further cut
in the direct
tax burden
required in
Germany
Social security
system: increas-
ing mobility of
labour ...... to be
welcomed
in principle
Agreements
on social
legislation
at EU level

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
20transition periods cannot therefore be ruled
out.
Where immigration is linked to additional em-
ployment in the destination country, this willlead to an increase in the persons liable topay contributions. However, the demographicdevelopment in the central and east Euro-pean countries is less favourable than in west-ern Europe. Although the proportion of se-nior citizens in the population is still below
the average in the “old” EU countries, a no-ticeable increase in this ratio can be expectedif there is no dramatic rise in the birth rate,life expectancy moves closer to the EU aver-age and individuals of working age migrate.Population projections by the United Nationsshow that the working population will havefallen even more sharply in the new centraland east European member states than in the“old” EU states by 2025. According to theseprojections, Estonia, Slovenia and Lithuaniaare likely to be particularly affected by the fall(see adjacent chart).
There is, however, no certainty that even suc-
cessfully broadening the base of people pay-ing contributions in Germany as a result ofimmigration will make it easier to finance so-cial security because the additional revenuefrom contributions will be at least partly off-set by claims to benefits. All the same, tem-porary relief is expected. In the longer term,however, today’s younger immigrants willalso become net beneficiaries of the social se-curity systems. Younger persons with below-average incomes are also net beneficiaries ofthe statutory health insurance system, espe-cially when members of their family, who areexempt from contributions, are also included.Where immigration concerns lower wagegroups, this will bring about immediatestrains.
In the end, the effects of EU enlargement on
the social security systems in Germany cannotbe reliably predicted. EU law and, in particu-lar, the principle of treating immigrants andthe domestic population as equals (fromPercentage change between 2000 and 2025
Luxembourg
Ireland
Cyprus 1
France
United Kingdom
MaltaSlovak Republic
The Netherlands
PortugalDenmark
Belgium
EU 15Poland
EU 25
Lithuania
Sweden
Greece
Germany
Finland
Spain
Czech Republic
Hungary
Austria
LatviaItaly
Slovenia
EstoniaGrowth in the population of
working age *in EU 25
Source: United Nations, World Population
Ageing 1950-2050. — *15 to 59 years
old. — 1Total.
Deutsche Bundesbank30+ 20+ 10+ 0 10− 20− 30−
Demographic
perspectivesImmigrants’
benefit claims
on existing
social security
system
Principle
of equal
treatment

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
21which the country of employment principle is
derived16are at odds with proposals for a
restriction of social benefits.17This is why
labour market and social security reforms inGermany are all the more indispensable.
EU enlargement will have an effect on Ger-
many’s net contribution to the EU budget.According to the European Commission’s ini-tial proposals for the new financial perspec-tive for the period from 2007 to 2013, theupper expenditure limits, which are currently1.06% of gross national income, should beincreased to 1.14%. Compared with the ac-tual budget estimates for 2003 and 2004 of0.98% in each case, this would represent aconsiderable expansion of the budget. If Ger-many’s share of the financing is approximate-ly one-fifth, as things now stand, this couldresult in an additional burden on the Germanbudget of up to 33 billion per year. In add-
ition, refunds from the EU budget are likely todecrease if promoting the east German re-gions in particular is a lower priority. Accord-ing to the European Commission’s most re-cent “cohesion report”, although the eastGerman promotional areas could remainunder the 75% threshold following EU en-largement and the associated decline in aver-age income in the EU, individual regions(south-west Brandenburg and Leipzig) arelikely to have already exceeded this promo-tional criterion owing to the enlargement(see adjacent chart).2001
EU 15
average = 100
EU 25
average = 100
75 %Saxony-Anhalt
Mecklenburg-
West Pomerania
Thuringia
BrandenburgSaxonyBerlin
Rhineland-
Palatinate
Lower Saxony
Schleswig-
Holstein
Saarland
North Rhine-
Westphalia
Baden-
Württemburg
Bavaria
HesseBremenHamburgEconomic power *of individual
German federal states
compared with EU average
Source: European Commission, Cohesion
Report, February 2004. — *Per capita GDP
expressed in purchasing power standards as
a percentage of the respective EU average.
Deutsche Bundesbank200 150 100 50 0
16See C Nowak (2003), EU-Osterweiterung, Personen-
freiz/C252gigkeit und staatliche Schutzpflichten im Bereich
der sozialen Sicherheit, in Europ/C228ische Zeitschrift f/C252r
Wirtschaftsrecht, Heft 4, p 102.
17For example, establishing a “country of origin prin-
ciple” for certain social benefits has been proposed. Ac-
cording to this, immigrants would obtain social benefits
of a redistributive nature only in accordance with a no-
tional claim in their country of origin. See H-W Sinn
(2001), inter alia , EU-Erweiterung und Arbeitskr/C228ftemi-
gration – Wege zu einer schrittweisen Ann/C228herung der
Arbeitsm/C228rkte, ifo Beitr/C228ge zur Wirtschaftsforschung,
Munich.Germany’s net
contribution to
the EU budget

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
22Consequences for economic policy
In enlarging to the east, an important step
has been taken in the economic and especial-ly political integration of Europe. This waspreceded by the accession of the new mem-ber states to the EU 15, in the form of theEuropean Agreements, for example, whichhad already been associated with a wide-spread opening-up of the markets, above allfor industrial goods. This was reflected inGermany’s close trade and financial integra-tion with this economic area as well as inten-sive competition with the suppliers domiciledthere.
This study comes to the conclusion that fur-
ther adjustments can also be expected afterthe formal accession to the EU in respect ofimproved factor allocation, whose quantita-tive effects are, however, difficult to estimate.It is often argued that, macroeconomically,prosperity gains will be relatively minor in theold member states – and therefore in Ger-many, too – as a result of the current roundof enlargement because some of the effectshave already been realised through includingthe new member states in the internationaldivision of labour, the economic weight ofthe countries is small and transition arrange-ments are in place.
However, EU enlargement also creates poten-
tial for growth going beyond the immediateadvantages brought about by integration be-cause in addition to the purely level effectdynamic aspects must also be taken into ac-count. The tax and regulation systems in thenew member states put the relevant condi-tions in Germany to the test and the pressure
on the labour market to reform will remainhigh. In particular, the tax systems in somecentral and east European countries arenoticeably more growth-friendly than inGermany.
It would be wrong to react defensively to a
gap in tax, labour costs and regulation bymaintaining the status quo or demandingthat other things be adjusted by harmonisingstandards. To do so would be to throw awayopportunities for growth and development inthe new member states, something in whichGermany can participate via close trade links.Acting defensively would conceal the needfor action that already exists in Germany any-way.
Besides tax policy, not least labour market
and wage policy are also under pressure toadapt and become more flexible. And thisneeds to happen before the end of the transi-tion periods for the free movement of work-ers from the new EU countries. Althoughthese transition periods protect parts of thedomestic labour market, at the same time,they also present an incentive for increasedGerman direct investment in low-cost neigh-bouring countries. The labour market will de-pend more than ever on giving appropriateanswers in order to keep sustained profitableemployment in Germany and bring aboutnew employment opportunities during thestructural change. Germany can take thechances of an increasing division of labour asa result of EU enlargement to the east if itseconomic policy continues to focus onreforms.
Important
integration step
Making use
of wealth
potential by ...... avoiding
defensive
answers and ...
... strengthen-
ing adaptability

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
23The economic scene
in Germany
in spring 2004

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
24OverviewRecovery continuing
In the first few months of this year the global
economic upturn grew both stronger andmore widely based. The terrorist attacks inMadrid and the escalation of the situation inthe Middle East had only a temporary unset-tling effect on economic agents. Judgingfrom the present perspective, there is a goodprospect that, despite the high geopoliticalrisks, no serious disruption of the world econ-omy will occur. According to the IMF’s latestforecast, global output will expand strongly in2004 by just over 4
1/C252%.
Business activity continued to be buoyed by
favourable financing conditions, the bolster-ing of purchasing power thanks to moderateprice movements and growing corporateprofitability. Although the widely feared dis-tortions on the foreign exchange markets didnot materialise, risks will persist in this areaunless and until the correction of the externalimbalances also includes the pursuit of sus-tainable economic policies and the adoptionof structural reforms. In addition, the continu-ing high level of crude oil and commodityprices is now jeopardising the global upturn.Economic expansion could be slowed downin the dollar zone, in particular, if the upwardprice pressures on the crude oil and commod-ity markets continue or even increase; but thelatest oil price hikes have made themselvesfelt in the euro area, too.
In the euro area the muted recovery which
began last year strengthened slightly in thefirst quarter of 2004. According to initial esti-mates, real GDP grew by just over
1/C252%. TheGlobal
economic
upturn is
firming
Major positives
and risks
Cyclical
upswing in
euro area
slightly stronger

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
25upswing was driven by the buoyant foreign
demand, although the revival of private con-sumption demand also played a part.
During the period under review the inflation
rate in the euro area was affected by changesin healthcare and by tax increases. The in-creases in copayments from patients in Ger-many and the Netherlands and the raising oftobacco tax in some euro-area countries ac-counted for three-quarters of the overall riseof 0.4% in the Harmonised Index of Con-sumer Prices in the first quarter of 2004 com-pared with the previous quarter. The annual-ised rate of price increases during the quarterunder review came to 1.7%. The price evolu-tion of oil products and the aforementionedincreases in taxes and administered priceswere partly masked in the first quarter bybaseline effects. According to Eurostat esti-mates, the inflation rate rose to 2.0% inApril. In the longer run the inflation risks ap-pear limited as long as there is no perceiveddanger of a sharp upthrust of external priceimpulses.
The previously robust pace of expansion of
the money stock M3 has slowed further inthe past few months; its annualised seasonal-ly adjusted three-month growth rate amount-ed to 4
1/C252% during the reporting period and
was thus in line with the Eurosystem’s refer-ence value. Although the accumulated excessliquidity harbours an inflationary potential, itis unlikely to become virulent in the foresee-able future given the low level of capacityutilisation and the favourable domestic costtrend. Against this background the Govern-ing Council of the ECB decided to keep itskey interest rates unchanged during the
period under review. Consequently, monetaryconditions in the euro area remained expan-sionary in the first quarter of this year andsupported the recovery in the real economy.
The German economy, too, is slowly picking
up speed. At any rate, the pace of economicexpansion accelerated in the first threemonths of this year compared with the twopreceding quarters. There is still no sign of aself-sustaining upturn, however. It is notice-able that macroeconomic growth in the firstquarter was fuelled exclusively by externalbusiness, whereas domestic demand stag-nated.
The salient feature of the current cyclical situ-
ation in Germany is households’ entrenchedconsumption restraint, which looks set to per-sist for the time being. This is indicated byboth the pattern of retail turnover and con-sumer surveys. Besides the further deterior-ation of the situation on the labour marketand a subdued income trend, the continuousrise in the saving ratio – which was not evi-dent during similar cyclical phases in thepast – indicates that consumption is beingdampened at present by both households’pronounced uncertainty and the greater needfor making private provision for old age. Ifthe high level of savings is be channelled intodomestic investment, further structural re-forms will be required that engender confi-dence in the policy makers’ ability to masterthe demographic and fiscal challenges andcreate new earnings prospects. Up to now,however, the propensity to invest in Germanyhas been low. Investment in machinery andStable price
outlook
Slower
monetary
expansionCyclical im-
provement
continuing
Internal
momentum
low

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
26equipment, at any rate, is unlikely to have
increased further during the period underreview after seasonal adjustment. The earliercommencement of planned residential con-struction projects prompted by the reductionof subsidies to home buyers has now come toan end; consequently, construction invest-ment, too, presumably fell somewhat, andthis was reflected in a decline in the output ofthe building trade. A ray of hope, by contrast,is offered by the slight revival of the servicessector, where banks and insurance corpor-ations as well as commercial service providersare reporting a positive trend in turnover.
The cyclical recovery was insufficient to have
a positive impact on the labour market. Theemployment trend continued its downwardslide in the first quarter, with the seasonallyadjusted number of employed persons fallingby 35,000 below the level at the end of2003. The sharp drop in full-time employeeswas only partly offset by the increases in low-paid part-time working and in the number ofself-employed. Registered unemploymentalso rose again in seasonally adjusted termsas the effect of tougher checks by the author-ities on the willingness and availability of job-less persons to take up work petered out. Theyear-on-year fall is due solely to the changedstatistical method of recording participants inaptitude tests and training measures, whohave no longer been counted as unemployedsince the start of this year. Without this meth-odological change unemployment in Aprilwould have increased by just under 20,000over the past 12 months.The rate of price increases in Germany, which
remains moderate, accelerated a little in thefirst quarter of the year. The rise in the annualrates of consumer price inflation from 1.1%in December 2003 to 1.6% in April wascaused – as was largely the case in the euroarea as a whole – not only by the ongoingprice growth of refined petroleum productsbut also, and more especially, by the in-creased payments in the context of thehealthcare reform as well as the raising oftaxes on tobacco products. If the product cat-egories energy, healthcare and tobacco aredisregarded, the year-on-year rate of inflationis reduced to 0.6%, compared with 0.7% inDecember 2003.
The state of public finances deteriorated fur-
ther. The combined deficit of central andstate government (ie excluding local govern-ment) in the first quarter exceeded the al-ready high prior-year figure. Nor does theoutlook for the rest of the year indicate anyfundamental improvement. At the moment itappears that the general government deficitratio will more or less match last year’s figure.
The main reason for the unsatisfactory devel-
opment of public finances in the first quarterwas the decline in tax revenue. This in turnowed something to the introduction of thepenultimate stage of the income tax reformat the beginning of this year. Furthermore, itis now becoming apparent that the expect-ations associated with the subsidy cuts andrevenue-boosting measures planned in orderto counterfinance the earlier introduction ofthe next stage of the tax reform were overlyoptimistic.
Further
deterioration
in labour
market
situationInflation rate
pushed up by
exceptional
effects
Parlous state
of public
finances...
... marked by
declining tax
revenue

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
27The deterioration of the underlying situation
this year will also make it difficult to complywith the 3% deficit ceiling in 2005. Aboveall, revenue levels will remain low, in particu-lar owing to the introduction of the finalstage of the income tax reform at the start ofnext year. Given the importance of fiscal pol-icy support to ensure the stability of the euro,further savings are needed on the expend-iture side over and above those planned
to date if the deficit limit laid down by theStability and Growth Pact is to be met in2005. Reallocations of financial assets, suchas the disposal of participating interests, haveno impact on the deficit as defined by theMaastricht criteria and, what is more, makeno contribution to sustainable budgetary con-solidation.
European
commitments
need to be
honoured in
2005

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
28Global and
European settingWorld economic activity
The global economic upturn has stabilised
further over the past few months. In addition,there are many signs that global economicactivity is clearly still on the rise. Although theMadrid terrorist attacks and the escalation ofviolence in the Middle East have at times ledto palpable uncertainty on the financial mar-kets, from today’s vantage point a serious dis-ruption to global economic activity appearsunlikely despite the major geopolitical risks. Inaddition, other important underlying condi-tions for a world economic recovery, such aslow financing costs, relatively subdued pricedevelopments and improved corporate profit-ability, have remained intact.
The persistently high crude oil prices and the
sharp rise in the cost of industrial raw mater-ials, however, could put a strain on the globaleconomy. In the first half of May the price ofBrent North Sea oil was US$36
1/C252per barrel,
11/C252times the previous year’s price; in euro
terms the year-on-year increase was 43%. In-dustrial raw material prices rose by 27
1/C252%o n
the year in US dollar terms and by 20% ineuro terms. The price increases on the inter-national commodity markets mainly reflectthe cyclical increase in demand stemmingfrom the United States and East Asia. TheChinese economy’s demand for commoditiesrose particularly sharply. Its share in globalconsumption of non-ferrous metals hasdoubled over the past six years to nearly one-fifth. However, supply-side and speculativefactors also play a role in crude oil pricemovements. Another important fact is thatOPEC is apparently seeking some compensa-Global upturn
has stabilised ...
...amid major
geopolitical
risks
Sharp rise in
commodity
prices as a
potential brake

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
29tion for the loss of purchasing power caused
by the US dollar’s depreciation. The latest an-nouncement that Saudi Arabia would in-crease its oil production, however, also madeit clear that the oil-producing countries haveno interest in excesses and tensions on the oilmarket which would jeopardise the globalupturn. Global economic growth has notbeen noticeably affected so far by the sharpprice increases on commodities markets.However, certain retarding effects, especiallyin the dollar zone, cannot be ruled out if oilprices, in particular, hold firm at their currentlevels for a longer period of time or even risefurther, thus causing overall energy pricelevels to move upwards.
After the turn of 2003-04, the global up-
swing largely followed the underlying region-al pattern which had formed in 2003. TheUSA and the East Asian emerging marketeconomies, especially China, remain the driv-ing forces. The Chinese economy, however, isfacing the prospect of overheating if add-itional economic policy countermeasures arenot taken. In Japan, the demand base of thecyclical recovery has broadened over the pastfew months insofar as households’ propensityto purchase has gone up perceptibly. In theeuro area, too, the economic recovery pickedup somewhat after the turn of the year; how-ever, it remains the straggler among the “bigthree” industrial economies. The growth rateof the economies of the central and eastEuropean countries in transition – startingfrom a very high level – has accelerated evenfurther. The Commonwealth of IndependentStates (CIS) is currently benefiting from sharp-ly rising oil revenues. Not only Russia and thecentral Asian oil exporting countries but also
the rest of the CIS (via close foreign tradelinks) are benefiting from these revenues. Inthose countries, real GDP in 2003 grew by anaverage of 8%, or even more sharply than inthe group of net oil-exporting countries. Themajority of Latin American countries are backon a growth track. This is particularly true ofArgentina, whose GDP rose by 8
3/C254% in 2003.
Its output has not yet returned to pre-crisislevels, though.
Industrial production in industrial countries
rose in the first quarter of 2004 by a seasonal-ly adjusted 1% vis-/C224-vis the previous period,in which it had increased by nearly 2%. It wasup by 3
1/C254% from its level of early 2003. Fol-
lowing the turn of 2003-04, price movementsin the industrial countries remained quiescenton the whole. As an average of the first threemonths, the year-on-year inflation rate was1.3%, or 1.6% excluding Japan. However,this should not be allowed to obscure the factthat the seasonally adjusted inflation rate hasaccelerated, particularly owing to rising en-ergy prices, from 0.3% in the last quarter of2003 to 0.6% in the January-March period.
According to the IMF forecast, global GDP
growth, at just over 4
1/C252%, will be higher this
year than in any year since 2000. It is expect-ed to fall slightly to just under 4
1/C252% in 2005.
In each of the two years, global outputgrowth will be well over
1/C252percentage point
stronger than had been predicted as late asSeptember 2003. According to the IMF’sspring forecast, GDP growth in the advancedeconomies is expected to be 3
1/C252% in 2004,
with the euro area, at 13/C254%, remaining wellConsiderable
regional
growth
differentials
still existProduction and
consumer
prices in
industrial
countries
IMF forecast

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
30behind the USA (41/C252%) and Japan and the
United Kingdom (each 31/C252%). The IMF also
predicts that the developing countries andemerging economies will once again see a6% increase in output. Within this group ofcountries, the growth differentials could evendiminish, especially because Asian and CISgrowth rates are not expected to be as highas in 2003, whereas Latin American output isexpected to expand by 4% this year following1
3/C254% a year earlier.
In the first quarter of 2004, overall output in
the USA rose by 1% according to preliminarycalculations and after adjustment for seasonaland working-day variations; this rate wassimilar to that in the fourth quarter of 2003.The year-on-year rise amounted to 5%. Pri-vate consumption, which rose by nearly 1%after seasonal adjustment, once again gave a
strong boost to growth. The household sav-ing ratio went up slightly to 1.9%. Commer-cial investment rose by 1
3/C254%; the continued
buoyancy of investment in machinery andequipment was offset by declining invest-ment in commercial construction. The deficitin the real foreign balance, however, declinedonly slightly. Real exports as defined in thenational accounts grew by
3/C254%; although this
outpaced import growth (+1/C252%), this growth
differential was insignificant owing to thegulf between import and export levels. Ac-cording to key early indicators, the US econ-omy may be expected to see further stronggrowth in the current quarter.
Consumer prices were up by a seasonally ad-
justed 1% in the first quarter, a rate whichclearly outpaced the previous quarter’s figure(+
1/C254%). Not only higher energy prices but
also a relatively strong increase in servicesprices contributed to this outcome. However,this has not been reflected in year-on-yearconsumer price inflation, which, at 1.8% inthe January-March period, was even some-what lower than in the preceding period. InMarch, the personal consumption deflator(excluding energy and food), which is the USFederal Reserve’s preferred measure, was1.4% higher than a year earlier.
The economic recovery in Japan has been in-
creasingly taking shape. One piece of import-ant evidence for this is that private consumerdemand, having already gone up distinctly inthe second half of 2003, continued its recov-ery. In the January-February period, nominalretail sales, after adjustment for seasonal vari-IMF forecast for 2004 and 2005*
Item 2002 2003 2004 2005
Real gross domestic
product Annual percentage change
Advanced
economies 1 +1 . 7 +2 . 1 +3 . 5 +3 . 1
of which
United States + 2.2 + 3.1 + 4.6 + 3.9Japan – 0.3 + 2.7 + 3.4 + 1.9Euro area + 0.9 + 0.4 + 1.7 + 2.3
Consumer prices
2
Advanced
economies 1 +1 . 5+1 . 8 +1 . 7 +1 . 7
of which
United States + 1.6 + 2.3 + 2.3 + 2.2Japan – 0.9 – 0.2 – 0.4 – 0.1Euro area + 2.3 + 2.1 + 1.7 + 1.6
UnemploymentNumber of unemployed persons as a
percentage of the labour force
Advanced
economies
1 6.4 6.6 6.4 6.3
of which
United States 5.8 6.0 5.5 5.4Japan 5.4 5.3 4.9 4.9Euro area 8.4 8.8 9.1 8.9
*Source: IMF, World Economic Outlook, April 2004. — 1Including
Taiwan, Hong Kong, South Korea and Singapore. — 2Consumer
price index; for the euro area, HICP.
Deutsche Bundesbank
USA Japan

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
31ations, were up by not less than 4% from
their level in the fourth quarter of 2003, andwere up on the year for the first time in quitea long time. In addition, it must be noted thataverage consumer prices in the January-Aprilperiod were practically unchanged from thelevels in both the fourth quarter and thesame period a year earlier. Besides privateconsumption, commercial investment andforeign demand probably gave a fresh boostto the Japanese economy in the wintermonths. The palpable improvement in confi-dence among major industrial enterprises is aparticular indication. The balance of favour-able responses in the Bank of Japan’s Tankansurvey for the first quarter of 2004 saw a dis-tinct improvement, hitting its highest levelsince the second quarter of 1997. Themounting positive reports about the economyfrom Japan must not, however, be allowed toobscure the fact that, in particular, the finan-cial sector and the small and medium-sizedenterprises (SMEs) sector are still in consider-able need of consolidation.
In the first quarter of 2004, the UK economy,
according to preliminary calculations, was upby just over
1/C252% (after adjustment for season-
al and working-day variations) from the lastquarter of 2003, in which it had grown byjust under 1%. Total economic production in-creased by 3% on the year. Real GDP growthwas supported once again by the services sec-tor, in which value added grew by a seasonal-ly adjusted
3/C254%. Among the individual ser-
vices, commerce, hotels and restaurants werethe best performers. This is a reflection of,among other things, the continued livelinessof consumer spending; its impact on retailtrade in the first quarter was that sales grew
by a seasonally adjusted 1
1/C252%. They were up
by not less than 51/C252% from early-2003 levels.
By contrast, industrial production shrank by
1/C252% (after seasonal adjustment). The appreci-
ation of the pound sterling and the deterior-ation of price competitiveness may also havecontributed to the UK’s weak industrial per-formance. The Harmonised Index of Con-sumer Prices (HICP) inflation rate, on whichthe UK inflation target of 2% is based, stoodat 1.1% in March. According to the nationalRetail Price Index (RPIX), which is methodo-logically different from the HICP , inflation was+2.1%.
The economies of the new EU member states
are running full steam ahead. In 2003, thereal GDP of this group of countries rose by3.6%, compared to 0.7% in the EU-15 and0.4% in the euro area. Following the turn of2003-04, the growth rate seems to havepicked up a notch. The upturn is beingfuelled by brisk domestic demand and strongexport growth. It is worth noting that real ex-ports as defined in the national accounts roseby an estimated 11
1/C252% in 2003 despite the
weak economic activity in the main westernEuropean purchasing countries, comparedwith real import growth of 9
1/C252%. For the cur-
rent year, a considerable expansion in exportsis to be expected, if only because of the euroarea’s economic recovery. According to theCommission’s spring economic forecast, GDPgrowth in the new EU member states will ac-celerate in the years 2004 and 2005 to 4%and 4
1/C254% respectively. The recent renewed
price surge has dampened the economic out-look. The aggregated inflation rate, havingUnited
KingdomNew
EU member
states

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
32gone down from 8.5% in 2000 to 2.1% in
2003, is expected to go up relatively stronglythis year. Rises in administrative prices insome countries are a major factor. The Com-mission expects consumer price inflation toaverage 3.8% in 2004.
The new member states’ average growth rate
of 3
1/C252% in the 1995-2003 period was consid-
erably more dynamic than that of the EU-15(+2%). This has reduced the prosperity gapto some extent, yet this gulf remains verylarge. In 2002, per capita GDP in the newmember states – calculated in terms of pur-chasing power parities – was 47% of theEU-15 average. The spread ranged from 35%in Latvia to 77% in Cyprus. Measured againstthe per capita income of the richer EU-15countries, the prosperity gap is even wider.Another clear indicator of the new member
states’ need for catching up is that they makeup 16% of the population of the enlargedEuropean Union yet generate only 5% oftotal GDP . These countries are so far behindin terms of income that the catching-up pro-cess is likely to take several decades to com-plete (see also article on pp 5-22).
Macroeconomic trends in the euro area
The tentative recovery in the euro area which
began in the second half of 2003 picked upsteam after the turn of 2003-04. One con-tributing factor was the revival in consumerdemand. Retail sales rose in the first quarterby a seasonally adjusted
3/C254% (following
+1/C254% in the fourth quarter of 2003). Given%
EU-25 EU-15 CY MT SL CZ HU SK PL EE LT LVNew member states, totalPer capita GDP expressed in purchasing power standards in 2002
EU-15 = 1000New member states, totalAnnual average real GDP growth between 1995 and 2003
12Economic growth and per capita income in the new
EU member states and in the EU as a whole
1Between 1999 and 2003. — 2Between 2000 and 2003.
Deutsche Bundesbank120
100
8060
40
20
05
43
2
1
Driving forces
behind upswing
somewhat
stronger

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
33that consumer sentiment is still in the dol-
drums, it is questionable, however, whetherthis trend will last. Exports, which grew quitestrongly despite the dampening impact of theeuro’s appreciation, were another importantfactor supporting economic activity. Deliveriesof goods to non-euro-area countries in theJanuary-February period rose by 3
1/C252%f r o m
their fourth-quarter levels after adjustmentfor seasonal variations. They were up by justover
1/C252% on the year.
According to the Flash Estimate, seasonally
adjusted real euro-area GDP increased by justover
1/C252% in the January-March period, as
against just under1/C252% in the preceding quar-
ter (further information on the individual ex-penditure components is not yet available). Itrose by 1
1/C254% on the year. The EuropeanCommission predicts that total output will
rise in the second quarter, too, at an aggre-gate rate of between 0.3% and 0.7%.
Aggregate output received no stimuli from in-
dustry in the January-February period. Sea-sonally adjusted industrial production fellslightly short of the rather positive result forthe fourth quarter of 2003. Its year-on-yeargrowth was merely
3/C254%. Fittingly, capacity
utilisation in April was somewhat lower thanin January. New orders in manufacturingwere similarly weak. The value of ordersplaced in the January-February period waslikewise down from its level of the fourthquarter of 2003. However, the situation in in-dustry might improve somewhat in thesecond quarter. According to the EU survey,the confidence indicator certainly rose dis-Important figures for the old and new EU member states
2003
Population Area Gross domestic product 1
Item Million EU-25 = 100 1,000 km2EU-25 = 100 5bn EU-25 = 100
EU-25 453.8 100 3,893 100 9,713.5 100
EU-15 379.5 84 3,154 81 9,276.0 95of which Euro area 305.8 67 2,456 63 7,247.3 75
Memo item Germany 82.5 18 357 9 2,129.8 22
New member states 74.3 16 739 19 437.5 5
1Calculated at market exchange rates.
Deutsche Bundesbank
Industry off to a
sluggish start in
2004

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
34tinctly in April after stagnating in the first
three months of 2004 on average at the pre-vious quarter’s levels after seasonal adjust-ment.
The number of persons affected by un-
employment in the euro area rose only slight-ly in the first quarter of 2004. In March 2004a seasonally adjusted total of 12.42 millionpersons in the euro area were without paidemployment. This corresponds to 8.8% ofthe labour force. The major economies ofFrance, Germany, Italy and Spain continue tohave unemployment rates in excess of 8%,along with Belgium and Finland. As the ex-pected revival of overall economic output inthe euro area progresses, the labour marketsituation is also likely to rebound slightly asthe year progresses. However, national gov-ernments will need to make additional effortsto enact reforms, and the social partners willneed to agree on employment-promotingwage policies in order to reduce the highstructural unemployment which plaguessome countries.
In the first few months of 2004, consumer
price movements in the euro area were influ-enced by measures to increase tax receiptsand to restore public health systems. The por-tion of healthcare costs borne directly by con-sumers rose in Germany and the Netherlandswith effect from 1 January. Since the HICPuses the net price concept to measure infla-tion for mixed-financed goods – ie the indexincludes the prices paid directly by the con-sumer and not the total cost of healthcareservices – the index level for the item ofhealthcare in the first quarter of 2004 was up2000 = 100, seasonally adjusted, log scale
2004SpainItalyFranceof which
GermanyEuro areaThree-month moving average
MonthlyIndustrial production *
in the euro area
Sources: Eurostat and national statistics. —
*Excluding construction.
Deutsche Bundesbank103
100
97
94
91103
100
97
94103
100
97
94
91103
100
97
94
91103
100
97
94
91
1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003Labour market
Consumer
prices

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
35by not less than 6% on the period. Given a
weight of around 4%, this corresponded to acontribution of around
1/C254percentage point to
the measured inflation rate. In addition, taxeson tobacco products were hiked sharply inseveral countries during the first quarter ofthe year. The prices of cigarettes and othertobacco products consequently rose by4.7%. Since the HICP weight of tobaccoproducts is 2.4%, the tax hikes contributedaround one-tenth of a percentage point to in-flation. All in all, in the first three months ofthe year prices were up by 0.4% on theperiod. Eliminating the tax increase and theeffects of the health reform reduces this fig-ure to less than 0.1%. Thus, excluding specialeffects, consumer price inflation remainedwithin a narrow range. Unprocessed foodprices, in particular, rose less sharply in early2004 than is usual at that time of year.
Year-on-year HICP inflation, despite the bur-
dens imposed by government measures,went down from 2.1% in the last quarter of2003 to 1.7% in the first quarter of 2004.This returned the annual inflation rate to theprice stability range for the euro. This hap-pened not only because price trends are gen-erally favourable at present but also due to abase effect – in the first quarter of 2003,crude oil had been very expensive in euroterms owing to the Iraq war. According to theEurostat Flash Estimate, annual inflation roseto 2.0% in April 2004, with the diminishingof the aforementioned base effect and therising prices for crude oil products likely tohave contributed to this development.Exchange rates
In the first few months of this year the situ-
ation on the international foreign exchangemarkets was relatively volatile. The exchangerate movements of the key currencies wereinfluenced by a turnaround in sentiment infavour of the US dollar. After a relatively longperiod of dollar weakness lasting until mid-February 2004 and causing the euro to hit anMonthly, log scale
1999 Q1=100
Real effective
exchange rate 1
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004... US dollar... pound sterling
... Japanese yenJanuary 1999 =100
The euro’s exchange
rate against the ...
oExchange rate of the euro
1Against the currencies of a small group of
countries based on consumer prices. —
o From 2004, weekly averages.
Deutsche Bundesbank110
105
100
95
90
85
80110
105
100
95
90
85
80
75
70
Developments
on the foreign
exchange
markets
US dollar

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
36The exchange rate regimes of the new EU member states and exchange rate
movements against the euro
The currencies of the countries which joined the
European Union on 1 May 2004 exhibit a ratherheterogeneous pattern in their exchange ratemovements against the euro. This is due notonly to the fact that the macroeconomic devel-opments and degree of success in maintainingstability are very different from one country tothe next but also, in particular, to the broadrange of exchange rate regimes currently beingapplied in the new member states.
Poland, the most populous of these countries,
leaves it up to the foreign exchange marketplayers to fix the rate for its currency, the zloty.Against the background of rising budget def-icits, the zloty has depreciated significantlyagainst the euro in recent years. The exchangelosses amounted to 13% in 2002 alone and a fur-ther 14
1/C252% in 2003. As of late, the zloty has
been trading against the euro at a level around15% lower than at the beginning of monetaryunion.
Like Poland, the Czech Republic pursues a float-
ing exchange rate regime. Capital inflows – ori-ginating in part from privatisation activities –caused the Czech koruna to appreciate againstthe euro up to 2002. There was a reversal in thistrend in the ensuing period, however, a develop-ment which, like in Poland, is likely to be con-nected with the incurrence of new governmentdebt. At 2.6%, however, the depreciation of theCzech koruna remained comparatively low in2003, which means that the Czech currency hasrisen against the euro by around 10% on bal-ance since the launch of the single currency.
Hungary has allowed its currency, the forint, to
fluctuate against the euro within an exchangerate band of €15% since 2001. Following theintroduction of the target zone system in Hun-gary, the forint always remained below the ini-tial central rate of 276.1 forints to the euro. InJune 2003, however, the central rate was raisedto 282.36 forints to the euro, whereupon theforint depreciated perceptibly on the foreign ex-change market even though the Hungarian cen-tral bank increased the key interest rates by atotal of 3 percentage points in two stages inthat month. During 2003, the forint depreciated
by 10% on balance. However, owing to improve-ments in the economic outlook in Hungary, theforint has rebounded noticeably against theeuro since then.
Slovakia, like Poland and the Czech Republic, ap-
plies a regime of floating exchange rates. TheSlovak koruna has posted slight gains againstthe euro since the fourth quarter of 2003. Thisdevelopment is attributable to large capital in-flows attracted by the economic policy reformsin recent years.
The Slovenian tolar is pegged to the euro within
a crawling band. In this exchange rate regime,the tolar’s central rate is continuously devaluedagainst the euro. Since the start of monetaryunion, the depreciation rate has totalled 21%.
Lithuania and Estonia have rigidly fixed the ex-
change rates of their currencies to the euro in acurrency board arrangement. The exchangerates of the Lithuanian litas and the Estoniankroon have, therefore, remained constantagainst the euro in recent years.
Latvia and Malta have pegged their currencies
to a basket of currencies. In Latvia, this basket ofcurrencies corresponds to the InternationalMonetary Fund’s special drawing right. TheUS dollar has the greatest weighting in this bas-ket. Thus, the movements of the Latvian latsagainst the euro mirror the movements in theeuro-US dollar exchange rate relatively clearly.The currency basket to which the Maltese lira ispegged also includes the US dollar, but has beendominated by the euro, especially since August2002. Therefore, this currency fluctuates onlyslightly against the euro.
Cyprus has pegged its pound to the euro within
an exchange rate target zone. In a similar fash-ion to Hungary, the maximum fluctuation mar-gin is €15% of the central rate. In actual fact,however, the exchange rate fluctuations of theCypriot pound against the euro have been verylimited in recent years.
Deutsche Bundesbank

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
37The euro’s exchange rate against the currencies
of the new EU member states
Deutsche Bundesbank 5 1 = ... currency units, weekly averages, log scale
Cypriot pound
Cyprus
2004Lats
LatviaTolar
SloveniaSlovak koruna
SlovakiaCzech koruna
Czech Republic
0.60
0.58
0.560.70
0.66
0.62
0.58
0.54
0.50240
230
220
210
200
19047
45
43
41
3938
36
34
32
30
28
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003Maltese lira
Malta
2004Litas
LithuaniaEstonian kroon
EstoniaZloty
PolandForint
Hungary
0.46
0.44
0.42
0.40
0.384.80
4.60
4.40
4.20
4.00
3.80
3.60
3.40
3.2016.00
15.60
15.205.00
4.80
4.60
4.40
4.20
4.00
3.80
3.60
3.40270
260
250
240
230
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
38all-time high of nearly US$1.29, market senti-
ment changed. The euro consequently wentback down somewhat. As this report went topress it traded at US$1.18. Economic devel-opments in the United States were the keyfactor. The publication of new data on strongnet portfolio inflows initially pushed doubtsabout the ability to finance the high US cur-rent account deficit somewhat into the back-ground. As the period continued, the turn-around in sentiment in favour of the US dollarwas supported by, in particular, the an-nouncement of unexpectedly positive US eco-nomic data which indicated that the econom-ic recovery in the United States was increas-ingly spilling over to the labour market. In thiscontext, the US Federal Reserve “intensified”its phraseology regarding future interest ratemoves, and capital market yields rose sharply.This helped the US dollar gain even moreground. The terrorist attacks in Madrid on11 March 2004 put depreciation pressure onthe US dollar only temporarily.
Ups and downs characterised the pattern of
the euro’s movements against the yen overthe past few months. The euro lost someground for a time against the yen on theheels of surprisingly positive Japanese cyclicaland economic data which indicated that a ro-bust economic recovery was in store forJapan. As the end of the period under reviewapproached, however, the euro rebounded
following the Japanese government’s declar-ation of its determination to smooth the rateof the yen by intervening on foreign ex-change markets. As this report went to press,the euro was trading at ¥135, its level at thebeginning of the year.
Unlike against the US dollar and the yen, the
euro has been losing ground against thepound sterling since the beginning of theyear. Favourable UK economic data were themajor factor causing the pound sterling torise against the euro as well as against othercurrencies. In addition, speculation surround-ing the interest rate hike made by the Bank ofEngland in early May and the rise in capitalmarket yields probably gave an additionalboost to the pound sterling. Most recently,the euro was trading at £0.67, ie 5% belowits rate at the beginning of the year.
As a weighted average against the currencies
of the euro area’s 12 most important tradingpartners, the euro has lost appreciable valuesince mid-February of this year. As this reportwent to press, it was 3
1/C252% below its value at
the beginning of the year. This is certainlyproviding some relief to euro-area exporters,who lost some of their former competitiveadvantage owing to the extent and the speedof the preceding euro appreciation.YenPound sterling
Effective
exchange rate
of the euro

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
39Monetary policy,
capital markets and
banking businessInterest rate policy and the
money markets
In the past few months, the ECB Governing
Council has continued to leave rates un-changed. The main refinancing operationswere still conducted as interest rate tenderswith a minimum bid rate of 2%. The interestrates on the marginal lending facility and thedeposit facility were also left unchanged at3% and 1% respectively. The steady interestrate policy course was based on the assess-ment that the outlook for price stability in theeuro area would remain favourable.
Market participants had been informed well in
advance of upcoming changes in the institu-tional conditions of the Eurosystem’s monetarypolicy instruments: these changes becameeffective at the beginning of March. First, thematurity of the main refinancing operationswas shortened to just one week. Second, thestart of the minimum reserve maintenanceperiod was changed to coincide with thesettlement day of the main refinancing oper-ation, which takes place after the first meetingof the ECB Governing Council each month. Asthe transition to the new institutional condi-tions was accompanied by a generous provi-sion of central bank money to the banks, be-fore the end of the exceptionally long reservemaintenance period (from the end of Januaryto the beginning of March), the overnight rate(EONIA) slid temporarily below the minimumbid rate. By contrast, at the end of the reservemaintenance period March/April, liquidity wasin demand, resulting in a short-term surge inthe EONIA. Apart from these exceptions, how-ever, the overnight rate hovered closelyEurosystem
interest rates
unchanged and
stable outlook
for prices
Money market
interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
40Money market management and liquidity needs
The Eurosystem introduced a number of innovations in its
money market management in the first quarter of 2004.Thus, for example, the March-April reserve maintenanceperiod began on 10 March rather than on 24 March in ac-cordance with the provisions under the new operationalframework for monetary policy. The first main refinancingoperation was settled on that day following the monthlymonetary policy meeting of the ECB Governing Councilwhich, in this case, had been held on 4 March. Moreover,the first regular main refinancing operation with a shortermaturity of one week rather than two weeks was also set-tled on 10 March. Following the end of the last two-weekoperation of 3 March, as of 17 March, only one Eurosystemmain refinancing operation will be outstanding at anytime.
In the period from 24 January to 6 April, the demand for
central bank balances, which is driven by the autonomousfactors determining liquidity, increased by 55.5 billion (see
adjacent table). The volume of banknotes in circulation fellby59.6 billion in the January-March period, which meant
that the sharp rise in the previous period as a result ofChristmas and New Year was largely reversed. However,banknotes in circulation increased again by 57.3 billion in
March and April owing, not least, to the upcoming Easterholidays.
General government deposits rose by 514.5 billion in the
period under review. The decline in the Eurosystem’s for-eign reserves by 57.8 billion – which without the rise would
have been somewhat greater owing to the end-of-quarterrevaluation on 31 March – also withdrew liquidity from thebanking system. By contrast, 514.5 billion was provided by
means of other factors, predominantly through an increasein the Eurosystem’s holdings of euro-denominated finan-cial assets not connected with monetary policy.
This time the Eurosystem did not meet the additional li-
quidity requirements by boosting the volume of its mainrefinancing operations – which were actually reduced by514.7 billion – but by increasing the volume of longer-term
refinancing operations (by 522.1 billion). Starting with the
operation on 29 January, the Eurosystem achieved this byexpanding the volume of the individual operations from515 billion to 525 billion.
On balance, credit institutions’ current account holdings
increased by 51.7 billion. Taking into account the overcom-
pliance with minimum reserve requirements, which wassignificantly less pronounced in the January-March periodthan in the preceding period, it was possible to fulfil thehigher requirements (up by 51.9 billion) without any prob-
lems.
The interest rate for overnight deposits (EONIA) on the
interbank market mostly remained, as usual, a few basispoints above the minimum bid rate of 2.00%. Larger devi-ations occurred only in the last few days of the reservemaintenance periods. The lowest level (1.84%) was at-tained on 5 March and the highest level (2.75%) on 6 April.Thus, the transition to the new operational framework formonetary policy in money market management was large-ly smooth.
1For longer-term trends and the contribution of the
Deutsche Bundesbank, see pages 14* and 15* of the Statis-tical Section of the Monthly Report .— 2Including end-
of-quarter valuation adjustments with no impact onliquidity. — 3Including monetary policy operations con-cluded in the second stage and still outstanding in the
third stage of monetary union (outright transactions andthe issuance of debt certificates) as well as financial assetsnot connected with monetary policy.
Deutsche BundesbankFactors determining bank liquidity1
5billion; calculated on the basis of
daily averages of the maintenance periods
2004
Item24 Jan
to9 Mar10 Mar
to6 Apr
I Provision (+) or absorption (–) of
central bank balances by
1 Change in banknotes in
circulation (increase: –) + 9.6 – 7.3
2 Change in general government
deposits with the Eurosystem(increase: –) – 11.6 – 2.9
3 Change in net foreign reserves
2–5 . 9 –1 . 9
4 Other factors2, 3+9 . 9 +4 . 6
Total + 2.0 – 7.5
II Monetary policy operations
of the Eurosystem
1 Open market
operations
(a) Main refinancing
operations – 13.2 – 1.5
(b) Longer-term refinancing
operations + 11.7 + 10.4
(c) Other operations – –
2 Standing facilities
(a) Marginal lending facility + 0.1 – 0.0(b) Deposit facility (increase: –) – 0.1 – 0.2
Total – 1.5 + 8.7
III Change in credit institutions’
current accounts( I + I I ) +0 . 5 +1 . 2
IV Change in the minimum reserve
requirement (increase: –) – 0.7 – 1.2

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
41around the minimum bid rate of the main refi-
nancing operations throughout most of theperiod under review.
In the period under review, longer-term inter-
est rates in the money market reflected mar-ket participants’ expectations of a change inthe rate of interest. While the yield spread be-tween twelve-month funds and overnightmoney at the beginning of February was stillnearly
1/C254percentage point at the end of
March, the twelve-month Euribor was actual-ly below the overnight rate of around 2%.However, the ECB Governing Council’s deci-sion at its 1 April meeting to maintain itssteady monetary policy course, dispelled tem-porary expectations of an interest rate cut. Atthe end of April, twelve-month funds weretrading just under
1/C254percentage point above
overnight funds: hence, longer-term interestrate expectations on the money market lookset to rise again.
Monetary developments in the euro area
In the first quarter, euro-area M3 again rose
slightly less than in the previous quarter. In an-nualised seasonally adjusted terms, the three-month rate was 4
1/C252% at the end of March. At
the same time, the three-month moving aver-age of annual rates of change went downfrom 7.5% for the period between Octoberand December to 6.4% for the period be-tween January and March. In the quarterunder review, two factors curbed the growthof M3: a lower growth in lending to the pri-vate sector and, probably to a greater extent,the surge in monetary capital formation. Bankdebt securities with a maturity of over two
years were particularly in demand, which sug-gests that investors’ preference for liquidity isfalling gradually. Yet current cash holdings arestill clearly larger than necessary to financeinflation-free economic growth. Under cur-rent conditions this does not pose acute risksto price stability, especially since a certain“normalisation” in cash holdings has beenobserved. However, since it cannot be ruledout completely that this surplus liquiditywon’t have any impact on demand in thecommodities markets, monetary trends mustcontinue to be monitored carefully.
Of the individual components of the monetary
aggregate M3, overnight deposits rose sharplyin the January to March period, after havinggrown perceptibly weaker in the previous quar-Seasonally adjusted, annual percentage change
%
2004Reference value: 4½%Three-month moving average
MonthlyGrowth of the money
stock M3 in the euro area
Deutsche Bundesbank9
87
6
54
3
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003
Slowdown in
monetary
expansion
Components
of the money
stock

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
42ter vis-/C224-vis earlier quarters. Its seasonally ad-
justed annual rate rose to over 14% in theperiod under review (from just under 6
1/C252%i n
the October to December period). Also cur-rency holdings again increased sharply. Overall,the monetary aggregate M1 rose by 15% inthe first quarter of 2004. By contrast, othershort-term bank deposits (excluding overnightdeposits) were depleted perceptibly in netterms in the quarter under review. However,this decline related exclusively to short-termtime deposits, which continued to be depletedat a quicker pace. Deposits redeemable with aperiod of notice of up to three months, how-ever, increased noticeably. In seasonally adjust-ed terms, the volume of marketable instru-ments included in M3 also declined strongly inthe first quarter. Repo transactions were par-ticularly reduced and the amount outstandingof money market fund shares declined slightly,too. At the end of the period under review,only the volume of money market paper andshort-term bank debt securities increasedsomewhat.
Of the balance sheet counterparts, loans to
domestic enterprises and individuals postedweaker growth in the period under reviewthan in the previous quarter. This concernsprimarily loans to the private sector which inthe first three months of this year grew at aseasonally adjusted annualised rate of justover 4
1/C252% after having grown by 61/C252%i n
the October to December 2003 period. Des-pite attractive financing terms, which werereflected mainly in strong demand for hous-ing loans, the moderate expansion of loans toenterprises dampened credit growth in theeuro area. 5 billion, seasonally adjusted,
change over the period indicated
 5 billionContraction ExpansionBalance sheet counterparts 1
Loans to
enterprises
and households
Public sector
borrowing2
Net external
asset position
Monetary capital
formation
Other
counterparts
of M33Money stock
Oct to Dec 2003
Increase in M3
Jan to Mar 2004Euro-area M3 and its
balance sheet counterparts
1Changes in balance sheet counterparts
are shown in terms of whether they expand
(+) or contract (−) the money stock. —
2Bank loans to general government less
euro-area general government deposits
and holdings of securities issued by the MFI
sector. — 3Calculated as errors and omis-
sions from the remaining items of the con-
solidated balance sheet of the MFI sector.
Deutsche Bundesbank150+120+90+60+30+0 30−60−90−120−Balance sheet
counterparts

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
43The growth of credit to the euro-area public
sector also weakened. In non-seasonally ad-justed terms, these grew in the January toMarch period by 357 billion, and, much like
in the previous years, a very large portionthereof ( 352 billion) was in the form of securi-
tised lending. Moreover, taken in isolation,the marked increase in central governmentdeposits subdued monetary expansion in thequarter under review.
M3 growth, by contrast, was stimulated by
heavy capital inflows from foreign paymenttransactions at the end of the period underreview. The net external asset position of theMFI sector, which reflects payments betweennon-banks and the non-euro-area countries,rose by 335
1/C252billion. A share of these cross-
border inflows may have also been absorbedby the perceptible increase in monetary cap-ital formation over the course of the quarterunder review. Domestic MFIs were again ableto place large volumes of bank debt securitieswith a maturity of over two years outside thedomestic banking sector. This is likely to havebeen supported by declining capital marketrates which enhanced the attractiveness oflonger-term bank debt securities vis-/C224-vissimilar government bonds. Furthermore,longer-term fixed-term deposits increasedperceptibly again. The trend reduction in de-posits redeemable at notice of over threemonths, which began in mid-2001, practi-cally came to a standstill at the end of thequarter.Securities markets
Some uncertainty with respect to the sustain-
ability of the global upturn depressed thebasic optimistic mood in the financial mar-kets. As a result, the protracted rise in shareprices in the equity market came to a halt inMarch. Even the subsequent release of againmore favourable economic data in the UnitedStates only boosted share prices temporarily.Daily data
%
Per-
cent-
age
points%
Per-
cent-
age
points Yield spreads of European
corporate bonds2
2002 2003 2004Spread of US bond yields
over the euro-area averageYield on ten-year government
bonds outstanding
Euro-area
average 1
USABond yields in the
euro area and the USA
1Weighted average of the yields on ten-
year government bonds of all euro-area
countries; GDP-weighted. — 2Spread of
seven to ten-year BBB-rated European cor-
porate bonds over euro-area governmentbonds with a comparable maturity. Source:
Merrill Lynch Indices.
Deutsche Bundesbank3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.50.5+
0
0.5−
1.0−6.0
4.55.5
4.05.0
3.54.5
3.0
Financial
markets –
the impact
of mixed
economic
expectations

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
44At the same time, in the light of expectations
of a gradual end to the easy-money policy inthe USA, capital market rates rose again,after having trended downwards in the previ-ous months.
As this report went to press, ten-year euro-area
government bonds were yielding at over4
1/C253%, nearly1/C252percentage point above their
low in mid-March. Temporary doubts on the in-tensity of the US upturn and less favourable
leading economic indicators on the Europeaneconomy contributed to this low in March. Asa result, both the business climate and con-sumer confidence in the euro area and in Ger-many became more gloomy. Moreover, in con-nection with the terrorist attacks in Spain inmid-March, uncertainty on the future price de-velopments in the bond market rose temporar-ily. As an upshot, however, renewed confidenteconomic expectations boosted bond marketyield. However, the yield increase was morepronounced in the US market than in the euroarea, meaning that the yield spread of long-term US government bonds vis-/C224-vis compar-able euro-area bonds widened to
1/C252percent-
age point. Not only did more optimistic growthexpectations play a role, comments by the USFederal Reserve Bank, which market partici-pants interpreted as an indication of an upcom-ing interest rate swing, also contributed to this.
By and large, the German market moved in
sync with the developments of European cap-ital market rates. However, the yield discounton ten-year bonds issued by the Federal Gov-ernment vis-/C224-vis the average of the othereuro-area government bonds has increasedsince mid-March to considerably more than
1/C2510percentage point. This is also likely to have
come as a result of portfolio shifts into highlyliquid German government bonds as a “safehaven” following the attacks in Madrid.
Surveys conducted on economic expectations
for the next ten years show that at 1.8%,long-term inflation expectations have re-mained virtually unchanged. With long-termreal interest rates of around 2
1/C254%, theseDaily data
%
%Basis
points
Memo item
Implied volatility 1
of the Bund future
2002 2003 2004Interest rate discount
of Federal bonds compared with
other euro-area government bonds
(enlarged scale)Yield on ...
... ten-year government bonds outstanding
    of the other euro-area countries
... ten-year Federal
    bonds outstandingYields on Federal bonds
and other euro-area
government bonds
1Market expectation of future volatility
derived from the prices of options on Bund
futures.
Deutsche Bundesbank9
876
5
430
20
10
05.5
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
On balance,
only a slight
change in
capital market
ratesYield discount
on Bunds
increases
vis-/C224-vis
discount on
paper issued
by other euro-
area countries
Real interest
rates in the
euro area in
line with
long-term
growth
expectations

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
45were largely in line with the long-term out-
look for growth in the euro area.
At the time this report went to press, the
yield spreads in the corporate bond marketfor seven to ten-year bonds with a BBB ratingwere just under 90 basis points – a low levelby historical comparison. There was only atemporary increase to just under 1 percent-age point. This development is in line withthe fall in share prices in March and the in-creasing uncertainty with respect to futureshare prices. Both factors exert significant in-fluence on the valuation of corporate bonds(see Monthly Report, April 2004, page 25).
The now favourable valuation is also beingsupported by an improvement in enterprises’credit ratings. In the first quarter the ratio ofupgrades to downgrades by rating agenciesrose further. The last time a similarly positiveenvironment was observed was in the firsthalf of 2000.
Share price movements in the European stock
markets reflected intervals of uncertaintywith respect to the future of the economicrecovery process. Following the terrorist at-tacks in Madrid in mid-March share prices ac-tually fell considerably for a short time. By theend of the month, German and Europeanequities, measured against the CDAX shareprice index and the Dow Jones EuroStoxx,had lost approximately 6% and 3% of theirvalue respectively since the beginning of theyear. In this context, German and other Euro-pean telecommunications and technologyshares – probably also due to portfolio shiftsin favour of more defensive ones – sufferedabove-average price losses. At the same time,Monthly data
2004Lin scale
Price-earnings ratio2
DAX
Dow Jones
EuroStoxxAverage earnings per share2
DAXDow Jones
EuroStoxxLog scale
Dow Jones EuroStoxx
share price index 1
DAX share price
index 1Price movements and profit
estimates for European
and German public
limited companies 
1March 2000 = 100; source:  Deutsche Börse
AG. — 2Based on year-on-year I / B / E /S
analyst estimates. Source: Thomson Finan-
cial Datastream.
Deutsche Bundesbank33
3027
24
2118
15
12130
115
100
85
70115
100
85
70
4085
60
50
45
40
35
30
2000 2001 2002 2003Financing terms
remain
favourable on
corporate
bonds market
Losses in the
equities market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
46share price uncertainty (measured by the im-
plied volatility of stock options) rose as well asthe risk premia demanded for investments inequities. Since then, however, the market hasrecovered somewhat again. On balance,however, the European equities marketsremained below the levels seen at the start ofthe year.
In the period under review, the intermittent
concerns about the future economic develop-ment and the geopolitical uncertainties didnot have any impact on the assessment of en-terprises’ earnings outlook. The annual ex-pected earnings for enterprises listed in theDAX have risen steadily since January by 7%and by just under 4% for enterprises listed inthe Dow Jones EuroStoxx index. Despiteprices swings the valuation level for bothmarkets has remained nearly unchanged and
is still below the historical average. An inter-national comparison shows that, based onexpected annual earnings, German and otherEuropean shares are – with a price-earningsratio of 15.0 – valued at a relatively low level.The US enterprises reflected in the S&P 500are valued at 17.1 and Japanese enterprises,measured by the MSCI Japan, are valuedat 19.5.
Sales and purchases of securities
The level of issuing activity in the German se-
curities markets was influenced significantlyby the financing needs of the public sectorand banks’ longer-term borrowing. In total,domestic borrowers issued debt securities tothe value of 3350 billion in the first quarter.
After deducting redemptions and changes inissuers’ holdings of their own bonds, 367 bil-
lion was raised. In addition, foreign bondswere sold for 320 billion net in the German
market in the first quarter. Hence, total fundsraised through the sale of domestic and for-eign bonds and notes reached 386
1/C252billion,
compared with 329 billion in the last quarter
of the past year.
Nearly half of the funds raised accrued to the
public sector. This sector increased its bondeddebt by 335 billion net following 312
1/C252billion
in the previous quarter. Three quarters of thisconsisted of issues by the Federal Govern-ment which expanded primarily its longer-term debt, including ten-year Federal bonds(316 billion net) and thirty-year Federal bonds
(35 billion). The volume outstanding of five-Investment activity in the German
securities markets
5billion
2003 2004 2003
ItemOct to
DecJan to
MarJan to
Mar
Bonds and notes
Residents 18.6 54.4 35.5
Credit institutions 8.6 55.3 20.0of which
Foreign bonds and notes 13.4 23.4 2.7
Non-banks 10.0 – 0.9 15.5of which
Domestic bonds and notes 19.2 2.6 11.6
Non-residents 10.5 32.3 33.2
Shares
Residents – 9.4 – 2.0 – 3.7
Credit institutions 9.2 6.7 – 6.2of which
Domestic shares 7.0 7.4 – 3.5
Non-banks – 18.6 – 8.7 2.5of which
Domestic shares – 21.9 – 9.2 9.8
Non-residents 21.2 3.1 – 3.4
Mutual fund shares
Investment in specialised funds 5.2 2.8 7.9
Investment in funds open to thegeneral public – 0.4 2.8 10.9of which: Share-based funds 0.9 0.6 – 0.8
Deutsche Bundesbank
Continued rise
in earnings
expectations......supports
relatively
favourable
valuations
Bond sales
Large issuing
volume of
public-sector
bonds

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
47year Bobls also increased by 35 billion. Two-
year treasury notes raised 311/C252billion while
Federal savings notes were redeemed for1
1/C252billion net. In addition, one bond issued
by the former Treuhand agency was re-deemed for 34 billion in March. To increase
the liquidity of the individual bonds, this bor-rower no longer issues debt securities in itsown name but refinances itself in conjunctionwith the Federal Government since 1998.
German credit institutions raised 334 billion
in the German bond market between Januaryand March 2004 after having raised 36
1/C252bil-
lion in the previous quarter. Their favoured is-suance vehicle was other bank debt secur-ities, which brought in 321
1/C252billion net. Their
share in the overall volume of bank debt se-curities outstanding has increased almoststeadily from over a one-fourth in the firstquarter of 2000 to now more than one-third.To a significant degree, the performance ofcertificates linked to the performance of anunderlying asset (for instance a share index)also contributed to this development. Bondsissued by specialised credit institutions raised317 billion net and the volume of mortgage
Pfandbriefe outstanding rose by 32
1/C252billion.
As in the previous period, public Pfandbriefewere redeemed in net terms. The volume ofthese mortgage bonds outstanding fell by37 billion during the period under review.
Despite still favourable financing costs in the
corporate bond market, the volume of debtsecurities issued by resident enterprisesdeclined by just under 32 billion in the first
quarter. In the previous period, such debtsecurities were issued for 36 billion net. Thevolume of money market paper issued by
resident enterprises remained virtually un-changed.
German credit institutions were the principal
purchasers in the German bond market in thefirst quarter of 2004. They added 355
1/C252bil-
lion to their bond portfolios, having pur-chased merely 38
1/C252billion in the previous
quarter. Their main interest was in foreignbonds and notes ( 323
1/C252billion) and public-
sector bonds ( 3201/C252billion). In net terms, for-
eign investors increased their holdings in Ger-man debt securities by 332
1/C252billion, adding
mainly public sector paper to their portfolios(318
1/C252billion). By contrast, domestic non-
banks, which invested 321/C252billion (net) in the
German bond market, focused only on paperissued by private borrowers. At the sameLending and deposits of monetary
financial institutions (MFIs)in Germany
*
5billion
2004 2003
ItemJan to
MarJan to
Mar
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight + 11.4 + 3.9
With agreed maturities
up to 2 years – 18.1 – 13.8over 2 years + 6.7 + 8.2
At agreed notice
up to 3 months + 2.6 + 8.8over 3 months – 1.5 – 4.7
Lending
to domestic enterprises andhouseholds
Unsecuritised – 5.0 + 8.7Securitised + 8.3 – 1.2
to domestic government
Unsecuritised + 5.3 – 4.4Securitised + 20.1 + 20.5
*As well as banks (including building and loan associ-
ations, but excluding the Bundesbank), monetary finan-cial institutions (MFIs) here also include money marketfunds; see also Table IV.1 in the Statistical Section of theMonthly Report .— 1Enterprises, households and gov-
ernment.
Deutsche BundesbankRise in
borrowing
by credit
institutions
Decline in funds
raised by
enterprises in
the bond
marketDomestic
bonds and
notes
purchased
mainly by credit
institutions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
48time, they reduced their holdings in foreign
bonds and notes by 331/C252billion.
Issuing activity in the German equity market
declined in the first quarter. Domestic enter-prises placed new shares with a market valueof only 31
1/C252billion. In the previous quarter,
the volume of shares outstanding had in-creased by 6
1/C252billion, mainly due to a capital
increase by an insurer and a big bank. Twonew issues, which had been originallyplanned for the period under review, werecancelled at short notice. This was probablydue, at least in part, to the mixed mood inthe equities market mentioned earlier. How-ever, a number of enterprises have an-nounced that an IPO would take place overthe course of the year.In the January to March period, domestic
credit institutions and foreign investors pur-chased German equities worth 37
1/C252billion
net and 33 billion net respectively. By con-
trast, domestic non-banks reduced their hold-ings of domestic shares by 39 billion. The for-
eign equities portfolio of domestic non-banksand credit institutions changed only slightly(3
1/C252billion and - 31/C252billion respectively).
Sales of both domestic and foreign mutual
fund shares picked up in the first quarter of2004 ( 312
1/C252billion). Domestic funds sold
shares for 351/C252billion, accruing in equal parts
to funds open to the general public and tospecialised funds tailored to the needs of in-stitutional investors. Of the funds open to thegeneral public, investors favoured open-endreal estate funds ( 32 billion), followed by
bond-based funds ( 31 billion) as well as
share-based funds and mixed funds ( 3
1/C252bil-
lion each). By contrast, money market funds,as in the previous quarter, redeemed shares(31 billion). Hence it seems that the gradually
increasing preference for higher-interest-bearing investment vehicles already apparentin the previous quarter, continued.
Deposit and lending business of German
banks with domestic customers
Much the same as in the rest of the euro
area, demand in the area of domestic de-posits in the period under review focusedprimarily on short-term bank deposits. Therewere signs in the fourth quarter of 2003 sug-gesting that as investors became more confi-dent on the economy they began to preferSeasonally adjusted
 5 bn
%Lin scale
Year-on-year change
2004Log scale
Loans1Loans to domestic enterprises
and households
1End of month; adjusted for statistical
changes.
Deutsche Bundesbank8
6
4
2
02250
2200
2150
2100
2050
2000
1950
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003
Lower volume
of funds raised
in the equity
marketEquities
purchased
by credit
institutions and
non-banks
Increased
investment
in mutual fund
shares
Liquidity
preference
increases again
considerably

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
49riskier and less liquid forms of investment: in
the first quarter of 2004, however, a mixtureof unfavourable and unsettling factors shiftedinvestors’ preference again towards liquidity.Moreover, the intermediate decline in capitalmarket rates meant lower opportunity costsfor cash holdings. In such an environment,quickly available and safe bank deposits wereonce again an attractive form of investment.
Overnight deposits benefited particularly
from the further increase in demand for liquidbank deposits. In the first quarter, these werebuilt up markedly, having been reduced con-siderably in the previous quarter. Somewhathigher interest rates and considerable shiftsaway from short-term time deposits, which inthe period under review were particularly thecase with non-financial enterprises, also hadan impact. In addition, other financing insti-tutions which are not attributed to the bank-ing sector expanded their sight depositssharply in January after having reduced themconsiderably in December – presumably foraccounting reasons.
The decline in short-term time deposits since
the end of 2001 (with an agreed maturity ofup to two years) accelerated in the periodunder review. Both non-financial and other fi-nancing institutions reduced these deposits.In addition, households also reduced theirshort-term time deposits further, which waslikely due to the ever-lower yield advantageof such deposits vis-/C224-vis overnight money. Inaddition to overnight deposits, short-termsavings deposits (with an agreed noticeperiod of three months) also benefited fromthe low-interest environment. These depositsNew business
% p.a.
% p.a.% p.a.
Loans to non-financial
corporations ...
... over  5 1 million with an initial
    rate fixation of up to 1 year... up to  5 1 million with an initial
    rate fixation of up to 1 year
... over  5 1 million with an initial
    rate fixation of over 5 yearsLoans to households
Consumer loans 1
2
Housing loans3Households’ deposits ...
... overnight... redeemable at notice
    of up to 3 months
... with an agreed  maturity
    of up to 1 yearBank interest
rates in Germany
1 With an initial rate fixation of over
1 year and up to 5 years. — 2 Decline
owing to special effect. — 3 With an initial
rate fixation of over 5 years and up to
10 years.
Deutsche Bundesbank5.5
5.24.94.64.34.03.7
3.4
3.12.87.0
6.76.46.15.85.55.2
4.9
4.62.7
2.42.11.81.5
1.2
0.9
2003 2004Sharp increase
in overnight
deposits
Short-term time
deposits fall
again sharply...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
50were also increased considerably in the period
under review. Their increase, however, was byfar unable to offset the decline in short-termtime deposits.
Of the longer-term bank deposits only the
longer-term time deposits (with a maturity ofover two years) continued to grow in theperiod under review. Employed persons andespecially insurers were the main depositorshere. The longer-term savings deposits (with
an agreed notice period of over threemonths) continued to decline in the periodunder review, although the decline was againweaker than in the previous quarter. Even so,since the start of the interest-lowering periodin the spring of 2001, these savings depositshave been reduced by nearly 30%. The mark-edly lower yield advantage vis-/C224-vis short-term savings deposits is likely to have beenone of the main reasons for this.
In the period under review, the credit expan-
sion in Germany varied greatly according tosector. While lending to the private sectorgrew only slightly, loans to the public sectorsurged in seasonally adjusted annual terms by14
1/C252% in the first quarter. This increase was
attributed mainly to a rise in holdings of do-mestic government paper. In the previousyear these holdings were also increased un-usually strongly in the first quarter but werereduced somewhat in the subsequent quar-ters again. Loans to the public sector also in-creased considerably in the first quarter. TheFederal government expanded strongly itsshort-term borrowing from German banksparticularly in March. At the same time, how-ever, it also increased sharply its deposits heldwith German banks.
In the first quarter, banks increased their se-
curitised lending to the domestic private sec-tor, owing particularly to corresponding se-curities purchases. Hence, banks in Germanyincreased sharply their holdings in equitiesand other dividend-bearing paper issued bydomestic enterprises. However, since theshares were mainly acquired in the secondary%
%
Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 1Consumer creditTo households
Housing loansTo enterprisesBank lending survey:
Changes in credit standards *
*Difference between the sum of the per-
centages for “tightened considerably” and
“tightened somewhat” and the sum of the
percentages for “eased somewhat” and
“eased considerably”. — 1Expectations for
Q2.
Deutsche Bundesbank40+
30+
20+
10+
0
10−40+
30+
20+
10+
0
10−60
50
40
3020
10
0
2002 2003 2004
...while
short-term
savings deposits
increased
Overall increase
in longer-term
bank depositsStrong increase
in lending
to the public
sector
Increase in
securitised
lending...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
51market, banks’ purchases did not result in a
corresponding cash flow to the issuing enter-prises. In the first quarter in Germany, privatenon-banks received nearly no new moneyfrom unsecuritised borrowing either. Banks’claims arising from advances and loans toenterprises and households in Germany re-mained practically unchanged in this period.The ongoing sharp reduction in short-termlending largely offset the increase in longer-term lending, which grew by a seasonally ad-justed annualised rate of 1
1/C252% in the period
under review. In the light of low long-terminterest rates, private borrowers have thus se-cured favourable financing terms in the long-er term. All major borrower groups are likelyto have taken advantage of these conditions,although the increase in longer-term housingloans was again low in the period underreview.
The weak credit development in Germany is
still essentially a result of lower credit de-mand. For example, in the April edition of theBank Lending Survey in the Eurosystem
1
banks report on lower demand from enter-prises and for housing loans now that the an-ticipatory effect from the past year as a resultof the discussion on the grant to home buyershas run its course. To a certain degree, thecredit development is also likely to have beeninfluenced by supply side factors. In the firstquarter of 2004, banks surveyed in Germanywere again inclined to further tighten slightlytheir lending guidelines and their creditstandards for loans to enterprises. Accordingto respondents, this reflected partly an in-crease in capital costs and a more critical as-sessment with respect to industry andenterprise-specific risks as well as the value of
collateral. The restrictive tendency witnessedin the previous quarter with respect to hous-ing loans strengthened somewhat as well.Some further tightening for loans to enter-prises is expected in the second quarter of%
%
Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1Consumer creditTo households
Housing loansTo enterprises
Average loansRiskier loansBank lending survey:
Changes in loan margins *
*Difference between the sum of the per-
centages for “tightened considerably” and
“tightened somewhat” and the sum of the
percentages for “eased somewhat” and
“eased considerably”.
Deutsche Bundesbank60+
40+
20+
0
20−80+
60+
40+
20+
0
20−100
80
604020
2002 2003 2004
1See Deutsche Bundesbank, Results of euro-area bank
lending survey, Monthly Report, June 2003, pp 67ff. The
aggregate survey results for Germany can be found
under http://www.bundesbank.de/volkswirtschaft/vo_
veroeffentlichungen.php....but only a
slight increase
in loans to the
private sector
Weak credit
demand and
somewhat
more restrictive
credit standards
for loans to
enterprises and
housing loans

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
522004; respondent institutions do not expect
noteworthy changes in their credit standardsfor loans to households (see chart onpage 50).
The trend continued towards risk-
differentiated spreads, particularly for hous-ing loans. In some cases, margin spreads forriskier loans even widened somewhat, whileaverage loans benefited from an initial nar-rowing of margin spreads. Riskier loans to en-terprises were also more strongly affected bybroader margin spreads than was the case foraverage loans. By contrast, the conditions forconsumer loans remained largely unchanged(see chart on page 51). With regard to otherlending conditions, the respondent banksalso indicated that they were occasionally ap-plying somewhat stricter criteria to loans to
enterprises in respect of collateral as well asto the lending ratio for housing loans.
Compared with the rest of Europe, the Ger-
man survey results indicated a somewhatmore restrictive trend on the credit supplyside in the area of loans to enterprises andhousing loans than the euro-area average.German banks also assessed credit demandas somewhat weaker.
2On the whole, the
interplay between somewhat more restrictivechanges on the credit supply side and, at thesame time, weaker activity on the credit de-mand side, is likely not to have resulted inadditional tension on the credit market.
2See European Central Bank, Monthly Bulletin, May
2004, pp 16ff.Ongoing trend
towards wider
margins –
collateral
gaining in
importance
againNo indication of
additional
tensions in the
credit market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
53Economic conditions
in GermanyUnderlying trends
The cyclical recovery of the German economy
gained strength somewhat in the first quarterof 2004. According to the flash estimate ofthe Federal Statistical Office, real gross do-mestic product (GDP) increased by 0.4%after seasonal and working-day adjustment.Growth had been 0.2% and 0.3%, respect-ively, in the previous two quarters. At an an-nualised rate, the current pace of expansioncorresponds to a 1
3/C254% rise in overall output.
This means that there is likely to have beenno further decline in average capacity utilisa-tion for the first time in some while. Real GDPin the first quarter was 0.7% up on the yearafter working-day adjustment. The corres-ponding unadjusted figure shows a 1.5%year-on-year increase. The fact that therewere more working days than in the sameperiod of 2003 played a part in this.
However, it would be rash simply to extrapo-
late from the growth rate of the first quarter.Various leading indicators and the surveys ofthe Ifo Institute and the Centre for EuropeanEconomic Research (ZEW) continue to signala rather subdued upturn in the next fewmonths. The fact that international crude oiland commodity prices are very high mightalso have a temporary retarding impact, espe-cially as the euro area – which is importantfor the economy – is only slowly gainingmomentum.
The cyclical upturn also remains narrowly
based. While domestic demand was very sub-dued at the start of the year, external tradewas generating strongly positive stimuli. Fol-Faster increase
in GDP...
...on a narrow
base

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
54lowing a temporary lull in the last three
months of 2003, exports picked up notice-ably in the first quarter. At the same time, im-ports were only slightly up on the quarter,when they had shown a rise not least as a re-sult of sizeable imports of intermediate and ITgoods. This led to a sharp increase in net ex-ports. However, there was still quite little will-ingness to invest more in the domestic capitalstock. At least, there is unlikely to have beena seasonally adjusted increase in investmentin machinery and equipment in the first quar-ter of 2004. Activity in the construction sectoris also likely to have weakened again some-what following the anticipatory effects thatoccurred in connection with the cutback inassistance for housing construction.The restraint in households’ consumption,
which had been noticeable for some while,continued after the start of 2004. This is re-vealed, first, by the surveys of the consumerresearch institution Gesellschaft f/C252r Konsum-
forschung (GfK). In terms of their underlying
trend, neither expectations regarding eco-nomic activity nor the outlook for incomes in-dicate an improved assessment. The propen-sity to purchase is persisting at a very lowlevel. Second, as is consistent with the survey,retail turnover in the first few months of theyear was down on the fourth quarter of 2003as well as down on the year. Although the in-come situation improved somewhat at thebeginning of the year after an additionalstage of the tax reform had come into effect,this was offset by additional burdens due tothe health reform and higher tobacco taxes.Furthermore, the continuing difficult situationon the labour market and the resulting job in-security are likely to have dampened the pro-pensity to spend. A further factor to be con-sidered is that the incomes in many newforms of employment, such as one-personbusinesses or mini and midi-jobs, tend to below in line with their low level of labour prod-uctivity and small number of working hours.
Precisely because the interest rate level and
price developments are very consumer-friendly at present and since there are cur-rently no major negative wealth effects stem-ming from the financial and real estate mar-kets that might depress consumption, lookingat the subdued income trend alone does notprovide an adequate explanation of the per-sistent weakness of consumption in Germany.On the contrary, there are indications that the
Adjusted for seasonal and working-day
variations, quarterly
%DM bn  5 bn
1997 98 99 00 01 02 03 2004Lin scale
Year-on-year change880900920940960980
oLog scale
Real GDP 1Economic growth in Germany
1At 1995 prices. — oFrom 1999, in euro.
Deutsche Bundesbank4+
2+
0
2−500
490
480
470460
450Weak private
consumption
Change in
savings
behaviour

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
55consumption and/or savings behaviour of
households has changed.
A comparison of the saving ratios in periods
of cyclical weakness since the early 1980sshows that, in such comparable periods,there was no continuous increase like the oneobserved since 2000. At the same time,econometric estimates of the consumptionfunction show persistently high negative resi-dues.
The current increase in the saving ratio might
be due partly to the debate on the problemsof the health and pension systems. This mayhave raised awareness of the necessity tomake personal provision. In general, theaccumulation of private assets for maintain-ing the standard of living in old age is to beseen positively as a major contribution to cop-ing with the demographic strains. Actually,the marked uncertainty about the specificfeatures of the reform in the social and labourmarket sectors has made it much more diffi-cult for households to assess the future out-look for incomes. The sooner and more con-vincingly the appropriate political decisionsensure greater planning certainty and reliabil-ity in terms of the underlying conditions, thesooner households’ caution in terms of theirconsumption decisions – which is rooted inthis situation – can be overcome. In saying allthat, it should be pointed out that both theprivate and the national saving ratios in Ger-many are to be rated as low on a longer-termcomparison. Higher domestic saving is by nomeans a disadvantage for longer-termgrowth as long as the financial resources finda productive use there. Enhancing the attract-Seasonally adjusted, monthly
Balance
Balance
Propensity to purchase2Households’ assessment of the
economic situation2
MonthlyCurrent situation 1Business
expectations 12000 = 100
Business climate in the
industrial sector 1Sentiment in the industrial
sector and among households
1 Source: Ifo Institute. — 2  According to
GfK data. Moving five-month averages.
Deutsche Bundesbank40+
20+
0
20−
40−
60−40+
20+
0
20−
40−105
100
95
90
85
80110
105
100
95
9085
1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
56iveness of Germany as a location for invest-
ment in this way is always a key task of eco-nomic policy.
Output and labour market
The situation in industry improved somewhat
in the first few months of the year. Seasonallyadjusted output in the first quarter was upslightly on the comparatively high figure forthe final quarter of 2003. After eliminatingworking-day effects, the figure was 1
1/C252%u p
on the year.
Intermediate goods performed better than
average with a clear seasonally adjusted in-crease in output. The year-on-year rise wentup from 2% in the final quarter of 2003 tomore than 2
1/C252% in the first three months of
the current year. This was due mainly to asharp seasonally adjusted increase in outputin the chemical industry. Producers of con-sumer goods also performed comparativelywell. Producers of non-durable goods, in par-ticular, expanded their production somewhat,although, in the case of tobacco goods, thisis likely to have been due in part to anticipa-tory effects owing to the further increase inthe tax on cigarettes and other tobacco prod-ucts as of 1 March. By contrast, cutbacks inproduction were reported by the capitalgoods sector. Not least, completions of motorvehicles were cut back again somewhat afterhaving been stepped up considerably towardsthe end of last year.
Construction output in the first few months
of 2004 was affected by marked fluctuationsin the weather. Following cutbacks in January,it was possible to step up work again in Feb-ruary. However, construction output in thefirst quarter as a whole was clearly down onthe final quarter of 2003. The figure was 3%down on the year compared with -
3/C254% in the
October to December period of last year. Thisshows that there was no continuation of thestabilisation that was becoming apparent in2003. Business conditions remained difficultin installation and building completion work,too. In the fourth quarter of 2003 (more re-cent statistics are unavailable at present),hours worked and turnover were both stillnoticeably down on the year, although theminus figure has become smaller recently.
The first few months of this year brought no
improvement for the wholesale and retail%
%
1991 1992 1993 19942000 2001 2002 2003Households’ saving ratio in
periods of cyclical slowdown
Deutsche Bundesbank15
1413
12
1114
13
12
1111
10
9
1980 1981 1982 1983
Industrial
output
stabilised......but further
decline in
construction

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
57trade, with turnover – at constant prices –
being down on the end of last year. House-holds’ reluctance to buy was even quite obvi-ous in the wholesale trade. This was not off-set by the more favourable development indeliveries of commodities and primary mater-ials as well as of machinery and equipment toindustry. In the hotel and catering trade,there was a lessening of the ongoing declinein turnover that had been triggered by sharpprice increases in connection with the intro-duction of euro cash. While hotel and accom-modation services even achieved initial in-creases in turnover, business in the restaurantsector continued to be on a downward trend.
The available indicators suggest an upturn for
other services sectors. According to the surveysof the German Industrial and Trade Association(DIHK), this applies, not least, to the banks andinsurance companies. Many branches of thecommercial services provider sector likewise re-port a positive development in turnover. Ac-cording to the spring survey of the Centre forEuropean Economic Research (ZEW), businessdeveloped positively especially for the advertis-ing industry, tax consultants and auditors aswell as for firms of management consultants.By contrast, in the field of information andcommunications technologies (ICT) expect-ations have probably not been entirely fulfilled.Nevertheless, in the first few months of thisyear the wholesale trade continued to reportdouble-digit year-on-year increases in sales ofoffice machinery and equipment.
The upward cyclical movement has not yet
been reflected on the labour market. Instead,unemployment has been going up again sincethe start of 2004 and there has been a further
decline in employment. According to FederalStatistical Office data, the seasonally adjustednumber of persons in work had fallen to38.16 million by February. This was around35,000 fewer than at the end of 2003. Thismeans that the shedding of labour, which hadnearly come to a standstill in the last fewmonths of 2003, has accelerated again. Thefact that the year-on-year decline of around2000 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
%%
Lin scale
Year-on-year change
1997 98 99 00 01 02 03 2004Log scale
ConstructionLin scale
Year-on-year changeLog scale
IndustryOutput in industry
and in construction
Deutsche Bundesbank10+
5+
0
5−
10−
15−110
105
100
95
90
85
8010+
5+
0
5−105
100
95
90
85Weak business
activity in the
wholesale and
retail trade as
well as in the
catering
industry
Upturn in the
services sector
Unfavourable
development in
employment

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
58240,000, or 0.6%, in the fourth quarter of
2003 had nevertheless narrowed to 130,000,or 0.3%, by February was partly due to the in-crease in the number of self-employed per-sons – to a certain extent, a result of one-person businesses promoted by labour marketpolicy. Moreover, there was an increase in thenumber of low-paid part-time jobs, which in-clude mini and midi-jobs. The fall in employ-ment therefore mainly affected full-timeemployees. A perceptible decline is to be
assumed in this context, with constructionand industry being especially heavily affected.
There was a marked rise in seasonally adjust-
ed unemployment in the past few months. Atthe end of April, the number of persons offi-cially registered as unemployed was 4.37 mil-lion. This was 95,000 more than in January.The seasonally adjusted unemployment rate,as calculated by the Federal EmploymentAgency, was 10.5% in April compared with10.3% in January. At the end of the periodunder review, the standardised EU rate was9.8%. This clearly reveals the progressivelywaning effects of redefining the unemploy-ment criteria, which accompanied the reformof the labour market and which led to a de-cline in registered unemployment in thesecond half of last year, and shows that thecyclical trend is regaining the upper hand. Achange to the statistics as of 1 January 2004,which removed participants in aptitude test-ing and training measures from the un-employment numbers, is the reason for theApril unemployment figure being around55,000 lower than in the same month lastyear. Without this adjustment, there wouldhave been an increase.
There have been further cutbacks in the trad-
itional measures of labour market promotion.Fewer participants in vocational trainingcourses and in job creation schemes were re-ported than 12 months previously, for ex-ample. By contrast, more persons receivedbridging allowances and business start-upgrants. Many unemployed persons have alsobeen integrated into personnel service agen-Quarterly
Millions
Millions
%Thou-
sandsThou-
sands
0
20041Unemployment rate
(seasonally adjusted)
AprAprLin scale
Year-on-year changeReduced log scale
Unemployed
(seasonally adjusted)
- AprLin scale
Year-on-year
changeLog scale
Employed
(seasonally
adjusted)Labour market
1From January 2004, unemployed exclud-
ing participants in aptitude tests and train-
ing measures.
Deutsche Bundesbank12
11
10
9400+
0
400−4.6
4.2
3.8800+
400+
0
400−
800−39.4
39.0
38.6
38.2
37.8
37.4
1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003Rise in
unemployment

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
59cies (PSAs), although employment in this area
fell recently owing to the insolvency of onelarge agency.
Orders
Seasonally adjusted demand for industrial
products in the first three months of the yearsomewhat exceeded the relatively high levelachieved in the fourth quarter of 2003. Year-on-year growth was only slightly down onthe good 3
1/C252% of the preceding three-month
period. The development in foreign orderswas even more positive. Compared with au-tumn 2003, they went up
1/C252% in seasonally
adjusted terms and were 4% up on the year.Demand for capital goods took the lead butproducers of intermediate goods also record-ed increasing export orders. It was only con-sumer goods for which fewer orders wereplaced than before. The overall persistenthigh level of interest abroad in German indus-trial products indicates that the appreciationof the euro has so far had a limited impact onGerman competitiveness. According to theofficial export price statistics, there were nomajor changes in contract prices either.
Domestic demand generated no stimuli in the
first three months of this year. In seasonallyadjusted terms, incoming orders were slightlydown on the final quarter of 2003, whichhad marked the high point of last year. Theyear-on-year increase, at 2
1/C252%, was roughly
just as high as in the fourth quarter of 2003.Consumer goods producers, in particular, suf-fered a significant decline in orders. The fig-ure was therefore further down on the year,ie -4% compared with no more than just
under -2% at the end of 2003. There wasscarcely any increase in orders for capitalgoods due, not least, to weak demand formechanical engineering products and for ap-paratus for telephony and telegraphy. Thiscontrasted with intermediate goods, whichmade up further ground. In seasonally adjust-ed terms, the first quarter showed an increaseof roughly 1% in new orders on the preced-Seasonally adjusted, quarterly, log scale
Domestic
1997 98 99 00 01 02 03 2004ForeignNew orders
Volume, 2000 = 100
TotalDemand for industrial goods
Deutsche Bundesbank105
100
95
9085110
80105
72100
7595
90
85105
100
95
90
85
80
75Virtual
stagnation
in demand
for industrial
goods

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
60ing period, which had already been quite
good. This was sustained by the metal-working industry, with the identifiable upturnat the end of 2003 continuing at a substantialpace.
Construction demand has been virtually stag-
nant since spring last year and this underlyingtrend persisted in the first few months of2004. Taking January and February together(more recent data are unavailable), seasonally
adjusted incoming orders were, in fact,around 1
3/C254% up on the fourth quarter of
2003. However, this was due to a number ofmajor industrial construction orders. In thisconstruction subsector, the volume of ordersin the first two months of 2004 was morethan 14% higher than in the final quarter of2003. This formed a counterweight to the de-clines in public sector construction and,above all, in housing construction, whereorders contracted by around 15% comparedwith the end of 2003. Owing to the cutbacksin public assistance as of 1 January 2004,many customers had started their construc-tion projects at an earlier date, which meantthat there was a “gap” in orders at the begin-ning of the year. Even though business activ-ity returned to normal in February, there areno signs of a sustained upturn. According toreports from brokers, supply is outstrippingdemand in many parts of Germany and thenumber of vacant properties is increasing insome areas.
Prices
Prices have been rising at a somewhat faster
pace recently. This has been due, in part, to asurge in prices on the international energyand commodity markets. World market pricesfor oil have been steadily pointing upwardsfor some weeks. Measured by the spot mar-ket prices for Brent North Sea Oil, a barrel ofoil cost around US$36
1/C252in the first half of
May. This was nearly one-quarter more thanat the end of 2003 and around 50% morethan 12 months previously. One main causeSeasonally adjusted, quarterly, log scale
...in housing construction
1997 98 99 00 01 02 03 2004...from the public sectorConstruction orders...
...from industrial
   enterprisesVolume, 2000 = 100
Total
construction orders
J-FDemand for
construction work
Deutsche Bundesbank140
130
120
110
100
90
80
70
60120
100110
90100
80110
90100
8090
70120
110
100
90
80
- - - - 
Slight rise in
construction
demandSomewhat
faster pace
of price
increase...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
61of this price surge – apart from geopolitical
risks – is the sharp rise in demand, especiallyin China and the USA, which is accompany-ing the cyclical upturn. Moreover, the OPECproducing countries have a declared interestin a high dollar price level, which also cush-ions depreciations of the settlement currency.Additionally, the global economic upswinghas led to a marked price surge in industrialcommodities. According to HWWA data,world market prices for non-ferrous metalsand for iron ore plus scrap have gone up byabout two-fifths and around one-third, re-spectively, year on year. It should be noted inthis context, however, that the prices in theyears before had been quite low. Domestical-ly, price developments were affected by costsbeing shifted to households in connectionwith the health reform and by higher tobaccotaxes.
After adjustment for seasonal variations, con-
sumer prices in the first four months of theyear went up by 1.1%, compared with nomore than 0.2% in the preceding referenceperiod. The year-on-year rate reached 1.6%in April, compared with 1.1% in December2003. After excluding energy, health care andtobacco, the increase was 0.6% in April,compared with 0.7% at the end of last year.This clearly reveals that there were only quiteminor price movements in the case of othergoods and services as well as house rents.
In the case of industrial factory gate prices,
international and national influences werealso easily identifiable. Specifically, there werewell above-average increases in the prices ofbasic metals and semi-finished products aswell as of products of the food and drink in-
dustry (including tobacco products). For com-mercial goods as a whole, the annual rate inMarch was +0.3%. For industrial goodsalone, the figure was +0.7%.
Quoted prices for construction work re-
mained largely constant at the start of 2004.The construction price index, which coversdevelopments ranging from housing con-2000 = 100, monthly, log scale
1997 98 99 00 01 02 03 2004Non-ferrous metals 1Crude oil 1Total
on a euro basison a US dollar
basisCommodity prices
Source: HWWA index “Euroland”. — 1On a
US dollar basis.
Deutsche Bundesbank140
120
100
80
70120
100
80
60
405070140
120
100
80
60
5070
...at the
consumer
level...
...and in
industry
Minor price
movements in
construction
and real estate
prices

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
62Deutsche BundesbankWorking-day adjustments to consumer prices since April 2004
The adjustment of time series to take account of calen-
dar effects such as the average impact of monthly vari-ations in the number of working days, is an indispens-able tool of short-term economic analysis. Seasonal adjustment which does not take account of calendar inﬂ uences eliminates only those effects which occur 
regularly and with similar intensity. However, there are also events which occur at varying times from one year to another. For example, the number of working days varies in a month depending on the number of Satur-days, Sundays and – in some cases, movable – public holidays. The aim of working-day adjustment is to assess and eliminate such working-day effects using regression analysis models.
Adjustments for working-day variations are particularly 
important with regard to real economic indicators. The 
Bundesbank publishes seasonally and working-day 
adjusted series for construction and industrial output as well as for the individual components of GDP in its Monthly Reports and Statistical Supplement 4. Work-ing-day effects also arise with regard to a number of demand components.
1 By contrast, price indices have, 
up to now, not usually been adjusted for working-day 
variations. However, consumer prices for travel and holiday services are noticeably dependent on ﬂ  uc-
tuations in seasonal demand in connection with the school holidays. In some cases, these occur in the same month every year, like the price peak at Christmas. In 
others, however, they vary according to the pattern 
of working days and public holidays. For example, although the price effect of the Easter holidays mostly becomes apparent in April, it is sometimes felt as early as March. 
The Federal Statistical Ofﬁ  ce bases its calculation of 
the consumer price indices for package holidays and air travel on the offers which start on the latest date before the 16th day of the month.
2 Working-day effects may, 
therefore, occur in months with a varying number of days off work in the second half of the month. As the 
timing of holidays varies across the German Länder , the 
number of days taken off work after the middle of the month in the individual Länder  is ﬁ rst determined for 
working-day adjustment. These ﬁ  gures are then con-
densed – together with the consumption weightings of the Länder – into mean values for Germany as a whole. 
Finally, the pan-German holiday variable is analysed in 
terms of its capacity to explain the time structure of 
prices. This establishes the existence of a statistically signiﬁ  cant calendar effect on the prices of package 
holidays and air travel in March and April owing to the varying dates of the Easter holidays.
3 Much the 
same applies with regard to the timing of the Whitsun holidays in May. June is not affected as the Whitsun holidays can fall, at the latest, in the ﬁ  rst half of June. 
No statistically signiﬁ  cant calendar effects have been 
identiﬁ  ed for the other months, in particular from July 
to September (summer holidays), in October (autumn holidays) and in December (Christmas).
The adjustment of consumer prices of package holidays 
and air travel starts in 1991 and is conﬁ  ned to March, 
April and May. The chart below shows the extremely 
volatile unadjusted series for package holidays – the price differentials within one year are greater than 30% – and a seasonally adjusted series which, although much smoother, is usually very unsettled around the Easter period in particular. Working-day adjustment 
smoothes out the peaks in the spring months.
Adjustment for working-day variations has only a 
minor effect on the overall index of consumer prices 
owing to the low weight of package holidays and air 
travel in the basket of goods (only 2.2% of underly-ing expenditure in 2000). In most years, the difference between the seasonally adjusted series and the season-ally and working-day adjusted series is no more than one-tenth, in rare cases two-tenths. The inﬂ  uence on 
the partial index for service prices is more important, 
however. This time series is considerably smoother 
when adjusted for working-day variations, thus mak-ing the underlying trend easier to identify.
1 For the Bundesbank’s seasonal adjustment practices, see 
Deutsche Bundesbank, The changeover from the seasonal adjustment method Census X-11 to Census X-12-ARIMA, Monthly Report , September 1999, pp 39-50. — 2 Two-week 
travel for two persons and city breaks from Friday to Mon-day are captured. In December, the prices of travel over the Christmas period are used. — 3 However, these effects are 
not strictly symmetrical. The price effect of an additional day off work over the Easter period is smaller in March than 
in April. In addition, price determination practice, namely taking the middle of the month, means that, in some years, the Easter effect is not visible in the unadjusted series in either March or April. In this case, the annual average price level is pushed downwards. Working-day adjustment com-pensates for this.2000 = 100, log scale
Unadjusted figures
season-
ally ad-
justed
seasonally and working-day adjusted
2000 2001 2002 2003Price index for package holidays
130
125
120
115
110
105
100
95
90

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
63struction to industrial commercial and office
buildings and road construction, was only0.2% up on the year in the first quarter.
Prices fell slightly in the real estate sector.
1For
the first time in some while, the prices ofnewly constructed owner-occupied apart-ments and houses were on a slight decline in2003 (data during the course of the year arecurrently unavailable). Used owner-occupieddwellings have been becoming somewhatcheaper for quite some time. In regionalterms, the price decreases were somewhatsharper in eastern Germany than in westernGermany and also tended to be somewhatsmaller in small towns than in large townsand cities.2000 = 100, annual averages, log scale
Resale
1995 2003Newly builtHouse prices *in Germany
*Terraced houses and owner-occupied
dwellings; Bundesbank calculations based
on raw data of Bulwien AG.
Deutsche Bundesbank104
102
100
98
96104
102
100
98
96 97 98 99 00 01 02
1The information refers to data provided by Bulwien AG
for an expanded group of 125 towns and cities which are
pooled by the Bundesbank to form a broad index.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
64Foreign trade
and paymentsForeign trade and current account
The external environment continued to im-
prove for German trade and industry at thebeginning of 2004. This was due mainly tothe discernible economic upturn in the coun-tries of trading partners outside the euroarea; by contrast, economic activity in theeuro-area countries was very much more sub-dued at the beginning of the year. Overall,the impetus exerted by foreign demand wasso strong that German exports of goods roseby a seasonally adjusted 5
1/C252% in the first
quarter of 2004 compared with the finalquarter of 2003.
At the same time, the export expectations of
German enterprises, which had alreadyreached an optimistic level in the previousfew months, improved further in April, a de-velopment which indicates that exports willcontinue to expand in the immediate future.This estimate is reinforced by the growth inexport orders, which underwent a furtherslight expansion in the first quarter of 2004after showing a relatively strong increase inthe previous quarter (+
1/C252% seasonally adjust-
ed). Evidently the retarding effects of the earl-ier appreciation of the euro, which have al-ways taken some time to work their waythrough to exports, are not having any im-pact on the trend owing to the sustainedglobal economic recovery. Certainly theappreciation-related pressure on German ex-ports also declined somewhat recently. At thetime this report went to press, the effectiveeuro exchange rate was 3
1/C252% below its level
at the beginning of the year.External
environment

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
65The powerful surge in demand for German
products at the beginning of the year camemainly from trading partners outside the euroarea. Exports of goods to non-euro-areacountries rose on an average of January andFebruary 2004 – regional and sectoral break-downs of German foreign trade are not yetavailable for March – by 9
1/C252% compared
with the fourth quarter of 2003. Yet againthis illustrates the dominant role played bythe growth of export markets in determininghow Germany’s external business fares. Bycontrast, changes in price competitiveness as-sociated, for example, with the appreciationof the euro and the related disappearance ofthe temporary competitive edge on prices fre-quently tend to play a secondary role in amacroeconomic analysis. At all events, thisassessment applies as long as the real ex-change rate relationships do not fluctuatesharply.
1
It was primarily the dynamic economicgrowth in Asia that stimulated the externalturnover of German exporters at the begin-ning of the year. For example, exports toChina rose by 27% and those to the emer-ging markets in South-East Asia by 17%. Thecyclical upturn in Japan also led to a sharp in-crease in Japanese demand for German prod-ucts (+9
1/C252%). Exports to Russia and the OPEC
countries, whose income from the export ofoil and gas has risen sharply, likewise in-creased rapidly (+24
1/C252% and +17% respect-
ively). Even so, the importance of each ofthese two countries in relation to Germany’sexports as a whole is relatively small. How-ever, business with customers in the UnitedStates, which is much more extensive with a9
1/C252% share of German exports and which in
2003 had still been suffering heavily from the 5 bn
%Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
2004MonthlyLin scale
Export expectations2Orders received
from abroad
values, 2000 = 100
MonthlyMonthly 1Log scale
ExportsExport trend
1Monthly values adjusted to match quar-
terly level. — 2Results of the Ifo business
survey; balances of positive and negative
company reports.
Deutsche Bundesbank20+
15+
10+
5+
0
5−110
105
100
95
90180
175
170
165
160
155
150
145
140
2000 2001 2002 2003
1Owing to the appreciation of the euro, the price com-
petitiveness of German enterprises vis-/C224-vis suppliers in
countries outside the euro area deteriorated well into the
first quarter of 2004. This was offset by the relatively
favourable German price and cost developments within
the euro area and – to a limited extent – by the recent
exchange rate corrections. Although this means that,
overall, the price competitiveness of German suppliers
worsened, it was still fairly advantageous compared with
the long-term average of the competition indicator up to
the end of the period under review.Breakdown
of exports

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
66strong appreciation of the euro against the
US dollar, also increased significantly in theperiod under review (+5
1/C252%).
By contrast, German exports to the EU coun-
tries not participating in European monetaryunion grew more moderately (+1
1/C252%). This
group of countries comprises not onlyDenmark, Sweden and the United Kingdombut since the EU enlargement of 1 May 2004also the ten new member states.
2Exports to
the other euro-area countries, which had stillbeen a mainstay of German foreign trade in2003, likewise grew only slightly (+1%) inresponse to the no more than moderate ex-pansion in euro-area economic output at thebeginning of the year.Almost the entire product range of German
exporters benefited from the more buoyantforeign demand at the beginning of the year.For example, German exports of intermediategoods rose by 10
1/C252% in view of the increase
in foreign output. Exports of chemicals in-creased sharply. Furthermore, the growingdemand from foreign households resulted ina marked increase in the exports of Germanconsumer goods (+6
1/C252%). Finally, the foreign
demand for investment, which had still beenfairly subdued in the previous year, increaseddiscernibly in the first quarter of 2004. Sub-sectors of the German economy, where cap-ital goods account for 45% of exports, alsobenefited from this. For example, Germanmanufacturers of machinery as well as of in-formation and communications technologyproducts exported 11
1/C252% more in each case.
However, the German motor industry, whoseproducts are likewise classified as capitalgoods statistically, sustained a loss in exportbusiness. Consequently, only a moderate ex-port increase (of 3%) was recorded in thecase of capital goods as a whole.
German imports of goods in the first quarter
of 2004 were, in seasonally adjusted terms,1
1/C252% above the level in the previous period.
The main reason for the increase was Germanenterprises’ greater demand for foreign inter-mediate goods owing to the expansion inoutput which was planned or which had al-Trend in foreign trade by region and
by category of goods
Average of January and February 2004 compared
with the average of October to December 2003%; seasonally adjusted
ItemEx-
portsIm-
ports
Total + 5.6 + 2.2Selected country/group of countries
Euro-area countries + 0.9 + 3.5
Other EU countries + 1.5 + 2.0United States + 5.6 – 0.6Japan + 9.6 + 9.7China + 27.2 – 3.5Emerging markets inSouth-East Asia + 17.1 – 1.8Russia + 24.4 – 6.3OPEC countries + 17.1 + 2.5
Categories of goods
Selected main categories
Intermediate goods + 10.3 + 6.4Capital goods + 2.8 – 0.7Consumer goods + 6.7 + 1.5Energy sources . – 2.0
Selected categories
Chemicals + 9.4 + 14.6Machinery + 11.4 + 1.3Motor vehicles and motor vehicleparts – 5.0 + 6.7Information technology + 11.3 – 3.5
Deutsche Bundesbank
2In order to preserve continuity in reporting, German
foreign trade with these new EU countries has been clas-
sified under trade with the EU countries since the begin-
ning of 2004. A more detailed account of the significance
of the new member states for Germany’s external rela-
tions appears in the article entitled “Effects of eastward
enlargement of the EU on the German economy” on
pp 5-22 of this Monthly Report.Imports
of goods

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
67ready taken place during the quarter con-
cerned. In the case of the imports of inter-mediates, for example, there was a recordedincrease of 6
1/C252% on an average of January
and February (data for March are not yetavailable) compared with the final quarter of2003. The increase in Germany’s demand forimports was directed mainly at chemicals. Im-ports of motor vehicles and motor vehicleparts were also more buoyant. By contrast,imports of information and communicationstechnology products were somewhat loweralthough they did start from the high levelachieved in the final quarter of 2003. Thiswas partially due to price reductions in thissegment. Imports of energy also declinedslightly but smaller volumes and falling pricesfor a time during the first few months of2004 were contributory factors here.
The range of goods imported by German en-
terprises at the beginning of the year resultedin the business turnover with suppliers fromother euro-area countries rising faster(+3
1/C252%) than business with manufacturers
from outside the euro area (+11/C252%). Imports
from Ireland, Finland and Austria increasedparticularly strongly. At the same time, theappreciation of the euro tended to depressthe value of (euro-denominated) importsfrom the dollar zone. The decline in importturnover with this region is therefore not onlya reflection of changes in volume. For ex-ample, German importers bought somewhatfewer goods from the United States in termsof value. After double-digit growth rates inthe final quarter of 2003 suppliers in Chinaand the emerging markets in South-EastAsia likewise had to accept falling turnoverMajor items of the balance
of payments
5billion
2003 2004
I t e m Q 1Q 4Q 1
I Current account
1 Foreign trade 1
Exports (fob) 162.8 171.2 177.3
Imports (cif) 133.5 139.6 136.2
Balance + 29.3 + 31.6 + 41.1
2 Services (balance) – 8.4 – 4.2 – 8.93 Factor income (balance) – 4.7 + 0.3 – 9.64 Current transfers (balance) – 5.8 – 6.3 – 5.5
Balance on current account
2 + 9.0 + 19.5 + 15.6
Memo item
Balances, seasonally adjusted
1 Foreign trade + 29.1 + 32.6 + 39.92 Services – 8.4 – 7.7 – 9.13 Factor income – 1.7 – 0.6 – 6.64 Current transfers – 7.3 – 6.1 – 7.0
Current account
2 + 10.0 + 16.1 + 15.5
II Balance of capital transfers 3 – 0.0 – 0.0 + 0.4
III Balance of financial account 4 – 13.1 – 19.8 – 5.3
IV Change in the foreign reserves
at transaction values(increase: –)
5 – 1.5 + 1.2 + 0.2
V Balance of unclassifiable
transactions + 5.7 – 0.9 – 11.0
1Special trade according to the official foreign trade statistics
(source: Federal Statistical Office). — 2Includes supplementary
trade items. — 3Including the acquisition/disposal of non-
produced non-financial assets. — 4For details see the table
“Financial transactions” on page 69. — 5Excluding allocation of
SDRs and changes due to value adjustments.
Deutsche Bundesbank

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
68with German enterprises. By contrast, im-
ports from Japan grew strongly. Manufactur-ers in the other 13 EU countries not partici-pating in European monetary union and inthe OPEC countries also increased their saleson the German market.
The fact that the exports of goods expanded
faster than the imports of goods in seasonallyadjusted terms in the first quarter of 2004 ul-timately led to a rise of 37
1/C252billion in the Ger-
man trade surplus to 340 billion. At the same
time, the deficit on invisible current transac-tions with non-residents increased sharply inthe first quarter of this year compared with itslevel in the final quarter of 2003. Largercross-border net payments of factor income,which had risen quarter on quarter by 36 bil-
lion, were the main factor contributing to thegrowing deficit. The deficit on services alsoincreased, and there was a marginal rise innet expenditure on current transfers. The out-come was a slightly reduced current accountsurplus of 315
1/C252billion in the first quarter of
2004 compared with one of 316 billion in the
previous quarter.
Financial transactions
In the first few months of 2004 the players
on the international financial markets werecaught between the opportunities affordedby the global economic upturn, on the onehand, and the – for a time – distinct uncer-tainty which prevailed as a result of the ter-rorist attacks in Madrid and the tensions inthe Middle East, on the other. This was re-flected in the (aforementioned) fluctuationsin rates and yields on the international for-
eign exchange and capital markets. The shift-ing market views can also be seen to someextent in the figures on German financialtransactions with non-residents. For example,net capital imports were recorded in portfolioinvestment during the first three months ofthis year whereas in the case of direct invest-ment funds were exported. In the euro areaas a whole, by contrast, the statistics so faravailable for the countries participating inEuropean monetary union indicate net capitalexports in both of these segments.
In the case of German portfolio investment,
where, as a rule, portfolio adjustments aremade very quickly in response to changedcyclical and risk assessment, net capital im-ports amounted to 310
1/C252billion between
January and March 2004 compared with netcapital imports of 320
1/C252billion in the final
quarter of 2003.
All in all, non-resident investors acquired Ger-
man securities worth 336 billion in the quar-
ter under review; between October and De-cember 2003 they had already invested 331
billion in Germany. They also shifted theirpreferences significantly in the process. In thefirst quarter of 2004, for example, they spent343
1/C252billion on the purchase of German
bonds and notes, which was discernibly morethan in the earlier three-month period. Theirpurchases consisted of slightly more privatebonds ( 325 billion) than public bonds ( 318
1/C252
billion). Non-residents were encouraged to in-
vest in German debt securities not only be-cause they expected that capital market yieldswould fall (and they would therefore makeCurrent
account
Trends
in financial
transactionsPortfolio
investment
Foreign
investment
in German
securities

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
69holding gains) but probably also to use them
as a safe haven for their funds as a precau-tionary move. Just how much the demand forthis paper is boosted by such motives in timesof crisis can also be seen from the fact thatthe interest advantage of Federal bonds oversimilar paper issued by other euro-area coun-tries increased by 8 basis points after the ter-rorist attacks in Madrid. Some of the fundsused to acquire German bonds stemmedfrom the sale of German money marketpaper, ie from debt securities with a maturityof one year or less. Non-residents reducedtheir holdings of this paper by 311
1/C252billion.
In the light of the relatively low share price
level and the favourable profitability assess-ments of German public limited companies,foreign investors had acquired equities ofGerman enterprises worth 320
1/C252billion dur-
ing the final quarter of 2003; in the first threemonths of 2004, however, they added only33 billion worth of such paper to their port-
folios. Contributory factors to this develop-ment were presumably not only the sluggishcyclical recovery in Germany but also the re-emergence of terrorist fears following the at-tacks in Madrid, which led to a discernible de-gree of uncertainty among investors and, atleast for a time, to significant mark-downs onEuropean and, particularly, German shares.
German residents invested more heavily in
foreign securities markets at the beginning of2004 ( 325
1/C252billion). As they have often been
in the past few years, they were again par-ticularly interested in bonds and notes ( 326
billion net) and in foreign government bonds,especially those denominated in euro ( 321
1/C252Financial transactions
5billion, net capital exports: –
2003 2004
I t e m Q 1Q 4Q 1
1 Direct investment – 0.9 – 11.9 – 14.4
German investment
abroad – 15.6 + 1.1 + 11.7Foreign investmentin Germany + 14.7 – 13.0 – 26.0
2 Portfolio investment + 34.7 + 20.4 + 10.3
German investment
abroad + 5.7 – 10.7 – 25.6
Shares + 15.6 – 6.0 + 1.3
Investment fundcertificates – 3.2 – 0.5 – 7.1Bonds and notes – 9.8 – 6.6 – 25.9Money market paper + 3.2 + 2.4 + 6.1
Foreign investment
in Germany + 29.0 + 31.1 + 35.9
Shares – 3.4 + 20.3 + 2.8
Investment fundcertificates – 0.9 + 0.3 + 0.8Bonds and notes + 17.7 + 14.4 + 43.8Money market paper + 15.5 – 3.9 – 11.5
3 Financial derivatives
1 + 2.4 – 0.0 – 1.4
4 Credit transactions – 48.7 – 27.6 + 1.2
Monetary financial
institutions 2 – 32.9 – 30.2 + 21.3
Long-term – 14.5 + 1.1 – 5.3
Short-term – 18.4 – 31.4 + 26.6
Enterprises and
individuals – 22.6 + 11.0 – 10.1
Long-term – 5.2 – 0.8 + 2.1
Short-term – 17.4 + 11.9 – 12.1
General government + 1.8 – 0.2 – 3.0
Long-term + 4.3 + 1.3 – 1.9
Short-term – 2.5 – 1.5 – 1.1
Bundesbank + 4.9 – 8.2 – 7.0
5 Other investment – 0.6 – 0.7 – 1.06 Balance of all
statistically recordedcapital flows – 13.1 – 19.8 – 5.3
Memo item
Change in the foreignreserves at transactionvalues (increase: –)
3 – 1.5 + 1.2 + 0,2
1Securitised and non-securitised options and financial
futures contracts. — 2Excluding the Bundesbank. —
3Excluding allocation of SDRs and changes due to
value adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankGerman
investment
in foreign
securities

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
70billion). Their investment in foreign debt se-
curities probably had something to do withthe opinion of some market players – at thetime – that bond market yields were still opento a certain downward revision, at least in theshort term. However, a slightly greateramount of funds also accrued again to for-eign institutional investors ( 37 billion com-
pared with 3
1/C252billion in the previous three
months) whereas in the previous two yearsthe funds flowing into these institutional in-vestors had sharply declined. Part of the pur-chases of bonds and notes and of investmentfund certificates issued by foreign borrowerswas probably financed from the proceedsarising from the sale of foreign money marketpaper ( 36 billion) and shares ( 31
1/C252billion)
which German investors removed from theirportfolios in the course of adjusting to the
changes in underlying conditions.
The cross-border financial flows within con-
glomerates were determined in the first quar-ter of 2004 by the sale of an enterprise in thetelecommunications sector. This transactionhad an impact on both German direct invest-ment abroad and, conversely, foreign directinvestment in Germany. In contrast to eventsin portfolio investment, direct investment inthis period resulted in net capital exports of314
1/C252billion compared with net outflows of
312 billion in the three months before.
Between January and March German firms
repatriated 3111/C252billion net, but it was only
their cross-border participating interests– particularly in the EU and USA – that werereduced by this. Most of this reduction wasdue to the aforementioned corporate restruc-turing. A German group sold its participatinginterest in a subsidiary abroad. At the sametime, however, German enterprises providedtheir foreign branches with new credit, withthe result that a certain counterflow oc-curred.
Substantial disinvestment also arose in the
case of foreign direct investment in Germanyduring the period under review ( 326 billion
net). The main reason for this was that theGerman telecommunications enterprise usedthe sales proceeds to repay existing direct in-vestment funds borrowed from an affiliatedenterprise abroad. By contrast, foreign invest-ors moderately increased their participatinginterests in Germany. 5 bn
%
Yield on ten-year Federal
bonds outstanding
End-of-quarter levels
Q  4Q  1Q  2Q  3Q  4Q  1Foreign investment
in fixed-interest securitiesForeign purchases of German
bonds and notes,
and interest rate movements
Deutsche Bundesbank4.6
4.4
4.24.0
3.8
3.620+
15+
10+
5+
0
5−
10−
2002 2003 2004Direct
investment
German direct
investment
abroad
Foreign direct
investment
in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
71At a seasonally adjusted total of 313 billion,
the net outflows of funds as a result of thenon-securitised credit transactions of non-banks were fairly substantial at the beginningof the year. This outcome was due primarilyto the operations (totalling 310 billion) of en-
terprises and individuals as they againstocked up their balances with foreign banksafter reducing them at the end of 2003 – acustomary practice at that time of year – forbalance sheet purposes. A further 33 billion
was exported during the period under reviewas a result of transactions by general govern-ment.
Between January and March 2004 net capital
imports of 314
1/C252billion arose through the
non-securitised credit transactions of thebanking system as a whole; in the previousquarter there had been net capital exports of338
1/C252billion. The decisive factor here was the
sharp reduction in the (non-securitised) netexternal assets of the German monetary fi-nancial institutions (excluding the Bundes-bank).
3By contrast, there were outflows of
37 billion as a result of the Bundesbank trans-actions that are classified as credit transac-
tions – primarily through settlements in thelarge-value payment system TARGET.
The foreign reserves of the Bundesbank re-
mained almost unchanged – at transactionvalues – during the first three months of2004. As both the price of gold and the ex-change rate of the US dollar increased duringthe period under review, they amounted to379
1/C252billion – at market prices – at the end
of March compared with 3761/C252billion at the
end of 2003. Consequently, the valuationlosses incurred in the previous quarter weremore or less offset.
3In order to enhance the comparability of the various
sets of statistics the term “monetary financial institu-
tion”, which is already widely used in the banking statis-
tics, will also be used in future in the balance of pay-
ments. This term covers not only the credit institutions
and the Bundesbank but also the money market funds. It
seems to be sensible to continue showing the credit
transactions of the credit institutions and the money mar-
ket funds separately from those of the Bundesbank, with
the result that one would talk about “monetary financial
institutions (excluding the Bundesbank)”. The change in
terminology does not create a statistical break because
the non-securitised cross-border credit transactions of the
money market funds were already classified under credit
institutions.Credit
transactions
of non-banks
Credit
transactions
of the banking
systemForeign
reserves of the
Bundesbank

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
72Public financesBudgetary development of central,
state and local government
In the first quarter of 2004, the deficit of cen-
tral and state government (results for localgovernment are not yet available) amountedto340 billion, around 34 billion higher than
in the same period in 2003. The main reasonwas a decline in tax revenue, which reflectedthe subdued domestic economy and the con-siderable income tax cuts. This contrastedwith a 1
1/C252% increase in expenditure.
Following record deficits of central, state and
local government of almost 370 billion in
2003, no improvement is expected on thewhole for this year. The crucial factor here isthe revenue side. For example, according tothe most recent forecast, tax revenue willprobably increase only marginally. Non-taxrevenue is likely to go down, partly as a resultof the significant decline in the Bundesbankprofit. The level of expenditure could remainlargely unchanged compared with 2003. Thecontributing factors include smaller growth intransfers to the social security funds, a furtherreduction in staff numbers, moderate pay de-velopments in the public sector, a generallystringent spending policy in view of the tightbudgetary position as well as the persistenceof very favourable financing conditions onthe capital market. Even so, as things standtoday, deficits are likely to considerably ex-ceed budget plans (which were optimistic,particularly for central government) owingto the continued weakness in revenue andabsent the implementation of additionalmeasures.Overview

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
73The trend in tax receipts was even gloomier in
the first quarter of this year. Tax revenue1of
central, state and local government was1/C252%
below the already low level of 2003. Adjustedfor the change in booking techniques for Fed-eral Government taxes,
2they even went
down by almost 11/C252%. This owed much to
the cut in income tax rates, which came intoforce at the beginning of the year. Further-more, the sustained sluggishness of domesticeconomic activity was reflected in an un-favourable development pattern of major ex-cise taxes.
Among the different types of income tax,
wage tax yielded 3
1/C252% less than in the previ-
ous year. Still, this decrease was relatively lowbecause, in terms of actual cash flow, the taxcuts had only a partial effect in the first quar-ter. Moreover, in view of the lower tax rates,a considerable number of special payments atthe end of 2003 were shifted into the newyear. Although the outturn of assessed in-come tax likewise worsened (by just under3
1/C252billion), revenue, adjusted for the in-
creased amounts for the grant to homebuyers – largely paid out in March – and thetax refunds to employees, actually went upsomewhat vis-/C224-vis the same time last year.The cuts in income tax rates seem to havebeen only partly accounted for by an adjust-ment of prepayments. Corporation tax re-ceipts went down by 11% (or 3
1/C254billion) to
just over 32 billion. This was, however, attrib-
utable to a special factor (caused by the re-structuring of a group); adjusted for this ef-fect, they went up by just under 3
1/C252billion.
Even so, this increase fell significantly short ofexpectations. Non-assessed taxes on earningsyielded just over 3
1/C252billion more than in
2003 as a result of the aforementioned spe-cial factor. Revenue from tax on interest in-come declined by slightly more than 12% pri-marily owing to the declining average interestrate on financial assets.
Although, among the indirect taxes, turnover
tax receipts went up by just over 1
1/C252% com-
pared with the – very low – level from theprevious year, the weak domestic consumerAnnual percentage change
%
Tax receipts, total 1
1st hf 2nd hf 1st hf 2nd hf Q 1 Q 2Tax revenue
1Including EU shares in German tax rev-
enue, but excluding receipts from local
government taxes, which are not yet
known for the last quarter recorded.
Deutsche Bundesbank4+
3+
2+
1+
0
1−
2−
3−
4−
5−
2002 2003 2004
1Including EU shares in German tax revenue but exclud-
ing receipts from local government taxes, which are not
yet known.
2Until the end of 2003, in the case of Federal Govern-
ment excise taxes, partial amounts due at the end of the
month were frequently recorded in the subsequent
month as revenue, whereas since the beginning of this
year they have been booked in the maturing month. This
changeover led to the decline in overall tax revenue in
the first quarter being understated by around one
percentage point vis-/C224-vis 2003.Tax revenue in
the first quarter

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
74demand continued to have a retarding influ-
ence on receipts. Mineral oil tax – the mostimportant excise tax – yielded almost 5% lessthan in the same period last year (adjustedfor the aforementioned change in bookingtechniques). This reflected the decline in en-ergy consumption as a consequence of thesluggish domestic economic activity as well asthe increase in oil prices. Tobacco tax – afteradjustment – also recorded a noticeable de-crease in receipts (-1
1/C252%); this reflected lower
sales of taxed tobacco products in Germany.The tax increases that came into force on1 March 2004 did not have an effect on rev-enue in the first quarter.
Following the unfavourable revenue trend at
the beginning of the year and as a result ofthe economic outlook – which is now beingassessed more cautiously – tax revenue for
2004 as a whole will be noticeably lowerthan expectations from the fourth quarter oflast year, which have now been modified toinclude the recent changes in tax legislation.According to the recently revised official taxestimate, which assumes real GDP growth of1.5% and nominal GDP growth of 2.3%, rev-enue will go up by only just under
1/C252% this
year. Vis-/C224-vis the autumn estimate, which iscomparable insofar as it has been adjustedfor the changes in tax legislation, shortfallslook likely to amount to 34
1/C252billion. They will
primarily affect corporation tax, assessed in-come tax, mineral oil tax and tobacco tax. Inaddition, the fact that revenue expected fromthe tax amnesty is estimated to be down by33
1/C252billion has exacerbated the shortfall. Ac-
cording to the new official forecast, the over-all tax ratio (as defined in the financial statis-tics) will decline this year by an additional0.4 percentage point to 20.4%, particularlyowing to the considerable reduction in the in-come tax schedule. Next year the tax ratiowill go down again somewhat as a result ofthe third stage of the tax reform, but then itis likely to go back up slightly in subsequentyears if the law does not change. From amedium-term perspective, the new officialestimate indicates significantly larger taxshortfalls vis-/C224-vis the May 2003 forecast,amounting to 327 billion – or just over 1% of
GDP – in 2007.
The deficit of central government expanded
by33
1/C252billion to 3281/C252billion in the first
quarter. Revenue went down by 4%. With adecline of around 3%, central governmenttax receipts developed more unfavourablyTrends in the revenue from major taxes
Revenue
in5billion
Q1
Type of tax 2004 2003Year-
on-yearchange(as %)
Wage tax 29.5 30.6 – 3.5
Assessed income tax – 5.8 – 5.4 .Corporation tax 2.2 2.4 – 10.9Turnover tax 34.2 33.7 + 1.6
Deutsche Bundesbank
Further outlookCentral
government
in the first
quarter

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
75than overall tax revenue. One reason was
that, in connection with the outcome of theparliamentary mediation committee from De-cember, the distribution of taxes has changedto the detriment of central government be-cause its share in corporation tax has beentemporarily reduced
3and the share of local
trade tax payable to central and state govern-ment has been lowered. Another contribut-ing factor was an increase in transfers to theEU, which are deducted from tax revenue bycentral government. Non-tax revenue, whichtends to fluctuate sharply during the year, de-clined sharply by just under 15%. Expenditureexpanded by 2%, mainly because of a signifi-cant rise in interest expenditure. The key fac-tor was that, unlike last year, no premium(which is offset against interest expenditure)was gained from the issuing of securities.
The Federal budget for 2004 envisages a sig-
nificant decrease in the deficit from 339 bil-
lion to 329
1/C252billion. However, as things now
stand, there is considerable risk of the previ-ous year’s level being exceeded. Expendituremay well stay below last year’s level, to besure; compared with 2003, when the increaseamounted to 2
1/C252%, no more transfers will be
made to the flood disaster fund. Also, trans-fers to the social security funds are likely togo up only marginally, since the gradual in-crease in grants to the pension insurancescheme (funded by the “ecology tax”) hasbeen discontinued; a decrease in the Federalgrant to the Federal Employment Agency isalso expected. The low rate of return in thecapital market made it possible for maturingsecurities to be refinanced at very favourablerates, which means that, despite a sharp risein debt, interest expenditure looks likely to be
very subdued. However, revenue will godown considerably as well. The most recenttax estimate envisaged that tax revenue ofcentral government would fall by 1
1/C252%. In
the case of non-tax revenue, although thebudget envisages an expansion in privatisa-tion proceeds, this effect will be more thanoffset by the decline in Bundesbank profitsbooked to the central government budget.
4
Furthermore, the revenue expected from 5 bn
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2The Federal Government’s
balance of revenue
and expenditure
Deutsche Bundesbank9+
6+
3+
0
3−
6−
9−
12−
15−
18−
21−
24−
27−
30−
2003 2004
3In the Fourth Act Promoting Modern Labour Market
Services (“Hartz IV”), which primarily governs the amal-
gamation of unemployment assistance and social assist-
ance from 2005 onwards, just over 321/C252billion in turn-
over tax was shifted away from central government in
2004.
4A share of 33.5 billion of the Bundesbank’ s profit distri-
bution is booked to the Federal Government budget ac-
counts. Any amount exceeding that sum accrues to the
Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities. Last year the
profit distribution reached 351/C252billion. This year, it went
down to 31/C254billion.Outlook for
this year ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
76motorway tolls for heavy goods vehicles will
not materialise.
As things now stand, next year considerable
efforts will be required in order to achieve anysignificant progress in reducing the huge def-icit. To be sure, according to the tax estimate,tax revenue of central government will in-crease by 3% despite further tax rate cuts be-cause the distribution of corporation tax willshift back in favour of the Federal Governmentand because it is assumed that underlying eco-nomic developments will be more favourable.Most non-tax revenue may also resume de-veloping somewhat more positively. All thesame, in view of the high structural deficits,savings on the expenditure side are imperative.Delays in implementing important reformmeasures, especially those measures with re-spect to the amalgamation of unemploymentassistance and social assistance, may presenteconomic policy and budget problems alike.Although selling off assets might lower netborrowing, this solution would only coverstructural deficits on a short-term basis.
In the first quarter, the special funds ran a
deficit of 32 billion following a surplus of just
over 3
1/C252billion last year, which had been
mainly attributable to payments made bycentral, state and local government to theflood disaster fund. The financial situation in2004 as a whole will also worsen consider-ably. For example, the bulk of the 33
1/C252billion
remaining in the flood disaster fund is likelyto be used up. Moreover, as a result of thelow Bundesbank profit, the Redemption Fundfor Inherited Liabilities will receive no share ofthe distribution, whereas in 2003 it collectedjust under 32 billion. If, in the case of the ERP
Special Fund, the loan repayments no longerconsiderably exceed the level envisaged inthe budget (as they did last year), the specialfunds may actually record a minor deficit fol-lowing a surplus of 310 billion in 2003.
State government budgets recorded a deficit
of310 billion in the first quarter. This repre-
sented a decline of 32 billion on the year. Rev-
enue grew by 2
1/C252%, not least because the
advancement of income tax rate cuts waspartly offset by a temporary shift in the distri-bution of corporation tax revenue in favourof state government. Expenditure went downby just over
1/C252%. Relief was afforded in par-
ticular by the fact that no more transfers hadto be made to the flood disaster fund. In2004 as a whole, despite the tax cuts, thestate government deficit is likely to go downvis-/C224-vis the record level in 2003 (of justunder 332 billion). In addition to the afore-
mentioned relief, there were also state-specific savings programmes. Next year, how-ever, is likely to see a renewed increase in def-icits as a result of further tax cuts, expiringcompensation for the tax cuts brought for-ward to 2004 as well as the shortfalls expect-ed in the tax estimate.
For local government no results for 2004 are
available yet. In 2003 as a whole, the munici-pal deficit almost doubled to 38
1/C252billion. This
was mainly attributable to a decline in rev-enue of just over 2%. Declining tax revenuewas accompanied by sharply decreasingtransfers from state government and signifi-cantly lower proceeds from the sale of partici-pating interests. Expenditure rose only mar-... and for 2005
Special fundsState
government
Local
government

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
77ginally, by1/C252%. Although grants to house-
holds and enterprises rose strongly, a counter-balance came in the form of a decline in in-vestment expenditure of just under 8% des-pite the additional spending in connectionwith flood relief. Additionally, at the end ofthe year there was a technical effect arisingfrom the January 2003 pay settlement, whichenabled the payment date for wages and sal-aries to be shifted to the end of the month,thus resulting in a delayed transfer of socialsecurity contributions. Overall, not least forthis reason, personnel expenditure went upby merely 1% last year.
For this year, a far-reaching reform of local
government finances was intended to steadyrevenue and bring noticeable relief. However,instead of the discussed extensive tax meas-ures, in practice the only decision taken wasthe lowering of the portion of local trade taxpayable to central and state governmentwhich had been raised to the benefit of thesetwo levels of government as of 2001. Fur-thermore, local government was to be in-cluded in the savings arising from the amal-gamation of unemployment assistance andsocial assistance. However, this reform hasbeen postponed until 2005.
The indebtedness of central, state and local
government rose very sharply, by 344
1/C252bil-
lion, in the first quarter. This developmentwas, however, offset by a 35 billion increase
in deposits. The bulk of new borrowing(331
1/C252billion) was raised in the capital mar-
ket. However, money market debt also ex-panded considerably, by 313 billion. Central
government had by far the greatest borrow-ing needs ( 335 billion). State government
also increased its indebtedness markedly, by39 billion. The growth of local government
debt probably remained limited, whereas inthe case of the special funds redemptionsmarginally outweighed new borrowing.
Social security funds
In the first quarter of 2004, the wage and sal-
ary earners’ pension insurance scheme re-corded a deficit of just under 33 billion, an in-
crease of 31 billion on the year. Expenditure
increased by almost 2%. By contrast, revenuebarely grew any further; one reason was thatreceipts from contributions stagnated. Sincethis revenue in January 2003 had still beenbased on the lower 2002 contribution rate ofNet borrowing in the market by
central, state and local government
5billion
of which
Period TotalSecuri-
ties 1Loansagainstborrow-ers’notes
2MemoitemAcquisi-tion bynon-resi-dents
2002 + 54.5 + 67.6 – 11.9 + 57.4
2003
pe + 79.9 + 73.4 + 7.5 + 35.8
of which
Q1 + 34.7 + 32.6 + 2.1 + 19.5Q2 + 13.5 + 11.8 + 1.6 + 16.3Q3 + 19.9 + 9.4 + 11.6 – 6.5Q4
pe + 11.8 + 19.5 – 7.9 + 6.5
2004
Q1pe + 44.4 + 34.4 + 10.0 ...
1Excluding equalisation claims. — 2Including cash ad-
vances and money market borrowing.
Deutsche Bundesbank
Indebtedness in
the first quarterStatutory
pension
insurance
scheme

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
7819.1%, it actually declined by1/C252% when ad-
justed for the increase in the contributionrate to 19.5%. Another reason was that theadditional Federal grant financed through en-ergy taxation – unlike in previous years – wasraised no further.
Pension expenditure rose by 2%. This was
due not only to the pension adjustment fromthe middle of last year but also in part to arise of just over
3/C254% in the number of current
pensioners. The decision to make pensionerspay the full contribution to the long-termcare insurance scheme adopted as part of theshort-term measures to stabilise the contribu-tion rate came into effect in April. Not in-creasing pensions in the middle of the yearwill have practically no repercussions com-pared with the current formula, since evenwithout this discretionary intervention there
would have been virtually no increase in pen-sions owing to last year’s weak wage trend.
This year the minimum level of the fluctuation
reserves has been lowered from 0.5 to only0.2 month’s expenditure. The associated re-course to the reserves enabled an otherwisenecessary increase in the contribution rate tobe avoided. Although for the remainder ofthis year a noticeably slower rise in expend-iture may be expected, additional liquidity as-sistance from the Federal Government maybe needed. This will depend not only onmacroeconomic trends but also on the pos-sible sale of the participating interest in theGAGFAH housing construction and manage-ment company held by the Federal InsuranceOffice for Salaried Employees. This mightconsiderably raise the liquidity of the fluctu-ation reserves. With the new pension reform,the reserves are to be renamed “sustainabilityreserves” beginning next year, and the upperceiling is to be raised to 1.5 months’ expend-iture. Since a lower increase in pension ex-penditure is expected in the next few years asa result of the “sustainability factor” and atemporary slowdown in the increase in newpensioners, the reserves may actually be re-plenished in the medium term despite thetense situation next year, if the contributionrate remains unchanged and macroeconomicdevelopments are favourable.
In the first quarter of 2004, the Federal
Employment Agency’s deficit, at just under33 billion, was somewhat higher than its 32
3/C254
billion level of last year. Revenue declined by
3/C254%; receipts from contributions were downQuarterly
 5 bn
 5 bn
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (−)Log scale
Expenditure
RevenueWage and salary earners’
pension insurance scheme
Deutsche Bundesbank4+
2+
0
2−
4−60
58
56
54
52
2001 2002 2003 2004
Federal Employ-
ment Agency

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
791/C254% on the year. Expenditure rose by merely
1/C254%, although contributions to the statutory
pension insurance scheme on behalf of recipi-ents of wage substitutes for January were, forthe first time, not booked prematurely in De-cember as had been customary. In the firstquarter, this gave rise to an additional burdenof3
1/C252billion compared with 2003.
Spending on unemployment benefits in-
creased by just over 7%. Without the afore-mentioned changeover effect, there wouldhave barely been a rise because the number ofunemployed persons – including participantsin training measures, who as of January haveno longer been classified as unemployed –largely held steady at last year’s high level. Ac-tive labour market policy measures created re-newed considerable savings. The resources forjob creation measures were 25% below theirprevious year’s level. Despite additional ex-penditure for promoting self-employment andfor personnel service agencies (PSAs), 6% lesswas spent on training. The required amount ofgrants anticipated in the budget plans,amounting to 35 billion for 2004, appears to
be sufficient from today’s viewpoint.
The statutory health insurance funds record-
ed a deficit of 33 billion in 2003, unchanged
from the year before. Although expenditurerose by merely just under 1
1/C252% (the savings
measures which came into effect last yearcontrasting with significant expenditure-raising anticipatory effects arising from thehealth reform which entered into force thisyear), revenue likewise only grew by justunder 1
1/C252% despite the increase in contribu-
tion rates. This owed something to an extra-ordinary drop in revenue in the fourth quar-
ter.5Quarterly
 5 bn
 5 bn 5 bn
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (−)Expenditure on...
...unemployment benefit
   and short-time work-
   ing benefits
...vocational training 2Log scale
Expenditure, total
Revenue 1Federal Employment Agency
1Excluding Federal Government liquidity
assistance. — 2Including job creation meas-
ures.
Deutsche Bundesbank1+
0
1−
2−
3−8.5
8.0
7.5
7.0
6.5
6.0
5.5
5.0
4.5
4.016
15
14
13
12
11
2001 2002 2003 2004
5Besides cuts in Christmas bonuses and a further in-
crease in the number of employees opting for company
pension plans with direct payments which are not subject
to social security contributions, the postponed transfer of
contributions by public sector employers as a result of the
January 2003 pay settlements caused receipts from con-
tributions to be particularly low. Furthermore, for 2003
as a whole, the maximum level of earnings subject to
contributions was not increased on a discretionary basis,
unlike in the case of the pension and unemployment
insurance schemes.Statutory
health
insurance funds

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
80The total sum of compensation subject to
health insurance contributions actually de-clined last year by 0.7%, also because of thesteady stream of members migrating to pri-vate health insurance schemes. This showsthat the financial problems encountered bythe statutory health insurance funds in 2003were largely revenue-related. As long as thegrowth of remuneration subject to compul-sory health insurance contributions is weak,relatively small increases in expenditure willbe enough to make it necessary to raise thecontribution rates. Since there is hardly anychance this year that the volume of earningssubject to compulsory contributions will growmuch faster, a stabilisation or reduction ofthe contribution burden will depend primarilyon how effectively the most recent health sys-tem reform can contain expenditure. In thelight of the increase in patients’ co-payments,it appears very likely that the demand forhealth services will be based to a larger extentupon the associated costs. However, on thebasis of present data it is not yet possible totell whether the decline in expenditure re-ported at the beginning of the year is due toa structural fall in expenditure or merely aconsequence of the anticipatory effects atthe end of 2003.
The long-term care insurance scheme posted
a record deficit of 3
3/C254billion in 2003; this was
financed by recourse to the reserves, whichstill held 34
1/C254billion at the end of 2003. Ex-
penditure rose by just over 1%, even thoughbenefits are not automatically adjusted. How-ever, the – lower – cash benefits to carerswithin the family continued to decline,whereas there was an increase in expenditurefor benefits in kind through outpatient ser-
vices and in old people’s homes. Revenuefrom contributions remained almost 1%under the figure from the previous year. Thiswas due in part to the same factors which in-fluenced the health insurance funds. How-ever, the 1.7% contribution rate to the long-term care insurance scheme was not raised.The reserves, which were relatively high inthe early stages of the long-term care insur-ance scheme, are now being tapped furtherin order to finance recurring deficits. In-creases in contribution rates are, therefore,already a medium-term threat.
General government budget trends
This year the overall deficit ratio will exceed
the 3% ceiling for the third year in a row. Asthings stand today, it will reach about thesame level as last year (3.9%). The economyis also likely to have a slightly negative impacton the deficit trend.
The revenue ratio will continue to decline
markedly. This is particularly attributable tothe extensive income tax cuts and the lowercontribution rates to the health insurancefunds. However, it is doubtful whether thetax measures (particularly potential receiptsfrom the tax amnesty), which are intended toboost revenue, will yield the anticipatedresults. The structure of macroeconomicgrowth is also likely to prove relatively unpro-ductive with regard to government revenue,since, in particular, private consumption andgross wages and salaries will grow sluggishly.Other revenue will also fall significantly, not
Long-term care
insurance
schemeDeficit ratio still
well above 3%

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
81least as a result of the marked reduction in
the distributed Bundesbank profit.
Admittedly, the government expenditure
ratio is also likely to fall distinctly. This is at-tributable not least to the health system re-form, which will lead to considerable savingsfor the statutory health insurance funds. Thetemporarily sluggish increase in the numberof pensioners, in conjunction with a lower(compared to earlier years) annual averagegrowth in individual pension payments, willcontribute to a curbing of expendituregrowth. Finally, central, state and local gov-ernment’s savings measures in the area ofpersonnel and other administrative spendingas well as the moderate (if at all) growth ininterest expenditure thanks to low interestrates may likewise contribute to a reductionin spending growth.The European commitments require that Ger-
many return to compliance with the 3% limitby next year at the latest. However, as thingsnow stand, there is still the risk that this willnot be achieved. The taxes and social securityratio will be reduced further owing mainly tothe next stage of income tax reform. Conse-quently, greater efforts are required on theexpenditure side. In order to ensure compli-ance with the 3% deficit limit and to end theovershooting of the constitutional limits fornew borrowing, it appears right now that ad-justments going beyond the adopted consoli-dation measures will be necessary. Althoughrecourse to sales of participating interestsmay help to comply with national budgetarylaw, such shifts in financial assets will notlower the deficit as laid down in theMaastricht Treaty.
Commitment
to comply with
3% limit by
2005

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
82

Statistical
Section
1*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004

ContentsI Key economic data for the euro area
1 Monetary developments and interest
rates 6*
2 External transactions and positions 6*
3 General economic indicators 7*
II Overall monetary survey in the
euro area
1 The money stock and its counterparts 8*2 Consolidated balance sheet of mon-
etary financial institutions (MFIs) 10*
3 Banking system’s liquidity position 14*
III Consolidated financial statement
of the Eurosystem
1 Assets 16*2 Liabilities 18*
IV Banks
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary
financial institutions (excluding theBundesbank) in Germany 20*
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks
(MFIs) in Germany, by category ofbanks 24*
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-/C224-vis residents 26*
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-/C224-vis non-residents 28*
2*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004

5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) 30*
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic enterprises and resident
individuals, housing loans, sectorsof economic activity 32*
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks
(non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs)in Germany 34*
8 Deposits of resident individuals and
domestic non-profit institutions atbanks (MFIs) in Germany 36*
9 Deposits of domestic public
authorities at banks (MFIs) inGermany, by creditor group 36*
10 Savings deposits and bank savings
bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germanysold to non-banks (non-MFIs) 38*
11 Debt securities and money market
paper outstanding of banks (MFIs)in Germany 38*
12 Building and loan associations (MFIs)
in Germany 39*
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign
branches and foreign subsidiaries ofGerman banks (MFIs) 40*
V Minimum reserves
1 Reserve ratios 42*2 Reserve maintenance in Germany up
to the end of 1998 42*
3 Reserve maintenance in the euro
area 42*VI Interest rates
1 ECB interest rates 43*2 Base rates 43*3 Eurosystem monetary policy oper-
ations allotted through tenders 43*
4 Money market rates, by month 43*5 Interest rates for outstanding
amounts and new business ofbanks (MFIs) in the euro area 44*
6 Interest rates and volumes for out-
standing amounts and new businessof German banks (MFIs) 45*
VII Capital market
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities
and shares in Germany 48*
2 Sales of debt securities issued by
residents 49*
3 Amounts outstanding of debt
securities issued by residents 50*
4 Shares in circulation issued by
residents 50*
5 Yields and indices on German
securities 51*
6 Sales and purchases of mutual
fund shares in Germany 51*
3*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004

VIII Public finances in Germany
1 General government budgetary
position 52*
2 Budgetary position of central,
state and local government 52*
3 Government fiscal position as
defined in the national accounts 53*
4 Tax revenue of central, state and
local government 53*
5 Tax revenue, by type 54*
6 Specific taxes levied by central,
state and local government 54*
7 General government debt 55*8 Change in general government
debt 57*
9 Loans raised by general govern-
ment against borrowers’ notes 57*
10 Central government debt 58*11 Central government borrowing
in the market 58*
12 Revenue, expenditure and assets
of the wage and salary earners’pension insurance fund 59*
13 Revenue and expenditure of the
Federal Employment Agency 59*
IX Economic conditions
1 Origin and use of domestic product,
distribution of national income 60*
2 Output in the production sector 61*3 Orders received by industry 62*4 Orders received by construction 63*5 Retail trade turnover 63*6 Labour market 64*7 Prices 65*8 Households’ income 66*9 Pay rates and actual earnings 66*
X External sector
1 Major items of the balance of
payments of the euro area 67*
2 Major items of the balance of
payments of the Federal Republicof Germany 68*
3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the
Federal Republic of Germany, bycountry and group of countries 69*
4 Services and factor income of the
Federal Republic of Germany 70*
5 Current transfers of the Federal
Republic of Germany 70*
6 Capital transfers 70*7 Financial account of the Federal
Republic of Germany 71*
8 External position of the Bundesbank 72*9 External position of the Bundesbank
in the euro area 72*
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises
in Germany (other than banks)vis-/C224-vis non-residents 73*
11 Deutsche Mark and euro exchange
rates of selected currencies 74*
12 Exchange rates for the national
currencies of the euro-area memberstates, the Deutsche Mark value ofthe ECU and euro conversion rates 74*
13 Effective exchange rates of the euro
and selected foreign currencies 75*
4*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004

Abbreviations and symbols
eEstimated
pProvisional
pePartly estimated
rRevised
...Data available at a later date
.Data unknown, not to be published or
not meaningful
0Less than 0.5 but more than nil
–Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to round-ing.
5*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
 I Key economic data for the euro area 
 
1 Monetary developments and interest rates
 
 
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions  1,2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
 M 3  3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3-month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
MFI lending, and capital 3-month ment bonds moving  average
M1 M2 (centred) total households formation  4 Eonia  5,7 Euribor  6,7 outstanding  8 
PeriodAnnual percentage change % per annum as a monthly average
2002          Sep 8.3 6.5 7.1 7.0 4.3 5.0 5.3 3.32 3.31 4.5
         Oct 8.4 6.8 6.9 7.0 4.3 4.9 5.0 3.30 3.26 4.6
         Nov 9.0 6.8 7.0 6.9 3.9 4.5 5.0 3.30 3.12 4.6         Dec 9.7 6.6 6.9 7.1 4.0 4.7 4.9 3.09 2.94 4.4
2003          Jan 9.2 6.6 7.3 7.4 4.2 4.8 4.6 2.79 2.83 4.2
         Feb 10.3 7.5 8.1 7.8 4.4 4.9 4.7 2.76 2.69 4.0         Mar 11.6 8.1 8.0 8.3 4.1 4.8 4.4 2.75 2.53 4.1
         Apr 11.1 8.1 8.7 8.5 4.8 5.1 4.7 2.56 2.53 4.2
         May 11.3 8.6 8.6 8.6 5.1 5.2 4.4 2.56 2.40 3.9         June 11.2 8.4 8.5 8.6 4.8 5.1 5.0 2.21 2.15 3.7
         July 11.3 8.6 8.7 8.5 5.4 5.6 5.2 2.08 2.13 4.0
         Aug 11.7 8.7 8.3 8.2 5.5 5.6 5.2 2.10 2.14 4.2         Sep 11.1 8.2 7.6 8.0 5.5 5.5 5.3 2.02 2.15 4.2
         Oct 12.2 8.3 8.1 7.7 5.7 5.5 5.8 2.01 2.14 4.3
         Nov 10.5 7.6 7.4 7.5 6.3 6.0 6.0 1.97 2.16 4.4         Dec 10.5 7.6 7.0 7.0 5.9 5.8 5.8 2.06 2.15 4.4
2004          Jan 11.3 7.4 6.5 6.6 5.8 5.8 5.9 2.02 2.09 4.2
         Feb 11.1 7.0 6.3 6.4 5.9 5.9 6.1 2.03 2.07 4.2         Mar 11.4 6.8 6.3 ... 6.1 6.0 6.9 2.01 2.03 4.0
         Apr ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2.08 2.05 4.2
1 Source: ECB. — 2 Seasonally adjusted. — 3 Excluding money market fund euro-area non-MFIs. — 5 Euro OverNight Index Average. — 6 Euro
shares
/units, money market paper andd ebt securities with a maturity of up Interbank OfferedRate. — 7 See also footnotes to Table VI.5., pp 44*. —
to two years heldby non-euro-area resid ents. — 4 Longer-term liabilities to 8  GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds; from 2001, Euro12. 
 
 
2 External transactions and positions  * 
  
 
Selected items of the euro-area balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1 
Current account Capital account Effective exchange rate  3 
of which Direct Securities Credit Reserve
Balance Trade balance Balance investment transactions assets Dollar rate Nominal Real  4 transactions  2 
Period
€
 million Euro/US-$ Q1 1999 = 100
2002          Sep + 7,976 + 11,613 − 5,329 − 9,249 + 21,456 − 13,752 − 3,784 0.9808 91.2 93.5
         Oct + 2,484 + 12,732 − 17,236 − 3,252 + 28,505 − 44,624 + 2,135 0.9811 91.7 94.1
         Nov + 9,937 + 12,359 − 11,495 + 14,678 + 14,494 − 38,248 − 2,420 1.0014 92.5 94.9         Dec + 5,553 + 9,332 − 14,200 + 1,149 − 8,445 − 5,852 − 1,052 1.0183 93.6 96.4
2003          Jan − 3,992 + 1,556 − 3,954 + 8,601 − 6,993 − 7,111 + 1,549 1.0622 95.8 98.6
         Feb + 2,645 + 8,483 − 21,238 + 2,318 − 7,098 − 21,798 + 5,340 1.0773 97.1 100.0         Mar + 4,271 + 6,782 + 10,897 + 2,037 + 15,221 − 11,353 + 4,992 1.0807 97.9 100.9
         Apr − 7,378 + 6,607 + 17,450 − 11,561 + 24,770 + 3,031 + 1,210 1.0848 98.6 101.8
         May − 1,623 + 7,443 − 23,004 + 642 + 11,068 − 35,072 + 358 1.1582 102.5 105.8         June + 2,083 + 10,107 − 26,419 + 13,612 + 24,804 − 65,588 + 754 1.1663 102.7 106.3
         July + 2,834 + 15,457 + 323 − 4,031 − 36,091 + 38,614 + 1,831 1.1372 101.4 104.9
         Aug + 3,033 + 10,501 + 5,943 − 5,564 − 38,761 + 50,017 + 251 1.1139 100.3 103.6         Sep + 5,645 + 10,865 − 6,902 − 9,529 + 11,173 − 8,490 − 57 1.1222 99.9 103.3
         Oct + 8,139 + 13,122 + 7,795 − 10,049 + 40,224 − 23,129 + 749 1.1692 101.3 104.8
         Nov + 3,918 + 8,457 + 6,175 + 4,581 + 5,029 − 8,952 + 5,517 1.1702 101.2 104.9         Dec + 6,486 + 8,329 − 10,511 − 931 − 31,782 + 14,880 + 7,322 1.2286 104.0 108.1
2004          Jan − 4,432 + 4,224 − 25,564 − 11,885 − 14,309 + 3,841 − 3,210 1.2613 105.1 108.9
         Feb + 5,754 + 9,502 + 9,381 + 7,818 + 4,071 − 11,487 + 8,979 1.2646 104.8 108.6         Mar ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.2262 103.1 107.1
         Apr ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.1985 101.2 105.2
*  Source: ECB. — 1  See also Tables X.12 and13, pp 74−75. — 2  Including
financial derivatives. — 3  Vis-à-vis a narrow group of countries. — 4  Based
on consumer prices. 
6* I Key economic data for the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
I  Key economic data for the euro area
 
3  General economic indicators
 
 
                   
Luxem- Nether- Euro
PeriodBelgium Germany Finland France Greece Ireland Italy bourg land s Austria Portugal Spain area 8 
Real gross domestic product 1 
2001 0.6 0.8 1.1 2.1 4.0 6.2 1.8 1.2 1.2 0.8 1.7 2.8 1.6
2002 0.7 0.2 2.3 1.2 3.9 6.9 0.4 1.3 0.2 1.4 0.4 2.0 0.92003 1.1 − 0.1 1.9 0.5 4.3 1.4 0.3 ... − 0.7 0.7 − 1.3 2.4 0.4
2002          Q4 2.2 0.3 3.3 0.8 3.2 7.5 0.7 0.1 1.3 − 1.5 2.1 1.02003          Q1 1.3 0.4 2.3 0.9 4.3 0.7 0.6 − 0.2 1.0 − 1.4 2.3 0.9
         Q2 0.9 − 0.7 1.4 − 0.4 4.5 2.4 0.3 − 1.1 0.7 − 2.2 2.2 0.0         Q3 1.0 − 0.2 2.1 0.1 5.0 − 0.3 0.2 − 1.2 0.9 − 1.0 2.3 0.2         Q4 1.2 0.2 1.7 1.4 5.0 2.7 − 0.1 − 0.4 0.5 − 0.5 2.8 0.7
2004          Q1 ... 1.5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Industrial production 1,2 
2001 − 0.5 r 0.2 0.1 1.1 1.0 10.1 − 1.2 3.2 0.5 2.8 3.1 − 1.5 0.4
2002 1.5 r − 1.0 1.7 − 1.3 1.7 7.8 − 1.3 0.4 − 1.0 0.9 − 0.4 0.2 − 0.5
2003 − 0.2 r 0.4 0.6 − 0.1 1.5 6.3 − 0.4 2.6 − 2.1 1.8 − 0.1 1.4 0.3
2002          Q4 3.7 1.7 5.2 − 0.9 3.1 6.6 0.7 1.7 0.1 1.5 − 2.5 2.6 1.32003          Q1 − 0.1
r 1.5 2.1 0.2 0.9 2.4 − 0.2 4.5 0.6 3.6 0.6 1.6 0.9
         Q2 − 1.1 r − 0.2 − 1.5 − 1.7 2.1 2.2 − 1.7 − 1.3 − 4.8 0.6 − 2.8 1.7 − 0.8
         Q3 2.5 r − 1.0 1.8 − 0.5 2.3 5.4 − 0.1 4.7 − 3.7 1.9 1.1 1.0 − 0.1
         Q4 − 2.0 r 1.5 0.4 1.5 0.7 15.2 0.3 2.9 − 1.0 1.4 1.0 1.1 1.4
2004          Q1 ... 7p 1.3 ... 0.5 ... ... ... ... ... ... − 3.1 1.6 ...
Capacity utilisation in industry 3 
2001 82.3 84.4 85.7 87.4 77.6 78.4 78.9 88.7 84.6 83.1 81.7 79.6 83.4
2002 79.6 82.3 82.7 85.3 77.0 75.9 77.3 85.1 82.9 80.2 79.4 77.2 81.42003 78.7 82.0 81.9 84.8 76.5 75.1 76.3 84.7 81.7 80.0 79.0 78.9 81.0
2003          Q1 79.3 82.3 82.2 85.1 75.8 74.5 77.5 84.1 82.5 79.7 77.5 78.6 81.3
         Q2 78.6 81.8 82.8 84.9 77.1 75.1 75.6 85.9 81.9 80.4 77.6 78.2 80.8         Q3 77.9 81.0 80.7 84.8 76.8 77.1 76.1 84.8 81.0 79.4 76.4 79.5 80.7         Q4 79.0 82.9 82.0 84.4 76.1 73.6 76.1 83.9 81.4 80.3 84.3 79.3 81.2
2004          Q1 79.4 82.8 82.8
4 81.4 77.5 74.4 76.8 83.5 82.1 80.0 80.6 77.0 4 80.6
         Q2 79.6 82.6 83.4 80.5 74.6 77.7 75.9 85.6 82.8 80.4 79.3 79.7 80.4
Unemployment rate 5 
2001 6.7 7.8 9.1 8.5 10.4 3.9 9.4 2.1 2.5 3.6 4.1 10.6 8.0
2002 7.3 8.6 9.1 8.8 10.0 4.3 9.0 2.8 2.7 4.3 5.1 11.3 8.42003 8.1 9.3 9.0 9.4 9.3 4.6 8.6 3.7 3.8 4.4 6.4 11.3 8.8
2003          Oct 8.3 9.3 8.9 9.5 4.6 8.5 3.9 4.1 4.5 6.5 11.2 8.8
         Nov 8.3 9.3 8.9 9.5 4.6 8.5 3.9 4.2 4.5 6.6 11.2 8.8         Dec 8.3 9.2 8.9 9.5 4.6 8.5 3.9 4.4 4.5 6.7 11.2 8.8
2004          Jan 8.4 9.2 8.9 9.5 4.5 8.5 3.9 4.5 4.5 6.8 11.1 8.8
         Feb 8.5 9.3 8.9 9.4 4.5 ... 4.0 4.7 4.5 6.8 11.2 8.8         Mar 8.5 9.3 8.9 9.4 4.5 ... 4.1 ... 4.5 6.9 11.2 8.8
         Apr 8.5 ... ... ... 4.5 ... ... ... 4.5 ... 11.2 ...
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1 
2001 2.4 1.9 2.7 1.8 3.7 4.0 2.3 2.4 5.1 2.3 4.4 2.8 2.3
2002 1.6 1.3 2.0 1.9 3.9 4.7 2.6 2.1 3.9 1.7 3.7 3.6 2.32003 1.5 1.0 1.3 2.2 3.4 4.0 2.8 2.5 2.2 1.3 3.3 3.1 2.1
2003          Oct 1.4 1.1 0.9 2.3 3.2 3.3 2.8 1.8 1.9 1.1 2.8 2.7 2.0
         Nov 1.8 1.3 1.2 2.5 3.2 3.3 2.8 2.0 2.0 1.3 2.3 2.9 2.2         Dec 1.7 1.1 1.2 2.4 3.1 2.9 2.5 2.4 1.6 1.3 2.3 2.7 2.0
2004          Jan 1.4 1.2 0.8 2.2 3.1 2.3 2.2 2.3 1.5 1.2 2.2 2.3 1.9
         Feb 1.2 0.8 0.4 1.9 2.6 2.2 2.4 2.4 1.3 1.5 2.1 2.2 1.6         Mar 1.0 1.1 − 0.4 1.9 2.9 1.8 2.3 2.0 1.2
p 1.5 2.2 p 2.2 p 1.7
         Apr 1.7 1.7 ... p 2.4 3.1 ... e 2.3 2.7 p 1.5 ... ... e 2.7 e 2.0
General government financial balance 6 
2001 0.5 − 2.8 5.2 − 1.5 − 1.4 1.1 − 2.6 6.3 0.0 0.2 − 4.4 − 0.4 − 1.62002 0.1 − 3.5 4.3 − 3.2 − 1.4 − 0.2 − 2.3 2.7 − 1.9 − 0.2 − 2.7 0.0 − 2.22003 0.2 − 3.9 2.3 − 4.1 − 3.2 0.2 − 2.4 − 0.1 − 3.2 − 1.1 − 2.8 0.3 ...
General government debt 6 
2001 108.1 59.4 43.9 56.8 106.9 36.1 110.6 5.5 52.9 67.1 55.6 57.5 69.22002 105.8 60.8 42.6 58.6 104.7 32.3 108.0 5.7 52.6 66.6 58.1 54.6 69.02003 100.5 64.2 45.3 63.0 103.0 32.0 106.2 4.9 54.8 65.0 59.4 50.8 ...
Sources: National data, European Commission, Eurostat, European Central adjusted. — 6  As a percentage of GDP; Maastricht Treaty definition;
Bank. Latest data are partly based on press reports and are provisional. — including proceeds from sales of UMTS licences. — 7  Adjusted in advance by
1  Annual percentage change; GDP of Greece andPortugal is calculated the Fed eral Statistical Office, by way of estimates, to the results of the
from seasonally adjusted data. — 2  Manufacturing, mining and energy; ad- Quarterly Production Survey for the first quarter (industry in Germany: on
justedfor working-d ay variations. — 3  Manufacturing, in %; seasonally average,  -2.5%). — 8  Including Greece (Harmonised Index of Consumer
adjusted; data are collected in January, April, July and October. — 4  France Prices, general government financial balance andgeneral government d ebt
and euro area from first quarter 2004 not seasonally adjusted. — from 2001 only). 
5  Standardised, as a percentage of the civilian labour force; seasonally
7*I  Key economic data for the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 
 
1 The money stock and its counterparts *
  
(a) Euro area 
  
€
 billion
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises Generaland households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreedat agreed maturitieson non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  
2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2002          Aug − 6.9 6.6 6.3 − 13.6 − 2.6 14.3 − 10.7 − 24.9 14.2 2.2 0.2 2.8 9.0
         Sep 55.2 40.9 4.8 14.4 11.5 18.8 65.6 46.9 23.4 1.0 0.4 12.0 10.0
         Oct 28.3 32.7 14.1 − 4.4 − 4.0 29.6 55.1 25.5 9.6 1.3 − 1.0 9.0 0.3
         Nov 37.3 22.2 5.5 15.1 6.1 34.9 84.4 49.5 18.9 3.7 − 0.5 13.4 2.3         Dec 51.6 57.3 14.8 − 5.7 − 14.1 21.0 − 33.7 − 54.7 23.9 16.5 − 0.1 − 2.2 9.6
2003          Jan 50.9 30.0 4.8 20.9 20.0 8.6 19.2 10.6 15.7 − 0.8 − 2.1 6.7 11.8
         Feb 51.0 35.6 4.3 15.4 17.8 10.2 66.7 56.5 11.1 7.0 − 1.2 9.7 − 4.5         Mar 48.4 39.1 7.7 9.3 8.7 13.2 5.7 − 7.5 13.4 7.3 − 1.6 12.5 − 4.8
         Apr 87.3 71.7 27.7 15.6 21.0 − 2.9 41.2 44.1 4.6 − 2.9 − 2.6 9.8 0.3
         May 69.3 42.6 14.2 26.7 30.7 41.2 42.2 1.1 17.8 6.6 − 1.3 19.0 − 6.5         June 12.8 25.8 − 6.6 − 13.0 − 13.9 58.1 39.5 − 18.7 17.1 2.9 − 1.6 9.2 6.7
         July 36.2 15.6 − 4.3 20.6 12.7 − 38.9 − 32.3 6.7 32.5 5.3 − 2.1 19.4 9.8
         Aug 0.7 10.8 4.8 − 10.1 − 4.0 − 31.7 − 70.9 − 39.2 16.5 7.7 − 1.6 3.7 6.8         Sep 58.3 32.6 1.6 25.7 24.0 19.5 31.1 11.7 27.0 0.6 − 0.6 19.6 7.3
         Oct 51.7 34.1 4.5 17.7 18.0 9.6 50.4 40.7 28.0 4.9 0.1 20.8 2.3
         Nov 90.7 67.2 14.4 23.6 13.8 18.6 44.6 26.1 29.6 7.9 0.2 17.4 4.1         Dec 22.9 44.7 5.1 − 21.8 − 32.2 − 12.5 − 12.2 0.3 16.1 16.5 1.1 0.3 − 1.7
2004          Jan 45.9 31.1 5.5 14.8 17.5 25.4 111.4 86.1 20.2 3.6 − 1.1 17.6 0.1
         Feb 57.6 43.0 6.3 14.6 23.0 6.2 23.0 16.8 19.6 9.2 − 0.2 8.4 2.3         Mar 73.1 45.5 17.2 27.6 11.7 3.8 76.2 72.4 43.9 6.0 − 0.2 31.0 7.1
  
  
(b) German contribution
 
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises Generaland households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreedat agreed maturitieson non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  
2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2002          Aug − 1.7 5.8 6.4 − 7.5 2.2 11.1 6.4 − 4.7 8.9 − 0.2 0.1 5.2 3.7
         Sep 12.0 10.8 − 0.7 1.2 4.1 15.4 31.0 15.6 1.5 − 0.5 − 0.5 2.0 0.5
         Oct 4.6 5.8 7.4 − 1.2 − 4.6 17.7 11.6 − 6.0 0.0 1.9 − 0.8 − 0.4 − 0.7
         Nov 9.4 4.6 4.3 4.8 3.5 19.2 32.0 12.8 5.8 4.1 − 0.6 0.4 1.9         Dec 11.4 23.0 12.1 − 11.6 − 8.5 1.9 − 40.8 − 42.7 − 9.5 3.1 0.2 − 15.2 2.4
2003          Jan 18.3 1.8 3.1 16.4 10.8 − 3.0 9.4 12.4 4.1 − 1.6 − 2.0 3.9 3.9
         Feb 0.7 7.9 − 1.3 − 7.2 0.5 10.3 20.2 9.9 4.4 6.3 − 1.2 0.8 − 1.5         Mar 4.6 2.7 − 1.2 1.9 5.1 18.7 25.2 6.5 1.7 1.9 − 1.6 − 1.1 2.6
         Apr 4.9 6.6 5.9 − 1.7 − 2.6 4.5 14.7 10.1 − 2.6 − 2.0 − 2.5 0.5 1.5
         May 1.9 4.0 3.0 − 2.1 2.4 27.6 22.6 − 5.0 − 2.8 − 1.6 − 1.5 4.8 − 4.4         June − 18.0 − 0.9 − 3.0 − 17.1 − 10.0 38.5 24.6 − 13.9 4.8 0.1 − 1.4 3.7 2.4
         July 0.6 − 8.4 − 0.5 9.0 − 1.6 − 24.6 − 18.6 6.0 8.7 4.9 − 2.1 4.9 1.0
         Aug − 13.6 2.7 0.9 − 16.3 − 11.0 16.7 − 20.6 − 37.3 5.7 3.2 − 1.5 2.2 1.8         Sep 17.7 12.8 − 3.6 4.9 10.8 − 1.8 10.5 12.3 2.3 − 1.3 − 0.7 9.1 − 4.8
         Oct − 1.8 − 9.3 − 3.4 7.5 4.5 6.4 − 0.2 − 6.6 3.1 0.3 0.1 2.6 0.2
         Nov 24.5 15.5 5.5 8.9 2.4 7.9 12.4 4.6 3.3 0.2 0.2 3.0 − 0.1         Dec − 10.1 0.0 1.1 − 10.2 − 7.8 11.4 12.4 1.1 − 0.2 1.5 1.0 − 2.9 0.2
2004          Jan − 0.6 − 6.8 1.4 6.2 6.1 23.0 34.9 11.9 2.6 − 0.2 − 1.1 6.5 − 2.7
         Feb 16.6 2.9 − 3.6 13.7 22.4 − 23.5 − 2.7 20.8 − 5.8 0.6 − 0.4 0.5 − 6.5         Mar 28.6 10.3 9.6 18.3 5.7 − 1.8 10.6 12.3 9.6 − 0.1 − 0.2 9.7 0.2
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of deduction of inter-MFI participations. — 4Including the counterparts of
monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have monetary liabilities of central governments. — 5Including the monetary
been eliminatedfrom the flow figures (see also the “Notes on the figures“ liabilities of central governments (Post Office, Treasury). — 6In Germany,
in the “Explanatory notes“ in the Statistical Supplement to the Monthly only savings deposits. — 7Paper held by residents outside the euro area has
Report 1, p 30). — 1Source: ECB. — 2Excluding MFIs’ portfolios. — 3After been eliminated. — 8Less German MFIs’ holdings of paper issued by
8*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
(a) Euro area 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V )
Money stock M2 Debt secur-
of which ities with
Intra- Money stock M1 maturities
Eurosystem Deposits of up toliability/ with an Deposits Money 2 years
IV De- claim agreedat agreed market (incl money
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund market    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares paper)    central  gov-
ernments Total  4 issue Total Total Total lation deposits  5 2 years  5 tions (net)  2,7  Period (net)  2,7,8 months  5,6 
− 11.0 − 9.6 − 13.7 − 7.5 − 26.5 4.5 − 31.1 13.5 5.5 7.7 12.4 1.1 2002          Aug 
1.6 3.5 − 45.5 41.7 62.9 5.6 57.3 − 23.3 2.2 2.4 − 2.2 3.6          Sep 
5.5 21.4 − 21.4 19.6 − 9.1 7.2 − 16.3 20.5 8.2 − 2.8 2.0 2.6          Oct 
− 4.3 − 15.2 − 72.8 65.1 60.0 7.5 52.6 − 7.3 12.4 − 4.4 14.7 − 2.7          Nov 
− 11.0 − 28.9 − 88.6 101.9 77.6 19.8 57.8 − 7.6 31.9 − 2.8 − 6.6 − 3.9          Dec 
15.2 20.2 − 8.5 − 32.8 − 61.0 − 7.4 − 53.6 2.5 25.7 14.7 19.4 7.2 2003          Jan 
18.6 − 8.2 − 39.7 27.1 10.4 7.2 3.2 2.4 14.3 0.9 12.1 − 0.4          Feb 
− 1.1 10.7 − 38.5 54.4 47.0 7.9 39.1 − 5.8 13.2 − 9.8 4.3 − 10.5          Mar 
− 16.5 7.7 − 88.6 50.0 31.0 9.1 21.9 10.8 8.2 6.4 11.8 20.3          Apr 
10.4 24.9 − 57.4 65.4 37.5 7.4 30.0 19.1 8.8 1.0 8.8 − 17.7          May
30.2 18.6 − 4.9 29.7 55.3 7.3 48.0 − 38.9 13.3 − 16.5 − 0.8 − 7.5          June
− 24.6 − 16.8 − 6.2 − 4.5 − 18.9 11.1 − 30.0 3.1 11.3 5.5 10.2 − 5.0          July− 10.0 − 32.7 − − 4.8 − 2.7 − 13.8 1.2 − 15.0 3.9 7.2 − 3.0 2.2 − 1.3          Aug 
20.9 25.6 − 4.3 16.5 45.8 2.1 43.6 − 29.6 0.3 − 4.5 − 8.9 1.2          Sep 
− 18.0 3.1 − 48.3 20.0 4.4 6.4 − 2.0 10.5 5.1 13.2 5.7 9.5          Oct 
14.6 17.6 − 47.6 52.2 49.3 7.9 41.3 − 4.1 7.1 − 1.0 − 4.3 0.8          Nov 
− 26.8 − 42.7 − 63.9 96.1 67.3 18.8 48.6 0.3 28.5 − 16.0 − 2.6 − 13.7          Dec 
20.5 39.8 − − 9.3 − 30.5 − 30.2 − 8.8 − 21.4 − 15.8 15.6 6.9 9.2 5.1 2004          Jan 
19.0 − 6.1 − 31.2 8.3 5.3 4.3 1.0 − 9.5 12.5 14.0 7.5 1.4          Feb 
− 9.2 23.8 − 18.5 28.4 38.9 6.0 32.9 − 15.1 4.6 − 11.1 3.6 − 2.4          Mar 
 
 
 (b) German contribution 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V  )10 
of which Components of the money stock
Debt securities
Deposits with
Intra- with an Deposits Money maturities
IV De- claim agreedat agreed market of up to 2 years
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund (incl money    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac- shares market    central  gov-
ernments Total issue  9,11 lation Total deposits 2 years months  6 tions (net)  7,8 paper)(net)  7  Period
1.3 − 3.4 3.2 0.9 2.4 − 5.2 3.7 0.1 1.2 1.5 1.2 2002          Aug 
1.0 12.3 2.2 1.6 12.1 14.9 − 9.4 1.0 6.4 0.6 − 0.8          Sep 
− 1.6 10.0 2.0 1.5 14.0 1.2 6.8 2.2 − 1.0 0.6 4.2          Oct 
− 0.6 − 3.6 1.5 2.5 27.0 31.8 − 5.6 3.3 − 3.2 − 0.2 0.8          Nov 
0.0 4.7 1.5 4.3 18.5 1.4 6.8 12.8 − 3.1 − 1.0 0.9          Dec 
− 0.8 15.1 0.5 − 0.7 − 3.1 − 9.3 − 4.7 4.1 5.3 2.5 − 1.1 2003          Jan 
1.4 − 14.2 2.2 1.7 19.5 5.6 − 0.7 3.0 2.3 1.3 8.1          Feb 
− 1.7 22.8 1.5 2.5 0.4 7.1 − 5.2 1.7 0.4 0.5 − 4.0          Mar 
− 1.1 4.4 0.9 2.8 8.7 8.2 − 2.0 1.1 0.0 − 0.0 1.4          Apr 
2.2 14.8 2.4 1.3 15.3 6.8 7.4 0.7 1.0 0.4 − 1.0          May
0.4 13.3 0.6 2.8 1.9 16.4 − 11.8 1.0 − 1.5 − 0.5 − 1.6          June
− 2.8 − 15.7 1.1 3.4 − 14.2 − 12.5 − 1.3 2.0 0.2 − 0.4 − 2.2          July
0.6 − 4.5 2.5 − 0.1 1.2 1.7 2.9 2.7 1.5 − 0.4 − 7.2          Aug 0.3 11.8 1.3 0.9 1.5 10.8 − 13.8 0.9 3.2 − 0.0 0.5          Sep 
− 0.7 − 3.6 1.2 1.3 5.9 3.3 − 3.5 0.9 5.6 − 0.7 0.2          Oct 
0.1 3.3 1.0 2.4 25.5 22.8 − 0.3 0.6 − 1.2 − 0.5 4.1          Nov 0.2 4.2 0.2 4.5 − 3.0 − 10.8 3.5 8.9 − 5.9 0.2 1.2          Dec 
0.0 22.5 3.5 − 5.0 − 2.7 8.3 − 14.1 1.3 2.5 − 0.5 − 0.3 2004          Jan 
1.3 − 1.8 1.1 0.9 − 0.6 5.7 − 5.2 1.2 0.9 − 0.2 − 3.0          Feb 
0.6 11.9 1.2 2.3 4.7 1.2 − 0.0 0.1 0.8 − 0.4 3.0          Mar 
euro-area MFIs. — 9Up to end-2002, including national banknotes and German money stocks M1, M2 or M3. — 11The difference between the
coins still in circulation. — 10The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s volume of euro banknotes actually issuedby the Bund esbank andthe
monetary aggregates shouldon no account be interpretedas national amount d isclosed in accord ance with the accounting regime chosen by the
monetary aggregates andare therefore not comparable with the erstwhile Eurosystem (see also footnote 3 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 
9*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
 
 
 
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
Claims
Total Shares andon non-
End of assets or Debt other Debt euro-area Other
year/month liabilities Total Total Loans securities  2 equities Total Loans securities  3 residents assets
 Euro area ( €  billion) 1
 
2002          Feb 13,657.5 9,520.6 7,465.4 6,548.7 349.9 566.7 2,055.3 847.5 1,207.8 2,836.2 1,300.7
         Mar 13,694.0 9,595.1 7,513.4 6,606.1 346.6 560.7 2,081.7 852.6 1,229.1 2,844.7 1,254.2
         Apr 13,680.2 9,612.5 7,550.9 6,641.2 342.9 566.8 2,061.7 832.4 1,229.3 2,826.0 1,241.6
         May 13,711.5 9,645.0 7,573.6 6,659.7 345.0 568.9 2,071.5 829.2 1,242.3 2,845.8 1,220.8         June 13,642.1 9,667.1 7,597.7 6,691.1 342.7 563.9 2,069.4 830.1 1,239.3 2,731.2 1,243.8
         July 13,678.9 9,652.9 7,586.1 6,692.6 344.4 549.1 2,066.8 828.5 1,238.3 2,755.6 1,270.3
         Aug 13,649.1 9,645.5 7,591.1 6,692.3 339.7 559.1 2,054.4 818.0 1,236.4 2,745.1 1,258.5         Sep 13,822.3 9,700.5 7,625.2 6,726.8 349.4 549.1 2,075.3 820.8 1,254.5 2,813.5 1,308.3
         Oct 13,863.8 9,726.3 7,657.4 6,742.7 353.1 561.6 2,068.8 820.4 1,248.5 2,862.9 1,274.6
         Nov 14,010.9 9,761.7 7,678.1 6,754.5 356.7 566.9 2,083.6 829.2 1,254.4 2,936.6 1,312.6         Dec 13,931.2 9,779.1 7,720.9 6,781.2 367.0 572.7 2,058.2 837.2 1,221.0 2,839.6 1,312.4
2003          Jan 13,975.3 9,853.4 7,748.4 6,804.8 374.9 568.7 2,105.1 829.0 1,276.1 2,851.6 1,270.2
         Feb 14,114.0 9,905.5 7,778.0 6,831.5 381.2 565.3 2,127.5 828.4 1,299.1 2,908.7 1,299.9         Mar 14,124.7 9,942.0 7,808.0 6,854.8 386.7 566.6 2,134.0 828.9 1,305.1 2,893.6 1,289.0
         Apr 14,228.2 10,027.6 7,880.8 6,891.2 404.1 585.4 2,146.8 823.3 1,323.5 2,905.9 1,294.7
         May 14,301.9 10,088.7 7,911.7 6,907.2 407.1 597.5 2,177.0 818.8 1,358.2 2,878.3 1,334.9         June 14,381.3 10,103.2 7,942.8 6,942.6 406.2 594.1 2,160.4 817.9 1,342.5 2,958.5 1,319.6
         July 14,372.1 10,160.2 7,983.0 6,963.0 403.6 616.3 2,177.3 825.9 1,351.4 2,943.7 1,268.2
         Aug 14,366.0 10,168.1 8,001.5 6,975.1 407.2 619.3 2,166.6 820.0 1,346.6 2,930.5 1,267.5         Sep 14,406.6 10,213.1 8,022.7 6,995.3 412.6 614.8 2,190.4 821.3 1,369.0 2,889.0 1,304.5
         Oct 14,492.3 10,260.4 8,057.4 7,024.3 420.3 612.7 2,203.0 820.9 1,382.1 2,951.7 1,280.1
         Nov 14,607.2 10,349.3 8,118.5 7,071.1 424.9 622.5 2,230.8 830.5 1,400.2 2,954.8 1,303.1         Dec 14,548.8 10,354.2 8,144.8 7,094.1 426.9 623.7 2,209.5 842.0 1,367.4 2,885.0 1,309.6
2004          Jan 14,763.8 10,403.5 8,168.7 7,109.6 426.3 632.9 2,234.8 839.4 1,395.3 3,016.3 1,344.1
         Feb 14,863.5 10,458.5 8,206.9 7,141.6 432.0 633.3 2,251.6 830.9 1,420.7 3,032.5 1,372.4         Mar 15,078.7 10,533.5 8,254.7 7,172.2 433.3 649.2 2,278.9 845.7 1,433.1 3,148.5 1,396.6
 German contribution ( €  billion) 
2002          Feb 4,322.9 3,316.3 2,600.1 2,283.4 65.1 251.6 716.2 497.1 219.1 822.1 184.4         Mar 4,334.0 3,315.0 2,597.6 2,290.4 67.2 240.1 717.4 495.4 221.9 829.6 189.3
         Apr 4,330.7 3,324.0 2,605.7 2,293.1 69.0 243.7 718.3 491.2 227.1 816.6 190.1
         May 4,341.9 3,327.7 2,606.9 2,294.6 69.2 243.2 720.8 485.6 235.2 827.5 186.7         June 4,291.6 3,309.3 2,596.0 2,294.8 69.7 231.6 713.3 480.4 232.8 800.0 182.3
         July 4,303.6 3,317.5 2,589.5 2,291.3 69.8 228.4 728.0 489.0 239.0 801.2 184.9
         Aug 4,307.0 3,315.3 2,594.9 2,289.8 67.1 238.0 720.4 479.8 240.6 810.2 181.5         Sep 4,355.6 3,327.5 2,605.3 2,301.6 66.5 237.3 722.2 477.0 245.2 841.9 186.1
         Oct 4,370.5 3,332.3 2,611.3 2,299.8 69.8 241.7 721.0 480.4 240.6 850.3 188.0
         Nov 4,413.9 3,341.1 2,615.3 2,299.5 69.6 246.2 725.8 481.7 244.1 879.3 193.5         Dec 4,359.5 3,344.6 2,630.8 2,304.4 66.6 259.8 713.8 478.4 235.4 823.8 191.1
2003          Jan 4,360.7 3,353.2 2,623.2 2,298.5 66.1 258.7 730.0 484.0 246.1 823.2 184.3
         Feb 4,383.3 3,351.8 2,627.3 2,303.8 66.5 257.0 724.6 477.9 246.6 841.2 190.2         Mar 4,395.2 3,351.2 2,624.8 2,302.6 67.2 255.0 726.4 474.6 251.7 861.1 182.9
         Apr 4,400.8 3,353.3 2,629.0 2,300.8 67.3 260.9 724.3 475.4 248.9 867.3 180.3
         May 4,401.1 3,351.6 2,629.9 2,298.8 67.9 263.2 721.7 470.7 251.1 871.8 177.7         June 4,411.5 3,334.6 2,629.8 2,301.7 67.0 261.1 704.8 463.7 241.2 906.3 170.6
         July 4,391.1 3,334.6 2,620.8 2,293.4 64.4 263.0 713.9 474.3 239.6 891.4 165.1
         Aug 4,373.2 3,322.7 2,624.8 2,296.4 64.5 263.9 697.9 469.1 228.8 886.0 164.4         Sep 4,384.6 3,337.1 2,634.6 2,309.9 64.2 260.5 702.5 463.0 239.4 877.7 169.8
         Oct 4,387.2 3,333.3 2,624.5 2,303.4 66.5 254.6 708.8 466.1 242.7 882.7 171.3
         Nov 4,409.5 3,355.4 2,637.9 2,311.5 66.9 259.5 717.5 472.5 245.0 884.0 170.2         Dec 4,392.5 3,337.7 2,630.9 2,303.9 69.0 258.0 706.7 469.9 236.8 880.9 173.9
2004          Jan 4,416.6 3,334.2 2,621.1 2,291.7 68.4 260.9 713.2 470.2 242.9 921.4 161.0
         Feb 4,424.0 3,346.3 2,619.5 2,295.4 67.9 256.2 726.7 461.6 265.2 916.1 161.5         Mar 4,479.8 3,374.7 2,629.4 2,295.8 66.6 267.0 745.3 474.2 271.1 939.6 165.5
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building 2002, euro currency in circulation; up to end-2002, also including nati onal
andloan associations), money market fund s, andthe European Central banknotes andcoins still in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p 12*).
Bank andnational central banks (the Eurosystem). — 1Source: ECB. — Excluding MFIs‘ cash in hand (in euro). From 2002, the German contribution
2Including money market paper of enterprises. — 3Including Treasury bills includes the volume of euro banknotes put into circulation by the
andother money market paper issuedby general government. — 4From
10*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
   
 
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreedAt agreed
maturities of notice of  6 
over
Currency 1 year and
in of which up to up to over up to over
Total in euro  5 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months  End of circulation  4 
year/month
Euro area ( €  billion) 1
 
240.5 5,671.3 5,311.3 5,359.8 1,823.2 946.9 78.7 1,148.1 1,252.0 110.8 2002          Feb 
254.3 5,686.3 5,327.3 5,376.5 1,824.7 954.6 80.4 1,151.5 1,255.7 109.5          Mar 
261.7 5,711.2 5,355.4 5,401.0 1,853.4 959.7 81.0 1,150.8 1,248.7 107.5          Apr 
273.8 5,713.5 5,366.7 5,409.7 1,856.8 961.3 81.5 1,153.0 1,250.6 106.4          May285.7 5,749.3 5,407.9 5,438.3 1,900.8 938.5 81.5 1,155.0 1,256.3 106.2          June
296.6 5,725.7 5,384.9 5,422.5 1,872.6 948.2 82.6 1,154.1 1,258.9 106.2          July
301.1 5,688.0 5,358.6 5,396.2 1,840.9 959.7 83.3 1,142.5 1,263.4 106.4          Aug 306.7 5,730.1 5,399.2 5,434.7 1,894.9 941.0 82.9 1,143.6 1,265.5 106.8          Sep 
313.9 5,745.4 5,410.6 5,446.2 1,875.8 964.2 82.8 1,144.9 1,272.8 105.8          Oct 
321.4 5,799.5 5,467.0 5,504.7 1,927.1 956.8 82.4 1,148.4 1,284.7 105.3          Nov 341.2 5,879.5 5,566.7 5,592.2 1,980.7 947.8 81.2 1,163.9 1,313.4 105.2          Dec 
312.1 5,869.8 5,536.5 5,569.2 1,956.3 953.1 76.7 1,168.3 1,311.7 103.1 2003          Jan 
319.3 5,913.0 5,560.3 5,586.5 1,956.1 952.7 75.4 1,175.6 1,324.8 101.9          Feb 
327.2 5,963.7 5,610.3 5,640.0 1,995.4 948.2 75.9 1,182.7 1,337.5 100.4          Mar 
336.3 5,979.6 5,640.1 5,671.5 2,012.8 961.3 74.2 1,179.6 1,345.8 97.7          Apr 
343.8 6,041.4 5,695.7 5,715.5 2,035.9 972.4 73.0 1,185.2 1,352.6 96.4          May351.0 6,100.7 5,715.9 5,744.9 2,083.6 940.3 72.4 1,188.2 1,365.6 94.8          June
361.5 6,093.4 5,739.1 5,770.3 2,090.1 944.5 72.1 1,194.5 1,376.3 92.8          July
362.7 6,089.3 5,741.1 5,779.3 2,078.5 951.1 72.2 1,203.9 1,382.4 91.2          Aug 364.8 6,118.0 5,755.0 5,789.1 2,117.4 922.4 73.0 1,203.5 1,382.3 90.6          Sep 
371.2 6,118.6 5,769.4 5,806.3 2,112.2 934.7 73.9 1,208.5 1,386.3 90.6          Oct 
379.2 6,180.1 5,818.5 5,851.9 2,151.0 927.4 75.5 1,215.7 1,391.5 90.8          Nov 397.9 6,235.8 5,913.1 5,932.7 2,194.0 923.7 74.9 1,230.1 1,418.1 91.8          Dec 
389.1 6,242.7 5,889.8 5,921.7 2,177.4 909.4 75.1 1,235.1 1,433.8 90.8 2004          Jan 
393.5 6,269.1 5,898.4 5,930.2 2,175.0 900.9 74.5 1,244.1 1,445.3 90.5          Feb 
399.5 6,289.7 5,921.6 5,965.6 2,210.7 891.3 72.6 1,250.5 1,450.2 90.3          Mar 
 German contribution ( €  billion) 
68.3 2,108.1 2,019.4 1,986.2 505.6 235.1 17.1 653.5 465.9 109.0 2002          Feb 
70.9 2,109.1 2,021.9 1,989.1 504.1 237.3 17.1 656.8 465.9 107.8          Mar 
74.0 2,100.4 2,015.8 1,984.7 513.9 234.0 17.1 655.2 458.6 105.9          Apr 
76.5 2,107.7 2,023.6 1,987.3 519.1 234.2 17.1 654.1 457.9 104.8          May79.8 2,119.3 2,035.6 1,997.1 530.9 234.4 17.3 653.0 457.0 104.6          June
83.4 2,112.5 2,030.5 1,993.2 525.8 235.8 17.6 653.9 455.5 104.6          July
84.3 2,098.8 2,018.1 1,979.2 521.5 239.6 17.6 640.1 455.6 104.8          Aug 85.9 2,105.7 2,023.7 1,987.6 536.6 233.0 17.5 639.6 456.5 104.3          Sep 
87.4 2,115.1 2,035.2 2,003.0 538.0 243.7 17.5 641.5 458.8 103.5          Oct 
89.9 2,147.3 2,066.9 2,035.6 569.5 237.6 17.9 645.7 462.0 102.9          Nov 94.2 2,170.7 2,092.1 2,054.2 567.8 242.4 18.2 648.0 474.8 103.1          Dec 
84.9 2,159.7 2,082.0 2,048.3 561.2 238.7 18.6 649.7 478.9 101.2 2003          Jan 
86.6 2,173.9 2,094.9 2,058.5 564.8 237.3 18.5 656.1 481.8 100.0          Feb 
89.0 2,175.8 2,098.2 2,063.3 572.0 232.8 18.6 657.9 483.5 98.4          Mar 
91.9 2,176.7 2,100.4 2,068.2 580.4 233.5 18.1 655.8 484.6 95.8          Apr 
93.2 2,189.4 2,112.0 2,073.9 585.9 236.9 17.8 653.8 485.3 94.3          May96.0 2,194.7 2,115.7 2,076.1 600.0 225.8 17.6 653.4 486.3 92.9          June
99.4 2,183.0 2,107.8 2,071.3 591.1 225.3 17.3 658.5 488.3 90.8          July
99.3 2,193.4 2,117.6 2,082.5 593.2 228.9 17.5 662.7 491.0 89.3          Aug 
100.2 2,188.3 2,112.7 2,079.6 603.5 217.2 17.5 661.0 491.8 88.5          Sep 
101.5 2,188.7 2,113.6 2,083.5 606.9 216.1 17.8 661.3 492.8 88.6          Oct 
103.9 2,211.8 2,137.8 2,105.1 628.8 214.6 18.3 661.2 493.4 88.9          Nov 108.5 2,215.1 2,143.0 2,105.2 616.1 216.3 18.5 662.1 502.3 89.9          Dec 
103.5 2,209.9 2,137.7 2,102.7 626.1 202.7 18.5 662.9 503.6 88.8 2004          Jan 
104.4 2,213.0 2,140.9 2,103.8 630.1 198.8 18.3 663.3 504.7 88.5          Feb 
106.7 2,215.1 2,142.0 2,106.6 631.4 200.7 18.0 663.5 504.8 88.2          Mar 
Bundesbank in accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the calculated by adding to this total the item “Intra-Eurosystem liability/claim
Eurosystem (see footnote 3 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). The relatedto banknote issue“ (see “Other liability items“). — 5Excluding
volume of currency actually put into circulation by the Bundesbank can be central governments’ deposits. — 6 In Germany, only saving deposits. 
11*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (cont’d) *
 
 
 
Liabilities (cont’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont’d)  
 
General government Repo transactions Debt securitieswith non-banks
Other general government in the euro area
With agreedAt agreedmaturities of notice of  
2 
Money
over of which market of which
Central 1 year andEnterprises fund d enom-
End of govern- up to up to over up to over and shares inatedyear/month ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total households (net)  
3 Total in euro
 Euro area ( €  billion) 1
 
2002          Feb 155.7 155.7 75.1 49.4 1.7 26.6 2.5 0.5 221.1 215.8 427.0 1,778.2 1,463.1
         Mar 157.5 152.3 69.3 51.8 1.6 26.7 2.5 0.5 229.6 224.9 431.2 1,793.1 1,474.6
         Apr 157.5 152.7 71.9 50.0 1.4 26.6 2.5 0.4 228.1 223.8 437.5 1,785.4 1,466.4
         May 149.0 154.8 68.8 55.2 1.4 26.6 2.4 0.4 234.8 230.7 442.6 1,805.0 1,481.5         June 155.0 156.0 71.6 53.3 1.5 26.7 2.4 0.4 229.6 225.9 439.1 1,788.3 1,476.9
         July 151.9 151.3 69.3 51.4 1.5 26.3 2.4 0.4 228.8 224.9 450.1 1,796.1 1,478.8
         Aug 141.0 150.8 67.8 52.4 1.5 26.3 2.4 0.4 236.5 231.9 463.4 1,814.3 1,496.0         Sep 146.3 149.1 70.7 48.4 1.3 25.9 2.4 0.4 238.3 234.4 460.9 1,813.0 1,494.1
         Oct 151.8 147.4 72.2 45.3 1.3 25.6 2.5 0.4 235.6 232.1 463.1 1,823.0 1,492.8
         Nov 147.5 147.4 71.9 45.6 1.3 25.6 2.5 0.4 229.6 225.8 477.6 1,831.1 1,494.1         Dec 136.4 150.9 75.6 45.1 1.4 25.6 2.8 0.4 226.9 224.4 470.5 1,818.2 1,490.3
2003          Jan 154.7 145.9 71.0 45.9 1.2 24.8 2.6 0.4 233.0 229.7 534.9 1,794.3 1,481.6
         Feb 175.8 150.6 72.2 49.9 1.0 24.4 2.7 0.4 233.8 230.3 547.2 1,802.6 1,485.6         Mar 176.2 147.5 71.8 47.1 0.9 24.5 2.8 0.3 224.0 220.8 550.8 1,804.0 1,485.7
         Apr 159.7 148.4 75.0 45.2 1.0 24.2 2.8 0.3 230.5 227.0 563.0 1,834.0 1,516.2
         May 170.1 155.9 76.9 50.8 0.9 24.1 2.8 0.3 231.4 227.8 571.1 1,820.5 1,514.3         June 200.3 155.5 80.1 46.8 0.9 24.6 2.8 0.3 214.9 211.9 571.0 1,830.8 1,514.1
         July 173.0 150.1 75.2 46.4 0.9 24.5 2.8 0.3 220.1 216.5 585.6 1,846.5 1,515.8
         Aug 163.0 147.0 73.4 45.7 0.9 23.9 2.8 0.3 217.1 214.2 587.8 1,859.7 1,512.7         Sep 183.9 145.1 75.0 42.0 1.0 23.9 2.8 0.3 211.5 207.9 576.9 1,861.7 1,518.5
         Oct 165.8 146.5 78.6 39.9 0.9 23.9 2.8 0.4 224.7 221.1 582.3 1,894.9 1,539.0
         Nov 180.4 147.7 80.0 39.6 0.9 24.0 2.9 0.3 224.7 220.9 584.7 1,903.1 1,552.3         Dec 153.6 149.6 79.7 41.5 0.9 24.3 2.9 0.4 208.7 206.4 581.8 1,873.6 1,534.1
2004          Jan 174.1 146.9 78.4 41.2 0.9 23.2 2.9 0.3 214.6 211.9 591.6 1,900.5 1,548.2
         Feb 193.1 145.8 76.7 41.4 0.9 23.5 3.0 0.4 228.6 225.4 599.1 1,909.4 1,557.1         Mar 183.9 140.2 73.4 39.1 0.9 23.3 3.1 0.4 217.5 213.9 600.7 1,946.6 1,574.9
 German contribution ( €  billion) 
2002          Feb 49.4 72.5 13.8 32.6 1.2 22.7 1.7 0.5 3.5 3.5 31.8 804.7 706.4         Mar 49.4 70.6 12.6 32.0 1.2 22.8 1.6 0.5 3.7 3.7 31.6 815.2 715.0
         Apr 47.5 68.2 11.8 30.6 1.0 22.7 1.6 0.4 3.4 3.4 31.3 812.8 712.9
         May 48.2 72.3 12.4 34.2 1.0 22.7 1.6 0.4 4.7 4.7 31.7 814.1 712.6         June 48.7 73.5 13.8 34.1 1.1 22.6 1.6 0.4 4.1 4.1 31.2 808.9 712.2
         July 47.6 71.7 13.9 32.3 1.0 22.5 1.5 0.4 3.1 3.1 31.4 817.3 715.7
         Aug 48.9 70.7 13.0 32.2 1.0 22.6 1.6 0.4 4.3 4.3 32.9 840.1 733.6         Sep 49.9 68.2 13.1 30.0 0.9 22.2 1.6 0.4 10.7 10.7 33.5 841.1 733.7
         Oct 48.3 63.7 12.8 26.0 0.9 22.0 1.6 0.4 9.6 9.6 34.0 844.6 730.7
         Nov 47.7 64.1 13.1 26.2 0.9 21.9 1.6 0.4 6.4 6.4 33.9 844.9 728.7         Dec 47.7 68.7 15.7 27.7 1.0 22.2 1.6 0.4 3.3 3.3 32.9 826.4 716.6
2003          Jan 46.9 64.5 12.7 26.9 1.0 21.8 1.7 0.4 8.6 8.6 35.5 817.6 702.1
         Feb 48.3 67.2 14.8 28.0 0.7 21.7 1.7 0.4 10.9 10.9 36.7 825.8 710.3         Mar 46.6 65.9 14.5 27.1 0.7 21.6 1.6 0.3 11.2 11.2 37.3 819.4 701.0
         Apr 45.5 63.1 14.1 24.9 0.7 21.5 1.6 0.3 11.3 11.3 37.2 818.7 699.8
         May 47.7 67.8 14.8 28.9 0.7 21.5 1.6 0.3 12.3 12.3 37.7 814.0 698.7         June 48.1 70.5 17.4 28.4 0.7 22.1 1.6 0.3 10.8 10.8 37.2 819.6 699.7
         July 45.3 66.3 14.0 27.9 0.6 21.9 1.6 0.3 10.9 10.9 36.8 822.7 696.4
         Aug 46.0 65.0 14.0 27.1 0.6 21.2 1.7 0.3 12.4 12.4 36.4 821.8 688.4         Sep 46.3 62.5 13.9 24.7 0.7 21.2 1.7 0.3 15.6 15.6 36.3 825.6 689.8
         Oct 45.5 59.7 13.8 22.1 0.6 21.2 1.6 0.4 21.1 21.1 35.7 829.7 692.4
         Nov 45.7 61.0 14.4 22.6 0.6 21.4 1.6 0.3 20.0 20.0 35.2 833.2 698.6         Dec 45.9 64.0 15.8 23.9 0.6 21.6 1.6 0.4 14.1 14.1 35.3 826.4 693.3
2004          Jan 46.0 61.3 14.4 23.6 0.6 20.7 1.7 0.3 16.6 16.6 34.8 836.4 695.5
         Feb 47.3 62.0 15.2 23.3 0.6 20.9 1.7 0.4 17.5 17.5 34.7 833.7 695.2         Mar 47.9 60.6 15.4 21.7 0.6 20.7 1.8 0.4 18.2 18.2 34.3 851.5 698.5
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building with money market fund shares. — 5Excluding liabilities arising from
andloan associations), money market fund s, andthe European Central securities issued . — 6After deduction of inter-MFI participations. — 7The
Bank andnational central banks (the Eurosystem). — 1Source: ECB. — 2In German contributions to the Eurosystem’s monetary aggregates shouldon
Germany, only savings deposits. — 3Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and are
German contribution, excluding German MFIs’ portfolios of securities issued therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2
by MFIs in the euro area. — 4In Germany, bank debt securities with or M3. — 8From 2003, including DM banknotes still in circulation (see also
maturities of up to one year are classedas money market paper; up to the footnote 4 on p 10*). — 9For the German contribution, the difference
January 2002 Monthly Report , they were publishedin this table together
12*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
   
 
 Memo item
 Other liability items Monetary aggregates  7 
 (From 2002, German contribution
issued (net)  3 excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
of which Monetary
Intra- liabilities
Eurosystem- of centralliability/ govern-
over Liabilities Excess claim Monetary ments1 year andto non- Capital of related  to capital (Post,
up to up to over euro-area andinter-MFI banknote forma- Office, End  of1 year  
4 2 years 2 years residents  5 reseves  6 liabilities Total  8 issue  9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12 tion 13 year/month Treasury)  14 
Euro area ( €  billion) 1
 
... ... 1,638.8 2,768.0 1,011.5 1.1 1,538.9 − 2,228.3 4,644.2 5,431.0 3,936.2 174.1 2002          Feb 
... ... 1,655.8 2,791.3 1,010.7 1.3 1,496.3 − 2,238.0 4,669.3 5,467.4 3,954.6 174.3          Mar 
... ... 1,650.2 2,773.9 1,004.6 − 8.9 1,486.6 − 2,277.7 4,705.6 5,505.9 3,940.1 175.5          Apr 
... ... 1,660.6 2,755.0 1,008.8 − 7.3 1,485.2 − 2,290.3 4,727.7 5,549.1 3,955.7 175.6          May... ... 1,655.2 2,620.0 985.8 10.7 1,533.6 − 2,349.7 4,767.8 5,569.3 3,929.4 176.2          June
... ... 1,670.1 2,648.3 993.4 − 2.9 1,542.7 − 2,328.0 4,757.9 5,562.3 3,950.5 174.5          July
... ... 1,687.1 2,616.3 1,004.3 − 0.2 1,525.4 − 2,301.2 4,749.7 5,576.1 3,967.0 177.2          Aug ... ... 1,680.8 2,674.3 1,015.9 − 5.0 1,588.0 − 2,364.1 4,791.4 5,622.0 3,973.4 177.6          Sep 
... ... 1,688.7 2,697.5 1,014.0 3.3 1,568.2 − 2,354.8 4,810.4 5,642.8 3,979.4 179.7          Oct 
... ... 1,698.5 2,737.3 1,016.2 − 3.4 1,601.5 − 2,414.5 4,875.0 5,713.3 3,994.4 181.3          Nov ... ... 1,689.3 2,627.0 1,006.4 10.8 1,550.9 − 2,499.4 4,981.0 5,806.0 3,990.8 191.9          Dec 
... ... 1,684.3 2,662.6 1,017.8 9.9 1,540.9 − 2,440.8 4,923.8 5,800.8 3,998.7 193.1 2003          Jan 
... ... 1,693.1 2,714.3 1,010.9 13.0 1,559.8 − 2,451.2 4,950.8 5,840.9 4,006.3 196.7          Feb 
... ... 1,703.8 2,694.2 1,001.0 14.1 1,545.7 − 2,497.5 5,003.6 5,877.7 4,012.6 196.7          Mar 
... ... 1,709.3 2,715.1 997.0 − 20.8 1,593.5 − 2,527.2 5,050.6 5,968.0 4,008.2 196.3          Apr 
... ... 1,713.7 2,653.5 993.8 − 4.0 1,650.4 − 2,561.5 5,108.8 6,016.3 4,013.5 199.7          May... ... 1,732.0 2,672.2 997.7 16.5 1,626.4 − 2,605.4 5,129.3 6,012.2 4,037.6 185.8          June
... ... 1,753.9 2,682.1 999.7 2.0 1,581.2 − 2,584.8 5,123.5 6,020.0 4,065.6 153.6          July
... ... 1,768.6 2,680.5 1,014.3 − 3.6 1,558.2 − 2,573.2 5,125.2 6,019.7 4,102.1 155.4          Aug ... ... 1,768.9 2,639.6 1,016.6 4.8 1,612.6 − 2,615.6 5,136.1 6,015.8 4,103.8 155.5          Sep 
... ... 1,792.8 2,690.3 1,014.1 8.7 1,587.3 − 2,620.4 5,157.1 6,065.0 4,130.3 156.5          Oct 
... ... 1,801.4 2,685.2 1,014.3 4.6 1,631.4 − 2,667.8 5,205.3 6,115.7 4,146.5 157.4          Nov ... ... 1,785.4 2,637.1 1,006.9 6.8 1,600.1 − 2,732.4 5,295.9 6,174.1 4,138.9 162.3          Dec 
. . 1,808.9 2,749.6 1,004.8 2.5 1,668.5 − 2,702.7 5,267.5 6,164.6 4,163.3 159.2 2004          Jan 
. . 1,817.4 2,766.6 1,008.2 3.8 1,685.2 − 2,706.8 5,275.2 6,194.4 4,184.0 164.1          Feb . . 1,857.2 2,859.1 1,023.9 11.0 1,730.6 − 2,747.2 5,306.6 6,214.2 4,245.6 165.8          Mar 
 German contribution ( €  billion) 
25.8 37.6 741.2 721.4 272.1 − 0.6 381.8 8.2 519.4 1,273.1 1,371.9 1,798.9 − 2002          Feb 
26.3 37.7 751.2 722.2 272.4 − 2.7 382.5 11.6 516.7 1,271.9 1,371.2 1,811.4 −          Mar 
27.0 38.7 747.1 730.0 270.0 − 1.1 384.0 12.9 525.7 1,268.7 1,369.1 1,801.3 −          Apr 
28.9 39.4 745.9 730.3 269.8 − 8.2 391.6 15.7 531.4 1,277.5 1,382.2 1,797.8 −          May26.8 38.1 743.9 687.5 265.5 − 24.8 399.9 16.7 544.6 1,290.0 1,390.4 1,790.1 −          June
26.0 38.7 752.7 705.5 267.7 − 39.0 405.0 18.8 539.7 1,283.4 1,382.7 1,801.9 −          July
28.4 37.5 774.2 698.7 272.4 − 50.5 410.3 22.0 534.5 1,282.0 1,385.1 1,814.5 −          Aug 28.4 36.8 775.9 713.1 274.4 − 48.6 425.8 24.1 549.6 1,289.2 1,397.9 1,816.9 −          Sep 
32.2 37.1 775.2 706.5 272.8 − 42.1 430.1 26.2 550.8 1,299.3 1,411.9 1,815.4 −          Oct 
32.1 38.1 774.7 716.9 274.2 − 47.5 437.8 27.6 582.6 1,328.8 1,438.8 1,819.8 −          Nov 32.1 39.0 755.3 661.0 277.7 − 56.9 444.3 29.1 583.5 1,349.2 1,456.6 1,806.8 −          Dec 
26.9 37.4 753.4 670.1 283.0 − 50.3 436.6 29.6 574.0 1,339.7 1,448.0 1,809.5 − 2003          Jan 
34.6 37.7 753.4 679.1 279.5 − 63.2 440.5 31.9 579.5 1,347.5 1,467.5 1,811.1 −          Feb 
31.9 36.5 751.0 682.6 280.3 − 48.9 437.6 33.3 586.5 1,350.9 1,467.7 1,809.6 −          Mar 
33.5 36.3 748.9 686.4 281.1 − 55.5 444.9 34.2 594.5 1,357.8 1,476.1 1,803.5 −          Apr 
32.2 34.1 747.7 666.8 277.5 − 43.6 447.0 36.6 600.7 1,371.8 1,488.0 1,795.1 −          May33.0 31.6 754.9 661.1 279.0 − 42.6 451.8 37.3 617.5 1,377.9 1,490.5 1,802.6 −          June
30.6 31.7 760.4 668.9 280.4 − 63.1 451.5 38.4 605.0 1,366.0 1,476.0 1,812.5 −          July
25.7 29.5 766.7 640.5 285.5 − 67.4 450.4 40.8 607.2 1,374.0 1,477.8 1,825.8 −          Aug 26.4 29.3 770.0 639.8 279.8 − 60.1 459.3 42.2 617.3 1,370.9 1,478.4 1,820.9 −          Sep 
25.7 30.1 773.9 638.2 279.6 − 63.5 457.6 43.4 620.7 1,371.7 1,484.4 1,825.0 −          Oct 
28.6 31.5 773.1 635.5 279.6 − 70.8 465.2 44.4 643.2 1,394.3 1,509.6 1,824.4 −          Nov 30.0 31.3 765.1 625.5 279.6 − 67.8 464.3 44.6 631.9 1,395.2 1,505.9 1,818.7 −          Dec 
31.2 29.8 775.4 642.9 276.3 − 47.1 446.8 48.1 640.5 1,391.1 1,503.5 1,824.6 − 2004          Jan 
26.7 31.3 775.8 663.1 270.2 − 60.8 452.6 49.2 645.3 1,392.7 1,502.8 1,819.0 −          Feb 
29.6 31.4 790.5 680.8 273.8 − 54.6 460.7 50.4 646.8 1,394.3 1,507.8 1,837.2 −          Mar 
between the volume of euro banknotes actually issuedby the Bund esbank years andat agreednotice of up to 3 months (exclud ing central govern-
and the amount disclosed in accordance with the accounting regime chosen ments’ deposits) and (for the euro area) central governments’ monetaryby the Eurosystem (see also footnote 3 on banknote circulation in Table liabilities with such maturities. — 12M2 plus repo transactions, money
III.2). — 10Overnight deposits (excluding central governments’ deposits), market fund shares, money market paper and debt securities up to 2
and(for the euro area) currency in circulation, central governments’ years. — 13Deposits with agreedmaturities of over 2 years andat agreed
overnight monetary liabilities, which are not included in the consolidated notice of over 3 months, debt securities with maturities of over 2 years,balance sheet. — 11M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities of up to 2 capital and reserves. — 14 Non-existent in Germany. 
13*II Overall monetary survey in the euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  euro  area
  
 3  Banking system’s liquidity position  * 
Stocks
  
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (includingmaintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Baseperiodcurrency operations operations facility operations facility operations d eposits (net)  
4 reserves)  5 money  6 circulation  3 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2001          Oct 389.9 136.7 60.0 1.1 − 0.1 − 325.2 43.6 93.6 125.1 450.4
         Nov 385.0 132.3 60.0 0.2 − 0.3 − 311.3 46.1 93.1 126.7 438.3         Dec 383.7 122.5 60.0 0.5 12.4 0.8 − 298.0 43.5 109.3 127.4 426.2
2002          Jan 385.2 118.5 60.0 0.4 3.7 0.6 − 344.3 38.3 54.2 130.4 475.2
         Feb 386.0 127.3 60.0 0.2 − 0.1 − 306.2 49.6 85.2 132.6 438.8         Mar 386.7 114.6 60.0 0.2 − 0.1 − 283.3 54.2 91.8 132.1 415.6
         Apr 395.4 112.7 60.0 0.4 − 0.2 − 285.9 55.9 95.3 131.2 417.3
         May 397.7 110.6 60.0 0.1 − 0.3 − 293.7 49.2 93.5 131.7 425.6
         June 396.2 112.6 60.0 0.5 − 0.4 − 300.8 45.1 91.2 131.8 433.0
         July 369.1 130.4 60.0 0.2 − 0.2 − 313.4 54.4 60.3 131.4 445.0
         Aug 360.0 139.2 55.2 0.1 − 0.1 − 322.7 50.9 50.8 129.9 452.8
         Sep 362.3 140.9 50.8 0.1 − 0.2 − 323.6 49.1 51.7 129.6 453.4
         Oct 370.0 146.1 45.3 0.1 − 0.1 − 329.2 45.6 58.2 128.3 457.6
         Nov 372.1 147.5 45.0 0.1 − 0.1 − 334.0 42.8 58.6 129.3 463.4         Dec 371.5 168.1 45.0 1.1 2.0 0.2 − 350.7 51.7 55.5 129.5 480.5
2003          Jan 360.9 176.3 45.0 0.5 − 0.3 − 353.9 43.7 53.3 131.6 485.8
         Feb 356.4 168.6 45.0 0.3 − 0.3 − 340.7 50.2 48.0 131.1 472.2         Mar 352.5 179.5 45.0 0.2 − 0.1 − 347.8 59.1 40.6 129.6 477.5
         Apr 337.4 179.4 45.0 0.1 − 0.2 − 358.5 52.1 20.5 130.6 489.3
         May 333.1 177.1 45.0 0.4 − 0.2 0.1 366.2 42.6 15.5 130.9 497.3         June 331.3 194.7 45.0 0.4 − 0.3 0.2 373.2 52.6 13.2 131.9 505.3
         July 320.4 204.7 45.0 0.4 − 0.3 − 382.7 52.4 2.9 132.2 515.2
         Aug 315.8 213.4 45.0 0.2 − 0.1 − 391.6 51.5 − 1.6 132.8 524.6
         Sep 315.0 214.0 45.0 0.1 − 0.6 − 391.7 54.4 − 4.4 132.0 524.2
         Oct 321.3 208.4 45.0 0.1 − 0.2 − 395.5 48.3 − 1.1 131.9 527.5
         Nov 321.8 205.8 45.0 0.1 − 0.3 − 399.4 43.4 − 2.2 131.8 531.4
         Dec 320.1 235.5 45.0 0.6 − 0.1 − 416.1 57.0 − 4.5 132.6 548.7
2004          Jan 309.2 232.6 45.0 0.3 − 0.1 − 427.6 37.0 − 11.2 133.6 561.4
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .         Mar 303.3 219.4 56.7 0.4 − 0.2 − 418.0 48.6 − 21.1 134.1 552.3
         Apr 301.4 217.9 67.1 0.4 − 0.4 − 425.3 51.5 − 25.7 135.3 561.0
Deutsche Bundesbank
2001          Oct 91.3 66.3 40.2 0.5 − 0.1 − 110.8 0.1 50.1 37.3 148.2
         Nov 89.8 68.2 38.5 0.2 − 0.2 − 104.6 0.1 53.8 38.0 142.9         Dec 89.4 62.4 40.1 0.2 5.0 0.5 − 96.6 0.1 67.1 37.8 134.9
2002          Jan 89.9 63.3 41.1 0.3 1.4 0.3 − 91.7 0.1 64.9 39.0 131.0
         Feb 89.9 63.3 42.4 0.1 − 0.0 − 78.5 0.1 78.6 38.6 117.2
         Mar 90.0 58.5 40.7 0.2 − 0.1 − 79.7 0.1 71.2 38.3 118.1
         Apr 92.3 57.6 40.4 0.3 − 0.2 − 80.8 0.1 71.8 37.9 118.8
         May 92.3 53.1 39.7 0.1 − 0.3 − 83.8 0.1 63.1 38.0 122.0
         June 91.6 60.6 38.8 0.1 − 0.3 − 85.4 0.1 67.3 38.1 123.8
         July 84.7 67.6 37.1 0.2 − 0.2 − 89.2 0.1 62.0 38.1 127.5
         Aug 82.5 63.1 36.4 0.0 − 0.1 − 92.2 0.1 51.8 37.9 130.2         Sep 82.4 64.4 32.7 0.1 − 0.1 − 92.4 0.0 49.1 37.9 130.4
         Oct 84.0 69.0 31.7 0.1 − 0.1 − 94.0 0.1 53.0 37.6 131.6
         Nov 84.3 73.2 31.6 0.1 − 0.1 − 94.6 0.1 56.5 37.9 132.6         Dec 84.4 91.1 33.8 0.9 0.7 0.2 − 99.3 0.1 73.5 37.8 137.3
2003          Jan 82.3 85.1 36.1 0.5 − 0.1 − 98.3 0.1 66.9 38.6 137.0
         Feb 81.4 81.6 36.5 0.2 − 0.3 − 95.5 0.1 65.6 38.3 134.1         Mar 81.4 90.0 34.9 0.1 − 0.1 − 97.5 0.1 70.9 37.9 135.5
         Apr 78.5 95.6 32.3 0.1 − 0.2 − 100.7 0.1 67.4 38.2 139.1
         May 77.6 98.8 32.4 0.4 − 0.1 0.1 102.5 0.1 68.4 38.1 140.7
         June 77.2 112.4 32.9 0.3 − 0.2 0.1 104.4 0.1 79.8 38.3 142.8
         July 74.3 115.5 32.4 0.3 − 0.2 − 107.1 0.1 77.1 38.2 145.4
         Aug 73.7 111.0 29.6 0.2 − 0.1 − 109.6 0.1 66.5 38.2 147.9
         Sep 73.9 114.0 29.1 0.1 − 0.4 − 109.8 0.1 69.2 37.7 147.9
         Oct 75.7 106.5 29.7 0.1 − 0.2 − 110.8 0.1 63.4 37.5 148.4
         Nov 76.1 102.3 30.8 0.0 − 0.2 − 111.5 0.1 60.0 37.5 149.1         Dec 76.1 118.3 30.9 0.3 − 0.1 − 115.9 0.1 72.2 37.4 153.4
2004          Jan 73.1 119.5 32.3 0.2 − 0.1 − 116.2 0.1 70.9 37.9 154.1
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .         Mar 72.4 109.7 41.3 0.2 − 0.2 − 113.5 0.1 72.0 37.9 151.5
         Apr 72.9 97.9 48.7 0.2 − 0.3 − 115.8 0.1 65.7 37.8 153.9
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. — *The banking system’s liquidity changes to the operational framework for monetary policy, there is no
position is defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro-area reserve maintenance period ending in February 2004. 2Source: ECB. —
credit institutions with the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the conso- 3From 2002, euro banknotes andother banknotes which have been issued
lid atedfinancial statement of the Eurosystem andthe financial statement by the national central banks of the Eurosystem andwhich are still in cir-
of the Bundesbank. — 1The reserve maintenance period begins on the culation. In accordance with the accounting procedure chosen by the Euro-
settlement day of the first main refinancing operation following the system for the issue of euro banknotes, 8% of the total value of the euromeeting of the Governing Council, at which the monthly assessment of the banknotes in circulation are allocatedon a monthly basis to the ECB. Themonetary policy stance is pre-scheduled. Due to the phasing-in of the counterpart of this adjustment is shown under “Other factors”. The
14*II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  euro  area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  euro  area
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserveand foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenancecurrency operations operations facility operations facility operations deposits (net)  
4 reserves)  5 money  6 period circulation  3 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
− 11.4 − 10.4 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 3.5 − 0.3 − − 10.2 − 1.6 − 11.8 − 1.0 − 11.5 2001          Oct 
− 4.9 − 4.4 − 0.0 − 0.9 − + 0.2 − − 13.9 + 2.5 − 0.5 + 1.6 − 12.1          Nov 
− 1.3 − 9.8
+ 0.0 + 0.3 + 12.4 + 0.5 − − 13.3 − 2.6 + 16.2 + 0.7 − 12.1          Dec 
+ 1.5 − 4.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 8.7 − 0.2 − + 46.3 − 5.2 − 55.1 + 3.0 + 49.0 2002          Jan 
+ 0.8 + 8.8
+ 0.0 − 0.2 − 3.7 − 0.5 − − 38.1 + 11.3 + 31.0 + 2.2 − 36.4          Feb 
+ 0.7 − 12.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 − + 0.0 − − 22.9 + 4.6 + 6.6 − 0.5 − 23.2          Mar 
+ 8.7 − 1.9 − 0.0 + 0.2 − + 0.1 − + 2.6 + 1.7 + 3.5 − 0.9 + 1.7          Apr 
+ 2.3 − 2.1 − 0.0 − 0.3 − + 0.1 − + 7.8 − 6.7 − 1.8 + 0.5 + 8.3          May
− 1.5 + 2.0 + 0.0 + 0.4 − + 0.1 − + 7.1 − 4.1 − 2.3 + 0.1 + 7.4          June
− 27.1 + 17.8 − 0.0 − 0.3 − − 0.2 − + 12.6 + 9.3 − 30.9 − 0.4 + 12.0          July
− 9.1 + 8.8 − 4.8 − 0.1 − − 0.1 − + 9.3 − 3.5 − 9.5 − 1.5 + 7.8          Aug 
+ 2.3 + 1.7 − 4.4 + 0.0 − + 0.1 − + 0.9 − 1.8 + 0.9 − 0.3 + 0.6          Sep 
+ 7.7 + 5.2 − 5.5 − 0.0 − − 0.1 − + 5.6 − 3.5 + 6.5 − 1.3 + 4.2          Oct 
+ 2.1 + 1.4 − 0.3 + 0.0 − − 0.0 − + 4.8 − 2.8 + 0.4 + 1.0 + 5.8          Nov − 0.6 + 20.6 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 2.0 + 0.1 − + 16.7 + 8.9 − 3.1 + 0.2 + 17.1          Dec 
− 10.6 + 8.2
+ 0.0 − 0.6 − 2.0 + 0.1 − + 3.2 − 8.0 − 2.2 + 2.1 + 5.3 2003          Jan 
− 4.5 − 7.7
+ 0.0 − 0.2 − + 0.0 − − 13.2 + 6.5 − 5.3 − 0.5 − 13.6          Feb 
− 3.9 + 10.9
+ 0.0 − 0.1 − − 0.2 − + 7.1 + 8.9 − 7.4 − 1.5 + 5.3          Mar 
− 15.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − + 0.1 − + 10.7 − 7.0 − 20.1 + 1.0 + 11.8          Apr − 4.3 − 2.3 − 0.0 + 0.3 − − 0.0 + 0.1 + 7.7 − 9.5 − 5.0 + 0.3 + 8.0          May− 1.8 + 17.6 + 0.0 − 0.0 − + 0.1 + 0.1 + 7.0 + 10.0 − 2.3 + 1.0 + 8.0          June
− 10.9 + 10.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − − 0.0 − 0.2 + 9.5 − 0.2 − 10.3 + 0.3 + 9.9          July
− 4.6 + 8.7 − 0.0 − 0.2 − − 0.2 − + 8.9 − 0.9 − 4.5 + 0.6 + 9.4          Aug 
− 0.8 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.1 − + 0.5 − + 0.1 + 2.9 − 2.8 − 0.8 − 0.4          Sep 
+ 6.3 − 5.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 − − 0.4 − + 3.8 − 6.1 + 3.3 − 0.1 + 3.3          Oct 
+ 0.5 − 2.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − + 0.1 − + 3.9 − 4.9 − 1.1 − 0.1 + 3.9          Nov 
− 1.7 + 29.7 + 0.0 + 0.5 − − 0.2 − + 16.7 + 13.6 − 2.3 + 0.8 + 17.3          Dec 
− 10.9 − 2.9
+ 0.0 − 0.3 − + 0.0 − + 11.5 − 20.0 − 6.7 + 1.0 + 12.7 2004          Jan 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
− 5.9 − 13.2 + 11.7 + 0.1 − + 0.1 − − 9.6 + 11.6 − 9.9 + 0.5 − 9.1          Mar − 1.9 − 1.5 + 10.4 − 0.0 − + 0.2 − + 7.3 + 2.9 − 4.6 + 1.2 + 8.7          Apr 
Deutsche Bundesbank
− 2.4 − 7.0 + 1.3 + 0.4 − 1.3 − 0.0 − − 4.7 − 0.0 − 4.5 + 0.2 − 4.5 2001          Oct 
− 1.5 + 2.0 − 1.7 − 0.3
+ 0.0 + 0.2 − − 6.1 + 0.0 + 3.7 + 0.7 − 5.3          Nov 
− 0.4 − 5.8 + 1.7 + 0.0 + 5.0 + 0.3 − − 8.1 + 0.0 + 13.3 − 0.1 − 7.9          Dec + 0.4 + 0.9 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 3.6 − 0.2 − − 4.8 − 0.0 − 2.2 + 1.1 − 3.9 2002          Jan 
+ 0.0 + 0.1 + 1.3 − 0.2 − 1.4 − 0.3 − − 13.2 − 0.0 + 13.6 − 0.4 − 13.8          Feb 
+ 0.1 − 4.9 − 1.7 + 0.1 − + 0.0 − + 1.2 − 0.0 − 7.4 − 0.3 + 0.9          Mar 
+ 2.4 − 0.9 − 0.3 + 0.1 − + 0.1 − + 1.0 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.4 + 0.7          Apr 
− 0.0 − 4.5 − 0.7 − 0.2 − + 0.1 − + 3.0 + 0.0 − 8.7 + 0.1 + 3.3          May
− 0.7 + 7.5 − 0.9 + 0.1 − − 0.0 − + 1.6 − 0.0 + 4.2 + 0.2 + 1.8          June
− 6.9 + 7.0 − 1.7 + 0.0 − − 0.1 − + 3.8 + 0.0 − 5.3 − 0.1 + 3.7          July
− 2.2 − 4.5 − 0.7 − 0.1 − − 0.1 − + 3.0 − 0.0 − 10.2 − 0.2 + 2.7          Aug − 0.1 + 1.3 − 3.7 + 0.0 − + 0.1 − + 0.2 − 0.0 − 2.8 − 0.0 + 0.2          Sep 
+ 1.6 + 4.6 − 1.0 + 0.0 − − 0.0 − + 1.5 + 0.0 + 3.9 − 0.3 + 1.2          Oct 
+ 0.4 + 4.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 − − 0.0 − + 0.7 + 0.0 + 3.5 + 0.3 + 1.0          Nov + 0.1 + 17.8 + 2.2 + 0.9 + 0.7 + 0.1 − + 4.7
+ 0.0 + 17.1 − 0.2 + 4.6          Dec 
− 2.1 − 6.0 + 2.4 − 0.5 − 0.7 − 0.0 − − 1.0 − 0.0 − 6.7 + 0.8 − 0.2 2003          Jan 
− 0.9 − 3.4 + 0.4 − 0.2 − + 0.1 − − 2.8 − 0.0 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 2.9          Feb + 0.0 + 8.4 − 1.6 − 0.1 − − 0.2 − + 2.0 + 0.0 + 5.2 − 0.4 + 1.4          Mar 
− 2.8 + 5.6 − 2.6 − 0.1 − + 0.1 − + 3.2
+ 0.0 − 3.5 + 0.3 + 3.6          Apr 
− 0.9 + 3.2 + 0.1 + 0.3 − − 0.0 + 0.1 + 1.8 + 0.0 + 1.0 − 0.1 + 1.6          May
− 0.4 + 13.6 + 0.5 − 0.1 − + 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.9 + 0.0 + 11.4 + 0.1 + 2.1          June
− 2.9 + 3.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 − − 0.0 − 0.1 + 2.7 − 0.0 − 2.7 − 0.1 + 2.6          July
− 0.6 − 4.6 − 2.8 − 0.1 − − 0.1 − + 2.5 + 0.0 − 10.5 + 0.1 + 2.5          Aug 
+ 0.2 + 3.1 − 0.5 − 0.1 − + 0.3 − + 0.2 − 0.0 + 2.7 − 0.5 − 0.0          Sep 
+ 1.8 − 7.5 + 0.6 + 0.0 − − 0.2 − + 1.0 − 0.0 − 5.7 − 0.2 + 0.6          Oct 
+ 0.4 − 4.3 + 1.2 − 0.0 − − 0.0 − + 0.7 + 0.0 − 3.4 + 0.0 + 0.7          Nov + 0.0 + 16.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 − − 0.1 − + 4.4 + 0.0 + 12.1 − 0.1 + 4.2          Dec 
− 3.0 + 1.2 + 1.4 − 0.1 − + 0.0 − + 0.2 − 0.0 − 1.2 + 0.5 + 0.7 2004          Jan 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
− 0.8 − 9.8 + 9.0 + 0.1 − + 0.1 − − 2.7 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.0 − 2.6          Mar + 0.5 − 11.8 + 7.4 − 0.0 − + 0.2 − + 2.4 − 0.0 − 6.3 − 0.1 + 2.4          Apr 
remaining 92% of the value of the euro banknotes in circulation is 4Remaining items in the consolidated financial statement of the Euro-
allocated, likewise on a monthly basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB showing system and the financial statement of the Bundesbank. — 5Equal to the dif-
in its balance sheet the percentage of the euro banknotes in circulation ference between the sum of liquidity-providing factors and the sum of li-
that corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference quidity-absorbing factors. — 6Calculatedas the sum of the “d eposit facili-
between the value of the euro banknotes allocatedto an NCB andthe ty”, “banknotes in circulation” and “cred it institutions’ current account hold -value of the euro banknotes which that NCB has put into circulation is ings”. likewise shown under “Other factors”. From 2003 euro banknotes only. —  
15*II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  euro  area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1 Assets *
 
 
€ billion
Claims on non-euro-area Claims on non-euro-area residents denominated
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
On investments, euro-area Balances Claims
reporting external loans residents with banks, arising from
date/ Gold and other denominated security the creditEnd of Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility undermonth  
1 assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
 Eurosystem 2
 
2003 Aug                29 814.8 119.8 203.5 31.9 171.5 15.2 4.6 4.6 −
         Sep                  5 809.5 119.8 201.5 32.0 169.5 15.2 4.4 4.4 −
                              12 804.4 119.8 202.6 32.5 170.1 14.6 4.5 4.5 −
                              19 813.6 119.8 199.6 32.5 167.1 16.4 4.5 4.5 −
                              26 829.2 119.7 202.4 32.3 170.1 14.8 4.6 4.6 −
         Oct                  3 3 813.6 3 130.8 3 201.0 32.2 3 168.8 15.1 5.0 5.0 −
                              10 815.9 130.8 200.8 32.2 168.6 15.8 4.7 4.7 −
                              17 803.7 130.8 198.3 32.3 166.0 15.8 4.9 4.9 −
                              24 812.5 130.8 198.0 32.2 165.8 16.4 5.1 5.1 −
                              31 818.6 130.8 199.7 32.1 167.5 15.4 5.0 5.0 −
         Nov                  7 813.5 130.7 198.8 32.2 166.7 15.9 5.0 5.0 −
                              14 811.9 130.6 195.7 32.2 163.5 15.8 5.1 5.1 −
                              21 827.1 130.5 196.1 31.9 164.2 15.2 5.5 5.5 −
                              28 833.3 130.4 194.8 31.9 162.8 14.2 5.5 5.5 −
         Dec                  5 858.3 130.4 194.5 31.9 162.6 15.8 5.3 5.3 −
                              12 847.0 130.3 192.7 31.9 160.8 16.3 5.5 5.5 −
                              19 848.7 130.2 189.9 30.3 159.6 17.8 5.9 5.9 −
                              24 835.2 130.2 189.5 30.4 159.1 18.0 6.0 6.0 −
2004 Jan                  2 3 838.3 130.3 3 176.8 3 29.1 3 147.7 17.4 6.3 6.3 −
                                9 812.0 130.3 176.4 29.1 147.3 18.4 6.5 6.5 −
                              16 812.6 130.3 178.0 29.1 148.9 17.6 7.5 7.5 −
                              23 823.3 130.3 176.3 29.0 147.3 18.1 7.7 7.7 −
                              30 824.4 130.3 178.3 29.0 149.3 17.1 7.6 7.6 −
         Feb                  6 817.0 130.3 177.5 29.0 148.5 17.6 7.3 7.3 −
                              13 813.2 130.3 173.8 29.0 144.8 17.3 7.1 7.1 −
                              20 816.9 130.3 171.2 28.9 142.3 17.6 7.3 7.3 −
                              27 824.0 130.3 168.6 28.9 139.6 18.0 7.3 7.3 −
         Mar                  5 826.8 130.3 168.1 28.9 139.2 17.5 7.2 7.2 −
                              12 819.7 130.3 167.0 27.6 139.4 17.3 7.4 7.4 −
                              19 822.8 130.3 166.6 27.6 138.9 17.2 7.2 7.2 −
                              26 830.3 130.3 167.0 28.5 138.6 16.6 7.2 7.2 −
         Apr                  2 3 847.1 3 136.5 3 171.6 3 29.3 3 142.3 3 17.8 8.5 8.5 −
                                8 848.1 136.5 171.4 29.3 142.2 16.8 8.3 8.3 −
                              16 835.3 136.5 171.2 29.3 141.9 17.0 8.0 8.0 −
                              23 842.7 136.5 171.7 29.7 142.0 17.5 7.4 7.4 −
                              30 853.5 136.5 173.6 29.7 143.9 17.7 7.4 7.4 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2002          June 3 217.9 3 35.4 3 51.2 8.8 3 42.4 − 0.3 0.3 −
         July 211.3 35.4 51.8 8.8 43.0 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Aug 218.3 35.4 50.9 8.7 42.2 − 0.3 0.3 −         Sep 
3 221.9 3 36.2 3 52.7 8.8 3 44.0 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Oct 226.4 36.2 52.1 8.6 43.5 − 0.3 0.3 −         Nov 229.9 36.2 53.0 8.6 44.4 − 0.3 0.3 −         Dec 
3 240.0 36.2 3 48.8 8.3 3 40.5 − 0.3 0.3 −
2003          Jan 233.9 36.2 48.9 8.2 40.7 − 0.3 0.3 −         Feb 236.2 36.2 49.2 8.2 41.0 − 0.3 0.3 −         Mar 
3 239.2 3 34.1 3 48.4 8.3 3 40.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Apr 230.5 34.1 47.0 8.2 38.7 − 0.3 0.3 −         May 258.1 34.1 47.8 8.3 39.6 − 0.3 0.3 −         June
3 258.2 3 33.4 3 45.0 8.3 3 36.7 − 0.3 0.3 −
         July 246.9 33.4 44.8 8.3 36.5 − 0.3 0.3 −         Aug 248.9 33.4 45.5 8.3 37.1 − 0.3 0.3 −         Sep 
3 257.5 3 36.5 3 44.7 8.5 3 36.2 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Oct 257.6 36.5 45.0 8.5 36.5 − 0.3 0.3 −         Nov 254.4 36.5 44.5 8.5 36.0 − 0.3 0.3 −         Dec 
3 267.7 36.5 3 40.1 7.6 3 32.5 − 0.3 0.3 −
2004          Jan 258.1 36.5 40.4 7.6 32.7 − 0.3 0.3 −         Feb 258.2 36.5 40.4 7.6 32.7 − 0.3 0.3 −         Mar 
3 256.2 3 38.3 3 41.5 7.6 3 33.8 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Apr 268.0 38.3 42.1 7.9 34.2 − 0.3 0.3 −
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the statements of the national central banks of the euro-area member states
financial statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) andthe financial (NCBs). The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold
16*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Lending to euro-area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations
denominated in euro
 Other claims on euro-area credit Securities General    On
Credits institutions of euro-area government    reporting
Main Longer-term Fine-tuning Structural Marginal related denomi- residents debt    date/refinancing refinancing reverse reverse lending to margin nated in denominated denominated Other    End of
Total operations operations operations operations facility calls euro in euro in euro assets    month  
1 
Eurosystem 2
 
264.1 219.0 45.0 − − 0.0 0.0 0.3 48.5 43.8 115.1 2003 Aug                29
260.0 215.0 45.0 − − 0.0 0.0 0.4 49.3 43.8 115.1          Sep                  5
253.0 208.0 45.0 − − 0.0 0.0 0.3 50.0 43.8 115.7                               12
263.0 218.0 45.0 − − 0.0 0.0 0.3 50.4 43.8 115.8                               19
276.1 231.0 45.0 − − 0.0 0.0 0.3 51.2 43.8 116.4                               26
249.3 204.0 45.0 − − 0.3 0.0 0.4 51.2 43.8 3 117.2          Oct                  3
250.0 205.0 45.0 − − − 0.0 0.3 51.9 43.8 117.8                               10
240.3 195.0 45.0 − − 0.2 0.0 0.4 52.4 43.8 117.0                               17
248.0 203.0 45.0 − − 0.0 0.0 0.4 52.5 43.8 117.5                               24
252.1 207.0 45.0 − − 0.0 0.0 0.4 53.0 43.8 118.5                               31
246.1 201.0 45.0 − − 0.0 0.1 0.6 53.4 43.8 119.3          Nov                  7
247.0 202.0 45.0 − − 0.0 0.0 0.7 53.1 43.8 120.1                               14
262.5 217.0 45.0 − − 0.5 0.0 0.8 53.0 43.8 119.5                               21
270.3 225.3 45.0 − − 0.0 0.0 0.8 53.6 43.8 120.1                               28
292.4 247.3 45.0 − − 0.0 0.0 0.5 54.3 43.8 121.5          Dec                  5
282.0 237.0 45.0 − − 0.0 0.0 0.5 53.9 43.8 122.1                               12
284.0 239.0 45.0 − − 0.0 0.0 0.7 54.1 43.7 122.5                               19
276.0 231.0 45.0 − − 0.0 0.0 0.7 54.1 42.9 117.8                               24
298.0 253.0 45.0 − − 0.0 0.0 0.8 61.3 42.7 3 104.6 2004 Jan                  2
270.4 225.0 45.0 − − 0.4 0.0 1.0 62.0 42.7 104.2                                 9
269.0 224.0 45.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.2 62.2 42.7 104.1                               16
279.6 229.0 45.0 − − 5.6 0.0 0.9 63.1 42.7 104.6                               23
279.0 224.0 55.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.1 63.6 42.7 104.7                               30
270.0 215.0 55.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.1 65.3 42.6 105.3          Feb                  6
268.0 213.0 55.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.5 66.0 42.6 106.5                               13
275.0 220.0 55.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.4 66.1 42.6 105.4                               20
283.9 218.7 65.0 − − 0.2 0.0 1.3 66.5 42.6 105.4                               27
285.9 220.7 65.0 − − 0.2 0.0 1.2 68.0 42.6 106.0          Mar                  5
277.7 212.5 65.0 − − 0.0 0.2 1.2 68.9 42.6 107.3                               12
281.5 216.5 65.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.3 69.0 42.6 107.1                               19
289.5 224.5 65.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.2 68.9 42.6 106.9                               26
293.0 218.0 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.1 3 68.5 42.6 3 107.5          Apr                  2
293.5 218.5 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.0 69.9 42.6 108.1                                 8
280.5 205.5 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.0 70.0 42.6 108.4                               16
286.0 211.0 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 0.9 71.2 42.5 108.9                               23
295.1 220.0 75.0 − − 0.0 0.0 1.0 71.0 42.5 108.7                               30
 Deutsche Bundesbank
109.1 71.2 36.9 − − 0.9 − 0.0 − 4.4 17.5 2002          June
98.2 61.8 36.4 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 21.2          July
100.3 68.3 32.0 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 26.9          Aug 
104.2 72.4 31.7 − − 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 24.0          Sep 
103.9 72.4 31.6 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 29.4          Oct 
111.1 77.0 34.0 − − 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 24.8          Nov 125.5 87.1 36.1 − − 2.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 24.8          Dec 
124.3 87.5 36.6 − − 0.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.8 2003          Jan 
126.3 91.6 34.7 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.7          Feb 
130.9 98.4 32.1 − − 0.4 − 0.0 − 4.4 21.1          Mar 
125.0 92.5 32.5 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.7          Apr 
151.8 118.7 32.9 − − 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.7          May155.0 122.5 32.4 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 20.1          June
144.0 115.1 28.8 − − 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.9          July
145.2 116.0 29.1 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 20.1          Aug 151.4 121.5 29.7 − − 0.2 − 0.0 − 4.4
3 20.1          Sep 
133.0 101.9 31.1 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 38.4          Oct 145.4 115.0 30.4 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 23.3          Nov 162.3 129.9 32.3 − − 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 24.0          Dec 
157.4 117.4 40.0 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.0 2004          Jan 
157.6 109.9 47.5 − − 0.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 18.9          Feb 
141.7 94.1 47.5 − − 0.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 30.1          Mar 
153.7 104.3 49.4 − − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 29.1          Apr 
 
andfinancial instruments are valuedat market rates at the endof the quar- for the Bund esbank: end -of month financial statement. — 2Source: ECB. —
ter.— 1For the Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly dates; 3 Changes are due mainly to revalutions at the end of the quarter. 
17*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities to euro-area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro-area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilitiesaccounts to euro-
On (covering Fine- area creditreporting the tuning Deposits institutions Debtdate/ Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
End of Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Othermonth  
1 liabilities Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment lation  2,3 liabilities
 Eurosystem 5
 
2003 Aug                29 814.8 390.4 131.0 131.0 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 2.0 66.9 61.7 5.3
         Sep                  5 809.5 393.9 133.4 133.3 0.1 − − 0.0 0.1 2.0 57.0 51.7 5.3
                              12 804.4 393.6 131.3 131.3 0.0 − − 0.0 0.1 2.0 54.2 48.9 5.4
                              19 813.6 392.1 129.1 128.7 0.5 − − 0.0 0.1 2.0 67.7 62.2 5.5
                              26 829.2 391.5 135.7 135.7 0.0 − − − 0.1 2.0 76.1 70.9 5.2
         Oct                  3 6 813.6 397.6 129.4 129.4 0.0 − − − 0.1 2.0 50.0 44.4 5.6
                              10 815.9 398.0 132.8 132.7 0.1 − − 0.0 0.1 2.0 48.2 42.8 5.4
                              17 803.7 396.8 131.0 130.3 0.7 − − 0.0 0.2 2.0 40.4 35.2 5.3
                              24 812.5 395.4 127.8 127.8 0.0 − − 0.0 0.2 2.0 53.5 48.4 5.2
                              31 818.6 398.4 128.2 128.2 0.0 − − 0.0 0.2 2.0 55.0 49.4 5.6
         Nov                  7 813.5 401.9 133.4 133.4 0.0 − − 0.0 0.2 1.1 41.4 36.0 5.4
                              14 811.9 401.9 132.5 132.4 0.1 − − 0.0 0.2 1.1 43.2 37.3 5.9
                              21 827.1 400.5 129.0 127.2 1.8 − − − 0.2 1.1 62.2 56.3 5.8
                              28 833.3 405.2 125.0 124.9 0.1 − − 0.0 0.2 1.1 70.3 64.2 6.1
         Dec                  5 858.3 416.2 137.4 137.4 0.0 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 70.7 64.8 5.9
                              12 847.0 419.7 129.5 129.5 0.0 − − − 0.3 1.1 64.8 59.1 5.7
                              19 848.7 429.5 129.8 129.7 0.1 − − − 0.3 1.1 55.2 49.4 5.7
                              24 835.2 439.2 113.5 113.5 0.0 − − − 0.3 1.1 48.1 42.2 5.8
2004 Jan                  2 6 838.3 434.3 152.9 152.8 0.1 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 35.6 29.8 5.8
                                9 812.0 425.2 133.7 133.6 0.1 − − − 0.3 1.1 38.8 32.9 5.9
                              16 812.6 419.2 135.1 135.1 0.1 − − − 0.3 1.1 42.9 37.0 5.9
                              23 823.3 415.1 134.7 134.3 0.4 − − − 0.3 1.1 57.4 51.7 5.8
                              30 824.4 415.6 132.1 132.1 0.0 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 60.1 54.0 6.1
         Feb                  6 817.0 418.8 133.2 133.1 0.0 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 48.6 42.5 6.1
                              13 813.2 418.5 135.4 135.3 0.1 − − − 0.3 1.1 44.8 38.7 6.2
                              20 816.9 417.5 131.0 131.0 0.0 − − − 0.3 1.1 56.7 50.4 6.3
                              27 824.0 418.9 128.9 128.8 0.1 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 67.4 61.1 6.2
         Mar                  5 826.8 423.7 137.7 137.6 0.1 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 56.6 50.8 5.9
                              12 819.7 424.1 135.2 135.2 0.0 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 51.8 46.1 5.7
                              19 822.8 423.8 133.2 133.1 0.0 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 57.4 51.8 5.6
                              26 830.3 423.8 131.9 131.8 0.1 − − − 0.3 1.1 66.7 61.1 5.5
         Apr                  2 6 847.1 431.0 140.2 140.0 0.1 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 54.9 48.9 5.9
                                8 848.1 441.4 135.1 135.0 0.1 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 51.6 45.6 6.0
                              16 835.3 435.8 135.2 135.2 0.0 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 44.3 38.3 6.0
                              23 842.7 432.0 131.1 131.0 0.0 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 59.0 53.4 5.7
                              30 853.5 435.4 133.6 133.5 0.0 − − 0.0 0.3 1.1 62.1 56.3 5.8
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2002          June 6 217.9 86.9 41.4 41.3 0.1 − − − − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         July 211.3 90.0 40.7 40.6 0.0 − − − − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Aug 218.3 90.7 44.3 44.2 0.1 − − − − − 0.5 0.0 0.5         Sep 
6 221.9 92.0 41.0 41.0 0.0 − − − − − 0.6 0.0 0.5
         Oct 226.4 94.2 41.3 41.3 0.0 − − − − − 0.6 0.1 0.5         Nov 229.9 95.7 41.0 40.9 0.0 − − − − − 0.8 0.1 0.7         Dec 
6 240.0 104.5 44.8 44.8 0.0 − − − − − 0.6 0.0 0.6
2003          Jan 233.9 94.5 40.9 40.8 0.1 − − − − − 0.5 0.0 0.5         Feb 236.2 96.1 38.1 38.1 0.1 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.5         Mar 
6 239.2 98.1 48.1 48.0 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.0 0.4
         Apr 230.5 101.8 36.4 36.3 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4         May 258.1 103.2 36.3 36.2 0.1 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4         June
6 258.2 105.2 38.8 38.8 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         July 246.9 108.5 39.6 39.5 0.1 − − − − − 0.5 0.0 0.5         Aug 248.9 108.6 41.0 41.0 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.0 0.4         Sep 
6 257.5 109.2 41.7 41.7 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Oct 257.6 110.8 42.0 42.0 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4         Nov 254.4 112.7 36.4 36.4 0.0 − − − − − 0.6 0.1 0.5         Dec 
6 267.7 121.4 44.6 44.5 0.1 − − − 0.2 − 0.6 0.1 0.5
2004          Jan 258.1 112.4 39.8 39.8 0.0 − − − − − 0.4 0.0 0.4         Feb 258.2 113.3 36.8 36.7 0.1 − − − − − 0.7 0.3 0.4         Mar 
6 256.2 115.0 31.0 31.0 0.0 − − − − − 0.7 0.4 0.4
         Apr 268.0 117.7 38.3 38.3 0.0 − − − − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the the Bundesbank: end-of-month financial statements. — 2From 2002, euro
financial statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) andthe financial banknotes andup to end -2002, banknotes still in circulation issuedby the
statements of the national central banks of the euro-area member states national central banks of the Eurosystem (see also footnote 4). —(NCBs). The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, goldand 3According to the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem on the
financial instruments are valuedat market rates at the endof the quar- issue of euro banknotes, a share of 8% of the total value of the euroter. — 1For Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly dates; for banknotes in circulation is allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The
18*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Liabilities to non-euro-area
residents denominated inforeign currency
Intra-  Eurosystem  
Liabilities Liabilities Liabilities Counterpart liability     Onto non-euro- to euro-area Deposits, arising of special related to     reportingarea residents residents balances from the drawing euro-  Capital    date/denominated in foreign and other rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and    End of credit facility
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF issue  
3 accounts reserves    month  1 liabilities  4 
Eurosystem 5
 
9.4 0.8 16.5 16.5 − 6.0 64.3 − 62.2 65.0 2003 Aug                29
9.7 0.8 15.0 15.0 − 6.0 64.4 − 62.2 65.0          Sep                  5
9.6 0.8 15.0 15.0 − 6.0 64.5 − 62.2 65.0                               12
9.3 0.8 13.8 13.8 − 6.0 65.5 − 62.2 65.0                               19
9.3 0.8 15.4 15.4 − 6.0 65.2 − 62.2 65.0                               26
9.5 0.7 17.2 17.2 − 6.0 6 65.0 − 6 71.2 65.0          Oct                  3
9.4 0.7 17.8 17.8 − 6.0 64.9 − 71.2 65.0                               10
9.5 0.6 15.2 15.2 − 6.0 65.8 − 71.2 65.0                               17
9.4 0.7 15.5 15.5 − 6.0 65.8 − 71.2 65.0                               24
9.6 0.8 16.2 16.2 − 6.0 66.0 − 71.2 65.0                               31
9.6 0.7 17.2 17.2 − 6.0 65.9 − 71.2 65.0          Nov                  7
9.7 0.7 14.2 14.2 − 6.0 66.2 − 71.2 65.0                               14
9.8 0.7 14.6 14.6 − 6.0 66.7 − 71.2 65.0                               21
9.7 0.7 12.3 12.3 − 6.0 66.7 − 71.2 65.0                               28
9.7 0.7 13.6 13.6 − 6.0 66.5 − 71.2 65.0          Dec                  5
9.5 0.7 12.4 12.4 − 6.0 67.0 − 71.2 65.0                               12
9.5 0.6 12.7 12.7 − 6.0 68.0 − 71.2 65.0                               19
10.3 0.6 12.6 12.6 − 6.0 67.3 − 71.2 65.0                               24
10.1 0.5 6 12.3 6 12.3 − 5.8 6 54.4 − 6 69.1 6 62.1 2004 Jan                  2
9.5 0.5 12.5 12.5 − 5.8 53.6 − 69.1 62.0                                 9
9.6 0.4 13.4 13.4 − 5.8 53.8 − 69.1 62.0                               16
10.8 0.4 12.6 12.6 − 5.8 54.0 − 69.1 62.0                               23
9.6 0.4 13.5 13.5 − 5.8 54.8 − 69.1 62.0                               30
9.5 0.4 15.0 15.0 − 5.8 53.2 − 69.1 62.0          Feb                  6
9.5 0.4 12.3 12.3 − 5.8 53.4 − 69.1 62.5                               13
9.3 0.4 10.6 10.6 − 5.8 52.5 − 69.1 62.8                               20
9.3 0.4 8.7 8.7 − 5.8 52.1 − 69.1 62.1                               27
10.0 0.5 8.9 8.9 − 5.8 51.0 − 69.1 62.1          Mar                  5
9.1 0.5 9.7 9.7 − 5.8 51.0 − 69.1 62.1                               12
9.0 0.4 9.3 9.3 − 5.8 51.5 − 69.1 62.1                               19
9.0 0.4 9.3 9.3 − 5.8 51.5 − 69.1 61.6                               26
8.6 0.3 9.6 9.6 − 5.9 6 55.2 − 6 80.6 59.5          Apr                  2
8.6 0.3 9.0 9.0 − 5.9 55.0 − 80.6 59.3                                 8
8.5 0.3 8.4 8.4 − 5.9 55.6 − 80.6 59.3                               16
8.4 0.3 8.8 8.8 − 5.9 56.0 − 80.6 59.3                               23
8.6 0.3 10.3 10.3 − 5.9 56.2 − 80.6 59.3                               30
 Deutsche Bundesbank
6.9 0.0 2.3 2.3 − 1.6 20.9 16.7 6 35.5 5.1 2002          June
7.1 0.0 3.0 3.0 − 1.6 8.9 18.8 35.5 5.1          July
7.1 0.0 2.3 2.3 − 1.6 9.2 22.0 35.5 5.1          Aug 7.2 0.0 2.8 2.8 − 1.6 10.2 24.1
6 37.3 5.1          Sep 
7.1 0.0 2.4 2.4 − 1.6 10.6 26.2 37.3 5.1          Oct 7.1 0.0 3.1 3.1 − 1.6 10.5 27.6 37.3 5.1          Nov 7.1 0.0 1.8 1.8 − 1.6 11.1 29.1
6 34.2 5.0          Dec 
7.8 0.0 2.2 2.2 − 1.6 17.6 29.6 34.2 5.0 2003          Jan 
7.3 0.0 2.4 2.4 − 1.6 19.1 31.9 34.2 5.0          Feb 7.1 0.0 3.4 3.4 − 1.5
6 11.7 33.3 6 30.4 5.0          Mar 
7.1 0.0 2.0 2.0 − 1.5 11.6 34.2 30.4 5.0          Apr 7.3 0.0 2.7 2.7 − 1.5 34.5 36.6 30.4 5.0          May7.4 0.0 3.2 3.2 − 1.5 31.3 37.3
6 28.2 5.0          June
7.3 0.0 3.0 3.0 − 1.5 14.9 38.4 28.2 5.0          July7.4 0.0 3.5 3.5 − 1.5 12.4 40.8 28.2 5.0          Aug 7.3 0.0 3.6 3.6 − 1.5 16.2 42.2
6 30.2 5.0          Sep 
7.4 0.0 3.9 3.9 − 1.5 12.9 43.4 30.2 5.0          Oct 7.4 0.0 3.2 3.2 − 1.5 12.9 44.4 30.2 5.0          Nov 7.7 0.0 2.8 2.8 − 1.4
6 10.5 44.6 6 29.1 5.0          Dec 
7.3 0.0 3.1 3.1 − 1.4 11.4 48.1 29.1 5.0 2004          Jan 
7.0 0.0 3.0 3.0 − 1.4 12.7 49.2 29.1 5.0          Feb 6.5 0.0 3.1 3.1 − 1.5 10.8 50.4
6 32.2 5.0          Mar 
6.2 0.0 3.4 3.4 − 1.5 10.9 52.3 32.2 5.0          Apr 
 
counterpart of this adjustment is disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem liability according to the aforementioned accounting regime and the value of eu ro
relatedto euro-banknote issue“. The remaining 92 % of the value of the banknotes put into circulation is also d isclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem
euro banknotes in circulation is also allocatedto the NCBs on a monthly claim/ liability relatedto banknote issue“. — 4For the Deutsche Bundes-
basis, andeach NCB shows in its balance sheet the share of the euro bank- bank: from 2003, includ ing DM banknotes still in circulation (see also foot-notes issued which corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The note 2). — 5Source: ECB. — 6Changes are due mainly to revaluations at the
difference between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to the NCB end of the quarter. 
19*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Assets
 
 Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, €  billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other member states to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and house-
holds
Secur- Secur-
Balance ities itiessheet Cash issuedissued
Periodtotal in hand Total Total Loans by banks Total Loans by banks Total Total Total Loans
 End of year or month
 
1995 7,778.7 27.3 2,210.2 2,019.0 1,399.8 619.3 191.2 158.0 33.2 4,723.3 4,635.0 3,548.8 3,298.7
1996 8,540.5 30.3 2,523.0 2,301.1 1,585.7 715.4 221.9 181.2 40.7 5,084.7 4,981.9 3,812.8 3,543.01997 9,368.2 30.7 2,836.0 2,580.7 1,758.6 822.1 255.3 208.8 46.5 5,408.8 5,269.5 4,041.3 3,740.81998 10,355.5 29.9 3,267.4 2,939.4 1,977.4 962.0 328.1 264.9 63.1 5,833.9 5,615.9 4,361.0 3,966.51999 5,678.5 17.2 1,836.9 1,635.0 1,081.4 553.6 201.9 161.8 40.1 3,127.4 2,958.6 2,326.4 2,093.4
2000 6,083.9 16.1 1,977.4 1,724.2 1,108.9 615.3 253.2 184.5 68.6 3,249.9 3,062.6 2,445.7 2,186.6
2001 6,303.1 14.6 2,069.7 1,775.5 1,140.6 634.9 294.2 219.8 74.4 3,317.1 3,084.9 2,497.1 2,235.72002 6,394.2 17.9 2,118.0 1,769.1 1,164.3 604.9 348.9 271.7 77.2 3,340.2 3,092.2 2,505.8 2,240.82003 6,432.0 17.3 2,111.5 1,732.0 1,116.8 615.3 379.5 287.7 91.8 3,333.2 3,083.1 2,497.4 2,241.2
2002          June 6,277.4 14.3 2,073.9 1,758.9 1,111.2 647.6 315.1 238.1 77.0 3,304.8 3,059.5 2,477.9 2,233.2
         July 6,265.6 13.8 2,051.7 1,731.9 1,094.9 637.1 319.7 242.3 77.4 3,313.1 3,063.8 2,471.5 2,231.6
         Aug 6,290.6 13.6 2,073.4 1,746.9 1,113.0 634.0 326.5 249.2 77.3 3,310.9 3,064.3 2,480.6 2,231.5         Sep 6,341.1 13.3 2,077.4 1,745.3 1,113.3 632.1 332.0 253.8 78.3 3,323.1 3,074.8 2,490.6 2,242.3
         Oct 6,359.1 14.2 2,078.3 1,741.3 1,117.9 623.5 336.9 257.2 79.7 3,327.8 3,080.9 2,494.9 2,240.6
         Nov 6,453.5 13.2 2,130.2 1,780.8 1,150.6 630.2 349.5 267.3 82.1 3,336.6 3,088.4 2,496.7 2,238.4         Dec 6,394.2 17.9 2,118.0 1,769.1 1,164.3 604.9 348.9 271.7 77.2 3,340.2 3,092.2 2,505.8 2,240.8
2003          Jan 6,380.7 13.2 2,104.3 1,748.5 1,136.2 612.3 355.8 277.0 78.8 3,348.8 3,101.1 2,501.4 2,237.9
         Feb 6,424.9 13.2 2,124.3 1,751.7 1,142.1 611.7 370.5 289.5 81.1 3,347.4 3,097.7 2,501.7 2,239.2         Mar 6,434.8 12.9 2,121.5 1,747.2 1,135.0 614.4 371.9 288.9 83.1 3,346.7 3,100.4 2,498.0 2,238.1
         Apr 6,430.3 13.8 2,107.6 1,732.2 1,118.6 613.6 375.4 291.6 83.8 3,348.8 3,102.2 2,499.1 2,234.6
         May 6,467.7 14.0 2,144.0 1,756.9 1,143.6 613.2 387.1 303.3 83.8 3,347.2 3,101.9 2,499.2 2,232.0         June 6,472.9 13.3 2,139.0 1,748.0 1,137.1 610.9 390.9 305.4 85.5 3,330.2 3,089.9 2,502.9 2,239.7
         July 6,425.7 13.3 2,113.5 1,728.1 1,109.7 618.4 385.3 297.4 88.0 3,330.2 3,093.7 2,494.1 2,231.1
         Aug 6,395.1 13.5 2,105.5 1,720.3 1,104.5 615.8 385.2 296.8 88.3 3,318.3 3,084.7 2,495.6 2,231.4         Sep 6,403.1 13.3 2,099.4 1,712.2 1,095.3 616.9 387.2 297.5 89.7 3,332.6 3,089.6 2,504.9 2,245.2
         Oct 6,399.3 13.6 2,092.9 1,715.9 1,096.1 619.9 376.9 285.3 91.7 3,328.9 3,086.1 2,496.9 2,242.9
         Nov 6,456.1 13.1 2,126.2 1,742.4 1,117.5 624.9 383.7 292.5 91.3 3,350.9 3,103.5 2,505.0 2,246.9         Dec 6,432.0 17.3 2,111.5 1,732.0 1,116.8 615.3 379.5 287.7 91.8 3,333.2 3,083.1 2,497.4 2,241.2
2004          Jan 6,424.2 13.2 2,084.1 1,713.6 1,101.3 612.4 370.4 278.3 92.1 3,329.8 3,078.3 2,489.0 2,230.4
         Feb 6,448.7 13.2 2,100.2 1,722.7 1,101.9 620.8 377.5 282.5 94.9 3,341.8 3,081.9 2,483.5 2,230.2         Mar 6,506.7 12.7 2,106.5 1,725.6 1,098.7 626.9 380.9 282.2 98.7 3,370.3 3,103.0 2,491.9 2,228.9
 Changes 1
1996 761.8 3.0 312.8 282.1 186.0 96.1 30.7 23.2 7.5 361.5 346.9 264.0 244.31997 825.6 0.5 313.1 279.6 172.9 106.7 33.5 27.6 5.9 324.0 287.5 228.4 197.61998 1,001.0 − 0.8 422.2 355.7 215.1 140.6 66.4 56.2 10.2 440.4 363.3 337.5 245.21999 452.6 1.8 179.8 140.1 81.4 58.6 39.8 26.3 13.5 206.6 158.1 156.8 126.4
2000 401.5 − 1.2 143.0 91.7 28.1 63.6 51.4 22.8 28.6 123.2 105.4 116.8 89.5
2001 244.9 − 1.4 91.0 50.7 30.3 20.5 40.3 34.5 5.8 55.1 23.9 50.4 48.12002 165.7 3.3 63.6 6.5 23.7 − 17.1 57.1 51.9 5.2 34.1 15.7 16.5 10.42003 83.5 − 0.6 − 20.2 − 49.0 − 47.5 − 1.5 28.8 15.7 13.1 29.6 23.0 22.2 26.4
2002          July − 19.9 − 0.5 − 22.9 − 27.5 − 16.3 − 11.1 4.5 4.2 0.3 7.2 3.6 − 7.1 − 2.6
         Aug 23.8 − 0.2 21.9 15.1 18.1 − 3.0 6.8 6.8 − 0.0 − 1.7 0.9 8.8 0.3         Sep 51.3 − 0.2 4.0 − 1.6 0.3 − 1.9 5.6 4.6 0.9 12.0 10.2 10.3 10.4
         Oct 20.3 0.9 0.8 − 4.1 4.6 − 8.7 4.9 3.5 1.5 4.6 6.2 4.4 − 1.5
         Nov 97.2 − 1.0 52.0 39.4 32.7 6.7 12.6 10.1 2.5 9.4 7.9 2.2 − 1.8         Dec − 29.0 4.7 3.0 1.0 13.7 − 12.7 1.9 4.4 − 2.4 11.4 10.8 16.1 7.8
2003          Jan − 14.6 − 4.7 − 25.1 − 30.7 − 28.1 − 2.7 5.6 5.3 0.4 18.3 17.1 3.7 1.4
         Feb 41.3 0.0 17.0 3.1 5.9 − 2.8 13.9 12.5 1.4 0.7 − 1.3 2.4 3.4         Mar 14.1 − 0.4 − 2.9 − 4.3 − 7.1 2.8 1.4 − 0.6 2.1 4.6 7.8 1.4 3.9
         Apr 4.5 1.0 − 13.7 − 17.2 − 16.5 − 0.8 3.5 2.7 0.8 4.9 4.2 3.2 − 1.2
         May 57.3 0.2 36.6 24.8 25.1 − 0.3 11.9 11.8 0.1 1.9 2.5 2.9 − 0.0         June − 5.9 − 0.7 − 5.2 − 8.9 − 6.5 − 2.4 3.8 2.0 1.7 − 18.0 − 12.5 3.2 7.2
         July − 49.6 − 0.1 − 25.7 − 20.1 − 27.4 7.3 − 5.6 − 8.0 2.4 0.6 4.5 − 8.1 − 8.1
         Aug − 43.7 0.3 − 8.1 − 7.9 − 5.2 − 2.7 − 0.3 − 0.5 0.3 − 13.6 − 10.0 0.5 − 0.6         Sep 26.2 − 0.2 − 5.9 − 8.1 − 9.2 1.2 2.1 0.7 1.4 17.7 7.4 11.8 16.2
         Oct − 5.0 0.3 − 6.5 4.1 0.8 3.3 − 10.6 − 12.6 2.0 − 1.8 − 2.0 − 7.3 − 1.7
         Nov 67.6 − 0.5 33.6 26.6 21.4 5.1 7.1 7.2 − 0.1 24.5 19.2 9.8 5.6         Dec − 8.6 4.2 − 14.4 − 10.3 − 0.7 − 9.6 − 4.1 − 4.7 0.7 − 10.1 − 13.7 − 1.4 0.3
2004          Jan − 15.4 − 4.1 − 26.5 − 18.1 − 15.5 − 2.6 − 8.5 − 9.4 0.9 − 0.6 − 1.0 − 4.6 − 6.6
         Feb 26.4 0.0 17.3 9.0 0.4 8.6 8.3 4.2 4.1 16.6 8.0 − 1.1 2.5         Mar 47.3 − 0.5 6.2 2.8 − 3.2 6.0 3.4 − 0.3 3.7 28.6 21.7 9.0 − 0.8
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section data from money market funds. — 1Statistical breaks have been eliminated
II. Unlike the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). — 2Including debt
the figures reported by banks (including building and loan associations) − securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims. 
20*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
IV Banks
 
   
 
euro area Claims on
non-euro-area
to non-banks in other member states residents
 General Enterprises andGeneral government households government
Secur- Secur- of which Secur- of which Other
ities Total Loans ities  
2 Total Total Loans Total Loans  3 ities Total Loans assets   Period
End of year or month
 
250.0 1,086.3 792.2 294.1 88.2 39.4 39.2 48.8 11.3 37.6 608.5 526.0 209.4 1995
269.7 1,169.1 857.8 311.4 102.8 36.8 36.8 66.0 17.2 48.8 678.1 575.3 224.4 1996300.6 1,228.2 911.0 317.2 139.2 41.9 41.2 97.3 23.4 73.9 839.6 710.2 253.1 1997394.5 1,254.9 939.1 315.8 218.0 62.5 56.0 155.5 35.6 119.9 922.0 758.0 302.2 1998233.0 632.1 488.4 143.7 168.8 65.3 35.9 103.6 20.7 82.8 511.2 404.2 185.8 1999
259.1 616.9 478.5 138.4 187.3 83.8 44.2 103.5 20.0 83.5 622.4 481.7 218.1 2000
261.3 587.8 468.7 119.1 232.3 111.3 53.7 121.0 26.2 94.8 727.3 572.0 174.3 2001265.0 586.4 448.5 137.9 248.0 125.0 63.6 123.0 25.5 97.5 738.1 589.2 179.9 2002256.2 585.6 439.6 146.1 250.2 133.5 62.7 116.6 25.9 90.7 803.7 645.6 166.4 2003
244.6 581.6 450.0 131.6 245.4 118.1 61.5 127.2 26.0 101.2 712.6 559.4 171.7 2002          June
239.9 592.3 458.1 134.2 249.3 118.1 59.8 131.2 26.5 104.7 712.9 557.9 174.2          July
249.1 583.7 448.5 135.2 246.6 114.3 58.3 132.3 26.9 105.4 722.0 566.9 170.7          Aug 248.3 584.2 445.3 138.9 248.3 114.7 59.3 133.6 27.2 106.3 752.3 597.5 174.9          Sep 
254.2 586.0 448.3 137.7 246.9 116.4 59.1 130.5 27.6 102.9 762.2 608.7 176.7          Oct 
258.2 591.7 449.2 142.5 248.2 118.6 61.0 129.6 28.0 101.6 791.0 634.2 182.4          Nov 265.0 586.4 448.5 137.9 248.0 125.0 63.6 123.0 25.5 97.5 738.1 589.2 179.9          Dec 
263.4 599.8 453.0 146.7 247.6 121.8 60.5 125.8 26.5 99.3 738.3 591.8 176.2 2003          Jan 
262.4 596.0 447.3 148.7 249.7 125.6 64.6 124.1 26.2 97.9 757.7 612.1 182.2          Feb 
259.9 602.4 444.0 158.4 246.3 126.8 64.5 119.5 26.2 93.3 778.6 630.9 175.1          Mar 
264.5 603.1 445.8 157.4 246.6 129.9 66.2 116.7 25.2 91.5 787.6 641.1 172.5          Apr 
267.2 602.7 439.8 162.9 245.3 130.7 66.7 114.6 26.5 88.2 792.4 644.3 170.2          May263.2 587.0 434.6 152.4 240.2 126.9 61.9 113.4 24.6 88.7 827.6 668.9 162.8          June
263.0 599.6 444.9 154.7 236.5 126.7 62.3 109.8 24.9 84.9 811.5 651.6 157.3          July
264.1 589.1 440.6 148.5 233.6 129.2 65.0 104.4 24.1 80.3 801.2 642.0 156.6          Aug 259.8 584.6 435.2 149.4 243.1 129.7 64.7 113.4 23.4 90.0 795.8 642.4 161.9          Sep 
254.0 589.2 436.6 152.6 242.8 127.6 60.6 115.2 25.1 90.1 800.6 643.9 163.3          Oct 
258.1 598.5 442.5 156.0 247.4 132.9 64.7 114.5 25.6 89.0 803.7 648.2 162.2          Nov 256.2 585.6 439.6 146.1 250.2 133.5 62.7 116.6 25.9 90.7 803.7 645.6 166.4          Dec 
258.6 589.2 440.2 149.0 251.5 132.0 61.2 119.5 25.6 93.9 843.7 683.0 153.4 2004          Jan 
253.3 598.3 432.1 166.2 260.0 136.0 65.2 124.0 25.0 99.0 839.5 680.6 154.0          Feb 
263.0 611.0 444.9 166.2 267.3 137.5 66.9 129.8 24.9 104.9 859.3 697.4 158.0          Mar 
Changes 1
19.7 82.9 65.5 17.3 14.6 − 2.6 − 2.5 17.2 6.0 11.2 69.5 49.3 15.1 199630.8 59.1 53.3 5.8 36.5 5.1 4.4 31.4 6.1 25.3 159.4 132.9 28.6 199792.3 25.8 28.1 − 2.3 77.1 18.9 13.0 58.3 12.5 45.7 83.9 52.0 55.3 199830.4 1.3 7.7 − 6.4 48.4 12.2 6.4 36.2 2.0 34.2 33.1 13.8 31.3 1999
27.3 − 11.4 − 6.7 − 4.6 17.8 16.8 7.2 1.0 − 0.3 1.2 103.9 71.9 32.5 2000
2.4 − 26.5 − 9.8 − 16.7 31.3 24.3 7.7 7.0 2.2 4.8 110.1 86.6 − 9.9 2001
6.2 − 0.8 − 20.2 19.4 18.3 15.9 12.0 2.4 − 0.6 3.0 65.7 64.1 − 0.4 2002
− 4.3 0.8 − 8.7 9.6 6.6 13.4 2.7 − 6.8 − 0.8 − 6.0 113.4 98.5 − 38.7 2003
− 4.5 10.7 8.1 2.6 3.5 − 0.3 − 2.0 3.8 0.4 3.4 − 6.1 − 7.1 2.5 2002          July
8.5 − 7.9 − 9.6 1.7 − 2.6 − 3.0 − 0.9 0.4 − 0.1 0.5 7.4 7.1 − 3.5          Aug 
− 0.1 − 0.1 − 3.2 3.1 1.8 0.5 1.1 1.3 0.4 0.9 31.2 31.4 4.3          Sep 
5.9 1.8 3.1 − 1.2 − 1.6 1.4 − 0.2 − 3.0 0.4 − 3.4 12.2 11.8 1.7          Oct 
4.0 5.7 0.9 4.8 1.4 2.3 2.0 − 0.9 0.4 − 1.3 31.1 27.5 5.7          Nov 8.3 − 5.3 − 0.8 − 4.6 0.6 6.9 3.1 − 6.3 − 2.3 − 4.0 − 39.1 − 32.8 − 8.4          Dec 
2.3 13.4 4.6 8.8 1.2 − 1.8 − 2.7 3.0 1.1 2.0 9.4 10.1 − 12.5 2003          Jan 
− 1.0 − 3.7 − 5.7 2.0 2.0 5.5 5.8 − 3.5 − 2.0 − 1.4 19.9 20.7 3.6          Feb 
− 2.5 6.4 − 3.3 9.7 − 3.2 1.3 0.0 − 4.5 0.1 − 4.5 24.4 21.8 − 11.6          Mar 
4.4 1.0 1.8 − 0.9 0.7 3.4 1.9 − 2.7 − 1.0 − 1.7 16.1 16.3 − 3.8          Apr 2.9 − 0.4 − 5.9 5.5 − 0.6 1.1 1.0 − 1.7 1.5 − 3.1 21.8 18.8 − 3.2          May
− 4.0 − 15.7 − 5.2 − 10.5 − 5.6 − 4.1 − 5.1 − 1.4 − 1.9 0.5 25.4 16.1 − 7.5          June
0.0 12.6 10.3 2.3 − 3.9 − 0.3 0.3 − 3.6 0.3 − 3.9 − 18.6 − 19.0 − 5.9          July1.1 − 10.5 − 4.3 − 6.2 − 3.6 2.2 2.4 − 5.8 − 0.9 − 4.8 − 21.0 − 19.0 − 1.2          Aug 
− 4.3 − 4.4 − 5.4 0.9 10.3 1.0 0.3 9.3 − 0.5 9.9 10.2 14.5 4.4          Sep 
− 5.6 5.3 1.4 3.9 0.2 − 2.0 − 4.2 2.2 1.6 0.5 − 0.5 − 3.6 3.5          Oct 
4.1 9.4 6.0 3.4 5.3 5.7 4.3 − 0.4 0.6 − 1.0 13.0 12.4 − 3.0          Nov 
− 1.7 − 12.4 − 2.9 − 9.5 3.6 1.4 − 1.4 2.2 0.5 1.7 13.4 9.4 − 1.7          Dec 
2.1 3.6 0.6 3.0 0.4 − 2.3 − 1.6 2.7 − 0.4 3.1 34.7 32.1 − 18.8 2004          Jan 
− 3.7 9.1 − 8.0 17.2 8.6 4.0 4.0 4.6 − 0.6 5.2 − 2.7 − 1.1 − 4.8          Feb 
9.8 12.7 12.7 − 0.0 6.9 1.3 1.5 5.6 − 0.1 5.8 10.9 8.8 2.1          Mar 
21*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Liabilities
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, €  billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreedAt agreed
of banks maturities  2 notice  3 
 
Balance in the in other of which of which
sheet home member Over- up to up to Over-
Periodtotal Total country states Total Total night Total Total 3 months Total night 2 years  4 
 
1995 7,778.7 1,761.5 1,582.0 179.6 3,260.0 3,038.9 549.8 1,289.0 472.0 1,200.1 749.5 110.1 4.5
1996 8,540.5 1,975.3 1,780.2 195.1 3,515.9 3,264.0 638.1 1,318.5 430.6 1,307.4 865.7 137.3 7.51997 9,368.2 2,195.6 1,959.1 236.5 3,647.1 3,376.2 654.5 1,364.9 426.8 1,356.9 929.2 162.5 7.31998 10,355.5 2,480.3 2,148.9 331.4 3,850.8 3,552.2 751.6 1,411.1 461.6 1,389.6 971.9 187.4 9.41999 5,678.5 1,288.1 1,121.8 166.3 2,012.4 1,854.7 419.5 820.6 247.0 614.7 504.4 111.1 6.5
2000 6,083.9 1,379.4 1,188.9 190.5 2,051.4 1,873.6 441.4 858.8 274.3 573.5 450.5 107.9 6.9
2001 6,303.1 1,418.0 1,202.1 215.9 2,134.0 1,979.7 525.0 880.2 290.6 574.5 461.9 105.2 7.62002 6,394.2 1,478.7 1,236.2 242.4 2,170.0 2,034.9 574.8 884.9 279.3 575.3 472.9 87.4 8.12003 6,432.0 1,471.0 1,229.4 241.6 2,214.6 2,086.9 622.1 874.5 248.0 590.3 500.8 81.8 9.3
2002          June 6,277.4 1,392.3 1,174.8 217.4 2,118.7 1,970.2 535.6 875.7 278.3 558.9 455.1 99.9 8.5         July 6,265.6 1,371.7 1,149.6 222.1 2,111.9 1,964.9 531.2 876.2 278.0 557.5 453.6 99.5 8.0
         Aug 6,290.6 1,389.2 1,165.7 223.5 2,098.3 1,962.0 526.7 877.6 280.7 557.8 453.8 87.4 7.3         Sep 6,341.1 1,400.2 1,172.1 228.1 2,105.1 1,967.6 540.3 869.1 272.6 558.3 454.7 87.5 8.8
         Oct 6,359.1 1,419.4 1,177.2 242.2 2,114.5 1,979.6 542.0 877.8 279.0 559.7 456.9 86.6 8.2
         Nov 6,453.5 1,460.0 1,214.3 245.7 2,146.5 2,008.8 571.8 874.6 273.2 562.4 460.2 90.1 10.0         Dec 6,394.2 1,478.7 1,236.2 242.4 2,170.0 2,034.9 574.8 884.9 279.3 575.3 472.9 87.4 8.1
2003          Jan 6,380.7 1,457.2 1,213.2 244.0 2,160.0 2,024.7 564.4 882.9 275.8 577.4 477.0 88.5 9.1
         Feb 6,424.9 1,466.4 1,224.6 241.9 2,173.4 2,036.7 571.1 886.4 272.1 579.2 479.9 88.5 8.0         Mar 6,434.8 1,471.5 1,218.2 253.2 2,175.3 2,040.7 578.3 883.1 266.2 579.3 481.6 88.0 7.7
         Apr 6,430.3 1,455.5 1,200.9 254.6 2,176.2 2,044.3 585.8 880.6 264.8 577.9 482.7 86.5 8.2
         May 6,467.7 1,508.5 1,253.9 254.6 2,188.9 2,053.8 591.4 885.3 270.9 577.1 483.4 87.4 8.8         June 6,472.9 1,509.2 1,252.8 256.4 2,194.2 2,059.3 608.2 874.5 260.2 576.7 484.4 86.7 9.0
         July 6,425.7 1,457.9 1,207.6 250.3 2,182.5 2,051.4 595.2 879.5 259.0 576.8 486.5 85.7 9.3
         Aug 6,395.1 1,450.5 1,198.0 252.5 2,193.0 2,061.5 597.8 885.7 261.3 578.0 489.3 85.5 8.9         Sep 6,403.1 1,451.2 1,188.3 262.9 2,187.8 2,057.4 607.3 871.8 248.1 578.3 490.2 84.2 9.6
         Oct 6,399.3 1,439.5 1,179.5 260.0 2,188.2 2,057.3 609.5 868.5 243.9 579.4 491.2 85.4 10.7
         Nov 6,456.1 1,463.6 1,214.6 249.0 2,211.2 2,082.4 632.7 869.4 244.7 580.3 491.9 83.1 9.9         Dec 6,432.0 1,471.0 1,229.4 241.6 2,214.6 2,086.9 622.1 874.5 248.0 590.3 500.8 81.8 9.3
2004          Jan 6,424.2 1,461.1 1,212.6 248.5 2,209.5 2,082.6 630.5 861.5 233.5 590.6 502.1 80.9 9.5
         Feb 6,448.7 1,454.4 1,215.7 238.7 2,212.3 2,085.6 633.8 860.3 230.1 591.5 503.3 79.5 10.8         Mar 6,506.7 1,459.8 1,203.6 256.2 2,214.3 2,088.6 632.9 864.2 230.9 591.4 503.5 78.0 13.1
 Changes 1
1996 761.8 213.7 198.2 15.5 256.0 225.2 88.3 29.5 − 41.4 107.3 116.2 27.2 3.01997 825.6 223.7 185.5 38.3 130.8 112.1 16.3 46.4 − 3.8 49.4 60.3 25.0 − 0.31998 1,001.0 277.0 182.8 94.2 205.9 176.8 97.8 46.3 34.8 32.7 42.0 26.2 2.01999 452.6 70.2 66.4 3.7 75.0 65.6 34.2 36.7 13.5 − 5.3 7.4 7.5 1.7
2000 401.5 87.5 66.0 21.5 38.7 19.8 22.5 37.8 27.0 − 40.5 − 53.6 − 4.2 0.3
2001 244.9 32.4 8.4 24.0 80.6 105.2 83.0 21.2 16.2 1.1 11.4 − 4.0 0.42002 165.7 70.2 37.2 33.1 53.0 57.0 50.3 5.9 − 11.0 0.8 11.0 − 2.6 0.62003 83.5 3.8 − 3.3 7.1 44.7 50.3 48.8 − 13.6 − 31.6 15.1 28.0 − 3.8 1.4
2002          July − 19.9 − 22.4 − 26.0 3.6 − 7.4 − 5.6 − 4.6 0.4 − 0.4 − 1.4 − 1.5 − 0.7 − 0.6
         Aug 23.8 18.2 16.4 1.8 0.0 − 2.8 − 4.5 1.4 2.7 0.3 0.1 1.5 − 0.7         Sep 51.3 11.1 6.4 4.7 6.4 5.2 13.3 − 8.6 − 8.5 0.5 1.0 0.2 1.5
         Oct 20.3 19.4 5.2 14.2 9.6 12.2 1.8 9.0 6.4 1.4 2.2 − 0.9 − 0.6
         Nov 97.2 41.3 37.4 3.9 32.3 29.4 29.8 − 3.2 − 5.8 2.7 3.3 3.5 1.8         Dec − 29.0 22.0 23.3 − 1.2 24.6 26.7 3.4 10.5 6.3 12.8 12.6 − 2.2 − 1.9
2003          Jan − 14.6 − 19.2 − 22.2 3.0 − 14.2 − 13.7 − 10.1 − 5.7 − 4.2 2.1 4.1 0.3 0.9
         Feb 41.3 9.1 11.4 − 2.3 14.3 11.9 6.7 3.4 − 3.7 1.8 3.0 1.0 − 1.1         Mar 14.1 5.9 − 5.9 11.9 2.2 4.1 7.4 − 3.3 − 5.9 0.1 1.7 − 0.3 − 0.3
         Apr 4.5 − 14.0 − 16.5 2.5 1.6 3.9 7.7 − 2.4 − 1.4 − 1.4 1.1 − 1.2 0.5
         May 57.3 54.5 52.0 2.5 13.9 10.2 6.1 4.9 6.3 − 0.8 0.7 1.5 0.7         June − 5.9 − 1.2 − 1.7 0.6 4.6 5.1 16.4 − 10.9 − 10.8 − 0.4 1.0 − 0.9 − 0.0
         July − 49.6 − 52.1 − 45.6 − 6.4 − 11.8 − 7.9 − 13.0 5.1 − 1.1 0.1 2.1 − 1.1 0.5
         Aug − 43.7 − 10.0 − 10.5 0.5 9.7 9.6 2.3 6.1 2.3 1.3 2.8 − 0.5 − 0.5         Sep 26.2 4.5 − 8.4 12.9 − 4.0 − 3.5 10.0 − 13.7 − 13.1 0.2 0.9 − 0.8 0.8
         Oct − 5.0 − 10.3 − 7.5 − 2.8 0.3 − 0.1 2.2 − 3.4 − 4.2 1.1 1.0 1.1 1.1
         Nov 67.6 26.1 35.8 − 9.7 23.6 25.4 23.5 1.0 0.9 0.9 0.7 − 2.0 − 0.7         Dec − 8.6 10.4 15.9 − 5.5 4.4 5.1 − 10.2 5.3 3.4 10.0 8.9 − 1.0 − 0.5
2004          Jan − 15.4 − 11.1 − 17.2 6.1 − 5.5 − 4.6 8.2 − 13.1 − 14.5 0.3 1.3 − 1.0 0.2
         Feb 26.4 − 6.3 3.3 − 9.6 3.0 3.1 4.2 − 2.0 − 4.2 0.9 1.2 − 1.4 1.3         Mar 47.3 4.0 − 12.6 16.6 1.6 2.7 − 1.1 3.8 0.7 − 0.1 0.1 − 1.6 2.3
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section contribution: from 1999, including deposits under savings and loan
II. Unlike the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to contracts (see Table IV.12). — 3For the German contribution: up to the end
the figures reported by banks (including building and loan associations) − of 1998, including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also
data from money market funds. — 1Statistical breaks have been eliminatedfootnote 2). — 4Up to December 1998, with maturities of less
from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). — 2For the German
22*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Debt securities
issued  7 
in other member states  5 Deposits ofcentral governments
With agreedAt agreed Liabilitiesmaturities notice arising
of which from Money of which Liabilities
domestic market with to non- repos with
of which of which central non-banks fundeuro- Capital maturities
up to up to govern- in the shares of up to area andOther
Total Total 3 months Total ments issued  
7 Total reserves   Period 2 years  4 euro area  6 2 years  7 residents Liabilities
End of year or month
 
97.3 11.4 8.3 8.3 111.0 111.0 − 39.1 1,608.1 70.3 393.9 325.0 391.0 1995
120.6 9.0 9.2 9.2 114.6 114.6 − 34.0 1,804.3 54.4 422.1 350.0 438.8 1996
145.8 9.2 9.4 9.4 108.3 108.3 − 28.6 1,998.3 62.5 599.2 388.1 511.3 1997168.3 13.8 9.7 9.7 111.2 111.2 − 34.8 2,248.1 80.2 739.8 426.8 574.8 1998
99.7 8.9 4.8 3.7 46.6 45.9 2.0 20.8 1,323.6 97.4 487.9 262.6 281.1 1999
96.3 6.7 4.7 3.3 69.9 67.6 0.4 19.3 1,417.1 113.3 599.8 298.1 318.4 2000
92.4 9.0 5.2 3.8 49.1 46.9 4.9 33.2 1,445.4 129.3 647.6 319.2 300.8 200174.6 9.9 4.7 3.6 47.7 45.6 3.3 36.7 1,468.2 71.6 599.2 343.0 309.8 200268.6 11.4 3.9 3.1 45.9 44.2 14.1 36.7 1,486.9 131.3 567.8 340.2 300.8 2003
86.7 8.5 4.6 3.4 48.7 45.9 4.1 34.9 1,472.6 73.8 628.9 331.2 294.7 2002          June
87.0 8.7 4.6 3.4 47.6 45.8 3.1 35.5 1,471.6 69.3 640.9 337.0 293.9          July
75.5 9.7 4.6 3.4 48.9 45.8 4.3 36.9 1,489.4 69.8 636.3 341.3 294.8          Aug 74.2 8.8 4.5 3.4 49.9 46.7 10.7 37.5 1,490.2 67.4 647.7 344.3 305.5          Sep 
73.9 9.1 4.5 3.4 48.3 46.8 9.6 38.1 1,485.9 65.2 642.5 343.2 306.0          Oct 
75.6 9.4 4.5 3.4 47.6 46.3 6.4 37.9 1,496.8 68.8 653.5 342.5 309.8          Nov 74.6 9.9 4.7 3.6 47.7 45.6 3.3 36.7 1,468.2 71.6 599.2 343.0 309.8          Dec 
74.8 10.4 4.7 3.6 46.9 45.2 7.6 38.5 1,461.1 138.9 602.9 350.5 305.9 2003          Jan 
75.9 12.3 4.6 3.6 48.2 45.1 10.9 39.6 1,468.4 145.7 606.7 354.1 305.4          Feb 
75.7 13.0 4.6 3.6 46.6 45.2 11.2 40.2 1,467.9 143.5 612.1 353.1 303.6          Mar 
73.8 12.3 4.5 3.5 45.5 44.9 11.3 39.6 1,468.6 142.6 620.2 351.6 307.2          Apr 
74.1 13.3 4.4 3.5 47.7 44.4 12.3 39.4 1,463.3 133.3 599.0 351.0 305.4          May73.4 12.2 4.4 3.5 48.1 44.6 10.8 38.7 1,470.0 128.7 594.8 348.2 307.0          June
72.1 12.1 4.3 3.4 45.3 43.8 10.9 38.4 1,482.8 133.0 603.6 348.1 301.6          July
72.4 12.8 4.2 3.4 45.9 43.8 12.4 38.1 1,480.0 122.1 579.2 344.0 298.0          Aug 70.5 12.0 4.1 3.3 46.2 43.4 15.6 38.0 1,485.5 124.4 579.7 341.0 304.3          Sep 
70.6 12.7 4.0 3.3 45.5 43.0 21.1 37.6 1,494.1 126.2 574.2 344.6 299.9          Oct 
69.3 11.4 4.0 3.2 45.7 43.6 20.0 37.1 1,502.7 131.5 574.6 343.0 304.0          Nov 68.6 11.4 3.9 3.1 45.9 44.2 14.1 36.7 1,486.9 131.3 567.8 340.2 300.8          Dec 
67.5 11.9 3.8 3.1 45.9 45.2 16.6 36.4 1,493.9 128.6 585.4 336.9 284.5 2004          Jan 
64.9 10.9 3.8 3.1 47.3 45.8 17.5 36.2 1,503.7 127.3 604.4 332.2 288.0          Feb 
61.1 10.2 3.7 3.1 47.8 46.2 18.2 35.9 1,532.3 134.8 623.3 330.1 292.8          Mar 
Changes 1
23.3 − 2.4 0.9 0.9 3.6 3.6 − − 5.1 196.3 − 15.9 28.1 25.0 47.8 199625.1 0.2 0.2 0.2 − 6.2 − 6.2 − − 4.5 194.8 8.1 172.3 37.1 71.2 199724.0 4.6 0.3 0.3 2.9 2.9 − 6.2 263.3 28.1 151.4 28.8 68.3 1998
5.9 1.5 − 0.2 − 1.3 1.9 1.2 0.6 3.5 168.0 65.1 89.7 38.0 7.7 1999
− 4.5 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.3 23.1 21.6 − 1.6 − 1.5 90.6 15.9 97.8 35.3 54.6 2000− 4.6 1.6 0.2 0.4 − 20.5 − 20.4 4.6 13.3 59.5 18.6 34.8 20.9 − 1.1 2001− 2.6 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 1.4 − 1.3 − 1.6 4.1 18.8 14.8 − 2.1 25.6 − 2.7 2002− 4.4 2.0 − 0.8 − 0.4 − 1.8 − 1.4 10.7 0.0 49.8 − 2.2 4.6 − 3.9 − 26.3 2003
− 0.1 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 1.0 0.6 − 3.4 − 1.2 5.4 5.3 3.4 2002          July
2.2 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.4 0.0 1.2 1.4 1.5 2.2 − 2.6 4.5 − 0.5          Aug 
− 1.3 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.0 0.8 6.4 0.6 1.0 1.0 12.4 3.0 10.4          Sep − 0.3 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.7 0.1 − 1.0 0.6 − 3.8 0.6 − 4.6 − 1.0 1.3          Oct 
1.8 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 3.2 − 0.2 11.9 10.7 13.2 − 0.5 2.5          Nov 
− 0.6 0.6 0.2 0.2 0.1 − 0.7 − 3.1 − 1.2 − 24.8 − 6.6 − 42.1 1.3 − 6.0          Dec − 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.0 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.4 5.3 1.8 4.8 2.9 11.3 3.2 − 7.7 2003          Jan 
2.1 3.0 − 0.0 0.0 1.4 − 0.1 2.3 1.1 8.1 6.8 4.4 3.7 − 1.7          Feb 
− 0.0 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.6 0.1 0.4 0.5 0.8 − 2.4 8.2 − 0.7 − 3.2          Mar − 1.6 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.1 − 0.3 0.0 − 0.5 3.5 − 0.8 13.7 − 0.9 1.2          Apr 
0.9 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 2.2 − 0.5 1.0 − 0.2 3.4 − 6.9 − 8.2 0.7 − 7.8          May
− 0.8 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 0.4 0.2 − 1.5 − 0.7 3.1 − 4.5 − 11.4 − 3.6 4.7          June− 1.5 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 2.8 − 0.8 0.2 − 0.4 12.1 4.3 7.0 − 0.2 − 4.6          July
0.0 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 0.6 0.0 1.5 − 0.2 − 7.1 − 10.9 − 32.4 − 4.9 − 0.2          Aug 
− 1.5 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.1 0.3 − 0.4 3.2 − 0.1 11.6 2.4 12.3 − 1.9 0.7          Sep 
0.1 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.4 5.6 − 0.5 7.8 1.8 − 10.3 3.4 − 1.1          Oct 
− 1.1 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 0.1 0.6 − 1.2 − 0.5 12.3 5.3 6.8 − 1.0 1.3          Nov 
− 0.3 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 0.3 0.6 − 5.9 − 0.4 − 10.6 − 0.1 3.2 − 1.8 − 7.9          Dec 
− 1.2 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 0.0 0.9 2.5 − 0.4 4.2 − 2.7 12.7 − 3.9 − 13.9 2004          Jan 
− 2.6 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.3 0.6 0.9 − 0.2 10.0 − 1.3 19.6 − 4.6 4.1          Feb 
− 3.9 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.5 0.4 0.8 − 0.3 23.5 7.5 14.1 − 2.6 6.4          Mar 
than four years. — 5Excluding deposits of central governments. — 6Data securities with maturities of up to one year are classedas money market
collectedseparately from 1999 only; up to December 1998, includ edin the paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were published
deposits with agreed maturities of up to two years. — 7In Germany, debt together with money market fund shares. 
23*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
IV Banks
 
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks*
 
 
€ billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
  of which of which 
Loans
 Cash in hand and credit
Number of balances forreporting Balance with Balances up to andfor Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Othermonth tions total banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets
All categories of banks
 
2003          Oct 2,235 6,434.4 58.0 2,387.0 1,711.0 665.3 3,569.5 452.2 2,571.3 4.4 528.4 158.0 262.0
         Nov 2,228 6,492.0 51.3 2,427.7 1,745.9 669.9 3,596.0 471.0 2,571.6 4.2 537.3 154.6 262.5         Dec 2,226 6,470.9 64.1 2,413.5 1,739.7 663.3 3,571.9 458.6 2,562.7 4.2 535.0 150.6 270.7
2004          Jan 2,224 6,463.9 52.7 2,421.6 1,749.6 662.1 3,580.3 457.9 2,561.5 4.1 546.7 149.8 259.5
         Feb 2,222 6,488.0 50.9 2,435.5 1,749.8 675.7 3,593.5 459.2 2,559.8 3.9 560.1 148.5 259.6         Mar 2,219 6,542.8 43.9 2,459.8 1,762.0 687.8 3,633.3 481.1 2,559.0 3.7 580.5 147.0 258.9
Commercial banks 5
2004          Feb 259 1,823.0 16.9 674.4 534.8 136.0 956.8 255.2 538.5 2.1 155.7 79.2 95.8         Mar 257 1,854.1 11.8 687.3 545.2 139.1 980.3 263.9 538.5 1.9 171.3 79.6 95.1
   Big banks 6
2004          Feb 4 1,057.6 9.8 391.7 329.8 60.1 525.7 163.7 269.3 1.4 88.8 69.2 61.3         Mar 4 1,078.3 4.4 408.7 347.5 59.3 532.5 165.8 267.9 1.3 95.5 69.4 63.4
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2004          Feb 171 676.7 6.6 239.2 166.1 71.9 390.6 72.3 253.8 0.7 61.2 9.9 30.4         Mar 170 680.9 6.8 234.6 158.5 75.2 401.0 77.5 255.0 0.6 65.7 10.1 28.5
   Branches of foreign banks
2004          Feb 84 88.8 0.5 43.5 39.0 4.0 40.5 19.1 15.5 0.0 5.6 0.1 4.1         Mar 83 94.9 0.6 44.1 39.2 4.6 46.7 20.7 15.6 0.0 10.2 0.1 3.3
Land  banks
2004          Feb 13 1,361.4 4.0 692.0 557.2 132.1 579.2 60.0 406.4 0.3 109.1 34.0 52.2         Mar 13 1,376.9 1.9 697.5 558.9 136.4 593.0 71.1 408.9 0.3 109.8 32.1 52.4
Savings banks
2004          Feb 489 982.0 16.8 225.8 72.6 152.6 702.4 72.7 537.3 0.9 91.0 14.7 22.4         Mar 488 977.7 16.3 223.5 70.7 152.0 701.0 72.4 536.3 0.9 91.1 14.7 22.2
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives  
 
2004          Feb 2 188.6 0.7 127.3 88.7 38.2 42.0 10.3 19.9 0.1 11.6 11.5 7.1         Mar 2 186.1 0.4 125.8 85.0 40.2 41.3 10.1 19.4 0.1 11.6 11.5 7.2
Credit cooperatives
2004          Feb 1,393 561.6 10.9 146.3 62.4 82.2 381.6 44.2 297.3 0.5 39.5 5.8 17.0         Mar 1,393 562.9 11.0 147.1 62.1 82.8 382.0 44.8 297.2 0.5 39.3 5.9 17.0
Mortgage banks
2004          Feb 25 863.3 1.0 225.9 145.3 80.0 617.5 10.4 497.5 − 109.5 0.8 18.0         Mar 25 867.6 2.0 227.2 144.7 81.6 620.0 11.6 495.3 − 113.1 0.8 17.5
Building and loan associations
2004          Feb 27 173.3 0.0 41.7 30.7 10.9 121.0 1.4 107.8 . 11.8 0.4 10.1         Mar 27 174.9 0.0 42.7 31.3 11.2 121.7 1.5 108.1 . 12.1 0.4 10.1
Banks with special functions
2004          Feb 14 534.6 0.4 302.0 258.1 43.7 193.0 5.1 155.1 − 31.8 2.1 37.1         Mar 14 542.6 0.3 308.7 264.1 44.4 194.1 5.7 155.4 − 32.2 2.1 37.4
Memo item: Foreign banks 7
2004          Feb 128 377.6 2.3 160.9 110.3 49.8 197.7 38.5 117.6 0.1 41.1 0.9 15.9         Mar 127 385.1 2.9 159.8 106.7 52.7 208.3 40.3 120.4 0.2 47.1 0.8 13.4
  of which:  Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 8
2004          Feb 44 288.9 1.8 117.4 71.4 45.8 157.2 19.4 102.1 0.1 35.4 0.8 11.8         Mar 44 290.2 2.2 115.7 67.5 48.1 161.5 19.6 104.7 0.1 37.0 0.7 10.1
*For the period up to December 1998, section IV (except for Table IV.1) included. For the definitions of the respective items, see the footnotes to
shows the assets and liabilities of banks (excluding building and loan Table IV.3. — 1For building and loan associations: Including deposits under
associations) in liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in savings andloan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 2Included in time
Germany. The assets andliabilities of foreign branches, of money market d eposits. — 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also
fund s (which are also classifiedas MFIs) andof the Bund esbank are not footnote 2). — 4Including subordinated negotiable bearer debt
24*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
IV Banks
 
   
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which of which published
reserves,
Time deposits  1 Savings deposits  3 partici-pation
Memo rights
item Bearer capital,
for for of which debt Liabilities
funds for
up to andmore arising At three Bank general securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking Other   End of months’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year  1 repos  2 Total notice bonds risks   month standing  4 liabilities
All categories of banks
 
1,776.8 251.2 1,525.4 2,446.8 649.1 347.0 754.5 71.8 589.5 499.2 106.6 1,542.9 293.4 374.6 2003          Oct 
1,797.8 249.3 1,548.3 2,472.1 672.9 351.1 750.6 79.4 590.4 499.8 107.1 1,549.2 294.1 378.9          Nov 
1,820.3 211.9 1,608.2 2,447.6 656.2 332.2 751.6 54.9 600.4 508.7 107.2 1,530.4 294.4 378.2          Dec 
1,820.1 280.7 1,539.3 2,453.1 677.1 316.5 751.5 65.8 600.6 510.0 107.4 1,537.1 291.3 362.3 2004          Jan 
1,818.6 256.7 1,561.8 2,470.4 691.2 319.9 750.7 83.4 601.4 511.2 107.1 1,548.5 285.0 365.5          Feb 
1,844.5 276.3 1,568.0 2,472.0 697.2 320.2 746.6 83.6 601.3 511.3 106.8 1,576.3 283.6 366.4          Mar 
Commercial banks 5
684.7 139.8 544.8 713.0 319.0 157.1 127.6 75.8 99.6 89.0 9.7 205.8 91.3 128.2 2004          Feb 
716.4 161.9 554.3 711.1 324.0 153.6 124.0 72.9 99.8 89.3 9.7 209.8 91.1 125.7          Mar 
Big banks 6
422.3 102.0 320.3 361.0 150.3 112.3 71.0 73.4 26.8 25.0 0.5 146.2 51.8 76.4 2004          Feb 
445.0 116.0 328.9 357.3 150.3 109.0 70.6 67.9 26.9 25.1 0.5 149.1 51.5 75.4          Mar 
Regional banks and other commercial banks
196.9 28.2 168.7 336.8 158.7 41.9 54.2 2.5 72.8 63.9 9.2 59.6 37.2 46.2 2004          Feb 
198.9 34.1 164.8 339.0 163.9 41.8 51.3 5.0 72.8 64.1 9.3 60.6 37.3 45.1          Mar 
Branches of foreign banks
65.5 9.6 55.8 15.3 10.0 2.9 2.3 − 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 2.4 5.6 2004          Feb 
72.5 11.8 60.6 14.8 9.8 2.9 2.1 − 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 2.4 5.2          Mar 
Land   banks
464.0 71.4 392.6 318.2 50.4 37.7 213.9 5.2 15.6 14.6 0.7 457.3 61.1 60.8 2004          Feb 
461.8 67.2 394.7 322.7 49.9 41.5 215.0 8.8 15.5 14.6 0.7 470.4 59.2 62.8          Mar 
Savings banks
218.9 5.4 213.4 632.5 191.7 54.6 10.8 − 304.9 251.5 70.5 42.9 46.2 41.6 2004          Feb 
215.2 5.2 210.1 630.6 191.7 53.3 10.6 − 304.5 251.3 70.4 42.9 46.3 42.8          Mar 
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives
 
112.1 30.3 81.8 29.7 6.7 5.7 16.9 2.4 − − 0.3 27.4 10.0 9.5 2004          Feb 
108.6 29.3 79.3 29.8 7.2 5.4 17.0 1.7 − − 0.3 27.5 10.0 10.1          Mar 
Credit cooperatives
74.1 1.7 72.3 404.0 119.5 53.7 24.4 − 181.0 155.9 25.5 31.8 30.4 21.4 2004          Feb 
74.9 2.7 72.2 403.7 119.6 53.4 24.3 − 181.2 155.8 25.3 31.5 30.5 22.2          Mar 
Mortgage banks
130.0 3.1 126.9 142.1 1.2 4.7 136.1 0.0 − − 0.2 546.1 21.0 24.1 2004          Feb 
132.4 4.7 127.8 142.9 1.3 5.0 136.5 0.2 − − 0.2 547.7 21.4 23.2          Mar 
Building and loan associations
29.6 2.0 27.6 111.7 0.6 0.8 109.9 − 0.4 0.4 0.2 7.2 7.3 17.4 2004          Feb 
30.3 2.1 28.2 112.4 0.4 0.8 110.7 − 0.4 0.4 0.2 7.2 7.3 17.8          Mar 
Banks with special functions
105.3 2.9 102.3 119.2 2.3 5.7 111.2 − − − − 230.0 17.8 62.4 2004          Feb 
104.8 3.3 101.5 118.8 3.2 7.2 108.4 − − − − 239.4 17.8 61.8          Mar 
Memo item:   Foreign banks 7
130.3 19.7 110.6 119.9 74.3 11.9 23.3 0.0 7.2 7.0 3.2 90.9 12.9 23.6 2004          Feb 
131.5 24.3 107.2 123.2 77.9 11.6 23.4 0.2 7.1 6.9 3.2 95.7 13.3 21.4          Mar 
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 8
64.9 10.1 54.8 104.6 64.3 9.0 21.0 0.0 7.1 7.0 3.2 90.9 10.5 18.0 2004          Feb 
59.1 12.5 46.6 108.4 68.1 8.8 21.2 0.2 7.1 6.9 3.2 95.7 10.9 16.2          Mar 
securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities. — 5Commercial includ edin other categories of banks andthe category ”Branches (with
banks comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, ”Regional banks and other dependent legal status) of foreign banks”. — 8Separate presentation of the
commercial banks” and”Branches of foreign banks”. — 6Deutsche Bank banks majority-ownedby foreign banks includ edin the categories
AG, Dresdner Bank AG, Commerzbank AG and Bayerische Hypo- und Vereins- ”Regional banks and other commercial banks” and ”Mortgage banks”. 
bank AG. — 7Sum of the banks majority-ownedby foreign banks and
25*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
IV Banks
 
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents*
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, €  billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs)  2,3 Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3,8 
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills and
handCred it money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro-area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Periodcoins)  1 bank Total and loans Bills  4 banks  5 banks  6 loans  7 Total Loans Bills  4 non-banks banks  9 
End of year or month*
 
1994 25.0 61.5 1,695.6 1,150.6 17.4 4.6 513.6 9.5 4,137.2 3,502.8 45.9 2.2 433.7
1995 26.0 61.0 1,859.9 1,264.9 17.5 4.3 561.9 11.4 4,436.9 3,802.0 46.8 1.4 427.3
1996 28.9 59.7 2,134.0 1,443.3 17.9 3.4 657.2 12.2 4,773.1 4,097.9 44.8 5.9 437.21997 29.3 60.2 2,397.9 1,606.3 18.1 3.6 758.9 11.1 5,058.4 4,353.9 44.7 2.9 473.31998 28.5 63.6 2,738.2 1,814.7 14.6 12.2 887.7 9.1 5,379.8 4,639.7 32.8 5.0 527.81999 16.8 45.6 1,556.9 1,033.4 0.0 19.2 504.2 3.9 2,904.5 2,569.6 7.0 3.0 287.5
2000 15.6 50.8 1,639.6 1,056.1 0.0 26.8 556.6 3.6 3,003.7 2,657.3 6.5 2.3 304.7
2001 14.2 56.3 1,676.0 1,078.9 0.0 5.6 591.5 2.8 3,014.1 2,699.4 4.8 4.4 301.52002 17.5 45.6 1,691.3 1,112.3 0.0 7.8 571.2 2.7 2,997.2 2,685.0 4.1 3.3 301.92003 17.0 46.7 1,643.9 1,064.0 0.0 8.8 571.0 2.3 2,995.6 2,677.0 3.7 3.4 309.6
2002          Oct 13.9 42.8 1,648.3 1,068.2 0.0 8.0 572.2 2.7 2,997.6 2,684.6 4.2 3.9 301.9
         Nov 12.9 41.7 1,689.1 1,102.1 0.0 13.3 573.8 2.6 3,003.5 2,683.3 4.1 3.6 309.5         Dec 17.5 45.6 1,691.3 1,112.3 0.0 7.8 571.2 2.7 2,997.2 2,685.0 4.1 3.3 301.9
2003          Jan 12.9 42.3 1,661.6 1,086.8 0.0 9.7 565.1 2.6 3,005.1 2,686.9 3.9 4.0 307.4
         Feb 12.9 39.0 1,667.6 1,095.5 0.0 9.7 562.3 2.5 3,001.9 2,682.6 3.8 3.6 308.9         Mar 12.6 47.5 1,655.8 1,081.1 0.0 10.0 564.7 2.5 3,005.5 2,677.5 3.8 4.8 316.4
         Apr 13.5 37.7 1,648.8 1,074.6 0.0 9.9 564.3 2.5 3,007.6 2,676.4 3.8 5.0 319.4
         May 13.7 38.3 1,674.3 1,099.7 0.0 9.2 565.3 2.5 3,003.6 2,667.8 3.9 4.5 324.5         June 12.9 40.9 1,665.5 1,090.9 0.0 9.9 564.7 2.5 2,992.4 2,670.2 3.9 3.9 311.4
         July 12.9 40.5 1,645.6 1,063.8 0.0 10.9 571.0 2.4 2,996.0 2,671.8 4.0 3.4 314.7
         Aug 13.2 42.5 1,636.2 1,056.4 0.0 9.3 570.5 2.4 2,986.9 2,667.9 4.0 3.4 309.6         Sep 12.9 42.1 1,627.9 1,047.0 0.0 9.7 571.2 2.4 2,995.7 2,676.3 3.9 2.1 311.4
         Oct 13.3 44.3 1,630.0 1,046.2 0.0 9.7 574.1 2.4 2,992.9 2,675.4 3.9 3.1 308.4
         Nov 12.8 38.2 1,663.1 1,073.8 0.0 10.5 578.8 2.3 3,012.2 2,685.5 3.7 3.4 317.5         Dec 17.0 46.7 1,643.9 1,064.0 0.0 8.8 571.0 2.3 2,995.6 2,677.0 3.7 3.4 309.6
2004          Jan 12.9 39.5 1,632.9 1,055.9 0.0 8.4 568.5 2.3 2,992.0 2,667.0 3.5 2.6 316.8
         Feb 12.9 37.6 1,645.1 1,058.5 0.0 8.5 578.0 2.3 2,994.8 2,658.8 3.4 2.5 328.1         Mar 12.4 31.1 1,656.6 1,062.0 0.0 8.1 586.4 2.4 3,015.7 2,670.4 3.2 2.1 338.0
Changes*
1995 + 1.0 − 0.5 + 193.5 + 139.4 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 54.3 + 0.2 + 312.8 + 303.6 + 1.0 − 0.8 + 2.91996 + 2.9 − 1.3 + 257.8 + 161.8 + 0.4 − 1.1 + 95.8 + 0.8 + 336.3 + 311.7 − 2.0 + 4.7 + 10.61997 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 262.5 + 160.7 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 102.6 − 1.1 + 285.2 + 255.5 − 0.1 − 3.0 + 36.51998 − 0.8 + 3.4 + 343.3 + 210.3 − 3.6 + 8.6 + 130.0 − 2.0 + 335.3 + 302.1 − 11.9 + 2.1 + 52.11999 + 2.2 + 13.2 + 122.1 + 66.3 + 0.0 + 12.9 + 42.8 − 0.7 + 156.1 + 136.9 + 2.6 + 0.4 + 16.7
2000 − 1.1 + 5.1 + 83.6 + 21.7 − 0.0 + 7.6 + 54.3 − 0.3 + 100.7 + 83.7 − 0.5 − 0.8 + 19.0
2001 − 1.4 + 5.5 + 34.6 + 20.1 − 0.0 − 21.3 + 35.8 − 0.9 + 11.9 + 40.8 − 1.6 + 1.6 + 0.32002 + 3.3 − 10.7 + 15.0 + 33.1 + 0.0 + 2.3 − 20.3 − 0.2 − 19.2 − 18.0 − 0.8 − 1.1 + 1.72003 − 0.5 + 1.1 − 47.2 − 48.2 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 8.0 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 9.3
2002          Oct + 0.9 + 0.6 − 4.4 + 3.8 − − 0.5 − 7.7 − 0.0 + 2.0 + 1.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.6
         Nov − 1.0 − 1.1 + 40.8 + 33.9 + 0.0 + 5.3 + 1.6 − 0.0 + 6.0 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 7.6         Dec + 4.7 + 3.8 + 2.2 + 10.2 + 0.0 − 5.4 − 2.6 + 0.0 − 6.3 + 1.6 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 7.6
2003          Jan − 4.6 − 3.2 − 29.7 − 25.5 − 0.0 + 1.9 − 6.1 − 0.1 + 7.9 + 1.9 − 0.1 + 0.6 + 5.5
         Feb + 0.0 − 3.3 + 6.0 + 8.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 2.8 − 0.0 − 3.3 − 4.3 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 1.5         Mar − 0.4 + 8.5 − 11.8 − 14.4 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 2.4 − 0.0 + 3.7 − 5.0 − 0.0 + 1.3 + 7.4
         Apr + 0.9 − 9.8 − 7.0 − 6.5 − − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 2.1 − 1.1 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 3.1
         May + 0.2 + 0.6 + 25.5 + 25.1 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 1.1 − 0.1 − 3.8 − 8.7 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 5.3         June − 0.7 + 2.6 − 8.8 − 8.8 − 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 11.1 + 2.5 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 13.1
         July − 0.0 − 0.4 − 20.1 − 27.2 − 0.0 + 0.8 + 6.3 − 0.0 + 3.8 + 1.6 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 3.4
         Aug + 0.2 + 2.0 − 9.4 − 7.4 − 0.0 − 1.5 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 9.1 − 3.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 5.1         Sep − 0.2 − 0.3 − 7.8 − 9.4 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 1.2 − 0.0 + 9.6 + 8.4 − 0.1 − 1.3 + 2.6
         Oct + 0.3 + 2.2 + 2.1 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 2.9 + 0.0 − 2.8 − 0.9 − 0.0 + 1.1 − 3.0
         Nov − 0.5 − 6.1 + 33.1 + 27.6 − + 1.0 + 4.5 − 0.1 + 19.3 + 10.1 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 9.1         Dec + 4.2 + 8.5 − 19.3 − 9.8 − − 1.7 − 7.8 − 0.0 − 16.1 − 8.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 7.4
2004          Jan − 4.1 − 7.1 − 11.0 − 8.1 − − 0.4 − 2.6 − 0.0 − 3.7 − 10.0 − 0.1 − 0.7 + 7.2
         Feb + 0.1 − 1.9 + 12.0 + 2.4 − + 0.1 + 9.5 − 0.0 + 2.8 − 8.1 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 11.3         Mar − 0.5 − 6.5 + 11.5 + 3.5 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 8.4 + 0.1 + 20.9 + 11.6 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 9.9
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminatedfrom the prior to maturity). — 5Up to November 1993, included in securities (see also
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as footnote 6). — 6Up to November 1993, including negotiable money market
provisional. Subsequent revisions which appear in the following Monthly paper; excluding registered debt securities. — 7From 1999, no longer
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, domestic included in loans or deposits (see also footnote 3). — 8Up to December
banknotes andcoins. — 2Up to December 1998, excluding loans to 1998, including loans to domestic building and loan associations. —
domestic building and loan associations. — 3Up to December 1998, 9Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims
including fiduciary loans (see also footnote 7). — 4Up to December 1998, (see also footnote 10). — 10Including debt securities arising from the
bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from exchange of equalisation claims. — 11Including liabilities arising from
red iscountedbills andbills sent for collection from the banks’ portfolios
26*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3,11,12  Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3,17 
Partici-
patinginterestsin
Memo domestic Memo Memo
item banks Sight Time Redis- item Sight Time Savings Bank item Equalisa-tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciary
loans  
7 Total 13,14  14,15  bills 16 loans  7 Total 15,18  bonds  20 loans  7   Period claims  10 enterprises posits  13 posits  19 
End of year or month*
 
68.1 84.4 70.7 1,427.9 342.8 976.9 75.2 33.1 2,875.7 540.2 1,109.3 940.5 206.9 78.8 1994
71.3 88.1 83.2 1,539.4 363.9 1,065.1 75.5 35.0 3,021.1 579.9 1,086.1 1,046.1 227.4 81.6 1995
81.3 106.0 89.7 1,731.0 401.1 1,202.4 75.4 52.2 3,241.5 675.1 1,109.8 1,143.0 227.8 85.8 199676.0 107.6 95.1 1,902.3 427.6 1,349.1 75.6 50.0 3,341.9 689.8 1,146.9 1,182.1 236.9 86.1 199771.6 102.8 129.2 2,086.9 472.5 1,505.2 59.4 49.7 3,520.3 799.5 1,194.1 1,211.0 234.9 80.9 199837.5 58.0 75.6 1,122.0 114.4 1,007.3 0.3 29.8 1,905.3 420.4 759.6 614.7 110.7 42.1 1999
33.1 58.5 82.7 1,189.2 113.4 1,075.3 0.4 30.1 1,945.8 443.4 819.9 573.5 109.0 42.1 2000
4.0 57.0 95.9 1,204.9 123.1 1,081.6 0.3 27.2 2,034.0 526.4 827.0 574.5 106.0 43.3 2001
3.0 54.8 119.0 1,244.0 127.6 1,116.2 0.2 25.6 2,085.9 575.6 830.6 575.3 104.4 42.1 20022.0 56.8 109.2 1,229.6 116.8 1,112.6 0.2 27.8 2,140.3 624.0 825.7 590.3 100.3 40.5 2003
3.0 55.1 111.5 1,184.4 130.0 1,054.2 0.1 25.7 2,037.6 543.1 829.8 559.7 105.0 41.6 2002          Oct 
3.0 55.0 113.3 1,221.3 157.3 1,063.9 0.2 25.7 2,062.1 572.4 822.6 562.4 104.7 41.5          Nov 
3.0 54.8 119.0 1,244.0 127.6 1,116.2 0.2 25.6 2,085.9 575.6 830.6 575.3 104.4 42.1          Dec 
3.0 54.7 118.4 1,214.6 134.8 1,079.7 0.2 25.5 2,076.4 565.2 830.3 577.4 103.5 42.1 2003          Jan 
3.0 54.8 118.0 1,224.7 134.5 1,090.1 0.2 25.6 2,084.6 571.6 830.0 579.2 103.7 41.9          Feb 
3.0 54.8 116.1 1,218.0 144.0 1,073.9 0.2 25.5 2,089.6 578.9 828.4 579.3 103.0 42.1          Mar 
3.0 54.6 116.7 1,203.4 137.4 1,065.9 0.1 25.5 2,094.8 586.3 828.2 577.9 102.4 41.8          Apr 
3.0 54.5 119.6 1,254.2 146.4 1,107.7 0.1 25.5 2,101.9 591.7 831.2 577.1 101.9 41.7          May3.0 54.4 118.1 1,252.5 150.5 1,101.8 0.1 25.4 2,109.6 608.9 822.7 576.7 101.3 41.8          June
2.0 54.2 119.1 1,207.7 123.6 1,084.0 0.1 25.3 2,102.3 595.6 829.0 576.8 100.9 41.7          July
2.0 54.6 118.8 1,198.2 120.9 1,077.2 0.1 25.7 2,111.4 598.5 834.5 578.0 100.4 41.7          Aug 2.0 54.4 115.1 1,188.2 116.0 1,072.0 0.1 25.5 2,112.3 608.8 825.4 578.3 99.9 41.5          Sep 
2.0 53.9 115.0 1,179.6 122.1 1,057.4 0.1 25.3 2,114.7 610.9 824.5 579.4 100.0 40.7          Oct 
2.0 54.1 113.3 1,214.5 135.3 1,079.1 0.1 25.5 2,138.6 634.1 824.0 580.3 100.1 40.7          Nov 2.0 56.8 109.2 1,229.6 116.8 1,112.6 0.2 27.8 2,140.3 624.0 825.7 590.3 100.3 40.5          Dec 
2.0 57.2 108.9 1,213.2 142.0 1,071.1 0.1 28.3 2,137.5 632.2 814.3 590.6 100.3 40.3 2004          Jan 
2.0 56.6 108.8 1,215.7 134.0 1,081.6 0.1 28.2 2,141.8 635.4 814.8 591.5 100.1 40.5          Feb 
2.0 54.9 107.2 1,204.3 140.0 1,064.2 0.1 27.8 2,145.8 635.4 819.2 591.4 99.8 39.3          Mar 
Changes*
− 1.2 + 7.3 + 12.5 + 134.2 + 20.4 + 111.5 + 0.4 + 2.0 + 158.3 + 48.9 − 14.2 + 105.6 + 11.7 + 6.3 1995+ 8.0 + 3.3 + 6.5 + 175.9 + 36.6 + 137.7 − 0.2 + 1.7 + 218.4 + 94.3 + 23.2 + 96.9 + 0.7 + 3.3 1996− 5.3 + 1.6 + 5.4 + 175.9 + 31.6 + 146.7 + 0.2 − 2.6 + 100.5 + 13.0 + 37.1 + 39.1 + 9.2 + 2.1 1997− 4.4 − 4.8 + 34.1 + 179.0 + 39.7 + 156.4 − 16.2 − 0.9 + 179.3 + 110.6 + 47.2 + 28.9 − 2.1 − 5.3 1998− 0.6 + 0.1 + 9.3 + 69.0 − 1.8 + 81.8 − 11.1 − 0.4 + 67.3 + 32.7 + 48.4 − 4.5 − 9.3 + 0.7 1999
− 0.8 + 0.5 + 7.1 + 64.7 − 2.3 + 66.9 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 41.3 + 22.3 + 61.1 − 40.5 − 1.7 − 0.0 2000
− 29.1 − 1.5 + 13.3 + 9.6 + 7.4 + 2.3 − 0.2 − 2.9 + 88.5 + 82.3 + 8.1 + 1.1 − 2.9 + 1.0 2001− 1.0 − 2.1 + 24.2 + 37.9 + 1.7 + 36.3 − 0.1 − 1.5 + 51.7 + 48.4 + 4.1 + 0.8 − 1.6 − 1.1 2002− 1.0 + 2.1 − 9.8 − 5.6 − 9.5 + 3.9 + 0.0 + 2.4 + 54.0 + 48.4 − 4.8 + 15.1 − 4.8 − 1.2 2003
− 0.0 + 0.1 + 3.6 + 5.1 − 3.0 + 8.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 12.8 + 2.3 + 9.5 + 1.4 − 0.3 + 0.0 2002          Oct 
+ 0.0 − 0.1 + 1.7 + 37.0 + 27.3 + 9.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 24.5 + 29.3 − 7.2 + 2.7 − 0.3 − 0.1          Nov 
− − 0.2 + 5.8 + 22.6 − 29.7 + 52.3 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 23.8 + 3.3 + 8.0 + 12.8 − 0.3 + 0.6          Dec 
− 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 29.4 + 7.2 − 36.5 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 9.5 − 10.4 − 0.3 + 2.1 − 0.9 − 0.0 2003          Jan 
− 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 17.8 − 0.3 + 18.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 7.6 + 6.4 − 0.3 + 1.8 − 0.4 − 0.2          Feb 
+ 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.9 − 6.7 + 9.5 − 16.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 5.1 + 7.3 − 1.6 + 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.1          Mar 
− 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.6 − 14.6 − 6.6 − 8.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 5.1 + 7.4 − 0.2 − 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.2          Apr 
− − 0.1 + 3.0 + 50.8 + 8.9 + 41.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 7.1 + 5.4 + 3.0 − 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.1          May
− 0.0 − 0.1 − 1.5 − 1.7 + 4.2 − 5.9 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 7.7 + 17.2 − 8.5 − 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.1          June− 1.0 − 0.2 + 1.0 − 44.9 − 27.0 − 18.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 7.1 − 13.3 + 6.5 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.0          July
− 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 9.5 − 2.7 − 6.8 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 9.1 + 2.9 + 5.5 + 1.3 − 0.5 − 0.1          Aug + 0.0 − 0.2 − 3.6 − 8.7 − 3.5 − 5.2 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.8 + 10.3 − 9.1 + 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.2          Sep 
− 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 8.6 + 6.1 − 14.7 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 2.5 + 2.1 − 0.9 + 1.1 + 0.1 − 0.3          Oct 
− + 0.2 − 1.7 + 34.9 + 13.2 + 21.7 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 23.8 + 23.2 − 0.4 + 0.9 + 0.2 + 0.0          Nov 
+ 0.0 + 2.7 − 4.1 + 15.1 − 18.6 + 33.6 + 0.1 + 2.3 + 1.7 − 10.1 + 1.7 + 10.0 + 0.1 − 0.2          Dec − 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 16.3 + 25.3 − 41.5 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 2.8 + 8.2 − 11.4 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.2 2004          Jan 
− − 0.5 − 0.1 + 2.4 − 8.0 + 10.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 4.3 + 4.1 − 0.4 + 0.9 − 0.2 + 0.2          Feb 
+ 0.0 − 1.8 − 1.6 − 11.4 + 6.0 − 17.4 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 4.0 − 0.0 + 4.5 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 1.2          Mar 
registered debt securities, registered money market paper and up to December 1998, including endorsement liabilities arising from
non-negotiable bearer debt securities; including subordinated liabilities. — rediscounted bills. — 17Up to December 1998, including liabilities to
12Up to December 1998, excluding liabilities to domestic building and loan domestic building and loan associations and money market funds. —
associations andmoney market fund s. — 13Up to December 1998, 18Since the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999,
including time deposits with terms of less than one month. — 14Including including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). —
liabilities arising from monetary policy operations with the Bundesbank. — 19Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also
15Up to December 1998, excluding time deposits with terms of less than footnote 18). — 20Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer
one month. — 16Own acceptances and promissory notes outstanding and, debt securities. 
27*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
IV Banks
 
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents*
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, €  billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills  3 negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills  3 Negotiable
(non- money money
euro-area Medium market Memo Medium market
banknotes andpaper item andpaper Securities Securities
and Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Periodcoins)  1 Total Total term term banks  4 banks  5 loans  6 Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month*
 
1994 1.2 492.3 455.0 309.0 146.0 0.1 23.7 13.5 257.4 173.0 35.0 138.0 0.6 66.5
1995 1.2 538.4 500.8 349.7 151.1 0.1 25.6 11.8 289.2 191.1 42.1 148.9 1.7 79.7
1996 1.4 588.9 544.2 386.6 157.6 0.3 31.5 13.0 352.0 230.4 60.2 170.2 4.9 103.91997 1.5 689.1 635.3 456.1 179.2 0.2 43.1 10.5 474.8 312.7 96.2 216.5 6.0 140.31998 1.5 774.9 706.9 533.6 173.3 0.4 58.7 9.0 610.3 364.9 93.9 270.9 11.6 211.01999 0.4 427.1 383.5 279.5 104.1 0.4 43.2 4.2 396.1 235.8 52.7 183.1 7.5 152.7
2000 0.4 507.7 441.4 325.4 116.0 1.3 65.0 3.6 475.8 286.8 71.1 215.7 6.5 182.5
2001 0.4 596.1 521.7 383.7 138.0 0.8 73.6 3.5 570.3 347.2 99.7 247.5 5.2 217.92002 0.3 690.6 615.3 468.0 147.2 0.9 74.4 2.7 558.8 332.6 92.6 240.0 9.3 216.92003 0.3 769.6 675.8 515.7 160.1 1.5 92.3 1.6 576.3 344.8 110.9 233.9 6.0 225.4
2002          Oct 0.3 672.9 595.2 450.2 145.0 1.9 75.8 2.7 585.5 355.6 108.9 246.7 9.8 220.1
         Nov 0.3 711.7 630.2 484.4 145.7 5.6 76.0 2.8 588.8 358.2 111.0 247.2 9.9 220.7         Dec 0.3 690.6 615.3 468.0 147.2 0.9 74.4 2.7 558.8 332.6 92.6 240.0 9.3 216.9
2003          Jan 0.3 695.1 620.5 471.3 149.1 0.9 73.8 2.6 559.9 333.2 91.5 241.6 10.8 215.9
         Feb 0.3 713.7 637.5 488.8 148.6 1.3 74.9 2.6 576.6 352.7 109.9 242.8 10.2 213.8         Mar 0.3 733.3 654.1 504.0 150.1 1.0 78.3 2.6 574.8 354.5 113.1 241.3 8.5 211.8
         Apr 0.3 738.6 657.2 505.9 151.2 1.7 79.8 2.6 583.3 364.8 125.1 239.7 7.4 211.1
         May 0.3 760.1 676.4 524.6 151.8 1.3 82.4 2.5 578.6 362.3 126.8 235.6 6.8 209.4         June 0.4 794.3 707.2 553.1 154.1 1.3 85.8 2.6 578.1 351.6 115.2 236.4 7.0 219.5
         July 0.3 779.1 689.4 533.9 155.5 1.4 88.3 2.6 567.4 345.3 106.5 238.8 6.8 215.3
         Aug 0.3 771.9 682.3 522.9 159.4 1.3 88.3 2.6 561.3 344.3 101.3 243.0 7.4 209.5         Sep 0.4 769.8 680.3 520.2 160.1 1.3 88.2 2.3 569.4 346.6 110.3 236.3 7.2 215.6
         Oct 0.4 757.0 664.9 502.0 162.9 0.9 91.2 1.6 576.6 348.6 106.0 242.6 8.0 219.9
         Nov 0.3 764.6 672.3 512.8 159.5 1.3 91.1 1.6 583.8 357.5 118.0 239.6 6.4 219.8         Dec 0.3 769.6 675.8 515.7 160.1 1.5 92.3 1.6 576.3 344.8 110.9 233.9 6.0 225.4
2004          Jan 0.3 788.7 693.8 531.9 161.9 1.2 93.6 1.6 588.4 353.0 118.0 235.0 5.5 229.8
         Feb 0.3 790.5 691.5 530.7 160.8 1.3 97.7 1.6 598.7 360.7 126.1 234.6 6.0 232.0         Mar 0.3 803.2 700.1 538.5 161.6 1.7 101.4 1.7 617.6 370.2 133.9 236.4 4.8 242.5
Changes*
1995 + 0.1 + 59.1 + 57.6 + 49.2 + 8.4 + 0.0 + 2.9 − 1.4 + 38.3 + 21.3 + 7.8 + 13.6 + 1.1 + 16.11996 + 0.2 + 34.2 + 29.9 + 27.2 + 2.7 + 0.2 + 5.2 − 1.1 + 58.4 + 36.2 + 17.0 + 19.2 + 3.1 + 21.41997 + 0.1 + 80.6 + 71.5 + 53.3 + 18.2 − 0.1 + 10.4 − 1.2 + 109.3 + 73.0 + 33.7 + 39.3 + 0.7 + 32.91998 − 0.0 + 100.8 + 89.5 + 79.3 + 10.2 + 0.0 + 13.1 − 1.8 + 122.0 + 42.7 − 6.4 + 49.1 + 5.5 + 66.01999 − 0.3 + 17.7 + 5.7 − 5.3 + 11.0 + 0.2 + 11.7 − 0.0 + 85.8 + 42.8 + 8.4 + 34.4 + 1.3 + 41.8
2000 − 0.0 + 78.9 + 56.5 + 44.6 + 11.8 + 0.9 + 21.6 − 0.7 + 72.0 + 45.0 + 17.4 + 27.7 − 1.2 + 28.2
2001 + 0.0 + 83.7 + 75.6 + 54.4 + 21.2 − 0.5 + 8.5 − 0.2 + 88.3 + 53.4 + 27.0 + 26.4 − 1.5 + 36.32002 − 0.1 + 120.3 + 118.0 + 99.4 + 18.6 + 0.1 + 2.2 − 0.9 + 21.2 + 12.7 − 0.4 + 13.2 + 4.6 + 3.92003 − 0.1 + 103.8 + 84.6 + 65.2 + 19.3 + 0.6 + 18.7 − 0.4 + 46.3 + 35.1 + 24.0 + 11.0 − 2.7 + 13.9
2002          Oct − 0.0 + 13.8 + 13.0 + 11.3 + 1.7 + 0.1 + 0.8 − 0.2 + 0.9 + 2.1 − 0.3 + 2.5 + 0.2 − 1.5
         Nov − 0.0 + 40.1 + 36.2 + 35.0 + 1.2 + 3.6 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 4.7 + 3.8 + 2.4 + 1.4 + 0.1 + 0.8         Dec + 0.0 − 14.1 − 8.2 − 11.3 + 3.1 − 4.7 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 20.8 − 18.2 − 16.7 − 1.6 − 0.4 − 2.1
2003          Jan − 0.1 + 9.2 + 9.6 + 6.6 + 3.0 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 6.8 + 4.9 − 0.0 + 4.9 + 1.6 + 0.2
         Feb + 0.0 + 18.9 + 17.3 + 17.5 − 0.1 + 0.5 + 1.1 − 0.0 + 16.8 + 19.6 + 18.3 + 1.3 − 0.7 − 2.2         Mar + 0.0 + 21.4 + 18.3 + 16.3 + 2.0 − 0.4 + 3.5 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 3.5 + 3.6 − 0.2 − 1.6 − 1.5
         Apr + 0.0 + 8.9 + 6.4 + 4.5 + 2.0 + 0.8 + 1.7 − 0.0 + 12.8 + 13.7 + 12.8 + 0.9 − 1.1 + 0.2
         May + 0.0 + 30.1 + 28.0 + 24.9 + 3.2 − 0.4 + 2.5 − 0.0 + 5.6 + 6.0 + 3.8 + 2.3 − 0.4 − 0.0         June + 0.1 + 29.4 + 26.3 + 25.1 + 1.2 − 0.0 + 3.2 + 0.0 − 6.2 − 14.9 − 12.6 − 2.3 + 0.1 + 8.6
         July − 0.1 − 16.5 − 19.1 − 20.3 + 1.2 + 0.2 + 2.4 − 0.0 − 12.3 − 7.5 − 9.0 + 1.5 − 0.3 − 4.6
         Aug + 0.0 − 13.2 − 12.8 − 15.3 + 2.5 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 13.0 − 6.1 − 6.4 + 0.2 + 0.5 − 7.3         Sep + 0.0 + 5.7 + 5.4 + 2.9 + 2.5 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.3 + 19.1 + 10.6 + 10.8 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 8.5
         Oct − 0.0 − 14.4 − 17.0 − 18.8 + 1.8 − 0.4 + 3.0 − 0.0 + 3.1 − 1.9 − 4.4 + 2.5 + 0.8 + 4.2
         Nov − 0.0 + 12.5 + 12.1 + 14.3 − 2.3 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 12.8 + 13.3 + 12.9 + 0.5 − 1.5 + 1.0         Dec − 0.0 + 11.7 + 9.9 + 7.6 + 2.3 + 0.3 + 1.5 − 0.0 + 0.5 − 6.0 − 5.7 − 0.4 − 0.2 + 6.8
2004          Jan + 0.0 + 16.3 + 14.8 + 14.0 + 0.8 − 0.3 + 1.8 + 0.0 + 7.6 + 5.3 + 6.4 − 1.1 − 0.6 + 2.9
         Feb − 0.0 + 2.7 − 1.5 − 0.6 − 0.9 + 0.1 + 4.1 + 0.0 + 11.1 + 8.0 + 8.4 − 0.4 + 0.6 + 2.5         Mar + 0.0 + 6.1 + 2.2 + 5.3 − 3.1 + 0.3 + 3.6 + 0.0 + 15.6 + 7.4 + 7.0 + 0.4 − 1.3 + 9.4
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminatedfrom the banknotes andcoins. — 2Up to December 1998, including fiduciary loans
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as (see also footnote 6). — 3Up to December 1998, bill-basedlend ing (bill
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from rediscounted bills and bills
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, foreign sent for collection from the banks’ portfolios prior to maturity). —
28*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
 Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bank
interests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memo
item andand item and item
Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciaryloans  
6 prises  7 Total Total  9 term  9 term loans  6 Total Total  9 term  9 term loans  6   Period deposits  8 deposits  8 
End of year or month*
 
17.3 34.0 402.3 111.6 283.7 150.8 132.9 7.1 181.5 20.6 155.3 41.7 113.6 5.6 1994
16.7 38.8 463.7 116.9 339.7 191.6 148.2 7.0 224.4 22.1 198.0 45.3 152.6 4.4 1995
12.7 45.8 486.5 147.1 335.7 172.0 163.7 3.8 273.5 34.3 237.2 50.0 187.2 2.1 199615.7 54.7 670.3 226.0 440.2 254.3 185.9 4.0 333.9 43.5 285.7 63.0 222.7 4.8 199722.9 62.9 875.7 309.5 562.5 359.1 203.4 3.7 390.3 51.3 329.6 71.8 257.8 9.5 199813.6 33.9 483.6 65.6 418.0 332.3 85.6 2.0 284.4 23.8 260.6 64.9 195.7 5.8 1999
13.9 47.4 586.0 113.7 472.2 382.9 89.3 1.7 314.9 35.4 279.5 62.5 217.0 5.6 2000
13.8 47.6 622.7 91.9 530.8 434.5 96.3 1.4 350.6 34.0 316.6 97.6 219.0 5.3 200115.6 44.8 614.2 101.6 512.7 410.4 102.3 1.1 319.2 33.5 285.7 87.0 198.7 4.5 200211.6 41.4 590.7 95.1 495.6 387.7 107.9 0.4 307.3 32.2 275.1 102.4 172.7 3.6 2003
14.2 45.7 633.0 116.1 516.9 412.9 104.1 1.1 342.4 38.2 304.2 99.4 204.8 4.6 2002          Oct 
14.7 45.8 648.3 125.2 523.1 420.1 103.0 1.1 346.8 42.6 304.2 101.1 203.0 4.7          Nov 
15.6 44.8 614.2 101.6 512.7 410.4 102.3 1.1 319.2 33.5 285.7 87.0 198.7 4.5          Dec 
15.4 42.7 623.1 112.6 510.5 406.1 104.4 1.0 324.7 35.7 289.1 95.4 193.7 4.4 2003          Jan 
15.4 42.4 616.4 117.7 498.7 392.8 105.9 1.0 330.8 33.2 297.6 107.5 190.1 4.3          Feb 
15.4 43.3 621.7 131.7 490.0 384.4 105.6 1.0 339.8 43.3 296.5 109.2 187.3 4.2          Mar 
15.1 43.2 634.6 141.6 493.0 387.9 105.1 1.0 333.3 39.3 294.0 110.3 183.7 4.0          Apr 
14.7 41.7 620.9 128.0 492.9 386.0 106.9 1.0 332.0 43.6 288.4 109.8 178.7 3.8          May15.1 42.2 622.8 143.1 479.7 372.8 106.9 1.0 324.6 43.8 280.8 99.8 180.9 3.9          June
15.2 43.1 617.2 123.6 493.7 384.1 109.6 0.9 328.0 40.3 287.7 108.5 179.2 3.9          July
15.3 43.1 601.1 108.0 493.1 386.3 106.8 0.3 324.7 39.5 285.2 103.5 181.7 4.7          Aug 15.0 43.7 607.5 144.2 463.3 361.2 102.1 0.3 326.6 40.0 286.6 109.5 177.1 6.8          Sep 
11.7 43.0 597.1 129.1 468.0 360.1 107.9 0.3 332.0 38.2 293.8 116.4 177.5 3.4          Oct 
11.7 41.3 583.1 113.9 469.2 361.3 107.9 0.3 333.5 38.8 294.7 121.6 173.1 3.3          Nov 11.6 41.4 590.7 95.1 495.6 387.7 107.9 0.4 307.3 32.2 275.1 102.4 172.7 3.6          Dec 
11.7 40.9 606.8 138.7 468.2 359.1 109.0 0.5 315.6 44.8 270.8 99.6 171.2 3.7 2004          Jan 
12.0 39.7 602.9 122.7 480.2 368.1 112.1 0.5 328.7 55.9 272.8 104.6 168.2 3.4          Feb 
9.5 39.8 640.2 136.3 503.8 389.4 114.4 0.5 326.2 61.8 264.4 103.0 161.4 0.9          Mar 
Changes*
− 0.2 + 5.2 + 71.0 + 7.9 + 64.6 + 45.9 + 18.7 − 1.5 + 47.8 + 2.2 + 46.5 + 4.1 + 42.4 − 0.9 1995
− 2.3 + 5.9 + 11.3 + 27.1 − 13.9 − 26.6 + 12.7 − 1.9 + 44.7 + 11.7 + 35.0 + 3.7 + 31.3 − 2.0 1996+ 2.7 + 7.9 + 157.3 + 67.7 + 89.5 + 71.8 + 17.7 + 0.1 + 51.0 + 5.4 + 43.3 + 11.4 + 31.9 + 2.3 1997+ 7.7 + 8.8 + 215.6 + 87.7 + 128.1 + 108.1 + 20.0 − 0.3 + 64.7 + 10.4 + 48.9 + 10.3 + 38.6 + 5.5 1998+ 1.1 + 10.9 + 37.4 − 9.2 + 46.6 + 47.6 − 1.0 − 0.0 + 61.0 + 7.2 + 53.8 + 15.9 + 37.9 + 0.1 1999
− 0.2 + 12.8 + 90.0 + 47.0 + 43.0 + 42.9 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 24.4 + 11.1 + 13.3 − 2.9 + 16.2 − 0.8 2000
− 0.5 − 0.5 + 23.5 − 23.6 + 47.0 + 42.4 + 4.6 − 0.4 + 30.8 − 1.8 + 32.6 + 33.3 − 0.7 − 0.6 2001+ 1.7 + 1.6 + 22.7 + 14.6 + 8.1 − 1.3 + 9.4 − 0.3 + 4.6 + 0.8 + 3.8 − 4.6 + 8.4 − 0.9 2002− 0.7 − 1.9 + 5.7 − 2.0 + 7.7 − 2.4 + 10.0 − 0.0 + 4.5 + 0.4 + 4.1 + 20.6 − 16.5 + 1.9 2003
+ 0.7 + 0.1 + 7.2 − 16.6 + 23.7 + 23.8 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.9 − 3.0 + 1.1 − 3.8 + 4.8 − 0.0 2002          Oct 
+ 0.5 + 0.3 + 16.8 + 9.4 + 7.4 + 8.4 − 0.9 − 0.0 + 5.5 + 4.5 + 1.0 + 2.0 − 1.0 + 0.1          Nov 
+ 0.9 − 0.4 − 25.4 − 22.0 − 3.4 − 3.8 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 21.6 − 8.6 − 13.0 − 13.0 − 0.1 − 0.2          Dec 
− 0.2 − 1.7 + 14.4 + 11.7 + 2.7 − 0.1 + 2.8 − 0.1 + 9.1 + 2.5 + 6.6 + 9.2 − 2.5 − 0.1 2003          Jan 
+ 0.1 − 0.3 − 6.7 + 5.4 − 12.0 − 13.5 + 1.5 − 0.0 + 6.6 − 2.5 + 9.2 + 12.2 − 3.1 − 0.1          Feb 
− 0.1 + 1.0 + 7.4 + 14.3 − 6.9 − 7.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 10.3 + 10.2 + 0.1 + 2.0 − 1.9 − 0.1          Mar 
− 0.3 + 0.1 + 17.1 + 10.6 + 6.5 + 6.4 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 4.0 − 3.8 − 0.1 + 1.8 − 1.9 − 0.3          Apr 
− 0.4 − 0.7 − 4.3 − 11.8 + 7.5 + 4.2 + 3.3 − 0.1 + 5.0 + 4.7 + 0.2 + 0.9 − 0.7 − 0.2          May+ 0.4 + 0.1 − 3.0 + 14.1 − 17.1 − 16.2 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 10.9 + 0.0 − 10.9 − 10.6 − 0.3 + 0.2          June
+ 0.0 + 0.3 − 6.9 − 19.8 + 12.8 + 10.4 + 2.4 − 0.1 + 2.7 − 3.6 + 6.4 + 8.5 − 2.1 − 0.0          July
+ 0.2 − 0.5 − 22.3 − 16.7 − 5.6 − 1.7 − 3.9 − 0.0 − 7.3 − 1.1 − 6.2 − 5.9 − 0.2 + 0.1          Aug − 0.3 + 1.2 + 16.1 + 37.6 − 21.5 − 18.4 − 3.1 − 0.0 + 7.8 + 1.1 + 6.7 + 7.5 − 0.8 + 2.1          Sep 
+ 0.0 − 0.8 − 11.8 − 15.4 + 3.6 − 1.5 + 5.1 − + 1.4 − 1.8 + 3.2 + 6.7 − 3.6 + 0.0          Oct 
− 0.0 − 1.3 − 9.2 − 14.2 + 5.1 + 4.0 + 1.0 − + 4.9 + 0.9 + 4.0 + 6.0 − 2.0 − 0.1          Nov − 0.1 + 0.6 + 14.9 − 17.7 + 32.6 + 31.1 + 1.5 + 0.1 − 21.2 − 6.2 − 15.0 − 17.7 + 2.7 + 0.3          Dec 
+ 0.1 − 0.8 + 12.9 + 43.2 − 30.2 − 30.7 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 5.8 + 12.5 − 6.7 − 3.5 − 3.2 + 0.1 2004          Jan 
+ 0.3 − 1.3 − 3.2 − 15.9 + 12.7 + 9.4 + 3.2 − 0.0 + 13.2 + 11.1 + 2.2 + 5.1 − 2.9 − 0.3          Feb 
+ 0.1 − 0.1 + 30.7 + 13.1 + 17.6 + 19.0 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 1.5 + 5.8 − 7.3 − 2.2 − 5.1 − 0.0          Mar 
4Up to November 1993, included in securities (see also footnote 5). — 5Up capital suppliedto branches abroad . — 8Up to December 1998, including
to November 1993, including negotiable money market paper; excluding time deposits with terms of less than one month. — 9Up to December 1998,
registeredd ebt securities. — 6From 1999, no longer included in loans and excluding time deposits with terms of less than one month. 
deposits (see also footnote 2). — 7Up to December 1998, including working
29*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
IV Banks
 
5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)*
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, €  billion
Lending to domestic Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total  1,2 
      to public authorities to enter- to enterprises and individuals  1 
 
including excluding Negoti-
negotiable money ablemarket paper, Loans money
Periodsecurities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total paper Total Loans bills  
5 Total Total bills 3,4 
End of year or month*
 
1994 4,137.2 3,633.1 583.5 549.1 548.6 0.4 34.4 32.7 1.8 3,553.7 2,661.9
1995 4,436.9 3,936.9 615.2 584.0 583.3 0.7 31.3 30.5 0.8 3,821.7 2,785.5
1996 4,773.1 4,248.7 662.2 617.2 616.2 1.0 45.1 40.2 4.9 4,110.8 3,007.21997 5,058.4 4,506.2 667.8 625.8 624.8 1.0 41.9 40.1 1.9 4,390.6 3,223.41998 5,379.8 4,775.4 704.3 661.3 660.8 0.5 43.0 38.5 4.5 4,675.5 3,482.41999 2,904.5 2,576.5 355.3 328.9 328.7 0.2 26.4 23.6 2.8 2,549.2 1,943.6
2000 3,003.7 2,663.7 371.2 348.2 347.7 0.5 22.9 21.2 1.7 2,632.5 2,038.6
2001 3,014.1 2,704.2 387.9 356.7 355.2 1.5 31.2 28.2 2.9 2,626.2 2,070.22002 2,997.2 2,689.1 365.4 331.9 331.0 1.0 33.5 31.1 2.4 2,631.8 2,079.72003 2,995.6 2,680.6 355.2 315.0 313.4 1.6 40.2 38.4 1.8 2,640.4 2,096.1
2002          Oct 2,997.6 2,688.8 364.2 335.7 334.2 1.5 28.5 26.1 2.4 2,633.4 2,076.6
         Nov 3,003.5 2,687.5 365.8 332.5 330.9 1.7 33.3 31.4 1.9 2,637.7 2,079.9         Dec 2,997.2 2,689.1 365.4 331.9 331.0 1.0 33.5 31.1 2.4 2,631.8 2,079.7
2003          Jan 3,005.1 2,690.8 371.1 329.7 328.5 1.2 41.4 38.6 2.8 2,634.0 2,076.5
         Feb 3,001.9 2,686.4 364.4 329.3 328.1 1.2 35.1 32.7 2.4 2,637.4 2,077.5         Mar 3,005.5 2,681.3 369.2 332.5 330.4 2.2 36.7 34.0 2.7 2,636.3 2,071.6
         Apr 3,007.6 2,680.2 366.3 326.5 324.2 2.2 39.8 37.0 2.8 2,641.3 2,079.0
         May 3,003.6 2,671.7 356.2 321.4 319.1 2.3 34.7 32.6 2.2 2,647.4 2,080.5         June 2,992.4 2,674.1 359.6 328.9 326.9 2.0 30.7 28.8 1.9 2,632.8 2,077.4
         July 2,996.0 2,675.8 357.5 315.5 314.2 1.3 42.0 39.8 2.2 2,638.6 2,081.8
         Aug 2,986.9 2,671.9 346.7 308.2 306.8 1.4 38.5 36.5 2.0 2,640.2 2,090.5         Sep 2,995.7 2,680.2 356.7 323.8 322.9 0.9 32.9 31.7 1.2 2,639.0 2,088.3
         Oct 2,992.9 2,679.3 353.7 317.2 316.1 1.0 36.6 34.5 2.1 2,639.1 2,087.7
         Nov 3,012.2 2,689.2 360.7 317.5 316.6 0.9 43.2 40.6 2.6 2,651.5 2,097.0         Dec 2,995.6 2,680.6 355.2 315.0 313.4 1.6 40.2 38.4 1.8 2,640.4 2,096.1
2004          Jan 2,992.0 2,670.5 346.6 305.7 304.4 1.3 41.0 39.6 1.4 2,645.3 2,097.7
         Feb 2,994.8 2,662.2 339.5 306.0 304.8 1.1 33.6 32.2 1.3 2,655.2 2,091.2         Mar 3,015.7 2,673.6 353.0 306.8 305.9 0.8 46.3 45.0 1.3 2,662.6 2,098.5
Changes*
1995 + 312.8 + 311.9 + 35.9 + 37.9 + 37.7 + 0.2 − 1.9 − 1.0 − 1.0 + 276.9 + 185.11996 + 336.3 + 312.9 + 44.3 + 32.6 + 32.2 + 0.4 + 11.7 + 7.4 + 4.3 + 292.0 + 221.51997 + 285.2 + 256.9 + 2.7 + 5.9 + 5.9 + 0.0 − 3.2 − 0.1 − 3.0 + 282.5 + 219.91998 + 335.3 + 285.5 + 51.7 + 50.6 + 51.2 − 0.6 + 1.1 − 1.6 + 2.7 + 283.6 + 258.31999 + 156.1 + 139.5 + 9.6 + 6.3 + 6.4 − 0.0 + 3.3 + 2.9 + 0.4 + 146.4 + 146.4
2000 + 100.7 + 83.2 + 14.5 + 18.1 + 17.8 + 0.3 − 3.6 − 2.5 − 1.1 + 86.1 + 93.8
2001 + 11.9 + 39.2 + 15.3 + 7.0 + 5.9 + 1.0 + 8.4 + 7.8 + 0.6 − 3.4 + 32.02002 − 19.2 − 18.8 − 23.4 − 25.7 − 25.2 − 0.5 + 2.3 + 2.9 − 0.6 + 4.3 + 7.62003 + 0.1 − 8.4 − 10.0 − 16.7 − 17.5 + 0.9 + 6.7 + 7.3 − 0.6 + 10.1 + 16.0
2002          Oct + 2.0 + 1.4 − 3.2 − 7.5 − 7.5 − 0.0 + 4.3 + 4.3 + 0.0 + 5.2 + 7.7
         Nov + 6.0 − 1.3 + 1.4 − 3.4 − 3.5 + 0.1 + 4.8 + 5.2 − 0.5 + 4.5 + 3.5         Dec − 6.3 + 1.6 − 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.5 − 5.9 − 0.3
2003          Jan + 7.9 + 1.7 + 5.7 − 2.2 − 2.4 + 0.2 + 7.9 + 7.5 + 0.4 + 2.2 − 3.6
         Feb − 3.3 − 4.4 − 6.7 − 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 6.3 − 5.9 − 0.4 + 3.5 + 1.0         Mar + 3.7 − 5.1 + 4.8 + 3.2 + 2.2 + 1.0 + 1.6 + 1.3 + 0.3 − 1.2 − 5.9
         Apr + 2.1 − 1.1 − 3.0 − 6.0 − 6.1 + 0.1 + 3.1 + 3.0 + 0.1 + 5.1 + 7.2
         May − 3.8 − 8.5 − 10.1 − 5.0 − 5.1 + 0.1 − 5.1 − 4.5 − 0.6 + 6.3 + 1.8         June − 11.1 + 2.5 + 3.4 + 7.5 + 7.8 − 0.3 − 4.1 − 3.8 − 0.2 − 14.6 − 3.1
         July + 3.8 + 1.7 − 1.9 − 13.2 − 12.7 − 0.5 + 11.3 + 11.0 + 0.2 + 5.7 + 4.3
         Aug − 9.1 − 4.0 − 10.7 − 7.3 − 7.4 + 0.1 − 3.4 − 3.3 − 0.1 + 1.6 + 8.7         Sep + 9.6 + 8.3 + 10.0 + 15.6 + 16.1 − 0.5 − 5.6 − 4.8 − 0.9 − 0.4 − 2.2
         Oct − 2.8 − 0.9 − 2.9 − 6.6 − 6.8 + 0.1 + 3.7 + 2.7 + 1.0 + 0.2 − 0.6
         Nov + 19.3 + 9.9 + 6.9 + 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.2 + 6.6 + 6.2 + 0.4 + 12.4 + 9.3         Dec − 16.1 − 8.6 − 5.4 − 2.4 − 3.2 + 0.8 − 3.0 − 2.2 − 0.8 − 10.7 − 0.9
2004          Jan − 3.7 − 10.1 − 8.6 − 9.4 − 9.0 − 0.4 + 0.8 + 1.1 − 0.4 + 5.0 + 1.7
         Feb + 2.8 − 8.3 − 7.1 + 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.1 − 7.4 − 7.4 − 0.0 + 9.9 − 6.5         Mar + 20.9 + 11.4 + 13.8 + 1.1 + 1.4 − 0.3 + 12.7 + 12.8 − 0.1 + 7.1 + 7.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the including fiduciary loans (see also footnote 9). — 3Up to December 1998,
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly red iscountedbills andbills sent for collection from the banks’ portfolios
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Up to December 1998, including loans prior to maturity). — 4From 1999, including small amounts of medium-term
to domestic building and loan associations. — 2Up to December 1998, series of bills. — 5From December 1993, including other negotiable
30*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
IV Banks
 
   
 
lending  2,6 
prises and individuals  1,2 to public authorities  2 
Loans Loans
Memo Memo
item Equal- item
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term  7 term  8 loans  9 Total Total term  7 term  8 loans  9   Period Securities  6 ities 6,10 claims  11 
End of year or month*
 
2,390.4 228.3 2,162.0 203.2 68.3 891.8 577.0 34.5 542.5 230.5 68.1 16.1 1994
2,522.0 214.1 2,307.9 192.9 70.6 1,036.2 713.0 74.5 638.4 234.4 71.3 17.5 1995
2,713.3 215.8 2,497.5 205.9 88.0 1,103.6 773.0 69.5 703.6 231.3 81.3 18.0 19962,900.0 216.2 2,683.8 234.1 89.3 1,167.2 833.8 53.0 780.8 239.2 76.0 18.3 19973,104.5 206.8 2,897.8 292.4 85.4 1,193.2 868.8 33.1 835.7 235.4 71.6 17.3 19981,764.8 182.5 1,582.3 178.9 49.2 605.6 459.5 30.9 428.6 108.6 37.5 8.7 1999
1,838.9 192.8 1,646.0 199.7 50.1 593.9 455.9 30.4 425.5 104.9 33.1 8.4 2000
1,880.5 191.1 1,689.4 189.7 48.9 556.0 440.3 25.6 414.6 111.8 4.0 8.0 20011,909.8 193.5 1,716.3 169.9 47.3 552.1 417.1 27.4 389.7 132.0 3.0 7.5 20021,927.7 195.0 1,732.8 168.3 49.9 544.3 401.0 34.6 366.4 141.3 2.0 7.0 2003
1,906.5 193.8 1,712.6 170.1 47.5 556.8 422.1 24.7 397.4 131.8 3.0 7.6 2002          Oct 
1,907.6 192.5 1,715.1 172.4 47.3 557.8 417.7 25.5 392.2 137.1 3.0 7.7          Nov 
1,909.8 193.5 1,716.3 169.9 47.3 552.1 417.1 27.4 389.7 132.0 3.0 7.5          Dec 
1,909.4 194.8 1,714.6 167.1 47.0 557.4 414.2 30.0 384.2 140.3 3.0 7.7 2003          Jan 
1,911.1 194.0 1,717.1 166.5 47.1 559.9 414.4 31.5 382.9 142.5 3.0 7.7          Feb 
1,907.1 193.1 1,714.0 164.5 47.2 564.6 409.8 29.9 379.8 151.9 3.0 7.6          Mar 
1,910.3 193.3 1,717.0 168.6 47.0 562.4 408.6 30.9 377.6 150.8 3.0 7.5          Apr 
1,912.9 193.2 1,719.7 167.6 47.0 566.9 407.1 31.5 375.5 156.9 3.0 7.5          May1,912.8 193.5 1,719.3 164.6 47.0 555.4 405.7 31.5 374.2 146.8 3.0 7.4          June
1,916.9 193.9 1,723.0 164.9 46.9 556.8 404.9 31.3 373.6 149.8 2.0 7.3          July
1,924.6 195.5 1,729.1 165.9 47.3 549.7 403.9 32.9 371.1 143.7 2.0 7.2          Aug 1,922.2 195.0 1,727.2 166.1 47.2 550.6 403.3 33.7 369.6 145.3 2.0 7.2          Sep 
1,926.8 195.7 1,731.1 160.9 46.8 551.4 402.0 32.5 369.4 147.5 2.0 7.2          Oct 
1,930.3 195.9 1,734.3 166.7 47.0 554.5 401.7 33.1 368.6 150.8 2.0 7.1          Nov 1,927.7 195.0 1,732.8 168.3 49.9 544.3 401.0 34.6 366.4 141.3 2.0 7.0          Dec 
1,926.0 195.0 1,731.0 171.7 50.1 547.6 400.5 33.9 366.5 145.1 2.0 7.1 2004          Jan 
1,925.4 194.3 1,731.1 165.8 49.6 564.1 399.8 34.8 365.0 162.3 2.0 7.0          Feb 
1,922.9 193.9 1,729.0 175.6 47.9 564.1 399.7 35.4 364.4 162.4 2.0 7.0          Mar 
Changes*
+ 176.0 − 1.9 + 177.9 + 3.3 + 5.9 + 91.8 + 91.8 + 15.3 + 76.6 − 0.4 − 1.2 + 1.5 1995+ 204.4 + 1.6 + 202.8 + 14.0 + 3.1 + 70.4 + 65.7 − 5.5 + 71.2 − 3.3 + 8.0 + 0.1 1996+ 189.0 + 0.3 + 188.7 + 29.5 + 1.4 + 62.6 + 60.6 − 18.0 + 78.6 + 7.0 − 5.3 + 0.2 1997+ 205.7 − 8.9 + 214.6 + 56.5 − 3.9 + 25.3 + 35.0 − 20.0 + 55.0 − 4.4 − 4.4 − 0.9 1998+ 121.8 + 25.1 + 96.8 + 24.6 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 8.5 + 6.2 + 2.3 − 7.8 − 0.6 − 0.1 1999
+ 71.8 + 6.9 + 64.9 + 22.1 + 0.8 − 7.7 − 3.8 − 0.4 − 3.5 − 3.1 − 0.8 − 0.3 2000
+ 41.9 − 2.8 + 44.7 − 9.8 − 1.2 − 35.4 − 16.5 − 5.5 − 10.9 + 10.1 − 29.1 − 0.4 2001+ 26.6 − 2.1 + 28.7 − 19.0 − 1.6 − 3.4 − 23.1 + 1.0 − 24.1 + 20.7 − 1.0 − 0.5 2002+ 17.9 + 0.2 + 17.8 − 1.9 + 2.6 − 5.9 − 16.1 + 4.9 − 21.0 + 11.2 − 1.0 − 0.5 2003
+ 5.8 + 1.8 + 4.1 + 1.9 + 0.2 − 2.5 − 1.2 + 0.1 − 1.3 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 2002          Oct 
+ 1.3 − 2.8 + 4.1 + 2.3 − 0.1 + 1.0 − 4.3 + 0.0 − 4.4 + 5.4 + 0.0 + 0.0          Nov 
+ 2.2 + 1.0 + 1.3 − 2.5 − 0.0 − 5.7 − 0.6 + 1.9 − 2.5 − 5.1 − − 0.1          Dec 
− 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 3.2 − 0.2 + 5.8 − 2.9 + 0.3 − 3.3 + 8.7 − 0.0 + 0.2 2003          Jan 
+ 1.7 − 0.7 + 2.4 − 0.7 + 0.1 + 2.4 + 0.2 + 1.5 − 1.3 + 2.2 − 0.0 + 0.0          Feb 
− 4.0 − 0.9 − 3.0 − 2.0 + 0.1 + 4.8 − 4.6 − 1.5 − 3.1 + 9.4 + 0.0 − 0.1          Mar 
+ 3.2 + 0.2 + 3.0 + 4.0 − 0.2 − 2.1 − 1.2 + 1.0 − 2.2 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.0          Apr 
+ 2.6 − 0.1 + 2.7 − 0.8 − 0.1 + 4.6 − 1.5 + 0.6 − 2.1 + 6.1 − − 0.0          May− 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.4 − 3.0 + 0.0 − 11.5 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 1.4 − 10.1 − 0.0 − 0.1          June
+ 4.1 + 0.4 + 3.7 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 1.4 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 3.1 − 1.0 − 0.1          July
+ 7.8 + 1.6 + 6.1 + 1.0 + 0.4 − 7.1 − 1.0 + 1.5 − 2.5 − 6.1 − 0.0 − 0.1          Aug − 2.4 − 0.5 − 1.9 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 1.8 − 0.6 + 0.9 − 1.5 + 2.4 + 0.0 − 0.0          Sep 
+ 4.5 + 0.7 + 3.8 − 5.1 − 0.4 + 0.8 − 1.4 − 1.2 − 0.1 + 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.0          Oct 
+ 3.5 + 0.2 + 3.3 + 5.8 + 0.2 + 3.1 − 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.8 + 3.3 − − 0.0          Nov − 2.5 − 1.0 − 1.6 + 1.6 + 2.9 − 9.7 − 0.7 + 1.5 − 2.2 − 9.0 + 0.0 − 0.1          Dec 
− 1.7 + 0.0 − 1.7 + 3.4 + 0.2 + 3.3 − 0.5 − 0.6 + 0.1 + 3.8 − 0.0 + 0.1 2004          Jan 
− 0.7 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 5.9 − 0.5 + 16.4 − 0.7 + 0.9 − 1.6 + 17.1 − − 0.0          Feb 
− 2.7 + 0.3 − 3.0 + 9.8 − 1.7 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 1.5 − 1.5 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0          Mar 
money market paper; excluding mobilisation and liquidity paper. — 6From notice of four years andmore; from 1999, of more than five years. — 9From
1999, breakdown of securities by medium and long-term lending no longer 1999, no longer included in lending (see also footnote 2). — 10Excluding
possible. — 7Up to December 1998, maturity or periodof notice of more d ebt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims (see also
than one year to less than four years; from 1999, more than one year up to footnote 11). — 11Including debt securities arising from the exchange of
andinclud ing five years. — 8Up to December 1998, maturity or periodof equalisation claims. 
31*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
IV Banks
 
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities po rtfolios)  1 
of which  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
 
Financing
Mortgage institu-
loans tions
secured Whole- Agri- Electricity, Transport, (excluding
by gas andsale culture, storage MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which water andforestry andinsurance
loans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- supply, Construc- retail andcommu- corpor-
PeriodTotal total Total estate loans Total loans turing mining  2 tion trade  3 fishing nication ations
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2001 2,236.3 981.4 1,053.9 757.7 296.2 1,295.6 346.1 174.3 36.7 67.9 172.9 31.3 50.0 39.0
2002 2,241.2 1,008.9 1,068.7 776.3 292.4 1,277.3 340.1 161.5 37.4 64.6 162.6 31.3 51.3 39.5
2003          Mar 2,237.9 1,012.5 1,067.0 782.0 285.0 1,273.2 338.4 158.5 37.3 63.5 159.3 32.0 51.1 50.3
         June 2,240.1 1,011.4 1,070.5 782.5 288.0 1,267.1 338.0 157.8 37.0 62.9 156.9 32.5 52.2 48.7         Sep 2,245.6 1,106.2 1,077.5 845.7 231.8 1,262.1 338.1 154.4 36.2 61.7 153.3 32.9 53.6 53.9         Dec 2,241.6 1,124.5 1,083.3 867.1 216.2 1,252.2 335.1 151.0 37.2 59.0 152.3 32.1 54.4 54.4
2004          Mar 2,229.2 1,124.8 1,075.2 861.7 213.5 1,242.1 329.3 149.3 37.7 58.4 148.6 31.9 56.3 57.5
 Short-term lending
2001 355.8 − 15.9 − 15.9 304.1 10.6 59.6 5.5 17.8 63.5 4.1 9.3 14.2
2002 331.4 − 14.5 − 14.5 281.1 9.3 52.0 5.1 15.9 58.7 4.2 8.4 13.6
2003          Mar 330.7 − 13.7 − 13.7 282.8 8.8 50.6 4.8 16.0 57.4 4.5 8.0 24.2
         June 327.3 − 14.4 − 14.4 278.8 9.3 51.1 4.5 15.9 56.5 4.7 7.9 22.3         Sep 323.3 − 14.0 − 14.0 274.7 8.7 48.7 4.0 15.1 54.6 4.7 7.8 26.3         Dec 313.9 − 14.1 − 14.1 266.7 8.9 46.6 4.2 13.2 55.9 3.9 8.0 25.8
2004          Mar 306.3 − 13.2 − 13.2 261.4 8.0 47.0 4.0 13.5 53.8 4.1 8.6 27.6
 Medium-term lending
2001 191.1 − 37.1 − 37.1 120.1 12.0 18.5 1.9 6.5 13.4 3.2 7.2 7.7
2002 193.5 − 36.1 − 36.1 121.8 11.3 17.9 2.0 6.5 13.5 3.3 8.5 6.8
2003          Mar 193.1 − 35.9 − 35.9 121.3 11.4 17.7 2.2 6.3 13.1 3.3 9.1 6.3
         June 193.5 − 37.4 − 37.4 121.0 11.9 17.6 2.5 6.0 12.7 3.4 9.9 6.4         Sep 195.0 − 38.0 − 38.0 121.4 12.0 17.6 2.2 6.1 12.6 3.4 10.5 6.4         Dec 195.0 − 38.2 − 38.2 121.2 12.0 17.5 2.3 6.0 11.9 3.4 10.9 6.5
2004          Mar 193.9 − 37.2 − 37.2 121.0 11.5 17.2 3.0 5.8 11.6 3.3 11.3 6.9
 Long-term lending
2001 1,689.4 981.4 1,000.9 757.7 243.2 871.4 323.5 96.2 29.4 43.7 96.1 24.0 33.5 17.1
2002 1,716.3 1,008.9 1,018.1 776.3 241.9 874.4 319.4 91.5 30.3 42.2 90.3 23.8 34.4 19.0
2003          Mar 1,714.0 1,012.5 1,017.3 782.0 235.3 869.1 318.2 90.2 30.4 41.2 88.8 24.2 34.1 19.8
         June 1,719.3 1,011.4 1,018.7 782.5 236.2 867.2 316.7 89.1 30.0 41.0 87.6 24.4 34.4 20.1         Sep 1,727.2 1,106.2 1,025.5 845.7 179.8 866.1 317.4 88.1 30.0 40.6 86.1 24.7 35.2 21.2         Dec 1,732.8 1,124.5 1,031.0 867.1 164.0 864.3 314.2 86.9 30.6 39.9 84.5 24.7 35.5 22.1
2004          Mar 1,729.0 1,124.8 1,024.8 861.7 163.0 859.7 309.8 85.0 30.6 39.1 83.3 24.5 36.4 23.0
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2003          Q1 − 3.3 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.3 − 4.2 − 1.8 − 2.9 − 0.1 − 1.1 − 3.5 + 0.7 − 0.2 + 10.3
         Q2 + 2.2 + 0.7 + 5.8 + 2.7 + 3.1 − 6.1 − 1.1 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 2.3 + 0.5 + 1.0 − 1.6         Q3 + 5.4 + 4.5 + 7.9 + 5.8 + 2.1 − 4.9 − 0.8 − 3.5 − 0.8 − 1.1 − 3.4 + 0.4 + 1.4 + 5.1         Q4 − 4.0 + 1.7 + 5.0 + 4.5 + 0.5 − 9.9 − 2.6 − 3.4 + 0.9 − 2.7 − 1.0 − 0.8 + 0.8 + 0.5
2004          Q1 − 12.4 − 1.2 − 4.6 − 1.9 − 2.8 − 9.2 − 2.3 − 1.3 + 0.5 − 0.6 − 3.7 − 0.2 + 1.9 + 3.1
 Short-term lending
2003          Q1 − 0.7 − − 0.9 − − 0.9 + 1.6 − 0.6 − 1.5 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.3 − 0.4 + 10.6
         Q2 − 3.4 − + 0.4 − + 0.4 − 4.0 + 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 2.0         Q3 − 4.0 − − 0.4 − − 0.4 − 4.2 − 0.7 − 2.4 − 0.6 − 0.8 − 1.8 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 3.9         Q4 − 9.5 − + 0.1 − + 0.1 − 7.9 + 0.2 − 2.1 + 0.3 − 1.9 + 1.3 − 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.6
2004          Q1 − 7.3 − − 0.9 − − 0.9 − 5.1 − 0.9 + 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 2.1 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 1.9
 Medium-term lending
2003          Q1 − 1.7 − − 0.3 − − 0.3 − 1.8 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.7
         Q2 + 0.4 − + 0.7 − + 0.7 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.8 + 0.1         Q3 + 1.5 − + 0.5 − + 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.1         Q4 − 0.0 − + 0.2 − + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.1
2004          Q1 − 0.4 − − 1.0 − − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.4
 Long-term lending
2003          Q1 − 1.0 − 0.4 + 1.2 + 0.4 + 0.9 − 4.1 − 1.2 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 1.0 − 1.6 + 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.4
         Q2 + 5.3 + 0.7 + 4.6 + 2.7 + 2.0 − 1.8 − 1.6 − 1.1 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.3         Q3 + 7.9 + 4.5 + 7.8 + 5.8 + 2.0 − 1.1 − 0.2 − 1.0 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 1.5 + 0.3 + 0.8 + 1.1         Q4 + 5.5 + 1.7 + 4.7 + 4.5 + 0.2 − 1.8 − 2.7 − 1.2 + 0.6 − 0.8 − 1.6 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 1.0
2004          Q1 − 4.7 − 1.2 − 2.8 − 1.9 − 0.9 − 4.1 − 1.0 − 1.5 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 1.3 − 0.3 + 0.9 + 0.9
*Excluding lending by foreign branches. Breakdown of lending by building always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent alterations, which will
andloan associations by areas andsectors estimated . Statistical alterations appear in the following Monthly Report , are not specially marked. —
have been eliminatedfrom the changes. The figures for the latest d ate are 1Excluding loans on a trust basis. — 2Including quarrying. — 3Including
32*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
IV Banks
 
   
 
 
 
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which of which
Debitbalanceson wage,
Other Lending salaryreal to self- Lending and of which
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans  
5 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises enterprises persons  4 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
723.3 169.4 50.3 194.3 458.6 74.7 926.7 704.3 222.4 110.7 22.9 14.1 3.5 2001
729.2 165.0 50.2 207.2 451.8 72.4 949.5 725.1 224.3 114.3 23.0 14.4 3.5 2002
721.1 163.6 48.6 206.4 448.1 72.9 950.5 725.0 225.4 115.5 22.1 14.3 3.5 2003          Mar 
719.1 163.2 48.5 206.8 444.5 71.9 958.8 729.1 229.8 114.2 22.7 14.2 3.5          June
716.1 162.3 48.6 205.7 441.8 70.2 969.6 735.9 233.7 116.1 23.2 13.8 3.5          Sep 711.9 160.7 44.0 207.2 437.0 67.7 975.6 744.7 230.9 118.6 21.6 13.7 3.5          Dec 
702.5 158.7 43.6 206.2 429.5 66.5 973.4 742.6 230.9 119.1 20.1 13.7 3.3 2004          Mar 
Short-term lending
130.1 21.6 20.4 34.1 56.0 15.8 50.3 5.3 45.0 2.8 22.9 1.4 0.0 2001
123.3 19.8 19.1 34.7 53.8 14.8 48.5 5.2 43.3 2.4 23.0 1.7 0.0 2002
117.3 19.0 18.0 33.5 52.2 15.3 46.2 4.9 41.3 2.3 22.1 1.7 0.0 2003          Mar 
115.9 18.7 17.9 33.6 51.8 15.0 46.8 5.0 41.7 2.3 22.7 1.7 0.0          June
113.5 17.9 18.3 32.1 50.6 14.4 47.2 5.2 42.0 2.3 23.2 1.4 0.0          Sep 109.1 17.9 14.6 31.2 49.4 12.9 45.9 5.1 40.8 2.4 21.6 1.2 0.0          Dec 
102.7 17.2 14.2 29.4 47.2 13.0 43.5 5.2 38.4 2.2 20.1 1.4 0.0 2004          Mar 
Medium-term lending
61.9 6.7 6.5 14.7 31.2 5.3 70.5 25.0 45.4 33.4 − 0.6 0.1 2001
63.2 6.2 7.2 16.7 31.2 4.8 71.1 24.7 46.4 35.3 − 0.5 0.1 2002
63.5 6.1 6.7 17.8 31.4 4.8 71.3 24.5 46.9 36.1 − 0.5 0.1 2003          Mar 
62.5 6.1 6.3 17.6 31.0 4.7 72.0 25.4 46.6 36.4 − 0.5 0.1          June
62.5 5.9 6.0 17.7 30.8 4.6 73.1 26.0 47.2 37.3 − 0.5 0.1          Sep 62.7 5.7 5.6 18.0 30.4 4.5 73.2 26.2 47.0 37.1 − 0.6 0.1          Dec 
61.9 5.5 5.8 18.1 29.6 4.2 72.3 25.6 46.7 37.3 − 0.6 0.1 2004          Mar 
Long-term lending
531.3 141.1 23.4 145.6 371.3 53.7 806.0 674.0 132.0 74.4 − 12.1 3.5 2001
542.8 139.0 24.0 155.8 366.8 52.8 829.8 695.3 134.6 76.6 − 12.1 3.4 2002
540.3 138.5 23.9 155.1 364.4 52.8 832.9 695.7 137.3 77.2 − 12.0 3.4 2003          Mar 
540.7 138.4 24.3 155.6 361.8 52.2 840.1 698.6 141.5 75.5 − 12.0 3.4          June
540.1 138.4 24.2 155.9 360.4 51.2 849.2 704.7 144.5 76.5 − 11.9 3.4          Sep 540.0 137.1 23.8 158.0 357.2 50.4 856.5 713.4 143.1 79.1 − 11.9 3.4          Dec 
537.9 136.0 23.6 158.6 352.7 49.3 857.6 711.8 145.8 79.6 − 11.7 3.2 2004          Mar 
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
− 7.4 − 1.3 − 1.6 − 0.2 − 3.8 − 0.2 + 1.0 + 1.9 − 0.9 + 1.8 − 1.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 2003          Q1
− 2.2 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 3.2 − 1.0 + 8.4 + 6.9 + 1.5 + 1.2 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0          Q2
− 3.1 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 2.4 − 1.4 + 10.8 + 8.8 + 2.0 + 2.1 + 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.0          Q3− 4.2 − 0.5 − 4.6 + 0.4 − 4.8 − 1.9 + 6.0 + 7.6 − 1.6 + 0.4 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 0.0          Q4
− 9.2 − 2.1 − 0.3 − 1.0 − 6.6 − 1.2 − 3.1 − 2.1 − 1.5 + 0.5 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.2 2004          Q1
Short-term lending
− 5.9 − 0.8 − 1.0 − 1.2 − 1.6 + 0.5 − 2.3 − 0.3 − 2.0 − 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 2003          Q1
− 1.4 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0          Q2
− 2.3 − 0.8 + 0.4 − 1.5 − 1.2 − 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.0          Q3− 4.4 − 0.0 − 3.7 − 0.9 − 1.1 − 1.5 − 1.3 − 0.1 − 1.2 + 0.0 − 1.6 − 0.2 + 0.0          Q4
− 6.4 − 0.7 − 0.4 − 1.8 − 2.3 + 0.1 − 2.4 + 0.1 − 2.4 − 0.2 − 1.5 + 0.1 − 2004          Q1
Medium-term lending
− 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.4 + 0.8 − − 0.0 + 0.0 2003          Q1
− 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.3 − + 0.0 + 0.0          Q2
− 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 0.6 + 0.9 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q3+ 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 − + 0.1 + 0.0          Q4
− 0.8 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.3 + 0.2 − − 0.0 − 0.0 2004          Q1
Long-term lending
− 0.7 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 2.2 − 0.6 + 3.2 + 2.4 + 0.7 + 1.1 − − 0.1 + 0.0 2003          Q1
+ 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.5 − 2.7 − 0.6 + 7.1 + 6.3 + 0.8 + 0.9 − − 0.0 − 0.0          Q2
− 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.7 − 1.0 − 0.7 + 9.2 + 8.0 + 1.2 + 1.1 − − 0.1 − 0.0          Q3− 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 1.0 − 3.3 − 0.3 + 7.3 + 7.5 − 0.2 + 0.5 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q4
− 1.9 − 1.1 − 0.2 + 0.7 − 3.9 − 1.0 − 0.4 − 1.6 + 1.2 + 0.5 − − 0.2 − 0.2 2004          Q1
the maintenance andrepair of motor vehicles andd urable consumer   
goods. — 4Including sole proprietors. — 5Excluding mortgage loans and   
housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit.  
33*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Included Subordinated
 liabilities in time
for up for up (excluding deposits:
to andto and for more Bank negotiable liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month*
 
2001 2,034.0 526.4 827.0 268.7 558.3 10.3 548.0 574.5 106.0 43.3 26.2 3.1
2002 2,085.9 575.6 830.6 258.3 572.3 8.8 563.5 575.3 104.4 42.1 27.9 1.52003 2,140.3 624.0 825.7 237.8 587.9 8.3 579.6 590.3 100.3 40.5 30.4 9.3
2003          Apr 2,094.8 586.3 828.2 249.5 578.7 8.2 570.5 577.9 102.4 41.8 28.9 5.6
         May 2,101.9 591.7 831.2 253.9 577.2 8.1 569.2 577.1 101.9 41.7 29.3 3.8         June 2,109.6 608.9 822.7 245.9 576.8 8.0 568.8 576.7 101.3 41.8 29.8 5.7
         July 2,102.3 595.6 829.0 246.4 582.6 8.0 574.6 576.8 100.9 41.7 29.8 7.1
         Aug 2,111.4 598.5 834.5 248.0 586.5 8.0 578.5 578.0 100.4 41.7 30.1 6.1         Sep 2,112.3 608.8 825.4 240.3 585.1 7.9 577.2 578.3 99.9 41.5 30.1 11.6
         Oct 2,114.7 610.9 824.5 238.7 585.7 8.0 577.7 579.4 100.0 40.7 30.4 14.5
         Nov 2,138.6 634.1 824.0 237.5 586.5 8.3 578.2 580.3 100.1 40.7 30.5 12.7         Dec 2,140.3 624.0 825.7 237.8 587.9 8.3 579.6 590.3 100.3 40.5 30.4 9.3
2004          Jan 2,137.5 632.2 814.3 225.0 589.3 8.3 581.0 590.6 100.3 40.3 30.7 9.8
         Feb 2,141.8 635.4 814.8 223.4 591.4 8.3 583.1 591.5 100.1 40.5 30.8 10.4         Mar 2,145.8 635.4 819.2 225.3 594.0 8.6 585.4 591.4 99.8 39.3 31.2 10.9
Changes*
2002 + 51.7 + 48.4 + 4.1 − 10.2 + 14.3 − 1.5 + 15.8 + 0.8 − 1.6 − 1.1 + 1.8 − 1.62003 + 54.0 + 48.4 − 4.8 − 20.3 + 15.6 − 0.5 + 16.1 + 15.1 − 4.8 − 1.2 + 2.0 + 7.8
2003          Apr + 5.1 + 7.4 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.6 − 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.4
         May + 7.1 + 5.4 + 3.0 + 4.5 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 1.4 − 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 1.9         June + 7.7 + 17.2 − 8.5 − 8.1 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 1.9
         July − 7.1 − 13.3 + 6.5 + 0.7 + 5.8 − 0.1 + 5.9 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.4
         Aug + 9.1 + 2.9 + 5.5 + 1.6 + 3.9 + 0.0 + 3.9 + 1.3 − 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 1.0         Sep + 0.8 + 10.3 − 9.1 − 7.8 − 1.4 − 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 5.4
         Oct + 2.5 + 2.1 − 0.9 − 1.5 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 1.1 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 2.9
         Nov + 23.8 + 23.2 − 0.4 − 1.2 + 0.8 + 0.3 + 0.4 + 0.9 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 1.8         Dec + 1.7 − 10.1 + 1.7 + 0.3 + 1.4 − 0.0 + 1.4 + 10.0 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 3.4
2004          Jan − 2.8 + 8.2 − 11.4 − 12.9 + 1.5 + 0.0 + 1.5 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.5
         Feb + 4.3 + 4.1 − 0.4 − 2.5 + 2.1 − 0.0 + 2.1 + 0.9 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.7         Mar + 4.0 − 0.0 + 4.5 + 1.9 + 2.6 + 0.3 + 2.3 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 1.2 + 0.4 + 0.5
Domestic public authorities End of year or month*
2001 122.7 16.1 102.3 37.7 64.5 1.2 63.3 2.3 2.1 36.6 1.4 −2002 113.9 16.6 93.3 30.9 62.4 0.9 61.5 2.1 1.9 36.3 1.2 −2003 108.1 17.8 86.6 29.1 57.5 0.5 57.0 2.0 1.7 34.9 1.1 −
2003          Apr 107.6 14.5 89.4 29.1 60.3 0.6 59.8 1.9 1.8 36.3 1.1 −
         May 111.4 15.0 92.7 32.6 60.0 0.5 59.5 1.9 1.8 36.2 1.1 −         June 114.5 18.1 92.6 32.6 60.1 0.5 59.5 1.9 1.7 36.2 1.1 −
         July 109.0 14.5 90.9 31.5 59.4 0.5 58.9 1.9 1.7 36.2 1.1 −
         Aug 107.7 14.7 89.2 30.8 58.4 0.5 57.9 2.0 1.7 36.1 1.1 −         Sep 105.0 15.4 85.9 28.7 57.2 0.5 56.7 2.0 1.7 36.0 1.1 −
         Oct 101.6 15.2 82.7 25.7 57.0 0.5 56.5 2.0 1.7 35.8 1.1 −
         Nov 104.1 15.8 84.6 27.0 57.7 0.5 57.2 2.0 1.7 35.8 1.1 −         Dec 108.1 17.8 86.6 29.1 57.5 0.5 57.0 2.0 1.7 34.9 1.1 −
2004          Jan 106.3 16.1 86.6 29.8 56.8 0.5 56.3 2.0 1.7 34.8 1.2 −
         Feb 107.4 16.6 87.2 30.0 57.1 0.5 56.7 2.1 1.6 34.8 1.2 −         Mar 106.4 17.6 85.0 28.6 56.4 0.9 55.6 2.2 1.6 33.5 1.0 −
Changes*
2002 − 8.6 + 0.5 − 8.7 − 6.6 − 2.1 − 0.3 − 1.8 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.2 −2003 − 4.8 + 1.2 − 5.7 − 1.6 − 4.1 − 0.4 − 3.7 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 1.6 − 0.1 −
2003          Apr − 2.3 − 0.5 − 1.7 − 1.4 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −
         May + 3.8 + 0.5 + 3.3 + 3.5 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 −         June + 3.1 + 3.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 −
         July − 5.4 − 3.7 − 1.8 − 1.1 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 −
         Aug − 0.5 + 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 −         Sep − 2.6 + 0.7 − 3.3 − 2.1 − 1.2 + 0.0 − 1.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 −
         Oct − 3.4 − 0.2 − 3.2 − 3.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 −
         Nov + 2.7 + 0.6 + 2.1 + 1.4 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.6 − + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −         Dec + 4.0 + 2.0 + 2.0 + 2.2 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.9 − 0.0 −
2004          Jan − 1.8 − 1.7 − 0.0 + 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 −
         Feb + 1.1 + 0.5 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 −         Mar − 1.0 + 1.0 − 2.1 − 1.4 − 0.7 + 0.4 − 1.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.3 − 0.1 −
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminatedfrom provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly
the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as Report , are not specially marked. — 1Including subordinated liabilities and
34*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany* (cont’d)
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Included Subordinated
 liabilities in time
for up for up (excluding deposits:
to andto and for more Bank negotiable liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic enterprises and resident individuals End of year or month*
 
2001 1,911.3 510.4 724.7 231.0 493.7 9.1 484.6 572.3 103.9 6.6 24.8 3.1
2002 1,972.0 559.0 737.3 227.5 509.8 7.9 502.0 573.2 102.5 5.8 26.6 1.52003 2,032.2 606.2 739.1 208.7 530.4 7.8 522.6 588.3 98.6 5.7 29.3 9.3
2003          Apr 1,987.2 571.8 738.8 220.4 518.4 7.6 510.8 575.9 100.6 5.5 27.8 5.6
         May 1,990.5 576.7 738.5 221.3 517.2 7.5 509.7 575.1 100.1 5.5 28.1 3.8         June 1,995.2 590.8 730.0 213.3 516.7 7.5 509.2 574.8 99.6 5.5 28.7 5.7
         July 1,993.3 581.2 738.1 214.9 523.2 7.5 515.7 574.8 99.2 5.5 28.7 7.1
         Aug 2,003.8 583.8 745.3 217.2 528.1 7.5 520.6 576.0 98.7 5.5 28.9 6.1         Sep 2,007.3 593.4 739.5 211.6 527.9 7.4 520.5 576.2 98.1 5.5 29.0 11.6
         Oct 2,013.1 595.7 741.8 213.0 528.7 7.5 521.2 577.4 98.3 5.0 29.2 14.5
         Nov 2,034.5 618.3 739.4 210.6 528.8 7.8 521.0 578.3 98.4 4.9 29.4 12.7         Dec 2,032.2 606.2 739.1 208.7 530.4 7.8 522.6 588.3 98.6 5.7 29.3 9.3
2004          Jan 2,031.1 616.1 727.7 195.2 532.6 7.8 524.7 588.6 98.7 5.6 29.6 9.8
         Feb 2,034.3 618.8 727.6 193.4 534.3 7.8 526.4 589.4 98.5 5.7 29.6 10.4         Mar 2,039.4 617.8 734.2 196.7 537.6 7.7 529.8 589.2 98.1 5.8 30.1 10.9
Changes*
2002 + 60.3 + 47.9 + 12.8 − 3.6 + 16.4 − 1.2 + 17.5 + 1.0 − 1.4 − 0.8 + 2.0 − 1.62003 + 58.7 + 47.2 + 1.0 − 18.7 + 19.7 − 0.1 + 19.8 + 15.1 − 4.5 + 0.4 + 2.1 + 7.8
2003          Apr + 7.4 + 7.9 + 1.5 + 1.0 + 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.8 − 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.4
         May + 3.3 + 4.9 − 0.3 + 0.9 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 1.1 − 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 1.9         June + 4.6 + 14.0 − 8.5 − 8.0 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 1.9
         July − 1.7 − 9.6 + 8.2 + 1.8 + 6.5 − 0.0 + 6.5 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.4
         Aug + 9.6 + 2.6 + 6.3 + 2.3 + 4.0 + 0.0 + 4.0 + 1.2 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 1.0         Sep + 3.5 + 9.6 − 5.8 − 5.6 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 5.4
         Oct + 5.9 + 2.3 + 2.3 + 1.5 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 1.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 2.9
         Nov + 21.2 + 22.6 − 2.5 − 2.6 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.9 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 1.8         Dec − 2.3 − 12.1 − 0.3 − 1.9 + 1.5 − 0.0 + 1.6 + 10.0 + 0.2 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 3.4
2004          Jan − 1.1 + 9.9 − 11.4 − 13.6 + 2.2 + 0.1 + 2.1 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.5
         Feb + 3.2 + 3.6 − 1.0 − 2.7 + 1.7 − 0.0 + 1.7 + 0.8 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.7         Mar + 5.0 − 1.1 + 6.6 + 3.3 + 3.3 − 0.1 + 3.4 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.5
of which:  Domestic enterprises End of year or month*
2001 668.4 180.0 461.3 91.7 369.6 2.9 366.8 4.3 22.8 6.4 14.3 3.12002 700.4 194.6 479.4 99.2 380.2 1.5 378.7 4.4 22.0 5.6 15.8 1.52003 730.8 205.8 498.1 102.1 396.0 1.6 394.4 4.8 22.1 5.4 17.3 9.3
2003          Apr 704.6 191.8 486.0 98.8 387.2 1.4 385.8 4.4 22.5 5.3 16.4 5.6
         May 705.7 192.3 486.3 100.2 386.1 1.4 384.7 4.6 22.4 5.2 16.7 3.8         June 710.6 202.0 481.6 96.1 385.5 1.4 384.1 4.7 22.4 5.3 17.2 5.7
         July 711.2 192.4 491.5 99.5 392.1 1.5 390.6 4.8 22.5 5.3 17.2 7.1
         Aug 716.9 189.6 500.0 103.2 396.8 1.5 395.2 4.8 22.4 5.3 17.4 6.1         Sep 723.7 200.7 495.9 99.7 396.2 1.5 394.7 4.8 22.3 5.3 17.4 11.6
         Oct 727.9 201.0 500.0 103.2 396.8 1.5 395.3 4.8 22.1 4.7 17.4 14.5
         Nov 733.5 206.0 500.7 102.8 397.9 1.7 396.2 4.7 22.0 4.7 17.4 12.7         Dec 730.8 205.8 498.1 102.1 396.0 1.6 394.4 4.8 22.1 5.4 17.3 9.3
2004          Jan 726.6 211.6 488.2 90.4 397.9 1.8 396.1 4.9 21.9 5.3 17.4 9.8
         Feb 723.7 207.6 489.3 90.0 399.3 1.8 397.5 5.1 21.7 5.4 17.4 10.4         Mar 730.9 207.4 496.5 94.6 401.9 1.9 400.0 5.1 21.8 5.5 17.8 10.9
Changes*
2002 + 31.1 + 13.4 + 18.3 + 7.4 + 10.9 − 1.3 + 12.2 + 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.8 + 1.6 − 1.62003 + 29.6 + 11.2 + 17.9 + 2.9 + 15.0 + 0.1 + 14.9 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 1.4 + 7.8
2003          Apr + 9.2 + 5.6 + 3.6 + 3.3 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.4
         May + 1.1 + 0.5 + 0.4 + 1.5 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 1.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 1.9         June + 4.9 + 9.6 − 4.7 − 4.2 − 0.6 − − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 1.9
         July + 0.8 − 9.5 + 10.1 + 3.5 + 6.6 + 0.1 + 6.5 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.4
         Aug + 4.8 − 2.8 + 7.6 + 3.7 + 3.9 + 0.1 + 3.8 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 1.0         Sep + 6.8 + 11.1 − 4.1 − 3.5 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 5.4
         Oct + 4.3 + 0.3 + 4.1 + 3.5 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 2.9
         Nov + 5.4 + 5.0 + 0.5 − 0.6 + 1.1 + 0.2 + 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 1.8         Dec − 2.7 − 0.2 − 2.6 − 0.7 − 1.9 − 0.1 − 1.8 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 3.4
2004          Jan − 4.2 + 5.8 − 9.9 − 11.7 + 1.8 + 0.1 + 1.7 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.5
         Feb − 2.9 − 3.1 + 0.2 − 1.3 + 1.4 + 0.1 + 1.4 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.7         Mar + 7.1 − 0.2 + 7.2 + 4.6 + 2.6 + 0.1 + 2.5 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.5
liabilities arising from registeredd ebt securities. — 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). — 4Including
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 3Excluding deposits liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
35*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
IV Banks
 
8 Deposits of resident individuals and domestic non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
 
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits
of resident Resident individuals Resident individualsindividualsanddomestic Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employedOther institu- employedOther institutions,
Periodtotal Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month*
 
2001 1,242.9 330.4 320.1 55.8 220.9 43.4 10.2 263.4 242.9 36.3 182.4 24.2
2002 1,271.6 364.5 352.8 61.3 241.4 50.0 11.7 257.9 238.3 35.2 180.5 22.62003 1,301.4 400.4 388.1 66.9 265.1 56.1 12.3 241.0 222.1 29.2 174.5 18.4
2003          Oct 1,285.2 394.7 382.2 68.3 258.7 55.2 12.5 241.7 223.1 30.9 172.7 19.6
         Nov 1,301.0 412.3 399.7 69.9 272.7 57.0 12.6 238.7 220.6 29.8 172.2 18.6         Dec 1,301.4 400.4 388.1 66.9 265.1 56.1 12.3 241.0 222.1 29.2 174.5 18.4
2004          Jan 1,304.6 404.5 392.1 68.6 265.8 57.7 12.5 239.5 221.5 29.1 174.3 18.0
         Feb 1,310.6 411.2 398.3 69.3 269.9 59.1 12.9 238.3 220.6 28.8 173.7 18.1         Mar 1,308.5 410.3 397.0 67.6 270.8 58.6 13.3 237.8 219.8 28.2 173.7 17.9
Changes*
2002 + 29.2 + 34.5 + 33.1 + 5.6 + 22.4 + 5.1 + 1.5 − 5.5 − 4.2 − 1.0 − 1.1 − 2.12003 + 29.2 + 36.0 + 35.3 + 5.6 + 23.7 + 6.0 + 0.6 − 16.9 − 16.2 − 6.0 − 6.0 − 4.2
2003          Oct + 1.6 + 2.0 + 2.2 + 2.7 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 1.8 − 1.3 − 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.2
         Nov + 15.8 + 17.6 + 17.5 + 1.7 + 14.0 + 1.9 + 0.1 − 3.0 − 2.5 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 1.0         Dec + 0.4 − 11.9 − 11.6 − 3.0 − 7.6 − 1.0 − 0.3 + 2.3 + 1.5 − 0.5 + 2.3 − 0.2
2004          Jan + 3.2 + 4.1 + 4.0 + 1.7 + 0.7 + 1.6 + 0.2 − 1.5 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.4
         Feb + 6.0 + 6.7 + 6.2 + 0.6 + 4.1 + 1.5 + 0.4 − 1.2 − 0.9 − 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.1         Mar − 2.1 − 0.9 − 1.3 − 1.7 + 0.9 − 0.5 + 0.4 − 0.6 − 0.8 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.2
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminatedfrom the Report , are not specially marked. — 1Including subordinated liabilities and
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as liabilities arising from registered debt securities. — 2Including deposits
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following MonthlyDEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
 
  
9 Deposits of domestic public authorities at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group
*
 
€ billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 Land  governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
Domestic for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
public to andfor more and  bank item to andfor more and  bank item
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary authorities,
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans
End of year or month*
 
2001 122.7 46.9 1.6 2.7 42.7 0.0 13.2 19.2 2.7 1.8 14.6 0.1 23.2
2002 113.9 45.6 0.9 3.6 41.1 0.0 13.5 18.9 2.5 1.4 14.9 0.1 22.62003 108.1 44.2 2.0 5.2 36.9 0.0 12.6 18.5 3.1 1.3 14.1 0.1 21.9
2003          Oct 101.6 43.0 1.5 4.7 36.8 0.0 13.2 19.0 3.0 1.9 14.1 0.1 22.3
         Nov 104.1 43.6 1.5 4.8 37.3 0.0 13.2 17.7 2.4 1.2 14.1 0.1 22.3         Dec 108.1 44.2 2.0 5.2 36.9 0.0 12.6 18.5 3.1 1.3 14.1 0.1 21.9
2004          Jan 106.3 45.2 1.8 6.3 37.1 0.0 12.6 19.6 3.7 2.7 13.2 0.1 21.9
         Feb 107.4 45.8 1.6 6.8 37.3 0.0 12.7 19.6 3.3 3.1 13.2 0.1 21.8         Mar 106.4 46.2 2.5 7.0 36.7 0.0 12.4 19.6 3.6 2.9 13.0 0.1 20.9
Changes*
2002 − 8.6 − 1.3 − 0.6 + 0.9 − 1.6 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.62003 − 4.8 − 1.4 + 1.1 + 1.7 − 4.2 − 0.0 − 1.0 − 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.7
2003          Oct − 3.4 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 1.1 − 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.1 − + 0.0
         Nov + 2.7 + 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 1.1 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0         Dec + 4.0 + 0.6 + 0.6 + 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.8 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.0 − − 0.4
2004          Jan − 1.8 + 0.9 − 0.3 + 1.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 1.1 + 0.6 + 1.4 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.1
         Feb + 1.1 + 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0         Mar − 1.0 + 0.4 + 0.9 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 1.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and which are included in ”Enterprises”. Statistical breaks have been eliminat ed
its successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, east German Railways from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded
and Federal Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the followingPost AG andDeutsche Telekom AG, andof publicly-ownedenterprises,
36*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Savings deposits  3  Memo item
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year  2 
Included Subordinated
of which liabilities in time
Domestic Domestic (excluding deposits:
up to andup to and Bank negotiable liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arising
tions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  4 loans from repos   Period individuals securities)  5 
End of year or month*
 
20.6 139.3 124.1 6.2 117.9 568.0 558.6 9.4 81.1 0.2 10.5 − 2001
19.6 128.3 129.6 6.3 123.3 568.8 559.9 8.9 80.4 0.2 10.8 − 200218.9 106.7 134.3 6.1 128.2 583.5 574.3 9.2 76.5 0.2 12.0 − 2003
18.6 109.8 131.9 6.0 125.9 572.6 563.3 9.3 76.2 0.2 11.9 − 2003          Oct 
18.1 107.8 130.9 6.1 124.8 573.6 564.5 9.1 76.4 0.2 12.0 −          Nov 
18.9 106.7 134.3 6.1 128.2 583.5 574.3 9.2 76.5 0.2 12.0 −          Dec 
18.1 104.8 134.7 6.1 128.6 583.7 574.4 9.2 76.8 0.2 12.1 − 2004          Jan 
17.8 103.4 134.9 6.0 129.0 584.3 575.0 9.4 76.7 0.2 12.2 −          Feb 
18.0 102.1 135.7 5.9 129.8 584.1 574.7 9.4 76.3 0.2 12.4 −          Mar 
Changes*
− 1.3 − 10.9 + 5.4 + 0.1 + 5.3 + 0.9 + 1.3 − 0.5 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 2002− 0.7 − 21.6 + 4.7 − 0.2 + 4.9 + 14.7 + 14.4 + 0.3 − 4.6 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 2003
− 0.5 − 2.0 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 2003          Oct 
− 0.5 − 2.0 − 1.0 + 0.1 − 1.1 + 1.0 + 1.2 − 0.2 + 0.2 − + 0.2 −          Nov 
+ 0.7 − 1.1 + 3.4 + 0.0 + 3.4 + 9.9 + 9.8 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 −          Dec 
− 0.8 − 1.9 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 2004          Jan 
− 0.3 − 1.4 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 −          Feb 
+ 0.2 − 1.3 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.1 −          Mar 
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). — 3Excluding deposits liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. — 5Included in
under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). — 4Including time deposits. DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
 
   
 
 
 
Local authorities and local authority associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
to andfor more and  bank item to andfor more and  bank item
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans   Period
End of year or month*
 
27.8 9.2 13.8 1.8 3.1 0.2 28.7 2.7 19.5 5.4 1.1 0.1 2001
27.6 10.5 12.2 2.0 3.0 0.2 21.7 2.7 13.7 4.5 0.9 0.1 200224.8 9.9 10.1 1.9 2.8 0.2 20.6 2.8 12.5 4.5 0.8 0.0 2003
22.7 8.6 9.4 1.9 2.8 0.2 16.9 2.1 9.7 4.3 0.8 0.0 2003          Oct 
23.5 9.1 9.7 1.9 2.8 0.2 19.3 2.8 11.3 4.4 0.8 0.0          Nov 
24.8 9.9 10.1 1.9 2.8 0.2 20.6 2.8 12.5 4.5 0.8 0.0          Dec 
22.2 8.2 9.2 2.0 2.8 0.2 19.3 2.4 11.7 4.5 0.8 0.0 2004          Jan 
23.8 9.2 9.8 2.0 2.9 0.2 18.2 2.5 10.2 4.7 0.8 0.0          Feb 
23.0 8.5 9.6 2.0 2.9 0.2 17.6 3.0 9.1 4.7 0.9 0.0          Mar 
Changes*
+ 0.0 + 1.3 − 1.4 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 7.0 − 0.0 − 5.7 − 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 2002− 2.8 − 0.5 − 2.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.0 2003
− 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 1.6 − 0.2 − 1.4 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 2003          Oct 
+ 0.8 + 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.4 + 0.7 + 1.5 + 0.2 + 0.0 −          Nov 
+ 1.3 + 0.8 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.3 − 0.1 + 1.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0          Dec 
− 2.6 − 1.7 − 0.9 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 1.2 − 0.4 − 0.9 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 2004          Jan 
+ 1.6 + 0.9 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 1.2 + 0.1 − 1.4 + 0.1 + 0.0 −          Feb 
− 0.8 − 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − − 0.6 + 0.5 − 1.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0          Mar 
Monthly Report , are not specially marked. — 1Federal Railways Fund, liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. — 3Including
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special deposits under savings and loan contracts. — 4Excluding deposits under
Fund, ”German Unity” Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. — 2Including savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
37*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
IV Banks
 
10 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs)*
 
 
€ billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at three months’ at more than three Memo
notice months’ notice item of which
Interest With
of which of which of which credited maturities
Special Special At three on of moresavings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months’
PeriodTotal Total Total Total Total notice d eposits total Total 2 years facilities  
2 facilities  2 non-banks
End of year or month*
 
2001 586.5 574.5 461.9 327.2 112.7 97.2 12.0 8.8 19.9 112.8 106.0 87.2 6.8
2002 586.2 575.3 472.8 343.5 102.4 88.5 10.9 8.1 17.6 111.3 104.4 86.3 6.92003 600.4 590.3 500.8 377.1 89.5 76.4 10.1 7.9 16.0 107.2 100.3 83.9 7.0
2003          Nov 590.4 580.3 491.9 369.7 88.4 75.6 10.0 7.9 0.4 107.1 100.1 83.9 7.0
         Dec 600.4 590.3 500.8 377.1 89.5 76.4 10.1 7.9 10.9 107.2 100.3 83.9 7.0
2004          Jan 600.6 590.6 502.1 379.2 88.5 76.5 10.0 7.9 0.6 107.4 100.3 84.1 7.0
         Feb 601.4 591.5 503.3 381.4 88.1 76.1 10.0 7.9 0.4 107.1 100.1 84.4 7.0         Mar 601.3 591.4 503.5 382.2 88.0 76.3 9.9 7.8 0.3 106.8 99.8 84.5 7.0
Changes*
2002 − 0.3 + 0.8 + 11.0 + 16.4 − 10.2 − 8.7 − 1.1 − 0.7 . − 1.5 − 1.6 − 0.9 + 0.12003 + 14.2 + 15.1 + 28.0 + 23.8 − 12.9 − 12.1 − 0.8 − 0.2 . − 4.6 − 4.8 − 3.0 + 0.1
2003          Nov + 0.8 + 0.9 + 0.7 + 1.4 + 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 . + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.4
         Dec + 10.0 + 10.0 + 8.9 + 7.0 + 1.1 + 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.0 . + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0
2004          Jan + 0.2 + 0.3 + 1.3 + 2.2 − 1.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 . + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1
         Feb + 0.8 + 0.9 + 1.2 + 2.2 − 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.0         Mar − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.8 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminatedfrom the loan contracts, which are classifiedas time d eposits. — 2Savings deposits
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the minimum or basic rate of
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly interest. — 3Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Excluding deposits under savings and securities. 
 
   
11 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany
*
 
€ billion
Non-negotiable bearer debt securities
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper and money market paper  6 
of which of which
with maturities of Subordinated
with maturities of
Certifi- more more non-
Floating Zero Foreign cates up to andmore up to andmore than 1 year than 1 year negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of including including than including including than debt debt
PeriodTotal  1 bonds  2 deposit 1 year  1 Total 1 year 2 years 2 years bonds  2,3 bonds  4,5 2 years  1 2 years  1 securities securities
End of year or month*)
 
2001 1,472.3 324.0 16.3 144.1 17.6 46.5 124.9 1,300.9 5.8 3.7 1.0 1.2 43.3 2.4
2002 1,462.9 339.2 16.1 159.5 34.7 62.3 120.1 1,280.5 9.9 7.8 0.7 1.3 42.4 2.32003 1,490.1 353.4 20.8 177.5 39.0 70.1 105.2 1,314.8 2.4 0.6 0.5 1.2 40.2 3.2
2003          Nov 1,509.0 351.1 21.5 182.2 39.4 73.0 105.5 1,330.5 2.2 0.4 0.5 1.3 40.2 3.2
         Dec 1,490.1 353.4 20.8 177.5 39.0 70.1 105.2 1,314.8 2.4 0.6 0.5 1.2 40.2 3.2
2004          Jan 1,497.2 355.3 21.8 185.1 37.3 69.7 102.7 1,324.8 2.3 0.6 0.5 1.2 40.0 3.2
         Feb 1,508.0 357.0 22.1 184.2 33.1 64.3 108.3 1,335.4 2.2 0.5 0.5 1.2 40.5 3.2         Mar 1,535.3 370.8 22.1 198.6 36.9 68.3 110.9 1,356.0 2.5 0.8 0.5 1.3 41.0 3.3
Changes*
2002 + 9.1 + 6.3 − 4.5 + 12.1 + 16.2 + 14.2 + 4.6 − 9.7 + 4.8 + 4.9 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 1.9 − 0.12003 + 19.6 + 7.0 + 4.7 + 13.2 + 3.2 + 0.1 − 14.9 + 34.4 + 2.6 + 2.9 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 1.5 + 0.3
2003          Nov + 6.3 + 3.7 + 0.8 − 4.7 − 1.0 + 2.3 + 0.6 + 3.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0
         Dec − 18.8 + 1.8 − 1.3 − 4.7 − 0.4 − 2.9 − 0.3 − 15.7 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0
2004          Jan + 7.0 + 1.8 + 1.1 + 7.6 − 1.7 − 0.5 − 2.5 + 10.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.0
         Feb + 10.8 + 1.8 + 0.2 − 0.8 − 4.2 − 5.4 + 5.6 + 10.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.5 − 0.0         Mar + 24.8 + 13.7 + 0.0 + 11.8 + 3.7 + 4.0 + 2.6 + 18.2 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.5 + 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminatedfrom the 2Including debt securities denominated in foreign currencies. — 3Issue
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as value when floated. — 4Including floating rate notes and zero coupon
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly bonds denominated in foreign currencies. — 5Bonds denominated in
Report , are not specially marked. — 1Decreases in June 2002 causedby non-euro-area currencies. — 6Non-negotiable bearer debt securities are
transition to net recording of debt securities outstanding (ie less own debt classified among bank savings bonds (see also Table IV.10, foo tnote 3). 
securities). The statistical break has been eliminatedfrom the changes. —
38*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
IV  Banks
  
12  Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany*
  Interim statements
  
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs)  5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memo
bal- item ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer New
andLoans Treasury Deposits Deposits d ebt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber (ex- Bank savings Interim andsavings savings ities ing pub- enteredof Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations total loans  
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month  8 loans)  1 paper)  4 serves)  7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2003 27 172.9 30.1 0.1 10.6 37.3 63.6 8.6 11.3 0.4 29.3 106.8 4.0 7.1 7.2 105.5
2004          Jan 27 172.6 30.3 0.1 10.5 37.1 63.8 8.6 11.7 0.4 29.2 107.1 4.3 7.1 7.3 9.4
         Feb 27 173.3 30.6 0.1 11.0 36.7 64.0 8.5 11.8 0.4 29.2 107.4 4.3 7.2 7.3 8.6         Mar 27 174.9 31.3 0.1 11.3 36.5 64.5 8.6 12.1 0.4 29.9 108.3 4.1 7.2 7.3 9.6
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2004          Jan 16 124.4 23.1 0.0 5.6 23.8 46.1 7.8 8.2 0.3 21.0 72.9 4.1 7.1 4.7 6.1         Feb 16 124.9 23.5 0.0 5.8 23.5 46.3 7.8 8.2 0.3 21.0 73.2 4.1 7.2 4.7 5.4         Mar 16 126.2 23.8 0.0 6.1 23.3 46.7 7.9 8.4 0.3 21.7 73.7 4.0 7.2 4.7 6.1
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2004          Jan 11 48.2 7.1 0.1 4.9 13.3 17.8 0.7 3.5 0.1 8.2 34.2 0.2 − 2.5 3.3         Feb 11 48.3 7.1 0.1 5.2 13.2 17.8 0.7 3.6 0.1 8.2 34.3 0.2 − 2.5 3.1         Mar 11 48.7 7.5 0.1 5.2 13.1 17.8 0.7 3.7 0.1 8.1 34.6 0.2 − 2.5 3.4
Trends in building and loan association business
  
€ billion
Changes in deposits Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans  10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings andsavings andments loan contracts loan contracts  
9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited interim deposits of which of which
on under Applied Applied and ofwhich of Memo Amounts deposits
cancelled to settle- to settle- bridging
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which item paid intosavings savings and which interim interim andalloc- Repay- Housing
andand  loan loan Net and andother ated ments bonusesloan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Periodtracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts  
9 tions  11 ceived  12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2003 27.0 2.9 5.7 48.2 29.7 43.7 17.9 4.0 8.2 3.2 17.5 12.2 8.0 14.8 11.9 0.6
2004          Jan 2.2 0.0 0.4 3.3 2.4 3.3 1.4 0.4 0.7 0.3 1.2 11.9 8.0 1.0 0.1
         Feb 2.0 0.0 0.4 3.4 2.3 2.8 1.2 0.3 0.5 0.2 1.1 11.9 8.1 1.1 0.0         Mar 2.9 0.0 0.5 3.7 2.4 3.8 1.6 0.3 0.7 0.3 1.5 11.7 8.0 1.3 . 0.1
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2004          Jan 1.5 0.0 0.3 2.3 1.6 2.5 1.0 0.3 0.4 0.2 1.0 7.3 3.9 0.7 0.0         Feb 1.3 0.0 0.3 2.3 1.4 2.0 0.8 0.2 0.3 0.2 0.9 7.2 3.9 0.8 0.0         Mar 1.9 0.0 0.3 2.6 1.6 2.8 1.1 0.2 0.4 0.2 1.2 7.1 3.9 0.9 . 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2004          Jan 0.7 − 0.2 0.9 0.7 0.8 0.4 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.2 4.6 4.0 0.3 0.0         Feb 0.7 0.0 0.2 1.1 0.9 0.8 0.4 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.2 4.7 4.2 0.4 0.0         Mar 1.0 0.0 0.2 1.1 0.9 1.0 0.5 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.2 4.6 4.1 0.4 . 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are count as new contracts. — 9For disbursements of deposits under savings
not specially marked. — 1Including postal giro account balances, claims on and loan contracts arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capital
building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt securities disbursed“. — 10Including housing bonuses credited. — 11Only allocations
andcentral bank cred it balances. — 2Loans under savings and loan accepted by the beneficiaries; including allocations applied to settlement of
contracts andinterim andbrid ging loans. — 3Including money market interim and bridging loans. — 12The amounts already credited to the
paper andsmall amounts of other securities issuedby banks. — 4Including accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in “Amounts paid into
equalisation claims. — 5Includ ing liabilities to build ing and loan savings andloan accounts“ and“Interest andrepayments receivedon
associations. — 6Including small amounts of savings deposits. — 7Including building loans“. 
participation rights capital andfundfor general banking risks. — 8Total
39*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
IV  Banks
  
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
  
  
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
Loans Credit  balances and loans
German   
banks to German
(MFIs)   non-banks
withforeign foreign of which
branches Money enter- Money
branches  1 
and/or and/or market prises to marketforeign foreign Balance paper, andforeign paper,subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- house- non- secur- Other
Period diaries diaries total Total Total banks banks Total Total Total holds banks ities  
2 assets ities 2,3 
Foreign  branches End of year or month *
  
2001 68 216 1,689.3 870.6 761.6 213.6 548.0 109.0 744.9 549.0 20.6 17.2 528.4 195.9 73.9
2002 60 205 1,407.4 679.9 572.3 198.3 374.0 107.6 668.5 484.0 18.8 15.0 465.1 184.6 59.02003 55 202 1,294.1 599.0 522.9 185.6 337.3 76.1 632.7 438.0 19.0 16.8 419.0 194.7 62.5
2003          May 58 205 1,429.1 660.4 560.4 192.7 367.6 100.0 714.1 529.3 17.9 14.7 511.4 184.9 54.6
         June 58 205 1,455.9 672.3 580.1 190.6 389.5 92.2 716.6 524.9 17.3 14.8 507.6 191.7 67.0
         July 55 202 1,434.0 651.3 570.4 192.4 377.9 81.0 704.0 492.8 19.2 16.0 473.5 211.3 78.6
         Aug 54 202 1,415.0 627.2 551.3 177.8 373.5 75.8 717.8 504.8 19.5 15.8 485.3 213.0 70.0         Sep 54 201 1,380.3 634.8 560.8 171.2 389.6 74.0 685.3 484.2 19.1 16.3 465.0 201.2 60.1
         Oct 55 200 1,368.7 621.8 540.7 168.3 372.5 81.1 680.1 476.0 20.0 16.5 456.0 204.1 66.8
         Nov 55 201 1,356.0 618.6 539.3 173.7 365.6 79.2 670.9 471.2 18.3 15.7 452.8 199.7 66.6         Dec 55 202 1,294.1 599.0 522.9 185.6 337.3 76.1 632.7 438.0 19.0 16.8 419.0 194.7 62.5
2004          Jan 55 202 1,390.3 647.7 566.3 191.5 374.8 81.3 673.5 472.8 19.2 16.9 453.6 200.8 69.1
         Feb 55 203 1,413.6 666.3 587.2 190.0 397.2 79.1 679.6 482.5 19.3 17.1 463.1 197.1 67.8
Changes *
2002 − 8 − 11 −139.1 −133.4 −139.9 − 15.4 −124.5 + 6.5 − 3.6 − 9.2 − 1.9 − 2.2 − 7.3 + 5.7 − 2.22003 − 5 − 3 − 6.8 − 45.3 − 17.4 − 12.7 − 4.7 − 27.9 + 22.5 − 2.5 + 0.2 + 1.7 − 2.7 + 24.9 + 15.9
2003          May − 1 − + 25.6 + 8.8 + 14.3 + 0.5 + 13.7 − 5.5 + 8.7 + 5.0 − 0.2 − 0.8 + 5.2 + 3.7 + 8.1
         June − − + 12.3 + 7.1 + 15.2 − 2.1 + 17.3 − 8.1 − 5.5 − 10.3 − 0.6 + 0.1 − 9.7 + 4.8 + 10.7
         July − 3 − 3 − 26.6 − 22.6 − 11.3 + 1.8 − 13.1 − 11.3 − 15.1 − 34.0 + 1.9 + 1.2 − 35.9 + 18.9 + 11.2
         Aug − 1 − − 37.1 − 30.3 − 24.8 − 14.6 − 10.2 − 5.5 + 3.5 + 4.6 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 4.3 − 1.1 − 10.2         Sep − − 1 − 9.1 + 15.8 + 17.0 − 6.6 + 23.5 − 1.2 − 18.0 − 9.8 − 0.4 + 0.5 − 9.4 − 8.2 − 6.9
         Oct + 1 − 1 − 13.6 − 13.7 − 20.8 − 3.0 − 17.8 + 7.1 − 6.4 − 8.9 + 0.9 + 0.2 − 9.8 + 2.5 + 6.5
         Nov − + 1 + 10.8 + 4.9 + 6.0 + 5.5 + 0.5 − 1.1 + 3.8 + 4.6 − 1.7 − 0.8 + 6.3 − 0.8 + 2.1         Dec − + 1 − 28.0 − 8.3 − 6.2 + 11.9 − 18.0 − 2.2 − 19.6 − 19.5 + 0.7 + 1.0 − 20.2 − 0.1 − 0.1
2004          Jan − − + 80.6 + 42.7 + 38.0 + 6.0 + 32.1 + 4.7 + 31.7 + 28.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 28.0 + 3.7 + 6.2
         Feb − + 1 + 24.8 + 19.5 + 21.7 − 1.6 + 23.2 − 2.2 + 6.7 + 9.7 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 9.5 − 3.0 − 1.3
  
  
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month *
  
2001 46 200 811.5 342.4 262.8 105.7 157.1 79.6 382.2 293.1 51.9 47.7 241.2 89.2 87.0
2002 47 200 704.2 333.7 265.5 125.7 139.8 68.2 300.1 239.1 46.7 42.9 192.4 61.0 70.42003 46 179 645.8 307.2 246.4 127.3 119.1 60.7 277.0 213.8 41.5 37.9 172.3 63.3 61.6
2003          May 48 195 645.0 300.0 234.0 119.7 114.2 66.1 278.0 215.8 42.7 39.0 173.1 62.2 66.9
         June 48 196 651.1 302.6 236.8 123.4 113.3 65.9 283.2 220.3 41.9 38.7 178.5 62.9 65.3
         July 47 195 668.1 323.1 255.1 127.5 127.6 68.0 278.0 215.0 41.2 38.5 173.7 63.0 67.1
         Aug 47 194 666.8 313.5 246.2 126.4 119.8 67.3 284.9 219.6 41.8 38.7 177.8 65.3 68.4         Sep 47 190 661.6 311.9 248.2 131.2 117.1 63.6 274.6 209.8 40.3 37.4 169.5 64.8 75.1
         Oct 46 187 652.0 308.5 244.4 128.1 116.3 64.1 272.2 206.3 39.3 36.9 167.0 65.9 71.4
         Nov 46 182 649.9 308.4 244.9 128.7 116.3 63.5 270.2 204.5 39.8 37.0 164.7 65.7 71.3         Dec 46 179 645.8 307.2 246.4 127.3 119.1 60.7 277.0 213.8 41.5 37.9 172.3 63.3 61.6
2004          Jan 46 177 618.1 295.8 233.1 115.2 117.9 62.7 263.3 199.1 41.6 37.9 157.5 64.2 59.0
         Feb 46 179 621.3 297.2 235.7 114.8 120.9 61.5 260.4 196.5 38.8 37.1 157.7 63.9 63.7
Changes *
2002 + 1 + 0 − 78.3 + 6.7 + 13.3 + 20.0 − 6.7 − 6.6 − 70.0 − 42.0 − 5.2 − 4.8 − 36.8 − 28.1 − 15.0
2003 − 1 − 21 − 32.8 − 14.0 − 10.7 + 1.6 − 12.3 − 3.3 − 11.9 − 14.2 − 5.2 − 5.0 − 9.0 + 2.3 − 6.9
2003          May − − + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 2.6 + 2.5 + 0.1 − 0.8 − 1.6 + 0.5 − 0.9 − 2.1 + 0.8 + 1.0
         June − + 1 + 2.3 + 0.6 + 1.6 + 3.7 − 2.1 − 1.0 + 3.5 + 2.9 − 0.9 − 0.3 + 3.8 + 0.6 − 1.8
         July − 1 − 1 + 15.9 + 20.0 + 18.0 + 4.0 + 14.0 + 2.0 − 5.8 − 6.0 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 5.4 + 0.2 + 1.7
         Aug − − 1 − 6.0 − 12.0 − 10.3 − 1.1 − 9.2 − 1.6 + 4.8 + 2.6 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 2.0 + 2.2 + 1.1         Sep − − 4 + 2.1 + 1.8 + 4.2 + 4.8 − 0.6 − 2.4 − 6.9 − 6.5 − 1.5 − 1.3 − 5.0 − 0.4 + 7.1
         Oct − 1 − 3 − 10.2 − 3.8 − 4.1 − 3.1 − 1.1 + 0.3 − 2.6 − 3.6 − 1.0 − 0.5 − 2.6 + 1.0 − 3.8
         Nov − − 5 + 2.2 + 2.1 + 2.0 + 0.6 + 1.4 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.2 + 0.3         Dec − − 3 + 2.7 + 2.1 + 3.7 − 1.4 + 5.1 − 1.6 + 9.5 + 11.9 + 1.6 + 0.9 + 10.3 − 2.4 − 8.9
2004          Jan − − 2 − 30.7 − 13.1 − 14.4 − 12.1 − 2.3 + 1.4 − 14.9 − 15.8 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 15.9 + 0.9 − 2.8
         Feb − + 2 + 3.6 + 1.5 + 2.6 − 0.4 + 3.0 − 1.1 − 2.6 − 2.3 − 2.8 − 0.7 + 0.5 − 0.3 + 4.7
*From March 2000, including the foreign branches of building and loan population have not been eliminated from the flow figures for the foreign
associations. In this table “foreign“ also includes the country of domicile of subsidiaries.) The figures for the latest date are always to be regarde das
the foreign branches andforeign subsid iaries. Statistical revisions have been provisional; subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly
eliminatedfrom the changes. (Breaks owing to changes in the reporting Report, are not specially marked. — 1Several branches in a given
40*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
IV  Banks
  
      
  
Deposits
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  4 
Money
Short-term market Medium  and long-term
paper
of which of which and debt
enter- enter- Working securities
out- capital Other prises  and prises  and
German Foreign house- house- Foreign stand- and own liabil-
Total Total banks Total Total Total holds Total holds ing  5 funds ities  6   Period banks non-banks
End of year or month * Foreign  branches
  
1,271.3 855.3 194.0 661.2 416.0 57.4 54.2 51.2 3.2 3.0 358.6 316.8 24.0 77.2 2001
1,116.0 758.5 250.1 508.4 357.5 62.6 58.4 55.0 4.2 3.8 294.9 212.1 25.9 53.6 20021,076.8 727.6 267.1 460.5 349.2 66.2 60.6 56.8 5.7 5.4 283.0 139.4 30.5 47.4 2003
1,181.0 774.5 273.5 501.0 406.5 73.6 68.5 63.8 5.1 4.8 332.9 167.2 24.7 56.2 2003          May
1,205.6 795.5 286.5 508.9 410.1 71.9 66.8 62.5 5.1 4.8 338.2 165.5 24.8 60.1          June
1,178.6 779.5 292.7 486.8 399.0 77.7 72.6 67.5 5.1 4.8 321.4 164.0 24.8 66.6          July
1,165.2 787.6 292.0 495.6 377.6 73.2 68.1 63.1 5.1 4.8 304.4 159.5 24.8 65.6          Aug 1,143.7 749.9 274.6 475.3 393.8 73.5 68.1 63.3 5.4 5.1 320.3 149.7 24.7 62.2          Sep 
1,136.7 739.5 265.4 474.1 397.2 76.4 70.9 66.7 5.5 5.2 320.9 149.0 24.8 58.2          Oct 
1,124.7 738.8 261.6 477.2 385.9 69.5 64.0 60.6 5.5 5.2 316.4 149.4 26.6 55.3          Nov 1,076.8 727.6 267.1 460.5 349.2 66.2 60.6 56.8 5.7 5.4 283.0 139.4 30.5 47.4          Dec 
1,155.0 765.6 281.4 484.3 389.4 74.0 68.0 64.8 6.0 5.7 315.4 149.9 28.9 56.4 2004          Jan 
1,186.4 790.4 267.1 523.2 396.1 72.4 66.3 62.6 6.1 5.7 323.7 144.6 28.9 53.7          Feb 
Changes *
− 53.4 − 31.7 + 56.0 − 87.7 − 21.7 + 5.2 + 4.2 + 3.8 + 1.0 + 0.8 − 26.9 −104.8 + 1.8 + 17.2 2002
+ 34.4 + 12.6 + 17.0 − 4.4 + 21.8 + 3.6 + 2.1 + 1.7 + 1.5 + 1.6 + 18.1 − 72.6 + 4.6 + 26.8 2003
+ 25.2 + 8.2 + 6.1 + 2.1 + 17.1 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 17.4 − 11.3 − 0.1 + 11.8 2003          May
+ 14.7 + 15.1 + 13.0 + 2.1 − 0.4 − 1.7 − 1.7 − 1.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.3 − 1.7 + 0.0 − 0.7          June
− 30.1 − 17.8 + 6.2 − 24.0 − 12.4 + 5.7 + 5.8 + 4.9 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 18.1 − 1.4 + 0.0 + 4.9          July
− 25.5 + 0.6 − 0.7 + 1.3 − 26.1 − 4.5 − 4.5 − 4.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 21.5 − 4.6 + 0.0 − 7.1          Aug − 3.9 − 27.7 − 17.4 − 10.3 + 23.8 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 23.5 − 9.7 − 0.1 + 4.7          Sep 
− 8.3 − 11.4 − 9.2 − 2.1 + 3.1 + 2.9 + 2.8 + 3.4 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 4.6          Oct 
+ 4.4 + 8.8 − 3.7 + 12.5 − 4.4 − 6.9 − 6.9 − 6.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.5 + 0.5 + 1.8 + 4.1          Nov − 23.4 + 2.8 + 5.5 − 2.7 − 26.2 − 3.3 − 3.5 − 3.9 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 22.9 − 10.0 + 3.9 + 1.4          Dec 
+ 66.6 + 31.0 + 14.2 + 16.8 + 35.5 + 7.8 + 7.4 + 8.0 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 27.8 + 10.5 − 1.5 + 5.1 2004          Jan 
+ 31.9 + 25.5 − 14.2 + 39.7 + 6.4 − 1.6 − 1.7 − 2.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 8.0 − 5.3 − 0.0 − 1.7          Feb 
  
  
End of year or month * Foreign  subsidiaries
  
576.5 362.5 79.2 283.3 214.0 36.4 32.5 23.9 3.9 3.8 177.6 99.8 47.3 87.9 2001
503.5 307.7 99.5 208.2 195.7 27.0 22.5 21.1 4.5 4.5 168.7 78.4 43.0 79.3 2002467.9 283.1 99.8 183.3 184.8 29.9 25.9 24.0 4.0 3.9 155.0 68.2 41.3 68.4 2003
459.8 281.3 92.2 189.1 178.5 29.0 24.7 24.4 4.4 4.3 149.4 72.8 41.2 71.1 2003          May
465.1 284.0 94.2 189.8 181.1 28.5 24.2 23.7 4.3 4.3 152.6 74.7 41.5 69.8          June
477.4 287.0 94.0 192.9 190.4 31.2 26.9 26.6 4.3 4.3 159.2 77.4 42.7 70.7          July
477.4 292.2 96.5 195.7 185.2 28.2 23.6 23.3 4.5 4.5 157.1 75.3 43.0 71.1          Aug 478.5 292.6 95.8 196.9 185.9 29.8 25.6 25.3 4.2 4.2 156.0 69.3 40.8 73.1          Sep 
469.3 288.2 92.9 195.3 181.1 29.6 25.4 23.5 4.3 4.2 151.5 71.0 40.1 71.6          Oct 
469.7 291.3 94.9 196.5 178.3 31.0 26.8 24.4 4.2 4.2 147.3 71.9 39.2 69.1          Nov 467.9 283.1 99.8 183.3 184.8 29.9 25.9 24.0 4.0 3.9 155.0 68.2 41.3 68.4          Dec 
444.3 263.0 86.3 176.7 181.3 30.0 26.0 25.7 4.0 3.9 151.3 67.9 38.3 67.6 2004          Jan 
447.4 263.5 86.0 177.4 183.9 30.1 26.1 25.7 4.0 3.9 153.8 68.3 39.0 66.7          Feb 
Changes *
− 47.1 − 37.4 + 20.3 − 57.8 − 9.7 − 9.4 − 10.0 − 2.9 + 0.6 + 0.6 − 0.3 − 21.4 − 4.4 − 5.4 2002
− 13.8 − 10.3 + 0.3 − 10.6 − 3.5 + 2.8 + 3.4 + 2.9 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 6.3 − 10.3 − 1.6 − 7.2 2003
+ 1.5 + 0.0 − 3.3 + 3.3 + 1.5 + 1.2 + 1.4 + 1.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 2.2 − 0.0 + 0.9 2003          May
+ 2.0 + 0.6 + 2.0 − 1.4 + 1.4 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 1.9 + 1.9 + 0.3 − 1.8          June
+ 11.4 + 2.4 − 0.1 + 2.6 + 9.0 + 2.7 + 2.7 + 2.9 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 6.2 + 2.7 + 1.1 + 0.6          July
− 3.8 + 2.7 + 2.4 + 0.3 − 6.6 − 3.1 − 3.3 − 3.3 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 3.5 − 2.1 + 0.3 − 0.4          Aug + 7.5 + 4.7 − 0.7 + 5.4 + 2.8 + 1.7 + 2.0 + 2.0 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 1.2 − 6.0 − 2.2 + 2.8          Sep 
− 9.7 − 4.7 − 2.9 − 1.9 − 5.0 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 1.8 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 4.8 + 1.7 − 0.6 − 1.6          Oct 
+ 4.0 + 5.4 + 2.0 + 3.4 − 1.5 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.8 + 0.9 − 0.9 − 1.8          Nov + 4.0 − 4.4 + 4.9 − 9.3 + 8.4 − 1.2 − 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 9.5 − 3.7 + 2.1 + 0.3          Dec 
− 26.1 − 21.4 − 13.5 − 7.9 − 4.6 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.7 − 0.3 − 3.0 − 1.4 2004          Jan 
+ 3.2 + 0.7 − 0.2 + 0.9 + 2.6 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 2.5 + 0.4 + 0.7 − 0.6          Feb 
country of domicile are regarded as a single branch. — 2Treasury bills, subord inatedliabilities andnon-negotiable d ebt securities. — 5Issues of
Treasury discount paper and other money market paper, debt negotiable and non-negotiable debt securities and money market
securities. — 3Including own debt securities. — 4Excluding paper. — 6 Including subordinated liabilities. 
41*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
V  Minimum reserves
 
1  Reserve ratios
Germany Euro area
 
% of liabilities subject to reserve requirements % of reserve base  1 
Sight Time
Applicable from liabilities liabilities Applicable from Ratio Savings deposits
1995  Aug 1 2    2    1.5    1999  Jan 1 2    
 
   
1Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the appli-
cation of minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of
0% applies pursuant to Article 4 (1)). 
 
  
2  Reserve maintenance in Germany up to the end of 1998
− pursuant to the Minimum Reserves Order of the Bundesbank 
 
DM million
Liabilities subject to reserve requirements Excess reserves  4 
Monthly Required% of the
average  1 Total reserves  2 Level Deficiencies Sight liabilities Time liabilities Savings deposits Actual reserves  3 required  reserves
1995          Dec 2,066,565 579,337 519,456 967,772 36,492 37,337 845 2.3 3
1996          Dec 2,201,464 655,483 474,342 1,071,639 38,671 39,522 851 2.2 41997          Dec 2,327,879 734,986 476,417 1,116,477 40,975 41,721 745 1.8 31998          Dec 2,576,889 865,444 564,878 1,146,567 45,805 46,432 627 1.4 4
1Pursuant to sections 5 to 7 of the Minimum Reserves Order. 2Amount balances of the credit institutions subject to reserve requirements on their
after applying the reserve ratios to the liabilities subject to reserve require- giro accounts at the Bundesbank. — 4 Actual reserves less required reserves. 
ments (section 5 (1) of the Minimum Reserves Order). — 3Average credit
 
 
3  Reserve maintenance in the euro area
− from 1999, pursuant to the ECB Regulation on the application of minimum reserves in accordance with
Article 19.1 of the Statute of the ESCB 
 
Maintenance Required reserves
period before deduction Required reserves
of lump-sum Lump-sum beginning in  1 after deduction of
Reserve base  2 allowance  3 allowance  4 Deficiencies  7 lump-sum allowance Current account  5 Excess reserves  6 
Euro area ( €  billion)
 
2003          Sep 6,588.6 131.8 0.5 131.2 131.9 0.6 0.0
         Oct 6,578.4 131.6 0.5 131.0 131.8 0.7 0.0
         Nov 6,615.0 132.3 0.5 131.8 132.6 0.8 0.0         Dec 6,664.2 133.3 0.5 132.8 133.6 0.9 0.0
2004          Jan 6,696.7 133.9 0.5 133.4 134.1 0.7 0.0
         Feb  
8 −−−−−−−
         Mar 6,756.2 135.1 0.5 134.6 135.3 0.7 0.0
         Apr  p ... ... ... 134.4 ... ... ...
         May ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Of which:  Germany ( €  million)
2003          Sep 1,871,273 37,425 219 37,207 37,455 248 1
         Oct 1,872,119 37,442 218 37,224 37,476 252 5
         Nov 1,863,105 37,262 218 37,044 37,373 329 1         Dec 1,884,373 37,687 217 37,470 37,852 382 0
2004          Jan 1,891,545 37,831 217 37,614 37,860 246 4
         Feb  
8 −−−−−−−
         Mar 1,885,245 37,705 217 37,488 37,784 296 3
         Apr  p 1,883,369 37,667 216 37,451 ... ... ...
         May  p 1,911,592 38,232 216 38,016 ... ... ...
1Up to December 2003, the Eurosystem’s reserve maintenance periods application of minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve
began on the 24th d ay of each month andend edon the 23rdd ay of the ratio of 0% applies, pursuant to Article 4 (1)). — 3Amount after applying
following month (with the first reserve maintenance periodlasting from 1 the reserve ratios to the reserve base. — 4Article 5 (2) of the Regulation of
January 1999 until 23 February 1999). From March 2004, the reserve the European Central Bank on the application of minimum reserves. —
maintenance periodwill start on the settlement d ay of the main refinancing 5Average credit balances of the credit institutions at the national central
operation immediately following the meeting of the Governing Council of banks. — 6Average credit balances less required reserves after deduction of
the ECB for which the monthly discussion of the monetary policy stance is the lump-sum allowance. — 7Required reserves after deduction of the
scheduled. For the transitional period, provision has been made for a lump-sum allowance. — 8Owing to changes in the operational framework
extend edreserve maintenance periodlasting from 24 January until 9 March for the monetary policy, no reserve maintenance periodbegan in February2004. — 2Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the 2004. 
42*V  Minimum reserves

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
VI Interest rates
 
1 ECB interest rates 2 Base rates
 
 
% per annum % per annum
Base rate
as per
Main Main Discount Base rate
Marginal Marginal Rate as per refinancing refinancing
Applicable Deposit lending Applicable Deposit lending Applicable Applicable Civil Code operations operations Transition
from facility 1 facility from facility 1 facility from Act  2 from 3 
1999 Jan                  1 2.00 3.00 4.50 2002 Dec                  6 1.75 2.75 3.75 1999 Jan                  1 2.50 2002 Jan                  1 2.57
         Jan                  4 2.75 3.00 3.25          May                  1 1.95          July                  1 2.47
         Jan                22 2.00 3.00 4.50 2003 Mar                  7 1.50 2.50 3.50
         Apr                  9 1.50 2.50 3.50          June                  6 1.00 2.00 3.00 2000 Jan                  1 2.68 2003 Jan                  1 1.97
         Nov                  5 2.00 3.00 4.00          May                  1 3.42          July                  1 1.22
         Sep                  1 4.26
2000 Feb                  4 2.25 3.25 4.25 2004 Jan                  1 1.14
         Mar                17 2.50 3.50 4.50 2001 Sep                  1 3.62
         Apr                28 2.75 3.75 4.75
         June                 9 3.25 4.25 5.25 2002 Jan                  1 2.71
         Sep                  1 3.50 4.50 5.50          to
         Oct                  6 3.75 4.75 5.75          Apr                  3
 
2001 May               11 3.50 4.50 5.50
         Aug                31 3.25 4.25 5.25
         Sep                18 2.75 3.75 4.75
         Nov                  9 2.25 3.25 4.25
1Up to 21 June 2000, fixedrate tend ers; from 28 June 2000, variable rate Act, readin conjunction with the Regulation Governing the Use of the Base
tenders at minimum bid rate. — 2Pursuant to the Discount Rate Transition Rate as a Reference Variable. — 3 Pursuant to section 247 of the Civil Code. 
 
 
 
3 Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders
 
 
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
BidAllotment Minimum Weighted
amount amount Fixed rate bid rate Marginal rate  1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement
€
 million % per annum ... days
Main refinancing operations
2004 Apr                  7 255,399 218,500 − 2.00 2.00 2.01 7
         Apr                14 265,103 205,500 − 2.00 2.00 2.01 7
         Apr                21 267,511 211,000 − 2.00 2.00 2.01 7
         Apr                28 270,499 220,000 − 2.00 2.00 2.01 7
         May                 5 267,916 211,000 − 2.00 2.00 2.01 7
         May               12 273,449 207,000 − 2.00 2.00 2.01 7
Longer-term refinancing operations
2004 Jan                29 47,117 25,000 − − 2.03 2.04 91
         Feb                26 34,597 25,000 − − 2.01 2.03 91
         Apr                  1 44,153 25,000 − − 1.85 1.90 91
         Apr                29 54,243 25,000 − − 2.01 2.03 91
Source: ECB. — 1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were   
allotted or collected.  
 
 
 
4 Money market rates, by month
 
 
% per annum
Money market rates reported by Frankfurt banks  1 Euribor  3 
One- One- Three- Six- Nine- Twelve-
week month month month month month
Overnight money Three-month funds Eonia  2 funds funds funds funds funds funds
Reporting Monthly Lowest andMonthly Lowest andperiodaverages highest rates averages highest rates Monthly averages
2003          Oct 2.02 1.40 − 2.11 2.13 2.09 − 2.16 2.01 2.08 2.10 2.14 2.17 2.23 2.30
         Nov 1.98 1.35 − 2.14 2.15 2.11 − 2.17 1.97 2.06 2.09 2.16 2.22 2.31 2.41         Dec 2.01
4 1.55 − 2.70 2.13 2.09 − 2.16 2.06 2.09 2.13 2.15 2.20 2.28 2.38
2004          Jan 2.02 1.80 − 2.09 2.07 2.04 − 2.12 2.02 2.06 2.08 2.09 2.12 2.15 2.22         Feb 2.03 2.00 − 2.08 2.05 2.02 − 2.09 2.03 2.06 2.06 2.07 2.09 2.11 2.16         Mar 2.01 1.80 − 2.08 2.01 1.92 − 2.06 2.01 2.05 2.04 2.03 2.02 2.02 2.06
         Apr 2.07 2.00 − 2.80 2.03 1.92 − 2.07 2.08 2.05 2.05 2.05 2.06 2.11 2.16
1Money market rates are not fixed or quoted officially; the monthly aver- of real turnover accord ing to the act/360 methodandpublishedvia
ages computed from daily quotations are unweighted. — 2Euro OverNight Moneyline Telerate. — 3Euro Interbank OfferedRate: unweightedaverage
Index Average: weighted average overnight rate for interbank operations rate calculated by Moneyline Telerate since 30 December 1998 according to
calculatedby the European Central Bank since 4 January 1999 on the basis the act/360 method . — 4 At end-December, 2.05% to 2.35%. 
43*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates for outstanding amounts and new business of banks (MFIs) in the European monetary union *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
Effective interest rate % per annum  1 
Non-financial Loans to households Loans to
Households’ corporations’ non-financial
deposits deposits Housing loans Consumer credit and other loans corporations
with an agreed maturity of with a maturity of
over 1 year over 1 year over 1 year
End of up to over up to over up to and up to over up to and up to over up to and up to over
month 2 years 2 years 2 years 2 years 1 year 5 years 5 years 1 year 5 years 5 years 1 year 5 years 5 years
2003          June 2.18 3.48 2.26 4.45 5.30 5.13 5.39 8.38 7.37 6.03 4.72 4.47 4.90
         July 2.08 3.43 2.24 4.40 5.21 5.07 5.31 8.31 7.28 5.96 4.60 4.33 4.81
         Aug 2.04 3.43 2.20 4.26 5.11 4.99 5.25 8.26 7.23 6.07 4.53 4.22 4.75         Sep 2.01 3.44 2.23 4.32 5.05 4.95 5.24 8.28 7.26 6.00 4.55 4.20 4.75
         Oct 1.97 3.47 2.12 4.33 4.97 4.92 5.20 8.11 7.12 5.85 4.55 4.12 4.71
         Nov 1.98 3.44 2.13 4.43 4.97 4.90 5.17 7.97 7.09 5.82 4.51 4.18 4.67         Dec 1.97 3.54 2.15 4.25 4.96 4.88 5.14 8.05 7.05 6.00 4.53 4.23 4.67
2004          Jan 1.94 3.36 2.09 4.26 4.90 4.89 5.11 8.15 7.02 5.92 4.55 4.08 4.56
         Feb 1.93 3.42 2.09 4.20 4.87 4.90 5.11 8.13 7.16 5.95 4.60 4.07 4.58
 
 
(b) New business +
 
Effective interest rate % per annum  1 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of with an agreed maturity of
over 1 year over 1 year
Reporting up to and up to over up to over up to and up to over
periodOvernight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years
2003          June 0.76 2.00 2.21 2.61 2.23 3.01 1.00 2.10 2.18 3.05
         July 0.68 1.91 2.10 2.32 2.14 2.93 0.88 2.02 2.14 2.73
         Aug 0.68 1.91 2.12 2.51 1.99 2.88 0.88 2.03 2.27 3.56         Sep 0.69 1.87 2.12 2.43 2.00 2.85 0.87 2.00 2.29 3.63
         Oct 0.69 1.89 2.16 2.51 2.05 2.73 0.89 1.98 2.23 3.89
         Nov 0.70 1.87 2.24 2.61 2.01 2.70 0.87 1.97 2.33 2.70         Dec 0.69 1.89 2.40 2.41 2.01 2.68 0.88 2.00 2.42 3.35
2004          Jan 0.69 1.91 2.37 2.74 2.02 2.65 0.95 1.99 2.07 3.12
         Feb 0.70 1.87 2.16 2.45 2.02 2.63 0.88 1.98 2.25 3.58
 
 
Loans to households
Consumer loans Housing loans Other loans
with an initial rate fixation with an initial rate fixation
floating floating floating over 1 year over 1 year over 5 years over 1 year
Reporting Over- rate or up and up to over rate or up and up to and up to over and up to over rate or up
periodd rafts Total  2 to 1 year 5 years 5 years Total  2 to 1 year 5 years 10 years 10 years to 1 year 5 years 5 years
2003          June 9.89 8.02 7.11 6.94 8.28 4.42 3.80 4.16 4.76 4.78 4.12 4.97 4.91
         July 9.76 7.92 7.25 7.04 8.20 4.33 3.68 3.92 4.64 4.68 4.11 4.95 4.98
         Aug 9.74 8.04 7.70 6.84 8.27 4.41 3.64 3.96 4.69 4.69 4.13 5.00 4.98         Sep 9.75 8.02 7.44 6.89 8.04 4.41 3.63 4.10 4.81 4.75 3.98 5.00 5.11
         Oct 9.72 7.91 7.20 6.74 8.07 4.40 3.62 4.02 4.87 4.78 4.05 5.09 5.21
         Nov 9.64 7.84 7.57 6.59 7.93 4.42 3.59 4.09 4.92 4.84 4.15 5.24 5.17         Dec 9.69 7.71 7.66 6.43 7.63 4.46 3.62 4.17 5.02 4.95 3.84 5.00 5.08
2004          Jan 9.87 8.32 7.62 7.04 8.49 4.49 3.62 4.28 5.02 4.92 4.06 5.12 5.16
         Feb 9.81 8.17 7.50 6.92 8.44 4.35 3.55 4.21 4.97 4.84 4.10 5.07 5.05
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations
Loans up to 
€
1 million with an initial rate fixation Loans over 
€
1 million with an initial rate fixation
Reporting floating rate or over 1 year andfloating rate or over 1 year and
periodOverd rafts up to 1 year up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year up to 5 years over 5 years
2003          June 5.68 4.20 4.60 4.89 3.14 3.39 4.18
         July 5.56 4.16 4.58 4.73 3.08 3.14 4.00
         Aug 5.47 4.17 4.65 4.77 3.18 3.41 4.36         Sep 5.46 4.08 4.79 4.76 3.11 3.32 4.28
         Oct 5.46 4.14 4.76 4.83 3.08 3.26 4.33
         Nov 5.41 4.10 4.94 4.71 3.02 3.30 4.17         Dec 5.57 4.04 4.84 4.81 3.12 3.41 4.32
2004          Jan 5.66 4.06 4.86 4.81 3.01 3.37 4.29
         Feb 5.62 4.02 4.95 4.78 2.97 3.19 4.30
Source: ECB. — For footnotes *, o and 1see p 45. For footnote + see p 46. — administration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and credit
2Annual percentage rate of charge as defined in Directive 87/102/EEC, insurance. 
which contains other relatedcharges which may occur for enquiries,
44*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity ofup to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 yearsEffective Effective Effective Effective
End of interest rate  
1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 
month % pa
€
 million % pa
€
 million % pa
€
 million % pa
€
 million
2003          Mar 2.45 147,530 3.31 188,390 2.52 77,837 5.00 29,937
         Apr 2.38 144,900 3.30 188,257 2.47 78,278 5.09 29,035
         May 2.36 144,074 3.28 188,011 2.44 79,303 5.08 28,165         June 2.15 139,931 3.27 187,960 2.13 76,477 5.09 28,180
         July 2.06 137,602 3.25 187,705 2.07 77,253 5.06 28,346
         Aug 2.04 135,705 3.24 187,639 2.05 80,491 5.03 28,452         Sep 2.00 133,458 3.23 187,511 2.04 77,051 5.04 29,069
         Oct 1.99 131,553 3.22 187,892 2.02 80,075 5.02 29,052
         Nov 1.98 129,649 3.16 186,957 2.02 80,795 4.99 29,633         Dec 2.00 128,564 3.16 190,465 2.05 74,309 4.98 29,363
2004          Jan 1.97 126,519 3.14 191,301 2.00 65,515 4.97 29,816
         Feb 1.94 124,617 3.13 191,935 1.99 72,633 4.96 29,775         Mar 1.94 122,662 3.11 192,587 1.98 71,663 4.95 29,261
 
 
Housing loans to households  3 Consumer credit and other loans to households  4, 5 
with a maturity of
over 1 year andover 1 year and
up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
End of rate  1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
month % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa
€
 million
€
 million
€
 million
€
 million
€
 million
€
 million
2003          Mar 5.83 7,445 5.41 31,086 5.95 872,486 9.32 92,563 6.63 71,519 6.42 327,047
         Apr 5.77 7,375 5.36 31,074 5.94 872,835 9.21 91,072 6.61 71,614 6.42 328,610
         May 5.70 7,482 5.32 31,264 5.93 874,918 9.18 89,467 6.56 71,774 6.41 328,951         June 5.72 7,870 5.27 32,349 5.91 874,476 9.19 91,794 6.55 70,545 6.40 330,208
         July 5.53 7,737 5.20 32,621 5.88 876,065 9.01 89,466 6.49 71,055 6.36 332,013
         Aug 5.54 7,963 5.15 32,709 5.87 877,688 8.91 87,862 6.40 71,011 6.34 333,305         Sep 5.48 8,022 5.11 32,871 5.85 879,014 8.94 90,945 6.38 70,957 6.34 333,058
         Oct 5.50 7,772 5.07 33,146 5.83 882,447 8.89 89,093 6.36 70,809 6.32 332,152
         Nov 5.44 7,751 5.04 33,167 5.82 884,545 8.74 84,602 6.33 70,975 6.30 331,730         Dec 5.55 7,756 5.01 33,052 5.79 886,159 8.90 88,558 6.35 70,446 6.28 329,925
2004          Jan 5.43 7,641 4.97 32,907 5.78 885,875 8.87 84,977 6.32 69,872 6.27 328,719
         Feb 5.38 7,521 4.96 32,809 5.77 884,820 8.77 83,635 6.29 69,585 6.26 328,977         Mar 5.32 7,690 4.90 32,179 5.75 880,907 8.74 84,319 6.27 69,588 6.25 331,300
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 
month % pa
€
 million % pa
€
 million % pa
€
 million
2003          Mar 5.25 200,784 4.90 87,358 5.51 488,963
         Apr 5.19 197,032 4.84 87,555 5.49 490,877
         May 5.16 194,503 4.81 87,344 5.47 491,026         June 5.05 200,061 4.68 87,487 5.45 487,707
         July 4.92 192,725 4.58 87,735 5.42 487,473
         Aug 4.89 188,935 4.54 88,871 5.40 489,036         Sep 4.88 193,086 4.51 88,151 5.39 486,570
         Oct 4.83 188,707 4.48 88,246 5.37 487,573
         Nov 4.75 190,666 4.48 88,462 5.36 489,132         Dec 4.84 187,742 4.46 87,966 5.33 488,777
2004          Jan 4.82 181,660 4.40 88,474 5.30 487,166
         Feb 4.78 181,186 4.37 87,879 5.29 488,299         Mar 4.76 183,496 4.34 87,531 5.27 487,221
*The MFI interest rate statistics are basedon the interest rates appliedby the end of the month. — 1The effective interest rates may always be
MFIs andthe relatedvolumes of euro-d enominatedd eposits andloans to calculatedeither as annualisedagreedinterest rates or as narrowly d efined
households and non-financial corporations domiciled in the euro area. The effective rates. Both calculation methods cover all interest payments onhousehold sector comprises individuals (including sole proprietors) and deposits and loans but not any other related charges which may occur fornon-profit institutions serving households. Non-financial corporations in- enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guarante es and
clude all enterprises other than insurance companies, banks and other finan- credit insurance. — 2Data basedon monthly balance sheet statistics. —
cial institutions. The interest rate statistics gatheredon a harmonisedbasis 3Securedandunsecuredloans for home purchase, includ ing build ing and
in the euro area from January 2003 are being collected in Germany on a home improvements; including loans granted by building and loansample basis. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regard edas provi- associations andinterim cred its as well as transmittedloans grantedby the
sional. Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are reporting agents in their own name andfor their own account. —not specially marked. Further information on the new interest rate statistics 4Consumer credits are loans granted for the purpose of personal use in the
can be found on the Bundesbank’s website (Statistics / Reporting System / consumption of goods and services. — 5For the purpose of these statistics,
Banking statistics / EWU-Zinsstatistik). This information is currently available other loans are loans grantedfor other purposes such as business , debt
in German only. — oThe statistics on outstanding amounts are collected at consolidation, education etc. — 6 Including overdrafts. 
45*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Households’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of  8 
over 1 year and
Overnight up to 1 year up to 2 years over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate  1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
period% pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa
€
 million
€
 million
€
 million
€
 million
€
 million
€
 million
2003          Mar 1.24 378,520 2.37 34,735 2.99 1,061 2.99 2,430 2.28 483,370 3.23 97,731
         Apr 1.21 380,747 2.30 34,394 3.01 1,009 2.99 2,876 2.28 484,486 3.17 95,207
         May 1.20 385,009 2.29 30,733 2.69 886 2.92 4,288 2.21 485,156 3.13 93,946         June 1.16 389,213 2.13 31,655 2.69 767 2.82 3,585 2.16 486,111 3.05 92,548
         July 1.06 389,222 1.98 29,175 2.54 665 2.63 1,689 2.11 488,133 2.97 90,491
         Aug 1.05 394,794 2.07 25,650 2.59 627 2.68 1,378 2.08 490,805 2.92 88,948         Sep 1.06 393,137 1.88 28,352 2.46 679 2.73 1,891 2.04 491,693 2.88 88,197
         Oct 1.07 394,958 1.94 28,477 2.47 986 2.93 3,332 2.20 492,668 2.76 88,289
         Nov 1.06 412,862 1.89 24,839 2.52 1,065 3.04 3,325 2.15 493,279 2.73 88,529         Dec 1.08 400,936 1.89 29,428 2.84 1,512 2.91 2,519 2.17 502,167 2.72 89,528
2004          Jan 1.10 405,052 1.92 30,791 2.78 1,542 3.15 3,852 2.18 503,431 2.68 88,506
         Feb 1.10 411,617 1.95 23,387 2.41 1,056 2.86 2,340 2.12 504,560 2.66 88,115         Mar 1.12 410,693 2.03 28,021 2.31 840 2.66 2,355 2.10 504,583 2.62 87,863
 
 
Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period% pa
€
 million % pa
€
 million % pa
€
 million % pa
€
 million
2003          Mar 1.40 112,327 2.48 31,973 2.59 259 4.03 1,664
         Apr 1.39 115,850 2.38 33,955 2.47 196 3.54 1,681
         May 1.39 118,034 2.40 33,417 2.43 56 3.40 502         June 1.25 121,685 2.05 41,507 2.29 322 3.30 887
         July 1.16 120,786 2.03 61,029 2.02 109 4.23 424
         Aug 1.16 118,994 2.00 40,582 2.52 187 3.68 2,473         Sep 1.15 124,565 1.94 34,584 2.61 210 3.92 1,179
         Oct 1.15 127,129 1.93 40,008 2.41 156 4.02 4,523
         Nov 1.07 129,086 1.95 35,693 2.56 256 3.26 1,160         Dec 1.05 138,713 1.96 36,247 2.76 360 4.09 1,075
2004          Jan 1.16 136,443 1.92 35,633 2.43 174 3.90 823
         Feb 1.11 128,210 1.95 38,596 2.18 197 4.26 697         Mar 1.11 130,125 1.92 34,914 2.28 201 3.82 1,274
 
 
Loans to households
Consumer loans with an initial rate fixation of  4 Other loans with an initial rate fixation of  5 
floating rate or over 1 year andfloating rate or over 1 year and
Total up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years over 5 years
Annual
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective percentage
rate of interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting charge  9 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 
period% pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa
€
 million
€
 million
€
 million
€
 million
€
 million
€
 million
2003          Mar 7.84 5.78 2,441 6.67 5,053 8.72 3,966 4.66 13,036 5.35 1,619 5.39 3,140
         Apr 7.82 5.68 2,303 6.67 4,880 8.83 4,109 4.65 8,388 5.27 1,834 5.47 2,764
         May 7.87 5.71 1,520 6.69 4,796 8.94 3,489 4.22 8,472 5.43 1,546 5.39 2,637         June 7.76 5.48 2,443 6.64 4,936 8.87 3,773 3.80 10,157 5.00 1,603 4.93 2,973
         July 7.83 5.58 1,913 6.59 5,969 8.75 4,405 3.76 9,268 4.94 1,802 5.06 2,654
         Aug 7.73 5.57 1,388 6.36 4,844 8.66 3,658 3.84 7,060 4.96 1,461 5.03 2,316         Sep 7.65 5.41 1,785 6.33 5,374 8.36 4,575 3.69 9,281 4.94 1,693 5.24 2,684
         Oct 7.52 5.26 2,631 6.33 5,096 8.42 4,398 3.73 11,515 5.00 3,368 5.26 2,543
         Nov 7.47 5.24 1,532 6.27 5,631 8.32 3,851 3.93 7,820 5.14 1,440 5.21 2,004         Dec 6.90 5.02 1,541 5.80 5,234 7.81 3,701 3.57 12,315 4.93 2,578 5.13 3,978
2004          Jan 8.01 5.30 1,427 6.62 4,233 9.00 3,746 3.85 8,611 5.08 1,992 5.27 1,998
         Feb 7.98 4.98 1,308 6.50 4,963 9.08 3,539 3.85 5,613 5.04 1,588 5.07 2,112         Mar 7.83 5.28 1,553 6.29 5,805 8.88 4,494 3.68 8,962 5.10 2,036 5.00 3,549
For footnotes * and 1to6, see p 45*. — +In the case of d eposits with an business at the endof the month has to be incorporatedin the calculation
agreedmaturity andall loans exclud ing overd rafts, new business covers all of average rates of interest. — 7Estimated. The volume of new business is
new agreements between households or non-financial corporations and the extrapolated to form the underlying total using the Horvitz-Thompson esti -
bank. The interest rates are calculatedas volumeweightedaverage rates mator. — 8Including non-financial corporations’ deposits; including fidelity
across all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. In the and growth premia. — 9Annual percentage rate of charge as defined in Dir-
case of overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice and overdrafts, ective 87/102/EEC, which contains other related charges which may occur f or
new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts for the enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and
sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending credit insurance. — 10 Excluding overdrafts. 
46*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Housing loans with an initial rate fixation of  3 
floating rate or over 1 year andover 5 years and
Overdrafts  11 Total up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years up to 10 years over 10 years
Annual per-
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective centage rate
Reporting Volume  12 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 interest rate  1 of charge  9 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period% pa
€
 million % pa % pa
€
 milion % pa
€
 million % pa
€
 million % pa
€
 million
2003          Mar 10.73 66,616 5.07 5.27 2,057 4.60 2,559 5.05 6,252 5.12 3,342
         Apr 10.71 64,751 5.04 5.23 2,321 4.48 3,135 5.03 7,423 5.17 3,661
         May 10.58 62,766 4.97 5.17 1,697 4.46 2,676 4.97 4,755 5.03 3,151         June 10.65 64,982 4.82 5.00 2,253 4.37 2,685 4.80 5,062 4.85 3,149
         July 10.44 63,287 4.69 4.58 2,805 4.16 3,589 4.70 6,864 4.85 3,973
         Aug 10.38 63,305 4.79 4.73 1,695 4.25 2,701 4.81 5,441 4.91 3,600         Sep 10.47 64,592 4.90 4.63 2,033 4.52 3,166 4.96 6,143 5.03 3,584
         Oct 10.41 63,212 4.90 4.44 2,463 4.48 3,292 5.00 6,201 5.08 3,200
         Nov 10.27 59,790 5.00 4.68 1,866 4.62 2,903 5.07 5,368 5.12 3,108         Dec 10.48 62,675 5.06 4.63 2,878 4.75 3,710 5.14 7,473 5.19 3,380
2004          Jan 10.40 59,768 5.02 4.57 2,827 4.65 3,280 5.15 5,978 5.19 3,201
         Feb 10.40 57,555 4.95 4.56 1,999 4.61 2,457 5.06 4,262 5.03 2,628         Mar 10.39 57,633 4.85 4.43 2,504 4.48 3,240 4.99 5,417 4.98 2,983
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations
Loans up to 
€
1 million with an initial rate fixation of  13 
Overdrafts  11 floating rate or up to 1 year  10 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate  1 Volume  12 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period% pa
€
 million % pa
€
 million % pa
€
 million % pa
€
 million
2003          Mar 6.76 94,106 4.98 8,664 5.27 1,530 5.28 2,577
         Apr 6.71 91,535 5.06 8,346 5.18 1,489 5.26 1,645
         May 6.64 90,296 4.80 7,566 5.11 1,235 5.16 1,699         June 6.60 93,175 4.49 7,813 4.94 1,008 5.11 1,483
         July 6.51 88,185 4.39 7,881 4.88 1,575 4.90 1,620
         Aug 6.54 86,025 4.36 5,782 4.91 1,626 4.93 1,714         Sep 6.40 88,489 4.52 7,119 5.00 1,205 5.02 1,671
         Oct 6.47 85,930 4.51 7,345 4.99 1,471 5.08 1,868
         Nov 6.36 88,429 4.47 7,001 5.20 1,146 4.95 1,215         Dec 6.44 87,201 4.55 6,976 5.05 1,613 5.14 1,850
2004          Jan 6.33 84,562 4.52 6,495 5.13 1,152 5.20 1,579
         Feb 6.26 86,480 4.58 6,151 5.12 1,510 5.04 1,068         Mar 6.22 87,415 4.43 7,139 5.00 1,263 5.20 1,385
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
Loans over 
€
1 million with an initial rate fixation of  13 
floating rate or up to 1 year  10 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 
period% pa
€
 million % pa
€
 million % pa
€
 million
2003          Mar 3.89 37,816 4.86 3,283 4.72 4,631
         Apr 3.87 35,932 4.12 2,944 4.85 5,828
         May 3.62 31,599 3.80 3,613 4.61 6,152         June 3.25 38,751 3.89 3,627 4.26 6,164
         July 3.32 33,140 3.91 2,885 4.27 6,336
         Aug 3.36 27,749 3.84 2,478 4.50 4,873         Sep 3.24 34,013 3.84 3,239 4.72 4,921
         Oct 3.25 34,631 4.06 3,284 4.63 5,125
         Nov 3.16 35,610 3.90 3,669 4.73 4,434         Dec 3.32 41,204 3.87 5,084 4.78 7,639
2004          Jan 3.25 32,666 4.33 4,274 4.99 4,169
         Feb 3.24 26,802 3.60 2,681 4.58 3,317         Mar 3.19 36,126 3.76 5,779 4.83 5,627
For footnotes *and 1to6, see p 45*. For footnotes +and 7to10, see The volume of outstand ing amounts reportedis extrapolatedto form the
p 46*. — 11Overdrafts are defined as debit balances on current accounts. underlying total using the Horvitz-Thompson estimator. — 13The amount
They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether they are within or refers to the single loan transaction considered as new business.  
beyondthe limits agreedbetween customers andthe bank. — 12Estimated.
47*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
VII Capital market
 
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany *
 
 
 
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities  1 Residents
Credit in- Bundes-
Sales stitutions bank
= Public Foreign including open
total Bank debt debt building marketpur- debt Corporate secur- secur- and loan Non- oper- Non-
Periodchases Total securities bond s ities  
2 ities 3 Total  4 banks  6 ations  5 residents  7 associations  5 
DM million
1991 231,965 219,346 131,670 667 87,011 12,619 173,099 45,095 127,310 694 58,866
1992 291,762 284,054 106,857 − 175 177,376 7,708 170,873 132,236 37,368 1,269 120,8871993 395,110 382,571 151,812 200 230,560 12,539 183,195 164,436 20,095 − 1,336 211,9151994 303,339 276,058 117,185 − 65 158,939 27,281 279,989 126,808 154,738 − 1,557 23,349
1995 227,099 203,029 162,538 − 350 40,839 24,070 141,282 49,193 94,409 − 2,320 85,815
1996 254,359 233,519 191,341 649 41,529 20,840 148,250 117,352 31,751 − 853 106,1091997 332,655 250,688 184,911 1,563 64,214 81,967 204,378 144,177 60,201 − 128,2761998 418,841 308,201 254,367 3,143 50,691 110,640 245,802 203,342 42,460 − 173,038
€
 million
1999 292,663 198,068 156,399 2,184 39,485 94,595 155,766 74,728 81,038 − 136,898
2000 226,393 157,994 120,154 12,605 25,234 68,398 151,568 91,447 60,121 − 74,825
2001 180,227 86,656 55,918 14,473 16,262 93,572 117,119 35,848 81,271 − 63,1082002 178,057 124,035 47,296 14,506 62,235 54,021 83,314 13,536 69,778 − 94,7432003 170,154 134,455 31,404 30,262 72,788 35,699 101,553 35,748 65,805 − 68,601
2004          Jan 22,325 19,229 3,290 − 1,669 17,608 3,096 1,157 4,371 − 3,214 − 21,168
         Feb 24,908 20,724 9,836 323 10,565 4,184 27,593 33,263 − 5,670 − − 2,685         Mar 39,427 26,871 20,849 − 579 6,600 12,556 25,651 17,680 7,971 − 13,776
 
  
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-purchases shares  
8 shares  9 Total  10 tutions  5,11 Non-banks  6 residents  12 
Period
DM million
1991 33,478 13,317 20,161 32,247 2,466 29,781 1,230
1992 32,595 17,226 15,370 40,651 2,984 37,667 − 8,0551993 39,355 19,512 19,843 30,871 4,133 26,738 8,4851994 55,125 29,160 25,966 54,466 1,622 52,844 659
1995 46,422 23,600 22,822 49,354 11,945 37,409 − 2,931
1996 72,491 34,212 38,280 55,962 12,627 43,335 16,5291997 119,522 22,239 97,280 96,844 8,547 88,297 22,6771998 249,504 48,796 200,708 149,151 20,252 128,899 100,352
€
 million
1999 150,013 36,010 114,005 103,136 18,637 84,499 46,877
2000 140,461 22,733 117,729 164,654 23,293 141,361 − 24,194
2001 81,546 17,575 63,971 − 3,371 − 14,714 11,343 84,9182002 39,700 9,232 30,470 19,058 − 23,236 42,294 20,6422003 17,382 16,838 544 − 7,885 7,056 − 14,941 25,268
2004          Jan − 4,029 681 − 4,710 − 1,457 2,661 − 4,118 − 2,572
         Feb 5,833 361 5,472 − 5,022 − 5,204 182 10,855         Mar − 721 276 − 997 4,506 9,279 − 4,773 − 5,227
*Up to end-1999, debt securities in this table comprise bonds and money funds. — 7Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic debt securities by
market paper issued by domestic banks; from January 2000, they comprise non-residents; transaction values. — 8At issue prices. — 9Net purchases or
all debt securities. For mutual fund shares, see Table VII.6. — 1Net sales at net sales (−) of foreign shares (including direct investment) by residents;
market values plus/minus changes in issuers’ portfolios of their own debt transaction values. — 10Domestic andforeign shares. — 11Up to end-1998,
securities. — 2Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and excluding syndicated shares. — 12Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic
Treuhandagency. — 3Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign debt shares (including direct investment) by non-residents; transaction values. —
securities by residents; transaction values. — 4Domestic and foreign debt The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not
securities. — 5Book values; statistically adjusted. — 6Residual; also specially marked. Some of the data for 2000 − 2003 have been revised by
including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual changes in the balance of payment statistics. 
48*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
VII Capital market
 
2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents * 
 
 
Up to end 1998, DM nominal million value; from 1999, €  million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
bonds issued Debt securities
issued by spe- by German-
Mortgage Public Other bank Corporate Public managed cialised credit
Period Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe institutions bonds  2 syndicates debt securities debt securities  3 
Gross sales  4 
1991 442,089 292,092 19,478 91,489 80,738 100,386 707 149,288 32,8321992 572,767 318,522 33,633 134,363 49,195 101,333 − 254,244 57,2821993 733,126 434,829 49,691 218,496 34,028 132,616 457 297,841 87,3091994 627,331 412,585 44,913 150,115 39,807 177,750 486 214,261 61,465
1995 620,120 470,583 43,287 208,844 41,571 176,877 200 149,338 102,719
1996 731,992 563,076 41,439 246,546 53,508 221,582 1,742 167,173 112,3701997 846,567 621,683 53,168 276,755 54,829 236,933 1,915 222,972 114,8131998 1,030,827 789,035 71,371 344,609 72,140 300,920 3,392 238,400 149,542
€
 million
1999 571,269 448,216 27,597 187,661 59,760 173,200 2,570 120,483 57,202
2000 659,148 500,895 34,528 143,107 94,556 228,703 8,114 150,137 31,597
2001 687,988 505,646 34,782 112,594 106,166 252,103 11,328 171,012 10,6052002 818,725 569,232 41,496 119,880 117,506 290,353 17,574 231,923 10,3132003 958,917 668,002 47,828 107,918 140,398 371,858 22,510 268,406 2,850
2003          Dec 56,365 41,299 1,932 6,284 8,706 24,376 2,008 13,058 −2004          Jan 98,833 67,202 3,675 11,912 14,414 37,201 354 31,277 1,000
         Feb 91,654 64,495 3,265 8,464 13,604 39,162 1,963 25,196 −         Mar 96,493 68,074 3,242 14,355 14,577 35,899 1,697 26,723 −
of which:  Debt securities with maturities of more than four years  5 
1991 303,326 172,171 11,911 65,642 54,878 39,741 707 130,448 22,7721992 430,479 211,775 28,594 99,627 40,267 43,286 − 218,703 51,9391993 571,533 296,779 43,365 160,055 26,431 66,923 230 274,524 82,0491994 429,369 244,806 36,397 109,732 29,168 69,508 306 184,255 53,351
1995 409,469 271,763 30,454 141,629 28,711 70,972 200 137,503 85,221
1996 473,560 322,720 27,901 167,811 35,522 91,487 1,702 149,139 92,5821997 563,333 380,470 41,189 211,007 41,053 87,220 1,820 181,047 98,4131998 694,414 496,444 59,893 288,619 54,385 93,551 2,847 195,122 139,645
€
 million
1999 324,888 226,993 16,715 124,067 37,778 48,435 2,565 95,331 44,013
2000 319,330 209,187 20,724 102,664 25,753 60,049 6,727 103,418 27,008
2001 299,751 202,337 16,619 76,341 42,277 67,099 7,479 89,933 6,4802002 309,157 176,486 16,338 59,459 34,795 65,892 12,149 120,527 9,2132003 369,336 220,103 23,210 55,165 49,518 92,209 10,977 138,256 2,850
2003          Dec 15,491 13,090 523 2,827 1,375 8,364 1,853 549 −2004          Jan 42,547 24,496 2,337 4,513 3,823 13,823 26 18,026 1,000
         Feb 49,583 29,006 1,642 4,903 7,072 15,389 1,773 18,804 −         Mar 41,699 29,606 1,409 8,423 5,132 14,642 1,545 10,548 −
Net sales  6 
1991 227,822 139,396 4,729 22,290 65,985 46,390 558 87,868 18,5831992 304,751 115,786 13,104 58,235 19,585 24,864 − 175 189,142 34,1141993 403,212 159,982 22,496 122,917 − 13,156 27,721 180 243,049 43,7011994 270,088 116,519 18,184 54,316 − 6,897 50,914 − 62 153,630 21,634
1995 205,482 173,797 18,260 96,125 3,072 56,342 − 354 32,039 61,020
1996 238,427 195,058 11,909 121,929 6,020 55,199 585 42,788 69,9511997 257,521 188,525 16,471 115,970 12,476 43,607 1,560 67,437 63,1811998 327,991 264,627 22,538 162,519 18,461 61,111 3,118 60,243 84,308
€
 million
1999 209,096 170,069 2,845 80,230 31,754 55,238 2,185 36,840 22,728
2000 155,615 122,774 5,937 29,999 30,089 56,751 7,320 25,522 − 16,705
2001 84,122 60,905 6,932 − 9,254 28,808 34,416 8,739 14,479 − 30,6572002 131,976 56,393 7,936 − 26,806 20,707 54,561 14,306 61,277 − 44,5462003 124,556 40,873 2,700 − 42,521 44,173 36,519 18,431 65,253 − 54,990
2003          Dec − 16,149 − 14,947 − 2,554 − 10,330 74 − 2,137 1,467 − 2,668 − 3,4852004          Jan 23,373 4,884 466 − 6,684 4,619 6,483 − 3,017 21,505 − 2,264
         Feb 24,025 12,224 1,097 − 1,555 4,061 8,620 1,595 10,206 − 5,487         Mar 23,340 21,597 970 1,518 7,719 11,390 − 259 2,002 − 5,681
*For definitions, see the notes in the Statistical Supplement to Monthly Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. — 4Gross sales
Report 2, Capital market statistics. — 1Excluding registered bank debt means only initial sales of newly issued securities. — 5Maximum maturity
securities. — 2Debt securities issuedby enterprises. — 3Including Federal according to the terms of issue. — 6 Gross sales less redemptions. 
49*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
VII  Capital market
 
3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued residents  * 
 
 
Up to end 1998, DM million nominal value; from 1999, € million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
End of year Debt securities bonds issued
or month/ issued by by German-
Maturity Mortgage Public specialisedOther bank Corporate Public managed
in years Total Total Pfandbriefe bonds syndicates credit institutions debt securities debt securities Pfandbriefe
DM million
1991 1,686,765 1,040,374 142,757 392,190 221,031 284,396 3,161 643,230 241,760
1992 1,991,515 1,156,162 155,862 450,424 240,616 309,259 2,983 832,370 275,8731993 2,394,728 1,316,142 178,357 573,341 227,463 336,981 3,163 1,075,422 319,5751994 2,664,814 1,432,661 196,541 627,657 219,214 389,249 3,101 1,229,053 341,210
1995 2,870,295 1,606,459 214,803 723,781 222,286 445,589 2,746 1,261,090 402,229
1996 3,108,724 1,801,517 226,711 845,710 228,306 500,790 3,331 1,303,877 472,1801997 3,366,245 1,990,041 243,183 961,679 240,782 544,397 4,891 1,371,313 535,3591998 3,694,234 2,254,668 265,721 1,124,198 259,243 605,507 8,009 1,431,558 619,668
€
 million
1999 2,097,926 1,322,863 134,814 655,024 163,284 369,741 6,280 768,783 339,560
2000 2,265,121 1,445,736 140,751 685,122 157,374 462,488 13,599 805,786 322,856
2001 2,349,243 1,506,640 147,684 675,868 201,721 481,366 22,339 820,264 292,1992002 2,481,220 1,563,034 155,620 649,061 222,427 535,925 36,646 881,541 247,6552003 2,605,775 1,603,906 158,321 606,541 266,602 572,442 55,076 946,793 192,666
2004          Jan 2,629,148 1,608,790 158,787 599,857 271,221 578,925 52,060 968,298 190,403
         Feb 2,653,173 1,621,014 159,885 598,302 275,282 587,545 53,655 978,504 184,916         Mar 2,676,513 1,642,611 160,854 599,820 283,001 598,935 53,396 980,506 179,235
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  2 Position at end-March 2004 
954,941 642,356 50,795 241,874 82,496 267,190 13,872 298,713 53,486    less than 2
625,017 426,299 52,449 173,923 80,733 119,194 14,444 184,274 45,996 2 to less than 4
442,584 268,039 30,985 95,101 54,915 87,038 6,489 168,056 51,090 4 to less than 6
254,451 129,553 17,799 54,857 21,428 35,468 8,431 116,465 14,567 6 to less than 8
202,542 85,357 8,394 21,501 16,707 38,755 5,257 111,927 5,282 8 to less than 10
55,892 47,448 395 7,345 6,736 32,972 1,303 7,142 4,921 10 to less than 15
26,408 11,814 35 1,407 6,382 3,990 452 14,141 2,076 15 to less than 20
114,682 31,744 − 3,811 13,604 14,327 3,149 79,788 1,816 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers’ portfolios. — debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of the residual
1Excluding debt securities handed to the trustee for temporary safe amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc. 
custody. — 2Calculatedfrom month und er review until final maturity for
50* 
 
4 Shares in circulation issued by residents
  
Up to end 1998, DM million nominal value; from 1999, €  million nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies’ capital due to
Memo item
Share circulation
at market values
cash payments contribution (market capita-
and ex- merger reduction lisation) Share capital = Net increase or contribution of shares,
change of of claims and circulation at net decrease (−) mining shares, of capital level at end
issue of and other transfer change of and of period end of period during period convertible GmbH shares,
Period under review under review bonds  1 etc of assets bonus shares real assets legal form liquidation under review  2 
DM million
1991 151,618 6,932 3,656 610 2,416 407 − 182 411 − 386 .
1992 160,813 9,198 4,295 728 1,743 1,073 − 732 3,030 − 942 .1993 168,005 7,190 5,224 772 387 876 10 707 − 783 .1994
o 190,012 14,237 6,114 1,446 1,521 1,883 − 447 5,086 − 1,367 .
1995 211,231 21,217 5,894 1,498 1,421 1,421 − 623 13,739 − 2,133 .19963 216,461 7,131 8,353 1,355 396 1,684 − 3,056 833 − 2,432 .
1997 221,575 5,115 4,164 2,722 370 1,767 − 2,423 197 − 1,678 .1998 238,156 16,578 6,086 2,566 658 8,607 − 4,055 3,905 − 1,188 .
€
 million
1999 133,513 11,747 5,519 2,008 190 1,075 2,099 1,560 − 708 1,603,304
2000 147,629 14,115 3,620 3,694 618 8,089 − 1,986 1,827 − 1,745 1,353,000
2001 166,187 18,561 7,987 4,057 1,106 8,448 1,018 − 905 − 3,152 1,205,6132002 168,716 2,528 4,307 1,291 486 1,690 − 868 − 2,152 − 2,224 647,4922003 162,131 − 6,585 4,482 923 211 513 − 322 − 10,806 − 1,584 851,001
2004          Jan 161,456 − 675 276 6 6 267 − 46 − 785 − 398 883,353
         Feb 161,574 117 146 2 3 22 − 6 − 22 − 28 879,521         Mar 161,565 − 9 137 44 55 49 − 11 − 94 − 189 850,562
oFrom January 1994, including the shares of east German companies market segment was closed down on 24 March 2003) and enterprises whose
(resultant increase in share circulation: DM 7,771 million). — 1Including shares are traded on the free market. Source: Bundesbank calculations based
shares issuedout of company profits. — 2Enterprises whose shares are listedon d ata of the Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mitteilungen and the
on the Official Market, on the regulatedmarket or on the Neuer Markt (stock Deutsche Börse AG. — 3 Figure revised downwards by DM 1,902 million. 
50*VII  Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
VII Capital market
 
5 Yields and indices on German securities
 
 
               
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices  2,3 
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed Memo item
Federal securities Foreign
DM/euro
bonds With a residual With a residual
maturity of maturity of issued by German Germanmore than 9 more than 9 German- bondiBoxx CDAX shareand including and including Corporate managed index index
€ Germany share price
Total Total Total 10 years  4 Total 10 years bonds (REX) price index index (DAX) syndicates  1,5 
Average End-1998 End-1987 End-1987
Period% per annum daily rate = 100 = 100 = 1000
1991 8.7 8.6 8.6 8.5 8.9 8.6 8.9 9.2 96.35 . 148.16 1,577.98
1992 8.1 8.0 8.0 7.8 8.3 8.1 8.7 8.8 101.54 . 134.92 1,545.051993 6.4 6.3 6.3 6.5 6.5 6.8 6.9 6.8 109.36 . 191.13 2,266.681994 6.7 6.7 6.7 6.9 6.8 7.2 7.0 6.9 99.90 . 176.87 2,106.58
1995 6.5 6.5 6.5 6.9 6.5 7.2 6.9 6.8 109.18 . 181.47 2,253.88
1996 5.6 5.6 5.6 6.2 5.5 6.4 5.8 5.8 110.37 . 217.47 2,888.691997 5.1 5.1 5.1 5.6 5.0 5.9 5.2 5.5 111.01 . 301.47 4,249.691998 4.5 4.4 4.4 4.6 4.5 4.9 5.0 5.3 118.18 100.00 343.64 5,002.391999 4.3 4.3 4.3 4.5 4.3 4.9 5.0 5.4 110.60 92.52 445.95 6,958.14
2000 5.4 5.3 5.2 5.3 5.6 5.8 6.2 6.3 112.48 94.11 396.59 6,433.61
2001 4.8 4.7 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.3 5.9 6.2 113.12 94.16 319.38 5,160.102002 4.7 4.6 4.6 4.8 4.7 5.1 6.0 5.6 117.56 97.80 188.46 2,892.632003 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.1 3.7 4.3 5.0 4.5 117.36 97.09 252.48 3,965.16
2004          Jan 3.8 3.8 3.9 4.2 3.7 4.3 4.1 4.1 117.68 97.33 259.30 4,058.60
         Feb 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.1 3.6 4.3 4.0 4.1 119.00 98.34 258.18 4,018.16         Mar 3.5 3.6 3.6 3.9 3.4 4.1 3.8 3.8 119.55 98.93 248.60 3,856.70
         Apr 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.1 3.6 4.3 3.8 4.1 117.92 97.51 254.33 3,985.21
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of the calculation. Monthly figures are calculated on the basis of the yields on
issue of over 4 years if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Conver- all the business days in a month. The annual figures are the unweighted
tible debt securities, etc. debt securities with unscheduled redemption, zero means of the monthly figures. — 2Endof year or month. — 3Source:
-coupon bonds, floating -rate notes and bonds not denominated in DM or Deutsche Börse AG. — 4Only debt securities eligible as underlying
euro are not included. Group yields for the various categories of securities instruments for futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages. —5If
are weighted by the amounts outstanding of the debt securities included in quoted on German stock exchanges. 
 
 
6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
  
Sales of mutual fund shares Purchases
Domestic mutual funds (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Non-banks  2 and loan associations  1 
of which
Sales Open- of which of which
= Secur- endForeign Foreigntotal Money ities- real Special- mutual mutualpur- market basedestate ised Foreign fund fund Non-resi-chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  
3 Total Total shares Total shares dents  4 
Period
DM million
1991 50,064 37,492 13,738 − 11,599 2,144 23,754 12,572 49,890 8,594 − 5 41,296 12,577 174
1992 81,514 20,474 − 3,102 − − 9,189 6,087 23,575 61,040 81,518 10,495 2,152 71,023 58,888 − 41993 80,259 61,672 20,791 − 6,075 14,716 40,881 18,587 76,258 16,982 2,476 59,276 16,111 4,0011994 130,995 108,914 63,263 31,180 24,385 7,698 45,650 22,081 125,943 9,849 − 689 116,094 22,770 5,052
1995 55,246 54,071 16,777 6,147 3,709 6,921 37,294 1,175 56,295 12,172 188 44,123 987 − 1,049
1996 83,386 79,110 16,517 − 4,706 7,273 13,950 62,592 4,276 85,704 19,924 1,685 65,780 2,591 − 2,3181997 145,805 138,945 31,501 − 5,001 30,066 6,436 107,445 6,860 149,977 35,924 340 114,053 6,520 − 4,1721998 187,641 169,748 38,998 5,772 27,814 4,690 130,750 17,893 190,416 43,937 961 146,479 16,507 − 2,775
€
 million
1999 111,282 97,197 37,684 3,347 23,269 7,395 59,513 14,086 105,521 19,862 − 637 85,659 14,722 5,761
2000 118,021 85,160 39,712 − 2,188 36,818 − 2,824 45,448 32,861 107,019 14,454 92 92,565 32,769 11,000
2001 97,032 76,811 35,522 12,410 9,195 10,159 41,289 20,221 96,082 10,251 2,703 85,831 17,518 9512002 66,478 59,482 25,907 3,682 7,247 14,916 33,575 6,996 67,150 2,100 3,007 65,050 3,989 − 6732003 48,195 43,943 20,079 − 924 7,408 14,166 23,864 4,252 49,726 − 2,658 734 52,384 3,518 − 1,530
2004          Jan 
r) 5,341 r)1,870 423 − 310 − 270 1,003 r)1,447 3,471 r)5,647 316 199 r)5,331 3,272 − 306
         Feb 1,106 − 81 − 118 − 362 − 139 388 36 1,187 750 − 63 − 63 813 1,250 356
         Mar 6,296 3,895 2,530 − 526 2,309 723 1,365 2,401 5,511 2,690 392 2,821 2,009 785
1Book values. — 2Residual. — 3Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign are provisional; revisions are not specially marked. Some of the data for
fundshares by resid ents; transaction values. — 4Net purchases or net sales 2000 − 2003 have been revisedby changes in the balance of payment
(−) of domestic fund shares by non-residents; transaction values (up to statistics. 
end-1988 recorded under shares). — The figures for the most recent date
51*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
1 General government budgetary position *
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, €  billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds  2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which
Other
operat- Fixed Compen-
of ing ex- asset Finan- Ex- Ex- sation
which pend- Current forma- cial Re- pend- Re- pend- of em-
PeriodTotal Taxes Total  3 ployees iture grants Interest tion aid  4 Balance venue  5 iture Balance venue iture Balance
1993 928.7 749.1 1,060.2 296.8 136.0 340.5 102.1 97.0 87.3 −131.5 660.8 658.7 + 2.1 1,492.1 1,621.5 −129.4
1994 995.2 786.2 1,102.2 315.5 137.3 353.4 114.0 93.2 86.5 −106.9 694.1 693.7 + 0.4 1,596.4 1,702.9 −106.5
1995 1,026.4 814.2 1,136.4 324.8 135.5 367.2 129.0 90.1 86.3 −110.1 731.2 743.8 − 12.5 1,664.9 1,787.5 −122.6
1996 1,000.3 800.0 1,121.8 326.2 137.0 362.2 130.7 83.9 80.1 −121.5 769.4 784.0 − 14.6 1,665.6 1,801.6 −136.11997 1,014.3 797.2 1,108.9 325.0 135.7 356.3 132.1 80.1 79.2 − 94.5 797.3 794.5 + 2.9 1,705.3 1,797.0 − 91.71998 1,072.1 833.0 1,128.8 325.4 137.4 373.7 133.7 79.7 79.8 − 56.7 812.2 808.9 + 3.3 1,765.5 1,818.9 − 53.41999 566.1 453.1 592.9 168.7 72.4 202.7 69.8 40.8 38.0 − 26.8 429.1 425.6 + 3.5 925.2 948.6 − 23.4
2000  
p 612.3 467.3 595.5 169.3 73.7 205.7 67.6 40.7 37.9 + 16.8 433.8 434.3 − 0.5 974.6 958.2 + 16.4
2001  6,pe 554.0 446.2 601.0 170.1 70.3 213.1 66.6 40.9 39.5 − 47.0 445.0 449.1 − 4.1 921.8 972.9 − 51.1
2002  pe 550.4 441.7 608.4 173.4 69.6 225.9 66.1 38.5 33.9 − 58.0 457.9 466.4 − 8.5 923.6 990.1 − 66.5
2003  pe 546.6 442.2 615.2 174.0 68.8 236.4 65.7 36.3 32.5 − 68.6 466.8 473.3 − 6.5 924.5 999.6 − 75.1
2002          Q1 118.3 98.6 150.2 39.9 15.3 57.9 24.0 6.5 6.0 − 31.8 111.3 112.8 − 1.5 206.4 239.8 − 33.4
         Q2 137.8 105.1 141.8 40.4 15.6 58.5 11.9 7.8 6.7 − 4.0 113.0 115.6 − 2.6 228.9 235.6 − 6.6         Q3 135.3 109.4 148.7 41.4 16.5 54.7 19.2 9.7 7.8 − 13.4 113.1 116.6 − 3.5 228.0 244.9 − 16.9         Q4 157.2 129.0 165.6 49.9 21.5 55.2 10.7 13.6 13.1 − 8.5 119.3 120.0 − 0.7 257.5 266.6 − 9.2
2003          Q1 117.2 96.3 154.5 40.9 15.6 61.8 23.6 5.6 6.5 − 37.3 116.3 116.8 − 0.5 207.7 245.5 − 37.8
         Q2 135.8 108.9 143.8 40.9 15.5 61.3 10.8 7.5 7.5 − 8.0 115.5 118.4 − 2.9 228.2 239.1 − 10.9         Q3 131.2 109.6 155.8 42.4 16.6 58.5 21.6 9.2 7.4 − 24.6 115.1 117.8 − 2.7 225.0 252.3 − 27.4         Q4  
p 160.7 127.4 159.8 48.1 20.5 55.2 9.5 12.9 13.7 + 0.9 119.0 120.4 − 1.5 261.1 261.7 − 0.6
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. The quarterly f igures
Office. — *The budgetary definition used here differs from that employed for some insurance sectors are estimated. — 3Including discrepancies in
for the government account in the national accounts and, in the case of the clearing transactions between central, state and local government. —
quarterly figures, in some respects also from the financial statistics. — 4Expenditure on investment grants, loans and acquisition of participating
1Including subsidiary budgets. Unlike the annual figure based on the interests. — 5Including Federal Government liquidity assistance to the
annual accounts statistics of the Federal Statistical Office, the quarterly Federal Labour Office. — 6Owing to modifications of the system of
figures do not include municipal special purpose associations and various classification, shifts occurred, in particular, between other operatin g
special accounts. For more details on revenue from the Bundesbank profit, expenditure and current grants. see footnote 1 to Table VIII.2. — 2The annual figures differ from the sum of
2 Budgetary position of central, state and local government *
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, €  billion
Central government State government Local government
Western  2,3 Eastern  3 Western  3 Eastern  3 
PeriodRevenue  1 Expenditure Revenue Expenditure Revenue Expenditure Revenue Expenditure Revenue Expenditure
1993 401.6 462.5 326.5 352.8 76.4 92.5 222.5 230.9 54.4 59.0
1994 439.6 478.9 328.8 357.0 79.3 95.9 228.9 235.1 53.9 59.2
1995 439.3 489.9 338.6 370.2 88.4 101.5 225.6 237.9 58.7 60.8
1996 411.9 490.4 344.8 379.7 93.7 105.5 227.7 232.9 55.0 57.71997 416.8 480.3 349.2 376.5 94.3 105.2 222.9 226.9 52.6 54.21998 439.0 495.6 360.5 380.3 96.4 104.7 231.4 226.3 51.5 52.41999 240.3 266.5 191.6 196.6 50.0 53.3 119.8 117.5 26.1 26.3
2000  
4 292.1 265.2 193.4 200.9 50.7 53.6 122.4 120.5 25.6 25.6
2001  pe 239.9 260.9 184.0 207.2 49.7 52.7 119.5 123.9 24.7 25.4
2002  pe 238.9 271.6 183.0 207.0 47.5 52.9 119.8 124.3 25.0 25.4
2003  pe 239.6 278.8 182.3 208.7 48.3 53.5 117.1 124.9 24.7 25.5
2002          Q1 47.4 68.9 42.4 49.4 10.2 12.0 24.7 29.1 5.2 5.4
         Q2 56.3 62.6 43.3 48.8 11.1 11.9 28.8 29.1 5.9 5.8         Q3 62.7 70.6 45.3 49.3 11.8 12.9 29.1 30.5 6.1 6.2         Q4 72.5 69.5 52.0 59.5 14.5 16.1 37.0 35.4 7.8 7.7
2003          Q1 46.6 71.9 42.2 51.1 9.7 12.6 25.2 29.4 5.3 5.6
         Q2 59.1 64.6 44.4 50.2 12.0 12.0 26.7 29.1 5.6 5.8         Q3 57.6 74.5 45.3 50.5 12.2 13.1 29.3 30.6 6.1 6.3         Q4  
p 76.3 67.8 49.9 56.5 14.1 15.6 35.6 35.3 7.6 7.6
52*Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Inherited Liabilities. — 2Including (eastern and western) Berlin, Bremen and
Office. — *See corresponding footnote to Table VIII.1. — 1Up to 1994, the Hamburg. — 3Unlike the annual figure basedon the annual accounts
Bundesbank profit transfer is shown in full; from 1995 onwards, only the statistics of the Federal Statistical Office, the quarterly figures do not
DM7 billion envisaged in the budget is shown. From 1995, revenue over and include various special accounts. — 4Including proceeds from the sale of
above the envisaged amount accrues directly to the Redemption Fund for UMTS licences. 
52*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
3 Government fiscal position as defined in the national accounts *
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, €  billion
Item 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000  1 2001 2002 2003  pe 
Revenue 1,704.0 1,726.8 1,775.9 943.2 965.5 951.0 954.0 963.0
of which
Taxes 850.0 856.9 897.4 490.4 511.7 488.3 486.0 490.5Social contributions 696.7 720.1 727.7 375.4 378.1 383.6 389.0 395.5
Expenditure 1,826.6 1,826.5 1,859.6 972.6 989.5 1,009.9 1,028.4 1,045.1of which
Intermediate consumption 142.7 140.2 144.1 76.2 78.0 81.1 84.5 84.7Compensation of Employees 319.6 319.0 319.3 165.4 165.7 165.5 167.7 168.2Interest 131.7 133.2 136.4 68.9 68.4 67.7 65.2 66.2Social benefits  
2 970.7 984.7 998.4 523.1 532.7 548.7 572.9 588.3
Gross capital formation 76.4 69.4 69.9 37.8 37.0 35.9 34.3 31.1
Net lending/net borrowing − 122.7 − 99.7 − 83.7 − 29.4 − 24.0 − 58.9 − 74.3 − 82.1
as a percentage of GDP − 3.4 − 2.7 − 2.2 − 1.5 − 1.2 − 2.8 − 3.5 − 3.9
Memo itemDebt as defined in theMaastricht Treaty 2,143.9 2,232.9 2,298.2 1,210.3 1,221.8 1,232.8 1,283.5 1,365.9
as a percentage of GDP 59.8 61.0 60.9 61.2 60.2 59.5 60.8 64.2
Source: Federal Statistical Office. — *Figures in accordance with ESA 95. In of UMTS licences. The figures of the Federal Statistical Office record such
contrast to the figures shown by the Federal Statistical Office, totals include proceeds (
€
50.85 billion) under "net increase in non-produced assets", with
(without affecting net lending/net borrowing) customs duties, the EU share the result that government expenditure is lower and a surplus (
€
22.8 billion
in VAT revenue andEU subsid ies. — 1Adjusted for proceeds from the sale or 1.1% of GDP) is shown. — 2 Including social benefits in kind. 
4 Tax revenue of central, state and local government
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, €  million
Central and state government and European Union Local government  4 
State government
of which of which Balance of
Central Eastern European Eastern untransferred
PeriodTotal Total  1 government  2 Total Germany Union  3 Total Germany tax shares  5 
1991 661,920 577,150 321,334 224,321 19,139 31,495 84,633 2,540 + 137
1992 731,738 638,423 356,849 247,372 23,807 34,203 93,374 4,034 − 581993 749,119 653,015 360,250 256,131 27,542 36,634 95,809 5,863 + 2951994 786,162 688,785 386,145 261,947 32,052 40,692 97,116 7,677 + 260
1995 814,190 719,332 390,807 288,520 . 40,005 94,498 8,460 + 359
1996 799,998 706,071 372,390 294,232 . 39,449 94,641 7,175 − 7141997 797,154 700,739 368,244 290,771 . 41,724 96,531 7,703 − 1171998 833,013 727,888 379,491 306,127 . 42,271 104,960 8,841 + 1641999 453,068 396,734 211,727 164,724 . 20,284 56,333 4,810 + 1
2000 467,253 410,117 219,034 169,249 . 21,833 57,241 4,895 − 104
2001 446,248 392,189 213,342 159,115 . 19,732 54,047 4,590 + 122002 441,703 389,162 214,371 156,231 . 18,560 52,490 4,769 + 512003  
p 442,238 390,445 214,010 155,510 . 20,925 51,644 ... + 149
2003          Q4  p 127,430 114,862 66,842 43,679 . 4,342 16,971 ... − 4,403
2004          Q1 . 84,151 42,014 36,033 . 6,105 . . .
2003          Nov . 28,130 15,010 11,172 . 1,948 . . .
         Dec . 58,343 35,270 21,367 . 1,707 . . .
2004          Jan . 28,565 11,878 13,974 . 2,713 . . .
         Feb . 28,669 15,322 11,418 . 1,929 . . .         Mar . 26,917 14,814 10,640 . 1,463 . . .
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. — 1Including receipts from the 1988. — 4Including local government taxes in Berlin, Bremen and
Equalisation of Burdens levies.  — 2Before deducting supplementary Hamburg. — 5Difference between the local government’s share in the
central government grants and shares in the revenue of mineral oil tax income taxes receivedby the state government cash offices in the periodin
remittedto state government. — 3Including the additional (GNP-related) question (see Table VIII.5) and the amounts passed on to local government
revenue accruing to the EU from the central government tax revenue from during the same period. 
53*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
5 Tax revenue, by type
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, €  million
Joint taxes Memo
item
Income taxes  2 Turnover taxes  5,6 Localgovern-
As- Invest- Central State ment
Local
sessedment Value- Turnover govern- govern- EU share in business
Wage income Corpora- income added tax on ment ment customs income tax trans-
PeriodTotal  1 Total tax  3 tax tion tax taxes  4 Total tax (VAT) imports taxes  8 taxes  8 duties taxes  9 fers 6,7 
1991 615,506 298,804 214,175 41,532 31,716 11,381 179,672 98,797 80,875 5,986 92,583 29,113 8,307 38,356
1992 681,751 331,310 247,322 41,531 31,184 11,273 197,712 117,274 80,438 6,923 104,802 32,963 7,742 43,3281993 697,988 341,785 257,987 33,234 27,830 22,734 216,306 174,492 41,814 4,181 93,678 34,720 7,240 44,9731994 734,234 343,055 266,522 25,510 19,569 31,455 235,698 195,265 40,433 6,271 105,410 36,551 7,173 45,450
1995 765,374 344,554 282,701 13,997 18,136 29,721 234,622 198,496 36,126 8,412 134,013 36,602 7,117 46,042
1996 746,958 317,807 251,278 11,616 29,458 25,456 237,208 200,381 36,827 8,945 137,865 38,540 6,592 40,8871997 740,272 313,794 248,672 5,764 33,267 26,092 240,900 199,934 40,966 8,732 135,264 34,682 6,900 39,5331998 775,028 340,231 258,276 11,116 36,200 34,640 250,214 203,684 46,530 10,284 130,513 37,300 6,486 47,1401999 422,012 184,408 133,809 10,887 22,359 17,353 137,155 111,600 25,555 5,463 72,235 19,564 3,186 25,277
2000 436,115 192,381 135,733 12,225 23,575 20,849 140,871 107,140 33,732 5,521 75,504 18,444 3,394 25,998
2001 417,358 170,817 132,626 8,771 − 426 29,845 138,935 104,463 34,472 5,510 79,277 19,628 3,191 25,1702002 414,008 165,096 132,190 7,541 2,864 22,502 138,195 105,463 32,732 5,752 83,494 18,576 2,896 24,8462003 414,853 162,567 133,090 4,568 8,275 16,633 136,996 103,162 33,834 7,085 86,617 18,713 2,877 24,409
2003          Q4 122,241 48,636 38,681 4,439 3,431 2,085 35,778 26,576 9,203 3,287 29,396 4,376 768 7,378
2004          Q1 88,805 32,644 29,518 − 5,808 2,177 6,756 34,243 25,919 8,324 133 15,573 5,522 691 4,654
2003          Nov 29,726 8,630 9,654 − 1,152 − 433 561 12,786 9,692 3,094 518 6,087 1,452 254 1,596
         Dec 62,549 31,003 19,274 6,684 4,219 827 11,888 8,764 3,124 1,629 16,376 1,401 253 4,206
2004          Jan 30,630 14,766 11,066 − 612 139 4,173 11,534 8,931 2,604 − 26 2,047 2,102 206 2,064
         Feb 30,220 8,531 9,560 − 1,554 − 1,437 1,962 12,994 10,262 2,731 154 6,731 1,572 240 1,551         Mar 27,955 9,347 8,892 − 3,642 3,475 621 9,715 6,726 2,990 5 6,796 1,848 245 1,039
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. — 1This total, unlike that in Table the statutory pension insurance scheme, with 2.2% of the balance accruing
VIII.4, does not include the receipts from the Equalisation of Burdens levies, to local government; of the residual balance, 50.5% was allocated to ce ntral
local business tax on earnings andcapital (less local business tax tranfers to government and49.5% to state government; in 2000 and2001, 50.25% was
central andstate government), the real property taxes andother local allocatedto central government and49.75% to state government; sincegovernment taxes, or the balance of untransferredtax shares. — 2From 2002 49.6% has been allocatedto central government and50.4% to state
1980, the revenue from wage tax andassessedincome tax has been government. The EU share must also be d ed ucted from the aforementionedallocatedto central, state andlocal government in the ratio of 42.5:42.5:15, central government share. — 6Since 1991 the distribution of turnover tax
andrevenue from corporation tax andinvestment income tax has been andthe level andd istribution of local business tax transfers have beenallocatedto central andstate government in the ratio of 50:50. — 3From affected by the financing of the debt service of the German Unity Fund. —
1996, after deducting child benefit. — 4From February 1993, including 7Central government andstate government 50% each. From 1998, central
revenue from the withholding tax on interest income, in which local government 42.2%, state government 57.8%. — 8For the breakdown, see
government has a share of 12%. — 5In 1998, 3.64% andfrom 1999, 5.63% Table VIII.6. — 9 From 1998, including the share in turnover taxes. 
was allocatedto central government to finance the supplementary grant to
6 Specific taxes levied by central, state and local government
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, €  million
Central government taxes State government taxes Local government taxes
Other Other Other
central state local
Insur- Electri- govern- Motor Inherit- govern- Local Real govern-
Mineral Tobacco Spirits ance city ment vehicle Wealth ance Beer ment busi- property ment
Periodoil tax tax tax tax tax taxes  1 tax tax tax tax taxes ness taxes taxes  3 
1991 47,266 19,592 5,648 5,862 . 14,215 11,012 6,729 2,636 1,647 7,090 41,297 9,921 1,181
1992 55,166 19,253 5,545 8,094 . 16,744 13,317 6,750 3,030 1,625 8,241 44,848 10,783 1,2811993 56,300 19,459 5,134 9,290 . 3,495 14,059 6,784 3,044 1,769 9,065 42,266 11,663 1,3831994 63,847 20,264 4,889 11,400 . 5,011 14,169 6,627 3,479 1,795 10,482 44,086 12,664 1,445
1995 64,888 20,595 4,837 14,104 . 29,590 13,806 7,855 3,548 1,779 9,613 42,058 13,744 1,426
1996 68,251 20,698 5,085 14,348 . 29,484 13,743 9,035 4,054 1,718 9,990 45,880 14,642 1,4631997 66,008 21,155 4,662 14,127 . 29,312 14,418 1,757 4,061 1,698 12,749 48,601 15,503 1,5091998 66,677 21,652 4,426 13,951 . 23,807 15,171 1,063 4,810 1,662 14,594 50,508 16,228 1,5321999 36,444 11,655 2,233 7,116 1,816 12,973 7,039 537 3,056 846 8,086 27,060 8,636 824
2000 37,826 11,443 2,151 7,243 3,356 13,485 7,015 433 2,982 844 7,171 27,025 8,849 784
2001 40,690 12,072 2,143 7,427 4,322 12,622 8,376 290 3,069 829 7,064 24,534 9,076 7902002 42,193 13,778 2,149 8,327 5,097 11,951 7,592 239 3,021 811 6,913 23,489 9,261 6962003  
p 43,188 14,094 2,204 8,870 6,531 11,730 7,336 230 3,373 786 6,989 24,146 9,658 667
2003          Q4  p 16,961 4,795 834 1,552 1,927 3,326 1,584 36 881 185 1,690 6,222 2,121 133
2004          Q1 4,612 2,376 439 3,834 1,473 2,839 2,091 34 1,197 178 2,021 . . .
2003          Nov 3,704 585 135 557 437 670 498 16 321 63 554 . . .
         Dec 9,953 2,476 500 610 883 1,953 505 11 272 54 559 . . .
2004          Jan −158 208 48 454 518 977 759 16 649 64 614 . . .
         Feb 1,474 1,070 230 2,777 449 731 567 9 207 60 729 . . .         Mar 3,296 1,098 161 603 506 1,132 765 9 342 54 678 . . .
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. — 1Other excise taxes andthe income until mid -1992, andagain since the beginning of 1995. — 2On earnings and
andcorporation tax surcharge ("solid arity surcharge") leviedfrom mid -1991 capital. — 3 Including tax-like revenue.   
54*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
7 General government debt *
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, €  million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
Treasury Five-year lending arising  from
Bundes- discount Federal Federal by credit Social German Equalisa-
End of year bank paper Treasury notes savings institu- security tion unifica-
or month Total advances (Bubills)  1 notes  2,3 (Bobls)  2 notes Bonds  2 tions  4 funds Other  4 tion 5 claims Other  6 
General government
1998 2,280,154 . 25,631 227,536 199,774 92,698 723,403 894,456 550 26,073 1,249 88,582 202
1999 1,199,975 . 12,594 102,364 120,998 41,621 416,051 450,111 281 10,200 476 45,175 1052000 1,211,439 . 11,616 109,951 126,276 35,991 438,888 433,443 211 10,524 285 44,146 1082001 1,223,929 . 23,036 151,401 130,045 26,395 448,148 422,440 174 13,110 85 8,986 1082002 1,277,630 . 30,815 203,951 137,669 17,898 456,300 404,046 137 18,844 29 7,845 97
2003          Mar 1,311,333 . 30,630 220,438 143,172 15,434 469,566 401,492 135 22,528 − 1 7,845 95
         June 1,325,969 . 31,165 232,373 150,627 14,284 462,639 401,353 135 25,460 − 4 7,845 92         Sep 1,345,938 . 33,424 237,449 146,729 13,754 469,120 406,284 317 32,071 − 6 6,706 91         Dec 
pe 1,357,759 . 36,022 246,490 153,616 12,810 471,052 396,158 354 34,462 − 1 6,711 86
Central government 7,8 
1998 957,983 . 24,666 84,760 199,274 92,698 519,718 24,125 − 2,603 1,270 8,684 1861999 714,069 . 11,553 44,335 120,498 41,621 379,808 67,872 60 2,568 476 45,175 1042000 715,819 . 11,516 44,678 123,642 35,991 400,490 52,836 29 2,099 285 44,146 1072001 701,077 . 21,136 59,643 119,911 26,395 416,195 47,111 26 1,481 85 8,986 1072002 725,405 . 30,227 78,584 127,484 17,898 422,558 39,517 0 1,167 29 7,845 97
2003          Mar 745,400 . 30,085 80,348 132,987 15,434 435,146 42,281 − 1,183 − 1 7,845 94
         June 749,920 . 30,416 82,834 140,442 14,284 428,166 43,744 − 2,102 − 4 7,845 91         Sep 766,213 . 32,892 85,526 136,544 13,754 434,085 49,360 186 7,076 − 6 6,706 90         Dec 767,697 . 35,235 87,538 143,431 12,810 436,194 38,146 223 7,326 − 1 6,711 85
State government (western)
1998 525,380 . 520 83,390 . . . 430,709 43 10,716 . − 21999 274,208 . 150 43,033 . . . 226,022 23 4,979 . − 12000 282,431 . − 48,702 . . . 227,914 22 5,792 . . 12001 305,788 . 1,800 67,721 . . . 228,270 5 7,991 . . 12002 328,390 . 250 97,556 . . . 217,333 5 13,246 . . 1
2003          Mar 339,986 . 300 109,109 . . . 213,990 7 16,579 . . 1
         June 345,390 . 322 116,274 . . . 209,820 8 18,966 . . 1         Sep 348,006 . 322 118,815 . . . 208,313 3 20,552 . . 1         Dec 
p 355,557 . 472 125,356 . . . 207,028 3 22,699 . . 1
State government (eastern)
1998 98,192 . 445 27,228 . . . 70,289 − 230 . . .1999 53,200 . 891 14,517 . . . 37,602 − 189 . . .2000 55,712 . 100 16,092 . . . 39,339 − 182 . . .2001 58,771 . 100 20,135 . . . 37,382 − 1,154 . . .2002 63,782 . 338 23,838 . . . 37,739 − 1,867 . . .
2003          Mar 64,965 . 245 26,134 . . . 36,351 − 2,235 . . .
         June 66,910 . 427 28,418 . . . 36,204 − 1,861 . . .         Sep 66,595 . 211 28,260 . . . 36,214 − 1,911 . . .         Dec 
p 68,075 . 315 28,833 . . . 37,021 − 1,906 . . .
For footnotes, see end of the table. 
55*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
7 General government debt * (cont’d)
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, €  million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
Treasury Five-year lending arising  from
Bundes- discount Federal Federal by credit Social German Equalisa-
End of year bank paper Treasury notes savings institu- security tion unifica-
or month Total advances (Bubills)  1 notes  2,3 (Bobls)  2 notes Bonds  2 tions  4 funds Other  4 tion 5 claims Other  6 
Local government (western) 9 
1998 158,960 . . 300 . . 1,330 153,208 119 4,003 . . .
1999 81,511 . . 153 . . 680 78,726 53 1,898 . . .2000 81,414 . . 153 . . 680 78,656 33 1,891 . . .2001 82,203 . . 153 . . 629 79,470 29 1,922 . . .2002 84,097 . . 153 . . 629 81,307 22 1,986 . . .
2003          Mar 85,100 . . 153 . . 578 82,369 20 1,980 . . .
         June 88,000 . . 153 . . 578 85,269 20 1,980 . . .         Sep 89,250 . . 153 . . 578 86,519 20 1,980 . . .         Dec 
pe 90,550 . . 153 . . 527 87,870 20 1,980 . . .
Local government (eastern) 9 
1998 39,873 . . 225 . . 460 38,777 255 156 . . .1999 20,726 . . 51 . . 335 20,138 124 78 . . .2000 17,048 . . 51 . . 335 16,497 114 50 . . .2001 17,005 . . − . . 284 16,581 107 33 . . .2002 16,745 . . − . . 284 16,318 102 41 . . .
2003          Mar 16,680 . . − . . 284 16,256 100 40 . . .
         June 16,750 . . − . . 284 16,326 100 40 . . .         Sep 16,850 . . − . . 284 16,426 100 40 . . .         Dec 
pe 17,050 . . − . . 131 16,779 100 40 . . .
German Unity Fund/Indemnification Fund 7 
1998 79,413 . − − − . 47,998 30,975 − 440 . . .1999 40,234 . − 275 500 . 28,978 10,292 − 189 . . .2000 40,629 . − 275 2,634 . 29,797 7,790 − 133 . . .2001 39,923 . − 3,748 10,134 . 21,577 4,315 − 149 . . .2002 39,810 . − 3,820 10,134 . 22,685 3,146 − 26 . . .
2003          Mar 39,833 . . 4,694 10,134 . 23,420 1,585 − − . . .
         June 39,600 . . 4,694 10,134 . 23,443 1,329 − − . . .         Sep 39,625 . . 4,694 10,134 . 24,005 793 − − . . .         Dec 39,568 . . 4,610 10,134 . 24,032 793 − − . . .
ERP Special Fund 7 
1998 34,159 . .... 11,944 20,988 − 1,227 . . .
1999 16,028 . . . − . 6,250 9,458 21 299 . . .2000 18,386 . . . − . 7,585 10,411 13 377 . . .2001 19,161 . . . − . 9,462 9,310 8 381 . . .2002 19,400 . . . 51 . 10,144 8,686 8 512 . . .
2003          Mar 19,369 . . . 51 . 10,138 8,660 8 512 . . .
         June 19,399 . . . 51 . 10,169 8,660 8 512 . . .         Sep 19,399 . . . 51 . 10,169 8,660 8 512 . . .         Dec 19,261 . . . 51 . 10,169 8,522 8 512 . . .
Federal Railways Fund 7,8 
1998 77,246 . . − 500 . 31,648 42,488 79 2,531 . . .
1999          June 39,231 . . − 1,023 . 16,805 20,401 34 968 . . .
Debt Processing Fund/Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities 7,8 
1998 304,978 . − 31,633 − . 110,006 79,226 54 4,167 − 20 79,899 151999          June 151,097 . − 11,127 2,000 . 58,897 36,133 27 2,015 − 9 40,902 4
Equalisation Fund for Safeguarding the Use of Coal 7,8 
1998 3,971 . .... 3 0 0 3,671 − − . . .
1999          June 2,302 . .... 1 5 3 2,148 − − . . .
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical 6Old debt mainly denominated in foreign currency, in accordance with the
Office. — *Excluding intergovernment debt. — 1Predominantly Treasury London Debts Agreement; excluding debt securities in own portfolios. —
discount paper (Bubills). — 2Excluding issuers’ holdings of their own 7In contrast to the capital market statistics, the debt incurred through the
securities. — 3Treasury notes issued by state government include long-term joint issuance of Federal securities is recorded here under central
paper. — 4Mainly loans against borrowers’ notes. Including loans raised government and its special funds in accordance with the agreed distribution
abroad. Other loans from non-banks, including loans from supplementary ratios. — 8Since 1 July 1999 central government has assumedjoint
public pension funds and liabilities arising from the investment assistance responsibility for the debts of the Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabi lities,
levy. — 5Old liabilities arising from housing construction and liabilities the Fed eral Railways Fundandthe Equalisation Fundfor Safeguard ing the
arising from housing construction by the former GDR’s armed forces and Use of Coal. From July, the aforementioned special funds are recorded
from housing construction in connection with the return of the troops of under central government. — 9Data other than year-endfigures have been
the former USSR stationed in eastern Germany to their home country. — estimated. Including debt of municipal special purpose associations. 
56*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
8 Change in general government debt *
  
  
Net borrowing  1 
End of 2002 2003
2002 2003  pe Total 1st hf Q3 Q4 Total  pe 1st hf Q3 Q4  pe 
Item
€
 million
Borrowers
Central government  2 725,405 767,697 + 24,328 + 15,709 + 10,110 − 1,491 + 42,292 + 24,515 + 16,293 + 1,484
German Unity Fund39,441 39,099 − 197 + 64 − − 261 − 342 − 258 − − 84
ERP Special Fund19,400 19,261 + 239 + 147 + 19 + 73 − 139 − 1 − − 138Indemnification Fund 369 469 + 84 + 40 + 19 + 25 + 100 + 47 + 26 + 27
State government (western) 328,390 355,557 + 22,603 + 8,660 + 6,170 + 7,774 + 27,167 + 17,000 + 2,616 + 7,552
State government (eastern) 63,782 68,075 + 5,011 + 1,385 + 1,377 + 2,249 + 4,293 + 3,128 − 315 + 1,480Local government (western)  
3 84,097 90,550 + 2,630 + 1,275 + 900 + 455 + 6,598 + 3,742 + 1,154 + 1,702
Local government (eastern)  3 16,745 17,050 − 242 − 211 − 30 − 1 + 289 + 17 + 111 + 161
Total 1,277,630 1,357,759 + 54,455 + 27,068 + 18,564 + 8,823 + 80,258 + 48,190 + 19,884 + 12,184
Debt by category
Treasury  discount 30,815 36,022 + 7,779 − 785 + 9,188 − 625 + 5,207 + 350 + 2,258 + 2,598 paper  (Bubills)  4 
Treasury notes  5 203,951 246,490 + 52,551 + 25,595 + 16,056 + 10,900 + 42,539 + 28,422 + 5,075 + 9,041
Five-year Federal notes (Bobls)  5 137,669 153,616 + 7,623 + 3,244 + 2,213 + 2,167 + 15,947 + 12,958 − 3,898 + 6,887
Federal savings notes 17,898 12,810 − 8,497 − 5,759 − 884 − 1,854 − 5,088 − 3,614 − 530 − 944Bonds  
5 456,300 471,052 + 8,152 + 15,758 − 1,446 − 6,159 + 14,752 + 6,339 + 6,481 + 1,932
Direct lending bycredit institutions  
6 404,046 396,158 − 17,640 − 13,578 − 6,624 + 2,562 − 7,759 − 2,842 + 4,846 − 9,763
Loans from social security funds 137 354 − 37 + 64 − 12 − 90 + 217 − 1 + 181 + 37Other loans  
6 18,803 34,421 + 5,733 + 2,571 + 1,212 + 1,950 + 15,618 + 6,616 + 6,611 + 2,391
Old debt  7 126 85 − 67 − 42 − 0 − 25 − 41 − 39 − 3 + 0
Equalisation claims 7,845 6,711 − 1,142 − − 1,139 − 3 − 1,134 + 0 − 1,139 + 5Investment assistance levy 41 41 − 0 − 0 + 0 + 0 − 0 + 0 − 0 + 0
Total 1,277,630 1,357,759 + 54,455 + 27,068 + 18,564 + 8,823 + 80,258 + 48,190 + 19,884 + 12,184
Creditors
Banking system
Bundesbank 4,440 4,440 − − −−−−−−
Credit institutions 532,700 524,600 − 1,046 − 1,529 + 370 + 413 − 7,971 + 4,651 + 2,015 − 14,637
Domestic non-banks
Social security funds 137 354 − 37 + 65 − 12 − 90 + 217 − 1 + 181 + 37
Other  8 228,353 280,565 − 1,862 + 3,131 − 894 − 799 + 52,212 + 7,741 + 24,187 + 20,284
Foreign creditors  pe 512,000 547,800 + 57,400 + 25,400 + 19,100 + 9,300 + 35,800 + 35,800 − 6,500 + 6,500
Total 1,277,630 1,357,759 + 54,455 + 27,068 + 18,564 + 8,823 + 80,258 + 48,190 + 19,884 + 12,184
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical own securities. — 6Including loans raised abroad. — 7Oldliabilities arising
Office. — *Excluding intergovernment debt. — 1Net borrowing differs from housing construction and liabilities arising from the housing
from the change in debt, which includes the assumption and transfer of construction of the former GDR’s armed forces and from housing
debts. — 2See Table VIII.7, footnote 8. — 3Data other than year-endconstruction in connection with the return of the troops of the former USSR
figures have been estimated. Including debt of municipal special purpose stationed in eastern Germany to their home country, and old debt inassociations. — 4Excluding mobilisation and liquidity paper. Predominantly accordance with the London Debts Agreement. — 8Ascertainedas a
Treasury discount paper (Bubills). — 5Excluding issuers’ holdings of their residual. 
9 Loans raised by general government against borrowers’ notes
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, €  million
Redemption Equalisation
Central German ERP Federal Fund for Fund  for Safe-
End of year govern- Unity Special State Local Railways Inherited guarding  the
or month Total  1 ment  2,3 FundFundgovernment government  4,5 Fund  3 Liabilites  3 Use of Coal 3 
1998 898,030 23,094 31,415 22,215 504,148 184,942 45,098 83,447 3,671
1999 444,031 64,704 10,481 9,778 264,158 94,909 − − −2000 431,364 54,731 7,178 10,801 268,362 90,292 − − −2001 416,067 44,791 4,464 9,699 267,988 89,126 − − −2002 398,910 34,636 3,172 9,205 262,840 89,057 − − −
2003 Mar 396,685 33,202 1,585 9,180 264,827 87,892 − − −
June 396,008 33,375 1,329 9,180 263,083 89,041 − − −
Sep 398,318 38,309 793 9,180 260,264 89,773 − − −Dec 
pe 398,745 38,410 793 9,042 260,020 90,480 − − −
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical 3See Table VIII.7, footnote 8. — 4Data other than year-endfigures have
Office. — 1Excluding Debt Register claims and cash advances. Including been estimated. Including municipal special purpose associations. —
small amounts of mortgage loans, landcharges in annuity andother forms, 5 Including contractually agreed loans. 
and debts outstanding. — 2Including Equalisation of Burdens Fund. —
57*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
10 Central government debt
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, €  million
Treasury discount Indebtedness
paper (Bubills)  1 to non-banks Old debt
of which Direct
Federal Federal Five-year lending arising  from
Treasury Treasury Federal Federal Federal by credit Social German Equal-
End of year financing notes notes savings bonds institu- security isation unifica-
or month Total Total paper (Schätze)  2 (Bobls)  2 notes (Bunds)  2 tions  3,4 funds Other  3,5,6 tion 7 claims Other  8 
1996 839,883 26,789 7,166 55,289 176,164 96,391 434,295 32,988 5 7,766 1,330 8,684 183
1997 905,691 25,286 5,221 78,848 177,721 99,317 481,619 31,845 5 870 1,300 8,684 1971998 957,983 24,666 4,558 84,760 199,274 92,698 519,718 24,125 − 2,603 1,270 8,684 186
1999  
9 714,069 11,553 1,584 44,335 120,498 41,621 379,808 67,872 60 2,568 476 45,175 104
2000 715,819 11,516 1,805 44,678 123,642 35,991 400,490 52,836 29 2,099 285 44,146 107
2001 701,077 21,136 1,658 59,643 119,911 26,395 416,195 47,111 26 1,481 85 8,986 1072002 725,405 30,227 1,618 78,584 127,484 17,898 422,558 39,517 0 1,167 29 7,845 972003 767,697 35,235 1,240 87,538 143,431 12,810 436,194 38,146 223 7,326 − 1 6,711 85
2003          Apr 747,512 30,048 1,308 80,447 133,377 15,458 429,019 50,040 − 1,183 4 7,845 92
         May 749,175 30,490 1,275 85,842 134,238 14,414 431,160 43,917 − 1,183 − 2 7,845 89         June 749,920 30,416 1,236 82,834 140,442 14,284 428,166 43,744 − 2,102 − 4 7,845 91
         July 760,392 30,842 1,207 87,689 141,157 13,804 426,319 51,688 − 2,102 − 7 6,706 91
         Aug 764,368 31,420 1,206 88,295 135,298 13,754 433,479 53,227 − 2,102 − 7 6,706 93         Sep 766,213 32,892 1,229 85,526 136,544 13,754 434,085 49,360 186 7,076 − 6 6,706 90
         Oct 769,146 33,239 1,218 90,274 142,861 12,761 439,993 35,959 186 7,076 2 6,706 89
         Nov 769,493 34,180 1,215 90,637 143,575 12,792 436,109 38,142 186 7,076 2 6,706 87         Dec 767,697 35,235 1,240 87,538 143,431 12,810 436,194 38,146 223 7,326 − 1 6,711 85
2004          Jan 786,023 35,941 1,229 92,560 143,816 11,830 448,242 39,290 223 7,326 − 1 6,711 86
         Feb 789,107 35,197 1,208 92,768 144,190 11,212 453,213 38,183 223 7,326 − 1 6,711 86         Mar 802,690 36,463 1,178 88,901 150,050 11,245 450,711 49,888 223 8,456 − 45 6,711 87
         Apr 
p 798,832 35,557 1,097 95,460 150,054 10,734 449,720 41,875 223 8,456 − 45 6,711 87
1Excluding mobilisation and liquidity paper. In November 1999, including with the return of the troops of the former USSR stationed in eastern
cash bills. — 2Excluding issuers’ holdings of their own securities. — Germany to their home country. — 8Commutation andcompensation d ebt
3Including loans raised abroad. — 4Including money market loans. — and old debt mainly denominated in foreign currency. — 9Since 1 July 1999
5Including loans granted by supplementary pension funds for government central government has assumed joint responsibility for the debts of the
employees. — 6Including liabilities arising from the investment assistance Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, the Federal Railways Fund and
levy. — 7Assumption of liabilities arising from housing construction for the the Equalisation Fundfor Safeguard ing the Use of Coal. From July 1999, the
former GDR’s armed forces and from housing construction in connection aforementioned special funds are included under central government.  
11 Central government borrowing in the market
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, €  million
of which
Five-year Loans against Change in
Total new borrowing Federal bonds (Bunds) Federal notes (Bobls) Other securities  2 borrowers’ notes Money money
market market
PeriodGross  1 Net Gross  1 Net Gross  1 Net Gross  1 Net Gross Net loans deposits
1996 + 185,696 + 83,049 + 54,038 + 31,988 + 45,445 + 5,445 + 67,015 + 39,586 + 15,050 + 1,906 + 4,148 + 6,548
1997 + 250,074 + 65,808 + 79,323 + 47,323 + 59,557 + 1,557 + 98,275 + 24,983 + 12,950 − 8,009 − 30 − 3,3041998 + 228,050 + 52,292 + 78,304 + 38,099 + 55,078 + 21,553 + 85,706 − 1,327 + 12,023 − 2,927 − 3,065 − 5,440
1999 + 139,865 + 31,631 + 53,931 + 114,080 + 22,229 + 18,610 + 44,904 − 5,836 + 14,861 + 52,897 + 3,937 + 1,832
2000 + 122,725 + 1,750 + 49,395 + 20,682 + 26,342 + 3,144 + 45,278 − 5,323 + 7,273 − 9,973 − 5,563 − 9402001 + 135,018 − 14,741 + 36,511 + 15,705 + 19,603 − 3,730 + 69,971 + 14,989 + 5,337 − 9,941 + 3,595 − 1,4952002 + 178,203 + 24,328 + 41,378 + 6,364 + 36,037 + 7,572 + 93,853 + 19,535 + 4,716 − 10,155 + 2,221 + 222003 + 227,078 + 42,292 + 62,535 + 13,636 + 42,327 + 15,947 + 109,500 + 8,874 + 11,480 + 3,775 + 1,236 + 7,218
2003          Jan-Apr + 78,058 + 22,107 + 23,437 + 6,460 + 12,427 + 5,894 + 28,597 − 757 + 1,401 − 1,658 + 12,197 + 475
2004          Jan-Apr  
p + 84,611 + 31,134 + 17,607 + 13,526 + 14,098 + 6,624 + 44,615 + 6,168 + 2,821 − 610 + 5,470 − 767
2003          Apr + 17,202 + 2,112 + 3,736 − 6,127 + 380 + 390 + 5,001 + 86 + 100 − 225 + 7,984 − 92         May + 15,681 + 1,663 + 2,133 + 2,141 + 8,260 + 861 + 10,443 + 4,794 + 565 − 404 − 5,720 + 61         June + 20,815 + 745 + 2,025 − 2,994 + 6,192 + 6,204 + 11,496 − 3,212 + 1,156 + 801 − 54 − 215
         July + 31,062 + 10,472 + 11,352 − 1,847 + 693 + 715 + 10,241 + 4,801 + 4,153 + 3,321 + 4,623 − 124
         Aug + 15,812 + 3,976 + 7,161 + 7,161 + 657 − 5,859 + 6,329 + 1,134 + 1,440 + 1,315 + 225 + 328         Sep + 23,605 + 1,845 + 6,694 + 606 + 1,246 + 1,246 + 13,693 − 1,297 + 977 + 298 + 995 − 73
         Oct + 11,968 + 2,933 + 8,442 + 5,908 + 6,317 + 6,317 + 10,100 + 4,102 + 296 − 214 − 13,187 − 188
         Nov + 17,180 + 347 + 1,205 − 3,883 + 6,680 + 715 + 6,311 + 1,335 + 394 − 408 + 2,590 − 189         Dec + 12,897 − 1,796 + 85 + 85 − 145 − 145 + 12,290 − 2,026 + 1,099 + 723 − 432 + 7,144
2004          Jan + 26,811 + 18,326 + 12,047 + 12,048 + 385 + 385 + 11,926 + 4,748 + 533 − 776 + 1,920 − 321
         Feb + 17,553 + 3,084 + 4,971 + 4,971 + 7,849 + 375 + 5,535 − 1,156 + 760 + 456 − 1,563 − 1,186         Mar + 36,156 + 13,583 + 1,580 − 2,502 + 5,860 + 5,860 + 15,425 − 2,567 + 673 + 217 + 12,619 + 6,423
         Apr 
p + 4,091 − 3,858 − 991 − 991 + 4 + 4 + 11,730 + 5,143 + 855 − 507 − 7,507 − 5,683
1After deduction of repurchases. — 2Federal Treasury notes (Schätze),   
Federal savings notes, Treasury discount paper (Bubills), Federal Treasury   
financing paper.  
58*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
12 Revenue, expenditure and assets of the wage and
salary earners’ pension insurance fund
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, €  million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 Assets  5 
of which of which
Payments Balance Mort- Memo
from Pen- of revenue gage item
central Pension sioners’ andand Ad minis-
Contri- govern- pay- health expend- other Real trative
PeriodTotal butions  2 ment Total ments  3 insurance  4 iture Total Deposits  6 Securities loans  7 estate assets
Germany
1993 290,393 232,408 52,671 298,065 252,920 15,898 − 7,672 39,786 29,957 8,499 1,100 229 6,297
1994 322,335 256,662 61,891 324,323 273,880 17,751 − 1,988 33,578 24,194 8,170 909 305 6,8901995 338,185 270,294 64,387 348,115 294,034 20,285 − 9,930 21,756 16,801 3,948 746 262 7,8001996  
8 353,672 282,616 68,388 362,667 305,780 21,660 − 8,995 14,456 9,608 2,119 2,500 229 8,863
1997 374,853 297,402 74,961 372,955 316,511 23,280 + 1,898 14,659 10,179 1,878 2,372 230 9,261
1998 389,101 297,827 88,755 385,707 327,823 24,393 + 3,394 18,194 14,201 1,493 2,274 226 9,5731999 208,173 152,206 54,628 203,295 172,919 12,950 + 4,878 13,623 11,559 824 1,127 114 4,9042000 211,137 150,712 58,862 210,558 178,599 13,365 + 579 14,350 11,459 1,676 1,105 110 4,8892001  
8 216,927 152,048 63,093 217,497 184,730 13,762 − 570 13,973 10,646 1,517 1,699 111 4,917
2002 221,563 152,810 66,958 225,689 191,133 14,498 − 4,126 9,826 6,943 1,072 1,685 126 4,878
2003  p 228,853 156,497 71,043 231,176 196,417 15,238 − 2,323 7,641 5,017 816 1,682 126 4,892
2002          Q1 53,033 36,050 16,622 55,450 47,271 3,512 − 2,417 11,943 8,712 1,427 1,698 106 4,933         Q2 54,621 37,404 16,780 55,560 47,012 3,508 − 939 10,663 7,490 1,366 1,696 111 4,954         Q3 55,043 37,938 16,614 57,105 48,276 3,704 − 2,062 8,911 5,919 1,182 1,689 121 4,947         Q4 58,392 41,409 16,585 57,549 48,441 3,898 + 843 9,826 6,943 1,072 1,685 126 4,878
2003          Q1 55,374 37,289 17,761 57,255 48,883 3,727 − 1,881 8,686 5,649 1,230 1,685 122 4,874
         Q2 56,442 38,349 17,749 57,396 48,763 3,735 − 954 7,698 4,906 980 1,686 126 4,867         Q3 57,241 39,085 17,830 58,256 49,409 3,858 − 1,015 6,348 3,822 727 1,683 116 4,855         Q4 59,796 41,772 17,703 58,269 49,363 3,916 + 1,527 7,641 5,017 816 1,682 126 4,892
2004          Q1 55,431 37,289 17,846 58,350 49,858 3,873 − 2,919 6,196 3,693 695 1,681 127 4,866
Source: Federal Minister of Labour and Social Affairs and Association of deducted from pension payments. — 4From 1995, including long-term care
German Pension Insurance Funds. — 1The annual figures do not tally with insurance for pensioners. — 5Largely corresponds to fluctuation reserves.
the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. From 1993, Endof year or quarter. From 1992, figures for the whole of Germany. —
including financial compensation payments. Excluding investment spending 6Including cash. — 7Excluding loans to other social security funds;
andproceed s. — 2Including contributions for recipients of government including participating interests. — 8Excluding income arising from the
cash benefits. — 3Payments by pension insurance funds to health insurance revaluation of participating interests. 
institutions under section 50 of the Social Security Code V have been
13 Revenue and expenditure of the Federal Employment Agency
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999, €  million
Revenue Expenditure
Grant or
of which of which working
capital
Promo- loans
Unemployment support  3,4 Job promotion  4,5 tion of fromwinter central
Contri- Western Eastern Western Eastern con- govern-
PeriodTotal  
1 butions Levies  2 Total Total Germany Germany Total Germany Germany struction Balance ment
Germany
1993 85,109 79,895 1,829 109,536 48,005 34,149 13,856 36,891 15,895 20,996 1,919 − 24,426 24,419
1994 89,658 81,536 3,822 99,863 48,342 35,163 13,179 31,273 14,382 16,891 1,822 − 10,205 10,1421995 90,211 84,354 2,957 97,103 49,254 36,161 13,094 34,441 16,745 17,696 1,586 − 6,892 6,8871996 91,825 85,073 3,346 105,588 57,123 40,186 16,938 36,478 18,368 18,111 903 − 13,763 13,7561997 93,149 85,793 2,959 102,723 60,273 40,309 19,964 31,418 16,117 15,301 443 − 9,574 9,5741998 91,088 86,165 2,868 98,852 53,483 35,128 18,355 34,279 16,784 17,496 471 − 7,764 7,719
1999 47,954 45,141 1,467 51,694 25,177 16,604 8,573 20,558 10,480 10,078 279 − 3,740 3,739
2000 49,606 46,359 1,403 50,473 23,946 15,615 8,331 20,324 10,534 9,790 294 − 868 8672001 50,682 47,337 1,640 52,613 25,036 16,743 8,294 20,713 11,094 9,619 268 − 1,931 1,9312002 50,885 47,405 2,088 56,508 27,610 19,751 7,860 21,011 11,568 9,443 245 − 5,623 5,6232003 50,635 47,337 2,081 56,850 29,735 21,528 8,207 19,155 10,564 8,591 272 − 6,215 6,215
2002          Q1 11,502 11,188 51 13,093 6,587 4,608 1,979 4,665 2,523 2,142 139 − 1,591 3,720
         Q2 12,200 11,459 433 14,141 7,098 5,005 2,093 5,230 2,903 2,327 97 − 1,941 2,200         Q3 12,710 11,808 528 13,905 6,708 4,839 1,869 5,182 2,849 2,334 7 − 1,195 854         Q4 14,473 12,951 1,077 15,369 7,218 5,299 1,919 5,933 3,293 2,640 2 − 896 − 1,151
2003          Q1 11,617 11,281 48 14,408 7,647 5,422 2,225 4,785 2,576 2,209 180 − 2,790 5,151
         Q2 12,272 11,487 536 14,667 7,975 5,708 2,267 4,721 2,623 2,098 84 − 2,395 2,408         Q3 12,828 11,797 619 13,645 7,251 5,313 1,938 4,453 2,462 1,991 7 − 817 514         Q4 13,917 12,773 878 14,131 6,863 5,086 1,777 5,196 2,903 2,293 1 − 214 − 1,858
2004          Q1 11,524 11,261 47 14,448 8,200 6,001 2,199 4,389 2,491 1,898 144 − 2,924 5,244
Source: Federal Employment Agency. — 1Exclud ing central government recipients of wage substitutes are paidin January insteadof in
liquidity assistance. — 2Levies to promote winter construction andto pay in- December. — 5Vocational training, measures to encourage job take-up,
solvency compensation to employees. — 3Unemployment benefit, rehabilitation, job creation measures, subsidies granted to Personnel Service
short-time working benefit. — 4Including contributions to the statutory Agencies (PSAs), compensation top-up payments and business start-up
health insurance funds and statutory pension insurance sheme. From 2003, grants. 
the January contributions to the statutory pension insurance scheme for
59*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
IX Economic conditions
  
1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
  Germany
  
  
  1999   2000   2001   2002   2003   2000   2001   2002   2003   2000   2001   2002   2003
Annual Percentage
Item
€
 billion percentage change of total
At  1995  prices
I Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 430.5 447.3 444.3 443.8 445.7 3.9 − 0.7 − 0.1 0.4 22.7 22.4 22.3 22.4Construction 105.1 102.1 95.8 90.1 86.1 − 2.9 − 6.1 − 5.9 − 4.5 5.2 4.8 4.5 4.3Wholesale/retail trade, hotel andrestaurant services, transportand storage  
1 334.5 353.5 367.6 371.3 373.8 5.7 4.0 1.0 0.7 17.9 18.5 18.7 18.8
Financing, renting and businessservices  
2 546.6 570.9 589.7 595.9 599.3 4.4 3.3 1.1 0.6 29.0 29.7 29.9 30.1
Public and private services  3 382.1 388.4 389.6 394.8 395.1 1.6 0.3 1.3 0.1 19.7 19.6 19.8 19.9
All economic sectors 1,823.5 1,886.7 1,911.5 1,919.9 1,923.8 3.5 1.3 0.4 0.2 95.8 96.2 96.5 96.8Memo item: Enterprise sector 1,596.1 1,658.5 1,684.3 1,693.4 1,698.7 3.9 1.6 0.5 0.3 84.2 84.8 85.1 85.5
Economic sectors, adjusted  
4 1,730.5 1,786.4 1,806.6 1,815.2 1,817.3 3.2 1.1 0.5 0.1 90.7 91.0 91.2 91.4
Gross domestic product 1,914.8 1,969.5 1,986.2 1,989.7 1,987.7 2.9 0.8 0.2 − 0.1 100 100 100 100
II Use of domestic product
Private consumption  5 1,099.1 1,120.6 1,136.9 1,125.3 1,124.1 2.0 1.4 − 1.0 − 0.1 56.9 57.2 56.6 56.6
Government consumption 374.3 378.0 382.0 388.4 391.7 1.0 1.0 1.7 0.9 19.2 19.2 19.5 19.7Machinery and equipment 160.3 176.5 167.8 152.5 147.9 10.1 − 4.9 − 9.1 − 3.0 9.0 8.4 7.7 7.4Premises 248.7 242.1 230.5 217.1 209.8 − 2.6 − 4.8 − 5.8 − 3.4 12.3 11.6 10.9 10.6Other investment  
6 23.4 25.5 27.0 27.4 27.9 9.0 5.6 1.6 1.8 1.3 1.4 1.4 1.4
Changes in inventories  7 − 5.7 − 8.1 − 24.7 − 22.0 − 7.4 . . . . − 0.4 − 1.2 − 1.1 − 0.4
Domestic use 1,900.2 1,934.7 1,919.4 1,888.6 1,894.0 1.8 − 0.8 − 1.6 0.3 98.2 96.6 94.9 95.3
Net exports 14.6 34.8 66.8 101.1 93.7 . . . . 1.8 3.4 5.1 4.7
Exports 581.8 661.5 698.8 722.6 731.1 13.7 5.6 3.4 1.2 33.6 35.2 36.3 36.8Imports 567.2 626.7 632.0 621.5 637.4 10.5 0.9 − 1.7 2.6 31.8 31.8 31.2 32.1
Gross domestic product 1,914.8 1,969.5 1,986.2 1,989.7 1,987.7 2.9 0.8 0.2 − 0.1 100 100 100 100
At  current  prices
III Use of domestic product
Private consumption  5 1,156.0 1,196.2 1,232.7 1,236.5 1,247.1 3.5 3.0 0.3 0.9 58.9 59.4 58.6 58.6
Government consumption 378.2 385.6 394.1 404.4 410.9 2.0 2.2 2.6 1.6 19.0 19.0 19.2 19.3
Machinery and equipment 159.6 176.7 167.4 151.9 145.1 10.7 − 5.3 − 9.3 − 4.5 8.7 8.1 7.2 6.8Premises 245.2 240.2 228.9 215.5 207.9 − 2.1 − 4.7 − 5.9 − 3.5 11.8 11.0 10.2 9.8Other investment  
6 21.6 23.2 24.4 24.6 24.7 7.3 5.0 1.0 0.3 1.1 1.2 1.2 1.2
Changes in inventories  7 2.1 0.7 − 15.0 − 13.2 3.0 . . . . 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.6 0.1
Domestic use 1,962.6 2,022.5 2,032.5 2,019.7 2,038.7 3.1 0.5 − 0.6 0.9 99.6 98.0 95.7 95.7Net exports 16.0 7.5 41.2 90.7 90.5 . . . . 0.4 2.0 4.3 4.3
Exports 586.4 686.1 731.5 757.6 761.0 17.0 6.6 3.6 0.4 33.8 35.3 35.9 35.7
Imports 570.4 678.6 690.2 667.0 670.5 19.0 1.7 − 3.4 0.5 33.4 33.3 31.6 31.5
Gross domestic product 1,978.6 2,030.0 2,073.7 2,110.4 2,129.2 2.6 2.2 1.8 0.9 100 100 100 100
IV Prices (1995 = 100)
Private consumption 105.2 106.7 108.4 109.9 110.9 1.5 1.6 1.3 1.0 . . . .Gross domestic product 103.3 103.1 104.4 106.1 107.1 − 0.3 1.3 1.6 1.0 . . . .Terms of trade 100.2 95.8 95.8 97.7 99.0 − 4.4 0.1 1.9 1.3 . . . .
V Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,057.8 1,099.1 1,121.3 1,130.5 1,132.7 3.9 2.0 0.8 0.2 72.9 72.7 71.9 72.0Entrepreneurial and propertyincome 410.4 409.3 420.9 441.1 439.9 − 0.3 2.8 4.8 − 0.3 27.1 27.3 28.1 28.0
National income 1,468.2 1,508.4 1,542.2 1,571.5 1,572.6 2.7 2.2 1.9 0.1 100 100 100 100
Memo item: Gross national
income 1,965.1 2,020.3 2,065.6 2,108.8 2,118.2 2.8 2.2 2.1 0.4 . . . .
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in February 2004. — 1In- cluding taxes on products (offset against subsidies on products). — 5Includ-
cluding communication services. — 2Financial intermediation, real estate ing non-profit institutions serving households. — 6Intangible fixedasset for-
activities, renting andbusiness services. — 3Including care-at-home servi- mation (inter alia, computer software and entertainment, literary or artistic
ces. — 4Gross value added after deduction of assumed bank charges, but ex- originals) and cultivated assets. — 7 Including net increase in valuables. 
60*IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
 IX Economic conditions
 
2 Output in the production sector
 Germany
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which
Industry  1 
of which:   by main industrial grouping of which:   by economic sector
Motor
Chemicals vehicles,
Production Inter- Non- and Machinery trailers
sector, Construc- mediate Capital Durable durable chemical Basic and and semi-total tion  
2 Energy  3 Total goods  4 goods  5 goods goods  6 products metals equipment trailers
2000 = 100  
  
1999 95.3 103.7 100.2 94.0 94.5 91.1 96.2 98.5 97.2 92.4 93.3 89.8
2000 99.9 100.0 99.9 99.9 99.9 99.9 99.9 99.9 99.9 99.9 99.9 99.9
2001  r 99.5 92.4 97.3 100.4 99.4 102.3 100.4 98.8 98.0 101.1 102.1 104.0
2002  r 98.3 89.0 97.4 99.3 98.9 101.1 92.0 98.2 101.7 101.8 99.5 105.4
2003  r 98.4 85.1 99.8 99.5 99.5 102.0 87.2 97.4 102.0 99.9 97.8 107.6
 
2002          July  r 99.0 102.1 89.7 99.7 101.6 100.7 84.1 97.5 105.4 103.6 100.1 101.9
         Aug  r 92.4 94.0 89.3 92.6 95.4 90.0 74.0 95.9 99.9 95.1 85.3 91.7
         Sep  r 104.7 104.4 92.2 106.1 105.7 108.9 103.8 102.2 103.2 108.0 108.8 114.5
         Oct  r 104.0 101.9 101.9 104.5 104.9 104.1 100.5 105.2 103.8 107.2 99.2 111.4
         Nov  r 105.8 96.2 103.1 107.0 104.3 110.9 103.5 105.8 102.1 105.3 105.7 119.9
         Dec  r 92.6 63.4 106.6 93.7 84.5 105.4 83.4 92.8 88.5 81.5 118.6 90.6
2003          Jan  r 90.3 51.8 110.3 91.7 93.9 89.9 82.0 92.9 102.5 101.0 80.7 101.9
         Feb  r 92.4 51.5 104.1 94.9 94.2 98.3 87.1 91.7 98.3 100.1 91.4 110.9
         Mar 104.7 83.8 109.0 106.1 106.0 110.0 97.2 100.6 112.2 110.4 103.5 121.4
         Apr  r 98.4 92.1 100.3 98.7 100.4 99.4 85.7 96.7 105.6 102.9 93.2 108.9
         May  r 96.0 91.2 95.3 96.5 98.9 97.3 79.8 93.9 102.4 101.3 91.8 106.9
         June  r 100.1 98.6 91.6 101.1 102.5 103.4 83.6 97.4 103.6 97.7 102.0 106.8
         July  r 100.4 102.3 90.5 101.2 102.4 103.1 85.7 98.6 105.0 101.7 98.9 108.7
         Aug  r 90.0 89.8 90.4 90.0 93.1 86.6 67.3 95.4 98.9 88.2 85.6 80.0
         Sep  r 102.3 100.9 92.2 103.5 103.3 106.6 97.1 99.1 97.6 101.6 104.4 110.8
         Oct  r 105.1 99.3 102.2 106.0 106.9 106.3 97.9 105.2 103.9 107.3 98.1 112.3
         Nov  r 106.4 93.1 104.6 107.8 105.3 113.9 100.2 103.2 101.4 103.2 105.9 125.1
         Dec  r 95.0 67.0 107.0 96.2 87.1 108.8 82.9 94.2 92.7 83.0 117.9 97.5
2004          Jan  r + 92.2 49.3 115.6 93.7 96.8 91.3 82.1 94.6 102.1 102.9 82.9 100.5
         Feb  r + 94.5 56.7 105.7 96.7 98.8 97.6 85.1 93.0 101.5 101.6 88.0 113.6
         Mar  + 7 103.7 7 74.9 107.3 106.0 106.2 110.7 93.4 99.5 107.7 107.6 104.9 123.6
Annual percentage change  
  
1999 + 1.1 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 1.2 + 1.5 + 1.0 − 0.4 + 1.9 + 3.5 − 3.6 − 2.2 + 3.22000 + 4.8 − 3.6 − 0.3 + 6.3 + 5.7 + 9.7 + 3.8 + 1.4 + 2.8 + 8.1 + 7.1 + 11.2
2001  
r − 0.4 − 7.6 − 2.6 + 0.5 − 0.5 + 2.4 + 0.5 − 1.1 − 1.9 + 1.2 + 2.2 + 4.1
2002  r − 1.2 − 3.7 + 0.1 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 1.2 − 8.4 − 0.6 + 3.8 + 0.7 − 2.5 + 1.3
2003  r + 0.1 − 4.4 + 2.5 + 0.2 + 0.6 + 0.9 − 5.2 − 0.8 + 0.3 − 1.9 − 1.7 + 2.1
 
2002          July  r − 0.3 − 3.9 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.4 − 6.0 − 1.7 + 2.4 + 5.1 − 0.4 + 3.0
         Aug  r − 0.8 − 5.9 + 0.9 − 0.3 + 1.3 − 0.1 − 12.5 − 1.7 + 5.3 + 1.8 − 4.3 + 6.0
         Sep  r − 0.6 − 4.1 + 0.8 − 0.4 + 1.4 − 1.4 − 7.6 − 0.3 + 6.3 + 1.2 − 3.5 + 3.1
         Oct  r + 0.2 − 7.1 + 4.8 + 0.5 + 1.5 + 0.5 − 6.1 − 0.5 + 3.9 + 3.2 − 1.5 + 1.3
         Nov  r + 2.8 − 3.0 − 0.9 + 3.8 + 4.1 + 4.9 − 2.9 + 2.5 + 6.7 + 7.4 + 2.3 + 11.4
         Dec  r + 0.1 − 12.2 − 3.4 + 1.3 + 3.3 + 0.9 − 8.5 + 0.3 + 8.3 + 6.4 − 1.5 + 5.2
2003          Jan  r + 0.9 − 9.9 + 1.2 + 1.4 + 2.8 + 2.3 − 8.4 − 0.9 + 3.9 + 3.3 − 3.5 + 6.7
         Feb  r + 0.4 − 23.0 + 7.3 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 4.7 − 5.9 − 2.0 − 1.1 − 1.5 + 2.1 + 10.0
         Mar  r + 0.8 − 6.6 + 6.3 + 0.7 + 1.4 + 2.0 − 6.7 − 2.0 + 1.4 + 1.8 − 1.3 + 5.1
         Apr  r + 0.3 − 4.5 + 3.5 + 0.4 + 1.1 − 0.3 − 4.8 + 1.2 + 3.1 − 1.5 − 4.0 + 2.9
         May  r + 0.4 − 3.8 + 2.0 + 0.5 + 0.6 + 2.2 − 4.4 − 1.9 − 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.2 + 5.8
         June  r − 1.9 − 1.6 + 5.3 − 2.7 − 0.5 − 5.1 − 12.0 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 8.9 − 6.6 − 7.7
         July  r + 1.4 + 0.2 + 0.9 + 1.5 + 0.8 + 2.4 + 1.9 + 1.1 − 0.4 − 1.8 − 1.2 + 6.7
         Aug  r − 2.6 − 4.5 + 1.2 − 2.8 − 2.4 − 3.8 − 9.1 − 0.5 − 1.0 − 7.3 + 0.4 − 12.8
         Sep  r − 2.3 − 3.4 + 0.0 − 2.5 − 2.3 − 2.1 − 6.5 − 3.0 − 5.4 − 5.9 − 4.0 − 3.2
         Oct  r + 1.1 − 2.6 + 0.3 + 1.4 + 1.9 + 2.1 − 2.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 1.1 + 0.8
         Nov  r + 0.6 − 3.2 + 1.5 + 0.7 + 1.0 + 2.7 − 3.2 − 2.5 − 0.7 − 2.0 + 0.2 + 4.3
         Dec  r + 2.6 + 5.7 + 0.4 + 2.7 + 3.1 + 3.2 − 0.6 + 1.5 + 4.7 + 1.8 − 0.6 + 7.6
2004          Jan  r + + 2.1 − 4.8 + 4.8 + 2.2 + 3.1 + 1.6 + 0.1 + 1.8 − 0.4 + 1.9 + 2.7 − 1.4
         Feb  r + + 2.3 + 10.1 + 1.5 + 1.9 + 4.9 − 0.7 − 2.3 + 1.4 + 3.3 + 1.5 − 3.7 + 2.4
         Mar  + 7 − 1.0 7 − 10.6 − 1.6 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.6 − 3.9 − 1.1 − 4.0 − 2.5 + 1.4 + 1.8
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — oUsing the quarrying. — 5Including manufacture of motor vehicles, trailers and
Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. — 1Manufacturing sector, unless semi-trailers. — 6Includ ing printing andservice activities relatedto prin-
assignedto the main grouping energy, plus mining andquarrying. — 2The ting. — 7Provisional up to adjustment to the figures of the annual overall
figures refer to the economic classifications ”Site preparation” and”Build - survey in the construction sector. — +Provisional; adjusted in advance by
ing of complete constructions or parts thereof; civil engineering”. — the Federal Statistical Office, by way of estimates, to the results of the
3Electricity, gas, steam and hot water supply, and, in particular, mining of Quarterly Production Survey for the first quarter (industry: on
coal andlignite, extraction of crud e petroleum andnatural gas andmanu- average -2.5%). facture of refinedpetroleum prod ucts. — 4Including mining and
61* IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
 IX Economic conditions
 
3 Orders received by industry *
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which of which
 
Industry,
total Domestic orders Foreign orders Intermediate goods Capital goods  1 Consumer goods  2 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annualpercent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age
Period2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change
Germany  
  
2000 99.9 + 13.8 99.9 + 8.2 100.0 + 21.8 100.0 + 14.3 100.0 + 16.3 99.9 + 4.2
2001 98.3 − 1.6 97.6 − 2.3 99.1 − 0.9 95.9 − 4.1 99.4 − 0.6 101.4 + 1.52002 98.3
+ 0.0 94.6 − 3.1 102.8 + 3.7 96.4 + 0.5 99.6 + 0.2 98.9 − 2.5
2003  r 99.0 + 0.7 94.7 + 0.1 104.4 + 1.6 97.8 + 1.5 100.7 + 1.1 95.4 − 3.5
 
2003          Mar  r 105.6 − 0.8 100.0 − 1.0 112.5 − 0.8 105.2 + 2.3 106.0 − 1.5 104.8 − 7.5
         Apr  r 97.2 − 0.1 93.0 − 1.4 102.5 + 1.4 97.4 + 0.1 98.5 + 1.2 91.3 − 6.3
         May  r 93.1 − 5.7 91.0 − 0.2 95.7 − 11.4 93.4 − 2.6 94.5 − 7.9 86.3 − 5.8
         June  r 100.7 − 0.4 95.1 − 1.1 107.7 + 0.6 98.5 − 1.5 105.2 + 2.0 89.2 − 7.2
         July  r 97.5 − 0.3 94.9 − 0.9 100.8 + 0.5 98.1 + 0.6 98.0 − 0.8 93.8 − 0.6
         Aug  r 89.9 − 2.0 87.3 − 3.5 93.2 + 0.0 89.5 + 0.0 89.6 − 3.0 92.9 − 3.2
         Sep  r 102.9 + 1.1 98.4 + 0.1 108.5 + 2.2 100.9 + 0.7 104.4 + 2.6 102.9 − 4.2
         Oct  r 102.7 + 2.4 99.1 + 1.5 107.2 + 3.5 102.5 + 2.8 102.9 + 2.4 102.8 + 0.9
         Nov  r 102.5 + 0.9 99.2 + 1.8 106.6 − 0.2 102.1 + 2.7 104.4 + 0.8 95.6 − 4.6
         Dec  r 98.0 + 6.8 89.7 + 1.5 108.5 + 12.9 91.1 + 5.3 106.4 + 9.0 86.9 + 1.6
2004          Jan 99.8 + 1.2 93.7 + 1.2 107.4 + 1.1 101.9 + 3.3 99.8 + 0.6 93.0 − 3.5
         Feb 101.2 + 2.4 95.9 + 0.4 107.8 + 4.8 102.2 + 5.6 101.2 + 1.5 98.3 − 3.7         Mar  
p 110.5 + 4.6 104.4 + 4.4 118.2 + 5.1 110.0 + 4.6 112.7 + 6.3 103.5 − 1.2
Western Germany  
  
2000 99.9 + 13.5 99.9 + 7.8 100.0 + 21.4 99.9 + 13.5 100.0 + 16.3 99.9 + 3.5
2001 97.8 − 2.1 97.2 − 2.7 98.6 − 1.4 95.1 − 4.8 99.1 − 0.9 101.1 + 1.22002 97.3 − 0.5 93.7 − 3.6 101.6 + 3.0 95.1
+ 0.0 98.9 − 0.2 98.3 − 2.8
2003  r 97.6 + 0.3 93.2 − 0.5 102.9 + 1.3 95.7 + 0.6 99.9 + 1.0 94.3 − 4.1
 
2003          Mar  r 104.2 − 0.2 98.8 − 1.5 110.7 + 1.3 103.4 + 2.4 104.9 + 0.1 104.0 − 8.0
         Apr  r 95.9 − 0.8 91.6 − 2.3 101.1 + 0.9 95.2 − 1.0 97.9 + 0.8 90.0 − 6.9
         May  r 91.9 − 6.5 89.5 − 1.0 94.8 − 12.0 91.4 − 3.4 94.0 − 8.7 85.0 − 6.0
         June  r 99.7 − 0.6 93.2 − 2.0 107.6 + 1.1 96.4 − 2.6 105.2 + 2.5 88.2 − 7.2
         July  r 96.4 − 1.1 93.7 − 1.7 99.7 − 0.5 95.9 − 0.3 97.7 − 1.7 93.1 − 1.2
         Aug  r 88.6 − 1.8 85.6 − 4.0 92.2 + 0.9 86.7 − 1.1 89.3 − 1.9 91.8 − 3.7
         Sep  r 101.3 + 0.2 96.3 − 1.1 107.4 + 1.8 98.6 − 0.2 103.4 + 2.0 101.8 − 4.9
         Oct  r 101.1 + 1.8 97.1 + 0.6 106.0 + 3.2 100.1 + 1.9 101.9 + 2.1 101.5 + 0.4
         Nov  r 100.4 + 0.1 97.4 + 1.0 103.9 − 1.0 100.0 + 1.7 102.2 + 0.1 94.0 − 5.3
         Dec  r 96.0 + 6.1 88.0 + 1.3 105.5 + 11.4 89.7 + 4.9 103.4 + 7.9 85.3 + 0.7
2004          Jan 98.1 + 0.5 92.4 + 0.7 105.0 + 0.4 99.9 + 4.1 98.4 − 1.0 91.9 − 3.8         Feb 99.8 + 1.9 94.2 − 0.6 106.5 + 4.7 100.2 + 5.1 100.1 + 1.0 97.4 − 4.2         Mar  
p 109.1 + 4.7 102.8 + 4.0 116.7 + 5.4 107.5 + 4.0 112.0 + 6.8 102.4 − 1.5
Eastern Germany  
  
2000 100.0 + 18.2 100.0 + 13.9 99.9 + 29.7 99.9 + 20.8 100.0 + 16.3 100.0 + 15.12001 104.9 + 4.9 102.4 + 2.4 110.9 + 11.0 106.0 + 6.1 103.4 + 3.4 106.1 + 6.12002 111.0 + 5.8 104.0 + 1.6 127.8 + 15.2 111.6 + 5.3 110.7 + 7.1 109.4 + 3.12003  
r 117.9 + 6.2 110.8 + 6.5 135.1 + 5.7 122.8 + 10.0 114.1 + 3.1 112.7 + 3.0
 
2003          Mar  r 124.2 − 8.3 112.8 + 4.4 151.8 − 24.7 126.8 + 2.8 122.9 − 19.5 118.7 + 1.5
         Apr  r 115.1 + 8.2 107.8 + 7.7 132.6 + 9.0 123.2 + 11.1 107.4 + 6.4 110.8 + 0.8
         May  r 109.1 + 4.6 106.8 + 6.8 114.7 + 0.2 117.4 + 6.2 101.1 + 5.0 106.2 − 3.4
         June  r 114.0 + 1.8 115.6 + 7.4 110.0 − 10.4 123.4 + 9.5 105.8 − 4.9 106.4 − 4.9
         July  r 112.2 + 11.0 107.4 + 6.4 123.6 + 21.8 123.9 + 10.2 101.3 + 12.9 106.1 + 7.9
         Aug  r 108.4 − 3.6 105.6 + 1.3 115.0 − 13.1 121.3 + 8.6 94.4 − 17.6 109.8 + 2.1
         Sep  r 124.3 + 11.2 121.0 + 12.2 132.1 + 8.7 128.3 + 10.6 121.1 + 13.5 120.0 + 4.4
         Oct  r 124.8 + 9.7 121.0 + 10.1 134.0 + 8.9 131.0 + 12.8 118.7 + 6.9 123.4 + 7.5
         Nov  r 132.2 + 11.2 118.5 + 9.9 165.3 + 13.6 127.5 + 13.2 139.9 + 10.7 121.5 + 5.1
         Dec  r 127.3 + 14.6 108.3 + 3.2 173.1 + 37.4 106.9 + 7.8 152.5 + 20.4 112.6 + 14.0
2004          Jan 122.6 + 8.9 107.8 + 6.4 158.4 + 13.3 125.9 − 3.2 122.4 + 29.3 110.1 − 0.2         Feb 120.7 + 8.7 114.3 + 10.4 136.0 + 5.3 125.4 + 10.1 117.7 + 8.0 112.6 + 5.4         Mar  
p 130.2 + 4.8 121.9 + 8.1 150.3 − 1.0 138.3 + 9.1 123.8 + 0.7 121.9 + 2.7
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *Economic tax. — oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. — 1Including
activities of the manufacturing sector, in particular excluding manufacture manufacture of motor vehicles, trailers and semi-trailers. — 2Including print-
of food products, beverages, tobacco and refined petroleum products; ing and service activities related to printing. 
results for specific operational segments; figures excluding value-added
62* IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
 IX Economic conditions
 
4 Orders received by construction *   
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Germany Western Germany Eastern Germany
Public Public Public
Housing sector Housing sector Housing sector Industrial Industrial Industrial
con- construc- construc- con- construc- construc- con- construc- construc-
Total struction tion  1 tion Total struction tion  1 tion Total struction tion  1 tion
 Annual Annual Annual
 per- per- per- centage centage centage
Periodchange
2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100
2000 99.9 − 8.6 100.0 99.9 100.0 99.9 − 7.0 99.9 99.9 100.0 100.0 − 13.4 100.0 99.9 100.0
2001 94.5 − 5.4 82.8 96.9 99.0 97.4 − 2.5 87.6 99.9 100.7 85.2 − 14.8 68.3 86.4 94.22002 88.7 − 6.1 72.8 91.5 95.6 91.0 − 6.6 79.6 93.1 95.6 81.7 − 4.1 51.9 85.8 95.72003 79.2 − 10.7 67.5 78.5 87.4 80.8 − 11.2 74.5 78.3 87.8 74.2 − 9.2 46.1 79.2 86.2
   
2003          Feb 64.4 − 13.0 54.6 67.4 67.0 67.5 − 8.7 59.4 68.9 71.1 54.3 − 26.7 40.1 62.4 54.9         Mar 88.7 − 20.7 78.8 86.4 97.5 91.7 − 24.4 86.9 87.7 99.5 79.0 − 4.0 54.0 81.5 91.5
         Apr 82.4 − 13.4 69.8 81.9 90.9 84.9 − 13.9 76.9 84.3 90.8 74.5 − 11.3 48.3 73.8 90.9
         May 82.7 − 10.3 66.6 83.1 92.4 81.6 − 12.6 70.7 79.7 90.8 86.2 − 2.7 54.0 95.1 96.9         June 94.4 − 11.3 75.7 91.8 109.0 95.9 − 11.6 83.7 92.1 108.1 89.7 − 9.8 51.4 91.1 111.2
         July 90.6 − 3.4 71.2 86.6 107.3 91.1 − 5.5 79.1 85.7 105.1 89.0 + 4.2 46.9 89.9 113.5
         Aug 81.1 − 8.3 67.7 76.1 95.1 81.7 − 6.2 73.8 74.7 94.9 79.2 − 14.3 49.0 81.0 95.7         Sep 91.2 − 10.5 76.3 88.8 103.2 91.2 − 11.8 84.9 85.3 102.3 90.9 − 6.4 50.2 101.3 105.4
         Oct 80.1 − 5.2 70.6 75.8 90.8 83.4 − 3.0 79.8 76.4 93.9 69.6 − 13.0 42.6 73.7 81.9
         Nov 69.2 − 7.5 62.0 73.6 68.7 71.0 − 3.8 69.5 74.0 68.5 63.1 − 19.0 39.1 71.7 69.3         Dec 69.3 − 12.6 66.7 68.4 71.9 71.1 − 14.4 73.9 68.4 72.5 63.4 − 5.8 44.9 68.3 69.8
2004          Jan 53.2 − 6.2 41.5 65.7 46.6 55.3 − 5.5 47.8 67.6 45.4 46.6 − 9.0 22.1 58.6 49.7
         Feb 66.2 + 2.8 58.3 75.3 60.8 67.3 − 0.3 64.7 79.2 54.9 62.6 + 15.3 38.8 61.8 77.7
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. — *Values exclusive engineering”. — oBundesbank calculation. — 1Including the railways and
of value-added tax. The figures refer to the economic classifications ”Site post office. 
preparation” and”Build ing of complete constructions or parts thereof; civil
 
 
5 Retail trade turnover *
    Germany
  
Retail trade  1 Memo item
of which:  By enterprises’ main product range of which
Pharmaceutical Household
and medical articles, Retail trade plus retailgoods, cosmetic Clothing, hardware, sales of motor vehicles
Food, beverages, and toilet footwear and paints and glass and motorcycles and Retail sales of
Total tobacco  
2 articles  2 leather goods  2 2,3 sales of automotive fuel motor vehicles  4 
Annual percent- Annual percent-
age change Annual Annual Annual Annual age change Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
Not age age age age Not age Price- Price-
Periodchange change change change change 2000 = 100 adjusted adjusted  5 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 adjusted adjusted  5 2000 = 100
1996 97.0 + 0.3 − 0.6 97.0 + 0.0 81.8 + 4.2 103.2 − 0.8 96.4 − 1.1 96.0 + 1.3 + 0.3 90.7 + 5.3
1997 95.9 − 1.1 − 1.7 95.7 − 1.3 83.4 + 2.0 101.4 − 1.7 95.2 − 1.2 95.8 − 0.2 − 0.7 94.0 + 3.6
1998 96.9 + 1.0 + 1.1 97.1 + 1.5 88.2 + 5.8 100.3 − 1.1 98.2 + 3.2 97.5 + 1.8 + 1.5 99.2 + 5.51999 97.7 + 0.8 + 0.5 98.0 + 0.9 94.7 + 7.4 100.2 − 0.1 97.6 − 0.6 98.7 + 1.2 + 0.8 102.9 + 3.7
2000 100.0 + 2.4 + 1.2 100.0 + 2.0 100.0 + 5.6 100.0 − 0.2 100.0 + 2.5 100.0 + 1.3 + 0.1 100.0 − 2.8
2001 101.8 + 1.8 . 104.7 + 4.7 107.3 + 7.3 99.5 − 0.5 96.5 − 3.5 101.9 + 1.9 . 102.4 + 2.42002 100.3 − 1.5 − 2.1 107.4 + 2.6 111.1 + 3.5 94.8 − 4.7 88.9 − 7.9 101.3 − 0.6 − 1.3 106.0 + 3.52003 99.7 − 0.6 − 0.7 109.3 + 1.8 113.9 + 2.5 89.9 − 5.2 87.7 − 1.3 101.1 − 0.2 − 0.4 107.2 + 1.1
 
2003          Mar 99.5 − 2.9 − 3.1 108.3 − 3.7 109.0 − 0.1 91.1 − 5.1 93.7 + 3.5 103.0 − 1.5 − 1.8 116.2 + 2.6
         Apr 103.1 + 2.1 + 2.5 113.5 + 5.4 113.2 + 0.4 97.0 + 0.1 92.0 − 1.0 106.1 + 1.0 + 1.2 117.4 − 2.7
         May 100.6 + 0.2 + 0.7 110.7 + 0.5 111.5 + 1.7 94.0 − 3.0 90.2 + 2.3 103.9 + 1.3 + 1.5 116.1 + 4.6         June 92.7 − 1.1 − 1.1 105.3 + 2.0 106.9 + 0.7 82.8 − 3.0 80.1 − 1.4 96.7 − 0.7 − 0.9 111.5 + 0.1
         July 98.9 − 1.1 − 1.2 110.7 + 3.4 118.1 + 2.7 87.7 − 5.6 85.7 − 3.1 103.4 + 0.2 − 0.1 120.4 + 4.1
         Aug 91.9 − 5.6 − 5.9 107.2 − 0.5 104.1 − 4.9 74.9 − 13.5 79.1 − 6.7 93.0 − 4.5 − 5.0 96.5 − 0.9         Sep 98.2 + 1.4 + 1.4 105.2 + 4.2 110.9 + 3.4 96.4 − 4.0 85.2 − 0.4 99.8 + 2.4 + 2.1 106.3 + 5.7
         Oct 105.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 113.5 + 3.6 117.5 + 2.2 107.2 − 2.9 94.0 − 0.5 107.0 + 0.2 − 0.4 113.8 + 1.1
         Nov 101.8 − 4.4 − 5.0 109.4 − 2.7 112.9 − 0.4 88.3 − 10.4 93.0 − 4.7 102.1 − 3.9 − 4.6 105.0 − 1.9         Dec 122.0 + 1.2 + 1.0 128.2 + 2.7 146.1 + 14.9 110.4 − 7.0 103.4 − 0.9 116.7 + 1.0 + 0.5 99.1 + 0.2
2004          Jan 92.1 − 1.6 − 1.6 103.3 + 1.8 102.3 − 8.0 77.0 − 5.3 79.5 + 0.9 90.3 − 2.3 − 2.6 84.4 − 5.5
         Feb 86.4 − 1.8 − 0.9 99.1 + 1.3 101.1 − 3.6 66.5 − 1.5 77.1 − 0.1 87.3 − 2.1 − 1.8 91.4 − 3.5         Mar  
e 100.2 + 0.7 + 1.2 109.6 + 1.2 111.8 + 2.6 87.4 − 4.1 94.0 + 0.3 103.2 + 0.2 + 0.1 ... ...
Source: Federal Statistical Office. — *Excluding value-added tax; figures tive fuel. — 2Retail sales in stores. — 3Including furniture and lighting
from 2003 provisional, partly revised and, judging by past experience, sub- equipment.— 4Including motor vehicle parts and accessories.— 5Up to
ject to considerable uncertainty in the most recent months. — 1Excluding (and including) 2000, at 1995 prices; from 2001, at 2000 prices. 
sales of motor vehicles andmotorcycles andexclud ing the sale of automo-
63* IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
 IX Economic conditions
 
6 Labour market * 
 
 
 
Persons in
Employed  1,2 Employees  1 employment  3 Unemployed  2 
Persons
Mining employedPersons
and under under-manu- employ- goingfactur- Short- ment pro- vocationaling Con- time motion further Unem-
Annual change Annual sector  
2 Annual ploy- Vacan- schemes  2,5 training  2 workers  2 struction  4 
percen- change, ment cies,
Thou- Thou- Thou- tage Thou- thou- rate  2,6 thou-
Period sands in % sands sands change Thousands sands sands in % sands  2 
Germany  
  
2000 38,750 + 1.8 + 676 34,745 + 1.8 6,373 1,053 86 316 352 3,890 − 211 9.7 514
2001 38,914 + 0.4 + 164 34,834 + 0.3 6,395 958 123 243 345 3,853 − 37 9.4 5072002 38,668 − 0.6 − 246 34,577 − 0.7 6,2177 883 207 192 332 4,061 + 209 9.8 452
2003 38,247 − 1.1 − 421 34,106 − 1.4 8 6,136 817 195 140 251 4,377 + 315 10.5 355
2003          Apr 38,137 − 1.5 − 562 6,140 824 242 138 262 4,497 + 471 10.8 419         May 38,221 − 1.4 − 535 34,092 − 1.6 6,131 830 225 134 255 4,343 + 3959 10.4 393
         June 38,298 − 1.1 − 428 6,127 833 222 131 241 4,259 + 303 10.2 373
         July 38,283 − 1.0 − 398 6,136 834 196 131 220 4,353 + 305 10.4 367
         Aug 38,322 − 1.0 − 383 34,219 − 1.3 6,145 836 150 131 212 4,316 + 296 10.4 356         Sep 38,517 − 0.9 − 351 6,146 835 169 133 221 4,208 + 265 10.1 330
         Oct 38,621 − 0.8 − 305 6,114 824 163 138 231 4,151 + 220 10.0 297
         Nov 38,606 − 0.6 − 236 34,381 − 0.9 6,096 814 162 140 235 4,184 + 157 10.0 275         Dec 38,455 − 0.5 − 175 6,060 790 149 135 227 4,315 + 89 10.4 258
2004          Jan 37,660 − 0.4 − 134 6,035 737 164 123 208
10 4,597 10 +2 5 10 11.0 277
         Feb o 37,644 o − 0.3 o − 131 ... ... 6,019 711 186 117 194 4,641 + 2 11.1 309
         Mar ... ... ... ... ... 197 109 192 4,547 + 14 10.9 324
         Apr ... ... ... ... ... 177 102 191 4,443 + 19 10.7 324
Western Germany 11  
  
2000 . . . . . 5,761 749 59 59 202 2,381 − 224 7.6 448
2001 . . . . . 5,769 696 94 53 197 2,321 − 60 7.2 4362002 . . . . . 5,5937 654 162 42 192 2,498 + 178 7.7 378
2003 . . . . . 8 5,503 607 160 30 155 2,753 + 255 8.4 292
2003          Apr . . . . . 5,510 613 201 32 160 2,812 + 363 8.6 350         May . . . . . 5,500 616 187 31 159 2,715 + 3069 8.2 327
         June . . . . . 5,495 617 182 30 151 2,664 + 255 8.1 306
         July . . . . . 5,502 616 162 29 137 2,735 + 253 8.3 300
         Aug . . . . . 5,507 617 119 28 133 2,724 + 246 8.3 287         Sep . . . . . 5,507 617 139 27 141 2,653 + 213 8.1 261
         Oct . . . . . 5,476 609 136 27 149 2,637 + 187 8.0 237
         Nov . . . . . 5,459 603 135 26 152 2,665 + 144 8.1 222         Dec . . . . . 5,427 587 122 25 146 2,750 + 102 8.4 212
2004          Jan . . . . . 5,401 553 135 22 132
10 2,927 10 +6 3 10 8.9 234
         Feb . . . . . 5,386 535 151 21 124 2,945 + 39 8.9 263
         Mar . . . . . ... ... 159 21 124 2,871 + 42 8.7 275
         Apr . . . . . ... ... 143 21 124 2,805 + 41 8.5 274
Eastern Germany 12  
  
2000 . . . . . 612 305 27 257 150 1,509 + 13 17.2 66
2001 . . . . . 626 262 29 190 148 1,532 + 23 17.3 712002 . . . . . 6257 229 45 150 140 1,563 + 31 17.7 74
2003 . . . . . 8 632 210 35 110 96 1,624 + 61 18.5 63
2003          Apr . . . . . 630 211 41 106 102 1,685 + 108 19.1 69         May . . . . . 631 214 38 103 96 1,628 + 909 18.6 67
         June . . . . . 632 216 39 102 89 1,595 + 48 18.3 67
         July . . . . . 634 218 34 102 82 1,618 + 53 18.5 67
         Aug . . . . . 638 219 31 104 80 1,592 + 50 18.2 69         Sep . . . . . 639 218 30 106 81 1,554 + 52 17.8 69
         Oct . . . . . 638 215 27 112 82 1,514 + 34 17.3 60
         Nov . . . . . 637 211 27 113 83 1,519 + 13 17.4 53         Dec . . . . . 633 203 27 110 81 1,565 − 14 17.9 46
2004          Jan . . . . . 634 183 29 101 75
10 1,670 10 −3 8 10 19.1 43
         Feb . . . . . 633 175 35 96 70 1,696 − 38 19.4 46
         Mar . . . . . ... ... 37 89 68 1,676 − 28 19.2 49
         Apr . . . . . ... ... 34 81 67 1,639 − 22 18.8 51
Source: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency. — *Monthly included for the first time. — 8The figures from 2003 onwards are positively
figures: endof month; employedpersons andemployees: averages; short- affectedby the fact that firms which are requiredto report andwhich have
time workers: mid-month; annual and quarterly figures: averages. — been identified in the course of drawing up the corporate register are inclu-1Work-place concept.— 2Annual figures, calculated by the Bundesbank; de- ded for the first time. — 9From May 2003, calculatedon the basis of new
viations from the official figures are due to rounding. — 3Including active labour force figures. — 10From January 2004, unemployedpersons
proprietors. — 4The figures refer to the economic classifications ”Site excluding all those participating in occupational aptitude testing and
preparation” and”Build ing of complete constructions or parts thereof; civil training schemes. — 11Excluding western Berlin; for the mining,
engineering”. — 5Employees involvedin job creation schemes andstruc- manufacturing and construction sectors, includ ing persons employed in
tural adjustment measures (SAM). — 6Relative to the total civilian labour western Berlin. — 12 Including western Berlin; for the mining,
force. — 7The figures from March 2002 onwards are positively affected by manufacturing and construction sectors, excluding persons employed in
the fact that construction firms which are requiredto report andwhich western Berlin. — o First preliminary estimate. 
have been identified in the course of drawing up the corporate register are
64* IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
 IX Economic conditions
 
7 Prices
 Germany
 
 
Consumer price index
Indices of Index of world market
of which foreign trade prices prices  of raw materials  5 
Other Index of
durable producerand non- prices ofdurable industrial Index ofconsumer Services Con- products producergoods excluding struction prices of sold on the
excluding house House price domestic Other raw agricultural
Total FoodEnergy  
1 rents  2 rents index  2,3 market  4 Exports Imports Energy  6 products  4 materials  7 energy  1,2 
Period 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 1995 = 100
Index level  
  
1999 98.6 100.6 100.3 87.7 99.0 98.8 99.3 2 97.0 89.9 97.0 90.8 57.6 83.1
2000 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 95.4 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0
2001 102.0 105.1 100.3 105.7 102.5 101.2 100.3 103.0 100.8 101.0 100.6 91.4 91.92002 103.4 106.1 101.1 106.0 105.0 102.6 100.2 102.4 94.6 100.8 98.4 86.1 91.12003 104.5 106.0 101.4 110.2 106.4 103.8 100.3 104.1 94.9 100.6 96.2 82.9 86.9
 
2002          July 103.7 105.9 100.9 105.9 106.5 102.7 102.2 93.5 100.8 97.5 84.0 89.4         Aug 103.5 104.7 100.8 106.2 106.2 102.8 100.3 102.1 93.4 100.8 97.9 87.9 89.9         Sep 103.4 104.5 100.9 107.2 105.3 102.8 102.2 94.6 100.9 98.3 92.9 91.8
         Oct 103.3 104.1 100.9 107.6 104.8 102.9 102.5 94.3 100.8 98.3 90.5 92.1
         Nov 103.0 103.6 101.0 105.1 104.5 103.0 100.2 102.2 94.8 100.7 97.3 80.5 90.8         Dec 104.0 104.0 100.9 105.6 107.9 103.0 102.4 94.4 100.7 97.9 87.2 89.6
2003          Jan 104.0 105.3 101.4 110.7 105.1 103.2 103.8 94.8 100.9 98.2 92.2 88.3
         Feb 104.5 105.9 101.6 113.0 105.9 103.4 100.3 104.2 96.4 101.0 98.5 97.3 89.7         Mar 104.6 106.3 101.6 113.8 105.6 103.5 104.4 94.8 101.0 98.0 89.5 88.3
         Apr 104.3 106.6 101.4 110.2 105.8 103.7 104.2 94.6 100.9 96.5 76.0 87.8
         May 104.1 106.8 101.4 108.2 105.6 103.7 100.3 103.9 93.9 100.5 95.2 72.5 83.5         June 104.4 107.1 101.3 108.8 106.1 103.8 103.9 95.4 100.3 95.1 77.0 81.3
         July 104.6 106.3 101.1 109.2 107.4 103.8 104.1 92.4 100.3 95.2 81.5 82.7
         Aug 104.6 105.1 101.0 110.4 107.7 103.9 100.3 104.1 94.0 100.4 95.8 86.4 85.2         Sep 104.5 105.6 101.4 109.7 106.7 103.9 104.2 97.4 100.5 95.7 78.7 87.5
         Oct 104.5 105.7 101.4 110.0 106.4 103.9 104.2 96.2 100.4 95.5 81.0 88.7
         Nov 104.3 105.5 101.4 109.5 105.8 104.1 100.3 104.2 97.6 100.4 95.5 81.7 91.0         Dec 105.1 105.7 101.4 109.4 109.0 104.1 104.2 96.1 100.2 95.1 80.7 89.4
2004          Jan 105.2 106.9 102.1 110.5 107.4 104.4 104.0 96.7 100.2 95.2 82.6 92.8
         Feb 105.4 106.4 101.9 110.2 108.3 104.5 100.5 104.1
p 97.5 100.3 95.3 82.2 96.2
         Mar 105.7 106.1 103.1 111.4 108.0 104.6 104.7 p 98.1 100.8 96.4 91.2 103.5
         Apr 106.0 106.3 103.3 113.1 108.1 104.7 ... ... ... ... 94.9 105.1
Annual percentage change  
  
1999 + 0.6 − 1.1 + 0.1 + 4.0 + 0.3 + 1.1 − 0.3 2 − 1.0 − 6.0 − 0.5 − 0.5 + 37.1 − 6.2
2000 + 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.3 + 14.0 + 1.0 + 1.2 + 0.7 2 + 3.1 + 6.1 + 3.1 + 10.1 + 73.6 + 20.3
2001 + 2.0 + 5.1 + 0.3 + 5.7 + 2.5 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 3.0 + 5.7 + 1.0 + 0.6 − 8.6 − 8.12002 + 1.4 + 1.0 + 0.8 + 0.3 + 2.4 + 1.4 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 6.2 − 0.2 − 2.2 − 5.8 − 0.92003 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 4.0 + 1.3 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 1.7 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 2.2 − 3.7 − 4.6
 
2002          July + 1.2 − 1.1 + 0.7 − 0.6 + 2.7 + 1.5 − 1.1 − 7.0 − 0.6 − 3.8 − 13.4 − 5.4         Aug + 1.2 − 0.6 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 2.6 + 1.4
+ 0.0 − 1.1 − 8.3 − 0.2 − 2.4 − 7.5 + 1.5
         Sep + 1.1 − 0.6 + 0.6 − 0.2 + 2.5 + 1.4 − 1.1 − 7.8
+ 0.0 − 1.6 − 0.4 + 7.9
         Oct + 1.3 − 1.0 + 0.4 + 3.5 + 2.3 + 1.4 + 0.1 − 6.5 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 14.7 + 10.2         Nov + 1.2 − 0.9 + 0.3 + 2.7 + 2.3 + 1.4 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 5.7 + 0.1 − 0.9 + 12.1 + 3.9         Dec + 1.2 − 1.1 + 0.1 + 4.1 + 2.0 + 1.4 + 0.6 − 5.4 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 23.2 + 2.9
2003          Jan + 1.1 − 3.1
+ 0.0 + 7.0 + 1.5 + 1.2 + 1.5 − 3.5 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 25.1 − 1.1
         Feb + 1.3 − 1.9 + 0.1 + 8.5 + 1.5 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 1.9 − 3.0 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 26.0 − 2.1
         Mar + 1.2 − 1.4 + 0.1 + 7.4 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 1.7 − 4.9 + 0.1 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 6.4
         Apr + 1.0 − 1.1 + 0.1 + 1.9 + 2.2 + 1.3 + 1.7 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 3.2 − 19.5 − 6.2
         May + 0.7 − 0.8 + 0.2 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.4 − 4.0 − 20.7 − 8.0         June + 1.0 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 2.7 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 1.4 + 1.8 − 0.6 − 3.1 − 8.7 − 9.6
         July + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 3.1 + 0.8 + 1.1 + 1.9 − 1.2 − 0.5 − 2.4 − 3.0 − 7.5
         Aug + 1.1 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 4.0 + 1.4 + 1.1
+ 0.0 + 2.0 + 0.6 − 0.4 − 2.1 − 1.7 − 5.2
         Sep + 1.1 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 2.3 + 1.3 + 1.1 + 2.0 + 3.0 − 0.4 − 2.6 − 15.3 − 4.7
         Oct + 1.2 + 1.5 + 0.5 + 2.2 + 1.5 + 1.0 + 1.7 + 2.0 − 0.4 − 2.8 − 10.5 − 3.7
         Nov + 1.3 + 1.8 + 0.4 + 4.2 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 2.0 + 3.0 − 0.3 − 1.8 + 1.5 + 0.2         Dec + 1.1 + 1.6 + 0.5 + 3.6 + 1.0 + 1.1 + 1.8 + 1.8 − 0.5 − 2.9 − 7.5 − 0.2
2004          Jan + 1.2 + 1.5 + 0.7 − 0.2 + 2.2 + 1.2 + 0.2 + 2.0 − 0.7 − 3.1 − 10.4 + 5.1
         Feb + 0.9 + 0.5 + 0.3 − 2.5 + 2.3 + 1.1 + 0.2 − 0.1
p + 1.1 − 0.7 − 3.2 − 15.5 + 7.2
         Mar + 1.1 − 0.2 + 1.5 − 2.1 + 2.3 + 1.1 + 0.3 p + 3.5 − 0.2 − 1.6 + 1.9 + 17.2
         Apr + 1.6 − 0.3 + 1.9 + 2.6 + 2.2 + 1.0 ... ... ... ... + 24.9 + 19.7
Source: Federal Statistical Office; for index of world market prices: HWWA In- index of raw material prices for the euro area based on the euro. — 6Coal
stitute. — 1Electricity, gas andother fuels. — 2Bundesbank calculation and crude oil. — 7Food, beverages and tobacco as well as industrial raw
based on data provided by the Federal Statistical Office. — 3Previously: materials. 
Overall construction price level. — 4Excluding value-added tax. — 5HWWA
65* IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
IX Economic conditions
  
8 Households’ income *
Germany
  
Up to end-1998 DM billion; from 1999 €  billion
Gross wages andNet wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries  1 salaries  2 Mass income  4 Saving  6 ratio  7 benefits received  3 Disposable income  5 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age
PeriodDM / 
€
change DM / 
€
change DM / 
€
change DM / 
€
change DM / 
€
change DM / 
€
change %
1991 1,355.4 . 941.4 . 426.2 . 1,367.6 . 1,917.5 . 250.1 . 13.0
1992 1,467.3 8.3 1,003.0 6.5 473.9 11.2 1,476.9 8.0 2,054.3 7.1 266.1 6.4 13.01993 1,505.9 2.6 1,032.7 3.0 511.2 7.9 1,543.9 4.5 2,120.6 3.2 261.3 − 1.8 12.31994 1,528.1 1.5 1,029.3 − 0.3 529.4 3.6 1,558.6 1.0 2,181.9 2.9 254.0 − 2.8 11.6
1995 1,577.1 3.2 1,037.9 0.8 553.7 4.6 1,591.7 2.1 2,256.4 3.4 252.1 − 0.7 11.2
1996 1,594.0 1.1 1,032.7 − 0.5 595.7 7.6 1,628.3 2.3 2,307.5 2.3 249.5 − 1.0 10.81997 1,591.3 − 0.2 1,015.9 − 1.6 609.6 2.3 1,625.5 − 0.2 2,356.5 2.1 244.7 − 1.9 10.41998 1,624.3 2.1 1,038.9 2.3 621.5 1.9 1,660.3 2.1 2,422.8 2.8 249.6 2.0 10.31999 855.4 3.0 549.2 3.4 327.5 3.1 876.7 3.3 1,281.1 3.4 125.1 − 1.9 9.8
2000 884.6 3.4 571.7 4.1 338.1 3.2 909.8 3.8 1,325.5 3.5 129.3 3.3 9.8
2001 903.7 2.2 592.4 3.6 347.5 2.8 939.8 3.3 1,373.7 3.6 141.0 9.1 10.32002 910.4 0.7 593.5 0.2 365.0 5.1 958.5 2.0 1,382.8 0.7 146.3 3.8 10.62003 909.4 − 0.1 588.3 − 0.9 375.2 2.8 963.4 0.5 1,398.4 1.1 151.3 3.4 10.8
2002          Q1 210.4 1.0 137.5 0.4 91.1 4.6 228.6 2.0 343.7 0.7 47.3 3.1 13.8
         Q2 218.6 0.7 140.0 0.1 90.0 4.5 230.0 1.8 342.7 0.2 34.2 2.1 10.0         Q3 227.3 1.1 152.4 0.5 91.5 5.8 243.9 2.5 340.5 0.8 30.8 4.6 9.0         Q4 254.1 0.2 163.6 − 0.3 92.5 5.3 256.1 1.7 356.0 0.9 34.1 5.7 9.6
2003          Q1 211.0 0.3 136.6 − 0.6 94.5 3.8 231.2 1.1 351.7 2.4 50.5 6.7 14.4
         Q2 218.5 − 0.1 138.5 − 1.1 93.1 3.5 231.6 0.7 347.3 1.3 35.6 4.3 10.3         Q3 227.1 − 0.1 151.2 − 0.8 93.7 2.4 244.9 0.4 342.9 0.7 31.8 3.4 9.3         Q4 252.8 − 0.5 162.0 − 1.0 93.9 1.5 255.8 − 0.1 356.6 0.2 33.4 − 2.1 9.4
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in February 2004. — plus monetary social benefits received. — 5Mass income plus operating
*Households including non-profit institutions serving households. — 1Resi- surplus, mixedincome, property income (net), other current transfers
dence concept. — 2After deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages received, income of non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (ex-
andsalaries andemployees’ contributions to the social security fund s. — clud ing wage tax andconsumption-relatedtaxes) andother current trans-
3Social security benefits in cash from the social security funds, central, state fers paid. Including the increase in claims on company pension funds. —6In-
andlocal government andforeign countries, pension payments (net), clud ing the increase in claims on company pension fund s. — 7Saving as a
private funded social benefits, less social contributions on social benefits, percentage of disposable income. consumption-relatedtaxes andpublic charges. — 4Net wages andsalaries
  
  
9 Pay rates and actual earnings
Germany
    
Overall economy Production sector (including construction)
Negotiated wage and salary level  1 Wages and salaries Negotiated wage and salary level  1 Wages and salaries
per employee per employee
on an hourly basis on a monthly basis on an hourly basis on a monthly basis (work-place concept)  2 (work-place concept)  3 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
Period1995 = 100 change 1995 = 100 change 1995 = 100 change 1995 = 100 change 1995 = 100 change change 1995 = 100
1995 100.0 4.9 100.0 4.6 100.0 3.2 100.0 6.1 100.0 5.5 100.0 4.1
1996 102.6 2.6 102.4 2.4 101.4 1.4 103.8 3.8 102.9 2.9 102.9 2.91997 104.1 1.5 103.9 1.5 101.7 0.3 105.8 1.9 104.6 1.7 104.7 1.71998 106.1 1.9 105.8 1.8 102.7 1.0 107.7 1.8 106.4 1.7 106.4 1.61999 109.1 2.9 108.7 2.7 104.3 1.5 110.9 3.0 109.4 2.9 108.3 1.8
2000 111.3 2.0 110.8 2.0 105.9 1.6 113.2 2.0 111.6 2.0 111.2 2.7
2001 113.5 2.0 113.0 2.0 107.9 1.9 115.2 1.8 113.6 1.8 113.7 2.22002 116.6 2.7 116.1 2.7 109.5 1.5 118.9 3.2 117.3 3.2 116.0 2.02003 118.9 2.0 118.5 2.1 110.9 1.3 122.0 2.6 120.3 2.5 . .
2002          Q2 107.7 2.8 107.2 2.8 105.1 1.3 109.1 3.5 107.7 3.5 117.8 1.9
         Q3 120.4 2.7 119.9 2.8 109.3 1.9 128.1 3.7 126.4 3.7 112.9 3.4         Q4 132.0 2.8 131.5 2.8 121.9 1.5 132.0 3.4 130.2 3.4 125.4 2.3
2003          Q1 109.3 2.9 108.9 3.0 104.0 2.0 109.7 3.2 108.2 3.1 . .
         Q2 110.1 2.2 109.7 2.3 106.7 1.5 112.0 2.6 110.5 2.6 . .         Q3 122.9 2.0 122.4 2.1 110.5 1.2 131.1 2.3 129.3 2.3 . .         Q4 133.6 1.2 133.1 1.3 122.3 0.4 135.1 2.3 133.2 2.3 . .
2004          Q1 111.1 1.7 111.0 1.9 . . 113.2 3.2 111.7 3.3 . .
2003          Sep 111.0 2.6 110.6 2.7 . . 113.9 4.2 112.4 4.2 . .
         Oct 110.5 2.0 110.1 2.1 . . 112.1 2.3 110.6 2.3 . .
         Nov 179.6 0.4 179.0 0.5 . . 180.8 2.3 178.3 2.2 . .         Dec 110.8 1.6 110.4 1.7 . . 112.3 2.4 110.7 2.4 . .
2004          Jan 110.8 1.9 110.7 2.1 . . 112.3 2.3 110.8 2.4 . .
         Feb 110.9 1.9 110.7 2.1 . . 112.3 2.4 110.8 2.5 . .         Mar 111.7 1.4 111.6 1.6 . . 115.0 4.8 113.5 4.9 . .
1Current data are normally revised upwards on account of additional supply, and excluding installation and building completion work. Calculated
reports. — 2Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in February by the Bundesbank on the basis of data from the Federal Statistical Office,
2004. — 3Production sector, excluding electricity, gas, steam and hot water using the old and new classifications of the economic sectors. 
66*IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
X External sector
 
1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
 
 
€ million
2003 2004
Item 2001  1 2002 2003 Q2 Q3 Q4 Dec Jan Feb
Current account − 16,684 + 54,455 + 26,061 − 6,918 + 11,512 + 18,543 + 6,486 − 4,432 + 5,754A
1 Goods
Exports (fob) incl supplementary items 1,033,862 1,063,218 1,034,610 254,501 257,064 269,777 86,832 81,849 85,012
Imports (fob) incl supplementary items 960,211 929,666 926,902 230,345 220,241 239,869 78,503 77,626 75,510
Balance + 73,651 + 133,551 + 107,709 + 24,157 + 36,823 + 29,908 + 8,329 + 4,224 + 9,502
2 Services
Receipts 321,672 329,844 326,672 79,378 86,508 85,089 29,677 23,677 24,014
Expenditure 322,038 316,728 309,351 73,691 82,811 79,100 27,274 24,234 23,887
Balance − 369 + 13,114 + 17,320 + 5,687 + 3,697 + 5,988 + 2,403 − 557 + 127
3 Income − 38,582 − 44,110 − 43,170 − 17,043 − 9,415 − 4,706 − 1,470 − 9,438 + 772
4 Current transfers
Transfer payments from non-residents 78,798 85,305 80,337 14,456 15,064 18,959 8,862 17,569 6,765
Transfer payments to non-residents 130,182 133,400 136,135 34,175 34,656 31,605 11,638 16,229 11,412
Balance − 51,387 − 48,097 − 55,798 − 19,719 − 19,592 − 12,647 − 2,776 + 1,340 − 4,647
Capital account + 6,574 + 10,977 + 13,284 + 1,902 + 2,764 + 7,223 + 5,021 + 353 + 2,096B
Financial account (net capital exports: −) − 34,165 − 65,808 − 43,445 − 31,973 − 636 + 3,459 − 10,511 − 25,564 + 9,381C
1 Direct investment − 112,440 − 4,718 − 9,874 + 2,693 − 19,124 − 6,399 − 931 − 11,885 + 7,818
By resident units abroad − 316,489 − 151,328 − 115,548 − 29,778 − 32,191 − 24,201 − 15,367 − 8,381 − 5,581By non-resident units in the euro area + 204,055 + 146,610 + 105,676 + 32,470 + 13,068 + 17,803 + 14,436 − 3,505 + 13,400
2 Portfolio investment + 67,948 + 114,633 + 25,300 + 62,014 − 59,089 + 18,192 − 24,868 − 14,900 + 4,408
By resident units abroad − 281,866 − 175,759 − 280,514 − 107,296 − 63,314 − 61,037 − 9,651 − 49,087 − 13,597
Equity − 101,583 − 40,365 − 65,644 − 33,226 − 19,386 − 24,205 − 7,361 − 14,521 − 5,526
Bonds and notes − 155,875 − 89,592 − 172,043 − 59,267 − 37,162 − 24,703 + 1,762 − 17,208 − 2,201
Money market instruments − 24,411 − 45,803 − 42,827 − 14,803 − 6,765 − 12,130 − 4,052 − 17,358 − 5,870
By non-resident units in the euro area + 349,814 + 290,394 + 305,813 + 169,310 + 4,225 + 79,228 − 15,217 + 34,187 + 18,005
Equity + 232,553 + 88,853 + 105,538 + 30,539 + 25,103 + 47,665 + 13,435 + 420 + 5,574
Bonds and notes + 113,135 + 133,670 + 195,310 + 124,575 − 7,771 + 38,120 − 4,963 + 21,441 + 12,419
Money market instruments + 4,129 + 67,869 + 4,968 + 14,196 − 13,107 − 6,556 − 23,688 + 12,326 + 12
3 Financial derivatives − 856 − 10,785 − 13,736 − 1,372 − 4,590 − 4,721 − 6,914 + 591 − 337
4 Other investment − 6,632 − 162,664 − 74,951 − 97,629 + 80,141 − 17,201 + 14,880 + 3,841 − 11,487
Eurosystem + 5,032 + 18,185 + 11,081 + 5,014 + 6,144 − 1,505 + 304 + 1,219 − 5,087
General government + 2,545 − 8,160 − 4,939 + 1,900 + 5,045 − 1,827 − 3,419 − 5,987 + 1,130
MFIs (excluding the Eurosystem) + 3,256 − 138,175 − 19,233 − 76,284 + 80,564 − 17,912 + 4,559 + 13,592 − 7,425
Long-term − 24,190 + 19,536 + 11,754 + 329 + 3,840 + 12,035 + 10,723 − 5,452 − 8,235Short-term + 27,446 − 157,704 − 30,989 − 76,615 + 76,724 − 29,948 − 6,164 + 19,044 + 810
Other sectors  
2 − 17,462 − 34,518 − 61,862 − 28,258 − 11,612 + 4,042 + 13,435 − 4,983 − 105
5 Reserve assets (Increase: −) + 17,815 − 2,277 + 29,816 + 2,322 + 2,025 + 13,588 + 7,322 − 3,210 + 8,979
Errors and omissions + 44,278 + 372 + 4,101 + 36,989 − 13,639 − 29,224 − 996 + 29,643 − 17,231D
*Source: European Central Bank. — 1From January 2001, including   
Greece. — 2 Enterprises and households.  
67*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
X External sector
 
2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
 
Current account Memo item Capital trans-
fers andChange in
the Bundes- acquisition/disposal of Change in bank’s net
Supple- non- the foreign external
Balance mentary produced reserves at Balance of assets aton current External trade Factor Current Financial transaction transaction non-financial unclassifiable
Periodaccount  
1 items  4,5 Services  6 income transfers assets  7 account  7 values  8 values  8 trade  1,2,3 transactions
DM million
1990  o + 73,021 + 105,382 − 3,833 − 26,118 + 32,859 − 35,269 − 4,975 − 89,497 − 11,611 + 33,062 − 10,976
1991 − 36,298 + 21,899 − 2,804 − 30,724 + 33,144 − 57,812 − 4,565 + 12,614 + 9,605 + 18,643 − 319
1992 − 30,013 + 33,656 − 1,426 − 44,983 + 33,962 − 51,222 − 1,963 + 69,792 − 52,888 + 15,072 − 68,7451993 − 23,062 + 60,304 − 3,038 − 52,549 + 27,373 − 55,151 − 1,915 + 21,442 + 22,795 − 19,260 + 35,7661994 − 46,749 + 71,762 − 1,104 − 62,803 + 4,852 − 59,455 − 2,637 + 57,871 + 2,846 − 11,332 − 12,242
1995 − 38,642 + 85,303 − 4,722 − 63,985 + 178 − 55,416 − 3,845 + 63,647 − 10,355 − 10,805 − 17,754
1996 − 20,643 + 98,538 − 5,264 − 64,743 + 1,815 − 50,989 − 3,283 + 23,607 + 1,882 − 1,564 + 1,6101997 − 14,916 + 116,467 − 7,360 − 68,696 − 2,588 − 52,738 + 52 + 31 + 6,640 + 8,193 + 8,4681998 − 20,677 + 126,970 − 5,934 − 75,072 − 13,337 − 53,304 + 1,289 + 32,810 − 7,128 − 6,295 − 8,231
1999 − 43,915 + 127,542 − 13,656 − 90,099 − 18,775 − 48,927 − 301 − 44,849 + 24,517 + 64,548 − 72,364
2000 − 54,471 + 115,645 − 13,505 − 95,967 − 5,166 − 55,478 + 13,345 + 55,434 + 11,429 − 25,737 + 94,3292001 + 3,421 + 186,771 − 10,499 − 98,323 − 20,889 − 53,639 − 756 − 51,306 + 11,797 + 36,844 + 63,911
€
 million
1999 − 22,454 + 65,211 − 6,982 − 46,067 − 9,599 − 25,016 − 154 − 22,931 + 12,535 + 33,003 − 36,9992000 − 27,851 + 59,128 − 6,905 − 49,067 − 2,641 − 28,366 + 6,823 + 28,343 + 5,844 − 13,159 + 48,2302001 + 1,749 + 95,495 − 5,368 − 50,272 − 10,680 − 27,425 − 387 − 26,233 + 6,032 + 18,838 + 32,6772002  
r + 45,670 + 132,788 − 5,968 − 36,422 − 16,844 − 27,883 − 212 − 70,724 + 2,065 + 23,201 − 33,292
2003 + 46,816 + 129,644 − 6,768 − 34,778 − 12,515 − 28,767 + 316 − 55,015 + 445 + 7,439 + 2,658
2001          Q2 − 5,075 + 22,104 − 1,479 − 13,019 − 4,492 − 8,189 − 13 + 19,031 + 2,039 − 15,982 + 21,099
         Q3 − 2,466 + 25,547 − 1,768 − 16,479 − 3,518 − 6,250 − 446 − 2,722 − 2,165 + 7,798 − 13,360         Q4 + 8,737 + 25,303 − 703 − 7,447 − 1,050 − 7,365 − 479 − 46,370 + 2,085 + 36,027 + 36,688
2002          Q1  
r + 9,445 + 33,328 − 1,028 − 10,633 − 6,722 − 5,500 + 160 + 5,740 − 1,352 − 13,993 − 18,496
         Q2  r + 10,420 + 31,721 − 1,383 − 8,605 − 2,682 − 8,631 − 75 − 9,488 + 2,432 − 3,289 + 1,694
         Q3  r + 9,507 + 35,543 − 1,552 − 12,652 − 5,563 − 6,269 + 62 − 17,554 + 87 + 7,899 − 17,588
         Q4 + 16,299 + 32,195 − 2,005 − 4,532 − 1,877 − 7,483 − 359 − 49,422 + 898 + 32,584 + 1,099
2003          Q1 + 8,956 + 29,304 − 1,529 − 8,350 − 4,690 − 5,779 − 30 − 13,099 − 1,495 + 5,669 + 3,444
         Q2 + 8,451 + 29,813 − 1,340 − 8,483 − 3,649 − 7,890 + 149 − 25,399 + 1,505 + 15,293 + 22,123         Q3 + 9,902 + 38,908 − 2,000 − 13,708 − 4,479 − 8,820 + 208 + 3,279 − 751 − 12,638 − 15,902         Q4 + 19,508 + 31,619 − 1,900 − 4,236 + 303 − 6,278 − 12 − 19,796 + 1,186 − 885 − 7,008
2004          Q1  
p + 15,645 + 41,104 − 1,485 − 8,886 − 9,552 − 5,536 + 441 − 5,315 + 205 − 10,976 − 6,821
2001          Oct + 3,305 + 9,661 − 210 − 4,609 + 1,346 − 2,882 − 140 − 1,265 − 1,001 − 898 − 1,307
         Nov + 925 + 7,351 − 428 − 2,939 − 192 − 2,867 − 180 − 23,782 + 204 + 22,833 + 6,860         Dec + 4,507 + 8,290 − 65 + 101 − 2,203 − 1,616 − 159 − 21,322 + 2,882 + 14,093 + 31,135
2002          Jan + 361 + 10,526 − 508 − 3,825 − 6,449 + 616 + 477 + 9,907 − 1,747 − 8,998 − 17,916
         Feb  
r + 2,642 + 10,558 − 323 − 2,995 − 1,228 − 3,370 − 155 − 5,211 + 67 + 2,656 + 1,535
         Mar + 6,441 + 12,245 − 198 − 3,814 + 955 − 2,746 − 162 + 1,044 + 328 − 7,651 − 2,116
         Apr + 2,949 + 10,015 − 910 − 2,509 − 620 − 3,027 − 148 + 330 + 1,657 − 4,788 − 9,839
         May  r + 3,584 + 10,408 − 565 − 3,230 − 557 − 2,472 + 47 + 492 + 1,379 − 5,501 + 3,826
         June + 3,887 + 11,299 + 92 − 2,866 − 1,506 − 3,132 + 26 − 10,310 − 603 + 7,000 + 7,707
         July + 1,110 + 13,224 − 770 − 3,705 − 5,416 − 2,224 − 203 − 11,194 − 548 + 10,836 − 15,567
         Aug  r + 2,031 + 10,477 − 312 − 5,856 − 921 − 1,359 + 86 − 4,630 + 886 + 1,627 − 5,579
         Sep + 6,367 + 11,842 − 471 − 3,092 + 773 − 2,686 + 179 − 1,730 − 252 − 4,564 + 3,559
         Oct + 3,087 + 11,529 − 364 − 3,826 − 966 − 3,287 − 82 − 21,706 + 570 + 18,132 − 5,279
         Nov + 8,450 + 12,283 − 632 − 1,346 + 446 − 2,301 − 137 − 5,800 − 842 − 1,670 + 4,265         Dec + 4,762 + 8,383 − 1,009 + 640 − 1,357 − 1,895 − 139 − 21,916 + 1,171 + 16,122 + 2,112
2003          Jan − 1,485 + 8,980 − 854 − 3,329 − 5,184 − 1,098 + 461 − 3,299 − 97 + 4,420 + 6,799
         Feb + 4,030 + 10,668 − 445 − 2,989 − 522 − 2,682 − 504 − 22,519 − 320 + 19,313 + 677         Mar + 6,411 + 9,656 − 230 − 2,032 + 1,016 − 2,000 + 13 + 12,719 − 1,078 − 18,064 − 4,032
         Apr + 3,437 + 9,216 − 572 − 2,164 − 339 − 2,704 − 126 − 3,365 + 1,449 − 1,395 + 1,477
         May + 3,084 + 10,210 − 389 − 2,830 − 1,379 − 2,527 + 156 − 7,420 − 854 + 5,033 + 22,684         June + 1,929 + 10,387 − 379 − 3,489 − 1,931 − 2,659 + 119 − 14,614 + 910 + 11,655 − 2,037
         July + 1,359 + 14,159 − 840 − 3,606 − 5,401 − 2,953 + 62 + 3,144 + 225 − 4,791 − 16,353
         Aug + 1,318 + 10,424 − 451 − 5,594 − 74 − 2,987 + 224 − 7,334 − 717 + 6,509 − 3,057         Sep + 7,224 + 14,325 − 709 − 4,508 + 997 − 2,880 − 78 + 7,469 − 259 − 14,356 + 3,508
         Oct + 7,758 + 10,829 − 557 − 2,344 + 1,704 − 1,874 − 27 − 4,471 − 255 − 3,005 − 21,689
         Nov + 5,363 + 10,373 − 600 − 1,191 − 320 − 2,899 + 49 − 4,277 + 521 − 1,656 + 14,870         Dec + 6,387 + 10,417 − 742 − 702 − 1,081 − 1,505 − 35 − 11,048 + 921 + 3,776 − 190
2004          Jan − 658 + 12,487 − 640 − 4,141 − 7,827 − 537 + 53 + 708 − 206 + 103 + 5,619
         Feb + 5,038 + 12,111 − 369 − 2,318 − 1,771 − 2,615 − 130 + 5,771 − 26 − 10,652 + 556         Mar  
p + 11,265 + 16,506 − 475 − 2,428 + 46 − 2,384 + 518 − 11,793 + 437 − 427 − 12,996
oFrom July 1990, including the external transactions of the former GDR. — included up to December 1992 in the supplementary trade items. —
1From the beginning of 1993, figures subject to significant uncertainty 4Mainly warehouse transactions for account of residents and deduction of
owing to changes in the method of data collection for foreign trade. — goods returned. — 5See footnote 3. — 6Excluding the expenditure on
2Special trade according to the official foreign trade statistics: imports cif, freight and insurance included in the cif import figure. — 7Capital
exports fob. — 3From January 1993, including additional estimates for exports: −. — 8 Increase: −. 
external transactions which d o not have to be reportedandwhich are
68*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
X External sector
 
3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
by country and group of countries *
 
 € million
 2003  2004
Country / group of countries  2001  2002  2003 Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar  p 
All countries  1 Exports 638,268 651,320 661,613 58,163 58,600 54,455 55,664 56,590 65,025
Imports 542,774 518,532 531,970 47,334 48,227 44,038 43,177 44,479 48,519Balance + 95,495 + 132,788 + 129,644 + 10,829 + 10,373 + 10,417 + 12,487 + 12,111 + 16,506
I Exports 461,512 470,873 487,924 43,485 44,118 40,455 40,911 42,215 ...European countries
Imports 384,901 372,955 385,358 34,044 35,296 31,963 31,045 32,705 ...Balance + 76,611 + 97,918 + 102,566 + 9,442 + 8,822 + 8,492 + 9,866 + 9,510 ...
Exports 401,887 408,286 423,726 38,046 38,558 34,945 35,514 36,851 ... 1 EU member states (25)
Imports 325,968 314,981 325,614 28,851 29,877 26,742 26,335 27,671 ...
Balance + 75,919 + 93,304 + 98,112 + 9,196 + 8,682 + 8,204 + 9,179 + 9,180 ...
Memo item
Exports 351,611 354,813 367,191 33,210 33,623 30,258 30,859 31,986 ...
 EU member  states  (15)
Imports 277,034 262,849 268,295 23,357 24,623 21,814 21,595 22,649 ...Balance + 74,577 + 91,964 + 98,896 + 9,854 + 9,000 + 8,444 + 9,265 + 9,337 ...
Euro-area Exports 275,384 276,270 286,249 25,886 26,555 23,734 24,267 24,766 ...countries Imports 221,680 211,642 217,853 19,124 20,131 17,630 17,696 18,527 ...
Balance + 53,704 + 64,628 + 68,397 + 6,762 + 6,424 + 6,104 + 6,571 + 6,239 ...
of which
Austria Exports 33,486 33,863 35,188 3,209 3,375 2,870 2,871 3,022 ...
Imports 20,664 21,047 21,026 1,763 1,981 1,717 1,612 1,861 ...Balance + 12,822 + 12,816 + 14,162 + 1,446 + 1,394 + 1,153 + 1,259 + 1,161 ...
Belgium andExports 35,187 34,108 36,393 3,323 3,466 3,074 3,201 3,265 ...Luxembourg Imports 28,521 26,505 27,710 2,332 2,531 2,118 2,208 2,268 ...
Balance + 6,666 + 7,603 + 8,683 + 991 + 935 + 956 + 994 + 997 ...
France Exports 69,601 68,721 70,006 6,433 6,258 5,581 5,665 5,899 ...
Imports 49,743 48,200 48,832 4,418 4,465 3,813 3,838 4,094 ...Balance + 19,858 + 20,521 + 21,174 + 2,015 + 1,793 + 1,768 + 1,827 + 1,805 ...
Italy Exports 47,119 47,335 48,785 4,467 4,510 3,892 4,275 4,248 ...
Imports 35,280 33,482 33,670 2,848 3,044 2,652 2,545 2,797 ...Balance + 11,839 + 13,853 + 15,115 + 1,619 + 1,466 + 1,240 + 1,730 + 1,451 ...
Netherlands Exports 40,011 40,463 40,997 3,509 3,668 3,805 3,468 3,525 ...
Imports 43,233 40,751 44,404 4,036 4,082 3,957 3,733 3,703 ...Balance − 3,222 − 288 − 3,407 − 527 − 415 − 152 − 265 − 178 ...
Spain Exports 27,841 29,436 32,504 2,996 3,175 2,612 2,873 2,857 ...
Imports 15,226 15,532 16,421 1,361 1,537 1,313 1,358 1,467 ...Balance + 12,615 + 13,903 + 16,084 + 1,635 + 1,638 + 1,299 + 1,515 + 1,390 ...
Other EU member Exports 126,503 132,016 137,477 12,161 12,003 11,211 11,247 12,085 ...states Imports 104,288 103,339 107,761 9,727 9,746 9,111 8,639 9,143 ...
Balance + 22,215 + 28,677 + 29,716 + 2,434 + 2,257 + 2,100 + 2,609 + 2,942 ...
of which
UnitedExports 52,764 53,761 55,307 4,987 4,796 4,489 4,546 5,126 ...Kingdom Imports 37,259 33,075 31,961 2,695 2,800 2,669 2,485 2,465 ...
Balance + 15,505 + 20,685 + 23,346 + 2,292 + 1,996 + 1,820 + 2,061 + 2,661 ...
Exports 59,624 62,588 64,198 5,439 5,559 5,510 5,397 5,365 ... 2 Other European
Imports 58,933 57,974 59,744 5,193 5,419 5,222 4,710 5,035 ... countries
Balance + 692 + 4,614 + 4,454 + 246 + 140 + 288 + 687 + 330 ...
II Exports 175,203 178,818 172,236 14,569 14,374 13,831 14,647 14,255 ...Non-European
Imports 157,199 144,950 145,910 13,224 12,875 12,007 12,074 11,718 ... countries
Balance + 18,003 + 33,869 + 26,326 + 1,346 + 1,500 + 1,824 + 2,573 + 2,537 ...Exports 12,042 11,797 12,079 1,086 965 953 948 962 ... 1 Africa
Imports 11,356 10,248 9,846 767 888 850 725 729 ...
Balance + 686 + 1,549 + 2,233 + 319 + 77 + 103 + 224 + 233 ...
Exports 89,801 89,081 79,617 6,707 6,503 6,067 6,527 6,509 ... 2 America
Imports 59,575 52,822 51,322 4,316 4,132 3,766 4,007 3,729 ...
Balance + 30,226 + 36,259 + 28,295 + 2,391 + 2,371 + 2,301 + 2,520 + 2,780 ...
of which
Exports 67,824 68,263 61,669 5,401 5,021 4,647 4,915 5,081 ... United States
Imports 45,982 40,376 39,046 3,332 2,968 2,880 3,019 2,799 ...Balance + 21,842 + 27,887 + 22,624 + 2,069 + 2,052 + 1,766 + 1,896 + 2,282 ...
Exports 68,936 72,915 75,539 6,327 6,480 6,418 6,743 6,368 ... 3 Asia
Imports 84,220 79,892 82,991 8,005 7,697 7,249 7,170 7,112 ...
Balance − 15,285 − 6,977 − 7,453 − 1,678 − 1,217 − 831 − 427 − 743 ...
of which
Middle East Exports 14,130 15,045 15,503 1,273 1,260 1,349 1,357 1,206 ...
Imports 5,434 4,696 4,460 410 358 345 300 301 ...Balance + 8,696 + 10,349 + 11,043 + 863 + 902 + 1,004 + 1,057 + 905 ...
Japan Exports 13,103 12,576 11,838 1,147 1,036 1,040 1,062 1,062 ...
Imports 22,910 19,896 19,139 1,730 1,670 1,567 1,605 1,655 ...Balance − 9,807 − 7,320 − 7,301 − 583 − 634 − 528 − 544 − 593 ...
Exports 12,118 14,571 18,201 1,493 1,532 1,552 1,682 1,522 ... People‘s Republic
of China  
2 Imports 19,942 21,338 25,024 2,612 2,409 2,436 2,259 2,219 ... of China  2 
Balance − 7,824 − 6,768 − 6,823 − 1,119 − 877 − 884 − 577 − 697 ...
Exports 4,424 5,026 5,001 449 427 393 429 415 ... 4 Oceania and
Imports 2,048 1,988 1,751 135 158 142 173 148 ... polar regions
Balance + 2,375 + 3,038 + 3,250 + 314 + 269 + 251 + 256 + 267 ...
Memo item
Exports 24,735 25,282 24,557 1,955 2,211 1,972 2,177 2,086 ... Emerging markets in
Imports 28,351 26,660 26,581 2,602 2,628 2,334 2,334 2,177 ... South-East Asia  3 
Balance − 3,616 − 1,377 − 2,023 − 647 − 417 − 363 − 157 − 91 ...
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (fob) by country of destination, supplies for ships and aircraft and other data not classifiable by regi on. —
imports (cif) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of 2Excluding Hong Kong. — 3Brunei Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indonesia,
countries according to the current position. — 1Including fuel and other Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of Korea, Singapore, Taiwan and Thailand. 
69*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
X External sector
 
4 Services and factor income of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
€ million
Services
Other services
of which
 
Patents Compen- Services  of Construction
Trans- Financial andsation of Investment Government self-employedand  assembly
PeriodTotal Travel  1 services licences Total income portation  2 transactions  3 persons  4 work,  repairs employees  5 
1999 − 46,067 − 35,468 + 2,882 + 1,005 − 1,896 + 1,997 − 14,588 − 2,245 − 403 − 756 − 8,843
2000 − 49,067 − 37,249 + 3,386 + 1,668 − 3,012 + 2,221 − 16,081 − 2,757 − 753 − 512 − 2,129
2001 − 50,272 − 37,955 + 4,151 + 1,079 − 2,455 + 3,488 − 18,581 − 2,538 − 619 − 257 − 10,4242002 − 36,422 − 35,445 + 2,750 + 1,380 − 1,461 + 5,237 − 8,883 − 2,035 + 403 − 144 − 16,7002003 − 34,778 − 36,110 + 1,825 + 1,529 − 882 + 5,050 − 6,190 − 1,863 + 1,419 − 86 − 12,428
2002          Q3 − 12,652 − 13,395 + 555 + 309 − 447 + 1,704 − 1,378 − 538 + 414 − 257 − 5,306
         Q4 − 4,532 − 6,677 + 1,072 + 425 + 100 + 1,253 − 704 − 465 + 250 + 24 − 1,901
2003          Q1 − 8,350 − 6,964 + 168 + 449 − 293 + 1,273 − 2,983 − 574 + 473 + 216 − 4,906
         Q2 − 8,483 − 9,270 + 695 + 355 − 193 + 1,203 − 1,272 − 485 + 177 − 85 − 3,565         Q3 − 13,708 − 14,427 + 453 + 339 − 369 + 1,316 − 1,020 − 410 + 439 − 240 − 4,239         Q4 − 4,236 − 5,448 + 509 + 386 − 26 + 1,257 − 915 − 393 + 330 + 22 + 281
2004          Q1 − 8,886 − 7,018 + 480 + 365 − 167 + 1,343 − 3,889 − 343 + 164 + 210 − 9,7622003          May − 2,830 − 2,513 + 67 + 135 − 43 + 352 − 829 − 138 + 61 − 31 − 1,348
         June − 3,489 − 4,013 + 398 + 145 − 99 + 425 − 346 − 149 + 101 − 32 − 1,900
         July − 3,606 − 3,187 + 108 + 150 − 141 + 469 − 1,004 − 168 + 228 − 70 − 5,331
         Aug − 5,594 − 6,469 + 242 + 140 − 58 + 404 + 146 − 138 + 114 − 86 + 12         Sep − 4,508 − 4,771 + 103 + 48 − 170 + 444 − 162 − 103 + 97 − 84 + 1,081
         Oct − 2,344 − 2,462 + 37 + 85 − 37 + 380 − 347 − 133 + 100 − 0 + 1,704
         Nov − 1,191 − 1,426 + 183 + 176 + 2 + 383 − 509 − 99 + 92 − 8 − 312         Dec − 702 − 1,560 + 289 + 125 + 9 + 494 − 58 − 161 + 139 + 30 − 1,111
2004          Jan − 4,141 − 2,378 + 32 + 103 − 0 + 436 − 2,333 − 143 + 31 + 67 − 7,894
         Feb − 2,318 − 1,907 + 134 + 112 + 7 + 426 − 1,091 − 93 + 114 + 64 − 1,834         Mar − 2,428 − 2,733 + 314 + 150 − 174 + 481 − 465 − 106 + 19 + 80 − 33
1From January 2002, figures subject to significant uncertainty. — 2Ex- vices supplied. — 4Engineering andother technical services, research and
cluding the expenditure on freight included in the cif import figure. — development, commercial services, etc. — 5 Wages and salaries. 
3Including the receipts from foreign military agencies for goods and ser-
5 Current transfers of the Federal Republic of Germany 6 Capital transfers
(balances) (balances)
€ million €  million
Public  1 Private  1 
Internationalorganisations  
2 
 
of which Other Remittances Other
European current by foreign current
PeriodTotal Total Total Communities Total workers transfers Total  4 Public  1 Private  1 transfers  3 
1999 − 25,016 − 17,348 − 15,428 − 13,846 − 1,920 − 7,667 − 3,429 − 4,239 − 154 − 1,351 + 1,197
2000 − 28,366 − 19,094 − 17,100 − 15,398 − 1,995 − 9,271 − 3,458 − 5,814 − 1,599 − 1,189 − 410
2001 − 27,425 − 16,927 − 14,257 − 12,587 − 2,670 − 10,499 − 3,520 − 6,978 − 387 − 1,361 + 9742002 − 27,883 − 16,207 − 13,045 − 11,214 − 3,162 − 11,676 − 3,470 − 8,206 − 212 − 1,416 + 1,2042003 − 28,767 − 18,793 − 15,397 − 13,732 − 3,396 − 9,974 − 3,332 − 6,642 + 316 − 1,235 + 1,551
2002          Q3 − 6,269 − 3,864 − 3,025 − 2,387 − 839 − 2,405 − 868 − 1,537 + 62 − 348 + 410
         Q4 − 7,483 − 4,477 − 3,232 − 2,998 − 1,245 − 3,006 − 868 − 2,139 − 359 − 565 + 207
2003          Q1 − 5,779 − 3,317 − 2,297 − 1,628 − 1,020 − 2,463 − 833 − 1,629 − 30 − 253 + 223
         Q2 − 7,890 − 5,403 − 5,375 − 4,790 − 28 − 2,487 − 833 − 1,654 + 149 − 276 + 425         Q3 − 8,820 − 6,017 − 4,896 − 4,650 − 1,121 − 2,803 − 833 − 1,970 + 208 − 249 + 457         Q4 − 6,278 − 4,057 − 2,829 − 2,665 − 1,227 − 2,222 − 833 − 1,389 − 12 − 457 + 445
2004          Q1 − 5,536 − 3,332 − 2,466 − 1,822 − 866 − 2,204 − 795 − 1,409 + 441 − 254 + 6952003          May − 2,527 − 1,472 − 1,647 − 1,565 + 175 − 1,055 − 278 − 777 + 156 − 90 + 246
         June − 2,659 − 2,015 − 1,973 − 1,512 − 43 − 643 − 278 − 366 + 119 − 115 + 234
         July − 2,953 − 2,092 − 1,655 − 1,491 − 437 − 861 − 278 − 583 + 62 − 84 + 147
         Aug − 2,987 − 2,061 − 1,579 − 1,556 − 482 − 926 − 278 − 648 + 224 − 73 + 297         Sep − 2,880 − 1,864 − 1,662 − 1,603 − 202 − 1,016 − 278 − 738 − 78 − 91 + 13
         Oct − 1,874 − 1,071 − 631 − 514 − 441 − 803 − 278 − 525 − 27 − 87 + 60
         Nov − 2,899 − 2,161 − 1,684 − 1,674 − 477 − 739 − 278 − 461 + 49 − 229 + 278         Dec − 1,505 − 824 − 515 − 477 − 310 − 681 − 278 − 403 − 35 − 141 + 107
2004          Jan − 537 + 278 + 501 + 862 − 223 − 815 − 265 − 550 + 53 − 84 + 137
         Feb − 2,615 − 1,912 − 1,547 − 1,388 − 366 − 702 − 265 − 437 − 130 − 95 − 36         Mar − 2,384 − 1,697 − 1,419 − 1,296 − 278 − 687 − 265 − 422 + 518 − 75 + 593
1The classification of “public” and “private” transfers depends on the (excluding capital transfers). — 3Payments to developing countries, pension
sector to which the participating domestic body belongs. — 2Current contri- payments, tax revenue andrefund s, etc. — 4Where identifiable; in
butions to the budgets of international organisations and to the EU budget particular, debt forgiveness. 
70*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
X External sector
 
7 Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
 
 
€ million
2003 2004
Item 2001 2002 2003 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Jan Feb Mar
I Net German investment abroad
(Increase/capital exports: −) − 270,632 − 249,672 − 174,719 − 64,565 + 7,919 − 18,278 − 75,436 − 38,254 + 2,594 − 39,776
1 Direct investment  1 − 41,185 − 9,161 − 2,268 + 15,290 − 3,041 + 1,085 + 11,655 − 8,268 + 20,622 − 699
Equity capital − 70,254 − 38,266 − 13,052 − 733 − 2,297 − 2,324 + 22,412 + 3,733 + 20,112 − 1,433
Reinvested earnings  2 + 17,892 + 16,224 + 1,380 + 345 + 345 + 345 + 325 + 108 + 108 + 108
Credit transactions ofGerman direct investors + 16,260 + 20,639 + 18,881 + 17,920 + 939 + 6,329 − 9,572 − 11,505 + 1,224 + 710Other capital − 5,083 − 7,759 − 9,477 − 2,241 − 2,029 − 3,265 − 1,511 − 604 − 823 − 84
2 Portfolio investment − 124,375 − 65,848 − 32,323 − 25,845 − 1,554 − 10,668 − 25,615 − 6,213 − 6,132 − 13,270
Equity
3 − 10,581 − 4,832 + 7,628 − 1,266 − 734 − 5,969 + 1,280 + 354 − 761 + 1,687
Mutual fund shares  4 − 20,222 − 6,995 − 4,253 − 335 − 240 − 467 − 7,059 − 3,471 − 1,187 − 2,401
Bonds and notes  5 − 95,067 − 49,056 − 37,811 − 20,470 − 860 − 6,645 − 25,909 − 5,047 − 7,101 − 13,761
Money market instruments + 1,495 − 4,965 + 2,112 − 3,774 + 280 + 2,412 + 6,073 + 1,951 + 2,917 + 1,205
3 Financial derivatives  6 + 6,829 − 863 − 493 − 2,457 − 384 − 36 − 1,397 − 187 − 697 − 513
4 Credit transactions − 110,515 − 172,208 − 137,045 − 50,898 + 13,575 − 7,988 − 59,047 − 23,183 − 10,916 − 24,947
MFIs  7,8 − 130,648 − 132,536 − 122,307 − 66,528 + 29,417 − 10,941 − 36,597 − 20,554 − 6,867 − 9,176
Long-term − 47,636 − 33,790 − 32,556 − 8,019 − 8,176 − 4,882 + 3,570 − 8 + 1,030 + 2,547
Short-term − 83,012 − 98,746 − 89,750 − 58,509 + 37,593 − 6,059 − 40,167 − 20,546 − 7,897 − 11,723
Enterprises and households − 19,861 − 10,830 − 16,234 − 4,413 − 113 + 9,965 − 17,583 − 9,787 − 4,446 − 3,350
Long-term − 2,502 − 1,187 − 2,729 − 635 − 565 − 888 − 747 − 517 − 11 − 219
Short-term  7 − 17,360 − 9,643 − 13,505 − 3,779 + 452 + 10,853 − 16,836 − 9,270 − 4,434 − 3,131
General government + 15,980 + 7,168 + 1,265 − 547 − 160 + 1,021 + 1,158 + 1,346 − 613 + 424
Long-term + 257 + 218 + 692 − 5 + 274 + 115 + 305 + 74 + 273 − 42Short-term  
7 + 15,723 + 6,950 + 572 − 541 − 434 + 906 + 853 + 1,272 − 886 + 466
Bundesbank + 24,015 − 36,010 + 230 + 20,590 − 15,569 − 8,033 − 6,025 + 5,812 + 1,010 − 12,846
5 Other investment  9 − 1,385 − 1,592 − 2,590 − 655 − 677 − 670 − 1,031 − 403 − 282 − 346
II Net foreign investment in Germany
(Increase/capital imports: +) + 244,399 + 178,948 + 119,704 + 39,166 − 4,640 − 1,518 + 70,121 + 38,962 + 3,176 + 27,982
1 Direct investment  1 + 23,622 + 38,269 + 11,400 + 3,874 + 5,829 − 12,994 − 26,033 − 1,432 − 16,923 − 7,679
Equity capital + 29,702 + 29,311 + 27,956 + 3,443 + 3,906 + 11,409 + 4,317 + 2,633 + 427 + 1,257Reinvested earnings  
2 − 20,520 − 13,008 − 5,484 − 1,371 − 1,371 − 1,371 − 1,298 − 433 − 433 − 433
Credit transactions of
foreign direct investors + 14,584 + 22,162 − 10,886 + 1,868 + 3,266 − 22,980 − 29,107 − 3,618 − 16,992 − 8,497Other capital − 143 − 197 − 186 − 66 + 27 − 52 + 54 − 14 + 75 − 7
2 Portfolio investment + 150,870 + 109,783 + 91,276 + 36,005 − 4,798 + 31,075 + 35,888 + 18,175 + 8,370 + 9,342
Equity  
3 + 86,812 + 15,712 + 24,204 + 4,267 + 2,989 + 20,306 + 2,793 − 2,687 + 10,699 − 5,219
Mutual fund shares + 951 − 673 − 1,530 − 139 − 802 + 278 + 835 − 306 + 356 + 785
Bonds and notes  5 + 80,299 + 83,473 + 69,243 + 30,806 + 6,343 + 14,389 + 43,774 + 24,309 + 7,665 + 11,799
Money market instruments − 17,191 + 11,271 − 642 + 1,071 − 13,328 − 3,897 − 11,514 − 3,141 − 10,351 + 1,977
3 Credit transactions + 69,859 + 30,814 + 17,005 − 746 − 5,676 − 19,580 + 60,222 + 22,187 + 11,719 + 26,316
MFIs  7,8 + 54,341 + 28,453 + 12,160 − 460 − 9,428 − 19,300 + 57,854 + 19,259 + 9,500 + 29,095
Long-term + 4,425 + 18,379 − 4,512 − 116 − 7,407 + 6,012 − 8,877 − 2,616 + 288 − 6,549
Short-term + 49,916 + 10,075 + 16,672 − 344 − 2,021 − 25,312 + 66,730 + 21,875 + 9,211 + 35,645
Enterprises and households + 12,008 + 3,332 − 820 − 2,022 + 1,032 + 1,068 + 7,533 + 4,529 + 2,861 + 143
Long-term + 11,743 + 5,250 − 1,901 + 1,258 + 1,345 + 57 + 2,835 + 874 + 1,815 + 147
Short-term  7 + 265 − 1,918 + 1,081 − 3,280 − 314 + 1,011 + 4,698 + 3,656 + 1,046 − 4
General government + 879 − 1,625 + 3,682 + 1,708 + 2,302 − 1,186 − 4,163 − 1,615 − 214 − 2,334
Long-term − 217 − 125 + 4,861 − 113 − 158 + 1,178 − 2,183 − 103 − 74 − 2,006Short-term  
7 + 1,096 − 1,500 − 1,179 + 1,821 + 2,460 − 2,365 − 1,980 − 1,512 − 140 − 328
Bundesbank + 2,631 + 653 + 1,983 + 28 + 418 − 161 − 1,002 + 14 − 427 − 588
4 Other investment + 47 + 83 + 24 + 33 + 6 − 19 + 45 + 32 + 11 + 2
III Balance of all statistically
recorded financial movements(Net capital exports: −) − 26,233 − 70,724 − 55,015 − 25,399 + 3,279 − 19,796 − 5,315 + 708 + 5,771 − 11,793
1From 1996, new definition for direct investment. — 2Estimated. — action values shown here are mostly derived from changes in stocks. Purely
3Including participation rights. — 4From 1991, including accumulated statistical changes have been eliminated as far as possible. — 8Excluding
earnings. — 5From 1975, excluding accrued interest. — 6Options, whether the Deutsche Bundesbank. — 9In particular, subscriptions of the Federal
evid encedby securities or not, andfinancial futures contracts. — 7The trans- Government to international organisations. 
71*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
X External sector
 
8 External position of the Bundesbank *
 
 
DM million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserve
positionin theInter- Liabilitiesnational arising Net Liabilities
Monetary arising from externalFund and Claims Loans and from liquidity position
Foreign special on the external Treasury (col 1 other claims
End of year currency drawing ECB  
2 on non- trans- discount less
or month Total Total Goldrights (net) Total paper col 8) balances  1 residents  3 actions  4 
1234567891 0 1 1
1991 97,345 94,754 13,688 55,424 8,314 17,329 2,592 42,335 42,335 − 55,010
1992 143,959 141,351 13,688 85,845 8,199 33,619 2,608 26,506 26,506 − 117,4531993 122,763 120,143 13,688 61,784 8,496 36,176 2,620 39,541 23,179 16,362 83,2221994 115,965 113,605 13,688 60,209 7,967 31,742 2,360 24,192 19,581 4,611 91,774
1995 123,261 121,307 13,688 68,484 10,337 28,798 1,954 16,390 16,390 − 106,871
1996 120,985 119,544 13,688 72,364 11,445 22,048 1,441 15,604 15,604 − 105,3811997 127,849 126,884 13,688 76,673 13,874 22,649 966 16,931 16,931 − 110,9181998 135,085 134,005 17,109 100,363 16,533 − 1,079 15,978 15,978 − 119,107
*Valuation of the goldhold ings andthe claims on non-resid ents in Monetary Cooperation Fund(EMCF)). — 3Including loans to the World
accordance with section 26 (2) of the Bundesbank Act and the provisions of Bank. — 4Including liquidity paper sold to non-residents by the
the Commercial Code, especially section 253. In the course of the year, Bundesbank; excluding the liquidity Treasury discount paper sold to
valuation at the preceding year’s balance sheet rates. — 1Mainly US dollar non-residents between March 1993 and March 1995, as shown in column 10. 
assets. — 2European Central Bank (up to 1993, claims on the European
  
 
9 External position of the Bundesbank in the euro area o
€ million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserveposition
Other in the Inter-national claims onMonetary Other residents Net externalFund and claims on Claims in other position of the
Goldspecial Foreign non-euro- within the euro-area Bund esbank Liabilities
End of year and gold drawing currency area Eurosystem member vis-à-vis non- (col 1 lessor month Total Total rights reserves (net)  
2 states col 9) receivables residents  1,3 residents  3 
1234567891 0
1999          Jan  4 95,316 93,940 29,312 8,461 56,167 140 1,225 11 8,169 87,146
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 8,332 52,420 9,162 39,746 11 6,179 135,779
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 7,762 53,377 313 6,620 14 6,592 94,1702001 76,147 93,215 35,005 8,721 49,489 312 − 17,385 5 8,752 67,3962002 103,948 85,002 36,208 8,272 40,522 312 18,466 167 9,005 94,9422003 95,394 76,680 36,533 7,609 32,538 312 17,945 456 10,443 84,951
2002          Nov 108,615 87,610 35,517 8,542 43,551 312 20,688 5 10,272 98,343
         Dec 103,948 85,002 36,208 8,272 40,522 312 18,466 167 9,005 94,942
2003          Jan 98,272 85,235 37,934 8,023 39,278 312 12,237 488 9,898 88,374
         Feb 95,491 83,685 35,721 8,008 39,956 312 11,001 493 9,669 85,822         Mar 98,240 82,530 34,100 8,348 40,083 312 14,908 490 10,599 87,641
         Apr 93,702 79,453 33,442 8,123 37,888 312 13,496 441 9,126 84,575
         May 70,456 78,904 34,252 7,871 36,781 312 − 9,216 455 9,818 60,638         June 73,550 78,425 33,435 8,292 36,698 312 − 5,663 476 10,537 63,014
         July 90,714 79,218 34,759 8,289 36,170 312 10,710 474 10,375 80,339
         Aug 98,605 84,197 37,546 8,583 38,068 312 13,592 504 11,060 87,545         Sep 91,894 81,206 36,491 8,492 36,223 312 9,902 474 10,879 81,016
         Oct 113,947 81,401 36,595 8,539 36,267 312 31,794 440 11,319 102,628
         Nov 97,130 79,624 36,705 8,374 34,545 312 16,742 452 10,518 86,612         Dec 95,394 76,680 36,533 7,609 32,538 312 17,945 456 10,443 84,951
2004          Jan 89,895 76,992 35,834 7,726 33,432 312 12,135 456 10,522 79,374
         Feb 87,987 76,089 34,930 7,736 33,423 312 11,140 446 10,078 77,910         Mar 104,464 79,717 38,266 7,610 33,841 312 23,981 454 9,545 94,920
         Apr 102,021 78,143 35,849 7,880 34,414 312 23,134 432 9,694 92,327
oClaims and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro Deutsche Bundesbank’s cross-border payments within the Eurosystem. Fro m
area. Up to December 2000, the levels at the endof each quarter are shown, November 2000, includ ing the TARGET positions which were previously
owing to revaluations, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the shown (in columns 6 and9) as bilateral assets andliabilities vis-à-vis na tional
levels are computedon the basis of cumulative transaction values. From central banks outsid e the Eurosystem. — 3See footnote 2. — 4Euro
January 2001, all end-of-month levels are valued at market prices. — opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January 1999. 1Including loans to the World Bank. — 2Including the balances in the
72*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
X External sector
 
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  vis-à-vis foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms payments
or month Total banks Total Total grantedeffected Total banks Total Total used received operations operations
All countries
 
2000 320,874 43,462 277,412 152,752 124,660 116,971 7,689 446,060 52,663 393,397 309,024 84,373 63,093 21,280
2001 358,120 62,434 295,686 171,939 123,747 114,857 8,890 505,266 60,132 445,134 354,561 90,573 65,988 24,5852002  
4 331,671 63,817 267,854 148,913 118,941 111,406 7,535 533,423 57,696 475,727 387,850 87,877 62,622 25,255
2003 357,399 86,627 270,772 154,953 115,819 108,515 7,304 543,186 54,822 488,364 400,431 87,933 60,464 27,469
2003          Dec 357,399 86,627 270,772 154,953 115,819 108,515 7,304 543,186 54,822 488,364 400,431 87,933 60,464 27,469
2004          Jan 376,102 97,551 278,551 165,784 112,767 105,352 7,415 541,955 59,085 482,870 397,897 84,973 56,451 28,522
         Feb 373,952 100,262 273,690 158,957 114,733 106,933 7,800 525,880 61,515 464,365 379,646 84,719 55,887 28,832         Mar 383,099 101,332 281,767 162,340 119,427 112,036 7,391 524,188 58,687 465,501 374,072 91,429 60,912 30,517
EU countries 5
 
2000 177,782 39,563 138,219 78,298 59,921 55,718 4,203 323,049 45,473 277,576 237,583 39,993 32,457 7,5362001 198,118 58,039 140,079 79,205 60,874 55,371 5,503 372,937 53,683 319,254 275,749 43,505 34,716 8,7892002  
4 200,930 60,118 140,812 84,643 56,169 51,693 4,476 402,561 52,503 350,058 307,920 42,138 32,650 9,488
2003 225,973 81,430 144,543 89,392 55,151 51,459 3,692 411,811 50,304 361,507 321,010 40,497 30,855 9,642
2003          Dec 225,973 81,430 144,543 89,392 55,151 51,459 3,692 411,811 50,304 361,507 321,010 40,497 30,855 9,642
2004          Jan 244,609 91,604 153,005 98,532 54,473 50,661 3,812 412,101 53,753 358,348 319,307 39,041 28,893 10,148
         Feb 244,375 92,678 151,697 95,345 56,352 52,249 4,103 392,919 53,931 338,988 300,405 38,583 28,560 10,023         Mar 251,007 93,160 157,847 99,577 58,270 54,521 3,749 385,501 50,947 334,554 291,940 42,614 31,286 11,328
of which:  Euro-area member states 1
 
2000 120,976 22,737 98,239 52,976 45,263 42,389 2,874 247,830 33,698 214,132 185,595 28,537 23,569 4,9682001 126,519 33,787 92,732 46,599 46,133 42,771 3,362 295,943 38,361 257,582 225,711 31,871 24,878 6,9932002  
4 129,490 32,521 96,969 54,542 42,427 39,350 3,077 331,733 37,366 294,367 263,863 30,504 22,996 7,508
2003 147,633 45,887 101,746 59,279 42,467 39,619 2,848 338,794 29,541 309,253 279,101 30,152 22,748 7,404
2003          Dec 147,633 45,887 101,746 59,279 42,467 39,619 2,848 338,794 29,541 309,253 279,101 30,152 22,748 7,404
2004          Jan 157,917 49,422 108,495 66,475 42,020 39,057 2,963 341,329 33,550 307,779 278,884 28,895 21,184 7,711
         Feb 156,892 51,807 105,085 61,008 44,077 40,823 3,254 313,682 34,891 278,791 250,138 28,653 20,953 7,700         Mar 162,182 52,802 109,380 64,168 45,212 42,367 2,845 322,381 33,888 288,493 256,488 32,005 23,105 8,900
Other industrial countries 3,6
 
2000 84,502 2,925 81,577 54,272 27,305 25,673 1,632 84,464 4,711 79,753 56,986 22,767 18,621 4,1462001 100,786 3,364 97,422 71,842 25,580 24,082 1,498 93,269 4,178 89,091 64,595 24,496 19,648 4,8482002  
4 77,144 2,743 74,401 48,866 25,535 24,303 1,232 90,594 3,267 87,327 64,544 22,783 18,081 4,702
2003 79,781 3,960 75,821 50,888 24,933 23,777 1,156 87,625 2,783 84,842 62,909 21,933 17,355 4,578
2003          Dec 79,781 3,960 75,821 50,888 24,933 23,777 1,156 87,625 2,783 84,842 62,909 21,933 17,355 4,578
2004          Jan 80,811 4,147 76,664 52,842 23,822 22,636 1,186 86,863 3,775 83,088 62,351 20,737 15,978 4,759
         Feb 78,974 6,080 72,894 48,988 23,906 22,731 1,175 87,853 5,189 82,664 62,242 20,422 15,527 4,895         Mar 80,426 6,597 73,829 48,213 25,616 24,466 1,150 92,042 5,337 86,705 64,837 21,868 16,999 4,869
Countries in transition
 
2000 19,082 240 18,842 5,028 13,814 13,104 710 8,202 113 8,089 928 7,161 4,384 2,7772001 20,444 204 20,240 6,103 14,137 13,449 688 9,095 151 8,944 1,699 7,245 4,341 2,9042002  
4 20,339 332 20,007 5,680 14,327 13,586 741 10,106 175 9,931 2,119 7,812 4,574 3,238
2003 21,472 319 21,153 6,261 14,892 14,140 752 12,887 135 12,752 3,084 9,668 5,353 4,315
2003          Dec 21,472 319 21,153 6,261 14,892 14,140 752 12,887 135 12,752 3,084 9,668 5,353 4,315
2004          Jan 20,602 313 20,289 6,060 14,229 13,508 721 12,814 126 12,688 3,053 9,635 5,170 4,465
         Feb 20,582 285 20,297 6,046 14,251 13,484 767 13,213 134 13,079 3,108 9,971 5,375 4,596         Mar 21,500 314 21,186 6,133 15,053 14,267 786 13,776 161 13,615 3,308 10,307 5,554 4,753
Developing countries 2
 
2000 39,508 734 38,774 15,154 23,620 22,476 1,144 30,345 2,366 27,979 13,527 14,452 7,631 6,8212001 38,772 827 37,945 14,789 23,156 21,955 1,201 29,965 2,120 27,845 12,518 15,327 7,283 8,0442002  
4 33,258 624 32,634 9,724 22,910 21,824 1,086 30,162 1,751 28,411 13,267 15,144 7,317 7,827
2003 30,173 918 29,255 8,412 20,843 19,139 1,704 30,863 1,600 29,263 13,428 15,835 6,901 8,934
2003          Dec 30,173 918 29,255 8,412 20,843 19,139 1,704 30,863 1,600 29,263 13,428 15,835 6,901 8,934
2004          Jan 30,080 1,487 28,593 8,350 20,243 18,547 1,696 30,177 1,431 28,746 13,186 15,560 6,410 9,150
         Feb 30,021 1,219 28,802 8,578 20,224 18,469 1,755 31,895 2,261 29,634 13,891 15,743 6,425 9,318         Mar 30,166 1,261 28,905 8,417 20,488 18,782 1,706 32,869 2,242 30,627 13,987 16,640 7,073 9,567
* Including the assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of households in January 2001, including Greece. — 2Up to April 2002, including Cyprus. —
Germany. The assets andliabilities vis-à-vis non-resid ents of banks (MFIs) in 3From May 2002, including Cyprus. — 4Change in the reporting
Germany are shown in Table 4 of Section IV, “Banks”. Statistical increases population owing to an increase in the exemption limit. — 5Up to
and decreases have not been eliminated; to this extent, the changes in to- December 2002, including Guernsey, Jersey and Isle of Man. — 6From
tals are not comparable with the figures shown in Table X.7. — 1From January 2003, including Guernsey, Jersey and Isle of Man.   
73*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
X External sector
11 Deutsche Mark and euro exchange rates of selected currencies *
 
Yearly Japan Denmark Sweden Norway Switzerland Canada Australia New Zealand United States United Kingdom
or monthly
average USD JPY DKK SEK GBP NOK CHF CAD AUD  1 NZD 1 
Historic spot middle rates on the Frankfurt exchange (1 or 100 currency units = DEM ...)
      
1991 1.6612 1.2346 25.932 27.421 2.926  25.580 115.740 1.4501 1.2942 0.9589
1992 1.5595 1.2313 25.869 26.912 2.753  25.143 111.198 1.2917 1.1476 0.84061993 1.6544 1.4945 25.508 21.248 2.483  23.303 111.949 1.2823 1.1235 0.89401994 1.6218 1.5870 25.513 21.013 2.4816 22.982 118.712 1.1884 1.1848 0.9605
1995 1.4338 1.5293 25.570 20.116 2.2620 22.614 121.240 1.0443 1.0622 0.9399
1996 1.5037 1.3838 25.945 22.434 2.3478 23.292 121.891 1.1027 1.1782 1.03571997 1.7348 1.4378 26.249 22.718 2.8410 24.508 119.508 1.2533 1.2889 1.14531998 1.7592 1.3484 26.258 22.128 2.9142 23.297 121.414 1.1884 1.1070 0.9445
      
Euro reference exchange rates published by the European Central Bank (EUR 1 = currency units ...) 2
      
1999 1.0658 121.32 7.4355 8.8075 0.65874 8.3104 1.6003 1.5840 1.6523 2.01452000 0.9236 99.47 7.4538 8.4452 0.60948 8.1129 1.5579 1.3706 1.5889 2.02882001 0.8956 108.68 7.4521 9.2551 0.62187 8.0484 1.5105 1.3864 1.7319 2.13002002 0.9456 118.06 7.4305 9.1611 0.62883 7.5086 1.4670 1.4838 1.7376 2.03662003 1.1312 130.97 7.4307 9.1242 0.69199 8.0033 1.5212 1.5817 1.7379 1.9438
2002          Aug 0.9778 116.31 7.4270 9.2489 0.63633 7.4284 1.4636 1.5333 1.8045 2.1076
         Sep 0.9808 118.38 7.4271 9.1679 0.63059 7.3619 1.4649 1.5434 1.7927 2.0847
         Oct 0.9811 121.57 7.4297 9.1051 0.62994 7.3405 1.4650 1.5481 1.7831 2.0381
         Nov 1.0014 121.65 7.4280 9.0818 0.63709 7.3190 1.4673 1.5735 1.7847 2.0155         Dec 1.0183 124.20 7.4264 9.0961 0.64218 7.2948 1.4679 1.5872 1.8076 1.9947
2003          Jan 1.0622 126.12 7.4324 9.1733 0.65711 7.3328 1.4621 1.6364 1.8218 1.9648
         Feb 1.0773 128.60 7.4317 9.1455 0.66977 7.5439 1.4674 1.6299 1.8112 1.9457         Mar 1.0807 128.16 7.4274 9.2265 0.68255 7.8450 1.4695 1.5943 1.7950 1.9497
         Apr 1.0848 130.12 7.4255 9.1541 0.68902 7.8317 1.4964 1.5851 1.7813 1.9700
         May 1.1582 135.83 7.4246 9.1559 0.71322 7.8715 1.5155 1.6016 1.7866 2.0083         June 1.1663 138.05 7.4250 9.1182 0.70224 8.1619 1.5411 1.5798 1.7552 2.0069
         July 1.1372 134.99 7.4332 9.1856 0.70045 8.2893 1.5476 1.5694 1.7184 1.9386
         Aug 1.1139 132.38 7.4322 9.2378 0.69919 8.2558 1.5400 1.5570 1.7114 1.9137         Sep 1.1222 128.94 7.4273 9.0682 0.69693 8.1952 1.5474 1.5330 1.6967 1.9227
         Oct 1.1692 128.12 7.4301 9.0105 0.69763 8.2274 1.5485 1.5489 1.6867 1.9446
         Nov 1.1702 127.84 7.4370 8.9939 0.69278 8.1969 1.5590 1.5361 1.6337 1.8608         Dec 1.2286 132.43 7.4419 9.0228 0.70196 8.2421 1.5544 1.6131 1.6626 1.8982
2004          Jan 1.2613 134.13 7.4481 9.1368 0.69215 8.5925 1.5657 1.6346 1.6374 1.8751
         Feb 1.2646 134.78 7.4511 9.1763 0.67690 8.7752 1.5734 1.6817 1.6260 1.8262         Mar 1.2262 133.13 7.4493 9.2346 0.67124 8.5407 1.5670 1.6314 1.6370 1.8566
         Apr 1.1985 129.08 7.4436 9.1653 0.66533 8.2976 1.5547 1.6068 1.6142 1.8727
‘
*Calculatedfrom d aily quotations. — 1Exchange rates from Australia and central banks at 14.15. For additional euro reference exchange rates of the
New Zealand; those for New Zealand calculated from rates as at the middle ECB, see Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Report 5, Exchange rate
andendof the month. — 2The ECB publishes daily euro reference ex- statistics.
change rates, which are calculatedon the basis of the concertation between
12 Exchange rates for the national currencies of the euro-area member states, the Deutsche Mark value of
the ECU * and euro conversion rates
France Italy Netherlands Belgium/ Austria Spain Finland Ireland Portugal Greece ECU values  1 
Yearly Luxembourg GRD  100 /
average FRF  100 ITL  1,000 NLG  100 BEF/LUF  100 ATS  100 ESP  100 FIM  100 IEP  1 PTE  100 EUR  1  2 ECU  1
Historic spot middle rates on the Frankfurt exchange in DEM
   
1991 29.409 1.3377 88.742 4.857  14.211 1.597  41.087 2.671  1.149  0.9103 2.05076
1992 29.500 1.2720 88.814 4.857  14.211 1.529  34.963 2.656  1.157  0.8178 2.020311993 29.189 1.0526 89.017 4.785  14.214 1.303  28.915 2.423  1.031  0.7213 1.936391994 29.238 1.0056 89.171 4.8530 14.214 1.2112 31.108 2.4254 0.9774 0.6683 1.92452
1995 28.718 0.8814 89.272 4.8604 14.214 1.1499 32.832 2.2980 0.9555 0.6182 1.87375
1996 29.406 0.9751 89.243 4.8592 14.214 1.1880 32.766 2.4070 0.9754 0.6248 1.909541997 29.705 1.0184 88.857 4.8464 14.210 1.1843 33.414 2.6297 0.9894 0.6349 1.964381998 29.829 1.0132 88.714 4.8476 14.213 1.1779 32.920 2.5049 0.9763 0.5952 1.969131999 . . . . . . . . . 325.76 .
2000 . . . . . . . . . 336.63 .
      
Irrevocable euro conversion rates (EUR 1 = currency units ...) 3
   
6.55957 1936.27 2.20371 40.3399 13.7603 166.386 5.94573 0.787564 200.482 4 340.750 5 1.95583
*Calculatedfrom d aily quotations. — 1As per data from the European exchange rates of the ECB (EU R 1 = GRD ...). — 3Applicable from 1 January
Commission. — 2Up to 1998, reciprocal values of the exchange rates for the 1999. — 4Applicable from 1 January 2001. — 5Deutsche Mark conversion
Deutsche Mark, publishedby the Bank of Greece; from 1999, euro reference rate. 
74*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
X External sector
 
13 Effective exchange rates * of the euro and selected foreign currencies
 
 
1999 Q1 = 100
Memo item Effective nominal exchange rates of selected foreign
Indicators of the German economy’s currencies against the currencies of 19 industrial
Effective exchange rate of the euro price competitiveness  3,4 countries  3,5,6 
Narrow group  1 Broad group  2 19 industrial countries  5 49 countries  7 
Real Real
based  on based  on based  on the
consumer consumer PoundCanad ian Swiss Japanese deflators of
Period Nominal prices Nominal prices US dollar sterling dollar franc yen total sales  8 based on consumer prices
1995 108.0 108.5 93.1 107.7 109.6 110.4 110.3 86.1 84.0 106.4 105.4 115.6
1996 108.1 108.7 95.4 105.9 106.2 106.8 105.2 90.9 85.9 108.8 104.2 100.61997 99.1 99.4 90.3 96.6 100.6 101.4 99.0 98.8 99.8 109.7 97.9 95.91998 101.5 101.3 96.5 99.2 100.9 101.1 100.1 103.4 103.3 103.5 99.9 89.71999 95.6 95.7 96.5 95.9 97.8 98.0 97.7 100.8 102.3 102.2 98.3 105.1
2000 85.4 86.1 88.0 86.0 91.8 92.6 91.1 105.4 105.2 103.6 96.8 117.9
2001 87.0 88.4 90.8 87.7 92.0 93.0 91.4 112.0 103.6 100.5 100.5 106.72002 89.7 92.3 95.4 91.6 93.1 94.0 92.6 110.7 104.2 98.7 104.9 100.82003 99.9 103.6 106.8 102.0
p 96.8 97.7 97.2 97.7 99.2 108.0 105.3 99.9
1999          Q1 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0         Q2 96.1 96.0 96.4 96.1 98.5 98.3 97.8 102.8 102.8 103.5 98.6 99.0         Q3 94.5 94.6 95.5 94.7 97.0 97.8 97.3 101.4 102.3 102.3 97.7 106.2         Q4 92.0 92.1 94.1 92.8 95.5 95.9 95.6 99.1 104.1 102.8 96.7 115.2
2000          Q1 88.8 89.3 91.0 89.2 93.6 94.8 93.5 101.5 106.4 104.9 95.1 114.9
         Q2 85.7 86.2 88.2 86.4 92.0 92.5 91.3 104.3 105.4 103.7 96.5 118.4         Q3 84.5 85.2 87.1 85.1 91.3 92.1 90.4 106.2 103.9 104.1 97.2 119.2         Q4 82.7 83.6 85.7 83.5 90.2 91.0 89.3 109.4 105.0 101.6 98.2 119.2
2001          Jan 88.9 89.6 91.5 88.5 . 94.0 92.3 107.7 102.4 102.7 100.0 108.3
         Feb 88.0 88.9 90.8 87.9 92.7 93.9 92.1 108.8 102.0 101.6 99.2 109.9         Mar 88.1 89.2 91.2 88.3 . 93.6 92.0 111.5 102.9 99.7 99.3 106.0
         Apr 87.3 88.6 90.8 88.0 . 93.1 91.5 113.0 103.7 100.0 99.4 104.9
         May 85.7 87.0 89.1 86.2 91.4 92.4 90.5 113.1 104.3 101.3 98.3 107.5         June 84.4 85.8 87.9 85.0 . 91.9 89.8 114.1 104.4 102.7 98.5 108.3
         July 85.1 86.6 88.9 85.9 . 92.7 90.8 114.3 104.9 102.5 99.5 105.8
         Aug 87.4 88.8 91.6 88.2 91.6 93.4 91.9 111.6 103.0 101.1 100.4 106.4         Sep 87.7 89.1 92.4 89.0 . 93.1 92.0 110.7 103.8 99.1 102.2 108.2
         Oct 87.8 89.4 92.6 89.2 . 92.7 91.6 111.8 103.7 99.0 103.0 106.2
         Nov 86.5 88.2 91.1 87.6 92.2 92.0 90.7 113.3 104.0 97.8 103.4 106.3         Dec 87.4 89.6 91.6 88.5 . 93.5 91.9 114.1 104.3 99.0 103.3 102.1
2002          Jan 87.3 89.7 91.4 87.9 . 93.6 91.4 116.4 104.9 97.9 103.3 98.3
         Feb 86.5 88.8 90.9 87.2 92.2 93.3 90.9 117.3 105.3 98.5 102.7 98.2         Mar 86.5 89.1 91.0 87.7 . 93.2 90.9 116.1 104.6 98.7 103.4 99.8
         Apr 87.0 89.5 91.5 88.1 . 92.7 90.5 115.3 105.2 99.0 103.8 99.4
         May 88.4 90.9 93.4 89.9 92.7 93.2 91.4 112.0 103.5 100.4 105.1 101.2         June 90.4 93.0 96.2 92.4 . 94.2 92.8 109.0 101.9 101.0 104.9 101.7
         July 91.4 94.1 98.0 94.1 . 95.2 94.4 106.0 103.5 99.4 106.0 104.3
         Aug 90.8 93.4 97.4 93.4 93.6 94.6 93.6 107.3 103.5 98.0 105.7 104.3         Sep 90.9 93.5 97.7 93.6 . 94.1 93.3 107.6 104.7 97.7 105.6 102.5
         Oct 91.4 94.1 98.3 94.2 . 94.0 93.3 108.5 105.0 97.6 105.8 99.8
         Nov 92.2 94.9 99.0 94.7 93.9 94.0 93.3 106.8 104.3 97.7 106.1 100.8         Dec 93.3 96.4 100.1 96.1 . 95.6 94.9 106.0 104.0 98.3 106.5 99.6
2003          Jan 95.5 98.6 102.7 98.0 . 96.3 95.8 103.0 102.6 98.8 107.9 100.4
         Feb 96.8 100.0 104.1 99.2 95.7 97.0 96.5 102.2 101.2 100.5 108.0 99.2         Mar 97.6 100.9 104.8 100.1 . 97.0 96.6 101.4 99.3 103.0 108.1 99.8
         Apr 98.3 101.8 105.0 100.3 . 96.9 96.3 101.4 98.7 104.1 106.4 98.6
         May 102.2 105.8 108.8 103.9 97.4 98.3 97.9 96.7 96.9 109.0 106.5 97.7         June 102.4 106.3 109.1 104.3 . 98.7 98.3 96.1 98.9 111.2 104.9 96.3
         July 101.1 104.9 107.5 102.7 . 98.8 97.9 97.8 98.5 109.5 103.9 97.3
         Aug 99.9 103.6 106.4 101.5
p 96.9 98.1 97.1 99.1 98.1 108.4 104.0 98.3
         Sep 99.5 103.3 106.1 101.4 . 97.2 96.6 97.2 98.2 110.5 103.3 101.1
         Oct 101.0 104.8 108.0 103.2 . 97.5 97.2 93.3 98.8 113.1 103.7 103.7
         Nov 100.9 104.9 108.1 103.2 p 97.0 97.4 97.1 93.0 99.5 114.1 102.9 103.9
         Dec 103.7 108.1 111.2 106.4 . 99.3 99.5 90.6 99.5 113.3 104.3 102.9
2004          Jan 104.7 108.9 112.3 106.7 . 100.1 99.8 88.9 101.6 114.3 103.9 102.9
         Feb 104.4 108.6 112.2 106.4 p 98.0 99.8 99.6 89.3 104.1 111.3 103.3 102.4
         Mar 102.8 107.1 110.1 104.8 . 98.9 98.3 90.9 104.2 111.8 103.2 102.1
         Apr 100.9 105.2 108.2 103.0 . 98.0 97.2 91.8 104.3 111.1 103.3 104.0
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of also includes the following countries: Algeria, Argentina, Brazi l, China,
the currency concerned. — 1ECB calculations based on the weighted Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Israel,
averages of the effective exchange rates of the euro or, prior to 1999, of the Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, New Zealand, Philippines, Poland, Romania,
exchange rates of the currencies preceding the euro against the currencies Russian Federation, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand and
of the following countries: Australia, Canada, Denmark, Hong Kong, Japan, Turkey. — 3The methodof calculation is consistent with the proced ure used
Norway, Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom by the ECB to compute the effective exchange rates of the euro (seeandUnitedStates. The weights usedin these calculations are basedon Monthly Bulletin, November 2001, pp 51−65). — 4Decline in the figures
manufacturedgood s trad e between 1995 and1997 andcapture third - implies an increase in competitiveness. — 5Euro-area countries andECB’s
market effects. Where consumer prices were not yet available, estimates narrow group excluding Australia, Hong Kong, Singapore and Southhave been used. For details of the methodology, see ECB, Monthly Bulletin, Korea. — 6Figures up to end-1998, computed by linking with the figures
August 2003, pp 67−74 andthe ECB’s Occasional Paper No 2, which can be publishedup to October 2001. — 7Euro-area countries andECB’s broad
downloaded from the ECB’s website. — 2ECB calculations. In addition to group. — 8 Annual and quarterly averages. 
the countries belonging to the narrow group (see footnote 1), this group
75*X External sector

76*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004

Overview of
publications
by the Deutsche
BundesbankThis overview provides information
about selected recent economic andstatistical publications by the DeutscheBundesbank. Unless otherwise indi-cated, these publications are availablein both English and German, in printedform and on the internet.
The publications are available free of
charge from the External Communica-tion Division. For a small fee to covercosts, a file which is updated monthlyand contains approximately 40,000time series published by the Bundes-bank can be obtained on magnetictape cassette or ZIP disk from the Divi-sion Statistical data processing, math-ematical methods. Orders should besent, in writing, to one of the ad-dresses listed on the reverse of the titlepage. Selected time series can also bedownloaded from the internet.
Annual Report
Monthly Report
For information on the articles published between
1990 and 2003 see the index attached to the Janu-
ary 2004 Monthly Report.
May 2003
– The economic scene in Germany in spring
2003
77*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004

June 2003
– The debate on deflationary risks in Germany
– Overall financial flows in 2002
– The development of German enterprises’ inter-
national capital links between end-1998 and
end-2001
– German results of euro-area bank lending
survey
– Monetary policy: how relevant are other policy-
makers? Bundesbank Spring Conference 2003
July 2003
– Economic and monetary policy cooperation
between the EU and the acceding countries
following the signature of the accession treaty
– The state of public finance in the EU acceding
countries
– Financial markets in central and east European
countries before accession to the EU
– Reports from the Economic Research Centre
August 2003
– The economic scene in Germany in summer
2003
September 2003
– The performance of German credit institutions
in 2002
– Price indicators for the housing market– Approaches to the validation of internal rating
systems
October 2003
– Germany’s competitive position and foreign
trade within the euro area
– The economic situation of small and medium-
sized enterprises in Germany
– Development and significance of education
expenditure in GermanyNovember 2003
– The economic scene in Germany in autumn
2003
– The monetary constitution under the Consti-
tution for Europe
December 2003
– Report on the stability of the German financial
system
– Stress testing the German banking system
January 2004
– The euro and prices two years on– Payment system oversight – a contribution to
the stability of the financial system and the effi-
ciency of payment operations
– The new MFI interest rate statistics – method-
ology for collecting the German data
February 2004
– The economic scene in Germany around the
turn of 2003-04
March 2004
– Public finances in crisis – the causes and the
need for action
– German balance of payments in 2003
April 2004
– Recent developments in the corporate bond
market
– Credit risk transfer instruments: their use by
German banks and aspects of financial stability
– The significance of information and communi-
cation technology
78*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004

Statistical Supplements to the
Monthly Report1
1 Banking statistics (monthly)
2 Capital market statistics (monthly)
3 Balance of payments statistics (monthly)
4 Seasonally adjusted business statistics (monthly)5 Exchange rate statistics (quarterly)
Special Publications
The monetary policy of the Bundesbank,
October 19952
Makro-/C246konometrisches Mehr-L/C228nder-Modell,November 1996
3
Europ/C228ische Organisationen und Gremien im Be-reich von W/C228hrung und Wirtschaft, May 1997
3
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 bis1989, August 1999
3
The market for German Federal securities,
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model: MEMMOD,
June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im Bereich
von W/C228hrung und Wirtschaft, March 20033
European economic and monetary union,February 2004
Special Statistical Publications
1 Banking statistics guidelines and customer clas-
sification, July 20034,52 Bankenstatistik Kundensystematik Firmenver-
zeichnisse, March 20043,6
3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen,
January 20003
4 Financial accounts for Germany 1991 to 2002,
September 20037
5 Annual accounts of west German enterprises
1971 to 1996, March 19991
6 Ratios from annual accounts of German enter-
prises between 1998 and 2000, March 20031, 7
7 Erl/C228uterungen zu den Leistungspositionen der
Zahlungsbilanz, September 20013
8 Balance of payments statistics of the Fed-
eral Republic of Germany, 2nd edition,February 1991
o
9 Securities deposits,
September 2003
10 International capital links,
June 20031, 7
11 Balance of payments by region,
August 2003
12 Technologische Dienstleistungen in der Zah-
lungsbilanz, May 20023
79*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
1Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data
contained in the German originals are available in English.
2Also available in French, Spanish, Russian and Chinese.
3Available in German only.
4Only the sections “Monthly Balance Sheet Statistics”,
“External position” and “Customer classification”(“Overall survey on sectoral classification”, “Survey on
breakdown by industry or activity” and “Explanatory
notes on the system of customer classification by industry
or activity”) are available in English.
5Current version only available on the internet at half-
yearly intervals.6Current version only available on the internet at quar-
terly intervals.7Available on the internet only.oNot available on the internet.

80*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
May 2004
Discussion Papers*
Series 1
Economic Research Centre
3/2004
Policy Instrument Choice and Non-CoordinatedMonetary Policy in Interdependent Economies
4/2004
Inflation Targeting Rules and Welfare in an Asym-metric Currency Area
5/2004
FDI versus cross-border financial services: The glo-balisation of German banks
6/2004
Clustering or competition? The foreign investment
behaviour of German banks
7/2004
PPP: a Disaggregated View
8/2004
A rental-equivalence index for owner-occupied
housing in West Germany 1985 to 1998
9/2004
The Inventory Cycle of the German Economy
10/2004
Evaluating the German Inventory Cycle Using Data
from the Ifo Business Survey
11/2004
Real-time data and business cycle analysis inGermanySeries 2
Banking and Financial Supervision
1/2003
Measuring the Discriminative Power of Rating
Systems
2/2003
Credit Risk Factor Modeling and the Basel II IRBApproach
1/2004
Forecasting Credit Portfolio Risk
Banking legislation
1 Bundesbank Act and Statute of the European
System of Central Banks and of the EuropeanCentral Bank, June 1998
2 Gesetz /C252ber das Kreditwesen, February 2001
3
2a Grundsatz I /C252ber die Eigenmittel der Institute,
January 20013
2b Grundsatz II /C252ber die Liquidit/C228t der Institute,
August 19993
7 Instruction sheet for the reporting of large ex-
posures and loans of 3 million Deutsche Markor more pursuant to sections 13 to 14 of the
Banking Act, September 1998
*Earlier Discussion Papers are available on the internet,
in some cases as abstracts.
For footnotes, see p 79*.

