MONTHLY REPORT
FEBRUARY MARCH APRIL MAY JUNE
2004
Vol 56
No 2

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
Deutsche Bundesbank
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 1460431 Frankfurt am MainGermany
Postal adress
Postfach 10 06 02
60006 Frankfurt am MainGermany
Tel +49 69 9566 -1Fax +49 69 5601071Telex 41227 within Germany
414431 from abroad
Internet http://www.bundesbank.deReproduction permitted only if source is stated.ISSN 0418 -8292The German original of this Monthly Report
went to press on 13 February 2004.Annual and weekly publishing schedules for
selected statistics of the Deutsche Bundes-bank can be downloaded from our website.The statistical data are also published on theinternet.
TheMonthly Report is published by the Deut-
sche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main, by vir-tue of section 18 of the Bundesbank Act. It isavailable to interested parties free of charge.
This is a translation of the original German-
language version, which is the sole authorita-tive text.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
ContentsThe economic scene in Germany
around the turn of 2003-04 5
Overview 6Global and European setting 10
New orders index for the euro areaand the EU 16
Monetary policy, capital markets and
banking business 21
Money market management andliquidity needs 22
Link between equity market and bondmarket performance 28
Lending rates in the euro area andin Germany 32
Bank lending survey 36
Economic conditions in Germany 39
The health reform and consumer prices 48
Foreign trade and payments 50Public finances 58
The next stage in the excessive deficitprocedure against Germany 67
Statistical Section 1*
Key economic data for the euro area 6*
Overall monetary survey in the euro area 8*Consolidated financial statementof the Eurosystem 16*Banks 20*Minimum reserves 42*Interest rates 43*Capital market 48*

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
4Public finances in Germany 52*
Economic conditions 60*External sector 67*
Overview of publications by the
Deutsche Bundesbank 77*

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
5The economic scene
in Germany around
the turn of 2003-04

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
6OverviewIn the wake of the global upturn
The upswing in the global economy has
gained momentum in recent months. At thesame time, it is now also more broadly based.Although economic developments continueto be driven by the USA (with an increase ingross domestic product (GDP) similar to theboom of 2000) and the East Asian emergingeconomies (led by the dynamically growingChinese economy), the upturn in the centraland east European countries in transition haslikewise strengthened and the economic re-covery in Japan has stabilised. Favourable fi-nancing terms are proving to be an importantmainstay of the current upswing. This appliesboth to the acquisition of new capital on theequity markets as well as to debt financing. Inaddition, important stimuli to global econom-ic recovery are being provided by the ongoingstructural changes in the corporate sector aswell as moderate price developments, whichare minimising purchasing power losses.
Owing to the dynamic global momentum,
which has surpassed previous expectations,the depreciation of the US dollar againstother major currencies has, up to now, notdisrupted the expansion process in the euroarea. The external stimuli fuelling the eco-nomic recovery are therefore still intact des-pite the fact that the US economy’s real netdemand for goods and services from the restof the world was already in decline in season-ally adjusted terms in the second half of2003. This points to a certain correction ofthe USA’s current account deficit, but therisks of excessive or abrupt exchange ratemovements as a result of global imbalancesGlobal
expansion is
gathering pace
Limited impact
of US dollar’s
depreciation

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
7will remain as long as the adjustment is not
also based on sustainable macroeconomicpolicies and structural reforms. However,when assessing exchange rate developmentsand their impact on the euro area it must beborne in mind that the trade-weighted ex-change rate of the euro has risen much lessthan its bilateral exchange rate against thedollar, which is often the focus of current dis-cussions. Whereas the euro rose by 20
1/C252%
against the US dollar in the course of 2003, itappreciated by “only” 11
1/C252% on a trade-
weighted average vis-/C224-vis the euro area’s12 most important partner currencies. Fur-thermore, it must be taken into account thatthe deterioration in competitiveness as a re-sult of appreciation is offset by income gainson the part of domestic economic agentsowing to improved terms of trade. Overall, inthe fourth quarter, euro-area GDP increasedby
1/C254% vis-/C224-vis the previous quarter.
Against the background of a virtually un-
changed rate of consumer price inflation of2% in the fourth quarter and balanced pricerisks, the Governing Council of the ECB leftthe Eurosystem’s key interest rates at theirprevailing low level during the period underreview. Monetary conditions therefore re-mained fairly generous in the euro area anddid not stand in the way of a real economicrecovery. The dynamics of M3 growth, whichremained high, weakened somewhat at theend of the period under review. Nonetheless,care must be taken to ensure that the liquid-ity overhang does not give rise to higherprices as the economic recovery progresses.The economic outlook has also brightened in
Germany. The situation in industry in particu-lar has improved perceptibly as measured bythe sharp increase in production and the re-newed rise in the number of orders received.Domestic demand picked up significantly atthe end of the period under review, althoughthe picture is still very mixed. The optimisticexpectations of the business community aswell as the overall improved underlying condi-tions suggest that the recovery process willcontinue.
The upturn in investment is particularly en-
couraging. Moreover, German exporters arecontinuing to benefit from global growth. Ex-port business in the fourth quarter remainedat largely the same high level that it hadreached in the third quarter, while at thesame time export expectations and orders re-ceived from abroad likewise increased notice-ably in comparison with the previous quarter.This shows that German suppliers are certain-ly able to withstand competitive pressures onthe price side and know how to exploit thegrowth potential of foreign markets. This isno doubt partly due to the fact that thecost advantages enjoyed by German supplierswithin the euro area and as a result of obtain-ing intermediate goods from new productionsites in central and eastern Europe and otherregions of the world form a certain counter-weight to the burdens arising from the euro’sappreciation. The fact that the German econ-omy has not grown more strongly underthese conditions is, in nominal terms, due tothe sharp rise in imports. For example, im-ports typically increase when foreign businesspicks up as the input of imports into export
Steady interest
rate policy
course with
balanced price
risksGradual cyclical
improvement in
Germany
Higher invest-
ment, buoyant
exports ...
... and imports

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
8goods is relatively high. Stock management
may also have played a role following thepronounced destocking of inventories in theprevious quarter. Moreover, the more attract-ive prices of imported goods were no doubtalso an important factor.
One of the weak points of the economic re-
covery process is the pronounced consumerrestraint at the present time. Real householdconsumption fell again in the fourth quarterand the sentiment indicated by consumerconfidence surveys deteriorated noticeably inDecember and January. Both the propensityto purchase and households’ assessment oftheir income prospects worsened around theturn of the year. Households’ real disposableincome was boosted by subdued price devel-opments. However, despite the announcedtax cuts, particularly the expected burdensarising from the health system reform andwidespread uncertainty about further reformsneeded to restore the financial sustainabilityof the social security systems are likely tohave curbed households’ propensity to con-sume. Rapid and cogent clarification concern-ing the further urgently required reformmeasures is therefore needed to give bothconsumers and investors greater planningcertainty beyond the current year and to re-gain their confidence and trust in the sustain-ability of public finances. The ongoing diffi-cult situation on the labour market is also cur-tailing consumer spending.
The demand for labour has continued to de-
cline. The number of persons in work fell by aseasonally adjusted 40,000 in the fourthquarter. However, as greater numbers of un-employed persons were concurrently deregis-
tered, above all as a result of increased re-views of their willingness and availability towork by the labour exchanges, registeredunemployment fell. Furthermore, when inter-preting the most recent figures, legislativechanges must also be taken into account. Forexample, persons taking part in aptitude testsand training measures were previously re-corded as being unemployed. Since the be-ginning of the year, they, like other partici-pants in labour market policy measures, areno longer counted as being unemployed.Without this change in the methodology, un-employment would have increased in Januaryin seasonally adjusted terms.
Prices remained virtually stable in the last
quarter. The appreciation of the euro alsoplayed a key role in this respect as it morethan compensated for the rise in oil and re-fined petroleum product prices denominatedin US dollars. The relatively sharp rise in theconsumer price index as provisionally calcu-lated by the Federal Statistical Office (0.4%on the month in seasonally adjusted terms inJanuary) should be viewed above all in con-nection with the increased charges under thehealth system reform which, strictly speaking,are not attributable to an increase in health-care prices but rather to a change in health-care financing. Excluding healthcare, theyear-on-year inflation rate fell from 1.2% to0.6%.
Public finances are still a matter of concern.
Although the budget deficits of central, stateand local government fell in the fourth quar-ter of 2003 year on year, this was largely at-
Consumption
still weak ...
... and declining
employmentFavourable
price climate
The poor state
of public
finances ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
9tributable to sizeable privatisation proceeds.
In 2003 as a whole, the deficits are likely tohave amounted to 370 billion, thereby ex-
ceeding the already high figure for 2002 by310 billion. Sluggish tax receipts were accom-
panied by a marked increase in expenditure.The deficit of the social security funds stillamounted to around 36 billion (compared
with 38
1/C252billion in 2002) even though the
contribution rates and the income ceiling forcontributions were raised markedly. Accord-ing to provisional figures from the FederalStatistical Office, the deficit ratio increased by
1/C252percentage point to 4.0% in 2003 in the
wake of the muted macroeconomic momen-tum. Most of this is of a structural nature,however. The general government deficitcould decrease significantly this year despitecomprehensive tax cuts. However, the declineto 3
1/C254% of GDP as expected by the Federal
Government requires comprehensive cost-cutting measures at all levels of government.The scenario also contains risks, not least
with regard to the partly uncertain financialimpact of various fiscal policy measures.
It is of crucial importance that the deficit ratio
be reduced this year and that it is broughtbelow the 3% deficit ceiling next year so asto limit the loss of credibility suffered by theStability and Growth Pact as the central fiscalpolicy instrument for supporting and protect-ing a stable monetary union. There is nocause to alter the pact. If applied consistently,it is suitable for ensuring sound public fi-nances and, in its current form, also affordssufficient flexibility, although its implementa-tion could undoubtedly be improved. Espe-cially given the positive growth effects ofsound government finances and the foresee-able demographic developments, the obliga-tion to ensure a balanced budget in thecourse of the economic cycle must be fulfilledas quickly as possible.
... calls for
comprehensive
consolidation ...... and no
changes to be
made to the
Stability and
Growth Pact

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
10Global and European
settingWorld economic activity
The global economic recovery continued at a
brisk pace in the past few months and hasnow entered into a rather robust and broadly-based upswing. The USA and the East Asianemerging economies remain at the heart ofthe upswing. The cyclical upturn of the worldeconomy also benefited from the fact thatthe Japanese economy continued to grow inthe fourth quarter, as indicated by the avail-able cyclical data. The euro area maintainedthe moderate recovery path embarked uponin the second quarter. However, it still lagsconsiderably behind the USA in terms ofgrowth and this gap is not likely to diminishthis year according to forecasts by inter-national institutions. Starting from an alreadyfairly high level, the economies of central andeast European countries in transition grew atan even faster pace. The Latin Americaneconomies, which benefited in particularfrom rising demand for commodities and theattendant distinct rise in prices, likewise seemto have bottomed out. Most of these econ-omies, however, remain exposed to consider-able financial vulnerability and thus also tothe threat of a cyclical setback.
Continued favourable financial conditions
promoted fast-paced global economicgrowth in the past few months. Rising cor-porate earnings and an increased risk appe-tite caused international share prices to risefurther, thereby noticeably improving manycompanies’ scope for raising new capital. Inaddition, debt financing remained inexpen-sive. The quite sharp depreciation of the USdollar against major currencies hardly made aWorld economy
undergoing
upswing

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
11dent in the upswing, either on a global scale
or from the point of view of the countriesconcerned. However, in the past few weeksUS-dollar-denominated prices on crude oilmarkets have almost returned to their highlevels of the previous year, which had beenaffected by the imminent Iraq war. It is dol-larised countries and countries whose curren-cies are pegged to the dollar, though, whichare being primarily affected by the high oilprices. In early February these prices, convert-ed to euro, were around one-fifth down onthe year.
Fourth-quarter industrial production in indus-
trial countries was up by an estimated 1
3/C254%
in seasonally adjusted terms on both thequarter and the year. Its average growth ratefor 2003 was
3/C254% following a decline of
31/C252% in total in the two preceding years. In
the past few months, inflation developmentsin industrial countries remained relatively sub-dued. Average consumer price inflation in theNovember-December 2003 period, at 1.4%,was lower than in any period since the thirdquarter of 2002. Excluding Japan, which isstill experiencing slight deflation, inflationwas at 1.9%.
Among the emerging markets, the Chinese
economy has experienced particularly dynam-ic growth. There is already mounting concernthat the economy could overheat. In the lastquarter of 2003, real GDP , according to offi-cial statistics, was 10% up on the year. Aver-age growth for 2003 was 9%. Fixed capitalformation went up by no less than one-fifth.It is also noteworthy that foreign trade hascontinued its strong growth, which is over-1995=100, seasonally adjusted, log scale
1995 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 2003JapanUnited KingdomEuro
areaof which
UnitedStatesSelected
countries
 1Three-month moving average
MonthlyIndustrial production *
in selected countries
Sources: National statistics, Eurostat and
the Bundesbank’s own calculations. — *In-
cluding mining and energy, excluding
construction. — 1In addition to euro-area
countries and countries shown, the selected
countries are Denmark, Norway, Sweden,
Switzerland and Canada; weighted withthe respective share in gross value added of
industry in those countries in 1995.
Deutsche Bundesbank108
104
100
96
92108
104
100
96104120
100116
96112
96108
104116132
112128
108124
104120
100116
98120
116
112
108
104
100
98
Fourth-quarter
industrial
production
and prices
Chinese
economy
booming

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
12whelming evidence that China’s economy is
becoming a new centre of gravitation in EastAsia. As an average of the past ten years, realGDP in China has gone up by 8
3/C254% as against
31/C254% in the USA and 2% in the euro area. If
this growth gap were to remain, Chineseoverall economic output – valued in terms ofpurchasing power parities, which take ac-count of differences in price levels betweencountries – could even overtake the USA by2013.
1However, Chinese per capita income
would still be a mere one-fifth of that of theUSA owing to the vastly larger populationacross which the volume of overall outputwould be spread.
According to initial estimates, aggregate out-
put in the USA rose by 1% in the last quarterof 2003 after adjustment for seasonal andworking-day variations. This represents ayear-on-year rise of 4
1/C254%. In 2003 as a
whole, real GDP grew by just over 3%, thehighest growth rate since the last boom year,which was 2000. In the fourth quarter, thestrongest contribution to growth came onceagain from private consumption, which wasup by a seasonally adjusted
1/C252% on the third
quarter’s level, which had been very highowing to special factors. However, this was atthe expense of the private saving ratio, whichwent down by
3/C254percentage point to 1.5%.
Industrial fixed capital formation was a sea-sonally adjusted 1
3/C254% higher than in the
third quarter and 61/C252% up vis-/C224-vis the same
period in the previous year. Private residentialconstruction likewise provided expansionarystimuli. Real expenditure on new housinggrew by 10% on the year; since the end of2001, it has risen by nearly one-fifth. Inven-tories grew once again in the fourth quarter
after having been depleted in the third quar-ter.
Real exports joined private consumption in
the last quarter of the year as the most im-portant growth-sustaining factor. They grewby a seasonally adjusted 4
1/C252% (as defined in
the national accounts). Exports of goods toEast Asian emerging markets and the centraland east European countries in transitiongrew particularly strongly. A renewed slow-down in import growth (of 2
3/C254%) caused a
further improvement in real net exports, con-tinuing a trend which began in the third quar-ter. The nominal foreign balance reacted insimilar fashion. This indicates that the currentaccount deficit declined slightly again in thefourth quarter, although exact figures for thisperiod are not yet available. It therefore ap-pears that the reduction in the external dis-equilibrium (caused by the depreciation ofthe US dollar) seems to have already begunto take hold. However, the downside forthose countries whose economies are sweptalong by the USA is that the US economy’sreal net demand for goods and services fromthe rest of the world was in decline in season-ally adjusted terms in the second half of 2003for the first time in a long time.
The strong fourth-quarter economic growth
in the United States – as in the precedingquarters – was associated with high product-ivity growth. Seasonally adjusted non-farmemployment accordingly rose only sluggishly.
1See also A Maddison, Chinese Economic Performance
in the Long Run, OECD Development Centre Studies ,
1998, pp 96-97.USA

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
13In January, however, more jobs were created
than in the fourth quarter. At the end of theperiod under review, the seasonally adjustedunemployment rate was 5.6%,
1/C252percentage
point lower than September’s level. Pricesgrew moderately in the United States overthe past few months. Consumer inflation was1.9% in December; its average for the yearwas 2.3% owing to the sharp price rises inthe first quarter. The personal consumptiondeflator (excluding food and energy), whichis the US Federal Reserve’s preferred measure,paints an even more favourable picture: inDecember it was only 0.7% higher than ayear earlier.
Japanese fourth-quarter industrial production
was up by a seasonally adjusted 3
1/C252% on the
quarter and by 33/C254% on the year. The aver-
age growth rate for 2003 was 3%, yet thisdid not compensate for even one-half of thesharp decline in the two preceding years.Aggregate output, for which data are not yetavailable, is also expected to have risen per-ceptibly in the last quarter of 2003. Rapidgrowth in foreign demand gave a renewedboost to the Japanese economy. The remark-able thing is that, in the first eleven monthsof 2003, four-fifths of total growth was ac-counted for by nominal goods exports intrade with China (including Hong Kong). Thedomestic economy was again unable to keepup with the rapid pace of export growth.Buoyant domestic demand for machinery andequipment certainly points to an uninterrupt-ed rise in commercial investment. However,this was offset by continued sluggishness inhousing construction and a decline in govern-ment investment. In addition, consumer de-mand – expressed in terms of retail sales –
stagnated in the fourth quarter at the de-pressed level of the previous period. In the pastfew months, however, the conditions for amoderate consumption revival have improved.In December, the seasonally adjusted un-employment rate went down by 0.3 percent-age point to 4.9% and the decline in labour in-come is gradually petering out. At the turn of2003-04, consumer prices were 0.5% lowerthan at the same time a year earlier. It must betaken into account that part of the price de-cline is associated with the appreciation-relatedimprovement in the terms of trade.
In the fourth quarter, the UK economy, ac-
cording to initial calculations, grew by justunder 1% on the quarter after adjustment forseasonal and working-day variations. At2
1/C252%, year-on-year growth was at its strong-
est rate since early 2001. Average real GDPgrowth for the year 2003 was just over 2%.This means that the United Kingdom, alongwith the catching-up countries of Greece andSpain, is likely to have been the EU’s top per-former. UK economic growth was drivenonce again by the services sector, whereasmanufacturing output was down by
1/C254%o n
the quarter after seasonal adjustment. On thedemand side, private consumption retainedits role as the driving force of the economy. Inthe fourth quarter, retail sales grew by a sea-sonally adjusted 1
1/C252% on the quarter and by
31/C252% on the year. Consumption benefited
from both a positive labour market situationand a calm price climate. The HarmonisedIndex of Consumer Prices (HICP) inflationrate, on which the UK inflation target of 2%is now based, was 1.3% at the end of theJapanUnited
Kingdom

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
14period under review. It averaged 1.4% for
2003. The national Retail Price Index exclud-ing mortgage interest payments (RPIX), whichis methodologically different from HICP andincludes the costs of owner-occupied hous-ing, was 2.6% in December.
Macroeconomic trends in the euro area
Real euro-area GDP rose by
1/C254% in the fourth
quarter of 2003 after seasonal adjustment,according to the Flash Estimate; this repre-sents a year-on-year rise of
1/C252%. Because of
the weak start in early 2003 and the stagna-tion which lasted until mid-year, annual aver-age growth, at just under
1/C252%, was at its
weakest level since 1993. Despite the unavail-ability of more detailed data on the individualexpenditure components at present, domes-tic demand is likely to have been the mainpillar of GDP growth at the end of 2003. Thebalance of payments data available up toNovember indicate that imports as defined inthe national accounts rose more sharply thanexports after adjustment for price and sea-sonal variations and that real net exportswere therefore on the decline.
In a sectoral analysis, industry gave an import-
ant boost to the cyclical recovery in the euroarea, with seasonally adjusted industrial pro-duction in October-November just under 1%higher than in the third quarter. This is con-firmed by the new orders index, which waspublished for the first time in November 2003(see notes on pp 16-17). According to theindex, in October-November, the value oforders in the euro-area manufacturing sectorrose by a seasonally adjusted 2
1/C252%f r o m
third-quarter levels. Seasonally adjusted cap-acity utilisation in the manufacturing sector isexpected to have risen in the fourth quarter,too. The decline in January vis-/C224-vis Octoberfigures shown by the current EU survey isbased on a statistical break in the correspond-ing series for France and should therefore beinterpreted with caution.
2
The EU survey showed a renewed seasonallyadjusted increase in industry confidence inJanuary following a moderate decline in De-cember, which is an indication of a continu-ation of the cyclical recovery in the euro-areaindustrial sector. The main reason was thatproduction expectations improved distinctlywhile assessments of order books and ware-house stocks remained unchanged. In thiscontext it is also worth noting that, accordingto the recently published results of theOctober-November 2003 investment test forthe EU, euro-area industrial enterprises areplanning to increase their investment budgetsby a price-adjusted 2%. This contrasts withan aggregate decrease of 12% in real ex-penditure on new plant and equipment in2002-03 according to the test. In January, theconsumer confidence indicator held firm at itslow level of the two preceding months.Households’ persistent scepticism in assessingtheir financial outlook played a role in thisrespect.
2According to European Commission data, the quarterly
survey of capacity utilisation in France was brought into
line with the harmonised EU programme with effect from
the first quarter of 2004. This led to a statistical break in
the series for France, which was also reflected in the
aggregated series for the EU and the euro area.GDP growth in
the fourth
quarter of 2003
Industrial
activity on
the riseEU survey

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
15Euro-area unemployment hardly rose any fur-
ther in the last three months of 2003. At8.8%, the standardised unemployment ratewas just as high as in the two preceding quar-ters in seasonally adjusted terms. This figurewas only 0.2 percentage point up on theyear. However, it clearly surpassed the cyclicaltrough of 8.0% reached in the second quar-ter of 2001. The recent stability in the euro-area labour market situation owes somethingto labour market policy reform in Germanyand Italy, to name just one factor.
In the last quarter of 2003, consumer prices
rose at a seasonally adjusted 0.5%, a pacesimilar to that of the third quarter. This corres-ponds to an annualised rate of around 2%.The year-on-year increase was likewise 2%;the result is the same even if the volatile com-ponents (energy and unprocessed foods) areexcluded. This means that euro-area con-sumer inflation at the end of 2003 had stabil-ised at the upper limit of price stability de-fined by the European System of CentralBanks. Of the key components of the Har-monised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP),processed foods showed the strongest in-crease in seasonally adjusted terms at the endof the period under review – especially owingto a renewed strong tobacco tax hike inFrance. Unprocessed food prices continued torise sharply owing to the after-effects of thehot and dry summer weather. The prices ofindustrial goods, however, changed only verylittle; energy even became cheaper. The rateof price increase for services held firm at thelevel of the two preceding quarters.In January 2004, euro-area consumer prices
(according to Eurostat’s Flash Estimate) roseby 2.0% on the year. Excluding the price ef-fects of the health system, reform in Germanymight have lowered the euro-area inflationby an estimated 0.2 percentage point.
The spread of euro-area inflation rates has
continued to diminish. The gap between thecountry with the lowest inflation rate andthose countries with the highest rates fellfrom nearly 3 percentage points in the thirdquarter to around 2 percentage points in thefourth quarter of last year. This spread hadbeen as high as just under 3
1/C252percentage
points in early 2003. Other measures of thespread, such as the standard deviation, con-firm this decline in inflation differentials. A keyfactor in the convergence of euro-area price- 1 0123 % points2003 Q4
2002 Q4Finland
Germany
Austria
Belgium
Netherlands
Luxembourg
FrancePortugal
Italy
Spain
Greece
IrelandEuro-area
inflation differentials *
* Change in the Harmonised Index of Con-
sumer Prices (HICP) in 2003 Q4 from 2002 Q4
and in 2002 Q4 from 2001 Q4; deviation of
national inflation rates from the euro-area
average.
Deutsche BundesbankLabour market
Consumer
prices
Inflation
differentials

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
16Deutsche BundesbankNew orders index for the euro area and the EU
In late November 2003 Eurostat published an industrial 
new orders index for the euro area and the EU as a 
whole for the ﬁ  rst time.1 The monthly data go back to 
January 1996 for the euro area and January 1998 for the 
EU15. This has added an important demand indicator to 
European business cycle statistics. In Germany, incoming 
orders have already been statistically recorded in the stat-
is tical publication Monatsbericht für Betriebe im verar-
beitenden Gewerbe  (Monthly Report for manufacturing 
enterprises) since 1977. 
The new orders index designed by Eurostat measures the 
value of new orders for industrial products in the report-
ing month relative to the monthly average of the base 
year (currently 2000). New orders also include produc-
tion-related services such as assembly and maintenance. 
However, the index calculation comprises only those eco-
nomic sectors in which order-based production is signiﬁ  -
cant. This “manufacturing working on orders”, as Euro-
stat calls it, accounts for 62.6% of total manufacturing 
turnover in the euro area and 62.9% in the EU15.2 The 
manufacture of transport equipment has the greatest 
weight in the index (22% in the euro area), followed by 
the “manufacture of electrical and optical equipment” 
at 19% and by the manufacture of basic metals and the 
manufacture of chemicals and chemical products at 17% each. The index does not include, for example, mining 
and the manufacture of food products and beverages, in 
which manufacturing is almost never order-based.The index is currently calculated on the basis of data 
from nine EU member states (eight of which are euro-
area countries). Greece and Ireland do not provide data 
on new orders at present; Austria will begin to provide 
such information in March 2004. Although new orders 
data from the United Kingdom, Sweden and the Neth-
erlands are available, they still contain cancelled orders, 
which violates the provisions of a Commission Regula-
tion implementing the Council Regulation. These data 
are not included in the calculation of aggregates for the 
EU and the euro area for reasons of statistical consist-
ency. In the euro area, 35.8% of new orders in the base 
year (2000) were accounted for by Germany, with 20.8% 
by France and 17.9% by Italy.
The member states provide unadjusted ﬁ  gures which 
are aggregated by Eurostat to form total ﬁ  gures for the 
EU15 and the euro area and then subjected to a special 
seasonal adjustment procedure (using TRAMO/SEATS). 
Germany also provides seasonally adjusted data. For that 
reason, the seasonally adjusted growth rates for the euro 
area and the EU15 might deviate from the weighted 
growth rates of the member states. The weights and the 
base year are adjusted at ﬁ  ve-year intervals. The aggre-
gated new orders statistics are published around seven 
weeks after the end of the reporting month.
Unlike the German new orders statistics, the new EU15 
and euro-area statistics do not make a  distinction 
1 See Eurostat, €uro-indicators, News Release 135/2003, 26 November 
2003. — 2 The main aggregate “manufacturing working on orders” encompasses, pursuant to Council Regulation (EC) No 1165/98 of 
19 May 1998, NACE Rev. 1 divisions 17,18, 21, 24 and 27-35. — 3 In 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
17between domestic and foreign orders. Moreover, new 
orders are shown only as values; no volume series exists. 
This is because in most of Germany’s neighbouring 
countries only producer prices for domestic sales are cal-
culated statistically, but not producer prices for foreign 
sales, also known as export prices.3
New orders data are often used as an early indicator of 
production or turnover trends. However, studies have 
shown that the new indicator does not provide exact 
information about when and to what extent new orders 
are reﬂ  ected in manufacturing production and sales. 
This may be associated with varying intervals between 
orders, production and invoicing, even within a given 
sector of industry. In addition, replies to surveys often 
feature a blurring of the distinction between sales from 
warehouse stocks, which are classiﬁ  able as turnover, and 
new orders, as well as a parallelism of manufacturing to 
order and ongoing manufacturing (which is accordingly 
not based on new orders) in some companies.
The available monthly data show that new orders have 
only a weak leading indicator property with regard to 
production. It must be noted, however, that the new 
orders index records manufacturing industries working 
on orders only, whereas the production index refers to the entire manufacturing industry. The correlation coef-
ﬁ cient – in terms of the change in the seasonally adjusted 
monthly values (in logarithms) for the euro area – at 0.7 is highest for the contemporaneous relationship of the 
two variables. It is only slightly higher if quarterly values 
are used in place of monthly values in order to make the 
initial data smoother. However, the two data series seem 
to share a longer-term trend which is determined by the 
trend in new orders.
In summary, the new orders index, despite its limited 
power as a leading indicator, can still provide useful additional information for ongoing cycle analysis in the 
EU and the euro area.
these countries, price adjustment of exports, such as for the national 
accounts, is done using average foreign trade values.2000 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly, log scale
New orders (values)Oct -
Nov
Industrial productionNew orders and industrial
production in the euro area
105
95
90
85
80100 --
1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
18movements was the slowdown in inflation
rates in some countries which had previouslybeen characterised by above-average rates ofprice increase. Inflation in Portugal and theNetherlands fell by no less than 1.5 percent-age points on the year. It fell by 1.4 percent-age points in Ireland and by 1.2 in Spain. Bycontrast, the inflation rate in Germany re-mained unchanged; in France, however, itrose by 0.4 percentage point owing to thesharp tobacco tax hike in 2003.
Exchange rates
Events on the foreign exchange markets were
marked by high exchange rate volatility at theturn of 2003-04. Renewed doubts about theability to finance the high US current accountdeficit put the US dollar under downwardpressure over long periods. At the same time,the euro – along with other currencies – post-ed significant gains. The euro-US dollar ratewas reversed to a degree in mid-January2004 when several ECB Governing Councilmembers expressed concern about the sharpexchange rate fluctuations.
The euro began to surge against the US dollar
in the second week of November and con-tinued to do so without any major interrup-tions for over two months. Data published atthe time indicating that those net capital im-ports resulting from long-term securitiestransactions had fallen in September to lessthan one-tenth of their previous month’s levelapparently raised fears in the markets thatinternational investors could be turning theirbacks on the United States. Such concernswere also engendered by the fact that the US
growth advantage and the large budget def-icit indicated that permanent relief was no-where in sight for the US current account def-icit. They received new impetus in Decemberwhen figures showed that securities-basednet capital imports in October once again fellfar short of their average of the precedingmonths.
The fact that yields on long-term government
bonds in the euro area regained a clear leadover those on US government bonds as ofmid-November also contributed to the USdollar’s weakness against the euro. The inter-est rate differential at the short end has al-ready favoured the euro for nearly threeyears. Finally, there were mounting reportsduring this period that an economic upswingin the euro-area countries was gainingstrength, which lent the euro an additionalboost. The single currency’s rise encouragedmarkets to expect further gains, which led toa self-perpetuating cycle causing the euro toreach one all-time high after another inDecember and early January.
After the euro-US dollar exchange rate had
hit its hitherto highest mark of over US$1.28(corresponding to a US dollar-DM rate ofaround DM1.52 to the US dollar, last reachedin November 1996) in mid-January 2004, anexchange rate correction took place. Appar-ently a lower valuation prevailed temporarilyon the markets following repeated officialstatements indicating that excessive ex-change rate volatility was undesirable. In add-ition, a steady stream of positive businessdata from the USA caused the US Federal Re-
Highly volatile
foreign
exchange
markets
The euro’s
exchange rate
against the US
dollar, ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
19serve to modify its assessment of monetary
policy. As this report went to press, however,the euro was back up to US$1.28. This was9% higher than its initial exchange rate and13% higher than the average rate for 2003.
Much like against the US dollar, the euro
gained against the yen since November aswell. Although there were signs of an im-provement in the Japanese economic outlookduring that period, which boosted the yen,Japan’ s monetary authorities repeatedly em-ployed massive intervention on foreign ex-change markets to resist (although ultimatelywith limited success) the upward pressure onthe yen against the US dollar, thus passingpart of the adjustment burden on to the euro.All in all, Japan’ s foreign reserves swelled byan estimated figure of over US$100 billion be-tween late October and late January. In add-ition, the funding for such forex interventionwas significantly expanded in December2003, a move interpreted by the markets as asignal of dogged resistance to the yen’ s appre-ciation. Despite the euro’s appreciation, theeuro-yen rate remained below its high of lastMay and, at the end of the period under re-view, the euro was trading at ¥135, 1 % high-er than at the beginning of monetary union.
Compared with its fluctuations against the
US dollar and the yen, the euro’s movementagainst the pound sterling remained withinrelatively narrow bounds. After a period ofeuro strength in November and early Decem-ber, the euro-pound sterling rate went backdown, especially following the turn of the year.The relative strength of the pound sterling –also against other major currencies – is asso-ciated with the bright outlook for the UK econ-
omy, which ultimately also led the Bank of Eng-land to raise interest rates in February. At theend of the reporting period, the euro wasworth £0.68. This was around 5% less than atthe beginning of monetary union in 1999.
Influenced by the movement of its exchange
rate against the US dollar and the yen, theeuro also rose perceptibly as of mid-Novem-Daily data, log scale
US$
£¥
Nominal effective exchange rate 2
1999 Q1 = 100
103.64  1... pound sterling
£0.7110 1... yen
¥133.73  1Against the ...
... US dollar
US$1.1789  1Exchange rate of the euro
1Initial level at the beginning of monetary
union on 4 January 1999. — 2According to
ECB calculations, against the currencies of
12 countries.
Deutsche Bundesbank106
103
100
97
940.72
0.70
0.68
0.66
0.64139
136
133
130
127
1241.27
1.24
1.21
1.18
1.15
1.12
1.09
1.06
1.03
JF M A M JJAS O N DJF M
2003 2004... against the
yen ...
... and against
the pound
sterling
Effective
exchange rate
of the euro

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
20ber 2003 on a weighted average against the
currencies of the euro area’s 12 most import-ant trading partners. Beginning in mid-Janu-ary, it had to relinquish some of its gains,however. As this report went to press, it wasaround 2% higher than at the beginning ofmonetary union, yet 5% higher than its aver-age level for 2003.
On the one hand, the euro’s appreciation has
improved the euro area’s terms of trade, re-ducing cost and price pressure in the euroarea and, along with many other factors, en-abling low central bank interest rates. On theother hand, the euro’s rise over the past twoyears has put a strain on exporters through-
out the euro area, especially since the euro’sreal effective exchange rate, the calculationof which takes into account the varying ratesof inflation in the euro area and its partnercountries, has now surpassed its post-1990long-term average. For Germany, the com-petitive situation is somewhat more advanta-geous because its relatively favourable costand price movements compared with the restof the euro area have given domestic sellerssomething against which their competitivelosses vis-/C224-vis companies from non-euro-area countries can be offset (see pp 50-57).
Impact of the
euro’s rise

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
21Monetary policy,
capital markets and
banking businessInterest rate policy and the
money markets
The Governing Council of the European Cen-
tral Bank did not change the Eurosystem’s keyinterest rates in the past few months. Allmain refinancing operations were conductedas variable rate tenders with a minimum bidrate of 2%, and the interest rates on the mar-ginal refinancing facility and the deposit facil-ity were left unchanged at 3% and 1% re-spectively. The steady interest rate policycourse was based on the assessment that theoutlook for price stability in the euro areawould remain favourable. While in the finalquarter the leading economic indicators andconfidence indicators again pointed to amoderate recovery in the real economy, theongoing sharp rise in the external value ofthe euro and the continued low level of cap-acity utilisation seem to have limited the risksto price stability emanating from the realeconomy. This assessment is currently alsosupported by monetary indicators.
Market participants had expected the Gov-
erning Council’s steady interest rate policycourse. In the quarter under review, the over-night interest rate (Eonia) remained fairlyclose to the minimum bid rate on the main re-financing operations. The only major devi-ations were limited to the end of each reservemaintenance period and the last week in De-cember, when financial institutions, generallyfor accounting purposes, endeavour to hold agreater amount of liquidity. By contrast, theinterest rates on longer-term contracts in themoney market were not as steady in thefourth quarter. In the light of market partici-Eurosystem
interest rates
unchanged and
stable outlook
for prices
Money market
interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
22Money market management and liquidity needs
Owing to changes in the autonomous factors, there
was an overall increase of 522.8 billion (see adjacent
table) in credit institutions’ demand for central bankbalances in the past three reserve maintenance periods.The main reason for this development was the usualseasonal increase of banknotes in circulation in the pre-Christmas period. By contrast, the changes in generalgovernments’ deposits with the Eurosystem createdmore liquidity. Although these deposits rose sharply inthe November-December period, they fell so markedlyin the December-January period that this added 511.3
billion in liquidity in the period under review. For themost part, changes in net foreign reserves and otherfactors offset each other. To a large extent, the changesin these two variables are a result of the quarterly valu-ation adjustment on 31 December 2003.
The Eurosystem offset the changes in the autonomous
factors by adjusting the volumes of the main refinan-cing operations; these were sharply expanded in theNovember-December period, resulting in a total in-crease in monetary policy operations of 524.5 billion.
The volume of longer-term refinancing operationsremained unchanged. Over the Christmas/New Yearperiod, for which it is difficult to forecast how theautonomous factors will develop, the Eurosystem didnot have to use fine-tuning operations to manageliquidity in the money market.
Short-term liquidity fluctuations were offset smoothly
by using the standing facilities. The largest recourse tothe marginal lending facility on a single day took placeon 23 December 2003, totalling 511.6 billion (Bundes-
bank: 55.0 billion). The credit institutions thus pro-
cured additional liquidity for the Christmas period.However, use of this facility was markedly down on theprevious year, when on 23 December 2002 recourse tothe marginal lending facility totalled 518.6 billion
(Bundesbank: 515.1 billion).
In total, credit institutions’ balances with the Eurosys-
tem increased by 51.7 billion, which is due to an in-
crease in the minimum reserve requirement of 51.5 bil-
lion and, to a lesser extent, to credit institutions’ some-what higher overcompliance with these requirements.
By and large, the overnight interest rate on the euro-
area interbank market, measured against the averageEonia rate, remained close to the minimum bid rate forthe main refinancing operations of 2.00%. Towardsthe end of the reserve maintenance periods, however,the Eonia sank perceptibly below the minimum bidrate. By contrast, there was only one major upward de-viation between 23 December, when a level of 2.46%was attained, and 31 December. This reflected theusual slight liquidity squeeze during the holidays andaround the end of the year.
1For longer-term trends and the contribution of the
Deutsche Bundesbank, see pages 14* and 15* of the Statis-tical Section of the Monthly Report .— 2Including end-
of-quarter valuation adjustments with no impact onliquidity. — 3Including monetary policy operations con-cluded in stage two and still outstanding in stage three
(outright transactions and the issuance of debt certificates)as well as financial assets not connected with monetarypolicy.
Deutsche BundesbankFactors determining bank liquidity1
5billion; calculated on the basis of
daily averages of the maintenance periods
2003-04
Item24 Oct
to23 Nov24 Nov
to23 Dec24 Dec
to23 Jan
I Provision (+) or absorption
(–) of central bankbalances by
1 Change in banknotes in
circulation (increase: –) – 3.9 – 16.7 – 11.5
2 Change in general
government depositswith the Eurosystem(increase: –) + 4.9 – 13.6 + 20.0
3 Change in net foreign
reserves
2+ 0.5 – 1.7 – 10.9
4 Other factors2, 3+1 . 1 +2 . 3 +6 . 7
Total + 2.6 – 29.7 + 4.3
II Monetary policy oper-
ations of the Eurosystem
1 Open market
operations
(a) Main refinancing
operations – 2.6 + 29.7 – 2.9
(b) Longer-term
refinancingoperations – 0.0 + 0.0 € 0.0
(c) Other operations – – –
2 Standing facilities
(a) Marginal lending
facility – 0.0 + 0.5 – 0.3
(b) Deposit facility
(increase: –) – 0.1 + 0.2 – 0.0
Total – 2.7 + 30.4 – 3.2
III Change in credit institu-
tions’ current accounts(I + II) – 0.1 + 0.8 + 1.0
IV Change in the minimum
reserve requirement(increase: –) + 0.2 – 0.7 – 1.0

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
23pants’ growing expectations of interest rate
increases last autumn, the longer-termmoney market rates initially carried increas-ingly higher premiums. At the beginning ofDecember, for example, the 12-month Euri-bor was temporarily just under 40 basispoints above its rate at the beginning of thequarter. Admittedly, it has declined markedlyagain since then. Overall, however, longer-term interest rate expectations on the moneymarket look set to rise.
Monetary developments in the euro area
The money stock M3 increased sharply in the
euro area in the fourth quarter, still far fasterthan appropriate for financing inflation-freeeconomic growth. Monetary expansion was,however, perceptibly lower than in the firsthalf of the year. At year-end the seasonallyadjusted annualised three-month growth rateof M3 was just under 6%. The three-monthmoving average of annual growth rates wentdown from 8.2% for the July-Septemberperiod to 7.6% for the October-Decemberperiod. Investments in instruments not in-cluded in the money stock M3 clearly con-tinued to become increasingly attractive. Inline with more optimistic economic expect-ations, equity prices rose again in the fourthquarter. Capital market rates also went upduring the fourth quarter. Consequently, theopportunity costs of holding cash also in-creased. All in all, the slowdown in monetaryexpansion indicates that investors’ preferencefor liquidity has gradually begun to wane.However, if this process were to stop and, atthe same time, the considerable cash hold-ings were to be used increasingly for con-
sumption spending and investment, priceswould be at risk. Bearing this in mind, monet-ary developments must continue to be ob-served closely.
Of the individual components of M3, over-
night deposits rose substantially in the fourthquarter. Their seasonally adjusted annualisedgrowth rate fell, however, from just under10% in the third quarter to 6% in the quarterunder review. Cash holdings continued to ex-pand strongly at a rate of 26%. Overall, themoney stock in the narrow monetary aggre-gate M1 therefore grew by a good 8
1/C252%i n
the fourth quarter. Although there was only amoderate increase in other short-term bankdeposits (excluding overnight deposits), in-vestment in the marketable financial instru-Seasonally adjusted, annual percentage change
%
Reference value: 4½%Three-month moving average
MonthlyGrowth of the money
stock M3 in the euro area
Deutsche Bundesbank9
87
6
54
3
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003Monetary
expansion
remains strong
but is slowing
Components
of the money
stock

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
24ments included in the money stock M3 grew
considerably in seasonally adjusted terms. Aswas the case in the previous quarter, moneymarket fund shares were in particular de-mand. In the period under review, repo trans-actions, money market paper and short-termbank debt securities also posted markedgrowth. In the previous quarters these instru-ments had still mainly been on the decline.
As regards balance sheet counterparts, lend-
ing to enterprises and households in the euroarea, in particular, stimulated monetarygrowth in the period under review. There wasa particularly steep rise in loans to the privatesector. At an annualised three-month rate ofjust over 6%, these instruments expandedsomewhat more strongly than the monetaryaggregate M3. Favourable financing condi-tions together with expectations of an eco-nomic recovery are likely to have againprompted private non-banks to borrowfunds.
In addition, monetary financial institutions
(MFIs) granted a perceptible volume of lend-ing to general government in the euro area.In non-seasonally adjusted terms there wasan increase of 324.7 billion in this lending in
the October-December period. There was aparticular surge in loans to government au-thorities (+ 321.4 billion) in the quarter under
review. The distinct reduction in central gov-ernment deposits also stimulated monetarygrowth in the fourth quarter.
Foreign payment transactions had no expan-
sionary effects on the money stock M3 in theperiod under review. After the elimination of 5 billion, seasonally adjusted,
change over the period indicated
 5 billionContraction ExpansionBalance sheet counterparts 1
Loans to
enterprises
and households
Public sector
borrowing2
Net external
asset position
Monetary capital
formation
Other
counterparts
of M33Money stock
July to Sep 2003
Increase in M3
Oct to Dec 2003Euro-area M3 and its
balance sheet counterparts
1Changes in balance sheet counterparts are
shown in terms of whether they expand (+)
or contract (−) the money stock. — 2Bank
loans to general government less euro-area
general government deposits and  holdings
of securities issued by the MFI sector. —3Calculated as errors and omissions from
the remaining items of the consolidated
balance sheet of the MFI sector.
Deutsche Bundesbank150+120+90+60+30+0 30−60−90−120−Balance sheet
counterparts

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
25seasonal effects, the net external asset pos-
ition of the MFI sector, which reflects pay-ments between non-banks and the non-euro-area countries, remained unchanged in thefourth quarter. The renewed acceleration ofmonetary capital formation, however, damp-ened monetary growth. Consequently, fromOctober to December, the seasonally adjustedannualised three-month growth rate oflonger-term financial liabilities of the bankingsector (excluding capital and reserves) in-creased to 9%. Again, sales were mainly ofbank debt securities outside the MFI sector;longer-term time deposits also increased con-siderably again. Furthermore, the reduction indeposits redeemable at notice of over threemonths practically came to a standstill in thelast three months of the year. Overall, the risein capital market yields has probably fuelledlonger-term investment activity in the bank-ing sector.
Securities markets
In the final months of 2003, the euro-area fi-
nancial markets continued to gain confidenceon the back of the brightened economic out-look. There was, for instance, a slight yield in-crease in the bond markets, while greaterprofit expectations led to rising prices, in par-ticular in the equity markets.
During the last quarter of 2003, the yields on
ten-year euro-area government bonds, ataround 4
1/C252%, topped their mid-June low by
nearly a percentage point. Since early Decem-ber, the European capital market rates havedeclined again somewhat; recently, however,they were still around 4
1/C254%. At the same
time, the US interest rate advantage, whichback in August had exceeded
1/C253percentage
point, largely levelled off in the fourth quar-ter. In mid-February the ten-year capitalmarket rates in the euro area were actually
1/C2510percentage point above the yields on
US Treasuries.Daily data
%
%Basis
points
Memo item
Implied volatility 1
of the Bund future
2002 2003 2004Interest rate discount
of Federal bonds compared with
other euro-area government bonds
(enlarged scale)Yield on ...
... ten-year government bonds outstanding
    of the other euro-area countries
... ten-year Federal
    bonds outstandingInterest rate discount
of Federal bonds
in the euro-area bond market
1Future volatility derived from the prices
of options on Bund futures.
Deutsche Bundesbank9
87
6
5
430
20
10
05.5
5.04.5
4.0
3.5
Financial
markets
affected by
brightened
economic
expectations
On balance,
slight increase
in capital
market rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
26By and large, the German market followed
suit. As in the previous quarter, the averageinterest rate discount on ten-year Federalbonds was just under
1/C2510percentage point
below the average of other euro-area govern-ment bonds. Around the turn of the year,however, the interest advantage of the Bundon the euro bond market declined to onlyaround 5 basis points in the period under re-view, which in part reflects the ongoing tense
budgetary position in Germany.
The interest rate swing in the euro-area cap-
ital markets and in the United States in thesecond half of 2003 initially began as a cor-rection of the extremely low level of interestrates relative to growth and inflationary ex-pectations. By contrast, in the final months of2003 the more favourable economic outlookand the associated improvement in earningsprospects, in particular, gained in importance.With inflationary expectations virtually un-changed, long-term real interest rates in theUSA, most recently at around 2% (calculatedon the basis of survey results on inflationaryexpectations), have doubled since their low inthe summer of last year. Interest rates have in-creased in the euro area and in Germany aswell, albeit only around half as much, toroughly 2
1/C252% in January this year. Conse-
quently, real capital market rates have con-tinued to be far below their average of 3%since the start of monetary union and evenfurther below the long-term average in Ger-many (just over 3
1/C252%).
The more optimistic outlook for the euro area
and for the German economy have had amarked impact on the equity market. The on-going share price increases which began inthe spring of last year continued well into thenew year. Compared to broad share price in-dices such as the Dow Jones EuroStoxx andthe CDAX, European share prices rose by17% and German equities gained 23% be-tween the beginning of October and mid-February, ie more strongly than Americanequities, which may also be due to a recentDaily data
%
Per-
cent-
age
points%
Per-
cent-
age
points Yield spreads of European
corporate bonds2
2002 2003 2004Spread of US bond yields
over the euro-area averageYield on ten-year government
bonds outstanding
Euro-area
average 1
USABond yields in the
euro area and the USA
1Weighted average of the yields on ten-
year government bonds of all euro-area
countries; GDP-weighted. — 2Spread of
seven to ten-year BBB-rated European cor-
porate bonds over euro-area governmentbonds with a comparable maturity. Source:
Merrill Lynch Indices.
Deutsche Bundesbank3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.50.5+
0
0.5−
1.0−6.0
4.55.5
4.05.0
3.54.5
3.0
Continued
slight interest
rate discount of
Federal Bonds
over other
euro-area
government
bondsReal rate of
interest remains
low
Strong share
price gains

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
27surge in takeover rumours. Bank shares, in
particular, made a major contribution to thepronounced gains in the German equity mar-ket. Telecommunication, media and technol-ogy shares also recorded above-averagegains.
Both the implied risk premia calculated using
the dividend discount model and the declin-ing implied volatilities of options on the DowJones EuroStoxx 50 and the DAX show thatthe price gains were accompanied by waningrisk aversion and a much lower share priceuncertainty in connection with rising confi-dence in future economic developments.European shares are currently up by morethan half and German equities by around80% on their March 2003 lows. Whereas theGerman blue chips included in the DAX arestill nearly 50% below their historical highs,the smaller companies listed in the MDAXhave again reached their early 2000 level.
The recovery of European and German share
prices are in line with analysts’ persistentlyoptimistic corporate earnings estimates. Theyear-on-year earnings expectations for Ger-man listed companies are especially favour-able. Whereas the estimates for shares listedin the DAX have risen 15% between Octoberand January, the estimates for shares in theDow Jones EuroStoxx have been revised up-wards by 8%. The valuation level of Germanshares therefore remained virtually un-changed at a level somewhat below the long-term average despite share price gains.Based on the expected earnings for the next12 months, the average price-earnings ratioMonthly data
2004Lin scale
Price-earnings ratio2
in relation to ...
... DAX share price index
... Dow Jones
   EuroStoxx share
   price indexAverage expected corporate profit2
DAX share
price index 1Dow JonesEuroStoxx share price index
 1Log scale
Dow Jones EuroStoxx
share price index 1
DAX share price
index 1Price movements and profit
estimates for European
and German public
limited companies 
1March 2000 = 100; source:  Deutsche Börse
AG. — 2Based on year-on-year I / B / E /S
analyst estimates. Source: Thomson Finan-
cial Datastream.
Deutsche Bundesbank33
3027
24
2118
15
12130
115
100
85
70115
100
85
70
4085
60
50
45
40
35
30
2000 2001 2002 2003Share price
uncertainty
abates once
again
Optimistic
earnings
expectations ...
... and virtually
unchanged
valuations

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
28Deutsche BundesbankLink between equity market and bond market performance
In the past few years, the German capital markets 
were characterised by a diverging trend in total returns between the equity market and the bond market.
1 While, with some exceptions, the German 
share index (DAX) lost around three-quarters of its value between March 2000 and March 2003, in the same period the yields on ten-year government bonds fell from approximately 5½% to below 3½% by the middle of 2003; their prices rose accordingly. 
By historical standards, a negative correlation like 
this between the equity market and the bond mar-ket tends to be an exception. If the relation between these two markets is observed over a longer period 
of time, it can be seen that, on average, since the 
start of the 1980s there has been a positive cor-relation between the weekly yields (correlation coefﬁ  cient of 0.28). In line with this correl ation, 
falling equity prices are generally accompanied by 
falling bond prices and thus higher yields. If one assumes that today’s equity prices reﬂ  ect their future 
discounted dividends and bond prices their future 
interest payments, this positive correlation can be 
explained to an extent by the fact that the two mar-kets depend on a common discounting factor.
2 Even 
so, the sustained negative correlation in the past few years shown in the chart below appears to have tem-
porarily replaced the basic positive correlation.
Recent studies focus on the role of uncertainty in 
the equity markets as one explanation for the time variability in the correlation of both markets.
3 This 
is based on the observation that periods of nega-tive correlation are often accompanied by marked volatility in the equity markets and a great degree 
of price uncertainty, as measured in terms of the 
implied volatility of options on the equity market. It becomes clear, for example, that following the stock market crash of 1987 or during the Russia 
ﬁ nancial crisis of 1998, movements in the equity and 
bond markets were divergent. This indicates that in times of crises investors shift their assets away from equities and purchase bonds, which they perceive to 
be safer (ﬂ  ight to quality). Bundesbank analyses on 
equity market volatility show that the volatility of the DAX has clearly increased since the end of the 1990s and has subsequently been at a signiﬁ  cantly 
higher level than was previously the case.
4 It may 
therefore be assumed that the negative correlation is being driven by equity market volatility in this 
recent period, too.
1 Total returns comprise both price movements as well 
as dividends and interest payments. — 2 This correl ation 
applies unequivocally only where the changes in the dis-counting factor are explained by a change in the real rate of interest and not by a change in inﬂ  ationary expect ations. 
The relatively weak positive correlation can therefore be explained by the existence of a number of contrasting factors (see J Y Campbell, J Ammer (1993), What moves the Stock and Bond Markets? A Variance Decomposition for Long-Term Asset Returns, Journal of Finance , Vol 48, 
pp 3-37). — 3 See IMF Global Financial Stability Report , Septem ber 2003, Chapter III. — 4 See T Werner, J Stapf 
(2003), How wacky is the DAX? The changing structure of 
German stock market volatility , Discussion Paper 18/2003, 
Deutsche Bundesbank. — 5 Rolling correlation (six-month 
time frame) of weekly DAX yields and of a bond market index based on ten-year Bunds (total return indices). In the event of a positive (negative) correlation, rising equity prices are accompanied by rising (falling) prices in the bond market and falling (rising) yields. — 6 Rolling variance 
(six-month time frame) of weekly DAX yields. — 7 Source: 
Thomson Financial Datastream, Bundesbank calculations.Weekly data
Correlation between equity market and bond market5,7
(left-hand scale)
Volatility on equity market6,7
(right-hand scale)
1980 81 82 83 84 85 86 871.0+
0.8+
0.6+
0.4+
0.2+
0
0.2–
0.4–
0.6–
0.8–
88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 9650
40
30
2010
0
97 98 99 00 01 02 03 2004

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
29is 15.7, ie slightly higher than for the Dow
Jones EuroStoxx price index (15.2).
Financing conditions in the corporate bond
market also remained favourable in thefourth quarter. In much the same way as inthe United States, the interest premia onseven to ten-year BBB-rated bonds have sta-bilised at a low level vis-/C224-vis governmentbonds with the same maturities. At the be-ginning of February they were just under1 percentage point. European BBB-ratedbonds were temporarily priced as low as75 basis points above government bonds.Consequently, the interest rate premiumreached its lowest level for several years.Above all, the low interest premia appear tocontinue to reflect investors’ increased de-mand for higher-interest-bearing invest-ments. Even so, several of the variables rele-vant to the valuation of corporate bonds alsodeveloped favourably: share prices rose fur-ther while equity market volatility fell. In add-ition, estimates of credit risk are also stabilis-ing. Consequently, the ratio of corporate rat-ing downgrades to upgrades by rating agen-cies did not deteriorate further in the fourthquarter after having been far higher at thestart of the year. However, in the monthsunder review, there were still more companydowngrades than upgrades.
Sales and purchases of securities
In the fourth quarter of 2003, the economic
recovery was also reflected in the sales figuresin the securities markets. However, its primeimpact was on the equity market (see page 30).In the period from October to December 2003
there was a moderate upturn in the volumeof funds raised in the German bond market.After resident borrowers had issued debt se-curities with a market value of 3275 billion in
each of the two previous quarters, gross salesincreased to 3289 billion. After deducting re-
demptions and changes in issuers’ holdingsof their own bonds, net sales receipts in-creased by only 35 billion to 325 billion in the
period under review. In the fourth quarter,twice as many foreign bonds were sold(39 billion) as in the previous quarter
(34
1/C252billion).
In the third quarter, German credit institutions
and public sector issuers tapped the bondmarket to a volume of 39
1/C252billion and 39 bil-
lion respectively; in the fourth quarter, publicInvestment activity in the German
securities markets
5billion
2003 2002
ItemJuly to
SepOct to
DecOct to
Dec
Bonds and notes
Residents 31.6 20.3 – 4.7
Credit institutions 4.0 8.6 – 19.7of which
Foreign bonds and notes 0.2 13.4 – 7.0
Non-banks 27.6 11.7 15.0of which
Domestic bonds and notes 23.2 15.9 3.4
Non-residents – 6.8 13.7 – 4.2
Shares
Residents 1.3 – 9.9 5.7
Credit institutions – 1.5 9.2 0.0of which
Domestic shares 0.0 7.0 – 1.3
Non-banks 2.7 – 19.1 5.6of which
Domestic shares – 1.4 – 22.9 – 1.0
Non-residents 3.4 22.2 3.7
Mutual fund shares
Investment in specialised funds 4.0 5.2 10.0
Investment in funds open to thegeneral public 2.6 – 0.4 3.0of which: Share-based funds 0.3 0.9 1.3
Deutsche BundesbankInterest premia
on non-top-
rated corporate
bonds still low
Increasing sales
of bonds and
notesFurther increase
in public sector
bond issues

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
30sector bonds took centre stage with net sales
of just under 3121/C252billion. Both the increased
funds ( 315 billion) raised by the Federal Gov-
ernment and the increased borrowing by thestate governments ( 37
1/C252billion) contributed
to this. The Federal Government issued ten-year Bunds and five-year Bobls, each to a vol-ume of 38 billion, followed by two-year Fed-
eral Treasury notes for 31
1/C252billion. The Fed-
eral special funds redeemed a Treuhandagency bond worth 35 billion as well as Fed-
eral Railway and Post Office bonds worth32
1/C252billion each.
German credit institutions raised 361/C252billion
in the German bond market between Octo-ber and December 2003 after having raised39
1/C252billion in the previous month. The sales
of other bank debt securities amounting to315
1/C252billion net were offset by net redemp-
tions of public Pfandbriefe totalling 315 bil-
lion. Debt securities worth 361/C252billion were
issued by specialised credit institutions, com-pared with 311
1/C252billion in the previous
period. By contrast, 31 billion worth of mort-
gage Pfandbriefe were redeemed; in the pre-vious quarter, 32 billion net of mortgage
Pfandbriefe had been issued.
Against the backdrop of favourable debt
financing conditions, companies also tappedthe German bond market for over 36 billion
in the fourth quarter. Most of the sales wereof commercial paper amounting to just under34
1/C252billion; the previous quarter had seen
net redemptions of this type of paper. Owingto particularly buoyant issuing activity at thestart of the year, the volume outstanding ofthese financing instruments increased by 5 bn
 5 bn% per
annum
2004Money market and open-end
real estate fundsNew investment in selected
funds open to the general public
Share-based fundsLin scale
DAX volatility index 1Log scale
End-1987 = 1000
DAX performance
index 1Equity prices and
selected investment in funds
1 End-of-month levels. Source: Deutsche
Börse AG.
Deutsche Bundesbank10+
8+
6+
4+
2+
0
2−16+
14+
12+
10+
8+
6+
4+
2+
0
2−60
5040
30
20
108000
7000
6000
5000
4000
3000
2500
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003Decline in
borrowing
by credit
institutions
Companies
again increas-
ingly tapping
the bond
market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
31more than 60% over the course of last year.
Hence issues of commercial paper gainedfurther in importance last year. Even so, theextent to which these issues were used tofinance real investments or also accrued tonon-monetary financial institutions remainsto be seen. Although at just under 32 billion
the level of funds raised through corporatebonds was only slightly up on the previousquarter, over the whole of the year theyamounted to just under 318
1/C252billion and
their importance was thus similar to that ofcommercial paper.
Non-banks were the main purchasers in the
German bond market between October andDecember 2003. In net terms, they added316 billion worth of German debt securities
to their portfolios (previous quarter: 323 bil-
lion). As was the case in the previous period,nearly two-thirds of bonds purchased by resi-dents were from the public sector ( 310
1/C252bil-
lion) while in net terms non-banks sold for-eign bonds and notes worth over 34 billion.
Foreign investors purchased German bondsand notes for 313
1/C252billion, most of which
accrued to private borrowers. By contrast,German credit institutions sold both publicsector bonds and private issuers’ bonds for atotal of just under 35 billion; at the same
time, however, they purchased 313
1/C252billion
worth of foreign fixed interest securities.
Against the backdrop of the strengthening
economy and the favourable equity marketenvironment, the level of issuing activity inthe German equity market increased in thefourth quarter. Between October and Decem-ber, domestic enterprises placed just under36
1/C252billion of new shares at market values,
three times as much as in the preceding quar-ter. The majority of these issues were listedequities. However, it should be borne in mindthat in the period under review, two sizeablecapital increases – one by an insurance com-pany, and the other, smaller, by a big bank –took place, with a major impact on the result.
In the fourth quarter of 2003 the main pur-
chasers of German equities were foreign in-vestors. They added 322 billion to their equi-
ties portfolio, compared with 33
1/C252billion in
the July-September period. On balance, creditinstitutions acquired 37 billion of domestic
shares and 32
1/C252billion of foreign shares.
Domestic credit institutions, by contrast,reduced their holdings of German shares by323 billion and purchased foreign shares for
34 billion.
Sales of domestic and foreign mutual fund
shares went down slightly to 35
1/C252billion in
the fourth quarter, compared with just under37 billion in the third quarter. Virtually all the
inflows accrued to domestic investment com-panies and on balance only to specialisedfunds ( 35 billion), which are reserved for insti-
tutional investors. By contrast, funds open tothe general public redeemed 3
1/C252billion in
shares. Redemptions by private investorswere mainly of shares in money market funds(32 billion). The volume outstanding of shares
in open-end real estate funds, which for along time had had the greatest appeal for in-vestors, also decreased ( 3
1/C252billion). Share-
based funds, however, attracted additionalfunds amounting to just under 31 billion.
Mixed funds and bond-based funds also re-Domestic
bonds and
notes
purchased
mainly by
non-banks
Increased
volume of
funds raised
in the equity
marketEquities
purchased
mainly by
foreign
investors
Declining
investment in
mutual fund
shares

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
32Deutsche BundesbankLending rates in the euro area and in Germany
The collection of harmonised data in accordance with the 
new euro-area interest rate statistics provides, for the ﬁ rst time, data which, since methodological differences 
have been eliminated, permit cross-border comparisons.
1 
It thus becomes clear that there are certain differences between the interest rates in the various euro-area mem-ber states.
2 This is to be expected for a single currency 
area as interest rates are affected not only by monetary 
policy, but by a host of national par ticu larities as well. For 
example, the cyclical situation and, more import antly, the 
structure of ﬁ  nancial relationships in a given country are 
major factors determining lending rates.
Compared with most of the other euro-area member 
states, German banks play a far more important role in the ﬁ  nancial system.
3 As a result, in the area of corpor ate 
ﬁ nance, the generally longer-term credit relations of an 
enterprise are often concentrated at one or just a few banks. On the one hand, owing to a steady ﬂ  ow of infor-
mation, relationship lending enables loans to be granted at more favourable conditions with respect to interest rates and volume, especially for loans with a lengthy maturity (long-termism). On the other hand, it fosters 
a certain amount of dependence on the borrower’s “house bank”, thereby lowering competitive pressure. Taken in isolation, this would lead to higher borrowing costs. Relationship lending also results in the fact that the “house bank” does not fully adapt its lending conditions to changes in reﬁ  nancing conditions. In a period of low 
interest, such behaviour should be reﬂ  ected in a higher 
rate of interest being charged on new lending than on 
existing loans in Germany when compared with the euro-area average. It is not possible to say a priori which of the aforementioned determinants has the greatest impact. 
Moreover, because they are better informed, “house 
banks” have been able to limit the problem of adverse selection and deal with those customers which present a greater risk by applying risk-differentiated rates of inter-est rather than by loan rationing. In aggregate inter-est rate statistics, which of course cannot differentiate between the underlying risks, the higher risk premium charged in these cases leads to a correspondingly higher reported interest rate level. Above and beyond this, 
owing to the cyclically susceptible default probabil ities, 
the risk premia can also be expected to move procyc lic-
ally, thereby contributing to a trend towards higher lend-ing rates in periods of economic weakness.
Finally, owing to the speciﬁ  c statistical collection  methods 
used, the observable trend towards long-termism  in Ger-
many is likely to have left its mark on the measurable rate of interest. The new euro-area interest rate statistics dif-ferentiate between loan maturities. Even so, the German loan maturities, especially in the longer-term matur ities 
ranges (over ﬁ  ve years), are likely to be at the long end. 
Given a “normal” yield curve, ie one that increases in line with the length of maturity, the aggregation itself results 
in a higher level of interest for Germany in each maturity 
range.
A comparison of German and European interest rates 
for loans to enterprises in 2003 shows that German rates are in some cases well above their corresponding euro-area aggregate (see adjacent table). A comparison of the interest rate differential between existing loans and new lending, however, produces no clear-cut indi-cation that interest rate smoothing by German banks, 
1 For methodological notes, in particular on the German data, see 
Deutsche Bundesbank, The new MFI interest rate statistics – method-ology for collecting the German data, Monthly Report , January 2004, 
pp 45-59. — 2 See European Central Bank, New ECB statistics on MFI Average deviation ofGerman interest rates
from the euro-area aggregates in 2003
Existing loans
As a percentage
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 yearover 1 year
up to 5 years over 5 years
0.26 0.25 0.54
New business
As a percentageOther loans over 51 million (up to 51 million) to non-financial
corporations with an initial rate fixation
up to 1 yearover 1 year
up to 5 years over 5 years
0.22
(0.37)0.56
(0.23)0.31
(0.23)

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
33 compared with their own reﬁ  nancing costs, was the 
cause. The gap between the euro-area average and the rate on long-term loans to enterprises in Germany, for example, is greater for existing loans than for new lend-ing. For medium-term loans to enterprises, which play a less  signiﬁ  cant quantitative role in Germany, the interest 
rates on existing loans are, as is to be expected, at least for large-volume contracts, closer to the euro-area aver-
age.
It should be borne in mind that in such a comparison, 
the breakdown of loans to enterprises for new lending is based on the original period of interest rate ﬁ  xation; 
for existing loans, however, the original maturity is used. This leads, in particular, to a varied classiﬁ  cation of 
variable interest loans, which are captured as short-term loans in new lending business; existing variable interest loans, however, are recorded on the basis of their longer maturity. Since these loans offer more favourable condi-tions owing to the fact that the borrower bears the risk of interest rate changes, and are likely to play a more signiﬁ  cant role in the other euro-area countries than in 
Germany, the different statistical treatment of such loans 
could contribute to a certain upward distortion of the German interest rate gap for existing loans relative to that for new business.
Furthermore, for loans to enterprises with a maturity 
of over ﬁ  ve years, the longer maturity in Germany has 
apparently resulted in a slower adaptation of interest rates on existing loans to the lower interest rate level than the euro-area aggregate. Consequently, over the course of the year, the gap between these rates in Ger-many and the euro-area average widened from 35 basis points to 67 basis points (see adjacent chart).
The interest differentials for mortgage Pfandbriefe with 
varying maturities may be used to quantify the possible inﬂ uence that the longer maturity in Germany for long-
term loans to enterprises may have. This reveals that the gap between German lending rates and the euro-area average occurs in the area of interest rate premia, which on mortgage Pfandbriefe in this maturity range were in line with the market average in 2003 for a residual ma tur-
ity of two to four years longer (25 to 62 basis points). The average interest rate premia which emerge in line with a longer residual maturity based on the yield curve 
estimate for the entire German bond market were 47 to 91 basis points in 2003, ie slightly higher.
Apart from the tendency towards longer maturities of 
German bank loans, there are other characteristics of the German ﬁ  nancial system which may play a role in 
explaining the deviation of German bank interest rates; these include relationship lending, banks’ reﬁ  nancing 
costs, borrowers’ collateral structure and, ultimately, the 
particular ities of the statistical methods used. However, 
given the short duration of the period under observa-tion, these individual factors are difﬁ  cult to assess. The 
same applies to the potential inﬂ  uence of cyclical factors. 
In summary, based on the existing data it cannot be said that a German enterprise, with otherwise equal features, has structurally higher interest rate expenses to bear than the average expenses borne by enterprises in other euro-area member states.
interest rates, Monthly Bulletin , December 2003, pp 23-25. — 3 See 
also European Central Bank, Report on ﬁ  nancial structures , 2002.%
JF M A M JJA S O N DOriginal maturity ...
... over 5 years
... between 1 and 5 yearsGermany
Euro areaInterest rates for loans to enterprises
in Germany and in the euro area
(on existing loans)
6.0
5.8
5.6
5.4
5.2
5.0
4.8
4.6
4.4
4.2
4.0
2003

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
34corded additional inflows of around 31/C252bil-
lion each, nearly the same level as in the pre-vious period. The reason for this developmentwas that private investors shifted their strat-egy towards riskier and less liquid forms of in-vestment such as share-based funds and, to alesser extent, bond-based funds and awayfrom money market funds in particular. Thisdevelopment surely also reflects a waningpropensity for liquidity.
Deposit and lending business of German
banks with domestic customers
In the last three months of 2003 develop-
ments in the German banking sector differedsomewhat from those observed in the euroarea. As regards deposit business, short-termbank deposits were especially affected. Con-
trary to the substantial increase at the euro-area level, overnight deposits of German in-vestors at German banks declined in season-ally adjusted terms in the fourth quarter, aftera previous increase of 10
1/C252%. Whereas in the
period under review non-financial enterprisesincreased their overnight deposits in volumessimilar to those of previous years, the other fi-nancial institutions withdrew far more de-posits in the October-December period thanis usually the case. Compared with the twoprevious years, the increase in households’sight deposits was rather moderate. Along-side the initial marked rise in capital marketyields over the course of the quarter, the on-going recovery in the equity markets probablyalso contributed to this development. Invest-ors’ overall waning appetite for liquidity isperhaps also reflected in the increased salesof shares in funds open to the general public,which invest in equities and bonds and notes.
Such factors probably also led to the strong
reduction in other short-term deposits of pri-vate domestic non-banks in the Germanbanking system. At the euro-area level, therewas still a slight increase in net terms, drivenby short-term savings deposits. In Germany,deposits redeemable at notice of threemonths, by contrast, declined discerniblyagain for the first time since the second quar-ter of 2002. In this context, the demand forhigher-interest-bearing special savings instru-ments, in particular, was far lower (in non-seasonally adjusted terms) in the quarterunder review than is usually the case at theend of the year. Moreover, in seasonally ad-justed terms, short-term time deposits de-Lending and deposits of monetary
financial institutions (MFIs)in Germany
*
5billion
2003 2002
ItemOct to
DecOct to
Dec
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight + 15.5 + 35.0
With agreed maturities
up to 2 years + 0.0 + 6.8over 2 years + 2.8 + 9.4
At agreed notice
up to 3 months + 10.6 + 18.1over 3 months + 1.4 – 1.2
Lending
to domestic enterprises andhouseholds
Unsecuritised – 0.2 + 4.6Securitised – 3.4 + 17.7
to domestic government
Unsecuritised + 4.5 + 3.2Securitised – 2.6 – 1.0
*As well as banks (including building and loan associ-
ations, but excluding the Bundesbank), monetary finan-cial institutions (MFIs) here also include money marketfunds; see also Table IV.1 in the Statistical Section of theMonthly Report .— 1Enterprises, households and gov-
ernment.
Deutsche Bundesbank
Overnight
deposits declineStrong
reduction in
short-term
savings deposits
and time
deposits

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
35clined strongly again in the period under re-
view. Households, in particular, continued toreduce their short-term time deposits, there-by continuing the trend started at the end of2001. However, contrary to the usual patternin the fourth quarter, non-financial enter-prises decreased their time deposits.
By contrast, in seasonally adjusted terms,
longer-term bank deposits increased furtherin the period under review, after having al-ready risen sharply in the previous quarter.Virtually the entire increase, however, was oflonger-term time deposits with a maturity ofover two years, which, probably owing to thediscernible rise in the rate of interest in thismarket segment in the fourth quarter, weremainly accumulated on a fairly large scale byemployed persons. By contrast, deposits withan agreed period of notice of more thanthree months were reduced further, continu-ing the trend which began in spring 2001.
Fairly large deviations from the trends in the
euro area as a whole were also observed inthe lending business of German banks. First,lending to the public sector was down on thelevel usually seen towards the end of theyear. Second, in seasonally adjusted terms,there was a decrease in lending by GermanMFIs to the domestic private sector betweenOctober and December. The annual rate ofchange fell from 1.7% at the end of Septem-ber to 0.7% at the end of December. Thedecline in lending mainly affected securitisedlending since German credit institutions per-ceptibly reduced their holdings of securitiesissued by the domestic private sector, ratherthan topping up these holdings as they usual-ly do towards the end of the year. In addition,
however, loans to German enterprises andhouseholds declined, while the demand forloans by households continued to increaseacross the entire euro area.
In many cases financing projects in the real
estate sector, which has been developing verydynamically in several member states,seemed to be the reason for the develop-ments in the euro area. There is no compar-able momentum in the German market, al-though demand in the area of housing con-struction did pick up at times in connectionwith the debate about reducing the grant tohome buyers. Housing loans have so far re-mained largely unaffected. In the fourthquarter, for example, these loans increased bya seasonally adjusted annualised rate of only
Seasonally adjusted
 5 bn
%Lin scale
Year-on-year changeLog scale
Loans1Loans to domestic enterprises
and households
1End of month; adjusted for statistical
changes.
Deutsche Bundesbank8
6
4
2
02250
2200
2150
2100
2050
2000
1950
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003Contrasting
increase in
longer-term
bank deposits
Reduced
lending to
public sector
and private
borrowers
Real estate
financing

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
36Deutsche BundesbankBank lending survey
Widening margin spread in retail business
According to the January results of the Eurosystem’s 
bank lending survey,2 in the fourth quarter of 2003 
some respondent institutions in Germany continued to tighten slightly their credit standards as applied to loans and credit lines to enterprises. This was largely unre-lated to the size of the enterprises or the loan maturity. According to the respondent institutions, this reﬂ  ected 
increases in some institutions’ cost of capital. In con-
trast to the previous quarter, however, risk assessment 
remained largely unchanged; some institutions cited the brighter economic outlook as the reason. There was a slight tightening for housing loans following essentially stable quarters. A further tightening for both loans to enterprises and housing loans is expected in the ﬁ  rst 
quarter of 2004; as in the previous quarter, respondent institutions do not expect changes in their credit stand-ards for consumer credit (see adjacent chart).
The respondent institutions reported increased margins 
for riskier loans, with margins on average retail loans practically unchanged or narrowing. This indi cates a sus-
tained risk-differentiated margin spread in retail busi-ness (see chart on page 37). By contrast, the data sup-plied by the banks indicated a broadening of margins for loans to enterprises which was not restricted to riskier 
loans, but rather also applied increasingly to average 
loans again. Nonetheless, the broadening of margins in all areas of credit business seems to have slowed in the past few quarters. With regard to other lending condi-tions, the respondent banks also indicated that they were occasionally applying somewhat stricter criteria to loans to enterprises in respect of collateral.
1 Difference between the sum of the percentages for “tightened 
considerably” and “tightened somewhat” and the sum of the percent-ages for “eased somewhat” and “eased considerably”. — 2 See Deut-
sche Bundesbank, German results of euro-area bank lending survey, %%%
Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4Expect-
ations
for Q1
2002 2003 2004Consumer creditTo households
Housing loansTo enterprisesChanges in the credit standards
applied to the approval of loans
or credit lines 1
40+
30+
20+
10+
0
10–40+
30+
20+
10+
0
10–60+
50+
40+
30+
20+
10+
0

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
37The survey showed that there was a slight increase in 
loan demand for private housing construction and, for the ﬁ  rst time, from enterprises as well. By contrast, 
banks indicated that for the ﬁ  rst time in a year, there 
was again a slight decline in demand for consumer loans. Whereas the dampening effect of lower ﬁ  nancing needs 
for ﬁ  xed investment abated perceptibly in the area of 
loans to enterprises, the debate about abolishing the 
grant to home buyers increased demand for housing 
loans. According to the data supplied by the respond-ents, the slight drop in demand for consumer loans was partially due to households using more of their savings for consumption purposes.
Compared with the aggregate results for the euro area, 
the replies from the German institutions taking part in the survey more frequently express expectations of an increase in loan demand from both enterprises and households in the ﬁ  rst quarter of 2004. By comparison, 
respond ents expect a far sharper decline in loan demand 
for private housing construction in Germany; this is prob-ably mainly due to the elimination of the German special effect associated with the grant to home buyers. Overall, the German survey results were more or less in line with the aggregate results for the euro area.
3
Altogether, the combination of changes in loan supply and demand in the fourth quarter of 2003 led to a slight tension in the credit market. The estimates for the ﬁ  rst 
quarter of 2004 suggest that this slight tension is likely to continue in the area of loans to enterprises.
Monthly Report , June 2003 pp 67-76. For data and further informa-
tion see www.bundesbank.de/vo/vo_veroeffentlichu ngen.php (avail-able in German only). — 3 See European Central Bank, Monthly Bul-
letin , February 2004, pp 12-15.%
%
%%
%
Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
2002 2003Consumer creditTo households
Housing loansTo enterprises
Riskier loans
Average
loansChanges in loan margins 1
50+
40+
30+
20+
10+
0
10–
20–90+
50+80+
40+70+
30+60+
20+50+
10+
0
10–
20–100+
50+90+
40+80+
30+70+
60+
50+

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
381/C252%, although the anticipated increase in
interest rates on longer-term mortgage loanswith a fixed rate of interest might have led tothe assumption that there would be a tem-porary stronger increase in demand.
Moreover, loans to enterprises were reduced
sharply in the final quarter of 2003. Short-term loans to non-financial enterprises wereespecially affected. However, the latest results
of the Eurosystem’s bank lending survey indi-cate that banks hardly tightened their condi-tions for granting loans to enterprises in thefourth quarter; it is therefore unlikely that anyserious additional retarding effects camefrom banks’ lending behaviour (see box onpp 36-37).
Corporate
lending

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
39Economic conditions
in GermanyUnderlying trends
The cyclical improvement in the German
economy continued in the fourth quarter of2003. However, much as in the summermonths, which had brought an initial upturn,the recovery progressed at only a moderatepace. According to the flash estimate of theFederal Statistical Office, the increase in realgross domestic product (GDP) in the finalquarter amounted to 0.2% after seasonaland working-day adjustment. At all events,this offset the dip in output which had arisenin the first half of the year and, after adjust-ment for variations in the number of workingdays, was slightly up on the comparable end-2002 level. In calendar-month terms, therewas a rise of 0.2%. This confirmed the -0.1%annual result for 2003 announced in earlyJanuary.
The slight growth in GDP in the fourth quar-
ter was sustained by an improvement indomestic demand, where there was a slightrevival in investment. Furthermore, inven-tories were no longer being reduced. Bycontrast, households’ consumption was stillproving to be an area of weakness. Seasonal-ly adjusted expenditure – at constant prices –showed a further decline and, as before, wasdown on the year. Despite numerous specialoffers and discount campaigns, it was princi-pally retail purchases that showed a sharpfall. Furthermore, there were fewer registra-tions of new cars. According to the surveysof the consumer research institution, Gesell-schaft f/C252r Konsumforschung (GfK), which areconducted for households on behalf of theEuropean Commission, consumer sentiment,Slight increase
in GDP
in Q4 2003
Recovery in
domestic
demand

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
40after having become more upbeat for a time,
has undergone a marked deterioration againrecently. It is not only the propensity to pur-chase which appears to have faltered, afterpreviously revealing signs of an improvement.Despite the relief afforded in the case of in-come tax, income developments were againbeing assessed more sceptically. This is likelyto be due, not least, to the reduced frame-work for incomes as a result of a discontinu-ation of special payments. However, strainsdue to the health reform as well as generaluncertainty about future measures to restorethe viability of the social systems are likely tohave had a dampening impact, too. Convin-cing reforms are needed to strengthen con-sumer confidence and to give rise to renewedoptimism about the sustainability of public fi-nances. An improvement in the labour mar-
ket situation is also indispensable.
Exports, which had supplied crucial stimuli to
growth in the third quarter, continued to gen-erate a positive impetus. According to the na-tional accounts data, which are based on theresults of the balance of payments statistics,seasonally adjusted fourth-quarter exportswere again up on the extremely good out-come for the summer months. At the sametime, imports – in contrast to the precedingquarter – also showed a marked rise, how-ever. This meant a considerable fall in real netexports, which thus had a dampening impacton overall growth.
The generally optimistic expectations of the
business sector (as reflected, say, in the sur-veys of the Centre for European EconomicResearch and the Ifo Institute) as well theoverall improved underlying conditions never-theless suggest that the course of recoverywill continue.
It is still impossible to tell at present how
smoothly this process will progress and whenit will lead into a self-sustaining upswing.Much depends on economic and reform pol-icy, both sides of industry and the global set-ting. At the moment, the exchange rate isbeing pinpointed as the main external risk toeconomic activity. The euro’s appreciation, es-pecially against the US dollar, has undoubted-ly been surprising, at least in terms of itspace. What also has to be recognised, how-ever, is the fact that the weighted effectiveexchange rate of the single European cur-rency in mid-February was no more than 3%
Adjusted for seasonal and working-day
variations, quarterly
%DM bn  5 bn
Lin scale
Year-on-year change880900920940960980
oLog scale
Real GDP 1Economic growth in Germany
1At 1995 prices. — oFrom 1999, in euro.
Deutsche Bundesbank4+
2+
0
2−500
490
480
470
460
450
1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003Recent fall in
net exports
How large is
the exchange
rate risk?

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
41higher than in autumn 2003, when most of
the forecasts for 2004 were made. Thismeans that, under status quo conditions, the
need for adjustment in terms of forecasting islikely to have been generally limited so far.
That is also true because the stimuli to eco-
nomic activity in Germany generated byworld trade have become identifiably strong-er and global economic growth this year mayindeed be somewhat higher than originallyexpected. The German economy is likely tobenefit quite well from this, too, especially asthe global pick-up in investment demand –which is also comparatively price-inelastic –operates very much to its advantage and Ger-many is present on a regionally broad front.Moreover, despite the considerable ex-change-rate-related losses compared withearlier high levels, the price competitivenessof the German economy may still be rated asbeing as good as on a multi-year average. Anadditional favourable factor in this context isthat German enterprises’ market position vis-/C224-vis suppliers from the rest of the euro areahas been further expanded on the price andcost side. This “real depreciation”, as it were,is mitigating the real appreciation on thirdmarkets, especially in the dollar area. That isnot the least reason why the economic riskemanating from the appreciation of the euroso far has been reasonably predictable.Nevertheless, a close watch will have to bekept on future exchange rate developments.
As revealed by various simulation results
using econometric models, the effects of anexchange rate shock are spread over severalyears and are, moreover, weakened by theSeasonally adjusted, monthly
Balance
Balance
Propensity to purchase3
2004Households’ assessment of the
economic situation3
MonthlyCurrent situation 1Business expectations 11991 = 100
Business climate in the
industrial sector 1, 2Sentiment in the industrial
sector and among households
1 Source: Ifo Institute. — 2 Western Ger-
many. — 3  According to GfK data. Moving
five-month averages.
Deutsche Bundesbank40+
20+
0
20−
40−
60−40+
20+
0
20−
40−110
105
100
95
90
85
80
75110
105
100
95
90
85
1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003Stronger
expansionary
stimuli from
world trade
Model
simulations

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
42real income gains of domestic enterprises and
households owing to the improvement in theterms of trade. An additional factor is thatthe effects of changes in exchange rates aredependent on the underlying causes and onmarket players’ expectations, above all, withregard to the persistence of the appreciationor depreciation. Simulation results describethe average effect based on estimated struc-tural parameters of fairly long sample periods.They therefore invariably have to be placed inthe current context and interpreted againstthat background.
For the hypothetical case of a general and
sustained (as well as unanticipated) 10% ap-preciation of the euro, calculations using theBundesbank model produce the followingshort and long-term price and quantity reac-
tions of the German economy.
– Consumer prices in the third year are
1/C252%
lower overall than in the baseline scenario;the short-term dampening impact on theinflation rate in the first year amounts tobetween 0.1 and 0.2 percentage point.
– Real GDP in the third year is between 1%
and 1
1/C252% lower overall than in the base-
line scenario; roughly half of the effect(between
1/C252and3/C254percentage point) oc-
curs as a loss of growth in the first year.
Following these quantitative “rule of thumb”
formulae and taking due account of the cur-rent exchange rate relationships and howthey differ from the typical exchange rateAverage since 1975 = 100, quarterly, log scale 1
75
80
85
90
95
100
105
110
115
120...the other
   euro-area
   countries
...non-euro-area countriesIndicator of price competitiveness
based on the deflators of total sales compared with...
1975 80 85 90 95 00 2004Price competitiveness of the German economy
1 Inverted scale: rise in the curve (decline in values) denotes increase in price competitiveness. — -  = Ex-
trapolated using monthly values. Latest position: January 2004.
Deutsche Bundesbank- 
- 
Price and
growth effects
Recovery
scenario
continues intact

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
43assumptions in the autumn 2003 forecasts,
the recovery scenario – notwithstanding someminor qualifications – still has the fundamen-tally highest probability. That is all the morethe case as the chances of global economicrecovery simultaneously appear to be on thefavourable side. The available data on exportexpectations and foreign orders support suchan assessment.
Output and labour market
Business developments in industry showed a
perceptible improvement in the fourth quar-ter; in December, the highest level of outputin 2003 was achieved after seasonal adjust-ment. In the fourth quarter as a whole, out-put was around 2
3/C254% up on the average of
the preceding three-month period. The figurewas 2
1/C254% higher than in the corresponding
period of 2002, having been as much as1
1/C254% down on the year in the third quarter.
Developments were especially positive in the
capital goods sector, where the quarter-on-quarter increase was 4% in seasonally adjust-ed terms. In particular, manufacturers of roadvehicles and producers of communicationsequipment as well as of measurement andcontrol instruments expanded their produc-tion sharply. A factor in the case of transportequipment was that one major group shutdown its main production plant betweenChristmas and the end of January for renova-tion, which meant that advance work wasperformed. Output in the intermediate goodssector was also expanded – by not quite asmuch but still quite sharply at 3%. The steelindustry, in particular, stepped up production
in this sector.
This acceleration in output was accompanied
by an increase in capacity utilisation. Accord-ing to the Ifo surveys, the degree of utilisationon an average of the fourth quarter went upto 82
1/C252% of normal full utilisation in season-
ally adjusted terms. This matched the level inthe comparable period of 2002, after theSeasonally adjusted, quarterly
%%
Capacity utilisation 1
0 Mean 1994-2003 Lin scale
Year-on-year changeLog scale
Output
2000 = 100Output and utilisation
in industry
1Results of the Ifo business survey.
Deutsche Bundesbank88
85
82
799+
6+
3+
0
3−
6−103
100
97
94
91
88
1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003Rising industrial
output
Increased
capacity
utilisation

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
44lowest level since the mid-1990s had been
reported in the first half of 2003.
The situation in the construction industry re-
mained subdued. According to the data avail-able so far, construction output in the last fewmonths of 2003 was slightly up on the third-quarter level in seasonally adjusted terms. Thelevel of output was still very low, however,and was still somewhat down on the year inthe fourth quarter as a whole. At least, thereare signs that things are stabilising. Develop-ments in the finishing trades were more un-favourable. Turnover in the third quarter(more recent information is unavailable atpresent) was 7% below that of the compar-able period in 2002. Hours worked were near-ly 8% down, in fact. Earlier, the minus figureshad been even larger, however.
In the fourth quarter, the commercial service
providers, who provide quarterly informationon their economic situation and expectationsin a Centre for European Economic Researchsurvey, were somewhat more cautious againin assessing their situation. In terms of currenttrends in both demand and turnover, the re-ports were no longer as positive as they hadbeen in the preceding quarter. Sentiment hasdeteriorated again of late, particularly amongtelecommunications services providers, man-agement consultancies as well as technicalconsultancy and planning firms. IT service pro-viders and the IT equipment trade performedbetter, however.
Turnover in the wholesale and retail trade – at
constant prices – was down on the year at theend of the period under review. This appliedparticularly to the retail trade, where the
fourth quarter figure was around 2% downon 2002. The development in the wholesaletrade was distinctly less unfavourable due, inparticular, to increased turnover in solid fuelsand refined petroleum. Durable and non-dur-able consumer goods also performed com-paratively well, however. By contrast, thehotel and restaurant trade was faced with de-clining turnover up to the end of the periodunder review. Even though the declining year-on-year figures are gradually becoming lesssevere, there was still a fall of just over 3
3/C254%
on an average of the last three months of2003. Restaurant businesses continued to beaffected to an above-average extent. Thisshows that people are evidently slow to over-come their reluctance to eat out – a develop-ment that began against the background ofsharp price increases in connection with theintroduction of euro banknotes and coins. Fur-thermore, the persistently unfavourable devel-opments on the labour market and in incomesare likely to have had a dampening impact.
The labour market continued to be character-
ised by persistent job losses during the lastfew months of 2003. According to the calcu-lations of the Federal Statistical Office, theseasonally adjusted number of persons inwork fell to 38.21 million in the fourth quar-ter of 2003. This was around 30,000 fewerthan in the summer quarter and 235,000, or
1/C252%, down on the year. Construction and in-
dustry remained particularly affected by theshedding of labour. Only a small number ofnew employment opportunities were beingcreated on balance in the services sector aswell, however. While there was a decline inWeak
construction
output
Cautious
service
providersDecline in
turnover in
wholesale and
retail as well as
in the hotel
and restaurant
trade
Continuing
reduction in
employment

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
45the number of persons in paid employment,
more people took up self-employment, en-couraged not least by increased labour mar-ket policy assistance, say, in the form of aone-person business.
The seasonally adjusted number of persons
registered as unemployed with the FederalEmployment Agency has fallen since spring2003. At the end of January 2004, the num-ber was 4.27 million. This takes account ofthe change to the methodology, which meansthat persons taking part in aptitude tests andtraining measures (roughly 85,000 persons inDecember) are no longer included among theunemployed. The figure was 160,000 downfrom the most recent peak in May. The year-on-year increase, which had been as much as400,000 in the second quarter of 2003, wasfollowed by a 26,400 decline. The seasonallyadjusted unemployment rate, as calculatedby the Federal Employment Agency, was10.2% in January 2004. Using the standard-ised European method, the relevant figurewas 9.2%. The labour exchanges’ efforts tofilter out persons with insufficient commit-ment to finding a job from among the regis-tered unemployed continued to be a crucialfactor in the declining official unemploymentfigure. During the last three months of 2003,no less than around one-quarter of all de-registrations from unemployment were con-nected with this.
Orders
New industrial orders showed a marked in-
crease after the end of last year’s summerholidays. In the fourth quarter of 2003, they
were a good 3
3/C254% higher, after seasonal ad-
justment, than the average level of the periodfrom July to September. Orders were some3
1/C252% up on the year, having been somewhat
down over 12 months in the third quarter.
Domestic demand, which had been largely
stagnant in summer, showed a sharp rise atthe end of the period under review. In sea-Quarterly
Millions
Millions
%Thou-
sands
Thou-
sands
0
20041Unemployment rate
(seasonally adjusted)
JanJanLin scale
Year-on-year changeReduced log scale
Unemployed
(seasonally adjusted)
- 
JanLin scale
Year-on-year
changeLog scale
Employed
(seasonally
adjusted)Labour market
1From January 2004, unemployed exclud-
ing participants in aptitude tests and train-
ing measures.
Deutsche Bundesbank12
11
10
9400+
0
400−4.6
4.2
3.8800+
400+
0
400−
800−39.4
39.0
38.6
38.2
37.8
37.4
1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003Falling
unemployment
Upturn in
demand ...... both in
Germany ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
46sonally adjusted terms, growth in the last
three months of the year amounted to 33/C254%.
The year-on-year rate jumped from-1
1/C254% in the third quarter to +21/C254% in the
fourth quarter. The fact that new orders wereconcentrated particularly on the October andNovember period points, firstly, to the effectsof catching up on the summer holiday periodand, secondly, to orders being placed early inview of the upcoming Christmas period. Theintermediate goods sector recorded the
strongest surge in orders at a seasonally ad-justed 4
3/C254%, showing, for the first time in
some while, growth in year-on-year terms at2
1/C254%. The lead was taken by the iron and
steel industry, where orders went up by one-tenth. Manufacturers of electricity distribu-tion and control apparatus achieved an in-crease of 4
1/C254%. There was a 31/C252% seasonally
adjusted rise in demand for consumer goods.This largely offset the downturn in orders inthe first three quarters of 2003. Orders forcapital goods also picked up in the last fewmonths of the year, albeit only to a below-average extent. Quarter-on-quarter growthwas 2
3/C254% after seasonal adjustment. The in-
crease on the year was almost 31/C252%. Al-
though the flow of orders for machinery andequipment slowed down perceptibly againtowards the end of the year, growth for thequarter as a whole was still around 7%.
Foreign demand for German industrial goods
reached a peak in December last year when awhole series of major orders was put on thebooks. The fourth quarter as a whole pro-duced a 3
1/C252% rise on the average of the
July to September period, which had alreadybrought an increase on the low in spring. Theflow of orders was 5% up on the year, com-pared with no more than +1% in the thirdquarter. The increase in the case of con-sumer goods producers was particularlysharp. There was buoyant demand especiallyfor consumer goods, including textiles andtextile products. Growth in the capital goodssector was also quite strong. Manufacturersof machinery and equipment, in particular,were faced with a whole series of majorSeasonally adjusted, quarterly, log scale
DomesticForeignNew orders
Volume, 2000 = 100
TotalDemand for
industrial goods
Deutsche Bundesbank105
100
95
9085110
80105
72100
7595
90
85105
100
95
90
85
80
1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003... and from
abroad

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
47orders, resulting in a seasonally adjusted
surge of more than 10% in the fourth quarteras a whole. Furthermore, demand for motorvehicles picked up somewhat after beingnearly stagnant for quite some time. Amongintermediate goods, the manufacture of basicmetals and fabricated metal products fea-tured prominently, with orders being around16% up on the quarter in seasonally adjustedterms in the final three months of 2003.
Demand for construction work remained
largely constant in October and November.Although this meant that demand had re-covered somewhat from the low in thesecond quarter of 2003, there has been nosign so far of a sustained improvement. Thisis due to the fact that, while housing con-struction orders have shown an increase, in-dustrial customers remain cautious. No stim-uli have been generated by the public sectoreither. Not least, a year-on-year decline of6% reveals just how low the total intake ofconstruction orders is. This was not muchbetter than in the third quarter when thefigure was 7
1/C252% down on the year.
Demand for housing construction in October
and November was 51/C252% up on the third
quarter in seasonally adjusted terms androughly one-tenth up on the low level in thefirst half of 2003. This is likely to have beendue mainly to the debate on cutbacks in as-sistance for housing construction. In order topre-empt such a cutback, quite a number ofbuilding projects were embarked on morespeedily. Taking construction permits as ayardstick, this principally concerned single-family houses. By contrast, there was littledemand for owner-occupied dwellings and
properties with three or more apartments. Itis likely that demand for owner-occupiedhouses will level off again in the current year.
Prices
Consumer prices went up quite sharply at the
beginning of 2004. Having remained largelySeasonally adjusted, quarterly, log. scale
...in housing construction...from the
   public sectorConstruction orders...
...from industrial
   enterprisesVolume, 2000 = 100
Total
construction
orders Oct -
NovDemand for
construction work
Deutsche Bundesbank140
130
120
110
100
90
80
70
60110
100
90
80110
100
90
80
75120
110
100
90
80
1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003- - - - 
Construction
demand largely
constant
Healthcare
more expensive

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
48The health reform and consumer prices
According to initial, provisional calculations, the sub-
index for healthcare, which reflects the changes due to
the health reform, went up in January 2004 by no less
than some 17% on the month. This means that the
overall year-on-year rate of consumer price increase
rose to 1.2%. Excluding healthcare, the figure is esti-
mated to have been no more than 0.6%.
A crucial element of the current reform is the partial
changeover from contribution-funded goods and ser-
vices to goods and services paid for by the consumers
themselves. This leads to an increase in private con-
sumption expenditure. For example, non-prescription
drugs may generally no longer be prescribed at the ex-
pense of the statutory health insurance institutions
(Krankenkassen ). As a rule, they are to be paid for in
full by the patient. Furthermore, many additional
charges have been increased and a surgery charge has
been introduced for the first time. Moreover, payments
for certain items (such as spectacles and travelling ex-
penses) will no longer be assumed by the health insur-
ance institutions.
The health system reform has such a large impact on
measured inflation because the consumer price index is
based on households’ consumption expenditure as de-
fined in the national accounts. This includes solely that
expenditure on which, in principle, consumers are able
to decide freely. However, direct taxes and social secur-
ity contributions – in this instance, compulsory health
insurance contributions – directly reduce households’
disposable income. The lowering of the health insur-
ance contributions, which the reform is designed to
achieve, therefore has a positive effect on incomes.
Benefits provided by the health insurance institutions,
which are funded from contributions, are classified as
public consumption in the national accounts.
Under this classification, the consumer price index, fol-
lowing the net price concept, includes only the house-
holds’ share of mixed-financed goods and services. In
other words, the price of a medicine, for example, is
the amount that has to be paid directly by the con-
sumer. If there is a reduction in the payment made by
the statutory health insurance institutions or restrictions
are imposed on the eligibility for prescription of cer-
tain medical products and services, consumers’ spend-
ing will increase. Given a change in the method of
funding, the consumer price index will therefore show
a price increase even if the market price of the medi-
cine has remained unchanged. Much the same situa-
tion obtains in the case of medical services for which
charges have been introduced for the first time.In the national accounts, purely redistributing the
funding of health services to households leads to a rise
in private consumption expenditure, accompanied by a
decline in government consumption spending. In much
the same way, a decline in the deflator of government
consumption offsets consumer price inflation so that
the price developments of GDP, in principle, remain un-
changed. As long as the producer prices of medical ser-
vices do not change, a shift in spending has no impact
on the general level of prices in the economy as a
whole. In monetary policy terms, such a situation is to
be assessed differently from, say, a cost-driven increase
in consumer prices.
The same applies to wage policy if consumer prices are
taken into consideration when pay demands are made.
A price increase due to redistribution has no impact on
the corporate sector’s profitability nor on its ability to
pay wages. The situation is different if – as is hoped –
there is a reduction in health insurance contributions.
Taken in isolation, this would mean an increase in the
scope for income distribution. However, it is the expli-
cit aim of the health reform to provide relief to em-
ployers in terms of their contributions to health insur-
ance as non-wage labour costs and, by extension, total
wage costs are seen as being at a high level that
obstructs employment. For that reason, it would be
inappropriate to fully exploit the expanded scope for
income distribution in wage bargaining.
There are good reasons to hope that the health reform
will lead to greater efficiency within the health system.
Since the price of medical products and services to be
paid directly by the consumers will go up considerably
in many cases, it may be expected that there will be a
more sparing take-up. For example, visits to the doctor
that are not absolutely necessary will be reduced and
demand for more cost-effective generic drugs will in-
crease. If such saving and substitution effects do occur,
the consumer price index will tend to overstate infla-
tion from the point of view of a cost-of-living index
since it is calculated as a Laspeyres index and, there-
fore, for a given quantity structure. With a (partial)
non-take-up of those products which have become
more expensive for the consumer, a Laspeyres index
will give a non-representative inflation rate (because it
is too high). Besides such quantity effects, there may
also be some direct price effects if the suppliers of med-
ical products and services respond to a fall in demand
by lowering their prices. As part of the health reform,
price controls for non-prescription drugs have been
lifted and pharmaceutical products may now be ob-
tained by mail order. Such direct price effects are there-
fore to be expected in the course of time.
Deutsche Bundesbank

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
49stable in seasonally adjusted terms in the last
few months of 2003, the index calculated ona provisional basis by the Federal StatisticalOffice showed a rise of 0.4% in January. Thiswas due mainly to the increased additionalcharges as part of the health reform. (See theexplanatory notes on page 48.) The chargesare also the main reason for the year-on-yearrate of increase of 1.1% in December goingup to 1.2% in January. Leaving aside the“healthcare” category of goods, the year-on-year rate of price increase in January is re-duced to 0.6%. A particular factor here is thebaseline effect of the higher tax on energyand tobacco, which became effective on1 January 2003. Furthermore, the customaryprice reductions for package holidays andhotel services following the Christmas holidayperiod turned out to be comparatively sharp,linked to the fact that households are show-ing less enthusiasm for travel.
The appreciation of the euro has more than
offset the persistent rise in prices on the inter-national markets for oil and refined petrol-eum products. This has had a dampening im-pact on energy prices. While spot marketprices for Brent North Sea Oil went up to well
over US$30 at the end of 2003/in early 2004,German import prices in December (more re-cent data are unavailable at present) showeda fall for crude oil as well as for petrol andheating oil. At the consumer level, this con-tributed to petrol prices remaining nearly con-stant in January 2004 and heating oil pricesgoing up less than last year despite somespells of cold winter weather.
There was only a small increase in industrial
factory gate prices on the domestic marketsin the last few months of 2003. In December,they were 1.8% up on the year. A large partof this increase was due to energy. At the endof 2003, it had risen in cost by over 8% onthe year, with the tax increases at the begin-ning of 2003 also playing a part in this.Excluding energy, industrial goods cost verylittle more on average in December 2003than they had one year earlier (+0.2%). Con-struction work, too, was only marginallymore expensive in the fourth quarter of lastyear than it had been 12 months previously(+0.1%).
Energy prices
dampened by
appreciationModerate price
pressure at the
producer level

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
50Foreign trade and
paymentsForeign trade and current account
In the fourth quarter of 2003, German for-
eign trade was subject to various, sometimescountervailing, influences. The mood amongexporters was one of growing optimism asthe upturn in the global economy, which be-came increasingly apparent in the course of2003, particularly in the second half of theyear, also boosted the German economy.However, the strengthening of the euro alsoseemed to make itself felt – whether as priceconcessions granted by German exporters totheir customers outside the euro area or aslosses of market shares owing to the fiercerprice competition. While it is true that Ger-many’s competitive position – for example,against 19 industrial countries on the basis ofthe deflator of total sales – is still slightly upon its long-term average, the considerableappreciation of the euro – more than 20%since the second quarter of 2002 – meansthat a (temporary) competitive advantage hasundoubtedly been lost, which will tend tomake export business more difficult.
Consequently, seasonally adjusted German ex-
ports of goods fell in the fourth quarter of2003 by just over
1/C252%c o m p a r e dw i t ht h e
– very good – comparable figure from the pre-ceding quarter. However, the fact that thisdoes not fundamentally call into question theprospects of a further recovery in foreign busi-ness, which are based, above all, on the con-siderable upward trend in global economicgrowth, is demonstrated by the sharp improve-ment in the leading indicators. For example,industry’ s export expectations as recorded bythe Ifo institute soared in October and the esti-External
environment

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
51mation remained comparatively favourable up
to the end of the period under review. Neworders received from abroad supported thesepositive expectations; in the fourth quarterthey were up by 3
1/C252% in real terms on the cor-
responding third-quarter figures.
It is not possible to draw any definite conclu-
sions from the breakdown of exports aboutthe possible implications of exchange ratechanges on the recent export developments.A comparison of an average of October andNovember – statistics on foreign trade by re-gion and sector are not yet available for De-cember – with the third quarter of last yearshows that German exporters managed to in-crease their deliveries mainly within the euroarea. Deliveries to other euro-area countries,which at 43% account for almost half of Ger-many’s total exports, rose by 2
1/C252%. German
suppliers probably benefited from the im-provement in the economy in the euro areaand their good price competitiveness vis-/C224-viscompetitors in other euro-area countries. Bycontrast, the turnover in exports to countriesoutside the euro area fell by 4
1/C252% in the
period under review. Exports to the centraland east European countries in transition, thesecond most important sales area for Germangoods after the European Union, went downby as much as 7
1/C252%. The fact that the euro
also appreciated significantly against some cen-tral and east European currencies in 2003 pos-sibly made itself felt here. However, anotherpossible explanation may be the rather ran-dom fluctuations in delivery patterns, whichcan play a significant role in the two-month-average breakdown by country under consid-eration here. This also applies to the declinein exports of goods to developing countries
(-6%) and to China (-10
1/C252%). The fact that
the aforementioned deterioration in pricecompetitiveness is only one aspect also be-comes clear when one considers the exampleof exports to the United States and the emer-ging markets in South-East Asia. Althoughsales of German goods to these countriesalso went down in the period under review,the decline was relatively moderate. Evidently, 5 bn
%Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
2004JanLin scale
Export expectations2Orders received
from abroad
values, 2000 = 100
MonthlyMonthly 1Log scale
ExportsExport trend
1Monthly values adjusted to match quar-
terly level. — 2Results of the Ifo business
survey; balances of positive and negative
company reports.
Deutsche Bundesbank20+
15+
10+
5+
0
5−110
105
100
95
90180
175
170
165
160
155
150
145
140
2000 2001 2002 2003Breakdown of
exports

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
52the competitive disadvantages in terms of
price were partially offset by the favourableeconomic developments in these countries.Furthermore, a decline in prices (in euro) ofexports to non-euro-area countries indicatesthat, in the period under review, German ex-porters attempted to counter the exchange-rate movements with price reductions. How-ever, this probably had a negative affect ontheir profit margins.
The decline in exports mainly affected the
consumer and intermediate goods sectors(-3
1/C252% in both cases). On an average of Oc-
tober and November fewer chemical engin-eering goods and metal products were ex-ported than in the third quarter. By contrast,capital goods exports were slightly up on thelevel in the preceding quarter. Exports ofmotor vehicle equipment increased in particu-
lar. In contrast to the general trend, exports inthis sector were 4
1/C252% above their level in the
third quarter. The introduction of new modelsby German manufacturers in the autumnmay have had an impact in this respect.
In contrast to exports, seasonally adjusted
German imports of goods in the fourth quar-ter were 4% up on the third quarter of 2003.As imports of goods had previously declinedeven more than would have been consistentwith the slight fall in domestic demand, thisdevelopment was probably mainly due tochanges in timing, which were reflected incorresponding stock movements, and to in-creased imports of intermediate goods inconnection with the substantial rise in indus-trial production. The growth in imports wasparticularly noticeable in the case of deliveriesfrom China (14
1/C252%), which now accounts for
approximately 5% of German imports. How-ever, considerably more goods were also im-ported from the South-East Asian emergingmarkets (+12%) and the central and eastEuropean transition countries (+9%) than inthe reference period. Some of these countriesgained competitive advantages over Germansuppliers as a result of the appreciation of theeuro. By contrast, there was a more moderateincrease in imports from the other euro-areacountries (+3%). Imports from the UnitedStates, at 7
1/C252% in nominal terms, declined
sharply although the month-to-month fluc-tuations – presumably also exchange-rate-related – are rather substantial.
A breakdown by sector shows that all the
major economic sectors participated in theTrend in foreign trade by region and
by category of goods
Average of October and November 2003 compared
with the average of July to September 2003%; seasonally adjusted
ItemEx-
portsIm-
ports
Total – 1.9 + 4.5Selected country/group of countries
Euro-area countries + 2.4 + 3.0
Other EU countries + 0.7 + 0.8United States – 3.5 – 7.4Japan + 0.5 + 4.2China – 10.7 + 14.3Central and east Europeancountries in transition – 7.4 + 9.0OPEC countries – 13.2 + 15.6Emerging markets in South-EastAsia – 2.2 + 12.2
Categories of goods
Selected main categories
Intermediate goods – 3.6 + 4.7Capital goods + 0.7 + 5.1Consumer goods – 3.4 + 4.1Energy sources . + 6.6
Selected categories
Chemicals – 5.0 + 5.9Machinery – 4.1 + 3.4Motor vehicles and motor vehicleparts + 4.4 + 1.4Information technology – 0.3 + 10.3
Deutsche BundesbankImports of
goods

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
53rise in imports. However, the increase in the
information and communications technologysector was particularly sharp (+10
1/C252%). This
coincides with recent observations that thehighest growth rate recorded on the globalPC market over the past three years was inthe fourth quarter of 2003. Imports of capitalgoods also increased at an above-average rate(+5%); however, there was also a demand forforeign consumer and intermediate goods.
After adjustment for seasonal variations, the
slight decline in exports of goods and thesharp rise in imports in the fourth quarter of2003 resulted in a decline of 36
1/C252billion to
332 billion in Germany’s trade surplus. At the
same time, the deficit in invisible current ac-count transactions with non-residents fromOctober to December was smaller than in thepreceding three-month period. For example,the deficit on Germany’s services account wassomewhat smaller than in the previous quar-ter, as were the net current transfers to non-residents. With regard to cross-border factorincome, the direction of the (net) flows ofpayments was reversed. In the final quarter of2003 there were net receipts of 3
1/C252billion.
As a result, in the fourth quarter of 2003the German current account ran a seasonallyadjusted surplus of 315
1/C252billion, compared
with one of approximately 3191/C252billion in the
previous quarter.
Financial transactions
The driving forces behind the upswing in the
world economy, which had continued to gainstrength up to the end of 2003 and increas-Major items of the balance
of payments
5billion
2002 2003
I t e m Q 4Q 3Q 4
I Current account
1 Foreign trade 1
Exports (fob) 168.6 165.6 171.2
Imports (cif) 136.4 126.7 139.6
Balance + 32.2 + 38.9 + 31.6
2 Services (balance) – 5.5 – 12.6 – 4.83 Factor income (balance) + 4.3 – 3.8 + 2.14 Current transfers (balance) – 7.4 – 8.2 – 6.9
Balance on current account
2 + 21.6 + 12.9 + 19.6
Memo item
Balances, seasonally adjusted
1 Foreign trade + 32.5 + 38.6 + 32.12 Services – 9.0 – 8.9 – 8.13 Factor income + 2.1 – 1.4 + 0.44 Current transfers – 7.2 – 7.7 – 6.7
Current account
2 + 16.5 + 19.3 + 15.4
II Balance of capital transfers 3 – 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.1
III Balance of financial account 4 – 47.2 – 2.4 – 24.5
IV Change in the foreign reserves
at transaction values(increase: –)
5 + 0.9 – 0.8 + 1.2
V Balance of unclassifiable
transactions + 25.0 – 10.0 + 3.5
1Special trade according to the official foreign trade statistics
(source: Federal Statistical Office). — 2Includes supplementary
trade items. — 3Including the acquisition/disposal of non-
produced non-financial assets. — 4For details see the table
“Financial transactions” on page 54. — 5Excluding allocation of
SDRs and changes due to value adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankCurrent
account
Trends in
financial
transactions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
54ingly affected the euro area, had a consider-
able impact on the international financialmarkets. Stock prices continued to rise up tothe end of the year whereas the prices oflonger-term bonds declined overall. At thesame time, there was a further upward surgein the euro, a development which was fed byconcerns about global balance of paymentdisequilibria. It was against this backdrop thatin the period under review both the euroarea, in general, and Germany, in particular,became more attractive locations for portfolioinvestments and consequently – according tothe figures available to date – drew in signifi-cant amounts of money from abroad.
Thus in the final quarter of 2003, portfolio
investments on the German market raised319
1/C252billion net, which, compared with the
net capital exports in the preceding quarter(39
1/C252billion), constituted a considerable turn-
around in the direction of the internationalmovement of capital. Greater new invest-ment on the German securities markets wasparticularly evident in the case of foreign in-vestors. Whereas in the preceding quarter, ina market that was generally marked by fairlysubstantial risks, non-resident investors hadsold German securities ( 34 billion), in the
period from October to December they pur-chased German securities for 335 billion.
There was particularly strong demand forshares issued by German enterprises. Non-residents acquired such shares to the value of321
1/C252billion after purchasing only 33 billion
worth of this kind of paper earlier in 2003.This development was no doubt due, in part,to the general decline in uncertainty – meas-ured in terms of the implicit volatility of theFinancial transactions
5billion, net capital exports: –
2002 2003
I t e m Q 4Q 3Q 4
1 Direct investment – 0.6 + 1.4 – 15.3
German investment
abroad – 6.3 – 5.0 – 1.6Foreign investmentin Germany + 5.7 + 6.3 – 13.7
2 Portfolio investment – 12.3 – 9.7 + 19.6
German investment
abroad – 9.4 – 5.5 – 15.6
Shares – 5.4 – 0.7 – 5.8
Investment fundcertificates + 0.6 – 0.2 – 0.6Bonds and notes – 7.2 – 1.2 – 6.9Money market paper + 2.6 – 3.4 – 2.3
Foreign investment
in Germany – 2.9 – 4.2 + 35.2
Shares + 2.5 + 3.4 + 21.3
Investment fundcertificates – 1.3 – 0.8 + 0.2Bonds and notes – 0.6 + 5.3 + 13.4Money market paper – 3.6 – 12.0 + 0.3
3 Financial derivatives
1 + 0.3 + 0.3 – 0.3
4 Credit transactions – 34.3 + 6.2 – 27.8
Credit institutions – 49.8 + 20.0 – 30.2
Long-term – 6.3 – 15.6 + 1.1
Short-term – 43.6 + 35.6 – 31.4
Enterprises and
individuals + 15.7 – 0.7 + 11.1
Long-term + 1.1 + 0.4 – 1.2
Short-term + 14.6 – 1.1 + 12.3
General government – 0.4 + 2.1 – 0.4
Long-term – 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.3
Short-term – 0.2 + 2.0 – 1.7
Bundesbank + 0.2 – 15.2 – 8.2
5 Other investment – 0.3 – 0.6 – 0.76 Balance of all
statistically recordedcapital flows – 47.2 – 2.4 – 24.5
Memo item
Change in the foreignreserves at transactionvalues (increase: –)
2 + 0.9 – 0.8 + 1.2
1Securitised and non-securitised options and financial
futures contracts. — 2Excluding allocation of SDRs and
changes due to value adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankPortfolio
investment
Foreign
investment
in German
securities

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
55DAX – and to the renewed improvement in
sentiment that emerged on the Germanstock exchanges at the end of the third quar-ter – based on favourable profit forecasts forGerman companies. This sentiment persisteduntil the end of the year and resulted in a riseof almost 22% in share prices, which wassubstantial by international standards.
1How-
ever, there was also a strong demand amongforeign investors for German bonds andnotes in the final quarter of 2003. They al-most tripled their net acquisitions here ( 313
1/C252
billion compared with 351/C252billion in the pre-
vious quarter). Once again there was strongdemand for bank debt securities in particular(312
1/C252billion compared with 315 billion). The
spread of these securities over public bondsfell by a further two basis points in the periodunder review – in line with the trend over thepast few months. Whereas money marketpaper had been particularly popular withglobal investors at the beginning of the year,in the period from October to December for-eign investors purchased just under 3
1/C252billion
worth of it – a further sign of declining un-certainty on the market.
For the same reasons, German financial mar-
ket players were also somewhat less re-strained and again invested fairly large sumsin foreign securities. In the quarter under re-view, they purchased 315
1/C252billion worth of
foreign paper, compared with 351/C252billion in
the preceding quarter. As in the previousthree months, they demonstrated a slightpreference for fixed-rate debt securities is-sued by non-resident borrowers ( 37 billion
compared with just under 31 billion) over
dividend-bearing paper issued by foreignpublic limited companies ( 36 billion com-
pared with just over 3
1/C252billion). Regional fig-
ures, where available, show that despite theweak US dollar, German investors acquired aconsiderable net amount of stocks and bondsfrom the United States in the period under re-view. Apparently the prospect of robust USeconomic growth in 2004 weighed morestrongly with German investors than concernabout a further depreciation of the dollar.As in the past, however, euro-denominatedbonds from other euro-area countries madeup a large share of the investment volume inbonds and notes. By contrast, German saverspaid less attention to foreign money market 5 bn
Log scale
DAX performance index 1
Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4Foreign acquisition
of German shares
(capital imports: +)Equity market in Germany
1End-of-quarter data; end-1987 = 1000;
Source: Deutsche Börse AG.
Deutsche Bundesbank4000
3500
3000
250020+
15+
10+
5+
0
5−
2002 2003
1In the same period (from the end of September to the
end of December) other major financial centres recorded
much slower index growth, ranging from 41/C252% (Nikkei)
to approximately 13% (the US Dow Jones index and the
Dow Jones EuroStoxx index).German
investment
in foreign
securities

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
56paper ( 321/C252billion) and investment fund cer-
tificates ( 31/C252billion) when making portfolio
decisions.
In the period under review, capital imports
also predominated in the area of non-securitised credit transactions of non-bankswith non-residents ( 310
1/C252billion net) whereas
in the preceding quarter inflows and outflowsof capital had been roughly in balance. As isusual at the end of the year, enterprises andindividuals, in particular, repatriated a consid-erable amount of funds which they had heldin bank accounts abroad, one of the reasonsbeing to reduce the number of outstandingloans in their closing balances (window dress-ing). By contrast, general government cross-border credit transactions were almost in bal-ance in the last quarter of 2003 (outflow of3
1/C252billion).
However, in the case of direct investment,
where the reaction to cyclical factors orevents on the financial markets is generallynot as rapid as it is in portfolio investment,outflows of capital predominated at 315
1/C252
billion in the period under review while in
the two preceding quarters of 2003 therehad been net capital imports (totalling 325
billion).
The main reason for this development was
the change in the investment and borrowingbehaviour of foreign enterprises. Althoughthey expanded their participating interests inGermany by 39
1/C252billion between October
and December, at the same time foreign affili-ates domiciled in Germany made consider-able repayments on longer-term loans, whichthey had previously taken out with their non-
resident parent or affiliated companies. Thus,overall, the value of foreign direct investmentin Germany declined by 313
1/C252billion, having
previously risen steadily throughout the earl-ier part of the year. Firms in the United States,as well as Belgium and Luxembourg (thefavoured locations for holding companies),were the main ones to receive extensiverepayments on loans from their Germanbranches. In the three-month period underreview, German investors, unlike foreign pro-prietors, once again kept a somewhat tighterhold on their subsidiaries and branches domi-ciled abroad. Altogether they transferred31
1/C252billion of funds to them (compared with
35 billion between July and September). This
time the favoured destinations of Germanenterprises were partner countries outsidethe European Union.
The external assets of the German banking
system increased by 338
1/C252billion, partly as a
reflection of the large net inflows arising fromthe securities transactions and credit transac-tions of the non-banks. German credit institu-tions generally tended to reduce their unse-curitised liabilities vis-/C224-vis their foreign part-ners while the growth in the Bundesbank’sassets primarily resulted from the large-valuepayment system TARGET ( 38 billion).
The foreign reserves of the Bundesbank,
which are shown separately from cross-border credit transactions in the balance ofpayments, declined by 31 billion at transac-
tion values between the end of Septemberand the end of the year. Thus the annualisedstock of foreign reserve assets declined byCredit
transactions of
non-banks
Direct
investment
Foreign direct
investment in
GermanyGerman direct
investment
abroad
Credit
transactions
of the banking
system
Bundesbank
foreign reserves

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
5731/C252billion owing to transaction-related dis-
posals. However, the considerable valuationchanges had a much stronger impact on theBundesbank’s balance sheet and the slightholding gains in the case of gold were unableto offset the sharp losses in the currency pos-ition as a result of the weak US dollar. At
the end of 2003 Germany’s foreign reservesamounted to the equivalent of 376
1/C252billion
compared with 381 billion at the end of Sep-
tember 2003 and just over 385 billion at the
beginning of last year.

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
58Public financesCentral, state and local government
In the fourth quarter of 2003, the budget
deficits of central, state and local governmentwere noticeably lower than in the fourthquarter of 2002. On the one hand, this wasdue to sizeable privatisation proceeds. On theother, expenditure is likely to have gonedown, not least as a result of the reduction inChristmas bonuses for civil servants at stategovernment level. In 2003 as a whole, how-ever, the deficits expanded again sharply.They probably amounted to 370 billion,
thereby exceeding the figure for 2002, whichwas already very high, by around 310 billion.
Tax revenue stagnated in the wake of theweak macroeconomic development. Otherrevenue was depressed by the much smallerBundesbank profit transfer. By contrast, ex-penditure increased markedly. This was main-ly attributable to the further sizeable increasein Federal grants to the statutory pension in-surance scheme but also to additional labourmarket-related expenditure and flood disasterrelief.
This year, the income tax cuts will place a
major strain on general government revenue.This will, however, be compensated by con-solidation measures. On balance, the budgetplans of central and state government envis-age significantly lower deficits than in 2003.This presupposes, however, that the addition-al revenue anticipated, for example, from theplanned tax amnesty will indeed be raisedand that a rigorous cost retrenchment policyis pursued.Overview

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
59The level of tax revenue1continued to stag-
nate in the fourth quarter against the back-ground of persistently weak domestic eco-nomic activity. Although receipts from thetaxation of energy consumption rose againsteeply as a result of the last stage of the eco-logical tax reform, which came into force atthe beginning of 2003, this was offset by adecline in revenue from turnover tax and in-come taxes. In the case of turnover tax, thiswas primarily related to the decline in retailtrade turnover. Wage tax receipts werelowered by the fact that end-of-year bonuspayments were reduced or held back until2004 for tax reasons. Assessed income taxand investment income taxes likewise yieldedless than in the same period in 2002. By con-trast, revenue levels for corporation tax con-tinued to recover.
According to the preliminary outturn – which
includes only an estimate for local govern-ment taxes – tax revenue in 2003 as a wholemerely matched the 2002 level. Despite therise in excise taxes, the overall tax ratio (as de-fined in the government’s financial statistics)receded by 0.2 percentage point to 20.7%,after already decreasing considerably in thetwo previous years, mainly as a result of thetax reform. Although tax receipts marginallyexceeded the most recent official estimatefrom November, they still fell over 318 billion
(almost 0.9% of GDP) short of the compar-able tax estimate from autumn 2002. Thismeans that tax revenue was far lower thanthe original expectations for the third yearin a row. This was largely attributable to theunexpectedly weak level of overall economicactivity.With regard to the major individual taxes,
wage tax and turnover tax recorded the mostdisappointing results. Wage tax receipts grewby little more than
1/C252% and were conse-
quently 361/C252billion lower than expected in
the autumn 2002 forecast. This was mainlyattributable to the fact that gross wages andsalaries stagnated – in contrast to the originalexpectations. Turnover tax receipts declinedfor the third consecutive year with a drop ofnearly 1%, turning out almost 35
1/C252billion
lower than anticipated. This was only partlydue to the much weaker growth in nominaldomestic demand compared with the originalassumptions. Besides the extension of theinput tax offsetting facility for purchased ve-Year-on-year change
%
Tax revenue, total 1
1st hf 2nd hf 1st hf 2nd hf Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4Tax revenue
1Including EU shares in German tax rev-
enue, but excluding receipts from local
government taxes, which are not yet
known for the last quarter recorded.
Deutsche Bundesbank4+
3+
2+
1+
0
1−
2−
3−
4−
5−
2001 2002 2003
1Including EU shares in German tax revenue but exclud-
ing receipts from local government taxes, which are not
yet known.Tax revenue
in fourth
quarter ...
... and in 2003
as a whole

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
60hicles used partly for private and partly for
business purposes, this may also have beencaused by further insolvency-related shortfallsand, possibly, by greater tax evasion. Of theprofit-related taxes, non-assessed taxes onearnings raised 39 billion; this was just over
one-third less than in the previous year andconsequently almost 34 billion below the ex-
pectations. The main reason for this was thefurther decrease in company dividend distri-butions, the effect of which was magnifiedby the moratorium for claiming corporationtax credits that had accumulated prior to thetax reform. Conversely, this same factor – to-gether with the temporary raising of the taxrate by 1.5 percentage points to 26.5% –helped to push up corporation tax receipts,which totalled just over 38 billion (compared
with less than 33 billion in 2002) and margin-ally exceeded the expectations from autumn
2002. The negative exceptional factors result-ing from the change in the corporation taxregime in 2001 thus continued to dwindle inimportance.
As a result of the emerging cyclical recovery,
a significant increase in tax revenue is envis-aged for 2004. In the official estimate fromNovember 2003, an increase of 2
3/C254% is fore-
cast, based on nominal economic growth of2
1/C252%. This estimate already took account of
the revenue shortfalls expected from the ori-ginally planned second stage of the tax re-form. The partial advancement of the thirdstage of the tax reform will, however, furtherreduce the marginal tax rates for income taxto a range of 16% to 45%; this will lead toadditional revenue shortfalls of around 39 bil-
lion. Only roughly one-third of this amountwill be offset by the abolition of tax breaksand accounting conveniences as well as therises in tobacco tax which will come intoforce in March and November. Although add-itional revenue is also envisaged from the de-creed tax amnesty, it is uncertain whether thiswill amount to 35 billion as anticipated by
central government. All in all, therefore, thereare a number of factors indicating that theoverall tax ratio may well decline a littlefurther.
In the fourth quarter the Federal Government
budget recorded a surplus of 38
1/C252billion; this
was 351/C252billion higher than in the fourth
quarter of 2002. This was, inter alia, attribut-
able to sizeable privatisation proceeds. In2003 as a whole, however, the deficit rosesteeply by 36
1/C252billion to over 339 billion.Trends in the revenue from major taxes
Revenue
in5billion
Full year
Type of tax 2002 2003Annual
percent-agechange
Wage tax 132.2 133.1 + 0.7
Assessed income tax 7.5 4.6 – 39.4Corporation tax 2.9 8.3 + 188.9Turnover tax 138.2 137.0 – 0.9
of which Q4
Wage tax 38.9 38.7 – 0.6
Assessed income tax 4.5 4.4 – 2.2Corporation tax 3.2 3.4 + 7.4Turnover tax 36.0 35.8 – 0.5
Deutsche BundesbankOutlook for
2004
Federal budget
in 2003 ...

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
61Consequently, the budget estimate from
spring 2003 was overshot by 320 billion.2Tax
shortfalls vis-/C224-vis the estimates, includingshortfalls arising from draft legislation thatwas finally not adopted, amounted to 311
1/C252
billion. In addition, labour market-related cost
burdens exceeded the original estimates by310
1/C252billion. Cuts in expenditure on interest
payments and guarantees as well as the newall-day school programme created only amoderate counterbalance. Total expenditurewent up by 3%, whereas a decline of
1/C252%
was envisaged in the original budgetaryplans.
The 2004 Federal budget – which takes ac-
count of the Federal Government plans fromautumn but not the results of the parliamen-tary mediation committee hearing on the re-form legislation – envisages a significant def-icit reduction vis-/C224-vis the outturn for 2003 to329
1/C252billion. This includes a further rise in
privatisation proceeds by 32 billion to 37 bil-
lion after it was originally intended to havevirtually no recourse to financing via assetdisposals.
In the course of the mediation proceedings
concluded in mid-December, it was decidedto bring forward only some of the tax cutsplanned for 2005. At the same time, the ori-ginally planned subsidy reductions to coun-terfinance the tax cuts were likewise down-sized. The changeover to “Unemploymentbenefit II” was postponed by six months untilthe start of 2005. In the aggregate, the deci-sions provide relief of 33 billion compared
with the 2004 Federal budget plans. Thosebudget plans are also subject to some uncer-tainty, however. Firstly, the projected net in-
come from the motorway toll for heavygoods vehicles of just over 32 billion will not
be realised. Secondly, the financial impact ofseveral reform laws and reform projects, suchas the tax amnesty or combating illicit work-ing, are very difficult to assess. Thirdly, anacross-the-board cut in expenditure of 32
1/C252
billion is required, above all owing to the deci-
sion not to reduce the Federal Governmentgrants to the statutory pension insurancescheme.
For the period of the medium-term financial
plan, for which the third stage of the incometax cuts had already been factored in, theFederal budget faces greater handicaps, 5 bn
 5 bn
Cumulative
20032002
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4Quarterly results
2002
2003The Federal Government’s
balance of revenue and
expenditure in 2002 and 2003
Deutsche Bundesbank15−
20−
25−
30−
35−
40−
45−
50−10+
5+
0
5−
10−
15−
20−
25−
2However, the supplementary budget actually envisaged
a deficit of almost 344 billion.... and in 2004
Situation after
the conclusion
of the
mediation
proceedings

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
62mainly because of the smaller reduction of
subsidies decided by the parliamentary medi-ation committee. Since, in addition, the pro-jected level of tax revenue will need to be re-vised downwards vis-/C224-vis the estimates inthe medium-term financial plan, further ad-justment measures are essential if the envis-aged lowering of the deficit to 310
1/C252billion
in 2007 is to be achieved.
The special funds recorded a surplus of 310
billion in 2003. This exceeded the figure for2002 by just over 31 billion, even though the
share of the Bundesbank’s profit accruing tothe Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilitieswas almost 36 billion lower. This was offset
by the new “Reconstruction Aid” Fund set upto deal with the consequences of the flooddisaster, which recorded a surplus of 33
1/C252bil-
lion last year, and the ERP Special Fund,which expanded its surplus by 33
1/C252billion to
34 billion as a result of a big increase in loan
repayments. A financial deterioration is ex-pected this year, however. This will be attrib-utable, firstly, to the further lowering of theBundesbank profit and, secondly, to the likelyutilisation of the resources accrued in the“Reconstruction Aid” Fund.
State government apparently recorded a
much smaller deficit in the fourth quarterthan during the same period in 2002. Thiswas due not least to the noticeable reduc-tions in Christmas bonuses paid to workingand retired civil servants in many Federalstates. But in 2003 as a whole, the deficit ofstate government probably again overshotthe record high of the previous year. Primarilyin response to the weak development of taxrevenue, numerous state governments were
obliged to adopt supplementary budgets inwhich the authorised level of borrowingexceeds the ceiling allowed by law. With itsruling of 31 October 2003, in which the stateof Berlin’s 2002/2003 budget was declaredunconstitutional, the Berlin ConstitutionalCourt demanded an adequate justificationfor such overstepping of the legally stipulatedborrowing limit. Applying these criteria, otherstates, too, would need to explain their ex-cessive borrowing. In the light of the highdeficits and the sizeable tax cuts in 2004 and2005, there is no alternative to pursuing apolicy of rigorous fiscal consolidation.
In 2004 state government budgets will re-
main very tight. However, in the meantimeconsiderable savings have been agreed. Forexample, civil servants’ Christmas bonuseswill be reduced in additional Federal statesand in most states their annual holiday bonuswill be abolished. Furthermore, in some statescivil servants’ weekly working hours are beingraised considerably, thereby reducing theneed to appoint new staff. In addition, stategovernments are lowering the grants theypay on a voluntary basis, in some cases sub-stantially. Even so, some states have still notsucceeded in lowering their estimated netborrowing to the constitutional upper limit.
For local government only the results for the
third quarter are currently available, accord-ing to which the deficit of 31
1/C252billion was
the same as in the previous year. Althoughtax revenue increased marginally by 1%, thiswas offset by a further steep drop in thegrants from state government, which meantSpecial funds
State
government
Local
government

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
63that overall revenue stagnated. Expenditure
likewise remained at the same level as in2002. Whereas social benefits grew by justunder 10%, expenditure on capital formationcontracted by the same margin of almostone-tenth (despite the flood-related increasein Saxony). The deficit for 2003 as a whole,judging from the present perspective, couldamount to 34
1/C252billion and thus be about
twice as high as in 2002. Although thebudgetary situation is likely to improve thisyear, particularly owing to measures adoptedin the mediation process (primarily themarked lowering of local business tax trans-fers), local government is again likely to runup sizeable deficits.
In the fourth quarter the indebtedness of cen-
tral, state and local government rose by313 billion. Whereas money market liabilities
were redeemed to the value of 311 billion,
324 billion net was raised on the capital mar-
ket. The largest borrower was state govern-ment with 310 billion on balance. Central
government had a significantly lower borrow-ing requirement of 32 billion, in part owing
to sizeable one-off privatisation proceeds.Local government debt probably increased by31 billion, whereas in the case of the special
funds redemptions marginally outweighednew borrowing.
Social security funds
In the fourth quarter, the wage and salary
earners’ pension insurance scheme recordeda seasonal surplus of 31
1/C252billion; this ex-
ceeded the figure for the same period lastyear by just over 31/C252billion. Revenue from
contributions grew only weakly by 1% intotal despite the higher contribution rate andthe significant rise in the ceiling for earningssubject to contributions. The reasons for thiswere cuts in Christmas bonuses, a further in-crease in the number of employees opting forcompany pension plans with direct paymentswhich are not subject to social security contri-butions as well as the delayed transfer of con-tributions by public sector employers.
3Total
revenue went up more steeply by 21/C252%, par-
ticularly because the grants from the Federalbudget increased again sharply as a result ofthe last stage of the ecological tax reform. Ex-Net borrowing in the market by
central, state and local government
5billion
of which
Period TotalSecuri-
ties 1Loansagainstborrow-ers’notes
2MemoitemAcquisi-tion bynon-resi-dents
2002 + 54.5 + 67.6 – 11.9 + 57.4
of which
Q1 + 25.6 + 15.2 + 10.5 + 12.2Q2 + 1.5 + 22.9 – 21.4 + 16.8Q3 + 18.6 + 25.1 – 5.4 + 19.1Q 4 +8 . 8 +4 . 4 +4 . 4 +9 . 3
2003
pe + 80.9 + 74.1 + 7.9 ...
Q1 + 34.7 + 32.6 + 2.1 + 19.5Q2 + 13.5 + 11.8 + 1.6 + 16.3Q3 + 19.9 + 9.4 + 11.6 – 6.5Q4
pe + 12.9 + 20.3 – 7.5 ...
1Excluding equalisation claims. — 2Including cash ad-
vances and money market borrowing.
Deutsche Bundesbank
3Following the latest pay settlement for the public sec-
tor, employers are gradually changing over to paying
wages and salaries at the end of the month instead of in
the middle of the month. The associated social security
contributions are then paid in the following month.Debt
Wage and
salary earners’
pension
insurance
scheme

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
64penditure grew fairly weakly (by just over 1%)
owing primarily to the fact that the pensionadjustment in mid-2003 was less than half ashigh as in 2002 and to the merely moderaterise in the number of pension recipients. Thefluctuation reserve of 0.47 month’s expend-iture fell slightly below the statutory require-ment of 0.5 month’s expenditure at the endof the year.
For this year, the lower limit for the fluc-
tuation reserve has been reduced to just0.2 month’s expenditure and another deficithas been budgeted for. Together with the re-maining short-term measures that have beenadopted,
4this means that the contribution
rate did not have to be raised above the cur-rent rate of 19.5%. However, the medium-term stabilisation of contribution rates pre-supposes a noticeable recovery on the labour
market. In the long term, limiting the rise inthe contribution rate will necessitate more ex-tensive amendments to pensions legislation.Important steps in this direction are currentlybeing taken in the form of the draft “PensionSustainability Act.”
The deficit of the Federal Employment
Agency – which changed its name at thebeginning of the year from Federal LabourOffice – in the fourth quarter of 2003 was3
1/C254billion; this was 33/C254billion lower than in
the fourth quarter of 2002. The main reasonfor this was, however, that the contributionsto the statutory pension insurance scheme onbehalf of recipients of wage substitutes forJanuary were, for the first time, not bookedprematurely in December. This one-off effectreduced the deficit by around 3
1/C252billion.
Revenue in the fourth quarter was almost 4%
below the level in the previous year. This wascaused by a steep decline in other revenueand a fall of 1
1/C252% in receipts from contribu-
tions – despite the significant rise in the ceil-ing for earnings subject to contributions. Ex-penditure fell more steeply (by just over 8%),partly as a result of the aforementioned ex-ceptional factor. In the fourth quarter 5% lesswas spent on unemployment benefit. Theadditional expenditure necessitated by therise in the number of unemployed personsand the higher contribution rates to theQuarterly
 5 bn
 5 bn
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (−)Log scale
Expenditure
RevenueWage and salary earners
pension insurance scheme
Deutsche Bundesbank4+
2+
0
2−60
58
56
54
52
2001 2002 2003
4These include making no pension adjustment in mid-
2004, shifting the payment date for new pensions from
the beginning to the end of the month, transferring the
full contribution burden to the long-term care insurance
scheme to pensioners themselves, as well as faster adjust-
ment of the contribution rate to pensioners’ health insur-
ance (which is anticipated to decline).Federal
Employment
Agency

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
65statutory pension and health insurance
schemes was offset by a significant decline inthe benefit recipient ratio. Expenditure on ac-tive labour market measures decreased by12
1/C252% in total. New expenditure in connec-
tion with the subsidised establishment ofone-person firms and grants to the PersonnelService Agencies (PSA) had virtually no finan-cial impact during the period under review.
The budget of the Federal Labour Office ini-
tially envisaged a balanced outturn for 2003.However, the Federal Government’s supple-mentary budget estimated a transfer require-ment of 37
1/C252billion. The actual deficit turned
out to be just over 36 billion. This was primar-
ily attributable to more stringent budgetarymanagement, particularly as regards job cre-ation schemes as well as vocational trainingand retraining measures. The budget for2004 envisages a deficit of just over 35 bil-
lion. The projected need for another largegovernment grant appears realistic given thatthe number of unemployed persons is unlike-ly to decrease substantially in 2004 and thatthe reform legislation
5adopted at the end
of 2003 will yield financial relief only in thecoming years.
The statutory health insurance fund recorded
a cumulative deficit of 32
1/C252billion up to the
end of the third quarter. Although this rep-resents a financial improvement of almost31 billion vis-/C224-vis the previous year, it is evi-
dent that contribution receipts, even follow-ing the raising of the average contributionrate from 14.0% to 14.3%, are still not suffi-cient to cover expenditure. In the first ninemonths these receipts (including contribu-tions to the statutory health insurance fund in
respect of “mini jobs”) were barely 2% high-er than in 2002 despite the increase in thecontribution rate. Expenditure on benefitsgrew only moderately by just under 1%.Quarterly
 5 bn
 5 bn 5 bn
Lin scale
Surplus (+) or deficit (−)Expenditure on...
...unemployment benefit
   and short-time work-
   ing benefits
...vocational training 2Log scale
Expenditure, total
Revenue 1Federal Employment Agency
1 Excluding Federal Government liquidity
assistance. — 2 Including job creation meas-
ures.
Deutsche Bundesbank1+
0
1−
2−
3−8.0
7.5
7.0
6.5
6.0
5.5
5.0
4.516
15
14
13
12
11
2001 2002 2003
5This includes the Third and Fourth Act Promoting Mod-
ern Labour Market Services and the Act to Reform the
Labour Market.Statutory
health
insurance fund

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
66The outturn for 2003 as a whole will be influ-
enced by the rush to claim healthcare servicesahead of the introduction of less generousbenefit rules from the beginning of 2004, thepattern of end-of-year bonuses and the trendin company pension payments that are ex-empt from social security contributions in thefourth quarter. Data on the statutory pensionand unemployment insurance schemes indi-cate a further erosion of the volume of earn-ings subject to contributions. A considerableannual deficit may therefore be expected forthe third year in a row. In 2004 the Act toModernise the Statutory Health InsuranceFund is intended to produce financial relief ofalmost 310 billion. This should enable the
health institutions to start repaying the debtwhich they have accumulated – in contraven-tion of the statutory rules – in the first of fourannual instalments. However, their potentialto lower the contribution rates is considerablyreduced both by this redemption requirementand by the need to compensate for theirstructural underfunding of expenditure. A fallin the annual average contribution rate towell below 14% is therefore unlikely to beachieved.
Outlook for the general government
sector as a whole
According to provisional data from the Fed-
eral Statistical Office, the general governmentdeficit ratio (as defined in the MaastrichtTreaty) rose to 4.0% last year after already ex-ceeding the 3% ceiling laid down in theTreaty and reaching 3.5% in 2002. The mainreason for this was the weak macroeconomicdevelopment, which was reflected in only a
small growth of revenue from tax and socialsecurity contributions and a rise in labourmarket-related spending.
Owing to countervailing effects there was
hardly any change in the structural deficitratio, which has led to some confusion in in-terpreting this variable. On the one hand,there was a series of restrictive fiscal policymeasures geared towards reducing the struc-tural deficits. Indirect taxes and contributionrates to the statutory health and pension in-surance funds were raised. Central, state andlocal government implemented a stringentexpenditure policy, which included the con-tinued downsizing of staffing levels, cuts incivil servants’ remuneration and the furthercurbing of investment expenditure. Savingswere also made in healthcare and labourmarket spending. On the other hand, thesefiscal policy measures were largely offset bynegative developments which were not cyc-lically induced. For example, payments to theEU increased markedly vis-/C224-vis the previousyear, the Bundesbank profit declined sharplyand additional expenditure was required forflood relief. Despite the aforementioned in-crease in tax and social security contributions,the taxes and social security ratio increasedonly marginally. Thus, social security contribu-tions grew more sluggishly than was to be ex-pected considering the development of grosswages and salaries and the increases in thecontribution rates; this was attributable notleast to more people changing from public toprivate health insurance institutions.
Rise in the
deficit ratio to
4% in 2003Structural
budgetary
position
virtually
unchanged

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
67The next stage in the excessive deficit procedure against Germany
In autumn last year it became apparent that
in 2004, not least owing to the scheduled ad-vancement of the tax cuts, Germany wouldagain overshoot the reference value for thegeneral government deficit of 3% of GDP, asdefined in the EC Treaty. The European Com-mission’s autumn forecast put the likely figureat 3.9%. The Federal Government, too, nowanticipated a renewed overshooting of thedeficit ceiling. This means that Germanyfailed to comply with the Ecofin Council’s re-commendation. In January 2003, after havingestablished that Germany had run up an ex-cessive deficit, the Ecofin Council had urgedthe government to bring the deficit backdown to the reference value by 2004 at thelatest.
1
The European Commission therefore recom-mended to the Council last November thatthe next stage of the excessive deficit proce-dure should be initiated against Germany andFrance - which was in a similar situation. How-ever, the Commission simultaneously sug-gested that the deadline for correcting theexcessive deficit be extended from 2004 to2005. Its main argument for doing so was theoutlook for economic growth, which in themeantime had worsened significantly in bothcountries. It is questionable whether even thisdeadline extension is consistent with the spiritof the Stability and Growth Pact. The ultimateobjective of the excessive deficit procedure isto achieve a rapid correction of unwelcomebudgetary developments, if necessary usingsanctions.
2
However, at its meeting on 25 November 2003the Ecofin Council did not follow the Commis-sion’s recommendation to give Germany andFrance a warning as the last step before sanc-tions are imposed. Instead, Germany com-mitted itself to take all the measures neces-sary to lower the deficit ratio to below 3% by2005 at the latest – on condition that theCommission’s growth outlook turns out to becorrect. In its concluding remarks, the Councilrecommended that Germany reduce its cyc-lically adjusted deficit in 2004 by 0.6% of GDP.In 2005, the reduction must amount to atleast 0.5% of GDP, but may have to be higherif this is necessary to comply with the 3% ceil-
ing. In the subsequent years, too, the rate ofbudgetary consolidation, measured by thecyclically adjusted financial balance, shouldamount to at least 0.5% of GDP per annum,so that a budgetary position which is close tobalance or in surplus can be achieved in themedium term and the debt ratio can be low-ered again. In addition, Germany was told toreport regularly on the progress made to-wards complying with these recommenda-tions. The Council also announced its inten-tion to initiate the next stage in the proce-dure if Germany does not fulfil these re-quirements. Similar recommendations wereadopted for France.
The Council’s conclusions deviate from the
normal sequence of the excessive deficit pro-cedure. In order to establish legal clarity alsowith regard to the future implementation ofthe Pact’s rules, the Commission filed an ac-tion at the European Court of Justice in Janu-ary to verify the legality of the Council’sapproach.
The procedures against Germany and France
have been suspended for the time being,even though the governments of both coun-tries themselves anticipate that the 3% ceilingwill be overshot again this year for the thirdtime in a row without the ability to invoke anescape clause. Following this precedent, thethreat of imposing sanctions in the event of acontinued excessive deficit has lost credibility.
The latest disputes about the interpretation
of the Pact have been used as an opportunityto demand its reform. However, in the presentsituation it is by no means certain thatamending the Pact or the EC Treaty will im-prove the underlying fiscal policy setting andcreate greater confidence in sound publicfinances. The negative repercussions of thisloss of credibility are more likely to be limitedif Germany and France consistently fulfilthe consolidation requirements demanded ofthem and if the member states and the Coun-cil implement the Pact’s rules strictly in thefuture.
1See also Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report, Febru-
ary 2003, p 53 in particular. — 2See also Deutsche Bundes-
bank, Monthly Report, November 2003, p 61 in particular.
Deutsche Bundesbank

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
68A decline in the deficit ratio is expected this
year. Although tax receipts will fall markedly(by315 billion or
3/C254% of GDP in total) as a re-
sult of the second and – partially advanced –third stage of the income tax reform, thesewill be accompanied by major relief for thegeneral government budgets. The fact thatsubsidies will be reduced – even if not tothe extent envisaged by the Federal Govern-ment – is a welcome development. Further-more, measures in connection with the taxamnesty and combating illicit work will resultin considerable additional revenue, whichcannot, however, be reliably quantified.Moreover, it may be assumed that the statu-tory health insurance fund will not record adeficit again this year. In view of the persist-ently tense budgetary situation, central, stateand local government are likely to adopt astringent spending stance. Staffing levels will
be trimmed further, the salary adjustment inthe public sector will be moderate, and otheroperating expenditure and investment arelikely to be very limited. From the presenthorizon, however, the deficit ratio is still ex-pected to exceed the 3% ceiling.
The updated German stability programme
put forward in December envisaged a de-crease in the deficit ratio in 2004 to 3
1/C252%.
Next year the ratio is supposed to fall belowthe 3% ceiling to 2
1/C252% and then be reduced
gradually to 11/C252% in 2007. This does not,
however, take account of the outcome of theparliamentary mediation committee from De-cember. That will lead to relief for public fi-nances this year compared with the Bundes-tag’s previous decisions. The mediation com-Key data of the Federal Government’s updated stability programme
in %
Item 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
Real GDP growth
Stability programme 2003 0.2 – 0.1 11/C252–2 21/C254 21/C254 21/C254
Stability programme 20021/C252 11/C252 21/C254 21/C254 21/C254 –
Deficit ratio (–)
Stability programme 2003 – 3.5 – 4 – 31/C254 –21/C252 –2 –11/C252
Stability programme 2002 – 33/C254 –23/C254 –11/C252 –1 0 –
Debt ratio
Stability programme 2003 60.8 64 65 651/C252 651/C252 65
Stability programme 2002 61 611/C252 601/C252 591/C252 571/C252 –
Structural deficit ratio (–) – 3.3 – 3.1 – 21/C252 –2 –11/C252 –1
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance.
Deutsche Bundesbank
Decline in the
deficit ratio
expected in
2004
Stability
programme

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
69mittee’s decision not to bring forward the
third stage of the tax reform in toto (implying
tax shortfalls of only 39 billion instead of over
315 billion) outweighs the fact that budget-
ary relief from the adopted measures will belower than initially planned. An updated ver-sion of the stability programme presented inJanuary therefore envisages a deficit ratio of3
1/C254% for 2004 (see table on page 68). In
2005, by contrast, the negative implicationsfor public finances – particularly the smaller-than-planned cuts in the commuting allow-ance and the grant to home buyers – will bepredominant. On balance, revenue will againrecord only sluggish growth owing to thethird stage of the income tax reform, the fullimpact of which will be felt by that time, andthe fact that receipts from the tax amnestywill be negligible.
As things stand today, it is not yet certain that
Germany will bring its deficit back below the3% ceiling next year – as envisaged in thestability programme. This is, however, neces-sary in order to comply with its Europeancommitments. If the limit is exceeded again inthe coming year, this would not only under-
mine the already damaged Stability andGrowth Pact (see box on page 67), but wouldalso lessen the credibility of German fiscalpolicy. However, besides achieving a short-term reduction in the deficit next year, it isalso necessary to work towards meeting thetarget set in the Stability and Growth Pact ofattaining a budgetary position which is atleast close to balance in the medium term. Inthis context all levels of government are re-quired to seek to comply with this require-ment, which is additionally incorporated inGerman budgetary law. The stability pro-gramme envisages a structural consolidationof
1/C252% of GDP per annum. According to an
Ecofin agreement reached last year, such arate of consolidation progress must be seenas a minimum goal for countries with abudgetary position that is not structurally bal-anced. In the light of the still very high deficitratio, the debt ratio (well above the referencevalue of 60%) which will continue to riseuntil 2005 and the assumed economic recov-ery, an accelerated reduction of the deficitwould be appropriate.
Faster deficit
reduction
required

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
70

Statistical
Section
1*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004

ContentsI Key economic data for the euro area
1 Monetary developments and interest
rates 6*
2 Foreign trade and payments 6*
3 General economic indicators 7*
II Overall monetary survey in the
euro area
1 The money stock and its counterparts 8*2 Consolidated balance sheet of mon-
etary financial institutions (MFIs) 10*
3 Banking system’s liquidity position 14*
III Consolidated financial statement
of the Eurosystem
1 Assets 16*2 Liabilities 18*
IV Banks
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary
financial institutions (excluding theBundesbank) in Germany 20*
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks
(MFIs) in Germany, by category ofbanks 24*
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-/C224-vis residents 26*
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs)
in Germany vis-/C224-vis non-residents 28*
2*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004

5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) 30*
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany
to domestic enterprises and resident
individuals, housing loans, sectors ofeconomic activity 32*
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks
(non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs)in Germany 34*
8 Deposits of resident individuals and
domestic non-profit institutions atbanks (MFIs) in Germany 36*
9 Deposits of domestic public author-
ities at banks (MFIs) in Germany, bycreditor group 36*
10 Savings deposits and bank savings
bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germanysold to non-banks (non-MFIs) 38*
11 Debt securities and money market
paper outstanding of banks (MFIs)in Germany 38*
12 Building and loan associations (MFIs)
in Germany 39*
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign
branches and foreign subsidiaries ofGerman banks (MFIs) 40*
V Minimum reserves
1 Reserve ratios 42*2 Reserve maintenance in Germany up
to the end of 1998 42*
3 Reserve maintenance in the euro
area 42*VI Interest rates
1 ECB interest rates 43*2 Base rates 43*3 Eurosystem monetary policy oper-
ations allotted through tenders 43*
4 Money market rates, by month 43*5 Interest rates for outstanding
amounts and new business ofbanks (MFIs) in the euro area 44*
6 Interest rates and volumes for out-
standing amounts and new businessof German banks (MFIs) 45*
VII Capital market
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities
and shares in Germany 48*
2 Sales of debt securities issued by
borrowers domiciled in Germany 49*
3 Outstanding amount of debt secur-
ities issued by borrowers domiciledin Germany 50*
4 Circulation of shares issued by resi-
dents of Germany 50*
5 Yields and indices on German
securities 51*
6 Sales and purchases of investment
fund certificates in Germany 51*
3*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004

VIII Public finances in Germany
1 General government budgetary
position 52*
2 Budgetary position of central,
state and local government 52*
3 Government fiscal position as
defined in the national accounts 53*
4 Tax revenue of central, state and
local government 53*
5 Tax revenue, by type 54*
6 Specific taxes levied by central,
state and local government 54*
7 General government debt 55*8 Changes in general government
debt 57*
9 Loans raised by general govern-
ment against borrowers’ notes 57*
10 Central government debt 58*11 Central government borrowing
in the market 58*
12 Revenue, expenditure and assets
of the wage and salary earners’pension insurance fund 59*
13 Revenue and expenditure of the
Federal Employment Agency 59*
IX Economic conditions
1 Origin and use of domestic product,
distribution of national income 60*
2 Output in the production sector 61*3 Orders received by industry 62*4 Orders received by construction 63*5 Retail trade turnover 63*6 Labour market 64*7 Prices 65*8 Households’ income 66*9 Pay rates and actual earnings 66*
X External sector
1 Major items of the balance of
payments of the euro area 67*
2 Major items of the balance of
payments of the Federal Republicof Germany 68*
3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the
Federal Republic of Germany, bycountry and group of countries 69*
4 Services and factor income of the
Federal Republic of Germany 70*
5 Current transfers of the Federal
Republic of Germany 70*
6 Capital transfers 70*7 Financial account of the Federal
Republic of Germany 71*
8 External position of the Bundesbank 72*9 External position of the Bundesbank
in the euro area 72*
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises
in Germany (other than banks)vis-/C224-vis non-residents 73*
11 Deutsche Mark and euro exchange
rates of selected currencies 74*
12 Exchange rates for the national
currencies of the euro-area memberstates, the Deutsche Mark value ofthe ECU and euro conversion rates 74*
13 Effective exchange rates of the euro
and selected foreign currencies 75*
4*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004

Abbreviations and symbols
eEstimated
pProvisional
pePartly estimated
rRevised
...Data available at a later date
.Data unknown, not to be published or
not meaningful
0Less than 0.5 but more than nil
–Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to round-ing.
5*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
 I Key economic data for the euro area 
 
1 Monetary developments and interest rates
 
 
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions  1, 2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
 M 3  3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3-month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
MFI lending, and capital 3-month ment bonds moving  average
M1 M2 (centred) total households formation  4 Eonia  5, 7 Euribor  6, 7 outstanding  8 
Period Annual percentage change % per annum as a monthly average
2002          Jun 7.2 6.5 7.1 7.3 4.4 5.3 4.3 3.35 3.46 5.2
         Jul 7.9 6.5 7.0 7.0 4.0 4.8 5.0 3.30 3.41 5.0
         Aug 7.9 6.5 7.0 7.1 4.2 5.1 5.3 3.29 3.35 4.7         Sep 8.3 6.5 7.1 7.0 4.3 5.0 5.2 3.32 3.31 4.5
         Oct 8.4 6.8 6.9 7.0 4.3 4.9 5.0 3.30 3.26 4.6
         Nov 9.0 6.8 7.0 6.9 3.9 4.6 5.0 3.30 3.12 4.6         Dec 9.7 6.6 6.9 7.1 4.1 4.7 4.9 3.09 2.94 4.4
2003          Jan 9.3 6.6 7.3 7.4 4.2 4.8 4.6 2.79 2.83 4.2
         Feb 10.4 7.5 8.1 7.8 4.4 4.9 4.7 2.76 2.69 4.0         Mar 11.7 8.0 8.0 8.3 4.1 4.8 4.4 2.75 2.53 4.1
         Apr 11.2 8.1 8.7 8.4 4.7 5.0 4.6 2.56 2.53 4.2
         May 11.4 8.6 8.6 8.6 5.1 5.2 4.4 2.56 2.40 3.9         Jun 11.4 8.4 8.5 8.6 4.9 5.2 5.1 2.21 2.15 3.7
         Jul 11.5 8.6 8.7 8.5 5.4 5.6 5.3 2.08 2.13 4.0
         Aug 11.8 8.6 8.3 8.2 5.5 5.6 5.3 2.10 2.14 4.2         Sep 11.2 8.2 7.6 8.0 5.5 5.5 5.2 2.02 2.15 4.2
         Oct 12.3 8.2 8.1 7.7 5.8 5.5 5.7 2.01 2.14 4.3
         Nov 10.7 7.6 7.4 7.6 6.3 6.1 6.0 1.97 2.16 4.4         Dec 10.6 7.5 7.1 ... 5.9 5.8 5.7 2.06 2.15 4.4
2004         J a n ... .... 2.02 2.09 4.2
1 Source: ECB. — 2 Seasonally adjusted. — 3 Excluding money market fund euro-area non-MFIs. — 5 Euro OverNight Index Average. — 6 Euro
shares
/units, money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up Interbank Offered Rate. — 7 See also footnotes to Table VI.5., pp 44*. —
to two years held by non-euro-area residents. — 4 Longerterm liabilities to 8 GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds; from 2001, Euro12. 
 
 
2 Foreign trade and payments  * 
  
 
Selected items of the euro-area balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1 
Current account Capital account Effective exchange rate  3 
of which Direct Securities Credit Reserve
Balance Trade balance Balance investment transactions assets Dollar rate Nominal Real  4 transactions  2 
Period
 5 
 million Euro/US-$ Q 1 1999=100
2002          Jun + 7,482 + 13,894 − 38,762 − 18,348 + 18,455 − 35,353 − 3,517 0.9554 90.6 93.2
         Jul + 8,172 + 16,026 − 16,898 − 5,992 + 405 − 8,698 − 2,612 0.9922 91.7 94.4
         Aug + 9,275 + 11,263 − 30,402 + 1,505 − 11,283 − 22,437 + 1,812 0.9778 91.1 93.6         Sep + 8,385 + 10,828 − 6,347 − 6,319 + 21,707 − 17,950 − 3,785 0.9808 91.2 93.8
         Oct + 4,584 + 12,457 − 13,892 − 6,929 + 28,063 − 37,162 + 2,136 0.9811 91.7 94.3
         Nov + 10,609 + 12,449 − 18,879 + 7,298 + 14,337 − 38,094 − 2,420 1.0014 92.5 95.1         Dec + 7,948 + 9,584 − 15,721 − 6,406 − 3,261 − 5,002 − 1,052 1.0183 93.6 96.7
2003          Jan − 5,191 + 1,491 − 12,195 − 2,196 − 2,109 − 9,439 + 1,549 1.0622 95.8 98.8
         Feb + 3,356 + 8,690 − 19,618 + 2,882 − 6,683 − 21,156 + 5,340 1.0773 97.1 100.2         Mar + 4,271 + 6,451 + 6,676 − 1,543 + 13,343 − 10,116 + 4,992 1.0807 97.9 101.2
         Apr − 7,629 + 6,311 + 16,010 − 16,148 + 23,253 + 8,157 + 748 1.0848 98.6 102.1
         May − 1,676 + 7,249 − 27,036 − 34 + 10,890 − 38,250 + 358 1.1582 102.5 106.1         Jun + 2,038 + 9,882 − 21,946 + 19,717 + 21,763 − 64,180 + 754 1.1663 102.7 106.6
         Jul + 3,142 + 15,488 − 10,994 − 4,212 − 49,619 + 40,997 + 1,840 1.1372 101.4 105.2
         Aug + 3,678 + 10,366 + 7,514 − 3,380 − 37,630 + 48,273 + 251 1.1139 100.3 103.9         Sep + 6,765 + 11,475 − 5,352 − 4,792 + 14,405 − 14,748 − 217 1.1222 99.9 103.5
         Oct + 9,266 + 14,525 − 4,380 − 10,551 + 28,591 − 22,658 + 238 1.1692 101.3 105.1
         Nov + 4,398 + 9,190 − 254 + 6,491 − 3,938 − 8,312 + 5,506 1.1702 101.2 105.2         Dec ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.2286 104.0 108.4
2004          Jan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.2613 105.1 109.6
*  Source: ECB. — 1  See also Tables X.12 and 13, pp 74−75. — 2  Including
financial derivatives. — 3  Vis-à-vis a narrow group of countries. — 4  Based
on consumer prices. 
6* I Key economic data for the euro area 

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
I  Key economic data for Euro area
 
3  General economic indicators
 
 
                   
Luxem- Nether- Euro
Period Belgium Germany Finland France Greece Ireland Italy bourg lands Austria Portugal Spain area 7 
Real gross domestic product 1 
2001 0.6 0.8 1.1 2.1 4.0 6.2 1.8 1.2 1.2 0.8 1.7 2.8 1.6
2002 0.7 0.2 2.3 1.2 3.8 6.9 0.4 1.3 0.2 1.4 0.4 2.0 0.92003 ... −0.1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
2002          Q3 1.3 0.9 2.7 1.6 3.6 7.2 0.5 0.7 1.4 −0.2 1.9 1.3
         Q4 2.2 0.3 3.2 0.8 3.2 7.5 0.7 0.1 1.3 −1.4 2.1 0.9
2003          Q1 1.5 0.4 1.9 1.1 4.3 0.8 0.7 −0.2 0.4 −1.3 2.4 0.9
         Q2 0.9 −0.7 0.9 −0.9 4.5 2.4 0.3 −1.2 0.7 −2.1 2.3 −0.2
         Q3 0.9 −0.2 1.6 −0.3 5.0 −0.1 0.4 −1.2 0.8 −0.9 2.4 0.1
         Q4 ... 0.2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Industrial production 1,2 
2001 −0.5 0.3 0.1 1.1 1.0 10.3 −1.1 3.2 0.5 2.8 3.1 −1.5 0.5
2002 1.5 −1.1 1.7 −1.2 1.7 7.8 −1.3 0.4 −1.0 0.9 −0.2 0.2 −0.5
2003 ... 6p 0.5 0.6 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0.2 1.4 ...
2002          Q3 3.5 −0.1 2.9 −1.3 0.1 10.6 −0.1 −0.3 −0.7 0.6 0.4 0.4 0.2
         Q4 3.7 1.7 5.2 −0.7 3.1 6.6 0.7 1.7 0.5 1.5 −1.9 2.5 1.2
2003          Q1 −0.1 1.5 2.1 −0.9 0.9 2.5 −0.5 4.5 1.3 3.6 0.7 1.5 0.8
         Q2 −2.6 −0.2 −1.5 −2.1 2.1 2.4 −1.4 −1.3 −3.4 0.7 −2.4 1.7 −0.7
         Q3 −1.4 −1.1 1.8 −0.6 2.0 6.1 −0.2 4.7 −2.4 1.9 1.7 1.0 0.0
         Q4 ... 6p 1.9 0.5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0.8 1.1 ...
Capacity utilisation in industry 3 
2001 82.3 84.4 85.7 87.4 77.6 78.4 78.9 88.7 84.6 83.1 81.7 79.6 83.42002 79.6 82.3 82.7 85.3 77.0 75.9 77.3 85.1 82.9 80.2 79.4 77.2 81.42003 78.7 82.0 81.9 84.8 76.5 75.1 76.3 84.7 81.7 80.0 77.9 78.9 81.0
2002          Q4 79.6 82.7 83.1 84.7 76.8 76.9 78.0 85.3 82.8 79.1 81.2 79.3 81.72003          Q1 79.3 82.3 82.2 85.1 75.8 74.5 77.5 84.1 82.5 79.7 77.7 78.6 81.3
         Q2 78.6 81.8 82.8 84.9 77.1 75.1 75.6 85.9 81.9 80.4 78.5 78.2 80.8         Q3 77.9 81.0 80.7 84.8 76.8 77.1 76.1 84.8 81.0 79.4 75.8 79.5 80.7         Q4 79.0 82.9 82.0 84.4 76.1 73.6 76.1 83.9 81.4 80.3 79.6 79.3 81.2
2004          Q1 79.4 82.8 82.8 82.4 77.5 74.4 76.8 83.5 82.1 80.0 80.3 77.0 80.7
Unemployment rate 4 
2001 6.7 7.8 9.1 8.5 10.4 3.9 9.4 2.1 2.5 3.6 4.1 10.6 8.0
2002 7.3 8.6 9.1 8.8 10.0 4.3 9.0 2.8 2.7 4.3 5.1 11.3 8.42003 8.1 9.3 9.0 9.4 ... 4.6 ... 3.7 ... 4.4 6.5 11.3 8.8
2003          July 8.2 9.3 9.1 9.4 4.7 8.6 3.8 3.8 4.5 6.3 11.3 8.8
         Aug 8.2 9.3 9.0 9.4 4.7 8.5 3.8 3.9 4.5 6.3 11.3 8.8         Sep 8.2 9.3 9.0 9.5 4.6 8.5 3.8 3.9 4.5 6.6 11.2 8.8
         Oct 8.3 9.3 9.0 9.5 4.6 8.4 3.9 4.0 4.5 6.9 11.2 8.8
         Nov 8.3 9.2 9.0 9.5 4.6 ... 3.9 4.1 4.5 6.9 11.2 8.8         Dec 8.3 9.2 9.0 9.5 4.5 ... 3.9 ... 4.5 6.9 11.2 8.8
2004          Jan ... 9.2 ... ... ... ... ... ... 4.5 ... 11.2 ...
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1 
2001 2.4 1.9 2.7 1.8 3.7 4.0 2.3 2.4 5.1 2.3 4.4 2.8 2.3
2002 1.6 1.3 2.0 1.9 3.9 4.7 2.6 2.1 3.9 1.7 3.7 3.6 2.32003 1.5 1.0 1.3 2.2 3.4 4.0
p 2.8 2.5 2.2 1.3 3.3 3.1 p 2.1
2003          July 1.4 0.8 1.0 1.9 3.5 3.9 2.9 1.9 2.1 1.0 2.9 2.9 1.9         Aug 1.6 1.1 1.2 2.0 3.3 3.9 2.7 2.3 2.2 1.0 2.9 3.1 2.1         Sep 1.7 1.1 1.2 2.3 3.3 3.8 3.0 2.7 2.0 1.4 3.2 3.0 2.2
         Oct 1.4 1.1 0.9 2.3 3.2 3.3 2.8 1.8 1.9 1.1 2.8 2.7 2.0
         Nov 1.8 1.3 1.2 2.5 3.2 3.3 2.8 2.0 2.0 1.3 2.3 2.9 2.2         Dec 1.7 1.1 1.2 2.4 3.1 2.9
p 2.5 2.4 1.6 1.3 2.3 2.7 p 2.0
2004          Jan ... e 1.3 ... ... ... ... e 2.2 ... p 1.5 ... ... ... e 2.0
General government financial balance 5 
2000 0.2 1.3 7.1 −1.4 −1.9 4.4 −0.6 6.4 2.2 −1.5 −2.8 −0.8 0.2
2001 0.6 −2.8 5.2 −1.5 −1.5 0.9 −2.6 6.1 0.0 0.3 −4.2 −0.3 −1.7
2002 0.1 −3.5 4.2 −3.1 −1.2 −0.2 −2.3 2.5 −1.6 −0.2 −2.7 0.1 −2.2
General government debt 5 
2000 109.6 60.2 44.6 57.2 106.2 38.4 110.6 5.5 55.9 66.8 53.3 60.5 69.62001 108.5 59.5 44.0 56.8 106.9 36.1 109.5 5.5 52.9 67.3 55.5 56.8 69.22002 105.8 60.8 42.7 59.0 104.7 32.4 106.7 5.7 52.4 67.3 58.1 53.8 69.0
Sources: National data, European Commission, Eurostat, European Central adjusted. —5  As a percentage of GDP; Maastricht Treaty definition, ESA 95;
Bank. Latest data are partly based on press reports and are provisional. — including proceeds from sales of UMTS licences. —6  Adjusted in advance by
1  Annual percentage change; GDP of Greece and Portugal is calculated the Federal Statistical Office, by way of estimates, to the results of the
from seasonally adjusted data. —2  Manufacturing, mining and energy; ad- Quarterly Production Survey for the fourth quarter (industry in Germany: on
justed for working-day variations. —3  Manufacturing, in %; seasonally average, + 1.5 %). —Output possibly understated. —7  Including Greece
adjusted; data are collected in January, April, July and October. — (Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices, general government financial
4  Standardised, as a percentage of the civilian labour force; seasonally balance and general government debt from 2001 only). 
7*I  Key economic data for Euro area

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
 
1 The money stock and its counterparts *
  
a European monetary union 
  
 5 
 billion
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises Publicand individuals authorities Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturitieson non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  
2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2002          May 39.0 32.1 3.9 6.9 9.7 39.0 73.8 34.8 26.0 3.5 −1.2 20.0 3.7
         Jun 32.8 32.4 −7.1 0.4 −1.0 41.1 −26.7 −67.8 −4.7 3.3 −0.2 9.0 −16.8
         Jul −18.9 −15.7 −12.8 −3.2 −1.4 1.5 − 3.4 − 5.0 24.7 1.3 −0.0 13.8 9.6
         Aug − 6.9 6.6 6.3 −13.6 −2.6 14.1 −10.7 −24.8 14.2 2.2 0.2 2.8 9.0
         Sep 55.2 40.9 4.8 14.4 11.5 18.3 65.6 47.4 23.4 1.0 0.4 12.0 10.0
         Oct 28.3 32.7 14.1 −4.3 −4.0 29.6 55.1 25.5 9.6 1.3 −1.0 9.0 0.4
         Nov 37.3 22.2 5.5 15.1 6.1 34.9 84.4 49.5 19.0 3.7 −0.5 13.4 2.4
         Dec 51.6 57.7 14.8 −6.1 −14.1 22.2 −33.0 −55.3 24.0 16.2 −0.1 −1.7 9.6
2003          Jan 51.0 29.6 4.8 21.4 20.0 6.9 17.5 10.6 16.2 −0.3 −2.1 6.7 11.9
         Feb 51.0 35.6 4.3 15.4 17.8 10.1 66.6 56.5 11.1 7.0 −1.2 9.7 −4.5
         Mar 48.4 39.1 7.7 9.3 8.7 14.1 6.6 − 7.5 13.4 7.3 −1.6 12.5 −4.8
         Apr 78.8 64.3 27.3 14.6 20.4 − 4.6 39.0 43.6 3.2 −3.2 −2.6 9.2 −0.2
         May 77.6 49.9 14.6 27.7 31.3 41.3 42.8 1.5 19.3 7.0 −1.3 19.6 −6.0
         Jun 14.9 27.9 −6.6 −13.0 −13.9 59.3 40.1 −19.2 19.4 2.8 −1.6 11.2 6.9
         Jul 36.2 15.5 −4.5 20.8 12.8 −39.7 −33.1 6.6 32.4 5.3 −2.1 19.3 9.9
         Aug − 1.1 10.1 4.0 −11.2 −5.0 −31.4 −70.5 −39.1 16.0 7.7 −1.6 3.2 6.7
         Sep 61.3 36.7 3.1 24.6 23.0 15.3 27.8 12.5 20.2 −0.6 −0.6 20.1 1.2
         Oct 51.6 32.3 3.1 19.3 19.5 12.8 52.9 40.0 30.3 4.9 0.1 23.0 2.3
         Nov 91.0 67.5 14.5 23.5 13.7 17.9 44.1 26.1 29.5 7.9 0.1 17.4 4.1         Dec 16.7 34.8 2.3 −18.1 −30.0 −13.1 −12.0 1.2 14.3 17.0 1.1 −1.6 −2.2
  
  
b German contribution
 
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises Publicand individuals authorities Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturitieson non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  
2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2002          May 6.6 3.7 −0.2 2.9 8.4 10.7 24.6 13.9 0.4 −0.4 −1.1 2.2 −0.4
         Jun −19.8 −12.6 −11.1 −7.2 −2.2 25.7 0.1 −25.6 −0.5 −0.7 −0.2 2.3 −1.9
         Jul 7.2 −7.4 −2.8 14.6 6.1 −16.5 −5.7 10.8 11.2 0.5 0.1 8.2 2.4
         Aug − 1.7 5.8 6.4 −7.5 2.2 11.0 6.4 −4.5 8.9 −0.2 0.1 5.2 3.7
         Sep 12.0 10.8 −0.7 1.2 4.1 14.9 31.0 15.6 1.5 −0.5 −0.5 2.0 0.5
         Oct 4.6 5.8 7.4 −1.2 −4.6 17.8 11.6 −6.1 0.1 1.9 −0.8 −0.3 −0.7
         Nov 9.4 4.6 4.3 4.8 3.5 19.2 32.0 12.8 5.8 4.1 −0.6 0.4 1.9
         Dec 5.7 17.8 6.8 −12.1 −8.5 2.2 −40.5 −42.7 −9.8 3.1 0.2 −17.0 2.4
2003          Jan 18.3 1.8 3.1 16.4 10.8 − 6.1 8.7 14.8 4.1 −1.6 −2.0 3.8 3.9
         Feb − 1.5 5.7 −1.3 −7.2 0.5 10.2 20.1 9.9 4.4 6.3 −1.2 0.9 −1.5
         Mar 4.6 2.7 −1.2 1.9 5.1 18.8 25.2 6.4 1.7 1.9 −1.6 −1.1 2.6
         Apr 4.9 6.6 5.9 −1.7 −2.6 4.3 14.4 10.1 −2.6 −2.0 −2.5 0.5 1.5
         May 1.9 4.0 3.0 −2.1 2.4 27.3 22.4 −5.0 −2.8 −1.6 −1.5 4.8 −4.4
         Jun −18.0 −0.9 −3.0 −17.1 −10.0 38.2 24.4 −13.8 4.8 0.1 −1.4 3.7 2.4
         Jul 0.6 −8.4 −0.5 9.0 −1.6 −24.5 −18.6 5.9 8.7 4.9 −2.1 4.9 1.0
         Aug −13.6 2.7 0.9 −16.3 −11.0 16.6 −20.6 −37.2 5.7 3.2 −1.5 2.2 1.8
         Sep 17.7 12.8 −3.6 4.9 10.8 − 1.8 10.5 12.3 2.3 −1.3 −0.7 9.1 −4.8
         Oct − 1.8 −9.3 −3.4 7.5 4.5 6.4 −0.2 −6.6 3.1 0.3 0.1 2.6 0.2
         Nov 24.5 15.5 5.5 8.9 2.4 7.9 12.4 4.6 3.3 0.2 0.2 3.0 −0.1
         Dec −15.2 −4.8 0.7 −10.4 −8.1 11.1 12.0 0.9 −0.3 1.5 1.0 −3.1 0.3
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of of inter-MFI participations. —4Including the counterparts of monetary
monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have been liabilities of central governments. —5Including the monetary liabilities of
eliminated from the flow figures (see also the “Notes on the figures “in the central governments (Post Office, Treasury). —6In Germany, only savings
“Explanatory notes “in the Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Report 1, deposits. —7Paper held by residents outside the euro area has been
p 30). —1Source: ECB. —2Excluding MFIs ’portfolios. —3After deduction eliminated. —8Less German MFIs ’holdings of paper issued by euro-area
8*II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
 
 
 
a European monetary union 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V )  5,6,10  
Money stock M2 Debt secur-
of which ities with
Intra- Money stock M1 maturities
Eurosystem Deposits of up toliability/ with an Deposits Money 2 years
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market (incl money
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund market    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares paper)    central  gov-
ernments Total  4 issue Total Total Total lation deposits  5 2 years  5 tions (net)  2,7  Period (net)  2,7,8 months  5,6 
− 8.5 12.5 − 48.1 27.6 14.5 12.2 2.3 10.9 2.2 6.7 4.0 9.8 2002          May
6.0 47.1 − 25.5 46.2 61.1 11.8 49.2 −20.6 5.7 − 6.1 − 7.3 − 7.4          Jun
− 3.1 −25.7 −− 13.2 − 15.8 − 22.8 10.9 − 33.7 4.2 2.8 − 0.7 12.0 − 8.7          Jul
− 11.0 − 9.7 − 13.6 − 7.5 − 26.4 4.5 − 31.0 13.5 5.5 7.7 12.3 1.1          Aug
1.6 3.4 − 45.1 41.8 62.9 5.6 57.4 −23.3 2.2 2.4 − 2.7 3.6          Sep
5.5 22.1 − 20.8 18.9 − 9.8 7.2 − 17.0 20.5 8.2 − 2.8 2.1 2.6          Oct
− 4.3 −14.5 − 72.1 64.5 59.4 7.5 51.9 − 7.3 12.4 − 4.4 14.7 − 2.7          Nov
− 11.0 −27.6 − 88.4 101.2 76.9 19.8 57.1 − 7.6 31.9 − 2.8 − 6.2 − 3.9          Dec
15.2 18.8 − 7.6 − 33.6 − 59.9 −7.4 − 52.5 2.5 23.8 14.7 19.4 7.2 2003          Jan
18.6 − 8.3 − 39.7 27.1 10.3 7.2 3.1 2.4 14.4 0.9 12.1 − 0.4          Feb
− 1.1 12.0 − 38.1 54.0 47.0 7.9 39.1 − 6.2 13.2 − 9.8 4.3 − 10.5          Mar
− 16.8 5.7 − 82.2 43.5 28.9 9.1 19.8 6.4 8.2 6.4 11.8 20.4          Apr
10.7 26.0 − 62.9 70.9 39.8 7.4 32.4 22.7 8.4 1.0 8.8 − 17.7          May
30.2 19.2 − 5.4 29.6 54.7 7.3 47.4 −39.0 14.0 −16.5 − 0.9 − 6.9          Jun
− 24.6 −17.4 − 6.1 − 4.6 − 18.6 11.1 − 29.7 3.0 11.0 5.5 10.3 − 5.0          Jul
− 10.5 −31.9 −− 6.1 − 2.9 − 13.9 1.2 − 15.0 3.8 7.2 − 3.0 2.1 − 2.3          Aug
21.3 29.7 − 5.5 16.2 45.4 2.2 43.3 −29.7 0.5 − 4.3 − 8.3 2.4          Sep
− 18.1 2.3 − 49.9 21.4 4.6 6.4 − 1.8 11.6 5.2 13.2 5.6 9.7          Oct
14.6 15.4 − 49.4 54.6 51.1 7.9 43.2 − 3.5 7.0 − 1.0 − 4.3 0.2          Nov
− 26.7 −50.6 − 66.7 91.7 63.0 19.0 44.0 0.9 27.8 −15.9 − 2.7 − 6.4          Dec
 
 
 b German contribution 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V )  5,6,10  
of which Components of money stock
Debt securities
Deposits with
Intra- with an Deposits Money maturities
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market of up to 2 years
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund (incl money    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac- shares market    central  gov-
ernments Total issue  9,11 lation Total deposits 2 years months  6 tions (net)  7,8 paper)(net)  7  Period
0.7 1.9 2.9 2.5 14.4 6.2 4.5 − 0.6 1.3 0.4 2.5 2002          May
0.5 − 1.8 1.0 3.3 7.6 13.1 0.3 − 1.0 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 3.7          Jun
− 1.1 − 10.0 2.0 3.7 − 9.4 − 5.1 − 0.2 − 1.5 − 1.0 0.3 − 1.8          Jul
1.3 − 3.4 3.2 0.9 2.4 − 5.2 3.7 0.1 1.2 1.3 1.2          Aug
1.0 12.3 2.2 1.6 12.1 14.9 − 9.0 1.0 6.4 0.1 − 0.8          Sep
− 1.6 9.9 2.0 1.5 14.0 1.2 6.8 2.2 − 1.0 0.6 4.2          Oct
− 0.6 − 3.6 1.5 2.5 27.0 31.8 − 5.6 3.3 − 3.2 − 0.2 0.8          Nov
0.0 0.6 1.5 4.3 18.5 1.0 7.2 12.8 − 3.1 − 0.5 0.9          Dec
− 0.8 12.2 0.5 − 0.7 − 3.2 − 9.3 − 4.7 4.1 5.3 2.5 − 1.1 2003         Jan
1.4 − 16.6 2.2 1.7 19.5 5.6 − 0.7 3.0 2.3 1.3 8.1          Feb
− 1.7 22.8 1.5 2.5 0.4 7.1 − 5.2 1.7 0.4 0.6 − 4.0          Mar
− 1.1 4.2 0.9 2.8 8.7 8.2 − 2.0 1.1 0.0 − 0.0 1.4          Apr
2.2 14.6 2.4 1.3 15.3 6.8 7.4 0.7 1.0 0.4 − 1.0          May
0.4 13.2 0.6 2.8 1.9 16.4 − 11.8 1.0 − 1.5 − 0.5 − 1.7          Jun
− 2.8 − 15.7 1.1 3.4 − 14.2 − 12.5 − 1.3 2.0 0.2 − 0.4 − 2.2          Jul
0.6 − 4.5 2.5 − 0.1 1.2 1.7 2.9 2.7 1.5 − 0.5 − 7.2          Aug
0.3 11.8 1.3 0.9 1.5 10.8 − 13.8 0.9 3.2 0.0 0.5          Sep
− 0.7 − 3.6 1.2 1.3 5.9 3.3 − 3.5 0.9 5.6 − 0.7 0.2          Oct
0.1 3.3 1.0 2.4 25.5 22.8 − 0.3 0.6 − 1.2 − 0.5 4.1          Nov
0.2 − 1.0 0.2 4.5 − 3.0 − 10.8 3.5 8.9 − 5.9 0.1 1.2          Dec
MFIs. —9Up to end-2002, including national banknotes and coins still in money stocks M1, M2 or M3. —11The difference between the volume of
circulation. —10The German contributions to the Eurosystem ’s monetary euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount
aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national monetary disclosed in accordance with the accounting regime chosen by theaggregates and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German Eurosystem (see also footnote 3 on banknote circulation in Table II I.2). 
9*II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
 
 
 
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and individuals Public authorities
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
End of assets or Debt other Debt euro-area Other
year/month liabilities Total Total Loans securities  2 equities Total Loans securities  3 residents assets
 European monetary union (  5  billion) 1
 
2001          Nov 13,574.5 9,413.9 7,379.6 6,501.9 333.1 544.6 2,034.3 843.3 1,191.0 2,826.6 1,334.0
         Dec 13,576.7 9,451.3 7,424.4 6,519.3 336.9 568.1 2,026.9 847.7 1,179.2 2,807.8 1,317.6
2002          Jan 13,667.7 9,495.6 7,444.6 6,534.6 341.9 568.1 2,050.9 844.6 1,206.3 2,830.9 1,341.2
         Feb 13,657.5 9,520.6 7,465.4 6,548.7 349.9 566.7 2,055.3 847.5 1,207.8 2,836.2 1,300.7         Mar 13,694.0 9,595.1 7,513.4 6,606.1 346.6 560.7 2,081.7 852.6 1,229.1 2,844.7 1,254.2
         Apr 13,680.2 9,612.5 7,550.9 6,641.2 342.9 566.8 2,061.7 832.4 1,229.3 2,826.0 1,241.6
         May 13,711.5 9,645.0 7,573.6 6,659.7 345.0 568.9 2,071.5 829.2 1,242.3 2,845.8 1,220.8         Jun 13,642.1 9,667.1 7,597.7 6,691.1 342.7 563.9 2,069.4 830.1 1,239.3 2,731.2 1,243.8
         Jul 13,678.9 9,652.9 7,586.1 6,692.6 344.4 549.1 2,066.8 828.5 1,238.3 2,755.6 1,270.3
         Aug 13,649.1 9,645.5 7,591.1 6,692.3 339.7 559.1 2,054.4 818.0 1,236.4 2,745.1 1,258.5         Sep 13,822.3 9,700.5 7,625.2 6,726.8 349.4 549.1 2,075.3 820.8 1,254.5 2,813.5 1,308.3
         Oct 13,863.8 9,726.3 7,657.4 6,742.7 353.1 561.6 2,068.8 820.4 1,248.5 2,862.9 1,274.6
         Nov 14,010.9 9,761.7 7,678.1 6,754.5 356.7 566.9 2,083.6 829.2 1,254.4 2,936.6 1,312.6         Dec 13,931.2 9,779.1 7,721.3 6,781.6 367.0 572.7 2,057.8 836.8 1,221.0 2,840.3 1,311.8
2003          Jan 13,975.3 9,853.1 7,748.0 6,804.4 374.9 568.7 2,105.1 829.0 1,276.1 2,852.5 1,269.7
         Feb 14,114.0 9,905.1 7,777.6 6,831.2 381.2 565.3 2,127.5 828.4 1,299.1 2,909.4 1,299.5         Mar 14,124.7 9,941.7 7,807.7 6,854.4 386.7 566.6 2,134.0 828.9 1,305.1 2,895.2 1,287.7
         Apr 14,218.5 10,018.8 7,873.1 6,883.9 404.0 585.2 2,145.8 822.8 1,322.9 2,905.4 1,294.3
         May 14,301.8 10,088.4 7,911.3 6,906.8 407.1 597.5 2,177.0 818.8 1,358.2 2,878.4 1,335.1         Jun 14,383.3 10,104.9 7,944.5 6,944.2 406.2 594.1 2,160.4 817.9 1,342.5 2,959.3 1,319.1
         Jul 14,381.8 10,166.6 7,985.0 6,964.6 402.8 617.6 2,181.6 825.9 1,355.7 2,942.7 1,272.5
         Aug 14,370.3 10,172.6 8,002.7 6,976.8 405.3 620.6 2,169.8 820.0 1,349.9 2,929.9 1,267.8         Sep 14,415.3 10,220.5 8,027.9 6,999.4 411.6 616.9 2,192.6 821.2 1,371.3 2,886.6 1,308.1
         Oct 14,503.3 10,267.7 8,060.9 7,028.0 418.6 614.3 2,206.8 821.0 1,385.8 2,951.9 1,283.7
         Nov 14,613.8 10,355.5 8,120.4 7,072.7 424.1 623.7 2,235.0 830.5 1,404.5 2,954.7 1,303.6         Dec 14,537.7 10,360.2 8,143.7 7,095.5 423.7 624.6 2,216.5 842.1 1,374.4 2,883.6 1,294.0
 German contribution (  5  billion) 
2001          Nov 4,336.2 3,303.9 2,587.2 2,279.0 64.8 243.4 716.6 506.6 210.0 837.9 194.5
         Dec 4,328.2 3,321.6 2,608.3 2,289.4 66.0 252.9 713.3 499.3 213.9 821.2 185.4
2002          Jan 4,321.4 3,315.2 2,600.6 2,280.2 66.9 253.4 714.6 499.7 215.0 820.0 186.2
         Feb 4,322.9 3,316.3 2,600.1 2,283.4 65.1 251.6 716.2 497.1 219.1 822.1 184.4         Mar 4,334.0 3,315.0 2,597.6 2,290.4 67.2 240.1 717.4 495.4 221.9 829.6 189.3
         Apr 4,330.7 3,324.0 2,605.7 2,293.1 69.0 243.7 718.3 491.2 227.1 816.6 190.1
         May 4,341.9 3,327.7 2,606.9 2,294.6 69.2 243.2 720.8 485.6 235.2 827.5 186.7         Jun 4,291.6 3,309.3 2,596.0 2,294.8 69.7 231.6 713.3 480.4 232.8 800.0 182.3
         Jul 4,303.6 3,317.5 2,589.5 2,291.3 69.8 228.4 728.0 489.0 239.0 801.2 184.9
         Aug 4,307.0 3,315.3 2,594.9 2,289.8 67.1 238.0 720.4 479.8 240.6 810.2 181.5         Sep 4,355.6 3,327.5 2,605.3 2,301.6 66.5 237.3 722.2 477.0 245.2 841.9 186.1
         Oct 4,370.5 3,332.3 2,611.3 2,299.8 69.8 241.7 721.0 480.4 240.6 850.3 188.0
         Nov 4,413.9 3,341.1 2,615.3 2,299.5 69.6 246.2 725.8 481.7 244.1 879.3 193.5         Dec 4,359.5 3,344.6 2,630.8 2,304.4 66.6 259.8 713.8 478.4 235.4 823.8 191.1
2003          Jan 4,360.7 3,353.2 2,623.2 2,298.5 66.1 258.7 730.0 484.0 246.1 824.1 183.4
         Feb 4,383.3 3,351.8 2,627.3 2,303.8 66.5 257.0 724.6 477.9 246.6 841.9 189.5         Mar 4,395.2 3,351.2 2,624.8 2,302.6 67.2 255.0 726.4 474.6 251.7 861.8 182.2
         Apr 4,400.8 3,353.3 2,629.0 2,300.8 67.3 260.9 724.3 475.4 248.9 867.7 179.8
         May 4,401.1 3,351.6 2,629.9 2,298.8 67.9 263.2 721.7 470.7 251.1 871.9 177.5         Jun 4,411.5 3,334.6 2,629.8 2,301.7 67.0 261.1 704.8 463.7 241.2 906.3 170.6
         Jul 4,391.1 3,334.6 2,620.8 2,293.4 64.4 263.0 713.9 474.3 239.6 891.4 165.1
         Aug 4,373.2 3,322.7 2,624.8 2,296.4 64.5 263.9 697.9 469.1 228.8 886.0 164.4         Sep 4,384.6 3,337.1 2,634.6 2,309.9 64.2 260.5 702.5 463.0 239.4 877.7 169.8
         Oct 4,387.2 3,333.3 2,624.5 2,303.4 66.5 254.6 708.8 466.1 242.7 882.7 171.3
         Nov 4,409.5 3,355.4 2,637.9 2,311.5 66.9 259.5 717.5 472.5 245.0 884.0 170.2         Dec 4,392.3 3,337.8 2,631.1 2,304.1 69.0 258.0 706.7 469.9 236.8 880.5 174.0
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building circulation; up to end-2002, also including national banknotes and coi ns still
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p 12*). Excluding MFIs ‘cash in hand (in
and national central banks (the Eurosystem). —1Source: ECB. —2Including euro). From 2002, the German contribution includes the volume of euro
money market paper of enterprises. —3Including Treasury bills and other banknotes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with the
money market paper of public authorities. —4From 2002, euro currency in
10*II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
 
   
 
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and individuals
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  6 
over
Currency 1 year and
in of which up to up to over up to over
Total in euro  5 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months  End of circulation  4 
year/month
European monetary union (  5  billion) 1
 
279.7 5,552.5 5,200.8 5,249.5 1,779.9 944.2 79.9 1,134.9 1,195.3 115.3 2001          Nov
239.7 5,698.1 5,360.0 5,403.0 1,881.2 952.2 80.0 1,142.4 1,231.7 115.3          Dec
246.7 5,669.6 5,318.9 5,363.4 1,828.5 948.3 79.5 1,146.2 1,249.2 111.8 2002          Jan
240.5 5,671.3 5,311.3 5,359.8 1,823.2 946.9 78.7 1,148.1 1,252.0 110.8          Feb
254.3 5,686.3 5,327.3 5,376.5 1,824.7 954.6 80.4 1,151.5 1,255.7 109.5          Mar
261.7 5,711.2 5,355.4 5,401.0 1,853.4 959.7 81.0 1,150.8 1,248.7 107.5          Apr
273.8 5,713.5 5,366.7 5,409.7 1,856.8 961.3 81.5 1,153.0 1,250.6 106.4          May285.7 5,749.3 5,407.9 5,438.3 1,900.8 938.5 81.5 1,155.0 1,256.3 106.2          Jun
296.6 5,725.7 5,384.9 5,422.5 1,872.6 948.2 82.6 1,154.1 1,258.9 106.2          Jul
301.1 5,688.0 5,358.6 5,396.2 1,840.9 959.7 83.3 1,142.5 1,263.4 106.4          Aug306.7 5,730.1 5,399.2 5,434.7 1,894.9 941.0 82.9 1,143.6 1,265.5 106.8          Sep
313.9 5,745.4 5,410.6 5,446.2 1,875.8 964.2 82.8 1,144.9 1,272.8 105.8          Oct
321.4 5,799.5 5,467.0 5,504.7 1,927.1 956.8 82.4 1,148.4 1,284.7 105.3          Nov341.2 5,879.2 5,566.5 5,591.9 1,980.7 947.8 81.2 1,163.6 1,313.4 105.2          Dec
312.1 5,869.6 5,536.2 5,568.9 1,932.2 953.1 76.7 1,168.5 1,335.3 103.1 2003          Jan
319.3 5,912.7 5,560.0 5,586.2 1,932.0 952.7 75.4 1,175.8 1,348.4 101.9          Feb
327.2 5,963.0 5,609.5 5,639.3 1,971.2 947.8 75.9 1,182.9 1,361.1 100.4          Mar
336.4 5,971.7 5,632.7 5,664.3 1,986.6 957.1 73.9 1,179.4 1,369.4 97.8          Apr
343.8 6,039.9 5,694.2 5,714.0 2,012.1 971.2 73.0 1,185.5 1,375.8 96.4          May351.0 6,099.1 5,714.2 5,743.3 2,059.2 939.0 72.4 1,188.4 1,389.5 94.9          Jun
361.5 6,091.6 5,737.3 5,768.5 2,066.0 943.1 72.1 1,194.8 1,399.8 92.8          Jul
362.7 6,087.4 5,739.7 5,777.4 2,054.3 949.5 72.2 1,204.1 1,406.1 91.2          Aug364.9 6,115.9 5,752.6 5,787.0 2,094.2 920.8 72.9 1,202.6 1,406.0 90.6          Sep
371.3 6,117.5 5,768.1 5,805.3 2,088.9 934.7 73.3 1,207.6 1,410.1 90.7          Oct
379.2 6,179.8 5,818.2 5,851.6 2,126.7 927.5 75.4 1,215.9 1,415.2 90.8          Nov398.1 6,233.6 5,911.1 5,930.3 2,167.3 923.8 75.5 1,230.9 1,441.0 91.8          Dec
 German contribution (  5  billion) 
92.4 2,103.2 2,006.3 1,973.0 504.0 240.7 18.7 648.7 447.5 113.5 2001          Nov
68.0 2,135.1 2,048.0 2,010.0 519.0 244.7 18.6 650.2 463.9 113.6          Dec
7 63.8 2,113.2 2,024.0 1,989.9 506.4 236.6 18.5 652.0 466.4 110.0 2002          Jan
68.3 2,108.1 2,019.4 1,986.2 505.6 235.1 17.1 653.5 465.9 109.0          Feb
70.9 2,109.1 2,021.9 1,989.1 504.1 237.3 17.1 656.8 465.9 107.8          Mar
74.0 2,100.4 2,015.8 1,984.7 513.9 234.0 17.1 655.2 458.6 105.9          Apr
76.5 2,107.7 2,023.6 1,987.3 519.1 234.2 17.1 654.1 457.9 104.8          May79.8 2,119.3 2,035.6 1,997.1 530.9 234.4 17.3 653.0 457.0 104.6          Jun
83.4 2,112.5 2,030.5 1,993.2 525.8 235.8 17.6 653.9 455.5 104.6          Jul
84.3 2,098.8 2,018.1 1,979.2 521.5 239.6 17.6 640.1 455.6 104.8          Aug85.9 2,105.7 2,023.7 1,987.6 536.6 233.0 17.5 639.6 456.5 104.3          Sep
87.4 2,115.1 2,035.2 2,003.0 538.0 243.7 17.5 641.5 458.8 103.5          Oct
89.9 2,147.3 2,066.9 2,035.6 569.5 237.6 17.9 645.7 462.0 102.9          Nov94.2 2,170.7 2,092.1 2,054.2 567.8 242.4 18.2 648.0 474.8 103.1          Dec
84.9 2,159.7 2,082.0 2,048.3 561.2 238.7 18.6 649.7 478.9 101.2 2003          Jan
86.6 2,173.9 2,094.9 2,058.5 564.8 237.3 18.5 656.1 481.8 100.0          Feb
89.0 2,175.8 2,098.2 2,063.3 572.0 232.8 18.6 657.9 483.5 98.4          Mar
91.9 2,176.7 2,100.4 2,068.2 580.4 233.5 18.1 655.8 484.6 95.8          Apr
93.2 2,189.4 2,112.0 2,073.9 585.9 236.9 17.8 653.8 485.3 94.3          May96.0 2,194.7 2,115.7 2,076.1 600.0 225.8 17.6 653.4 486.3 92.9          Jun
99.4 2,183.0 2,107.8 2,071.3 591.1 225.3 17.3 658.5 488.3 90.8          Jul
99.3 2,193.4 2,117.6 2,082.5 593.2 228.9 17.5 662.7 491.0 89.3          Aug
100.2 2,188.3 2,112.7 2,079.6 603.5 217.2 17.5 661.0 491.8 88.5          Sep
101.5 2,188.7 2,113.6 2,083.5 606.9 216.1 17.8 661.3 492.8 88.6          Oct
103.9 2,211.8 2,137.8 2,105.1 628.8 214.6 18.3 661.2 493.4 88.9          Nov108.5 2,215.1 2,143.0 2,105.2 616.1 216.3 18.5 662.1 502.3 89.9          Dec
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see footnote 3 on banknote liability items “).—5Excluding central governments ’deposits. —6In
circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into circulation Germany, only saving deposits. —7Includes decrease of
 5 
11.6 billion
by the Bundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the item (DM22.7 billion) owing to the change in the method of recording banknote
“Intra-Eurosystem liability/claim related to banknote issue “(see “Other circulation (see also footnote 4). 
11*II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (cont ’d) *
 
 
 
Liabilities (cont ’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont ’d)  
 
Public authorities Repo transactions Debt securitieswith non-banks
Other public authorities in the euro area
With agreed At agreedmaturities of notice of  
2 
Money
over of which market of which
Central 1 year and Enterprises fund denom-
End of govern- up to up to over up to over and shares inatedyear/month ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total individuals (net)  
3 Total in euro
 European monetary union (  5  billion) 1
 
2001          Nov 150.2 152.8 69.5 51.9 1.6 26.7 2.6 0.5 225.9 218.3 400.8 1,760.3 1,453.8
         Dec 139.0 156.0 69.7 54.9 1.7 26.7 2.6 0.5 218.5 214.6 398.0 1,760.8 1,453.6
2002          Jan 148.9 157.3 74.1 51.4 1.7 27.0 2.5 0.5 216.2 211.4 416.6 1,775.9 1,463.4
         Feb 155.7 155.7 75.1 49.4 1.7 26.6 2.5 0.5 221.1 215.8 427.0 1,778.2 1,463.1         Mar 157.5 152.3 69.3 51.8 1.6 26.7 2.5 0.5 229.6 224.9 431.2 1,793.1 1,474.6
         Apr 157.5 152.7 71.9 50.0 1.4 26.6 2.5 0.4 228.1 223.8 437.5 1,785.4 1,466.4
         May 149.0 154.8 68.8 55.2 1.4 26.6 2.4 0.4 234.8 230.7 442.6 1,805.0 1,481.5         Jun 155.0 156.0 71.6 53.3 1.5 26.7 2.4 0.4 229.6 225.9 439.2 1,788.3 1,476.9
         Jul 151.9 151.3 69.3 51.4 1.5 26.3 2.4 0.4 228.8 224.9 450.3 1,796.1 1,478.8
         Aug 141.0 150.8 67.8 52.4 1.5 26.3 2.4 0.4 236.5 231.9 463.4 1,814.3 1,496.0         Sep 146.3 149.1 70.7 48.4 1.3 25.9 2.4 0.4 238.3 234.4 460.4 1,813.0 1,494.1
         Oct 151.8 147.4 72.2 45.3 1.3 25.6 2.5 0.4 235.6 232.1 462.7 1,823.0 1,492.8
         Nov 147.5 147.4 71.9 45.6 1.3 25.6 2.5 0.4 229.6 225.8 477.1 1,831.1 1,494.1         Dec 136.4 150.9 75.6 45.1 1.4 25.6 2.8 0.4 226.9 224.4 470.5 1,818.6 1,490.8
2003          Jan 154.7 145.9 70.8 45.9 1.2 24.8 2.8 0.4 233.0 229.7 534.9 1,794.7 1,482.5
         Feb 175.8 150.6 72.0 49.9 1.0 24.4 2.9 0.4 233.8 230.3 547.2 1,803.1 1,486.5         Mar 176.2 147.5 71.6 47.1 0.9 24.5 3.0 0.3 224.0 220.8 550.8 1,804.5 1,486.6
         Apr 159.4 148.0 74.8 44.8 1.0 24.2 3.0 0.3 230.5 227.0 563.0 1,834.0 1,516.7
         May 170.1 155.9 76.7 50.8 0.9 24.1 3.0 0.3 231.4 227.8 571.1 1,821.0 1,515.2         Jun 200.3 155.5 79.8 46.8 0.9 24.6 3.0 0.3 214.9 211.9 571.0 1,833.9 1,517.5
         Jul 173.0 150.1 74.9 46.4 0.9 24.5 3.2 0.3 220.1 216.5 585.5 1,849.8 1,519.2
         Aug 162.5 147.5 73.7 45.7 0.9 23.9 3.0 0.3 217.1 214.2 587.7 1,861.5 1,514.7         Sep 183.8 145.1 74.8 42.1 1.0 23.9 3.0 0.3 211.7 208.0 577.4 1,864.9 1,521.2
         Oct 165.7 146.5 78.4 40.0 0.9 23.8 3.0 0.4 224.9 221.2 582.8 1,900.4 1,544.1
         Nov 180.4 147.7 79.8 39.6 0.9 24.0 3.1 0.3 224.7 220.9 584.7 1,906.1 1,555.8         Dec 153.7 149.6 79.4 41.5 0.9 24.3 3.2 0.4 208.8 206.5 581.7 1,882.0 1,539.5
 German contribution (  5  billion) 
2001          Nov 56.6 73.6 14.7 33.0 1.0 22.7 1.7 0.5 4.0 4.0 28.5 795.0 702.6
         Dec 49.1 75.9 14.6 35.2 1.2 22.7 1.7 0.5 4.9 4.9 30.2 794.3 699.5
2002          Jan 50.1 73.3 13.6 33.3 1.2 23.0 1.7 0.5 2.5 2.5 31.4 798.9 700.3
         Feb 49.4 72.5 13.8 32.6 1.2 22.7 1.7 0.5 3.5 3.5 31.8 804.7 706.4         Mar 49.4 70.6 12.6 32.0 1.2 22.8 1.6 0.5 3.7 3.7 31.6 815.2 715.0
         Apr 47.5 68.2 11.8 30.6 1.0 22.7 1.6 0.4 3.4 3.4 31.3 812.8 712.9
         May 48.2 72.3 12.4 34.2 1.0 22.7 1.6 0.4 4.7 4.7 31.7 814.1 712.6         Jun 48.7 73.5 13.8 34.1 1.1 22.6 1.6 0.4 4.1 4.1 31.3 808.9 712.2
         Jul 47.6 71.7 13.9 32.3 1.0 22.5 1.5 0.4 3.1 3.1 31.6 817.3 715.7
         Aug 48.9 70.7 13.0 32.2 1.0 22.6 1.6 0.4 4.3 4.3 32.9 840.1 733.6         Sep 49.9 68.2 13.1 30.0 0.9 22.2 1.6 0.4 10.7 10.7 33.0 841.1 733.7
         Oct 48.3 63.7 12.8 26.0 0.9 22.0 1.6 0.4 9.6 9.6 33.6 844.6 730.7
         Nov 47.7 64.1 13.1 26.2 0.9 21.9 1.6 0.4 6.4 6.4 33.4 844.9 728.7         Dec 47.7 68.7 15.7 27.7 1.0 22.2 1.6 0.4 3.3 3.3 33.0 826.4 716.6
2003          Jan 46.9 64.5 12.7 26.9 1.0 21.8 1.7 0.4 8.6 8.6 35.5 817.6 702.1
         Feb 48.3 67.2 14.8 28.0 0.7 21.7 1.7 0.4 10.9 10.9 36.8 825.8 710.3         Mar 46.6 65.9 14.5 27.1 0.7 21.6 1.6 0.3 11.2 11.2 37.4 819.4 701.0
         Apr 45.5 63.1 14.1 24.9 0.7 21.5 1.6 0.3 11.3 11.3 37.2 818.7 699.8
         May 47.7 67.8 14.8 28.9 0.7 21.5 1.6 0.3 12.3 12.3 37.7 814.0 698.7         Jun 48.1 70.5 17.4 28.4 0.7 22.1 1.6 0.3 10.8 10.8 37.1 819.6 699.7
         Jul 45.3 66.3 14.0 27.9 0.6 21.9 1.6 0.3 10.9 10.9 36.8 822.7 696.4
         Aug 46.0 65.0 14.0 27.1 0.6 21.2 1.7 0.3 12.4 12.4 36.3 821.8 688.4         Sep 46.3 62.5 13.9 24.7 0.7 21.2 1.7 0.3 15.6 15.6 36.3 825.6 689.8
         Oct 45.5 59.7 13.8 22.1 0.6 21.2 1.6 0.4 21.1 21.1 35.7 829.7 692.4
         Nov 45.7 61.0 14.4 22.6 0.6 21.4 1.6 0.3 20.0 20.0 35.2 833.2 698.6         Dec 45.9 64.0 15.8 23.9 0.6 21.6 1.6 0.4 14.1 14.1 35.3 826.2 693.1
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building securities issued. —6After deduction of inter-MFI participations. —7The
and loan associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank German contributions to the Eurosystem ’s monetary aggregates should on
and national central banks (the Eurosystem). —1Source: ECB. —2In no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and are
Germany, only savings deposits. —3Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the therefore not comparable to the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2 or
German contribution, excluding German MFIs ’portfolios of securities issued M3. —8From 2003, including DM banknotes still in circulation (see also foot-
by MFIs in the euro area. —4In Germany, bank debt securities with note 4 on p 10*). —9For the German contribution, the difference between
maturities of up to one year are classed as money market paper; up to the the volume of euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the
January 2002 Monthly Report , they were published in this table together amount disclosed in accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the
with money market fund shares. —5Excluding liabilities arising from Eurosystem (see also footnote 3 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). —
12*II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union
 
   
 
 Memo item
 Other liability items Monetary aggregates  7 
 (German contribution, From 2002
issued (net)  3 excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
of which Monetary
Intra- liabilities
Eurosystem- of centralliability/ govern-
over Liabilities Excess claim Monetary ments1 year and to non- Capital of related to capital (Post,
up to up to over euro-area and inter-MFI banknote forma- Office, End of1 year  
4 2 years 2 years residents  5 reseves  6 liabilities Total  8 issue  9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12 tion 13 year/month Treasury)  14 
European monetary union (  5  billion) 1
 
... ... 1,606.6 2,729.9 982.6 10.4 1,632.4 − 2,195.7 4,549.8 5,328.6 3,866.6 161.3 2001          Nov
... ... 1,613.6 2,723.0 995.2 − 8.5 1,551.8 − 2,262.7 4,667.7 5,430.2 3,893.8 171.6          Dec
... ... 1,632.9 2,759.4 1,007.5 2.0 1,573.8 − 2,223.4 4,639.4 5,414.0 3,925.9 174.1 2002          Jan
... ... 1,638.8 2,768.0 1,011.5 1.1 1,538.9 − 2,212.7 4,628.5 5,415.3 3,936.2 174.1          Feb
... ... 1,655.8 2,791.3 1,010.7 1.3 1,496.3 − 2,223.4 4,654.7 5,452.8 3,954.6 174.3          Mar
... ... 1,650.2 2,773.9 1,004.6 − 8.9 1,486.6 − 2,262.7 4,690.6 5,490.9 3,940.1 175.5          Apr
... ... 1,660.6 2,755.0 1,008.8 − 7.3 1,485.2 − 2,275.0 4,712.4 5,533.8 3,955.7 175.6          May
... ... 1,655.2 2,619.9 985.8 10.7 1,533.6 − 2,334.1 4,752.2 5,553.8 3,929.4 176.2          Jun
... ... 1,670.1 2,648.2 993.4 − 2.9 1,542.7 − 2,312.4 4,742.3 5,546.9 3,950.5 174.5          Jul
... ... 1,687.1 2,616.3 1,004.3 − 0.2 1,525.4 − 2,285.7 4,734.2 5,560.7 3,967.0 177.2          Aug
... ... 1,680.8 2,674.8 1,015.9 − 5.0 1,588.0 − 2,348.7 4,776.1 5,606.1 3,973.4 177.6          Sep
... ... 1,688.7 2,697.9 1,014.0 3.3 1,568.2 − 2,338.8 4,794.4 5,626.3 3,979.4 179.7          Oct
... ... 1,698.5 2,737.7 1,016.2 − 3.4 1,601.5 − 2,397.7 4,858.3 5,696.1 3,994.4 181.3          Nov
... ... 1,689.7 2,626.9 1,006.4 10.7 1,550.9 − 2,482.0 4,963.6 5,788.7 3,991.0 191.9          Dec
... ... 1,684.7 2,662.5 1,017.8 9.7 1,540.9 − 2,416.6 4,923.3 5,800.4 3,999.3 193.1 2003          Jan
... ... 1,693.6 2,714.3 1,010.9 12.9 1,559.8 − 2,426.9 4,950.3 5,840.4 4,007.0 196.7          Feb
... ... 1,704.2 2,694.1 1,001.0 14.3 1,545.7 − 2,473.2 5,002.7 5,876.9 4,013.3 196.7          Mar
... ... 1,709.2 2,714.6 996.5 − 21.4 1,593.2 − 2,500.8 5,043.2 5,960.7 4,007.4 196.3          Apr
... ... 1,714.2 2,653.4 993.8 − 2.9 1,650.4 − 2,537.6 5,107.0 6,014.5 4,014.2 199.7          May
... ... 1,734.5 2,671.6 997.7 17.7 1,626.4 − 2,580.8 5,127.5 6,010.9 4,040.4 185.8          Jun
... ... 1,756.8 2,681.5 999.7 8.0 1,584.3 − 2,560.5 5,121.5 6,018.3 4,068.7 153.6          Jul
... ... 1,771.0 2,679.9 1,014.3 − 2.5 1,562.3 − 2,548.7 5,123.0 6,016.7 4,104.8 155.4          Aug
... ... 1,771.9 2,639.9 1,010.6 3.8 1,626.3 − 2,590.9 5,133.7 6,014.2 4,099.9 155.5          Sep
... ... 1,798.0 2,689.9 1,008.3 14.5 1,593.7 − 2,595.9 5,156.1 6,065.0 4,128.7 156.5          Oct
... ... 1,804.4 2,683.9 1,014.4 5.7 1,635.3 − 2,645.1 5,206.7 6,117.1 4,149.9 159.3          Nov
... ... 1,786.5 2,636.9 1,003.7 − 2.3 1,595.2 − 2,705.6 5,292.8 6,178.4 4,137.6 162.2          Dec
 German contribution (  5  billion) 
19.0 42.4 733.6 736.7 264.4 − 21.8 333.7 − 611.1 1,353.7 1,447.7 1,783.4 −2001          Nov
20.4 44.5 729.5 702.1 265.3 10.6 317.7 − 601.6 1,367.0 1,466.9 1,781.7 −         Dec
25.6 35.1 738.2 724.3 267.2 − 0.1 384.0 11.6 520.0 1,277.7 1,372.3 1,790.8 −2002          Jan
25.8 37.6 741.2 721.4 272.1 − 0.6 381.8 8.2 519.4 1,273.1 1,371.9 1,798.9 −         Feb
26.3 37.7 751.2 722.2 272.4 − 2.7 382.5 11.6 516.7 1,271.9 1,371.2 1,811.4 −         Mar
27.0 38.7 747.1 730.0 270.0 − 1.1 384.0 12.9 525.7 1,268.7 1,369.1 1,801.3 −         Apr
28.9 39.4 745.9 730.3 269.8 − 8.2 391.6 15.7 531.4 1,277.5 1,382.2 1,797.8 −         May
26.8 38.1 743.9 687.4 265.5 − 24.8 399.9 16.7 544.6 1,290.0 1,390.4 1,790.1 −         Jun
26.0 38.7 752.7 705.4 267.7 − 39.0 405.0 18.8 539.7 1,283.4 1,382.7 1,801.9 −         Jul
28.4 37.5 774.2 698.7 272.4 − 50.5 410.3 22.0 534.5 1,282.0 1,385.1 1,814.5 −         Aug
28.4 36.8 775.9 713.6 274.4 − 48.6 425.8 24.1 549.6 1,289.2 1,397.9 1,816.9 −         Sep
32.2 37.1 775.2 706.9 272.8 − 42.1 430.1 26.2 550.8 1,299.3 1,411.9 1,815.4 −         Oct
32.1 38.1 774.7 717.3 274.2 − 47.5 437.8 27.6 582.6 1,328.8 1,438.8 1,819.8 −         Nov
32.1 39.0 755.3 661.0 277.7 − 56.9 444.3 29.1 583.5 1,349.2 1,456.6 1,806.8 −         Dec
26.9 37.4 753.4 670.0 283.0 − 50.3 436.6 29.6 574.0 1,339.7 1,448.0 1,809.5 −2003          Jan
34.6 37.7 753.4 679.1 279.5 − 63.2 440.5 31.9 579.5 1,347.5 1,467.5 1,811.1 −         Feb
31.9 36.5 751.0 682.5 280.3 − 48.9 437.6 33.3 586.5 1,350.9 1,467.8 1,809.6 −         Mar
33.5 36.3 748.9 686.4 281.1 − 55.5 444.9 34.2 594.5 1,357.8 1,476.1 1,803.5 −         Apr
32.2 34.1 747.7 666.8 277.5 − 43.6 447.0 36.6 600.7 1,371.8 1,488.0 1,795.1 −         May
33.0 31.6 754.9 661.1 279.0 − 42.6 451.8 37.3 617.5 1,377.9 1,490.4 1,802.6 −         Jun
30.6 31.7 760.4 668.9 280.4 − 63.1 451.5 38.4 605.0 1,366.0 1,476.0 1,812.5 −         Jul
25.7 29.5 766.7 640.6 285.5 − 67.4 450.4 40.8 607.2 1,374.0 1,477.8 1,825.8 −         Aug
26.4 29.3 770.0 639.8 279.8 − 60.1 459.3 42.2 617.3 1,370.9 1,478.4 1,820.9 −         Sep
25.7 30.1 773.9 638.2 279.6 − 63.5 457.6 43.4 620.7 1,371.7 1,484.4 1,825.0 −         Oct
28.6 31.5 773.1 635.5 279.6 − 70.8 465.2 44.4 643.2 1,394.3 1,509.6 1,824.4 −         Nov
30.0 31.3 764.9 625.5 279.6 − 67.7 464.2 44.6 632.0 1,395.3 1,505.9 1,818.5 −         Dec
10Overnight deposits (excluding central governments ’deposits), and (for maturities. —12M2 plus repo transactions, money market fund shares,
the euro area) currency in circulation, central governments ’overnight money market paper and debt securities up to 2 years. —13Deposits with
monetary liabilities, which are not included in the consolidated balance agreed maturities of over 2 years and at agreed notice of over 3 months,
sheet. —11M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities of up to 2 years and at debt securities with maturities of over 2 years, capital and reserves. —
agreed notice of up to 3 months (excluding central governments ’deposits) 14 Non-existent in Germany. 
and (for the euro area) central governments ’monetary liabilities with such
13*II Overall monetary survey in the European monetary union

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  European  monetary  union
  
 3  Banking system ’s liquidity position  * 
Stocks
  
 5  billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions ‘
current
account
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (includingmaintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Baseperiod currency operations operations facility operations facility operations deposits (net)  
4 reserves)  5 money  6 circulation  3 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2001          July 397.6 161.9 59.9 0.2 − 0.4 − 350.8 42.5 98.8 127.1 478.3
         Aug 402.1 164.0 60.0 0.1 − 0.2 − 347.6 48.8 101.8 127.8 475.6
         Sep 401.3 147.1 60.0 0.5 3.5 0.4 − 335.4 45.2 105.4 126.1 461.9
         Oct 389.9 136.7 60.0 1.1 − 0.1 − 325.2 43.6 93.6 125.1 450.4
         Nov 385.0 132.3 60.0 0.2 − 0.3 − 311.3 46.1 93.1 126.7 438.3
         Dec 383.7 122.5 60.0 0.5 12.4 0.8 − 298.0 43.5 109.3 127.4 426.2
2002          Jan 385.2 118.5 60.0 0.4 3.7 0.6 − 344.3 38.3 54.2 130.4 475.2
         Feb 386.0 127.3 60.0 0.2 − 0.1 − 306.2 49.6 85.2 132.6 438.8
         Mar 386.7 114.6 60.0 0.2 − 0.1 − 283.3 54.2 91.8 132.1 415.6
         Apr 395.4 112.7 60.0 0.4 − 0.2 − 285.9 55.9 95.3 131.2 417.3
         May 397.7 110.6 60.0 0.1 − 0.3 − 293.7 49.2 93.5 131.7 425.6
         June 396.2 112.6 60.0 0.5 − 0.4 − 300.8 45.1 91.2 131.8 433.0
         July 369.1 130.4 60.0 0.2 − 0.2 − 313.4 54.4 60.3 131.4 445.0
         Aug 360.0 139.2 55.2 0.1 − 0.1 − 322.7 50.9 50.8 129.9 452.8
         Sep 362.3 140.9 50.8 0.1 − 0.2 − 323.6 49.1 51.7 129.6 453.4
         Oct 370.0 146.1 45.3 0.1 − 0.1 − 329.2 45.6 58.2 128.3 457.6
         Nov 372.1 147.5 45.0 0.1 − 0.1 − 334.0 42.8 58.6 129.3 463.4
         Dec 371.5 168.1 45.0 1.1 2.0 0.2 − 350.7 51.7 55.5 129.5 480.5
2003          Jan 360.9 176.3 45.0 0.5 − 0.3 − 353.9 43.7 53.3 131.6 485.8
         Feb 356.4 168.6 45.0 0.3 − 0.3 − 340.7 50.2 48.0 131.1 472.2
         Mar 352.5 179.5 45.0 0.2 − 0.1 − 347.8 59.1 40.6 129.6 477.5
         Apr 337.4 179.4 45.0 0.1 − 0.2 − 358.5 52.1 20.5 130.6 489.3
         May 333.1 177.1 45.0 0.4 − 0.2 0.1 366.2 42.6 15.5 130.9 497.3
         June 331.3 194.7 45.0 0.4 − 0.3 0.2 373.2 52.6 13.2 131.9 505.3
         July 320.4 204.7 45.0 0.4 − 0.3 − 382.7 52.4 2.9 132.2 515.2
         Aug 315.8 213.4 45.0 0.2 − 0.1 − 391.6 51.5 −1.6 132.8 524.6
         Sep 315.0 214.0 45.0 0.1 − 0.6 − 391.7 54.4 −4.4 132.0 524.2
         Oct 321.3 208.4 45.0 0.1 − 0.2 − 395.5 48.3 −1.1 131.9 527.5
         Nov 321.8 205.8 45.0 0.1 − 0.3 − 399.4 43.4 −2.2 131.8 531.4
         Dec 320.1 235.5 45.0 0.6 − 0.1 − 416.1 57.0 −4.5 132.6 548.7
2004          Jan 309.2 232.6 45.0 0.3 − 0.1 − 427.6 37.0 −11.2 133.6 561.4
Deutsche Bundesbank
2001          July 92.8 85.4 37.0 0.1 − 0.3 − 121.8 0.1 55.5 37.7 159.7
         Aug 94.2 77.0 38.2 0.1 − 0.2 − 119.3 0.1 52.0 37.8 157.3
         Sep 93.7 73.3 38.9 0.1 1.3 0.1 − 115.4 0.1 54.6 37.1 152.7
         Oct 91.3 66.3 40.2 0.5 − 0.1 − 110.8 0.1 50.1 37.3 148.2
         Nov 89.8 68.2 38.5 0.2 − 0.2 − 104.6 0.1 53.8 38.0 142.9
         Dec 89.4 62.4 40.1 0.2 5.0 0.5 − 96.6 0.1 67.1 37.8 134.9
2002          Jan 89.9 63.3 41.1 0.3 1.4 0.3 − 91.7 0.1 64.9 39.0 131.0
         Feb 89.9 63.3 42.4 0.1 − 0.0 − 78.5 0.1 78.6 38.6 117.2
         Mar 90.0 58.5 40.7 0.2 − 0.1 − 79.7 0.1 71.2 38.3 118.1
         Apr 92.3 57.6 40.4 0.3 − 0.2 − 80.8 0.1 71.8 37.9 118.8
         May 92.3 53.1 39.7 0.1 − 0.3 − 83.8 0.1 63.1 38.0 122.0
         June 91.6 60.6 38.8 0.1 − 0.3 − 85.4 0.1 67.3 38.1 123.8
         July 84.7 67.6 37.1 0.2 − 0.2 − 89.2 0.1 62.0 38.1 127.5
         Aug 82.5 63.1 36.4 0.0 − 0.1 − 92.2 0.1 51.8 37.9 130.2
         Sep 82.4 64.4 32.7 0.1 − 0.1 − 92.4 0.0 49.1 37.9 130.4
         Oct 84.0 69.0 31.7 0.1 − 0.1 − 94.0 0.1 53.0 37.6 131.6
         Nov 84.3 73.2 31.6 0.1 − 0.1 − 94.6 0.1 56.5 37.9 132.6
         Dec 84.4 91.1 33.8 0.9 0.7 0.2 − 99.3 0.1 73.5 37.8 137.3
2003          Jan 82.3 85.1 36.1 0.5 − 0.1 − 98.3 0.1 66.9 38.6 137.0
         Feb 81.4 81.6 36.5 0.2 − 0.3 − 95.5 0.1 65.6 38.3 134.1
         Mar 81.4 90.0 34.9 0.1 − 0.1 − 97.5 0.1 70.9 37.9 135.5
         Apr 78.5 95.6 32.3 0.1 − 0.2 − 100.7 0.1 67.4 38.2 139.1
         May 77.6 98.8 32.4 0.4 − 0.1 0.1 102.5 0.1 68.4 38.1 140.7
         June 77.2 112.4 32.9 0.3 − 0.2 0.1 104.4 0.1 79.8 38.3 142.8
         July 74.3 115.5 32.4 0.3 − 0.2 − 107.1 0.1 77.1 38.2 145.4
         Aug 73.7 111.0 29.6 0.2 − 0.1 − 109.6 0.1 66.5 38.2 147.9
         Sep 73.9 114.0 29.1 0.1 − 0.4 − 109.8 0.1 69.2 37.7 147.9
         Oct 75.7 106.5 29.7 0.1 − 0.2 − 110.8 0.1 63.4 37.5 148.4
         Nov 76.1 102.3 30.8 0.0 − 0.2 − 111.5 0.1 60.0 37.5 149.1
         Dec 76.1 118.3 30.9 0.3 − 0.1 − 115.9 0.1 72.2 37.4 153.4
2004          Jan 73.1 119.5 32.3 0.2 − 0.1 − 116.2 0.1 70.9 37.9 154.1
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. —*The banking system ’s liquidity notes and other banknotes which have been issued by the national central
position is defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro-area banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in circulation. In accordancecredit institutions with the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the conso- with the accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for the issue oflidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statement euro banknotes, 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulationof the Bundesbank. —1The reserve maintenance period of the ESCB ’s are allocated on a monthly basis to the ECB. The counterpart of this adjust-
minimum reserve system starts on the 24th of each month and ends on the ment is shown under “Other factors ”. The remaining 92% of the value of
23rd of the following month. —2Source: ECB. —3From 2002, euro bank- the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly basis,
14*II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  European  monetary  union

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  European  monetary  union
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions ‘
current
account
Net assets Longer- Other Other balancesin gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserveand foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenancecurrency operations operations facility operations facility operations deposits (net)  
4 reserves)  5 money  6 period circulation  3 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
+ 12.6 + 0.2 + 0.8 + 0.0 − + 0.0 −− 0.3 + 1.2 + 11.3 + 1.4 + 1.0 2001          July
+ 4.5 + 2.1 + 0.1 −0.1 −− 0.2 −− 3.2 + 6.3 + 3.0 + 0.7 − 2.7          Aug 
− 0.8 −16.9
+ 0.0 + 0.4 + 3.5 + 0.2 −− 12.2 − 3.6 + 3.6 − 1.7 − 13.7          Sep 
−11.4 −10.4 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 3.5 −0.3 −− 10.2 − 1.6 −11.8 − 1.0 − 11.5          Oct 
− 4.9 − 4.4 − 0.0 −0.9 − + 0.2 −− 13.9 + 2.5 −0.5 + 1.6 − 12.1          Nov 
− 1.3 − 9.8
+ 0.0 + 0.3 + 12.4 + 0.5 −− 13.3 − 2.6 + 16.2 + 0.7 − 12.1          Dec 
+ 1.5 − 4.0 − 0.0 −0.1 − 8.7 −0.2 − + 46.3 − 5.2 −55.1 + 3.0 + 49.0 2002          Jan 
+ 0.8 + 8.8
+ 0.0 −0.2 − 3.7 −0.5 −− 38.1 + 11.3 + 31.0 + 2.2 − 36.4          Feb 
+ 0.7 −12.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 − + 0.0 −− 22.9 + 4.6 + 6.6 − 0.5 − 23.2          Mar 
+ 8.7 − 1.9 − 0.0 + 0.2 − + 0.1 − + 2.6 + 1.7 + 3.5 − 0.9 + 1.7          Apr 
+ 2.3 − 2.1 − 0.0 −0.3 − + 0.1 − + 7.8 − 6.7 −1.8 + 0.5 + 8.3          May
− 1.5 + 2.0 + 0.0 + 0.4 − + 0.1 − + 7.1 − 4.1 −2.3 + 0.1 + 7.4          June
−27.1 + 17.8 − 0.0 −0.3 −− 0.2 − + 12.6 + 9.3 −30.9 − 0.4 + 12.0          July
− 9.1 + 8.8 − 4.8 −0.1 −− 0.1 − + 9.3 − 3.5 −9.5 − 1.5 + 7.8          Aug 
+ 2.3 + 1.7 − 4.4 + 0.0 − + 0.1 − + 0.9 − 1.8 + 0.9 − 0.3 + 0.6          Sep 
+ 7.7 + 5.2 − 5.5 −0.0 −− 0.1 − + 5.6 − 3.5 + 6.5 − 1.3 + 4.2          Oct 
+ 2.1 + 1.4 − 0.3 + 0.0 −− 0.0 − + 4.8 − 2.8 + 0.4 + 1.0 + 5.8          Nov 
− 0.6 + 20.6 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 2.0 + 0.1 − + 16.7 + 8.9 −3.1 + 0.2 + 17.1          Dec 
−10.6 + 8.2
+ 0.0 −0.6 − 2.0 + 0.1 − + 3.2 − 8.0 −2.2 + 2.1 + 5.3 2003          Jan 
− 4.5 − 7.7
+ 0.0 −0.2 − + 0.0 −− 13.2 + 6.5 −5.3 − 0.5 − 13.6          Feb 
− 3.9 + 10.9
+ 0.0 −0.1 −− 0.2 − + 7.1 + 8.9 −7.4 − 1.5 + 5.3          Mar 
−15.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 −0.1 − + 0.1 − + 10.7 − 7.0 −20.1 + 1.0 + 11.8          Apr 
− 4.3 − 2.3 − 0.0 + 0.3 −− 0.0 + 0.1 + 7.7 − 9.5 −5.0 + 0.3 + 8.0          May
− 1.8 + 17.6 + 0.0 −0.0 − + 0.1 + 0.1 + 7.0 + 10.0 −2.3 + 1.0 + 8.0          June
−10.9 + 10.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 −− 0.0 − 0.2 + 9.5 − 0.2 −10.3 + 0.3 + 9.9          July
− 4.6 + 8.7 − 0.0 −0.2 −− 0.2 − + 8.9 − 0.9 −4.5 + 0.6 + 9.4          Aug 
− 0.8 + 0.6 − 0.0 −0.1 − + 0.5 − + 0.1 + 2.9 −2.8 − 0.8 − 0.4          Sep 
+ 6.3 − 5.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 −− 0.4 − + 3.8 − 6.1 + 3.3 − 0.1 + 3.3          Oct 
+ 0.5 − 2.6 − 0.0 −0.0 − + 0.1 − + 3.9 − 4.9 −1.1 − 0.1 + 3.9          Nov 
− 1.7 + 29.7 + 0.0 + 0.5 −− 0.2 − + 16.7 + 13.6 −2.3 + 0.8 + 17.3          Dec 
−10.9 − 2.9
+ 0.0 −0.3 − + 0.0 − + 11.5 −20.0 −6.7 + 1.0 + 12.7 2004          Jan 
Deutsche Bundesbank
+ 3.2 + 5.5 − 0.5 + 0.0 − + 0.0 −− 1.9 − 0.0 + 9.9 + 0.2 − 1.7 2001          July
+ 1.3 − 8.4 + 1.2 −0.1 −− 0.2 −− 2.4 − 0.0 −3.5 + 0.2 − 2.4          Aug 
− 0.4 − 3.7 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 1.3 −0.0 −− 3.9 + 0.0 + 2.6 − 0.7 − 4.7          Sep 
− 2.4 − 7.0 + 1.3 + 0.4 − 1.3 −0.0 −− 4.7 − 0.0 −4.5 + 0.2 − 4.5          Oct 
− 1.5 + 2.0 − 1.7 −0.3 − + 0.2 −− 6.1 + 0.0 + 3.7 + 0.7 − 5.3          Nov 
− 0.4 − 5.8 + 1.7 + 0.0 + 5.0 + 0.3 −− 8.1 + 0.0 + 13.3 − 0.1 − 7.9          Dec 
+ 0.4 + 0.9 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 3.6 −0.2 −− 4.8 − 0.0 −2.2 + 1.1 − 3.9 2002          Jan 
+ 0.0 + 0.1 + 1.3 −0.2 − 1.4 −0.3 −− 13.2 − 0.0 + 13.6 − 0.4 − 13.8          Feb 
+ 0.1 − 4.9 − 1.7 + 0.1 − + 0.0 − + 1.2 − 0.0 −7.4 − 0.3 + 0.9          Mar 
+ 2.4 − 0.9 − 0.3 + 0.1 − + 0.1 − + 1.0 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.4 + 0.7          Apr 
− 0.0 − 4.5 − 0.7 −0.2 − + 0.1 − + 3.0 + 0.0 −8.7 + 0.1 + 3.3          May
− 0.7 + 7.5 − 0.9 + 0.1 −− 0.0 − + 1.6 − 0.0 + 4.2 + 0.2 + 1.8          June
− 6.9 + 7.0 − 1.7 + 0.0 −− 0.1 − + 3.8 + 0.0 −5.3 − 0.1 + 3.7          July
− 2.2 − 4.5 − 0.7 −0.1 −− 0.1 − + 3.0 − 0.0 −10.2 − 0.2 + 2.7          Aug 
− 0.1 + 1.3 − 3.7 + 0.0 − + 0.1 − + 0.2 − 0.0 −2.8 − 0.0 + 0.2          Sep 
+ 1.6 + 4.6 − 1.0 + 0.0 −− 0.0 − + 1.5 + 0.0 + 3.9 − 0.3 + 1.2          Oct 
+ 0.4 + 4.3 − 0.1 −0.0 −− 0.0 − + 0.7 + 0.0 + 3.5 + 0.3 + 1.0          Nov 
+ 0.1 + 17.8 + 2.2 + 0.9 + 0.7 + 0.1 − + 4.7
+ 0.0 + 17.1 − 0.2 + 4.6          Dec 
− 2.1 − 6.0 + 2.4 −0.5 − 0.7 −0.0 −− 1.0 − 0.0 −6.7 + 0.8 − 0.2 2003          Jan 
− 0.9 − 3.4 + 0.4 −0.2 − + 0.1 −− 2.8 − 0.0 −1.2 − 0.3 − 2.9          Feb 
+ 0.0 + 8.4 − 1.6 −0.1 −− 0.2 − + 2.0 + 0.0 + 5.2 − 0.4 + 1.4          Mar 
− 2.8 + 5.6 − 2.6 −0.1 − + 0.1 − + 3.2
+ 0.0 −3.5 + 0.3 + 3.6          Apr 
− 0.9 + 3.2 + 0.1 + 0.3 −− 0.0 + 0.1 + 1.8 + 0.0 + 1.0 − 0.1 + 1.6          May
− 0.4 + 13.6 + 0.5 −0.1 − + 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.9 + 0.0 + 11.4 + 0.1 + 2.1          June
− 2.9 + 3.1 − 0.4 −0.0 −− 0.0 − 0.1 + 2.7 − 0.0 −2.7 − 0.1 + 2.6          July
− 0.6 − 4.6 − 2.8 −0.1 −− 0.1 − + 2.5 + 0.0 −10.5 + 0.1 + 2.5          Aug 
+ 0.2 + 3.1 − 0.5 −0.1 − + 0.3 − + 0.2 − 0.0 + 2.6 − 0.5 − 0.0          Sep 
+ 1.8 − 7.5 + 0.6 + 0.0 −− 0.2 − + 1.0 − 0.0 −5.7 − 0.2 + 0.6          Oct 
+ 0.4 − 4.3 + 1.2 −0.0 −− 0.0 − + 0.7 + 0.0 −3.4 + 0.0 + 0.7          Nov 
+ 0.0 + 16.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 −− 0.1 − + 4.4 + 0.0 + 12.1 − 0.1 + 4.2          Dec 
− 3.0 + 1.2 + 1.4 −0.1 − + 0.0 − + 0.2 − 0.0 −1.2 + 0.5 + 0.7 2004          Jan 
to the NCBs, with each NCB showing in its balance sheet the percentage of statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statement of thethe euro banknotes in circulation that corresponds to its paid-up share in Bundesbank. —5Equal to the difference between the sum of liquidity-pro-
the ECB ’s capital. The difference between the value of the euro banknotes viding factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors. —6Calculated as
allocated to an NCB and the value of the euro banknotes which that NCB the sum of the “deposit facility ”,“banknotes in circulation ”and “credit
has put into circulation is likewise shown under “Other factors ”. From 2003 institutions ’ current account holdings ”. 
euro banknotes only. —4Remaining items in the consolidated financial  
15*II  Overall  monetary  survey  in  the  European  monetary  union

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1 Assets *
 
 
 5  billion
Claims on non-euro-area Claims on non-euro-area residents denominated
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
On investments, euro-area Balances Claims
reporting external loans residents with banks, arising from
date/ Gold and other denominated security the creditEnd of Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility undermonth  
1 assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
 Eurosystem 2
 
2003 May                30 801.4 122.2 214.2 31.5 182.7 17.3 3.4 3.4 −
         Jun                  6 777.1 122.2 213.5 31.4 182.1 16.4 3.5 3.5 −
                               13 801.7 122.2 214.8 31.5 183.3 15.5 3.3 3.3 −
                               20 791.7 122.2 212.0 32.3 179.7 16.8 3.4 3.4 −
                               27 813.6 122.2 212.9 32.2 180.7 17.1 3.4 3.4 −
         Jul                  4 3 802.1 3 120.0 3 206.4 3 31.4 3 175.0 3 15.6 4.0 4.0 −
                               11 798.0 120.0 208.4 31.4 177.0 15.0 3.6 3.6 −
                               18 795.3 120.0 205.4 31.4 173.9 15.8 4.4 4.4 −
                               25 828.5 119.9 204.0 31.4 172.6 15.2 4.4 4.4 −
         Aug                  1 802.9 120.0 204.0 31.5 172.5 15.2 4.3 4.3 −
                                 8 812.6 120.0 203.2 31.9 171.3 15.2 4.4 4.4 −
                               15 798.4 120.0 203.0 31.9 171.1 14.7 4.4 4.4 −
                               22 800.2 119.8 202.2 31.9 170.3 14.8 4.8 4.8 −
                               29 814.8 119.8 203.5 31.9 171.5 15.2 4.6 4.6 −
         Sep                  5 809.5 119.8 201.5 32.0 169.5 15.2 4.4 4.4 −
                               12 804.4 119.8 202.6 32.5 170.1 14.6 4.5 4.5 −
                               19 813.6 119.8 199.6 32.5 167.1 16.4 4.5 4.5 −
                               26 829.2 119.7 202.4 32.3 170.1 14.8 4.6 4.6 −
2003 Oct                  3 3 813.6 3 130.8 3 201.0 32.2 3 168.8 15.1 5.0 5.0 −
                               10 815.9 130.8 200.8 32.2 168.6 15.8 4.7 4.7 −
                               17 803.7 130.8 198.3 32.3 166.0 15.8 4.9 4.9 −
                               24 812.5 130.8 198.0 32.2 165.8 16.4 5.1 5.1 −
                               31 818.6 130.8 199.7 32.1 167.5 15.4 5.0 5.0 −
         Nov                  7 813.5 130.7 198.8 32.2 166.7 15.9 5.0 5.0 −
                               14 811.9 130.6 195.7 32.2 163.5 15.8 5.1 5.1 −
                               21 827.1 130.5 196.1 31.9 164.2 15.2 5.5 5.5 −
                               28 833.3 130.4 194.8 31.9 162.8 14.2 5.5 5.5 −
         Dec                  5 858.3 130.4 194.5 31.9 162.6 15.8 5.3 5.3 −
                               12 847.0 130.3 192.7 31.9 160.8 16.3 5.5 5.5 −
                               19 848.7 130.2 189.9 30.3 159.6 17.8 5.9 5.9 −
                               24 835.2 130.2 189.5 30.4 159.1 18.0 6.0 6.0 −
2004 Jan                  2 3 838.3 130.3 3 176.8 3 29.1 3 147.7 17.4 6.3 6.3 −
                                 9 812.0 130.3 176.4 29.1 147.3 18.4 6.5 6.5 −
                               16 812.6 130.3 178.0 29.1 148.9 17.6 7.5 7.5 −
                               23 823.3 130.3 176.3 29.0 147.3 18.1 7.7 7.7 −
                               30 824.4 130.3 178.3 29.0 149.3 17.1 7.6 7.6 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2002          Mar 3 227.4 3 38.5 3 59.6 3 8.8 3 50.8 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Apr 205.3 38.5 58.0 8.3 49.6 − 0.3 0.3 −
         May 218.3 38.5 56.6 8.4 48.2 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Jun 3 217.9 3 35.4 3 51.2 8.8 3 42.4 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Jul 211.3 35.4 51.8 8.8 43.0 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Aug 218.3 35.4 50.9 8.7 42.2 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Sep 3 221.9 3 36.2 3 52.7 8.8 3 44.0 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Oct 226.4 36.2 52.1 8.6 43.5 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Nov 229.9 36.2 53.0 8.6 44.4 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Dec 3 240.0 36.2 3 48.8 8.3 3 40.5 − 0.3 0.3 −
2003          Jan 233.9 36.2 48.9 8.2 40.7 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Feb 236.2 36.2 49.2 8.2 41.0 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Mar 3 239.2 3 34.1 3 48.4 8.3 3 40.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Apr 230.5 34.1 47.0 8.2 38.7 − 0.3 0.3 −
         May 258.1 34.1 47.8 8.3 39.6 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Jun 3 258.2 3 33.4 3 45.0 8.3 3 36.7 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Jul 246.9 33.4 44.8 8.3 36.5 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Aug 248.9 33.4 45.5 8.3 37.1 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Sep 3 257.5 3 36.5 3 44.7 8.5 3 36.2 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Oct 257.6 36.5 45.0 8.5 36.5 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Nov 254.4 36.5 44.5 8.5 36.0 − 0.3 0.3 −
         Dec 3 267.7 36.5 3 40.1 7.6 3 32.5 − 0.3 0.3 −
2004          Jan 258.1 36.5 40.4 7.6 32.7 − 0.3 0.3 −
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the statements of the national central banks of the euro-area member states
financial statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial (NCBs). The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold
16*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Lending to euro-area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations
denominated in euro
 Other claims on euro-area credit Securities General    On
Credits institutions of euro-area government    reporting
Main Longer-term Fine-tuning Structural Marginal related denomi- residents debt    date/refinancing refinancing reverse reverse lending to margin nated in denominated denominated Other    End of
Total operations operations operations operations facility calls euro in euro in euro assets    month  
1 
Eurosystem 2
 
247.4 202.0 45.0 −− 0.3 0.1 0.3 42.3 44.3 110.1 2003 May                 30
223.5 178.4 45.0 −− 0.1 0.0 0.2 43.1 44.3 110.3          Jun                   6
246.9 201.4 45.0 −− 0.4 0.1 0.3 43.4 44.3 111.0                                13
238.0 191.0 45.0 −− 1.9 0.1 0.3 43.8 44.3 110.9                                20
257.9 212.0 45.0 −− 0.8 0.1 0.2 44.1 44.3 111.3                                27
251.1 206.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.1 0.3 44.1 43.8 3 116.9          Jul                   4
245.1 200.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.3 44.5 43.8 117.4                                11
244.1 199.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.3 44.5 43.8 117.0                                18
277.8 232.0 45.0 −− 0.7 0.0 0.3 46.6 43.8 116.5                                25
252.1 207.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.1 0.2 46.9 43.8 116.5          Aug                   1
262.1 217.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.1 0.2 47.1 43.8 116.5                                  8
250.0 205.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.2 47.2 43.8 115.2                                15
251.7 205.0 45.0 −− 1.7 0.0 0.3 47.9 43.8 114.8                                22
264.1 219.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.3 48.5 43.8 115.1                                29
260.0 215.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.4 49.3 43.8 115.1          Sep                   5
253.0 208.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.3 50.0 43.8 115.7                                12
263.0 218.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.3 50.4 43.8 115.8                                19
276.1 231.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.3 51.2 43.8 116.4                                26
249.3 204.0 45.0 −− 0.3 0.0 0.4 51.2 43.8 3 117.2 2003 Oct                   3
250.0 205.0 45.0 −−− 0.0 0.3 51.9 43.8 117.8                                10
240.3 195.0 45.0 −− 0.2 0.0 0.4 52.4 43.8 117.0                                17
248.0 203.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.4 52.5 43.8 117.5                                24
252.1 207.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.4 53.0 43.8 118.5                                31
246.1 201.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.1 0.6 53.4 43.8 119.3          Nov                   7
247.0 202.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.7 53.1 43.8 120.1                                14
262.5 217.0 45.0 −− 0.5 0.0 0.8 53.0 43.8 119.5                                21
270.3 225.3 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.8 53.6 43.8 120.1                                28
292.4 247.3 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.5 54.3 43.8 121.5          Dec                   5
282.0 237.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.5 53.9 43.8 122.1                                12
284.0 239.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.7 54.1 43.7 122.5                                19
276.0 231.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.7 54.1 42.9 117.8                                24
298.0 253.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 0.8 61.3 42.7 3 104.6 2004 Jan                   2
270.4 225.0 45.0 −− 0.4 0.0 1.0 62.0 42.7 104.2                                  9
269.0 224.0 45.0 −− 0.0 0.0 1.2 62.2 42.7 104.1                                16
279.6 229.0 45.0 −− 5.6 0.0 0.9 63.1 42.7 104.6                                23
279.0 224.0 55.0 −− 0.0 0.0 1.1 63.6 42.7 104.7                                30
 Deutsche Bundesbank
106.8 65.7 40.4 −− 0.7 − 0.0 − 4.4 17.7 2002          Mar
86.6 46.7 39.6 −− 0.3 − 0.0 − 4.4 17.5          Apr
101.0 62.3 38.6 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 17.4          May
109.1 71.2 36.9 −− 0.9 − 0.0 − 4.4 17.5          Jun
98.2 61.8 36.4 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 21.2          Jul
100.3 68.3 32.0 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 26.9          Aug
104.2 72.4 31.7 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 24.0          Sep
103.9 72.4 31.6 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 29.4          Oct
111.1 77.0 34.0 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 24.8          Nov
125.5 87.1 36.1 −− 2.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 24.8          Dec
124.3 87.5 36.6 −− 0.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.8 2003          Jan
126.3 91.6 34.7 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.7          Feb
130.9 98.4 32.1 −− 0.4 − 0.0 − 4.4 21.1          Mar
125.0 92.5 32.5 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.7          Apr
151.8 118.7 32.9 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.7          May
155.0 122.5 32.4 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 20.1          Jun
144.0 115.1 28.8 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.9          Jul
145.2 116.0 29.1 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 20.1          Aug
151.4 121.5 29.7 −− 0.2 − 0.0 − 4.4 3 20.1          Sep
133.0 101.9 31.1 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 38.4          Oct
145.4 115.0 30.4 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 23.3          Nov
162.3 129.9 32.3 −− 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.4 24.0          Dec
157.4 117.4 40.0 −− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.4 19.0 2004          Jan
 
and financial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quar- for the Bundesbank: end-of month financial statement. —2Source: ECB. —
ter.—1For the Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly dates; 3 Changes are due mainly to revalutions at the end of the quarter. 
17*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
 5  billion
Liabilities to euro-area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro-area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilitiesaccounts to euro-
On (covering Fine- area creditreporting the tuning Deposits institutions Debtdate/ Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
End of Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Othermonth  
1 liabilities Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment lation  2,3 liabilities
 Eurosystem 5
 
2003 May                30 801.4 371.0 134.9 134.8 0.1 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 65.5 60.3 5.2
         Jun                  6 777.1 376.0 112.7 112.7 0.1 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 58.9 53.4 5.5
                               13 801.7 376.5 139.1 139.0 0.1 −−− 0.0 2.0 55.1 49.7 5.4
                               20 791.7 376.0 134.4 134.1 0.3 −−− 0.0 2.0 48.4 42.9 5.5
                               27 813.6 377.2 131.0 130.9 0.1 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 73.0 67.7 5.3
         Jul                  4 6 802.1 383.7 133.3 133.2 0.1 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 57.9 52.7 5.3
                               11 798.0 386.2 130.9 130.9 0.0 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 52.1 46.7 5.4
                               18 795.3 386.9 133.8 133.7 0.0 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 45.7 40.4 5.3
                               25 828.5 386.3 142.6 142.5 0.0 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 70.6 65.3 5.3
         Aug                  1 802.9 392.1 126.0 125.9 0.1 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 56.8 51.4 5.4
                                 8 812.6 395.1 134.6 134.6 0.0 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 55.6 50.2 5.3
                               15 798.4 395.0 129.2 129.2 0.0 −− 0.0 0.0 2.0 48.7 43.3 5.3
                               22 800.2 390.0 136.2 135.0 1.2 −− 0.0 0.1 2.0 48.8 43.5 5.3
                               29 814.8 390.4 131.0 131.0 0.0 −− 0.0 0.1 2.0 66.9 61.7 5.3
         Sep                  5 809.5 393.9 133.4 133.3 0.1 −− 0.0 0.1 2.0 57.0 51.7 5.3
                               12 804.4 393.6 131.3 131.3 0.0 −− 0.0 0.1 2.0 54.2 48.9 5.4
                               19 813.6 392.1 129.1 128.7 0.5 −− 0.0 0.1 2.0 67.7 62.2 5.5
                               26 829.2 391.5 135.7 135.7 0.0 −−− 0.1 2.0 76.1 70.9 5.2
2003 Oct                  3 6 813.6 397.6 129.4 129.4 0.0 −−− 0.1 2.0 50.0 44.4 5.6
                               10 815.9 398.0 132.8 132.7 0.1 −− 0.0 0.1 2.0 48.2 42.8 5.4
                               17 803.7 396.8 131.0 130.3 0.7 −− 0.0 0.2 2.0 40.4 35.2 5.3
                               24 812.5 395.4 127.8 127.8 0.0 −− 0.0 0.2 2.0 53.5 48.4 5.2
                               31 818.6 398.4 128.2 128.2 0.0 −− 0.0 0.2 2.0 55.0 49.4 5.6
         Nov                  7 813.5 401.9 133.4 133.4 0.0 −− 0.0 0.2 1.1 41.4 36.0 5.4
                               14 811.9 401.9 132.5 132.4 0.1 −− 0.0 0.2 1.1 43.2 37.3 5.9
                               21 827.1 400.5 129.0 127.2 1.8 −−− 0.2 1.1 62.2 56.3 5.8
                               28 833.3 405.2 125.0 124.9 0.1 −− 0.0 0.2 1.1 70.3 64.2 6.1
         Dec                  5 858.3 416.2 137.4 137.4 0.0 −− 0.0 0.3 1.1 70.7 64.8 5.9
                               12 847.0 419.7 129.5 129.5 0.0 −−− 0.3 1.1 64.8 59.1 5.7
                               19 848.7 429.5 129.8 129.7 0.1 −−− 0.3 1.1 55.2 49.4 5.7
                               24 835.2 439.2 113.5 113.5 0.0 −−− 0.3 1.1 48.1 42.2 5.8
2004 Jan                  2 6 838.3 434.3 152.9 152.8 0.1 −− 0.0 0.3 1.1 35.6 29.8 5.8
                                 9 812.0 425.2 133.7 133.6 0.1 −−− 0.3 1.1 38.8 32.9 5.9
                               16 812.6 419.2 135.1 135.1 0.1 −−− 0.3 1.1 42.9 37.0 5.9
                               23 823.3 415.1 134.7 134.3 0.4 −−− 0.3 1.1 57.4 51.7 5.8
                               30 824.4 415.6 132.1 132.1 0.0 −− 0.0 0.3 1.1 60.1 54.0 6.1
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2002          Mar 6 227.4 80.5 42.0 42.0 0.1 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Apr 205.3 81.7 40.1 38.9 1.2 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.5
         May 218.3 84.1 44.9 44.9 0.0 −−− − − 0.6 0.0 0.6
         Jun 6 217.9 86.9 41.4 41.3 0.1 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Jul 211.3 90.0 40.7 40.6 0.0 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Aug 218.3 90.7 44.3 44.2 0.1 −−− − − 0.5 0.0 0.5
         Sep 6 221.9 92.0 41.0 41.0 0.0 −−− − − 0.6 0.0 0.5
         Oct 226.4 94.2 41.3 41.3 0.0 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Nov 229.9 95.7 41.0 40.9 0.0 −−− − − 0.8 0.1 0.7
         Dec 6 240.0 104.5 44.8 44.8 0.0 −−− − − 0.6 0.0 0.6
2003          Jan 233.9 94.5 40.9 40.8 0.1 −−− − − 0.5 0.0 0.5
         Feb 236.2 96.1 38.1 38.1 0.1 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.5
         Mar 6 239.2 98.1 48.1 48.0 0.0 −−− − − 0.5 0.0 0.4
         Apr 230.5 101.8 36.4 36.3 0.0 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         May 258.1 103.2 36.3 36.2 0.1 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Jun 6 258.2 105.2 38.8 38.8 0.0 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Jul 246.9 108.5 39.6 39.5 0.1 −−− − − 0.5 0.0 0.5
         Aug 248.9 108.6 41.0 41.0 0.0 −−− − − 0.5 0.0 0.4
         Sep 6 257.5 109.2 41.7 41.7 0.0 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Oct 257.6 110.8 42.0 42.0 0.0 −−− − − 0.5 0.1 0.4
         Nov 254.4 112.7 36.4 36.4 0.0 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
         Dec 6 267.7 121.4 44.6 44.5 0.1 −−− − − 0.6 0.1 0.5
2004          Jan 258.1 112.4 39.8 39.8 0.0 −−− − − 0.4 0.0 0.4
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the banknotes and up to end-2002, banknotes still in circulation issued by the
financial statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial national central banks of the Eurosystem (see also footnote 4). —
statements of the national central banks of the euro-area member states 3According to the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem on the
(NCBs). The balance sheet items for foreign currency, securities, gold and issue of euro banknotes, a share of 8% of the total value of the eurofinancial instruments are valued at market rates at the end of the quar- banknotes in circulation is allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. Theter.—1For Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly dates; for counterpart of this adjustment is disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem liability
the Bundesbank: end-of-month financial statements. —2From 2002, euro related to euro-banknote issue “. The remaining 92 % of the value of the
18*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Liabilities to non-euro-area
residents denominated inforeign currency
Intra-  
Liabilities Eurosystem  
Liabilities to euro-area Liabilities Counterpart liability     Onto non-euro- residents Deposits, arising of special related to     reportingarea residents denominated balances from the drawing euro-  Capital    date/denominated in foreign and other rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and    End of credit facility
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF issue  
3 accounts reserves    month  1 liabilities  4 
Eurosystem 5
 
8.8 1.0 14.0 14.0 − 6.2 64.9 − 67.9 65.0 2003 May                 30
9.0 1.0 13.7 13.7 − 6.2 64.6 − 67.9 65.0          Jun                   6
9.0 1.0 15.2 15.2 − 6.2 64.6 − 67.9 65.0                                13
10.6 1.0 14.6 14.6 − 6.2 65.7 − 67.9 65.0                                20
8.7 1.0 16.0 16.0 − 6.2 65.5 − 67.9 65.0                                27
8.8 0.9 6 16.4 6 16.4 − 6.0 6 65.8 − 6 62.2 65.0          Jul                   4
8.7 0.9 17.9 17.9 − 6.0 66.0 − 62.2 65.0                                11
8.9 0.9 16.7 16.7 − 6.0 67.1 − 62.2 65.0                                18
9.3 0.9 16.6 16.6 − 6.0 66.9 − 62.2 65.0                                25
9.1 0.9 16.3 16.3 − 6.0 66.6 − 62.2 65.0          Aug                   1
9.0 0.8 15.8 15.8 − 6.0 66.4 − 62.2 65.0                                  8
9.4 0.8 14.8 14.8 − 6.0 65.2 − 62.2 65.0                                15
9.3 0.8 14.9 14.9 − 6.0 64.8 − 62.2 65.0                                22
9.4 0.8 16.5 16.5 − 6.0 64.3 − 62.2 65.0                                29
9.7 0.8 15.0 15.0 − 6.0 64.4 − 62.2 65.0          Sep                   5
9.6 0.8 15.0 15.0 − 6.0 64.5 − 62.2 65.0                                12
9.3 0.8 13.8 13.8 − 6.0 65.5 − 62.2 65.0                                19
9.3 0.8 15.4 15.4 − 6.0 65.2 − 62.2 65.0                                26
9.5 0.7 17.2 17.2 − 6.0 6 65.0 − 6 71.2 65.0 2003 Oct                   3
9.4 0.7 17.8 17.8 − 6.0 64.9 − 71.2 65.0                                10
9.5 0.6 15.2 15.2 − 6.0 65.8 − 71.2 65.0                                17
9.4 0.7 15.5 15.5 − 6.0 65.8 − 71.2 65.0                                24
9.6 0.8 16.2 16.2 − 6.0 66.0 − 71.2 65.0                                31
9.6 0.7 17.2 17.2 − 6.0 65.9 − 71.2 65.0          Nov                   7
9.7 0.7 14.2 14.2 − 6.0 66.2 − 71.2 65.0                                14
9.8 0.7 14.6 14.6 − 6.0 66.7 − 71.2 65.0                                21
9.7 0.7 12.3 12.3 − 6.0 66.7 − 71.2 65.0                                28
9.7 0.7 13.6 13.6 − 6.0 66.5 − 71.2 65.0          Dec                   5
9.5 0.7 12.4 12.4 − 6.0 67.0 − 71.2 65.0                                12
9.5 0.6 12.7 12.7 − 6.0 68.0 − 71.2 65.0                                19
10.3 0.6 12.6 12.6 − 6.0 67.3 − 71.2 65.0                                24
10.1 0.5 6 12.3 6 12.3 − 5.8 6 54.4 − 6 69.1 62.1 2004 Jan                   2
9.5 0.5 12.5 12.5 − 5.8 53.6 − 69.1 62.0                                  9
9.6 0.4 13.4 13.4 − 5.8 53.8 − 69.1 62.0                                16
10.8 0.4 12.6 12.6 − 5.8 54.0 − 69.1 62.0                                23
9.6 0.4 13.5 13.5 − 5.8 54.8 − 69.1 62.0                                30
 Deutsche Bundesbank
7.0 0.0 6 3.0 6 3.0 − 1.7 30.9 11.6 6 44.8 5.1 2002          Mar
7.0 0.0 2.4 2.4 − 1.7 9.1 12.9 44.8 5.1          Apr
7.0 0.0 1.6 1.6 − 1.7 12.7 15.7 44.8 5.1          May
6.9 0.0 2.3 2.3 − 1.6 20.9 16.7 6 35.5 5.1          Jun
7.1 0.0 3.0 3.0 − 1.6 8.9 18.8 35.5 5.1          Jul
7.1 0.0 2.3 2.3 − 1.6 9.2 22.0 35.5 5.1          Aug
7.2 0.0 2.8 2.8 − 1.6 10.2 24.1 6 37.3 5.1          Sep
7.1 0.0 2.4 2.4 − 1.6 10.6 26.2 37.3 5.1          Oct
7.1 0.0 3.1 3.1 − 1.6 10.5 27.6 37.3 5.1          Nov
7.1 0.0 1.8 1.8 − 1.6 11.1 29.1 6 34.2 5.0          Dec
7.8 0.0 2.2 2.2 − 1.6 17.6 29.6 34.2 5.0 2003          Jan
7.3 0.0 2.4 2.4 − 1.6 19.1 31.9 34.2 5.0          Feb
7.1 0.0 3.4 3.4 − 1.5 6 11.7 33.3 6 30.4 5.0          Mar
7.1 0.0 2.0 2.0 − 1.5 11.6 34.2 30.4 5.0          Apr
7.3 0.0 2.7 2.7 − 1.5 34.5 36.6 30.4 5.0          May
7.4 0.0 3.2 3.2 − 1.5 31.3 37.3 6 28.2 5.0          Jun
7.3 0.0 3.0 3.0 − 1.5 14.9 38.4 28.2 5.0          Jul
7.4 0.0 3.5 3.5 − 1.5 12.4 40.8 28.2 5.0          Aug
7.3 0.0 3.6 3.6 − 1.5 16.2 42.2 6 30.2 5.0          Sep
7.4 0.0 3.9 3.9 − 1.5 12.9 43.4 30.2 5.0          Oct
7.4 0.0 3.2 3.2 − 1.5 12.9 44.4 30.2 5.0          Nov
7.7 0.0 2.8 2.8 − 1.4 6 10.5 44.6 6 29.1 5.0          Dec
7.3 0.0 3.1 3.1 − 1.4 11.4 48.1 29.1 5.0 2004          Jan
 
euro banknotes in circulation is also allocated to the NCBs on a monthly banknotes put into circulation is also disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem
basis, and each NCB shows in its balance sheet the share of the euro bank- claim/ liability related to banknote issue “.—4For the Deutsche Bundes-
notes issued which corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB ’s capital. The bank: from 2003, including DM banknotes still in circulation (see also foot-
difference between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to the NCB note 2). —5Source: ECB. —6Changes are due mainly to revaluations at the
according to the aforementioned accounting regime and the value of euro end of the quarter. 
19*III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Assets
 
 
 Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999, 
 5 
 billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area  3 Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other member states to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and indi-
viduals
Secur- Secur-
Balance ities itiessheet Cash issued issued
Period total  
2 in hand Total Total Loans  3 by banks Total Loans  3 by banks Total Total Total Loans  3 
 End of year or month
 
1995 7,778.7 27.3 2,210.2 2,019.0 1,399.8 619.3 191.2 158.0 33.2 4,723.3 4,635.0 3,548.8 3,298.7
1996 8,540.5 30.3 2,523.0 2,301.1 1,585.7 715.4 221.9 181.2 40.7 5,084.7 4,981.9 3,812.8 3,543.01997 9,368.2 30.7 2,836.0 2,580.7 1,758.6 822.1 255.3 208.8 46.5 5,408.8 5,269.5 4,041.3 3,740.81998 10,355.5 29.9 3,267.4 2,939.4 1,977.4 962.0 328.1 264.9 63.1 5,833.9 5,615.9 4,361.0 3,966.51999 5,678.5 17.2 1,836.9 1,635.0 1,081.4 553.6 201.9 161.8 40.1 3,127.4 2,958.6 2,326.4 2,093.4
2000 6,083.9 16.1 1,977.4 1,724.2 1,108.9 615.3 253.2 184.5 68.6 3,249.9 3,062.6 2,445.7 2,186.6
2001 6,303.1 14.6 2,069.7 1,775.5 1,140.6 634.9 294.2 219.8 74.4 3,317.1 3,084.9 2,497.1 2,235.72002 6,394.2 17.9 2,118.0 1,769.1 1,164.3 604.9 348.9 271.7 77.2 3,340.2 3,092.2 2,505.8 2,240.82003 6,432.0 17.3 2,111.7 1,732.2 1,116.7 615.5 379.5 287.7 91.8 3,333.4 3,083.1 2,497.4 2,241.2
2002          Mar 6,269.8 16.9 2,033.3 1,744.1 1,096.1 647.9 289.3 213.2 76.1 3,310.6 3,065.5 2,478.9 2,230.3
         Apr 6,267.7 14.9 2,032.8 1,736.5 1,085.8 650.7 296.3 220.2 76.1 3,319.5 3,072.8 2,485.6 2,231.6
         May 6,304.5 14.7 2,055.5 1,749.0 1,096.7 652.2 306.6 230.7 75.8 3,323.3 3,074.2 2,485.6 2,232.0         Jun 6,277.4 14.3 2,073.9 1,758.9 1,111.2 647.6 315.1 238.1 77.0 3,304.8 3,059.5 2,477.9 2,233.2
         Jul 6,265.6 13.8 2,051.7 1,731.9 1,094.9 637.1 319.7 242.3 77.4 3,313.1 3,063.8 2,471.5 2,231.6
         Aug 6,290.6 13.6 2,073.4 1,746.9 1,113.0 634.0 326.5 249.2 77.3 3,310.9 3,064.3 2,480.6 2,231.5         Sep 6,341.1 13.3 2,077.4 1,745.3 1,113.3 632.1 332.0 253.8 78.3 3,323.1 3,074.8 2,490.6 2,242.3
         Oct 6,359.1 14.2 2,078.3 1,741.3 1,117.9 623.5 336.9 257.2 79.7 3,327.8 3,080.9 2,494.9 2,240.6
         Nov 6,453.5 13.2 2,130.2 1,780.8 1,150.6 630.2 349.5 267.3 82.1 3,336.6 3,088.4 2,496.7 2,238.4         Dec 6,394.2 17.9 2,118.0 1,769.1 1,164.3 604.9 348.9 271.7 77.2 3,340.2 3,092.2 2,505.8 2,240.8
2003          Jan 6,380.7 13.2 2,104.3 1,748.5 1,136.2 612.3 355.8 277.0 78.8 3,348.8 3,101.1 2,501.4 2,237.9
         Feb 6,424.9 13.2 2,124.3 1,751.7 1,142.1 611.7 370.5 289.5 81.1 3,347.4 3,097.7 2,501.7 2,239.2         Mar 6,434.8 12.9 2,121.5 1,747.2 1,135.0 614.4 371.9 288.9 83.1 3,346.7 3,100.4 2,498.0 2,238.1
         Apr 6,430.3 13.8 2,107.6 1,732.2 1,118.6 613.6 375.4 291.6 83.8 3,348.8 3,102.2 2,499.1 2,234.6
         May 6,467.7 14.0 2,144.0 1,756.9 1,143.6 613.2 387.1 303.3 83.8 3,347.2 3,101.9 2,499.2 2,232.0         Jun 6,472.9 13.3 2,139.0 1,748.0 1,137.1 610.9 390.9 305.4 85.5 3,330.2 3,089.9 2,502.9 2,239.7
         Jul 6,425.7 13.3 2,113.5 1,728.1 1,109.7 618.4 385.3 297.4 88.0 3,330.2 3,093.7 2,494.1 2,231.1
         Aug 6,395.1 13.5 2,105.5 1,720.3 1,104.5 615.8 385.2 296.8 88.3 3,318.3 3,084.7 2,495.6 2,231.4         Sep 6,403.1 13.3 2,099.4 1,712.2 1,095.3 616.9 387.2 297.5 89.7 3,332.6 3,089.6 2,504.9 2,245.2
         Oct 6,399.3 13.6 2,092.9 1,715.9 1,096.1 619.9 376.9 285.3 91.7 3,328.9 3,086.1 2,496.9 2,242.9
         Nov 6,456.1 13.1 2,126.2 1,742.4 1,117.5 624.9 383.7 292.5 91.3 3,350.9 3,103.5 2,505.0 2,246.9         Dec 6,432.0 17.3 2,111.7 1,732.2 1,116.7 615.5 379.5 287.7 91.8 3,333.4 3,083.1 2,497.4 2,241.2
 Changes 1
1996 761.8 3.0 312.8 282.1 186.0 96.1 30.7 23.2 7.5 361.5 346.9 264.0 244.31997 825.6 0.5 313.1 279.6 172.9 106.7 33.5 27.6 5.9 324.0 287.5 228.4 197.61998 1,001.0 −0.8 422.2 355.7 215.1 140.6 66.4 56.2 10.2 440.4 363.3 337.5 245.2
1999 452.6 1.8 179.8 140.1 81.4 58.6 39.8 26.3 13.5 206.6 158.1 156.8 126.4
2000 401.5 −1.2 143.0 91.7 28.1 63.6 51.4 22.8 28.6 123.2 105.4 116.8 89.5
2001 244.9 −1.4 91.0 50.7 30.3 20.5 40.3 34.5 5.8 55.1 23.9 50.4 48.1
2002 165.7 3.3 63.6 6.5 23.7 −17.1 57.1 51.9 5.2 33.6 15.3 16.1 10.4
2003 84.0 −0.6 −20.1 −48.8 −47.5 −1.3 28.7 15.7 13.0 24.5 17.9 17.5 22.0
2002          Apr 7.7 −2.0 −0.9 −8.0 −10.3 2.3 7.1 7.0 0.1 11.0 8.7 8.1 2.3
         May 52.5 −0.2 23.2 12.8 11.1 1.8 10.4 10.5 −0.2 6.6 3.6 2.1 2.4
         Jun −5.8 −0.4 18.3 10.0 14.3 −4.3 8.3 7.4 0.9 −19.8 −17.1 −10.1 −1.1
         Jul −19.9 −0.5 −22.9 −27.5 −16.3 −11.1 4.5 4.2 0.3 7.2 3.6 −7.1 −2.6
         Aug 23.8 −0.2 21.9 15.1 18.1 −3.0 6.8 6.8 −0.0 −1.7 0.9 8.8 0.3
         Sep 51.3 −0.2 4.0 −1.6 0.3 −1.9 5.6 4.6 0.9 12.0 10.2 10.3 10.4
         Oct 20.3 0.9 0.8 −4.1 4.6 −8.7 4.9 3.5 1.5 4.6 6.2 4.4 −1.5
         Nov 97.2 −1.0 52.0 39.4 32.7 6.7 12.6 10.1 2.5 9.4 7.9 2.2 −1.8
         Dec −29.0 4.7 3.0 1.0 13.7 −12.7 1.9 4.4 −2.4 10.9 10.3 15.6 7.8
2003          Jan −14.6 −4.7 −25.1 −30.7 −28.1 −2.7 5.6 5.3 0.4 18.3 17.1 3.7 1.4
         Feb 41.3 0.0 17.0 3.1 5.9 −2.8 13.9 12.5 1.4 0.7 −1.3 2.4 3.4
         Mar 14.1 −0.4 −2.9 −4.3 −7.1 2.8 1.4 − 0.6 2.1 4.6 7.8 1.4 3.9
         Apr 4.5 1.0 −13.7 −17.2 −16.5 −0.8 3.5 2.7 0.8 4.9 4.2 3.2 −1.2
         May 57.3 0.2 36.6 24.8 25.1 −0.3 11.9 11.8 0.1 1.9 2.5 2.9 −0.0
         Jun −5.9 −0.7 −5.2 −8.9 −6.5 −2.4 3.8 2.0 1.7 −18.0 −12.5 3.2 7.2
         Jul −49.6 −0.1 −25.7 −20.1 −27.4 7.3 −5.6 − 8.0 2.4 0.6 4.5 −8.1 −8.1
         Aug −43.7 0.3 −8.1 −7.9 −5.2 −2.7 −0.3 − 0.5 0.3 −13.6 −10.0 0.5 −0.6
         Sep 26.2 −0.2 −5.9 −8.1 −9.2 1.2 2.1 0.7 1.4 17.7 7.4 11.8 16.2
         Oct −5.0 0.3 −6.5 4.1 0.8 3.3 −10.6 − 12.6 2.0 −1.8 −2.0 −7.3 −1.7
         Nov 67.6 −0.5 33.6 26.6 21.4 5.1 7.1 7.2 −0.1 24.5 19.2 9.8 5.6
         Dec −8.2 4.2 −14.3 −10.2 −0.8 −9.4 −4.2 − 4.7 0.6 −15.2 −18.9 −6.0 −4.1
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey “in section data from money market funds. —1Statistical breaks have been eliminated
II. Unlike the other tables in section IV, this table includes −in addition to from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). —2Up to December
the figures reported by banks (including building and loan associations) − 1998, volume of business (balance sheet total plus endorsement liabilities
20*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
IV Banks
 
   
 
 
euro area  3 Claims on
non-euro-area
to non-banks in other member states residents
 Public Enterprises and Public authorities individuals authorities
Secur- Secur- of which Secur- of which Other
ities Total Loans  
3 ities 4 Total Total Loans  3 Total Loans  3 ities Total Loans  3 assets   Period
End of year or month
 
250.0 1,086.3 792.2 294.1 88.2 39.4 39.2 48.8 11.3 37.6 608.5 526.0 209.4 1995
269.7 1,169.1 857.8 311.4 102.8 36.8 36.8 66.0 17.2 48.8 678.1 575.3 224.4 1996300.6 1,228.2 911.0 317.2 139.2 41.9 41.2 97.3 23.4 73.9 839.6 710.2 253.1 1997394.5 1,254.9 939.1 315.8 218.0 62.5 56.0 155.5 35.6 119.9 922.0 758.0 302.2 1998233.0 632.1 488.4 143.7 168.8 65.3 35.9 103.6 20.7 82.8 511.2 404.2 185.8 1999
259.1 616.9 478.5 138.4 187.3 83.8 44.2 103.5 20.0 83.5 622.4 481.7 218.1 2000
261.3 587.8 468.7 119.1 232.3 111.3 53.7 121.0 26.2 94.8 727.3 572.0 174.3 2001265.0 586.4 448.5 137.9 248.0 125.0 63.6 123.0 25.5 97.5 738.1 589.2 179.9 2002256.2 585.6 439.6 146.1 250.3 133.7 62.9 116.6 25.9 90.7 803.3 645.5 166.4 2003
248.6 586.6 464.3 122.3 245.0 118.7 60.1 126.3 26.7 99.6 730.8 574.6 178.3 2002          Mar
254.0 587.2 460.4 126.9 246.7 120.1 61.5 126.6 26.4 100.2 721.2 568.3 179.3          Apr
253.6 588.6 455.2 133.4 249.0 121.3 62.6 127.7 26.0 101.8 734.8 580.6 176.1          May244.6 581.6 450.0 131.6 245.4 118.1 61.5 127.2 26.0 101.2 712.6 559.4 171.7          Jun
239.9 592.3 458.1 134.2 249.3 118.1 59.8 131.2 26.5 104.7 712.9 557.9 174.2          Jul
249.1 583.7 448.5 135.2 246.6 114.3 58.3 132.3 26.9 105.4 722.0 566.9 170.7          Aug248.3 584.2 445.3 138.9 248.3 114.7 59.3 133.6 27.2 106.3 752.3 597.5 174.9          Sep
254.2 586.0 448.3 137.7 246.9 116.4 59.1 130.5 27.6 102.9 762.2 608.7 176.7          Oct
258.2 591.7 449.2 142.5 248.2 118.6 61.0 129.6 28.0 101.6 791.0 634.2 182.4          Nov265.0 586.4 448.5 137.9 248.0 125.0 63.6 123.0 25.5 97.5 738.1 589.2 179.9          Dec
263.4 599.8 453.0 146.7 247.6 121.8 60.5 125.8 26.5 99.3 738.3 591.8 176.2 2003          Jan
262.4 596.0 447.3 148.7 249.7 125.6 64.6 124.1 26.2 97.9 757.7 612.1 182.2          Feb
259.9 602.4 444.0 158.4 246.3 126.8 64.5 119.5 26.2 93.3 778.6 630.9 175.1          Mar
264.5 603.1 445.8 157.4 246.6 129.9 66.2 116.7 25.2 91.5 787.6 641.1 172.5          Apr
267.2 602.7 439.8 162.9 245.3 130.7 66.7 114.6 26.5 88.2 792.4 644.3 170.2          May263.2 587.0 434.6 152.4 240.2 126.9 61.9 113.4 24.6 88.7 827.6 668.9 162.8          Jun
263.0 599.6 444.9 154.7 236.5 126.7 62.3 109.8 24.9 84.9 811.5 651.6 157.3          Jul
264.1 589.1 440.6 148.5 233.6 129.2 65.0 104.4 24.1 80.3 801.2 642.0 156.6          Aug259.8 584.6 435.2 149.4 243.1 129.7 64.7 113.4 23.4 90.0 795.8 642.4 161.9          Sep
254.0 589.2 436.6 152.6 242.8 127.6 60.6 115.2 25.1 90.1 800.6 643.9 163.3          Oct
258.1 598.5 442.5 156.0 247.4 132.9 64.7 114.5 25.6 89.0 803.7 648.2 162.2          Nov256.2 585.6 439.6 146.1 250.3 133.7 62.9 116.6 25.9 90.7 803.3 645.5 166.4          Dec
Changes 1
19.7 82.9 65.5 17.3 14.6 −2.6 −2.5 17.2 6.0 11.2 69.5 49.3 15.1 1996
30.8 59.1 53.3 5.8 36.5 5.1 4.4 31.4 6.1 25.3 159.4 132.9 28.6 199792.3 25.8 28.1 −2.3 77.1 18.9 13.0 58.3 12.5 45.7 83.9 52.0 55.3 1998
30.4 1.3 7.7 −6.4 48.4 12.2 6.4 36.2 2.0 34.2 33.1 13.8 31.3 1999
27.3 −11.4 −6.7 −4.6 17.8 16.8 7.2 1.0 −0.3 1.2 103.9 71.9 32.5 2000
2.4 −26.5 −9.8 −16.7 31.3 24.3 7.7 7.0 2.2 4.8 110.1 86.6 −9.9 2001
5.7 −0.8 −20.2 19.4 18.3 15.9 12.0 2.4 −0.6 3.0 65.7 64.1 −0.4 2002
−4.5 0.4 −8.7 9.1 6.6 13.2 2.7 −6.6 −0.8 −5.8 111.5 98.4 −31.4 2003
5.7 0.6 −3.9 4.5 2.2 1.8 1.7 0.5 −0.2 0.7 −1.2 1.1 0.8 2002          Apr
−0.3 1.6 −5.1 6.7 3.0 1.6 1.5 1.4 −0.3 1.6 25.8 23.0 −3.0          May
−9.0 −7.0 −5.1 −1.9 −2.7 −2.6 −0.5 −0.2 0.2 −0.4 0.6 −0.3 −4.5          Jun
−4.5 10.7 8.1 2.6 3.5 −0.3 −2.0 3.8 0.4 3.4 −6.1 −7.1 2.5          Jul
8.5 −7.9 −9.6 1.7 −2.6 −3.0 −0.9 0.4 −0.1 0.5 7.4 7.1 −3.5          Aug
−0.1 −0.1 −3.2 3.1 1.8 0.5 1.1 1.3 0.4 0.9 31.2 31.4 4.3          Sep
5.9 1.8 3.1 −1.2 −1.6 1.4 −0.2 −3.0 0.4 −3.4 12.2 11.8 1.7          Oct
4.0 5.7 0.9 4.8 1.4 2.3 2.0 −0.9 0.4 −1.3 31.1 27.5 5.7          Nov
7.8 −5.3 −0.8 −4.6 0.6 6.9 3.1 −6.3 −2.3 −4.0 −39.1 −32.8 −8.4          Dec
2.3 13.4 4.6 8.8 1.2 −1.8 −2.7 3.0 1.1 2.0 8.7 10.1 −11.8 2003          Jan
−1.0 −3.7 −5.7 2.0 2.0 5.5 5.8 −3.5 −2.0 −1.4 19.7 20.7 3.8          Feb
−2.5 6.4 −3.3 9.7 −3.2 1.3 0.0 −4.5 0.1 −4.5 24.3 21.8 −11.6          Mar
4.4 1.0 1.8 −0.9 0.7 3.4 1.9 −2.7 −1.0 −1.7 15.9 16.3 −3.5          Apr
2.9 −0.4 −5.9 5.5 −0.6 1.1 1.0 −1.7 1.5 −3.1 21.5 18.8 −2.9          May
−4.0 −15.7 −5.2 −10.5 −5.6 −4.1 −5.1 −1.4 −1.9 0.5 25.2 16.1 −7.3          Jun
0.0 12.6 10.3 2.3 −3.9 −0.3 0.3 −3.6 0.3 −3.9 −18.6 −19.0 −5.9          Jul
1.1 −10.5 −4.3 −6.2 −3.6 2.2 2.4 −5.8 −0.9 −4.8 −21.0 −19.0 −1.2          Aug
−4.3 −4.4 −5.4 0.9 10.3 1.0 0.3 9.3 −0.5 9.9 10.2 14.5 4.4          Sep
−5.6 5.3 1.4 3.9 0.2 −2.0 −4.2 2.2 1.6 0.5 −0.5 −3.6 3.5          Oct
4.1 9.4 6.0 3.4 5.3 5.7 4.3 −0.4 0.6 −1.0 13.0 12.4 −3.0          Nov
−1.9 −12.8 −2.9 −9.9 3.6 1.2 −1.4 2.4 0.5 1.9 13.0 9.3 4.2          Dec
and bills sent for collection from the banks ’portfolios prior to maturity) and bill-based lending instead of bill holdings. —4Including debt securities
trust funds. —3Up to December 1998, including fiduciary loans and arising from the exchange of equalisation claims. 
21*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Liabilities
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999,  5  billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area  4 
in the euro area  3 
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities  5 notice  6 
 
Balance in the in other of which of which
sheet home member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total  2 Total country states Total Total night Total  4 Total 3 months Total night 2 years  7 
 
1995 7,778.7 1,761.5 1,582.0 179.6 3,260.0 3,038.9 549.8 1,289.0 472.0 1,200.1 749.5 110.1 4.5
1996 8,540.5 1,975.3 1,780.2 195.1 3,515.9 3,264.0 638.1 1,318.5 430.6 1,307.4 865.7 137.3 7.51997 9,368.2 2,195.6 1,959.1 236.5 3,647.1 3,376.2 654.5 1,364.9 426.8 1,356.9 929.2 162.5 7.31998 10,355.5 2,480.3 2,148.9 331.4 3,850.8 3,552.2 751.6 1,411.1 461.6 1,389.6 971.9 187.4 9.41999 5,678.5 1,288.1 1,121.8 166.3 2,012.4 1,854.7 419.5 820.6 247.0 614.7 504.4 111.1 6.5
2000 6,083.9 1,379.4 1,188.9 190.5 2,051.4 1,873.6 441.4 858.8 274.3 573.5 450.5 107.9 6.9
2001 6,303.1 1,418.0 1,202.1 215.9 2,134.0 1,979.7 525.0 880.2 290.6 574.5 461.9 105.2 7.62002 6,394.2 1,478.7 1,236.2 242.4 2,170.0 2,034.9 574.8 884.9 279.3 575.3 472.9 87.4 8.12003 6,432.0 1,471.0 1,229.4 241.6 2,214.6 2,086.9 622.1 874.5 248.0 590.3 500.8 81.8 9.3
2002          Mar 6,269.8 1,371.2 1,157.9 213.3 2,108.5 1,954.0 508.0 875.2 278.4 570.8 463.8 105.1 8.1         Apr 6,267.7 1,362.1 1,129.9 232.1 2,099.9 1,948.3 515.1 871.3 274.5 561.8 456.7 104.1 10.1
         May 6,304.5 1,382.7 1,150.7 232.0 2,107.1 1,957.8 523.5 874.3 277.0 560.1 456.1 101.1 7.4         Jun 6,277.4 1,392.3 1,174.8 217.4 2,118.7 1,970.2 535.6 875.7 278.3 558.9 455.1 99.9 8.5
         Jul 6,265.6 1,371.7 1,149.6 222.1 2,111.9 1,964.9 531.2 876.2 278.0 557.5 453.6 99.5 8.0
         Aug 6,290.6 1,389.2 1,165.7 223.5 2,098.3 1,962.0 526.7 877.6 280.7 557.8 453.8 87.4 7.3         Sep 6,341.1 1,400.2 1,172.1 228.1 2,105.1 1,967.6 540.3 869.1 272.6 558.3 454.7 87.5 8.8
         Oct 6,359.1 1,419.4 1,177.2 242.2 2,114.5 1,979.6 542.0 877.8 279.0 559.7 456.9 86.6 8.2
         Nov 6,453.5 1,460.0 1,214.3 245.7 2,146.5 2,008.8 571.8 874.6 273.2 562.4 460.2 90.1 10.0         Dec 6,394.2 1,478.7 1,236.2 242.4 2,170.0 2,034.9 574.8 884.9 279.3 575.3 472.9 87.4 8.1
2003          Jan 6,380.7 1,457.2 1,213.2 244.0 2,160.0 2,024.7 564.4 882.9 275.8 577.4 477.0 88.5 9.1
         Feb 6,424.9 1,466.4 1,224.6 241.9 2,173.4 2,036.7 571.1 886.4 272.1 579.2 479.9 88.5 8.0         Mar 6,434.8 1,471.5 1,218.2 253.2 2,175.3 2,040.7 578.3 883.1 266.2 579.3 481.6 88.0 7.7
         Apr 6,430.3 1,455.5 1,200.9 254.6 2,176.2 2,044.3 585.8 880.6 264.8 577.9 482.7 86.5 8.2
         May 6,467.7 1,508.5 1,253.9 254.6 2,188.9 2,053.8 591.4 885.3 270.9 577.1 483.4 87.4 8.8         Jun 6,472.9 1,509.2 1,252.8 256.4 2,194.2 2,059.3 608.2 874.5 260.2 576.7 484.4 86.7 9.0
         Jul 6,425.7 1,457.9 1,207.6 250.3 2,182.5 2,051.4 595.2 879.5 259.0 576.8 486.5 85.7 9.3
         Aug 6,395.1 1,450.5 1,198.0 252.5 2,193.0 2,061.5 597.8 885.7 261.3 578.0 489.3 85.5 8.9         Sep 6,403.1 1,451.2 1,188.3 262.9 2,187.8 2,057.4 607.3 871.8 248.1 578.3 490.2 84.2 9.6
         Oct 6,399.3 1,439.5 1,179.5 260.0 2,188.2 2,057.3 609.5 868.5 243.9 579.4 491.2 85.4 10.7
         Nov 6,456.1 1,463.6 1,214.6 249.0 2,211.2 2,082.4 632.7 869.4 244.7 580.3 491.9 83.1 9.9         Dec 6,432.0 1,471.0 1,229.4 241.6 2,214.6 2,086.9 622.1 874.5 248.0 590.3 500.8 81.8 9.3
 Changes 1
1996 761.8 213.7 198.2 15.5 256.0 225.2 88.3 29.5 −41.4 107.3 116.2 27.2 3.0
1997 825.6 223.7 185.5 38.3 130.8 112.1 16.3 46.4 −3.8 49.4 60.3 25.0 −0.3
1998 1,001.0 277.0 182.8 94.2 205.9 176.8 97.8 46.3 34.8 32.7 42.0 26.2 2.01999 452.6 70.2 66.4 3.7 75.0 65.6 34.2 36.7 13.5 −5.3 7.4 7.5 1.7
2000 401.5 87.5 66.0 21.5 38.7 19.8 22.5 37.8 27.0 −40.5 −53.6 −4.2 0.3
2001 244.9 32.4 8.4 24.0 80.6 105.2 83.0 21.2 16.2 1.1 11.4 −4.0 0.4
2002 165.7 58.4 32.5 25.9 53.0 57.0 50.3 5.9 −11.0 0.8 11.0 −2.6 0.6
2003 84.0 −8.7 −8.2 −0.5 44.7 50.3 48.8 −13.6 −31.6 15.1 28.0 −3.8 1.4
2002          Apr 7.7 −9.2 −28.0 18.8 −7.9 −5.4 7.4 −3.8 −3.8 −9.0 −7.1 −0.6 1.9
         May 52.5 20.9 21.1 −0.1 9.2 11.0 8.8 3.9 3.2 −1.7 −0.6 −2.5 −2.6
         Jun −5.8 6.9 22.2 −15.3 11.9 12.1 12.0 1.3 1.3 −1.2 −1.0 −0.6 1.2
         Jul −19.9 −20.5 −25.2 4.6 −7.4 −5.6 −4.6 0.4 −0.4 −1.4 −1.5 −0.7 −0.6
         Aug 23.8 17.5 16.1 1.5 0.0 −2.8 −4.5 1.4 2.7 0.3 0.1 1.5 −0.7
         Sep 51.3 10.9 6.4 4.6 6.4 5.2 13.3 −8.6 −8.5 0.5 1.0 0.2 1.5
         Oct 20.3 19.2 5.1 14.1 9.6 12.2 1.8 9.0 6.4 1.4 2.2 −0.9 −0.6
         Nov 97.2 40.6 37.1 3.5 32.3 29.4 29.8 −3.2 −5.8 2.7 3.3 3.5 1.8
         Dec −29.0 18.7 22.0 −3.3 24.6 26.7 3.4 10.5 6.3 12.8 12.6 −2.2 −1.9
2003          Jan −14.6 −21.4 −23.0 1.6 −14.2 −13.7 −10.1 −5.7 −4.2 2.1 4.1 0.3 0.9
         Feb 41.3 9.2 11.4 −2.2 14.3 11.9 6.7 3.4 −3.7 1.8 3.0 1.0 −1.1
         Mar 14.1 5.0 −6.3 11.3 2.2 4.1 7.4 −3.3 −5.9 0.1 1.7 −0.3 −0.3
         Apr 4.5 −16.0 −17.4 1.4 1.6 3.9 7.7 −2.4 −1.4 −1.4 1.1 −1.2 0.5
         May 57.3 50.5 50.5 −0.0 13.9 10.2 6.1 4.9 6.3 −0.8 0.7 1.5 0.7
         Jun −5.9 0.8 −1.1 1.8 4.6 5.1 16.4 −10.9 −10.8 −0.4 1.0 −0.9 −0.0
         Jul −49.6 −51.4 −45.4 −6.1 −11.8 −7.9 −13.0 5.1 −1.1 0.1 2.1 −1.1 0.5
         Aug −43.7 −7.4 −9.6 2.1 9.7 9.6 2.3 6.1 2.3 1.3 2.8 −0.5 −0.5
         Sep 26.2 0.7 −9.8 10.5 −4.0 −3.5 10.0 −13.7 −13.1 0.2 0.9 −0.8 0.8
         Oct −5.0 −10.0 −7.4 −2.6 0.3 −0.1 2.2 −3.4 −4.2 1.1 1.0 1.1 1.1
         Nov 67.6 24.1 35.1 −11.0 23.6 25.4 23.5 1.0 0.9 0.9 0.7 −2.0 −0.7
         Dec −8.2 7.4 14.8 −7.4 4.4 5.1 −10.2 5.3 3.4 10.0 8.9 −1.0 −0.5
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey “in section and bills sent for collection from the banks ’portfolios prior to maturity) and
II. Unlike the other tables in section IV, this table includes −in addition to liabilities incurred in the banks ’own name but on behalf of third parties. —
the figures reported by banks (including building and loan associations) − 3Up to December 1998, including liabilities arising from fiduciary loans and
data from money market funds. —1Statistical breaks have been eliminated liabilities arising from rediscounted bills (endorsement liabilities). —4Up to
from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). —2Up to December December 1998, including liabilities arising from fiduciary loans. —
1998, volume of business (balance sheet total plus endorsement liabilities
22*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Debt securities
issued  10 
in other member states  8 Deposits of
central governments  4 
With agreed At agreed Liabilities
maturities notice arising
of which from Money of which Liabilities
domestic market with to non- repos with
of which of which central non-banks fund euro- Capital maturities
up to up to govern- in the shares of up to area and Other
Total  4 Total 3 months Total ments Total reserves   Period 2 years  7 euro area  9 issued  10 2 years  10 residents Liabilities
End of year or month
 
97.3 11.4 8.3 8.3 111.0 111.0 − 39.1 1,608.1 70.3 393.9 325.0 391.0 1995
120.6 9.0 9.2 9.2 114.6 114.6 − 34.0 1,804.3 54.4 422.1 350.0 438.8 1996
145.8 9.2 9.4 9.4 108.3 108.3 − 28.6 1,998.3 62.5 599.2 388.1 511.3 1997
168.3 13.8 9.7 9.7 111.2 111.2 − 34.8 2,248.1 80.2 739.8 426.8 574.8 1998
99.7 8.9 4.8 3.7 46.6 45.9 2.0 20.8 1,323.6 97.4 487.9 262.6 281.1 1999
96.3 6.7 4.7 3.3 69.9 67.6 0.4 19.3 1,417.1 113.3 599.8 298.1 318.4 2000
92.4 9.0 5.2 3.8 49.1 46.9 4.9 33.2 1,445.4 129.3 647.6 319.2 300.8 200174.6 9.9 4.7 3.6 47.7 45.6 3.3 36.7 1,453.5 71.6 599.2 343.0 309.8 200268.6 11.4 3.9 3.1 45.9 44.2 14.1 36.7 1,486.9 131.3 567.8 340.3 300.8 2003
92.0 9.3 5.0 3.7 49.4 46.9 3.7 35.8 1,479.4 129.0 666.4 323.3 281.6 2002          Mar
89.4 8.3 4.7 3.5 47.5 45.8 3.4 35.9 1,478.2 133.1 673.4 325.3 289.7          Apr
89.1 9.5 4.7 3.4 48.2 45.6 4.7 35.4 1,480.6 134.6 673.3 329.0 291.6          May86.7 8.5 4.6 3.4 48.7 45.9 4.1 35.0 1,472.6 133.1 628.9 331.1 294.7          Jun
87.0 8.7 4.6 3.4 47.6 45.8 3.1 35.6 1,471.6 133.7 640.9 336.8 293.9          Jul
75.5 9.7 4.6 3.4 48.9 45.8 4.3 37.1 1,489.4 135.9 636.3 341.2 294.8          Aug74.2 8.8 4.5 3.4 49.9 46.7 10.7 37.0 1,490.2 137.0 647.7 344.8 305.5          Sep
73.9 9.1 4.5 3.4 48.3 46.8 9.6 37.6 1,485.9 137.5 642.5 343.7 306.0          Oct
75.6 9.4 4.5 3.4 47.6 46.3 6.4 37.5 1,496.8 148.2 653.5 343.0 309.8          Nov74.6 9.9 4.7 3.6 47.7 45.6 3.3 36.7 1,453.5 71.6 599.2 343.0 309.8          Dec
74.8 10.4 4.7 3.6 46.9 45.2 7.6 38.5 1,461.1 138.9 602.9 350.5 305.9 2003          Jan
75.9 12.3 4.6 3.6 48.2 45.1 10.9 39.6 1,468.4 145.7 606.7 354.0 305.4          Feb
75.7 13.0 4.6 3.6 46.6 45.2 11.2 40.2 1,467.9 143.5 612.1 353.1 303.6          Mar
73.8 12.3 4.5 3.5 45.5 44.9 11.3 39.6 1,468.6 142.6 620.2 351.6 307.2          Apr
74.1 13.3 4.4 3.5 47.7 44.4 12.3 39.4 1,463.3 133.3 599.0 351.0 305.4          May73.4 12.2 4.4 3.5 48.1 44.6 10.8 38.7 1,470.0 128.7 594.8 348.2 307.0          Jun
72.1 12.1 4.3 3.4 45.3 43.8 10.9 38.4 1,482.8 133.0 603.6 348.1 301.6          Jul
72.4 12.8 4.2 3.4 45.9 43.8 12.4 38.1 1,480.0 122.1 579.2 344.1 298.0          Aug70.5 12.0 4.1 3.3 46.2 43.4 15.6 38.0 1,485.5 124.4 579.7 341.0 304.3          Sep
70.6 12.7 4.0 3.3 45.5 43.0 21.1 37.6 1,494.1 126.2 574.2 344.6 299.9          Oct
69.3 11.4 4.0 3.2 45.7 43.6 20.0 37.1 1,502.7 131.5 574.6 343.0 304.0          Nov68.6 11.4 3.9 3.1 45.9 44.2 14.1 36.7 1,486.9 131.3 567.8 340.3 300.8          Dec
Changes 1
23.3 −2.4 0.9 0.9 3.6 3.6 −− 5.1 196.3 −15.9 28.1 25.0 47.8 1996
25.1 0.2 0.2 0.2 −6.2 −6.2 −− 4.5 194.8 8.1 172.3 37.1 71.2 1997
24.0 4.6 0.3 0.3 2.9 2.9 − 6.2 263.3 28.1 151.4 28.8 68.3 1998
5.9 1.5 −0.2 −1.3 1.9 1.2 0.6 3.5 168.0 65.1 89.7 38.0 7.7 1999
−4.5 −0.5 −0.1 −0.3 23.1 21.6 −1.6 −1.5 90.6 15.9 97.8 35.3 54.6 2000
−4.6 1.6 0.2 0.4 −20.5 −20.4 4.6 13.3 59.5 18.6 34.8 20.9 −1.1 2001
−2.6 1.1 −0.5 −0.3 −1.4 −1.3 −1.6 4.2 18.8 14.8 −2.1 25.9 9.7 2002
−4.4 2.0 −0.8 −0.4 −1.8 −1.4 10.7 −0.1 49.9 −2.1 4.4 −3.8 −13.2 2003
−2.3 −1.0 −0.3 −0.3 −1.9 −1.2 −0.3 0.2 0.9 4.1 15.9 2.3 5.8 2002          Apr
0.2 1.3 −0.1 −0.0 0.7 −0.1 1.3 −0.0 6.2 1.7 12.6 4.1 −1.8          May
−1.8 −1.0 −0.0 0.0 0.5 0.3 −0.6 −0.3 −4.1 −2.1 −28.2 2.5 6.2          Jun
−0.1 0.2 −0.1 −0.0 −1.1 −0.1 −1.0 0.6 −3.4 −1.2 5.4 5.2 1.5          Jul
2.2 1.0 −0.0 −0.0 1.4 0.0 1.2 1.2 1.5 2.2 −2.6 4.7 0.2          Aug
−1.3 −0.9 −0.0 −0.0 1.0 0.8 6.4 0.1 1.0 1.0 12.4 3.5 10.5          Sep
−0.3 0.4 −0.0 −0.0 −1.7 0.1 −1.0 0.7 −3.8 0.6 −4.6 −1.1 1.4          Oct
1.8 0.3 −0.0 −0.0 −0.6 −0.5 −3.2 −0.2 11.9 10.7 13.2 −0.5 3.2          Nov
−0.6 0.6 0.2 0.2 0.1 −0.7 −3.1 −0.8 −24.8 −6.6 −42.1 1.0 −2.4          Dec
−0.6 −0.5 −0.0 0.0 −0.8 −0.4 5.3 1.8 4.8 2.9 11.3 3.2 −5.4 2003          Jan
2.1 3.0 −0.0 0.0 1.4 −0.1 2.3 1.1 8.1 6.8 4.4 3.7 −1.8          Feb
−0.0 0.7 −0.1 −0.0 −1.6 0.1 0.4 0.5 0.8 −2.3 8.2 −0.7 −2.3          Mar
−1.6 −0.6 −0.1 −0.0 −1.1 −0.3 0.0 −0.5 3.5 −0.8 13.7 −0.9 3.1          Apr
0.9 1.2 −0.1 −0.0 2.2 −0.5 1.0 −0.2 3.4 −6.9 −8.2 0.7 −3.8          May
−0.8 −1.0 −0.1 −0.0 0.4 0.2 −1.5 −0.7 3.1 −4.5 −11.4 −3.5 2.8          Jun
−1.5 −0.2 −0.1 −0.1 −2.8 −0.8 0.2 −0.3 12.1 4.3 7.0 −0.2 −5.2          Jul
0.0 0.6 −0.1 −0.0 0.6 0.0 1.5 −0.3 −7.1 −10.9 −32.4 −4.8 −2.8          Aug
−1.5 −0.7 −0.1 −0.1 0.3 −0.4 3.2 −0.1 11.6 2.4 12.3 −2.0 4.5          Sep
0.1 0.7 −0.1 −0.1 −0.7 −0.4 5.6 −0.5 7.8 1.8 −10.3 3.4 −1.4          Oct
−1.1 −1.2 −0.1 −0.1 0.1 0.6 −1.2 −0.5 12.3 5.3 6.8 −1.0 3.3          Nov
−0.4 0.1 −0.1 −0.1 0.3 0.6 −5.9 −0.5 −10.5 −0.1 2.9 −1.8 −4.2          Dec
5For the German contribution: from 1999, including deposits under savings collected separately from 1999 only; up to December 1998, included in the
and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). —6For the German contribution: up to deposits with agreed maturities of up to two years. —10In Germany, debt
the end of 1998, including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market
also footnote 5). —7Up to December 1998, with maturities of less than paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were published
four years. —8Excluding deposits of central governments. —9Data together with money market fund shares. 
23*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
IV Banks
 
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks*
 
 
 5  billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
  of which of which 
Loans
 Cash in hand and credit
Number of balances forreporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Othermonth tions total banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets
All categories of banks
 
2003          July 2,285 6,464.7 53.7 2,424.8 1,753.0 659.3 3,563.4 455.9 2,560.6 4.6 530.0 162.2 260.6
         Aug 2,271 6,434.7 56.0 2,408.1 1,738.5 658.8 3,548.2 440.1 2,571.5 4.5 519.1 161.9 260.5         Sep 2,251 6,441.9 55.5 2,397.7 1,727.1 659.4 3,565.0 460.5 2,561.9 4.5 527.0 158.8 264.9
         Oct 2,235 6,434.4 58.0 2,387.0 1,711.0 665.3 3,569.5 452.2 2,571.3 4.4 528.4 158.0 262.0
         Nov 2,228 6,492.0 51.3 2,427.7 1,745.9 669.9 3,596.0 471.0 2,571.6 4.2 537.3 154.6 262.5         Dec 2,226 6,471.1 64.1 2,413.5 1,739.7 663.2 3,572.0 458.6 2,562.7 4.2 535.1 150.7 270.9
Commercial banks 5
2003          Nov 261 1,811.9 13.0 662.4 527.5 130.0 952.9 252.1 542.9 2.3 148.3 85.4 98.1         Dec 261 1,803.9 23.1 678.1 546.4 127.7 927.6 239.2 539.1 2.3 141.6 80.3 94.8
   Big banks 6
2003          Nov 4 1,049.4 5.1 386.5 328.8 55.4 518.6 155.2 273.6 1.4 84.2 74.8 64.5         Dec 4 1,044.7 12.8 403.5 346.9 54.9 496.3 146.1 270.7 1.5 75.6 70.4 61.7
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2003          Nov 173 671.0 7.5 228.9 158.6 68.9 394.5 78.1 253.9 0.8 58.6 9.8 30.3         Dec 173 671.3 9.7 228.6 160.0 67.4 393.4 76.3 253.0 0.8 60.5 9.8 29.7
   Branches of foreign banks
2003          Nov 84 91.5 0.4 47.0 40.1 5.7 39.9 18.8 15.5 0.0 5.5 0.9 3.3         Dec 84 87.9 0.7 45.9 39.5 5.3 37.9 16.8 15.4 0.0 5.5 0.1 3.3
Land  banks
2003          Nov 13 1,355.2 5.1 686.1 553.8 129.3 581.5 68.8 408.1 0.3 101.2 34.3 48.3         Dec 13 1,345.7 4.1 673.4 543.3 127.7 578.6 66.9 405.5 0.3 103.0 34.5 55.1
Savings banks
2003          Nov 491 993.7 18.8 234.1 76.2 156.8 703.5 74.1 535.9 1.1 91.9 14.5 22.8         Dec 491 1,000.1 20.9 234.8 78.7 155.2 705.5 75.3 537.1 1.0 91.6 14.7 24.2
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives  
 
2003          Nov 2 190.8 0.8 127.0 88.1 38.1 45.0 11.7 21.5 0.1 11.6 11.4 6.5         Dec 2 186.6 0.6 123.6 84.8 38.2 43.4 11.3 20.5 0.1 11.4 11.6 7.4
Credit cooperatives
2003          Nov 1,395 564.1 12.0 149.0 66.4 80.9 380.0 44.6 296.3 0.6 38.4 5.7 17.4         Dec 1,393 566.3 13.3 146.8 64.1 80.5 382.7 45.4 297.4 0.5 39.2 5.8 17.6
Mortgage banks
2003          Nov 25 866.3 1.2 228.2 148.2 79.9 617.2 11.9 502.7 − 102.6 0.9 18.8
         Dec 25 871.6 1.6 226.5 146.6 79.7 620.9 12.4 501.8 − 105.2 0.9 21.7
Building and loan associations
2003          Nov 27 170.0 0.0 39.2 28.5 10.7 121.6 1.4 109.1 . 11.1 0.4 8.8         Dec 27 172.9 0.1 40.8 30.1 10.6 120.7 1.6 107.8 . 11.3 0.4 10.9
Banks with special functions
2003          Nov 14 540.1 0.4 301.6 257.3 44.0 194.3 6.3 155.1 − 32.3 2.0 41.8
         Dec 14 524.1 0.4 289.5 245.9 43.6 192.5 6.5 153.6 − 31.9 2.5 39.2
Memo item: Foreign banks 7
2003          Nov 129 381.5 2.6 165.2 112.7 51.2 196.1 39.8 115.6 0.1 40.4 1.6 16.1         Dec 129 380.5 3.4 166.2 114.3 50.6 194.9 37.0 116.9 0.1 40.8 0.8 15.3
  of which:  Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 8
2003          Nov 45 290.0 2.2 118.2 72.5 45.5 156.2 21.0 100.1 0.1 34.9 0.7 12.8         Dec 45 292.6 2.7 120.2 74.8 45.3 157.1 20.2 101.4 0.1 35.3 0.7 11.9
*For the period up to December 1998, section IV (except for Table IV.1) included. For the definitions of the respective items, see the footnotes to
shows the assets and liabilities of banks (excluding building and loan Table IV.3. —1For building and loan associations: Including deposits under
associations) in liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). —2Included in time
Germany. The assets and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market deposits. —3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also
funds (which are also classified as MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not footnote 2). —4Including subordinated negotiable bearer debt
24*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
IV Banks
 
   
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which of which published
reserves,
Time deposits  1 Savings deposits  3 partici-pation
Memo rights
item Bearer capital,
for for of which debt Liabilities
funds for
up to and more arising At three Bank general securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking Other   End of months ’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year  1 repos  2 Total notice bonds risks   month standing  4 liabilities
All categories of banks
 
1,825.0 247.1 1,577.7 2,430.3 635.9 346.7 752.9 65.4 587.2 494.6 107.6 1,533.8 294.6 380.9 2003          July
1,799.3 228.9 1,570.3 2,436.1 638.0 343.3 759.3 57.9 588.4 497.3 107.1 1,526.4 295.0 377.8          Aug 
1,795.8 260.3 1,535.3 2,438.9 648.7 341.6 753.5 71.4 588.5 498.2 106.5 1,530.5 293.3 383.4          Sep 
1,776.8 251.2 1,525.4 2,446.8 649.1 347.0 754.5 71.8 589.5 499.2 106.6 1,542.9 293.4 374.6          Oct 
1,797.8 249.3 1,548.3 2,472.1 672.9 351.1 750.6 79.4 590.4 499.8 107.1 1,549.2 294.1 378.9          Nov 1,820.3 211.9 1,608.2 2,447.6 656.2 332.2 751.6 54.9 600.4 508.7 107.2 1,530.4 294.4 378.5          Dec 
Commercial banks 5
671.7 132.7 538.8 708.1 292.1 179.5 129.2 69.2 98.1 87.1 9.2 210.5 99.3 122.3 2003          Nov 
692.3 115.6 576.5 681.4 282.1 159.9 130.8 47.7 99.3 88.4 9.3 208.3 99.5 122.4          Dec 
Big banks 6
407.8 94.1 313.7 360.7 126.8 133.9 72.8 67.8 26.7 24.8 0.5 153.1 58.8 69.1 2003          Nov 
427.9 81.9 346.0 337.3 124.1 111.1 74.7 45.7 26.9 25.1 0.5 151.0 58.8 69.7          Dec 
Regional banks and other commercial banks
198.5 29.2 169.1 328.7 153.2 41.8 53.6 1.4 71.4 62.3 8.7 57.4 37.4 49.0 2003          Nov 
199.4 21.9 177.3 328.5 150.1 43.5 53.8 2.0 72.4 63.3 8.8 57.3 37.5 48.6          Dec 
Branches of foreign banks
65.4 9.4 56.0 18.8 12.2 3.8 2.8 − 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 3.2 4.2 2003          Nov 
65.0 11.8 53.2 15.6 7.9 5.3 2.3 − 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 3.2 4.1          Dec 
Land   banks
449.7 66.6 383.2 321.2 50.9 40.0 214.2 7.8 15.5 14.4 0.8 458.9 63.3 62.1 2003          Nov 
450.5 50.3 400.2 319.7 50.9 39.2 213.2 4.5 15.6 14.6 0.8 449.2 63.3 63.1          Dec 
Savings banks
220.8 4.9 215.8 633.3 196.4 56.1 10.5 − 299.7 245.9 70.6 43.4 46.0 50.2 2003          Nov 
229.1 8.1 221.0 636.9 193.5 57.1 10.7 − 305.0 250.5 70.7 43.3 46.0 44.7          Dec 
 
Regional institutions of credit cooperatives
 
112.2 34.6 77.6 31.2 7.3 6.2 17.4 2.3 −− 0.3 28.0 10.0 9.4 2003          Nov 
109.4 28.3 81.1 30.5 6.2 6.9 17.1 2.7 −− 0.3 26.6 10.0 10.2          Dec 
Credit cooperatives
73.6 1.3 72.2 404.5 122.7 54.7 24.5 − 176.8 152.1 25.9 31.1 30.2 24.7 2003          Nov 
76.6 3.6 73.0 405.0 119.2 55.5 24.4 − 180.1 155.0 25.8 31.3 30.3 23.1          Dec 
Mortgage banks
126.7 5.1 121.6 143.9 1.1 4.6 138.0 0.1 −− 0.2 548.5 20.9 26.2 2003          Nov 
133.5 3.1 130.4 143.2 1.2 4.8 136.9 0.0 −− 0.2 544.8 20.9 29.2          Dec 
Building and loan associations
30.4 1.7 28.7 107.4 0.3 0.8 105.8 − 0.3 0.3 0.1 7.1 7.2 17.8 2003          Nov 
29.7 1.6 28.1 110.8 0.4 0.8 109.1 − 0.4 0.3 0.2 7.1 7.2 18.0          Dec 
Banks with special functions
112.7 2.4 110.4 122.4 2.1 9.3 111.0 −−−− 221.6 17.1 66.2 2003          Nov 
99.2 1.2 98.0 120.1 2.7 8.0 109.4 −−−− 219.7 17.2 67.9          Dec 
Memo item:   Foreign banks 7
136.8 20.6 116.1 119.0 72.8 11.3 25.0 0.1 7.3 7.1 2.6 87.7 14.0 23.9 2003          Nov 
139.5 21.0 118.4 115.6 68.2 13.1 24.4 0.0 7.2 7.1 2.6 87.8 13.8 23.8          Dec 
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 8
71.5 11.2 60.1 100.2 60.7 7.6 22.2 0.1 7.3 7.1 2.6 87.7 10.9 19.6 2003          Nov 
74.5 9.2 65.2 100.0 60.3 7.7 22.1 0.0 7.2 7.1 2.6 87.8 10.6 19.7          Dec 
securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities. —5Commercial included in other categories of banks and the category ”Branches (with
banks comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks ”,”Regional banks and other dependent legal status) of foreign banks ”.—8Separate presentation of the
commercial banks ”and ”Branches of foreign banks ”.—6Deutsche Bank banks majority-owned by foreign banks included in the categories
AG, Dresdner Bank AG, Commerzbank AG and Bayerische Hypo- und Vereins- ”Regional banks and other commercial banks ” and ”Mortgage banks ”. 
bank AG. —7Sum of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks and
25*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
IV Banks
 
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis- à-vis residents*
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999,  5  billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs)  2,3 Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3,8 
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills and
hand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro-area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins)  1 bank Total and loans Bills  4 banks  5 banks  6 loans  7 Total Loans Bills  4 non-banks banks  9 
End of year or month*
 
1994 25.0 61.5 1,695.6 1,150.6 17.4 4.6 513.6 9.5 4,137.2 3,502.8 45.9 2.2 433.7
1995 26.0 61.0 1,859.9 1,264.9 17.5 4.3 561.9 11.4 4,436.9 3,802.0 46.8 1.4 427.3
1996 28.9 59.7 2,134.0 1,443.3 17.9 3.4 657.2 12.2 4,773.1 4,097.9 44.8 5.9 437.21997 29.3 60.2 2,397.9 1,606.3 18.1 3.6 758.9 11.1 5,058.4 4,353.9 44.7 2.9 473.31998 28.5 63.6 2,738.2 1,814.7 14.6 12.2 887.7 9.1 5,379.8 4,639.7 32.8 5.0 527.81999 16.8 45.6 1,556.9 1,033.4 0.0 19.2 504.2 3.9 2,904.5 2,569.6 7.0 3.0 287.5
2000 15.6 50.8 1,639.6 1,056.1 0.0 26.8 556.6 3.6 3,003.7 2,657.3 6.5 2.3 304.7
2001 14.2 56.3 1,676.0 1,078.9 0.0 5.6 591.5 2.8 3,014.1 2,699.4 4.8 4.4 301.52002 17.5 45.6 1,691.3 1,112.3 0.0 7.8 571.2 2.7 2,997.2 2,685.0 4.1 3.3 301.92003 17.0 46.7 1,643.8 1,064.0 0.0 8.8 571.0 2.3 2,996.1 2,677.0 3.7 3.4 310.1
2002          July 13.4 41.2 1,643.8 1,047.7 0.0 7.6 588.4 2.6 2,995.7 2,685.3 4.3 4.2 299.1
         Aug 13.2 46.0 1,650.2 1,060.1 0.0 7.7 582.4 2.7 2,987.3 2,675.6 4.2 3.9 300.6         Sep 13.0 42.3 1,652.7 1,064.4 0.0 8.5 579.8 2.7 2,995.5 2,683.2 4.2 3.9 301.2
         Oct 13.9 42.8 1,648.3 1,068.2 0.0 8.0 572.2 2.7 2,997.6 2,684.6 4.2 3.9 301.9
         Nov 12.9 41.7 1,689.1 1,102.1 0.0 13.3 573.8 2.6 3,003.5 2,683.3 4.1 3.6 309.5         Dec 17.5 45.6 1,691.3 1,112.3 0.0 7.8 571.2 2.7 2,997.2 2,685.0 4.1 3.3 301.9
2003          Jan 12.9 42.3 1,661.6 1,086.8 0.0 9.7 565.1 2.6 3,005.1 2,686.9 3.9 4.0 307.4
         Feb 12.9 39.0 1,667.6 1,095.5 0.0 9.7 562.3 2.5 3,001.9 2,682.6 3.8 3.6 308.9         Mar 12.6 47.5 1,655.8 1,081.1 0.0 10.0 564.7 2.5 3,005.5 2,677.5 3.8 4.8 316.4
         Apr 13.5 37.7 1,648.8 1,074.6 0.0 9.9 564.3 2.5 3,007.6 2,676.4 3.8 5.0 319.4
         May 13.7 38.3 1,674.3 1,099.7 0.0 9.2 565.3 2.5 3,003.6 2,667.8 3.9 4.5 324.5         June 12.9 40.9 1,665.5 1,090.9 0.0 9.9 564.7 2.5 2,992.4 2,670.2 3.9 3.9 311.4
         July 12.9 40.5 1,645.6 1,063.8 0.0 10.9 571.0 2.4 2,996.0 2,671.8 4.0 3.4 314.7
         Aug 13.2 42.5 1,636.2 1,056.4 0.0 9.3 570.5 2.4 2,986.9 2,667.9 4.0 3.4 309.6         Sep 12.9 42.1 1,627.9 1,047.0 0.0 9.7 571.2 2.4 2,995.7 2,676.3 3.9 2.1 311.4
         Oct 13.3 44.3 1,630.0 1,046.2 0.0 9.7 574.1 2.4 2,992.9 2,675.4 3.9 3.1 308.4
         Nov 12.8 38.2 1,663.1 1,073.8 0.0 10.5 578.8 2.3 3,012.2 2,685.5 3.7 3.4 317.5         Dec 17.0 46.7 1,643.8 1,064.0 0.0 8.8 571.0 2.3 2,996.1 2,677.0 3.7 3.4 310.1
Changes*
1995 + 1.0 −0.5 + 193.5 + 139.4 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 54.3 + 0.2 + 312.8 + 303.6 + 1.0 −0.8 + 2.9
1996 + 2.9 −1.3 + 257.8 + 161.8 + 0.4 − 1.1 + 95.8 + 0.8 + 336.3 + 311.7 −2.0 + 4.7 + 10.6
1997 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 262.5 + 160.7 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 102.6 −1.1 + 285.2 + 255.5 −0.1 −3.0 + 36.5
1998 −0.8 + 3.4 + 343.3 + 210.3 −3.6 + 8.6 + 130.0 −2.0 + 335.3 + 302.1 −11.9 + 2.1 + 52.1
1999 + 2.2 + 13.2 + 122.1 + 66.3 + 0.0 + 12.9 + 42.8 −0.7 + 156.1 + 136.9 + 2.6 + 0.4 + 16.7
2000 −1.1 + 5.1 + 83.6 + 21.7 −0.0 + 7.6 + 54.3 −0.3 + 100.7 + 83.7 −0.5 −0.8 + 19.0
2001 −1.4 + 5.5 + 34.6 + 20.1 −0.0 −21.3 + 35.8 −0.9 + 11.9 + 40.8 −1.6 + 1.6 + 0.3
2002 + 3.3 −10.7 + 15.0 + 33.1 + 0.0 + 2.3 −20.3 −0.2 −19.2 −18.0 −0.8 −1.1 + 1.7
2003 −0.5 + 1.1 −47.2 −48.2 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.1 −0.3 + 0.2 − 8.0 −0.4 + 0.3 + 9.3
2002          July −0.5 −2.5 −24.9 −13.8 − + 1.4 −12.4 −0.0 + 5.1 + 6.5 −0.0 −1.0 + 0.6
         Aug −0.2 + 4.8 + 6.4 + 12.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 6.0 + 0.0 − 8.4 − 9.6 −0.0 −0.2 + 1.5
         Sep −0.2 −3.8 + 2.6 + 4.4 − + 0.8 − 2.6 −0.0 + 7.9 + 7.3 −0.1 −0.0 + 0.7
         Oct + 0.9 + 0.6 − 4.4 + 3.8 −− 0.5 − 7.7 −0.0 + 2.0 + 1.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.6
         Nov −1.0 −1.1 + 40.8 + 33.9 + 0.0 + 5.3 + 1.6 −0.0 + 6.0 − 1.3 −0.0 −0.3 + 7.6
         Dec + 4.7 + 3.8 + 2.2 + 10.2 + 0.0 − 5.4 − 2.6 + 0.0 − 6.3 + 1.6 −0.1 −0.2 − 7.6
2003          Jan −4.6 −3.2 −29.7 −25.5 −0.0 + 1.9 − 6.1 −0.1 + 7.9 + 1.9 −0.1 + 0.6 + 5.5
         Feb + 0.0 −3.3 + 6.0 + 8.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 2.8 −0.0 − 3.3 − 4.3 −0.1 −0.4 + 1.5
         Mar −0.4 + 8.5 −11.8 −14.4 −0.0 + 0.2 + 2.4 −0.0 + 3.7 − 5.0 −0.0 + 1.3 + 7.4
         Apr + 0.9 −9.8 − 7.0 − 6.5 −− 0.1 − 0.4 −0.0 + 2.1 − 1.1 −0.0 + 0.2 + 3.1
         May + 0.2 + 0.6 + 25.5 + 25.1 −0.0 − 0.7 + 1.1 −0.1 − 3.8 − 8.7 + 0.1 −0.6 + 5.3
         June −0.7 + 2.6 − 8.8 − 8.8 −0.0 + 0.6 − 0.6 −0.0 −11.1 + 2.5 + 0.0 −0.5 −13.1
         July −0.0 −0.4 −20.1 −27.2 −0.0 + 0.8 + 6.3 −0.0 + 3.8 + 1.6 + 0.1 −0.3 + 3.4
         Aug + 0.2 + 2.0 − 9.4 − 7.4 −0.0 − 1.5 − 0.5 −0.0 − 9.1 − 3.9 −0.0 −0.0 − 5.1
         Sep −0.2 −0.3 − 7.8 − 9.4 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 1.2 −0.0 + 9.6 + 8.4 −0.1 −1.3 + 2.6
         Oct + 0.3 + 2.2 + 2.1 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 2.9 + 0.0 − 2.8 − 0.9 −0.0 + 1.1 − 3.0
         Nov −0.5 −6.1 + 33.1 + 27.6 − + 1.0 + 4.5 −0.1 + 19.3 + 10.1 −0.2 + 0.3 + 9.1
         Dec + 4.2 + 8.5 −19.3 − 9.8 −− 1.7 − 7.8 −0.0 −16.1 − 8.6 −0.0 −0.0 − 7.4
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the prior to maturity). —5Up to November 1993, included in securities (see also
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as footnote 6). —6Up to November 1993, including negotiable money market
provisional. Subsequent revisions which appear in the following Monthly paper; excluding registered debt securities. —7From 1999, no longer
Report , are not specially marked. —1Up to December 1998, domestic included in loans or deposits (see also footnote 3). —8Up to December
banknotes and coins. —2Up to December 1998, excluding loans to 1998, including loans to domestic building and loan associations. —
domestic building and loan associations. —3Up to December 1998, 9Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims
including fiduciary loans (see also footnote 7). —4Up to December 1998, (see also footnote 10). —10Including debt securities arising from the
bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from exchange of equalisation claims. —11Including liabilities arising from
rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks ’portfolios
26*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3,11,12  Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  3,17 
Partici-
patinginterestsin
Memo domestic Memo Memo
item banks Sight Time Redis- item Sight Time Savings Bank item Equalisa-tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciary
loans  
7 Total 13,14  14,15  bills 16 loans  7 Total 15,18  bonds  20 loans  7   Period claims  10 enterprises posits  13 posits  19 
End of year or month*
 
68.1 84.4 70.7 1,427.9 342.8 976.9 75.2 33.1 2,875.7 540.2 1,109.3 940.5 206.9 78.8 1994
71.3 88.1 83.2 1,539.4 363.9 1,065.1 75.5 35.0 3,021.1 579.9 1,086.1 1,046.1 227.4 81.6 1995
81.3 106.0 89.7 1,731.0 401.1 1,202.4 75.4 52.2 3,241.5 675.1 1,109.8 1,143.0 227.8 85.8 199676.0 107.6 95.1 1,902.3 427.6 1,349.1 75.6 50.0 3,341.9 689.8 1,146.9 1,182.1 236.9 86.1 199771.6 102.8 129.2 2,086.9 472.5 1,505.2 59.4 49.7 3,520.3 799.5 1,194.1 1,211.0 234.9 80.9 199837.5 58.0 75.6 1,122.0 114.4 1,007.3 0.3 29.8 1,905.3 420.4 759.6 614.7 110.7 42.1 1999
33.1 58.5 82.7 1,189.2 113.4 1,075.3 0.4 30.1 1,945.8 443.4 819.9 573.5 109.0 42.1 2000
4.0 57.0 95.9 1,204.9 123.1 1,081.6 0.3 27.2 2,034.0 526.4 827.0 574.5 106.0 43.3 2001
3.0 54.8 119.0 1,244.0 127.6 1,116.2 0.2 25.6 2,085.9 575.6 830.6 575.3 104.4 42.1 20022.0 57.1 109.3 1,229.6 116.8 1,112.6 0.2 27.8 2,140.3 624.0 825.7 590.3 100.3 40.8 2003
3.0 55.2 95.0 1,157.4 118.2 1,039.1 0.1 25.9 2,016.2 531.6 821.1 557.5 106.0 41.6 2002          July
3.0 55.2 105.9 1,173.0 115.3 1,057.6 0.1 25.9 2,013.9 527.2 823.0 557.8 105.9 41.6          Aug 
3.0 55.0 107.9 1,179.3 133.0 1,046.1 0.1 25.7 2,025.0 540.8 820.6 558.3 105.3 41.6          Sep 
3.0 55.1 111.5 1,184.4 130.0 1,054.2 0.1 25.7 2,037.6 543.1 829.8 559.7 105.0 41.6          Oct 
3.0 55.0 113.3 1,221.3 157.3 1,063.9 0.2 25.7 2,062.1 572.4 822.6 562.4 104.7 41.5          Nov 3.0 54.8 119.0 1,244.0 127.6 1,116.2 0.2 25.6 2,085.9 575.6 830.6 575.3 104.4 42.1          Dec 
3.0 54.7 118.4 1,214.6 134.8 1,079.7 0.2 25.5 2,076.4 565.2 830.3 577.4 103.5 42.1 2003          Jan 
3.0 54.8 118.0 1,224.7 134.5 1,090.1 0.2 25.6 2,084.6 571.6 830.0 579.2 103.7 41.9          Feb 
3.0 54.8 116.1 1,218.0 144.0 1,073.9 0.2 25.5 2,089.6 578.9 828.4 579.3 103.0 42.1          Mar 
3.0 54.6 116.7 1,203.4 137.4 1,065.9 0.1 25.5 2,094.8 586.3 828.2 577.9 102.4 41.8          Apr 
3.0 54.5 119.6 1,254.2 146.4 1,107.7 0.1 25.5 2,101.9 591.7 831.2 577.1 101.9 41.7          May3.0 54.4 118.1 1,252.5 150.5 1,101.8 0.1 25.4 2,109.6 608.9 822.7 576.7 101.3 41.8          June
2.0 54.2 119.1 1,207.7 123.6 1,084.0 0.1 25.3 2,102.3 595.6 829.0 576.8 100.9 41.7          July
2.0 54.6 118.8 1,198.2 120.9 1,077.2 0.1 25.7 2,111.4 598.5 834.5 578.0 100.4 41.7          Aug 2.0 54.4 115.1 1,188.2 116.0 1,072.0 0.1 25.5 2,112.3 608.8 825.4 578.3 99.9 41.5          Sep 
2.0 53.9 115.0 1,179.6 122.1 1,057.4 0.1 25.3 2,114.7 610.9 824.5 579.4 100.0 40.7          Oct 
2.0 54.1 113.3 1,214.5 135.3 1,079.1 0.1 25.5 2,138.6 634.1 824.0 580.3 100.1 40.7          Nov 2.0 57.1 109.3 1,229.6 116.8 1,112.6 0.2 27.8 2,140.3 624.0 825.7 590.3 100.3 40.8          Dec 
Changes*
−1.2 + 7.3 + 12.5 + 134.2 + 20.4 + 111.5 + 0.4 + 2.0 + 158.3 + 48.9 −14.2 + 105.6 + 11.7 + 6.3 1995
+ 8.0 + 3.3 + 6.5 + 175.9 + 36.6 + 137.7 −0.2 + 1.7 + 218.4 + 94.3 + 23.2 + 96.9 + 0.7 + 3.3 1996
−5.3 + 1.6 + 5.4 + 175.9 + 31.6 + 146.7 + 0.2 −2.6 + 100.5 + 13.0 + 37.1 + 39.1 + 9.2 + 2.1 1997
−4.4 −4.8 + 34.1 + 179.0 + 39.7 + 156.4 −16.2 −0.9 + 179.3 + 110.6 + 47.2 + 28.9 −2.1 −5.3 1998
−0.6 + 0.1 + 9.3 + 69.0 − 1.8 + 81.8 −11.1 −0.4 + 67.3 + 32.7 + 48.4 − 4.5 −9.3 + 0.7 1999
−0.8 + 0.5 + 7.1 + 64.7 − 2.3 + 66.9 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 41.3 + 22.3 + 61.1 −40.5 −1.7 −0.0 2000
−29.1 −1.5 + 13.3 + 9.6 + 7.4 + 2.3 −0.2 −2.9 + 88.5 + 82.3 + 8.1 + 1.1 −2.9 + 1.0 2001
−1.0 −2.1 + 24.2 + 37.9 + 1.7 + 36.3 −0.1 −1.5 + 51.7 + 48.4 + 4.1 + 0.8 −1.6 −1.1 2002
−1.0 + 2.3 −9.8 − 5.6 − 9.5 + 3.9 + 0.0 + 2.4 + 54.0 + 48.4 − 4.8 + 15.1 −4.8 −1.0 2003
−1.0 −0.2 −0.5 −24.9 −13.9 −11.0 −0.0 −0.1 − 5.3 − 4.7 + 0.5 − 1.4 + 0.3 + 0.0 2002          July
+ 0.0 −0.0 + 11.5 + 16.4 − 2.9 + 19.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 2.3 − 4.4 + 1.9 + 0.3 −0.1 −0.0          Aug 
+ 0.0 −0.2 + 1.9 + 6.4 + 17.9 −11.5 + 0.0 −0.2 + 10.9 + 13.5 − 2.6 + 0.5 −0.5 −0.0          Sep 
−0.0 + 0.1 + 3.6 + 5.1 − 3.0 + 8.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 12.8 + 2.3 + 9.5 + 1.4 −0.3 + 0.0          Oct 
+ 0.0 −0.1 + 1.7 + 37.0 + 27.3 + 9.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 24.5 + 29.3 − 7.2 + 2.7 −0.3 −0.1          Nov 
−− 0.2 + 5.8 + 22.6 −29.7 + 52.3 + 0.0 −0.1 + 23.8 + 3.3 + 8.0 + 12.8 −0.3 + 0.6          Dec 
−0.0 −0.1 −0.6 −29.4 + 7.2 −36.5 −0.0 −0.2 − 9.5 − 10.4 − 0.3 + 2.1 −0.9 −0.0 2003          Jan 
−0.0 + 0.1 −0.4 + 17.8 − 0.3 + 18.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 7.6 + 6.4 − 0.3 + 1.8 −0.4 −0.2          Feb 
+ 0.0 −0.0 −1.9 − 6.7 + 9.5 −16.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 5.1 + 7.3 − 1.6 + 0.1 −0.7 −0.1          Mar 
−0.0 −0.2 + 0.6 −14.6 − 6.6 − 8.0 −0.0 + 0.0 + 5.1 + 7.4 − 0.2 − 1.4 −0.6 −0.2          Apr 
−− 0.1 + 3.0 + 50.8 + 8.9 + 41.9 −0.0 −0.0 + 7.1 + 5.4 + 3.0 − 0.8 −0.5 −0.1          May
−0.0 −0.1 −1.5 − 1.7 + 4.2 − 5.9 −0.0 −0.1 + 7.7 + 17.2 − 8.5 − 0.4 −0.6 + 0.1          June
−1.0 −0.2 + 1.0 −44.9 −27.0 −18.0 −0.0 −0.1 − 7.1 − 13.3 + 6.5 + 0.1 −0.4 −0.0          July
−0.0 + 0.3 −0.3 − 9.5 − 2.7 − 6.8 −0.0 + 0.4 + 9.1 + 2.9 + 5.5 + 1.3 −0.5 −0.1          Aug 
+ 0.0 −0.2 −3.6 − 8.7 − 3.5 − 5.2 −0.0 −0.2 + 0.8 + 10.3 − 9.1 + 0.2 −0.5 −0.2          Sep 
−0.0 −0.4 −0.2 − 8.6 + 6.1 −14.7 + 0.0 −0.2 + 2.5 + 2.1 − 0.9 + 1.1 + 0.1 −0.3          Oct 
− + 0.2 −1.7 + 34.9 + 13.2 + 21.7 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 23.8 + 23.2 − 0.4 + 0.9 + 0.2 + 0.0          Nov 
+ 0.0 + 3.0 −4.0 + 15.1 −18.6 + 33.6 + 0.1 + 2.3 + 1.7 − 10.1 + 1.7 + 10.0 + 0.1 + 0.0          Dec 
registered debt securities, registered money market paper and up to December 1998, including endorsement liabilities arising from
non-negotiable bearer debt securities; including subordinated liabilities. — rediscounted bills. —17Up to December 1998, including liabilities to
12Up to December 1998, excluding liabilities to domestic building and loan domestic building and loan associations and money market funds. —
associations and money market funds. —13Up to December 1998, 18Since the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999,
including time deposits with terms of less than one month. —14Including including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). —
liabilities arising from monetary policy operations with the Bundesbank. — 19Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also
15Up to December 1998, excluding time deposits with terms of less than footnote 18). —20Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer
one month. —16Own acceptances and promissory notes outstanding and, debt securities. 
27*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
IV Banks
 
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis- à-vis non-residents*
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999,  5  billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills  3 negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills  3 Negotiable
(non- money money
euro-area Medium market Memo Medium market
banknotes and paper item and paper Securities Securities
and Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins)  1 Total Total term term banks  4 banks  5 loans  6 Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month*
 
1994 1.2 492.3 455.0 309.0 146.0 0.1 23.7 13.5 257.4 173.0 35.0 138.0 0.6 66.5
1995 1.2 538.4 500.8 349.7 151.1 0.1 25.6 11.8 289.2 191.1 42.1 148.9 1.7 79.7
1996 1.4 588.9 544.2 386.6 157.6 0.3 31.5 13.0 352.0 230.4 60.2 170.2 4.9 103.91997 1.5 689.1 635.3 456.1 179.2 0.2 43.1 10.5 474.8 312.7 96.2 216.5 6.0 140.31998 1.5 774.9 706.9 533.6 173.3 0.4 58.7 9.0 610.3 364.9 93.9 270.9 11.6 211.01999 0.4 427.1 383.5 279.5 104.1 0.4 43.2 4.2 396.1 235.8 52.7 183.1 7.5 152.7
2000 0.4 507.7 441.4 325.4 116.0 1.3 65.0 3.6 475.8 286.8 71.1 215.7 6.5 182.5
2001 0.4 596.1 521.7 383.7 138.0 0.8 73.6 3.5 570.3 347.2 99.7 247.5 5.2 217.92002 0.3 690.6 615.3 468.0 147.2 0.9 74.4 2.7 558.8 332.6 92.6 240.0 9.3 216.92003 0.3 769.6 675.8 515.7 160.1 1.5 92.3 1.6 575.9 344.8 110.9 233.9 6.0 225.0
2002          July 0.4 614.2 538.2 400.0 138.3 1.5 74.5 2.8 579.1 346.2 101.4 244.9 5.8 227.0
         Aug 0.3 631.2 554.9 413.3 141.6 1.5 74.8 2.8 576.0 344.3 98.9 245.4 8.9 222.8         Sep 0.3 659.5 582.6 439.2 143.4 1.9 75.0 2.8 584.9 353.7 109.3 244.4 9.5 221.7
         Oct 0.3 672.9 595.2 450.2 145.0 1.9 75.8 2.7 585.5 355.6 108.9 246.7 9.8 220.1
         Nov 0.3 711.7 630.2 484.4 145.7 5.6 76.0 2.8 588.8 358.2 111.0 247.2 9.9 220.7         Dec 0.3 690.6 615.3 468.0 147.2 0.9 74.4 2.7 558.8 332.6 92.6 240.0 9.3 216.9
2003          Jan 0.3 695.1 620.5 471.3 149.1 0.9 73.8 2.6 559.9 333.2 91.5 241.6 10.8 215.9
         Feb 0.3 713.7 637.5 488.8 148.6 1.3 74.9 2.6 576.6 352.7 109.9 242.8 10.2 213.8         Mar 0.3 733.3 654.1 504.0 150.1 1.0 78.3 2.6 574.8 354.5 113.1 241.3 8.5 211.8
         Apr 0.3 738.6 657.2 505.9 151.2 1.7 79.8 2.6 583.3 364.8 125.1 239.7 7.4 211.1
         May 0.3 760.1 676.4 524.6 151.8 1.3 82.4 2.5 578.6 362.3 126.8 235.6 6.8 209.4         June 0.4 794.3 707.2 553.1 154.1 1.3 85.8 2.6 578.1 351.6 115.2 236.4 7.0 219.5
         July 0.3 779.1 689.4 533.9 155.5 1.4 88.3 2.6 567.4 345.3 106.5 238.8 6.8 215.3
         Aug 0.3 771.9 682.3 522.9 159.4 1.3 88.3 2.6 561.3 344.3 101.3 243.0 7.4 209.5         Sep 0.4 769.8 680.3 520.2 160.1 1.3 88.2 2.3 569.4 346.6 110.3 236.3 7.2 215.6
         Oct 0.4 757.0 664.9 502.0 162.9 0.9 91.2 1.6 576.6 348.6 106.0 242.6 8.0 219.9
         Nov 0.3 764.6 672.3 512.8 159.5 1.3 91.1 1.6 583.8 357.5 118.0 239.6 6.4 219.8         Dec 0.3 769.6 675.8 515.7 160.1 1.5 92.3 1.6 575.9 344.8 110.9 233.9 6.0 225.0
Changes*
1995 + 0.1 + 59.1 + 57.6 + 49.2 + 8.4 + 0.0 + 2.9 −1.4 + 38.3 + 21.3 + 7.8 + 13.6 + 1.1 + 16.1
1996 + 0.2 + 34.2 + 29.9 + 27.2 + 2.7 + 0.2 + 5.2 −1.1 + 58.4 + 36.2 + 17.0 + 19.2 + 3.1 + 21.4
1997 + 0.1 + 80.6 + 71.5 + 53.3 + 18.2 −0.1 + 10.4 −1.2 + 109.3 + 73.0 + 33.7 + 39.3 + 0.7 + 32.9
1998 −0.0 + 100.8 + 89.5 + 79.3 + 10.2 + 0.0 + 13.1 −1.8 + 122.0 + 42.7 −6.4 + 49.1 + 5.5 + 66.0
1999 −0.3 + 17.7 + 5.7 − 5.3 + 11.0 + 0.2 + 11.7 −0.0 + 85.8 + 42.8 + 8.4 + 34.4 + 1.3 + 41.8
2000 −0.0 + 78.9 + 56.5 + 44.6 + 11.8 + 0.9 + 21.6 −0.7 + 72.0 + 45.0 + 17.4 + 27.7 −1.2 + 28.2
2001 + 0.0 + 83.7 + 75.6 + 54.4 + 21.2 −0.5 + 8.5 −0.2 + 88.3 + 53.4 + 27.0 + 26.4 −1.5 + 36.3
2002 −0.1 + 120.3 + 118.0 + 99.4 + 18.6 + 0.1 + 2.2 −0.9 + 21.2 + 12.7 −0.4 + 13.2 + 4.6 + 3.9
2003 −0.1 + 103.8 + 84.6 + 65.2 + 19.3 + 0.6 + 18.7 −0.4 + 46.3 + 35.1 + 24.0 + 11.0 −2.7 + 13.9
2002          July −0.0 + 1.2 + 0.8 − 1.4 + 2.3 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.2 −5.3 −4.5 −0.7 + 0.5 + 4.6
         Aug −0.0 + 14.3 + 14.0 + 13.8 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.3 −0.0 − 2.0 −0.9 −2.3 + 1.3 + 3.1 −4.2
         Sep + 0.0 + 28.8 + 28.2 + 26.3 + 1.9 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 9.6 + 9.7 + 10.5 −0.8 + 0.6 −0.8
         Oct −0.0 + 13.8 + 13.0 + 11.3 + 1.7 + 0.1 + 0.8 −0.2 + 0.9 + 2.1 −0.3 + 2.5 + 0.2 −1.5
         Nov −0.0 + 40.1 + 36.2 + 35.0 + 1.2 + 3.6 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 4.7 + 3.8 + 2.4 + 1.4 + 0.1 + 0.8
         Dec + 0.0 −14.1 − 8.2 −11.3 + 3.1 −4.7 −1.2 −0.1 −20.8 −18.2 −16.7 −1.6 −0.4 −2.1
2003          Jan −0.1 + 9.2 + 9.6 + 6.6 + 3.0 −0.0 −0.4 −0.1 + 6.8 + 4.9 −0.0 + 4.9 + 1.6 + 0.2
         Feb + 0.0 + 18.9 + 17.3 + 17.5 −0.1 + 0.5 + 1.1 −0.0 + 16.8 + 19.6 + 18.3 + 1.3 −0.7 −2.2
         Mar + 0.0 + 21.4 + 18.3 + 16.3 + 2.0 −0.4 + 3.5 −0.0 + 0.3 + 3.5 + 3.6 −0.2 −1.6 −1.5
         Apr + 0.0 + 8.9 + 6.4 + 4.5 + 2.0 + 0.8 + 1.7 −0.0 + 12.8 + 13.7 + 12.8 + 0.9 −1.1 + 0.2
         May + 0.0 + 30.1 + 28.0 + 24.9 + 3.2 −0.4 + 2.5 −0.0 + 5.6 + 6.0 + 3.8 + 2.3 −0.4 −0.0
         June + 0.1 + 29.4 + 26.3 + 25.1 + 1.2 −0.0 + 3.2 + 0.0 − 6.2 −14.9 −12.6 −2.3 + 0.1 + 8.6
         July −0.1 −16.5 −19.1 −20.3 + 1.2 + 0.2 + 2.4 −0.0 −12.3 −7.5 −9.0 + 1.5 −0.3 −4.6
         Aug + 0.0 −13.2 −12.8 −15.3 + 2.5 −0.1 −0.3 + 0.0 −13.0 −6.1 −6.4 + 0.2 + 0.5 −7.3
         Sep + 0.0 + 5.7 + 5.4 + 2.9 + 2.5 −0.0 + 0.4 −0.3 + 19.1 + 10.6 + 10.8 −0.2 + 0.0 + 8.5
         Oct −0.0 −14.4 −17.0 −18.8 + 1.8 −0.4 + 3.0 −0.0 + 3.1 −1.9 −4.4 + 2.5 + 0.8 + 4.2
         Nov −0.0 + 12.5 + 12.1 + 14.3 −2.3 + 0.4 + 0.1 −0.0 + 12.8 + 13.3 + 12.9 + 0.5 −1.5 + 1.0
         Dec −0.0 + 11.7 + 9.9 + 7.6 + 2.3 + 0.3 + 1.5 −0.0 + 0.5 −6.0 −5.6 −0.4 −0.2 + 6.8
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the banknotes and coins. —2Up to December 1998, including fiduciary loans
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as (see also footnote 6). —3Up to December 1998, bill-based lending (bill
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from rediscounted bills and bills
Report , are not specially marked. —1Up to December 1998, foreign sent for collection from the banks ’portfolios prior to maturity). —
28*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs)  2 Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)  2 
 Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bank
interests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memo
item and and item and item
Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciaryloans  
6 prises  7 Total Total  9 term  9 term loans  6 Total Total  9 term  9 term loans  6   Period deposits  8 deposits  8 
End of year or month*
 
17.3 34.0 402.3 111.6 283.7 150.8 132.9 7.1 181.5 20.6 155.3 41.7 113.6 5.6 1994
16.7 38.8 463.7 116.9 339.7 191.6 148.2 7.0 224.4 22.1 198.0 45.3 152.6 4.4 1995
12.7 45.8 486.5 147.1 335.7 172.0 163.7 3.8 273.5 34.3 237.2 50.0 187.2 2.1 199615.7 54.7 670.3 226.0 440.2 254.3 185.9 4.0 333.9 43.5 285.7 63.0 222.7 4.8 199722.9 62.9 875.7 309.5 562.5 359.1 203.4 3.7 390.3 51.3 329.6 71.8 257.8 9.5 199813.6 33.9 483.6 65.6 418.0 332.3 85.6 2.0 284.4 23.8 260.6 64.9 195.7 5.8 1999
13.9 47.4 586.0 113.7 472.2 382.9 89.3 1.7 314.9 35.4 279.5 62.5 217.0 5.6 2000
13.8 47.6 622.7 91.9 530.8 434.5 96.3 1.4 350.6 34.0 316.6 97.6 219.0 5.3 200115.6 44.8 614.2 101.6 512.7 410.4 102.3 1.1 319.2 33.5 285.7 87.0 198.7 4.5 200211.6 41.4 590.7 95.1 495.6 387.7 107.9 0.4 307.3 32.2 275.1 102.4 172.7 3.6 2003
13.4 47.2 618.3 121.3 497.1 395.4 101.6 1.1 347.9 38.6 309.3 95.8 213.5 4.6 2002          July
13.4 47.0 615.5 91.8 523.7 419.2 104.5 1.1 337.2 34.8 302.5 100.9 201.6 4.5          Aug 
13.4 47.0 626.2 132.7 493.5 389.3 104.2 1.1 344.6 41.2 303.4 103.2 200.2 4.6          Sep 
14.2 45.7 633.0 116.1 516.9 412.9 104.1 1.1 342.4 38.2 304.2 99.4 204.8 4.6          Oct 
14.7 45.8 648.3 125.2 523.1 420.1 103.0 1.1 346.8 42.6 304.2 101.1 203.0 4.7          Nov 15.6 44.8 614.2 101.6 512.7 410.4 102.3 1.1 319.2 33.5 285.7 87.0 198.7 4.5          Dec 
15.4 42.7 623.1 112.6 510.5 406.1 104.4 1.0 324.7 35.7 289.1 95.4 193.7 4.4 2003          Jan 
15.4 42.4 616.4 117.7 498.7 392.8 105.9 1.0 330.8 33.2 297.6 107.5 190.1 4.3          Feb 
15.4 43.3 621.7 131.7 490.0 384.4 105.6 1.0 339.8 43.3 296.5 109.2 187.3 4.2          Mar 
15.1 43.2 634.6 141.6 493.0 387.9 105.1 1.0 333.3 39.3 294.0 110.3 183.7 4.0          Apr 
14.7 41.7 620.9 128.0 492.9 386.0 106.9 1.0 332.0 43.6 288.4 109.8 178.7 3.8          May15.1 42.2 622.8 143.1 479.7 372.8 106.9 1.0 324.6 43.8 280.8 99.8 180.9 3.9          June
15.2 43.1 617.2 123.6 493.7 384.1 109.6 0.9 328.0 40.3 287.7 108.5 179.2 3.9          July
15.3 43.1 601.1 108.0 493.1 386.3 106.8 0.3 324.7 39.5 285.2 103.5 181.7 4.7          Aug 15.0 43.7 607.5 144.2 463.3 361.2 102.1 0.3 326.6 40.0 286.6 109.5 177.1 6.8          Sep 
11.7 43.0 597.1 129.1 468.0 360.1 107.9 0.3 332.0 38.2 293.8 116.4 177.5 3.4          Oct 
11.7 41.3 583.1 113.9 469.2 361.3 107.9 0.3 333.5 38.8 294.7 121.6 173.1 3.3          Nov 11.6 41.4 590.7 95.1 495.6 387.7 107.9 0.4 307.3 32.2 275.1 102.4 172.7 3.6          Dec 
Changes*
−0.2 + 5.2 + 71.0 + 7.9 + 64.6 + 45.9 + 18.7 −1.5 + 47.8 + 2.2 + 46.5 + 4.1 + 42.4 −0.9 1995
−2.3 + 5.9 + 11.3 + 27.1 − 13.9 − 26.6 + 12.7 −1.9 + 44.7 + 11.7 + 35.0 + 3.7 + 31.3 −2.0 1996
+ 2.7 + 7.9 + 157.3 + 67.7 + 89.5 + 71.8 + 17.7 + 0.1 + 51.0 + 5.4 + 43.3 + 11.4 + 31.9 + 2.3 1997+ 7.7 + 8.8 + 215.6 + 87.7 + 128.1 + 108.1 + 20.0 −0.3 + 64.7 + 10.4 + 48.9 + 10.3 + 38.6 + 5.5 1998
+ 1.1 + 10.9 + 37.4 −9.2 + 46.6 + 47.6 −1.0 −0.0 + 61.0 + 7.2 + 53.8 + 15.9 + 37.9 + 0.1 1999
−0.2 + 12.8 + 90.0 + 47.0 + 43.0 + 42.9 + 0.1 −0.4 + 24.4 + 11.1 + 13.3 −2.9 + 16.2 −0.8 2000
−0.5 − 0.5 + 23.5 −23.6 + 47.0 + 42.4 + 4.6 −0.4 + 30.8 −1.8 + 32.6 + 33.3 −0.7 −0.6 2001
+ 1.7 + 1.6 + 22.7 + 14.6 + 8.1 − 1.3 + 9.4 −0.3 + 4.6 + 0.8 + 3.8 −4.6 + 8.4 −0.9 2002
−0.7 − 1.9 + 5.7 −2.0 + 7.7 − 2.4 + 10.0 −0.0 + 4.5 + 0.4 + 4.1 + 20.6 −16.5 + 1.9 2003
+ 0.2 − 0.1 + 5.5 −13.6 + 19.0 + 16.3 + 2.7 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 2.1 −1.6 + 0.1 2002          July
−0.0 − 0.2 − 1.5 −29.2 + 27.7 + 24.8 + 3.0 −0.0 + 4.7 −3.8 + 8.5 + 5.3 + 3.2 −0.0          Aug 
+ 0.1 + 0.0 + 11.3 + 40.9 − 29.6 − 29.6 −0.1 + 0.0 + 8.1 + 6.5 + 1.6 + 2.9 −1.3 + 0.1          Sep 
+ 0.7 + 0.1 + 7.2 −16.6 + 23.7 + 23.8 −0.1 −0.0 −1.9 −3.0 + 1.1 −3.8 + 4.8 −0.0          Oct 
+ 0.5 + 0.3 + 16.8 + 9.4 + 7.4 + 8.4 −0.9 −0.0 + 5.5 + 4.5 + 1.0 + 2.0 −1.0 + 0.1          Nov 
+ 0.9 − 0.4 −25.4 −22.0 − 3.4 − 3.8 + 0.5 −0.0 −21.6 −8.6 −13.0 −13.0 −0.1 −0.2          Dec 
−0.2 − 1.7 + 14.4 + 11.7 + 2.7 − 0.1 + 2.8 −0.1 + 9.1 + 2.5 + 6.6 + 9.2 −2.5 −0.1 2003          Jan 
+ 0.1 − 0.3 − 6.7 + 5.4 − 12.0 − 13.5 + 1.5 −0.0 + 6.6 −2.5 + 9.2 + 12.2 −3.1 −0.1          Feb 
−0.1 + 1.0 + 7.4 + 14.3 − 6.9 − 7.0 + 0.0 −0.0 + 10.3 + 10.2 + 0.1 + 2.0 −1.9 −0.1          Mar 
−0.3 + 0.1 + 17.1 + 10.6 + 6.5 + 6.4 + 0.2 + 0.0 −4.0 −3.8 −0.1 + 1.8 −1.9 −0.3          Apr 
−0.4 − 0.7 − 4.3 −11.8 + 7.5 + 4.2 + 3.3 −0.1 + 5.0 + 4.7 + 0.2 + 0.9 −0.7 −0.2          May
+ 0.4 + 0.1 − 3.0 + 14.1 − 17.1 − 16.2 −0.8 + 0.0 −10.9 + 0.0 −10.9 −10.6 −0.3 + 0.2          June
+ 0.0 + 0.3 − 6.9 −19.8 + 12.8 + 10.4 + 2.4 −0.1 + 2.7 −3.6 + 6.4 + 8.5 −2.1 −0.0          July
+ 0.2 − 0.5 −22.3 −16.7 − 5.6 − 1.7 −3.9 −0.0 −7.3 −1.1 −6.2 −5.9 −0.2 + 0.1          Aug 
−0.3 + 1.2 + 16.1 + 37.6 − 21.5 − 18.4 −3.1 −0.0 + 7.8 + 1.1 + 6.7 + 7.5 −0.8 + 2.1          Sep 
+ 0.0 − 0.8 −11.8 −15.4 + 3.6 − 1.5 + 5.1 − + 1.4 −1.8 + 3.2 + 6.7 −3.6 + 0.0          Oct 
−0.0 − 1.3 − 9.2 −14.2 + 5.1 + 4.0 + 1.0 − + 4.9 + 0.9 + 4.0 + 6.0 −2.0 −0.1          Nov 
−0.1 + 0.6 + 14.9 −17.7 + 32.6 + 31.1 + 1.5 + 0.1 −21.2 −6.2 −15.0 −17.7 + 2.7 + 0.3          Dec 
4Up to November 1993, included in securities (see also footnote 5). —5Up capital supplied to branches abroad. —8Up to December 1998, including
to November 1993, including negotiable money market paper; excluding time deposits with terms of less than one month. —9Up to December 1998,
registered debt securities. —6From 1999, no longer included in loans and excluding time deposits with terms of less than one month. 
deposits (see also footnote 2). —7Up to December 1998, including working
29*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
IV Banks
 
5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)*
 
 
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999,  5  billion
Lending to domestic Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total  1,2 
      to public authorities to enter- to enterprises and individuals  1 
 
including excluding Negoti-
negotiable money ablemarket paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total paper Total Loans bills  
5 Total Total bills 3,4 
End of year or month*
 
1994 4,137.2 3,633.1 583.5 549.1 548.6 0.4 34.4 32.7 1.8 3,553.7 2,661.9
1995 4,436.9 3,936.9 615.2 584.0 583.3 0.7 31.3 30.5 0.8 3,821.7 2,785.5
1996 4,773.1 4,248.7 662.2 617.2 616.2 1.0 45.1 40.2 4.9 4,110.8 3,007.21997 5,058.4 4,506.2 667.8 625.8 624.8 1.0 41.9 40.1 1.9 4,390.6 3,223.41998 5,379.8 4,775.4 704.3 661.3 660.8 0.5 43.0 38.5 4.5 4,675.5 3,482.41999 2,904.5 2,576.5 355.3 328.9 328.7 0.2 26.4 23.6 2.8 2,549.2 1,943.6
2000 3,003.7 2,663.7 371.2 348.2 347.7 0.5 22.9 21.2 1.7 2,632.5 2,038.6
2001 3,014.1 2,704.2 387.9 356.7 355.2 1.5 31.2 28.2 2.9 2,626.2 2,070.22002 2,997.2 2,689.1 365.4 331.9 331.0 1.0 33.5 31.1 2.4 2,631.8 2,079.72003 2,996.1 2,680.6 355.2 315.0 313.4 1.6 40.2 38.4 1.8 2,640.9 2,096.1
2002          July 2,995.7 2,689.5 370.4 335.5 334.1 1.5 34.9 32.2 2.7 2,625.3 2,068.5
         Aug 2,987.3 2,679.9 356.0 331.2 329.9 1.2 24.8 22.1 2.7 2,631.4 2,073.3         Sep 2,995.5 2,687.4 367.4 343.2 341.6 1.5 24.2 21.8 2.4 2,628.2 2,068.8
         Oct 2,997.6 2,688.8 364.2 335.7 334.2 1.5 28.5 26.1 2.4 2,633.4 2,076.6
         Nov 3,003.5 2,687.5 365.8 332.5 330.9 1.7 33.3 31.4 1.9 2,637.7 2,079.9         Dec 2,997.2 2,689.1 365.4 331.9 331.0 1.0 33.5 31.1 2.4 2,631.8 2,079.7
2003          Jan 3,005.1 2,690.8 371.1 329.7 328.5 1.2 41.4 38.6 2.8 2,634.0 2,076.5
         Feb 3,001.9 2,686.4 364.4 329.3 328.1 1.2 35.1 32.7 2.4 2,637.4 2,077.5         Mar 3,005.5 2,681.3 369.2 332.5 330.4 2.2 36.7 34.0 2.7 2,636.3 2,071.6
         Apr 3,007.6 2,680.2 366.3 326.5 324.2 2.2 39.8 37.0 2.8 2,641.3 2,079.0
         May 3,003.6 2,671.7 356.2 321.4 319.1 2.3 34.7 32.6 2.2 2,647.4 2,080.5         June 2,992.4 2,674.1 359.6 328.9 326.9 2.0 30.7 28.8 1.9 2,632.8 2,077.4
         July 2,996.0 2,675.8 357.5 315.5 314.2 1.3 42.0 39.8 2.2 2,638.6 2,081.8
         Aug 2,986.9 2,671.9 346.7 308.2 306.8 1.4 38.5 36.5 2.0 2,640.2 2,090.5         Sep 2,995.7 2,680.2 356.7 323.8 322.9 0.9 32.9 31.7 1.2 2,639.0 2,088.3
         Oct 2,992.9 2,679.3 353.7 317.2 316.1 1.0 36.6 34.5 2.1 2,639.1 2,087.7
         Nov 3,012.2 2,689.2 360.7 317.5 316.6 0.9 43.2 40.6 2.6 2,651.5 2,097.0         Dec 2,996.1 2,680.6 355.2 315.0 313.4 1.6 40.2 38.4 1.8 2,640.9 2,096.1
Changes*
1995 + 312.8 + 311.9 + 35.9 + 37.9 + 37.7 + 0.2 − 1.9 − 1.0 −1.0 + 276.9 + 185.1
1996 + 336.3 + 312.9 + 44.3 + 32.6 + 32.2 + 0.4 + 11.7 + 7.4 + 4.3 + 292.0 + 221.51997 + 285.2 + 256.9 + 2.7 + 5.9 + 5.9 + 0.0 − 3.2 − 0.1 −3.0 + 282.5 + 219.9
1998 + 335.3 + 285.5 + 51.7 + 50.6 + 51.2 −0.6 + 1.1 − 1.6 + 2.7 + 283.6 + 258.3
1999 + 156.1 + 139.5 + 9.6 + 6.3 + 6.4 −0.0 + 3.3 + 2.9 + 0.4 + 146.4 + 146.4
2000 + 100.7 + 83.2 + 14.5 + 18.1 + 17.8 + 0.3 − 3.6 − 2.5 −1.1 + 86.1 + 93.8
2001 + 11.9 + 39.2 + 15.3 + 7.0 + 5.9 + 1.0 + 8.4 + 7.8 + 0.6 − 3.4 + 32.0
2002 − 19.2 − 18.8 −23.4 −25.7 −25.2 −0.5 + 2.3 + 2.9 −0.6 + 4.3 + 7.6
2003 + 0.2 − 8.4 −10.0 −16.7 −17.5 + 0.9 + 6.7 + 7.3 −0.6 + 10.2 + 16.0
2002          July + 5.1 + 6.5 − 0.3 − 7.6 − 8.1 + 0.5 + 7.3 + 8.8 −1.5 + 5.5 + 2.1
         Aug − 8.4 − 9.6 −14.4 − 4.4 − 4.1 −0.2 −10.0 −10.1 + 0.0 + 6.1 + 4.0
         Sep + 7.9 + 7.2 + 11.2 + 11.8 + 11.5 + 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.3 −0.3 − 3.3 − 3.9
         Oct + 2.0 + 1.4 − 3.2 − 7.5 − 7.5 −0.0 + 4.3 + 4.3 + 0.0 + 5.2 + 7.7
         Nov + 6.0 − 1.3 + 1.4 − 3.4 − 3.5 + 0.1 + 4.8 + 5.2 −0.5 + 4.5 + 3.5
         Dec − 6.3 + 1.6 − 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.1 −0.7 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.5 − 5.9 − 0.3
2003          Jan + 7.9 + 1.7 + 5.7 − 2.2 − 2.4 + 0.2 + 7.9 + 7.5 + 0.4 + 2.2 − 3.6
         Feb − 3.3 − 4.4 − 6.7 − 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 6.3 − 5.9 −0.4 + 3.5 + 1.0
         Mar + 3.7 − 5.1 + 4.8 + 3.2 + 2.2 + 1.0 + 1.6 + 1.3 + 0.3 − 1.2 − 5.9
         Apr + 2.1 − 1.1 − 3.0 − 6.0 − 6.1 + 0.1 + 3.1 + 3.0 + 0.1 + 5.1 + 7.2
         May − 3.8 − 8.5 −10.1 − 5.0 − 5.1 + 0.1 − 5.1 − 4.5 −0.6 + 6.3 + 1.8
         June − 11.1 + 2.5 + 3.4 + 7.5 + 7.8 −0.3 − 4.1 − 3.8 −0.2 − 14.6 − 3.1
         July + 3.8 + 1.7 − 1.9 −13.2 −12.7 −0.5 + 11.3 + 11.0 + 0.2 + 5.7 + 4.3
         Aug − 9.1 − 4.0 −10.7 − 7.3 − 7.4 + 0.1 − 3.4 − 3.3 −0.1 + 1.6 + 8.7
         Sep + 9.6 + 8.3 + 10.0 + 15.6 + 16.1 −0.5 − 5.6 − 4.8 −0.9 − 0.4 − 2.2
         Oct − 2.8 − 0.9 − 2.9 − 6.6 − 6.8 + 0.1 + 3.7 + 2.7 + 1.0 + 0.2 − 0.6
         Nov + 19.3 + 9.9 + 6.9 + 0.3 + 0.5 −0.2 + 6.6 + 6.2 + 0.4 + 12.4 + 9.3
         Dec − 16.1 − 8.6 − 5.4 − 2.4 − 3.2 + 0.8 − 3.0 − 2.2 −0.8 − 10.6 − 0.9
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the including fiduciary loans (see also footnote 9). —3Up to December 1998,
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as bill-based lending (bill holdings plus endorsement liabilities arising from
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly rediscounted bills and bills sent for collection from the banks ’portfolios
Report , are not specially marked. —1Up to December 1998, including loans prior to maturity). —4From 1999, including small amounts of medium-term
to domestic building and loan associations. —2Up to December 1998, series of bills. —5From December 1993, including other negotiable
30*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
IV Banks
 
   
 
lending  2,6 
prises and individuals  1,2 to public authorities  2 
Loans Loans
Memo Memo
item Equal- item
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term  7 term  8 loans  9 Total Total term  7 term  8 loans  9   Period Securities  6 ities 6,10 claims  11 
End of year or month*
 
2,390.4 228.3 2,162.0 203.2 68.3 891.8 577.0 34.5 542.5 230.5 68.1 16.1 1994
2,522.0 214.1 2,307.9 192.9 70.6 1,036.2 713.0 74.5 638.4 234.4 71.3 17.5 1995
2,713.3 215.8 2,497.5 205.9 88.0 1,103.6 773.0 69.5 703.6 231.3 81.3 18.0 19962,900.0 216.2 2,683.8 234.1 89.3 1,167.2 833.8 53.0 780.8 239.2 76.0 18.3 19973,104.5 206.8 2,897.8 292.4 85.4 1,193.2 868.8 33.1 835.7 235.4 71.6 17.3 19981,764.8 182.5 1,582.3 178.9 49.2 605.6 459.5 30.9 428.6 108.6 37.5 8.7 1999
1,838.9 192.8 1,646.0 199.7 50.1 593.9 455.9 30.4 425.5 104.9 33.1 8.4 2000
1,880.5 191.1 1,689.4 189.7 48.9 556.0 440.3 25.6 414.6 111.8 4.0 8.0 20011,909.8 193.5 1,716.3 169.9 47.3 552.1 417.1 27.4 389.7 132.0 3.0 7.5 20021,927.8 195.0 1,732.8 168.3 50.1 544.8 401.0 34.6 366.4 141.8 2.0 7.0 2003
1,897.5 191.7 1,705.8 171.0 47.5 556.8 425.8 24.5 401.3 128.0 3.0 7.7 2002          July
1,901.6 192.3 1,709.3 171.6 47.5 558.1 426.2 24.7 401.5 128.9 3.0 7.7          Aug 
1,900.6 192.1 1,708.6 168.2 47.3 559.3 423.3 24.6 398.7 133.1 3.0 7.7          Sep 
1,906.5 193.8 1,712.6 170.1 47.5 556.8 422.1 24.7 397.4 131.8 3.0 7.6          Oct 
1,907.6 192.5 1,715.1 172.4 47.3 557.8 417.7 25.5 392.2 137.1 3.0 7.7          Nov 1,909.8 193.5 1,716.3 169.9 47.3 552.1 417.1 27.4 389.7 132.0 3.0 7.5          Dec 
1,909.4 194.8 1,714.6 167.1 47.0 557.4 414.2 30.0 384.2 140.3 3.0 7.7 2003          Jan 
1,911.1 194.0 1,717.1 166.5 47.1 559.9 414.4 31.5 382.9 142.5 3.0 7.7          Feb 
1,907.1 193.1 1,714.0 164.5 47.2 564.6 409.8 29.9 379.8 151.9 3.0 7.6          Mar 
1,910.3 193.3 1,717.0 168.6 47.0 562.4 408.6 30.9 377.6 150.8 3.0 7.5          Apr 
1,912.9 193.2 1,719.7 167.6 47.0 566.9 407.1 31.5 375.5 156.9 3.0 7.5          May1,912.8 193.5 1,719.3 164.6 47.0 555.4 405.7 31.5 374.2 146.8 3.0 7.4          June
1,916.9 193.9 1,723.0 164.9 46.9 556.8 404.9 31.3 373.6 149.8 2.0 7.3          July
1,924.6 195.5 1,729.1 165.9 47.3 549.7 403.9 32.9 371.1 143.7 2.0 7.2          Aug 1,922.2 195.0 1,727.2 166.1 47.2 550.6 403.3 33.7 369.6 145.3 2.0 7.2          Sep 
1,926.8 195.7 1,731.1 160.9 46.8 551.4 402.0 32.5 369.4 147.5 2.0 7.2          Oct 
1,930.3 195.9 1,734.3 166.7 47.0 554.5 401.7 33.1 368.6 150.8 2.0 7.1          Nov 1,927.8 195.0 1,732.8 168.3 50.1 544.8 401.0 34.6 366.4 141.8 2.0 7.0          Dec 
Changes*
+ 176.0 − 1.9 + 177.9 + 3.3 + 5.9 + 91.8 + 91.8 + 15.3 + 76.6 − 0.4 − 1.2 + 1.5 1995
+ 204.4 + 1.6 + 202.8 + 14.0 + 3.1 + 70.4 + 65.7 − 5.5 + 71.2 − 3.3 + 8.0 + 0.1 1996
+ 189.0 + 0.3 + 188.7 + 29.5 + 1.4 + 62.6 + 60.6 −18.0 + 78.6 + 7.0 − 5.3 + 0.2 1997
+ 205.7 − 8.9 + 214.6 + 56.5 −3.9 + 25.3 + 35.0 −20.0 + 55.0 − 4.4 − 4.4 −0.9 1998
+ 121.8 + 25.1 + 96.8 + 24.6 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 8.5 + 6.2 + 2.3 − 7.8 − 0.6 −0.1 1999
+ 71.8 + 6.9 + 64.9 + 22.1 + 0.8 − 7.7 − 3.8 − 0.4 − 3.5 − 3.1 − 0.8 −0.3 2000
+ 41.9 − 2.8 + 44.7 − 9.8 −1.2 − 35.4 −16.5 − 5.5 −10.9 + 10.1 −29.1 −0.4 2001
+ 26.6 − 2.1 + 28.7 −19.0 −1.6 − 3.4 −23.1 + 1.0 −24.1 + 20.7 − 1.0 −0.5 2002
+ 18.0 + 0.2 + 17.8 − 1.9 + 2.8 − 5.9 −16.1 + 4.9 −21.0 + 11.2 − 1.0 −0.5 2003
+ 6.4 + 0.5 + 5.9 − 4.4 −0.1 + 3.4 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.7 + 5.0 − 1.0 −0.1 2002          July
+ 4.1 + 0.6 + 3.5 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 2.1 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 1.6 + 0.0 −0.0          Aug 
− 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.7 − 2.8 −0.2 + 0.6 − 2.9 − 0.1 − 2.8 + 3.5 + 0.0 −0.0          Sep 
+ 5.8 + 1.8 + 4.1 + 1.9 + 0.2 − 2.5 − 1.2 + 0.1 − 1.3 − 1.3 − 0.0 −0.0          Oct 
+ 1.3 − 2.8 + 4.1 + 2.3 −0.1 + 1.0 − 4.3 + 0.0 − 4.4 + 5.4 + 0.0 + 0.0          Nov 
+ 2.2 + 1.0 + 1.3 − 2.5 −0.0 − 5.7 − 0.6 + 1.9 − 2.5 − 5.1 −− 0.1          Dec 
− 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 3.2 −0.2 + 5.8 − 2.9 + 0.3 − 3.3 + 8.7 − 0.0 + 0.2 2003          Jan 
+ 1.7 − 0.7 + 2.4 − 0.7 + 0.1 + 2.4 + 0.2 + 1.5 − 1.3 + 2.2 − 0.0 + 0.0          Feb 
− 4.0 − 0.9 − 3.0 − 2.0 + 0.1 + 4.8 − 4.6 − 1.5 − 3.1 + 9.4 + 0.0 −0.1          Mar 
+ 3.2 + 0.2 + 3.0 + 4.0 −0.2 − 2.1 − 1.2 + 1.0 − 2.2 − 0.9 − 0.0 −0.0          Apr 
+ 2.6 − 0.1 + 2.7 − 0.8 −0.1 + 4.6 − 1.5 + 0.6 − 2.1 + 6.1 −− 0.0          May
− 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.4 − 3.0 + 0.0 − 11.5 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 1.4 −10.1 − 0.0 −0.1          June
+ 4.1 + 0.4 + 3.7 + 0.3 −0.1 + 1.4 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 3.1 − 1.0 −0.1          July
+ 7.8 + 1.6 + 6.1 + 1.0 + 0.4 − 7.1 − 1.0 + 1.5 − 2.5 − 6.1 − 0.0 −0.1          Aug 
− 2.4 − 0.5 − 1.9 + 0.2 −0.2 + 1.8 − 0.6 + 0.9 − 1.5 + 2.4 + 0.0 −0.0          Sep 
+ 4.5 + 0.7 + 3.8 − 5.1 −0.4 + 0.8 − 1.4 − 1.2 − 0.1 + 2.2 − 0.0 −0.0          Oct 
+ 3.5 + 0.2 + 3.3 + 5.8 + 0.2 + 3.1 − 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.8 + 3.3 −− 0.0          Nov 
− 2.5 − 1.0 − 1.6 + 1.6 + 3.1 − 9.7 − 0.7 + 1.5 − 2.2 − 9.0 + 0.0 −0.1          Dec 
money market paper; excluding mobilisation and liquidity paper. —6From notice of four years and more; from 1999, of more than five years. —9From
1999, breakdown of securities by medium and long-term lending no longer 1999, no longer included in lending (see also footnote 2). —10Excluding
possible. —7Up to December 1998, maturity or period of notice of more debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims (see also
than one year to less than four years; from 1999, more than one year up to footnote 11). —11Including debt securities arising from the exchange of
and including five years. —8Up to December 1998, maturity or period of equalisation claims. 
31*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
IV Banks
 
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and resident individuals, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
 
 5  billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and resident individuals (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding sec urities portfolios)  1 
of which  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
 
Financing
Mortgage institu-
loans tions
secured Whole- Agri- Electricity, Transport, (excluding
by gas and sale culture, storage MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which water and forestry and insurance
loans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- supply, Construc- retail and commu- enter-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing mining  2 tion trade  3 fishing nication prises
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2000 2,187.3 955.2 1,030.8 737.6 293.2 1,267.8 344.1 174.9 35.9 68.2 173.2 31.4 49.1 34.2
2001 2,236.3 981.4 1,053.9 757.7 296.2 1,295.6 346.1 174.3 36.7 67.9 172.9 31.3 50.0 39.0
2002          Dec 2,241.2 1,008.9 1,068.7 776.3 292.4 1,277.3 340.1 161.5 37.4 64.6 162.6 31.3 51.3 39.5
2003          Mar 2,237.9 1,012.5 1,067.0 782.0 285.0 1,273.2 338.4 158.5 37.3 63.5 159.3 32.0 51.1 50.3
         June 2,240.1 1,011.4 1,070.5 782.5 288.0 1,267.1 338.0 157.8 37.0 62.9 156.9 32.5 52.2 48.7         Sep 2,245.6 1,106.2 1,077.5 845.7 231.8 1,262.1 338.1 154.4 36.2 61.7 153.3 32.9 53.6 53.9         Dec 2,241.6 1,124.5 1,083.3 867.0 216.2 1,252.3 335.1 151.0 37.2 59.0 152.3 32.1 54.4 54.4
 Short-term lending
2000 348.4 − 15.9 − 15.9 294.6 10.7 61.5 6.2 17.9 62.2 4.2 10.1 10.5
2001 355.8 − 15.9 − 15.9 304.1 10.6 59.6 5.5 17.8 63.5 4.1 9.3 14.2
2002          Dec 331.4 − 14.5 − 14.5 281.1 9.3 52.0 5.1 15.9 58.7 4.2 8.4 13.6
2003          Mar 330.7 − 13.7 − 13.7 282.8 8.8 50.6 4.8 16.0 57.4 4.5 8.0 24.2
         June 327.3 − 14.4 − 14.4 278.8 9.3 51.1 4.5 15.9 56.5 4.7 7.9 22.3
         Sep 323.3 − 14.0 − 14.0 274.7 8.7 48.7 4.0 15.1 54.6 4.7 7.8 26.3
         Dec 313.9 − 14.1 − 14.1 266.7 8.9 46.6 4.2 13.2 55.9 3.9 8.0 25.8
 Medium-term lending
2000 192.8 − 39.3 − 39.3 120.1 12.8 17.6 1.5 7.0 13.3 3.4 6.9 9.1
2001 191.1 − 37.1 − 37.1 120.1 12.0 18.5 1.9 6.5 13.4 3.2 7.2 7.7
2002          Dec 193.5 − 36.1 − 36.1 121.8 11.3 17.9 2.0 6.5 13.5 3.3 8.5 6.8
2003          Mar 193.1 − 35.9 − 35.9 121.3 11.4 17.7 2.2 6.3 13.1 3.3 9.1 6.3
         June 193.5 − 37.4 − 37.4 121.0 11.9 17.6 2.5 6.0 12.7 3.4 9.9 6.4
         Sep 195.0 − 38.0 − 38.0 121.4 12.0 17.6 2.2 6.1 12.6 3.4 10.5 6.4
         Dec 195.0 − 38.2 − 38.2 121.2 12.0 17.5 2.3 6.0 11.9 3.4 10.9 6.5
 Long-term lending
2000 1,646.0 955.2 975.5 737.6 238.0 853.1 320.6 95.9 28.2 43.4 97.7 23.9 32.1 14.62001 1,689.4 981.4 1,000.9 757.7 243.2 871.4 323.5 96.2 29.4 43.7 96.1 24.0 33.5 17.1
2002          Dec 1,716.3 1,008.9 1,018.1 776.3 241.9 874.4 319.4 91.5 30.3 42.2 90.3 23.8 34.4 19.0
2003          Mar 1,714.0 1,012.5 1,017.3 782.0 235.3 869.1 318.2 90.2 30.4 41.2 88.8 24.2 34.1 19.8
         June 1,719.3 1,011.4 1,018.7 782.5 236.2 867.2 316.7 89.1 30.0 41.0 87.6 24.4 34.4 20.1         Sep 1,727.2 1,106.2 1,025.5 845.7 179.8 866.1 317.4 88.1 30.0 40.6 86.1 24.7 35.2 21.2         Dec 1,732.8 1,124.5 1,031.0 867.0 164.0 864.3 314.2 86.9 30.6 39.9 84.5 24.7 35.5 22.1
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2002          Q4 − 1.5 + 4.3 + 6.3 + 3.0 + 3.3 − 8.7 − 0.9 − 6.2 − 0.9 − 2.3 − 1.4 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 2.7
2003          Q1 − 3.3 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.3 − 4.2 − 1.8 − 2.9 − 0.1 − 1.1 − 3.5 + 0.7 − 0.2 + 10.3
         Q2 + 2.2 + 0.7 + 5.8 + 2.7 + 3.1 − 6.1 − 1.1 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 2.3 + 0.5 + 1.0 − 1.6
         Q3 + 5.4 + 4.5 + 7.9 + 5.8 + 2.1 − 4.9 − 0.8 − 3.5 − 0.8 − 1.1 − 3.4 + 0.4 + 1.4 + 5.1
         Q4 − 3.9 − 0.8 + 7.5 + 4.5 + 3.0 − 9.9 − 2.6 − 3.4 + 0.9 − 2.7 − 1.0 − 0.8 + 0.8 + 0.5
 Short-term lending
2002          Q4 −10.8 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 −10.2 + 0.2 − 4.6 − 1.0 − 1.6 − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 3.4
2003          Q1 − 0.7 −− 0.9 −− 0.9 + 1.6 − 0.6 − 1.5 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.3 − 0.4 + 10.6
         Q2 − 3.4 − + 0.4 − + 0.4 − 4.0 + 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 2.0
         Q3 − 4.0 −− 0.4 −− 0.4 − 4.2 − 0.7 − 2.4 − 0.6 − 0.8 − 1.8 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 3.9
         Q4 − 9.5 − + 0.1 − + 0.1 − 7.9 + 0.2 − 2.1 + 0.3 − 1.9 + 1.3 − 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.6
 Medium-term lending
2002          Q4 − 0.1 −− 0.4 −− 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.1
2003          Q1 − 1.7 −− 0.3 −− 0.3 − 1.8 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.7
         Q2 + 0.4 − + 0.7 − + 0.7 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.8 + 0.1
         Q3 + 1.5 − + 0.5 − + 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.1
         Q4 − 0.0 − + 0.2 − + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.1
 Long-term lending
2002          Q4 + 9.4 + 4.3 + 6.4 + 3.0 + 3.5 + 1.5 − 0.7 − 1.5 + 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.6
2003          Q1 − 1.0 − 0.4 + 1.2 + 0.4 + 0.9 − 4.1 − 1.2 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 1.0 − 1.6 + 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.4
         Q2 + 5.3 + 0.7 + 4.6 + 2.7 + 2.0 − 1.8 − 1.6 − 1.1 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.3
         Q3 + 7.9 + 4.5 + 7.8 + 5.8 + 2.0 − 1.1 − 0.2 − 1.0 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 1.5 + 0.3 + 0.8 + 1.1
         Q4 + 5.5 − 0.8 + 7.2 + 4.5 + 2.7 − 1.8 − 2.7 − 1.2 + 0.6 − 0.8 − 1.6 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 1.0
*Excluding lending by foreign branches. Breakdown of lending by building always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent alterations, which will
and loan associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical alterations appear in the following Monthly Report , are not specially marked. —
have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest date are 1Excluding loans on a trust basis. —2Including quarrying. —3Including
32*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
IV Banks
 
   
 
 
 
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which of which
Debitbalanceson wage,
Other Lending salaryreal to self- Lending and of which
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans  
5 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises enterprises persons  4 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
700.8 162.3 46.8 183.1 459.0 75.0 905.5 683.0 222.6 108.6 24.3 14.0 3.7 2000
723.3 169.4 50.3 194.3 458.6 74.7 926.7 704.3 222.4 110.7 22.9 14.1 3.5 2001
729.2 165.0 50.2 207.2 451.8 72.4 949.5 725.1 224.3 114.3 23.0 14.4 3.5 2002          Dec 
721.1 163.6 48.6 206.4 448.1 72.9 950.5 725.0 225.4 115.5 22.1 14.3 3.5 2003          Mar 
719.1 163.2 48.5 206.8 444.5 71.9 958.8 729.1 229.8 114.2 22.7 14.2 3.5          June
716.1 162.3 48.6 205.7 441.8 70.2 969.6 735.9 233.7 116.1 23.2 13.8 3.5          Sep 711.9 160.7 44.0 207.2 437.0 67.7 975.6 744.7 230.9 118.6 21.6 13.7 3.5          Dec 
Short-term lending
122.1 19.6 18.1 30.0 57.1 16.2 52.6 5.2 47.4 2.3 24.3 1.2 0.0 2000130.1 21.6 20.4 34.1 56.0 15.8 50.3 5.3 45.0 2.8 22.9 1.4 0.0 2001
123.3 19.8 19.1 34.7 53.8 14.8 48.5 5.2 43.3 2.4 23.0 1.7 0.0 2002          Dec 
117.3 19.0 18.0 33.5 52.2 15.3 46.2 4.9 41.3 2.3 22.1 1.7 0.0 2003          Mar 
115.9 18.7 17.9 33.6 51.8 15.0 46.8 5.0 41.7 2.3 22.7 1.7 0.0          June
113.5 17.9 18.3 32.1 50.6 14.4 47.2 5.2 42.0 2.3 23.2 1.4 0.0          Sep 109.1 17.9 14.6 31.2 49.4 12.9 45.9 5.1 40.8 2.4 21.6 1.2 0.0          Dec 
Medium-term lending
61.4 6.8 6.3 13.6 33.1 5.5 72.2 26.4 45.8 33.0 − 0.6 0.1 2000
61.9 6.7 6.5 14.7 31.2 5.3 70.5 25.0 45.4 33.4 − 0.6 0.1 2001
63.2 6.2 7.2 16.7 31.2 4.8 71.1 24.7 46.4 35.3 − 0.5 0.1 2002          Dec 
63.5 6.1 6.7 17.8 31.4 4.8 71.3 24.5 46.9 36.1 − 0.5 0.1 2003          Mar 
62.5 6.1 6.3 17.6 31.0 4.7 72.0 25.4 46.6 36.4 − 0.5 0.1          June
62.5 5.9 6.0 17.7 30.8 4.6 73.1 26.0 47.2 37.3 − 0.5 0.1          Sep 
62.7 5.7 5.6 18.0 30.4 4.5 73.2 26.2 47.0 37.1 − 0.6 0.1          Dec 
Long-term lending
517.3 135.9 22.5 139.5 368.7 53.2 780.8 651.4 129.4 73.3 − 12.2 3.6 2000
531.3 141.1 23.4 145.6 371.3 53.7 806.0 674.0 132.0 74.4 − 12.1 3.5 2001
542.8 139.0 24.0 155.8 366.8 52.8 829.8 695.3 134.6 76.6 − 12.1 3.4 2002          Dec 
540.3 138.5 23.9 155.1 364.4 52.8 832.9 695.7 137.3 77.2 − 12.0 3.4 2003          Mar 
540.7 138.4 24.3 155.6 361.8 52.2 840.1 698.6 141.5 75.5 − 12.0 3.4          June
540.1 138.4 24.2 155.9 360.4 51.2 849.2 704.7 144.5 76.5 − 11.9 3.4          Sep 
540.1 137.1 23.8 158.0 357.2 50.4 856.5 713.4 143.2 79.1 − 11.9 3.4          Dec 
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
+ 6.1 − 2.2 + 2.4 + 4.8 − 1.5 − 1.7 + 7.3 + 7.1 + 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.9 − 0.1 + 0.0 2002          Q4
− 7.4 − 1.3 − 1.6 − 0.2 − 3.8 − 0.2 + 1.0 + 1.9 − 0.9 + 1.8 − 1.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 2003          Q1
− 2.2 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 3.2 − 1.0 + 8.4 + 6.9 + 1.5 + 1.2 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0          Q2
− 3.1 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 2.4 − 1.4 + 10.8 + 8.8 + 2.0 + 2.1 + 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.0          Q3
− 4.1 − 0.5 − 4.6 + 0.4 − 4.8 − 1.9 + 6.0 + 10.1 − 4.0 + 0.4 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 0.0          Q4
Short-term lending
+ 2.2 − 1.2 + 1.8 + 1.6 − 0.1 − 1.3 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.0 2002          Q4
− 5.9 − 0.8 − 1.0 − 1.2 − 1.6 + 0.5 − 2.3 − 0.3 − 2.0 − 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 2003          Q1
− 1.4 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0          Q2
− 2.3 − 0.8 + 0.4 − 1.5 − 1.2 − 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.0          Q3
− 4.4 − 0.0 − 3.7 − 0.9 − 1.1 − 1.5 − 1.3 − 0.1 − 1.2 + 0.0 − 1.6 − 0.2 + 0.0          Q4
Medium-term lending
− 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.6 + 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 −− 0.0 + 0.0 2002          Q4
− 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.4 + 0.8 −− 0.0 + 0.0 2003          Q1
− 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.3 − + 0.0 + 0.0          Q2
− 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 0.6 + 0.9 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q3
+ 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 − + 0.1 + 0.0          Q4
Long-term lending
+ 4.0 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 2.7 − 1.0 − 0.3 + 8.1 + 7.1 + 1.0 + 0.4 −− 0.1 + 0.0 2002          Q4
− 0.7 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 2.2 − 0.6 + 3.2 + 2.4 + 0.7 + 1.1 −− 0.1 + 0.0 2003          Q1
+ 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.5 − 2.7 − 0.6 + 7.1 + 6.3 + 0.8 + 0.9 −− 0.0 − 0.0          Q2
− 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.7 − 1.0 − 0.7 + 9.2 + 8.0 + 1.2 + 1.1 −− 0.1 − 0.0          Q3
− 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 1.0 − 3.3 − 0.3 + 7.3 + 9.9 − 2.6 + 0.5 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q4
the maintenance and repair of motor vehicles and durable consumer   
goods. —4Including sole proprietors. —5Excluding mortgage loans and   
housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit.  
33*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
  
 5  billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Included Subordinated
 liabilities in time
for up for up (excluding deposits:
to and to and for more Bank negotiable liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month*
 
2001 2,034.0 526.4 827.0 268.7 558.3 10.3 548.0 574.5 106.0 43.3 26.2 3.1
2002 2,085.9 575.6 830.6 258.3 572.3 8.8 563.5 575.3 104.4 42.1 27.9 1.52003 2,140.3 624.0 825.7 237.8 587.9 8.3 579.6 590.3 100.3 40.8 30.4 9.3
2003          Jan 2,076.4 565.2 830.3 255.7 574.5 8.6 565.9 577.4 103.5 42.1 28.0 3.5
         Feb 2,084.6 571.6 830.0 253.5 576.6 8.3 568.3 579.2 103.7 41.9 29.0 4.1         Mar 2,089.6 578.9 828.4 249.9 578.5 8.5 570.0 579.3 103.0 42.1 28.9 5.2
         Apr 2,094.8 586.3 828.2 249.5 578.7 8.2 570.5 577.9 102.4 41.8 28.9 5.6
         May 2,101.9 591.7 831.2 253.9 577.2 8.1 569.2 577.1 101.9 41.7 29.3 3.8         June 2,109.6 608.9 822.7 245.9 576.8 8.0 568.8 576.7 101.3 41.8 29.8 5.7
         July 2,102.3 595.6 829.0 246.4 582.6 8.0 574.6 576.8 100.9 41.7 29.8 7.1
         Aug 2,111.4 598.5 834.5 248.0 586.5 8.0 578.5 578.0 100.4 41.7 30.1 6.1         Sep 2,112.3 608.8 825.4 240.3 585.1 7.9 577.2 578.3 99.9 41.5 30.1 11.6
         Oct 2,114.7 610.9 824.5 238.7 585.7 8.0 577.7 579.4 100.0 40.7 30.4 14.5
         Nov 2,138.6 634.1 824.0 237.5 586.5 8.3 578.2 580.3 100.1 40.7 30.5 12.7         Dec 2,140.3 624.0 825.7 237.8 587.9 8.3 579.6 590.3 100.3 40.8 30.4 9.3
Changes*
2002 + 51.7 + 48.4 + 4.1 −10.2 + 14.3 − 1.5 + 15.8 + 0.8 −1.6 − 1.1 + 1.8 − 1.6
2003 + 54.0 + 48.4 − 4.8 −20.3 + 15.6 − 0.5 + 16.1 + 15.1 −4.8 − 1.0 + 2.0 + 7.8
2003          Jan − 9.5 − 10.4 − 0.3 − 2.6 + 2.3 − 0.1 + 2.4 + 2.1 −0.9 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 2.0
         Feb + 7.6 + 6.4 − 0.3 − 2.3 + 2.0 − 0.4 + 2.4 + 1.8 −0.4 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.7
         Mar + 5.1 + 7.3 − 1.6 − 3.6 + 2.0 + 0.3 + 1.7 + 0.1 −0.7 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 1.1
         Apr + 5.1 + 7.4 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.6 − 1.4 −0.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.4
         May + 7.1 + 5.4 + 3.0 + 4.5 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 1.4 − 0.8 −0.5 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 1.9
         June + 7.7 + 17.2 − 8.5 − 8.1 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.4 −0.6 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 1.9
         July − 7.1 − 13.3 + 6.5 + 0.7 + 5.8 − 0.1 + 5.9 + 0.1 −0.4 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.4
         Aug + 9.1 + 2.9 + 5.5 + 1.6 + 3.9 + 0.0 + 3.9 + 1.3 −0.5 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 1.0
         Sep + 0.8 + 10.3 − 9.1 − 7.8 − 1.4 − 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.2 −0.5 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 5.4
         Oct + 2.5 + 2.1 − 0.9 − 1.5 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 1.1 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 2.9
         Nov + 23.8 + 23.2 − 0.4 − 1.2 + 0.8 + 0.3 + 0.4 + 0.9 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 1.8
         Dec + 1.7 − 10.1 + 1.7 + 0.3 + 1.4 − 0.0 + 1.4 + 10.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 3.4
Domestic public authorities End of year or month*
2001 122.7 16.1 102.3 37.7 64.5 1.2 63.3 2.3 2.1 36.6 1.4 −
2002 113.9 16.6 93.3 30.9 62.4 0.9 61.5 2.1 1.9 36.3 1.2 −
2003 108.1 17.8 86.6 29.1 57.5 0.5 57.0 2.0 1.7 35.1 1.1 −
2003          Jan 109.2 13.5 91.8 29.4 62.4 0.9 61.5 2.0 1.9 36.3 1.1 −
         Feb 111.1 15.2 92.0 30.0 61.9 0.6 61.4 2.0 1.8 36.2 1.1 −
         Mar 109.9 15.0 91.1 30.5 60.6 0.5 60.0 2.0 1.8 36.3 1.1 −
         Apr 107.6 14.5 89.4 29.1 60.3 0.6 59.8 1.9 1.8 36.3 1.1 −
         May 111.4 15.0 92.7 32.6 60.0 0.5 59.5 1.9 1.8 36.2 1.1 −
         June 114.5 18.1 92.6 32.6 60.1 0.5 59.5 1.9 1.7 36.2 1.1 −
         July 109.0 14.5 90.9 31.5 59.4 0.5 58.9 1.9 1.7 36.2 1.1 −
         Aug 107.7 14.7 89.2 30.8 58.4 0.5 57.9 2.0 1.7 36.1 1.1 −
         Sep 105.0 15.4 85.9 28.7 57.2 0.5 56.7 2.0 1.7 36.0 1.1 −
         Oct 101.6 15.2 82.7 25.7 57.0 0.5 56.5 2.0 1.7 35.8 1.1 −
         Nov 104.1 15.8 84.6 27.0 57.7 0.5 57.2 2.0 1.7 35.8 1.1 −
         Dec 108.1 17.8 86.6 29.1 57.5 0.5 57.0 2.0 1.7 35.1 1.1 −
Changes*
2002 − 8.6 + 0.5 − 8.7 − 6.6 − 2.1 − 0.3 − 1.8 − 0.2 −0.2 − 0.3 − 0.2 −
2003 − 4.8 + 1.2 − 5.7 − 1.6 − 4.1 − 0.4 − 3.7 − 0.1 −0.2 − 1.4 − 0.1 −
2003          Jan − 4.7 − 3.1 − 1.5 − 1.4 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 −0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 −
         Feb + 1.9 + 1.7 + 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 −0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 −
         Mar − 1.2 − 0.2 − 0.9 + 0.5 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 1.4 − 0.0 −0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 −
         Apr − 2.3 − 0.5 − 1.7 − 1.4 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 −0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −
         May + 3.8 + 0.5 + 3.3 + 3.5 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.0 −0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 −
         June + 3.1 + 3.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 −
         July − 5.4 − 3.7 − 1.8 − 1.1 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.0 −0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 −
         Aug − 0.5 + 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 −0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 −
         Sep − 2.6 + 0.7 − 3.3 − 2.1 − 1.2 + 0.0 − 1.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 −
         Oct − 3.4 − 0.2 − 3.2 − 3.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 −0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 −
         Nov + 2.7 + 0.6 + 2.1 + 1.4 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.6 − + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −
         Dec + 4.0 + 2.0 + 2.0 + 2.2 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 −0.0 − 0.7 − 0.0 −
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly
the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as Report , are not specially marked. —1Including subordinated liabilities and
34*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany* (cont ’d)
 
  
 5  billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Included Subordinated
 liabilities in time
for up for up (excluding deposits:
to and to and for more Bank negotiable liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic enterprises and resident individuals End of year or month*
 
2001 1,911.3 510.4 724.7 231.0 493.7 9.1 484.6 572.3 103.9 6.6 24.8 3.1
2002 1,972.0 559.0 737.3 227.5 509.8 7.9 502.0 573.2 102.5 5.8 26.6 1.52003 2,032.2 606.2 739.1 208.7 530.4 7.8 522.6 588.3 98.6 5.7 29.3 9.3
2003          Jan 1,967.2 551.7 738.5 226.3 512.2 7.8 504.4 575.4 101.6 5.8 26.9 3.5
         Feb 1,973.5 556.4 738.1 223.4 514.6 7.7 506.9 577.2 101.9 5.7 27.8 4.1         Mar 1,979.8 563.9 737.3 219.4 518.0 8.0 510.0 577.3 101.2 5.8 27.8 5.2
         Apr 1,987.2 571.8 738.8 220.4 518.4 7.6 510.8 575.9 100.6 5.5 27.8 5.6
         May 1,990.5 576.7 738.5 221.3 517.2 7.5 509.7 575.1 100.1 5.5 28.1 3.8         June 1,995.2 590.8 730.0 213.3 516.7 7.5 509.2 574.8 99.6 5.5 28.7 5.7
         July 1,993.3 581.2 738.1 214.9 523.2 7.5 515.7 574.8 99.2 5.5 28.7 7.1
         Aug 2,003.8 583.8 745.3 217.2 528.1 7.5 520.6 576.0 98.7 5.5 28.9 6.1         Sep 2,007.3 593.4 739.5 211.6 527.9 7.4 520.5 576.2 98.1 5.5 29.0 11.6
         Oct 2,013.1 595.7 741.8 213.0 528.7 7.5 521.2 577.4 98.3 5.0 29.2 14.5
         Nov 2,034.5 618.3 739.4 210.6 528.8 7.8 521.0 578.3 98.4 4.9 29.4 12.7         Dec 2,032.2 606.2 739.1 208.7 530.4 7.8 522.6 588.3 98.6 5.7 29.3 9.3
Changes*
2002 + 60.3 + 47.9 + 12.8 − 3.6 + 16.4 − 1.2 + 17.5 + 1.0 −1.4 − 0.8 + 2.0 − 1.6
2003 + 58.7 + 47.2 + 1.0 −18.7 + 19.7 − 0.1 + 19.8 + 15.1 −4.5 + 0.4 + 2.1 + 7.8
2003          Jan − 4.8 − 7.3 + 1.2 − 1.2 + 2.4 − 0.1 + 2.4 + 2.2 −0.9 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 2.0
         Feb + 5.7 + 4.6 − 0.4 − 2.9 + 2.4 − 0.1 + 2.5 + 1.8 −0.3 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.7
         Mar + 6.3 + 7.5 − 0.7 − 4.1 + 3.3 + 0.3 + 3.1 + 0.1 −0.7 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 1.1
         Apr + 7.4 + 7.9 + 1.5 + 1.0 + 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.8 − 1.4 −0.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.4
         May + 3.3 + 4.9 − 0.3 + 0.9 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 1.1 − 0.8 −0.5 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 1.9
         June + 4.6 + 14.0 − 8.5 − 8.0 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.4 −0.5 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 1.9
         July − 1.7 − 9.6 + 8.2 + 1.8 + 6.5 − 0.0 + 6.5 + 0.1 −0.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.4
         Aug + 9.6 + 2.6 + 6.3 + 2.3 + 4.0 + 0.0 + 4.0 + 1.2 −0.5 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 1.0
         Sep + 3.5 + 9.6 − 5.8 − 5.6 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.2 −0.5 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 5.4
         Oct + 5.9 + 2.3 + 2.3 + 1.5 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 1.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 2.9
         Nov + 21.2 + 22.6 − 2.5 − 2.6 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.9 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 1.8
         Dec − 2.3 − 12.1 − 0.3 − 1.9 + 1.5 − 0.0 + 1.6 + 10.0 + 0.2 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 3.4
of which:  Domestic enterprises End of year or month*
2001 668.4 180.0 461.3 91.7 369.6 2.9 366.8 4.3 22.8 6.4 14.3 3.12002 700.4 194.6 479.4 99.2 380.2 1.5 378.7 4.4 22.0 5.6 15.8 1.52003 730.8 205.8 498.1 102.1 396.0 1.6 394.4 4.8 22.1 5.4 17.3 9.3
2003          Jan 692.7 185.3 480.7 98.5 382.2 1.5 380.6 4.4 22.3 5.6 16.3 3.5
         Feb 692.3 183.6 481.8 97.7 384.1 1.5 382.7 4.4 22.5 5.5 16.5 4.1         Mar 695.4 186.2 482.3 95.4 386.9 1.8 385.2 4.4 22.5 5.6 16.5 5.2
         Apr 704.6 191.8 486.0 98.8 387.2 1.4 385.8 4.4 22.5 5.3 16.4 5.6
         May 705.7 192.3 486.3 100.2 386.1 1.4 384.7 4.6 22.4 5.2 16.7 3.8         June 710.6 202.0 481.6 96.1 385.5 1.4 384.1 4.7 22.4 5.3 17.2 5.7
         July 711.2 192.4 491.5 99.5 392.1 1.5 390.6 4.8 22.5 5.3 17.2 7.1
         Aug 716.9 189.6 500.0 103.2 396.8 1.5 395.2 4.8 22.4 5.3 17.4 6.1         Sep 723.7 200.7 495.9 99.7 396.2 1.5 394.7 4.8 22.3 5.3 17.4 11.6
         Oct 727.9 201.0 500.0 103.2 396.8 1.5 395.3 4.8 22.1 4.7 17.4 14.5
         Nov 733.5 206.0 500.7 102.8 397.9 1.7 396.2 4.7 22.0 4.7 17.4 12.7         Dec 730.8 205.8 498.1 102.1 396.0 1.6 394.4 4.8 22.1 5.4 17.3 9.3
Changes*
2002 + 31.1 + 13.4 + 18.3 + 7.4 + 10.9 − 1.3 + 12.2 + 0.1 −0.7 − 0.8 + 1.6 − 1.6
2003 + 29.6 + 11.2 + 17.9 + 2.9 + 15.0 + 0.1 + 14.9 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 1.4 + 7.8
2003          Jan − 7.7 − 9.2 + 1.3 − 0.7 + 2.0 − 0.0 + 2.0 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 2.0
         Feb − 0.4 − 1.7 + 1.1 − 0.8 + 2.0 − 0.0 + 2.0 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.7
         Mar + 3.1 + 2.6 + 0.5 − 2.3 + 2.8 + 0.3 + 2.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 1.1
         Apr + 9.2 + 5.6 + 3.6 + 3.3 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.6 + 0.0 −0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.4
         May + 1.1 + 0.5 + 0.4 + 1.5 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 1.1 + 0.2 −0.0 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 1.9
         June + 4.9 + 9.6 − 4.7 − 4.2 − 0.6 −− 0.6 + 0.0 −0.1 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 1.9
         July + 0.8 − 9.5 + 10.1 + 3.5 + 6.6 + 0.1 + 6.5 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.4
         Aug + 4.8 − 2.8 + 7.6 + 3.7 + 3.9 + 0.1 + 3.8 + 0.1 −0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 1.0
         Sep + 6.8 + 11.1 − 4.1 − 3.5 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.1 −0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 5.4
         Oct + 4.3 + 0.3 + 4.1 + 3.5 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.0 −0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 2.9
         Nov + 5.4 + 5.0 + 0.5 − 0.6 + 1.1 + 0.2 + 0.9 − 0.0 −0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 1.8
         Dec − 2.7 − 0.2 − 2.6 − 0.7 − 1.9 − 0.1 − 1.8 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 3.4
liabilities arising from registered debt securities. —2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). —4Including
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). —3Excluding deposits liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
35*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
IV Banks
 
8 Deposits of resident individuals and domestic non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
  
 5  billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits
of resident Resident individuals Resident individualsindividualsanddomestic Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month*
 
2001 1,242.9 330.4 320.1 55.8 220.9 43.4 10.2 263.4 242.9 36.3 182.4 24.2
2002 1,271.6 364.5 352.8 61.3 241.4 50.0 11.7 257.9 238.3 35.2 180.5 22.62003 1,301.4 400.4 388.1 66.9 265.1 56.1 12.3 241.0 222.1 29.2 174.5 18.4
2003          July 1,282.1 388.8 376.3 65.8 255.8 54.7 12.5 246.6 227.4 31.7 175.2 20.4
         Aug 1,286.9 394.2 381.9 67.1 259.5 55.3 12.2 245.3 226.2 31.5 174.5 20.2         Sep 1,283.6 392.7 379.9 65.5 258.7 55.6 12.8 243.6 224.4 31.1 173.5 19.8
         Oct 1,285.2 394.7 382.2 68.3 258.7 55.2 12.5 241.7 223.1 30.9 172.7 19.6
         Nov 1,301.0 412.3 399.7 69.9 272.7 57.0 12.6 238.7 220.6 29.8 172.2 18.6         Dec 1,301.4 400.4 388.1 66.9 265.1 56.1 12.3 241.0 222.1 29.2 174.5 18.4
Changes*
2002 + 29.2 + 34.5 + 33.1 + 5.6 + 22.4 + 5.1 + 1.5 − 5.5 − 4.2 −1.0 −1.1 −2.1
2003 + 29.2 + 36.0 + 35.3 + 5.6 + 23.7 + 6.0 + 0.6 −16.9 −16.2 −6.0 −6.0 −4.2
2003          July −2.5 − 0.0 + 0.8 + 1.8 − 0.8 −0.2 −0.8 − 1.9 − 1.5 −0.3 −0.9 −0.3
         Aug + 4.8 + 5.4 + 5.7 + 1.3 + 3.7 + 0.6 −0.2 − 1.3 − 1.2 −0.2 −0.7 −0.3
         Sep −3.3 − 1.5 − 2.0 − 1.6 − 0.8 + 0.4 + 0.6 − 1.7 − 1.8 −0.3 −1.0 −0.4
         Oct + 1.6 + 2.0 + 2.2 + 2.7 − 0.1 −0.4 −0.3 − 1.8 − 1.3 −0.3 −0.8 −0.2
         Nov + 15.8 + 17.6 + 17.5 + 1.7 + 14.0 + 1.9 + 0.1 − 3.0 − 2.5 −1.1 −0.5 −1.0
         Dec + 0.4 −11.9 −11.6 − 3.0 − 7.6 −1.0 −0.3 + 2.3 + 1.5 −0.5 + 2.3 −0.2
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the Report , are not specially marked. —1Including subordinated liabilities and
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as liabilities arising from registered debt securities. —2Including deposits
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following MonthlyDEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
 
  
9 Deposits of domestic public authorities at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group
*
 
 5  billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 Land  governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
Domestic for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
public to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary authorities,
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans
End of year or month*
 
2001 122.7 46.9 1.6 2.7 42.7 0.0 13.2 19.2 2.7 1.8 14.6 0.1 23.2
2002 113.9 45.6 0.9 3.6 41.1 0.0 13.5 18.9 2.5 1.4 14.9 0.1 22.62003 108.1 44.2 2.0 5.2 36.9 0.0 12.6 18.5 3.1 1.3 14.1 0.1 22.2
2003          July 109.0 43.8 0.5 4.8 38.5 0.0 13.5 20.9 3.4 3.3 14.2 0.1 22.4
         Aug 107.7 43.8 0.8 4.8 38.2 0.0 13.5 19.6 2.7 2.5 14.2 0.1 22.3         Sep 105.0 43.4 1.6 4.8 37.0 0.0 13.4 20.2 3.2 2.8 14.2 0.1 22.3
         Oct 101.6 43.0 1.5 4.7 36.8 0.0 13.2 19.0 3.0 1.9 14.1 0.1 22.3
         Nov 104.1 43.6 1.5 4.8 37.3 0.0 13.2 17.7 2.4 1.2 14.1 0.1 22.3         Dec 108.1 44.2 2.0 5.2 36.9 0.0 12.6 18.5 3.1 1.3 14.1 0.1 22.2
Changes*
2002 −8.6 −1.3 −0.6 + 0.9 −1.6 + 0.0 + 0.3 −0.3 −0.1 −0.4 + 0.3 −0.0 −0.6
2003 −4.8 −1.4 + 1.1 + 1.7 −4.2 −0.0 −1.0 −0.2 + 0.5 + 0.1 −0.8 −0.0 −0.4
2003          July −5.4 −0.8 −0.3 −0.0 −0.5 + 0.0 −0.0 −2.6 −1.9 −0.5 −0.2 −− 0.0
         Aug −0.5 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.1 −0.3 − + 0.0 −1.4 −0.6 −0.8 + 0.0 −− 0.1
         Sep −2.6 −0.4 + 0.8 −0.0 −1.2 −− 0.1 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.2 −0.0 −0.0 −0.1
         Oct −3.4 −0.4 −0.1 −0.2 −0.2 −0.0 −0.2 −1.1 −0.2 −0.8 −0.1 − + 0.0
         Nov + 2.7 + 0.6 −0.0 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.0 −1.1 −0.6 −0.5 −0.0 −0.0 −0.0
         Dec + 4.0 + 0.6 + 0.6 + 0.5 −0.4 −0.0 −0.6 + 0.8 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.0 −− 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and which are included in ”Enterprises ”. Statistical breaks have been eliminated
its successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, east German Railways from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded
and Federal Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the followingPost AG and Deutsche Telekom AG, and of publicly-owned enterprises,
36*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
IV Banks
 
    
 
 Savings deposits  3  Memo item
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year  2 
Included Subordinated
of which liabilities in time
Domestic Domestic (excluding deposits:
up to and up to and Bank negotiable liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arising
tions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  4 loans from repos   Period individuals securities)  5 
End of year or month*
 
20.6 139.3 124.1 6.2 117.9 568.0 558.6 9.4 81.1 0.2 10.5 −2001
19.6 128.3 129.6 6.3 123.3 568.8 559.9 8.9 80.4 0.2 10.8 −2002
18.9 106.7 134.3 6.1 128.2 583.5 574.3 9.2 76.5 0.2 12.0 −2003
19.2 115.5 131.1 6.0 125.1 570.1 560.8 9.2 76.7 0.2 11.5 −2003          July
19.1 114.0 131.3 6.0 125.3 571.2 561.9 9.3 76.2 0.2 11.6 −         Aug 
19.1 111.8 131.7 5.9 125.8 571.5 562.2 9.3 75.8 0.2 11.6 −         Sep 
18.6 109.8 131.9 6.0 125.9 572.6 563.3 9.3 76.2 0.2 11.9 −         Oct 
18.1 107.8 130.9 6.1 124.8 573.6 564.5 9.1 76.4 0.2 12.0 −         Nov 
18.9 106.7 134.3 6.1 128.2 583.5 574.3 9.2 76.5 0.2 12.0 −         Dec 
Changes*
− 1.3 −10.9 + 5.4 + 0.1 + 5.3 + 0.9 + 1.3 −0.5 −0.7 −0.0 + 0.3 −2002
− 0.7 −21.6 + 4.7 −0.2 + 4.9 + 14.7 + 14.4 + 0.3 −4.6 + 0.0 + 0.6 −2003
− 0.4 − 1.8 −0.1 −0.1 −0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 −0.5 − + 0.0 −2003          July
− 0.1 − 1.5 + 0.2 −0.1 + 0.2 + 1.1 + 1.1 + 0.0 −0.5 + 0.0 + 0.1 −         Aug 
+ 0.0 − 2.2 + 0.4 −0.0 + 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.0 −0.4 −0.0 −0.0 −         Sep 
− 0.5 − 2.0 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.3 −         Oct 
− 0.5 − 2.0 −1.0 + 0.1 −1.1 + 1.0 + 1.2 −0.2 + 0.2 − + 0.2 −         Nov 
+ 0.7 − 1.1 + 3.4 + 0.0 + 3.4 + 9.9 + 9.8 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 −         Dec 
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). —3Excluding deposits liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. —5Included in
under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 2). —4Including time deposits. DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
 
   
 
 
 
Local authorities and local authority associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans   Period
End of year or month*
 
27.8 9.2 13.8 1.8 3.1 0.2 28.7 2.7 19.5 5.4 1.1 0.1 2001
27.6 10.5 12.2 2.0 3.0 0.2 21.7 2.7 13.7 4.5 0.9 0.1 200224.8 9.9 10.1 1.9 2.8 0.2 20.6 2.8 12.5 4.5 0.8 0.0 2003
23.0 8.2 10.1 1.9 2.8 0.2 21.3 2.3 13.3 4.9 0.8 0.0 2003          July
24.9 9.2 11.0 1.9 2.8 0.2 19.4 2.0 12.5 4.1 0.8 0.0          Aug 
23.0 8.3 10.0 1.9 2.8 0.2 18.4 2.4 11.1 4.2 0.8 0.0          Sep 
22.7 8.6 9.4 1.9 2.8 0.2 16.9 2.1 9.7 4.3 0.8 0.0          Oct 
23.5 9.1 9.7 1.9 2.8 0.2 19.3 2.8 11.3 4.4 0.8 0.0          Nov 24.8 9.9 10.1 1.9 2.8 0.2 20.6 2.8 12.5 4.5 0.8 0.0          Dec 
Changes*
+ 0.0 + 1.3 −1.4 + 0.2 −0.1 + 0.0 −7.0 −0.0 −5.7 −1.0 −0.3 −0.0 2002
−2.8 −0.5 −2.1 −0.0 −0.2 + 0.0 −0.4 + 0.1 −1.3 + 0.9 −0.1 −0.0 2003
−0.4 −0.3 −0.2 + 0.1 −0.0 + 0.0 −1.6 −1.2 −0.4 −0.1 −0.0 −2003          July
+ 1.9 + 1.0 + 0.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −1.1 −0.3 −0.9 + 0.1 + 0.0 −0.0          Aug 
−1.9 −0.9 −1.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −0.9 + 0.4 −1.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 −0.0          Sep 
−0.3 + 0.4 −0.5 −0.1 −0.1 + 0.0 −1.6 −0.2 −1.4 + 0.1 −0.0 −0.0          Oct 
+ 0.8 + 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.4 + 0.7 + 1.5 + 0.2 + 0.0 −         Nov 
+ 1.3 + 0.8 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.3 −0.1 + 1.2 + 0.1 −0.1 −0.0          Dec 
Monthly Report , are not specially marked. —1Federal Railways Fund, liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. —3Including
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special deposits under savings and loan contracts. —4Excluding deposits under
Fund, ”German Unity ”Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. —2Including savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
37*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
IV Banks
 
10 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs)*
 
 
 5  billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at three months ’ at more than three Memo
notice months ’ notice item of which
Interest With
of which of which of which credited maturities
Special Special At three on of moresavings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months ’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities  
2 facilities  2 non-banks
End of year or month*
 
2001 586.5 574.5 461.9 327.2 112.7 97.2 12.0 8.8 19.9 112.8 106.0 87.2 6.8
2002 586.2 575.3 472.8 343.5 102.4 88.5 10.9 8.1 17.6 111.3 104.4 86.3 6.92003 600.4 590.3 500.8 377.1 89.5 76.4 10.1 7.9 16.0 107.2 100.3 83.9 7.0
2003          Aug 588.4 578.0 489.3 365.0 88.8 76.3 10.3 8.1 0.4 107.1 100.4 84.1 6.7
         Sep 588.5 578.3 490.2 365.9 88.1 75.6 10.2 8.0 0.4 106.5 99.9 83.6 6.7
         Oct 589.5 579.4 491.2 367.5 88.2 75.4 10.1 8.0 0.4 106.6 100.0 83.7 6.7
         Nov 590.4 580.3 491.9 369.7 88.4 75.6 10.0 7.9 0.4 107.1 100.1 83.9 7.0         Dec 600.4 590.3 500.8 377.1 89.5 76.4 10.1 7.9 10.9 107.2 100.3 83.9 7.0
Changes*
2002 −0.3 + 0.8 + 11.0 + 16.4 −10.2 −8.7 −1.1 −0.7 . −1.5 −1.6 −0.9 + 0.1
2003 + 14.2 + 15.1 + 28.0 + 23.8 −12.9 −12.1 −0.8 −0.2 . −4.6 −4.8 −3.0 + 0.1
2003          Aug + 1.2 + 1.3 + 2.8 + 2.9 −1.5 −1.5 −0.1 −0.0 . −0.5 −0.5 −0.3 + 0.0
         Sep + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.9 + 0.9 −0.7 −0.7 −0.1 −0.0 . −0.6 −0.5 −0.5 −0.0
         Oct + 1.0 + 1.1 + 1.0 + 1.0 + 0.1 −0.2 −0.1 −0.1 . + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 −0.0
         Nov + 0.8 + 0.9 + 0.7 + 1.4 + 0.3 + 0.2 −0.1 −0.1 . + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.4
         Dec + 10.0 + 10.0 + 8.9 + 7.0 + 1.1 + 0.9 + 0.0 + 0.0 . + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 −0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the loan contracts, which are classified as time deposits. —2Savings deposits
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the minimum or basic rate of
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly interest. —3Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
Report , are not specially marked. —1Excluding deposits under savings and securities. 
 
   
11 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany
*
 
 5  billion
Non-negotiable bearer debt securities
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper and money market paper  6 
of which of which
with maturities of Subordinated
with maturities of
Certifi- more more non-
Floating Zero Foreign cates up to and more up to and more than 1 year than 1 year negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of including including than including including than debt debt
Period Total  1 bonds  2 deposit 1 year  1 Total 1 year 2 years 2 years bonds  2,3 bonds  4,5 2 years  1 2 years  1 securities securities
End of year or month*)
 
2001 1,472.3 324.0 16.3 144.1 17.6 46.5 124.9 1,300.9 5.8 3.7 1.0 1.2 43.3 2.4
2002 1,462.9 339.2 16.1 159.5 34.7 62.3 120.1 1,280.5 9.9 7.8 0.7 1.3 42.4 2.32003 1,490.1 353.4 21.4 177.5 39.0 70.1 105.2 1,314.8 2.4 0.6 0.5 1.2 40.2 3.2
2003          Aug 1,487.0 342.1 22.1 179.9 35.6 68.0 101.0 1,318.0 2.2 0.5 0.5 1.2 39.4 3.0
         Sep 1,490.7 339.4 21.8 180.8 37.4 69.2 100.9 1,320.6 2.3 0.5 0.5 1.3 39.9 3.0
         Oct 1,502.7 347.4 20.7 186.9 40.4 70.7 104.8 1,327.1 2.3 0.5 0.5 1.3 40.2 3.2
         Nov 1,509.0 351.1 21.5 182.2 39.4 73.0 105.5 1,330.5 2.2 0.4 0.5 1.3 40.2 3.2         Dec 1,490.1 353.4 21.4 177.5 39.0 70.1 105.2 1,314.8 2.4 0.6 0.5 1.2 40.2 3.2
Changes*
2002 + 9.1 + 6.3 −4.5 + 12.1 + 16.2 + 14.2 + 4.6 − 9.7 + 4.8 + 4.9 −0.3 + 0.2 −1.9 −0.1
2003 + 19.6 + 7.0 + 5.3 + 13.2 + 3.2 + 0.1 −14.9 + 34.4 + 2.6 + 2.9 −0.2 −0.1 −1.5 + 0.3
2003          Aug − 7.5 −2.7 −1.4 + 2.9 −6.6 −11.5 − 4.1 + 8.0 −0.0 + 0.0 −0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1
         Sep + 3.7 −2.7 −0.3 + 0.9 + 1.8 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 2.7 + 0.1 + 0.1 −0.0 + 0.0 + 0.5 −0.0
         Oct + 12.0 + 7.8 −1.1 + 6.1 + 3.0 + 1.6 + 4.0 + 6.5 −0.0 −0.1 + 0.0 − + 0.3 + 0.1
         Nov + 6.3 + 3.7 + 0.8 −4.7 −1.0 + 2.3 + 0.6 + 3.4 −0.0 −0.0 + 0.0 −0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0
         Dec −18.8 + 1.8 −0.7 −4.7 −0.4 −2.9 − 0.3 −15.7 + 0.1 + 0.2 −0.0 −0.0 + 0.1 −0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the 2Including debt securities denominated in foreign currencies. —3Issue
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as value when floated. —4Including floating rate notes and zero coupon
provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly bonds denominated in foreign currencies. —5Bonds denominated in
Report , are not specially marked. —1Decreases in June 2002 caused by non-euro-area currencies. —6Non-negotiable bearer debt securities are
transition to net recording of debt securities outstanding (ie less own debt classified among bank savings bonds (see also Table IV.10, foo tnote 3). 
securities). The statistical break has been eliminated from the changes. —
38*IV Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
IV  Banks
  
12  Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany*
  Interim statements
  
 5  billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs)  5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memo
bal- item ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer New
and Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- enteredof Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations total loans  
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month  8 loans)  1 paper)  4 serves)  7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2002 28 163.8 25.2 0.2 11.7 40.8 58.6 7.9 10.4 0.4 29.5 100.8 3.5 6.9 7.1 79.6
2003          Oct 27 168.9 27.6 0.1 10.7 38.0 63.5 8.8 11.1 0.4 29.7 103.2 3.8 7.2 7.1 8.9
         Nov 27 170.0 28.4 0.1 10.7 37.6 64.0 9.0 11.1 0.4 30.0 103.6 3.9 7.1 7.2 9.0         Dec 27 172.9 30.1 0.1 10.6 37.3 63.6 8.6 11.3 0.4 29.3 106.8 4.0 7.1 7.2 14.3
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2003          Oct 16 121.5 21.4 0.1 5.5 24.4 45.9 8.1 7.7 0.3 21.6 70.3 3.6 7.2 4.6 5.8         Nov 16 122.5 22.2 0.1 5.5 24.1 46.3 8.2 7.7 0.3 21.9 70.5 3.7 7.1 4.7 5.7         Dec 16 124.4 22.7 0.1 5.6 23.9 45.8 7.8 8.0 0.3 20.6 72.7 3.8 7.1 4.7 9.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2003          Oct 11 47.4 6.1 0.1 5.2 13.6 17.5 0.7 3.4 0.1 8.2 33.0 0.2 − 2.5 3.0
         Nov 11 47.5 6.2 0.1 5.2 13.5 17.6 0.7 3.4 0.1 8.1 33.0 0.2 − 2.5 3.3
         Dec 11 48.5 7.5 0.1 5.0 13.4 17.7 0.7 3.3 0.1 8.7 34.1 0.2 − 2.5 5.3
Trends in building and loan association business
  
 5  billion
Changes in deposits Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans  10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings andments loan contracts loan contracts  
9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited interim deposits of which of which
on under Applied Applied and ofwhich of Memo Amounts deposits
cancelled to settle- to settle- bridging
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which item paid intosavings savings and which interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housing
and and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonusesloan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts  
9 tions  11 ceived  12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2002 22.9 2.7 4.3 44.0 29.4 40.6 17.2 3.8 9.3 3.1 14.2 10.9 7.8 14.2 11.2 0.5
2003          Oct 2.0 0.1 0.5 4.4 2.9 4.0 1.6 0.4 0.8 0.3 1.6 12.5 8.2 1.1 0.0
         Nov 2.0 0.1 0.4 3.6 2.0 3.2 1.3 0.3 0.6 0.2 1.4 12.6 8.2 1.1 0.0         Dec 3.3 2.5 0.8 3.6 2.2 4.3 1.7 0.3 0.7 0.2 1.9 12.2 8.0 1.5 ... 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2003          Oct 1.4 0.0 0.3 3.1 1.9 2.9 1.1 0.3 0.5 0.2 1.3 7.8 4.2 0.8 0.0         Nov 1.3 0.0 0.2 2.4 1.2 2.3 0.8 0.2 0.4 0.2 1.1 7.8 4.1 0.8 0.0         Dec 2.4 1.7 0.6 2.5 1.3 3.2 1.2 0.2 0.5 0.2 1.5 7.6 4.0 1.1 ... 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2003          Oct 0.6 0.0 0.2 1.3 1.0 1.1 0.5 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.3 4.7 4.0 0.4 0.0         Nov 0.7 0.0 0.2 1.2 0.9 0.9 0.4 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.3 4.8 4.1 0.4 0.0         Dec 0.9 0.8 0.2 1.1 0.9 1.1 0.5 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.3 4.6 4.0 0.4 ... 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are count as new contracts. —9For disbursements of deposits under savings
not specially marked. —1Including postal giro account balances, claims on and loan contracts arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capital
building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt securities disbursed “.—10Including housing bonuses credited. —11Only allocations
and central bank credit balances. —2Loans under savings and loan accepted by the beneficiaries; including allocations applied to settlement of
contracts and interim and bridging loans. —3Including money market interim and bridging loans. —12The amounts already credited to the
paper and small amounts of other securities issued by banks. —4Including accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in “Amounts paid into
equalisation claims. —5Including liabilities to building and loan savings and loan accounts “and “Interest and repayments received on
associations. —6Including small amounts of savings deposits. —7Including building loans “. 
participation rights capital and fund for general banking risks. —8Total
39*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
IV  Banks
  
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs)*
  
  
 5  billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
Loans Credit  balances and loans
German   
banks to German
(MFIs)   non-banks
withforeign foreignbranches Money of which Money
branches  1 
and/or and/or market enter- to marketforeign foreign Balance paper, prises foreign paper,subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- and indi- non- secur- Other
Period diaries diaries total Total Total banks banks Total Total Total viduals banks ities  
2 assets ities 2,3 
Foreign  branches End of year or month*
  
2000 71 212 1,558.2 829.4 722.1 211.0 511.1 107.3 656.7 501.5 21.7 17.1 479.9 155.2 72.0
2001 68 216 1,689.3 870.6 761.6 213.6 548.0 109.0 744.9 549.0 20.6 17.2 528.4 195.9 73.92002 60 205 1,407.4 679.9 572.3 198.3 374.0 107.6 668.5 484.0 18.8 15.0 465.1 184.6 59.0
2003          Feb 60 206 1,439.6 693.9 592.3 197.4 394.8 101.6 691.5 506.8 18.4 15.2 488.4 184.7 54.2
         Mar 60 206 1,402.0 669.4 564.6 186.0 378.5 104.9 684.0 500.4 17.4 14.8 483.0 183.6 48.6
         Apr 59 205 1,429.4 659.8 553.6 192.2 361.4 106.2 720.2 535.3 18.1 15.5 517.2 184.9 49.5
         May 58 205 1,429.1 660.4 560.4 192.7 367.6 100.0 714.1 529.3 17.9 14.7 511.4 184.9 54.6         Jun 58 205 1,455.9 672.3 580.1 190.6 389.5 92.2 716.6 524.9 17.3 14.8 507.6 191.7 67.0
         Jul 55 202 1,434.0 651.3 570.4 192.4 377.9 81.0 704.0 492.8 19.2 16.0 473.5 211.3 78.6
         Aug 54 202 1,415.0 627.2 551.3 177.8 373.5 75.8 717.8 504.8 19.5 15.8 485.3 213.0 70.0         Sep 54 201 1,380.3 634.8 560.8 171.2 389.6 74.0 685.3 484.2 19.1 16.3 465.0 201.2 60.1
         Oct 55 200 1,368.7 621.8 540.7 168.3 372.5 81.1 680.1 476.0 20.0 16.5 456.0 204.1 66.8
         Nov 55 201 1,356.0 618.6 539.3 173.7 365.6 79.2 670.9 471.2 18.3 15.7 452.8 199.7 66.6
Changes*
2001 −3 + 4 + 99.1 + 24.8 + 26.1 + 2.3 + 23.8 −1.3 + 72.7 + 35.6 −1.1 −0.0 + 36.7 + 37.1 + 1.6
2002 −8 −11 −139.1 −133.4 −139.9 −15.4 −124.5 + 6.5 −3.6 −9.2 −1.9 −2.2 −7.3 + 5.7 −2.2
2003          Feb −− − 28.1 −32.0 −31.0 −5.1 −25.9 −1.0 + 10.3 + 9.6 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 9.6 + 0.7 −6.4
         Mar −− − 32.3 −22.7 −26.1 −11.4 −14.7 + 3.4 −4.7 −4.3 −1.0 −0.4 −3.3 −0.4 −4.9
         Apr −1 −1 + 37.5 −6.3 −7.8 + 6.2 −14.0 + 1.6 + 41.8 + 39.1 + 0.7 + 0.7 + 38.4 + 2.7 + 1.9
         May −1 − + 25.6 + 8.8 + 14.3 + 0.5 + 13.7 −5.5 + 8.7 + 5.0 −0.2 −0.8 + 5.2 + 3.7 + 8.1
         Jun −− + 12.3 + 7.1 + 15.2 −2.1 + 17.3 −8.1 −5.5 −10.3 −0.6 + 0.1 −9.7 + 4.8 + 10.7
         Jul −3 −3 −26.6 −22.6 −11.3 + 1.8 −13.1 −11.3 −15.1 −34.0 + 1.9 + 1.2 −35.9 + 18.9 + 11.2
         Aug −1 −− 37.1 −30.3 −24.8 −14.6 −10.2 −5.5 + 3.5 + 4.6 + 0.3 −0.2 + 4.3 −1.1 −10.2
         Sep −− 1 −9.1 + 15.8 + 17.0 −6.6 + 23.5 −1.2 −18.0 −9.8 −0.4 + 0.5 −9.4 −8.2 −6.9
         Oct + 1 −1 −13.6 −13.7 −20.8 −3.0 −17.8 + 7.1 −6.4 −8.9 + 0.9 + 0.2 −9.8 + 2.5 + 6.5
         Nov − + 1 + 10.8 + 4.9 + 6.0 + 5.5 + 0.5 −1.1 + 3.8 + 4.6 −1.7 −0.8 + 6.3 −0.8 + 2.1
  
  
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month*
  
2000 40 170 580.5 248.1 183.8 82.2 101.6 64.3 263.5 203.4 45.4 42.3 158.0 60.1 69.0
2001 46 200 811.5 342.4 262.8 105.7 157.1 79.6 382.2 293.1 51.9 47.7 241.2 89.2 87.02002 47 200 704.2 333.7 265.5 125.7 139.8 68.2 300.1 239.1 46.7 42.9 192.4 61.0 70.4
2003          Feb 47 197 670.6 309.9 241.7 116.3 125.4 68.2 289.9 226.1 44.5 41.9 181.6 63.8 70.8
         Mar 47 194 656.7 305.7 237.1 119.8 117.3 68.6 283.9 223.7 43.0 40.7 180.7 60.3 67.1
         Apr 48 195 652.2 303.7 236.3 122.4 114.0 67.4 282.3 220.8 42.2 39.9 178.6 61.5 66.3
         May 48 195 645.0 300.0 234.0 119.7 114.2 66.1 278.0 215.8 42.7 39.0 173.1 62.2 66.9         Jun 48 196 651.1 302.6 236.8 123.4 113.3 65.9 283.2 220.3 41.9 38.7 178.5 62.9 65.3
         Jul 47 195 668.1 323.1 255.1 127.5 127.6 68.0 278.0 215.0 41.2 38.5 173.7 63.0 67.1
         Aug 47 194 666.8 313.5 246.2 126.4 119.8 67.3 284.9 219.6 41.8 38.7 177.8 65.3 68.4         Sep 47 190 661.6 311.9 248.2 131.2 117.1 63.6 274.6 209.8 40.3 37.4 169.5 64.8 75.1
         Oct 46 187 652.0 308.5 244.4 128.1 116.3 64.1 272.2 206.3 39.3 36.9 167.0 65.9 71.4
         Nov 46 182 649.9 308.4 244.9 128.7 116.3 63.5 270.2 204.5 39.8 37.0 164.7 65.7 71.3
Changes*
2001 + 6 + 30 +229.9 + 92.5 + 78.0 + 23.5 + 54.6 + 14.5 +119.5 + 89.1 + 6.5 + 5.3 + 82.7 + 30.4 + 17.92002 + 1
+ 0 −78.3 + 6.7 + 13.3 + 20.0 −6.7 −6.6 −70.0 −42.0 −5.2 −4.8 −36.8 −28.1 −15.0
2003          Feb −− 1 −5.4 −1.1 −1.5 −5.1 + 3.7 + 0.3 −3.9 −5.0 −0.9 −0.9 −4.1 + 1.1 −0.4
         Mar −− 3 −12.2 −3.4 −4.0 + 3.5 −7.5 + 0.6 −5.2 −1.7 −1.5 −1.3 −0.2 −3.5 −3.6
         Apr + 1 + 1 −1.2 −0.5 + 0.1 + 2.5 −2.4 −0.7 −0.0 −1.2 −0.8 −0.8 −0.4 + 1.2 −0.7
         May −− + 0.1 −0.0 −0.1 −2.6 + 2.5 + 0.1 −0.8 −1.6 + 0.5 −0.9 −2.1 + 0.8 + 1.0
         Jun − + 1 + 2.3 + 0.6 + 1.6 + 3.7 −2.1 −1.0 + 3.5 + 2.9 −0.9 −0.3 + 3.8 + 0.6 −1.8
         Jul −1 −1 + 15.9 + 20.0 + 18.0 + 4.0 + 14.0 + 2.0 −5.8 −6.0 −0.6 −0.2 −5.4 + 0.2 + 1.7
         Aug −− 1 −6.0 −12.0 −10.3 −1.1 −9.2 −1.6 + 4.8 + 2.6 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 2.0 + 2.2 + 1.1
         Sep −− 4 + 2.1 + 1.8 + 4.2 + 4.8 −0.6 −2.4 −6.9 −6.5 −1.5 −1.3 −5.0 −0.4 + 7.1
         Oct −1 −3 −10.2 −3.8 −4.1 −3.1 −1.1 + 0.3 −2.6 −3.6 −1.0 −0.5 −2.6 + 1.0 −3.8
         Nov −− 5 + 2.2 + 2.1 + 2.0 + 0.6 + 1.4 + 0.2 −0.3 −0.1 + 0.5 + 0.1 −0.7 −0.2 + 0.3
*From March 2000, including the foreign branches of building and loan population have not been eliminated from the flow figures for the foreign
associations. In this table “foreign “also includes the country of domicile of subsidiaries.) The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as
the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical revisions have been provisional; subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly
eliminated from the changes. (Breaks owing to changes in the reporting Report, are not specially marked. —1Several branches in a given
40*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
IV  Banks
  
      
  
Deposits
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  4 
Money
Short-term market Medium  and long-term
paper
of which of which and debt
enter- enter- Working securities
out- capital Other prises  and prises  and
German Foreign indi- indi- Foreign stand- and own liabil-
Total Total banks Total Total Total viduals Total viduals ing  5 funds ities  6   Period banks non-banks
End of year or month* Foreign  branches
  
1,186.1 799.5 158.2 641.4 386.5 60.9 58.4 51.6 2.5 2.4 325.7 272.3 22.0 77.9 2000
1,271.3 855.3 194.0 661.2 416.0 57.4 54.2 51.2 3.2 3.0 358.6 316.8 24.0 77.2 20011,116.0 758.5 250.1 508.4 357.5 62.6 58.4 55.0 4.2 3.8 294.9 212.1 25.9 53.6 2002
1,158.7 771.4 244.9 526.6 387.3 71.1 65.8 62.0 5.3 5.0 316.2 199.0 26.2 55.6 2003          Feb
1,128.7 755.1 254.7 500.4 373.7 71.7 66.3 62.3 5.4 5.1 302.0 191.6 26.2 55.5          Mar
1,172.9 776.6 267.5 509.1 396.3 73.9 68.7 64.9 5.2 4.9 322.4 178.5 24.8 53.2          Apr
1,181.0 774.5 273.5 501.0 406.5 73.6 68.5 63.8 5.1 4.8 332.9 167.2 24.7 56.2          May1,205.6 795.5 286.5 508.9 410.1 71.9 66.8 62.5 5.1 4.8 338.2 165.5 24.8 60.1          Jun
1,178.6 779.5 292.7 486.8 399.0 77.7 72.6 67.5 5.1 4.8 321.4 164.0 24.8 66.6          Jul
1,165.2 787.6 292.0 495.6 377.6 73.2 68.1 63.1 5.1 4.8 304.4 159.5 24.8 65.6          Aug1,143.7 749.9 274.6 475.3 393.8 73.5 68.1 63.3 5.4 5.1 320.3 149.7 24.7 62.2          Sep
1,136.7 739.5 265.4 474.1 397.2 76.4 70.9 66.7 5.5 5.2 320.9 149.0 24.8 58.2          Oct
1,124.7 738.8 261.6 477.2 385.9 69.5 64.0 60.6 5.5 5.2 316.4 149.4 26.6 55.3          Nov
Changes*
+ 53.8 + 36.3 + 35.2 + 1.1 + 17.5 −3.7 −4.4 −0.6 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 21.2 + 44.6 + 2.1 −1.3 2001
−53.4 −31.7 + 56.0 −87.7 −21.7 + 5.2 + 4.2 + 3.8 + 1.0 + 0.8 −26.9 −104.8 + 1.8 + 17.2 2002
−13.0 −17.7 + 0.6 −18.3 + 4.7 + 2.6 + 1.3 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 2.2 −15.2 + 0.3 −0.1 2003          Feb
−26.5 −14.1 + 9.8 −23.9 −12.4 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 −12.9 −7.5 −0.0 + 1.7          Mar
+ 50.8 + 25.8 + 12.8 + 13.1 + 25.0 + 2.2 + 2.5 + 2.6 −0.3 −0.2 + 22.8 −13.0 −1.4 + 1.1          Apr
+ 25.2 + 8.2 + 6.1 + 2.1 + 17.1 −0.3 −0.3 −1.1 −0.0 −0.0 + 17.4 −11.3 −0.1 + 11.8          May
+ 14.7 + 15.1 + 13.0 + 2.1 −0.4 −1.7 −1.7 −1.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.3 −1.7 + 0.0 −0.7          Jun
−30.1 −17.8 + 6.2 −24.0 −12.4 + 5.7 + 5.8 + 4.9 −0.1 −0.1 −18.1 −1.4 + 0.0 + 4.9          Jul
−25.5 + 0.6 −0.7 + 1.3 −26.1 −4.5 −4.5 −4.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 −21.5 −4.6 + 0.0 −7.1          Aug
− 3.9 −27.7 −17.4 −10.3 + 23.8 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 23.5 −9.7 −0.1 + 4.7          Sep
− 8.3 −11.4 −9.2 −2.1 + 3.1 + 2.9 + 2.8 + 3.4 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 −0.8 + 0.1 −4.6          Oct
+ 4.4 + 8.8 −3.7 + 12.5 −4.4 −6.9 −6.9 −6.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.5 + 0.5 + 1.8 + 4.1          Nov
  
  
End of year or month* Foreign  subsidiaries
  
414.6 267.9 61.0 207.0 146.7 32.5 29.2 21.9 3.2 3.2 114.2 56.3 34.7 74.9 2000
576.5 362.5 79.2 283.3 214.0 36.4 32.5 23.9 3.9 3.8 177.6 99.8 47.3 87.9 2001503.5 307.7 99.5 208.2 195.7 27.0 22.5 21.1 4.5 4.5 168.7 78.4 43.0 79.3 2002
474.6 297.1 89.6 207.5 177.5 28.2 23.7 23.1 4.6 4.5 149.3 80.0 42.0 74.0 2003          Feb
463.7 287.2 89.9 197.3 176.4 27.7 23.2 22.9 4.5 4.4 148.8 77.7 41.4 74.0          Mar
464.6 285.4 95.5 189.9 179.2 27.8 23.3 23.0 4.5 4.5 151.4 75.0 41.3 71.4          Apr
459.8 281.3 92.2 189.1 178.5 29.0 24.7 24.4 4.4 4.3 149.4 72.8 41.2 71.1          May465.1 284.0 94.2 189.8 181.1 28.5 24.2 23.7 4.3 4.3 152.6 74.7 41.5 69.8          Jun
477.4 287.0 94.0 192.9 190.4 31.2 26.9 26.6 4.3 4.3 159.2 77.4 42.7 70.7          Jul
477.4 292.2 96.5 195.7 185.2 28.2 23.6 23.3 4.5 4.5 157.1 75.3 43.0 71.1          Aug478.5 292.6 95.8 196.9 185.9 29.8 25.6 25.3 4.2 4.2 156.0 69.3 40.8 73.1          Sep
469.3 288.2 92.9 195.3 181.1 29.6 25.4 23.5 4.3 4.2 151.5 71.0 40.1 71.6          Oct
469.7 291.3 94.9 196.5 178.3 31.0 26.8 24.4 4.2 4.2 147.3 71.9 39.2 69.1          Nov
Changes*
+ 160.9 + 94.6 + 18.2 + 76.3 + 66.4 + 3.9 + 3.3 + 2.0 + 0.6 + 0.6 + 62.5 + 43.6 + 13.7 + 11.7 2001−47.1 −37.4 + 20.3 −57.8 −9.7 −9.4 −10.0 −2.9 + 0.6 + 0.6 −0.3 −21.4 −4.4 −5.4 2002
− 3.6 −1.2 −6.0 + 4.8 −2.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 −2.6 + 2.9 −0.5 −4.2 2003          Feb
− 9.5 −8.9 + 0.3 −9.2 −0.7 −0.6 −0.5 −0.3 −0.1 −0.1 −0.1 −2.3 −0.6 + 0.3          Mar
+ 3.6 −0.1 + 5.6 −5.6 + 3.6 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 3.5 −2.6 −0.1 −2.1          Apr
+ 1.5 + 0.0 −3.3 + 3.3 + 1.5 + 1.2 + 1.4 + 1.4 −0.1 −0.1 + 0.2 −2.2 −0.0 + 0.9          May
+ 2.0 + 0.6 + 2.0 −1.4 + 1.4 −0.5 −0.5 −0.7 −0.1 −0.1 + 1.9 + 1.9 + 0.3 −1.8          Jun
+ 11.4 + 2.4 −0.1 + 2.6 + 9.0 + 2.7 + 2.7 + 2.9 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 6.2 + 2.7 + 1.1 + 0.6          Jul
− 3.8 + 2.7 + 2.4 + 0.3 −6.6 −3.1 −3.3 −3.3 + 0.2 + 0.2 −3.5 −2.1 + 0.3 −0.4          Aug
+ 7.5 + 4.7 −0.7 + 5.4 + 2.8 + 1.7 + 2.0 + 2.0 −0.3 −0.3 + 1.2 −6.0 −2.2 + 2.8          Sep
− 9.7 −4.7 −2.9 −1.9 −5.0 −0.2 −0.3 −1.8 + 0.1 + 0.1 −4.8 + 1.7 −0.6 −1.6          Oct
+ 4.0 + 5.4 + 2.0 + 3.4 −1.5 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 0.9 −0.0 −0.0 −2.8 + 0.9 −0.9 −1.8          Nov
country of domicile are regarded as a single branch. —2Treasury bills, subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt securities. —5Issues of
Treasury discount paper and other money market paper, debt negotiable and non-negotiable debt securities and money market
securities. —3Including own debt securities. —4Excluding paper. — 6 Including subordinated liabilities. 
41*IV  Banks

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
V  Minimum reserves
 
1  Reserve ratios
Germany Euro area
 
% of liabilities subject to reserve requirements % of reserve base  1 
Sight Time
Applicable from liabilities liabilities Applicable from Ratio Savings deposits
1995  Aug 1 2    2    1.5    1999  Jan 1 2    
 
   
1Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the appli-
cation of minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of
0% applies pursuant to Article 4 (1)). 
 
  
2  Reserve maintenance in Germany up to the end of 1998
− pursuant to the Minimum Reserves Order of the Bundesbank 
 
DM million
Liabilities subject to reserve requirements Excess reserves  4 
Monthly Required % of the
average  1 Total reserves  2 Level Deficiencies Sight liabilities Time liabilities Savings deposits Actual reserves  3 required  reserves
1995          Dec 2,066,565 579,337 519,456 967,772 36,492 37,337 845 2.3 3
1996          Dec 2,201,464 655,483 474,342 1,071,639 38,671 39,522 851 2.2 41997          Dec 2,327,879 734,986 476,417 1,116,477 40,975 41,721 745 1.8 31998          Dec 2,576,889 865,444 564,878 1,146,567 45,805 46,432 627 1.4 4
1Pursuant to sections 5 to 7 of the Minimum Reserves Order. 2Amount balances of the credit institutions subject to reserve requirements on their
after applying the reserve ratios to the liabilities subject to reserve require- giro accounts at the Bundesbank. — 4 Actual reserves less required reserves. 
ments (section 5 (1) of the Minimum Reserves Order). —3Average credit
 
 
3  Reserve maintenance in euro area
− from 1999, pursuant to the ECB Regulation on the application of minimum reserves in accordance with
Article 19.1 of the Statute of the ESCB 
 
Maintenance Required reserves
period before deduction Required reserves
of lump-sum Lump-sum beginning in  1 after deduction of
Reserve base  2 allowance  3 allowance  4 Deficiencies  7 lump-sum allowance Current account  5 Excess reserves  6 
Euro area (  5  billion)
 
2003          Apr 6,544.6 130.9 0.5 130.3 130.9 0.6 0.0
         May 6,586.3 131.7 0.5 131.2 131.9 0.7 0.0         June 6,606.0 132.1 0.5 131.6 132.2 0.6 0.0
         July 6,633.3 132.7 0.5 132.1 132.8 0.7 0.0
         Aug 6,593.8 131.9 0.5 131.3 132.0 0.6 0.0         Sep 6,588.6 131.8 0.5 131.2 131.9 0.6 0.0
         Oct  
r 6,578.4 131.6 0.5 131.0 131.8 0.7 0.0
         Nov 6,615.0 132.3 0.5 131.8 132.6 0.8 0.0
         Dec  p 6,665.9 133.3 0.6 132.8 133.6 0.9 0.0
Of which:  Germany (  5  million)
2003          Apr 1,906,364 38,127 229 37,898 38,125 227 4
         May 1,911,254 38,225 228 37,997 38,263 266 2         June 1,907,522 38,150 226 37,924 38,150 226 2
         July 1,908,858 38,177 223 37,954 38,216 262 3
         Aug 1,883,921 37,678 221 37,458 37,684 226 3         Sep 1,871,273 37,425 219 37,207 37,455 248 1
         Oct 1,872,119 37,442 218 37,224 37,476 252 5
         Nov 1,863,105 37,262 218 37,044 37,373 329 1         Dec  
p 1,884,373 37,687 217 37,470 37,852 382 0
1Up to December 2003, the Eurosystem ’s reserve maintenance periods 2004. —2Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the
began on the 24th day of each month and ended on the 23rd day of the application of minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve
following month (with the first reserve maintenance period lasting from 1 ratio of 0% applies, pursuant to Article 4 (1)). —3Amount after applying
January 1999 until 23 February 1999). From March 2004, the reserve the reserve ratios to the reserve base. —4Article 5 (2) of the Regulation of
maintenance period will start on the settlement day of the main refinancing the European Central Bank on the application of minimum reserves. —
operation immediately following the meeting of the Governing Council of 5Average credit balances of the credit institutions at the national central
the ECB for which the monthly discussion of the monetary policy stance is banks. —6Average credit balances less required reserves after deduction of
scheduled. For the transitional period, provision has been made for a the lump-sum allowance. —7Required reserves after deduction of the
extended reserve maintenance period lasting from 24 January until 9 March lump-sum allowance. 
42*V  Minimum reserves

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
VI Interest rates
 
1 ECB interest rates 2 Base rates
 
 
% pa % pa
Base rate
as per
Main Main Discount Base rate
Marginal Marginal Rate as per refinancing refinancing
Applicable Deposit lending Applicable Deposit lending Applicable Applicable Civil Code operations operations Transition
from facility 1 facility from facility 1 facility from Act  2 from 3 
1999 Jan                  1 2.00 3.00 4.50 2002 Dec                  6 1.75 2.75 3.75 1999 Jan                  1 2.50 2002 Jan                  1 2.57
         Jan                  4 2.75 3.00 3.25          May                  1 1.95          July                  1 2.47
         Jan                22 2.00 3.00 4.50 2003 Mar                  7 1.50 2.50 3.50
         Apr                  9 1.50 2.50 3.50          June                  6 1.00 2.00 3.00 2000 Jan                  1 2.68 2003 Jan                  1 1.97
         Nov                  5 2.00 3.00 4.00          May                  1 3.42          July                  1 1.22
         Sep                  1 4.26
2000 Feb                  4 2.25 3.25 4.25 2004 Jan                  1 1.14
         Mar                17 2.50 3.50 4.50 2001 Sep                  1 3.62
         Apr                28 2.75 3.75 4.75
         June                 9 3.25 4.25 5.25 2002 Jan                  1 2.71
         Sep                  1 3.50 4.50 5.50          to
         Oct                  6 3.75 4.75 5.75          Apr                  3
 
2001 May               11 3.50 4.50 5.50
         Aug                31 3.25 4.25 5.25
         Sep                18 2.75 3.75 4.75
         Nov                  9 2.25 3.25 4.25
1Up to 21 June 2000 fixed rate tenders, from 28 June 2000 variable rate Act, read in conjunction with the Regulation Governing the Use of the Base
tenders at minimum bid rate. —2Pursuant to the Discount Rate Transition Rate as a Reference Variable. — 3 Pursuant to section 247 of the Civil Code. 
 
 
 
3 Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders
 
 
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid Allotment Minimum Weighted
amount amount Fixed rate bid rate Marginal rate  1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement
 5 
 million % pa ... days
Main refinancing operations
2004 Jan                  6 118,344 80,000 − 2.00 2.02 2.04 15
         Jan                14 166,033 144,000 − 2.00 2.00 2.02 14
         Jan                21 101,083 85,000 − 2.00 2.00 2.01 14
         Jan                28 165,044 139,000 − 2.00 2.01 2.02 14
         Feb                  4 112,763 76,000 − 2.00 2.01 2.02 14
         Feb                11 147,492 137,000 − 2.00 2.00 2.01 12
Longer-term refinancing operations
2003 Oct                30 32,384 15,000 −− 2.13 2.14 91
         Nov                27 25,402 15,000 −− 2.12 2.13 91
         Dec                18 24,988 15,000 −− 2.12 2.14 105
2004 Jan                29 47,117 25,000 −− 2.03 2.04 91
*Source: ECB. —1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were   
allotted or collected.  
 
 
 
4 Money market rates, by month
 
 
% pa
Money market rates reported by Frankfurt banks  1 Euribor  3 
One- One- Three- Six- Nine- Twelve-
week month month month month month
Overnight money Three-month funds Eonia  2 funds funds funds funds funds funds
Reporting Monthly Lowest and Monthly Lowest andperiod averages highest rates averages highest rates Monthly averages
2003          July 2.08 1.86 −2.15 2.11 2.08 −2.14 2.08 2.12 2.13 2.13 2.09 2.07 2.08
         Aug 2.09 2.04 −2.50 2.12 2.10 −2.15 2.10 2.10 2.12 2.14 2.17 2.21 2.28
         Sep 2.03 1.35 −2.15 2.13 2.09 −2.16 2.02 2.11 2.13 2.15 2.18 2.21 2.26
         Oct 2.02 1.40 −2.11 2.13 2.09 −2.16 2.01 2.08 2.10 2.14 2.17 2.23 2.30
         Nov 1.98 1.35 −2.14 2.15 2.11 −2.17 1.97 2.06 2.09 2.16 2.22 2.31 2.41
         Dec 2.01
4 1.55 −2.70 2.13 2.09 −2.16 2.06 2.09 2.13 2.15 2.20 2.28 2.38
2004          Jan 2.02 1.80 −2.09 2.07 2.04 −2.12 2.02 2.06 2.08 2.09 2.12 2.15 2.22
1Money market rates are not fixed or quoted officially; the monthly aver- of real turnover according to the act/360 method and published via
ages computed from daily quotations are unweighted. —2Euro OverNight Moneyline Telerate. —3Euro Interbank Offered Rate: unweighted average
Index Average: weighted average overnight rate for interbank operations rate calculated by Moneyline Telerate since 30 December 1998 according to
calculated by the European Central Bank since 4 January 1999 on the basis the act/360 method. — 4 At end-December, 2.05% to 2.35%. 
43*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates for outstanding amounts and new business of banks (MFIs) in the European monetary union *
a Outstanding amounts o
 
Effective interest rate % pa  1 
Non-financial Loans to households Loans to
Households ’ corporations ’ non-financial
deposits deposits Housing loans Consumer credit and other loans corporations
with an agreed maturity of with a maturity of
over 1 year over 1 year over 1 year
End of up to over up to over up to and up to over up to and up to over up to and up to over
month 2 years 2 years 2 years 2 years 1 year 5 years 5 years 1 year 5 years 5 years 1 year 5 years 5 years
2003          Apr 2.39 3.54 2.53 4.62 5.40 5.26 5.49 8.53 7.45 6.11 4.89 4.61 5.03
         May 2.34 3.47 2.50 4.50 5.33 5.22 5.44 8.52 7.34 6.09 4.83 4.56 4.94         June 2.18 3.47 2.26 4.45 5.30 5.13 5.39 8.47 7.37 6.03 4.72 4.46 4.90
         July 2.08 3.43 2.24 4.40 5.21 5.07 5.31 8.36 7.27 5.96 4.60 4.32 4.80
         Aug 2.04 3.42 2.20 4.26 5.11 4.99 5.25 8.31 7.23 6.07 4.53 4.21 4.74         Sep 2.01 3.44 2.23 4.32 5.05 4.95 5.24 8.34 7.26 6.00 4.55 4.19 4.75
         Oct 1.97 3.47 2.12 4.28 5.04 4.92 5.20 8.17 7.12 5.85 4.55 4.12 4.71
         Nov 1.98 3.44 2.13 4.34 4.96 4.90 5.17 7.98 7.09 5.82 4.51 4.17 4.67         Dec 1.98 3.53 2.15 4.15 4.96 4.88 5.14 8.04 7.05 6.00 4.53 4.23 4.66
 
 
b New business +
 
Effective interest rate % pa  1 
Households ’ deposits Non-financial corporations ’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of with an agreed maturity of
over 1 year over 1 year
Reporting up to and up to over up to over up to and up to over
period Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years
2003          Apr 0.84 2.25 2.56 2.82 2.29 3.14 1.12 2.43 2.37 3.29
         May 0.84 2.23 2.39 2.65 2.23 3.10 1.08 2.43 2.31 2.94         June 0.76 2.00 2.22 2.62 2.21 3.01 1.00 2.10 2.18 3.04
         July 0.68 1.91 2.11 2.34 2.12 2.93 0.88 2.02 2.14 2.73
         Aug 0.68 1.91 2.13 2.53 1.97 2.88 0.89 2.03 2.28 3.55         Sep 0.69 1.87 2.13 2.44 1.98 2.85 0.87 2.00 2.30 3.64
         Oct 0.70 1.89 2.16 2.51 2.03 2.73 0.89 1.98 2.23 3.71
         Nov 0.70 1.87 2.24 2.61 2.00 2.70 0.87 1.97 2.33 2.77         Dec 0.69 1.89 2.40 2.41 2.00 2.68 0.89 2.08 2.41 3.37
 
 
Loans to households
Consumer loans Housing loans Other loans
with an initial rate fixation with an initial rate fixation
over 1 year over 1 year over 1 year over 1 year
Reporting Over- up to and up to over up to and up to and up to over up to and up to over
period drafts Total  2 1 year 5 years 5 years Total  2 1 year 5 years 10 years 10 years 1 year 5 years 5 years
2003          Apr 9.89 8.15 7.44 6.99 8.32 4.67 4.07 4.32 5.00 5.03 4.71 5.30 5.33
         May 9.86 8.16 7.63 6.98 8.34 4.56 3.93 4.29 4.94 4.91 4.44 5.35 5.32         June 9.89 8.02 7.10 6.94 8.28 4.42 3.80 4.16 4.76 4.78 4.12 4.97 4.91
         July 9.76 7.92 7.24 7.04 8.20 4.33 3.68 3.92 4.64 4.68 4.11 4.95 4.98
         Aug 9.74 8.04 7.69 6.84 8.28 4.41 3.64 3.96 4.69 4.69 4.13 5.00 4.98         Sep 9.75 8.01 7.40 6.89 8.04 4.41 3.63 4.10 4.81 4.75 3.98 5.00 5.11
         Oct 9.72 7.91 7.18 6.74 8.07 4.40 3.62 4.02 4.87 4.78 4.05 5.09 5.21
         Nov 9.64 7.84 7.56 6.59 7.93 4.42 3.59 4.09 4.92 4.84 4.15 5.25 5.17         Dec 9.70 7.70 7.63 6.43 7.63 4.46 3.63 4.16 5.02 4.95 3.83 5.00 5.08
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations
Loans up to 
 5 
 1 million with an initial rate fixation Loans over 
 5 
 1 million with an initial rate fixation
Reporting over 1 year and over 1 year and
period Overdrafts up to 1 year up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year up to 5 years over 5 years
2003          Apr 5.85 4.57 4.89 5.04 3.50 3.69 4.58
         May 5.82 4.47 4.86 4.96 3.40 3.57 4.36         June 5.68 4.20 4.60 4.89 3.14 3.39 4.18
         July 5.56 4.15 4.59 4.73 3.07 3.14 4.00
         Aug 5.47 4.17 4.65 4.77 3.18 3.41 4.36         Sep 5.46 4.08 4.79 4.76 3.11 3.32 4.28
         Oct 5.46 4.14 4.76 4.83 3.08 3.26 4.33
         Nov 5.41 4.10 4.94 4.71 3.02 3.30 4.17         Dec 5.58 4.03 4.85 4.81 3.12 3.42 4.33
Source: ECB. —For footnotes *, o and 1see p 45. For footnote + see p 46. — administration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and credit
2Annual percentage rate of charge as defined in Directive 87/102/EEC, insurance. 
which contains other related charges which may occur for enquiries,
44*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
a Outstanding amounts o
 
Households ’ deposits Non-financial corporations ’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 yearsEffective Effective Effective Effective
End of interest rate  
1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 
month % pa
 5 
 million % pa
 5 
 million % pa
 5 
 million % pa
 5 
 million
2003          Jan 2.65 151,997 3.33 184,483 2.72 78,517 5.00 30,799
         Feb 2.53 149,588 3.33 188,293 2.60 79,509 5.05 30,693         Mar 2.45 147,530 3.31 188,390 2.52 77,837 5.00 29,937
         Apr 2.38 144,900 3.30 188,257 2.47 78,278 5.09 29,035
         May 2.36 144,074 3.28 188,011 2.44 79,303 5.08 28,165         June 2.15 139,931 3.27 187,960 2.13 76,477 5.09 28,180
         July 2.06 137,602 3.25 187,705 2.07 77,253 5.06 28,346
         Aug 2.04 135,705 3.24 187,639 2.05 80,491 5.03 28,452         Sep 2.00 133,458 3.23 187,511 2.04 77,051 5.04 29,069
         Oct 1.99 131,553 3.22 187,892 2.02 80,075 5.02 29,052
         Nov 1.98 129,649 3.16 186,957 2.02 80,795 4.99 29,633         Dec 2.00 128,564 3.16 190,464 2.05 74,309 4.98 29,368
 
 
Housing loans to households  3 Consumer credit and other loans to households  4, 5 
with a maturity of
over 1 year and over 1 year and
up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
End of rate  1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
month % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa
 5 
 million
 5 
 million
 5 
 million
 5 
 million
 5 
 million
 5 
 million
2003          Jan 5.86 7,556 5.46 31,290 5.96 864,296 9.19 93,025 6.65 71,201 6.41 333,989
         Feb 5.85 7,392 5.45 31,146 5.96 865,776 9.36 92,205 6.63 71,146 6.43 334,186         Mar 5.83 7,445 5.41 31,086 5.95 872,486 9.32 92,563 6.63 71,519 6.42 327,047
         Apr 5.77 7,375 5.36 31,074 5.94 872,835 9.21 91,072 6.61 71,614 6.42 328,610
         May 5.70 7,482 5.32 31,264 5.93 874,918 9.18 89,467 6.56 71,774 6.41 328,951         June 5.72 7,870 5.27 32,349 5.91 874,476 9.19 91,794 6.55 70,545 6.40 330,208
         July 5.53 7,737 5.20 32,621 5.88 876,065 9.01 89,466 6.49 71,055 6.36 332,013
         Aug 5.54 7,963 5.15 32,709 5.87 877,688 8.91 87,862 6.40 71,011 6.34 333,305         Sep 5.48 8,022 5.11 32,871 5.85 879,014 8.94 90,945 6.38 70,957 6.34 333,058
         Oct 5.50 7,772 5.07 33,146 5.83 882,447 8.89 89,093 6.36 70,809 6.32 332,152
         Nov 5.44 7,751 5.04 33,167 5.82 884,545 8.74 84,602 6.33 70,975 6.30 331,730         Dec 5.55 7,756 5.01 33,053 5.79 886,165 8.89 88,557 6.35 70,445 6.28 329,920
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 
month % pa
 5 
 million % pa
 5 
 million % pa
 5 
 million
2003          Jan 5.22 205,132 4.93 88,111 5.55 491,747
         Feb 5.32 203,528 4.96 87,569 5.54 491,589         Mar 5.25 200,784 4.90 87,358 5.51 488,963
         Apr 5.19 197,032 4.84 87,555 5.49 490,877
         May 5.16 194,503 4.81 87,344 5.47 491,026         June 5.05 200,061 4.68 87,487 5.45 487,707
         July 4.92 192,725 4.58 87,735 5.42 487,473
         Aug 4.89 188,935 4.54 88,871 5.40 489,036         Sep 4.88 193,086 4.51 88,151 5.39 486,570
         Oct 4.83 188,707 4.48 88,246 5.37 487,573
         Nov 4.75 190,666 4.48 88,462 5.36 489,132         Dec 4.83 187,698 4.46 88,025 5.33 488,716
*The MFI interest rate statistics are based on the interest rates applied by as annualised agreed interest rates or as narrowly defined effective rates .
MFIs and the related volumes of euro-denominated deposits and loans to Both calculation methods cover all interest payments on deposits and loans
households and non-financial corporations domiciled in the euro area. The but not any other related charges which may occur for enquiries, adminis-household sector comprises individuals (including sole proprietors) and tration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and credit insurance.non-profit institutions serving households. Non-financial corporations in- Disagios are regarded as interest payments and included in the intere st rate
clude all enterprises other than insurance companies, banks and other finan- calculation. The annualised agreed interest rate and the narrowly defi ned
cial institutions. The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis effective rate differ in the underlying method of annualising intere st rate
in the euro area from January 2003 are being collected in Germany on a payments. —2Data based on monthly balance sheet statistics. —3Secured
sample basis. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as provi- and unsecured loans for home purchase, including building and home im-sional. Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are provements; including loans granted by building and loan associations a nd
not specially marked. Further information on the new interest rate statistics interim credits as well as transmitted loans granted by the reporting a gents
can be found on the Bundesbank ’s website (Statistics / Reporting System / in their own name and for their own account. —4Consumer credits are
Banking statistics / EWU-Zinsstatistik). This information is currently available loans granted for the purpose of personal use in the consumption o f goods
in German only. —oThe statistics on outstanding amounts are collected at and services. —5For the purpose of these statistics, other loans are loans
the end of the month. Non-performing loans and loans for debt granted for other purposes such as business, debt consolidation, educationrestructuring at interest rates below market rates are not included in the etc. — 6 Including overdrafts. 
calculation. —1The effective interest rates may always be calculated either
45*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont ’d)
b New business +
 
Households ’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of  8 
over 1 year and
Overnight up to 1 year up to 2 years over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate  1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa
 5 
 million
 5 
 million
 5 
 million
 5 
 million
 5 
 million
 5 
 million
2003          Jan 1.20 367,117 2.60 38,283 3.06 2,532 3.52 3,568 2.39 478,755 3.31 100,457
         Feb 1.25 373,381 2.42 30,394 2.89 1,263 3.17 3,649 2.36 481,714 3.27 99,280         Mar 1.24 378,520 2.37 34,735 2.99 1,061 2.99 2,430 2.28 483,370 3.23 97,731
         Apr 1.21 380,747 2.30 34,394 3.01 1,009 2.99 2,876 2.28 484,486 3.17 95,207
         May 1.20 385,009 2.29 30,733 2.69 886 2.92 4,288 2.21 485,156 3.13 93,946         June 1.16 389,213 2.13 31,655 2.69 767 2.82 3,585 2.16 486,111 3.05 92,548
         July 1.06 389,222 1.98 29,175 2.54 665 2.63 1,689 2.11 488,133 2.97 90,491
         Aug 1.05 394,794 2.07 25,650 2.59 627 2.68 1,378 2.08 490,805 2.92 88,948         Sep 1.06 393,137 1.88 28,352 2.46 679 2.73 1,891 2.04 491,693 2.88 88,197
         Oct 1.07 394,958 1.94 28,477 2.47 986 2.93 3,332 2.20 492,668 2.76 88,289
         Nov 1.06 412,862 1.89 24,839 2.52 1,065 3.04 3,325 2.15 493,279 2.73 88,529         Dec 1.08 400,937 1.89 29,428 2.84 1,512 2.91 2,519 2.17 502,167 2.72 89,528
 
 
Non-financial corporations ’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % pa
 5 
 million % pa
 5 
 million % pa
 5 
 million % pa
 5 
 million
2003          Jan 1.42 114,861 2.71 45,720 4.64 307 4.36 1,133
         Feb 1.47 115,231 2.62 39,388 3.35 196 4.48 843         Mar 1.40 112,327 2.48 31,973 2.59 259 4.03 1,664
         Apr 1.39 115,850 2.38 33,955 2.47 196 3.54 1,681
         May 1.39 118,034 2.40 33,417 2.43 56 3.40 502         June 1.25 121,685 2.05 41,507 2.29 322 3.30 887
         July 1.16 120,786 2.03 61,029 2.02 109 4.23 424
         Aug 1.16 118,994 2.00 40,582 2.52 187 3.68 2,473         Sep 1.15 124,565 1.94 34,584 2.61 210 3.92 1,179
         Oct 1.15 127,129 1.93 40,008 2.41 156 4.02 4,523
         Nov 1.07 129,086 1.95 35,693 2.56 256 3.26 1,160         Dec 1.05 138,733 1.96 36,247 2.76 360 4.13 1,370
 
 
Loans to households
Consumer loans with an initial rate fixation of  4 Other loans with an initial rate fixation of  5 
over 1 year and over 1 year and
Total up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years over 5 years
Annual
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective percentage
rate of interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting charge  9 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa
 5 
 million
 5 
 million
 5 
 million
 5 
 million
 5 
 million
 5 
 million
2003          Jan 7.78 5.87 3,776 6.69 4,415 8.88 2,912 4.91 16,141 5.53 1,686 5.76 2,290
         Feb 7.90 5.78 2,160 6.71 5,214 8.92 3,136 4.45 9,944 5.70 1,485 5.51 2,437         Mar 7.84 5.78 2,441 6.67 5,053 8.72 3,966 4.66 13,036 5.35 1,619 5.39 3,140
         Apr 7.82 5.68 2,303 6.67 4,880 8.83 4,109 4.65 8,388 5.27 1,834 5.47 2,764
         May 7.87 5.71 1,520 6.69 4,796 8.94 3,489 4.22 8,472 5.43 1,546 5.39 2,637         June 7.76 5.48 2,443 6.64 4,936 8.87 3,773 3.80 10,157 5.00 1,603 4.93 2,973
         July 7.83 5.58 1,913 6.59 5,969 8.75 4,405 3.76 9,268 4.94 1,802 5.06 2,654
         Aug 7.73 5.57 1,388 6.36 4,844 8.66 3,658 3.84 7,060 4.96 1,461 5.03 2,316         Sep 7.65 5.41 1,785 6.33 5,374 8.36 4,575 3.69 9,281 4.94 1,693 5.24 2,684
         Oct 7.52 5.26 2,631 6.33 5,096 8.42 4,398 3.73 11,515 5.00 3,368 5.26 2,543
         Nov 7.47 5.24 1,532 6.27 5,631 8.32 3,851 3.93 7,820 5.14 1,440 5.21 2,004         Dec 6.90 5.02 1,541 5.80 5,234 7.81 3,701 3.57 12,315 4.93 2,578 5.13 3,978
For footnotes * and 1to6, see p 45*. —+In the case of deposits with an that all outstanding deposit and lending business at the end of the month
agreed maturity and all loans excluding overdrafts, new business covers all has to be incorporated in the calculation of average rates of interest. —
new agreements between households or non-financial corporations and the 7Estimated. The volume of new business is extrapolated to form the
bank. This includes all financial arrangements in which terms have been underlying total using the Horvitz-Thompson estimator. —8Including
agreed for the first time in the reporting month as well as all newly non-financial corporations ’deposits; including fidelity and growth
negotiated (but extant) deposit and lending contracts. The interest rates are premia. —9Annual percentage rate of charge as defined in Directive
calculated as volumeweighted average rates across all new agreements 87/102/EEC, which contains other related charges which may occur for
concluded during the reporting month. In the case of overnight deposits, enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guarantees anddeposits redeemable at notice and overdrafts, new business is collected in credit insurance. — 10 Including variable rate loans; excluding overdrafts. 
the same way as outstanding amounts for the sake of simplicity. This means
46*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
VI Interest rates
 
6 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont ’d)
b New business +
 
Loans to households (cont ’d)
Housing loans with an initial rate fixation of  3 
over 1 year and over 5 years and
Overdrafts  11 Total up to 1 year  10 up to 5 years up to 10 years over 10 years
Annual per-
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective centage rate
Reporting Volume  12 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 interest rate  1 of charge  9 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % pa
 5 
 million % pa % pa
 5 
 milion % pa
 5 
 million % pa
 5 
 million % pa
 5 
 million
2003          Jan 10.57 66,323 5.39 5.45 3,113 4.94 2,871 5.39 6,402 5.38 3,161
         Feb 10.84 65,329 5.18 5.27 2,151 4.76 2,260 5.19 4,859 5.19 3,228         Mar 10.73 66,616 5.07 5.27 2,057 4.60 2,559 5.05 6,252 5.12 3,342
         Apr 10.71 64,751 5.04 5.23 2,321 4.48 3,135 5.03 7,423 5.17 3,661
         May 10.58 62,766 4.97 5.17 1,697 4.46 2,676 4.97 4,755 5.03 3,151         June 10.65 64,982 4.82 5.00 2,253 4.37 2,685 4.80 5,062 4.85 3,149
         July 10.44 63,287 4.69 4.58 2,805 4.16 3,589 4.70 6,864 4.85 3,973
         Aug 10.38 63,305 4.79 4.73 1,695 4.25 2,701 4.81 5,441 4.91 3,600         Sep 10.47 64,592 4.90 4.63 2,033 4.52 3,166 4.96 6,143 5.03 3,584
         Oct 10.41 63,212 4.90 4.44 2,463 4.48 3,292 5.00 6,201 5.08 3,200
         Nov 10.27 59,790 5.00 4.68 1,866 4.62 2,903 5.07 5,368 5.12 3,108         Dec 10.48 62,675 5.06 4.63 2,878 4.75 3,710 5.14 7,473 5.19 3,380
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations
Loans up to 
 5 
 1 million with an initial rate fixation of  13 
Overdrafts  11 up to 1 year  10 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate  1 Volume  12 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % pa
 5 
 million % pa
 5 
 million % pa
 5 
 million % pa
 5 
 million
2003          Jan 6.73 96,563 5.42 8,671 5.29 1,410 5.36 1,636
         Feb 6.84 96,831 4.94 8,189 5.28 1,134 5.32 1,469         Mar 6.76 94,106 4.98 8,664 5.27 1,530 5.28 2,577
         Apr 6.71 91,535 5.06 8,346 5.18 1,489 5.26 1,645
         May 6.64 90,296 4.80 7,566 5.11 1,235 5.16 1,699         June 6.60 93,175 4.49 7,813 4.94 1,008 5.11 1,483
         July 6.51 88,185 4.39 7,881 4.88 1,575 4.90 1,620
         Aug 6.54 86,025 4.36 5,782 4.91 1,626 4.93 1,714         Sep 6.40 88,489 4.52 7,119 5.00 1,205 5.02 1,671
         Oct 6.47 85,930 4.51 7,345 4.99 1,471 5.08 1,868
         Nov 6.36 88,429 4.47 7,001 5.20 1,146 4.95 1,215         Dec 6.44 87,202 4.55 6,977 5.05 1,613 5.14 1,850
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont ’d)
Loans over 
 5 
 1 million with an initial rate fixation of  13 
up to 1 year  10 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 
period % pa
 5 
 million % pa
 5 
 million % pa
 5 
 million
2003          Jan 4.05 42,168 4.27 3,681 4.93 4,988
         Feb 3.88 33,419 4.62 4,027 4.96 4,321         Mar 3.89 37,816 4.86 3,283 4.72 4,631
         Apr 3.87 35,932 4.12 2,944 4.85 5,828
         May 3.62 31,599 3.80 3,613 4.61 6,152         June 3.25 38,751 3.89 3,627 4.26 6,164
         July 3.32 33,140 3.91 2,885 4.27 6,336
         Aug 3.36 27,749 3.84 2,478 4.50 4,873         Sep 3.24 34,013 3.84 3,239 4.72 4,921
         Oct 3.25 34,631 4.06 3,284 4.63 5,125
         Nov 3.16 35,610 3.90 3,669 4.73 4,434         Dec 3.32 41,204 3.87 5,084 4.78 7,640
For footnotes *and 1to6, see p 45*. For footnotes +and 7to10, see The volume of outstanding amounts reported is extrapolated to form the
p 46*. —11Overdrafts are defined as debit balances on current accounts. underlying total using the Horvitz-Thompson estimator. —13The amount
They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether they are within or refers to the single loan transaction considered as new business.  
beyond the limits agreed between customers and the bank. —12Estimated.
47*VI Interest rates

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
VII Capital market
 
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  *)
 
 
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities  1 Residents
Credit in- Bundes-
Sales stitutions bank
= Public Foreign including open
total Bank Indus- debt debt building marketpur- debt trial secur- secur- and loan Non- oper- Non-
Period chases Total securities bonds ities  
2 ities 3 Total  4 assc. 5 banks  6 ations  5 residents  7 
DM million
1991 231,965 219,346 131,670 667 87,011 12,619 173,099 45,095 127,310 694 58,866
1992 291,762 284,054 106,857 − 175 177,376 7,708 170,873 132,236 37,368 1,269 120,887
1993 395,110 382,571 151,812 200 230,560 12,539 183,195 164,436 20,095 − 1,336 211,915
1994 303,339 276,058 117,185 − 65 158,939 27,281 279,989 126,808 154,738 − 1,557 23,349
1995 227,099 203,029 162,538 − 350 40,839 24,070 141,282 49,193 94,409 − 2,320 85,815
1996 254,359 233,519 191,341 649 41,529 20,840 148,250 117,352 31,751 − 853 106,109
1997 332,655 250,688 184,911 1,563 64,214 81,967 204,378 144,177 60,201 − 128,276
1998 418,841 308,201 254,367 3,143 50,691 110,640 245,802 203,342 42,460 − 173,038
 5 
 million
1999 292,663 198,068 156,399 2,184 39,485 94,595 155,766 74,728 81,038 − 136,898
2000 226,594 157,994 120,154 12,605 25,234 68,600 154,089 91,447 62,642 − 72,505
2001 180,899 86,656 55,918 14,473 16,262 94,245 114,467 35,848 78,619 − 66,432
2002 180,957 124,035 47,296 14,506 62,235 56,922 91,562 13,536 78,026 − 89,395
2003 173,415 134,455 31,404 30,262 72,788 38,960 108,733 35,748 72,985 − 64,682
2003          Oct 36,200 26,957 10,387 4,246 12,324 9,243 16,091 12,463 3,628 − 20,109
         Nov 12,218 10,600 9,765 25 809 1,618 15,971 8,488 7,483 −− 3,753
         Dec − 14,378 −12,701 −13,781 1,914 − 834 − 1,677 − 11,742 − 12,344 602 −− 2,636
 
  
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-purchases shares  
8 shares  9 Total  10 tutions  5  11 Non-banks  6 residents  12 
Period
DM million
1991 33,478 13,317 20,161 32,247 2,466 29,781 1,230
1992 32,595 17,226 15,370 40,651 2,984 37,667 − 8,055
1993 39,355 19,512 19,843 30,871 4,133 26,738 8,4851994 55,125 29,160 25,966 54,466 1,622 52,844 659
1995 46,422 23,600 22,822 49,354 11,945 37,409 − 2,931
1996 72,491 34,212 38,280 55,962 12,627 43,335 16,529
1997 119,522 22,239 97,280 96,844 8,547 88,297 22,6771998 249,504 48,796 200,708 149,151 20,252 128,899 100,352
 5 
 million
1999 150,013 36,010 114,005 103,136 18,637 84,499 46,877
2000 139,704 22,733 116,973 159,528 23,293 136,235 − 19,826
2001 82,286 17,575 64,714 − 2,127 − 14,714 12,587 84,412
2002 52,185 9,232 42,954 30,444 − 23,236 53,680 21,740
2003 19,433 16,838 2,595 − 6,105 7,061 − 13,166 25,538
2003          Oct 2,906 744 2,162 − 9,409 454 − 9,863 12,315
         Nov 4,665 5,229 − 564 − 214 6,579 − 6,793 4,879
         Dec 4,710 291 4,419 − 250 2,209 − 2,459 4,960
*Until the end of 1999, debt securities comprise the bonds and money ment funds. —7Net purchases or net sales ( −) of domestic debt securities by
market paper of domestic banks, from January 2000 all fixed-interest non-residents; transaction values. —8At issue prices. —9Net purchases or
securities. Investment fund certificates see Table VII.6. —1Net sales at net sales ( −) of foreign shares (including direct investment) by residents;
market values plus/less changes in issuers ’portfolios of their own debt transaction values. —10Domestic and foreign shares. —11Up to the end
securities. —2Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and of 1998, excluding shares under syndicate agreement. —12Net purchases
Treuhand agency. —3Net purchases or net sales ( −) of foreign debt or net sales ( −) of domestic shares (including direct investment) −before
securities by residents; transaction values. —4Domestic and foreign debt 1989 also including domestic investment fund certificates −by
securities. —5Book values; statistically adjusted. —6Residual; also non-residents; transaction values. —The figures for the latest data are to be
including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic invest- regarded as provisional; corrections are not specially marked.  
48*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
VII Capital market
 
2 Sales of debt securities issued by borrowers domiciled in Germany  *)
 
 
Until the end of 1998 DM nominal million value, from 1999  5  million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item:
Foreign  DM/euro
Mortgage Communal bonds issued Debt securities
bonds bonds issued by spe- by German-
All bank debt (Hypotheken- ( Öffentliche Other bank Industrial Public managed cialised credit
Period Total securities pfandbriefe) Pfandbriefe) institutions bonds  2 syndicates debt securities debt securities  3 
Gross sales  4 
1991 442,089 292,092 19,478 91,489 80,738 100,386 707 149,288 32,832
1992 572,767 318,522 33,633 134,363 49,195 101,333 − 254,244 57,282
1993 733,126 434,829 49,691 218,496 34,028 132,616 457 297,841 87,3091994 627,331 412,585 44,913 150,115 39,807 177,750 486 214,261 61,465
1995 620,120 470,583 43,287 208,844 41,571 176,877 200 149,338 102,719
1996 731,992 563,076 41,439 246,546 53,508 221,582 1,742 167,173 112,3701997 846,567 621,683 53,168 276,755 54,829 236,933 1,915 222,972 114,8131998 1,030,827 789,035 71,371 344,609 72,140 300,920 3,392 238,400 149,542
 5 
 million
1999 571,269 448,216 27,597 187,661 59,760 173,200 2,570 120,483 57,202
2000 659,148 500,895 34,528 143,107 94,556 228,703 8,114 150,137 31,597
2001 687,988 505,646 34,782 112,594 106,166 252,103 11,328 171,012 10,6052002 818,725 569,232 41,496 119,880 117,506 290,353 17,574 231,923 10,3132003 958,917 668,002 47,828 107,918 140,398 371,858 22,510 268,406 2,850
2003          Sep 79,597 55,626 4,795 10,870 12,361 27,600 632 23,339 −
         Oct 92,016 59,710 3,240 6,347 12,925 37,198 1,159 31,148 1,500
         Nov 74,916 56,932 4,335 8,304 9,199 35,094 495 17,489 −
         Dec 56,365 41,299 1,932 6,284 8,706 24,376 2,008 13,058 −
of which: Debt securities with a maturity of over 4 years  5 
1991 303,326 172,171 11,911 65,642 54,878 39,741 707 130,448 22,7721992 430,479 211,775 28,594 99,627 40,267 43,286 − 218,703 51,939
1993 571,533 296,779 43,365 160,055 26,431 66,923 230 274,524 82,0491994 429,369 244,806 36,397 109,732 29,168 69,508 306 184,255 53,351
1995 409,469 271,763 30,454 141,629 28,711 70,972 200 137,503 85,221
1996 473,560 322,720 27,901 167,811 35,522 91,487 1,702 149,139 92,5821997 563,333 380,470 41,189 211,007 41,053 87,220 1,820 181,047 98,4131998 694,414 496,444 59,893 288,619 54,385 93,551 2,847 195,122 139,645
 5 
 million
1999 324,888 226,993 16,715 124,067 37,778 48,435 2,565 95,331 44,013
2000 319,330 209,187 20,724 102,664 25,753 60,049 6,727 103,418 27,008
2001 299,751 202,337 16,619 76,341 42,277 67,099 7,479 89,933 6,4802002 309,157 176,486 16,338 59,459 34,795 65,892 12,149 120,527 9,2132003 369,336 220,103 23,210 55,165 49,518 92,209 10,977 138,256 2,850
2003          Sep 29,022 20,045 2,205 5,841 3,387 8,612 43 8,934 −
         Oct 33,947 14,192 749 2,290 1,758 9,396 473 19,281 1,500
         Nov 26,240 18,085 2,661 3,291 3,019 9,115 455 7,699 −
         Dec 15,491 13,090 523 2,827 1,375 8,364 1,853 549 −
Net sales  6 
1991 227,822 139,396 4,729 22,290 65,985 46,390 558 87,868 18,5831992 304,751 115,786 13,104 58,235 19,585 24,864 − 175 189,142 34,114
1993 403,212 159,982 22,496 122,917 − 13,156 27,721 180 243,049 43,701
1994 270,088 116,519 18,184 54,316 − 6,897 50,914 − 62 153,630 21,634
1995 205,482 173,797 18,260 96,125 3,072 56,342 − 354 32,039 61,020
1996 238,427 195,058 11,909 121,929 6,020 55,199 585 42,788 69,9511997 257,521 188,525 16,471 115,970 12,476 43,607 1,560 67,437 63,1811998 327,991 264,627 22,538 162,519 18,461 61,111 3,118 60,243 84,308
 5 
 million
1999 209,096 170,069 2,845 80,230 31,754 55,238 2,185 36,840 22,728
2000 155,615 122,774 5,937 29,999 30,089 56,751 7,320 25,522 − 16,705
2001 84,122 60,905 6,932 − 9,254 28,808 34,416 8,739 14,479 − 30,657
2002 131,976 56,393 7,936 − 26,806 20,707 54,561 14,306 61,277 − 44,546
2003 124,556 40,873 2,700 − 42,521 44,173 36,519 18,431 65,253 − 54,990
2003          Sep 9,794 9,725 1,682 − 1,645 3,626 6,062 230 − 161 − 4,765
         Oct 27,014 7,854 − 1,366 − 6,267 4,983 10,504 795 18,365 − 2,967
         Nov 10,095 9,565 1,718 − 1,719 1,674 7,891 − 332 862 − 4,379
         Dec − 16,149 − 14,947 − 2,554 − 10,330 74 − 2,137 1,467 − 2,668 − 3,485
*For definitions see the notes in the Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. —4Gross sales means only
Report 2, Capital market statistics. —1Excluding registered bank debt initial sales of newly issued securities. —5Maximum maturity according to
securities. —2Debt securities of enterprises. —3Including Federal Railways the terms of issue. — 6 Gross sales less redemptions. 
49*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
VII Capital market
 
3 Outstanding amount of debt securities issued by borrowers domiciled in Germany  * 
 
 
Until the end of 1998 DM million nominal value, from 1999  5  million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 Memo item:
 Foreign  DM/euro
End of year Mortgage Communal bonds issued
or month/ bonds bonds by German- Debt securities of
Maturity All bank specialised Other bank Industrial Public managed (Öffentliche (Hypotheken-
in years Total bonds syndicates credit institutions debt securities debt securities debt securities Pfandbriefe) pfandbriefe)
DM million
1991 1,686,765 1,040,374 142,757 392,190 221,031 284,396 3,161 643,230 241,760
1992 1,991,515 1,156,162 155,862 450,424 240,616 309,259 2,983 832,370 275,873
1993 2,394,728 1,316,142 178,357 573,341 227,463 336,981 3,163 1,075,422 319,575
1994 2,664,814 1,432,661 196,541 627,657 219,214 389,249 3,101 1,229,053 341,210
1995 2,870,295 1,606,459 214,803 723,781 222,286 445,589 2,746 1,261,090 402,229
1996 3,108,724 1,801,517 226,711 845,710 228,306 500,790 3,331 1,303,877 472,180
1997 3,366,245 1,990,041 243,183 961,679 240,782 544,397 4,891 1,371,313 535,359
1998 3,694,234 2,254,668 265,721 1,124,198 259,243 605,507 8,009 1,431,558 619,668
 5 
 million
1999 2,097,926 1,322,863 134,814 655,024 163,284 369,741 6,280 768,783 339,560
2000 2,265,121 1,445,736 140,751 685,122 157,374 462,488 13,599 805,786 322,856
2001 2,349,243 1,506,640 147,684 675,868 201,721 481,366 22,339 820,264 292,199
2002 2,481,220 1,563,034 155,620 649,061 222,427 535,925 36,646 881,541 247,655
2003 2,605,775 1,603,906 158,321 606,541 266,602 572,442 55,076 946,793 192,666
2003          Oct 2,611,829 1,609,289 159,156 618,591 264,854 566,688 53,941 948,599 200,530
         Nov 2,621,924 1,618,854 160,875 616,872 266,528 574,579 53,609 949,461 196,151
         Dec 2,605,775 1,603,906 158,321 606,541 266,602 572,442 55,076 946,793 192,666
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  2 Position at end-December 2003 
929,218 632,932 51,588 236,372 77,989 266,983 17,772 278,513 60,596    less than 2
612,234 421,610 47,925 180,743 75,050 117,890 14,021 176,603 46,514 2 to less than 4
430,375 254,985 32,806 96,728 48,071 77,380 5,815 169,575 53,105 4 to less than 6
246,982 132,097 17,377 57,542 21,840 35,335 7,647 107,238 17,362 6 to less than 8
194,918 79,147 8,279 21,987 17,496 31,385 5,553 110,219 6,011 8 to less than 10
59,112 41,158 309 8,518 6,750 25,580 2,385 15,569 5,043 10 to less than 15
17,018 12,763 35 1,259 6,309 5,160 434 3,821 1,197 15 to less than 20
115,918 29,216 − 3,391 13,094 12,730 1,449 85,252 2,839 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers ’portfolios. — debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of the residual
1Excluding debt securities handed to the trustee for temporary safe amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc. 
custody. —2Calculated from month under review until final maturity for
50* 
 
4 Circulation of shares issued by residents of Germany
  
Until the end of 1998 DM million nominal value, from 1999  5  million nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies ’ capital due to
Memo item:
Share circulation
at market values
Share Net increase or cash payment contribution (market capita-
capital= and ex- merger reduction lisation) net decrease(-) contribution of shares,
change of of claims and circulation at during period mining shares, of capital level at end
under issue of and other transfer change of and of period end of period convertible GmbH shares,
Period under review review bonds  1 etc. of assets bonus shares real assets legal form liquidation under review  2 
DM million
1991 151,618 6,932 3,656 610 2,416 407 − 182 411 − 386 .
1992 160,813 9,198 4,295 728 1,743 1,073 − 732 3,030 − 942 .
1993 168,005 7,190 5,224 772 387 876 10 707 − 783 .
1994 o 190,012 14,237 6,114 1,446 1,521 1,883 − 447 5,086 − 1,367 .
1995 211,231 21,217 5,894 1,498 1,421 1,421 − 623 13,739 − 2,133 .
1996 3 216,461 7,131 8,353 1,355 396 1,684 − 3,056 833 − 2,432 .
1997 221,575 5,115 4,164 2,722 370 1,767 − 2,423 197 − 1,678 .
1998 238,156 16,578 6,086 2,566 658 8,607 − 4,055 3,905 − 1,188 .
 5 
 million
1999 133,513 11,747 5,519 2,008 190 1,075 2,099 1,560 − 708 1,603,304
2000 147,629 14,115 3,620 3,694 618 8,089 − 1,986 1,827 − 1,745 1,353,000
2001 166,187 18,561 7,987 4,057 1,106 8,448 1,018 − 905 − 3,152 1,205,613
2002 168,716 2,528 4,307 1,291 486 1,690 − 868 − 2,152 − 2,224 647,492
2003 162,131 − 6,585 4,482 923 211 513 − 322 − 10,806 − 1,584 851,001
2003          Oct 162,701 − 224 315 75 0 14 − 439 66 − 256 803,272
         Nov 162,307 − 394 526 17 7 42 − 940 20 − 66 817,059
         Dec 162,131 − 176 246 2 19 7 − 111 − 200 − 139 851,001
oFrom January 1994 including the shares of east German companies whose shares are listed on the free market. Source: Bundesbank calculations
(resultant increase in share circulation: DM 7,771 million). —1Including share based on data of the "Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mitteilungen"
issues out of company profits. —2Including enterprises whose shares are lis- and the "Deutsche B örse AG". —3Figure reduced by DM 1,902 million
ted on the official market, on the regulated market or on the Neuer Markt owing to revisions. 
(stock market segment was closed down on 24 March 2003) and enterprises
50*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
VII Capital market
 
5 Yields and indices on German securities
 
 
               
Yields on bonds outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices  2 , 3 
Public bonds Bank debt securities Bonds Shares
Memo item:
Listed Foreign
Federal securities DM/euro
bonds
With re- With re- issued by German Germansidual matur- sidual matur- German- bond iBoxx- CDAX share
managed index index ities of over 9 ities of over 9 Industrial
 5 -Germany- share price
Total Total Total Total to 10 years bonds (REX) price index index (DAX) to 10 years  4 syndicates  1,5 
Average End- End- End-
Period % p.a. daily rate 1998=100 1987=100 1987=1000
1991 8.7 8.6 8.6 8.5 8.9 8.6 8.9 9.2 96.35 . 148.16 1,577.98
1992 8.1 8.0 8.0 7.8 8.3 8.1 8.7 8.8 101.54 . 134.92 1,545.051993 6.4 6.3 6.3 6.5 6.5 6.8 6.9 6.8 109.36 . 191.13 2,266.681994 6.7 6.7 6.7 6.9 6.8 7.2 7.0 6.9 99.90 . 176.87 2,106.58
1995 6.5 6.5 6.5 6.9 6.5 7.2 6.9 6.8 109.18 . 181.47 2,253.88
1996 5.6 5.6 5.6 6.2 5.5 6.4 5.8 5.8 110.37 . 217.47 2,888.691997 5.1 5.1 5.1 5.6 5.0 5.9 5.2 5.5 111.01 . 301.47 4,249.691998 4.5 4.4 4.4 4.6 4.5 4.9 5.0 5.3 118.18 100.00 343.64 5,002.391999 4.3 4.3 4.3 4.5 4.3 4.9 5.0 5.4 110.60 92.52 445.95 6,958.14
2000 5.4 5.3 5.2 5.3 5.6 5.8 6.2 6.3 112.48 94.11 396.59 6,433.61
2001 4.8 4.7 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.3 5.9 6.2 113.12 94.16 319.38 5,160.102002 4.7 4.6 4.6 4.8 4.7 5.1 6.0 5.6 117.56 97.80 188.46 2,892.632003 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.1 3.7 4.3 5.0 4.5 117.36 97.09 252.48 3,965.16
2003          Oct 3.9 3.9 4.0 4.2 3.8 4.4 4.4 4.5 116.90 96.85 234.95 3,655.99
         Nov 4.0 4.1 4.1 4.4 4.0 4.5 4.4 4.3 116.48 96.20 240.05 3,745.95         Dec 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.3 3.9 4.5 4.3 4.2 117.36 97.09 252.48 3,965.16
2004          Jan 3.8 3.8 3.9 4.2 3.7 4.3 4.1 4.1 117.68 97.33 259.30 4,058.60
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of included in the calculation. Monthly figures are calculated on the basis of
issue of over 4 years, if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Conver- the yields on all the business days of a month. The annual figures are the un-
tible debt securities, etc., debt securities with unscheduled redemption, weighted means of the monthly figures. —2End of year or month. —
zero-coupon bonds, floating-rate notes and bonds not denominated in DM 3Source: German Stock Exchange plc. —4Only bonds eligible as underlying
or euros are not included. Group yields for the various categories of secu- instruments for futures contracts are included; calculated as unweighted
rities are weighted with the amounts outstanding of the debt securities averages. — 5 As far as quoted on German stock exchanges. 
 
 
6 Sales and purchases of investment fund certificates in Germany
  
Sales of investment fund certificates Purchases
Domestic funds (sales receipts) Residents
Investment funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Non-banks  2 and loanassociations  1 
of which
of which of which
Sales Open- Special- Foreign Foreign= Secur- end ised invest- invest-total Money ities- real invest- ment mentpur- market based estate ment Foreign fund cer- fund cer- Non-resi-chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  
3 Total Total tificates Total tificates dents  4 
Period
DM million
1991 50,064 37,492 13,738 − 11,599 2,144 23,754 12,572 49,890 8,594 − 5 41,296 12,577 174
1992 81,514 20,474 −3,102 −− 9,189 6,087 23,575 61,040 81,518 10,495 2,152 71,023 58,888 − 4
1993 80,259 61,672 20,791 − 6,075 14,716 40,881 18,587 76,258 16,982 2,476 59,276 16,111 4,001
1994 130,995 108,914 63,263 31,180 24,385 7,698 45,650 22,081 125,943 9,849 − 689 116,094 22,770 5,052
1995 55,246 54,071 16,777 6,147 3,709 6,921 37,294 1,175 56,295 12,172 188 44,123 987 −1,049
1996 83,386 79,110 16,517 −4,706 7,273 13,950 62,592 4,276 85,704 19,924 1,685 65,780 2,591 −2,318
1997 145,805 138,945 31,501 −5,001 30,066 6,436 107,445 6,860 149,977 35,924 340 114,053 6,520 −4,172
1998 187,641 169,748 38,998 5,772 27,814 4,690 130,750 17,893 190,416 43,937 961 146,479 16,507 −2,775
 5 
 million
1999 111,282 97,197 37,684 3,347 23,269 7,395 59,513 14,086 105,521 19,862 − 637 85,659 14,722 5,761
2000 117,676 85,160 39,712 −2,188 36,818 −2,824 45,448 32,516 106,674 14,454 92 92,220 32,424 11,000
2001 96,511 76,811 35,522 12,410 9,195 10,159 41,289 19,701 95,407 10,251 2,703 85,156 16,997 1,105
2002 66,267 59,482 25,907 3,682 7,247 14,916 33,575 6,784 66,507 2,100 3,007 64,407 3,778 − 241
2003 47,865 43,943 20,079 − 924 7,408 14,166 23,864 3,922 49,431 − 2,663 734 52,094 3,188 −1,566
2003          Oct 637 292 − 8− 980 548 432 301 345 − 548 − 4,363 − 5 3,815 350 1,185
         Nov 311 470 − 315 − 353 16 16 785 − 159 1,113 − 213 − 134 1,326 − 25− 802
         Dec 4,345 3,971 − 122 − 484 1,223 − 880 4,093 374 4,537 1,439 322 3,098 52 − 192
1Book values. —2Residual. —3Net purchases or net sales ( −) of foreign non-residents; transaction values (before 1989 classified as shares). —The
investment fund certificates by residents; transaction values. —4Net figures for the latest data are to be regarded as provisional; corrections are
purchases or net sales ( −) of domestic investment fund certificates by not specially marked. 
51*VII Capital market

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
1 General government budgetary position *
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999,  5  billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds  2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which
Other
operat- Fixed Compen-
of ing ex- asset Finan- Ex- Ex- sation
which pend- Current forma- cial Re- pend- Re- pend- of em-
Period Total Taxes  3 Total  4 ployees iture grants Interest tion aid  5 Balance venue  6 iture Balance venue iture Balance
1993 928.7 749.1 1,060.2 296.8 136.0 340.5 102.1 97.0 87.3 −131.5 660.8 658.7 + 2.1 1,492.1 1,621.5 −129.4
1994 995.2 786.2 1,102.2 315.5 137.3 353.4 114.0 93.2 86.5 −106.9 694.1 693.7 + 0.4 1,596.4 1,702.9 −106.5
1995 1,026.4 814.2 1,136.4 324.8 135.5 367.2 129.0 90.1 86.3 −110.1 731.2 743.8 −12.5 1,664.9 1,787.5 −122.6
1996 1,000.3 800.0 1,121.8 326.2 137.0 362.2 130.7 83.9 80.1 −121.5 769.4 784.0 −14.6 1,665.6 1,801.6 −136.1
1997 1,014.3 797.2 1,108.9 325.0 135.7 356.3 132.1 80.1 79.2 −94.5 797.3 794.5 + 2.9 1,705.3 1,797.0 −91.7
1998 1,072.1 833.0 1,128.8 325.4 137.4 373.7 133.7 79.7 79.8 −56.7 812.2 808.9 + 3.3 1,765.5 1,818.9 −53.4
1999 566.1 453.1 592.9 168.7 72.4 202.7 69.8 40.8 38.0 −26.8 429.1 425.6 + 3.5 925.2 948.6 −23.4
2000  p 612.3 467.3 595.5 169.3 73.7 205.7 67.6 40.7 37.9 + 16.8 433.8 434.3 −0.5 974.6 958.2 + 16.4
2001  7,pe 554.0 446.2 601.0 170.1 70.3 213.1 66.6 40.9 39.5 −47.0 445.0 449.1 −4.1 921.8 972.9 −51.1
2002  pe 550.4 441.7 608.4 173.4 69.6 225.9 66.1 38.5 33.9 −58.0 457.9 466.4 −8.5 923.5 990.0 −66.5
2002          Q1 118.3 98.6 150.2 39.9 15.3 57.9 24.0 6.5 6.0 −31.8 111.3 112.8 −1.5 206.4 239.8 −33.4
         Q2 137.8 105.1 141.8 40.4 15.6 58.5 11.9 7.8 6.7 −4.0 113.0 115.6 −2.6 228.9 235.6 −6.6
         Q3 135.3 109.4 148.7 41.4 16.5 54.7 19.2 9.7 7.8 −13.4 113.1 116.6 −3.5 228.0 244.9 −16.9
         Q4 157.2 129.0 165.6 49.9 21.5 55.2 10.7 13.6 13.1 −8.5 119.3 120.0 −0.7 257.5 266.6 −9.2
2003          Q1 117.2 96.3 154.5 40.9 15.6 61.8 23.6 5.6 6.5 −37.3 116.3 116.8 −0.5 207.7 245.5 −37.8
         Q2 135.8 108.9 143.8 40.9 15.5 61.3 10.8 7.5 7.5 −8.0 115.5 118.4 −2.9 228.2 239.1 −10.9
         Q3 131.2 109.6 155.8 42.4 16.6 58.5 21.6 9.2 7.4 −24.6 115.1 117.8 −2.7 225.0 252.3 −27.4
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical for some insurance sectors are estimated. —3The tax revenue shown here
Office. —*The budgetary definition used here differs from that employed is taken from the budget statistics and may differ from the data given in
for the government account in the national accounts and, in the case of the Table VIII.4, which are based on the tax statistics. —4Including
quarterly figures, in some respects also from the financial statistics. — discrepancies in clearing transactions between central, state and local
1Including subsidiary budgets. Unlike the annual figure based on the government. —5Expenditure on investment grants, loans and acquisition
annual accounts statistics of the Federal Statistical Office, the quarterly of participating interests. —6Including Federal Government liquidity
figures do not include municipal special purpose associations and various assistance to the Federal Labour Office. —7Owing to modifications of the
special accounts. For more details on revenue from the Bundesbank profit, system of classification, shifts occurred, in particular, between othersee footnote 1 to Table VIII.2. —2The annual figures differ from the sum of operating expenditure and current grants. 
the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. The quarterly figures
2 Budgetary position of central, state and local government *
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999,  5  billion
Central government State government Local government
Western  2,3 Eastern  3 Western  3 Eastern  3 
Period Revenue  1 Expenditure Revenue Expenditure Revenue Expenditure Revenue Expenditure Revenue Expenditure
1993 401.6 462.5 326.5 352.8 76.4 92.5 222.5 230.9 54.4 59.0
1994 439.6 478.9 328.8 357.0 79.3 95.9 228.9 235.1 53.9 59.2
1995 439.3 489.9 338.6 370.2 88.4 101.5 225.6 237.9 58.7 60.8
1996 411.9 490.4 344.8 379.7 93.7 105.5 227.7 232.9 55.0 57.71997 416.8 480.3 349.2 376.5 94.3 105.2 222.9 226.9 52.6 54.21998 439.0 495.6 360.5 380.3 96.4 104.7 231.4 226.3 51.5 52.41999 240.3 266.5 191.6 196.6 50.0 53.3 119.8 117.5 26.1 26.3
2000  
4 292.1 265.2 193.4 200.9 50.7 53.6 122.4 120.5 25.6 25.6
2001  pe 239.9 260.9 184.0 207.0 49.7 52.9 119.5 123.9 24.7 25.4
2002  pe 238.9 271.6 183.6 207.7 47.6 53.4 119.8 124.3 25.0 25.4
2002          Q1 47.4 68.9 42.4 49.4 10.2 12.0 24.7 29.1 5.2 5.4
         Q2 56.3 62.6 43.3 48.8 11.1 11.9 28.8 29.1 5.9 5.8         Q3 62.7 70.6 45.3 49.3 11.8 12.9 29.1 30.5 6.1 6.2         Q4 72.5 69.5 52.0 59.5 14.5 16.1 37.0 35.4 7.8 7.7
2003          Q1 46.6 71.9 42.2 51.1 9.7 12.6 25.2 29.4 5.3 5.6
         Q2 59.1 64.6 44.4 50.2 12.0 12.0 26.7 29.1 5.6 5.8         Q3 57.6 74.5 45.3 50.5 12.2 13.1 29.3 30.6 6.1 6.3
52*Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Inherited Liabilities. —2Including (eastern and western) Berlin, Bremen and
Office. —*See corresponding footnote to Table VIII.1. —1Up to 1994, the Hamburg. —3Unlike the annual figure based on the annual accounts
Bundesbank profit transfer is shown in full; from 1995 onwards, only the statistics of the Federal Statistical Office, the quarterly figures do not
DM7 billion envisaged in the budget is shown. From 1995, revenue over and include various special accounts. —4Including proceeds from the sale of
above the envisaged amount accrues directly to the Redemption Fund for UMTS licences. 
52*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
3 Government fiscal position as defined in the national accounts *
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM billion; from 1999,  5  billion
Item 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000  1 2001 2002 2003  pe 
Revenue 1,704.0 1,726.8 1,775.9 943.2 965.5 951.0 954.0 962.6
of which
Taxes 850.0 856.9 897.4 490.4 511.7 488.3 486.0 490.0Social contributions 696.7 720.1 727.7 375.4 378.1 383.6 389.0 395.4
Expenditure 1,826.6 1,826.5 1,859.6 972.6 989.5 1,009.9 1,028.4 1,048.6of which
Intermediate consumption 142.7 140.2 144.1 76.2 78.0 81.1 84.5 84.8Compensation of Employees 319.6 319.0 319.3 165.4 165.7 165.5 167.7 168.6Interest 131.7 133.2 136.4 68.9 68.4 67.7 65.2 66.8Social benefits  
2 970.7 984.7 998.4 523.1 532.7 548.7 572.9 587.9
Gross capital formation 76.4 69.4 69.9 37.8 37.0 35.9 34.3 31.0
Net lending/net borrowing − 122.7 − 99.7 − 83.7 − 29.4 − 24.0 − 58.9 − 74.3 − 86.0
as a percentage of GDP − 3.4 − 2.7 − 2.2 − 1.5 − 1.2 − 2.8 − 3.5 − 4.0
Memo itemDebt as defined in theMaastricht Treaty 2,143.9 2,232.9 2,298.2 1,210.3 1,221.8 1,232.8 1,283.5 .
as a percentage of GDP 59.8 61.0 60.9 61.2 60.2 59.5 60.8 .
Source: Federal Statistical Office. —*Figures in accordance with ESA 95. In of UMTS licences. The figures of the Federal Statistical Office record such
contrast to the figures shown by the Federal Statistical Office, totals include proceeds (
 5 
50.85 billion) under "net increase in non-produced assets", with
(without affecting net lending/net borrowing) customs duties, the EU share the result that government expenditure is lower and a surplus (
 5 
22.8 billion
in VAT revenue and EU subsidies. —1Adjusted for proceeds from the sale or 1.1% of GDP) is shown. — 2 Including social benefits in kind. 
4 Tax revenue of central, state and local government
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999,  5  million
Central and state government and European Union Local government  4 
State government
of which of which Balance of
Central Eastern European Eastern untransferred
Period Total Total  1 government  2 Total Germany Union  3 Total Germany tax shares  5 
1991 661,920 577,150 321,334 224,321 19,139 31,495 84,633 2,540 + 137
1992 731,738 638,423 356,849 247,372 23,807 34,203 93,374 4,034 − 58
1993 749,119 653,015 360,250 256,131 27,542 36,634 95,809 5,863 + 2951994 786,162 688,785 386,145 261,947 32,052 40,692 97,116 7,677 + 260
1995 814,190 719,332 390,807 288,520 . 40,005 94,498 8,460 + 359
1996 799,998 706,071 372,390 294,232 . 39,449 94,641 7,175 − 714
1997 797,154 700,739 368,244 290,771 . 41,724 96,531 7,703 − 117
1998 833,013 727,888 379,491 306,127 . 42,271 104,960 8,841 + 1641999 453,068 396,734 211,727 164,724 . 20,284 56,333 4,810 + 1
2000 467,253 410,117 219,034 169,249 . 21,833 57,241 4,895 − 104
2001 446,248 392,189 213,342 159,115 . 19,732 54,047 4,590 + 12
2002 441,703 389,162 214,371 156,231 . 18,560 52,490 4,769 + 512003 . 390,445 214,010 155,510 . 20,925 . . .
2003          Q3 109,162 96,012 52,229 38,203 . 5,580 13,037 1,276 + 113
         Q4 . 114,862 66,842 43,679 . 4,342 . . .
2003          Aug . 27,902 15,111 10,944 . 1,846 . . .
         Sep . 36,590 19,790 14,925 . 1,876 . . .
         Oct . 28,389 16,562 11,140 . 688 . . .
         Nov . 28,130 15,010 11,172 . 1,948 . . .         Dec . 58,343 35,270 21,367 . 1,707 . . .
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. —1Including receipts from the 1988. —4Including local government taxes in Berlin, Bremen and
Equalisation of Burdens levies.  —2Before deducting supplementary Hamburg. —5Difference between the local government ’s share in the
central government grants and shares in the revenue of mineral oil tax income taxes received by the state government cash offices in the period in
remitted to state government. —3Including the additional (GNP-related) question (see Table VIII.5) and the amounts passed on to local government
revenue accruing to the EU from the central government tax revenue from during the same period. 
53*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
5 Tax revenue, by type
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999,  5  million
Joint taxes Memo
item
Income taxes  2 Turnover taxes  5,6 Localgovern-
As- Invest- Central State ment
Local
sessed ment Value- Turnover govern- govern- EU share in business
Wage income Corpora- income added tax on ment ment customs income tax trans-
Period Total  1 Total tax  3 tax tion tax taxes  4 Total tax (VAT) imports taxes  8 taxes  8 duties taxes  9 fers 6,7 
1991 615,506 298,804 214,175 41,532 31,716 11,381 179,672 98,797 80,875 5,986 92,583 29,113 8,307 38,356
1992 681,751 331,310 247,322 41,531 31,184 11,273 197,712 117,274 80,438 6,923 104,802 32,963 7,742 43,3281993 697,988 341,785 257,987 33,234 27,830 22,734 216,306 174,492 41,814 4,181 93,678 34,720 7,240 44,9731994 734,234 343,055 266,522 25,510 19,569 31,455 235,698 195,265 40,433 6,271 105,410 36,551 7,173 45,450
1995 765,374 344,554 282,701 13,997 18,136 29,721 234,622 198,496 36,126 8,412 134,013 36,602 7,117 46,042
1996 746,958 317,807 251,278 11,616 29,458 25,456 237,208 200,381 36,827 8,945 137,865 38,540 6,592 40,8871997 740,272 313,794 248,672 5,764 33,267 26,092 240,900 199,934 40,966 8,732 135,264 34,682 6,900 39,5331998 775,028 340,231 258,276 11,116 36,200 34,640 250,214 203,684 46,530 10,284 130,513 37,300 6,486 47,1401999 422,012 184,408 133,809 10,887 22,359 17,353 137,155 111,600 25,555 5,463 72,235 19,564 3,186 25,277
2000 436,115 192,381 135,733 12,225 23,575 20,849 140,871 107,140 33,732 5,521 75,504 18,444 3,394 25,998
2001 417,358 170,817 132,626 8,771 −426 29,845 138,935 104,463 34,472 5,510 79,277 19,628 3,191 25,170
2002 414,008 165,096 132,190 7,541 2,864 22,502 138,195 105,463 32,732 5,752 83,494 18,576 2,896 24,8462003 414,853 162,567 133,090 4,568 8,275 16,633 136,996 103,162 33,834 7,085 86,617 18,713 2,877 24,409
2003          Q3 102,140 39,615 32,137 2,982 1,180 3,315 34,211 26,102 8,110 1,800 21,225 4,534 756 6,129
         Q4 122,241 48,636 38,681 4,439 3,431 2,085 35,778 26,576 9,203 3,287 29,396 4,376 768 7,378
2003          Aug 29,604 9,199 10,559 −1,182 −1,186 1,007 11,726 9,027 2,699 566 6,422 1,453 238 1,702
         Sep 39,174 19,254 9,636 5,795 3,081 741 11,097 8,498 2,599 15 7,045 1,495 267 2,583
         Oct 29,966 9,003 9,753 −1,093 −354 698 11,104 8,120 2,985 1,140 6,934 1,523 262 1,577
         Nov 29,726 8,630 9,654 −1,152 −433 561 12,786 9,692 3,094 518 6,087 1,452 254 1,596
         Dec 62,549 31,003 19,274 6,684 4,219 827 11,888 8,764 3,124 1,629 16,376 1,401 253 4,206
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. —1This total, unlike that in Table the statutory pension insurance scheme, with 2.2% of the balance accruing
VIII.4, does not include the receipts from the Equalisation of Burdens levies, to local government; of the residual balance, 50.5% was allocated to ce ntral
local business tax on earnings and capital (less local business tax tranfers to government and 49.5% to state government; in 2000 and 2001, 50.25% was
central and state government), the real property taxes and other local allocated to central government and 49.75% to state government; sincegovernment taxes, or the balance of untransferred tax shares. —2From 2002 49.6% has been allocated to central government and 50.4% to state
1980, the revenue from wage tax and assessed income tax has been government. The EU share must also be deducted from the aforementionedallocated to central, state and local government in the ratio of 42.5:42.5:15, central government share. —6Since 1991 the distribution of turnover tax
and revenue from corporation tax and investment income tax has been and the level and distribution of local business tax transfers have beenallocated to central and state government in the ratio of 50:50. —3From affected by the financing of the debt service of the German Unity Fund. —
1996, after deducting child benefit. —4From February 1993, including 7Central government and state government 50% each. From 1998, central
revenue from the withholding tax on interest income, in which local government 42.2%, state government 57.8%. —8For the breakdown, see
government has a share of 12%. —5In 1998, 3.64% and from 1999, 5.63% Table VIII.6. — 9 From 1998, including the share in turnover taxes. 
was allocated to central government to finance the supplementary grant to
6 Specific taxes levied by central, state and local government
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999,  5  million
Central government taxes State government taxes Local government taxes
Other Other Other
central state local
Insur- Electri- govern- Motor Inherit- govern- Local Real govern-
Mineral Tobacco Spirits ance city ment vehicle Wealth ance Beer ment busi- property ment
Period oil tax tax tax tax tax taxes  1 tax tax tax tax taxes ness taxes taxes  3 
1991 47,266 19,592 5,648 5,862 . 14,215 11,012 6,729 2,636 1,647 7,090 41,297 9,921 1,181
1992 55,166 19,253 5,545 8,094 . 16,744 13,317 6,750 3,030 1,625 8,241 44,848 10,783 1,2811993 56,300 19,459 5,134 9,290 . 3,495 14,059 6,784 3,044 1,769 9,065 42,266 11,663 1,3831994 63,847 20,264 4,889 11,400 . 5,011 14,169 6,627 3,479 1,795 10,482 44,086 12,664 1,445
1995 64,888 20,595 4,837 14,104 . 29,590 13,806 7,855 3,548 1,779 9,613 42,058 13,744 1,426
1996 68,251 20,698 5,085 14,348 . 29,484 13,743 9,035 4,054 1,718 9,990 45,880 14,642 1,4631997 66,008 21,155 4,662 14,127 . 29,312 14,418 1,757 4,061 1,698 12,749 48,601 15,503 1,5091998 66,677 21,652 4,426 13,951 . 23,807 15,171 1,063 4,810 1,662 14,594 50,508 16,228 1,5321999 36,444 11,655 2,233 7,116 1,816 12,973 7,039 537 3,056 846 8,086 27,060 8,636 824
2000 37,826 11,443 2,151 7,243 3,356 13,485 7,015 433 2,982 844 7,171 27,025 8,849 784
2001 40,690 12,072 2,143 7,427 4,322 12,622 8,376 290 3,069 829 7,064 24,534 9,076 7902002 42,193 13,778 2,149 8,327 5,097 11,951 7,592 239 3,021 811 6,913 23,489 9,261 6962003 43,188 14,094 2,204 8,870 6,531 11,730 7,336 230 3,373 786 6,989 . . .
2003          Q3 10,607 3,749 521 1,724 1,855 2,768 1,776 36 844 228 1,651 5,853 2,798 170
         Q4 16,961 4,795 834 1,552 1,927 3,326 1,584 36 881 185 1,690 . . .
2003          Aug 3,400 747 156 934 477 708 536 8 287 79 543 . . .
         Sep 3,643 1,166 158 371 493 1,214 551 13 307 70 554 . . .
         Oct 3,305 1,734 199 385 607 703 581 10 287 68 576 . . .
         Nov 3,704 585 135 557 437 670 498 16 321 63 554 . . .         Dec 9,953 2,476 500 610 883 1,953 505 11 272 54 559 . . .
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. —1Other excise taxes and the income until mid-1992, and again since the beginning of 1995. —2On earnings and
and corporation tax surcharge ("solidarity surcharge") levied from mid-1991 capital. — 3 Including tax-like revenue.   
54*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
7 General government debt *
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999,  5  million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
Treasury Five-year lending arising  from
Bundes- discount Federal Federal by credit Social German Equalisa-
End of year bank paper Treasury notes savings institu- security tion unifica-
or month Total advances (Bubills)  1 notes  2,3 (Bobls)  2 notes Bonds  2 tions  4 funds Other  4 tion 5 claims Other  6 
General government
1998 2,280,154 . 25,631 227,536 199,774 92,698 723,403 894,456 550 26,073 1,249 88,582 202
1999 1,199,975 . 12,594 102,364 120,998 41,621 416,051 450,111 281 10,200 476 45,175 1052000 1,211,439 . 11,616 109,951 126,276 35,991 438,888 433,443 211 10,524 285 44,146 1082001 1,223,929 . 23,036 151,401 130,045 26,395 448,148 422,440 174 13,110 85 8,986 1082002 1,277,630 . 30,815 203,951 137,669 17,898 456,300 404,046 137 18,844 29 7,845 97
2003          Mar 1,311,333 . 30,630 220,438 143,172 15,434 469,566 401,492 135 22,528 −1 7,845 95
         June 1,325,969 . 31,165 232,373 150,627 14,284 462,639 401,353 135 25,460 −4 7,845 92
         Sep 1,345,938 . 33,424 237,449 146,729 13,754 469,120 406,284 317 32,071 −6 6,706 91
Central government 7,8 
1998 957,983 . 24,666 84,760 199,274 92,698 519,718 24,125 − 2,603 1,270 8,684 186
1999 714,069 . 11,553 44,335 120,498 41,621 379,808 67,872 60 2,568 476 45,175 104
2000 715,819 . 11,516 44,678 123,642 35,991 400,490 52,836 29 2,099 285 44,146 1072001 701,077 . 21,136 59,643 119,911 26,395 416,195 47,111 26 1,481 85 8,986 1072002 725,405 . 30,227 78,584 127,484 17,898 422,558 39,517 0 1,167 29 7,845 97
2003          Mar 745,400 . 30,085 80,348 132,987 15,434 435,146 42,281 − 1,183 −1 7,845 94
         June 749,920 . 30,416 82,834 140,442 14,284 428,166 43,744 − 2,102 −4 7,845 91
         Sep 766,213 . 32,892 85,526 136,544 13,754 434,085 49,360 186 7,076 −6 6,706 90
         Dec 
p 768,330 . 35,175 87,627 143,402 12,805 436,830 38,433 186 7,076 2 6,706 87
State government (western)
1998 525,380 . 520 83,390 . . . 430,709 43 10,716 . − 2
1999 274,208 . 150 43,033 . . . 226,022 23 4,979 . − 1
2000 282,431 . − 48,702 . . . 227,914 22 5,792 . . 1
2001 305,788 . 1,800 67,721 . . . 228,270 5 7,991 . . 1
2002 328,390 . 250 97,556 . . . 217,333 5 13,246 . . 1
2003          Mar 339,986 . 300 109,109 . . . 213,990 7 16,579 . . 1
         June 345,390 . 322 116,274 . . . 209,820 8 18,966 . . 1         Sep 348,006 . 322 118,815 . . . 208,313 3 20,552 . . 1         Dec 
p 356,307 . 472 125,356 . . . 207,778 3 22,699 . . 1
State government (eastern)
1998 98,192 . 445 27,228 . . . 70,289 − 230 . . .
1999 53,200 . 891 14,517 . . . 37,602 − 189 . . .
2000 55,712 . 100 16,092 . . . 39,339 − 182 . . .
2001 58,771 . 100 20,135 . . . 37,382 − 1,154 . . .
2002 63,782 . 338 23,838 . . . 37,739 − 1,867 . . .
2003          Mar 64,965 . 245 26,134 . . . 36,351 − 2,235 . . .
         June 66,910 . 427 28,418 . . . 36,204 − 1,861 . . .
         Sep 66,595 . 211 28,260 . . . 36,214 − 1,911 . . .
         Dec p 68,075 . 315 28,833 . . . 37,021 − 1,906 . . .
For footnotes, see end of the table. 
55*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
7 General government debt * (cont ’d)
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999,  5  million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
Treasury Five-year lending arising  from
Bundes- discount Federal Federal by credit Social German Equalisa-
End of year bank paper Treasury notes savings institu- security tion unifica-
or month Total advances (Bubills)  1 notes  2,3 (Bobls)  2 notes Bonds  2 tions  4 funds Other  4 tion 5 claims Other  6 
Local government (western) 9 
1998 158,960 . . 300 . . 1,330 153,208 119 4,003 . . .
1999 81,511 . . 153 . . 680 78,726 53 1,898 . . .2000 81,414 . . 153 . . 680 78,656 33 1,891 . . .2001 82,203 . . 153 . . 629 79,470 29 1,922 . . .2002 84,097 . . 153 . . 629 81,307 22 1,986 . . .
2003          Mar 85,100 . . 153 . . 578 82,369 20 1,980 . . .
         June 88,000 . . 153 . . 578 85,269 20 1,980 . . .         Sep 89,250 . . 153 . . 578 86,519 20 1,980 . . .
Local government (eastern) 9 
1998 39,873 . . 225 . . 460 38,777 255 156 . . .1999 20,726 . . 51 . . 335 20,138 124 78 . . .2000 17,048 . . 51 . . 335 16,497 114 50 . . .2001 17,005 . . − . . 284 16,581 107 33 . . .
2002 16,745 . . − . . 284 16,318 102 41 . . .
2003          Mar 16,680 . . − . . 284 16,256 100 40 . . .
         June 16,750 . . − . . 284 16,326 100 40 . . .
         Sep 16,850 . . − . . 284 16,426 100 40 . . .
German Unity Fund/Indemnification Fund 7 
1998 79,413 . −−− . 47,998 30,975 − 440 . . .
1999 40,234 . − 275 500 . 28,978 10,292 − 189 . . .
2000 40,629 . − 275 2,634 . 29,797 7,790 − 133 . . .
2001 39,923 . − 3,748 10,134 . 21,577 4,315 − 149 . . .
2002 39,810 . − 3,820 10,134 . 22,685 3,146 − 2 6...
2003          Mar 39,833 . . 4,694 10,134 . 23,420 1,585 −− ...
         June 39,600 . . 4,694 10,134 . 23,443 1,329 −− ...
         Sep 39,625 . . 4,694 10,134 . 24,005 793 −− ...
         Dec 39,568 . . 4,610 10,134 . 24,032 793 −− ...
ERP Special Fund 7 
1998 34,159 . .... 11,944 20,988 − 1,227 . . .
1999 16,028 . . . − . 6,250 9,458 21 299 . . .
2000 18,386 . . . − . 7,585 10,411 13 377 . . .
2001 19,161 . . . − . 9,462 9,310 8 381 . . .
2002 19,400 . . . 51 . 10,144 8,686 8 512 . . .
2003          Mar 19,369 . . . 51 . 10,138 8,660 8 512 . . .
         June 19,399 . . . 51 . 10,169 8,660 8 512 . . .         Sep 19,399 . . . 51 . 10,169 8,660 8 512 . . .         Dec 19,261 . . . 51 . 10,169 8,522 8 512 . . .
Federal Railways Fund 7,8 
1998 77,246 . . − 500 . 31,648 42,488 79 2,531 . . .
1999          June 39,231 . . − 1,023 . 16,805 20,401 34 968 . . .
Debt Processing Fund/Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities 7,8 
1998 304,978 . − 31,633 − . 110,006 79,226 54 4,167 −20 79,899 15
1999          June 151,097 . − 11,127 2,000 . 58,897 36,133 27 2,015 −9 40,902 4
Equalisation Fund for Safeguarding the Use of Coal 7,8 
1998 3,971 . .... 3 0 0 3,671 −− ...
1999          June 2,302 . .... 1 5 3 2,148 −− ...
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical 6Old debt mainly denominated in foreign currency, in accordance with the
Office. —*Excluding intergovernment debt. —1Predominantly Treasury London Debts Agreement; excluding debt securities in own portfolios. —
discount paper (Bubills). —2Excluding issuers ’holdings of their own 7In contrast to the capital market statistics, the debt incurred through the
securities. —3Treasury notes issued by state government include long-term joint issuance of Federal securities is recorded here under central
paper. —4Mainly loans against borrowers ’notes. Including loans raised government and its special funds in accordance with the agreed distribution
abroad. Other loans from non-banks, including loans from supplementary ratios. —8Since 1 July 1999 central government has assumed joint
public pension funds and liabilities arising from the investment assistance responsibility for the debts of the Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabi lities,
levy. —5Old liabilities arising from housing construction and liabilities the Federal Railways Fund and the Equalisation Fund for Safeguarding the
arising from housing construction by the former GDR ’s armed forces and Use of Coal. From July, the aforementioned special funds are recorded
from housing construction in connection with the return of the troops of under central government. —9Data other than year-end figures have been
the former USSR stationed in eastern Germany to their home country. — estimated. Including debt of municipal special purpose associations. 
56*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
8 Change in general government debt *
  
  
Net borrowing  1 
End of 2002 2003
2002 Total Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3  p Sep 2003  p 
Item
 5 
 million
Borrowers
Central government  2 725,405 766,213 + 24,328 + 20,542 −4,833 + 10,110 −1,491 + 19,995 + 4,520 + 16,293
German Unity Fund 39,441 39,183 − 197 + 64 −− − 261 − 2− 256 −
ERP Special Fund 19,400 19,399 + 239 − 63 + 210 + 19 + 73 − 31 + 30 −
Indemnification Fund 369 442 + 84 + 19 + 21 + 19 + 25 + 25 + 23 + 26
State government (western) 328,390 348,006 + 22,603 + 4,422 + 4,237 + 6,170 + 7,774 + 11,596 + 5,404 + 2,616
State government (eastern) 63,782 66,595 + 5,011 + 372 + 1,013 + 1,377 + 2,249 + 1,183 + 1,945 − 315
Local government (western)  3 84,097 89,250 + 2,630 + 275 + 1,000 + 900 + 455 + 2,003 + 1,739 + 1,154
Local government (eastern)  3 16,745 16,850 − 242 − 32 − 180 − 30 − 1− 46 + 63 + 111
Total 1,277,630 1,345,938 + 54,455 + 25,599 + 1,468 + 18,564 + 8,823 + 34,722 + 13,468 + 19,884
Debt by category
Treasury  discount 30,815 33,424 + 7,779 −5,219 + 4,434 + 9,188 − 625 − 185 + 535 + 2,258 paper  (Bubills)  4 
Treasury notes  5 203,951 237,449 + 52,551 + 7,294 + 18,301 + 16,056 + 10,900 + 16,486 + 11,936 + 5,075
Five-year Federal notes (Bobls)  5 137,669 146,729 + 7,623 + 3,375 − 132 + 2,213 + 2,167 + 5,504 + 7,455 −3,898
Federal savings notes 17,898 13,754 −8,497 −3,748 −2,012 − 884 −1,854 −2,464 −1,150 − 530
Bonds  5 456,300 469,120 + 8,152 + 13,469 + 2,289 −1,446 −6,159 + 13,266 −6,927 + 6,481
Direct lending bycredit institutions  
6 404,046 406,284 −17,640 + 8,297 −21,875 −6,624 + 2,562 −1,535 −1,307 + 4,846
Loans from social security funds 137 317 − 37 + 44 + 21 − 12 − 90 − 2 + 1 + 181
Other loans  6 18,803 32,030 + 5,733 + 2,124 + 447 + 1,212 + 1,950 + 3,684 + 2,932 + 6,611
Old debt  7 126 85 − 67 − 36 − 6− 0− 25 − 33 − 6− 3
Equalisation claims 7,845 6,706 −1,142 −− − 1,139 − 3 −+0 −1,139
Investment assistance levy 41 41 − 0− 0 −+0 +0 +0 − 0− 0
Total 1,277,630 1,345,938 + 54,455 + 25,599 + 1,468 + 18,564 + 8,823 + 34,722 + 13,468 + 19,884
Creditors
Banking system
Bundesbank 4,440 4,440 −−−−−−−−
Credit institutions 532,700 539,600 −1,046 + 11,471 −13,300 + 370 + 413 + 13,319 −8,668 + 2,015
Domestic non-banks
Social security funds 137 317 − 37 + 44 + 21 − 12 − 90 − 2 + 1 + 181
Other  8 228,353 260,281 −1,862 + 1,884 −2,053 − 894 − 799 + 1,905 + 5,836 + 24,187
Foreign creditors  pe 512,000 541,300 + 57,400 + 12,200 + 16,800 + 19,100 + 9,300 + 19,500 + 16,300 −6,500
Total 1,277,630 1,345,938 + 54,455 + 25,599 + 1,468 + 18,564 + 8,823 + 34,722 + 13,468 + 19,884
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical own securities. —6Including loans raised abroad. —7Old liabilities arising
Office. —*Excluding intergovernment debt. —1Net borrowing differs from housing construction and liabilities arising from the housing
from the change in debt, which includes the assumption and transfer of construction of the former GDR ’s armed forces and from housing
debts. —2See Table VIII.7, footnote 8. —3Data other than year-end construction in connection with the return of the troops of the former USSR
figures have been estimated. Including debt of municipal special purpose stationed in eastern Germany to their home country, and old debt in
associations. —4Excluding mobilisation and liquidity paper. Predominantly accordance with the London Debts Agreement. —8Ascertained as a
Treasury discount paper (Bubills). —5Excluding issuers ’holdings of their residual. 
9 Loans raised by general government against borrowers ’ notes
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999,  5  million
Redemption Equalisation
Central German ERP Federal Fund for Fund  for Safe-
End of year govern- Unity Special State Local Railways Inherited guarding  the
or month Total  1 ment  2,3 Fund Fund government government  4,5 Fund  3 Liabilites  3 Use of Coal 3 
1998 898,030 23,094 31,415 22,215 504,148 184,942 45,098 83,447 3,671
1999 444,031 64,704 10,481 9,778 264,158 94,909 −− −
2000 431,364 54,731 7,178 10,801 268,362 90,292 −− −
2001 416,067 44,791 4,464 9,699 267,988 89,126 −− −
2002 Sep 401,432 39,267 4,044 9,231 260,611 88,280 −− −
Dec 398,910 34,636 3,172 9,205 262,840 89,057 −− −
2003 Mar 396,685 33,202 1,585 9,180 264,827 87,892 −− −
June 396,008 33,375 1,329 9,180 263,083 89,041 −− −
Sep p 398,318 38,309 793 9,180 260,264 89,773 −− −
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical 3See Table VIII.7, footnote 8. —4Data other than year-end figures have
Office. —1Excluding Debt Register claims and cash advances. Including been estimated. Including municipal special purpose associations. —
small amounts of mortgage loans, land charges in annuity and other forms, 5 Including contractually agreed loans. 
and debts outstanding. —2Including Equalisation of Burdens Fund. —
57*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
10 Central government debt
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999,  5  million
Treasury discount Indebtedness
paper (Bubills)  1 to non-banks Old debt
of which Direct
Federal Federal Five-year lending arising  from
Treasury Treasury Federal Federal Federal by credit Social German Equal-
End of year financing notes notes savings bonds institu- security isation unifica-
or month Total Total paper (Sch ätze) 2 (Bobls)  2 notes (Bunds)  2 tions  3,4 funds Other  3,5,6 tion 7 claims Other  8 
1996 839,883 26,789 7,166 55,289 176,164 96,391 434,295 32,988 5 7,766 1,330 8,684 183
1997 905,691 25,286 5,221 78,848 177,721 99,317 481,619 31,845 5 870 1,300 8,684 1971998 957,983 24,666 4,558 84,760 199,274 92,698 519,718 24,125 − 2,603 1,270 8,684 186
1999  
9 714,069 11,553 1,584 44,335 120,498 41,621 379,808 67,872 60 2,568 476 45,175 104
2000 715,819 11,516 1,805 44,678 123,642 35,991 400,490 52,836 29 2,099 285 44,146 1072001 701,077 21,136 1,658 59,643 119,911 26,395 416,195 47,111 26 1,481 85 8,986 1072002 725,405 30,227 1,618 78,584 127,484 17,898 422,558 39,517 0 1,167 29 7,845 972003  
p 768,330 35,175 1,178 87,627 143,402 12,805 436,830 38,433 186 7,076 2 6,706 87
2003          Jan 743,400 30,218 1,549 84,053 127,786 15,408 426,630 50,171 0 1,167 30 7,845 95         Feb 745,992 30,081 1,462 84,808 129,055 15,515 428,692 48,701 0 1,167 36 7,845 94         Mar 745,400 30,085 1,375 80,348 132,987 15,434 435,146 42,281 − 1,183 −1 7,845 94
         Apr 747,512 30,048 1,308 80,447 133,377 15,458 429,019 50,040 − 1,183 4 7,845 92
         May 749,175 30,490 1,275 85,842 134,238 14,414 431,160 43,917 − 1,183 −2 7,845 89
         June 749,920 30,416 1,236 82,834 140,442 14,284 428,166 43,744 − 2,102 −4 7,845 91
         July 760,392 30,842 1,207 87,689 141,157 13,804 426,319 51,688 − 2,102 −7 6,706 91
         Aug 764,368 31,420 1,206 88,295 135,298 13,754 433,479 53,227 − 2,102 −7 6,706 93
         Sep 766,213 32,892 1,229 85,526 136,544 13,754 434,085 49,360 186 7,076 −6 6,706 90
         Oct 769,146 33,239 1,218 90,274 142,861 12,761 439,993 35,959 186 7,076 2 6,706 89         Nov 769,493 34,180 1,215 90,637 143,575 12,792 436,109 38,142 186 7,076 2 6,706 87         Dec 
p 768,330 35,175 1,178 87,627 143,402 12,805 436,830 38,433 186 7,076 2 6,706 87
2004          Jan p 786,356 35,849 1,131 92,649 143,753 11,733 448,737 39,577 186 7,076 2 6,706 87
1Excluding mobilisation and liquidity paper. In November 1999, including with the return of the troops of the former USSR stationed in eastern
cash bills. —2Excluding issuers ’holdings of their own securities. — Germany to their home country. —8Commutation and compensation debt
3Including loans raised abroad. —4Including money market loans. — and old debt mainly denominated in foreign currency. —9Since 1 July 1999
5Including loans granted by supplementary pension funds for government central government has assumed joint responsibility for the debts of the
employees. —6Including liabilities arising from the investment assistance Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, the Federal Railways Fund and
levy. —7Assumption of liabilities arising from housing construction for the the Equalisation Fund for Safeguarding the Use of Coal. From July 1999, the
former GDR ’s armed forces and from housing construction in connection aforementioned special funds are included under central government. 
11 Central government borrowing in the market
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999,  5  million
of which
Five-year Loans against Change in
Total new borrowing Federal bonds (Bunds) Federal notes (Bobls) Other securities  2 borrowers ’ notes Money money
market market
Period Gross  1 Net Gross  1 Net Gross  1 Net Gross  1 Net Gross Net loans deposits
1996 + 185,696 + 83,049 + 54,038 + 31,988 + 45,445 + 5,445 + 67,015 + 39,586 + 15,050 + 1,906 + 4,148 + 6,548
1997 + 250,074 + 65,808 + 79,323 + 47,323 + 59,557 + 1,557 + 98,275 + 24,983 + 12,950 − 8,009 − 30 − 3,304
1998 + 228,050 + 52,292 + 78,304 + 38,099 + 55,078 + 21,553 + 85,706 − 1,327 + 12,023 − 2,927 − 3,065 − 5,440
1999 + 139,865 + 31,631 + 53,931 + 114,080 + 22,229 + 18,610 + 44,904 − 5,836 + 14,861 + 52,897 + 3,937 + 1,832
2000 + 122,725 + 1,750 + 49,395 + 20,682 + 26,342 + 3,144 + 45,278 − 5,323 + 7,273 − 9,973 − 5,563 − 940
2001 + 135,018 − 14,741 + 36,511 + 15,705 + 19,603 − 3,730 + 69,971 + 14,989 + 5,337 − 9,941 + 3,595 − 1,495
2002 + 178,203 + 24,328 + 41,378 + 6,364 + 36,037 + 7,572 + 93,853 + 19,535 + 4,716 −10,155 + 2,221 + 22
2002          Jan-Dec + 178,203 + 24,328 + 41,378 + 6,364 + 36,037 + 7,572 + 93,853 + 19,535 + 4,716 −10,155 + 2,221 + 22
2003          Jan-Dec  p + 227,710 + 42,925 + 63,171 + 14,271 + 42,298 + 15,918 + 109,525 + 8,898 + 11,480 + 3,775 + 1,236 + 7,218
2003          Jan + 34,388 + 17,995 + 11,187 + 4,071 + 292 + 302 + 10,732 + 2,969 + 628 − 895 + 11,549 + 449
         Feb + 14,560 + 2,592 + 2,063 + 2,063 + 7,831 + 1,269 + 5,793 + 725 + 40 − 305 − 1,166 + 112
         Mar + 11,908 − 592 + 6,451 + 6,454 + 3,924 + 3,933 + 7,071 − 4,536 + 633 − 234 − 6,170 + 6
         Apr + 17,202 + 2,112 + 3,736 − 6,127 + 380 + 390 + 5,001 + 86 + 100 − 225 + 7,984 − 92
         May + 15,681 + 1,663 + 2,133 + 2,141 + 8,260 + 861 + 10,443 + 4,794 + 565 − 404 − 5,720 + 61
         June + 20,815 + 745 + 2,025 − 2,994 + 6,192 + 6,204 + 11,496 − 3,212 + 1,156 + 801 − 54 − 215
         July + 31,062 + 10,472 + 11,352 − 1,847 + 693 + 715 + 10,241 + 4,801 + 4,153 + 3,321 + 4,623 − 124
         Aug + 15,812 + 3,976 + 7,161 + 7,161 + 657 − 5,859 + 6,329 + 1,134 + 1,440 + 1,315 + 225 + 328
         Sep + 23,605 + 1,845 + 6,694 + 606 + 1,246 + 1,246 + 13,693 − 1,297 + 977 + 298 + 995 − 73
         Oct + 11,968 + 2,933 + 8,442 + 5,908 + 6,317 + 6,317 + 10,100 + 4,102 + 296 − 214 −13,187 − 188
         Nov + 17,180 + 347 + 1,205 − 3,883 + 6,680 + 715 + 6,311 + 1,335 + 394 − 408 + 2,590 − 189
         Dec p + 13,529 − 1,163 + 721 + 721 − 173 − 173 + 12,315 − 2,001 + 1,099 + 723 − 432 + 7,144
2004          Jan p + 26,508 + 18,026 + 11,907 + 11,907 + 352 + 352 + 11,796 + 4,624 + 533 − 776 + 1,920 − 321
1After deduction of repurchases. —2Federal Treasury notes (Sch ätze),   
Federal savings notes, Treasury discount paper (Bubills), Federal Treasury   
financing paper.  
58*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
VIII Public finances in Germany
  
12 Revenue, expenditure and assets of the wage and
salary earners ’ pension insurance fund
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999,  5  million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 Assets  5 
of which of which
Payments Balance Mort- Memo
from Pen- of revenue gage item
central Pension sioners ’ and and Adminis-
Contri- govern- pay- health expend- other Real trative
Period Total butions  2 ment Total ments  3 insurance  4 iture Total Deposits  6 Securities loans  7 estate assets
Western Germany
1997 305,606 248,463 54,896 295,635 246,011 17,892 + 9,971 14,659 10,179 1,878 2,372 230 9,261
1998 317,340 250,063 65,191 304,155 254,783 18,636 + 13,185 18,194 14,201 1,493 2,274 226 9,573
1999 169,124 128,191 39,884 159,819 134,536 9,910 + 9,305 13,623 11,559 824 1,127 114 4,904
2000 173,020 128,057 43,638 166,569 139,180 10,253 + 6,451 14,350 11,459 1,676 1,105 110 4,8892001  
8 178,293 130,064 46,710 172,382 144,374 10,610 + 5,911 13,973 10,646 1,517 1,699 111 4,917
2002 182,132 131,109 49,416 178,754 149,636 11,245 + 3,378 9,826 6,943 1,072 1,685 126 4,878
2003  p 188,462 134,479 52,904 182,704 153,656 11,878 + 5,758 7,641 5,017 816 1,682 126 4,892
2002          Q4 48,213 35,599 12,279 45,928 37,894 3,056 + 2,285 9,826 6,943 1,072 1,685 126 4,878
2003          Q1 45,408 31,969 13,173 45,117 38,234 2,900 + 291 8,686 5,649 1,230 1,685 122 4,874
         Q2 46,373 32,875 13,212 45,379 38,127 2,898 + 994 7,698 4,906 980 1,686 126 4,867         Q3 47,229 33,668 13,296 46,157 38,652 3,000 + 1,072 6,348 3,822 727 1,683 116 4,855         Q4 49,452 35,966 13,223 46,051 38,643 3,079 + 3,401 7,641 5,017 816 1,682 126 4,892
Eastern Germany
1997 79,351 48,939 20,065 87,424 70,500 5,388 −8,073 . . . . . .
1998 81,072 47,764 23,564 90,863 73,040 5,757 −9,791 . . . . . .
1999 43,214 24,015 14,744 47,641 38,383 3,040 −4,427 . . . . . .
2000 43,513 22,655 15,224 49,385 39,419 3,112 −5,872 . . . . . .
2001 44,462 21,984 16,383 50,943 40,356 3,152 −6,481 . . . . . .
2002 45,657 21,701 17,542 53,161 41,497 3,253 −7,504 . . . . . .
2003  p 45,727 22,018 18,139 53,808 42,761 3,360 −8,081 . . . . . .
2002          Q4 11,955 5,810 4,306 13,397 10,547 842 −1,442 . . . . . .
2003          Q1 11,187 5,320 4,588 13,359 10,649 827 −2,172 . . . . . .
         Q2 11,457 5,474 4,537 13,405 10,636 837 −1,948 . . . . . .
         Q3 11,461 5,417 4,534 13,548 10,757 858 −2,087 . . . . . .
         Q4 11,622 5,806 4,480 13,496 10,720 837 −1,874 . . . . . .
Source: Federal Minister of Labour and Social Affairs and Association of deducted from pension payments. —4From 1995, including long-term care
German Pension Insurance Funds. —1The annual figures do not tally with insurance for pensioners. —5Largely corresponds to fluctuation reserves.
the sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. From 1993, End of year or quarter. From 1992, figures for the whole of Germany. —
including financial compensation payments. Excluding investment spending 6Including cash. —7Excluding loans to other social security funds;
and proceeds. —2Including contributions for recipients of government including participating interests. —8Excluding income arising from the
cash benefits. —3Payments by pension insurance funds to health insurance revaluation of participating interests. 
institutions under section 50 of the Social Security Code V have been
13 Revenue and expenditure of the Federal Employment Agency
  
  
Up to end-1998, DM million; from 1999,  5  million
Revenue Expenditure
Grant or
of which of which working
capital
Promo- loans
Unemployment support  3,4 Job promotion  4,5 tion of fromwinter central
Contri- Western Eastern Western Eastern con- govern-
Period Total  
1 butions Levies  2 Total Total Germany Germany Total Germany Germany struction Balance ment
Germany
1997 93,149 85,793 2,959 102,723 60,273 40,309 19,964 31,418 16,117 15,301 443 −9,574 9,574
1998 91,088 86,165 2,868 98,852 53,483 35,128 18,355 34,279 16,784 17,496 471 −7,764 7,719
1999 47,954 45,141 1,467 51,694 25,177 16,604 8,573 20,558 10,480 10,078 279 −3,740 3,739
2000 49,606 46,359 1,403 50,473 23,946 15,615 8,331 20,324 10,534 9,790 294 − 868 867
2001 50,682 47,337 1,640 52,613 25,036 16,743 8,294 20,713 11,094 9,619 268 −1,931 1,931
2002 50,885 47,405 2,088 56,508 27,610 19,751 7,860 21,011 11,568 9,443 245 −5,623 5,623
2003 50,635 47,337 2,081 56,850 29,735 21,528 8,207 19,155 10,564 8,591 272 −6,215 6,215
2002          Q4 14,473 12,951 1,077 15,369 7,218 5,299 1,919 5,933 3,293 2,640 2 − 896 −1,151
2003          Q1 11,617 11,281 48 14,408 7,647 5,422 2,225 4,785 2,576 2,209 180 −2,790 5,151
         Q2 12,272 11,487 536 14,667 7,975 5,708 2,267 4,721 2,623 2,098 84 −2,395 2,408
         Q3 12,828 11,797 619 13,645 7,251 5,313 1,938 4,453 2,462 1,991 7 − 817 514
         Q4 13,917 12,773 878 14,131 6,863 5,086 1,777 5,196 2,903 2,293 1 − 214 −1,858
Source: Federal Employment Agency. —1Excluding central government the January contributions to the statutory pension insurance scheme for
liquidity assistance. —2Levies to promote winter construction and to pay in- recipients of wage substitutes are paid in January instead of in December.
solvency compensation to employees. —3Unemployment benefit, —5Vocational training, measures to encourage job take-up, rehabilitation,
short-time working benefit. —4Including contributions to the statutory job creation measures, subsidies granted to Personnel Service Agencies
health insurance funds and statutory pension insurance sheme. From 2003, (PSAs), compensation top-up payments and business start-up grant s. 
59*VIII Public finances in Germany

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
IX Economic conditions
  
1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
  Germany
  
  
  1999   2000   2001   2002   2003   2000   2001   2002   2003   2000   2001   2002   2003
Annual Percentage
Item
 5 
 billion percentage change of total
At  1995  prices
I Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 430.5 447.3 444.3 443.8 445.9 3.9 −0.7 −0.1 0.5 22.7 22.4 22.3 22.4
Construction 105.1 102.1 95.8 90.1 85.9 −2.9 −6.1 −5.9 −4.7 5.2 4.8 4.5 4.3
Wholesale/retail trade, hotel andrestaurant services, transportand storage  
1 334.5 353.5 367.6 371.3 373.7 5.7 4.0 1.0 0.6 17.9 18.5 18.7 18.8
Financing, renting and businessservices  
2 546.6 570.9 589.7 595.9 598.0 4.4 3.3 1.1 0.3 29.0 29.7 29.9 30.1
Public and private services  3 382.1 388.4 389.6 394.8 395.0 1.6 0.3 1.3 0.1 19.7 19.6 19.8 19.9
All economic sectors 1,823.5 1,886.7 1,911.5 1,919.9 1,922.3 3.5 1.3 0.4 0.1 95.8 96.2 96.5 96.7Memo item: Enterprise sector 1,596.1 1,658.5 1,684.3 1,693.4 1,696.9 3.9 1.6 0.5 0.2 84.2 84.8 85.1 85.4
Economic sectors, adjusted  
4 1,730.5 1,786.4 1,806.6 1,815.2 1,815.8 3.2 1.1 0.5 0.0 90.7 91.0 91.2 91.4
Gross domestic product 1,914.8 1,969.5 1,986.2 1,989.7 1,987.4 2.9 0.8 0.2 −0.1 100 100 100 100
II Use of domestic product
Private consumption  5 1,099.1 1,120.6 1,136.9 1,125.3 1,123.4 2.0 1.4 −1.0 −0.2 56.9 57.2 56.6 56.5
Government consumption 374.3 378.0 382.0 388.4 391.1 1.0 1.0 1.7 0.7 19.2 19.2 19.5 19.7Machinery and equipment 160.3 176.5 167.8 152.5 146.4 10.1 −4.9 −9.1 −4.0 9.0 8.4 7.7 7.4
Premises 248.7 242.1 230.5 217.1 209.7 −2.6 −4.8 −5.8 −3.4 12.3 11.6 10.9 10.6
Other investment  
6 23.4 25.5 27.0 27.4 27.9 9.0 5.6 1.6 1.8 1.3 1.4 1.4 1.4
Changes in inventories  7 −5.7 −8.1 −24.7 −22.0 −8 . 0.... −0.4 −1.2 −1.1 −0.4
Domestic use 1,900.2 1,934.7 1,919.4 1,888.6 1,890.4 1.8 −0.8 −1.6 0.1 98.2 96.6 94.9 95.1
Net exports 14.6 34.8 66.8 101.1 97.0 . . . . 1.8 3.4 5.1 4.9
Exports 581.8 661.5 698.8 722.6 730.7 13.7 5.6 3.4 1.1 33.6 35.2 36.3 36.8Imports 567.2 626.7 632.0 621.5 633.7 10.5 0.9 −1.7 2.0 31.8 31.8 31.2 31.9
Gross domestic product 1,914.8 1,969.5 1,986.2 1,989.7 1,987.4 2.9 0.8 0.2 −0.1 100 100 100 100
At  current  prices
III Use of domestic product
Private consumption  5 1,156.0 1,196.2 1,232.7 1,236.5 1,246.4 3.5 3.0 0.3 0.8 58.9 59.4 58.6 58.5
Government consumption 378.2 385.6 394.1 404.4 410.3 2.0 2.2 2.6 1.4 19.0 19.0 19.2 19.3Machinery and equipment 159.6 176.7 167.4 151.9 144.0 10.7 −5.3 −9.3 −5.2 8.7 8.1 7.2 6.8
Premises 245.2 240.2 228.9 215.5 207.9 −2.1 −4.7 −5.9 −3.6 11.8 11.0 10.2 9.8
Other investment  
6 21.6 23.2 24.4 24.6 24.7 7.3 5.0 1.0 0.3 1.1 1.2 1.2 1.2
Changes in inventories  7 2.1 0.7 −15.0 −13.2 1.4 . . . . 0.0 −0.7 −0.6 0.1
Domestic use 1,962.6 2,022.5 2,032.5 2,019.7 2,034.6 3.1 0.5 −0.6 0.7 99.6 98.0 95.7 95.5
Net exports 16.0 7.5 41.2 90.7 95.3 . . . . 0.4 2.0 4.3 4.5
Exports 586.4 686.1 731.5 757.6 763.0 17.0 6.6 3.6 0.7 33.8 35.3 35.9 35.8Imports 570.4 678.6 690.2 667.0 667.8 19.0 1.7 −3.4 0.1 33.4 33.3 31.6 31.4
Gross domestic product 1,978.6 2,030.0 2,073.7 2,110.4 2,129.8 2.6 2.2 1.8 0.9 100 100 100 100
IV Prices (1995 = 100)
Private consumption 105.2 106.7 108.4 109.9 110.9 1.5 1.6 1.3 1.0 . . . .Gross domestic product 103.3 103.1 104.4 106.1 107.2 −0.3 1.3 1.6 1.0 . . . .
Terms of trade 100.2 95.8 95.8 97.7 99.1 −4.4 0.1 1.9 1.4 . . . .
V Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,057.8 1,099.1 1,121.3 1,130.5 1,132.4 3.9 2.0 0.8 0.2 72.9 72.7 71.9 72.1Entrepreneurial and propertyincome 410.4 409.3 420.9 441.1 437.9 −0.3 2.8 4.8 −0.7 27.1 27.3 28.1 27.9
National income 1,468.2 1,508.4 1,542.2 1,571.5 1,570.3 2.7 2.2 1.9 −0.1 100 100 100 100
Memo item: Gross nationalincome 1,965.1 2,020.3 2,065.6 2,108.8 2,115.5 2.8 2.2 2.1 0.3 . . . .
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in January 2004. Prelimi- products). —5Including non-profit institutions serving households. —6In-
nary figure. —1Including communication services. —2Financial interme- tangible fixed asset formation (inter alia, computer software and entertain-
diation, real estate activities, renting and business services. —3Including ment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets. —7Including net in-
care-at-home services. —4Gross value added after deduction of assumed crease in valuables. 
bank charges, but excluding taxes on products (offset against subsidies on
60*IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
 IX. Economic conditions
 
2 Output in the production sector
 Germany
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which
Industry  1 
of which:   by main industrial grouping of which:   by economic sector
Motor
Chemicals vehicles,
Production Inter- Non- and Machinery trailers
sector, Construc- mediate Capital Durable durable chemical Basic and and semi-total tion  
2 Energy  3 Total goods  4 goods  5 goods goods  6 products metals equipment trailers
2000 = 100  
  
1999 95.3 103.7 100.2 94.0 94.5 91.1 96.2 98.4 97.2 92.4 93.3 89.8
2000 99.9 100.0 99.9 99.9 99.9 99.9 99.9 99.9 99.9 99.9 99.9 99.9
2001 99.6 92.4 97.3 100.5 99.7 102.3 100.4 98.8 98.0 101.1 102.1 104.02002 98.3 88.9 97.4 99.3 98.9 101.1 92.0 98.2 101.7 101.8 99.5 105.42003  
x 98.5 85.1 99.6 99.6 99.8 102.1 86.3 97.5 101.9 101.3 97.9 107.9
 
2002          Apr 98.1 96.4 96.9 98.3 99.3 99.7 90.0 95.6 102.4 104.5 97.1 105.8         May 95.6 94.8 93.4 96.0 98.3 95.2 83.5 95.7 102.6 101.8 92.0 101.0         June 102.0 100.1 87.0 103.9 103.0 109.0 95.0 97.7 103.8 107.2 109.2 115.7
         July 99.0 102.1 89.7 99.7 101.6 100.7 84.1 97.5 105.4 103.6 100.1 101.9
         Aug 92.4 94.0 89.3 92.6 95.4 90.0 74.0 95.9 99.9 95.1 85.3 91.7         Sep 104.8 104.4 92.2 106.2 105.7 109.0 103.8 102.2 103.2 108.0 108.8 114.5
         Oct 104.0 101.9 101.9 104.5 104.9 104.1 100.5 105.3 103.8 107.2 99.2 111.4
         Nov 105.8 96.2 103.1 107.0 104.3 110.9 103.5 105.8 102.1 105.3 105.7 119.9         Dec 92.6 63.3 106.6 93.7 84.5 105.4 83.4 92.8 88.5 81.5 118.6 90.6
2003          Jan 90.4 51.8 110.2 91.8 93.9 90.0 82.7 92.8 102.8 100.5 81.0 102.1
         Feb 92.4 51.4 104.0 94.9 94.1 98.4 87.8 91.5 98.2 99.9 91.5 111.3         Mar 104.6 83.8 109.0 106.0 105.9 109.9 98.0 100.2 112.1 110.3 103.7 121.0
         Apr 98.4 92.2 100.4 98.7 100.5 99.3 85.5 96.6 105.6 102.8 92.9 109.0
         May 96.0 91.3 95.4 96.5 99.0 97.2 79.9 93.9 102.4 101.4 91.5 106.9         June 100.2 98.6 91.7 101.2 102.9 103.5 82.5 97.3 103.7 102.0 102.1 106.8
         July 100.4 102.4 90.5 101.2 102.6 103.0 84.1 98.7 105.1 103.7 98.5 108.7
         Aug 90.0 89.8 90.4 90.0 93.3 86.6 65.0 95.7 99.0 89.7 85.2 79.9         Sep 102.3 101.0 92.2 103.5 103.5 106.6 94.4 99.5 97.8 103.6 104.0 110.8
         Oct  
x 105.2 99.4 101.5 106.2 107.3 106.9 95.1 105.1 102.3 110.5 99.0 113.2
         Nov  x 106.7 93.2 104.0 108.2 105.7 114.7 98.1 103.3 99.8 106.6 107.3 126.1
         Dec  x 95.7 66.3 106.0 97.2 88.9 109.1 82.7 95.0 93.7 84.3 117.8 98.8
Annual percentage change  
  
1999 + 1.1 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 1.2 + 1.5 + 1.0 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 3.5 − 3.6 − 2.2 + 3.2
2000 + 4.8 − 3.6 − 0.3 + 6.3 + 5.7 + 9.7 + 3.8 + 1.5 + 2.8 + 8.1 + 7.1 + 11.2
2001 − 0.3 − 7.6 − 2.6 + 0.6 − 0.2 + 2.4 + 0.5 − 1.1 − 1.9 + 1.2 + 2.2 + 4.1
2002 − 1.3 − 3.8 + 0.1 − 1.2 − 0.8 − 1.2 − 8.4 − 0.6 + 3.8 + 0.7 − 2.5 + 1.3
2003  x + 0.2 − 4.3 + 2.3 + 0.3 + 0.9 + 1.0 − 6.2 − 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.5 − 1.6 + 2.4
 
2002          Apr − 1.5 + 3.2 + 0.0 − 2.2 − 2.3 − 1.3 − 10.6 − 1.5 + 0.8 + 0.1 − 1.8 − 0.8
         May − 3.5 − 5.4 + 2.0 − 3.8 − 3.2 − 4.6 − 14.4 − 0.9 + 5.2 − 0.9 − 6.8 − 2.8
         June − 1.9 − 4.2 + 1.0 − 1.9 − 2.7 − 0.1 − 8.8 − 2.0 + 1.4 + 1.7 − 1.4 + 5.8
         July − 0.3 − 3.8
+ 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.4 − 6.0 − 1.7 + 2.4 + 5.1 − 0.4 + 3.0
         Aug − 0.8 − 6.0 + 0.9 − 0.3 + 1.3 − 0.1 − 12.5 − 1.7 + 5.3 + 1.8 − 4.3 + 6.0
         Sep − 0.5 − 4.0 + 0.8 − 0.3 + 1.4 − 1.3 − 7.6 − 0.3 + 6.3 + 1.2 − 3.5 + 3.1
         Oct + 0.2 − 7.1 + 4.8 + 0.5 + 1.5 + 0.5 − 6.1 − 0.4 + 3.9 + 3.2 − 1.5 + 1.3
         Nov + 2.8 − 3.1 − 0.9 + 3.8 + 4.1 + 4.9 − 2.9 + 2.5 + 6.7 + 7.4 + 2.3 + 11.4
         Dec + 0.1 − 12.2 − 3.4 + 1.3 + 3.3 + 0.9 − 8.5 + 0.3 + 8.3 + 6.4 − 1.5 + 5.2
2003          Jan + 1.0 − 10.1 + 1.1 + 1.5 + 2.8 + 2.4 − 7.6 − 1.0 + 4.2 + 2.8 − 3.1 + 6.9
         Feb + 0.4 − 23.2 + 7.2 + 1.2 + 0.2 + 4.8 − 5.2 − 2.2 − 1.2 − 1.7 + 2.2 + 10.4
         Mar + 0.7 − 6.5 + 6.3 + 0.6 + 1.3 + 1.9 − 6.0 − 2.4 + 1.4 + 1.7 − 1.1 + 4.8
         Apr + 0.3 − 4.4 + 3.6 + 0.4 + 1.2 − 0.4 − 5.0 + 1.0 + 3.1 − 1.6 − 4.3 + 3.0
         May + 0.4 − 3.7 + 2.1 + 0.5 + 0.7 + 2.1 − 4.3 − 1.9 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.5 + 5.8
         June − 1.8 − 1.5 + 5.4 − 2.6 − 0.1 − 5.0 − 13.2 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 4.9 − 6.5 − 7.7
         July + 1.4 + 0.3 + 0.9 + 1.5 + 1.0 + 2.3
+ 0.0 + 1.2 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 1.6 + 6.7
         Aug − 2.6 − 4.5 + 1.2 − 2.8 − 2.2 − 3.8 − 12.2 − 0.2 − 0.9 − 5.7 − 0.1 − 12.9
         Sep − 2.4 − 3.3
+ 0.0 − 2.5 − 2.1 − 2.2 − 9.1 − 2.6 − 5.2 − 4.1 − 4.4 − 3.2
         Oct  x + 1.2 − 2.5 − 0.4 + 1.6 + 2.3 + 2.7 − 5.4 − 0.2 − 1.4 + 3.1 − 0.2 + 1.6
         Nov  x + 0.9 − 3.1 + 0.9 + 1.1 + 1.3 + 3.4 − 5.2 − 2.4 − 2.3 + 1.2 + 1.5 + 5.2
         Dec  x + 3.3 + 4.7 − 0.6 + 3.7 + 5.2 + 3.5 − 0.8 + 2.4 + 5.9 + 3.4 − 0.7 + 9.1
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. —oUsing the facture of refined petroleum products. —4Including mining and
Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. —1Manufacturing sector, unless quarrying. —5Including manufacture of motor vehicles, trailers and
assigned to the main grouping energy, plus mining and quarrying. —2The semi-trailers. —6Including printing and service activities related to prin-
figures refer to the economic classifications ”Site preparation ”and ”Build- ting. —xProvisional; adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical Office,
ing of complete constructions or parts thereof; civil engineering ”.— by way of estimates, to the results of the Quarterly Production Survey for
3Electricity, gas, steam and hot water supply, and, in particular, mining of the fourth quarter (industry: + 1.5%). 
coal and lignite, extraction of crude petroleum and natural gas and manu-
61* IX. Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
 IX Economic conditions
 
3 Orders received by industry *  
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which of which
 
Industry,
total Domestic orders Foreign orders Intermediate goods Capital goods  1 Consumer goods  2 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annualpercent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age
Period 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change 2000=100 change
Germany  
  
2000 99.9 + 13.8 99.9 + 8.2 100.0 + 21.8 100.0 + 14.3 100.0 + 16.3 99.9 + 4.2
2001 98.3 − 1.6 97.6 − 2.3 99.1 − 0.9 95.9 − 4.1 99.4 − 0.6 101.4 + 1.5
2002 98.3
+ 0.0 94.6 − 3.1 102.8 + 3.7 96.4 + 0.5 99.6 + 0.2 98.9 − 2.5
2003  p 98.8 + 0.5 94.7 + 0.1 104.0 + 1.2 97.8 + 1.5 100.5 + 0.9 95.5 − 3.4
 
2002          Dec 91.8 − 2.0 88.4 − 1.6 96.1 − 2.4 86.5 + 2.2 97.6 − 4.5 85.5 − 3.0
2003          Jan 97.9 + 3.1 92.4 − 0.2 104.7 + 6.8 97.8 + 4.9 98.1 + 2.9 97.0 − 2.4
         Feb 98.5 + 3.2 95.4 + 3.5 102.4 + 3.1 96.5 + 2.2 99.3 + 5.6 102.1 − 1.9
         Mar 105.6 − 0.8 100.3 − 0.7 112.2 − 1.1 105.3 + 2.4 105.5 − 2.0 106.5 − 6.0
         Apr 97.2 − 0.2 93.2 − 1.2 102.2 + 1.0 97.4 + 0.1 98.3 + 1.0 92.3 − 5.2
         May 93.0 − 5.8 91.0 − 0.2 95.5 −11.6 93.6 − 2.4 94.1 − 8.3 86.2 − 5.9
         June 100.2 − 0.9 94.3 − 2.0 107.6 + 0.5 98.6 − 1.4 104.4 + 1.3 88.5 − 7.9
         July 97.2 − 0.6 94.7 − 1.1 100.3
+ 0.0 97.8 + 0.3 98.0 − 0.8 92.0 − 2.5
         Aug 90.4 − 1.4 88.0 − 2.8 93.3 + 0.1 89.7 + 0.2 90.4 − 2.2 92.5 − 3.6
         Sep 102.7 + 0.9 98.3
+ 0.0 108.2 + 1.9 100.6 + 0.4 104.4 + 2.6 102.6 − 4.5
         Oct 102.5 + 2.2 99.2 + 1.6 106.7 + 3.0 102.5 + 2.8 102.8 + 2.3 102.0 + 0.1         Nov 102.9 + 1.3 99.4 + 2.1 107.2 + 0.4 102.7 + 3.3 104.6 + 1.0 96.3 − 3.9
         Dec  
p 97.8 + 6.5 90.0 + 1.8 107.5 + 11.9 90.8 + 5.0 105.8 + 8.4 87.8 + 2.7
Western Germany  
  
2000 99.9 + 13.5 99.9 + 7.8 100.0 + 21.4 99.9 + 13.5 100.0 + 16.3 99.9 + 3.52001 97.8 − 2.1 97.2 − 2.7 98.6 − 1.4 95.1 − 4.8 99.1 − 0.9 101.1 + 1.2
2002 97.3 − 0.5 93.7 − 3.6 101.6 + 3.0 95.1
+ 0.0 98.9 − 0.2 98.3 − 2.8
2003  p 97.4 + 0.1 93.2 − 0.5 102.6 + 1.0 95.6 + 0.5 99.6 + 0.7 94.4 − 4.0
 
2002          Dec 90.5 − 2.7 86.9 − 2.2 94.7 − 3.3 85.5 + 2.3 95.8 − 5.6 84.7 − 3.3
2003          Jan 96.9 + 2.5 91.7 − 0.2 103.1 + 5.6 95.2 + 3.8 98.4 + 2.9 96.2 − 2.7
         Feb 97.7 + 3.1 94.7 + 3.3 101.2 + 2.7 95.0 + 1.6 98.7 + 5.4 101.9 − 2.0
         Mar 104.2 − 0.2 99.1 − 1.2 110.4 + 1.0 103.5 + 2.5 104.4 − 0.4 105.9 − 6.4
         Apr 95.9 − 0.8 91.8 − 2.1 100.8 + 0.6 95.1 − 1.1 97.7 + 0.6 91.2 − 5.7
         May 91.8 − 6.6 89.4 − 1.1 94.7 −12.1 91.5 − 3.3 93.6 − 9.1 84.9 − 6.1
         June 99.2 − 1.1 92.3 − 2.9 107.5 + 1.0 96.5 − 2.5 104.2 + 1.6 87.4 − 8.0
         July 96.1 − 1.4 93.5 − 1.9 99.2 − 1.0 95.6 − 0.6 97.7 − 1.7 91.2 − 3.2
         Aug 89.1 − 1.2 86.4 − 3.1 92.3 + 1.0 87.0 − 0.8 90.1 − 1.0 91.4 − 4.1
         Sep 101.2 + 0.1 96.2 − 1.2 107.1 + 1.5 98.2 − 0.6 103.3 + 1.9 101.5 − 5.1
         Oct 100.9 + 1.6 97.2 + 0.7 105.4 + 2.6 100.0 + 1.8 101.7 + 1.9 100.7 − 0.4
         Nov 100.7 + 0.4 97.6 + 1.2 104.5 − 0.5 100.5 + 2.2 102.3 + 0.2 94.7 − 4.6
         Dec  p 95.6 + 5.6 88.2 + 1.5 104.4 + 10.2 89.2 + 4.3 102.9 + 7.4 85.9 + 1.4
Eastern Germany  
  
2000 100.0 + 18.2 100.0 + 13.9 99.9 + 29.7 99.9 + 20.8 100.0 + 16.3 100.0 + 15.12001 104.9 + 4.9 102.4 + 2.4 110.9 + 11.0 106.0 + 6.1 103.4 + 3.4 106.1 + 6.12002 111.0 + 5.8 104.0 + 1.6 127.8 + 15.2 111.6 + 5.3 110.7 + 7.1 109.4 + 3.12003  
p 117.9 + 6.2 110.9 + 6.6 134.9 + 5.6 122.7 + 9.9 114.1 + 3.1 112.8 + 3.1
 
2002          Dec 111.1 + 7.6 104.9 + 5.0 126.0 + 13.1 99.2 + 3.7 126.7 + 11.8 98.8 + 3.8
2003          Jan 111.3 + 9.4 99.7 + 0.1 139.2 + 30.6 128.2 + 17.1 93.7 + 2.1 110.3 + 2.4
         Feb 110.6 + 7.4 103.3 + 6.2 128.3 + 9.9 113.4 + 8.4 108.9 + 8.5 105.5 − 0.8
         Mar 123.7 − 8.7 112.6 + 4.3 150.4 −25.3 126.4 + 2.4 122.7 −19.6 116.3 − 0.6
         Apr 115.0 + 8.0 107.8 + 7.7 132.4 + 8.8 123.2 + 11.0 107.5 + 6.5 110.4 + 0.5         May 109.6 + 5.1 107.8 + 7.8 113.8 − 0.6 117.5 + 6.3 102.0 + 5.9 106.8 − 2.8
         June 114.3 + 2.1 116.1 + 7.9 110.0 −10.3 123.2 + 9.3 106.7 − 4.0 106.6 − 4.7
         July 112.3 + 11.1 107.5 + 6.5 123.7 + 21.9 123.7 + 10.1 101.8 + 13.5 105.9 + 7.7         Aug 108.3 − 3.7 105.5 + 1.2 114.9 −13.2 121.1 + 8.4 94.4 −17.6 109.9 + 2.2
         Sep 124.2 + 11.1 120.9 + 12.2 132.0 + 8.6 128.1 + 10.4 121.1 + 13.5 120.0 + 4.4
         Oct 124.8 + 9.7 120.9 + 10.0 134.3 + 9.2 131.1 + 12.9 118.6 + 6.8 123.4 + 7.5
         Nov 132.3 + 11.3 118.6 + 10.0 165.2 + 13.5 127.7 + 13.4 139.7 + 10.5 121.4 + 5.0         Dec  
p 128.8 + 15.9 109.8 + 4.7 174.7 + 38.7 109.0 + 9.9 152.6 + 20.4 117.5 + 18.9
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. —*Economic tax. —oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. —1Including
activities of the manufacturing sector, in particular excluding manufacture manufacture of motor vehicles, trailers and semi-trailers. —2Including print-
of food products, beverages, tobacco and refined petroleum products; ing and service activities related to printing. 
results for specific operational segments; figures excluding value-added
62* IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
 IX Economic conditions
 
4 Orders received by construction *   
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Germany Western Germany Eastern Germany
Public Public Public
Housing sector Housing sector Housing sector Industrial Industrial Industrial
con- construc- construc- con- construc- construc- con- construc- construc-
Total struction tion  1 tion Total struction tion  1 tion Total struction tion  1 tion
 Annual Annual Annual
 per- per- per- centage centage centage
Period change
2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 change 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100
1999 109.3 −2.1 119.6 106.1 106.7 107.4 + 0.8 114.7 104.3 106.4 115.5 −10.0 134.6 112.2 107.2
2000 99.9 −8.6 100.0 99.9 100.0 99.9 −7.0 99.9 99.9 100.0 100.0 −13.4 100.0 99.9 100.0
2001 94.5 −5.4 82.8 96.9 99.0 97.4 −2.5 87.6 99.9 100.7 85.2 −14.8 68.3 86.4 94.2
2002 88.7 −6.1 72.8 91.5 95.6 91.0 −6.6 79.6 93.1 95.6 81.7 −4.1 51.9 85.8 95.7
   
2002          Nov 74.8 −8.1 68.5 74.9 78.6 73.8 −10.0 75.3 72.8 74.0 77.9 −1.8 47.6 82.4 91.7
         Dec 79.3 −0.3 70.1 89.1 74.0 83.1 −2.2 80.3 93.0 73.2 67.3 + 8.5 38.9 75.5 76.4
2003          Jan 56.8 −9.3 49.7 61.7 55.5 58.5 −11.2 55.3 62.1 56.2 51.2 −2.1 32.5 60.3 53.5
         Feb 64.4 −13.0 54.6 67.4 67.0 67.5 −8.7 59.4 68.9 71.1 54.3 −26.7 40.1 62.4 54.9
         Mar 88.7 −20.7 78.8 86.4 97.4 91.7 −24.3 86.9 87.7 99.4 79.0 −4.0 54.0 81.5 91.5
         Apr 82.4 −13.4 69.8 81.9 90.9 84.9 −13.9 76.9 84.3 90.8 74.5 −11.3 48.3 73.8 90.9
         May 82.7 −10.3 66.6 83.1 92.4 81.6 −12.6 70.7 79.7 90.8 86.2 −2.7 54.0 95.1 96.9
         June 94.4 −11.3 75.7 91.8 108.9 95.9 −11.6 83.7 92.1 108.1 89.7 −9.8 51.4 91.1 111.2
         July 90.6 −3.4 71.2 86.6 107.3 91.1 −5.6 79.1 85.7 105.1 89.0 + 4.2 46.9 89.9 113.5
         Aug 81.1 −8.3 67.7 76.1 95.1 81.7 −6.2 73.8 74.7 94.8 79.2 −14.3 49.0 81.0 95.7
         Sep 91.2 −10.5 76.3 88.8 103.2 91.3 −11.7 84.9 85.3 102.4 90.9 −6.4 50.2 101.3 105.4
         Oct 80.5 −4.7 70.5 75.6 92.3 83.9 −2.4 79.8 76.4 95.2 69.9 −12.6 42.2 72.8 83.6
         Nov 69.2 −7.5 62.0 73.6 68.7 71.0 −3.8 69.5 74.0 68.5 63.1 −19.0 39.1 71.7 69.3
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. —*Values exclusive engineering". —oBundesbank calculation. —1Including the railways and
of value-added tax. The figures refer to the economic classifications "Site post office. preparation" and "Building of complete constructions or parts thereof; civil
 
 
5 Retail trade turnover *
    Germany
  
Retail trade  1 Memo item
of which:  By enterprises ’ main product range of which
Pharmaceutical Household
and medical articles, Retail trade plus retailgoods, cosmetic Clothing, hardware, sales of motor vehicles
Food, beverages, and toilet footwear and paints and glass and motorcycles and Retail sales of
Total tobacco  
2 articles  2 leather goods  2 2  3 sales of automotive fuel motor vehicles  4 
Annual percent- Annual percent-
age change Annual Annual Annual Annual age change Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
Not age age age age Not age Price- Price-
Period change change change change change 2000 = 100 adjusted adjusted  5 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 2000 = 100 adjusted adjusted  5 2000 = 100
1996 97.0 + 0.3 −0.6 97.0 + 0.0 81.8 + 4.2 103.2 −0.8 96.4 −1.1 96.0 + 1.3 + 0.3 90.7 + 5.3
1997 95.9 −1.1 −1.7 95.7 −1.3 83.4 + 2.0 101.4 −1.7 95.2 −1.2 95.8 −0.2 −0.7 94.0 + 3.6
1998 96.9 + 1.0 + 1.1 97.1 + 1.5 88.2 + 5.8 100.3 −1.1 98.2 + 3.2 97.5 + 1.8 + 1.5 99.2 + 5.5
1999 97.7 + 0.8 + 0.5 98.0 + 0.9 94.7 + 7.4 100.2 −0.1 97.6 −0.6 98.7 + 1.2 + 0.8 102.9 + 3.7
2000 100.0 + 2.4 + 1.2 100.0 + 2.0 100.0 + 5.6 100.0 −0.2 100.0 + 2.5 100.0 + 1.3 + 0.1 100.0 −2.8
2001 101.8 + 1.8 . 104.7 + 4.7 107.3 + 7.3 99.5 −0.5 96.5 −3.5 101.9 + 1.9 . 102.4 + 2.4
2002 100.2 −1.6 −2.1 107.4 + 2.6 111.1 + 3.5 94.6 −4.9 88.8 −8.0 101.1 −0.8 −1.5 105.3 + 2.8
2003  e 99.4 −0.8 −1.0 108.9 + 1.4 112.7 + 1.4 90.1 −4.8 87.6 −1.4 100.8 −0.3 −0.6 ... ...
 
2002          Dec 120.0 −2.4 −2.5 124.8 + 1.5 126.9 + 2.6 118.5 −4.7 104.3 −8.1 115.1 −1.1 −2.0 98.7 + 5.1
2003          Jan 93.7 + 1.4 + 1.9 101.6 + 4.2 111.3 + 2.9 81.4 −1.1 78.8 −2.4 92.5 + 1.3 + 1.6 89.4 + 0.9
         Feb 88.0 + 1.1 + 1.2 97.9 + 2.9 105.0 + 4.5 67.6 −5.8 77.2 −0.9 89.2 + 1.2 + 1.2 94.8 + 1.6
         Mar 99.6 −2.7 −2.9 108.4 −3.6 109.1
+ 0.0 91.2 −4.9 93.6 + 3.4 103.1 −1.2 −1.5 116.3 + 3.4
         Apr 103.2 + 2.1 + 2.4 113.6 + 5.5 113.3 + 0.3 97.1 + 0.2 92.0 −0.9 106.2 + 1.1 + 1.3 117.7 −1.9
         May 100.7 + 0.5 + 1.0 110.7 + 0.5 111.5 + 1.8 94.1 −2.8 90.3 + 2.5 104.0 + 1.7 + 1.9 116.2 + 5.3
         June 92.8 −0.7 −1.0 105.3 + 2.0 106.9 + 0.8 82.9 −2.8 80.0 −1.4 96.8 −0.3 −0.7 111.5 + 0.8
         July 99.1 −0.8 −1.0 110.8 + 3.6 118.3 + 2.9 87.8 −5.4 85.9 −2.6 103.6 + 0.6 + 0.2 120.6 + 5.0
         Aug 92.0 −5.2 −5.4 107.3 −0.3 104.2 −4.8 75.0 −13.4 79.2 −6.6 93.1 −4.0 −4.5 96.6 −0.1
         Sep 98.3 + 1.4 + 1.1 105.3 + 4.3 111.1 + 3.4 96.6 −3.6 85.4 −0.1 99.8 + 2.5 + 2.0 106.2 + 6.3
         Oct 105.9 + 0.1 −0.2 113.4 + 3.5 117.2 + 1.9 108.3 −1.7 94.2 −0.3 107.1 + 0.4 −0.2 113.0 + 1.1
         Nov 101.5 −4.6 −5.3 109.2 −2.8 112.2 −1.1 89.3 −9.2 92.9 −4.8 101.6 −4.1 −5.0 103.4 −2.6
         Dec  e 117.4 −2.2 −2.5 123.3 −1.2 131.7 + 3.8 110.1 −7.1 101.5 −2.7 113.1 −1.7 −2.2 ... ...
Source: Federal Statistical Office. —*Excluding value-added tax; figures tive fuel. —2Retail sales in stores. —3Including furniture and lighting
from 2002 provisional, partly revised and, judging by past experience, sub- equipment. —4Including motor vehicle parts and accessories. —5Up to
ject to considerable uncertainty in the most recent months. —1Excluding (and including) 2000, at 1995 prices; from 2001, at 2000 prices. 
sales of motor vehicles and motorcycles and excluding the sale of automo-
63* IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
 IX Economic conditions
 
6 Labour market * 
 
 
 
Persons in
Employed  1,2 Employees  1 employment  3 Unemployed  2 
Persons
Mining employed Persons
and under under-manu- employ- goingfactur- Short- ment pro- vocationaling Con- time motion further Unem-
Annual change Annual sector Annual ploy- Vacan-
schemes  2,5 training  2 workers  2 struction  4 
percen- change, ment cies,
Thou- Thou- Thou- tage Thou- thou- rate  2,6 thou-
Period sands in % sands sands change Thousands sands sands in % sands  2 
Germany  
  
2000 38,750 + 1.8 + 676 34,745 + 1.8 6,373 1,053 86 316 352 3,889 −211 9.7 514
2001 38,914 + 0.4 + 164 34,834 + 0.3 6,395 958 123 243 345 3,852 −37 9.4 506
2002 38,668 −0.6 −246 34,577 −0.7 6,218 8 883 207 192 332 4,060 + 209 9.8 451
2003 38,246 −1.1 −422 ... ... ... ... 195 140 251 4,376 + 316 10.5 355
2003          Jan r 37,794 −1.4 −556 ... 788 195 155 299 4,623 + 333 11.1 350
         Feb r 37,775 −1.5 −566 33,733 −1.7 ... 757 227 150 287 4,706 + 410 11.3 388
         Mar r 37,930 −1.5 −565 ... 806 244 143 275 4,608 + 452 11.1 415
         Apr r 38,137 −1.5 −562 ... 824 242 138 262 4,495 + 471 10.8 419
         May r 38,221 −1.4 −535 34,112 −1.5 ... 830 225 134 255 4,342 + 396 7 10.4 393
         June r 38,298 −1.1 −428 ... 833 222 131 241 4,257 + 303 10.2 373
         July r 38,283 −1.0 −398 ... 834 196 131 220 4,352 + 305 10.4 367
         Aug r 38,322 −1.0 −383 34,125 −1.5 ... 836 150 131 212 4,314 + 296 10.4 356
         Sep r 38,517 −0.9 −351 ... 835 169 133 221 4,207 + 265 10.1 330
         Oct r 38,621 −0.8 −305 ... 823 163 138 231 4,152 + 222 10.0 297
         Nov o 38,606 o −0.6 o −236 ... ... ... 814 162 140 235 4,184 + 159 10.0 275
         Dec ... ... ... ... ... 149 135 227 4,317 + 91 10.4 258
2004          Jan ... ... ... ... ... 164 123 208 11 4,597 11 +2 5 11 11.0 277
Western Germany 9  
  
2000 . . . . . 5,761 749 59 59 202 2,380 −224 7.6 448
2001 . . . . . 5,769 696 94 53 197 2,320 −60 7.2 436
2002 . . . . . 5,593 8 654 162 42 192 2,498 + 178 7.7 377
2003 . . . . . ... ... 160 30 155 2,753 + 255 8.4 292
2003          Jan . . . . . ... 593 157 35 175 2,898 + 262 8.8 294
         Feb . . . . . ... 572 187 34 168 2,951 + 317 9.0 328         Mar . . . . . ... 601 199 33 165 2,880 + 352 8.8 348
         Apr . . . . . ... 613 201 32 160 2,811 + 363 8.6 350
         May . . . . . ... 616 187 31 159 2,715 + 306
7 8.2 327
         June . . . . . ... 617 182 30 151 2,663 + 255 8.1 306
         July . . . . . ... 616 162 29 137 2,734 + 253 8.3 300
         Aug . . . . . ... 617 119 28 133 2,723 + 246 8.3 287         Sep . . . . . ... 617 139 27 141 2,653 + 213 8.1 261
         Oct . . . . . ... 609 136 27 149 2,638 + 188 8.0 237
         Nov . . . . . ... 603 135 26 152 2,666 + 145 8.1 222         Dec . . . . . ... ... 122 25 146 2,752 + 104 8.4 212
2004          Jan . . . . . ... ... 135 22 132
11 2,927 11 +6 3 11 8.9 234
Eastern Germany 10  
  
2000 . . . . . 612 305 27 257 150 1,508 + 13 17.2 66
2001 . . . . . 626 262 29 190 148 1,532 + 23 17.3 702002 . . . . . 625
8 229 45 150 140 1,563 + 31 17.7 74
2003 . . . . . ... ... 35 110 96 1,623 + 61 18.5 63
2003          Jan . . . . . ... 196 39 120 125 1,725 + 71 19.5 55
         Feb . . . . . ... 185 40 116 118 1,756 + 94 19.9 61         Mar . . . . . ... 205 45 110 110 1,728 + 99 19.6 67
         Apr . . . . . ... 211 41 106 102 1,684 + 108 19.1 69
         May . . . . . ... 214 38 103 96 1,628 + 90 18.6 67         June . . . . . ... 216 39 102 89 1,594 + 48 18.3 67
         July . . . . . ... 218 34 102 82 1,618 + 53 18.5 67
         Aug . . . . . ... 219 31 104 80 1,591 + 50 18.2 69         Sep . . . . . ... 218 30 106 81 1,554 + 52 17.8 69
         Oct . . . . . ... 214 27 112 82 1,514 + 34 17.3 60
         Nov . . . . . ... 211 27 113 83 1,519 + 13 17.4 53         Dec . . . . . ... ... 27 110 81 1,565 −13 17.9 46
2004          Jan . . . . . ... ... 29 101 75
11 1,670 11 −3811 19.1 43
Source: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency. —*Monthly figures. —8The figures from March 2002 onwards are positively affected by
figures: end of month; employed persons and employees: averages; short- the fact that construction firms which are required to report and which
time workers: mid-month; annual and quarterly figures: averages. — have been identified in the course of drawing up the corporate register are
1Work-place concept. —2Annual figures, calculated by the Bundesbank; de- included for the first time. —9Excluding western Berlin; for the mining,
viations from the official figures are due to rounding. —3Including active manufacturing and construction sectors, including persons employed in
proprietors. —4The figures refer to the economic classifications ”Site western Berlin. —10 Including western Berlin; for the mining,
preparation ”and ”Building of complete constructions or parts thereof; civil manufacturing and construction sectors, excluding persons employed in
engineering ”.—5Employees involved in job creation schemes and struc- western Berlin. —11From January 2004, unemployed persons excluding all
tural adjustment measures (SAM). —6Relative to the total civilian labour those participating in occupational aptitude testing and training
force. —7From May 2003, calculated on the basis of new labour force schemes. — o First preliminary estimate. 
64* IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
 IX Economic conditions
 
7 Prices
 Germany
 
 
Consumer price index
Indices of Index of world market
of which foreign trade prices prices  of raw materials  5 
Other Index of
durable producerand non- prices ofdurable industrial Index ofconsumer Services Con- products producergoods excluding struction prices of sold on the
excluding house House price domestic Other raw agricultural
Total Food Energy  
1 rents  2 rents index  2,3 market  4 Exports Imports Energy  6 products  4 materials  7 energy  1,2 
Period 2000 = 100 1995 = 100 2000 = 100
Index level  
  
1999 98.6 100.6 100.3 87.7 99.0 98.8 99.3 2 97.0 89.9 100.9 100.2 57.6 83.1
2000 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 95.4 104.4 111.4 100.0 100.0
2001 102.0 105.1 100.3 105.7 102.5 101.2 100.3 103.0 100.8 105.4 112.1 91.4 91.92002 103.4 106.1 101.1 106.0 105.0 102.6 100.2 102.4 94.6 105.3 109.3 86.1 91.12003 104.5 106.0 101.4 110.2 106.4 103.8 100.3 104.1
p 94.9 105.4 107.3 82.9 86.9
 
2002          Apr 103.3 107.8 101.3 108.1 103.5 102.4 102.5 96.0 105.4 110.7 94.4 93.6         May 103.4 107.7 101.2 106.9 104.4 102.5 100.2 102.5 94.5 105.4 110.1 91.4 90.8         June 103.4 106.6 101.1 105.9 104.9 102.6 102.5 93.7 105.4 108.7 84.3 89.9
         July 103.7 105.9 100.9 105.9 106.5 102.7 102.2 93.5 105.3 108.2 84.0 89.4
         Aug 103.5 104.7 100.8 106.2 106.2 102.8 100.3 102.1 93.4 105.4 108.8 87.9 89.9         Sep 103.4 104.5 100.9 107.2 105.3 102.8 102.2 94.6 105.5 109.5 92.9 91.8
         Oct 103.3 104.1 100.9 107.6 104.8 102.9 102.5 94.3 105.5 109.5 90.5 92.1
         Nov 103.0 103.6 101.0 105.1 104.5 103.0 100.2 102.2 94.8 105.4 108.0 80.5 90.8         Dec 104.0 104.0 100.9 105.6 107.9 103.0 102.4 94.4 105.4 109.0 87.2 89.6
2003          Jan 104.0 105.3 101.4 110.7 105.1 103.2 103.8 94.8 105.5 109.6 92.2 88.3
         Feb 104.5 105.9 101.6 113.0 105.9 103.4 100.3 104.2 96.4 105.8 110.3 97.3 89.7         Mar 104.6 106.3 101.6 113.8 105.6 103.5 104.4 94.8 105.8 109.6 89.5 88.3
         Apr 104.3 106.6 101.4 110.2 105.8 103.7 104.2 94.9 105.7 107.4 76.0 87.8
         May 104.1 106.8 101.4 108.2 105.6 103.7 100.3 103.9 93.9 105.3 105.9 72.5 83.5         June 104.4 107.1 101.3 108.8 106.1 103.8 103.9 95.3 105.1 105.8 77.0 81.3
         July 104.6 106.3 101.1 109.2 107.4 103.8 104.1 92.4 105.1 106.0 81.5 82.7
         Aug 104.6 105.1 101.0 110.4 107.7 103.9 100.3 104.1 93.9 105.2 106.9 86.4 85.2         Sep 104.5 105.6 101.4 109.7 106.7 103.9 104.2 97.4 105.4 106.7 78.7 87.5
         Oct 104.5 105.7 101.4 110.0 106.4 103.9 104.2 95.9 105.3 106.8 81.0 88.7
         Nov 104.3 105.5 101.4 109.5 105.8 104.1 100.3 104.2
p 97.5 105.4 106.8 81.7 91.0
         Dec 105.1 105.7 101.4 109.4 109.0 104.1 104.2 p 96.8 105.2 106.3 80.7 89.4
2004          Jan e 105.2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 82.6 92.8
Annual percentage change  
  
1999 + 0.6 − 1.1 + 0.1 + 4.0 + 0.3 + 1.1 −0.3 2 − 1.0 − 6.0 − 0.5 − 0.5 + 37.1 − 6.2
2000 + 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.3 + 14.0 + 1.0 + 1.2 + 0.7 2 + 3.1 + 6.1 + 3.5 + 11.2 + 73.6 + 20.3
2001 + 2.0 + 5.1 + 0.3 + 5.7 + 2.5 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 3.0 + 5.7 + 1.0 + 0.6 − 8.6 − 8.1
2002 + 1.4 + 1.0 + 0.8 + 0.3 + 2.4 + 1.4 −0.1 − 0.6 − 6.2 − 0.1 − 2.5 − 5.8 − 0.9
2003 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 4.0 + 1.3 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 1.7 p + 0.3 + 0.1 − 1.8 − 3.7 − 4.6
 
2002          Apr + 1.5 + 2.3 + 1.2 + 0.7 + 1.9 + 1.4 − 1.1 − 6.8 − 0.3 − 2.8 − 2.9 − 1.2
         May + 1.2 + 0.2 + 1.0 − 2.6 + 2.9 + 1.4 −0.1 − 1.3 − 8.9 − 0.6 − 4.3 −12.3 − 6.5
         June + 1.0 − 1.1 + 0.9 − 2.8 + 2.6 + 1.5 − 1.3 − 6.6 − 0.6 − 5.2 −19.5 − 6.9
         July + 1.2 − 1.1 + 0.7 − 0.6 + 2.7 + 1.5 − 1.1 − 7.0 − 0.5 − 4.2 −13.4 − 5.4
         Aug + 1.2 − 0.6 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 2.6 + 1.4
+ 0.0 − 1.1 − 8.3 + 0.0 − 2.6 − 7.5 + 1.5
         Sep + 1.1 − 0.6 + 0.6 − 0.2 + 2.5 + 1.4 − 1.1 − 7.8 + 0.2 − 1.4 − 0.4 + 7.9
         Oct + 1.3 − 1.0 + 0.4 + 3.5 + 2.3 + 1.4 + 0.1 − 6.5 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 14.7 + 10.2
         Nov + 1.2 − 0.9 + 0.3 + 2.7 + 2.3 + 1.4 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 5.7 + 0.5 − 0.6 + 12.1 + 3.9
         Dec + 1.2 − 1.1 + 0.1 + 4.1 + 2.0 + 1.4 + 0.6 − 5.4 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 23.2 + 2.9
2003          Jan + 1.1 − 3.1
+ 0.0 + 7.0 + 1.5 + 1.2 + 1.5 − 3.5 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 25.1 − 1.1
         Feb + 1.3 − 1.9 + 0.1 + 8.5 + 1.5 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 1.9 − 3.0 + 0.9 + 0.6 + 26.0 − 2.1
         Mar + 1.2 − 1.4 + 0.1 + 7.4 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 1.7 − 4.9 + 0.6 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 6.4
         Apr + 1.0 − 1.1 + 0.1 + 1.9 + 2.2 + 1.3 + 1.7 − 1.1 + 0.3 − 3.0 −19.5 − 6.2
         May + 0.7 − 0.8 + 0.2 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 3.8 −20.7 − 8.0
         June + 1.0 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 2.7 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 1.4 + 1.7 − 0.3 − 2.7 − 8.7 − 9.6
         July + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 3.1 + 0.8 + 1.1 + 1.9 − 1.2 − 0.2 − 2.0 − 3.0 − 7.5
         Aug + 1.1 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 4.0 + 1.4 + 1.1
+ 0.0 + 2.0 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 1.7 − 1.7 − 5.2
         Sep + 1.1 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 2.3 + 1.3 + 1.1 + 2.0 + 3.0 − 0.1 − 2.6 −15.3 − 4.7
         Oct + 1.2 + 1.5 + 0.5 + 2.2 + 1.5 + 1.0 + 1.7 + 1.7 − 0.2 − 2.5 −10.5 − 3.7
         Nov + 1.3 + 1.8 + 0.4 + 4.2 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 2.0 p + 2.8 + 0.0 − 1.1 + 1.5 + 0.2
         Dec + 1.1 + 1.6 + 0.5 + 3.6 + 1.0 + 1.1 + 1.8 p + 2.5 − 0.2 − 2.5 − 7.5 − 0.2
2004          Jan e + 1.2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... −10.4 + 5.1
Source: Federal Statistical Office; for index of world market prices: HWWA In- Overall construction price level. —4Excluding value-added tax. —5HWWA
stitute. —1Electricity, gas and other fuels. —2Bundesbank calculation index of raw material prices ’euro area ’on a euro basis. —6Coal and crude
based on data provided by the Federal Statistical Office. —3Previously: oil. — 7 Food, beverages and tobacco as well as industrial raw materials. 
65* IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
IX Economic conditions
  
8 Households ’ income *
Germany
  
Up to end-1998 DM billion; from 1999  5  billion
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries  1 salaries  2 Saving  6 ratio  7 benefits received  3 "Mass income"  4 Disposable income  5 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age
Period DM / 
 5 
change DM / 
 5 
change DM / 
 5 
change DM / 
 5 
change DM / 
 5 
change DM / 
 5 
change %
1991 1,355.4 . 941.4 . 426.2 . 1,367.6 . 1,917.5 . 250.1 . 13.0
1992 1,467.3 8.3 1,003.0 6.5 473.9 11.2 1,476.9 8.0 2,054.3 7.1 266.1 6.4 13.01993 1,505.9 2.6 1,032.7 3.0 511.2 7.9 1,543.9 4.5 2,120.6 3.2 261.3 −1.8 12.3
1994 1,528.1 1.5 1,029.3 −0.3 529.4 3.6 1,558.6 1.0 2,181.9 2.9 254.0 −2.8 11.6
1995 1,577.1 3.2 1,037.9 0.8 553.7 4.6 1,591.7 2.1 2,256.4 3.4 252.1 −0.7 11.2
1996 1,594.0 1.1 1,032.7 −0.5 595.7 7.6 1,628.3 2.3 2,307.5 2.3 249.5 −1.0 10.8
1997 1,591.3 −0.2 1,015.9 −1.6 609.6 2.3 1,625.5 −0.2 2,356.5 2.1 244.7 −1.9 10.4
1998 1,624.3 2.1 1,038.9 2.3 621.5 1.9 1,660.3 2.1 2,422.8 2.8 249.6 2.0 10.31999 855.4 3.0 549.2 3.4 327.5 3.1 876.7 3.3 1,281.1 3.4 125.1 −1.9 9.8
2000 884.6 3.4 571.7 4.1 338.1 3.2 909.8 3.8 1,325.5 3.5 129.3 3.3 9.82001 903.7 2.2 592.4 3.6 347.5 2.8 939.8 3.3 1,373.7 3.6 141.0 9.1 10.32002 910.4 0.7 593.5 0.2 365.0 5.1 958.5 2.0 1,382.8 0.7 146.3 3.8 10.6
2001          Q4 253.4 1.6 164.0 3.4 87.9 3.0 251.9 3.2 352.8 3.6 32.3 11.8 9.1
2002          Q1 210.4 1.0 137.5 0.4 91.1 4.6 228.6 2.0 343.7 0.7 47.3 3.1 13.8
         Q2 218.6 0.7 140.0 0.1 90.0 4.5 230.0 1.8 342.7 0.2 34.2 2.1 10.0         Q3 227.3 1.1 152.4 0.5 91.5 5.8 243.9 2.5 340.5 0.8 30.8 4.6 9.0         Q4 254.1 0.2 163.6 −0.3 92.5 5.3 256.1 1.7 356.0 0.9 34.1 5.7 9.6
2003          Q1 211.1 0.3 136.8 −0.5 93.9 3.1 230.7 0.9 351.2 2.2 50.1 5.9 14.3
         Q2 218.4 −0.1 138.3 −1.2 92.8 3.1 231.1 0.5 346.7 1.1 35.3 3.4 10.2
         Q3 226.8 −0.2 150.9 −1.0 93.2 1.9 244.1 0.1 341.5 0.3 31.6 2.5 9.2
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in November 2003. — plus monetary social benefits received. —5"Mass income" plus operating
*Households including non-profit institutions serving households. —1Resi- surplus, mixed income, property income (net), other current transfers
dence concept. —2After deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages received, income of non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (ex-
and salaries and employees ’contributions to the social security funds. — cluding wage tax and consumption-related taxes) and other current trans-
3Social security benefits in cash from the social security funds, central, state fers paid. Including the increase in claims on company pension funds. —6In-
and local government and foreign countries, pension payments (net), cluding the increase in claims on company pension funds. —7Saving as a
private funded social benefits, less social contributions on social benefits, percentage of disposable income. 
consumption-related taxes and public charges. —4Net wages and salaries
  
  
9 Pay rates and actual earnings
Germany
    
Overall economy Production sector (including construction)
Negotiated wage and salary level  1 Wages and salaries Negotiated wage and salary level  1 Wages and salaries
per employee per employee
on an hourly basis on a monthly basis on an hourly basis on a monthly basis (work-place concept)  2 (work-place concept)  3 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
Period 1995 = 100 change 1995 = 100 change 1995 = 100 change 1995 = 100 change 1995 = 100 change change 1995 = 100
1995 100.0 4.9 100.0 4.6 100.0 3.2 100.0 6.1 100.0 5.5 100.0 4.1
1996 102.6 2.6 102.4 2.4 101.4 1.4 103.8 3.8 102.9 2.9 102.9 2.91997 104.1 1.5 103.9 1.5 101.7 0.3 105.8 1.9 104.6 1.7 104.7 1.71998 106.1 1.9 105.7 1.8 102.7 1.0 107.7 1.8 106.4 1.7 106.4 1.61999 109.2 2.9 108.6 2.7 104.3 1.5 110.9 3.0 109.4 2.9 108.3 1.8
2000 111.3 1.9 110.8 2.0 105.9 1.6 113.2 2.0 111.6 2.0 111.2 2.7
2001 113.5 2.0 113.0 2.0 107.9 1.9 115.2 1.8 113.6 1.8 113.7 2.22002 116.5 2.7 116.1 2.7 109.5 1.5 118.9 3.2 117.3 3.2 116.0 2.02003 119.0 2.1 118.6 2.2 . . 122.2 2.8 120.5 2.8 . .
2002          Q1 106.2 2.5 105.7 2.5 102.0 1.2 106.3 2.2 104.9 2.2 108.2 0.9
         Q2 107.7 2.8 107.2 2.8 105.1 1.3 109.2 3.6 107.8 3.6 117.8 1.9         Q3 120.2 2.6 119.7 2.6 109.3 1.9 127.5 3.2 125.8 3.2 112.9 3.4         Q4 132.1 2.9 131.6 2.9 121.9 1.5 132.4 3.7 130.6 3.7 125.4 2.3
2003          Q1 109.3 3.0 109.0 3.1 104.1 2.1 110.1 3.5 108.6 3.5 . .
         Q2 110.0 2.1 109.6 2.2 106.6 1.4 111.8 2.3 110.3 2.3 . .         Q3 122.9 2.2 122.5 2.3 110.7 1.3 131.2 2.9 129.4 2.9 . .         Q4 133.8 1.3 133.4 1.3 . . 135.8 2.5 133.9 2.5 . .
2003          June 110.3 2.2 110.0 2.3 . . 112.7 2.9 111.2 2.8 . .
         July 147.5 2.3 147.1 2.4 . . 168.4 3.0 166.0 3.0 . .
         Aug 110.5 2.2 110.2 2.3 . . 112.6 2.9 111.1 2.8 . .         Sep 110.6 2.1 110.2 2.2 . . 112.7 2.7 111.1 2.7 . .
         Oct 110.6 2.0 110.3 2.1 . . 112.7 2.5 111.2 2.5 . .
         Nov 179.8 0.5 179.2 0.6 . . 181.7 2.4 179.2 2.4 . .         Dec 110.9 1.7 110.6 1.8 . . 112.9 2.6 111.3 2.6 . .
1Current data are normally revised upwards on account of additional Calculated by the Bundesbank on the basis of data from the Federal
reports. —2Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in Statistical Office, using the old and new classifications of the economic
November 2003. —3Production sector, excluding electricity, gas, steam and sectors. 
hot water supply, and excluding installation and building completion work.
66*IX Economic conditions

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
X External sector
 
1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
 
 
 5  million
2003
Item 2000 2001  1 2002 Q1 Q2 Q3 Sep Oct Nov
Current account −67,554 −14,496 + 67,020 + 2,436 −7,267 + 13,585 + 6,765 + 9,266 + 4,398 A
1 Goods
Exports (fob) incl supplementary items 989,826 1,033,850 1,059,597 252,630 254,448 256,335 88,673 98,105 87,254
Imports (fob) incl supplementary items 958,276 960,256 928,982 235,998 231,005 219,006 77,198 83,580 78,064
Balance + 31,553 + 73,597 + 130,617 + 16,632 + 23,442 + 37,329 + 11,475 + 14,525 + 9,190
2 Services
Receipts 287,455 324,525 332,173 75,678 79,231 85,808 28,199 28,678 24,635
Expenditure 304,943 325,625 320,839 74,067 74,324 81,064 26,308 26,034 23,764
Balance −17,488 −1,100 + 11,336 + 1,610 + 4,907 + 4,743 + 1,890 + 2,644 + 870
3 Income −27,052 −35,730 −28,243 −12,705 −15,950 −9,840 + 142 −4,667 + 663
4 Current transfers
Transfer payments from non-residents 66,720 78,780 85,715 32,581 14,692 15,397 5,015 4,696 5,608Transfer payments to non-residents 121,284 130,049 132,406 35,681 34,359 34,045 11,757 7,933 11,934
Balance −54,564 −51,263 −46,690 −3,100 −19,665 −18,647 −6,742 −3,237 −6,325
Capital account + 9,839 + 6,698 + 10,894 + 1,957 + 1,880 + 2,583 + 113 + 1,109 + 1,140B
Financial account (net capital exports: −) + 68,443 −24,407 −97,217 −25,137 −32,972 −8,832 −5,352 −4,380 − 254 C
1 Direct investment −14,944 −102,384 −41,497 − 857 + 3,535 −12,384 −4,792 −10,551 + 6,491
By resident units abroad −442,262 −304,981 −183,504 −36,475 −36,858 −29,504 −17,930 −11,845 + 1,666
By non-resident units in the euro area + 427,315 + 202,597 + 142,005 + 35,618 + 40,393 + 17,119 + 13,138 + 1,294 + 4,825
2 Portfolio investment −111,550 + 68,075 + 103,427 + 7,039 + 57,387 −68,386 + 14,182 + 26,737 −4,311
By resident units abroad −410,666 −288,246 −173,906 −47,263 −102,878 −67,518 −22,156 −34,189 −26,816
Equity −285,922 −104,755 −40,179 + 10,775 −32,912 −23,588 −5,622 −14,354 −7,127
Bonds and notes −114,280 −155,839 −88,945 −49,943 −59,669 −39,076 −9,299 −10,398 −15,396
Money market instruments −10,455 −27,646 −44,785 −8,095 −10,298 −4,854 −7,235 −9,437 −4,293
By non-resident units in the euro area + 299,110 + 356,318 + 277,331 + 54,302 + 160,266 − 866 + 36,338 + 60,926 + 22,504
Equity + 49,940 + 233,200 + 90,756 + 3,721 + 29,330 + 21,381 + 10,854 + 27,631 + 15,915Bonds and notes + 239,199 + 114,017 + 127,683 + 47,883 + 117,220 −10,460 + 20,033 + 17,802 + 7,569
Money market instruments + 9,968 + 9,098 + 58,894 + 2,698 + 13,716 −11,789 + 5,450 + 15,493 − 980
3 Financial derivatives −3,441 −1,481 −10,227 −2,488 −1,481 −4,458 + 223 + 1,854 + 373
4 Other investment + 180,810 −6,429 −146,647 −40,711 −94,273 + 74,522 −14,748 −22,658 −8,312
Eurosystem − 221 + 5,028 + 18,181 −4,950 + 2,426 + 3,423 + 773 − 590 −3,520
General government −1,477 + 2,552 −8,251 −10,173 + 1,845 + 4,469 + 4,176 − 193 + 2,539
MFIs (excluding the Eurosystem) + 158,435 + 3,249 −136,384 −5,285 −76,170 + 80,182 −7,764 −15,178 −6,337
Long-term + 2,460 −24,234 + 21,098 −4,952 + 597 + 3,462 − 619 −1,376 + 1,025
Short-term + 155,969 + 27,483 −157,487 − 334 −76,765 + 76,720 −7,145 −13,802 −7,362
Other sectors  
2 + 24,088 −17,261 −20,193 −20,299 −22,376 −13,551 −11,933 −6,697 − 994
5 Reserve assets (Increase: −) + 17,568 + 17,815 −2,277 + 11,881 + 1,860 + 1,874 − 217 + 238 + 5,506
Errors and omissions −10,731 + 32,208 + 19,304 + 20,745 + 38,356 −7,336 −1,526 −5,994 −5,283 D
*Source: European Central Bank. —1From January 2001, including   
Greece. — 2 Enterprises and households.  
67*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
X External sector
 
2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
 
Current account Memo item Capital trans-
fers and Change in
the Bundes- acquisition/disposal of Change in bank ’s net
Supple- non- the foreign external
Balance mentary produced reserves at Balance of assets aton current Foreign trade Factor Current Financial transaction transaction non-financial unclassifiable
Period account  
1 items  4,5 Services  6 income transfers assets  7 account  7 values  8 values  8 trade  1,2,3 transactions
DM million
1990  o + 73,001 + 105,382 −3,833 −26,138 + 32,859 −35,269 −4,975 −89,497 −11,611 + 33,082 −10,976
1991 −36,277 + 21,899 −2,804 −30,703 + 33,144 −57,812 −4,565 + 12,614 + 9,605 + 18,623 − 319
1992 −30,023 + 33,656 −1,426 −44,993 + 33,962 −51,222 −1,963 + 69,792 −52,888 + 15,082 −68,745
1993 −23,071 + 60,304 −3,038 −52,559 + 27,373 −55,151 −1,915 + 21,442 + 22,795 −19,251 + 35,766
1994 −46,760 + 71,762 −1,104 −62,814 + 4,852 −59,455 −2,637 + 57,871 + 2,846 −11,321 −12,242
1995 −38,657 + 85,303 −4,722 −63,999 + 178 −55,416 −3,845 + 63,647 −10,355 −10,791 −17,754
1996 −20,729 + 98,538 −5,264 −64,829 + 1,815 −50,989 −3,283 + 23,607 + 1,882 − 1,478 + 1,610
1997 −15,756 + 116,467 −7,360 −69,535 − 2,588 −52,738 + 52 + 31 + 6,640 + 9,033 + 8,468
1998 −21,666 + 126,970 −5,934 −76,062 −13,337 −53,304 + 1,289 + 32,810 −7,128 − 5,305 −8,231
1999 −45,780 + 127,542 −13,656 −91,964 −18,775 −48,927 − 301 −44,849 + 24,517 + 66,413 −72,364
2000 −54,655 + 115,645 −13,691 −97,534 − 3,593 −55,482 + 13,345 + 71,006 + 11,429 −41,125 + 94,329
2001 + 8,185 + 186,771 −10,624 −100,168 −14,141 −53,652 − 756 −41,892 + 11,797 + 22,665 + 63,911
 5 
 million
1999 −23,407 + 65,211 −6,982 −47,020 − 9,599 −25,016 − 154 −22,931 + 12,535 + 33,956 −36,999
2000 −27,945 + 59,128 −7,000 −49,868 − 1,837 −28,368 + 6,823 + 36,305 + 5,844 −21,027 + 48,230
2001 + 4,185 + 95,495 −5,432 −51,215 − 7,230 −27,432 − 387 −21,419 + 6,032 + 11,588 + 32,677
2002 + 62,804 + 132,788 −5,935 −38,246 + 751 −26,555 − 212 −86,103 + 2,065 + 21,445 −33,292
2003  p + 50,888 + 129,673 −6,977 −34,889 − 8,590 −28,329 + 465 −71,311 + 445 + 19,513 + 2,658
2001          Q1 + 1,064 + 22,540 −1,420 −13,575 − 858 − 5,623 + 552 + 4,035 + 4,072 − 9,723 −11,749
         Q2 − 4,038 + 22,104 −1,503 −13,043 − 3,408 − 8,189 − 13 + 17,775 + 2,039 −15,763 + 21,099
         Q3 − 1,889 + 25,547 −1,779 −16,642 − 2,765 − 6,250 − 446 − 141 −2,165 + 4,639 −13,360
         Q4 + 9,048 + 25,303 − 730 − 7,955 − 199 − 7,371 − 479 −43,088 + 2,085 + 32,434 + 36,688
2002          Q1 + 13,911 + 33,328 −1,049 −11,092 − 2,148 − 5,128 + 160 + 721 −1,352 −13,440 −18,496
         Q2 + 13,373 + 31,721 −1,389 − 8,875 + 466 − 8,550 − 75 −20,119 + 2,432 + 4,388 + 1,694
         Q3 + 13,883 + 35,543 −1,566 −12,808 − 1,829 − 5,457 + 62 −19,490 + 87 + 5,459 −17,588
         Q4 + 21,637 + 32,195 −1,931 − 5,471 + 4,262 − 7,419 − 359 −47,215 + 898 + 25,039 + 1,099
2003          Q1 + 9,680 + 29,304 −1,354 − 8,612 − 4,337 − 5,321 + 5 −15,950 −1,495 + 7,760 + 3,444
         Q2 + 8,634 + 29,813 −1,919 − 8,888 − 2,475 − 7,896 + 152 −28,535 + 1,505 + 18,245 + 22,123
         Q3 + 12,933 + 38,908 −1,344 −12,553 − 3,832 − 8,245 + 208 −2,358 − 751 −10,033 −15,902
         Q4  p + 19,642 + 31,648 −2,359 − 4,836 + 2,055 − 6,867 + 100 −24,468 + 1,186 + 3,541 −7,008
2001          July − 3,198 + 9,441 − 567 − 5,397 − 3,970 − 2,705 − 226 + 5,225 − 151 − 1,650 −10,589
         Aug + 1,564 + 9,038 − 699 − 6,539 + 1,276 − 1,512 − 172 + 3,554 + 460 − 5,406 −4,247
         Sep − 255 + 7,069 − 513 − 4,707 − 71 − 2,033 − 47 −8,920 −2,474 + 11,696 + 1,476
         Oct + 3,413 + 9,661 − 219 − 4,721 + 1,575 − 2,882 − 140 −1,322 −1,001 − 950 −1,307
         Nov + 969 + 7,351 − 425 − 3,095 + 5 − 2,867 − 180 −20,220 + 204 + 19,227 + 6,860
         Dec + 4,666 + 8,290 − 86 − 139 − 1,779 − 1,622 − 159 −21,546 + 2,882 + 14,158 + 31,135
2002          Jan + 1,966 + 10,526 − 515 − 3,917 − 4,823 + 695 + 477 + 8,769 −1,747 − 9,465 −17,916
         Feb + 4,156 + 10,558 − 332 − 3,192 + 206 − 3,084 − 155 −4,946 + 67 + 878 + 1,535
         Mar + 7,789 + 12,245 − 203 − 3,982 + 2,468 − 2,739 − 162 −3,102 + 328 − 4,853 −2,116
         Apr + 4,537 + 10,015 − 916 − 2,659 + 1,058 − 2,961 − 148 − 125 + 1,657 − 5,920 −9,839
         May + 3,919 + 10,408 − 565 − 3,230 − 231 − 2,462 + 47 − 417 + 1,379 − 4,928 + 3,826
         June + 4,917 + 11,299 + 93 − 2,986 − 362 − 3,127 + 26 −19,576 − 603 + 15,236 + 7,707
         July + 2,856 + 13,224 − 774 − 3,785 − 3,956 − 1,853 − 203 −11,581 − 548 + 9,476 −15,567
         Aug + 3,165 + 10,477 − 317 − 5,824 + 196 − 1,366 + 86 −6,178 + 886 + 2,040 −5,579
         Sep + 7,862 + 11,842 − 474 − 3,200 + 1,931 − 2,238 + 179 −1,731 − 252 − 6,058 + 3,559
         Oct + 5,840 + 11,529 − 414 − 3,869 + 1,950 − 3,356 − 82 −19,457 + 570 + 13,129 −5,279
         Nov + 9,284 + 12,283 − 627 − 1,645 + 1,565 − 2,291 − 137 −4,333 − 842 − 3,970 + 4,265
         Dec + 6,513 + 8,383 − 889 + 43 + 748 − 1,772 − 139 −23,425 + 1,171 + 15,880 + 2,112
2003          Jan − 1,313 + 8,980 − 708 − 3,920 − 4,907 − 759 + 475 −5,645 − 97 + 6,580 + 6,799
         Feb + 4,370 + 10,668 − 142 − 2,932 − 577 − 2,647 − 504 −20,067 − 320 + 16,521 + 677
         Mar + 6,622 + 9,656 − 505 − 1,760 + 1,147 − 1,916 + 33 + 9,763 −1,078 −15,340 −4,032
         Apr + 3,138 + 9,216 − 897 − 2,872 + 331 − 2,640 − 123 −5,647 + 1,449 + 1,184 + 1,477
         May + 2,971 + 10,210 − 557 − 3,124 − 1,169 − 2,390 + 156 −10,122 − 854 + 7,849 + 22,684
         June + 2,526 + 10,387 − 465 − 2,892 − 1,638 − 2,867 + 119 −12,766 + 910 + 9,211 −2,037
         July + 1,230 + 14,159 − 621 − 4,133 − 5,325 − 2,850 + 62 + 754 + 225 − 2,271 −16,353
         Aug + 2,299 + 10,424 − 461 − 5,079 + 157 − 2,742 + 224 −8,631 − 717 + 6,825 −3,057
         Sep + 9,405 + 14,325 − 263 − 3,341 + 1,336 − 2,653 − 78 + 5,519 − 259 −14,587 + 3,508
         Oct + 7,512 + 10,829 − 740 − 2,311 + 1,555 − 1,822 − 26 −5,113 − 255 − 2,118 −21,689
         Nov + 6,435 + 10,373 − 830 − 1,403 + 1,137 − 2,842 + 185 −8,994 + 521 + 1,853 + 14,870
         Dec  p + 5,694 + 10,446 − 790 − 1,122 − 637 − 2,203 − 59 −10,362 + 921 + 3,806 − 190
oFrom July 1990, including the external transactions of the former GDR. — included up to December 1992 in the supplementary trade items. —
1From the beginning of 1993, figures subject to significant uncertainty 4Mainly warehouse transactions for account of residents and deduction of
owing to changes in the method of data collection for foreign trade. — goods returned. —5See footnote 3. —6Excluding the expenditure on
2Special trade according to the official foreign trade statistics: imports cif, freight and insurance included in the cif import figure. —7Capital
exports fob. —3From January 1993, including additional estimates for exports: −. — 8 Increase: −. 
external transactions which do not have to be reported and which are
68*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
X External sector
 
3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
by country and group of countries *
 
  5  million
 2003
Country / group of countries  2000  2001  2002 Jan / Nov Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec  p 
All countries  1 Exports 597,440 638,268 651,320 607,158 49,675 58,183 58,163 58,600 54,453
Imports 538,311 542,774 518,532 487,932 39,251 43,858 47,334 48,227 44,007Balance + 59,128 + 95,495 + 132,788 + 119,227 + 10,424 + 14,325 + 10,829 + 10,373 + 10,446
I Exports 460,422 481,991 486,520 450,994 35,568 43,077 43,922 43,873 ...Industrial countries
Imports 389,927 390,269 367,287 341,050 27,514 30,243 32,351 33,189 ...Balance + 70,495 + 91,722 + 119,233 + 109,945 + 8,054 + 12,834 + 11,571 + 10,684 ...
Exports 337,375 351,611 354,813 336,933 26,273 32,204 33,210 33,623 ... 1 EU member states
Imports 273,951 277,034 262,849 246,481 19,428 22,243 23,357 24,623 ...
Balance + 63,424 + 74,577 + 91,964 + 90,452 + 6,845 + 9,961 + 9,854 + 9,000 ...
of  which
Exports 264,870 275,384 276,270 262,515 19,952 25,097 25,886 26,555 ... Euro-area
Imports 217,946 221,680 211,642 200,222 15,523 18,321 19,124 20,131 ... member states
Balance + 46,924 + 53,704 + 64,628 + 62,293 + 4,429 + 6,776 + 6,762 + 6,424 ...
of which
Austria Exports 32,436 33,486 33,863 32,318 2,759 3,103 3,209 3,375 ...
Imports 20,497 20,664 21,047 19,309 1,613 1,780 1,763 1,981 ...Balance + 11,939 + 12,822 + 12,816 + 13,009 + 1,146 + 1,323 + 1,446 + 1,394 ...
Belgium and Exports 32,728 35,187 34,108 33,319 2,859 3,850 3,323 3,466 ...Luxembourg Imports 26,230 28,521 26,505 25,592 2,060 2,356 2,332 2,531 ...
Balance + 6,499 + 6,666 + 7,603 + 7,727 + 799 + 1,494 + 991 + 935 ...
France Exports 67,418 69,601 68,721 64,425 4,576 5,869 6,433 6,258 ...
Imports 50,862 49,743 48,200 45,019 3,254 4,136 4,418 4,465 ...Balance + 16,556 + 19,858 + 20,521 + 19,406 + 1,323 + 1,733 + 2,015 + 1,793 ...
Italy Exports 45,011 47,119 47,335 44,893 2,856 4,068 4,467 4,510 ...
Imports 35,776 35,280 33,482 31,018 2,374 2,796 2,848 3,044 ...Balance + 9,235 + 11,839 + 13,853 + 13,875 + 481 + 1,272 + 1,619 + 1,466 ...
Netherlands Exports 38,993 40,011 40,463 37,192 3,141 3,484 3,509 3,668 ...
Imports 44,739 43,233 40,751 40,448 3,290 3,494 4,036 4,082 ...Balance − 5,745 − 3,222 − 288 − 3,255 − 150 − 10 − 527 − 415 ...
Spain Exports 26,732 27,841 29,436 29,892 2,104 2,794 2,996 3,175 ...
Imports 16,087 15,226 15,532 15,107 999 1,370 1,361 1,537 ...Balance + 10,645 + 12,615 + 13,903 + 14,785 + 1,105 + 1,424 + 1,635 + 1,638 ...
Sweden Exports 13,524 12,978 13,496 13,172 1,088 1,288 1,366 1,332 ...
Imports 10,202 8,999 8,868 8,726 692 817 761 861 ...Balance + 3,322 + 3,979 + 4,628 + 4,446 + 397 + 470 + 605 + 471 ...
United Exports 49,377 52,764 53,761 50,818 4,146 4,851 4,987 4,796 ...Kingdom Imports 36,923 37,259 33,075 29,292 2,426 2,417 2,695 2,800 ...
Balance + 12,453 + 15,505 + 20,685 + 21,526 + 1,720 + 2,434 + 2,292 + 1,996 ...
Exports 39,944 39,987 40,687 37,298 3,161 3,615 3,412 3,417 ... 2 Other European
Imports 36,800 39,165 39,420 37,138 3,140 2,913 3,606 3,575 ... industrial countries  
2 
Balance + 3,144 + 821 + 1,267 + 160 + 22 + 702 − 194 − 158 ...
of which
Switzerland Exports 25,596 27,489 26,702 23,737 1,936 2,156 2,097 2,087 ...
Imports 18,797 19,753 19,461 17,487 1,378 1,449 1,794 1,683 ...
Balance + 6,799 + 7,737 + 7,241 + 6,250 + 558 + 707 + 303 + 404 ...
Exports 83,103 90,393 91,020 76,763 6,134 7,257 7,300 6,833 ... 3 Non-European
Imports 79,176 74,069 65,019 57,431 4,947 5,086 5,389 4,991 ... industrial countries
Balance + 3,926 + 16,324 + 26,001 + 19,332 + 1,187 + 2,172 + 1,911 + 1,841 ...
of which
Japan Exports 13,195 13,103 12,576 10,798 898 1,047 1,147 1,036 ...
Imports 26,847 22,910 19,896 17,572 1,351 1,581 1,730 1,670 ...
Balance −13,651 − 9,807 − 7,320 − 6,774 − 453 − 534 − 583 − 634 ...
Exports 61,764 67,824 68,263 57,023 4,475 5,393 5,401 5,021 ... United States
Imports 47,121 45,982 40,376 36,165 3,217 3,215 3,332 2,968 ...Balance + 14,643 + 21,842 + 27,887 + 20,857 + 1,258 + 2,178 + 2,069 + 2,052 ...
II Exports 70,318 83,246 91,284 91,175 8,249 9,043 8,478 8,721 ...Countries in transition
Imports 82,900 90,341 93,662 94,048 7,510 8,839 9,801 9,646 ...Balance −12,582 − 7,095 − 2,378 − 2,873 + 739 + 204 −1,323 − 926 ...
of which
Central and east Exports 59,900 69,914 75,373 73,238 6,568 7,196 6,863 7,077 ...European countries Imports 62,781 68,701 70,686 69,776 5,489 6,545 7,081 7,098 ...in transition Balance − 2,882 + 1,213 + 4,687 + 3,462 + 1,079 + 651 − 218 − 21 ...
People ‘s Republic Exports 9,459 12,118 14,571 16,650 1,553 1,716 1,493 1,532 ...
of China  
3 Imports 18,553 19,942 21,338 22,588 1,873 2,158 2,612 2,409 ...Balance − 9,094 − 7,824 − 6,768 − 5,939 − 320 − 442 −1,119 − 877 ...
III Exports 65,023 71,477 71,884 63,701 5,736 5,949 5,655 5,898 ...Developing countries
Imports 64,742 61,490 56,940 52,195 4,176 4,705 5,114 5,335 ...Balance + 282 + 9,987 + 14,944 + 11,506 + 1,560 + 1,244 + 540 + 563 ...
of which
Exports 24,029 24,735 25,282 22,586 2,012 2,214 1,955 2,211 ... Emerging markets in
Imports 30,498 28,351 26,660 24,246 2,002 2,293 2,602 2,628 ... South-East Asia  
4 
Balance − 6,469 − 3,616 − 1,377 − 1,661 + 10 − 79 − 647 − 417 ...
OPEC countries Exports 10,729 13,669 14,689 12,730 1,329 1,188 1,153 1,151 ...
Imports 10,235 8,220 6,977 6,696 494 619 599 722 ...Balance + 494 + 5,449 + 7,713 + 6,034 + 835 + 569 + 554 + 429 ...
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (fob) by country of destination, 2Including Cyprus. —3Excluding Hong Kong. —4Brunei Darussalam,
imports (cif) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of Korea, Singapore,countries according to the current position. —1Including fuel and other Taiwan and Thailand. 
supplies for ships and aircraft and other data not classifiable by region. —
69*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
X External sector
 
4 Services and factor income of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
 5  million
Services
Other services
of which
 
Patents Compen- Services  of Construction
Trans- Financial and sation of Investment Government self-employed and  assembly
Period Total Travel  1 services licences Total income portation  2 transactions  3 persons  4 work,  repairs employees  5 
1999 −47,020 −36,421 + 2,882 + 1,005 −1,896 + 1,997 −14,588 −2,245 − 403 − 756 −8,843
2000 −49,868 −37,420 + 3,385 + 980 −2,904 + 2,221 −16,130 −2,733 − 782 − 512 −1,325
2001 −51,215 −37,416 + 4,144 + 509 −2,395 + 3,488 −19,545 −2,536 −1,123 − 257 −6,974
2002 −38,246 −35,243 + 3,032 + 584 −1,414 + 5,257 −10,461 −2,026 − 363 − 354 + 1,105
2003 −34,889 −32,281 + 3,113 + 1,019 − 859 + 4,952 −10,833 −1,833 + 664 − 298 −8,291
2002          Q2 − 8,875 − 8,454 + 1,027 + 104 − 655 + 1,228 −2,126 − 505 − 158 − 148 + 614
         Q3 −12,808 −13,331 + 717 + 179 − 442 + 1,707 −1,638 − 539 + 194 − 310 −1,519
         Q4 − 5,471 − 6,647 + 1,094 + 350 + 123 + 1,263 −1,653 − 457 − 10 − 29 + 4,291
2003          Q1 − 8,612 − 6,564 + 751 + 423 − 216 + 1,227 −4,234 − 556 + 170 + 173 −4,511
         Q2 − 8,888 − 7,607 + 1,296 − 94 − 236 + 1,202 −3,449 − 487 + 6 − 143 −2,333
         Q3 −12,553 −12,623 + 484 + 348 − 383 + 1,313 −1,692 − 403 + 241 − 303 −3,529
         Q4 − 4,836 − 5,486 + 581 + 341 − 24 + 1,210 −1,458 − 386 + 247 − 26 + 2,082
2003          Feb − 2,932 − 1,675 + 156 + 149 + 0 + 384 −1,946 − 120 + 60 + 52 − 629
         Mar − 1,760 − 2,231 + 451 + 68 − 143 + 424 − 328 − 221 + 54 + 62 + 1,084
         Apr − 2,872 − 2,402 + 375 − 321 − 109 + 426 − 841 − 196 − 43 − 42 + 373
         May − 3,124 − 2,218 + 290 + 62 − 55 + 351 −1,553 − 136 + 15 − 50 −1,119
         June − 2,892 − 2,987 + 632 + 165 − 72 + 424 −1,055 − 155 + 34 − 51 −1,587
         July − 4,133 − 3,480 + 133 + 135 − 136 + 467 −1,252 − 169 + 156 − 91 −5,235
         Aug − 5,079 − 5,370 + 215 + 147 − 74 + 403 − 401 − 124 + 65 − 107 + 264
         Sep − 3,341 − 3,773 + 136 + 66 − 173 + 442 − 39 − 111 + 19 − 105 + 1,441
         Oct − 2,311 − 2,469 + 63 + 69 − 73 + 375 − 276 − 131 + 91 − 15 + 1,570
         Nov − 1,403 − 1,456 + 205 + 164 + 9 + 370 − 694 − 100 + 59 − 23 + 1,159
         Dec − 1,122 − 1,560 + 313 + 108 + 40 + 465 − 488 − 155 + 96 + 11 − 648
1From January 2002, figures subject to significant uncertainty. —2Ex- vices supplied. —4Engineering and other technical services, research and
cluding the expenditure on freight included in the cif import figure. — development, commercial services, etc. — 5 Wages and salaries. 
3Including the receipts from foreign military agencies for goods and ser-
5 Current transfers of the Federal Republic of Germany 6 Capital transfers
(balances) (balances)
 5  million  5  million
Public  1 Private  1 
International
organisations  2 
 
of which Other Remittances Other
European current by foreign current
Period Total Total Total Communities Total workers transfers Total  4 Public  1 Private  1 transfers  3 
1999 −25,016 −17,348 −15,428 −13,846 −1,920 −7,667 −3,429 −4,239 − 154 −1,351 + 1,197
2000 −28,368 −19,095 −17,100 −15,398 −1,996 −9,272 −3,458 −5,814 −1,599 −1,189 − 410
2001 −27,432 −16,927 −14,257 −12,587 −2,670 −10,505 −3,520 −6,985 − 387 −1,361 + 974
2002 −26,555 −15,644 −12,416 −11,214 −3,227 −10,911 −3,470 −7,441 − 212 −1,416 + 1,204
2003 −28,329 −19,419 −15,985 −14,323 −3,435 −8,910 −3,332 −5,578 + 465 −1,141 + 1,606
2002          Q2 −8,550 −5,262 −5,254 −4,997 − 8 −3,289 − 868 −2,421 − 75 − 274 + 199
         Q3 −5,457 −3,585 −2,746 −2,387 − 838 −1,873 − 868 −1,005 + 62 − 348 + 410
         Q4 −7,419 −4,483 −3,161 −2,998 −1,322 −2,936 − 868 −2,069 − 359 − 565 + 207
2003          Q1 −5,321 −3,310 −2,294 −1,628 −1,016 −2,011 − 833 −1,178 + 5 − 233 + 238
         Q2 −7,896 −5,411 −5,373 −4,789 − 37 −2,486 − 833 −1,653 + 152 − 276 + 427
         Q3 −8,245 −6,014 −4,896 −4,650 −1,118 −2,231 − 833 −1,398 + 208 − 249 + 457
         Q4 −6,867 −4,685 −3,421 −3,257 −1,264 −2,182 − 833 −1,349 + 100 − 384 + 484
2003          Feb −2,647 −1,889 −1,499 −1,296 − 390 − 758 − 278 − 480 − 504 − 87 − 416
         Mar −1,916 −1,174 − 889 − 850 − 285 − 742 − 278 − 464 + 33 − 41 + 74
         Apr −2,640 −1,915 −1,754 −1,712 − 161 − 725 − 278 − 447 − 123 − 70 − 53
         May −2,390 −1,476 −1,647 −1,565 + 171 − 914 − 278 − 636 + 156 − 90 + 246
         June −2,867 −2,020 −1,972 −1,512 − 48 − 847 − 278 − 569 + 119 − 115 + 234
         July −2,850 −2,095 −1,655 −1,491 − 441 − 754 − 278 − 477 + 62 − 84 + 147
         Aug −2,742 −2,054 −1,579 −1,556 − 476 − 688 − 278 − 410 + 224 − 73 + 297
         Sep −2,653 −1,864 −1,662 −1,603 − 201 − 789 − 278 − 511 − 78 − 91 + 13
         Oct −1,822 −1,074 − 631 − 514 − 443 − 748 − 278 − 471 − 26 − 87 + 61
         Nov −2,842 −2,166 −1,684 −1,674 − 481 − 676 − 278 − 399 + 185 − 132 + 316
         Dec −2,203 −1,446 −1,106 −1,068 − 340 − 757 − 278 − 480 − 59 − 165 + 107
1The classification of “public ”and “private ”transfers depends on the (excluding capital transfers). —3Payments to developing countries, pension
sector to which the participating domestic body belongs. —2Current contri- payments, tax revenue and refunds, etc. —4Where identifiable; in
butions to the budgets of international organisations and to the EU budget particular, debt forgiveness. 
70*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
X External sector
 
7 Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
 
 
 5  million
2003
Item 2001 2002 2003 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Oct Nov Dec
I Net German investment abroad
(Increase/capital exports: −) −270,851 −258,451 −184,549 −95,947 −63,257 + 1,092 −26,437 −17,472 −10,873 + 1,908
1 Direct investment  1 −36,314 −28,700 − 8,443 −16,036 + 14,170 − 4,963 − 1,614 − 2,874 − 3,262 + 4,522
Equity capital −61,618 −46,821 −18,305 − 7,471 − 1,557 − 2,533 − 6,743 − 290 − 2,357 − 4,096
Reinvested earnings  2 + 13,949 − 2,630 −−−−−−−−
Credit transactions of
German direct investors + 16,360 + 27,883 + 18,280 − 6,787 + 17,512 − 682 + 8,237 − 1,656 + 144 + 9,749
Other capital − 5,005 − 7,132 − 8,418 − 1,778 − 1,785 − 1,748 − 3,108 − 928 − 1,049 − 1,131
2 Portfolio investment −129,559 −69,036 −35,492 + 5,562 −20,019 − 5,483 −15,553 −11,794 − 1,555 − 2,204
Equity 3 −15,614 − 5,330 + 7,390 + 14,707 − 816 − 693 − 5,808 − 2,206 − 96− 3,507
Mutual fund shares  4 −19,701 − 6,784 − 3,921 − 3,100 − 101 − 160 − 561 − 345 + 159 − 374
Bonds and notes  5 −95,098 −50,806 −38,274 − 9,616 −20,576 − 1,219 − 6,863 − 7,993 − 8 + 1,139
Money market instruments + 853 − 6,116 − 687 + 3,571 + 1,474 − 3,411 − 2,321 − 1,250 − 1,609 + 538
3 Financial derivatives  6 + 6,278 − 533 + 840 + 2,865 − 2,089 + 328 − 264 + 1,889 + 39 − 2,192
4 Credit transactions −109,871 −158,634 −138,948 −87,752 −54,678 + 11,816 − 8,334 − 4,484 − 5,921 + 2,071
Credit institutions  7 −130,648 −130,536 −122,307 −74,254 −66,528 + 29,417 −10,941 + 18,653 −24,977 − 4,618
Long-term −47,636 −31,790 −32,556 −11,479 − 8,019 − 8,176 − 4,882 − 4,409 + 1,739 − 2,213
Short-term −83,012 −98,746 −89,750 −62,774 −58,509 + 37,593 − 6,059 + 23,062 −26,716 − 2,405
Enterprises and households −19,217 + 744 −17,857 −17,690 − 8,193 − 1,872 + 9,898 − 1,030 + 3,728 + 7,199
Long-term − 1,857 − 400 − 2,974 − 756 − 492 − 768 − 958 − 305 − 190 − 464
Short-term  7 −17,360 + 1,144 −14,883 −16,934 − 7,701 − 1,104 + 10,856 − 725 + 3,919 + 7,663
General government + 15,980 + 7,168 + 986 + 950 − 547 − 160 + 742 − 241 + 290 + 694
Long-term + 257 + 218 + 692 + 309 − 5 + 274 + 115 + 23 + 103 − 12
Short-term  7 + 15,723 + 6,950 + 293 + 641 − 541 − 434 + 627 − 265 + 186 + 705
Bundesbank + 24,015 −36,010 + 230 + 3,242 + 20,590 −15,569 − 8,033 −21,866 + 15,037 − 1,204
5 Other investment  8 − 1,385 − 1,549 − 2,506 − 588 − 641 − 606 − 672 − 209 − 174 − 289
II Net foreign investment in Germany
(Increase/capital imports: +) + 249,433 + 172,348 + 113,238 + 79,998 + 34,722 − 3,450 + 1,969 + 12,359 + 1,879 −12,270
1 Direct investment  1 + 23,990 + 35,635 + 10,526 + 8,454 + 9,475 + 6,323 −13,725 −10,961 + 5,936 − 8,701
Equity capital + 30,089 + 26,985 + 25,686 + 9,064 + 2,900 + 4,335 + 9,386 + 287 + 673 + 8,426Reinvested earnings  
2 −17,513 − 8,379 − 3,600 − 900 − 900 − 900 − 900 − 300 − 300 − 300
Credit transactions offoreign direct investors + 11,558 + 17,225 −11,374 + 385 + 7,540 + 2,861 −22,160 −10,908 + 5,571 −16,823
Other capital − 143 − 197 − 186 − 96− 66 + 27 − 52− 40− 8− 4
2 Portfolio investment + 156,175 + 105,998 + 87,548 + 30,557 + 25,964 − 4,173 + 35,200 + 33,677 − 276 + 1,799
Equity  
3 + 88,638 + 16,844 + 24,432 − 2,580 + 2,331 + 3,391 + 21,289 + 12,383 + 4,278 + 4,627
Mutual fund shares + 1,105 − 241 − 1,567 − 901 − 58− 799 + 191 + 1,185 − 802 − 192
Bonds and notes  5 + 81,246 + 79,231 + 65,386 + 22,682 + 23,979 + 5,280 + 13,446 + 18,133 − 4,824 + 137
Money market instruments −14,815 + 10,164 − 704 + 11,355 − 289 −12,045 + 275 + 1,976 + 1,071 − 2,772
3 Credit transactions + 69,221 + 30,641 + 15,148 + 40,983 − 742 − 5,606 −19,486 −10,353 − 3,777 − 5,357
Credit institutions  7 + 54,341 + 28,321 + 11,998 + 41,251 − 502 − 9,450 −19,300 −10,526 − 4,429 − 4,346
Long-term + 4,425 + 18,247 − 4,675 − 3,099 − 158 − 7,429 + 6,012 + 1,397 − 1,027 + 5,642
Short-term + 49,916 + 10,075 + 16,672 + 44,350 − 344 − 2,021 −25,312 −11,922 − 3,402 − 9,988
Enterprises and households + 11,412 + 3,334 − 1,918 − 2,278 − 1,951 + 1,150 + 1,161 + 89 + 1,226 − 154
Long-term + 11,351 + 5,142 − 4,112 − 6,014 + 1,006 + 1,148 − 253 + 195 + 619 − 1,067
Short-term  7 +6 1 − 1,807 + 2,193 + 3,736 − 2,958 + 1 + 1,414 − 106 + 607 + 913
General government + 837 − 1,667 + 3,086 + 313 + 1,683 + 2,277 − 1,186 − 349 + 114 − 951
Long-term − 217 − 112 + 4,265 + 3,407 − 138 − 183 + 1,178 − 3− 21 + 1,202
Short-term  7 + 1,054 − 1,555 − 1,179 − 3,094 + 1,821 + 2,460 − 2,365 − 347 + 135 − 2,152
Bundesbank + 2,631 + 653 + 1,983 + 1,697 + 28 + 418 − 161 + 433 − 688 + 94
4 Other investment + 47 + 74 + 16 + 5 + 25 + 6 − 19− 4− 4− 12
III Balance of all statistically
recorded financial movements(Net capital exports: −) −21,419 −86,103 −71,311 −15,950 −28,535 − 2,358 −24,468 − 5,113 − 8,994 −10,362
1From 1996, new definition for direct investment. —2Estimated. — action values shown here are mostly derived from changes in stocks. Purely
3Including participation rights. —4From 1991, including accumulated statistical changes have been eliminated as far as possible. —8In particular,
earnings. —5From 1975, excluding accrued interest. —6Options, whether subscriptions of the Federal Government to international organisations. 
evidenced by securities or not, and financial futures contracts. —7The trans-
71*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
X External sector
 
8 External position of the Bundesbank *
 
 
DM million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents Liabilities vis- à-vis non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserve
positionin theInter- Liabilitiesnational arising Net Liabilities
Monetary arising from externalFund and Claims Loans and from liquidity position
Foreign special on the external Treasury (col 1 other claims
End of year currency drawing ECB  
2 on non- trans- discount less
or month Total Total Gold rights (net) Total paper col 8) balances  1 residents  3 actions  4 
1234567891 0 1 1
1991 97,345 94,754 13,688 55,424 8,314 17,329 2,592 42,335 42,335 − 55,010
1992 143,959 141,351 13,688 85,845 8,199 33,619 2,608 26,506 26,506 − 117,453
1993 122,763 120,143 13,688 61,784 8,496 36,176 2,620 39,541 23,179 16,362 83,222
1994 115,965 113,605 13,688 60,209 7,967 31,742 2,360 24,192 19,581 4,611 91,774
1995 123,261 121,307 13,688 68,484 10,337 28,798 1,954 16,390 16,390 − 106,871
1996 120,985 119,544 13,688 72,364 11,445 22,048 1,441 15,604 15,604 − 105,381
1997 127,849 126,884 13,688 76,673 13,874 22,649 966 16,931 16,931 − 110,918
1998 135,085 134,005 17,109 100,363 16,533 − 1,079 15,978 15,978 − 119,107
*Valuation of the gold holdings and the claims on non-residents in Monetary Cooperation Fund (EMCF)). —3Including loans to the World
accordance with section 26 (2) of the Bundesbank Act and the provisions of Bank. —4Including liquidity paper sold to non-residents by the
the Commercial Code, especially section 253. In the course of the year, Bundesbank; excluding the liquidity Treasury discount paper sold to
valuation at the preceding year ’s balance sheet rates. —1Mainly US dollar non-residents between March 1993 and March 1995, as shown in column 10. 
assets. —2European Central Bank (up to 1993, claims on the European
  
 
9 External position of the Bundesbank in the euro area o
 5  million
Reserve assets and other claims on non-residents
Reserve assets
Reserve
position
Other in the Inter-national claims onMonetary Other residents Net externalFund and claims on Claims in other position of the
Gold special Foreign non-euro- within the euro-area Bundesbank Liabilities
End of year and gold drawing currency area Eurosystem member vis- à-vis non- (col 1 less
or month Total Total rights reserves (net)  
2 states col 9) receivables residents  1,3 residents  3 
1234567891 0
1999          Jan  4 95,316 93,940 29,312 8,461 56,167 140 1,225 11 8,169 87,146
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 8,332 52,420 9,162 39,746 11 6,179 135,779
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 7,762 53,377 313 6,620 14 6,592 94,1702001 76,147 93,215 35,005 8,721 49,489 312 − 17,385 5 8,752 67,396
2002 103,948 85,002 36,208 8,272 40,522 312 18,466 167 9,005 94,9422003 95,394 76,680 36,533 7,609 32,538 312 17,945 456 10,443 84,951
2002          Aug 110,682 87,466 35,197 8,797 43,471 312 22,902 1 9,432 101,250
         Sep 108,889 88,937 36,225 8,751 43,961 312 19,639 1 9,966 98,923
         Oct 112,748 87,441 35,530 8,594 43,317 312 24,993 2 9,473 103,276
         Nov 108,615 87,610 35,517 8,542 43,551 312 20,688 5 10,272 98,343         Dec 103,948 85,002 36,208 8,272 40,522 312 18,466 167 9,005 94,942
2003          Jan 98,272 85,235 37,934 8,023 39,278 312 12,237 488 9,898 88,374
         Feb 95,491 83,685 35,721 8,008 39,956 312 11,001 493 9,669 85,822         Mar 98,240 82,530 34,100 8,348 40,083 312 14,908 490 10,599 87,641
         Apr 93,702 79,453 33,442 8,123 37,888 312 13,496 441 9,126 84,575
         May 70,456 78,904 34,252 7,871 36,781 312 − 9,216 455 9,818 60,638
         June 73,550 78,425 33,435 8,292 36,698 312 − 5,663 476 10,537 63,014
         July 90,714 79,218 34,759 8,289 36,170 312 10,710 474 10,375 80,339         Aug 98,605 84,197 37,546 8,583 38,068 312 13,592 504 11,060 87,545         Sep 91,894 81,206 36,491 8,492 36,223 312 9,902 474 10,879 81,016
         Oct 113,947 81,401 36,595 8,539 36,267 312 31,794 440 11,319 102,628
         Nov 97,130 79,624 36,705 8,374 34,545 312 16,742 452 10,518 86,612         Dec 95,394 76,680 36,533 7,609 32,538 312 17,945 456 10,443 84,951
2004          Jan 89,895 76,992 35,834 7,726 33,432 312 12,135 456 10,522 79,374
oClaims and liabilities vis- à-vis all countries within and outside the euro Deutsche Bundesbank ’s cross-border payments within the Eurosystem. From
area. Up to December 2000, the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, November 2000, including the TARGET positions which were previously
owing to revaluations, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the shown (in columns 6 and 9) as bilateral assets and liabilities vis- à-vis national
levels are computed on the basis of cumulative transaction values. From central banks outside the Eurosystem. —3See footnote 2. —4Euro
January 2001, all end-of-month levels are valued at market prices. — opening balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January 1999. 
1Including loans to the World Bank. —2Including the balances in the
72*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
X External sector
 
10 Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
 5  million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities vis- à-vis non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  vis-à-vis foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms payments
or month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received operations operations
All countries
 
2000 320,874 43,462 277,412 152,752 124,660 116,971 7,689 446,060 52,663 393,397 309,024 84,373 63,093 21,280
2001 358,120 62,434 295,686 171,939 123,747 114,857 8,890 505,266 60,132 445,134 354,561 90,573 65,988 24,5852002  
4 331,671 63,817 267,854 148,913 118,941 111,406 7,535 533,423 57,696 475,727 387,850 87,877 62,622 25,255
2003 356,849 86,077 270,772 154,953 115,819 108,515 7,304 542,866 54,502 488,364 400,431 87,933 60,464 27,469
2003          Sep 368,099 94,193 273,906 157,407 116,499 108,083 8,416 567,725 53,879 513,846 427,170 86,676 58,702 27,974
         Oct 371,358 96,793 274,565 156,178 118,387 109,782 8,605 554,035 53,563 500,472 412,163 88,309 59,983 28,326
         Nov 370,955 91,356 279,599 159,277 120,322 112,489 7,833 559,954 54,257 505,697 418,200 87,497 59,168 28,329         Dec 356,849 86,077 270,772 154,953 115,819 108,515 7,304 542,866 54,502 488,364 400,431 87,933 60,464 27,469
EU countries 5
 
2000 177,782 39,563 138,219 78,298 59,921 55,718 4,203 323,049 45,473 277,576 237,583 39,993 32,457 7,5362001 198,118 58,039 140,079 79,205 60,874 55,371 5,503 372,937 53,683 319,254 275,749 43,505 34,716 8,7892002  
4 200,930 60,118 140,812 84,643 56,169 51,693 4,476 402,561 52,503 350,058 307,920 42,138 32,650 9,488
2003 225,423 80,880 144,543 89,392 55,151 51,459 3,692 411,131 49,984 361,147 321,010 40,137 30,495 9,642
2003          Sep 236,075 88,856 147,219 91,292 55,927 51,061 4,866 421,465 49,377 372,088 332,343 39,745 29,740 10,005
         Oct 240,091 90,524 149,567 92,449 57,118 52,187 4,931 411,771 48,943 362,828 322,411 40,417 30,276 10,141
         Nov 236,136 85,112 151,024 92,428 58,596 54,587 4,009 416,860 49,744 367,116 326,848 40,268 30,120 10,148         Dec 225,423 80,880 144,543 89,392 55,151 51,459 3,692 411,131 49,984 361,147 321,010 40,137 30,495 9,642
of which:  Euro-area member states 1
 
2000 120,976 22,737 98,239 52,976 45,263 42,389 2,874 247,830 33,698 214,132 185,595 28,537 23,569 4,9682001 126,519 33,787 92,732 46,599 46,133 42,771 3,362 295,943 38,361 257,582 225,711 31,871 24,878 6,9932002  
4 129,490 32,521 96,969 54,542 42,427 39,350 3,077 331,733 37,366 294,367 263,863 30,504 22,996 7,508
2003 147,083 45,337 101,746 59,279 42,467 39,619 2,848 338,434 29,541 308,893 279,101 29,792 22,388 7,404
2003          Sep 153,217 50,539 102,678 60,512 42,166 38,967 3,199 342,882 31,208 311,674 282,592 29,082 21,420 7,662
         Oct 152,915 48,779 104,136 60,754 43,382 40,068 3,314 343,318 30,658 312,660 282,947 29,713 22,002 7,711
         Nov 153,259 46,667 106,592 61,295 45,297 42,166 3,131 348,348 31,531 316,817 287,088 29,729 21,943 7,786         Dec 147,083 45,337 101,746 59,279 42,467 39,619 2,848 338,434 29,541 308,893 279,101 29,792 22,388 7,404
Other industrial countries 3,6
 
2000 84,502 2,925 81,577 54,272 27,305 25,673 1,632 84,464 4,711 79,753 56,986 22,767 18,621 4,1462001 100,786 3,364 97,422 71,842 25,580 24,082 1,498 93,269 4,178 89,091 64,595 24,496 19,648 4,8482002  
4 77,144 2,743 74,401 48,866 25,535 24,303 1,232 90,594 3,267 87,327 64,544 22,783 18,081 4,702
2003 79,781 3,960 75,821 50,888 24,933 23,777 1,156 87,625 2,783 84,842 62,909 21,933 17,355 4,578
2003          Sep 79,685 3,782 75,903 51,150 24,753 23,592 1,161 100,344 2,534 97,810 75,611 22,199 16,954 5,245
         Oct 77,717 4,360 73,357 48,194 25,163 23,989 1,174 96,879 2,722 94,157 71,848 22,309 17,098 5,211
         Nov 80,663 4,420 76,243 51,190 25,053 23,838 1,215 97,312 2,699 94,613 72,680 21,933 16,694 5,239         Dec 79,781 3,960 75,821 50,888 24,933 23,777 1,156 87,625 2,783 84,842 62,909 21,933 17,355 4,578
Countries in transition
 
2000 19,082 240 18,842 5,028 13,814 13,104 710 8,202 113 8,089 928 7,161 4,384 2,7772001 20,444 204 20,240 6,103 14,137 13,449 688 9,095 151 8,944 1,699 7,245 4,341 2,9042002  
4 20,339 332 20,007 5,680 14,327 13,586 741 10,106 175 9,931 2,119 7,812 4,574 3,238
2003 21,472 319 21,153 6,261 14,892 14,140 752 12,887 135 12,752 3,084 9,668 5,353 4,315
2003          Sep 21,193 245 20,948 6,010 14,938 14,165 773 12,211 194 12,017 2,697 9,320 5,241 4,079
         Oct 21,888 288 21,600 6,074 15,526 14,719 807 12,793 184 12,609 2,719 9,890 5,677 4,213
         Nov 22,637 294 22,343 6,404 15,939 15,153 786 13,060 100 12,960 3,150 9,810 5,541 4,269         Dec 21,472 319 21,153 6,261 14,892 14,140 752 12,887 135 12,752 3,084 9,668 5,353 4,315
Developing countries 2
 
2000 39,508 734 38,774 15,154 23,620 22,476 1,144 30,345 2,366 27,979 13,527 14,452 7,631 6,8212001 38,772 827 37,945 14,789 23,156 21,955 1,201 29,965 2,120 27,845 12,518 15,327 7,283 8,0442002  
4 33,258 624 32,634 9,724 22,910 21,824 1,086 30,162 1,751 28,411 13,267 15,144 7,317 7,827
2003 30,173 918 29,255 8,412 20,843 19,139 1,704 31,223 1,600 29,623 13,428 16,195 7,261 8,934
2003          Sep 31,146 1,310 29,836 8,955 20,881 19,265 1,616 33,705 1,774 31,931 16,519 15,412 6,767 8,645
         Oct 31,662 1,621 30,041 9,461 20,580 18,887 1,693 32,592 1,714 30,878 15,185 15,693 6,932 8,761
         Nov 31,519 1,530 29,989 9,255 20,734 18,911 1,823 32,722 1,714 31,008 15,522 15,486 6,813 8,673         Dec 30,173 918 29,255 8,412 20,843 19,139 1,704 31,223 1,600 29,623 13,428 16,195 7,261 8,934
* Including the assets and liabilities vis- à-vis non-residents of households in January 2001, including Greece. —2Up to April 2002, including Cyprus. —
Germany. The assets and liabilities vis- à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in 3From May 2002, including Cyprus. —4Change in the reporting
Germany are shown in Table 4 of Section IV, “Banks ”. Statistical increases population owing to an increase in the exemption limit. —5Up to
and decreases have not been eliminated; to this extent, the changes in to- December 2002, including Guernsey, Jersey and Isle of Man. —6From
tals are not comparable with the figures shown in Table X.7. —1From January 2003, including Guernsey, Jersey and Isle of Man.   
73*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
X External sector
11 Deutsche Mark and euro exchange rates of selected currencies *
Yearly Japan Denmark Sweden Norway Switzerland Canada Australia New Zealand United States United Kingdom
or monthly
average USD JPY DKK SEK GBP NOK CHF CAD AUD  1 NZD 1 
Historic spot middle rates on the Frankfurt exchange (1 or 100 currency units = DEM ...)
      
1991 1.6612 1.2346 25.932 27.421 2.926  25.580 115.740 1.4501 1.2942 0.9589
1992 1.5595 1.2313 25.869 26.912 2.753  25.143 111.198 1.2917 1.1476 0.84061993 1.6544 1.4945 25.508 21.248 2.483  23.303 111.949 1.2823 1.1235 0.89401994 1.6218 1.5870 25.513 21.013 2.4816 22.982 118.712 1.1884 1.1848 0.9605
1995 1.4338 1.5293 25.570 20.116 2.2620 22.614 121.240 1.0443 1.0622 0.9399
1996 1.5037 1.3838 25.945 22.434 2.3478 23.292 121.891 1.1027 1.1782 1.03571997 1.7348 1.4378 26.249 22.718 2.8410 24.508 119.508 1.2533 1.2889 1.14531998 1.7592 1.3484 26.258 22.128 2.9142 23.297 121.414 1.1884 1.1070 0.9445
      
Euro reference exchange rates published by the European Central Bank (EUR 1 = currency units ...) 2
      
1999 1.0658 121.32 7.4355 8.8075 0.65874 8.3104 1.6003 1.5840 1.6523 2.01452000 0.9236 99.47 7.4538 8.4452 0.60948 8.1129 1.5579 1.3706 1.5889 2.02882001 0.8956 108.68 7.4521 9.2551 0.62187 8.0484 1.5105 1.3864 1.7319 2.13002002 0.9456 118.06 7.4305 9.1611 0.62883 7.5086 1.4670 1.4838 1.7376 2.03662003 1.1312 130.97 7.4307 9.1242 0.69199 8.0033 1.5212 1.5817 1.7379 1.9438
2002          May 0.9170 115.86 7.4356 9.2208 0.62823 7.5207 1.4572 1.4210 1.6662 1.9859
         June 0.9554 117.80 7.4330 9.1137 0.64405 7.4043 1.4721 1.4627 1.6793 1.9517
         July 0.9922 117.11 7.4301 9.2689 0.63870 7.4050 1.4624 1.5321 1.7922 2.0646
         Aug 0.9778 116.31 7.4270 9.2489 0.63633 7.4284 1.4636 1.5333 1.8045 2.1076         Sep 0.9808 118.38 7.4271 9.1679 0.63059 7.3619 1.4649 1.5434 1.7927 2.0847
         Oct 0.9811 121.57 7.4297 9.1051 0.62994 7.3405 1.4650 1.5481 1.7831 2.0381
         Nov 1.0014 121.65 7.4280 9.0818 0.63709 7.3190 1.4673 1.5735 1.7847 2.0155         Dec 1.0183 124.20 7.4264 9.0961 0.64218 7.2948 1.4679 1.5872 1.8076 1.9947
2003          Jan 1.0622 126.12 7.4324 9.1733 0.65711 7.3328 1.4621 1.6364 1.8218 1.9648
         Feb 1.0773 128.60 7.4317 9.1455 0.66977 7.5439 1.4674 1.6299 1.8112 1.9457         Mar 1.0807 128.16 7.4274 9.2265 0.68255 7.8450 1.4695 1.5943 1.7950 1.9497
         Apr 1.0848 130.12 7.4255 9.1541 0.68902 7.8317 1.4964 1.5851 1.7813 1.9700
         May 1.1582 135.83 7.4246 9.1559 0.71322 7.8715 1.5155 1.6016 1.7866 2.0083         June 1.1663 138.05 7.4250 9.1182 0.70224 8.1619 1.5411 1.5798 1.7552 2.0069
         July 1.1372 134.99 7.4332 9.1856 0.70045 8.2893 1.5476 1.5694 1.7184 1.9386
         Aug 1.1139 132.38 7.4322 9.2378 0.69919 8.2558 1.5400 1.5570 1.7114 1.9137         Sep 1.1222 128.94 7.4273 9.0682 0.69693 8.1952 1.5474 1.5330 1.6967 1.9227
         Oct 1.1692 128.12 7.4301 9.0105 0.69763 8.2274 1.5485 1.5489 1.6867 1.9446
         Nov 1.1702 127.84 7.4370 8.9939 0.69278 8.1969 1.5590 1.5361 1.6337 1.8608         Dec 1.2286 132.43 7.4419 9.0228 0.70196 8.2421 1.5544 1.6131 1.6626 1.8982
2004          Jan 1.2613 134.13 7.4481 9.1368 0.69215 8.5925 1.5657 1.6346 1.6374 1.8751
‘
*Calculated from daily quotations. —1Exchange rates from Australia and central banks at 14.15. For additional euro reference exchange rates of the
New Zealand; those for New Zealand calculated from rates as at the middle ECB, see Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Report 5, Exchange rate
and end of the month. —2The ECB publishes daily euro reference ex- statistics.
change rates, which are calculated on the basis of the concertation between
12 Exchange rates for the national currencies of the euro-area member states, the Deutsche Mark value of
the ECU * and euro conversion rates
France Italy Netherlands Belgium/ Austria Spain Finland Ireland Portugal Greece ECU values  1 
Yearly Luxembourg GRD  100 /
average FRF  100 ITL  1,000 NLG  100 BEF/LUF  100 ATS  100 ESP  100 FIM  100 IEP  1 PTE  100 EUR  1  2 ECU  1
Historic spot middle rates on the Frankfurt exchange in DEM
   
1991 29.409 1.3377 88.742 4.857  14.211 1.597  41.087 2.671  1.149  0.9103 2.05076
1992 29.500 1.2720 88.814 4.857  14.211 1.529  34.963 2.656  1.157  0.8178 2.020311993 29.189 1.0526 89.017 4.785  14.214 1.303  28.915 2.423  1.031  0.7213 1.936391994 29.238 1.0056 89.171 4.8530 14.214 1.2112 31.108 2.4254 0.9774 0.6683 1.92452
1995 28.718 0.8814 89.272 4.8604 14.214 1.1499 32.832 2.2980 0.9555 0.6182 1.87375
1996 29.406 0.9751 89.243 4.8592 14.214 1.1880 32.766 2.4070 0.9754 0.6248 1.909541997 29.705 1.0184 88.857 4.8464 14.210 1.1843 33.414 2.6297 0.9894 0.6349 1.964381998 29.829 1.0132 88.714 4.8476 14.213 1.1779 32.920 2.5049 0.9763 0.5952 1.969131999 . . . . . . . . . 325.76 .
2000 . . . . . . . . . 336.63 .
      
Irrevocable euro conversion rates (EUR 1 = currency units ...) 3
   
6.55957 1936.27 2.20371 40.3399 13.7603 166.386 5.94573 0.787564 200.482 4 340.750 5 1.95583
*Calculated from daily quotations. —1As per data from the European exchange rates of the ECB (EU R 1 = GRD ...). —3Applicable from 1 January
Commission. —2Up to 1998, reciprocal values of the exchange rates for the 1999. —4Applicable from 1 January 2001. —5Deutsche Mark conversion
Deutsche Mark, published by the Bank of Greece; from 1999, euro reference rate. 
74*X External sector

DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
X External sector
 
13 Effective exchange rates * of the euro and selected foreign currencies
 
 
1999 Q1 = 100
Memo item Effective nominal exchange rates of selected foreign
Indicators of the German economy ’s currencies against the currencies of 19 industrial
Effective exchange rate of the euro price competitiveness  3,4 countries  3,5,6 
Narrow group  1 Broad group  2 19 industrial countries  5 49 countries  7 
Real Real
based  on based  on based  on the
consumer consumer Pound Canadian Swiss Japanese deflators of
Period Nominal prices Nominal prices US dollar sterling dollar franc yen total sales  8 based on consumer prices
1995 107.8 108.8 93.2 107.9 109.8 110.4 110.3 86.1 84.0 106.4 105.4 115.6
1996 107.9 108.8 95.4 106.0 106.4 106.8 105.2 90.9 85.9 108.8 104.2 100.61997 99.1 99.5 90.4 96.7 100.7 101.4 99.0 98.8 99.8 109.7 97.9 95.91998 101.5 101.3 96.6 99.2 101.0 101.1 100.1 103.4 103.3 103.5 99.9 89.71999 95.7 95.8 96.6 95.9 97.8 98.0 97.7 100.8 102.3 102.2 98.3 105.1
2000 85.7 86.3 88.2 86.2 91.9 92.6 91.1 105.4 105.2 103.6 96.8 117.9
2001 87.3 88.6 91.0 87.9 92.0 93.0 91.4 112.0 103.6 100.5 100.5 106.72002 90.0 92.5 95.6 91.8 93.2 94.0 92.6 110.7 104.2 98.7 104.9 100.82003 100.2 103.9 107.1 102.2
p 96.9 97.7 97.2 97.7 99.2 108.0 105.3 99.9
1998          Q1 98.8 98.8 92.6 96.4 99.6 99.8 98.7 103.2 104.5 107.3 100.1 92.5         Q2 100.2 100.1 94.2 97.5 100.8 100.7 99.1 104.8 104.8 106.5 98.5 86.8         Q3 102.5 102.5 97.8 100.4 101.7 102.1 101.1 106.3 104.1 102.0 99.4 83.7         Q4 104.2 103.8 101.7 102.6 101.8 101.8 101.6 99.4 99.8 98.0 101.6 95.7
1999          Q1 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0
         Q2 96.1 96.0 96.5 96.1 98.5 98.3 97.8 102.8 102.8 103.5 98.6 99.0         Q3 94.6 94.7 95.5 94.8 97.1 97.8 97.3 101.4 102.3 102.3 97.7 106.2         Q4 92.2 92.2 94.2 92.8 95.5 95.9 95.6 99.1 104.1 102.8 96.7 115.2
2000          Q1 89.0 89.5 91.1 89.3 93.8 94.8 93.5 101.5 106.4 104.9 95.1 114.9
         Q2 86.0 86.4 88.4 86.5 92.0 92.5 91.3 104.3 105.4 103.7 96.5 118.4         Q3 84.8 85.4 87.3 85.2 91.4 92.1 90.4 106.2 103.9 104.1 97.2 119.2         Q4 83.0 83.8 85.9 83.7 90.2 91.0 89.3 109.4 105.0 101.6 98.2 119.2
2001          Jan 89.2 89.9 91.7 88.7 . 94.0 92.3 107.7 102.4 102.7 100.0 108.3
         Feb 88.3 89.1 91.0 88.0 92.7 93.9 92.1 108.8 102.0 101.6 99.2 109.9         Mar 88.4 89.4 91.4 88.5 . 93.6 92.0 111.5 102.9 99.7 99.3 106.0
         Apr 87.6 88.8 91.0 88.1 . 93.1 91.5 113.0 103.7 100.0 99.4 104.9
         May 85.9 87.2 89.3 86.4 91.5 92.4 90.5 113.1 104.3 101.3 98.3 107.5         June 84.7 86.0 88.1 85.2 . 91.9 89.8 114.1 104.4 102.7 98.5 108.3
         July 85.4 86.8 89.1 86.0 . 92.7 90.8 114.3 104.9 102.5 99.5 105.8
         Aug 87.7 89.0 91.8 88.4 91.7 93.4 91.9 111.6 103.0 101.1 100.4 106.4         Sep 88.0 89.3 92.6 89.1 . 93.1 92.0 110.7 103.8 99.1 102.2 108.2
         Oct 88.0 89.6 92.8 89.3 . 92.7 91.6 111.8 103.7 99.0 103.0 106.2
         Nov 86.8 88.4 91.3 87.8 92.2 92.0 90.7 113.3 104.0 97.8 103.4 106.3         Dec 87.7 89.8 91.9 88.7 . 93.5 91.9 114.1 104.3 99.0 103.3 102.1
2002          Jan 87.6 90.0 91.6 88.1 . 93.6 91.4 116.4 104.9 97.9 103.3 98.3
         Feb 86.8 89.0 91.1 87.4 92.3 93.3 90.9 117.3 105.3 98.5 102.7 98.2         Mar 86.8 89.3 91.3 87.9 . 93.2 90.9 116.1 104.6 98.7 103.4 99.8
         Apr 87.2 89.7 91.7 88.2 . 92.7 90.5 115.3 105.2 99.0 103.8 99.4
         May 88.6 91.1 93.7 90.0 92.9 93.2 91.4 112.0 103.5 100.4 105.1 101.2         June 90.6 93.2 96.4 92.6 . 94.2 92.8 109.0 101.9 101.0 104.9 101.7
         July 91.7 94.4 98.2 94.3 . 95.2 94.4 106.0 103.5 99.4 106.0 104.3
         Aug 91.1 93.6 97.7 93.6 93.6 94.6 93.6 107.3 103.5 98.0 105.7 104.3         Sep 91.2 93.8 98.0 93.8 . 94.1 93.3 107.6 104.7 97.7 105.6 102.5
         Oct 91.7 94.3 98.5 94.4 . 94.0 93.3 108.5 105.0 97.6 105.8 99.8
         Nov 92.5 95.1 99.3 94.9 94.1 94.0 93.3 106.8 104.3 97.7 106.1 100.8         Dec 93.6 96.7 100.4 96.3 . 95.6 94.9 106.0 104.0 98.3 106.5 99.6
2003          Jan 95.8 98.8 103.0 98.1 . 96.3 95.8 103.0 102.6 98.8 107.9 100.4
         Feb 97.1 100.2 104.4 99.4 95.7 97.0 96.5 102.2 101.2 100.5 108.0 99.2         Mar 97.9 101.2 105.1 100.3 . 97.0 96.6 101.4 99.3 103.0 108.1 99.8
         Apr 98.6 102.1 105.2 100.6 . 96.9 96.3 101.4 98.7 104.1 106.4 98.6
         May 102.5 106.1 109.1 104.1 97.4 98.3 97.9 96.7 96.9 109.0 106.5 97.7         June 102.7 106.6 109.3 104.5 . 98.7 98.3 96.1 98.9 111.2 104.9 96.3
         July 101.4 105.2 107.8 102.9 . 98.8 97.9 97.8 98.5 109.5 103.9 97.3
         Aug 100.3 103.9 106.6 101.8
p 97.0 98.1 97.1 99.1 98.1 108.4 104.0 98.3
         Sep 99.9 103.5 106.4 101.5 . 97.2 96.6 97.2 98.2 110.5 103.3 101.1
         Oct 101.3 105.1 108.3 103.4 . 97.5 97.2 93.3 98.8 113.1 103.7 103.7
         Nov 101.2 105.2 108.3 103.4 p 97.5 97.4 97.1 93.0 99.5 114.1 102.9 103.9
         Dec 104.0 108.4 111.4 106.5 . 99.3 99.4 90.6 99.5 113.3 104.3 102.9
2004          Jan 105.1 109.6 112.6 107.2 . 99.8 99.6 88.9 101.6 114.3 103.9 102.9
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of April 2000, pp 39 −48.—2ECB calculations. In addition to the countries
the currency concerned. —1ECB calculations based on the weighted belonging to the narrow group (see footnote 1), this group also includes the
averages of the effective exchange rates of the euro or, prior to 1999, of the following countries: Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, China, Croatia, Cypru s, Czech
exchange rates of the currencies preceding the euro against the currencies Republic, Estonia, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico ,
of the following countries: Australia, Canada, Denmark, Greece, Hong Kong, Morocco, New Zealand, Philippines, Poland, Romania, Russian Federatio n,
Japan, Norway, Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, United Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand and Turkey. —3The
Kingdom and United States. The weights used in these calculations are method of calculation is consistent with the procedure used by the ECB to
based on manufactured goods trade between 1995 and 1997 and capture compute the effective exchange rates of the euro (see Monthly Bulletin,
third-market effects. From January 2001, Greece ceased to be a partner November 2001, pp 51 −65).—4Decline in the figures implies an increase in
country in the effective exchange rate of the euro; the weighting scheme competitiveness. —5Euro-area countries and ECB ’s narrow group excluding
was adjusted accordingly. Owing to the change in the weighting scheme, Australia, Hong Kong, Singapore and South Korea. —6Figures up to
effective exchange rate data as from January 2001 are not fully comparable end-1998, computed by linking with the figures published up to Octoberwith earlier data. Where consumer prices were not yet available, estimates 2001. —7Euro-area countries and ECB ’s broad group. —8Annual and
have been used. For details of the methodology see: ECB, Monthly Bulletin, quarterly averages. 
75*X External sector

76*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004

Overview of
publications
by the Deutsche
BundesbankThis overview provides information
about selected recent economic andstatistical publications by the DeutscheBundesbank. Unless otherwise indi-cated, these publications are availablein both English and German, in printedform and on the internet.
The publications are available free of
charge from the Press and Public Rela-tions Division. For a small fee to covercosts, a file which is updated monthlyand contains approximately 40,000time series published by the Bundes-bank can be obtained on magnetictape cassette or ZIP disk from the Divi-sion Statistical data processing, math-ematical methods. Orders should besent, in writing, to one of the ad-dresses listed on the reverse of the titlepage. Selected time series can also bedownloaded from the internet.
Annual Report
Monthly Report
For information on the articles published between
1990 and 2003 see the index attached to the Janu-
ary 2004 Monthly Report.
March 2003
– The Eurosystem’s monetary policy framework –
experience to date and measures to improve its
efficiency
– Macroeconomic aspects of share price devel-
opments
77*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004

– The development of production potential in
Germany
– German balance of payments in 2002
April 2003
– The development of public finances in Ger-
many following qualification for European
monetary union
– The development of bank deposits in Germany– German enterprises’ profitability and financing
in 2001
– Financial sanctions: legal framework and im-
plementation in Germany
May 2003
– The economic scene in Germany in spring
2003
June 2003
– The debate on deflationary risks in Germany– Overall financial flows in 2002– The development of German enterprises’ inter-
national capital links between end-1998 and
end-2001
– German results of euro-area bank lending
survey
– Monetary policy: how relevant are other policy-
makers? Bundesbank Spring Conference 2003
July 2003
– Economic and monetary policy cooperation
between the EU and the acceding countries
following the signature of the accession treaty
– The state of public finance in the EU acceding
countries
– Financial markets in central and east European
countries before accession to the EU
– Reports from the Economic Research Centre
August 2003
– The economic scene in Germany in summer
2003September 2003
– The performance of German credit institutions
in 2002
– Price indicators for the housing market– Approaches to the validation of internal rating
systems
October 2003
– Germany’s competitive position and foreign
trade within the euro area
– The economic situation of small and medium-
sized enterprises in Germany
– Development and significance of education
expenditure in Germany
November 2003
– The economic scene in Germany in autumn
2003
– The monetary constitution under the Consti-
tution for Europe
December 2003
– Report on the stability of the German financial
system
– Stress testing the German banking system
January 2004
– The euro and prices two years on– Payment system oversight – a contribution to
the stability of the financial system and the effi-
ciency of payment operations
– The new MFI interest rate statistics – method-
ology for collecting the German data
February 2004
– The economic scene in Germany around the
turn of 2003-04
78*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004

Statistical Supplements to the
Monthly Report1
1 Banking statistics (monthly)
2 Capital market statistics (monthly)
3 Balance of payments statistics (monthly)
4 Seasonally adjusted business statistics (monthly)5 Exchange rate statistics (quarterly)
Special Publications
The monetary policy of the Bundesbank,
October 19952
Makro-/C246konometrisches Mehr-L/C228nder-Modell,November 1996
3
Europ/C228ische Organisationen und Gremien im Be-reich von W/C228hrung und Wirtschaft, May 1997
3
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 bis1989, August 1999
3
The market for German Federal securities,
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model: MEMMOD,
June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Die Europ/C228ische Wirtschafts- und W/C228hrungsunion,
December 20023
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im Bereichvon W/C228hrung und Wirtschaft, March 2003
3
Special Statistical Publications
1 Banking statistics guidelines and customer clas-
sification, July 20034,52 Bankenstatistik Kundensystematik Firmenver-
zeichnisse, December 20033,6
3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen,
January 20003
4 Financial accounts for Germany 1991 to 2002,
September 20037
5 Annual accounts of west German enterprises
1971 to 1996, March 19991
6 Ratios from annual accounts of German enter-
prises between 1998 and 2000, March 20031, 7
7 Erl/C228uterungen zu den Leistungspositionen der
Zahlungsbilanz, September 20013
8 Balance of payments statistics of the Fed-
eral Republic of Germany, 2nd edition,February 1991
o
9 Securities deposits,
September 2003
10 International capital links,
June 20031, 7
11 Balance of payments by region,
August 2003
12 Technologische Dienstleistungen in der Zah-
lungsbilanz, May 20023
79*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
1Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data
contained in the German originals are available in English.
2Also available in French, Spanish, Russian and Chinese.
3Available in German only.
4Only the sections “Monthly Balance Sheet Statistics”,
“External position” and “Customer classification”(“Overall survey on sectoral classification”, “Survey on
breakdown by industry or activity” and “Explanatory
notes on the system of customer classification by industry
or activity”) are available in English.
5Current version only available on the internet at half-
yearly intervals.6Current version only available on the internet at quar-
terly intervals.7Available on the internet only.oNot available on the internet.

80*DEUTSCHE
BUNDESBANK
Monthly Report
February 2004
Discussion papers*
Series 1
Economic Research Centre
June 2003 12/03
Active monetary policy, passive fiscal policy andthe value of public debt: some further monetary
arithmetic
June 2003 13/03
Bidder Behavior in Repo Auctions without Mini-
mum Bid Rate: Evidence from the Bundesbank
June 2003 14/03
Did the Bundesbank React to Stock Price Move-ments?
15/2003
Money in a New-Keynesian model estimated with
German data
16/2003
Exact tests and confidence sets for the tail coeffi-cient of a-stable distributions
17/2003The Forecasting Performance of German StockOption Densities
18/2003
How wacky is the DAX? The changing structure of
German stock market volatility
1/2004
Foreign Bank Entry into Emerging Economies: AnEmpirical Assessment of the Determinants andRisks Predicated on German FDI Data
2/2004
Does Co-Financing by Multilateral Development
Banks Increase “Risky” Direct Investment in Emer-ging Markets? – Evidence for German Banking FDI3/2004Policy Instrument Choice and Non-CoordinatedMonetary Policy in Interdependent Economies
4/2004
Inflation Targeting Rules and Welfare in an Asym-
metric Currency Area
Series 2
Banking and Financial Supervision
1/2003
Measuring the Discriminative Power of Rating
Systems
2/2003
Credit Risk Factor Modeling and the Basel II IRBApproach
Banking legislation
1 Bundesbank Act and Statute of the European
System of Central Banks and of the EuropeanCentral Bank, June 1998
2 Gesetz /C252ber das Kreditwesen, February 2001
3
2a Grundsatz I /C252ber die Eigenmittel der Institute,
January 20013
2b Grundsatz II /C252ber die Liquidit/C228t der Institute,
August 19993
7 Instruction sheet for the reporting of large ex-
posures and loans of 3 million Deutsche Markor more pursuant to sections 13 to 14 of the
Banking Act, September 1998
*Earlier discussion papers are available on the internet,
in some cases as abstracts.
For footnotes, see p 79*.

